The Works of the Reverend
                        George Whitefield, M.A.




  ┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
  │                                                                │
  │                      Transcriber’s Notes                       │
  │                                                                │
  │                                                                │
  │  Punctuation has been standardized.                            │
  │                                                                │
  │  Most of the abbreviations used to save space in printing have │
  │  been expanded to the non-abbreviated form for easier reading. │
  │                                                                │
  │  The text is inconsistent in its usage of quotation marks.     │
  │  The transcriber has attempted to make their use consistent    │
  │  throughout this work for improved readability.                │
  │                                                                │
  │  Characters in small caps have been replaced by all caps.      │
  │                                                                │
  │  Non-printable characteristics have been given the following   │
  │      Italic text:             --> _text_                       │
  │        emphasized text within                                  │
  │           italics             --> |text|                       │
  │                                                                │
  │  This book was written in a period when many words had         │
  │  not become standardized in their spelling. Words may have     │
  │  multiple spelling variations or inconsistent hyphenation in   │
  │  the text. These have been left unchanged unless indicated     │
  │  with a Transcriber’s Note.                                    │
  │                                                                │
  │  Footnotes are identified in the text with a superscript       │
  │  number and are shown immediately below the paragraph in which │
  │  they appear.                                                  │
  │                                                                │
  │  Transcriber’s Notes are used when making corrections to the   │
  │  text or to provide additional information for the modern      │
  │  reader. These notes are identified by ♦♠♥♣ symbols in the     │
  │  text and are shown immediately below the paragraph in which   │
  │  they appear.                                                  │
  └────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘




                           THE WORKS OF THE
                   REVEREND GEORGE WHITEFIELD, M.A.

                   Late of PEMBROKE-COLLEGE, OXFORD,

                 And Chaplain to the Right Honourable,
                      the Countess of HUNTINGDON.


                              CONTAINING


                      All his SERMONS and TRACTS
                  Which have been already published:

                                 WITH

                    A SELECT COLLECTION of LETTERS,
         Written to his most intimate Friends, and Persons of
         Distinction, in _England_, _Scotland_, _Ireland_, and
         _America_, from the Year 1734, to 1770, including the
                     whole Period of his Ministry.

                                 ALSO

               Some other PIECES on IMPORTANT SUBJECTS,
       never before printed; prepared by Himself for the Press.

                         To which is prefixed,

                        An ACCOUNT of his LIFE,
            Compiled from his Original PAPERS and LETTERS.


                               VOLUME V.


                                LONDON:

         Printed for EDWARD and CHARLES DILLY, in the Poultry;
             and Messrs. KINCAID and CREECH, at Edinburgh.

                              MDCCLXXII.




                              CONTENTS¹.

    ¹ The ♦Sermons marked with a *, are now first published from
      the Author’s own Manuscripts.

    ♦ “Seamons” replaced with “Sermons”

  ⭘ SERMON I. The Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent.

      GENESIS iii. 5. _And I will put enmity between thee and the
        woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise
        thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel._

  ⭘ SERMON II. Walking with God.

      GENESIS v. 24. _And Enoch walked with God, and he was not,
        for God took him._

  ⭘ SERMON III. Abraham’s offering up his Son Isaac.

      GENESIS xxii. 12. _And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the
        lad, neither do thou any thing unto him; for now I know
        that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy
        son, thine only son from me._

  ⭘ SERMON IV. The great Duty of Family-Religion.

      JOSHUA xxiv. 15. _As for me and my house, we will serve the
        Lord._

  ⭘ SERMON V. Christ the best Husband: or, an earnest Invitation
    to Young Women to come and see Christ. Preached to a Society
    of Young Women, in Fetter-Lane.

      PSALM xlv. 10, 11. _Hearken, O daughter, and consider,
        and incline thine ear: forget also thine own people, and
        thy father’s house: so shall the King greatly desire thy
        beauty; for he is thy Lord, and worship thou him._

  ⭘ SERMON VI. Britain’s Mercies, and Britain’s Duty. Preached at
    Philadelphia, on Sunday, August 24, 1746, and occasioned by
    the Suppression of the late unnatural Rebellion.

      PSALM cv. 45. _That they might observe his statutes and keep
        his laws._

  ⭘ SERMON VII. Thankfulness for Mercies received, a necessary
    Duty. A Farewel Sermon, preached on board the Whitaker, at
    Anchor near Savannah, in Georgia, Sunday, May 17, 1738.

      PSALM cvii. 30, 31. _Then are they glad, because they are
        at rest, and so he bringeth them unto the haven where they
        would be. O that men would therefore praise the Lord for
        his goodness, and declare the wonders that he doeth for
        the children of men!_

  ⭘ SERMON VIII. The Necessity and Benefits of Religious Society.

      ECCLESIASTES iv. 9, 10, 11, 12. _Two are better than one,
        because they have a good reward for their labour. For if
        they fall, the one will lift up his fellow: but woe be to
        him that is alone when he falleth; for he hath not another
        to help him up. Again if two lie together, then they have
        heat; but how can one be warm alone? And if one prevail
        against him, two shall withstand him; and a threefold cord
        is not quickly broken._

  ⭘ SERMON IX. The Folly and Danger of not being righteous enough.

      ECCLESIASTES vii. 16. _Be not righteous over-much, neither
        make thyself over-wise: why shouldst thou destroy thyself?_

  ⭘ SERMON X. A Preservative against unsettled Notions, and want
    of Principles, in regard to Righteousness and Christian
    Perfection. Being a more particular Answer to Doctor Trapp’s
    four Sermons upon the same Text.

      ECCLESIASTES vii. 16. _Be not righteous over-much, neither
        make thyself over-wise: why shouldst thou destroy thyself?_

  ⭘ SERMON XI. The Benefits of an early Piety. Preached at Bow
    Church, London, before the Religious Societies.

      ECCLESIASTES xii. 1. _Remember now thy Creator in the days
        of thy youth._

  ⭘ SERMON XII. Christ the Believer’s Husband.

      ISAIAH liv. 5. _For thy Maker is thy husband._

  ⭘ *SERMON XIII. The Potter and the Clay.

      JEREMIAH xviii. 1‒6. _The word which came to Jeremiah from
        the Lord, saying, Arise and go down to the potter’s house,
        and there I will cause thee to hear my words. Then I went
        down to the potter’s house, and behold, he wrought a work
        on the wheels. ‏And the vessel that he made of clay was
        marred in the hands of the potter, so he made it again
        another vessel, as seemed good to the potter to make it.
        Then the word of the Lord came to me, saying, O house of
        Israel, cannot I do with you as this potter? saith the
        Lord. Behold, as the clay is in the potter’s hand, so are
        ye in mine hand, O house of Israel._

  ⭘ SERMON XIV. The Lord our Righteousness.

      JEREMIAH xxiii. 6. _The Lord our righteousness._

  ⭘ *SERMON XV. The Righteousness of Christ an everlasting
    Righteousness.

      DANIEL ix. 24. _And to bring in everlasting righteousness._

  ⭘ SERMON XVI. The Observation of the Birth of Christ, the Duty
    of all Christians; or the true Way of keeping Christmas.

      MATTHEW i. 21. _And she shall bring forth a son, and thou
        shalt call his name Jesus: for he shall save his people
        from their sins._

  ⭘ *SERMON XVII. The Temptation of Christ.

      MATTHEW iv. 1‒11. _Then was Jesus led up of the spirit into
        the wilderness, to be tempted of the devil, &c._

  ⭘ SERMON XVIII. The Heinous Sin of profane Cursing and Swearing.

      MATTHEW v. 34. _But I say unto you, Swear not at all._

  ⭘ SERMON XIX. Christ the Support of the Tempted.

      MATTHEW vi. 13. _Lead us not into temptation._

  ⭘ SERMON XX. Worldly Business no Plea for the Neglect of Religion.

      MATTHEW viii. 22. _Let the dead bury their dead._

  ⭘ SERMON XXI. Christ the only Rest for the Weary and Heavy Laden.

      MATTHEW xi. 28. _Come unto me, all ye that are weary and
        heavy laden, and I will give you rest._

  ⭘ SERMON XXII. The Folly and Danger of parting with Christ for
    the Pleasures and Profits of Life.

      MATTHEW viii. 23, to the End. _And when he was entered into
        a ship, his disciples followed him, &c._

  ⭘ *SERMON XXIII. Marks of a True Conversion.

        MATTHEW xviii. 3. _Verily, I say unto you, except ye be
          converted, and become as little children, ye shall not
          enter into the kingdom of heaven._

  ⭘ SERMON XXIV. What think ye of Christ?

      MATTHEW xxii. 42. _What think ye of Christ?_

  ⭘ SERMON XXV. The wise and foolish Virgins.

      MATTHEW xxv. 13. _Watch therefore, for ye know neither the
        day nor the hour in which the Son of man cometh._

  ⭘ SERMON XXVI. The Eternity of Hell-Torments.

      MATTHEW xxv. 46. _These shall go away into everlasting
        punishment._

  ⭘ SERMON XXVII. Blind Bartimeus.

      MARK x. 52. _And Jesus said unto him, Go thy way; thy faith
        hath made thee whole. And immediately he received his
        sight, and followed Jesus in the way._

  ⭘ SERMON XXVIII. Directions how to hear Sermons.

      LUKE viii. 18. _Take heed, therefore, how ye hear._

  ⭘ SERMON XXIX. The Extent and Reasonableness of Self-Denial.

      LUKE ix. 23. _And he said unto them all, If any man will
        come after me, let him deny himself._

  ⭘ *SERMON XXX. Christ’s Transfiguration.

        LUKE ix. 28‒36. _And it came to pass about an eight days
          after these sayings, he took Peter and John and James,
          and went up into a mountain to pray, &c._

  ⭘ SERMON XXXI. The Care of the Soul urged as the one thing
    needful.

      LUKE x. 42. _But one thing is needful._




                               SERMON I.

          The Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent.


                           GENESIS iii. 15.

  _And I will put Enmity between thee and the Woman, and between
    thy Seed and her Seed; it shall bruise thy Head, and thou
    shalt bruise his Heel._

ON reading to you these words, I may address you in the language of the
holy angels to the shepherds, that were watching their flocks by night;
“Behold, I bring you glad tidings of great joy.” For this is the first
promise that was made of a Saviour to the apostate race of _Adam_. We
generally look for CHRIST only in the New Testament; but christianity,
in one sense, is very near as old as the creation. It is wonderful
to observe how gradually GOD revealed his Son to mankind. He began
with the promise in the text, and this the elect lived upon, till the
time of _Abraham_. To him, GOD made further discoveries of his eternal
council concerning man’s redemption. Afterwards, at sundry times, and
in divers manners, GOD spoke to the fathers by the prophets, till at
length the LORD JESUS himself was manifested in flesh, and came and
tabernacled amongst us.

This first promise must certainly be but dark to our first parents, in
comparison of that great light which we enjoy: And yet, dark as it was,
we may assure ourselves they built upon it their hopes of everlasting
salvation, and by that faith were saved.

How they came to stand in need of this promise, and what is the extent
and meaning of it, I intend, GOD willing, to make the subject-matter of
your present meditation.

The fall of man is written in too legible characters not to be
understood: Those that deny it, by their denying, prove it. The very
heathens confessed, and bewailed it: They could see the streams of
corruption running through the whole race of mankind, but could not
trace them to the fountain-head. Before GOD gave a revelation of his
Son, man was a riddle to himself. And _Moses_ unfolds more, in this one
chapter (out of which the text is taken) than all mankind could have
been capable of finding out of themselves, though they had studied to
all eternity.

In the preceding chapter he had given us a full account, how GOD spoke
the world into being; and especially how he formed man of the dust of
the earth, and breathed into him the breath of life, so that he became
a living soul. A council of the Trinity was called concerning the
formation of this lovely creature. The result of that council was, “Let
us make man in our image, after our likeness. So GOD created man in
his own image, in the image of GOD created he him.” _Moses_ remarkably
repeats these words, that we might take particular notice of our divine
Original. Never was so much expressed in so few words: None but a man
inspired could have done so. But it is remarkable, that though _Moses_
mentions our being made in the image of GOD, yet he mentions it but
twice, and that in a transient manner; as though he would have said,
“man was made in honour, GOD made him upright, ‘in the image of GOD,
male and female created he them.’ But man so soon fell, and became like
the beasts that perish, nay, like the devil himself, that it is scarce
worth mentioning.”

How soon man fell after he was created, is not told us; and therefore,
to fix any time, is to be wise above what is written. And, I think,
they who suppose that man fell the same day in which he was made,
have no sufficient ground for their opinion. The many things which
are crouded together in the former chapter, such as the formation
of _Adam_’s wife, his giving names to the beasts, and his being put
into the garden which GOD had planted, I think require a longer space
of time than a day to be transacted in. However, all agree in this,
“man stood not long.” How long, or how short a while, I will not take
upon me to determine. It more concerns us to enquire, how he came
to fall from his stedfastness, and what was the rise and progress of
the temptation which prevailed over him. The account given us in this
chapter concerning it, is very full; and it may do us much service,
under GOD, to make some remarks upon it.

“Now the serpent (says the sacred historian) was more subtile than
any beast of the field which the LORD GOD had made; and he said unto
the woman, Yea, hath GOD said, ye shall not eat of every tree of the
garden?”

Though this was a real serpent, yet he that spoke was no other than
the devil; from hence, perhaps, called the old serpent, because he took
possession of the serpent when he came to beguile our first parents.
The devil envied the happiness of man, who was made, as some think, to
supply the place of the fallen angels. GOD made man upright, and with
full power to stand if he would: He was just, therefore, in suffering
him to be tempted. If he fell, he had no one to blame except himself.
But how must satan effect his fall? He cannot do it by his power, he
attempts it therefore by policy: he takes possession of a serpent,
which was more subtile than all the beasts of the field, which the LORD
GOD had made; so that men who are full of subtilty, but have no piety,
are only machines for the devil to work upon, just as he pleases.

“And he said unto the woman.” Here is an instance of his subtilty. He
says unto the woman, the weaker vessel, and when she was alone from her
husband, and therefore was more liable to be overcome; “Yea, hath GOD
said, ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?” These words are
certainly spoken in answer to something which the devil either saw or
heard. In all probability, the woman was now near the tree of knowledge
of good and evil; (for we shall find her, by and by, plucking an apple
from it) perhaps she might be looking at, and wondering what there was
in that tree more than the others, that she and her husband should be
forbidden to taste of it. Satan seeing this, and coveting to draw her
into a parley with him, (for if the devil can persuade us not to resist,
but to commune with him, he hath gained a great point) he says, “Yea,
hath GOD said, ye shall not eat of every tree in the garden?” The
first thing he does is to persuade her, if possible, to entertain hard
thoughts of GOD; this is his general way of dealing with GOD’s children:
“Yea, hath GOD said, ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?
What! hath GOD planted a garden, and placed you in the midst of it,
only to teaze and perplex you? hath he planted a garden, and yet forbid
you making use of any of the fruits of it at all?” It was impossible
for him to ask a more insnaring question, in order to gain his end:
for _Eve_ was here seemingly obliged to answer, and vindicate GOD’s
goodness. And therefore,――

Verse 2, 3. The woman said unto the serpent, “We may eat of the fruit
of the trees of the garden: But of the fruit of the tree which is in
the midst of the garden, GOD hath said, ye shall not eat of it, neither
shall ye touch it, lest ye die.”

The former part of the answer was good, “We may eat of the fruit of the
trees of the garden, GOD has not forbid us eating of every tree of the
garden. No; we may eat of the fruit of the trees in the garden (and,
it should seem, even of the tree of life, which was as a sacrament to
man in a state of innocence) there is only one tree in the midst of the
garden, of which GOD hath said, ye shall not eat of it, neither shall
ye touch it, lest ye die.” Here she begins to warp, and sin begins to
conceive in her heart. Already she has contracted some of the serpent’s
poison, by talking with him, which she ought not to have done at all.
For she might easily suppose, that it could be no good being, that
could put such a question unto her, and insinuate such dishonourable
thoughts of GOD. She should therefore have fled from him, and not stood
to have parleyed with him at all. Immediately the ill effects of it
appear, she begins to soften the divine threatning. GOD had said, “the
day thou eatest thereof, _thou shalt surely die_;” or, dying thou shalt
die. But _Eve_ says, “Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it,
_lest ye die_.” We may be assured we are fallen into, and begin to fall
by temptation, when we begin to think GOD will not be as good as his
word, in respect to the execution of his threatnings denounced against
sin. Satan knew this, and therefore artfully

“Said unto the woman, (verse 4.) Ye shall not surely die,” in an
insinuating manner, “Ye shall not surely die. Surely, GOD will not be
so cruel as to damn you only for eating an apple, it cannot be.” Alas!
how many does Satan lead captive at his will, by flattering them, that
they shall not surely die; that hell-torments will not be eternal; that
GOD is all mercy; that he therefore will not punish a few years sin
with an eternity of misery? But _Eve_ found GOD as good as his word;
and so will all they who go on in sin, under a false hope that they
shall not surely die.

We may also understand the words spoken positively, and this is
agreeable to what follows; You shall not surely die; “It is all a
delusion, a mere bugbear, to keep you in a servile subjection.”

For (verse 5.) “GOD doth know, that in the day ye eat thereof, then
shall your eyes be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and
evil.”

What child of GOD can expect to escape slander, when GOD himself was
thus slandered even in paradise? Surely the understanding of _Eve_ must
have been, in some measure, blinded, or she would not have suffered the
tempter to speak such perverse things. In what odious colours is GOD
here represented! “GOD doth know, that in the day ye eat thereof, ye
shall be as gods,” (equal with GOD.) So that the grand temptation was,
that they should be hereafter under no controul, equal, if not superior,
to GOD that made them, knowing good and evil. _Eve_ could not tell what
Satan meant by this; but, to be sure, she understood it of some great
privilege which they were to enjoy. And thus Satan now points out a way
which seems right to sinners, but does not tell them the end of that
way is death.

To give strength and force to this temptation, in all probability,
Satan, or the serpent, at this time plucked an apple from the tree,
and ate it before _Eve_; by which _Eve_ might be induced to think,
that the sagacity and power of speech, which the serpent had above the
other beasts, must be owing, in a great measure, to his eating that
fruit; and, therefore, if he received so much improvement, she might
also expect a like benefit from it. All this, I think, is clear; for,
otherwise, I do not see with what propriety it could be said, “When the
woman saw that it was good for food.” How could she know it was good
for food, unless she had seen the serpent feed upon it?

Satan now begins to get ground apace. Lust had conceived in _Eve_’s
heart; shortly it will bring forth sin. Sin being conceived, brings
forth death. Verse 6. “And when the woman saw that the tree was good
for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be
desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat,
and gave also unto her husband, and he did eat.”

Our senses are the landing ports of our spiritual enemies. How needful
is that resolution of holy _Job_, “I have made a covenant with mine
eyes!” When _Eve_ began to gaze on the forbidden fruit with her eyes,
she soon began to long after it with her heart. When she saw that it
was good for food, and pleasant to the eyes, (here was the lust of the
flesh, and lust of the eye) but, above all, a tree to be desired to
make one wise, wiser than GOD would have her be, nay, as wise as GOD
himself; she took of the fruit thereof, and gave also unto her husband
with her, and he did eat. As soon as ever she sinned herself, she
turned tempter to her husband. It is dreadful, when those, who should
be help-meets for each other in the great work of their salvation,
are only promoters of each other’s damnation: but thus it is. If we
ourselves are good, we shall excite others to goodness; if we do evil,
we shall entice others to do evil also. There is a close connection
between doing and teaching. How needful then is it for us all to
take heed that we do not sin any way ourselves, lest we should become
factors for the devil, and insnare, perhaps, our nearest and dearest
relatives? “she gave also unto her husband with her, and he did eat.”

Alas! what a complication of crimes was there in this one single act
of sin! Here is an utter disbelief of GOD’s threatning; the utmost
ingratitude to their Maker, who had so lately planted this garden,
and placed them in it, with such a glorious and comprehensive charter.
And, the utmost neglect of their posterity, who they knew were to stand
or fall with them. Here was the utmost pride of heart: they wanted to
be equal with GOD. Here’s the utmost contempt put upon his threatning
and his law: the devil is credited and obeyed before him, and all this
only to satisfy their sensual appetite. Never was a crime of such a
complicated nature committed by any here below: Nothing but the devil’s
apostasy and rebellion could equal it.

And what are the consequences of their disobedience? Are their eyes
opened? Yes, their eyes are opened; but, alas! it is only to see their
own nakedness. For we are told (verse 7.) “That the eyes of them both
were opened, and they knew that they were naked.” Naked of GOD, naked
of every thing that was holy and good, and destitute of the divine
image, which they before enjoyed. They might rightly now be termed
_Ichabod_; for the glory of the LORD departed from them. O how low did
these sons of the morning then fall! out of GOD, into themselves; from
being partakers of the divine nature, into the nature of the devil and
the beast. Well, therefore, might they know that they were naked, not
only in body, but in soul.

And how do they behave now they are naked? Do they flee to GOD for
pardon? Do they seek to GOD for a robe to cover their nakedness? No,
they were now dead to GOD, and became earthly, sensual, devilish:
therefore, instead of applying to GOD for mercy, “they sewed or platted
fig-leaves together, and made themselves aprons,” or things to gird
about them. This is a lively representation of all natural men: we see
that we are naked: we, in some measure, confess it; but, instead of
looking up to GOD for succour, we patch up a righteousness of our own
(as our first-parents platted fig-leaves together) hoping to cover our
nakedness by that. But our righteousness will not stand the severity of
GOD’s judgment: it will do us no more service than the fig-leaves did
_Adam_ and _Eve_, that is, none at all.

For (verse 8.) “They heard the voice of the LORD GOD walking in the
trees of the garden, in the cool of the day; and _Adam_ and his wife
(notwithstanding their fig-leaves) hid themselves from the presence of
the LORD GOD, among the trees of the garden.”

They heard the voice of the LORD GOD, or the Word of the LORD GOD, even
the LORD JESUS CHRIST, who is “the word that was with GOD, and the word
that was GOD.” They heard him walking in the trees of the garden, in
the cool of the day. A season, perhaps, when _Adam_ and _Eve_ used to
go, in an especial manner, and offer up an evening-sacrifice of praise
and thanksgiving. The cool of the day. Perhaps the sin was committed
early in the morning, or at noon; but GOD would not come upon them
immediately, he staid till the cool of the day. And if we would
effectually reprove others, we should not do it when they are warmed
with passion, but wait till the cool of the day.

But what an alteration is here! Instead of rejoicing at the voice
of their beloved, instead of meeting him with open arms and inlarged
hearts, as before, they now hide themselves in the trees of the garden.
Alas, what a foolish attempt was this? Surely they must be naked,
otherwise how could they think of hiding themselves from GOD? Whither
could they flee from his presence? But, by their fall, they had
contracted an enmity against GOD: they now hated, and were afraid to
converse with GOD their Maker. And is not this our case by nature?
Assuredly it is. We labour to cover our nakedness with the fig-leaves
of our own righteousness: We hide ourselves from GOD as long as we can,
and will not come, and never should come, did not the Father prevent,
draw, and sweetly constrain us by his grace, as he here prevented
_Adam_.

Verse 9. “And the LORD GOD called unto _Adam_, and said unto him,
_Adam_, where art thou?”

“The LORD GOD called unto _Adam_,” (for otherwise _Adam_ would never
have called unto the LORD GOD) and said, “_Adam_, where art thou? How
is it that thou comest not to pay thy devotions as usual?” Christians,
remember the LORD keeps an account when you fail coming to worship.
Whenever therefore you are tempted to withhold your attendance, let
each of you fancy you heard the LORD GOD calling unto you, and saying,
“O man, O woman, where art thou?” It may be understood in another and
better sense; “_Adam_, where art thou?” What a condition is thy poor
soul in? This is the first thing the LORD asks and convinces a sinner
of; when he prevents and calls him effectually by his grace; he also
calls him by name; for unless GOD speaks to us in particular, and we
know where we are, how poor, how miserable, how blind, how naked, we
shall never value the redemption wrought out for us by the death and
obedience of the dear LORD JESUS. “_Adam_, where art thou?”

Verse 10. “And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was
afraid.” See what cowards sin makes us. If we knew no sin, we should
know no fear. “Because I was naked, and I hid myself.” Verse 11. “And
he said, who told thee that thou wast naked? Hast thou eaten of the
tree, whereof I (thy Maker and Law-giver) commanded thee, that thou
shouldst not eat?”

GOD knew very well that _Adam_ was naked, and that he had eaten of
the forbidden fruit. But GOD would know it from _Adam_’s own mouth.
Thus GOD knows all our necessities before we ask, but yet insists upon
our asking for his grace, and confessing our sins. For, by such acts,
we acknowledge our dependence upon GOD, take shame to ourselves, and
thereby give glory to his great name.

Verse 12. “And the man said, the woman which thou gavest to be with me,
she gave me of the tree, and I did eat.”

Never was nature more lively delineated. See what pride _Adam_
contracted by the fall! How unwilling he is to lay the blame upon, or
take shame to himself. This answer is full of insolence towards GOD,
enmity against his wife, and disingenuity in respect to himself. For
herein he tacitly reflects upon GOD. “The woman that _thou_ gavest
to be with me.” As much as to say, if _thou_ hadst not given me _that
woman_, I had not eaten the forbidden fruit. Thus, when men sin, they
lay the fault upon their passions; then blame and reflect upon GOD for
giving them those passions. Their language is, “the appetites that thou
gavest us, they deceived us; and therefore we sinned against thee.”
But, as GOD, notwithstanding, punished _Adam_ for hearkning to the
voice of his wife, so he will punish those who hearken to the dictates
of their corrupt inclinations: For GOD compels no man to sin. _Adam_
might have withstood the solicitations of his wife, if he would. And
so, if we look up to GOD, we should find grace to help in the time
of need. The devil and our own hearts tempt, but they cannot force
us to consent, without the concurrence of our own wills. So that our
damnation is of ourselves, as it will evidently appear at the great
day, notwithstanding all mens present impudent replies against GOD. As
_Adam_ speaks insolently in respect to GOD, so he speaks with enmity
against his wife; the woman, or this woman, she gave me. He lays all
the fault upon her, and speaks of her with much contempt. He does not
say, my wife, my dear wife; but, _this woman_. Sin disunites the most
united hearts: it is the bane of holy fellowship. Those who have been
companions in sin here, if they die without repentance, will both hate
and condemn one another hereafter. All damned souls are accusers of
their brethren. Thus it is, in some degree, on this side the grave.
“The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the tree,
and I did eat.” What a disingenuous speech was here! He makes use of no
less than fifteen words to excuse himself, and but one or two (in the
original) to confess his fault, if it may be called a confession at all.
“The woman which thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the tree;”
here are fifteen words; “And I did eat.” With what reluctance do these
last words come out? How soon are they uttered? “And I did eat.” But
thus it is with an unhumbled, unregenerate heart: It will be laying
the fault upon the dearest friend in the world, nay, upon GOD himself,
rather than take shame to itself. This pride we are all subject to
by the fall; and, till our hearts are broken, and made contrite by
the spirit of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, we shall be always charging GOD
foolishly. “Against thee, and thee only, have I sinned, that thou
mightest be justified in thy saying, and clear when thou art judged,”
is the language of none but those, who, like _David_, are willing to
confess their faults, and are truly sorry for their sins. This was not
the case of _Adam_: his heart was not broken; and therefore he lays the
fault of his disobedience upon his wife and GOD, and not upon himself;
“The woman which thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the tree,
and I did eat.”

Verse 13. “And the LORD GOD said, What is this that thou hast done?”
What a wonderful concern does GOD express in this expostulation! “What
a deluge of misery hast thou brought upon thyself, thy husband, and
thy posterity? What is this that thou hast done? Disobeyed thy GOD,
obeyed the devil, and ruined thy husband, for whom I made thee to be an
help-meet! What is this that thou hast done?” GOD would here awaken her
to a sense of her crime and danger, and therefore, as it were, thunders
in her ears: for the law must be preached to self-righteous sinners. We
must take care of healing before we see sinners wounded, lest we should
say, Peace, peace, where there is no peace. Secure sinners must hear
the thunderings of mount _Sinai_, before we bring them to mount _Sion_.
They who never preach up the law, it is to be feared, are unskilful
in delivering the glad tidings of the gospel. Every minister should
be a _Boanerges_, a son of thunder, as well as a _Barnabas_, a son
of consolation. There was an earthquake and a whirlwind, before the
small still voice came to _Elijah_: We must first shew people they are
condemned, and then shew them how they must be saved. But how and when
to preach the law, and when to apply the promises of the gospel, wisdom
is profitable to direct. “And the LORD GOD said unto the woman, What is
this that thou hast done?”

“And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.” She does
not make use of so many words to excuse herself, as her husband; but
her heart is as unhumbled as his. What is this, says GOD, that thou
hast done? GOD here charges her with doing it. She dares not deny the
fact, or say, I have not done it; but she takes all the blame off
herself, and lays it upon the serpent; “The serpent beguiled me, and I
did eat.” She does not say, “LORD, I was to blame for talking with the
serpent; LORD, I did wrong, in not hastening to my husband, when he
put the first question to me; LORD, I plead guilty, I only am to blame,
O let not my poor husband suffer for my wickedness!” This would have
been the language of her heart, had she now been a true penitent. But
both were now alike proud; therefore neither will lay the blame upon
themselves: “The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. The woman which
thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat.”

I have been the more particular in remarking this part of their
behaviour, because it tends so much to the magnifying of Free-grace,
and plainly shews us, that salvation cometh only from the LORD. Let
us take a short view of the miserable circumstances our first parents
were now in: They were legally and spiritually dead, children of
wrath, and heirs of hell. They had eaten the fruit, of which GOD had
commanded them, that they should not eat; and when arraigned before
GOD, notwithstanding their crime was so complicated, they could not be
brought to confess it. What reason can be given, why sentence of death
should not be pronounced against the prisoners at the bar? All must own
they are worthy to die. Nay, how can GOD, consistently with his justice,
possibly forgive them? He had threatened, that the day wherein they
eat of the forbidden fruit, they should “surely die;” and, if he did
not execute this threatening, the devil might then slander the Almighty
indeed. And yet mercy cries, spare these sinners, spare the work of
thine own hands. Behold, then, wisdom contrives a scheme how GOD may be
just, and yet be merciful; be faithful to his threatening, punish the
offence, and at the same time spare the offender. An amazing scene of
divine love here opens to our view, which had been from all eternity
hid in the heart of GOD! Notwithstanding _Adam_ and _Eve_ were thus
unhumbled, and did not so much as put up one single petition for pardon,
GOD immediately passes sentence upon the serpent, and reveals to them a
Saviour.

Verse 14. “And the LORD GOD said unto the serpent, because thou hast
done this, thou art accursed above all cattle, and above every beast
of the field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat
all the days of thy life;” _i. e._ he should be in subjection, and his
power should always be limited and restrained. “His enemies shall lick
the very dust,” says the Psalmist. (Verse 15.) “And I will put enmity
between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed: it shall
bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.”

Before I proceed to the explanation of this verse, I cannot but take
notice of one great mistake which the author of the _Whole Duty of Man_
is guilty of, in making this verse contain a covenant between GOD and
_Adam_, as though GOD now personally treated with _Adam_, as before the
fall. For, talking of the second covenant in his preface, concerning
caring for the soul, says he, “This second covenant was made with
_Adam_, and us in him, presently after the fall, and is briefly
contained in these words, _Genesis_ iii. 15. where GOD declares, ‘The
seed of the woman shall break the serpent’s head;’ and this was made
up, as the first was, of some mercies to be afforded by GOD, and some
duties to be performed by us.” This is exceeding false divinity: for
these words are not spoken to _Adam_; they are directed only to the
serpent. _Adam_ and _Eve_ stood by as criminals, and GOD could not
treat with them, because they had broken his covenant. And it is so far
from being a covenant wherein “some mercies are to be afforded by GOD,
and some duties to be performed by us,” that here is not a word looking
that way; it is only a declaration of a free gift of salvation through
JESUS CHRIST our LORD. GOD the Father and GOD the Son had entered into
a covenant concerning the salvation of the elect from all eternity,
wherein GOD the Father promised, That, if the Son would offer his soul
a sacrifice for sin, he should see his seed. Now this is an open
revelation of this secret covenant, and therefore GOD speaks in the
most positive terms, “It shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise
his heel.” The first _Adam_, GOD had treated with before; he proved
false: GOD therefore, to secure the second covenant from being broken,
puts it into the hands of the second _Adam_, the LORD from heaven.
_Adam_, after the fall, stood no longer as our representative; he
and _Eve_ were only private persons, as we are, and were only to lay
hold on the declaration of mercy contained in this promise by faith,
(as they really did) and by that they were saved. I do not say but
we are to believe and obey, if we are everlastingly saved. Faith and
obedience are conditions, if we only mean that they in order go before
our salvation; but I deny that these are proposed by GOD to _Adam_,
or that GOD treats with him in this promise, as he did before the fall
under the covenant of works. For how could that be, when _Adam_ and
_Eve_ were now prisoners at the bar, without strength to perform any
conditions at all? The truth is this: GOD, as a reward of CHRIST’s
sufferings, promised to give the elect faith and repentance, in order
to bring them to eternal life: and both these, and every thing else
necessary for their everlasting happiness, are infallibly secured to
them in this promise; as Mr. _Boston_, an excellent _Scots_ divine,
clearly shews, in a book entitled, “A view of the covenant of grace.”

This is by no means an unnecessary distinction; it is a matter of great
importance: for want of knowing this, people have been so long misled.
They have been taught that they must do so and so, as though they were
under a covenant of works, and then for DOING this, they should be
saved. Whereas, on the contrary, people should be taught, That the LORD
JESUS was the second _Adam_, with whom the Father entered into covenant
for fallen man; That they can now do nothing of or for themselves, and
should therefore come to GOD, beseeching him to give them faith, by
which they shall be enabled to lay hold on the righteousness of CHRIST;
and that faith they will then shew forth by their works, out of love
and gratitude to the ever-blessed JESUS, their most glorious Redeemer,
for what he has done for their souls. This is a consistent scriptural
scheme: without holding this, we must run into one of those two bad
extremes; I mean, _Antinomianism_ on the one hand, or _Arminianism_ on
the other: from both which may the good LORD deliver us!

But to proceed: By the seed of the woman, we are here to understand the
LORD JESUS CHRIST, who, though very GOD of very GOD, was, for us men
and our salvation, to have ♦a body prepared for him by the Holy Ghost,
and to be born of a woman who never knew man, and by his obedience
and death make an atonement for man’s transgression, and bring in
an everlasting righteousness, work in them a new nature, and thereby
bruise the serpent’s head, _i. e._ destroy his power and dominion over
them. By the serpent’s seed, we are to understand the devil and all his
children, who are permitted by GOD to tempt and sift his children. But,
blessed be GOD, he can reach no further than our heel.

    ♦ duplicate word “a” removed

It is not to be doubted but _Adam_ and _Eve_ understood this promise
in this sense; for it is plain, in the latter part of the chapter,
sacrifices were instituted. From whence should those skins come, but
from beasts slain for sacrifice, of which GOD made them coats? We find
_Abel_, as well as _Cain_, offering sacrifice in the next chapter: and
the Apostle tells us, he did it by faith, no doubt in this promise.
And _Eve_, when _Cain_ was _born_, said, “I have gotten a man from
the LORD;” or, (as Mr. _Henry_ observes, it may be rendered) “I have
gotten a man,――the Lord,――the promised Messiah.” Some further suppose,
that _Eve_ was the first believer; and therefore they translate it thus,
“The seed, (not of the, but) of this woman:” which magnifies the grace
of GOD so much the more, that she, who was first in the transgression,
should be the first partaker of redemption. _Adam_ believed also, and
was saved: for unto _Adam_ and his wife did the LORD GOD make coats of
skins, and cloathed them: which was a remarkable type of their being
clothed with the righteousness of our LORD JESUS CHRIST.

This promise was literally fulfilled in the person of our LORD JESUS
CHRIST. Satan bruised his heel, when he tempted him for forty days
together in the wilderness: he bruised his heel, when he raised up
strong persecution against him during the time of his public ministry:
he in an especial manner bruised his heel, when our LORD complained,
that his soul was exceeding sorrowful, even unto death, and he sweat
great drops of blood falling upon the ground, in the garden: He bruised
his heel, when he put it into the heart of _Judas_ to betray him: and
he bruised him yet most of all, when his emissaries nailed him to an
accursed tree, and our LORD cried out, “My GOD, my GOD, why hast thou
forsaken me?” Yet, in all this, the blessed JESUS, the seed of the
woman, bruised Satan’s accursed head: for, in that he was tempted,
he was able to succour those that are tempted. By his stripes we
are healed. The chastisement of our peace was upon him. By dying,
he destroyed him that had the power of death, that is, the devil. He
thereby spoiled principalities and powers, and made a shew of them
openly, triumphing over them upon the cross.

This promise has been fulfilled in the elect of GOD, considered
collectively, as well before, as since the coming of our LORD in the
flesh: for they may be called, the seed of the woman. Marvel not,
that all who will live godly in CHRIST JESUS, must suffer persecution.
In this promise, there is an eternal enmity put between the seed of
the woman, and the seed of the serpent; so that those that are born
after the flesh, cannot but persecute those that are born after the
spirit. This enmity shewed itself, soon after this promise was revealed,
in _Cain_’s bruising the heel of _Abel_: it continued in the church
through all ages before CHRIST came in the flesh, as the history of
the Bible, and the xith chapter of the _Hebrews_, plainly shew. It
raged exceedingly after our LORD’s ascension; witness the _Acts of the
Apostles_, and the History of the Primitive Christians. It now rages,
and will continue to rage and shew itself, in a greater or less degree,
to the end of time. But let not this dismay us; for in all this, the
seed of the woman is more than conqueror, and bruises the serpent’s
head. Thus the _Israelites_, the more they were oppressed, the more
they increased. Thus it was with the Apostles; thus it was with their
immediate followers. So that _Tertullian_ compares the church in his
time to a mowed field; the more frequently it is cut, the more it
grows. The blood of the martyrs was always the seed of the church. And
I have often sat down with wonder and delight, and admired how GOD has
made the very schemes which his enemies contrived, in order to hinder,
become the most effectual means to propagate his gospel. The devil has
had so little success in persecution, that if I did not know that he
and his children, according to this verse, could not but persecute,
I should think he would count it his strength to sit still. What did
he get by persecuting the martyrs in Queen _Mary_’s time? Was not the
grace of GOD exceedingly glorified in their support? What did he get
by persecuting the good old Puritans? Did it not prove the peopling
of _New-England_? Or, to come nearer our own times, what has he got
by putting _us_ out of the synagogues? Hath not the word of GOD,
since that, mightily prevailed? My dear hearers, you must excuse me
for enlarging on this head; GOD fills my soul generally, when I come to
this topic. I can say with _Luther_, “If it were not for persecution,
I should not understand the scripture.” If Satan should be yet
suffered to bruise my heel further, and his servants should thrust me
into prison, I doubt not, but even that would only tend to the more
effectual bruising of his head. I remember a saying of the then Lord
Chancellor to the pious _Bradford_: “Thou hast done more hurt, said he,
by thy exhortations in private in prison, than thou didst in preaching
before thou wast put in,” or words to this effect. The promise of the
text is my daily support; “I will put enmity between thy seed and her
seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.”

Further: this promise is also fulfilled, not only in the church in
general, but in every individual believer in particular. In every
believer there are two seeds, the seed of the woman, and the seed
of the serpent; the flesh lusting against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh. It is with the believer, when quickened with grace
in his heart, as it was with _Rebekah_, when she had conceived _Esau_
and _Jacob_ in her womb; she felt a struggling, and began to be uneasy;
“If it be so, says she, why am I thus?” Thus grace and nature struggle
(if I may so speak) in the womb of a believer’s heart: but, as it was
there said, “The elder shall serve the younger;” so it is here,――grace
in the end shall get the better of nature; the seed of the woman shall
bruise the serpent’s head. Many of you that have believed in CHRIST,
perhaps may find some particular corruption yet strong, so strong, that
you are sometimes ready to cry out with _David_, “I shall fall one day
by the hand of _Saul_.” But, fear not, the promise in the text insures
the perseverance and victory of believers over sin, Satan, death, and
hell. What if indwelling corruption does yet remain, and the seed of
the serpent bruise your heel, in vexing and disturbing your righteous
souls? Fear not, though faint, yet pursue: you shall yet bruise the
serpent’s head. CHRIST hath died for you; and yet a little while,
and he will send death to destroy the very being of sin in you. Which
brings me

To shew the most extensive manner in which the promise of the text
shall be fulfilled, viz. at the final judgment, when the LORD JESUS
shall present the elect to his Father, without spot or wrinkle, or any
such thing, glorified both in body and soul.

Then shall the seed of the woman give the last and fatal blow, in
bruising the serpent’s head. Satan, the accuser of the brethren, and
all his accursed seed, shall then be cast out, and never suffered to
disturb the seed of the woman any more. Then shall the righteous shine
as the sun in the kingdom of their Father, and sit with CHRIST on
thrones in majesty on high.

Let us, therefore, not be weary of well-doing; for we shall reap
an eternal harvest of comfort, if we faint not. Dare, dare, my dear
brethren in CHRIST, to follow the Captain of your salvation, who was
made perfect through sufferings. The seed of the woman shall bruise
the serpent’s head. Fear not men. Be not too much cast down at the
deceitfulness of your hearts. Fear not devils; you shall get the
victory even over them. The LORD JESUS has engaged to make you more
than conquerors over all. Plead with your Saviour, plead: plead the
promise in the text. Wrestle, wrestle with GOD in prayer. If it has
been given you to believe, fear not if it should also be given you to
suffer. Be not any wise terrified by your adversaries; the king of the
church has them all in a chain: be kind to them, pray for them; but
fear them not. The LORD will yet bring back his ark, though at present
driven into the wilderness; and Satan like lightening shall fall from
heaven.

Are there any enemies of GOD here? The promise of the text encourages
me to bid you defiance: the seed of the woman, the ever-blessed JESUS,
shall bruise the serpent’s head. What signifies all your malice? You
are only raging waves of the sea, foaming out your own shame. For you,
without repentance, is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. The
LORD JESUS sits in heaven, ruling over all, and causing all things to
work for his childrens good: he laughs you to scorn: he hath you in the
utmost derision, and therefore so will I. Who are you that persecute
the children of the ever-blessed GOD? Though a poor stripling, the LORD
JESUS, the seed of the woman, will enable me to bruise your heads.

My brethren in CHRIST, I think I do not speak thus in my own strength,
but in the strength of my Redeemer. I know in whom I have believed; I
am persuaded he will keep that safe, which I have committed unto him.
He is faithful who hath promised, that the seed of the woman shall
bruise the serpent’s head. May we all experience a daily completion of
this promise, both in the church and in our hearts, till we come to the
church of the first-born, the spirits of just men made perfect, in the
presence and actual fruition of the great GOD our heavenly Father!

  To whom, with the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all honour,
    power, might, majesty, and dominion, now and for evermore.
    _Amen._




                              SERMON II.

                           Walking with GOD.


                            GENESIS v. 24.

  _And |Enoch| walked with GOD, and he was not, for GOD took him._

VARIOUS are the pleas and arguments, which men of corrupt minds
frequently urge against yielding obedience to the just and holy
commands of GOD. But, perhaps, one of the most common objections
that they make is this, that our LORD’s commands are not practicable,
because contrary to flesh and blood; and consequently, that he is “an
hard master, reaping where he has not sown, and gathering where he has
not strewed.” These we find were the sentiments entertained by that
wicked and slothful servant mentioned in the xxvth of St. _Matthew_;
and are undoubtedly the same with many which are maintained in the
present wicked and adulterous generation. The Holy Ghost foreseeing
this, hath taken care to inspire holy men of old, to record the
examples of many holy men and women; who, even under the Old Testament
dispensation, were enabled chearfully to take CHRIST’s yoke upon them,
and counted his service perfect freedom. The large catalogue of saints,
confessors, and martyrs, drawn up in the xith chapter to the _Hebrews_,
abundantly evidences the truth of this observation. What a great cloud
of witnesses have we there presented to our view? All eminent for their
faith, but some shining with a greater degree of lustre than do others.
The proto-martyr _Abel_, leads the van. And next to him, we find
_Enoch_ mentioned, not only because he was next in order of time, but
also on account of his exalted piety. He is spoken of in the words
of the text in a very extraordinary manner. We have here a short but
very full and glorious account, both of his behaviour in this world,
and the triumphant manner of his entering into the next. The former is
contained in these words, “And _Enoch_ walked with GOD.” The latter in
these, “and he was not: for GOD took him.” He was not; i. e. He was not
found, he was not taken away in the common manner, he did not see death;
for _Hebrews_ xi. 5. GOD had translated him. Who this _Enoch_ was, does
not appear so plainly. To me, he seems to have been a person of public
character. I suppose, like _Noah_, a preacher of righteousness. And,
if we may credit the Apostle _Jude_, he was a flaming preacher. For
he quotes one of his prophecies, wherein he saith, “Behold, the LORD
cometh with ten thousand of his saints, to execute judgment upon all,
and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly
deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches,
which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.” But whether a public
or private person, he has a noble testimony given him in the lively
oracles. The author of the epistle to the _Hebrews_ saith, that before
his translation he had this testimony, “that he pleased GOD;” and
his being translated, was a proof of it beyond all doubt. And I would
observe, that it was wonderful wisdom in GOD to translate _Enoch_ and
_Elijah_ under the Old Testament dispensation, that hereafter when
it should be asserted, that the LORD JESUS was carried into heaven,
it might not seem a thing altogether incredible to the _Jews_; since
they themselves confessed, that two of their own prophets had been
translated several hundred years before. But it is not my design
to detain you any longer, by enlarging, or making observations on
_Enoch_’s short, but comprehensive character. The thing I have in view,
being to give a discourse, as the LORD shall enable, upon a weighty
and a very important subject; I mean, _walking with_ GOD. “And _Enoch_
walked with GOD.” If so much as this can be truly said of you and me
after our decease, we shall not have any reason to complain, that we
have lived in vain.

In handling my intended subject, I shall,

_First_, Endeavour to shew, what is implied in these words, _walked
with_ GOD.

_Secondly_, I shall prescribe some means, upon the due observance of
which, believers may keep up and maintain their _walk with_ GOD. And,

_Thirdly_, Offer some motives to stir us up, if we never walked with
GOD before, to come and walk with GOD now. The whole shall be closed
with a word or two of application.

_First_, I am to shew what is implied in these words, “walked with
GOD;” or in other words, what we are to understand by _walking with_
GOD.

And _First_, _Walking with_ GOD, implies, that the prevailing power of
the enmity of a person’s heart, be taken away by the blessed Spirit of
GOD. Perhaps it may seem a hard saying to some, but our own experience
daily proves, what the scripture in many places assert, that the carnal
mind, the mind of the unconverted, natural man, nay, the mind of the
regenerate, so far as any part of him remains unrenewed, is enmity,
not only an enemy, but “enmity itself against GOD; so that it is not
subject to the law of GOD, neither indeed can it be.” Indeed one may
well wonder that any creature, especially that lovely creature man,
made after his Maker’s own image, should ever have any enmity, much
less a prevailing enmity against that very GOD in whom he lives,
and moves, and hath his being. But alas! so it is. Our first parents
contracted it when they fell from GOD by eating the forbidden fruit,
and the bitter and malignant contagion of it, hath descended to, and
quite overspread their whole posterity. This enmity discovered itself,
in _Adam_’s endeavouring to hide himself in the trees of the garden.
When he heard the voice of the LORD GOD, instead of running with an
open heart, saying, Here am I; alas! he now wanted no communion with
GOD; and still more discovered his lately contracted enmity, by the
excuse he made to the Most High. “The woman, or this woman, thou gavest
to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat.” By saying thus,
he in effect lays all the fault upon GOD; as though he had said, if
thou hadst not given me this woman, I had not sinned against thee, so
thou mayst thank thyself for my transgression. In the same manner this
enmity works in the hearts of _Adam_’s children. They now and again
find something rising against GOD, and saying even unto GOD, what
doest thou? “It scorns any meaner competitor (says the learned Doctor
_Owen_ in his excellent treatise on indwelling sin) than GOD himself.”
Its command is like that of the _Assyrians_ in respect to _Ahab_,
Shoot only at the King. And it strikes against every thing that has
the appearance of real piety, as the _Assyrians_ shot at _Jehosaphat_
in _Ahab_’s cloathes. But the opposition ceases when it finds that
it is only an appearance, as the _Assyrians_ left off shooting at
_Jehosaphat_, when they perceived it was not _Ahab_ they were shooting
at. This enmity discovered itself in accursed _Cain_; he hated and
slew his brother _Abel_, because _Abel_ loved, and was peculiarly
favoured by his GOD. And this same enmity rules and prevails in every
man that is naturally engendered of the offspring of _Adam_. Hence that
averseness to prayer and holy duties, which we find in children, and
very often in grown persons, who have notwithstanding been blessed with
a religious education. And all that open sin and wickedness, which like
a deluge has overflowed the world, are only so many streams running
from this dreadful, contagious fountain; I mean the enmity of man’s
desperately wicked and deceitful heart. He that cannot set his seal to
this, knows nothing yet, in a saving manner, of the holy scriptures,
or of the power of GOD. And all that do know this, will readily
acknowledge, that before a person can be said to walk with GOD, the
prevailing power of this heart-enmity must be destroyed. For persons
do not use to walk and keep company together, who entertain an
irreconcilable enmity and hatred against one another. Observe me, I
say, the prevailing power of this enmity must be taken away. For the
inbeing of it will never be totally removed, till we bow down our heads
and give up the ghost. The apostle _Paul_, no doubt, speaks of himself,
and that too not when he was a pharisee, but a real christian; when
he complains, “that when he would do good, evil was present with him;”
not having dominion over him, but opposing and resisting his good
intentions and actions, “so that he could not do the things which he
would,” in that perfection which the new man desired. This is what he
calls sin dwelling in him. “And this is that Φρόνημα ♦σαρκός, which,
(to use the words of the ninth article of our church,) some do expound
the wisdom, some sensuality, some the affectation, some the desire of
the flesh, which doth remain, yea, in them that are regenerated.” But
as for its prevailing power, it is destroyed in every soul that is
truly born of GOD, and gradually more and more weakened as the believer
grows in grace, and the spirit of GOD gains a greater and greater
ascendancy in the heart.

  ♦ “σταρκος” replaced with “σαρκός”

But _Secondly_, Walking with GOD not only implies, that the prevailing
power of the enmity of a man’s heart be taken away, but also that
a person is actually reconciled to GOD the Father, in and through
the all-sufficient righteousness and atonement of his dear Son. “Can
two walk together, (says _Solomon_), unless they are agreed?” JESUS
is our peace, as well as our peace-maker. When we are justified by
faith in CHRIST, then, but not till then, we have peace with GOD; and
consequently cannot be said till then, to walk with him. Walking with
a person, being a sign and token that we are friends to that person,
or at least, though we have been at variance, yet that now we are
reconciled and become friends again. This is the great errand that
gospel ministers are sent out upon. To us is committed the ministry of
reconciliation: As ambassadors for GOD, we are to beseech sinners, in
CHRIST’s stead, to be reconciled unto GOD; and when they comply with
the gracious invitation, and are actually by faith brought into a state
of reconciliation with GOD, then, and not till then, may they be said
so much as to begin to walk with GOD.

Further, _Thirdly_, Walking with GOD implies, a settled, abiding
communion and fellowship with GOD, or what in scripture is called, “The
Holy Ghost dwelling in us.” This is what our LORD promised when he told
his disciples, that “the Holy Spirit should be in, and with them;” not
to be like a wayfaring-man, to stay only for a night, but to reside
and make his abode in their hearts. This I am apt to believe is what
the Apostle _John_ would have us understand, when he talks of a person
abiding in him, in CHRIST, “and walking as he himself also walked.”
And this is what is particularly meant in the words of our text. “And
_Enoch_ walked with GOD.” _i. e._ He kept up and maintained a holy,
settled, habitual, though undoubtedly not altogether uninterrupted
communion and fellowship with GOD, in and through CHRIST JESUS. So
that to sum up what has been said on this part of the first general
head, _walking with_ GOD consists especially in the fixed habitual
bent of the will for GOD, in an habitual dependance upon his power and
promise, in an habitual voluntary dedication of our all to his glory,
in an habitual eying of his precept in all we do, and in an habitual
complacence in his pleasure in all we suffer.

_Fourthly_, _Walking with_ GOD implies, our making progress or advances
in the divine life. _Walking_, in the very first idea of the word,
seems to suppose a progressive motion. A person that walks, though he
move slowly, yet he goes forwards and does not continue in one place.
And so it is with those that walk with GOD. They go on, as the psalmist
says, “from strength to strength;” or, in the language of the Apostle
_Paul_, “they pass from glory to glory, even by the Spirit of the LORD.”
Indeed in one sense, the divine life admits of neither increase nor
decrease. When a soul is born of GOD, to all intents and purposes he is
a child of GOD, and, though he should live to the age of _Methuselah_,
yet he would then be only a child of GOD, after all. But in another
sense, the divine life admits of decays and additions. Hence it is,
that we find the people of GOD charged with backslidings, and losing
their first love. And hence it is, that we hear of babes, young men and
fathers in CHRIST; and upon this account it is that the Apostle exhorts
_Timothy_, “to let his progress be made known to all men.” And what is
here required of _Timothy_ in particular; by St. _Peter_, is enjoined
all christians in general, “But grow in grace, (says he) and in the
knowledge of our LORD and Saviour JESUS CHRIST.” For the new creature
increases in spiritual stature; and though a person can but be a new
creature, yet there are some that are more conformed to the divine
image than others, and will, after death, be admitted to a greater
degree of blessedness. For want of observing this distinction, even
some gracious souls that have better hearts than heads, (as well as
men of corrupt minds, reprobates concerning the faith) have unawares
run into downright _Antinomian_ principles, denying all growth of grace
in a believer, or any marks of grace to be laid down in the scriptures
of truth. From such principles, and more especially from practices
naturally consequent on such principles, may the LORD of all Lord’s
deliver us!

From what then has been said, we may now know what is implied in the
words, “walked with GOD,” viz. Our having the prevailing enmity of our
hearts taken away by the power of the Spirit of GOD; our being actually
reconciled and united to him by faith in JESUS CHRIST; our having and
keeping up a settled communion and fellowship with him; and our making
a daily progress in this fellowship, so as to be conformed to the
divine image more and more.

How this is done, or, in other words, by what means believers keep
up and maintain their walk with GOD, comes to be considered under our
second general head.

And, _First_, Believers keep up and maintain their walk with GOD, by
reading of his holy word. “Search the scriptures,” says our blessed
LORD, “for these are they that testify of me.” And the royal psalmist
tells us, “that GOD’s word was a light unto his feet, and a lanthorn
unto his paths;” and he makes it one property of a good man, “that
his delight is in the law of the LORD, and that he exercises himself
therein day and night.” “Give thyself to reading,” (says _Paul_ to
_Timothy_); “And this book of the law, (says GOD to _Joshua_) shall
not go out of thy mouth.” For whatsoever was written in afore time, was
written for our learning. And the word of GOD is profitable for reproof,
correction, and instruction in righteousness, and every way sufficient
to make every true child of GOD thoroughly furnished to every good
work. If we once get above our Bibles, and cease making the written
word of GOD our sole rule, both as to faith and practice, we shall soon
lie open to all manner of delusion, and be in great danger of making
shipwreck of faith and a good conscience. Our blessed LORD, though
he had the Spirit of GOD without measure, yet always was governed by,
and fought the devil with, “It is written.” This the Apostle calls the
“Sword of the Spirit.” We may say of it as _David_ said of _Goliah_’s
sword, “None like this.” The scriptures are called the lively oracles
of GOD: not only because they are generally made use of to beget in
us a new life, but also to keep up and increase it in the soul. The
Apostle _Peter_, in his 2d epistle, prefers it even to seeing CHRIST
transfigured upon the mount. For after he had said, chapter i. 18.
“That the voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with Him
in the holy mount;” he adds, “We have also a more sure word of prophecy;
whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light shining in a
dark place, until the day dawn, and the day-star arise in your hearts:”
i. e. Till we shake off these bodies, and see JESUS face to face. Till
then, we must see and converse with him through the glass of his word.
We must make his testimonies our counsellors, and daily, with _Mary_,
sit at JESUS feet, by faith hearing his word. We shall then by happy
experience find, that they are spirit and life, meat indeed, and drink
indeed to our souls.

_Secondly_, Believers keep up and maintain their walk with GOD by
secret prayer. The spirit of grace is always accompanied with the
spirit of supplication. It is the very breath of the new-creature, the
fan of the divine life, whereby the spark of holy fire kindled in the
soul by GOD, is not only kept in, but raised into a flame. A neglect of
secret prayer has been frequently an inlet to many spiritual diseases,
and has been attended with fatal consequences. _Origen_ observed,
“That the day he offered incense to an idol, he went out of his closet
without making use of secret prayer.” It is one of the most noble parts
of the believer’s spiritual armour. “Praying always, says the Apostle,
with all manner of supplication.” “Watch and pray, says our LORD,
that ye enter not into temptation.” And he spake a parable, that his
disciples should pray, and not faint. Not that our LORD would have
us always upon our knees, or in our closets, to the neglect of our
other relative duties. But he means, that our souls should be kept
in a praying-frame, so that we might be able to say, as a good man
in _Scotland_ once said to his friends on his death-bed, “Could these
curtains, or could these walls speak, they would tell you what sweet
communion I have had with my GOD here.” O prayer, prayer! It brings
and keeps GOD and man together. It raises man up to GOD, and brings
GOD down to man. If you would therefore, O believers, keep up your
walk with GOD; pray, pray without ceasing. Be much in secret, set
prayer. And when you are about the common business of life, be much in
ejaculatory prayer, and send, from time to time, short letters post to
heaven upon the wings of faith. They will reach the very heart of GOD,
and return to you again loaded with spiritual blessings.

_Thirdly_, Holy and frequent meditation is another blessed means of
keeping up a believer’s walk with GOD. “Prayer, reading, temptation,
and meditation,” says _Luther_, “make a minister.” And they also
make, and perfect a christian. Meditation to the soul, is the same as
digestion to the body. Holy _David_ found it so, and therefore he was
frequently employed in meditation, even in the night season. We read
also of _Isaac_’s going out into the fields to meditate in the evening;
or, as it is in the margin, to pray. For meditation is a kind of silent
prayer, whereby the soul is frequently, as it were, carried out of
itself to GOD, and in a degree made like unto those blessed Spirits,
who by a kind of immediate intuition always behold the face of our
heavenly Father. None but those happy souls that have been accustomed
to this divine employ, can tell what a blessed promoter of the divine
life, meditation is. “Whilst I was musing, says _David_, the fire
kindled.” And whilst the believer is musing on the works and word
of GOD; especially that work of works, that wonder of wonders, that
mystery of godliness, “GOD manifest in the flesh,” the Lamb of GOD
slain for the sins of the world: he frequently feels the fire of divine
love kindle, so that he is obliged to speak with his tongue, and tell
of the loving-kindness of the LORD to his soul. Be frequent therefore
in meditation, all ye that desire to keep up and maintain a close and
uniform walk with the most-high GOD.

_Fourthly_, Believers keep up their walk with GOD, by watching
and noting his providential dealings with them. If we believe the
scriptures, we must believe what our LORD hath declared therein, “That
the very hairs of his disciples heads are all numbered; and that a
sparrow does not fall to the ground, (either to pick up a grain of corn,
or when shot by a fowler) without the knowledge of our heavenly Father.”
Every cross has a call in it, and every particular dispensation of
divine providence, has some particular end to answer in those to whom
it is sent. If it be of an afflictive nature, GOD does thereby say, “My
son, keep thyself from idols:” if prosperous, he does it as it were by
a small, still voice, say, “My son, give me thy heart.” If believers,
therefore, would keep up their walk with GOD, they must from time to
time hear what the LORD has to say concerning them in the voice of his
providence. Thus we find _Abraham_’s servant, when he went to fetch
a wife for his master _Isaac_, eyed and watched the providence of
GOD, and by that means found out the person that was designed for his
master’s wife. “For a little hint from Providence,” says pious Bishop
_Hall_, “is enough for faith to feed upon.” And as I believe it will be
one part of our happiness in heaven, to take a view of, and look back
upon, the various links of the golden chain which drew us there; so
those that enjoy most of heaven below, I believe, will be most minute
in remarking GOD’s various dealings with them, in respect to his
providential dispensations here on earth.

_Fifthly_, In order to walk closely with GOD, his children must not
only watch the motions of GOD’s providence without them, but the
motions also of his blessed Spirit in their hearts. “As many as are
the sons of GOD, are led by the Spirit of GOD,” and give up themselves
to be guided by the Holy Ghost, as a little child gives its hand to
be led by a nurse or parent. It is no doubt in this sense, that we
are to be converted, and become like little children. And though it is
the quintessence of enthusiasm, to pretend to be guided by the Spirit
without the written word; yet it is every christian’s bounden duty to
be guided by the Spirit in conjunction with the written word of GOD.
Watch, therefore, I pray you, O believers, the motions of GOD’s blessed
Spirit in your souls, and always try the suggestions or impressions
that you may at any time feel, by the unerring rule of GOD’s most
holy word: and if they are not found to be agreeable to that, reject
them as diabolical and delusive. By observing this caution, you will
steer a middle course between the two dangerous extremes many of this
generation are in danger of running into; I mean, _enthusiasm_, on the
one hand, and _deism_, and _downright infidelity_, on the other.

_Sixthly_, They that would maintain a holy walk with GOD, must walk
with him in ordinances as well as providences, &c. It is, therefore,
recorded of _Zachary_ and _Elizabeth_, that “They walked in all
GOD’s ordinances as well as commandments, blameless.” And all rightly
informed christians, will look upon ordinances, not as beggarly
elements, but as so many conduit-pipes, whereby the infinitely
condescending _Jehovah_ conveys his grace to their souls. They will
look upon them as childrens bread, and as their highest privileges.
Consequently they will be glad when they hear others say, “Come, let
us go up to the house of the LORD.” They will delight to visit the
place where GOD’s honour dwelleth, and be very eager to embrace all
opportunities to shew forth the LORD CHRIST’s death till he come.

_Seventhly_ and _lastly_, If you would walk with GOD, you will
associate and keep company with those that do walk with him. “My
delight, says holy _David_, is in them that do excel” in virtue.
They were in his sight, the excellent ones of the earth. And the
primitive christians, no doubt, kept up their vigour and first love, by
continuing in fellowship one with another. The Apostle _Paul_ knew this
full well, and therefore exhorts the christians to see to it, that they
did not forsake the assembling of themselves together. For how can one
be warm alone? And has not the wisest of men told us, that, “as iron
sharpeneth iron, so doth the countenance of a man his friend?” If we
look, therefore, into church history, or make a just observation of our
own times, I believe we shall find, that as the power of GOD prevails,
christian societies, and fellowship meetings prevail proportionably.
And as one decays, the other has insensibly decayed and dwindled away
at the same time. So necessary is it for those that would walk with
GOD, and keep up the life of religion, to meet together as they have
opportunity, in order to provoke one another to love and good works.

Proceed we now to the Third general thing proposed, To offer some
motives to excite all to come and walk with GOD.

And _First_, Walking with GOD, is a very honourable thing. This
generally is a prevailing motive to persons of all ranks, to stir them
up to any important undertaking. O that it may have its due weight and
influence with you, in respect to the matter now before us! I suppose
you would all think it a very high honour to be admitted into an
earthly prince’s privy-council, to be trusted with his secrets, and
to have his ear at all times, and at all seasons. It seems _Haman_
thought it so, when he boasted, _Esther_ v. 11, that besides his being
“advanced above the princes and servants of the king; yea, moreover,
_Esther_ the Queen did let no man come in with the King unto the
banquet that she had prepared, but myself; and to-morrow am I invited
unto her also with the King.” And when afterwards a question was put to
this same _Haman_, chapter vi. 6. “What shall be done unto the man whom
the King delighteth to honour?” he answered, verse 8. “Let the royal
apparel be brought which the king used to wear, and the horse that the
king rideth upon, and the crown royal which is set upon his head; and
let this apparel and horse be delivered to the hand of one of the
king’s most noble princes, that they may array the man withal whom the
King delights to honour, and bring him on horseback through the street
of the city, and proclaim before him, Thus shall it be done to the man
whom the King delighteth to honour.” This was all then, it seems, that
an ambitious _Haman_ could ask, and the most valuable thing that he
thought _Ahasuerus_, the greatest monarch upon earth, could give. But
alas, what is this honour in comparison of that which the meanest of
those enjoy, that walk with GOD! Think ye it a small thing, Sirs, to
have the secret of the LORD of Lords with you, and to be called the
friends of GOD? and such honour have all GOD’s saints. “The secret of
the LORD is with them that fear him:” and “Henceforth, says the blessed
JESUS, call I you no longer servants, but friends; for the servant
knoweth not the will of his master.” Whatever you may think of it, holy
_David_ was so sensible of the honour attending a walk with GOD, that
he declares, “He had rather be a door-keeper in his house, than to
dwell even in the tents of ungodliness.” O that all were like-minded
with him!

But, _Secondly_, As it is an honourable, so it is a pleasing thing to
walk with GOD. The wisest of men has told us, that “Wisdom’s ways are
ways of pleasantness, and all her paths peace.” And I remember pious
Mr. _Henry_, when he was just about to expire, said to a friend, “You
have heard many mens dying words, and these are mine; A life spent in
communion with GOD, is the pleasantest life in the world.” I am sure I
can set to my seal that this is true. Indeed, I have been lifted under
JESUS’s banner only for a few years; but I have enjoyed more solid
pleasure in one moment’s communion with my GOD, than I should or could
have enjoyed in the ways of sin, though I had continued to have went
on in them for thousands of years. And may I not appeal to all you that
fear and walk with GOD, for the truth of this? Has not one day in the
LORD’s courts, been to you better than a thousand? In keeping GOD’s
commandments, have you not found a present and very great reward? Has
not his word been sweeter to you than the honey, or the honey-comb? O
what have you felt, when, _Jacob_-like, you have been wrestling with
your GOD? Has not JESUS often met you when meditating in the fields,
and been made known to you over and over again in breaking of bread?
Has not the Holy Ghost frequently shed the divine love abroad in your
hearts abundantly, and filled you with joy unspeakable, even joy that
is full of glory? I know you will answer all these questions in the
affirmative, and freely acknowledge the yoke of CHRIST to be easy, and
his burden light; or (to use the words of one of our collects) “That
his service is perfect freedom.” And what need we then any further
motive to excite us to walk with GOD?

But methinks I hear some among you say, “How can these things be? For,
if walking with GOD, as you say, is such an honourable and pleasant
thing, whence is it, that the name of the people of this way is cast
out as evil, and every where spoken against? How comes it to pass that
they are frequently afflicted, tempted, destitute, and tormented? Is
this the honour, this the pleasure that you speak of?” I answer, Yes.
Stop a while; be not over-hasty. Judge not according to appearance,
but judge righteous judgment, and all will be well. It is true, we
acknowledge the “people of this way,” as you, and _Paul_ before you,
when a persecutor, called them, have their names cast out as evil, and
are a sect every where spoken against. But by whom? Even by the enemies
of the most high GOD. And do you think it a disgrace to be spoken evil
of by them? Blessed be GOD, we have not so learnt CHRIST. Our royal
Master has pronounced those “blessed, who are persecuted, and have
all manner of evil spoken against them falsly.” He has commanded them
“to rejoice and be exceeding glad.” For it is the ♦privilege of their
discipleship, and that their reward will be great in heaven. He himself
was thus treated. And can there be a greater honour put upon a creature,
than to be conformed to the ever-blessed Son of GOD? And further, it
is equally true, that the people of this way are frequently afflicted,
tempted, destitute, and tormented. But what of all this? Does this
destroy the pleasure of walking with GOD? No, in no wise; for those
that walk with GOD, are enabled, through CHRIST strengthening them,
to joy even in tribulation, and to rejoice when they fall into divers
temptations. And I believe I may appeal to the experience of all true
and close walkers with GOD, Whether or not their suffering times, have
not frequently been their sweetest times, and that they enjoyed most
of GOD, when most cast out and despised by men? This we find was the
case of CHRIST’s primitive servants, when threatened by the _Jewish_
sanhedrim, and commanded to preach no more in the name of JESUS; they
rejoiced, that they were accounted worthy to suffer shame for the
sake of JESUS. _Paul_ and _Silas_ sang praises even in a dungeon; and
the face of _Stephen_, that glorious proto-martyr of the christian
church, shone like the face of an angel. And JESUS is the same now, as
he was then, and takes care so to sweeten sufferings and afflictions
with his love, that his ♠disciples find, by happy experience, that as
afflictions abound, consolations do much more abound. And therefore
these objections, instead of destroying, do only more enforce the
motives before urged to excite you to walk with GOD.

  ♦ “prilege” replaced with “privilege”

  ♠ “disciciples” replaced with “disciples”

But supposing the objections were just, and walkers with GOD were
as despicable and unhappy as you would represent them to be; yet I
have a third motive to offer, which, if weighed in the balance of
the sanctuary, will over-weigh all objections, viz. That there is a
heaven at the end of this walk. For, to use the words of pious Bishop
_Beveridge_, “Though the way be narrow, yet it is not long; and though
the gate be straight, yet it opens into everlasting life.” _Enoch_
found it so. He walked with GOD on earth, and GOD took him to sit down
with him for ever in the kingdom of heaven. Not that we are to expect
to be taken away as he was: no; I suppose we shall all die the common
death of all men. But after death, the spirits of those who have walked
with GOD, shall return to GOD that gave them; and at the morning of the
resurrection, soul and body shall be for ever with the LORD. Their
bodies shall be fashioned like unto CHRIST’s glorious body, and their
souls filled with all the fulness of GOD. They shall sit on thrones;
they shall judge angels. They shall be enabled to sustain an exceeding
and eternal weight of glory, even that glory which JESUS CHRIST enjoyed
with the Father before the world began. _O gloriam quantam et qualem_,
says the learned and pious _Arndt_, just before he bowed down his
head, and gave up the ghost. The very thought of it is enough to make
us “wish to leap our seventy years,” as good Dr. _Watts_ expresses
himself, and to make us break out into the earnest language of the
royal Psalmist, “My soul is athirst for GOD, yea for the living GOD.
When shall I come to appear in the immediate presence of my GOD?”
I wonder not that a sense of this, when under a more than ordinary
irradiation and influx of divine life and love, causes some persons
even to faint away, and for a time lose the power of their senses. A
less sight than this, even a sight of _Solomon_’s glory, made _Sheba_’s
queen astonished; and a still lesser sight than that, even a sight
of _Joseph_’s waggons, made holy _Jacob_ to faint, and for a while,
as it were, die away. _Daniel_, when admitted to a distant view of
this excellent glory, fell down at the feet of the angel as one dead.
And if a distant view of this glory be so excellent, what must the
actual possession of it be? If the first fruits are so glorious, how
infinitely must the harvest exceed in glory?

And now what shall I, or indeed what can I well say more, to excite you,
even you that are yet strangers to CHRIST, to come and walk with GOD?
If you love honour, pleasure, and a crown of glory, come, seek it where
alone it can be found. Come, put ye on the LORD JESUS. Come, haste ye
away and walk with GOD, and make no longer provision for the flesh,
to fulfil the lust thereof. Stop, stop, O sinner! turn ye, turn ye,
O ye unconverted men! for the end of that way you are now walking in,
however right it may seem in your blinded eyes, will be death, even
eternal destruction both of body and soul. Make no long tarrying,
I say: at your peril, I charge you, step not one step further on in
your present walk. For how knowest thou, O man, but the next step thou
takest may be into hell? Death may seize thee, judgment find thee, and
then the great gulph will be fixed between thee and endless glory, for
ever and ever. O think of these things, all ye that are unwilling to
come and walk with GOD. Lay them to heart. Shew yourselves men, and in
the strength of JESUS say, Farewel lust of the flesh, I will no more
walk with thee! Farewel lust of the eye, and pride of life! Farewel
carnal acquaintance, and enemies of the cross, I will no more walk
and be intimate with you! Welcome JESUS, welcome thy word, welcome thy
ordinances, welcome thy Spirit, welcome thy people, I will henceforth
walk with you. O that there may be in you such a mind! GOD will set
his almighty fiat to it, and seal it with the broad seal of heaven,
even the signet of his Holy Spirit. Yes, he will, though you have been
walking with, and following after, the devices and desires of your
desperately wicked hearts, ever since you have been born. “I the high
and lofty one,” says the great Jehovah, “that inhabiteth eternity,
will dwell with the humble and contrite heart, even with the man that
trembleth at my word.” The blood, even the precious blood of JESUS
CHRIST, if you come to the Father in and through him, shall cleanse you
from all sin.

But the text leads me to speak to you that are saints, as well as to
you that are open or unconverted sinners. I need not tell you that
walking with GOD is not only honourable, but pleasant and profitable
also: for ye know it by happy experience, and will find it more and
more so every day. Only give me leave to stir up your pure minds by
way of remembrance, and to beseech you by the mercies of GOD in CHRIST
JESUS, to take heed to yourselves, and walk closer with your GOD, than
you have in days past: for the nearer you walk with GOD, the more you
will enjoy of Him whose presence is life, and be the better prepared
for being placed at his right-hand, where are pleasures for evermore.
O do not follow JESUS afar off! O be not so formal, so dead and stupid
in your attendance on holy ordinances! Do not so shamefully forsake the
assembling yourselves together, or be so niggardly, and so indifferent
about the things of GOD. Remember what JESUS says of the church
of _Laodicea_, “Because thou art neither hot nor cold, I will spew
thee out of my mouth.” Think of the love of JESUS, and let that love
constrain you to keep near unto him; and though you die for him, do not
deny him, do not keep at a distance from him in any wise.

One word to my brethren in the ministry that are here present, and I
have done. You see, my brethren, my heart is full; I could almost say
it is too big to speak, and yet too big to be silent, without dropping
a word to you. For does not the text speak in a particular manner to
those who have the honour of being stiled the ambassadors of CHRIST,
and stewards of the mysteries of GOD? I observed at the beginning of
this discourse, that _Enoch_ in all probability was a public person,
and a flaming preacher. Though he be dead, does he not yet speak to
us, to quicken our zeal, and make us more active in the service of
our glorious and ever-blessed Master? How did _Enoch_ preach? How
did _Enoch_ walk with GOD, though he lived in a wicked and adulterous
generation? Let us then follow him, as he followed JESUS CHRIST, and
ere long, where he is, there shall we be also. He is now entered into
his rest: yet a little while, and we shall enter into ours, and that
too much sooner than he did. He sojourned here below three hundred
years; but blessed be GOD, the days of man are now shortened, and in a
few days our work will be over. The Judge is before the door: he that
cometh will come, and will not tarry: his reward is with him. And we
shall all (if we are zealous for the LORD of Hosts) ere long shine as
the stars in the firmament, in the kingdom of our heavenly Father, for
ever and ever. To Him, the blessed JESUS, and eternal Spirit, be all
honour and glory, now, and to all eternity. _Amen_, and _Amen_.




                              SERMON III.

               _Abraham_’s offering up his Son _Isaac_.


                           GENESIS xxii. 12.

  _And he said, Lay not thine Hand upon the Lad, neither do thou
    any thing unto him; for now I know that thou fearest God,
    seeing thou hast not withheld thy Son, thine only Son from me._

THE great Apostle _Paul_, in one of his epistles, informs us, that
“whatsoever was written aforetime was written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the holy scripture might have hope.”
And as without faith it is impossible to please GOD, or be accepted in
JESUS, the Son of his love; we may be assured, that whatever instances
of a more than common faith are recorded in the book of GOD, they
were more immediately designed by the holy Spirit for our learning
and imitation, upon whom the ends of the world are come. For this
reason, the author of the epistle to the _Hebrews_, in the xith
chapter, mentions such a noble catalogue of Old Testament saints and
martyrs, “who subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, stopped the
mouths of lions, &c. and are gone before us to inherit the promises.” A
sufficient confutation, I think, of their error, who lightly esteem the
Old Testament saints, and would not have them mentioned to christians,
as persons whose faith and patience we are called upon more immediately
to follow. If this was true, the apostle would never have produced such
a cloud of witnesses out of the Old Testament, to excite the christians
of the first, and consequently purest age of the church, to continue
stedfast and unmoveable in the profession of their faith. Amidst this
catalogue of saints, methinks the patriarch _Abraham_ shines the
brightest, and differs from the others, as one star differeth from
another star in glory; for he shone with such distinguished lustre,
that he was called the “friend of GOD,” the “father of the faithful;”
and those who believe on CHRIST, are said to be “sons and daughters of,
and to be blessed with, faithful _Abraham_.” Many trials of his faith
did GOD send this great and good man, after he had commanded him to get
out from his country, and from his kindred, unto a land which he should
shew him; but the last was the most severe of all, I mean, that of
offering up his only son. This, by the divine assistance, I propose to
make the subject of your present meditation, and, by way of conclusion,
to draw some practical inferences, as GOD shall enable me, from this
instructive story.

The sacred penman begins the narrative thus; verse 1. “And it came to
pass, after these things, GOD did tempt _Abraham_.” After these things,
that is, after he had underwent many severe trials before, after he was
old, full of days, and might flatter himself perhaps that the troubles
and toils of life were now finished; “after these things, GOD did tempt
_Abraham_.” Christians, you know not what trials you may meet with
before you die: notwithstanding you may have suffered, and been tried
much already, yet, it may be, a greater measure is still behind, which
you are to fill up. “Be not high-minded, but fear.” Our last trials, in
all probability, will be the greatest: and we can never say our warfare
is accomplished, or our trials finished, till we bow down our heads,
and give up the ghost. “And it came to pass, after these things, that
GOD did tempt _Abraham_.”

“GOD did tempt _Abraham_.” But can the scripture contradict itself?
Does not the apostle _James_ tell us, “that GOD tempts no man;” and
GOD does tempt no man to evil, or on purpose to draw him into sin; for,
when a man is thus tempted, he is drawn away of his own heart’s lust,
and enticed. But in another sense, GOD may be said to tempt, I mean, to
try his servants; and in this sense we are to understand that passage
of _Matthew_, where we are told, that, “JESUS was led up by the Spirit
(the good Spirit) into the wilderness, to be tempted of the devil.” And
our LORD, in that excellent form of prayer which he has been pleased
to give us, does not require us to pray that we may not absolutely
be led into temptation, but delivered from the evil of it; whence
we may plainly infer, that GOD sees it fit sometimes to lead us into
temptation, that is, to bring us into such circumstances as will
try our faith and other christian graces. In this sense we are to
understand the expression before us; “GOD did tempt or try _Abraham_.”

How GOD was pleased to reveal his will at this time to his faithful
servant, whether by the _Shechinah_, or divine appearance, or by a
small still voice, as he spoke to _Elijah_, or by a whisper, like that
of the Spirit to _Philip_, when he commanded him to go join himself to
the eunuch’s chariot, we are not told, nor is it material to enquire.
It is enough that we are informed, GOD said unto him, _Abraham_; and
that _Abraham_ knew it was the voice of GOD: for he said, “Behold, here
I am.” O what a holy familiarity (if I may so speak) is there between
GOD and those holy souls that are united to him by faith in CHRIST
JESUS! GOD says, _Abraham_; and _Abraham_ said (it should seem without
the least surprize) Behold, here I am. Being reconciled to GOD by the
death and obedience of CHRIST, which he rejoiced in, and saw by faith
afar off; he did not, like guilty _Adam_, seek the trees of the garden
to hide himself from, but takes pleasure in conversing with GOD, and
talketh with him, as a man talketh with his friend. O that CHRIST-less
sinners knew what it is to have fellowship with the Father and the Son!
They would envy the happiness of saints, and count it all joy to be
termed enthusiasts and fools for CHRIST’s sake.

But what does GOD say to _Abraham_? Verse 2. “Take now thy son, thine
only son _Isaac_, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of
_Moriah_, and offer him there for a burnt-offering upon one of the
mountains which I shall tell thee of.”

Every word deserves our particular observation. Whatever he was to
do, he must do it now, immediately, without conferring with flesh and
blood. But what must he do? “Take now thy son.” Had GOD said, take now
a firstling, or choicest lamb or beast of thy flock, and offer it up
for a burnt-offering, it would not have appeared so ghastly; but for
GOD to say, “take now thy son, and offer him up for a burnt-offering,”
one would have imagined, was enough to stagger the strongest faith. But
this is not all: it must not only be a son, but “thine only son _Isaac_,
whom thou lovest.” If it must be a son, and not a beast, that must be
offered, why will not _Ishmael_ do, the son of the bond-woman? No, it
must be his only son, the heir of all, his _Isaac_, by interpretation
_laughter_, the son of his old age, in whom his soul delighted, “whom
thou lovest,” says GOD, in whose life his own was wrapped up: and this
son, this only son, this _Isaac_, the son of his love, must be taken
now, even now, without delay, and be offered up by his own father, for
a burnt offering, upon one of the mountains of the which GOD would tell
him.

Well might the apostle, speaking of this man of GOD, say, that “against
hope he believed in hope, and, being strong in faith, gave glory to
GOD:” For, had he not been blessed with faith which man never before
had, he must have refused to comply with this severe command. For
how many arguments might nature suggest, to prove that such a command
could never come from GOD, or to excuse himself from obeying it? “What!
(might the good man have said) butcher my own child! it is contrary
to the very law of nature: much more to butcher my dear son _Isaac_,
in whose seed GOD himself has assured me of a numerous posterity. But
supposing I could give up my own affections, and be willing to part
with him, though I love him so dearly, yet, if I murder him, what will
become of GOD’s promise? Besides, I am now like a city built upon a
hill; I shine as a light in the world, in the midst of a crooked and
perverse generation: How then shall I cause GOD’s name to be blasphemed,
how shall I become a by-word among the heathen, if they hear that I
have committed a crime which they abhor! But, above all, what will
_Sarah_ my wife say? How can I ever return to her again, after I have
imbrued my hands in my dear child’s blood? O that GOD would pardon me
in this thing, or take my life in the place of my son’s!” Thus, I say,
_Abraham_ might have argued, and that too seemingly with great reason,
against complying with the divine command. But as before by faith he
considered not the deadness of _Sarah_’s womb, when she was past age,
but believed on him, who said, “_Sarah_ thy wife shall bear thee a
son indeed;” so now, being convinced that the same GOD spoke to and
commanded him to offer up that son, and knowing that GOD was able to
raise him from the dead, without delay he obeys the heavenly call.

O that unbelievers would learn of faithful _Abraham_, and believe
whatever is revealed from GOD, though they cannot fully comprehend it!
_Abraham_ knew GOD commanded him to offer up his son, and therefore
believed, notwithstanding carnal reasoning might suggest many
objections. We have sufficient testimony, that GOD has spoken to us by
his son; why should we not also believe, though many things in the New
Testament are above our reason? For, where reason ends, faith begins.
And, however infidels may stile themselves reasoners, of all men they
are the most unreasonable: For, is it not contrary to all reason, to
measure an infinite by a finite understanding, or think to find out the
mysteries of godliness to perfection?

But to return to the patriarch _Abraham_: We observed before what
plausible objections he might have made; but he answered not a single
word: no, without replying against his Maker, we are told, verse 3.
that “_Abraham_ rose up early in the morning, and saddled his ass, and
took two of his young men with him, and _Isaac_ his son, and clave the
wood for the burnt-offering, and rose up and went unto the place of
which GOD had told him.”

From this verse we may gather, that GOD spoke to _Abraham_ in a dream,
or vision of the night: For it is said, he rose up early. Perhaps it
was near the fourth watch of the night, just before break of day, when
GOD said, Take now thy son; and _Abraham_ rises up early to do so; as
I doubt not but he used to rise early to offer up his morning-sacrifice
of praise and thanksgiving. It is often remarked of people in the Old
Testament, that they rose early in the morning; and particularly of
our LORD in the New, that he rose a great while before day to pray.
The morning befriends devotion; and, if people cannot use so much
self-denial as to rise early to pray, I know not how they will be able
to die at a stake (if called to it) for JESUS CHRIST.

The humility as well as the piety of the patriarch is observable:
he saddled his own ass (great men should be humble;) and to shew his
sincerity, though he took two of his young men with him, and _Isaac_
his son, yet he keeps his design as a secret from them all: nay, he
does not so much as tell _Sarah_ his wife: for he knew not but she
might be a snare unto him in this affair; and, as _Rebekah_ afterwards,
on another occasion, advised _Jacob_ to flee, so _Sarah_ also might
persuade _Isaac_ to hide himself; or the young men, had they known of
it, might have forced him away, as in after-ages the soldiers rescued
_Jonathan_ out of the hands of _Saul_. But _Abraham_ sought no such
evasion, and therefore, like an _Israelite_ indeed, in whom there was
no guile, he himself resolutely “clave the wood for the burnt-offering,
rose up and went unto the place of which GOD had told him.” In the
second verse GOD commanded him to offer up his son upon one of the
mountains which he would tell him of. He commanded him to offer his son
up, but would not then directly tell him the place where: this was to
keep him dependent and watching unto prayer: for there is nothing like
being kept waiting upon GOD; and, if we do, assuredly GOD will reveal
himself unto us yet further in his own time. Let us practise what we
know, follow providence so far as we can see already; and what we know
not, what we see not as yet, let us only be found in the way of duty,
and the LORD will reveal even that unto us. _Abraham_ knew not directly
where he was to offer up his son; but he rises up and sets forward, and
behold now GOD shews him: “And he went to the place of which GOD had
told him.” Let us go and do likewise.

Verse 4. “Then on the third day _Abraham_ lifted up his eyes, and saw
the place afar off.”

So that the place, of which GOD had told him, was no less than three
days journey distant from the place where GOD first appeared to him,
and commanded him to take his son. Was not this to try his faith, and
to let him see that what he did, was not meerly from a sudden pang of
devotion, but a matter of choice and deliberation? But who can tell
what the aged patriarch felt during these three days? Strong as he was
in faith, I am persuaded his bowels often yearned over his dear son
_Isaac_. Methinks I see the good old man walking with his dear child
in his hand, and now and then looking upon him, loving him, and then
turning aside to weep. And perhaps, sometimes he stays a little behind
to pour out his heart before GOD, for he had no mortal to tell his
case to. Then, methinks, I see him join his son and servants again, and
talking to them of the things pertaining to the kingdom of GOD, as they
walked by the way. At length, “on the third day, he lifts up his eyes,
and saw the place afar off.” And, to shew that he was yet sincerely
resolved to do whatsoever the LORD required of him, he even now will
not discover his design to his servants, but “said, verse 5. to his
young men,” (as we should say to our worldly thoughts, when about to
tread the courts of the LORD’s house) “Abide you here with the ass; and
I and the lad will go up yonder and worship, and come again to you.”
This was a sufficient reason for their staying behind; and, it being
their master’s custom to go frequently to worship, they could have no
suspicion of what he was going about. And by _Abraham_’s saying, that
he and the lad would come again, I am apt to think he believed GOD
would raise him from the dead, if so be he permitted him to offer his
child up for a burnt-offering. However that be, he is yet resolved to
obey GOD to the uttermost; and therefore,

Verse 6. “_Abraham_ took the wood of the burnt-offering, and laid it
upon _Isaac_ his son; and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife,
and they went both of them together.” Little did _Isaac_ think that
he was to be offered on that very wood which he was carrying upon his
shoulders; and therefore _Isaac_ innocently, and with a holy freedom
(for good men should not keep their children at too great a distance)
“spake unto _Abraham_ his father, and said, My father; and he (with
equal affection and holy condescension) said, Here am I, my son.” And
to shew how careful _Abraham_ had been (as all christian parents ought
to be) to instruct his _Isaac_ how to sacrifice to GOD, like a youth
trained up in the way wherein he should go; _Isaac_ said, “Behold
the fire and the wood; but where is the lamb for a burnt-offering?”
How beautiful is early piety! how amiable, to hear young people ask
questions about sacrificing to GOD in an acceptable way! _Isaac_ knew
very well that a lamb was wanting, and that a lamb was necessary for a
proper sacrifice: “Behold the fire and the wood; but where is the lamb
for a burnt-offering?” Young men and maidens, learn of him.

Hitherto, it is plain, _Isaac_ knew nothing of his father’s design: but
I believe, by what his father said in answer to his question, that now
was the time _Abraham_ revealed it unto him.

Verse 8. “And _Abraham_ said, My son, GOD will provide himself a Lamb
for a burnt-offering.” Some think, that _Abraham_ by faith saw the
LORD JESUS afar off, and here spake prophetically of that Lamb of
GOD already slain in decree, and hereafter to be actually offered up
for sinners. This was a lamb of GOD’s providing indeed (we dared not
have thought of it) to satisfy his own justice, and to render him just
in justifying the ungodly. What is all our fire and wood, the best
preparation and performances we can make or present, unless GOD had
provided himself this Lamb for a burnt-offering? He could not away
with them. The words will well bear this interpretation. But, whatever
_Abraham_ might intend, I cannot but think he here made an application,
and acquainted his son, of GOD’s dealing with his soul; and at length,
with tears in his eyes, and the utmost affection in his heart, cried
out, “Thou art to be the lamb, my Son;” GOD has commanded me to provide
thee for a burnt-offering, and to offer thee upon the mountain which we
are now ascending. And, as it appears from a subsequent verse, _Isaac_,
convinced that it was the divine will, made no resistance at all: For
it is said, “They went both of them together;” and again, when we are
told, that _Abraham_ bound _Isaac_, we do not hear of his complaining,
or endeavouring to escape, which he might have done, being (as some
think) near thirty years of age, and, it is plain, capable of carrying
wood enough for a burnt-offering. But he was partaker of the like
precious faith with his aged father, and therefore is as willing to be
offered, as _Abraham_ is to offer him: And “so they went both of them
together.”

Verse 9. At length “they came to the place of which GOD had told
_Abraham_. He built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and
bound _Isaac_ his son, and laid him on the altar upon the wood.”

And here let us pause a while, and by faith take a view of the place
where the father has laid him. I doubt not but the blessed angels
hovered round the altar, and sang, “Glory be to GOD in the highest,”
for giving such faith to man. Come, all ye tender-hearted parents,
who know what it is to look over a dying child: fancy that you saw the
altar erected before you, and the wood laid in order, and the ♦beloved
_Isaac_ bound upon it: fancy that you saw the aged parent standing
by weeping. (For, why may we not suppose that _Abraham_ wept, since
JESUS himself wept at the grave of _Lazarus_?) O what pious, endearing
expressions passed now alternately between the father and the son!
_Josephus_ records a pathetic speech made by each, whether genuine
I know not: but methinks I see the tears trickle down the Patriarch
_Abraham_’s cheeks; and out of the abundance of the heart, he cries,
Adieu, adieu, my son; the LORD gave thee to me, and the LORD calls thee
away; blessed be the name of the LORD: adieu, my _Isaac_, my only son,
whom I love as my own soul; adieu, adieu. I see _Isaac_ at the same
time meekly resigning himself into his heavenly Father’s hands, and
praying to the most High to strengthen his earthly parent to strike
the stroke. But why do I attempt to describe what either son or father
felt? It is impossible: we may indeed form some faint idea of, but
shall never fully comprehend it, till we come and sit down with them in
the kingdom of heaven, and hear them tell the pleasing story over again.
Hasten, O LORD, that blessed time! O let thy kingdom come!

  ♦ “belove” replaced with “beloved”

And now, the fatal blow is going to be given. “And _Abraham_ stretched
forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his son.” But do you not
think he intended to turn away his head, when he gave the blow? Nay,
why may we not suppose he sometimes drew his hand in, after it was
stretched out, willing to take another last farewell of his beloved
_Isaac_, and desirous to defer it a little, though resolved at last
to strike home? Be that as it will, his arm is now stretched out,
the knife is in his hand, and he is about to put it to his dear son’s
throat.

But sing, O heavens! and rejoice, O earth! Man’s extremity is GOD’s
opportunity: for behold, just as the knife, in all probability, was
near his throat, verse 11. “the angel of the LORD, (or rather the LORD
of angels, JESUS CHRIST, the angel of the everlasting covenant) called
unto him, (probably in a very audible manner) from heaven, and said,
_Abraham_, _Abraham_. (The word is doubled, to engage his attention;
and perhaps the suddenness of the call made him draw back his hand,
just as he was going to strike his son.) And _Abraham_ said, Here am I.”

“And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any
thing unto him: for now know I that thou fearest GOD, seeing thou hast
not withheld thy son, thine only son from me.”

Here then it was that _Abraham_ received his son _Isaac_ from the dead
in a figure. He was in effect offered upon the altar, and GOD looked
upon him as offered and given unto him. Now it was that _Abraham_’s
faith, being tried, was found more precious than gold purified seven
times in the fire. Now as a reward of grace, though not of debt, for
this signal act of obedience, by an oath, GOD gives and confirms the
promise, “that in his seed all the nations of the earth should be
blessed,” verse 17, 18. With what comfort may we suppose the good old
man and his son went down from the mount, and returned unto the young
men! With what joy may we imagine he went home, and related all that
had passed to _Sarah_! And above all, with what triumph is he now
exulting in the paradise of GOD, and adoring rich, free, distinguishing,
electing, everlasting love, which alone made him to differ from
the rest of mankind, and rendered him worthy of that title which he
will have so long as the sun and the moon endure, “The Father of the
faithful!”

But let us now draw our eyes from the creature, and do what _Abraham_,
if he was present, would direct to; I mean, fix them on the Creator,
GOD blessed for evermore.

I see your hearts affected, I see your eyes weep. (And indeed, who can
refrain weeping at the relation of such a story?) But, behold, I shew
you a mystery, hid under the sacrifice of _Abraham_’s only son, which,
unless your hearts are hardned, must cause you to weep tears of love,
and that plentifully too. I would willingly hope you even prevent me
here, and are ready to say, “It is the love of GOD, in giving JESUS
CHRIST to die for our sins.” Yes; that is it. And yet perhaps you find
your hearts, at the mentioning of this, not so much affected. Let this
convince you, that we are all fallen creatures, and that we do not love
GOD or CHRIST as we ought to do: for, if you admire _Abraham_ offering
up his _Isaac_, how much more ought you to extol, magnify and adore
the love of GOD, who so loved the world, as to give his only begotten
Son CHRIST JESUS our LORD, “that whosoever believeth on Him should not
perish, but have everlasting life?” May we not well cry out, Now know
we, O LORD, that thou hast loved us, since thou hast not withheld thy
Son, thine only Son from us? _Abraham_ was GOD’s creature (and GOD
was _Abraham_’s friend) and therefore under the highest obligation to
surrender up his _Isaac_. But O stupendious love! whilst we were his
enemies, GOD sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law,
that he might become a curse for us. O the freeness, as well as the
infinity, of the love of GOD our Father! It is unsearchable: I am lost
in contemplating it; it is past finding out. Think, O believers, think
of the love of GOD, in giving JESUS CHRIST to be a propitiation for our
sins. And when you hear how _Abraham_ built an altar, and laid the wood
in order, and bound _Isaac_ his son, and laid him on the altar upon the
wood; think how your heavenly Father bound JESUS CHRIST his only Son,
and offered him upon the altar of his justice, and laid upon him the
iniquities of us all. When you read of _Abraham_’s stretching forth his
hand to slay his Son, Think, O think, how GOD actually suffered his Son
to be slain, that we might live for evermore. Do you read of _Isaac_
carrying the wood upon his shoulders, upon which he was to be offered?
Let this lead you to mount _Calvary_ (this very mount of _Moriah_ where
_Isaac_ was offered, as some think) and take a view of the antitype
JESUS CHRIST, the Son of GOD, bearing and ready to sink under the
weight of that cross, on which he was to hang for us. Do you admire
_Isaac_ so freely consenting to die, though a creature, and therefore
obliged to go when GOD called? O do not forget to admire infinitely
more the dear LORD JESUS, that promised seed, who willingly said, “Lo,
I come,” though under no obligation so to do, “to do thy will,” to obey
and die for men, “O GOD!” Did you weep just now, when I bid you fancy
you saw the altar, and the wood laid in order, and _Isaac_ laid bound
on the altar? Look by faith, behold the blessed JESUS, our all-glorious
_Emmanuel_, not bound, but nailed on an accursed tree: see how he hangs
crowned with thorns, and had in derision of all that are round about
him: see how the thorns pierce him, and how the blood in purple streams
trickle down his sacred temples! Hark how the GOD of nature groans!
See how he bows his head, and at length humanity gives up the ghost!
_Isaac_ is saved, but JESUS, the GOD of _Isaac_, dies: A ram is offered
up in _Isaac_’s room, but JESUS has no substitute; JESUS must bleed,
JESUS must die; GOD the Father provided this Lamb for himself from
all eternity. He must be offered in time, or man must be damned for
evermore. And now, where are your tears? Shall I say, refrain your
voice from weeping? No; rather let me exhort you to look to him whom
you have pierced, and mourn, as a woman mourneth for her first-born:
for we have been the betrayers, we have been the murderers of this LORD
of glory; and shall we not bewail those sins, which brought the blessed
JESUS to the accursed tree? Having so much done, so much suffered for
us, so much forgiven, shall we not love much? O! let us love Him with
all our hearts, and minds, and strength, and glorify him in our souls
and bodies, for they are his. Which leads me to a second inference I
shall draw from the foregoing discourse.

From hence we may learn the nature of true, justifying faith. Whoever
understands and preaches the truth, as it is in JESUS, must acknowledge,
that salvation is GOD’s free gift, and that we are saved, not by any
or all the works of righteousness which we have done or can do: no; we
can neither wholly nor in part justify ourselves in the sight of GOD.
The LORD JESUS CHRIST is our righteousness; and if we are accepted with
GOD, it must be only in and through the personal righteousness, the
active and passive obedience, of JESUS CHRIST his beloved Son. This
righteousness must be imputed, or counted over to us, and applied by
faith to our hearts, or else we can in no wise be justified in GOD’s
sight: and that very moment a sinner is enabled to lay hold on CHRIST’s
righteousness by faith, he is freely justified from all his sins,
and shall never enter into condemnation, notwithstanding he was a
fire-brand of hell before. Thus it was that _Abraham_ was justified
before he did any good work: he was enabled to believe on the LORD
CHRIST; it was accounted to him for righteousness; that is, CHRIST’s
righteousness was made over to him, and so accounted his. This, this
is gospel; this is the only way of finding acceptance with GOD: good
works have nothing to do with our justification in his sight. We are
justified by faith alone, as saith the article of our church; agreeable
to which the apostle _Paul_ says, “By grace ye are saved, through faith;
and that not of yourselves; it is the gift of GOD.” Notwithstanding,
good works have their proper place: they justify our faith, though
not our persons; they follow it, and evidence our justification in
the sight of men. Hence it is that the apostle _James_ asks, was
not _Abraham_ justified by works? (alluding no doubt to the story on
which we have been discoursing) that is, did he not prove he was in a
justified state, because his faith was productive of good works? This
declarative justification in the sight of men, is what is directly to
be understood in the words of the text; “Now know I, says GOD, that
thou fearest me, since thou hast not withheld thy Son, thine only
Son from me.” Not but that GOD knew it before; but this is spoken
in condescension to our weak capacities, and plainly shews, that
his offering up his son was accepted with GOD, as an evidence of the
sincerity of his faith, and for this, was left on record to future ages.
Hence then you may learn, whether you are blessed with, and are sons
and daughters of, faithful _Abraham_. You say you believe; you talk of
free grace and free justification: you do well; the devils also believe
and tremble. But has the faith, which you pretend to, influenced your
hearts, renewed your souls, and, like _Abraham_’s, worked by love? Are
your affections, like his, set on things above? Are you heavenly-minded,
and like him, do you confess yourselves strangers and pilgrims on the
earth? In short, has your faith enabled you to overcome the world, and
strengthened you to give up your _Isaacs_, your laughter, your most
beloved lusts, friends, pleasures, and profits for GOD? If so, take the
comfort of it; for justly may you say, “We know assuredly, that we do
fear and love GOD, or rather are loved of him.” But if you are only
talking believers, have only a faith of the head, and never felt the
power of it in your hearts, however you may bolster yourselves up,
and say, “We have _Abraham_ for our father, or CHRIST is our Saviour;”
unless you get a faith of the heart, a faith working by love, you shall
never sit with _Abraham_, _Isaac_, _Jacob_, or JESUS CHRIST, in the
kingdom of heaven.

But I must draw one more inference, and with that I shall conclude.

Learn, O saints! from what has been said, to sit loose to all your
worldly comforts; and stand ready prepared to part with every thing,
when GOD shall require it at your hand. Some of you perhaps may have
friends, who are to you as your own souls; and others may have children,
in whose lives your own lives are bound up: all I believe have their
_Isaacs_, their particular delights of some kind or other. Labour, for
CHRIST’s sake, labour, ye sons and daughters of _Abraham_, to resign
them daily in affection to GOD, that, when he shall require you really
to sacrifice them, you may not confer with flesh and blood, any more
than the blessed patriarch now before us. And as for you that have
been in any measure tried like unto him, let his example encourage
and comfort you. Remember, _Abraham_ your father was tried so before
you: think, O think of the happiness he now enjoys, and how he is
incessantly thanking GOD for tempting and trying him when here below.
Look up often by the eye of faith, and see him sitting with his dearly
beloved _Isaac_ in the world of spirits. Remember, it will be but a
little while, and you shall sit with them also, and tell one another
what GOD has done for your souls. There I hope to sit with you, and
hear this story of his offering up his Son from his own mouth, and to
praise the Lamb that sitteth upon the throne, for what he hath done for
all our souls, for ever and ever.




                              SERMON IV.

                  The great Duty of Family-Religion.


                           JOSHUA xxiv. 15.

           _As for me and my House, we will serve the_ LORD.

THESE words contain the holy resolution of pious _Joshua_, who having
in a most moving, affectionate discourse recounted to the _Israelites_
what great things GOD had done for them, in the verse immediately
preceding the text, comes to draw a proper inference from what he had
been delivering; and acquaints them, in the most pressing terms, that
since GOD had been so exceeding gracious unto them, they could do no
less, than out of gratitude for such uncommon favours and mercies,
dedicate both themselves and families to his service. “Now therefore,
fear the LORD, and serve him in sincerity and truth, and put away
the Gods which your fathers served on the other side of the flood.”
And by the same engaging motive does the prophet _Samuel_ afterwards
enforce their obedience to the commandments of GOD, 1 _Samuel_ xii. 24.
“Only fear the LORD, and serve him in truth, with all your heart; for
consider how great things he hath done for you.” But then, that they
might not excuse themselves (as too many might be apt to do) by his
giving them a bad example, or think he was laying heavy burdens upon
them, whilst he himself touched them not with one of his fingers, he
tells them in the text, that whatever regard they might pay to the
doctrine he had been preaching, yet he (as all ministers ought to
do) was resolved to live up to and practise it himself: “Chuse you
therefore, whom you will serve, whether the Gods which your fathers
served, or the Gods of the _Amorites_, in whose land ye dwell: but as
for me and my house, we will serve the LORD.”

A resolution this, worthy of _Joshua_, and no less becoming, no less
necessary for every true son of _Joshua_, that is intrusted with
the care and government of a family in our day: and, if it was ever
seasonable for ministers to preach up, or people to put in practice
_family-religion_, it was never more so than in the present age; since
it is greatly to be feared, that out of those many housholds that
call themselves christians, there are but few that serve GOD in their
respective families as they ought.

It is true indeed, visit our churches, and you may perhaps see
something of the _form of godliness_ still subsisting amongst us; but
even that is scarcely to be met with in private houses. So that were
the blessed angels to come, as in the patriarchal age, and observe
our spiritual oeconomy at home, would they not be tempted to say as
_Abraham_ to _Abimilech_, “Surely, the fear of GOD is not in this
place?” _Genesis_ xx. 11.

How such a general neglect of family-religion first began to overspread
the christian world, is difficult to determine. As for the primitive
christians, I am positive it was not so with them: No, they had not
so learned CHRIST, as falsely to imagine religion was to be confined
solely to their assemblies for public worship; but, on the contrary,
behaved with such piety and exemplary holiness in their private
families, that St. _Paul_ often styles their house a church: “Salute
such a one, says he, and the church which is in his house.” And, I
believe, we must for ever despair of seeing a primitive spirit of
piety revived in the world, till we are so happy as to see a revival of
primitive family religion; and persons unanimously resolving with good
old _Joshua_, in the words of the text, “As for me and my house, we
will serve the LORD.”

From which words, I shall beg leave to insist on these three things.

  I. _First_, That it is the duty of every governor of a family to
    take care, that not only he himself, but also that those
    committed to his charge, “_serve the_ LORD.”

  II. _Secondly_, I shall endeavour to shew after what manner
    a governor and his houshold ought to serve the LORD. And,

  III. _Thirdly_, I shall offer some motives, in order to excite
    all governors, with their respective housholds, to serve the
    LORD in the manner that shall be recommended.

And _First_, I am to shew that it is the duty of every governor of
a family to take care, that not only he himself, but also that those
committed to his charge, should serve the LORD.

And this will appear, if we consider that every governor of a family
ought to look upon himself as obliged to act in three capacities: as a
prophet, to instruct; as a priest, to pray for and with; as a king, to
govern, direct, and provide for them. It is true indeed, the latter of
these, their kingly office, they are not so frequently deficient in,
(nay in this they are generally too solicitous;) but as for the two
former, their priestly and prophetic office, like _Gallio_, they care
for no such things. But however indifferent some governors may be
about it, they may be assured, that GOD will require a due discharge of
these offices at their hands. For if, as the apostle argues, “He that
does not provide for his own house,” in temporal things, “has denied
the faith, and is worse than an infidel;” to what greater degree of
apostasy must he have arrived, who takes no thought to provide for the
spiritual welfare of his family!

But farther, persons are generally very liberal of their invectives
against the clergy, and think they justly blame the conduct of that
minister who does not take heed to and watch over the flock, of which
the Holy Ghost has made him overseer: but may not every governor of a
family, be in a lower degree liable to the same censure, who takes no
thought for those souls that are committed to his charge? For every
house is as it were a little parish, every governor (as was before
observed) a priest, every family a flock: and if any of them perish
through the governor’s neglect, their blood will GOD require at their
hands.

Was a minister to disregard teaching his people publicly, and from
house to house, and to excuse himself by saying, that he had enough
to do to work out his own salvation with fear and trembling, without
concerning himself with that of others; would you not be apt to think
such a minister, to be like the unjust judge, “One that neither feared
GOD, nor regarded man?” And yet, odious as such a character would be,
it is no worse than that governor of a family deserves, who thinks
himself obliged only to save his own soul, without paying any regard
to the souls of his houshold. For (as was above hinted) every house is
as it were a parish, and every master is concerned to secure, as much
as in him lies, the spiritual prosperity of every one under his roof,
as any minister whatever is obliged to look to the spiritual welfare of
every individual person under his charge.

What precedents men who neglect their duty in this particular, can
plead for such omission, I cannot tell. Doubtless not the example
of holy _Job_, who was so far from imagining that he had no concern,
as governor of a family, with any one’s soul but his own, that the
scripture acquaints us, “When the days of his childrens feasting
were gone about, that _Job_ sent and sanctified them, and offered
burnt-offerings, according to the number of them all; for _Job_ said,
It may be that my sons have sinned and cursed GOD in their hearts:
thus did _Job_ continually.” Nor can they plead the practice of good
old _Joshua_, whom, in the text, we find as much concerned for his
houshold’s welfare, as his own. Nor lastly, that of _Cornelius_,
who feared GOD, not only himself, but with all his house: and were
christians but of the same spirit of _Job_, _Joshua_, and the _Gentile_
centurion, they would act as _Job_, _Joshua_, and _Cornelius_ did.

But alas! if this be the case, and all governors of families ought
not only to serve the LORD themselves, but likewise to see that their
respective housholds do so too; what will then become of those who not
only neglect serving GOD themselves, but also make it their business
to ridicule and scoff at any of their house that do? Who are not
content with “not entering into the kingdom of heaven themselves; but
those also that are willing to enter in, they hinder.” Surely such men
are factors for the devil indeed. Surely their damnation slumbereth
not: for although GOD, in his good providence, may suffer such
stumbling-blocks to be put in his childrens way, and suffer their
greatest enemies to be those of their own housholds, for a trial of
their sincerity, and improvement of their faith; yet we cannot but
pronounce a woe against those masters by whom such offences come. For
if those that only take care of their own souls, can scarcely be saved,
where will such monstrous profane and wicked governors appear?

But hoping there are but few of this unhappy stamp, proceed we now to
the

Second thing proposed; To shew after what manner a governor and his
houshold ought to serve the LORD.

1. And the first thing I shall mention, is, _reading the word of_
GOD. This is a duty incumbent on every private person. “Search the
scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life,” is a precept
given by our blessed LORD indifferently to all: but much more so, ought
every governor of a family to think it in a peculiar manner spoken to
himself, because (as hath been already proved) he ought to look upon
himself as a prophet, and therefore, agreeably to such a character,
bound to instruct those under his charge in the knowledge of the word
of GOD.

This we find was the order GOD gave to his peculiar people _Israel_:
for thus speaks his representative _Moses_, _Deuteronomy_ vi. 6, 7.
“These words,” that is, the scripture words, “which I command thee this
day, shall be in thy heart, and thou shalt teach them diligently unto
thy children,” that is, as it is generally explained, servants, as well
as children, “and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thy house.”
From whence we may infer, that the only reason, why so many neglect to
read the words of scripture diligently to their children is, because
the words of scripture are not in their hearts: for if they were, out
of the abundance of the heart their mouth would speak.

Besides, servants as well as children, are, for the generality, very
ignorant, and mere novices in the laws of GOD: and how shall they
know, unless some one teach them? And what more proper to teach them
by, than the lively oracles of GOD, “which are able to make them wise
unto salvation?” And who more proper to instruct them by these lively
oracles, than parents and masters, who (as hath been more than once
observed) are as much concerned to feed them with spiritual, as with
bodily bread, day by day.

But if these things be so, what a miserable condition are those unhappy
governors in, who are so far from feeding those committed to their care
with the sincere milk of the word, to the intent they may grow thereby,
that they neither search the scriptures themselves, nor are careful
to explain them to others? Such families must be in a happy way indeed
to do their Master’s will, who take such prodigious pains to know it!
Would not one imagine that they had turned converts to the Church of
_Rome_; that they thought ignorance to be the mother of devotion; and
that those were to be condemned as heretics who read their Bibles? And
yet how few families are there amongst us, who do not act after this
unseemly manner! But shall I praise them in this? I praise them not:
Brethren, this thing ought not so to be.

2. Pass we on now to the second means whereby every governor and his
houshold ought to serve the LORD, _family-prayer_.

This is a duty, though as much neglected, yet as absolutely necessary
as the former. Reading is a good preparative for prayer, as prayer
is an excellent means to render reading effectual. And the reason why
every governor of a family should join both these exercises together,
is plain, because a governor of a family cannot perform his priestly
office (which we before observed he is in some degree invested with)
without performing this duty of family prayer.

We find it therefore remarked, when mention is made of _Cain_ and
_Abel_’s offering sacrifices, that they brought them. But to whom did
they bring them? Why, in all probability, to their father _Adam_, who,
as priest of the family, was to offer sacrifice in their names. And
so ought every spiritual son of the second _Adam_, who is entrusted
with the care of an houshold, to offer up the spiritual sacrifices of
supplications and thanksgivings, acceptable to GOD through JESUS CHRIST,
in the presence and name of all who wait upon, or eat meat at his table.

Thus we read our blessed LORD behaved, when he tabernacled amongst us:
for it is said often, that he prayed with his twelve disciples, which
was then his little family. And he himself has promised a particular
blessing to joint supplications: “Wheresoever two or three are gathered
together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.” And again, “If
two or three are agreed touching any thing they shall ask, it shall be
given them.” Add to this, that we are commanded by the Apostle to “pray
always, with all manner of supplication,” which doubtless includes
family prayer. And holy _Joshua_, when he set up the good resolution
in the text, that he and his houshold would serve the LORD, certainly
resolved to pray with his family, which is one of the best testimonies
they could give of their serving him.

Besides, there are no families but what have some common blessings,
of which they have been all partakers, to give thanks for; some common
crosses and afflictions, which they are to pray against; some common
sins, which they are all to lament and bewail: but how this can be done,
without joining together in one common act of humiliation, supplication,
and thanksgiving, is difficult to devise.

From all which considerations put together, it is evident, that family
prayer is a great and necessary duty; and consequently, those governors
that neglect it, are certainly without excuse. And it is much to be
feared, if they live without family prayer, they live without GOD in
the world.

And yet, such an hateful character as this is, it is to be feared,
that was GOD to send out an angel to destroy us, as he did once to
destroy the _Egyptian_ first-born, and withal give him a commission,
as then, to spare no houses but where they saw the blood of the
lintel, sprinkled on the door-post, so now, to let no families escape,
but those that called upon him in morning and evening prayer; few
would remain unhurt by his avenging sword. Shall I term such families
christians or heathens? Doubtless they deserve not the name of
christians; and heathens will rise up in judgment against such profane
families of this generation: for they had always their houshold gods,
whom they worshipped, and whose assistance they frequently invoked. And
a pretty pass those families surely are arrived at, who must be sent
to school to pagans. But will not the LORD be avenged on such profane
housholds as these? Will he not pour out his fury upon those that call
not upon his name?

3. But it is time for me to hasten to the third and last means I shall
recommend, whereby every governor ought with his houshold to serve the
LORD, _catechizing_ and _instructing_ their children and servants, and
bringing them up in the nurture and admonition of the LORD.

That this, as well as the two former, is a duty incumbent on every
governor of an house, appears from that famous encomium or commendation
GOD gives of _Abraham_: “I know that he will command his children and
his houshold after him, to keep the way of the LORD, to do justice and
judgment.” And indeed scarce any thing is more frequently pressed upon
us in holy writ, than this duty of catechising. Thus, says GOD in a
passage before cited, “Thou shalt teach these words diligently unto
thy children.” And parents are commanded in the New Testament, to
“breed up their children in the nurture and admonition of the LORD.”
The holy Psalmist acquaints us, that one great end why GOD did such
great wonders for his people, was, “to the intent that when they
grew up, they should shew their children, or servants, the same.” And
in _Deuteronomy_ vi. at the 20th and following verses, GOD strictly
commands his people to instruct their children in the true nature
of the ceremonial worship, when they should enquire about it, as he
supposed they would do, in time to come. And if servants and children
were to be instructed in the nature of _Jewish_ rites, much more
ought they now to be initiated and grounded in the doctrines and
first principles of the gospel of CHRIST: not only, because it is a
revelation, which has brought life and immortality to a fuller and
clearer light, but also, because many seducers are gone abroad into
the world, who do their utmost endeavour to destroy not only the
superstructure, but likewise to sap the very foundation of our most
holy religion.

Would then the present generation have their posterity be true lovers
and honourers of GOD; masters and parents must take _Solomon_’s good
advice, and train up and catechise their respective housholds in the
way wherein they should go.

I am aware but of one objection, that can, with any shew of reason, be
urged against what has been advanced; which is, that such a procedure
as this will take up too much time, and hinder families too long
from their worldly business. But it is much to be questioned, whether
persons that start such an objection, are not of the same hypocritical
spirit as the traitor _Judas_, who had indignation against devout
_Mary_, for being so profuse of her ointment, in anointing our blessed
LORD, and asked why it might not be sold for two hundred pence, and
given to the poor. For has GOD given us so much time to work for
ourselves, and shall we not allow some small pittance of it, morning
and evening, to be devoted to his more immediate worship and service?
Have not people read, that it is GOD who gives men power to get wealth,
and therefore that the best way to prosper in the world, is to secure
his favour? And has not our blessed LORD himself promised, that if
we seek first the kingdom of GOD and his righteousness, all outward
necessaries shall be added unto us?

_Abraham_, no doubt, was a man of as great business as such objectors
may be; but yet he would find time to command his houshold to serve
the LORD. Nay, _David_ was a king, and consequently had a great deal
of business upon his hands; yet notwithstanding, he professes that
he would walk in his house with a perfect heart. And, to instance but
one more, holy _Joshua_ was a person certainly engaged very much in
temporal affairs; and yet he solemnly declares before all _Israel_,
that as for him and his houshold, they would serve the LORD. And did
persons but redeem their time, as _Abraham_, _David_, or _Joshua_ did,
they would no longer complain, that family duties kept them too long
from the business of the world.

III. But my Third and Last general head, under which I was to offer
some motives, in order to excite all governors, with their respective
housholds, to serve the LORD in the manner before recommended, I hope,
will serve instead of a thousand arguments, to prove the weakness and
folly of any such objection.

1. And the first motive I shall mention is the duty of _gratitude_,
which you that are governors of families owe to GOD. Your lot, every
one must confess, is cast in a fair ground: providence hath given you
a goodly heritage, above many of your fellow-creatures; and therefore,
out of a principle of gratitude, you ought to endeavour, as much as
in you lies, to make every person of your respective housholds to call
upon him as long as they live: not to mention, that the authority, with
which GOD has invested you as parents and governors of families, is a
talent committed to your trust, and which you are bound to improve to
your Master’s honour. In other things we find governors and parents
can exercise lordship over their children and servants readily, and
frequently enough can say to one, Go, and he goeth; and to another,
Come, and he cometh; to a third, Do this, and he doeth it. And shall
this power be so often employed in your own affairs, and never exerted
in the things of GOD? Be astonished, O heavens, at this!

Thus did not faithful _Abraham_; no, GOD says, that he knew _Abraham_
would command his servants and children after him. Thus did not
_Joshua_: no, he was resolved not only to walk with GOD himself, but
to improve his authority in making all about him do so too: “As for me
and my houshold, we will serve the LORD.” Let us go and do likewise.

2. But _Secondly_, If gratitude to GOD will not, methinks love and pity
to your children should move you, with your respective families, to
serve the LORD.

Most people express a great fondness for their children: nay so great,
that very often their own lives are wrapped up in those of their
offspring. “Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should
not have compassion on the son of her womb?” says GOD by his Prophet
_Isaiah_. He speaks of it as a monstrous thing, and scarce credible;
but the words immediately following, affirm it to be possible, “Yea,
they may forget:” and experience also assures us they may. Father
and mother may both forsake their children: for what greater degree
of forgetfulness can they express towards them, than to neglect
the improvement of their better part, and not bring them up in the
knowledge and fear of GOD?

It is true indeed, parents seldom forget to provide for their childrens
bodies, (though, it is to be feared, some men are so far sunk beneath
the beasts that perish, as to neglect even that) but then how often do
they forget, or rather, when do they remember, to secure the salvation
of their immortal souls? But is this their way of expressing their
fondness for the fruit of their bodies? Is this the best testimony they
can give of their affection to the darling of their hearts? Then was
_Dalilah_ fond of _Samson_, when she delivered him up into the hands of
the _Philistines_: then were those ruffians well affected to _Daniel_,
when they threw him into a den of lions.

3. But _Thirdly_, If neither gratitude to GOD, nor love and pity to
your children, will prevail on you; yet let a principle of _common
honesty_ and _justice_ move you to set up the holy resolution in the
text.

This is a principle which all men would be thought to act upon. But
certainly, if any may be truly censured for their injustice, none can
be more liable to such censure, than those who think themselves injured
if their servants withdraw themselves from their bodily work, and yet
they in return take no care of their inestimable souls. For is it just
that servants should spend their time and strength in their master’s
service, and masters not at the same time give them what is just and
equal for their service?

It is true, some men may think they have done enough when they give
unto their servants food and raiment, and say, “Did not I bargain with
thee for so much a year?” But if they give them no other reward than
this, what do they less for their very beasts? But are not servants
better than they? Doubtless they are: and however masters may put off
their convictions for the present, they will find a time will come,
when they shall know they ought to have given them some spiritual as
well as temporal wages; and the cry of those that have mowed down their
fields, will enter into the ears of ♦the LORD of Sabaoth.

  ♦ duplicate word “the” removed

4. But _Fourthly_, If neither gratitude to GOD, pity to children, nor
a principle of common justice to servants, are sufficient to balance
all objections; yet let that darling, that prevailing motive of
_self-interest_ turn the scale, and engage you with your respective
housholds to serve the LORD.

This weighs greatly with you in other matters: be then persuaded to let
it have a due and full influence on you in this: and if it has, if you
have but faith as a grain of mustard-seed, how can you avoid believing,
that promoting family-religion, will be the best means to promote
your own temporal, as well as eternal welfare? For “Godliness has the
promise of the life that now is, as well as that which is to come.”

Besides, you all, doubtless, wish for honest servants, and pious
children: and to have them prove otherwise, would be as great a grief
to you, as it was to _Elisha_ to have a treacherous _Gehazi_, or
_David_ to be troubled with a rebellious _Absalom_. But how can it be
expected they should learn their duty, except those set over them, take
care to teach it to them? Is it not as reasonable to expect you should
reap where you had not sown, or gather where you had not strawed?

Did christianity, indeed, give any countenance to children and
servants to disregard their parents and masters according to the flesh,
or represent their duty to them, as inconsistent with their entire
obedience to their father and master who is in heaven, there might then
be some pretence to neglect instructing them in the principles of such
a religion. But since the precepts of this pure and undefiled religion,
are all of them holy, just, and good; and the more they are taught
their duty to GOD, the better they will perform their duties to you;
methinks, to neglect the improvement of their souls, out of a dread of
spending too much time in religious duties, is acting quite contrary to
your own interest as well as duty.

5. _Fifthly_ and _Lastly_, If neither gratitude to GOD, love to
your children, common justice to your servants, nor even that most
prevailing motive self-interest, will excite; yet let a consideration
of the _terrors of the_ LORD persuade you to put in practice the pious
resolution in the text. Remember, the time will come, and that perhaps
very shortly, when we must all appear before the judgment-seat of
CHRIST; where we must give a solemn and strict account how we have had
our conversation, in our respective families in this world. How will
you endure to see your children and servants (who ought to be your joy
and crown of rejoicing in the day of our LORD JESUS CHRIST) coming out
as so many swift witnesses against you; cursing the father that begot
them, the womb that bare them, the paps which they have sucked, and the
day they ever entered into your houses? Think you not, the damnation
which men must endure for their own sins, will be sufficient, that they
need load themselves with the additional guilt of being accessary to
the damnation of others also? O consider this, all ye that forget to
serve the LORD with your respective housholds, “lest he pluck you away,
and there be none to deliver you!”

But GOD forbid, brethren, that any such evil should befal you: no,
rather will I hope, that you have been in some measure convinced by
what has been said of the great importance of _family-religion_; and
therefore are ready to cry out in the words immediately following the
text, “GOD forbid that we should forsake the LORD;” and again, verse 21,
“Nay, but we will (with our several housholds) serve the LORD.”

And that there may be always such a heart in you, let me exhort all
governors of families, in the name of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, often to
reflect on the inestimable worth of their own souls, and the infinite
ransom, even the precious blood of JESUS CHRIST, which has been paid
down for them. Remember, I beseech you to remember, that you are fallen
creatures; that you are by nature lost and estranged from GOD; and
that you can never be restored to your primitive happiness, till by
being born again of the Holy Ghost, you arrive at your primitive state
of purity, have the image of GOD restamped upon your souls, and are
thereby made meet to be partakers of the inheritance with the saints
in light. Do, I say, but seriously and frequently reflect on, and act
as persons that believe such important truths, and you will no more
neglect your family’s spiritual welfare than your own. No, the love of
GOD, which will then be shed abroad in your hearts, will constrain you
to do your utmost to preserve them; and the deep sense of GOD’s free
grace in CHRIST JESUS, (which you will then have) in calling you, will
excite you to do your utmost to save others, especially those of your
own houshold. And though, after all your pious endeavours, some may
continue unreformed; yet you will have this comfortable reflection
to make, that you did what you could to make your families religious:
and therefore may rest assured of sitting down in the kingdom of
heaven, with _Abraham_, _Joshua_, and _Cornelius_, and all the godly
housholders, who in their several generations shone forth as so many
lights in their respective housholds upon earth. _Amen._




                               SERMON V.

           CHRIST the best Husband: Or an earnest Invitation
                to Young Women to come and see CHRIST.

        Preached to a Society of Young Women, in _Fetter-Lane_.


                          PSALM xlv. 10, 11.

  _Hearken, O Daughter, and consider, and incline thine Ear:
    Forget also thine own People, and thy Father’s House: So shall
    the King greatly desire thy Beauty; for he is thy Lord, and
    worship thou him._

THIS psalm is called the song of loves, the most pure and spiritual,
the most dear and delightful loves; namely, those which are between
CHRIST the beloved, and his church, which is his spouse; wherein is set
forth, first, the LORD JESUS CHRIST in regard of his majesty, power,
and divinity, his truth, meekness and equity: And then the spouse
is set forth, in regard of her ornaments, companions, attendants and
posterity; and both in regard of their comeliness and beauty. After
the description of CHRIST, an invitation to his espousals, is given
the children of men, called by the name of daughter; and therefore,
particularly applicable unto you, my dear sisters, as being the
daughters of men, yet not so as excluding the sons of men.

I shall now, therefore, consider the words, as spoken to you in
particular, and containing this doctrine;

That the LORD JESUS CHRIST doth invite the daughters of men to be his
spouse; and is exceeding desirous of their beauty; who, forgetting
their people and father’s house, do hearken, consider and incline to
his invitation, and join themselves to him in this relation.

I shall shew,

I. How CHRIST doth espouse himself unto the children, but, more
especially, unto the daughters of men.

The LORD JESUS CHRIST, doth espouse himself unto the children of
men, in this world, but the public solemnization of the marriage, is
reserved until the last day; when his spouse shall be brought forth to
him, in white robes, and a raiment of perfect righteousness, more rich
and curious, my dear sisters, than any of your needle-work; and the
marriage feast will be kept in his Father’s house, in heaven, where
they shall be received into the nearest and closest embraces of his
love. The marriage knot is tied here, in which are included four things:

_First_, Mutual Choice.

_Secondly_, Mutual Affection.

_Thirdly_, Mutual Union.

_Fourthly_, Mutual Obligation.

_First_, My dear sisters, there is a _mutual choice_, which is not
only in CHRIST, as Mediator, but also by CHRIST as the eternal Son of
GOD, yea, GOD himself; notwithstanding all that the polite _Arians_ and
_Socinians_ say to the contrary. The LORD JESUS CHRIST, my dear sisters,
doth chuse you merely by his free grace; it is freely of his own
mercy, that he brings you into the marriage covenant: You, who have so
grievously offended him, yet, the LORD JESUS CHRIST hath chosen you;
you did not, you would not have chosen him; but when once, my dear
sisters, he hath chosen you, then, and not till then, you make choice
of him for your Lord and Husband.

The LORD JESUS CHRIST when he first comes to you, finds you full of
sin and pollution; you are deformed, defiled, enslaved, poor, miserable
and wretched, very despicable and loathsome, by reason of sin; and he
maketh choice of you, not because of your holiness, nor of your beauty,
nor of your being qualified for them; no, the LORD JESUS CHRIST puts
those qualifications upon you, as may make you meet for his embrace;
and you are drawn to make choice of this LORD JESUS CHRIST because he
first chose you.

_Secondly_, In this espousal of your’s, my dear sisters, there is a
_mutual affection_; this doth accompany the choice. Your hearts are
drawn out after CHRIST; your souls pant and long for him; you cannot be
at rest until you are engaged to this JESUS: You are ready to cry out
continually, none but CHRIST, none but CHRIST: this is the language of
your hearts, if you are truly sensible of your need of him. The more
acquaintance you have of this LORD JESUS, the more pleased you are with
your choice, and the more your affections are drawn towards him. And
where can you place your affections better than upon that JESUS who
shed his blood for your sakes? Surely he deserves both your loves and
affections: Go on, go on, my dear sisters, that your affections may
grow stronger and stronger.

_Thirdly_, There is not only mutual choice, and mutual affection, but
likewise _mutual Union_: And here doth the marriage lie chiefly, in
this union; CHRIST and souls are contracted, and the knot is tied so
fast, that neither men on earth, how great soever they be, nor devils
in hell, though they should combine all their wrath and rage together,
still they cannot dissolve, they cannot untie it; no, my dear sisters,
it is indissolvable, for the union is, by the spirit, on CHRIST’s part,
and by faith on your’s: By the spirit, CHRIST doth lay hold on you; and
by faith, you do lay hold on him; and thus the match is made; CHRIST
becomes your’s, his person, portion, and all his benefits are your’s;
and you become CHRIST’s, your persons, your hearts, and all that you
have is resigned up unto him; and O that they may be so more and more.

_Fourthly_, There is a _mutual Obligation_ between CHRIST and his
spouse. CHRIST obliges himself to love you here; he will not, indeed
he never will leave you, he will protect you from the malice of
the _Pharisees_ of this generation, he will provide for you in all
difficulties; he will live with you here, and at last he will take you
to himself, to live with him for ever. And you are engaged to him to
be loving, loyal, faithful, obedient; and you are to stick close to him
as long as you live; and then you will find yourselves to be married to
the best advantage, both for soul and body, for time and for eternity.

II. CHRIST doth Invite all of you to be his spouse.

And it is on this account that he sends forth his ministers to preach.
It is this, that makes me thus come among you; that you would accept of
this invitation, to which, in the name of the LORD JESUS CHRIST, I do
call and intreat you to take him, on his own terms. He calls all of you,
my sisters, whether elder or younger, whether married or unmarried, of
higher degree, or of the meanest quality, the poorest servants, yea,
the rabble of this world, as the world calls you, who are willing to
be espoused unto the LORD JESUS CHRIST. I say, the poor are as welcome
to be CHRIST’s spouse as those that are rich. He regardeth not the rich
more than the poor: he chose a mean virgin, espoused to a carpenter,
to be his mother; and he chuseth and calleth all such to be his spouse;
then be not discouraged at your being despised in the world; for
if you are but loved by CHRIST, and espoused to him, it will be an
over-sufficiency for all the trouble that you have met with here.

III. Those who would be espoused unto CHRIST, must hearken, consider,
and incline to his invitation, and forget even their father’s house.

Such as would be espoused unto CHRIST must hearken. “Hearken, O
daughter.” Many amongst you, my sisters, stop their ears against the
calls of the gospel; they shut their ears like the deaf adder, which
will not hearken unto the voice of the charmer, though he charm never
so wisely. You will not hearken unto the invitations of CHRIST; you
can hearken unto the vanities of the world, and be delighted with the
espousals of the world, but never think, or are delighted with the
espousals of CHRIST.

It was by the ear, that the temptation of sin was received by the first
man, when he departed from GOD; and by the ear, the invitation to be
CHRIST’s spouse must be received, before the heart will be opened to
receive JESUS CHRIST in this conjugal relation.

If you would, my dear sisters, be espoused to CHRIST, you must consider
CHRIST’s invitation. It is not a slight or bare hearing of CHRIST’s
invitation, which will be of any service to you, or make up the match
between CHRIST and your souls; no, you must receive CHRIST in the
heart; you must consider the thing itself, the advantages of it, the
difference between CHRIST’s invitations and the devil’s temptations, or
any of the world’s proffers.

Those who would be espoused to CHRIST, must be inclined to accept of
CHRIST’s invitation. “Hearken, O daughter, consider and incline thine
ear.” This is to incline your hearts: You must consent with ♦your wills;
there must be a compliance to the motion of CHRIST, and you must have
desires after CHRIST, and then your hearts will say, ‘LORD, let us be
thy spouse, and be thou our beloved.’

  ♦ “you” replaced with “your”

You must likewise forget your father’s house. “Hearken, O daughter,
and consider, and forget thy father’s house.” You are not here to
cast off all affections unto natural relations; but you must forget
all relations, so as to be ready to forego all their favour, when it
standeth in competition with that of the LORD JESUS CHRIST; and do not
let your carnal friends and relations hinder you from closing with, and
espousing the LORD JESUS. I earnestly beseech you to suffer the loss
of any thing, rather than to lose his favours; you must indeed forget
your own people, that is, you must forget all your evil customs which
you have learned in your father’s house, and forsake all your vain
conversation, your reading of plays, novels, or romances; and you must
keep from learning to sing the songs of the drunkard; for CHRIST, if
you are his spouse, hath redeemed you.

Such of you, my dear sisters, as are espoused to the LORD JESUS CHRIST
are very beautiful. I do not mean in respect of your bodies; you may
have less of external comeliness than others, in respect of your bodies,
but as to your souls you will exceed in beauty, not so much in the eyes
of man, as in the eyes of GOD; such have the most beautiful image of
GOD stamped upon them; none in the world, beside them, have the least
spark of spiritual beauty. Such as are not married to CHRIST, are
unregenerated, they are not born again, nor brought from sin unto GOD,
which must be done before you be espoused to CHRIST.

And the LORD JESUS CHRIST desireth to see this beauty in his spouse,
for he cries out, “O my dove, thou art in the clefts of the rock, in
the secret places of the stairs, let me see thy countenance, let me
hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely.”
He calleth his spouse his love, being the dear object of his love;
and he admireth her loveliness; he repeats it twice in one verse,
“Behold thou art fair, my love, behold thou art fair.” Thus you see
he describes their beauty. And then, my sisters, we have a wonderful
expression of CHRIST to his spouse, “Thou hast ravished my heart, my
sister, my spouse, thou hast ravished my heart with one of thine eyes,
with one chain of thy neck.” Thus you see how pleased the LORD JESUS
CHRIST is with his spouse; and will not you, therefore, be espoused
unto the LORD JESUS? I offer JESUS CHRIST to all of you; if you have
been never so notorious for sin, if you have been as great a harlot as
_Mary Magdalen_ was, when once you are espoused to CHRIST, you shall
be forgiven. Therefore be not discouraged, at whatever slights and
contempts the world may pass upon you, but come and join yourselves to
the LORD JESUS CHRIST, and all your sins shall be washed away in his
blood; and when once you are espoused to JESUS, you are disjoined from
sin, you are born again. You are now, as it were, espoused unto sin;
sin is your husband, and you are too fond of it, but when once you are
married to CHRIST, when you are born again, then you may be said to die
unto sin; but till then, sin liveth in your affections; therefore, my
sisters, give sin its death-wound in your hearts; you have been called
by the word time after time, and it has had no effect upon you; but
when you are espoused unto the LORD JESUS CHRIST, then you will be
brought to him by his Spirit: You will then lay hold on him by faith,
his Spirit will draw you unto himself; he will make you to be willing
in the day of his power; he will give you faith in him. Faith is the
hand of the soul which layeth hold on CHRIST; therefore, do not rest
contented till you have this grace of faith wrought in you with power;
do not be contented till you have received the LORD JESUS CHRIST.

Embrace CHRIST in the arms of your dearest love; then you love the LORD
JESUS CHRIST with sincerity, when you love and esteem him before father,
mother, or all the delights and pleasures of this life; but if you do
delight in any thing that this world can produce, more than in the LORD
JESUS CHRIST, you have no true love to him.

If you are espoused to CHRIST, you have acquaintance and converse
with him; you will endeavour to promote his interest, and advance his
name in the world; when others are going to the polite and fashionable
diversions of life, you will be labouring to bring honour to the LORD
JESUS CHRIST; you will commend your beloved above all other beloveds,
and endeavour to bring others into love to him. Can you, my dear
sisters, who are now assembled to worship GOD, shew such evidence
of your espousals unto the LORD JESUS CHRIST? O! how joyful, how
comfortable an estate is this! Surely this is a marriage worth seeking
after; this is the only desirable marriage, and the LORD JESUS CHRIST
is the only lover that is worth seeking after.

Now, my dear sisters, I shall speak a few words to those of you who
have not yet espoused yourselves to the LORD JESUS. It is a great sin,
and surely you highly affront the LORD that bought you. It is likewise
your folly to refuse and neglect the gracious proffers of being the
spouse of CHRIST; hereby you forfeit all that love which he would
bestow upon you; hereby you chuse rags before robes, dross before gold,
pebbles before jewels, guilt before a pardon, wounds before healing,
defilement before cleansing, deformity before comeliness, trouble
before peace, slavery before liberty, the service of the devil before
the service of CHRIST. Hereby you chuse dishonour before a crown, death
before life, hell before heaven, eternal misery and torment before
everlasting joy and glory. And need there a farther evidence of your
folly and madness, in refusing and neglecting CHRIST to be your spouse.

My dear sisters, I should exceed the limits of your time, should I
particularize all the advantages which you would obtain by being
espoused to the LORD JESUS. This is your wisdom; they are foolish
virgins who refuse; but you are the wise virgins who have accepted of
the LORD JESUS CHRIST, and have disposed of yourselves to him; you have
made the wisest choice; and however the blind world may deem you fools,
and despise you as being methodically mad, yet you are wise in the
esteem of GOD, and will, one day, appear so in the esteem of them that
now despise you. It is your glory that you are espoused unto the LORD
JESUS; and therefore glory in your espousal; glory not in yourselves,
but in the LORD who hath thus freely and graciously bestowed these
favours upon you. It is your safety to be espoused unto the LORD JESUS
CHRIST, he will protect and defend you even from sin and satan, and
eternal ruin; and therefore thus far you are safe; he hath a regard for
you in times of danger from men, and these times of danger seem to be
hastening; it is now arising as a black cloud no bigger than a man’s
hand, and by and by it will overspread the heavens, and when it is full
it will burst; but if you are espoused to CHRIST, you are safe.

Now, my dear sisters, I shall conclude with an earnest exhortation
to high and low, rich and poor, one with another, to be espoused unto
CHRIST.

Let me speak unto you, young women, who are not yet espoused unto
CHRIST, in an especial manner. It may be to satisfy your curiosity, has
brought many of you here; though, perhaps, this may be the time when
you shall be brought home to embrace the LORD JESUS, and be espoused
to him. And O, that I may persuade you, by his Spirit, to espouse
yourselves unto the LORD of life.

And if you are but brought to close with the LORD JESUS CHRIST, I shall
attain my end, and then both you and I shall rejoice that I preached
this sermon to you.

Come virgins, will you give me leave to be a suitor unto you, not in my
own name, but in the name of the LORD? O! that I may prevail with you
for your affections, and persuade you to give them unto CHRIST! May I
be instrumental of bringing your souls to CHRIST! May I be instrumental
to join you and CHRIST together this day!

Be not coy, as some of you possibly are in other loves: modesty and
the virgin blush may very well become you, when proposals of another
kind are made unto you; but here coyness is folly, and backwardness
to accept of this motion, is shame: you have ten thousand times more
reason to blush at the refusal of CHRIST for your beloved, than at the
acceptance; when otherwise the devil and sin would ravish your virgin
affections. Never had you a better motion made to you; never was such a
match proffered to you as this, of being matched and espoused unto the
LORD JESUS CHRIST.

Consider who the LORD JESUS is, whom you are invited to espouse
yourselves unto; he is the best husband; there is none comparable to
JESUS CHRIST.

Do you desire one that is great? He is of the highest dignity, he
is the glory of heaven, the darling of eternity, admired by angels,
dreaded by devils, and adored by saints. For you to be espoused to so
great a king, what honour will you have by this espousal?

Do you desire one that is rich? None is comparable to CHRIST, the
fulness of the earth belongs to him. If you be espoused to CHRIST,
you shall share in his unsearchable riches; you shall receive of his
fulness, even grace for grace here, and you shall hereafter be admitted
to glory, and shall live with this JESUS to all eternity.

Do you desire one that is wise? There is none comparable to CHRIST
for wisdom. His knowledge is infinite, and his wisdom is correspondent
thereto. And if you are espoused to CHRIST, he will guide and counsel
you, and make you wise unto salvation.

Do you desire one that is potent, who may defend you against your
enemies, and all the insults and reproaches of the Pharisees of this
generation? There is none that can equal CHRIST in power; for the LORD
JESUS CHRIST hath all power.

Do you desire one that is good? There is none like unto CHRIST in this
regard; others may have some goodness, but it is imperfect; CHRIST’s
goodness is compleat and perfect, he is full of goodness, and in him
dwelleth no evil.

Do you desire one that is beautiful? His eyes are most sparkling, his
looks and glances of love are ravishing, his smiles are most delightful
and refreshing unto the soul: CHRIST is the most lovely person of all
others in the world.

Do you desire one that can love you? None can love you like CHRIST: His
love, my dear sisters, is incomprehensible; his love passeth all other
loves: The love of the LORD JESUS is first, without beginning; his love
is free without any motive; his love is great without any measure; his
love is constant without any change, and his love is everlasting.

It was the love of the LORD JESUS CHRIST, my dear sisters, which
brought him down from heaven; and which veiled his divinity in a human
soul and body; for he is GOD over all blessed for ever: It was love
that made him subject to hunger, thirst and sorrow; he was humbled,
even unto death for you; for you who are espoused to him, he underwent
the painful, shameful and ignominious death of the cross: and can you,
my sisters, hear this, and not be concerned to think that the blessed
JESUS underwent all this for such sinful creatures as you and I are?
And when out of love he had finished the redemption on earth, as to
what was needful for satisfaction; it was his love that carried him
back to heaven, where he was before, that he might make application of
what he had purchased, that there he might make intercession for those
whom he had redeemed, and prepare a place for them, even glorious
mansions with himself, in the house not made with hands, which is
eternal in the heavens. It is out of love that he sendeth such tokens
to his people from heaven to earth, which he conveyeth through his
ordinances, by his Spirit unto them. Surely then none is so deserving
as the LORD JESUS CHRIST for you to espouse yourselves unto: if you be
espoused unto CHRIST he is your’s, all that he is, all that he hath;
you shall have his heart, and share in the choicest expressions of his
dearest love.

The LORD JESUS CHRIST, my dear sisters, doth beseech you to be his
spouse. We ministers have a commission from the LORD JESUS CHRIST to
invite you, in his name, unto this very thing; and CHRIST’s invitations
are real; general; frequent; earnest; free.

CHRIST’s invitations of you, to be his spouse, are _real_; and as the
thing is real, so you, my dear sisters, are really invited unto it.
The LORD doth not mock and dissemble with you, as some pretending
lovers, who dissemble love unto virgins, until they have gained their
affections, and then falsely and basely relinquish them, never really
intending either to espouse, or marry them: but the LORD doth really
intend the thing, in his invitations of you; he never cast off any
whose consent and affections he had gained. Again,

CHRIST’s invitations of you, my dear sisters, are _general_. All of you
are invited, none of you are excluded; all sorts of sinners are invited;
the most vile and abominable sinners, the most notorious transgressors
are invited to be CHRIST’s spouse, and shall be as welcome as any unto
the embraces of his love.

CHRIST’s invitations of you are _frequent_: JESUS CHRIST calls on
you frequently; he hath waited on you time after time, one year after
another; and he doth now invite you, by me this day, to come unto Him.
Do not slight this invitation, but receive it with joy and thankfulness.
Come, I beseech you, to this JESUS, who thus invites you to be his
spouse. Again,

CHRIST’s invitations to be his spouse are _earnest_; he doth call upon
you, and not only call, but call earnestly too; yea, he useth many
arguments with you: he will press you to come unto him; he is loth to
take any denial from you: he knocks, and knocks hard at the door of
your hearts for entertainment; and surely you will not deny the LORD
of life and glory who died for you, and gave himself for you: O my dear
sisters, let this be the evening of your espousals to the LORD JESUS
CHRIST.

He invites you _freely_ to be his spouse, for all his invitations are
free; he doth not expect a portion with you, as worldly lovers do; He
wants nothing of you: nay, you must have nothing, if you be espoused
unto the LORD JESUS CHRIST. If you be poor, miserable, blind, naked,
JESUS CHRIST will supply all these defects of his own free mercy; he
will fill and supply you with all things out of his treasury; he will
make you meet for himself; he will prepare you to live with him for
ever.

Consider, if you be once espoused unto CHRIST, if once joined in this
relation, you shall never be separated from him; neither men nor devils
shall be able to separate you: none, none, shall disjoin you; and
when death doth break all other bonds, it shall not break the conjugal
bond between you and CHRIST, but bring you unto the most full and
everlasting possession of your beloved.

And what do you now say, young women? shall I have a grant for my
master, or be sent away with a repulse and refusal; no, I cannot carry
such a message to my master; I hope better things of you, my sisters,
and things which accompany salvation: methinks by this time ye should
begin to have a mind unto JESUS CHRIST; you look as if you did desire;
you hearken as if you would consent. What do you say? Shall the match
be made up this evening between CHRIST and your souls? O that I may
be instrumental in joining your hands, or rather your hearts together:
O that I may be instrumental to tie that knot, which never can be
unloosed.

Some marry in haste, and repent at leisure; but if you were once
espoused unto JESUS CHRIST, you would never repent; nothing would
grieve you, but that you were not joined to him sooner; and you would
not be disjoined again for all the world.

Shall this be the day of your espousals? Some of you have stayed a long
time; and will you defer any longer? If you will not now, perhaps you
may never have another opportunity; this may be the last time of asking;
and therefore it is dangerous to refuse: some of you are very young,
too young for other espousals; but none of you, my dear sisters, are
too young to be espoused unto the LORD JESUS CHRIST: in other espousals,
you must have the consent of your parents; but in this you are at your
own disposal; you may give, and ought to match yourselves to CHRIST,
whether parents do consent or not.

But if any of you should ask, what you must do that you may be espoused
unto CHRIST? You must be sensible of your need of being espoused to
him; and untill you are sensible of your need of the LORD JESUS CHRIST,
you cannot be espoused to him: You must have desires after this JESUS,
and seek unto him for an interest in him; you must cry nightly unto
him to espouse you to himself: put off the filthiness of sin and all
its defilements; and then, my sisters, put on the white raiment, and
clean garments, which CHRIST hath provided for you, the robes of his
righteousness; in these garments you shall be beautiful; and in these
garments you shall be accepted: you must have the wedding garment on;
you must put off all your own good works, for they will be but a means
to keep you from CHRIST; no, you must come as not having your own
righteousness, which is of the law, but you must have the righteousness
of CHRIST. Therefore, come unto the LORD JESUS CHRIST, and he will give
it to you; he will not send you away without it. Receive him upon his
own terms, and he is your’s for ever: O devote yourselves to him, soul
and body, and all, to be his for ever; and CHRIST will be your’s, and
then happy, happy you, that ever you were born! But if any of you die
before this espousal unto the LORD JESUS CHRIST, then woe, woe, unto
you, that ever you had a being in life; but if you go to CHRIST you
shall be espoused unto the LORD JESUS: though your sins have been never
so great, yea, the blood of CHRIST will cleanse you from them; the
marriage covenant between CHRIST and your souls will dissolve all your
sins; you will then be weary of your old ways, for all things will
become new in your souls.

Now, my dear Sisters, I shall conclude by just speaking a word or two
to those of you, who are already espoused unto the LORD JESUS CHRIST.

O admire, admire the rich and free grace, which hath brought you to
this relation: Is not this an instance of the greatest of love, that
you should be the spouse of the LORD JESUS CHRIST? You that had no
beauty, you that had no comeliness, that was full of sin, that He
should embrace such as you and I are; that we should be taken into
the embrace of this LORD JESUS. O infinite condescending kindness!
O amazing love! Reverence, reverence, I beseech you, this LORD JESUS
CHRIST.

He is your LORD, and you must reverence him, love and be faithful
unto him, be subject to him, and careful to please him in every thing;
endeavour to keep up a daily communion with him; look, long and prepare
for CHRIST’s second appearance, when the nuptials between you shall
be solemnized, and you live with him in mansions of everlasting joys,
where you shall love and live with this king of glory for ever and ever.

I know not how to conclude; methinks I could speak to you till midnight,
if it would bring you unto the LORD JESUS CHRIST, and make you be
espoused to him, for indeed, that will be the espousal which will turn
to the greatest advantage, as you will find by experience, if you will
but make the trial; and that you may do so, my prayers and my constant
endeavours shall be used.

I will, my dear sisters, spend and be spent for you, and by the
assistance of GOD, will persevere in this that I have begun; and as
many of you may have opportunity some evening in the week, without
breaking in on the business of life; I shall therefore, my sisters,
either be here, or where you shall be publicly acquainted with: I will
not mind being reproached or despised: the men of this world may use
what language they please; they may say I am a Methodist. Indeed, my
sisters, I am resolved, by the grace of GOD, to use all methods I can,
to pluck you from Satan, that you may be as brands plucked from the
burning fire: this shall be my method, which I hope will be the means
of effectually saving your precious and immortal souls.

And if I am the instrument of this, I shall rejoice, yea, and I will
rejoice in spight of what men, or devils, can say or do to the contrary:
and may the LORD JESUS CHRIST direct, and assist me at all times, to
act what will be most for his glory, and the welfare of your souls: and
may you all say a hearty Amen thereto.

  “Now the LORD JESUS CHRIST, who is GOD over all, blessed for
    ever, assist and watch over you, keep you from all evil and
    sin here, and present you before his Father faultless at the
    great day of account! To this LORD JESUS CHRIST, the Father,
    and the blessed Spirit, three persons and but one eternal and
    invisible GOD, be ascribed all honour, power, glory, might,
    majesty and dominion, now, henceforth, and for ever more. Amen,
    Amen.”

  “The grace of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, the love of GOD, and the
    fellowship of the Holy Ghost be with you all, to comfort under,
    and deliver you from tribulation; to preserve you to your
    respective places of abode; and when there, to keep you in
    his fear, that you may live to his glory; that to live may
    be CHRIST’s, and to die be your eternal gain; so that you may
    live with him through eternal ages, and sing Hallelujahs to
    him for ever. Amen.”




                              SERMON VI.

              _Britain_’s Mercies, and _Britain_’s Duty.

  Preached at _Philadelphia_, on _Sunday, August 24, 1746_. and
    occasioned by the Suppression of the late unnatural Rebellion.


                             PSALM cv. 45.

   _That they might observe his Statutes and keep his Laws._

MEN, brethren, and fathers, and all ye to whom I am about to preach
the kingdom of GOD, I suppose you need not be informed, that being
indispensibly obliged to be absent on your late thanksgiving-day, I
could not shew my obedience to the governor’s proclamation, as my own
inclination led me, or as might justly be expected from, and demanded
of me. But as the occasion of that day’s thanksgiving is yet, and
I trust ever will be, fresh in our memory, I cannot think that a
discourse on that subject can even now be altogether unseasonable. I
take it for granted, further, that you need not be informed, that among
the various motives which are generally urged to enforce obedience
to the divine commands, that of love is the most powerful and cogent.
The terrors of the law may affright and awe, but love dissolves and
melts the heart. “The love of CHRIST,” says the great apostle of the
_Gentiles_, “constraineth us.” Nay, love is so absolutely necessary for
those that name the name of CHRIST, that without it, their obedience
cannot truly be stiled evangelical, or be acceptable in the sight of
GOD. “Although, (says the apostle) I bestow all my goods to feed the
poor, and though I give my body to be burnt, and have not charity,”
(i. e. unless unfeigned love to GOD, and to mankind for his great
name’s sake, be the principle of such actions, howsoever it may benefit
others) “it profiteth me nothing.” This is the constant language of the
lively oracles of GOD. And, from them it is equally plain, that nothing
has a greater tendency to beget and excite such an obediential love in
us, than a serious and frequent consideration of the manifold mercies
we receive time after time from the hands of our heavenly Father. The
royal psalmist, who had the honour of being stiled, “the man after
GOD’s own heart,” had an abundant experience of this. Hence it is,
that whilst he is musing on the divine goodness, the fire of divine
love kindles in his soul; and, out of the abundance of his heart,
his mouth speaketh such grateful and extatic language as this. “What
shall I render unto the LORD for all his mercies? Bless the LORD, O
my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy name.” And why?
“who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who healeth all thy diseases,
who redeemeth thy life from destruction, who crowneth thee with loving
kindness and tender mercies.” And when the same holy man of GOD had
a mind to stir up the people of the _Jews_ to set about a national
reformation, as the most weighty and prevailing argument he could make
use of for that purpose, he lays before them, as it were, in a draught,
many national mercies, and distinguishing deliverances, which have
been conferred upon and wrought out for them, by the most high GOD.
The psalm to which the words of our text belong, is a pregnant proof
of this; it being a kind of epitome or compendium of the whole _Jewish_
history: at least it contains an enumeration of many signal and
extraordinary blessings the _Israelites_ had received from GOD, and
also the improvement they were in duty bound to make of them, “Observe
his statutes and keep his laws.”

To run through all the particulars of the psalm, or draw a parallel
(which might with great ease and justice be done) between GOD’s
dealings with us and the _Israelites_ of old: To enumerate all the
national mercies bestowed upon, and remarkable deliverances wrought
out for the kingdoms of _Great-Britain_ and _Ireland_, from the infant
state of _William_ the _Norman_ to their present manhood, and more
than _Augustan_ maturity, under the auspicious reign of our rightful
Sovereign King _George_ the second; howsoever pleasing and profitable
it might be at any other time, would, at this juncture, prove, if not
an irksome, yet an unreasonable undertaking.

The occasion of the late solemnity, I mean the suppression of a most
horrid and unnatural rebellion, will afford more than sufficient matter
for a discourse of this nature, and furnish us with abundant motives to
love and obey that glorious _Jehovah_, who giveth salvation unto kings,
and delivers his people from the hurtful sword.

Need I make an apology, before this auditory, if, in order to see
the greatness of our late deliverance, I should remind you of the
many unspeakable blessings which we have for a course of years
enjoyed, during the reign of his present Majesty, and the gentle,
mild administration under which we live? Without justly incurring the
censure of giving flattering titles, I believe all who have eyes to
see, and ears to hear, and are but a little acquainted with our public
affairs, must acknowledge, that we have one of the best of Kings. It is
now above nineteen years since he began to reign over us. And yet, was
he seated on a royal throne, and were all his subjects placed before
him, was he to address them as _Samuel_ once addressed the _Israelites_,
“Behold here I am, old and grey-headed, witness against me before the
LORD, whose ox have I taken? Or whose ass have I taken? Or whom have
I defrauded? Whom have I oppressed?” They must, if they would do him
justice, make the same answer as was given to _Samuel_, “Thou hast not
defrauded us, nor oppressed us.” What _Tertullus_, by way of flattery,
said to _Felix_, may with the strictest justice be applied to our
sovereign, “By thee we enjoy great quietness, and very worthy deeds
have been done unto our nation by thy providence.” He has been indeed
_Pater Patriæ_, a father to our country, and though old and grey-headed,
has jeoparded his precious life for us in the high places of the field.
Nor has he less deserved the great and glorious title, which the LORD
promises, that kings should sustain in the latter days, I mean, “a
nursing father of the church.” For not only the Church of _England_,
as by law established, but all denominations of christians whatsoever,
have enjoyed their religious as well as civil liberties. As there
has been no authorized oppression in the state, so there has been no
publicly allowed persecution in the church. We breathe indeed in free
air; as free (if not freer) both as to temporals and spirituals, as
any nation under heaven. Nor is the prospect likely to terminate in his
majesty’s death, which I pray GOD to defer. Our princesses are disposed
of to protestant powers. And we have great reason to be assured,
that the present heir apparent, and his consort, are like minded with
their royal father. And I cannot help thinking, that it is a peculiar
blessing vouchsafed us by the King of kings, that his present Majesty
has been continued so long among us. For now, his immediate successor
(though his present situation obliges him, as it were, to lie dormant)
has great and glorious opportunities, which we have reason to think
he daily improves, of observing and weighing the national affairs,
considering the various steps and turns of government, and consequently
of laying in a large fund of experience, to make him a wise and great
prince, if ever GOD should call him to sway the _British_ sceptre.
Happy art thou, O _England_! Happy art thou, O _America_, who on every
side art thus highly favoured!

But, alas! how soon would this happy scene have shifted, and a
melancholy gloomy prospect have succeeded in its room, had the rebels
gained their point, and a popish abjured pretender been forced upon the
_British_ throne! For, supposing his birth not to be spurious, (as we
have great reason to think it really was) what could we expect from one,
descended from a father, who, when Duke of _York_, put all _Scotland_
into confusion; and afterwards, when crowned King of _England_, for
his ♦arbitrary and tyrannical government, both in church and state, was
justly obliged to abdicate the throne, by the assertors of _British_
liberty? Or, supposing the horrid plot, first hatched in hell, and
afterwards nursed at _Rome_, had taken place; supposing, I say, the old
Pretender should have obtained the triple crown, and have transferred
his pretended title (as it is reported he has done) to his eldest son,
what was all this for, but that, by being advanced to the popedom,
he might rule both son and subjects with less controul, and by their
united interest, keep the three kingdoms of _England_, _Scotland_, and
_Ireland_, in greater vassallage to the see of _Rome_? Ever since this
unnatural rebellion broke out, I have looked upon the young Pretender
as the phaeton of the present age. He is ambitiously and presumptuously
aiming to seat himself in the throne of our rightful sovereign King
_George_, which he is no more capable of keeping, than _Phaeton_ was
to guide the chariot of the sun; and had he succeeded in his attempt,
like him, would only have set the world on fire. It is true, to do
him justice, he has deserved well of the Church of _Rome_, and, in all
probability, will hereafter be canonized amongst the noble order of
their fictitious saints. But, with what an iron rod we might expect
to have been bruised, had his troops been victorious, may easily be
gathered from those cruel orders said to be found in the pockets of
some of his officers, “Give no quarters to the Elector’s troops.” Add
to this, that there was great reason to suspect, that, upon the first
news of the success of the rebels, a general massacre was intended. So
that if the LORD had not been on our side, _Great Britain_, not to say
_America_, would, in a few weeks or months, have been an _Aceldama_, a
field of blood.

  ♦ “arbritrary” replaced with “arbitrary”

Besides, was a _Popish_ Pretender to rule over us, instead of being
represented by a free parliament, and governed by laws made by their
consent, as we now are; we should shortly have had only the shadow of
one, and it may be, no parliament at all. This is the native product
of a _Popish_ government, and what the unhappy family, from which this
young adventurer pretends he descended, has always aimed at. Arbitrary
principles he has sucked in with his mother’s milk, and if he had been
so honest, instead of that immature motto upon his standard, _Tandem
triumphans_, only to have put, _Stet pro ratione Voluntas_, he had
given us a short, but true portrait of the nature of his intended, but
blessed be GOD, now defeated reign. And why should I mention, that the
sinking of the national debt, or rending away the funded property of
the people, and the dissolution of the present happy union between the
two kingdoms, would have been the immediate consequences of his success,
as he himself declares in his second manifesto, dated from _Holy-rood
House_? These are evils, and great ones too; but then they are only
evils of a temporary nature. They chiefly concern the body, and must
necessarily terminate in the grave. But, alas! what an inundation of
spiritual mischiefs, would soon have overflowed the Church, and what
unspeakable danger should we and our posterity have been reduced to
in respect to our better parts, our precious and immortal souls? How
soon would whole swarms of monks, dominicans and friars, like so many
locusts, have overspread and plagued the nation; with what winged
speed would foreign titular bishops have posted over, in order to take
possession of their respective sees? How quickly would our universities
have been filled with youths who have been sent abroad by their
_Popish_ parents, in order to drink in all the superstitions of the
church of _Rome_? What a speedy period would have been put to societies
of all kinds, for promoting christian knowledge, and propagating the
gospel in foreign parts? How soon would our pulpits have every where
been filled with these old antichristian doctrines, free-will, meriting
by works, transubstantiation, purgatory, works of supererogation,
passive-obedience, non-resistance, and all the other abominations of
the whore of _Babylon_? How soon would our protestant charity schools
in _England_, _Scotland_ and _Ireland_, have been pulled down, our
Bibles forcibly taken from us, and ignorance every where set up as
the mother of devotion? How soon should we have been deprived of
that invaluable blessing, liberty of conscience, and been obliged to
commence (what they falsely call) catholicks, or submit to all the
tortures which a bigoted zeal, guided by the most cruel principles,
could possibly invent? How soon would that mother of harlots have made
herself once more drunk with the blood of the saints? And the whole
tribe even of free-thinkers themselves, been brought to this dilemma,
either to die martyrs for, (although I never yet heard of one that did
so) or, contrary to all their most avowed principles, renounce their
great _Diana_, unassisted, unenlightened reason? But I must have done,
lest while I am speaking against antichrist, I should unawares fall
myself, and lead my hearers into an antichristian spirit. True and
undefiled religion will regulate our zeal, and teach us to treat even
the man of sin with no harsher language than that which the angel gave
to his grand employer Satan, “The LORD rebuke thee.”

Glory be to GOD’s great name! the LORD has rebuked him; and that too
at a time when we had little reason to expect such a blessing at GOD’s
hands. My dear hearers, neither the present frame of my heart, nor
the occasion of your late solemn meeting, lead me to give you a detail
of our public vices. Though, alas! they are so many, so notorious,
and withal of such a crimson-dye, that a gospel minister would not
be altogether inexcusable, was he, even on such a joyful occasion,
to lift up his voice like a trumpet, to shew the British nation their
transgression, and the people of _America_ their sin. However, though
I would not cast a dismal shade upon the pleasing picture the cause of
our late rejoicings set before us; yet thus much may, and ought to be
said, that as GOD has not dealt so bountifully with any people as with
us, so no nation under heaven has dealt more ungratefully with Him.
We have been like _Capernaum_, lifted up to heaven in privileges, and
for the abuse of them, like her, have deserved to be thrust down into
hell. How well soever it may be with us, in respect to our civil and
ecclesiastical constitution, yet in regard to our morals, _Isaiah_’s
description of the _Jewish_ polity is too applicable, “The whole head
is sick, the whole heart is faint; from the crown of the head to the
sole of our feet, we are full of wounds and bruises, and putrifying
sores.” We have, _Jeshurun_-like, waxed fat and kicked. We have played
the harlot against GOD, both in regard to principles and practices.
“Our gold is become dim, and our fine gold changed.” We have crucified
the Son of GOD afresh, and put him to an open shame. Nay, CHRIST has
been wounded in the house of his friends. And every thing long ago
seemed to threaten an immediate storm. But, O the long-suffering and
goodness of GOD to us-ward! When all things seemed ripe for destruction,
and matters were come to such a crisis, that GOD’s praying people began
to think, that though _Noah_, _Daniel_ and _Job_, were living, they
would only deliver their own souls; yet then in the midst of judgment
the Most High remembered mercy, and when a popish enemy was breaking in
upon us like a flood, the LORD himself graciously lifted up a standard.

This to me does not seem to be one of the most unfavourable
circumstances which have attended this mighty deliverance; nor do
I think you will look upon it as a circumstance altogether unworthy
your observation. Had this cockatrice indeed been crushed in the egg,
and the young Pretender driven back upon his first arrival, it would
undoubtedly have been a great blessing. But not so great as that for
which you lately assembled to give GOD thanks: for then his Majesty
would not have had so good an opportunity of knowing his enemies, or
trying his friends. The _British_ subjects would in a manner have lost
the fairest occasion that ever offered to express their loyalty and
gratitude to the rightful sovereign. _France_ would not have been so
greatly humbled; nor such an effectual stop have been put, as we trust
there now is, to any such further _Popish_ plot, to rob us of all that
is near and dear to us. “Out of the eater therefore hath come forth
meat, and out of the strong hath come forth sweetness.” The Pretender’s
eldest son is suffered not only to land in the _North-West Highlands_
in _Scotland_, but in a little while he becomes a great band. This for
a time is not believed, but treated as a thing altogether incredible.
The friends of the government in those parts, not for want of loyalty,
but of sufficient authority to take up arms, could not resist him. He
is permitted to pass on with his terrible banditti, and, like the comet
that was lately seen, spreads his baleful influences all around him.
He is likewise permitted to gain a short-liv’d triumph by a victory
over a body of our troops at _Preston-Pans_, and to take a temporary
possession of the metropolis of _Scotland_. Of this he makes his boast,
and informs the public, that “Providence had hitherto favoured him with
wonderful success, led him in the way to victory, and to the capital
of the antient kingdom, though he came without foreign aid.” Nay, he
is further permitted to press into the very heart of _England_. But
now the Almighty interposes. Hitherto he was to go, and no further.
Here were his malicious designs to be staid. His troops of a sudden
are driven back. Away they post to the _Highlands_, and there they are
suffered not only to increase, but also to collect themselves into a
large body, that having, as it were, what _Caligula_ once wished _Rome_
had, but one neck, they might be cut off with one blow.

The time, manner, and instrument of this victory, deserves our notice.
It was on a general fast-day, when the clergy and good people of
_Scotland_ were lamenting the disloyalty of their perfidious countrymen,
and, like _Moses_, lifting up their hands, that _Amalek_ might not
prevail. The victory was total and decisive. Little blood was spilt
on the side of the Royalists. And, to crown all, Duke _William_, his
Majesty’s youngest son, has the honour of first driving back, and then
defeating the rebel-army. A prince, who in his infancy and youth, gave
early proofs of an uncommon bravery and nobleness of mind; a prince,
whose courage has increased with his years. Who returned wounded
from the battle of _Dettingen_, behaved with surprizing bravery at
_Fontenoy_, and now, by a conduct and magnanimity becoming the high
office he sustains, like his glorious predecessor the Prince of
_Orange_, has delivered three kingdoms from the dread of popish
cruelty, and arbitrary power. What renders it still more remarkable is,
The day on which his Highness gained this victory, was the day after
his birth-day, when he was entering on the 26th year of his age; and
when _Sullivan_, one of the Pretender’s privy-council, like another
_Ahitophel_, advised the rebels to give our soldiers battle, presuming
they were surfeited and over-charged with their yesterday’s rejoicings,
and consequently unfit to make any great stand against them. But, glory
be to GOD, who catches the wise in their own craftiness! his counsel,
like _Ahitophel_’s, proves abortive. Both General and soldiers were
prepared to meet them. “GOD taught their hands to war, and their
fingers to fight,” and brought the Duke, after a deserved slaughter
of some thousands of the rebels, with most of his brave soldiers,
victorious from the field.

If we then take a distinct view of this notable transaction, and trace
it in all the particular circumstances that have attended it, I believe
we must with one heart and voice confess, that if it be a mercy for a
state to be delivered from a worse than a _Catiline_’s conspiracy, or a
church to be rescued from a hotter than a _Dioclesian_ persecution; if
it be a mercy to be delivered from a religion that turns plough-shares
into swords, and pruning-hooks into spears, and makes it meritorious
to shed protestant blood; if it be a mercy to have all our present
invaluable privileges, both in church and state, secured to us more
than ever; if it be a mercy to have these great things done for us,
at a season, when for our crying sins, both church and state justly
deserved to be overturned; and if it be a mercy to have all this
brought about for us, under GOD, by one of the blood-royal, a prince
acting with an experience far above his years; if any, or all of these
are mercies, then have you lately commemorated one of the greatest
mercies that ever the glorious GOD vouchsafed to the _British_ nation.

And shall we not rejoice and give thanks? Should we refuse, would not
the stones cry out against us? Rejoice then we may and ought: but,
O let our rejoicing be in the LORD, and run in a religious channel.
This, we find, has been the practice of GOD’s people in all ages. When
he was pleased, with a mighty hand, and out-stretched arm, to lead
the _Israelites_ through the _Red-Sea_, as on dry ground, “Then sang
_Moses_ and the children of _Israel_; and _Miriam_ the prophetess, the
sister of _Aaron_, took a timbrel in her hand, and all the women went
out after her. And _Miriam_ answered them, Sing ye to the LORD; for
he hath triumphed gloriously.” When GOD subdued _Jabin_, the King of
_Canaan_, before the children of _Israel_, “then sang _Deborah_ and
_Barak_ on that day, saying, ‘Praise ye the LORD for the avenging
of _Israel_.’” When the ark was brought back out of the hands of
the _Philistines_, _David_, though a king, danced before it. And, to
mention but one instance more, which may serve as a general directory
to us on this and such-like occasions: when the great Head of the
church had rescued his people from the general massacre intended to
be executed upon them by a cruel and ambitious _Haman_, “_Mordecai_
sent letters unto all the _Jews_ that were in all the provinces of the
King _Ahasuerus_ both nigh and far, to establish among them, that they
should keep the fourteenth day of the month _Adar_, and the fifteenth
day of the same yearly, as the days wherein the _Jews_ rested from
their enemies, and the month which was turned unto them from sorrow
unto joy, and from mourning into a good day: that they should make them
days of feasting and joy, and of sending portions one to another, and
gifts to the poor.” And why should we not go and do likewise?

And shall we not also, on such an occasion, express our gratitude to,
and make honourable mention of, those worthies who have signalized
themselves, and been ready to sacrifice both lives and fortunes at this
critical juncture?

This would be to act the part of those ungrateful _Israelites_, who
are branded in the book of GOD, for not shewing kindness to the house
of “_Jerub-Baal_, namely _Gideon_, according to all the goodness which
he shewed unto _Israel_.” Even a _Pharaoh_ could prefer a deserving
_Joseph_, _Ahasuerus_ a _Mordecai_, and _Nebuchadnezzar_ a _Daniel_,
when made instruments of signal service to themselves and people.
“My heart, says _Deborah_, is towards (_i. e._ I have a particular
veneration and regard for) the Governors of _Israel_ that offered
themselves willingly. And blessed above women shall _Jael_ the wife
of _Heber_ the _Kenite_ be; for she put her hand to the nail, and her
right-hand to the workman’s hammer, and with the hammer she smote
_Sisera_, she smote off his head, when she had pierced and stricken
through his temples.” And shall we not say, “Blessed above men let
his Royal Highness the Duke of _Cumberland_ be; for through his
instrumentality, the great and glorious JEHOVAH hath brought mighty
things to pass?” Should not our hearts be towards the worthy Archbishop
of _York_, the Royal Hunters, and those other _English_ heroes who
offered themselves so willingly? Let the names of _Blakeney_, _Bland_,
and _Rea_, and all thole who waxed valiant in fight on this important
occasion, live for ever in the _British_ annals. And let the name of
that great, that incomparable brave soldier of the King, and a good
soldier of JESUS CHRIST, Colonel _Gardiner_, (excuse me if I here
drop a tear: he was my intimate friend) let his name, I say, be had in
everlasting remembrance.

But, after all, is there not an infinitely greater debt of gratitude
and praise due from us, on this occasion, to Him that is higher than
the highest, even the King of kings and Lord of Lords, the blessed and
only Potentate? Is it not his arm, his strong and mighty arm, (what
instruments soever may have been made use of) that hath brought us
this salvation? And may I not therefore address you, in the exulting
language of the beginning of this psalm, from which we have taken our
text? “O give thanks unto the LORD, call upon his name, make known his
deeds among the people. Sing unto him; sing psalms unto him; talk ye
of all his wondrous works; glory ye in his holy name; remember his
marvellous work which he hath done.”

But shall we put off our good and gracious benefactor with mere
lip-service? GOD forbid. Your worthy Governor has honoured GOD in his
late excellent proclamation, and GOD will honour him. But shall our
thanks terminate with the day? No, in no wise. Our text reminds us of
a more noble sacrifice, and points out to us the great end the Almighty
JEHOVAH proposes, in bestowing such signal favours upon a people, “That
they should observe his statutes, and keep his laws.”

This is the return we are all taught to pray, that we may make to the
Most High GOD, the Father of mercies, in the daily office of our church,
“That our hearts may be unfeignedly thankful, and that we may shew
forth his praise, not only with our lips, but in our lives, by giving
up ourselves to his service, and by walking before him in holiness and
righteousness all our days.” O that these words were the real language
of all that use them! O that there were in us such a mind! How soon
would our enemies then flee before us? And GOD, even our own GOD, would
yet give us more abundant blessings!

And why should not we “observe GOD’s statutes, and keep his laws?” Dare
we say, that any of his commands are grievous? Is not CHRIST’s yoke, to
a renewed soul, as far as renewed, easy; and his burden comparatively
light? May I not appeal to the most refined reasoner, whether the
religion of JESUS CHRIST be not a social religion? Whether the
Moral Law, as explained by the LORD JESUS in the gospel, has not a
natural tendency to promote the present good and happiness of a whole
commonwealth, supposing they were obedient to them, as well as the
happiness of every individual? From whence come wars and fighting
amongst us? From what fountain do all those evils, which the present
and past ages have groaned under, flow, but from a neglect of the laws
and statutes of our great and all-wise law-giver JESUS of _Nazareth_?
Tell me, ye men of letters, whether _Lycurgus_ or _Solon_, _Pythagoras_
or _Plato_, _Aristotle_, _Seneca_, _Cicero_, or all the antient
lawgivers and heathen moralists; put them all together, ever published
a system of ethics, any way worthy to be compared with the glorious
system laid down in that much despised book, (to use Sir _Richard
Steel_’s expression) emphatically called, the Scriptures? Is not the
divine image and superscription written upon every precept of the
gospel? Do they not shine with a native intrinsic lustre? And, though
many things in them are above, yet, is there any thing contrary to
the strictest laws of right reason? Is not JESUS CHRIST, in scripture,
stiled the Word, the Logos, the Reason? And is not his service a
reasonable service? What if there be mysteries in his religion? Are
they not without all controversy great and glorious? Are they not
mysteries of godliness, and worthy of that GOD who reveals them? Nay,
is it not the greatest mystery, that men, who pretend to reason, and
call themselves philosophers, who search into the _arcana naturæ_,
and consequently find a mystery in every blade of grass, should yet
be so irrational as to decry all mysteries in religion? Where is the
scribe? where is the wise? where is the disputer against the christian
revelation? Does not every thing without and within us, conspire to
prove its divine original? And would not self-interest, if there was no
other motive, excite us to observe GOD’s statutes, and keep his laws?

Besides, considered as a protestant people, do we not lie under the
greatest obligations of any nation under heaven, to pay a chearful,
unanimous, universal, persevering obedience to the divine commands.

The wonderful and surprising manner of GOD’s bringing about a
reformation, in the reign of King _Henry the Eighth_; his carrying it
on in the blessed reign of King _Edward the Sixth_; his delivering us
out of the bloody hands of Queen _Mary_, and destroying the _Spanish_
invincible armada, under her immediate protestant successor Queen
_Elizabeth_; his discovery of the popish plot under King _James_; the
glorious revolution by King _William_; and, to come nearer to our own
times, his driving away four thousand five hundred _Spaniards_, from
a weak (though important) frontier colony, when they had, in a manner,
actually taken possession of it; his giving us _Louisbourg_, one of the
strongest fortresses of our enemies, contrary to all human probability,
but the other day, into our hands: these, I say, with the victory which
you have lately been commemorating, are such national mercies, not to
mention any more, as will render us utterly inexcusable, if they do not
produce a national reformation, and incite us all, with one heart, to
keep GOD’s statutes, and observe his laws.

Need I remind you further, in order to excite in you a greater
diligence to comply with the intent of the text, that though the storm,
in a great measure, is abated by his Royal Highness’s late success, yet
we dare not say, it is altogether blown over?

The clouds may again return after the rain; and the few surviving
rebels (which I pray GOD avert) may yet be suffered to make head
against us. We are still engaged in a bloody, and, in all probability,
a tedious war, with two of the most inveterate enemies to the interests
of _Great-Britain_. And, though I cannot help thinking, that their
present intentions are so iniquitous, their conduit so perfidious, and
their schemes so directly derogatory to the honour of the Most High
GOD, that he will certainly humble them in the end, yet, as all things
in this life happen alike to all, they may for a time, be dreadful
instruments of scourging us. If not, GOD has other arrows in his quiver
to smite us with, besides the _French_ King, his Catholick Majesty, or
an abjured Pretender. Not only the sword, but plague, pestilence, and
famine, are under the divine command. Who knows but he may say to them
all, “Pass through these lands?” A fatal murrain has lately swept away
abundance of cattle at home and abroad. A like epidemical disease may
have a commission to seize our persons as well as our beasts. Thus GOD
dealt with the _Egyptians_: who dare say, he will not deal so with us?
Has he not already given some symptoms of it? What great numbers upon
the continent have been lately taken off by the bloody-flux, small-pox,
and yellow-fever? Who can tell what further judgments are yet in store?
However, this is certain, the rod is yet hanging over us: and I believe
it will be granted on all sides, that if such various dispensations of
mercy and judgment do not teach the inhabitants of any land to learn
righteousness, they will only ripen them for a greater ruin. Give me
leave, therefore, to dismiss you at this time with that solemn awful
warning and exhortation, with which the venerable _Samuel_, on a public
occasion, took leave of the people of _Israel_: “Only fear the LORD,
and serve him in truth, with all your heart: for consider how great
things he hath done for you. But if ye shall still do wickedly, [I will
not say as the Prophet did, You shall be consumed; but] ye know not but
you may provoke the LORD Almighty to consume both you and your king.”
Which GOD of his infinite mercy prevent, for the sake of JESUS CHRIST:
to whom, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, three persons, but one
GOD, be all honour and glory, now and for evermore. _Amen, Amen._




                              SERMON VII.

         Thankfulness for Mercies received, a necessary Duty.

  A Farewel Sermon, preached on board the _Whitaker_, at Anchor
    near _Savannah_, in _Georgia_, _Sunday, May 17, 1738_.


                         PSALM, cvii. 30, 31.

  _Then are they glad, because they are at rest, and so he bringeth
    them unto the haven where they would be._

  _O that men would therefore praise the LORD for his goodness,
    and declare the wonders that he doeth for the children of men!_

NUMBERLESS marks does man bear in his soul, that he is fallen and
estranged from GOD; but nothing gives a greater proof thereof, than
that backwardness, which every one finds within himself, to the duty
of praise and thanksgiving.

When GOD placed the first man in paradise, his soul no doubt was so
filled with a sense of the riches of the divine love, that he was
continually employing that _breath of life_, which the Almighty had
not long before breathed into him, in blessing and magnifying that
all-bountiful, all-gracious GOD, in whom he lived, moved, and had his
being.

And the brightest idea we can form of the angelical hierarchy above,
and the spirits of just men made perfect, is, that they are continually
standing round the throne of GOD, and cease not day and night, saying,
“Worthy art thou, O Lamb that wast slain, to receive power and riches,
and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing.”
_Revelation_ v. 12.

That then, which was man’s perfection when time first began, and will
be his employment when death is swallowed up in victory, and time shall
be no more, without controversy, is part of our perfection, and ought
to be our frequent exercise on earth: and I doubt not but those blessed
spirits, who are sent forth to minister to them who shall be heirs of
salvation, often stand astonished when they encamp around us, to find
our hearts so rarely enlarged, and our mouths so seldom opened, to shew
forth the loving-kindness of the LORD, or to speak of all his praise.

Matter for praise and adoration, can never be wanting to creatures
redeemed by the blood of the Son of GOD; and who have such continual
scenes of his infinite goodness presented to their view, that were
their souls duly affected with a sense of his universal love, they
could not but be continually calling on heaven and earth, men and
angels, to join with them in praising and blessing that “high and lofty
one, who inhabiteth eternity, who maketh his sun to shine on the evil
and on the good,” and daily pours down his blessings on the whole race
of mankind.

But few are arrived to such a degree of charity or love, as to rejoice
with those that do rejoice, and to be as thankful for others mercies,
as their own. This part of christian perfection, though begun on earth,
will be consummated only in heaven; where our hearts will glow with
such fervent love towards GOD and one another, that every fresh degree
of glory communicated to our neighbour, will also communicate to us a
fresh topic of thankfulness and joy.

That which has the greatest tendency to excite the generality of fallen
men to praise and thanksgiving, is a sense of GOD’s private mercies,
and particular benefits bestowed upon ourselves. For as these come
nearer our own hearts, so they must be more affecting; and as they are
peculiar proofs, whereby we may know, that GOD does in a more especial
manner favour us above others, so they cannot but sensibly touch us;
and if our hearts are not quite frozen, like coals of a refiner’s
fire, they must melt us down into thankfulness and love. It was a
consideration of the distinguishing favours GOD had shewn to his chosen
people _Israel_, and the frequent and remarkable deliverances wrought
by him in behalf of “those who go down to the sea in ships, and occupy
their business in great waters,” that made the holy Psalmist break out
so frequently as he does in this psalm, into this moving, pathetical
exclamation, “O that men would therefore praise the LORD for his
goodness, and declare the wonders that he doeth for the children of
men!”

His expressing himself in so fervent a manner, implies both the
importance and neglect of the duty. As when _Moses_ on another occasion
cried out, “O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they
would _practically_ consider their latter end!” _December_ xxxii. 29.

I say, importance and neglect of the duty; for out of those many
thousands that receive blessings from the LORD, how few give thanks
in remembrance of his holiness? The account given us of the ungrateful
lepers, is but too lively a representation of the ingratitude of
mankind in general; who like them, when under any humbling providence,
can cry, “JESUS, Master, have mercy on us!” _Luke_ xvii. 13. but when
healed of their sickness, or delivered from their distress, scarce one
in ten can be found “returning to give thanks to GOD.”

And yet as common as this sin of ingratitude is, there is nothing
we ought more earnestly to pray against. For what is more absolutely
condemned in holy scripture than ingratitude? Or what more peremptorily
required than the contrary temper? Thus says the Apostle, “Rejoice
evermore; in every thing give thanks,” 1 _Thessalonians_ v. 16, 18.
“Be careful for nothing; but in every thing by prayer and supplication,
with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto GOD,”
_Philippians_ iv. 6.

On the contrary, the Apostle mentions it as one of the highest crimes
of the _Gentiles_, that they were not thankful. “Neither were they
thankful,” _Romans_ i. 21. as also in another place, he numbers the
“unthankful,” 2 _Timothy_ iii. 2. amongst those unholy, prophane
persons, who are to have their portion in the lake of fire and
brimstone.

As for our sins, GOD puts them behind his back; but his mercies he will
have acknowledged, “There is virtue gone out of me,” says JESUS CHRIST,
_Luke_ viii. 46. and the woman who was cured of her bloody issue,
must confess it. And we generally find, when GOD sent any remarkable
punishment upon a particular person, he reminded him of the favours
he had received, as so many aggravations of his ingratitude. Thus when
GOD was about to visit _Eli_’s house, he thus expostulates with him by
his prophet: “Did I plainly appear unto the house of thy fathers, when
they were in _Egypt_, in _Pharaoh_’s house? And did I chuse him out of
all the tribes of _Israel_, to be my priest, to offer upon mine altar,
to burn incense, and to wear an ephod before me? Wherefore kick ye
at my sacrifice, and at mine offering, which I have commanded in my
habitation, and honourest thy sons above me, to make yourselves fat
with the chiefest of all the offerings of _Israel_ my people? Wherefore
the LORD GOD of _Israel_ saith, I said indeed, that thy house, and the
house of thy father, should walk before me for ever; but now the LORD
saith, Be it far from me, for them that honour me will I honour, and
they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.” 1 _Samuel_ ii. 27, 28,
29, 30.

It was this and such like instances of GOD’s severity against the
unthankful, that inclined me to chuse the words of the text, as the
most proper subject I could discourse on at this time.

Four months, my good friends, we have now been upon the sea in this
ship, and “have occupied our business in the great waters.” At GOD
Almighty’s word, we have seen “the stormy wind arise, which hath lifted
up the waves thereof. We have been carried up to the heaven, and down
again to the deep, and some of our souls melted away because of the
trouble; but I trust we cryed earnestly unto the LORD, and he delivered
us out of our distress. For he made the storm to cease; so that the
waves thereof were still. And now we are glad, because we are at rest,
for GOD hath brought us to the haven where we would be. O that you
would therefore praise the LORD for his goodness, and declare the
wonders that he hath done for us, the unworthiest of the sons of men.”

Thus _Moses_, thus _Joshua_ behaved. For when they were about to take
their leaves of the children of _Israel_, they recounted to them what
great things GOD had done for them, as the best arguments and motives
they could urge to engage them to obedience. And how can I copy after
better examples? What fitter, what more noble motives, to holiness and
purity of living, can I lay before you, than they did?

Indeed, I cannot say, that we have seen the “pillar of a cloud by day,
or a pillar of fire by night,” going visibly before us to guide our
course; but this I can say, that the same GOD who was in that pillar of
a cloud, and pillar of fire, which departed not from the _Israelites_,
and who has made the sun to rule the day, and the moon to rule the
night, has, by his good providence, directed us in our right way, or
else the pilot had steered us in vain.

Neither can I say, That we have seen the “sun stand still,” as the
children of _Israel_ did in the days of _Joshua_. But surely GOD,
during part of our voyage, has caused it to withhold some of that heat,
which it usually sends forth in these warmer climates, or else it had
not failed, but some of you must have perished in the sickness that has
been, and does yet continue among us.

We have not seen the waters stand purposely on an heap, that we might
pass through, neither have we been pursued by _Pharaoh_ and his host,
and delivered out of their hands; but we have been led through the sea
as through a wilderness, and were once remarkably preserved from being
run down by another ship; which had GOD permitted, the waters, in all
probability, would immediately have overwhelmed us, and like _Pharaoh_
and his host, we should have sunk, as stones, into the sea.

We may, indeed, atheist like, ascribe all these things to natural
causes, and say, “Our own skill and foresight has brought us hither in
safety.” But as certainly as JESUS CHRIST, the angel of the covenant,
in the days of his flesh, walked upon the water, and said to his
sinking disciples, “Be not afraid, it is I,” so surely has the same
everlasting I AM, “who decketh himself with light as with a garment,
who spreadeth out the heavens like a curtain, who claspeth the winds
in his fist, who holdeth the waters in the hollow of his hands,” and
guided the wise men by a star in the east; so surely, I say, has he
spoken, and at his command the winds have blown us where we are now
arrived. For his providence ruleth all things; “Wind and storms obey
his word:” he saith to it at one time, Go, and it goeth; at another,
Come, and it cometh; and at a third time, Blow this way, and it bloweth.

It is he, my brethren, and not we ourselves, that has of late sent us
such prosperous gales, and made us to ride, as it were, on the wings of
the wind, into the haven where we would be.

“O that you would therefore praise the LORD for his goodness,” and by
your lives declare, that you are truly thankful for the wonders he had
shewn to us, who are less than the least of the sons of men.

I say, declare it by your lives. For to give him thanks, barely with
your lips, while your hearts are far from him, is but a mock sacrifice,
nay, an abomination unto the LORD.

This was the end, the royal Psalmist says, GOD had in view, when he
shewed such wonders, from time to time, to the people of _Israel_,
“That they might keep his statutes, and observe his laws,” _Psalm_ cv.
44. and this, my good friends, is the end GOD would have accomplished
in us, and the only return he desires us to make him, for all the
benefits he hath conferred upon us.

O then, let me beseech you, give to GOD your hearts, your whole hearts;
and suffer yourselves to be drawn by the cords of infinite love, to
honour and obey him.

Assure yourselves you can never serve a better master; for his service
is perfect freedom; his yoke, when worn a little while, is exceeding
easy, his burden light; and in keeping his commandments there is great
reward; love, peace, joy in the Holy Ghost here, and a crown of glory
that fadeth not away, hereafter.

You may, indeed, let other lords have dominion over you, and Satan may
promise to give you all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of
them, if you will fall down and worship him; but he is a liar, and was
so from the beginning; he has not so much to give you, as you may tread
on with the sole of your foot; or could he give you the whole world,
yet, that could not make you happy without GOD. It is GOD alone, my
brethren, whose we are, in whose name I now speak, and who has of
late shewed us such mercies in the deep, that can give solid lasting
happiness to your souls; and he for this reason only desires your
hearts, because without him you must be miserable.

Suffer me not then to go away without my errand; as it is the last time
I shall speak to you, let me not speak in vain; but let a sense of the
divine goodness lead you to repentance.

Even _Saul_, that abandoned wretch, when _David_ shewed him his skirt,
which he had cut off, when he might have also taken his life, was
so melted down with his kindness, that he lifted up his voice and
wept. And we must have hearts harder than _Saul_’s, nay, harder
than the nether milstone, if a sense of GOD’s late loving kindnesses,
notwithstanding he might so often have destroyed us, does not even
compel us to lay down our arms against him, and become his faithful
servants and soldiers unto our lives end.

If they have not this effect upon us, we shall, of all men, be most
miserable; for GOD is just, as well as merciful; and the more blessings
we have received here, the greater damnation, if we do not improve them,
shall we incur hereafter.

But GOD forbid that any of those should ever suffer the vengeance
of eternal fire, amongst whom, I have, for these four months, been
preaching the gospel of CHRIST; but yet thus must it be, if you do
not improve the divine mercies: and instead of your being my crown of
rejoicing in the day of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, I must appear as a swift
witness against you.

But, brethren, I am persuaded better things of you, and things that
accompany salvation, though I thus speak.

Blessed be GOD, some marks of a partial reformation at least, have been
visible amongst all you that are soldiers. And my weak, though sincere
endeavours, to build you up in the knowledge and fear of GOD, have not
been altogether in vain in the LORD.

Swearing, I hope is, in a great measure, abated with you; and GOD, I
trust, has blessed his late visitations, by making them the means of
awakening your consciences, to a more solicitous enquiry about the
things which belong to your everlasting peace.

Fulfil you then my joy, by continuing thus minded, and labour to go
on to perfection. For I shall have no greater pleasure than to see, or
hear, that you walk in the truth.

Consider, my good friends, you are now, as it were, entering on a new
world, where you will be surrounded with multitudes of heathens; and
if you take not heed to “have your conversation honest amongst them,”
and to “walk worthy of the holy vocation wherewith you are called,” you
will act the hellish part of _Herod_’s soldiers over again; and cause
CHRIST’s religion, as they did his person, to be had in derision of
those that are round about you.

Consider further, what peculiar privileges you have enjoyed, above
many others that are entering on the same land. They have had, as
it were, a famine of the word, but you have rather been in danger of
being surfeited with your spiritual manna. And, therefore, as more
instructions have been given you, so from you, men will most justly
expect the greater improvement in goodness.

Indeed, I cannot say, I have discharged my duty towards you as I ought.
No, I am sensible of many faults in my ministerial office, and for
which I have not failed, nor, I hope, ever shall fail, to humble myself
in secret before GOD. However, this I can say, that except a few days
that have been spent necessarily on other persons, whom GOD immediately
called me to write and minister unto, and the two last weeks wherein
I have been confined by sickness; all the while I have been aboard,
I have been either actually engaged in, or preparing myself for
instructing you. And though you are now to be committed to the care of
another (whose labours I heartily beseech GOD to bless amongst you) yet
I trust I shall, at all seasons, if need be, willingly spend, and be
spent, for the good of your souls, though the more abundantly I love
you, the less I should be loved.

As for your military affairs, I have nothing to do with them. Fear GOD,
and you must honour the King. Nor am I well acquainted with the nature
of that land which you are now come over to protect; only this I may
venture to affirm in the general, that you must necessarily expect upon
your arrival at a new colony, to meet with many difficulties. But your
very profession teaches you to endure hardship; “be not, therefore,
faint-hearted, but quit yourselves like men, and be strong,” _Numbers_
xiv. Be not like those cowardly persons, who were affrighted at the
report of the false spies, that came and said, that there were people
tall as the _Anakims_ to be grappled with, but be ye like unto _Caleb_
and _Joshua_, all heart; and say, we will act valiantly, for we shall
be more than conquerors over all difficulties through JESUS CHRIST
that loved us. Above all things, my brethren, take heed, and beware of
murmuring, like the perverse _Israelites_, against those that are set
over you; and “learn, whatsoever state you shall be in, therewith to be
content,” _Philippians_ iv. 11.

As I have spoken to you, I hope your wives also will suffer the word of
exhortation,

Your behaviour on shipboard, especially the first part of the voyage,
I chuse to throw a cloak over; for to use the mildest terms, it was not
such as became the gospel of our LORD JESUS CHRIST. However, of late,
blessed be GOD, you have taken more heed to your ways, and some of
you have walked all the while, as became “women professing godliness.”
Let those accept my hearty thanks, and permit me to intreat you all
in general, as you are all now married, to remember the solemn vow
you made at your entrance into the marriage state, and see that you be
subject to your own husbands, in every lawful thing: Beg of GOD to keep
the door of your lips, that you offend not with your tongues; and walk
in love, that your prayers be not hindered. You that have children, let
it be your chief concern to breed them up in the nurture and admonition
of the LORD. And live all of you so holy and unblameable, that you may
not so much as be suspected to be unchaste; and as some of you have
imitated _Mary Magdalen_ in her sin, strive to imitate her also in her
repentance.

As for you, sailors, what shall I say? How shall I address myself to
you? How shall I do that which I so much long to do; touch your hearts?
Gratitude obliges me to wish thus well to you. For you have often
taught me many instructive lessons, and reminded me to put up many
prayers to GOD for you, that you might receive your spiritual sight.

When I have seen you preparing for a storm, and reefing your sails
to guard against it; how have I wished that you and I were as careful
to avoid that storm of GOD’s wrath, which will certainly, without
repentance, quickly overtake us? When I have observed you catch at
every fair gale, how have I secretly cried, O that we were as careful
to know the things that belong to our peace, before they are for ever
hid from our eyes! And when I have taken notice, how steadily you eyed
your compass in order to steer aright, how have I wished, that we as
steadily eyed the word of GOD, which alone can preserve us from “making
shipwreck of faith, and a good conscience?” In short, there is scarce
any thing you do, which has not been a lesson of instruction to me;
and, therefore, it would be ungrateful in me, did I not take this
opportunity of exhorting you in the name of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, to
be as wise in the things which concern your soul, as I have observed
you to be in the affairs belonging to your ship.

I am sensible, that the sea is reckoned but an ill school to learn
CHRIST in: and to see a devout sailor, is esteemed as uncommon a thing,
as to see a _Saul_ amongst the prophets. But whence this wondering?
Whence this looking upon a godly sailor, as a man to be wondered at, as
a speckled bird in the creation? I am sure, for the little time I have
come in and out amongst you, and as far as I can judge from the little
experience I have had of things, I scarce know any way of life, that is
capable of greater improvements than yours.

The continual danger you are in of being overwhelmed by the great
waters; the many opportunities you have of beholding GOD’s wonders in
the deep; the happy retirement you enjoy from worldly temptations; and
the daily occasions that are offered you, to endure hardships, are such
noble means of promoting the spiritual life, that were your hearts bent
towards GOD, you would account it your happiness, that his providence
has called you, to “go down to the sea in ships, and to occupy your
business in the great waters.”

The royal Psalmist knew this, and, therefore, in the words of the text,
calls more especially on men of your employ, to “praise the LORD for
his goodness, and declare the wonders he doth for the children of men.”

And O that you would be wise in time, and hearken to his voice to-day,
“whilst it is called to-day!” For ye yourselves know how little is to
be done on a sick bed. GOD has, in an especial manner, of late, invited
you to repentance: two of your crew he has taken off by death, and most
of you he has mercifully visited with a grievous sickness. The terrors
of the LORD have been upon you, and when burnt with a scorching fever,
some of you have cried out, “What shall we do to be saved?” Remember
then the resolutions you made, when you thought GOD was about to take
away your souls; and see that according to your promises, you shew
forth your thankfulness, not only with your lips, but in your lives.
For though GOD may bear long, he will not forbear always; and if these
signal mercies and judgments do not lead you to repentance, assure
yourselves there will at last come a fiery tempest, from the presence
of the LORD, which will sweep away you, and all other adversaries of
GOD.

I am positive, neither you nor the soldiers have wanted, nor will
want any manner of encouragement to piety and holiness of living, from
those two persons who have here the government over you; for they have
been such helps to me in my ministry, and have so readily concurred
in every thing for your good, that they may justly demand a public
acknowledgment of thanks both from you and me.

Permit me, my honoured friends, in the name of both classes of your
people, to return you hearty thanks for the care and tenderness you
have expressed for the welfare of their better parts.

As for the private favours you have shewn to my person, I hope so
deep a sense of them is imprinted on my heart, that I shall plead them
before GOD in prayer, as long as I live.

But I have still stronger obligations to intercede in your behalf. For
GOD, ever adored be his free grace in CHRIST JESUS! has set his seal to
my ministry in your hearts. Some distant pangs of the new-birth I have
observed to come upon you; and GOD forbid that I should sin against the
LORD, by ceasing to pray, that the good work begun in your souls, may
be carried on till the day of our LORD JESUS CHRIST.

The time of our departure from each other is now at hand, and you
are going out into a world of temptations. But though absent in body,
let us be present with each other in spirit; and GOD, I trust, will
enable you to be singularly good, to be ready to be accounted fools
for CHRIST’s sake; and then we shall meet never to part again in the
kingdom of our Father which is in heaven.

To you, my companions and familiar friends, who came over with me to
sojourn in a strange land, do I in the next place address myself. For
you I especially fear, as well as for myself; because as we take sweet
counsel together oftner than others, and as you are let into a more
intimate friendship with me in private life, the eyes of all men will
be upon you to note even the minutest miscarriage; and, therefore,
it highly concerns you to “walk circumspectly towards those that are
without,” I hope, that nothing but a single eye to GOD’s glory and
the salvation of your own souls, brought you from your native country.
Remember then the end of your coming hither, and you can never do
amiss. Be patterns of industry, as well as of piety, to those who shall
be around you; and above all things let us have such fervent charity
amongst ourselves, that it may be said of us, as of the primitive
christians, “See how the christians love one another.”

And now I have been speaking to others particularly, I have one general
request to make to all, and that with reference to myself.

You have heard, my dear friends, how I have been exhorting every one of
you to shew forth your thankfulness for the divine goodness, not only
with your lips, but in your lives: But “physician heal thyself,” may
justly be retorted on me. For (without any false pretences to humility)
I find my own heart so little inclined to this duty of thanksgiving for
the benefits I have received, that I had need fear sharing _Hezekiah_’s
fate, who because he was lifted up by, and not thankful enough for, the
great things GOD had done for him, was given up a prey to the pride of
his own heart.

I need, therefore, and beg your most importunate petitions at the
throne of grace, that no such evil may befal me; that the more GOD
exalts me, the more I may debase myself; and that after I have preached
to others, I myself may not be cast away.

And now, brethren, into GOD’s hands I commend your spirits, who, I
trust, through his infinite mercies in CHRIST JESUS, will preserve you
blameless, till his second coming to judge the world.

Excuse my detaining you so long; perhaps it is the last time I shall
speak to you: my heart is full, and out of the abundance of it, I could
continue my discourse until midnight. But I must away to your new world;
may GOD give you new hearts, and enable you to put in practice what
you have heard from time to time, to be your duty, and I need not wish
you any thing better. For then GOD will so bless you, that “you will
build you cities to dwell in; then will you sow your lands and plant
vineyards, which will yield you fruits of increase,” _Psalm_ cvii.
36, 37. “Then your oxen shall be strong to labour, there shall be
no leading into captivity, and no complaining in your streets; then
shall your sons grow up as the young plants, and your daughters be as
the polished corners of the temple: then shall your garners be full
and plenteous with all manner of store, and your sheep bring forth
thousands, and ten thousands in your streets,” _Psalm_ cxliv. In short,
then shall the LORD be your GOD; and as surely as he has now brought us
to this haven, where we would be, so surely, after we have past through
the storms and tempests of this troublesome world, will he bring us
to the haven of eternal rest, where we shall have nothing to do, but
to praise him for ever for his goodness, and declare, in never-ceasing
songs of praise, the wonders he has done for us, and all the other sons
of men.

  ‏“To which blessed rest, GOD of his infinite mercy bring us all,
    through JESUS CHRIST our LORD! to whom with the Father and
    Holy Ghost be all honour and glory, might, majesty, and
    dominion, now, henceforth, and for evermore. _Amen, Amen._”‏




                             SERMON VIII.

           The Necessity and Benefits of Religious Society.


                    ECCLESIASTES iv. 9, 10, 11, 12.

  _Two are better than One, because they have a good Reward for
    their Labour._

  _For if they fall, the One will lift up his Fellow: But woe be
    to him that is alone when he falleth; for he hath not another
    to help him up._

  _Again, if Two lie together, then they have heat; but how can
    One be warm alone?_

  _And if One prevail against him, Two shall withstand him; and a
    threefold Cord is not quickly broken._

AMONG the many reasons assignable for the sad decay of _true
christianity_, perhaps the neglecting to assemble ourselves together,
in _religious societies_, may not be one of the least. That I may
therefore do my endeavour towards promoting so excellent a means of
piety, I have selected a passage of scripture drawn from the experience
of the wisest of men, which being a little enlarged on and illustrated,
will fully answer my present design; being to shew, in the best
manner I can, the necessity and benefits of society in general, and
of religious society in particular.

“Two are better than one, &c.”

From which words I shall take occasion to prove,

_First_, The truth of the wise man’s assertion, “Two are better than
one,” and that in reference to society in general, and religious
society in particular.

_Secondly_, To assign some reasons why two are better than one,
especially as to the last particular. 1. Because men can raise up one
another when they chance to slip: “For if they fall, the one will lift
up his fellow.” 2. Because they can impart heat to each other: “Again,
if two lie together, then they have heat; but how can one be warm
alone?” 3. Because they can secure each other from those that do oppose
them: “And if one prevail against him, two shall withstand him; and a
threefold cord is not quickly broken.” From hence,

_Thirdly_, I shall take occasion to shew the duty incumbent on every
member of a _religious society_.

And _Fourthly_, I shall draw an inference or two from what may be said;
and then conclude with a word or two of exhortation.

_First_, I am to prove the truth of the wise man’s assertion, that “two
are better than one,” and that in reference to society in general, and
religious societies in particular.

And how can this be done better, than by shewing that it is absolutely
necessary for the welfare both of the bodies and souls of men? Indeed,
if we look upon man as he came out of the hands of his Maker, we
imagine him to be perfect, entire, lacking nothing. But GOD, whose
thoughts are not as our thoughts, saw something still wanting to make
_Adam_ happy. And what was that? Why, an help meet for him. For thus
speaketh the scripture: “And the LORD GOD said, It is not good that the
man should be alone, I will make an help meet for him.”

Observe, GOD said, “It is not good,” thereby implying that the creation
would have been imperfect, in some sort, unless an help was found out
meet for _Adam_. And if this was the case of man before the fall; if
an help was meet for him in a state of perfection; surely since the
fall, when we come naked and helpless out of our mother’s womb, when
our wants increase with our years, and we can scarcely subsist a day
without the mutual assistance of each other, well may we say, “It is
not good for man to be alone.”

Society then, we see, is absolutely necessary in respect to our bodily
and personal wants. If we carry our view farther, and consider mankind
as divided into different cities, countries, and nations, the necessity
of it will appear yet more evident. For how can communities be kept up,
or commerce carried on, without society? Certainly not at all, since
providence seems wisely to have assigned a particular product to almost
each particular country, on purpose, as it were, to oblige us to be
social; and hath so admirably mingled the parts of the whole body of
mankind together, “that the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need
of thee; nor again, the hand to the foot, I have no need of thee.”

Many other instances might be given of the necessity of society, in
reference to our bodily, personal, and national wants. But what are
all these when weighed in the balance of the sanctuary, in comparison
of the infinite greater need of it, with respect to the soul? It was
chiefly in regard to this better part, no doubt, that GOD said, “It
is not good for the man to be alone.” For, let us suppose _Adam_ to be
as happy as may be, placed as the Lord of the creation in the paradise
of GOD, and spending all his hours in adoring and praising the blessed
Author of his being; yet as his soul was the very copy of the divine
nature, whose peculiar property it is to be communicative, without the
divine all-sufficiency he could not be compleatly happy, because he was
alone and incommunicative, nor even content in paradise, for want of
a partner in his joys. GOD knew this, and therefore said, “It is not
good that the man shall be alone, I will make a help meet for him.”
And though this proved a fatal means of his falling; yet that was not
owing to any natural consequence of society; but partly to that cursed
apostate, who craftily lies in wait to deceive; partly to _Adam_’s own
folly, in rather chusing to be miserable with one he loved, than trust
in GOD to raise him up another spouse.

If we reflect indeed on that familiar intercourse, our first parent
could carry on with heaven, in a state of innocence, we shall be apt
to think he had as little need of society, as to his soul, as before
we supposed him to have, in respect to his body. But yet, as GOD and
the holy angels were so far above him on the one hand, and the beasts
so far beneath him on the other, there was nothing like having one to
converse with, who was “bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh.”

Man, then, could not be fully happy, we see, even in paradise, without
a companion of his own species, much less now he is driven out. For,
let us view him a little in his natural estate now, since the fall, as
“having his understanding darkened, his mind alienated from the life of
GOD;” as no more able to see his way wherein he should go, than a blind
man to describe the sun: that notwithstanding this, he must receive his
sight ere he can see GOD: and that if he never sees him, he never can
be happy. Let us view him in this light (or rather this darkness) and
deny the necessity of society if we can. A divine revelation we find is
absolutely necessary, we being by nature as unable to know, as we are
to do our duty. And how shall we learn except one teach us? But was GOD
to do this himself, how should we, but with _Moses_, exceedingly quake
and fear? Nor would the ministry of angels in this affair, be without
too much terror. It is necessary, therefore (at least GOD’s dealing
with us hath shewed it to be so) that we should be drawn with the cords
of a man. And that a divine revelation being granted, we should use
one another’s assistance, under GOD, to instruct each other in the
knowledge, and to exhort one another to the practice of those things
which belong to our everlasting peace. This is undoubtedly the great
end of society intended by GOD since the fall, and a strong argument it
is, why “two are better than one,” and why we should “not forsake the
assembling ourselves together.”

But farther, let us consider ourselves as christians, as having
this natural veil, in some measure, taken off from our eyes by the
assistance of GOD’s holy Spirit, and so enabled to see what he requires
of us. Let us suppose ourselves in some degree to have tasted the
good word of life, and to have felt the powers of the world to come,
influencing and moulding our souls into a religious frame: to be fully
and heartily convinced that we are soldiers listed under the banner
of CHRIST, and to have proclaimed open war at our baptism, against
the world, the flesh, and the devil; and have, perhaps, frequently
renewed our obligations so to do, by partaking of the LORD’s supper:
that we are surrounded with millions of foes without, and infested with
a legion of enemies within: that we are commanded to shine as lights
in the world, in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation: that
we are travelling to a long eternity, and need all imaginable helps
to shew, and encourage us in our way thither. Let us, I say, reflect
on all this, and then how shall each of us cry out, brethren, what a
necessary thing it is to meet together in religious societies?

The primitive christians were fully sensible of this, and therefore
we find them continually keeping up communion with each other: for
what says the scripture? They continued stedfastly in the apostle’s
doctrine and fellowship, _Acts_ ii. 42. _Peter_ and _John_ were no
sooner dismissed by the great council, than they haste away to their
companions. “And being set at liberty they came to their own, and
told them all these things which the high priest had said unto them,”
_Acts_ iv. 23. _Paul_, as soon as converted, “tarried three days with
the disciples that were at _Damascus_,” _Acts_ ix. 19. And _Peter_
afterwards, when released from prison, immediately goes to the house of
_Mary_, where there were “great multitudes assembled, praying,” _Acts_
xii. 12. And it is reported of the christians in after-ages, that they
used to assemble together before day-light, to sing a psalm to CHRIST
as GOD. So precious was the _Communion of Saints_ in those days.

If it be asked, what advantages we shall reap from such a procedure
now? I answer, much every way. “Two are better than one, because they
have a good reward for their labour: for if they fall, the one will
lift up his fellow; but woe be to him that is alone when he falleth,
for he hath not another to help him up. Again, if two lie together,
then they have heat; but how can one be warm alone? And if one prevail
against him, two shall withstand him; and a threefold cord is not
quickly broken.”

  Which directly leads me to my Second general head, under which
    I was to assign some reasons why “two are better than one,”
    especially in _Religious Society_.

1. As man in his present condition cannot always stand upright, but by
reason of the frailty of his nature cannot but fall; one eminent reason
why two are better than one, or, in other words, one great advantage
of religious society is, “That when they fall, the one will lift up his
fellow.”

And an excellent reason this, indeed! For alas! when we reflect how
prone we are to be drawn into error in our judgments, and into vice in
our practice; and how unable, at least how very unwilling, to espy or
correct our own miscarriages; when we consider how apt the world is to
flatter us in our faults, and how few there are so kind as to tell us
the truth; what an inestimable privilege must it be to have a set of
true, judicious, hearty friends about us, continually watching over
our souls, to inform us where we have fallen, and to warn us that we
fall not again for the future. Surely it is such a privilege, that (to
use the words of an eminent christian) we shall never know the value
thereof, till we come to glory.

But this is not all; for supposing that we could always stand upright,
yet whosoever reflects on the difficulties of religion in general,
and his own propensity to lukewarmness and indifference in particular,
will find that he must be zealous as well as steady, if ever he expects
to enter the kingdom of heaven. Here, then, the wise man points out
to us another excellent reason why two are better than one. “Again, if
two lye together, then they have heat; but how can one be warm alone?”
Which was the next thing to be considered.

2. A second reason why two are better than one, is because they can
impart heat to each other.

It is an observation no less true than common, that kindled coals,
if placed asunder, soon go out, but if heaped together, quicken and
enliven each other, and afford a lasting heat. The same will hold good
in the case now before us. If christians kindled by the grace of GOD,
unite, they will quicken and enliven each other; but if they separate
and keep asunder, no marvel if they soon grow cool or tepid. If two or
three meet together in CHRIST’s name, they will have heat: but how can
one be warm alone?

Observe, “How can one be warm alone?” The wise man’s expressing
himself by way of question, implies an impossibility, at least a very
great difficulty, to be warm in religion without company, where it
may be had. Behold here, then, another excellent benefit flowing from
religious society; it will keep us zealous, as well as steady, in the
ways of godliness.

But to illustrate this a little farther by a comparison or two. Let
us look upon ourselves (as was above hinted) as soldiers listed under
CHRIST’s banner; as going out with “ten thousand, to meet one that
cometh against us with twenty thousand;” as persons that are to
“wrestle not only with flesh and blood, but against principalities,
against powers, and spiritual wickednesses in high places.” And then
tell me, all ye that fear GOD, if it be not an invaluable privilege
to have a company of fellow soldiers continually about us, animating
and exhorting each other to stand our ground, to keep our ranks, and
manfully to follow the captain of our salvation, though it be through
a sea of blood?

Let us consider ourselves in another view before mentioned, as persons
travelling to a long eternity; as rescued by the free grace of GOD, in
some measure, from our natural _Egyptian_ bondage, and marching under
the conduct of our spiritual _Joshua_, through the wilderness of this
world, to the land of our heavenly _Canaan_. Let us farther reflect
how apt we are to startle at every difficulty; to cry, “There are
lions! There are lions in the way! There are the sons of _Anak_” to be
grappled with, ere we can possess the promised land: How prone we are,
with _Lot_’s wife, to look wishfully back on our spiritual _Sodom_,
or, with the foolish _Israelites_, to long again for the flesh-pots
of _Egypt_; and to return to our former natural state of bondage and
slavery. Consider this, my brethren, and see what a blessed privilege
it will be to have a set of _Israelites_ indeed about us, always
reminding us of the folly of any such cowardly design, and of the
intolerable misery we shall run into, if we fall in the least short of
the promised land.

More might be said on this particular, did not the limits of a
discourse of this nature oblige me to hasten,

3. To give a third reason, mentioned by the wise man in the text,
why two are better than one; because they can secure each other
from enemies without. “And if one prevail against him, yet two shall
withstand him: and a threefold cord is not quickly broken.”

Hitherto we have considered the advantages of religious societies, as a
great preservative against falling (at least dangerously falling) into
sin and lukewarmness, and that too from our own corruptions. But what
says the wise son of _Sirach_? “My son, when thou goest to serve the
LORD, prepare thy soul for temptation:” and that not only from inward,
but outward foes; particularly from those two grand adversaries, the
world and the devil: for no sooner will thine eye be bent heavenward,
but the former will be immediately diverting it another way, telling
thee thou needest not be singular in order to be religious; that you
may be a christian without going so much out of the common road.

Nor will the devil be wanting in his artful insinuations, or impious
suggestions, to divert or terrify thee from pressing forwards, “that
thou mayst lay hold on the crown of life.” And if he cannot prevail
this way, he will try another; and, in order to make his temptation the
more undiscerned, but withal more successful, he will employ, perhaps,
some of thy nearest relatives, or most powerful friends, (as he set
_Peter_ on our blessed Master) who will always be bidding thee to spare
thyself; telling thee thou needest not take so much pains; that it is
not so difficult a matter to get to heaven as some people would make of
it, nor the way so narrow as others imagine it to be.

But see here the advantage of religious company; for supposing thou
findest thyself thus surrounded on every side, and unable to withstand
such horrid (though seemingly friendly) counsels, haste away to thy
companions, and they will teach thee a truer and better lesson; they
will tell thee, that thou must be singular if thou wilt be religious;
and that it is as impossible for a christian, as for a city set upon
a hill, to be hidden: that if thou wilt be an almost christian (and
as good be none at all) thou mayest live in the same idle, indifferent
manner as thou seest most other people do: but if thou wilt be not only
almost, but altogether a christian, they will inform thee thou must
go a great deal farther: that thou must not only faintly seek, but
“earnestly strive to enter in at the strait gate:” that there is but
one way now to heaven as formerly, even through the narrow passage of
a sound conversion: and that in order to bring about this mighty work,
thou must undergo a constant, but necessary discipline of fasting,
watching, and prayer. And therefore, the only reason why those friends
give thee such advice, is, because they are not willing to take so much
pains themselves; or, as our Saviour told _Peter_ on a like occasion,
because they “savour not the things that be of GOD, but the things that
be of men.”

This then, is another excellent blessing arising from religious society,
that friends can hereby secure each other from those who oppose them.
The devil is fully sensible of this, and therefore he has always done
his utmost to suppress, and put a stop to the communion of saints.
This was his grand artifice at the first planting of the gospel; to
persecute the professors of it, in order to separate them. Which,
though GOD, as he always will, over-ruled for the better; yet, it shews,
what an enmity he has against christians assembling themselves together.
Nor has he yet left off his old stratagem; it being his usual way to
entice us by ourselves, in order to tempt us; where, by being destitute
of one another’s help, he hopes to lead us captive at his will.

But, on the contrary, knowing his own interest is strengthened by
society, he would first persuade us to neglect the communion of saints,
and then bid us “stand in the way of sinners,” hoping thereby to put
us into the seat of the scornful. _Judas_ and _Peter_ are melancholy
instances of this. The former had no sooner left his company at supper,
but he went out and betrayed his master: and the dismal downfal of the
latter, when he would venture himself amongst a company of enemies,
plainly shews us what the devil will endeavour to do, when he gets
us by ourselves. Had _Peter_ kept his own company, he might have kept
his integrity; but a single cord, alas! how quickly was it broken?
Our blessed Saviour knew this full well, and therefore it is very
observable, that he always sent out his disciples “two by two.”

And now, after so many advantages to be reaped from religious society,
may we not very justly cry out with the wise man in my text, “Woe be
to him that is alone; for when he falleth, he hath not another to lift
him up?” When he is cold, he hath not a friend to warm him; when he is
assaulted, he hath not a second to help him to withstand his enemy.

  III. I now come to my third general head, under which was to be
    shewn the several duties incumbent on every ‏member of a
    religious society, as such, which are three. 1. Mutual reproof;
    2. Mutual exhortation; 3. Mutual assisting and defending each
    other.

1. _Mutual reproof._ “Two are better than one; for when they fall, the
one will lift up his fellow.”

Now, reproof may be taken either in a more extensive sense, and then
it signifies our raising a brother by the gentlest means, when he falls
into sin and error; or in a more restrained signification, as reaching
no farther than those miscarriages, which unavoidably happen in the
most holy men living.

The wise man, in the text, supposes all of us subject to both: “For
when they fall (thereby implying that each of us may fall) the one will
lift up his fellow.” From whence we may infer, that “when any brother
is overtaken with a fault, he that is spiritual (that is, regenerate,
and knows the corruption and weakness of human nature) ought to restore
such a one in the spirit of meekness.” And why he should do so, the
apostle subjoins a reason “considering thyself, lest thou also be
tempted;” i. e. considering thy own frailty, lest thou also fall by the
like temptation.

We are all frail unstable creatures; and it is merely owing to the free
grace and good providence of GOD that we run not into the same excess
of riot with other men. Every offending brother, therefore, claims
our pity rather than our resentment; and each member should strive to
be the most forward, as well as most gentle, in restoring him to his
former state.

But supposing a person not to be overtaken, but to fall wilfully into
a crime; yet who art thou that deniest forgiveness to thy offending
brother? “Let him that standeth take heed lest he fall.” Take ye,
brethren, the holy apostles as eminent examples for you to learn by,
how you ought to behave in this matter. Consider how quickly they
joined the right hand of fellowship with _Peter_, who had so wilfully
denied his master: for we find _John_ and him together but two days
after, _John_ xx. 2. And verse 19, we find him assembled with the rest.
So soon did they forgive, so soon associate with their sinful, yet
relenting brother. “Let us go and do likewise.”

But there is another kind of reproof incumbent on every member of a
religious society; namely, a _gentle rebuke_ for some miscarriage or
other, which though not actually sinful, yet may become the occasion
of sin. This indeed seems a more easy, but perhaps will be found a more
difficult point than the former: for when a person has really sinned,
he cannot but own his brethrens reproof to be just; whereas, when it
was only for some little misconduct, the pride that is in our natures
will scarce suffer us to brook it. But however ungrateful this pill may
be to our brother, yet if we have any concern for his welfare, it must
be administered by some friendly hand or other. By all means then let
it be applied; only, like a skilful physician, gild over the ungrateful
pill, and endeavour, if possible, to deceive thy brother into health
and soundness. “Let all bitterness, and wrath, and malice, and
evil-speaking, be put away” from it. Let the patient know, his recovery
is the only thing aimed at, and that thou delightest not causelesly to
grieve thy brother; then thou canst not want success.

2. _Mutual exhortation_ is the second duty resulting from the words of
the text. “Again, if two lye together, then they have heat.”

Observe, the wise man supposes it as impossible for religious persons
to meet together, and not to be the warmer for each other’s company,
as for two persons to lye in the same bed, and yet freeze with cold.
But now, how is it possible to communicate heat to each other, without
mutually stirring up the gift of GOD which is in us, by brotherly
exhortation? Let every member then of a religious society write that
zealous apostle’s advice on the tables of his heart; “See that ye
exhort, and provoke one another to love, and to good works; and so
much the more, as you see the day of the LORD approaching.” Believe
me, brethren, we have need of exhortation to rouse up our sleepy souls,
to set us upon our watch against the temptations of the world, the
flesh, and the devil; to excite us to renounce ourselves, to take up
our crosses, and follow our blessed master, and the glorious company of
saints and martyrs, “who through faith have fought the good fight, and
are gone before us to inherit the promises.” A third part, therefore,
of the time wherein a religious society meets, seems necessary to
be spent in this important duty: for what avails it to have our
understandings enlightened by pious reading, unless our wills are at
the same time inclined, and inflamed by mutual exhortation, to put it
in practice? Add also, that this is the best way both to receive and
impart light, and the only means to preserve and increase that warmth
and heat which each person first brought with him; GOD so ordering this,
as all other spiritual gifts, that “to him that hath, i. e. improves
and communicates what he hath, shall be given; but from him that hath
not, or does not improve the heat he hath, shall be taken away even
that which he seemed to have.” So needful, so essentially necessary,
is exhortation to the good of society.

3. Thirdly, The text points out another duty incumbent on every member
of a religious society, to defend each other from those that do oppose
them. “And if one prevail against him, yet two shall withstand him; and
a threefold cord is not quickly broken.”

Here the wise man takes it for granted, that offences will come, nay,
and that they may prevail too. And this is no more than our blessed
master has long since told us. Not, indeed, that there is any thing
in christianity itself that has the least tendency to give rise to, or
promote such offences: No, on the contrary, it breathes nothing but
unity and love.

But so it is, that ever since the fatal sentence pronounced by GOD,
after our first parents fall, “I will put enmity between thy seed
and her seed;” he that is born after the flesh, the unregenerate
unconverted sinner, has in all ages “persecuted him that is born after
the spirit:” and so it always will be. Accordingly we find an early
proof given of this in the instance of _Cain_ and _Abel_; of _Ishmael_
and _Isaac_; and of _Jacob_ and _Esau_. And, indeed, the whole
Bible contains little else but an history of the great and continued
opposition between the children of this world, and the children of GOD.
The first christians were remarkable examples of this; and though those
troublesome times, blessed be GOD, are now over, yet the apostle has
laid it down as a general rule, and all who are sincere experimentally
prove the truth of it; that “they that will live godly in CHRIST
JESUS, must (to the end of the world, in some degree or other) suffer
persecution.” That therefore this may not make us desert our blessed
master’s cause, every member should unite their forces, in order to
stand against it. And for the better effecting this, each would do
well, from time to time, to communicate his experiences, grievances,
and temptations, and beg his companions (first asking GOD’s assistance,
without which all is nothing) to administer reproof, exhortation, or
comfort, as his case requires: so that “if one cannot prevail against
it, yet two shall withstand it; and a threefold (much less a many-fold)
cord will not be quickly broken.”

  IV. But it is time for me to proceed to the fourth general thing
    proposed, to draw an inference or two from what has been said.

1. And first, if “two are better than one,” and the advantages of
religious society are so many and so great; then it is the duty of
every true christian to set on foot, establish and promote, as much as
in him lyes, societies of this nature. And I believe we may venture to
affirm, that if ever a spirit of true christianity is revived in the
world, it must be brought about by some such means as this. Motives,
surely, cannot be wanting, to stir us up to this commendable and
necessary undertaking: for, granting all hitherto advanced to be of
no force, yet methinks the single consideration, that great part of
our happiness in heaven will consist in the _Communion of Saints_;
or that the interest as well as piety of those who differ from us, is
strengthened and supported by nothing more than their frequent meetings;
either of these considerations, I say, one would think, should induce
us to do our utmost to copy after their good example, and settle a
lasting and pious communion of the saints on earth. Add to this, that
we find the kingdom of darkness established daily by such like means;
and shall not the kingdom of CHRIST be set in opposition against it?
Shall the children of _Belial_ assemble and strengthen each other in
wickedness; and shall not the children of GOD unite, and strengthen
themselves in piety? Shall societies on societies be countenanced for
midnight revellings, and the promoting of vice, and scarcely one be
found intended for the propagation of virtue? Be astonished, O heavens
at this!

2. But this leads me to a second inference; namely, to warn persons
of the great danger those are in, who either by their subscriptions,
presence, or approbation, promote societies of a quite opposite nature
to religion.

And here I would not be understood, to mean only those public meetings
which are designed manifestly for nothing else but revellings and
banquetings, for chambering and wantonness, and at which a modest
heathen would blush to be present; but also those seemingly innocent
entertainments and meetings, which the politer part of the world are
so very fond of, and spend so much time in: but which, notwithstanding,
keep as many persons from a sense of true religion, as doth
intemperance, debauchery, or any other crime whatever. Indeed, whilst
we are in this world, we must have proper relaxations, to fit us
both for the business of our profession, and religion. But then, for
persons who call themselves christians, that have solemnly vowed at
their baptism, to renounce the vanities of this sinful world; that are
commanded in scripture “to abstain from all appearance of evil, and
to have their conversation in heaven:” for such persons as these to
support meetings, which (to say no worse of them) are vain and trifling,
and have a natural tendency to draw off our minds from GOD, is absurd,
ridiculous, and sinful. Surely two are not better than one in this
case: No; it is to be wished there was not one to be found concerned in
it. The sooner we forsake the assembling ourselves together in such a
manner, the better; and no matter how quickly the cord that holds such
societies (was it a thousand-fold) is broken.

But you, brethren, have not so learned CHRIST: but, on the contrary,
like true disciples of your Lord and Master, have by the blessing
of GOD (as this evening’s solemnity abundantly testifies) happily
formed yourselves into such societies, which, if duly attended on,
and improved, cannot but strengthen you in your christian warfare, and
“make you fruitful in every good word and work.”

What remains for me, but, as was proposed, in the last place, to close
what has been said, in a word or two, by way of exhortation, and to
beseech you, in the name of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, to go on in the
way you have begun; and by a constant conscientious attendance on your
respective societies, to discountenance vice, encourage virtue, and
build each other up in the knowledge and fear of GOD.

Only permit me to “stir up your pure minds, by way of remembrance,” and
to exhort you, “if there be any consolation in CHRIST, any fellowship
of the spirit,” again and again to consider, that as all christians in
general, so all members of religious societies in particular, are in
an especial manner, as houses built upon an hill; and that therefore
it highly concerns you to walk circumspectly towards those that are
without, and to take heed to yourselves, that your conversation, in
common life, be as becometh such an open and peculiar profession of
the gospel of CHRIST: knowing that the eyes of all men are upon you,
narrowly to inspect every circumstance of your behaviour: and that
every notorious wilful miscarriage of any single member will, in some
measure, redound to the scandal and dishonour of your whole fraternity.

Labour, therefore, my beloved brethren, to let your practice correspond
to your profession: and think not that it will be sufficient for you to
plead at the last day, LORD have we not assembled ourselves together in
thy name, and enlivened each other, by singing psalms, and hymns, and
spiritual songs? For verily, I say unto you, notwithstanding this, our
blessed LORD will bid you depart from him; nay, you shall receive a
greater damnation, if, in the midst of these great pretensions, you are
found to be workers of iniquity.

But GOD forbid that any such evil should befal you; that there should
be ever a _Judas_, a traitor, amongst such distinguished followers of
our common master. No, on the contrary, the excellency of your rules,
the regularity of your meetings, and more especially your pious zeal
in assembling in such a public and solemn manner so frequently in the
year, persuade me to think, that you are willing, not barely to seem,
but to be in reality, christians; and hope to be found at the last day,
what you would be esteemed now, holy, sincere disciples of a crucified
Redeemer.

Oh, may you always continue thus minded! and make it your daily,
constant endeavour, both by precept and example, to turn all your
converse with, more especially those of your own societies, into the
same most blessed spirit and temper. Thus will you adorn the gospel
of our LORD JESUS CHRIST in all things: Thus will you anticipate the
happiness of a future state; and by attending on, and improving the
communion of saints on earth, be made meet to join the communion and
fellowship of the spirits of just men made perfect, of the holy angels,
nay, of the ever-blessed and eternal GOD in heaven.

  Which GOD of his infinite mercy grant through JESUS CHRIST our
    LORD; to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, three
    persons and one GOD, be ascribed, as is most due, all honour
    and praise, might, majesty and dominion, now and for ever.
    _Amen._ ‏




                              SERMON IX.

          The Folly and Danger of being not righteous enough.


                         ECCLESIASTES vii. 16.

  _Be not righteous over-much, neither make thyself over-wise: why
    shouldst thou destroy thyself?_

NOTHING is more frequent, than while people are living in a course of
sin, and after the fashion and manner of the world, there is no notice
taken of them; neither are their ways displeasing to their companions
and carnal relations: but if they set their faces Zion-ward, and begin
to feel the power of GOD on their hearts; then they are surrounded
with temptations from their friends, who thus act the devil’s part.
The enemies, the greatest enemies a young convert meets with, my dear
brethren, are those of his own house. They that will be godly, must
suffer persecution; so it was in CHRIST’s time, and so it was in the
Apostles time too; for our LORD came not to send peace, but a sword.
Our relations would not have us sit in the scorner’s chair; they would
not have us be prodigals, consuming our substance upon harlots; neither
would they have us rakes or libertines, but they would have us be
contented with an almost christianity. To keep up our reputation by
going to church, and adhering to the outward forms of religion, saying
our prayers, reading the word of GOD, and taking the sacraments; this,
they imagine, is all that is necessary for to be christians indeed; and
when we go one step farther than this, their mouths are open against us,
as _Peter_’s was to CHRIST: “Spare thyself, do thyself no harm.”

And of this nature are the words of the text. They are not the words
of _Solomon_ himself, but the words of an infidel speaking to him, whom
he introduces in several parts of this book; for _Solomon_ had been
shewing the misfortunes which attended the truly good, as in the verse
before our text.

Upon this the infidel says, “Be not righteous over-much, neither
be thou over-wise: why shouldst thou destroy thyself?” _i. e._
Why shouldst thou bring these misfortunes upon thyself, by being
over-strict? Be not righteous over-much; eat, drink, and be merry, live
as the world lives, and then you will avoid those misfortunes which may
attend you, by being righteous over-much.

This text has another meaning; but take it which way you will, my
brethren, it was spoken by an unbeliever; therefore it was no credit
for the person who lately preached upon this text, to take it for
granted, that these were the words of _Solomon_: the words of an
infidel was not a proper text to a christian congregation. But as
_David_ came out against _Goliah_, not armed as the champion was, with
sword and spear, but with a sling and stone, and then cut off his head
with his own sword; so I come out against these letter-learned men, in
the strength of the LORD JESUS CHRIST; and, my dear brethren, I trust
he will direct me to use my sling, so that our enemies may not gainsay
us; and by the sword of GOD’s word, cut off the heads of our Redeemer’s
enemies.

But though they are not the words of _Solomon_, yet we will take them
in the same manner the late writer did; and, from the words, shall,

  _First_, Shew you what it is, not to be righteous over-much,
    that we may not destroy ourselves.

  _Secondly_, I shall let you see what it is to be righteous
    over-much. And then,

  _Thirdly_, Conclude with an exhortation to all of you, high and
    low, rich and poor, one with another, to come to the LORD
    JESUS CHRIST.

_First_, The first thing proposed, is to shew you what it is not to be
righteous over-much. And here,

It is by no means to be righteous over-much, to affirm we must have the
same Spirit of GOD as the first Apostles had, and must feel that Spirit
upon our hearts.

By receiving the Spirit of GOD, is not to be understood, that we are
to be inspired to shew outward signs and wonders, to raise dead bodies,
to cure leprous persons, or to give sight to the blind; these miracles
were only of use in the first ages of the church; and therefore
christians (nominal christians, for we have little else but the name)
may have all the gifts of the Spirit, and yet none of the graces of it:
Thou, O man, mayest be enabled by faith to remove mountains; thou, by
the power of GOD, mayest cast out devils; thou, by that power, mayest
speak with the tongues of men and angels; yea, thou mayest, by that
power, hold up thy finger and stop the sun in the firmament; and if
all these are unsanctified by the Spirit of GOD, they would be of
no service to thee, but would hurry thee to hell with the greater
solemnity. _Saul_ received the spirit of prophesying, and had another
heart, yet _Saul_ was probably a cast-away. We must receive the Spirit
of GOD in its sanctifying graces upon our souls; for CHRIST says,
“Unless a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of GOD.” We
are all by nature born in sin, and at as great a distance from GOD, as
the devils themselves. I have told you often, and now tell you again,
that you are by nature a motley mixture of the beast and devil, and
we cannot recover ourselves from the state wherein we have fallen,
therefore must be renewed by the Holy Ghost. By the Holy Ghost, I mean,
the third Person of the ever-blessed Trinity, co-equal, co-essential,
co-eternal, and consubstantial with the Father and the Son; and
therefore, when we are baptized, it is into the nature of the Father,
into the nature of the Son, and into the nature of the Holy Ghost: and
we are not true christians, till we are sanctified by the Spirit of GOD.

Though our modern preachers do not actually deny the Spirit of GOD,
yet they say, “Christians must not feel him;” which is in effect to
deny him. When _Nicodemus_ came to CHRIST, and the LORD JESUS was
instructing him, concerning the new birth, says he to our LORD, “How
can these things be?” _Nicodemus_, though a master of _Israel_, acts
just as our learned Rabbi’s do now. The answer that CHRIST gave him
should stop the mouths of our letter-learned pharisees: “The wind
bloweth where it listeth, and we hear the sound thereof, but cannot
tell whence it cometh, nor whither it goeth.” Now till the Spirit
of GOD is felt on our souls as the wind on our bodies, indeed, my
dear brethren, you have no interest in him: religion consists not in
external performance, it must be in the heart, or else it is only a
name, which cannot profit us, a name to live whilst we are dead.

A late preacher upon this text, seems to laugh at us, for talking of
the Spirit in a sensible manner, and talks to us as the _Jews_ did to
CHRIST: They said, “How can this man give us his flesh to eat?” So he
asks, “What sign or proof do we give of it?” We do not imagine, that
GOD must appear to us, and give it us: no; but there may be, and is,
a frequent receiving, when no seeing of it; and it is as plainly felt
in the soul, as any impression is, or can be, upon the body. To what
a damnable condition should we bring poor sinners, if they could not
be sensible of the Spirit of GOD; namely, a reprobate mind and past
feeling?

“What proof do they give?” says the writer. What sign would they have?
Do they expect us to raise the dead, to give sight to the blind, to
cure lepers, to make the lame to walk, and the deaf to hear? If these
are what they expect, I speak with humility, GOD, by us, hath done
greater things than these: many, who were dead in sin, are raised to
scripture-life: those, who were leprous by nature, are cleansed by the
Spirit of GOD; those, who were lame in duty, now run in GOD’s commands;
those, who were deaf, their ears are unstopped to hear his discipline,
and hearken to his advice; and the poor have the gospel preached to
them. No wonder people talk at this rate, when they can tell us, “That
the Spirit of GOD, is a good conscience, consequent thereupon.” My
dear brethren, _Seneca_, _Cicero_, _Plato_, or any of the heathen
philosophers, would have given as good a definition as this: It means
no more, than reflecting that we have done well. This, this is only
Deism refined: Deists laugh at us, when we pretend to be against their
notions, and yet these men use no other reason for our differing from
them, than what is agreeable to Deists principles.

This writer tells us, “It is against common-sense to talk of the
feeling of the Spirit of GOD.” Common-sense, my brethren, was never
allowed to be a judge; yea, it is above its comprehension, neither are,
nor can the ways of GOD be known by common-sense. We should never have
known the things of GOD at all by our common senses: no; it is the
revelation of GOD which is to be our judge; it is that we appeal to,
and not to our weak and shallow conceptions of things. Thus we may see,
it is by no means to be righteous over-much, to affirm we must have the
Spirit of GOD as the Apostles had. Nor,

_Secondly_, Is it to be righteous over-much to frequent religious
assemblies.

The preacher, upon this text, aims at putting aside all the religious
societies that are in the kingdom: Indeed, he says, “You may go to
church as often as opportunity serves, and on _Sundays_; say your
prayers, read the word of GOD; and, in his opinion, every thing else
had better be let alone: and as for the Spirit of GOD upon your souls,
you are to look upon it as useless and unnecessary.” If this, my
brethren, is the doctrine we have now preached, christianity is at a
low ebb indeed: but GOD forbid you should thus learn JESUS CHRIST. Do
you not forbear the frequenting of religious assemblies; for as nothing
helps to build up the devil’s kingdom more than the societies of wicked
men, nothing would be more for pulling of it down, than the people of
GOD meeting to strengthen each others hands; and as the devil has so
many friends, will none of you be friends to the blessed JESUS? Yes,
I hope many of you will be of the LORD’s side, and build each other up
in christian love and fellowship. This is what the primitive christians
delighted in; and shall not we follow so excellent an example? My
brethren, till christian conversation is more agreeable to us, we
cannot expect to see the gospel of CHRIST run and be glorified. Thus
it is by no means to be righteous over-much, to frequent religious
assemblies. Nor,

_Thirdly_, Is it to be righteous over-much, to abstain from the
diversions and entertainments of the age.

We are commanded to “abstain from the appearance of evil,” and that
“whatsoever we do, whether we eat or drink, we shall do all to the
glory of GOD.” The writer upon this text tells us, “That it will be
accounted unlawful to smell to a rose:” no, my dear brethren, you may
smell to a pink and rose too if you please, but take care to avoid the
appearance of sin. They talk of innocent diversions and recreations;
for my part, I know of no diversion, but that of _doing good_: if you
can find any diversion which is not contrary to your baptismal vow,
of renouncing the pomps and vanities of this wicked world; if you can
find any diversion which tends to the glory of GOD; if you can find any
diversion, which you would be willing to be found at by the LORD JESUS
CHRIST, I give you free licence to go to them and welcome; but if, on
the contrary, they are found to keep sinners from coming to the LORD
JESUS CHRIST; if they are a means to harden the heart, and such as you
would not willingly be found in when you come to die, then, my dear
brethren, keep from them: for, indeed, the diversions of this age are
contrary to christianity. Many of you may think I have gone too far,
but I shall go a great deal farther yet: I will attack the devil in
his strongest holds, and bear my testimony against our fashionable and
polite entertainments. What satisfaction can it be, what pleasure is
there in spending several hours at _cards_? Strange! that even people
who are grown old, can spend whole nights in this diversion: perhaps
many of you will cry out, “What harm is there in it?” My dear brethren,
whatsoever is not of faith, or for the glory of GOD, is a sin: Now does
cards tend to promote this? Is it not mispending your precious time,
which should be employed in working out your salvation with fear and
trembling? Do _play-houses_, _horse-racing_, _balls_ and _assemblies_,
tend to promote the glory of GOD? Would you be willing to have your
soul demanded of you, while you are at one of those places? Many of
these are, (I must speak, I cannot forbear to speak against these
entertainments; come what will, I will declare against them) many,
I say, of these are kept up by public authority: the play-houses are
supported by a public fund, and our newspapers are full of horse-races
all through the kingdom: these things are sinful; indeed they
are exceeding sinful. What good can come from a horse-race; from
abusing GOD Almighty’s creatures, and putting them to that use he
never designed for them: the play-houses, are they not nurseries of
debauchery in the age? and the supporters and patrons of them, are
encouragers and promoters of all the evil that is done by them; they
are the bane of the age, and will be the destruction of those who
frequent them. Is it not high time for the true ministers of JESUS
CHRIST, who have been partakers of the heavenly gift, to lift up their
voices as a trumpet, and cry aloud against these diversions of the age?
Are they not earthly, sensual, devilish? If you have tasted of the love
of GOD, and have felt his power upon your souls, you would no more go
to a play, than you would run your head into a furnace.

And what occasions these places to be so much frequented, is the
clergy’s making no scruple to be at these polite places: they frequent
play-houses, they go to horse-races, they go to balls and assemblies,
they frequent taverns, and follow all the entertainments that the age
affords; and yet these are the persons who should advise their hearers
to refrain from them; but instead thereof, they encourage them by their
example. Persons are too apt to rely upon, and believe their pastors,
rather than the scriptures; they think that there is no crime in going
to plays or horse-races, to balls and assemblies; for if there were,
they think those persons, who are their ministers, would not frequent
them: but, my dear brethren, observe they always go disguised, the
ministers are afraid of being seen in their gowns and cassocks; the
reason thereof is plain, their consciences inform them, that it is not
an example fit for the ministers of the gospel to set; thus, they are
the means of giving that offence to the people of GOD, which I would
not for ten thousand worlds: they lay a stumbling-block in the way
of their weak brethren, which they will not remove, though it is a
stumbling-block of offence. “Woe unto the world because of offences,
but woe unto that man by whom the offence cometh.” The polite gentlemen
of the age, spend their time in following these diversions, because
the love of GOD is not in their hearts; they are void of CHRIST, and
destitute of the Spirit of GOD; and not being acquainted with the
delight there is in GOD and his ways, being strangers to these things,
they run to the devil for diversions, and are pleased and delighted
with the silly ones he shews them.

My dear brethren, I speak of these things, these innocent diversions,
as the polite part of the world calls them, by experience; perhaps none,
for my age, hath read or seen more plays than I have: I took delight
in, and was pleased with them. It is true, I went to church frequently,
received the sacrament, and was diligent in the use of the forms
of religion, but I was all this while ignorant of the power of GOD
on my heart, and unacquainted with the work of grace; but when GOD
was pleased to shine with power upon my soul, I could no longer be
contented to feed on husks, or what the swine did eat: the Bible then
was my food; there, and there only I took delight: and till you feel
this same power, you will not abstain from the earthly delights of this
age, you will take no comfort in GOD’s ways, nor receive any comfort
from him; for you are void of the love of GOD, having only the form
of godliness, while you are denying the power of it; you are nominal
christians, when you have not the power of christianity.

The polite gentlemen say, “Are we to be always upon our knees? Would
you have us be always at prayer, and reading or hearing the word of
GOD?”

My dear brethren, the fashionable ones, who take delight in hunting,
are not tired of being continually on horseback after their hounds; and
when once you are renewed by the Spirit of GOD, it will be a continual
pleasure to be walking with, and talking of GOD, and telling what great
things JESUS CHRIST hath done for your souls; and till you can find as
much pleasure in conversing with GOD, as these men do of their hounds,
you have no share in him; but when you have tasted how good the LORD is,
you will shew forth his praise; out of the abundance of your heart your
mouth will speak.

This brings me to the second thing proposed, which is an extream that
very seldom happens:

_Secondly_, To shew what it is to be righteous over-much. And here,

_First_, When we confine the Spirit of GOD to this or that particular
church; and are not willing to converse with any but those of the same
communion; this is to be righteous over-much with a witness: and so
it is, to confine our communion within church-walls, and to think that
JESUS could not preach in a field as well as on consecrated-ground;
this is _judaism_, this is _bigotry_: this is like _Peter_, who would
not go to preach the gospel to the _Gentiles_, till he had a vision
from GOD: and when his conduct was blamed by the disciples, he could
not satisfy them till he had acquainted them with the vision he
had seen. And, therefore, we may justly infer, the Spirit of GOD is
the center of unity; and wherever I see the image of my Master, I
never enquire of them their opinions; I ask them not what they are,
so they love JESUS CHRIST in sincerity and truth, but embrace them
as my brother, my sister, and my spouse: and this is the spirit of
christianity. Many persons, who are bigots to this or that opinion,
when one of a different way of thinking hath come where they were, have
left the room or place on the account: this is the spirit of the devil;
and if it was possible that these persons could be admitted into heaven
with such tempers, that very place would be hell to them. Christianity
will never flourish, till we are all of one heart and of one mind; and
this would be the only means of seeing the gospel of JESUS to flourish,
more than ever it will by persecuting those who differ from us.

This may be esteemed as enthusiasm and madness, and as a design to
undermine the established church: No; GOD is my judge, I should rejoice
to see all the world adhere to her articles; I should rejoice to
see the ministers of the Church of _England_, preach up those very
articles they have subscribed to; but those ministers who do preach
up the articles, are esteemed as madmen, enthusiasts, schismatics, and
underminers of the established church: and though they say these things
of me, blessed be GOD, they are without foundation. My dear brethren,
I am a friend to her articles, I am a friend to her homilies, I am
a friend to her liturgy; and, if they did not thrust me out of their
churches, I would read them every day; but I do not confine the Spirit
of GOD there; for I say it again, I love all that love the LORD JESUS
CHRIST, and esteem him my brother, my friend, my spouse; aye, my very
soul is knit to that person. The spirit of persecution will never,
indeed it will never make any to love JESUS CHRIST. The pharisees make
this to be madness, so much as to mention persecution in a christian
country; but there is as much the spirit of persecution now in the
world, as ever there was; their will is as great, but blessed be GOD,
they want the power; otherwise, how soon would they send me to prison,
make my feet fast in the stocks, yea, would think they did GOD service
in killing me, and would rejoice to take away my life.

This is not the Spirit of CHRIST, my dear brethren; I had not come to
have thus preached; I had not come into the highways and hedges; I had
not exposed myself to the ill treatment of these letter-learned men,
but for the sake of your souls: indeed, I had no other reason, but
your salvation; and for that (I speak the truth in CHRIST, I lie not) I
would be content to go to prison; yea, I would rejoice to die for you,
so I could but be a means to bring some of you to JESUS: I could not
bear to see so many in the highway to destruction, and not shew them
their danger: I could not bear, my brethren, to see you more willing
to learn, than the teachers are to instruct you: and if any of them
were to come and preach to you, I should not envy them, I should not
call them enthusiasts or madmen; I should rejoice to hear they had ten
thousand times more success than I have met with; I would give them the
right-hand of fellowship; I would advise them to go on; I would wish
them good luck in the name of the LORD, and say as CHRIST did, when the
disciples informed him of some casting out devils in his name, and were
for rebuking of them, “Forbid them not, for they that are not against
us are for us;” or as St. _Paul_ says, “Some preach CHRIST of envy,
and some of good-will; notwithstanding, so CHRIST is but preached,
I rejoice; yea, and will rejoice.” The gospel of JESUS, is a gospel
of peace. Thus you may see, that to be righteous over-much, is to be
uncharitable, censorious, and to persecute persons for differing from
us in religion.

_Secondly_, Persons are righteous over-much, when they spend so much
time in religious assemblies, as to neglect their families. There is
no licence given by the blessed JESUS, for idleness; for in the very
infancy of the world, idleness was not allowed of. In paradise, _Adam_
and _Eve_ dressed the garden, _Cain_ was a tiller of the ground, and
_Abel_ was a keeper of sheep; and there is a proverb amongst the _Jews_,
“That he who brings his son up without a business, brings him up to
be a thief:” and therefore our Saviour was a carpenter; “Is not this
the carpenter’s son,” said the _Jews_: and St. _Paul_, though brought
up at the feet of _Gamaliel_, was a tent-maker. Labour, my brethren,
is imposed on all mankind as part of the divine curse; and you are
called to be useful in the society to which you belong: take care
first for the kingdom of GOD, and all things necessary shall be added.
To labour for the meat that perisheth, is your duty; only take care,
that you do not neglect getting the meat for the soul: that is of the
greatest consequence, for this plain reason, the things of this life
are temporal, but those of the next are eternal. I would have rich
men to work as well as poor: it is owing to their idleness, that the
devil hurries them to his diversions; they can be in their beds all the
morning, and spend the afternoon and evening in dressing, visiting, and
at balls, plays, or assemblies, when they should be working out their
salvation with fear and trembling. Such a life as this, occasions a
spiritual numbness in the soul; and if JESUS CHRIST was not to stop
those who thus spend their time, they would be hurried into eternity,
without once thinking of their immortal souls. But JESUS CHRIST has
compassion upon many of them, and while they are in their blood, he
bids them “live.” And though I preach this doctrine to you, yet I do
not bid you be idle; no, they that do not work should not eat. You have
two callings, a general one, and a special one: as we are to regard
the one in respect of our bodies, so we are to regard the other on
account of our souls. Take heed, my brethren, I beseech you, take heed,
lest you labour so for the meat that perisheth, as to forget that meat
which endureth for ever. Seek the things of GOD first; look well to
obtain oil in your lamps, grace in your hearts. I am not persuading
you to take no care about the things of the world, but only not to
be encumbered with them, so as to neglect your duty towards GOD, and
a proper concern for your souls. It is meet, it is right, it is your
bounden duty, to mind the callings wherein GOD hath placed you; and you
may be said to be righteous over-much not to regard them. This brings
me,

_Thirdly_, To give you another sign of being righteous over-much; and
that is, when we fast and use corporal austerities, so as to unfit us
for the service of GOD.

This, my brethren, you may think there is no occasion at all to caution
you against, and indeed there is not a great necessity for it; however,
many persons, upon their first being awakened to a sense of their sin,
are tempted to use austerities to that excess which is sinful. It is
our duty to fast, it is our duty to fast often, and it is what we are
directed to by JESUS CHRIST himself; but then we are to take care to do
it in a proper manner: to bring our bodies under for the service of GOD,
is that which we are commanded by our LORD JESUS CHRIST.

The late preacher upon this text, runs into great extremes, and charges
us with saying and acting things, of which we never thought; but I
do not regard what he said of me: I do not mind his bitter invectives
against my ministry; I do not mind his despising my youth, and calling
me novice and enthusiast; I forgive him from my very heart: but when
he reflects on my Master; when he speaks against my Redeemer; when
JESUS CHRIST is spoken against, I must speak, (I must speak indeed, or
I should burst:) when he gives liberty to persons to take a chearful
glass, and alledges CHRIST for an example, as in the marriage-feast,
saying, “CHRIST turned water into wine, when it is plain there had been
more drank than was necessary before;” what is this, but to charge
CHRIST with encouraging drunkenness? It is true, the Governor says,
“Every man in the beginning sets forth good wine, and when men have
well drank, that which is worse; but thou hast kept the good wine until
now:” but it does not at all follow, that it was not necessary, or that
there had been a sufficient quantity before: I would not speak thus
slightingly of one of my Master’s miracles, for the whole world. And
we may observe, that as CHRIST chiefly visited poor people, they might
not have wherewithal to buy a sufficient quantity of wine; or having
more guests than were expected, the wine was expended sooner than they
thought; then the Mother of JESUS tells him, “They have no wine;” he
answers, “Woman, what have I to do with thee? My hour is not yet come.”
After this he commanded them to fill the water-pots with water, and
they filled them to the brim, and this water he turned into wine: now
it does not at all follow, that there was more drank than was necessary;
neither would the LORD JESUS CHRIST have continued in the house if
there had. But we have an excellent lesson to learn from this miracle:
by the water-pots being empty, we may understand, the heart of man
being by nature destitute of his grace, his speaking and commanding to
fill them, shews, that when CHRIST speaks, the heart that was empty of
grace before, shall be filled; and the water-pots being filled to the
brim, shews, that CHRIST will fill believers hearts brim full of the
Holy Ghost: and from the Governor’s observing, that the last wine was
the best, learn, that a believer’s best comforts, shall be the last and
greatest, for they shall come with the greatest power upon the soul,
and continue longest there: this, this my dear brethren, is the lesson
we may learn from this miracle.

But one great inconsistency I cannot avoid taking notice of in this
late learned preacher. In the beginning of his sermon, he charges us
with “laying heavy burthens upon people, which they are not able to
bear;” in the latter part he charges us with being Antinomians, whose
tenets are, “So you say you believe in the LORD JESUS CHRIST, you may
live the life of devils.” Now, he charges us with being _too strict_,
and by and by with being _too loose_. Which side, my brethren, will
you take? Thus you see, when persons forsake CHRIST, they make strange
mistakes; for there can be no greater opposition of sentiments than
this letter-learned writer has made: as opposite as light and darkness,
good and evil, sweet and bitter. And, on this account, to find out
these lettered-learned gentlemens notions of the new-birth, I put
a paragraph in my Journal; and, blessed be GOD, I have obtained my
desires, and have plainly perceived, that the persons who have lately
written concerning the new-birth, know no more of it than a blind man
does of colours, nor can they have any more notion of it, (by all their
learning, falsely so called) than the blind man, who was to give an
account what the sun was, and, after a considerable time allowed for
study, he said, “It was like the sound of a trumpet.” And till they are
taught of GOD, they will be unacquainted with the new-birth: therefore,
if you have a mind to know what the devil has to say against us, read
Dr. _Trapp_’s sermons.

It is with grief I speak these things, and were not the welfare of your
souls, and my Redeemer’s honour at stake, I would not now open my mouth,
yea I would willingly die (GOD is my judge) for the person who wrote
such bitter things against me, so it would be a means of saving his
soul. If he had only spoken against me, I would not have answered him;
but, on his making my Redeemer a pattern of vice, if I was not to speak,
the very stones would cry out; therefore, the honour of my Redeemer,
and love to you, constrains me to speak. It is of necessity that I
speak, when the divinity of JESUS CHRIST is spoken against, it is the
duty of ministers to cry aloud, and spare not. I cannot forbear, come
what will; for I know not what kind of divinity we have now among us:
we must have a righteousness of our own, and do our best endeavours,
and then CHRIST will make up the deficiency; that is, you must be your
own Saviour, in part. This is not the doctrine of the gospel; this is
not the doctrine of JESUS: no; CHRIST is all in all; JESUS CHRIST must
be your whole wisdom; JESUS CHRIST must be your whole righteousness,
JESUS CHRIST must be your whole sanctification; or JESUS CHRIST will
never be your eternal redemption and sanctification. Inward holiness
is looked on, by some, as the effect of enthusiasm and madness; and
preachers of the necessity of the new-birth, are esteemed as persons
fit for _Bedlam_. Our polite and fashionable doctrine, is, “That there
is a fitness in man, and that GOD, seeing you a good creature, bestows
upon you his grace.” GOD forbid, my dear brethren, you should thus
learn JESUS CHRIST!

This is not the doctrine I preach to you: I say, salvation is the free
gift of GOD. It is GOD’s free grace, I preach unto you, not of works,
lest any one should boast. JESUS CHRIST justifies the ungodly; JESUS
CHRIST passed by, and saw you polluted with your blood, and bid you
live. It is not of works, it is of faith: we are not justified for our
faith, for faith is the instrument, but by your faith, the active as
well as the passive obedience of CHRIST, must be applied to you. JESUS
CHRIST hath fulfilled the law, he hath made it honourable; JESUS CHRIST
hath made satisfaction to his Father’s justice, full satisfaction;
and it is as compleat as it is full, and GOD will not demand it again.
JESUS CHRIST is the way; JESUS CHRIST is the truth; and JESUS CHRIST
is the life. The righteousness of JESUS CHRIST, my brethren, must be
imputed to you, or you can never have any interest in the blood of
JESUS; your own works are but as filthy rags, for you are justified
before GOD, without any respect to your works past, present, or to come.
This doctrine is denyed by the learned rabbi’s; but if they deny these
truths of the gospel, they must not be offended, though a child dare
speak to a doctor; and, in vindication of the cause of JESUS CHRIST, a
child, a boy, by the Spirit of GOD, can speak to the learned clergy of
this age.

If I had a voice so great, and could speak so loud, as that the whole
world could hear me, I would cry, “Be not righteous over-much,” by
bringing your righteousness to CHRIST, and by being righteous in your
own eyes. Man must be abased, that GOD may be exalted.

The imputed righteousness of JESUS CHRIST is a comfortable doctrine
to all real christians; and you sinners, who ask what you must do to
be saved? how uncomfortable would it be, to tell you by good works,
when, perhaps, you have never done one good work in all your life:
this would be driving you to despair, indeed: no; “Believe in the LORD
JESUS CHRIST, and you shall be saved:” therefore none of you need go
away despairing. Come to the LORD JESUS by faith, and he shall receive
you. You have no righteousness of your own to depend on. If you are
saved, it is by the righteousness of CHRIST, through his atonement, his
making a sacrifice for sin: his righteousness must be imputed to you,
otherwise you cannot be saved. There is no difference between you, by
nature, and the greatest malefactor that ever was executed at _Tyburn_:
the difference made, is all owing to the free, the rich, the undeserved
grace of GOD; this has made the difference. It is true, talking at
this rate, will offend the pharisees, who do not like this levelling
doctrine, (as they call it); but if ever you are brought to JESUS
CHRIST by faith, you will experience the truth of it. Come by faith
to JESUS CHRIST; do not come, pharisee-like, telling GOD what you have
done, how often you have gone to church, how often you have received
the sacrament, fasted, prayed, or the like: no; come to CHRIST as poor,
lost, undone, damned sinners; come to him in this manner, and he will
accept of you: do not be rich in spirit, proud and exalted, for there
is no blessing attends such; but be ye poor in spirit, for theirs is
the kingdom of GOD; they shall be made members of his mystical body
here, and shall be so of the church triumphant hereafter. Acknowledge
yourselves as nothing at all, and when you have done all, say, “You
are unprofitable servants.” There is no salvation but by JESUS CHRIST;
there is no other name given under heaven amongst men, whereby we
may be saved, but that of the LORD JESUS. GOD, out of CHRIST, is a
consuming fire; therefore strive for an interest in his Son the LORD
JESUS CHRIST; take him on the terms offered to you in the gospel;
accept of him in GOD’s own way, lay hold on him by faith.

Do not think you are christians; do not flatter yourselves with being
righteous enough, and good enough, because you lead moral decent lives,
do no one any harm, go to church, and attend upon the outward means
of grace; no, my brethren, you may do this, and a great deal more, and
yet be very far from having a saving, experimental knowledge of JESUS
CHRIST.

Beg of CHRIST to strike home upon your hearts, that you may feel the
power of religion. Indeed, you must feel the power of GOD here, or the
wrath of GOD hereafter. These are truths of the utmost consequence;
therefore, do not go contradicting, do not go blaspheming away. Blessed
be GOD, you are not such cowards to run away for a little rain. I
hope good things of you; I hope you have felt the power of GOD; and
if GOD should bring any of you to himself through this foolishness of
preaching, you will have no reason to complain it was done by a youth,
by a child: no; if I could be made an instrument to bring you to GOD,
they may call me novice, enthusiast, or what they please, I should
rejoice; yea, and I would rejoice.

O that some sinner might be brought to JESUS CHRIST! Do not say I
preach despair: I despair of no one, when I consider GOD had mercy
on such a wretch as I, who was running in a full career to hell: I
was hasting thither, but JESUS CHRIST passed by and stopped me; JESUS
CHRIST passed by me while I was in my blood, when I was polluted with
filth; he passed by me, and bid me live. Thus I am a monument of GOD’s
free grace; and therefore, my brethren, I despair of none of you, when
I consider, I say, what a wretch I was. I am not speaking now out of a
false humility, a pretended sanctity, as the pharisees call it: no, the
truth in CHRIST I speak, and therefore, men and devils do your worst; I
have a gracious Master will protect me; it is his work I am engaged in,
and JESUS CHRIST will carry me above their rage.

Those who are come here this night out of curiosity to hear what the
babbler says; those who come to spend an idle hour to find something
for an evening-conversation at a coffee-house; or you who have stopped
in your coaches as you passed by, remember that you have had JESUS
CHRIST offered to you; I offer JESUS CHRIST to every one of you:
perhaps you may not regard it because it is in a field. But JESUS
CHRIST is wherever his people meet in sincerity and truth to worship
him: he is not confined to church walls: he has met us here; many,
very many of you know he has; and therefore you may believe on him with
greater confidence.

Can you bear to think of a bleeding, panting, dying JESUS, offering
himself up for sinners, and you will not accept of him? Do not say, you
are poor, and therefore are ashamed to go to church, for GOD has sent
the gospel out unto you. Do not harden your hearts: oppose not the will
of JESUS.

O that I could speak to your hearts, that my words would centre there.
My heart is full of love to you. I would speak, till I could speak no
more, so I could but bring you to CHRIST. I may never meet you all,
perhaps, any more. The cloud of GOD’s providence seems to be moving.
GOD calls me by his providence away from you, for a while. GOD knows
whether we shall ever see each other in the flesh. At the day of
judgment we shall all meet again. I earnestly desire your prayers.
Pray that I may not only begin, _Jehu_-like, in the spirit, but that
I may continue in it. Pray that I may not fall away, that I may not
decline suffering for you, if I should be called to it. Be earnest, O
be earnest with GOD in my behalf, that while I am preaching to others,
I may not be a cast-away. Put up your prayers for me, I beseech you.
Go not to the throne of grace, without carrying me upon your heart; for
you know not what influence your prayers may have. As for you, my dear
brethren, GOD knows my heart, I continually bear you on my mind, when I
go in and out before the LORD; and it is my earnest desire, you may not
perish for lack of knowledge, but that he would send out more ministers
to water what his own right-hand hath planted. May the Antient of
Days come forth upon his white horse, and may all opposition fall to
the ground. As we have begun to bruise the serpent’s head, we must
expect he will bruise our heel. The devil will not let his kingdom fall
without raging horribly. He will not suffer the ministers of CHRIST to
go on, without bringing his power to stop them. But fear not, my dear
brethren, _David_, though a stripling, encountered the great _Goliah_;
and if we pray, GOD will give us strength against all our spiritual
enemies. Shew your faith by your works. Give the world the lye. Press
forward. Do not stop, do not linger in your journey, but strive for
the mark set before you. Fight the good fight of faith, and GOD will
give you spiritual mercies. I hope we shall all meet at the right-hand
of GOD. Strive, strive to enter in at the strait gate, that we may
be borne to _Abraham_’s bosom, where sin and sorrow shall cease. No
scoffer will be there, but we shall see JESUS, who died for us; and not
only see him, but live with him for ever.

  Which GOD, of his infinite mercy, & c.




                               SERMON X.

  A Preservative against unsettled Notions, and want of Principles,
    in regard to Righteousness and Christian Perfection.

  Being a more particular Answer to Doctor _Trapp_’s Four Sermons
    upon the same Text.


           To all the True Members of Christ’s Holy Church.

_Dear Fellow Christians_,

THE great, and indeed the only motive which prompted me to publish this
sermon, was the desire of providing for your security from error, at
a time when the deviators from, and false pretenders to truth, are so
numerous, that the most discerning find it a matter of the greatest
difficulty to avoid being led astray by one or by other into downright
falshood. There is no running divisions upon truth; like a mathematical
point, it will neither admit of subtraction nor addition: And as it is
indivisible in its nature, there is no splitting the difference, where
truth is concerned. Irreligion and enthusiasm are diametrical opposites,
and true piety between both, like the center of an infinite line, is
at an equal infinite distance from the one and the other, and therefore
can never admit of a coalition with either. The one erring by defect,
the other by excess. But whether we err by defect, or excess, is of
little importance, if we are equally wide of the mark, as we certainly
are in either case. For whatever is less than truth, cannot be truth;
and whatever is more than true must be false.

Wherefore, as the whole of this great nation seems now more than ever
in danger of being hurried into one or the other of these equally
pernicious extremes, irreligion or fanaticism, I thought myself more
than ordinarily obliged to rouze your, perhaps, drowsy vigilance, by
warning you of the nearness of your peril; cautioning you from leaning
towards either side, though but to peep at the slippery precipice; and
stepping between you and error, before it comes nigh enough to grapple
with you. The happy medium of true christian piety, in which it has
pleased the mercy of GOD to establish you, is built on a firm rock,
“and the gates of hell shall never prevail against it.” While then you
stand steadily upright in the fulness of the faith, falshood and sin
shall labour in vain to approach you; whereas, the least familiarity
with error, will make you giddy, and if once you stagger in principles,
your ruin is almost inevitable.

But now I have cautioned you of the danger you are in from the enemies
who threaten your subversion, I hope your own watchfulness will
be sufficient to guard you from any surprise. And from their own
assaults you have nothing to fear, since while you persist in the
firm resolution, through GOD’s grace, to keep them out, irreligion and
enthusiasm, falshood and vice, impiety and false piety, will combine in
vain to force an entrance into your hearts.

Take then, my dearly beloved fellow-members of CHRIST’s mystical body,
take the friendly caution I give you in good part, and endeavour to
profit by it: attend wholly to the saving truths I here deliver to you,
and be persuaded, that they are uttered by one who has your eternal
salvation as much at heart as his own.

  “And thou, O LORD JESUS CHRIST, fountain of all truth, whence
    all wisdom flows, open the understandings of thy people to the
    light of thy true faith, and touch their hearts with thy grace,
    that they may both be able to see, and willing to perform
    what thou requirest of them. Drive away from us every cloud
    of error and perversity; guard us alike from irreligion and
    false pretensions to piety; and lead us on perpetually towards
    that perfection to which thou hast taught us to aspire; that
    keeping us here in a constant imitation of thee, and peaceful
    ‏union with each other, thou mayest at length bring us to that
    everlasting glory, which thou hast promised to all such as
    shall endeavour to be perfect, even as the Father who is in
    heaven is perfect, who with thee and the Holy Ghost lives and
    reigns one GOD, world without end! _Amen, Amen._”


                         ECCLESIASTES vii. 16.

  _Be not righteous over-much, neither make thyself over-wise:
    Why shouldest thou destroy thyself?_

RIGHTEOUS over-much! may one say; Is there any danger of that? Is it
even possible? Can we be too good? If we give any credit to the express
word of GOD, we cannot be too good, we cannot be righteous over-much.
The injunction given by GOD to _Abraham_ is very strong: “Walk before
me, and be thou perfect.” The same he again lays upon all _Israel_, in
the eighteenth of _Deuteronomy_: “Thou shalt be perfect, and without
blemish, with the LORD thy GOD.” And lest any should think to excuse
themselves from this obligation, by saying, it ceased when the old law
was abolished, our blessed Saviour ratified and explained it: “Be ye,
therefore, perfect, even as your Father who is in heaven is perfect.”
So that until our perfection surpasses that of our heavenly Father, we
can never be too good nor righteous over-much; and as it is impossible
we should ever surpass, or even come up to him in the perfection of
goodness and righteousness, it follows in course that we never can
be good or righteous in excess. Nevertheless Doctor _Trapp_ has found
out that we may be righteous over-much, and has taken no small pains,
with much agitation of spirit, to prove that it is a _great folly and
weakness_, nay, a _great sin_. “O LORD! rebuke thou his spirit, and
grant that this false doctrine may not be published to his confusion in
the day of judgment!”

But if what this hasty, this deluded man advances had been true,
could there be any occasion, however, of warning against it in these
times, “when the danger (as he himself to his confusion owns) is on
the contrary extreme; when all manner of vice and wickedness abounds
to a degree almost unheard of?” I answer for the present, that “there
must be heresies amongst you, that they who are approved may be made
manifest.”

However, this earthly-minded minister of a new gospel, has taken a text
which seems to favour his naughty purpose, of weaning the well-disposed
little ones of CHRIST from that perfect purity of heart and spirit,
which is necessary to all such as mean to live to our LORD JESUS.
O LORD, what shall become of thy flock, when their shepherds betray
them into the hands of the ravenous wolf! when a minister of thy word
perverts it to overthrow thy kingdom, and to destroy scripture with
scripture!

_Solomon_, in the person of a desponding, ignorant, indolent liver,
says to the man of righteousness: “Be not righteous over-much, neither
make thyself over-wise: Why shouldest thou destroy thyself?” But
must my angry, over-sighted brother _Trapp_, therefore, personate a
character so unbecoming his function, merely to overthrow the express
injunction of the LORD to us; which obliges us never to give over
pursuing and thirsting after the perfect righteousness of CHRIST, until
we rest in him? Father, forgive him, for he knows not what he says!

What advantage might not satan gain over the elect, if the false
construction, put upon this text by that unseeing teacher, should
prevail! Yet though he blushes not to assist satan to bruise our heel,
I shall endeavour to bruise the heads of both, by shewing,

I. _First_, The genuine sense of the text in question.

II. The character of the persons, who are to be supposed speaking here;
And

III. The character of the persons spoken to.

From whence will naturally result these consequences.

_First_, That the Doctor was grosly (LORD grant he was not maliciously)
mistaken in his explanatory sermon on this text, as well as in the
♦application of it.

  ♦ “applicaion” replaced with “application”

_Secondly_, That he is a teacher and approver of worldly maxims.

_Thirdly_, That he is of course an enemy to perfect righteousness in
men, through CHRIST JESUS, and, therefore, no friend to CHRIST: And,
therefore, that no one ought to be deluded by the false doctrine he
advances, to beguile the innocent, and deceive, if possible, even the
elect.

I. To come at the true sense of the text in question, it will be
necessary to look back, to the preceding verse, where the wise man,
reflecting on the vanities of his youth, puts on for a moment his
former character. “All things, have I seen in the days of my vanity:
(and among the rest) there is a just man that perisheth in his
righteousness, and there is a wicked man who prolongeth his life in his
wickedness.” Now it is very plain, that he is not here talking of a man,
who is righteous over-much, in the Doctor’s manner of understanding
the words, that is, “faulty, and criminal by excess.” For on one side
he commends him for being a just man, and full of righteousness, and
yet on the other tells us, that his righteousness is the shortening of
his life. Whereas, had he looked upon his perishing in righteousness
to be an over-righteousness, he would never have called him a just
man. Neither by a wicked man, can he mean a man given up to the utmost
excess of wickedness, since he tells us, that he prolongeth his life
in (or by) his wickedness. Who does not know, that the excess of almost
every kind of vice, is of itself a shortener of life. So that the
whole opposition and contrast lies between a good man, and a bad man.
A good man whose goodness shortens his life, a bad man whose iniquity
lengthens his life, or at least is not excessive enough to shorten the
thread of it. _Solomon_, absorbed in these reflections, speaks here by
way of _prosopopeia_, not the sense of _Solomon_, the experienced, the
learned, the wise; but of the former _Solomon_, a vain young fellow,
full of self-love, and the strong desires of life. In the quality of
such a one then, he looks with the same eye upon the righteous man,
who perishes in his righteousness, as he would on a wicked one, who
should perish in his wickedness. For it is neither the righteousness
of the one, nor the wickedness of the other, that offends him, but the
superlative degrees of both; which tending equally to shorten life, he
looks upon them as equally opposite to the self-love he fondles within
him. And, therefore, he deems an excess of debauchery as great an enemy
to the lasting enjoyment of the pleasures of life, as an extraordinary
righteousness would be. Well then might he say to the latter, in
this character, “Be not over-much wicked, neither be thou foolish;
why shouldst thou die before thy time?” And to the former: “Be not
righteous over-much, neither make thyself over-wise: Why shouldst thou
destroy thyself?”

What wonder then, that a youth of sprightliness and sense, but led away
by self-love to be fond of the pleasures and enjoyments of life, when
attained without hurry, and possessed without risk; what wonder, I say,
that such a youth should conceive an equal dislike to the superlative
degrees of virtue and vice, and, therefore, advise such of his
companions as give into the excess of debauchery, to refrain from it:
as it must infallibly tend to clog their understandings, stupify their
senses, and entail upon their constitutions a train of infirmities,
which cannot but debilitate their natural vigour, and shorten their
days? “Be not over-much wicked, neither be thou foolish: Why shouldst
thou die before thy time?” What wonder, that the same self-love should
prompt him to dissuade such of his friends or acquaintance, as he
wishes to have for companions, and countenancers of his worldly-minded
pursuits, from pursuing righteousness and wisdom to a degree that must
destroy in them all taste of earthly pleasures, and may possibly impair
their constitutions, and forward their end? “Be not righteous over-much,
neither make thyself over-wise: Why shouldst thou destroy thyself?”

This is the sense in which _Solomon_ (placing himself in the state of
vanity of his youth) speaks to the one, and the other: to the righteous,
and to the ungodly. This is the true, genuine sense of the letter; and
every other sense put upon it, is false and groundless, and wrested
rather to pervert than explain the truth of the text. O christian
simplicity, whither art thou fled? Why will not the clergy speak truth?
And why must this false prophet suffer thy people, O LORD, to believe
a lye? they have held the truth in unrighteousness. Raise up, I beseech
thee, O LORD, some true pastors, who may acquaint them with the nature
and necessity of perfect righteousness, and lead them to that love of
christian perfection which the angry-minded, pleasure-taking Doctor
_Trapp_, labours to divert them from, by teaching, that “all christians
must have to do with some vanities.”

Is not the meaning of this text plain to the weakest capacity? I have
here given it to you, as I have it from the mouth of the royal preacher
himself. I have made use of no “philosophy and vain deceit after the
tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after
CHRIST,” to impose a fleshly sense upon you, for the sense of the
word of GOD. No, I have given you a natural exposition, obvious from
the very words themselves. Hence you may see, my fellow-strugglers
in righteousness, how grosly our angry adversary is mistaken in his
explanation of this text. LORD! open his eyes, and touch his heart;
and convert him, and all those erring ministers, who have seen vain and
foolish things for thy people, and have not discovered their iniquity,
to turn away thy captivity. For they have erred through wine, and
through strong drink are out of the way: The priest and the prophet
have erred through strong drink, they are swallowed up of wine, they
are out of the way through strong drink, they err in vision, they
stumble in judgment.

It is plain from the words of the text, that the royal Preacher was
speaking in the person of a vain worldling, when he said, “Be not
righteous over-much;” whereby he meant to exhort the truly righteous
not to be dismayed, terrified, or disturbed from their constant pursuit
of greater and greater perfection of righteousness, until they rest in
CHRIST; notwithstanding the derision, fleshly persuasion, ill-treatment
and persecution of worldly men: Who, one day, repenting and groaning
for anguish of spirit, shall say within themselves, “These were they
whom we had sometime in derision, and a proverb of reproach. We fools,
accounted their lives madness; and their end to be without honour. How
are they numbered among the children of GOD, and their lot is among the
saints!”

How blind then is the application (not to say perverse) which this
self-wise clergyman makes from the text, to such as, following the
advice of the apostle, (_Colossians_ iii. 2.) “set their affection
on things above, not on things on the earth.” Must hastiness in anger
get the better of sense and truth? Must the people be misled because
the pastor cannot, or will not see? Or must the injunction of CHRIST,
“Be perfect, even as your Father, who is in heaven, is perfect,” give
place to the maxim of the heathen _Tully_: The greatest reproach to a
philosopher, is to confute his doctrine by his practice; if this be the
case, alas, what a deplorable, unspeakably deplorable condition is that
of some christians! Wherefore, “thus saith the LORD” concerning the
prophets who make his people to err, that bite with their teeth and cry
peace; and he that putteth not into their mouths, they even prepare war
against him: therefore night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have
a vision, and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine, and
the sun shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall be dark over
them.

But I will leave these lovers of darkness, and turn to you, O beloved,
elect of GOD! I beseech you, by the bowels of CHRIST, suffer not
yourselves to be deceived by their flattering, sin-soothing speeches.
“Be not of that rebellious people, lying children, children who will
not hear the law of the LORD: who say to the seers, see not; and to
the prophets, prophesy not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth
things, prophesy deceits.” Follow not those, who flatter you in the
vanities they practise themselves. O may you never be of the number
of those, in the person of whom _Solomon_ here says, “Be not righteous
over-much;” for their character is the character of the beast.

II. The character of the persons, who are to be supposed speaking here
in the text, is in a word the same with the character of those whom
_Solomon_ here personates: who, as is already shewn, are a vain set of
men, neither righteous enough to have an habitual desire of improving
virtue to its perfection, nor quite so flagitious as to give into
self-destroying vices: in a word, they are self-lovers, the sole end
of whose pursuits, whether indifferent, bad, or laudable in themselves,
is self-enjoyment. Insomuch that they look upon virtue and vice,
righteousness and wickedness, with the same eye, and their fondness or
aversion for both is alike, as their different degrees appear to be the
means to enhance and prolong the enjoyment of pleasure, or to lessen
and shorten those pleasures. Thus any virtue, while it is kept within
such bounds as may render it subservient to the pleasurable degrees
of vice, will meet with no opposition from them; on the contrary, they
will even commend it. But the moment it becomes a restraint to _vice in
moderation_ (if I may be allowed to make use of terms adequate to their
system) from that moment it gives offence, and they put in their caveat,
“Be not righteous over-much.” In like manner, vice, while confined to
certain limits, which rather improve than obstruct pleasures, is with
them a desirable good; but no sooner does it launch out into any depth,
sufficient to drown and diminish the relish of those pleasures, than
they declare open war against it; “Be not over-much wicked.” And the
reason they assign for their opposition in both cases, is the same:
“why shouldst thou destroy thyself? Why shouldst thou die before thy
time?” Such is the prudence of the world, the flesh, and the devil.
Such the maxims of these refined libertines, so much the more dangerous
as they are less obvious; so much the more insinuating, as they are
removed from certain extravagancies capable of shocking every man who
has the least sense and delicacy. O LORD, how true is it, that the sons
of darkness are wiser in their generation than the sons of light!

You are not then, beloved in the LORD, to imagine that your greatest
opposition, in struggling for perfect righteousness, is to come from
profligates, from men whose enormous vices create horror even to
themselves: no, your most dangerous, most formidable enemies, are the
kind of men I have painted to you, who render vice relishable with a
mixture of apparent virtue, and cloath wickedness in the apparel of
righteousness; “Beware of them, for they come to you in the cloathing
of sheep, but inwardly are ravenous wolves.”

This perverse generation will ensnare you into ungodliness, by seeming
oppositions to vice, and allow you to swallow the seemings of virtue
and righteousness like an emetic, only to puke forth the reality of
them. They paint black, white, and the white they convert into black.
Not content with seeming what they are not, they labour to make you,
what they are. Righteousness and wickedness they interweave in an
artful tissue, capable of deceiving the very elect, and difficult for
the most discerning among them to unravel; as alms-giving and avarice,
pride and humility, temperance and luxury, are dextrously blended
together; while as mutual curbs to each other, they combine to stem
the tide of impediments to worldly enjoyment, which might flow from
extraordinary degrees on either side. Thus “Alms-giving (you are told)
is very excellent,” and you believe the proposition, without knowing
the particular sense it is spoken in, which is, that alms-giving is
an excellent curb upon avarice, by preserving a rich man from such
a superlative love of money as deprives him of the self-enjoyment
of it. And upon the strength of this belief, the worldly-minded man,
who labours to deceive you, gains credit enough with you to establish
this maxim, that all superlative degrees of alms-giving, are _great
sins_, and that a man must never sell all he has and give it to the
poor, because some may have families of their own, and ought to make
sufficient provision for them, according to that proverb, “Charity
begins at home;” when no one, at least scarce any one, is wise enough
to know, when he has a sufficiency. O LORD, which are we to believe,
these worldlings, or thee? If thou dost deceive us, why dost thou
threaten us with punishments, if we do not heed thee? And if the world
is deceitful, shall we not flee from it to cleave to thee?

“Pride is a great sin” even with these worldlings, inasmuch as the
external excesses of it, may obstruct the way to many ambitious
terminations of view, and its internal agitations are the destruction
of that peace, to which even self-love aspires; besides, the frequent
extravagancy of its motions may not only be prejudicial to health,
but a shortner of life. And, therefore, no wonder they should object
against it, “Be not over-much wicked: why shouldst thou die before thy
time?” For this reason, they look upon a little mixture of humility
to be not only commendable, but even necessary to curb the extravagant
sallies of an over-bearing pride. But then a superlative degree of
humility, that is, humility free from the least tincture of pride or
vanity, which is the same with them, as “_an over-strained humility_,
is a fault as well as folly;” because, forsooth, it is an expediment to
the self-enjoyment of the world and its pleasures; “All christians must
have to do with some vanities, or else they must needs go out of the
world indeed; for the world itself is all over vanity.” ’Tis nothing,
therefore, surprising, my brethren, to see a man of this cast of mind
making a vain ostentation of his little superficial acquaintance, with
the antient _Greeks_ and _Romans_. What is this but acting conformably
to his own principle, that “all christians must have to do with some
vanities?” And shall we wonder to hear such a one prefer their writings,
to those of an apostle; or be astonished to see him wound the apostle
with raillery, through your sides, for wishing to know nothing but
JESUS CHRIST, and him crucified? No, with him it is consistency to
laugh and reprove you out of the perfection of righteousness, which,
however he may play with terms, is with him the same as being righteous
over-much; but with you it would be inconsistency, who ought to know no
difference between being righteous, and living in a perpetual, habitual
desire of being superlatively so. It is no more then, than you ought
to expect to hear such advocates for the world cry out to you, “Be not
righteous over-much: why should you destroy yourselves?” But, O LORD,
surely this is not the same voice which tells us, that unless we humble
ourselves like unto children, we shall not enter into the kingdom of
heaven, and that he is greatest there, who humbles himself the most
like a child! But what will not men advance who are drunk with passion,
and intoxicated with self-love?

“The vice of intemperance in eating, and drinking, is plain to every
body,” they own. And, therefore, they give it up as an excess which
cannot but tend to the impairing of health, and shortening of life: nay,
it drowns the very relish of pleasure in actual eating and drinking.
Hence will every refined debauchee exclaim against it with Dr. _Trapp_:
“Be not over-much wicked: why shouldst thou destroy thyself?” Little
sobriety, say they, is requisite to give a zest to luxury and worldly
pleasures. But too much of it is too much, “to eat nothing but bread
and herbs, and drink nothing but water, unless there be a particular
reason for it (such perhaps as Doctor _Cheyne_ may assign) is folly at
best, (that is, even though it be done for CHRIST’s sake) therefore no
virtue:” “Be not then righteous over-much, why shouldst thou destroy
thyself?” And if you should answer these carnally-minded men with the
words of the apostle, _Romans_ viii. “We are debtors, not to the flesh,
to live after the flesh: For if we live after the flesh, we shall die:
but if we, through the spirit, do mortify the deeds of the flesh, we
shall live.” If you answer them thus, they will tell you, “this is
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.” And it will be to
as little purpose to answer them, with what St. _Paul_ says elsewhere
(_Romans_ xiv. 17.) “The kingdom of GOD is not meat and drink, but
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost:” They will not
blush to tell you, that “our blessed Saviour came eating and drinking,
nay worked a miracle to make wine (at an entertainment) when it is
plain there had been more drank than was necessary.” To such lengths
does the love of the world hurry these self-fond, merry-making
worldlings! Tell them of self-denial, they will not hear you, it
is an encroachment upon the pleasures of life, and may shorten it
of a few days, which you are never sure of possessing; it is being
“righteous over-much: why shouldst thou destroy thyself?” JESUS, you
will say, tells us (_John_ xii. 25.) “He that loveth his life shall
lose it, and he that hateth his life in this world, shall keep it
unto life eternal.” But this and the like, they will inform you, “are
hyperbolical phrases.” Now what signifies minding JESUS, when he speaks
hyperbolically, that is, speaks more than is strictly true. Yet, O LORD
JESUS, grant us to mind thee, whatever these worldlings may say; remind
us, that if any man will come after thee, he must deny himself, and
take up his cross, and follow thee! O how enlarging is it to the soul,
to take up the cross of CHRIST and follow him!

But you are charged, ye beloved lovers of perfect righteousness,
with extravagances. You allow of “no sort of recreation or diversion;
nothing but an universal mortification and self-denial; no pleasure but
from religion only:” you teach “that the bodily appetites must not be
in the least degree gratified, any farther than is absolutely necessary
to keep body and soul together, and mankind in being: No allowances
are to be made for melancholy misfortunes, or human infirmity; grief
must be cured only by prayer;” (a horrid grievance this, to such as
think prayer burdensome at best) “To divert it by worldly amusements
is carnal.” A heavy charge this: but lest it should seem so only to
those carnal persons, who are resolved to give way to their carnal
appetites; what you look upon as advisable only, these perverters of
truth insinuate to be looked upon by you as indispensable duties. And
lest prevarication should fail, downright falshoods must be placed
to your account, “so that to taste an agreeable fruit, or smell to
a rose, must be unlawful with you,” however you disown it. But O, my
beloved christians, be not discouraged from the pursuit of perfect
righteousness by these or such vile misrepresentations. For “blessed
are ye when men shall revile you, and shall say all manner of evil
against you falsely for the sake of CHRIST JESUS. Rejoice, and be
exceeding glad: For great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted
they the prophets who were before you.”

Thus far, then, may suffice to shew clearly with what dangerous views
the worldly-minded men, whom _Solomon_ personates in the text before us,
lay siege to your souls in fair speeches. What I have said, is enough
to convince you, that their character is that of the beast, whom St.
_John_, in the Revelations, “saw coming up from the sea (that is,
the flagitious world) with seven heads.” And what shall we say of a
man, a clergyman, who teaches, and is an advocate for their perverse
doctrines? May we not, nay, must we not, for the glory of GOD, and your
good, inform you, that he is a “Teacher and approver of worldly maxims.”
May I not, nay, must I not, give you this caution with the royal
preacher: “When he speaketh fair, believe him not, for there are seven
abominations in his heart?” But how different is the character I have
given you, from the character of the persons to whom the text under
consideration is spoken: that is, the character of all such, as, like
you, are resolved never to rest, ’till they rest in CHRIST JESUS. To
shew this, I shall now pass to my third point.

III. To what sort of persons does _Solomon_ in the character of a
worldling address himself, when he says, “Be not righteous over-much,
neither make thyself over-wise: why shouldst thou destroy thyself?”
Not to the wicked, ’tis plain; for besides that it would have been
an unnecessary precaution, he turns to these in the next verse with
another kind of warning, which however has some analogy with this. “Be
not over-much wicked, neither be thou foolish, why shouldst thou die
before thy time?” Was it then to the righteous, in a common way; that
is, to such as content themselves with the observance of the absolute
essentials of GOD’s laws? Surely our adversaries will not allow this,
unless they be of opinion, that to be righteous at all, is to be
righteous over-much. And yet it cannot possibly be supposed that the
persons spoken to, are men perfectly righteous; since, as I proved
to you, in the introduction of this discourse, till we come up to the
perfection of our heavenly father, we can never be righteous _enough_,
much less _perfectly_ righteous: wherefore, as in this life, men cannot
attain to the perfection of their heavenly father, it follows in course
that the persons here spoken to, cannot be men perfectly righteous,
there being no such men existing; for as St. _John_ saith, “If we say
that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.”
Alas, O LORD, when shall we be delivered from the body of this death?

It remains, that the persons spoken to, in the text, are such only, as
persisting stedfastly in a firm adherence to all the essential laws of
GOD, content not themselves with the practice of common virtues in a
common degree, but live in a perpetual habitude of desires, struggles,
and yearnings towards an intimate union with CHRIST, the perfection
of righteousness. They are not of the number of those righteous with
indifference, who would fain blend the service of GOD and mammon, would
fain have CHRIST and the world for their masters, and halting between
two, like the children of _Israel_ of old, with their faces to heaven,
and their hearts to the earth, are neither hot nor cold. Alas, would
they were cold or hot! But “because they are luke-warm, and neither
cold nor hot, the LORD shall spew them out of his mouth.”

Not so the persons spoken to in my text; not so you, O beloved in GOD,
who having shaken off the world and worldly affections, to run the more
swiftly after righteousness, hate your own lives for the sake of CHRIST.
Happy, happy are all you, who put on our LORD JESUS, and with him the
new man! “You are the true circumcision which worship GOD in spirit,
and rejoice in CHRIST JESUS, and have no confidence in the flesh.”

What wonder then, christians? To you I speak, all ye lovers and
strugglers after the perfect righteousness of your divine Master CHRIST;
what wonder is it, that you should be charged with enthusiasm, with
folly, with fanaticism and madness? Were not the apostles so before
you, when they preached CHRIST JESUS? Nay were they not reputed drunk
with wine? Can you be amazed at it in an age, “when all manner of
vice abounds to a degree almost unheard of,” when the land is full of
adulterers, and because of swearing the land mourneth. O how is the
faithful city become an harlot! my heart within me is broken, because
of the clergy, all my bones shake? I am like a drunken man, and like
a man whom wine hath overcome; because of the LORD, and because of the
words of his holiness, perverted by this deluded clergyman.

When the clergy, whom CHRIST has appointed to teach his people “to walk
before him and be perfect,” become teachers of worldly maxims, what can
be expected from the laity? It is notorious, that for the moralizing
iniquity of the priest, the land mourns. They have preached and lived
many sincere persons out of the church of _England_. They endeavour
to make you vain: (as the prophets did in the days of _Jeremiah_) they
speak a vision out of their own mouth, and not out of the mouth of
the LORD. In a word, “both prophet and priest are prophane, and do
wickedness in the very house of the LORD.” Nay, they say still to them
who despise the LORD, The LORD hath said, ye shall have peace; and they
say to every one who walketh after the imagination of his own heart, No
evil shall come upon you.

Such is the language, my beloved lovers of christian perfection, which
the indolent, earthly-minded, pleasure-taking clergy of the church of
_England_, use to strengthen the hands of evil-doers, that none may
return from his wickedness. Such is the doctrine of the letter-learned
divine, who has dipped his pen in gall, to decry perfect righteousness,
and to delude you from it, with a false application of that text so
grosly misunderstood by him: “Be not righteous over-much, neither be
thou over-wise: why shouldst thou destroy thyself?” But suffer not
yourselves, my fellow-christians, to be deluded by him. For as I have
already shewn to you, he is grosly (LORD grant he was not maliciously)
mistaken in his manner of explaining this text; and so far from making
a right application of it according to the wise, the experienced
_Solomon_’s intention, he acts the character of a vain libertine,
full of self-love, and earthly desires, whom _Solomon_ but personated,
to ridicule. But the doctor by realizing that character in himself,
becomes the teacher and approver of worldly maxims, which he applies
to you, on purpose to destroy in you the yearnings after perfect
righteousness in CHRIST. May I not then, nay, must I not warn you, my
beloved, that this man is an enemy to perfect righteous in men through
CHRIST JESUS, and, therefore, no friend to CHRIST? O that my head was
an ocean, and my eyes fountains of tears, to weep night and day for
this poor creature, this hood-winked member of the clergy.

Pray you, O true christians, pray and sigh mightily to the LORD;
importune him in the behalf of this erring pastor; pray that he would
vouchsafe to open the eyes, and touch the stubborn heart of this scribe,
that he may become better instructed. Otherwise, as the LORD said by
the mouth of his true prophet _Jeremiah_, “Behold, I will feed him
with wormwood, and make him drink the water of gall; for from him is
prophaneness gone forth into all the land.”

This good, however, hath he done by attempting to shew the folly, sin,
and danger of that which he miscalls being righteous over-much, that
is, being superlatively righteous, in desire and habitual struggles; he
has thereby given me the occasion to shew you, brethren, in the course
of this sermon, the great and real folly, sin, and danger of not being
righteous enough; which, perhaps, I should never have thought of doing,
had not his false doctrine pointed out to me the necessity of doing it.
Thus does the all-wise providence of GOD, make use of the very vices of
men to draw good out of evil; and chuse their very errors to confound
falsehood and make way for truth. Though this should be more than our
angry adversary intended, yet, LORD, reward him according to his works;
and suffer him no longer to be hasty in his words, that we may have
room to entertain better hopes of him for the future.

Blessed be GOD for sending you better guides! I am convinced it was
his divine will: our dear fellow-creature, Doctor _Trapp_, falling
into such errors, has given so great a shock to the sound religion of
_christian perfection_, that unless I had opposed him, I verily believe
the whole flock who listened to his doctrine, would have been scattered
abroad like sheep having no shepherd. “But woe to ye scribes and
pharisees! Woe be unto the pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep
of my pasture, saith the LORD.”

Full well I know that this sermon will not be pleasing to my poor
peevish adversary; but correction is not to pleasure but to profit: few
children can be brought willingly to kiss the rod which rebuketh them;
though, when they become of riper understanding, they will bless the
hand that guided it. Thus shall this angry man, I trust, thank me one
day for reproving him, when his reason shall be restored to him by the
light of the holy spirit. O LORD, grant thou this light unto him, and
suffer him to see with what bowels of pity and tenderness I love him in
thee, even while I chasten him.

Neither am I insensible, brethren, how offensive my words will be to
worldlings in general, who loving falsehood better than truth, and the
flesh before the spirit, will still prefer the doctor’s sin-soothing
doctrines to the plain gospel verities preached by me. O how my soul
pities them. But I have done my duty, I wash my hands, and am innocent
of the blood of all. I have not sought to please my hearers, but
have spoken plain truth though it should offend. For what things were
gain to me, those I counted loss for CHRIST; and hope I shall ever do
so. Not that I presume to think myself already perfect. But “I press
forward towards the mark, for the prize of the high-calling of GOD in
CHRIST JESUS.”

None of us, as I before told you, can boast of having attained the
summit of perfection; though, he is the nearest to it, who is widest
from the appetites of the flesh, and he stands the highest, who is
the lowliest in his own esteem: wherefore, as many of us as have made
any advances towards CHRIST and his kingdom, “whereto we have already
attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing.”

Walk not then, brethren, according to the ways of the world: but be
followers of CHRIST together with me. And if any, even an angel of
light, should presume to teach you any other gospel than that which
I have here taught you, let him be accursed. “For you will find many
walking, like such of whom I have told you already, and now tell you
weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of CHRIST: whose end
is destruction, whose GOD is their belly: and whose glory is in their
shame, for they mind worldly things. But your conversation is in heaven,
from whence also you look for the Saviour, the LORD JESUS CHRIST: who
shall change your vile bodies, that they may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able to subdue
even all things unto himself,” even the stubborn heart of our perverse
adversary.

  Which GOD of his infinite mercy grant, &c.




                              SERMON XI.

                    The Benefits of an Early Piety.

                  Preached at _Bow_ Church, _London_,
                    before the Religious Societies.


                         ECCLESIASTES xii. I.

  _Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth._

THE amiableness of religion in itself, and the innumerable advantages
that flow from it to society in general, as well as to each sincere
professor in particular, cannot but recommend it to the choice of every
considerate person, and make, even wicked men, as they wish to die
the death, so in their more sober intervals, to envy the life of the
righteous. And, indeed, we must do the world so much justice, as to
confess, that the question about religion does not usually arise from a
dispute whether it be necessary or not (for most men see the necessity
of doing something for the salvation of their souls;) but when is
the best time to set about it. Persons are convinced by universal
experience, that the first essays or endeavours towards the attainment
of religion, are attended with some difficulty and trouble, and
therefore they would willingly defer the beginning of such a seemingly
ungrateful work, as long as they can. The wanton prodigal, who is
spending his substance in riotous living, cries, a little more pleasure,
a little more sensuality, and then I will be sober in earnest. The
covetous worldling, that employs all his care and pains in “heaping up
riches, though he cannot tell who shall gather them,” does not flatter
himself that this will do always; but hopes with the rich fool in the
gospel, to lay up goods for a few more years on earth, and then he will
begin to lay up treasures in heaven. And, in short, thus it is that
most people are convinced of the necessity of being religious some time
or another; but then, like _Felix_, they put off the acting suitably to
their convictions, ’till, what they imagine, a more convenient season:
whereas, would we be so humble as to be guided by the experience and
counsel of the wisest men, we should learn that youth is the fittest
season for religion; “Remember now thy creator, (says _Solomon_) in the
days of thy youth.” By the word _remember_, we are not to understand
a bare speculative remembrance, or calling to mind, (for that, like
a dead faith, will profit us nothing,) but such a remembrance as will
constrain us to obedience, and oblige us out of gratitude, to perform
all that the LORD our GOD shall require of us. For as the forgetting
GOD in scripture language, implies a total neglect of our duty, in like
manner remembring him signifies a perfect performance of it: so that,
when _Solomon_ says, “Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth,”
it is the same as if he had said, keep GOD’s commandments; or, in other
words, be religious in the days of thy youth, thereby implying, that
youth is the most proper season for it.

I shall in the following discourse,

  _First_, Endeavour to make good the wise man’s proposition,
    implied in the words of the text, and to shew that youth is
    the fittest season for religion.

  _Secondly_, By way of motive, I shall consider the many
    unspeakable advantages that will arise from, “Remembering our
    Creator in the days of our youth.” And,

  _Thirdly_, I shall conclude with a word or two of exhortation to
    the younger part of this audience.

_First_, I am to make good the wise man’s proposition, implied in the
words of the text, and to shew that youth is the fittest season for
religion: “Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth.” But to
proceed more clearly in this argument, it may not be improper, first,
to explain what I mean by the word _religion_. By this term, then, I
would not be understood to mean a bare outward profession or naming
the name of CHRIST; for we are told, that many who have even prophesied
in his name, and in his name cast out devils, shall notwithstanding be
rejected by him at the last day: nor would I understand by it, barely
being admitted into CHRIST’s church by baptism; for then _Simon Magus_,
_Arius_, and the heresiarchs of old, might pass for religious persons;
for these were baptized: nor yet the receiving the other seal of the
covenant, for then _Judas_ himself might be canonized for a saint; nor
indeed do I mean any or all of these together, considered by themselves;
but a thorough, real, inward change of nature, wrought in us by the
powerful operations of the Holy Ghost, conveyed to and nourished in
our hearts, by a constant use of all the means of grace, evidenced by
a good life, and bringing forth the fruits of the spirit.

The attaining this real, inward religion, is a work of so great
difficulty, that _Nicodemus_, a learned doctor and teacher in _Israel_,
thought it altogether impossible, and therefore ignorantly asked our
blessed LORD, “How this thing could be?” And, _truly_, to rectify a
disordered nature, to mortify our corrupt passions, to turn darkness
to light, to put off the old man, and put on the new, and thereby to
have the image of GOD reinstamped upon the soul, or, in one word, “to
be born again,” however light some may make of it, must, after all
our endeavours, be owned by man to be impossible. It is true, indeed,
CHRIST’s yoke is said to be an easy or a gracious yoke, and his burthen
light; but then it is to those only to whom grace has been given to
bear and draw in it. For, as the wise son of _Sirach_ observes, “At
first wisdom walked with her children in crooked ways, and brings
them into fear; and torments them with her discipline, and does not
turn to comfort and rejoice them, ’till she has tried them and proved
their judgment.” No; we must not flatter ourselves that we shall walk
in wisdom’s pleasant ways, unless we first submit to a great many
difficulties. The spiritual birth is attended with its pangs, as well
as the natural: for they that have experienced it, (and they only are
the proper judges,) can acquaint you, that in all things that are dear
to corrupt nature, we must deny ourselves, lest, after all, when we
come to the birth, we should want strength to bring forth.

But if these things are so; if there are difficulties and pangs
attending our being born again; if we must deny ourselves, what season
more proper than that of youth? When, if ever, our bodies are robust
and vigorous, and our minds active and couragious; and, consequently,
we are then best qualified to endure hardness, as good soldiers of
JESUS CHRIST.

We find, in secular matters, people commonly observe this method, and
send their children abroad among the toils and fatigues of business, in
their younger years, as well knowing they are then fittest to undergo
them. And why do they not act with the same consistency in the grand
affair of religion? Because, as our Saviour has told us, “The children
of this world are wiser in their generation than the children of light.”

But, _Secondly_, If pure and undefiled religion consists in the renewal
of our corrupted natures, then it is not only a work of difficulty, but,
the perfection of it, of time.

And if this be the case, then it highly concerns every one to set about
it betimes, and to “work their work while it is day, before the night
cometh, when no man can work.”

Could we, indeed, live to the age of _Methuselah_, and had but little
business to employ ourselves in, we might then be more excusable, if
we made no other use of this world, than what too many do, take our
pastime therein: but since our lives are so very short, and we are
called to work out our salvation with fear and trembling, we have no
room left for trifling, lest we should be snatched away while our lamps
are untrimmed, and we are entirely unprepared to meet the Bridegroom.

Did we know a friend or neighbour, who had a long journey of the utmost
importance to make, and yet should stand all the day idle, neglecting
to set out till the sun was about to go down, we could not but pity and
condemn his egregious folly. And yet it is to be feared most men are
just such fools; they have a long journey to take, nay, a journey to
eternity, a journey of infinite importance, and which they are obliged
to dispatch before the sun of their natural life be gone down; and yet
they loiter away the time allotted them to perform their journey in,
till sickness or death surprizes them; and then they cry out, “What
shall we do to inherit eternal life?” But leaving such to the mercies
of GOD in CHRIST, who can call at the eleventh hour, I pass on to

The Second general thing proposed, To shew the advantages that will
arise from remembering our Creator in the days of our youth; which may
serve as so many motives to excite and quicken all persons immediately
to set about it.

And the first benefit resulting from thence is, that it will bring
most honour and glory to GOD. This, I suppose, every serious person
will grant, ought to be the point in which our actions should centre;
for to this end were we born, and to this end were we redeemed by the
precious blood of JESUS CHRIST, that we should promote GOD’s eternal
glory. And as the glory of GOD is most advanced by paying obedience
to his precepts, they that begin soonest to walk in his ways, act most
to his glory. The common objection against the divine laws in general,
and the doctrines of the gospel in particular, is, that they are not
practicable; that they are contrary to flesh and blood; and that all
those precepts concerning self-denial, renunciation of and deadness
to the world, are but so many arbitrary restraints imposed upon human
nature: but when we see mere striplings not only practising, but
delighting in such religious duties, and in the days of their youth,
when, if ever, they have a relish for sensual pleasures, subduing and
despising the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of
life; this, this is pleasing to GOD; this vindicates his injured honour;
this shews that his service is perfect freedom, “that his yoke is easy,
and his burden light.”

But, _Secondly_, as an early piety redounds most to the honour of
GOD, so it will bring most honour to ourselves: for those that honour
GOD, GOD will honour. We find it, therefore, remarked to the praise of
_Obadiah_, that he served the LORD from his youth: of _Samuel_, that he
stood, when young, before GOD in a linen ephod: of _Timothy_, that from
a child he had known the holy scriptures: of St. _John_, that he was
the youngest and most beloved disciple: and of our blessed LORD himself,
that at twelve years old he went up to the temple, and sat among the
doctors, both hearing and asking them questions.

Nor, _Thirdly_, will an early piety afford us less comfort than
honour, not only because it renders religion habitual to us, but also
because it gives us a well-grounded assurance of the sincerity of our
profession. Was there no other argument against a death-bed repentance,
but the unsatisfactoriness and anxiety of such a state, that should
be sufficient to deter all thinking persons from deferring the most
important business of their life to such a dreadful period of it. For
supposing a man to be sincere in his profession of repentance on a
death-bed (which, in most cases, is very much to be doubted) yet, he is
often afraid lest his convictions and remorse proceed not from a true
sorrow for sin, but a servile fear of punishment. But one, who is a
young saint, need fear no such perplexity; he knows that he loves GOD
for his own sake, and is not driven to him by a dread of impending evil;
he does not decline the gratifications of sense, because he can no
longer “hear the voice of singing men and singing women;” but willingly
takes up his cross, and follows his blessed Master in his youth, and
therefore has reason to expect greater confidence of his sincerity
towards GOD. But farther, as an early piety assures the heart of its
sincerity, so, likewise, it brings its present reward with it, as it
renders religion and all its duties habitual and easy. A young saint,
was you to ask him, would joyfully tell you the unspeakable comfort of
beginning to be religious betimes: as for his part, he knows not what
men mean by talking of mortification, self-denial, and retirement, as
hard and rigorous duties; for he has so accustomed himself to them,
that, by the grace of GOD, they are now become even natural, and he
takes infinitely more pleasure in practising the severest precepts of
the gospel, than a luxurious _Dives_ in a bed of state, or an ambitious
_Haman_ at a royal banquet. And O how happy must that youth be, whose
duty is become a second nature, and to whom those things, which seem
terrible to others, are grown both easy and delightful!

But the greatest advantage of an early piety is still behind,
_Fourthly_, It lays in the best provision of comfort and support
against such times as we shall stand most in need thereof, viz. all
times of our tribulation, and in particular, against the time of old
age, the hour of death, and the day of judgment.

This is the argument the wise man makes use of in the words immediately
following the text: “Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth,
while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, wherein thou
shalt say, I have no pleasure in them.” Observe, the time of old age,
is an evil time, years wherein there is no pleasure: and ask those that
are grown old, and they will inform you so. Cordials surely, then, must
be exceeding proper to support our drooping spirits: and O what cordial
comparable to the recollection of early piety, depending wholly on the
righteousness of CHRIST? When the eyes, like _Isaac_’s, are grown dim
with age; when “the keepers of the house, the hands, shall tremble,” as
the wise man goes on to describe the infirmities of old age; when “the
strong men bow themselves,” or the legs grow feeble; and the “grinders,”
the teeth, shall cease to do their proper office, because they are
few; for a person then to hear the precepts of the gospel read over to
him, and to be able to lay his hand on his heart, and to say sincerely,
notwithstanding a consciousness of numberless short-comings, “All these
have I endeavoured, through grace, to keep from my youth:” this must
give him, through CHRIST who worketh all, comfort that I want words to
express and thoughts to conceive. But, supposing it was possible for
us to escape the inconveniences of old age, yet still death is a debt,
since the fall, we all must pay; and, what is worse, it generally comes
attended with such dreadful circumstances, that it will make even a
_Felix_ to tremble. But as for the godly, that have been enabled to
serve the LORD from their youth, it is not usually so with them; no,
they have faith given them to look upon death, not as a king of terrors,
but as a welcome messenger, that is come to conduct them to their
wished-for home. All the days of their appointed time have they waited,
and it has been the business of their whole lives to study to prepare
themselves for the coming of their great change; and, therefore, they
rejoice to hear that they are called to meet the heavenly Bridegroom.
Thus dies the early pious, whose “path has been as the shining light,
that shineth more and more unto the perfect day.” But follow him
beyond the grave, and see with what an holy triumph he enters into his
Master’s joy; with what an humble boldness he stands at the dreadful
tribunal of JESUS CHRIST; and can you then forbear to cry out, “Let me
die the death of the righteous, and let my latter end, and future state,
be like his?”

Need I then, after having shewn so many advantages to arise from an
early piety, use any more arguments to persuade the younger part of
this audience, to whom, in the _Third_ and last place, I address myself,
to “remember their Creator in the days of their youth?”

What! will not all the arguments I have mentioned, prevail with them
to leave their husks, and return home to eat of the fatted calf? What!
will they thus requite our Saviour’s love? That be far from them! Did
he come down and shed his precious blood to deliver them from the power
of sin; and will they spend their youthful strength and vigour in the
service of it, and then think to serve CHRIST, when they can follow
their lusts no longer? Is it fit, that many, who are endowed with
excellent gifts, and are thereby qualified to be supports and ornaments
of our sinking church, should, notwithstanding, forget the GOD who gave
them, and employ them in things that will not profit? O why will they
not arise, and, like so many _Phineas’s_, be zealous for the Lord of
Hosts? Doubtless, when death overtakes them, they will wish they had:
and what hinders them, but that they begin now? Think you that any
one yet ever repented that he began to be religious too soon? But how
many, on the contrary, have repented that they began when almost too
late? May we not well imagine, that young _Samuel_ now rejoices that
he waited so soon at the tabernacle of the LORD? Or young _Timothy_,
that from a child he knew the holy scriptures? And if you wish to be
partakers of their joy, let me persuade you to be partakers of their
piety.

I could still go on to fill my mouth with arguments; but the
circumstances and piety of those amongst whom I am now preaching “the
kingdom of GOD,” remind me to change my style; and, instead of urging
any more dissuasives from sin, to fill up what is behind of this
discourse, with encouragements to persevere in holiness.

Blessed, for ever blessed be the GOD and the Father of our LORD JESUS
CHRIST, I am not speaking to persons inflamed with youthful lusts,
but to a multitude of young professors, who by frequently assembling
together, and forming themselves into religious societies, are, I hope
on good ground, in a ready way to be of the number of those “young men,
who have overcome the wicked-one.”

Believe me, it gladdens my very soul, to see so many of your faces set
heaven-wards, and the visible happy effects of your uniting together,
cannot but rejoice the hearts of all sincere christians, and oblige
them to wish you good luck in the name of the LORD. The many souls who
are nourished weekly with the spiritual body and blood of JESUS CHRIST,
by your means; the weekly and monthly lectures that are preached by
your contributions; the daily incense of thanksgiving and prayer which
is publicly sent up to the throne of grace by your subscriptions; the
many children which are trained up “in the nurture and admonition of
the LORD,” by your charities; and, lastly, the commendable and pious
zeal you exert in promoting and encouraging divine psalmody, are such
plain and apparent proofs of the benefit of your religious societies,
that they call for a public acknowledgment of praise and thanksgiving
to our blessed Master, who has not only put into your hearts such good
designs, but enabled you also to bring the same to good effect.

It is true it has been objected, “That young mens forming themselves
into religious societies, has a tendency to make them spiritually proud,
and to ‘think more highly of themselves than they ought to think.’” And,
perhaps, the imprudent, imperious behaviour of some novices in religion,
who, “though they went out from you, were not of you,” may have given
too much occasion for such an aspersion.

But you, brethren, have not so learned CHRIST. Far, far be it from you
to look upon yourselves, as righteous, and despise others, because you
often assemble yourselves together. No; this, instead of creating pride,
ought to beget an holy fear in your hearts, lest your practice should
not correspond with your profession, and that, after you have benefited
and edified others, you yourselves should become cast-aways.

Worldly-mindedness, my brethren, is another rock against which we are
in danger of splitting. For, if other sins have slain their thousands
of professing christians, this has slain its ten thousands. I need not
appeal to past ages; your own experience, no doubt, has furnished you
with many unhappy instances of young men, who, “after (as one would
have imagined) they had escaped the pollutions which are in the world
through lust,” and “had tasted the good word of life,” and endured
for a season, whilst under the tuition and inspection of others: yet,
when they have come to be their own masters, through a want of faith,
and through too great an earnestness in “labouring for the meat which
perisheth,” have cast off their first love, been again entangled with
the world, and “returned like the dog to his vomit, and like the sow
that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire.” You would, therefore,
do well, my brethren, frequently to remind each other of this dangerous
snare, and to exhort one another to begin, pursue, and end your
christian warfare, in a thorough renunciation of the world, and worldly
tempers; so that, when you are obliged by Providence to provide for
yourselves, and those of your respective housholds, you may continue
to walk by faith, and still “seek first the kingdom of GOD, and his
righteousness;” not doubting, but all other things, upon your honest
industry and endeavours, shall be added unto you.

And now, what shall I say more? To speak unto you, fathers, who
have been in CHRIST so many years before me, and know the malignity
of worldly-mindedness, and pride in the spiritual life, would be
altogether needless. To you, therefore, O young men, (for whom I
am distressed, for whom I fear as well as for myself) do I once
more address myself, in the words of the beloved disciple, “Look
to yourselves, that we lose not those things which we have wrought,
but receive a full reward.” Be ever mindful, then, of the words that
have been spoken to us by the apostles of the LORD and Saviour. “Give
diligence to make your calling and election sure. Beware, lest ye
also being led away by the error of the wicked, fall from your own
stedfastness. Let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall.
Be not high-minded, but fear. But we are persuaded better things of
you, and things that accompany salvation, though we thus speak. For GOD
is not unrighteous, to forget your works and labours of love. And we
desire that every one of you do shew the same diligence, to the full
assurance of hope unto the end: that ye be not slothful, but followers
of them, who through faith and patience inherit the promises.” It is
true, we have many difficulties to encounter, many powerful enemies to
overcome, ere we can get possession of the promised land. We have an
artful devil, an ensnaring world, and above all, the treachery of our
own hearts, to withstand and strive against. “For strait is the gate,
and narrow is the way that leadeth unto eternal life.” But wherefore
should we fear, since he that is with us is far more powerful, than
all who are against us? Have we not already experienced his almighty
power, in enabling us to conquer some difficulties which seemed as
insurmountable then, as those we struggle with now? And cannot he, who
delivered us out of the paws of those bears and lions, preserve us also
from being hurt by the strongest _Goliah_?

“Be stedfast therefore, my brethren, be immoveable.” Be not “ashamed
of the gospel of CHRIST: for it is the power of GOD unto salvation.”
Fear not man; fear not the contempt and revilings which you must meet
with in the way of duty; for one of you shall chase a thousand; and two
of you put ten thousand of your enemies to flight. And if you will be
contented, through grace, to suffer for a short time here; I speak the
truth in CHRIST, I lye not; then may ye hope, according to the blessed
word of promise, that ye shall be exalted to sit down with the Son
of Man, when he shall come in the glory of his Father, with his holy
angels, to judgment hereafter. May Almighty GOD give every one of us
such a measure of his grace, that we may not be of the number of those
that draw back unto perdition, but of them that believe and endure unto
the end, to the saving of our souls, through our LORD JESUS CHRIST.

  Which GOD, &c.




                              SERMON XII.

                    CHRIST the Believer’s Husband.


                            ISAIAH liv. 5.

  _For thy Maker is thy Husband._

ALTHOUGH believers by nature, are far from GOD, and children of wrath,
even as others, yet it is amazing to think how nigh they are brought
to him again by the blood of JESUS CHRIST. Eye hath not seen, nor ear
heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of any man living, fully
to conceive, the nearness and dearness of that relation, in which they
stand to their common head. He is not ashamed to call them brethren.
Behold, says the blessed JESUS in the days of his flesh, “my mother
and my brethren.” And again after his resurrection, “go tell my
brethren.” Nay sometimes he is pleased to term believers his _friends_.
“Henceforth call I you no longer servants, but friends.” “Our friend
_Lazarus_ sleepeth.” And what is a friend? Why there is a friend that
is nearer than a brother, nay, as near as one’s own soul. And “thy
friend, (says GOD in the book of _Deuteronomy_) which is as thy own
soul.” Kind and endearing appellations these, that undoubtedly bespeak
a very near and ineffably intimate union between the LORD JESUS and
the true living members of his mystical body! But, methinks, the words
of our text point out to us a relation, which not only comprehends,
but in respect to nearness and dearness, exceeds all other relations
whatsoever. I mean that of a _Husband_. “For thy Maker is thy husband;
the LORD of Hosts is his name; and thy Redeemer the Holy One of
_Israel_, the GOD of the whole earth shall he be called.”

These words were originally spoken to the people of the _Jews_,
considered collectively as a peculiar people, whom our LORD had
betrothed and married to himself; and they seem to be spoken, when
religion was on the decline among their churches; when they had, in a
great measure, lost that life and power, which they once experienced;
and their enemies began to insult them with a “where is now your GOD?”
Such a state of things must undoubtedly be very afflicting to the true
mourners in _Zion_; and put them upon crying unto the LORD in this
their deep distress. He hears their prayer, his bowels yearn towards
them; and in the preceding verse, he assures them, that though the
enemy had broken in upon them like a flood, yet their extremity should
be his opportunity to lift up a standard against him. “Fear not, (says
the great Head and King of his church) for thou shalt not be ashamed
(finally or totally); neither be thou confounded, (dissipated or
dejected, giving up all for gone, as though thou never shouldst
see better days, or another revival of religion) for thou shalt not
(entirely) be put to shame;” though for a while, for thy humiliation,
and the greater confusion of thy adversaries, I suffer them to triumph
over thee: “For thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth, and shalt
not remember the reproach of thy widow-hood any more;” _i. e._ I
will vouchsafe you such another glorious gale of my blessed Spirit,
that you shall quite forget your former troubled widow-state, and
give your enemies no more occasion to insult you, on account of your
infant-condition, but rather to envy you, and gnash their teeth, and
melt away at the light of your unthought-of glory and prosperity. And
why will the infinitely great and condescending JESUS deal thus with
his people? Because the church is his spouse; “For, (as in the words
just now read to you) thy Maker is thy husband; thy Redeemer, the Holy
One of _Israel_;” and therefore he loves thee too well, to let thy
enemies always trample thee under foot. “The LORD of Hosts is his
name, the GOD of the whole earth shall he be called;” and therefore he
is armed with sufficient power to relieve his oppressed people, and
overcome and avenge himself of all their haughty and insulting foes.

This seems to be the prime and genuine interpretation of the text
and context, especially if we add, that they may have a further view
to the latter-day glory, and that blessed state of the church, which
the people of GOD have been looking for in all ages, and the speedy
approach of which, we undoubtedly pray for, when we put up that
petition of our LORD’s, “thy kingdom come.”

But, though the words were originally spoken to the _Jews_, yet they
are undoubtedly applicable to all believers in all ages, and, when
inlarged on in a proper manner, will afford us suitable matter of
discourse both for sinners and for saints; for such as know GOD, as
well as for such who know him not; and likewise for those, who once
walked in the light of his blessed countenance, but are now backslidden
from him, have their harps hung upon the willows, and are afraid
that their beloved is gone, and will return to their souls no more.
Accordingly, without prefacing this discourse any farther, as I suppose
that a mixed multitude of saints, unconverted sinners, and backsliders,
are present here this day, I shall endeavour so to speak from the words
of the text, that each may have a proper portion, and none be sent
empty away.

In prosecuting this design, I will,

  I. Endeavour to shew, what must pass between JESUS CHRIST and
    our souls before we can say, “that our Maker is our husband.”

  II. The duties of love which they owe to our LORD, who stand in
    so near a relation to him.

  III. The miserable condition of such as cannot yet say, “their
    Maker is their husband.” And

  IV. I shall conclude with a general exhortation to all such
    unhappy souls, to come and match with the dear LORD JESUS. And
    O! may that GOD who blessed _Abraham_’s servant, when he went
    out to seek a wife for his son _Isaac_, bless me, even me also,
    now I am come, I trust, relying on divine strength, to invite
    poor sinners, and recal backsliders, to my Master JESUS!

And _First_, I am to shew, what must pass between JESUS CHRIST and our
souls before we can say, “Our Maker is our husband.”

But before I proceed to this, it may not be improper to observe, that
if any of you, amongst whom I am now preaching the kingdom of GOD,
are enemies to inward religion, and explode the doctrine of inward
feelings, as enthusiasm, cant and nonsense, I shall not be surprized,
if your hearts rise against me whilst I am preaching; for I am about to
discourse on true, vital, internal piety; and an inspired apostle hath
told us, “that the natural man discerneth not the things of the spirit,
because they are spiritually discerned.” But, however, be noble as the
_Bereans_ were; search the Scriptures as they did; lay aside prejudice;
hear like _Nathaniel_, with a true _Israelitish_ ear; be willing to do
the will of GOD; and then you shall, according to the promise of our
dearest LORD, “know of the doctrine, whether it be of GOD, or whether
I speak of myself.”

I would further observe, that if any here do expect fine preaching
from me this day, they will, in all probability, go away disappointed.
For I came not here to shoot over people’s heads; but, if the LORD
shall be pleased to bless me, to reach their hearts. Accordingly, I
shall endeavour to cloath my ideas in such plain language, that the
meanest negro or servant, if GOD is pleased to give a hearing ear,
may understand me; for I am certain, if the poor and unlearned can
comprehend, the learned and rich must.

This being premised, proceed we to shew what must pass between JESUS
CHRIST and our souls, before we can say, “our Maker is our husband.”

Now, that we may discourse more pertinently and intelligibly upon this
point, it may not be amiss to consider, what is necessary to be done,
before a marriage between two parties amongst ourselves, can be said
to be valid in the sight of GOD and man. And that will lead us in a
familiar way, to shew what must be done, or what must pass between us
and JESUS CHRIST, before we can say, “our Maker is our husband.”

And _First_, In all lawful marriages, it is absolutely necessary, that
the parties to be joined together in that holy and honourable estate,
are actually and legally freed from all pre-engagements whatsoever.
“A woman is bound to her husband, (saith the apostle) so long as her
husband liveth.” The same law holds good in respect to the man. And
so likewise, if either party be betrothed and promised, though not
actually married to another, the marriage is not lawful, till that
pre-engagement and promise be fairly and mutually dissolved. Now, it
is just thus between us and the LORD JESUS. For, we are all by nature
born under, and wedded to the law, as a covenant of works. Hence it is
that we are so fond of, and artfully go about, in order to establish
a righteousness of our own. It is as natural for us to do this, as
it is to breathe. Our first parents, _Adam_ and _Eve_, even after the
covenant of grace was revealed to them in that promise, “the seed of
the woman shall bruise the serpent’s head,” reached out their hands,
and would again have taken hold of the tree of life, which they had
forfeited, had not GOD drove them out of paradise, and compelled
them, as it were, to be saved by grace. And thus all their descendants
naturally run to, and want to be saved, partly at least, if not
wholly, by their works. And even gracious souls, who are inwardly
renewed, so far as the old man abides in them, find a strong propensity
this way. Hence it is, that natural men are generally so fond of
_Arminian_ principles. “Do and live,” is the native language of a
proud, self-righteous heart. But before we can say, “our Maker is our
husband,” we must be divorced from our old husband the law; we must
renounce our own righteousness, our own doings and performances, in
point of dependence, whether in whole or part, as dung and dross, for
the excellency of the knowledge of CHRIST JESUS our LORD. For thus
speaks the apostle _Paul_ to the _Romans_, chapter vii. 4. “Ye also are
become dead to the law (as a covenant of works) by the body of CHRIST,
that ye should be married to another, even to him, who is raised from
the dead.” As he also speaketh in another place, “I have espoused
you, as a chaste virgin to JESUS CHRIST.” This was the apostle’s own
case. Whilst he depended on his being a _Hebrew_ of the _Hebrews_,
and thought himself secure, because, as to the outward observation
of the law, he was blameless; he was an entire stranger to the divine
life: but when he began to experience the power of JESUS CHRIST’s
resurrection, we find him, in his epistle to the _Philippians_,
absolutely renouncing all his external privileges, and all his
pharisaical righteousness; “Yea, doubtless, and I count all things but
loss, nay but dung, that I may win CHRIST, and be found in him, not
having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is
through the faith of JESUS CHRIST, the righteousness which is of GOD
by faith.” And thus it must be with us, ere we can say, “our Maker is
our husband.” Though we may not be wrought upon in that extraordinary
way in which the apostle was, yet we must be dead to the law, we must
be espoused as chaste virgins to JESUS CHRIST, and count all external
privileges, and our most splendid performances (as was before observed)
only “as dung and dross, for the excellency of the knowledge of JESUS
CHRIST our LORD.”

But further; before a marriage among us can stand good in law, both
parties must not only be freed from all pre-engagements, but there
must be a mutual consent on both sides. We are not used to marry people
against their wills. This is what the _Jews_ called betrothing, or
espousing, a thing previous to the solemnity of marriage. Thus we
find, the Virgin _Mary_ is said to be espoused to _Joseph_, before they
actually came together, _Matthew_ i. 18. And thus it is among us. Both
parties are previously agreed, and, as it were, espoused to each other,
before we publish, what we call the banns of marriage concerning them.
And so it will be in the spiritual marriage, between JESUS CHRIST and
our souls. Before we are actually married or united to him by faith;
or, to keep to the terms of the text, before we assuredly can say, that
“our Maker is our husband,” we must be made willing people in the day
of GOD’s power, we must be sweetly and effectually persuaded by the
Holy Spirit of GOD, that the glorious _Emmanuel_ is willing to accept
of us, just as we are, and also that we are willing to accept of him
upon his own terms, yea, upon any terms. And when once it comes to
this, the spiritual marriage goes on apace, and there is but one thing
lacking to make it compleat. And what is that? An actual union.

This is absolutely necessary in every lawful marriage among men. There
must be a joining of hands before witnesses, ere they can be deemed
lawfully joined together. Some men indeed of corrupt minds, are apt to
look upon this as a needless ceremony, and think it sufficient to be
married, as they term it, in the sight of GOD. But whence men get such
divinity, I know not. I am positive, not from the Bible; for we there
read that even at the first marriage in paradise, there was something
of outward solemnity; GOD himself (if I may so speak) being there the
priest. For we are told, _Genesis_ ii. 22. that, after GOD had made
the woman, “he brought her unto the man.” And indeed, to lay aside all
manner of outward ceremony in marriage, would be to turn the world into
a den of brute beasts. Men would then take, or forsake as many wives as
they pleased, and we should soon sink into as bad and brutal a state,
as those nations are, amongst whom such practices are allowed of, and
who are utterly destitute of the knowledge of our LORD and Saviour
JESUS CHRIST. Whoever has experienced the power of his resurrection, I
am persuaded will never plead for such a licentious practice. For the
terms made use of in Scripture, to represent the mystical union between
CHRIST and his church, such as, our being “joined to the LORD,” and
“married to JESUS CHRIST,” are all metaphorical expressions, taken
from some analogous practices amongst men. And as persons when married,
though before twain, are now one flesh; so those that are joined to
the LORD, and can truly say, “our Maker is our husband,” are in the
apostle’s language, one spirit. This was typified in the original
marriage of our first parents. When GOD brought _Eve_ to _Adam_, he
received her with joy at his hands, and said, “this is bone of my bone,
and flesh of my flesh.” They had there, primarily, but one name. For
thus speaks the sacred Historian, _Genesis_ v. 1, 2. “In the day that
GOD created man, he blessed them, and called their name _Adam_.” And
why? because they were one flesh, and were to have but one heart. The
self-same terms are made use of in Scripture, to express the believer’s
union with JESUS CHRIST. We are called Christians, after CHRIST’s
name, because made partakers of CHRIST’s nature. Out of his fulness,
believers receive grace for grace. And therefore, the marriage state,
especially by the apostle _Paul_, is frequently made use of, to figure
out to us the real, vital union, between JESUS CHRIST and regenerate
souls. This is termed by the apostle, _Ephesians_ v. 32. “A great
mystery.” But great as it is, we must all experience it, before we
can say assuredly, that “our Maker is our husband.” For what says our
LORD, in that prayer he put up to his Father before his bitter passion?
“Father, I will that those whom thou hast given me, shall be where I am,
that they may be one with thee; even as thou, O Father, and I are one,
I in them, and they in me, that we all may be made perfect in one.” O
infinite condescension! O ineffable union! Hence it is, that believers
are said to be members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones.
Hence it is, that the apostle speaking of himself, says, “I live, yet
not I, but CHRIST liveth in me.” What an expression is that? How much
does it comprehend? And, that we might not think this was something
peculiar to himself, he puts this close question to the _Corinthians_;
“Know ye not, that CHRIST is in you, unless you be reprobates?”
Agreeable to what he says in his epistle to the _Colossians_, “CHRIST
in you, the hope of glory.” And hence it is, that our church, in
the communion-office, directs the minister to acquaint all those who
receive the sacrament worthily, that they are one with CHRIST, and
CHRIST with them; that they dwell in CHRIST, and CHRIST in them. Words
that deserve to be written in letters of gold, and which evidently shew,
what our reformers believed all persons must experience, before they
could truly and assuredly say, that “their Maker is their husband.”

From what has been delivered, may not the poorest and most illiterate
person here present easily know whether or not he is really married
to JESUS CHRIST. Some indeed, I am afraid, are so presumptuous as to
affirm, at least to insinuate, that there is no such thing as knowing,
or being fully assured, whilst here below, whether we are in CHRIST
or not. Or at least, if there be such a thing, it is very rare, or was
only the privilege of the primitive believers. Part of this is true,
and part of this absolutely false. That this glorious privilege of a
full assurance is very rare, is too, too true. And so it is equally too
true, that real christians, comparatively speaking, are very rare also.
But that there is no such thing, or that this was only the privilege
of the first followers of our blessed LORD, is directly opposite to
the word of GOD. “We know (says St. _John_, speaking of believers in
general) that we are his, by the spirit which he hath given us;” and,
“He that believeth hath the witness in himself;” “because you are sons
(saith St. _Paul_) GOD hath sent forth his Spirit into your hearts,
even the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.” Not that
I dare affirm, that there is no real christian, but what has this full
assurance of faith, and clearly knows, that his Maker is his husband.
In speaking thus, I should undoubtedly condemn some of the generation
of GOD’s dear children, who through the prevalence of unbelief,
indwelling sin, spiritual sloth, or it may be, for want of being
informed of the privileges of believers, may walk in darkness, and see
no light; therefore, though I dare not affirm, that a full assurance
of faith is absolutely necessary for the very being, yet I dare assert,
that it is absolutely necessary, for the well being of a christian.
And for my own part, I cannot conceive, how any persons, that pretend
to christianity, can rest satisfied or contented without it. This is
stopping short, on this side _Jordan_, with a witness. And gives others
too much reason to suspect, that such persons, however high their
profession may be, have, as yet, no true saving grace at all.

Men, whose hearts are set on this world’s goods, or, to use our LORD’s
language, “the children of this world,” act not so. I suppose there
is scarce a single merchant in this great congregation, especially
in these troublous times, that will venture out either his ship or
cargo, without first insuring, both against the violence of an enemy,
or a storm. And I suppose there is scarce a single house, of any
considerable value, in any populous town or city, but the owner has
taken out a policy from the fire-office, to insure it, in case of fire.
And can I be so irrational as to think, that there is such a thing as
securing my goods, and my house, and that there is no such thing as
insuring, what is infinitely more valuable, my precious and immortal
soul? Or if there be such a thing, as undoubtedly there is, what
foolishness of folly must it needs be in men, that pretend to be men of
parts, of good sense, and solid reasoning, to be so anxious to secure
their ships against a storm, and their houses against a fire, and at
the same time, not to be unspeakably more solicitous, to take a policy
out of the assurance-office of heaven; even the seal and witness of
the blessed Spirit of GOD, to insure their souls against that storm
of divine wrath, and that vengeance of eternal fire, which will at the
last decisive day come upon all those, who know not GOD, and have not
obeyed his gracious gospel? To affirm therefore, that there is no such
thing as knowing, that “our Maker is our husband;” or that it was a
privilege peculiar to the first christians, to speak in the mildest
terms, is both irrational and unscriptural. Not that all who can say,
their Maker is their husband, can give the same clear and distinct
account of the time, manner and means of their being spiritually united
and married by faith, to the blessed bridegroom of the church. Some
there may be now, as well as formerly, sanctified from the womb. And
others in their infancy and non-age, as it were silently converted.
Such perhaps may say, with a little _Scotch_ maiden, now with GOD, when
I asked her, whether JESUS CHRIST had taken away her old heart, and
given her a new one? “Sir, it may be, (said she,) I cannot directly
tell you the time and place, but this I know, it is done.” And indeed
it is not so very material, though no doubt it is very satisfactory,
if we cannot relate all the minute and particular circumstances, that
attended our conversion; if so be we are truly converted now, and can
say, the work is done, and that, “our Maker is our husband.” And I
question, whether there is one single adult believer, now on earth, who
lived before conversion, either in a course of secret or open sin, but
can, in a good degree, give an account of the beginning and progress of
the work of grace in his heart.

What think ye? Need I tell any married persons in this congregation,
that they must go to the university, and learn the languages, before
they can tell whether they are married or not? Or, if their marriage
was to be doubted, could they not, think you, bring their certificates,
to certify the time and place of their marriage; and the minister that
joined them together in that holy state? And if you are adult, and
are indeed married to JESUS CHRIST, though you may be unlearned, and
what the world terms illiterate men, cannot you tell me the rise and
progress, and consummation of the spiritual marriage, between JESUS
CHRIST and your souls? Know you not the time, when you were first under
the drawings of the Father, and JESUS began to woo you for himself?
Tell me, O man, tell me, O woman, knowest thou not the time, or at
least, knowest thou not, that there was a time, when the blessed Spirit
of GOD stripped thee of the fig-leaves of thy own righteousness, hunted
thee out of the trees of the garden of thy performances, forced thee
from the embraces of thy old husband the law, and made thee to abhor
thy own righteousness, as so many filthy rags? Canst thou not remember,
when, after a long struggle with unbelief, JESUS appeared to thee,
as altogether lovely, mighty and willing to save? And canst thou not
reflect upon a season, when thy own stubborn heart was made to bend;
and thou wast made willing to embrace him, as freely offered to thee in
the everlasting gospel? And canst thou not, with pleasure unspeakable,
reflect on some happy period, some certain point of time, in which a
sacred something (perhaps thou couldst not then well tell what) did
captivate, and fill thy heart, so that thou could say, in a rapture
of holy surprize, and extacy of divine love, “My LORD and my GOD! my
beloved is mine, and I am his; I know that my Redeemer liveth;” or, to
keep to the words of our text, “My Maker is my husband.” Surely, amidst
this great and solemn assembly, there are many that can answer these
questions in the affirmative. For these are transactions, not easily
to be forgotten; and the day of our espousals is, generally, a very
remarkable day; a day to be had in everlasting remembrance.

And can any of you indeed, upon good grounds say, that your Maker is
your husband? May I not then (as it is customary to wish persons joy
who are just entered into the marriage state) congratulate you upon
your happy change, and wish you joy, with all my heart? Sure am I that
there was joy in heaven on the day of your espousals: and why should
not the blessed news occasion joy on earth? May I not address you in
the language of our LORD to the women that came to visit his sepulchre,
“All hail!” for ye are highly favoured. Blessed are ye among men,
blessed are ye among women! All generations shall call you blessed.
What! “is your Maker your husband? the holy one of _Israel_ your
Redeemer?” Sing, O heavens, and rejoice, O earth! What an amazing
stoop is this! What a new thing has GOD created on the earth! Do not
your hearts, O believers, burn within you, when meditating on this
unspeakable condescension of the high and lofty one that inhabiteth
eternity? Whilst you are musing, does not the sacred fire of divine
love kindle in your souls? And, out of the abundance of your hearts,
do you not often speak with your tongues, and call upon all that is
within you, to laud and magnify your Redeemer’s holy name? Is not that
GOD-exalting, self-abasing expression frequently in your mouths, “Why
me, LORD, why me?” And are you not often constrained to break out
into that devout exclamation of _Solomon_, when the glory of the LORD
filled the temple, “And will GOD indeed dwell with man?” ungrateful,
rebellious, ill, and hell-deserving man! O, my brethren, my heart is
enlarged towards you! Tears, while I am speaking, are ready to gush out.
But they are tears of love and joy. How shall I give it vent? How shall
I set forth thy happiness, O believer, thou bride of GOD! And is thy
Maker thy husband? Is his name “The LORD of hosts?” Whom then shouldst
thou fear? And is thy Redeemer the holy one of _Israel_? the GOD of the
whole earth should he be called! of whom then shouldst thou be afraid?
He that toucheth thee, toucheth the very apple of GOD’s eye. “The
very hairs of thy head are all numbered;” and “it is better that a man
should have a milstone tied round his neck, and be drowned in the sea,
than that he should justly offend thee.”

All hail, (I must again repeat it) thou Lamb’s bride! for thou art
all glorious within, and comely, through the comeliness thy heavenly
bridegroom hath put upon thee. Thy garment is indeed of wrought gold;
and, ere long, the King shall bring thee forth with a raiment of
needle-work, and present thee blameless before his Father, without
spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing. In the mean while, well shall it
be with you, and happy shall you be, who are married to JESUS CHRIST:
for all that CHRIST has, is yours. “He is made of GOD to you, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and eternal redemption.” “Whether _Paul_,
or _Cephas_, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or
things to come; all are yours.” All his attributes are engaged for your
preservation, and all things shall work together for your good, who
love GOD, and, by being thus married to the LORD JESUS, give an evident
proof that you are called according to his purpose. What say you? When
you meditate on these things, are you not frequently ready to cry out,
What shall we render unto the LORD for all these mercies, which, of
his free unmerited grace, he hath been pleased to bestow upon us? For,
though you are dead to the law, as a covenant of works, yet you are
alive to the law as a rule of life, and are in, or under the law (for
either expression seems to denote the same thing) to your glorious
husband, JESUS CHRIST.

Pass we on therefore to the

_Second_ general head, under which I was to shew, what duties of love
they owe to JESUS CHRIST, who are so happy as to be able to say, “My
Maker is my husband.”

I say, duties of love. For being now married to JESUS CHRIST, you
work not for life, but from life. The love of GOD constrains you, so
that, if there was no written law, or supposing JESUS would set you
at liberty from his yoke, so far as grace prevails in your hearts, you
would say, we love our blessed bridegroom, and will not go from him.

And what does the LORD require of you? That we may speak on this head
as plainly as may be, we shall pursue the method we begun with; and,
by carrying on the allegory, and examining what is required of truly
christian wives, under the gospel, infer what our LORD may justly
demand of those who are united to him by faith, and can therefore say,
“our Maker is our husband.”

And here let us go to the law and to the testimony. What says the
scripture? “Let the wife see that she _reverence_ her husband.” It is,
no doubt, the duty of married women to think highly of their husbands.
From whom may husbands justly command respect, if not from their wives?
The apostle’s expression is emphatical. “Let the wife see that she
reverence her husband;” thereby implying, that women, some of them
at least, are too prone to disrespect their husbands; as _Michal_,
_Saul_’s daughter, despised _David_ in her heart, when she tauntingly
said, 2 _Samuel_ vi. 20. “How glorious was the king of _Israel_ to-day,
who uncovered himself to-day in the eyes of the handmaids of his
servants, as one of the vain fellows shamlessly uncovereth himself.”

This is a source and fountain, from whence many domestic evils
frequently flow. Women should remember the character that husbands
sustain in scripture. They are to them, what CHRIST is to the church.
And it is mentioned to the honour of _Sarah_, that she called _Abraham_
“Lord.” “Shall I have a child who am old, _my Lord_ being old also?” It
is remarkable, there are but two good words in that whole sentence, “my
Lord,” (for all the others are the language of unbelief) and yet those
two words the Holy Ghost mentions to her eternal honour, and buries,
as it were, the rest in oblivion. “Even as _Sarah_ (says St. _Peter_)
obeyed _Abraham_, calling him Lord.” An evident proof how pleasing it
is in the sight of GOD, for women in the married state to reverence and
respect their husbands. Not that husbands therefore should lord it over
their wives, or require too much respect at their hands. This would be
unchristian, as well as ungenerous, indeed. They ought rather, as GOD
has taken such care to keep up their authority, commanding their wives
to reverence and respect them; they ought, I say, to be doubly careful,
that they live so holy and unblameable, as to lay their wives under no
temptation to despise them. But to return from this digression. Does
the apostle say, “Let the wife see that she reverence her husband?” May
I not pertinently apply this caution to you who are married to JESUS
CHRIST? See to it that you reverence and respect your husband. I say,
_see to it_. For the devil will be often suggesting to you hard and
mean thoughts against your husband. It was thus he beset our mother
_Eve_, even in a state of innocence. He would fain persuade her to
entertain hard thoughts of her glorious benefactor. “What, has GOD
said, ye shall not eat of the trees of the garden?” Has he been so
cruel to put you here in a beautiful garden only to vex and teize you?
This he made use of as an inlet to all his succeeding insinuations. And
this trade he is still pursuing, and will be pursuing to the very end
of time. Besides, in the eyes of the world, JESUS CHRIST has no form
or comeliness that they should desire him; and therefore, unless you
“watch and pray,” you will be led into temptation, and not keep up such
high thoughts of your blessed JESUS as he justly deserves. In this you
can never exceed. Women, perhaps, may sometimes think too highly of,
and, through excess of love, idolize their earthly comforts. But it is
impossible for you to think too highly of your heavenly husband, JESUS
CHRIST.

Farther, what says the apostle in his epistle to the _Ephesians_?
Speaking of the marriage state, he says, “The wife is the _glory_ of
her husband;” as though he had said, a christian wife should so behave,
and so walk, as to be a credit to her husband. As _Abigail_ was an
honour to _Nabal_, and by her sweet deportment made up, in some degree,
for her husband’s churlishness. This is to be a help-meet indeed. Such
a woman will be praised in the gate; and her husband get glory, and
meet with respect on her account. And ought a woman to be the glory of
her husband? How much more ought you, that are the Lamb’s bride, so to
live, and so to walk, as to bring glory, and gain respect, to the cause
and interest of your husband JESUS? This is what the apostle every
where supposes, when he would draw a parallel between a temporal and
spiritual marriage. “The woman, is the glory of her husband, even as
the church is the glory of CHRIST.” Agreeable to this, he tells the
_Corinthians_, “Whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all
to the glory of GOD;” and as he also speaks to the _Thessalonians_, 1
_Thessalonians_ ii. 11, 12. “As you know how we exhorted, and comforted,
and charged every one of you (as a father doth his children) that you
would walk worthy of GOD who hath called you to his kingdom, and his
glory.” What an expression is here! “That you would walk worthy of
GOD.” O! how ought this, and such like texts, to stir up your pure
minds, O believers, so to have your conversation in this world, that
you may be what the apostle says some particular persons were, even
“the glory of CHRIST.” You are his glory; he rejoices over you with
singing; and you should so walk, that all who know and hear of you,
may glorify CHRIST in you.

_Subjection_, is another duty, that is enjoined married women, in the
word of GOD. They are to “be subject to their own husbands in every
thing,” every lawful thing: “For, the husband is the head of the wife,
even as CHRIST is the head of the church.” And knowing how unapt some
base minds would be to submit to the husband’s authority, he takes
care to enforce this duty of subjection by many cogent and powerful
arguments. “For _Adam_ was first made, and not _Eve_. Neither was the
man made for the woman, but the woman for the man.” And again, “The man
was not first in the transgression, but the woman.” Upon which accounts,
subjection was imposed on her as part of her punishment. “Thy desire
(says GOD) shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule (though not
tyrannize) over thee.” So that, to use the words of pious Mr. _Henry_,
those who attempt to usurp authority over their husbands, not only
contradict a divine command, but thwart a divine curse. And if women
are to be subject to their own husbands in every thing, how much more
ought believers, whether men or women, to be subject to JESUS CHRIST:
for he is the head of the church. He has bought her by his blood.
Believers therefore are not their own, but are under the highest
obligations to glorify and obey JESUS CHRIST, in their bodies and their
souls, which are his. Add to this, that his service, as it is admirably
expressed in one of our collects, is perfect freedom. His commandments
holy, just, and good. And therefore it is your highest privilege, O
believers, to submit to, and obey them. Earthly husbands may be so
mean as to impose some things upon their wives, merely to shew their
authority; but it is not so with JESUS CHRIST. He can and does impose
nothing, but what immediately conduces to our present, as well as
future good. In doing, nay, in suffering for JESUS CHRIST, there is
a present unspeakable reward. And therefore I may say to believers,
as the blessed Virgin said to the servants at the marriage in _Cana_,
“Whatsoever he says unto you, do it.” “For his yoke is easy, and his
burden is light.” And I believe it might easily be proved in a few
minutes, that all the disorders which are now in the world, whether in
church or state, are owing to a want of being universally, unanimously,
chearfully, and perseveringly conformed to the laws and example of our
LORD and Saviour JESUS CHRIST.

Again, _Faithfulness_ in the marriage state, is strictly enjoined
in the scriptures of truth. “Marriage is honourable in all, and the
bed undefiled. But whoremongers and adulterers GOD will judge.” Nay,
adultery is an iniquity to be punished by the earthly judges; it
dissolves the marriage relation. “For the man has not power over his
own body, but the woman; neither has the woman power over her own body,
but the man.” The heathens themselves have been taught this by the
light of nature; and adultery, among some of them, is punished with
immediate death. And ought married persons to be thus careful to keep
the marriage-bed undefiled, how carefully then ought believers to
keep their souls chaste, pure, and undefiled, now they are espoused to
JESUS CHRIST? For there is such a thing as spiritual adultery; “O ye
adulterers and adulteresses,” saith St. _James_. And GOD frequently
complains of his people’s playing the harlot. Hence it is, that St.
_John_, in the most endearing manner, exhorts believers to “keep
themselves from idols.” For the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh,
and pride of life, are always ready to steal away our hearts from JESUS
CHRIST. And every time we place our affections upon any thing more
than CHRIST, we do undoubtedly commit spiritual adultery. For we admit
a creature to rival the Creator, who is GOD over all, blessed for
evermore. “Little children, therefore, keep yourselves from idols.”

But it is time for me to draw towards the close of this head.
_Fruitfulness_ was a blessing promised by GOD to the first happy pair;
“Increase and multiply, and replenish the earth.” “Lo, children, and
the fruit of the womb, (says the Psalmist) are a gift and heritage,
which cometh of the LORD.” And so, if we are married to JESUS CHRIST,
we must be fruitful. In what? In every good word and work: for thus
speaks the Apostle, in his epistle to the _Romans_: “Wherefore, my
brethren, ye also are become dead to the law, by the body of CHRIST,
that ye should be married to another, even to him who is raised from
the dead.” What follows? “That we should bring forth fruit unto GOD.”
Glorious words, and proper to be considered in a peculiar manner,
by such who would explode the doctrine of free justification, as an
_Antinomian_ doctrine, and as though it destroyed good works. No;
it establishes, and lays a solid foundation, whereon to build the
superstructure of good works. _Titus_ is therefore commanded to “exhort
believers to be careful to maintain good works.” And “herein (says
our LORD) is my Father glorified, that ye bring forth much fruit. Let
your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven:” with a multitude of passages
to the same purpose.

Moreover, it is required of wives, that they not only love and
reverence their husbands, but that they also love and respect their
_husband’s friends_. And if we are married to JESUS CHRIST, we shall
not only reverence the bridegroom, but we shall also love and honour
the bridegroom’s friends. “By this, shall all men know that ye are my
disciples, if ye love one another.” “By this we know, (says the beloved
disciple) that we have passed from death to life, because we love
the brethren.” Observe, _the brethren_, indefinitely, of whatever
denomination. And this love must be “without dissimulation, and with
a pure heart fervently.” This was the case of the primitive christians.
They were all of one heart, and of one mind. It was said of them
(O that it could be said of us!) “See how these christians love one
another!” They were of the same spirit as a good woman of _Scotland_
was, who, when she saw a great multitude, as is customary in that
country, coming from various parts to receive the blessed sacrament,
saluted them with a “Come in, ye blessed of the LORD, I have an house
that will hold an hundred of you, and a heart that will hold ten
thousand.” Let us go and do likewise.

Once more. Persons that are married, take one another _for better_ or
_for worse_, for richer or for poorer, to love and to cherish each
other in sickness and in health. And if we are married to JESUS CHRIST,
we shall be willing to bear his _cross_, as well as to wear his _crown_.
“If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, take up his cross,
and follow me.” Neither will they be compelled to do this, as _Simon_
of _Cyrene_ was, but they will be volunteers in his service; they will
cry out, Crown him, crown him, when others are crying out, “Crucify
him, crucify him.” They will never leave or forsake him, but willingly
follow the Captain of their salvation, though it be through a sea of
blood.

I might run the parallel still further, and also enlarge upon the hints
already given; but I fear I have said enough already to reproach most
believers; I am sure I have said more than enough to abash and upbraid
myself. For alas! how vilely, treacherously, and ungratefully have we
behaved towards our spiritual husband, the dear LORD JESUS, ever since
the day of our espousals? Had our friends, or even the wives of our
own bosoms, behaved to us as we have behaved to our great and best
friend, our glorious husband, we should have broken off our friendship,
and sued for a bill of divorcement long ago. Under our first love,
what promises did we make to him? But how frowardly have we behaved
ourselves in this covenant? How little have we reverenced him? How
often has our Beloved been no more to us than another beloved? How
little have we lived to his glory? Have we not been a shame and
reproach to his gospel? Have we not crucified him afresh, and has he
not been sorely wounded in the house of his friends? Nay, has not his
holy name been blasphemed through our means? For alas! how little have
we obeyed him? How careless and indifferent have we been, whether we
pleased him or not? We have often said, indeed, when commanded by him
to go work in his vineyard, We go, LORD; but alas! we went not. Or if
we did go, with what reluctance has it been? How unwilling to watch
with our dear Lord and Master, only one hour? And of his sabbaths, how
often have we said, What a weariness is this? As for our adulteries,
and spiritual fornications, how frequent, how aggravated have they
been? Have not idols of all sorts, been suffered to fill up the room of
the ever-blessed JESUS in our hearts? You that love him in sincerity,
will not be offended if I tell you, that the xvith chapter of _Ezekiel_
gives, in my opinion, a lively description of our behaviour towards
our LORD. We were, like base-born children, cast out in the field to
the loathing of our persons: no eye pitied or had compassion on us.
JESUS passed by, saw us polluted in our own blood, and said unto us,
“Live,” _i. e._ preserved us, even in our natural state, from death.
And when his time of love was come, he spread the skirt of his imputed
righteousness over us, and covered the nakedness of our souls, entered
into covenant with us, and we became his. He washed us also with
water, even in the laver of regeneration, and thoroughly washed us
by his precious blood, from the guilt of all our sins. He cloathed
us also with broidered work, and decked us with ornaments, even with
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. We did eat fine
flour and honey at his ordinances, and we fed on JESUS CHRIST in our
hearts by faith, with thanksgiving. In short, we were made exceeding
beautiful, and the kingdom of GOD was erected in our hearts. We were
renowned among our neighbours for our love to GOD, and all that knew us
took knowledge of us, that we had been with JESUS. But alas! how have
we fallen, who were once sons of the morning! How have we trusted in
our own beauty, have grown spiritually proud, and provoked our patient
and unspeakably long-suffering LORD to anger? Where is that ardent love
we spake of, when we told him, that, though we should die for him, we
would not deny him in any wise? How desperately wicked, and deceitful
above all things, have we proved our hearts to be, since we have done
all these things, even the work of an imperious woman? These are great
and numerous charges; but great and numerous as they are, there is not
a single believer here present, but, if he knows his own heart, may
plead guilty to some, or all of them. But this is a tender point: I see
you concerned: your tears, O believers, are a proof of the anguish of
your souls. And can any of us give any reason, why JESUS CHRIST should
not give us a bill of divorcement, and put us away? May he not justly
speak to us as he did to his adultress _Israel_, in the forementioned
xvith of _Ezekiel_, “Wherefore, O harlot, hear the word of the LORD; I
will judge thee as women that break wedlock, and shed blood, are judged.
I will give thee blood in fury and jealousy, because thou hast not
remembered the days of thy youth, but hast fretted me in all these
things. Behold, therefore, I also will recompence thy way upon thy head.
I will even deal with thee as thou hast done, who hast despised the
oath, in breaking the covenant, the marriage contract that was between
us.” This, I am persuaded, you will confess to be the treatment which
we all most justly deserve. But be not overwhelmed with over-much
sorrow: for though the LORD our GOD is a jealous GOD, and will
certainly ♦visit our offences with a rod, and our backslidings with
a spiritual scourge, yet his loving-kindness will he not utterly take
from us, nor suffer his truth to fail. Though we have changed, yet
he changeth not: He abideth faithful: his loving-kindness abideth for
evermore. Hark! how sweetly he speaks to his backsliding people of
old; “O _Israel_, thou hast destroyed thyself, but in me is thy help.
I will heal their backsliding, and love them freely.” And in the verses
immediately following the words of the text, how comfortably does he
address his espoused people! “In a little wrath, I hid my face from
thee for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on
thee, saith the LORD thy Redeemer. For this is as the waters of _Noah_
unto me: for as I have sworn, that the waters of _Noah_ should no more
go over the earth; so have I sworn, that I would not be wroth with
thee, nor rebuke thee. For the mountains shall depart, and the hills
be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall
the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the LORD that hath mercy
on thee.” O that this goodness may lead us to repentance! O that this
unparalleled, infinite, unchangeable love, may constrain us to an
universal, uniform, chearful, unanimous, persevering obedience to all
the commands of GOD!

  ♦ “vsit” replaced with “visit”

Brethren, my heart is enlarged towards you, and I could dwell a long
while upon the many great and precious invitations that are made to
backsliders, to return to their first love, and do their first works:
but it is high time for me, if, as was proposed,

III. I give to every one their proper portion; to speak to those poor
souls, who know nothing of this blessed Bridegroom of the church, and
consequently cannot yet say, “My Maker is my husband.”

Ah! I pity you from my inmost soul; I could weep over, and for you,
though perhaps you will not weep for yourselves. But surely you would
weep, and howl too, did you know the miserable condition those are in,
who are not married to JESUS CHRIST. Will you give me leave (I think
I speak it in much love) to inform you, that if you are not married to
JESUS CHRIST, you are married to the law, the world, the flesh, and the
devil, neither of which can make you happy; but all, on the contrary,
concur to make you miserable. Hear ye not, ye that are married to the
law, and seek to be justified in the sight of GOD, partly, at least,
if not wholly, by your own works, what the law saith to those that are
under it, as a covenant of works? “Cursed is every one that continueth
not in all things that are written in the book of the law, to do them.”
Every word breathes threatening and slaughter to poor fallen creatures.
Cursed, both here and hereafter, be this man, and every one, naturally
engendered of the offspring of _Adam_, without exception, that
continueth not, even to the very end of life, in all things; not only
in some, or many, but in all things, that are written in the book of
the law, to do them, in the utmost perfection: for “he that offendeth
in one point, is guilty of all.” So that, according to the tenor of the
covenant of works, whosoever is guilty of one wicked thought, word, or
action, is under the curse of an angry sin-avenging GOD. “For as many
as are under the law, are under the curse.” And do you know what it is
to be under the curse of GOD, and to have the Wrath of GOD abide upon
you? If you did, I believe you would not be so unwilling to be divorced
from the law, and be espoused, as chaste virgins, to JESUS CHRIST.

And why are ye so wedded to the world? Did it ever prove faithful or
satisfactory to any of its votaries? Has not _Solomon_ reckoned up the
sum total of worldly happiness? And what does it amount to? “Vanity,
vanity, saith the preacher, all is vanity,” nay he adds, “and vexation
of spirit.” And has not a greater than _Solomon_ informed us, that
a man’s life, the happiness of a man’s life, doth not consist in the
things which he possesseth? Besides, “know ye not that the friendship
of this world is enmity with GOD; so that whosoever will be a friend
to the world, (to the corrupt customs and vices of it) is an enemy to
GOD?” And what better reasons can you give for being wedded to your
lusts? Might not the poor slaves in the gallies, as reasonably be
wedded to their chains? For do not your lusts fetter down your souls
from GOD? Do they not lord it, and have they not dominion over you? Do
not they say, Come, and ye come; Go, and ye go; Do this, and ye do it?
And is not he or she that liveth in pleasure, dead, whilst he liveth?
And above all, how can ye bear the thoughts of being wedded to the
devil, as every natural man is: for thus speaks the scripture, “He
now ruleth in the children of disobedience.” And how can ye bear to be
ruled by one, who is such a professed open enemy to the most high and
holy GOD? Who will make a drudge of you, whilst you live, and be your
companion in endless and extreme torment, after you are dead? For thus
will our LORD say to those on the left hand, “Depart from me, ye cursed,
into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.” But,

IV. Will you permit me, O sinners, that I may draw towards a close of
this discourse, to propose a better match to your souls. This is a part
of the discourse which I long to come to, it being my heart’s desire,
and earnest prayer to GOD, that your souls may be saved. “And now, O
LORD GOD Almighty, thou Father of mercies, and GOD of all consolations,
thou GOD and Father of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, who hast promised to give
thy Son the heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of
the earth for his possession, send me good speed this day, O LORD, send
me now prosperity. Behold, I stand here without the camp, bearing a
little of thy dear Son’s sacred reproach! Hear me, O LORD, hear me, and
according to thy word, let thy dear, thine only begotten Son, see of
the travel of his soul, and be satisfied! O help me so to speak, that
many may believe on, and cleave unto thy blessed, thine holy child
JESUS!”

But who am I, that I should undertake to recommend the blessed JESUS to
others, who am myself altogether unworthy to take his sacred name into
my polluted lips? Indeed, my brethren, I do not count myself worthy
of such an honour; but since it has pleased him, in whom all fulness
dwells, to count me worthy, and put me into the ministry, the very
stones would cry out against me, did I not attempt, at least, to lisp
out his praise; and earnestly recommend the ever-blessed JESUS to the
choice of all.

Thus _Abraham_’s faithful servant behaved, when sent out to fetch a
wife for his master _Isaac_. He spake of the riches and honours, which
GOD had conferred on him; but what infinitely greater honours and
riches, has the GOD and Father of our LORD JESUS, conferred on his only
Son, to whom I now invite every christless sinner! To you, therefore,
I call, O ye sons of men, assuring you, there is every thing in JESUS
that your hearts can desire, or hunger and thirst after. Do people in
disposing of themselves or their children in marriage, generally covet
to be matched with persons of _great names_? Let this consideration
serve as a motive to stir you up to match with JESUS. For GOD the
Father has given him a name above every name; he has upon his vesture,
and upon his thigh, a name written, “The King of kings, and the Lord
of lords;” and here in the text we are told, “The Lord of Hosts is his
name.” Nor has he an empty title, but power equivalent; for he is a
prince, as well as a saviour. “All power is given unto him, both in
heaven and on earth:” “The GOD of the whole earth, (says our text) he
shall be called.” The government of men, of the church, and of devils,
is put upon his shoulders: “Thrones, principalities and powers, are
made subject unto him; by him kings reign, and princes decree justice;
he setteth up one, and putteth down another: and of his kingdom there
shall be no end.” Will _riches_ be an inducement unto you to come
and match with JESUS? Why then, I can tell you, the riches of JESUS
are infinite: for unto me, who am less than the least of all saints,
is this grace given, that I should preach to poor sinners, the
unsearchable riches of JESUS CHRIST. I appeal to you that are his
saints, whether you have not found this true, by happy experience; and
though some of you, may have been acquainted with him thirty, forty,
fifty years ago, do you not find his riches are yet unsearchable, and
as much past finding out, as they were the very first moment in which
you gave him your hearts!

Would you match with a _wise husband_? Haste then, sinners, come away
to JESUS: He is the fountain of wisdom, and makes all that come unto
him, wise unto salvation; “He is the wisdom of the Father: the LORD
possessed him in the beginning of his way, before his works of old.
When he prepared the heavens, he was there; when he appointed the
foundations of the earth, then was he with him, as one brought up with
him; he was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him.” As he
is wise, so is he _holy_; and therefore, in the words of our text, he
is stiled, “The Redeemer, the Holy One of _Israel_:” and by the angel
_Gabriel_, “That holy Thing.” The apostles, addressing GOD the Father,
stile him his “holy child JESUS:” and the spirits of just men made
perfect, and the angels in heaven, cease not day or night, saying,
“Holy, holy, holy.” Nor is his _beauty_ inferior to his wisdom or
holiness; the seraphs veil their faces, when they appear before him:
“He is the chiefest among ten thousand, nay, he is altogether lovely.”
And, as he is altogether lovely, so is he altogether _loving_: his
name and his nature is Love. GOD, GOD in CHRIST is love: love in the
abstract. And in this has he manifested his love, in that, whilst we
were yet sinners, nay open enemies, JESUS, in his own due time, died
for the ungodly. He loved us so as to give himself for us. O what
manner of love is this! What was _Jacob_’s love to _Rachel_, in
comparison of the love which JESUS bore to a perishing world! He became
a curse for us. For it is written, “Cursed is every man that hangeth
upon a tree.” What _Zipporah_ said to her husband improperly, JESUS may
say properly to his spouse the church, “A bloody wife hast thou been
to me, because of the crucifixion.” For he has purchased her with his
own blood. And having once loved his people, he loves them unto the
end. His love, like himself, is from everlasting to everlasting. He
hates putting away: though we change, yet he changeth not: he abideth
faithful. When we are married here, there comes in that shocking clause,
to use the words of holy Mr. _Boston_, “Till death us doth part;” but
death itself shall not separate a true believer from the love of GOD,
which is in CHRIST JESUS his Lord: for he will never cease loving his
Bride, till he has loved her to heaven, and presented her before his
Father, without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing. Nay, his love will,
as it were, but be beginning, through the endless ages of eternity.

And now, Sirs, what say you? Shall I put that question to you, which
_Rebecca_’s relations, upon a proposal of marriage, put to her? “Will
ye go with the man?” With the God-man, this infinitely great, this
infinitely powerful, this all-wise, all-holy, altogether lovely,
ever-loving JESUS? What objection have you to make against such a
gracious offer? One would imagine, you had not a single one; but it is
to be feared, through the prevalency of unbelief, and the corruption of
your desperately wicked deceitful hearts, you are ready to urge several.
Methinks I hear some of you say within yourselves, “We like the
proposal, but alas! we are poor.” Are you so? If that be all, you may,
notwithstanding, be welcome to JESUS: “For has not GOD chosen the poor
of this world, to make them rich in faith, and heirs of his everlasting
kingdom?” And what says that Saviour, to whom I am now inviting you?
“Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.”
And what says his Apostle concerning him? “Though he was rich, yet for
our sakes he became poor, that we through his poverty might be made
rich.” But say you, “We are not only poor, but we are in debt; we owe
GOD ten thousand talents, and have nothing to pay;” but that need not
keep you back: for GOD the Father, from the LORD JESUS, his dearly
beloved Son, has received double for all believers sins: the blood of
JESUS cleanseth from them all. But you are blind, and miserable, and
naked; to whom then should you fly for succour, but to JESUS, who came
to open the eyes of the blind, to seek and save the miserable and lost,
and cloath the naked with his perfect and spotless righteousness. And
now, what can hinder your espousals with the dear and ever-blessed Lamb
of GOD? I know but of one thing, that dreadful sin of unbelief. But
this is my comfort, JESUS died for unbelief, as well as for other sins,
and has promised to send down the Holy Spirit to convince the world
of this sin in particular: “If I go not away, the Comforter will not
come unto you; but if I go away, I will send the Comforter, and he
will convince the world of sin.” What sin? of unbelief; “because they
believe not on me.” O that this promise may be so fulfilled in your
hearts, and JESUS may so become the author of divine faith in your
souls, that you may be able to send me the same message as a good woman
in _Scotland_, on her dying bed, sent me by a friend: “Tell him, (says
she) for his comfort, that at such a time he married me to the LORD
JESUS.” This would be comfort indeed. Not that we can marry you to
CHRIST: No; the Holy Ghost must tie the marriage knot. But such honour
have all GOD’s ministers; under him they espouse poor sinners to JESUS
CHRIST. “I have espoused you (says St. _Paul_) as a chaste virgin to
JESUS CHRIST.” O that you may say, We will go with the man; then will
I bow my head, as _Abraham_’s servant did, and go with joy and tell my
Master, that he has not left his poor servant destitute this day: then
shall I rejoice in your felicity. For I know, my Master will take you
into the banqueting-house of his ordinances, and his banner over you
shall be love. That this may be the happy case of you all, may the
glorious GOD grant, for the sake of JESUS his dearly beloved Son, the
glorious bridegroom of his church; to whom, with the Father, and the
Holy Spirit, be all honour and glory, now and for evermore. _Amen_, and
_Amen_.




                             SERMON XIII.

                       The Potter and the Clay.


                         JEREMIAH xviii. 1‒6.

  _The word which came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying, Arise,
    and go down to the potter’s house, and there I will cause thee
    to hear my words. Then I went down to the potter’s house, and
    behold, he wrought a work on the wheels. And the vessel that
    he made of clay was marred in the hands of the potter, so he
    made it again another vessel, as seemed good to the potter to
    make it. Then the word of the Lord came to me, saying, O house
    of Israel, cannot I do with you as this potter? saith the Lord.
    Behold, as the clay is in the potter’s hand, so are ye in mine
    hand, O house of Israel._

AT sundry times, and in divers manners, GOD was pleased to speak to
our fathers by the prophets, before he spoke to us in these last days
by his Son. To _Elijah_, he revealed himself by a small still voice.
To _Jacob_, by a dream. To _Moses_, he spake face to face. Sometimes
he was pleased to send a favourite prophet on some especial errand;
and whilst he was thus employed, vouchsafed to give him a particular
message, which he was ordered to deliver without reserve to all the
inhabitants of the land. A very instructive instance of this kind we
have recorded in the passage now read to you. The first verse informs
us that it was a word, or message, which came immediately from the
LORD to the prophet _Jeremiah_. At what time, or how the prophet was
employed when it came, we are not told. Perhaps, whilst he was praying
for those who would not pray for themselves: Perhaps, near the morning,
when he was slumbering or musing on his bed. For the word came to
him, saying, “Arise.” And what must he do when risen? He must “go
down to the potter’s house” (the prophet knew where to find it) “and
there (says the great Jehovah) I will cause thee to hear my words.”
_Jeremiah_ does not confer with flesh and blood, he does not object
that it was dark or cold, or desire that he might have his message
given him there, but without the least hesitation is immediately
obedient to the heavenly vision. “Then (says he) I went down to the
potter’s house, and behold he wrought a work upon the wheels.” Just as
he was entering into the house or workshop, the potter, it seems, had a
vessel upon his wheel. And was there any thing so extraordinary in this,
that it should be ushered in with the word BEHOLD? What a dreaming
visionary, or superstitious enthusiast, would this _Jeremiah_ be
accounted, even by many who read his prophecies with seeming respect,
was he alive now? But this was not the first time _Jeremiah_ had heard
from heaven in this manner. He therefore willingly obeyed; and had you
or I accompanied him to the potter’s house, I believe we should have
seen him silently, but intensely waiting upon his great and all-wise
Commander, to know wherefore he sent him thither. Methinks I see him
all attention. He takes notice, that “the vessel was of clay;” but as
he held it in his hand, and turned round the wheel, in order to work it
into some particular form, “it was marred in the hands of the potter,”
and consequently unfit for the use he before intended to put it to. And
what becomes of this marred vessel? Being thus marred, I suppose, the
potter, without the least imputation of injustice, might have thrown it
aside, and taken up another piece of clay in its room. But he did not.
“He made it again another vessel.” And does the potter call a council
of his domestics, to enquire of them what kind of vessel they would
advise him to make of it? No, in no wise. “He made it again another
vessel, as seemed good to the potter to make it.”

“Then,” adds _Jeremiah_, whilst he was in the way of duty――then――whilst
he was mentally crying, LORD what wouldst thou have me to do? “Then
the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, O house of _Israel_, cannot
I do with you as this potter? saith the LORD. Behold, as the clay is
in the hands of the potter (marred, and unfit for the first designed
purpose) so are ye in mine hand, O house of _Israel_.” At length, then,
_Jeremiah_ hath his sermon given to him: short, but popular. It was
to be delivered to the whole house of _Israel_, princes, priests, and
people: short, but pungent, even sharper than a two-edged sword. What!
says the sovereign LORD of heaven and earth, must I be denied the
privilege of a common potter? May I not do what I will with my own?
“Behold, as the clay is in the potter’s hands, so are ye in mine hands,
O house of _Israel_. I made and formed you into a people, and blessed
you above any other nation under heaven: but, O _Israel_, thou by thy
backslidings hast destroyed thyself. As the potter therefore might
justly have thrown aside his marred clay, so may I justly unchurch
and unpeople you. But what if I should come over the mountains of your
guilt, heal your backslidings, revive my work in the midst of the years,
and cause your latter end greatly to increase? Behold, as the clay
is in the hands of the potter, lying at his disposal, either to be
destroyed or formed into another vessel, so are ye in my hands, O
house of _Israel_: I may either reject, and thereby ruin you, or I
may revisit and revive you according to my own sovereign good will and
pleasure, and who shall say unto me, what dost thou?”

This seems to be the genuine interpretation, and primary intention
of this beautiful part of holy writ. But waving all further enquiries
about its primary design or meaning, I shall now proceed to shew, that
what the glorious Jehovah here says of the house of _Israel_ in general,
is applicable to every individual of mankind in particular. And as I
presume this may be done, without either wire-drawing scripture on the
one hand, or wresting it from its original meaning on the other, not
to detain you any longer, I shall, from the passage thus explained
and paraphrased, deduce, and endeavour to enlarge on these two general
heads.

_First_, I shall undertake to prove, that every man naturally
engendered of the offspring of _Adam_, is in the sight of the
all-seeing, heart-searching GOD, only as a “piece of marred clay.”

_Secondly_, That being thus marred, he must necessarily be renewed:
and under this head, we shall likewise point out by whose agency this
mighty change is to be brought about.

These particulars being discussed, way will naturally be made for a
short word of application.

_First_, To prove that every man naturally engendered of the offspring
of _Adam_, is in the sight of an all-seeing, heart-searching GOD, only
as a piece of marred clay.

Be pleased to observe, that we say every man _naturally_ engendered
of the offspring of _Adam_, or every man since the fall: for if we
consider man as he first came out of the hands of his Maker, he was
far from being in such melancholy circumstances. No: he was originally
made upright; or as _Moses_, that sacred penman, declares, “GOD made
him after his own image.” Surely never was so much expressed in so few
words; which hath often made me wonder how that great critic _Longinus_,
who so justly admires the dignity and grandeur of _Moses_’s account of
the creation, and “GOD said, Let there be light, and there was light;”
I say I have often wondered why he did not read a little further, and
bestow as just an encomium upon this short, but withal inexpressibly
august and comprehensive description of the formation of man, “so GOD
created man in his own image.” Struck with a deep sense of such amazing
goodness, and that he might impress yet a deeper sense of it upon our
minds too, he immediately adds, “in the image of GOD made he him.”
A council of the most adorable Trinity was called on this important
occasion: GOD did not say, Let there be a man, and there was a man, but
GOD said, “Let us make man in our image, after our likeness.” This is
the account which the lively oracles of GOD do give us of man in his
first estate: but it is very remarkable, that the transition from the
account of his creation to that of his misery, is very quick, and why?
For a very good reason, because he soon fell from his primeval dignity;
and by that fall, the divine image is so defaced, that he is now to be
valued only as antiquarians value an ancient medal, merely for the sake
of the image and superscription once stamped upon it; or of a second
divine impress, which, through grace, it may yet receive.

Let us take a more particular survey of him, and see whether these
things are so or not: and first, as to his _understanding_. As man was
created originally “after GOD in knowledge,” as well as righteousness
and true holiness, we may rationally infer, that his understanding,
in respect to things natural, as well as divine, was of a prodigious
extent: for he was made but a little lower than the angels, and
consequently being like them, excellent in his understanding, he knew
much of GOD, of himself, and all about him; and in this as well as
every other respect, was, as Mr. _Collier_ expresses it in one of
his essays, a perfect major: but this is far from being our case now.
For in respect to _natural things_, our understandings are evidently
darkened. It is but little that we can know, and even that little
knowledge which we can acquire, is with much weariness of the flesh,
and we are doomed to gain it as we do our daily bread, I mean by the
sweat of our brows.

Men of low and narrow minds soon commence wise in their own conceits:
and having acquired a little smattering of the learned languages, and
made some small proficiency in the dry sciences, are easily tempted to
look upon themselves as a head taller than their fellow mortals, and
accordingly too, too often put forth great swelling words of vanity.
But persons of a more exalted, and extensive reach of thought, dare
not boast. No: they know that the greatest scholars are in the dark,
in respect to many even of the minutest things in life: and after all
their painful researches into the _Arcanæ Naturæ_, they find such an
immense void, such an unmeasurable expanse yet to be travelled over,
that they are obliged at last to conclude, almost with respect to
every thing, “that they know nothing yet as they ought to know.” This
consideration, no doubt, led _Socrates_, when he was asked by one
of his scholars, why the oracle pronounced him the wisest man on
earth, to give him this judicious answer, “Perhaps it is, because
I am most sensible of my own ignorance.” Would to GOD, that all who
call themselves christians, had learnt so much as this heathen! We
should then no longer hear so many _learned men_, falsely so called,
betray their ignorance by boasting of the extent of their shallow
understanding, nor by professing themselves so wise, prove themselves
such arrant pedantic fools.

If we view our understandings in respect to _spiritual things_, we
shall find that they are not only darkened, but become darkness itself,
even “darkness that may be felt” by all who are not past feeling.
And how should it be otherwise, since the infallible word of GOD
assures us, that they are alienated from the light and life of GOD,
and thereby naturally as incapable to judge of divine and spiritual
things, comparatively speaking, as a man born blind is incapacitated to
distinguish the various colours of the rainbow. “The natural man, (says
an inspired apostle) discerneth not the things of the Spirit of GOD;”
so far from it, “they are foolishness unto him;” and why? Because they
are only to be “spiritually discerned.” Hence it was, that _Nicodemus_,
who was blessed with an outward and divine revelation, who was a ruler
of the _Jews_, nay a master of _Israel_, when our LORD told him, “he
must be born again;” appealed to be quite grappled. “How (says he)
can a man be born when he is old? can he enter a second time into his
mother’s womb and be born? how can these things be?” Were three more
absurd questions ever proposed by the most ignorant man alive? or can
there be a clearer proof of the blindness of man’s understanding, in
respect to divine, as well as natural things? Is not man then a piece
of marred clay?

This will appear yet more evident, if we consider the _perverse bent of
his will_. Being made in the very image of GOD; undoubtedly before the
fall, man had no other will but his Maker’s. GOD’s will, and _Adam_’s,
were then like unisons in music. There was not the least disunion, or
discord between them. But now he hath a will, as directly contrary to
the will of GOD, as light is contrary to darkness, or heaven to hell.
We all bring into the world with us a carnal mind, which is not only
an enemy to GOD, but “enmity itself, and which is therefore not subject
unto the law of GOD, neither indeed can it be.” A great many shew much
zeal in talking against the man of sin, and loudly (and indeed very
justly) exclaim against the _Pope_ for sitting in the temple, I mean
the church of CHRIST, and “exalting himself above all that is called
GOD.” But say not within thyself, who shall go to _Rome_, to pull down
this spiritual antichrist? as though there was no antichrist but what
is without us. For know, O man, whoever thou art, an infinitely more
dangerous antichrist, because less discerned, even _self-will_, sits
daily in the temple of thy heart, exalting itself above all that is
called GOD, and obliging all its votaries to say of CHRIST himself,
that Prince of peace, “we will not have this man to reign over us.”
GOD’s people, whose spiritual senses are exercised about spiritual
things, and whose eyes are opened to see the abominations that are in
their hearts, frequently feel this to their sorrow. Whether they will
or not, this enmity from time to time bubbles up, and in spight of all
their watchfulness and care, when they are under the pressure of some
sharp affliction, a long desertion, or tedious night of temptation,
they often find something within rising in rebellion against the
all-wise disposals of divine Providence, and saying unto GOD their
heavenly father, “what dost thou?” This makes them to cry (and no
wonder, since it constrained one of the greatest saints and apostles
first to introduce the expression) “O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death?” The spiritual and renewed soul
groans thus, being burdened; but as for the natural and unawakened man,
it is not so with him; self-will, as well as every other evil, either
in a more latent or discernable manner, reigns in his unrenewed soul,
and proves him, even to a demonstration to others, whether he knows, or
will confess it himself or not, that in respect to the disorders of his
will, as well as his understanding, man is only a piece of marred clay.

A transient view of fallen man’s _affections_ will yet more firmly
corroborate this melancholy truth. These, at his being first placed
in the paradise of GOD, were always kept within proper bounds, fixed
upon their proper objects, and, like so many gentle rivers, sweetly,
spontaneously and habitually glided into their ocean, GOD. But now the
scene is changed. For we are now naturally full of vile affections,
which like a mighty and impetuous torrent carry all before them. We
love what we should hate, and hate what we should love; we fear what
we should hope for, and hope for what we should fear; nay, to such
an ungovernable height do our affections sometimes rise, that though
our judgments are convinced to the contrary, yet we will gratify our
passions though it be at the expence of our present and eternal welfare.
We feel a war of our affections, warring against the law of our minds,
and bringing us into captivity to the law of sin and death. So that
_video meliora proboque, deteriora sequor_, I approve of better things
but follow worse, is too, too often the practice of us all.

I am sensible, that many are offended, when mankind are compared to
beasts and devils. And they might have some shadow of reason for being
so, if we asserted in a physical sense, that they were really beasts
and really devils. For then, as I once heard a very learned prelate,
who was objecting against this comparison, observe, “a man being a
beast would be incapable, and being a devil, would be under an
impossibility of being saved.” But when we make use of such _shocking
comparisons_, as he was pleased to term them, we would be understood
only in a moral sense; and in so doing, we assert no more than some of
the most holy men of GOD have said of themselves, and others, in the
lively oracles many ages ago. Holy _David_, the man after GOD’s own
heart, speaking of himself, says, “so foolish was I, and as a beast
before thee.” And holy _Job_, speaking of man in general, says, that
“he is born as a wild ass’s colt,” or take away the expletive, which as
some think ought to be done, and then he positively asserts, that man
is a wild ass’s colt. And what says our LORD, “Ye are of your father
the devil;” and “the whole world is said to lie in him, the wicked
one, who now rules in the children of disobedience,” that is, in all
unrenewed souls. Our stupidity, proneness to fix our affections on the
things of the earth, and our eagerness to make provision for the flesh,
to fulfil the lusts thereof, evidence us to be earthly and brutal;
and our mental passions, anger, hatred, malice, envy, and such like,
prove with equal strength, that we are also devilish. Both together
conspire to evince, that in respect to his affections, as well as his
understanding and will, man deservedly may be termed a piece of marred
clay.

The present _blindness of natural conscience_ makes this appear in a
yet more glaring light; in the soul of the first man _Adam_, conscience
was no doubt the candle of the LORD, and enabled him rightly and
instantaneously to discern between good and evil, right and wrong. And,
blessed be GOD! some remains of this are yet left; but alas, how dimly
does it burn, and how easily and quickly is it covered, or put out
and extinguished. I need not send you to the heathen world, to learn
the truth of this; you all know it by experience. Was there no other
evidence, your own consciences are instead of a thousand witnesses,
that man, as to his natural conscience, as well as understanding, will
and affections, is much marred clay.

Nor does that great and boasted _Diana_, I mean unassisted
_unenlightened reason_, less demonstrate the justness of such an
assertion. Far be it from me to decry or exclaim against human reason.
CHRIST himself is called the “LOGOS, the Reason;” and I believe it
would not require much learning, or take up much time to prove, that so
far and no farther than as we act agreeably to the laws of CHRIST JESUS,
are we any way conformable to the laws of right reason. His service is
therefore called “a reasonable service.” And however his servants and
followers may now be looked upon as fools and madmen; yet there will
come a time, when those who despise and set themselves to oppose divine
revelation, will find, that what they now call reason, is only _reason
depraved_, and as utterly incapable, of itself, to guide us into the
way of peace, or shew the way of salvation, as the men of _Sodom_
were to find _Lot_’s door after they were struck with blindness by the
angels, who came to lead him out of the city. The horrid and dreadful
mistakes, which the most refined reasoners in the heathen world ran
into, both as to the object, as well as manner of divine worship, have
sufficiently demonstrated the weakness and depravity of human reason:
nor do our modern boasters afford us any better proofs of the greatness
of its strength, since the best improvement they generally make of
it, is only to reason themselves into downright wilful infidelity, and
thereby reason themselves out of eternal salvation. Need we now any
further witness, that man, fallen man, is altogether a piece of marred
clay?

But this is not all, we have yet more evidence to call; for do the
blindness of our understandings, the perverseness of our will, the
rebellion of our affections, the corruption of our consciences, the
depravity of our reason prove this charge; and does not the present
_disordered frame_ and _constitution of our bodies_ confirm the same
also? Doubtless in this respect, man, in the most literal sense of the
word, is a piece of marred clay. For GOD originally made him of the
“dust of the earth.” So that notwithstanding our boasting of our high
pedigrees, and different descent, we were all originally upon a level,
and a little red earth was the common substratum out of which we were
all formed. Clay indeed it was, but clay wonderfully modified, even by
the immediate hands of the Creator of heaven and earth. One therefore
hath observed, that it is said “GOD built the man;” he did not form
him rashly or hastily, but built and finished him according to the
plan before laid down in his own eternal mind. And though, as the great
GOD is without body, parts, or passions, we cannot suppose when it
is said “GOD made man after his own image,” that it has any reference
to his body, yet I cannot help thinking (with Doctor _South_) that as
the eternal Logos was hereafter to appear, GOD manifest in the flesh,
infinite wisdom was undoubtedly exerted in forming a casket into which
so invaluable a pearl was in the fulness of time to be deposited. Some
of the ancients are said to have asserted, that man at the first, had
what we call a glory shining round him; but without attempting to be
wise above what is written, we may venture to affirm, that he had a
glorious body, which knowing no sin, knew neither sickness nor pain.
But now on this, as well as other accounts, he may justly be called
_Ichabod_; for its primitive strength and glory are sadly departed
from it, and like the ruins of some ancient and stately fabric, only
so much left as to give us some faint idea of what it was when it
first appeared in its original and perfect beauty. The apostle _Paul_,
therefore, who knew how to call things by their proper names, as well
as any man living, does not scruple to term the human body, though
in its original constitution fearfully and wonderfully made, a “vile
body;” vile indeed! since it is subject to such vile diseases, put
to such vile, yea very vile uses, and at length is to come to so vile
an end. “For dust we are, and to dust we must return.” This among
other considerations, we may well suppose, caused the blessed JESUS to
weep at the grave of _Lazarus_. He wept, not only because his friend
_Lazarus_ was dead, but he wept to see human nature, through man’s own
default, thus laid in ruins, by being subject unto such a dissolution,
made like unto the beasts that perish.

Let us here pause a while, and with our sympathizing LORD, see if
we cannot shed a few silent tears at least, upon the same sorrowful
occasion. Who, who is there amongst us, that upon such a melancholy
review of man’s present, real, and most deplorable depravity both in
body and soul, can refrain from weeping over such a piece of marred
clay? Who, who can help adopting holy _David_’s lamentation over _Saul_
and _Jonathan_? “How are the mighty fallen! How are they slain in their
high places!” Originally it was not so. No, “GOD made man after his
own image: in the image of GOD made he man.” Never was there so much
expressed in so few words. He was created after GOD in righteousness
and true holiness.

This is the account, which the sacred volume gives us of this
interesting point. This, this is that blessed book, that book of books,
from whence, together with an appeal to the experience of our own
hearts, and the testimonies of all past ages, we have thought proper
to fetch our proofs. For, after all, we must be obliged to divine
revelation, to know what we were, what we are, and what we are to be.
In these, as in a true glass, we may see our real and proper likeness.
And from these only can we trace the source and fountain of all those
innumerable evils, which like a deluge have overflowed the natural
and moral world. If any should object against the authenticity of
this revelation, and consequently against the doctrine this day drawn
from thence, they do in my opinion thereby very much confirm it. For
unless a man was very much disordered indeed, as to his understanding,
will, affections, natural conscience, and his power of reasoning, he
could never possibly deny such a revelation, which is founded on a
multiplicity of infallible external evidences, hath so many internal
evidences of a divine stamp in every page, is so suited to the common
exigencies of all mankind, so agreeable to the experience of all men,
and which hath been so wonderfully handed and preserved to us, hath
been so instrumental to the convicting, converting, and comforting
so many millions of souls, and hath stood the test of the most severe
scrutinies, and exact criticisms of the most subtle and refined, as
well as of the most malicious and persecuting enemies, that ever lived,
even from the beginning of time to this very day. Persons of such
a turn of mind, I think, are rather to be prayed for, than disputed
with, if so be this perverse wickedness of their hearts may be forgiven
them: They are in the very gall of bitterness, and must have “their
consciences seared as it were with a red-hot iron,” and must have
their eyes “blinded by the GOD of this world,” otherwise they could not
but see, and feel, and assent to the truth of this doctrine, of man’s
being universally depraved; which not only in one or two, but in one or
two thousands, in every page, I could almost say, is written, in such
legible characters, that he that runs may read. Indeed, revelation
itself is founded upon the doctrine of the fall. Had we kept our
original integrity, the law of GOD would have yet been written in our
hearts, and thereby the want of a divine revelation, at least such as
ours, would have been superseded; but being fallen, instead of rising
in rebellion against GOD, we ought to be filled with unspeakable
thankfulness to our all bountiful Creator, who by a few lines in his
own books hath discovered more to us, than all the philosophers and
most learned men in the world could, or would, have discovered, though
they had studied to all eternity.

I am well aware, that some who pretend to own the validity of divine
revelation, are notwithstanding enemies to the doctrine that hath
this day been delivered; and would fain elude the force of the proofs
generally urged in defence of it, by saying, they only bespeak the
corruption of particular persons, or have reference only to the heathen
world: but such persons err, not knowing their own hearts, or the power
of JESUS CHRIST: for by nature there is no difference between _Jew_
or _Gentile_, _Greek_ or _Barbarian_, bond or free. We are altogether
equally become abominable in GOD’s sight, all equally fallen short of
the glory of GOD, and consequently all alike so many pieces of marred
clay.

How GOD came to suffer man to fall? how long man stood before he fell?
and how the corruption contracted by the fall, is propagated to every
individual of his species? are questions of such an abstruse and
critical nature, that should I undertake to answer them, would be only
gratifying a sinful curiosity, and tempting you, as Satan tempted our
first parents, to eat forbidden fruit. It will much better answer the
design of this present discourse, which is practical, to pass on

II. To the next thing proposed, and point out to you the absolute
necessity there is of this fallen nature’s being renewed.

This I have had all along in my eye, and on account of this, have
purposely been so explicit on the first general head: for ♦as
_Archimedes_ once said, “Give me a place where I may fix my foot, and
I will move the world;” so without the least imputation of arrogance,
with which, perhaps, he was justly chargeable, we may venture to say,
grant the foregoing doctrine to be true, and then deny the necessity
of man’s being renewed who can.

  ♦ “has” replaced with “as”

I suppose, I may take it for granted, that all of you amongst whom I
am now preaching the kingdom of GOD, hope after death to go to a place
which we call Heaven. And my heart’s desire and prayer to GOD for you
is, that you all may have mansions prepared for you there. But give
me leave to tell you, was you now to see these heavens opened, and the
angel (to use the words of the seraphic _Hervey_) cloathed with all
his heavenly drapery, with one foot upon the earth, and another upon
the sea; nay, were you to see and hear the angel of the everlasting
covenant, JESUS CHRIST himself, proclaiming “time shall be no more,”
and giving you all an invitation immediately to come to heaven; heaven
would be no heaven to you, nay it would be a hell to your souls, unless
you were first prepared for a proper enjoyment of it here on earth.
“For what communion hath light with darkness?” Or what fellowship
could unrenewed sons of _Belial_ possibly keep up with the pure and
immaculate JESUS?

The generality of people form strange ideas of heaven. And because
the scriptures, in condescension to the weakness of our capacities,
describe it by images taken from earthly delights and human grandeur,
therefore they are apt to carry their thoughts no higher, and at
the best only form to themselves a kind of _Mahometan_ paradise. But
permit me to tell you, and GOD grant it may sink deep into your hearts!
Heaven is rather a state than a place; and consequently, unless you are
previously disposed by a suitable state of mind, you could not be happy
even in heaven itself. For what is grace but glory militant? What is
glory but grace triumphant? This consideration made a pious author say,
that “holiness, happiness, and heaven, were only three different words
for one and the self-same thing.” And this made the great _Preston_,
when he was about to die, turn to his friends, saying, “I am changing
my place, but not my company.” He had conversed with GOD and good men
on earth; he was going to keep up the same, and infinitely more refined
communion with GOD, his holy angels, and the spirits of just men made
perfect, in heaven.

To make us meet to be blissful partakers of such heavenly company,
this “marred clay,” I mean, these depraved natures of ours, must
necessarily undergo an universal moral change: our understandings must
be enlightened; our wills, reason, and consciences, must be renewed;
our affections must be drawn toward, and fixed upon things above;
and because flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven,
this corruptible must put on incorruption, this mortal must put on
immortality. And thus old things must literally pass away, and behold
all things, even the body as well as the faculties of the soul, must
become new.

This moral change is what some call, repentance, some, conversion, some,
regeneration; choose what name you please, I only pray GOD, that we all
may have the thing. The scriptures call it holiness, sanctification,
the new creature, and our LORD calls it a “New birth, or being born
again, or born from above.” These are not barely figurative expressions,
or the flights of eastern language, nor do they barely denote a
relative change of state conferred on all those who are admitted into
CHRIST’s church by baptism; but they denote a real, moral change of
heart and life, a real participation of the divine life in the soul of
man. Some indeed content themselves with a figurative interpretation;
but unless they are made to experience the power and efficacy thereof,
by a solid living experience in their own souls, all their learning,
all their laboured criticisms, will not exempt them from a real
damnation. CHRIST hath said it, and CHRIST will stand, “Unless a man,”
learned or unlearned, high or low, though he be a master of _Israel_
as _Nicodemus_ was, unless he “be born again, he cannot see, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of GOD.”

If it be enquired, who is to be the potter? and by whose agency this
marred clay is to be formed into another vessel? Or in other words,
if it be asked, how this great and mighty change is to be effected? I
answer, not by the mere dint and force of moral suasion. This is good
in its place. And I am so far from thinking, that christian preachers
should not make use of rational arguments and motives in their sermons,
that I cannot think they are fit to preach at all, who either cannot,
or will not use them. We have the example of the great GOD himself
for such a practice; “Come (says he) and let us reason together.” And
St. _Paul_, that prince of preachers, “reasoned of temperance, and
righteousness, and a judgment to come.” And it is remarkable, “that
whilst he was reasoning of these things, _Felix_ trembled.” Nor are
the most persuasive strains of holy rhetoric less needful for a scribe
ready instructed to the kingdom of GOD. The scriptures both of the
Old and New Testament, every where abound with them. And when can they
be more properly employed, and brought forth, than when we are acting
as ambassadors of heaven, and beseeching poor sinners, as in CHRIST’s
stead, to be reconciled unto GOD. All this we readily grant. But at
the same time, I would as soon go to yonder church-yard, and attempt
to raise the dead carcases, with a “come forth,” as to preach to
dead souls, did I not hope for some superior power to make the word
effectual to the designed end. I should only be like a sounding brass
for any saving purposes, or as a tinkling cymbal. Neither is this
change to be wrought by the power of our own free-will. This is an
idol every where set up, but we dare not fall down and worship it.
“No man (says CHRIST) can come to me, unless the Father draw him.”
Our own free-will, if improved, may restrain us from the commission of
many evils, and put us in the way of conversion; but, after exerting
our utmost efforts (and we are bound in duty to exert them) we
shall find the words of our own church article to be true, that “man
since the fall hath no power to turn to GOD.” No, we might as soon
attempt to stop the ebbing and flowing of the tide, and calm the most
tempestuous sea, as to imagine that we can subdue, or bring under
proper regulations, our own unruly wills and affections by any strength
inherent in ourselves.

And therefore, that I may keep you no longer in suspence, I inform you,
that this heavenly potter, this blessed agent, is the Almighty Spirit
of GOD, the Holy Ghost, the third person in the most adorable Trinity,
coessential with the Father and the Son. This is that Spirit, which at
the beginning of time moved on the face of the waters, when nature lay
in one universal chaos. This was the Spirit that over-shadowed the Holy
Virgin, before that holy thing was born of her: and this same Spirit
must come, and move upon the chaos of our souls, before we can properly
be called the sons of GOD. This is what _John_ the baptist calls
“being baptized with the Holy Ghost,” without which, his and all other
baptisms, whether infant or adult, avail nothing. This is that fire,
which our LORD came to send into our earthly hearts, and which I pray
the LORD of all lords to kindle in every unrenewed one this day.

As for the extraordinary operations of the Holy Ghost, such as working
of miracles, or speaking with divers kinds of tongues, they are long
since ceased. But as for this miracle of miracles, turning the soul to
GOD by the more ordinary operations of the Holy Ghost, this abides yet,
and will abide till time itself shall be no more. For it is he that
sanctifieth us, and all the elect people of GOD. On this account, true
believers are said to be “born from above, to be born not of blood, nor
of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of GOD.” Their
second, as well as their first creation, is truly and purely divine.
It is, therefore, called “a creation;” but put ye on (says the apostle)
the new man which is created――And how? Even as the first man was,
“after GOD in righteousness and true holiness.”

These, these are the precious truths, which a scoffing world would fain
rally or ridicule us out of. To produce this glorious change, this new
creation, the glorious JESUS left his Father’s bosom. For this he led
a persecuted life; for this he died an ignominious and accursed death;
for this he rose again; and for this he now sitteth at the right hand
of his Father. All the precepts of his gospel, all his ordinances, all
his providences, whether of an afflictive or prosperous nature, all
divine revelation from the beginning to the end, all center in these
two points, to shew us how we are fallen, and to begin, carry on, and
compleat a glorious and blessed change in our souls. This is an end
worthy of the coming of so divine a personage. To deliver a multitude
of souls of every nation, language and tongue, from so many moral evils,
and to reinstate them in an incomparably more excellent condition than
that from whence they are fallen, is an end worthy the shedding of
such precious blood. What system of religion is there now, or was there
ever exhibited to the world, any way to be compared to this? Can the
deistical scheme pretend in any degree to come up to it? Is it not
noble, rational, and truly divine? And why then will not all that
hitherto are strangers to this blessed restoration of their fallen
natures, (for my heart is too full to abstain any longer from an
application) why will you any longer dispute or stand out against it?
Why will you not rather bring your clay to this heavenly Potter, and
say from your inmost souls, “Turn us, O good LORD, and so shall we be
turned?” This, you may and can do: and if you go thus far, who knows
but that this very day, yea this very hour, the heavenly Potter may
take you in hand, and make you vessels of honour fit for the Redeemer’s
use? Others that were once as far from the kingdom of GOD as you are,
have been partakers of this blessedness. What a wretched creature was
_Mary Magdalene_? And yet out of her JESUS CHRIST cast seven devils.
Nay, he appeared to her first, after he rose from the dead, and she
became as it were an apostle to the very apostles. What a covetous
creature was _Zaccheus_? He was a griping cheating publican; and yet,
perhaps, in one quarter of an hour’s time, his heart is enlarged, and
he made quite willing to give half of his goods to feed the poor. And
to mention no more, what a cruel person was _Paul_. He was a persecutor,
a blasphemer, injurious; one that breathed out threatnings against
the disciples of the LORD, and made havoc of the church of CHRIST. And
yet what a wonderful turn did he meet with, as he was journeying to
_Damascus_? from a persecutor, he became a preacher; was afterwards
made a spiritual father to thousands, and now probably sits nearest
the LORD JESUS CHRIST in glory. And why all this? That he might be
made an example to them that should hereafter believe. O then believe,
repent; I beseech you, believe the gospel. Indeed, it is glad tidings,
even tidings of great joy. You will then no longer have any thing to
say against the doctrine of _Original Sin_; or charge the Almighty
foolishly, for suffering our first parents to be prevailed on to eat
such sour grapes, and permitting thereby their children’s teeth to be
set on edge. You will then no longer cry out against the doctrine of
the _New Birth_, as enthusiasm, or brand the assertors of such blessed
truths with the opprobrious names of fools and madmen. Having felt,
you will then believe; having believed, you will therefore speak; and
instead of being vessels of wrath, and growing harder and harder in
hell fire, like vessels in a potter’s oven, you will be made vessels
of honour, and be presented at the great day by JESUS, to his heavenly
Father, and be translated to live with him as monuments of rich, free,
distinguishing and sovereign grace, for ever and ever.

You, that have in some degree experienced the quickening influence (for
I must not conclude without dropping a word or two to GOD’s children)
you know how to pity, and therefore, I beseech you also to pray for
those, to whose circumstances this discourse is peculiarly adapted.
But will you be content in praying for them? Will you not see reason to
pray for yourselves also? Yes, doubtless, for yourselves also. For you,
and you only know, how much there is yet lacking in your faith, and how
far you are from being partakers in that degree, which you desire to
be, of the whole mind that was in CHRIST JESUS. You know what a body of
sin and death you carry about with you, and that you must necessarily
expect many turns of GOD’s providence and grace, before you will be
wholly delivered from it. But thanks be to GOD, we are in safe hands.
He that has been the author, will also be the finisher of our faith.
Yet a little while, and we like him shall say “It is finished;” we
shall bow down our heads and give up the ghost. Till then, (for to
thee, O LORD, will we now direct our prayer) help us, O Almighty Father,
in patience to possess our souls. Behold, we are the clay, and thou
art the Potter. Let not the thing formed say to him that formed it,
whatever the dispensations of thy future Will concerning us may be,
Why dost thou deal with us thus? Behold, we put ourselves as blanks in
thine hands, deal with us as seemeth good in thy sight, only let every
cross, every affliction, every temptation, be overruled to the stamping
thy blessed image in more lively characters on our hearts; that so
passing from glory to glory, by the powerful operations of thy blessed
Spirit, we may be made thereby more and more meet for, and at last be
translated to a full, perfect, endless, and uninterrupted enjoyment
of glory hereafter, with thee O Father, thee O Son, and thee O blessed
Spirit; to whom, three persons but one GOD, be ascribed, as is most due,
all honour, power, might, majesty and dominion, now and to all eternity.
Amen and Amen.




                              SERMON XIV.

                      The LORD our Righteousness.


                          JEREMIAH xxiii. 6.

  _The LORD our Righteousness_.

WHOEVER is acquainted with the nature of mankind in general, or the
propensity of his own heart in particular, must acknowledge, that
_self-righteousness_ is the last idol that is rooted out of the heart:
being once born under a covenant of works, it is natural for us all to
have recourse to a covenant of works, for our everlasting salvation.
And we have contracted such a devilish pride, by our fall from GOD,
that we would, if not wholly, yet in part at least, glory in being
the cause of our own salvation. We cry out against popery, and that
very justly; but we are all Papists, at least, I am sure, we are
all Arminians by nature; and therefore no wonder so many natural men
embrace that scheme. It is true, we disclaim the doctrine of merit,
are ashamed directly to say we deserve any good at the hands of GOD;
therefore, as the Apostle excellently well observes, “we go about,” we
fetch a circuit, “to establish a righteousness of our own, and,” like
the Pharisees of old, “will not wholly submit to that righteousness
which is of GOD through JESUS CHRIST our LORD.”

This is the sorest, though, alas! the most common evil that was ever
yet seen under the sun. An evil, that in any age, especially in these
dregs of time wherein we live, cannot sufficiently be inveighed against.
For as it is with the people, so it is with the priests; and it is to
be feared, even in those places, where once the truth as it is in JESUS
was eminently preached, many ministers are so sadly degenerated from
their pious ancestors, that the doctrines of grace, especially the
personal, _all-sufficient righteousness of_ JESUS, is but too seldom,
too slightly mentioned. Hence the love of many waxeth cold; and I have
often thought, was it possible, that this single consideration would be
sufficient to raise our venerable forefathers again from their graves;
who would thunder in their ears their fatal error.

The righteousness of JESUS CHRIST is one of those great mysteries,
which the angels desire to look into, and seems to be one of the first
lessons that GOD taught men after the fall. For, what were the coats
that GOD made to put on our first parents, but types of the application
of the merits or righteousness of JESUS CHRIST to believers hearts? We
are told, that those coats were made of skins of beasts; and, as beasts
were not then food for men, we may fairly infer, that those beasts
were slain in sacrifice, in commemoration of the great sacrifice, JESUS
CHRIST, thereafter to be offered. And the skins of the beasts thus
slain, being put on _Adam_ and _Eve_, they were hereby taught how their
nakedness was to be covered with the righteousness of the Lamb of GOD.

This is it which is meant, when we are told, “_Abraham_ believed on the
LORD, and it was accounted to him for righteousness.” In short, this
is it of which both the law and the prophets have spoken, especially
_Jeremiah_ in the words of the text, “The LORD our righteousness.”

I propose, through divine grace,

  I. To consider who we are to understand by the word LORD.

  II. How the LORD is man’s righteousness.

  III. I will consider some of the chief objections that are
    generally urged against this doctrine.

  IV. I shall shew some very ill consequences that flow naturally
    from denying this doctrine.

  V. Shall conclude with an exhortation to all to come to CHRIST
    by faith, that they may be enabled to say with the Prophet in
    the text, “The LORD our righteousness.”

I. I am to consider who we are to understand by the word LORD. The LORD
our righteousness.

If any Arians or Socinians are drawn by curiosity to hear what the
babler has to say, let them be ashamed of denying the divinity of that
LORD, who has bought poor sinners with his precious blood. For the
person mentioned in the text, under the character of the LORD, is JESUS
CHRIST. Verse 5. “Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will
raise unto _David_ a righteous branch, a king shall reign and prosper,
and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth. In his days (verse
6.) _Judah_ shall be saved, and _Israel_ shall dwell safely; and this
is his name whereby he shall be called, The LORD our righteousness.”
By the _righteous branch_, all agree, that we are to understand JESUS
CHRIST. He it is that is called the LORD in our text. If so, if there
were no other text in the Bible to prove the divinity of CHRIST, this
is sufficient: for if the word _Lord_ may properly belong to JESUS
CHRIST, he must be GOD. And, as you have it in the margin of your
Bibles, the word _Lord_ is in the original _Jehovah_, which is the
essential title of GOD himself. Come then, ye Arians, kiss the Son of
GOD, bow down before him, and honour him, even as ye honour the Father.
Learn of the angels, those morning-stars, and worship him as truly
GOD: for otherwise you are as much idolators, as those that worship
the Virgin _Mary_. And as for you Socinians, who say CHRIST was a mere
man, and yet profess that he was your Saviour, according to your own
principles you are accursed: for, if CHRIST be a mere man, then he is
only an arm of flesh: and it is written, “Cursed is he that trusteth
on an arm of flesh.” But I would hope, there are no such monsters here;
at least, that, after these considerations, they would be ashamed of
broaching such monstrous absurdities any more. For it is plain, that,
by the word _Lord_, we are to understand the LORD JESUS CHRIST, who
here takes to himself the title of _Jehovah_, and therefore must be
very GOD of very GOD; or, as the Apostle devoutly expresses it, “GOD
blessed for evermore.”

II. How the LORD is to be man’s righteousness, comes next to be
considered.

And that is, in one word, by _imputation_. for it pleased GOD, after
he had made all things by the word of his power to create man after his
own image. And so infinite was the condescension of the high and lofty
One, who inhabiteth eternity, that, although he might have insisted on
the everlasting obedience of him and his posterity; yet he was pleased
to oblige himself, by a covenant or agreement made with his own
creatures, upon condition of an unsinning obedience, to give them
immortality and eternal life. For when it is said, “The day thou eatest
thereof, thou shalt surely die;” we may fairly infer, so long as he
continued obedient, and did not eat thereof, he should surely live.
The 3d of _Genesis_ gives us a full, but mournful account, how our
first parents broke this covenant, and thereby stood in need of a
better righteousness than their own, in order to procure their future
acceptance with GOD. For what must they do? They were as much under
a covenant of works as ever. And though, after their disobedience,
they were without strength; yet they were obliged not only to do, but
continue to do all things, and that too in the most perfect manner,
which the LORD had required of them: and not only so, but to make
satisfaction to GOD’s infinitely offended justice, for the breach
they had already been guilty of. Here then opens the amazing scene of
_divine philanthropy_, I mean, GOD’s love to man: For behold, what man
could not do, JESUS CHRIST, the son of his Father’s love, undertakes
to do for him. And that GOD might be just in justifying the ungodly,
though “he was in the form of GOD, and therefore thought it no robbery
to be equal with GOD; yet he took upon him the form of a servant,” even
human nature. In that nature he obeyed, and thereby fulfilled the whole
moral law in our stead; and also died a painful death upon the cross,
and thereby became a curse for, or instead of, those whom the Father
had given to him. As GOD, he satisfied, at the same time that he obeyed
and suffered as man; and, being GOD and man in one ♦person, he wrought
out a full, perfect, and sufficient righteousness for all to whom it
was to be imputed.

  ♦ “persan” replaced with “person”

Here then we see the meaning of the word _righteousness_. It implies
the active as well as passive obedience of the LORD JESUS CHRIST. We
generally, when talking of the merits of CHRIST, only mention the
latter,――his death; whereas, the former,――his life and active obedience,
is equally necessary. CHRIST is not such a saviour as becomes us,
unless we join both together. CHRIST not only died, but lived; not
only suffered, but obeyed for, or instead of, poor sinners. And both
these jointly make up that compleat righteousness, which is to be
imputed to us, as the disobedience of our first parents was made ours
by imputation. In this sense, and no other, are we to understand that
parallel which the apostle _Paul_ draws, in the vth of the _Romans_,
between the first and second _Adam_. This is what he elsewhere terms,
“our being made the righteousness of GOD in him.” This is the sense
wherein the Prophet would have us to understand the words of the text;
therefore, _Jeremiah_ xxxiii. 16. “She (_i. e._ the church itself)
shall be called, (having this righteousness imputed to her) The LORD
our righteousness.” A passage, I think, worthy of the profoundest
meditation of all the sons and daughters of _Abraham_.

Many are the objections which the proud hearts of fallen men
are continually urging against this wholesome, this divine, this
soul-saving doctrine. I come now,

III. To answer some few of those which I think the most considerable.

And, _First_, they say, because they would appear friends to morality,
“That the doctrine of an imputed righteousness is destructive of good
works, and leads to licentiousness.”

And who, pray, are the persons that generally urge this objection?
Are they men full of faith, and men really concerned for good works?
No; whatever few exceptions there may be, if there be any at all,
it is notorious, they are generally men of corrupt minds, reprobate
concerning the faith. The best title I can give them is, that of
_profane moralists_, or moralists falsely so called. For I appeal to
the experience of the present as well as past ages, if iniquity did
and does not most abound, where the doctrine of CHRIST’s whole personal
righteousness is most cried down, and most seldom mentioned: Arminian
being antichristian principles, always did, and always will lead to
antichristian practices. And never was there a reformation brought
about in the church, but by the preaching the doctrine of an imputed
righteousness. This, as that man of GOD, _Luther_, calls it, is
“_Articulus stantis aut cadentis Ecclesiæ_,” the article by which the
Church stands or falls. And though the preachers of this doctrine are
generally branded by those on the other side, with the opprobrious
names of Antinomians, deceivers, and what not; yet, I believe, if the
truth of the doctrine on both sides was to be judged of by the lives of
the preachers and professors of it, on our side the question would have
the advantage every way.

It is true, this, as well as every other doctrine of grace, may be
abused. And perhaps the unchristian walk of some, who have talked of
CHRIST’s imputed righteousness, justification by faith, and the like,
and yet never felt it imputed to their own souls, has given the enemies
of the LORD thus cause to blaspheme. But this is a very unsafe, as well
as a very unfair way of arguing. The only question should be, Whether
or not this doctrine of an imputed righteousness, does in itself cut
off the occasion of good works, or lead to ♦licentiousness? To this we
may boldly answer, In no wise. It excludes works, indeed, from being
any cause of our justification in the sight of GOD; but it requires
good works as a proof of our having this righteousness imputed to us,
and as a declarative evidence of our justification in the sight of
men. And then, how can the doctrine of an imputed righteousness be a
doctrine leading to licentiousness?

  ♦ “licentousness” replaced with “licentiousness”

It is all calumny. The apostle _Paul_ introduceth an infidel making
this objection, in his epistle to the _Romans_; and none but infidels,
that never felt the power of CHRIST’s resurrection upon their souls,
will urge it over again. And therefore, notwithstanding this objection,
with the Prophet in the text, we may boldly say, “The LORD is our
righteousness.”

But Satan (and no wonder that his servants imitate him) often
transforms himself into an angel of light: and therefore, (such
perverse things will infidelity and Arminianism make men speak) in
order to dress their objections in the best colours, some urge, “That
our Saviour preached no such doctrine; that in his sermon on the mount,
he mentions only morality:” and consequently the doctrine of an imputed
righteousness falls wholly to the ground.

But surely the men, who urge this objection, either never read, or
never understood, our LORD’s blessed discourse, wherein the doctrine of
an imputed righteousness is so plainly taught, that he who runs, if he
has eyes that see, may read.

Indeed our LORD does recommend morality and good works, (as all
faithful ministers will do) and clears the moral law from many corrupt
glosses put upon it by the letter-learned Pharisees. But then, before
he comes to this, ’tis remarkable, he talks of inward piety, such as
poverty of spirit, meekness, holy mourning, purity of heart, especially
hungring and thirsting after righteousness; and then recommends good
works, as an evidence of our having his righteousness imputed to us,
and these graces and divine tempers wrought in our hearts. “Let your
light (that is, the divine light I before have been mentioning) shine
before men, in a holy life; that they, seeing your good works, may
glorify your father which is in heaven.” And then he immediately adds,
“think not that I am come to destroy the moral law: I came not to
destroy, (to take away the force of it as a rule of life) but to fulfil,
(to obey it in its whole latitude, and give the compleat sense of it.)”
And then he goes on to shew how exceeding broad the moral law is. So
that our LORD, instead of setting aside an imputed righteousness in
his sermon upon the mount, not only confirms it, but also answers the
foregoing objection urged against it, by making good works a proof and
evidence of its being imputed to our souls. He, therefore, that hath
ears to hear, let him hear what the Prophet says in the words of the
text, “The LORD our righteousness.”

But as Satan not only quoted scripture, but backed one temptation
after another with it, when he attacked CHRIST in the wilderness; so
his children generally take the same method in treating his doctrine.
And, therefore, they urge another objection against the doctrine of an
imputed righteousness, from the example of the young man in the gospel.

We may state it thus: “The Evangelist _Mark_, say they, chapter x.
mentions a young man that came to CHRIST, running, and asking him
what he should do to inherit eternal life? CHRIST referred him to
the commandments, to know what he must do to inherit eternal life.
It is plain, therefore, works were to be, partly at least, the cause
of his justification: and consequently the doctrine of an imputed
righteousness is unscriptural.” This is the objection in its full
strength: and little strength in all its fulness. For, was I to prove
the necessity of an imputed righteousness, I scarce know how I could
bring a better instance to make it good.

Let us take a nearer view of this young man, and of our LORD’s
behaviour towards him, _Mark_ x. 17. the Evangelist tells us, “That
when CHRIST was gone forth into the way, there came one running (it
should seem it was some nobleman; a rarity indeed to see such a one
running to CHRIST!) and not only so, but he kneeled to him, (perhaps
many of his rank now, scarce knew the time when they kneeled to
CHRIST) and asked him, saying, Good Master, what shall I do that I may
inherit eternal life?” Then JESUS, to see whether or not he believed
him to be what he really was, truly and properly GOD, said unto him,
“Why callest thou me good? There is none good but one, that is GOD.”
And, that he might directly answer his question, says he, “Thou
knowest the commandments: do not commit adultery, do not bear false
witness, defraud not, honour thy father and thy mother.” This was
a direct answer to his question; namely, That eternal life was not
to be attained by his doings. For our LORD, by referring him to the
commandments, did not (as the objectors insinuate) in the least hint,
that his morality would recommend him to the favour and mercy of GOD:
but he intended thereby, to make the law his schoolmaster to bring him
to himself; that the young man, seeing how he had broken every one of
these commandments, might thereby be convinced of the insufficiency of
his own, and consequently of the absolute necessity of looking out for
a better righteousness, whereon he might depend for eternal life.

This was what our Lord designed. The young man being self-righteous,
and willing to justify himself, said, “All these have I observed from
my youth:” but had he known himself, he would have confessed, all
these have I broken from my youth. For, supposing he had not actually
committed adultery, had he never lusted after a woman in his heart?
What, if he had not really killed another, had he never been angry
without a cause, or spoken unadvisedly with his lips? If so, by
breaking one of the least commandments in the least degree, he became
liable to the curse of GOD: for “cursed is he (saith the law) that
continueth not to do all things that are written in this book.” And
therefore, as observed before, our LORD was so far from speaking
against, that he treated the young man in that manner, on purpose to
convince him of the necessity of an imputed righteousness.

But perhaps they will reply, it is said, “JESUS beholding him, loved
him.” And what then? This he might do with a human love, and at the
same time this young man have no interest in his blood. Thus CHRIST is
said to wonder, to weep over _Jerusalem_, and say, “O that thou hadst
known, &c.” But such-like passages are to be referred only to his
human nature. And there is a great deal of difference between the love
wherewith CHRIST loved this young man, and that wherewith he loved
_Mary_, _Lazarus_, and their sister _Martha_. To illustrate this by
a comparison: A minister of the LORD JESUS CHRIST seeing many amiable
dispositions, such as a readiness to hear the word, a decent behaviour
at public worship, and a life outwardly spotless in many, cannot but
so far love them; but then there is much difference betwixt the love
which a minister feels for such, and that divine love, that union and
sympathy of soul, which he feels for those that he is satisfied are
really born again of GOD. Apply this to our LORD’s case, as a faint
illustration of it. Consider what has been said upon the young man’s
case in general, and then, if before you were fond of this objection,
instead of triumphing, like him you will go sorrowful away. Our
Saviour’s reply to him more and more convinces us of the truth of the
prophet’s assertion in the text, that “the LORD is our righteousness.”

But there is a fourth, and a grand objection yet behind, which is
taken from the 25th chapter of _Matthew_, “where our LORD is described
as rewarding people with eternal life, because they fed ♦the hungry,
cloathed the naked, and such-like. Their works therefore were a
cause of their justification, consequently the doctrine of imputed
righteousness is not agreeable to scripture.”

 ♦ “they” replaced with “the”

This, I confess, is the most plausible objection that is brought
against the doctrine insisted on from the text; and that we may answer
it in as clear and brief a manner as may be, we confess, with the
Article of the Church of _England_, “That albeit good works do not
justify us, yet they will follow after justification, as fruits of
it; and though they can claim no reward in themselves, yet forasmuch
as they spring from faith in CHRIST, and a renewed soul, they shall
receive a reward of grace, though not of debt; and consequently the
more we abound in such good ♦works, the greater will be our reward when
JESUS CHRIST shall come to judgment.”

  ♦ “words” replaced with “works”

Take these considerations along with us, and they will help us much
to answer the objection now before us. For thus saith _Matthew_, “Then
shall the King say to them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed children
of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the world. For I was an hungred, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty,
and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and
ye cloathed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye
came unto me. I will therefore reward you, because you have done these
things out of love to me, and hereby have evidenced yourselves to be
my true disciples.” And that the people did not depend on these good
actions for their justification in the sight of GOD, is evident. “For
when saw we thee an hungred, say they, and fed thee? or thirsty, and
gave thee drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in, or
naked, and cloathed thee? Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and
came unto thee?” Language, and questions, quite improper for persons
relying on their own righteousness, for acceptance and acquittance in
the sight of GOD.

But then they reply against this: “In the latter part of the chapter,
it is plain that JESUS CHRIST rejects and damns the others for not
doing these things. And therefore, if he damns these for not doing,
he saves those for doing; and consequently the doctrine of an imputed
righteousness is good for nothing.”

But that is no consequence at all; for GOD may justly damn any man for
omitting the least duty of the moral law, and yet in himself is not
obliged to give to any one any reward, supposing he has done all that
he can. We are unprofitable servants; we have not done near so much
as it was our duty to do, must be the language of the most holy souls
living; and therefore, from or in ourselves, cannot be justified in the
sight of GOD. This was the frame of the devout souls just now referred
to. Sensible of this, they were so far from depending on their works
for justification in the sight of GOD, that they were filled, as it
were, with a holy blushing, to think our LORD should condescend to
mention, much more to reward them for, their poor works of faith and
labours of love. I am persuaded their hearts would rise with a holy
indignation against those who urge this passage, as an objection to
the assertion of the prophet, that “the LORD is our righteousness.”

Thus, I think, we have fairly answered these grand objections, which
are generally urged against the doctrine of an _imputed righteousness_.
Was I to stop here, I think I may say, “We are made more than
conquerors through him that loved us.” But there is a way of arguing
which I have always admired, because I have thought it always very
convincing, by shewing the _absurdities_ that will follow from denying
any particular proposition in dispute.

IV. This is the next thing that was proposed. And never did greater
or more absurdities flow from the denying any doctrine, than will flow
from denying the doctrine of CHRIST’s imputed righteousness.

And _first_, if we deny this doctrine, we turn the truth, I mean the
word of GOD, as much as we can, into a lie, and utterly subvert all
those places of scripture which say that we are saved by grace; that
it is not of works, lest any man should boast; that salvation is GOD’s
free gift; and that he who glorieth, must glory only in the LORD. For,
if the whole personal righteousness of JESUS CHRIST be not the sole
cause of my acceptance with GOD, if any work done by or foreseen in
me, was in the least to be joined with it, or looked upon by GOD as an
inducing, impulsive cause of acquitting my soul from guilt, then I have
somewhat whereof I may glory in myself. Now boasting is excluded in
the great work of our redemption; but that cannot be, if we are enemies
to the doctrine of an imputed righteousness. It would be endless to
enumerate how many texts of scripture must be false, if this doctrine
be not true. Let it suffice to affirm in the general, that if we deny
an imputed righteousness, we may as well deny a divine revelation all
at once: for it is the _alpha_ and _omega_, the beginning and the end
of the book of GOD. We must either disbelieve that, or believe what the
prophet hath spoken in the text, “that the LORD is our righteousness.”

But farther: I observed at the beginning of this discourse, that
we are all _Arminians_ and _Papists_ by nature: for as one says,
“_Arminianism_ is the back way to _popery_.” And here I venture further
to affirm, that if we deny the doctrine of an imputed righteousness,
whatever we may stile ourselves, we are really _Papists_ in our hearts,
and deserve no other title from men.

Sirs, what think you? Suppose I was to come and tell you, that you must
intercede with saints, for them to intercede with GOD for you; would
you not then say, I was justly reputed a _popish missionary_ by some,
and deservedly thrust out of the synagogues by others? I suppose you
would. And why? Because, you would say, the intercession of JESUS
CHRIST was sufficient of itself, without the intercession of saints;
and that it was blasphemous to join theirs with his, as though it was
not sufficient.

Suppose I went a little more round about; and told you that the death
of CHRIST was not sufficient, without our death being added to it;
that you must die as well as CHRIST, join your death with his, and then
it would be sufficient. Might you not then, with a holy indignation,
throw dust in the air, and justly call me a “setter forth of strange
doctrines?” And now then, if it be not only absurd, but blasphemous,
to join the intercession of saints with the intercession of CHRIST, as
though his intercession was not sufficient; or our death with the death
of CHRIST, as though his death was not sufficient: judge ye, if it be
not equally absurd, equally blasphemous, to join our obedience, either
wholly or in part, with the obedience of CHRIST, as if that was not
sufficient. And if so, what absurdities will follow the denying that
the LORD, both as to his active and passive obedience, is our
righteousness?

One more absurdity I shall mention, as following the denying this
doctrine, and I have done.

I remember a story of a certain prelate, who, after many arguments
in vain urged to convince the Earl of _Rochester_ of the invisible
realities of another world, took his leave of his lordship with some
such words as these: “Well, my lord, if there be no hell, I am safe;
but if there should be such a thing as hell, what will become of you?”
I apply this to those that oppose the doctrine now insisted on. If
there be no such thing as the doctrine of an imputed righteousness,
those who hold it, and bring forth fruit unto holiness, are safe; but
if there be such a thing (as there certainly is) what will become of
you that deny it? It is no difficult matter to determine. Your portion
must be in the lake of fire and brimstone for ever and ever. Since
you will rely upon your works, by your works you shall be judged. They
shall be weighed in the balance of the sanctuary; and they will be
found wanting. By your works therefore shall you be condemned; and you,
being out of CHRIST, shall find GOD, to your poor wretched souls, a
consuming fire.

The great _Stoddard_ of _Northampton_ in _New-England_, has therefore
well intitled a book which he wrote (and which I would take this
opportunity to recommend) “The Safety of appearing in the Righteousness
of CHRIST.” For why should I lean upon a broken reed, when I can have
the rock of ages to stand upon, that never can be moved?

And now, before I come to a more particular application, give me leave,
in the apostle’s language, triumphantly to cry out, “Where is the
scribe, where the disputer?” Where is the reasoning infidel of this
generation? Can any thing appear more reasonable, even according to
your own way of arguing, than the doctrine here laid down? Have you not
felt a convincing power go along with the word? Why then will you not
believe on the LORD JESUS CHRIST, that so he may become the LORD _your_
righteousness?

But it is time for me to come a little closer to your consciences.

Brethren, though some may be offended at this doctrine, and may account
it foolishness; yet, to many of you, I doubt not but it is precious,
it being agreeable to the form of sound words, which from your infancy
has been delivered to you; and, coming from a quarter, you would least
have expected, may be received with more pleasure and satisfaction.
But give me leave to ask you one question; Can you say, the LORD our
righteousness? I say, the LORD _our_ righteousness. For entertaining
this doctrine in your heads, without receiving the LORD JESUS CHRIST
savingly by a lively faith into your hearts, will but increase your
damnation. As I have often told you, so I tell you again, an unapplied
CHRIST is no CHRIST at all. Can you then, with believing _Thomas_, cry
out, “My LORD and my GOD?” Is CHRIST your sanctification, as well as
your outward righteousness? For the word righteousness, in the text,
not only implies CHRIST’s personal righteousness imputed to us, but
also holiness wrought in us. These two, GOD has joined together. He
never did, he never does, he never will put them asunder. If you are
justified by the blood, you are also sanctified by the Spirit of our
LORD. Can you then in this sense say, The LORD our righteousness? Were
you ever made to abhor yourselves for your actual and original sins,
and to lothe your own righteousness; for, as the prophet beautifully
expresses it, “your righteousness is as filthy rags?” Were you ever
made to see and admire the all-sufficiency of CHRIST’s righteousness,
and excited by the Spirit of GOD to hunger and thirst after it?
Could you ever say, my soul is athirst for CHRIST, yea, even for the
righteousness of CHRIST? O when shall I come to appear before the
presence of my GOD in the righteousness of CHRIST! nothing but CHRIST!
nothing but CHRIST! Give me CHRIST, O GOD, and I am satisfied! my soul
shall praise thee for ever.

Was this ever the language of your hearts? and, after these inward
conflicts, were you ever enabled to reach out the arm of faith, and
embrace the blessed JESUS in your souls, so that you could say, “my
beloved is mine, and I am his?” If so, fear not, whoever you are. Hail,
all hail, you happy souls! The LORD, the LORD CHRIST, the everlasting
GOD, is your righteousness. CHRIST has justified you, who is he that
condemneth you? CHRIST has died for you, nay rather is risen again, and
ever liveth to make intercession for you. Being now justified by his
grace, you have peace with GOD, and shall, ere long, be with JESUS in
glory, reaping everlasting and unspeakable fruits both in body and soul.
For there is no condemnation to those that are really in CHRIST JESUS.
“Whether _Paul_ or _Apollos_, or life or death, all is yours if you
are CHRIST’s, for CHRIST is GOD’s.” My brethren, my heart is enlarged
towards you! O think of the love of CHRIST in dying for you! If the
LORD be your righteousness, let the righteousness of your LORD be
continually in your mouth. Talk of, O talk of, and recommend the
righteousness of CHRIST, when you lye down, and when you rise up, at
your going out and coming in! Think of the greatness of the gift, as
well as of the giver! Shew to all the world, in whom you have believed!
Let all by your fruits know, that the LORD is your righteousness, and
that you are waiting for your LORD from heaven! O study to be holy,
even as he who has called you, and washed you in his own blood, is
holy! Let not the righteousness of the LORD be evil spoken of through
you. Let not JESUS be wounded in the house of his friends; but grow
in grace, and in the knowledge of our LORD and Saviour JESUS CHRIST,
day by day. O think of his dying love! Let that love constrain you
to obedience! having much forgiven, love much. Be always asking, What
shall I do, to express my gratitude to the LORD, for giving me his
righteousness? Let that self-abasing, GOD-exalting question be always
in your mouths; “Why me, LORD? why me?” why am I taken, and others
left? why is the LORD my righteousness? why is he become my salvation,
who have so often deserved damnation at his hands?

My friends, I trust I feel somewhat of a sense of GOD’s distinguishing
love upon my heart; therefore I must divert a little from
congratulating you, to invite poor christless sinners to come to him,
and accept of his righteousness, that they may have life.

Alas, my heart almost bleeds! What a multitude of precious souls are
now before me! how shortly must all be ushered into eternity! and yet,
O cutting thought! was GOD now to require all your souls, how few,
comparatively speaking, could really say, the LORD _our_ righteousness!

And think you, _O sinners_, that you will be able to stand in the day
of judgment, if CHRIST be not your righteousness! No, that alone is the
wedding-garment in which you must appear. O christless sinners, I am
distressed for you! the desires of my soul are enlarged. O that this
may be an accepted time! that the LORD may be your righteousness! For
whither would you flee, if death should find you naked? Indeed there is
no hiding yourselves from his presence. The pitiful fig-leaves of your
own righteousness will not cover your nakedness, when GOD shall call
you to stand before him. _Adam_ found them ineffectual, and so will you.
O think of death! O think of judgment! Yet a little while, and time
shall be no more; and then what will become of you, if the LORD be not
your righteousness? Think you that CHRIST will spare you? No, he that
formed you, will have no mercy on you. If you are not of CHRIST, if
CHRIST be not your righteousness, CHRIST himself shall pronounce you
damned. And can you bear to think of being damned by CHRIST? Can you
bear to hear the LORD JESUS say to you, “Depart from me, ye cursed,
into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.” Can you
live, think you, in everlasting burnings? Is your flesh brass, and your
bones iron? what if they are? hell-fire, that fire prepared for the
devil and his angels, will heat them through and through. And can you
bear to depart from CHRIST? O that heart-piercing thought! Ask those
holy souls, who are at any time bewailing an absent GOD, who walk in
darkness, and see no light, though but a few days or hours; ask them,
what it is to lose a sight and presence of CHRIST? See how they seek
him sorrowing, and go mourning after him all the day long! And, if it
is so dreadful to lose the sensible presence of CHRIST only for a day,
what must it be to be banished from him to all eternity?

But thus it must be, if CHRIST be not your righteousness. For GOD’s
justice must be satisfied; and, unless CHRIST’s righteousness is
imputed and applied to you here, you must hereafter be satisfying the
divine justice in hell-torments eternally; nay, CHRIST himself shall
condemn you to that place of torment. And how cutting is that thought!
Methinks I see poor, trembling, christless wretches, standing before
the bar of GOD, crying out, LORD, if we must be damned, let some
angel, or some archangel, pronounce the damnatory sentence: but all in
vain. CHRIST himself shall pronounce the irrevocable sentence. Knowing
therefore the terrors of the LORD, let me persuade you to close with
CHRIST, and never rest till you can say, “the LORD our righteousness.”
Who knows but the LORD may have mercy on, nay, abundantly pardon you?
Beg of GOD to give you faith; and, if the LORD gives you that, you will
by it receive CHRIST, with his righteousness, and his All. You need not
fear the greatness or number of your sins. For are you sinners? so am I.
Are you the chief of sinners? so am I. Are you backsliding sinners? so
am I. And yet the LORD (for ever adored be his rich, free and sovereign
grace) the LORD is my righteousness. Come then, _O young men_, who (as
I acted once myself) are playing the prodigal, and wandering away afar
off from your heavenly Father’s house, come home, come home, and leave
your swines trough. Feed no longer on the husks of sensual delights:
for CHRIST’s sake arise, and come home! your heavenly Father now calls
you. See yonder the best robe, even the righteousness of his dear Son,
awaits you. See it, view it again and again. Consider at how dear a
rate it was purchased, even by the blood of GOD. Consider what great
need you have of it. You are lost, undone, damned for ever, without it.
Come then, poor, guilty prodigals, come home: indeed, I will not, like
the elder brother in the gospel, be angry; no, I will rejoice with the
angels in heaven. And O that GOD would now bow the heavens, and come
down! Descend, O Son of GOD, descend; and, as thou hast shewn in me
such mercy, O let thy blessed Spirit apply thy righteousness to some
young prodigals now before thee, and clothe their naked souls with thy
best robe!

But I must speak a word to you, _young maidens_, as well as young men.
I see many of you adorned, as to your bodies: but are not your souls
naked? Which of you can say, the Lord is my righteousness? which of you
was ever solicitous to be dressed in this robe of invaluable price, and
without which you are no better than whited sepulchres in the sight of
GOD? Let not then so many of you, young maidens, any longer forget your
chief and only ornament. O seek for the LORD to be your righteousness,
or otherwise burning will soon be upon you, instead of beauty!

And what shall I say to you of a middle age, you _busy merchants_, you
_cumbered Martha’s_, who, with all your gettings, have not yet gotten
the LORD to be your righteousness? Alas! what profit will there be of
all your labour under the sun, if you do not secure this pearl of
invaluable price? this one thing, so absolutely needful, that it only
can stand you in stead, when all other things shall be taken from you.
Labour therefore no longer so anxiously for the meat which perisheth,
but henceforward seek for the LORD to be your righteousness, a
righteousness that will entitle you to life everlasting. I see also
many _hoary heads_ here, and perhaps the most of them cannot say, the
LORD is my righteousness. O gray-headed sinners, I could weep over you!
your gray hairs, which ought to be your crown, and in which perhaps
you glory, are now your shame. You know not that the LORD is your
righteousness: O haste then, haste ye, aged sinners, and seek an
interest in redeeming love! Alas, you have one foot already in the
grave, your glass is just run out, your sun is just going down, and it
will set and leave you in an eternal darkness, unless the LORD be your
righteousness! Flee then, O flee for your lives! be not afraid. All
things are possible with GOD. If you come, though it be at the eleventh
hour, CHRIST JESUS will in no wise cast you out. Seek then for the LORD
to be your righteousness, and beseech him to let you know, how it is
that a man may be born again when he is old! But I must not forget the
_lambs_ of the flock. To feed them was one of my LORD’s last commands.
I know he will be angry with me, if I do not tell them, that the
LORD may be _their_ righteousness; and that of such is the kingdom of
heaven. Come then, ye little children, come to CHRIST; the LORD CHRIST
shall be _your_ righteousness. Do not think, that you are too young to
be converted. Perhaps many of you may be nine or ten years old, and yet
cannot say, the LORD is our righteousness; which many have said, though
younger than you. Come then, while you are young. Perhaps you may
not live to be old. Do not stay for other people. If your fathers and
mothers will not come to CHRIST, do you come without them. Let children
lead them, and shew them how the LORD may be _their_ righteousness. Our
LORD JESUS loved little children. You are his lambs; he bids me feed
you. I pray GOD make you willing betimes to take the LORD for your
righteousness.

Here then I could conclude; but I must not forget the _poor negroes_;
no, I must not. JESUS CHRIST has died for them, as well as for others.
Nor do I mention you last, because I despise your souls, but because
I would have what I shall say, make the deeper impression upon your
hearts. O that you would seek the LORD to be your righteousness! Who
knows but he may be found of you? For in JESUS CHRIST there is neither
male nor female, bond nor free; even you may be the children of GOD, if
you believe in JESUS. Did you never read of the eunuch belonging to the
queen of _Candace_? a negro like yourselves. He believed. The LORD was
his righteousness. He was baptized. Do you also believe, and you shall
be saved. CHRIST JESUS is the same now as he was yesterday, and will
wash you in his own blood. Go home then, turn the words of the text
into a prayer, and intreat the LORD to be _your_ righteousness. Even so,
come LORD JESUS, come quickly, into all our souls! _Amen_, LORD JESUS,
_Amen_ and _Amen_!




                              SERMON XV.

      The Righteousness of CHRIST, an everlasting Righteousness.


                            DANIEL ix. 24.

  _And to bring in everlasting Righteousness._

ON reading these words, I cannot help addressing you in the language of
the angels to the poor shepherds, who kept watch over their flocks by
night, “Behold, I bring you glad tidings of great joy,” such tidings,
that if we have ears to hear, if we have eyes to see, and if our hearts
have indeed experienced the grace of GOD, must cause us to cry out with
the Virgin _Mary_, “My soul doth magnify the LORD, and my spirit doth
rejoice in GOD my Saviour.” The words which I have read to you, are
part of one of the most explicit revelations that was given of JESUS
CHRIST, before he made his public entrance into this our world. It has
been observed by some, and very properly too, that it is one mark of
the divine goodness to his creatures, that he is pleased to let light
come in gradually upon the natural world. If the sun from midnight
darkness, was immediately to shine forth in his full meridian blaze,
his great splendor would be apt to dazzle our eyes, and strike us blind
again: but GOD is pleased to make light come gradually in, and by that
means we are prepared to receive it. And as GOD is pleased to deal with
the natural, so he has dealt with the moral, with the spiritual world.
The LORD JESUS CHRIST did not appear in his full glory all at once,
but as the sun rises gradually, so did the LORD JESUS, the Sun of
righteousness, rise gradually upon men, with healing under his wings.
Hence it was, that our first parents had nothing to fix their faith
upon, but that first promise, “The seed of the woman shall bruise the
serpent’s head.” And in future ages, at sundry times, and after divers
manners, GOD was pleased to speak to our fathers by the prophets,
before he spake to us in these last days by his son; and the prophets
that were more peculiarly dear to GOD, it should seem had more peculiar
and extraordinary revelations vouchsafed to them, concerning JESUS
CHRIST.

It is plain from the accounts we have in Scripture, that the Prophet
_Daniel_ was one of these; he is stiled by the angel, not only a “man
that was beloved,” but a “man that was _greatly_ beloved,” or as it is
in the margin of your bibles, “he was a man of desires,” of large and
extensive desires to promote the glory of GOD; he was a desirable man,
a man that did much good in his generation, and therefore his life
was much to be desired by those who loved GOD. The words which I
have chosen for the subject of our present meditation, contain part
of a revelation made to this man. If you look back to the beginning
of this chapter, you will find how the good man was employed, when
GOD was pleased to give him this revelation; verse 2. “In the first
year of _Darius_’s reign, I _Daniel_ understood by books the number
of the years, whereof the word of the LORD came to _Jeremiah_ the
prophet, that he would accomplish seventy years in the desolations of
_Jerusalem_.” _Daniel_ was a great man, and withal a good man; great as
he was, it seems he was not above reading his Bible; he made the Bible
his constant study; for it is the Bible we are to understand by what
is here termed books, and elsewhere, the scriptures of truth. He found,
that the time for GOD’s people being delivered from the captivity,
was now at hand. Well, one would have thought, that therefore _Daniel_
needed not to pray; but this, instead of retarding, quickened him
in his prayers: and therefore we are told in the third verse, “I set
my face unto the LORD GOD, to seek by prayer and supplications, with
fasting and sackcloth, and ashes.” It is beautifully expressed: “he
set his face,” as though he was resolved never to let his eye go off
GOD, till GOD was pleased to give him an answer; he was resolved,
_Jacob_-like, to wrestle with the LORD GOD, until GOD should be pleased
to give him the desired blessing. We are told in the fourth verse,
that “he prayed unto the LORD, and made confession,” not only of his
own sins, but the sins of his people. And when ye retire home to your
houses, before ye go to bed, I would recommend to you the reading of
this prayer; every word of it bespeaks his exceeding concern for the
public good. It would take me up too much time, was I to make such
observations as indeed the prayer deserves; to bring you sooner to the
words of the text, let us go forward to the twentieth verse, and there
you will find the success that _Daniel_ met with, when praying. Says he,
“while I was praying and confessing my sin, and the sin of my people
_Israel_, and presenting my supplication before the LORD my GOD, for
the holy mountain of my GOD; yea, while I was speaking in prayer, even
the man _Gabriel_, whom I had seen in the vision at the beginning,
being caused to fly swiftly, touched me about the time of the evening
oblation.” The manner in which _Daniel_ expresses himself, is very
emphatical: “While I was _speaking in prayer_;” implying, that GOD
suffers us, when we draw near to him by faith in prayer, to lay all our
complaints before him; he suffers us to speak unto, and talk with him,
as a man talketh with his friend. _Daniel_ at this time too was making
_confession_ one part of his prayer; for we are never, never in a
better frame to receive answers from above, than when we are humbling
ourselves before the LORD. He was not only confessing his own sins,
but he was confessing the sins of his people; he was praying for those,
who perhaps seldom prayed for themselves; “while I was speaking in
prayer, the man _Gabriel_:” which word, by interpretation, signifies
_the strength of_ GOD; a very proper name, says Bishop _Hall_, for
that angel who was to come and bring the news to the world, of the GOD
of strength, the LORD JESUS CHRIST. This angel is here represented as
flying, and as flying swiftly; to show us how willing, how unspeakably
willing those blessed spirits are, to bring good news to men. And it is
upon this account, I suppose, that we are taught by our LORD to pray,
“that GOD’s will may be done by us on earth, as it is done in heaven,”
that we may imitate a little of that alacrity and vigour, which angels
employ, when they are sent on errands for GOD.

Well, here is not only mention made of the angel’s flying swiftly, but
there is mention made of the time that he came; “He came and touched me,
about the time of the evening oblation,” that is, about three o’clock
in the afternoon; at this time there was a sacrifice made to GOD,
and this sacrifice was in a peculiar manner a type of the LORD JESUS,
who in the evening of the world was to become a sacrifice for sinners.
We are told in the 22d verse, what message this angel delivered,
“He informed me, and talked with me, and said, O _Daniel_, I am now
come forth to give thee skill and understanding; at the beginning of
thy supplication, the commandment came forth, and I am come to show
thee, for thou art greatly beloved, therefore understand the matter,
and consider the vision.” This passage, with such-like passages of
scripture, hath often comforted my soul, and may comfort the hearts of
all GOD’s people. There are a great many of you, perhaps, have prayed,
and prayed again to GOD, and probably you do not find any answer given
you: you pray for an enlarged heart, you pray for comfort, you pray for
deliverance; GOD is pleased to withhold it for a while; then the devil
strikes in, and says, GOD has shut out your prayers, GOD will never
hear, GOD will never regard you, therefore pray no more. But, my dear
friends, this is a mistake; a thousand years are with GOD as one day;
and the LORD JESUS has bid us, “to pray always, and not faint.” You
may have had your prayers heard, the very moment they went out of your
lips, though it may not please your GOD, (and it may not be proper
for you) to let you know that they are heard. “At the beginning of thy
supplication, the commandment went forth;” and this very angel some
hundred years after, told _Zacharias_, that his prayer was heard; a
prayer for what? a prayer for a child; it could not be supposed that
at the very time _Zacharias_ was praying for a child; but his prayer
he had put up forty years before, GOD was pleased to answer so long
afterwards.

But to proceed with _Gabriel_’s declaration, verse 24. “Seventy ♦weeks
are determined upon thy people, and upon thy holy city, to finish
transgression, to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for
iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness,” I do not intend
to trouble you about the critical exposition of these _seventy weeks_;
commentators are divided exceedingly upon this subject; some of them
explain them one way, and some another, and perhaps we shall never
know till the day of judgment, till the glorious day spoken of in the
New Testament, which are right. My intention is to dwell upon this
particular part of the angel’s message, that some one person was to
do something _unspeakable_ for GOD’s people, even “to bring in an
everlasting righteousness.”

  ♦ “years” replaced with “weeks”

If you want to know who was the person that was to do this, look to
the 26th verse, and you will find the person mentioned, the LORD JESUS
CHRIST: “after threescore and two weeks shall the _Messiah_ be cut
off, but not for himself:” he is the person spoken of, he was “to put
an end to sin, to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in
everlasting righteousness.”

From these important words, I shall endeavour,

  _First_, To shew you what we are to understand by the word,
    “Righteousness.”

  _Secondly_, I shall endeavour to shew you, upon what account it
    is, that the righteousness mentioned in the text, is called an
    “everlasting righteousness.”

  _Thirdly_, I shall shew, what we are to understand by “bringing
    it in.” And,

Then speak a word to saints and sinners. And while I am speaking to
your ears, may GOD, for the LORD JESUS CHRIST’s sake, speak to your
hearts!

_First_, To explain what we are to understand by the word,
“righteousness.” If I was to ask some people what we are to understand
by the word, righteousness; if the person was an _Arminian_, or an
enemy to the doctrine of free grace, he would answer me, it signifies
what we commonly call _moral honesty_, or doing justice between man
and man. And, indeed, in various passages of scripture, the word
righteousness has no other meaning, at least, it bears that meaning.
I suppose, we are to understand it in this sense, when we are told,
that _Paul_, preaching before _Felix_, “reasoned of temperance,
of righteousness, and of a judgment to come.” _Felix_ had been a
very unrighteous and unjust man, and therefore, to convince him of
his wickedness, to alarm his conscience, to put him upon seeking
help in the LORD JESUS, _Paul_ preached not only of temperance, (for
_Felix_ had been a very intemperate man) but he preached to him of
righteousness, of the necessity of doing justice, because he had been
an unjust man; and he puts before him the judgment to come, in order to
make him fly to JESUS CHRIST for deliverance from the bad consequences
of that judgment; and there are other places of scripture, where the
word righteousness may be understood in this sense.

It likewise signifies inward holiness, wrought in us by the blessed
Spirit of GOD. But, I believe, the word righteousness in my text
signifies, what, I trust most, I should be glad if I could say, all who
attend this night, will be glad to hear of: What is that? It is what
all reformed divines, that have clear heads and clear hearts, call an
_imputed righteousness_, or the righteousness of the LORD JESUS CHRIST
to be imputed to poor sinners upon their believing: and, if you ask me,
what I mean by an imputed righteousness; not to shoot over your heads,
but rather, if GOD shall be pleased to make me, to reach your hearts,
I will tell you, by this word “righteousness,” I understand all that
CHRIST hath done, and all that CHRIST hath suffered: or, to make use of
the term generally made use of by sound divines, “CHRIST’s active, and
CHRIST’s passive obedience;” put these two together, and they make up
the righteousness of the LORD JESUS CHRIST. My dear friends, thus stood
the case between GOD and man: at first GOD made man upright. _Moses_
gives us a short, but never was so full a description of the origin
and nature of man given by any other but himself. “In the image of GOD
made he man,” says that sacred historian, being inspired by the Spirit
of GOD. GOD said, and it was done; GOD commanded, and the world arose
before him; “Let there be light,” and instantaneously behold light
appeared: but when that lovely, that divine, that blessed creature Man,
the Lord of the creation, GOD’s vicegerent, was to be made, GOD calls
a council, and says, “Let us make man after our own image.” Now, this
image is to be understood, no doubt, in respect of man’s soul; for GOD
being no corporeal substance, man could not be made after his image
that way. Well, in this condition GOD made man. _Adam_ stood as our
representative. _Adam_ and _Eve_ had but one name originally, “GOD made
man, and called their name _Adam_.” GOD left _Adam_ to his own free
will; he was pleased to enter into a covenant with him, which, indeed,
is an amazing instance of GOD’s condescension. GOD might have ordered
man to do so and so, and not made him any promise of a reward: but
the great Creator was pleased to promise him, that if he performed an
unsinning obedience, if he abstained from eating a particular tree,
that he and his posterity should live for ever; but if He broke that
command, in the day that he ate thereof, he and all his posterity
were to die. Now, I verily believe, had you and I been there present,
however some people may object against GOD’s severity, in imputing
_Adam_’s sin to us; yet I believe, if you and I, and all the world
had been present, we should have heartily come into this agreement.
Supposing GOD had called the whole creation together, and had said,
“Ye, my creatures, I have made here a man after my own image, I have
breathed into him the breath of life, I have caused him to become a
living soul, I have filled him with righteousness and true holiness; he
has not the least propensity to sin, only he is a fallible and mutable
creature; all that I desire of this man is, that he abstain from yonder
tree: I have given to him all the trees of the garden, I have made
him, and planted for him a garden with mine own right hand, I desire he
may abstain from plucking yonder fruit: Will ye stand or fall by this
man, will ye let him be your representative, will ye be content that
his obedience or disobedience be imputed to you?” If we had been all
there, every one of us would have said, “LORD GOD, we will let him be
our representative;” the terms were so easy, the improbability of his
falling was so exceeding great, that I believe every one of us should
have all put our hand to the covenant. And supposing us alive, and that
we had agreed to that covenant, who is that man or woman that could
find fault with GOD’s imputing _Adam_’s sin to us. Well, my friends,
GOD made man in this condition; the devil envied his happiness; it is
supposed by some, that man was made to supply the places of the fallen
angels. But the devil envied man, and had leave to tempt him; _Eve_
soon reached out her hand and plucked of the forbidden fruit, and
afterwards _Adam_ transgressed also; and from that very moment, to make
use of Mr. _Boston_’s words, “Man’s name was _Ichabod_,” the glory of
the LORD departed from him. _Adam_ and _Eve_ then fell: you, and I, and
all their posterity (whom they represented) fell in them. Mankind had
but one neck; and GOD might have served mankind, as _Caligula_ would
have served _Rome_, according to his own words, “I wish it had but one
neck, and I would cut it off with one blow.” GOD, if he pleased, might
have sent us all to hell. Here _Calvin_ represents GOD’s attributes
as struggling one with another; Justice saying to GOD, seeing Justice
had framed the sanction, “Is the law broken, damn the offender, and
send him to hell.” The mercy of GOD, his darling attribute, cries out,
“Spare him, spare him.” The wisdom of GOD contrives a way, that justice
might be satisfied, and yet mercy be triumphant still. How was that?
The LORD JESUS interposes, the days-man, the dear Redeemer! he saw GOD
wielding his flaming sword, and his hand taking hold of vengeance; the
LORD JESUS CHRIST saw the sword ready to be sheathed in the blood of
the offender; when no eye could pity, when no angel or archangel could
rescue, just as GOD was, as it were, about to give the fatal blow, just
as the knife was put to the throat of the offender, the Son of GOD, the
eternal Logos, says, “Father, spare the sinner; let him not die; Father,
Father, O hold thy hand, withdraw thy sword, for I come to do thy will;
man has broken thy law, and violated thy covenant: I do not deny but
man deserves to be damned for ever; but, Father, what _Adam_ could not
do, if thou wilt prepare me a body, I in the fulness of time will go,
and die for him; he has broken thy law, but I will go and keep it, that
thy law may be honoured; I will give a perfect unsinning obedience to
all thy commandments; and that thou mayst justify ungodly creatures, I
will not only go down and obey thy law, but I will go down and bleed;
I will go down and die: here I am; I ♦will step in between thee and
sinners, and be glad to have thy sword sheathed in my heart’s blood for
them.”

  ♦ duplicate word “will” removed

In the fulness of time descends the eternal Logos, “In the fulness of
time GOD sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the law, to
redeem them that are under the law from the curse of it, being made a
curse for us.” The LORD JESUS CHRIST being cloathed in human nature,
fulfilled all righteousness; he submitted to every institution of GOD,
and was pleased to obey the whole moral law; and afterwards, O can we
think of it, O can you hear of it, without a heart leaping with joy, at
last the LORD JESUS bled and died! and when he was just expiring, just
as he was about to bow down his head, and give up the ghost, what do ye
think he said? He said, “It is finished!” As much as to say, “Now the
arduous work, the difficult task I had undertaken, blessed be GOD, is
now completely over; all the demands of the law are finished; now GOD’s
justice is satisfied; now a new and living way is opened by my blood to
the holiest of all for poor sinners.”

So that when CHRIST’s righteousness is here spoken of, we are to
understand “CHRIST’s obedience and death,” all that CHRIST has done,
and all that CHRIST has suffered for an elect world, for all that will
believe on him. And blessed be GOD for this righteousness! blessed be
GOD for the epithet which in the text is put to this righteousness;
it might be called a _blessed_ righteousness, it might be called
a _glorious_ righteousness; it might be called an _invaluable_
righteousness; but the angel calls it an _everlasting righteousness_;
GOD give you to take the comfort of it!

_Secondly_, I am now to shew, on what account, this righteousness is
here called an _everlasting_ righteousness; and pray why do you think
is CHRIST’s righteousness called an everlasting righteousness?

I suppose it is called an everlasting righteousness,

_First_, Because CHRIST’s righteousness was intended by the great GOD
to extend to mankind even from eternity. All of you know, that old love
is the best love. When we have an old acquaintance, a friend, that has
loved us for many years, indeed that love is sweet: though we may love
new friends, yet when an old friend and a new friend meet together,
we may say, that the old is better. Now this should endear GOD to us,
to think that from all the ages of eternity GOD had thoughts of you;
GOD intended the LORD JESUS CHRIST to save your souls and mine: hence
it is, that GOD, to endear _Jeremiah_ to him, tells him, I have loved
thee with an everlasting love. Hence it is, that the LORD JESUS, when
he calls his elect people up to heaven, says, “Come, ye blessed of
my Father;” what follows? “receive the kingdom prepared for you;” how
long? “from the foundation of the world.” All that we receive in time;
all the streams that come to our souls, are but so many streams flowing
from that inexhaustible fountain, GOD’s electing, GOD’s sovereign,
GOD’s distinguishing, GOD’s everlasting love; and, therefore, the
righteousness of JESUS CHRIST may properly be called an everlasting
righteousness, because GOD intended it from everlasting.

_Secondly_, It is called an everlasting righteousness, because the
efficacy of CHRIST’s death took place immediately upon _Adam_’s fall.
Christianity, in one sense, is as old as the creation. Great Professor
_Franck_, of _Germany_, says, “That CHRIST is the sum and substance
of all righteousness.” Mr. _Henry_ observes, “That the LORD JESUS
CHRIST is the treasure hid in the field of the Old Testament, under
the types and shadows of the _Mosaic_ dispensation.” We have the Sun
of Righteousness shining in his full meridian in the New Testament
dispensation. Now the righteousness of JESUS CHRIST, may be called an
everlasting righteousness, because all the saints that have been saved,
or that ever will be saved, are all saved by the righteousness of
CHRIST. A great many censorious people are mighty inquisitive to know,
what will become of the heathens, that never heard of JESUS CHRIST.
I would say to such persons, as the LORD JESUS CHRIST did to another
curious enquirer, “What is that to thee? follow thou me.” Pray, for
what should you and I trouble ourselves about the heathens? Are not we
heathens? It is too true, that we have too much of the heathens temper
and practice with us. But why should we lose our time in enquiring
about what will become of the heathen, and not rather enquire what will
become of our own souls? We may be sure GOD will deal with heathens
according to their light: if he has given them no revelation, they will
not be judged by a revelation; if they have not had a law, they will
be judged without law. But as for the _Jews_ and _Gentiles_, who have
the gospel revealed to them, however Deists may argue contrary to it;
however they may set up reason in opposition to divine revelation;
we may be sure none were ever saved, or will be saved, but by the
righteousness of CHRIST. It was through faith in him, that _Abel_ was
saved; it was through the sacrifice of JESUS CHRIST, that _Abraham_
was accepted, and that all the prophets of old were accepted; and there
is none other name given under heaven, whereby we can be saved, but
that of CHRIST. And therefore, since persons under the law, and under
the gospel, are to be saved only through CHRIST; therefore, CHRIST’s
righteousness may properly be called an everlasting righteousness. But
this is not all.

_Thirdly_, The righteousness of JESUS CHRIST, is not only to be called
an everlasting righteousness, because that all persons under the law,
and all persons under the gospel, are saved by it; but because the
efficacy thereof, blessed be GOD for it! is to continue till time shall
be no more. Blessed be GOD for JESUS CHRIST! the efficacy of whose
blood, death, and atonement, is as great and as effectual now to the
salvation of poor sinners, as when he bowed his blessed head, and gave
up the ghost: “JESUS CHRIST is the same yesterday, to-day, and for
ever;” and whosoever believes on him now, whosoever comes to, and
accepts of him, shall now see his power, shall taste of his grace, and
shall be actually saved by him, the same as if he had been in company
with those who saw him expiring.

_Fourthly_, CHRIST’s righteousness may be called an everlasting
righteousness, because the benefit of it is to endure to everlasting
life. Indeed, some people tell us, that a person may be in CHRIST
to-day, and go to the devil to-morrow: but, blessed be GOD, ye have
not so learned CHRIST! No, my dear friends, thanks be to GOD for that
divine text, “There is now no condemnation to them that are in CHRIST
JESUS.” Though GOD’s people may fall foully; and though many are full
of doubts and fears, and say, “One day I shall fall by the hands of
_Saul_;” however ye may say in your haste, “All men are liars;” however
your poor souls may be harassed, yet no wicked devil, nor your own
depraved heart, shall be able to separate you from the love of GOD:
GOD has loved you, GOD has fixed his heart upon you, and having loved
his own, he loves them unto the end. The LORD of life and of glory,
the blessed JESUS, will never cease loving you, till he hath loved and
brought you to heaven; when he will rejoice, and say, “Behold me, O
my Father, and the dear children that thou hast given me; thou gavest
them me; thine they were, I have bought them with my blood, I have
won them with my sword and with my bow, and I now will wear them as
so many jewels of my crown.” Therefore, JESUS CHRIST’s righteousness
may be called an everlasting righteousness, because those who once
take hold of, and are interested in it, shall be saved everlastingly by
CHRIST: “It is GOD that justifies us, (says St. _Paul_) who is he that
condemneth? It is CHRIST that died, yea rather that is risen again.”
He gives devils the challenge, “O death, where is thy sting, O grave,
where is thy victory? Who shall separate us from the love of GOD? I
am persuaded that neither death nor life, neither principalities nor
powers, nor any other creature, shall ever be able to seperate us from
the love of GOD, which is in CHRIST JESUS our LORD.” Those whom GOD
justifies, he also glorifies. And because CHRIST lives, blessed be GOD,
we shall live also. I know not what you may say; but though I trust I
have felt the grace of CHRIST, yet I find that I have as much need to
come to CHRIST every day for fresh strength, as if I had never believed
before: and if I was to depend upon my own faithfulness, and not the
faithfulness of the Son of GOD, I am sure I should soon desert the LORD
JESUS CHRIST. But glory be to GOD, he is faithful that hath promised!
Glory be to GOD, our salvation depends not upon our own free will, but
upon GOD’s free grace! Here is a sure bottom; the believer may build
upon it; let the storms blow as long and as high as they please, they
may make the poor creature tremble, but blessed be GOD, they never
shall be able to take him off the foundation; though they may shake
him, they shall only shake off his corruption: and I believe all that
fear GOD, will be glad to part with it. On all these accounts, CHRIST’s
righteousness may be called an everlasting righteousness.

III. It is said, in my text, that JESUS was to bring it in. What are
we to understand by his bringing it in? Our LORD’s promulgating and
proclaiming it to the world. Indeed, it was brought in under the law;
but then it was brought in under types and shadows, and most of the
_Jews_ looked no further. But JESUS CHRIST brought life and immortality
to light by the gospel. The light of _Moses_ was only twilight; the
light of the gospel, is like the sun at noon-day, shining in his
full meridian. Therefore, JESUS CHRIST may be said to bring in this
everlasting righteousness, because he proclaimed it to the world, and
commanded it to be preached, that GOD sent his Son into the world, that
the world through him might be saved.

Again, The LORD JESUS CHRIST brought in this righteousness, as he
wrought it out for sinners upon the cross. Some Antinomians, for want
of a proper distinction, run into a grievous error, telling us, Because
GOD intended to justify by the righteousness of JESUS CHRIST, therefore
man is justified from all eternity: which is absurd: a person cannot
be justified, till he is actually existing; therefore, though man is
justified, as it lies in GOD’s mind from all eternity, yet it was not
actually brought in till the LORD JESUS CHRIST pronounced those blessed
words, “It is finished;” the grand consummation! then JESUS brought
it in. A new and a living way was to be opened to the Holy of Holies,
for poor sinners, by the blood of CHRIST. But I do not think that the
expression, _brought in_, is to be limited to this sense, though I
suppose it is the primary one; it implies not only CHRIST’s bringing
it into the world, as promulgating, and having it written in the word
of GOD, and as having wrought it out for sinners in his life, and on
the cross; but he brings it in, in a manner, which, I pray GOD may
take place this night; I mean, bringing it, by his blessed Spirit, into
poor believers hearts. All that CHRIST hath done, all that CHRIST hath
suffered, all CHRIST’s active obedience, all CHRIST’s passive obedience,
will do us no good, unless by the Spirit of GOD, it is brought into
our souls. As one expresses it, “An unapplied CHRIST is no CHRIST at
all.” To hear of a CHRIST dying for sinners, will only increase your
damnation, will only sink you deeper into hell, unless we have ground
to say, by a work of grace wrought in our hearts, that the LORD JESUS
hath brought this home to us. Hence it is, that the Apostle, speaking
of CHRIST, says, “Who loved me, and gave himself for me.” O that dear,
that great, that little, but important word, _me_. Happy they, who can
adopt the Apostle’s language! Happy they that can apply it to their
own heart; and when they hear that CHRIST has brought in an everlasting
righteousness, can say, Blessed be GOD, it is brought in by the blessed
Spirit to my soul!

Are there any here that can go along with me on this doctrine? But
why do I ask this question, when preaching to numbers, who, I hope,
have tasted of the grace of GOD long ago? I do not know; I cannot
distinguish you; you are just like other people, as to your looks
and habits; but if I do not, and if your neighbours cannot know you,
that great GOD, in whose presence you are, knows you; He, before whose
tribunal we are shortly to appear, knows you. If CHRIST JESUS hath
brought his everlasting righteousness into your heart; if it is applied
by the Spirit of GOD to your soul, what shall I say to you? I will say
as the Angel to _John_, “Come up hither,” thou child of GOD! Come up
hither, thou son, thou daughter of _Abraham_! Come and join with me, in
calling upon angels and archangels, in calling upon the spirits of just
men made perfect, to help thee to praise that loving Redeemer, that
has brought in an everlasting righteousness. O was ever love like this!
When _Abraham_ was about to offer up his son, GOD said, “Now I know
that thou lovest me, since thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only
son from me.” Now may each child of GOD say, “Now, O GOD, I know that
thou hast loved me, since thou hast not withheld thy Son, thy dear
Son, the LORD JESUS CHRIST, from dying for me.” If thou hast got CHRIST
brought into thy soul by faith, O look forward, look towards a happy
eternity; O look towards those everlasting mansions, into which GOD
will bring thee after death. My dear friends, I could say much from
this text to comfort GOD’s people: But

I must address myself to you, poor souls, who cannot say, that this
righteousness has been brought home to your souls; but if it was never
brought home before, may GOD, for the LORD JESUS CHRIST’s sake, bring
it home now! Are any of you depending upon a righteousness of your
own? Do any of you here, think to save yourselves by your own doings?
I say to you, as the Apostle said to one that offered money for a
power to confer the gift of the Holy Ghost, your righteousness shall
perish with you. Poor miserable creatures! What is there in your tears?
what in your prayers? what in your performances, to appease the wrath
of an angry GOD? Away from the trees of the garden; come, ye guilty
wretches, come as poor, lost, undone, and wretched creatures, and
accept of a better righteousness than your own. As I said before, so
I tell you again, the righteousness of JESUS CHRIST is an everlasting
righteousness: it is wrought out for the very chief of sinners. Ho,
every one that thirsteth, let him come and drink of this water of life
freely. Are any of you wounded by sin? Do any of you feel you have no
righteousness of your own? Are any of you perishing for hunger? Are any
of you afraid ye will perish for ever? Come, dear souls, in all your
rags; come, thou poor man; come, thou poor, distressed woman; you, who
think GOD will never forgive you, and that your sins are too great to
be forgiven; come, thou doubting creature, who art afraid thou wilt
never get comfort; arise, take comfort, the LORD JESUS CHRIST, the LORD
of life, the LORD of glory, calls for thee: through his righteousness
there is hope for the chief of sinners, for the worst of creatures.
What if thou hadst committed all the sins in the world? What if thou
hadst committed the sins of a thousand, what if thou hadst committed
the sins of a million of worlds? CHRIST’s righteousness will cover, the
blood of the LORD JESUS CHRIST will cleanse thee from the guilt of them
all. O let not one poor soul stand at a distance from the Saviour. My
dear friends, could my voice hold out, was my strength equal to my will,
I would wrestle with you; I would strive with arguments, till you came
and washed in this blood of the Lamb; till you came and accepted of
this everlasting righteousness. O come, come! Now, since it is brought
into the world by CHRIST, so in the name, in the strength, and by
the assistance of the great GOD, I bring it now to the pulpit; I now
offer this righteousness, this free, this imputed, this everlasting
righteousness to all poor sinners that will accept of it. For GOD’s
sake accept it this night: you do not know but ye may die before
to-morrow. How do ye know, but while I am speaking, a fit of the
apoplexy may seize, and death arrest you? O my dear friends, where
can ye go? where will ye appear? How will ye stand before an angry
GOD, without the righteousness of the LORD JESUS CHRIST put upon your
souls? Can ye stand in your own rags? Will ye dare to appear before a
heart-searching GOD, without the apparel of your elder brother? If ye
do, I know your doom: CHRIST will frown you into hell: “Depart, depart,
ye cursed, into everlasting fire,” shall be your portion. Think, I
pray you, therefore, on these things; go home, go home, go home, pray
over the text, and say, “LORD GOD, thou hast brought an everlasting
righteousness into the world by the LORD JESUS CHRIST; by the blessed
Spirit bring it into my heart!” then, die when ye will, ye are safe; if
it be to-morrow, ye shall be immediately translated into the presence
of the everlasting GOD: that will be sweet! Happy they who have got
this robe on; happy they that can say, “My GOD hath loved me, and I
shall be loved by him with an everlasting love!” That every one of you
may be able to say so, may GOD grant, for the sake of JESUS CHRIST, the
dear Redeemer; to whom be glory for ever. _Amen._




                              SERMON XVI.

                The Observation of the Birth of CHRIST,
                      the Duty of all Christians;
                 or the true Way of keeping Christmas.


                            MATTHEW i. 21.

  _And she shall bring forth a Son, and thou shalt call his Name
    Jesus: For he shall save his People from their Sins._

THE celebration of the birth of CHRIST hath been esteemed a duty by
most who profess christianity. When we consider the condescension and
love of the LORD JESUS CHRIST, in submitting to be born of a virgin,
a poor sinful creature; and especially as he knew how he was to be
treated in this world; that he was to be despised, scoffed at, and at
last to die a painful, shameful, and ignominious death; that he should
be treated as though he was the off-scouring of all mankind; used, not
like the son of a man, and, therefore, not at all like the Son of GOD;
the consideration of these things should make us to admire the love of
the LORD JESUS CHRIST, who was so willing to offer himself as a ransom
for the sins of the people, that when the fulness of time was come,
CHRIST came, made of a woman, made under the law: he came according to
the eternal counsel of the Father; he came, not in glory or in splendor,
not like him who brought all salvation with him: no, he was born in
a stable, and laid in a manger; oxen were his companions. O amazing
condescension of the LORD JESUS CHRIST, to stoop to such low and poor
things for our sake. What love is this, what great and wonderful love
was here, that the Son of GOD should come into our world in so mean
a condition, to deliver us from the sin and misery in which we were
involved by our fall in our first parents! And as all that proceeded
from the springs must be muddy, because the fountain was so, the LORD
JESUS CHRIST came to take our natures upon him, to die a shameful, a
painful, and an accursed death for our sakes; he died for our sins,
and to bring us to GOD; he cleansed us by his blood from the guilt of
sin, he satisfied for our imperfections; and now, my brethren, we have
access unto him with boldness; he is a mediator between us and his
offended Father.

Therefore, if we do but consider into what state, and at how great
a distance from GOD we are fallen; how vile our natures were; what a
depravity, and how incapable to restore that image of GOD to our souls,
which we lost in our first parents: when I consider these things, my
brethren, and that the LORD JESUS CHRIST came to restore us to that
favour with GOD which we had lost, and that CHRIST not only came down
with an intent to do it, but actually accomplished all that was in his
heart towards us; that he raised and brought us into favour with GOD,
that we might find kindness and mercy in his sight; surely this calls
for some return of thanks on our part to our dear Redeemer, for this
love and kindness to our souls. How just would it have been of him,
to have left us in that deplorable state wherein we, by our guilt, had
involved ourselves? For GOD could not, nor can receive any additional
good by our salvation; but it was love, mere love; it was free love
that brought the LORD JESUS CHRIST into our world about 1700 years ago.
What, shall we not remember the birth of our JESUS? Shall we yearly
celebrate the birth of our temporal king, and shall that of the King
of kings be quite forgotten? Shall that only, which ought to be had
chiefly in remembrance, be quite forgotten? GOD forbid! No, my dear
brethren, let us celebrate and keep this festival of our church, with
joy in our hearts: let the birth of a Redeemer, which redeemed us
from sin, from wrath, from death, from hell, be always remembered;
may this Saviour’s love never be forgotten! but may we sing forth all
his love and glory as long as life shall last here, and through an
endless eternity in the world above! may we chaunt forth the wonders
of redeeming love, and the riches of free grace, amidst angels and
archangels, cherubim and seraphim, without intermission, for ever
and ever! And as, my brethren, the time for keeping this festival is
approaching, let us consider our duty in the true observation thereof,
or the right way for the glory of GOD, and the good of immortal souls,
to celebrate the birth of our LORD JESUS CHRIST; an event which ought
to be had in eternal remembrance.

It is my design to lay down rules for the true keeping of that time of
_Christmas_, which is now approaching.

  I. I shall shew you when you may be said, not to observe this
    festival aright.

  II. I shall shew you, when your observation and celebrating of
    this festival is done according to the glory of GOD, and to
    the true manner of keeping of it.

  III. Shall conclude with an exhortation to all of you, high and
    low, rich and poor, one with another, to have a regard to your
    behaviour at all times, but more especially, my dear brethren,
    on this solemn occasion.

I. My brethren, I am to shew when your celebration of this festival is
not of the right kind.

And _First_, you do not celebrate this aright, when you spend most of
your time in cards, dice, or gaming of any sort.

This is a season, for which there is no more allowance for wasting
of your precious time in those unlawful entertainments, than any
other. Persons are apt to flatter themselves that they are free and at
liberty to spend whole evenings now at cards, at dice, or any diversion
whatsoever, to pass away, as they call it, a tedious evening. They
can do any thing now to pass away that, which is hastening as fast as
thought: time is always upon the wing; it is no sooner present but it
is past, and no sooner come but it is gone. And have we so much to do,
and so little time to do it in, and yet complain of time lying heavy
upon our hands? Have we not the devil and the beast to get out of our
souls? Are not our natures to be changed, our corruptions to be subdued,
our wills to be brought over to GOD, our hard hearts to be softened,
all old things to be done away, and all things to become new in our
souls? Is there not all this to be done? And yet we have too much time
upon our hands! It is well, that instead of having too much time, it
be not found that we have got too little, when we come to die: then
we shall wish, my brethren, that we had made more account of our time,
that we had improved it for the glory of GOD, and the welfare of our
immortal souls.

Good GOD! how amazing is the consideration, that many can go to church
in the morning, and take the Sacrament, and come home and spend the
afternoon and evening in cards: Is this, my brethren, discerning the
LORD’s body? Is this taking the sacrament according to its institution?
Is not this a pollution thereof, and making the blood of the covenant
an unholy thing.

Therefore, those of you who have made this your practice in times past,
let me beseech you, in the bowels of mercy, not to do so any more; for,
indeed, it is earthly, it is sensual, it is devilish. Consider what is
said of those who eat and drink at the LORD’s table unworthily, that
they eat and drink their own damnation: And can they, my brethren, be
said to eat and drink any otherwise, who no sooner go from the table
of the LORD, but run to the diversions of the devil? Indeed this is
exceeding sinful, and displeasing unto the LORD; then forbear those
diversions which are so evil in themselves: O be not found in those
exercises, and in that pleasure, which you would not be found in
when you come to die. Thus, my brethren, you see it is not a right
celebration of the birth of the LORD JESUS, to spend it in cards, dice,
or any other diversions, which proceed so directly from the devil, and
are destructive to all true goodness.

_Secondly_, They cannot be said truly to celebrate this time, who spend
their time in eating and drinking to excess.

This is a season when persons are apt to indulge themselves in all
manner of luxury: iniquity now abounds apace; nothing is scarcely to
be seen but things of the greatest extravagance imaginable; not only
for the necessities of the body, but to pamper it in lust, to feed its
vices, to make us go on in sin, to be a means for gratifying our carnal
appetite; and this is a means to make us forget the LORD of glory.
This makes us only fit to do such drudgery, as the devil shall set us
about; this is only preparing to run wheresoever the devil sends: this,
instead of denying ourselves, is indulging ourselves; this is not, nor
cannot be called, a celebration of the birth of our LORD JESUS CHRIST,
when we are making ourselves worse than the beasts that perish.

I am not speaking against eating and drinking of the good things
of life, but against the eating and drinking of them to excess,
because, thus they unqualify us for the service of GOD; and to our
fellow-creatures they make us unsociable, and may occasion us to be
guilty of saying and acting those things, which we should be ashamed
to think of, if we had only eat or drank with moderation.

Therefore, my dear brethren, let me beseech you to set a watch over
yourselves; be careful that you do not run into that company which may
tempt you to evil; for would a man run himself into danger on purpose?
Would a man enter himself into that company, where, before he goes, he
knows he shall be exposed to great temptations; and therefore, if you
have any reason to think that the company you are going into will be a
temptation, I beseech you, by the mercies of GOD in CHRIST JESUS, that
you would not run into it.

How can you say, “Lead us not into temptation,” when you are resolved
to lead yourselves into it, by running into the occasions of sins. You
are commanded to keep from the appearance of evil; and do you do that,
by running into the place and company where it is like to be committed?
No, this is so far from avoiding, and shunning it, that it is a plain
proof to the contrary; therefore, if you are for observing this time,
this festival of our church, let it not be done by running to excess;
for you plainly see, that those who are guilty thereof, cannot be said
properly to celebrate it.

_Thirdly_, Nor can they, my brethren, be said to keep, or rightly
observe the commemoration of the birth of our Redeemer, the LORD JESUS
CHRIST, who neglect their worldly callings to follow pleasures and
diversions.

Alas! many, instead of keeping this time as it ought to be, run into
sin with greediness; instead of devoting their time to the LORD, it
is only devoted to the devil and their own lusts. How many who thus
mispend their time, at this season, lay by the work of their callings
for a considerable time, with no other view, but to follow earthly,
sensual, and devilish pleasures. If they should go to hear a sermon,
or to a society, my brethren, the mouths of all the _Pharisees_ at
once are open against them, that they are not only a going to be ruined
themselves, but are going to ruin their families too; they think it
needless to make so much ado; this is being _righteous over-much_; but
you may be as wicked as you please, and they will not cry out; however,
when you are _wicked over-much_, by serving the devil and your own
pleasures for a week or a month together, then, my brethren, with them
you are only taking a little recreation, spending your time in innocent
diversions; no one cries out against you, there is no outcry that you
are going to be ruined. Again, if you give never so small a matter
among the poor people of GOD, for their relief, then you are robbing
your families, then you are going to turn madmen, and in a few days
will be so methodistically mad, that you are not fit for a polite
gentleman’s conversation; but if you spend one hundred times the money
in playhouses, &c. on your lusts and pleasures, then you are liked and
esteemed as a good friend and companion; but, my dear brethren, these
good companions in the world’s account, are never so in the LORD JESUS
CHRIST’s. You cannot serve GOD and mammon; you must either lose your
lusts, your pleasures, and your delights, or you cannot expect to find
favour with GOD; for indeed, and indeed, the ways that too many follow
at this time, are sinful, yea, they are exceeding sinful. You see they
cannot be said to celebrate this holy time, who thus mispend their
precious time to the neglect of their families; such are destroying
themselves with a witness.

Thus, my dear brethren, I have shewn you who they are who do not
rightly observe this holy festival.

II. I come now, in the second place, to shew you, who they are who do
rightly observe, and truly celebrate the birth of our Redeemer.

And I shall shew you who they are in two particulars, directly opposite
to the others; and then, my brethren, take your choice: you must choose
the one or the other, there is no medium, you must either serve the
LORD or Baal; and, therefore, my dear brethren, let me beg of you to
consider,

_First_, That those spend their time aright, and truly observe this
festival, who spend their hours in reading, praying, and religious
conversation.

What can we do to employ our time to a more noble purpose, than reading
of what our dear Redeemer has done and suffered; to read, that the King
of kings, and the LORD of lords, came from his throne and took upon
him the form of the meanest of his servants; and what great ♦things
he underwent. This, this is an history worth reading, this is worth
employing our time about: and surely, when we read of the sufferings
of our Saviour, it should excite us to prayer, that we might have an
interest in the LORD JESUS CHRIST; that the blood which he spilt upon
mount _Calvary_, and his death and crucifixion, might make an atonement
for our sins, that we might be made holy; that we might be enabled to
put off the old man with his deeds, and put on the new man, even the
LORD JESUS CHRIST; that we may throw away the heavy yoke of sin, and
put on the yoke of the LORD JESUS CHRIST. Indeed, my brethren, these
things call for prayer, and for earnest prayer too; and O do be earnest
with GOD, that you may have an interest in this Redeemer, and that you
may put on his righteousness, so that you may not come before him in
your filthy rags, nor be found not having on the wedding garment. O do
not, I beseech you, trust unto yourselves for justification; you cannot,
indeed, you cannot be justified by the works of the law. I intreat that
your time may be thus spent; and if you are in company, let your time
be spent in that conversation which profiteth: let it not be about your
dressing, your plays, your profits, or your worldly concerns, but let
it be the wonders of redeeming love: O tell, tell to each other, what
great things the LORD has done for your souls; declare unto one another,
how you were delivered from the hands of your common enemy, _Satan_,
and how the LORD has brought your feet from the clay, and has set them
upon the rock of ages, the LORD JESUS CHRIST; there, my brethren, is
no slipping; other conversation, by often repeating, you become fully
acquainted with, but of CHRIST there is always something new to raise
your thoughts; you can never want matter when the love of the LORD
JESUS CHRIST is the subject: then let JESUS be the subject, my brethren,
of all your conversation.

  ♦ “thnigs” replaced with “things”

Let your time be spent on him: O this, this is an employ, which if you
belong to JESUS, will last you to all eternity. Let others enjoy their
cards, their dice, and gaming hours; do you, my brethren, let your time
be spent in reading, praying, and religious conversation. Which will
stand the trial best at the last day? which do you think will bring
most comfort, most peace, in a dying hour? O live and spend your time
now, as you will wish to have done, when you come to die.

_Secondly_, Let the good things of life, you enjoy, be used with
moderation.

I am not, as the scoffers of this day tell you, against eating and
drinking the good things of life; no, my brethren, I am only against
their being used to an excess; therefore, let me beseech you to avoid
those great indiscretions, those sinful actions, which will give the
enemies of GOD room to blaspheme. Let me beseech you, to have a regard,
a particular regard to your behaviour, at this time; for indeed the
eyes of all are upon you, and they would rejoice much to find any
reason to complain of you. They can say things against us without a
cause; and how would they rejoice if there was wherewith they might
blame us? Then they would triumph and rejoice indeed; and all your
little slips, my dear brethren, are, and would be charged upon me. O at
this time, when the eyes of so many are upon you, be upon your guard;
and if you use the good things of this life with moderation, you do
then celebrate this festival in the manner which the institution calls
for.

And instead of running into excess, let that money, which you might
expend to pamper your own bodies, be given to feed the poor; now, my
brethren, is the season, in which they commonly require relief; and
sure you cannot act more agreeable, either to the season, to the time,
or for the glory of GOD, than in relieving his poor distressed servants.
Therefore, if any of you have poor friends, or acquaintance, who are
in distress, I beseech you to assist them; and not only those of your
acquaintance, but the poor in general. O my dear brethren, that will
turn to a better account another day, than all you have expended to
please the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, or the pride of
life. Consider, CHRIST was always willing to relieve the distressed; it
is his command also; and can you better commemorate the birth of your
king, your Saviour, the LORD JESUS CHRIST, than in obeying one of his
commands?

Do not, my dear brethren, be forgetful of the poor of this world;
consider, if providence has smiled upon you, and blessed you with
abundance of the things of this life, GOD calls for some returns of
gratitude from you: be ye mindful of the poor, and when you are so,
then you may be said to have a true regard for that time which is now
approaching; if you would truly observe this festival, let it be done
with moderation, and a regard to the poor of this world.

_Thirdly_, Let me beg of you not to alienate too much of your time from
the worldly business of this life, but have a proper regard thereunto,
and then you may be said rightly to observe this festival.

GOD allows none to be idle: in all ages business was commended; and
therefore do not think that any season will excuse us in our callings:
we are not, my brethren, to labour for the things of this life
inordinately, but we are to labour for them with all moderation: we
are not to neglect our callings; no, we are to regard those places and
stations of life, which GOD in his providence has thought convenient
for us; and therefore, when you neglect your business to the hurt of
your families, whatever pretence you thereby make for so doing, you
are guilty of sin; you are not acting according to the doctrine of the
gospel, but are breaking the commands of the LORD JESUS CHRIST, both
according to his word, and to his own practice.

At this festival, persons are apt to take a little more liberty than
usual; and if that time from our vocations is not prejudicial to
ourselves or families, and is spent in the service of GOD, and the good
of immortal souls, then I do not think it sinful; but there is too much
reason to fear, that the time is spent upon our own lusts, and then
it is exceeding sinful, it is against our own souls, and it is against
the good of our families, and instead of commemorating the birth of our
dear Redeemer, we are dishonouring him in the greatest degree possibly
we can.

Therefore, enquire strictly into your end and design in spending your
time; see, my brethren, whether it proceeds from a true love to your
Redeemer, or whether there is not some worldly pleasure or advantage
at the bottom: if there is, our end is not right; but if it proceed
intirely from love to him that died, and gave himself for us, our
actions will be a proof thereof; then our time will be spent, not
in the polite pleasures of life, but according to the doctrines and
commands of the blessed JESUS; then our conversation will be in heaven:
and O that this might be found to be the end of each of you, who now
hear me; then we should truly observe this festival, and have a true
regard to the occasion thereof, that of CHRIST’s coming to redeem the
souls of those which were lost.

Let me now conclude, my dear brethren, with a few words of exhortation,
beseeching you to think of the love of the LORD JESUS CHRIST. Did JESUS
come into the world to save us from death, and shall we spend no part
of our time in conversing about our dear JESUS; shall we pay no regard
to the birth of him, who came to redeem us from the worst of slavery,
from that of sin, and the devil; and shall this JESUS not only be
born on our account, but likewise die in our stead, and yet shall we
be unmindful of him? Shall we spend our time in those things which
are offensive to him? Shall we not rather do all we can to promote
his glory, and act according to his commands? O my dear brethren, be
found in the ways of GOD; let us not disturb our dear Redeemer by any
irregular proceedings; and let me beseech you to strive to love, fear,
honour and obey him, more than ever you have done yet; let not the
devil engross your time, and that dear Saviour who came into the world
on your accounts, have so little. O be not so ungrateful to him who
has been so kind to you; What could the LORD JESUS CHRIST have done for
you more than he has? Then do not abuse his mercy, but let your time be
spent in thinking and talking of the love of JESUS, who was incarnate
for us, who was born of a woman, and made under the law, to redeem us
from the wrath to come.

  Now to GOD the Father, GOD the Son, &c.




                             SERMON XVII.

                       The Temptation of CHRIST.


                           MATTHEW iv. 1‒11.

  _Then was JESUS led up of the spirit into the wilderness, to be
    tempted of the devil. And when he had fasted forty days and
    forty nights, he was afterwards an hungered. And when the
    tempter came to him, he said, If thou be the Son of GOD,
    command that these stones may be made bread. But he answered
    and said, It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone,
    but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of GOD.
    Then the devil taketh him up into the holy city, and setteth
    him on a pinnacle of the temple, and saith unto him, If thou
    be the Son of GOD, cast thyself down: for it is written, He
    shall give his angels charge concerning thee, and in their
    hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy
    foot against a stone. JESUS said unto him, It is written again,
    Thou shalt not tempt the LORD thy GOD. Again, the devil taketh
    him up into an exceeding high mountain, and sheweth him all
    the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them: and saith
    unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall
    down and worship me. Then saith JESUS unto him, Get thee hence,
    Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the LORD thy GOD,
    and him only shalt thou serve. Then the devil leaveth him, and
    behold, angels came and ministered unto him._

DEARLY beloved, to-day you are invited to take a walk into the
wilderness, to behold, sympathize with, and get instruction and
comfort from a Saviour tempted. In the conflict, he approves himself
to be GOD’s beloved Son; and the Father gives demonstrable evidence,
that with, and in him, he is indeed well pleased. Let us with serious
attention consider, when, where, and how, our great _Michael_ fought
with and overcame the dragon. The Evangelist _Matthew_ is very
particular in relating the preparations for, the beginning, process,
and issue of this glorious and important combat.

“Then was JESUS led up of the spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted
of the devil.” In the close of the foregoing chapter we are told, that
the blessed JESUS had been publicly baptized, and was also solemnly
inaugurated to his mediatorial office, by the opening of the heavens,
by the Spirit of GOD descending on him like a dove, and by a voice from
heaven, saying, “This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well-pleased;”
and then it was, when he came from the solemn ordinance of baptism;
when he was about to shew himself openly unto _Israel_; when he was
full of the Holy Ghost (_Luke_ iv. 1.); even _then_ was he led, with a
holy unconstrained violence, as a champion into the field, to engage an
enemy, whom he was sure to conquer. But whither is this conqueror led?
Into a lonesome, wide, howling wilderness: probably, says Mr. _Henry_,
into the great wilderness of _Sinai_; a wilderness, not only lonesome,
but inhabited by wild beasts. _Mark_ i. 13. Hither was our LORD led,
not only that he might prepare himself by retirement and prayer, but
also that he might be alone, and thereby give Satan all the advantages
he could desire. In this combat, as well as that of his last agony,
“of the people, there was to be none with him.” Neither does he content
himself with praying, but he fasts also, and that “forty days and forty
nights,” (verse 2.): as _Moses_ and _Elias_ had done, many years before,
it may be, in the very same place. All these fasts were miraculous;
and therefore, though we are taught hereby, that fasting is a christian
duty, yet, to pretend, in an ordinary way, to imitate them, by fasting
for so long a term together, is no doubt superstitious, presumptuous,
and sinful: but few people, I believe, need such a caution.

During these forty days, we may suppose, our LORD felt no hunger:
converse with heaven, to him was instead of meat and drink; but
“afterwards he was an hungered;” exceedingly so, no doubt. And now, the
important fight begins. For, then “the tempter,” emphatically so called,
because he first tempted our first parents to sin, and hath ever since
been unwearied in tempting their descendants; then the tempter, who
in an invisible manner had been attacking our blessed LORD all the
whole forty days, when he saw him hungering, and in such distressing
circumstances, came to him, as it should seem, in a visible shape, and
probably transformed into the appearance of an angel of light. And what
does he tempt him to? To nothing less, than to doubt of his being the
Son of GOD. “If thou be the Son of GOD.” What! put an _if_ to this,
Satan, after the glorious JESUS had been proved to be GOD’s son, and
repeatedly too in such a glorious manner? Surely, thou thyself couldst
not but see the heavens opened, and the Spirit descending; surely,
thou didst hear the voice that came to him from heaven, immediately
after his baptism, saying, “This is my beloved Son:” And dost thou now
say unto him, “If thou be the Son of GOD.” Yes; but Satan knew, and
believed he was full well; but he wanted to make our LORD to doubt of
it. And why? Because he was in such a melancholy situation. As though
he had said, “If GOD was thy father, he would never suffer thee to
starve to death in a howling wilderness, among wild beasts. Surely,
the voice thou lately didst hear, was only a delusion. If thou wast
the Son of GOD, especially his beloved Son, in whom he was so pleased,
thou wouldst be taken more care of by him.” Thus he attacked our first
parents, by suggesting to them hard thoughts of their all-bountiful
Creator: “Yea, hath GOD said, Ye shall not eat of every tree in the
garden?” “Hath he placed you amidst such a variety of delicious fruits,
only to teaze and make you miserable?” And how artfully now does he
labour to insinuate himself into our LORD’s affections, as he then did
to ingratiate himself with our first parents. “If thou be the Son of
GOD, says he, come, prove it, by commanding these stones (a heap of
which, probably, lay very near) to be made bread: this will demonstrate
thy divinity, and relieve thy pressing necessity at the same time.”
Thus, as in all his other temptations, Satan would fain appear to be
his very kind friend; but the holy JESUS saw through the disguised
enmity of his antagonist; and scorning either to distrust his righteous
Father on the one hand, or to work a miracle to please and gratify the
devil on the other, although he had the Spirit of GOD without measure,
and might have made use of a thousand other ways, yet answers him with
a text of scripture: “It is written, that man shall not live by bread
alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of GOD.” This
is a quotation from _Deuteronomy_ viii. 3, and contains a reason given
by the great GOD, why he chose to feed the _Israelites_ with manna;
that they might learn thereby, man doth not live by bread alone, but
by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of GOD. This our blessed
LORD here applies to himself; and his being in the wilderness, made
the application of it still more pertinent. _Israel_ was GOD’s son:
out of _Egypt_ was he called to sojourn in the wilderness, where he
was miraculously supported. And therefore our LORD, knowing that he
was typified by this _Israel_, and that, like them, he was now in a
wilderness, quotes this scripture as a reason why he should not, at
Satan’s suggestion, either despair of receiving help from his Father
in his present circumstances, or distrust the validity of his late
manifestations, or make use of any unwarrantable means for his present
relief. For as GOD was his father, he would, therefore, either in an
ordinary way spread a table for him in the wilderness, or support and
sustain him, as he did his _Israel_ of old, in some extraordinary way
or other without it: “For man shall not live by bread alone, but by
every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of GOD.”

Thus is the tempter foiled in the first onset; but he hath other
arrows in his quiver, with which he will farther strive to wound the
immaculate Lamb of GOD. Since he cannot draw him in either to distrust,
or despair, he will now try if he cannot prevail on him to presume.
In order to effect this, “He taketh the blessed JESUS up into the Holy
City,” or _Jerusalem_, called by our Saviour, the city of the Great
King, and here called holy, because the holy temple was in it, and, we
would hope, many holy people. This was a populous place, and therefore,
would greatly befriend the devil’s design. And not only so, but “he
setteth him on a pinnacle,” a battlement or wing, “of the temple,” the
top of which was so very high, that, as _Josephus_ observes, it would
make a man’s head run giddy to look down from it. And some think this
was done at the time of public worship. How the holy JESUS suffered
himself to be taken hither; whether he was transported through the air,
or whether he followed Satan on foot, is uncertain; but certainly it
was an instance of amazing condescension in our LORD, that he should
permit so foul a fiend, to carry or lead his holy body about in this
manner. Well! Satan hath now gotten him upon the pinnacle of the
temple, and still harping upon his old string, “If thou be the Son
of GOD, (says he) cast thyself down,” and thereby shew to this large
worshipping assembly, (who will assuredly then believe) that thou art
GOD’s beloved Son, under the special protection of heaven, and art that
Messiah, “who was to come into the world.” This was artful, very artful.
But he seems to improve in cunning: for he brings his Bible with him,
and backs his temptation with a text of scripture; “For it is written,
(says he) he shall give his angels charge concerning thee, and in their
hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot
against a stone.” But is _Saul_ also among the prophets? Does the devil
quote scripture, yea, and seemingly such a very apposite one too? I
suspect some design, without doubt: for herein, he would mimic our LORD,
who, he perceived, intended to fight him with this weapon; and not
liking the sharp edge of it, he thought that if he quoted scripture,
the LORD JESUS would not employ it against him any more. “It is written,
(therefore said he) he shall give his angels charge concerning thee,
and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou
dash thy foot against a stone: and therefore, since thou art sure of
such protection, thou needst not fear to cast thyself down.” This was
plausible, and by the length of it, one would be apt to imagine, it
was a fair quotation; but Satan takes care, not only to misapply, but
also to maim it, purposely omitting these important words, “in all
thy ways.” It is true, GOD had given charge to his angels, concerning
his children in general, and his beloved Son in particular, that they
should keep him in all his ways; but, if our LORD had at this time, at
the devil’s request, and to gratify pride, thrown himself down from the
pinnacle, and thereby unnecessarily presumed on his Father’s protection,
he would not have been in GOD’s way, and therefore, would have had no
right to the promised protection at all. Satan was aware of this, and
therefore slily left out what he knew would not suit his purpose. But
is scripture the worse, for being abused or perverted by the devil,
or his emissaries? No, in no wise. Our LORD, therefore, lets him know,
that he should not throw aside this important weapon upon this account,
but puts by this home thrust, with another scripture: “It is written
_again_, Thou shalt not tempt the LORD thy GOD.” Still our LORD quotes
something out of the book of _Deuteronomy_, and hath his eye upon
_Israel_ in his wilderness state. Originally these words were directed
to the _Israelites_ in general, and accordingly are in the plural
number; but here our LORD, as before, makes a particular application
of them to himself: Satan bids him cast himself down, assuring him, GOD
had promised in his word, to order his angels to take care of him: Now,
says our LORD, “It is written in another part of his word, that the
_Israelites_ should not tempt the LORD their GOD, by distrusting his
goodness on the one hand, or presuming on his protection on the other:
And, therefore, as I would not command the stones to be made bread,
needlessly and distrustfully set up to provide for myself; neither will
I now presume unnecessarily upon GOD’s power, by casting myself down,
though placed by thee in such a dangerous situation.”

Thus our great _Michael_ comes off conqueror in the second assault. And
doth not the serpent feel his head bruised enough yet? Not at all: on
the contrary, being more and more enraged at such unusual opposition,
and want of success, “He again taketh him up into an exceeding high
mountain, (what mountain is not very material) and sheweth him all the
kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them,” St. _Luke_ adds, “in
a moment of time:” which confirms the common conjecture, that Satan
did not shew our LORD really the kingdoms of the world, (for that must
have taken up more time) but only took him up into an exceeding high
mountain to humour the thing, and by exerting his utmost art, impressed
on our LORD’s imagination _all at once_, a very strong, and to any but
innocence itself, a very striking prospect of the kingdoms of the world,
and the glory of them; not the cares: that would not serve Satan’s turn.
He shewed our Saviour crowns, but never told him, those crowns were
gilded with thorns; “He shewed him, (says Mr. _Henry_, my favourite
commentator) as in a landscape, or airy representation in a cloud,
such as that great deceiver could easily frame and put together, the
glorious and splendid appearance of princes, their robes and retinue,
their equipage and life-guards; the pomps of thrones and courts, and
stately palaces; the sumptuous buildings in cities; the gardens and
fields about the country seats, with the various instances of their
wealth, pleasure, and gaiety; so as might be most likely to strike the
fancy, and excite the admiration and affection. Such was this shew.”
Our Saviour very well knew it, only lets Satan go to the full length
of his string, that his victory over him might be the more illustrious.
And now, says the devil, “All these things (a mighty all indeed; a mere
imaginary bubble!) will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship
me.” He would fain have it taken for granted, that he had succeeded in
the two preceding temptations: “Come, thou seest thou art not the Son
of GOD, or if thou art, thou seest what an unkind Father he is; thou
art here in a starving condition, therefore take my advice, disown
thy relation to him, set up for thyself, call me father, ask of me
blessings, and all these will I give thee; while all that I desire
in return, is but a bow, only fall down and worship me.” Here Satan
discovers himself with a witness: this was a desperate parting stroke,
indeed. It is now high time for thee, O thou enemy of souls, to be
commanded to depart! Filled with a holy resentment at such hellish
treatment, and impatient of the very thought of setting up for himself,
or alienating the least part of his heart and affections from his
Father, or dividing them between his GOD and the world; “Then said
JESUS unto him, Get thee hence, Satan, (I know thee who thou art,
under all thy disguises) get thee hence, thou grand adversary: for it
is written, Thou shalt worship the LORD thy GOD, and him only shalt
thou serve: this is the great commandment of the law; this is the
commandment my Father gave unto his _Israel_ of old, and wouldst thou
have me, who came to fulfil the law and the prophets, thus shamefully
be a transgressor of it? Get thee hence, I will bear thy insolence
no longer: thy other temptations were hellish, like thyself, but this
intolerably so: get thee therefore hence, Satan: my heavenly Father is
the LORD my GOD, and him only will I serve.”

And now the battle is over: the important combat is ended: JESUS hath
won the field: Satan is routed and totally put to flight. “Then,” when
the devil found that JESUS could withstand even the golden bait, the
lust of the eye and pride of life, in the two last, as well as the lust
of the flesh in the first temptation, despairing of the least success,
and quite stunned with that all-powerful _Get thee hence, Satan_, “he
leaveth him.”

Hell, we may well suppose, like the Philistines of old, was confounded,
and gave a horrible groan, when they saw their great _Goliah_, in whom
they had so long trusted, thus shamefully and totally defeated in no
less than three pitched battles. The first _Adam_ was attacked but
once, and was conquered; but the second _Adam_, though thus repeatedly
assaulted, comes off without the least sin, not only conqueror, but
more than conqueror. Think you not, that there was joy, joy unspeakable
in heaven, upon this glorious occasion? Think you not that the angels,
those sons of GOD, and the multitude of the heavenly host, who shouted
so loud at our LORD’s birth, did not repeat, if possible, with yet
greater extasy, that heavenly anthem, “Glory be to GOD in the highest.”
For a while they were only spectators, orders, we may suppose, being
issued out, that they should only wait around, but not relieve their
praying, fasting, tempted LORD; but now the restraint is removed: Satan
departs, and “behold, angels came and ministered unto him;” they came
to administer to his bodily necessities, and to congratulate him upon
the glorious and compleat victory which he had gained: some of them,
it may be, had done this kind office for _Elijah_ long ago; and with
unspeakably greater joy, they repeat it to the LORD of _Elijah_ now.
His Father sends him bread from heaven; and by this lets him know, that
notwithstanding the horrid temptations with which he had been attacked,
he is his own beloved son, in and with whom he was well pleased.

And was there joy in heaven on this happy occasion? What equal, and
if possible, what infinitely greater joy ought there to be among the
children of GOD here on earth? For we should do well to remember, that
our blessed LORD in this great fight with, and conquest over the dragon,
acted as a public person, as a fæderal head of his mystical body
the church, even the common representative of all believers. We may
therefore from this blessed passage gather strong consolations; since
by our LORD’s conquest over Satan, we are thereby assured of our own,
and in the mean while can apply to him as a compassionate High-Priest,
who was in all things tempted as we are, that he might experimentally
be enabled to succour us when we are tempted.

Who, who after hearing of or reading this, can think themselves
hardly used, or utterly cast off by GOD, because they are tempted to
self-murder, blasphemy, or any other horrid and shocking crimes? Who
can wonder at wave being permitted to come upon wave, and one trial
to follow upon the back of another? Who can admire, that Satan follows
them to holy ordinances, and tempts them to doubt of the reality of
all their manifestations, and of their being GOD’s children, even
after they have enjoyed the most intimate and delightful communion with
their heavenly Father? Was not our LORD treated thus? And “shall the
servant be above his Lord, or the disciple above his Master?” No, it
is sufficient that the servant be as his Lord, and the disciple as his
Master.

But not to dwell on a general improvement, let us see what particular
lessons may be learned from this affecting portion of holy writ.

And _First_, was our LORD thus violently beset in the _wilderness_?
then we may learn, that however profitable solitude and retirement may
be, when used in due season, yet when carried to an extreme is hurtful,
and rather befriends than prevents temptation. Woe be to him that
is thus always alone; for he hath not another to lift him up when he
falleth, or to advise with when he is tempted. As a hermit in _America_
once told me, when I asked him whether he found that way of life
lessened his temptations; “Dost not thou know, friend, (said he) that
a tree which grows by itself, is more exposed to winds and storms than
another that stands surrounded with other trees in the woods?” Our LORD
knew this, and therefore he was _led by the Spirit_ into the wilderness
to be tempted of the devil. LORD, keep us from leading ourselves
into this temptation, and succour and support us whenever led by thy
providence into it! Then, and then only, shall we be safe amidst the
fiery darts of the grand enemy of our souls.

_Secondly_, Did our LORD by prayer, fasting, and temptation, prepare
himself for his public ministry? Surely then, all those who profess to
be inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost to take upon them the office and
administration of the church, should be prepared in the same manner.
For though the knowledge of books and men, are good in their places,
yet without a knowledge of Satan’s devices be superadded, a minister
will be only like a physician, that undertakes to prescribe to sick
people, without having studied the nature of herbs. And hence, it is
to be feared, many heavy laden and afflicted souls have been sent by
certain ministers, to surgeons, to be blooded in the arm, instead of
being directed to apply to the blood of CHRIST to cleanse their hearts.
Hence, conviction is looked upon as a delirium, and violent temptations
censured as downright madness. Hence, souls that are truly and
earnestly repenting of their sins, and as earnestly seeking after rest
in CHRIST, have been directed to plays, novels, romances, and merry
company, to divert them from being righteous over-much. Miserable
comforters are such blind guides! Surely, they deserve no better
titles than that of _murderers of souls_! They go not into the kingdom
of heaven themselves, and those who are entering in they would by
this means hinder. Go not after them, all ye young men who would
be able ministers of the New Testament; but on the contrary, if you
would be useful in binding up the broken hearted, and pouring the oil
of consolation into wounded souls, prepare yourselves for manifold
temptations. For as _Luther_ says, “prayer and meditation, reading and
temptation, make a minister.” If now exercised with spiritual conflicts,
be not disheartened, it is a good sign that our LORD intends to make
use of you. Being thus tempted like unto your brethren, you will be the
better enabled to succour and advise those who shall apply to you under
their temptations. What says the apostle _Paul_? “If we are afflicted,
it is for your sake.” And if you are afflicted, it is only that you may
save your own souls, and help to save the souls of those who shall be
committed to your charge. Be strong therefore in the grace which is in
CHRIST JESUS, and learn to endure hardness, like good soldiers, that
are hereafter to instruct others how they must fight the good fight of
faith.

_Thirdly_, Did the tempter come to CHRIST when he saw him an hungered?
Let those of you that are reduced to a low estate, from hence learn,
that an hour of poverty is an hour of temptation, not only to murmuring
and doubting of our sonship and the divine favour, but also to help
ourselves by unlawful means. “If thou be the Son of GOD, said Satan,
command that these stones may be made bread.” This is what _Agur_
dreaded, “lest I be poor and steal.” Learn, ye godly poor, to be upon
your guard, and remember that poverty and temptations are no marks of
your being cast off by GOD. Your LORD was an hungered; your LORD was
tempted on this account to doubt his sonship, before you. Learn of him
not to distrust, but rather to trust in your heavenly Father. Angels
came and ministered unto CHRIST; and he who is LORD of the angels,
will send some kind messenger or another to relieve your wants. Your
extremity shall be the Redeemer’s opportunity to help you. Make your
wants known unto him, he careth for you. Though in a desart, though no
visible means appear at present, yet you shall in GOD’s due time find a
table spread for you and yours; “For man doth not live by bread alone,
but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of GOD.”

And may not such among you, who are exalted, as well as those who are
brought low, from Satan’s taking the LORD JESUS, and placing him upon
a pinnacle of the temple, learn also a lesson of holy watchfulness and
caution. High places are slippery places, and are apt to make even the
strongest heads and most devout hearts to turn giddy. How necessary
therefore is that excellent petition in our Litany, “in all time of our
wealth, (as well as in all time of our tribulation) good LORD deliver
us!” Agreeably to this, _Agur_ prays as much against riches as poverty;
if he was poor, he feared he should be tempted to steal, if rich, that
he should trust in uncertain riches, and say, who is the LORD?

I charge, therefore, all of you, who are rich and high in this world,
to watch and pray, lest ye fall by Satan’s temptation. Those especially
of you, that are placed as on the pinnacle of the temple, exalted above
your fellows in the church of GOD, take heed in an especial manner unto
yourselves, lest by spiritual pride, vanity, or any other sin that doth
most easily beset persons in such eminent stations, ye cast yourselves
down. This is what Satan aims at. He strives to make us destroyers
of ourselves. And he hath a particular enmity against such as you; he
knows, that your name is _Legion_; and that if you cast yourselves down,
he shall gain a great advantage over many others; you cannot fall alone.
O that it may be said of us, as the papists used to say of _Luther_,
“That _German_ beast doth not love gold.” May the fire of divine love
burn up all the love of this present evil world, and pride of life,
out of your hearts! This, Satan reserved for his last, as thinking it
was the most powerful and prevailing temptation, “He took our LORD up
into an exceeding high mountain, and shewed him all the kingdoms of
the world and the glory of them.” He cares not how high he exalts us,
or how high he is obliged to bid, so he can but get our hearts divided
between GOD and the world. All this will he offer to give us, if we
will only fall down and worship him. Arm us, dear LORD JESUS, with thy
Spirit, and help us under all such circumstances, to learn of thee, and
say unto the tempter, “Get thee hence, Satan; for it is written, thou
shalt worship the LORD thy GOD, and him only shalt thou serve.”

_Fourthly_, Whether beset with this or any other temptation, let all
of us learn of our LORD to fight the devil with the sword of the Spirit,
which is the word of GOD. Though he had the Spirit without measure,
yet he always made use of this. We may say of it, as _David_ did of
_Goliah_’s sword, “none like this,” none like this. And supposing
Satan should be permitted to transform himself into an angel of light,
and by false impressions, and delusive applications of misquoted texts,
attempt to turn this weapon upon us against ourselves; let us not
therefore be prevailed on to let go, but by comparing spiritual things
with spiritual, as our LORD did, find out GOD’s mind and our duty.
Had CHRIST’s children and ministers only observed this one lesson,
how much strange fire would quickly have been extinguished? how much
real enthusiasm been easily stopped? how many imaginary revelations
have been detected? how many triumphs of Satan and his emissaries been
prevented? and how much more would the comforts of CHRIST’s people
and ministers been continued and increased, not only in this present,
but also in every age of the christian church? But let us not be
discouraged or think worse of CHRIST, his cause, or his word, because
through Satan’s subtlety, any of us, or others, may have been drawn in
to make some wrong applications of it; others have been thus tempted
and mistaken before us. However, let us be humbled before GOD and man,
and be excited by our past ignorance of Satan’s devices, to adhere more
closely to the written word, and to pray more earnestly for GOD’s holy
Spirit to give us direction by it. “Then will it still be a lanthorn
unto our feet, and a light unto our paths;” we shall yet be enabled
to behave more skilfully under all our future trials. Many we must yet
expect; nay, perhaps our severest temptations are yet to come; Satan
left our LORD, after his attacking him in the wilderness, “only for
a season,” as St. _Luke_ has it, until the season of his death and
passion. And thus he may be permitted to deal with us. We are not yet
come to our compleat rest; the King of terrors is yet to be grappled
with, and the valley of the shadow of death to be passed through;
long before that, we may be called to endure many a fiery trial, and
be beset with manifold temptations, under which we may be as ignorant
how to behave, as under those with which we have already been visited.
Alas! we know not what remaining corruptions are in our hearts, which
time and temptation may draw out and discover. Perhaps Satan hath
not yet attacked us on our weakest side; when he does, if left to
ourselves, how weak shall we be? It is said of _Achilles_, that he
was invulnerable, except in the heel, and by a wound in that, at last
he died. “Let not him, therefore, that putteth on the harness, boast
as though he had put it off.” Neither, on the other hand, let us be
faint-hearted or dismayed. Satan may tempt, but cannot force; he may
sift, but CHRIST will pray. He who hath helped us already, will help
us to the end. He who conquered for us in the wilderness, will ere
long make us also more than conquerors over all trials and temptations,
inward and outward, and over death and hell itself, through his
almighty, everlasting, and never-failing love. We now sow in tears;
in a very little time, and we shall reap with joy: we may now go on
our way weeping, by reason of the enemy oppressing us; but, ere long,
angels shall be sent, not to minister to us in this wilderness, but to
carry us to an heavenly _Canaan_, even to _Abraham_’s bosom. Then shall
we see this accuser and tempter of our LORD, of our brethren, and of
ourselves, cast out: this wicked one, as well as the wicked world, and
wicked heart, will no more be permitted to vex, disturb or annoy us.

“But woe unto you that laugh now; for you shall then lament and
weep.” Woe unto you, who either believe there is no devil, or never
felt any of his temptations. Woe unto you that are at ease in _Zion_,
and instead of staying to be tempted by the devil, by idleness,
self-indulgence, and making continual provision for the flesh, even
tempt the devil to tempt you. Woe unto you, who not content with
sinning yourselves, turn factors for hell, and make a trade of tempting
others to sin. Woe unto you, who either deny divine revelation, or
never make use of it but to serve a bad turn. Woe unto you who sell
your consciences, and pawn your souls for a little worldly wealth or
honour. Woe unto you who climb up to high places, when in church or
state, by corruption, bribery, extortion, cringing, flattery, or bowing
down to, and soothing the vices of those by whom you expect to rise.
Woe unto you! for whether you will own the relation or not, surely you
are of your father the devil; for the works of your father you will do;
I tremble for you. How can you escape the damnation of hell.

But I have not time to follow such as you any farther. This discourse,
and the present frame of my mind, lead me rather to speak to those,
who by feeling Satan’s fiery darts, know assuredly that there is a
devil. Comfort thou, comfort thou, these afflicted ones, O LORD. O thou
all-merciful and all-bountiful GOD, and thou compassionate High-Priest,
thou once tempted, but now triumphant Saviour, as thou once didst
not disdain to be ministered unto by angels, bless we pray thee this
discourse, to the support and strengthening of thy tempted people,
though delivered by the meanest messenger thou didst ever yet employ in
thy church!

I add no more. The LORD bless you and keep you! The LORD lift up the
light of his countenance, stablish, strengthen, and settle you, and
bring you to his eternal kingdom!




                             SERMON XVIII.

           The Heinous Sin of Profane Cursing and Swearing.


                            MATTHEW v. 34.

  _But I say unto you, Swear not at all._

AMONG the many heinous sins for which this nation is grown infamous,
perhaps there is no one more crying, but withal more common, than
the abominable custom of profane swearing and cursing. Our streets
abound with persons of all degrees and qualities, who are continually
provoking the holy one of _Israel_ to anger, by their detestable oaths
and blasphemies: and our very children, “out of whose mouths,” the
psalmist observes in his days, “was perfected praise,” are now grown
remarkable for the quite opposite ill quality of cursing and swearing.
This cannot but be a melancholy prospect, for every sincere and honest
minister of JESUS CHRIST, to view his fellow-creatures in; and such
as will put him on contriving some means to prevent the spreading at
least of so growing an evil; knowing that the LORD (without repentance)
will assuredly visit for these things. But alas! what can he do?
Public animadversions are so neglected amongst us, that we seldom
find a common swearer punished as the laws direct. And as for private
admonition, men are now so hardened through the deceitfulness of sin,
that to give them sober and pious advice, and to shew them the evil
of their doings, is but like “casting pearls before swine; they only
turn again and rend you.” Since matters then are come to this pass, all
that we can do is, that as we are appointed watchmen and ambassadors
of the LORD, it is our duty from time to time to shew the people their
transgression, and warn them of their sin; so that whether they will
hear, or whether they will forbear, we however may deliver our own
souls. That I therefore may discharge my duty in this particular, give
me leave, in the name of GOD, humbly to offer to your most serious
consideration, some few observations on the words of the text, in order
to shew the heinousness of profane cursing and swearing.

But, before I proceed directly to the prosecution of this point,
it will be proper to clear this precept of our LORD from a
misrepresentation that has been put on it by some, who infer from
hence, that our Saviour prohibits swearing before a magistrate, when
required on a solemn and proper occasion. But that all swearing is
not absolutely unlawful for a christian, is evident from the writings
of St. _Paul_, whom we often find upon some solemn occasions using
several forms of imprecation, as, “I call GOD to witness;” “GOD is my
judge;” “By your rejoicing in CHRIST JESUS,” and such like. And that
our Saviour does by no means forbid swearing before a magistrate, in
the words now before us, is plain, if we consider the scope and design
he had in view, when he gave his disciples this command. Permit me to
observe to you then, that our blessed master had set himself, from the
27th verse of the chapter, out of which the text is taken, to vindicate
and clear the moral law from the corrupt glosses and misconstruction of
the _Pharisees_, who then sat in _Moses_’s chair, but were notoriously
faulty in adhering too closely to the literal expression of the law,
without ever considering the due extent and spiritual meaning of it.
Accordingly they imagined, that because GOD had said, “Thou shalt not
commit adultery,” that therefore, supposing a person was not guilty
of the very act of adultery, he was not chargeable with the breach
of the seventh commandment. And likewise in the matter of swearing,
because GOD had forbidden his people, in the books of _Exodus_ and
_Deuteronomy_, “to take his name in vain,” or to swear falsely by
his name; they therefore judged it lawful to swear by any creature
in common discourse, supposing they did not directly mention the name
of GOD. Our blessed Saviour therefore, in the words now before us,
rectifies this their mistake about swearing, as he had done in the
verses immediately foregoing, concerning adultery, and tells the people,
that whatever allowances the _Pharisees_ might give to swear by any
creature, yet he pronounced it absolutely unlawful for any of his
followers to do so. “You have heard, that it has been said by them
of old time,” (namely, by the _Pharisees_ and teachers of the _Jewish_
law) “Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but perform unto the LORD thine
oaths: but I say unto you,” (I who am appointed by the Father to be
the great prophet and true law-giver of his church) “Swear not at all,
(in your common conversation) neither by heaven for it is GOD’s throne;
(and therefore to swear by that, is to swear by Him that sits thereon)
neither by the earth, for it is his foot-stool; nor by _Jerusalem_,
for it is the city of the great King; neither shalt thou swear by thy
head, because thou canst not make one hair white or black: but let your
communications (which plainly shews that CHRIST is here speaking of
swearing, not before a magistrate, but in common conversation) let your
communication be yea, yea; nay, nay, (a strong affirmation or negation
at the most); for whatsoever is more than this, cometh of evil;” that
is, cometh from an evil principle, from the evil one, the devil, the
author of all evil.

Which by the way, methinks, should be a caution to all such persons,
who, though not guilty of swearing in the gross sense of the word, yet
attest the truth of what they are speaking of, though ever so trifling,
by saying, Upon my life,――as I live,――by my faith,――by the heavens, and
such like: which expressions, however harmless and innocent they may
be esteemed by some sorts of people, yet are the very oaths which our
blessed LORD condemns in the words immediately following the text; and
persons who use such unwarrantable forms of speaking, must expect to be
convicted and condemned as swearers, at our Saviour’s second coming to
judge the world.

But to return: It appears then from the whole tenor of our Saviour’s
discourse, that in the words of the text he does by no means disannul
or forbid swearing before a magistrate (which, as might easily be
shewn, is both lawful and necessary) but only profane swearing in
common conversation; the heinousness and sinfulness of which I come
now, more immediately to lay before you.

And here, not to mention that it is a direct breach of our blessed
master’s and great law-giver’s command in the words of the text, as
likewise of the third commandment, wherein GOD positively declares, “he
will not hold him guiltless (that is, will assuredly punish him) that
taketh his name in vain:” not to mention that it is the greatest abuse
of that noble faculty of speech, whereby we are distinguished from the
brute creation; or the great hazard the common swearer runs, of being
perjured some time or other: not to mention those reasons against it,
which of themselves would abundantly prove the folly and sinfulness
of swearing: I shall at this time content myself with instancing four
particulars, which highly aggravate the crime of profane swearing, and
those are such as follow:

  I. _First_, Because there is no temptation in nature to this sin,
    nor does the commission of it afford the offender the least
    pleasure or satisfaction.

  II. _Secondly_, Because it is a sin which may be so often
    repeated.

  III. _Thirdly_, Because it hardens infidels against the christian
    religion, and must give great offence, and occasion much
    sorrow and concern to every true disciple of JESUS CHRIST.

  IV. _Fourthly_, Because it is an extremity of sin, which can only
    be matched in hell.

I. The first reason then, why swearing in common conversation is so
heinous in GOD’s sight, and why we should not swear at all, is, because
it has no temptation in nature, nor does the commission of it, unless
a man be a devil incarnate, afford the offender the least pleasure or
satisfaction.

Now here, I presume, we may lay it down as a maxim universally agreed
on, that the guilt of any crime is increased or lessened in proportion
to the weakness or strength of the temptation, by which a person
is carried to the commission of it. It was this consideration that
extenuated and diminished the guilt of _Saul_’s taking upon him to
offer sacrifice before the Prophet _Samuel_ came; and of _Uzza_’s
touching the ark, because it was in danger of falling: as, on the
contrary, what so highly aggravated the disobedience of our first
parents, and of _Lot_’s wife, was, because the former had so little
reason to eat the forbidden fruit, and the latter so small a temptation
to look back on _Sodom_.

And now if this be granted, surely the common swearer must of all
sinners be the most without excuse, since there is no manner of
temptation in nature to the commission of his crime. In most of the
other commands, persons, perhaps, may plead the force of natural
inclination in excuse for the breach of them: one, for instance, may
alledge his strong propensity to anger, to excuse his breaking of the
sixth: another, his proneness to lust, for his violation of the seventh.
But surely the common swearer has nothing of this kind to urge in his
behalf: for though he may have a natural inclination to this or that
crime, yet no man, it is to be presumed, can say, he is born with a
swearing constitution.

But farther, As there is no temptation to it, so there is no pleasure
or profit to be reaped from the commission of it. Ask the drunkard why
he rises up early to follow strong drink, and he will tell you, because
it affords his sensual appetite some kind of pleasure and gratification,
though it be no higher than that of a brute. Enquire of the covetous
worldling, why he defrauds and over-reaches his neighbour, and he has
an answer ready; to enrich himself, and lay up goods for many years.
But it must certainly puzzle the profane swearer himself, to inform
you what pleasure he reaps from swearing: for alas! it is a fruitless
tasteless thing that he sells his soul for. But indeed he does not sell
it at all: in this case he prodigally gives it away (without repentance)
to the devil; and parts with a blessed eternity, and runs into
everlasting torment, merely for nothing.

II. But _Secondly_, what increases the heinousness of profane swearing,
is, that it is a sin which may so often be repeated.

This is another consideration which always serves to lessen or
increase the guilt and malignity of any sin. It was some excuse for
the drunkenness of _Noah_, and the adultery of _David_, that they
committed these crimes but once: as, on the contrary, of the patriarch
_Abraham_’s distrust of GOD, that he repeated the dissembling of
_Sarah_ to be his wife, two several times. And if this be admitted
as an aggravation of other persons crimes, surely much more so of the
guilt of common swearing, because it is a sin which may be, and is for
the generality often repeated. In many other gross sins it cannot be
so: if a man be overcome in drink, there must be a considerable time
ere he can recover his debauch, and return to his cups again: or if he
be accustomed to profane the sabbath, he cannot do it every day, but
only one in seven. But alas! the profane swearer is ready for another
oath, almost before the sound of the first is out of our ears: yea,
some double and treble them in one sentence, even so as to confound the
sense of what they say, by an horrid din of blasphemy! Now if the great
and terrible _Jehovah_ has expresly declared that he will not hold him
guiltless, that is, will assuredly punish him, that taketh his name
but once in vain: what a vast heap of these heinous sins lies at every
common swearer’s door! It would be apt to sink him into an intolerable
despair, did he but see the whole sum of them. And O what a seared
conscience must that wretch have, that does not feel this prodigious
weight!

III. But _Thirdly_, what makes the sin of profane swearing appear
yet more exceeding sinful, is, that it hardens infidels against the
christian religion.

It is the Apostle _Peter_’s advice to the married persons of his time,
that they should walk as became the gospel of CHRIST, that those who
were without, might be won to embrace the christian religion, by seeing
and observing their pious conversation coupled together with fear. And
what the Apostle presses on married persons, we find elsewhere enjoined
on each particular member of the church. Accordingly we are commanded
by our blessed LORD, to “let our light so shine before men, that they
may see our good works, and glorify our Father which is in heaven:” And
the Apostle _Paul_ bids us “walk circumspectly towards them that are
without, redeeming the time;” that is, embracing all opportunities to
do them good, “because the days are evil.” But alas! in what a direct
contradiction does the profane swearer live to this and such-like
precepts, who, instead of gaining proselytes to CHRIST from the
unbelieving part of the world, does all he can to oppose it! For
how can it be expected, that infidels should honour our GOD, when
christians themselves despise him; or that any should embrace our
religion, when professors of it themselves make so light of one of
its strictest commands? No; to our grief and shame be it spoken, it is
by reason of such impieties as these, that our holy religion (the best
and purest in itself) is become a by-word among the heathen; that the
sacred authority of the holy JESUS and his doctrine is despised; and
“GOD’s name (as it is written) blasphemed among the _Gentiles_.”

These cannot but be sad stumbling-blocks and offences in the way of our
brethren’s conversion: “But woe be to those men by whom such offences
come.” We may say of them, as our blessed LORD did of _Judas_, “it had
been better for such men, that they had never been born:” Or, as he
threatens in another place, “It shall be more tolerable for _Sodom_ and
_Gomorrah_ in the day of judgment, than for such sinners.”

But this is not all; As profane swearing must undoubtedly harden those
in their infidelity, that are without, so must it no less grieve and
give great offence to those honest and sincere persons that are within
the church. We hear of _David_’s complaining and crying out, “Woe is me,
that I am constrained to dwell with _Mesech_, and to have my habitation
amongst the tents of _Kedar_;” that is, that he was obliged to live and
converse with a people exceedingly wicked and profane. And St. _Peter_
tells us, that “_Lot_’s righteous soul was grieved day by day, whilst
he saw and observed the ungodly conversation of the wicked.” And no
doubt it was one great part of our blessed Master’s sufferings whilst
on earth, that he was compelled to converse with a wicked and perverse
generation, and to hear his heavenly Father’s sacred name profaned
and scoffed at by unrighteous and wicked men. And surely it cannot
but pierce the heart of every true and sincere christian, of every one
that does in any measure partake of the spirit of his Master, to hear
the multitude of oaths and curses which proceed daily and hourly out
of the mouths of many people, and those too, whose liberal education,
and seeming regard for the welfare of religion, one would think, should
teach them a more becoming behaviour. To hear the great and terrible
name of GOD polluted by men, which is adored by angels; and to consider
how often that sacred name is profaned in common discourse, which
we are not worthy to mention in our prayers: this, I say, cannot
but make each of them cry out with holy _David_, “Woe is me, that
I am constrained to dwell with _Mesech_, and to have my habitation
amongst the tents of _Kedar_.” And though the blasphemous and profane
discourses of others, will not be imputed to sincere persons for
sin, so long as they “have no fellowship with such hellish fruits
of darkness, but rather reprove them;” yet it will greatly enhance
the present guilt, and sadly increase the future punishment of every
profane swearer, by whom such offences come. For if, as our Saviour
tells us, “it had been better for a man to have a mill-stone tied about
his neck, than that he should offend one of his little ones, (that
is, the weakest of his disciples) how much sorer punishment will they
be thought worthy of,” who not only cause GOD’s name to be blasphemed
among the _Gentiles_, and the religion of our dear Redeemer to be
abhorred; but who make his saints to weep and mourn, and vex their
righteous souls from day to day, by their ungodly, profane, and
blasphemous conversation? Surely, as GOD will put the tears of the
one into his bottle, so it will be just in him to punish the other
with eternal sorrow, for all their ungodly and hard speeches, and cast
them into a lake of fire and brimstone, where they shall be glad of
a drop of water to cool those tongues, with which they have so often
blasphemed the LORD of Hosts, and grieved the people of our GOD.

IV. But it is time for me to proceed to give my _Fourth_ and last
reason, why common swearing is so exceeding sinful; and that is,
Because it is such an extremity of sin, that can only be matched in
hell, where all are desperate, and without hope of mercy.

The damned devils, and damned souls of men in hell, may be supposed
to rave and blaspheme in their torments, because they know that the
chains wherein they are held, can never be knocked off: but for men
that swim in the river of GOD’s goodness, whose mercies are renewed
to them every morning, and who are visited with fresh tokens of his
infinite unmerited loving-kindness every moment: for these favourite
creatures to set their mouths against heaven, and to blaspheme a
gracious, patient, all-bountiful GOD; is a height of sin which exceeds
the blackness and impiety of devils and hell itself.

And now, after what has been here offered, to shew the heinousness of
profane cursing and swearing in common conversation, may I not very
justly address myself to you in the words of the text, “Therefore I say
unto you, Swear not at all;” since it is a sin that has no temptation
in nature, nor brings any pleasure or profit to the committer of it;
since it hardens infidels in their infidelity, and affords sad causes
of grief and lamentation to every honest christian; since it is a sin
that generally grows into a habit; and lastly, such a sin that can only
be matched in hell.

1. And first then, if these things be so, and the sin of profane
swearing, as hath been in some measure shewn, is so exceeding sinful,
what shall we say to such unhappy men, who think it not only allowable,
but fashionable and polite, to “take the name of GOD in vain;” who
imagine that swearing makes them look big among their companions, and
really think it a piece of honour to abound in it? But alas! little do
they think that such a behaviour argues the greatest degeneracy of mind
and fool-hardiness, that can possibly be thought of. For what can be
more base, than one hour to pretend to adore GOD in public worship, and
the very next moment to blaspheme his name: indeed, such a behaviour,
from persons who deny the being of a GOD, (if any such fools there be)
is not altogether so much to be wondered at; but for men, who not only
subscribe to the belief of a Deity, but likewise acknowledge him to be
a GOD of infinite majesty and power; for such men to blaspheme his holy
name, by profane cursing and swearing, and at the same time confess,
that this very GOD has expressly declared, he will not hold him
guiltless, but will certainly and eternally punish (without repentance)
him that taketh his name in vain; is such an instance of foolhardiness,
as well as baseness, that can scarcely be paralleled. This is what they
presume not to do in other cases of less danger: they dare not revile a
general at the head of his army, nor rouze a sleeping lion when within
reach of his paw. And is the Almighty GOD, the great JEHOVAH, the
everlasting King, who can consume them by the breath of his nostrils,
and frown them to hell in an instant; is he the only contemptible
being in their account, that may be provoked without fear, and offended
without punishment? No; though GOD bear long, he will not bear always:
the time will come, and that too, perhaps, much sooner than such
persons may expect, when GOD will vindicate his injured honour, when
he will lay bare his almighty arm, and make those wretches feel the
eternal smart of his justice, whose power and name they have so often
vilified and blasphemed. Alas! what will become of all their bravery
then? Will they then wantonly sport with the name of their Maker, and
call upon the King of all the earth to damn them any more in jest? No;
their note will then be changed: indeed, they shall call, but it will
be for “the rocks to fall on them, and the hills to cover them from the
wrath of him that sitteth upon the throne, and from the Lamb for ever.”
It is true, time was when they prayed, though without thought, perhaps,
for damnation both for themselves and others: and now they will find
their prayers answered. “They delighted in cursing, therefore shall it
happen unto them; they loved not blessing, therefore shall it be far
from them; they cloathed themselves with cursing like as with a garment,
and it shall come into their bowels like water, and like oil into their
bones.”

2. But farther, if the sin of swearing is so exceeding heinous,
and withal so common, then it is every particular person’s duty,
especially those that are in authority, to do their utmost towards
discountenancing and suppressing so malignant a crime. The duty we owe
both to GOD and our neighbour, requires this at our hands: by the one
we are obliged to assert our Maker’s honour; by the other to prevent
our neighbour’s ruin: and it is but doing as we would be done by, and
as we ourselves act in cases of lesser consequence. Were we to hear
either our own or our friend’s good name vilified and traduced, we
should think it our bounden duty to vindicate the wronged reputation
of each: and shall the great, terrible, and holy name of our best and
only friend, our king, our father, nay our GOD: shall this be daily,
nay every moment, defied and blasphemed; and will no one dare to stand
up in defence of his honour and holiness? Be astonished, O heavens, at
this! No; let us scorn all such base and treacherous treatment: let us
resolve to support the cause of religion, and with a becoming prudent
courage manifest our zeal for the honour of the LORD of Hosts. Men in
authority have double the advantages of ordinary christians: their very
office shews they are intended for the punishment of evil doers. And
such is the degeneracy of mankind, that the generality of them will be
more influenced by the power of persons in authority, than by the most
laboured exhortations from the pulpit. To such, therefore, if there
are any here present, I humbly address myself, beseeching them, in the
name of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, to do their utmost to put a stop to, and
refrain profane cursing and swearing. And though it must be confessed,
that this is a work which requires a great deal of courage and pains,
yet they would do well to consider, it is for GOD they undertake it,
who certainly will support and bear them out in a due execution of
their office here, and reward them with an exceeding and eternal weight
of glory hereafter. But it is time to draw towards a conclusion.

3. Let me, therefore, once more address myself to every person here
present, in the name of our LORD JESUS CHRIST; and if any amongst them
have been any way guilty of this notorious sin of swearing, let me
entreat them by all that is near and dear to them, that they would
neither give the magistrate the trouble to punish, nor their friends
any reason for the future to warn them against committing the crime;
but keep a constant and careful watch over the door of their lips, and
withal implore the divine assistance (without which all is nothing)
that they offend no more so scandalously with their tongues. Let them
seriously lay to heart, what with great plainness and simplicity has
here been delivered: and if they have any regard for themselves as
men, or their reputation as christians; if they would not be a public
scandal to their profession, or a grief to all that know or converse
with them: in short, if they would not be devils incarnate here, and
provoke GOD to punish them eternally hereafter; I say unto them in the
name of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, “Swear not at all.”




                              SERMON XIX.

                  CHRIST the Support of the Tempted.


                            MATTHEW vi. 13.

  _Lead us not into Temptation._

THE great and important duty which is incumbent on christians, is
to guard against all appearance of evil; to watch against the first
risings in the heart to evil; and to have a guard upon our actions,
that they may not be sinful, or so much as seem to be so. It is true,
the devil is tempting us continually, and our own evil hearts are ready
to join with the tempter, to make us fall into sins, that he thereby
may obtain a victory over us, and that we, my brethren, may be his
subjects, his servants, his slaves; and then by-and-by he will pay
us our wages, which will be death temporal, and death eternal. Our
LORD JESUS CHRIST saw how his people would be tempted; and that the
great enemy of their souls would lay hold of every opportunity, so he
could but be a means of keeping poor sinners from coming to the LORD
JESUS CHRIST; hurrying you with temptation, to drive you to some great
sins; and then if he cannot gain you over, fall it to a smaller, and
suit his temptations time after time; and when he finds none of these
things will do, often transform himself into an angel of light, and
by that means make the soul fall into sin, to the dishonour of GOD,
and the wounding of itself: the LORD JESUS, I say, seeing how liable
his disciples, and all others, would be to be overcome by temptation,
therefore advises them, when they pray, to beg that they might not
be led into temptation. It is so dangerous to engage so subtle and
powerful an enemy as Satan is, that we shall be overcome as often as we
engage, unless the LORD is on our side. My brethren, if you were left
to yourselves, you would be overcome by every temptation with which you
are beset.

These words are part of the prayer which CHRIST taught his disciples;
and I shall, therefore, make no doubt, but that you all believe them to
be true, since they are spoken by one who cannot lie. I shall,

  I. Shew you who it is that tempts you.

  II. Shall shew, my brethren, why he tempts you.

  III. Mention some of the ways and means he makes use of, to draw
    you over to his temptations.

  IV. Let you see how earnest you ought to be to the LORD, that he
    may preserve you from being led into temptation.

  V. I shall make some application by way of entreaty unto you, to
    come unto CHRIST, that he, my brethren, may deliver you from
    being tempted.

I. _First_, We are to consider who it is that tempts ye.

And the Tempter is Satan, the prince of the power of the air, he that
now ruleth in the children of disobedience; he is an enemy to GOD and
goodness, he is a hater of all truth: Why else did he slander GOD in
paradise? Why did he tell _Eve_, “You shall not surely die?” He is full
of malice, envy, and revenge: for what reasons else could induce him to
molest innocent man in paradise? The person that tempts ye, my brethren,
is remarkable for his subtilty: for having not power given him from
above, he is obliged to wait for opportunities to betray us, and to
catch us by guile: he, therefore, made use of the serpent to tempt our
first parents: and to lie in wait to deceive, is another part of his
character. And though this character is given of the devil, if we were
to examine our own hearts, we should find many of the tempter’s
characters legible in us.

Do not many of you love to make a lie? And if it is done in your trade,
you therefore look on it as excusable; but whether you believe it
or not, it is sinful, it is exceedingly sinful. Though you may value
yourselves as fine rational creatures, and that you are noble beings;
and you were so, as you first came out of GOD’s hands; but now you are
fallen, there is nothing lovely, nothing desirable in man; his heart is
a sink of pollution, full of sin and uncleanness: Yet, though a man’s
own heart is so desperately wicked, he is told by our modern polite
preachers, that there is a fitness in men, and that GOD seeing you a
good creature, gives you his grace; but this, though it is a modern,
polite, and fashionable way of talking, is very unscriptural; it is
very contrary to the doctrines of the Reformation, and to our own
Articles. But however contrary to the doctrines of the Church of
_England_, yet our pulpits ring of nothing more, than doing no one
any harm, living honestly, loving your neighbour as yourselves, and
do what you can, and then CHRIST is to make up the deficiency: this is
making CHRIST to be half a saviour, and man the other part; but I say,
CHRIST will be your whole righteousness, your whole wisdom, your whole
sanctification, or else he will never be your whole redemption. How
amazing is it, that the ministers of the church of _England_ should
speak quite contrary to what they have subscribed! Good GOD! if these
are the guides of the ignorant, and esteemed to be the true ministers
of JESUS, because they have a great share of letter-learning; when at
the same time they are only the blind leaders of the blind; and without
a special Providence, they both will fall into the ditch.

No wonder at people’s talking of the fitness and unfitness of things,
when they can tell us, that the Spirit of GOD, is a good conscience,
and the comforts of the Holy Ghost are consequent thereupon. But this
is wrong; for it should be said, the Spirit of GOD, are the comforts of
the Holy Ghost, and a good conscience consequent thereupon. _Seneca_,
_Cicero_, _Plato_, or any of the heathen philosophers, would have given
as good a definition as this; it means no more than reflecting we have
done well.

But let these modern, polite gentlemen, and let my letter-learned
brethren, paint man in as lovely colours as they please, I will not do
it: I dare not make him better than the word of GOD does. If I was to
paint man in his proper colours, I must go to the kingdom of hell for
a copy: for man is by nature full of pride, subtilty, malice, envy,
revenge, and all uncharitableness; and what are these but the tempers
of the devil? and lust, sensuality, pleasure, these are the tempers of
the beast. Thus, my brethren, man is half a beast, and half a devil,
a motley mixture of the beast and devil. And this is the creature,
who has made himself so obnoxious to the wrath of GOD, and open to his
indignation, that is told, that he must be part his own saviour, by
doing good works, and what he cannot do CHRIST will do for him.

This is giving the tempter great room to come in with his temptation;
he may press a soul to follow moral duties, to go to church, take the
sacrament, read, pray, meditate; the devil is well content you should
do all these; but if they are done in your own strength, or if you go
no farther than here, you are only going a smoother way to hell.

Thus, my brethren, you may see who it is that tempts us. But

II. Why he tempts you, is the second thing I am to shew you.

It is out of envy to you, and to the LORD JESUS CHRIST, he endeavours
to keep you from closing with JESUS; and if he can but keep you from
laying hold by faith on CHRIST, he knows he has you safe enough; and
the more temptations you are under, and according to their nature and
greatness, you are more hurried in your minds; and the more unsettled
your thoughts and affections are, the more apt you are to conclude,
that if you were to go to CHRIST, at present, in all that hurry of
mind, he would not receive you; but this is the policy of the tempter,
to make you have low and dishonourable thoughts of the blessed JESUS;
and so by degrees he works upon your minds, that you are careless and
indifferent about CHRIST. This, this, my brethren, is the design of the
tempter. Nothing will please him more, than to see you ruined and lost
for ever. He tempts you for that end, that you may lose your interest
in JESUS CHRIST, and that you may dwell with him and apostate spirits
to all eternity. He knows that JESUS CHRIST died for sinners, yet he
would fain keep souls from seeking to this city of refuge for shelter,
and from going to _Gilead_ for the true balm.

It is he that rules in thy heart, O scoffer, O _Pharisee_; the devil
reigns there, and endeavours to blind your eyes, that you shall not see
what danger you are in, and how much evil there is in those hearts of
yours; and as long as he can keep you easy and unconcerned about having
your hearts changed, he will be easy; though if he can, he will tempt
you to sin against him, until you are hardened in your iniquity. O, my
brethren, do not give the devil a handle wherewith he may lay hold on
you: alas! it is no wonder that the devil tempts you, when he finds you
at a play, a ball, or masquerade; if you are doing the devil’s work, it
is no wonder if he presses you in the continuation thereof; and how can
any say, “Lead us not into temptation,” in the morning, when they are
resolved to run into it at night? Good GOD! Are these persons members
of the church of _England_? Alas, when you have gone to church, and
read over the prayers, it is offering no more than the sacrifice of
fools; you say _Amen_ to them with your lips, when in your hearts you
are either unconcerned at what you are about, or else you think that
the bare saying of your prayers is sufficient, and that then GOD and
you have balanced accounts.

But, my dear brethren, do not deceive yourselves, GOD is not to be
mocked. You are only ruining yourselves for time and eternity. You pray,
“lead us not into temptation,” when you are tempting the devil to come
and tempt you.

III. I shall now point out some of the ways and means, he makes use of
to draw you to himself.

But this is a field so large, and I have but just begun to be a soldier
of JESUS CHRIST, that I cannot name many unto you. I shall therefore be
very short on this head.

1. He endeavours to make you think sin is not so great as it is;
that there is no occasion of being so over-strict, and that you are
righteous over-much; that you are ostentatious, and will do yourself
harm by it; and that you will destroy yourselves. He shows you, my
brethren, the bait, but he hides the hook; he shows you the pleasure,
profits and advantages, that attend abundance of this world’s goods;
but he does not show you the crosses, losses and vexations that you may
have while you are in the enjoyment of the blessings of this world.

2. When he finds he cannot allure you by flattery, he will try you
by frowns, and the terrors of this world; he will stir up people to
point at you, and cry, “Here comes another troop of his followers:”
He will stir them up to jeer, scoff, backbite, and hate you; but if he
still finds this will not do, then he throws doubts, my brethren, and
discouragements in your mind, whether the way you are in is the true
way or not; or else he will suggest, What! do you expect to be saved by
CHRIST? Also, He did not die for you; you have been too great a sinner;
you have lived in sin so long, and committed such sins against CHRIST,
which he will not forgive. Thus he hurries poor sinners almost into
despair.

And very often, when the people of GOD are met to worship him, he sends
his agents, the scoffers, to disturb them. We saw an instance of their
rage just now; they would fain have disturbed us; but the LORD was on
our side, and so prevented all the attempts of wicked and designing
men, to disturb and disquiet us. LORD JESUS, forgive them who are thus
persecuting thy truth! JESUS, shew them that they are fighting against
thee, and that it is hard for them to kick against the pricks! These,
my brethren, are some of the ways Satan takes, in his temptations,
to bring you from CHRIST: Many more might be named; but these are
sufficient, I hope, to keep you on your guard, against all that the
enemy can do to hinder you from coming to CHRIST.

‏IV. I come to shew you, how earnest you ought to be with JESUS CHRIST,
either not to suffer you to be led into temptations, or to preserve you
under them.

And here, my dear brethren, let me beseech you to go to JESUS CHRIST;
tell him, how you are assaulted by the evil one, who lies in wait
for your souls; tell him, you are not able to master him, in your own
strength; beg his assistance, and you shall find him ready to help you;
ready to assist you, and to be your Guide, your Comforter, your Saviour,
your All: He will give you strength to resist the fiery darts of the
devil; and, therefore, you can no where find one so proper to relieve
you, as JESUS CHRIST; he knows what it is to be tempted; he was tempted
by Satan in the wilderness, and he will give you the assistance of
his Spirit, to resist the evil one, and then he will fly from you.
In CHRIST JESUS you shall have the strength you stand in need of, the
devil shall have no power; therefore fear not, for in the name of the
LORD we shall overcome all our spiritual _Amalekites_: Let the devil
and his agents rage, let them breathe out threatnings, yea, let them
breathe out slaughters, yet we can rejoice in this, that JESUS CHRIST
hath them in his power, they shall go no farther than he permits them;
they may rage, they may rage horribly, but they can go no farther,
until they have got more power from on high.

If they could do us what mischief they would, very few of us should be
permitted to see our habitations any more; but, blessed be GOD, we can
commit ourselves to his protection; he has been our protector hitherto,
he will be so still. Then earnestly intreat of the LORD to support you
under those temptations, which the devil may assault you with; he is a
powerful adversary, he is a cunning one too; he would be too hard for
us, unless we have the strength of CHRIST to be with us. But let us be
looking up unto JESUS, that he would send his Spirit into our hearts,
and keep us from falling. O my dear brethren in CHRIST JESUS, how
stands it now between GOD and your souls? Is JESUS altogether lovely
to your souls? is he precious unto you? I am sure, if you have not gone
back from CHRIST, he will not from you; he will root out the accursed
things of this world, and dwell in your hearts. You are candidates for
heaven; and will you mind earth? What are all the pleasures of earth,
without an interest in the LORD JESUS CHRIST? And one smile from him is
more to be desired than rubies, yea more than the whole world.

O you who have found JESUS CHRIST assisting you, and supporting you
under all the temptations of this life, will you forsake him? have you
not found him a gracious master? is he not the chiefest of ten thousand,
and altogether lovely? Now you see a form and comeliness in CHRIST,
which you never saw before. O! how do you and I wish we had known JESUS
sooner, and that we had more of his love; it is condescending love, it
is amazing, it is forgiving love, it is dying love, it is exalted and
interceding love, and it is glorified love. Methinks when I am talking
of the love of JESUS CHRIST, who loved me before I loved him; he saw
me polluted in blood, full of sores, a slave to sin, to death and hell,
running to destruction, then he passed by me, and said unto my soul,
“Live;” he snatched me as a brand plucked from the burning. It was
love that saved me, it was all of the free grace of GOD, and that only.
The little experience I have had of this love, makes me amazed at the
condescension, the love, and mercifulness of the blessed JESUS, that
he should have mercy upon such a wretch. O, my brethren, the kingdom of
GOD is within me, and this fills me so full of love, that I would not
be in my natural state again, not for millions of millions of worlds;
I long to be with JESUS, to live with the LORD that bought me, to live
forever with the Lamb that was slain, and to sing _Hallelujah_’s unto
him. Eternity itself will be too short to set forth the love of the
LORD JESUS CHRIST. I cannot, indeed I cannot forbear speaking again,
and again, and again, of the LORD JESUS.

And if there are any here who are strangers to this love of the LORD
JESUS CHRIST, do not despair; come, come unto CHRIST, and he will have
mercy upon you, he will pardon all your sins, he will heal all your
backslidings, he will love you freely, and take you to be with himself.
Come therefore, O my guilty brethren, unto JESUS, and you shall find
rest for your souls. You need not fear, you need not despair, when GOD
has had mercy upon such a wretch as I; and he will save you also, if
you will come unto him by faith.

Why do ye delay? What! do you say, you are poor, and therefore ashamed
to come? It is not your poverty that CHRIST mindeth; come in all your
rags, in all your pollution, and he will save you. Do not depend upon
any thing but the blood of JESUS CHRIST; do not stand out an hour
longer, but give your hearts to CHRIST, give him the firstlings of the
flock; come unto him now, lest he should cut you off before you are
prepared, and your soul be sent to that pit from whence there is no
redemption.

Do not waver, but give him that which he desires, your hearts; it is
the heart the LORD JESUS CHRIST wanteth; and when you have an inward
principle wrought in your hearts by this same JESUS, then you will
feel the sweetness and pleasure of communion with GOD. O consider, my
brethren, the love of the LORD JESUS CHRIST, in dying for you; and are
you resolved to slight his dying love? Your sins brought CHRIST from
heaven, and I humbly pray to the LORD that they may not be a means of
sending you to hell. What language will make you leave your sins and
come to CHRIST? O that I did but know! and that it lay in my power
to give you this grace; not one of you, not the greatest scoffer here
should go hence before he was changed from a natural to a spiritual
life; then, then we would rejoice and take sweet council together; but
all this is not in my power: but I tell you where you may have it, even
of the LORD JESUS; he will give it to you, if you ask it of him, for he
has told us, “Ask, and you shall receive;” therefore ask of him, and if
you are repulsed again and again, intreat him more, and he will be unto
you as he was to the poor _Syrophœnician_ woman, who came to CHRIST
on account of her daughter; and if she was so importunate to him for a
body, how much more should we be solicitous for our souls? If you seek
to him in faith, his answer will be to you as it was to her, “Thy faith
hath saved thee, be it as thou wouldest have it.”

O, do not forsake the seeking of the LORD; do not, I beseech you,
neglect the opportunities which may be offered to you, for the
salvation of your souls; forsake not the assembling of yourselves
together, to build up and confirm and strengthen those who are weak
in faith; to convince sinners, that they may feel the power of GOD
pricking them in their hearts, and make them cry out, “What must we do
to be saved?”

The devil and his agents have their clubs of revelling, and their
societies of drunkenness; they are not ashamed to be seen and heard
doing the devil their master’s works; they are not ashamed to proclaim
him; and sure you are not ashamed of the LORD JESUS CHRIST; you dare
proclaim that JESUS, who died that you might live, and who will own
you before his Father and all the holy angels: Therefore, dare to be
singularly good; be not afraid of the face of man; let not all the
threats of the men of this world move you: what is the loss of all the
grandeur, or pleasure, or reputation of this life, compared to the loss
of heaven, of CHRIST and of your souls? and as for the reproaches of
the world, do not mind them; when they revile you, never, never revile
again; do not answer railing with railing; but let love, kindness,
meekness, patience, long-suffering, be found in you, as they were
in the blessed JESUS; therefore, I beseech you, do not neglect the
frequent coming together, and telling each other, what great things
JESUS CHRIST hath done for your souls.

I do not now, as the Pharisees say I do, encourage you to leave your
lawful callings, and your business, in which GOD, by his providence,
hath placed you; for you have two callings, the one a general, and the
other a special one; it is your duty to regard your ♦families, and if
you neglect them out of any pretence whatsoever, as going to church or
to societies, you are out of the way of your duty, and offering that to
GOD which he commanded you not. But then, my brethren, you are to take
care that the things of this life do not hinder the preparing for that
which is to come; let not the business of the world make you unmindful
of your souls; but in all your moral actions, in the business of life,
let all be done with a view to the glory of GOD, and the salvation of
your souls.

  ♦ “familes” replaced with “families”

The night draws on, and obliges me to hasten to a conclusion; though,
methinks, I could speak until my tongue clave to the roof of my mouth,
yea, until I could speak no more, if it was to save your souls from the
paws of him who seeketh to devour them.

Therefore let me beseech you, in all love and compassion: Consider, you,
who are Pharisees; you, who will not come to CHRIST, but are trusting
to yourselves for righteousness; who think, because you lead civil,
honest, decent lives, all will go well at last; but let me tell you,
O ye Pharisees, that harlots, murderers, and thieves, shall enter the
kingdom of GOD before you. Do not flatter yourselves of being in the
way to heaven, when you are in the broad way to hell; but if you will
throw away your righteousness and come to CHRIST, and be contented to
let JESUS CHRIST do all for you, and in you, then CHRIST is willing to
be your Saviour; but if you bring your good works with you, and think
to be justified on the account of them, you may seek to be justified
by them for ever, and never be justified; no, it is only the blood of
JESUS that cleanseth us from the filth and pollution of all our sins;
and you must be sanctified before you are justified. As for good works,
we are justified before GOD without any respect to them, either past,
present, or to come: when we are justified, good works will follow our
justification, for we can do no good works, until we are cleansed of
our pollution, by the sanctification of the Spirit of GOD.

O ye scoffers, come and see this JESUS, this LORD of glory whom you
have despised; and if you will but come to CHRIST, he will be willing
to receive you, notwithstanding all the persecution you have used
towards his members: However, if you are resolved to persist in your
obstinacy, remember, salvation was offered to you, that CHRIST and free
grace were proposed; but you refused to accept of either, and therefore
your blood will be required at your own hands.

I shall only say this unto you, that however you may despise either me
or my ministry, I shall not regard it, but shall frequently shew you
your danger, and propose to you the remedy; and shall earnestly pity
and pray for you, that GOD would shew you your error, and bring you
home into his sheepfold, that you, from ravenous lions, may become
peaceful lambs.

And as for you, O my brethren, who desire to chuse CHRIST for your Lord,
and to experience his power upon your souls, and as yet do not find
your desires and prayers answered; go on, and CHRIST will manifest
himself unto you, as he does not unto the world; you shall be made
to see and feel this love of JESUS upon your souls; you shall have a
witness in your own breast, that you are the LORD’s; therefore, do not
fear, the LORD JESUS CHRIST will gather you with his elect, when he
comes at that great day of accounts, to judge every one according to
the deeds done in the body, whether they be good, or whether they be
evil: and, O that the thought of answering to GOD for all our actions,
would make us more mindful about the consequences that will attend it.

And now let me address all of you, high and low, rich and poor, one
with another, to accept of mercy and grace while it is offered to you:
Now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation; and will you
not accept it, now it is offered unto you? do not stand out one moment
longer; but come and accept of JESUS CHRIST in his own way, and then
you shall be taken up at the last day, and be with him for ever and
ever: and sure this should make you desirous of being with that JESUS
who has done so much for you, and is now interceding for you, and
preparing mansions for you; where may we all arrive and sit down with
JESUS to all eternity!

  Which GOD of his infinite mercy grant, &c.




                              SERMON XX.

         Worldly business no Plea for the Neglect of Religion.


                           MATTHEW viii. 22.

  _Let the dead bury their dead._

ST. _Paul_ preaching at _Athens_, tells them, that as he passed by
and beheld their devotions, he perceived they were in all things too
_superstitious_. But was this apostle to rise, and come publishing the
glad tidings of salvation in any of our populous cities, he would see
no reason why he should charge the inhabitants with this; but rather
as he passed by and observed the tenor of their life, say, I perceive
in all things ye are too _worldly-minded_; ye are too eagerly bent on
pursuing your lawful business; so eagerly, as either wholly to neglect,
or at least too heedlesly to attend on the one thing needful.

There cannot then be a greater charity shewn to the christian
world, than to sound an alarm in their ears, and to warn them of the
inexpressible danger, of continually grasping after the things of this
life, without being equally, nay a thousand times more concerned for
their well-being in a future state.

And there is still the more occasion for such an alarm, because
worldly-mindedness so easily and craftily besets the hearts of men.
For out of a specious pretence of serving GOD in labouring for the
meat which perisheth, they are insensibly lulled into such a spiritual
slumber, as scarce to perceive their neglect to secure that which
endureth to everlasting life.

The words of the text, if not at first view, yet when examined and
explained, will be found applicable to this case, as containing an
admirable caution not to pursue the affairs of this world, at the
expence of our happiness in the next.

They are the words of JESUS CHRIST himself: the occasion of their being
spoken was this; As he was conversing with those that were gathered
round about him, he gave one of them an immediate summons to follow him:
but he, either afraid to go after such a persecuted master, or rather
loving this present world, says, “Suffer me first to go home and bury
my father,” or, as most explain it, let me first go and dispatch some
important business I have now in hand. But JESUS said unto him, “Let
the dead bury their dead;” leave worldly business to worldly men, let
thy secular business be left undone, rather than thou shouldst neglect
to follow me.

Whether this person did as he was commanded, I know not; but this I
know, that what CHRIST said here in person, he has often whispered with
the small still voice of his holy Spirit, and said to many here present,
that rise up early and late take rest, and eat the bread of carefulness,
Come draw off your affections from the things of this life; take up
your cross and follow me. But they, willing to justify themselves,
make answer, LORD, suffer us first to bury our fathers, or dispatch our
secular affairs. I say unto all such, “Let the dead bury their dead,”
let your worldly business be left undone, rather than you should
neglect to follow him.

From the words thus explained, naturally arises this proposition, that
no business, though ever so important, can justify a neglect of true
religion.

The truth of which I shall first shew, and then make an application of
it.

I. _First_ then, I am to prove, that no temporal business, though ever
so important, can justify a neglect of true religion.

By the word _religion_, I do not mean any set of moral virtues, any
partial amendment of ourselves, or formal attendance on any outward
duties whatsoever: but an application of CHRIST’s whole and personal
righteousness, made by faith to our hearts; a thorough real change of
nature wrought in us by the invisible, yet powerful operation of the
Holy Ghost, preserved and nourished in our souls by a constant use of
all the means of grace, evidenced by a good life, and bringing forth
the fruits of the Spirit.

This is true and undefiled religion, and for the perfecting this good
work in our hearts, the eternal Son of GOD came down and shed his
precious blood; for this end were we made, and sent into the world, and
by this alone can we become the sons of GOD. Were we indeed to judge by
the common practice of the world, we might think we were sent into it
for no other purpose, than to care and toil for the uncertain riches of
this life: but if we consult the lively oracles, they will inform us,
that we were born for nobler ends, even to be born again from above,
to be restored to the divine likeness by JESUS CHRIST, our second
_Adam_, and thereby be made meet to inherit the kingdom of heaven; and
consequently, there is an obligation laid upon all, even the most busy
people, to secure this end; it being an undeniable truth, that all
creatures ought to answer the end for which they were created.

Some indeed are for confining religion to the clergy, and think it only
belongs to those who serve at the altar: but what a fatal mistake is
this, seeing all persons are indifferently called by GOD to the same
state of inward holiness. As we are all corrupt in our nature, so must
we all be renewed and sanctified. And though it must be granted, that
the clergy lie under double obligations to be examples to believers,
in faith, zeal, charity, and whatever else is commendable and of good
report, as being more immediately dedicated to the service of GOD; yet
as we have been all baptized with one baptism into the death of CHRIST,
we are all under the necessity of performing our baptismal covenant,
and perfecting holiness in the fear of GOD: for the holy scriptures
point out to us but one way of admission into the kingdom of CHRIST,
through the narrow gate of a sound conversion: and he that does not
enter into the sheepfold, whether clergy or lay-man, by this door, will
find, to his everlasting confusion, there is no climbing up another way.

Besides, what a gross ignorance of the nature of true religion, as well
as of our own happiness, does such a distinction discover? For what
does our Saviour, by willing us to be religious, require of us? but
to subdue our corrupt passions, to root out ill habits, to engraft the
heavenly graces of GOD’s most holy Spirit in their room; and, in one
word, to fill us with all the fulness of GOD.

And will men be so much their own enemies, as to affirm this belongs
only to those who minister in holy things? Does it not equally concern
the most active man living? Is it the end of religion to make men
happy, and is it not every one’s privilege to be as happy as he can? Do
persons in business find the corruptions of their nature, and disorder
of their passions, so pleasing, that they care not whether they ever
regulate or root them out? Or will they consent that ministers shall be
alone partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light? If not, as
they desire the same end, why will they not make use of the same means?
Do they think that GOD will create a new thing upon the earth, and,
contrary to the purity of his nature, and immutability of his counsel,
admit them into heaven in their natural state, because they have been
encumbred about many worldly things? Search the scriptures, and see if
they give any room for such a groundless hope.

But farther, one would imagine there was something of the highest
concern and utmost importance in our temporal affairs, that they should
divert so many from purifying their hearts by faith which is in CHRIST
JESUS.

A covetous miser, who neglects religion by being continually intent
on seeking great things for himself and those of his own houshold,
flatters himself he herein acts most wisely; and at the same time will
censure and condemn a young prodigal, who has no time to be devout,
because he is so perpetually engaged in wasting his substance by
riotous living and following of harlots. But yet a little while, and
men will be convinced, that they are as much without excuse who lose
their souls by hunting after riches, as those who lose them by hunting
after sensual pleasures. For though business may assume an air of
importance, when compared with other trifling amusements, yet when put
in the balance with the loss of our precious and immortal souls, it
is equally frivolous, according to that of our Saviour, “What shall it
profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul;
or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?”

And now what need we any further proof? We have heard the decision out
of CHRIST’s own mouth. But because it is so difficult to convince such
of this important truth, whose hearts are blinded by the deceitfulness
of riches, that we had need cry out to them in the language of the
prophet, “O earth, earth, hear the word of the LORD,” I shall lay
before you one passage of scripture more, which I could wish were
written on the tables of all our hearts. In the xivth of St. _Luke_,
the 18th and following verses, our blessed LORD puts forth this parable,
“A certain man made a great supper, and bade many, and sent his servant
at supper-time, to call them that were bidden: but they all, with one
consent, began to make excuse. The one said, I have bought a piece of
ground, and I must needs go and see it, I pray thee have me excused.
And another said, I have bought a yoke of oxen, and I must needs go
and prove them, I pray thee therefore have me excused. So the servant
returned, and shewed his master all these things.” And what follows?
Did the master accept of their excuses? No, the text tells us the good
man was angry, and said, “that none of those which were bidden, should
taste of his supper.” And what does this parable teach, but that the
most lawful callings cannot justify our neglect; nay, that they are no
longer lawful when they in any wise interfere with the great concerns
of religion? For the marriage supper here spoken of, means the gospel;
the master of the house is CHRIST; the servants sent out, are his
ministers, whose duty it is, from time to time, to call the people to
this marriage-feast, or, in other words, to be religious. Now we find
those that were bidden, were very well and honestly employed. There was
no harm in buying or seeing a piece of ground, or in going to prove a
yoke of oxen; but here lay their fault, they were doing these things,
when they were invited to come to the marriage feast.

Without doubt, persons may very honestly and commendably be employed
in following their respective callings; but yet, if they are engaged
so deeply in these, as to hinder their working out their salvation
with fear and trembling, they must expect the same sentence with their
predecessors in the parable, that none of them shall taste of CHRIST’s
supper: for our particular calling, as of this or that profession, must
never interfere with our general and precious calling, as christians.
Not that christianity calls us entirely out of the world, the holy
scriptures warrant no such doctrine.

It is very remarkable, that in the book of life, we find some almost
of all kinds of occupations, who notwithstanding served GOD in their
respective generations, and shone as so many lights in the world.
Thus we hear of a good centurion in the evangelists, and a devout
_Cornelius_ in the _Acts_; a pious lawyer; and some that walked with
GOD, even of _Nero_’s houshold, in the epistles; and our divine master
himself, in his check to _Martha_, does not condemn her for minding,
but for being cumbered or perplexed about many things.

No, you may, nay, you must labour, out of obedience to GOD, even for
the meat which perisheth.

But I come, in the _Second_ place, to apply what has been said.

I beseech you, by the mercies of GOD in CHRIST JESUS, let not your
concern for the meat which perisheth be at the expence of that which
endureth to everlasting life; for, to repeat our blessed Saviour’s
words, “What shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world,
and lose his own soul; or, what shall a man give in exchange for his
soul?”

Were we always to live in the world, then worldly wisdom would be our
highest wisdom: but forasmuch as we have here no continuing city, and
were only sent into this world to have our natures changed, and to fit
ourselves for that which is to come; then to neglect this important
work for a little worldly gain, what is it but, with profane _Esau_,
to sell our birth-right for a mess of pottage.

Alas! how unlike are christians to christianity! they are commanded to
“seek first the kingdom of GOD and his righteousness,” and all other
real necessaries shall be added unto them; but they are fearful (O
men of little faith!) that if they should do so, all other necessaries
would be taken from them: they are strictly forbidden to be careful
for the morrow, and yet they rest not night or day, but are continually
heaping up riches for many years, though they know not who shall gather
them. Is this acting like persons that are strangers and pilgrims
upon earth? Is this keeping their baptismal vow? Or rather, is it
not directly apostatizing from it, and deserting the service of JESUS
CHRIST, to list themselves under the banner of mammon?

But what will be the hope of such worldlings, when GOD shall take away
their souls? What if the almighty should say to each of them, as he did
to the rich fool in the gospel, “this night shall thy soul be required
of thee;” O then, what would all those things profit them, which they
are now so busy in providing?

Was eternal life, that free gift of GOD in CHRIST JESUS, to be
purchased with money; or could men carry their stocks beyond the grave,
to buy oil for their lamps, i. e. grace for their hearts, when they
should be called to meet the bridegroom, there might be some reason why
GOD might well bear with them: but since their money is to perish with
them; since it is certain, as they brought nothing into the world, so
they can carry nothing out; or supposing they could, since there is no
oil to be bought, no grace to be purchased when once the lamp of their
natural life is gone out; would it not be much more prudent to spend
the short time they have here allotted them, in buying oil while it
may be had, and not for fear of having a little less of that which will
quickly be another man’s, eternally lose the true riches?

What think you? Is it to be supposed, it grieved that covetous
worldling before mentioned, when his soul sprung into the world of
spirits, that he could not stay here till he had pulled down his barns
and built greater? Or think you not that all things here below seemed
equally little to him then, and he only repented that he had not
employed more time in pulling down every high thought that exalted
itself against the Almighty, and building up his soul in the knowledge
and fear of GOD?

And thus it will be with all unhappy men, who like him are disquieting
themselves in a vain pursuit after worldly riches, and at the same time
are not rich towards GOD.

They may, for a season, seem excellently well employed in being
solicitously careful about the important concerns of this life; but
when once their eyes are opened by death, and their souls launched into
eternity, they will then see the littleness of all sublunary cares, and
wonder they should be so besotted to the things of another life, while
they were, it may be, applauded for their great wisdom and profound
sagacity in the affairs of this world.

Alas! how will they bemoan themselves for acting like the unjust
steward, so very wisely in their temporal concerns, in calling their
respective debtors so carefully, and asking how much every one owes
to them, and yet never remembring to call themselves to an account,
or enquire how much they owed to their own great LORD and master?

And now what shall I say more? The GOD of this world, and the
inordinate desire of other things, must have wholly stifled the
conscience of that man, who does not see the force of these plain
reasonings.

Permit me only to add a word or two to the rich, and to persons that
are freed from the business of this life.

But here I must pause a while, for I am sensible that it is but an
ungrateful, and as some may imagine, an assuming thing, for such a
novice in religion to take upon him to instruct men in high stations,
and who perhaps would disdain to set me with the dogs of their flock.

But however, since St. _Paul_, who knew what best became a young
preacher, commanded _Timothy_, young as he was, to exhort and charge
the rich with all authority; I hope none here that are so, will be
offended, if with humility I beg leave to remind them, though they once
knew this, that if persons in the most busy employs are indispensibly
obliged to “work out their salvation with fear and trembling,” much
more ought they to do so, who are free from the toils and incumbrance
of a lower way of life, and consequently have greater opportunities and
leisure to prepare themselves for a future state.

But is this really the case? or do we not find, by fatal experience,
that too many of those whom GOD has exalted above their brethren, who
are “cloathed in purple and fine linnen, and fare sumptuously every
day,” by a sad abuse of GOD’s great bounty towards them, think that
their stations set them above religion, and so let the poor, who live
by the sweat of their brows, attend more constantly on the means of
grace than do they?

But woe unto such rich men! for they have received their consolation.
Happy had it been if they had never been born: for if the careless
irreligious tradesman cannot be saved, where will luxurious and wicked
gentlemen appear?

Let me therefore, by way of conclusion, exhort all persons, high and
low, rich and poor, one with another, to make the renewal of their
fallen nature, the one business of their lives; and to let no worldly
profit, no worldly pleasure, divert them from the thoughts of it. Let
this cry, “Behold the bridegroom cometh,” be ever sounding in our ears;
and let us live as creatures that are every moment liable to be hurried
away by death to judgment: let us remember, that this life is a state
of infinite importance, a point between two eternities, and that after
these few days are ended, there will remain no more sacrifice for sin;
let us be often asking ourselves, how we shall wish we had lived when
we leave the world? And then we shall always live in such a state, as
we shall never fear to die in. Whether we live, we shall live unto the
LORD; or whether we die, we shall die unto the LORD; so that living or
dying we may be the LORD’s.

To which end, let us beseech GOD, the protector of all them that put
their trust in him, without whom nothing is strong, nothing is holy,
to increase and multiply upon us his mercy, that he being our ruler and
guide, we may so pass through things temporal, that we finally lose not
the things eternal; through JESUS CHRIST our LORD.




                              SERMON XXI.

          CHRIST the only Rest for the Weary and Heavy-Laden.


                            MATTHEW xi. 28.

  _Come unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will
    give you rest._

NOTHING is more generally known than the duties which belong to
christianity; and yet, how amazing is it, nothing is less practised?
There is much of it in name and shew, but little of it in the heart and
conversation; indeed, if going to church, and to the sacrament, or, if
our being called after the name of CHRIST, and being baptized into that
name; if that will make us christians, I believe all of us would have
a claim thereto: but if it consists in the heart, that there must be an
inward principle wrought in us by faith; that there must be a change of
the whole nature, a putting off the old man with his deeds, a turning
from sin unto GOD, a cleaving only unto the Son of Righteousness; and
that there must be a new birth, and we experience the pangs thereof;
and that you must feel yourselves weary and heavy laden with your sins,
before you will seek for deliverance from them; if this is to be the
case, if there is so much in being children of GOD, alas! how many who
please themselves with an outside shew, a name to live whilst they are
dead; and how few that have any share in this spiritual state, in this
true and living name? How few are they who are weary and heavy laden
with their sins, and seek to CHRIST for rest? They say, in a formal
customary manner, we are sinners, and there is no health in us; but how
few feel themselves sinners, and are so opprest in their own spirits,
that they have no quiet nor rest in them, because of the burden of
their sins, and the weight that is fallen and lays on their minds?

Under these burdens, these heavy burdens, they are at a loss what to
do whereby they may obtain rest; they fly to their works, they go to
a minister, and he tells them to read, to pray, and meditate, and take
the sacrament: thus they go away, and read, and pray, and meditate
almost without ceasing, and never neglect the sacrament whenever there
is an opportunity for the taking of it. Well, when the poor soul has
done all this, it still finds no ease, there is yet no relief: Well,
what must you do then? To lie still under the burden they cannot, and
to get rid of it they cannot: O what must the burdened soul do! Why,
goes to the clergyman again, and tells him the case, and what it has
done, and that it is no better. Well, he asks, have you given alms to
the poor? Why no. Then go and do that, and you will find rest. Thus the
poor sinner is hurried from duty to duty, and still finds no rest: all
things are uneasy and disquiet within, and there remains no rest in
the soul. And if it was to go through all the duties of religion, and
read over a thousand manuals of prayers, none would ever give the soul
any rest; nothing will, until it goes to the LORD JESUS CHRIST, for
there is the only true rest; that is the rest which abideth, and will
continue for ever. It is not in your own works, nor in your endeavours:
no; when CHRIST comes into your souls, he pardons you, without any
respect to your works, either past, present, or to come.

From the words, my brethren, I have now read, I shall

  I. Shew you who are the weary and heavy laden.

  II. Inquire what is meant by coming to CHRIST. And,

  III. Conclude with exhorting you to accept of the invitation
    which the LORD JESUS CHRIST gives unto you to come unto him,
    with the assurance of finding rest. ‏

_First_, I am to shew you, who are the weary and heavy-laden.

And here it will be necessary to consider who are not; and then, to
consider who they are that are really so.

1. Those who think themselves good enough, and are pleased that they
are not so bad as others, these are not weary or heavy laden.

No, these Pharisees are not thus troubled; they laugh and jest at those
who talk of feeling their sins, and think there is no occasion to make
so much ado about religion: it is to be righteous over-much, and the
means to destroy yourselves. They think if they do but mean well, and
say their prayers, as they call them, it is sufficient: though they
may say a prayer, yea, thousands of prayers, and all the while be only
offering up the sacrifice of fools. They may call GOD, Father, every
day, when it is only mocking of GOD, and offering up false fire unto
him; and it would be just for him to serve them, as he did _Nahab_ and
_Abihu_, destroy them, cut them off from the face of the earth: but he
is waiting to be gracious, and willing to try a little longer, whether
you will bring forth any thing more than the leaves of an outward
profession, which is not all that the LORD requires: no, he wants the
heart; and unless you honour him with that, he does not regard your
mouths, when the other is far from him. You may say over your prayers
all your lives, and yet you may never pray over one: therefore, while
you flatter yourselves you are good enough, and that you are in a state
of salvation, you are only deceiving your own souls, and hastening on
your own destruction. Come unto him, not as being good enough, but as
vile sinners, as poor, and blind, and naked, and miserable, and then
JESUS will have compassion.

O ye Pharisees, what fruits do ye bring forth? Why, you are moral,
polite creatures; you do your endeavours, you do what you can, and so
JESUS is to make up the rest. You esteem yourselves fine, rational,
and polite beings, and think it is too unfashionable to pray; it is
not polite enough: perhaps you have read some prayers, but knew not
how to pray from your hearts; no, by no means: that was being righteous
over-much indeed.

But when once you are sensible of your being lost, damned creatures,
and see hell gaping ready to receive you; if GOD was but to cut the
thread of life, O then, then you would cry earnestly unto the LORD to
receive you, to open the door of mercy unto you; your tones would then
be changed, you would no more flatter yourselves with your abilities
and good wishes: no, you would see how unable you were, how incapable
to save yourselves; that there is no fitness, no free will in you:
no fitness, but for eternal damnation, no free will but that of doing
evil; and that when you would do good, evil is present with you, and
the thing that ye would not, that do ye. He knows the secret intent of
every heart; and this is a pleasure to you, my dear brethren, who come
on purpose to meet with him, though it be in a field. And, however some
may esteem me a mountebank, and an enthusiast, one that is only going
to make you methodically mad; they may breathe out their invectives
against me, yet CHRIST knows all; he takes notice of it, and I shall
leave it to him to plead my cause, for he is a gracious Master: I have
already found him so, and am sure he will continue so. Vengeance is his,
and he will repay it. Let them revile me; let them cast me out of their
synagogues, and have my name in reproach, I shall not answer them by
reviling again, or in speaking evil against them: no, that is not the
Spirit of CHRIST, but meekness, patience, long-suffering, kindness, &c.

Ye pharisees, who are going about to establish your own righteousness;
you, who are too polite to follow the LORD JESUS CHRIST in sincerity
and truth; you, who are all for a little shew, a little outside work;
who lead moral, civil, decent lives, CHRIST will not know you at the
great day, but will say unto you, O ye Pharisees, was there any place
for me in your love? Alas! you are full of anger and malice, and
self-will; yet you pretended to love and serve me, and to be my people:
but, however, I despise you; I, who am GOD, and knoweth the secret of
all hearts; I, who am truth itself, the faithful and true witness, say
unto you, “Depart from me, ye workers of iniquity, into that place of
torment, prepared for the devil and his angels.” Good GOD! and must
these discreet polite creatures, who never did any one harm, but led
such civil, decent lives, must they suffer the vengeance of eternal
fire? Cannot their righteous souls be saved? Where then must the sinner
and the ungodly appear? Where wilt thou, O sabbath-breaker, appear,
thou, who canst take thy pleasure, thy recreation, on the LORD’s-day,
who refusest to hear the word of GOD, who wilt not come to church to
be instructed in the ways of the LORD? Where will you, O ye adulterers,
fornicators, and such-like of this generation appear? Whoremongers and
adulterers GOD will judge, and them he will condemn. Then you will not
call these tricks of youth: no, but you will call on the rocks and the
mountains to fall on you, to hide you from the fury and anger of the
LORD. Where wilt thou, O man, appear, that takes pleasure in making a
mock of sin, who despisest all reproof, who throws about thy jests as
a madman does fire, and asks whether thou art not in sport? Where wilt
thou, O man, appear, that makes it thy business to preach against the
children of the Most High; thou, who art inventing methods in order to
stop the progress of the gospel, and using thy utmost power to quash
the preaching thereof; who art raising of evil reports against the
disciples of CHRIST, and esteemest them madmen, fools, schismatics,
and a parcel of rabble? Thou, O man, with all thy letter-learning, wilt
surely see the judgment-seat of CHRIST, though, perhaps, sorely against
your will; to be cast by him into eternal fire, a place prepared for
the devil and his angels. There is a burning tophet kindled by the
fury of an avenging GOD, which will never, never be quenched. The devil
longs to embrace you in his hellish arms, whenever the sentence is
past, where you must for ever bear the weight of your sin: there is no
redemption then; the day of grace is past; the door of hope is shut;
mercy will be no more offered, but you must be shut out from GOD for
ever. O who can dwell with everlasting burnings!

However you may think of hell, indeed it is not a painted fire; it
is not an imagination to keep people in awe: then, then you will feel
the power of the almighty arm. If you will not lay hold on his golden
sceptre, he will break you with his iron rod. O ye Pharisees, who
are now so good, so much better than others, how will ye stand before
CHRIST, when drest in his glory as judge? You Arians, may now despise
his divinity; then you shall have a proof of it; he will shew, that
he has all power, and that he was no subordinate GOD; he will shew you
that he has all power in heaven and earth that he was King of kings,
and Lord of lords; that he was the mighty GOD, the everlasting Father;
and this power that he has, he will exercise in preserving you to no
other end, but to punish you for ever. Thus you, who please yourselves
with being good enough now, who are not weary and heavy laden with a
sense of your sins here, will be weary and heavy laden with a sense of
your punishment hereafter.

2. Those, my brethren, are not weary and heavy laden with a sense of
their sins, who can delight themselves in the polite entertainments of
the age, and follow the sinful diversions of life.

Now they can go to balls and assemblies, play-houses and horse-racing;
they have no thought of their sins; they know not what it is to weep
for sin, or humble themselves under the mighty hand of GOD; they can
laugh away their sorrows, and sing away their cares, and drive away
these melancholy thoughts; they are too polite to entertain any sad
thoughts; the talk of death and judgment is irksome to them, because
it damps their mirth; they could not endure to think of their sin and
danger; they could not go to a play, and think of hell; they could not
go quietly to a masquerade, and think of their danger; they could not
go to a ball or an assembly in peace, if they thought of their sins.

And so it is proved, even to a demonstration, that these are not weary
and heavy laden: for if they are not thoughtful about their sins, they
will never be weary and heavy laden of them. But at the day of judgment
all will be over: they shall lose all their carnal mirth, all their
pleasure, all their delight will be gone for ever.

They will say then of their laughter, it is mad; and of mirth, What
dost thou? Their merry conceits, and witty jests against the poor
despised people of GOD, are then over. Their mirth was but as the
crackling of thorns under a pot; it made a great blaze and unseemly
noise for a while, but it was presently gone, and will return no more.

They think now, that if they were to fast or to pray, and meditate
and mourn, they should be righteous over-much, and destroy themselves;
their lives would be a continual trouble, and it would make them run
mad. Alas, my brethren, what misery must that life be, where there
is no more pleasant days, no more balls or plays, no cards or dice,
those wasters of precious time, no horse-racing and cock-fighting, from
whence no good ever came, unless abusing GOD Almighty’s creatures, and
putting them to that use which he never designed them, can be called
so. How miserable will your life be, when all your joys are over,
when your pleasures are all past, and no more mirth or pastime? Do you
think there is one merry heart in hell? one pleasing countenance? or
jesting, scoffing, swearing tongue? A sermon now is irksome: the offer
of salvation, by the blood of JESUS CHRIST, is now termed enthusiasm;
but then you would give thousands of worlds, if in your power, for one
tender of mercy, for one offer of grace, which now you so much despise.

Now, you are not weary of your diversions, nor are you heavy laden with
the sins, with which they are accompanied; but then you will be weary
of your punishment, and the aggravation which attends it. Your cards
and dice, your hawks and hounds, and bowls, and your pleasant sports,
will then be over. What mirth will you have in remembering your sports
and diversions? I would not have you mistake me, and say, I am only
preaching death and damnation to you; I am only shewing you what will
be the consequence of continuing in these sinful pleasures; and if
the devil does not hurry you away with half a sermon, I shall shew
you how to avoid these dangers, which I now preach up as the effect
of sin unrepented of. I mention this, lest you should be hurried away
by the devil: but be not offended, if I point out unto you more of the
terrors which will attend your following these polite and fashionable
entertainments of the present age, and of not being weary and heavy
laden with a sense of your sins.

They who delight in drinking wine to excess, and who are drunkards,
what bitter draughts will they have instead of wine and ale? The heat
of lust will be then also abated; they will no more sing the song of
the drunkard; no more spend their time in courting their mistresses,
in lascivious discourse, in amorous songs, in wanton dalliances, in
brutish defilements: no, these are all over; and it will but prick
each other to the heart to look one another in the face. Then they will
wish, that instead of sinning together, they had prayed together; had
frequented religious societies; had stirred up each other to love and
holiness, and endeavoured to convince each other of the evil of sin,
and how obnoxious they are to the wrath of GOD; and the necessity of
being weary and heavy laden with a sense thereof; that they might have
escaped the punishment which they suffer, by their following the sinful
and polite diversions of the age they fell into. But as it was against
GOD himself they had sinned, so no less than GOD will punish them
for their offences: he hath prepared these torments for his enemies;
his continual anger will still be devouring of them; his breath of
indignation will kindle the flame; his wrath will be a continual
burden to their souls. Woe be to him who falls under the stroke of the
Almighty!

Thus they are not weary and heavy laden with their sins, who can follow
the polite and fashionable entertainments of the age. But,

_Secondly_, I am to shew you what it is to be weary and heavy laden
with sins. And

1. You may be said, my brethren, to be weary and heavy laden, when your
sins are grievous unto you, and it is with grief and trouble you commit
them.

You, who are awakened unto a sense of your sins, who see how hateful
they are to GOD, and how they lay you open to his wrath and indignation,
and would willingly avoid them; who hate yourselves for committing them;
when you are thus convinced of sin, when you see the terrors of the
law, and are afraid of his judgments; then you may be said to be weary
of your sins. And O how terrible do they appear when you are first
awakened to a sense of them; when you see nothing but the wrath of
GOD ready to fall upon you, and you are afraid of his judgments! O how
heavy is your sin to you then! Then you feel the weight thereof, and
that it is grievous to be borne.

2. When you are obliged to cry out under the burden of your sins, and
know not what to do for relief; when this is your case, you are weary
of your sins. It does not consist in a weariness all of a sudden: no,
it is the continual burden of your soul, it is your grief and concern
that you cannot live without offending GOD, and sinning against him;
and these sins are so many and so great, that you fear they will not be
forgiven.

I come, _Secondly_, to shew you what is meant by coming to CHRIST.

It is not, my brethren, coming with your own works: no, you must come
in full dependance upon the LORD JESUS CHRIST, looking on him as the
LORD who died to save sinners: Go to him, tell him you are lost, undone,
miserable sinners, and that you deserve nothing but hell; and when you
thus go to the LORD JESUS CHRIST out of yourself, in full dependance
on the LORD JESUS CHRIST, you will find him an able and a willing
saviour: he is pleased to see sinners coming to him in a sense of their
own unworthiness; and when their case seems to be most dangerous, most
distressed, then the LORD in his mercy steps in and gives you his grace;
he puts his Spirit within you, takes away your heart of stone, and
gives you a heart of flesh. Stand not out then against this LORD, but
go unto him, not in your own strength, but in the strength of JESUS
CHRIST.

And this brings me, _Thirdly_, to consider the exhortation CHRIST gives
unto all of you, high and low, rich and poor, one with another, to come
unto him that you may have rest. And if JESUS CHRIST gives you rest,
you may be sure it will be a rest indeed; it will be such a rest as
your soul wants; it will be a rest which the world can neither give nor
take away. O come all of ye this night, and you shall find rest: JESUS
CHRIST hath promised it. Here is a gracious invitation, and do not let
a little rain hurry you away from the hearing of it; do but consider
what the devil and damned spirits would give to have the offer of mercy,
and to accept of CHRIST, that they may be delivered from the torments
they labour under, and must do so for ever; or, how pleasing would this
rain be to them to cool their parched tongues; but they are denied both,
while you have mercy offered to you; free and rich mercy to come to
CHRIST: here is food for your souls, and the rain is to bring forth the
fruits of the earth, as food for your bodies. Here is mercy upon mercy.

Let me beseech you to come unto CHRIST, and he will give you rest: you
shall find rest unto your souls. O you, my weary, burthened brethren,
do but go to CHRIST in this manner, and though you go to him weary, you
shall find rest before you come from him: let not any thing short of
the LORD JESUS CHRIST be your rest; for wherever you seek you will be
disappointed; but if you do but seek unto the LORD JESUS CHRIST, there
you will find a fulness of every thing which your weary soul wants. Go
to him this night; here is an invitation to all you who are weary souls.
He does not call you, O Pharisees; no, it is only you weary sinners;
and sure you will not stay from him, but accept of his invitation; do
not delay; one moment may be dangerous: death may take you off suddenly.
You know not but that a fit of the apoplexy may hurry you from time
into eternity: therefore, be not for staying till you have something
to bring; come in all your rags, in all your filthiness, in all your
distresses, and you will soon find JESUS CHRIST ready to help, and
to relieve you: he loves you as well in your rags, as in your best
garments; he regards not your dress; no, do but come unto him, and you
shall soon find rest for your souls.

What say you? Shall I tell my Master you will come unto him, and that
you will accept him on his own terms. Let me, my brethren, beseech you
to take JESUS without any thing of your own righteousness: for if you
expect to mix any thing of yourself with CHRIST, you build upon a sandy
foundation; but if you take CHRIST for your rest, he will be that unto
you. Let me beseech you to build upon this rock of ages. O my brethren,
think of the gracious invitation, “Come unto me,” to JESUS CHRIST: it
is he that calls you: And will you not go?

Come, come unto him. If your souls were not immortal, and you in danger
of losing them, I would not thus speak unto you; but the love of your
souls constrains me to speak: methinks this would constrain me to speak
unto you for ever. Come then by faith, and lay hold of the LORD JESUS:
though he be in heaven, he now calleth thee. Come, all ye drunkards,
swearers, sabbath-breakers, adulterers, fornicators; come, all ye
scoffers, harlots, thieves, and murderers, and JESUS CHRIST will save
you; he will give you rest, if you are weary of your sins. O come lay
hold upon him. Had I less love for your souls, I might speak less; but
that love of GOD, which is shed abroad in my heart, will not permit me
to leave you, till I see whether you will come to CHRIST or no. O for
your life receive him, for fear he may never call you any more. Behold,
the Bridegroom cometh; it may be this night the cry may be made. How
would you bear this, if you were sure to die before the morning light?
GOD grant you may begin to live, that when the king of terrors shall
come, you may have nothing to do but to commit your souls into the
hands of a faithful Redeemer.

  Now to GOD the Father, GOD the Son, and GOD the Holy Ghost, be
    all honour, praises, dominion, and power, henceforth and for
    evermore, _Amen_, _Amen_. ‏




                             SERMON XXII.

              The Folly and Danger of parting with CHRIST
                for the Pleasures and Profits of Life.


                     MATTHEW viii. 23, to the End.

  _And when he was entered into a ship, his disciples followed him.
    And behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, insomuch
    that the ship was covered with the waves: But he was asleep.
    And his disciples came to him, and awoke him, saying, Lord,
    save us, we perish. And he saith unto them, Why are ye fearful,
    O ye of little faith? Then he arose and rebuked the winds and
    the sea, and there was a great calm. But the men marvelled,
    saying, What manner of man is this, that even the winds and
    the sea obey him! And when he was come to the other side into
    the country of the |Gergesenes|, there met him two possessed
    with devils, coming out of the tombs, exceeding fierce, so
    that no man might pass by that way. And behold, they cried out,
    saying, What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God?
    Art thou come hither to torment us before the time? And there
    was, a good way off from them, an herd of many swine, feeding.
    So the devils besought him, saying, If thou cast us out,
    suffer us to go away into the herd of swine. And he said unto
    them, Go: And when they were come out, they went into the herd
    of swine; and behold, the whole herd of swine ran violently
    down a steep place into the sea, and perished in the waters.
    And they that kept them, fled and went their ways into the
    city, and told every thing; and what was befallen to the
    possessed of the devils. And behold, the whole city came out
    to meet Jesus, and when they saw him, they besought him that
    he would depart out of their coasts._

IF we were but sensible of the great necessity there is, in this our
day, of being real christians, sure we should not be contented with
being nominal ones; but we are sunk into I know not what; we are no
better than baptised heathens: And how amazing is it, that we should
profess the name of CHRIST, and yet so little converse about him;
surely, this name whereby we are called, should be the theme of our
discourse here, and of our eternal _Hallellujahs_ in a world to come.
But is it not more amazing, to consider, that instead of the name of
JESUS, whereby we are to have salvation, we are taught to look for
it in ourselves, and that there must be a fitness in us before GOD
bestows his grace and favour upon us. But what doctrine is this? Not
the doctrine of the scripture, not the doctrine of JESUS, not that
of the primitive christians, not that of the reformation, nor that
of the articles of the church of _England_: No, it is the doctrine of
the devil: this is making CHRIST but half a Saviour, and driving man
into an error of the greatest consequence, in making him go to JESUS
in his own strength, and not in the name of the LORD JESUS CHRIST:
But, my brethren, unless you go in the strength of JESUS CHRIST; unless
you depend only upon him for salvation; unless he is your wisdom,
righteousness and sanctification, he will never be your redemption. Our
salvation is the free gift of GOD; it is owing to his free love, and
the free grace of JESUS CHRIST, that ever you are saved.

Do not flatter yourselves of being good enough, because you are morally
so; because you go to church, say the prayers, and take the sacrament,
therefore you think no more is required: alas, you are deceiving your
own souls; and if GOD, in his free grace and mercy, does not shew you
your error, it will only be leading you a softer way to your eternal
ruin; but GOD forbid that any of you, to whom I am now speaking, should
imagine this; no, you must be abased, and GOD must be exalted, or
you will never begin at the right end, you will never see JESUS with
comfort or satisfaction, unless you go to him only on the account of
what he has done and suffered.

Is it not plain to a demonstration, that we are acting the part of the
_Gergesenes_, who came and desired JESUS to depart from them: Let us
consider the words, and then we shall see how exactly we are performing
the part of these men over again.

_And when he was entered into a ship his disciples followed him._

CHRIST had been working of many miracles, as we read a few verses
before; and as he continually went about doing good, so now he was
going to the country of the _Gergesenes_ to dispossess two, who were
possessed with devils; and his disciples followed him: No doubt they
were reproached and pointed at, for following such a babbler, as the
Scribes and Pharisees esteemed the LORD JESUS CHRIST: Doubtless they
were pointed at, jeered, scoffed, and esteemed madmen, enthusiasts, and
a parcel of rabble; but still they followed the LORD JESUS CHRIST, they
did not mind a little reproach; no, they loved their Master too well to
forbear following him for the sake of a little persecution. And if you
do but love the LORD JESUS CHRIST, love him above all, you will follow
him in spight of the malice of all the Scribes and Pharisees of this
generation.

_And behold there arose a great tempest on the sea._

The presence of CHRIST in the ship, did not preserve the disciples from
fears and troubles; they were filled with uneasiness, although CHRIST
was with them: this was only for a trial of their faith, to see if they
would stand fast for the LORD in a persecuting time. My dear brethren,
if the LORD is trying of you, do not give out; no, stand fast in all
that the LORD may call you to suffer: It is easy to follow CHRIST when
all things are safe: but your love to JESUS CHRIST would be seen more,
if you must lose your lives, or deny your JESUS; it would be a trial
of your love, when fire and faggot was before you, if you would rush
into that, rather than flie from the truth as it is in JESUS. Though
all things are calm now, the storm is gathering, and by and by it
will break; it is at present no bigger than a man’s hand; but when
it is full it will break, and then you will see whether you are sound
christians or not. Persecution would scatter the hypocrites, and make
nominal christians afraid to worship GOD; they would then soon turn
unto the world and the things of it.

_And his disciples came to him, and awoke him, saying, LORD, save us,
we perish. And he saith unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little
faith? Then he arose and rebuked the winds and sea, and there was a
great calm. But the men marvelled, saying, What manner of man is this,
that even the winds and the sea obey him!_

Here we may see the great compassion of the LORD JESUS CHRIST; no
sooner had the disciples awakened him, and he saw their danger, but he
rebuked the winds and seas, and all things were calm: Thus it was in
a natural way, and will be so in a spiritual one; for no sooner does
JESUS CHRIST speak peace to a troubled soul, but all is calm and quiet:
Now none but GOD could have performed this great miracle, and therefore
it is no wonder that his disciples and the men of the ship were amazed
to see the wonders he performed; and they could not forbear to express
their sense thereof, by inquiring, “What manner of man is this!”

And when the LORD has brought you out of trouble, you will be amazed
at the gracious dealings of the LORD with you, and wonder that he would
so easily remove your troubles from you, when you have deserved nothing
but wrath and destruction, and to be punished to all eternity.

_And when he was come to the other side into the country of the
|Gergesenes|, there met him two possessed with devils, coming out of
the tombs, exceeding fierce, so that no man might pass by that way. And
behold, they cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee, JESUS,
thou Son of GOD? Art thou come hither to torment us before the time?_

Two men, who were possessed bodily with that evil one who is going
about seeking whom he may devour, met JESUS; as soon as they saw him
they were afraid, and ♦cried out: though they made every one afraid
of them, yet they no sooner saw CHRIST, but their power left them, and
they cried out, “What have we to do with thee, JESUS, thou Son of GOD?”
We know that thou art GOD; we do not want thee, we have no power over
thee, but thou hast over us, and we fear thou art come to torment us
before our time; we know that we are to be brought to judgment, and
therefore we would not be tormented until that time come.

  ♦ “creid” replaced with “cried”

_And there was, a good way off from them, a herd of many swine feeding.
So the devils besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, suffer us to
go into the herd of swine._

The evil spirits were sensible that CHRIST was come to dispossess them,
and that their time was now come, when they must leave the bodies of
these two men; for when CHRIST comes, who is stronger than the strong
man armed, all must fall before him; they could not stand against the
power of CHRIST: And here we may observe, that though the devil is an
enemy, yet he is a chained one; he cannot hurt a poor swine until he
has power given him from above: and we may likewise see the malice of
the devil, that he would hurt a poor swine rather than do no mischief;
and the devil would, if in his power, destroy each of your souls, but
CHRIST, by his mighty power, prevents him.

_And he said unto them, Go: And when they were come out, they went into
the herd of swine; and behold, the whole herd of swine ran violently
down a steep place into the sea, and perished in the waters. And they
that kept them fled, and went their ways into the city, and told every
thing, and what was befallen to the possessed of the devils. And behold,
the whole city came out to meet JESUS, and when they saw him, they
besought him that he would depart out of their coasts._

Here observe, that no sooner had CHRIST given the devils permission to
enter the swine, but they did, and their malice was so great, that the
swine ran violently down a steep place into the sea, and were drowned.

What poor spite was here, that the devil should disturb poor swine!
And the city, therefore, was so grieved for the loss of a little wealth,
that they came and besought CHRIST to depart; they did not want his
company; they preferred a few poor swine before the company of CHRIST;
a few worldly goods, a little pleasure, or any thing rather than CHRIST,
part with CHRIST before any thing; but one, who is sensible of the love
of CHRIST, will part with all, rather than with the LORD JESUS CHRIST.

Thus far the letter of the story goes; perhaps you think there is
nothing to be learned herefrom, and that this is all you are to
understand by it; but if so, my brethren, you are much mistaken; for
here is an excellent lesson to be learned, and that you will see, by
considering the words again, in a spiritual sense.

_And behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, insomuch that the
ship was covered with the waves: but he was asleep._

And do not you frequently experience great tempests in this world? does
not the sea of temptation beat over your souls? you are afraid lest
you should be overcome by them; you can see no way to escape, for your
souls are covered with waves, and you expect to be swallowed up in
the tempest; you are afraid lest you should fall into the hands of
the evil one. O do not fear, for JESUS CHRIST, though he may be asleep
to your thinking, yet will keep you, he will preserve you from the
raging of the men, of the Pharisees of this world; they may rage and
spit forth all their venom against you, still CHRIST will deliver,
preserve and protect you; if you but seek unto him in a sense of your
own helplessness and unworthiness, you will soon find he is a GOD ready
to pardon and forgive. O that all that hear me would be persuaded to
bow their knee, and their hearts, as soon as they go home: but alas,
how many of our christians go to GOD, day by day, and call him, Father,
which is but mocking of GOD, when the devil is their father: None have
a right to call him father, but those who have received the spirit of
adoption, whereby they have a right to call him, “Abba, Father.” Could
the brute beasts speak, they might call GOD father as well as some of
you; for he is their Creator to whom they owe their being; but this
will not entitle you to call GOD father, in a spiritual sense; no, you
must be born again of GOD; however you may flatter yourselves, you must
have an inward principle wrought in your hearts by faith. This you must
experience, this, this you must feel before you are christians indeed.

The LORD JESUS CHRIST takes notice of each of you: you may think the
LORD does not take notice of us, because we are in a field, and out of
church walls; but he does observe with what view you came this evening
to hear his word; he knows whether it was to satisfy your curiosity, or
to find out wherewith you might ridicule the preacher. The thoughts and
intentions of all your hearts are not hidden from JESUS CHRIST; though
he may seem to be asleep, because you are, at present, insensible of
his workings upon your heart, and he may not seem to take notice of you,
and regard you, no more than he did the _Syrophœnician_ woman; yet he
will turn to you and behold you with love; the LORD will be mindful of
you in due time, and speak peace to your troubled soul, though the sea
of troubles is beating over you, though the Pharisees of this day are
scoffing at you, yet, when CHRIST rebukes, then they shall cease.

Do not depend on yourself: say unto him, “Save us, LORD, or we perish:”
beseech him to be your guide, and your salvation: I beseech you, by the
tender mercies of GOD, which are in CHRIST JESUS, that you present
yourselves to him, as your reasonable service.

Awake, you that sleep, and arise from the dead, from the death of sin,
and CHRIST then will give you the light of his righteousness. Come to
CHRIST and you shall be welcome; O come unto this blessed JESUS, come
notwithstanding your vileness; for if you come not you will perish:
If CHRIST does not save you, your own good meaning, your own good
intentions cannot; no, as you are in your blood, so you must perish in
your blood; but if you come to CHRIST you will find mercy, you shall
not perish. You cannot find salvation in any other but in CHRIST; if
the disciples could have saved themselves, they would not have awoken
JESUS CHRIST; but they were sensible that no one could save them but
him; and therefore they cried out unto him; and so you, who are under
the sense of sin, who are in fear of hell, if you seek unto your own
works, you only seek your own death; for there is no fitness in you. I
speak the truth in CHRIST JESUS, I lie not, there is no fitness in you,
but a fitness for eternal damnation; for what are you by nature, but
children of wrath, and your hearts are Satan’s garrison. Because you
have gone to church, said the prayers, gone to the sacrament, and done
no one any harm, you speak peace to your souls; and all is in peace you
think, and your case is good enough; but indeed, all is a false peace,
and if you have no other peace than this, you must shortly lie down in
everlasting flames; this is an ungrounded, self created peace, and if
you trust to this peace you will perish.

But do as the disciples did when they were in distress; they go
to CHRIST and say to him, “LORD, save us, we perish.” I offer you
salvation this day; the door of mercy is not yet shut, there does yet
remain a sacrifice for sin, for all that will accept of the LORD JESUS
CHRIST; he only knows the inmost thoughts of thy heart, he will embrace
you in the arms of his love; he sees the first risings of grace in you,
and would willingly encourage it: the angels long for your being in
the love and favour of GOD; they will rejoice to see you turn from sin
unto him. All the ministers of the blessed JESUS would be glad to be
instruments to turn you from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto GOD.

_And he saith to them, why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith?_

And so, my brethren, I may say to you; why are you fearful to leave
your sins and turn to GOD? O turn to him, turn in a sense of your
own unworthiness; tell him how polluted you are, how vile, and be not
faithless, but believe; do not go in your own strength, and then you
need not fear. Why fear ye that the LORD JESUS CHRIST will not accept
of you? your sins will be no hindrance, your unworthiness will be
no hindrance; if your own corrupt hearts do not keep you back, or if
your own good works do not hinder you from coming, nothing will hinder
CHRIST from receiving of you: he loves to see poor sinners coming to
him, he is pleased to see them lie at his feet pleading his promises:
and if you thus come to CHRIST, he will not send you away without his
Spirit; no, but will receive and bless you.

O do not put a slight on infinite love: what would you have CHRIST do
more? Is it not enough for him to come on purpose to save? Will you not
serve GOD in your souls, as well as with your bodies? If not, you are
only deceiving yourselves, and mocking of GOD; he must have the heart.
O ye of little faith, why are ye fearful lest he should not accept of
you? If you will not believe me, sure you will believe the LORD JESUS
CHRIST; he has told thee that he will receive you: then why tarry ye,
and do not go to him directly? Does he desire impossibilities? It is
only, “Give me thy heart:” or, does he want your heart only for the
same end as the devil does, to make you miserable? no, he only wants
you to believe on him, that you might be saved. This, this, is all the
dear Saviour desires, to make you happy, that you may leave your sins,
to sit down eternally with him, at the marriage supper of the Lamb.

_Then he arose and rebuked the winds and the sea, and there was a great
calm._

Thus, you see, it was only in the power of CHRIST to stop the raging of
the sea; he rebuked it: the disciples might have spoken for ever, and
it would not have ceased: so it is with the word preached; I may preach
to you while I live; I may speak till I can speak no more; but the
doctrines of CHRIST will never do you good, unless he impress them upon
your hearts: O then, in all thy troubles look up to CHRIST, that he may
rebuke them; and if he speaks the word, then they shall cease. If the
Pharisees of this generation scoff and jeer you, if they say all manner
of evil against you, do not answer them; leave it unto CHRIST to rebuke
them; for all you can say will be of no more signification, than the
disciples speaking to the sea; but when CHRIST speaks the word, then
they shall cease; let it not discourage you, for if you will live godly
in CHRIST JESUS, you must suffer persecution.

It is true, that those who are sincerely good, are set up for marks for
every one to shoot at. There is a continual enmity between the seed of
the woman and the seed of the serpent; if you were of the world, the
world would love its own; but because CHRIST hath chosen you out of the
world, therefore it hateth you.

Do not think of following CHRIST into glory, unless you go through the
press here. Look forward, my brethren, into eternity, and behold CHRIST
coming, and his reward with him, to give a kind recompence for all the
temptations and difficulties of this present life.

_But the men marvelled, saying, What manner of man is this, that even
the winds and the seas obey him!_

The men of the ship were amazed to see the miracle that JESUS CHRIST
wrought only by his word; they thought he was something more than a man.
And have not we as much reason to admire, that when we are overwhelmed
with troubles, from within and without, that JESUS CHRIST, only by the
word of his power, should speak peace, and then there is peace indeed.
When GOD first awakens us with a sense of sin, and sets his terrors
in array against us, then there are troubles and tempests; for Satan
having got possession, before he will give place, he will fight and
drive hard to keep the soul from closing with JESUS: But when CHRIST
comes, he storms the heart, he breaks the peace, he giveth it most
terrible alarms of judgment and hell, he sets all in a combustion of
fear and sorrow, ’till he hath forced it to yield to his mere mercy,
and take him for its governor; then Satan is cast out; then the storm
is rebuked, and he establishes a firm and lasting peace.

Can the sea be still while the wind is raging? no, it is impossible:
so it is that there can be no peace in the soul, while it is at enmity
with CHRIST; indeed, it may flatter itself and speak peace, but there
can be no true peace: tho’ thou, O Pharisee, may harden and fortify
thy heart against fear, grief, and trouble, yet, as sure as GOD is true,
they will batter down thy proud and fortified spirit, and seize upon it,
and drive thee to amazement. This will be done here, or hereafter; here
in mercy, or hereafter in wrath and judgment.

O my brethren, consider what CHRIST hath done, and you will be
astonished that he has done so much for such wicked wretches as you and
I are. If you are easy under the storm and tempest of sin, and do not
cry to CHRIST for salvation, thou art in a dangerous condition: and it
is a wonder to consider, how a man that is not sure of having made his
peace with GOD, can eat, or drink, or live in peace; that thou art not
afraid, when thou liest down, that thou should’st awake in hell: but
if CHRIST speak peace unto thy soul, who can then speak trouble? None;
no, not men or devils: Therefore, lie down at the feet of CHRIST whom
you have resisted, and say, LORD, what wouldst thou have me to do? and
he will rebuke the winds and seas of thy troubled mind, and all things
will be calm.

_And when he was come to the other side into the country of the
|Gergesenes|, there met him two possessed with devils, coming out of
the tombs, exceeding fierce, so that no man might pass by that way._

The LORD JESUS CHRIST, who went about doing good continually, very
well knew, that he should meet two poor men in this country of the
_Gergesenes_, who were possessed with devils; and JESUS CHRIST went
on purpose that way, that he might relieve them. The devil, where he
has the power, never wants will: but as I said before, so I say again,
though the devil is an enemy, yet he is a chained one; he could not
destroy these two poor men, he could not hurt the people that passed
that way, he could only terrify them: and thus it is with you; the
devil tries his utmost skill and power to frighten you from coming to
the LORD JESUS CHRIST; he uses the utmost of his endeavours to keep
poor sick and weary sinners from coming to JESUS; if he can but make
you lose your souls, it is the end he aims at.

And how many souls does he keep from CHRIST, for fear of reproach?
Many thousands would willingly see CHRIST in his glory, in the world
to come, and would be happy with him there, but they are afraid of
being now laughed at, and of hearing the pharisees say, here is another
of his followers: they are afraid of losing their worldly business,
or of being counted methodistically mad and fit for bedlam. I doubt
not but many are kept from JESUS CHRIST, for fear of a little hurt or
inconveniency.

What will such say, when the LORD JESUS CHRIST shall appear in his
glory? Would you be glad to be confessed by him then, you must now not
be ashamed of confessing him before men: let not the fierceness of the
devil keep you back from CHRIST, for fear of being counted fools; for
the time will come, when it will be found who are truly wise, and who
are truly mad.

Are you afraid to stand up for the cause of CHRIST in the world? Dare
not you be singularly good? Are you afraid of being members of JESUS
CHRIST? I tell you, such persons would crucify him afresh were he in
the world. But do not you, my brethren, so learn CHRIST; let not the
temptations of the devil keep you from coming to the LORD JESUS CHRIST;
he may be fierce, he may hurry you from place to place, but strive
with him, so that he may not drive you from CHRIST; and if you seek
unto CHRIST, he will so help you that you shall resist the devil, and
then he will fly from you; CHRIST will dispossess him, be not afraid
therefore to meet JESUS CHRIST; tell him all that your souls want, and
he will give it to you; and you shall not be any longer troubled with
the fierce outrages of the devil.

_And they cried out, saying, what have we to do with thee, JESUS, thou
Son of GOD? Art thou come to torment us before the time?_

As soon as the devils observed JESUS coming near, then they were afraid,
lest he was come to punish them before that day of accounts, when all
must be brought to judgment.

The devils themselves are enough to convince all our polite Arians and
Socinians. They here own the LORD JESUS CHRIST to be GOD blessed for
ever; they feel his power, and are assured of his being the GOD who
must condemn them at the great day of accounts; and they were afraid
lest the LORD JESUS CHRIST was come to punish them now. But though the
devils believe the divinity of CHRIST, yet the world swarms with Arians
and Socinians.

The Arians make CHRIST no more than a titular GOD, a subordinate deity,
one who was more than man, and yet less than GOD; that he was a prophet
sent from GOD they own, but deny him to be equal with the Father. But I
hope, my brethren, he is to you, what our creed makes him, GOD of GOD,
very GOD of very GOD, co-eternal and consubstantial with the Father;
that as there was not a moment of time in which GOD the Father was not,
so there is not a moment of time in which GOD the Son was not. For he
says himself, “All things were made by him;” and if they were made by
him, he must be GOD; and whoever reads but the word of GOD, will find
divine homage is paid to him, “and that he thought it no robbery to be
equal with GOD;” he is “the Alpha and Omega.” These and a great many
more places might be brought to prove the divinity of the LORD JESUS
CHRIST; he could never have made satisfaction for our sins if he had
not been GOD as well as Man. As Man he suffered; as GOD he satisfied;
so was GOD and man in one person; he took our nature upon him, and was
offered upon the cross for the sins of all those who come unto him,
which if he had not been GOD he could never have satisfied for. It may
be proved, even to a demonstration, that the LORD JESUS CHRIST is GOD,
and that he is equal with the Father.

The Socinians do not go so far as the others; they look on CHRIST to
be no more than a good man, who told the people their duty, and died in
defence of the doctrines which he delivered unto them.

But I hope there are none such here, that have so low and dishonourable
thoughts of the blessed JESUS, and that thus despise the divinity of
the LORD who bought them. No, I hope better things of you, and things
that accompany salvation. Think you, that any one who denies the deity
of CHRIST can ever be saved by him, living and dying in that state?
Surely, the time will come, when they who have denied his Deity, shall
feel the power of it hereafter; they shall feel that he is GOD as well
as man; then he will be owned as GOD by all those who now dare to deny
his truths; but GOD forbid it should go undetermined till then! Woe
unto the polite infidels of this generation, for the devils will rise
up in judgment against them.

If any such are here, consider what you are doing of, before it is too
late; return, return ye unto the LORD, and he will have mercy upon you,
and to JESUS CHRIST, and he will abundantly pardon. O my friends, let
me beseech you to consider what you are about, lest you fall into hell,
and there be none to deliver you.

_And the devils besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, suffer us
to go away into the herd of swine. And he said unto them, Go: And when
they were come out, they went into the herd of swine; and behold, the
whole herd of swine ran violently down a steep place into the sea, and
perished in the waters._

Here we may see, that no sooner had the devil power, but he puts it
into execution; thus, if the devil has but power to tempt, or to hurry
a soul, O how grievous a tyrant he is, hurrying from one temptation
to another, from one sin unto another, and would, if it were possible,
hurry you all into hell with as much violence, as he did the poor swine
into the sea; but CHRIST by his grace prevents it. JESUS CHRIST died
for souls, and therefore the devil cannot do with them as he will; he
may have the will, but he cannot get the power. It is plain, that when
the devil himself, or persecuting men, get the power, they will harrass
the poor christians; every thing is too good for them, and they are not
worthy to be set with the dogs of the flock. My brethren, how joyful
would many be, if the laws of our land would permit them to destroy us;
how would the Pharisees hurry us to prison and to death; but, blessed
be GOD, he does not say to them, as to the devil, “Go:” No, he bids
them stay, he hedges their way up with thorns that they cannot stir
to hurt us; they would fain, but they dare not destroy us; nothing
withholds them but the power of the blessed JESUS. And therefore, be
not afraid of their wrath though it is cruel, and of their anger though
it be fierce: let them shoot their arrows, even bitter words, against
us, blessed be GOD, the shield of faith will be a preservative against
them all.

And when you are thus preserved, it will be the occasion of joy in the
Holy Ghost; though many look on the joy of the Holy Ghost as enthusiasm
and madness, and say that there is no such thing; but well do I know
there is, it carries its own evidence along with it. Plead therefore
with GOD, in the name of JESUS CHRIST; continue to wrestle with him,
until he bestows the blessing upon you, and gives you a feeling of that
joy which the world intermeddles not with, and which they are strangers
to: indeed the devil may stir up his agents to hurry us from one
trouble to another; but it will not signify, for the LORD JESUS CHRIST
will not suffer him to hurry us into hell; no, but will give us his
Spirit, which will be a preservative against all the assaults of the
devil. Now see what followed this miracle, which JESUS had wrought, by
permitting the devil to enter into the herd of swine.

_And they that kept them fled, and went their ways into the city, and
told every thing; and what was befallen to the possessed of the devils._

The people were so amazed to see the power that CHRIST had, and the
malice with which the devil was possessed, that they were afraid, and
told all that had befallen the possessed of the devils: and so, when
the spirit of GOD has been at work on your souls, and you are brought
to feel the power of GOD upon your hearts, you will be so overjoyed
that you will tell to every one what great things GOD has done for
your souls; you will be so full of joy, that you will declare the whole
working of GOD on your hearts, and you will declare how you have been
enabled to overcome Satan, and how you were affected at such a sermon,
in such a place, and at such a time.

You will then love to talk of JESUS; no conversation will be so
pleasing as that of the LORD JESUS CHRIST; no, he will be altogether
lovely unto you, when you have once tasted of his love, and felt the
power of his grace upon your hearts.

_And behold the whole city came out to meet JESUS, and when they saw
him, they besought him that he would depart out of their coasts._

The whole city came to meet JESUS, not to worship, nor to thank him
for the releasing of the two poor men who were possessed; no, but to
beseech him to go from them; they valued their swine more than the
LORD JESUS CHRIST, and had rather part from him, than them: and have we
not among us, thousands who call themselves christians, who had rather
part with CHRIST than their pleasures? A play, a ball, or an assembly
is far more agreeable to them than the company and presence of the LORD
JESUS CHRIST: if they can but indulge their sensual appetite, please
and pamper their bellies, satisfy the lust of the eye, the lust of the
flesh, and the pride of life, they regard no more, but rest contented,
as if they were to live here always. O my dear brethren, I hope none
of you can rest contented with such proceedings as these, but that you
like the company of the LORD JESUS too well to part with him for a few
delights of this life: and are there not many, who part with CHRIST for
their own good works, and think they can go to heaven, if they do but
go to church and say their prayers and take the sacrament? but alas!
they will be much deceived, for if they rest in any thing short of the
LORD JESUS, if they do not make him the chief corner-stone, they will
fall infinitely short of what they flattered themselves to attain unto.

I would speak a few words to you before I part from you this evening,
by way of application. Let me beseech you to come to JESUS CHRIST; I
invite you all to come to him and receive him as your LORD and Saviour;
he is ready to receive you: if you are afraid to go because you are in
a lost condition, he came to save such; and to such as were weary and
heavy laden, such as feel the weight and burden of their sins, he has
promised he will give rest: such as feel the weight and burden of their
sins on their souls, a burden too heavy for them to bear, are weary
of it, and know not how to obtain deliverance of it, in the name of my
LORD and master, I invite you to come to him, that you may find rest
for your souls.

If you will but come unto him he will not reproach you, as justly he
might; he will not reflect upon you for not coming sooner unto him; no,
my dear brethren, he will rejoice and be glad, and will say unto you,
“Son, daughter, be of good cheer, your sins are forgiven you:” these
words he said to others; and if you will but come unto him, by faith in
his blood, he is ready to say the same unto you now, as he did to them
formerly, for “he is the same to-day, yesterday and for ever:” though
he suffered on the cross seventeen hundred years ago, yet he is the
same in goodness and power as ever he was.

He calls you, by his ministers; O come unto him, beg of him to break
your stubborn hearts, that you may be willing to be brought to him in
his own way, to be made poor in spirit, and entitled to an inheritance
among them that are sanctified.

O come and drink of the water of life; you may buy without money and
without price; he is labouring to bring you back from sin, and from
Satan unto himself: open the door of your hearts, and the King of glory
shall enter in.

But if you are strangers to this doctrine, and account it foolishness;
or, if you think you have enough of your own to recommend you to the
favour of GOD, however you may go to church, or receive the sacrament,
you have no true love to the LORD JESUS CHRIST; you are strangers
to the truth of grace in your hearts, and are unacquainted with the
new-birth; you do not know what it is to have your natures changed;
and ’till you do experience these things, you never can enter into the
kingdom of GOD.

What shall I say, my brethren, unto you? My heart is full, it is quite
full, and I must speak, or I shall burst. What, do you think your souls
of no value? do you esteem them as not worth saving? Are your pleasures
worth more than your souls? Had you rather regard the diversions of
this life, than the salvation of your souls? If so, you will never be
partakers with him in glory; but if you come unto him, he will give you
a new nature, supply you with his grace here, and bring you to glory
hereafter; and there you may sing praises and hallelujahs to the Lamb
for ever.

And may this be the happy end of all who hear me! may the LORD guide
you by his counsel, until he comes to fetch you to heaven, and make you
partakers of his glory!

May he direct you in his ways, and lead you in those paths which lead
to everlasting life! May you be holy here, and happy hereafter: may
your lives answer the profession you make, that we may all be found at
the right hand of the LORD JESUS CHRIST, when he shall come to judge
the world according to our works, whether they be good or evil! and
that we then may be presented faultless before the presence of his
glory with exceeding joy, GOD of his infinite mercy grant, &c.




                             SERMON XXIII.

                      Marks of a true Conversion.


                           MATTHEW xviii. 3.

  _Verily, I say unto you, except ye be converted, and become as
    little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven._‏

I SUPPOSE I may take it for granted, that all of you, among whom I am
now about to preach the kingdom of GOD, are fully convinced, that it
is appointed for all men once to die, and that ye all really believe
that after death comes the judgment, and that the consequence of that
judgment will be, that ye must be doomed to dwell in the blackness of
darkness, or ascend to dwell with the blessed GOD, for ever and ever.
I may take it for granted also, that whatever your practice in common
life may be, there is not one, though ever so profligate and abandoned,
but hopes to go to that place, which the scriptures call Heaven,
when he dies. And, I think, if I know any thing of mine own heart,
my heart’s desire, as well as my prayer to GOD, for you all, is, that
I may see you sitting down in the kingdom of our heavenly Father.
But then, though we all hope to go to heaven when we die, yet, if we
may judge by people’s lives, and our LORD says, “that by their fruits
we may know them,” I am afraid it will be found, that thousands, and
ten thousands, who hope to go to this blessed place after death, are
not now in the way to it while they live. Though we call ourselves
christians, and would consider it as an affront put upon us, for any
one to doubt whether we were christians or not; yet there are a great
many, who bear the name of CHRIST, that yet do not so much as know
what real christianity is. Hence it is, that if you ask a great many,
upon what their hopes of heaven are founded, they will tell you, that
they belong to this, or that, or the other denomination, and part of
christians, into which _Christendom_ is now unhappily divided. If you
ask others, upon what foundation they have built their hope of heaven,
they will tell you, that they have been baptized, that their fathers
and mothers presented them to the LORD JESUS CHRIST in their infancy;
and though, instead of fighting under CHRIST’s banners they have
been fighting against him, almost ever since they were baptised, yet
because they have been admitted to church, and their names are in the
Register-book of the parish, therefore they will make us believe, that
their names are also written in the book of life. But a great many,
who will not build their hopes of salvation upon such a sorry rotten
foundation as this, yet if they are, what we generally call, negatively
good people; if they live so as their neighbours cannot say that they
do any body harm, they do not doubt but they shall be happy when they
die; nay, I have found many such die, as the scripture speaks, “without
any bands in their death.” And if a person is what the world calls an
honest moral man, if he does justly, and, what the world calls, loves
a little mercy, is now and then good-natured, reacheth out his hand to
the poor, receives the sacrament once or twice a year, and is outwardly
sober and honest; the world looks upon such an one as a christian
indeed, and doubtless we are to judge charitably of every such person.
There are many likewise, who go on in a round of duties, a model of
performances, that think they shall go to heaven; but if you examine
them, though they have a CHRIST in their heads, they have no CHRIST in
their hearts.

The LORD JESUS CHRIST knew this full well; he knew how desperately
wicked and deceitful mens hearts were; he knew very well how many
would go to hell even by the very gates of heaven, how many would climb
up even to the door, and go so near as to knock at it, and yet after
all be dismissed with a “verily I know you not.” The LORD, therefore,
plainly tells us, what great change must be wrought in us, and what
must be done for us, before we can have any well grounded hopes of
entering into the kingdom of heaven. Hence, he tells _Nicodemus_, “that
unless a man be born again, and from above, and unless a man be born
of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of GOD.”
And of all the solemn declarations of our LORD, I mean with respect to
this, perhaps the words of the text are one of the most solemn, “except,
(says CHRIST) ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall
not enter into the kingdom of heaven.” The words, if you look back to
the context, are plainly directed to the disciples; for we are told,
“that at the same time came the disciples unto JESUS.” And I think it
is plain from many parts of Scripture, that these disciples, to whom
our LORD addressed himself at this time, were in some degree converted
before. If we take the words strictly, they are applicable only to
those, that have already gotten some, though but weak, faith in CHRIST.
Our LORD means, that though they had already tasted the grace of GOD,
yet there was so much of the old man, so much indwelling sin, and
corruption, yet remaining in their hearts, that unless they were more
converted than they were, unless a greater change past upon their souls,
and sanctification was still carried on, they could give but very
little evidence of their belonging to his kingdom, which was not to be
set up in outward grandeur, as they supposed, but was to be a spiritual
kingdom, begun here, but compleated in the kingdom of GOD hereafter.
But though the words had a peculiar reference to our LORD’s disciples;
yet as our LORD makes such a declaration as this in other places of
Scripture, especially in that discourse to _Nicodemus_, I believe the
words may be justly applied to saints and sinners; and as I suppose
there are two sorts of people here, some who know CHRIST, and some of
you that do not know him; some that are converted, and some that are
strangers to conversion, I shall endeavour so to speak, that if GOD
shall be pleased to assist me, and to give you an hearing ear and an
obedient heart, both saints and sinners may have their portion.

_First_, I shall endeavour to show you in what respects we are to
understand this assertion of our LORD’s, “that we must be converted
and become like little children.” I shall then,

_Secondly_, Speak to those who profess a little of this child-like
temper.

And _Lastly_, shall speak to you, who have no reason to think that this
change has ever past upon your souls. And

_First_, I shall endeavour to show you, what we are to understand
by our LORD’s saying, “Except ye be converted and become as little
children.” But I think, before I speak to this point, it may be proper
to premise one or two particulars.

1. I think, that the words plainly imply, that before you or I can have
any well-grounded, scriptural hope, of being happy in a future state,
there must be some great, some notable, and amazing change pass upon
our souls. I believe, there is not one adult person in the congregation,
but will readily confess, that a great change hath past upon their
bodies, since they came first into the world, and were infants dandled
upon their mothers knees. It is true, ye have no more members than ye
had then; but how are these altered! Tho’ you are in one respect the
same ye were, for the number of your limbs, and as to the shape of your
body, yet if a person that knew you when ye were in your cradle, had
been absent from you for some years, and saw you when grown up, ten
thousand to one if he would know you at all, ye are so altered, so
different from what ye were, when ye were little ones. And as the words
plainly imply, that there has a great change past upon our bodies since
we were children, so before we can go to heaven, there must as great
a change pass upon our souls; Our souls considered in a physical sense
are still the same, there is to be no philosophical change wrought on
them: But then, as for our temper, habit and conduct, we must be so
changed and altered, that those who knew us the other day, when in a
state of sin, and before we knew CHRIST, and are acquainted with us now,
must see such an alteration, that they may stand as much amazed at it,
as a person at the alteration wrought on any person he has not seen for
twenty years from his infancy.

2. But I think it proper to premise something farther, because this
text is the grand strong-hold of _Arminians_, and others. They learn
of the devil to bring texts to propagate bad principles: when the devil
had a mind to tempt JESUS CHRIST, because CHRIST quoted scripture,
therefore Satan did so too. And such persons, that their doctrine and
bad principles may go down the better, would fain persuade unwary and
unstable souls, that they are founded upon the word of GOD. Though
the doctrine of original sin, is a doctrine written in such legible
characters in the word of GOD, that he who runs may read it; and though,
I think, every thing without us, and every thing within us, plainly
proclaims that we are fallen creatures; though the very heathens, who
had no other light, but the dim light of unassisted reason, complained
of this, for they felt the wound, and discovered the disease, but
were ignorant of the cause of it; yet there are too many persons
of those who have been baptized in the name of CHRIST, that dare to
speak against the doctrine of original sin, and are angry with those
ill-natured ministers, who paint man in such black colours. Say they,
“It cannot be that children come into the world with the guilt of
_Adam_’s sin lying upon them.” Why? Desire them to prove it from
Scripture, and they will urge this very text, our LORD tells us,
“Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not
enter into the kingdom of heaven.” Now their argument runs thus, “It
is implied in the words of the text, that little children are innocent,
and that they come into the world like a mere blank piece of white
paper, otherwise our LORD must argue absurdly, for he could never
pretend to say, that we must be converted, and be made like wicked
creatures; that would be no conversion.” But, my dear friends, this is
to make JESUS CHRIST speak what he never intended, and what cannot be
deduced from his words. That little children are guilty, I mean, that
they are conceived and born in sin, is plain from the whole tenor of
the book of GOD. _David_ was a man after GOD’s own heart, yet, says
he, “I was conceived in sin.” _Jeremiah_ speaking of every one’s heart,
says, “the heart of man is deceitful and desperately wicked above all
things.” GOD’s servants unanimously declare, (and _Paul_ cites it from
one of them) “that we are altogether now become abominable, altogether
gone out of the way of original righteousness, there is not one of us
that doth good (by nature), no not one.” And I appeal to any of you
that are mothers and fathers, if ye do not discern original sin or
corruption in your children, as soon as they come into the world; and
as they grow up, if ye do not discover self-will, and an aversion to
goodness. What is the reason your children are so averse to instruction,
but because they bring enmity into the world with them, against a good
and gracious GOD? So then, it is plain from scripture and fact, that
children are born in sin, and consequently that they are children of
wrath. And for my part, I think, that the death of every child is a
plain proof of original sin; sickness and death came into the world
by sin, and it seems not consistent with GOD’s goodness and justice,
to let a little child be sick or die, unless _Adam_’s first sin was
imputed to him. If any charge GOD with injustice for imputing _Adam_’s
sin to a little child, behold we have gotten a second _Adam_, to bring
our children to him. Therefore, when our LORD says, “unless ye are
converted, and become as little children,” we are not to understand,
as though our LORD would insinuate, that little children are perfectly
innocent; but in a comparative, and as I shall shew you by and by, in
a rational sense. Little children are innocent, compare them with grown
people; but take them as they are, and as they come into the world,
they have hearts that are sensual, and minds which are carnal. And
I mention this with the greatest concern, because I verily believe,
unless parents are convinced of this, they will never take proper
care of their children’s education. If parents were convinced, that
children’s hearts were so bad as they are, you would never be fond of
letting them go to balls, assemblies, and plays, the natural tendency
of which is to debauch their minds, and make them the children of the
devil. If parents were convinced of this, I believe they would pray
more, when they bring their children to be baptized, and would not make
it a mere matter of form. And I believe, if they really were convinced,
that their children were conceived in sin, they would always put up
that petition, before their children came into the world, which I have
heard that a good woman always did put up, “LORD JESUS, let me never
bear a child for hell or the devil.” O! is it not to be feared, that
thousands of children will appear, at the great day, before GOD, and
in presence of angels and men will say, Father and mother, next to the
wickedness of mine own heart, I owe my damnation to your bad education
of me.

Having premised these two particulars, I now proceed to shew in what
sense we are really to understand the words, that we must be converted
and become like little children. The Evangelist tells us, “that the
disciples at this time came unto JESUS, saying, Who is the greatest
in the kingdom of heaven?” These disciples had imbibed the common
prevailing notion, that the LORD JESUS CHRIST was to be a temporal
prince; they dreamed of nothing but being ministers of state, of
sitting on CHRIST’s right-hand in his kingdom, and lording it over
GOD’s people; they thought themselves qualified for state offices, as
generally ignorant people are apt to conceive of themselves. Well, say
they, “Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?” Which of us shall
have the chief management of public affairs? A pretty question for a
few poor fishermen, who scarcely knew how to drag their nets to shore,
much less how to govern a kingdom. Our LORD, therefore, in the 2d verse,
to mortify them, calls a little child, and sets him in the midst of
them. This action was as much as if our LORD had said, “Poor creatures!
your imaginations are very towering; you dispute who shall be greatest
in the kingdom of heaven; I will make this little child preach to you,
or I will preach to you by him: Verily I say unto you, (I who am truth
itself, I who know in what manner my subjects are to enter into my
kingdom; I say unto you, ye are so far from being in a right temper
for my kingdom, that) except ye be converted, and become as this little
child, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven, (unless ye are,
comparatively speaking, as loose to the world, as loose to crowns,
scepters, and kingdoms, and earthly things, as this poor little child
I have in my hand) ye shall not enter into my kingdom.” So that what
our LORD is speaking of, is not the innocency of little children, if
you consider the relation they stand in to GOD, and as they are in
themselves, when brought into the world; but what our LORD means is,
that as to ambition and lust after the world, we must in this sense
become as little children. Is there never a little boy or girl in this
congregation? Ask a poor little child, that can just speak, about a
crown, scepter, or kingdom, the poor creature has no notion about it:
give a little boy or girl a small thing to play with, it will leave
the world to other people. Now in this sense we must be converted, and
become as little children; that is, we must be as loose to the world,
comparatively speaking, as a little child.

Do not mistake me, I am not going to persuade you to shut up your shops,
or leave your business; I am not going to persuade you, that if ye will
be christians, ye must turn hermits, and retire out of the world: ye
cannot leave your wicked hearts behind you, when you leave the world;
for I find when I am alone, my wicked heart has followed me, go where I
will. No, the religion of JESUS is a social religion. But though JESUS
CHRIST does not call us to go out of the world, shut up our shops,
and leave our children to be provided for by miracles; yet this must
be said to the honour of christianity, if we are really converted,
we shall be loose from the world. Though we are engaged in it, and
are obliged to work for our children; though we are obliged to follow
trades and merchandize, and to be serviceable to the commonwealth; yet
if we are real christians, we shall be loose to the world; though I
will not pretend to say that all real christians have attained to the
same degree of spiritual-mindedness. This is the primary meaning of
these words, that we must be converted and become as little children;
nevertheless, I suppose the words are to be understood in other senses.

When our LORD says, we must be converted and become as little children,
I suppose he means also, that we must be sensible of our weakness,
comparatively speaking, as a little child. Every one looks upon a
little child, as a poor weak creature; as one that ought to go to
school and learn some new lesson every day; and as simple and artless:
one without guile, having not learned the abominable art, called
dissimulation. Now in all these senses, I believe we are to understand
the words of the text.――――Are little children sensible of their
weakness? Must they be led by the hand? Must we take hold of them
or they will fall? So, if we are converted, if the grace of GOD be
really in our hearts, my dear friends, however we may have thought of
ourselves once, whatever were our former high exalted imaginations; yet
we shall now be sensible of our weakness; we shall no more say, “We are
rich and increased with goods, and lack nothing;” we shall be inwardly
poor: we shall feel “that we are poor, miserable, blind, and naked.”
And as a little child gives up its hand to be guided by a parent or a
nurse, so those who are truly converted, and are real christians, will
give up the heart, their understandings, their wills, their affections,
to be guided by the word, providence, and the Spirit of the LORD. Hence
it is, that the Apostle, speaking of the sons of GOD, says, “As many
as are led by the Spirit of GOD, they are (and to be sure he means they
only are) the sons of GOD.”

And as little children look upon themselves to be ignorant creatures,
so those that are converted, do look upon themselves as ignorant too.
Hence it is, that _John_, speaking to christians, calls them little
children; “I have written unto you, little children.” And CHRIST’s
flock is called a little flock, not only because little in number,
but also because those who are members of his flock, are indeed little
in their own eyes. Hence that great man, that great apostle of the
_Gentiles_, that spiritual father of so many thousands of souls, that
man, who in the opinion of Dr. _Goodwin_, “sits nearest the God-man,
the LORD JESUS CHRIST, in glory,” that chosen vessel, the Apostle
_Paul_, when he speaks of himself, says, “Unto me, who am less than
the least of all saints, is this grace given, that I should preach
among the _Gentiles_ the unsearchable riches of CHRIST.” Perhaps some
of you, when you read these words, will be apt to think that _Paul_
did not speak true, that he did not really feel what he said; because
you judge _Paul_’s heart by your own proud hearts: but the more ye
get of the grace of GOD, and the more ye are partakers of the divine
life, the more will ye see your own meanness and vileness, and be less
in your own eyes. Hence it is, that Mr. _Flavel_, in his book called,
_Husbandry Spiritualized_, compares young christians to green corn;
which before it is ripe, shoots up very high, but there is little
solidity in it: whereas, an old christian is like ripe corn; it doth
not lift up its head so much, but then it is more weighty, and fit
to be cut down, and put into the farmer’s barn. Young christians are
also like little rivulets; ye know rivulets are shallow, yet make
great noise; but an old christian, he makes not much noise, he goes on
sweetly, like a deep river sliding into the ocean.

And as a little child is looked upon as an harmless creature, and
generally speaks true; so, if we are converted, and become as little
children, we shall be guileless as well as harmless. What said the dear
Redeemer when he saw _Nathaniel_? As though it was a rare sight he
gazed upon, and would have others gaze upon it; “Behold an _Israelite_
indeed:” Why so? “In whom is no guile.” Do not mistake me; I am not
saying, that christians ought not to be prudent; they ought exceedingly
to pray to GOD for prudence, otherwise they may follow the delusions of
the devil, and by their imprudence give wrong touches to the ark of GOD.
It was the lamentation of a great man, “GOD has given me many gifts,
but GOD has not given me prudence.” Therefore, when I say, a christian
must be guileless, I do not mean, he should expose himself, and lie
open to every one’s assault: we should pray for the wisdom of the
serpent, though we shall generally learn this wisdom by our blunders
and imprudence: and we must make some advance in christianity, before
we know our imprudence. A person really converted, can say, as it is
reported of a philosopher, “I wish there was a window in my breast,
that every one may see the uprightness of my heart and intentions:” And
though there is too much of the old man in us, yet, if we are really
converted, there will be in us no allowed guile, we shall be harmless.
And that is the reason why the poor christian is too often imposed upon;
he judgeth other people by himself; having an honest heart, he thinks
every one as honest as himself, and therefore is a prey to every one. I
might enlarge upon each of these points, it is a copious and important
truth; but I do not intend to multiply many marks and heads.

And therefore, as I have something to say by way of personal
application, give me leave therefore, with the utmost tenderness, and
at the same time with faithfulness, to call upon you, my dear friends.
My text is introduced in an awful manner, “Verily I say unto you;” and
what JESUS said then, he says now to you, to me, and to as many as sit
under a preached gospel, and to as many as the LORD our GOD shall call.
Let me exhort you to see whether ye are converted; whether such a great
and almighty change has passed upon any of your souls. As I told you
before, so I tell you again, ye all hope to go to heaven, and I pray
GOD Almighty ye may be all there: when I see such a congregation as
this, if my heart is in a proper frame, I feel myself ready to lay down
my life, to be instrumental only to save one soul. It makes my heart
bleed within me, it makes me sometimes most unwilling to preach, lest
that word that I hope will do good, may increase the damnation of any,
and perhaps of a great part of the auditory, through their own unbelief.
Give me leave to deal faithfully with your souls. I have your dead
warrant in my hand: CHRIST has said it, JESUS will stand to it, it is
like the laws of the _Medes_ and _Persians_, it altereth not. Hark, O
man! hark, O woman! he that hath ears to hear, let him hear what the
LORD JESUS CHRIST says, “Verily I say unto you, except ye be converted,
and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom
of heaven.” Though this is _Saturday_ night, and ye are now preparing
for the sabbath, for what you know, you may yet never live to see the
sabbath. You have had awful proofs of this lately; a woman died but
yesterday, a man died the day before, another was killed by something
that fell from a house, and it may be in twenty-four hours more, many
of you may be carried into an unalterable state. Now then, for GOD’s
sake, for your own souls sake, if ye have a mind to dwell with GOD,
and cannot bear the thought of dwelling in everlasting burning, before
I go any further, silently put up one prayer, or say _Amen_ to the
prayer I would put in your mouths; “LORD, search me and try me; LORD,
examine my heart, and let my conscience speak; O let me know whether
I am converted or not!” What say ye, my dear hearers? what say ye, my
fellow-sinners? what say ye, my guilty brethren? Has GOD by his blessed
Spirit wrought such a change in your hearts? I do not ask you, whether
GOD has made you angels? That I know will never be; I only ask you,
Whether ye have any well-grounded hope to think that GOD has made you
new creatures in CHRIST JESUS? So renewed and changed your natures,
that you can say, I humbly hope, that as to the habitual temper and
tendency of my mind, that my heart is free from wickedness; I have a
husband, I have a wife, I have also children, I keep a shop, I mind
my business; but I love these creatures for GOD’s sake, and do every
thing for CHRIST: and if GOD was now to call me away, according to the
habitual temper of my mind, I can say, LORD, I am ready; and however I
love the creatures, I hope I can say, Whom have I in heaven but thee?
Whom have I in heaven, O my GOD and my dear Redeemer, that I desire in
comparison of thee? Can you thank GOD for the creatures, and say at the
same time, these are not my CHRIST? I speak in plain language, you know
my way of preaching: I do not want to play the orator, I do not want to
be counted a scholar; I want to speak so as I may reach poor people’s
hearts. What say ye, my dear hearers? Are ye sensible of your weakness?
Do ye feel that ye are poor, miserable, blind, and naked by nature? Do
ye give up your hearts, your affections, your wills, your understanding
to be guided by the Spirit of GOD, as a little child gives up its hand
to be guided by its parent? Are ye little in your own eyes? Do ye think
meanly of yourselves? And do you want to learn something new every
day? I mention these marks, because I am apt to believe they are more
adapted to a great many of your capacities. A great many of you have
not that flowing of affection ye sometimes had, therefore ye are for
giving up all your evidences, and making way for the devil’s coming
into your heart. You are not brought up to the mount as ye used to be,
therefore ye conclude ye have no grace at all. But if the LORD JESUS
CHRIST has emptied thee, and humbled thee, if he is giving thee to see
and know that thou art nothing; though thou art not growing upward,
thou art growing downward; and though thou hast not so much joy, yet
thy heart is emptying to be more abundantly replenished by and by. Can
any of you follow me? Then, give GOD thanks, and take the comfort of it.

If thou art thus converted, and become a little child, I welcome thee,
in the name of the LORD JESUS, into GOD’s dear family; I welcome thee,
in the name of the dear Redeemer, into the company of GOD’s children.
O ye dear souls, though the world sees nothing in you, though there
be no outward difference between you and others, yet I look upon you
in another light, even as so many kings sons and daughters: all hail!
in the name of GOD, I wish every one of you joy from my soul, ye sons
and daughters of the King of kings. Will not you henceforth exercise a
child-like temper? Will not such a thought melt down your hearts, when
I tell you, that the great GOD, who might have frowned you to hell for
your secret sins, that nobody knew of but GOD and your own souls, and
who might have damned you times without number, hath cast the mantle of
his love over you; his voice hath been, Let that man, that woman live,
for I have found a ransom. O will ye not cry out, Why me, LORD? Was
King _George_ to send for any of your children, and were you to hear
they were to be his adopted sons, how highly honoured would you think
your children to be? What great condescension was it for _Pharaoh_’s
daughter to take up _Moses_, a poor child exposed in an ark of
bulrushes, and breed him up for her child? But what is that happiness
in comparison of thine, who was the other day a child of the devil, but
now by converting grace art become a child of GOD? Are ye converted?
Are ye become like little children? Then what must ye do? My dear
hearers, be obedient to GOD, remember GOD is your father; and as every
one of you must know what a dreadful cross it is to have a wicked,
disobedient child; if ye do not want your children to be disobedient
to you, for CHRIST’s sake be not disobedient to your heavenly parent.
If GOD be your father, obey him: if GOD be your father, serve him;
love him with all your heart, love him with all your might, with all
your soul, and with all your strength. If GOD be your father, fly from
every thing that may displease him; and walk worthy of that GOD, who
has called you to his kingdom and glory. If ye are converted and become
like little children, then behave as little children: they long for
the breast, and with it will be contented. Are ye new-born babes? then
desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby. I do not
want that Arminian husks should go down with you; ye are kings sons and
daughters, and have a more refined taste; you must have the doctrines
of grace; and blessed be GOD that you dwell in a country, where the
sincere word is so plainly preached. Are ye children? then grow in
grace, and in the knowledge of your LORD and Saviour JESUS CHRIST. Have
any of you children that do not grow? do not ye lament these children,
and cry over them; do not ye say, my child will never be fit for any
thing in the world? Well, doth it grieve you to see a child that will
not grow; how much must it grieve the heart of CHRIST to see you grow
so little? Will ye be always children? Will ye be always learning the
first principles of christianity, and never press forward toward the
mark, for the prize of the high calling of GOD in CHRIST JESUS? GOD
forbid. Let the language of your heart be, “LORD JESUS help me to grow,
help me to learn more, learn me to live so as my progress may be known
to all!”

Are ye GOD’s children? Are ye converted, and become like little
children? Then deal with GOD as your little children do with you; as
soon as ever they want any thing, or if any body hurt them, I appeal
to yourselves if they do not directly run to their parent. Well, are ye
GOD’s children? Doth the devil trouble you? Doth the world trouble you?
Go tell your father of it, go directly and complain to GOD. Perhaps you
may say, I cannot utter fine words: but do any of you expect fine words
from your children? If they come crying, and can speak but half words,
do not your hearts yearn over them? And has not GOD unspeakably more
pity to you? If ye can only make signs to him; “As a father pitieth
his children, so will the LORD pity them that fear him.” I pray you
therefore be bold with your father, saying, “Abba, Father,” Satan
troubles me, the world troubles me, my own mother’s children are angry
with me; heavenly Father, plead my cause! the LORD will then speak for
you some way or other.

Are ye converted, and become as little children, have ye entered
into GOD’s family? Then assure yourselves, that your heavenly father
will chasten you now and then; “for what son is there whom the father
chastneth not: if ye are without chastisement, of which all are
partakers, then are ye bastards and not sons.” It is recorded of bishop
_Latimer_, that in the house where he came to lodge, he overheard the
master of the house say, I thank GOD I never had a cross in my life:
O said he, then I will not stay here. I believe there is not a child
of GOD, when in a good frame, but has prayed for great humility; they
have prayed for great faith, they have prayed for great love, they have
prayed for all the graces of the Spirit: Do ye know, when ye put up
these prayers, that ye did also say, LORD send us great trials: for how
is it possible to know ye have great faith, humility and love, unless
GOD put you into great trials, that ye may know whether ye have them or
not. I mention this, because a great many of the children of GOD (I am
sure it has been a temptation to me many times, when I have been under
GOD’s smarting rod) when they have great trials, think GOD is giving
them over. If therefore ye are GOD’s children; if ye are converted
and become as little children; do not expect that GOD will be like a
foolish parent; no, he is a jealous GOD, he loves his child too well to
spare his rod. How did he correct _Miriam_? How did he correct _Moses_?
How hath GOD in all ages corrected his dearest children? Therefore
if ye are converted, and become as little children, if GOD hath taken
away a child, or your substance, if GOD suffers friends to forsake you,
and if you are forsaken as it were both by GOD and man, say, LORD I
thank thee! I am a perverse child, or GOD would not strike me so often
and so hard. Do not blame your heavenly Father, but blame yourselves;
he is a loving GOD, and a tender Father, “he is afflicted in all our
afflictions:” therefore when GOD spake to _Moses_, he spake out of
the bush; as much as to say, “_Moses_, this bush represents my people;
as this bush is burning with fire, so are my children to burn with
affliction; but I am in the bush; if the bush burns, I will burn with
it, I will be with them in the furnace, I will be with them in the
water, and though the water come over them, it shall not overflow them.”

Are ye GOD’s children? Are ye converted and become as little children?
Then will ye not long to go home and see your Father? O happy they that
have gotten home before you; happy they that are up yonder, happy they
who have ascended above this field of conflict. I know not what you may
think of it, but since I heard that some, whose hearts GOD was pleased
to work upon, are gone to glory, I am sometimes filled with grief,
that GOD is not pleased to let me go home too. How can you see so much
coldness among GOD’s people? How can ye see GOD’s people like the moon,
waxing and waning? Who can but desire to be forever with the LORD?
Thanks be to GOD, the time is soon coming; thanks be to GOD, he will
come and will not tarry. Do not be impatient, GOD in his own time will
fetch you home. And though ye may be brought to short allowance now,
though some of you may be narrow in your circumstances, yet do not
repine; a GOD, and the gospel of CHRIST, with brown bread, are great
riches. In thy Father’s house there is bread enough and to spare;
though thou art now tormented, yet by and by thou shalt be comforted;
the angels will look upon it as an honour to convey thee to _Abraham_’s
bosom, though thou art but a _Lazarus_ here. By the frame of my heart,
I am much inclined to speak comfortably to GOD’s people.

But I only mention one thing more, and that is, if ye are converted,
and become as little children, then for GOD’s sake take care of doing
what children often do; they are too apt to quarrel one with another.
O love one another; “he that dwells in love dwells in GOD, and GOD in
him.” _Joseph_ knew that his brethren were in danger of falling out,
therefore when he left them, says he, “fall not out by the way.” Ye are
all children of the same Father, ye are all going to the same place;
why should ye differ? The world has enough against us, the devil has
enough against us, without our quarelling with each other; O walk in
love. If I could preach no more, if I was not able to hold out to the
end of my sermon, I would say as _John_ did, when he was grown old and
could not preach, “Little children, love one another:” if ye are GOD’s
children, then love one another. There is nothing grieves me more, than
the differences amongst GOD’s people. O hasten that time, when we shall
either go to heaven, or never quarrel any more!

Would to GOD I could speak to all of you in this comfortable language;
but my master tells me, I must “not give that which is holy to dogs,
I must not cast pearls before swine;” therefore, though I have been
speaking comfortably, yet what I have been saying, especially in this
latter part of the discourse, belongs to children; it is children’s
bread, it belongs to GOD’s people. If any of you are graceless,
christless, unconverted creatures, I charge you not to touch it, I
fence it in the name of GOD; here is a flaming sword turning every way
to keep you from this bread of life, till ye are turned to JESUS CHRIST.
And therefore, as I suppose many of you are unconverted, and graceless,
go home, and away to your closets, and down with your stubborn hearts
before GOD; if ye have not done it before, let this be the night: Or,
do not stay till ye go home; begin now, while standing here; pray to
GOD, and let the language of thy heart be, LORD convert me! LORD make
me a little child, LORD JESUS let me not be banished from thy kingdom!
My dear friends, there is a great deal more implied in the words, than
is expressed: when CHRIST says, “Ye shall not enter into the kingdom
of heaven,” it is as much as to say, “ye shall certainly go to hell, ye
shall certainly be damned, and dwell in the blackness of darkness for
ever, ye shall go where the worm dies not, and where the fire is not
quenched.” The LORD GOD impress it upon your souls! May an arrow (as
one lately wrote me in a letter) dipped in the blood of CHRIST, reach
every unconverted sinner’s heart! May GOD fulfil the text to every one
of your souls! It is he alone that can do it. If ye confess your sins,
and leave them, and lay hold on the LORD JESUS CHRIST, the Spirit of
GOD shall be given you; if you will go and say, turn me, O my GOD! thou
knowest not, O man, what the return of GOD may be to thee. Did I think
that preaching would be to the purpose, did I think that arguments
would induce you to come, I would continue my discourse till midnight.
And however some of you may hate me without a cause, would to GOD
every one in this congregation was as much concerned for himself, as
at present (blessed be GOD) I feel myself concerned for him. O that
my head were waters, O that mine eyes were a fountain of tears, that
I might weep over an unconverted, graceless, wicked, and adulterous
generation. Precious souls, for GOD’s sake think what will become of
you when ye die, if you die without being converted; if ye go hence
without the wedding garment, GOD will strike you speechless, and ye
shall be banished from his presence for ever and ever. I know ye cannot
dwell with everlasting burnings; behold then I shew you a way of escape;
JESUS is the way, JESUS is the truth, the LORD JESUS CHRIST is the
resurrection and the life. It is his Spirit must convert you, come to
CHRIST, and ye shall have it; and may GOD for CHRIST’s sake give it to
you all, and convert you, that we may all meet, never to part again, in
his heavenly kingdom; even so LORD JESUS, Amen and Amen.




                             SERMON XXIV.

                       What think ye of CHRIST?


                           MATTHEW xxii. 42.

  _What think ye of CHRIST?_

WHEN it pleased the eternal Son of GOD to tabernacle among us, and
preach the glad tidings of salvation to a fallen world, different
opinions were entertained by different parties concerning him. As
to his person, some said he was _Moses_; others that he was _Elias_,
_Jeremias_, or one of the ancient prophets; few acknowledged him to be
what he really was, GOD blessed for evermore. And as to his doctrine;
though the common people, being free from prejudice, were persuaded
of the heavenly tendency of his going about to do good, and for the
generality, heard him gladly, and said he was a good man; yet the
envious, worldly-minded, self-righteous governors and teachers of the
_Jewish_ church, being grieved at his success on the one hand, and
unable (having never been taught of GOD) to understand the purity of
his doctrine, on the other; notwithstanding our LORD spake as never
man spake, and did such miracles which no man could possibly do, unless
GOD was with him; yet they not only were so infatuated, as to say,
that he deceived the people, but also were so blasphemous as to affirm,
that he was in league with the devil himself, and cast out devils
by _Beelzebub_ the prince of devils. Nay, our LORD’s own brethren
and kinsmen, according to the flesh, were so blinded by prejudice
and unbelief, that on a certain day, when he went out to teach the
multitudes in the fields, they sent to take hold on him, urging this
as a reason for their conduct, “That he was besides himself.”

Thus was the King and the LORD of glory judged by man’s judgment, when
manifest in flesh: far be it from any of his ministers to expect better
treatment. No, if we come in the spirit and power of our Master, in
this, as in every other part of his sufferings, we must follow his
steps. The like reproaches which were cast on him, will be thrown on us
also. Those that received our LORD and his doctrine, will receive and
hear us for his name’s sake. The poor, blessed be GOD, as our present
meeting abundantly testifies, receive the gospel, and the common people
hear us gladly; whilst those who are sitting in _Moses_’ chair, and
love to wear long robes, being ignorant of the righteousness which is
of GOD by faith in CHRIST JESUS, and having never felt the power of GOD
upon their hearts, will be continually crying out against us, as madmen,
deceivers of the people, and as acting under the influence of evil
spirits.

But he is unworthy the name of a minister of the gospel of peace,
who is unwilling, not only to have his name cast out as evil, but
also to die for the truths of the LORD JESUS. It is the character of
_hirelings_ and _false prophets_, who care not for the sheep, to have
all men speak well of them. “Blessed are you, (says our LORD to his
first apostles, and in them to all succeeding ministers) when men speak
all manner of evil against you falsely for my name’s sake.” And indeed
it is impossible but such offences must come: for men will always judge
of others, according to the principles from which they act themselves.
And if they care not to yield obedience to the doctrines which we
deliver, they must necessarily, in self-defence, speak against the
preachers, lest they should be asked that question, which the Pharisees
of old feared to have retorted on them, if they confessed that _John_
was a prophet, “Why then did you not believe on him?” In all such cases,
we have nothing to do but to search our own hearts, and if we can
assure our consciences, before GOD, that we act with a single eye to
his glory, we are chearfully to go on in our work, and not in the least
to regard what men or devils can say against, or do unto us.

But to return. You have heard what various thoughts there were
concerning JESUS CHRIST, whilst here on earth: nor is he otherwise
treated, even now he is exalted to sit down at the right hand of his
Father in heaven. A stranger to christianity, was he to hear, that
we all profess to hold one LORD, would naturally infer, that we all
thought and spoke one and the same thing about him. But alas! to our
shame be it mentioned, though CHRIST be not divided in himself, yet
professors are sadly divided in their thoughts about him; and that
not only as to the circumstances of his religion, but also of those
essential truths which must necessarily be believed and received by us,
if ever we hope to be heirs of eternal salvation.

Some, and I fear a multitude which no man can easily number, there
are amongst us, who call themselves christians, and yet seldom or
never seriously think of JESUS CHRIST at all. They can think of their
shops and their farms, their plays, their balls, their assemblies, and
horse-races (entertainments which directly tend to exclude religion out
of the world); but as for CHRIST, the author and finisher of faith, the
LORD who has bought poor sinners with his precious blood, and who is
the only thing worth thinking of, alas! he is not in all, or at most
in very few of their thoughts. But believe me, O ye earthly, sensual,
carnally-minded professors, however little you may think of CHRIST
now, or however industriously you may strive to keep him out of your
thoughts, by pursuing the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, and
the pride of life, yet there is a time coming, when you will wish you
had thought of CHRIST more, and of your profits and pleasures less.
For the gay, the polite, the rich also must die as well as others, and
leave their pomps and vanities, and all their wealth behind them. And
O! what thoughts will you entertain concerning JESUS CHRIST, in that
hour?

But I must not pursue these reflections: they would carry me too far
from the main design of this discourse, which is to shew, what those
who are truly desirous to know how to worship GOD in spirit and in
truth, ought to think concerning JESUS CHRIST, whom GOD hath sent to
be the end of the law for righteousness to all them that shall believe.

I trust, _my brethren_, you are more noble than to think me too strict
or scrupulous, in thus attempting to regulate your thoughts about JESUS
CHRIST: for by our thoughts, as well as our words and actions, are we
to be judged at the great day. And in vain do we hope to believe in,
or worship CHRIST aright, unless our principles, on which our faith
and practice are founded, are agreeable to the form of sound words
delivered to us in the scriptures of truth.

Besides, many deceivers are gone abroad into the world. Mere heathen
morality, and not JESUS CHRIST, is preached in most of our churches.
And how should people think rightly of CHRIST, of whom they have
scarcely heard? Bear with me a little then, whilst, to inform your
consciences, I ask you a few questions concerning JESUS CHRIST: for
there is no other name given under heaven, whereby we can be saved, but
his.

_First_, What think you about the person of CHRIST? “Whose Son is
he?” This is the question our LORD put to the Pharisees in the words
following the text; and never was it more necessary to repeat this
question than in these last days. For numbers that are called after
the name of CHRIST, and I fear, many that pretend to preach him, are
so far advanced in the blasphemous chair, as openly to deny his being
really, truly, and properly GOD. But no one that ever was partaker of
his Spirit, will speak thus lightly of him. No; if they are asked, as
_Peter_ and his brethren were, “But whom say ye that I am?” they will
reply without hesitation, “Thou art CHRIST the Son of the ever-living
GOD.” For the confession of our LORD’s divinity, is the rock upon which
he builds his church. Was it possible to take this away, the gates of
hell would quickly prevail against it. My brethren, if JESUS CHRIST
be not very GOD of very GOD, I would never preach the gospel of CHRIST
again. For it would not be gospel; it would be only a system of moral
ethics: _Seneca_, _Cicero_, or any of the _Gentile_ philosophers,
would be as good a Saviour as JESUS of _Nazareth_. It is the divinity
of our LORD that gives a sanction to his death, and makes him
such a high-priest as became us, one who by the infinite merits
of his suffering could make a full, perfect, sufficient sacrifice,
satisfaction and oblation to infinitely offended justice. And
whatsoever minister of the church of _England_, makes use of her forms,
and eats of her bread, and yet holds not this doctrine (as I fear
too many such are crept in amongst us) such a one belongs only to the
synagogue of Satan. He is not a child or minister of GOD: no; he is a
wolf in sheep’s cloathing; he is a child and minister of that wicked
one the devil.

Many will think these hard sayings: But I think it no breach of charity
to affirm, that an _Arian_ or _Socinian_ cannot be a christian. The one
would make us believe JESUS CHRIST is only a _created_ God, which is
a self-contradiction: and the other would have us look on him only as
a good man; and instead of owning his death to be an atonement for the
sins of the world, would persuade us, that CHRIST died only to seal the
truth of his doctrine with his blood. But if JESUS CHRIST be no more
than a mere man, if he be not truly GOD, he was the vilest sinner that
ever appeared in the world. For he accepted of divine adoration from
the man who had been born blind, as we read _John_ ix. 38. “And he
said, LORD I believe, and worshipped him.” Besides, if CHRIST be not
properly GOD, our faith is vain, we are yet in our sins: for no created
being, though of the highest order, could possibly merit any thing
at GOD’s hands: it was our LORD’s divinity, that alone qualified him
to take away the sins of the world; and therefore we hear St. _John_
pronouncing so positively, that “the Word (JESUS CHRIST) was not only
with GOD, but was GOD.” For the like reason, St. _Paul_ says, “that
he was in the form of GOD: That in him dwelt all the fulness of the
godhead bodily.” Nay, JESUS CHRIST assumed ♦the title which GOD gave to
himself, when he sent _Moses_ to deliver his people _Israel_. “Before
_Abraham_ was, I AM.” And again, “I and my father are one.” Which last
words, though our modern infidels would evade and wrest, as they do
other scriptures, to their own damnation, yet it is evident that the
_Jews_ understood our LORD, when he spake thus, as making himself equal
with GOD; otherwise, why did they stone him as a blasphemer? And now,
why should it be thought a breach of charity, to affirm, that those
who deny the divinity of JESUS CHRIST, in the strictest sense of the
word, cannot be christians? For they are greater infidels than the
devils themselves, who confessed that they knew who he was, “even the
holy one of GOD.” They not only believe, but, which is more than the
unbelievers of this generation do, they tremble. And was it possible
for arch-hereticks, to be released from their chains of darkness, under
which (unless they altered their principles before they died) they
are now reserved to the judgment of the great day, I am persuaded they
would inform us, how hell had convinced them of the divinity of JESUS
CHRIST, and that they would advise their followers to abhor their
principles, lest they should come into the same place, and thereby
increase each others torments.

  ♦ duplicate word “the” removed

But, _Secondly_, What think you of the manhood or incarnation of
JESUS CHRIST? For CHRIST was not only GOD, but he was GOD and man in
one person. Thus runs the text and context, “When the Pharisees were
gathered together, JESUS asked them, saying, What think ye of CHRIST?
Whose Son is he? They say unto him, The Son of _David_. How then, says
our divine master, does _David_ in spirit call him LORD?” From which
passage it is evident, that we do not think rightly of the person of
JESUS CHRIST, unless we believe him to be perfect GOD and perfect man,
of a reasonable soul and human flesh subsisting.

For it is on this account that he is called CHRIST, or the _anointed
one_, who through his own voluntary offer was set apart by the father,
and strengthened and qualified by the anointing or communication of the
Holy Ghost, to be a mediator between Him and offending man.

The reason why the Son of GOD took upon him our nature, was, the fall
of our first parents. I hope there is no one present so atheistical,
as to think, that man made himself: no, it was GOD that made us,
and not we ourselves. And I would willingly think, that no one is so
blasphemous as to suppose, that if GOD did make us, he made us such
creatures as we now find ourselves to be. For this would be giving
GOD’s word the lie, which tells us, that “in the image of GOD (not in
the image which we now bear on our souls) made he man.” As GOD made man,
so GOD made him perfect. He placed him in the garden of _Eden_, and
condescended to enter into a covenant with him, promising him eternal
life, upon condition of unsinning obedience; and threatening eternal
death, if he broke his law, and did eat the forbidden fruit.

Man did eat; and herein acting as our representative, thereby involved
both himself and us in that curse, which GOD, the righteous judge, had
said should be the consequence of his disobedience. But here begins
that mystery of godliness, GOD manifested in the flesh. For (sing,
O heavens, and rejoice, O earth!) the eternal Father, foreseeing how
Satan would bruise the heel of man, had in his eternal counsel provided
a means whereby he might bruise that accursed Serpent’s head. Man is
permitted to fall, and become subject to death; but JESUS, the only
begotten Son of GOD, begotten of the Father before all worlds, Light
of light, very GOD of very GOD, offers to die to make an atonement
for his transgression, and to fulfil all righteousness in his stead.
And because it was impossible for him to do this as he was GOD, and
yet since man had offended, it was necessary it should be done in the
person of man; rather than we should perish, this everlasting GOD,
this Prince of Peace, this Antient of Days, in the fulness of time,
had a body prepared for him by the Holy Ghost, and became an infant. In
this body he performed a compleat obedience to the law of GOD; whereby
he, in our stead, fulfilled the covenant of works, and at last became
subject to death, even death upon the cross; that as GOD he might
satisfy, as man he might obey and suffer; and being GOD and man in one
person, might once more procure a union between GOD and our souls.

And now, What think you of this love of CHRIST? Do not you think it
was wondrous great? Especially when you consider, that we were CHRIST’s
bitter enemies, and that he would have been infinitely happy in himself,
notwithstanding we had perished for ever. Whatever you may think of
it, I know the blessed angels, who are not so much concerned in this
mystery of godliness as we, think most highly of it. They do, they will
desire to look into, and admire it, through all eternity. Why, why O ye
sinners, will you not think of this love of CHRIST? Surely it must melt
down the most hardened heart. Whilst I am speaking, the thought of this
infinite and condescending love fires and warms my soul. I could dwell
on it for ever. But it is expedient for you, that I should ask you
another question concerning JESUS CHRIST.

_Thirdly_, What think you about being justified by CHRIST? I believe
I can answer for some of you: for many, I fear, think to be justified
or looked upon as righteous in GOD’s sight, without JESUS CHRIST.
But such will find themselves dreadfully mistaken: for out of CHRIST,
“GOD is a consuming fire.” Others satisfy themselves, with believing
that CHRIST was GOD and man, and that he came into the world to save
sinners in general; whereas, their chief concern ought to be, how they
may be assured that JESUS CHRIST came into the world to save them in
particular. “The life that I now live in the flesh, (says the Apostle)
is by faith of the Son of GOD, who loved me, and gave himself for me.”
Observe, _for me_: it is this immediate application of JESUS CHRIST
to our own hearts, that renders his merits effectual to our eternal
salvation. An unapplied CHRIST will do us no service at all. Others
there are who go still farther: for they think that JESUS CHRIST is
God-man; that he is to be applied to their hearts; and that they can
be justified in GOD’s sight, only in or through him: but then they make
him only in part a saviour: They are for doing what they can themselves,
and then JESUS CHRIST is to make up the deficiencies of their
righteousness. This is the sum and substance of our modern divinity.
And was it possible for me to know the thoughts of most that hear
me this day, I believe they would tell me, this was the scheme they
had laid, and perhaps depended on for some years, for their eternal
salvation. Is it not then high time, my brethren, for you to entertain
quite different thoughts concerning justification by JESUS CHRIST? For
if you think thus, you are in the case of those unhappy _Jews_, who
went about to establish their own righteousness, and would not submit
to, and consequently missed of that righteousness which is of GOD by
faith in CHRIST JESUS our LORD. What think you then, if I tell you,
that you are to be justified freely through faith in JESUS CHRIST,
without any regard to any work or fitness foreseen in us at all? For
salvation is the free gift of GOD. I know no fitness in man, but a
fitness to be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone for ever. Our
righteousnesses, in GOD’s sight, are but as filthy rags: he cannot
away with them. Our holiness, if we have any, is not the cause, but
the effect of our justification in GOD’s sight. “We love GOD, because
he first loved us.” We must not come to GOD as the proud Pharisee did,
bringing in as it were a reckoning of our services; we must come in the
temper and language of the poor Publican, smiting upon our breasts, and
saying, “GOD be merciful to me a sinner:” for JESUS CHRIST justifies us
whilst we are ungodly. He came not to call the righteous, but sinners
to repentance. The poor in spirit only, they who are willing to go out
of themselves, and rely wholly on the righteousness of another, are so
blessed as to be members of his kingdom. The righteousness, the whole
righteousness of JESUS CHRIST, is to be imputed to us, instead of our
own: “For we are not under the law, but under grace: and to as many
as walk after this rule, peace be on them:” for they, and they only
are the true _Israel_ of GOD. In the great work of man’s redemption,
boasting is entirely excluded: which could not be, if only one of our
works was to be joined with the merits of CHRIST. Our salvation is all
of GOD, from the beginning to the end: it is not of works, lest any
man should boast: man has no hand in it: it is CHRIST who is to be made
to us of GOD the Father, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
eternal redemption. His active as well as his passive obedience, is to
be applied to poor sinners. He has fulfilled all righteousness in our
stead, that we might become the righteousness of GOD in him. All we
have to do, is to lay hold on this righteousness by faith: and the very
moment we do apprehend it by a lively faith, that very moment we may be
assured, that the blood of JESUS CHRIST has cleansed us from all sin:
“For the promise is to us and to our children, and to as many as the
LORD our GOD shall call.” If we and our whole houses believe, we shall
be saved as well as the Jaylor and his house: for the righteousness
of JESUS CHRIST is an everlasting, as well as a perfect righteousness.
It is as effectual to all who believe in him now, as formerly; and
so it will be, till time shall be no more. Search the scriptures, as
the _Bereans_ did, and see whether these things are not so. Search St.
_Paul_’s epistles to the _Romans_ and _Galatians_, and there you will
find this doctrine so plainly taught you, that, unless you have eyes
and see not, he that runs may read. Search the _Eleventh Article_ of
our Church: “We are accounted righteous before GOD, only for the merits
of our Lord and Saviour JESUS CHRIST by faith, and not for our own
works or deservings.”

This doctrine of our free justification by faith in CHRIST JESUS,
however censured and evil spoken of by our present Masters of _Israel_,
was highly esteemed by our wise fore-fathers: for in the subsequent
words of the forementioned article, it is called a most _wholesome
doctrine_, and very full of comfort: and so it is to all that are weary
and heavy laden, and are truly willing to find rest in JESUS CHRIST.

This is gospel, this is glad tidings of great joy to all that feel
themselves poor, lost, undone, damned sinners. “Ho, every one that
thirsteth, come unto the waters of life, and drink freely; come and
buy without money and without price.” Behold a fountain opened in your
Saviour’s side, for sin and for all uncleanness. “Look unto him whom
you have pierced:” look unto him by faith, and verily you shall be
saved, though you came here only to ridicule and blaspheme, and never
thought of GOD or of CHRIST before.

Not that you must think GOD will save you because, or on account of
your faith; for faith is a work, and then you would be justified for
your works: but when I tell you, we are to be justified by faith, I
mean that faith is the instrument whereby the sinner applies or brings
home the redemption of JESUS CHRIST to his heart. And to whomsoever
GOD gives such a faith, (for it is the free gift of GOD) he may lift up
his head with boldness, he need not fear; he is a spiritual son of our
spiritual _David_; he is passed from death to life, he shall never come
into condemnation. This is the gospel which we preach. If any man or
angel preach any other gospel, than this of our being freely justified
through faith in CHRIST JESUS, we have the authority of the greatest
Apostle, to pronounce him accursed.

And now, my brethren, what think you of this foolishness of preaching?
To you that have tasted the good word of life, who have been
enlightened to see the riches of GOD’s free grace in CHRIST JESUS, I
am persuaded it is precious, and has distilled like the dew into your
souls. And O that all were like-minded! But I am afraid, numbers are
ready to go away contradicting and blaspheming. Tell me, are there not
many of you saying within yourselves, “This is a licentious doctrine;
this preacher is opening a door for encouragement in sin.” But this
does not surprize me at all, it is a stale, antiquated objection,
as old as the doctrine of justification itself; and (which by the
way is not much to the credit of those who urge it now) it was made
by an infidel. St. _Paul_, in his epistle to the _Romans_, after he
had, in the first five chapters, demonstrably proved the doctrine of
justification by faith alone; in the sixth, brings in an unbeliever
saying, “Shall we continue in sin then, that grace may abound?” But as
he rejected such an inference with a “GOD forbid!” so do I: for the
faith which we preach, is not a dead speculative faith, an assenting
to things credible, as credible, as it is commonly defined: it is not
a faith of the head only, but a faith of the heart. It is a living
principle wrought in the soul, by the Spirit of the ever-living GOD,
convincing the sinner of his lost, undone condition by nature; enabling
him to apply and lay hold on the perfect righteousness of JESUS CHRIST,
freely offered him in the gospel, and continually exciting him, out
of a principle of love and gratitude, to shew forth that faith, by
abounding in every good word and work. This is the sum and substance
of the doctrine that has been delivered. And if this be a licentious
doctrine, judge ye. No, my brethren, this is not destroying, but
teaching you how to do good works, from a proper principle. For to
use the words of our Church in another of her Articles, “Works done
before the grace of CHRIST, and the inspiration of the Spirit, are not
pleasant to GOD, forasmuch as they spring not of faith in JESUS CHRIST;
rather, for that they are not done as GOD has willed and commanded
them to be done, we doubt not but they have the nature of sin.” So that
they who bid you do, and then live, are just as wise as those who would
persuade you to build a beautiful magnificent house, without laying a
foundation.

It is true, the doctrine of our free justification by faith in CHRIST
JESUS, like other gospel truths, may and will be abused by men of
corrupt minds, reprobates concerning the faith; but they who receive
the truth of GOD in the love of it, will always be shewing their
faith by their works. For this reason, St. _Paul_, after he had told
the _Ephesians_, “By grace they were saved through faith, not of
works, lest any man should boast,” immediately adds, “For we are his
workmanship, created in CHRIST JESUS unto good works.” And in his
epistle to _Titus_, having given him directions to tell the people they
were justified by grace, directly subjoins, chapter iii. verse 8. “I
will that you affirm constantly, that they who have believed in GOD
might be careful to maintain good works.” Agreeable to this, we are
told in our Twelfth Article, “That albeit good works, which are the
fruits of faith, and follow after justification, cannot put away our
sins, and endure the severity of GOD’s judgment; yet are they pleasing
and acceptable to GOD in CHRIST; and do spring necessarily out of
a true and lively faith, insomuch, that a lively faith may be as
evidently known by them, as a tree discerned by the fruit.”

What would I give, that this Article was duly understood and preached
by all that have subscribed to it! The ark of the LORD would not then
be driven into the wilderness, nor would so many persons dissent from
the Church of _England_. For I am fully persuaded, that it is not so
much on account of rites and ceremonies, as our not preaching the truth
as it is in JESUS, that so many have been obliged to go and seek for
food elsewhere. Did not we fall from our established doctrines, few,
comparatively speaking, would fall from the Established Church. Where
CHRIST is preached, though it be in a church or on a common, dissenters
of all denominations have, and do most freely come. But if our clergy
will preach only the law, and not shew the way of salvation by faith in
CHRIST JESUS, the charge of schism at the day of judgment, I fear, will
chiefly lye at their door. The true sheep of CHRIST know the voice of
CHRIST’s true shepherds, and strangers they will not hear.

Observe, my dear brethren, the words of the Article, “Good works are
the fruits of faith, and follow after justification.” How then can they
precede, or be any way the cause of it? Our persons must be justified,
before our performances can be accepted. GOD had respect to _Abel_
before he had respect to his offering: and therefore the righteousness
of JESUS CHRIST must be freely imputed to, and apprehended by us
through faith, before we can offer an acceptable sacrifice to GOD:
for out of CHRIST, as I hinted before, GOD is a consuming fire: and
whatsoever is not of faith in CHRIST, is sin.

That people mistake the doctrine of free justification, I believe, is
partly owing to their not rightly considering the different persons
to whom St. _Paul_ and St. _James_ wrote in their epistles; as also
the different kind of justification each of them writes about. The
former asserts in line upon line, argument upon argument, “That we
are justified by faith alone:” The latter put this question, “Was
not _Abraham_ justified by works?” From whence many, not considering
the different views of these holy men, and the different persons they
wrote to, have blended and joined faith and works, in order to justify
us in the sight of GOD. But this is a capital mistake; for St. _Paul_
was writing to the _Jewish_ proselytes, who sought righteousness
by the works, not of the ceremonial only, but of the moral law.
In contradistinction to that, he tells them, they were to look for
justification in GOD’s sight, only by the perfect righteousness
of JESUS CHRIST apprehended by faith. St. _James_ had a different
set of people to deal with; such who abused the doctrines of free
justification, and thought they should be saved (as numbers among us
do now) upon their barely professing to believe on JESUS CHRIST. These
the holy Apostle endeavours wisely to convince, that such a faith was
only a dead and false faith; and therefore, it behoved all who would
be blessed with faithful _Abraham_, to shew forth their faith by their
works, as he did: “For was not _Abraham_ justified by works?” Did he
not prove that his faith was a true justifying faith, by its being
productive of good works? From whence it is plain, that St. _James_ is
talking of a declarative justification before men; shew me, demonstrate,
evidence to me, that thou hast a true faith, by thy works: Whereas,
St. _Paul_ is talking only of our being justified in the sight of GOD;
and thus he proves, that _Abraham_, as we also are to be, was justified
before ever the moral or ceremonial law was given to the _Jews_: for
it is written, “_Abraham_ believed in the LORD, and it was accounted to
him for righteousness.”

Take the substance of what has been said on this head, in the few
following words. Every man that is saved, is justified three ways:
_First_, _meritoriously_, by the death of JESUS CHRIST: “It is the
blood of JESUS CHRIST alone that cleanses us from all sin.” _Secondly_,
_instrumentally_, by faith: faith is the means or instrument whereby
the merits of JESUS CHRIST are applied to the sinner’s heart: “Ye are
all the children of GOD by faith in CHRIST JESUS.” _Thirdly_, we are
justified _declaratively_; namely, by good works: good works declare
and prove to the world, that our faith is a true saving faith. “Was not
_Abraham_ justified by works?” And again, “Shew me thy faith by thy
works.”

It may not be improper to illustrate this doctrine by an example or
two. I suppose no one will pretend to say, that there was any fitness
for salvation in _Zaccheus_ the publican, when he came to see JESUS
out of no better principle, than that whereby perhaps thousands are led
to hear me preach; I mean, curiosity: but JESUS CHRIST prevented and
called him by his free grace, and sweetly, but irresistibly inclined
him to obey that call; as, I pray GOD, he may influence all you that
come only to see who the preacher is. _Zaccheus_ received our LORD
joyfully into his house, and at the same time by faith received him
into his heart: _Zaccheus_ was then freely justified in the sight of
GOD. But behold the immediate fruits of that justification! He stands
forth in the midst, and as before he had believed in his heart, he now
makes confession with his mouth to salvation: “Behold, LORD, the half
of my goods I give unto the poor; and if I have taken any thing from
any man by false accusation, I restore him four-fold.” And thus it will
be with thee, O believer, as soon as ever GOD’s dear Son is revealed in
thee by a living faith; thou wilt have no rest in thy spirit, till out
of love and gratitude for what GOD has done for thy soul, thou shewest
forth thy faith by thy works.

Again, I suppose every body will grant there was no fitness for
salvation in the persecutor _Saul_; no more than there is in those
persecuting zealots of these last days, who are already breathing out
threatenings, and, if in their power, would breathe out slaughter also,
against the disciples of the LORD.

Now our LORD, we know, freely prevented him by his grace, (and O that
he would thus effectually call the persecutors of this generation)
and by a light from heaven struck him to the ground. At the same time,
by his Spirit, he pricked him to the heart, convinced him of sin, and
caused him to cry out, “Who art thou, LORD?” CHRIST replies, “I am
JESUS whom thou persecutest.” Faith then was instantaneously given
to him, and behold, immediately _Saul_ cries out, “LORD, what wouldst
thou have me to do?” And so will every poor soul that believes on the
LORD JESUS with his whole heart. He will be always asking, LORD, what
shall I do for thee? LORD, what wouldst thou have me to do? Not to
justify himself, but only to evidence the sincerity of his love and
thankfulness to his all-merciful High-priest, for plucking him as a
firebrand out of the fire.

Perhaps many self-righteous persons amongst you, may flatter yourselves,
that you are not so wicked as either _Zaccheus_ or _Saul_ was, and
consequently there is a greater fitness for salvation in you than in
them. But if you think thus, indeed you think more highly of yourselves
than you ought to think: for by nature we are all alike, all equally
fallen short of the glory of GOD, all equally dead in trespasses
and sins, and there needs the same almighty power to be exerted in
converting any one of the most sober, good-natured, moral persons here
present, as there was in converting the publican _Zaccheus_, or that
notorious persecutor _Saul_. And was it possible for you to ascend
into the highest heaven, and to enquire of the spirits of just men made
perfect, I am persuaded they would tell you this doctrine is from GOD.
But we have a more sure word of prophecy, to which we do well to give
heed, as unto a light shining in a dark place. My brethren, the word is
nigh you; search the scriptures; beg of GOD to make you willing to be
saved in this day of his power: for it is not flesh and blood, but the
Spirit of JESUS CHRIST, that alone can reveal these things unto you.

_Fourthly_ and _Lastly_, What think you of JESUS CHRIST being formed
within you? For whom CHRIST justifies, them he also sanctifies.
Although he finds, yet he does not leave us unholy. A true christian
may not so properly be said to live, as JESUS CHRIST to live in him.
For they only that are led by the Spirit of CHRIST, are the true sons
of GOD.

As I observed before, so I tell you again, the faith which we preach
is not a dead, but a lively active faith wrought in the soul, working a
thorough change, by the power of the Holy Ghost, in the whole man: and
unless CHRIST be thus in you, notwithstanding you may be orthodox as
to the foregoing principles, notwithstanding you may have good desires,
and attend constantly on the means of grace; yet, in St. _Paul_’s
opinion, you are out of a state of salvation. “Know you not, (says that
Apostle to the _Corinthians_, a church famous for its gifts above any
church under heaven) that CHRIST is in you, (by his Spirit) unless you
are reprobates?”

For CHRIST came not only to save us from the guilt, but from the power
of our sins: till he has done this, however he may be a Saviour to
others, we can have no assurance or well-grounded hope, that he has
saved us: for it is by receiving his blessed Spirit into our hearts,
and feeling him witnessing with our spirits, that we are the sons
of GOD, that we can be certified of our being sealed to the day of
redemption.

This is a great mystery; but I speak of CHRIST and the new-birth.
Marvel not at my asking you, what you think about CHRIST being formed
within you? For either GOD must change his nature, or we ours. For as
in _Adam_ we all have spiritually died, so all that are effectually
saved by CHRIST, must in CHRIST be spiritually made alive. His only end
in dying and rising again, and interceding for us now in heaven, is to
redeem us from the misery of our fallen nature, and, by the operation
of his blessed Spirit, to make us meet to be partakers of the heavenly
inheritance with the saints in light. None but those that thus are
changed by his grace here, shall appear with him in glory hereafter.

Examine yourselves, therefore, my brethren, whether you are in the
faith; prove yourselves; and think it not sufficient to say in your
creed, I believe in JESUS CHRIST: many say so, who do not believe, who
are reprobates, and yet in a state of death. You take GOD’s name in
vain, when you call him Father, and your prayers are turned into sin,
unless you believe in CHRIST, so as to have your life hid with him in
GOD, and to receive life and nourishment from him, as branches do from
the vine.

I know, indeed, the men of this generation deny there is any such thing
as feeling CHRIST within them; but alas! to what a dreadful condition
would such reduce us, even to the state of the abandoned heathen, who,
St. _Paul_ tells us, “were past feeling.” The Apostle prays, that the
_Ephesians_ may abound in all knowledge and spiritual understanding,
or as it might be rendered, spiritual sensation. And in the office
for the visitation of the sick, the minister prays, that the LORD may
make the sick person know and feel, that there is no other name under
heaven given unto men, in whom and through whom they may receive health
and salvation, but only the name of our LORD JESUS. For there is a
spiritual, as well as a corporeal feeling; and though this is not
communicated to us in a sensible manner, as outward objects affect our
senses, yet it is as real as any sensible or visible sensation, and
may be as truly felt and discerned by the soul, as any impression from
without can be felt by the body. All who are born again of GOD, know
that I lie not.

What think you, Sirs, did _Naaman_ feel, when he was cured of his
leprosy? Did the woman feel virtue coming out of JESUS CHRIST, when she
touched the hem of his garment, and was cured of her bloody issue? So
surely mayst thou feel, O believer, when JESUS CHRIST dwelleth in thy
heart. I pray GOD to make you all know and feel this, ere you depart
hence.

O my brethren, my heart is enlarged towards you. I trust I feel
something of that hidden, but powerful presence of CHRIST, whilst I am
preaching to you. Indeed it is sweet, it is exceedingly comfortable.
All the harm I wish you, who without cause are my enemies, is, that
you felt the like. Believe me, though it would be hell to my soul, to
return to a natural state again, yet I would willingly change states
with you for a little while, that you might know what it is to have
CHRIST dwelling in your hearts by faith. Do not turn your backs; do
not let the devil hurry you away: be not afraid of convictions; do not
think worse of the doctrine, because preached without the church walls.
Our LORD, in the days of his flesh, preached on a mount, in a ship, and
a field; and I am persuaded, many have felt his gracious presence here.
Indeed we speak what we know. Do not reject the kingdom of GOD against
yourselves: be so wise as to receive our witness. I cannot, I will not
let you go; stay a little, let us reason together. However lightly you
may esteem your souls, I know our LORD has set an unspeakable value
on them. He thought them worthy of his most precious blood. I beseech
you, therefore, O sinners, be ye reconciled to GOD. I hope you do not
fear being accepted in the beloved. Behold, he calleth you; behold,
he prevents and follows you with his mercy, and hath sent forth his
servants into the highways and hedges, to compel you to come in.
Remember then, that at such an hour of such a day, in such a year, in
this place, you were all told what you ought to think concerning JESUS
CHRIST. If you now perish, it will not be for lack of knowledge: I am
free from the blood of you all. You cannot say I have been preaching
damnation to you; you cannot say I have, like legal preachers, been
requiring you to make brick without straw. I have not bidden you to
make yourselves saints, and then come to GOD; but I have offered you
salvation on as cheap terms as you can desire. I have offered you
CHRIST’s whole wisdom, CHRIST’s whole righteousness, CHRIST’s whole
sanctification and eternal redemption, if you will but believe on him.
If you say, you cannot believe, you say right; for faith, as well as
every other blessing, is the gift of GOD: but then wait upon GOD, and
who knows but he may have mercy on thee? Why do we not entertain more
loving thoughts of CHRIST? Or do you think he will have mercy on others,
and not on you? But are you not sinners? And did not JESUS CHRIST come
into the world to save sinners? If you say you are the chief of sinners;
I answer, that will be no hindrance to your salvation, indeed it will
not, if you lay hold on him by faith. Read the Evangelists, and see how
kindly he behaved to his disciples who fled from and denied him: “Go
tell my brethren,” says he. He did not say, Go tell those traitors; but,
“Go tell my brethren, and _Peter_:” as though he had said, Go tell my
brethren in general, and poor _Peter_ in particular, “that I am risen;”
O comfort his poor drooping heart, tell him I am reconciled to him;
bid him weep no more so bitterly: for though with oaths and curses he
thrice denied me, yet I have died for his sins, I am risen again for
his justification: I freely forgive him all. Thus slow to anger, and
of great kindness, was our all-merciful High-priest. And do you think
he has changed his nature, and forgets poor sinners, now he is exalted
to the right-hand of GOD? No, he is the same yesterday, to-day, and for
ever, and sitteth there only to make intercession for us. Come then,
ye harlots, Come ye publicans, come ye most abandoned of sinners, come
and believe on JESUS CHRIST. Though the whole world despise you and
cast you out, yet he will not disdain to take you up. O amazing, O
infinitely condescending love! even you, he will not be ashamed to call
his brethren. How will you escape if you neglect such a glorious offer
of salvation? What would the damned spirits, now in the prison of hell,
give, if CHRIST was so freely offered to their souls? And why are not
we lifting up our eyes in torments? Does any one out of this great
multitude dare say, he does not deserve damnation? If not, why are we
left, and others taken away by death? What is this but an instance of
GOD’s free grace, and a sign of his good will towards us? Let GOD’s
goodness lead us to repentance! O let there be joy in heaven over some
of you repenting! Though we are in a field, I am persuaded the blessed
angels are hovering now around us, and do long, “as the hart panteth
after the water-brooks,” to sing an anthem at your conversion. Blessed
be GOD, I hope their joy will be fulfilled. An awful silence appears
amongst us. I have good hope that the words which the LORD has enabled
me to speak in your ears this day, have not altogether fallen to
the ground. Your tears and deep attention, are an evidence, that the
LORD GOD is amongst us of a truth. Come, ye Pharisees, come and see,
in spite of your satanical rage and fury, the LORD JESUS is getting
himself the victory. And brethren, I speak the truth in CHRIST, I
lie not, if one soul of you, by the blessing of GOD, be brought to
think savingly of JESUS CHRIST this day, I care not if my enemies were
permitted to carry me to prison, and put my feet fast in the stocks,
as soon as I have delivered this sermon. Brethren, my heart’s desire
and prayer to GOD is, that you may be saved. For this cause I follow
my Master without the camp. I care not how much of his sacred reproach
I bear, so that some of you be converted from the errors of your ways.
I rejoice, yea and I will rejoice. Ye men, ye devils, do your worst:
the LORD who sent, will support me. And when CHRIST, who is our life,
and whom I have now been preaching, shall appear, I also, together with
his despised little ones, shall appear with him in glory. And then,
what will you think of CHRIST? I know what you will think of him. You
will then think him to be the fairest among ten thousand: You will
then think and feel him to be a just and sin-avenging judge. Be ye
then persuaded to kiss him lest he be angry, and so you be banished for
ever from the presence of the LORD. Behold, I come to you as the angel
did to _Lot_. Flee, flee, for your lives; haste, linger no longer in
your spiritual _Sodom_, for otherwise you will be eternally destroyed.
Numbers, no doubt, there are amongst you, that may regard me no more
than _Lot_’s sons-in-law regarded him. I am persuaded I seem to some of
you as one that mocketh: but I speak the truth in CHRIST, I lie not; as
sure as fire and brimstone was rained from the LORD out of heaven, to
destroy _Sodom_ and _Gomorrah_, so surely, at the great day, shall the
vials of GOD’s wrath be poured on you, if you do not think seriously of,
and act agreeable to the gospel of the LORD’s CHRIST. Behold, I have
told you before; and I pray GOD, all you that forget him may seriously
think of what has been said, before he pluck you away, and there be
none to deliver you.

  Now to GOD the Father, &c.




                              SERMON XXV.

                     The wise and foolish Virgins.


                           MATTHEW xxv. 13.

  _Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour in
    which the Son of man cometh._

THE apostle _Paul_, in his epistle to the _Hebrews_, informs us, “That
it is appointed for all men once to die; after that is the judgment.”
And I think, if any consideration be sufficient to awaken a sleeping
drowsy world, it must be this, That there will be a day wherein these
heavens shall be wrapt up like a scroll, this element melt with fervent
heat, the earth and all things therein be burnt up, and every soul,
of every nation and language, summoned to appear before the dreadful
tribunal of the righteous Judge of quick and dead, to receive rewards
and punishments, according to the deeds done in their bodies. The great
apostle just mentioned, when brought before _Felix_, could think of no
better means to convert that sinful man, than to reason of temperance,
righteousness, and more especially of a judgment to come. The first
might in some measure affect, but, I am persuaded, it was the last
consideration, a judgment to come, that made him to tremble: and so
bad as the world is now grown, yet there are few have their consciences
so far seared, as to deny that there will be a reckoning hereafter.
The promiscuous dispensations of providence in this life, wherein we
see good men afflicted, destitute, tormented, and the wicked permitted
triumphantly to ride over their heads, has been always looked upon
as an indisputable argument, by the generality of men, that there
will be a day in which GOD will judge the world in righteousness, and
administer equity unto his people. Some indeed are so bold as to deny
it, while they are engaged in the pursuit of the lust of the eye, and
the pride of life. But follow them to their death-beds, ask them, when
their souls are ready to launch into eternity, what they then think of
a judgment to come? and they will tell you, they dare not give their
consciences the lie any longer. They feel a fearful looking for of
judgment and fiery indignation in their hearts. Since then these things
are so, does it not highly concern each of us, my brethren, before we
come on a bed of sickness, seriously to examine how the account stands
between GOD and our souls, and how it will fare with us in that day? As
for the openly prophane, the drunkard, the whoremonger, the adulterer,
and such-like, there is no doubt of what will become of them; without
repentance they shall never enter into the kingdom of GOD and his
CHRIST: no; their damnation slumbereth not; a burning fiery _Tophet_,
kindled by the fury of GOD’s eternal wrath, is prepared for their
reception, wherein they must suffer the vengeance of eternal fire. Nor
is there the least doubt of the state of true believers. For though
they are despised and rejected of natural men, yet being born again of
GOD, they are heirs of GOD, and joint heirs with CHRIST. They have the
earnest of the promised inheritance in their hearts, and are assured,
that a new and living way is made open for them, into the holy of
holies, by the blood of JESUS CHRIST, into which an abundant entrance
shall be administered to them at the great day of account. The only
question is, what will become of the _almost Christian_, one that
is content to go, as he thinks, in a middle way to heaven, without
being prophane on the one hand, or, as he falsly imagines, righteous
over-much on the other? Many there are in every congregation, and
consequently some here present, of this stamp. And what is worst of
all, it is more easy to convince the most notorious publicans and
sinners of their being out of a state of salvation, than any of these.
Notwithstanding, if JESUS CHRIST may be our judge, they shall as
certainly be rejected and disowned by him at the last day, as though
they lived in open defiance of all his laws. For what says our LORD in
the parable of which the words of the text are a conclusion, and which
I intend to make the subject of my present discourse. “Then,” at the
day of judgment, which he had been discoursing of in the foregoing, and
prosecutes in this chapter, “shall the kingdom of heaven, (the state of
professors in the gospel church) be likened unto ten virgins, who took
their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom.” In which words,
is a manifest allusion to a custom prevailing in our LORD’s time among
the _Jews_ at marriage solemnities, which were generally at night, and
at which it was customary for the persons of the bride-chamber to go
out in procession, with many lights, to meet the bridegroom. By the
_bridegroom_, you are here to understand JESUS CHRIST. The church, i. e.
true believers, are his _spouse_; he is united to them by one spirit,
even in this life; but the solemnizing of these sacred nuptials, is
reserved till the day of judgment, when he shall come to take them home
to himself, and present them before men and angels, as his purchase,
to his Father, without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing. By the ten
virgins we are to understand, the professors of christianity in general.
All are called virgins, because all are called to be saints. Whosoever
names the name of CHRIST, is obliged by that very profession to depart
from all iniquity. But the pure and chaste in heart, are the only
persons that will be so blessed as to see GOD. As CHRIST was born of
a virgin, so he can dwell in none but virgin souls, made pure and holy
by the cohabitation of his holy Spirit. What says the apostle? “All are
not _Israelites_ that are of _Israel_,” all are not christians that are
called after the name of CHRIST: No, says our LORD, in the 2d verse,
“Five of those virgins were wise,” true believers, “and five were
foolish,” formal hypocrites. But why are five said to be wise, and the
other five foolish? Hear what our LORD says in the following verses;
“They that were foolish took their lamps, and took no oil with them:
but the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps.” They that
were foolish took their lamps of an outward profession. They would
go to church, say over several manuals of prayers, come perhaps
into a field to hear a sermon, give at a collection, and receive the
sacrament constantly, nay, oftner than once a month. But then here lay
the mistake; they had no oil in their lamps, no principle of grace, no
living faith in their hearts, without which, though we should give all
our goods to feed the poor, and our bodies to be burnt, it would profit
us nothing. In short, they were exact, nay, perhaps superstitious
bigots as to the form, but all the while they were strangers to, and,
in effect, denied the power of godliness in their hearts. They would go
to church, but at the same time, think it no harm to go to a ball or an
assembly, notwithstanding they promised at their baptism, to renounce
the pomps and vanities of this wicked world. They were so exceedingly
fearful of being righteous over-much, that they would even persecute
those that were truly devout, if they attempted to go a step farther
than themselves. In one word, they never effectually felt the power
of the world to come. They thought they might be christians without
so much inward feeling, and therefore, notwithstanding their high
pretensions, had only a name to live.

And now, Sirs, let me pause a while, and in the name of GOD, whom I
endeavour to serve in the gospel of his dear Son, give me leave to ask
one question. Whilst I have been drawing, though in miniature, the
character of these foolish virgins, have not many of your consciences
made the application, and with a small, still, though articulate voice,
said, Thou man, thou woman, art one of those foolish virgins, for thy
sentiments and practice agree thereto? Stifle not, but rather encourage
these convictions; and who knows, but that ♦the LORD who is rich in
mercy to all that call upon him faithfully, may so work upon you even
by this foolishness of preaching, as to make you wise virgins before
you return home?

  ♦ insert missing word “the”

What they were you shall know immediately: “But the wise took oil in
their vessels with their lamps.” Observe, the wise, the true believers,
had their lamps as well as the foolish virgins; for christianity does
not require us to cast off all outward forms; we may use forms, and
yet not be formal: for instance, it is possible to worship GOD in a
set form of prayer, and yet worship him in spirit and in truth. And
therefore, brethren, let us not judge one another. The wise virgins
had their lamps; herein did not lie the difference between them and the
foolish, that one worshipped GOD with a form, and the other did not: No:
as the Pharisee and Publican went up to the temple to pray, so these
wise and foolish virgins might go to the same place of worship, and sit
under the same ministry; but then the wise took oil in their vessels
with their lamps; they kept up the form, but did not rest in it;
their words in prayer were the language of their hearts, and they were
no strangers to inward feelings; they were not afraid of searching
doctrines, nor affronted when ministers told them they deserved
to be damned; they were not self-righteous, but were willing that
JESUS CHRIST should have all the glory of their salvation; they were
convinced that the merits of JESUS CHRIST were to be apprehended only
by faith; but yet were they as careful to maintain good works, as
though they were to be justified by them: in short, their obedience
flowed from love and gratitude, and was chearful, constant, uniform,
universal, like that obedience which the holy angels pay our Father in
heaven.

Here then let me exhort you to pause again; and if any of you can
faithfully apply these characters to your hearts, give GOD the glory,
and take the comfort to your own souls; you are not false but true
believers. JESUS CHRIST has been made of GOD to you wisdom, even that
wisdom, whereby you shall be made wise unto salvation. GOD sees a
difference between you and foolish virgins, if natural men will not.
You need not be uneasy, though one chance and fate in this life may
happen to you both. I say, one chance and fate; for, verse 5. “while
the bridegroom tarried,” in the space of time which passed between our
LORD’s ascension and his coming again to judgment, “they all slumbered
and slept.” The wise as well as foolish died, for dust we are, and
to dust we must return. It is no reflection at all upon the divine
goodness, that believers, as well as hypocrites, must pass through
the valley of the shadow of death; for CHRIST has taken away the sting
of death, so that we need fear no evil. It is to them a passage to
everlasting life: death is only terrible to those who have no hope,
because they live without faith in the world. Whosoever there are
amongst you, that have received the first-fruits of the spirit, I am
persuaded you are ready to cry out, we would not live here always,
we long to be dissolved, that we may be with JESUS CHRIST; and though
worms must destroy our bodies as well as others, yet we are content,
being assured that our Redeemer liveth, that he will stand at the
latter days upon the earth, and that in our flesh we shall see GOD.

But it is not so with hypocrites and unbelievers beyond the grave; for
what says our LORD? “And at midnight:” observe, at midnight, when all
was hushed and quiet, and no one dreaming of any such thing, “a cry
was made;” the voice of the arch-angel and the trump of GOD was heard
sounding this general alarm; to things in heaven, to things in earth,
and to things in the waters under the earth, “BEHOLD!” mark how this
awful summons is ushered in with the word _behold_, to engage our
attention? “Behold the bridegroom cometh!” even JESUS CHRIST, the
desire of nations, the bridegroom of his spouse the church: Because he
tarried for a while to exercise the faith of saints, and give sinners
space to repent, scoffers were apt to cry out, “Where is the promise of
his coming? But the LORD is not slack concerning his promise, as these
men account slackness.” For behold, he that was to come, now cometh,
and will not tarry any longer: he cometh to be glorified in his saints,
and to take vengeance on them that know not GOD, and have not obeyed
his gospel: he cometh not as a poor despised _Galilean_; not to be
laid in a stinking manger; not to be despised and rejected of men;
not to be blindfolded, spit upon, and buffeted; not to be nailed to an
accursed tree; he cometh not as the Son of man, but as he really was,
the eternal Son of the eternal GOD: He cometh riding on the wings of
the wind, in the glory of the Father and his holy angels, and to be had
in everlasting reverence of all that shall be round about him. “Go ye
forth to meet him;” arise, ye dead, ye foolish, as well as wise virgin,
arise and come to judgment. Multitudes, no doubt, that hear this
awakening cry, would rejoice if the rocks might fall on, and the hills
cover them from the presence of the Lamb: what would they give, if as
they lived as beasts, they might now die like the beasts that perish?
How would they rejoice, if those same excuses which they made on this
side eternity for not attending on holy ordinances, would serve to
keep them from appearing before the heavenly bridegroom! But as _Adam_,
notwithstanding his fig-leaves, and the trees of the garden, could
not hide himself from GOD, when arrested with an “_Adam_, where art
thou?” So now the decree is gone forth, and the trump of GOD has given
its last sound; all tongues, people, nations, and languages, both wise
and foolish virgins, must come into his presence, and bow beneath his
footstool; even _Pontius Pilate_, _Annas_ and _Caiaphas_; even the
proud persecuting high-priests and Pharisees of this generation, must
appear before him: for says our LORD, “then, (when the cry was made,
Behold, the bridegroom cometh!) in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye,
the graves were opened, the sea gave up its dead, and all those virgins,
both wise and foolish, arose and trimmed their lamps,” or endeavoured
to put themselves in a proper posture to meet the bridegroom.

But how may we imagine the foolish virgins were surprized, when,
notwithstanding their high thoughts and proud imaginations of their
security, they now find themselves wholly naked, and void of that
inward holiness and purity of heart, without which no man living at
that day shall comfortably meet the LORD! I doubt not, but many of
these foolish virgins, whilst in this world, were cloathed in purple
and fine linnen, fared sumptuously every day, and disdained to set the
wise virgins, some of whom might be as poor as _Lazarus_, even with
the dogs of their flock. These were looked upon by them as enthusiasts
and madmen, as persons that were righteous over-much, and who intended
to turn the world upside down: but now death hath opened their eyes,
and convinced them, to their eternal sorrow, that he is not a true
christian, who is only one outwardly. Now they find (though, alas! too
late) they, and not the wise virgins, had been beside themselves. Now
their proud hearts are made to stoop, their lofty looks are brought low;
and as _Dives_ entreated that _Lazarus_ might dip the tip of his finger
in water, and be sent to cool his tongue, so these foolish virgins,
these formal hypocrites, are obliged to turn beggars to those whom they
once despised: “Give us of your oil;” O! impart to us a little of that
grace and holy spirit, for the insisting on which we fools accounted
your lives madness; for alas! “our lamps are gone out;” we had only the
form of godliness; we were whited sepulchres; we were heart-hypocrites;
we contented ourselves with desiring to be good; and though confident
of salvation whilst we lived, yet our hope is entirely gone, now GOD
has taken away our souls: Give us therefore, O! give us, though we
once despised you, give us of your oil, for our lamps of an outward
profession, and transient convictions, are quite gone out. “Comfort
ye, comfort ye, my people, saith the LORD.” My brethren in CHRIST,
hear what the foolish say to the wise virgins, and learn in patience to
possess your souls. If you are true followers of the lowly JESUS, I am
persuaded you have your names cast out, and all manner of evil spoken
falsly against you, for his name’s sake; for no one ever did or will
live godly in CHRIST JESUS, without suffering persecution; nay, I doubt
not but your chief foes are those of your own houshold: tell me, do not
your carnal relations and friends vex your tender souls day by day, in
bidding you spare yourselves, and take heed lest you go too far: And as
you passed along to come and hear the word of GOD, have you not heard
many a Pharisee cry out, Here comes another troop of his followers!
Brethren, be not surprized, CHRIST’s servants were always the world’s
fools; you know it hated him before it hated you. Rejoice and be
exceeding glad. Yet a little while, and behold the bridegroom cometh,
and then shall you hear these formal scoffing Pharisees saying unto you,
“Give us of your oil, for our lamps are gone out.” When you are reviled,
revile not again: when you suffer, threaten not; commit your souls into
the hands of him that judgeth righteously: for behold the day cometh,
when the children of GOD shall speak for themselves.

The wise virgins, in the parable, no doubt endured the same cruel
mockings as you may do; but as the lamb before the shearers is dumb,
so in this life opened they not their mouths; but now we find they can
give their enemies an answer: “Not so, lest there be not enough for us
and you; but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for yourselves.”
These words are not to be understood as though they were spoken in
an insulting manner; for true charity teaches us to use the worst of
sinners, and our most bitter enemies, with the meekness and gentleness
of CHRIST: Though _Dives_ was in hell, yet _Abraham_ does not say, Thou
villain, but only, “Son, remember:” and I am persuaded, had it been in
the power of these wise virgins, they would have dealt with the foolish
virgins, as, GOD knows, I would willingly deal with my most inveterate
enemies, not only give them of their oil, but also exalt them to the
right hand of GOD. It was not then for want of love, but the fear of
wanting a sufficiency for themselves, that made them return this answer,
“Not so, lest there be not enough for us and you:” for they that have
most grace, have none to spare; none but self-righteous, foolish
virgins think they are good enough, or have already attained. Those
who are truly wise are always most distrustful of themselves, pressing
forwards to the things that are before, and think it well if after they
have done all, they can make their calling and election sure. “Not so,
lest there be not enough for us and you; but go ye rather to them that
sell, and buy for yourselves.” These words indeed seem to be spoken in
a triumphant, but certainly they were uttered in the most compassionate
manner; “go ye to them that sell, and buy for yourselves;” unhappy
virgins! you accounted our lives folly; whilst with you in the body,
how often have you condemned us for our zeal in running to hear
the word of GOD, and looked upon us as enthusiasts, for talking and
affirming, that we must be led by the spirit, and walk by the spirit,
and feel the spirit of GOD witnessing with our spirits, that we are his
children? But now you would be glad to be partakers of this privilege,
but it is not ours to give. You contented yourselves with seeking, when
you should have been striving to enter in at the strait gate. And now
go to them that sell, if you can, and buy for yourselves.

And what say you to this, ye foolish formal professors? For I doubt not
but curiosity and novelty hath brought many such, even to this despised
place, to hear a sermon. Can you hear this reply to the foolish virgins,
and yet not tremble? Why, yet a little while, and thus it shall be done
to you. Rejoice and bolster yourselves up in your duties and forms;
endeavour to cover your nakedness with the fig-leaves of an outward
profession and a legal righteousness, and despise the true servants
of CHRIST as much as you please, yet know, that all your hopes will
fail you when GOD brings you into judgment. For not he who commendeth
himself is justified, but he whom the LORD commendeth.

But to return; we do not hear of any reply the foolish virgins make:
No, their consciences condemned them; like the person without a
wedding-garment, they are struck dumb, and are now filled with anxious
thoughts how they shall buy oil, that they may lift up their heads
before the bridegroom. “But whilst they went to buy,” verse 10, whilst
they were thinking what they should do, the bridegroom, the LORD JESUS,
the king, the husband of his spouse the church, cometh, attended with
thousands and twenty times ten thousands of saints and angels, publicly
to count up his jewels; “and they that were ready,” the wise virgins
who had oil in their lamps, and were sealed by his spirit to the
day of redemption, these having on the wedding garment of an imputed
righteousness, and a new nature, “went in with him to the marriage.”

But who can express the transports that these wise virgins felt, when
they were thus admitted, in holy triumph, into the presence and full
enjoyment of him, whom their souls hungred and thirsted after! No doubt
they had tasted of his love, and by faith had often fed on him in their
hearts, when sitting down to commemorate his last supper here on earth;
but how full may we think their hearts and tongues were of his praises,
when they see themselves seated together to eat bread in his heavenly
kingdom. And what was best of all, “the door was shut,” and shut them
in, to enjoy the ever blessed GOD, and the company of angels and the
spirits of just men made perfect, without interruption for evermore.
I say, without interruption; for in this life, their eyes often gushed
out with water, because men kept not GOD’s law; and they could never
come to appear before the LORD, or to hear his word, but Satan and his
emissaries would come also to disturb them; but now “the door is shut,”
now there is a perfect communion of saints, which they in vain longed
for in this lower world; now tares no longer grow up with the wheat;
not one single hypocrite or unbeliever can screen himself amongst them.
“Now the wicked cease from troubling, and now their weary souls enjoy
an everlasting rest.”

Once more, O believers, let me exhort you in patience to possess your
souls. GOD, if he has freely justified you by faith in his son, and
given you his spirit, has sealed you to be his; and has secured you, as
surely as he secured _Noah_, when he locked him in the ark. But though
heirs of GOD, and joint heirs with CHRIST, and neither men nor devils
can pluck you out of your heavenly Father’s hands, yet you must be
tossed about with manifold temptations; however, lift up your heads,
the day of your perfect, compleat redemption draweth nigh. Behold the
bridegroom cometh to take you to himself, the door shall be shut, and
you shall be for ever with the LORD.

But I even tremble to tell you, O nominal christians, that the door
will be shut, I mean the door of mercy, never, never to be opened to
give you admission, though you should continue knocking to all eternity.
For thus speaks our LORD, verse 11. “Afterwards,” after those that were
ready went in, and the door was shut; after they had, to their sorrow,
found that no oil was to be bought, no grace to be procured, “came
also the other virgins;” and as _Esau_, after _Jacob_ had gotten the
blessing, cried with an exceeding bitter cry, “Bless me, even me also,
O my father;” so they came saying, “LORD, LORD, open to us.” Observe
the importunity of these foolish virgins, implied in the words, “LORD,
LORD.” Whilst in the body, I suppose they only read, did not pray over
their prayers. If you now tell them, they should “pray without ceasing,”
they should pray from their hearts, and feel the want of what they
prayed for; they would answer, they could not tell what you mean by
inward feelings; that GOD did not require us to be always on our knees,
but if a man did justly, and loved mercy, and did as the church forms
required him, it was as much as the LORD required at his hands.

I fear, sirs, too many among us are of this mind: nay, I fear there
are many so polite, so void of the love of GOD, as to think it too
great a piece of self-denial, to rise early to offer up a sacrifice of
praise and thanksgiving acceptable to GOD through JESUS CHRIST. If any
such, by the good providence of GOD, are brought hither this morning,
I beseech you to consider your ways, and remember, if you are not
awakened out of your spiritual lethargy, and live a life of prayer here,
you shall but in vain cry out with the foolish virgins, “LORD, LORD,
open unto us,” hereafter. Observe farther, the impudence, as well as
importunity of these other virgins; “LORD, LORD,” say they, as though
they were intimately acquainted with the holy JESUS. Like numbers among
us, who because they go to church, repeat their creeds, and receive the
blessed sacrament, think they have a right to call JESUS their Saviour,
and dare call GOD their Father, when they put up the LORD’s prayer. But
JESUS is not your Saviour. The devil, not GOD, is your father, unless
your hearts are purified by faith, and you are born again from above.
It is not merely being baptized by water, but being born again of the
Holy Ghost that must qualify you for salvation; and it will do you no
service at the great day, to say unto CHRIST, LORD, my name is in the
register of such and such a parish. I am persuaded, the foolish virgins
could say this and more; but what answer did JESUS make? He answered
and said, verse 12. “Verily, I say unto you:” He puts the word VERILY,
to assure them he was in earnest. “I say unto you,” I who am truth
itself, I whom you have owned in words, but in works denied, “verily,
I say unto you, I know you not.” These words must not be understood
literally; for whatever Arians and Socinians may say to the contrary,
yet we affirm, that JESUS CHRIST is GOD, GOD blessed for ever,
and therefore knoweth all things. He saw _Nathaniel_, when under
the fig-tree: he sees, and is now looking down from heaven, his
dwelling-place, upon us, to see how we behave in these fields. Brethren,
I know nothing of the thoughts and intents of your hearts, in coming
hither; but JESUS CHRIST knows who come like new-born babes, desirous
to be fed with the sincere milk of the word; and he knows who came
to hear what the babler says, and to run away with part of a broken
sentence, that they may have whereof to accuse him. This expression
then, “I know you not,” must not be understood literally; no, it
implies a knowledge of approbation, as though CHRIST had said, “You
call me, LORD, LORD, but you have not done the things that I have said;
you desire me to open the door, but how can you come in hither not
having on a wedding garment? Alas, you are naked! Where is my outward
righteousness imputed to you? Where is my inherent righteousness
wrought in you? Where is my divine image stamped upon your souls? How
dare you call me LORD, LORD, when you have not received the Holy Ghost,
whereby I seal all that are truly mine? Verily, I know you not; depart
from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and
his angels.”

And now, he that hath ears to hear, let him hear what manner of persons
these were, whom JESUS CHRIST dismissed with this answer. Remember,
I entreat you, remember they are not sent away for being fornicators,
swearers, sabbath-breakers, or prodigals. No, in all probability, as
I observed before, they were, touching the outward observances of the
moral law, blameless; they were constant as to the form of religion;
and if they did no good, yet no one could say, they did any one any
harm. The only thing for which they were condemned, and eternally
banished from the presence of the LORD, (for so much is implied in “I
know you not”) was this, they had no oil in their lamps, no principle
of a true living faith and holiness in their hearts. And if persons
may go to church, receive the sacrament, lead honest moral lives,
and yet be sent to hell at the last day, as they certainly will be if
they advance no farther, Where wilt thou, O drunkard? Where wilt thou,
O swearer? Where wilt thou, O sabbath-breaker? Where wilt thou that
deniest divine revelation, and even the form of godliness? Where will
you, and such-like sinners appear? I know very well. You must appear
before the dreadful tribunal of JESUS CHRIST: however you may, like
_Felix_, put off the prosecution of your convictions, yet you, as
well as others, must arise after death, and appear in judgment; you
will then find, to your eternal sorrow, what I just hinted at in the
beginning of this discourse, that your damnation slumbereth not: sin
has blinded your hearts, and hardened your foreheads now, but yet a
little while, and our LORD will ease him of his adversaries. Methinks,
by faith, I see the heavens opened, and the holy JESUS coming, with
his face brighter than ten thousand suns, darting fury upon you from
his eyes! Methinks I see you rising from your graves, trembling and
astonished, and crying out, who can abide this day of his coming!

And now what inference shall I draw from what has been delivered? Our
LORD, in the words of the text, has drawn one for me; “Watch therefore,
for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man cometh.”

“_Watch_;” that is, be upon your guard, and keep your graces in
continual exercise: For as when we are commanded to watch unto prayer,
it signifies that we should continue instant in that duty; so when we
are required to watch in general, it means that we should put on the
whole armour of GOD, and live every day as though it was our last. And
O! that the LORD may now enable me to lift up my voice like a trumpet!
For had I a thousand tongues, or could I speak so loud that the whole
world might hear me, I could not sound a more useful alarm than that
which is contained in the text. WATCH therefore, my brethren, I beseech
you by the mercies of GOD in CHRIST JESUS, watch; be upon your guard;
awake, ye that sleep in the dust: for ye know neither the day nor
the hour wherein the Son of man cometh. Perhaps to-day, perhaps this
midnight, the cry may be made: “for in a moment, in the twinkling of
an eye, the trump is to sound.” However, supposing the final day of
judgment may yet be a great way off, the day of death is certainly near
at hand: for what is our life? “It is but a vapour,” but a span long,
soon passeth it away, and we are gone. Blessed be GOD, we are all here
well; but who, out of this great multitude, dares say, I shall go home
to my house in safety? Who knows, but whilst I am speaking, GOD may
commission his ministring spirits immediately to call some of you away
by a sudden stroke, to give an account with what attention you have
heard this sermon. You know, my brethren, some such instances we have
lately had. And what angel or spirit hath assured us, that some of you
shall not be the next? “Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day
nor the hour wherein the Son of man will come:” And it is chiefly for
this reason, that GOD has hidden the day of our deaths from us. For
since I know not but I may die to-morrow, why, O my soul, may each
of us say, wilt thou not watch to-day? Since I know not but I may die
the next moment, why wilt thou not prepare for dying this? Many such
reflections as these, my brethren, croud in upon my mind. At present,
blessed be the LORD, who delights to magnify his strength in a poor
worm’s weakness, I am at a stand, not so much about what I shall say,
as what I shall leave unsaid. My belly, like _Elihu_’s, is, as it were,
full of new wines; “out of the abundance of my heart my mouth speaketh.”
The seeing so great a multitude standing before me; a sense of the
infinite majesty of that GOD in whose name I preach, and before whom
I as well as you must appear, to give an account; and the uncertainty
there is whether I shall live another day, to speak to you any more:
these considerations, especially the presence of GOD, which I now
feel upon my soul, furnishes me with so much matter, that I scarce
know where to begin, or where to end my application. However, for
method-sake, by the divine assistance, I will branch it into three
particulars.

And _first_, I would remind you that are notoriously ungodly, of what
our LORD says in the text: For though I have said that your damnation
slumbereth not, whilst you continue in an impenitent state; yet that
was only to set you upon your watch, to convince you of your danger,
and excite you to cry out, “What shall we do to be saved?” I appeal to
all that hear me, whether I have said, the door of mercy should be shut
against you, if you believe on JESUS CHRIST: No, if you are the chief
of sinners; if you are murderers of fathers, and murderers of mothers;
if you are emphatically the dung and offscouring of all things; yet if
you believe on JESUS CHRIST, and cry unto him with the same faith as
the expiring thief, “LORD, remember me, now thou art in thy kingdom;”
I will pawn my eternal salvation upon it, if he does not shortly
translate you to his heavenly paradise. Wonder not at my speaking with
so much assurance: For I know “it is a faithful and true saying, and
worthy of all acceptation, that JESUS CHRIST came into the world to
save (all truly affected and believing) sinners:” Nay, so great is his
love, that I am persuaded, was it necessary, he would come again into
the world, and die a second time for them on the cross. But, blessed
be GOD, when our LORD bowed down his head, and gave up the ghost, our
redemption was finished. It is not our sins, but our want of a lively
faith in his blood, that will prove our condemnation: if you draw
near to him by faith, though ye are the worst of sinners, yet he will
not say unto you, “Verily I know you not.” No, a door of mercy shall
be opened to you. Look then, look then, by an eye of faith, to that
GOD-man whom ye have pierced. Behold him bleeding, panting, dying upon
the cross, with arms stretched out ready to embrace you all. Hark!
how he groans! See how all nature is in an agony! The rocks rend, the
graves open; the sun withdraws its light, ashamed as it were to see the
GOD of nature suffer; and all this to usher in man’s great redemption.
Nay, the Holy JESUS, in the very agonies and pangs of death, prays for
his very murderers; “Father, forgive them, for they know not what they
do.” If then you have crucified the Son of GOD afresh, and put him to
an open shame, yet do not despair, only believe, and even this shall be
forgiven. You have read, at least you have heard, no doubt, how three
thousand were converted at St. _Peter_’s preaching one single sermon,
after our LORD’s ascension into heaven; and many of the crucifiers of
the LORD of glory undoubtedly were amongst them; and why should you
despair? For “JESUS CHRIST is the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever.”
The Holy Ghost shall be sent down on you, as well as on them, if you
do but believe; for CHRIST ascended up on high to receive this gift
even for the vilest of men. Come then, all ye that are weary and heavy
laden with the sense of your sins, lay hold on CHRIST by faith, and he
will give you rest; for salvation is the free gift of GOD to all them
that believe. And though you may think this too good news to be true,
yet I speak the truth in CHRIST, I lie not, this is the gospel, this is
the glad tidings which we are commissioned to preach to every creature.
Be not faithless then, but believing. Let not the devil lead you
captive at his will any longer; for all the wages he gives his servants
is death, death often in this life, death everlasting in the next:
But the free gift of GOD, is eternal life to all that believe in
JESUS CHRIST. Pharisees are and will be offended at my coming here,
and offering you salvation on such cheap terms; but the more they bid
me hold my peace, the more will I cry out and proclaim to convicted
sinners, that JESUS, _David_’s Son according to the flesh, but
_David_’s Lord as he was GOD, will have mercy upon all that by a living
faith truly turn to him. If this is to be vile, I pray GOD, I may be
more vile. If they will not let me preach CHRIST crucified, and offer
salvation to poor sinners in a church, I will preach him in the lanes,
streets, highways and hedges; and nothing pleases me better, than to
think I am now in one of the devils strongest holds. Surely, the LORD
has not sent me and all you hither for nothing; no, blessed be GOD,
the fields are white ready unto harvest, and many souls I hope will
be gathered into his heavenly garner. It is true, it is the midnight
of the church, especially the poor church of _England_; but GOD has
lately sent forth his servants to cry, “Behold the bridegroom cometh:”
I beseech you, O sinners, hearken unto the voice! Let me espouse you
by faith to my dear master; and henceforward “watch and pray,” that you
may be ready to go forth to meet him.

_Secondly_, I would apply myself to those amongst you, that are not
openly profane, but by depending on a formal round of duties, deceive
your own souls, and are only foolish virgins. But I must speak to your
conviction, rather than your comfort. My dear brethren, do not deceive
your own souls. You have heard how far the foolish virgins went, and
yet were answered with “Verily I know you not:” The reason is, because
none but such who have a living faith in JESUS CHRIST, and are truly
born again, can possibly enter into the kingdom of heaven. You may,
perhaps, live honest and outwardly moral lives, but if you depend on
that morality, or join your works with your faith, in order to justify
you before GOD, you have no lot or share in CHRIST’s redemption: For
what is this but to deny the LORD that has bought you? What is this but
making yourselves your own Saviours? taking the crown from JESUS CHRIST,
and putting it on your own heads? The crime of the devil, some have
supposed, consisted in this, that he would not bow to JESUS CHRIST,
when the Father commanded all the angels to worship him; and what do
you less? You will not own and submit to his righteousness; and though
you pretend to worship him with your lips, yet your hearts are far from
him; besides you, in effect, deny the operations of his blessed spirit,
you mistake common for effectual grace; you hope to be saved, because
you have good desires, and a few short convictions; and what is this,
but to give GOD, his word, and all his saints, the lie? A _Jew_, a
_Turk_, has equally as good grounds whereon to build his hopes of
salvation. Need I not then to cry out to you, ye foolish virgins, watch.
Beg of GOD to convince you of your self-righteousness, and the secret
unbelief of your hearts; or otherwise, whensoever the cry shall be
made, “Behold the bridegroom cometh,” you will find yourselves utterly
unprepared to go forth to meet him: You may cry “Lord, Lord;” but the
answer will be, “Verily, I know you not.”

_Thirdly_, I would speak a word or two by way of exhortation to
those who are wise virgins, and are assured that they have on a
wedding-garment. That there are many such amongst you, who by grace
have renounced your own righteousness, and know that the righteousness
of the LORD JESUS is imputed to you, I make no doubt. GOD has his
secret ones in the worst of times; and I am persuaded he has not let
so loud a gospel cry to be made amongst his people, as of late has been
heard, for nothing. No, I am confident, the Holy Ghost has been given
to many at the preaching of faith, and has powerfully fallen upon many,
whilst they have been hearing the word. You are now then no longer
foolish, but wise virgins; notwithstanding, I beseech you also to
suffer the word of exhortation; for wise virgins are too apt, whilst
the bridegroom tarries, to slumber and sleep. Watch therefore, my
dear brethren, watch and pray, at this time especially; for perhaps a
time of suffering is at hand. The ark of the LORD begins already to be
driven into the wilderness. Be ye therefore upon your watch, and still
persevere in following your LORD, even without the camp, bearing his
reproach: the cry that has been lately made, has awakened the devil
and his servants; they begin to rage horribly; and well they may; for
I hope their kingdom is in danger. Watch therefore, for if we are not
always upon our guard, a time of trial may overtake us unawares; and,
instead of owning, like _Peter_ we may be tempted to deny our master.
Set death and eternity often before you. Look unto JESUS, the author
and finisher of your faith, and consider how little a while it will be,
ere he comes to judgment; and then our reproach shall be wiped away;
the accusers of us and our brethren shall be cast down, and we all
shall be lodged in heaven for ever, with our dear LORD JESUS.

_Lastly_; what I say unto you, I say unto all, watch: high and low,
rich and poor, young and old, one with another, I beseech you, by the
mercies of JESUS, to be upon your guard: fly, fly to JESUS CHRIST,
that heavenly bridegroom: behold he desires to take you to himself,
miserable, poor, blind and naked as you are; he is willing to cloath
you with his everlasting righteousness, and make you partakers of that
glory, which he enjoyed with the Father before the world began. Do
not turn a deaf ear to me; do not reject the message on account of
the meanness of the messenger. I am a child; but the LORD has chosen
me, that the glory might be all his own. Had he sent to invite you
by a learned rabbi, you might have been tempted to think the man had
done something; but now GOD has sent a child, that the excellency of
the power may be seen not to be of man, but of GOD. Let the learned
Pharisees then despise my youth: I care not how vile I appear in the
sight of such men; I glory in it. And I am persuaded, if any of you
should be married to CHRIST by this preaching, you will have no reason
to repent, when you come to heaven, that GOD sent a child to cry,
“Behold the bridegroom cometh!” O! my brethren, the thought of being
instrumental in bringing one of you to glory, fills me with fresh zeal.
Once more I entreat you, “Watch, watch and pray:” for the LORD JESUS
will receive all that call upon him faithfully. Let that cry, “Behold
the bridegroom cometh,” be continually sounding in your ears; and begin
now to live, as though you were assured, this night you were to “go
forth to meet him.” I could say more, but the other business and duties
of the day oblige me to stop. May the LORD give you all an hearing ear,
and obedient heart, and so closely unite you to himself by one spirit,
that when he shall come in terrible majesty, to judge mankind, you may
be found having on a wedding garment, and ready to go in with him to
the marriage.

  Grant this, O LORD, for thy dear Son’s sake!




                             SERMON XXVI.

                    The Eternity of Hell-Torments.


              To the INHABITANTS of SAVANNAH in GEORGIA.

_My dear Friends_,

THOUGH the following sermon has been preached elsewhere, yet as the
occasion of my preaching it among you was particular, as you seemed to
give an uncommon attention to it in public, and afterwards expressed
your satisfaction in it to me, when I came to visit you in your own
houses, I thought proper to offer it to you.

And here I cannot but bless GOD for the general dislike of heretical
principles that I have found among you; as also for your zeal and
approbation of my conduct, when the glory of GOD and your welfare, have
obliged me to resent and publicly declare against the antichristian
tenets of some lately under my charge.

I need only exhort you to beg of GOD to give you a true faith, and to
add to your faith virtue, that you may adorn the gospel of our LORD
JESUS CHRIST in all things.

Your constant daily attendance upon public worship, the gladness
wherewith you have received me into your houses, the mildness wherewith
you have submitted to my reproofs, more especially the great (though
unmerited) concern you shewed at my departure, induce me to hope this
will be your endeavour.

How long GOD of his good providence will keep me from you, I know
not. However, you may assure yourselves I will return according to my
promise, as soon as I have received imposition of hands, and compleated
the other business that called me hither.

In the mean while, accept of this, as a pledge of the undissembled love
of

  Your affectionate though unworthy pastor,

London,
 1738.

                                                  GEORGE WHITEFIELD.


                           MATTHEW xxv. 46.

  _These shall go away into everlasting punishment._

THE excellency of the gospel dispensation, is greatly evidenced by
those sanctions of rewards and punishments, which it offers to the
choice of all its hearers, in order to engage them to be obedient to
its precepts. For it promises no less than eternal happiness to the
good, and denounces no slighter a punishment than everlasting misery
against the wicked: On the one hand, “It is a savour of life unto life,”
on the other, “A savour of death unto death.” And though one would
imagine, the bare mentioning of the former would be sufficient to draw
men to their duty, yet ministers in all ages have found it necessary,
frequently to remind their people of the latter, and to set before them
the terrors of the LORD, as so many powerful dissuasives from sin.

But whence is it that men are so disingenuous? The reason seems to
be this: The promise of eternal happiness is so agreeable to the
inclinations and wishes of mankind, that all who call themselves
christians, universally and willingly subscribe to the belief of it:
but then there is something so shocking in the consideration of eternal
torments, and seemingly such an infinite disproportion between an
endless duration of pain, and a short life spent in pleasure, that men
(some at least of them) can scarcely be brought to confess it as an
article of their faith, that an eternity of misery awaits the wicked
in a future state.

I shall therefore at this time, beg leave to insist on the proof of
this part of one of the Articles of our Creed; and endeavour to make
good what our blessed LORD has here threatened in the words of the text,
“These (that is, the wicked) shall go away into everlasting punishment.”

Accordingly, without considering the words as they stand in relation to
the context, I shall resolve all I have to say, into this one general
proposition, “That the torments reserved for the wicked hereafter, are
eternal.”

But before I proceed to make good this, I must inform you that I take
it for granted,

All present do stedfastly believe, They have something within them,
which we call a soul, and which is capable of surviving the dissolution
of the body, and of being miserable or happy to all eternity.

I take it for granted farther, That you believe a divine revelation;
that those books, emphatically called the Scriptures, were written by
the inspiration of GOD, and that the things therein contained, are
founded upon eternal truth.

I take it for granted, That you believe, that the Son of GOD came down
to die for sinners; and that there is but one Mediator between GOD and
man, even the man CHRIST JESUS.

These things being granted, (and they were necessary to be premised)
proceed we now to make good the one general proposition asserted in the
text, That the torments reserved for the wicked hereafter are eternal.
“These shall go away into everlasting punishment.” The

_First_ argument I shall advance to prove that the torments reserved
for the wicked hereafter, are eternal, is, That the word of GOD himself
assures us, in line upon line, that it will be so.

To quote all the texts that might be produced in proof of this, would
be endless. Let it suffice to instance only in a few. In the Old
Testament, in the book of _Daniel_, chapter xii. verse 2. we are told,
that “some shall awake to everlasting life, and others to everlasting
contempt.” In the book of _Isaiah_, it is said, that “the worm of those
that have transgressed GOD’s law, and die impenitently, shall not die,
nor their fire be quenched.” And in another place, the holy Prophet,
struck, no doubt, with astonishment and horror at the prospect of the
continuance of the torments of the damned, breaks out into this moving
expostulation, “Who can dwell with everlasting burnings?”

The New Testament is still fuller as to this point, it being a
revelation which brought this and such-like particulars to a clear
light. The Apostle _Jude_ tells us of the profane despisers of
dignities in his days, that “for them was reserved the blackness of
darkness for ever.” And in the book of the _Revelations_, it is written,
that “the smoke of the torments of the wicked ascendeth for ever and
ever.” And if we believe the witness of men inspired, the witness of
the Son of GOD, who had the Spirit given him, as Mediator, without
measure, is still far greater: and in St. _Mark_’s gospel, He repeats
this solemn declaration three several times, “It is better for thee
to enter into life maimed;” that is, it is better to forego the
gratification of thy lust, or incur the displeasure of a friend, which
may be as dear to thee as a hand, or as useful as a foot, “than having
two hands and feet, (that is, for indulging the one, or disobeying GOD
to oblige the other) to be cast into hell, where the worm dieth not,
and the fire is not quenched.”

And here again, in the words of the text, “These (the wicked) shall go
away into everlasting punishment.”

I know it has been objected by some who have denied the eternity of
hell-torments, That the words _everlasting_ and _ever and ever_, are
often used in the Holy Scriptures, (especially in the Old Testament)
when they signify not an endless duration, but a limited term of time.

And this we readily grant: but then we reply, That when the words
are used with this limitation, they either manifestly appear to be
used so from the context; or are put in opposition to occasional
types which GOD gave his people on some special occasions, as when
it is said, “It shall be a perpetual or everlasting statute,” or, “a
statute for ever;” that is, a standing type, and not merely transient
or occasional, as was the pillar of cloud, the manna, and such-like.
Or, lastly, they have a relation to that covenant, GOD made with his
spiritually _Israel_; which, if understood in a spiritual sense, will
be everlasting, though the ceremonial dispensation be abolished.

Besides, it ought to be observed, that some of the passages just now
referred to, have neither of these words so much as mentioned in them,
and cannot possibly be interpreted, so as to denote only a limited term
of years.

But let that be as it will, it is evident even to a demonstration, that
the words of the text will not admit of such a restrained signification,
as appears from their being directly opposed to the words immediately
following, “That the righteous shall go into life eternal.” From which
words, all are ready to grant, that the life promised to the righteous
will be eternal. And why the punishment threatened to the wicked should
not be understood to be eternal likewise, when the very same word in
the original, is used to express the duration of each, no shadow of a
reason can be given.

But, _Secondly_, There cannot be one argument urged, why GOD should
reward his saints with everlasting happiness, which will not equally
prove that he ought to punish sinners with eternal misery.

For, since we know nothing (at least for a certainty) how he will deal
with either, but by a Divine Revelation; and since, as was proved by
the foregoing argument, he hath as positively threatened eternally to
punish the wicked, as to reward the good; it follows, that his truth
will be as much impeached and called in question, did he not inflict
his punishments, as it would be, if he did not confer his rewards.

To this also it has been objected, That though GOD is obliged by
promise to give his rewards, yet his veracity could not be called
in question, supposing he should not execute his threatenings, as
he actually did not in the case of _Nineveh_; which GOD expressly
declared by his Prophet _Jonah_, “should be destroyed in forty days:”
notwithstanding the sequel of the story informs us, that _Nineveh_ was
spared.

But in answer to this objection we affirm, that GOD’s threatenings, as
well as promises, are without repentance; and for this reason, because
they are both founded on the eternal laws of right reason. Accordingly
we always find, that where the conditions were not performed, on
the non-performance of which the threatenings were denounced, GOD
always executed the punishment threatened. The driving _Adam_ out of
_Eden_, the destruction of the old world by a deluge of water, and the
overthrow of _Sodom_ and _Gomorrah_, are, and will be always so many
standing monuments of GOD’s executing his threatenings when denounced,
though to our weak apprehensions, the punishment may seem far to exceed
the crime.

It is true, GOD did spare _Nineveh_, and that because the inhabitants
did actually repent, and therefore performed the conditions upon
which it was supposed, by the Prophet’s being sent to warn them, the
threatened punishment should be withheld.

And so in respect to gospel threatenings. If men will so far consult
their own welfare, as to comply with the gospel, GOD certainly will
not punish them, but on the contrary, confer upon them his rewards. But
to affirm that he will not punish, and that eternally to, impenitent,
obstinate sinners, according as he hath threatened; what is it, in
effect, but to make GOD like a man, that he should lie, or the son of
man, that he should repent?

But the absurdity of such an opinion will appear still more evident
from

The _Third_ argument I shall offer to prove, that the torments reserved
for the wicked hereafter are eternal, From the nature of the christian
covenant.

And here I must again observe, that it was taken for granted at the
beginning of this discourse, that you believe the Son of GOD came down
to save sinners; and that there is but one Mediator between GOD and man,
even the man CHRIST JESUS.

And here I take it for granted farther, (unless you believe the absurd
and unwarrantable doctrine of purgatory) that you are fully persuaded,
this life is the only time allotted by Almighty GOD for working out
our salvation, and that after a few years are passed over, there will
remain no more sacrifice for sin.

And if this be granted (and who dares deny it?) it follows, that if
a wicked man dieth in his wickedness, and under the wrath of GOD,
he must continue in that state to all eternity. For, since there is
no possibility of their being delivered out of such a condition, but
by and through CHRIST; and since, at the hour of death, the time of
CHRIST’s mediation and intercession for him is irrecoverably gone;
the same reason that may be given, why GOD should punish a sinner that
dieth under the guilt of his sins for a single day, will equally hold
good, why he should continue to punish him for a year, an age, nay to
all eternity.

But I hasten to the _Fourth_ and last argument, to prove, That the
torments reserved for the wicked hereafter are eternal, Because the
devil’s punishment is to be so.

That there is such a being whom we call the devil; that he was once an
angel of light, but for his pride and rebellion against GOD, was cast
down from heaven, and is now permitted, with the rest of the spiritual
wickednesses, to walk to and fro, seeking whom they may devour; that
there is a place of torment reserved for them, or, to use the Apostle’s
words, “That they are reserved in everlasting chains under darkness
unto the judgment of the great day;” are truths all here present were
supposed to be convinced of, at the beginning of this discourse, you
believing the Holy Scriptures to be written by the inspiration of GOD,
wherein these truths are delivered.

But then if we allow all this, and think it no injustice in GOD to
punish those once glorious spirits for their rebellion; how can we
think it unjust in him, to punish wicked men for their impenitency to
all eternity?

You will say, perhaps, that they have sinned against greater light,
and therefore deserve a greater punishment. And so we grant that the
punishment of the fallen angels may be greater as to degree; than that
of wicked men; but then we affirm; it will be equal as to the eternal
duration of it: for in that day, as the lively oracles of GOD inform us,
shall the Son of Man say to them on his left hand, “Depart from me, ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.”
Where we find that impenitent sinners are to be cast into the same
everlasting fire, with the devil and his angels; and that too very
justly. For though they may have sinned against greater light, yet
christians sin against greater mercy. Since CHRIST took not hold of,
did not die for, the fallen angels, but for men and for our salvation.
So that if GOD spared not those excellent beings, assure thyself, O
obstinate sinner, whoever thou art, he will by no means spare thee.

From what then has been said it plainly appears, that verily the
torments reserved for the wicked hereafter, are eternal. And if so,
brethren, how ought we to fly to JESUS CHRIST for refuge; how holy
ought we to be in all manner of conversation and godliness, that we
may be accounted worthy to escape this wrath to come!

But before I proceed to a practical exhortation, permit me to draw an
inference or two from what has been said.

And _First_, If the torments reserved for the wicked hereafter are
eternal, what shall we say to those, who make an open profession in
their creed to believe a life everlasting, a life of misery as well as
happiness, and yet dare to live in the actual commission of those sins
which will unavoidably, without repentance, bring them into that place
of torment? Thou believest that the punishments of the impenitently
wicked in another life, are eternal: “Thou dost well, the devils also
believe and tremble.” But know, O vain man, unless this belief doth
influence thy practice, and makes thee bid adieu to thy sins, every
time thou repeatest thy creed, thou doest in effect say, I believe I
shall be undone for ever.

But, _Secondly_, If the torments reserved for the wicked hereafter are
eternal, then let this serve as a caution to such persons, (and it is
to be feared there are some such) who go about to dissuade others from
the belief of such an important truth: There being no surer way, in all
probability, to encourage and promote infidelity and prophaneness, than
the broaching or maintaining so unwarrantable a doctrine. For if the
positive threats of GOD concerning the eternity of hell-torments, are
already found insufficient to deter men from sin, what a higher pitch
of wickedness may we imagine they will quickly arrive at, when they
are taught to entertain any hopes of a future recovery out of them; or,
what is still worse, that their souls are hereafter to be annihilated,
and become like the beasts that perish? But wo unto such blind leaders
of the blind. No wonder if they both fall into the ditch. And let
such corrupters of GOD’s word know, that I testify unto every man that
heareth me this day, “That if any one shall add unto, or take away from
the words that are written in the book of GOD, GOD shall take his part
out of the book of life, and shall add unto him all the plagues that
are in that book.”

_Thirdly_ and _Lastly_, If the torments reserved for the wicked
hereafter are eternal, then this may serve as a reproof for those
who quarrel with GOD, and say it is inconsistent with his justice,
to punish a person to all eternity, only for enjoying the pleasures
of sin for a season. But such persons must be told, that it is not
their thinking or calling GOD unjust, will make him so, no more
than a condemned prisoner’s saying the law or judge is unjust, will
render either duly chargeable with such an imputation. But knowest
thou, O worm, what blasphemy thou art guilty of, in charging GOD with
injustice? “Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why hast
thou made me thus?” Wilt thou presume to arraign the Almighty at the
bar of thy shallow reasoning? and call him unjust, for punishing thee
eternally, only because thou wishest it may not be so? But hath GOD
said it, and shall he not do it? He hath said it: and let GOD be true,
though every man be a liar. “Shall not the judge of all the earth do
right?” Assuredly he will. And if sinners will not own his justice in
his threatenings here, they will be compelled ere long to own and feel
them, when tormented by him hereafter.

But to come to a more practical application of what has been delivered.

You have heard, brethren, the eternity of hell-torments plainly proved,
from the express declarations of holy scriptures, and consequences
naturally drawn from them. And now there seems to need no great art of
rhetoric to persuade any understanding person to avoid and abhor those
sins, which without repentance will certainly plunge him into this
eternal gulph. The disproportion between the pleasure and the pain (if
there be any pleasure in sin) is so infinitely great, that supposing
it was only possible, though not certain, that the wicked would be
everlastingly punished, no one that has the reason of a man, for the
enjoying a little momentary pleasure, would, one might imagine, run the
hazard of enduring eternal pain. But since the torments of the damned
are not only possible, but certain, (since GOD himself, who cannot
lie, has told us so) for men, notwithstanding, to persist in their
disobedience, and then flatter themselves, that GOD will not make good
his threatenings, is a most egregious instance of folly and presumption.

_Dives_ himself supposed, that if one rose from the dead, his brethren
would amend their lives; but Christians, it seems, will not repent,
though the Son of GOD died and rose again, and told them what they must
expect, if they continue obstinate in evil-doing.

Would we now and then draw off our thoughts from sensible objects,
and by faith meditate a while on the miseries of the damned, I doubt
not but we should, as it were, hear many an unhappy soul venting his
fruitless sorrows, in some such piteous moans as these.

“O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body
of death!” O foolish mortal that I was, thus to bring myself into
these never-ceasing tortures, for the transitory enjoyment of a few
short-lived pleasures, which scarcely afforded me any satisfaction,
even when I most indulged myself in them. Alas! are these the wages,
these the effects of sin? Are all the grand deceiver’s inviting
promises come to this? O damned apostate! First to delude me with
pretended promises of happiness, and after several years drudgery in
his service, thus to involve me in eternal woe. O that I had never
hearkened to his beguiling insinuations! O that I had rejected his
very first suggestions with the utmost detestation and abhorrence! O
that I had taken up my cross and followed CHRIST! O that I had never
ridiculed serious godliness; and out of a false politeness, condemned
the truly pious as too severe, enthusiastic, or superstitious! For I
then had been happy indeed, happy beyond expression, happy to all
eternity, yonder in those blessed regions where they sit, cloathed
with unspeakable glory, and chanting forth their seraphic hallelujahs
to the Lamb that sitteth upon the throne for ever. But, alas! these
reflections come now too late: these wishes now are vain and fruitless.
I have not suffered, and therefore must not reign with them. I have
in effect denied the LORD that bought me, and therefore justly am I
now denied by him. But must I live for ever tormented in these flames?
Must this body of mine, which not long since lay in state, was cloathed
in purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day, must it be
here eternally confined, and made the mockery of insulting devils? O
eternity! that thought fills me with despair: I must be miserable for
ever.

Come then, all ye self-deluding, self-deluded sinners, and imagine
yourselves for once in the place of that truly wretched man I have been
here describing. Think, I beseech you by the mercies of GOD in CHRIST
JESUS, think with yourselves, how racking, how unsupportable the
never-dying worm of a self-condemning conscience will hereafter be to
you. Think how impossible it will be for you to dwell with everlasting
burnings.

Come, all ye christians of a lukewarm, _Laodicean_ spirit, ye
_Gallio_’s in religion, who care a little, but not enough for the
things of GOD; O think, think with yourselves, how deplorable it will
be to lose the enjoyment of heaven, and run into endless torments,
merely because you will be content to be almost, and will not strive
to be altogether christians. Consider, I beseech you consider, how you
will rave and curse that fatal stupidity which made you believe any
thing less than true faith in JESUS, productive of a life of strict
piety, self-denial, and mortification, can keep you from those torments,
the eternity of which I have been endeavouring to prove.

But I can no more. These thoughts are too melancholy for me to dwell
on, as well as for you to hear; and GOD knows, as punishing is his
strange work, so denouncing his threatenings is mine. But if the bare
mentioning the torments of the damned is so shocking, how terrible must
the enduring of them be!

And now, are not some of you ready to cry out, “These are hard sayings,
who can bear them?”

But let not sincere christians be in the least terrified at what has
been delivered: No, for you is reserved a crown, a kingdom, an eternal
and exceeding weight of glory. CHRIST never said that the righteous,
the believing, the upright, the sincere, but the wicked, merciless,
negatively good professors before described, shall go into everlasting
punishment. For you, who love him in sincerity, a new and living way
is laid open into the Holy of Holies by the blood of JESUS CHRIST: and
an abundant entrance will be administered unto you, at the great day of
account, into eternal life. Take heed, therefore, and beware that there
be not in any of you a root of bitterness springing up of unbelief:
but on the contrary, stedfastly and heartily rely on the many precious
promises reached out to you in the gospel, knowing that he who hath
promised is faithful, and therefore will perform.

But let no obstinately wicked professors dare to apply any of the
divine promises to themselves: “For it is not meet to take the
childrens meat and give it unto dogs:” No, to such the terrors of
the LORD only belong. And as certainly as CHRIST will say to his
true followers, “Come, ye blessed children of my Father, receive the
kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world;” so he will
unalterably pronounce this dreadful sentence against all that die in
their sins, “Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared
for the devil and his angels.”

From which unhappy state, may GOD of his infinite mercy deliver us
all through JESUS CHRIST; to whom, with thee O Father, and thee O Holy
Ghost, three Persons and one eternal GOD, be ascribed, as is most due,
all honour, power, might, majesty, and dominion, now and for evermore.




                             SERMON XXVII.

                          Blind _Bartimeus_.


                              MARK x. 52.

  _And JESUS said unto him, Go thy way; thy faith hath made thee
    whole. And immediately he received his sight, and followed
    JESUS in the way_.

WHEN the apostle _Peter_ was recommending JESUS of _Nazareth_, in
one of his sermons to the _Jews_, he gave him a short, but withal a
glorious and exalted character, “That he went about doing good.” He
went about, he sought occasions of doing good; it was his meat and
drink to do the works of him that sent him, whilst the day of his
public administration lasted. Justly was he stiled by the prophet, the
sun of righteousness. For, as the sun in the natural firmament diffuses
his quickening and reviving beams through the universe, so, wherever
this sun of righteousness, the blessed JESUS arose, he arose with
healing under his wings. He was indeed a prophet like unto _Moses_,
and proved that he was the Messiah which was to come into the world,
by the miracles which he wrought; though with this material difference,
the miracles of _Moses_, agreeable to the Old Testament dispensation,
were miracles of judgment; the miracles of JESUS, who came to bear our
sicknesses and heal our infirmities, were miracles of mercy, and were
wrought, not only for the cure of people’s bodies, but also for the
conversion of their precious and immortal souls. Sometimes, one and the
same person was the subject of both these mercies. A glorious proof of
this, we have in the miraculous cure wrought upon a poor blind beggar,
named _Bartimeus_, who is to be the subject of the following discourse,
and to whom the words of the text refer. “JESUS said unto him, Go thy
way, thy faith hath made thee whole. And immediately he received his
sight, and followed JESUS in the way.”

My design is, _First_, to make some observations on the matter of fact,
as recorded by the evangelists. And then,

_Secondly_, To point out the improvement that may be made thereof. May
JESUS so bless this following discourse, that every spiritually blind
hearer may receive his sight, and, after the example of _Bartimeus_,
“follow JESUS in the way!”

If we would take a view of the whole story, we must go back to the
46th verse of this chapter. “And they (our LORD and his disciples,
who, we find by the context, had been conversing together) came to
_Jericho_,” a place devoted by _Joshua_ to the curse of GOD; and
yet, even this place yields converts to JESUS; _Zaccheus_ had been
called there formerly; and _Bartimeus_, as we shall hear by-and-by,
in all probability, was called now. For some good may come even out of
_Nazareth_. CHRIST himself was born there, and his sovereign grace can
reach and overcome the worst of people, in the very worst of places.
JESUS came to _Jericho_. Let not his ministers, if providence points
out their way, shun going to seemingly the most unlikely places to
do good, some chosen vessels may be therein. JESUS and his disciples
came to _Jericho_. They were _itinerants_; and, as I have frequently
observed, seldom stayed long in a place; not that this is any argument
against the stated settlement of particular pastors over particular
parishes. But however, our LORD’s practice, in this respect, gives a
kind of a sanction to itinerant preaching, when persons are properly
called to, and qualified for, such an employ. And I believe we may
venture to affirm (though we would by no means prescribe or dictate
to the Holy One of _Israel_) that, whenever there shall be a general
revival of religion in any country, itinerant preaching will be more in
vogue. And it is to be feared, that those who condemn it now, merely on
account of the meanness of its appearances, would have joined with the
self-righteous Scribes and Pharisees, in condemning even the Son of GOD
himself, for such a practice.

“And as he went out of _Jericho_ with his disciples, and a great
number of people;” ♦ὄχλου ἱκανοῦ a great number of mob, or rabble,
as the High-priests of that generation termed them: for these were
the constant followers of JESUS of _Nazareth_; it was the poor that
received his gospel, the common people heard him gladly, and followed
him from place to place. Not that all who followed him, were his true
disciples. No, some followed him only for his loaves, others out of
curiosity; though some undoubtedly followed to hear, and be edified by
the gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth. JESUS knew this,
and was also sensible how displeasing this crowding after him was to
some of the rulers of the _Jewish_ church, who, upon every occasion,
were ready to say, “Have any of the Scribes and Pharisees believed on
him?” But, notwithstanding, I do not hear of our blessed LORD’s sending
them home but once; and that was, after they had been with him three
days, and had nothing left to eat, he saw they were as sheep having
no shepherd, and therefore had compassion on them, and taught them. A
sufficient warrant this for gospel-ministers to preach to poor souls
that follow to hear the word, whatever principle their coming may
proceed from. At the same time, they should caution people against
thinking themselves christians, because they follow CHRIST’s ministers.
This our LORD frequently did. For there are many that followed JESUS,
and now follow his ministers, and hear them gladly; nay, perhaps do
many things, as _Herod_ did, who, it is to be feared, will never follow
them into the kingdom of heaven. Much people followed JESUS out of
_Jericho_, but how many of them were offended in him; and afterwards,
it may be, cried out, “Crucify him, crucify him.” Who would depend on
popularity? It is like the morning cloud, or early dew, that passeth
away. But what a press, and seemingly continued hurry of business did
the blessed JESUS live in! he could not be hid; go where he would,
much people followed him. He had scarce time to eat bread. Happy is it
for such who are called to act in a public station in the church, and
to be more abundant in labours, that their JESUS has trodden in this
dangerous path before them. Popularity is a fiery furnace, and no one,
but he who kept the three children amidst _Nebuchadnezzar_’s flames,
can preserve popular ministers from being hurt by it. But we can do all
things through CHRIST strengthening us. And I have often thought, that
there is one consideration sufficient to extinguish, or moderate at
least, any excess of joy and self-complacence, which the most popular
preacher may feel, when followed even by the greatest multitudes;
and that is this, “How many of these hearers will go away, without
receiving any saving benefit by my preaching; nay, how many, it may be,
will only have their damnation increased by it!” As we find many will
say at the great day, “hast thou not taught in our streets;” to whom
JESUS shall answer, “Verily, I know you not.”

  ♦ “ὓγλουικανοῦ” replaced with “ὄχλου ἱκανοῦ”

But to proceed, “As our LORD went out of _Jericho_ with his disciples,
and a great number of people, blind _Bartimeus_, (the son of _Timeus_)
sat by the highway-side begging.” It should seem that he was a noted,
though by no means what we commonly call, a sturdy beggar; having no
other way, as he had lost his sight, to get his bread; his case was
still the more pitiable, if he was, as some think the name imports, the
blind son of a blind father. It may be, he begged for his father and
himself too; and if so, then this may give us light into that passage
of _Matthew_ xx. 22. where we are told, that “two men spake to JESUS.”
It might be father and son, though only one is mentioned here, because
he only followed JESUS in the way. Thus that holy, judicious, and
practical expositor of holy writ, Mr. _Henry_. But however this be, he
is not blamed for begging, neither should we discommend others for so
doing, when providence calls to it. It was the unjust steward that said,
“To beg I am ashamed.” It is our pride that often makes us unwilling
to be beholden; JESUS was not thus minded, he lived, as it were, upon
alms; the women that followed him, ministred to him of their substance.
_Bartimeus_, not being able to dig, begs for his living; and, in
order to make a better trade of it, sat by the highway-side, in all
probability, without, or near the gate of the city, where people must
necessarily pass in and out. But though he had lost his sight, he had
his hearing perfect; and it should comfort us, if we have lost one
sense, that we have the use of another, and that we are not deprived
of the benefit of all. Happy was it for _Bartimeus_ that he could
hear, though not see. For in all probability, upon hearing the noise
and clamour of the much people that followed after our LORD, his
curiosity set him upon enquiring into the cause of it, and some one or
another told him, “that JESUS of _Nazareth_ was passing by;” JESUS of
_Nazareth_, called so, because he was bred there, or out of contempt;
_Nazareth_ being either a very mean, or very wicked place, or both,
which made guileless _Nathaniel_ say, “Can any good come out of
_Nazareth_?” And what does _Bartimeus_ do when he hears of JESUS? We
are told, verse 47; “And when he heard that it was JESUS of _Nazareth_,
he began to cry out.” This plainly denotes, that though the eyes of
his body were shut, yet the eyes of his mind were, in some degree,
opened, so that he saw, perhaps, more than most of the multitude that
followed after JESUS; for, as soon as he heard of him, he began to
cry out; which he would not have done, had he not heard of him before,
and believed also, that he was both able and willing to restore sight
to the blind. “He began to cry out.” This implies, that he had a deep
sense of his own misery, and the need which he had of a cure; his
prayers did not freeze as they went out of his lips; he began to cry
out, that JESUS might hear him, notwithstanding the noise of the throng;
and he began to cry out, as soon as he heard he was passing by, not
knowing whether he might ever enjoy such an opportunity any more. “He
began to cry out, JESUS, thou Son of _David_, have mercy upon me.” The
people called him JESUS of _Nazareth_. _Bartimeus_ stiles him, “JESUS,
thou Son of _David_.” Thereby evidencing, that he believed him to be
the Messiah who was to come into the world, unto whom the LORD GOD was
to give the throne of his father _David_, and of whose kingdom there
was to be no end. “JESUS, thou Son of _David_;” or, as it is in the
parallel place of St. _Matthew_ xx. 30. “O LORD, thou son of _David_;”
of whom it had been long foretold, _Isaiah_ xxxv. that when he should
come, “the eyes of the blind should be opened.” “Have mercy upon me,”
the natural language of a soul brought to lie down at the feet of a
sovereign GOD. Here is no laying claim to a cure by way of merit; no
proud, self-righteous, GOD I thank thee that I am not as other men are:
no bringing in a reckoning of performances, nor any doubting of JESUS’s
power or willingness to heal him, but out of the abundance of the heart,
his mouth speaketh, and, in the language of the poor, broken-hearted
publican, he cries out, “JESUS, thou Son of _David_, have mercy on me.”
JESUS, thou friend of sinners, thou Saviour, who, though thou be the
true GOD, wast pleased to become the Son of _David_, and to be made man,
that thou mightest seek and save those that were lost, have mercy upon
me; let thy bowels yearn towards a poor, miserable, blind beggar!

One would have thought that such a moving petition as this would have
melted the whole multitude, that heard his piteous cry, into compassion,
and induced some at least to turn suitors in his behalf, or help to
carry him to the blessed JESUS. But instead of that, we are told, verse
48, that “many charged him.” The word in the original seems to imply a
charge, attended with threatning, and spoken in an angry manner. They
charged him “to hold his peace;” and it may be, threatned to beat him
if he did not. They looked upon him beneath the notice of JESUS of
_Nazareth_, and were ready enough to ask, whether he thought JESUS
CHRIST had nothing else to do but to wait upon him. This was, no doubt,
very discouraging to blind _Bartimeus_. For opposition comes closest
when it proceeds from those who are esteemed followers of the Lamb. The
spouse complains as of something peculiarly afflicting, that her own
mother’s children were angry with her. But opposition only serves to
whet the edge of true devotion, and therefore _Bartimeus_, instead of
being silenced by their charges and threatnings, “cried out the more a
great deal, thou Son of _David_, have mercy on me.” Still he breaks out
into the same humble language, and, if JESUS, the Son of _David_, will
have mercy on him, he cares not much what some of his peevish followers
said of, or did unto him. This was not a vain repetition, but a devout
reiteration of his request. We may sometimes repeat the same words, and
yet not be guilty of that Βαττολογια, or vain speaking, which our LORD
condemns. For our LORD himself prayed in his agony, and said twice the
same words; “Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me.”
Thus _Bartimeus_, “JESUS, thou Son of _David_, have mercy upon me.”
And how does the Son of _David_ treat him? does he join issue with the
multitude, and charge him to hold his peace? or does he go on, thinking
him beneath his notice? no; for, says St. _Mark_, verse 49. “And JESUS
stood still,” though he was on a journey, and it may be in haste (for
it is not losing time to stop now and then on a journey to do a good
office by the way) “and commanded him to be called:” why so? to teach
us to be condescending and kind even to poor, if real beggars, and
tacitly to reprove the blind, misguided zeal of those who had charged
him to hold his peace. By this also our LORD prepares the multitude
the better to take the more notice of the blind man’s faith, and of his
own mercy and power exerted in the healing of him. For there are times
and seasons when we are called to perform acts of charity in the most
public manner, and that too very consistently with the injunction
of our Saviour, “not to let our right hand know what our left hand
doth.” For there is a great deal of difference between giving alms, and
exercising acts of charity, that are seen of men, and doing them, that
they may be seen; the one is always sinful, the other often becomes
our duty. JESUS commanded _Bartimeus_ to be called, “and they called
him.” Who called him? it may be, those who a little before charged
him to hold his peace. For it often happens, that our opposers and
discouragers, afterwards become our friends. “When a man’s ways please
the LORD, he makes his enemies be at peace with him.” And it is to
be wished, that all who have charged poor souls, that are crying
after JESUS, to hold their peace, and to spare themselves, and not be
righteous over-much, would imitate the people here, and encourage those
they once persecuted and maligned. “They call the blind man, saying
unto him, Be of good comfort, rise, he calleth thee.” The words, and
manner of speaking them, implies haste, and a kind of solicitude for
the blind man’s relief. O! that we might hereby learn to be patient,
and long-suffering, towards opposers. For it may be, that many may
oppose awakened souls, not out of enmity, but through prejudice and
misinformation, through ignorance and unbelief, and a real, though
perhaps false, persuasion, that their relations are going in a wrong
way. By and by they may be convinced, that CHRIST is indeed calling
them, and then they may become real and open friends to the cause and
work of GOD; if not, it is our duty to behave with meekness towards
all, and not to render railing for railing, but contrarywise blessing,
knowing that we are thereunto called, that we may inherit a blessing;
JESUS did not break out into harsh language against these opposers,
neither did _Bartimeus_. “Our LORD stood still, and commanded him to
be called; and they call the blind man, saying unto him, Be of good
comfort, rise, he calleth thee; and he, casting away his garment, rose
and came to JESUS.” Had _Bartimeus_ not been in earnest when he cried,
“JESUS, thou Son of _David_, have mercy upon me,” he might have said,
why do you mock me? why bid ye me arise; rise indeed I can, but after I
am risen, how can I, being blind, find my way unto him? If he will come
to me, it is well; if not, all your calling availeth nothing, it being
impossible for me to find my way. Thus thousands now-a-days object to
evangelical preachers, saying, Why do you bid us come to, and believe
on JESUS CHRIST, when you tell us it is impossible of ourselves to
turn to GOD, or to do good works; and that no one can come unto him,
unless the Father draw him. Is not this like the people’s calling upon
_Bartimeus_, to arise and come to JESUS, when he could not possibly see
his way before him? true, it is so; and would to GOD that all who make
this objection, would imitate _Bartimeus_, and put forth the strength
they have! What if we do call you to come, and to believe on the LORD
JESUS CHRIST, that you may be saved? does this imply, that you have a
power in yourselves to do so? no, in no wise, no more than JESUS saying
unto _Lazarus_’s dead and stinking carcase, “Come forth,” implied,
that _Lazarus_ had a power to raise himself from the grave. We call
to you, being commanded to preach the gospel to every creature, hoping
and praying, that CHRIST’s power may accompany the word, and make it
effectual to the quickening and raising of your dead souls. We also
call to you to believe, upon the same account as JESUS said unto the
lawyer, “do this, and thou shalt live;” that you seeing your utter
inability to come, might thereby be convinced of your unbelief, and
be led to ask for faith of him, whose gift it is, and who is therefore
in scripture emphatically stiled the _Author_, as well as _Finisher_,
of our faith. Add to this, that it is your duty to wait at the pool,
or to make use of the strength you have, in the earnest and steady
performance of all commanded duty. For though you cannot do what is
spiritually good, because you want spiritual principles of action,
yet ye may do what is morally and materially good, inasmuch as ye are
reasonable creatures; and though doing your duty as you can, no ways
deserves mercy, or entitles you to it, yet it is the way in which you
are required to walk, and the way in which GOD is usually found. While
you are attempting to stretch out your withered arm, peradventure it
may be restored; and who knows but JESUS may work faith in you, by his
almighty power?

_Bartimeus_ has set before such objectors an example; O that they would
once submit to be taught by a poor blind beggar! For he, casting away
his garment, rose, and blind as he was, came to JESUS; “casting away
his garment.” This seems to be a large coat or cloak, that he wore to
screen himself from the rain and cold; undoubtedly, it was the most
necessary and valuable vestment he had, and one would have thought,
that he should have taken this along with him; but he knew very
well, that if he did so, it might hang about his heels, and thereby
his reaching JESUS be retarded at least, if not prevented entirely.
Valuable therefore as it was to him, he cast it away. The word implies,
that he threw it from off his shoulders, with great precipitancy and
resolution, knowing that if he got a cure, which he now hoped for, by
CHRIST’s calling him, he should never want his garment again. And thus
will all do that are in earnest about coming to JESUS here, or seeing
and enjoying him in his kingdom eternally hereafter. They will cut off
a right-hand, they will pluck out a right-eye, they will leave father
and mother, husband and wife, yea, and their own lives also, rather
than not be his disciples. The apostle _Paul_, therefore, exhorts
christians, to “lay aside every weight, and the sin that doth most
easily beset them,” or hang about their heels, as the word in the
original imports; alluding to the custom of the _Romans_, who wore
long garments. Such a one was this, which _Bartimeus_ had wrapped round
him. But he, to shew that he sincerely desired to recover his sight,
casting it away, arose and came to JESUS. And what treatment did JESUS
give him? did he say, come not nigh me, thou impudent noisy beggar? No,
“he answered and said unto him, What wilt thou, that I should do unto
thee?” an odd question this, seemingly. For did not our LORD know what
he wanted? yes, he did; but the LORD JESUS dealt with him, as he deals
with us. He will make us acknowledge our wants ourselves, that we
thereby may confess our dependance upon him, and be made more sensible
of the need we stand in, of his divine assistance. The blind man
immediately replies, “LORD, (thereby intimating his belief of CHRIST’s
divinity) that I might receive my sight.” Methinks, I see the poor
creature listening to the voice of our Saviour, and with looks and
gestures bespeaking the inward earnestness of his soul, he cries out,
“LORD, that I may receive my sight.” As though he had said, I believe
thou art that Messiah who was to come into the world. I have heard
of thy fame, O JESUS! and hearing the long-wished-for glad-tidings of
thy coming this way, I cry unto thee, asking not for silver and gold,
but what thou, thou alone canst give me, LORD, that I might receive
my sight. No sooner does he ask, but he receives. For, verse 52,
“JESUS said unto him, Go thy way, thy faith hath made thee whole; and
immediately he received his sight.” With the word there went a power;
and he that spake light out of darkness, saying, “Let there be light,
and there was light,” commanded light into this poor blind beggar’s
eyes, and behold there was light. The miracle was instantaneous;
_immediately_ he received his sight. And next to a miracle it was,
that by breaking into open light all at once, he was not struck blind
again: but he that gave the sight, preserved it when given. O! happy
_Bartimeus_! thy eyes are now opened, and the very first object thou
dost behold, is the ever-loving, altogether-lovely JESUS. Methinks I
see thee transported with wonder and admiration, and all the disciples,
and the multitude, gazing around thee! And now, having received thy
sight, why dost thou not obey the LORD’s command, and go thy way? why
dost thou not haste to fetch thy garment, that thou just now in a hurry
didst cast away? No, no! with his bodily eyes, I believe he received
also a fresh addition of spiritual sight, and though others saw no
form or comeliness in the blessed JESUS, that they should desire him;
yet he by an eye of faith discovered such transcendent excellencies
in his royal person, and felt at the same time such a divine attraction
towards his all-bountiful benefactor, that instead of going his way to
fetch his garment, “he followed JESUS in the way;” and by his actions,
says with faithful, honest-hearted _Ruth_, “entreat me not to leave
thee; for whither thou goest, I will go; where thou lodgest, I will
lodge; thy people shall be my people; and thy God, my GOD.” He followed
JESUS in the way; the narrow way, the way of the cross; and I doubt not
but long since he has followed him to his crown, and is at this time
sitting with him at the right hand of his Father.

And now, my dear hearers, how find you your hearts affected at the
relation of this notable miracle which JESUS wrought? are you not ready
to break out into the language of the song of _Moses_, and to say, “Who
is like unto thee, O LORD, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises,
continually doing wonders!” Marvellous are thy works, O JESUS, and that
our souls know right well! But we must not stop here, in admiring what
the LORD did for _Bartimeus_; this, no doubt, as well as other parts
of Scripture, was written for our learning, upon whom the ends of the
world are come; consequently, as was proposed in the

_Second_ place, we should see what spiritual improvement can be made of
this history, upon which we have already been making some remarks.

A natural man, indeed, goes no further than the outward court of
the Scripture, and reads this, and the other miracles of our blessed
Saviour, just in the same manner as he reads _Homer_’s battles, or the
exploits of _Alexander_. But GOD forbid, that we should rest in only
hearing this matter of fact. For I tell thee, O man, I tell thee, O
woman, whoever thou art, that sittest this day under a preached gospel,
that if thou art in a natural state, thou art as blind in thy soul,
as _Bartimeus_ was in his body; a blind child of a blind father, even
of thy father _Adam_, who lost his sight when he lost his innocence,
and entailed his blindness, justly inflicted, upon thee, and me, and
his whole posterity. Some think indeed, that they see; but alas! such
talk only like men in their sleep, like persons beside themselves; the
scriptures every where represent fallen man, not only as spiritually
blind, but dead also; and we no more know, by nature, savingly the way
of salvation by JESUS CHRIST, than _Bartimeus_, when he was blind, knew
the colours of the rainbow. This, I trust, some of you begin to feel,
I see you concerned, I see you weeping, and, was I to ask some of you,
what you want to have done unto you? I know your answer would be, that
we may receive our sight. And GOD forbid, that I should charge you to
hold your peace, as though JESUS would not regard you! no, your being
made sensible of your natural blindness, and crying thus earnestly
after JESUS, is a sign at least, that you are awakened by his holy
Spirit (though it is possible, that you may cry with an exceeding
bitter cry, as _Esau_ did, and be lost at last); however, christian
charity induces me to believe and hope the best; I will therefore, in
the language of those who afterwards encouraged _Bartimeus_, say unto
you, Arise, take comfort; for, I trust, JESUS is calling you; follow
therefore the example of _Bartimeus_, cast away your garment; lay aside
every weight, and the sin which doth most easily beset you, arise, and
come to JESUS. He commands me, by his written word, to call to you,
and say, “Come unto him, all ye that are weary, and heavy laden, and he
will refresh you, he will give you rest.” Be not afraid, ye seek JESUS
of _Nazareth_, behold, he comes forth to meet you; ye are now on the
highway side, and JESUS, I trust, is passing by; I feel his presence,
I hope many of you feel it too; O then, cry mightily to him, who is
mighty and willing to save you; lay yourselves at the feet of sovereign
grace, say unto him, “JESUS, thou Son of _David_, have mercy on me,”
in the same frame as _Bartimeus_ did, and JESUS will answer you, he
will not cast out your prayer; according to your faith, so shall it be
done unto you. Blind as you are, you shall, notwithstanding, receive
your sight; Satan, indeed, and unbelief, will suggest many objections
to you, your carnal relations will also join issue with them, and
charge you to hold your peace; one will tell you, that your blindness
is too inveterate to be cured; another, that it is too late; a third,
that though JESUS can, yet he will not have mercy upon such poor, blind,
despicable beggars, as ye are; but, the more they charge you to hold
your peace, do you cry out so much the more a great deal, “JESUS, thou
Son of _David_, have mercy on us.” JESUS, thou Saviour, thou friend
of sinners, thou Son of _David_, and therefore a Son of man! gracious
words! endearing appellations! be encouraged by them, to draw nigh unto
him. Though _David_’s Lord, yet he is become _David_’s Son, after the
flesh, that ye through him may be made the sons of GOD: no matter what
thou art, O woman, what thou art, O man; though thou art literally a
poor beggar, think not thy condition too mean for JESUS to take notice
of; he came into the highways and hedges, to call such poor beggars
in; or, if you are rich, think not yourselves too high to stoop to
JESUS; for he is the King of kings; and you never will be truly rich,
until you are made rich in JESUS; fear not being despised, or losing
a little worldly honour: one sight of JESUS will make amends for all:
you will find something so inviting, so attracting, so satisfying, in
the altogether-lovely Lamb of GOD, that every sublunary enjoyment will
sicken, and die, and vanish before you; and you will no more desire
your former vain and trifling amusements, than _Bartimeus_, after he
had received his sight, desired to go back again and fetch his garment.
O that there may be many such blind beggars among you this day!

Here is a great multitude of people following me, a poor worm, this
day. I rejoice to see the fields thus white, ready unto harvest, and
to spread the gospel-net amidst so many; but alas! I shall return
home with a heavy heart, unless some of you will arise and come to my
JESUS; I desire to preach HIM, and not myself; rest not in hearing and
following me. Behold, believe on, and follow the Lamb of GOD, who came
to take away the sins of the world. Indeed, I do not despair of any
of you, neither am I discouraged, on account of my preaching in the
highways and hedges; JESUS called _Zaccheus_; JESUS called _Bartimeus_,
as he passed through _Jericho_; that cursed, that devoted place; and
why may he not call some of you, out of these despised fields? is his
arm shortened, that he cannot save? is he not as mighty now, and as
willing to save, even to the uttermost, all that come to the Father
through him, as he was seventeen hundred years ago? assuredly he is;
he hath said, and he also will do it, “Whosoever cometh to me, I will
in no wise cast out.” In no wise, or by no means. O encouraging words!
sinners, believe ye this? arise then, be of good comfort, for JESUS is
indeed calling you. Some of you, I trust, have obeyed this invitation,
and have had a sight of him long ago; I know then, you will bless and
love him; and if he should say unto you, as he did unto _Bartimeus_, go
you your way; your answer would be, we love our master, and will not go
from him. But suffer ye the word of exhortation:

Suffer me to stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance, shew that
you have indeed seen him, and that you do indeed love him, by following
him in the way; I mean, in the way of the cross, the way of his
ordinances, and in the way of his holy commandments; for alas! the love
of many waxeth cold, and few there are that follow JESUS rightly in the
way; few there are that cast away their garments so heartily as they
should; some idol or another hangs about us, and hinders us in running
the race that is set before us. Awake therefore, ye sleepy, though, it
may be, wise virgins. Awake, awake, put on strength; shake yourselves
from the dust; arise and follow JESUS more closely in the way, than
ever you did yet. Lift up the hands that hang down, and strengthen
the feeble knees. Provide right paths for your feet, lest that which
is lame be turned out of the way, but rather be ye healed. For though
the way be narrow, yet it is not long; “though the gate be straight,
(to use the words of pious bishop _Beveridge_) yet it opens into
everlasting life.” O that ye may get a fresh sight of him again this
day! That would be like oil to the wheels of your graces, and make
your souls like the chariots of _Aminadab_. It is only owing to your
losing sight of him, that you go so heavily from day to day. A sight
of JESUS, like the sun rising in the morning, dispels the darkness and
gloominess that lies upon the soul. Take therefore a fresh view of him,
O believers, and never rest until you are translated to see him as he
is, and to live with him for evermore, in the kingdom of heaven. Even
so, LORD JESUS, _Amen_ and _Amen_!




                            SERMON XXVIII.

                    Directions how to hear Sermons.


                            LUKE viii. 18.

  _Take heed, therefore, how ye hear._

THE occasion of our LORD’s giving this caution, was this: Perceiving
that much people were gathered together to hear him out of every city,
and knowing (for he is GOD, and knoweth all things) that many, if not
most of them, would be hearers only, and not doers of the word; he
spake to them by a parable, wherein, under the similitude of a sower
that went out to sow his seed, he plainly intimated, how few there were
amongst them, who would receive any saving benefit from his doctrine,
or bring forth fruit unto perfection.

The application one would imagine should have been plain and obvious;
but the disciples, as yet unenlightened in any great degree by the Holy
Spirit, and therefore unable to see into the hidden mysteries of the
kingdom of GOD, dealt with our Saviour, as people ought to deal with
their ministers; they discoursed with him privately about the meaning
of what he had taught them in public; and with a sincere desire of
doing their duty, asked for an interpretation of the parable.

Our blessed LORD, as he always was willing to instruct those that were
teachable, (herein setting his ministers an example to be courteous and
easy of access) freely told them the signification. And withal, to make
them more cautious and more attentive to his doctrine for the future,
he tells them, that they were in an especial manner to be the light
of the world, and were to proclaim on the house-top whatsoever he told
them in secret; and as their improving the knowledge already imparted,
was the only condition upon which more was to be given them, it
therefore highly concerned them to “take heed how they heard.”

From the context then it appears, that the words were primarily spoken
to the Apostles themselves. But as it is to be feared, out of those
many thousands that flock to hear sermons, but few, comparatively
speaking, are effectually influenced by them, I cannot but think it
very necessary to remind you of the caution given by our LORD to his
disciples, and to exhort you with the utmost earnestness, to “take heed
how you hear.”

In prosecution of which design I shall,

_First_, Prove that every one ought to take all opportunities of
hearing sermons. And,

_Secondly_, I shall lay down some cautions and directions, in order to
your hearing with profit and advantage.

_First_, I am to prove, that every one ought to take all opportunities
of hearing sermons.

That there have always been particular persons set apart by GOD, to
instruct and exhort his people to practise what he should require
of them, is evident from many passages of scripture. St. _Jude_
tells us, that “_Enoch_, the seventh from _Adam_, prophesied (or
preached) concerning the LORD’s coming with ten thousand of his saints
to judgment.” And _Noah_, who lived not long after, is stiled by
St. _Peter_, “a preacher of righteousness.” And though in all the
intermediate space between the flood and giving of the law, we hear but
of few preachers, yet we may reasonably conclude, that GOD never left
himself without witness, but at sundry times, and after divers manners,
spoke to our fathers by the patriarchs and prophets.

But however it was before, we are assured that after the delivery of
the law, GOD constantly separated to himself a certain order of men
to preach to, as well as pray for his people; and commanded them to
enquire their duty at the priests mouths. And though the _Jews_ were
frequently led into captivity, and for their sins scattered abroad
on the face of the earth, yet he never utterly forsook his church,
but still kept up a remnant of prophets and preachers, as _Ezekiel_,
_Jeremiah_, _Daniel_, and others, to reprove, instruct, and call them
to repentance.

Thus was it under the law. Nor has the church been worse, but
infinitely better provided for under the gospel. For when JESUS CHRIST,
that great High-priest, had through the eternal Spirit offered himself,
as a full, perfect, sufficient sacrifice and satisfaction for the sins
of the whole world, and after his resurrection had all power committed
to him, both in heaven and earth, he gave commission to his Apostles,
and in them to all succeeding ministers, to “go and preach his gospel
to every creature;” promising to “to be with them, to guide, assist,
strengthen, and comfort them always, even to the end of the world.”

But if it be the duty of ministers to preach, (and woe be to them
if they do not preach the gospel, for a necessity is laid upon them)
no doubt, the people are obliged to attend to them; for otherwise,
wherefore are ministers sent?

And how can we here avoid admiring the love and tender care which our
dear Redeemer has expressed for his spouse the church? Who, because he
could not be always with us in person, on account it was expedient he
should go away, and as our forerunner take possession of that glory he
had purchased by his precious blood, yet would not leave us comfortless,
but first settled a sufficient number of pastors and teachers; and
afterwards, according to his promise, actually did and will continue
to send down the Holy Ghost, to furnish them and their successors
with proper gifts and graces “for the work of the ministry, for the
perfecting of the saints, for the edifying of his body in love, till we
all come in the unity of the spirit, to the fulness of the measure of
the stature of CHRIST.”

O how insensible are those persons of this unspeakable gift, who do
despite to the Spirit of grace, who crucify the Son of GOD afresh, and
put him to an open shame, by wilfully refusing to attend on so great
a means of their salvation? How dreadful will the end of such men be?
How aggravating, that light should come into the world, that the glad
tidings of salvation should be so very frequently proclaimed in this
populous city, and that so many should loath this spiritual manna, this
angels food, and call it light bread? How much more tolerable will it
be for _Tyre_ and _Sidon_, for _Sodom_ and _Gomorrah_, than for such
sinners? Better, that men had never heard of a Saviour being born, than
after they have heard, not to give heed to the ministry of those, who
are employed as his ambassadors, to transact affairs between GOD and
their souls.

We may, though at a distance, without a spirit of prophesy, foretel the
deplorable condition of such men; behold them cast into hell, lifting
up their eyes, being in torment, and crying out, How often would our
ministers have gathered us, as a hen gathereth her chickens under
her wings? But we would not. O that we had known in that our day, the
things that belonged to our everlasting peace! But now they are for
ever hid from our eyes.

Thus wretched, thus inconceiveably miserable, will such be as slight
and make a mock at the public preaching of the gospel. But taking it
for granted, there are but few, if any, of this unhappy stamp, who
think it worth their while to tread the courts of the LORD’s house, I
pass on now to the

_Second_ general thing proposed, to lay down some cautions and
directions, in order to your hearing sermons with profit and advantage.

And here, if we reflect on what has been already delivered, and
consider that preaching is an ordinance of GOD, a means appointed by
JESUS CHRIST himself for promoting his kingdom amongst men, you cannot
reasonably be offended, if, in order that you may hear sermons with
profit and advantage, I

1. Direct or entreat you to come to hear them, not out of curiosity,
but from a sincere desire to know and do your duty.

Formality and hypocrisy in any religious exercise, is an abomination
unto the LORD. And to enter his house merely to have our ears
entertained, and not our hearts reformed, must certainly be highly
displeasing to the Most High GOD, as well as unprofitable to ourselves.

Hence it is, that so many remain unconverted, yea, unaffected with
the most evangelical preaching; so that like St. _Paul_’s companions,
before his conversion, they only hear the preacher’s voice with
their outward ears, but do not experience the power of it inwardly in
their hearts: Or, like the ground near _Gideon_’s fleece, they remain
untouched; whilst others, who came to be fed with the sincere milk
of the word, like the fleece itself, are watered by the dew of GOD’s
heavenly blessing, and grow thereby.

Flee therefore, my brethren, flee curiosity, and prepare your hearts by
a humble disposition, to receive with meekness the engrafted word, and
then it will be a means, under GOD, to quicken, build up, purify, and
save your souls.

2. A second direction I shall lay down for the same purpose, is, not
only to prepare your hearts before you hear, but also to give diligent
heed to the things that are spoken from the word of GOD.

If an earthly king was to issue out a royal proclamation, on performing
or not performing the conditions therein contained, the life or death
of his subjects entirely depended, how solicitous would they be to hear
what those conditions were? And shall not we pay the same respect to
the King of kings, and LORD of lords, and lend an attentive ear to his
ministers, when they are declaring, in his name, how our pardon, peace,
and happiness may be secured?

When GOD descended on mount _Sinai_ in terrible majesty, to give unto
his people the law, how attentive were they to his servant _Moses_? And
if they were so earnest to hear the thunderings or threatenings of the
law, shall not we be as solicitous to hear from the ministers of CHRIST,
the glad tidings of the gospel?

Whilst CHRIST was himself on earth, it is said, that the people hung
upon him to hear the gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth.
And if we looked on ministers as we ought, as the sent of JESUS CHRIST,
we should hang upon them to hear their words also.

Besides, the sacred truths that gospel ministers deliver, are not dry
insipid lectures on moral philosophy, intended only to amuse us for a
while; but the great mysteries of godliness, which, therefore, we are
bound studiously to listen to, lest through our negligence we should
either not understand them, or by any other means let them slip.

But how regardless are those of this direction, who, instead of hanging
on the preacher to hear him, doze or sleep whilst he is speaking to
them from GOD? Unhappy men! Can they not watch with our blessed LORD
one hour? What! have they never read how _Eutychus_ fell down as he was
sleeping, when St. _Paul_ continued his discourse till midnight, and
was taken up dead?

But to return. Though you may prepare your hearts, as you may think,
by a teachable disposition, and be attentive whilst discourses are
delivering, yet this will profit you little, unless you observe♦

  ♦ duplicate word “a” removed

3. A third direction, Not to entertain any the least prejudice against
the minister.

For could a preacher speak with the tongue of men and angels, if his
audience was prejudiced against him, he would be but as sounding brass,
or tinkling cymbal.

That was the reason why JESUS CHRIST himself, the Eternal Word, could
not do many mighty works, nor preach to any great effect among those of
his own country; for they were offended at him: And was this same Jesus,
this GOD incarnate, again to bow the heavens, and to come down speaking
as never man spake, yet, if we were prejudiced against him, as the
_Jews_ were, we should harden our hearts as the _Jews_ did theirs.

Take heed therefore, my brethren, and beware of entertaining any
dislike against those whom the Holy Ghost has made overseers over you.
Consider that the clergy are men of like passions with yourselves: and
though we should even hear a person teaching others to do, what he has
not learned himself; yet, that is no sufficient reason for rejecting
his doctrine: for ministers speak not in their own, but CHRIST’s name.
And we know who commanded the people to do whatsoever the Scribes and
Pharisees should say unto them, though they said but did not. But

4. _Fourthly_, As you ought not to be prejudiced against, so you
should be careful not to depend too much on a preacher, or think more
highly of him than you ought to think. For though this be an extream
that people seldom run into, yet preferring one teacher in opposition
to another, has often been of ill consequence to the church of GOD. It
was a fault which the great Apostle of the _Gentiles_ condemned in the
_Corinthians_: For whereas one said, “I am of _Paul_; another, I am of
_Apollos_: are ye not carnal,” says he? “For who is _Paul_, and who is
_Apollos_, but instruments in GOD’s hands by whom you believed?” And
are not all ministers sent forth to be ministring ambassadors to those
who shall be heirs of salvation? And are they not all therefore greatly
to be esteemed for their work’s sake.

The Apostle, it is true, commands us to pay double honour to those who
labour in the word and doctrine: but then to prefer one minister at
the expence of another, (perhaps, to such a degree, as when you have
actually entered a church, to come out again because he does not preach)
is earthly, sensual, devilish.

Not to mention that popularity and applause cannot but be exceedingly
dangerous, even to a rightly informed mind; and must necessarily fill
any thinking man with a holy jealousy, lest he should take that honour
to himself, which is due only to GOD, who alone qualifies him for his
ministerial labours, and from whom alone every good and perfect gift
cometh.

5. A _Fifth_ direction I would recommend is, to make a particular
application of every thing that is delivered to your own hearts.

When our Saviour was discoursing at the last supper with his beloved
disciples, and foretold that one of them should betray him, each of
them immediately applied it to his own heart, and said, “LORD, is it
I?” And would persons, in like manner, when preachers are dissuading
from any sin, or persuading to any duty, instead of crying, this was
designed against such and such a one, turn their thoughts inwardly, and
say, LORD, is it I? how far more beneficial should we find discourses
to be, than now they generally are?

But we are apt to wander too much abroad; always looking at the mote
which is in our neighbour’s eye, rather than at the beam which is in
our own. Haste we now to the

6. _Sixth_ and last direction: If you would receive a blessing from the
LORD, when you hear his word preached, pray to him, both before, in,
and after every sermon, to endue the minister with power to speak, and
to grant you a will and ability to put in practice, what he shall shew
from the book of GOD to be your duty.

This would be an excellent means to render the word preached effectual
to the enlightening and enflaming your hearts; and without this, all
the other means before prescribed will be in vain.

No doubt it was this consideration that made St. _Paul_ so earnestly
entreat his beloved _Ephesians_ to intercede with GOD for him: “Praying
always, with all manner of prayer and supplication in the spirit, and
for me also, that I may open my mouth with boldness, to make known the
mysteries of the gospel.” And if so great an Apostle as St. _Paul_,
needed the prayers of his people, much more do those ministers, who
have only the ordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit.

Besides, this would be a good proof that you sincerely desired to do,
as well as to know the will of GOD. And it must highly profit both
ministers and people; because GOD, through your prayers, will give them
a double portion of his Holy Spirit, whereby they will be enabled to
instruct you more fully in the things which pertain to the kingdom of
GOD.

And O that all who hear me this day, would seriously apply their hearts
to practise what has now been told them! How would ministers see Satan,
like lightning, fall from heaven, and people find the word preached
sharper than a two-edged sword, and mighty, through GOD, to the pulling
down of the devil’s strong holds!

The Holy Ghost would then fall on all them that hear the word, as when
St. _Peter_ preached; the gospel of CHRIST would have free course, run
very swiftly, and thousands again be converted by a sermon.

For “JESUS CHRIST is the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever.” He
has promised to be with his ministers always, even unto the end of the
world. And the reason why we do not receive larger effusions of the
blessed Spirit of GOD, is not because our all-powerful Redeemer’s hand
is shortened, but because we do not expect them, and confine them to
the primitive times.

It does indeed sometimes happen, that GOD, to magnify his free grace in
CHRIST JESUS, is found of them that sought him not; a notorious sinner
is forcibly worked upon by a public sermon, and plucked as a firebrand
out of the fire. But this is not GOD’s ordinary way of acting: No,
for the generality, he only visits those with the power of his word,
who humbly wait to know what he would have them to do; and sends
unqualified hearers not only empty, but hardened away.

Take heed, therefore, ye careless, curious professors, if any such
be here present, how you hear. Remember, that whether we think of
it or not, “we must all appear before the judgment-seat of CHRIST;”
where ministers must give a strict account of the doctrine they have
delivered, and you as strict a one, how you have improved under it.
And, good GOD! how will you be able to stand at the bar of an angry,
sin-avenging judge, and see so many discourses you have despised, so
many ministers, who once longed and laboured for the salvation of your
precious and immortal souls, brought out as so many swift witnesses
against you? Will it be sufficient then, think you, to alledge, that
you went to hear them only out of curiosity, to pass away an idle hour,
to admire the oratory, or ridicule the simplicity of the preacher? No;
GOD will then let you know, that you ought to have come out of better
principles; that every sermon has been put down to your account, and
that you must then be justly punished for not improving by them.

But fear not, you little flock, who with meekness receive the ingrafted
word, and bring forth the peaceable fruits of righteousness; for it
shall not be so with you. No, you will be your minister’s joy, and
their crown of rejoicing in the day of our LORD JESUS: And they will
present you in a holy triumph, faultless and unblameable, to our common
Redeemer, saying, “Behold us, O LORD, and the children which thou hast
given us.”

But still take heed how you hear: for upon your improving the grace
you have, more shall be given, and you shall have abundance. “He
is faithful that has promised, who also will do it.” Nay, GOD from
out of _Sion_, shall so bless you, that every sermon you hear shall
communicate to you a fresh supply of spiritual knowledge. The word
of GOD shall dwell in you richly; you shall go on from strength to
strength, from one degree of grace unto another, till being grown up
to be perfect men in CHRIST JESUS, and filled with all the fulness of
GOD, you shall be translated by death to see him as he is, and to sing
praises before his throne with angels and archangels, cherubim and
seraphim, and the general assembly of the first-born, whose names are
written in heaven, for ever and ever.

  Which GOD, &c.




                             SERMON XXIX.

             The Extent and Reasonableness of Self-Denial.


                             LUKE ix. 23.

  _And he said unto them all, If any man will come after me, let
    him deny himself._

WHOEVER reads the gospel with a single eye, and sincere intention, will
find, that our blessed LORD took all opportunities of reminding his
disciples that his kingdom was not of this world; that his doctrine was
a doctrine of the cross; and that their professing themselves to be his
followers, would call them to a constant state of voluntary suffering
and self-denial.

The words of the text afford us one instance, among many, of our
Saviour’s behaviour in this matter: for having in the preceding verses
revealed himself to _Peter_, and the other apostles, to be “The CHRIST
of GOD;” lest they should be too much elated with such a peculiar
discovery of his deity, or think that their relation to so great a
personage would be attended with nothing but pomp and grandeur, he
tells them, in the 22d verse, that “the son of man was to suffer many
things,” in this world, though he was to be crowned with eternal glory
and honour in the next: and that if any of them or their posterity
would share in the same honour, they must bear a part with him in his
self-denial and sufferings. For “He said unto them all, if any man will
come after me, let him deny himself.”

From which words I shall consider these three things:

  I. _First_, The nature of the self-denial recommended in the
    text; and in how many respects we must deny ourselves, in
    order to come after JESUS CHRIST.

  II. _Secondly_, I shall endeavour to prove the universality and
    reasonableness of this duty of self-denial.

  III. _Thirdly_, I shall offer some considerations, which may
    serve as so many motives to reconcile us to, and quicken us in,
    the practice of this self-denial.

I. _First_, I am to shew you the nature of the self-denial recommended
in the text; or in how many respects we must deny ourselves in order to
follow JESUS CHRIST.

Now as the faculties of the soul are distinguished by the understanding,
will and affections; so in all these must each of us deny himself. We
must not lean to our own understanding, being wise in our own eyes,
and prudent in our own sight; but we must submit our short-sighted
reason to the light of divine revelation. There are mysteries in
religion, which are above, though not contrary to our natural reason:
and therefore we shall never become christians unless we cast down
imaginations, “and every high thing that exalteth itself against
the knowledge of GOD, and bring into captivity every thought to the
obedience of CHRIST.” It is in this respect, as well as others, that
we must become fools for CHRIST’s sake, and acknowledge we know nothing
without revelation, as we ought to know. We must, with all humility and
reverence, embrace the truths revealed to us in the holy scriptures;
for thus only can we become truly wise, even “Wise unto salvation.”
It was matter of our blessed LORD’s thanksgiving to his heavenly
father, that he had “hidden these things from the wise and prudent,
and had revealed them unto babes.” And in this respect also we must
“be converted and become as little children,” teachable, and willing
to follow the Lamb into whatsoever mysteries he shall be pleased to
lead us; and believe and practise all divine truths, not because we can
demonstrate them, but because GOD, “who cannot lye,” has revealed them
to us.

Hence then we may trace infidelity to its fountain head: for it is
nothing else, but a pride of the understanding, an unwillingness to
submit to the truths of GOD, that makes so many, professing themselves
wise, to become such fools as to deny the LORD, who has so dearly
bought them; and dispute the divinity of that eternal Word, “in whom
they live, and move, and have their being:” Whereby it is justly to be
feared, they will bring upon themselves sure, if not swift destruction.

But, as we must deny ourselves in our understandings, so must we deny,
or, as it might be more properly rendered, renounce our wills: that is,
we must make our own wills no principle of action, but “whether we eat
or drink, or whatsoever we do, we must do all, (not merely to please
ourselves, but) to the glory of GOD.” Not that we are therefore to
imagine we are to have no pleasure in any thing we do: “Wisdom’s ways
are ways of pleasantness;” but pleasing ourselves must not be the
principal, but only the subordinate end of our actions.

And I cannot but particularly press this doctrine upon you, because
it is the grand secret of our holy religion. It is this, my brethren,
that distinguishes the true christian from the mere moralist and
formal professor; and without which none of our actions are acceptable
in GOD’s sight: For “if thine eye be single,” says our blessed LORD,
_Matthew_ vi. 22. that is, if thou aimest simply to please GOD, without
any regard to thy own will, “thy whole body, (or all thy actions) will
be full of light;” agreeable to the gospel, which is called light: “But
if thine eye be evil, (if thine intention be diverted any other way)
thy whole body, (all thy actions) will be full of darkness,” sinful and
unprofitable, we must not only do the will of GOD, but do it because it
is his will; since we pray that “GOD’s will may be done on earth as it
is in heaven.” And no doubt, the blessed angels not only do every thing
that GOD willeth, but do it chearfully, out of this principle, because
GOD willeth it: And if we would live as we pray, we must go and do
likewise.

But farther; as we must renounce our wills in doing, so likewise must
we renounce them in suffering the will of GOD. Whatsoever befals us, we
must say with good old _Eli_, “It is the LORD, let him do what seemeth
him good;” or with one that was infinitely greater than _Eli_, “Father,
not my will, but thine be done.” O JESUS, thine was an innocent will,
and yet thou renouncedst it: Teach us, even us also, O our Saviour! to
submit our wills to thine, in all the evils which shall be brought upon
us; and in every thing enable us to give thanks, since it is thy
blessed will concerning us!

_Thirdly_, we must deny ourselves, as in our understandings and
wills, so likewise in our affections. More particularly, we must deny
ourselves the pleasurable indulgence and self-enjoyment of riches: “If
any man will come after me, he must forsake all and follow me.” And
again (to shew the utter inconsistency of the love of the things of
this world with the love of the Father) he tells us, “unless a man
forsake all that he hath, he cannot be my disciple.”

Far be it from me to think that these texts are to be taken in a
literal sense; as though they obliged rich persons to go sell all
that they have and give to the poor, (for that would put it out of
their power to be serviceable to the poor for the future) but however,
they certainly imply thus much, that we are to sit loose to, sell and
forsake all in affection, and be willing to part with every thing, when
GOD shall require it at our hands: that is, as the apostle observes, we
must “use the world as though we used it not;” and though we are in the
world, we must not be of it. We must look upon ourselves as stewards,
and not proprietors, of the manifold gifts of GOD; provide first what
is necessary for ourselves and for our housholds, and expend the rest,
not in indulgencies and superfluous ornaments, forbidden by the apostle,
but in cloathing, feeding, and relieving the naked, hungry, distressed
disciples of JESUS CHRIST. This is what our blessed LORD would have us
understand by forsaking all, and in this sense must each of us deny
himself.

I am sensible that this will seem an hard saying to many, who will be
offended because they are covetous, and “lovers of pleasure more than
lovers of GOD:” but if I yet pleased such men, I should not be the
servant of CHRIST. No, we must not, like _Ahab_’s false prophets, have
a lying spirit in our mouths, but declare faithfully the whole will of
GOD; and like honest _Micajah_, out of pity and compassion, tell men
the truth, though they may falsely think we prophecy not good but evil
concerning them.

But to proceed: As we must renounce our affection for riches, so
likewise our affections for relations, when they stand in opposition to
our love of, and duty to GOD: For thus saith the Saviour of the world:
“If any man will come after me, and hateth not his father and mother,
his children, and brethren, and sisters, yea and his own life also,
he cannot be my disciple.” Strange doctrine this! What, hate our own
flesh! What, hate the father that begat us, the mother that bare us!
How can these things be? Can GOD contradict himself? Has he not bid
us to honour our father and mother? and yet we are here commanded to
hate them. How can these truths be reconciled? By interpreting the
word hate, not in a rigorous and absolute sense, but comparatively:
not as implying a total alienation, but a less degree of affection.
For thus our blessed Saviour himself (the best and surest expositor of
his own meaning) explains it in a parallel text, _Matthew_ x. 37. “He
that loveth father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me: He that
loveth son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me.” So that when
the persuasions of our friends (as for our trial they may be permitted
to be) are contrary to the will of GOD, we must say with _Levi_, “we
have not known them;” or, agreeably to our blessed LORD’s rebuke to
_Peter_, “Get you behind me, my adversaries; for you savour not the
things that be of GOD, but the things that be of man.”

Farther, we must deny ourselves in things indifferent: for it might
easily be shewn, that as many, if not more, perish by an immoderate use
of things in themselves indifferent, as by any gross sin whatever. A
prudent christian therefore, will consider not only what is lawful, but
what is expedient also: not so much what degrees of self-denial best
suit his inclinations here, as what will most effectually break his
will, and fit him for greater degrees of glory hereafter.

_Lastly_, To conclude this head, we must renounce our own righteousness:
For, though we should give all our goods to feed the poor, and our
bodies to be burned, yet, if we in the least depend on that, and do
not wholly rely on the perfect all-sufficient righteousness of JESUS
CHRIST, it will profit us nothing. “CHRIST is the end of the law for
righteousness to every one that believeth.” We are compleat in him, and
him only. Our own righteousnesses are but as filthy rags. We must count
all things but dung and dross, so that we may be found in him, not
having our own righteousness, but the righteousness which is of GOD,
through JESUS CHRIST our LORD.

And is this the doctrine of christianity? is not the christian world
then asleep? If not, whence so much self-righteousness, whence the
self-indulgence, whence the reigning love of riches which we every
where meet with? Above all, whence that predominant greediness after
sensual pleasure, that has so over-run this sinful nation, that was a
pious stranger to come amongst us, he would be tempted to think some
heathen Venus was worshipped here, and that temples were dedicated
to her service. But we have the authority of an inspired apostle to
affirm, that they who live in a round of pleasure, “are dead while they
live.” Wherefore, as the Holy Ghost saith, “Awake thou that sleepest,
and arise from the dead, and CHRIST shall give thee light.” But the
power of raising the spiritually dead belongeth only unto GOD. Do thou
therefore, O Holy JESUS, who by thy almighty word commandest _Lazarus_
to come forth, though he had lain in the grave some days, speak also as
effectually to these spiritually dead souls, whom Satan for many years
hath so fast bound by sensual pleasures, that they are not so much as
able to lift up their eyes or hearts to heaven.

II. But I pass on to the second general thing proposed, to consider the
universal obligation and reasonableness of this doctrine of self-denial.

When our blessed master had been discoursing publicly concerning the
watchfulness of the faithful and wise steward, his disciples asked him,
“Speakest thou this parable to all, or only to us?” The same question
I am aware has been, and will be put concerning the foregoing doctrine:
for too many, unwilling to take CHRIST’s easy yoke upon them, in order
to evade the force of the gospel precepts, would pretend that all
those commands concerning self-denial, and renouncing ourselves and
the world, belonged to our LORD’s first and immediate followers, and
not to us or to our children. But such persons greatly err, not knowing
the scriptures, nor the power of godliness in their hearts. For the
doctrine of JESUS CHRIST, like his blessed self, is “the same yesterday,
to-day, and for ever.” What he said unto one, he said unto all, even
unto the ends of the world; “If any man will come after me, let him
deny himself:” and in the text it is particularly mentioned that he
said it unto them ALL. And lest we should still absurdly imagine that
this word ALL was to be confined to his apostles, with whom he was then
discoursing, it is said in another place, that JESUS turned unto the
multitude and said, “If any man will come after me, and hateth not his
father and mother, yea and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.”
When our blessed LORD had spoken a certain parable, it is said, “the
scribes and Pharisees were offended, for they knew the parable was
spoken against them:” And if christians can now read these plain and
positive texts of scripture, and at the same time not think they are
spoken of them, they are more hardened than _Jews_, and more insincere
than Pharisees¹.

  ¹ Law’s _Christian Perfection_.

In the former part of this discourse I observed, that the precepts
concerning forsaking and selling all, did not oblige us in a literal
sense, because the state of the church does not demand it of us, as
it did of the primitive christians; but still the same deadness to the
world, the same abstemious use of, and readiness to part with our goods
for CHRIST’s sake, is as absolutely necessary for, and as obligatory
on us, as it was on them. For though the church may differ as to the
outward state of it, in different ages, yet as to the purity of its
inward state, it was, is, and always will be invariably the same. And
all the commands which we meet with in the epistles, about “mortifying
our members which are upon the earth, of setting our affections on
things above, and of not being conformed to this world;” are but so
many incontestible proofs that the same holiness, heavenly-mindedness,
and deadness to the world, is as necessary for us, as for our LORD’s
immediate followers.

But farther, as such an objection argues an ignorance of the scriptures,
so it is a manifest proof, that such as make it are strangers to the
power of godliness in their hearts. For since the sum and substance
of religion consists in recovery from our fallen estate in _Adam_, by
a new-birth in CHRIST JESUS, there is an absolute necessity for us to
embrace and practice the self-denial before spoken of. If we are alive
unto GOD, we shall be dead to ourselves and the world. If all things
belonging to the spirit live and grow in us, all things belonging to
the old man must die in us. We must mourn before we are comforted,
and receive the spirit of bondage before we are blessed with the
unspeakable privilege of the spirit of adoption, and with a full
assurance of faith can say, “Abba, Father.”

Were we indeed in a state of innocence, and had we, like _Adam_
before his fall, the divine image fully stamped upon our souls, we
then should have no need of self-denial; but since we are fallen,
sickly, disordered, self-righteous creatures, we must necessarily deny
ourselves (and count it our privilege to do so) ere we can follow JESUS
CHRIST to glory. To reject such a salutary practice on account of the
difficulty attending it at first, is but too like the obstinacy of a
perverse sick child, who nauseates and refuses the potion reached out
to it by a skilful physician or a tender parent, because it is a little
ungrateful to the taste.

Had any of us seen _Lazarus_ when he lay full of sores at the rich
man’s gate; or _Job_ when he was smitten with ulcers, from the crown
of his head to the sole of his foot: And had we at the same time
prescribed to them some healing medicines, which, because they might
put them to pain, they would not apply to their wounds, should we not
most justly think, that they were either fond of a distempered body,
or were not sensible of their distempers? But our souls, by nature, are
in an infinitely more deplorable condition than the bodies of _Job_ or
_Lazarus_, when full of ulcers and boils: for, alas! “our whole head
is sick, and our whole heart faint, from the crown of the head to the
sole of the foot, we are full of wounds and bruises and putrifying
sores, and there is no health in us.” And if we are unwilling to deny
ourselves, and come after JESUS CHRIST in order to be cured, it is a
sign we are not sensible of the wretchedness of our state, and that we
are not truly made whole.

Even _Naaman_’s servants could say, when he refused (pursuant to
_Elisha_’s orders) to wash in the river _Jordan_, that he might cure
his leprosy, “Father, if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing,
wouldst thou not have done it? How much rather then, when he saith to
thee, wash and be clean?” And may not I very properly address myself to
you in the same manner, my brethren? If JESUS CHRIST, our great prophet,
had bid you to do some far more difficult thing, would you not have
done it? Much more then should you do it, when he only bids you deny
yourselves what would certainly hurt you if indulged in, and he will
give you a crown of life.

But to illustrate this by another comparison: In the 12th chapter of
the _Acts_, we read, that “St. _Peter_ was kept in prison, and was
sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains: And behold an
angel of the LORD came upon him, and smote _Peter_ on the side, saying,
arise up quickly: And his chains fell off from his hands.” But had this
great apostle, instead of rising up quickly, and doing as the blessed
angel commanded him, hugged his chains and begged that they might not
be let fall from his hands, would not any one think that he was in
love with slavery, and deserved to be executed next morning? And does
not the person who refuses to deny himself, act as inconsistently,
as this apostle would have done if he had neglected the means of his
deliverance? For our souls, by nature, are in a spiritual dungeon,
sleeping and fast bound between the world, the flesh, and the devil,
not with two but ten thousand chains of lusts and corruptions. Now
JESUS CHRIST, like St. _Peter_’s good angel, by the power of his gospel
comes and opens the prison door, and bids us “deny ourselves and follow
him.” But if we do not arise, gird up the loins of our mind and follow
him, are we not in love with bondage, and do we not deserve never to be
delivered from it?

Indeed, I will not affirm that this doctrine of self-denial appears in
this just light to every one. No, I am sensible that to the natural man
it is foolishness, and to the young convert an hard saying. But what
says our Saviour? “If any man will do my will, he shall know of the
doctrine, whether it be of GOD, or whether I speak of myself.” This,
my dear friends, is the best, the only way of conviction: Let us up and
be doing; let us arise quickly, and deny ourselves, and the LORD JESUS
will remove those scales from the eyes of our minds, which now, like so
many veils, hinder us from seeing clearly the reasonableness, necessity,
and inexpressible advantage of the doctrine that has been delivered.
Let us but once thus shew ourselves men, and then the spirit of GOD
will move on the face of our souls, as he did once upon the face of
the great deep; and cause them to emerge out of that confused chaos, in
which they are most certainly now involved, if we are strangers and
enemies to self-denial and the cross of CHRIST.

III. Proceed we therefore now to the third and last general thing
proposed, to offer some considerations, which may serve as so many
motives to reconcile us to, and quicken us in, the practise of this
duty of self-denial.

1. And the first means I shall recommend to you, in order to reconcile
you to this doctrine, is, to meditate frequently on the life of our
blessed Lord and Master JESUS CHRIST. Follow him from his cradle to the
cross, and see what a self-denying life he led! And shall not we drink
of the cup that he drank of, and be baptized with the baptism that
he was baptized with? Or think we, that JESUS CHRIST did and suffered
every thing in order to have us excused and exempted from sufferings?
No, far be it from any sincere christian to judge after this manner:
for St. _Peter_ tells us, “He suffered for us, leaving us an example
that we should follow his steps.” Had CHRIST, indeed, like those that
sat in _Moses_’ chair, laid heavy burthens of self-denial upon us,
(supposing they were heavy, which they are not) and refused to touch
them himself with one of his fingers; we might have had some pretence
to complain: But since he has enjoined us nothing, but what he first
put in practise himself, thou art inexcusable, O disciple, whoever
thou art, who wouldst be above thy persecuted self-denying master: And
thou art no good and faithful servant, who art unwilling to suffer and
sympathize with thy mortified, heavenly-minded LORD.

2. Next to the pattern of our blessed master, think often on the lives
of the glorious company of the apostles, the goodly fellowship of the
prophets, and the noble army of martyrs; who by a constant looking
to the author and finisher of our faith, have fought the good fight,
and are gone before us to inherit the promises. View again and again,
how holily, how self-denyingly, how unblameably they lived: And if
self-denial was necessary for them, why not for us also? Are we not
men of like passions with them? Do we not live in the same wicked world
as they did? Have we not the same good spirit to assist, support, and
purify us, as they had? and is not the same eternal inheritance reached
out to us, as was to them? And if we have the same nature to change,
the same wicked world to withstand, the same good spirit to help, and
the same eternal crown at the end; why should not we lead the same
lives as they did? Do we think they did works of supererogation? if not,
why do not we do as they did? or why does your own church set apart
festivals to commemorate the deaths and sufferings of the saints, but
in order to excite you to follow them as they did CHRIST.

3. _Thirdly_, Think often on the pains of hell; consider, whether it is
not better to cut off a right-hand or foot, and pull out a right-eye,
if they offend us (or cause us to sin) “rather than to be cast into
hell, where the worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched.” Think
how many thousands there are now reserved with damned spirits in chains
of darkness unto the judgment of the great day. And think withal,
that this, this must be our case shortly, unless we are wise in time,
deny ourselves, and follow JESUS CHRIST. Think you, they now imagine
JESUS CHRIST to be an hard master; or rather think you not, they would
give ten thousand times ten thousand worlds, could they but return to
life again, and take CHRIST’s easy yoke upon them? And can we dwell
with everlasting burnings more than they? No, if we cannot bear this
precept, deny yourselves, take up your crosses; how shall we bear the
irrevocable sentence, “Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels?” But I hope those, amongst whom
I am now preaching the kingdom of GOD, are not so disingenuous as to
need to be driven to their duty by the terrors of the LORD, but rather
desire to be drawn by the cords of love.

_Lastly_, Therefore, often meditate on the joys of heaven: think, think
with what unspeakable glory those happy souls are now incircled, who
when on earth were called to deny themselves as well as we, and were
not disobedient to that call: Lift up your hearts frequently towards
the mansions of eternal bliss, and with an eye of faith, like _Stephen_,
see the heavens opened, and the Son of man with his glorious retinue of
departed saints, sitting and solacing themselves in eternal joys. Hark!
methinks I hear them chanting forth their everlasting _Hallelujahs_,
and echoing triumphant songs of joy. And do you not long, my brethren,
to join this heavenly choir? do not your hearts burn within you? As the
hart panteth after the water brooks, do not your souls so long after
the blessed company of these sons of GOD? Behold then a heavenly ladder
reached down to you, by which you may climb to this holy hill. Let us
believe on the LORD JESUS CHRIST, and deny ourselves! By this alone,
every saint that ever lived ascended into the joy of their LORD: And
then, we, even we also shall ere long be lifted up into the same most
blissful regions, there to enjoy an eternal rest with the people of GOD,
and join with them in singing doxologies and songs of praise, to the
everlasting, blessed, all-glorious, most adorable Trinity, for ever and
ever.

Which GOD of his infinite mercy grant, _&c._




                              SERMON XXX.

                       CHRIST’s Transfiguration.


                            LUKE ix. 28‒36.

  _And it came to pass about an eight days after these sayings,
    he took |Peter| and |John| and |James|, and went up into
    a mountain to pray. And as he prayed, the fashion of his
    countenance was altered, and his rayment was white and
    glistering. And behold, there talked with him two men, which
    were |Moses| and |Elias|: who appeared in glory, and spake of
    his decease, which he should accomplish at |Jerusalem|. But
    |Peter| and they that were with him, were heavy with sleep:
    and when they were awake, they saw his glory, and the two men
    that stood with him. And it came to pass, as they departed
    from him, |Peter| said unto JESUS, Master, it is good for us
    to be here; and let us make three tabernacles, one for thee,
    and one for |Moses|, and one for |Elias|: not knowing what he
    said. While he thus spake, there came a cloud and overshadowed
    them, and they feared as they entered into the cloud. And
    there came a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my
    beloved Son, hear him. And when the voice was past, JESUS was
    found alone; and they kept it close, and told no man in those
    days any of those things which they had seen._

WHEN the angel was sent to the Redeemer’s beloved disciple _John_, we
are told that the angel said unto him, “Come up hither:” He was to be
exalted, to be brought nearer heaven, that his mind might be better
prepared for those great manifestations, which an infinitely great and
condescending GOD intended to vouchsafe him. And on reading the verses
that you have just now heard, when I also see such a great and serious
assembly convened in the presence of GOD, I think I must address you,
as the angel addressed _John_, and say unto you, “Come up hither;”
leave your worldly thoughts, for a time forget the earth. And as it
is the Lord’s-day, a time in which we ought more particularly to think
of heaven, I must desire you to pray to GOD, that ye may get up on
_Pisgah_’s mount, and take a view of the promised land. It is true,
indeed, eye hath not seen, ear hath not heard, nor hath it entered into
the heart of any man to conceive the great and good things, which GOD
hath prepared for his people here; much less, those infinitely greater
and more glorious things, that he hath laid up for them that fear him,
in the eternal world: but, blessed be GOD! though we are not yet in
heaven, unless to be in CHRIST may properly be termed heaven, and then
all real christians are there already; yet, the blessed JESUS has been
pleased to leave upon record some account of himself, of what happened
to him in the days of his flesh, and of some manifestations he was
pleased to grant to a few of his disciples; that from what happened
to them here below, we may form some faint, though but a faint idea
of that happiness that awaits his people in his kingdom above. If any
of you enquire, in what part of our LORD’s life those instances are
recorded, I have an answer ready: One of these instances, and that a
very remarkable one, is recorded in the verses that I have now chosen
for the subject of your meditation.

The verses give us an account of what is generally called our LORD’s
_Transfiguration_; his being wonderfully changed, and his being
wonderfully owned by his Father upon the mount. Some think that this
was done upon a sabbath-day; and the particular occasion of our blessed
LORD’s condescending to let his servants have such a sight as this,
we may gather from the 27th verse. It seems our blessed LORD had been
promising a great reward to those who should not be ashamed of him:
“Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words, of him shall the
Son of Man be ashamed, when he shall come in his own glory, and of
his Father, and of the holy angels.” In this threatening is implied,
a reward to those who should not be ashamed of him: “But, (adds he) I
tell you of a truth, there be some standing here, who shall not taste
of death, till they see the kingdom of GOD:” As much as to say, There
will be a day, when I will come in the glory of my Father and of his
holy angels; but I tell you there are some of my favourites; I tell you
of a truth, though you may think it too good news, there are some of
you that shall not taste of death, till ye shall see the kingdom of
GOD. Some divines think, that this promise has reference to our LORD’s
erecting a gospel church; and if we take it in this sense, it means
that the Apostles, who were then present, some of them at least, should
not die, till they saw Satan’s kingdom in a great measure pulled down,
and the Redeemer’s gospel-kingdom erected. Some think it has a peculiar
reference to _John_, who it seems survived all the other Apostles, and
lived till CHRIST came; that is, till he came to destroy _Jerusalem_.
But it is the opinion of Mr. _Henry_, of Bishop _Hall_, of _Burkit_,
and others, who have written upon this passage, that our blessed LORD
has a peculiar reference to the transfiguration upon the mount: “There
be some of you here, that shall not taste of death, till ye see my
transfiguration upon the mount; till ye see some glorified saint come
down from heaven and pay me a visit, and consequently see a little
of that kingdom of GOD, which ye shall have a full sight of, when ye
come to glory.” This seems to be the right interpretation. If you will
look to the margin of your Bibles, you will see the parallel place in
_Matthew_, where the account of our LORD’s transfiguration is given,
and there you will find it immediately follows upon this promise of our
LORD.

Well, as CHRIST had told them, that they should not taste of death,
till they had seen the kingdom of GOD, why the Evangelist, at the
28th verse, tells us, “It came to pass about an eight days after these
sayings, he took _Peter_, and _John_, and _James_, and went up into
a mountain to pray.” About an eight days; that is, as Bishop _Hall_
thinks, upon the sabbath-day; or, according to some, the first day of
the week, which was hereafter to be the christian sabbath; our blessed
LORD takes _Peter_, _John_, and _James_: Why did not the LORD JESUS
CHRIST take more of his disciples? Why three, and these three? And why
three only? Our blessed LORD was pleased to take three and no more, to
show us that he is a sovereign agent; to show us, that though he loved
all his disciples, yet there are some to whom he is pleased to allow
peculiar visits. He loved _Peter_, and all the other disciples; yet
_John_ was the disciple that he peculiarly loved. And he took three
rather than one, because three were sufficient to testify the truth
of his being transfigured: “Out of the mouth of two or three witnesses
every word shall be established.” And he took no more than three,
because these three were enough. And he took these three, _Peter_,
_John_, and _James_, in particular, because these very persons
that were now to see CHRIST transfigured, were hereafter to see him
agonizing in the garden, sweating great drops of blood falling unto the
ground. And had not these three disciples seen CHRIST upon the mount,
the seeing him afterwards in the garden, might have staggered them
exceedingly: they might have doubted whether it was possible for the
Son of GOD to be in such doleful circumstances. Well, our LORD takes
these three “up into a mountain.” Why so? Because CHRIST JESUS was to
be like _Moses_, who was taken up into a mountain, when GOD intended
to deliver unto him the moral law: And our blessed LORD went up into a
mountain, because a mountain befriended devotion. When he had a mind to
retire to pray to his Father, he went to such places where he could be
most secret, and give the greatest vent to his heart. Thus we are told,
that once when _Peter_ prayed, it was upon the house-top. And if we
have a mind to be near GOD, we should choose such places as are freest
from ostentation, and that most befriend our communion with GOD. ♦And
what doth CHRIST, when he got up into a mountain? We are told, he went
up into a mountain “to pray.” CHRIST had no corruption to confess, and
he had but few wants of his own to be relieved; yet we hear of CHRIST
being much in prayer; we hear of his going up to a mountain to pray;
of his rising up a great while before it was day to pray; and of his
spending a whole night in prayer to GOD.

  ♦ “Aud” replaced with “And”

In the 29th verse, you have an account of the effect of our LORD’s
praying; “As he prayed, the fashion of his countenance was altered,
and his raiment was white and glistering.” I would have you take
notice, that our LORD was not changed in respect of his body, while
he was going up to the mount, but when he got upon the mount, and
while engaged in prayer. It is sufficient that way for our souls to be
transformed: the time we are more particularly to expect the influences
of GOD’s Spirit, is, when we are engaged in prayer. There seems to be a
very great propriety in our LORD’s being transfigured or changed upon
the mount. I hope I need inform none of you, that when _Moses_ went up
to the mount of GOD, GOD was pleased to speak to him face to face; and
when he came down from the mount, the people of _Israel_ observed that
_Moses_’s face shone so, that he was obliged to have a veil put upon
his face. Now the shining of _Moses_’s face, was a proof to the people,
that _Moses_ had been conversing with GOD. And _Moses_ told the people,
“That the LORD would raise up unto them a prophet like unto him, whom
the people were to hear.” GOD the Father, in order to give his Son
(considering him as man) a testimony that he was a prophet, was pleased
not only to let his face glitter or shine; but to show that he was a
prophet far superior to _Moses_, he was pleased to let his garment be
white and glistering, and “his countenance (as we are told by another
Evangelist) did shine as the sun.” What a change was here! What a
sight! Methinks I see _Peter_, _James_, and _John_ surprized: and,
indeed, well might the Evangelist, considering what happened, usher in
the following part of the story with the word _Behold_; “Behold, there
talked with him two men, _Moses_ and _Elias_:” And in the 31st verse,
you have an account of their dress, “They appeared in glory;” and of
their discourse, “They spake of his decease which he should accomplish
at _Jerusalem_.”

“Behold, two men, which were _Moses_ and _Elias_;” these were two very
proper persons to come upon this embassy to the Son of GOD. _Moses_ was
the great lawgiver, _Elias_ was the great restorer of the law: The body
of _Moses_ was hidden and never found, _Elias_’s body was translated
immediately, and carried up in a fiery chariot to heaven: And it may
be that this was done particularly, because these two were hereafter
to have the honour of waiting upon the Son of GOD. “They appeared in
glory;” that is, their bodies were now in that glorious habit, in which
the bodies of believers are to be at the morning of the resurrection.
CHRIST was, as it were, now sitting in his royal robes; and as it is
usual for ambassadors, when they are to be admitted into the king’s
presence, on bringing a message from one king to another, to appear
in all their grandeur, to make the message more solemn; so here, these
heavenly messengers being to wait upon the LORD JESUS CHRIST, are
invested as with royal dignity, they appeared in glory, and “they spake
of his decease which he should accomplish at _Jerusalem_,” they came to
tell the Redeemer of his sufferings, and of the place of his sufferings,
and to acquaint him, that his sufferings, however great, however bitter,
were to be _accomplished_; that there was to be an end put to them, as
our LORD himself speaks, “The things concerning me are to have an end.”
What other particulars they spoke to our LORD, we are not told. But
what effect this had upon the disciples, you may learn from the 32d
verse, “_Peter_, and they that were with him, were heavy with sleep.”

We are not to suppose, that _Peter_, _James_ and _John_, were now
asleep in a literal sense; no, if we compare this, with another passage
of holy writ, I mean the account given us of _Daniel_’s being impressed
and overcome, when he saw the angel of the LORD, you will find that
this sleep implies what we call a swoon. They were overcome with the
sight of the glory of CHRIST’s garments, the glistering of his body,
and the glory in _Moses_ and _Elias_ appeared: these quite overcame
them, sunk them down, and, like the Queen of _Sheba_, when she saw
_Solomon_’s glory, they had no life in them. But they recovered
themselves: “when they were awake,” that is, when they had recovered
their strength, when GOD had put strength into them, as the angel put
strength into _Daniel_, “they saw his glory, and the two men that stood
with him.” And how do you think they gazed upon CHRIST? how may we
suppose they fixed their eyes upon _Moses_ and _Elias_? _Peter_, who
was always the first speaker, out of the abundance of his heart, spoke
upon this occasion. Verse 33. “And it came to pass as they departed
from him, _Peter_ said unto JESUS, Master, it is good for us to be here;
and let us make three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for _Moses_,
and one for _Elias_, not knowing what he said.” _Peter_, when he had
drank a little of CHRIST’s new wine, speaks like a person intoxicated;
he was overpowered with the brightness of the manifestation. “Let us
make three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for _Moses_, and one
for _Elias_.” It is well added, “not knowing what he said.” That ♦he
should cry out, “Master, it is good for us to be here,” in such good
company, and in so glorious a condition, is no wonder; which of us all
would not have been apt to have done the same? But to talk of building
tabernacles, and one for CHRIST, and one for _Moses_, and one for
_Elias_, was saying something for which _Peter_ himself must stand
reproved. Surely, _Peter_, thou wast not quite awake! thou talkest like
one in a dream: If thy LORD had taken thee at thy word, what a poor
tabernacle wouldst thou have had, in comparison of that house not made
with hands, eternal in the heavens, in which thou hast long since dwelt,
now the earthly house of the tabernacle of thy body is dissolved? What!
build tabernacles below, and have the crown, before thou hast borne
the cross? O _Peter, Peter_! “Master, spare thyself,” sticks too too
closely to thee: And why so selfish, _Peter_? Carest thou not for
thy fellow disciples that are below, who came not up with thee to the
mount? carest thou not for the precious souls, that are as sheep having
no shepherd, and must perish for ever, unless thy Master descends from
the mount to teach, and to die for them? wouldst thou thus eat thy
spiritual morsels alone? Besides, if thou art for building tabernacles,
why must there be three of them, one for CHRIST, and one for _Moses_,
and one for _Elias_? are CHRIST and the prophets divided? do they not
sweetly harmonize and agree in one? did they not prophesy concerning
the sufferings of thy LORD, as well as of the glory that should follow?
Alas, how unlike is their conversation to thine? _Moses_ and _Elias_
came down to talk of suffering, and thou art dreaming of building I
know not what tabernacles. Surely, _Peter_, thou art so high upon the
mount, that thy head runs giddy.

  ♦ “she” replaced with “he”

However, in the midst of these infirmities, there was something that
bespoke the honesty and integrity of his heart. Though he knew not very
well what he said, yet he was not so stupid as his pretended successor
at _Rome_. He does not fall down and worship these two departed saints,
neither do I hear him say to either, _Ora pro nobis_; he had not so
learnt CHRIST; no, he applies himself directly to the head, “he said
unto JESUS, Master, it is good for us to be here.” And though he
was for building, yet he would not build without his Master’s leave.
“Master, let us build,” or, as St. _Mark_ words it, “wilt thou that
we build three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for _Moses_, and
one for _Elias_?” I do not hear him add, and one for _James_, and one
for _John_, and one for _Peter_. No, he would willingly stay out with
them upon the mount, though it was in the cold and dark night, so that
CHRIST and his heavenly attendants were taken care of. The sweetness
of such a heavenly vision, would more than compensate for any bodily
suffering that might be the consequence of their longer abode there:
nay farther, he does not desire that either CHRIST, or _Moses_, or
_Elias_, should have any trouble in building; neither does he say, let
my curates, _James_ and _John_, build, whilst I sit idle and lord it
over my brethren; but he says, “let us build;” he will work as hard, if
not harder than either of them, and desire to be distinguished only by
his activity, enduring hardness, and his zeal to promote the welfare of
their common LORD and Master.

Doubtless, _Peter_ had read how the glory of the LORD filled the
tabernacle, and the temple of old; and now JESUS is transfigured,
and _Moses_ and _Elias_ appear in glory, he thinks it right that new
tabernacles shall be erected for them. Such a mixture of nature and
grace, of short-sightedness and infirmity, is there in the most ardent
and well-meant zeal of the very best of men, when nearest the throne
of grace, or even upon the mount with GOD. Perfection in any grace must
be looked for, or expected, only among the spirits of just men made
perfect in heaven. Those who talk of any such thing on earth, like
_Peter_, they know not what they say.

But how came _Peter_ so readily to distinguish which was _Moses_, and
which was _Elias_? He seems to speak without the least hesitation, “Let
us build three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for _Moses_, and one
for _Elias_,” as though he was very well acquainted with them, whereas
they had both been dead, long, long before _Peter_ was born. Was there,
do you imagine, any thing distinguishing in their apparel? or any
thing in their conversation that discovered them? or rather, did he not
know them here on the mount, as we may from hence infer, that departed
saints do, and will know each other in heaven, even by intuition and
immediate revelation? But alas! how transient are our views of heaven,
during our sojourning here on earth: Verse 34. “Whilst he thus spake,”
whilst _Peter_ was talking of building tabernacles, whilst he was
saying, “it is good for us to be here,” whilst he was dreaming that
his mountain was so strong that it never could be moved, “there came a
cloud and overshadowed them.” St. _Matthew_ observes, it was a bright
cloud, not dark like that on mount _Sinai_, but bright, because the
gospel opens to us a far more bright dispensation than that of the law.
This overshadowed, and thereby not only filled them with an holy awe,
but also screened them, in some measure, from the brightness of that
glory with which they were now surrounded, and which otherwise would
have been insupportable. This cloud was like the veil thrown on the
face of _Moses_, and prepared them for the voice which they were soon
to hear coming out of it. I am not much surprized at being informed by
St. _Matthew_, that “they feared as they entered into the cloud,” or by
St. _Mark_, that “they were sore afraid.” For since the fall, there is
such a consciousness in us all of deserved wrath, that we cannot help
fearing when we enter into a cloud, even though JESUS CHRIST himself
be in the midst of it. Ah _Peter_, where is thy talk of building
tabernacles now? is thy strong mountain so quickly removed? what, come
down so soon? why do we not now hear thee saying, “It is good for us to
be here?” Alas! he and his fellow disciples are quite struck dumb; see
how they tremble, and, like _Moses_ upon another occasion, exceedingly
quake and fear. But how quickly are those fears dispelled, how soon is
the tumult of their minds hushed and calmed, with that soul-reviving
voice that came from the excellent glory, verse 35, “This is my beloved
Son, hear him.”

St. _Mark_ and St. _Matthew_ add “in whom I am well pleased.” The same
testimony that GOD the Father gave to the blessed JESUS at his baptism,
before he entered upon his temptation, is now repeated, in order to
strengthen and prepare him for his impending agony in the garden.
Probably, it was a small still though articulate voice, attended
neither with thunder nor lightning, nor the sound of a trumpet, but,
agreeable to the blessed news which it contained, ushered in with
tokens of unspeakable complacency and love. GOD the Father, hereby
gives _Moses_ and _Elias_ a solemn discharge, as though they were
sent from heaven on purpose to give up their commission to their
rightful LORD, and like the morning star, disappear when the Sun of
Righteousness himself arises to bring in a gospel day. “This is my
beloved Son, hear Him.” But the emphasis upon the word _this_; this
Son of Man, this JESUS, whom you are shortly to see in a bloody sweat,
blindfolded, spit upon, buffeted, scourged, and at length hanging upon
a tree, I am not ashamed to own to be my Son, my only begotten Son,
who was with me before the heavens were made, or the foundations of the
earth were laid; my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, in whom my
soul delighteth, and whom I do by these presents, publicly constitute
and appoint to be the king, priest, and prophet of the church. “Hear
ye Him.” No longer look to _Moses_ or _Elias_, no longer expect to be
saved by the works of the law; but by the preaching and application of
the ever-blessed gospel. Hear ye him, so as to believe on, love, serve,
obey, and, if needs be, to die and lay down your very lives for him.
“Hear him;” hear what he hath to say, for he comes with a commission
from above. Hear his doctrine; hear him, so as to obey him; hear him,
so as to put in practice his precepts, and copy after his good example.

In the 36th verse, we have the close of this heavenly feast; “When the
voice was past, JESUS was found alone; and they kept it close, and told
no man in those days, any of those things which they had seen.” If we
compare this, with the account which the other Evangelists give of our
blessed LORD’s transfiguration, you will find this was done by CHRIST’s
order: _Peter_, _James_, and _John_, would otherwise have gone down
and told the whole world, that they had seen the LORD CHRIST upon the
mount of transfiguration; but our LORD ordered them to keep it silent.
Why so? If they had gone down from the mount, and told it to the other
disciples, it might have raised ill blood in the others; they might
have said, Why did our Master single out _Peter_, _James_, and _John_?
Why might not we have had the privilege of going up to the mount as
well as they? Had they said, that their LORD was transfigured, people
would not have believed them; they would have thought, that _Peter_,
_James_, and _John_ were only enthusiasts; but if they kept it till
after his resurrection, and he had broken the gates of death, for them
then to say, that they saw him upon the mount transfigured, would
corroborate the evidence.

I have thus paraphrased the words for your better understanding the
account the Evangelist gives of our blessed LORD’s transfiguration; but
I have not yet done; I have been speaking to your heads; the practical
part is yet to come. O that GOD may reach your hearts! And though,
according to order, I ought to begin with the practical inferences that
might be drawn from the first part; yet, I think it best to show you,
who are the people of GOD, especially you young converts, that have
honesty, but not much prudence, what instructions our LORD would here
have you to learn.

“When the voice was past, JESUS was found alone, and they kept it
close, and told no man in those days any of those things which they had
seen.” There is nothing more common, when GOD vouchsafes communications
to a poor soul, than for the person that enjoys them, to go and tell
all that he has seen and felt, and often at improper seasons and to
improper persons. I remember that Mr. _Henry_ observes, “_Joseph_
had more honesty than he had policy, or else he would never have told
his brethren of his dreams.” Young christians are too apt to blunder
thus: I am sure it is a fault of which I have been exceedingly guilty,
speaking of things which, perhaps, had better been concealed; which
is a fault GOD’s people are too apt to fall into. Though it is good
for those that have seen CHRIST, and that have felt his love, to tell
others what GOD hath done for their souls; yet, however you may think
of it now, when you come down from the mount, and know yourselves a
little, ye will find reason often to hold your tongue. Young christians
are like children, to whom if you give a little money in their pocket,
they cannot be quiet till they have spent it upon something or other:
young christians, when they get a little of GOD, are ready to talk too
much of it. They should therefore beware, and know when to speak, and
when to be silent.

But, my dear friends, did our LORD JESUS CHRIST take _Peter_, _James_,
and _John_ into a mountain to pray? Are any of you fathers, mothers,
masters and mistresses of families? Learn then from hence to take
your children, your servants, and those that belong to you, from the
world, at certain times, and not only pray for them, but pray with them.
If CHRIST did thus, who had few wants of his own to be supplied, and
nothing to confess and lament over; if CHRIST was such a lover of
prayer, surely, you and I, who have so many wants to be supplied, so
many corruptions to mourn over; you and I should spend much time in
prayer. I do not say that you are to lock yourselves up in your closets,
and not mind your shops or farms, or worldly business; I only say, that
you should take care to husband all your time: and if you are GOD’s
children, you will frequently retire from the world, and seek a visit
from your GOD.

Was the LORD JESUS transformed or transfigured, while he was praying?
Learn hence, to be much in spiritual prayer. The way to have the
soul transformed, changed into, and made like unto GOD, is frequently
to converse with GOD. We say, a man is as his company. Persons by
conversing together, frequently catch each others tempers: and if you
have a mind to imbibe the divine temper, pray much. And as CHRIST’s
garments became white and glistering, so shall your souls get a little
of GOD’s light to shine upon them.

Did _Moses_ and _Elias_ appear in glory? Are there any old saints here?
I doubt not but there are a considerable number. And are any of you
afraid of death? Do any of you carry about with you a body that weighs
down your immortal soul? I am sure a poor creature is preaching to you,
that every day drags a crazy load along. But come, believers, come, ye
children of GOD, come, ye aged decrepid saints, come and trample upon
that monster death. As thou goest over yonder church-yard, do as I know
an old excellent christian in _Maryland_ did; go, sit upon the grave,
and meditate on thine own dissolution. Thou mayest, perhaps, have
a natural fear of dying: the body and the soul do not care to part
without a little sympathy and a groan; but O look yonder, look up to
heaven, see there thy JESUS, thy Redeemer, and learn, that thy body is
to be fashioned hereafter like unto CHRIST’s most glorious body; that
poor body which is now subject to gout and gravel, and that thou canst
scarce drag along; that poor body, which hinders thee so much in the
spiritual life, will ere long hinder thee no more: it shall be put into
the grave; but though it be sown in corruption, it shall be raised in
incorruption; though it is sown in dishonour, it shall be raised again
in glory. This consideration made blessed _Paul_ to cry out, “O death,
where is thy sting! O grave, where is thy victory!” Thy soul and body
shall be united together again, and thou shalt be “for ever with the
LORD.” Those knees of thine, which perhaps are hard by kneeling in
prayer; that tongue of thine, which hath sung hymns to CHRIST; those
hands of thine, which have wrought for GOD; those feet, which have
ran to CHRIST’s ordinances; shall all, in the twinkling of an eye,
be changed; and thou shalt be able to stand under an exceeding and an
eternal weight of glory. Come then, ye believers in CHRIST, look beyond
the grave; come, ye dear children of GOD, and however weak and sickly
ye are now, say, Blessed be GOD, I shall soon have a body strong, full
of vigour and of glory.

But as this speaks comfort to saints, it speaks terror to sinners,
to all persons that live and die out of CHRIST. It is the opinion of
Archbishop _Usher_, that as the bodies of the saints shall be glorified,
so the bodies of the damned shall be deformed. And if this be true,
alas! what a poor figure will the fine ladies cut, who die without a
CHRIST! What a poor figure will the fine gentleman cut in the morning
of the resurrection, that now dresses up his body, and at the same
time neglects to secure an interest in CHRIST and eternal happiness!
It is the opinion, likewise, of Archbishop _Usher_, that damned souls
will lose all the good tempers they had here; so that though GOD gave
unregenerate people a constitutional meekness, good nature, and courage,
for the benefit of the commonwealth; yet, the use of these things being
over, and they having died without CHRIST, and it being impossible
there will be an appearance of good in hell, their good tempers will be
for ever lost. If this be so, it is an awful consideration; and I think
persons who love their bodies, should also hence take care to secure
the welfare of their souls.

Did _Peter_ know which was _Moses_ and which _Elias_? Then I think,
and GOD be praised for it, it is plain from this and other passages
of scripture, that we shall know one another when we come to heaven.
_Dives_ knew _Lazarus_: “Father _Abraham_, send _Lazarus_:” And we are
told, “he saw _Lazarus_ sitting in _Abraham_’s bosom.” _Adam_ knew his
wife _Eve_; though cast into a deep sleep when GOD made her out of his
rib, yet, by a kind of intuition, he says, “This is bone of my bone,
and flesh of my flesh.” And it is on this account, that the Apostle,
speaking to the _Philippians_, says, “Ye are my joy and crown of
rejoicing, in the day of the LORD.” What comfort will this be to a
spiritual father! Says one, Here is the man, O LORD JESUS, that brought
my soul to taste of thy love; says another, This is the man, that
at such a time, and with such words, struck my heart: thou, O LORD,
knowest it. Then the spiritual father will rejoice over his children.
You that have met and have prayed together, sighed and sympathized
together, and told your temptations to one another, shall be for
ever with the LORD and with each other. There we shall see _Abraham_,
_Isaac_, and _Jacob_ sitting, with all the redeemed company; and we
shall know the names of every one mentioned in the book of GOD. O
blessed prospect! O blessed time! Who that thinks of this, of seeing
the Lamb sitting upon the throne, with all GOD’s people about him,
but must desire to go to heaven, and be for ever, for ever with the
LORD. And if there is such comfort for believers to know one another
in heaven, with what comfort may any of you, that have lost fathers,
mothers, or friends, think of them: we are parted for a little while,
but we shall see them again. My father died in CHRIST, my mother died
in the LORD, my husband, my wife, was a follower of JESUS; I shall see
them, though not now; I shall go to them, but they shall not return
to me! This may keep you from sorrowing as persons without hope; and
keep you from being so cruel, as to wish them to come down to this evil
world.

But O what a dreadful consideration is this for damned souls! I believe,
that as glorified spirits will know one another, so will damned souls
know one another too. And as the company of the blessed increases the
happiness of heaven, so the company of the damned will increase their
torments. What made _Dives_ to put up that petition? “I have five
brethren; send somebody to my father’s house to testify unto them, lest
they also come into this place of torment.” One would imagine at first
reading, that hell had made _Dives_ charitable, and that though he was
ill natured on earth, yet he had acquired some good nature in hell. No,
no, there is not a spark of good nature in the place of torment. But
_Dives_ knew, if his five brethren came there, they might say, We may
thank you, next to an evil heart, for coming hither; you made us drink
healths, till we were drunk; you taught us to game, to curse, to swear,
&c. He knew very well, that his five brethren being brought to hell
by his example, hell would be heated five times hotter to torment his
soul. One will cry out, Cursed be the day that ever I was companion
with such an one in sin; cursed be the day that ever we hearkened to
one another’s advice, and were allured by each others example to sin
against GOD.

But did a cloud overshadow _Peter_, _James_, and _John_? were heavenly
and divine visits here but short? Then wonder not, ye people of GOD,
if ye are upon the mount one hour, and down in the valley of the shadow
of death the next. There is nothing in the world more common, after
you have been in a good frame, than for a cloud to overshadow you.
We generally say, “It is good to be here,” and often make a CHRIST of
our graces; and therefore the LORD sends a cloud to overshadow us. But
never fear; GOD shall speak to you out of the cloud; GOD will reveal
himself to you; this cloud shall soon be gone; ere long we shall be in
heaven, and in that glory where no cloud can possibly reach us.

I can now only mention one thing more, and that is, Did the Father say,
“This is my beloved Son, hear him?” then let every one of our hearts
echo to this testimony given of CHRIST, “This is my beloved Saviour.”
Did GOD so love the world, as to send his only begotten Son, his well
beloved Son to preach to us? then, my dear friends, HEAR HIM. What GOD
said seventeen hundred years ago, immediately by a voice from heaven,
concerning his Son upon the mount, that same thing GOD says to you
immediately by his word, “Hear him.” If ye never heard him before, hear
him now. Hear him so as to take him to be your prophet, priest, and
your king; hear him, so as to take him to be your GOD and your all.
Hear him to-day, ye youth, while it is called to-day; hear him now,
lest GOD should cut you off before you have another invitation to hear
him; hear him while he cries, “Come unto me;” hear him while he opens
his hand and his heart; hear him while he knocks at the door of your
souls, lest you should hear him saying, “Depart, depart, ye cursed,
into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.” Hear him,
ye old and grey-headed, hear him, ye that have one foot in the grave;
hear him, I say; and if ye are dull of hearing, beg of GOD to open the
ears of your hearts, and your blind eyes; beg of GOD that you may have
an enlarged and a believing heart, and that ye may know what the LORD
GOD saith concerning you. GOD will resent it, he will avenge himself on
his adversaries, if you do not hear a blessed Saviour. He is GOD’s son,
he is GOD’s beloved son; he came upon a great errand, even to shed his
precious blood for sinners; he came to cleanse you from all sin, and to
save you with an everlasting salvation. Ye who have heard him, hear him
again; still go on, believe in and obey him, and by-and-by you shall
hear him saying, “Come, ye blessed of my Father, receive the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world.” May GOD grant it to
you all, for the LORD JESUS CHRIST’s sake. _Amen_, and _Amen_.




                             SERMON XXXI.

         The Care of the Soul urged as the one thing needful.


                              LUKE x. 42.

  _But one thing is needful._

IT was the amiable character of our blessed Redeemer, that “he went
about doing good,” this great motive, which animated all his actions,
brought him to the house of his friend _Lazarus_, at _Bethany_, and
directed his behaviour there. Though it was a season of recess from
public labour, our LORD brought the sentiments and the pious cares of
a preacher of righteousness into the parlour of a friend; and there his
doctrine dropped as the rain, and distilled as the dew, on the little
happy circle that were then surrounding him. _Mary_, the sister of
_Lazarus_, with great delight made one amongst them; she seated herself
at the feet of JESUS, in the posture of an humble disciple; and we have
a great deal of reason to believe, that _Martha_, his other sister,
would gladly have been with her there; but domestic cares pressed hard
upon her, and “she was cumbered with much serving,” being, perhaps, too
solicitous to prepare a sumptuous entertainment for her heavenly master
and the train that attended him. Happy are they, who in a crowd of
business do not lose something of the spirituality of their minds, and
of the composure and sweetness of their tempers. This good woman comes
to our LORD with too impatient a complaint; insinuating some little
reflection, not only on _Mary_, but on himself too. “LORD, dost thou
not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone? Bid her, therefore,
that she help me.” Our LORD, willing to take all opportunities of
suggesting useful thoughts, answers her in these words, of which the
text is a part, “_Martha, Martha_, thou art careful and troubled about
many things, but one thing is needful; and _Mary_ has chosen that
good part, which shall not be taken away from her.” Alas, _Martha_!
the concerns of the soul are of so much greater importance than those
of the body, that I cannot blame your sister on this occasion: I rather
recommend her to your imitation, and caution you, and all my other
friends, to be much on your guard, that in the midst of your worldly
cares, you do not lose sight of what much better deserves your
attention.

I shall consider these words, “One thing is needful,” as a kind of
aphorism, or wise and weighty sentence, which dropped from the mouth
of our blessed Redeemer, and is evidently worthy of our most serious
regard. I shall,

  I. Consider what we are to understand by “The one thing” here
    spoken of.

  II. Shew you what is intended, when it is said to be the one
    thing _needful_.

  III. I will shew how justly it may be so represented, or prove
    that it is, indeed, the one thing needful. And then conclude
    with some reflections.

My friends, the words which are now before us, are to this day, as true,
as they were seventeen hundred years ago. Set your hearts to attend to
them. O that you may, by divine grace, be awakened to hear them with a
due regard, and be so impressed with the plain and serious things which
are now to be spoken, as you probably would, if I were speaking by your
dying beds, and you had the near and lively view of eternity!

_First_, I am to consider, what we are to understand by the “one thing
needful.”

Now in a few words, it is the “_Care of the soul_,” opposed, as you
see in the text, to the care, the excessive care of the body; to which
_Martha_ was gently admonished by our LORD. This is a general answer,
and it comprehends a variety of important particulars, which is the
business of our ministry often to open to you at large: The care
of the soul, implies a readiness to hear the words of CHRIST, to
seat ourselves with _Mary_ at his feet, and to receive both the law
and the gospel from his mouth. It supposes, that we learn from this
divine teacher the worth of our souls, their danger, and their remedy;
and that we become above all things solicitous about their eternal
salvation. That, heartily repenting of all our sins, and cordially
believing the everlasting gospel, we receive the LORD JESUS CHRIST for
righteousness and life, resting our souls on the value of his atonement,
and the efficacy of his grace. It imports, the sincere dedication
of ourselves to the service of GOD, and a faithful adherence to it,
notwithstanding all oppositions arising from inward corruptions,
or outward temptations; and a resolute perseverance in the way of
gospel dependance, ’till we receive the end of our faith in our
compleat salvation. This is the “one thing needful,” represented
indeed in various scriptures by various names. Sometimes it is called
“Regeneration,” or “the new creature,” because it is the blessed work
of GOD’s efficacious grace. Sometimes the “Fear of GOD,” and sometimes
“his love, and the keeping his commandments;” and very frequently
in the new testament it is called “faith,” or “receiving CHRIST, and
believing on him,” which therefore is represented as the “great work of
GOD,” _John_ vi. 29. the great thing which GOD in his glorious gospel
requires, as well as by his spirit produces in us: each of these, if
rightly understood and explained, comprehends all that I have said on
this head. On the whole, we may say, that, as the body is one, though
it has many members, and the soul is one, though it has many faculties,
so in the present case, this real vital religion is “one thing,”
one sacred principle of divine life, bringing us to attend to the
care of our souls, as of our greatest treasure. It is one thing,
notwithstanding all the variety of views in which it may be considered,
and of characters under which it may be described. I proceed,

_Secondly_, To consider what may be intended in the representation
which is here made of it, as the “one thing _needful_.”

Now I think it naturally includes these three particulars: it is a
matter of universal concern; of the highest importance; and of so
comprehensive a nature, that every thing which is truly worthy of our
regard, may be considered as included in, or subservient to it. Let me
a little illustrate each of these particulars.

1. The care of the soul may be called the “one thing needful,” as it is
matter of universal concern.

Our LORD, you see, speaks of it as needful in the general. He says
not, for this or that particular person; or for those of such an age,
station, or circumstance in life, but needful for all. And indeed,
when discoursing on such a subject, one might properly introduce it
with those solemn words of the psalmist, “Give ear, all ye people,
hear, all ye inhabitants of the earth, both high and low, rich and
poor, together,” _Psalm_ xlix. 1, 2. For it is the concern of all,
from the king that sits upon the throne, to the servant that grindeth
at the mill, or the beggar that lieth upon the dunghill. It is needful
for us that are _ministers_, for our own salvation is concerned: and
woe, insupportable woe will be to our souls, if we think it enough to
recommend it to others, and to talk of it in a warm, or an awful manner,
in public assemblies, or in our private converse, while it does not
penetrate our hearts, as our own greatest care. Our case will then be
like that of the _Israelitish_ lord in _Samaria_, _2 Kings_ vii. 2. who
was employed to distribute the corn when the siege was raised; though
we see it with our eyes, and dispense it with our hands, we shall
ourselves die miserably, without tasting the blessings we impart. It
is needful to all you that are our _hearers_, without the exception of
one single person. It is needful to you that are _rich_, though it may
on some accounts be peculiarly difficult for you; even as difficult,
comparatively speaking, as for a “Camel to go through the eye of a
needle,” _Matthew_ xix. 24. yet if it be neglected, you are poor in the
midst of all your wealth, and miserable in all your abundance; a wretch
starving for hunger, in a magnificent palace and a rich dress, would
be less the object of compassion than you. It is needful for you that
are _poor_; though you are distressed with so many anxious cares, “what
you shall eat, and what you shall drink, and wherewithal you shall be
cloathed,” _Matthew_ vi. 31. The nature that makes you capable of such
anxieties as these, argues your much greater concern in the “bread
which endures to eternal life,” _John_ vi. 27. than in that by which
this mortal body must be supported. It is needful for you that are
_advanced in years_; though your strength be impaired so that the
“grashopper is a burthen,” _Ecclesiastes_ xii. 5. and though you
have by your long continuance in sin rendered this great work so
hard, that were it less important, one would in pity let you alone
without reminding you of it: yet, late as it is, it must be done, or
your hoary heads will be brought down to the grave with wrath, and
sink under a curse aggravated by every year and by every day of your
lives. It is needful to you that are _young_, though solicited by so
many gay vanities, to neglect it, though it may be represented as an
unseasonable care at present, yet I repeat it, it is needful to you;
immediately needful, unless you who walk so frequently over the dust
of your brethren and companions, that died in the bloom and vigour
of their days, have made some secret covenant with the grave for
yourselves, and found out some wonderful method, hitherto unknown, of
securing this precarious life, and of answering for days and months to
come, while others cannot answer for one single moment.

2. The care of the soul is “a matter of the highest importance;” beyond
any thing which can be brought into comparison with it.

As _Solomon_ says of wisdom, that “it is more precious than rubies,
and that all things which can be desired are not to be compared with
her,” _Proverbs_ iii. 15. So I may properly say of this great and most
important branch of wisdom; whatever can be laid in the balance with it,
will be found altogether lighter than vanity. This is strongly implied
when it is said in the text, “one thing is needful;” one thing, and
_one thing alone_ is so. Just as the blessed GOD is said to be “only
wise,” _1 Timothy_ i. 17. and “only holy,” _Revelation_ xv. 4. because
the wisdom and holiness of angels and men is as nothing, when compared
with his. What seems most great and most important in life, what kings
and senates, what the wisest and greatest of this world are employing
their time, their councils, their pens, their labours upon, are trifles,
when compared with this one thing. A man may subsist, he may in some
considerable measure be happy, without learning, without riches,
without titles, without health, without liberty, without friends,
nay, though “the life be more than meat, and the body than raiment,”
_Matthew_ vi. 25. yet may he be happy, unspeakably happy, without
the body itself. But he cannot be so, in the neglect of the one thing
needful. I must therefore bespeak your regard to it in the words of
_Moses_, “it is not a light thing, but it is your life,” _Deuteronomy_
xxxii. 47.

3. The care of the soul is of so comprehensive a nature, that “every
thing truly worthy of our regard may be considered as included in it,
or subservient to it.”

As _David_ observes, that “the commandment of GOD is exceeding broad,”
_Psalm_ cxix. 96. so we may say of this one thing needful; or as
_Solomon_ very justly and emphatically expresses it, “to fear GOD and
to keep his commandments is the whole duty of man,” _Ecclesiastes_ xii.
13. his whole duty, and his whole interest; and every thing which is
wise and rational does in its proper place and connection make a part
of it. We should judge very ill concerning the nature of this care, if
we imagined, that it consisted merely in acts of devotion, or religious
contemplation; it comprehends all the lovely and harmonious band
of social and humane virtues. It requires a care of society, a care
of our bodies, and of our temporal concerns; but then all is to be
regulated, directed, and animated by proper regards to GOD, CHRIST, and
immortality. Our food and our rest, our trades and our labours, are to
be attended to, and all the offices of humanity performed in obedience
to the will of GOD, for the glory of CHRIST, and in a view to improving
the mind in a growing meetness for a state of compleat perfection.
Name any thing which has no reference at all to this, and you name
a worthless trifle, however it may be gilded to allure the eye,
or however it may be sweetened to gratify the taste. Name a thing,
which, instead of thus improving the soul, has a tendency to debase
and pollute, to enslave and endanger it, and you name what is most
unprofitable and mischievous, be the wages of iniquity ever so great;
most foul and deformed, be it in the eyes of men ever so honourable, or
in their customs ever so fashionable. Thus I have endeavoured to shew
you what we may suppose implied in this expression of “one thing being
needful.” I am now,

_Thirdly_, To shew you with how much propriety the care of the soul may
be represented under this character, as the one thing needful, or as a
matter of universal and most serious concern, to which every thing else
is to be considered as subservient, if at all worthy of our care and
pursuit.

There let me appeal to the sentiments of those who must be allowed most
capable of judging, and to the evident reason of the case itself, as it
must appear to every unprejudiced mind.

1. Let me argue “from the opinions of those who must be allowed most
capable of judging in such an affair,” and we shall quickly see that
the care of the soul appears to them, the one thing needful.

Is the judgment of the blessed GOD “according to truth,” how evidently
and how solemnly is that judgment declared? I will not say merely in
this or the other particular passage of his word, but in the whole
series of his revelations to the children of men, and the whole tenor
of his addresses to them. Is not this the language of all, from the
early days of _Job_ and _Moses_ to the conclusion of the canon of
scripture. _Job_ xxviii. 21, 23, 28. “If wisdom be hid from the eyes
of all the living, surely GOD understandeth the way thereof, he knoweth
the place thereof;” and if he does, it is plainly pointed out, for
“unto man he still saith, behold, the fear of the LORD, that is wisdom,
and to depart from evil, that is understanding.” By _Moses_ he declared
to the _Israelites_, that “to do the commandments of the LORD would
be their wisdom and their understanding in the sight of the nations,
who should hear his statutes, and say, surely this is a wise and an
understanding people,” _Deuteronomy_ iv. 6. When he had raised up one
man on the throne of _Israel_, with the character of the wisest that
ever lived upon the face of the earth, he chose to make him eminently
a teacher of this great truth. And though now all that he spoke on the
curious and less concerning subjects of natural philosophy is lost,
“though he spoke of trees from the cedar to the hyssop, and of beasts,
and of fowls, and of creeping things, and of fishes,” _1 Kings_ iv.
33. that saying is preserved in which he testifies, that “the fear
of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom,” _Proverbs_ i. 7, 9, 10. and
those _Proverbs_, in almost every line of which, they who neglect
GOD and their own souls, are spoken of as fools, as if that were the
most proper signification of the word, while the religious alone are
honoured with the title of wise. But in this respect, as attesting this
truth in the name of GOD and in his own, “a greater than _Solomon_ is
here.”

For if we inquire what it was that our LORD JESUS CHRIST judged to be
the one thing needful, the words of the text contain as full an answer
as can be imagined; and the sense of them is repeated in a very lively
and emphatical manner, in that remarkable passage wherein our LORD not
only declares his own judgment, but seems to appeal to the consciences
of all, as obliged by their own secret convictions to subscribe to the
truth of it. “What is a man profited, if he gain the whole world, and
lose his own soul; or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?”
_Matthew_ xvi. 26. If it were once lost, what would he not be willing
to give to redeem it? But it depends not on the words of CHRIST alone.
Let his actions, his sufferings, his blood, his death, speak what
a value he set on the souls of men. Is it to be imagined, that he
would have relinquished heaven, have dwelt upon earth, have laboured
by night and by day, and at last have expired on the cross, for a
matter of light importance? Or can we think that he, in whom “dwell
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, and all the fulness of the
Godhead bodily,” _Colossians_ ii. 3, 9. was mistaken in judgment so
deliberately formed, and so solemnly declared?

If after this, there were room to mention human judgment and
testimonies, how easy would it be to produce a cloud of witnesses in
such a cause, and to shew that the wisest and best of men in all ages
of the world have agreed in this point, that amidst all the diversities
of opinion and profession, which succeeding generations have produced,
this has been the unanimous judgment, this the common and most
solicitous care of those whose characters are most truly valuable, to
secure the salvation of their own souls, and to promote the salvation
of others.

And let me beseech you seriously to reflect, what are the characters
of those who have taken the liberty, most boldly and freely to
declare their judgment on the contrary side? The number of such is
comparatively few; and when you compare what you have observed of their
temper and conduct, I will not say with what you read of holy men of
old, but with what you have yourselves seen in the faithful, active,
and zealous servants of CHRIST, in these latter ages, with whom you
have conversed; do you on the whole find, that the rejecters and
deriders of the gospel, are in other respects so much more prudent
and judicious, so much wiser for themselves, and for others, that are
influenced by them, as that you can be in reason obliged to pay any
great deference to the authority of a few such names as these, in
opposition to those to whom they are here opposed?

But you will say, and you will say it too truly, Though but a few may
venture in words to declare for the neglect of the soul and its eternal
interest, that the greater part of ♦mankind do it in their actions. But
are the greater part of mankind so wise, and so good, as implicitly to
be followed in matters of the highest importance? And do not multitudes
of these, declare themselves on the other side, in their most serious
moments? When the intoxications of worldly business and pleasures
are over, and some languishing sickness forces men to solitude and
retirement; what have you generally observed to be the effect of such
a circumstance? Have they not then declared themselves convinced of
the truth we are now labouring to establish? Nay, do we not sometimes
see, that a distemper which seizes the mind with violence, yet does
not utterly destroy its reasoning faculties, fixes this conviction
on the soul in a few hours, nay, sometimes in a few moments? Have you
never seen a gay, thoughtless creature, surprized in the giddy round of
pleasures and amusements, and presently brought not only to seriousness,
but terror and trembling, by the near views of death? Have you never
seen the man of business and care interrupted, like the rich fool in
the parable, in the midst of his schemes for the present world? And
have you not heard one and the other of them owning the vanity of those
pleasures and cares, which but a few days ago were every thing to them?
Confessing that religion was the one thing needful, and recommending
it to others with an earnestness, as if they hoped thereby to atone
for their own former neglect? We that are ministers, frequently are
witnesses to such things as these, and I believe few of our hearers are
intire strangers to them.

  ♦ “mainkind” replaced with “mankind”

Once more, what if to the testimony of the dying, we could add that of
the dead? What if GOD were to turn aside the vail between us and the
invisible world, and permit the most careless sinner in the assembly
to converse for a few moments with the inhabitants of it? If you were
to apply yourself to a happy Spirit, that trod the most thorny road
to paradise, or passed through the most fiery trial, and to ask him,
“was it worth your while to labour so much, and to endure so much for
what you now possess?” Surely if the blessed in heaven were capable
of indignation, it would move them to hear that it should be made a
question. And, on the other hand, if you could inquire of one tormented
in that flame below, though he might once be “clothed in purple and
fine linen, and fare sumptuously every day,” _Luke_ xvi. 19. if you
could ask him, “whether his former enjoyments were an equivalent for
his present sufferings and despair?” What answer do you suppose he
would return? Perhaps an answer of so much horror and rage, as you
would not be able so much as to indure. Or if the malignity of his
nature should prevent him from returning any answer at all, surely
there would be a language even in that silence, a language in the
darkness, and flames, and groans of that infernal prison, which would
speak to your very soul what the word of GOD is with equal certainty,
though less forcible conviction, speaking to your ear, that “one
thing is needful.” You see it is so in the judgment of GOD the Father,
and the LORD JESUS CHRIST, of the wisest and best of men, of many,
who seemed to judge most differently of it, when they come to more
deliberate and serious thought, and not only of the dying, but of the
dead too, of those who have experimentally known both worlds, and most
surely know what is to be preferred. But I will not rest the whole
argument here; therefore,

2. I appeal to the evident reason of the case itself, as it must appear
to every unprejudiced mind, that the care of the soul is indeed the one
thing needful.

I still consider myself as speaking not to atheists, or to deists, but
to those who not only believe the existence and providence of GOD, and
a future state of happiness and misery, but likewise who credit the
truth of the christian revelation, as many undoubtedly do, who live in
a fatal neglect of GOD, and their own souls. Now on these principles, a
little reflection may be sufficient to convince you, that it is needful
to the present repose of your own mind; needful, if ever you would
secure eternal happiness, and avoid eternal misery, which will be
aggravated, rather than alleviated by all your present enjoyments.

1. The care of the soul is the one thing needful, because, “without it
you cannot secure the peace of your own mind, nor avoid the upbraidings
of your conscience.”

That noble faculty is indeed the vicegerent of GOD in the soul. It
is sensible of the dignity and worth of an immortal spirit, and will
sometimes cry out of the violence that is offered to it, and cry so
loud, as to compel the sinner to hear, whether he will or not. Do you
not sometimes find it yourselves? when you labour most to forget the
concerns of your soul, do they not sometimes force themselves on your
remembrance? You are afraid of the reflections of your own mind, but
with all your artifice and all your resolution can you intirely avoid
them? Does not conscience follow you to your beds, even if denied
the opportunity of meeting you in your closets, and, though with an
unwelcome voice, there warn you, “that your soul is neglected, and will
quickly be lost:” Does it not follow you to your shops and your fields,
when you are busiest there? Nay, I will add, does it not sometimes
follow you to the feast, to the club, to the dance, and perhaps, amidst
all resistance, to the theatre too? Does it not sometimes mingle your
sweetest draughts with wormwood, and your gayest scenes with horror? So
that you are like a tradesman, who, suspecting his affairs to be in a
bad posture, lays by his books and his papers, yet sometimes they will
come accidentally in his way. He hardly dares to look abroad for fear
of meeting a creditor or an arrest: and if he labours to forget his
cares and his dangers, in a course of luxury at home, the remembrance
is sometimes awakened, and the alarm increased, by those very
extravagancies in which he is attempting to lose it. Such probably
is the case of your minds, and it is a very painful state; and while
things are thus within, external circumstances can no more make you
happy, than a fine dress could relieve you under a violent fit of the
stone. Whereas, if this great affair were secured, you might delight
in reflection, as much as you now dread it; and conscience, of your
bitterest enemy, would become a delightful friend, and the testimony of
it your greatest rejoicing.

2. The care of the soul is the one thing needful, “because without this
your eternal happiness will be lost.”

A crown of everlasting glory is not surely such a trifle as to be
thrown away on a careless creature, that will not in good earnest
pursue it. GOD doth not ordinarily deal thus, even with the bounties of
his common providence, which are comparatively of little value. As to
these, the hand of the diligent generally makes rich, and he would be
thought distracted, rather than prudent, who should expect to get an
estate merely by wishing for it, or without some resolute and continued
application to a proper course of action for that purpose. Now, that we
may not foolishly dream of obtaining heaven, in the midst of a course
of indolence and sloth, we are expresly told in the word of GOD, that
“the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by
force,” _Matthew_ xi. 12. and are therefore exhorted to “strive,” with
the greatest intenseness, and eagerness of mind, as the word properly
signifies, “to enter in at the strait gate,” for this great and
important reason, “because many shall another day seek to enter in, and
shall not be able,” _Luke_ xiii. 24. Nay, when our LORD makes the most
gracious promises to the humble petitioner, he does it in such a manner
as to exclude the hopes of those who are careless and indifferent. “Ask,
and it shall be given you; seek, and you shall find; knock, and it
shall be opened unto you,” _Matthew_ vii. 7. If, therefore, you do not
ask, seek, and knock, the door of mercy will not be opened, and eternal
happiness will be lost. Not that heaven is to be obtained by our own
good works: no, no; for having done all, we must account ourselves
unprofitable servants.

And surely if I could say no more as to the fatal consequences of your
neglect, than this, that eternal happiness will be lost, I should say
enough to impress every mind, that considers what ETERNITY means. To
fall into a state of everlasting forgetfulness, might indeed appear
a refuge to a mind filled with the apprehension of future misery. But
O how dreadful a refuge is it! Surely it is such a refuge, as a vast
precipice, (from which a man falling would be dashed to pieces in a
moment) might appear to a person, pursued by the officers of justice,
that he might be brought out to a painful and lingering execution.
If an extravagant youth would have reason to look round with anguish,
on some fair and ample paternal inheritance, which he had sold or
forfeited merely for the riot of a few days: how much more melancholy
would it be for a rational mind to think that its eternal happiness
is lost for any earthly consideration whatever? Tormenting thought!
“Had I attended to that one thing which I have neglected, I might have
been, through the grace of GOD in CHRIST JESUS, great and happy beyond
expression, beyond conception: not merely for the little span of ten
thousand thousand ages, but for ever. A line reaching even to the
remotest star would not have been able to contain the number of ages,
nor would millions of years have been sufficient to figure them down;
this is eternity, but I have lost it, and am now on the verge of being.
This lamp, which might have outlasted those of the firmament, will
presently be extinguished; and I blotted out from amongst the works of
GOD, and cut off from all the bounties of his hand.” Would not this be
a very miserable case, if this were all? And would it not be sufficient
to prove this to be the better part, which, as our LORD observes, can
“never be taken away?” But GOD forbid that we should be so unfaithful
to him, and to the souls of men, as to rest in such a representation
alone. I therefore add once more,

3. The care of the soul is the one thing needful, because “without it,
you cannot avoid a state of eternal misery, which will be aggravated,
rather than alleviated by all your present enjoyments.”

Nothing can be more evident from the word of the GOD of truth. It there
plainly appears to be a determined case, which leaves no room for a
more favourable conjecture or hope. “The wicked shall be turned into
hell, even all the nations that forget GOD,” _Psalm_ ix. 17. “They
shall go away into everlasting punishment,” _Matthew_ xxv. 46. into a
state where they shall in vain seek death, and death shall flee from
them. Oh! brethren, it is a certain, but an awful truth, that your
souls will be thinking and immortal beings, even in spite of themselves.
They may indeed torment, but they cannot destroy themselves. They can
no more suspend their power of thought and perception, than a mirror
its property of reflecting rays that fall on its surface. Do you
suspect the contrary? Make the trial immediately. Command your minds
to cease from thinking but for one quarter of an hour, or for half that
time, and exclude every idea and every reflection. Can you succeed in
that attempt? Or rather, does not thought press in with a more sensible
violence on that resistance; as an anxious desire to sleep, makes us so
much the more wakeful. Thus will thought follow you beyond the grave,
thus will it, as an unwelcome guest, force itself upon you, when it can
serve only to perplex and distress the mind. It will for ever upbraid
you, that notwithstanding all the kind expostulations of GOD and man,
notwithstanding all the keen remonstrances of conscience, and the
pleadings of the blood of CHRIST, you have gone on in your folly, till
heaven is lost, and damnation incurred; and all, for what? for a shadow
and a dream.

Oh think not, sinners, that the remembrance of your past pleasures,
and of your success in your other cares, whilst that of the one thing
needful was forgotten, think not that this will ease your minds. It
will rather torment them the more. “Son, remember that thou in thy
life-time receivedst thy good things.” Bitter remembrance! Well might
the heathen poets represent the unhappy spirits in the shades below, as
eagerly catching at the water of forgetfulness, yet unable to reach it.
Your present comforts will only serve to give you a livelier sense of
your misery, as having tasted such degrees of enjoyment; and to inflame
the reckoning, as you have misimproved those talents lodged in your
hands for better purposes. Surely, if these things were believed, and
seriously considered, the sinner would have no more heart to rejoice
in his present prosperity, than a man would have to amuse himself with
the curiosities of a fine garden, through which he was led to be broken
upon the rack.

But I will enlarge no farther on these things. Would to GOD that the
unaccountable stupidity of mens minds, and their fatal attachment to
the pleasures and cares of the present life, did not make it necessary
to insist on them so frequently and so copiously!

I now proceed to the reflections which naturally arise from hence, and
shall only mention two.

1. How much reason have we to lament the folly of mankind in neglecting
the one thing needful.

If religion be indeed the truest wisdom, then surely we have the
justest reason to say with _Solomon_, “that folly and madness is in
mens hearts,” _Ecclesiastes_ ix. 3. Is it the one thing needful? Look
on the conduct of the generality of mankind, and you would imagine they
thought it the one thing needless: the vainest dream, and the idlest
amusement of the mind. GOD is admonishing them by ordinances, and
providences, sometimes by such as are most awful, to lay it to heart;
he speaks once, yea twice, (yea a multitude of times) but man regards
not, _Job_ xxxiii. 14. They profess perhaps to believe all that I have
been saying, but act as if the contrary were self-evident; they will
risk their souls and eternity for a thing of nought, for that, for the
sake of which they would not risk so much as a hand, or a finger, or a
joint, no, nor perhaps a toy that adorns it. Surely this is the wonder
of angels, and perhaps of devils too, unless the observation of so many
ages may have rendered it familiar to both. And can we, my christian
brethren, behold such a scene with indifference? If some epidemical
madness had seized our country, or the places where we live, so that as
we went from one place to another, we every where met with lunaticks,
and saw amongst the rest, some perhaps of the finest genius, in the
most eminent stations in life, amusing themselves with straws and
bubbles, or wounding themselves and others; surely were we ever so
secure from the danger of infection or assault, the sight would cut us
to the heart. A good-natured man would hardly be able to go abroad, or
even be desirous to live, if it must be amongst so many sad spectacles.
Yet these poor creatures might, notwithstanding this, be the children
of GOD, and the higher their frenzy rose, the nearer might their
complete happiness be. But alas! the greater part of mankind are seized
with a worse kind of madness, in which they are ruining their souls:
and can we behold it with indifference? The LORD awaken our compassion,
our prayers, and our endeavours, in dependence on divine grace, that
we may be instrumental in bringing them to their mind, and making them
wise indeed, that is, wise to salvation!

2. How necessary is it that we should seriously enquire, how this one
thing needful is regarded by us!

Let me entreat you to remember your own concern in it, and
enquire――Have I thought seriously of it? Have I seen the importance
of it? Has it lain with a due and abiding weight on my mind? Has
it brought me to CHRIST, that I might lay the stress of these great
eternal interests on him? And am I acting in the main of my life,
as one that has these convictions? Am I willing, in fact, to give up
other things, my interests, my pleasures, my passions to this? Am I
conversing with GOD and with man, as one that believes these things; as
one that has deliberately chosen the better part, and is determined to
abide by that choice?

Observe the answer which conscience returns to these enquiries, and you
will know your own part in that more particular application, with which
I shall conclude.

1. Let me address those that are entirely unconcerned about the one
thing needful.

Brethren, I have been stating the case at large, and now I appeal to
your consciences, are these things so, or are they not? GOD and your
own hearts best know for what the care of your soul is neglected;
but be it what it will, the difference between one grain of sand and
another, is not great, when it comes to be weighed against a talent
of gold. Whatever it is, you had need to examine it carefully. You had
need to view that commodity on all sides, of which you do in effect
say, For this will I sell my soul; for this will I give up heaven,
and venture hell, be heaven and hell whatever they may. In the name of
GOD, brethren, is this the part of a man, of a rational creature? To
go on with your eyes open towards a pit of eternal ruin, because there
are a few gay flowers in the way: or what if you shut your eyes, will
that prevent your fall? It signifies little to say, I will not think of
these things, I will not consider them: GOD has said, “In the last days
they shall consider it perfectly,” _Jeremiah_ xxiii. 20. The revels of
a drunken malefactor will not prevent nor respite his execution. Pardon
my plainness; if it were a fable or a tale, I would endeavour to amuse
you with words, but I cannot do it where your souls are at stake.

2. I would apply to those who are, in some sense, convinced of the
importance of their souls, and yet are inclined to defer that care of
them a little longer, which, in the general, they see to be necessary.

I know you that are young, are under peculiar temptations to do this;
though it is strange that the death of so many of your companions,
should not be an answer to some of the most specious and dangerous
of those temptations. Methinks, if there were the least degree of
uncertainty, the importance is too weighty to put matters to the
venture. But here the uncertainty is great and apparent. You must
surely know, that there are critical seasons of life for managing the
concerns of it, which are of such a nature, that if once lost, they
may never return: here is a critical season: “Now is the accepted time,
now is the day of salvation,” _2 Corinthians_ vi. 2. “To-day, if ye
will hear his voice, harden not your hearts,” _Hebrews_ iii. 7, 8. This
language may not be spoken to-morrow. Talk not of a more convenient
season; none can be more convenient; and that to which you would
probably refer it, is least of all so, a dying time. You would not
chuse then to have any important business in hand; and will you of
choice refer the greatest business of all to that languishing, hurrying,
amazing hour? If a friend were then to come to you with the balance
of an intricate account, or a view of a title to an estate, you would
shake your fainting head, and lift up your pale trembling hand, and say,
perhaps, with a feeble voice, “Alas, is this a time for these things?”
And is it a time for so much greater things than these? I wish you
knew, and would consider, into what a strait, we that are ministers are
sometimes brought, when we are called to the dying beds of those who
have spent their lives in the neglect of the one thing needful. On the
one hand, we fear, lest if we palliate matters, and speak smooth things,
we shall betray and ruin their souls: and on the other, that if we use
a becoming plainness and seriousness, in warning them of their danger,
we shall quite overwhelm them, and hasten the dying moment, which is
advancing by such swift steps. O let me entreat you for our sakes,
and much more for your own, that you do not drive us to such sad
extremities; but if you are convinced, as I hope some of you may now
be, that the care of the soul is that needful thing we have represented,
let the conviction work, let it drive you immediately to the throne of
grace; from thence you may derive that wisdom and strength, which will
direct you in all the intricacies which entangle you, and animate you
in the midst of difficulty and discouragement.

3. I would in the last place address myself to those happy souls, who
have in good earnest attended to the one thing needful.

I hope, that when you see how commonly it is neglected, neglected
indeed, by many, whose natural capacities, improvements, and
circumstances in life, appear to you superior to your own; you will
humbly acknowledge, that it was distinguishing grace which brought
you into this happy state, and formed you to this most necessary care.
Bless the LORD, therefore, who hath given you that counsel, in virtue
of which you can say, “He is your portion.” Rejoice in the thought,
that the great concern is secured: as it is natural for us to do, when
some important affair is dispatched, which has long lain before us,
and which we have been inclined to put off from one day to another, but
have at length strenuously and successfully attended. Remember still to
endeavour to continue acting on these great principles, which at first
determined your choice; and seriously consider, that those who desire
their life may at last be given them for a prey, must continue on their
guard, in all stages of their journey through a wilderness, where daily
dangers are still surrounding them. Being enabled to secure the great
concern, make yourselves easy as to others of smaller importance: You
have chosen the kingdom of GOD, and his righteousness; other things,
therefore, shall be added unto you: and if any which you desire should
not be added, comfort yourselves with this thought, that you have
the good part, which can never be taken away. And, not to enlarge on
these obvious hints, which must so often occur, be very solicitous
that others may be brought to a care about the one thing needful. If
it be needful for you, it is so for your children, your friends, your
servants. Let them, therefore, see your concern in this respect for
them, as well as for yourselves. Let parents especially attend to this
exhortation, whose care for their offspring often exceeds in other
respects, and fails in this. Remember that your children may never live
to enjoy the effects of your labour and concern to get them estates
and portions: the charges of their funerals may, perhaps, be all their
share of what you are so anxiously careful to lay up for them. And O
think what a sword would pierce through your very heart, if you should
stand by the corpse of a beloved child with this reflection: “This poor
creature has done with life, before it learnt its great business in it;
and is gone to eternity, which I have seldom been warning it to prepare
for, and which, perhaps, it learned of me to forget.”

On the whole, may this grand care be awakened in those by whom it has
been hitherto neglected: may it be revived in each of our minds. And
that you may be encouraged to pursue it with greater chearfulness,
let me conclude with this comfortable thought, that in proportion to
the necessity of the case, through the merits of CHRIST JESUS, is the
provision which divine grace has made for our assistance. If you are
disposed to sit down at CHRIST’s feet, he will teach you by his word
and Spirit. If you commit this precious jewel, which is your eternal
all, into his hand, he will preserve it unto that day, and will then
produce it richly adorned, and gloriously improved to his own honour,
and to your everlasting joy.

  Which GOD of his infinite mercy grant, &c.


                       END of the FIFTH VOLUME.
