LIBRARY  OF  CON(iRKSS. 


!  UNITE.])  STATES  .OF  AMERICA,  p. 


flffiB  mum®  ©uffia 


ifr 


ofP^ 


irmmm^  ^awm 


From  J)a.gxter7~e<7type  fry  Morcuid. 


THE 


BLIND   GIRL, 


&  u  &    €)  t  ft  e  v    39  0  c  m  s. 


7YtA*> 

BY    FRANCES    JANE    C 


R  O  S  B  Y,  V  ^v  UjAyrA 


A   PUPIL   AT   THE 


NEW- YORK    INSTITUTION    FOR    THE    BLIND. 


-"Who  best 


Bears  his  mild  yoke,  they  serve  him  best ;  his  state 
Is  kingly."  .  .  .  Milton. 


NEW- YORK: 

PUBLISHED   BY   WILEY  &  PUTNAM 

161    Broadway. 

184  4. 


Entered,  according  to  the  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1844, 

By    FRANCES    JANE    CROSBY, 

in  the  Clerk's  Office  of  the   District  Court  of  the  Southern 

District  of  New- York. 


PIERCY    AND    REED,    PRINTERS, 

9  Spruce-Street. 


PREFACE. 


In  venturing  the  publication  of  the  little  volume  contain- 
ing the  poetic  effusions  of  one,  circumstanced  as  the  author- 
ess is,  great  reliance  is  placed  on  the  forbearing  spirit  of 
those  who  may  bestow  on  it  a  perusal ;  but  the  friends,  by 
whose  advice  it  is  now  presented  for  the  patronage  of  the 
public,  feel  that  partiality  does  not  altogether  forestal  judg- 
ment, when  they  say,  that  apart  from  other  considera- 
tions, the  following  productions  are  fraught  with  much 
that  entitles  them  to  that  reception,  which  a  sympathetic 
spirit  might  alone  dictate. 

Those  who  have  listened  to  the  occasional  recitations  of 
the  authoress,  when  appeals  have  been  made  before  the 
public,  either  in  behalf  of  the  Institution  of  which  she  has 
for  nine  years  been  an  inmate,  or  of  those  who,  like  herself, 
in  early  life  were  deprived  of  mental,  as  well  as  natural 
light,  will  recollect  the  emotions  excited  by  the  touching 
strains  in  which  the  advantages  she  thei'e  enjoyed  were 


y  PREFACE. 

pourtrayecl ;  and  while  the  tear  gathered  in  the  eye,  have 
experienced  a  higher  sense  of  gratitude  for  the  possession 
of  that  blessing,  of  which  she,  with  those  around  her,  were 
deprived. 

That  one,  who  from  the  earliest  period  of  infancy  has 
been  deprived  of  sight,  and  whose  entire  knowledge  of 
external  objects,  from  which  to  paint  with  the  imagination's 
pencil,  has  been  derived  from  oral  description,  should  be 
able  thus  faithfully  -to  present  scenes  from  nature,  and  in 
colors  so  vivid  and  true,  as  to  render  the  reader  incredulous 
as  to  the  originality  of  the  production,  is  a  subject  of  surprise, 
as  well  as  admiration.  This,  however,  is  a  staking  evidence 
of  the  effect  of  the  culturing  hand  of  education  on  this  class 
of  our  unfortunate  fellow-citizens,  and  none  higher  or  more 
conclusive  could  be  given,  of  the  utility  of  that  system, 
which  has  produced  such  happy  results  on  her,  and  oth- 
ers like  her,  who  have  found  an  intellectual  recompense 
within  the  walls  of  those  Institutions,  where  it  is  so  effec- 
tually brought  to  bear. 

It  is  generally,  and  correctly  believed,  that  the  minds  of 
those  whose  thoughts  are  not  distracted  by  external  objects, 
are  capable  of  greater  concentration,  but  it  is  not  the  less 
important  that  culture  should  open  the  avenue  to  thought, 
otherwise  it  must  roam  round  its  prison  house,  chafed  with 
ideas  indistinct  and  unsatisfactory,  struggling  for  escape  from 
a  chaotic  existence.  The  present  age  has  felt  the  full  force 
of  this,  and  enlightened  counsels  have  legislated  most  effec- 
tually to  secure  to  this  class  and  those  deprived  of  the  sense 
of  hearing,  means  by  which  alone  they  can  be  efficiently 


PREFACE*  •  9 

instructed  in  all  the  branches  of  education.  Thus  we  find 
among  the  sightless,  those  who  expatiate  on  "  the  glory  of 
the  moon  and  the  stars  which  He  lias  made,"  and  among  the 
mute  those  who  unfold  the  mysteries  of  revelation. 

Frances  Jane  Crosby,  whose  compositions  are  to  be  found 
in  the  following  pages,  was  deprived  of  sight  by  illness  at 
the  early  age  of  six  weeks.  She  entered  "  The  Neto-York 
Institution  for  the  Blind"  when  she  was  fifteen  years  old, 
prior  to  which  her  opportunities  for  education  were  exceed- 
ingly limited  ;  losing  her  father  in  her  infancy,  her  remain- 
ing parent  was  left  in  indigent  circumstances,  to  provide 
for  herself,  and  therefore  unable  to  bestow  that  care  on  her 
sightless  daughter,  which  she  so  much  needed. 

Thus  the  dawn  of  her  mental  existence  may  be  said 
to  have  commenced  with  her  introduction  to  the  Insti- 
tution, from  which  period  her  intellectual  powers  have 
expanded,  until  her  imaginative  mind  has  been  enabled 
to  clothe  its  thoughts  in  language  at  once  chaste  and 
poetic. 

Whatever  merit  the  public  may  accord  to  these  effusions, 
most  of  which  were  addressed  to  personal  friends  as  occa- 
sioned by  the  incidents  to  -which  they  refer,  and  were 
not  designed  for  the  press ;  it  may  rest  assured  that  the 
several  pieces  are  the  unaided  productions  of  the  authoress. 
They  were  penned  from  dictation,  with  very  little  revision 
by  herself,  and  less  from  any  other  source.  Thus  in  many 
instances  much  of  the  spirit  of  the  composition  may  have 
been  lost  by  punctuation,  which  had  it  been  done  by  the 
composer,  would  convey  more  justly  the  thought  intended. 


10  PREFACE. 

With  these  prefatory  remarks,  the  book  is  thrown  into 
that  prolific  tide,  which  now  flows  from  that  vast  machine 
"-  the  Press,''  hardly  venturing  to  hope,  that  amidst  its 
teeming  productions,  much  pecuniary  advantage  will  be 
realized  to  "  the  blind  girl,"  for  whose  benefit  it  is 
published,  and  whose  declining  health  renders  its  avails 
the  more  important. 

It  is  however  believed,  that  a  feeling,  kindred  to  that 
which  prompts  the  writer  to  the  present  publication,  will 
influence  those  to  whom  it  is  now  offered. 

April,  1844. 


DEDICATION. 


TO     THE     MANAGERS     OF     THE     NEW-YORK     INSTITUTION     FOR 
THE    BLIND. 

Since  those  whose  judgment  I  esteem 

Superior  to  my  own, 
These  scattered  thoughts,  which  have  employed 

My  leisure  hours  alone, 
Advise,  that  to  the  public  eye 

They  should  presented  be  ; 
Though  such  a  step,  till  counselled  thus, 

Had  ne'er  occurred  to  me : 
The  course,  which  author's  have  pursued, 

I  too  would  imitate, 
And  to  some  valued  friend  or  friends 

This  work  would  dedicate. 

Whom  should  I  more  revere  than  those, 

Who  o'er  my  youthful  hours, 
Have  long  the  faithful  guardians  been, 

And  strewed  my  path  with  flowers  ? 
But  language  how  inadequate 

Their  kindness  to  express  ! 
Yet  God's  all-seeing  eye  beholds — 

And  will  that  kindness  bless. 
This  feeble  token  of  esteem, 

Dear  friends,  to  you  I  bring  ; 
Accept  the  grateful  tribute,  then — 

"  Affection's  offering." 

F.  J.   C. 


CONTENTS 


Preface  „ 7 

Dedication 11 

The  Blind  Girl ...13 

The  Rise  and  Progress 20 

Dedication  of  the  Chapel 27 

To  the  Senate  of  the  State 29 

The  Blind  Girl's  Lament 31 

The  Desolate 33 

To  the  Heroes  of  Bunker  Hill 36 

Reflections  on  the  Closing  Year 3# 

The  Captive 39 

Thoughts  at  Midnight 42 

Niagara. 46 

To  an  Absent  Daughter 47 

To  a  Boquet 4# 

I'll  Think  of  Thee  (a  song) 50 

On  Receiving  a  Boquet 51 

Song  of  the  Greek  Girl 52 

On  the  Death  of  a  Parent 53 

The  Sleeping  Infant 54 

On  the  Death  of  the  Father  of  a  Fellow  Pupil 56 

To  a  Friend  and  Fellow  Pupil 58 


11  CONTENTS. 

Address  to  Miss D . 60 

The  Orphan's  Prayer ..". 62 

The  Wish 64 

The  Mandan  Chief 65 

Impromptu 67 

On  the  Death  of  H.  B 69 

Easter  Sunday 71 

On  the  Death  of  a  Child 73 

The  Neglected  Child 75 

"  Jesus  Wept" 78 

Erin... -. 79 

"  My  Native  Land" 82 

The  Emigrant 84 

Address  to  Rev.  Dr.  Hewitt 86 

An  Epithalamium 88 

"  Speed  Me  to  My  Home" „ 90 

The  Guitar 92 

To  a  Spirit 94 

Impromptu 96 

Address  to  General  Bertrand 96 

Requiem  on  Gen.  Bertrand 98 

On  the  Departure  of  a  Teacher. 100 

To  a  Favorite  Willow „ . 101 

To  a  Star „.„...,..., 103 

Farewell  to  the  Summer  Flowers , , 105 

On  the  Departure  of  a  Pupil. 106 

The  Grecian  War  Song 107 

Childhood 108 

Ode  on  the  Fourth  of  July 109 


CONTENTS.  Ill 

Lines  Addressed  to  C.  B.,  Esq 110 

"  My  Prairie  Home" 101 

Geneva 113 

Solitude 115 

On  the  Death  of  General  Harrison 116 

Lament  of  Mrs.  Harrison 118 

On  the  Death  of  the  Hon.  H.  S.  Legare 120 

The  Sister's  Lament 122 

"  They  are  Gone" 124 

To  Lake  Erie 125 

To  a  Favorite  Plant 126 

A  Rose ...127 

The  Tear .....129 

Reflections  after  a  Drive 130 

Lines  inscribed  to  Professor  R 132 

My  Mother's  Grave 134 

Ida 134 

Psalm  iv.  8 139 

The  Christmas  Hymn 140 

To  Solitude 141 

The  Blind  Girl's  Song 1 43 

"Shall  I  Meet  Thee  Again?" .144 

Jerusalem ..145 

Address  delivered  at  the  New  York  Tabernacle 147 

Address  delivered  before  Congress 149 

Address  delivered  before  the  Legislature  of  N.  Jersey. . .  152 

An  Address  recited  while  on  the  Tour  in  1842 155 

An  Address  recited  while  on  the  Tour  in  1843 158 


THE  BLIND   GIRL. 

Her  home  was  near  an  ancient  wood, 
Where  many  an  oak  gigantic  stood, 
And  fragrant  flowers  of  every  hue 
In  that  sequestered  valley  grew — 

A  church  there  reared  its  little  spire  ; 
And  in  their  neat  and  plain  attire, 
The  humble  peasants  would  repair 
On  Sabbath  morn,  to  worship  there  ; 

And  on  the  laughing  breeze  would  float 
The  merry  warbler's  choral  note, 
When  at  Aurora's  rosy  dawn, 
She  decked  with  light  the  dewy  lawn. 

A  pearly  stream  meander'd  there  ; 
And  on  its  verdant  banks  so  fair, 
From  school  released,  at  close  of  day, 
A  group  of  happy  girls  would  play. 

With  their  gay  laugh  the  woodlands  rang 
Or  if  some  rustic  air  they  sang, 
Those  rural  notes,  of  music  sweet, 
Echo,  would  in  mock  tones  repeat. 

B 


14  THE    BLIND    GIRL, 

Amid  those  scenes  of  mirth  arid  glee„ 
That  sightless  girl,  oh  where  was  she  % 
Was  she,  too,  blithely  sporting  there, 
Or  wreathing  garlands  for  her  hair  ] 

She  sat  beside  her  cottage  door  ; 
Her  brow  a  pensive  sadness  wore  ; 
And  while  she  listened  to  the  song 
That  issued  from  that  youthful  throng ; 

The  tears,  warm  gushing  on  her  cheek, 
Told  what  no  language  e'er  could  speak  ; 
While  their  young  hearts  were  light  and  gay? 
Her  hours  passed  heavily  away. — 

A  mental  night  was  o'er  her  thrown  ; 
She  sat  dejected,  and  alone. 
Yet,  no  ;   a  mother's  accents  dear, 
Game  softly  on  that  blind  girl's  ear. 

While  all  were  locked  in  dreamy  sleepr 
That  mother,  o'er  her  couch  would  weep, 
And  as  she  knelt  in  silence  there, 
Would  breathe  to  God  her  fervent  prayer  ; 

"  That  He,  all  merciful  and  mild, 

Would  bless  her  sightless — only  child." 

'Twas  eve — the  summer's  sky  was  bright, 
The  crescent  moon  unveiled  her  light, 
And  many  a  mild  and  radiant  star 
Its  lustre  spread  o'er  climes  afar. 


THE    BLIND    GIRL.  15 

That  mother,  to  her  throbbing  breast 
Her  lovely  daughter  fondly  pressed, 
She  on  her  bosom  leaned  her  head, 
And  thus  in  mournful  accents  said  : 

"  Tell  me,  dear  mother,  what  is  sight  ? 
I  hear  you  say  the  stars  are  bright 
In  yonder  sky  of  azure  hue  ; 
I  wish  I  could  behold  them,  too: 

You  tell  me  of  the  summer  flowers, 
That  blossom  in  the  green  wood  bowers, 
Their  balmy  breath  is  sweet  to  me, 
And  shall  T  ne'er  their  beauty  see  ?" 

There  Anna  paused — her  mother  sighed, 
Then  in  a  low,  sweet  voice,  replied  : 
"  On  earth  these  joys  may  ne'er  be  thine, 
But  why,  my  child,  why  thus  repine  ! 

'Tis  thy  Almighty  Father's  will, 
He  bids  thy  murmuring  heart  be  still ; 
There  is  a  fairer  world  than  this — 
A  world  of  never-fading  bliss. 
Tkerelet  thy  heart — thy  treasure  be, 
And  thou  its  purer  joys  shalt  see." 

The  summer  and  the  autumn  passed, 
And  wildly  blew  the  winter  blast ; 
'Twas  midnight,  nature  slept  profound, 
Unbroken  stillness  reigned  around — 


16  THE    BLIND    GIRL. 

Save  in  one  little  cottage,  where 
Was  heard  a  dying  mother's  prayer, 

"  Oh  God,  my  helpless  orphan  see, 
She  hath  no  other  friend  but  Thee  ; 
She  frendless  on  the  world  is  thrown 
Sightless — heart-broken — and  alone  ; — 
Father  all  merciful  and  mild — 
Oh  God  !  protect  my  orphan  child  !" 

One  last  farewell  that  mother  breathed — 
One  parting  'sigh  her  bosom  heaved, 
And  all  was  over — she  had  fled 
To  mingle  with  the  silent  dead. 

The  dreary  winter  passed  away, 
The  spring  returned  and  all  was  gay; 
O'er  hill  and  vale,  and  verdant  plain, 
The  warbling  choir  was  heard'  again.. 

Yet  spring  or  nature's  cheerful  voice> 
Made  not  that  orphan's  heart  rejoice; 
Her  mother's  grave  was  near  her  cot, 
And  Anna,  to  that  lonely  spot 
Led  by  some  friendly  hand,  would  stray, 
To  kiss  the  turf  that  wrapt  her  clay. 

rTwas  evening's  melancholy  hour, 
And  zephyrs  fanned  each  sleeping  flower  ; 
O'er  her  soft  lute  her  fingers  ran, 
And  thus  her  mournful  lay  began  :. 


J 


THE    BLIND    GIRL.  17 

"  Alas  !   how  bitter  is  my  lot, 
Without  a  friend — without  a  home — 

Alone — unpitied  and  forgot — 
A  sightless  orphan,  now  I  roam. 

Where  is  that  gentle  mother  now, 
Who  once  so  fondly  o'er  me  smiled, 

Who  gently  kissed  my  burning  brow, 
And  to  her  bosom  clasped  her  child  ] 

I  could  not  see  that  angel  eye, 
Suffused  with  many  a  bitter  tear, 

But  oh  !  her  deep,  heart-rending  sigh, 
Stole  mournful  on  my  listening  ear. 

I  knelt  beside  her  dying  bed, 
I  felt  her  last  expiring  breath, 

God  bless  my  child,  she  faintly  said, 
And  closed  those  lovely  eyes  in  death. 

Oh  !   how  I  long  to  soar  away, 
Where  that  departed  one  doth  dwell, 

To  join  with  her  the  choral  lay, 
Angelic  choirs  forever  swell !" 

She  ceased — she  heard  a  footstep  near, 
A  voice  broke  gently  on  her  ear  : 
"  Maiden,  I've  heard  thy  tale  of  woe, 
And  more  of  thee  I  fain  would  know ; 
Oh  tell  me  why  thy  youthful  brow 
Is  mantled  o'er  with  sadness  now  1" 

"  Sir,"  she  replied,  "  well  may  I  weep  ; 
Beneath  this  little  mound,  doth  sleej) 

B* 


18  THE    BLIND    GIRL„ 

All  that  on  earth  to  me  was  dear  ; 
My  mother's  lifeless  form  lies  here  ;* 
And  I,  her  only  child,  am  left 
Of  kindred,  and  of  home  bereft ; 
But  He  who  marks  the  sparrow's  fall, 
Will  hear  the  helpless  orphan's  call. 
My  mother  bid  me  trust  His  care, 
He  will  not  leave  me  to  despair." 

The  stranger  sighed  ;  "  Maiden,"  said  he> 
"  Thou  hast-  my  warmest  sympathy  ;: 
No  longer  friendless  shalt  thou  roam, 
I'll  take  thee  to  a  happier  home  ; 
A  home  erected  for  the  Blind — 
Where  friends,  affectionate  and  kind, 
Will  o'er  thee  watch  with  tender  care, 
And  wipe  away  the  oiphan's  tear." 
"  Forgive  me,  sir!"  the  maiden  said, 
As  modestly  she  bent  her  head  ; 
"  I  cannot  bear  to  leave  this  grave, 
Where  these  pale  flowers  so  sadly  wave,, 
And  oh  !  while  here  I  sit  alone, 
And  listen  to  the  wind's  low  moan, 
Methinks  my  sainted  mother  dear 
Smiles  on  me  from  her  starry  sphere,, 
And  softly  then  she  seems  to  say, 
1  My  child,  my  darling,  come  away 
To  the  bright  mansion  where  I  dwell, 
And  bid  that  world  of  care  farewell," 


THE    BLIND    GIRL.  19 

The  stranger  wept ;  his  generous  heart 
In  other's  sorrows  shared  a  part. 
"  Thou  must  not  linger  here,"  said  he, 
"  Haste,  I  entreat  thee,  haste  with  me, 
Thou  lone  one,  to  that  dear  retreat, 
Where  thou  a  sister  band  shalt  meet ; 
Yes,  maiden,  they  are  blind,  like  thee, 
And  they  will  love  thee  tenderly." 

How  changed  !   that  sightless  orphan  now  : 
No  longer  clouded  is  her  brow  ; 
Her  buoyant  step  is  light  and  free, 
And  none  more  happy  is  than  she  : 
For  Education's  glorious  light 
Hath  chased  away  her  mental  night. 
Contentment  smiles  upon  her  face, 
And  with  delight,  her  fingers  trace 
The  page,  "  by  inspiration  given," 
To  guide  her  to  a  brighter  heaven. 
If  o'er  the  past  her  memory  stray, 
Then  music's  sweet  and  charming  lay, 
Drives  each  dark  vision  from  her  breast, 
And  lulls  each  heaving  sigh  to  rest. 
Her  grateful  lips  breathe  many  a  prayer 
For  him  who  kindly  placed  her  there. 

[The  foregoing  was  suggested  by  an  incident  which  occurred 
while  visiting  the  interior  of  the  State  of  New  York,  with  a  view 
of  satisfying  the  public  mind  of  the  advantages  to  be  derived 
from  placing  the  blind  at  the  Institution,  and  was  inscribed  to 
H.  M.,  one  of  the  managers,  who  accompanied  the  party,  with- 
out reference  to  publication.} 


THE   RISE  AND  PROGRESS 

OF   THE    NEW  YORK   INSTITUTION    FOR   THE    BLIND 

Come,  gentle  muse  !    my  lay  inspire ; 
Once  more  I  tune  my  slumbering  lyre, 
And  fain  would  touch  its  sweetest  string  ; 
Aid  me  !  oh  !  aid  me,  while  I  sing. 
But  say  of  what  my  song  shall  be  ? 
Would'st  hear  a  plaintive  melody  1 
Or  shall  I  wake  a  nobler  strain — 
Some  warlike  hero's  deeds  of  fame  ; 
Or,  borne  on  fancy's  magic  wing, 
Fly  to  Castalia's  limpid  spring  ; 
Or  climb  Parnassus,  and  behold 
Where  gods  and  goddesses  of  old 
Were  wont,  in  fair  Elysian  bowers, 
To  dwell  mid  amaranthine  flowers  ; 
Or  sing  of  fair  Columbia, 
Our  own  bright  land  of  liberty — - 
Where  o'er  full  many  a  patriot's  grave, 
Doth  freedom's  spangled  banner  wave  ? 
I  seek  no  dreams  of  fiction  now, 
Nor  wreaths  to  deck  a  warrior's  brow  ; 


NEW  YORK  INSTITUTION  FOR  THE  BLIND.       21 

The  theme,  my  happy  home  shall  be, 
Endear'd  by  tenderest  ties  to  me  ; 
Here  many  a  rolling  year  has  flown, 
The  brightest  joys  I  e'er  have  known  ; 
Here  have  I  felt — nor  could  my  heart 
Endure  from  scenes  like  these  to  part; 
I  cannot  look  o'er  earth  abroad, 
And  view  the  wondrous  works  of  God — 
The  distant  rang^e  of  mountains  high, 
Whose  snow-ca]3't  summits  reach  the  sky — 
The  landscape,  in  its  robes  of  green — 
The  star-gem'd  firmament  serene  ; 
An  all-wise  providence  Divine 
Has  this  denied, — shall  I  repine  1 
No  ;  to  my  heavenly  Father's  will, 
I  bow  submissive,  and  be  still. 

Reader  !   permit  me  to  contrast 

Our  present  prospects,  with  the  past ; 

And  if  this  simple  melody 

Hath  touch'd  a  chord  of  sympathy — 

Tho'  scarce  I  dare  to  hope,  a  strain 

So  humble,  would  thy  notice  claim, — 

Go,  gentle  reader,  back  with  me 

A  few  short  years,  and  thou  shalt  see 

The  blind,  in  mental  darkness,  left 

Their  way  to  grope,  and  many  reft 

Of  all  that  rendered  life  most  dear, 

Without  one  beam  of  hope  to  cheer 


22  THE  RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE 

Their  stricken  hearts  ;   ah  !  they  were  thrown 
Friendless,  upon  the  world  alone  ; 
Touch'd  with  compassion  for  their  woes, 
A  philanthropic  few  arose, 
Resolved  the  blind  to  educate, 
And  thus  their  lot  ameliorate. 

The  period  now  my  muse  hath  sung 

To  that  of  eighteen  thirty-one. 

Three  sightless  orjplians  they  obtained, — 

Their  love,  their  confidence,  they  gained  ; 

The  mental  progress  that  was  made, 

Soon  their  instructor's  toil  repaid  : 

Thus  weeks  and  months  flew  quickly  by, 

Until,  at  last  the  public  eye 

They  by  some  presentations  drew  ; 

For  they  could  scarce  believe  it  true, 

That  those  on  whom  the  orb  of  day 

Had  never  shed  its  golden  ray, 

By  touch  alone,  were  taught  to  read ; 

This  seemed  impossible  indeed. 

Their  numbers  rapidly  increased, 

And  soon  to  them  was  kindly  leased 

A  private  mansion,  and  around, 

Old  trees  o'erspread  the  pleasure  ground. 

Here  first,  upon  my  mental  sight 

Was  poured  instruction's  dawning  light, 


NEW  YORK  INSTITUTION  FOR  THE  BLIND.       23 

Ere  yet  this  stately  pile  was  reared, 
Which  shall  for  ages  stand  rever'd  ; 
Close  to  this  spot  our  home  did  stand, 
And  we  were  but  a  little  band. 
Our  funds  were  small,  our  patrons  few, 
Still  did  our  managers  pursue 
Their  arduous  Work,  and  many  a  year, 
They  struggled  on,  for  hope  was  near  ; 
Tho'  countless  obstacles  they  met, 
That  radiant  star  smil'd  on  them  yet. 

Thus  to  our  State  they  then  applied, 

Nor  was  their  aid  by  it  denied, 

She  did  her  fostering  care  bestow, — 

What  gratitude  to  her  we  owe  ! 

How  oft  my  wandering  thoughts  have  stray'd 

To  when  this  corner-stone  was  laid: 

'Twas  winter,  yet  the  day  was  mild, 

And  Nature  on  the  structure  smil'd  ; 

The  prayers  then  offered,  seemed  to  rise 

Like  holy  incense  to  the  skies ; 

In  lofty  strains,  a  choral  lay 

Was  wafLed  on  the  breeze  away. 

Quickly  the  dreary  winter  pass'd, 

The  gentle  spring  returned  at  last ; 

Then  rapidly  the  work  progressed, 

For  God,  from  heaven  beheld,  and  bless'd. 

The  summer  came,  and  pass'd  away, 

And  autumn,  clad  in  its  array 


24  THE  RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE 

Of  faded  charms,  each  verdant  hill ; 

The  voice  of  winter  loud  and  shrill, 

Broke  on  our  ear,  with  mournful  sound, 

And  in  its  icy  fetters  bound, 

The  chrystal  streams  forbore  to  flow, 

And  Nature  wore  her  garb  of  snow. 

'Twas  then,  with  heartfelt  sorrow  true, 

We  bade  our  much-lov'd  home  adieu  ; 

For  oh  !  its  ancient  walls  had  long 

Resounded  with  our  joyous  song. 

We  saw  it  soon  in  ruin  laid, 

And  e'en  the  willow,  'neath  whose  shade, 

A  circle  nightly  gathered  round, 

The  woodman's  axe  hurled  to  the  ground. 

Thus  time  sped  on  with  rapid  flight  : 

Now,  with  emotions  of  delight, 

This  noble  edifice,  complete, 

We  view — and  in  its  dear  retreat, 

The  friendless,  the  deserted  blind, 

Thank  heaven  !   a  home  and  friends  do  find. 

Header  !   art  weary  of  my  lay ? 

Or  would'st  our  happy  home  survey  1 

Come  then — I'll  thy  conductor  be, — 

Enter  its  Gothic  walls  with  me. 

Mark  yonder  group — can'st  thou  not  trace 

A  cheerful  smile  on  every  face, 


NEW  YORK  INSTITUTION  FOR  THE  BLIND.       20 

As  arm  in  arm,  the  spacious  hall 
They  promenade,  and  sigliiless  all- 
Hark  ! — gently  bursting  on  thine  ear, 
The  voice  of  music,  soft,  and  clear  ; 
Now  mournfully,  the  cadence  floats, 
And  now,  it  swells  in  loftier  notes  : 
Methinks  thou  long;  could'st  linger  here, 
But  to  the  school-room  we'll  repair  : 
Here,  for  a  moment,  pause  and  view, 
As  each  their  various  tasks  pursue, 
The  unclouded  brow,  the  glowing  cheek, 
Which  doth  the  heart's  own  language  speak; 
Let  solemn  awe  inspire  thy  breast, 
And  in  the  sacred  chapel  rest — 
Where,  on  each  holy  Sabbath  day 
We  meet  to  praise  our  God  and  pray. 
His  ministers,  of  every  name, 
The  Gospel  messages  proclaim  ; 
Nor  do  we  worship  here  alone — 
To  all,  our  doors  are  open  thrown — 
Yes,  all,  who  love  the  house  of  prayer, 
We  cordially  invite  them  there. 

Now  fade  the  crimson  tints  of  day, 
The  setting  sun,  its  dying  ray 
Sheds  softly  from  the  puiple  west, 
O'er  the  majestic  Hudson's  breast. 
c 


26  THE  RISE  AND  PROGRESS,  ETC. 

Oh  !   gaze  upon  this  magic  scene, 
The  sky,  all  cloudless  and  serene ; 
Onward  that  mighty  river  flows, 
And  Nature  sinks  to  sweet  repose ; 
Well  may  a  home  like  ours  be  dear  : 
Ah  !   who  could  not  be  happy  here  1 
Sweet  thought — the  blind  from  every  State 
May  in  its  joys  participate  ! 

And  now,  my  muse  !  farewell  to  thee — 
Here  would  I  close  my  melody, 
And  leave  thee,  gentle  reader,  too, 
And  breathe  the  parting  word — adieu  ! 


DEDICATION  OF  THE  CHAPEL. 


Oh  !  thou  omniscient,  omnipresent  Lord  ! 

Invisible,  eternal  God  of  all ! 
The  vast  creation  trembles  at  thy  word 

And  at  thy  footstool  nations  prostrate  fall. 

Thy  throne  is  fixed  above  the  starry  frame ; 

Yet  thou,  in  earthly  temples  lov'st  to  dwell. 
The  humble  spirit  thou  wilt  not  disdain — 

The  wounded  heart,  thy  balm  divine  dost  heal. 

Father,  we  humbly  supplicate  thy  grace  ; — 
May  thy  benignant  smiles  to  us  be  given  ; 

Thy  blessing  rest  upon  this  sacred  place ; 

Thine   earthly  house — we  trust,  the  gate  of 
heaven. 

Here  will  we  listen  to  thy  holy  word ; 

Light  to  our  path,  oh  !  may  its  precepts  be  ; 
Here  shall  the  voice  of  praise,  and  prayer  be 
heard — 

Ourselves,  our  all,  we  dedicate  to  thee. 


28  DEDICATION    OP    THE    CHAPEL. 

Protect,  oh  Lord  !  the  dwelling  of  the  blind,. 

And  to  its  guardians,  aid  divine  impart; 
Oh  !  make  us  to  thy  holy  will  resigned, 

Let  love  and  union  reign  in  every  heart. 

Accept  our  songs  of  gratitude  and  praise  ; 

Soon  may  we  tune  the  golden  lyres  above. 
And  with  cherubic  legions,  sweetly  raise, 

The  ceaseless  anthems  of  eternal  love. 


TO     THE     HONORABLE     THE 


SENATE  OF  THE  STATE   OF  NEW  YORK, 


On  the  occasion  of  the  Institution  being  visited  by  the  Ho- 
norable the  Senate  of  the  State,  sitting  in  New  York  as  a 
Court  for  the  Correction  of  Errors.     June  22,  1843. 


Warm  hearted  friends,  we  smile  with  you  to  meet, 
We  bid  you  welcome  to  our  dear  retreat ; 
This  stately  pile  a  monument  doth  stand 
Of  your  munificence,  illustrious  band  ! 

Thanks  to  our  State,  we  with  one  voice  exclaim; 
Her  aid  was  not  solicited  in  vain ; 
To  her,  through  your  benevolence  we  owe 
The  calm  delights  that  in  our  bosoms  glow. 

Yon  glorious  orb  that  gilds  the  azure  skies, 
Sheds  not  a  ray  to  cheer  these  sightless  eyes  ; 
The  dewy  lawn,  mild  nature's  sylvan  bowers, 
To  trace  these  lovely  scenes  must  ne'er  be  ours, 
c* 


30    TO  THE  SENATE  OF  THE  STATE  OF  N.  Y. 

But  education's  pure  refulgent  light 
Illumes  our  souls,  dispels  our  mental  night ; 
Joy  on  each  brow  a  smiling  garland  weaves, 
Here  too,  her  magic  strain  soft  music  breathes. 

Our  gratitude,  these  lips  may  ne'er  express, 
Yet  G-od  above,  your  generous  acts  shall  bless; 
The  page  of  hist'ry  shall  record  your  fame, 
And  thousands  yet  unborn,  shall  bless  your  name. 

A  few  short  years  and  we,  who  now  are  here, 
Must  bid  farewell,  the  home  to  us  so  dear ; 
Yes,  other  forms  beneath  this  roof  will  dwell, 
And  other  lips  shall  of  your  kindness  tell. 

Adieu,  for  you  our  fervent  prayers  shall  rise 
To  the  Almighty  Ruler  of  the  skies, 
Still  shall  your  mem'ry  round  each  heart  be  twin'd, 
Adieu,  ye  friends  and  patrons  of  the  Blind  ! 


THE  BLIND  GIRL'S  LAMENT. 

Again  the  well  remembered  spot  I  tread — 

The  spot,  of  all  on  earth,  most  dear  to  me  ; 
Ye  scenes  of  childhood,  now  for  ever  fled, 

Fond  memory  brings  you  back,  with  all  your 
glee. 
When  morn's  fair  goddess  wide  her  gates  did  ope, 

I've  wandered  here,  to  greet  her  early  dawn  ; 
When  tuneful  birds  their  melodies  awoke, 

I've  heard  thy  murmurs,  lovely  Horicon  * 
But  on  the  bosom  of  that  stream  to  gaze, 

These  sightless  orbs,  alas  !  now  strive  in  vain  ; 
The  golden  sun  sheds  not  for  me  its  rays, 

To  light  o'er  once  familiar  scenes  again. 
Oh  !  what  is  sight?    A  gift  I  ne'er  can  know — 

But  never  let  me  murmur  or  repine. 
Why  should  these  eyes  with  tears  of  grief  o'erflow, 

For  that  which  never,  never,  can  be  mine  % 
Here  have  I  roamed  at  twilight's  pensive  hour, 

When  stars  illum'd  the  blue  ethereal  sky  ; 
Here  breathed  the  fragrance  of  each  sleeping 
flower, 

And  heard  the  balmy  zephyr's  gentle  sigh. 

*  The  Indian  name  for  Lake  George. 


32  THE    BLIND    GIRL'S    LAMENT. 

But  where  are  those  my  bosom  held  so  dear, 

Who  in  my  joys  and  sorrows  shared  a  part; 
Whose  accents  fell  like  music  on  my  ear  ? 

How  sacred  is  their  memory  to  my  heart. 
Alas  !  their  dwelling  is  the  stranger's  home  ; 

I  call,  but  echo's  voice  alone  replies  ; 
And  as  I  wander  o'er  the  spot,  alone, 

Unbidden  tears  of  grief  suffuse  my  eyes. 
When    sorrow   blights    some    fondly  cherished 
flower* 

We've  nourished  long,  and  tenderly  caressed, 
Is  there  a  balm  that  in  that  cheerless  hour 

Can  sooth  the  anguish  of  the  troubled  breast? 
Oh,  yes  !  Hope  fondly  whispers  in  mine  ear, 

That  with  those  loved  ones  I  shall  meet  again; 
She  from  my  cheek  doth  wipe  the  gushing  tear, 

And  bids  my  anxious  heart  no  more  complain. 


THE  DESOLATE. 

Ah  !  why  my  heart  so  crushed  and  sad  ? 

Why  fall  these  tears  of  anguish  deep  1 
There's  not  a  tone  mine  ear  can  glad, 

Oh  !  let  me  weep. 

Why  sleeps  my  lyre,  why  silent  now, 

Those  chords  that  once  I  lov'd  to  sweep  ? 

A  shade  is  gathering  o'er  my  brow, 
Oh  !  let  me  weep. 

Fair  star  of  hope,  celestial  beam ! 

Say  hast  thou  set,  forever  set  ? 
Thy  smile  was  but  a  pleasing  dream, 

I  must  forget. 

The  victim  of  distracting  care, 

My  isolated  heart  in  vain 
Would  seek  a  kindred  one  to  share, 

And  lull  its  pain. 

Oh,  slander  !     On  that  guiltless  name, 
Why  thy  reproaches  basely  heap  ] 

Why  innocence  thus  falsely  blame  ] 
Oh  !  let  me  weep. 


34  THE    DESOLATE. 

Though  thou  hast  "wronged  the  truest  heart, 
That  ever  beat  in  mortal  breast, 

Each  wound  inflicted  by  thy  dart, 
Shall  be  redressed. 

'Tis  evening ;  once  my  favorite  hour  ; 

Pale  Phoebus  lights  the  crested  deep ; 
But,  oh  !  how  lonely  looks  my  bower,- — 

Oh  !  let  me  weep. 

The  blushing  rose  its  fragrance  shed 

So  sweetly  on  the  balmy  air, 
The  mignionette  then  raised  its  head, 

My  tender  care. 

I  saw  them  droop  beneath  the  storms, 
That  o'er  my  bower  too  rudely  swept ; 

I  knelt  to  kiss  their  withered  forms, 
Then  turned  and  wept. 

Before  me  passed  a  youthful  train  ; 

I  heard  their  merry  notes  of  glee  ; 
Yet  not  one  bosom  could  I  claim, 

That  beat  for  me. 

E'en  she,  whose  love  I  thought  so  true, 
Who  'round  me  clung  so  tenderly, 

Whose  tears  would  oft  my  cheek  bedew, 
Was  false  to  me. 


THE    DESOLATE.  35 

I  stood  beside  a  limpid  stream, 

Pure  gushing  from  a  rock-bound  hill, 

The  air  was  bland  ;  the  sky  serene ; 
And  all  was  still. 

A  trembling  star,  of  mildest  hue, 
Was  gleaming  in  jhe  purple  west, 

And  pearly  drops  of  balmy  dew, 
Young  flowers  caressed. 

Oh  !  lovely  orb,  as  the  eye  traced, 

Methinks  thou  to  my  memory, 
Did'st  paint  °  well  remembered  face, 

Once  dear  to  me. 

While  :hus  I  mused,  a  threatening  cloud 
Swept  o'er  the  sky  of  azure  blue, 

That  radiant  star,  in  its  dark  shroud, 
Sank  from  my  view. 

I  gazed  ;  the  cloud  soon  passed  away, 
Again  that  star  burst  on  mine  eye ; 

I  felt  a  calm  serenity, 
I  knew  not  why. 

When  sorrow  wrings  my  aching  heart, 

And  all  is  dead  and  drear  to  me, 
Fair  star  !  thy  lustre  then  impart — 

My  guardian  be. 


TO  THE  HEROES  OF  BUNKER'S  HILL. 

Rest,  warriors,  rest !  your  toils  are  o'er  ; 
The  war-drum  beats  to  arms  no  more  ; 
The  thundering  cannon's  dreadful  sound, 
Shall  never  wake  your  sleep  profound. 

Rest,  warriors,  rest !  while  o'er  your  graves, 
The  tree  you  planted  nobly  waves  ; 
This  blood-stained  field  your  deeds  proclaim, 
And  victory's  laurels  crown  your  name. 

Rest,  warriors,  rest !   ye  patriot  band, 
This  stately  monument  shall  stand  ; 
Rear  to  the  clouds  its  towering  head, 
When  centuries  their  flight  have  sped. 

Born  to  inhale  pure  freedom's  air, 
You  scorn'd  Britannia's  yoke  to  wear ; 
By  freedom's  sacred  rites  you  swore 
To  be  a  monarch's  slaves  no  more. 

Britannia  heard,  and  soon  a  band 
Of  trusty  warriors  reach  our  land. 
The  morning  dawned  serene  and  bright, 
And  in  the  sun's  resplendent  light 


TO    THE    HEROES    OF    BUNKER'S    HILL.  37 

Their  armor  gleams.     But  what  to  you, 
Is  their  display,  ye  gallant  few  1 
Fierce  glances  light  the  foeman's  eye, 
Your  own  with  equal  fire  reply. 

But  hark  !  the  bugle's  dread  alarms 
Now  calls  aloud,  to  arms  !  to  arms ! 
Quickly  the  signal  ye  obeyed, 
Met  the  bold  tyrant  undismayed. 

When  bleeding  on  this  spot  you  lay, 

And  life  was  ebbing  fast  away, 

Still  were  your  faithful  voices  heard — 

"  Fight,  comrades,  fight !"  your  dying  word. 

"  Burst  the  stem  chain  of  slavery — 
Columbia,  thou  shalt  yet  be  free." 
And  she  is  free,  illustrious  band  ! 
Kind  heaven  hath  simTd  upon  our  land, 


REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  CLOSING-  YEAR, 
18  43. 


'Twill  soon  be  gone — the  wailing  night  wind  drear 
Chaunts  her  sad  requiem  to  the  closing  year ; 
'Twill  soon  be  gone — the  brilliant  starry  train, 
In  silent  eloquence  repeat  the  strain. 

'Twill  soon  be  gone — the  placid  queen  of  night, 

O'er  its  departure  sheds  her  mellow  light ; 

Oh,  time  !  what  art  thou  ]  who  thy  course  may 

stay  1 
Not  ours  the  past  nor  future,  hut  to-day. 

Hark  !  hark  !  the  distant  peal  of  yonder  bell, 
In  measured  tones  the  midnight  hour  doth  tell — 
Old  year  !  thy  reign  is  passed,  we  bid  adieu 
To  thee,  and  smiling  usher  in  the  new. 

I'll  to  my  couch,  and  dream  the  hours  away, 
'Till  fair  Aurora  opes  the  gates  of  day; 
But  e'er  I  go,  dear  friends,  on  you  I  call, 
"  A  happy  new  year"  is  my  wish  to  all. 


THE    CAPTIVE. 

The  deep-toned  bell,  from  Linder's  lofty  tower, 
With  awful  peal  proclaims  the  midnight  hour  j 
And  spectres  grim,  in  robes  of  ghastly  white. 
Come  forth  to  wander  'mid  the  gloom  of  night. 

They  move  with  noiseless  tread,  that  ghostly  train, 
Low*  muttering  sounds,  convulse  the  trembling 

frame  ; 
The  eye  revolts  in  terror  from  the  sight, 
The  blood  congeals,  the   cheek   grows  deathly 

white. 

That  ancient  tower,  for  centuries  hath  stood, 
The  scene  of  barbarous  cruelty  and  blood  : 
The  hapless  victim,  doom'd  to  torturing  pain, 
Though  innocent,  for  mercy  pleads  in  vain, 
Within  those  hated  walls  her  accents  never  came. 


40  THE    CAPTIVE. 

Blind  superstition  wields  its  sceptre  there, 
And  fiends  in  human  form  its  tenants  are ; 
The  mangled  wretch,  with  frantic  joy  they  see, 
And  laugh  exulting  at  his  agony. 

Within  a  deep  and  loathsome  vault,  confined 
For  years,  a  captive,  hath  Alvero  pined ; 
A  youth  of  noble  origin  is  he, 
In  this  abode  of  guilt  and  misery. 

Why  is  he  doom'd  a  wretched  life  to  spend  '? 
Oh,  death  to  him  would  be  a  welcome  friend  : 
Pale  and  distorted  are  his  features  now, 
And  grief  sits  silent  on  his  lofty  brow. 

Say,  what  his  crime  %  ask  of  that  tyrant  band 
That  with  malignant  looks  around  him  stand  ;■ 
Fell  murderers,  hold  !  ye  stern,  accursed  throng, 
Hold  !  or  high  heaven  will  yet  avenge  his  wrong. 

'Tis  done  !    'tis  done  !    I  see  the  quivering  dart,. 
The  life-blood  gushes  from  Alvero's  heart, — 
A  deep  convulsive  sigh  his  bosom  yields, 
Hark  !    hark  !    methinks  a   kindred   name   he 
breathes. 

"  Oh,  Eveline  ! — far,  far  from  thee  I  die — 
Would  thou  could'st  hear  my  last  expiring  sigh  ; 
Would  that  my  head  were  pillowed  on  thy  breast, 
How  calm,  how  peaceful,  could  I  sink  to  rest. 


THE    CAPTIVE.  41 

If  those  who  dwell  in  yon  celestial  sphere, 
Forget  not  those  they  lov'd  on  earth  so  dear; 
If  mortal's  sorrows,  they  perchance  may  see, 
My  faithful  spirit  shall  thy  guardian  be." 

A  groan — another — he  has  passed  away, 

To  the  bright  regions  of  eternal  day, 

The  affrighted  raven  screams  and  flaps  her  wings, 

Night's  mournful  wind  the  captive's  requiem  sings. 


THOUGHTS  AT  MIDNIGHT. 

Pale  Cynthia,  lovely  goddess  of  the  night, 
That  o'er  reposing  nature  sheds  her  light, 
Ye  radiant  stars,  that  shine  from  pole  to  pole — 
That  round  this  dark  terrestrial  planet  roll, 

Fain  would  I  to  your  distant  regions  soar, 
And  traverse  worlds  unseen — unknown  before. 
Oh  !  restless  spirit,  would'st  presume  to  scale 
Those  airy  heights,  or  lift  the  mystic  veil  % 

^ain  wish  :  aside  that  veil  thou  may'st  not  draw  \ 
It  is  not  thine  to  scan  creation's  law ; 
Study  what  God  reveals,  and  ask  no  more, 
And  where  thou  can'st  not  comprehend,  adore. 

He  to  those  countless  orbs  has  lustre  given ; 
His   hand  directs    them   through    the    pathless 

heaven  ; 
He  at  a  glance  the  universe  surveys — 
Deep  and  incomprehensible  his  ways. 

But  hark  !   another  hour  has  passed  away. 
Oh,  time  !  thy  rapid  current  who  can  stay  ? 


THOUGHTS    AT    MIDNIGHT.  43 

And  yet,  how  unimproved  thy  moments  fly; 
Mortals  forget  that  they  are  born  to  die. 

Death  comes  when  least  expected  :  who  can  tell 
For  whom  may  next  be  tolled  the  funeral  knell  ] 
The  grey-hair'd  sire,  the  blooming,  and  the  brave, 
The  prince — the  peasant — share  one  common 
grave. 

We  fondly  gaze  on  those  we  loved  to-day  ; 
The  morrow  dawns,  and  where,  oh  !  where,  are 

they] 
Lifeless  and  cold,  their  cherished  forms  are  laid 
In  solemn  silence,  'neath  the  grave's  dark  shade. 

Religion — sacred  treasure — but  for  thee, 
The  world  a  lonely  wilderness  would  be; 
Amid  the  darkest  hour  thou  still  art  nigh, 
To  wipe  the  gushing  tear  from  sorrow's  eye. 

Who  would  not  give  a  thousand  worlds  to  feel? 
The  calm  serenity  thou  dost  reveal  % 
Oh !  sacred  gem  divine,  to  mortals  given — 
On  earth  our  solace,  and  our  guide  to  heaven. 

But  hush  !  what  sounds  are  stealing  on  my  ear ; 
'Tis  but  the  sighing  of  the  winds  I  hear. 
Oh  !  there  is  music  in  each  plaintive  note — 
How  soft,  yet  mournful,  o'er  my  soul  they  float, 


44  THOUGHTS    AT    MIDNIGHT. 

How  sweet,  at  such  an  hour,  the  parting  sigh 
To  heave  upon  a  mother's  breast,  and  die  ; 
When  the  triumphant  soul  shall  wing  its  flight, 
To  hail  in  heaven  a  morn  of  holier  light. 

'Twere  sad  to  languish  in  a  distant  land, 
Our  pillow  smoothed  but  by  a  stranger's  hand  ; 
To  pass  the  restless  hours  of  night  alone, 
Without  one  heart  congenial  with  our  own. 

No  mother  near,  in  soothing  tones  to  speak; 
To  bathe  the  aching  head — the  burning  cheek. 
Whence  comes  that  shadowy  form,  with  noise- 
less tread, 
From  the  dark  mansions  of  the  lonely  dead  ? 

Why  trembles  thus,  my  agitated  frame  1 
'Tis  but  the  phantom  of  a  fever'd  brain  ; 
Nay  see,  it  smiles  benignant  on  me  now, 
A  heavenly  mildness  sits  upon  that  brow. 

Speak,  I  conjure  thee,  habitant  of  bliss  ! 
Say  what  has  called  thee  to  a  world  like  this  ? 
Dost  bring  some  message  from  yon  starry  sphere? 
Then  deign  thine  accents  to  a  mortal  ear. 

"  Frail  child  of  earth,  awake,  delay  no  more, 
Know  thou  the  morn  of  life  will  soon  be  o'er  : 


THOUGHTS    AT    MIDNIGHT.  45 

Trust  not  the  world,  nor  seek  its  smiles  to  gain, 
False  are  its  friendships,  and  its  pleasures  vain. 

"  Farewell !  I'll  still  thy  faithful  guardian  be, 
"While  floats  thy  bark  o'er  life's  tempestuous  sea; 
And  when,  oh  !  when  the  gathering  storm  shall 

cease, 
Be  thine  the  haven  of  eternal  peace." 

The  vision  speaks,  then  fading  from  my  sight, 
To  heaven's  celestial  courts  it  wings  its  flight; 
Night's  dusky  shadows  quickly  melt  away, 
And  smiling  nature  hails  the  opening  day. 


NIAGARA. 

A  party  from  the  Institution  visited  the  Falls,  in  Sep- 
tember, 1843  ;  aiid  the  authoress,  with  several  of  her  blind 
companions,  ascended  the  Tower,  and  there  traced  the  out- 
line of  then  shape. 

Awake,  my  muse  !   thy  wings  expand  ! 

Oh,  what  sublimity  is  here! 
Niagara's  mighty  thunders  burst 

With  awful  grandeur  on  mine  ear. 
Niagara  !   on  thy  brink  I  stand, 

And  taste  unutterable  bliss  ; 
What  pen,  what  language  can  pourtray 

A  scene  so  wonderful  as  this  ? 
Father  Divine  ! — we  lift  our  hearts 

In  humble  gratitude  to  thee — 
Who  spread'st  the  azure  vault  above, 

Whose  hand  controls  the  boist'rous  sea  ! 
Thou  bad'st  the  foaming  cat'ract  roll ! 

Thou  form'st  the  rainbow  tints  we  see  ! 
We  gaze — we  wonder  and  admire — 

Niagara  !  — we  are  lost  in  thee. 


TO   AN  ABSENT   DAUGHTER, 


IN    AFFLICTION. 


Oh,  murmur  not !   tho'  deep  the  wound 

Thy  Father's  hand  hath  given  ; 
'Tis  but  to  wean  thy  soul  from  earth, 

To  purer  joys  in  heaven. 
What  tho'  our  fondest  hopes  are  crush'd, 

Our  dearest  ties  are  riven, 
Tho'  sundered  here,  we  yet  may  meet 

To  part  no  more — in  heaven. 
Dear,  absent  child  !   thy  parent's  tears 

Flow  for  thy  deep  distress  : 
Their  fondest  prayers  to  heaven  ascend, 

May  God  thy  sorrows  bless. 
Then  murmur  not,  tho'  deep  the  wound 

Thy  Father's  hand  hath  given  ; 
Religion's  pure  and  holy  reign, 

Shall  light  thy  soul  to  heaven. 


TO   A  BOQUET. 


Ye  lovely  gems  of  innocence  ! 

The  objects  of  my  constant  care, 
From  each  distracting  thought  I  turn, 

To  see  you  blooming  fresh  and  fair. 

What  tho'  the  piercing  wintry  blast, 
Falls  like  a  dirge  upon  my  ear, 

And  the  wild  tempest  loudly  roars, — 
Sweet  flowers,  it  cannot  reach  you  here. 

What  do  I  see  1 — your  lovely  forms 

Now  languish  ! — must  ye,  then,  decay  1 

Ye  pine  for  spring's  refreshing  showers, 
And  for  the  sun's  more  genial  ray. 

Then,  fare  ye  well ! — your  scentless  leaves, 
I'll  bathe  with  tears  of  fond  regret ; 

I  lov'd  ye  when  you  looked  so  fair — 
Wither'd  and  dead,  I  love  you  yet ! 


TO    A    BOQUET.  49 

Thus,  when  some  dear  one,  from  our  side, 
Is  torn  by  death's  cold  hand  away, 

We  mourn  the  cherish'd  treasure  gone, 
And  weeping,  kiss  the  lifeless  clay. 

O'er  the  bright  joys  forever  crush'd, 
Will  memory  brood  with  fond  regret ; 

We  lov'd  her  when  like  us  she  smil'd, 
And  tho'  no  more,  we  love  her  yet ! 


SONG-; 
"I'LL   THINK   OF   THEE!" 

(Music  composed  by  F.  J.  C.) 

I'll  think  of  thee,  at  that  soft  hour, 
When  fade  the  parting  hues  of  day, 

And  o'er  each  grove,  and  woodbine  bow'r, 
The  balmy  gales  of  summer  play. 

When  night  around,  her  mantle  throws, 
And  stars  illume  the  deep  blue  sea — 

When  wearied  Nature  seeks  repose, 

Oh  then — I'll  dream — I'll  dream  of  thee  ! 

When  from  the  east  Aurora  breaks, 
And  night's  dark  shadows  glide  away ; 

When  Nature  from  her  slumber  wakes, 
To  hail  with  joy  the  op'ning  day. 

When  sweetly  bursting  on  mine  ear, 
The  tuneful  warbler's  note  of  glee, 

I'll  fondly  fancy  thou  art  near, 

To  touch  the  "light  guitar"  for  me. 


ON  RECEIVING-  A  BOUQUET   OF   PTOSES. 


FROM    A    FEMALE    FRIEND 


Thanks,  gentle  one,  for  these  sweet  roses  fair, 
CulPd  by  thy  hand,  and  rear'd  so  tenderly ; 

They  are  the  objects  of  our  fondest  care — 

We  kiss  their  blushing  forms,  and  think  of  thee. 

What,  than  the  rose,  more  delicate  appears  1 
Yet,  bitter  thought,  it  blossoms  to  decay  ; 

Like  hopes  in  embryo  dreams  of  other  years, 
Or  purest  joys,  that  quickly  pass  away. 

Dear  friend,  the  rose  of  health  is  on  thy  cheek — 
Long,  long  unrivall'd,  may  it  flourish  there  ; 

Those  beaming  eyes,  in  mildest  language  speak, 
The  deep  emotions  of  a  heart  sincere. 

Oh !  we  could  wish  thine  hours  might  glide  away 
Calm  and  unrufn'd,  as  the  moonlit  stream; 

That  yon  bright  star — pure  hope's  celestial  ray — 
Might  with  unsullied  splendour,  o'er  thee  beam. 


SONG-   OF   THE    GREEK   GIRL. 


Farewell,  guitar  ! — this  faltering  hand 

Will  touch  thy  trembling  chords  no  more ! 
Far  from  my  lovely,  native  land, 
I  languish  on  a  distant  shore  ; 
From  Grecia's  isle  forever  torn, 
A  captive  exile,  now  I  mourn. 

Farewell,  guitar  ! — another  hand 

Will  wake  thy  trembling  chords  for  me, 
And  in  my  own  dear  native  land, 
Recal  my  favorite  melody  : 

The  land  where  minstrels  pour'd  their  lays, 
Where  dwelt  the  bard  of  by-gone  days. 

Oh  !  might  I  find  at  last  a  grave 

In  thee,  my  happy,  happy  isle  ! 
The  mournful  cypress  o'er  me  wave, 
And  wild  flowers  sadly  on  me  smile ; 

There,  bosom  friends,  and  kindred  dear, 
Would  to  my  memory  drop  a  tear. 


ON  THE  DEATH  OF  AN  AGED  PARENT. 

Farewell  !  aged  parent — farewell ! 

Thy  pilgrimage  is  o'er  ; 
The  circle,  by  thy  presence  charm'd, 

Shall  welcome  thee  no  more. 

Thy  family,  to  thee  so  dear, 

Thy  loss  now  deeply  feel ; 
The  hitter  grief  that  wrings  their  hearts, 

Their  flowing  tears  reveal. 

Oft  has  thy  gen'rous  hand  reliev'd 

The  orphan,  and  distress 'd, 
And  they  in  humble  gratitude, 

Thy  name  have  often  bless'd  ; 

And  oh  !  to  thee,  we  fondly  hope, 

A  rich  reward  is  given  ; 
That  those  who  weep  for  thee  on  earth, 

Shall  greet  thee,  yet,  in  heaven  ! 

E* 


WHILE    WATCHING 


THE  SLEEPING  INFANT  OF  A  FHIEND. 

Yes,  loved  one  !  thou  art  sleeping  ; 

And  on  thy  infant  face, 
A  look  of  angel  purity, 

Sweet  innocent !  I  trace  ; 
And  while  thy  tranquil  breathings 

Come  softly  on  mine  ear, 
I  know  that  seraphs  guard  thee, 

From  yonder  happy  sphere. 

Yes,  lov'd  one  !  thou  art  sleeping, 

I  o'er  the  cradle  bend, 
And  as  I  kiss  thy  spotless  brow, 

My  pray'rs  to  heaven  ascend  : 
That  He,  who  in  his  gracious  arms 

On  earth  did  infants  take, 
Will  guard  and  keep  thee,  gentle  flower, 

For  thy  dear  parent's  sake  ! 


ON  THE  SLEEPING  INFANT  OF  A  FRIEND.         55 

How  tenderly  they  watch  thee  ! 

Ah  !   who  their  love  can  tell  1 
And  as  thy  infant  mind  expands, 

With  joy  their  bosoms  swell : 
How  oft  thy  laughing  lips  are  press'd 

To  thy  fond  mother's  cheek, 
And  from  her  heart's  pure  font  doth  gush 

What  words  can  never  speak  ! 

Sweet  babe  !  upon  life's  ocean, 

All  peaceful  may  thou  glide — 
The  idol  of  thy  mother's  heart, 

And  thy  fond  father's  pride  ! 
And  when  by  many  a  winter's  frost, 

Their  locks  are  silver'd  o'er, 
Oh  !  may  their  first-born  child  be  near, 

To  cherish,  and  adore  ! 


ON  THE  DEATH 


OF  THE  FATHER  OF  A  FELLOW  PUPIL. 

Father  !  hast  thou  fled  forever, 

From  the  friends  who  lov'd  thee  dear  ? 

"Will  thy  soothing  accents  never 
Meet  again  thy  children's  ear  ? 

No,  dear  father,  life  is  over ; 

Thou  art  freed  from  every  pain  ; 
Death's  cold  hand  has  torn  thee  from  us— 

We  shall  never  meet  again. 

Ah  !  methinks  I  see  my  mother, 
Bending  o'er  thy  bed  of  death  ; 

On  her  cheek,  now  pale  with  anguish, 
Steals  his  last  expiring  breath. 

By  her  stand  my  weeping  sisters, 
Gazing  on  thy  wasting  frame, 

While  my  brothers  round  thee  hover, 
Mingling  tears  of  grief  and  pain. 


ON    THE    DEATH,    ETC.  57 

One  deep  struggle,  and  thy  spirit 

Leaves  its  tenement  of  clay, 
Borne,  we  trust,  by  guardian  angels, 

To  the  brightest  realms  of  day. 

There  no  sigh  shall  heave  thy  bosom  ; 

There  the  pains  of  death  are  o'er  ; 
There,  dear  father,  may  we  meet  thee, 

Never  to  be  parted  more. 


TO  A  FRIEND  AND  FELLOV\f  PUPIL, 


WHO  PROPOSED  TO  THROW  AWAY  THE  FADED  FLOWER    OF  A 
FAVORITE    PLANT. 

Cast  not  this  simple  flower  away  ! 
I  mark  with  sorrow  its  rie(  ay  ; 
But  tho'  its  transient  day  be  o'er, 
Eliza,  thou  should'st  love  it  more. 

Though  other  flowers  round  it  smile, 
They'll  blossom  but  a  little  while  : 
Then,  like  my  hyacinth  decay  : 
Cast  not  that  simple  flower  away. 

The  time  may  come,  perchance  ere  long, 
When  she,  whose  light  and  joyous  song 
Thou  oft  hast  heard,  and  in  whose  heart's 
Affections  thou  dost  share  a  part ; 

May,  like  that  wither' d  flowret,  fade, 
And  in  the  silent  grave  be  laid. 
With  her,  will  all  thy  love  decay  ? — 
Cast  not  that  simple  flower  away  ! 


TO    A    FRIEND    AND    FELLOW    PUPIL.  59 

Methinks  I  see  the  gathering  tear 
Fall  from  thine  eyes,  my  sister  dear ; 
Forgive,  if  I  have  caused  thee  pain — 
I  will  not  wound  thy  heart  again. 

Yet,  by  the  love  thou  bear'st  to  me, 
And  my  affection  deep  for  thee, 
Friend  of  my  bosom,  say,  oh !  say, 
Thou  wilt  not  cast  that  flower  away  ! 


ADDRESSED  TO  MISS  D.; 

THE    MATRON    WHO  WAS  ABOUT  TO  LEAVE  THE  INSTITUTION. 

Yes,  thou  art  gazing  with  delight 

On  those  young  flow'rets  now ; 
Of  them,  I  fain  a  wreath  would  twine. 

To  place  upon  thy  brow. 
But,  oh  !  methinks  thou  would  prefer 

Wild  nature's  rural  flowers, 
That  blossom  by  meand'ring  streams, 

Or  'mid  sequester'd  bowers  ; 
Then  let  me  cull  these  lovely  gems 

From  some  romantic  spot, 
The  fairest,  sweetest  flower  I  bring, 

Shall  be  "  forget  me  not  !" — 
"  Forget  me  not !"  alas  !  I  soon 

To  thee  must  bid  farewell ; 
But  need  I  say,  within  this  heart 

Thy  memory  still  shall  dwell. 
My  heartfelt  gratitude  to  thee 

These  lips  can  never  speak, 
But  thou  may'st  read  it  in  the  tear 

Warm  gushing  on  my  cheek. 


ADDRESSED    TO    MISS    D.  61 

Iii  sickness  thou  hast  o'er  me  watched — 

My  every  want  supplied, 
And  nought  I  wish'd,  that  thou  could'st  grant, 

Was  e'er  to  me  denied. 
I  thank  thee  for  each  kind  reproof, 

I  have  from  thee  received  ; 
But  I  acknowledge  with  regret, 

I  thee  too  oft  have  grieved. 
Forgive  the  faults  of  erring  youth  ; 

Believe  my  heart  sincere  ; 
Its  purest  wishes  are  thine  own, 

My  friend,  forever  dear. 
Oh  !  would'st  thou  still  with  us  remain, 

How  happy  we  should  be. 
Vain  wish — but,  oh  !   where'er  thou  art, 

May  heaven  still  smile  on  thee. 
Farewell ; — the  dearest  friends  must  part — 

The  fondest  ties  be  riven  ; 
But  we  may  meet — oh  !  blissful  thought — 

To  part  no  more,  in  heaven. 


THE  ORPHAN'S  PRAYER. 

INSCRIBED    TO    ANNA    S. 

Oh  !  thou  who  sit'st  enthroned  in  light, 

Above  the  starry  frame, 
To  whom  the  supplicating  voice 

Was  never  raised  in  vain, 
Kind  Father  !  bend  thy. gracious  ear, 
Oh  !  deign  the  orphan's  prayer  to  hear. 

Give  me  a  calm,  submissive  heart, 
Thy  chastening  rod  to  bear ; 

Let  me  not  murmur  at  thy  will, 
Nor  yield  me  to  despair. 

The  world  has  now  no  joys  for  me — 

I  dedicate  my  all  to  thee. 

I  have  no  tender  mother  now, 

My  youthful  steps  to  guide, 
Oh  !  I  can  ne'er  forget  the  morn 

That  gentle  mother  died. 
She  clasped  me  to  her  throbbing  heart, 
And  softly  whispered,  we  must  part. 


the  orphan's  prayer.  63 

Weep  not  for  me  when  I  am  gone, 

Nor  heave  one  plaintive  sigh, 
I  go  to  meet  thy  father  dear, 

In  realms  beyond  the  sky. 
Prepare,  my  child  !   to  follow  me 
Where  we  no  more  shall  severed  be. 

When  nature  by  the  tranquil  breeze 

Of  eve,  is  lulled  to  sleep, 
Upon  that  mother's  lonely  grave 

I  love  to  sit  and  weep, — ■ 
And  while  I  kneel  in  sorrow  there, 
Kind  Father  !  hear  the  orphan's  prayer. 


THE  WISH. 

I  ask  ;  but  not  the  glittering  pomp 

Of  wealth  and  pageantry  ; 
Nor  splendid  dome  ;   a  rural  cot, 

My  domicil  shall  be. 

'Tis  not  to  mingle  with  the  gay, 

The  opulent,  and  proud  ; 
'Tis  not  to  court  the  flattering  smile 

Of  an  admiring  crowd.. 

I  ask  a  heart — a  faithful  heart — 

Congenial  with  mine  own, 
Whose  undivided  love  I  share, 

Unenvied  and  alone. 

A  heart  in  sorrow's  cheerless  hour, 

To  soften  every  care  ; 
To  taste  with  me  the  sweets  of  life, 

And  all  its  ills  to  share. 

Thus  linked  by  friendship's  golden  chain, 
Ah  !  who  more  bless'd  than  we  ; 

Unruffled  as  the  pearly  stream, 
Our  halcyon  days  would  be* 


THE  MAJSTDAN  CHIEF. 


[The  circumstance  alluded  to  in  the  following  lines,  ia 
that  of  the  Mandan  Chief,  who,  on  the  destruction  of  his 
tribe  by  the  small  pox,  as  the  last  survivor,  rode  to  the 
prairies,  where,  after  slaying  his  war-horse,  destroyed 
himself.  ] 


He  mounts  his  favorite  steed  of  war, 
And  o'er  the  prairie  wild, 

He  speeds  that  fiery  courser  on — 
A  lonely  forest  child. 

His  home  is  desolate  and  drear  ; 

His  kindred,  where  are  they? 
That  tribe,  once  powerful  and  brave, 

Disease  hath  swept  away. 

He  yet  survives  ;  but  what  is  life, 
When  those  we  love  are  fled  1 

That  Indian  seeks  a  resting-place, 
Among  the  peaceful  dead. 


66  THE    MANDAN"   CHIEF. 

And  now  he  halts  ;  before  him  lies 

A  vast  expansive  plain, 
A  moment,  and  that  noble  steed, 

By  his  own  hand  is  slain. 

Shade  of  my  fathers  !  he  exclaims, 

I  come  with  yon  to  rest ; 
He  grasps  the  instrument  of  death, 

And  plants  it  in  his  breast. 

Fast  streaming  from  the  fatal  wound , 

He  sees  the  purple  gore  ; 
'Tis  done  !   'tis  done  !  he  faintly  cries, 

Then  falls,  to  rise  no  more. 


IMPROMPTU, 

IN    ANSWER    TO    THE    QUESTION,    "  WILL   YOU    SENT)    FOR    MJ 
WHEN  YOU  ARE  ILL  ?" 

The  promise  I  have  made  thee, 

Doubt  not  I  will  fulfil, 
For  I  would  have  thee  near  me, 

My  friend,  when  I  am  ill ; 
Yes,  I  would  lay  my  aching  head 

Upon  thy  faithful  breast, 
And  while  I  felt  its  gentle  throb, 

Would  sweetly  sink  to  rest. 

Come  throw  thy  arms  about  me, 

As  thou  hast  oft  before ; 
The  song  I  lov'd  so  dearly, 

Oh  !  sing  to  me  once  more. 
Yes,  twine  thine  arms  around  me, 

And  press  thy  cheek  to  mine  ; 
The  love  that  thus  has  warm'd  me, 

Shall  ever  still  be  thine, 


68  IMPROMPTU. 

It  was  but  yester-night  I  dream'd, 

In  Eden's  bower  we  strayed, 
And  sat,  and  talked  of  happiness, 

Beneath  the  olive  shade. 
There  every  tree,  and  plant,  and  flower, 

In  all  their  beauty  bloom'd, 
And  with  their  balmy  fragrance, 

The  evening  air  perfum'd. 

Oh  !  there  is  a  fairer  Eden, 

In  yonder  world  above  ; 
There  may  we  meet,  no  more  to  part, 

Friend  of  my  fondest  love. 
There  may  thy  voice  in  higher  strains, 

Than  it  on  earth  can  raise, 
Be  tuned  with  all  the  heavenly  choir, 

To  its  Redeemer's  praise. 


L  INE  S 


OCCASIONED    BY    THE    DEATH    OF    HENRIETTA    B. 

Yes,  she  has  fled,  forever  fled; 

That  lovely  flower  has  ceased  to  bloom  ; 
Pale  flowers,   their  silent  perfume  shed, 

On  Henrietta's  lonely  tomb. 

Her  gentle  voice  in  death  is  hushed 
Forever  clos'd  that  sparkling  eye, — 

And  fondest  hopes,  alas  !   are  crush'd ; 
Oh  !   'tis  a  solemn  thing  to  die. 

For  her  do  tender  parents  mourn  ; 

Their  hearts  are  wrung  with  anguish  deep  ; 
To  them  she  never  can  return — 

Yet,  cease,  dear  parents,  cease  to  weep. 

Oh  !  trust,  beyond  this  vale  of  tears, 

Her  soul  has  gone  to  heaven's  bright  shore  ; 

Sweet  thought ; — a  few  more  fleeting  years 
And  you  shall  meet  to  part  no  more. 


70  LINES. 

Sisters,  for  her,  whom  all  did  love, 

Oh  !  wake  not  sorrow's  plaintive  strain, 

Methinks  from  yonder  world  above, 
She  whispers  "  we  shall  meet  again." 

You  stood  around  her  dying  bed  ; 

You  kiss'd  her  cold  and  lifeless  clay  ; 
You  laid  her  with  the  silent  dead  ; 

Yet,  two,  alas  !  were  far  away. 

Oh  !  thou  who  hear'st  the  mourner's  cry — 
Thou  who  did'st  weep  o'er  Lazarus  dead- 

Oh  !  sweetly  calm  each  heaving  sigh, 
And  wipe  the  bitter  tears  they  shed. 

Watch  o'er  them,  Lord,  with  tender  care, 
"While  from  their  native  land  they  roam, 

And  spare,  oh  !  heavenly  guardian,  spare, 
And  bring  them  safely  to  their  home. 


EASTEH  SUNDAY. 


Hail,  sacred  morn  !    when  from  the  tomb 

The  Son  of  God  arose, 
"  Captivity  he  captive  led," 

And  triumph'd  o'er  his  foes. 

Rejoice  !   oh,  holy  church,  rejoice  ! 

Awake  thy  noblest  strain, 
Put  off  thy  weeds  of  mourning  now, 

The  Saviour  lives  again. 

Oh  !  let  thy  loud  hosannahs  reach 

The  portals  of  the  sky, 
While  angels  tune  their  gentle  harps 

And  heav'nly  choirs  reply. 

"  Glory  to  God  !  he  ever  lives 

To  plead  our  cause  above, 
He, — he  is  worthy  to  receive 

All  honor,  power,  and  love. 


72  EASTER    SUNDAY. 

"  Hail,  mighty  king  !  we  at  thy  feet 
Our  grateful  homage  pay, 

Accept  the  humble  sacrifice, 
And  wash  our  sins  away. 

"  Then  at  the  resurrection  morn, 
When  the  last  trump  shall  sound, 

May  we  awake  to  life  anew, 
And  with  thy  saints  be  found." 


ON  THE  DEATH  OF  A  CHILD. 


Sleep  on,  thou  lovely  one  !  sleep  on, 

While  o'er  thy  lonely  grave, 
The  mournful  breeze  of  evening  sighs, 

And  the  pale  flowrets  wave. 

Sweet  bud  !  too  soon  death's  icy  hand 
Hath  borne  thee  to  the  tomb, 

But  thou  in  purer  loveliness, 
In  Paradise  shall  bloom. 

Oh  !   there  was  one  that  o'er  thee  knelt, 

And  wept  from  thee  to  part, 
Who  gazed  upon  thy  lifeless  form, 
With  almost  bursting  heart. 

She  breathed  a  kiss  upon  those  lips, 

That  still  in  death  were  fair, 
She  spoke  not ;  language  could  not  paint, 

That  mother's  deep  despair. 


74  ON    THE    DEATH    OF    A    CHILD. 

And  was  there  none  to  sooth  her  grief, 

And  wipe  the  bitter  tear, 
That  from  her  swollen  eyelids  burst  ] 

Ah  !  yes,  thy  father  dear. 

The  partner  of  her  early  love, 
With  her  beside  thee  knelt, 

He  strove  to  hide  the  bitter  grief 
His  stricken  bosom  felt. 

"  Weep  not,"  he  said,  in  faltering  tones, 
"  Our  darling  one  has  fled, 
But  he  who  gave,  has  borne  her  hence  ; 
Then  weep  not  for  the  dead." 

"  Soon  from  this  transitory  world, 
Shall  our  glad  spirits  soar, 
To  meet  in  heaven  our  darling  child, 
Where  parting  is  no  more." 


THE  NEGLECTED  CHILD. 


Her  home  was  by  the  mountain  side, 

Where  verdure  gaily  smil'd  ; 
No  ray  illum'd  the  sightless  eyes. 

Of  the  neglected  child. 

She  heard  the  breezes  murmur  by. 
And  the  streamlet  rush  along  ; 

And  wildly  on  her  ear,  would  break, 
Her  native  Alpine  song. 

No  fond  emotions  of  delight, 

Her  lonely  hours  beguil'd  ; 
None  wip'd  the  tear-drop  from  the  cheek 

Of  that  neglected  child. 

Alas  !  no  bosom  friend  was  near, 

Her  rising  grief  to  quell ; 
For  in  a  far,  far  distant  land, 

Did  her  fond  parents  dwell. 


76  THE  NEGLECTED  CHILD. 

She  felt  the  genial  sunny  beam, 

That  o'er  her  gently  smil'd, 
But  ah  !    no  ray  ilium 'd  the  path,, 

Of  the  neglected  child. 

Thus  months  and  years  roll'd  cheerless  on, 

In  pensiveness  and  grief; 
When  heaven,  all  bounteous  and  kind, 

Gave  her  sad  heart  relief. 

Parental  love  she  felt  once  more — 

A  father  on  her  smiled — 
And  warmly  to  his  heart  he  press'd, 

The  long  neglected  child. 

But  joys — far  sweeter  joys  than  these — 

The  sightless  girl  did  feel ; 
And  down  her  cheek,  the  heartfelt  tear 

Of  gratitude  did  steal. 

Then  education,  to  her  mind, 

Its  blessings  did  impart  ; 
A  ray  of  gladness  brightly  shone,. 

In  that  young  docile  heart. 

Her  fingers  trace  the  sacred  page, 

By  inspiration  given  ; 
Her  guide  through  life's  lone  wilderness,— 

The  chart  that  points  to  heaven- 


THE  NEGLECTED  CHILD.  77 

Forever  be  those  joys  her  own, 

That  long  have  on  her  smil'd ; 
Dear  to  my  heart  shall  be  the  name, 

Of  the  neglected  child. 


"JESUS  WEPT." 
john  xi.  35. 

He  wept !  the  son  of  God — the  Saviour  wept ! — 
When  at  the  lowly  grave  where  Laz'rus  slept;— 
He  wept — for  oh  !   his  human  nature  felt 
Their  grief,  who  at  his  feet  in  sorrow  knelt. 
He  wipes  the  tear  from  sorrow's  weeping  eye — 
He  calms  the  troubled  breast,  the  heaving  sigh  ; 
And  tho'  his  rod  we  feel,  in  love  't  is  giv'n, — 
'Tis  but  to  raise  our  hearts  from  earth  to  heav'n. 
He  for  our  sins  did  die — oh  !   wondrous  love  ! 
He,  with  his  Father  pleads  our  cause  above  : 
The  contrite  spirit,  He  will  not  disdain — 
The  soul  that  seeks  him,  shall  not  seek  in  vain. 
Tho'  tempests  rise,  if  we  on  him  are  staid, 
He'll  whisper — I  am  here — "  be  not  afraid." 
Tho'  earthly  friends  forsake,  He  still  is  nigh, 
To  guard  his  children  with  a  watchful  eye. 


ERIN. 

Oh  !  Erin,  lovely  isle  !   for  thee 

My  tears  of  heartfelt  pity  flow  ; 
Wilt  still  a  monarch's  vassal  be  ? 

The  voice  of  Freedom  answers,  no  I 

Too  long,  oppression's  galling  chain, 
Thou  injur'd  Isle,  thy  sons  have  worn  ! 

Crush'd,  and  despis'd,  their  rights  profaned; 
Oh,  say,  shall  wrongs  like  these  be  borne  X 

Just  indignation  fires  my  breast, 
The  child  of  blood-bought  liberty ; 

I  cannot  see  that  land  oppress'd, 

Though  not  mine  own,  but  dear  to  me. 

Why  should  not  Freedom's  banner  wave, 
O'er  Erin's  isle  its  noble  crest  1 

Is  there  a  heart,  I  ask,  more  brave, 
Than  beats  within  an  Irish  breast  ] 


80 


Go  thou — her  cool,  soft  breeze,  inhale^ — 
Whose  mind  stern  prejudice  doth  close  ; 

Beneath  her  lofty  shades  regale, 
Or  by  her  noble  streams  repose. 

Would'st  thou  on  splendour  feast  thine  eyesi 
Thou  many  a  stately  dome  may'st  see  ; 

If  rural  scenes  thou  dearer  prize, 

There  Nature  opes  her  store  for  thee — 

Wreathe  for  thy  brow  a  chaplet  fair — 
There  bloom  rich  flowers  of  every  hue, 

The  daisy,  and  the  primrose  rare, 
And  Erin's  pride,  the  shamrock,  too. 

Nay,  scorn  it  not !  the  shamrock  green, 
The  shamrock  Erin  loves  so  dear; — 

While  tracing  each  enchanting  scene, 
To  Ireland's  misery  give  a  tear. 

Hark  !  heard'st  thou  not  that  stifled  sigh. 
That  from  her  children  doth  proceed  1 

Senseless  and  cold  thy  heart  must  be, 
If  for  their  wrongs  it  would  not  bleed  ! 

If  thine  Columbia's  happy  land, 

Where  Liberty's  bright  star  doth  smile, 

When  on  its  peaceful  shores  thou  stand, 
Think  of  the  lovely  Emerald  Isle. 


ERIN.  81 

And  when  before  thy  Father's  throne, 
Thou  supplicate  his  gracious  smile — 

Unseen,  save  by  his  eye  alone, 

Forsret  not  then,  the  Emerald  Isle. 


MY  NATIVE  LAND.  GOOD  NIGHT !" 


Adieu  !   adieu  !   my  native  land — 

I  leave  thy  happy  shore  ; 
Oh  !  bitter  thought !  perhaps  to  view 

Thy  lovely  scenes  no  more. 

My  gallant  bark,  her  sails  unfurl, 
The  stars  are  beaming  bright ; 

Bird -like,  she  floats  upon  the  wave, 
"  My  native  land,  good  night !" 

The  rugged  hills,  the  mountain  wild, 
Where  once  I  lov'd  to  stray, 

While  birds,  their  little  notes  of  glee, 
Caroll'd  from  spray  to  spray. 

Alas!  these  rural  scenes  are  fast 

Receding  from  my  sight ; 
One  lingering  look  on  thee  I  cast, 

"  My  native  land,  good  night !" 


MY  NATIVE  LAND,  GOOD  NIGHT.  83 

The  crystal  brook,  that  gently  glides 

Beside  my  peaceful  cot, 
Fresh  flow'rs  that  breathe  their  sweet  perfume 

Around  that  lovely  spot. 

The  mighty  Hudson,  on  whose  breast 

I've  gazed  with  fond  delight — 
All,  all  are  fading  from  my  view, 

"  My  native  land,  good  night  !" 


THE  EMIGRANT. 

He  drop't  a  tear, — disease  had  laid 

That  aged  pilgrim  low ; 
He  drop't  a  tear, — for  memory  touch'd 

A  chord,  that  bade  it  flow. 

His  hands  were  folded  on  his  breast, 
He  knew  he  soon  must  die  ; 

But  'twas  not  the  approach  of  death, 
That  dimm'd  with  tears  his  eye. 

"  Farewell !   dear  native  land,  farewell !" 

In  broken  tones  he  said  ; 
"  Alas  !   my  ashes  must  repose, 

Where  strangers'  feet  will  tread  ! 

"  My  wife — my  ever  faithful  wife, — 
One  parting  word  to  thee  ; 
Oh,  let  me  clasp  thy  hand  once  more, 
Yet  weep  not  thus  for  me  ! 

"  The  widow's  God  will  still  be  thine, 
Thy  comforter,  and  guide  ;" 


THE  EMIGRANT.  85 

One  kiss,  and  on  her  faithful  breast, 
He  lean'd  his  head,  and  died. 

And  to  the  church-yard  he  was  borne, 

With  slow  and  solemn  tread  ; 
They  laid  his  pale  and  lifeless  form 

Among  the  silent  dead. 

The  grave  was  closed — they  left  the  spot- 
But  one  still  linger 'd  there, 

Whose  agonizing  look  bespoke, 
Her  bosom's  deep  despair* 

She  sought  her  home — that  home,  alas  ! 

Was  desolate  and  drear  ; — - 
She  trod  the  threshold,  but  no  voice 

Of  welcome,  met  her  ear. 

She  was  a  stranger,  and  alone  ; 

All  kindred  ties  were  riven  ; 
And  now,  with  those  she  lov'd  so  dear, 

Her  spirit  blends  in  heaven. 


AN  ADDRESS 

TO  THE  REV.  DR.  HEWITT,  OF  BRIDGEPORT,  CONN. 

Servant  of  God  !    His  gracious  eye 

Beholds  thee  with  delight  ! 
The  flock  which  to  thy  trust  he  gives, 

Is  precious  in  his  sight. 

Press  on  !    ambassador  from  Christ  ! 

Thou  a  reward  shall  reap  ; 
For  souls,  with  gospel  truths  impress'd, 

Shall  wake  from  error's  sleep. 

Be  not  disheartened,  though  thy  words 

May  seem  to  flow  in  vain  ; 
The  Lord  will  soon  his  word  revive, 

And  souls  be  born  again. 

Thou  to  thy  faithful  flock  art  dear, 
Their  pastor,  and  their  friend, 

And  often  at  the  mercy  seat, 
Your  supplications  blend. 


AN  ADDRESS  TO  THE  REV.  DR.  HEWITT.         87 

Soon  will  thy  pilgrimage  be  o'er, 

Thy  work  on  earth  be  done  ; 
And  thou  the  welcome  plaudit  hear, 

"  Servant  of  God  !   well  done  !" 


AN  EPITHILAMIUM. 

ON    MEETING    A    FRIEND,    AFTER    HER    MARRIAGE. 

We  meet  a^ain — we  meet  a^ain — 

Thou  art  as  lovely  now, 
As  when  those  auburn  tresses  last 

I  parted  from  thy  brow. 

Time  has  not  cbang'd  thee — no,  thine  eye 

Still  dances  with  delight — 
The  same  fond  smile  is  on  thy  lip> 

Thy  bosom  still  is  light. 

We  meet  again,  but  who  is  he, 

That  lingers  at  thy  side, 
That  holds  thy  trembling  hand  in  his, 

And  on  thee  looks  with  pride  1 

Thy  partner  % — yes  !   the  bridal  wreath, 

Is  on  thy  brow  so  fair ; 
He  to  the  altar  thee  has  led — 

Oh,  happy,  happy  pair! 


AN    EPITHILAMIUM.  S9 

And  may  the  gentle  star  of  peace, 

Your  guardian  ever  be  ; 
Your  little  bark  serenely  glide, 

O'er  an  unruffled  sea. 

We  meet  again — we  meet  again — 

Thou  art  as  lovely  now, 
As  when  those  auburn  tresses  last 

I  parted  from  thy  brow. 


SPEED  ME  TO  MY  HOME.. 


Oh  !  bear  me  to  that  blissful  clime, 

My  bosom  holds  so  dear, 
And  let  the  murmur  of  its  stream, 

Fall  sweetly  on  my  ear. 

I  love  not  India's  sultry  land — 
I  wish  no  more  to  roam, — 

Unfurl  thy  snowy  sails,  my  bark  ! 
And  speed  me  to  my  home. 

O'er  bonny  Scotland's  highland  hills, 
At  twilight  hour  I've  stray'd, 

While  on  the  bosom  of  the  Clyde 
The  silver  moonbeams  play'd. 

But,  on  the  Hudson's  sunny  banks, 
I  long  once  more  to  roam  ; 

Unfurl  thy  snowy  sails,  my  bark  ! 
And  speed  me  to  my  home. 


SPEED   ME  TO  MY  HOME.  91 

I've  sat  beneath  the  rural  shade, 

Of  England's  rosy  bowers, 
I've  heard  the  music  of  her  birds, 

And  cull'd  her  fairest  flowers. 

But  to  Columbia,  dearer  land, 

My  fancy  loves  to  roam  ; 
Unfurl  thy  snowy  sails,  my  bark  ! 

And  speed  me  to  my  home, 


THE  GUITAR. 


ON    PRESENTING    TO    A    FRIEND    AND    FELLOW     PUPIL, 
ANNA    S.,    HER    GUITAR.* 


Oh  !   Anna  dear,  my  light  guitar, 
I  would  bequeath  to  thee ; 

I  cannot  bear  its  music  now> 
It  hath  no  charms  for  me. 

Yes,  take  it — keep  it  for  my  sake, 

I  may  no  more  its  numbers  wake. 

But  thou  its  dulcet  chords  wilt  sweep, 

At  twilight's  dewy  hour, 
And  thou  wilt  wake  my  favorite  lay, 

In  thine  own  rosy  bower. 
Then  while  thy  heart  is  full  of  grief, 
Oh,  Anna  !  wilt  thou  think  of  me  1 


*  The  instrument  was  laid  aside  by  the  advice  of  hef 
physician. 


THE    GUITAR. 


Think  of  those  happy,  happy  hours  ; 

We  have  together  pass'd, 
The  cherished  hopes  of  other  years, 

Too  pure,  too  bright  to  last. 
On  thy  fond  bosom  I  have  wept, 
When  all  around  us  gently  slept. 

The  rose  of  health  hath  fled  my  cheek, 
And  something  to  my  heart, 

Is  sadly  whispering,  I  ere  long 

With  thee,  dear  friend,  must  part ; 

Thine  was  to  me  a  sister's  love, 

That  flame  shall  light  our  souls  above. 

Oh,  God  !  protect  this  orphan  one, 

With  thy  parental  care  ; 
And  leave  her  not  the  cruel  storms, 

Of  this  bleak  world  to  bear  ; 
But  may  affection's  hallow'd  smile, 
Her  pilgrimage  on  earth  beguile. 


TO  A  SPIRIT. 


Come  on  the  breeze  at  the  twilight  hour, 
When  I  muse  alone  in  my  leaf-clad  bower, 
There  let  thy  gentle  voice  be  heard, 
Like  the  carol  sweet  of  some  favorite  bird, 
Breathe  o'er  the  chords  of  my  slumbering  lute, 
Tones  that,  alas  !  have  long  been  mute. 

Come,  on  the  balmy  breath  of  night, 
When  the  pale  moon  is  spreading  her  silv'ry  light, 
O'er  the  sylvan  grove  and  the  chrystal  deep, 
And  nature  is  lock'd  in  her  dreamy  sleep  ; 
Leave  the  pure  mansions  of  bliss  awhile — 
Come,  on  thy  youth's  companion  smile. 

Come,  when  the  cheerful  voice  of  spring, 
Gaily  through  woodland  and  grove  doth  ring  ; 
Come,  when  the  cuckoo's  welcome  note, 
Sweetly  and  clear  on  the  breeze  doth  float, 
Wandering  alone  'mid  the  silent  glen, 
Hover,  oh  !  hover,  around  me  then. 


TO    A    SPIRIT.  9 

Come,  when  the  tear  of  sorrow  flows  ; 
Thou,  and  thou  only,  could'st  sooth  my  woes ; 
Come,  when  my  cheek  is  pale  with  care, 
Or  the  hectic  flush  is  lurking  there  ; 
Oh !  how  I  sigh  for  thy  starry  home, 
Never,  oh  !  never,  again  to  roam. 


IMPROMPTU. 

SLINES   addressed    to    gen.  count  bertrand,  on  visit- 
ing   THE    INSTITUTION,    NOV.    1343. 

Welcome,  thou  illustrious  General ! 

To  Columbia's  lovely  shore — 
Welcome,  thou  illustrious  General  ! 

Well  may  France  thy  name  adore. 

On  her  throne,  in  splendor  seated, 
Did  the  brave  Napoleon  reign ; 

Flattering  courtiers  gathered  round  him, 
Distant  nations  sang  his  fame. 

But,  alas  !   o'er  fallen  greatness, 

Was  that  monarch  doomed  to  mourn, 

And  an  exile  from  his  country, 
To  St.  Helen's  Isle  was  borne; 

When  by  those  he  lov'd  deserted, 
Thine  was  still  a  faithful  heart ; 

Thou  wert  proud  to  share  the  exile 
Of  the  hapless  Bonaparte, 


IMPROMPTU.  97 

Like  an  angel,  whispering  comfort, 
Still  in  sickness  thou  wert  nigh ; 

And  when  life's  last  scenes  were  over, 
Tears  of  anguish  dimmed  thine  eye. 

He  has  gone  !  yes,   gone  forever, 

But  around  thy  generous  heart, 
Ties  that  only  death  can  sever, 

Twine  the  name  of  Bonaparte. 

Welcome,  then,  illustrious  General ! 

We,  a  sightless  band  exclaim  ; 
Laurels  of  immortal  honor, 

Wreath  their  garlands  o'er  thy  name. 

Welcome,  thou,  illustrious  General ! 

We  rejoice  to  meet  thee  here  ; 
We,  alas  !   cannot  behold  thee, 

But  thy  voice  may  glad  our  ear. 

When  thou  o'er  the  deep  art  sailing, 
Where  the  angry  tempests  roar, 

We  implore  our  God  to  bear  thee 
Safely  to  thy  native  shore. 


REQUIEM  ON  GENERAL  BERTRAND, 

ON    HEARING    OF    HIS    DECEASE. 

Hark  !  o'er  yonder  pathless  ocean, 

Comes  a  voice  of  bitter  woe  ; 
France  in  sorrow's  weeds  is  shrouded — 

Death  hath  laid  her  hero  low. 

List  ye,  to  the  mournful  tidings, 
Sons  of  fair  Columbia's  shore  ! 

Drop,  oh  !  drop,  one  tear  of  pity, 
Marshal  Bertrand  is  no  more. 

He,  whom  recently  ye  welcomed 

With  emotions  of  delight, 
To  this  lovely  land ;  where  freedom 

Waves  aloft  its  banner  bright  j — 

He  who  deeply  felt  your  kindness, 
And  who  blest  our  happy  shore, 

In  the  silent  grave  is  sleeping; 
Marshal  Bertrand  is  no  more. 


REQUIEM  ON  GENERAL  BERTRAND.      9§ 

Scarcely  had  his  friends  receiv'd  him 

To  his  native  land  again ; 
Scarcely  heard  their  joyous  greeting, 

Ere  to  him  death's  summons  came. 

Fare  thee  well,  illustrious  General ! 

Now  thy  pilgrimage  is  o'er, — 
Far  the  mournful  news  is  echoed, 

Marshal  Bertrand  is  no  more. 

On  the  gentle  breeze  of  evening, 
Comes  his  requiem,  soft  and  low, — 

Keen,  oh,  France  !  must  be  thine  anguish, 
But  'tis  meet  thy  tears  should  flow. 

He  who  for  thy  fallen  monarch, 

Exiled  from  his  native  shore, 
Tore  himself  from  home  and  country, 

Marshal  Bertrand  is  no  more. 

'Till  Napoleon's  latest  moments, 
Bertrand  was  his  constant  friend, 

With  unwearied  care  beguiling 
Grief  that  only  death  must  end. 

Faint  and  yet  more  faint  the  struggle  ; 

Bertrand  knelt  beside  his  bed, 
On  his  hand,  his  head  reclining, 

Wept  in  silence  o'er  the  dead. 


100     REQUIEM  ON  GENERAL  BERTRAND. 

Years  rolled  on,  and  from  St.  Helen's, 
Back  to  France,  his  corpse  they  bore, — 

By  whose  side  will  rest  his  ashes — 
Marshal  Bertrand  now  no  more. 

May  we  hope  that  tranquil  spirit, 

Doth  in  heaven's  bright  mansions  dwell ; 

Once  again,  in  faltering  accents, 
Marshal  Bertrand  !  fare  thee  well. 


ON  THE  DEPARTURE  OF  A  TEACHER. 


K[ND  teacher,  must  we  part  with  thee  % 
Wilt  thou  no  longer  with  us  dwell  1 

Ah,  no — it  must  not,  cannot  be, 

Thou  wilt  not  breathe  the  sad  farewell. 

Oh  !  who  will  now  thy  place  supply  1 
Who  will  instruction  now  impart  1 

The  tear-drop  steals  from  every  eye, 
And  sorrow  bursts  from  every  heart. 

Yet  memory  still  shall  cling  to  thee, 

On  happier  days  our  thoughts  shall  dwell; 

But,  oh  !  it  must  not,  cannot  be, 

Thou  wilt  not  breathe  the  sad  farewell. 

Yet,  if  thou  must  from  us  remove, 

Oh  !  let  us  willingly  submit  ; 
Accept  thy  pupils'  grateful  love, 

Thy  kindness  they  will  ne'er  forget. 

May  Hope's  bright  beams  still  smile  on  thee, 
And  pleasure  with  thee  ever  dwell ; 

But,  no  !  it  must  not,  cannot  be — ■ 

Thou  wilt  not  breathe  the  sad  farewell. 


LINES  TO  A  FAVORITE  WILLOW. 

Farewell,  old  tree  !  beneath  whose  shade, 

I  lov'd  at  twilight  hour  to  sit  : 
Thee  to  the  ground  the  axe  hath  laid, 

I  view  thee  now  with  fond  regret. 

Here,  with  my  young  companions  gay, 
I've  sported  oft  in  by-gone  days, — 

Here  at  the  closing  hour  of  day, 

I've  heard  soft  music's  thrilling  lays. 

When  Venus,  evening's  fav'rite  star, 

Shone  forth  from  yonder  clear  blue  sky, 

Here  have  I  tuned  my  light  guitar, 
To  some  romantic  melody. 

But  thou  art  gone,  forever  gone  ! 

These  happy  days,  alas  !    are  o'er, 
The  light  guitar,  the  joyous  song, 

Will  echo  from  thy  shade  no  more. 

Could  tears  the  woodman's  axe  have  stay'd, 
I  would  have  freely  wept  for  thee  ; 

Oh  !  how  I  sigh  for  thy  dear  shade, 
Sacred  to  memory  and  me. 


TO  A  STAR. 

Thou  radiant  orb,  whose  twinkling  beams, 
Smile  o'er  the  distant  mountain  streams, 
I've  watched  thee  oft,  with  eager  eye, 
As  in  the  calm,  cerulean  sky, 
Thou  dost  a  constant  vigil  keep, 
O'er  lovely  nature's  peaceful  sleep. 

What  art  thou  1  may  I  read  in  thee, 
Aught  of  my  future  destiny  ] 
Can'st  thou  some  hidden  joy  reveal, 
Or  pang,  this  bosom  yet  must  feel  ? 
Can'st  thou  recall  to  me  the  past 
Departed  hopes,  too  bright  to  last  ! 

By  whom  to  thee  was  radiance  given  1 
Who  guides  thee  through  the  pathless  heaven  1 
Art  thou  a  sun,  whose  golden  ray, 
Doth  light  to  other  worlds  convey  ; 
Worlds  where  the  ever  verdant  flowers, 
Bloom  in  their  bright  Elysian  bowers  1 


104  TO    A    STAR. 

And  aweeter  than  Apollo's  lyre, 
The  music  of  the  aerial  choir  ; — 
Love  not  the  muses  there  to  dwell, — 
Their  notes  in  magic  strains  to  swell  % 
Fain  would  I  soar,  mild  orb  !  to  thee, 
But  thou  art  veiled  in  mystery. 


FAREV/ELL  TO  THE  SUMMER  FLOWER; 


Farewell  !  farewell,  to  the  summer  flowers  ! 
They  are  faded  and  gone  from  their  greenwood 

bowers  ; 
One  drooping  lily  alone  I  see, 
And  the  lovely  gem  I  have  culled  for  thee. 

'Twill  wither  ere  long,  and  thy  fondest  care, 
Will  be  lavished  in  vain  on  that  flowret  fair ; 
'Tis  an  emblem  of  childhood's  hours  long  past, 
Bright  hours  we  could  wish  might  forever  last. 

'Tis  evening  now,  and  the  sun's  last  gleam, 
Is  bidding  adieu  to  the  mountain  stream  ; 
I'm  sweeping  my  harp's  wild  notes  to  thee— 
Then  list  to  thy  favorite  melody. 

Mournful  breezes  around  me  sigh, 
And  the  starry  train  from  the  deep  blue  sky, 
Serenely  smile  o'er  the  rippling  sea — 
Then  list  to  thy  favorite  melody. 


'    ON  THE   DEPARTURE    OF  A  PUPIL 

FROM     THE     INSTITUTE. 

Dear  brother,  farewell !  since  the  word  must  be 

spoken, 
And  thou  from  our  circle  far  distant  must  dwell ; 
Oh !  ne'er  shall  the  tie  that  unites  us  be  broken — 
May  heaven  protect  thee,  dear  brother,  farewell ! 

Here  long  have  we  dwelt,  and  the  pure  stream 

of  gladness, 
Around  us  hath  flowed,  like  a  rill  thro'  the  dell, 
All  waveless  and  calm — but  a  billow  of  sadness, 
Now  ruffles  its  waters — dear  brother,  farewell  ! 

Thou  leav'st  us,   but  friends  in  transport  will 

meet  thee — 
Thou  goest  to  the  home  of  thy  childhood  to  dwell ; 
And  oh !  when  maternal  affection  doth  greet  thee, 
Forget  not  the  friends  who  now  bid  thee  farewell  f 


THE  GRECIAN  WAR  SONG. 

Awake  !   awake,  my  tuneful  lyre  ! 

The  notes  of  minstrelsy  ; 
I'll  sing  to  thee,  my  native  land, 

A  song  of  liberty  ! 

The  Persian  band  are  at  our  gates, 
Their  glitt'ring  arms  I  see — 

They  chant  our  death-song  in  our  ears, 
But  Greece  shall  yet  be  free  ! 


On  !   Grecian  warriors,  to  the  field 
Your  bleeding  country  save  ; 

On  !  on  !  the  victory  achieve  ! 
Or  share  the  hero's  grave. 


They  wave  the  crimson  sword  on  high — 
Haste — ere  they  strike  the  blow  ! 

Your  swords,  proud  Grecians,  to  the  earth, 
Shall  crush  the  faithless  foe. 


CHILDHOOD. 

Come  back,  oh  !  come  back,  to  this  bosom  once 

more, 
Ye  days  of  my  childhood — long,  long  pass'd 

away— 
To  the  warblers  that  caroll'd  their  melodies  o'er, 

I  listened,  as  'buoyant  and  happy  as  they  ; 
Bright  garlands  I  twined,  of  the  wild  fragrant 

flowers, 
As  I  basked  in  the  sunbeams  that  smiled  in  the 

bowers. 

Oh,  where  is  the  oak  that  majestic'ly  stood, 
And  braved  the  wild  tempest  that  swept  o'er 
its  head! 

Oh,  where  is  my  cottage,  beside  the  greenwood! 
'Tis  echo,  all  mournful,  replies,  they  are  fled  : 

They  are  fled,  and  a  stranger,  forgotten,  I  roam  ; 

Farewell  to  my  kindred  !  my  dear  native  home  ! 

Come  back,  oh !  come  back,  to  this  desolate  heart, 
My  youthful  companions,  to  friendship  sincere ; 

Ah  !    why  was  I  doomed,  from  those  loved  ones 
to  part — 
To  moisten  their  graves  with  affection's  sad  tear  1 

They  are  gone,  and  a  stranger,  unpitied,  I  roam, 

Farewell  to  my  kindred !  my  long-cherish'd  home. 


ODE  ON  THE  FOURTH  OF  JULY. 


Awake  !  ye  brave  sons  of  Columbia,  awake  ! 
See   the   morn  of  your  freedom   resplendently 

break  ; 
A  shout  o'er  the  East  and  the  West  doth  resound, 
And  the  North  and  the  South  sweetly  echo  the 

sound. 

Columbia  !   Columbia  !  transported  arise  ; 
Let  thy  altars  of  freedom  be  rear'd  to  the  skies; 
United  forever  our  nation  shall  be  ; 
Hurrah  for  Columbia,  the  land  of  the  free  ! 

Oh  !    Washington,    Warren,    Montgomery,    ye 

brave, 
Smile,  smile,  o'er  the  country  you  struggled  to 

save : 
Here  liberty's  tree  unmolested  still  grows, 
And  we  'neath  its  shadowy  branches  repose. 

No  more  shall  the  war-cry  be  heard  on  thy  shore, 
Thrice  happy  Columbia,  thy  struggles  are  o'er, — 
United  for  ever  our  nation  shall  be — 
Hurrah  for  Columbia,  the  land  of  the  free  ! 

K 


LINES  ADDRESSED  TO   C.  B.  ESQ., 

ON' new  year's  day,  1842. 

Kind  friend — these  effusions,  I  tender  to  you, 
Whose  kindness  has  taught  me  your  name  to 
revere ; 
May'blessings  descend,[like  the  soft  evening  dew, 
And  crown  the  return  of  this  "  happy  New 
Year." 

As  the  gondola  glides  o'er  the  calm  summer  sea, 
'Mid  the  wild  canzonet  of  the  gay  gondolier, 

Oh  !  thus  may  life's  moments,  unruffled  still  be — 
And  each  return  biing  you  a  "  happy  New 

Year." 

My  heart's  kindest  wishes,  on  you  I  bestow, 
For  zeal,  still  unwearied  and  friendship  sin- 
cere ; 

And  still  from  my  bosom  these  accents  shall  flow, 
I  "wish  you"  full  many  a  "  happy  New  Year." 


"MY    PEAIEIE    HOME." 

ADDRESSED    TO    MR.    B.    M. 

Oh  !  I  have  dwelt  in  sunny  isles, 

Far,  far,  beyond  the  sparkling  deep, 

Where  nature  ever  verdant  smiles, 
'Mid  skies  that  never,  never  weep  ; 

And  I  have  plucked  each  fragrant  flower, 

Luxuriant  from  its  native  bower. 

There  birds  with  gaudy  plumes  arrayed, 
Carol  their  plaintive  songs  at  night, 

And  through  the  deep  accacian  shade, 
The  crescent  moon  unveils  her  light ; 

As  o'er  each  magic  scene  I'd  roam, 

I  have  sighed  for  thee,  "  my  prairie  home." 

Speed  lightly  on,  my  gallant  bark  ! 

Unfurl  once  more  thy  snowy  sails — 
Speed  lightly  on,  o'er  waters  dark  ; 

Now  gently  blow  the  spicy  gales, — 
O'er  distant  lands  no  more  I'll  roam, 
But  haste  to  thee,  "  my  prairie  home." 


112  "my  prairie  home." 

Earth  has  no  dearer  spots  for  me, 
Than  thy  expansive  meadows  are, 

The  peaceful  dwellings  of  the  free  ; 
The  deer  is  wildly  bounding  there 

And  on  the  breeze  in  joyous  notes, 

The  pioneer's  sweet  chorus  floats. 


GENEVA. 

COMPOSED  WHILE  ON   A  VISIT  TO  THAT  PLACE,  IN   1843. 

Geneva  !  thou  spot  ever  dear  to  my  heart, 
Our  State's  lovely  Eden,  sweet  village,  thou  art; 
Thy  groves  of  rich  verdure,  delighted  I  tread, 
While  flow'rets  around  me    their  soft  perfume 
shed. 

Before  me  thy  lake,  all  majestic  and  clear, 
Whose  murmurs,  like  music,  now  float  on  my  ear, 
Reflects,  like  a  mirror,  the  sun's  golden  beam, — 
On  its  calm,  silvery  breast,  not  a  ripple  is  seen. 

Yet,  while  'neath  the  shade  of  thy  green  woods  I 

stray, 
I  weep,  for  thy  beauties  ere  long  will  decay  ; 
The  keen  breath  of  autumn  will  sweep  o'er  thy 

lawn, 
And  hush'd  be  the  notes  of  the  wild  warbler's  song. 

Yet,  not  for  thy  beauties  alone  art  thou  dear, 
Geneva  !  the  friends  warmly  cherished  are  here, 
Whose  mem'ries  enshrined  in  our  bosoms  remain, 
Whose  kindness  our  grateful  emotions  doth  claim. 


114 


Farewell,  lovely  spot  !  ever  dear  to  this  heart, 

From  thy  scenes  so  enchanting,  alas  !  I  must  part. 

Dear  friends,  in  this  bosom  your  kindness  shall 
dwell, 

May  blessings  attend  you,  ye  lov'd  ones — fare- 
well I 


0  L  I  T  U  D  E. 


Oh  !   rural  life,  I  sigh  for  thee, 
How  dear  thy  rustic  haunts  to  me  ; 
I,  in  some  lonely  spot  would  dwell, 
And  bid  the  busy  world  farewell. 

I  seek  not  its  applause  to  gain  ; 
Its  flattering  words  are  false  and  vain  ; 
Its  smiles  are  like  the  summer  showers  ; 
Its  friendships  die  like  withered  flowers. 

Oh  !  that  some  humble  cot  were  mine, 
Where  peace,  a  fadeless  wreath  might  twine, 
And  envy,  strife,  and  anxious  care, 
Might  never,  never,  reach  me  there. — 

"Where  no  discordant  notes  should  ring, 
But  sweetest  rapture  tune  each  string, 
And  friendship's  pure  and  hallowed  smile 
Fondly  each  fleeting  hour  beguile,, 


ON  THE  DEATH  OF  GENERAL  HARRISON, 

APRIL,      18  41. 

He  is  gone  !  in  death's  cold  arms  he  sleeps, 

Our  President — our  hero  brave, 
While  fair  Columbia  o'er  him  weeps, 

And  chants  the  requiem  o'er  his  grave  ; 
Her  sanguine  hopes  are  blighted  now, 
And  weeds  of  sorrow  veil  her  brow. 

Ah  !  Indiana,  where  is  he, 

"Who  once  thy  sons  to  battle  led  1 

The  red  man  quailed  beneath  his  eye, 
And  from  his  camp  disheartened  fled  ; 

With  steady  hand  he  bent  his  bow, 

And  laid  the  warlike  savage  low. 

The  forests  with  his  praises  rung, 

His  fame  was  echo'd  far  and  wide, — 

With  loud  hurrah,  his  name  was  sung, 
Columbia's  hero,  and  her  pride. 

The  tuneful  harp  is  now  unstrung, 

And  on  the  drooping  willow  hung, 


ON  THE  DEATH  OF  GENERAL  HARRISON.   117 

Him  for  our  President  we  chose, 

To  execute  the  nation's  laws; 
While  from  each  gladdened  heart  arose 

Loud  acclamations  of  applause  ; 
Scarce  had  his  arduous  work  begun, 
When  set  fair  freedom's  favorite  son. 

Within  the  dark  and  lonely  cell, 

No  anxious  cares  shall  reach  him  more ; 

Illustrious  patriot,  fare  thee  well  ! 
Thy  earthly  pilgrimage  is  o'er; 

With  Washington,  our  father,  friend, 

Thy  fame  undying,  now  we  blend. 


THE  LAMENT  OF  MRS.  HARRISON, 


My  heart-strings  are  breaking,  oh !  sad  is  my  lay, 

My  hero,  my  bosom  companion,  is  fled  ; 
Oh,  death  !   why  so  soon  did'st  thou  tear  him 
away 
From  his  home,  and  his  country,  to  sleep  with 
the  dead  % 

No  more  shall  he  bleed  in  America's  cause, 
Or  lead  to  the  battle  the  dauntless  and  brave, 

Though   hush'd    are  the    shouts  of  a  nation's 
applause, 
The  laurels  of  victory  bloom  o'er  his  grave. 

A  mantle  of  gloom  shrouds  the  Capitol  now, 
Columbia,  her  President's  loss  doth  deplore  ; 

A  shade  of  despondency  veils  every  brow, 
And  the  sound  of  rejoicing  is  echo'd  no  more. 


TIFE    LAMENT    OF    MRS.    HARRISON.  119 

Oh  !  could  I  have  watch'd  the  last  moments  of  life, 
And  from  those  dear  lips,  caught  the  parting 
farewell ; 

But  far  from  his  home,  his  children,  and  wife, 
His  last  sigh  was  breath'd, — his  last  accents  fell. 

No  more  shall  his  soothings  my  sorrow  beguile, 
Then  what  are  earth's  varied  enjoyments  to 
me  ] 

The  summons  of  death  I  could  meet  with  a  smile, 
My  soullike  a  captive  doth  sigh  to  be  free. 


LINE  S 


Written  on  hearing  of  the  death  of  the  Hon.  H.  S.  Legare,  of 
South  Carolina,  late  Secretary  of  State,  at  Boston,  while 
on  a  tour  with  the  President  of  the  U.  S.,  June,  1843. 


Farewell! — esteemed,  departed  one — farewell ! 
Deep,  solemn  tones,  have  pealed  their  funeral 

knell! 
Thou  to  the  grave  art  gone — sweet  be  thy  rest, 
For  angels  guard  the  relics  of  the  blest. 

Hark  !  hark  !  thy  requiem  floats  upon  the  ear, 
So  deeply  sad  ! — we  pause — we  weep  to  hear. 
Ye  patriot  sons,  of  fair  Columbia's  shore, 
A  brilliant  star  has  set,  to  rise  no  more. 

Weep,  oh,  Columbia  !   o'er  his  lonely  grave, 
There  let  the  cypress,  sorrow's  emblem,  wave ; 
The  mournful  breezes  sigh,  wild  flowret's  bloom, 
And  breathe  their  fragrance  o'er  his  hallowed 
tomb. 


121 


Far  from  his  home,  he  closed  his  bright  career  : 
His  dying  words  were  of  his  sister  dear, — 
His  only  relative  !     Oh,   gracious  heaven  ! 
Her  heart  will  break; — its  last  fond  tie  is  riven. 

Oh,  God  !   convulsive  throbs  her  bosom  now  ; 
Her  tresses  fall  neglected  on  her  brow  ; 
Her  streaming  eyes,  uplifted,  turn  to  thee, 
Friend  of  the  orphan  1  still  her  guardian  be. 

Legare  !  —  thy  name,  thy  country  will  revere, 
Thou  wast  her  pride — she  smiled  to  call  thee 

dear ; 
But,  thou  art  gone  to  join  that  patriot  band, 
Whose  spirits  hover  o'er  this  happy  land. 

Illustrious  statesman  ! — orator — farewell ! 
Our  quivering  lips  in  mournful  accents  swell, — 
While  we  thy  loss,  disconsolate,  deplore, 
Hope  whispers,  we  may  meet  to  part  no  more. 


THE  SISTEPJS  LAMENT. 


Oh  !  lightly  press  yon  clay  cold  sod, 

Where  doth  the  mournful  cypress  wave  : 

Oh  !   lightly  press  yon  clay  cold  sod, — 
It  wraps  an  only  brother's  grave. 

Lone  is  ray  heart,  its  idol  fled; 

I  call  him,  but,  alas  !  in  vain, — 
He's  number'd  with  the  mighty  dead — 

We  ne'er  shall  meet  on  earth  asrain. 

Oh  !   could  I  for  a  moment  felt, 

Upon  my  cheek  his  parting  breath, 

Oh  !   could  I  at  his  bedside  knelt, 

And  kiss'd  those  lips,  tho'  closed  in  death. 

'T would  sooth  the  grief,  that  wrings  my  heart, 

To  think  he  on  my  bosom  died  ; 
But,  stranger  hands  perform'd  the  part, 

That  was,  alas  !  to  me  denied. 


the  sister's  lament.  12( 

Brother  !   thy  voice  I  nowhere  hear, 
No  more  thy  gentle  smile  I  see, — 

Bat  thy  pure  spirit  hovers  near, 
And  will  thy  sister's  guardian  be. 

And,  oh  !   when  life's  last  scenes  are  o'er, 
May  my  glad  soul,  on  wings  of  love, 

Be  wafted  to  yon  heavenly  shore. 
Where  all  is  happiness  above. 

There  may  I  meet  thee,  brother  dear  ! 

And  never,  never  part  again  ; 
Where  wip'd  away,  is  every  tear — 

Where  comes  not  sorrow's  plaintive  strain . 


THEY  ARE  GONE. 


They  are  g-one  I  those  bright  and  blissful  hours, 
When  the  soft  wind  laugh'd,   'mid  the    green- 
wood bowers, 
And  the  night-bird  caroled  its  plaintive  lay, 
As  faded  the  crimson  tints  of  day. 

And  the  dew-drop  came,  at  the  twilight  close, 
To  sleep  on  the  breast  of  the  mountain  rose; 
They  are  gone  !  those  blissful  hours  are  passed, 
And  a  snowy  garb  on  the  earth  is  cast. 

And,  oh  !  when  the  friends  we  lov'd  are  fled, 
To  the  cold,  cold  mansions  of  the  dead ; 
Like  the  fragile  flower,  may  we  cease  to  bloom, 
And  sleep  with  them  in  the  peaceful  tomb. 


TO  LAKE  EUIE, 


On  Erie's  banks,  when  morn's  bright  green, 

Dispels  the  shades  of  night, 
And  sprinkles  o'er  the  dewy  lawn, 

Her  rosy  tints  of  light. 

I  stood  ;  with  ecstacy  I  gazed 

Upon  its  glassy  breast — 
The  winds  were  hush'd,  its  billows  slept 

Calm  as  an  infant's  rest. 

Oh  !   I  could  dwell,  forever  dwell 

'Mid  such  a  scene  as  this, 
Could  o'er  yon  lake's  fair  bosom  glide, 

Nor  dream  of  aught  but  bliss. 

Yet,  no  ;  it  must  not,  cannot  be, 

I  may  not  linger  here, 
Then,  Erie,  lovely  lake  !  farewell 

I  leave  thee  with  a  tear. 


TO  A  FAVORITE  PLANT. 


Farewell,  lovely  flow'ret  !  thy  delicate  form 
Is  crushed  by  the  breath  of  the  bleak  winter  storrn  ; 
Too  rudely,  alas  !  hath  it  swept  o'er  thy  head, 
Thy  leaves  once  so  fragrant,  lie  withered  and  dead, 

I  have  seen  thee  when  beauty's  pure  smile  was 

thine  own  ; 
I  sigh'd  to  behold  thee  thus  languish  alone  ; 
Bright  Phoebus  in  vain  doth  his  beams  orer  thee 

shed, 
Thy  leaves  once  so  fragrant,  lie  withered  and  dead. 

No  more  will  the  dew-drop  be  rock'd   on  thy 

breast, 
Sweetly  lull'd  by  the  soft  breathing  zephyr  to  rest ; 
But  the  tear  of  affection  shall  moisten  thy  bed, 
Tho'  thy  leaves  once  so  fragrant  lie  withered  and 

dead. 


A  ROSET, 


I  saw  at  e'en  a  blushing  rose, 

'Tvvas  delicate  and  fair, 
The  dew-drop  on  its  bosom  slept: 

Its  fragrance  filled  the  air. 

I  gazed  upon  its  fragile  form, 
While  zephyrs  round  it  blew, 

And  longed  to  pluck  it  from  the  busrv 
On  which  it  fondly  grew. 

I  turned  to  watch  a  placid  stream, 
That  murmured  at  my  side, 

As  through  a  deep  and  flowery  vale 
It  rapidly  did  glide. 

Unclouded  was  the  deep  blue  sky, 
Night's  silvery  queen  rose  bright, 

And  o'er  the  bosom  of  that  stream. 
She  poured  her  gentle  light, 


128  A    ROSE. 

I  turned  again  to  view  my  rose. 

But  it  no  more  was  gay, 
A  canker  worm  was  at  its  root, 

And  threatened  its  decay. 

Thus,  like  the  rose,  the  lovely  youth. 
In  innocence  may  bloom, 

And  soon,  by  death's  resistless  hand, 
Is  hurried  to  the  tomb. 


THE  TEAR. 

When  tossed  on   the  deep,    whore    the   ocean 
waves  foam, 

And  the  surge  dashes  wild  on  the  ear, 
How  sweet  the  reflection  that  lov'd  ones  at  home 

Will  shed  o'er  our  absence  a  tear. 

When  we  of  the  sunshine  of  hope  are  bereft, 
And  our  path  is  all  lonely  and  drear  ; 

When  as  oft  not  a  ray  to  console  us  is  left, 
There's  a  solace  in  sympathy's  tear. 

And  when  on  the  ear  some  old  melody  breaks, 
That  in  youth  we  delighted  to  hear, 

A  thousand  fond  scenes  in  our  bosom  awakes 
While  bursts  from  our  eye  the  sad  tear. 

When  the  last  rays  of  evening  are  faded  andgonef 
And  the  moon  her  pale  lustre  discloses, 

When  hush'd  are  the  notes  of  the  nightingale's 
song, 
And  nature  in  silence  reposes, — ■ 

How  sweet  to  revisit  the  grave  of  a  friend, 
When  our  sighs  none  but  heaven  can  hear ; 

To  kiss  the  cold  stone,  as  in  sadness  we  bend, 
And  moisten  her  name  with  a  tear, 


REFLECTIONS  AFTER  A  DRIVE. 


My  swelling  heart  is  bursting  with  delight, 
Again  I  feel  the  balmy  breath  of  spring  ; 

The  genial  sun  is  beautiful  and  bright ; 
I  hear  the  merry  warblers  sweetly  sing. 

On  rolJs  the  vehicle — -away  !   away  ! 

Through  many  a  wild,  romantic  spot  we  glide. 
Here  waking  flowers  their  opening  buds  display; 

There  streamlets  murmur  by  the  green  hill 
side. 

Oh  !  when  from  cage  released,  the  captive  bird 
Spreads  her  light  wings,  and  gaily  soars  in  air; 

Whose  carol,  'mid  sequester'd  groves  is  heard, 
My  buoyant  spirit  may  with  her  compare. 

No  threatening  clouds  o'ercast  my  sunny  sky  ; 

No  dark,  foreboding  thoughts  my  peace  alloy; 
The  rapid  moments  float  unheeded  by, 

Mine  is  indeed  a  lot  of  purest  joy. 


REFLECTIONS  AFTER  A  DRIVE.       131 

'Tis  evening's  tranquil  hour  of  peaceful  rest, 
And  silent  now  each  sportive  note  of  mirth, 

While  mellow  light  out  from  the  crimson  west, 
Looks  forth,  all  lovely,  o'er  the  sleeping  earth. 

Tho'  all  alone,  I'm  not  less  happy  now, 

Than  when  I  mingled  with  the  busy  throng, 

There  comes  a  pleasing  sadness  o'er  my  brow, 
My  muse  with   pensive  thoughts  inspires  my 
song. 

How  soon  our  brightest  moments  pass  away, 
And  but  the  memory  of  their  scenes  is  left  ; 

Scarcely  we  hail  the  dawn  of  pleasure's  ray, 
Ere  we,  alas  !   are  of  that  ray  bereft. 

The  rapid  vehicle,  no  more  I  see, 

Its  rolling  sound  upon  mine  ear  hath  died, — 
Yet  on  the  tablet  of  my  heart,  shall  be 

Engraved  the  memory  of  that  happy  ride. 


LINES, 


INSCRIBED    TO    PROFESSOR    R.,    INSTRUCTOR    IN    MUSIC    AT 
THE    INSTITUTION. 

Oh,  Germany  !  thrice  happy  land, 

Where  youth's  gay  morning  passed  away, 

Though  on  a  distant  shore  I  stand, 

To  thee  my  thoughts  still  love  to  stray  ; 

And  memory,  on  thy  scenes  shall  dwell — 

Home  of  my  fathers,  fare  thee  well  ! 

Thy  sunny  hanks,  thy  murmuring  rills, 
Where  music,  oft  my  heart  hath  cheered, 

Thy  flowery  lawns,  thy  verdant  hills, 
Still  to  this  bosom  are  endeared  ; 

Fond  memory  on  thy  scenes  shall  dwell, 

Home  of  my  fathers,  fare  thee  well  ! 

The  warbling  birds,  that  sweetly  sang 
At  morn,  around  my  fav'rite  tree, — 

The  meiry  bells,  that  loudly  rang, 
How  dear  their  mem'ry  still  to  me  ; 

May  peace  within  thy  bosom  dwell, 

Land  of  my  fathers,  fare  thee  well  ! 


133 


Yet  dearer  still  the  peaceful  cot, 

Where  parents  lov'd,  and  friends  caressed, 
Within  thy  walls,  oh  !  lovely  spot, 

May  heaven's  rich  blessings  ever  rest: 
My  memory  on  thy  scenes  shall  dwell, 
Home  of  my  fathers,  fare  thee  well ! 


MY  MOTHER'S  GRAVE. 


There  is  a  spot  I  love  to  tread, 
At  midnight's  peaceful  hour, 

When  sinks  the  sun  beneath  the  west, 
And  closed  is  every  flower. 

"When  not  a  ripple  doth  appear, 
To  wake  the  slumbering  wave, 

Oh  !  then  I  love  to  sit  and  weep 
Beside  my  mother's  grave. 

When  nature,  from  her  slumbers  wakes, 

To  hail  the  opening  morn, 
I  love  to  kiss  the  clay  cold  turf 

That  wraps  her  gentle  form. 

Though  doom'd  to  meet  the  cruel  storm, 

On  life's  tempestuous  wave, 
One  spot  shall  still  be  dear  to  me, 

My  mother's  lonely  grave. 


IDA 


OR,    THE    BROKEN-HEARTED. 


Tell  me,  ye  glittering  hosts  of  light, 

That  nightly  gem  yon  arch  above, 
If  in  your  beauteous  realms  so  bright, 

She  dwells,  the  sister  of  my  love. 
Her  lute  unstrung,  neglected  lies — 

No  more  its  chords  her  fingers  sweep, — 
Far  from  her  own  fair  Grecian  skies, 

She  in  her  lonely  grave  doth  sleep. 
Ye  birds  that  round  this  wild  retreat, 

Warble  your  notes  from  bough  to  bough, 
To  me  your  music  once  was  sweet, 

But,  oh  !  it  only  mocks  me  now. 
All  nature  smiles,  but  not  for  me  ; 

And  at  my  feet  her  flow 'rets  bloom  ; 
Yet  while  their  opening  buds  I  see, 

Xt  o'er  me  casts  a  deeper  gloom. 


13S  IDA  ;    OR,.   THE    BROKEN-HEARTED 

*Tis  wrong — but,  oh  !  I  cannot  bear, 

While  she  in  death  is  sleeping  here, 
That  aught  she  lov'd  a  smile  should  wear. 

Oh,  lost  Ianthe  !   sister  dear, 
How  mj  sad  spirit  longs  to  break 

Its  earthly  chain,   and  soar  away, 
Where  angel  choirs  harmonious  wake 

In  heavenly  strains  their  choral  lay.. 
My  bosom's  idol  is  no  more  ; 

I  have  no  tie  to  bind  me  here  ; 
I  would  that  on  our  native  shore, 

Thou  did'st  repose,  my  sister  dear. 
Oh,  Greece  !  my  own  bright  land  of  song> 

To  thee  my  eager  fancy  strains  ; 
Before  me  rise  a  youthful  throng, 

Companions  of  my  childhood's  days ; 
Land  where  the  muses  lov'd  to  dwell — - 
Land  of  the  cypress !   "  fare  thee  well." 

Thus  Ida  mus'd  ;  the  shades  of  night 

Were  gathering  round  a  lonely  wood, 
Where  in  a  simple  robe  of  white, 

Beside  a  new  made  grave  she  stood. 
Her  eye  was  of  the  mildest  blue, 

But  its  bright  glance  had  pass'd  away* 
And  with  her  curls  of  auburn  hue, 

The  sporting  zephyrs  seemed  to  play. 
She  could  not  weep,  or  for  the  grief 

That  weigh'd  so  heavy  on  her  heart. 


IDA  ;    OR,    THE    BROKEN-HEARTED.  137 

She  might  have  found  that  sweet  relief, 

Which  falling  tears  alone  impart. 
One  hand  upon  her  brow  was  press'd, 

As  on  her  knees  she  sank  in  prayer; 
The  other  held,  with  fond  caress, 

A  ringlet  of  her  sister's  hair. 
"  Father,  divine,"  she  meekly  said, 

"  Oh  !  deign  to  hear  the  suppliant's  prayer ; 
On  me  thy  chastening  hand  is  laid  ; 

I  ask  for  strength,  my  grief  to  bear." 
She  rose,  and  in  her  tearless  eye, 

A  look  of  calm  submission  beam'd — 
She  rais'd  it  to  the  azure  sky, 

Where  night's  pale  lamp  all  lovely  gleam'd ; 
Then  parting  from  her  snowy  brow, 

The  tresses  that  were  waving  there, 
Upon  a  mound,  herself  she  threw, 

Fann'd  by  the  cool  refreshing  air. 
She  rais'd  her  deep  blue  eyes  once  more, 

Her  hands  were  clasp'd  upon  her  breast, 
One  gentle  sigh,  and  all  was  o'er — 

The  broken-hearted  was  at  rest. 

Farewell,  Grecian  maiden  !    thy   grief-stricken 
bosom, 

No  longer  convulsive  with  agony  heaves  ; 
A  grave  by  the  side  of  thy  sister  we've  made  thee, 

And  pity,  a  sigh  o'er  thy  memory  breathes. 


138  IDA;    OR,    THE    BROKEN-HEARTED. 

We'll  plant  near  thy  pillow  the   cypress   and 
myrtle  ; 
The  willow  shall  weep  o'er  thy  desolate  grave, 
The  rose  and  the  woodbine,  shall  blossom  around 
thee, — 
Farewell,  Grecian  maiden  !  fair  child  of  the 
brave. 


PSALM  IV.  8. 

"  I  will  both  lay  me  down  in  peace,  and  sleep :  for  thou, 
Lord,  only,  makest  me  to  dwell  in  safety." 

Drawn  is  the  curtain  of  the  night, 
Oil  !    't  is  the  sacred  hour  of  rest ; 

Sweet  hour,  I  hail  thee  with  delight, 
Thrice  welcome  to  my  weary  breast. 

Oh,  God  !  to  thee,  my  fervent  prayer, 

I  offer,  kneeling  at  thy  feet ; 
Tho'  humbly  breath 'd,  oh  !   deign  to  hear — 

Smile  on  me  from  the  mercy  seat. 

While  angels  round,  their  watches  keep, 
Whose  harps  thy  praise  unceasing  swell, 
"I  lay  me  down  in  peace,  and  sleep/' 
For  thou  in  safety  mak'st  me  dwell. 

Drawn  is  the  curtain  of  the  night — 
Thou  bid'st  creation  silent  be — 

And  now,  with  holy,  calm  delight, 
Father,  I  would  commune  with  thee. 

Shepherd  of  Israel,  deign  to  keep, 
And  guard  my  soul  from  every  ill ; 

Thus  will  I  lay  me  down,  and  sleep, 
For  thou  in  safety  mak'st  me  dwell. 


THE    CHRISTMAS  HYMN. 


How  tranquil,  how  serene  the  night, 

When  to  the  sleeping  earih, 
A  heavenly  host  of  seraphs  bright, 

Proclaim'd  a  Saviour's  birth  ! 

The  shepherds,  on  Judea's  plains, 
With  wonder  heard  their  songs, 
"  Glory  to  God  ! — to  Him  alone, 
Our  highest  praise  belongs." 

"  Glory  to  God  !"  through  heaven's  broad  arch, 
The  sacred  chorus  ran, 
Good  will,  and  never-ending  peace, 
Henceforth  to  mortal  man. 

"  Glory  to  God  !"  let  all  the  earth, 
To  Him  their  honours  bring, 
And  every  heart,  and  every  tongue, 
His  praise  responsive  sing. 


TO   SOLITUDE, 

I  love  at  twilight's  pensive  hour, 
To  hie  me  to  some  lonely  spot, 

Where  dew-drops  kiss  each  sleeping  flower, 
And  daily  toil  and  cares  forgot. 

Fain  would  I  trace  each  lingering  star, 
That  glistens  in  yon  cloudless  sky, — 

They  shed  their  radiant  beams  afar, 
But  dawn  not  on  the  sightless  eye. 

Yet  solitude  has  charms  for  me, 
Oh  !  how  I  love  its  lone  retreat ; 

The  breeze  that  whispers  through  each  tree, 
Steals  on  my  ear  like  music  sweet. 

I  love  the  laving  stream  to  hear, 

Meandering  through  the  valley  fair  ; 

But  there's  a  joy  more  sweet,  more  dear, 
The  gentle  muse  inspires  me  there. 


142  TO    SOLITUDE. 

Borne  on  its  wings,  ray  spirit  flies, 
Far,  far  beyond  terrestrial  spheres  ; 

To  planetary  worlds  I  rise, 

While  distant  music  glads  my  ears. 

What  are  the  festive  halls  of  mirth, 
Oh,  solitude  !  compared  with  thee  % 

The  purest,  brightest  spots  of  earth, 
Are  thy  .sequestered  wilds  to  me. 


THE   BLIND  GIRL'S  SONG. 

They  tell  me  of  a  sunny  sky, 

Tinned  with  etherial  liorht : 
But>  ah  !   for  me,  no  sunbeams  shine, 

My  day  is  veil'd  in  night. 

Yet,  there's  a  beam,  a  nobler  beam, 
Of  knowledge,  bright  and  fair  ; 

That  beam  may  light  my  darken'd  path, 
And  soften  every  care. 

The  moon  that  o'er  the  sleeping  earth, 

Shines  forth  in  majesty, 
The  sparkling  deep  that  proudly  rolls, 

Hath  no  delights  for  me. 

Yet  I  can  hear  a  brother's  voice, 
In  tenderest  accents  speak  ; 

And  feel  a  sister's  pearly  tear, 
Steal  gently  on  my  cheek. 


SHALL  I  MEET   THEE   AGAIN 


DEDICATED    TO    A    FELLOW    PUPIL    IN    THE    INSTITUTION, 


Shall   I    meet    thee    again,  where   so    oft  we 
have  met, 
When  our  bosoms  from  sorrow  were  free  % 
Oh,  those  moments  of  pleasure  will  steal  o'er  me 

yet, 

When  thou  art  far  distant  from  me  ! 

Shall  I  meet  thee  again,  'neath  the  green  wil- 
low's shade, 

That  waves  o'er  Oneida's  calm  lake  1 
When  the  mild  rays  of  evening  in  loveliness  fade, 

Shall  my  lute,  its  soft  music  awake  ? 

Oh  !  say  shall  I  meet  thee  unalter'd  again — 
Thy  friendship  as  fervent  as  now  ] 

Or  will  absence  efface  from  thy  bosom  my  name, 
And  cold  be  the  smile  on  thy  brow  ? 


JERUSALEM. 

I  stood  upon  the  mount,  called  Olivet, 

The  spot  where  once  the  blessed  Saviour  sat ; 

And  from  his  lips  divinely  flow'd 

Accents  of  mercy,  to  a  fallen  race. 

The  sun  had  sunk  beneath  the  crimson  west, 

And  night,  around  its  dusky  mantle  threw. 

All — all  was  still — and  as  mine  eyes  survey'd 

The  ruins  of  that  city,  once  so  fair, 

I  wept ;  and  half  unconscious,  from  my  lips, 

Broke  forth  these  scattered  thoughts. — 

Jerusalem  ! 
How  like  that  glorious  orb,  thou  once  wert  lovely! 
But,  alas  !  how  changed  thy  glory  is  ! 
A  night  of  deeper  gloom  enshrouds  thee  now. 
Here  once,  magnificent,  a  temple  stood, 
And  Israel's  God  was  worshipped   and  adored ; 
But  where  that  temple  now  1  Oh,  not  one  stone 
Is  left,  to  mark  the  spot  where  once  it  stood. 
Jehovah's  name,  by  heathen  lips  blasphemed, 
And  Israel,  once  a  mighty  nation  strong, 
O'er  all  the  earth  dispersed — a  scattered  few — 


i 


146  JERUSALEM. 

Shunned,  and  despised,  alas !  in  exile  roam  ; 
Ill-fated  city,  't  was  thy  crimes  alone, 
That  hurl'd  upon  thy  head  this  misery ! 

"  Would  thou  had'st  known,  in  thy  prosperity, 

The  things  that  to  thy  peace  belonged  ! 

But  now,  they  from  thine  eyes  are  hid  :" 

Oh  !  thou  hast  slain  the  Lord's  anointed  Saviour 

of  thy  race  ! 
And  thou  hast  said,  "  His  blood  on  us   and  on 

our  children  be." 
Yet,  there  is  hope  for  thee,  Jerusalem ! 
Weep  o'er  thy  sins,  and  to  thy  God  return  ; 
Believe  Messiah  has  already  come, 
And  plead  the  merits  of  his  pardoning  blood. 


ADDRESS; 


Delivered  May,  1843,  at  the  N.  Y.  Tabernacle,  at  the  An- 
niversary Exhibition  of  the  Pupils  of  the  New  York  Insti- 
tution for  the  Blind. 


They  tell  us  of  the  starry  train, 
That  sparkles  in  yon  sky  of  blue, 

When  gently  o'er  the  verdant  plain 
Mild  evening  sheds  its  pensive  hue. 

And  of  the  glorious  orb  of  day, 

That  'lumes  the  spacious  earth  we  tread ; 
But  vain,  alas,  its  golden  ray 

Upon  our  sightless  eye  is  shed. 

They  tell  us  of  the  landscape  fair, 

The  gushing  fount — the  pleasant  shade — 

Of  spring's  young  flowers  that  blossom  there, 
In  nature's  lovely  garb  arrayed. 

The  smile  that  decks  the  human  face — 
The  brilliant  eye — the  joyous  brow, — 

Are  beauties  we  may  never  trace — 
A  rayless  midnight  shrouds  us  now. 


148  ADDRESS. 

But  why,  ah  !    why,  the  falling  tear  % 
Why  heaves  the  sad  unbidden  sigh  1 

The  lamp  of  knowledge,  bright  and  fair, 
Pours  lustre  on  our  mental  eye. 

And  oh  !  Religion's  heavenly  ray, 
Our  bosoms  light  with  sacred  love, 

And  bids  us  look  from  earth  away, 
To  an  eternal  world  above. 

To  us  our  Father  hath  denied 

The  blessings  he  on  you  bestows, 

Yet,  sweetly  now  our  moments  glide — 
He  gives  us  friends  to  soothe  our  woes. 

And  oh  !  we  never  can  express 
The  gratitude  to  you  we  owe — 

God  your  benevolence  shall  bless, 
And  his  approving  smile  bestow. 


AN  ADDP.ESS, 


DELIVERED  BY  FRANCES  JANE  CROSBY,  A  PUPIL  OF  THE 
NEW  YORK  INSTITUTION  FOR  THE  BLIND, 


At  the  Hall  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  in  presence  of 
the  Senate  and  Representatives  of  the  United  States,  on 
the  occasion  of  an  exhibition  given  by  seventeen  pupils 
from  the  Institution,  at  Washington,  January  24,  1844. 

Our  Union's  Capitol !   fair  "Washington — 
Thou  bear'st  the  father  of  thy  country's  name  ! 
A  hero,  whose  illustrious  deeds  have  won 
Triumphant  laurels  of  undying  fame. 

That  soul,  alive  to  every  generous  flame, 
None  ever  ask'd  his  sympathy  in  vain  ; 
That  noble  hero  sleeps,  and  o'er  his  grave, 
See  freedom's  spangled  banner  proudly  wave  ! 

Peace  to  the  ashes  of  the  mighty  dead  ! 
Who  in  the  glorious  cause  of  freedom  bled  : 
Methinks  that  now,  from  yonder  starry  sphere, 
Their  guardian  spirits  hover  o'er  you  here. 


150  AN    ADDRESS. 

Dear  friends,  a  sightless  group  presumes  to  claim 
Your  kind  attention,  not,  we  trust,  in  vain  ; 
A  sister  State  is  ours,  her  fostering  care, 
Yes,  her  benevolence  we  largely  share. 

As  o'er  the  mighty  Hudson's  breast  you  fly, 
A  stately  edifice  attracts  your  eye  ; 
That  edifice  our  generous  State  has  rear'd, 
Our  happy  home,  long  to  our  hearts  endear'd. 

Ah !  yes,  't  was  there  our  fingers  learn'd  to  trace, 
The  sacred  volume,  God's  own  word  of  grace  ; 
Kind  friends  watch  o'er  us  with  parental  care, 
Our  every  joy,  our  every  grief  they  share. 

What  though  these  orbs  in  rayless  darkness  roll, 
Instruction  pours  its  radiance  o'er  the  soul, 
And  fancy  pictures  to  the  mental  eye, 
The  glittering  hosts  that  'lume  the  midnight  sky. 

The  noble  strains  of  music,  sweet  and  clear, 
You  have   this  evening  heard,  were  taught  us 

there ; 
Where  time  its  rapid  flight  unheeded  wings, 
Each  fleeting  moment  some  new  pleasure  brings. 

Oh,  you  who  here  from  every  State  convene, 
Illustrious  band  !  may  we  not  hope  the  scene 


AN    ADDRESS.  151 

You  now  behold,  will  prove  to  every  mind, 
Instruction  hath  a  ray  to  cheer  the  blind. 

Without  that  ray,  sad  were  indeed  their  lot, 
Dejected,  lonely,  and  too  oft  forgot, — 
They  brood  in  silent  sadness  o'er  their  woe, 
For  them  our  tears  of  heartfelt  pity  flow. 

One  boon  of  you,  illustrious  band  !  we  claim, 
Oh  !  say  our  boon  shall  not  be  ask'd  in  vain  ; 
Go  aid  their  cause,  and  rear  for  them  a  home, 
Leave,  leave  them  not  unheeded  still  to  roam. 

Go  aid  their  cause,  their  mental  night  dispel, 
Bid  grief's  sad  sigh  no  more  their  bosoms  swell; 
May  every  State  in  this  bright  land  of  fame, 
An  Institution  for  the  Blind  contain. 

Go  aid  their  cause,  and  He  who  reigns  above, 
Will  your  kind  labours  graciously  approve ; 
Those  sightless  ones,  your  tender  cares  relieve, 
For  you  full  many  a  grateful  prayer  will  breathe, 


'AN  ADDRESS, 


DELIVERED  BI  FRANCES  JANE  CROSBY,  A  PUPIL,    ETC., 

Before  the  Governor,  Council  and  Assembly  of  the  State  of 
New  Jersey,  on  the  occasion  of  an  exhibition  given  before 
that  body,  at  Trenton,  by  twenty  pupils  from  the  Institu- 
tion.    January  29,  1844. 

Now  mid  the  evening  sky  serene, 
Majestic  rolls  night's  silver  queen  ; 
Her  starry  train  revolving  round, 
Smiles  o'er  calm  nature's  sleep  profound. 

Alas  !  though  mild  their  lustre  be, 
Their  beauties  we  may  never  see  ; 
But  there  's  a  ray  more  pure,  more  bright, 
That  in  our  bosoms  sheds  its  light. 

That  ray  our  darken'd  path  beguiles, 

And  wreaths  the  clouded  brow  with  smiles  ; 

'T  is  education,  dearer  far 

Than  brilliant  moon,  or  beaming  star. 


AN    ADDRESS.  153 

Thanks  to  our  Father,  God  above, 
For  the  rich  tokens  of  his  love  ; 
The  blind  girl's  home  he  deigns  to  bless, 
And  turns  her  grief  to  happiness. 

How  oft,  at  evening's  silent  hour, 
"When  zephyrs  fan  each  fragrant  flower, 
And  peaceful  nature  calmly  slept 
In  pensive  sadness,  we  have  wept. 

Now  sweetly  glide  the  hours  away, 
Cheered  by  soft  music's  thrilling  ray  ; 
And  pure  affection's  accents  dear, 
Fall  gently  on  our  listening  ear. 

We — honor'd  legislative  band  ! 
With  glowing  hearts  before  you  stand  ; — 
We  plead  for  those  bereft  of  sight, 
Who  sigh  for  education's  light. 

We  tender  you  our  thanks  sincere, 
For  those  entrusted  to  our  care  ; 
But  many,  many  yet  remain, 
And  shall  we  plead  for  them  in  vain  \ 


154  AN    ADDRESS. 


TO  HIS  EXCELLENCY,  THE  GOVERNOR. 

We,  lionor'd  sir !  appeal  to  thee, 
In  their  behalf— thy  sympathy 
We  humbly  ask — thou,  ever  kind, 
Will  not  refuse  to  aid  the  blind. 

To  say,  we  are  aware  't  is  thine,* 
On  whom  instruction's  light  may  shine  ; 
And  will  this  generous  State  deny, 
The  fund  sufficient  to  supply 

Those,  who  their  aid,  their  pity  claim  ; 
And  must  we  plead  for  them  in  vain  1 
No,  lionor'd  sir  !   this  must  not  be  ; 
Once  more  we  ask  thy  sympathy. 

Make  them  the  objects  of  thy  care, 
May  they  the  light  of  knowledge  share 
And  many  a  prayer  for  thee  will  rise, 
To  Him  enthroned  above  the  skies. 


*  Referring  to  the  act  empowering  the  Governor  to  nomi- 
nate the  subjects  for  instruction  under  its  provisions. 


ADDRESS, 

Recited  at  several  exhibitions  when  on  a  tour  through  the 
western  part  of  the  State  of  New  York,  hi  August,  1842, 
inviting  the  public  to  send  the  Blind  to  the  Institution. 

Contented,  happy,  tho'  a  sightless  band, 
Dear  friends  !  this  evening  we  before  you  stand  ; 
We  for  a  moment  your  attention  claim, 
And  trust  that  boon  will  not  be  asked  in  vain. 

The  varied  scenes  the  rural  landscape  yields, 
The  smiling  meadows  and  the  flowery  fields, 
The  boundless  Ocean  and  the  vaulted  skies, 
Must  never,  never  glad  these  sightless  eyes. 

But  there's  a  lamp  within,  whose  sacred  light, 
Burns  with  a  lustre  ever  pure  and  bright — - 
'Tis  education — we  have  shown  to  you 
"What  by  its  rays  illumed,  the  blind  can  do. 

Without  it,  life  a  dreary  waste  would  be, 
With  nought  to  break  its  long  monotony ; 
No  sunny  beams  to  light  our  cheerless  way— 
Our  vacant  thoughts,  ah  !  whither  would  they 
stray  ? 


156  ADDRESS. 

But  thanks  to  God,  his  sovereign  care  we  own, 
He  hath  not  left  us  friendless  and  alone, — 
His  pitying  eye  beheld  the  helpless  blind, 
And  reared  us  friends  affectionate  and  kind. 

Fain  would  I  bear  you  to  our  happy  home — 
Come  then  with  me,  on  fancy's  pinions  roam, 
Where  peace  and  love,  twin  sisters,  fondly  smile, 
And  music's  strains  our  cheerless  hours  beguile. 

When  fair  Aurora  from  the  orient  sky 
Bids  night's  celestial  orb  before  her  fly, 
We  hail  the  opening  day  with  vigor  new, 
And  with  delight  our  various  tasks  pursue. 

But  oh  !  while  thus  our  moments  sweetly  glide, 
We  think  of  those  like  us  of  sight  denied,    - 
Whose  minds,  enshrouded  in  a  mental  night, 
Sigh  to  behold  instruction's  glorious  light. 

Perchance  some  tender  parent  now  is  here, 
Whose  only  child,  perhaps  a  daughter  dear, 
Of  sight  bereaved,  doth  tears  of  pity  claim, 
Then  why  at  home  that  darling  one  detain  1 

Place,  I  entreat  you,  place  your  offspring  there, 
Where  she  the  blessings  we  enjoy  may  share  ; 
Where,  pruned  by  education's  culturing  hand, 
Her  intellect,  long  dormant,  may  expand. 


ADDRESS.  157 


And  she  will  bless  you  with  affection's  tears, 
When  she  to  you  returns  in  after  years — 
Will  with  her  fingers  trace  the  sacred  page, 
When  o'er  you  steals  apace  declining  age. 


AN  ADDRESS, 

Composed  and  recited  while  on  a  tour  with  a  party  from 
the  Institution  through  the  interior  of  the  State  of  New 
York,  in  September,  1843. 

The  deep  blue  sky,  serenely  bright, 
On  which  your  eyes  with  rapture  gaze  ; 

Where  stars  unveil  their  mellow  light, 
And  God  his  wondrous  power  displays  : 

The  gushing  fount,  whose  glassy  breast, 
Reflects  the  parting  hues  of  day, 

Nature,  in  robes  of  verdure  drest, 

The  opening  buds,  the  flow'rets  gay  ; 

The  lofty  hills,  the  greenwood  bowers, — 
Though  fair  these  rural  scenes  appear, 

On  them  to  gaze  must  ne'er  be  ours  ; 
These  orbs,  alas  !   they  cannot  cheer. 

But,  oh  !  instruction's  nobler  light, 
Sheds  on  our  mental  eye  its  ray  ; 

We  hail  its  beams  with  new  delight, 
And  bid  each  gloomy  thought  away. 


ADDRESS.  159 

To  us,  our  God  kind  friends  has  given, 
Whose  names  we  ever  shall  revere  ; 

Recorded  in  the  book  of  heaven, 
Shall  their  munificence  appear. 

'T  was  they  who  reared  the  happy  home, 
Beneath  whose  peaceful  roof  we  dwell ; 

No  more  unheeded  now  we  roam, 
Our  lips  the  notes  of  gladness  swell. 

But  while  our  sunny  moments  fly, 

Unsullied  by  a  shade  of  care, 
For  those  like  us  bereft,  we  sigh, 

And  wish  they,  too,  our  joys  might  share. 

Is  there  no  tender  parent  here, 

Who  oft  in  sorrow  weeps  alone, 
For  the  sweet  child  he  holds  so  dear, 

O'er  whom  a  rayless  night  is  thrown  ? 

Then  place  amid  our  youthful  band, 

That  lov'd  one,  cherish'd  long  by  thee  ; 

There  will  her  intellect  expand. 

And  her  young  heart  beat  light  and  free. 

There  will  her  fingers  learn  to  trace 
The  page  by  inspiration  given  ; — 

The  page  of  sacred  truth  and  grace — 
The  star  that  guides  her  soul  to  heaven. 


