'^:^jmyy 


mmmt 


WMm'>m^?& 


'x-^^^^^.^.yr.^.VM^V>. 


•>7  J^  y  1, 


THIS  BOOK 

IS  FROM 

THE  LIBRARY  OF 

Rev.  James  Leach 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2007  with  funding  from 

IVIicrosoft  Corporation 


http://www.archive.org/details/christianleadersOOryleuoft 


V 

IN   THE    EIGHTEENTH    CENTURY. 


BISHOP  JOHN  CHARLES  RYLE,   D.D. 


Frontispiece. 


The 

CHRISTIAN  LEADERS 
OF  ENGLAND 

In   the   Eighteenth    Century 


BY 

JOHN  CHARLES  RYLE,  D.D. 

(First  Bishop  of  Liverpool,   1880- 1900) 

Jiuthor  of 
''Knots  Untied,"  "  Light  from  Old  Times,"  S^e.,  &c. 


FOURTH    EDITION 


WITH   EIGHT  PORTRAIT    ILLUSTRATIONS 


London : 

Chas.   J.   Thynne   &  Jarvis,   Ltd. 
Whitefriars   Street,  Fleet   Street,  E.G.  4 


MAR  2  5  1968 


OF 


T0«0^ 


xtfutt. 


[HE  volume  now  in  the  reader's  hands  requires  a  fevs^ 
prefatory  sentences   of  explanation.      I   should   bi 
sorry  if  there  was  any  mistake  as  to  its  nature  and 
intention. 

It  consists  of  a  series  of  biographical  papers,  contributed  to 
3.  well-known  and  most  valuable  monthly  period'cal  during  the 
years  1866  and  1867.*  My  object  in  drawmg  up  these  papers 
was  to  bring  before  the  public  in  a  comprehensive  form  the 
-lives,  characters,  and  work  of  the  leading  ministers  by  whose 
agency  God  was  pleased  to  revive  Christianity  in  England  in 
the  1 8th  century.  I  had  long  felt  that  these  great  men  were 
not  sufficiently  known,  and  their  merit  in  consequence  not  suffi- 
ciently recognized.  I  thought  that  the  Church  and  the  world 
ought  to  know  something  more  than  they  seem  to  know  about 
such  men  as  Whitefield,  Wesley,  Romaine,  Rowlands,  Grim- 
shaw,  Berridge,  Venn,  Toplady,  Hervey,  Walker,  and  Fletcher. 
For  twenty  years  I  waited  anxiously  for  some  worthy  account 
of  these  mighty  spiritual  heroes.  At  last  I  became  weary  of 
waiting,  and  resolved  to  take  the  pen  in  my  own  hand,  and  do 
what  I  could  in  the  pages  of  a  periodical.  These  papers,  in 
compliance  with  the  wishes  of  friends,  are  now  brought  together 
in  a  portable  form. 

How  far  my  attempt  has  been  successful,  I  must  now  leave 

•  The  Family  Trttuury. 


iv  PREFACE. 

the  public  to  judge.  To  literary  merits  the  volume  can  lay  no 
claim.  Its  chapters  were  written  from  month  to  month  in  the 
midst  of  many  ministerial  engagements,  under  a  pressure  which 
none  can  understand  but  those  who  write  for  periodicals.  To 
expect  such  a  volume  to  be  a  model  of  finished  composition 
would  be  absurd.  I  only  lay  claim  to  a  tolerable  degree  of 
accuracy  about  historical  facts.  I  have  been  careful  to  make 
no  statement  for  which  I  could  not  find  some  authority. 

The  reader  will  soon  discover  that  I  am  an  enthusiastic 
admirer  of  the  men  whose  pictures  I  have  sketched  in  this 
volume.  I  confess  it  honestly.  I  am  a  thorough  enthusiast 
about  them.  I  believe  firmly  that,  excepting  Luther  and  his 
Continental  contemporaries  and  our  own  martyred  Reformers, 
the  world  has  seen  no  such  men  since  the  days  of  the  apostles. 
I  believe  there  have  been  none  who  have  preached  so  much 
clear  scriptural  truth,  none  who  have  lived  such  lives,  none 
who  have  shown  such  courage  in  Christ's  service,  none  who 
have  suflTered  so  much  for  the  truth,  none  who  have  done  so 
much  good.  If  any  one  can  name  better  men,  he  knows  more 
than  I  do. 

I  now  send  forth  this  volume  with  an  earnest  prayer  that  God 
may  pardon  all  its  defects,  use  it  for  his  own  glory,  and  raise 
up  in  his  Church  men  like  those  who  are  here  described.  Surely, 
when  we  look  at  the  state  of  England,  we  may  well  say,  "  Where 
is  the  Lord  God  of  Whitefield  and  of  Rowlands,  of  Grimshaw 
and  of  Venn  ?     O  Lord,  revive  thy  work ! " 

J.  C.  RYLE. 

Straddrokb  Vicarage,  Augttst  lo,  1868. 

P.S. — I  think  it  right  to  say  that  the  chief  substance  of  the 
biography  of  "  Whitefield,"  in  this  volume,  was  originally  de- 
livered as  a  lecture  in  London  in  1852.  It  now  appears 
remoulded  and  enlarged.  The  other  ten  biographies  were  pre- 
pared expressly  for  the  Family  Ireasury. 


CONTENTS. 


©tie  UlfUgfoua  anb  iWoral  ©ontJttton  of  ©nglanU 

AT  THE  BEGINNING  OF  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. 

Pag 
Importance  of  the  History  of  the  Eighteenth  Century — Political  and  Financial  Position 
of  England — Low  State  of  Religion  both  in  Churches  and  Chapels — Testimonies 
on  the  subject — Defects  of  Bishops  and  Clergy — Poverty  of  the  Printed  Theology 
— Wretched  Condition  of  the  Country  as  to  Education,  Morals,  and  Popular  Litera- 
ture— The  "  Good  Old  Times"  a  mere  Mvth xi 


11. 

2C!)r  ag^ncp  6p  iaf\itlf  ffiijn'stuuitg  toaa  5RfbibpD  in  ©nglanft 

IN  THE  MIDDLE  OF  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. 

Improvement  of  England  since  middle  of  Eighteenth  Century  an  undeniable  Fact- 
Agents  in  effecting  the  Change  a  few  isolated  and  humble  Clergymen — Preaching 
the  chief  Instrument  they  employed — The  Manner  of  their  Preaching — The  Sub- 
stance of  their  Preaching .* 21 


III. 

(Stoxqt  S2ai)ttefieia  antr  Ijts  ilHt'ntattg. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Whitefield's  Birth-place  and  Parentage — Educated  at  Gloucester  Grammar  School- 
Enters  Pembroke  College,  Oxford — Season  of  Spiritual  Conflict — Books  which 
were  made  useful  to  him — Ordained  by  Bishop  Benson — First  Sermon — Preaches 
in  London — Curate  of  Dummer,  Hants — Goes  to  America — Returns  in  a  year- 
Preaches  in  the  open  air — Is  excluded  from  most  London  Pulpits — Extent  of  his 
Labours  for  thirty-one  years — Dies  at  Newbury  Port,  America,  in  1770 — Interest- 
ing circumstances  of  his  Death 30 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  II. 

PfcSff 

Estimate  of  Good  that  WhiteAeld  did — ^Testimonies  to  his  direct  Usefukiess — Indirect 
Good  that  he  did — Peculiar  character  of  his  Preaching — ^Witnesses  to  his  real  power 
as  a  Preacher — Analysis  of  his  seventy-five  published  Sermons — Simplicity,  Direct- 
ness, Power  of  Description,  Earnestness,  Pathos,  Action,  Voice,  and  Fluency,  his 
leading  Excellences — Inner  Life,  Humility,  Love  to  Christ,  Laboriousness,  Self- 
denial,  Disinterestedness,  Cheerfulness,  Catholicity— Specimen  of  his  Preaching..     4^ 


TV, 

Holin  SSIfSirs  anD  It's  ftttntstrs. 

CHAPTER  I. 

John  Wesley — Reason  why  better  known  than  many  of  his  Contemporaries — Birth>- 
place — Sketch  of  his  Father  and  Mother — Educated  at  Charter-House  and  Oxford 
— Early  Religious  History — Ordained,  1725 — Lives  at  Oxford  eight  Years — ^Joins 
the  Methodist  Club — Sails  for  Georgia,  1736— Returns  to  England,  1738 — Com- 
mences Field-preaching — Continues  Working  for  fifty-three  Years — Dies  in  1791— 
Singleness  of  Eye,  Diligence,  and  Versatility  of  M  iiid — Arminianism 64, 

CHAPTER  IL 

Wesley's  Preaching — Preface  to  Published  Volume  of  Sermons — Extracts  from  Ser- 
mons Preached  before  the  University  of  Oxford — Rules  for  the  Guidance  of  his 
Helpers — Advice  to  his  Preachers — Letter  to  the  Bishop  of  Lincoln — General 
Estimate  of  Wesley's  Merits 89 


V. 

SiSlilHam  (Snmsljah)  of  |^atoorti|»  anH  |)i0  i)ttni0n-c. 

CHAPTER  1. 

Born  at  Brindle,  1708 — Educated  at  Christ's  College,  Cambridge — Ordained,  1731 — 
Curate  of  Rochdale  and  Todmorden — Death  of  his  Wife — Minister  of  Haworth, 
174a — Description  of  Haworth — Style  of  his  Ministry — His  Manner  of  Life,  Dili- 
gence, Charity,  Love  of  Peace,  Humility — His  Ministerial  Success 106^ 

CHAPTER  II. 

Extra-Parochial  Labour  in  Yorkshire,  Lancashire,  and  Cheshire — 1  he  Nature  of  this 
Labour  Explained  and  Defended — Persecution  at  Colne — The  Archbishop  of  York's 
Visit  to  Haworth — His  Love  to  the  Articles  and  Homilies — His  Last  Illness,  Dying 
Sayings,  Death,  and  Funeral lao. 

CHAPTER  in. 
I>iterary  Remains — Covenant  and  Summary  of  Belief— Letter  to  Christians  in  London 
— Anecdotes  and  Traditions — Influence  in  his  Parish — Haworth  Races  Stopped — 
Mode  of  Discovering  F'alse  Professors — Peculiarities  in  his  Conduct  of  Divine 
Service — Testimony  of  Romaine,  Venn,  and  Newton 13) 


CONTENTS.  irfl 

VI. 

S^illtam  Uomainr  anD  Iiia  iAmtstrs. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Bom  at  Hartlepool  in  1714 — Educated  at  Houghton-le-Spring  and  Christ  Church, 
Oxford — Character  for  Learning  at  Oxford — Ordained,  1736— Curate  of  Lew- 
trenchard  and  Banstead — Lectures  at  St.  Botolpb's  1748,  and  St.  Dunstan's 
1749— Troubles  at  St.  Dunstan's — Morning  Preacher  at  St.  George's,  Hanover 
Square,  1750 — Loses  his  Preachership,  1755 — Gresham  Professor  of  Astronomy — 
Morning  Preacher  at  St  Olave,  Southwark,  and  St.  Bartholomew  the  Great- 
Preaches  before  the  University  of  Oxford — Gives  great  Offence 149 

CHAPTER  II. 

Rector  of  St.  Anne's,  Blackfriars,  1764 — Difficulties  in  the  way  of  his  Appointment — 
Letter  to  Lady  Huntingdon — Usefulness  at  Blackfriars — Peculiarities  of  Address 
and  Temperament — Last  Illness  and  Dying  Saying — Death,  1795 — Public  Funeral 
—Literary  Remains 163 


VIL 

]9«inf(I  i^otulantfs  anD  fits  l^tntstrp. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Bom  in  Wales,  1713 — Educated  at  Hereford,  and  never  at  a  University — Ordained, 
1733 — Curate  of  Llangeitho — An  Altered  Man  in  173S — Extraordinary  Effect  of  his 
Preaching — Extra-parochial  and  Out-door  Preaching — License  Withdrawn  by  thr 
Bishop  in  1763 — Continues  to  Preach  in  *.  Chapel  at  Llangeitho — Died  1790— 
Account  of  his  Portrait 180 

CHAPTER  II. 
Analysis  of  his  Preaching — Much  of  Christ — Richness  of  Thought — Felicity  of  Lan- 
guage— Large  Measure  of  Practical  and  Experimental  Teaching — Manner,  De- 
livery, and  Voice — Christmas  Evans'  Description  of  his  Preaching — Testimony  of 
Mr.  Jones  of  Creaton — Specimens  of  Rowlands'  Sermons — Inner  Life  and  Private 
Character — Humility,  Prayerfulness,  Diligence,  Self-Denial,  Courage,  Fervour- 
Rowland  Hill's  Anecdote 195 


Vlli. 

Sfolin  iSmrOlgr  anH  f)(s  i^tnistrs. 

CHAPTER  L 

Bom  at  Kingston,  Notts,  1716 — Educated  at  Nottingham — Fails  to  learn  the  Business 
of  a  Grazier — Goes  to  Clare  Hall,  Cambridge,  1734 — Elected  Fellow  of  Clare, 
1742 — Curate  of  Stapleford,  1749 — Vicar  of  Everton,  1755 — Begins  to  Preach  the 
Full  Gospel,  1757 — Open-air  Preaching — Itinerant  and  Extra- parochial  Ministra- 
tions— Singular  Physical  Effect  on  some  Hearers — Opposition  and  Persecution — 
Dies,  1793 — His  Epitaph 216 


«wii  CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  II. 

Hia  Quaintness  and  Eccentricity — No  Quaintness  in  his  Outlines  of  Sermons — His 
Style  of  Preaching  Defended — Specimen  of  his  Quaint  Thoughts — His  HumiFity, 
Love  of  Christ,  Kindness,  Self-Denial,  Shrewdness,  Courage — His  Sympathizing 
Letters *Vi 


l^rnrj  Fenn  anb  %i%  l^fntBtrp. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Bora  at  Barnes,  Surrey,  1724 — His  Ancestors — Curious  Anecdotes  of  his  Boyhood 
and  Youth — Enters  St.  John's,  Cambridge,  1742 — Fellow  of  Queen's,  1749 — Curate 
of  West  Horsley,  1750 — Curate  of  Clapham,  1754 — Change  in  his  Religious  Views 
— Becomes  acquainted  with  Whitefield  and  Lady  Huntingdon — Married,  1757 — 
Vicar  of  HuddcrsBeld,  1759.. 254 

CHAPTER  IT. 

Mode  of  Working  at  Huddersfield— Effect  of  his  Ministry — Fruits  found  in  1824 — Extra- 
parochial  Labours — Friendly  Relation  with  Whitefield — Health  Fails — ^Wife  Dies 
—Leaves  Huddersfield  for  YelHng,  1771 — Description  of  Yelling — Second  Marriage 
•^Description  of  Life  at  Yelling — Dies,  1797 268 

CHAPTER  IIL 

HlIs  Preaching  Analyzed — His  Literary  Remains  Examined — Extraordinary  Power  as  a 
Letter-writer — Soundness  of  Judgment  about  Doctrine — ^Wisdom  and  Good  Sense 
about  Duties — Prudent  Management  of  his  Children — Unworldliness  and  Cheer- 
fulness— Catholicity  and  Kindliness  of  Spirit — Testimony  of  Cowper,  Simeon,  and 
Sir  James  Stephen 98$ 


X. 

SSlalfttr  of  ©ruto,  anii  |)iB  fttiniatrp. 

Born  at  Exeter,  1714 — Educated  at  Exeter  College,  Oxford — Ordained,  1737 — Curate  of 
Truro,  1746 — ^At  First  verj' ignorant  of  the  Gospel — Mr.  Conon's  Influence — Effect 
of  his  Preaching — Opposition — Self-denial  and  Holy  Life — Remarkable  Effect  on 
Soldiers — Private  Un if j  JtfAetin)»s — Died,  i76x—Li(«!a^-y  Remains — Preaching...  306 


XL 

games  f^erbep  of  SlSarsion  iPabfll,  anU  Ij(8  ilECntetts. 

Born  near  Northampton,  1713 — Educated  at  Lincoln  College,  Oxford — Intimacy  with 
John  Wesley — Ordained,  1736 — Curate  of  Dummcr,  1738 ;  of  Bideford,  1740;  and 
of  Weston  Favell,  1743 — Early  Religious  History — Correspondence  with  White- 
field —  Studious  Habit  at  Weston  Favell — Literary  Remains  Analyzed — Corre- 
spondence—  Humour — Private  Life  —  Charity — Self-denial — Died,  1758 — Testi- 
mon''  of  Romaine,  Venn,  Cowper,  Cecil,  Bickersteth,  and  Daniel  Wilson 328 


CONTENTS.  « 


XII. 

Page 

®orn  at  Farnham,  1740 — Ordained,  1762 — Vicar  of  Broad  Hembury,  Devonshire,  1768 
— Removes  to  London,  1775 — Dies,  1778 — Conversion,  1756 — His  Preaching — His 
Writings  as  a  Controversialist — His  Hymns 358 


XIII. 

JFUtr!)fr  of  iWaUelfg,  anlJ  Ijt's  pimt'strg, 

CHAPTER  I. 

Bom  In  Switzerland,  1729 — Educated  at  Geneva  and  Leutzburg — ^Wishes  to  be  a  Sol- 
dier— Becomes  a  Tutor  in  England,  1750— Private  Tutor  in  Mr.  Hill's  Family, 
1752 — Becomes  Acquainted  with  Methodists — Inward  Conflict — Ordained,  1757 — 
Vicar  of  Madeley,  1760— Correspondence  with  Charles  Wesley  and  Lady  Hunt- 
ingdon    385 

CHAPTER  IL 

Ministerial  Labours  at  Madeley — Superintendent  of  Trevecca  College,  1768 — Resigns 
Trevecca,  1771 — Laid  aside  by  ill  health,  1776 — Goes  to  Clifton,  Newington,  and 
Switzerland — Returns  to  Madeley,  1781 — Marries — Dies,  1765— His  Preaching- 
Writing — Private  Character — Testimony  of  Wesley  and  Venn 405 


XIV. 

'COHOkUSION ! .436 


I. 

The  Religious  and  Moral  Condition 

of    England 

AT    THE 
BEGINNING    OF   THE    EIGHTEENTH    CENTURY. 

Importance  of  the  History  of  the  Eighteenth  Century — Political  and  Financial  Position  of 
England — Low  State  of  Religion  both  in  Churches  and  Chapels — Testimonies  on  the 
subject — Defects  of  Bishops  and  Qergy — Poverty  of  the  Printed  Theology — Wretched 
Condition  of  the  Country  as  to  Education,  Morals,  and  popular  Literature — The 
"  Good  Old  Times"  a  mere  Myth. 

[HE  subject  I  propose  to  handle  in  this  volume  is  partly 
historical  and  partly  biographical.  If  any  reader 
expects  from  the  title  a  fictitious  tale,  or  something 
partly  drawn  from  my  imagination,  I  fear  he  will  be  disappointed. 
Such  writing  is  not  in  my  province,  and  I  have  no  leisure  for  it 
if  it  was.  Facts,  naked  facts,  and  the  stern  realities  of  life, 
absorb  all  the  time  that  I  can  spare  for  the  press. 

I  trust,  however,  that  with  most  readers  the  subject  I  have 
chosen  is  one  that  needs  no  apology.  The  man  who  feels  no 
interest  in  the  history  and  biography  of  his  own  country  is 
surely  a  poor  patriot  and  a  worse  philosopher. 

"  Patriot "  he  cannot  be  called.  True  patriotism  will  make 
an  Englishman  care  for  everything  that  concerns  England.  A 
true  patriot  will  like  to  know  something  about  every  one  who 


12  POLITICAL  AND  FINANCIAL 

has  left  his  mark  on  English  character,  from  the  Venerable 
Bede  down  to  Hugh  Stowell,  from  Alfred  the  Great  down  to 
Pounds,  the  originator  of  Ragged  Schools. 

"  Philosopher  "  he  certainly  is  not.  What  is  philosophy  but 
history  teaching  by  examples  ?  To  know  the  steps  by  which 
England  has  reached  her  present  position  is  essential  to  a  right 
understanding  both  of  our  national  privileges  and  our  national 
dangers.  To  know  the  men  whom  God  raised  up  to  do  his 
work  in  days  gone  by,  will  guide  us  in  looking  about  for 
-standard-bearers  in  our  own  days  and  days  to  come. 

I  venture  to  think  that  there  is  no  period  of  English  history 
which  is  so  thoroughly  instructive  to  a  Christian  as  the  middle 
of  last  century.  It  is  the  period  of  which  we  are  feeling  the 
influence  at  this  very  day.  It  is  the  period  with  which  our 
grandfathers  and  great-grandfathers  were  immediately  con- 
nected. It  is  a  period,  not  least,  from  which  we  may  draw 
most  useful  lessons  for  our  own  times. 

Let  me  begin  by  trying  to  describe  the  actual  condition  of 
England  a  hundred  years  ago.  A  few  simple  facts  will  suffice 
to  make  this  plain. 

The  reader  will  remember  that  I  am  not  going  to  speak  of 
our /^///zVa/ condition.  I  might  easily  tell  him  that,  in  the  days 
of  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  and  the  elder 
Pitt,  the  position  of  England  was  very  different  from  what  it  is 
now.  Great  statesmen  and  orators  there  were  among  us,  no 
doubt.  But  our  standing  among  the  nations  of  the  earth  was 
com])aratively  poor,  weak,  and  low.  Our  voice  among  the 
nations  of  the  earth  carried  far  less  weight  than  it  has  since 
obtained.  The  foundation  of  our  Indian  Empire  had  hardly 
been  laid.  Our  Australian  possessions  were  a  part  of  the  world 
only  just  discovered,  but  not  colonized.  At  home  there  was  a 
strong  party  in  the  country  which  still  longed  for  the  restoration 
of  the  Stuarts.  In  1745  the  Pretender  and  a  Highland  army 
marched  from  Scotland  to  invade  England,  and  got  as  far  as 


POSITION  OF  ENGLAND.  I  J. 

Derby.  Corruption,  jobbing,  and  mismanagement  in  high 
places  were  the  rule,  and  purity  the  exception.  Civil  and 
religious  disabilities  still  abounded.  The  test  and  corporation 
Acts  were  still  unrepealed.  To  be  a  Dissenter  was  to  be 
regarded  as  only  one  degree  better  than  being  seditious  and  a 
rebel  Rotten  boroughs  flourished.  Bribery  among  all  classes 
was  open,  unblushing,  and  profuse.  Such  was  England  politi- 
cally a  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago. 

The  reader  will  remember,  furthermore,  that  I  am  not  going 
to  speak  of  our  condition  in  a  fijiancial  and  economical  point  of 
view.  Our  vast  cotton,  silk,  and  linen  manufactures  had  hardly 
begun  to  exist.  Our  enormous  mineral  treasures  of  coal  and 
iron  were  scarcely  touched.  We  had  no  steam-boats,  no  loco- 
motive engines,  no  railways,  no  gas,  no  electric  telegraph,  no 
penny  post,  no  scientific  farming,  no  macadamized  roads,  no 
free-trade,  no  sanitary  arrangements,  and  no  police  deserving 
the  name.  Let  any  Englishman  imagine,  if  he  can,  his  country 
without  any  of  the  things  that  I  have  just  mentioned,  and  he 
will  have  some  faint  idea  of  the  economical  and  financial  con- 
dition of  England  a  hundred  years  ago. 

But  I  leave  these  things  to  the  political  economists  and  his- 
torians of  this  world.  Interesting  as  they  are,  no  doubt,  they 
form  no  part  of  the  subject  that  I  want  to  dwell  upon.  I  wish 
to  treat  that  subject  as  a  minister  of  Christ's  gospel.  It  is  the 
religious  and  moral  condition  of  England  a  hundred  years  ago 
to  which  I  shall  confine  my  attention.  Here  is  the  point  to- 
which  I  wish  to  direct  the  reader's  eye. 

The  state  of  this  country  in  a  rehgious  and  moral  point  of 
view  in  the  middle  of  last  century  was  so  painfully  unsatisfac- 
tory that  it  is  difficult  to  convey  any  adequate  idea  of  it.  Eng- 
lish people  of  the  present  day  who  have  never  been  led  to- 
inquire  into  the  subject,  can  have  no  conception  of  the  dark- 
ness that  prevailed.  From  the  year  1700  till  about  the  era  of 
the  French  Revolution,  England  seemed  barren  of  all  that  is 


14  LOW  STATE  OF  RELIC  I  OX. 

really  good.  How  such  a  state  of  things  can  have  arisen  in  a 
land  of  free  Bibles  and  professing  Protestantism  is  almost  past 
comprehension.  Christianity  seemed  to  lie  as  one  dead,  inso- 
much that  you  might  have  said  "  she  is  dead."  Morality,  how- 
ever much  exalted  in  pulpits,  was  thoroughly  trampled  under 
foot  in  the  streets.  There  was  darkness  in  high  places  and 
darkness  in  low  places — darkness  in  the  court,  the  camp,  the 
Parliament,  and  the  bar — darkness  in  countr}'^,  and  darkness  in 
town — darkness  among  rich  and  darkness  among  poor — a 
gross,  thick,  religious  and  moral  darkness — a  darkness  that 
might  be  felt. 

Does  any  one  ask  what  the  churches  were  doing  a  hundred 
years  ago  ]  The  answer  is  soon  given.  The  Church  of  Eng- 
land existed  in  those  days,  with  her  admirable  articles,  her 
time-honoured  liturgy,  her  parochial  system,  her  Sunday  ser- 
vices, and  her  ten  thousand  clergy.  The  Nonconformist  body 
existed,  with  its  hardly  won  liberty  and  its  free  pulpit.  But 
one  account  unhappily  may  be  given  of  both  parties.  They 
-existed,  but  they  could  hardly  be  said  to  have  lived.  They  did 
nothing ;  they  were  sound  asleep.  The  curse  of  the  Uniformity 
Act  seemed  to  rest  on  the  Church  of  England.  The  blight  of 
ease  and  freedom  from  persecution  seemed  to  rest  upon  the 
Dissenters.  Natural  theology,  without  a  single  distinctive  doc- 
trine of  Christianity,  cold  morality,  or  barren  orthodoxy,  formed 
the  staple  teaching  both  in  church  and  chapel.  Sermons  every- 
where were  little  better  than  miserable  moral  essays,  utterly 
devoid  of  anything  likely  to  awaken,  convert,  or  save  souls. 
Both  parties  seemed  at  last  agreed  on  one  point,  and  that  was 
to  let  the  devil  alone,  and  to  do  nothing  for  hearts  and  souls. 
And  as  for  the  weighty  truths  for  which  Hooper  and  Latimer 
had  gone  to  the  stake,  and  Baxter  and  scores  of  Puritans 
had  gone  to  jail,  they  seemed  clean  forgotten  and  laid  on  the 
:shelf. 

When  such  was  the  state  of  things  in  churches  and  chapels, 


ARCHBISHOP  SECKEIVS  CHARGE.  X% 

at  can  surprise  no  one  to  learn  that  the  land  was  deluged  with 
infidelity  and  scepticism.  The  prince  of  this  worid  made  good 
use  of  his  opportunity.  His  agents  were  active  and  zealous  in 
promulgating  every  kind  of  strange  and  blasphemous  opinion. 
Collins  and  Tindal  denounced  Christianity  as  priestcraft 
Whiston  pronounced  the  miracles  of  the  Bible  to  be  grand 
impositions.  Woolston  declared  them  to  be  allegories.  Arian- 
ism  and  Socinianism  were  openly  taught  by  Clark  and  Priestly, 
and  became  fashionable  among  the  intellectual  part  of  the  com- 
munity. Of  the  utter  incapacity  of  the  pulpit  to  stem  the  pro- 
gress of  all  this  flood  of  evil,  one  single  fact  will  give  us  some 
idea.  The  celebrated  lawyer,  Blackstone,  had  the  curiosity, 
early  in  the  reign  of  George  III.,  to  go  from  church  to  church 
and  hear  every  clergyman  of  note  in  London.  He  says  that  he 
did  not  hear  a  single  discourse  which  had  more  Christianity  in 
it  than  the  writings  of  Cicero,  and  that  it  would  have  been  im- 
possible for  him  to  discover,  from  what  he  heard,  whether  the 
-preacher  were  a  follower  of  Confucius,  of  Mahomet,  or  of  Christ ! 
Evidence  about  this  painful  subject  is,  unhappily,  only  too 
abundant.  My  difficulty  is  not  so  much  to  discover  witnesses, 
as  to  select  them.  This  was  the  period  at  which  Archbishop 
Seeker  said,  in  one  of  his  charges,  "  In  this  we  cannot  be 
mistaken,  that  an  open  and  professed  disregard  of  religion 
is  become,  through  a  variety  of  unhappy  causes,  the  distin- 
guishing character  of  the  age.  Such  are  the  dissoluteness  and 
contempt  of  principle  in  the  higher  part  of  the  world,  and  the 
profligacy,  intemperance,  and  fearlessness  of  committing  crimes 
in  the  lower  part,  as  must,  if  the  torrent  of  impiety  stop  not, 
become  absolutely  fatal.  Christianity  is  ridiculed  and  railed  at 
with  very  little  reserve  ;  and  the  teachers  of  it  without  any  at 
all."  This  was  the  period  when  Bishop  Butler,  in  his  preface  to 
the  "Analogy,"  used  the  following  remarkable  words:  "  It  has 
-come  to  be  taken  for  granted  that  Christianity  is  no  longer  a 
subject  of  inquiry ;  but  that  it  is  now  at  length  discovered  to  be 


f  6  DEFECTS  OF  BISHOPS 

fictitious.  And  accordingly  it  is  treated  as  if,  in  the  present  age^ 
this  were  an  agreed  point  among  all  persons  of  discernment^ 
and  nothing  remained  but  to  set  it  up  as  a  principal  subject  for 
mirth  and  ridicule."  Nor  were  such  complaints  as  these  con- 
fined to  Churchmen.  Dr.  Watts  declares  that  in  his  day  "  there 
was  a  general  decay  of  vital  religion  in  the  hearts  and  lives  of 
men,  and  that  it  was  a  general  matter  of  mournful  observation 
among  all  who  lay  the  cause  of  God  to  heart."  Dr.  Guyse, 
another  most  respectable  Nonconformist,  says,  "The  religion 
of  nature  makes  up  the  darling  topic  of  our  age  ;  and  the  reli- 
gion of  Jesus  is  valued  only  for  the  sake  of  that,  and  only  so 
far  as  it  carries  on  the  light  of  nature,  and  is  a  bare  improve- 
ment of  that  kind  of  light  All  that  is  distinctively  Christian, 
or  that  is  peculiar  to  Christ,  everything  concerning  him  that  has 
not  its  apparent  foundation  in  natural  light,  or  that  goes  beyond 
its  principles,  is  waived,  and  banished  and  despised."  Testi- 
mony like  this  might  easily  be  multiplied  tenfold.  But  I  spare 
the  reader.  Enough  probably  has  been  adduced  to  prove  that 
when  I  speak  of  the  moral  and  religious  condition  of  England 
at  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century  as  painfully  unsatis- 
factory, I  do  not  use  the  language  of  exaggeration. 

What  were  the  bishops  of  those  days?  Some  of  them  were 
undoubtedly  men  of  powerful  intellect  and  learning,  and  of  un- 
blamable lives.  But  the  best  of  them,  like  Seeker,  and  Butler^ 
and  Gibson,  and  Lowth,  and  Horn,  seemed  unable  to  do  more 
than  deplore  the  existence  of  evils  which  they  saw  but  knew 
not  how  to  remedy.  Others,  like  Lavington  and  Warburton, 
fulminated  fierce  charges  against  enthusiasm  and  fanaticism, 
and  appeared  afraid  of  England  becoming  too  religious !  The 
majority  of  the  bishops,  to  say  the  truth,  were  mere  men  of  the 
world.  They  were  unfit  for  their  position.  The  prevailing 
tone  of  the  Episcopal  body  may  be  estimated  by  the  fact,  that 
Archbishop  Cornwallis  gave  balls  and  routs  at  Lambeth  Palace 
until  the  king  himself  interfered  by  letter  and  requested  him  ta 

1S6) 


AND  PAROCHIAL  CLERGY.  17 

desist*  Let  me  also  add,  that  when  the  occupants  of  the 
Episcopal  bench  were  troubled  by  the  rapid  spread  of  White- 
field's  influence,  it  was  gravely  suggested  in  high  quarters  that 
the  best  way  to  stop  his  influence  was  to  make  him  a  bishop. 

What  were  the  parochial  clergy  of  those  days  ?  The  vast 
majority  of  them  were  sunk  in  worldliness,  and  neither  knew 
nor  cared  anything  about  their  profession.  They  neither  did 
good  themselves,  nor  liked  any  one  else  to  do  it  for  them.  They 
hunted,  they  shot,  they  farmed,  they  swore,  they  drank,  they 
gambled.  They  seemed  determined  to  know  everything  except 
Jesus  Christ  and  him  crucified.  When  they  assembled  it  was 
generally  to  toast  "  Church  and  King,"  and  to  build  one  another 
up  in  earthly-mindedness,  prejudice,  ignorance,  and  formahty. 
When  they  retired  to  their  own  homes,  it  was  to  do  as  little  and 
preach  as  seldom  as  possible.  And  when  they  did  preach, 
their  sermons  were  so  unspeakably  and  indescribably  bad,  that 
it  is  comforting  to  reflect  they  were  generally  preached  to  empty 
benches. 

What  sort  of  theological  literature  did  this  period 
bequeath  to  us  ?  The  poorest  and  weakest  in  the  English 
language.  This  is  the  age  to  which  we  owe  such  divinity  as 
that  of  the  "  Whole  Duty  of  Man,"  and  the  sermons  of  Tillotson 


•  The  king's  letter  on  this  occasion  is  so  curious,  that  I  give  it  in  its  entirety,  as  I  find 
it  in  that  interesting  though  ill-arranged  book,  "The  Life  and  Times  of  Lady  Hunting- 
don." The  letter  was  evidently  written  in  consequence  of  an  interview  which  Lady 
Huntingdon  had  with  the  king.  A  critical  reader  will  remember  that  the  king  was  pro- 
bably more  familiar  with  the  German  than  the  English  language. 

"  My  good  Lord  Prelate, — I  could  not  delay  giving  you  the  notification  of  the  grief 
and  concern  with  which  my  breast  was  affected  at  receiving  authentic  information  that 
routs  have  made  their  way  into  your  palace.  At  the  same  time,  I  must  signify  to  you  my 
sentiments  on  this  subject,  which  hold  these  levities  and  vain  dissipations  as  utterly  inex- 
pedient, if  not  unlawful,  to  pass  in  a  residence  for  many  centuries  devoted  to  divine  studies, 
religious  retirement,  and  the  extensive  exercise  of  charity  and  benevolence  ;  I  add,  in  a 
place  where  so  many  of  your  predecessors  have  led  theii  lives  in  such  sanctity  as  has 
thrown  lustre  on  the  pure  religion  they  professed  and  adorned.  From  the  dissatisfaction 
with  which  you  must  perceive  I  behold  these  improprieties,  not  to  speak  in  harsher  terms, 
and  on  s.iill  nsorc  pious  principles,  1  tru.-it  you  will  suppress  them  immediately  ;  so  that  I 
may  not  have  occasion  to  show  any  further  marks  of  my  displeasure,  or  to  interpose  in  a 
different  manner.  May  God  take  your  grace  into  his  almighty  pro(eciijn  ! — I  remain,  my 
Lord  Primate,  your  gracious  fiicaii.  G.  R.** 

(195^  i 


l8  EDUCATION,  MORALS,  AND 

and  Blair.  Inquire  at  any  old  bookseller's  shop,  and  you  will 
find  there  is  no  theology  so  unsaleable  as  the  sermons  published 
about  the  middle  and  latter  part  of  the  i8th  century. 

What  sort  of  education  did  the  lower  orders  possess  ? 
In  the  greater  part  of  parishes,  and  especially  in  rural 
districts,  they  had  no  education  at  all.  Nearly  all  our  rural 
schools  have  been  built  since  1800.  So  extreme  was  the  ignor- 
ance, that  a  Methodist  preacher  in  Somersetshire  was  charged 
before  the  magistrates  with  swearing,  because  in  preaching  he 
quoted  the  text,  "He  that  belie veth  not  shall  be  damned!" 
^Vhile,  not  to  be  behind  Somersetshire,  Yorkshire  furnished  a 
constable  who  brought  Charles  Wesley  before  the  magistrates  as 
a  favourer  of  the  Pretender,  because  in  public  prayer  he  asked 
the  Lord  to  "bring  back  his  banished  ones!"  To  cap  all,  the 
vice-chancellor  of  Oxford  actually  expelled  six  students  from 
the  University  because  "  they  held  Methodistic  tenets,  and  took 
on  them  to  pray,  read,  and  expound  Scripture  in  private  houses." 
To  swear  extempore,  it  was  remarked  by  some,  brought  an 
Oxford  student  into  no  trouble ;  but  to  pray  extempore  was  an 
offence  not  to  be  borne  ! 

What  were  the  morals  of  this  period  ?  It  may  suffice 
to  say  that  duelling,  adultery,  fornication,  gambling,  swear- 
ing, Sabbath-breaking  and  drunkenness  were  hardly  regarded  as 
vices  at  all.  They  were  the  fashionable  practices  of  people  in 
the  highest  ranks  of  society,  and  no  one  was  thought  the  worse 
of  for  indulging  in  them.  The  best  evidence  of  this  point  is 
to  be  found  in  Hogarth's  pictures. 

What  was  the  popular  literature  of  this  time  ?  I  pass 
over  the  fact  that  Bolingbroke,  and  Gibbon,  and  Hume 
the  historian,  were  all  deeply  dyed  with  scepticism.  I  speak 
of  the  light  reading  which  was  most  in  vogue.  Turn  to 
the  pages  of  Fielding,  Smollett,  Swift,  and  Sterne,  and  you  have 
the  answer.  The  cleverness  of  these  writers  is  undeniable ; 
but  the  indecency  of  many  of  their  writings  is  so  glaring  and 


UTERATURE  OF  THE  PERIOD.  1 9 

gross,  that  few  people  now-a-days  would  like  to  allow  their 
works  to  be  seen  on  their  drawing-room  table. 

My  picture,  I  fear,  is  a  very  dark  and  gloomy  one.  I  wish 
It  were  in  my  power  to  throw  a  little  more  light  into  it.  But 
facts  are  stubborn  things,  and  specially  facts  about  literature. 
The  best  literature  of  this  period  is  to  be  found  in  the 
moral  writings  of  Addison,  Johnson,  and  Steele.  But  the 
effects  of  such  literature  on  the  general  public,  it  may  be  feared, 
was  infinitesimally  small.  In  fact,  I  beheve  that  Johnson 
and  the  essayists  had  no  more  influence  on  the  religion  and 
morality  of  the  masses  than  the  broom  of  the  renowned  Mrs. 
Partington  had  on  the  waves  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean. 

To  sum  up  all,  and  bring  this  part  of  my  subject  to  a  conclu- 
sion, I  ask  my  readers  to  remember  that  the  good  works  with 
which  everyone  is  now  familiar  did  not  then  exist  in  our 
country.  Wilberforce  had  not  yet  attacked  the  slave  trade. 
Howard  had  not  yet  reformed  prisons.  Raikes  had  not  estab- 
lished Sunday  schools.  We  had  no  Bible  Societies,  no  ragged 
schools,  no  city  missions,  no  pastoral  aid  societies,  no  missions 
to  the  heathen.  The  spirit  of  slumber  was  over  the  land.  In 
a  religious  and  moral  point  of  view,  England  was  sound  asleep. 

I  cannot  help  remarking,  as  I  draw  this  chapter  to  a  conclu- 
sion, that  we  ought  to  be  more  thankful  for  the  times  in  which 
we  live.  I  fear  we  are  far  too  apt  to  look  at  the  evils  we  see 
around  us,  and  to  forget  how  much  worse  things  were  a  hundred 
years  ago.  I  have  no  faith,  for  my  part,  and  I  boldly  avow  it, 
in  those  "good  old  times"  of  which  some  delight  to  speak.  I 
regard  them  as  a  mere  fable  and  a  myth.  I  believe  that  our 
own  times  are  the  best  times  that  England  has  ever  seen.  I  do 
not  say  this  boastfully.  I  know  we  have  many  things  to  de- 
plore ;  but  I  do  say  that  we  might  be  worse.  I  do  say  that  we 
were  much  worse  a  hundred  years  ago.  The  general  standard 
of  rehgion  and  morality  is  undoubtedly  far  higher.  At  all 
events,  at  present,  we  are  awake.  We  see  and  feel  evils  to  whiciij 


f  o  THE  "  GOOD  OLD  TIMES''  A  MYTH. 

a  hundred  years  ago,  men  were  insensible.  We  struggle  to  be 
free  from  these  evils ;  we  desire  to  amend.  This  is  a  vase  im- 
provement. With  all  our  many  faults  we  are  not  sound  asleep. 
On  every  side  there  is  stir,  activity,  movement,  progress,  and 
not  stagnation.  Bad  as  we  are,  we  confess  our  badness ;  weak 
as  we  are,  we  acknowledge  our  failings ;  feeble  as  our  efforts 
are,  we  strive  to  amend  ;  little  as  we  do  for  Christ,  we  do  try 
to  do  something.  Let  us  thank  God  for  this !  Things  might 
be  worse.  Comparing  our  own  days  with  the  middle  of  the 
i8th  century,  we  have  reason  to  thank  God  and  take 
courage. 


II.    . 

IN  THE  MIDDLE  OF  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. 

Improvement  of  England  since  middle  of  Eighteenth  Century  an  undeniable  Fact — Agent* 
in  effecting  the  Change  a  few  isolated  and  humble  Clergymen — Preaching  the  chief 
Instrument  they  employed — The  Manner  of  their  Preaching — The  Substance  of  their 
Preaching. 

[HAT  a  great  change  for  the  better  has  come  over  Eng- 
land in  the  last  hundred  and  fifty  years  is  a  fact  which 
I  suppose  no  well-informed  person  would  ever  attempt 
to  deny.  You  might  as  well  attempt  to  deny  that  there  was  a 
Protestant  Reformation  in  the  days  of  Luther,  a  Long  Parlia- 
ment in  the  time  of  Cromwell,  or  a  French  republic  at  the  end 
of  the  last  century.  There  has  been  a  vast  change  for  the 
better.  Both  in  religion  and  morahty  the  country  has  gone 
through  a  complete  revolution.  People  neither  think,  nor  talk, 
nor  act  as  they  did  in  1750.  It  is  a  great  fact,  which  the  chil- 
dren of  this  world  cannot  deny,  however  they  may  attempt  to 
explain  it.  They  might  as  well  try  to  persuade  us  that  high-water 
and  low-water  at  London  Bridge  are  one  and  the  same  thing. 

But  by  what  agency  was  this  great  change  effected?  To 
whom  are  we  indebted  for  the  immense  improvement  in  religion 
and  morality  which  undoubtedly  has  come  over  the  land?  Who, 
in  a  word,  were  the  instruments  that  God  employed  in  bringing 
about  the  great  English  Reformation  of  the  eighteenth  century! 


sa  IMPROVEMENT  OF  ENGLAND 

This  is  the  one  point  that  I  wish  to  examine  generally  in  the 
present  chapter.  The  names  and  biographies  of  the  principal 
agents  I  shall  reserve  for  future  chapters. 

The  government  of  the  country  can  lay  no  claim  to  the  credit 
of  the  change.  Morality  cannot  be  called  into  being  by  penal 
enactments  and  statutes.  People  were  never  yet  made  religious 
by  Acts  of  Parliament.  At  any  rate,  the  Parliaments  and  ad- 
ministrations of  last  century  did  as  little  for  religion  and  moral- 
ity as  any  that  ever  existed  in  England. 

Nor  yet  did  the  change  come  from  the  Church  of  England, 
as  a  body.  The  leaders  of  that  venerable  communion  were 
utterly  unequal  to  the  times.  Left  to  herself,  the  Church  of 
England  would  probably  have  died  of  dignity,  and  sunk  at  her 
anchors. 

Nor  yet  did  the  change  come  from  the  Dissenters.  Content 
with  their  hardly-won  triumphs,  that  worthy  body  of  men 
seemed  to  rest  upon  their  oars.  In  the  plenary  enjoyment  of 
their  rights  of  conscience,  they  forgot  the  great  vital  principles 
of  their  forefathers,  and  their  own  duties  and  responsibilities. 

Who,  then,  were  the  reformers  of  the  last  century  %  To  whom 
are  we  indebted,  under  God,  for  the  change  which  took  place  1 

The  men  who  wrought  deliverance  for  us,  at  this 
period,  were  a  few  individuals,  most  of  them  clergymen  of  the 
Established  Church,  whose  hearts  God  touched  about  the  same 
time  in  various  parts  of  the  country.  They  were  not  wealthy 
or  highly  connected.  They  had  neither  money  to  buy  ad- 
herents, nor  family  influence  to  command  attention  and  respect. 
They  were  not  put  forward  by  any  Church,  party,  society,  or 
institution.  They  were  simply  men  whom  God  stirred  up  and 
brought  out  to  do  his  work,  without  previous  concert,  scheme, 
or  plan.  They  did  his  work  in  the  old  apostoHc  way,  by 
becoming  the  evangelists  of  their  day.  They  taught  one  set  of 
truths.  They  taught  them  in  the  same  way,  with  fire,  reality, 
earnestness,  as  men  fully  convmced  of  what  they  taught.    They 


AN  UNDENIABLE  FACT.  23 

taught  them  in  the  same  spirit,  always  loving,  compassionate, 
and,  like  Paul,  even  weeping,  but  always  bold,  unflinching,  and 
not  fearing  the  face  of  man.  And  they  taught  them  on  the 
same  plan,  always  acting  on  the  aggressive ;  not  waiting  for 
sinners  to  come  to  them,  but  going  after,  and  seeking  sinners ; 
not  sitting  idle  till  sinners  offered  to  repent,  but  assaulting  the 
high  places  of  ungodliness  like  men  storming  a  breach,  and 
giving  sinners  no  rest  so  long  as  they  stuck  to  their  sins. 

The  movement  of  these  gallant  evangelists  shook  England 
from  one  end  to  another.  At  first  people  in  high  places 
affected  to  despise  them.  The  men  of  letters  sneered  at  them 
as  fanatics ;  the  wits  cut  jokes,  and  invented  smart  names  foi 
them;  the  Church  shut  her  doors  on  them;  the  Dissenters 
turned  the  cold  shoulder  on  them;  the  ignorant  mob  persecuted 
them.  But  the  movement  of  these  few  evangelists  went  on,  and 
made  itself  felt  in  every  part  of  the  land.  Many  were  aroused 
and  awakened  to  think  about  religion ;  many  were  shamed  out 
of  their  sins ;  many  were  restrained  and  frightened  at  their  own 
ungodliness ;  many  were  gathered  together  and  induced  to  pro- 
fess a  decided  hearty  religion ;  many  were  converted ;  many 
who  affected  to  dislike  the  movement  were  secretly  provoked 
to  emulation.  The  little  sapling  became  a  strong  tree;  the 
little  rill  became  a  deep,  broad  stream ;  the  little  spark  became 
a  steady  burning  flame.  A  candle  was  lighted  of  which  we  are 
now  enjoying  the  benefit.  The  feeling  of  all  classes  in  the 
land  about  religion  and  morality  gradually  assumed  a  totally 
different  complexion.  And  all  this,  under  God,  was  effected 
by  a  few  unpatronized,  unpaid  adventurers  !  When  God  takes 
a  work  in  hand,  nothing  can  stop  it.  When  God  is  for  us, 
none  can  be  against  us. 

The  instrumentality  by  which  the  spiritual  reformers  of  the 
last  century  carried  on  their  operations  was  of  the  simplest 
description.  It  was  neither  more  nor  less  than  the  old  apostolic 
weapon  of  -preaching.   The  sword  which  St.  Paul  wielded  with 


a4  THE  INSTRUMENT  EMPLOYED. 

such  mighty  effect,  when  he  assaulted  the  strongholds  of  hea- 
thenism eighteen  hundred  years  ago,  was  the  same  sword  by 
which  they  won  their  victories.  To  say,  as  some  have  done, 
that  they  neglected  education  and  schools,  is  totally  incorrect. 
Wherever  they  gathered  congregations,  they  cared  for  the  chil- 
dren. To  say,  as  others  have  done,  that  they  neglected  the 
sacraments,  is  simply  false.  Those  who  make  that  assertion 
only  expose  their  entire  ignorance  of  the  religious  history  of 
England  at  this  time.  It  wouJd  be  easy  to  name  men 
among  the  leading  reformers  of  the  i8th  century  whose  com- 
municants might  be  reckoned  by  hundreds,  and  who  honoured 
the  Lord's  Supper  more  than  forty-nine  out  of  fifty  clergymen 
in  their  day.  But  beyond  doubt  preaching  was  their  favourite 
weapon.  They  wisely  went  back  to  first  principles,  and  took 
up  apostolic  plans.  They  held,  with  St.  Paul,  that  a  minister's 
first  work  is  "  to  preach  the  gospel." 

They  preached  everywhere.  If  the  pulpit  of  a  parish  churcli 
was  open  to  them,  they  gladly  availed  themselves  of  it.  If  it 
could  not  be  obtained,  they  were  equally  ready  to  preach  in  a 
barn.  No  place  came  amiss  to  them.  In  the  field  or  by  the 
road-side,  on  the  village-green  or  in  a  market-place,  in  lanes  or 
in  alleys,  in  cellars  or  in  garrets,  on  a  tub  or  on  a  table,  on  a 
bench  or  on  a  horse-block,  wherever  hearers  could  be  gathered, 
the  spiritual  reformers  of  the  i8th  century  were  ready  to  speak 
to  them  about  their  souls.  Tliey  were  instant  in  season  and 
out  of  season  in  doing  the  fisherman's  work,  and  compassed  sea 
and  land  in  carrying  forward  thtir  Father's  business.  Now,  all 
this  was  a  new  thing.  Can  we  wonder  that  it  produced  a  great 
effect  ? 

They  preached  simply.  They  rightly  concluded  that  the  very 
first  qualification  to  be  aimed  at  in  a  sermon  is  to  be  under- 
stood. They  saw  clearly  that  thousands  of  able  and  well-com- 
posed sermons  are  utterly  useless,  because  they  are  above  the 
heads  of  the  hearers.     They  strove  to  come  down  to  the  level 


PREACHING  TO  THE  HEART.  25 

of  the  people,  and  to  speak  what  the  poor  could  understand. 
To  attain  this  they  were  not  ashamed  to  crucify  their  style,  and 
to  sacrifice  their  reputation  for  learning.  To  attain  this  they 
used  illustrations  and  anecdotes  in  abundance,  and,  like  their 
divine  Master,  borrowed  lessons  from  every  object  in  nature. 
They  carried  out  the  maxim  of  Augustine, — "  A  wooden  key  is 
not  so  beautiful  as  a  golden  one,  but  if  it  can  open  the  door 
when  the  golden  one  cannot,  it  is  far  more  useful."  They  re- 
vived the  style  of  sermons  in  which  Luther  and  Latimer  used 
to  be  so  eminently  successful.  In  short,  they  saw  the  truth  of 
what  the  great  German  reformer  meant  when  he  said,  "  No  one 
can  be  a  good  preacher  to  the  people  who  is  not  willing  to 
preach  in  a  manner  that  seems  childish  and  vulgar  to  some." 
Now  all  this  again  was  quite  new  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago. 

They  preached  fervently  and  directly.  They  cast  aside  that 
dull,  cold,  heavy,  lifeless  mode  of  delivery,  which  had  long  made 
sermons  a  very  proverb  for  dulness.  They  proclaimed  the 
words  of  faith  with  faith,  and  the  story  of  life  with  life.  They 
spoke  with  fiery  zeal,  like  men  who  were  thoroughly  persuaded 
that  what  they  said  was  true,  and  that  it  was  of  the  utmost 
importance  to  your  eternal  interest  to  hear  it.  They  spoke  like 
men  who  had  got  a  message  from  God  to  you,  and  must  deliver 
it,  and  must  have  your  attention  while  they  delivered  it.  They 
threw  heart  and  soul  and  feeling  into  their  sermons,  and  sent 
their  hearers  home  convinced,  at  any  rate,  that  the  preacher 
was  sincere  and  wished  them  well.  They  believed  that  you 
must  speak  from  the  heart  if  you  wish  to  speak  to  the  heart, 
and  that  there  must  be  unmistakable  faith  and  conviction 
within  the  pulpit  if  there  is  to  be  faith  and  conviction  among 
the  pews.  All  this,  I  repeat,  was  a  thing  that  had  become 
almost  obsolete  in  those  days.  Can  we  wonder  that  it 
took  people  by  storm,  and  produced  an  immense  effect  ? 

But  what  was  the  substance  and  subject-matter  of  the  preach- 
ing which  produced  such  wonderful  effect  a  hundred  years  ago  1 


20  THE  SUBSTANCE  AND  SUBJECT-MATTER 

I  will  not  insult  my  readers'  common  sense  by  only  saying  that 
it  was  "  simple,  earnest,  fervent,  real,  genial,  brave,  life-like," 
and  so  forth ;  I  would  have  it  understood  that  it  was  eminently 
doctrinal,  positive,  dogmatical,  and  distinct.  The  strongholds 
of  the  last  century's  sins  would  never  have  been  cast  down  by 
mere  earnestness  and  negative  teaching.  The  trumpets  which 
blew  down  the  walls  of  Jericho  were  trumpets  which  gave  no 
uncertain  sound.  The  English  evangelists  of  this  century  were 
not  men  of  an  uncertain  creed.  But  what  was  it  that  they 
proclaimed  1  A  little  information  cjv  this  point  may  not  be 
without  use. 

For  one  thing,  then,  the  spiritual  reformers  of  the  1 8th  century 
taught  constantly  the  sufficiency  and  supremacy  of  Holy  Scripture. 
The  Bible,  whole  and  unmutilated,  was  their  sole  rule  of  faith 
and  practice.  They  accepted  all  its  statements  without  ques- 
tion or  dispute.  They  knew  nothing  of  any  part  of  Scripture 
being  uninspired.  They  never  allowed  that  man  has  any 
"  verifying  faculty "  within  him,  by  which  Scripture  statements 
may  be  weighed,  rejected,  or  received.  They  never  flinched 
from  asserting  that  there  can  be  no  error  in  the  Word  of  God  ; 
and  that  when  we  cannot  understand  or  reconcile  some  part  of 
its  contents,  the  fault  is  in  the  interpreter  and  not  in  the  text 
In  all  their  preaching  they  were  eminently  men  of  one  book. 
To  that  book  they  were  content  to  pin  their  faith,  and  by  it  to 
stind  or  fall.  This  was  one  grand  characteristic  of  their 
preaching.    They  honoured,  they  loved,  they  reverenced  the  Bible. 

P'urthermore,  the  reformers  of  the  i8th  century  taught  con- 
stantly the  total  corruption  of  human  nature.  They  knew  nothing 
of  the  modern  notion  that  Christ  is  in  every  man,  and  that  all 
possess  something  good  within,  which  they  have  only  to  stir  up 
and  use  in  order  to  be  saved.  They  never  flattered  men  and 
women  in  this  fashion.  They  told  them  plainly  that  they  were 
dead,  and  must  be  made  alive  again  ;  that  they  were  guilty, 
lost,  helpless,  and  hopeless,  and  in  imminent  danger  of  eternal 


OF  THE  PREACHING.  2J 

ruin.     Strange  and  paradoxical  as  it  may  seem  to  some,  their 
ftrst  step  towards  making  men  good  was  to  show  them  that 
ihey  were  utterly  bad  ;  and  their  primary  argument  in  persuad 
ing  men  to  do  something  for  their  souls  was  to  convince  them 
that  they  could  do  nothing  at  all. 

Furthermore,  the  reformers  of  the  i8th  century  taught  con- 
stantly that  Christ's  death  upon  ike  cross  was  the  only  satisfaction 
for  maris  sin  ;  and  that,  when  Christ  died,  he  died  as  our  sub- 
stitute— "  the  just  for  the  unjust."  This,  in  fact,  was  the  cardi- 
nal point  in  almost  all  their  sermons.  They  never  taught  the 
modern  doctrine  that  Christ's  death  was  only  a  great  example 
of  self-sacrifice.  They  saw  in  it  something  far  higher,  greater, 
deeper  than  this.  They  saw  in  it  the  payment  of  man's  mighty 
debt  to  God.  They  loved  Christ's  person  ;  they  rejoiced  in 
Christ's  promises  ;  they  urged  men  to  walk  after  Christ's 
example.  But  the  one  subject,  above  all  others,  concerning 
Christ,  which  they  delighted  to  dwell  on,  was  the  atoning  blood 
which  Christ  shed  for  us  on  the  cross. 

Furthermore,  the  reformers  of  the  i8th  century  taught  con- 
stantly the  great  doctrine  of  Justification  by  faith.  They  told 
men  that  faith  was  the  one  thing  needful  in  order  to  obtain  an 
interest  in  Christ's  work  for  their  souls ;  that  before  we  believe, 
we  are  dead,  and  have  no  interest  in  Christ;  and  that  the 
moment  we  do  believe,  we  live,  and  have  a  plenary  title  to  all 
Christ's  benefits.  Justification  by  virtue  of  church  member- 
ship— justification  without  believing  or  trusting — were  notions 
to  which  they  gave  no  countenance.  Ever}'thing,  if  you  will 
believe,  and  the  moment  you  believe  ;  nothing,  if  you  do  not 
believe, — was  the  very  marrow  of  their  preaching. 

Furthermore,  the  reformers  of  the  1 8th  century  taught  con- 
stantly the  universal  fiecessity  of  heart  conversion  and  a  new 
creation  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  They  proclaimed  everywhere  to 
the  crowds  whom  they  addressed,  "  Ye  must  be  bom  again." 
Sonship  to  God  by  baptism — sonship  to  God  while  we  do  the 


a8  THE  SUBSTANCE  AND  SUBJECT-MATTER 

will  of  the  devil — such  sonship  they  never  admitted.  The 
regeneration  which  they  preached  was  no  dormant,  torpid, 
motionless  thing.  It  was  something  that  could  bu  seen,  dis- 
cerned, and  known  by  its  effects. 

Furthermore,  the  reformers  of  the  i8th  century  taught  con- 
stantly the  inseparable  connection  between  true  faith  and  personal 
holiness.  They  never  allowed  for  a  moment  that  any  church 
membership  or  religious  profession  was  the  least  proof  of  a  man 
being  a  true  Christian  if  he  lived  an  ungodly  life.  A  true  Chris- 
tian, they  maintained,  must  always  be  known  by  his  fruits ;  and 
these  fruits  must  be  plainly  manifest  and  unmistakable  in  all 
the  relations  of  life.  "  No  fruits,  no  grace,"  was  the  unvarying 
tenor  of  their  preaching. 

Finally,  the  reformers  of  the  i8th  century  taught  constantly 
as  doctrines  both  equally  true,  God's  eternal  hatred  against  sin^ 
and  God's  love  towards  sinners.  They  knew  nothing  of  a  "  love 
lower  than  hell,"  and  a  heaven  where  holy  and  unholy  are  all 
at  length  to  find  admission.  Both  about  heaven  and  hell  they 
used  the  utmost  plainness  of  speech.  They  never  shrunk  from 
declaring,  in  plainest  terms,  the  certainty  of  God's  judgment 
and  of  wrath  to  come,  if  men  persisted  in  impenitence  and 
unbelief ;  and  yet  they  never  ceased  to  magnify  the  riches  of 
God's  kindness  and  compassion,  and  to  entreat  all  sinners  to 
repent  and  turn  to  God  before  it  was  too  late. 

Such  were  the  main  truths  which  the  English  evangelists  of 
last  century  were  constantly  preaching.  These  were  the  princi- 
pal doctrines  which  they  were  always  proclaiming,  whether  in 
town  or  in  country,  whether  in  church  or  in  the  open  air, 
whether  among  rich  or  among  poor.  These  were  the  doctrines 
by  which  they  turned  England  upside  down,  made  ploughmen 
and  colliers  weep  till  their  dirty  faces  were  seamed  with  tears, 
arrested  the  attention  of  peers  and  philosophers,  stormed  the 
strongholds  of  Satan,  plucked  thousands  like  brands  from  the 
burning,  and  altered  the  character  of  the  age.    Call  them  simple 


OF  THE  PREACHING.  2^ 

and  elementary  doctrines  if  you  will.  Say,  if  you  please,  that 
you  see  nothing  grand,  striking,  new,  peculiar  about  this  list  of 
truths.  But  the  fact  is  undeniable,  that  God  blessed  these 
truths  to  the  reformation  of  England  when  it  seemed  dead 
indeed.  What  God  has  blessed  it  ill  becomes  man  to 
despise. 


IIL 


CHAPTER    I. 

Whitcficld's  Birth-place  and  Parentage — Educated  at  Gloucester  Grammar  School — Entei; 
Pembroke  College,  Oxford — Season  of  Spiritual  Conflict — Books  which  were  made 
useful  to  him — Ordained  by  Bishop  Benson — First  Sermon — Preaches  in  London — 
Curate  of  Dummer,  Hants — Goes  to  America — Returr.s  in  a  Year — Preaches  in  the 
open  air — Is  excluded  from  most  London  Pulpits — Extent  of  his  Labours  for  thirty-one 
years — Dies  at  Newbury  Port,  America,  in  1770 — Interesting  circumstances  of  his  Death. 

|H0  were  the  men  that  revived  reh'gion  in  England  in 
the  1 8th  century  ?  What  were  their  names,  that  we 
may  do  them  honour  ]  Where  were  they  bom  ?  How 
were  they  educated  ?  What  are  the  leading  facts  in  their  lives  1 
What  was  their  special  department  of  labour  1  To  these  questions 
I  wish  to  supply  some  answers  in  the  present  and  future  chapters. 

I  pity  the  man  who  takes  no  interest  in  such  inquiries.  The 
instruments  that  God  employs  to  do  his  work  in  the  world 
deserve  a  close  inspection.  The  man  who  did  not  care  to  look 
at  the  rams'  horns  that  blew  down  Jericho,  the  hammer  and 
nail  that  slew  Sisera,  the  lamps  and  trumpets  of  Gideon,  the 
sling  and  stone  of  David,  might  fairly  be  set  down  as  a  cold 
and  heartless  person.  I  trust  that  all  who  read  this  volume 
will  like  to  know  something  about  the  English  evangelists  of  the 
eighteenth  century. 

The  first  and  foremost  whom  I  will  name  is  the  well-known 
George  Whitefield.     Though  not  ihc  lirst  in  order,  il  we  look 


WHITEFI ELD'S  BIRTH-PLACE,  3» 

at  the  date  of  his  birth,  I  place  him  first  in  the  order  of  merit, 
without  any  hesitation.     Of  all  the  spiritual  heroes  of  this 
dark  period  none  saw  so  soon  as  Whitefield  what  the  times 
demanded,   and  none  were  so  forward  in  the  great  work  of 
spiritual  aggression.     I  should  think  I  committed  an  act  of 
injustice  if  I  placed  any  name  before  his. 

Whitefield  was  born  at  Gloucester  in  the  year  17 14.  That 
venerable  county-town,  which  was  his  birth-place,  is  connected 
with  more  than  one  name  which  ought  to  be  dear  to  every 
lover  of  Protestant  truth.  Tyndal,  one  of  the  first  and  ablest 
translators  of  the  English  Bible,  was  a  Gloucestershire  man. 
Hooper,  one  of  the  greatest  and  best  of  our  English  reformers, 
was  Bishop  of  Gloucester,  and  was  burned  at  the  stake  for 
Christ's  truth,  within  view  of  his  own  cathedral,  in  Queen 
Mary's  reign.  In  the  next  century  Miles  Smith,  Bishop  of 
Gloucester,  was  one  of  the  first  to  protest  against  the  Romaniz- 
ing proceedings  of  Laud,  who  was  then  Dean  of  Gloucester. 
In  fact,  he  carried  his  Protestant  feehng  so  far  that,  when  Laud 
moved  the  communion-table  in  the  cathedral  to  the  east  end, 
and  placed  it  for  the  first  time  "altar-wise,"  in  1616,  Bishop 
Smith  was  so  much  offended  that  he  refused  to  enter  the  walls 
of  the  cathedral  from  that  day  till  his  death.  Places  like 
Gloucester,  we  need  not  doubt,  have  a  rich  entailed  inheritance 
of  many  prayers.  The  city  where  Hooper  preached  and 
prayed,  and  where  the  zealous  Miles  Smith  protested,  was  the 
place  where  the  greatest  preacher  of  the  gospel  England  has 
ever  seen  was  born. 

Like  many  other  famous  men,  Whitefield  was  of  humble 
origin,  and  had  no  rich  or  noble  connections  to  help  him  for- 
ward in  the  world.  His  mother  kept  the  Bell  Inn  at  Glouces- 
ter, and  appears  not  to  have  prospered  in  business  ;  at  any 
rate,  she  never  seems  to  have  been  able  to  do  anything  for 
Whitefield's  advancement  in  life.  The  inn  itself  is  still  stand- 
ing, and  is  reputed  to  be  the  birth-place,  not  only  of  our  greatest 


$2  EDUCATED  AT  THE  GRAMMAR  SCHOOL. 

English  preacher,  but  also  of  a  well-known  English  prelate — 
Henry  Philpot,  Bishop  of  Exeter. 

Whitefield's  early  life,  according  to  his  own  account,  was 
anything  but  religious ;  though,  like  many  boys,  he  had  occa- 
sional prickings  of  conscience  and  spasmodic  fits  of  devout 
feeling.  But  habits  and  general  tastes  are  the  only  true  test  of 
young  people's  characters.  He  confesses  that  he  was  "  addicted 
to  lying,  filthy  talking,  and  foolish  jesting,"  and  that  he  was 
a  "  Sabbath-breaker,  a  theatre-goer,  a  card-player,  and  a 
romance-reader."  All  this,  he  says,  went  on  till  he  was  fifteen 
years  old. 

Poor  as  he  was,  his  residence  at  Gloucester  procured  him  the 
advantage  of  a  good  education  at  the  Free  Grammar  School  of 
that  city.  Here  he  was  a  day-scholar  until  he  was  fifteen. 
Nothing  is  known  of  his  progress  there.  He  can  hardly,  how- 
ever, have  been  quite  idle,  or  else  he  would  not  have  been 
ready  to  enter  an  University  afterwards  at  the  age  of  eighteen. 
His  letters,  moreover,  show  an  acquaintance  with  Latin,  in  the 
shape  of  frequent  quotations,  which  is  seldom  acquired,  if  not 
picked  up  at  school.  The  only  known  fact  about  his  school- 
days is  this  curious  one,  that  even  then  he  was  remarkable  for 
his  good  elocution  and  memory,  and  was  selected  to  recite 
speeches  before  the  Corporation  of  Gloucester  at  their  annual 
visitation  of  the  Grammar  School. 

At  the  age  of  fifteen  Whitefield  appears  to  have  left  school, 
and  to  have  given  up  Latin  and  Greek  for  a  season.  In  all 
probability,  his  mother's  straitened  circumstances  made  it  abso- 
lutely necessary  for  him  to  do  something  to  assist  her  in  busi- 
ness and  to  get  his  own  living.  He  began,  therefore,  to  help 
her  in  the  daily  work  of  the  Bell  Inn.  "  At  length,"  he 
says,  "  I  put  on  my  blue  apron,  washed  cups,  cleaned  rooms, 
and,  in  one  word,  became  a  professed  common  drawer  for  nigh 
a  year  and  a  half." 

This  state  of  things,  ho\vever,  did  not  last  long.     His  mother* 


GEORGE   WHITEFIELD. 


Face  p.  33. 


HIS  RESIDENCE  A  T  OXFORD,  33 

business  at  the  Bell  did  not  flourish,  and  she  finally  retired  from 
it  altogether.  An  old  school-fellow  revived  in  his  mind  the 
idea  of  going  to  Oxford,  and  he  went  back  to  the  Grammar 
School  and  renewed  his  studies.  Friends  were  raised  up  who 
made  interest  for  him  at  Pembroke  College,  Oxford,  where  the 
Grammar  School  of  Gloucester  held  two  exhibitions.  And  at 
length,  after  several  providential  circumstances  had  smoothed 
the  way,  he  entered  Oxford  as  a  servitor  at  Pembroke  at  the  age 
of  eighteen.* 

Whitefield's  residence  at  Oxford  was  the  great  turning-point 
in  his  hfe.  For  two  or  three  years  before  he  went  to  the  Uni- 
versity his  journal  tells  us  that  he  had  not  been  without  religious 
convictions.  But  from  the  time  of  his  entering  Pembroke  College 
these  convictions  fast  ripened  into  decided  Christianity.  He 
diligently  attended  all  means  of  grace  within  his 'reach.  He 
spent  his  leisure  time  in  visiting  the  city  prison,  reading  to  the 
prisoners,  and  trying  to  do  good.  He  became  acquainted  with 
the  famous  John  Wesley  and  his  brother  Charles,  and  a  little 
band  of  like-minded  young  men,  including  the  well-known  author 
of  "  Theron  and  Aspasio,"  James  Hervey.  These  were  the  de- 
voted party  to  whom  the  name  "  Methodists  "  was  first  applied, 
on  account  of  their  strict  "  method  "  of  living.  At  one  time  he 
seems  to  have  greedily  devoured  such  books  as  "Thomas  \ 
Kempis,"  and  "  Castanuza's  Spiritual  Combat,"  and  to  have  been 
in  danger  of  becoming  a  semi-papist,  an  ascetic,  or  a  mystic, 
and  of  placing  the  whole  of  religion  in  self-denial.  He  says  in 
his  Journal,  *'  I  always  chose  the  worst  sort  of  food.  I  fasted 
twice  a  week.  My  apparel  was  mean.  I  thought  it  unbecom- 
ing a  penitent  to  have  his  hair  powdered.  I  wore  woollen  gloves, 
\  patched  gown,  and  dirty  shoes ;  and  though  I  was  convinced 

*  Happening  to  be  at  Oxford  in  June  1865,  I  went  to  Pembroke  College,  and  asked 
whether  any  one  knew  the  rooms  which  Whitefield  occupied  when  he  was  at  Oxford. 
The  porter  informed  me  that  nothing  whatever  was  known  about  them.  The  rooms  which 
the  famous  Dr.  Johnson  occupied  at  Pembroke  are  still  pointed  out.  Johnson  left  Oxford 
just  before  Whitefield  went  up. 

(196)  3 


S4  ORDAINED  BY  BISHOP  BENSON. 

that  the  kingdom  of  God  did  not  consist  in  meat  and  drink,  yet 
I  resolutely  persisted  in  these  voluntary  acts  of  self-denial, 
because  I  found  in  them  great  promotion  of  the  spiritual  life." 
Out  of  all  this  darkness  he  was  gradually  delivered,  partly  by 
the  advice  of  one  or  two  experienced  Christians,  and  partly  by 
reading  such  books  as  Scougal's  "  Life  of  God  in  the  Heart  of 
Man,"  Law's  "  Serious  Call,"  Baxter's  "Call  to  the  Unconverted," 
Alleine's  "  Alarm  to  Unconverted  Sinners,"  and  Matthew 
Henry's  "  Commentary."  "  Above  all,"  he  says,  "  my  mind 
being  now  more  opened  and  enlarged,  I  began  to  read  the  Holy 
Scriptures  upon  my  knees,  laying  aside  all  other  books,  and 
praying  over,  if  possible,  every  line  and  word.  This  proved 
meat  indeed  and  drink  indeed  to  my  soul.  I  daily  received 
fresh  life,  light,  and  power  from  above.  I  got  more  true  know- 
ledge from  reading  the  book  of  God  in  one  month  than  I  could 
ever  have  acquired  from  all  the  writings  of  men."  Once  taught 
to  understand  the  glorious  liberty  of  Christ's  gospel,  Whitefield 
never  turned  again  to  asceticism,  legalism,  mysticism,  or  strange 
views  of  Christian  perfection.  The  experience  received  by  bitter 
conflict  was  most  valuable  to  him.  The  doctrines  of  free  grace, 
once  thoroughly  grasped,  took  deep  root  in  his  heart,  and 
became,  as  it  were,  bone  of  his  bone  and  flesh  of  his  flesh.  Of 
all  the  little  band  of  Oxford  methodists,  none  seem  to  have  got 
hold  so  soon  of  clear  views  of  Christ's  gospel  as  he  did,  and 
none  kept  it  so  unwaveringly  to  the  end. 

At  the  early  age  of  twenty-two  Whitefield  was  admitted  to 
holy  orders  by  Bishop  Benson  of  Gloucester,  on  Trinity  Sunday, 
1736.  His  ordination  was  not  of  his  own  seeking.  The  bishop 
heard  of  his  character  from  Lady  Selwyn  and  others,  sent  for 
him,  gave  him  five  guineas  to  buy  books,  and  offered  to  ordain 
him,  though  only  twenty-two  years  old,  whenever  he  wished. 
This  unexpected  offer  came  to  him  when  he  was  full  of  scruples 
about  his  own  fitness  for  the  ministry.  It  cut  the  knot  and 
brought  hira  to  the  point  of  decision.      "I  began  to  think." 


HIS  FIRST  SERMON.  35 

he  says,  "  that  if  I  held  out  longer  I  should  fight  against 
God." 

Whitefield's  first  sermon  was  preached  in  the  very  town  where 
he  was  born,  at  the  church  of  St.  Mary-le-Crypt,  Gloucester. 
His  own  description  of  it  is  the  best  account  that  can  be  given : 
— "  Last  Sunday,  in  the  afternoon,  I  preached  my  first  sermon 
in  the  church  of  St.  Mary-le-Crypt,  where  I  was  baptized,  and 
also  first  received  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  Curiosity, 
as  you  may  easily  guess,  drew  a  large  congregation  together 
upon  this  occasion.  The  sight  at  first  a  little  awed  me.  But 
I  was  comforted  with  a  heartfelt  sense  of  the  divine  presence, 
and  soon  found  the  unspeakable  advantage  of  having  been 
accustomed  to  public  speaking  when  a  boy  at  school,  and  of 
exhorting  the  prisoners  and  poor  people  at  their  private  houses 
while  at  the  university.  By  these  means  I  was  kept  from  being 
daunted  overmuch.  As  I  proceeded  I  perceived  the  fire  kindled, 
till  at  last,  though  so  young  and  am.idst  a  crowd  of  those  who 
knew  me  in  my  childish  days,  I  trust  I  was  enabled  to  speak 
with  some  degree  of  gospel  authority.  Some  few  mocked,  but 
most  seemed  for  the  present  struck ;  and  I  have  since  heard 
that  a  complaint  was  made  to  the  bishop  that  I  drove  fifteen 
mad  the  first  sermon  !  The  worthy  prelate  wished  that  the 
madness  might  not  be  forgotten  before  next  Sunday." 

Almost  immediately  after  his  ordination,  Whitefield  went  to 
Oxford  and  took  his  degree  as  Bachelor  of  Arts.  He  then 
commenced  his  regular  ministerial  Hfe  by  undertaking  tempo- 
rary duty  at  the  Tower  Chapel,  London,  for  two  months.  While 
engaged  there  he  preached  continually  in  many  London  churches; 
and  among  others,  in  the  parish  churches  of  Islington,  Bishops- 
gate,  St.  Dunstan's,  St.  Margaret's,  Westminster,  and  Bow, 
Cheapside.  From  the  very  first  he  obtained  a  degree  of  popu- 
larity such  as  no  preacher,  before  or  since,  has  probably  ever 
reached.  Whether  on  week-days  or  Sundays,  wherever  he 
preached,  the  churches  were  crowded,  and  an  immense  sensa- 


S6  HIS  VISIT  TO  AMERICA. 

tion  was  produced.  The  plain  truth  is,  that  a  really  eloquent^ 
extempore  preacher,  preaching  the  pure  gospel  with  most  un- 
common gifts  of  voice  and  manner,  was  at  that  time  an  entire 
novelty  in  l^ondon.  The  congregations  were  taken  by  surprise 
and  carried  by  storm. 

From  T^ondon  he  removed  for  two  months  to  Dummer,  a 
little  rural  parish  in  Hampshire,  near  Basingstoke.  This  was  a 
totally  new  sphere  of  action,  and  he  seemed  like  a  man  buried 
alive  among  poor  illiterate  people.  But  he  was  soon  reconciled 
to  it,  and  thought  afterwards  that  he  reaped  much  profit  by 
conversing  with  the  poor.  From  Dummer  he  accepted  an 
invitation,  which  had  been  much  pressed  on  him  by  the  Wesleys, 
to  visit  the  colony  of  Georgia  in  North  America,  and  assist  in 
the  care  of  an  Orphan  House  which  had  been  set  up  near 
Savannah  for  the  children  of  colonists.  After  preaching  for  a 
few  months  in  Gloucestershire,  and  especially  at  Bristol  and 
Stonehouse,  he  sailed  for  America  in  the  latter  part  of  1737, 
and  continued  there  about  a  year.  The  affairs  of  this  Orphan 
House,  it  may  be  remarked,  occupied  much  of  his  attention 
from  this  period  of  his  life  till  he  died.  Though  well-meant,  it 
seems  to  have  been  a  design  of  very  questionable  wisdom,  and 
certainly  entailed  on  Whitefield  a  world  of  anxiety  and  responsi- 
bility to  the  end  of  his  days. 

Whitefield  returned  from  Georgia  at  the  latter  part  of  the 
year  1738,  partly  to  obtain  priest's  orders,  which  were  conferred 
on  him  by  his  old  friend  Bishop  Benson,  and  partly  on  business 
connected  with  the  Orphan  House.  He  soon,  however,  dis- 
covered that  his  position  was  no  longer  what  it  was  before  he 
sailed  for  Georgia.  The  bulk  of  the  clergy  were  no  longer 
favourable  to  him,  and  regarded  him  with  suspicion  as  an 
enthusiast  and  a  fanatic.  They  were  especially  scandalized  by 
his  preaching  the  doctrine  of  regeneration  or  the  new  birth,  as 
a  thing  which  many  baptized  persons  greatly  needed  I  The 
number  of  pulpits  to  which  he  had  access  rapidly  diminishecL 


i 


OPEN-AIR  PREACHING.  37 

Churchwardens,  who  had  no  eyes  for  drunkenness  and  impurity, 
were  filled  with  intense  indignation  about  what  they  called 
"  breaches  of  order."  Bishops  who  could  tolerate  Arianism, 
Socinianism,  and  Deism,  were  filled  with  indignation  at  a  man 
who  declared  fully  the  atonement  of  Christ  and  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  began  to  denounce  him  openly.  In  short, 
from  this  period  of  his  life,  Whitefield's  field  of  usefulness  within 
the  Church  of  England  narrowed  rapidly  on  every  side. 

The  step  which  at  this  juncture  gave  a  turn  to  the  whole 
current  of  Whitefield's  ministry  was  his  adoption  of  the  system 
of  open-air  preaching.  Seeing  that  thousands  everywhere  would 
attend  no  place  of  worship,  spent  their  Sundays  in  idleness  or 
sin,  and  were  not  to  be  reached  by  sermons  within  walls,  he 
resolved,  in  the  spirit  of  holy  aggression,  to  go  out  after  them 
"  into  the  highways  and  hedges,"  on  his  Master's  principle,  and 
"  compel  them  to  come  in."  His  first  attempt  to  do  this  was 
among  the  coUiers  at  Kings  wood  near  Bristol,  in  February  1739. 
After  much  prayer  he  one  day  went  to  Hannam  Mount,  and 
standing  upon  a  hill  began  to  preach  to  about  a  hundred  colliers 
upon  Matt.  v.  1-3.  The  thing  soon  became  known.  The 
number  of  hearers  rapidly  increased,  till  the  congregation 
amounted  to  many  thousands.  His  own  account  of  the  be- 
haviour of  these  neglected  coUiers,  who  had  never  been  in  a 
church  in  their  lives,  is  deeply  affecting  : — "  Having,"  he  writes 
to  a  friend,  "  no  righteousness  of  their  own  to  renounce,  they 
were  glad  to  hear  of  a  Jesus  who  was  a  friend  to  publicans,  and 
came  not  to  call  the  righteous  but  sinners  to  repentance.  The 
first  discovery  of  their  being  affected  was  the  sight  of  the  white 
gutters  made  by  their  tears,  which  plentifully  fell  down  their 
black  cheeks  as  they  came  out  of  their  coal-pits.  Hundreds  of 
them  were  soon  brought  under  deep  conviction,  which,  as  the 
event  proved,  happily  ended  in  a  sound  and  thorough  conver- 
sion. The  change  was  visible  to  all,  though  numbers  chose  to 
impute  it  to  anything  rather  than  the  finger  of  God.     As  the 


jS  FORBIDDEN  TO  PREACH. 

scene  was  quite  new,  it  often  occasioned  many  inward  conflicts 
Sometimes,  when  twenty  thousand  people  were  before  me,  I  had 
not  in  my  own  apprehension  a  word  to  say  either  to  God  or 
them.  But  I  was  never  totally  deserted,  and  frequently  (for  to 
deny  it  would  be  lying  against  God)  was  so  assisted  that  I  knew 
by  happy  experience  what  our  Lord  meant  by  saying,  '  Out  of 
his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water.'  The  open  firmament 
above  me,  the  prospect  of  the  adjacent  fields,  with  the  sight  of 
thousands,  some  in  coaches,  some  on  horseback,  and  some  in 
the  trees,  and  at  times  all  affected  and  in  tears,  was  almost  too 
much  for,  and  quite  overcame  me." 

Two  months  after  this  Whitefield  began  the  practice  of  open- 
air  preaching  in  London,  on  April  27,  1739.  The  circumstances 
under  which  this  happened  were  curious.  He  had  gone  to 
Islington  to  preach  for  the  vicar,  his  friend  Mr.  Stonehouse. 
In  the  midst  of  the  prayer  the  churchwardens  came  to  him  and 
demanded  his  license  for  preaching  in  the  diocese  of  London. 
Whitefield,  of  course,  had  not  got  this  license  any  more  than 
any  clergyman  not  regularly  officiating  in  the  diocese  has  at 
this  day.  The  upshot  of  the  matter  was,  that  being  forbidden 
by  the  churchwardens  to  preach  in  the  pulpit,  he  went  outside 
after  the  communion-service,  and  preached  in  the  churchyard. 
"  And,"  says  he,  "  God  was  pleased  so  to  assist  me  in  preaching, 
and  so  wonderfully  to  affect  the  hearers,  that  I  believe  we  could 
have  gone  singing  hymns  to  prison.  Let  not  the  adversaries 
say,  I  have  thrust  myself  out  of  their  synagogues.  No ;  they 
have  thrust  me  out." 

From  that  day  forward  he  became  a  constant  field-preacher^ 
whenever  weather  and  the  season  of  the  year  made  it  possible. 
Two  days  afterwards,  on  Sunday,  April  29,  he  records: — "I 
preached  in  Moorfields  to  an  exceeding  great  multitude.  Being 
weakened  by  my  morning's  preaching,  I  refreshed  myself  in 
the  afternoon  by  a  little  sleep,  and  at  five  went  and  preached 
jit  Kennington  Common,  about  two  miles  from  London,  when 


BECOMES  A  FIELD-PREACHER.  39 

no  less  than  thirty  thousand  people  were  supposed  to  be  pre- 
sent." Henceforth,  wherever  there  were  large  open  spaces 
round  London,  wherever  there  were  large  bands  of  idle,  god- 
less, Sabbath-breaking  people  gathered  together,  in  Hackney 
Fields,  Mary-le-bonne  Fields,  May  Fair,  Smithfield,  Blackheath, 
Moorfields,  and  Kennington  Common,  there  went  Whitefield 
and  lifted  up  his  voice  for  Christ.*  The  gospel  so  proclaimed 
was  Hstened  to  and  greedily  received  by  hundreds  who  never 
dreamed  of  going  to  a  place  of  worship.  The  cause  of  pure 
religion  was  advanced,  and  souls  were  plucked  from  the  hand 
of  Satan,  like  brands  from  the  burning.  But  it  was  going  much 
too  fast  for  the  Church  of  those  days.  The  clergy,  with  a  few 
lionourable  exceptions,  refused  entirely  to  countenance  this 
strange  preacher.  In  the  true  spirit  of  the  dog  in  the  manger, 
they  neither  liked  to  go  after  the  semi-heathen  masses  of  popu- 
lation themselves,  nor  liked  any  one  else  to  do  the  work  for 
them.  The  consequence  was,  that  the  ministrations  of  White- 
field  in  the  pulpits  of  the  Church  of  England  from  this  time 
almost  entirely  ceased.  He  loved  the  Church  in  which  he  had 
been  ordained ;  he  gloried  in  her  Articles  ;  he  used  her  Prayer- 
book  with  pleasure.  But  the  Church  did  not  love  him,  and  sd 
lost  the  use  of  his  services.  The  plain  truth  is,  that  the  Church 
of  England  of  that  day  was  not  ready  for  a  man  like  Whitefield. 
The  Church  was  too  much  asleep  to  understand  him,  and  was 
vexed  at  a  man  who  would  not  keep  still  and  let  the  devil  alone. 
The  facts  of  Whitefield's  history  from  this  period  to  the  day 
of  his  death  are  almost  entirely  of  one  complexion.  One  year 
was  just  like  another ;  and  to  attempt  to  follow  him  would  be 
only  going  repeatedly  over  the  same  ground.  From  1739  to  the 
year  of  his  death,  1770,  a  period  of  thirty-one  years,  his  life  was 
one  uniform  employment.  He  was  eminently  a  man  of  one  thing, 

*  The  reader  will  remember  that  all  this  happened  when  London  was 
comparatively  a  small  place.  Most  of  the  open  places  where  White- 
6eld  preached  are  now  covered  with  buildings.  Kennington  Oval  and 
Blackheath  alone  remain  open  at  this  day. 


40  EXTENT  OF  HIS  LABOURS, 

and  always  about  his  Master's  business.  From  Sunday  morn- 
ings to  Saturday  nights,  from  the  ist  of  January  to  the  31st  of 
December,  excepting  when  laid  aside  by  illness,  he  was  almost 
incessantly  preaching  Christ,  and  going  about  the  world  en- 
treating men  to  repent  and  come  to  Christ  and  be  saved. 
There  was  hardly  a  considerable  town  in  England,  Scotland,  or 
Wales,  that  he  did  not  visit  as  an  evangelist.  When  churches 
were  opened  to  him  he  gladly  preached  in  churches ;  when 
only  chapels  could  be  obtained,  he  cheerfully  preached  in 
chapels.  When  churches  and  chapels  alike  were  closed,  or 
were  too  small  to  contain  his  hearers,  he  was  ready  and  willing 
to  preach  in  the  open  air.  For  thirty-one  years  he  laboured  in 
this  way,  always  proclaiming  the  same  glorious  gospel,  and 
always,  as  far  as  man's  eye  can  judge,  with  immense  effect.  In 
one  single  Whitsuntide  week,  after  preaching  in  Moorfields,  he 
received  one  thousand  letters  from  people  under  spiritual  con- 
cern, and  admitted  to  the  Lord's  table  three  hundred  and  fifty 
persons.  In  the  thirty-four  years  of  his  ministry  it  is  reckoned 
that  he  preached  publicly  eighteen  thousand  times. 

His  journeyings  were  prodigious,  when  the  roads  and  con- 
veyances of  his  time  are  considered.  He  was  famihar  with 
"  perils  in  the  wilderness  and  perils  in  the  seas,"  if  ever  man 
was  in  modern  times.  He  visited  Scotland  fourteen  times,  and 
was  nowhere  more  acceptable  or  useful  than  he  was  in  that 
Bible-loving  country.  He  crossed  the  Atlantic  seven  times, 
backward  and  forward,  in  miserable  slow  sailing  ships,  and 
arrested  the  attention  of  thousands  in  Boston,  New  York,  and 
Philadelphia.  He  went  over  to  Ireland  twice,  and  on  one 
occasion  was  almost  murdered  by  an  ignorant  Popish  mob  in 
Dublin.  As  to  England  and  Wales,  he  traversed  every  county 
in  them,  from  the  Isle  of  Wight  to  Berwick-on-Tweed,  and  from 
the  Land's  End  to  the  North  Foreland. 

His  regular  ministerial  work  in  London  for  the  wintei  season, 
when  field-preaching  was  necessarily  suspended,  was  something 


HIS  DEA  TH,  41 

prodigious.  His  weekly  engagements  at  the  Tabernacle  in 
Tottenham  Court  Road,  which  was  built  for  him  when  the 
pulpits  of  the  Established  Church  were  closed,  comprised  the 
following  work  : — Every  Sunday  morning  he  administered  the 
Lord's  Supper  to  several  hundred  communicants  at  half-past 
six.  After  this  he  read  prayers,  and  preached  both  morning 
and  afternoon.  Then  he  preached  again  in  the  evening  at 
half-past  five,  and  concluded  by  addressing  a  large  society  of 
widows,  married  people,  young  men  and  spinsters,  all  sitting 
separately  in  the  area  of  the  Tabernacle,  with  exhortations  suit- 
able to  their  respective  stations.  On  Monday,  Tuesday,  Wed- 
nesday, and  Thursday  mornings,  he  preached  regularly  at  six. 
On  Monday,  Tuesday,  Wednesday,  Thursday,  and  Saturday 
evenings,  he  delivered  lectures.  This,  it  will  be  observed, 
made  thirteen  sermons  a  week  !  And  all  this  time  he  was  car- 
rying on  a  large  correspondence  with  people  in  almost  every 
part  of  the  world. 

That  any  human  frame  could  so  long  endure  the  labours  that 
Whitefield  went  through  does  indeed  seem  wonderful.  That 
his  life  was  not  cut  short  by  violence,  to  which  he  was  frequently 
exposed,  is  no  less  wonderful.  But  he  was  immortal  till  his 
work  was  done.  He  died  at  last  very  suddenly  at  Newbury 
Port,  in  North  America,  on  Sunday,  September  the  29th,  1770, 
at  the  comparatively  early  age  of  fifty-six.  He  was  once 
married  to  a  widow  named  James,  of  Abergavenny,  who  died 
before  him.  If  we  may  judge  from  the  little  mention  made 
of  his  wife  in  his  letters,  the  marriage  does  not  seem  to  have 
contributed  much  to  his  happiness.  He  left  no  children,  but 
he  left  a  name  far  better  than  that  of  sons  and  daughters.  Never 
perhaps  was  there  a  man  of  whom  it  could  be  so  truly  said  that 
he  spent  and  was  spent  for  Christ  than  George  Whitefield. 

The  circumstances  and  particulars  of  this  great  evangelist's 
end  are  so  deeply  interesting,  that  I  shall  make  no  excuse  for 
dwelling  on  them.     It  was  an  end  in  striking  harmony  with  the 


42  INTERESTING  CIRCUMSTANCES 

tenor  of  his  life.  As  he  had  lived  for  more  than  thirty  years, 
so  he  died,  preaching  to  the  very  last.  He  literally  almost  died 
in  harness.  "  Sudden  death,"  he  had  often  said,  "  is  sudden 
glory.  Whether  right  or  not,  I  cannot  help  wishing  that  I  may 
go  Ow  in  the  same  manner.  To  me  it  would  be  worse  than 
death  to  live  to  be  nursed,  and  to  see  friends  weeping  about' 
me."  He  had  the  desire  of  his  heart  granted.  He  was  cut 
down  in  a  single  night  by  a  spasmodic  fit  of  asthma,  almost 
before  his  friends  knew  that  he  was  ill. 

On  the  morning  of  Saturday  the  29th  of  September,  the  day 
before  he  died,  Whitefield  set  out  on  horseback  from  Ports- 
mouth in  New  Hampshire,  in  order  to  fulfil  an  engagement  to 
preach  at  Newbury  Port  on  Sunday.  On  the  way,  unfortunately, 
he  was  earnestly  importuned  to  preach  at  a  place  called  Exeter, 
and  though  feeling  very  ill,  he  had  not  the  heart  to  refuse.  A 
friend  remarked  before  he  preached  that  he  looked  more  uneasy 
tlian  usual,  and  said  to  him,  "  Sir,  you  are  more  fit  to  go  to  bed 
than  to  preach."  To  this  Whitefield  replied:  "True,  sir;" 
and  then  turning  aside,  he  clasped  his  hands  together,  and 
looking  up,  said  :  "  Lord  Jesus,  I  am  weary  in  thy  work,  but 
not  of  thy  work.  If  I  have  not  yet  finished  my  course,  let  me 
go  and  speak  for  thee  once  more  in  the  fields,  seal  thy  truth, 
and  come  home  and  die.**  He  then  went  and  preached  to  a 
very  great  multitude  in  the  fields  from  the  text  2  Cor.  xiii.  5, 
for  the  space  of  nearly  two  hours.  It  was  his  last  sermon,  and 
a  fitting  conclusion  to  his  whole  career. 

An  eye-witness  has  given  the  following  striking  account  of 
this  closing  scene  of  Whitefield's  life  : — "  He  rose  from  his  seat, 
and  stood  erect.  His  appearance  alone  was  a  powerful  sermon. 
The  thinness  of  his  visage,  the  paleness  of  his  countenance,  the 
evident  struggling  of  the  heavenly  spark  in  a  decayed  body  for 
utterance,  were  all  deeply  interesting ;  the  spirit  was  willing, 
but  the  flesh  was  dying.  In  this  situation  he  remained  several 
minutes,  unable  to  speak.     He  then  said  :  '  I  will  wait  for  the 


OF  HIS  DEA  TH,  43 

gracious  assistance  of  God,  for  he  will,  I  am  certain,  assist  me 
once  more  to  speak  in  his  name.'  He  then  delivered  perhaps 
one  of  his  best  sermons.  The  latter  part  contained  the  follow- 
ing passage  :  '  I  go ;  I  go  to  a  rest  prepared :  my  sun  has  given 
light  to  many,  but  now  it  is  about  to  set — no,  to  rise  to  the 
zenith  of  immortal  glory.  I  have  outlived  many  on  earth,  but 
they  cannot  outlive  me  in  heaven.  Many  shall  outlive  me  on 
earth  and  live  when  this  body  is  no  more,  but  there — oh,  thought 
divine  ! — I  shall  be  in  a  world  where  time,  age,  sickness,  and 
sorrow  are  unknown.  My  body  fails,  but  my  spirit  expands. 
How  willingly  would  I  live  for  ever  to  preach  Christ.  But  I 
die  to  be  with  him.  How  brief — comparatively  brief — has  been 
my  life  compared  to  the  vast  labours  which  I  see  before  me 
yet  to  be  accomplished.  But  if  I  leave  now,  while  so  few  care 
about  heavenly  things,  the  God  of  peace  will  surely  visit  you." 

After  the  sermon  was  over,  Whitefield  dined  with  a  friend, 
and  then  rode  on  to  Newbury  Port,  though  greatly  fatigued. 
On  arriving  there  he  supped  early,  and  retired  to  bed.  Tradi- 
tion says,  that  as  he  went  up-stairs,  with  a  lighted  candle  in  his 
hand,  he  could  not  resist  the  inclination  to  turn  round  at  the 
head  of  the  stair,  and  speak  to  the  friends  who  were  assembled 
to  meet  him.  As  he  spoke  the  fire  kindled  within  him,  and 
before  he  could  conclude,  the  candle  which  he  held  in  his  hand 
had  actually  burned  down  to  the  socket.  He  retired  to  his 
bedroom,  to  come  out  no  more  alive.  A  violent  fit  of  spasmodic 
asthma  seized  him  soon  after  he  got  into  bed,  and  before  six 
o'clock  the  next  morning  the  great  preacher  was  dead.  If  ever 
man  was  ready  for  his  change,  Whitefield  was  that  man.  When 
his  time  came,  he  had  nothing  to  do  but  to  die.  Where  he 
died  there  he  was  buried,  in  a  vault  beneath  the  pulpit  of  the 
church  where  he  had  engaged  to  preach.  His  sepulchre  is 
shown  to  this  very  day  ;  and  nothing  makes  the  little  town 
where  he  died  so  famous  as  the  fact  that  it  contains  the  bonea 
of  George  Whitefield 


44  GEORGE  ^HITEFIELUS  MISSION. 

Such  are  the  leading  facts  in  the  life  of  the  prince  of  English 
evangelists  of  the  i8th  century.  His  personal  character 
the  real  extent  of  his  usefulness,  and  some  account  of  his  style  of 
preaching,  are  subjects  which  I  must  reserve  for  another  chapter. 


CHAPTER  II. 

Estimate  of  good  that  Whitefield  did — Testimonies  to  his  direct  Usefulness — Indirect  good 
that  he  did — Peculiar  character  of  his  Preaching — Witnesses  to  his  real  power  as  a 
Preacher — Analysis  of  his  seventy-five  published  Sermons — Simplicity,  Directness, 
Power  of  Description,  Earnestness,  Pathos,  Action,  Voice,  and  Fluency,  his  leading 
Excellences — Inner  Life,  Humility,  Love  to  Christ,  Laboriousness,  Self-denial,  Disin- 
terestedness, Cheerfulness,  Catholicity — Specimen  of  his  Preaching. 

George  Whitefield,  in  my  judgment,  was  so  entirely  chief 
and  first  among  the  English  Reformers  of  the  i8th  century,  that 
I  make  no  apology  for  offering  some  further  information  about 
him.  The  real  amount  of  good  he  did,  the  pecuhar  character 
of  his  preaching,  the  private  character  of  the  man,  are  all  points 
that  deserve  consideration.  They  are  points,  I  may  add,  about 
which  there  is  a  vast  amount  of  misconception. 

This  misconception  perhaps  is  unavoidable,  and  ought  not 
to  surprise  us.  The  materials  for  forming  a  correct  opinion 
about  such  a  man  as  Whitefield  are  necessarily  very  scanty. 
He  wrote  no  book  for  the  million,  of  world-wide  fame,  like 
Bunyan's  "  Pilgrim's  Progress."  He  headed  no  crusade  against 
an  apostate  Church,  with  a  nation  at  his  back,  and  princes  on 
his  side,  like  Martin  Luther.  He  founded  no  religious  deno- 
mination, which  pinned  its  faith  on  his  writings  and  carefully 
embalmed  his  best  acts  and  words,  like  John  Wesley.  There 
are  Lutherans  and  Wesleyans  in  the  present  day,  but  there  are 
no  Whitefieldites.  No  !  The  great  evangelist  and  preacher 
was  a  simple,  guileless  man,  who  lived  for  one  thing  only,  and 
that  was  to  preach  Christ.  If  he  did  thai,  he  cared  for  nothing 
else.  The  records  of  such  a  man  are  large  and  full  in  heaveni 
I  ha\  e  no  doubt     But  they  are  few  and  scanty  upon  earth. 


mS  DIRECT  USEFULNESS.  4$ 

We  must  not  forget,  beside  this,  that  the  rirany  in  every  age 
see  nothing  in  a  man  Hke  Whitefield  but  fanaticism  and  enthu- 
siasm. They  abhor  everything  like  "zeal"  in  religion.  They 
dislike  every  one  who  turns  the  world  upside  down,  and  de- 
parts from  old  traditional  ways,  and  will  not  let  the  devil  alone. 
Such  persons,  no  doubt,  would  tell  us  that  the  ministry  of 
Whitefield  only  produced  temporary  excitement,  that  his  preach- 
ing was  common-place  rant,  and  that  his  character  had  nothing 
about  it  to  be  specially  admired.  It  may  be  feared  that 
eighteen  hundred  years  ago  they  would  have  said  much  the 
same  of  St.  Paul. 

The  question,  "  What  good  did  Whitefield  do  % "  is  one  which 
I  answer  without  the  least  hesitation.  I  believe  that  the  direct 
good  which  he  did  to  immortal  souls  was  enormous.  I  will 
go  further, — I  believe  it  is  incalculable.  Credible  witnesses 
in  England,  Scotland,  and  America,  have  placed  on  record  their 
conviction  that  he  was  the  means  of  converting  thousands  of 
people.  Many,  wherever  he  preached,  were  not  merely  pleased, 
excited,  and  arrested,  but  positively  turned  from  sin,  and  made 
thorough  servants  of  God.  "  Numbering  the  people,"  I  do  not 
forget,  is  at  all  times  an  objectionable  practice.  God  alone 
can  read  hearts  and  discern  the  wheat  from  the  tares.  Many, 
no  doubt,  in  days  of  religious  excitement,  are  set  down  as  con- 
verted who  are  not  converted  at  all.  But  I  wish  my  readers  to 
understand  that  my  high  estimate  of  Whitefield's  usefulness  is 
based  on  a  solid  foundation.  I  ask  them  to  mark  well  what 
Whitefield's  cotemporaries  thought  of  the  value  of  his  labours. 

Franklin,  the  well-known  American  philosopher,  was  a  cold- 
blooded, calculating  man,  a  Quaker  by  profession,  and  not 
likely  to  form  too  high  an  estimate  of  any  minister's  work. 
Yet  even  he  confessed  that  "  it  was  wonderful  to  see  the  change 
soon  made  by  his  preaching  in  the  manners  of  the  inhabitants 
of  Philadelphia.  From  being  thoughtless  or  indifferent  about 
religion,  it  seemed  as  if  all  the  world  were  growing  religious." 


40  fESTIMONIES  TO  HIS  WORTH. 

Franklin  himself,  it  may  be  remarked,  was  the  leading  printer 
of  religious  works  at  Philadelphia ;  and  his  readiness  to  print 
Whitefield's  sermons  and  journals  shows  his  judgment  of  the 
hold  that  he  had  on  the  American  mind. 

Maclaurin,  Willison,  and  Macculloch,  were  Scotch  ministers 
whose  names  are  well  known  north  of  the  Tweed,  and  the  two 
former  of  whom  deservedly  rank  high  as  theological  writers. 
All  these  have  repeatedly  testified  that  Whitefield  was  made  an 
instrument  of  doing  immense  good  in  Scotland.  Willison  \w 
particular  says,  '*'  that  God  honoured  him  with  surprising  success 
among  sinners  of  all  ranks  and  persuasions." 

Old  Henry  Venn,  of  Huddersfield  and  YeUing,  was  a  man 
of  strong  good  sense,  as  well  as  of  great  grace.  His  opinion 
was,  that  "if  the  greatness,  extent,  success,  and  disinterested- 
ness of  a  man's  labours  can  give  him  distinction  among  the 
children  of  Christ,  then  we  are  warranted  to  affirm  that  scarce 
any  one  has  equalled  Mr.  Whitefield."  Again  he  says  :  "  He 
was  abundantly  successful  in  his  vast  labours.  Th«  seals  of  his 
ministry,  from  first  to  last,  I  am  persuaded,  were  more  than 
could  be  credited  could  the  number  be  fixed.  This  is  certain, 
his  amazing  popularity  was  only  from  his  usefulness ;  for  he  no 
sooner  opened  his  mouth  as  a  preacher,  than  God  commanded 
an  extraordinary  blessing  upon  his  word." 

John  Newton  was  a  .shrewd  man,  as  well  as  an  eminent 
minister  of  the  gospel.  His  testimony  is  :  "  That  which  finished 
Mr.  Whitefield's  character  as  a  shining  light,  and  is  now  his 
crown  of  rejoicing,  was  the  singular  success  which  the  Lord  was 
pleased  to  give  him  in  winning  souls.  It  seemed  as  if  he  never 
preached  in  vain.  Perhaps  there  is  hardly  a  place  in  all  the 
extensive  compass  of  his  labours  where  some  may  not  yet 
be  found  who  thankfully  acknowledge  him  as  their  spiritual 
father." 

John  Wesley  did  not  agree  with  Whitefield  on  several  theo- 
logical points  of  no  small  importance.     But  when  he  preached 


HIS  INDIRECT  USEFULNESS.  47 

his  funeral  sermon,  he  said :  "  Have  we  read  or  heard  of  any 
person  who  called  so  many  thousands,  so  many  myriads  o( 
sinners  to  repentance  1  Above  all,  have  we  read  or  heard  of 
any  one  who  has  been  the  blessed  instrument  of  bringing  so 
many  sinners  from  darkness  to  light,  and  from  the  power  of 
Satan  unto  God  ? " 

Valuable  as  these  testimonies  undoubtedly  are,  there  is  one 
point  which  they  leave  totally  untouched.  That  point  is  the 
quantity  of  indirect  good  that  Whitefield  did.  Great  as  the 
direct  effects  of  his  labours  were,  I  believe  finniy  that  the  in- 
direct effects  were  even  greater.  His  ministry  was  made 
a  blessing  to  thousands  who  never  perhaps  either  saw  or 
heard  him. 

He  was  among  the  first  in  the  eighteenth  century  who  re- 
vived attention  to  the  old  truths  which  produced  the  Protestant 
Reformation.  His  constant  assertion  of  the  doctrines  taught 
by  the  Reformers,  his  repeated  reference  to  the  Articles  and 
Homihes,  and  the  divinity  of  the  best  English  theologians, 
obliged  many  to  think,  and  roused  them  to  examine  their  own 
principles.  If  the  whole  truth  was  known,  I  believe  it  would 
prove  that  the  rise  and  progress  of  the  Evangelical  body  in  the 
Church  of  England  received  a  mighty  impulse  from  George 
Whitefield. 

But  this  is  not  the  only  indirect  good  that  Whitefield  did  in 
his  day.  He  was  among  the  first  to  show  the  right  way  to 
meet  the  attacks  of  infidels  and  sceptics  on  Christianity.  He 
saw  clearly  that  the  most  powerful  weapon  against  such  men 
is  not  cold,  metaphysical  reasoning  and  dry  critical  disquisition, 
but  preaching  the  whole  gospel — living  the  whole  gospel — and 
spreading  the  whole  gospel.  It  was  not  the  writings  of  Leland, 
and  the  younger  Sherlock,  and  Waterland,  and  Leslie,  that 
rolled  back  the  flood  of  infidelity  one  half  so  much  as  the 
preaching  of  Whitefield  and  his  companions.  They  were  the 
■men  who  were  the  true  chamoions  of  Christianity.     Infidels  2Jt 


48  CHARACTER  OF  HIS  PREACHING. 

seldom  shaken  by  mere  abstract  reasoning.  The  surest  ail- 
ments against  them  are  gospel  truth  and  gospel  life. 

Above  all,  he  was  the  very  first  Englishman  who  seems  to 
ha/e  thoroughly  understood  what  Dr.  Chalmers  aptly  called 
the  agp-essive  system.  He  was  the  first  to  see  that  Christ's 
ministers  must  do  the  work  of  fishermen.  They  must  not  wait 
for  souls  to  come  to  them,  but  must  go  after  souls,  and  "  compel 
them  to  come  in."  He  did  not  sit  tamely  by  his  fireside,  like 
a  cat  in  a  rainy  day,  mourning  over  the  wickedness  of  the  land. 
He  went  forth  to  beard  the  devil  in  his  high  places.  He 
attacked  sin  and  wickedness  face  to  face,  and  gave  them  no 
peace.  He  dived  into  holes  and  corners  after  sinners.  He 
hunted  out  ignorance  and  vice  wherever  they  could  be  found. 
In  short,  he  set  on  foot  a  system  of  action  which,  up  to  his 
time,  had  been  comparatively  unknown  in  this  country,  but  a 
system  which,  once  commenced,  has  never  ceased  to  be  em- 
ployed down  to  the  present  day.  City  missions,  town  missions, 
district  visiting  societies,  open-air  preachings,  home  missions, 
special  services,  theatre  preachings,  are  all  evidences  that  the 
value  of  the  "  aggressive  system  "  is  now  thoroughly  recognized 
by  all  the  Churches.  We  understand  better  how  to  go  to  work 
now  than  we  did  a  hundred  years  ago.  But  let  us  never  forget 
that  the  first  man  to  commence  operations  of  this  kind  was 
George  Whitefield,  and  let  us  give  him  the  credit  he  deserves. 

The  peculiar  character  of  Whitefield'' s preaching  is  the  subject 
which  next  demands  some  consideration.  Men  naturally  wish 
to  know  what  was  the  secret  of  his  unparalleled  success.  The 
subject  is  one  surrounded  with  considerable  difficulty,  and  it  is 
no  easy  matter  to  form  a  correct  judgment  about  it.  The 
common  idea  of  many  people,  that  he  was  a  mere  common- 
place ranting  Methodist,  remarkable  for  nothing  but  great 
fluency,  strong  doctrine,  and  a  loud  voice,  will  not  bear  a 
moment's  investigation.  Dr.  Johnson  was  foolish  enough  t» 
•ay,  that  "  he  vociferated  and  made  an  impression,  but  never 


POPULARITY  OF  HIS  PREACHING.  49 

drew  as  much  attention  as  a  mountebank  does ;  and  that  he 
did  not  draw  attention  by  doing  better  than  others,  but  by 
doing  what  was  strange."  But  Johnson  was  anything  but  in- 
fallible when  he  began  to  talk  about  ministers  and  religion. 
Such  a  theory  will  not  hold  water.  It  is  contradictory  to  un- 
deniable facts. 

It  is  a  fact  that  no  preacher  in  England  has  ever  succeeded 
in  arresting  the  attention  of  such  crowds  as  Whitefield  con- 
stantly addressed  around  London.  No  preacher  has  ever  been 
so  universally  popular  in  every  country  that  he  visited,  in  Eng- 
land, Scotland,  and  America.  No  preacher  has  ever  retained  his 
hold  on  his  hearers  so  entirely  as  he  did  for  thirty-four  years. 
His  popularity  never  waned.  It  was  as  great  at  the  end  of  his 
day  as  it  was  at  the  beginning.  Wherever  he  preached,  men 
would  leave  their  workshops  and  employments  to  gather  round 
him,  and  hear  like  those  who  heard  for  eternity.  This  of  itself 
is  a  great  fact.  To  command  the  ear  of  "  the  masses  "  for  a 
quarter  of  a  century,  and  to  be  preaching  incessantly  the  whole 
time,  is  an  evidence  of  no  common  power. 

It  is  another  fact  that  Whitefield's  preaching  produced  a 
powerful  effect  on  people  in  every  rank  of  life.  He  won  the 
admiration  of  high  as  well  as  low,  of  rich  as  well  as  poor,  of 
learned  as  well  as  unlearned.  If  his  preaching  had  been 
popular  with  none  but  the  uneducated  and  the  poor,  we  might 
have  thought  it  possible  that  there  was  little  in  it  but  declama- 
tion and  noise.  But,  so  far  from  this  being  the  case,  he  seems 
to  have  been  acceptable  to  numbers  of  the  nobility  and  gentry. 
The  Marquis  of  Lothian,  the  Earl  of  Leven,  the  Earl  of  Buchan, 
Lord  Rae,  Lord  Dartmouth,  Lord  James  A.  Gordon,  might  be 
named  among  his  warmest  admirers,  beside  Lady  Huntingdon 
and  a  host  of  ladies. 

It  is  a  fact  that  eminent  critics  and  literary  men,  like  Lord 
Bolingbroke  and  Lord  Chesterfield,  were  frequently  his  de- 
lighted  hearers.      Even  the    cold   artificial   Chesterfield   was 

(19S)  4 


50  HIS  PUBLISHED  SERMONS. 

known  to  warm  under  Whitefield's  eloquence.  Bolingbroke 
said,  "  He  is  the  most  extraordinary  man  in  our  times.  He  has 
the  most  commanding  eloquence  I  ever  heard  in  any  person." 
Franklin  the  philosopher  spoke  in  no  measured  terms  of  his 
preaching  powers.  Hume  the  historian  declared  that  it  was 
worth  going  twenty  miles  to  hear  him. 

Now,  facts  like  these  can  never  be  explained  away.  They 
completely  upset  the  theory  that  Whitefield's  preaching  was 
nothing  but  noise  and  rant.  Bolingbroke,  Chesterfield,  Hume, 
and  Franklin,  were  not  men  to  be  easily  deceived.  They  were 
no  mean  judges  of  eloquence.  They  were  probably  among  the 
best  qualified  critics  of  their  day.  Their  unbought  and  un- 
biassed opinions  appear  to  me  to  supply  unanswerable  proof 
that  there  must  have  been  something  very  extraordinary  about 
"VSHiitefield's  preaching.  But  still,  after  all,  the  question  remains 
to  be  answered.  What  was  the  secret  of  Whitefield's  unrivalled 
popularity  and  effectiveness  ?  And  I  frankly  admit  that,  with 
the  scanty  materials  we  possess  for  forming  our  judgment,  the 
question  is  a  very  hard  one  to  answer. 

The  man  who  turns  to  the  seventy-five  sermons  published 
.nder  Whitefield's  name  will  probably  be  much  disappointed. 
He  will  see  in  them  no  commanding  intellect  or  grasp  of  mind. 
He  will  find  in  them  no  deep  philosophy,  and  no  very  striking 
thoughts.  It  is  only  fair,  however,  to  say,  that  by  far  the  greater 
part  of  these  sermons  were  taken  do^vn  in  shorthand  by 
reporters,  and  published  without  correction.  These  worthy 
men  appear  to  have  done  their  work  very  indiff"erently,  and 
were  evidently  ignorant  alike  of  stopping  and  paragraphing,  of 
grammar  and  of  gospel.  The  consequence  is,  that  many  pas- 
sages in  these  seventy-five  sermons  are  what  Bishop  Latimei 
would  have  called  a  "  mingle-mangle,"  and  what  we  should  call 
in  this  day  "  a  complete  mess."  No  wonder  that  poor  White- 
field  says,  in  one  of  his  last  letters,  dated  September  26,  1769, 
"  I  wish  you  had  advertised  against  the  publication  of  ray  last 


DISTINCTIVE  CHARACTERISTICS.  51 

sermon.  It  is  not  verbatim  as  I  delivered  it.  It  some  places 
it  makes  me  speak  false  concord,  and  even  nonsense.  In 
others  the  sense  and  connection  are  destroyed  by  injudicious, 
disjointed  paragraphs,  and  the  whole  is  entirely  unfit  for  the 
public  review." 

I  venture,  however,  to  say  boldly  that,  with  all  their  faults, 
Whitefield's  printed  sermons  will  well  repay  a  candid  perusal. 
The  reader  must  recollect  that  they  were  not  carefully  prepared 
for  the  press,  like  the  sermons  of  Melville  or  Bradley,  bu; 
wretchedly  reported,  paragraphed,  and  stopped,  and  he  must 
read  with  this  continually  before  his  mind.  Moreover,  he  must 
remember  that  English  composition  for  speaking  to  hearers, 
and  EngHsh  composition  for  private  reading,  are  almost  like 
two  different  languages,  so  that  sermons  which  "  preach  "  well 
"  read "  badly.  Let  him,  I  say,  remember  these  two  things, 
and  judge  accordingly,  and  I  am  much  mistaken  if  he  does  not 
find  much  to  admire  in  many  of  Whitefield's  sermons.  For  my 
own  part,  I  must  plainly  say  that  I  think  they  are  greatly  under- 
rated. 

Let  me  now  point  out  what  appear  to  have  been  the  distinc- 
tive characteristics  of  Whitefield's  preaching. 

For  one  thing,  Whitefield  preached  a  singularly  pure  gospel. 
Few  men,  perhaps,  ever  gave  their  hearers  so  mr;ich  wheat  and 
'o  little  chaff.  He  did  not  get  up  to  talk  about  his  party,  his 
cause,  his  interest  or  his  office.  He  was  perpetually  telling  you 
about  your  sins,  your  heart,  Jesus  Christ,  the  Holy  Ghost,  the 
absolute  need  of  repentance,  faith,  and  holiness,  in  the  way  that 
the  Bible  presents  these  mighty  subjects.  "  Oh,  the  righteous- 
ness of  Jesus  Christ!"  he  would  often  say;  "  I  must  be  excused 
if  I  mention  it  in  almost  all  my  sermons."  Preaching  of  this 
kind  is  the  preaching  that  God  delights  to  honour.  It  must  be 
pre-eminently  a  manifestation  of  truth. 

For  another  thing,  Whitefield's  preaching  was  singularly  lucid 
and  simple.     His   hearers,  whatever  they  might  think  of  his 


5*  HIS  POWER  OF  DESCRIPTION. 

doctrine,  could  never  fail  to  understand  what  he  meant.  His 
style  of  speaking  was  easy,  plain,  and  conversational.  He  seemed 
to  abhor  long  and  involved  sentences.  He  always  saw  his  mark, 
and  went  directly  at  it.  He  seldom  troubled  his  hearers  with 
abstruse  argument  and  intricate  reasoning.  Simple  Bible  state- 
ments, apt  illustrations,  and  pertinent  anecdotes,  were  the  more 
common  weapons  that  he  used.  The  consequence  was  that  his 
hearers  always  understood  him.  He  never  shot  above  their 
heads.  Here  again  is  one  grand  element  of  a  preacher's  suc- 
cess. He  must  labour  by  all  means  to  be  understood.  It  was 
a  wise  saying  of  Archbishop  Usher,  "  To  make  easy  things  seem 
hard  is  every  man's  work ;  but  to  make  hard  things  easy  is  the 
work  of  a  great  preacher." 

For  another  thing,  Whitefield  was  a  singularly  bold  and  direct 
preacher.  He  never  used  that  indefinite  expression  "we," 
which  seems  so  pecuhar  to  English  pulpit  oratory,  and  which 
only  leaves  a  hearer's  mind  in  a  state  of  misty  confusion.  He 
met  men  face  to  face,  like  one  who  had  a  message  from  God 
to  them,  "  I  have  come  here  to  speak  to  you  about  your  soul." 
The  result  was  that  many  of  his  hearers  used  often  to  think  that 
his  sermons  were  specially  meant  for  themselves.  He  was  not 
content,  as  many,  with  sticking  on  a  meagre  tail-piece  of  appli- 
cation at  the  end  of  a  long  discourse.  On  the  contrary,  a  con- 
stant vein  of  application  ran  through  all  his  sermons.  "  This  is 
for  you,  and  this  is  for  you."     His  hearers  were  never  let  alone. 

Another  striking  feature  in  Whitefield's  preaching  was  his 
singular  power  of  description.  The  Arabians  have  a  proverb 
which  says,  "  He  is  the  best  orator  who  can  turn  men's  ears 
into  eyes."  Whitefield  seems  to  have  had  a  peculiar  faculty  of 
doing  this.  He  dramatized  his  subject  so  thoroughly  that  it 
seemed  to  move  and  walk  before  your  eyes.  He  used  to  draw 
sucli  vivid  pictures  of  the  things  he  was  handling,  that  his 
hearers  could  believe  they  actually  saw  and  heard  thenoL  "  On 
one  occasion,"  says  one  of  his  biographers,  "  Lord  Chesterfield 


HIS  EARNESTNESS.  S3 

was  among  his  hearers.  The  great  preacher,  in  describing  the 
miserable  condition  of  an  unconverted  sinner,  illustrated  the 
subject  by  describing  a  blind  beggar.  The  night  was  dark,  and 
the  road  dangerous.  The  poor  mendicant  was  deserted  by  his 
dog  near  the  edge  of  a  precipice,  and  had  nothing  to  aid  him  in 
groping  his  way  but  his  staif.  Whitefield  so  warmed  with  his 
subject,  and  enforced  it  with  such  graphic  power,  that  the  whole 
auditory  was  kept  in  breathless  silence,  as  if  it  saw  the  move- 
ments of  the  poor  old  man  ;  and  at  length,  when  the  beggar 
was  about  to  take  the  fatal  step  which  would  have  hurled  him 
down  the  precipice  to  certain  destruction.  Lord  Chesterfield 
actually  made  a  rush  forward  to  save  him,  exclaiming  aloud, 
*  He  is  gone !  he  is  gone  ! '  The  noble  lord  had  been  so 
entirely  carried  away  by  the  preacher,  that  he  forgot  the  whole 
was  a  picture." 

Another  leading  characteristic  of  Whitefield's  preaching  was 
his  tremendous  earnestness.  One  poor  uneducated  man  said  of 
him,  that  "  he  preached  like  a  lion."  He  succeeded  in  showing 
people  that  he  at  least  believed  all  he  was  saying,  and  that  his 
heart,  and  soul,  and  mind,  and  strength,  were  bent  on  making 
them  believe  it  too.  His  sermons  were  not  like  the  morning 
and  evening  gun  at  Portsmouth,  a  kind  of  formal  discharge, 
fired  off  as  a  matter  of  course,  that  disturbs  nobody.  They  were 
^1  life  and  fire.  There  was  no  getting  away  from  them.  Sleep 
was  next  to  impossible.  You  must  listen  whether  you  liked  it 
or  not.  There  was  a  holy  violence  about  him  which  firmly 
took  your  attention  by  storm.  You  were  fairly  carried  off  your 
legs  by  his  energy  before  you  had  time  to  consider  what  you 
would  do.  This,  we  may  be  sure,  was  one  secret  of  his  success. 
We  must  convince  men  that  we  are  in  earnest  ourselves,  if  we 
want  to  be  believed.  The  difference  between  one  preacher 
and  another,  is  often  not  so  much  in  the  things  said,  as  in  the 
manner  in  which  they  are  said. 

It  is  recorded  by  one  of  his  biographers  that  an  American 


54  ///-S'  J^A  THOS  AND  FEELING. 

gentleman  once  went  to  hear  him,  for  the  first  time,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  report  he  heard  of  his  preaching  powers.  The 
day  was  rainy,  the  congregation  comparatively  thin,  and  the 
beginning  of  the  sermon  rather  heavy.  Our  American  friend 
began  to  say  to  himself,  "  This  man  is  no  great  wonder  after 
all."  He  looked  round,  and  saw  the  congregation  as  little 
interested  as  himself.  One  old  man,  in  front  of  the  pulpit,  had 
fallen  asleep.  But  all  at  once  Whitefield  stopped  short.  His 
countenance  changed.  And  then  he  suddenly  broke  forth  in 
an  altered  tone  :  "  If  I  had  come  to  speak  to  you  in  my  own 
name,  you  might  well  rest  your  elbows  on  your  knees,  and  your 
heads  on  your  hands,  and  sleep ;  and  once  in  a  while  look  up, 
and  say,  What  is  this  babbler  talking  ofl  But  I  have  not 
come  to  you  in  my  own  name.  No  !  I  have  come  to  you  in 
the  name  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts "  (here  he  brought  down  his 
hand  and  foot  with  a  force  that  made  the  building  ring),  "  and 
I  must  and  will  be  heard."  The  congregation  started.  The 
old  man  woke  up  at  once.  "  Ay,  ay  ! "  cried  Whitefield,  fixing 
his  eyes  on  him,  "  I  have  waked  you  up,  have  1 1  I  meant  to 
do  it.  I  am  not  come  here  to  preach  to  stocks  and  stones  :  I 
have  come  to  you  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  God  of  Hosts,  and 
I  must,  and  will,  have  an  audience."  The  hearers  were  stripped 
of  their  apathy  at  once.  Every  word  of  the  sermon  after  this 
was  heard  with  deep  ai^tention,  and  the  American  gentleman 
never  forgot  it. 

One  more  feature  in  Whitefield's  preaching  deserves  special 
notice  ;  and  that  is,  the  immense  amount  of  pathos  and  feeling 
which  it  always  contained.  It  was  no  uncommon  thing  with 
him  to  weep  profusely  in  the  pulpit.  Cornelius  Winter,  who 
often  accompanied  him  in  his  latter  journeys,  went  so  far  as  to 
say  that  he  hardly  ever  knew  him  get  through  a  sermon  without 
some  tears.  There  seems  to  have  been  nothing  of  affectation 
in  this.  He  felt  intensely  for  the  souls  before  him,  and  his 
feelings  found  an  outlet  in  tears.     Of  all  the  ingredients  of  his 


WHITEFIELD  AS  AN  OR  A  TOR.  55 

success  in  preaching,  none,  I  suspect,  were  so  powerful  as  this. 
It  awakened  affections  and  touched  secret  springs  in  men, 
which  no  amount  of  reasoning  and  demonstration  could  have 
moved.  It  smoothed  down  the  prejudices  which  many  had 
conceived  against  him.  They  could  not  hate  the  man  who 
wept  so  much  over  their  souls.  "  I  came  to  hear  you,"  said 
one  to  him,  "  with  my  pocket  full  of  stones,  intending  to  break 
your  head  ;  but  your  sermon  got  the  better  of  me,  and  broke 
my  heart."  Once  become  satisfied  that  a  man  loves  you,  and 
you  will  listen  gladly  to  anything  he  has  to  say. 

I  will  now  ask  the  reader  to  add  to  this  analysis  of  White- 
field's  preaching,  that  even  by  nature  he  possessed  several  of 
the  rarest  gifts  which  fit  a  man  to  be  an  orator.  His  actiofi  was 
perfect — so  perfect  that  even  Garrick,  the  famous  actor,  gave  it 
unqualified  praise.  His  voice  was  as  wonderful  as  his  action  — 
so  powerful  that  he  could  make  thirty  thousand  people  hear 
him  at  once,  and  yet  so  musical  and  well  toned  that  some  said 
he  could  raise  tears  by  his  pronunciation  of  the  word  "  Meso- 
potamia." His  manner  in  the  pulpit  was  so  curiously  graceful 
and  fascinating  that  it  was  said  that  no  one  could  hear  him  for 
five  minutes  without  forgetting  that  he  squinted.  ll\>  fluency 
and  command  of  appropriate  language  were  of  the  highest 
order,  prompting  him  always  to  use  the  right  word  aiid  to  put 
it  in  the  right  place.  Add,  I  repeat,  these  gifts  to  the  things 
already  mentioned,  and  then  consider  whether  there  is  not 
sufficient  in  our  hands  to  account  for  his  power  and  popularity 
as  a  preacher. 

For  my  own  part,  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  I  believe 
no  English  preacher  has  ever  possessed  such  a  combination  of 
excellent  qualifications  as  Whitefield.  Some,  no  doubt,  have 
surpassed  him  in  some  of  his  gifts  ;  others,  perhaps,  have 
equalled  him  in  others.  But  for  a  well-balanced  combination 
of  some  of  the  finest  gifts  that  a  preacher  can  possess,  united 
with  an  unrivalled  voice,  manner,  delivery,  action,  and  com- 


56  HIS  PRIVATE  CHARACTER. 

mand  of  words,  Whitefield,  I  repeat  my  opinion,  stands  alone. 
No  Englishman,  I  believe,  dead  or  alive,  has  ever  equalled  him. 
And  I  suspect  we  shall  always  find  that,  just  in  proportion  as 
preachers  have  approached  that  curious  combination  of  rare 
gifts  which  Whitefield  possessed,  just  in  that  very  proportion 
have  they  attained  what  Clarendon  defines  true  eloquence  to 
be — "  a  strange  power  of  making  themselves  believed." 

The  inner  life  and  personal  character  of  this  great  spiritual 
hero  of  the  last  century  are  a  branch  of  my  subject  on  which  I 
shall  not  dwell  at  any  length.  In  fact,  there  is  no  necessity  for 
my  doing  so.  He  was  a  singularly  transparent  man.  There 
was  nothing  about  him  requiring  apology  or  explanation.  His 
faults  and  good  qualities  were  both  clear  and  plain  as  noon-day. 
I  shall  therefore  content  myself  with  simply  pointing  out  the 
prominent  features  of  his  character,  so  far  as  they  can  be 
gathered  from  his  letters  and  the  accounts  of  his  contempo- 
raries, and  then  bring  my  sketch  of  him  to  a  conclusion. 

He  was  a  man  of  deep  and  unfeigned  humility.  No  one  can 
read  the  fourteen  hundred  letters  of  his,  published  by  Dr. 
Gillies,  without  observing  this.  Again  and  again,  in  the  very 
zenith  of  his  popularity,  we  find  him  speaking  of  himself  and 
his  works  in  the  lowliest  terms.  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a 
sinner,"  he  writes  on  September  ri,  1753,  "and  give  me,  for 
his  infinite  mercy's  sake,  an  humble,  thankful,  and  resigned 
heart.  Truly  I  am  viler  than  the  vilest,  and  stand  amazed  at 
his  employing  such  a  wretch  as  I  am."  "  Let  none  of  my 
friends,"  he  writes  on  December  27,  1753,  "cry  to  such  a 
sluggish,  lukewarm,  unprofitable  worm,  Spare  thyself  Rather 
spur  me  on,  I  pray  you,  with  an  Awake,  thou  sleeper,  and 
begin  to  do  something  for  thy  God."  Language  like  this,  no 
doubt,  seems  foolishness  and  affectation  to  the  world  ;  but  the 
well-instructed  Bible  reader  will  see  in  it  the  heartfelt  experience 
of  all  the  brightest  saints.  It  is  the  language  of  men  like 
Baxter,  and  Brainerd,  and  M'Cheyne.     It  is  the  same  mind 


HIS  DILIGENCE  AND  SELF-DENIAL.  57 

that  was  in  the  inspired  Apostle  Paul.     Those  that  have  most 
light  and  grace  are  always  the  humblest  men. 

He  was  a  man  of  burning  love  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
That  name  which  is  "  above  every  name"  stands  out  inces- 
santly in  all  his  correspondence.     Like  fragrant  ointment,  it 
gives  a  savour  to  all  his  communications.     He  seems  never 
weary  of  saying  something   about  Jesus.      "  My  Master,"  as 
George  Herbert  said,  is  never  long  out  of  his  mind.     His  love. 
His  atonement,  His  precious  blood,  His  righteousness,  His 
leadiness  to  receive  sinners,  His  patience  and  tender  dealing 
with  saints,  are'themes  which  appear  ever  fresh  before  his  eyes. 
In  this  respect,  at  least,  there  is  a  curious  likeness  between 
him  and  that  glorious  Scotch  divine,  Samuel  Rutherford. 

He  was  a  man  of  unwearied  diligence  and  lahoriousness  about 
his  Master's  business.  It  would  be  difficult,  perhaps,  to  name 
any  one  in  the  annals  of  the  Churches  who  worked  so  hard  for 
Christ,  and  so  thoroughly  spent  himself  in  his  service.  Henry 
Venn,  in  a  funeral  sermon  for  him,  preached  at  Bath,  bore  the 
following  testimony  : — "  What  a  sign  and  wonder  was  this  man 
of  God  in  the  greatness  of  his  labours  !  One  cannot  but  stand 
amazed  that  his  mortal  frame  could,  for  the  space  of  near  thirty 
years,  without  interruption,  sustain  the  weight  of  them  ;  for 
what  so  trying  to  the  human  frame,  in  youth  especially,  as  long- 
continued,  frequent,  and  violent  straining  of  the  lungs  1  Who 
that  knows  their  structure  would  think  it  possible  that  a  person 
little  above  the  age  of  manhood  could  speak  in  a  single  week, 
and  that  for  years — in  general  forty  hours,  and  in  very  many 
weeks  sixty — and  that  to  thousands  ;  and  after  this  labour, 
instead  of  taking  any  rest,  could  be  offering  up  prayers  and 
intercessions,  with  hymns  and  spiritual  songs,  as  his  manner 
was,  in  every  house  to  which  he  was  invited  1  The  truth  is, 
that  in  point  of  labour  this  extraordinary  servant  of  God  did  as 
much  in  a  few  weeks  as  most  of  those  who  exert  themselves  are 
?ible  to  do  in  the  space  of  a  year." 


58  CHEERFULNESS  OF  HIS  NA  TURE. 

He  was  to  the  end  a  man  oi  eminent  self-denial.  His  style  of 
living  was  most  simple.  He  was  remarkable  to  a  proverb  for 
moderation  in  eating  and  drinking.  All  through  life  he  was  an 
early  riser.  His  usual  hour  for  getting  up  was  four  o'clock, 
both  in  summer  and  winter ;  and  equally  punctual  was  he  in 
retiring  about  ten  at  night.  A  man  of  prayerful  habits,  he  fre- 
quently spent  whole  nights  in  reading  and  devotion.  Cornelius 
Winter,  who  often  slept  in  the  same  room,  says  that  he  would 
sometimes  rise  during  the  night  for  this  purpose.  He  cared 
little  for  money,  except  as  a  help  to  the  cause  of  Christ,  and 
refused  it,  when  pressed  upon  him  for  his  own  use,  once  to  the 
amount  of  ;^7ooo.  He  amassed  no  fortune,  and  founded  no 
wealthy  family.  The  little  money  he  left  behind  him  at  his 
death  arose  entirely  from  the  legacies  of  friends.  The  Pope's 
coarse  saying  about  Luther,  "  This  German  beast  does  not  love 
gold,"  might  have  been  equally  applied  to  Whitefield. 

He  was  a  man  of  remarkable  disinterestedness  and  singleness  of 
eye.  He  seemed  to  live  only  for  two  objects — the  glory  of  God 
and  the  salvation  of  souls.  Of  secondary  and  covert  objects 
he  knew  nothing  at  all.  He  raised  no  party  of  followers  who 
took  his  name.  He  established  no  denominational  system,  of 
which  his  own  writings  should  be  cardinal  elements.  A  favour- 
ite expression  of  his  is  most  characteristic  of  the  man  :  "  Let  the 
name  of  George  Whitefield  perish,  so  long  as  Christ  is  exalted." 

He  was  a  man  of  a  singularly  happy  and  cheerful  spirit.  No 
one  who  saw  him  could  ever  doubt  that  he  enjoyed  his  religion. 
Tried  as  he  was  in  many  ways  throughout  his  ministry — slan- 
dered by  some,  despised  by  others,  misrepresented  by  false 
brethren,  opposed  everywhere  by  the  ignorant  clergy  of  his 
time,  worried  by  incessant  controversy — his  elasticity  never 
failed  him.  He  was  eminently  a  rejoicing  Christian,  whose 
very  demeanour  recommended  his  Master's  service.  A  vene- 
rable lady  of  New  York,  after  his  death,  when  speaking  of  the 
inthiences  by  which  the  Spirit  won  her  heart  to  God,  used  these 


HIS  CHARITY  AND  CATHOLICITY.  59 

remarkable  words,  —  "Mr.  Whitefield  was  so  cheerful  that  it 
tempted  me  to  become  a  Christian." 

Last,  but  not  least,  lie  was  a  man  of  extraordinary  charity^ 
catholicity^  and  liberality  \\\  his  religion.     He  knew  nothing  of 
that  narrow-minded  feeling  which  makes  some  men  fancy  that 
everything  must  be  barren  outside  their  own  camps,  and  that 
their   own  party  has  got  a  complete  monopoly  of  truth  and 
heaven.     He  loved  all  who  loved  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sin- 
cerity.    He  measured  all  by  the   measure  which  the  angels 
use, — "  Did  they  profess  repentance  towards  God,  faith  towards 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  holiness  of  conversation  1"     If  they 
did,  they  were  as  his  brethren.     His  soul  was  with  such  men, 
by  whatever  name  they  were  called.     Minor  differences  were 
wood,  hay,  and  stubble  to  him.       The  marks  of  the    Lord 
Jesus  were  the  only  marks  he  cared  for.     This  catholicity  is 
the  more  remarkable  when  the  spirit  of  the  times  he  lived  in  is 
considered.     Even  the  Erskines,  in  Scotland,  wanted  him  to 
preach  for  no  other  denomination  but  their  own — viz.,  the 
Secession  Church.     He  asked  them,  "  Why  only  for  them  ?"  — 
and  received  the  notable  answer  that  "  they  were  the  Lord's 
people."     This  was  more  than   Whitefield  could  stand.     He 
asked  "  if  there  were  no  other  Lord's  people  but  themselves  ;" 
he  told  them,  "  if  all  others  were  the  devil's  people,  they  cer- 
tainly had  more  need  to  be  preached  to  ;"  and  he  wound  up  by 
informing  them,  that  "  if  the  Pope  himself  would  lend  him  his 
pulpit,  he  would  gladly  proclaim  the  righteousness  of  Christ  in 
it"     To  this  catholicity  of  spirit  he  adhered  all  his  days.     If 
other  Christians  misrepresented  him,  he  forgave  them  ;  and  it 
they  refused  to  work  with  him,  he  still  loved  them.     Nothing 
could  be  a  more  weighty  testimony  against  narrow-mindedness 
than  his  request,  made  shortly  before  his  death,  that,  when  he 
did  die,  John  Wesley  should  be  asked  to  preach  his  funeral 
sermon.     Wesley  and  he  had  long  ceased  to  agree  about  Cal- 
vinistic  pomts  ;  but  Whitefield,  to  the  very  last,  was  determined 


6o  NO  T  IVITHO  UT  FA  UL  TS. 

to  forget  minor  differences,  and  to  regard  Wesley  as  Calvin  did 
Luther,  "  only  as  a  good  servant  of  Jesus  Christ."  On  another 
occasion  a  censorious  professor  of  religion  asked  him  "  whether 
he  thought  they  would  see  John  Wesley  in  heaven?"  "No, 
sir,"  was  the  striking  answer ;  "  I  fear  not.  He  will  be  so  near 
the  throne,  and  we  shall  be  at  such  a  distance,  that  we  shall 
hardly  get  a  sight  of  him." 

Far  be  it  from  me  to  say  that  the  subject  of  this  chapter  was 
a  man  without  faults.  Like  all  God's  saints,  he  was  an  imper- 
fect creature.  He  sometimes  erred  in  judgment.  He  often 
drew  rash  conclusions  about  Providence,  and  mistook  his  own 
inclination  for  God's  leadings.  He  was  frequently  hasty  both 
with  his  tongue  and  his  pen.  He  had  no  business  to  say  that 
*'  Archbishop  Tillotson  knew  no  more  of  the  gospel  than  Ma- 
homet." He  was  wrong  to  set  down  some  people  as  the  Lord's 
enemies,  and  others  as  the  Lord's  friends  so  precipitately  and 
positively  as  he  sometimes  did.  He  was  to  blame  for  denounc- 
ing many  of  the  clergy  as  "letter-learned  Pharisees,"  because 
they  could  not  receive  the  doctrine  of  the  new  birth.  But  still, 
after  all  this  has  been  said,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  the 
main  he  was  an  •  eminently  holy,  self-denying,  and  consistent 
man.  "  The  faults  of  his  character,"  says  an  American  writer, 
"  were  like  spots  on  the  sun — detected  without  much  difficulty 
by  any  cool  and  careful  observer  who  takes  pains  to  look  for 
them,  but  to  all  practical  purposes  lost  in  one  general  and  genial 
effulgence."  Well  indeed  would  it  be  for  the  Churches  of  our 
day,  if  God  was  to  give  them  more  ministers  like  this  great 
evangelist  of  England  ! 

It  only  remains  to  say  that  those  who  wish  to  know  mo 
about  Whitefield  would  do  well  to  peruse  the  seven  volumes  o 
his  letters  and  other  publications,  which  Dr.  Gillies  edited  in 
1770.     I  am  much  mistaken  if  they  are  not  agreeably  surprised 
at  their  contents.     To  me  it  is  matter  of  astonishment  that, 
awnit'st  the  many  reprints  of  the  nineteenth  century,  no  pub- 


EXTRA  CTS  FROM  SERMON.  6 1 

Usher  has  yet  attempted  a  complete   reprint  of  the  works  of 
George  Whitefield, 

A  short  extract  from  the  conclusion  of  a  sermon  preached  by 
Whitefield  on  Kennington  Common,  may  be  interesting  to  some 
readers,  and  may  serve  to  give  them  some  faint  idea  of  the 
great  preacher's  style.  It  was  a  sermon  on  the  text,  "What 
think  ye  of  Christ  1"  (Matt.  xxii.  42.) 

"  O  my  brethren,  my  heart  is  enlarged  towards  you.  I  trust 
I  feel  something  of  that  hidden  but  powerful  presence  of  Christ, 
whilst  I  am  preaching  to  you.  Indeed  it  is  sweet — it  is  ex- 
ceedingly comfortable.  All  the  harm  I  wish  you  who  without 
cause  are  my  enemies,  is  that  you  felt  the  like.  Believe  me, 
though  it  would  be  hell  to  my  soul  to  return  to  a  natural  state 
again,  yet  I  would  willingly  change  states  with  you  for  a  Httle 
while,  that  you  might  know  what  it  is  to  have  Christ  dwelling 
in  your  hearts  by  faith.  Do  not  turn  your  backs.  Do  not  let 
the  devil  hurry  you  away.  Be  not  afraid  of  convictions.  Do 
not  think  worse  of  the  doctrine  because  preached  without  the 
church  walls.  Our  Lord,  in  the  days  of  his  flesh,  preached  on 
a  mount,  in  a  ship,  and  a  field ;  and  I  am  persuaded  many  have 
felt  his  gracious  presence  here.  Indeed,  we  speak  what  we 
know.  Do  not  therefore  reject  the  kingdom  of  God  against 
yourselves.     Be  so  wise  as  to  receive  our  witness. 

"  I  cannot,  I  will  not  let  you  go.  Stay  a  little,  and  let  us 
reason  together.  However  lightly  you  may  esteem  your  souls, 
I  know  our  Lord  has  set  an  unspeakable  value  on  them.  He 
thought  them  worthy  of  his  most  precious  blood.  I  beseech 
you,  therefore,  O  sinners,  be  ye  reconciled  to  God.  I  hope  you 
do  not  fear  being  accepted  in  the  Beloved.  Behold,  he  calleth 
ydii.  Behold,  he  prevents,  and  follows  you  with  his  mercy, 
and  hath  sent  forth  his  servants  into  the  highways  and  hedges 
to  compel  you  to  come  in. 

"  Remember,  then,  that  at  such  an  hour  of  such  a  day,  in 
such  a  year,  in  this  place,  you  were  all  told  what  you  ought  to 


62  SPECIMEN  OF  HIS  PREACHING. 

think  concerning  Jesus  Christ.  If  you  now  perish,  it  will  not  be 
from  lack  of  knowledge.  I  am  free  from  the  blood  of  you  all. 
You  cannot  say  I  have  been  preaching  damnation  to  you.  You 
cannot  say  I  have,  like  legal  preachers,  been  requiring  you 
to  make  bricks  without  straw.  I  have  not  bidden  you  to  make 
yourselves  saints  and  then  come  to  God.  I  have  offered  you 
salvation  on  as  cheap  terms  as  you  can  desire.  I  have  offered 
you  Christ's  whole  wisdom,  Christ's  whole  righteousness,  Christ's 
whole  sanctification  and  eternal  redemption,  if  you  will  but 
believe  on  him.  If  you  say  you  cannot  believe,  you  say  right ; 
for  faith,  as  well  as  every  other  blessing,  is  the  gift  of  God.  But 
then  wait  upon  God,  and  who  knows  but  he  may  have  mercy 
on  thee. 

"  Why  do  we  not  entertain  more  loving  thoughts  of  Christ  1 
Do  you  think  he  will  have  mercy  on  others  and  not  on  you  1 
Are  you  not  sinners  1  Did  not  Jesus  Christ  come  into  the 
world  to  save  sinners? 

"  If  you  say  you  are  the  chief  of  sinners,  I  answer  that  will  be 
no  hindrance  to  your  salvation.  Indeed  it  will  not,  if  you  lay 
hold  on  Christ  by  faith.  Read  the  Evangelists,  and  see  how 
kindly  he  behaved  to  his  disciples,  who  had  fled  from  and 
denied  him.  *  Go,  tell  my  brethren^  says  he.  He  did  not  say, 
*  Go,  tell  those  traitors,'  but,  *  Go,  tell  my  brethren  and  Peter.^ 
It  is  as  though  he  had  said,  *  Go,  tell  my  brethren  in  general, 
and  Peter  in  particular,  that  I  am  risen.  Oh,  comfort  his  poor 
drooping  heart.  Tell  him  I  am  reconciled  to  him.  Bid  him 
weep  no  more  so  bitterly.  For  though  with  oaths  and  curses 
he  thrice  denied  me,  yet  I  have  died  for  his  sins ;  I  have  risen 
again  for  his  justification  :  I  freely  forgive  him  all."  Thus  slow 
to  anger  and  of  great  kindness,  was  our  all-merciful  High  Priest 
And  do  you  think  he  has  changed  his  nature  and  forgets  poor 
sinners,  now  he  is  exalted  to  the  right  hand  of  God?  No  ;  he 
is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever ;  and  sitteth  there 
only  to  make  intercession  for  us. 


SPECIMEN  OF  HIS  PREACHING.  63 

"  Come,  then,  ye  harlots ;  come,  ye  publicans ;  come,  ye 
most  abandoned  sinners,  come  and  believe  on  Jesus  Christ. 
Though  the  whole  world  despise  you  and  cast  you  out,  yet  he 
will  not  disdain  to  take  you  up.  Oh  amazing,  oh  infinitely  con- 
descending love  !  even  you  he  will  not  be  ashamed  to  call  his 
brethren.  How  will  you  escape  if  you  neglect  such  a  glorious 
offer  of  salvation  %  What  would  the  damned  spirits  now  in  the 
prison  of  hell  give  if  Christ  was  so  freely  olSfered  to  them  %  And 
why  are  we  not  lifting  up  our  eyes  in  torments  %  Does  any  one 
out  of  this  great  multitude  dare  say  he  does  not  deserve  damna- 
tion 1  Why  are  we  left,  and  others  taken  away  by  death  %  What 
is  this  but  an  instance  of  God's  free  grace,  and  a  sign  of  his 
good-will  toward  us  ?  Let  God's  goodness  lead  us  to  repentance. 
Oh,  let  there  be  joy  in  heaven  over  some  of  you  repenting ! " 


iV. 


CHAPTER  L 

Joho  Wesley — Reason  why  better  known  than  many  of  his  Contemporaries — Birth-pIao»-~- 
Sketch  of  his  Father  and  Mother— Educated  at  Charter-House  and  Oxford— Eari> 
Religious  History — Ordained,  1725 — Lives  at  Oxford  eight  Years — ^Joins  the  Methodist 
Oub— Sails  for  Georgia,  1736 — Returns  to  England,  1738 — Commences  Field-preach- 
ing— Continues  Working  for  fifty-three  Year» — Dies  in  1791 — Singleness  of  Eye,  Dili- 
gence, and  Versatility  of  Mind — Arminianism. 

[HE  second  in  the  list  of  English  Reformers  of  the  i8th 
century,  whose  history  I  propose  to  consider,  is  a  man 
of  world-wide  reputation — the  famous  John  Wesley. 
The  name  of  this  great  evangelist  is  perhaps  better  known 
than  that  of  any  of  his  fellow  labourers  of  this  period. 
This,  however,  is  easily  accounted  for.  He  lived  to  the  ripe 
old  age  of  eighty-eight.  For  sixty-five  years  he  was  continually 
before  the  eyes  of  the  public,  and  doing  his  Master's  work  in 
every  part  of  England.  He  founded  a  new  religious  denomina- 
tion, remarkable  to  this  very  day  for  its  numbers,  laboriousness, 
and  success,  and  justly  proud  of  its  great  founder.  His  life  has 
been  repeatedly  written  by  his  friends  and  followers,  his  works 
constantly  reprinted,  his  precepts  and  maxims  reverentially 
treasured  up  and  embalmed,  like  Joseph's  bones.  In  fact,  if 
ever  a  good  Protestant  has  been  practically  canonized,  it  has 
been  John  Wesley !  It  would  be  strant];e  indeed  if  his  name 
was  not  well  known. 


y^'Ti^^n^  OJ^^CCx, 


e^AC^y 


Face  p.  64. 


JOHN  WESLEY'S  BIRTH.  6$ 

Of  such  a  man  as  this  I  cannot  pretend  to  give  more  than  a 
brief  account  in  the  short  space  of  a  few  pages.  The  leading 
facts  of  his  long  and  well-spent  life,  and  the  leading  features  of 
his  peculiar  character,  are  all  that  I  can  possibly  compress  into 
the  limits  of  this  memoir.  Those  who  want  more  must  look 
elsewhere.  * 

John  Wesley  was  bom  on  the  17th  of  June  1703,  at  Epworth, 
in  North  Lincolnshire,  of  which  parish  his  father  was  rector. 
He  was  the  ninth  of  a  family  of  at  least  thirteen  children,  com- 
prising three  sons  and  ten  daughters.  Of  the  daughters,  those 
who  grew  up  made  singularly  foolish  and  unhappy  marriages. 
Of  the  sons,  the  eldest,  Samuel,  was  for  some  years  usher  of 
Westminster  School,  and  an  intimate  friend  ofthe  famous  Bishop 
Atterbury,  and  finally  died  head-master  of  Tiverton  School. 
The  second,  John,  was  founder  of  the  Methodist  communion ; 
and  the  third,  Charles,  was  almost  throughout  life  John's  com- 
panion and  fellow-labourer. 

John  Wesley's  father  was  a  man  of  considerable  learning  and 
great  activity  of  mind.  As  a  writer,  he  was  always  bringing  out 
something  either  in  prose  or  in  verse,  but  nothing,  unhappily 
for  his  pocket,  which  was  ever  acceptable  to  the  reading  public, 
or  is  much  cared  for  in  the  present  day.  As  a  politician,  he 
was  a  zealous  supporter  of  the  Revolution  which  brought  into 
England  the  House  of  Orange ;  and  it  was  on  this  account  that 
Queen  Mary  presented  him  to  the  Crown  living  of  Epworth. 
^s  a  clergyman,  he  seems  to  have  been  a  diligent  pastor  and 
preacher,  of  the  theological  school  of  Archbishop  Tillotson. 
As  a  manager  of  his  worldly  affairs,  he  appears  to  have  been 
most  unsuccessful.  Though  rector  of  a  living  now  valued  at 
;^iooo  a-year,  he  was  always  in  pecuniary  difficulties,  was  once 

♦  The  principal  lives  of  Wesley  by  Methodist  hands  are  those  of  Whitehead,  Moore, 
and  Watson.  Soiithey's  well-known  life  of  Wesley  is  not  a  fair  book,  and  the  unfavour- 
able animus  of  the  writer  throughout  is  painfully  manifest.  The  best,  most  impartial,  and 
most  complete  account  of  Wesley  is  one  published  by  Seelcy  in  1856,  by  an  aiiciayaious 
writ^jr. 

afi^i  5 


66  JOHN  WESLEY'S  PARENTS. 

in  prison  for  debt,  and  finally  left  his  widow  and  children  almost 
destitute.  When  I  add  to  this  that  he  was  not  on  good  tenns 
with  his  parishioners,  and,  poor  as  he  was,  insisted  on  going  up 
to  London  every  year  to  attend  the  very  unprofitable  meetings 
of  Convocation  for  months  at  a  time,  the  reader  will  probably 
agree  with  me  that,  like  too  many,  he  was  a  man  of  more 
book-learning  and  cleverness  than  good  sense. 

The  mother  of  John  Wesley  was  evidently  a  woman  of  extra- 
ordinary power  of  mind.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Dr.  Annes- 
ley,  a  man  well  known  to  readers  of  Puritan  theology  as  one  of 
the  chief  promoters  of  the  Morning  Exercises,  and  ejected  from 
St  Giles',  Cripplegate,  in  1662.  From  him  she  seems  to  have 
inherited  the  masculine  sense  and  strong  decided  judgment 
which  distinguished  her  character.  To  the  influence  of  his 
mother's  early  training  and  example,  John  Wesley,  doubtless, 
was  indebted  for  many  of  his  peculiar  habits  of  mind  and  quali- 
fications. 

Her  own  account  of  the  way  in  which  she  educated  all  her 
children,  in  one  of  her  letters  to  her  son  John,  is  enough  to 
show  that  she  was  no  common  woman,  and  that  her  sons  were 
not  likely  to  turn  out  common  men.  She  says,  "  None  of  them 
was  taught  to  read  till  five  yeais  old,  except  Keziah,  in  whose 
case  I  was  over-ruled  ;  and  she  was  more  years  in  learning  than 
any  of  the  rest  had  been  months.  The  way  of  teaching  was 
this :  the  day  before  a  child  began  to  learn,  the  house  was  set 
in  order,  every  one's  work  appointed  them,  and  a  charge  given 
that  none  should  come  into  the  room  from  nine  to  twelve,  or 
from  two  to  five,  which  were  our  school  hours.  One  day  was 
allowed  the  child  wherein  to  learn  its  letters,  and  each  of  them 
did  in  that  time  know  all  its  letters,  great  and  small,  except 
Molly  and  Nancy,  who  were  a  day  and  a  half  before  they  knew 
them  perfectly,  for  which  I  then  thought  them  very  dull ;  but 
the  reason  why  I  thought  them  so  was  because  the  rest  learned 
so  readily,  and  yo^ir  brother  Samuel,  who  was  the  first  child  I 


HIS  MOTHER'S  MEETINGS.  6; 

ever  taught,  learnt  the  alphabet  in  a  few  hours.  He  was  five 
years  old  on  the  loth  of  February;  the  next  day  he  began  to 
learn,  and  as  soon  as  he  knew  the  letters,  began  at  the  first 
chapter  of  Genesis.  He  was  taught  to  spell  the  first  verse,  then 
to  read  it  over  and  over  till  he  could  read  it  off-hand  without 
any  hesitation ;  so  on  to  the  second,  &c.,  till  he  took  ten  verses 
»br  a  lesson,  which  he  quickly  did.  Easter  fell  low  that  year, 
and  by  Whitsuntide  he  could  read  a  chapter  very  well,  for  he 
read  continually,  and  had  such  a  prodigious  memory  that  I 
cannot  remember  ever  to  have  told  him  the  same  word  twice. 
What  was  stranger,  any  word  he  had  learnt  in  his  lesson  he  knew 
wherever  he  saw  it,  either  in  his  Bible  or  any  other  book,  by  which 
means  he  learned  very  soon  to  read  an  English  author  well." 

Her  energetic  and  decided  conduct,  as  wife  of  a  parish 
clergyman,  is  strikingly  illustrated  by  a  correspondence  still 
extant  between  herself  and  her  husband  on  a  curious  occasion. 
It  appears  that  during  Mr.  Wesley's  long-protracted  absences 
from  home  in  attending  Convocation,  Mrs.  Wesley,  dissatisfied 
with  the  state  of  things  at  Epworth,  began  the  habit  of  gathering 
a  few  parishioners  at  the  rectory  on  Sunday  evenings  and  read- 
ing to  them.  As  might  naturally  have  been  expected,  the 
attendance  soon  became  so  large  that  her  husband  took  alarm 
at  the  report  he  heard,  and  made  some  objections  to  the  prac- 
tice. The  letters  of  Mrs.  Wesley  on  this  occasion  are  a  model 
of  strong,  hard-headed.  Christian  good  sense,  and  deserve  the 
perusal  of  many  timid  believers  in  the  present  day.  After  de- 
fending what  she  had  done  by  many  wise  and  unanswerable 
arguments,  and  beseeching  her  husband  to  consider  seriously 
the  bad  consequences  of  stopping  the  meeting,  she  winds  up  all 
with  the  following  remarkable  paragraph  : — "  If  you  do,  after 
all,  think  fit  to  dissolve  this  assembly,  do  not  tell  me  that  you 
desire  me  to  do  it,  for  that  will  not  satisfy  my  conscience.  But 
send  me  your  positive  command  in  such  full  and  express  terms 
as  may  absolve  me  from  all  guilt  and  punishment  for  neglecting 


68  EDUCA  TED  A  T  CHAR TER-HOUSE. 

the  opportunity  of  doing  good,  when  you  and  I  shall  appeal 
before  the  great  and  awful  tribunal  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 

A  mother  of  this  stamp  was  just  the  person  to  leave  deeo 
marks  and  impressions  on  the  minds  of  her  children.  Of  the 
old  rector  of  P2pworth  we  can  trace  little  in  his  sons  John  and 
Charles,  except,  perhaps,  their  poetical  genius.  But  there  is 
much  in  John's  career  and  character  throughout  life  which  shows 
the  hand  of  his  mother. 

The  early  years  of  John  Wesley's  life  appear  to  have  passed 
quietly  away  in  his  Lincolnshire  home.  The  only  remarkable 
event  recorded  by  his  biographers  is  his  marvellous  escape 
from  being  burnt  alive,  when  Epworth  rectory  was  burned  down. 
This  happened  in  1709,  when  he  was  six  years  old,  and  seems 
to  have  been  vividly  impressed  on  his  mind.  He  was  pulled 
through  the  bedroom  window,  at  the  last  moment,  by  a  man 
who,  for  want  of  a  ladder,  stood  on  another  man's  shoulders. 
Just  at  that  moment  the  roof  of  the  house  fell  in,  but  happily 
fell  inward,  and  the  boy  and  his  deliverer  escaped  unhurt.  He 
says  himself,  in  his  description  of  the  event,  "When  they 
brought  me  to  the  house  where  my  father  was,  he  cried  out, 
*  Come,  neighbours,  let  us  kneel  down !  let  us  give  thanks  to 
God  !  He  has  given  me  all  my  eight  children  ;  let  the  house 
go,  I  am  rich  enough.' " 

In  the  year  17 14,  at  the  age  of  eleven,  John  Wesley  was 
placed  at  the  Charter-house  School  in  London.  That  mighty 
plunge  in  life — a  boy's  first  entrance  at  a  public. school — seems 
to  have  done  him  no  harm.  He  had  probably  been  well 
grounded  at  his  father's  house  in  all  the  rudiments  of  a  classical 
education,  and  soon  became  distinguished  for  his  diligence  and 
progress  at  school.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  his  elder  brother, 
then  an  usher  at  Westminster,  describes  him  as  "  a  brave  boy, 
learning  Hebrew  as  fast  as  he  can." 

In  the  year  1720,  at  the  age  of  seventeen,  John  Wesley  went 
up  to  Oxford  as  an  undergraduate,  having  been  elected  to 


EARL  Y  RELIGIO  US  HIS  TOR  K  69 

Christ  Church.  Little  is  known  of  the  first  three  or  four  years 
of  his  university  life,  except  that  he  was  steady,  studious,  and 
remarkable  for  his  classical  knowledge  and  genius  for  compo- 
sition. It  is  evident,  however,  that  he  made  the  best  use  of  his 
time  at  college,  and  picked  up  as  much  as  he  could  in  a  day 
when  honorary  class-lists  were  unknown,  and  incitements  to. 
study  were  very  few.  Like  most  great  divines,  he  found  the  ad- 
vantage of  university  education  all  his  life  long.  Men  might 
dislike  his  theology,  but  they  could  never  say  that  he  was  a 
fool,  and  had  no  right  to  be  heard. 

In  the  beginning  of  1725,  at  the  age  of  twenty-two,  he  seems 
to  have  gone  through  much  exercise  of  mind  as  to  the  choice 
of  a  profession.  Naturally  enough,  he  thought  of  taking  orders, 
but  was  somewhat  daunted  by  serious  reflection  on  the  solemnity 
of  the  step.  This  very  reflection,  however,  appears  to  have 
been  most  useful  to  him.  and  to  have  produced  in  his  mind 
deeper  thoughts  about  God,  his  soul,  and  religion  generally, 
than  he  had  ever  entertained  before.  He  began  to  studT 
divinity,  and  to  go  through  a  regular  course  of  reading  for  the 
ministry.  He  had,  probably,  no  very  trustworthy  guide  in  his 
choice  of  religious  literature  at  this  period.  The  books  which 
apparently  had  the  greatest  influence  on  him  were  Jeremy 
Taylor's  "  Holy  Living  and  Dying,"  and  Thomas  k  Kempis's 
*' Imitation  of  Christ."  Devout  and  well-meaning  as  these 
authors  are,  they  certainly  were  not  likely  to  give  him  very 
clear  views  of  scriptural  Christianity,  or  very  cheerful  and  happy 
views  of  Christ's  service.  In  short,  though  they  did  him  good 
by  making  him  feel  that  true  religion  was  a  serious  business,  and 
a  concern  of  the  heart,  they  evidently  left  him  in  much  dark- 
ness and  perplexity. 

At  this  stage  of  John  Wesley's  life,  his  correspondence  with 
his  father  and  mother  is  peculiarly  interesting,  and  highly 
creditable  both  to  the  parents  and  the  son.  He  evidently 
opened  his  mind  to  them,  and  told  them  all  his  mental  and 


7©  CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  HIS  PARENTS. 

spiritual  difficulties.  His  letters  and  their  replies  are  well  worth 
reading.  They  all  show  more  or  less  absence  of  spiritual  light 
and  clear  views  of  the  gospel.  But  a  singular  vein  of  honesty 
and  conscientiousness  runs  throughout.  One  feels  "This  is 
just  the  spirit  that  God  will  bless.  This  is  the  single  eye  to 
which  will  be  given  more  light." 

Let  us  hear  what  his  father  says  about  the  question,  "  Which 
is  the  best  commentary  on  the  Bible  1 "  "I  answer,  the  Bible 
itself  For  the  several  paraphrases  and  translations  of  it  in  the 
Polyglot,  compared  with  the  original  and  with  one  another,  are 
in  my  opinion,  to  an  honest,  devout,  industrious,  and  humble 
man,  infinitely  preferable  to  any  comment  I  ever  saw." 

Let  us  hear  what  his  mother  says  on  the  point  of  taking 
holy  orders  : — "  The  alteration  of  your  temper  has  occasioned 
me  much  speculation.  I,  who  am  apt  to  be  sanguine,  hope  it 
may  proceed  from  the  operation  of  God's  Holy  Spirit,  that  by 
taking  off  your  relish  for  earthly  enjoyments  he  may  prepare 
and  dispose  your  mind  for  a  more  serious  and  close  application 
to  things  of  a  more  sublime  and  spiritual  nature.  If  it  be  so, 
happy  are  you  if  you  cherish  those  dispositions.  And  now  in 
good  earnest  resolve  to  make  religion  the  business  of  your  hfe ; 
for,  after  all,  that  is  the  one  thing  that,  strictly  speaking,  is 
necessary  :  all  things  beside  are  comparatively  little  to  the  pur- 
poses of  life.  I  heartily  wish  you  would  now  enter  upon  a  strict 
examination  of  yourself,  that  you  may  know  whether  you  have 
a  reasonable  hope  of  salvation  by  Jesus  Christ,  If  you  have 
the  satisfaction  of  knowing,  it  will  abundantly  reward  your 
pains  ;  if  you  have  not,  you  will  find  a  more  reasonable  occasion 
for  tears  than  can  be  met  with  in  a  tragedy.  This  matter  de- 
serves great  consideration  by  all,  but  especially  by  those  designed 
for  the  ministry,  who  ought  above  all  things  to  make  their  own 
calling  and  election  sure,  lest,  after  they  have  preached  to  others, 
they  themselves  should  be  cast  away." 

Let  us  hear  what  his  mother  says  about  Thomas  \  K^mpis's 


HIS  ORDINATION.  71 

Opinion,  that  all  mirth  or  pleasure  is  useless,  if  not  sinful  She 
observes  : — "  I  take  Kempis  to  have  been  an  honest,  weak  man, 
that  had  more  zeal  than  knowledge,  by  his  condemning  all 
mirth  or  pleasure  as  sinful  or  useless,  in  opposition  to  so  many- 
direct  and  plain  texts  of  Scripture.  Would  you  judge  of  the 
lawfulness  or  unlawfulness  of  pleasures'?  of  tk«  innocence  or 
malignity  of  actions'?  take  this  rule, — whatever  weakens  your 
reason,  impairs  the  tenderness  of  your  conscience,  obscures  your 
sense  of  God,  or  takes  off  the  rehsh  of  spiritual  things  ;  in  short, 
whatever  increases  the  strength  and  authority  of  your  body  over 
your  mind,  that  thing  is  sin  to  you,  however  innocent  it  may  be 
in  itself." 

Let  us  hear  what  John  Wesley  himself  says  in  a  letter  on  the 
opinion  of  Jeremy  Taylor — "  Whether  God  has  forgiven  us  or 
no,  we  know  not  \  therefore  let  us  be  sorrowful  for  ever  having 
sinned."  He  remarks — "  Surely  the  graces  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
are  not  of  so  little  force  as  that  we  cannot  perceive  whether  we 
have  them  or  not  If  we  dwell  in  Christ,  and  Christ  in  us, 
which  He  will  not  do  unless  we  be  regenerate,  certainly  we 
must  be  sensible  of  it  If  we  never  can  have  any  certainty  of 
being  in  a  state  of  salvation,  good  reason  is  it  that  every  moment 
should  be  spent,  not  in  joy,  but  in  fear  and  treml).ing;  and 
then,  undoubtedly,  in  this  life  we  are  of  all  men  most  miserable. 
God  deliver  us  from  such  a  fearful  expectation  as  this." 

Correspondence  of  this  style  could  hardly  fail  to  do  good  to 
a  young  man  in  John  Wesley's  frame  of  mind.  It  led  him  no 
doubt  to  closer  study  of  the  Scriptures,  deeper  self-examination, 
and  more  fervent  prayer.  Whatever  scruples  he  may  have  had 
were  finally  removed,  and  he  was  at  length  ordained  deacon  on 
September  the  19th,  1725,  by  Dr.  Potter,  then  Bishop  of  Oxford, 
and  afterwards  Archbishop  of  Canterbury. 

In  the  year  1726  John  Wesley  was  elected  Fellow  of  Lincoln 
College,  after  a  contest  of  more  than  ordinary  severity.  His 
recently  adopted  seriousness  of  deportment  and  general  reli- 


7«  HIS  RESIDENCE  AT  OXFORD. 

giousness  were  used  as  a  handle  against  him  by  his  adversaries. 
But  his  high  character  carried  him  triumphantly  through  all 
opposition,  to  the  great  delight  of  his  father.  Tried  as  he  ap- 
parently was  at  the  time  in  his  temporal  circumstances,  he 
wrote  :  "  Whatever  will  be  my  own  fate  before  the  summer  is 
over  God  knows ;  but,  wherever  I  am,  my  Jack  is  Fellow  of 
Lincoln." 

The  eight  years  following  John  Wesley's  election,  to  his  fel- 
lowship of  Lincoln — from  1726  to  1734 — form  a  remarkable 
epoch  in  his  life,  and  certainly  gave  a  tone  and  colour  to  all 
his  future  history.  During  the  whole  of  these  years  he  was 
resident  at  Oxford,  and  for  some  time  at  any  rate  acted  as  tutor 
and  lecturer  in  his  college.  Gradually,  however,  he  seems  to 
have  laid  nimself  out  more  and  more  to  try  to  do  good  to 
others,  and  latterly  was  entirely  taken  up  with  it. 

His  mode  of  action  was  in  the  highest  degree  simple  and 
unpretending.  Assisted  by  his  brother  Charles,  then  a  student 
of  Christ  Church,  he  gathered  a  small  society  of  like-minded 
young  men,  in  order  to  spend  some  evenings  in  a  week  together 
in  the  study  of  the  Greek  Testament.  This  was  in  November 
1729.  The  members  of  this  society  were  at  first  four  in  num- 
ber; namely,  John  Wesley,  Charles  Wesley,  Mr.  Morgan  of 
Christ  Church,  and  Mr.  Kirkman  of  Merton.  At  a  somewhat 
later  period  they  were  joined  by  Mr.  Ingham  of  Queen's,  Mr. 
Broughton  of  Exeter,  Mr.  Clayton  of  Brazenose,  the  famous 
George  Whitefield  of  Pembroke,  and  the  well-known  James 
Hervey  of  Lincoln. 

This  Utile  band  of  witnesses,  as  might  reasonably  have  been 
expected,  soon  began  to  think  of  doing  good  to  others,  as  well  as 
getting  good  themselves.  In  the  summer  of  1730  they  began 
to  visit  prisoners  in  the  castle  and  poor  people  in  the  town,  to 
send  neglected  children  to  school,  to  give  temporal  aid  to  the 
sick  and  needy,  and  to  distribute  Bibles  and  Prayer-books 
among  those  who  had  not  got  them.     Their  first  steps  were 


THE  ' '  HOL  Y  CL  UB. "  73 

taken  very  cautiously,  and  with  frequent  reference  to  John 
Wesley's  father  for  advice.  Acting  by  his  advice,  they  laid  all 
their  operations  before  the  Bishop  of  Oxford  and  his  chaplain, 
and  did  nothing  without  full  ecclesiastical  sanction. 

Cautious,  and  almost  childish,  however,  as  the  proceedings 
of  these  young  men  may  appear  to  us  in  the  present  day,  they 
vera  too  far  in  advance  of  the  times  to  escape  notice,  hatred, 
and  opposition.  A  kind  of  persecution  and  clamour  was  raised 
against  Wesley  and  his  companions  as  enthusiasts,  fanatics,  and 
troublers  of  Israel.  They  were  nicknamed  the  "  Methodists  " 
or  "  Holy  Club,"  and  assailed  with  a  storm  of  ridicule  and 
abuse.  Through  this,  however,  they  manfully  persevered,  and 
held  on  their  way,  being  greatly  encouraged  by  the  letters  of 
the  old  Rector  of  Epworth.  In  one  of  them  he  says,  "  I  hear 
my  son  John  has  the  honour  of  being  styled  the  Father  of 
the  Holy  Club.  If  it  be  so,  I  am  sure  I  must  be  the  grand- 
father of  it,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  had  rather  any  of  my 
sons  should  be  so  dignified  and  distinguished  than  have  the 
title  His  HoHness." 

The  real  amount  of  spiritual  good  that  John  Wesley  did 
during  these  eight  years  of  residence  at  Oxford  is  a  point  that 
cannot  easily  be  ascertained.  With  all  his  devotedness,  asceti- 
cism, and  self-denial,  it  must  be  remembered  that  at  this  time 
he  knew  very  little  of  the  pure  gospel  of  Christ.  His  views  of 
leUgious  truth,  to  say  the  least,  were  very  dim,  misty,  defective, 
and  indistinct.  No  one  was  more  sensible  of  this  than  he 
afterwards  was  himself,  and  no  one  could  be  more  ready  and 
willing  to  confess  it.  Such  books  as  "  Law's  Serious  Call," 
"  Law's  Christian  Perfection,"  "  Theologia  Germanica,"  and 
mystical  writers,  were  about  the  highest  pitch  of  divinity  that 
he  had  yet  attained.  But  we  need  not  doubt  that  he  learned 
experience  at  this  period  which  he  found  useful  in  after-life. 
At  any  rate  he  became  thoroughly  trained  in  habits  of  labo- 
'riousness,   time- redemption,    and    self-mortificaiion,    which    he 


74  SAILS  FOR  GEORGIA. 

carried  with  him  to  the  day  of  his  death.  God  has  his  own 
way  of  tempering  and  preparing  instruments  for  his  work,  and, 
whatever  we  may  think,  we  may  be  sure  his  way  is  best. 

In  the  year  1734  John  Wesley's  father  died,  and  the  family 
home  was  broken  up.  Just  at  this  time  the  providence  of  God 
opened  up  to  him  a  new  sphere  of  duty,  the  acceptance  of 
which  had  a  most  important  effect  on  his  whole  spiritual  history. 
This  sphere  was  the  colony  of  Georgia,  in  North  America. 
The  trustees  of  that  infant  settlement  were  greatly  in  want  of 
proper  clergymen  to  send  out,  both  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the 
Indians  and  to  provide  means  of  grace  for  the  colonists.  At 
this  juncture  John  Wesley  and  his  friends  were  suggested  to 
their  notice,  as  the  most  suitable  persons  they  could  find,  on 
account  of  their  high  character  for  regular  behaviour,  attention 
to  religious  duties,  and  readiness  to  endure  hardships.  The 
upshot  of  the  matter  was,  that  an  offer  was  made  to  John 
Wesley,  and,  after  conferring  with  Mr.  Law,  his  mother,  his 
elder  brother,  and  other  friends,  he  accepted  the  proposal  of 
the  trustees,  and,  in  company  with  his  brother  Charles  and  their 
common  friend  Mr.  Ingham,  set  sail  for  Georgia. 

Wesley  landed  in  Georgia  on  the  6th  of  February  1736,  after 
a  long  stormy  voyage  of  four  months,  and  remained  in  the 
colony  two  years.  I  shall  not  take  up  the  reader's  time  by  any 
detailed  account  of  his  proceedings  there.  It  may  suffice  to 
say,  that,  for  any  good  he  seems  to  have  done,  his  mission  was 
almost  useless.  Partly  from  the  inherent  difficulties  of  an 
English  clergyman's  position  in  a  colony — partly  from  the  con- 
fused and  disorderly  condition  of  the  infant  settlement  where 
he  was  stationed — partly  from  a  singular  want  of  tact  and  dis- 
cretion in  dealing  with  men  and  things — partly,  above  all,  from 
his  own  very  imperfect  views  of  the  gospel,  Wesley's  expedition 
to  Georgia  appears  to  have  been  a  great  failure,  and  he  was  evi- 
dently  glad  to  get  away. 

The  ways  of  God,  hov^ever,  are  not  as  man's  ways.     There 


RETURNS  TO  ENGLAND.  75 

was  a  "  need  be  "  for  the  two  years'  absence  in  America,  just 
as  there  was  for  Philip's  journey  down  the  desert  road  to  Gaza, 
and  Paul's  sojourn  in  prison  at  Caesarea.  If  Wesley  did  nothing 
in  Georgia,  he  certainly  gained  a  great  deal.  If  he  taught  little 
to  others,  he  undoubtedly  learned  much.  On  the  outward 
voyage  he  became  acquainted  with  some  Moravians  on  board, 
and  was  deeply  struck  by  their  deliverance  from  "  the  fear  of 
death  "  in  a  storm.  After  landing  in  Georgia  he  continued  his 
intercourse  with  them,  and  discovered  to  his  astonishment  that 
there  was  such  a  thing  as  personal  assurance  of  forgiveness. 
These  things,  combined  with  the  peculiar  trials,  difficulties,  and 
disappointments  of  his  colonial  ministry,  worked  mightily  on 
his  mind,  and  showed  him  more  of  himself  and  the  gospel  than 
he  had  ever  learned  before.  The  result  was  that  he  landed  at 
Deal  on  the  ist  of  February  1738,  a  very  much  humbler,  but  a 
much  wiser  man  than  he  had  ever  been  before.  In  plain  words, 
he  had  become  the  subject  of  a  real  inward  work  of  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

Wesley's  own  accounts  of  his  spiritual  experience  during  these 
two  years  of  his  life  are  deeply  interesting.  I  will  transcribe 
one  or  two  of  them. 

On  February  the  7th,  1736,  he  records: — "On  landing  in 
Georgia  I  asked  the  advice  of  Mr.  Spangenberg,  one  of  the 
German  pastors,  with  regard  to  my  own  conduct.  He  said  in 
reply,  '  My  brother,  I  must  first  ask  you  one  or  two  questions. 
Have  you  the  witness  within  yourself?  Does  the  Spirit  of  God 
bear  witness  with  your  spirit  that  you  are  a  child  of  God  V — I 
was  surprised,  and  knew  not  what  to  answer.  He  observed  it, 
and  asked,  *  Do  you  know  Jesus  Christ?' — I  paused,  and  said, 

*  I  know  he  is  the  Saviour  of  the  world.' — '  Tme,'  replied  he ; 

*  but  do  you  know  he  has  saved  you  V — I  answered,  '  I  hope  he 
has  died  to  save  me.' — He  only  added,  '  Do  you  know  yourself  I' 
— I  said,  '  I  do.'     But  I  fear  they  were  vain  words." 

On  January  24th,  1738,  on  board  ship  on  his  homeward 


y6  TRUE  FAITH. 

voyage,  he  makes  the  following  record  : — '  I  went  to  America 
to  convert  the  Indians ;  but  oh,  who  shall  convert  me  ?  Who, 
what  is  he  that  will  deliver  me  from  this  evil  heart  of  unbelief  I 
I  have  a  fair  summer  religion ;  I  can  talk  well ;  nay,  and  be- 
lieve myself,  while  no  danger  is  near.  But  let  death  look  rae 
in  the  face,  and  my  spirit  is  troubled,  nor  can  I  say  to  die  is 
gain." 

On  February  the  ist,  1738,  the  day  that  he  landed  in  England, 
he  says  ;  '*  It  is  now  two  years  and  almost  four  months  since  I 
left  my  native  country  in  order  ■to  teach  the  Georgian  Indians 
the  nature  of  Christianity ;  but  what  have  I  learned  of  myself 
in  the  meantime  1  Why,  what  I  least  suspected,  that  I,  who 
went  to  America  to  convert  others,  was  myself  never  converted 
to  God  1  I  am  not  mad,  though  I  thus  speak ;  but  I  speak  the 
words  of  truth  and  soberness." 

"  If  it  be  said  that  I  have  faith — for  many  such  things  have 
I  heard  from  miserable  comforters — I  answer,  so  have  the  devils 
a  sort  of  faith ;  but  still  they  are  strangers  to  the  covenant  of 
promise.  .  .  .  The  faith  I  want  is  a  sure  trust  and  confidence  in 
God  that  through  the  merits  of  Christ  my  sins  are  forgiven,  and 
I  reconciled  to  the  favour  of  God.  I  want  that  faith  which  St 
Paul  recommends  to  all  the  world,  especially  in  his  Epistle  to 
the  Romans ;  that  faith  which  makes  every  one  that  hath  it  to 
cry,  *  I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me ;  and  the  life 
which  I  now  live  in  the  flesh,  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of 
God,  who  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for  me.'  I  wani  that 
faith  which  none  can  have  without  knowing  that  he  hath  it." 

Records  like  these  are  deeply  instructive.  They  teach  that 
important  lesson  which  man  is  so  slow  to  learn — that  we  may 
hf-ve  a  great  deal  of  earnestness  and  religiousness  without  any 
true  soul-saving  and  soul-comforting  religion — that  we  may  be* 
diligent  in  the  use  of  fasting,  prayers,  forms,  ordinances,  and 
the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  without  knowing  anything 
of  inward  joy,  peace,  or  comnmnion  with  God — and  above  all, 


STARTS  A  RELIGIOUS  SOCIETY.  77 

thai  we  may  be  moral  in  life,  and  laborious  in  good  works, 
without  being  true  believers  in  Christ,  or  fit  to  die  and  meet 
God.  Well  would  it  be  for  the  churches  if  truths  like  these 
were  proclaimed  from  every  pulpit,  and  pressed  on  every  con- 
gregation !  Thousands,  for  lack  of  such  truths,  are  walking  in 
a  vain  shadow,  and  totally  ignorant  that  they  are  yet  dead  in 
sins.  If  any  one  wants  to  know  how  far  a  man  may  go  in 
outward  goodness,  and  yet  not  be  a  true  Christian,  let  him 
carefully  study  the  experience  of  John  Wesley.  I  am  bold  to 
say  that  it  is  eminently  truth  for  the  times. 

A  man  hungering  and  thirsting  after  righteousness,  as  Wes- 
ley was  now,  was  not  left  long  without  more  light.  The  good 
work  which  the  Holy  Ghost  had  begun  within  him  was  carried 
on  rapidly  after  he  landed  in  England,  until  the  sun  rose  on  his 
mind,  and  the  shadows  passed  away.  Partly  by  conference 
with  Peter  Bohler,  a  Moravian,  and  other  Moravians  in  London, 
partly  by  study  of  the  Scriptures,  partly  by  special  prayer  for 
living,  saving,  justifying  faith  as  the  gift  of  God,  he  was  brought 
to  a  clear  view  of  the  gospel,  and  found  out  the  meaning  of  joy 
and  peace  in  simply  believing.  Let  me  add — as  an  act  of 
justice  to  one  of  whom  the  world  was  not  worthy — that  at  this 
period  he  was,  by  his  own  confession,  much  helped  by  Martin 
Luther's  preface  to  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans. 

This  year,  1738,  was  beyond  doubt  the  turning-point  in  Wes- 
ley's spiritual  history,  and  gave  a  direction  to  all  his  subsequent 
life.  It  was  in  the  spring  of  this  year  that  he  began  a  religious 
society  at  the  Moravian  Chapel  in  Fetter  Lane,  London,  which 
was  the  rough  type  and  pattern  of  all  Methodist  societies  formed 
afterwards.  The  rules  of  this  little  society  are  extant  still,  and 
with  some  additions,  modifications,  and  improvements,  contain 
the  inward  organization  ot  Methodism  in  the  present  day.  It 
was  at  this  period  also  that  he  began  preaching  the  new  truths. 
he  had  learned,  in  many  of  the  pulpits  in  London,  and  soon 
found,  like  Whitefield,  that  the  proclamation  of  salvation  by 


7B  COMMENCES  FIELD-PREACHING. 

grace,  and  justification  by  faith,  was  seldom  allowed  a  second 
time.  It  was  in  the  winter  of  this  year,  after  returning  from  a 
visit  to  the  Moravian  settlement  in  Germany,  that  he  began 
aggressive  measures  on  home  heathenism,  and  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  Bristol  followed  Whitefield's  example  by  preaching  in 
the  open  air,  in  rooms,  or  wherever  men  could  be  brought  to- 
gether. 

We  have  now  reached  a  point  at  which  John  Wesley's  history, 
like  that  of  his  great  contemporary  Whitefield,  becomes  one  un- 
deviating  uniform  narrative  up  to  the  time  of  his  death.  It  would 
be  useless  to  dwell  on  one  year  more  than  another.  He  was 
always  occupied  in  one  and  the  same  business,  always  going  up 
and  down  the  land  preaching,  and  always  conducting  evangel- 
istic measures  of  some  kind  and  description.  For  fifty-three 
years — from  1738  to  1791 — he  held  on  his  course,  always  busy, 
and  always  busy  about  one  thing — attacking  sin  and  ignorance 
everywhere,  preaching  repentance  toward  God  and  faith  toward 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  everywhere — awakening  open  sinners, 
leading  on  inquirers,  building  up  saints — never  wearied,  never 
swerving  from  the  path  he  had  marked  out,  and  never  doubting 
of  success.  Those  only  who  read  the  Journals  he  kept  for  fifty 
years  can  have  any  idea  of  the  immense  amount  of  work  that  he 
got  through.  Never  perhaps  did  any  man  have  so  many  irons  in 
the  fire  at  one  time,  and  yet  succeed  in  keeping  so  many  hot. 

Like  Whitefield,  he  justly  regarded  preaching  as  God's  chosen 
instrument  for  doing  good  to  souls,  and  hence,  wherever  he 
went,  his  first  step  was  to  preach.  Like  him,  too,  he  was  ready 
to  preach  anywhere  or  at  any  hour — early  in  the  morning  or 
late  at  night,  in  church,  in  chapel,  or  in  room — in  streets,  in 
fields,  or  on  commons  and  greens.  Like  him,  too,  he  was 
always  preaching  more  or  less  the  same  great  truths — sin,  Christ, 
and  holiness — ruin,  redemption,  and  regeneration — the  blood 
of  Christ  and  the  work  of  the  Spirit — faith,  repentance,  and  con- 
version— from  one  end  of  the  year  to  the  other. 


HIS  SYSTEM  OF  ORGANIZATION.  "9 

Wesley,  however,  was  very  unlike  Whitefield  in  one  irr.^ortant 
respect.  He  did  not  forget  to  organize  as  well  as  to  preach. 
He  was  not  content  with  reaping  the  fields  which  he  found 
ripe  for  the  harvest.  He  took  care  to  bind  up  his  sheaves  and 
gather  them  into  the  barn.  He  was  as  far  superior  to  White- 
field  as  an  administrator  and  man  of  method,  as  he  was  inferior 
to  him  as  a  mere  preacher.*  Shut  out  from  the  Church  of 
England  by  the  folly  of  its  rulers,  he  laid  the  foundation  of  a 
new  denomination  with  matchless  skill,  and  with  a  rare  discern- 
ment of  the  wants  of  human  nature.  To  unite  his  people  as 
one  body — to  give  every  one  something  to  do — to  make  each 
one  consider  his  neighbour  and  seek  his  edification — to  call 
forth  latent  talent  and  utilize  it  in  some  direction — to  keep  '•  all 
at  it  and  always  at  it "  (to  adopt  his  quaint  saying), — these  were 
his  aims  and  objects.  The  machinery  he  called  into  existence 
was  admirably  well  adapted  to  carry  out  his  purposes.  His 
preachers,  lay-preachers,  class- leaders,  band-leaders,  circuits, 
classes,  bands,  love-feasts,  and  watch-nights,  made  up  a  spiritual 
engine  which  stands  to  this  day,  and  in  its  own  way  can  hardly 
be  improved.  If  one  thing  more  than  another  has  given  per- 
manence and  solidity  to  Methodism,  it  was  its  founder's  mas- 
terly talent  for  organization. 

It  is  needless  to  tell  a  Christian  reader  that  Wesley  had  con- 
stantly to  fight  with  opposition.     The  prince  of  this  world  will 

*  A  writer  in  the  North  British  Review  has  well  and  forcibly  described  the  dirfarence 
between  the  two  great  Englisl.  evangelists  of  the  last  century.  "  NVhitefield  was  soul,  and 
Wesley  was  system.  Whitefield  was  the  summer  cloud  which  burst  at  morning  or  noon  a 
fragrant  exhalation  over  an  ample  track,  and  took  the  rest  of  the  day  to  gather  again  ; 
Wesley  was  the  polished  conduit  in  the  midst  of  the  garden,  through  which  the  living  water 
glided  in  pearly  brightness  and  perennial  music,  the  same  vivid  stream  from  day  to  day. 
All  force  and  imi>etus,  Whitefield  was  the  powder-blast  in  the  quarry,  and  by  one  explosive 
sermon  would  shake  a  district,  and  detach  materials  for  other  men's  long  work;  deft,  neat, 
and  painstaking,  Wesley  loved  to  split  and  trim  each  fragment  into  uniform  plinths  and 
polished  stones.  Whitefield  was  the  bargeman  or  the  waggoner  who  brought  the  timber 
of  the  house,  and  Wesley  was  the  architect  who  set  it  up.  Whitefield  had  no  patience  far 
ecclesiastical  polity,  no  aptitude  for  pastoral  details  ;  We-sley,  with  a  Ic.ider-like  propensuy 
for  building,  was  always  constructing  societies,  and  with  a  king-like  craft  of  ruling,  was 
most  at  home  when  presiding  over  a  class  or  a  conference.  It  was  their  infelicity  that  they 
did  not  always  work  together ;  it  was  the  happiness  of  the  age,  and  the  furtiicrauce  of  the 
gospel,  thftt  they  lived  alongside  of  one  anotlier." 


80  HIS  DEATH. 

never  allow  his  captives  to  be  rescued  from  him  without  a 
struggle.  Sometimes  he  was  in  danger  of  losing  his  life  by  the 
assaults  of  violent,  ignorant,  and  semi-heathen  mobs,  as  at  Wed- 
nesbury,  Walsall,  Colne,  Shoreham,  and  Devizes.  Sometimes 
he  was  denounced  by  bishops  as  an  enthusiast,  a  fanatic,  and 
a  sower  of  dissent.  Often — far  too  often — he  was  preached 
against  and  held  up  to  scorn  by  the  parochial  clergy,  as  a  here- 
tic, a  mischief-maker,  and  a  meddling  troubler  of  Israel.  But 
none  of  these  things  moved  the  good  man.  Calmly,  resolutely, 
and  undauntedly  he  held  on  his  course,  and  in  scores  of  cases 
lived  down  all  opposition.  His  letters  in  reply  to  the  attacks 
made  upon  him  are  always  dignified  and  sensible,  and  do  equal 
honour  to  his  heart  and  head. 

I  have  now  probably  told  the  reader  enough  to  give  him  a 
general  idea  of  John  Wesley's  life  and  history.  I  dare  not  go 
further.  Indeed,  the  last  fifty  years  of  his  life  were  so  entirely 
of  one  complexion,  that  I  know  not  where  I  should  stop  if  I 
went  further.  When  I  have  said  that  they  were  years  of  con- 
stant travelling,  preaching,  organizing,  conferring,  writing,  argu- 
ing, reasoning,  counselHng,  and  warring  against  sin,  the  world, 
and  the  devil,  I  have  just  said  all  that  I  dare  enter  upon. 

He  died  at  length  in  1791,  in  the  eighty-eighth  year  of  his 
life  and  the  sixty-fifth  of  his  ministry,  full  of  honour  and  respect, 
and  in  the  "perfect  peace"  of  the  gospel.  He  had  always 
enjoyed  wonderful  health,  and  never  hardly  knew  what  it  was 
to  feel  weariness  or  pain  till  he  was  eighty-two.  The  weary 
wheels  of  life  at  length  stood  still,  and  he  died  of  no  disease  but 
sheer  old  age. 

The  manner  of  his  dying  was  in  beautiful  harmony  with  his 
life.  He  preached  within  a  very  few  days  of  his  death,  and  the 
texts  of  his  two  last  sermons  were  curiously  characteristic  of  the 
man.  The  last  but  one  was  at  Chelsea,  on  February  the  i8th, 
on  the  words,  "The  king's  business  requireth  haste"  (i  Sam. 
-xxi.  8).     The  last  of  all  was  at  Leatherhead,  on  Wednesday 


INCIDENTS  OF  HIS  DEATH,  8l 

the  23rd,  on  the  words,  "  Seek  ye  the  I..ord  while  he  may  be 
found"  (Isa.  Iv.  6).  After  this  he  gradually  sunk,  and  died  on 
Tuesday  the  29th.  He  retained  his  senses  to  the  end,  and 
showed  clearly  where  his  heart  and  thoughts  were  to  the  very 
last. 

The  day  but  one  before  he  died  he  slept  much  and  spoke 
little.  Once  he  said  in  a  low  but  distinct  manner,  "  There  is 
no  way  into  the  holiest  but  by  the  blood  of  Jesus."  He  after- 
wards inquired  what  the  words  were  from  which  he  had 
preached  a  little  before  at  Hampstead.  Being  told  they  were 
these,  "  Ye  know  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that 
though  he  was  rich,  yet  for  your  sakes  he  became  poor,  that 
ye  through  his  poverty  might  be  rich'  (2  Cor.  viii.  8);  he  re- 
plied, "  That  is  the  foundation,  the  only  foundation ;  there  is 
no  other." 

The  day  before  he  died,  he  said  suddenly,  "  I  will  get  up.'' 
While  they  were  preparing  his  clothes,  he  broke  out  in  a  man- 
ner which^  considering  his  weakness,  astonished  all  present,  in 
singing,— 

"  I'll  praise  my  Maker  while  I've  breath. 
And  when  my  voice  is  lost  in  death. 

Praise  shall  employ  my  noblest  powers ; 
My  days  of  praise  shall  ne'er  be  past, 
While  life,  and  thought,  and  being  last. 

Or  immortality  endures." 

Not  long  after,  a  person  coming  in,  he  tried  to  speak,  but 
could  not.  Finding  they  could  not  understand  him,  he  paused 
a  little,  and  then  with  all  his  remaining  strength  cried  out, 
"  The  best  of  all  is,  God  is  with  us ;"  and  soon  after,  lifting  up 
his  dying  voice  in  token  of  victory,  and  raising  his  feeble  arm 
with  a  holy  triumph,  he  again  repeated  the  heart-reviving  words, 
"  The  best  of  all  is,  God  is  with  us."  The  night  following  he 
often  attempted  to  repeat  the  hymn  before  mentioned,  but  could 
only  utter  the  opening  words,  "  I'll  praise  ;  I'll  praise."  About 
ten  o'clock  next  morning  he  was  heard  to  articulate  the  word 
"  Farewell,"  and  then  without  a  groan  fell  asleep  in  Christ  and 

(196)  6 


Ss  THE  METHODIST  COMMUNION. 

rested  from  his  labours.  Truly  this  was  a  glorious  sunset ! 
"  Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  let  my  last  end  be 
Uke  his." 

Wesley  was  once  married.  At  the  age  of  forty-eight  he 
married  a  widow  lady  of  the  name  of  Vizelle,  of  a  suitable  age, 
and  of  some  independent  property,  which  she  took  care  to  have 
settled  upon  herself  The  union  was  a  most  unhappy  one. 
Whatever  good  qualities  Mrs.  Wesley  may  have  had,  they  were 
buried  and  swallowed  up  in  the  fiercest  and  most  absurd  passion 
of  jealousy.  One  of  his  biographers  remarks,  "  Had  he  searched 
the  whole  kingdom,  he  could  hardly  have  found  a  woman  more 
unsuitable  to  him  in  all  important  respects."  After  making  her 
husband  as  uncomfortable  as  possible  for  twenty  years,  by 
opening  his  letters,  putting  his  papers  in  the  hands  of  his  ene- 
mies in  the  vain  hope  of  blasting  his  character,  and  even  some- 
times laying  violent  hands  on  him,  Mrs.  Wesley  at  length  left 
her  home,  leaving  word  that  she  never  intended  to  return. 
Wesley  simply  states  the  fact  in  his  journal,  saying  that  he  knew 
not  the  cause,  and  briefly  adding,  "  I  did  not  forsake  her,  I  did 
not  dismiss  her,  I  will  not  recall  her." 

Like  Whitefield,  John  Wesley  left  no  children.  But  he  left 
behind  him  a  large  and  influential  communion,  which  he  not 
only  saw  spring  up,  but  lived  to  see  it  attain  a  vigorous  and 
healthy  maturity.  The  number  of  Methodist  preachers  at  the 
time  of  his  death  amounted  in  the  British  dominions  to  313, 
and  in  the  United  States  of  America  to  198.  The  number  of 
Methodist  members  in  the  British  dominions  was  76,968,  and 
in  the  United  States  57,621.  Facts  like  these  need  no  com- 
ment ;  they  speak  for  themselves.  Few  labourers  for  Christ 
have  ever  been  so  successful  as  Wesley,  and  to  none  certainly 
was  it  ever  given  to  see  so  much  with  his  own  eyes. 

In  taking  a  general  view  of  this  great  spiritual  hero  of  the 
1  gtbcentury,  it  may  be  useful  to  point  out  some  salient  points 
of  his  character  which  demand  particular  attention.      When 


If 


WESLETS  PECULIAR  QUALIFICATIONS.  83 


God  puts  special  honour  on  any  of  his  servants,  it  is  well  to 
analyze  their  gifts,  and  to  observe  carefully  what  they  were. 
What,  then,  were  the  peculiar  qualifications  which  marked 
John  Wesley  % 

The  first  thing  which  I  ask  the  reader  to  notice  is  his  extra- 
ordinary singleness  of  eye  and  tenacity  of  purpose.  Once  embarked 
on  his  evangelistic  voyage,  he  pressed  forward,  and  never 
flinched  for  a  day.  "  One  thing  I  do,"  seemed  to  be  his  motto 
and  constraining  motive.  To  preach  the  gospel,  to  labour  to 
do  good,  to  endeavour  to  save  souls, — these  seemed  to  become 
his  only  objects,  and  the  ruhng  passion  of  his  life.  In  pursuit 
of  them  he  compassed  sea  and  land,  putting  aside  all  considera- 
tions of  ease  and  rest,  and  forgetting  all  earthly  feelings.  Few 
men  but  himself  could  have  gone  to  Epworth,  stood  upon  their 
father's  tombstone,  and  preached  to  an  open-air  congregation, 
"  The  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink,  but  righteous- 
ness, and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  Few  but  himself 
.  could  have  seen  fellow-labourers,  one  after  another,  carried  to 
their  graves,  till  he  stood  almost  alone  in  his  generation,  and 
yet  preached  on,  as  he  did,  with  unabated  spirit,  as  if  the  ranks 
around  him  were  still  full.  But  his  marvellous  singleness  of 
€ye  carried  him  through  all.  "  Beware  of  the  man  of  one 
book,"  was  the  advice  of  an  old  philosopher  to  his  pupils. 
The  man  of  "  one  thing"  is  the  man  who  in  the  long  run  does 
great  things,  and  shakes  the  world. 

The  second  thing  1  ask  the  reader  to  notice  is  his  extra- 
ordinary diligence,  self-denial,  and  economy  of  time.  It  puts  one 
almost  out  of  breath  to  read  the  good  man's  Journals,  and  to 
mark  the  quantity  of  work  that  he  crowded  into  one  year.  He 
was  to  all  appearance  always  working,  and  never  at  rest 
^'  Leisure  and  I,"  he  said,  "  have  taken  leave  of  one  another. 
I  propose  to  be  busy  as  long  as  I  live,  if  my  health  is  so  long 
indulged  to  me."  This  resolution  was  made  in  the  prime  of 
Jife  ;    and  never  was  resolution  more  punctually  observed. 


84  lilS  VERSA  TILITY  OF  MIND. 

**  Lord,  let  me  not  live  to  be  useless,"  was  the  prayer  which  he 
uttered  after  seeing  one,  whom  he  once  knew  as  an  active  and 
useful  man,  reduced  by  age  to  be  a  picture  of  human  nature  in 
disgrace,  feeble  in  body  and  mind,  slow  of  speech  and  under- 
standing. Even  the  time  which  he  spent  in  travelling  was  not 
lost.  "  History,  poetry,  and  philosophy,"  said  he,  "  I  commonly 
read  on  horseback,  having  other  employment  at  other  times. ** 
When  you  met  him  in  the  street  of  a  crowded  city,  he  attracted 
notice  not  only  by  his  bands  and  cassock,  and  his  long  silvery 
hair,  but  by  his  pace  and  manner ;  both  indicating  that  all  his 
minutes  were  numbered,  and  that  not  one  was  to  be  lost. 
"  But  though  I  am  always  in  haste,"  he  said,  "  I  am  never  in  a 
hurry,  because  I  never  undertake  any  more  work  than  I  can  go 
through  with  perfect  calmness  of  spirit."  Here,  again,  is  one 
secret  of  great  usefulness.  We  must  abhor  idleness  ;  we  must 
redeem  time.  No  man  knows  how  much  can  be  done  in 
twelve  hours  until  he  tries.  It  is  precisely  those  who  do  most 
work  who  find  that  they  can  do  most. 

The  last  thing  which  I  ask  the  reader  to  notice  is  his  marvel- 
lous versatility  of  mind  and  capacity  for  a  variety  of  things.  No 
one  perhaps  can  fully  realize  this  who  does  not  read  the  large 
biographies  which  record  all  his  doings,  or  study  his  wonderful 
Journals.  Things  the  most  opposite  and  unhke — things  the 
most  petty  and  trifling — things  the  most  thoroughly  secular — 
things  most  thoroughly  spiritual, — all  are  alike  mastered  by  his 
omnivorous  mind.  He  finds  time  for  all,  and  gives  directions 
about  all.  One  day  we  find  him  condensing  old  divinity,  and 
publishing  fifty  volumes  of  theology,  called  the  "  Christian 
Library;" — another  day  we  find  him  writing  a  complete  com- 
mentary on  the  whole  Bible  ; — another  day  we  find  him  com- 
posing hymns,  which  live  to  this  day  in  the  praises  of  many  a 
congregation; — another  day  we  find  him  drawing  up  minute 
directions  for  his  preachers,  forbidding  them  to  shout  and 
gcream  and  preach  too  long,  insisting  on  their  reading  regularly 


AN  ARMINIAN  IN  DOCTRINE,  •$ 

lest  their  sermons  became  threadbare,  requiring  them  not  to 
drink  spirits,  and  charging  them  to  get  up  early  in  the  morn- 
ing;— another  day  we  find  him  calmly  reviewing  the  current 
literature  of  the  day,  and  criticizing  all  the  new  books  with  cool 
and  shrewd  remarks,  as  if  he  had  nothing  else  to  do.  Like 
Napoleon,  nothing  seems  too  small  or  too  great  for  his  mind  to 
attend  to ;  like  Calvin,  he  writes  as  if  he  had  nothing  to  do 
but  write,  preaches  as  if  he  had  nothing  to  do  but  preach,  and 
administers  as  if  he  had  nothing  to  do  but  administer.  A  ver- 
satility like  this  is  one  mighty  secret  of  power,  and  is  a  striking 
characteristic  of  most  men  who  leave  their  mark  on  the  world. 
To  be  a  steam-engine  and  a  penknife,  a  telescope  and  a  micro- 
scope, at  the  same  time,  is  probably  one  of  the  highest  attain- 
ments of  the  human  mind. 

I  should  think  my  sketch  of  Wesley  incomplete  if  I  did  not 
notice  the  objection  continually  made  against  him — that  he  was 
an  Arminian  in  doctrine.  I  fully  admit  the  seriousness  of  the 
objection.  I  do  not  pretend  either  to  explain  the  charge  away, 
or  to  defend  his  objectionable  opinions.  Personally,  I  feel 
unable  to  account  for  any  well- instructed  Christian  holding 
such  doctrines  as  perfection  and  the  defectibility  of  grace,  or 
denying  such  as  election  and  the  imputed  righteousness  of 
Christ. 

But,  after  all,  we  must  beware  that  we  do  not  condemn 
men  too  strongly  for  not  seeing  all  things  in  our  point  of  view, 
or  excommunicate  and  anathematize  them  because  they  do  not 
pronounce  our  shibboleth.  It  is  written  in  God's  Word,  "  Why 
dost  thou  judge  thy  brother  %  or  why  dost  thou  set  at  nought 
thy  brother  1**  We  must  think  and  let  think.  We  must  learn 
to  distinguish  between  things  that  are  of  the  essence  of  the 
gospel  and  things  which  are  of  the  perjection  of  gospel.  We 
may  think  that  a  man  preaches  an  imperfect  gospel  who  denies 
election,  considers  justification  to  be  nothing  more  than  forgive- 
ness, and  tells  believers  in  one  sennon  that  they  may  attain 


86  WESLEY'S  SERMON  ON  THE 

perfection  in  this  life,  and  in  another  sermon  that  they  may 
entirely  fall  away  from  grace.  But  if  the  same  man  strongly 
and  boldly  exposes  and  denounces  sin,  clearly  and  fully  lifts  up 
Christ,  distinctly  and  openly  invites  men  to  believe  and  repent, 
shall  we  dare  to  say  that  the  man  does  not  preach  the  gospel 
at  all  %  Shall  we  dare  to  say  that  he  will  do  no  good  %  I,  for 
one,  cannot  say  so,  at  any  rate.  If  I  am  asked  whether  I 
prefer  Whitefield's  gospel  or  Wesley's,  I  answer  at  once  that  I 
prefer  Whitefield's  :  I  am  a  Calvinist,  and  not  an  Armmian. 
But  if  I  am  asked  to  go  further,  and  to  say  that  Wesley  preached 
no  gospel  at  all,  and  did  no  real  good,  I  answer  at  once  that  I 
cannot  do  so.  That  Wesley  would  have  done  better  if  he  could 
have  thrown  off  his  Arminianism,  I  have  not  the  least  doubt ; 
but  that  he  preached  the  gospel,  honoured  Christ,  and  did 
extensive  good,  I  no  more  doubt  than  I  doubt  my  own 
existence. 

Let  those  who  depreciate  Wesley  as  an  Arminian,  read  his 
own  words  in  the  funeral  sermon  which  he  preached  on  the 
occasion  of  Whitefield's  death.  He  says  of  his  great  fellow- 
labourer  and  brother : — 

"  His  fundamental  point  was  to  give  God  all  the  glory  of 
whatever  is  good  in  man.  In  the  business  of  salvation  he  set 
Christ  as  high  and  man  as  low  as  possible.  With  this  point  he 
■«iid  his  friends  at  Oxford — the  original  Methodists  so-called — 
set  out.  Their  grand  principle  was,  there  is  no  power  by 
nature,  and  no  merit  in  man.  They  insisted,  *  all  grace  to 
speak,  think,  or  act  right,  is  in  and  from  the  Spirit  of  Christ ; 
and  all  merit  is  not  in  man,  how  high  soever  in  grace,  but 
merely  in  the  blood  of  Christ'  So  he  and  they  taught.  There 
is  no  power  in  man,  till  it  is  given  him  from  above,  to  do  one 
good  work,  to  speak  one  good  word,  or  to  form  one  good 
desire.  For  it  is  not  enough  to  say  all  men  are  sick  of  sin :  no, 
we  are  all  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins. 

"  And  we  are  all  helpless,  both  with  regard  to  the  power  anJ 


DEA  TH  OF  WHITEFIELD.  <7 

the  guilt  of  sin.  For  who  can  bring  a  clean  thing  out  of  an 
unclean  ]  None  less  than  the  Almighty.  Who  can  raise  those 
that  are  dead,  spiritually  dead,  in  sin  ?  None  but  he  who 
raised  us  from  the  dust  of  the  earth.  But  on  what  consideration 
will  he  do  this  ?  Not  for  works  of  righteousness  that  we  have 
done.  The  dead  cannot  praise  thee,  O  Lord,  nor  can  they  do 
anything  for  which  they  should  be  raised  to  life.  Whatever, 
therefore,  God  does,  he  does  it  merely  for  the  sake  of  his  well- 
beloved  Son.  *He  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,  he 
was  bruised  for  our  iniquities.  He  himself  bore  all  our  sins  in 
his  own  body  on  the  tree.  He  was  delivered  for  our  offences, 
and  rose  again  for  our  justification.'  Here,  then,  is  the  sole 
meritorious  cause  of  every  blessing  we  can  or  do  enjoy,  and,  in 
particular,  of  our  pardon  and  acceptance  with  God,  of  our  full 
and  free  justification.  But  by  what  means  do  we  become  inter- 
ested in  what  Christ  has  done  and  suffered  ]  *  Not  by  works, 
lest  any  man  should  boast,  but  by  faith  alone.'  '  We  conclude,' 
says  the  apostle,  '  that  a  man  is  justified  by  faith  without  the 
deeds  of  the  law.'  And  '  to  as  many  as  receive  Christ  he  gives 
power  to  become  sons  of  God  ;  even  to  them  which  believe  in 
his  name,  who  are  bom  not  of  the  will  of  man  but  of  God.' 

"  Except  a  man  be  thus  bom  again  he  cannot  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  God.  But  all  who  are  thus  bom  of  the  Spirit  have 
the  kingdom  of  God  within  them.  Christ  sets  up  his  kingdom 
in  their  hearts — righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost.  That  mind  is  in  them  which  was  in  Christ  Jesus, 
enabling  them  to  walk  as  Christ  walked.  His  indwelling  Spirit 
makes  them  holy  in  mind,  and  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversa- 
tion. But  still,  seeing  all  this  is  a  free  gift  through  the  blood 
and  righteousness  of  Christ,  there  is  etemally  the  same  reason 
to  remember — he  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in  the  Lord. 

"  You  are  not  ignorant  that  these  are  the  fundamental  doc- 
trines which  Mr.  Whitefield  everywhere  insisted  on ;  and  may 
they  not  be  summed  up,  as  it  were,  in  two  words — *  the  new 


88  WESLEY'S  PREACHING. 

birth,  and  justification  by  faith  V  These  let  us  insist  upon  with 
all  boldness,  and  at  all  times,  in  all  places,  in  public  and  in 
private.  Let  us  keep  close  to  these  good  old  unfashionable 
doctrines,  how  many  soever  contradict  and  blaspheme." 

Such  were  the  words  of  the  Arminian,  John  Wesley.  I  make 
no  comment  on  them.  I  only  say,  before  any  one  despises 
this  great  man  because  he  was  an  Arminian,  let  him  take  care 
that  he  really  knows  what  Wesley's  opinions  were.  Above  all, 
let  him  take  care  that  he  thoroughly  understands  what  kind  of 
doctrines  he  used  to  preach  in  England  a  hundred  years  ago. 


CHAPTER  IL 

Wesley's  Preaching — Preface  to  Published  Volume  of  Sermoni— Elztracts  from  Sermons 
Preached  before  the  University  of  Oxford — Rules  for  the  Guidance  of  his  Helpers- 
Advice  to  his  Preachers — Letter  to  the  Bishop  of  Lincoln — General  Estimate  of  Wes- 
ley's Merits. 

England  a  hundred  years  ago  received  such  deep  impressions 
from  John  Wesley,  that  I  should  not  feel  I  did  him  justice  if  I 
did  not  give  my  readers  a  few  select  specimens  of  his  writings. 
Before  we  turn  away  from  the  father  of  Methodism,  let  us  try  to 
get  some  distinct  idea  of  his  style  of  thought  and  his  mode  of 
expressing  himself.     Let  us  see  how  his  mind  worked. 

The  man  who  could  leave  his  mark  so  indelibly  on  his  fellow- 
countrymen  as  John  Wesley  did,  we  must  all  feel  could  have 
been  no  ordinary  man.  The  man  who  could  keep  his  hold  on 
assemblies  till  he  was  between  eighty  and  ninety  years  old,  and 
produce  effects  second  only  to  those  produced  by  Whitefield, 
must  evidently  have  possessed  peculiar  gifts.  Two  or  three 
extracts  from  his  sermons  and  other  writings  will  probably  be 
thought  interesting  and  instructive  by  most  Christian  readers. 

The  materials  for  forming  a  judgment  in  this  matter  are 
happily  abundant,  and  easily  accessible.  A  volume  of  fifty- 
•even  sermons  lies  before  me  at  this  moment,  prepared  for 


HJS  VOLUME  OF  SERMONS,  89 

publication  by  Wesley's  own  hands,  and  first  published  in  177 1. 
It  is  a  volume  that  deserves  far  more  attention  than  it  generally 
receives  in  the  present  day.  The  doctrine  of  some  of  the  dis- 
courses, I  must  honestly  confess,  is  sometimes  very  defective. 
Nevertheless,  the  volume  contains  many  noble  passages;  and 
there  are  not  a  few  pages  in  it  which,  for  clearness,  terseness, 
pointedness,  vigour,  and  pure  Saxon  phraseology,  are  perfect 
models  of  good  style. 

Wesley's  preface  to  his  volume  of  sermons  is  of  itself  very  re- 
markable. I  will  begin  by  giving  a  few  extracts  from  it.  He  says, — 

"  I  design  plain  truth  for  plain  people.  Therefore,  of  set 
purpose,  I  abstain  from  all  nice  and  philosophical  speculations; 
from  all  perplexed  and  intricate  reasonings ;  and,  as  far  as 
possible,  from  even  the  show  of  learning,  unless  in  sometimes 
citing  the  original  Scriptures.  I  labour  to  avoid  all  words 
which  are  not  easy  to  be  understood — all  which  are  not  used 
in  common  life;  and  in  particular  those  technical  terms  that 
so  frequently  occur  in  Bodies  of  divinity — those  modes  of 
speaking  which  men  of  reading  are  intimately  acquainted  with, 
but  which  to  common  people  are  an  unknown  tongue.  Yet  I 
am  not  assured  that  I  do  not  sometimes  slide  into  them  un- 
awares ;  it  is  so  extremely  natural  to  imagine  th.it  a  word  which 
is  familiar  to  ourselves  is  so  to  all  the  world. 

"  Nay,  my  design  is,  in  some  sense,  to  forget  all  that  ever 
I  have  read  in  my  life.  I  mean  to  speak  in  the  general,  as 
if  I  had  never  read  one  author,  ancient  or  modern,  always 
excepting  the  inspired.  I  am  persuaded  that,  on  the  one  hand, 
this  may  be  a  means  of  enabhng  me  more  clearly  to  express 
the  sentiments  of  my  heart,  while  I  simply  follow  the  chain  of 
my  own  thoughts  without  entangling  myself  with  those  of  other 
men ;  and  that,  on  the  other,  I  shall  come  with  fewer  weights 
upon  my  mind,  with  less  of  prejudice  and  prepossession,  either 
to  search  for  myself  or  to  deliver  to  others  the  naked  truth  of 
the  gospel 


90  EXTRACTS  FROM  PREFACE  TO 

"To  candid,  reasonable  men  I  am  not  afraid  to  lay  open 
what  have  been  the  inmost  thoughts  of  my  heart.  I  have^ 
thought,  *  I  am  a  creature  of  a  day,  passing  through  Hfe  as  an 
arrow  through  the  air.  I  am  a  spirit  come  from  God,  and 
returning  to  God,  just  hovering  over  the  great  gulf,  till  a  few 
moments  hence  I  am  no  more  seen !  I  drop  into  an  un- 
changeable eternity !  I  want  to  know  one  thing, — the  way  to 
heaven — how  to  land  safe  on  that  happy  shore.  God  himself 
has  condescended  to  teach  the  way ;  for  this  very  end  he  came 
from  heaven.  He  hath  written  it  down  in  a  book.  Oh,  give 
me  that  book  !  At  any  price  give  me  the  book  of  God !  I 
have  it :  here  is  knowledge  enough  for  me.  Let  me  be  a  man 
of  one  book.  Here,  then,  I  am  free  from  the  busy  ways  of 
men.  I  sit  down  alone :  only  God  is  here.  In  his  presence 
I  open,  I  read  his  book;  for  this  end — to  find  the  way  to 
heaven.  Is  there  a  doubt  concerning  the  meaning  of  what  I 
read  % — does  anything  appear  dark  and  intricate  ] — I  lift  up  my 
heart  to  the  Father  of  lights  :  Lord,  is  it  not  thy  word,  "  If  any 
man  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God  : "  thou  givest  liberally, 
and  upbraidest  not.  Thou  hast  said,  if  any  be  willing  to  do 
thy  will  he  shall  know.  I  am  willing  to  do ;  let  me  know  thy 
will.  I  then  search  after  and  consider  parallel  passages  of 
Scripture,  comparing  spiritual  things  with  spiritual.  I  meditate 
thereon  with  all  the  earnestness  and  attention  of  which  my 
mind  is  capable.  If  any  doubt  still  remains,  I  consult  those 
who  are  experienced  in  the  ways  of  God ;  and  then  the  writings- 
whereby,  being  dead,  they  yet  speak.  And  what  I  thus  learn 
that  I  teach.' 

"  But  some  may  say,  I  have  mistaken  the  way  myself,  although 
I  have  undertaken  to  teach  it  to  others.  It  is  probable  that 
many  will  think  this,  and  it  is  very  possible  that  I  have.  But 
I  trust,  whereinsoever  I  have  mistaken,  my  mind  is  open  to 
conviction.  I  sincerely  desire  to  be  better  informed.  I  say  to 
God  and  man,  *  What  I  know  not  teach  thou  me.* 


VOLUME  OF  SERMONS.  9t 

**  Are  you  persuaded  you  see  more  clearly  than  me  %  It  is 
not  unlikely  that  you  may.  Then  treat  me  as  you  would 
desire  to  be  treated  yourself  upon  a  change  of  circumstances. 
Point  me  out  a  better  way  than  I  have  yet  known.  Show  me 
it  is  so  by  plain  proof  of  Scripture.  And  if  I  linger  in  the  path 
I  have  been  accustomed  to  tread,  and  therefore  I  am  unwilling 
to  leave  it,  labour  with  me  a  little ;  take  me  by  the  hand  and 
lead  me  as  I  am  able  to  bear.  But  be  not  discouraged  if  I 
entreat  you  not  to  beat  me  down  in  order  to  quicken  my  pace : 
I  can  go  but  feebly  and  slowly  at  best :  then  I  should  not  be 
able  to  go  at  all.  May  I  not  request  you,  further,  not  to  give 
m.e  hard  names,  in  order  to  bring  me  into  the  right  way. 
Suppose  I  was  ever  so  much  in  the  wrong,  I  doubt  this  would 
not  set  me  right.  Rather  it  would  make  me  run  so  much  the 
further  from  you,  and  so  get  more  and  more  out  of  the  way. 

"  Nay !  perhaps  if  you  are  angry,  so  shall  I  be  too ;  and  then 
there  will  be  small  hopes  of  finding  the  truth.  If  once  anger 
arises,  its  smoke  will  so  dim  the  eyes  of  my  soul  that  I  shall  be 
able  to  see  nothing  clearly.  For  God's  sake,  if  it  be  possible 
to  avoid  it,  let  us  not  provoke  one  another  to  wrath.  Let  us 
not  kindle  in  each  other  this  fire  of  hell ;  much  less  blow  it  up 
into  a  flame.  If  we  could  discern  truth  by  that  dreadful  light, 
would  it  not  be  loss  rather  than  gain  ?  For  how  far  is  love, 
even  with  many  wrong  opinions,  to  be  preferred  before  truth 
itself  without  love  !  We  may  die  without  the  knowledge  of 
many  truths,  and  yet  be  carried  into  Abraham's  bosom.  But 
if  we  die  without  love,  what  will  knowledge  avaiU  Just  as 
much  as  it  avails  the  devil  and  his  angels  1 " 

The  next  specimen  of  John  Wesley's  mind  shall  be  an  extract 
from  a  sermon  preached  by  him  at  St.  Mary's,  Oxford,  before 
the  University,  on  June  i8,  1738,  from  the  words,  "By  grace 
ye  are  saved  through  faith  "  (Ephes.  ii.  8).  It  concludes  with 
the  following  passages  : — 

"  At  this  time  more  especially  will  we  speak,  that  by  grace  ye 


9  2  EXTRA  CTS  FROM  SERMONS  PRE  A  CHED 

are  saved  through  faith,  because  never  was  the  maintaining  this 
doctrine  more  seasonable  than  it  is  at  this  day.  Nothing  but 
this  can  effectually  prevent  the  increase  of  the  Romish  delusion 
among  us.  It  is  endless  to  attack  one  by  one  all  the  errors  of 
that  Church.  But  salvation  by  faith  strikes  at  the  root,  and  all 
fall  at  once  when  this  is  established.  It  was  this  doctrine, 
which  our  Church  justly  calls  the  strong  rock  and  foundation 
of  the  Christian  religion,  that  first  drove  Popery  out  of  these 
kingdoms,  and  it  is  this  alone  can  keep  it  out.  Nothing  but 
this  can  give  a  check  to  that  immorality  which  hath  overspread 
the  land  as  a  flood.  Can  you  empty  the  great  deep  drop  by 
drop  1  Then  you  may  reform  us  by  dissuasion  from  particular 
vices.  But  let  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith  be 
brought  in,  and  so  shall  its  proud  waves  be  stayed.  Nothing 
but  this  can  stop  the  mouths  of  those  who  glory  in  their  shame, 
and  openly  'deny  the  Lord  that  bought  them.'  They  can  talk 
as  sublimely  of  the  law  as  he  that  hath  it  written  by  God  in  his 
heart.  To  hear  them  speak  on  this  head  might  incline  one  to 
think  they  were  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God.  But  take 
them  out  of  the  law  into  the  gospel ;  begin  with  the  righteous- 
ness of  faith,  with  Christ  the  end  of  the  law  to  every  one  thai 
believeth;  and  those  who  but  now  appeared  almost  if  not  alto- 
gether Christians,  stand  confessed  the  sons  of  perdition,  as  far 
from  life  and  salvation  (God  be  merciful  unto  them)  as  the 
depth  of  hell  from  the  height  of  heaven. 

"  For  this  cause  the  adversary  so  rages  whenever  salvation  by 
faith  is  declared  to  the  world.  For  this  reason  did  he  stir  up 
earth  and  hell  to  destroy  those  vvho  preached  it.  And  for  the 
same  reason,  knowing  that  faith  alone  could  overturn  the 
foundation  of  his  kingdom,  did  he  call  forth  all  his  forces,  and 
employ  all  his  arts  of  lies  and  calumny,  to  affright  that  champion 
of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  Martin  Luther,  from  reviving  it  Nor  can 
we  wonder  thereat ;  for  as  that  man  of  God  observes,  How 
would  it  enrage  a  proud,  strong  man,  armed,  to  be  stopped  and 


BEFORE  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD.  93 

set  at  nought  by  a  little  child  coming  against  him  with  a  reed 
in  his  hand  1  Especially  when  he  knew  that  little  child  would 
surely  overthrow  him  and  tread  him  under  foot.  Even  so, 
Lord  Jesus !  thus  hath  thy  strength  been  even  made  perfect  in 
weakness !  Go  forth  then,  thou  little  child  that  believest  in 
Him,  and  his  right  hand  shall  teach  thee  terrible  things. 
Though  thou  art  helpless  and  weak  as  an  infant  of  days,  the  strong 
man  shall  not  be  able  to  stand  before  thee.  Thou  shalt  prevail 
over  him,  and  subdue  him,  and  overthrow  him,  and  trample  him 
under  thy  feet.  Thou  shalt  march  on  with  the  great  Captain 
of  thy  salvation,  conquering  and  to  conquer,  until  all  thine 
enemies  are  destroyed,  and  death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory." 

The  next  specimen  that  I  will  give  of  John  Wesley's  preach- 
ing is  the  conclusion  of  his  sermon  on  justification  by  faith.  It 
ends  with  the  following  striking  paragraph.  The  text  is 
Romans  iv.  5  : — 

"  Thou  ungodly  one  who  hearest  or  readest  these  words,  thou 
vile,  helpless,  miserable  sinner,  I  charge  thee  before  God,  the 
judge  of  all,  go  straight  unto  Jesus  with  all  thy  ungodliness. 
Take  heed  thou  destroy  not  thine  own  soul  by  pleading  thy 
righteousness  more  or  less.  Go  as  altogether  ungodly,  guilty, 
lost,  destroyed,  deserving  and  dropping  into  hell ;  and  thus  shalt 
thou  find  favour  in  his  sight,  and  know  that  he  justifieth  the  un- 
godly. As  such  thou  shalt  be  brought  unto  the  blood  of  sprink- 
ling, as  an  undone,  helpless,  damned  sinner.  Thus  look  unto 
Jesus  !  There  is  the  Lamb  of  God,  who  taketh  away  thy  sins  ! 
Plead  thou  no  works,  no  righteousness  of  thine  own  !  no  humi- 
lity, contrition,  sincerity.  In  no  wise.  That  were,  in  very 
deed,  to  deny  the  Lord  that  bought  thee.  No !  Plead  thou 
singly  the  blood  of  the  covenant,  the  ransom  paid  for  thy  proud, 
stubborn,  sinful  soul.  Who  art  thou  that  now  seest  and  feelest 
both  thine  inward  and  outward  ungodliness?  Thou  art  the 
man  !  I  want  thee  for  my  Lord.  I  challenge  thee  for  a  child 
of  God  by  faith.     The  Lord  hath  need  of  thee.     Thou  who 


94  EXTRACTS  FROM  SERMONS  PREACHED 

feelest  thou  art  just  fit  for  hell  art  just  fit  to  advance  his  gloiy, 
the  glory  of  free  grace,  justifying  the  ungodly  and  him  that 
worketh  not.  Oh,  come  quickly  !  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus ; 
and  thou,  even  thou,  art  reconciled  to  God. " 

The  last  example  of  John  Wesley's  preaching  that  I  will 
bring  before  the  reader,  is  a  portion  of  a  sermon  preached  by 
him  at  St.  Mary's,  Oxford,  before  the  University,  in  1744.  The 
text  is  Acts  iv.  31,  and  the  title  of  the  sermon  is  "Scriptural 
Christianity. "  After  asking  the  question,  "  Where  does  Scrip- 
tural Christianity  exists*  he  proceeds  to  address  his  hearers  in 
the  following  manner. — These  hearers,  we  must  remember,  were 
the  University  of  Oxford,  Heads  of  Houses,  Professors,  Fellows, 
Tutors,  and  other  residents  : — 

"  I  beseech  you,  brethren,  by  the  mercies  of  God,  if  ye  do 
account  me  a  madman  or  a  fool,  yet  as  a  fool  bear  with  me. 
It  is  utterly  needful  that  some  one  should  use  great  plainness 
of  speech  towards  you.  It  is  more  especially  needful  at  this 
time  ;  for  who  knoweth  but  it  may  be  the  last.  Who  knoweth 
how  soon  the  righteous  Judge  may  say :  *  I  will  no  more  be 
entreated  for  this  people.  Though  Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job  were 
in  this  land,  they  should  but  deliver  their  own  souls.'  And  who 
will  use  this  plainness  if  I  do  not  %  Therefore  I,  even  I,  will 
speak.  And  I  adjure  you,  by  the  living  God,  that  ye  steel  not 
your  hearts  against  receiving  a  blessing  at  my  hands.  Do  not 
say  in  your  hearts,  ^  7wn persuadebis  etiamsi  persuaseris ;'  or,  in 
other  words, '  Lord,  thou  shalt  not  send  by  whom  thou  wilt  send. 
Let  me  rather  perish  in  my  blood  than  be  saved  by  this  man. ' 

"  Brethren,  I  am  persuaded  better  things  of  you,  though  I 
fhus  speak.  Let  me  ask  you  then,  in  tender  love,  and  in  the 
spirit  of  meekness,  is  this  city  of  Oxford  a  Christian  city  1  Is 
Christianity,  Scriptural  Christianity,  found  here  ]  Are  we,  as  a 
community  of  men,  ^o  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  as  to  enjoy  in 
our  hearts,  and  show  forth  in  our  lives,  the  genuine  fruits  of  the 
Spirit?    Are  all  the  magistrates,  all  heads  and  governors  of 


BEFORE  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD.  95 

colleges  and  halls,  and  their  respective  societies  (not  to  speak 
of  inhabitants  M  the  town),  of  one  heart  and  one  soul  %  Is  the 
love  of  God  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  ?  Are  our  tempers  the 
same  that  were  in  Himi  Are  our  lives  agreeable  thereto  1 
Are  we  holy,  as  He  who  hath  called  us  is  holy,  in  all  manner 
of  conversation  % 

"  In  the  fear,  and  in  the  presence  of  the  great  God  before 
whom  both  you  and  I  shall  shortly  appear,  I  pray  you  that  are 
in  authority  over  us  (whom  I  reverence  for  your  office*  sake),  to 
consider  not  after  the  manner  of  dissemblers  with  God,  Are  you 
filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  1  Are  you  lively  portraitures  of  him 
whom  ye  are  appointed  to  represent  among  men  ?  I  have  said, 
ye  are  gods,  ye  magistrates  and  rulers  ;  ye  are  by  office  so  nearly 
allied  to  the  God  of  heaven.  In  your  several  stations  and 
degrees  ye  are  to  show  forth  to  us  the  Lord  our  Governor. 
Are  all  the  thoughts  of  your  hearts,  all  your  tempers  and  desires, 
suitable  to  your  high  calling  1  Are  all  your  words  like  unto  those 
which  come  out  of  the  mouth  of  God  ?  Is  there  in  all  your 
actions  dignity  and  love,  a  greatness  which  words  cannot  ex- 
press, which  can  flow  only  from  a  heart  full  of  God,  and  yet 
consistent  with  the  charac'T  of  man  that  is  a  worm,  and  the 
son  of  man  that  is  a  worm  1 

"  Ye  venerable  men,  who  are  more  especially  called  to  form 
the  tender  minds  of  youth,  to  dispel  therein  the  shades  of  ignor- 
ance and  error,  and  train  them  up  to  be  heirs  unto  salvation, 
are  you  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  with  those  fruits  of  the 
Spirit  which  your  important  office  so  indispensably  requires  1 
Is  your  heart  whole  with  God,  and  full  of  love  and  zeal  to  set 
up  his  kingdom  on  earth  %  Do  you  continually  remind  those 
under  your  care  that  the  one  rational  end  of  all  our  studies  is  to 
know,  love,  and  serve  the  only  true  God  and  Jesus  Christ  whom 
he  hath  sent  ?  Do  you  inculcate  upon  them  day  by  day  that 
love  alone  never  faileth,  and  that  without  love  all  learning  is  but 
splendid  ignorance,  pompous  folly,  vexation  of  spirit  ?     Has  all 


9^  EXTRACTS  FROM  SERMONS  PREACHEtf 

you  t«ach  an  actual  tendency  to  the  love  of  God,  and  of  all 
mankind  for  his  sake  %  Have  you  an  eye  to  this  end,  in  what- 
ever you  prescribe,  touching  the  kind,  manner,  and  measure  of 
their  studies,  desiring  and  labouring  that  wherever  the  lot  of 
these  young  soldiers  of  Christ  is  cast,  they  may  be  so  many 
burning  and  shining  lights,  adorning  the  gospel  of  Christ  in  all 
things?  And,  permit  me  to  ask,  do  you  put  forth  all  your 
strength  in  the  vast  work  you  have  undertaken?  Do  you 
labour  herein  with  all  your  might,  exerting  every  faculty  of 
your  souls,  using  every  talent  which  God  hath  lent  you,  and  that 
to  the  uttermost  of  your  power  ? 

"  Let  it  not  be  said  that  I  speak  here  as  if  all  under  your  care 
were  intended  to  be  clergymen.  Not  so ;  I  only  speak  as  if 
they  were  all  intended  to  be  Christians.  But  what  example  is 
set  them  by  us  who  enjoy  the  beneficence  of  our  forefathers, 
by  fellows,  students,  scholars,  more  especially  those  who  are  of 
some  rank  and  eminence  ?  Do  ye,  brethren,  abound  in  the 
fruits  of  the  Spirit,  in  lowliness  of  mind,  in  self-denial  and 
mortification,  in  tenderness  and  composure  of  spirit,  in  patience, 
meekness,  sobriety,  temperance,  and  in  unwearied,  restless  en- 
deavours to  do  good  unto  all  men,  to  relieve  their  outward 
wants  and  to  bring  their  souls  to  the  true  knowledge  and  love 
of  God  ?  Is  this  the  general  character  of  Fellows  of  colleges  % 
I  fear  it  is  not  Rather,  have  not  pride  and  haughtiness  of 
spirit,  impatience  and  peevishness,  sloth  and  indolency,  glut- 
tony and  sensuality,  and  even  a  proverbial  uselessness,  been 
objected  to  us,  perhaps  not  always  by  our  enemies  nor  wholly 
without  ground  ?  Oh  !  that  God  would  roll  away  this  reproach 
from  us,  that  the  very  memory  of  it  might  perish  for  ever  I 

"  Many  of  us  are  men  immediately  consecrated  to  God,  called 
to  minister  in  holy  things.  Are  we,  then,  patterns  to  the  rest, 
in  word,  in  conversation,  in  charity,  in  spirit,  in  faith,  in  purity  1 
Is  there  written  on  our  foreheads  and  on  our  hearts.  Holiness 
to  the  Lord  ?    From  what  motive  did  we  enter  upon  the  office  1 


BEFORE  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD.  97 

Was  it  indeed  with  a  single  eye  to  serve  God,  trusting  that  we 
were  inwardly  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  take  upon  us  this 
ministration  for  the  promotion  of  his  glory,  and  the  edifying  of 
his  people  1  And  have  we  clearly  determined,  by  God's  grace, 
to  give  ourselves  wholly  to  this  office  %  Do  we  forsake  and 
set  aside,  as  much  as  in  us  Hes,  all  worldly  cares  and  studies  I 
Do  we  apply  ourselves  wholly  to  this  one  thing,  and  draw  all 
our  cares  and  studies  this  way  ]  Are  we  apt  to  teach  ]  Are 
we  taught  of  God,  that  we  may  be  able  to  teach  others  also  1 
Do  we  know  God  ?  Do  we  know  Jesus  Christ  1  Hath  God 
revealed  his  Son  in  us  %  And  hath  he  made  us  able  ministers 
of  the  new  covenant  ]  Where,  then,  are  the  seals  of  our 
apostleship  %  Who  that  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  have 
been  quickened  by  our  word  ?  Have  we  a  burning  zeal  to  save 
souls  from  death,  so  that  for  their  sakes  we  often  forget  even  to 
eat  our  bread  %  Do  we  speak  plainly,  by  manifestation  of  the 
truth  commending  ourselves  to  every  man's  conscience  \  Are 
we  dead  to  the  world,  and  the  things  of  the  world,  laying  up  all 
our  treasure  in  heaven  %  Do  we  lord  it  over  God's  heritage,  or 
are  we  the  least,  the  servants  of  all  ?  When  we  bear  the  re- 
proach of  Christ  does  it  sit  heavy  on  us,  or  do  we  rejoice 
therein  1  When  we  are  smitten  on  the  one  cheek,  do  we  resent 
it  ?  Are  we  impatient  of  affronts  ]  or  do  we  turn  the  other 
cheek  also,  not  resisting  evil,  but  overcoming  evil  with  good  1 
Have  we  a  bitter  zeal,  inciting  us  to  strive  sharply  and  passion- 
ately with  them  that  are  out  of  the  way  ?  or,  is  our  zeal  the  flame 
of  love,  so  as  to  direct  all  our  words  with  sweetness,  lowliness, 
and  meekness  of  wisdom  % 

"  Once  more,  what  shall  we  say  concerning  the  youth  of  this 
place  % — Have  you  either  the  form  or  the  power  of  Christian 
godliness  \  Are  you  humble,  teachable,  advisable  ;  or  stubborn, 
self-willed,  heady,  and  high-minded  %  Are  you  obedient  to  your 
superiors  as  to  parents,  or  do  you  despise  those  to  whom  ye 
owe  the  tenderest  reverence  ]    Are  you  diligent  in  your  ev«ry 

(196)  7 


98  EXTKACl^S  FROM  SERMONS  PREACHED 

business,  pursuing  your  studies  with  all  your  strength  ?  Do  you 
redeem  the  time,  crowding  as  much  work  into  every  day  as  it 
can  contain  ?  Rather  are  ye  not  conscious  to  yourselves  that 
you  waste  away  day  after  day,  either  in  reading  what  has  no 
tendency  to  Christianity,  or  in  gambling,  or  in — you  know  not 
what  ]  Are  you  better  managers  of  your  fortune  than  of  your 
time  ?  Do  you,  out  of  principle,  take  care  to  owe  no  man  any- 
thing ?  Do  you  remember  the  Sabbatli  day  to  keep  it  holy,  to 
spend  it  in  the  more  immediate  worship  of  God  !  When  you 
are  in  his  house,  do  you  consider  God  is  there  1  do  you  behave 
as  seeing  him  that  is  invisible  ?  Do  you  know  how  to  possess 
your  bodies  in  sanctification  and  honour  ?  Are  not  drunken- 
ness and  uncleanness  found  among  you  1  Yea,  are  there  not  a 
multitude  of  you  who  glory  in  their  shame  1  Do  not  many  of 
you  take  the  name  of  God  in  vain,  perhaps  habitually,  with- 
out either  remorse  or  fear?  Yea,  are  there  not  a  multitude 
among  you  that  are  forsworn  ?  I  fear  a  swiftly-increasing 
multitude  ?  Be  not  surprised,  brethren.  Before  God  and  this 
congregation  I  own  myself  to  have  been  of  this  number, 
solemnly  swearing  to  observe  all  those  customs  which  I  then 
knew  nothing  of,  and  those  statutes  which  I  did  not  so  much 
as  read  over,  either  then  or  for  some  years  after.  What  is  per- 
jury if  this  is  not  ?  But  if  it  be,  oh,  what  a  weight  of  sin,  yea, 
sin  of  no  common  dye,  lieth  upon  us  1  And  doth  not  the  Most 
High  regard  it  1 

"  May  it  not  be  one  of  the  consequences  of  this  that  so  many 
of  you  are  a  generation  of  triflers,  triflers  with  God,  with  one 
another,  and  with  your  own  souls  ?  For  how  few  of  you  spend, 
from  one  week  to  another,  a  single  hour  in  private  prayer? 
How  few  of  you  have  any  thought  of  God  in  the  general  tenor 
of  your  conversation  ?  Who  of  you  is  in  any  degree  acquainted 
with  the  work  of  his  Spirit,  his  supernatural  work  in  the  souls  of 
men  ?  Can  you  hear,  unless  now  and  then  in  a  church,  any 
talk  of  the  Holy  Spirit  1    Would  you  not  take  it  for  granted,  if 


BEFORE  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD.  99 

one  began  such  a  conversation,  that  it  was  either  hypocrisy  or 
enthusiasm  ?  In  the  name  of  the  Lord  God  Almighty,  I  ask 
what  rehgion  are  you  of?  Even  the  talk  oi  Christianity,  ye  can- 
not, will  not  bear.  Oh,  my  brethren,  what  a  Christian  city  is 
this !     It  is  time  for  thee,  Lord,  to  lay  to  thine  hand. 

"For,  indeed,  what  probability — what  possibility  rather, 
speaking  after  the  manner  of  men — is  there  that  Christianity, 
Scriptural  Christianity,  should  be  again  the  religion  of  this  place, 
and  that  all  orders  of  men  among  us  should  speak  and  live  as 
men  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit  ?  By  whom  should  this  Chris 
tianity  be  restored  1  By  those  of  you  that  are  in  authority  1 
Are  you  convinced,  then,  that  this  is  Scriptural  Christianity! 
Are  you  desirous  it  should  be  restored  ?  Do  you  count  your 
fortune,  liberty,  life,  not  dear  unto  yourselves  so  you  may  be 
instrumental  in  restoring  of  it?  But  suppose  you  have  the 
desire,  who  hath  any  power  proportioned  to  effect  \  Perhaps 
some  of  you  have  made  a  few  vain  attempts,  but  with  how  small 
success !  Shall  Christianity,  then,  be  restored  by  young,  un- 
known, inconsiderable  men  ?  I  know  not  whether  ye  yourselves 
would  suffer  it.  Would  not  some  of  you  cry  out,  *  Young  man, 
in  so  doing  thou  reproachest  us  ! '  But  there  is  no  danger  of 
your  being  put  to  the  proof ;  so  hath  iniquity  overspread  us 
like  a  flood.  Whom  then  shall  God  send  %  The  famine,  the 
pestilence  (God's  last  messengers  to  a  guilty  land),  or  the  sword? 
the  armies  of  Romish  aliens  to  reform  us  into  our  first  love  % 
Nay,  rather  let  us  fall  into  thy  hand,  O  Lord ;  and  let  us  not 
fall  into  the  hand  of  man. 

"  Lord,  save,  or  we  perish !  Take  us  out  of  the  mire,  that 
we  sink  not !  Oh,  help  us  against  these  enemies,  for  vain  is  the 
help  of  man.  Unto  thee  all  things  are  possible.  According  to 
the  greatness  of  thy  power,  preserve  thca  those  that  are  ap- 
pointed to  die,  and  preserve  us  in  the  manner  that  seemeth  to 
thee  good ;  not  as  we  will,  but  as  thou  wilt." 

The   reader  will  probably  agree  with  me  that  this  is  a  re- 


lOO  WESLEY'S  RULES  FOR  THE 

markable  sermon,  and  one  of  a  class  that  is  not  frequently 
heard  in  University  pulpits.  What  was  thought  of  it  in  1744 
by  the  Vice-chancellor,  the  Heads  of  Houses,  and  the  Fellows 
and  Tutors  of  Colleges,  we  have  little  means  of  knowing.  In 
his  journal,  Wesley  only  remarks  :  "  I  preached  this  day  for  the 
last  time,  I  suppose,  at  St.  Mary's.  Be  it  so.  I  am  now  clear 
of  the  blood  of  these  men.  I  have  fully  delivered  my  own  soul. 
The  beadle  came  to  me  afterwards,  and  told  me,  *  that  the  Vice- 
chancellor  had  sent  him  for  my  notes.'  I  sent  them  without 
delay,  not  without  admiring  the  wise  providence  of  God.  Per- 
haps few  men  of  note  would  have  given  a  sermon  of  mine  the 
reading,  if  I  had  put  it  in  their  hands.  But  by  this  reason  it 
came  to  be  read,  probably  more  than  once,  by  every  man  of 
eminence  in  the  University."  Many,  perhaps,  will  agree  with 
me  that,  if  Oxford  had  heard  more  of  such  plain  preaching 
during  the  last  one  hundred  and  fifty  years,  it  would  have 
been  well  for  the  Church  of  England. 

Turning  away  from  Wesley's  preaching,  I  will  now  give  a 
specimen  of  his  mind  of  a  very  different  description.  I  will 
give  the  twelve  rules  which  he  laid  down  for  the  guidance  of  his 
helpers  in  evangelistic  work  in  the  Methodist  communion.  They 
serve  to  illustrate,  I  think,  in  a  very  striking  manner,  the  great 
shrewdness  and  good  sense  of  the  man,  and  are  also  good 
examples  of  his  terse,  pithy  style  of  composition.  He  says  to 
his  helpers : — 

"  I.  Be  diligent.  Never  be  unemployed  for  a  moment ;  never 
be  triflingly  employed.  Never  while  away  time  ;  neither  spend 
any  more  time  at  any  place  than  is  strictly  necessary. 

"  2.  Be  serious.  Let  your  motto  be,  Holiness  to  the  Lord. 
Avoid  all  lightness,  jesting,  and  foolish  talking. 

"  3.  Converse  sparingly  and  cautiously  with  women,  particu- 
larly with  young  women  in  private. 

"4.  Take  no  step  towards  marriage  without  first  acquainting 
me  with  your  design. 


GUIDANCE  OF  HIS  HELPERS.  lOI 

"  5.  Believe  evil  of  no  one  ;  unless  you  see  it  done,  take  heed 
how  you  credit  it.  Put  the  best  construction  on  everything : 
you  know  the  jud£^^  is  always  supposed  to  be  on  the  prisoner's 
side. 

"  6.  Speak  evil  of  no  one  ;  else  your  words  especially  would 
eat  as  doth  a  canker.  Keep  your  thoughts  within  your  own 
breast  till  you  come  to  the  person  concerned. 

"  7.  Tell  every  one  what  you  think  wrong  in  him,  and  that 
plainly,  and  as  soon  as  may  be,  else  it  will  fester  in  your  heart. 
Make  all  haste  to  cast  the  fire  out  of  your  bosom. 

"  8.  Do  not  affect  the  gentleman.  You  have  no  more  to  do 
with  this  character  than  with  that  of  a  dancing-master.  A 
preacher  of  the  gospel  is  the  servant  of  all. 

"  9.  Be  ashamed  of  nothing  but  sin ;  not  of  fetching  wood 
(if  time  permit),  or  of  drawing  water  \  not  of  cleaning  your  own 
shoes,  or  your  neighbour's. 

"  10.  Be  punctual.  Do  everything  exactly  at  the  time ;  and, 
in  general,  do  not  mend  our  rules,  but  keep  them ;  not  for 
wrath,  but  for  conscience'  sake. 

"  II.  You  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  save  souls.  Therefore 
spend  and  be  spent  in  this  work.  And  go  always  not  to  those 
who  want  you,  but  to  those  who  want  you  most. 

"  1 2.  Act  in  all  things,  not  according  to  your  own  will,  but 
as  a  son  in  the  gospel.  As  such,  it  is  your  part  to  employ  your 
time  in  the  manner  which  we  direct,  partly  in  preaching  and 
visiting  the  flock  from  house  to  house ;  partly  in  reading,  medi- 
tation, and  prayer.  Above  all,  if  you  labour  with  us  in  the 
Lord's  vineyard,  it  is  needful  that  you  should  do  that  part  of 
the  work  which  we  advise,  at  those  times  and  places  which  we 
judge  most  for  his  glory." 

Comment  on  these  rules  is  needless.  They  speak  for  them- 
selves. Though  originally  drawn  up  with  a  special  view  to  the 
wants  of  the  Methodist  helpers,  they  contain  wisdom  for  all 
bodies  of  Christians.     Happy  would  it  be  for  all  the  churches 


I02  ADVICE  TO  PREACHERS. 

of  Christ,  if  all  the  ministers  of  the  gospel  would  carry  out  the 
spirit  of  these  rules,  and  remember  their  wise  suggestions  far 
more  than  they  do. 

Let  us  next  take  an  illustration  of  the  manner  in  which  he 
used  to  advise  his  preachers  individually.  To  one  who  was  in 
danger  of  becoming  a  noisy,  clamorous  preacher,  he  writes  : — 

"  Scream  no  more  at  peril  of  your  soul.  God  now  warns 
you  by  me,  whom  he  has  set  over  you.  Speak  as  earnestly  as 
you  can,  but  do  not  scream.  Speak  with  all  your  heart,  but 
with  a  moderate  voice.  It  was  said  of  our  Lord,  '  He  shall  not 
cry^  The  word  means  properly,  he  shall  not  screajn.  Herein 
be  a  follower  of  me,  as  I  am  of  Christ.  I  often  speak  loud, 
often  vehemently;  but  I  never  scream  ;  I  never  strain  myself; 
I  dare  not ;  I  know  it  would  be  a  sin  against  God  and  my  own 
soul." 

To  one  who  neglected  the  duty  of  private  reading  and 
regular  study,  he  wrote  as  follows  : — 

"  Hence  your  talent  in  preaching  does  not  increase ;  it  is  just 
the  same  as  it  was  seven  years  ago.  It  is  lively,  but  not  deep ; 
there  is  little  variety ;  there  is  no  compass  of  thought.  Read- 
ing only  can  supply  this,  with  daily  meditation  and  daily  prayer. 
You  wrong  yourself  greatly  by  omitting  this  ;  you  never  can  be 
a  deep  preacher  without  it,  any  more  than  a  thorough  Christian. 
Oh  begin !  Fix  some  part  of  every  day  for  private  exercises. 
You  may  acquire  the  taste  which  you  have  not ;  what  is  tedious 
at  first  will  afterwards  be  pleasant.  Whether  you  like  it  or  not, 
read  and  pray  daily.  It  is  for  your  life !  There  is  no  other 
way  ;  else  you  will  be  a  trifler  all  your  days,  and  a  pretty  super- 
ficial preacher.  Do  justice  to  your  own  soul ;  give  it  time  and 
means  to  grow  :  do  not  starve  yourself  any  longer." 

The  last  specimen  of  John  Wesley's  mind  that  I  will  give, 
is  an  extract  from  a  letter  which  he  wrote  to  the  Bishop  of 
Lincoln,  by  way  of  public  protest,  on  account  of  the  disgraceful 
persecution   which    some   intolerant    magistrates    carried     on 


LETTER  TO  THE  BISHOP  OF  LINCOLN.  103 

against  the  Lincolnshire  Methodists.  It  is  an  interesting  letter, 
not  only  on  account  of  the  holy  boldness  of  its  style,  but  also 
on  account  of  the  age  of  the  writer.     He  says : — 

"  My  Lord,  I  am  a  dying  man,  having  already  one  foot  in 
the  grave.  Humanly  speaking,  I  cannot  long  creep  upon  the 
earth,  being  now  nearer  ninety  than  eighty  years  of  age.  But 
I  cannot  die  in  peace  before  I  have  discharged  this  office  of 
Christian  love  to  your  Lordship.  I  write  without  ceremony,  as 
neither  hoping  nor  fearing  anything  from  your  Lordship  or  from 
any  man  living.  And  I  ask,  in  the  name  and  in  the  presence 
of  Him,  to  whom  both  you  and  I  are  shortly  to  give  an  account, 
why  do  you  trouble  those  that  are  quiet  in  the  land,  those  that 
fear  God  and  work  righteousness  ?  Does  your  Lordship  know 
what  the  Methodists  are — that  many  thousands  of  them  are 
zealous  members  of  the  Church  of  England,  and  strongly 
attached,  not  only  to  His  Majesty,  but  to  his  present  ministry  I 
Why  should  your  Lordship,  setting  religion  out  of  the  question, 
throw  away  such  a  body  of  respectable  friends  ?  Is  it  for  their 
religious  sentiments  1  Alas,  my  Lord,  is  this  a  time  to  perse- 
cute any  man  for  conscience'  sake  %  I  beseech  you,  my  Lord, 
do  as  you  would  be  done  to.  You  are  a  man  of  sense ;  you 
are  a  man  of  learning ;  nay,  I  verily  believe  (what  is  of  infinitely 
more  value),  you  are  a  man  of  piety.  Then  think,  and  let 
think.  I  pray  God  to  bless  you  with  the  choicest  of  his  bless- 
ings." 

With  this  letter  I  conclude  my  illustrations  of  John  Wesley's 
mind  and  its  working.  It  would  be  easy  to  add  to  the  extracts 
I  have  given  from  the  large  stock  of  materials  which  are  still 
within  reach  of  all  who  choose  to  look  for  them.  But  there  is 
such  a  thing  as  overloading  a  subject,  and  injuring  it  by  over- 
quotation.  I  believe  I  have  said  enough  to  supply  my  readers 
with  the  means  of  forming  a  judgment  of  John  Wesley's  mental 
calibre. 

Has   any   one   been  accustomed  to    regard    the  father  of 


I04  ESTIMATE  OF  WESLETS  MERITS. 

Methodism  as  a  mere  fanatic,  as  a  man  of  moderate  abilities 
and  superficial  education,  as  a  successful  popular  preacher  and 
leader  of  an  ignorant  sect,  but  nothing  more  %  I  ask  such  an 
one  to  examine  carefully  the  specimens  I  have  given  of  Wesley's 
mind,  and  to  reconsider  his  opinion.  Whether  men  like 
Methodist  doctrine  or  not,  I  think  they  must  honestly  concede 
that  the  old  Fellow  of  Lincoln  was  a  scholar  and  a  sensible 
man.  The  world,  which  always  sneers  at  evangelical  religion, 
may  please  itself  by  saying  that  the  men  who  shook  England  a 
hundred  years  ago  were  weak-minded,  hot-headed  enthusiasts, 
and  unlearned  and  ignorant  men.  The  Jews  said  the  same  of 
the  apostles  in  early  days.  But  the  world  cannot  get  over  facts. 
The  founder  of  Methodism  was  a  man  of  no  mean  reputation 
in  Oxford,  and  his  writings  show  him  to  have  been  a  well-read, 
logical-minded,  and  intelligent  man.  Let  the  children  of  this 
world  deny  this  if  they  can. 

Finally,  has  any  one  been  accustomed  to  regard  Wesley  with 
dislike  on  account  of  his  Arminian  opinions  ?  Is  any  one  in 
the  habit  of  turning  away  from  his  name  with  prejudice,  and  re« 
fusing  to  believe  that  such  an  imperfect  preacher  of  the  gospel 
could  do  any  good  ]  I  ask  such  an  one  to  remould  his  opinion, 
to  take  a  more  kindly  view  of  the  old  soldier  of  the  cross,  and 
to  give  him  the  honour  he  deserves. 

What  though  John  Wesley  did  not  use  all  the  weapons  of 
truth  which  our  great  Captain  has  provided  ?  What  though  he 
often  said  things  which  you  and  I  feel  we  could  not  say,  and 
left  unsaid  things  which  we  feel  ought  to  be  said  ?  Still,  not- 
withstanding this,  he  was  a  bold  fighter  on  Christ's  side,  a  fear- 
less warrior  against  sin,  the  world,  and  the  devil,  and  an 
unflinching  adherent  of  the  I^rd  Jesus  Christ  in  a  very  dark 
day.  He  honoured  the  Bible.  He  cried  down  sin.  He  made 
much  of  Christ's  blood.  He  exalted  holiness.  He  taught  the 
absolute  need  of  repentance,  faith,  and  conversion.  Surely 
tliese  things  ought  not  to  be  forgotten.     Surely  theie  is  a  ceep 


AN  INSTRUMENT  FOR  GOOD.  105 

lesson  in  those  words  of  our  Master,  "  Forbid  him  not :  for 
there  is  no  man  which  shall  do  a  miracle  in  my  name,  that  can 
lightly  speak  evil  of  me.  For  he  that  is  not  against  us  is  on 
our  part "  (Mark  ix.  39,  40). 

Then  let  us  thank  God  for  what  John  Wesley  was,  and  not 
keep  poring  over  his  deficiencies,  and  only  talking  of  what  he 
was  not.  Whether  we  like  it  or  not,  John  Wesley  was  a  mighty 
instrument  in  God's  hand  for  good  ;  and,  next  to  George  White- 
field  was  the  first  and  foremost  evangelist  of  England  in  the 
18th  century. 


CHAPTER  L 

Born  at  Brindle,  1708— Educated  at  Christ's  College,  Cambridge — Ordained,  1731— Cunt* 
of  Rochdale  andTodmorden — Death  of  bis  Wife — Minister  of  Haworth,  174a — Detcilp- 
tion  of  Haworth — Style  of  his  Ministry — His  Manner  of  Life,  Diligence,  Charity,  Lore 

of  Peace,  Humility — His  Ministerial  Success. 

|HE  third  spiritual  hero  of  the  last  century  whom  I  wish 
to  introduce  to  my  readers,  is  one  who  is  very  little 
known.      The  man  I  mean  is  William  Grimshaw, 
Perpetual  Curate  of  Haworth,  in  Yorkshire. 

Thousands,  I  can  well  believe,  are  familiar  with  the  history 
of  Whitefield  and  Wesley,  who  have  not  so  much  as  heard  of 
Grimshaw's  name.  Yet  he  was  a  mighty  man  of  God,  of  whom 
the  Church  and  the  world  were  not  worthy.  If  greatness  is  to 
be  measured  by  usefulness  to  souls,  I  believe  there  were  not  in 
England  at  this  period  three  greater  men  than  William 
Grimshaw. 

The  reasons  why  this  good  man  is  so  little  known  are  soon 
explained. 

For  one  thing,  Grimshaw  never  withdrew  from  his  position 
as  a  beneficed  clergyman  of  the  Church  of  England.  He  lived 
md  died  incumbent  of  a  Yorkshire  parochial  district.  He 
founded  no  new  sect,  and  drew  up  no  new  articles  of  faith.  He 
found  as  much  liberty  as  he  wanted  within  the  pale  of  a  bene- 


GRIMSHAW'S  FIELD  OF  LABOUR.  107 

ficed  clergyman's  position,  and  with  tliat  liberty  he  was  content 
Such  a  man,  in  the  very  nature  of  things,  will  rarely  emerge 
from  comparative  obscurity.  No  zealous  partisan  will  chronicle 
his  actions  and  movements.  No  persecuted  followers  will  pub- 
lish accounts  of  his  life  and  opinions.  The  man  who  remains 
in  the  ranks,  or  behind  the  intrenchments,  will  never  be  so  con- 
spicuous as  he  who  carries  on  a  guerilla  warfare  single-handed, 
or  stands  forth  outside  on  the  plain.* 

For  another  thing,  Grimshaw  never  went  to  London,  or 
opened  his  mouth  so  much  as  once  in  a  London  pulpit.  He 
moved  in  a  purely  provincial  orbit,  in  days  when  railways,  tele- 
graphs, and  penny  postage  were  not  even  dreamed  of  Withia 
that  orbit,  no  doubt,  he  was  a  star  of  the  first  magnitude ;  but 
beyond  it  he  was  never  heard  or  seen.  We  need  not  wonder 
that  he  was  little  known  in  his  day  and  generation.  The  minister 
who  never  preaches  in  London,  and  writes  nothing,  must  not 
be  surprised  if  the  world  knows  nothing  of  him.  Like  some  of 
the  judges  of  Israel,  he  may  be  great  in  his  own  district,  but 
some  of  the  tribes  will  scarcely  be  acquainted  with  his  name. 

After  all,  the  being  famous  is  a  thing  that  depends  greatly  on 
position  and  opportunity.  It  is  not  enough  to  possess  gifts 
and  powers  :  there  must  also  be  the  means  of  exhibiting  them. 
For  want  of  opportunity  some  of  the  greatest  men  perhaps  are 
buried  in  obscurity.  There  may  be  great  physicians  who  could 
never  find  a  practice,  great  lawyers  who  could  never  get  a  brief, 
and  great  soldiers  who  never  had  a  chance  of  distinguishing 
themselves.  The  main  reason  why  the  Church  has  done  so 
little  honour  to  Grimshaw's  name  may  be,  that  it  had  so  little 
opportunity  of  knowing  him. 

William  Grimshaw  was  born  at  Brindle,  in  Lancashire,  on  the 

*  It  ought  to  be  remembered  that  neither  Wesley  nor  Whitefield  ever  held  a  living  in  the 
Church  of  England.  It  is,  therefore,  not  correct  to  speak  of  them  as  men  who  sectdedicom. 
the  Church.  They  resigned  no  living  or  official  position,  simply  because  they  had  none  to 
resign.  They  were  practically  excluded  from  the  pulpits  of  the  Establishment,  because  the 
clergy  as  a  body  refused  to  admit  them.  But  they  never  formally  separated  themselves 
firom  the  communion  in  which  they  had  been  ordained. 


lo8  HIS  ORDINATION, 

3rd  of  September  1708.  Brindle  is  an  agricultural  parish,  con- 
taining at  present  about  thirteen  hundred  people,  and  lies  not 
far  from  the  three  manufacturing  towns  of  Preston,  Chorley, 
and  Blackburn.  Nothing  whatever  is  known  of  the  rank  and 
position  of  his  parents.  Who  his  mother  was,  whether  he  had 
any  brothers  and  sisters,  what  was  his  father's  occupation  and 
employment,  are  all  points  which  are  now  veiled  in  complete 
obscurity.  Beyond  the  fact  that  one  of  the  churchwardens  of 
Brindle  in  1728  was  a  certain  William  Grimshaw,  nothing  has 
ever  been  ascertained.* 

About  Grimshaw's  early  life  and  education  I  can  tell  my 
readers  almost  nothing.  That  he  went  to  the  Grammar  Schools 
of  Blackburn  and  Hesketh,  was  admitted  to  Christ's  College, 
Cambridge,  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  and  in  due  course  of  time 
took  his  degree  as  Bachelor  of  Arts,  are  the  only  facts  that  I 
can  collect  about  the  first  twenty-one  years  of  his  life.  But  his 
character  as  a  boy  and  young  man,  and  his  conduct  at  school 
and  college,  are  matters  about  which  I  cannot  supply  the  slight- 
est information,  because  none  exists.  There  are,  however,  no 
grounds  for  supposing  that  he  spent  his  time  at  all  better  than 
other  young  men  of  his  day,  or  that  he  evinced  any  concern 
about  religion. 

In  the  year  1731  Grimshaw  was  ordained  deacon,  and  entered 
holy  orders  as  curate  of  Rochdale.  He  seems  to  have  taken 
on  him  this  solemn  office  without  any  spiritual  feeling,  and  in 
utter  ignorance  of  the  duties  of  a  minister  of  Christ's  gospel. 
Like  too  many  young  clergymen,  he  appears  to  have  been 
ordained  without  knowing  anything  aright  either  about  his  own 
soul,  or  about  the  way  to  do  good  to  the  souls  of  others.  In 
fact,  in  after-life  he  deeply  lamented  that  he  sought  ordination 
from  the  lowest  and  most  unworthy  of  motives — the  desire  to 

*  1  think  it  right  to  say,  that  almost  the  only  accessible  source  of  information  about 
Grimshaw  is  a  biography  of  him  lately  published  by  Mr.  Spence  Hardy.  It  is  an  interesting 
volume,  and  well  worth  reading,  though  the  author's  predilections  in  favour  of  Methodism 
•re  rather  too  manifest. 


BECOMES  CURATE  OF  TODMORDEN.  109 

be  in  a  resnectable  profession,  and,  if  possible,  to  get  a  good 
living. 

Grimshaw's  Jtay  at  Rochdale,  for  some  reason  which  we  can- 
not now  explain,  was  a  very  short  one.  In  September  1731, 
the  very  year  that  he  was  ordained,  he  became  curate  of  Tod- 
morden,  and  left  Rochdale  entirely.  Todmorden  lies  in  a 
romantic  valley  between  Rochdale  and  Leeds,  well  known  to 
all  who  travel  by  the  Lancashire  and  Yorkshire  Railway.  Before 
the  steam-engine  was  invented,  it  must  have  been  a  singularly 
beautiful  place.  Ecclesiastically,  it  is  a  chapelry  in  the  patron- 
age of  the  Vicar  of  Rochdale,  and  stands  partly  in  the  great 
parish  of  Rochdale  and  partly  in  the  equally  large  parish  of 
Halifax.  Here  Grimshaw  continued  for  no  less  than  eleven 
years. 

The  eleven  years  during  which  Grimshaw  resided  at  Tod- 
morden were,  beyond  doubt,  the  turning-point  in  his  spiritual 
history.  It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  we  possess  nothing  but 
the  most  scanty  information  about  this  period  of  his  life. 
Enough,  however,  exists  to  throw  some  light  on  the  way 
through  which  he  was  led  to  become  the  man  of  God  that  he 
was  in  after-days. 

It  appears  then,  according  to  Middleton,  one  of  his  bio- 
graphers, that  about  the  year  1734,  three  years  after  he  came 
to  Todmorden,  Grimshaw  began  for  the  first  time  to  feel  deep 
concern  about  his  own  soul,  and  the  souls  of  his  parishioners. 
A  change  came  over  his  life  and  outward  behaviour.  He  laid 
aside  the  diversions  in  which  he  had  hitherto  spent  the  greater 
part  of  his  time — such  as  hunting,  fishing,  card-playing,  revel- 
ling, and  merry-making — and  began  to  visit  his  people,  and 
press  on  them  the  importance  of  religion,  like  one  who  really 
believed  it.  At  the  same  time  he  commenced  the  practice  of 
praying  in  secret  four  times  a-day,  a  practice  which  there  is 
reason  to  believe  he  never  left  off. 

There  is  nothing  to  show  that  his  views  of  Christianity  at 


I  lO  DEA  TH  OF  HIS  WIFE. 

this  period  were  any  but  the  most  dark  and  obscure.  Of  the 
distinctive  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  of  salvation  by  grace,  justifi- 
cation by  faith,  free  pardon  through  Christ's  blood,  and  the 
converting  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  probably  knew  nothing 
at  all.  He  had  none  but  books  of  a  very  legal  character,  most 
of  them  given  by  Dr.  Dunster,  Vicar  of  Rochdale,  when  he  waf 
his  curate.  He  had  no  friend  to  deal  with  him,  as  Peter  did 
with  Cornelius,  or  Aquila  and  Priscilla  did  with  ApoUos,  and 
"  show  him  the  way  of  God  more  perfectly."  But  he  was 
honest  in  seeking  light,  and  light  came,  though  not  immediately. 
He  prayed  much,  like  Saul  in  the  house  of  Judas  at  Damascus, 
and  after  many  days  his  prayer  was  heard.  He  used  such 
means  as  he  had,  and  in  so  using  means  God  met  him  and 
helped  him.  He  had  a  sincere  desire  to  do  God's  will,  and  the 
promise  of  the  Lord  Jesus  was  verified,  "  He  shall  know  of  the 
doctrine  whether  it  be  of  God"  (John  vii.  17). 

The  struggle  between  light  and  darkness  in  Grimshaw's  mind 
appears  to  have  continued  several  years.  Long  as  this  delay 
may  seem  to  us,  we  must  not  forget  that  he  was  entirely  without 
help  from  man,  and  had  to  work  out  every  spiritual  problem 
unassisted  and  alone.  But  though  the  work  within  him  went 
on  slowly,  it  went  on  solidly  and  surely.  The  illness  and  death 
of  his  first  wife,  leaving  him  a  desolate  widower  with  two  chil- 
dren, after  four  years  of  married  life,  appears  to  have  been  a 
powerful  means  of  drawing  him  nearer  to  God.  The  perusal 
of  two  most  valuable  Puritan  books,  "Brooks'  Precious  Remedies 
against  Satan's  Devices,"  and  "  Owen  on  Justification,"  seems 
to  have  been  extremely  helpful  and  establishing  to  his  soul 
And  the  final  result  was,  that  after  several  years  of  severe  con- 
flict, Grimshaw  no  longer  "  walked"  in  darkness,  but  had  the 
full  light  of  life"  (John  viii.  12).  The  scales  completely  fell 
from  his  eyes.  He  saw  and  knew  the  whole  truth,  and  the 
truth  made  him  free.  He  left  Todmorden  a  far  wiser  and  hap- 
pier man  than  he  entered  it.     Hard  as  the  schooling  was,  he 


THE  BLIND  LEADING  THE  BLIND.  Til 

there  learned  lessons  which  he  never  forgot  to  his  life's  end. 
Few  men,  perhaps,  have  ever  so  thoroughly  verified  the  truth  of 
Luther's  saying,  "  Prayer  and  temptation,  the  Bible  and  medi- 
tation, make  a  true  minister  of  the  gospel." 

Grimshaw's  testimony  to  the  power  of  the  Scriptures  at  this 
crisis  in  his  spiritual  history,  is  very  striking  and  instructive. 
Like  many  others,  he  found  the  Bible  almost  a  new  book  to 
his  mind.  Up  to  this  time  he  had  known  it  only  in  the  letter, 
but  now  he  became  acquainted  with  it  in  its  spiritual  power. 
He  afterwards  told  a  friend  that  "  if  God  had  drawn  up  his 
Bible  to  heaven,  and  sent  him  down  another,  it  could  not 
have  been  newer  to  him."  So  true  is  it  that  when  man  be- 
comes a  new  creature  "  old  things  pass  away  and  all  things 
become  new." 

Grimshaw's  people  at  Todmorden  soon  found  that  a  change 
had  come  over  their  minister's  mind.  In  the  middle  of  his 
spiritual  conflict,  and  before  he  had  found  peace,  it  is  related 
that  a  poor  woman  came  to  him  in  great  distress  of  soul,  and 
asked  him  what  she  must  do.  He  could  only  say,  "  I  cannot 
tell  what  to  say  to  you,  Susan,  for  I  am  in  the  same  state  my- 
self; but  to  despair  of  the  mercy  of  God  would  be  worse  than 
all."  Another  woman,  named  Mary  Scholefield,  of  Calf  Lees, 
had  sought  his  advice  in  the  beginning  of  his  ministry,  and  got 
the  following  answer:  "Put  away  these  gloomy  thoughts.  Go 
into  merry  company.  Divert  yourself;  and  all  will  be  well  at 
last."  At  a  later  period  he  went  to  her  house  and  said,  "  O 
Mary,  what  a  blind  leader  of  the  bHnd  was  I,  when  I  came  to 
take  off  thy  burden  by  exhorting  thee  to  live  in  pleasure,  and 
to  follow  the  vain  amusements  of  the  world  1 "  Incidents  like 
these,  we  may  be  sure,  would  soon  be  known  throughout  Tod- 
morden. True  conversion,  like  the  presence  of  Christ,  is  a 
thing  that  cannot  be  hid. 

It  would  indeed  be  interesting  if  we  had  any  authentic 
records  of  Grimshaw's  history  during  these  momentous  eleven 


112  A  PPOINTED  MINIS  TER  OF  HA  IVOR  TH. 

years  at  Todmorden.  But  God  has  thought  fit  to  withhold 
them  from  us.  It  is  certainly  very  curious  that  without  the 
least  concert  with  the  other  great  evangelists  who  were  his 
contemporaries,  he  should  have  arrived  at  the  same  doctrinal 
conclusions  and  taken  up  the  same  line  of  action.  But  it  is 
an  established  fact,  and  well  ascertained,  that  all  the  time  he 
was  at  Todmorden  he  was  an  eiitire  stranger  to  Whitefield  and 
Wesley,  and  never  read  a  line  of  their  writings.  It  is  no  lesy 
curious  to  observe  how  God  was  pleased  to  wean  him  from  the 
love  of  worldly  things,  by  taking  away  his  beloved  wife,  whose 
loss  he  seems  to  have  felt  most  keenly.  But  the  well-instructed 
Christian  will  see  in  all  this  part  of  his  history  the  hand  of 
perfect  wisdom.  The  tools  that  the  great  Architect  intends  to 
use  much,  are  often  kept  long  in  the  fire,  to  temper  them  and 
fit  them  for  work.  The  discipline  that  Grimshaw  went  through 
at  Todmorden  was  doubtless  very  severe.  But  the  lessons  he 
learned  under  it  could  probably  have  been  learned  in  no  other 
school. 

In  the  month  of  May  1742,  Grimshaw  was  appointed 
minister  of  Haworth  in  Yorkshire,  and  remained  there  twenty- 
one  years,  until  his  death.  How  and  by  what  interest  he  got 
the  appointment,  we  do  not  know.  At  the  present  time, 
the  patronage  is  in  the  hands  of  the  Vicar  of  Bradford  and 
certain  trustees.  It  is  not  unlikely  that  his  first  wife's  family 
had  something  to  do  with  it.*  Haworth  is  a  chapelry  in  the 
parish  of  Bradford,  and  about  four  miles  from  the  town  of 
Keighley.  It  stands  in  a  cold,  desolate,  bleak  moorland 
country,  on  the  hills  which  divide  Yorkshire  from  Lancashire, 
and,  running  down  from  the  Lake  district  to  the  peak  of 
Derbyshire,  form  the  "backbone"  of  England.  None  but 
those  who  have  travelled  from  Manchester  to  Leeds  by  the 
Lancashire  and   Yorkshire   Railway,  or  from  Manchester  to 

•  Haworth  is  best  known  at  present  as  the  birth-plar.e  and  residence  of  the  unluppy 
Charlotte  Bront2,  whose  father  was  tncumb  :nt  of  the  place. 


WILLIAM  GRIMSHAW. 


Face  p.  113. 


DESCRIPTION  OF  HA  WORTH.  113 

Huddersfield  by  the  London  and  North-Western,  or  from 
Manchester  to  Sheffield  by  the  Great  Northern  line,  can  have 
any  adequate  idea  of  the  rugged,  weather-beaten,  mountainous 
character  of  this  district.  Its  valleys  are  beautiful,  highly 
cultivated,  and  teeming  with  life  and  manufacturing  activity. 
But  the  upper  parts  of  the  country  are  often  as  wild,  and  steep, 
and  uncultivated,  and  unapproachable,  as  a  Highland  moor. 
At  the  top  of  one  of  the  roughest  parts  of  the  mountain  dis- 
trict lies  the  village  of  Haworth,  the  principal  scene  of  Grim- 
shaw's  ministerial  labour. 

Haworth  a  hundred  years  ago  was  perhaps  as  rough  and  un- 
civilized a  place  as  a  minister  could  go  to.  Even  Doomsday- 
Book  specially  describes  it  as  "  desolate  and  waste."  It  is  a 
long  narrow  village,  built  of  brown  stone,  approached  by  a 
steep  ascent  from  Keighley  or  Hebden  bridge.  The  street  is 
so  steep  that  one  can  understand  it  must  have  been  only 
recently  that  wheeled  carriages  went  there.  Indeed,  there  is  a 
legend  that  when  the  first  carriage  came  to  Haworth  the 
villagers  brought  out  hay  to  feed  it,  under  the  idea  that  it  was 
an  animal !  Such  was  the  parish  in  which  Grimshaw  set  up 
the  standard  of  the  cross.  A  less  promising  field  can  hardly 
be  imagined. 

Grimshaw  began  his  work  at  Haworth  after  a  manner  very 
different  from  his  beginning  at  Todmorden.  He  commenced 
preaching  to  his  wild  and  rough  parishioners  the  gospel  of 
Christ  in  the  plainest  and  most  familiar  manner,  and  followed 
up  his  preaching  by  house  to  house  visitation.  His  preaching 
was  not  confined  to  the  walls  of  the  church.  Wherever  he 
could  get  people  together,  whether  in  a  room,  a  barn,  a  field,  a 
quarry,  or  by  the  roadside,  he  was  ready  to  preach.  His  visit- 
ing was  not  a  mere  going  from  family  to  family  to  gossip  about 
temporal  matters,  sickness,  and  children.  Wherever  he  went 
he  took  his  Master  with  him,  and  spoke  plainly  to  people  about 
their  souls.     In  this  kind  of  work  his  whole  life  was  spent  at 

m»  8 


114  GRIMSHA  WS  MODE  OF  A  CTION. 

Haworth.  Preaching  publicly  and  privately  repentance  to- 
ward God,  and  faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  after  the 
manner  of  St  Paul,  was  his  one  employment  throughout  the 
whole  twenty-one  years  of  his  ministry.  He  himself  describes 
his  mode  of  action  in  the  following  letter  : — 

"  The  method  which  I,  the  least  and  most  unworthy  of  my 
Lord's  ministers,  take  in  my  parish,  is  this:  I  preach  the  gospel 
— glad  tidings  of  salvation  to  penitent  sinners  through  faith  in 
Christ's  blood  only — twice  every  Sunday  the  year  round,  save 
when  I  expound  the  Church  Catechism  and  thirty-nine  articles, 
or  read  the  Homilies,  which  in  substance  I  think  my  duty  to 
do  in  some  part  of  the  year  annually,  on  the  Lord's  day  morn- 
ings. I  have  found  this  practice,  I  bless  God,  of  inexpressible 
benefit  to  my  congregation,  which  consists,  especially  in  the 
summer  season,  of  perhaps  ten  or  twelve  hundred  souls,  or,  as 
some  think,  many  more.  We  have  also  prayer,  and  a  chapter 
expounded  every  Lord's  Day  evening.  I  visit  my  parish  in 
twelve  several  places  monthly,  convening  six,  eight,  or  ten 
families  in  each  place,  allowing  any  people  of  the  neighbouring 
parishes  that  please  to  attend  the  exhortation.  This  I  call  my 
monthly  visitation.  I  am  now  entering  into  the  fifth  year  of  it, 
and  wonderfully  has  the  Lord  blessed  it.  The  only  thing  more 
are  our  funeral  expositions  and  exhortations,  and  visiting  our 
societies  in  one  or  other  of  the  three  last  days  of  the  month. 
This  I  purpose,  through  the  grace  of  God,  to  make  my  con- 
stant business  in  my  parish  so  long  as  I  live." 

In  carrying  on  this  kind  of  work,  Grimshaw  gladly  availed 
himself  of  every  help  that  he  could  obtain  from  like-minded 
men.  He  became  acquainted  with  John  Nelson,  the  famous 
Yorkshire  stone-mason,  one  of  the  most  remarkable  lay- 
preachers  whom  Wesley  sent  forth,  and  ft-equently  received 
him  at  Haworth.  He  welcomed  those  few  clergymen  who 
were  of  one  heart  with  himself,  and  seized  every  opportunity  of 
getting  them  to  preach  to  his  people.     Whitefield,  the  two 


EFFECT  OF  HIS  MINISTR  Y.  1 1  5 

Wesleys,  Romaine,  and  Venn,  were  among  those  whom  he 
was  only  too  glad  to  place  in  his  pulpit.  On  such  occasions  ic 
was  no  uncommon  thing  to  leave  the  church  and  preach  in 
the  churchyard,  in  order  to  meet  the  convenience  of  the 
crowds  who  came  together.  When  the  Lord's  Supper  was 
administered  at  such  seasons,  it  was  sometimes  necessary  for 
the  first  congregation  of  coram  anicants  to  retire  from  the 
church  and  give  way  to  others,  until  all  had  partaken  of  the 
ordinance.  In  one  instance,  when  Whitefield  was  present,  the 
numbers  who  came  to  the  Lord's  Table  were  so  great  that  no 
less  than  thirty-five  bottles  of  wine  were  used  ! 

The  effect  produced  by  this  new  and  fervent  style  of  minis- 
tration, as  might  well  be  expected,  was  very  great  indeed.  An 
interest  about  religion  was  aroused  throughout  the  whole  dis- 
trict round  Haworth,  and  multitudes  began  to  think  who  had 
never  thought  before.  Grimshaw  himself  says,  in  a  letter  to 
Dr.  Gillies,  author  of  the  "Historical  Collections:"  "Souls 
were  affected  by  the  word,  brought  to  see  their  lost  estate  by 
nature,  and  to  experience  peace  through  faith  in  the  blood  of 
Jesus.  My  church  began  to  be  crowded,  insomuch  that  many 
were  obliged  to  stand  out  of  doors.  Here,  as  in  many  places, 
it  was  amazing  to  see  and  hear  what  weeping,  roaring,  and 
agony,  many  people  were  seized  with,  at  the  apprehension  of 
their  sinful  state  and  wrath  of  God.  After  a  season  I  joined 
people,  such  as  were  truly  seeking,  or  had  found  the  Lord,  in 
society,  for  meetings  and  exercises.  These  meetings  are  held 
once  a  week,  about  two  hours,  and  are  called  classes,  consist- 
ing of  about  ten  or  twelve  members  each.  We  have  much  of 
Ithe  Lord's  presence  among  them,  and  greatly  in  consequence 
must  such  meetings  conduce  to  Christian  edification.'* 

The  style  of  preaching  which  Grimshaw  adopted  was  pecu- 
liarly well  suited  to  the  rough  and  uneducated  population  w^th 
which  he  had  to  do.  He  was  eminently  a  plain  preacher.  Hw 
first  aim  undoubtedly  was  to  preach  the  whole  truth  as  it  is  in 


1 1 6  HIS  STYLE  OF  PRE  A  CHING. 

Jesus  ;  his  second  was  to  preach  so  as  to  be  understood.  To 
accomplish  this  end  he  was  willing  to  make  many  sacrifices,  to 
crucify  his  natural  taste  as  an  educated  clergyman  who  had  been 
at  Cambridge,  and  to  be  thought  a  fool  by  intellectual  men. 
But  he  cared  nothing  so  long  as  he  could  succeed  in  reaching 
the  hearts  and  consciences  of  his  hearers.  John  Newton,  who 
knew  him  well,  has  left  some  remarks  on  this  characteristic  of 
Grimshaw's  preaching  which  are  well  worth  reading.  He  says : 
"  The  desire  of  usefulness  to  persons  of  the  weakest  capacity, 
or  most  destitute  of  the  advantages  of  education,  influenced  his 
phraseology  in  preaching.  Though  his  abilities  as  a  speaker, 
and  his  fund  of  general  knowledge,  rendered  him  very  compe- 
tent to  stand  before  great  men,  yet,  as  his  stated  hearers  were 
chiefly  of  the  poorer  and  more  unlettered  classes,  he  con- 
descended to  accommodate  himself,  in  the  most  familiar  man- 
ner, to  their  ideas,  and  to  their  modes  of  expression.  Like  the 
apostles,  he  disdained  that  elegance  and  excellence  of  speech 
which  is  admired  by  those  who  seek  entertainment  perhaps  not 
less  than  instruction  from  the  pulpit.  He  rather  chose  to  dehver 
his  sentiments  in  what  he  used  to  term  '  market  language. '  And 
though  the  warmth  of  his  heart  and  the  rapidity  of  his  imagina- 
tion might  sometimes  lead  him  to  clothe  his  thoughts  in  words 
which  even  a  candid  critic  could  not  justify,  yet  the  general 
effect  of  his  plain  manner  was  striking  and  impressive,  suited  to 
make  the  dullest  understand,  and  to  fix  for  a  time  the  attention 
of  the  most  careless.  Frequently  a  sentence  which  a  delicate 
hearer  might  judge  quaint  or  vulgar,  conveyed  an  important 
truth  to  the  ear,  and  fixed  it  on  the  memory  for  years  after  the 
r^st  of  the  sermon  and  the  general  subject  were  forgottea 
Judicious  hearers  could  easily  excuse  some  escapes  of  this 
kind,  and  allow  that,  though  he  had  a  singular  felicity  in  bring- 
ing dowTi  the  great  truths  of  the  gospel  to  a  level  with  the 
meanest  capacity,  he  did  not  degrade  them.  The  solemnity  ol 
his  manner,  the  energy  with  which  he  spoke,  the  spirit  of  lovt 


HIS  EARNESTNESS  OF  MANNER,  II7 

prhich  beamed  in  his  eyes  and  breathed  through  his  addresses, 
were  convincing  proofs  that  he  did  not  trifle  with  his  people.  I 
may  give  my  judgment  on  this  point,  something  in  his  own  way, 
by  quoting  a  plain  and  homely  proverb  which  says,  *  That  is 
the  best  cat  which  catches  the  most  mice. '  His  improprieties, 
if  he  was  justly  chargeable  with  any,  are  very  easily  avoided ; 
but  few  ministers  have  had  equal  success.  But  if  his  language 
was  more  especially  suited  to  the  taste  of  his  unpolished  rustic 
hearers,  his  subject-matter  was  calculated  to  affect  the  hearts  of 
all,  whether  high  or  low,  rich  or  poor,  learned  or  ignorant ;  and 
they  who  refused  to  believe  were  often  compelled  to  tremble. " 

The  manner  in  which  he  conducted  public  worship  at 
Haworth  seems  to  have  been  as  remarkable  as  his  preaching. 
There  was  a  life,  and  fire,  and  reality,  and  earnestness  about  it, 
which  made  it  seem  a  totally  different  thing  from  what  it  was  in 
other  churches.  The  Prayer-Book  seemed  like  a  new  book ; 
and  the  reading-desk  was  almost  as  arresting  to  the  congrega- 
tion as  the  pulpit.  Middleton,  in  his  life  of  him,  says  :  "  In  per- 
formance of  divine  service,  and  especially  at  the  communion,  he 
was  at  times  like  a  man  with  his  feet  on  earth  and  his  soul  in 
heaven.  In  prayer,  before  sermon,  he  would  indeed  '  take  hold 
(as  he  used  to  say)  of  the  very  horns  of  the  altar, '  which,  he 
added,  *  he  could  not,  he  would  not,  let  go  till  God  had  given 
the  blessing. '  And  his  fervency  often  was  such,  and  attended 
with  such  heartfelt  and  melting  expressions,  that  scarcely  a  dry 
eye  was  to  be  seen  in  his  numerous  congregation." 

The  life  which  Grimshaw  lived  appears,  by  the  testimony  of 
all  his  contemporaries,  to  have  been  as  remarkable  as  his 
preaching.  In  the  highest  sense  he  seems  to  have  adorned  the 
doctrine  of  the  gospel,  and  to  have  made  it  beautiful  in  the  eyes 
of  all  around  him.  He  was  not  like  some  of  whom  the  bitter 
remark  has  been  made,  that  when  they  are  in  the  pulpit  it  is  a 
pity  they  ever  get  out  of  it,  and  when  out  of  it,  a  pity  that  they 
should  ever  get  in.     The  same  Christ  that  he  preached  in  the 


1 18  ms  CHARITY  AND  HUMILITY. 

pulpit  was  the  Christ  that  he  endeavoured  to  follow  in  his  daily 
life. 

He  was  a  man  of  rare  diligence  and  self-denial.  None  ever 
worked  harder  than  he  did  in  his  calling,  and  few  worked  so 
hard.  He  seldom  preached  less  than  twenty,  and  often  nearly 
thirty  times  in  a  week.  In  doing  this  he  would  constantly 
travel  scores  of  miles,  content  with  the  humblest  fare  and  the 
roughest  accommodation. 

He  was  a  man  of  rare  charity  and  brotherly  love.  He  loved 
all  who  loved  Christ,  by  whatever  name  they  might  be  called, 
and  he  was  kind  to  every  one  in  temporal  as  well  as  spiritual 
thinp:s.  "  In  fact,"  says  Middleton,  "  his  charity  knew  no 
bound  but  his  circumstances.  As  his  grace  and  faithfulness 
rendered  him  useful  to  all,  so  his  benevolent  liberality  particu- 
larly endeared  him  to  the  poor.  He  frequently  used  to  say,  '  If 
I  shall  die  to-day  I  have  not  a  penny  to  leave  behind  me.  * 
And  yet  he  did  not  quit  the  world  in  debt,  for  he  had  prudence 
as  well  as  grace. " 

He  was  pre-eminently  a  peacemaker.  "  The  animosities  and 
differences  of  men,"  says  Middleton,  "afforded  his  affectionate 
spirit  nothing  but  pain.  No  labour  was  too  great  or  too  long  if 
their  reconciliation  might  be  his  reward.  When  he  has  met  with 
cases  of  uncommon  perseverance  or  obduracy,  he  has  been 
known  to  fall  on  his  knees  before  them,  beseeching  them,  for 
Christ's  sake,  to  love  one  another,  and  offering  to  let  them 
tread  on  his  neck  if  they  would  only  be  at  peace  among  them- 
selves." 

He  was,  above  all,  a  man  of  rare  humility.  Few  gifted  men, 
perhaps,  ever  thought  so  meanly  of  themselves,  or  were  so  truly 
ready  in  honour  to  prefer  others.  "  What  have  we  to  bos'St  of?" 
he  said.  "What  have  we  that  we  have  not  received  1  tittXy 
by  grace  we  are  saved.  When  I  die  I  shall  then  have  my 
greatest  grief  and  my  greatest  joy, — my  greatest  grief  that  I 
have  done  so  little  for  Jesus,  and  my  greatest  joy  that  Jesus  has 


HIS  MINISTERIAL  SUCCESS.  II9 

done  so  mudi  for  me.     My  last  words  shall  be,  Here  goes  an 

unprofitable  servant/'* 

That  such  a  man  as  Grimshaw  should  soon  obtain  immense 
influence  in  Haworth  is  nothing  more  than  we  might  expect. 
Preaching  as  he  did  and  living  as  he  did,  we  can  well  under- 
stand that  he  produced  a  mighty  impression  on  his  wild  parish- 
ioners. Sin  was  checked,  Sabbath-breaking  became  unfashion- 
able, immorality  was  greatly  restrained.  Like  John  the  Baptist 
in  the  wilderness,  he  shook  the  little  corner  of  Yorkshire  where 
he  was  placed,  and  stirred  men's  minds  to  the  very  bottom. 
Hundreds  learned  to  fear  hell  who  did  not  really  love  heaven. 
Scores  were  restrained  from  sin  though  they  were  not  converted 
to  God.    .  . 

But  this  was  not  all.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Grimshaw 
was  the  rneans  of  true  conversion  to  many  souls.  Year  after 
year  the  Holy  Ghost  applied  his  sermons  to  the  hearts  and  con- 
sciences of  .not  a  few  of  his  hearers,  and  added  to  the  true 
Church  of  Christ  such  as  should  be  saved.  In  one  single  year, 
after  burying  eighteen ' persons,  he  said  that  "he  had  great 
reason  to  believe  that  sixteen .  of  them  were  entered  into  the 
kingdom  of  God. " 

"Not  long  before  his  death,"  says  one  of  his  biographers, 
"  he  stood  with  the  Rev.  John  Newton  upon  a  hill  near 
Haworth  surveying  the  romantic  prospect.  He  then  said  that 
at  the  time  he  first  came  into  that  part  of  the  country  he  might 
have  gone  half  a  day's  journey  on  horseback  toward  the  east, 
west,  north,  and  south,  without  meeting  one  truly  serious  person, 
or  even  hearing  of  one.  But  now,  through  the  blessing  of  God 
upon  his  labours,  he  could  tell  of  several  hundreds  of  persons 
who  attended  his  ministry,  and  were  devout  communicants  with 
him  at  the  Lord's  Table ;  and  of  nearly  all  the  last-named  he 
could  say  that  he  was  as  well  acquainted  with  their  several 
temptations,  trials,  and  mercies,  both  personal  and  domestic,  as 
if  he  had  lived  in  their  families." 


l»0  BECOMES  AN  EVANGELIST. 

The  extra-parochial  labours  which  Grimshaw  undertook,  and 
the  persecutions  which  they  entailed  upon  him,  his  early  death, 
and  some  account  of  his  few  literary  remains,  are  subjects  of  so 
much  interest  that  I  must  defer  them  to  another  chapter. 


CHAPTER  IL 

Eztra-Parochial  Labotir  in  Yorkshire,  Lancashire,  and  Cheshire — The  Nature  of  this 
Labour  Explained  and  Defended — Persecution  at  Colne — The  Archbishop  of  York's 
Visit  to  Haworth — His  Love  to  the  Articles  and  Homilies — His  Last  Illness,  Dying 
Sayings,  Death,  and  Funeral. 

The  religious  condition  of  England  at  this  time  was 
so  deplorably  bad,  that  a  man  like  Grimshaw  was  not  likely  to 
confine  his  labours  to  his  own  parish.  Led  by  the  force 
of  circumstances,  he  soon  began  to  preach  outside  his  pa- 
rochial boundaries,  and  finally  "  did  the  work  of  an  evan- 
gelist" throughout  the  whole  region  within  fifty  miles  of 
Haworth. 

The  circumstances  which  led  Grimshaw  into  this  course  of 
action  are  soon  explained.  Hundreds  of  his  regular  hearers  at 
Haworth  were  not  his  parishioners,  and  came  together  from 
distant  places.  Once  taught  of  God  to  know  the  value  of  the 
gospel,  they  went  out  of  their  own  parishes  to  get  the  spiritual 
food  which  they  could  not  find  at  home.  It  was  only  natural 
that  these  people  should  feel  for  their  families  and  neighbours, 
and  desire  that  they  might  hear  what  had  done  good  to  them- 
selves. They  asked  Grimshaw  to  come  and  preach  at  their 
houses,  and  represented  to  him  the  ignorance  and  spiritual 
destitution  of  all  around  their  own  homes.  They  entreated  hira 
to  come  and  tell  their  friends  and  relatives  the  same  things  he 
was  every  week  telling  his  congregation  at  Haworth.  They 
told  him  that  souls  were  perishing  for  lack  of  knowledge,  un- 
shepherded,  uncared  for,  and  untaught,  and  promised  him  a 
'learty  welcome  if  he  would  "  come  over**  his  parish  boundaries 


VISITS  THE  ADJACENT  COUNTRY,  121 

and  "help"  them.  h\  Deals  like  these,  we  can  well  believe, 
were  not  made  in  vain.  In  a  short  time  these  extra-parochial 
labours  became  a  regular  and  systematic  business.  The  voice 
of  the  incumbent  of  Haworth  was  soon  heard  in  many  other 
places  beside  his  parish-church,  and  for  many  years  he  was 
known  throughout  Yorkshire,  Lancashire,  Cheshire,  and  North 
Derbyshire,  as  the  apostle  and  preacher  of  the  district. 

It  would  be  interesting  to  name  all  the  places  which  Grim 
shaw  was  in  the  habit  of  visiting  as  an  evangelist,  but  it  is 
impossible  to  do  so.  No  accurate  record  remains  of  the  extent 
of  his  labours,  and  he  left  no  journal  behind  him.  It  is  known, 
however,  that  in  Yorkshire  he  used  to  preach  at  Leeds,  Halifax, 
Bradford,  Manningham,  Todmorden,  Birstal,  Keighley,  Otley, 
Bingley,  Bramley,  Heptonstall,  Luddenden,  and  Osmotherley. 
In  Lancashire,  he  used  to  visit  Manchester,  Bolton,  Rochdale, 
Colne,  Padiham,  Holme,  Bacop,  and  Rossendale.  In  Cheshire, 
we  find  him  at  Stockport,  Tarvin,  and  Rostheme  ;  and  in  Derby- 
shire at  Mellor.  These  places  are  probably  not  a  tenth  part  of 
those  he  visited,  but  they  are  places  specially  mentioned  by  his 
biographers. 

In  all  these  places  the  people  who  valued  such  preaching  as 
Grimshaw's  were  banded  together  in  societies,  aad  generally 
under  the  direction  of  one  man.  The  incumbent  of  a  large 
parish  like  Haworth,  of  course,  could  only  leave  his  own  work 
for  a  short  time,  and  visit  distant  preaching-stations  at  long 
intervals.  Between  his  visits,  the  societies  were  necessarily  left 
very  much  to  themselves  and  their  local  leaders.  Conference 
with  these  leaders,  receiving  reports  from  them  of  the  spiritual 
condition  of  the  societies,  and  arranging  with  them  for  break- 
ing up  new  ground  as  well  as  keeping  old  ground  in  cultivation, 
made  no  small  part  of  Grimshaw's  extra-parochial  work.  To 
these  leaders  of  societies  was  left  the  provision  of  rooms,  or 
bams,  or  convenient  fields  for  preaching,  and  the  collection  of 
money   to  defray  expenses.     Thus,  when   the   incumbent  of 


laa  ANECDOTE  OF  ALICE  CROSS. 

Haworth,  or  some  like-minded  friend,  paid  his  periodical  visit, 
he  had  nothing  to  do  but  to  preach. 

The  managers  or  leaders  of  these  societies,  scattered  about 
Yorkshire,  Lancashire,  and  Cheshire,  were  seldom  above  the 
middle  class,  and  frequently  no  more  than  intelligent  small 
farmers.  There  is  no  evidence  that  Grimshaw's  ministry  ever  had 
much  effect  upon  the  upper  ranks,  or  indeed  was  ever  brought 
to  bear  upon  them.  But  none  but  an  ignorant  man  will  ever 
think  the  worse  of  it  on  that  account.  To  get  hold  of  the  lower 
middle  and  lower  classes  of  society,  and  enlist  them  in  the  ser- 
vice of  Christ,  is  at  this  day  one  of  the  greatest  problems  the 
Churches  have  to  solve.  If  Grimshaw  succeeded  in  doing  this, 
it  is  enough  to  prove  that  he  was  "no  common  man.  A  church  is 
never  in  so  healthy  a  state  as  it  is  when  "  the  common  people 
hear  gladly. " 

Let  the  following  extract  from  Hardy's  "  Life  of  Grimshaw" 
supply  an  instance  of  the  sort  of  people  that  Grimshaw  got  hold 
of  in  his  itinerant  labours  outside  his  own  parish  : — "  At  Booth 
Bank,  in  the  parish  of  Rostherne,  Cheshire,  Grimshaw's  services 
used  to  be  held  in  the  house  of  John  and  Alice  Cross.  Alice  was 
a  woman  of  great  spirit  and  intrepidity,  and  a  heroine  in  Christ's 
service.  Her  husband  was  a  quiet  sober  man,  but  for  some 
time  after  her  conversion  he  remained  in  histoid  ways.  When 
going  out  to  worship,  with  her  straw  hat  in  one  hand  and  the 
door-latch  in  the  other,  she  would  say  to  him,  *  John  Cross,  wilt 
thou  go  to  heaven  with  me  %  If  thou  wilt  not,  I  am  determined 
not  to  go  to  hell  with  thee  !'  John  yielded  at  last ;  a  pulpit 
was  fixed  in  the  largest  room  of  their  house  at  Rostherne,  and 
the  messengers  of  God  were  made  welcome  to  their  fare  and 
fcirm.  When  beggars  came  to  the  door  she  told  them  of  the 
riches  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus,  and,  kneeling  by  their  side,  com- 
mended them  to  the  grace  of  God,  and  then  sent  them  away,  grate- 
ful for  her  charity,  and  impressed  by  her  earnestness  in  seeking 
^eir  souls'  good.     Nor  were  the  more  honourable  of  the  land 


GRIM  SUA  W'S  LABOURS  DEFENDED.  "  1 23 

beyond  the  reach  of  her  reproofs.  On  one  occasion  she  stopped 
the  Cheshire  hunt,  when  passing  her  house,  and  addressed  the 
horsemen,  especially  Lord  Stamford  and  Sir  Harry  Main- 
waring,  who  listened  to  her  warning  and  rode  on.  When  the 
expected  preacher  did  not  come,  though  the  pulpit  was  not 
occupied,  the  congregation  did  not  go  empty  away.  Alice 
Cross  herself,  in  her  simple  and  earnest  way,  dealt  out  the 
bread  of  life. "  Such  were  the  kind  of  households  that  Grim- 
shaw  used  to  make  centres  of  operation  in  his  extra-parochial 
evangelism.  Such  were  the  kind  of  people  who  valued  his 
labours,  welcomed  his  visits,  and  proved  the  value  of  his  preach- 
ing, in  the  district  within  fifty  miles  of  Haworth. 

No  doubt  these  extra-parochial  labours  of  Grimshaw  will 
appear  wrong  to  many  in  the  present  day.  Many  are  such 
excessive  lovers  of  parochial  order  that  they  feel  scandalized  at 
the  idea  of  an  incumbent  preaching  in  other  men's  parishes. 
Such  people  would  do  well  to  remember  the  condition  of 
England  in  Grimshaw's  times.  There  were  scores  and  hundreds 
of  parishes  all  over  the  north  of  England  in  which  there  was  no 
resident  clergyman  ;  and  the  services  of  the  Church,  even  when 
performed,  were  cold,  brief,  and  utterly  unprofitable.  To  tell 
us  that  Grimshaw  ought  to  have  left  the  inhabitants  of  these 
parishes  to  perish  in  ignorance  rather  than  commit  a  breach  of 
parochial  order,  is  simply  ridiculous.  Men  might  as  well  tell 
us  that  we  must  not  knock  at  a  person's  door  and  awaken  him, 
when  his  house  is  on  fire,  because  we  have  not  the  honour  of 
his  acquaintance  !  The  parochial  system  of  the  Church  of 
England  was  designed  for  the  good  of  men's  souls.  It  was 
never  intended  to  ruin  souls  by  cutting  them  off  from  the  sound 
of  the  gospel. 

The  thing  that  is  really  wonderful,  in  the  history  of  Grim- 
shaw's extra-parochial  labours,  is  the  non-interference  of  eccle- 
siastical authorities.  How  the  incumbent  of  Haworth  can 
have  gone  on  for  fifteen  or  twenty  years  preaching  all  over 


124  *'MAD  GRIMSHAW.'' 

Lancashire.  Yorkshire,  and  Cheshire,  without  being  stopped  by 
bishops  and  archdeacons,  is  very  hard  to  understand  !  Let  us 
charitably  hope  that  many  felt  in  their  secret  hearts  that  some 
such  evangehsm  as  his  was  absolutely  needed.  The  enor- 
mous size  of  such  parishes  as  Bradford  and  Halifax  in  York- 
shire— asWhalley,  Rochdale,  and  Prestwich,  in  Lancashire — as 
Stockport,  Astbury,  and  j'restbury,  in  Cheshire,  made  it  utterly 
impossible  for  the  clergymen  of  the  mother-churches  to  provide 
means  of  grace  for  their  parishioners.  We  may  well  believe, 
that  to  arrest  such  labours  as  Grimshaw's  in  these  unwieldy 
parishes  would  have  been  so  unwise,  that  even  bishops  and 
archdeacons  of  the  last  century  shrank  from  attempting  it.  Be 
the  cause  what  it  may,  it  is  a  most  curious  fact  that  Grimshaw 
was  never  entirely  stopped  in  his  extra-parochial  ministry.  The 
hand  of  the  Lord  was  with  him,  and  he  carried  on  his  itinerant 
work,  as  well  as  his  regular  services  at  Haworth,  up  to  his 
death. 

But  though  Grimshaw  was  never  actually  stopped,  we  must 
not  suppose  that  he  escaped  persecution.  The  prince  of  this 
world  will  never  willingly  part  with  any  of  his  subjects.  He 
will  stir  up  opposition  against  any  one  who  tries  to  pull  down 
his  kingdom.  The  incumbent  of  Haworth  was  often  obliged  to 
face  abuse  and  personal  violence  of  a  kind  that  we  can  hardly 
imagine  in  the  present  day.  "  Mad  Grimshaw"  was  the  name 
given  to  him  by  many  throughout  the  district  in  which  he 
laboured.  None  opposed  him  more  than  some  of  the  clergy. 
With  the  true  dog-in-the-manger  spirit,  they  neither  did  good 
themselves  nor  liked  any  one  else  to  do  it  for  them. 

The  most  violent  of  Grimshaw's  opponents  was  the  Rev.  George 
White,  perpetual  curate  of  Colne  and  Marsden,  in  Lanca- 
shire. This  worthy  commenced  his  attack  by  publishing  a  sermon 
against  the  Methodists,  preached  at  his  two  churches  in  August 
1748.  In  this  sermon  he  charged  Grimshaw  and  all  his  fellow- 
labourers  with  being  "  authors  of  confusion  ;  open  destroyers  of 


PERSECUTION  A  T  COLNL.  1 25 

the  public  peace ;  flying  in  the  face  of  the  very  Church  they 
craftily  pretend  to  follow  \  occasioning  many  bold  insurrections, 
which  threaten  our  spiritual  government ;  schismatical  rebels 
against  the  best  of  Churches  ;  authors  of  a  further  breach  in  ouj- 
unhappy  divisions ;  contemners  of  the  great  command,  '  Six 
days  shalt  thou  labour ;'  defiers  of  all  laws,  civil  and  ecclesias- 
tical ;  professed  disrespecters  of  learning  and  education  ;  causing 
a  visible  ruin  of  trade  and  manufactures  ;  and,  in  short,  promo- 
ters of  a  shameful  progress  of  enthusiasm  and  confusion  not  to 
be  paralleled  in  any  other  Christian  dominion." 

Not  content  with  preaching  this  stuff  and  nonsense,  White 
proceeded  to  stir  up  a  mob  to  stop  the  preaching  of  Grimshaw 
and  his  companions  by  force  and  violence.  He  actually  issued 
a  proclamation,  in  order  to  collect  a  mob,  in  the  following 
words  :  "  Notice  is  hereby  given,  that  if  any  men  be  mindful  to 
enlist  into  His  Majesty's  service,  under  the  command  of  the 
Rev.  George  White,  commander-in-chief,  and  John  Banister, 
lieutenant-general  of  His  Majesty's  forces,  for  the  defence  of  the 
Church  of  England,  and  the  support  of  the  manufactures  in  and 
about  Colne,  both  which  are  now  in  danger,  let  them  now  repair 
to  the  cross,  when  each  man  shall  have  a  pint  of  ale  for  advance, 
and  other  proper  encouragements. " 

The  consequence  of  this  outrageous  proclamation  was  just 
what  might  have  been  expected,  "  Lewd  fellows  of  the  baser 
sort"  are  always  ready  to  make  a  riot  against  religion,  as  they 
were  in  the  days  of  St.  Paul.  When  Grimshaw  and  John 
Wesley  went  to  Colne  to  preach,  on  the  24th  of  August  1748, 
they  were  attacked  by  an  overwhelming  mob  of  drunken  people 
armed  with  clubs,  and  dragged  before  White  like  thieves  and 
malefactors.  After  a  vain  endeavour  to  extort  a  promise  from 
them  that  they  would  desist  from  coming  to  preach  at  Colne, 
they  were  allowed  to  leave  the  house.  As  soon  as  they  got 
outside,  "  the  mob  closed  in  upon  them,  and  tossed  them  about 
with  great  violence,  throwing  Grimshaw  down,  and  covering 


126  REPLY  TO  WHITE'S  SERMON. 

both  of  them  with  mire,  there  being  no  one  to  come  to  their 
rescue.  The  people  who  had  assembled  to  hear  the  word  of 
God  were  treated  with  even  greater  cruelty.  They  had  to  run 
for  their  lives,  amidst  showers  of  dirt  and  stones,  and  no  regard 
was  paid  to  either  sex  or  age.  Some  were  trampled  in  the  mire ; 
others  dragged  by  the  hair ;  and  many  were  unmercifully  beaten 
with  clubs.  One  was  forced  to  leap  from  a  rock,  ten  or  twelve 
feet  high,  into  the  river,  to  prevent  being  thrown  in  headlong. 
When  he  crawled  out,  wet  and  bruised,  they  swore  they  would 
throw  him  in  again,  and  were  with  difficulty  prevented  from 
executing  their  threat.  White,  well-pleased,  was  watching  his 
mad  followers  all  this  time  without  a  word  to  stay  them.  "* 

None  of  these  things  moved  the  lion-hearted  incumbent  of 
Haworth.  Not  long  afterwards  he  went  to  Colne  again,  and 
was  again  shamefully  treated — pelted  with  mud  and  dirt,  and 
dragged  violently  along  the  road.  In  the  following  year,  1749, 
he  published  a  long  reply  to  White's  sermon,  extending  to 
eighty-six  pages,  in  which  he  powerfully  and  triumphantly  re- 
futed White's  charges.t 

Persecution  of  this  rough  kind  was  not  the  only  hard  raeasuic 
that  Grimshaw  had  to  undergo  in  consequence  of  his  extra-pa- 
rochial evangelism.  He  was  more  than  once  called  to  account 
for  his  conduct  by  the  Archbishop  of  York,  and  seems  to  hare 
escaped  suspension  or  deprivation  in  a  most  marvellous  manner. 

On  one  occasion  "  a  charge  was  preferred  against  him  for 
having  preached  in  a  Hcensed  meeting-house  at  Leeds.  Had 
proof  been  forthcoming  to  substantiate  the  charge,  he  would 
have  been  dismissed  from  his  cure  for  irregularity.     Though  no 

*  See  Hardy's  "  Life  of  Grimshaw,"  p.  82. 

1  White  must  have  been  a  very  extreme  specimen  of  thf  cweless,  worthless  clergyman 
of  the  last  century.  He  was  educated  at  Douay  College  for  the  Romish  priesthood,  and 
after  his  recantation  was  recommended  for  preferment  to  the  vicar  of  Whalley,  by  Arch- 
bishop Potter.  He  frequently  abandoned  his  parish  for  weeks  together  ;  and,  on  one  occa- 
lion,  is  said  to  have  read  the  funeral-service  more  than  twenty  times  in  a  single  night  over 
the  dead  bodies  that  had  been  buried  in  his  absence  !  He  died  at  Langroyd  in  1751 ;  and 
it  is  pleasant  to  record,  that  he  is  said  to  have  sent  for  Grimshaw  on  his  death-bed,  and 
expressed  his  sorrow  for  the  part  he  took  in  the  riotous  proceedings  above  described. 


CALLED  TO  ACCOUNT  BY  THE  ARCHBISHOP.       127 

act  of  delinquency  was  proved,  he  was  obliged  to  promise  the 
archbishop  that  he  would  not  preach  in  any  place  that  had  been 
licensed  for  the  worship  of  dissenters ;  while  he  repeated  his 
detennination  to  continue  preaching  abroad  so  long  as  there 
were  souls  for  whom  no  one  seemed  to  care.  On  another  occasion, 
when  accused  of  preaching  out  of  his  own  parish,  he  was  asked 
by  the  archbishop,  *  How  many  communicants  had  you  when 
you  first  came  to  Haworth  ?'  He  answered,  *  Twelve,  my  lord. ' 
'  How  many  have  you  now  V  was  the  next  question.  The  reply 
was,  '  In  the  winter,  from  three  to  four  hundred  ;  and  in  the 
summer,  near  twelve  hundred.*  On  hearing  this  the  arch- 
bishop expressed  his  approbation,  and  said,  '  We  cannot  find 
fault  with  Mr.  Grimshaw  when  he  is  instrumental  in  bringing  so 
many  persons  to  the  Lord's  Table. '  "* 

On  another  occasion,  "  when  complaint  was  made  to  the 
archbishop  of  his  ramblings  and  intrusions  into  other  men's 
folds,  the  archbishop  announced  his  intention  to  hold  a  confir- 
mation-service in  Mr.  Grimshaw's  church,  and  to  have  an  inter- 
view with  him  on  the  occasion.  On  the  day  appointed  they 
met  in  Haworth  vestry,  and  while  the  clergy  and  laity  were 
assembling  in  great  numbers,  the  following  conversation  took 
place  :  *  I  have  heard, '  said  the  archbishop,  '  many  extraordi- 
nary, reports  respecting  your  conduct,  Mr.  Grimshaw.  It  has 
been  stated  to  me  that  you  not  only  preach  in  private  houses 
in  your  parish,  but  also  travel  up  and  down,  and  preach  where 
you  have  a  mind,  without  consulting  your  diocesan  or  the  clergy 
into  whose  parishes  you  obtrude  your  labours ;  and  that  your 
discourses  are  very  loose  ;  that,  in  fact,  you  can  and  do  preach 
about  anything.  That  I  may  be  able  to  judge  for  myself,  both 
of  your  doctrine  and  manner  of  stating  it,  I  give  you  notice  that 
I  shall  expect  you  to  preach  before  me  and  the  clergy  present 
in  two  hours  hence,  and  from  the  text  which  I  am  about  to 
name. '     After  repeating  the  text,  the  archtsshop  added  ;  *  Sir, 

*  Hardy's  "  Life  of  Grimshaw,"  p.  039. 


IlS  EFFECT  OF  GRIMSITA  WS  SERMON. 

you  may  now  retire,  and  make  what  preparation  you  can  while 
I  confirm  the  young  people.*  —  'My  lord/  said  Grimshaw, 
looking  out  of  the  vestry-door  into  the  church,  '  see  what  multi- 
tudes of  people  are  here  !  Why  should  the  order  of  the  service 
be  reversed,  and  the  congregation  kept  out  of  the  sermon  for 
two  hours?*  Send  a  clergyman  to  read  prayers,  and  I  will 
begin  immediately. '  After  prayers  Mr.  Grimshaw  ascended  the 
pulpit,  and  began  an  extempore  prayer  for  the  archbishop,  the 
people,  and  the  young  persons  about  to  be  confirmed,  and 
wrestled  with  God  for  his  assistance  and  blessing,  until  the 
congregation,  the  clergy,  and  the  archbishop  himself,  were 
moved  to  tears.  After  the  service  was  over,  the  clergy  gathered 
round  the  archbishop  to  ascertain  what  proceedings  he  intended 
to  adopt  in  order  to  restrain  the  preacher  from  such  rash  and  ex- 
temporaneous expositions  of  God's  Word.  To  their  surprise  the 
archbishop,  taking  Mr.  Grimshaw  by  the  hand,  said  with  a 
tremulous  voice,  '  I  would  to  God  that  all  the  clergy  in  my 
diocese  were  like  this  good  man  !'  Mr.  Grimshaw  afterwards 
observed  to  a  party  of  friends  who  came  to  take  tea  with  him 
that  evening,  '  I  did  expect  to  be  turned  out  of  my  parish  on 
this  occasion  ;  but  if  I  had  been  I  would  have  joined  my  friend 
John  Wesley,  taken  my  saddle-bags  and  gone  to  one  of  his 
poorest  circuits. '  "t 

It  is  impossible  to  turn  from  this  part  of  Grimshaw's  history 
without  feehngs  of  righteous  indignation.  There  is  something 
revolting  in  the  idea  of  a  holy  and  zealous  minister  of  the 
Church  of  England  being  persecuted  for  overstepping  the  bounds 
of  ecclesiastical  etiquette,  while  hundreds  of  clergymen  were  let 
alone  and  undisturbed  whose  lives  and  doctrine  were  beneath 
contempt.  All  over  England  country  livings  were  often  filled 
by  hunting,  shooting,  gambling,  drinking,  card-playing,  swear- 


*  It  is  evident  that  the  conibrniatioii  described  in  this  story  must  have  been  held  on  a 
Lkinday. 

t  From  Strachan's  "  Life  of  Rev.  G.  Lowe,"  a  Methodist  nuaister. 


HIS  LOVE  TO  THE  ARTICLES  AND  HOMiLIES.      129 

ing,  ignorant  clergymen,  who  cared  neither  for  law  nor  gospel, 
and  utterly  neglected  their  parishes.  When  they  did  preach, 
they  either  preached  to  empty  benches,  or  else  "  the  hungry 
sheep  looked  up  and  were  not  fed."  And  yet  these  men  lived 
under  their  own  vines  and  fig-trees  enjoying  great  quietness, 
untouched  by  bishops,  eating  the  fat  of  the  land,  and  calling 
themselves  the  true  supporters  of  the  Church  !  But  the  moment 
a  man  rose  up  like  Grimshaw,  who  gloried  in  the  Articles, 
Liturgy,  and  Homilies,  and  preached  the  Gospel,  he  was  treated 
like  a  felon  and  malefactor,  and  his  name  cast  out  as  evil  ! 
Truly  God's  patience  with  the  Church  of  England  a  hundred 
years  ago  was  something  marvellous.  Marvellous  that  he  did 
not  remove  our  candlestick  altogether  !  Marvellous  that  he 
granted  her  such  a  revival,  and  raised  up  so  many  burning  and 
shining  lights  amongst  her  ministers  ! 

To  talk  of  Grimshaw  being  no  Churchman  and  being  an 
enemy  to  the  Church  of  England,  is  preposterous  and  absurd. 
If  attachment  to  the  standards  and  formularies  of  his  own 
communion  is  a  mark  of  Churchman  ship,  he  was  a  Churchman 
in  the  truest  sense.  No  doubt  he  loved  all  who  loved  Jesus 
Christ  in  sincerity.  No  doubt  he  made  nothing  of  parochial 
boundaries  when  souls  were  perishing,  and  other  clergymen 
neglected  their  duties.  But  to  the  day  of  his  death  he  was  a 
steady  adherent  of  the  Church  in  which  he  had  been  ordained, 
ased  her  services  devoutly  and  regularly,  and  did  more  for  her 
real  interests  than  any  clergyman  in  the  north  of  England.  One 
of  his  biographers  specially  mentions  "  that  he  greatly  admired 
the  Homilies,  and  regarded  their  disuse,  and  neglect  of  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles,  as  the  chief  occasion  of  all  the  mischief  to 
the  Church,  believing  it  probable  that  if  they  had  been  con- 
stantly read  Methodism  would  never  have  appeared.  '  He 
said  once,  that  an  old  clergyman  of  his  acquaintance,  being 
asked  by  his  curate  if  he  might  read  the  Homilies  in  the  pulpit, 

answered  "  No  !  for  if  you  should  do  so,  the  whole  congregation 
a96)  9 


13©  HIS  LAST  ILLNESS. 

would  turn  Methodists."  On  another  occasion  he  wrote  to 
Charles  Wesley  the  following  remarkable  words :  "  I  see  no- 
thing so  materially  amiss  in  the  liturgy,  or  the  Church  consti- 
tution, as  to  disturb  my  conscience  or  justify  my  separation. 
No  :  where  shall  I  go  to  mend  myself?  I  believe  the  Church 
of  England  to  be  the  soundest,  purest,  and  most  apostolical 
national  Christian  Church  in  the  world.  Therefore  I  can  in 
good  conscience  (as  I  am  determined,  God  willing,  to  do)  live 
and  die  in  her."  Yet  this  is  the  man  who,  some  dare  to  tell  us, 
was  no  Churchman  ! 

Grimshaw's  holy  and  useful  career  was  brought  to  an  end  on 
the  7th  of  April  1763.  He  died  in  his  own  house  at  Haworth 
of  a  putrid  fever,  in  the  fifty-fifth  year  of  his  age  and  the  twenty- 
first  of  his  ministry  at  Haworth.  The  fever  of  which  he  died 
had  been  raging  in  his  parish  from  the  beginning  of  the  year, 
and  had  proved  fatal  to  many  of  the  inhabitants.  "  On  its  first 
breaking  out,"  says  Hardy,  "  he  had  a  presentiment  that  it 
would  prove  fatal  to  some  member  of  his  family,  and  had 
exhorted  all  to  be  ready."  When  visiting  a  parishioner  he 
caught  the  prevailing  epidemic,  and  at  once  predicted  that  he 
would  not  recover. 

To  the  physician  who  attended  him  "  he  expressed  in  strong 
terms  the  humiliating  feelings  he  had  on  a  retrospect  of  his 
whole  life,  and  how  disproportionate,  defective,  and  defiled  his 
best  services  had  been,  compared  with  the  obligation  under 
which  he  felt  himself,  and  the  importance  of  the  cause  in  which 
he  had  been  engaged ;  and  that  he  hoped,  if  the  Lord  should 
prolong  his  days  and  raise  him  up,  to  be  much  more  active  and 
iiligent" 

To  his  friend  and  brother  in  the  gospel,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Ing- 
ham, he  said  :  "  My  last  enemy  is  come  !  The  signs  of  death 
are  upon  me.  But  I  am  not  afraid.  No !  no !  Blessed  be 
God,  my  hope  is  sure,  and  I  am  in  his  hands."  Afterwards, 
when  Mr.  Ingham  prayed  for  the  lengthening  of  his  life,  that  he 


B URIED  IN  L UDDENDEN  CHURCH.  1 3 1 

might  yet  be  useful  to  Christ's  cause,  he  said,  "  Alas  !  what 
have  my  wretched  services  been  ?  I  have  now  need  to  cry,  at 
the  end  of  my  unprofitable  course,  God  be  merciful  to  me  a 
sinner!"  At  another  time,  laying  his  hand  on  his  heart,  he 
said,  "  I  am  quite  exhausted  ;  but  I  shall  soon  be  at  home — for 
ever  with  the  Lord^a  poor  miserable  sinner  redeemed  by  his 
blood." 

His  valued  fellow-labourer,  the  Rev.  Henry  Venn,  then  vicar 
of  Huddersfield,  came  over  to  see  him  from  Huddersfield,  and 
asked  him  how  he  felt.  To  him  he  replied,  "  Never  had  I  such 
a  visit  from  God  since  I  first  knew  him.  I  am  as  happy 
as  I  can  be  on  earth,  and  as  sure  of  glory  as  if  I  were  in  it." 
After  this,  finding  that  his  disease  was  peculiarly  infectious 
and  dangerous,  he  requested  his  friends  to  visit  him  as  little 
as  possible.  But  his  peace  and  hope  are  reported  to  have 
continued  unshaken  to  the  end.  As  he  lived  so  he  died, 
rejoicing  in  Chri^st  Jesus,  and  putting  no  confidence  in  the 
flesh." 

He  was  buried,  by  his  own  desire,  by  the  side  of  his  first  wife 
in  the  chancel  of  Luddenden  Church,  in  the  valley  of  the 
Calder,  not  far  from  Haworth.  Like  Joseph,  "  he  gave  com- 
mandment concerning  his  bones."  He  had  drawn  up  full  and 
particular  directions  about  his  funeral  long  before  he  was  taken 
ill,  and  these  directions  were  carefully  followed.  The  number 
of  attendants  was  to  be  twenty,  "  religious  or  relative  friends, 
or  both."  He  would  have  only  a  plain,  poor  man's  burial  suit, 
and  a  plain,  poor  man's  coffin  of  elm  boards,  with  the  words  on 
the  cover,  "  To  me  to  live  is  Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain."  All 
the  way  to  the  church  suitable  verses  were  to  be  sung,  in 
various  selected  metres  and  tunes,  out  of  the  23rd,  39th,  and 
91st  Psalms,  and  also  suitable  hymns.  One  of  the  attendants, 
at  least,  was  to  be  a  Methodist  preacher,  and  he  was  to  preach 
a  funeral  sermon  from  the  text  on  his  coffin  (Phil.  i.  21).  The 
Methodist  preacher  selected  for  the  occasion  was  his  old  friend 


13*  CRIMSHAWS  FAMILY. 

and  fellow-labourer,  Henry  Venn.*  The  church  at  Luddenden 
was  too  small  to  contain  the  immense  congregation  which 
assembled,  and  the  preacher  had  to  take  his  position  in  the 
grave-yard.  "  Tradition  reports,"  says  Hardy,  "  that  Venn's 
voice  rose  like  the  swell  of  a  full-toned  bell  as  he  told  forth  the 
virtues  of  his  departed  friend,  and  exhorted  the  people  to  follow 
him  as  he  had  followed  Christ."  Never,  indeed,  had  any  man 
a,  more  honourable  burial.  Like  Stephen,  "  devout  men  carried 
hi»"  to  his  grave,  and  made  great  lamentation  over  him."  He 
had,  as  Venn  well  remarks,  "  what  is  more  ennobling  than  all 
the  pomp  of  solemn  dirges,  or  of  a  royal  funeral.  He  was  fol- 
lowed to  the  tomb  by  a  great  multitude,  who  beheld  his  corpse 
with  affectionate  sighs  and  many  tears,  and  who  cannot  still 
hear  his  much-loved  name  without  weeping  for  the  guide  of 
their  souls." 

Grimshaw  was  twice  married,  and  twice  left  a  widower.  His 
first  wife  was  Sarah,  daughter  of  John  Lockwood  of  Ewood 
Hall.  She  had  been  twice  married  before,  first  to  William  Sut- 
cliffe  of  Scaitcliffe  Hall,  and  secondly  to  John  Ramsden,  both 
of  whom  died  without  children.  He  was  evidently  greatly 
attached  to  his  first  wife,  and  her  death,  on  the  ist  of  No- 
vember 1739,  made  a  deep  impression  on  him.  His  second 
wife  was  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Henry  Cockcroft  of  Mayroyd, 
near  Hebden  Bridge.  I  can  find  no  record  of  the  date  of  her 
death. 

Grimshaw  had  only  two  children,  both  by  his  first  wife,  a  son 
and  a  daughter.  His  daughter  died  when  only  twelve  year* 
old,  when  at  school  at  Kingswood,  near  Bristol.  Charles 
Wesley  says  that  "  she  departed  in  the  Lord."  His  son  sur- 
vived his  father  only  three  years,  and  died  childless.  During 
his  father's  lifetime  he  had  been  careless  and  intemperate,  and 
the  cause  of  great  grief     When  he  visited  him  on  his  death- 

♦  All  evangelical  clergymen  of  the  Church  of  England  used  to  be 
called  "Methodists"  at  this  time. 


HIS  LITERARY  REMAINS.  \%\ 

bed,  Grimshaw  told  him  to  take  care  what  he  did,  as  he  wai 
not  fit  to  die.  To  him  also  he  used  the  remarkable  words  that 
"  his  body  felt  like  a  boiling  vessel,  but  his  soul  was  as  happy 
as  it  could  be  made  by  God."  John  Grimshaw  died  at  Ewood 
on  the  17th  May  1766,  and  by  God's  great  mercy  there  was 
hope  in  his  death.  His  father's  dying  words  perhaps  sunk  into 
his  heart,  and  at  any  rate  his  father's  many  prayers  for  him 
were  heard  After  his  father's  death,  he  used  to  ride  a  horse 
which  formerly  belonged  to  him,  and  one  day  meeting  an 
inhabitant  of  Haworth,  the  man  remarked,  "  I  see  you  are 
riding  the  old  parson's  horse." — "Yes,"  was  the  reply;  "once 
he  carried  a  great  saint,  and  now  he  carries  a  great  sinner." 
Long  before  his  death  young  Grimshaw  had  given  clear  evi- 
dence of  repentance  unto  salvation,  and  found  pardon  and 
peace  in  Christ ;  and  a  Httle  time  before  he  died,  Jie  was  heard 
to  exclaim,  "  What  will  my  old  father  say  when  he  sees  I  have 
got  to  heaven  1" 


CHAPTER  III. 

Literary  Remains — Covenaat  and  Summary  of  Belief — Letter  to  Christians  in  London- 
Anecdotes  and  Traditions — Influence  in  his  Parish — Haworth  Races  Stopped — Mode 
of  Discovering  False  Professors — Peculiarities  in  his  Conduct  of  Divine  Service — Tes- 
timony of  Romaine,  Venn,  and  Newton. 

In  order  to  form  a  correct  estimate  of  a  great  man's  character, 
there  are  two  sources  of  information  to  which  we  should  always 
turn,  if  possible,  in  addition  to  the  events  of  his  hfe.  The 
hterary  remains  he  leaves  behind  him  form  one  of  these  sources; 
the  anecdotes  handed  down  about  him  by  contemporaries  form 
another.  From  both  these  sources  I  will  endeavour  to  supply 
the  reader  of  these  pages  with  some  further  infonnation  about 
William  Grimshaw. 

The  literary  remains  of  a  man  like  Grimshaw  are  necessarily 
few  and  scanty.  It  could  hardly  be  otherwise.  A  clergyman 
who  was  constantly  preaching  twenty  or  thirty  times  a-week, 


1 34  GRIMSHA  W'S  CO VENANT. 

and  carrying  on  a  system  of  aggressive  evangelism  all  over 
Yorkshire,  Lancashire,  and  Cheshire,  was  not  likely  to  have 
much  time  for  writing.  In  fact,  his  "  Reply  to  White,"  already 
referred  to,  is  the  only  formal  publication  that  he  ever  put 
forth.  He  says  himself  in  the  Reply,  "  I  have  as  httle  leisure 
for  writing  as  for  anything  I  do."  There  are,  however,  a  few 
valuable  relics  of  his  thoughts  still  extant,  which  are  useful,  as 
indicating  his  turn  of  mind,  and  will  probably  be  thought  inter- 
esting by  all  Christian  readers. 

His  covenant  with  God,  given  at  length  by  Hardy,  is  a 
very  striking  and  interesting  document,  though  too  long  for  the 
pages  of  a  memoir  like  this.*  The  folio wifig  disconnected 
extracts  will  give  some  idea  of  it : — 

'*  Eternal  and  unchangeable  Jehovah  !  thou  great  Creator  of  heaven 
and  earth,  and  adorable  Lord  of  angels  and  men  !  I  desire  with  the  deepest 
humiliation  and  abasement  of  soul  to  fall  down  at  this  time  in  thine  awful 
presence,  and  earnestly  pray  that  thou  wilt  penetrate  my  heart  with  a  suit- 
able sense  of  thine  unutterable  and  inconceivable  glories."  .  .  . 

"  I  know  that  through  Jesus,  the  Son  of  thy  love,  thou  condescendest  to 
visit  sinful  mortals,  and  to  allow  their  approach  to  thee  and  this  covenant 
intercourse  with  thee.  Nay,  I  know  that  the  scheme  and  plan  are  entirely 
thine  own,  and  that  thou  hast  graciously  sent  to  propose  it  unto  me,  as 
none  untaught  by  thee  could  have  been  able  to  join  it,  or  inclined  to  embrace 
it,  even  wnen  actually  proposed."  .  .  . 

"  To  thee,  therefore,  do  I  now  come,  invited  by  thy  love,  and  trusting 
his  righteousness  alone,  laying  myself  at  thy  feet  with  shame  and  confusion 
of  face,  and  smiting  on  my  breast,  saying  with  the  publican,  God  be  merci- 
ful to  me  a  sinner  !  I  acknowledge,  O  Lord,  that  I  have  been  a  great  trans- 
gressor. My  sins  have  reached  unto  heaven,  and  mine  iniquities  have  been 
lifted  up  unto  the  skies.  My  base  corruptions  and  lusts  have  numberless 
ways  wrought  to  bring  forth  fruit  unto  death,  and  if  thou  wert  extreme  to 
mark  what  I  have  done  amiss,  I  could  never  abide  it.  But  thou  hast  gra- 
ciously called  me  to  return  unto  thee,  though  I  am  a  prodigal  son  and  a 
backsliding  child.  Behold,  therefore,  I  solemnly  come  before  thee.  O  my 
Lord,  I  am  convinced  of  my  sin  and  folly.  Thou  knowest,  O  Lord,  I 
solemnly  covenanted  with  thee  in  the  year  1 738.    And  now,  once  more  and 

*  In  giving  this  covenant  to  my  readers,  I  would  carefully  abstain  from  saying  that  such 
covenants  ought  always  to  be  made,  or  to  be  pressed  on  all  Christians.  So  far  from  that, 
I  think  them  likely  to  do  harm  to  some  minds.  Let  every  one  use  his  liberty.  He  that 
finds  it  good  to  make  a  covenant,  let  him  make  it.  But  let  him  not  condeniB  his  aeigi^ 
hour  who  makes  none. 


GRIMSHAW'S  COVENANT.  135 

for  ever,  I  most  solemnly  give  up,  devote,  and  resign  all  I  am,  spirit,  soul, 
and  body  to  thee,  and  to  thy  pleasure  and  commands  in  Christ  Jesus  my 
Saviour,  this  4th  of  December  1752  ;  sensible  of  my  vileness  and  unworthi- 
ness,  but  yet  sensible  that  I  am  thy  pardoned,  justified,  and  regenerated 
child  in  the  spirit  and  blood  of  my  dear  and  precious  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ, 
by  clear  experience."  .  .  . 

"  Glory  be  to  thee,  O  my  Triune  God  !  Permit  me  to  repeat  and  renew 
my  covenant  with  thee.  I  desire  and  resolve  to  be  wholly  and  for  ever 
thine.  Blessed  God,  I  most  solemnly  surrender  myself  unto  thee.  Hear, 
O  heaven,  and  give  ear,  O  earth !  I  avouch  this  day  the  Lord  to  be  my 
God,  Father,  Saviour,  and  portion  for  ever.  I  am  one  of  his  covenant 
children  for  ever.  Record,  O  eternal  Lord,  in  thy  book  of  remembrance 
that  henceforth  I  am  thine  for  ever.  From  this  day  I  solemnly  renounce  all 
former  lords — world,  flesh,  and  devil— in  thy  name.  No  more,  directly  or 
indirectly,  will  I  obey  them.  I  renounced  them  many  years  ago,  and  I 
renounce  them  for  ever.  This  day  I  give  up  myself  to  thee,  a  living  sacri- 
fice, holy  and  acceptable  unto  thee  ;  which  I  know  is  my  reasonable  service. 
To  thee  I  consecrate  all  my  worldly  possessions  ;  in  thy  service  I  desire  and 
purpose  to  spend  all  my  time,  desiring  thee  to  teach  me  to  spend  every 
moment  of  it  to  thy  glory  and  the  setting  forth  of  thy  praise,  in  every  station 
and  relation  of  life  I  am  now  or  may  hereafter  be  in.  And  I  earnestly  pray 
that  whatever  influence  thou  mayest  in  any  wise  give  me  over  others,  thou 
wouldest  give  me  strength  and  courage  to  exert  it  to  the  utmost  to  thy  glory, 
resolving  not  only  myself  to  do  it,  but  that  all  others,  so  far  as  I  can  ration- 
ally and  properly  influence  them,  shall  serve  the  Lord.  In  that  cause  would 
I,  O  Lord,  steadfastly  persevere  to  my  last  breath,  steadfastly  praying  that 
every  day  of  my  life  may  supply  the  defects  and  correct  the  irregularities  of 
the  former ;  and  that  by  divine  grace  I  may  be  enabled  not  only  in  that 
happy  way  to  hold  on,  but  to  grow  daily  more  active  in  it.  Nor  do  I  only 
consecrate  all  I  have  to  thy  service,  but  I  also  most  humbly  resign  and  sub- 
mit to  thy  holy  and  sovereign  will  all  that  I  have.  I  leave,  O  Lord,  to  thy 
management  and  direction  all  I  possess  and  all  I  wish,  and  set  every  enjoy- 
ment and  interest  before  thee  to  be  disposed  of  as  thou  pleasest.  Continue 
or  remove  what  thou  hast  given  me,  bestow  or  refuse  what  I  imagine  I  want, 
as  thou  seest  good ;  and  though  I  dare  not  say  I  will  never  repine,  yet  I 
hope  I  may  say  I  will  labour  not  only  to  submit  but  to  acquiesce  ;  not  only 
to  bear  thy  heaviest  afllictions  on  me,  but  to  consent  to  them  and  praise 
thee  for  them  ;  contentedly  resolving,  in  all  thy  appointments,  my  will  into 
thine  ;  esteeming  myself  as  nothing,  and  thee,  O  God,  as  the  great  Eternal 
All,  whose  word  shall  determine,  and  whose  power  shall  order  all  things  in 
the  world."  .  .  . 

"Dispose  my  affairs,  O  God,  in  a  manner  which  may  be  wholly  subser- 
vient to  thy  glory  and  my  own  true  happiness ;  and  when  I  have  aone, 
borne,  and  endured  thy  will  upon  earth,  call  me  home  at  what  time  and  in 
what  manner  thou  pleasest.  Only  grant  that  in  my  dying  moments,  and 
the  near  approach  of  eternity,  I  may  remember  this  my  engagement  to  thee, 


€$6  HIS  SUMMARY  OF  BELIEF. 

and  may  employ  my  latest  breath  in  thy  service  ;  and  do  thou,  when  thou 
seest  me  in  the  agonies  of  death,  remember  this  coTenrmt  too,  though  I 
should  be  incapable  of  recollecting  it.  Look  down  upon  me,  O  Lord,  thy 
languishing,  dying  child  ;  place  thine  everlasting  arms  underneath  my  head  ; 
put  strength  and  confidence  into  my  departing  spirit,  and  receive  it  to  the 
embrace  of  thine  everlasting  love."  .  .  . 

"And  when  I  am  thus  numbered  with  the  dead  and  all  the  interests  of 
mortality  are  over  with  me  for  ever,  if  this  solemn  memorial  should  fall  into 
the  hands  of  any  surviving  friends  or  relations,  may  it  be  the  means  of  mak- 
ing serious  impressions  on  their  minds,  and  may  they  read  it  not  only  as  mji 
language,  but  as  their  own,  and  learn  to  fear  the  Lord  my  God,  and  with 
rae  to  put  their  trust  under  the  shadow  of  his  vrings  for  time  and  for 
eternity."  .  .  . 

"I  solemnly  subscribe  this  dedication  of  myself  to  the  ever-blessed  Triune 
God,  in  the  presence  of  angels  and  all  invisible  spectators,  this  fourth  day  ol 
December  1752.  William  Grimshaw." 

The  next  document  from  which  I  will  supply  some  extracts, 
is  a  Creed  or  Summary  of  Belief  which  Grimshaw  sent  to 
Romaine  in  December  1762,  only  four  months  before  his  deatli. 
It  is  to  be  found  at  length  in  Middleton's  Biographia  Evangelica. 
This  creed  is  a  regular  systematic  statement  of  Grimshaws 
icligious  views,  drawn  out  into  twenty-six  heads,  and  is  of  course 
far  too  Kung  to  be  inserted  in  this  place.  A  few  paragraphs  are 
ail  that  \.  can  give  the  reader.  They  prove,  at  any  rate,  that, 
howevei  much  Grimshaw  may  have  agreed  with  Wesley  on  many 
points,  \  e  certainly  was  not  an  Arminian.* 

'*  XXII. — I  believe  it  is  by  the  Spirit  we  are  enabled,  not  to  eradicate  (as 
some  affirm),  for  that  is  absurd,  but  to  subjugate  the  old  man ;  to  suppress, 
not  extirj5ate,  the  exorbitancies  of  our  fleshly  appetites ;  to  resist  and  over- 
come the  world  and  the  devil,  and  to  grow  in  grace  gradually,  not  suddenly, 
unto  the  perfect  and  eternal  day.  This  is  all  I  acknowledge  or  know  to  be 
Christian  perfection  or  sanctification. 

"  xxiii. — I  believe  that  all  true  believers  will  be  daily  tempted  by  the 
flesh,  as  well  as  by  the  world  and  the  devil,  even  to  their  lives'  end ;  and 
they  will  feel  an  inclination,  more  or  less,  to  comply,  yea  and  do  comply 

•  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  in  one  of  his  letters,  on  another  occasion,  Grimshaw  uses 
the  following  language :  ' '  My  perfection  is  to  see  my  own  imperfection ;  my  comfort,  10 
feel  that  I  have  the  world,  flesh,  and  devil  to  overthrnw  through  th«  Soirit  and  merits  u( 
my  dear  Saviour ;  and  my  desire  and  hope  is  to  love  God  with  all  mv  heart,  mind,  soul, 
end  strength,  to  the  last  gasp  of  life.  This  is  my  perfection.  I  know  no  other,  expectinc 
to  lay  down  my  life  and  my  sword  together." 


LETTER  TO  CHRISTIANS  IN  LONDON.  137 

therewith.  So  that  the  best  believer,  if  he  knows  what  he  says,  and  $a)ri 
the  truth,  is  but  a  sinner  at  the  best. 

"xxiv. — I  believe  that  their  minds  are  incessantly  subject  to  a  thousand 
impertinent,  unprofitable  thoughts,  even  amidst  their  reading,  meditation, 
and  prayers ;  that  all  their  religious  exercises  are  deficient ;  that  all  theii 
graces,  how  eminent  soever,  are  imperfect;  that  God  sees  iniquity  in  all 
their  holy  things ;  and  though  it  be  granted  that  they  love  God  with  all 
their  hearts,  yet  they  must  continually  pray  with  the  psalmist,  *  Enter  nor 
into  judgment  with  thy  servant' 

"XXV. — But  I  believe  that  Jesus  is  a  full  as  well  as  a  free  Saviour,  the 
same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  He  alone  is  not  only  the  believer's 
wisdom  and  righteousness,  but  his  sanctification  and  redemption;  and  in 
him  is  a  fountain  ever  open  for  sin  and  uncleanness  unto  the  last  breath  ci 
his  life.     This  is  my  daily,  necessary  privilege,  my  relief,  and  my  comfort 

**xxvi. — I  believe,  lastly,  that  God  is  faithful  and  unchangeable;  that  all 
his  promises  are  yea  and  amen ;  that  he  never,  never  will,  as  the  apostle 
says,  leave  me;  will  never,  never,  never  forsake  me;  but  that  I,  and  all 
that  believe,  love,  and  fear  him,  shall  receive  the  end  of  our  faith — the  sal- 
vation of  our  souls. 

'*  Here  is  the  sum  and  substance  of  my  creed.  It  is  at  least  wh:.£  I  pre- 
sume to  call  my  form  of  sound  words.  In  it  I  can  truly  say  I  have  no 
respect  to  men  or  books,  ancient  or  modem,  but  to  the  Holy  Scriptures, 
reason,  and  experience.  According  to  this  creed  hitherto  I  have,  and  1 
hope  hereafter  to  proceed  in  ail  my  preaching,  debasing  man  and  exalting 
iny  dear  Lord  in  all  his  offices." 

The  last  specimen  that  I  will  give  of  Grimsliaw's  remains  is 
a  letter  addressed  by  him  to  certain  Christians  in  London.  It 
is  dated  January  9,  1760,  and  is  to  be  foimd  in  Hardy's  Life. 

'*  Grace,  mercy,  and  peace  be  to  you  from  God  our  Father  and  from  oui 
Lord  Jesus.  It  is  well  with  some  sorts  of  people  that  you  have  had,  or  now 
have  to  do  with.  It  is  well  with  those  of  you  in  Christ  who  are  gone  to  God ; 
it  is  well  with  those  of  you  in  Christ  who  are  not  gone  to  God ;  it  is  well 
with  those  of  you  who  earnestly  long  to  be  in  Christ,  tliat  they  may  go  to 
God;  it  is  well  for  those  who  neither  desire  to  be  in  Christ  nor  to  go  to 
God;  and  it  is  only  bad  with  such  who,  being  out  of  Christ,  are  gone  to 
the  devil.     Them  it  is  best  to  let  alone,  and  say  no  more  about  them. 

"  It  is  well  with  those  of  you  who,  being  in  Christ,  are  gone  to  God. 
You,  ministers  and  members  of  Christ,  have  no  more  doubt  or  pain  about 
them.  They  are  now  and  for  ever  out  of  the  reach  of  the  worlds  flesh,  and 
deviL  They  are  gone  where  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and  where 
the  weary  are  at  rest  They  are  sweetly  reposing  in  Abraham's  bosom. 
They  dwell  in  His  presence  who  hath  redeemed  them,  where  there  is  fulness 
of  joy  and  pleasure  for  evermore.  They  are  waiting  the  joyful  morning  of 
the  resurrection,  when  their  vile  bodies  shall  be  made  like  unto  his  glorious 


138  LETTER  TO  CHRISTIANS  IN  LONDON. 

body,  shall  be  re-united  to  the  soul,  shall  receive  the  joyful  sentence,  and 
inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  them  from  the  foundation  of  the  world. 

**  It  is  well  also  with  those  of  you  who  are  in  Christ  though  not  gone  to 
God.  You  live  next  door  to  them.  Heaven  is  begun  with  you  too.  The 
kingdom  of  God  is  within  you  ;  you  feel  it.  This  is  a  kingdom  of  righteous- 
ness, and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  begun  in  grace,  and  shall 
crminate  in  glory.  Yea,  it  is  Christ  within  you  the  hope  of  glory.  Christ 
ihe  rock,  the  foundation  laid  in  your  hearts,  hope  in  the  middle,  and  glory 
at  the  top.  Christ,  hope,  glory  !  Christ,  hope,  glory !  You  are  washed  in 
the  blood  of  the  Lamb ;  justified,  sanctified,  and  shall  shortly  be  glorified. 
Yea,  your  lives  are  already  hid  with  Christ  in  God.  You  have  your  con- 
versation already  in  heaven.  Already  you  sit  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ 
Jesus.  What  heavenly  sentences  are  these !  What  can  come  nearer  Para- 
dise? Bless  the  Lord,  O  ye  happy  souls,  and  let  all  that  is  within  you  bless 
his  holy  name.  Sing  unto  the  Lord  as  long  as  you  live,  and  praise  your 
God  while  you  have  your  being.  And  how  long  will  that  be  ?  Through 
the  endless  ages  of  a  glorious  eternity  ! 

"  It  is  well  with  all  those  of  you  who  truly  desire  to  be  in  Christ,  that  you 
may  go  to  God.  Surely  he  owns  you.  Your  desires  are  from  him ;  yoa  shall 
enjoy  his  favour.  By-and-by  you  shall  have  peace  with  him  through  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Go  forth  by  the  footsteps  of  the  flock,  and  feed  by  the 
Shepherd's  tents.  Be  constant  in  every  means  of  grace.  He  will  be  found 
of  them  that  diligently  seek  him.  Blessed  are  they  that  mourn,  for  they 
shall  be  comforted.  Though  your  sins  be  never  so  many,  never  so  monstrous, 
all  shall  be  forgiven.  He  will  have  mercy  upon  you,  and  will  abundantly 
pardon.  For  where  sin  hath  abounded,  grace  doth  much  more  abound. 
He  who  hath  begun  this  good  work  in  you  will  accomplish  it  to  your  eternal 
good  and  his  eternal  glory.  Therefore  doubt  not,  fear  not ;  a  broken  and 
a  contrite  heart  God  will  not  despise.  The  deeper  is  your  sorrow,  the 
nearer  is  your  joy.  Your  extremity  is  God's  opportunity.  It  is  usually 
darkest  just  before  daybreak.  You  shall  shortly  find  pardon,  peace,  and 
plenteous  redemption,  and  at  last  rejoice  in  the  common  and  glorious  sal- 
vation of  his  saints. 

*'  And  lastly,  it  is  well  for  you  who  neither  truly  desire  to  be  in  Christ, 
nor  to  go  to  God.  For  it  is  well  for  you  that  you  are  not  in  hell.  It  is 
well  your  day  of  grace  is  not  utterly  past  Behold,  now  is  your  accepted 
time;  behold,  now  is  your  day  of  salvation  I  Oli  that  you  may  employ  the 
remainder  of  it  in  working  out  yo  ir  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling.  Now 
is  faith  to  be  had — saving  faith.  Now  you  may  be  washed  from  all  sins  in 
the  Redeemer's  blood,  justified,  sanctified,  and  prepared  for  heaven.  Take, 
I  beseech  you,  the  time,  while  the  time  is.  You  have  now  the  means  of 
grace  to  use,  the  ordinances  of  God  to  enjoy,  his  Word  to  read  and  hear, 
his  ministers  to  instruct  you,  and  his  members  to  converse  with.  You  know 
»ot  what  a  day  may  bring  forth.  You  may  die  suddenly.  As  death  learet 
you  judgment  will  find  you.  And  if  you  should  die  as  you  are — out  of 
Christ,  Toid  of  true  faith,  unregenerate,  unsanctified — fire  and  brimstone, 


VALUE  OF  LITERARY  REMAINS.  139 

storm  and  tempest,  God  will  rain  upon  you,  as  your  eternal,  intolerable 
portion  to  drink, 

"  Suffer  me,  therefore,  thus  far,  one  and  all  of  you.  God's  glory  and  your 
everlasting  salvation  is  all  I  aim  at.  What  I  look  for  in  return  from  you  is, 
I  confess,  much  more  than  I  deserve — your  prayers." 


It  would  be  easy  to  supply  many  more  extracts  than  these. 
But  I  forbear.  I  make  no  apology,  however,  for  the  length  of 
those  I  have  already  given.  The  reader  will  probably  agree 
with  me  that  they  are  in  themselves  full  of  interesting  matter. 
But  this  is  not  all.  They  possess  an  additional  value  as  sup- 
plying a  most  graphic  picture  of  Grimshaw's  mode  of  expressing 
himself,  and  of  the  topics  on  which  his  mind  was  constantly 
dwelling.  In  fact,  they  furnish  a  pretty  correct  idea  of  what 
the  good  man's  preaching  must  have  been.  He  evidently 
wrote  as  he  thought  and  spoke.  His  remains  are  just  the  over- 
flowings of  a  heart  full  of  Scripture,  full  of  Christ,  full  of  deep 
thoughts  on  the  sinfulness  of  sin,  the  value  of  the  soul,  the  need 
of  repentance  and  faith,  the  happiness  of  holy  living,  tlie  im- 
portance of  a  world  to  come.  Let  a  man  analyze  Grimshaw's 
remains  carefully  and  thoughtfully,  and  I  suspect  he  will  have 
a  very  fair  conception  of  the  style  in  which  Grimshaw  used  to 
preach. 

The  anecdotes  and  traditions  that  have  been  handed  down 
about  the  good  Incumbent  of  Haworth  are  very  many  and  very 
curious.  All  of  them,  perhaps,  are  not  true.  Some,  perhaps, 
are  greatly  exaggerated.  Many,  however,  after  making  every 
fair  deduction,  are  undoubtedly  credible  and  genuine.  I  will 
mention  some  of  them. 

The  influence  he  gradually  obtained  in  his  own  parish  was 
very  great.  Even  those  who  were  not  converted  looked  up  to 
him  and  feared  him.  John  Newton  says  :  "  One  Sunday,  as  a 
man  was  passing  through  Haworth  on  horseback,  his  horse  lost 
a  shoe.  He  applied  to  a  blacksmith  to  put  it  on.  To  his 
surprise,  the  man  told  him  he  could  not  shoe  a  horse  on  the 


14©  ANECDOTES  AND  TRADITIONS. 

Lord's  day  without  the  ministers  leave.  They  went  togethci 
tQ  Mr.  Grimshaw,  and  the  man  satisfying  him  that  he  was  really 
in  haste,  going  for  a  doctor,  Mr.  Grimshaw  permitted  the  black- 
smith to  shoe  the  horse,  which  otherwise  he  would  not  have 
done  for  double  pay." 

"  It  was  his  frequent  custom,"  adds  Newton,  "  to  leave  the 
church  at  Haworth  while  ihe  psalm  before  sermon  was  singing, 
to  see  if  any  were  absent  Irom  worship  and  idling  their  time  in 
the  churchyard,  the  street,  or  the  ale-houses  ;  and  many  of  those 
whom  he  so  found  he  would  drive  into  church  before  him.*  A 
friend  of  mine,  passing  a  public-house  in  Haworth  on  a  Lord's 
day  morning,  saw  several  persons  making  their  escape  out  of  it, 
some  jumping  out  of  the  lower  windows,  and  some  over  a  low 
wall.  He  was  at  first  alarmed,  fearing  the  house  was  on  fire ; 
but  upon  inquiring  what  was  the  cause  of  the  commotion,  he 
was  only  told  that  they  saw  the  parson  coming.  They  were 
more  afraid  of  the  parson  than  of  a  justice  of  the  peace.  His 
reproof  was  so  authoritative,  and  yet  so  mild  and  friendly,  that 
the  stoutest  sinner  could  not  stand  before  him. 

"  He  endeavoured  likewise  to  suppress  the  common  custom 
of  walking  in  the  fields  on  the  Lord's  day  in  summer,  instead 
of  coming  to  God's  house.  He  not  only  bore  his  testimony 
against  it  from  the  pulpit,  but  went  into  the  fields  in  person  to 
detect  and  reprove  the  delinquents.  There  was  a  spot  at  some 
distance  from  the  village,  where  many  young  people  used  to 
assemble  on  Sundays  in  spite  of  all  his  warnings.  At  last  he 
disguised  himself  one  evening,  that  he  might  not  be  known  till 
he  was  near  enough  to  discover  who  they  were.  He  then  threw 
off  his  disguise,  and  charged  them  not  to  move.  He  took  down 
all  their  names  with  his  pencil,  and  ordered  them  to  attend  on 


•  According  to  Hardy,  there  is  a  tradition  in  Haworth  that  Grimshaw  sometitnec 
a  j.tick  or  horse-whip  on  these  occasions,  and  that  he  occasionally  gave  out  the  i  igth  Psalm 
to  be  sung  during  his  absence  from  church,  in  order  that  he  might  have  the  longer  tim* 
foi   prosecuting  his  search  after  the  disorderly.    These  stories,  however,  are  probably 

apucrvphal. 


HAWORTH  RACES  STOPPED.  14» 

hira  on  a  day  and  hour  which  he  appointed.  They  all  waited 
on  him  accordingly,  as  punctually  as  if  they  had  been  served 
with  a  warrant.  When  they  came,  he  led  them  into  a  private 
room,  when,  after  forming  them  into  a  circle  and  commanding 
them  to  kneel  down,  he  kneeled  down  in  the  midst  of  them, 
and  prayed  for  them  with  much  earnestness  for  a  considerable 
time.  After  rising  from  his  knees,  he  gave  them  a  close  and 
affecting  lecture.  He  never  had  occasion  to  repeat  this 
friendly  discipline.  He  entirely  broke  the  objectionable  cus- 
tom." 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  and  well-authenticated  anecdotes 
about  Grimshaw  is  in  connection  with  Haworth  races.  These 
races  were  an  annual  festival  got  up  by  the  innkeepers,  and  a 
great  occasion  of  drunkenness,  riot,  profligacy,  and  confusion. 
For  some  time  Grimshaw  attempted  in  vain  to  stop  these  races. 
"  At  last,"  says  John  Newton,  "  unable  to  prevail  with  men,  he 
addressed  himself  to  God.  For  some  time  before  the  races  he 
made  it  a  subject  of  fervent  prayer  that  the  Lord  would  be 
pleased  to  interfere,  and  to  stop  these  evil  proceedings  in  his 
own  way.  When  the  race-time  came,  the  people  assembled  as 
usual,  but  they  were  soon  dispersed.  Before  the  races  could 
begin,  dark  clouds  covered  the  sky,  and  such  excessively  heavy 
rain  fell,  that  the  people  could  not  remain  on  the  ground,  and 
it  continued  to  rain  incessantly  during  the  three  days  appointed 
for  the  races.  This  event  was  much  spoken  of  at  Haworth. 
It  became  a  sort  of  proverbial  saying  among  the  people  that  old 
Grimshaw  put  a  stop  to  the  races  by  his  prayers.  And  it 
proved  an  efifectual  stop.  There  were  no  more  races  at 
Haworth." 

"  He  was  particularly  watchful,"  says  Newton,  "  over  those  of 
his  flock  who  made  an  open  profession  of  religion,  to  see  if 
they  adorned  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour  in  all  things,  and 
maintained  a  consistent  character ;  and  he  was  very  severe  in 
hifi  censures   if  he  found  any  of  his  communicants  guilty  of 


142  GRJMSHAW'S  DISGUISE, 

wrong  practices.  When  he  suspected  hypocrisy,  he  sometimes 
took  such  strange  methods  to  detect  it,  as  perhaps  few  men  but 
himself  would  have  thought  of.  He  had  a  suspicion  of  the 
sincerity  of  some  of  his  hearers,  who  made  great  pretence  to 
religion.  In  order  to  find  out  one  of  them,  he  disguised  him- 
self as  a  poor  man,  and  applied  to  him  for  relief  and  a  lodging  ; 
)  and,  behold  !  this  person  who  wished  to  be  thought  veiy  good 
and  charitable,  treated  him  with  some  abuse. — He  then  went  to 
another  house,  to  a  woman  who  was  almost  blind.  He  touched 
her  gently  with  his  stick,  and  went  on  doing  it  until  she,  sup- 
posing it  was  done  by  some  children  in  the  neighbourhood, 
began  not  only  to  threaten  but  to  swear  at  them.  Thus  he  was 
confirmed  in  his  apprehensions." 

"  At  a  cottage  prayer-meeting,"  says  Hardy,  "  some  of  Grim- 
shaw's  people  had  to  endure  much  annoyance  and  persecution, 
and  for  a  long  time  no  one  could  discover  who  the  delinquents 
were.  At  last  the  incumbent  came  to  their  assistance  and 
solved  the  mystery.  He  put  on  an  old  woman's  cap,  and  peeped 
stealthily  from  behind  the  door,  and  then  appeared  to  grow 
rather  bolder,  while  he  quietly  made  the  observation  he  wished. 
He  found  there  was  a  set  of  rude  boys  who  only  came  to  make 
sport  and  annoy  others.  They  soon  began  to  make  fun  of 
the  old  woman  (as  she  seemed  to  be),  and  defied  her  with  mocks 
and  menaces.  In  this  way  they  were  all  found  out  and  brought 
to  justice,  and  then  the  persecution  ceased." 

He  carried  his  humiUty  and  simplicity  of  living  to  such  an 
extent  that  he  thought  anything  good  enough  for  himself,  if  he 
could  only  show  a  Christian  brother  kindness  and  hospitality. 
A  godly  friend  who  once  came  to  stay  a  night  with  him,  was 
horrified  on  looking  out  of  his  bedroom  window  in  the  morn- 
ing, to  see  Grimshaw  with  his  own  hands  cleaning  his  guest's 
boots  !  Nor  was  this  all.  On  coming  down  stairs  he  dis- 
covered that  Grimshaw  had  actually  given  up  his  own  bedroom 
for  his  accommodation,  and  had  spent  the  night  in  a  hay-loft  I 


HIS  PECULIARITIES.  1 43 

His  ways  in  his  own  parish,  as  he  went  about  doing  the  work 
of  a  pastor,  were  very  peculiar.  Hardy  says,  "  When  he  met 
with  any  one  in  the  lanes  he  would  enter  into  familiar  conver- 
sation with  them,  and  generally  asked  if  they  were  accustomed 
to  pray.  When  they  answered  in  the  affirmative,  and  he  doubted 
their  sincerity,  he  bade  them  kneel  down  and  show  him  how 
they  performed  this  duty.  There  were  sometimes  scenes  by  the 
road-side,  in  consequence,  that  a  stranger  could  not  look  at 
without  a  smile  ;  but  to  the  persons  concerned  these-  inquiries 
were,  in  some  instances,  the  means  of  awakening  concern  about 
their  souls.  The  tradition  of  the  district  is,  that  '  he  would  rive 
them  from  horseback  to  make  them  pray.'  But  he  was  as  ready 
to  do  an  act  of  courtesy  as  to  administer  reproof.  Once  on  his 
way  to  Colne,  he  overtook  an  old  woman,  and  asked  her  where 
she  was  going.  She  replied,  '■  To  hear  Grimshaw.'  He  pitied 
her  many  infirmities  ;  but  she  said  her  heart  was  already  there, 
and  she  would  make  the  body  follow.  Struck  by  her  earnest- 
ness, he  actually  took  her  up  behind  him  on  the  pillion  of  his 
own  horse,  and  thus  enabled  her  to  reach  the  place  without 
further  toil." 

Hardy  adds,  "  Grimshaw  was  not  unmindful  of  himself,  whilst 
watchful  over  the  souls  of  others.  Once  he  had  a  very  fine  cow, 
in  which  he  took  so  much  pride,  that  the  thought  of  her  fol- 
lowed him  into  the  service  of  the  Church,  and  hindered  his 
communion  with  God.  He  determined  that  she  should  no 
longer  ruffle  his  mind,  and  so  announced  her  for  sale.  When  a 
farmer  came  to  look  at  her,  he  asked,  as  usual,  whether  she  had 
any  fault.  To  this  Grimshaw  made  this  quaint  reply, '  Her  fault 
in  my  eyes  will  be  no  fault  to  you ;  she  follows  me  into  my  pulpit' " 

The  things  that  he  did  inside  his  church,  both  in  the  reading- 
desk  and  the  pulpit,  may  certainly  seem  to  us  very  eccentric 
and  strange  in  the  present  day.*     Undoubtedly,  they  are  not 

*  Hardy,  in  his  biography,  gives  an  interesting  description  of  Haworth  Parish  Church, 
vkich,  according  to  him,  is  very  little  altered  since  Gnmshaw's  death.    Among  other  things 


144  PECULIARITIES  IN  HIS  CONDUCT 

examples  for  imitation  ;  and  unless  a  man  is  "  a  Grimshaw,"  he 
has  no  right  to  attempt  them.  Before  condemning  them  too 
strongly,  however,  men  should  call  to  mind  the  times  and  the 
population  with  which  he  had  to  do.  We  are,  in  fact,  dealing 
with  a  man  who  lived  in  the  i8th  century. 

He  was  very  particular  in  enforcing  order  and  devout  be^ 
haviour  among  the  worshippers  in  his  church  at  Haworth. 
Carelessness  and  inattention  were  instantly  observed  and  openly 
rebuked  ;  and  he  would  not  proceed  with  the  service  until  he  savr 
every  person  present  in  the  attitude  of  devotion.  Some  of  his 
hearers  certainly  deserved  great  attention  and  encouragement. 
Not  a  few  came  ten  or  twelve  miles  every  Sunday  to  attend  his 
ministry.  One  John  Madden  of  Bacup  often  walked  to  Ha- 
worth on  the  Sabbath,  and  returned  the  same  evening,  a  distance, 
out  and  home,  of  nearly  forty  miles.* 

In  giving  out  the  hymns  to  be  sung  in  church,  he  sometimes 
took  singular  liberties.  A  valued  friend  of  mine  was  told  by  an 
old  man  in  Haworth  that  he  remembered  his  grandfather  speaking 
of  Grimshaw,  and  telling  the  following  story  : — His  grandfather 
was  in  Haworth  Church,  when  Grimshaw  gave  out  the  well- 
known  hymn  of  Dr.  Watts,  beginning, — 

"  Come,  ye  that  love  the  Lord, 
And  let  your  joys  be  known ; 
Join  in  a  song  with  sweet  accord, 
And  so  surround  the  throne." 

He  said,  that  when  Grimshaw  had  read  the  first  verse,  he  looked 
at  the  people,  and  cried  out,  "  Now,  unconverted  sinners  here 
present,  can  you  sing  that  1 " 

His  sermons  were  seldom  short  when  he  occupied  his  own 
pulpit  at  Haworth.     Indeed,  he  sometimes  preached  for  two 

he  says  :  "Appropriate  inscriptions,  in  various  parts  of  the  church,  remind  the  worship* 
pers  of  their  duty.  Under  the  sounding-board  of  the  pulpit,  in  gilt  letters,  there  is  th« 
sentence,  '  I  determined  not  to  know  anything  save  Jesus  Christ  and  him  crucified.'  His 
favourite  text,  '  To  me  to  live  is  Christ,'  appears  on  the  pulpit,  on  the  brass  chandelier,  and 
sa  a  tablet  with  the  names  of  the  church-officers.  On  the  baptismal  font  is  the  senteac«i 
'  I  indeed  baptise  with  water,  but  he  shall  baptize  with  the  Holy  Ghost'" 
•  Mttkodist  Mai,azuu  iat  1811,  p.  521. 


OF  DIVINE  SERVICE.  145 

hours!  For  this  he  once  made  an  apology  to  John  Newton  : 
"  If  I  were  in  some  places,"  he  said,  "  I  might  not  think  it 
needful  to  speak  so  much.  But  many  of  my  hearers,  who  are 
wicked  and  careless,  are  likewise  very  ignorant  and  slow  of 
apprehension.  If  they  do  not  understand  me,  I  cannot  hope  ta 
do  them  good  ;  and  when  I  think  of  the  uncertainty  of  life, 
that,  perhaps,  it  may  be  the  last  opportunity,  and  that  it  is  no* 
impossible  I  may  never  see  them  again  till  the  great  day,  I  know 
not  how  to  be  expUcit  enough.  I  try  to  set  the  subject  in  a 
variety  of  lights.  I  express  the  same  thoughts  in  different 
words,  and  can  scarcely  tell  how  to  leave  off,  lest  I  should- haver 
omitted  something,  for  want  of  which  my  preaching  and  their 
hearing  should  be  vain." 

His  prayers  after  sermon  must  have  been  sometimes  very 
remarkable.  John  Pawson,  a  well-known  Methodist  preacher, 
said,  in  1803,  that  he  heard  him,  fifty  years  before,  preach  a 
most  comforting  discourse  on  the  words,  "  O  fear  the  Lord,  ye 
his  saints,  for  there  is  no  want  to  them  that  fear  him"  (Ps. 
xxxiv.  9),  in  which  he  spoke  very  strongly  about  God's  faith- 
fulness to  his  promises,  and  said,  "  Before  the  Lord  will  suffer 
his  promise  to  fail,  he  will  lay  aside  his  divinity  and  un-Go(i 
himself."  He  then  offered  the  following  prayer  ;  "  Lord,  dis- 
miss us  with  thy  blessing.  Take  all  these  poor  people  under 
thy  care,  and  bring  them  in  safety  to  their  own  houses,  and  gi\  e 
them  their  supper  when  they  get  home.  But  let  them  not  eat  a 
morsel  till  they  have  said  a  grace.  Then  let  them  eat  and  be 
satisfied,  and  return  thanks  to  thee  when  they  have  done.  Thert 
let  them  kneel  down  and  say  their  prayers  before  they  go  to 
bed.  Let  them  do  this  for  once  at  any  rate,  and  then  thou  wilt 
preserve  them  till  the  morning." 

Though  Grimshaw's  ministry  was  almost  entirely  among  the 
poor  and  lower  middle  classes,  he  was  quite  able  to  take  his 
position  and  speak  wisely  and  shrewdly  in  any  company.  On 
one  occasion  he  was  invited  to  meet  a  nobleman  who  had 

^^'  10 


146  MORE  TALENTS  THAN  GRACE. 

imbibed  infidel  principles,  and  had  resisted  the  efforts  of  two 
eminent  clergymen  to  convince  him  of  his  error.  He  wished 
at  once  to  draw  Grimshaw  into  a  discussion,  but  Grimshaw 
firmly  and  decidedly  declined.  "My  lord,"  he  said,  "  I  do  not 
refuse  to  argue  because  I  have  nothing  to  say,  or  because  I 
fear  for  my  cause.  I  refuse  because  argument  will  do  you  no 
good.  If  you  really  needed  any  information,  I  would  gladly 
assist  you.  But  the  fault  is  not  in  your  head,  but  in  your  heart, 
which  can  only  be  reached  by  a  divine  power.  I  shall  pray  for 
you,  but  I  will  not  dispute  with  you."  The  nobleman  afterwards 
said  that  he  was  more  impressed  by  the  honesty  and  firmness  of 
those  simple  words  than  by  all  the  arguments  he  had  heard. 

"  To  a  lady,"  says  Hardy,  "  with  whom  Grimshaw  was  con- 
versing, he  once  gave  a  striking  reproof  She  was  expressing 
her  admiration  of  a  certain  minister  who  had  more  talents  than 
grace.  '  Madam,'  said  Grimshaw,  '  I  am  glad  you  never  saw 
the  devil.  He  has  greater  talents  than  all  the  ministers  in  the 
world.  I  fear,  if  you  saw  him,  you  would  fall  in  love  with  him, 
as  you  have  so  high  a  regard  for  talents  without  sanctity.  Pray, 
do  not  be  led  away  with  the  sound  of  talents.' " 

Anecdotes  like  these  tell  a  tale  that  ought  not  to  be  over- 
looked. The  subject  of  them  must  surely  have  been  no  ordinary 
man.  When  sayings  and  doings  are  so  carefully  treasured  up 
and  handed  down  from  generation  to  generation,  the  character 
round  which  they  cluster  was  one  of  no  common  mo'Ud.  I  repeat 
the  opinion  that  I  expressed  at  the  beginning  c:  this  biography. 
There  were  not  three  greater  spiritual  heroes  in  England  one 
hundred  years  ago  than  William  Grimshaw. 

I  will  now  conclude  this  paper  with  three  short  extracts  firom 
men  of  approved  characters  in  the  last  century,  which  serve  to 
show  the  high  estimation  in  which  Grimshaw  was  held  by  his 
contemporaries. 

Romaine  said  publicly  in  a  sermon  preached  i?tSt.  Dunstan's 
in  the  West,  shortly  after  Grimshaw's  death.-- 


TESTIMONY  OF  ROMAINE  AND  VENN.  147 

"  Mr.  Grimshaw  was  one  of  the  most  laborious  and  indefati- 
gable ministers  of  Christ  that  I  ever  knew.  For  the  good  of  souls 
he  rejected  all  hopes  of  affluent  fortune,  and  for  the  love  of 
Christ  cheerfully  undertook  difficulties,  dangers,  and  tribula- 
tions. He  preached  Christ  and  Christ  alone  ;  and  God  gave 
him  very  numerous  seals  to  his  ministry.  Himself  hath  told  me 
that  not  fewer  than  1200  were  in  communion  with  him,  most  of 
whom,  in  the  judgment  of  charity,  he  could  not  but  believe  to 
be  one  with  Christ,  When  some  of  his  friends,  in  tenderness 
to  his  health,  would  wish  him  to  spare  himself,  he  would  answer, 
— '  Let  me  labour  now  :  I  shall  have  rest  enough  by-and-by.  I 
cannot  do  enough-  for  Christ,  who  has  done  so  much  for  me.' 
He  was  the  most  humble  walker  with  God  I  ever  met  with  ; 
inasmuch  that  he  could  never  bear  to  hear  any  commendations 
of  his  usefulness,  or  anything  which  belonged  to  him.  His  last 
words  were,  '  Here  goes  an  unprofitable  servant !'" 

Henry  Venn,  who  preached  his  funeral  sermon,  said,  among 
other  things, — "  It  is  hard  to  determine  whether  we  have  more 
"cause  to  lament  his  removal  from  our  world,  or  to  rejoice  that 
God  was  pleased  to  enrich  him  with  divine  knowledge  in  so 
large  a  measure,  to  make  him  so  long  an  eminent  instrument  in 
his  hand  of  converting  sinners,  and  to  enable  him  to  persevere 
with  an  unblemished  character  till  he  finished  his  course  with 
joy.  Few  have  ever  expressed  so  great  ardency  of  aflfection  to 
the  service  of  Christ  as  your  late  much-loved  pastor. 

"  Never  was  there  any  sordid  child  of  this  world  more  en- 
grossed by  the  love  of  money,  and  more  laborious  in  heaping  it 
up,  than  your  late  pastor  was  in  teaching  and  preaching  the 
kingdom  of  God,  and  the  things  concerning  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ." 

John  Newton  says, — "  I  knew  Mr.  Grimshaw,  and  had  re- 
peated conversations  with  him  for  four  or  five  years.  I  number 
it  among  the  many  great  mercies  of  my  life,  that  I  was  favoured 
with  his  notice,  edified  (I  hope)  by  his  instruction  and  example, 


148  TESTIMON Y  OF  JOHN  NE IVTOM, 

and  encouraged  and  directed  by  his  advice,  at  the  critical  time 
y^rhen  my  own  mind  was  engaged  with  the  desire  of  entering 
th<?  ministry.  I  saw  in  him,  much  more  clearly  than  I  could 
have  learned  from  books  or  lectures,  what  it  was  to  be  a  faithful 
and  exemplary  minister  of  the  gospel ;  and  the  remembrance  of 
him  has  often  both  humbled  and  animated  me." 

These  testimonies  are  weighty  and  powerful.  But  they  are 
not  mere  flattering  words.  They  are  well  deserved,  and  they 
are  true. 


CHAPTER    I. 

Bora  &t  Hartlepool  in  1714 — Educated  at  Hoiighton-Ie-Spring  apd  Christ  Church,  Oxford 
—Character  for  Learning  at  Oxford — Ordained  1736 — Curate  of  Lewtrenchard  and 
Banstead — Lectures  at  St.  Botolph's  1748,  and  St.  Dunstan's  1749 — Troubles  at  St. 
Dunstan's — Morning  Preacher  at  St.  George's,  Hanover  Square,  1750 — Loses  his 
Preachership  1755 — Gresham  Professor  of  Astronomy — Morning  Preacher  at  St. 
Clave,  Southwark,  and  St.  Bartholomew  the  Great — Preaches  before  the  University 
•f  Oxford — Gives  great  Offence. 

jHE  true  Church  of  Christ  is  curiously  like  a  well- 
appointed  army. 

The  soldiers  of  an  army  all  owe  allegiance  to  one 
common  sovereign,  and  are  engaged  in  one  common  cause. 
They  are  commanded  by  one  general,  and  fight  against  one 
common  foe.  And  yet  there  are  marked  varieties  and  diversities 
among  them.  Cavalry,  infantry,  and  artillery  have  each  their 
own  peculiar  mode  of  fighting.  Each  arm  in  its  own  way  is 
useful.  It  is  the  well-balanced  combination  of  all  three  which 
gives  to  the  whole  army  efficiency  and  power. 

It  is  just  the  same  with  the  true  Church  of  Christ.  Its 
members  all  love  the  same  Saviour,  and  are  led  by  the  same 
Spirit ;  all  wage  the  same  warfare  against  sin  and  the  devil,  and 
s£  believe  the  same  gospel.  But  the  work  of  one  soldier  of 
Christ  is  not  the  work  of  another.     Each  is  appointed  by  the 


150  BIRTH  OF  WILLIAM  ROMAINE. 

Great  Captain  to  fill  his  own  peculiar  positior,  and  each  ii 
specially  useful  in  his  own  department. 

Thoughts  such  as  these  come  across  my  mind,  when  I  turn 
from  Whitefield,  Wesley,  and  Grimshaw,  to  the  fourth  spiritual 
hero  of  the  i8th  century — William  Romaine.  In  doctrine  and 
practical  piety,  the  four  good  men  were,  in  the  main,  of  one 
mind.  In  their  mode  of  working,  they  were  curiously  unlike 
one  another.  Whitefield  and  Wesley  were  spiritual  cavalry,  who 
scoured  the  country,  and  were  found  everywhere.  Grimshaw 
was  an  infantry  soldier,  who  had  his  head-quarters  at  Haworth, 
and  never  went  far  from  home.  Romaine,  in  the  meantime, 
was  a  commander  of  heavy  artillery,  who  held  a  citadel  in  the 
heart  of  a  metropolis,  and  seldom  stirred  beyond  his  walls.  Yet 
all  these  four  men  were  mighty  instruments  in  God's  hand  for 
good  \  and  not  one  of  them  could  have  been  spared.  Each  did 
good  service  in  his  own  line  ;  and  not  the  least  useful,  I  hope 
to  show,  was  the  Rector  of  St.  Anne's,  Blackfriars,  William 
Romaine.  In  what  are  called  popular  gifts,  no  doubt,  he 
was  not  equal  to  his  three  great  contemporaries.  But  none 
of  the  three,  probably,  was  so  well  fitted  as  he  was  to  fill  the 
position  which  he  occupied  in  London. 

William  Romaine  was  bom  at  Hartlepool,  in-  the  county  of 
Durham,  on  the  25th  of  September  1714.  His  father  was  one 
of  tiie  French  Protestants  who  took  refuge  in  England  after  the 
revocation  of  the  edict  of  Nantes.  He  settled  at  Hartlepool  as 
a  corn  merchant,  and  appears  to  have  prospered  in  business. 
At  any  rate,  he  brought  up  a  family  of  two  sons  and  three 
daughters,  and  left  behind  a  high  character  as  a  kind  and  esti- 
mable man  when  he  died,  1757,  at  the  ripe  age  of  eighty-five. 

There  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  Romame's  parents  were 
decidedly  religious  people,  and  that  from  his  earliest  years  he 
saw  true  Christianity  both  taught  and  exemplified  in  his  own 
home.  The  value  of  this  rare  privilege  can  hardly  be  overrated. 
The  seeds  of  a  long  life  of  service  and  usefulness  were  certainly 


HIS  DILIGENCE  AT  OXFORD.  r5l 

sown  by  the  Holy  Ghost  in  this  Hartlepool  home.  Romaine  never 
forgot  this.  In  a  letter  written  to  a  friend  when  he  was  seventy 
years  old,  he  usos  the  following  expressions :  "  Mr.  Whitefield 
used  often  to  put  me  in  mind  how  singularly  favoured  I  was. 
He  had  none  of  his  family  converted  ;  while  my  father,  mother, 
and  three  sisters  were  like  those  blessed  people  of  whom  it  is 
written,  'Jesus  loved  Martha  and  her  sister,  and  Lazarus.'  And 
as  they  loved  him  again,  so  do  we." 

At  the  age  of  ten,  Romaine  was  sent  to  a  well-known  grammar 
school  at  Houghton-le-Spring,  in  the  county  of  Durham,  founded 
by  the  famous  Bernard  Gilpin  at  the  time  of  the  Protestant 
Reformation.  At  this  school  he  remained  seven  years.  From 
thence,  in  the  year  1731,  he  was  sent  to  Oxford ;  and  after  first 
entering  Hertford  College,  was  finally  removed  to  Christ  Church. 
For  the  next  six  years  he  appears  to  have  resided  principally  at 
Oxford,  until  he  took  his  degree  as  Master  of  Arts  in  October 

1737- 

.  Of  Romaine's  manner  of  life  at  Oxford  we  know  nothing, 
except  the  fact  that  he  was  a  hard  reader,  and  had  a  high 
reputation  as  a  man  of  ability.  Of  his  friends,  companions,  and 
associates,  we  have  no  record.  This  at  first  sight  seems  some* 
what  remarkable,  when  we  remember  that  it  was  precisely  at 
this  period  that  "  Methodism,"  so-called,  took  its  rise  at  the 
University.  In  fact,  it  was  just  the  time  when  John  Wesley, 
Charles  Wesley,  Whitefield,  Ingham,  and  Hervey,  were  begin- 
ning to  work  for  Christ  in  Oxford,  and  had  formed  a  kind  of 
religious  society.  There  is  not,  however,  the  slightest  trace  of 
any  communication  between  them  and  Romaine.  The  most 
natural  supposition  is,  that  he  was  wholly  absorbed  in  literary 
pursuits,  and  allowed  himself  no  time  for  other  work.  To  this 
we  may  add  the  fact,  that  the  natural  bent  of  his  character 
would  probably  incline  him  to  keep  by  himself  and  stand 
alone. 

The  high  character  which  he  attained  in  the  university,  as  a 


t$2  HIS  ORDINATION, 

learned  man,  is  clearly  shown  by  an  anecdote  related  of  him  by 
his  curate  and  successor,  Mr.  Goode,  after  his  death.  He  says 
in  his  funeral  sermon  :  "  Dress  was  never  a  foible  of  Mr. 
Romaine's.  His  mind  was  superior  to  such  borrowed  ornaments. 
Immersed  in  the  noble  pursuit  of  literature,  before  his  conse- 
cration to  a  still  more  exalted  purpose,  he  paid  but  little  atten- 
tion  to  outward  decoration.  Being  observed  at  Oxford,  on  one 
occasion,  to  walk  by  rather  negligently  attired,  a  visitor  inquired 
of  a  friend.  Master  of  one  of  the  colleges:  'Who  is  that  slovenly 
person  with  his  stockings  down  1'  The  master  replied  :  '  That 
•lovenly  person,  as  you  call  him,  is  one  of  the  greatest  geniuses 
of  the  age,  and  is  likely  to  be  one  of  the  greatest  men  in  the 
kingdom.'" 

Commendation  like  this  was,  of  course,  somewhat  exaggerated 
and  extravagant.  But  at  any  rate,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
Romaine  left  Oxford  a  thorough  scholar  and  a  well-read  man. 
His  worst  enemies  in  after-hfe  could  never  lay  to  his  charge 
that  he  was  "  unlearned  and  ignorant."  They  might  dislike  his 
doctrinal  views,  but  they  could  never  deny  that  in  any  matter 
of  Hebrew,  Greek,  or  Latin  criticism,  his  opinion  was  entitled 
to  respect.  Well  would  it  be  for  the  Churches,  if  in  this  respect 
there  were  more  evangelical  ministers  who  walked  in  the  steps 
of  Romaine.  Grace  and  soundness  in  the  faith,  diligence  and 
personal  piety,  are  undoubtedly  the  principal  things.  But 
book-learning  ought  not  to  be  despised.  An  ignorant  and  ill- 
read  ministry,  in  days  of  intellectual  activity,  must  sooner  or 
later  fall  into  contempt. 

Romaine  was  ordained  deacon  at  Hereford  in  1736,  by 
Bishop  Egerton ;  and  priest  in  1738,  by  the  Bishop  of  Win- 
chester, the  notorious  Dr.  Hoadley.  The  history  of  the  first 
eleven  years  of  his  ministerial  life  is  involved  in  much  uncer- 
tainty. I  am  unable  to  tell  the  reader  who  gave  him  a  title  for 
orders,  or  why  he  was  ordained  at  Hereford.  I  can  only  find 
out  that  his  first  engagement  was  the  curacy  of  Lewtrenchard 


CURATE  OF  BANSTEAD.  1 53 

near  Okehampton,  in  Devonshire.  He  went  there  on  a  visit  to 
an  Oxford  friend,  whose  father  lived  at  Lidford,  and  upon  the 
express  condition  that  his  friend  should  find  him  work.  He 
only  remained  here  about  six  months.  From  Lewtrenchard  he 
removed  into  the  diocese  of  Winchester,  and  was  curate  of 
Banstead,  near  Epsom,  for  anything  we  can  see,  for  an  unbroken 
period  of  ten  years.  Much  of  his  after-course  in  life  probably 
hinged  on  this  curacy.  It  was  here  that  he  became  acquainted 
with  Sir  Daniel  Lambert,  an  alderman  of  London,  who  lived  in 
the  parish,  and  was  lord-mayor  in  1741.  He  thought  so  highly 
of  Romaine  that  he  appointed  him  his  chaplain  during  the  year 
of  his  mayoralty — a  circumstance  which  brought  him  into  notice 
as  a  preacher,  both  at  St.  Paul's  Cathedral  and  in  many  other 
London  pulpits. 

It  is  highly  probable  that  the  ten  years  which  Romaine  spent 
at  Banstead  were  years  of  deep  study  and  literary  pursuits.  It 
was  at  this  time  that  he  published  two  volumes  in  reply  to 
Warburton's  "  Divine  Legation  of  Moses,"  in  which  he  ably 
controverted  the  main  positions  of  that  mischievous  book.  He 
also  prepared  for  the  press  a  new  edition  of  the  Hebrew  Con- 
cordance and  Lexicon  of  Marius  de  Calasio,  in  four  large 
volumes — a  work  which  required  very  close  attention,  and  which 
employed  him  no  less  than  seven  years.  The  small  size  of  his 
cure  at  Banstead  no  doubt  left  him  abundant  time  for  study ; 
and  this  time  was  well  spent.  The  extremely  firm  and  unwa- 
vering position  which  he  assumed  on  points  of  doctrine  in  aftep 
life,  may  be  traced  in  all  probability  to  the  quiet  ten  years 
which  he  spent  in  his  Surrey  curacy.  Foundation-stones  are 
often  laid  in  a  young  ministers  mind  during  his  residence  in 
such  a  position,  which  nothing  in  after-life  can  ever  shake  or 
displace. 

One  thing,  at  all  events,  is  very  certain,  whatever  else  is 
uncertain,  about  Romaine's  ministerial  beginnings.  There 
never  seems  to  nave  been  a  period,  from  the  time  of  his  ordinUr 


1 54  PRE  A  CHES  A  T  ST.  PA  UL  'S. 

tion,  when  he  did  not  preach  clear,  distinct,  and  unmistakable 
evangelical  doctrines.  The  truths  of  the  glorious  gospel  appear 
to  have  been  applied  to  his  heart  by  the  Holy  Spirit  from  the 
days  of  his  childhood  at  Hartlepool.  From  the  very  first  he 
was  a  well-instructed  divine,  and,  unlike  many  clergymen,  had 
nothing  to  unlearn  after  he  was  ordained. 

The  proof  of  this  may  be  seen  in  the  sermon  which  he 
preached  in  St.  Paul's  Cathedral,  as  chaplain  to  the  Lord 
Mayor,  on  September  2,  1741.  At  this  time,  it  will  be  remem- 
bered, he  was  only  twenty-seven  years  old.  The  title  of  this 
sermon  is,  "  No  Justification  by  the  Law  of  Nature,"  and  the 
text  is  Romans  ii.  14,  15.  Cadogan,  his  biographer,  justly 
remarks  on  this  sermon  :  "Although  we  do  not  discover  in  this 
discourse  the  same  fertile  experience,  use,  and  application  of  the 
truth  as  are  to  be  found  in  his  later  writings,  yet  we  discover 
the  same  truth  itself  by  which  he  was  then  made  free  from  the 
errors  of  the  day,  and  in  the  enjoyment  of  which  he  lived  and 

died The  truth  is,  he  was  a  believer  possessed  of  that 

unfeigned  faith  which  dwelt  in  his  father  and  mother  before 
him,  and  we  are  persuaded  that  it  was  in  him  also." 

The  second  marked  period  in  Romaine's  ministerial  life 
extends  from  1748  to  1766.  Within  this  space  of  eighteen 
years  he  met  with  some  of  his  greatest  trials,  and  filled  many 
different  posts  in  the  Lord's  vineyard,  but  always  in  London. 
I  may  add,  that  at  no  time  in  his  life,  perhaps,  was  he  more 
useful  and  more  popular.  He  was  in  the  full  vigour  of  body 
and  mind,  and  enjoyed  a  reputation  as  a  bold  and  uncompro- 
mising preacher  of  evangehcal  doctrine  throughout  the  metro- 
polis, which  few  other  living  men  equalled,  and  fewer  still 
surpassed. 

The  first  post  that  Romaine  regularly  occupied  in  London 
was  that  of  lecturer  at  St.  Botolph's,  Billingsgate.  The  circum- 
stances which  led  to  his  appointment  were  so  singular  that  I 
think  it  well   to  mention  them.      They  supply  an  admirable 


LECTURER  OE  ST.  BOTOLPH'S.  155 

"Uustration  of  the  manner  in  which  God  works  b)'^  his  providence 
in  finding  a  right  position  for  his  people.  It  seems,  then,  to 
have  been  Romaine's  intention,  after  finishing  his  edition  of 
Calasio's  Lexicon,  to  return  to  his  native  county,  and  to  seek 
employment  near  his  home.  In  fact,  he  had  actually  packed 
up  his  trunks,  and  sent  them  on  board  ship  with  this  view.  But 
as  he  was  going  to  the  water-side,  in  order  to  secure  his  owti 
passage,  he  was  met  by  a  gentleman,  an  entire  stranger  to  him, 
who  stopped  and  asked  him  if  his  name  was  Romaine.  The 
gentleman  had  formerly  known  his  father,  and  was  led  to  make 
the  inquiry  by  observing  a  strong  resemblance  to  him  in  the 
clergyman  whom  he  met.  After  some  conversation  about  his 
family,  this  gentleman,  who  was  a  man  of  some  influence  in  the 
city,  told  him  that  the  lectureship  of  St.  Botolph's,  Billingsgate, 
was  then  vacant,  and  that  if  he  liked  to  become  a  candidate  for 
the  post,  he  would  gladly  exert  his  influence  in  his  behalf. 
Romaine,  seeing  in  this  unexpected  providence  the  finger  of 
God,  at  once  consented,  provided  he  was  not  obliged  to  canvass 
the  voters  in  person,  a  custom  which  he  always  thought  incon- 
sistent with  the  office  of  a  clergyman.  The  result  was,  that  in 
the  autumn  of  1748  he  was  chosen  lecturer  of  St.  Botolph's,  and 
commenced  his  long  career  as  a  London  clergyman. 

It  is  deeply  instructive  to  observe  in  a  case  like  this,  how 
God  chooses  the  habitation  of  his  people,  and  places  them 
where  he  knows  it  is  best  for  them  to  be.  Cadogan,  Romaine's 
excellent  biographer,  remarks  on  this  part  of  his  history  :  "  A 
settlement  in  the  metropolis  was  the  thing  of  all  others  which 
he  last  thought  of,  and  to  which  he  was  the  least  inclined. 
From  the  bent  of  his  genius  to  the  study  of  nature,  of  minerals, 
fossils,  and  plants,  and  the  wonders  of  God  in  creation,  a 
country  hfe,  so  favourable  to  these  pursuits,  would  have  been 
chosen  by  him.  But  God  chose  otherwise  for  him ;  and  by  a 
circumstance  trivial  and  accidental  to  appearance,  but  in  reality 
ft  tuni  of  providence  such  as  decides  the  condition  of  most  men, 


»5^  TROUBLES  AT  ST.   DUNSTAirS, 

called  him  to  a  city-lectureship,  and  so  detained  him  in  London, 
where  he  was  kept  to  the  end  of  his  existence  as  a  witness  for 
Jesus  Christ,  with  abiHties  as  truly  suited  to  this  meridian  as 
those  of  the  Apostle  Paul  to  the  meridian  of  Ephesus,  Corinth, 
or  Rome." 

In  the  year  1749,  he  was  chosen  lecturer  of  St.  Dunstan's  in 
the  West — an  appointment  which  brought  down  on  him  one  of 
the  fiercest  storms  of  persecution  which  he  had  to  face  in  the 
course  of  his  ministry.  The  Rector  of  St.  Dunstan's,  for  some 
reason,  disputed  his  right  to  the  pulpit,  and  occupied  it  himself 
during  the  time  of  prayers,  in  order  to  exclude  him  from  it. 
Romaine,  in  the  meantime,  appeared  constantly  in  his  place  to 
assert  his  claim  to  the  lectureship,  and  his  readiness  to  perform 
the  duties  of  the  office.  The  affair  was  at  length  carried  into 
the  Court  of  King's  Bench,  and  after  hearing  the  cause  argued, 
Lord  Mansfield  decided  that  Romaine  was  legally  entitled  to 
the  lectureship,  and  that  seven  o'clock  in  the  evening  was  a 
convenient  time  to  preach  the  lecture. 

Even  then,  however,  the  troubles  of  the  lectureship  were  not 
over.  Cadogan  says  that  even  after  Lord  Mansfield's  decision, 
the  churchwardens  refused  to  open  the  doors  of  the  church  till 
seven  o'clock,  and  to  light  it  when  there  was  occasion.  The 
result  was,  that  Romaine  frequently  read  prayers  and  preached 
by  the  light  of  a  single  candle,  which  he  held  in  his  own  hand. 
Besides  this,  as  the  church  doors  were  kept  shut  until  the  precise 
moment  fixed  for  preaching  the  lecture,  the  congregation  was 
usually  assembled  in  Fleet  Street  waiting  for  admission.  The 
consequence  was  a  great  concourse  of  people,  collected  in  a 
principal  thoroughfare  of  the  metropolis,  and  though  not  noisy 
or  disorderly,  occasioning  much  inconvenience  to  those  who 
passed  that  way.  This  state  of  things  actually  continued  for 
some  time.  Happily  for  all  parties,  Dr.  Terrick,  Bishop  of 
London,  who  had  once  held  the  lectureship  himself,  happened 
to  pass  through  Fleet  Street  one  evening  when  the  congrega- 


MORNING-PREACHER  AT  ST.   GEORGE'S.  15^ 

t&n  were  waiting  outside  St.  Dunstan's.  Observing  the  crowd, 
he  asked  the  cause  of  it,  and  being  told  that  it  was  Romaine's 
congregation,  he  interfered  with  the  rector  and  churchwarciens 
on  their  behalf,  expressed  great  respect  for  the  lecturer,  and 
obtained  for  him  and  his  hearers  that  the  service  should  begin 
at  six,  that  the  doors  should  be  opened  in  proper  time,  and 
that  lights  should  be  provided  in  the  winter  season.  From  this 
time  forth  Romaine  continued  in  the  quiet  exercise  of  his 
ministry  at  St.  Dunstan's,  without  disturbance,  and  to  the  edifi- 
cation of  many,  to  the  end  of  his  life.  In  fact,  he  held  this 
lectureship  for  no  less  than  forty-six  years,  though  it  was  only 
worth  eighteen  pounds  a-year  ! 

In  the  year  1750,  Romaine  was  appointed  assistant  morning- 
preacher  at  St.  George's,  Hanover  Square,  and  held  the  office 
for  five  years.  Of  all  the  many  pulpits  which  he  occupied 
during  his  long  ministry,  this  was  by  far  the  most  important 
Standing,  as  the  church  does,  in  an  extremely  prominent  posi- 
tion in  the  west  end  of  London,  and  well  known  as  the  mother- 
church  of  the  most  fashionable  quarter  of  the  metropolis,  it 
opened  up  to  him  a  great  and  effectual  door  of  usefulness. 
Romaine,  in  many  respects,  was  just  the  man  for  the  post 
His  undeniable  powers  as  a  preacher  attracted  attention.  His 
well-known  scholarship  commanded  respect  even  from  those 
who  did  not  agree  with  him.  And  best  of  all,  his  bold,  uncom- 
promising declarations  of  the  real  gospel  of  Christ,  and  plain 
denunciations  of  fashionable  sins,  were  precisely  the  message 
which  the  Bible  leads  us  to  expect  God  will  bless.  It  is  not, 
perhaps,  too  much  to  say,  that  from  the  day  St  George's, 
Hanover  Square,  was  built,  to  this  very  day,  it  has  never  had 
its  pulpit  so  well  filled  on  Sunday  mornings  as  it  was  for  five 
years  by  Romaine. 

The  circumstances  of  the  times  in  which  he  preached  at  St. 
George's  made  his  testimony  peculiarly  valuable  and  important 
A  cold   heartless  scepticism  about  all  the  leading  truth :^   o( 


1 58  EARTHQUAKE  A T  LONDON, 

Christianity  prevailed  widely  among  the  upper  and  middle 
classes  of  society.  Bishop  Butler  had  complained  not  long 
before,  that  "many  persons  seemed  to  take  it  for  granted  that 
Christianity  was  fictitious,  and  that  nothing  remained  but  to  set 
it  up  as  a  principal  object  of  mirth  and  ridicule."  That  such 
principles  naturally  produced  the  utmost  profligacy,  reckless- 
ness, and  immorality  of  practice,  no  Bible  reader  will  be  sur- 
prised to  hear.  In  fact,  the  utter  ungodliness  of  the  age  was 
so  thorough  that  few  living  in  the  present  day  can  have  the 
slightest  conception  of  it.  Against  this  ungodliness  Romaine 
boldly  lifted  up  a  standard,  and  blew  the  trumpet  of  the  gospel 
with  no  uncertain  sound.  He  was  in  the  highest  sense  a  man 
for  the  times,  and  he  was  exactly  in  the  right  place.  Those 
who  would  like  to  see  how  boldly  and  powerfully  he  delivered 
his  Master's  message,  would  do  well  to  read  two  sermons  which 
he  delivered  at  St.  George's,  one  of  them  entitled,  "  A  Method 
for  Preventing  the  Frequency  of  Robberies  and  Murders;" 
and  the  other,  "  A  Discourse  on  the  Self-Existence  of  Jesus 
Christ." 

Just  about  the  time  that  he  was  removed  from  the  pulpit  of 
St.  George's,  the  inhabitants  of  London  were  dreadfully  fright- 
ened by  two  severe  shocks  of  an  earthquake.  Happening  simul- 
taneously with  the  awful  earthquake  which  iu  a  moment  over- 
threw Lisbon  and  destroyed  forty  thousand  persons,  this  event 
caused  great  alarm.  Thousands  of  persons  fled  to  Hyde  Park 
and  spent  the  night  there.  Hundreds  crowded  to  the  places  of 
worship  where  so-called  Methodist  doctrines  were  preached,  and 
anxiously  sought  consolation.  Even  Sherlock,  Bishop  of  London, 
thought  it  necessary  to  publish  a  Letter  to  his  Diocese  on  the 
subject,  in  which  he  exhorted  the  clergy  "  to  awaken  the  people, 
to  call  them  from  their  lethargy,  and  make  them  see  their  own 
danger."  Here  again  Romaine  was  just  the  man  for  the  occa- 
sion. He  preached  and  printed  two  sermons,  which  even  now 
will  amply  repay  perusal.     One  of  them  is  called,  "  An  Alarm 


LOSES  HIS  PRE  A  CHERSHIP.  1 5  9 

to  a  Careless  World  \ "  and  the  other,  "  The  Duty  of  Watchful- 
ness Enforced."  Delivered  at  the  time  they  were,  we  cannot 
doubt  that  they  are  specimens  of  the  kind  of  sermons  which 
Romaine  usually  preached  at  that  period  of  his  ministry.  I 
think  it  impossible  to  read  them  without  feeling  deep  regret 
that  the  Church  of  England  in  the  wc-st  end  of  London  has  not 
had  more  of  such  preachir^g. 

Romaine's  ministry,  as  assistant  morning -preacher  at  St. 
George's,  Hanover  Square,  began  in  April  1750  and  ended  in 
September  1755.  During  that  time  he  preached  occasionally 
at  Bow  Church,  in  exchange  with  Dr.  Newton,  afterwards  Bishop 
of  Bristol ;  and  also  at  Curzon  Chapel,  then  called  St.  George's, 
Mayfair,  in  exchange  with  the  Rector.  The  circumstances 
-tinder  which  he  left  St.  George's  are  so  remarkable  that  they 
deserve  special  notice. 

It  appears  that  the  office  which  he  filled  as  assistant  morning- 
preacher  was  not  a  regularly  endowed  and  independent  ap- 
pointment, but  one  entirely  dependent  on  the  Rector,  and  kept 
up  at  his  own  option,  discretion,  and  expense.  The  Rector  of 
St.  George's,  who  first  invited  Romaine  to  take  the  office,  and 
then  at  the  end  of  five  years  removed  him  from  it,  was  Dr. 
Andrew  Trebeck.  His  appointment  was  owing  to  his  high 
character  and  reputation,  and  not  to  personal  friendship ;  his 
removal  was  caused  by  the  popularity  and  plainness  of  his 
ministry.  The  real  truth  was,  that  his  preaching  attracted  such 
crowds  to  the  old  parish-church,  that  the  regular  seat-holders 
took  offence,  and  complained  that  they  were  put  to  inconve- 
nience. Strong  pressure  was  brought  to  bear  upon  the  Rector , 
and  he,  "  willing  to  please "  the  parishioners,  gave  Romaine 
notice  to  terminate  his  engagement.  This  notice  he  received 
quietly,  saying,  that  "he  was  willing  to  relinquish  the  office, 
hoping  that  his  doctrine  had  been  Christian,  and  owning  the 
inconvenience  which  had  attended  the  parishioners."  A  more 
discreditable   affair  than    this   probably   never   disfigured   the 


I  op  GRESHAM  PROFESSOR  OF  ASTRONOMY. 

parochial  annals  of  the  diocese  of  London.  An  eminent  and 
godly  clergyman  was  removed  from  his  post  because  he  attracted 
too  many  hearers  !  And  yet,  at  this  ver)'  time,  scores  of  clergy- 
men in  London  churches  v/ere  no  doubt  preaching  every  week 
to  empty  benches  or  to  congregations  of  half-a-dozen  people, 
without  any  one  interfering  with  them ! 

It  is  consolatory  to  think  that  there  was  one  parishioner  at 
least  in  St.  George's,  Hanover  Square,  who  made  a  noble  pro- 
test against  the  treatment  which  Romaine  received.  This  was 
the  old  Earl  of  Northampton.  He  rebuked  those  who  com- 
plained that  the  parish-church  was  crowded,  by  reminding  them 
that  they  bore  the  greater  crowd  of  a  ball-room,  an  assembly, 
or  a  play-house,  without  the  least  complaint.  "  If,"'  said  he, 
"  the  power  to  attract  be  imputed  as  a  matter  of  admiration  to 
Garrick,  why  should  it  be  urged  as  a  crime  against  Romaine  1 
Shall  excellence  be  considered  exceptionable  only  in  divine 
things  1 " — Another  member  of  the  congregation  who  is  said  to 
have  adhered  steadfastly  to  Romaine's  cause  at  this  juncture, 
was  Mr.  John  Sanderson,  afterwards  state-coachman  to  George 
III.  This  worthy  man  lived  to  the  great  age  of  eighty-nine» 
and  died  in  1799,  after  long  adorning  the  doctrine  he  professed 
by  an  exemplary  and  godly  life. 

During  the  five  years  that  Romaine  was  preaching  at  St 
George's,  he  occupied  for  a  short  time  the  situation  of  Pro- 
fessor of  Astronomy  at  Gresham  College.  There  is  little  record 
extant  of  what  he  did  in  this  office,  and  it  is  doubtful  whether 
he  was  very  successful  in  it.  In  all  probability  he  was  a  much 
better  theologian  than  an  astronomer,  and  was  better  fitted  for 
lecturing  about  Christ  and  heaven  than  about  the  sun,  moon, 
and  stars.  But  whatever  credit  he  lost  as  a  professor  of  astro- 
nomy, he  retrieved  a  hundred-fold  by  his  conduct  about  the 
Bill  for  removing  Jewish  disabilities.  This  he  thought  it  his 
duty  to  oppose  vehemently,  to  the  great  gratification  of  many 
citizens  of  London.     In  fact,  his  arguments  were  so  highly 


REV.   WILLIAM    ROMAINE. 


Face  p.  161 


MORNING-PREACHER  AT  Sr.   OLAVE'S,  ETC.         iti 

esteemed,  that  his  various  letters  on  the  subject  were  collected 
into   a   pamphlet   and    reprinted   by  his  friends   in   the  City 

in  1753- 

From  the  date  of  Romaine's  removal  from  St.  George's, 
Hanover  Square,  until  his  appointment  to  the  Rectory  of  St. 
Anne's,  Blackfriars,  we  find  him  occupying  several  different 
positions,  and  never  long  in  any  one.  The  only  post  which  he 
never  vacated  was  the  Lectureship  of  St,  Dunstan's,  Fleet 
Street.  In  the  beginning  of  1756  he  became  curate  and  morn- 
ing-preacher at  St.  Olave's,  Southwark.  He  continued  in  this 
office  until  the  year  1759,  residing  most  of  the  time  in  Walnut 
Tree  Walk,  Lambeth.  After  leaving  St.  Olave's,  he  was  morn- 
ing-preacher for  two  years  at  St.  Bartholomew  the  Great,  near 
West  Smithfield.  From  thence  he  removed  to  Westminster 
Chapel,  but  only  preached  there  six  months.  The  abrupt 
termination  of  his  engagement  there  was  occasioned  by  a  fresh 
piece  of  persecution.  The  Dean  and  Chapter  of  Westminster 
withdrew  their  patronage, and  protection  from  the  chapel,  and 
refused  him  their  nomination  for  a  licence  to  preach  there. 
From  this  time  he  had  no  stated  employment  in  the  Church,- 
except  the  Lectureship  of  St.  Dunstan's,  until  he  was  chosen 
Rector  of  St.  Anne's,  Blackfriars,  in  1766. 

We  must  not,  however,  suppose  for  a  moment  that  Romaine 
was  an  idle  man  during  the  years  when  he  had  no  settled 
employment  in  the  morning  of  Sundays.  He  appears  to  have 
been  constantly  preaching  charity  sermons  in  London  churches  ] 
for  which  purpose,  from  his  great  popularity,  his  services  were 
eagerly  sought  after.  He  also  preached  very  frequently  at  the 
chapel  of  the  Lock  Hospital,  upon  the  first  institution  of  that 
charity. 

At  this  period  of  his  hfe  he  was  several  times  called  upon  tc 
preach  before  the  University  of  Oxford.  This,  however,  came 
to  an  end  after  he  had  preached  two  sermons,  entitled,  "  The^ 
Lord  our  Righteousness,"  on   March  20,  1757,  in  St.  Mary's. 

(!»)  n 


l6t  GIVES  GREA  T  OFFENCE. 

These  sennons  gave  great  offence,  and  he  was  never  allowed 
to  enter  the  University  pulpit  again  after  delivering  them.  They 
ire  to  be  found  among  his  published  works  at  the  present  day, 
and  furnish  a  melancholy  proof  of  the  spiritual  darkness  in 
which  Oxford  was  sunk  at  this  time.  The  governing 
body  of  an  University  which  could  exclude  a  man  from  its 
pulpit  for  preaching  such  doctrine  as  these  sermons  contain, 
must  indeed  have  been  in  a  miserably  benighted  state  of  mind, 
Romaine's  dedication  of  them  to  Dr.  Randolph,  President  of 
Corpus  Christi,  and  Vice-chancellor  of  the  University,  is  well 
worth  reading.  He  says,  "  When  I  delivered  these  discourses 
I  had  no  design  to  make  them  public ;  but  I  have  been  since 
compelled  to  it.  I  understand  they  gave  great  offence,  espe- 
cially to  you,  and  I  am  in  consequence  thereof  refused  the  uni- 
versity pulpit.  In  justice,  not  to  myself,  for  I  desire  to  be  out 
of  the  question,  but  to  the  great  doctrine  here  treated  of,  namely, 
the  righteousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  only  ground 
of  our  acceptance  and  justification  before  God  the  Father,  I 
have  sent  to  the  press  what  was  delivered  from  the  pulpit.  I 
leave  the  friends  of  our  Church  to  judge,  whether  there  be  any- 
thing herein  advanced  contrary  to  the  Scriptures  and  to  the 
doctrines  of  the  Reformation.  If  not,  I  am  safe.  If  there  be, 
you  are  bound  to  make  it  appear.  You  have  a  good  pen,  and 
have  great  leisure ;  make  use  of  them ;  and  I  hope  and  pray 
you  may  make  use  of  them  for  your  good  and  mine."  Com- 
ment on  the  whole  affair  is  needless.  The  treatment  which 
Romaine  received  at  Oxford  was  as  little  creditable  to  the  Uni- 
versity as  that  which  he  received  in  the  west  end, of  London 
was  to  the  parishioners  of  St.  George's,  Hanover  Square. 

It  was  about  this  period  of  his  life  that  Romaine  became  in- 
timate with  the  well-known  Lady  Huntingdon,  who  made  him 
one  of  her  domestic  chaplains.  In  this  capacity  he  used  to 
preach  frequently  at  her  house,  both  in  London  and  near 
Ashby-de-la-Zouch,  and  at  the  various  chapels,  or  preaching- 


RECTOR  OF  ST.  ANNE'S.  163 

houses,  which  she  built  at  Brighton,  Bath,  and  elsewhere.  To 
her  friencisnip,  indeed,  he  was  finally  indebted  for  his  appoint- 
ment to  the  Rectory  of  St.  Anne's,  Blackfriars,  in  the  fifty-second 
year  of  his  age.  The  circumstances,  however,  of  his  appoint- 
ment to  this  post,  the  history  of  his  twenty-nine  years'  ministry 
in  it,  and  some  account  of  his  writings,  letters,  and  character, 
are  matters  which  I  shall  reserve  for  another  chapter. 


CHAPTER  II. 

Rector  of  St.  Anne's,  Blackfriars,  1764— Difficulties  m  the  way  of  his  Appointment- 
Letter  to  Lady  Huntingdon — Usefulness  at  Blackfriars — Peculiarities  of  Address 
and  Temperament — Last  Illness  and  Dying  Saying — Death  1795 — Public  Funeral — 
Literary  Remains. 

The  biographer  of  William  Romaine  can  hardly  fail  to  observe 
that  his  life  naturally  divides  itself  into  three  portions.  The 
first  extends  from  his  birth  to  the  commencement  of  his  London 
ministry  in  1746.  The  second  ranges  from  1746  to  his  final 
settlement  at  St.  Anne's,  Blackfriars,  in  1764.  The  third  com- 
prises his  ministry  at  Blackfriars,  up  to  the  time  of  his  death 
in  1795.  I^  ^s  this  third  and  last  portion  of  his  history  which 
I  propose  to  deal  with  in  this  chapter. 

Romaine's  appointment  to  the  rectory  of  St.  Anne's,  Black- 
friars, took  place  at  a  very  critical  period  in  his  ministerial  life. 
He  was  now  about  fifty  years  old.  After  preaching  as  a  lec- 
turer in  London  for  eighteen  years,  he  was  still  without  a  stated 
position  as  the  incumbent  of  a  parish.  Every  door  seemed 
shut  against  him.  Opposition  and  persecution  followed  him 
wherever  he  went.  It  seemed,  in  short,  a  question  whether  he 
had  not  better  give  up  London  altogether,  and  turn  his  steps 
elsewhere.  Lord  Dartmouth  offered  him  a  living  in  the 
country.  Whitefield  urged  him  to  accept  a  large  church  at 
Philadelphia,  in  America.  Hot-headed  friends  pressed  him  to 
iet  them  build  him  a  chapel.     It  seemed  far  from  improbable 


1 64        HIS  LOVE  FOR  THE  CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND, 

that  he  might  fulfil  the  predictions  of  his  enemies,  and  end  by 
leaving  the  Church  of  England  and  becoming  a  regular 
dissenter. 

But  Romaine  had  a  very  deep  sense  of  the  value  of  the 
Church  of  England.  He  loved  her  Articles  and  Prayer-Book 
with  no  common  love.  Whatever  her  defects  in  administra- 
tion, and  however  ill  she  treated  her  best  children,  he  beheved 
that  the  occupant  of  her  pulpits  had  peculiar  advantages  ;  and 
he  steadfastly  refused  to  leave  her.  He  was  catholic,  and  kin^, 
and  liberal  to  those  who  were  not  churchmen,  and  lived  in 
habits  of  friendly  communion  with  many  of  them.  To  this 
even  John  Wesley,  Arminian  as  he  was,  bears  strong  testimony. 
In  a  letter  to  Lady  Huntingdon,  in  1763,  he  says,  "  Mr.  Romaine 
has  shown  a  truly  sympathizing  spirit,  and  acted  like  a  brother." 
But  nothing  could  induce  him  to  give  up  his  own  position  and 
become  a  Nonconformist.  At  this  juncture  he  was  greatly 
strengthened  in  his  determination  by  the  advice  of  that  excel- 
lent clergyman.  Walker  of  Truro.  He  resolved  to  stick  by  the 
Church  in  which  he  had  been  ordained,  and  to  wait  patiently 
for  some  door  to  be  opened.  His  patience  was  at  length  re- 
warded. By  a  singular  train  of  providences,  he  became  rector 
of  an  important  parish  in  the  City,  and  there  spent  the  last 
twenty-nine  years  of  his  life  in  the  undisturbed  exercise  of  his 
ministry. 

The  circumstances  under  which  Romaine  was  appointed  ta 
his  new  sphere  of  duty  were  somewhat  remarkable.  The 
patronage  of  the  united  parish  of  St.  Andrew  by  the  Wardrobe 
with  St.  Anne's,  Blackfriars,  is  vested  in  the  Lord-Chancellor 
and  the  parishioners  alternately.  The  immediate  predecessor 
of  Romaine  was  Mr.  Henley,  nephew  of  the  theii  Lord-Chan- 
cellor Henley.  He  only  held  the  living  about  six  years,  and 
died  of  putrid  fever,  caught  in  visiting  a  parishioner.  Upon 
his  death  the  appointment  fell  to  the  turn  of  the  parishioners ; 
and  at  once  some  friends  of  Romaine,  without  his  knowledge 


PROBA  TIONA  R  Y  SERMON,  1 6  5 

and  consent,  resolved  to  nominate  him  as  a  candidate  for  the 
vacant  living.  It  was  soon  found  that  at  least  two-thirds  of  the 
parishioners  were  in  his  favour ;  and  though  he  refused  to  can- 
vass for  votes  himself,  his  interest  was  warmly  supported  by 
Lady  Huntingdon,  Mr.  Thornton,  and  Mr.  Madan. 

There  were  two  other  candidates  beside  Romaine,  and  in 
accordance  with  the  custom  on  such  occasions,  he  was  called 
on  to  preach  a  probationary  sermon  before  the  parishioners. 
This  sermon,  preached  on  September  30,  1764,  from  2  Cor. 
iv.  5,  is  to  be  found  among  his  printed  works,  and  is  credit- 
able both  to  his  heart  and  head.  One  part  of  it,  in  which  he 
assigned  his  reason  for  not  canvassing  the  electors  in  person, 
deserves  particular  notice.     He  says, — 

"  Some  have  insinuated  that  it  was  from  pride  that  I  would  not 
go  about  the  parish,  from  house  to  house,  canvassing  for  votes; 
but  truly  it  was  from  another  motive, — I  could  not  see  how  this 
could  promote  the  glory  of  God.  How  can  it  be  for  the 
honour  of  Jesus  that  his  ministers,  who  have  renounced  fame, 
riches,  and  ease,  should  be  most  anxious  and  earnest  in  the 
pursuit  of  those  very  things  which  they  have  renounced? 
Surely  this  would  be  getting  into  a  worldly  spirit,  as  much  as 
the  spirit  of  parliamenteering.  And  as  this  method  of  can- 
vassing cannot  be  for  Jesus'  sake,  so  neither  is  it  for  our  honour; 
it  is  far  beneath  our  function :  nor  is  it  for  your  profit.  What 
good  is  it  to  your  souls — what  compliment  to  your  under- 
iitanding — what  advantage  to  you,  in  any  shape,  to  be  directed 
and  applied  to  by  every  person  with  whom  you  have  any  con- 
nection, or  on  whom  you  have  any  dependence  %  Is  not  this- 
depriving  you  of  the  freedom  of  your  choice  ?  Determined  by 
these  motives,  when  my  friends,  of  their  own  accord,  put  me 
up  as  a  candidate,  to  whom  I  have  to  this  hour  made  no  appli- 
cation, directly  or  indirectly,  I  left  you  to  yourselves.  If  you 
choose  me,  I  desire  to  be  your  servant  for  Jesus'  sake ;  and  if 
you  do  not,  the  will  of  the  Lord  be  done.*' 


iC6      DIFFICULTIES  AND  OPPOSITION  OVERCOME. 

It  deserves  notice  that  this  sermon  did  the  preacher's  cause 
no  harm,  but  rather  operated  in  his  favour.  It  was  well 
received  by  the  parishioners,  and  was  published  at  their 
request. 

Notwithstanding  the  strong  support  Romaine  received,  his 
appointment  was  not  finally  secured  without  great  difficulty  and 
opposition.  A  hotly  contested  election,  a  poll,  a  scrutiny  and 
an  appeal  to  the  Court  Of  Chancery,  interposed  between  the 
first  movement  of  his  friends  and  the  final  accomplishment  of 
their  wishes.  At  length,  after  eighteen  months'  delay,  all  ob- 
stacles were  overcome,  a  decree  was  given  in  his  favour  by  Lord 
Henley,  and  he  was  instituted  and  inducted  rector  of  St.  Anne's, 
Blackfriars,  in  February  1766,  No  one,  perhaps,  throughout 
this  anxious  period  of  suspense,  worked  more  heartily  in  his 
behalf  than  Lady  Huntingdon.  She  saw  clearly  the  immense 
importance  of  such  a  champion  of  Christ's  gospel  being  settled 
in  a  prominent  position  in  London  ;  and  she  left  no  stone  un- 
turned to  secure  his  success.  Help,  too,  was  raised  up  in  some 
quarters  of  a  most  unexpected  kind.  A  publican  in  the  parish 
is  said  to  have  been  one  of  his  most  active  supporters  and  can- 
vassers ;  and  at  first  no  one  could  understand  the  reason.  But 
after  all  was  over,  on  Romaine's  calling  on  him  to  thank  him, 
the  worthy  publican  replied,  "  Indeed,  sir,  I  am  more  indebted 
to  you  than  you  to  me ;  for  you  have  made  my  wife,  who  was 
one  of  the  worst,  the  best  woman  in  the  world." 

Romaine  entered  on  his  new  sphere  with  a  very  deep  sense 
of  his  own  insufficiency.  He  who  intended  him  to  be  a  wise 
master-builder,  taught  him  to  lay  a  sound  foundation  of  self- 
abasement  and  humility.  His  own  letters  on  the  occasion  of 
his  election  give  a  very  graphic  picture  of  his  feelings. 

In  one  he  says  :  "  My  friends  are  rejoicing  all  around  me, 
and  wishing  me  a  joy  that  I  cannot  take.  It  is  my  Master's 
will,  and  1  submit.  He  knows  best  what  is  for  his  own  glory 
and  his  people's  good  ;  and  I  am  certain  he  makes  no  mistakes 


LETTER  TO  LADY  HUNTINGDON.  167 

on  either  of  these  points.  But  my  head  hangs  down  upon  the 
occasion,  through  the  awful  apprehension  which  I  ever  had  of 
the  care  of  souls.  I  am  frightened  to  think  of  watching  over 
two  or  three  thousands,  when  it  is  work  enough  to  watch  over 
ont.  The  plague  of  my  own  heart  almost  wearies  me  to 
death ;  what  can  I  do  with  so  vast  a  number  ?" 

In  a  letter  to  Lady  Huntingdon,  of  the  same  date,  he  says : 
"  Now,  when  I  was  setting  up  my  rest,  and  had  begun  to  say 
unto  my  soul,  Soul,  take  thine  ease,  I  am  called  into  a  public 
station,  and  to  the  sharpest  engagement,  just  as  I  had  got  into 
winter  quarters.  I  can  see  nothing  before  me,  so  long  as  breath 
is  in  my  body,  but  war;  and  that  with  unreasonable  men,  a 
dividied  parish,  an  angry  clergy,  and  a  wicked  world,  all  to  be 
resisted  and  overcome.  Besides  all  these,  a  sworn  enemy, 
subtle  and  cruel,  with  whom  I  can  make  no  peace — no,  not  a 
moment's  time,  night  and  day — with  all  his  children  and  his 
host,  is  aiming  at  my  destruction.  When  I  take  counsel  of  the 
flesh  I  begin  to  faint ;  but  when  I  go  to  the  sanctuary,  I  see 
my  good  cause,  and  my  almighty  Master  and  true  Friend,  and 
then  he  makes  my  courage  revive.  Although  I  am  no  way  fit 
for  the  work,  yet  he  called  me  to  it,  and  on  him  I  depend  for 
strength  to  do  it,  and  for  success  to  crown  it.  I  utterly  de- 
spair of  doing  anything  as  of  myself,  and  therefore  the  more 
I  have  to  do,  the  more  I  shall  be  forced  to  live  by  faith  on 
Him.  In  this  view  I  hope  to  get  a  great  income  by  my 
living.     I  shall  want  Jesus  more,  and  shall  get  closer  to  him." 

Whatever  anticipations  of  trouble  Romaine  may  have  formed 
in  his  mind,  he  met  with  comparatively  little  at  Blackfriars. 
In  fact,  his  twenty-nine  years'  ministry  there,  compared  to  his 
earUer  days,  was  a  season  of  quietness.  Enemies  and  oppo- 
nents no  doubt  he  had,  like  every  faithful  clergyman  who 
preaches  the  gospel.  But  they  could  do  little  to  disturb  him. 
The  result  was  that  the  latter  years  of  his  life,  though  not 
less  useful  than  the  former,  were  certainly  less  eventful.     Like 


f  oo  USEFULNESS  A  T  BLA  CKFRTARS. 

the  river  that  at  first  dashes  brawling  down  the  mountain-side, 
but  gUdes  silently  along  when  it  reaches  the  plains  and  becomes 
navigable,  so  Romaine's  ministry  from  the  time  of  his  settle- 
ment at  Blackfriars,  though  it  made  less  noise,  was  probably 
more  beneficial  to  the  Church  of  Christ.  He  necessarily 
became  less  of  an  itinerant  and  missionary  preacher.  The 
claims  of  his  own  parish  and  pulpit  obliged  him  to  stay  much 
at  home,  and  absorbed  much  of  his  time  and  attention.  But 
his  usefulness,  whatever  some  hasty  judges  might  think,  was 
not  only  not  diminished,  but  was  probably  much  increased. 

The  plain  truth  is,  that  as  rector  of  a  London  parish,  Romaine 
became  a  rallying  point  for  all  in  London  who  loved  evangelical 
truth  in  the  Church  of  England.  Man  after  man,  and  family 
after  family,  gathered  round  his  pulpit,  until  his  congregation 
became  the  nucleus  of  a  vast  amount  of  good  in  the  metro- 
pohs.  His  constant,  unflinching  declaration  of  Christ's  whole 
truth  insensibly  produced  a  powerful  impression  on  men's 
minds,  and  made  them  understand  what  a  true  clergyman  of 
the  Church  of  England  ought  to  be.  His  undeniable  learning 
made  him  an  adversary  that  few  cared  to  cope  with,  and 
gave  a  weight  to  his  assertions  which  they  did  not  always  pos- 
sess when  they  came  from  the  lips  of  half-educated  men.  His 
position  gave  him  peculiar  advantages.  Almost  within  sight 
both  of  St.  Paul's  and  Westminster  Abbey,  he  held  a  post  from 
which  he  was  always  ready  to  go  forth  and  do  battle,  either 
with  tongue  or  pen.  If  error  arose  rampant,  he  was  on  the 
spot  prepared  to  attack  it.  If  truth  was  assaulted,  he  was 
equally  prepared  to  sally  forth  and  defend  it.  In  short,  the 
good  that  he  did,  as  rector  of  Blackfriars,  though  less  showy, 
was  probably  more  solid  and  permanent  than  the  gopd  that  he 
did  all  the  rest  of  his  life. 

To  attempt  to  chronicle  all  the  events  of  his  life  during  his 
twenty-nine  years  at  Blackfriars  would  be  of  little  use,  even  if 
we  possessed  materials  for  doing  it.     From  the  very  beginning 


HIS  ADDRESS  AND  TEMPERAMENT.  169 

irf"  his  incumbency,  he  took  great  pains  to  have  the  services  of 
his  church  conducted  with  strict  reverence  and  good  order. 
Like  many  other  clergymen,  he  never  rested  till  he  had  put  tlie 
fabric  of  his  church  in  good  repair,  had  built  a  good  parsonage, 
and  made  the  parochial  schools  thoroughly  efficient.  These 
things  once  accomplished,  he  gave  himself  entirely  to  the 
direct  work  of  his  office.  He  was  never  idle,  and  seldom 
passed  a  silent  Sabbath.  Preaching,  visiting,  writing  for  the 
press,  or  corresponding  with  the  many  who  asked  his  advice, 
occupied  nearly  all  his  time  to  his  life's  end. 

He  was  not  perhaps  what  would  be  called  now-a-days  a 
"genial"  man.  He  was  " naturally  close  and  reserved,"  says 
Cadogan,  "  irritable  to  a  certain  degree,  short  and  quick  in 
his  replies,  and  frequently  mistaken  as  being  rude  and  morose 
where  he  meant  nothing  of  the  kind.  Had  he  paid  more 
attention  than  he  did  to  the  various  distresses  of  soul  and  body 
which  were  brought  before  him,  he  would  have  had  no  time 
left  for  reading,  meditation,  and  prayer,  and,  in  short,  for 
what  every  man  must  attend  to  in  private  who  would  be  use- 
ful in  public.  It  was  not  uncommon  for  him  to  tell  those 
who  came  to  him  with  cases  of  conscience  and  questions  of 
spiritual  concern,  that  he  said  all  he  had  to  say  in  the  pul- 
pit. Thus  people  might  be  hurt  for  the  moment  by  such  a  dis- 
missal, but  they  had  only  to  attend  his  preaching,  and  they 
soon  found  that  their  difficulties  had  impressed  him  as  well 
as  themselves ;  that  they  had  been  submitted  to  God,  and  that 
they  had  been  the  subject  of  his  serious  and  affectionate  con- 
sideration." 

These  observations  of  Cadogan's  deserve  special  attention. 
Romaine,  unhappily,  is  not  the  only  minister  whose  reputation 
has  suffered  from  gross  misrepresentation  and  misconstruction. 
Few  men,  unfortunately,  are  so  liable  to  be  unfairly  judged  as 
ministers  who  fill  prominent  posts,  and  are  eminent  for  gifts 
and  graces.     Even  Christians  are  too  ready  to  set  them  down 


17©  ANECDOTES  OF  ROMAINE. 

as  haughty,  proud,  cold,  distant,  reserved,  and  unsocial,  without 
any  just  ground  for  so  doing.  The  immense  demands  con- 
tinually made  on  their  time  and  strength,  the  many  private 
difficulties  they  frequently  have  to  contend  with,  the  absolute 
necessity  they  are  under  of  much  daily  reading,  meditation,  and 
communion  with  God — all  these  things  are  too  ofter  entirely 
forgotten.  Many  indeed  are  the  wounds  of  feelmg  which  minis- 
ters have  to  endure  from  the  unkind  remarks  of  unreasonable 
friends.  The  cup  which  Romaine  had  to  dnnk  is  a  cup  which 
many  clergymen  have  to  drink  in  the  present  day. 

The  few  anecdotes  preserved  about  Romaine  are  all  some- 
what characteristic  of  the  man  as  Cadogan  describes  him. 
They  all  give  the  idea  of  one  who  was  short  and  abrupt  to  an 
extreme  in  his  communications ;  so  much  so,  in  fact,  that  we 
can  quite  understand  captious  people  being  offended  by  him. 
And  yet  the  anecdotes  always  tend  to  prove  that  he  was  a  man 
of  no  common  graces,  gifts,  and  good  sense. 

He  was  one  evening  invited  to  a  friend's  house,  and,  after 
tea,  the  lady  of  the  house  asked  him  to  play  at  cards,  to  which 
he  made  no  objection.  The  cards  were  brought  out,  and  when 
all  were  ready  to  begin  playing,  Romaine  said,  "  Let  us  ask 
the  blessing  of  God."  "Ask  the  blessing  of  God!"  said  the 
lady  in  great  surprise  ;  "  I  never  heard  of  such  a  thing  before  a 
game  of  cards."  Romaine  then  inquired,  "  Ought  we  to  engage 
in  anything  on  which  we  cannot  ask  God's  blessing  ?"  This 
reproof  put  an  end  to  the  card-playing. 

On  another  occasion  he  was  addressed  by  a  lady,  who  ex- 
pressed the  great  pleasure  she  had  enjoyed  under  his  preaching, 
and  added  that  she  could  comply  with  his  requirements,  with 
the  exception  of  one  thing.  "And  what  is  that?"  asked  Ro- 
maine. "  Cards,  sir,"  was  the  reply.  "  You  think  you  could 
not  be  happy  without  them?"  "  No,  sir,  I  know  I  could  not." 
"  Then,  madam."  said  be,  "  cards  are  your  god,  and  they  must 
save  you."     It  is  recorded  that  this  pointed  remark  led  to 


THE  DISSENTING  MINISTER.  I'll 

serious  reflections,  and  finally  to  the  abandonment  of  card- 
playing. 

When  the  unhappy  Dr.  Dodd  was  sentenced  to  death  for 
forgery,  Romaine,  among  others,  felt  a  deep  and  melancholy 
interest  about  him.  There  was  once  a  time  when  he  and  Dodd 
had  been  on  terms  of  intimacy,  from  their  common  zeal  for 
the  prosecution  of  Hebrew  learning.  When,  however,  poor 
Dodd  began  to  love  the  world  better  than  Christ,  the  intimacy 
gradually  ceased,  and  he  actually  told  Romaine  that  he  hoped 
he  would  not  acknowledge  him  if  they  met  in  public  !  Before 
his  execution,  Romaine  visited  him  in  Newgate  at  his  particular 
request,  and  many  were  anxious  to  know  what  he  thought  of 
the  prisoner's  spiritual  state.  But  the  only  answer  that  could 
be  extracted  from  him  was  this  :  "  I  hope  he  may  be  a  real 
penitent ;  but  there  is  a  great  difference  between  saying, '  God 
be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner,'  and  really  feeling  it." 

Short  and  abrupt  as  the  rector  of  Blackfriars  evidently  was  in 
his  demeanour,  he  was  very  sensible  of  his  own  deficiencies  of 
temper,  and  very  willing  to  confess  himself  in  the  wrong.  On 
one  occasion  a  dissenting  minister  who  often  attended  his  lec- 
tures, called  on  him  to  complain  of  some  severe  reflections 
which  he  thought  Romaine  had  made  upon  Dissenters.  Having 
made  his  complaint,  Romaine  replied,  "  I  do  not  want  to  have 
anything  to  say  to  you,  sir.*' — "  If  you  will  hear  me,"  added  the 
other,  "  I  will  tell  you  my  name  and  profession.  I  am  a  Pro- 
testant dissenting  minister." — "  Sir,"  said  Romaine,  "  I  neither 
wish  to  know  your  name  nor  your  profession."  Upon  this  the 
unfortunate  Nonconformist  bowed  and  took  his  leave.  Not 
long  after  Romaine,  to  the  great  surprise  of  his  hearer  and 
reprover,  returned  the  visit,  and  after  the  usual  salutation,  be- 
gan :  "  Well,  Mr.  T.,  I  am  not  come  to  renounce  my  principles, 
I  have  not  changed  my  sentiments,  I  will  not  give  up  my 
preference  for  the  Church  of  England ;  but  I  am  come  as  a 
Christian  to  make  some  apology.    I  think  my  behaviour  to  you 


I7«  HTS  LA  TTER   YEARS. 

gir,  the  other  day,  was  not  becoming,  nor  such  as  it  should  have 
been."     They  then  shook  hands,  and  parted  good  friends. 

Romaine's  last  illness  found  him  still  doing  his  Father's 
business,  and  happy  in  his  work.  He  lived  to  the  great  age  of 
eighty-one,  and  enjoyed  the  full  use  of  his  faculties  to  the  very 
last.  During  the  last  ten  years  of  his  life  he  seems  to  have 
become  greatly  mellowed  and  softened,  and  to  have  been  a 
beautiful  example  of  that  lovely  sight,  a  godly  old  man,  "  a 
hoary  head  found  in  the  way  of  righteousness."  He  went 
gradually  down  the  valley  toward  the  river,  with  all  the  golden 
richness  of  a  setting  sun  in  summer.  There  appeared  to  be 
Uttle  but  heaven  in  his  sermons  or  in  his  life ;  and,  like  dying 
Baxter,  he  spoke  of  his  future  home  with  great  familiarity,  like 
one  who  had  already  seen  it. 

It  was  well  remarked  by  some  of  his  friends,  in  these  last 
days  of  his  ministry,  that  he  was  a  true  diamond,  naturally  rough 
and  pointed,  but  the  more  he  was  broken  by  years  the  more  he 
appeared  to  shine.  There  was  often  a  light  upon  his  coun- 
tenance— and  particularly  when  he  preached — which  lookea 
like  the  dawn,  or  a  faint  appearance  of  glory.  If  any  one  asked 
him  how  he  did,  his  general  answer  was,  "  As  well  as  1  can  be 
out  of  heaven."  He  made  this  reply,  shortly  before  his  death, 
to  a  friend  of  a  different  communion,  and  then  added,  "There 
is  but  one  central  point,  in  which  we  must  all  meet — Jesus 
Christ  and  him  crucified."  This  was  the  object  which  he 
always  kept  in  sight — the  wonderful  God-man,  whom,  according 
to  his  own  words,  "  He  had  taken  for  body  and  for  soul,  for 
time  and  for  eternity,  his  present  and  everlasting  all." 

Romaine's  simple  and  regular  habits  of  life,  no  doubt,  had 
much  to  say  to  his  length  of  days  and  vigorous  old  age.  There 
are  ministers,  unquestionably,  who  seem  independent  of  regular 
food  and  hours,  and  whose  iron  constitutions  appear  to  stand 
any  strain.  But  their  number  is  small.  Of  Romaine,  Cadogan 
•ays,  "  His  hour  of  breakfast  was  six  in  the  mommg  ;  of  dinner, 


HIS  LAST  SERMONS.  173 

half-past  one  in  the  afternoon;  and  of  supper,  seven  in  the  even- 
ing. His  family  were  assembled  to  prayer  at  nine  o'clock  in 
the  morning,  and  at  the  same  hour  at  night.  His  Hebrew 
Psalter  was  his  constant  companion  at  breakfast,  and  he  often 
said  how  much  his  first  repast  was  sanctified  by  the  Word  of 
God  and  prayer.  From  ten  o'clock  to  one  he  was  generally 
employed  in  visiting  the  sick  and  friends.  He  retired  to  his 
study  after  dinner,  and  sometimes  walked  again  after  supper  in 
summer.  After  evening  service  in  his  family,  he  retired  again 
to  his  study,  and  to  his  bed  at  ten.  From  this  mode  of  living 
he  never  deviated,  except  when  he  was  a  guest  in  the  house  of 
friends  ;  and  then  he  breakfasted  at  seven,  dined  at  two,  and 
supped  at  eight.  His  adherence  to  rules,  in  this  respect,  was 
never  more  marked  than  in  a  circumstance  which  happened 
during  the  last  years  of  his  life.  He  was  invited  by  an  eminent 
dignitary  of  the  Church  to  dine  with  him  at  five  o'clock.  He 
felt  respect  for  the  inviter,  and  wished  to  show  it.  Instead, 
therefore,  of  sending  a  written  apology,  he  waited  upon  him 
himself,  thanked  him  for  the  invitation,  and  excused  himself  by 
pleading  his  long  habits  of  early  hours,  his  great  age,  and  his 
often  infirmities." 

Romaine's  death-bed  was  a  beautiful  illustration  of  the  truth 
of  John  Wesley's  saying,  "  Our  people  die  well !  The  world 
ttiay  find  fault  with  our  opinions,  but  the  world  cannot  deny 
that  our  people  die  well."  This  was  eminently  the  case  with 
Romaine.  His  fatal  illness  attacked  him  on  Saturday,  the  6th 
of  June  1795,  and  put  an  end  to  his  life  on  the  26th  of  July. 
Tile  last  sermon  which  he  preached  was  on  the  preceding 
Thursday  evening  at  St.  Dunstan's.  It  was  an  exposition  of 
the  eighteenth  chapter  of  St.  John's  Gospel;  and  he  remarked 
to  his  curate  that  he  must  get  on  as  fast  as  he  could,  lest  he 
should  not  get  through  the  Gospel  before  the  lectures  closed 
for  the  summer.  His  concluding  sermon  at  Blackfriars  was  on 
the  preceding  Tuesday  morning,  from  the  thirteenth  verse  of 


1 7 4  HIS  LAST  ILLNESS. 

the  103rd  Psalm — "  Like  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children,  so  the 
Lord  pitieth  them  that  fear  him."  These  dates  are  worthy  of 
special  notice.  This  fine  old  servant  of  Christ,  at  the  age  of 
eighty-one,  was  evidently  preaching  at  least  three  days  in  every 
week  ! 

From  the  moment  he  was  seized  with  his  illness,  he  con- 
sidered it  to  be  his  last ;  and  though  he  had  occasional 
symptoms  of  recovery  during  the  seven  weeks  that  his  illness 
continued,  he  never  entered  the  pulpit  again.  He  spoke  of 
himself  as  a  dying  man,  but  always  as  one  that  had  peace 
in  believing.  On  the  morning  of  his  seizure  he  came  down  to 
breakfast  as  usual,  in  the  house  at  Balham  Hill,  where  he  was 
staying,  and  presided  in  family  devotion.  It  was  observed  that 
he  prayed  most  earnestly  to  God  that  "  he  would  fit  them  for, 
and  support  them  in  their  trials  that  day,  which  might  be  many." 
He  returned  the  same  day  to  his  own  house  in  London,  and 
conversed  most  profitably  and  comfortably  in  the  way,  on  the 
approach  of  death  and  near  prospect  of  eternity.  He  said, 
"How  animating  is  the  view  which  I  have  now  of  death,  and 
the  hope  laid  up  for  me  in  heaven,  full  of  glory  and  immor- 
tality !"     On  arriving  at  home  his  last  illness  struck  him. 

He  continued  at  his  own  house  in  London  under  medical 
advice  for  three  weeks,  and  used  all  the  means  which  his  physi- 
cian thought  fit  to  prescribe.  But  he  said,  "  You  are  taking 
much  pains  to  prop  up  this  feeble  body ;  I  thank  you  for.  it  j 
it  will  not  do  now."  His  Hebrew  Psalter  lay  close  by  him, 
and  out  of  it  he  frequently  read  a  verse  or  two,  not  being  able 
to  attend  to  more.  From  the  nature  of  his  illness  he  could 
speak  but  little ;  and  being  once  asked  if  be  would  see  some  of 
his  friends,  he  replied,  "  He  needed  no  better  company  than  L 
enjoyed." 

"  On  the  26th  of  June,"  says  his  biographer,  Cadogan,  "  li 
left  town,  and  went  to   a  friend's  house  at  Tottenham  for 
fortnight,  where  he  was  so  much  better  that  he  was  able  to 


HIS  D  YING  SA  YINGS.  1 7  5 

walk  about  the  garden.  Upon  his  return  to  town,  he  told  his 
curate  that  he  had  laid  long  in  the  arms  of  death,  and  if  re- 
covering, it  was  very  slowly.  '  But,'  said  he,  '  this  is  but  a  poor 
dying  life  at  best ;  however,  I  am  in  His  hands  who  will  do  the 
best  for  me ;  I  am  sure  of  that.  I  have  lived  to  experience  all 
I  have  spoken  and  all  I  have  written,  and  I  bless  God  for  it.' — 
To  another  friend  he  said,  *  I  have  the  peace  of  God  in  my 
conscience,  and  the  love  of  God  in  my  heart ;  and  that,  you 
know,  is  sound  experience.  I  knew  before  that  the  doctrines  I 
preached  were  truths,  but  now  I  experience  them  to  be  bless- 
ings.'— Thanking  another  friend  for  a  visit,  he  told  him  '  that 
he  had  come  to  see  a  saved  sinner.' — This  he  often  affirmed 
should  be  his  dying  breath;  he  desired  to  die  with  the  lan- 
guage of  the  publican  in  his  mouth — '  God  be  merciful  to  me 
a  sinner !'" 

He  continued  in  London  for  a  few  days  in  this  blessed  frame 
of  mind,  and  then  returned  on  the  13  th  of  July  to  the  house  of 
his  friend,  Mr.  Whitridge,  at  Balham  Hill,  where  he  had  been 
the  day  that  he  was  first  taken  ill.  From  this  date  his  strength 
rapidly  decayed,  but  his  faith  and  patience  never  failed  him. 
He  was  often  saying,  "  How  good  is  God !  What  comforts 
does  he  give  me  !  What  a  prospect  do  I  see  before  me  of  glory 
and  immortahty !  He  is  my  God  in  life,  in  death,  and  through- 
out eternity."  On  the  23rd  of  July,  as  he  sat  at  breakfast,  he 
said,  "  It  is  now  nearly  sixty  years  since  God  opened  my  mouth 
to  publish  the  everlasting  sufficiency  and  eternal  glory  of  the 
salvation  in  Christ  Jesus ;  and  it  has  now  pleased  him  to  shut 
my  mouth,  that  my  heart  might  feel  and  experience  what  my 
mouth  has  so  often  spoken." 

On  the  24th  of  July,  after  being  helped  down-stairs  for  the 
last  time,  he  said,  "  Oh,  how  good  is  God  \  With  what  a  night 
has  he  favoured  me !"  requesting  at  the  same  time  that  prayer 
without  ceasing  might  be  made  for  him,  that  his  faith  and 
patience  might  not  fail.     He  spoke  with  great  kindness  and 


I7<5  HIS  DEATH. 

affection  of  his  wife ;  and,  thanking  her  for  all  her  care  of  him, 
said,  "  Come,  my  love,  that  I  may  bless  you :  the  Lord  be  with 
you  a  covenant  God  for  ever  to  save  and  bless  you  !" — Mrs. 
VVhitridge,  in  whose  house  he  was  dying,  on  seeing  and  hearing 
him  bless  his  wife,  said,  "  Have  you  not  a  blessing  for  me,  sir?" 
"  Yes,"  he  replied ;  "  I  pray  God  to  bless  you."  And  so  he 
•aid  to  every  one  that  came  to  him. 

On  Saturday  the  25th  of  July  he  was  not  able  to  get  down 
stairs,  but  lay  upon  a  couch  all  day,  in  great  weakness  of  body, 
but  strong  in  faith,  giving  glor}'-  to  God,  and  the  power  of  Christ 
resting  on  him.  Towards  the  close  of  the  day  some  thought 
they  heard  him  say,  "  Though  I  walk  through  the  valley  of  the 
shadow  of  death  I  will  fear  no  evil,  for  thou  art  with  me."— 
About  an  hour  before  his  death,  Mr.  Whitridge,.his  host  and 
friend,  said,  "  I  hope,  my  dear  sir,  you  now  find  the  salvation 
of  Jesus  Christ  precious,  dear,  and  valuable  to  you."  His  answer 
was,  "  He  is  a  precious  Saviour  to  me  now."  These  were  the 
last  words  he  spoke  to  man.  To  the  Lord  he  was  heard  to 
say,  "  Holy !  holy !  holy !  blessed  Jesus !  to  thee  be  endless 
praise  !"  About  midnight,  as  the  Sabbath  began,  he  breathed 
his  last,  and  entered  that  eternal  rest  which  remains  for  the 
people  of  God.  Well  saith  the  Scriptures,  "  Mark  the  perfect 
man,  and  behold  the  upright :  for  the  end  of  that  man  is  peace" 
(Ps.  xxxvii.  37). 

Romaine's  friends  and  relations  had  fully  intended  to  give 
him  a  private  funeral.  But  this  proved  impossible.  The  many 
hearers  of  a  minister  who  had  preached  the  gospel  in  London 
for  forty-five  years  could  not  be  prevented  showing  their  respect 
and  affection  by  following  him  to  the  grave.  Scores  looked  up 
to  him  as  their  spiritual  father.  Hundreds  venerated .»his  char- 
acter and  consistency,  even  though  they  did  not  fully  embrace 
the  gospel  he  had  preached.  The  consequence  was  that  his 
(uneral,  in  spite  of  all  wishes  and  intentions,  was  a  peculiarly 
public  one.     lifty  coaches  followed  the  hearse  from  Clapham 


PUBLIC  FUNERAL,  r  7  7 

Common,  besides  many  persons  on  foot.  By  the  time  the 
procession  reached  the  obeUsk  in  St.  George's  Fields,  the  mul- 
titude collected  was  very  great  indeed  \  but  silence,  solemnity, 
and  decorum  prevailed.  At  the  foot  of  Blackfriars*  Bridge  the 
city  marshals  were  waiting  with  their  men  in  black  silk  scarfs 
and  hatbands,  and  rode  before  the  hearse  to  the  entrance  of 
the  church.  They  had  been  ordered  out  by  the  lord  mayor,  as 
his  token  of  respect  for  the  memory  of  a  man  whose  character 
had  stood  so  high  in  the  city  of  London.  Thus  went  to  his 
long  home  on  August  3rd,  1795,  amidst  every  outward  mark  of 
respect  and  affection,  the  venerable  rector  of  Blackfriars.  At 
the  end  of  his  long  forty-five  years'  ministry  no  one  lifted  up  his 
tongue  against  him.  The  winds  and  waves  of  persecution  had 
at  length  ceased.  He  had  fairly  lived  down  all  opposition,  and 
he  died  honoured  and  lamented.  So  true  is  that  word  of  Scrip- 
ture, "  When  a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord,  he  maketh  even 
his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him"  (Prov.  xvi.  7). 

Romaine  was  once  married,  though  rather  later  in  life  than 
many  ministers.  His  wife  was  a  Miss  Price,  and,  as  we  have 
already  seen,  she  survived  him.  He  had  children,  of  whom  one 
son  died  at  Trincomalee  in  1782,  to  his  great  sorrow.  Another 
son  was  with  him  in  his  last  illness,  of  whom  he  spoke  with 
great  affection,  expressing  his  hope  of  him  as  a  son  in  the  faitli, 
as  well  as  a  son  in  the  flesh.  Of  his  other  children  I  can  find 
no  account. 

Most  of  Romame's  literary  works  are  so  well  known  that  I 
need  not  trouble  my  readers  with  any  account  of  them.  His  ^ 
largest  work,  "  The  Life,  AValk,  and  Triumph  of  Faith,"  has 
been  often,  reprinted,  and  holds  a  respectable  position  among 
English  cvangehcal  classics.  His  "  Twelve  Sermons  on  the 
Law  and  the  Gospel"  have  also  been  more  than  once  repub- 
lished, and  in  my  judgment  deservedly  so.  I  regard  it  as  the 
best  and  most  valuable  work  he  ever  sent  to  the  press.     His 

expository  sermons  on  the  107th  Psalm  and  on  Solomon's  Song 
UM)  12 


178  HIS  LITERARY  REMAINS. 

are  not  so  well  known  as  they  ought  to  be.  The  latter  espe- 
cially throws  more  light  on  a  most  difficult  book  of  Scripture 
than  many  works  of  much  higher  pretensions.  His  single  ser- 
mons are  of  course  very  little  known.  But  no  one  who  wants 
*^o  get  a  just  idea  of  the  kind  of  preacher  Romaine  was,  should 
>mit  to  read  them.  For  simplicity,  pith,  point,  and  forcible- 
oess, — for  short,  true,  vigorous  sentences, — they  will  bear  a 
favourable  comparison  with  almost  any  evangelical  sermons .  of 
the  last  century. 

Many  of  his  letters  in  his  published  correspondence  are  very 
valuable.  Like  John  Newton,  he  wrote  in  days  when  the 
modem  machinery  of  societies,  committee  meetings,  Exeter  Hall 
gatherings,  &c.,  was  totally  unknown,  and  when  a  man  had 
more  leisure  to  write  long  letters  than  he  has  now.  Those  who 
like  reading  Newton's  "  Cardiphonia"  and  "  Omicron,"  would 
find  Romaine's  correspondence  well  worth  perusing.  Christ 
and  the  Bible  are  the  two  golden  threads  which  seem  to  run 
through  all  his  letters. 

Perhaps,  after  all,  one  of  the  most  useful  publications  that 
Romaine  ever  sent  forth  is  one  that  is  hardly  known  at  all.  I 
may  be  wrong,  but  my  firm  belief  is,  that  my  estimate  of  its 
usefulness  will  be  found  correct  at  the  last  day.  The  publica- 
tion I  refer  to  is  called  "  An  Earnest  Invitation  to  the  Friends  of 
the  Established  Church  to  join  with  several  of  their  brethren, 
clergy  and  laity,  in  London,  in  setting  apart  an  hour  of  every 
week  for  Prayer  and  Supplication  during  the  present  trouble- 
some times."  There  is  strong  reason  to  believe  that  this  little 
publication  was  made  eminently  useful  when  it  first  appeared, 
and  has  led  to  an  amazing  succession  of  supplications,  inter- 
cessions, and  prayers  down  to  the  present  day.  It  was  beyond 
all  doubt  a  move  in  the  right  direction.  It  sent  men  to  Him 
who  alone  has  all  hearts  in  his  hands,  and  alone  can  revive  his 
Church  in  dead  times.  Who  can  tell  but  that  much  of  the 
Spirit's  work  in  the  last  sixty  years  will  be  found  at  last  to  have 


RETROSPECT  OF  HIS  LIFE.  179 

been  the  answer  to  Romaine's  prayers  \  One  fact,  at  any  rate, 
deserv'es  to  be  specially  remembered.  When  Romaine  first  sent 
torth  this  Invitation  in  1757,  he  only  knew  about  a  dozen  cler- 
gymen in  all  England  who  were  willing  to  unite  with  him,  and 
join  his  scheme  of  prayer.  But  when  he  died,  in  1795,  he 
reckoned  that  the  number  of  like-minded  men  in  the  Establish- 
ment had  swelled  to  at  least  three  hundred.  That  fact  alone 
speaks  for  itself 

I  leave  the  fourth  spiritual  hero  of  the  eighteenth  century 
here,  and  ask  my  readers  to  give  his  name  the  honour  that  it 
deserves.  He  had  not  all  the  popular  gifts  of  some  of  his  con- 
temporaries. He  had  not  the  genial  attractive  characteristics 
of  many  in  his  day.  But  take  him  for  all  in  all,  he  was  a  great 
man,  and  a  mighty  instrument  in  God's  hand  for  good.  He 
stood  in  a  most  prominent  position  in  London  for  forty-five 
years,  testifying  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God,  and  never 
flinching  for  a  day.  He  stood  alone,  with  almost  no  backers, 
supporters,  or  fellow  labourers.  He  stood  in  the  same  place, 
constantly  preaching  to  the  same  hearers,  and  not  able,  like 
Whitefield,  Wesley,  Grimshaw,  and  other  itinerant  brethren,  to 
preach  old  sermons.  He  stood  there  witnessing  to  truths  which 
were  most  unpopular,  and  brought  down  on  him  opposition, 
persecution,  and  scorn.  He  stood  in  a  most  pubhc  post,  con- 
tinually watched,  observed,  and  noticed  by  unfriendly  eyes, 
ready  to  detect  faults  in  a  moment  if  he  committed  them.  Yet, 
during  all  these  forty-five  years,  he  maintained  a  blameless 
character,  firmly  upheld  his  first  principles  to  the  last,  and  died 
at  length,  like  a  good  soldier  at  his  post,  full  of  days  and  honour. 
The  man  of  whom  these  things  can  be  said  must  have  been  no 
common  man.  It  is  place  and  position  that  specially  prove 
what  we  are.  In  England  at  this  time  there  were  not  four 
spiritual  champions  greater  and  more  honourable  than 
William  Romaine. 


vri. 


CHAPTER  I. 

Bom  tn  Wales  1713 — Educated  at  Hereford,  and  never  at  a  University — Ordained  ITJJ"— 
Curate  of  Llangcitho — ^An  Altered  Man  in  1738 — Extraordinary  Effect  of  his  Preachinf 
— Extra-parochial  and  Out-door  Preaching — License  Withdrawn  by  the  Bishop  to 
1763 — Continues  to  Preach  in  a  Chapel  at  Llangeitho — Died  1790 — Account  of  his 
Portrait. 

[NE  of  the  greatest  spiritual  champions  of  the  i8th  cen- 
tury, whom  1  wish  to  introduce  to  my  readers  in  this 
chapter,  is  one  who  is  very  Httle  known.  The  man 
I  mean  is  the  Rev.  Daniel  Rowlands  of  Llangeitho  in  Cardi- 
ganshire. Thousands  of  my  countrymen,  I  suspect,  have  some 
little  acquaintance  with  Whitefield,  Wesley,  and  Romaine,  who 
never  even  heard  the  name  of  the  great  apostle  of  Wales. 

That  such  should  be  the  case  need  not  surprise  us.  Rowlands 
was  a  Welsh  clergyman,  and  seldom  preached  in  the  English 
language.  He  resided  in  a  very  remote  part  of  the  Princi- 
pality, and  hardly  ever  came  to  London.  His  ministry  was 
almost  entirely  among  the  middle  and  lower  classes  in  about 
five  counties  in  Wales.  These  circumstances  alone  are  enough 
to  account  for  the  fact  that  so  few  people  know  anything  about 
him.  Whatever  the  causes  may  be,  there  are  not  many  EngUsh- 
men  who  understand  Welsh,  or  can  even  pronoimce  the  names 
of  the  parishes  where  Rowlands  used  to  preach.     In  the  fact 


DANIEL  ROWLANDS,    THE  WELSH  PREACHER.      l8l 

of  these  circumstances,  we  have  no  right  to  be  surprised  if  his 
reputation  has  been  confined  to  the  land  of  his  nativity. 

In  addition  to  all  this,  we  must  remember  that  no  biographical 
account  of  Rowlands  was  ever  drawn  up  by  his  contemporaries. 
Materials  for  such  an  account  were  got  together  by  one  of  his 
sons,  and  forwarded  to  Lady  Huntingdon.  Her  death,  un- 
fortunately, immediately  afterwards,  prevented  these  materials 
being  used,  and  what  became  of  them  after  her  death  has  never 
been  ascertained.  The  only  memoirs  of  Rowlands  are  two 
lives,  written  by  clergymen  who  are  still  living.  They  are 
both  excellent  and  useful  in  their  way,  but  of  course  they  labour 
under  the  disadvantage  of  having  been  drawn  up  long  after  the 
mighty  subject  of  them  had  passed  away.*  These  two  volumes, 
and  some  very  valuable  information  which  I  have  succeeded  in 
obtaining  from  a  kind  correspondent  in  Wales,  are  the  only 
mines  of  matter  to  which  I  have  had  access  in  drawing  up  this 
memoir. 

Enough,  however,  and  more  than  enough,  is  extant,  to  prove 
that  Daniel  Rowlands,  in  the  highest  sense,  was  one  of  the 
ipiritual  giants  of  the  i8th  century.  It  is  a  fact  that  Lady 
Huntmgdon,  no  mean  judge  of  clergymen,  had  the  highest 
opinion  of  Rowlands.  Few  people  had  better  opportunities  of 
forming  a  judgment  of  preachers  than  she  had,  and  she  thought 
Rowlands  was  second  only  to  Whitefield.  It  is  a  fact  that  no 
British  preacher  of  the  i8th  century  kept  together  in  one  dis- 
tricrt  such  enormous  congregations  of  souls  for  fifty  years  as 
Rowlands  did.  It  is  a  fact,  above  all,  that  no  man  at  this 
time  seems  to  have  preached  with  such  unmistakable  power  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  accompanying  him  as  Rowlands.  These  are 
great  isolated  facts  that  cannot  be  disputed.     Like  the  few 

*  The  memoirs  of  Rowlands  to  which  I  refer  are  two  small  volumes  by  the  Rev.  John 
Owen,  Rector  of  Thrussington,  and  the  Rev.  E.  Morgan,  Vicar  of  Syston,  both  in  the 
county  of  Leicester.  The  private  information  which  I  have  received  has  been  supplied  by 
»  relative  of  the  great  Welsh  apostle,  though  not  in  lineal  descent,  the  Rev.  William  Row- 
lands of  Fishguard,  South  Wales.  Some  few  facts,  it  may  be  interesting  to  my  readers  ta 
know,  come  from  an  old  man  of  eighty-five,  who,  when  a  boy,  heard  Rowlands  preach. 


1 8 2  BORN  A  T  PANT-  Y-BEUD K 

scattered  bones  of  extinct  mammoths  and  mastodons,  they 
speak  volumes  to  all  who  have  an  ear  to  hear.  They  tell  us 
that,  in  considering  and  examining  Daniel  Rowlands,  we  are 
dealing  with  no  common  man. 

Daniel  Rowlands  was  born  in  the  year  17 13,  at  Pant-y-beudy 
in  the  parish  of  Llancwnlle,  near  Llangeitho,  Cardiganshire. 
He  was  the  second  son  of  the  Rev.  Daniel  Rowlands,  rector  of 
Llangeitho,  by  Jennet,  his  wife.  When  a  child  of  three  years 
old,  he  had  a  narrow  escape  of  death,  like  John  Wesley.  A 
large  stone  fell  down  the  chimney  on  the  very  spot  where  he 
had  been  sitting  two  minutes  before,  which,  had  he  not  pro- 
videntially moved  from  his  place,  must  have  killed  him. 
Nothing  else  is  known  of  the  first  twenty  years  of  his  life, 
except  the  fact  that  he  received  his  education  at  Hereford 
Grammar  School,  and  that  he  lost  his  father  when  he  was 
,  eighteen  years  old.  It  appears,  from  a  tablet  in  Llangeitho 
Church,  that  when  Rowlands  was  bom,  his  father  was  fifty-four 
and  his  mother  forty-five  years  old.  His  father's  removal  could 
not  therefore  have  been  a  premature  event,  as  he  must  have 
attained  the  ripe  age  of  seventy-two. 

From  some  cause  or  other,  of  which  we  can  give  no  account, 
Rowlands  appears  to  have  gone  to  no  University.  His  father's 
death  may  possibly  have  made  a  dift'erence  in  the  circumstances 
of  the  family.  At  any  rate,  the  next  fact  we  hear  about  him 
after  his  father's  death,  is  his  ordination  in  London  at  the  early 
age  of  twenty,  in  the  year  1733.  He  was  ordained  by  letters 
dimissory  from  the  Bishop  of  St.  David's,  and  it  is  recorded,  as 
a  curious  proof  both  of  his  poverty  and  his  earnestness  of 
character,  that  he  went  to  London  on  foot. 

The  title  on  which  Rowlands  was  ordained  was  that  of  curate 
to  his  elder  brother  John,  who  had  succeeded  his  father,  and 
held  the  three  adjacent  livings  of  Llangeitho,  Llancwnlle,  and 
Llandewibrefi.  He  seems  to  have  entered  on  his  ministerial 
duties  like  thousands  in  his  day — without  the  slightest   adr 


HIS  EARLY  LIFE.  1 83 

quate  sense  of  his  responsibilities,  and  utterly  ignorant  of  the 
gospel  of  Christ.  According  to  Owen  he  was  a  good  classical 
scholar,  and  had  made  rapid  progress  at  Hereford  School  in  all 
secular  learning.  But  in  the  neighbourhood  where  he  was  bom 
and  began  his  ministry,  he  is  reported  never  to  have  given  any 
proof  of  fitness  to  be  a  minister.  He  was  only  known  as  a 
man  remarkable  for  natural  vivacity,  of  middle  size,  of  a  firm 
make,  of  quick  and  nimble  action,  very  adroit  and  successful  in 
all  games  and  athletic  amusements,  and  as  ready  as  any  one, 
after  doing  duty  in  church  on  Sunday  morning,  to  spend  the 
rest  of  God's  day  in  sports  and  revels,  if  not  in  drunkenness. 
Such  was  the  character  of  the  great  apostle  of  Wales  for  some 
time  after  his  ordination  !  He  was  never  likely,  afterwards,  to 
forget  St.  Paul's  words  to  the  Corinthians,  "  Such  were  some 
of  you"  (i  Cor.  vi.  11),  or  to  doubt  the  possibility  of  any  one's 
conversion. 

The  precise  time  and  manner  of  Rowlands'  conversion  are 
points  involved  in  much  obscurity.  According  to  Morgan,  the 
first  thing  that  awakened  him  out  of  his  spiritual  slumber,  was 
the  discovery  that,  however  well  he  tried  to  preach,  he  could 
not  prevent  one  of  his  congregations  being  completely  thinned 
by  a  dissenting  minister  named  Pugh.  It  is  said  that  this  made 
him  alter  his  sermons,  and  adopt  a  more  awakening  and  alarm- 
ing style  of  address.  According  to  Owen,  he  was  first  brought 
to  himself  by  hearing  a  well-known  excellent  clergyman,  named 
Griffith  Jones,  preach  at  Llandewibrefi.  On  this  occasion  his 
appearance,  as  he  stood  in  the  crowd  before  the  pulpit,  is  said 
to  have  been  so  full  of  vanity,  conceit,  and  levity,  that  Mr. 
Jones  stopped  in  his  sermon  and  offered  a  special  prayer  for 
him,  that  God  would  touch  his  heart,  and  make  him  an  instru- 
ment for  turning  souls  from  darkness  to  light.  This  prayer  is 
said  to  have  had  an  immense  effect  on  Rowlands,  and  he  is 
reported  to  have  been  a  different  man  from  that  day.  I  do  not 
attempt   to  reconcile  the  two  accounts.     I  can  quite  believe 


1 84  A  CHANGED  MAN. 

that  both  are  true.  When  tlie  Holy  Ghost  takes  in  hand  the 
conversion  of  a  soul,  he  often  causes  a  variety  of  circumstances 
to  concur  and  co-operate  in  producing  it.  This,  I  am  sure, 
would  be  the  testimony  of  all  experienced  believers.  Owen 
got  hold  of  one  set  of  facts,  and  Morgan  of  another.  Both 
happened  probably  about  the  same  time,  and  both  probably 
are  true. 

One  thing,  at  any  rate,  is  very  certain.  From  about  the  year 
1738,  when  Rowlands  was  twenty-five,  a  complete  change  came 
over  his  life  anxi  ministry.  He  began  to  preach  like  a  man  in 
earnest,  and  to  speak  and  act  like  one  who  had  found  out  that 
sin,  and  death,  and  judgment,  and  heaven,  and  hell,  were  great 
realities.  Gifted  beyond  most  men  with  bodily  and  mental 
qualifications  for  the  work  of  the  pulpit,  he  began  to  consecrate 
himself  wholly  to  it,  and  threw  himself,  body,  and  soul,  and 
mind,  into  his  sermons.  The  consequence,  as  might  be  ex 
pected,  was  an  enormous  amount  of  popularity.  The  churches 
where  he  preached  were  crowded  to  suffocation.  The  effect  of 
his  ministry,  in  the  way  of  awakening  and  arousing  sinners,  was 
something  tremendous.  "  The  impression,"  says  Morgan,  "  on 
the  hearts  of  most  people,  was  that  of  awe  and  distress,  and  as 
if  they  saw  the  end  of  the  world  drawing  near,  and  hell  ready 
to  swallow  them  up.  His  fame  soon  spread  throughout  the 
country,  and  people  came  from  all  parts  to  hear  him.  Not 
only  the  churches  were  filled,  but  also  the  churchyards.  It  is 
said  that,  under  deep  conviction,  numbers  of  the  people  lay 
down  on  the  ground  in  the  churchyard  of  Llancwnlle,  and  it 
was  not  easy  for  a  person  to  pass  by  without  stumbling  against 
some  of  them." 

At  this  very  time,  however  curious  it  may  seem,  it  is  clear 
that  Rowlands  did  not  preach  the  full  gospel.  His  testimony 
was  unmistakably  truth,  but  still  it  was  not  the  whole  truth.  He 
painted  the  spirituality  and  condemning  power  of  the  law  in 
•uch  vivid  colours  that  his  hearers  trembled  before  him,  and 


PREACHES  THE  LAW.  185 

cried  out  for  mercy.  But  he  did  not  yet  lift  up  Christ  crucified 
in  all  his  fulness,  as  a  Refuge,  a  Physician,  a  Redeemer  and  a 
Friend ;  and  hence,  though  many  were  wounded,  they  were  not 
healed.  How  long  he  continued  preaching  in  this  strain  it  is, 
at  this  distance  of  time,  extremely  diflicult  to  say.  So  far  as  I 
can  make  out  by  comparing  dates,  it  went  on  for  about  four 
years.  The  work  that  he  did  tor  God  in  this  period,  I  have  no 
doubt,  was  exceedingly  useful,  as  a  preparation  for  the  message 
of  later  days.  I,  for  one,  believe  that  there  are  places,  and 
times,  and  seasons,  and  congregations,  in  which  powerful 
preaching  of  the  law  is  of  the  greatest  value.  I  strongly  sus- 
pect that  many  evangelical  congregations  in  the  present  day 
would  be  immensely  benefited  by  a  broad,  powerful  exhibition 
of  God's  law.  But  that  there  was  too  much  law  in  Rowlands' 
preaching  for  four  years  after  his  conversion,  both  for  his  own 
comfort  and  the  good  of  his  hearers,  is  very  evident  from  the 
fragmentary  accounts  that  remain  of  his  ministry. 

The  means  by  which  the  mind  of  Rowlands  was  gradually 
led  into  the  full  light  of  the  gospel  have  not  been  fully  explained 
by  his  biographers.  Perhaps  the  simplest  explanation  will  be 
found  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  words,  "  If  any  man  will  do 
his  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine"  (John  vii.  17).  Row- 
lands was  evidently  a  man  who  honestly  lived  up  to  his  light, 
and  followed  on  to  know  the  Lord.  His  Master  took  care 
that  he  did  not  long  walk  in  darkness,  but  showed  him  "the 
light  of  life,"  One  principal  instrument  of  guiding  him  into 
the  whole  truth  was  that  same  Mr.  Pugh  who,  at  an  earlier 
period,  had  thinned  his  congregation  !  He  took  great  interest 
in  Rowlands  at  this  critical  era  in  his  spiritual  history,  and 
gave  him  much  excellent  advice.  "  Preach  the  gospel,  dear 
•sir,"  he  would  ^say ;  "  preach  the  gospel  to  the  people,  and 
apply  the  balm  of  Gilead,  the  blood  of  Christ,  to  their  spiritual 
wounds,  and  show  the  necessity  of  faith  in  the  crucified  Saviour." 
Happy  indeed  are  young  ministers  who  have  an  Aquila  Cir 


l86  EFFECT  OF  HIS  PREACHING, 

Priscilla  near  them,  and  when  they  get  good  advice  are  willing 
to  listen  to  it !  The  friendship  of  the  eminent  layman,  Howell 
Harris,  with  whom  Rowlands  became  acquainted  about  this 
time,  was  no  doubt  a  great  additional  help  to  his  soul.  In  one 
way  or  another,  the  great  apostle  of  Wales  was  gradually  led 
into  the  full  noontide  light  of  Christ's  truth ;  and  about  the  year 
1742,  in  the  thirtieth  year  of  his  age,  became  established  as  the 
preacher  of  a  singularly  full,  free,  clear,  and  well-balanced 
gospel. 

The  effect  of  Rowlands'  ministry  from  this  time  forward  to 
his  life's  end  was  something  so  vast  and  prodigious,  that  it 
almost  takes  away  one's  breath  to  hear  of  it.  We  see  un- 
happily so  very  little  of  spiritual  influences  in  the  present  day, 
the  operations  of  the  Holy  Ghost  appear  confined  within  such 
narrow  limits  and  to  reach  so  few  persons,  that  the  harvests 
reaped  at  Llangeitho  at  this  period  sound  almost  in- 
credible. But  the  evidence  of  the  results  of  his  preaching  is  so 
abundant  and  incontestable,  that  there  is  no  rooui  left  for 
doubt.  One  universal  testimony  is  borne  to  the  fact  that  Row- 
lands was  made  a  blessing  to  hundreds  of  souls.  People  used 
to  flock  to  hear  him  preach  from  every  part  of  the  Principality, 
and  to  think  nothing  of  travelling  fifty  or  sixty  miles  for  the 
purpose.  On  sacrament  Sundays  it  was  no  uncommon  thirg 
for  him  to  have  1500,  or  2000,  or  even  2500  communicants! 
The  people  on  these  occasions  would  go  together  in  companies, 
like  the  Jews  going  up  to  the  temple  feast  in  Jerusalem,  and 
would  return  home  afterwards  singing  hymns  and  psalms  on 
their  journey,  caring  nothing  for  fatigue. 

It  is  useless  to  attempt  accounting  for  these  effects  of  the 
great  Welsh  preacher's  ministry,  as  many  do,  by  calling  them 
religious  excitement.  Such  people  would  do  well  to  remember 
that  the  influence  which  Rowlands  had  over  his  hearers  was  an 
influence  which  never  waned  for  at  least  forty-eight  years.  It 
had  its  ebbs  and  flows,  no  doubt,  and  rose  on  several  occasions 


DANGERS  IN  RELIGIOUS  EXCITEMENT.  187 

to  the  spring-tide  of  revivals ;  but  at  no  time  did  his  ministry 
appear  to  be  without  immense  and  unparalleled  results.  Ac- 
cording to  Charles  of  Bala,  and  many  other  unexceptionable 
witnesses,  it  seemed  just  as  attractive  and  effective  when  he 
was  seventy  years  old  as  it  was  when  he  was  fifty.  When  we 
recollect,  moreover,  the  singular  fact  that  on  Sundays,  at  least, 
Rowlands  was  very  seldom  absent  from  Llangeitho,  and  that 
for  forty-eight  years  he  was  constantly  preaching  on  the  same 
spot,  and  not,  like  Whitefield  and  Wesley,  incessantly  address- 
ing fresh  congregations,  we  must  surely  allow  that  few  preachers 
have  had  such  extraordinary  spiritual  success  since  the  days  of 
the  apostles. 

Of  course  it  would  be  absurd  to  say  that  there  was  no  excite* 
ment,  unsound  profession,  hypocrisy,  and  false  fire  among  the 
thousands  who  crowded  to  hear  Rowlands.  There  was  much, 
no  doubt,  as  there  always  will  be,  when  large  masses  of  people 
are  gathered  together.  Nothing,  perhaps,  is  so  infectious  as  a 
kind  of  sham,  sensational  Christianity,  and  particularly  among 
unlearned  and  ignorant  men.  The  Welsh,  too,  are  notoriously 
an  excitable  people.  No  one,  however,  was  more  fully  alive 
to  these  dangers  than  the  great  preacher  himself,  and  no  one 
could  warn  his  hearers  more  incessantly  that  the  Christianity 
which  was  not  practical  was  unprofitable  and  vain.  But,  after 
all,  the  effects  of  Rowlands'  ministry  were  too  plain  and  pal- 
pable to  be  mistaken.  There  is  clear  and  overwhelming 
evidence  that  the  lives  of  many  of  his  hearers  were  vastly 
improved  after  hearing  him  preach,  and  that  sin  was  checked 
and  distinct  knowledge  of  Christianity  increased  to  an  immense 
extent  throughout  the  Principality. 

It  will  surprise  no  Christian  to  hear  that,  from  an  early 
period,  Rowlands  found  it  impossible  to  confine  his  labours  to 
his  own  parish.  The  state  of  the  country  was  so  deplorable  as 
to  religion  and  morality,  and  the  applications  he  received  for 
help  were  so  many,  that  he  felt  he  had  no  choice  in  the  matter. 


1 88  INVITED  TO  PREACH  AT  YSTRADFFIN, 

The  circumstances  under  which  he  first  began  preaching  out  oi 
his  own  neighbourhood  are  so  interesting,  as  described  by 
Owen,  that  I  shall  give  his  words  without  abbreviation : — 

•*  There  was  a  farmer's  wife  in  Ystradffin,  in  the  county  of 
Carmarthen,  who  had  a  sister  living  near  Llangeitho.  This 
woman  came  at  times  to  see  her  sister,  and  on  one  of  these 
occasions  she  heard  some  strange  things  about  the  clergyman 
of  the  parish — that  is,  Rowlands.  The  common  saying  was, 
that  he  was  not  right  in  his  mind.  However,  she  went  to  hear 
him,  and  not  in  vain ;  but  she  said  nothing  then  to  her  sistef 
or  to  anybody  else  about  the  sermon,  and  she  returned  home  to 
her  family.  The  following  Sunday  she  came  again  to  her 
sister's  home  at  Llangeitho.  'What  is  the  matter?' said  her 
sister,  in  great  surprise.  '  Are  your  husband  and  your  children 
well  ] '  She  feared,  from  seeing  her  again  so  soon  and  so  un- 
expectedly, that  something  unpleasant  had  happened,  '  Oh, 
yes,'  was  the  reply,  *  nothing  of  that  kind  is  amiss.'  Again  she 
asked  her,  'What,  then,  is  the  matter?'  To  this  she  replied, 
'  I  don't  well  know  what  is  the  matter.  Something  that  your 
cracked  clergyman  said  last  Sunday  has  brought  me  here  to-day. 
It  stuck  in  my  mind  all  the  week,  and  never  left  me  night  nor 
day.'  She  went  again  to  hear,  and  continued  to  come  every 
Sunday,  though  her  road  was  rough  and  mountainous,  and  her 
home  more  than  twenty  miles  from  Llangeitho. 

"  After  continuing  to  hear  Rowlands  about  half  a  year,  she 
felt  a  strong  desire  to  ask  him  to  come  and  preach  at  Ystradffin. 
She  made  up  her  mind  to  try;  and,  after  service  one  Sunday, 
she  went  to  Rowlands,  and  accosted  him  in  the  following  man- 
ner:— *  Sir,  if  what  you  say  to  us  is  true,  there  are  many  in  my 
neighbourhood  in  a  most  dangerous  condition,  going  fast  to 
eternal  misery.  For  the  sake  of  their  souls,  come  over,  sir,  to 
preach  to  them.'  The  woman's  request  took  Rowlands  by 
surprise;  but  without  a  moment's  hesitation  he  said,  in  his  usual 
quick  way,  'Yes,  I  will  come,  if  you  can  get  the  clergyman's 


COMMENCES  FIELD-PREACHFNG.  189 

permission.'  This  satisfied  the  woman,  and  she  returned  home 
as  much  pleased  as  if  she  had  found  some  rich  treasure.  She 
took  the  first  opportunity  of  asking  her  clergyman's  permission, 
and  easily  succeeded.  Next  Sunday  she  went  joyfully  to 
Llangeitho,  and  informed  Rowlands  of  her  success.  According 
to  his  promise  he  went  over  and  preached  at  Ystradffin,  and 
his  very  first  sermon  there  was  wonderfully  blessed.  Not  less 
than  thirty  persons,  it  is  said,  were  converted  that  day  !  Many 
of  them  afterwards  came  regularly  to  hear  him  at  Llangeitho." 

From  this  time  forth,  Rowlands  never  hesitated  to  preach 
outside  his  o\vn  parish,  wherever  a  door  of  usefulness  was 
opened.  When  he  could,  he  preached  in  churches.  When 
churches  were  closed  to  him,  he  would  preach  in  a  room,  a 
barn,  or  the  open  air.  At  no  period,  however,  of  his  ministerial 
life  does  he  appear  to  have  been  so  much  of  an  itinerant  as 
some  of  his  contemporaries.  He  rightly  judged  that  hearers  of 
the  gospel  required  to  be  built  up  as  well  as  awakened,  and  for 
this  work  he  was  pecuHarly  well  qualified.  Whatever,  there-^ 
fore,  he  did  on  week  days,  the  Sunday  generally  found  him  at 
Llangeitho. 

The  circumstances  under  which  he  first  began  the  practice  of 
field-preaching  were  no  less  remarkable  than  those  under  which 
he  was  called  to  preach  at  Ystradffin.  It  appears  that  after 
his  own  conversion  he  felt  great  anxiety  about  the  spiritual  con- 
dition of  his  old  companions  in  sin  and  folly.  Most  of  them 
were  thoughtless  headstrong  young  men,  who  thoroughly  dis- 
liked his  searching  sermons,  and  refused  at  last  to  come  to 
church  at  all.  "  Their  custom,"  says  Owen,  "  was  to  go  on 
Sunday  to  a  suitable  place  on  one  of  the  hills  above  Llangeitho, 
and  there  amuse  themselves  with  sports  and  games."  Rowlands 
tried  all  means  to  stop  this  sinful  profanation  of  the  Lord's  day, 
but  for  some  time  utterly  failed.  At  last  he  determined  to  go 
there  himself  on  a  Sunday.  As  these  rebels  against  God  would 
not  come  to  him  in  church,  he  resolved  to  go  to  them  on  their 


190  ESTABLISHES  SOCIETIES. 

own  ground.  He  went  therefore,  and  suddenly  breaking  into 
the  ring  as  a  cock-fight  was  going  on,  addressed  them  power- 
fully and  boldly  about  the  sinfulness  of  their  conduct.  The 
effect  was  so  great  that  not  a  tongue  was  raised  to  answer  or 
oppose  him,  and  from  that  day  the  Sabbath  assembly  in  that 
place  was  completely  given  up.  For  the  rest  of  his  life  Row- 
lands never  hesitated,  when  occasion  required,  to  preach  in  the 
open  air. 

The  extra-parochial  work  that  Rowlands  did  by  his  itinerant 
preaching  was  carefully  followed  up  and  not  allowed  to  fall  to 
the  ground.  No  one  understood  better  than  he  did,  that  souls 
require  almost  as  much  attention  after  they  are  awakened  as 
they  do  before,  and  that  in  spiritual  husbandry  there  is  need  of 
watering  as  well  as  planting.  Aided,  therefore,  by  a  few  zealous 
fellow-labourers,  both  lay  and  clerical,  he  established  a  regular 
system  of  Societies,  on  John  Wesley's  plan,  over  the  greater 
part  of  Wales,  through  which  he  managed  to  keep  up  a  con- 
stant communication  with  all  who  valued  the  gospel  that  he 
preached,  and  to  keep  them  well  together.  These  societies 
were  all  connected  with  one  great  Association,  which  met  four 
times  a-year,  and  of  which  he  was  generally  the  moderator. 
The  amount  of  his  influence  at  these  Association-meetings  may 
be  measured  by  the  fact  that  above  one  hundred  ministers  in 
the  Principality  regarded  him  as  their  spiritual  father  !  From 
the  very  first  this  Association  seems  to  have  been  a  most  wisely 
organized  and  useful  institution,  and  to  it  may  be  traced  the 
existence  of  the  Calvinistic  Methodist  body  in  Wales  at  this 
very  day. 

The  mighty  instrument  whom  God  employed  in  doing  all  the 
good  works  I  have  been  describing,  was  not  permitted  to  do 
them  without  many  trials.  For  wise  and  good  ends,  no  doubt 
— to  keep  him  humble  in  the  midst  of  his  immense  success 
and  to  prevent  his  being  exalted  overmuch — he  was  called  upon 
io  drink  many  bitter  cups.     like  his  divine  Master,  he  was  "  a 


RO  WLANDS  ONL  V  A  CUR  A  TE.  !  9 1 

man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief."  The  greatest  of 
these  trials,  no  doubt,  was  his  ejection  from  the  Church  of 
England  in  1763,  after  serving  her  faithfully  for  next  to  nothing 
as  an  ordained  clergyman  for  thirty  years.  The  manner  in 
which  this  disgraceful  transaction  was  accomplished  was  so  re- 
markable, that  it  deserves  to  be  fully  described. 

Rowlands,  it  must  be  remembered,  was  never  an  incumbent. 
From  the  time  of  his  ordination  in  1733,  he  was  simply  curate 
of  Llangeitho,  under  his  elder  brother  John,  until  the  time  of 
his  death  in  1760.  What  kind  of  a  clergyman  his  elder  brother 
was  is  not  very  clear.  He  was  drowned  at  Aberystwith,  and 
we  only  know  that  for  twenty-seven  years  he  seems  to  have 
left  everything  at  Llangeitho  in  Daniel's  hands,  and  to  have  let 
him  do  just  what  he  liked.  Upon  the  death  of  John  Rowlands, 
the  Bishop  of  St.  David's,  who  was  patron  of  Llangeitho,  was 
asked  to  give  the  living  to  his  brother  Daniel,  upon  the  very 
reasonable  ground  that  he  had  been  serving  the  parish  as 
curate  no  less  than  twenty-seven  years  !  The  bishop  unhappily 
refused  to  comply  with  this  request,  alleging  as  his  excuse  that 
he  had  received  many  complaints  about  his  irregularities.  He 
took  the  very  singular  step  of  giving  the  Hving  to  John,  the  son 
of  Daniel  Rowlands,  a  young  man  twenty-seven  years  old. 
The  result  of  this  very  odd  proceeding  was,  that  Daniel  Row- 
lands became  curate  to  his  own  son,  as  he  had  been  curate  to 
his  own  brother,  and  continued  his  labours  at  Llangeitho  for 
three  years  more  uninterruptedly.* 

The  reasons  why  the  Bishop  of  St.  David's  refused  to  give 
Rowlands  the  living  of  Llangeitho  maybe  easily  di  fined.  So 
long  as  he  was  only  a  curate,  he  knew  that  he  could  easily 
silence  him.  Once  instituted  and  inducted  as  incumbent,  he 
would  have  occupied  a  position  from  which  he  could  not  have 

*  For  a  clue  to  all  this  intricacy,  I  am  entirely  indebted  to  the  Rev.  W.  i<,owlands  of 
Fishguard.  Unless  the  facts  I  have  detailed  are  carefully  remembered,  it  is  ieipossible  to 
understand  how  Daniel  Rowlands  was  so  easily  turned  out  of  his  position.  \\c  truth  ii, 
<hat  he  was  only  a  curate 


19?  ffIS  LICENSE  WITHDRA  IVN. 

been  removed  without  much  difficulty.  Influenced,  probably, 
by  some  such  considerations,  the  bishop  permitted  Rowlands 
to  continue  preaching  at  Llangcitho  as  curate  to  his  son,  warn- 
ing him  at  the  same  time  that  the  Welsh  clergy  were  constantly 
complaining  of  his  irregularities,  and  that  he  could  not  long 
look  over  them.  These  "  irregularities,"  be  it  remembered, 
were  neither  drunkenness,  breach  of  the  seventh  commandment, 
hunting,  shooting,  nor  gambling  !  The  whole  substance  of  his 
offence  was  preaching  out  of  his  own  parish  wherever  he  could 
get  hearers  !  To  the  bishop's  threats  Rowlands  replied,  "  that 
he  had  nothing  in  view  but  the  glory  of  God  in  the  salvation 
of  sinners,  and  that  as  his  labours  had  been  so  much  blessed 
he  could  not  desist." 

At  length,  in  the  year  1763,  the  fatal  step  was  taken.  The 
bishop  sent  Rowlands  a  mandate,  revoking  his  license,  and  was 
actually  foolish  enough  to  have  it  served  on  a  Sunday !  The 
niece  of  an  eye-witness  describes  what  happened  in  the  follow- 
ing words:  "My  uncle  was  at  Llangeitho  church  that  very 
morning.  A  stranger  came  forward  and  served  Mr.  Rowlands 
with  a  notice  from  the  bishop,  at  the  very  time  when  he  was 
stepping  into  the  pulpit.  Mr.  Rowlands  read  it,  and  told  the 
people  that  the  letter  which  he  had  just  received  was  from  the 
bishop,  revoking  his  license.  Mr.  Rowlands  then  said,  *We 
must  obey  the  higher  powers.  Let  me  beg  you  will  go  out 
quietly,  and  then  we  shall  conclude  the  service  of  the  morning 
by  the  church  gate.'  And  so  they  walked  out,  weeping  and 
crying.  My  uncle  thought  there  was  not  a  dry  eye  in  the  church 
at  the  moment.  Mr.  Rowlands  accordingly  preached  outside 
the  church  with  extraordinary  effect." 

A  more  unhappy,  ill-timed,  blundering  exercise  of  episcopal 
power  than  this,  it  is  literally  impossible  to  conceive!  Here 
was  a  man  of.ingular  gifts  and  graces,  who  had  no  objection 
to  anything  in  the  Articles  or  Prayer-book,  cast  out  of  the 
Church  of  England  for  no  other  fault   than   excess  of  zeaL 


PREACHES  IN  A  CHAPEL.  193 

And  this  ejection  took  place  at  a  time  when  scores  of  Welsh 
clergymen  were  shamefully  neglecting  their  duties,  and  too  often 
were  drunkards,  gamblers,  and  sportsmen,  if  not  worse  !  Tha 
the  bishop  afterwards  bitterly  repented  of  what  he  did,  is  very 
poor  consolation  indeed.  It  was  too  late.  The  deed  was 
done.  Rowlands  was  shut  out  of  the  Church  of  England,  and 
an  immense  number  of  his  people  all  over  Wales  followed  him. 
A  breach  was  made  in  the  walls  of  the  Established  Church 
which  will  probably  never  be  healed.  As  long  as  the  world 
stands,  the  Church  of  England  in  Wales  will  never  get  over  the 
injury  done  to  it  by  the  preposterous  and  stupid  revocation  of 
Daniel  Rowlands'  license. 

There  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  Rowlands  felt  his  expul- 
sion most  keenly.  However,  it  made  no  difference  whatever 
in  his  line  of  action.  His  friends  and  followers  soon  built  him 
a  large  and  commodious  chapel  in  the  parish  of  liangeitho,  and 
migrated  there  in  a  body.  He  did  not  even  leave  Liangeitho 
rectory;  for  his  son,  being  rector,  allowed  him  to  reside  there 
as  long  as  he  lived.  In  fact,  the  Church  of  England  lost  every- 
thing by  ejecting  him,  and  gained  nothing  at  all.  The  great 
Welsh  preacher  was  never  silenced  practically  for  a  single  da}-, 
and  the  Church  of  England  only  reaped  a  harvest  of  odium 
and  dislike  in  Wales,  which  is  bearing  fruit  to  this  very  hour. 

From  the  time  of  his  ejection  to  his  death,  the  course  of 
Rowlands'  life  seems  to  have  been  comparatively  undisturbed. 
No  longer  persecuted  and  snubbed  by  ecclesiastical  superiors,- 
he  held  on  his  way  for  twenty-seven  years  in  great  quietness, 
undiminished  popularity,  and  immense  usefulness,  and  died  at 
length  in  Liangeitho  rectory  on  October  the-  i6th,  1790,  at  the 
ripe  old  age  of  seventy-seven. 

"  He  was  unwell  during  the  last  year  of  his  life,"  says  Mor- 
gan, "  but  able  to  go  on  with  his  ministry  at  Liangeitho,  though 
he  scarcely  went  anywhere  else.  It  was  his  particular  wish  that 
he  might  go  direct  from  his  work  to  his  everlasting  rest,  and 

(195)  13 


194  HIS  DEA  TH  AND  BURIAL, 

not  be  kept  long  on  a  death-bed.  His  heavenly  Father  was 
pleased  to  grant  his  desire,  and  when  his  departure  was  draw- 
ijig  nigh,  he  had  some  pleasing  idea  of  his  approaching 
end." 

One  of  his  children  has  supplied  the  following  interesting 
account  of  his  last  days: — "My  father  male  the  following  ob- 
servations in  his  sermons  two  Sundays  before  his  departure. 
He  said,  *  I  am  almost  leaving,  and  am  on  the  point  of  being 
taken  from  you.  I  am  not  tired  of  work,  but  in  it.  I  have 
some  presentiment  that  my  heavenly  Father  will  soon  release 
me  from  my  labours,  and  bring  me  to  my  everlasting  rest. 
But  I  hope  that  he  will  continue  his  gracious  presence  with 
you  after  I  am  gone.'  He  told  us,  conversing  on  his  departure 
after  worship  the  last  Sunday,  that  he  should  like  to  die  in  a 
quiet,  serene  manner,  and  hoped  that  he  should  not  be  disturbed 
by  our  sighs  and  crying.  He  added,  *  I  have  no  more  to  state, 
by  way  of  acceptance  with  God,  than  I  have  always  stated  :  I 
die  as  apoor  sinner,  depending  fully  and  entirely  on  the  merits 
of  a  crucified  Saviour  for  my  acceptance  with  God.*  In  his 
last  hours  he  often  used  the  expression,  in  Latin,  which  Wesley 
used  on  his  death-bed,  '  God  is  with  us  ;'  and  finally  departed 
in  great  peace." 

Rowlands  was  buried  at  Llangeitho,  at  the  east  end  of  the 
church.  His  enemies  could  shut  him  out  of  the  pulpit,  but 
not  out  of  the  churchyard.  An  old  inhabitant  of  the  parish, 
now  eighty-five  years  of  age,  says :  "  I  well  remember  his 
tomb,  and  many  times  have  I  read  the  inscription,  his  name, 
and  age,  with  that  of  his  wife's,  Eleanor,  who  died  a  year 
and  two  months  after  her  husband.  The  stone  was  laid  on 
a  three  feet  wall,  but  it  is  now  worn  out  by  the  hand  of  time." 

Rowlands  was  once  married.  It  is  believed  that  his  wife  was 
the  daughter  of  Mr.  Davies  of  Glynwchaf,  near  Llangeitho.  He 
had  seven  children  who  survived  him,  and  two  who  died  in 
infancy.     What  became  of  all  his  family,  and  whether  there  are 


STOR  Y  OF  HIS  FOR  TRA  IT.  195 

any  lineal  descendants  of  his,  I  have  been  unable  to  ascertain 
with  accuracy. 

The  engraving  of  him  which  faces  the  title-page  of  the  lives 
drawn  up  by  Morgan  and  Owen,  gives  one  the  idea  of  Row- 
lands being  a  grave  and  solemn-looking  man.  It  is  probably 
taken  from  the  picture  of  him  which  Lady  Huntingdon  sent  an 
artist  to  take  at  the  very  end  of  his  life.  The  worthy  old  saint 
did  not  at  all  like  having  his  portrait  taken.  "  Why  do  you 
object,  sir?"  said  the  artist  at  last.  "  Whyl"  replied  the  old 
man,  with  great  emphasis  ;  "I  am  only  a  bit  of  clay  like  thy- 
self." And  then  he  exclaimed,  "  Alas  !  alas  I  alas  !  taking  the 
picture  of  a  poor  old  sinner  !  alas!  alas  !" — "  His  countenance," 
says  Morgan,  "  altered  and  fell  at  once,  and  this  is  the  reason 
why  the  picture  appears  so  heavy  and  cast  down." 

I  have  other  things  yet  to  tell  about  Rowlands.  His  preach- 
ing and  the  many  characteristic  anecdotes  about  him  deserve 
special  notice.  But  I  must  reserve  these  points  for  another 
chapter. 


CHAPTER  IL 

Analysis  of  his  Preaching — Much  of  Christ — Richnesi  of  Thought — Felicity  of  Languaf^ 
—Large  Measure  of  Practical  and  Experimental  Teaching — Manner,  Deliveiy,  and 
Voice — Christmas  Evans'  Description  of  his  Preaching — Testimony  of  Mr.  Jones  of 
Creaton — Specimens  of  Rowlands'  Sermons — Inner  Life  and  Private  Character- 
Humility,  Prayerfulness,  Diligence,  Self-Denial,  CouragCj  Fervour — Rowland  Hill's 
Anecdote. 

In  taking  a  general  survey  of  the  ministry  of  Daniel  Rowlands 
of  Llangeitho,  the  principal  thing  that  strikes  one  is  the  extra- 
ordinary power  of  his  preaching.  There  was  evidently  some- 
thing very  uncommon  about  his  sermons.  On  this  point  we 
have  the  clear  and  distinct  testimony  of  a  great  cloud  of  wit- 
nesses. In  a  day  when  God  raised  up  several  preachers  of  very 
|;reat  power,  Rowlands  was  considered  by  competent  judges  to 
be  equalled  by  only  one  man,  and  to  be  excelled  by  none. 


196  ROWLANDS'  SERMONS. 

Whitefield  was  thought  to  equal  him  ;  but  even  Whitefield  was 
not  thought  to  surpass  him.  This  is  undoubtedly  high  praise. 
Some  account  of  the  good  man's  sermons  will  probably  prove 
interesting  to  most  of  ray  readers.  What  were  their  pecuhar 
characteristics  ?     What  were  they  like  'J 

I  must  begin  by  frankly  confessing  that  the  subject  is  sur- 
rounded by  difficulties.  The  materials  out  of  which  we  have 
to  form  our  judgment  are  exceedingly  small.  Eight  sermons, 
translated  out  of  Welsh  into  English  in  the  year  1774,  are  the 
only  literary  record  which  exists  of  the  great  Welsh  apostle's 
fifty  years'  ministry.  Besides  these  sermons,  and  a  few  frag- 
ments of  occasional  addresses,  we  have  hardly  any  means  of 
testing  the  singularly  high  estimate  which  his  contemporaries 
formed  of  his  preaching  powers.  When  I  add  to  this,  that  the 
eight  sermons  extant  appear  to  be  poorly  translated,  the  reader 
will  have  some  idea  of  the  difficulties  I  have  to  contend  with. 

Let  me  remark,  however,  once  for  all,  that  when  the  genera- 
tion which  heard  a  great  preacher  has  passed  away,  it  is  often 
hard  to  find  out  the  secret  of  his  popularity.  No  well-read 
person  can  be  ignorant  that  Luther  and  Knox  in  the  sixteenth 
century,  Stephen  Marshall  in  the  Commonwealth  times,  and 
George  Whitefield  in  the  eighteenth  century,  were  the  most 
popular  and  famous  preachers  of  their  respective  eras.  Yet  na 
one,  perhaps,  can  read  their  sermons,  as  we  now  possess  them, 
without  a  secret  feeling  that  they  do  not  answer  to  their  reputa- 
tion. In  short,  it  is  useless  to  deny  that  there  is  some  hidden 
secret  about  pulpit  power  which  baffles  all  attempts  at  defini- 
tion. The  man  who  attempts  to  depreciate  the  preaching  of 
Rowlands  on  the  ground  that  the  only  remains  of  him  now 
extant  seem  poor,  will  find  that  he  occupies  an  untenable  posi- 
tion. He  might  as  well  attempt  to  depreciate  the  great  cham- 
pions of  the  German  and  Scottish  Reformations. 

After  all,  we  must  remember  that  no  man  has  a  right  to  paw 
unfavourable  criticisms  on  the  remains  of  great  popular  preachers, 


ANALYSIS  OF  HIS  PREACHING.  197 

unless  he  has  first  thoroughly  considered  what  kind  of  thing  a 
popular  sermon  must  of  necessity  be.  The  vast  majority  of 
sermon-hearers  do  not  want  fine  words,  close  reasoning,  deep 
philosophy,  metaphysical  abstractions,  nice  distinctions,  elabo- 
rate composition,  profound  learning.  They  delight  in  plain 
language,  simple  ideas,  forcible  illustrations,  direct  appeals  to 
heart  and  conscience,  short  sentences,  fervent,  loving  earnest- 
ness of  manner.  He  who  possesses  such  qualifications  will 
seldom  preach  to  empty  benches.  He  who  possesses  them  in 
a  high  degree  will  always  be  a  popular  preacher.  Tried  by 
this  standard,  the  popularity  of  Luther  and  Knox  is  easily 
explained.  Rowlands  appears  to  have  been  a  man  of  this 
stamp.  An  intelligent  judge  of  popular  preaching  can  hardly 
fail  to  see  in  his  remains,  through  all  the  many  disadvantages 
under  which  we  read  them,  some  of  the  secrets  of  his  marvel- 
lous success. 

Having  cleared  my  way  by  these  preliminary  remarks,  I  will 
proceed  at  once  to  show  my  readers  some  of  the  leading  charac- 
teristics of  the  great  Welsh  evangelist's  preaching,  I  give  them 
as  the  result  of  a  close  analysis  of  his  literary  remains.  Weak 
and  poor  as  they  undoubtedly  look  in  the  garb  of  a  translation, 
I  venture  to  think  that  the  following  points  stand  out  clearly  in 
Rowlands'  sermons,  and  give  us  a  tolerable  idea  of  what  his 
preaching  generally  was. 

The  first  thing  that  I  notice  in  the  remains  of  Rowlands  is 
the  constant  presence  of  Christ  m  all  his  addresses.  The  Lord 
Jesus  stands  out  prominently  in  almost  every  page.  That  his 
doctrine  was  always  eminently  "evangelical"  is  a  point  on 
which  I  need  not  waste  words.  The  men  about  whom  I  am 
writing  were  all  men  of  that  stamp.  But  of  all  the  spiritual  cham- 
pions of  last  century,  none  appear  to  me  to  have  brought  Christ 
forward  more  prominently  than  Rowlands.  The  blood,  the 
sacrifice,  the  righteousness,  the  kindness,  the  patience,  the 
saving  grace,  the  example,  the  greatness  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  are 


[9*  RICHNESS  OF  THOUGHT. 

subjects  which  appear  to  run  through  every  sermon,  and  to  crop 
out  at  every  turn.  It  seems  as  if  the  preacher  could  never  say 
enough  about  his  Master,  and  was  never  weary  of  commending 
him  to  his  hearers.  His  divinity  and  his  humanity,  his  office 
and  his  character,  his  death  and  his  Hfe,  are  pressed  on  our 
attention  in  every  possible  connection.  Yet  it  all  seems  to 
come  in  naturally,  and  without  effort,  as  if  it  were  the  regular 
outflowing  of  the  preacher's  mind,  and  the  language  of  a  heart 
speaking  from  its  abundance.  Here,  I  suspect,  was  precisely 
one  of  the  great  secrets  of  Rowlands'  power.  A  ministry  full  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  is  exactly  the  sort  of  ministry  that  I  should 
expect  God  to  bless.  Christ-honouring  sermons  are  just  the 
sermons  that  the  Holy  Spirit  seals  with  success. 

The  second  thing  that  I  notice  in  the  remains  of  Rowlands  is 
a  singular  richness  of  thought  and  matter.  Tradition  records 
that  he  was  a  diligent  student  all  his  life,  and  spent  a  great  deal 
of  time  in  the  preparation  of  his  sermons.  I  can  quite  believe 
this.  Even  in  the  miserable  relics  which  we  possess,  I  fancy  I 
detect  strong  internal  evidence  that  he  was  deeply  read  in 
Puritan  divinity.  I  suspect  that  he  was  very  familiar  with  the 
writings  of  such  men  as  Gurnall,  Watson,  Brooks,  Clarkson, 
and  their  contemporaries,  and  was  constantly  storing  his  mind 
with  fresh  thoughts  from  their  pages.  Those  who  imagine  that 
the  great  Welsh  preacher  was  nothing  but  an  empty  declaimer 
of  trite  commonplaces,  bald  platitudes,  and  hackneyed  phrases, 
with  a  lively  manner  and  a  loud  voice,  are  utterly  and  entirely 
mistaken.  They  will  find,  even  in  the  tattered  rags  of  his  trans- 
lated sermons,  abundant  proof  that  Rowlands  was  a  man  who 
read  much  and  thought  much,  and  gave  his  hearers  plenty  to 
carry  away.  Even  ih  the  thin  little  volume  of  eight  sermons 
which  I  have,  I  find  frequent  quotations  from  Chrysostom, 
Augustine,  Ambrose,  Bernard,  and  Theophylact.  I  find  fre- 
quent  reference  to  things  recorded  by  Greek  and  Latin  classical 
writers.    I  mark  such  names  as  Homer,  Socrates,  Plato,  ^Eschines, 


FELICITY  OF  LANGUAGE.  /99 

Aristotle,  Pythagoras,  Carneades.  Alexander  the  Great,  /uliua 
Caesar,  Nero,  the  Augean  stable,  Thersites,  and  Xantippe,  make 
their  appearance  here  and  there.  That  Rowlands  was  indebted 
to  his  friends  the  Puritans  for  most  of  these  materials,  I  make 
no  question  at  all.  But  wherever  he  may  have  got  his  learning, 
there  is  no  doubt  that  he  possessed  it,  and  knew  how  to  make 
use  of  it  in  his  sermons.  In  this  respect  I  think  he  excelled  ail 
his  contemporaries.  Not  one  of  them  shows  so  much  reading 
in  his  sermons  as  the  curate  of  Llangeitho.  Here  again,  I 
venture  to  suggest,  was  one  great  secret  of  Rowlands'  success. 
The  man  who  takes  much  pains  with  his  sermons,  and  never 
brings  out  what  has  "  cost  him  nothing,"  is  just  the  man  I 
expect  God  will  bless.  We  want  well-beaten  oil  for  the  service 
of  the  sanctuary. 

The  third  thing  that  I  notice  in  the  remains  of  Rowlands  is 
the  curious  felicity  of  the  language  in  which  he  expressed  his 
ideas.  Of  course  this  is  a  point  on  which  I  must  speak  diffi- 
dently, knowing  literally  nothing  of  the  Welsh  tongue,  and  entirely 
dependent  on  translation.  But  it  is  impossible  to  mistake  certain 
peculiarities  in  style  which  stand  forth  prominently  in  every- 
thing which  comes  from  the  great  Welsh  apostle's  mind.  He 
abounds  in  short,  terse,  pithy,  epigrammatic,  proverbial  sentences, 
of  that  kind  which  arrests  the  attention  and  sticks  in  the 
memory  of  hearers.  He  has  a  singularly  happy  mode  of  quot- 
ing Scriptures  in  confirming  and  enforcing  the  statement  he 
makes.  Above  all,  he  is  rich  in  images  and  illustrations,  drawn 
from  everything  almost  in  the  world,  but  always  put  in  such  a 
way  that  the  simplest  mind  can  understand  them.  Much  of  the 
peculiar  interest  of  his  preaching,  I  suspect,  may  be  traced  to 
this  talent  of  putting  things  in  the  most  vivid  and  pictorial  way. 
He  made  his  hearers  feel  that  they  actually  saw  the  things  of 
which  he  was  speaking.  No  intelligent  reader  of  the  Bible,  I 
suppose,  needs  to  be  reminded  that  in  all  this  Rowlands  walked 
in  the  footsteps  of  his  divine  Master.     The  sermons  of  Him 


200  HIS  PRACTICAL  TEACHING. 

who  "  spake  as  never  man  spake,"  were  not  elaborate  rhetorical 
arguments.  Parables  founded  on  subjects  familiar  to  the 
humblest  intellect,  terse,  broad,  sententious  statements,  were  the 
staple  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  preaching.  Much  of  the 
marvellous  success  of  Rowlands,  perhaps,  may  be  traced  up  to 
his  wise  imitation  of  the  best  of  patterns,  the  great  Head  of  the 
Church. 

The  fourth  and  last  thing  which  I  notice  in  the  remains  of 
Rowlands,  is  the  large  measure  oi  practical  and  experimental 
teaching  which  enters  into  all  his  sermons.  Anxious  as  he  un- 
doubtedly was  to  convert  sinners  and  arouse  the  careless,  he 
never  seems  to  forget  the  importance  of  guiding  the  Church  of 
God  and  building  up  believers.  Warnings,  counsels,  encourage- 
ments, consolations  suited  to  professing  Christians,  are  con- 
tinually appearing  in  all  his  discourses.  The  peculiar  character 
of  his  ministerial  position  may  partly  account  for  this.  He  was 
always  preaching  in  the  same  place,  and  to  many  of  the  sam$ 
hearers,  on  Sundays.  He  was  not  nearly  so  much  an  itinerant 
as  many  of  his  contemporaries.  He  could  not,  like  Whitefield, 
and  Wesley,  and  Berridge,  preach  the  same  sermon  over  and 
over  again,  and  yet  feel  that  probably  none  of  his  hearers  had 
heard  it  before.  Set  for  the  defence  of  the  gospel  at  Llangeitho 
every  Sunday,  and  seeing  every  week  the  same  faces  looking  up 
to  him,  he  probably  found  it  absolutely  necessary  to  "  bring 
forth  new  things  as  well  as  old,"  and  to  be  often  exhorting 
many  of  his  hearers  not  to  stand  still  in  first  principles,  but  to 
"  go  on  unto  perfection."  But  be  the  cause  what  it  may,  there 
is  abundant  evidence  in  the  sermons  of  Rowlands  that  he  never 
forgot  the  believers  among  his  people,  and  generally  contrived 
to  say  a  good  many  things  for  their  special  benefit.  Here 
again,  I  venture  to  think,  we  have  one  more  clue  to  his  extra- 
ordinary usefulness.  He  "  rightly  divided  the  word  of  truth," 
and  gave  to  every  man  his  portion.  Most  preachers  of  the 
gospel,  I  suspect,  fail  greatly  in  this  matter.     They  either  neglect 


HIS  MANNER  AND  DELIVERY.  20I 

the  unconverted  or  the  true  Christians  in  their  congregations. 
They  either  spend  their  strength  in  perpetually  teaching  elemen- 
tary truths,  or  else  they  dwell  exclusively  on  the  privileges  and 
duties  of  God's  children.  From  this  one-sided  style  of  preach- 
ing Rowlands  seems  to  have  been  singularly  free.  Even  in  the 
midst  of  the  plainest  addresses  to  the  ungodly,  he  never  loses 
the  opportunity  of  making  a  general  appeal  to  the  godly.  In  a 
word,  his  ministry  of  God's  truth  was  thoroughly  well-balanced 
and  well-proportioned  ;  and  this  is  just  the  ministry  which  we 
may  expect  the  Holy  Ghost  will  bless. 

The  manner  and  delivery  of  this  great  man,  when  he  was  in 
the  act  of  preaching,  require  some  special  notice.  Every  sen- 
sible Christian  knows  well  that  voice  and  delivery  have  a  great 
deal  to  say  to  the  effectiveness  of  a  speaker,  and  above  all  of 
one  who  speaks  in  the  pulpit.  A  sermon  faultless  both  in  doc- 
trine and  composition  will  often  sound  dull  and  tiresome,  when 
tamely  read  by  a  clergyman  with  a  heavy  monotonous  manner. 
A  sermon  of  little  intrinsic  merit,  and  containing  perhaps  not 
half-a-dozen  ideas,  will  often  pass  muster  as  briUiant  and  elo- 
quent, when  delivered  by  a  lively  speaker  with  a  good  voice. 
For  want  of  good  delivery  some  men  make  gold  look  like  copper, 
while  others,  by  the  sheer  force  of  a  good  delivery,  make  a  few 
halfpence  pass  for  gold.  Truths  divine  seem  really  "  mended" 
by  the  tongue  of  some,  while  they  are  marred  and  damaged  by 
others.  There  is  deep  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  human  nature 
in  the  answer  given  by  an  ancient  to  one  who  asked  what  were 
the  first  qualifications  of  an  orator  :  "  The  first  qualification," 
he  said,  "  is  action  ;  and  the  second  is  action  ;  and  the  third  is 
action. "  The  meaning  of  course  was,  that  it  was  almost  im- 
possible to  overrate  the  importance  of  manner  and  delivery. 

The  voice  of  Rowlands,  according  to  tradition,  was  remark- 
ably powerful.  We  may  easily  believe  this,  when  we  recollect 
that  he  used  frequently  to  preach  to  thousands  in  the  open  air. 
and  to  make  himself  heard  by  all  without  difficulty.     But  we 


foa  mS  POWERFUL   VOICE. 

must  not  suppose  that  power  was  the  only  attribute  of  his  vocal 
organ,  and  that  he  was  nothing  better  than  one  who  screamed, 
shouted,  and  bawled  louder  than  other  ministers.  There  is 
universal  testimony  from  all  good  judges  who  heard  him,  that 
his  voice  was  singularly  moving,  affecting,  and  tender,  and  pos- 
sessed a  strange  power  of  drawing  forth  the  sympathies  of  his 
hearers.  In  this  respect  he  seems  to  have  resembled  Baxter 
and  Whitefield.  Like  Whitefield,  too,  his  feelings  never  inter- 
fered with  the  exercise  of  his  voice;  and  even  when  his  affections 
moved  him  to  tears  in  preaching,  he  was  able  to  continue  speak- 
ing with  uninterrupted  clearness.  It  is  a  striking  feature  of  the 
moving  character  of  his  voice,  that  a  remarkable  revival  of  religion 
began  at  Llangeitho  while  Rowlands  was  reading  the  litany  of 
the  Church  of  England.  The  singularly  touching  and  melting 
manner  in  which  he  repeated  the  words,  "  By  thine  agony  and 
bloody  sweat,  good  Lord,  deliver  us,"  so  much  affected  the  whole 
congregation,  that  almost  all  began  to  weep  loudly,  and  an 
awakening  of  spiritual  life  commenced  which  extended  through- 
out the  neighbourhood. 

Of  the  manner,  demeanour,  and  action  of  Rowlands  in  the 
delivery  of  his  sermons,  mention  is  made  by  all  who  write  of 
him.  All  describe  them  as  being  something  so  striking  and 
remarkable,  that  no  one  could  have  an  idea  of  them  but  an 
eye-witness.  He  seems  to  have  combined  in  a  most  extraor- 
dinary degree  solemnity  and  liveHness,  dignity  and  famiharity, 
depth  and  fervour.  His  singular  plainness  and  directness  made 
even  the  poorest  feel  at  home  when  he  preached ;  and  yet  he 
never  degenerated  into  levity  or  buffoonery.  His  images  and 
similes  brought  things  home  to  his  hearers  with  such  graphic 
power  that  they  could  not  help  sometimes  -smiling.  But  he 
never  made  his  Master's  business  ridiculous  by  pulpit  joking.  If 
he  did  say  things  that  made  people  smile  occasionally,  he  fai 
more  often  said  things  that  made  them  weep. 

The  following  sketch  by  the  famous  Welsh  preacher,  Christ- 


TESTIMONY  OF  CHRISTMAS  EVANS.  203 

mas  Evans,  will  probably  give  as  good  an  idea  as  we  can  now 
obtain  of  Rowlands  in  the  pulpit.  It  deserves  the  more  atten- 
tion, because  it  is  the  sketch  of  a  Welshman,  an  eye-witness,  a 
keen  observer,  a  genuine  admirer  of  his  hero,  and  one  who  was 
himself  in  after-days  a  very  extraordinary  man  : — 

"  Rowlands'  mode  of  preaching  was  peculiar  to  himself — 
inimitable.  Methinks  I  see  him  now  entering  in  his  black 
gown  through  a  little  door  from  the  outside  to  the  pulpit,  and 
making  his  appearance  suddenly  before  the  immense  congrega- 
tion. His  countenance  was  in  every  sense  adorned  with  ma- 
jesty, and  it  bespoke  the  man  of  strong  sense,  eloquence,  and 
authority.  His  forehead  was  high  and  prominent ;  his  eye  was 
quick,  sharp,  and  penetrating ;  he  had  an  aquiline  or  Roman 
nose,  proportionable  comely  lips,  projecting  chin,  and  a  sono- 
rous, commanding,  and  well-toned  voice. 

"  When  he  made  his  appearance  in  the  pulpit,  he  frequently 
gave  out,  with  a  clear  and  audible  voice,  Psalm  xxvii.  4  to  be 
sung.  Only  one  verse  was  sung  before  sermon,  in  those  days 
notable  for  divine  influences;  but  the  whole  congregation  joined 
in  singing  it  with  great  fervour.  Then  Rowlands  would  stand 
up,  and  read  his  text  distinctly  in  the  hearing  of  all.  The  whole 
congregation  were  all  ears  and  most  attentive,  as  if  they  were 
on  the  point  of  hearing  some  evangelic  and  heavenly  oracle, 
and  the  eyes  of  all  the  people  were  at  the  same  time  most 
intensely  fixed  upon  him.  He  had  at  the  beginning  of  his  dis- 
course some  stirring,  striking  idea,  like  a  small  box  of  ointment 
which  he  opened  before  the  great  one  of  his  sermon,  and  it 
filled  all  the  house  with  its  heavenly  perfume,  as  the  odour  of 
Mary's  alabaster  box  of  ointment  at  Bethany  ;  and  the  congre- 
gation being  delightfully  enlivened  with  the  sweet  odour,  were 
prepared  to  look  for  more  of  it  from  one  box  after  the  other 
throughout  the  sermon. 

"  I  will  borrow  another  similitude  in  order  to  give  some  idea 
of  his  most  energetic  eloquence.     It  shall  be  taken  from  the 


*04  TESTIMONY  OF  CHRISTMAS  EVANS, 

trade  of  a  blacksmith.  The  smith  first  puts  the  iron  into  the 
fire,  and  then  blows  the  bellows  softly,  making  some  inquiries 
respecting  the  work  to  be  done,  while  his  eye  all  the  time  is 
fixed  steadily  on  the  process  of  heating  the  iron  in  the  fire.  But 
as  soon  as  he  perceives  it  to  be  in  a  proper  and  pliable  state, 
he  carries  it  to  the  anvil,  and  brings  the  weighty  hammer  and 
sledge  down  on  the  metal,  and  in  the  midst  of  stunning  noise 
and  fiery  sparks  emitted  from  the  glaring  metal,  he  fashions  and 
moulds  it  at  his  will. 

"  Thus  Rowlands,  having  glanced  at  his  notes  as  a  matter  of 
form,  would  go  on  with  his  discourse  in  a  calm  and  deliberate 
manner,  speaking  with  a  free  and  audible  voice  ;  but  he  would 
gradually  become  warmed  with  his  subject,  and  at  length  his 
voice  became  so  elevated  and  authoritative,  that  it  resounded 
through  the  whole  chapel.  The  effect  on  the  people  was  won- 
derful ;  you  could  see  nothing  but  smiles  and  tears  running 
down  the  face  of  all.  The  first  flame  of  heavenly  devotion 
under  the  first  division  having  subsided,  he  would  again  look 
on  his  scrap  of  notes,  and  begin  the  second  time  to  melt  and 
make  the  minds  of  the  people  supple,  until  he  formed  them 
again  into  the  same  heavenly  temper.  And  thus  he  would  do 
six  or  seven  times  in  the  same  sermon. 

"Rowlands'  voice,  countenance,  and  appearance  used  to 
change  exceedingly  in  the  pulpit,  and  he  seemed  to  be  greatly 
excited ;  but  there  was  nothing  low  or  disagreeable  in  him — all 
was  becoming,  dignified,  and  excellent.  There  was  such  a 
vehement,  invincible  flame  in  his  ministry,  as  eff'ectually  drove 
away  the  careless,  worldly,  dead  spirit ;  and  the  people  so 
awakened  drew  nigh,  as  it  were,  to  the  bright  cloud — to  Christ, 
to  Moses,  and  Elias — eternity  and  its  amazing  realities  rushing 
into  their  minds. 

"  There  was  very  little,  if  any,  inference  or  application  at  the 
end  of  Rowlands'  sermon,  for  he  had  been  applying  and  en- 
forcing the  glorious  truths  of  the  gospel  throughout  the  whole 


OTHER  WITNESSES,  »OS 

of  his  discourse.  He  would  conclude  with  a  very  few  striking 
and  forcible  remarks,  which  were  most  overwhelming  and  in- 
vincible ;  and  then  he  would  make  a  very  sweet,  short  prayer, 
and  utter  the  benediction.  Then  he  would  make  haste  out  of 
the  pulpit  through  the  little  door.  His  exit  was  as  sudden  as 
his  entrance.  Rowlands  was  a  star  of  the  greatest  magnitude 
that  appeared  the  last  century  in  the  Principality ;  and  perhaps 
there  has  not  been  his  like  in  Wales  since  the  days  of  the 
apostles." 

It  seems  almost  needless  to  add  other  testimony  to  this 
graphic  sketch,  though  it  might  easily  be  added.  The  late  Mr. 
Jones  of  Creaton,  who  was  no  mean  judge,  and  heard  the 
greatest  preachers  in  England  and  Wales,  used  to  declare  that 
"he  never  heard  but  one  Rowlands."  The  very  first  time  he 
heard  him,  he  was  so  struck  with  his  manner  of  delivery,  as  well 
as  his  sermon,  that  it  led  him  to  a  serious  train  of  thought, 
which  ultimately  ended  in  his  conversion. — Charles  of  Bala, 
himself  a  very  eminent  minister,  said  that  there  was  a  pecu- 
liar "dignity  and  grandeur"  in  Rowlands'  ministry,  "as  well 
as  profound  thoughts,  strength  and  melodiousness  of  voice, 
and  clearness  and  animation  in  exhibiting  the  deep  things  ot 
God." — A  Birmingham  minister,  who  came  accidentally  to  a 
place  in  Wales  where  Rowlands  was  preaching  to  an  immense 
congregation  in  the  open  air,  says  :  "  I  never  witnessed  such  a 
scene  before.  The  striking  appearance  of  the  preacher,  and  hig 
zeal,  animation,  and  fervour  v/ere  beyond  description.  Row- 
lands' countenance  was  most  expressive ;  it  glowed  almost  like 
an  angel's." 

After  saying  so  much  about  the  gifts  and  power  of  this  graat 
preacher,  it  is  perhaps  hardly  fair  to  offer  any  specimens  of  his 
sermons.  To  say  nothing  of  the  fact  that  we  only  possess  them 
in  the  form  of  translations,  it  must  never  be  forgotten  that  true 
pulpit  eloquence  can  rarely  be  expressed  on  paper.  Wise  men 
know  well  that  sermons  which  are  excellent  to  listen  to,  are  just 


t06  SPECIMENS  OF  HIS  SERMONS. 

the  sermons  which  do  not  "  read "  well.  However,  as  I  have 
hitherto  generally  given  my  readers  some  illustrations  of  the 
style  of  my  i8th  century  heroes,  they  will  perhaps  be  disap- 
pointed if  I  do  not  give  them  a  few  passages  from  Rowlands*. 

My  first  specimen  shall  be  taken  from  his  sermon  on  the 
words,  **  All  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love 
God"  (Rom.  viii.  28). 

"  Observe  what  he  says.  Make  thou  no  exception,  when  he 
makes  none.  All !  remember  he  excepts  nothing.  Be  thou 
confirmed  in  thy  faith ;  give  glory  to  God,  and  resolve,  with  Job, 
*  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  him.'  The  Almighty 
may  seem  for  h  seaion  to  be  your  enemy,  in  order  that  he  may 
become  your  eternal  friend.  Oh  !  believers,  after  all  your  tribu- 
lation and  anguish,  you  must  conclude  with  David,  '  It  is  good 
for  me  that  I  have  been  afflicted,  that  I  might  learn  thy 
statutes.'  Under  all  your  disquietudes  you  must  exclaim,  *  O 
the  depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of 
God  !  how  unsearchable  are  his  judgments,  and  his  ways  past 
finding  out !'  His  glory  is  seen  when  he  works  by  means  ;  it 
is  more  seen  when  he  works  without  means ;  it  is  seen,  above 
all,  when  he  works  contrary  to  means.  It  was  a  great  work  to 
open  the  eyes  of  the  blind ;  it  was  a  greater  still  to  do  it  by 
applying  clay  and  spittle,  things  more  likely,  some  think,  to 
take  away  sight  than  to  restore.  He  sent  a  horror  of  great 
darkness  on  Abraham,  when  he  was  preparing  to  give  him  the 
best  light.  He  touched  the  hollow  of  Jacob's  thigh,  and  lamed 
him,  when  he  was  going  to  bless  him.  He  smote  Paul  with 
blindness,  when  he  was  intending  to  open  the  eyes  of  his  mind. 
He  refused  the  request  of  the  woman  of  Canaan  for  a  while, 
but  afterwards  she  obtained  her  desire.  See,  therefore,  that  all 
thf  paths  of  the  Lord  are  mercy,  and  that  all  things  work  to- 
gether for  good  to  them  that  love  him. 

''  Even  affliction  is  very  useful  and  profitable  to  the  godly. 
The  prodigal  son  had  no  thought  of  returning  to  his  father's 


ON  ROMANS  VIII.  28.  207 

house  till  he  had  been  humbled  by  adversity.  Hagar  was 
haughty  under  Abraham's  roof,  and  despised  her  mistress ;  but 
in  the  wilderness  she  was  meek  and  lowly.  Jonah  sleeps  on 
board  ship,  but  in  the  whale's  belly  he  watches  and  prays. 
Manasseh  lived  as  a  libertine  at  Jerusalem,  and  committed  the 
most  enormous  crimes ;  but  when  he  was  bound  in  chains  in 
the  prison  at  Babylon  his  heart  was  turned  to  seek  the  Lord 
his  God.  Bodily  pain  and  disease  have  been  instrumental  in 
rousing  many  to  seek  Christ,  when  those  who  were  in  high 
health  have  given  themselves  no  concern  about  him.  The 
ground  which  is  not  rent  and  torn  with  the  plough  bears  nothing 
but  thistles  and  thorns.  The  vines  will  run  wild,  in  process  of 
time,  if  they  be  not  pruned  and  trimmed.  So  would  our  wild 
hearts  be  overrun  with  filthy,  poisonous  weeds,  if  the  true  Vine- 
dresser did  not  often  check  their  growth  by  crosses  and  sanc- 
tified troubles.  '  It  is  good  for  a  man  that  he  bear  the  yoke  in 
his  youth.'  Our  Saviour  says,  '  Every  branch  that  beareth  fruit, 
my  Father  purgeth,  that  it  may  bring  forth  more  fruit.'  There 
can  be  no  gold  or  silver  finely  wrought  without  being  first  puri- 
fied with  fire,  and  no  elegant  houses  built  with  stones  till  the 
hammers  have  squared  and  smoothed  them.  So  we  can  neither 
become  vessels  of  honour  in  the  house  of  our  Father  till  we  are 
melted  in  the  furnace  of  affliction,  nor  lively  stones  in  the  walls 
of  new  Jerusalem  till  the  hand  of  the  Lord  has  beaten  off  our 
proud  excrescences  and  tumours  with  his  own  hammers. 

"  He  does  not  say  that  all  things  will,  but  do,  work  together 
for  good.  The  work  is  on  the  wheel,  and  every  movement  of 
the  wheel  is  for  your  benefit.  Not  only  the  angels  who  encamp 
around  you,  or  the  saints  who  continually  pray  for  you,  but 
even  your  enemies,  the  old  dragon  and  his  angels,  are  engaged 
in  this  matter.  It  is  true,  this  is  not  their  design.  No! 
They  think  they  are  carrying  on  their  own  work  of  destrojdng 
you,  as  it  is  said  of  the  Assyrian  whom  the  Lord  sent  to 
punish  a  hj^ocritical  nation,  '  Howbeit,  he  meaneth  not  so ;' 


2o8  SPECIMENS  OF  HIS  SERMONS. 

yet  it  was  God's  work  that  he  was  carrying  on,  though  he  did 
not  intend  to  do  so.  All  the  events  that  take  place  in  the 
world  carry  on  the  same  work — the  glory  of  the  Father  and  the 
salvation  of  his  children.  Every  illness  and  infirmity  that  may 
seize  you,  every  loss  you  may  meet  with,  every  reproach  you 
may  endure,  every  shame  that  may  colour  your  faces,  every 
sorrow  in  your  hearts,  every  agony  and  pain  in  your  flesh,  every 
aching  in  your  bones,  are  for  your  good.  Every  change  in  your 
condition — your  fine  weather  and  your  rough  weather,  your 
sunny  weather  and  your  cloudy  weather,  your  ebbing  and  your 
flowing,  your  liberty  and  your  imprisonment,  all  turn  out  for 
good.  Oh,  Christians,  see  what  a  harvest  of  blessings  ripens 
from  this  text !  The  Lord  is  at  work  ;  all  creation  is  at  work ; 
men  and  angels,  friends  and  foes,  all  are  busy,  working  together 
for  good.  Oh,  dear  Lord  Jesus,  what  hast  thou  seen  in  us  that 
thou  shouldst  order  things  so  wondrously  for  us,  and  make  all 
things — all  things  to  work  together  for  our  good?" 

My  second  specimen  shall  be  taken  from  his  sermon  on 
Rev.  iii.  20  : — 

"  Oh,  how  barren  and  unfruitful  is  the  soul  of  man,  until  the 
word  descends  like  rain  upon  it,  and  it  is  watered  with  the  dew 
of  heaven  !  But  when  a  few  drops  have  entered  and  made  it 
supple,  what  a  rich  harvest  of  graces  do  they  produce !  Is 
the  heart  so  full  of  malice  that  the  most  suppliant  knee  can 
expect  no  pardon  1  Is  it  as  hard  to  be  pacified  and  calmed  as 
the  roaring  sea  when  agitated  by  a  furious  tempest  1  Is  it  a 
covetous  heart ;  so  covetous  that  no  scene  of  distress  can  soften 
it  into  sympathy,  and  no  object  of  wretchedness  extort  a  penny 
from  its  gripe?  Is  it  a  wanton  and  adulterous  heart,  which 
may  as  soon  be  satisfied  as  the  sea  can  be  filled  with  gold  1  Be 
it  so.  But  when  the  word  shall  *  drop  on  it  as  the  rain,  and 
distil  as  the  dew,'  behold,  in  an  instant  the  flint  is  turned  into 
flesh,  the  tumultuous  sea  is  hushed  ir  to  a  calm,  and  the  moun- 
tains of  Gilboa  are  clothed  with  herbt  and  flowers,  where  before 


ON  HEBREWS  1.  %  209 

not  a  green ^lade  was  to  be  seen!  See  the  mighty  change! 
It  converts  Zaccheus,  the  hard-hearted  publican  and  rapacious 
tax-gatherer,  into  a  restorer  of  what  he  had  unjustly  gotten,  and 
a  merciful  reliever  of  the  needy.  It  tames  the  furious  perse- 
cuting Saul,  and  makes  him  gentle  as  a  lamb.  It  clothes  Ahab 
with  sackcloth  and  ashes.  It  reduces  Felix  to  such  anguish  of 
mind  that  he  trembles  like  an  aspen  leaf.  It  disposes  Peter  to 
leave  his  nets,  and  makes  him  to  catch  thousands  of  souls  at 
one  draught  in  the  net  of  the  gospel.  Behold,  the  world  is  con- 
verted to  the  faith,  not  by  the  magicians  of  Egypt,  but  by  the 
outcasts  of  Judaea !" 

The  last  specimen  that  I  will  give  is  from  his  sermon  on 
Heb.  i.  9: — 

"  Christ  took  our  nature  upon  him  that  he  might  sympathize 
with  us.  Almost  every  creature  is  tender  toward  its  own  kind, 
however  ferocious  to  others.  The  bear  will  not  be  deprived  of 
her  whelps  without  resistance:  she  will  tear  the  spoiler  to 
pieces  if  she  can.  But  how  great  must  be  the  jealousy  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  for  his  people  !  He  will  not  lose  any  of  them.  He 
has  taken  them  as  members  of  himself,  and  as  such  watches 
over  them  with  fondest  care.  How  much  will  a  man  do  for 
one  of  his  members  before  he  suffers  it  to  be  cut  off  ?  Think 
not,  O  man,  that  thou  wouldst  do  more  for  thy  members  than 
the  Son  of  God.  To  think  so  would  be  blasphemy,  for  the 
pre-eminence  in  all  things  belongs  to  him.  Yea,  he  is  acquainted 
with  all  thy  temptations,  because  he  was  in  all  things  tempted 
as  thou  art.  Art  thou  tempted  to  deny  God  %  So  was  he. 
Art  thou  tempted  to  kill  thyself?  So  was  he.  Art  thou 
tempted  by  the  vanities  of  the  world?  So  was  he.  Art  thou 
tempted  to  idolatry  %  So  was  he ;  yea,  even  to  worship  the 
devil.  He  was  tempted  from  the  manger  to  the  cross.  He 
was  a  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief.  The  Head  in 
heaven  is  sympathizing  with  the  feet  that  are  pinched  and  pressed 
on  earth,  and  says,  *  Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  me]'" 


-  lo  ffjs  INNER  LIFE 

I  should  find  no  difficulty  in  adding  to  these  extracts,  if 
the  space  at  my  command  did  not  forbid  me.  Feeble  and 
unsatisfactory,  as  they  undoubtedly  are,  in  the  form  of  a  trans- 
lation, they  will  perhaps  give  my  readers  some  idea  of  what 
Rowlands  tvas  in  the  pulpit,  so  far  as  concerns  the  working  of 
his  mind.  'Of  his  manner  and  delivery,  of  course,  they  cannot 
give  the  least  idea.  It  would  be  easy  to  fill  pages  with  short, 
epigrammatic,  proverbial  sayings  culled  from  his  sermons, 
of  which  th'ere  is  a  rich  abundance  in  many  passages.  But 
enough,  perhaps,  has  been  brought  forward  to  give  a  general 
impression  of  the  preaching  that  did  such  wonders  at  Llan- 
geitho.  Those  who  want  to  know  more  of  it  should  try  to  get 
hold  of  the  little  volume  of  translated  sermons  from  which  my 
extracts  have  been  made.  Faintly  and  inadequately  as  it  repre- 
sents the  great  Welsh  preacher,  it  is  still  a  volume  worth  hav- 
mg,  and  one  that  ought  to  be  better  known  than  it  is.  Scores 
of  books  are  reprinted  in  the  present  day  which  are  not  half  so 
valuable  as  Rowlands'  eight  sermons. 

The  inner  life  and  private  character  of  the  great  Welsh 
preacher  would  form  a  deeply  interesting  subject,  no  doubt,  if 
we  knew  more  about  them.  But  the  utter  absence  of  all 
materials  except  a  few  scattered  anecdotes  leaves  us  very  much 
in  the  dark.  Unless  the  memoirs  of  great  men  are  written 
by  relatives,  neighbours,  or  contemporaries,  it  stands  to  reason 
that  we  shall  know  little  of  anything  but  their  public  conduct 
and  doings.  This  applies  eminently  to  Daniel  Rowlands.  He 
had  no  Boswell  near  him  to  chronicle  the  details  of  his  long 
and  laborious  life,  and  to  present  him  to  us  as  he  appeared  at 
home.  The  consequence  is,  that  a  vast  quantity  of  interesting 
matter,  which  the  Church  of  Christ  would  like  to  know,  lirs 
buried  with  him  in  his  grave. 

One  thing,  at  any  rate,  is  very  certain.  His  private  life  was 
as  holy,  blameless,  and  consistent,  as  the  life  of  a  Christian 
can  he.     Many  years  ago,  the   Quarterly  Review  contained 


AND  PRIVA  TE  CHAR  A  CTER.  a  1 1 

&n  article  insinuating  that  he  was  addicted  to  drunkenness, 
wliich  called  forth  an  indignant  and  complete  refutation  from 
many  competent  witnesses  in  South  Wales,  and  specially  from 
the  neighbourhood  of  Llangeitho.  That  such  charges  should 
be  made  against  good  men  need  never  surprise  us.  Slander 
and  lying  are  the  devil's  favourite  weapons,  when  he  wants  to 
injure  the  mightiest  assailants  of  his  kingdom.  Satan  is  pre- 
eminently "  a  har."  Bunyan,  Whitefield,  and  Wesley  had  to 
drink  of  the  same  bitter  cup  as  Rowlands.  But  that  the  charge 
against  Rowlands  was  a  mere  groundless,  malicious  falsehood, 
was  abundantly  proved  by  Mr.  Griffith,  the  vicar  of  Aberdare,  in 
a  reply  to  the  article  of  the  Quarterly  Review,  printed  at  Car- 
diff. We  need  not  be  reminded,  if  we  read  our  Bibles,  who  it 
was  of  whom  the  wicked  Jews  said,  "  Behold  a  man  gluttonous, 
and  a  winebibber,  a  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners"  (Maft. 
xi.  19).  If  the  children  of  this  world  cannot  prevent  the  gos- 
pel being  preached,  they  try  to  blacken  the  character  of  the 
preacher.  What  saith  the  Scripture  ?  "  The  disciple  is  not 
above  his  master,  nor  the  servant  above  his  lord.  It  is  enough 
for  the  disciple  that  he  be  as  his  master,  and  the  servant  as  his 
lord.  If  they  have  called  the  Master  of  the  house  Beelzebub, 
how  much  more  shall  they  call  them  of  his  household  1'* 
(Matt.  X.  24,  25). 

The  only  light  that  we  can  throw  on  the  character  and  private 
habits  of  Rowlands  is  derived  from  the  few  anecdotes  which 
still  survive  about  him.  I  shall,  therefore,  conclude  my  account 
of  him  by  presenting  them  to  my  readers  without  note  or  com- 
ment. 

One  leading  feature  in  Rowlands'  character  was  his  hutnility. 
Like  every  eminent  servant  of  God  of  whom  much  is  known, 
he  had  a  deep  and  abiding  sense  of  his  own  sinfulness,  weak- 
ness, and  corruption,  and  his  constant  need  of  God's  grace. 
On  seeing  a  vast  concourse  of  people  coming  to  hear  him,  he 
would  frequently  exclaim  :  "  Oh,  may  the  Lord  have  mercy  on 


2 1 2  HIS  PR  A  YERFULNESS. 

me,  and  help  me,  a  poor  worm,  sinful  dust  and  ashes  !" — UTien 
a  l)ackslider  was  pointed  out  to  him,  who  had  once  been  one 
of  his  followers,  he  said :  "  It  is  to  be  feared  indeed  that  he  is 
one  of  my  disciples ;  for  had  he  been  one  of  my  Lord's  disciples, 
he  would  not  have  been  in  such  a  state  of  sin  and  rebellion.** 
He  often  used  to  say,  during  his  latter  days,  that  there  were  four 
lessons  which  he  had  laboured  to  learn  throughout  the  whole 
coarse  of  his  religious  life,  and  yet  that  he  was  but  a  dull 
scholar  even  in  his  old  age.  These  lessons  were  the  following 
— (i.)  To  repent  without  despairing;  (2.)  To  believe  without 
being  presumptuous;  (3.)  To  rejoice  without  falling  into  levity; 
(4.)  To  be  angry  without  sinning.  He  used  also  often  to  say, 
that  a  self-righteous  legal  spirit  in  man  was  like  his  shirt,  a  gar- 
ment which  he  puts  on  first,  and  puts  off  last. 

A  habit  oi praying  fnuch  was  another  leading  characteristic  of 
Rowlands.  It  is  said  that  he  used  often  to  go  to  the  top  of 
Aeron  Hills,  and  there  pour  out  his  heart  before  God  in  the 
most  tender  and  earnest  manner  for  the  salvation  of  the 
numerous  inhabitants  of  the  country  which  lay  around  him. 
"  He  lived,"  says  Morgan,  "  in  the  spirit  of  prayer,  and  hence 
his  extraordinary  success.  On  one  occasion  having  engaged 
to  preach  at  a  certain  church  which  stood  on  an  eminence,  he 
had  to  cross  a  valley  in  sight  of  the  people,  who  were  waiting 
for  him  in  the  churchyard.  They  saw  him  descend  into  the 
bottom  of  the  valley,  but  then  lost  sight  of  him  for  some  time. 
At  last,  as  he  did  not  come  up  by  the  time  they  expected,  and 
service-time  had  arrived,  some  of  them  went  down  the  hill  in 
search  of  him.  They  discovered  him,  at  length,  on  his  knees 
in  a  retired  spot  a  little  out  of  the  road.  He  got  up  when  he 
saw  them,  and  went  with  them,  expressing  sorrow  for  the 
delay ;  but  he  added,  '  I  had  a  delightful  opportunity  below.' 
'rhe  sermon  which  followed  was  most  extraordinary  in  power 
and  effect.'* 

Diligertiie  was  another  distinguishing  feature  in  the  character 


HIS  SELF-DENIAL.  i?'3 

of  Rowlands.  He  was  continually  improving  his  mine,  "Dy  read- 
ing, meditation,  and  study.  He  used  to  be  up  and  reading  as 
early  as  four  o'clock  in  the  morning;  and  he  took  immense 
pains  in  the  preparation  of  his  sermons.  Morgan  says,  "  Every 
part  of  God's  Word,  at  length,  became  quite  familiar  to  him. 
He  could  tell  chapter  and  verse  of  any  text  or  passage  of  Scrip- 
ture that  was  mentioned  to  him.  Indeed  the  word  of  God 
dwelt  richly  in  him.  He  had,  moreover,  a  most  retentive 
memory,  and  when  preaching,  could  repeat  the  texts  referred 
to,  oflf-hand,  most  easily  and  appropriately." 

Self-denial  was  another  leading  feature  of  Rowlands*  char- 
acter. He  was  all  his  life  a  very  poor  man  ;  but  he  was  always 
a  contented  one,  and  lived  in  the  simplest  way.  Twice  he  re- 
fused the  offer  of  good  livings — one  in  North  Wales,  and  the 
other  in  South  Wales — and  preferred  to  remain  a  dependent 
curate  with  his  flock  at  Llangeitho.  The  offer  in  one  case 
came  from  the  excellent  John  Thornton.  When  he  heard  that 
Rowlands  had  refused  it,  and  ascertained  his  reasons,  he  wrote 
to  his  son,  saying,  "  I  had  a  high  opinion  of  your  father  before, 
but  now  I  have  a  still  higher  opinion  of  him,  though  he  declines 
my  offer.  The  reasons  he  assigns  are  highly  creditable  to  him. 
It  is  not  a  usual  thing  with  me  to  allow  other  people  to  go  to 
my  pocket ;  but  tell  your  father  that  he  is  fully  welcome  to  do 
so  whenever  he  pleases/'  The  residence  of  the  great  Welsh 
evangelist  throughout  life  was  nothing  but  a  small  cottage  pos- 
sessing no  great  accommodation.  His  journeys,  when  he  went 
about  preaching,  were  made  on  horseback,  until  at  last  a  small 
carriage  was  left  him  as  a  legacy  in  his  old  age.  He  was  con- 
tent, when  journeying  in  his  Master  s  service,  with  very  poor 
fare  and  very  indifferent  lodgings.  He  says  himself,  "  We  used 
to  travel  over  hills  and  mountains,  on  our  little  nags,  without 
anything  to  eat  but  the  bread  and  cheese  we  carried  in  our 
pockets,  and  without  anything  to  drink  but  water  from  the 
springs.     If  we  had  a  little  buttermilk  in  some  cottages  wc 


ai4  HIS  COURAGE, 

thought  it  a  great  thing.  But  now  men  must  have  tea,  and 
some,  too,  must  have  brandy!"  Never  did  man  seem  so 
thoroughly  to  realize  the  primitive  and  apostoHc  rule  of  life— 
"  Having  food  and  raiment,  let  us  be  therewith  content." 

Courage  was  another  prominent  feature  in  Rowlands'  char- 
acter. He  was  often  fiercely  persecuted  when  he  went  about 
preaching,  and  even  his  life  was  sometimes  in  danger.  Once, 
when  he  was  preaching  at  Aberystwith,  a  man  swore  in  a 
dreadful  manner  that  he  would  shoot  him  immediately.  He 
aimed  his  gun,  and  pulled  the  trigger,  but  it  would  not  g< 
off. — On  another  occasion  his  enemies  actually  placed  gun- 
powder under  the  place  where  he  was  about  to  stand  when 
preaching,  and  laid  a  train  to  a  distant  point,  so  that  at  a 
given  time  they  might  apply  a  match,  and  blow  up  the 
preacher  and  congregation.  However,  before  the  time  arrived,  a 
good  man  providentially  discovered  the  whole  plot,  and  brought 
it  to  nothing. — On  other  occasions  riotous  mobs  were  assembled, 
stones  were  thrown,  drums  beaten,  and  every  effort  made  to 
prevent  the  sermon  being  heard.  None  of  these  things  ever 
seems  to  have  deterred  Rowlands  for  a  moment.  As  long  as 
he  had  strength  to  work  he  went  on  with  his  Master's  busi- 
ness, unmoved  by  opposition  and  persecution.  Like  Colonel 
Gardiner,  he  "  feared  God,  and  beside  him  he  feared  nothing." 
He  had  given  himself  to  the  work  of  preaching  the  gospel, 
and  from  this  work  he  allowed  neither  clergy  nor  laity,  bishops 
nor  gentry,  rich  nor  poor,  to  keep  him  back. 

Fervent  and  deep  feeling  was  the  last  characteristic  which  I 
mark  in  Rowlands.  He  never  did  anything  by  halves. 
Whether  preaching  or  praying,  whether  in  church  or  in  the 
open  air,  he  seems  to  have  done  all  he  did  with  heart  and 
soul,  and  mind  and  strength.  "  He  possessed  as  much  ani- 
mal spirits,"  says  one  witness,  "as  were  sufficient  for  half-a- 
dozen  men.*'  This  energy  seems  to  have  had  an  inspiring 
rifect  about  it,  and  to  have  swept  everything  before  it  like  a 


KO IVLAND  HILL 'S  ANECDOTE,  2 J  5 

fire.  One  who  went  to  hear  him  every  month  from  Carnar- 
vonshire, gives  a  striking  account  of  his  singular  fervour  when 
Rowlands  was  preaching  on  John  iii.  16.  He  says,  "  He  dwelt 
with  such  overwhelming,  extraordinary  thoughts  on  the  love 
of  God,  and  the  vastness  of  his  gift  to  man,  that  I  was 
swallowed  up  in  amazement.  I  did  not  know  that  my  feet 
were  on  the  ground  ;  yea,  I  had  no  idea  where  I  was,  whether 
on  earth  or  in  heaven.  But  presently  he  cried  out  with  a 
most  powerful  voice,  '  Praised  be  God  for  keeping  the  Jews 
in  ignorance  respecting  the  greatness  of  the  Person  in  their 
hands !  Had  they  known  who  he  was,  they  would  never  have 
presumed  to  touch  him,  much  less  to  drive  nails  through  his 
blessed  hands  and  feet,  and  to  put  a  crown  of  thorns  on  his 
holy  head.  For  had  they  known,  they  would  not  have  cruci- 
fied the  Lord  of  glor)'.'  " 

I  will  wind  up  this  account  of  Rowlands  by  mentioning  a 
little  incident  which  the  famous  Rowland  Hill  often  spoke 
of  in  his  latter  days.  He  was  attending  a  meeting  of  Metlio- 
dist  ministers  in  Wales  in  one  of  his  visits,  when  a  man, 
nearly  a  hundred  years  old,  got  up  from  a  corner  ©f  the 
room  and  addressed  the  meeting  in  the  following  words: — 
'•  Brethren,  let  me  tell  you  this :  I  have  heard  Daniel  Row- 
lands preach,  and  I  heard  him  once  say.  Except  your  con- 
sciences be  cleansed  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  you  must  all 
perish  in  the  eternal  fires."  Rowlands,  at  that  tmie,  had  been 
dead  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century.-  Yet,  even  at  that 
interval,  "  though  dead  he  spoke."  It  is  a  faithful  saying,  and 
worthy  of  all  remembrance,  that  the  ministry  which  exalts 
Christ  crucified  most,  is  the  ministry  which  produces  most  last 
ing  eifects.  Never,  perhaps,  did  any  preacher  exalt  Christ  more 
than  Rowlands  did,  and  never  did  preacher  leave  behind  him 
such  deep  and  abiding  marks  in  the  isolated  comer  of  the 
world  where  he  laboured. 


vm. 


CHAI'TER  L 

florr)  at  Kingi-ton,  Notts,  1716 — Educated  at  Nottingham — Fail*  to  learti  the  Business  oft 
Grazier — Goes  to  Clare  Hall,  Caii)bridge,  1734 — Elected  P'ellow  vi  Clare,  174a-" 
Curate  of  Staplcfyrd.  1749 — Vicar  of  Evcrion,  1755 — Begins  to  Preach  tlic  Full  Gospel, 
ly^j — Open-air  Preaching — Itinerant  and  Extra-parochial  Ministrations — Singxilar  Phy- 
sical Effect  on  some  Hearers — Opposition  and  Persecution — Dies,  1793 — His  Epitaph, 

S  well  as  in  Lancashire  and  Wales,  there  were 
spiritual  giants  in  the  Eastern  Counties  of  England 
in  the  iSth  century.  The  sixth  leader  of  the  great 
revival  of  this  century  whom  I  wish  to  introduce  to  my  readers, 
was  a  man  as  remarkable  in  his  way  as  either  Grimshaw  or  Row- 
lands. 7. ike  them,  he  lived  in  an  obscure  and  out-of-the-way 
village.  But,  like  them,  he  shook  the  earth  around  him,  and  was 
one  of  those  who  "turn  the  world  upside  down."  The  man  I  mean 
is  John  Berridge,  Vicar  of  Everton,  in  the  county  of  Bedfordshire. 
Of  all  the  P^nglisli  'evangelists  of  the  eighteenth  century,  this 
good  man  was  undeniably  the  most  quaint  and  eccentric.  ^Vith- 
out  controversy  he  was  a  very  odd  person,  a  comet  rather  tiian 
a  planet,  a  man  who  must  be  put  in  a  class  by  himself,  a 
minister  who  said  and  did  things  which  nobody  else  could  say 
or  do.  But  the  eccentricities  of  the  Vicar  of  Everton  are  i)ro- 
bably  better  known  than  his  graces.  With  all  his  peculiarities, 
he  was  a  man  of  rare  gifts,  and  deeply  taught  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
Above  all,  he  was  a  mighty  instrument  for  good  in  the  orbit  in 


REV.    JOHN    BERRIDGE. 


Face  p.  21  6. 


BIR  TH  OF  JOHN  BERRIDGE.  21? 

which  he  moved.  Few  preachers,  perhaps,  a|  this  period 
were  more  honoured  by  God  and  more  useful  to  souls  than 
the  eccentric  John  Berridge, 

My  account  of  this  good  man  is  compiled  from  very  scanty 
materials.  A  single  volume,  of  no  great  size,  containing  his 
literary  remains,  and  a  short  biography  by  his  curate,  Mr.  Whit- 
ringham,  is  the  only  source  of  information  about  him  that  I  can 
find.  In  this,  however,  there  is  nothing  that  should  surprise  us. 
He  was  never  married,  and  lived  entirely  alone.  He  resided 
in  an  isolated  rural  parish,  far  away  from  London,  in  days  when 
there  were  no  railways,  and  even  turnpike  roads  were  not  good: 
He  was  settled  at  a  distance  from  his  own  family,  in  a  county 
where,  apparently,  he  had  no  relatives  or  connections.  He 
wrote  very  httle,  and  was  chielly  known  by  his  preaching. 
Add  to  these  facts  the  mighty  one,  that  Berridge  belonged  to 
"  a  sect  everywhere  spoken  against,"  and  we  need  not  wonder 
that  the  records  remaining  of  him  are  very  few.  But  there  is  a 
memorial  of  him  that  will  never  perish.  The  last  day  will  show 
that  his  Master  kept  "  a  book  of  remembrance,"  and  that  ''his 
record  was  on  high," 

John  Berridge  was  bom  at  Kingston,  in  the  county  of  Not- 
tinghamshire, on  March  i,  1716,  within  a  very  few  years  of 
Whitefield,  Wesley,  Grimshaw,  Romaine,  and  Rowlands.  I'he 
village  in  which  he  was  born  may  be  seen  any  day  from  Keg- 
worth  Station  by  those  who  travel  to  the  north  along  the  Mid- 
land Railway.  His  father  was  a  wealthy  farmer  and  grazier 
at  Kingston,  who  married  a  Miss  Sarah  Hathwaite,  in  the  year 
1 7 14.  John  Berridge  was  his  eldest  son.  He  had  three  other 
sons,  about  whom  I  can  find  out  nothing,  except  that  his  brother 
Tiiomas  lived  and  died  at  Chatteris,  hi  the  Isle  of  Ely,  and 
survived  the  subject  of  this  memoir.* 

•  A  well-informed  correspondent  expresses  some  doubt  as  to  Thonias  Porridge  having 
died  at  Chatteris.  He  says  there  is  reason  to  think  that  he  lived  and  died  at  Draycott  m 
JDerbyshire.  He  also  says  that  in  1841  a  direct  lineal  descendant  of  one  of  Jolui  Bcmdge'l 
brothers  was  living  at  Sutton-Bonnington,  in  Nottinghamshire. 


2 1 5  ED UCA TED  AT  NO TTINGHAM. 

The  first  fourteen  years  of  Berridge's  life  were  chiefly  spent 
with  an  aunt  at  Nottingham,  with  whom  he  was  a  particular 
favourite.  Here  also  he  received  the  groundwork  of  his  educa- 
tion, but  at  what  school,  and  under  what  teacher,  I  have  been 
unable  to  ascertain.  It  is  evident  that  even  when  a  boy  he  was 
remarkable  for  seriousness  and  steadiness ;  so  much  so,  as  to 
excite  the  attention  of  all  who  knew  him.  There  is  not,  how- 
ever, the  slightest  proof  that  he  knew  anything  at  this  time  of 
scriptural  religion ;  nor  was  it  likely,  I  fear,  in  those  days,  that 
he  would  hear  anything  about  it  in  Nottingham.  No  doubt,  in 
after-life  he  had  abundant  reason  to  be  thankful  for  his  early 
morality.  Steadiness  and  correctness  of  life,  of  course,  are  not 
conversion,  and  save  no  man's  soul.  But  still  they  are  not  to 
be  despised.  The  scars  left  by  youthful  sins,  even  after  for- 
giveness and  complete  reconciliation  with  God,  are  never  wholly 
effaced,  and  the  recollection  of  them  often  causes  bitter  sorrow. 

Berridge  himself  ascribes  his  first  serious  impressions  to  a 
singular  circumstance  : — "  One  day,  as  he  was  returning  from 
school,  a  boy,  who  lived  near  his  aunt,  invited  him  into  his 
house,  and  asked  if  he  might  read  to  him  out  of  the  Bible.  He 
consented.  This,  however,  being  repeated  several  times,  he 
began  to  feel  a  secret  aversion,  and  would  gladly  have  declined 
if  he  had  dared.  But  having  obtained  the  reputation  of  being 
pious ^  he  was  afi^id  to  risk  it  by  refusal.  One  day,  however, 
as  he  was  returning  from  a  fair,  where  he  had  been  spending  a 
holiday,  he  hesitated  to  pass  the  door  of  his  neighbour,  lest  he 
should  be  invited  as  before.  The  boy,  however,  was  waiting 
for  him,  and  not  only  invited  him  to  come  in  and  read  the 
Bible,  but  also  asked  if  they  should  pray  together.  It  was  then 
that  Berridge  began  to  perceive  he  was  not  right  before  God,  or 
else  he  would  not  have  felt  the  aversion  that  he  did  to  the  boy's 
invitations.  And  such,  he  says,  was  the  effect  of  that  day's 
inter^'iew,  that  not  long  afterv^'ards  he  bimsielf  began  a  sinula/ 
practice  with  his  companions." 


UNFIT  FOR  A  GRAZTER.  219 

Facts  such  as  these  are  always  interesting  to  those  who  study 
God's  ways  of  dealing  with  souls.  It  is  clear  that  he  often 
"moves  on  the  face"  of  hearts  by  his  Spirit  long  before  he 
introduces  light,  order,  and  life.  We  must  never  despise  the 
"  day  of  small  things."  The  impressions  and  convictions  of 
children,  especially,  ought  never  to  be  rudely  treated  or  over- 
looked. They  have  often  a  green  spot  in  their  characters  which 
ought  to  be  carefully  cultivated  by  good  advice,  kind  encourage- 
ment, and  prayer.  Berridge,  unfortunately,  seems  to  have  had 
no  one  near  him  at  this  critical  period  to  guide  and  direct  him. 
Who  can  tell  but  the  counsel  of  some  Aquila  or  Priscilla,  if  they 
had  found  him  at  Nottingham,  might  have  saved  him  from 
many  years  of  darkness,  and  from  many  agonizing  exercises  of 
mind? 

At  the  age  of  fourteen  Berridge  left  school,  and  returned  to 
his  home  at  Kingston,  with  the  intention  of  taking  up  his 
father's  business.  This  plan,  however,  soon  fell  to  the  ground. 
For  some  time  his  father  used  to  take  him  about  to  markets 
and  fairs,  in  order  that  he  might  become  familiar  with  the  price 
of  cattle,  sheep,  and  pigs,  and  learn  his  business  by  observa- 
tion and  experience.  The  next  step,  of  course,  was  to  ask  him 
to  give  his  judgment  of  the  value  of  animals  which  his  father 
wished  to  purchase — a  matter  in  which  necessarily  lies  the 
whole  secret  of  a  grazier's  success.  Here,  however,  poor  John 
was  so  invariably  wrong  in  his  estimates,  that  old  Mr.  Berridge 
began  to  despair  of  ever  making  him  fit  to  be  a  grazier  -,  and 
used  often  to  say,  "John,  I  find  you  cannot  form  any  idea  of 
the  price  of  cattle,  and  I  shall  have  to  send  you  to  college  to 
be  a  light  to  the  Gentiles." 

How  long  this  state  of  suspense  about  Berridge's  future  life 
continued,  we  have  no  means  of  ascertaining.  In  all  proba- 
bility it  went  on  for  two  or  three  years,  and  was  a  cause  of  much 
family  trouble.  An  old  Nottinghamshire  grazier  was  not  Ukely 
to  let  his  eldest  son  forsake  oxen  and  sheep,  and  go  to  college, 


2  20  GOES  TO  CLARE  HALL,   CAMBRIDGE. 

without  a  hard  struggle  to  prevent  him.  But  the  son's  distaste 
for  his  father's  caUing  was  deep  and  insuperable.  His  religious 
impressions,  moreover,  were  kept  up  and  deepened  by  conversa- 
tion with  a  tailor  in  Kingston,  with  whom  he  became  so  inti- 
mate that  his  friends  threatened  to  bind  him  to  articles  of 
apprenticeship  under  him.  At  last  old  Mr.  Berridge,  seeing 
that  his  son  had  no  apparent  inclination  for  anything  but  read- 
ing and  religion,  had  the  good  sense  to  give  up  his  cherished 
plans,  and  to  consent  to  his  going  to  Cambridge.  And  thus 
John  Berridge  was  finally  entered  at  Clare  Hall  on  October  28, 
1734,  in  the  nineteenth  year  of  his  age. 

God's  ways  are  certainly  not  like  man's  ways.  Curious  as  it 
may  appear,  for  fourteen  or  fifteen  years  after  entering  Clare 
Hall,  John  Berridge  seems  to  have  gone  backward  rather  than 
forward  in  spiritual  things.  He  took  his  degree  as  B.A.  in  1738, 
and  as  M.A.  in  1742;  and  about  the  same  time  was  elected 
Fellow  of  his  College,  and  resided  there,  doing  comparatively 
nothing,  till  1749.  He  was  a  hard-reading  man,  and  made  such 
progress  in  every  branch  of  literature  that  he  obtained  a  high 
reputation  in  the  University  as  a  thorough  scholar.  A  clergy- 
man who  knew  him  well  for  fifty  years,  said  that  he  was  as 
familiar  with  Greek  and  Latin  as  he  was  with  his  mother  tongue. 
He  says  himself  that  he  sometimes,  at  this  period  of  his  life, 
read  fifteen  hours  a-day.  But  his  very  cleverness  became  a 
snare  to  him.  His  natural  love  of  humour  and  social  disposi- 
tion entailed  on  him  many  temptations  His  acquaintance  was 
courted  by  people  of  high  rank  and  position ;  and  men  like  the 
elder  Pitt,  afterwards  Lord  Chatham,  were  among  his  intimate 
associates  and  friends.  All  this,  no  doubt,  was  very  pleasant  to 
flesh  and  blood,  but  very  bad  for  his  soul.  In  short,  he  had  to 
learn,  by  bitter  experience,  that  wit  and  brilliant  powers  of  con- 
versation, like  beauty,  musical  skill,  and  a  fine  voice,  are  very 
perilous  possessions.  They  seem  to  help  people  forward  in  this 
Horld,  but  they  are  in  reality  most  dangerous  to  their  possessors. 


HIS  ORDINATIOiV.  221 

Whittingham,  his  biographer,  says  of  him  at  this  time : — 
** '  Hudibras '  was  so  famiUar  to  him,  that  he  was  at  no  loss  in 
using  any  part  of  it  on  any  occasion.  While  he  was  at  college, 
if  it  was  known  he  would  be  present  at  any  public  dinner,  the 
table  was  sure  to  be  crowded  with  company,  who  were  delighted 
with  the  singularity  of  his  conversation  and  his  witty  sayings. 
But  as  '  evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners,'  so  Ber- 
ridge  speedily  caught  the  spirit  of  his  company,  and  drank  in 
the  Socinian  scheme  of  religion  to  such  a  degree  that  he  lost 
all  his  serious  impressions,  and  discontinued  private  prayer  for 
the  space  of  ten  years,  a  few  intervals  excepted  !  In  these  in- 
tervals he  would  weep  bitterly,  reflecting  on  his  sad  state  of 
mind  compared  with  what  it  was  when  he  first  came  to  the 
University  j  and  he  would  often  say  to  a  fellow- student,  after- 
wards an  eminent  clergyman,  '  Oh  that  it  were  with  me  as  in 
years  past !'" 

This  part  of  Berridge's  history  is  indeed  a  melancholy  picture. 
It  is  the  more  so  when  we  remember  that  it  was  during  this 
period  of  his  life  that  he  must  have  taken  holy  orders  as  a  Fel- 
low of  Clare  Hall,  and  professed  that  he  was  "  inwardly  moved 
by  the  Holy  Ghost"  to  take  upon  him  the  office  of  a  minister ! 
He  was  probably  ordained  by  the  Bishop  of  Ely.  How  utterly 
unfit  he  was  for  the  ministerial  office,  we  may  see  at  a  glance 
from  the  account  given  of  him  by  Whittingham.  Yet  it  is  a 
sorrowful  fact,  I  fear,  that  the  case  of  Berridge  has  only  been 
that  of  thousands.  No  earthly  condition  appears  to  be  so 
deadening  to  a  man's  soul  as  the  position  of  a  resident  Fellow 
of  a  college,  and  the  society  of  a  Common  room  at  Oxford  or 
Cambridge.  If  Berridge  fell  for  a  season  before  the  influences 
brought  to  bear  upon  his  soul  at  Clare  Hall,  we  must  in  justice 
remember  that  he  was  exposed  to  extraordinary  temptations. 
How  hardly  shall  resident  Fellows  of  colleges  enter  the  kingdom 
of  God  !  It  was  a  miracle  of  grace  that  he  was  not  cast  away  for 
ever,  and  did  not  sink  beneath  the  waters,  never  to  rise  again. 


Z22  CUR  A  TE  OF  STAPLE  FORD. 

In  the  year  1749  it  pleased  God  to  awaken  his  conscience 
once  more,  and  to  revive  within  him  his  old  religious  im- 
pressions. In  that  year,  after  eleven  years  of  apparent  idleness, 
he  began  to  feel  a  desire  to  do  something  as  a  clergyman,  and 
accepted  the  curacy  of  Stapleford,  near  Cambridge.  At  this 
period,  it  will  be  remembered,  he  was  thirty-three  years  old,  and 
thus  had  lost  no  less  than  ten  valuable  years  of  time. 

Berridge  entered  on  his  duties  as  curate  of  Stapleford  with 
great  zeal,  and  a  sincere  desire  to  do  good,  and  served  his 
church  regularly  from  college  for  no  less  than  six  years.  He 
took  great  pains  with  his  parishioners,  and  pressed  upon  them 
very  earnestly  the  importance  of  sanctification,  but  without  pro- 
ducing the  slightest  effect  on  their  lives.  His  preaching,  even 
at  this  time,  was  striking,  plain,  and  attractive.  His  life  was 
moral,  upright,  and  correct.  His  diligence  as  a  pastor  was 
undeniable.  Yet  his  ministry,  throughout  these  six  years,  was 
entirely  without  fruit,  to  his  own  great  annoyance  and  mortifica- 
tion. The  fact  was,  that  up  to  this  time  he  was  utterly  ignorant 
of  the  gospel.  He  did  not  really  know  what  message  he  had 
to  deliver  to  his  hearers.  He  knew  nothing  aright  of  Christ 
crucified,  of  justification  by  faith  in  his  blood,  of  salvation  by 
grace,  of  the  complete  present  forgiveness  of  all  who  believe, 
and  of  the  absolute  necessity  of  coming  to  Christ  as  our  Saviour, 
as  the  very  first  step  towards  heaven.  At  present  these  blessed 
truths  were  hidden  from  the  Fellow  of  Clare  College,  and  he 
could  tell  his  people  nothing  about  them.  No  wonder  that  he 
did  no  good !  If  he  wounded,  he  could  not  heal.  If  he  pulled 
down,  he  could  not  build  up.  If  he  showed  hi.«  flock  that  they 
were  wrong,  he  had  no  idea  what  could  set  them  right.  In 
short,  his  Christianity  was  like  a  solar  system  without  the  sun, 
and  of  course  did  no  good  to  his  congregation.  There  can  be 
no  doubt  that  he  learned  lessons  as  curate  of  Stapleford  which 
he  remembered  to  the  last  day  ,of  his  life.  He  learned  the 
thorough  usclnssness  of  a  ministry,  however  zealous,  in  which 


VICAK  OF  EVERTON,  2»3 

Christ  has  not  his  rightful  office,  and  faith  has  not  its  riglitful 
place.  But  we  may  well  believe  that  the  clever  and  accom- 
plished Fellow  of  Clare  learned  his  lesson  with  much  humiliation 
and  with  many  bitter  tears. 

In  the  year  1755  Berridge  was  presented  by  his  college  to 
the  vicarage  of  Everton,  in  Bedfordshire.  He  took  up  his 
residence  at  once  on  his  living,  and  never  moved  again  till  be 
was  called  away  to  a  better  world,  after  holding  his  cure  for  no 
less  than  thirty-eight  years.  It  was  at  this  place  that  his  eyes 
were  opened  to  the  whole  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  and  the  whole 
tone  of  his  ministry  was  changed.  It  was  here  that  he  first 
found  out  the  enormous  mistakes  of  which  he  had  been  guilty 
as  a  teacher  of  others,  and  began  to  preach  in  a  scriptural 
manner  the  real  gospel  of  Christ.  The  circumstances  under 
which  this  change  took  place  are  so  well  described  by  his  bio- 
grapher Whittingham,  that  I  think  it  best  to  give  the  account  in 
his  own  words. 

"  At  Everton,"  he  says,  "  Mr.  Berridge  at  first  pressed  sanctifi- 
cation  and  regeneration  on  his  hearers  as  strenuously  as  he  had 
at  Stapleford,  but  with  as  little  success.  Nor  was  it  to  be 
wondered  at,  as  his  preaching  rather  tended  to  make  them  trust 
in  themselves  as  righteous,  than  to  depend  on  Christ  for  the 
remission  of  sins.  Having  continued  for  two  years  in  this 
unsuccessful  mode  of  preaching,  and  his  desire  to  do  good  con- 
tinually increasing,  he  began  to  be  discouraged.  A  doubt  arose 
in  his  mind  whether  he  was  right  himself,  and  preached  as  he 
ought  to  do.  This  suggestion  he  rejected  for  some  time  with 
disdain,  supposing  the  advantages  of  education,  which  he  had 
improved  to  a  high  degree,  could  not  have  left  him  ignorant  ol 
the  best  mode  of  instructing  his  people.  This  happened  about 
Christmas  1757.  But  not  being  able  to  repel  these  secret  mis- 
givings, his  mind  was  brought  into  a  state  of  embarrassment 
and  distress  to  which  hitherto  he  had  been  a  stranger.  How- 
ever, this  had  the  happy  effect  of  making  him  cry  mightily  to 


•24  FAITH  AND  BELIEF. 

God  for  direction.  The  constant  language  of  his  heart  '.vas 
this — '  Lord,  if  I  am  right,  keep  me  so  ;  if  I  am  not  right,  make 
me  so,  and  lead  me  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in 
Jesus.' — After  the  incessant  repetition  of  this  child-like  prayer, 
it  is  no  wonder  that  God  should  lend  a  gracious  ear,  and  return 
him  an  answer,  which  he  did  almost  two  days  after.  As  he  sat 
one  morning  musing  on  a  text  of  Scripture,  the  following  words 
seemed  to  dart  into  his  mind  like  a  voice  from  heaven — *  Cease 
from  thine  own  works;  only  believe.'  At  once  the  scales 
seemed  to  fall  from  his  eyes,  and  he  perceived  the  application. 
He  saw  the  rock  on  which  he  had  been  splitting  for  many  years, 
by  endeavouring  to  blend  the  Law  and  the  Gospel,  and  to 
unite  Christ's  righteousness  with  his  own.  Immediately  he 
began  to  think  on  the  words  'faith'  and  'believe,'  and  looking 
into  his  Concordance,  found  them  very  frequently  used.  This 
surprised  him  so  much,  that  he  instantly  resolved  to  preach 
Jesus  Christ  and  salvation  by  faith.  He  therefore  composed 
several  sermons  of  this  description,  and  addressed  his  hearers 
in  a  manner  very  unusual,  and  far  more  pointed  than  before. 

"  God  very  soon  began  to  bless  this  new  style  of  ministry. 
After  he  had  preached  in  this  strain  two  or  three  Sabbaths,  and 
was  wondering  whether  he  was  yet  right,  as  he  had  perceived 
no  better  effect  from  them  than  from  his  former  discourses,  one 
of  his  parishioners  came  to  inquire  for  him.  Being  introduced, 
he  said,  'Well,  Sarah,  what  is  the  matter?' — '  Matter!'  she 
replied :  '  why,  I  don't  know  what  is  the  matter.  Those  new 
sermons  1  I  find  we  are  all  to  be  lost  now.  I  can  neither 
eat,  drink,  nor  sleep.  I  don't  know  what  is  to  become  of  me.' 
The  same  week  came  two  or  three  more  on  a  like  errand.  It 
is  easy  to  conceive  what  relief  these  visits  must  have  afforded 
nis  mind  in  a  state  of  anxiety  and  suspense.  So  confirmed  was 
he  thereby  in  the  persuasion  that  his  late  impressions  were  from 
God,  that  he  determined  in  future  to  know  nothing  but  Jesus 
Christ  and  him  crucified.     He  was  deeply  humbled  that  he 


PBE ACHES  TEE  GOSPEL.  225 

should  have  spent  so  many  years  of  his  life  to  no  better  purpose  ** 
than  to  confirm  his  hearers  in  their  ignorance.  He  therefore 
immediately  burned  all  his  old  sermons,  and  shed  tears  of  joy 
over  their  destruction.  This  circumstance  aroused  the  neigh- 
bourhood. His  church  soon  became  crowded  with  hearers,  and 
God  gave  testimony  to  the  word  of  his  grace  in  the  frequent 
conviction  and  conversion  of  sinners." 

In  describing  this  period  of  his  life,  Berridge  says  himself,  in  ' 
a  letter  to  a  friend  :  "I  preached  up  sanctification  by  the  works 
of  the  law  very  earnestly  for  six  years  in  Stapleford,  and  never 
brought  one  soul  to  Christ.    I  did  the  same  at  Everton  for  two 
years,  without  any  success  at  all.     But  as  soon  as  I  preached 
Jesus  Christ,  and  faith  in  his  blood,  then  believers  were  added 
to  the  Church  continually  ;  then  people  flocked  from  all  parts 
to  hear  the  glorious  sound  of  the  gospel ;  some  coming  six 
miles,  others  eight,  and  others  ten.     And  what  is  the  reason 
why  my  ministry  was  not  blessed,  when  I  preached  up  salvation 
partly  by  faith  and  partly  by  works?  It  is  because  this  doctrine 
is  not  of  God,  and  because  he  will  prosper  no  ministers  but  such 
as  preached  salvation  in  his  own  appointed  way;  namely,  by 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ." 

I  pity  the  man  who  can  read  such  an  account  as  this  without 
interest.  If  ever  there  was  a  case  in  which  we  can  see  clearly 
the  hand  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  was  this  case  of  John  Berridge. 
Here  is  a  clergyman  in  the  prime  of  bodily  and  mental  vigour, 
suddenly  changed  from  being  a  preacher  of  morality  into  a 
preacher  of  Christ's  gospel.  He  is  not  a  mere  boy,  but  a  man 
of  forty-two  years  of  age,  well  read,  of  acknow^Jedged  literary 
attainments,  and  the  very  reverse  of  a  fool.  He  is  not  per- 
suaded and  influenced  by  any  living  person,  and  seems  to  have 
no  earthly  friend  or  adviser.  Yet  all  of  a  sudden  he  begins  to 
preach  the  very  same  doctrine  as  Whitefield,  Wesley,  Grimshaw, 
Romaine,  and  Rowlands,  and  with  the  same  effects.  One 
account  alone  can  be  given  of  the  whole  affair.     It  was  the 

(195)  15 


226  BEGINS  OPEN-AIIl  PBEACEING. 

finger  of  God.  Flesh  and  blood  did  not  reveal  the  truth  to 
Berridge,  but  our  Father  who  is  in  heaven.  Well  would  it  be 
for  the  churches  if  there  were  more  cases  like  his  ! 

Once  enlightened  by  the  Holy  Ghost  and  brought  into  the 
liberty  of  God's  children,  John  Berridge  made  rapid  advances 
both  in  preaching  and  practice.  He  was  not  a  man  to  do  any- 
thing by  halves,  whether  converted  or  unconverted  ;  and  as 
soon  as  he  was  converted  he  threw  himself  with  constitutional 
energy  into  his  Master's  service,  with  all  his  might,  and  soul, 
and  strength.  The  learned  Fellow  of  (Clare  soon  ceased  to 
preach  written  sermons,  having  discovered,  by  a  providential 
accident,  that  he  possessed  the  happy  gift  of  preaching  without 
book.  His  next  step  was  to  commence  preaching  outside  his 
own  parish,  all  over  the  district  in  which  he  lived,  like  a 
missionary.  This  he  began  on  June  22,  1758.  One  of  the 
first-fruits  of  this  itinerant  aggression  was  a  clergyman  named 
Hicks,  rector  of  Wrestlingworth,  near  Everton,  who  afterwards 
became  a  very  useful  man,  and  a  faithful  labourer  in  Christ's 
vineyard.  His  third  and  crowning  step  was  to  commence 
preachingout  of  doors.  This  he  began  doing  on  May  14,  1759, 
and  describes  it  himself  in  a  letter  quoted  by  Whittingham  : — 
"On  Monday  week,  Mr.  Hicks  accompanied  me  to  Meldred. 
On  the  way  we  called  at  a  farm-house.  After  dinner,  I  went 
into  the  yard,  and  seeing  nearly  a  hundred  and  fifty  people,  I 
called  for  a  table,  and  preached  for  the  first  time  in  the  open 
air.  We  then  went  to  Meldred,  where  I  preached  in  a  field  to 
about  four  thousand  people.  In  the  morning,  at  five,  Mr. 
Hicks  preached  in  the  same  field  to  about  a  thousand.  Here 
the  presence  of  the  Lord  was  wonderfully  among  us  ;  and  I 
trust,  beside  many  that  were  slightly  wounded,  nearly  thirty 
received  heart-felt  conviction." 

Berridge  had  now  climbed  to  the  top  of  the  tree  as  an  evan- 
gelist. He  preached  the  pure  gospel ;  he  preached  extempore; 
he  preached  anywhere  and  everywhere  where  he  could  get 


EXTENT  OF  HIS  LAB0UB8.  227 

hearers  ;  he  preached,  like  his  Master,  in  the  open  air,  if  need 
required.  We  cannot  therefore  wonder  that  he  was  soon  pub- 
licly known  as  a  fellow-labourer  with  Whitefield,  Wesley,  Grim- 
shaw,  and  Romaine,  and,  as  a  popular  preacher,  little  inferior 
to  any  of  these  great  men.  His  life  from  this  time  forth,  with 
little  intermission,  for  more  than  thirty  years,  was  spent  in 
preaching  the  gospel.  To  this  work  he  gave  himself  wholly. 
In  season  and  out  of  season,  out  of  doors  or  in  doors,  in 
churches  or  in  barns,  in  streets,  or  in  fields,  in  his  parish  or  out 
of  his  parish,  the  old  Fellow  of  Clare  College  was  constantly 
telling  the  story  of  the  Cross,  and  exhorting  sinners  to  repent, 
believe,  and  be  saved.  He  became  acquainted  with  Lady 
Huntingdon,  John  Thornton,  John  Wesley,  Fletcher,  John 
Newton,  and  other  eminent  Christians  of  his  day,  and  kept  up 
friendly  intercourse  with  them.  He  went  to  London  some- 
times in  the  winter,  and  preached  occasionally  in  the  well- 
known  Tabernacle  in  Tottenham  Court  Road.  But,  as  a  gene- 
ral rule,  he  seldom  went  far  from  his  own  district,  and  rarely 
went  into  society.  He  found  enough,  and  more  than  enough, 
to  do  in  meeting  the  spiritual  wants  of  congregations  within 
that  district  and  seldom  went  to  regions  beyond. 

The  extent  of  his  labours  was  prodigious.  He  used  to  preach 
in  every  part  of  Bedfordshire,  Cambridgeshire,  and  Hunting- 
donshire, and  in  many  parts  of  Hertfordshire,  Essex,  and 
Suffolk.*  He  would  often  preach  twelve  times,  and  ride  a 
hundred  miles  in  a  week.  Nor  was  he  content  with  preaching. 
He  watched  carefully  over  those  who  were  aroused  by  his  ser- 
mons, and  provided  lay  evangelists  to  look  after  them  when  he 
left  them.  Some  of  these  evangelists  appear  to  have  been 
nothing  but  humble  labouring  men,  for  whose  maintenance  he 
ha,d  to  provide  out  of  his  own  pocket.     But  expenses  like  these 


*  It  is  a  singular  fact  that  I  can  find  no  record  of  Berridge  ever  having  visited 
Nottinghamshire,  or  in  his  own  county,  I  can  only  suppose  that  his  relatives  did  not 
sympathize  with  him,  and  gave  him  no  encouragement  to  come  among  them. 


128  EFFECTS   OF  HIS  PBEACHINO. 

he  cheerfully  defrayed  out  of  his  own  purse  as  long  as  he  had 
a  shilling  to  spare,  counting  it  an  honour  to  spend  his  income 
in  furthering  Christ's  gospel.  When  he  had  nothing  of  his  own 
to  give,  he  would  ask  help  of  the  well-known  John  Thornton, 
the  London  Merchant ;  and  to  the  honour  of  that  good  man  he 
never  seems  to  have  asked  in  vain. 

.  The  spiritual  effects  that  were  produced  by  his  preaching 
were  immense.  In  fact,  a  singular  blessing  appears  to  have 
attended  his  ministry  from  the  very  moment  that  he  begar  to 
preach  the  gospel.  When  we  find  that  he  was  the  means  of 
awakening  no  less  than  four  thousand  persons  in  one  single 
year,  we  may  have  some  little  idea  of  the  good  that  he  did  in 
his  district  by  his  thirty  years'  preaching.  In  calculations  like 
these,  allowance  must  always  be  made  for  a  vast  amount  of 
exaggeration,  and  for  an  equally  vast  amount  of  excitement  and 
false  profession.  Still,  after  every  reasonable  deduction  has 
been  made,  there  is  no  just  ground  for  doubting  that  Berridgc 
was  the  means  of  doing  good  to  thousands  of  souls.  Wherever 
he  went  he  produced  some  impression.  Some  were  reclaimed 
from  sin,  some  were  awakened  and  convinced,  and  some  were 
thoroughly  converted  to  God.  If  this  is  not  doing  good,  there 
is  no  such  thing  as  doing  good  in  the  world.  Spiritual  work 
done  in  rural  parishes  is,  perhaps,  less  "  seen  of  men  "  than  any 
work  within  the  province  of  the  Christian  ministry.  The  work 
that  Berridge  did  among  farmers  and  labourers  had  few  to  pro- 
claim and  chronicle  it.  But  I  strongly  suspect  the  last  day  will 
prove  that  he  was  a  man  who  seldom  preached  in  vain.  How 
few  there  are  of  whom  this  can  be  said  ! 

It  is  undeniable  that  at  certain  periods  of  Berridge's  ministry 
very  curious  physical  effects  were  produced  on  those  who  were 
aroused  by  his  preaching.  Some  of  his  hearers  cried  out  aloud 
hysterically,  some  were  thrown  into  strong  convulsions,  and 
some  fell  into  a  kind  of  trance  or  catalepsy,  which  lasted  a  long 
time.     These  physical  effects  were  carefully  noticed  by  John 


OPPOSITION  AND  PEBSECUTION.  229 

Wesley  and  others  who  witnessed  them,  and  certainly  tended  to 
bring  discredit  on  the  gospel,  and  to  prejudice  worldly  people. 
But  it  is  only  fair  to  Berridge  to  say,  that  he  never  encouraged 
these  demonstrations,  and  certainly  did  not  regard  them  as  a 
necessary  mark  of  conversion.  That  such  phenomena  will 
somtimes  appear  in  cases  of  strong  religious  excitement — 
that  they  are  peculiarly  catching  and  infectious,  especially 
among  young  women — that  even  the  most  scientific  medical 
men  are  greatly  puzzled  to  explain  them, — all  these  arc  facts 
which  have  been  thoroughly  established  within  the  memory  of 
this  present  generation.  To  attempt  to  depreciate  Berridge's 
usefulness  because  of  these  things,  is  simply  ridiculous. 
Whatever  the  faults  of  the  vicar  of  Kverton  were,  he  certainly 
does  not  seem  to  have  favoured  fanaticism.  That  he  was  per- 
plexed by  the  physical  demonstrations  I  have  described,  and 
at  first  attached  more  value  to  them  than  they  deserved,  is  the 
utmost  that  can  be  said  against  him  on  the  subject.  But,  after 
all,  the  same  may  be  said  of  many  calm  and  sober-minded  wit- 
nesses who  saw  the  Ulster  revival  in  1858.  In  short,  the  whole 
subject,  like  demoniacal  possession,  is  a  very  deep  and 
mysterious  one,  and  there  we  must  be  content  to  leave  it.  3ut  a 
minister  ought  certainly  not  to  be  put  down  as  a  fanatic  because 
people  go  into  convulsions  under  his  preaching. 

It  is  needless  to  tell  any  Christian  that  Berridge  was  fiercely 
persecuted  by  the  world  throughout  the  whole  period  of  his 
ministry.  No  name  was  too  bad  to  be  given  to  him.  No 
means  were  left  untried  by  his  enemies  to  stop  him  in  his  useful 
career.  Foremost,  of  course,  among  his  persecutors  were  the 
unconverted  clergy  of  Bedfordshire,  Huntingdonshire,  and 
Cambridgeshire,  who,  like  the  dog  in  the  manger,  would  neither 
do  good  themselves  nor  let  any  one  else  do  it  for  them.  But, 
singularly  enough,  no  weapon  forged  against  the  vicar  of  Ever- 
ton  seemed  to  prosper.  Like  Grimshawat  Haworth,  there  was  an 
invisible  wall  of  protection  around  him,  which  his  bitterest  foes 


230  COMPLAINT  TO  THE  BISHOP. 

could  not  pull  down.  Irregular  as  his  proceedings  undoubtedly 
were,  offensive  as  they  necessarily  must  have  been  to  the  idle, 
worldly  clergymen  who  lived  near  him,  they  appeared  unable 
to  lay  hold  upon  him  and  shut  his  mouth  from  one  end  of  his 
ministry  to  the  other.  From  some  extraordinary  cause  which 
we  cannot  now  explain,  the  itinerant  evangelist  of  Everton  was 
never  stopped  by  his  persecutors  for  a  single  day !  So  true  is 
the  Word  of  God  :  "  When  a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord,  he 
maketh  even  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him." 

One  special  interposition  of  God  in  order  to  protect  Berridge 
from  his  enemies  was  so  remarkable  that  it  deserves  particular 
notice.  It  derives  a  peculiar  interest  from  the  fact  that  the 
record  of  it  has  been  handed  down  in  the  good  man's  own 
words.     He  says  : — 

"  Soon  after  I  began  to  preach  the  gospel  of  Christ  at  Ever- 
ton, the  church  was  filled  from  the  villages  around  us,  and  the 
neighbouring  clergy  felt  themselves  hurt  at  their  churches  being 
deserted.  A  person  of  my  own  parish,  too,  was  much  offended. 
He  did  not  like  to  see  so  many  strangers,  and  be  so  incom- 
moded- Between  them  both,  it  was  resolved,  if  possible,  to 
turn  me  out  of  my  living.  For  this  purpose,  they  complained 
of  me  to  the  bishop  of  the  diocese,  that  I  had  preached  out  of 
my  parish.  I  was  soon  after  sent  for  by  the  bishop  ;  I  did  not 
much  like  my  errand,  but  I  went.  When  I  arrived,  the  bishop 
accoited  me  in  a  very  abrupt  manner :  *  Well,  Berridge,  they 
tell  me  you  go  about  preaching  out  of  your  own  parish.    Did 

I  institute  you  the  livings  of  A y,  or  E n,  or  P n  ?  ' 

— *  No,  my  Lord,'  said  I ;  '  neither  do  I  claim  any  of  these 
livings.  The  clergymen  enjoy  them  undisturbed  by  me ' — 
'  Well,  but  you  go  and  preach  there,  which  you  have  no  right 

to  do  ! ' — '  It  is  true,  my  lord,  I  was  one  day  at  E n,  and 

there  were  a  few  poor  people  assembled  together,  and  I  admon- 
ished them  to  repent  of  their  sins,  and  to  believe  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  for  the  salvation  of  their  souls;  and  I  remember 


TKBEATENING   AND    ENTBEATING.  231 

seeing  five  or  six  clergymen  that  day,  my  lord,  all  out  of  their 

own  parishes  upon  E n  bowling  green.' — '  Poh  ! '  said  his 

lordship  ;  '  I  tell  you,  you  have  no  right  to  preach  out  of  your 
own  parish ;  and  if  you  do  not  desist  from  it,  you  will  very 
likely  be  sent  to  Huntingdon  gaol.' — '  As  to  that,  my  lord,'  said 
I,  '  I  have  no  greater  liking  to  Huntingdon  gaol  than  other 
people;  but  I  had  rather  go  thither  with  a  good  conscience, 
than  live  at  my  liberty  without  one.' — Here  his  lordship  looked 
very  hard  at  me,  and  very  gravely  assured  me  'that  I  was  be- 
side myself,  and  that  in  a  few  months'  time  I  should  either  be 
better  or  worse.' — '  Then,'  said  I,  '  my  lord,  you  make  your- 
self quite  happy  in  this  business  ;  for  if  I  should  be  better,  you 
suppose  I  should  desist  from  this  practice  of  my  own  accord ; 
and  if  worse,  you  need  not  send  me  to  Huntingdon  gaol,  as  I 
shall  be  provided  with  an  accommodation  in  Bedlam ' — His 
lordship  now  changed  his  mode  of  attack.  Instead  of  threaten- 
ing, he  began  to  entreat.  '  Berridge,'  said  he,  '  you  know  how  I 
have  long  been  your  friend,  and  I  wish  to  be  so  still.  I  am  con- 
tinually teazed  with  the  complaints  of  the  clergymen  around 
you.  Only  assure  me  that  you  will  keep  lo  your  own  parish  ;  you 
may  do  as  you  please  there.  I  have  but  little  time  to  live ;  do 
not  bring  down  my  grey  hairs  with  sorrow  to  the  grave. — At  this 
instant  two  gentlemen  were  announced,  who  desired  to  speak 
with  his  lordship.  *  Berridge,'  said  he,  '  go  to  your  inn,  and 
come  again  at  such  an  hour,  and  dine  with  me.' — I  went,  and, 
on  entering  a  private  room,  fell  immediately  upon  my  knees. 
I  could  bear  threatening,  but  knew  not  how  to  withstand 
entreaty,  especially  the  entreaty  of  a  respectable  old  man. 

"At  the  appointed  time  I  returned.  At  dinner  I  was  treated 
with  great  respect.  The  two  gentlemen  also  dined  with  us.  I 
found  they  had  been  informed  who  I  was,  as  they  sometimes 
cast  their  eyes  towards  me,  in  some  such  manner  as  one  would 
glance  at  a  monster.  After  dinner  his  lordship  took  me  into 
the  garden.    '  Well,  Berridge,'  said  he, '  have  you  considered  of 


232  AN  ENEMY   BECOMES  A  FBIEND. 

my  request  ? ' — 'I  have,  my  lord,'  said  I,  '  and  have  been  upon 
my  knees  concerning  it.' — '  Well,  and  will  you  promise  me  that 
you  will  preach  no  more  out  of  your  own  parish  ?  ' — '  It  would 
afford  me  great  pleasure,'  said  I,*  to  comply  with  your  lordship's 
request,  if  I  could  do  it  with  a  good  conscience.  I  am  satisfied 
the  Lord  has  blessed  my  labours  of  this  kind,  and  I  dare  not 
desist.' — '  A  good  conscience  ! '  said  his  lordship ;  '  do  you  not 
know  that  it  is  contrary  to  the  canons  of  the  Church?' — 'There 
is  one  canon,  my  lord,'  I  replied,  '  which  says,"  Go  preach  the 
gospel  to  every  creature." ' — '  But  why  should  you  wish  to  inter- 
fere with  the  charge  of  other  men  ?  One  man  cannot  preach 
the  gospel  to  all  the  world.' — 'If  they  would  preach  the  gospel 
themselves,' said  I,  'there  would  be  no  need  for  my  preaching 
it  to  their  people ;  but,  as  they  do  not,  I  cannot  desist.' — His 
lor«lship  then  parted  with  me  in  some  displeasure.  I  returned 
home  not  knowing  what  would  befall  me,  but  thankful  to  God 
that  I  had  preserved  a  conscience  void  of  offence. 

"  I  took  no  measures  for  my  own  preservation ;  but  Divine 
Providence  worked  for  me  in  a  way  1  never  expected.  When 
I  was  at  Clare  Hall  I  was  particularly  acquainted  with  a  certain 
Fellow  of  that  college,  and  we  were  both  on  terms  of  intimacy 
with  Mr.  Pitt,  the  late  Lord  Chatham,  who  was  at  that  time  also 
at  the  University.  This  P'ellow  of  Clare  Hall,  when  I  began  to 
preach  the  gospel,  became  my  enemy,  and  did  me  some  injury. 
At  length,  however,  when  he  heard  that  I  was  likely  to  come 
into  trouble,  and  to  be  turned  out  of  my  living  at  Everton,  his 
heart  relented.  He  began  to  think  within  himself,  *  We  shall 
ruin  this  poor  fellow  among  us.'  This  was  just  about  the  time 
that  I  was  sent  for  by  the  bishop.  Of  his  own  accord  he  writes 
a  letter  to  Mr.  Pitt,  saying  nothing  about  my  Methodism,  but 
to  this  effect : — 'Our  old  friend  Berridge  has  got  a  living  in 
Bedfordshire,  and  I  am  told  there  is  one  of  his  neighbours  who 
gives  him  a  great  deal  of  trouble,  has  accused  him  to  the  bishop, 
and,  it  is  said,  will  turn  him  out  of  his  living.     I  wish  you  would 


VENN'S  VISIT  TO  BERRIDGE.  a33 

contrive  to  stop  his  proceedings.'  Mr.  Pitt,  was  then  a  young 
man,  and,  not  desiring  to  apply  himself  to  the  bishop,  spoke  to 
a  certain  nobleman  about  it  to  whom  the  bishop  was  indebted 
for  his  promotion.  This  nobleman  made  it  his  business,within  a 
few  days,  to  see  the  bishop,  who  was  then  in  London.  'My  lord,' 
he  said,  'I  am  informed  you  have  a  very  honest  fellow  named 
Berridge  in  your  diocese,  and  that  he  has  been  ill-treated  by  a 
litigious  neighbour.  I  hear  he  has  accused  him  to  your  lord- 
ship, and  wishes  to  turn  him  out  of  his  living.  You  would 
oblige  me,  my  lord,  if  you  would  take  no  notice  of  this  person, 
and  not  suffer  the  honest  man  to  be  interrupted.' — The  bishop 
was  astonished,  and  could  not  imagine  in  what  manner  things 
could  thus  have  got  round.  It  w^ould  not  do,  however,  to 
object ;  he  was  obliged  to  bow  compliance,  and  so  I  con- 
tinued ever  after  uninterrupted  in  my  sphere  of  action." 

Great  as  Berridge's  labours  were,  they  do  not  appear  to  have 
materialy  affected  his  bodily  health.  He  seems  to  have  pos- 
sessed one  of  those  iron  constitutions,  which  nothing  but  old 
age  can  quite  break  down.  He  lived  to  be  seventy-seven  ;  and 
though  in  his  latter  years  a  feeble  old  man,  and  very  solitary, 
without  wife,  sister,  or  brother,  to  minister  to  him,  he  was  mer- 
cifully kept  in  great  peace  to  the  last.  Henry  Venn's  account 
of  a  visit  to  hmi  in  1 792,  the  year  before  he  died,  is  very  touch- 
ing and  interesting.  He  says,  "  I  lately  visited  my  dear  brother 
Berridge.  His  sight  is  very  dim,  his  ears  can  scarcely  hear, 
and  his  faculties  are  fast  decaying,  so  that,  if  he  continues  any 
time,  he  may  outlive  the  use  of  them.  But  in  this  ruin  of  his 
earthly  tabernacle  it  is  surprising  to  see  the  joy  in  his  counte- 
nance, and  the  lively  hope  with  which  he  looks  for  the  day  of 
his  dissolution.  In  his  prayer  with  me  and  my  children,  we 
were  much  affected  by  his  commending  himself  to  the  Lord,  as 
quite  a/one,  not  able  to  read  or  hear,  or  do  anything.  But  he 
said,  *  Lord,  I  have  thy  presence  and  love,  Ma/  sufficeth.'  " 
Berridge  died  at  Everton  vicarage  on  January  22nd,  1793. 


234  DEATH  OF  BEBBIDGE. 

For  some  little  time  the  infirmities  natural  to  his  years  had  pre- 
vented him  doing  much  public  work.  But  he  was  most  merci- 
fully spared  any  long  reason  of  pain  and  disease,  and  died  after 
only  a  few  days'  illness,  the  weary  wheels  of  life  not  so  much 
broken  by  sickness  as  worn  out  and  standing  still.  His  frame 
of  mind  during  his  last  days  was  very  comfortable.  He  spoke 
but  little,  but  what  he  did  say  was  in  terms  of  gratitude  for  the 
rich  support  he  experienced  in  the  prospect  of  eternity.  He 
felt  the  stability  of  the  rock  on  which  he  had  been  long  resting 
his  hopes  of  heaven ;  and  while  speaking  of  the  excellency  and 
preciousness  of  the  Saviour,  he  said  in  an  emphatic  manner, 
"  What  should  I  do  now  if  I  had  no  better  foundation  to  rest 
upon  than  what  Dr.  Priestley  the  Socinian  points  out  ?" 

He  was  buried  in  Everton  churchyard  on  the  following  Sun- 
day, amidst  an  immense  concourse  of  people  assembled  from 
all  parts  of  the  country. 

Six  clergymen,  "devout  men,  carried  him  to  his  grave,  and 
made  great  lamentation  over  him."  A  funeral  sermon  was  then 
preached  by  the  well-known  Charles  Simeon,  from  2  Tim.  iv.  7, 
8,  a  text  admirably  well  suited  to  the  occasion.  Old  Henry 
Venn  of  Yelling,  his  son  John  Venn,  and  Charles  Simeon,  were 
among  the  few  neighbours  with  whom  the  good  old  Vicar  of 
Everton  felt  entire  sympathy;  and  his  letters  give  frequent  evi- 
dence of  the  value  he  set  on  them,  and  the  pleasure  he  took  in 
their  society. 

Berridge's  tomb  is  placed  on  the  north-east  side  of  Everton 
churchyard,  where  formerly  those  only  were  buried  who  had 
come  to  some  dishonourable  end.  But  before  he  died  he  fre- 
quently said  that  his  remains  should  be  laid  in  that  part  of  the 
churchyard,  which,  he  said  with  characteristic  pleasantry,  might 
be  "a  means  of  consecrating  it."  His  epitaph,  composed  by 
himself,  is  so  remarkable  in  its  way,  that  1  think  it  needless  to 
make  any  excuse  for  giving  it  entire.  It  is  inscribed  on  the 
south  side  of  his  tomb,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  required 


HIS  EPITAPH.  235 

nothing  but  the  date  of  that  event  being  inserted  to  complete 
it.     True  to  himself  Berridge  was  quaint  even  to  his  grave. 

Here  lie 
the  ear'i'hly  remains  of 

^obn  3iSecct&gc, 

LATE    VICAR    OF    EVKRTON, 

AND   AN    ITINERANT    SERVANT   OF  JESUS    CHRIST., 

WHO    LOVED    HIS   MASTER   AND    HIS   WORK, 

AND   AFTER    RUNNING   ON    HIS    ERRANDS   MANY   YEARS 

WAS    CALLED    UP   TO   WAIT   ON    HIM    ABOVE. 

READER. 

Art  thou  born  again  ? 

No  salvation  without  a  new  birth  ! 

I  was  born  in  sin,  February  1716. 

Remained  ignorant  of  my  fallen  state  till  1730. 

Lived  proudly  on  faith  and  ^orks  for  salvation  till  1754. 

Was  admitted  to  Everton  vicarage,  1751. 

Fled  to  Jesus  alone  for  refuge,  1756, 

Fell  asleep  in  Christ,  January  22,  1793. 

I  leave  the  Vicar  of  Everton  here.  I  have  yet  other  things  to 
tell  about  him,  but  I  have  no  room  to  give  them  now.  A  few 
anecdotes  illustrating  his  character,  and  some  account  of  his 
sermons,  literary  remains,  and  correspondence,  will  form  the 
substance  of  another  chapter. 


CHAPTER   II. 

His  Quaintness  and  Eccentricity — 2<o  Quaintness  in  his  Outlines  of  Sermons— His  Style 
of  Preaching  Defended— Specimen  of  his  Quaint  Thoughts — His  Humility,  Love  of 
Christ,  Kindness,  Self-Denial,  Shrewdness,  Courage— His  Sympathizing  letters. 

Every  student  of  natural  history  knows  well  that  some  of  God's 
creatures  are  curiously  odd-looking  and  grotesque.  There  are 
birds,  like  the  American  toucan,  with  bills  of  such  enormous 


236  BEREIDGE'S  QUAINTNESS  AND  ECCENTIilCITY. 
size  that  we  cannot  understand  how  they  are  used.  There  are 
beasts,  like  the  Mandril  baboon,  marked  with  such  brilliant 
blue  and  red  colours  that  we  are  fairly  at  a  loss  to  explain  thei^ 
object.  Yet  they  are  all  the  work  of  an  all-wise  Creator.  Our 
Father  made  them  all.  Not  one  of  them  could  have  been  made 
better.  Each  and  all,  we  need  not  doubt,  is  perfectly  adapted 
for  the  place  in  creation  which  it  was  intended  to  fill. 

Thoughts  such  as  these  come  across  my  mind  when  I  survey 
the  character  of  John  Bt  rridge,  Vicar  of  Everton.  Never,  pro- 
bably, did  the  grace  of  God  dwell  in  a  vessel  of  such  singularly 
tempered  clay.  There  was  a  strange  vein  of  quaintness  in  his 
mental  constitution,  which  seemed  to  crop  out  and  bubble  up 
on  every  occasion.  He  was  continually  saying  odd  things,  and 
employing  odd  illustrations  to  convey  his  meaning.  I  do  not 
for  a  moment  think  that  he  was  an  intentional  "joker  of  jokes," 
or  really  wished  to  set  people  laughing;  but  his  mind  was  so 
peculiarly  compounded  that  he  could  not  help  putting  things 
in  a  ludicrous  way.  It  was  in  vain  that  his  friends  warned  him 
of  his  besetting  sin,  and  entreated  him  to  lay  it  aside.  The 
poor  old  evangelist  acknowledged  his  infirmity,  and  pleaded 
that  he  was  born  with  a  fool's  cap  on,  and  that  a  fool's  cap  was 
not  so  easily  put  off  as  a  night-cap.  Hard  as  he  strove  to  keep 
down  his  enemy,  it  was  never  completely  subdued.  "  Odd 
things,"  he  said,  "break  from  me  as  abruptly  as  croaking  from 
a  raven."  The  habit  of  quaintness  was  bone  of  his  bones  and 
flesh  of  his  flesh.  It  stuck  to  him  as  closely  as  his  skin,  and 
never  left  him  until  he  was  laid  in  the  grave.  Quaintly  he 
thought  and  quaintly  he  spoke,  quaintly  he  preached  and 
quaintly  he  wrote,  quaint  he  lived  and  quaint  he  died.  In 
this  respect  I  fully  concede  he  was  a  beacon  to  be  avoided, 
and  not  an  example  to  be  followed. 

While,  however,  I  admit  that  Berridge  was  painfully  quaint 
and  odd,  I  do  not  at  all  admit  the  justice  of  Southey's  remark, 
that  he  was  buffoon  as  well  as  fanatic."     This  judgment  is 


HIS  OUTLINES  OF   SEBMONS.  237 

unwarrantably  severe.  The  twenty-six  Outlines  of  Sermons, 
which  his  biographer  has  published,  contain  abundant  proof 
that  the  Vicar  of  Everton  never  deliberately  prepared  buffoonery 
for  the  pulpit.  On  the  contrary,  with  one  or  two  trifling  ex- 
ceptions; there  is  a  "  conspicuous  absence  "  of  anything  that 
could  create  a  smile.  The  reader  of  these  Outlines  will  find 
them  very  simple,  very  full  of  Scripture,  very  spiritual,  and  very 
evangelical.  He  will  find  in  them,  no  doubt,  nothing  very  deep 
or  profound,  nothing  very  striking  or  original ;  though  he  will 
always  find  man  painted  in  his  true  colours  and  put  in  his  right 
place,  and  Christ  magnified,  glorified,  and  exalted  in  every  page. 
But  if  he  expects  to  find  anything  ludicrous,  jocose,  or  absurd, 
any  quaint  anecdotes,  or  ridiculous  illustrations,  he  will  be 
utterly  and  entirely  disappointed.  I  should  like  those  who 
decry  poor  Borridge  as  a  mere  pulpit  jester,  to  read  over,  with 
attention,  the  hundred  pages  in  which  Whittingham  has  recorded 
the  remains  of  the  good  man's  preaching.  If  they  do  not  alter 
their  opinion  very  materially,  I  shall  be  much  surprised.  They 
will  probably  agree  with  me  that  if  the  composer  of  such  Out- 
lines of  Sermons  was  a  "buffoon  and  a  fanatic,"  it  would  do 
no  harm  to  the  Church  of  England  if  she  had  a  few  more  such 
"  buffoons  and  fanatics  "  among  her  clergy. 

In  justice  to  Berridge,  I  give  it  as  my  own  deliberate  opinion, 
that  whatever  quaintness  there  was  in  his  sermons,  was  strictly 
confined  to  the  extemporaneous  part  of  them,  or  to  the  illus- 
trations which  struck  him  on  the  spur  of  the  moment.  At  any 
rate,  there  is  little  or  no  trace  of  it  in  his  written  Outlines.  A 
man  like  the  old  Fellow  of  Clare  Hall, of  great  natural  genius,and 
a  keen  sense  of  the  ludicrous,  with  his  mind  full  of  Aristophanes 
and  Hudibras,  might  surely  be  lightly  judged  if  he  sometimes 
said  odd  things  in  his  sermons.  The  excitement  of  seeing  a 
great  multitude  banging  on  his  lips  was  doubtless  great.  The 
anxiety  to  say  what  would  arrest  and  arouse  was,  doubtless, 
overwhelming.    What  wonder  if  he  sometimes  broke  away  from 


238  HIS  STYLE  DEFENDED. 

the  outlines  of  his  sermons,  and  said  things  in  the  heat  of  his 
zeal  which  in  calmer  moments  he  might  condemn  ?  One  thing, 
at  any  rate,  is  very  clear  from  the  remains  of  his  preaching,  and 
that  is,  that  he  was  a  methodical  preacher.  If  he  did  occasion- 
ally break  over  the  fence,  and  let  fall  odd  sayings,  he  managed 
to  get  back  into  the  road,  and  was  sooner  or  later  marching 
along  in  good  order. 

After  all,  I  venture  to  think  that  men  are  often  far  too 
squeamish  in  their  judgment  of  preachers.  Great  allowance 
ought  always  to  be  made  for  those  who,  like  Berridge,  are  con- 
stantly preaching  in  rural  districts  to  uneducated  congregations. 
None  but  those  who  have  preached  for  many  years  in  such 
districts  can  have  the  least  idea  of  the  preacher's  difficulties. 
There  is  a  gulf  between  his  mind  and  the  minds  of  his  hearers 
of  which  few  have  the  smallest  conception.  How  to  get  at 
their  understandings,  how  to  make  them  comprehend  what  we 
are  saying,  is  the  grand  problem  that  has  to  be  solved.  Their 
standard  of  taste  is  not  that  of  Oxford  or  Cambridge.  Things 
that  sound  coarse  and  vulgar  and  unrefined  to  a  trained  mind 
and  a  well  educated  ear,  do  not  sound  so  to  them.  Their  first 
and  foremost  want  is  to  understand  what  the  preacher  is  talking 
about;  and  he  that  can  make  poor  farmers  and  labourers  under- 
stand what  he  says  is  a  preacher  deserving  of  the  highest  praise. 
They  care  nothing  for  fine  abstract  ideas  and  rhetorical  figures. 
They  only  care  to  hear  what  they  can  carry  away.  Now  this, 
I  suspect,  was  precisely  the  thing  that  Berridge  never  forgot. 
His  grand  aim  was  to  make  his  hearers  understand,  and  to 
attain  that  aim  he  sacrificed  everything.  If  he  made  them 
smile,  he  also  made  them  weep.  If  he  excited  them,  he  did 
not  let  them  go  to  sleep.  If  he  broke  the  rules  of  taste,  and 
made  men  laugh,  he  also  succeeded  in  breaking  hard  hearts, 
and  making  them  repent.  All  honour  be  to  him  for  his  bold- 
ness! Better  a  thousand  times  for  men  to  smile  and  be  con- 
verted, than  to  look  stiff,  and  grave,  and  sleepy  in  their  pews, 


BIS  LITE  BABY   BEMAINS.  239 

and  remain  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  I  do  not  defend 
Berridge's  escapades  and  transgressions  of  good  taste.  I  do 
not  recommend  him  as  a  model  to  young  preachers.  I  only 
say  that  those  who  run  him  down  and  depreciate  him  because 
of  his  quaintness,  would  do  well  to  remember  that  he  did  what 
many  do  not — he  awakened  and  converted  souls.  Thousands 
of  correct,  and  smooth,  and  prim,  and  proper  clergymen  are 
creeping  through  this  world,  who  never  broke  a  canon  of  taste 
in  the  pulpit,  never  told  an  anecdote,  never  used  a  vulgar  illus- 
tration, and  never  raised  a  smile.  They  have  their  reward  ! 
Their  educated  friends  and  relations  admire  them,  and  the 
world  praises  them.  But  they  never  prick  a  conscience,  never 
frighten  a  sinner,  never  build  up  a  saint,  never  pull  down  a 
single  stone  of  the  devil's  kingdom — never  save  a  soul.  Give 
me  the  man  who,  like  Berridge,  may  commit  many  mistakes, 
and  offend  many  scrupulous  ears,  but  yet  reaches  hearts,  and 
helps  to  fill  heaven. 

Those  who  wish  to  form  a  correct  idea  of  the  singularly 
quaint  workings  of  Berridge's  mind,  must  turn  from  the  Outlines 
of  his  Sermons  to  his  other  literary  remains.  These  remains 
consist  of  a  collection  of  hymns  called  "  Zion's  Songs,"  a  prose 
work  entitled  "The  Christian  World  Unmasked,"  and  a  selec- 
tion of  private  letters  to  friends.  The  hymns  I  shall  leave 
alone.  The  Vicar  of  Everton  was  no  more  a  poet  than  Cicero 
or  Julius  Caesar;  and  although  the  doctrine  of  his  hymns  is  very 
sound,  the  poetry  of  them  is  very  poor,  while  the  ideas  they 
occasionally  present  are  painfully  ludicrous.  The  "  Christian 
World  Unmasked"  is  a  dialogue  between  two  imaginary 
characters  about  the  way  of  salvation,  and  contains  much  that 
is  pointed  and  clear ;  but  it  is  written  throughout  in  such  a  very 
unrefined  style,  that  it  is  not  likely  to  be  extensively  useful. 
The  letters  to  private  friends  are  excellent,  and  are  worth  all  the 
rest  of  Whittingham's  volume  put  together.  From  these  and 
ihe  '•  Christian  World  "  I  will  now  select  a  few  specimens  of 


240  EXTBACTS  FIIOM  HIS  WBITINGS. 

Berridge's  quaintness.  I  have  spoken  a  good  deal  about  it, 
and  it  is  only  just  and  fair  to  let  the  reader  see  what  it  was 
like. 

Let  us  hear  how  Berridge  speaks  of  human  nature  :  "  Nature 
lost  her  legs  in  Paradise,  and  has  not  found  them  since;  nor 
has  she  any  will  to  come  to  Jesus.  The  way  is  steep  and 
narrow,  full  of  self-denials,  crowded  up  with  stumbling-blocks  : 
she  cannot  like  it ;  and  when  she  does  come,  it  is  with  huge 
complaining.  Moses  is  obliged  to  flog  her  tightly,  and  make 
her  heart  ache,  before  she  casts  a  weeping  look  on  Jesus. 
Once  she  doated  on  this  Jewish  lawgiver,  was  fairly  wedded  to 
him,  and  sought  to  please  him  by  her  works — and  he  seemed  a 
kindly  husband  ;  but  now,  he  grows  so  grim  a  tyrant,  there 
is  no  bearing  of  him.  When  she  takes  a  wrong  step,  his 
mouth  is  always  full  of  cursing,  and  his  resentment  so  im- 
placable, no  weeping  will  appease  him,  nor  promise  of  amend- 
ment."* 

Let  us  hear  Berridge  about  the  "Whole  Duty  of  Man  :" 
"The  'Whole  Duty  of  Man'  was  sent  abroad  with  a  good 
intent,  but  has  failed  of  its  purpose,  as  all  such  teaching  ever 
will.  Morality  has  not  thriven  since  its  publication ;  and  never 
can  thrive,  unless  founded  wholly  upon  grace.  The  heathen, 
for  want  of  this  foundation,  could  do  nothing.  They  spoke 
some  noble  truths,  but  spoke  to  men  with  withered  hearts  and 
loathing  appetites.  They  were  like  way-posts,  which  show  a 
road,  but  cannot  help  a  cripple  forward;  and  yet  many  of  them 
preached  higher  morals  than  are  often  taught  by  their  modem 
friends.  In  their  way  they  were  skilful  fishermen,  but  fished 
without  the  gospel-bait,  and  could  catch  no  fry.  And  after 
they  had  toiled  long  in  vain,  we  take  up  their  angle-rods,  and 
dream  of  more  success,  though  not  possessed  of  half  their  skill. 
God  has  shown  how  little  human  wit  and  strength  can  do  to* 
compass  reformation.     Reason  has  explored  the  moral  path^. 

•  "  Christian  "World,"  p.  292,  Whitting ham's  Edition. 


JUSTIFICA  TILN  B  V  FAITH.  24  ? 

planted  it  wth  roses,  and  fenced  it  round  with  motives ;  but  ai> 
in  vain.* 

Let  us  hear  him  again :  "  Men  are  rightly  treated  in  the 
reading-desk,  and  called  by  their  proper  name  of  miserable 
sinners.  But  in  the  pulpit  they  are  complimented  on  the 
dignity  of  their  earthly,  sensual,  devilish  natures,  are  flattered 
with  a  princely  will  and  power  to  save  themselves,  and  orna- 
mented with  a  lusty  scam  of  merit.  Justification  by  faith,  the 
jewel  of  the  Gospel  covenant,  the  groundwork  of  the  Reforma- 
tion, the  glory  of  the  British  Church,  is  now  derided  as  a  poor 
old  beggarly  element,  which  may  suit  a  negro  or  a  convict,  but 
will  not  save  a  lofty  scribe  nor  a  lewd  gentleman.  And  the 
covenant  of  grace,  though  executed  legally  by  Jesus,  purchased 
by  his  life  and  death,  written  and  sealed  witli  his  blood,  is 
deemed  of  no  value,  till  ratified  by  Moses.  Paul  declares  no 
other  foundation  can  we  lay  beside  that  which  is  laid,  Christ 
Jesus.  But  men  are  growing  wise  above  that  which  is  written, 
and  will  have  two  foundations  for  their  hopes.  These  are, 
fancied  merit,  added  to  the  meritorious  life  and  death  of  Christ. 
If  an  angel  should  visit  our  earth,  and  proclaim  such  a  kind  of 
gospel  as  is  often  hawked  from  the  press  and  pulpit,  though  he 
preached  morality  with  most  seraphic  power,  and  till  his  wings 
dropped  off,  he  would  never  turn  one  soul  to  God,  nor  produce 
a  single  grain  of  true  morality,  arising  from  the  love  of  God,  and 
aiming  only  at  his  glory."  t 

I^t  us  hear  him  again :  "  Once  I  went  to  Jesus  as  a  cox- 
comb, and  gave  myself  fine  airs,  fancying,  if  He  were  some- 
thing, so  was  I ;  if  He  had  merit,  so  had  I.  I  used  him  as  a 
healthy  man  will  use  a  walking-staff— lean  an  ounce  upon  it, 
and  vapour  with  it  in  the  air.  But  now  He  is  my  whole  crutch; 
no  foot  can  stir  a  step  without  him.  He  is  my  all,  as  he  ought 
to  be  if  he  will  become  my  Saviour,  and  bids  me  cast  all  my 
care  on  him.     My  heart  can  have  no  rest  unless  it  leans  upon 

•  "  Christian  World,"  p.  335.  t  "  Christian  World,"  p.  341. 


242  EXTRACTS  FROM  HIS  LETTERS. 

hiin  wholly;  and  then  it  feels  his  peace.  But  I  am  apt  to  leave 
my  resting-place ;  and  when  I  ramble  from  it,  my  breast  will 
quickly  brew  up  mischief.  Some  evil  temper  now  begins  to 
boil,  or  some  care  would  fain  perplex  me,  or  some  idle  wants 
to  please  me,  or  some  deadness  or  lightness  creeps  upon  my 
spirit,  and  communion  with  my  Saviour  is  withdrawn.  When 
these  thorns  stick  in  ray  flesh,  I  do  not  try,  as  heretofore,  to 
pick  them  out  with  my  own  needle ;  but  I  carry  all  my  com- 
plaints to  Jesus,  casting  every  care  on  him.  His  office  is  to 
save,  and  mine  to  look  to  him  for  help.  If  evil  tempers  arise, 
I  go  to  him  as  some  demoniac.  If  deadness  creeps  upon  me, 
I  go  as  a  paralytic.  If  dissipation  comes,  I  go  as  a  lunatic.  If 
darkness  clouds  ray  face,  I  go  as  a  Bartimeus.  And  when  I 
pray,  I  always  go  as  a  leper,  crying,  as  Isaiah  did,  Unclean, 
unclean."  * 

Let  us  hear  what  he  says  in  a  letter  to  John  Newton,  dated 
October  i8,  1771  :  "The  foulest  stain  and  highest  absurdity  in 
our  nature  is  pride.  And  yet  this  base  hedgehog  so  rolls  him- 
self up  in  his  bristly  coat,  we  can  seldom  get  a  sight  of  his 
claws.  It  is  the  root  of  unbelief  Men  cannot  submit  to  the 
righteousness  of  Christ,  and  pride  cleaves  to  them  like  a  pitched 
shirt  to  the  skin,  or  like  leprosy  to  the  wall.  No  sharp  culture 
of  ploughing  and  harrowing  will  clear  the  ground  of  it.  The 
foul  weed  will  be  sure  to  spring  up  again  with  the  next  kindly 
rain.  This  diabolical  sin  has  brought  more  scourges  on  my 
back  than  anything  else ;  and  it  is  of  so  insinuating  a  nature, 
that  I  know  not  how  to  part  with  it.  I  hate  it,  and  love  it ;  I 
quarrel  with  it,  and  embrace  it;  I  dread  it,  and  yet  suff"er  it  to 
lie  in  ray  bosom.  It  pleads  a  right,  through  the  fall,  to  be  a 
tenant  for  life;  and  has  such  a  wonderful  appetite,  that  it  can 
feed  kindly  both  on  grace  and  garbage — will  be  as  warm  and 
snug  in  a  cloister  as  a  palace,  and  be  as  much  delighted  with  a 
6ce  prayer  as  a  foul  oath." 

*  "  Christian  World,"  p.  a4& 


LETTER  TO  SAMUEL  WILKES.  ->43 

Let  us  hear  what  he  says  in  a  letter  to  Samuel  Wilkes,  dated 
August  1 6,  1774:  "Sitting  closely  on  the  beach  is  very  sweet 
after  a  stormy  voyage;  but  I  fancy  you  will  find  it  more  difficult 
to  walk  closely  with  Jesus  in  a  calm  than  a  storm,  in  easy 
circumstances  than  in  straits.  A  Christian  never  falls  asleep  in 
the  fire  or  in  the  water,  but  grows  drowsy  in  the  sunshine.  We 
love  to  nestle,  but  can/.ot  make  a  nest  in  a  hard  bed.  God  has 
given  you  good  abilities.  This,  of  course,  will  make  you  re- 
spected by  men  of  business,  and  tempt  you  at  times  to  admire 
yourself,  and  thus  bring  a  smart  rod  upon  your  back.  Sharp 
genius,  like  a  sharp  knife,  often  makes  a  wrong  gash,  and  cuts 
a  finger  instead  of  food.  We  scarcely  know  how  to  turn  our 
backs  on  admiration,  though  it  comes  from  the  vain  world ;  yet 
a  kick  from  the  world  does  believers  less  harm  than  a  kiss.  I 
apprehend  a  main  part  of  your  trial  will  lie  here.  When  you 
are  tempted  to  think  gaudily  of  yourself,  and  spread  your 
feathers  like  a  peacock,  remember  that  fine  parts  in  themselves 
are  like  the  fine  wings  of  a  butterfly,  which  garnish  out  the 
moth  and  grub  beneath.  Remember,  too,  that  a  fiend  has 
sharper  parts  than  the  sharpest  of  us,  and  that  one  grain  of 
godly  grace  is  of  more  worth  than  a  hundred  thousand  heads- 
ful  of  Attic  wit,  or  of  philosophic,  theologic,  or  commercial 
science." 

Let  us  hear  what  he  writes  to  Lady  Huntingdon  about  the 
marriage  of  ministers,  on  March  23,  1770:  "Before  I  parted 
with  honest  G.,  1  cautioned  him  much  against  petticoat  snares. 
He  has  burnt  his  wings  already.  Sure  he  will  not  imitate  a 
'  foolish  gnat,  and  hover  again  about  the  candle  1  If  he  should 
fall  inco  a  sleeping-lap,  like  Samson,  he  will  soon  need  a  flannel 
night-cap,  and  a  rusty  chain  to  i\y^  him  down,  like  a  chained 
Bible  to  the  reading-desk.  No  trap  so  mischievous  to  the  field- 
preacher  as  wedlock;  and  it  is  laid  for  him  at  every  hedge 
comer.  Matrimony  has  quite  maimed  poor  Charles  [Wesley], 
and  might  have  spoiled  John  [Wesley]  and  George  [Whitefield], 


2 44  EX TRA  CTS  FROM  HIS  LE  TTh  RS. 

if  a  wise  Master  had  not  graciously  sent  them  a  brace  of  ferretsk 
Dear  George  has  now  got  his  liberty  again  ;  and  he  will  escape 
well  if  he  is  not  caught  by  another  tenter-hook.  Eight  or  nine 
years  ago,  having  been  grievously  tormented  with  house-keep- 
ing, I  truly  had  thought  of  looking  out  for  a  Jezebel  myself. 
But  it  seemed  highly  needful  to  ask  advice  of  the  Lord. 
So,  kneeling  down  on  my  knees  before  a  table,  with  a  Bible 
between  my  hands,  I  besought  the  Lord  to  give  me  a  direc- 
tion." I  may  add  that  Jeremiah  xvi.  2  settled  the  question,  to 
Berridge's  satisfaction,  in  the  negative. 

In  another  letter  he  says  :  "  A  man  may  be  constitutionally 
meek  as  the  lamb,  constitutionally  kind  as  the  spaniel,  consti- 
tutionally cheerful  as  the  lark,  and  constitutionally  modest  as 
the  owl;  but  these  things  are  not  sanctification.  No  sweet, 
humble,  heavenly  tempers,  no  sanctifying  graces,  are  found  but 
from  the  cross." 

In  another  letter  he  says  :  "A  Smithfield  fire  would  unite  the 
sheep  of  Christ,  and  frighten  the  goats  away ;  but  when  the 
world  ceases  to  persecute  the  flocks,  they  begin  to  fight  each 
other.  Indeed,  the  worst  part  of  the  sheep  is  in  his  headj 
which  is  not  half  so  good  as  a  calf's  head ;  and  with  this  they 
are  ever  butting  at  each  other.' 

In  another  letter  he  says:  "I  told  my  brother  Mr.  Henpy 
Venn  he  need  not  fear  being  hanged  for  sheep-stealing,  while 
he  only  whistles  the  sheep  into  a  better  pasture,  and  meddles 
neither  with  the  flock  nor  fleece.  And  I  am  sure  he  cannot 
sink  much  lower  in  credit;  for  he  has  lost  his  character  right 
honestly  by  preaching  law  and  gospel  without  mincing.  The 
scoffing  world  makes  no  other  distinction  between  him  and  me, 
than  between  Satan  and  Beelzebub.  We  have  both  got  tufted 
horns  and  cloven  feet;  only  I  am  thought  the  more  impudent 
devil  of  the  two." 

I  leave  the  subject  of  John  Berridge's  quaintness  here.  It 
would  be  easy  to  multiply  quotations  like  those  I  have  given; 


PROMINENT  FEATURES  IN  Ills  CHARACTER.        245 

but  I  have  probably  said  enough  to  give  my  readers  some  idea 
of  the  strange  workings  of  the  good  Vicar  of  Everton's  mind.  I 
do  not  pretend  to  defend  his  odd  sayings.  I  fully  admit  that  they 
were  calculated  to  interfere  with  his  usefulness.  But,  once  for 
all,  I  must  request  my  readers  not  to  judge  them  too  severely, 
and,  above  all,  to  beware  of  setting  down  the  eccentric  author 
of  them  as  a  ranting  fool.  Berridge,  we  may  depend  on  it,  was 
nothing  of  the  kind.  Quaint  as  his  sayings  were,  a  Christian 
reader  will  seldom  fail  to  discern  in  them  a  deep  vein  of  common 
sense,  shrewdness,  and'  sagacity.  Odd  and  unrefined  as  his 
illustrations  often  were,  they  were  just  the  kind  of  thing  that 
arrests  and  keeps  up  the  attention  of  rural  hearers.  Let  us 
grant  that  he  erred  in  an  excess  of  quaintness,  but  let  us  not 
forget  that  hundreds  of  preachers  err  in  an  excess  of  conect 
dulness,  and  never  do  good  to  a  single  soul. 

I  should  be  sorry  to  leave  on  my  reader's  mind  the  impres- 
sion that  quaintness  was  the  leading  characteristic  of  the  good 
Vicar  of  Everton.  There  were  other  prominent  features  in  his 
character  which  were  quite  as  remarkable  as  his  quaintness,  but 
which  his  detractors  have  found  it  convenient  to  forget.  There 
were  many  grand  and  fine  points  about  this  old  evangelist, 
which  deserve  to  be  had  in  remembrance,  and  which  all  who 
love  pure  and  undefiled  religion  will  know  how  to  appreciate. 
I  will  briefly  mention  a  few  of  them,  and  then  draw  my  account 
of  him  to  a  conclusion. 

Berridge  was  a  man  of  deep  humility.  That  queen  of  all  the 
graces,  which  adorned  Whitefield  and  Grimshaw  so  remark- 
ably, was  a  prominent  feature  in  his  character.  No  man  could 
be  more  sensible  of  his  infirmities  than  he  was,  and  no  one 
could  speak  of  himself  more  disparagingly  than  he  did.  He 
says,  in  1773:  "Ten  years  ago,  I  hoped  to  be  something  long 
before  this  time,  and  seemed  in  a  promising  way;  but  a  nearer 
view  of  the  spiritual  wickedness  in  my  heart,  and  of  the  spiritual 
demands  of  God's  laws,  has  forced  me  daily  to  cry,  *0  wretchcid 


94^  HIS  LOVE  OF  CHRFST. 

man  that  I  am!  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner!'  I  am  now 
sinking  from  a  poor  something  into  a  vile  nothing;  and  wish 
to  be  nothing,  that  Christ  may  be  all.  I  am  creeping  down  the 
ladder  from  self-complacence  to  self-abhorrence;  and  the  more 
I  abhor  myself,  the  more  I  must  hate  sin,  which  is  the  cause  of 
that  abhorrence." — "  A-s  the  heart  is  more  washed,  we  grow 
more  sensible  of  its  remaining  defilement;  just  as  we  are  more 
displeased  with  a  single  spot  on  a  new  coat,  than  with  a  hundred 
stains  on  an  old  one.  The  more  wicketl  men  grow,  the  less 
ashamed  they  are  of  themselves ;  and  the  more  holy  men  grow, 
the  more  they  learn  to  abhor  themselves." 

For  another  thing,  Berridge  was  a  man  who  gloried  in  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christy  and  in  all  his  preaching,  speaking,  and 
writing,  delighted  to  make  much  of  Him.  He  says,  in  one  of 
his  letters:  "Once  I  was  sensible  of  my  lameness,  but  did 
not  know  that  Christ  was  to  be  my  whole  strength  as  well  as 
righteousness.  I  saw  His  blood  could  purge  away  the  guilt  of 
sin ;  but  I  thought  I  had  some  natural  might  against  the  power 
of  sin.  Accordingly,  I  laboured  to  cut  away  my  own  corrup)- 
tions,  and  pray  away  my  own  will,  but  laboured  in  the  fire.  At 
length,  God  has  shown  me  that  John  Berridge  cannot  drive  the 
devil  out  of  himself;  but  Jesus  Christ,  blessed  be  his  name, 
must  say  to  the  Legion, '  Come  out'  I  see  that  faith  alone  can 
purify  the  heart  as  well  as  purify  the  conscience,  and  that  Christ 
is  worthy  to  be  my  all  in  everything,  in  wisdom,  righteousness, 
sanctification,  and  redemption." 

For  another  thing,  Berridge  was  a  man  of  singidar  kindness 
mid  self-denial.  No  man  perhaps  ever  carried  on  Christ's  work 
with  more  thoroughly  disinterested  views.  Whether  at  home 
or  abroad  he  was  always  giving,  and  never  receiving,  and  went 
through  all  his  immense  labours  gratuitously.  Houses  and 
barns  were  rented  for  preaching,  lay-preachers  maintained  in 
all  directions,  and  his  own  travelling  expenses  defrayed  by  him- 
self.    Whenever  he  preached  in  a  cottage,  he  invariably  left 


I/rS  SELF-DENIAL.  247 

luiit-a-cro\vn  for  the  use  of  it;  and,  during  his  itinerancy,  he 
actually  spent  ;^5oo  in  this  way  alone.  Cases  of  distress  and 
sufl'ering  always  met  with  munificent  help  from  him.  His 
whole  income,  both  private  and  professional,  was  annually 
spent  in  doing  good,  and  even  his  family  plate  was  sold  to  buy 
clothes  for  his  itinerant  preachers.  As  to  his  own  habits  at 
home,  they  were  simple  in  the  extreme.  To  one  who  came  to 
supply  his  pulpit  (the  Hon.  and  Rev.  W.  Shirley),  when  absent 
from  home,  he  wrote  the  following  quaint  intimation :  "  You 
must  eat  what  is  set  before  you,  and  be  thankful.  I  get  hot 
victuals  but  once  a  week  for  myself,  namely,  on  Saturday;  but, 
because  you  are  an  Honourable  man,  I  have  ordered  two  hot 
joints  to  be  got  each  week  for  you.  Use  what  I  have  just  as 
your  own.  I  make  no  feasts,  but  save  all  I  can,  to  give  all  I 
can.  I  have  never  yet  been  worth  a  groat  at  the  year's  end, 
>ior  desire  it."  As  to  his  fare  abroad,  when  itinerating  in  the 
eastern  counties,  he  says  in  another  letter:  "I  fear  my  weekly 
-circuit  would  not  suit  a  London  or  Bath  divine.  Long  rides, 
and  miry  roads,  in  sharp  weather!  Cold  houses  to  sit  in,  with 
very  moderate  fuel,  and  three  or  four  children  roaring  or  rock- 
ing about  you  I  Coarse  food,  and  meagre  liquor!  Lumpy  beds 
to  lie  on  and  too  short  for  the  feet,  with  stiff  blankets  like 
boards  for  a  covering  I  Rise  at  five  in  the  moraing  to  preach ;  at 
seven,  breakfast  on  poor  tea;  at  eight,  mount  a  horse  with  boots 
never  cleaned,  and  then  ride  home  praising  God  for  all  mercies!" 
For  another  thing,  Berridge  was  a  man  of  uncommon  shrewd- 
ness^ good  sense,  and  sagacity.  Never  was  there  a  more  complete 
mistake  than  to  suppose  that  he,  any  more  than  Romaine,  was 
a  mere  ranting,  weak-headed  fanatic.  A  careful  perusal  of  his 
remains  will  show  them  to  be  replete  with  deep,  thoughtful,  and 
far-sighted  remarks.  His  criticism  of  Cowper's  Poems,  his 
letters  about  Lady  Huntingdon's  College  at  Trevecca,  his  well- 
balanced  statements  of  some  of  the  most  disputed  points  in  the 
Calvinistic  controversy,  and  his  sensible  treatment  of  enthusiasts 


348  ADVICE  TO  A   YOUNG  MINISTER. 

■under  his  ministry,  are  excellent  evidences  of  this  feature  in  his 
character.  I  know  few  wiser  and  more  com[)rehensive  letters 
of  advice  to  a  young  minister  about  a  seniion  than  one  (not 
dated)  which  Whittingham  has  inserted  at  the  end  of  his  collec- 
tion. Among  other  things,  he  says:  "When  you  open  your 
commission,  begin  with  laying  open  the  innumerable  corruption* 
of  the  hearts  of  your  audience.  Moses  will  lend  you  a  knife, 
which  may  be  often  whetted  at  his  grindstone.  Lay  open  the 
universal  sinfulness  of  men's  natures,  the  darkness  of  the  mind, 
the  frowardness  of  the  will,  the  fretfulness  of  the  temper,  and 
the  earthliness  and  sensuality  of  the  affections.  Speak  of  the 
evil  of  sin  in  its  nature,  its  rebellion  againsi  God  as  our  Sove- 
reign, ingratitude  to  God  as  our  Lawgiver,  and  contempt  both 
of  his  authority  and  love.  Declare  the  evil  of  sin  in  its  effects, 
bringing  all  our  sicknesses,  pains,  and  snares — all  the  evils  we 
feel,  and  all  the  evils  we  fear." — "  Lay  open  the  spirituality  of 
the  law  and  its  extent,  reaching  to  every  thought,  word,  and 
action,  and  declaring  every  transgression,  whether  by  omission 
or  commission,  deserving  of  death.  Declare  man's  utter  helpless- 
ness to  change  his  nature,  or  make  his  peace." — "  When  your 
hearers  are  deeply  affected  with  these  things,  which  is  often 
seen  by  the  hanging  down  of  their  heads,  then  preach  Christ. 
Lay  open  the  Saviour's  almighty  power  to  soften  the  hard 
heart  and  give  it  repentance,  to  bring  pardon  to  the  broken 
heart,  a  spirit  of  prayer  to  the  prayerless  heart,  holiness 
to  the  filthy  heart,  and  faith  to  the  unl)elieving  heart  Let 
them  know  that  all  the  trea.sures  of  grace  are  lodged  in  Jesu. 
Christ  for  the  use  of  the  poor  needy  sinner,  and  that  he  is  full 
of  love  as  well  as  of  power;  turns  no  beggar  from  his  gate,  but 
receives  all  comers  kindly;  loves  to  bless  ihem,  and  bestows 
all  his  blessings  free.  Here  you  must  wave  the  gospel  flag, 
and  magnify  the  Saviour  supremely  Speak  it  with  a  fiill 
mouth,  that  his  blood  can  wash  away  the  foulest  sins,  and  h.is 
grace  subdue  the  stoutest  corruptions.     Entreat  the  people  to 


HIS  COURAGE  AND  BOLDNESS.  249 

seek  his  grace,  to  seek  it  directly,  to  seek  it  diligently,  to  seek 
it  constantly;  and  acquaint  them  that  all  who  thus  seek  shall 
assuredly  find  the  salvation  of  God." 

For  another  thing,  Berridge  was  a  man  of  extraordinary 
courage  and  bo/dn-ess.  He  was  one  of  those  who  could  say  with 
David :  "  I  will  speak  of  thy  testimonies  before  kings,  and  not 
be  ashamed."  In  doing  his  Master's  business,  and  delivering 
his  Master's  message,  he  was  never  stopped  for  a  moment  by 
fear  of  personal  danger  or  regard  for  the  opinion  of  the  world. 
Neither  bishops,  squires,  nor  parsons  had  any  terrors  for  him. 
At  an  early  period  of  his  evangelical  mmistry  he  took  his  hne, 
and  from  that  line  he  never  swerved.  The  occasion  of  his  first 
resolving  never  to  be  afraid  is  strikingly  described  in  the  follow- 
ing anecdote,  which  I  take  from  the  "  Churchman's  Monthly 
Penny  Magazine"  for  1852: — 

"  In  one  of  the  villages  in  which  he  was  knowji  as  a  preacher  of  the  new 
doctrines,  which  were  then  beginning  to  excite  a  great  sensation  in  diflTercnt 
spots  in  England,  he  was  exposed,  when  passing  through  it,  to  the  hootitigs 
and  revilings  of  the  mob  to  an  extent  which  frequently  chafed  his  excitable 
spirit.  This  village  was  composed  nearly  exclusively  of  a  long,  straggling 
street,  and,  as  is  to  be  seen  in  many  similar  hamlets  in  England  and  else- 
where, was  surrounded  on  one  side  by  a  narrow  lane,  which,  jutting  off  at 
one  end,  joined  it  again,  by  a  much  wider  circuit  Uian  that  made  by  the 
street,  at  the  other.  On  one  day  in  which  Berridge  was  about  to  pass 
throui;h  this  village,  his  spirit  quailed  within  him,  in  anticipation  of  the 
rough  reception  he  would  certainly  meet  with  from  the  bigoted  inhabitants. 
He  felt  as  if  he  could  not  encounter  it,  and  accordingly  turned  into  the 
narrow  lane  of  which  we  have  spoken  just  at  the  moment  when  a  pig-driver 
of  his  acquaintance  entered  the  sti-eet  with  his  noisy  charge.  It  was  their 
hap,  each  pursuing  his  own  course,  to  meet  again  at  the  farther  end  of  the 
village,  when  the  j)ig-driver,  who  not  only  knew  Berridge,  but  knew  his 
principles,  and  knew  the  truth,  looked  up  in  his  face  with  a  most  peculiar 
expression,  and  said  :   '  So  yoti  are  ashamed  cn'f. ' 

"The  saying  went  to  his  heart.  'Yes,'  he  said,  'I  have  been  ashamed 
otit;  1  resolve,  in  the  strength  of  God,  to  be  ashamed  of  it  no  more,  but 
henceforth  to  press  after  it,  firm  unto  the  end,'  A  resolution  which,  under- 
tr.keii  by  a  resolute  mind  in  the  fear  of  God,  was,  perhaps,  never  more 
faithfully  carried  out  in  the  future  progress  of  a  long  and  devoted  life." 

Last,  but  not  leas':,  Berridge  was  a  man  of  deep  acquaintance 


»SO  If  IS  TENDER  SYMPATHY, 

with  Christian  experiencCy  and  tmder  sympathy  with  the  people 
of  (iod.  Those  who  fancy  that  he  was  a  rough,  vulgar,  ranting 
out-door  preacher,  always  full  of  jests  and  jokes  and  high  spirits, 
and  always  dwelling  on  elementary  truths,  know  very  little  of 
the  good  man's  character.  Let  them  read  the  following  letters 
carefully,  and  mark  how  the  •♦■'nerant  evangehst  of  Everton 
could  write  to  his  friends.  Tne  first  of  the  three  was  written 
to  a  friend  on  the  occasion  of  his  wife's  death,  and  will  be 
found  in  Whittingham's  volume.  The  other  two  have  come  to 
me  from  private  hands,  and  have  never  been  printed  before: — 

Everton,  March  26,  177 1. 

••  Dear  Brother, — Mr.  W informs  me  of  the  loss  of  your  dear 

wife.  You  once  knew  she  was  mortal ;  but  she  has  now  put  off  mortality, 
and  is  become  immortal.     Can  this  grieve  you  ?     Oh,  tha^.  I  was  where  she 

now  is  I — 

'  Safe  landed  on  that  peaceful  shore, 
Where  pilgrims  meet  to  part  no  more* 

She  was  once  a  mourning  smner  in  the  wilderness,  but  she  is  now  a  glorified 
saint  in  Zion;  the  Lord  is  become  her  everlasting  light — the  days  of  her 
mourning  are  ended.  Does  this  trouble  you  ? — She  Avas  once  afflicted  with 
bodily  pains  and  weakness,  encompassed  with  cares,  and  harassed  with  a 
crowd  of  anxious,  needless  fears;  but  she  has  now  arrived  at  her  Father's 
house,  and  Jesus  has  wiped  away  all  tears  from  her  eyes,  and  freed  her  in 
a  moment  from  all  pains,  cares,  fears,  and  wants.  And  shall  this  affect 
you? — You  have  not  lost  your  wife;  she  has  only  left  you  for  a  few 
moments — left  an  earthly  husband  to  visit  a  heavenly  Father — and  expects 
your  arrival  there  soon,  to  join  the  hallelujah  for  redeeming  love.  Are  you 
still  weeping?— Fie  upon  you,  brother! — weeping  because  your  wife  can 
weep  no  more  !  weeping  because  she  is  happy,  because  she  is  joined  to  that 
assembly  where  all  are  kings  and  priests  !  weeping  because  she  is  daily 
feasted  with  heavenly  manna,  and  hourly  drinking  new  wine  in  her  Father's 
kingdom  !  weeping  because  she  is  now  where  you  would  be,  and  long  to  be 
eternally  !  weeping  because  she  is  singing,  and  singing  sweet  anthems  to 
her  (iod  and  your  God  I — O  shameful  weeping !  Jesus  has  fetched  your 
bride  triumphantly  home  to  his  kingdom,  to  draw  your  soul  more  ardently 
thither,  he  has  broken  up  a  cistern  to  bring  you  nearer,  and  keep  you  closer 
to  the  fountain ;  has  caused  a  moment's  separation,  to  divorce  your  affeC' 
tions  from  the  creature ;  and  has  torn  a  wedding- string  from  your  heart,  to 
set  it  a-bleeding  more  freely,  and  panting  more  vehemently  for  Jesus,  Here- 
after you  will  see  how  gracious  the  Lord  has  been,  in  calling  a  beloved  wife 
home,  in  order  to  betroth  the  husband  more  effectually  to  himself.     Re- 


SPECIMEN  OF  HIS  LE  TTERS.  25 1 

member  that  the  house  of  mourning  becomes  and  befriends  a  sinner ;  that 
sorrow  is  a  safe  companion  for  a  pilgrim,  who  walks  much  astray  until  his 
heart  is  well  broken.  May  all  your  tears  flow  in  a  heavenly  channel,  and 
every  sigh  waft  your  soul  to  Jesus  !  May  the  God  of  all  consolation  comfort 
you  through  life,  and  in  death  afford  you  a  triumphant  entrance  into  his 
kingdom  !     So  prays  your  friend  and  brother  in  the  gospel  of  Christ, 

*•  J.  Bkrridgk." 

"  EvKRTON,  Sept.  14,  1773. 

"  Dear  Sir, — I  received  your  kiiid  letter,  and  thank  you  for  it.  You 
want  nothing  but  an  opened  eye  to  see  the  glory  of  Christ's  redemption  ;  and 
he  must  give  it,  and  will  bestow  it,  when  it  is  most  for  his  glory  and  your 
advantage.  Had  you  Daniel's  holiness,  Paul's  zeal,  John's  love,  Magda- 
len's repentance  (and  I  wish  you  had  them  all),  yet  altogether  they  would 
give  you  no  title  to  a  pardon.  You  must  at  last  receive  it  as  a  ruined  sinner, 
even  as  the  Cross-thief  received  it. 

'*  No  graces  or  services  of  your  own  can  give  you  a  right  to  pardon  ;  you 
must  come  to  Jesus  for  it,  weary  and  heavy-laden ;  and  if  you  are  afflicted  for 
sin,  and  desirous  of  being  delivered  from  its  guilt  and  power,  no  past  iniqui- 
ties in  your  life,  nor  present  corruptions  of  your  heart,  will  be  a  bar  to  par- 
doning mercy.  If  we  are  truly  seeking  salvation  by  Jesus,  we  shall  be  dis- 
posed, as  we  are  really  bound,  to  seek  after  holiness. 

**  But  remember,  though  holiness  is  the  walk  to  heaven,  Christ  is  the 
VKty  to  God  ;  and  when  you  seek  for  pardon,  you  must  go  wholly  out  01 
your  walk,  be  it  good  or  bad,  and  look  only  to  Him  who  is  the  way.  You 
must  look  to  him  as  a  miserable  sinner,  justly  condemned  by  his  law,  a  pro- 
per brand  for  hell,  and  look  to  be  plucked  from  the  fire  by  rich  and  sove- 
reign grace.  You  have  just  as  much  worthiness  for  a  pardon  as  the  Cross- 
thief  had,  which  is  none  at  all ;  and  in  your  best  estate  you  will  never  have 
any  more.  A  pardon  was  freely  given  to  him  upon  asking  for  it  freely,  and 
given  instantly  because  no  room  was  left  for  delays ;  and  a  pardon  is  as 
ready  for  you  as  for  him,  when  you  can  ask  for  it  as  he  did,  with  self-loath- 
ing and  condemnation  ;  but  the  proper  seasons  of  bestowing  the  pardon  are 
kept  in  Jesus'  own  hand.  He  makes  his  mercy  manifest  to  the  heart  when 
it  will  most  glorify  his  grace  and  benefit  the  sinner.  Only  continue  askini; 
for  mercy ;  and  seek  it  only  through  the  blood  of  the  cross,  without  any  evt; 
to  your  own  worthiness,  and  that  blood  in  due  time  will  be  sprinkled  nn 
your  conscience,  and  you  shall  cry,  Abba,  Father. 

"  Present  my  kindest  love  to  my  dear  brother  Mr.  Romaine.  The  Lord 
continue  his  life  and  usefulness.  Kind  respects  and  Christian  salutation  to 
Mrs.  Olney.  Grace  and  peace  be  with  both,  and  with  your  affectionate  and 
obliged  servant  J.  Berridge." 

'*  EvERTO^f,  Nov.  7,  1786. 
"Dear  Sir, — I  received  your  kind  letter,  along  with  your  present.     I 
thank  you  for  the  present,  as  being  a  tokec  '^f  your  respect,  and  attended,  I 


252  SPECnfEN  OF  HIS  LETTERS. 

find,  Willi  your  daily  prayers  for  me,  which  T  value  more  than  human  pre- 
sents. The  Lord  bless  you,  and  lift  up  the  light  of  his  countenance  npop 
you,  and  «jive  yoii  a  sweet  enjoyment  of  his  peace. 

"I  have  hitherto  found  that  Christian  people  who  live  in  the  dark,  fearing 
and  doubting,  yet  waiting  on  God,  have  usually  a  very  happy  death,  l^hey 
are  kept  humble,  hungering  and  praying,  and  the  Lord  clears  up  their  evi- 
dences at  lenfjth  in  a  last  sickness,  if  not  before,  and  they  go  off  with  halle- 
lujahs. 

' '  From  what  1  know  of  you,  and  from  the  account  you  give  of  yourself,  I 
have  no  doubt  of  the  safety  of  your  state  :  yet  rest  not  here,  but  seek  further. 
Two  things  should  be  carefully  attended  to  by  all  upright  people — one  is  the 
evidence  of  the  Word,  the  other  is  the  e\'idence  or  witness  of  the  Spirit 
The  Word  says:  '  All  that  beheve  are  justified  from  all  things'  (Acts  xiii,  39). 
1  ask,  then,  do  you  not  place  your  whole  dependence  on  Jesus  Christ  for 
salvation  ?  Do  you  not  heartily  accept  of  Jesus  Christ  in  all  his  offices,  and 
are  you  not  daily  seeking  to  him  to  teach  you  and  rule  you,  as  well  as  to 
pardon  you  ?  Then  you  are  certainly  a  believer,  and  as  such  are  justified  in 
God's  sight  from  all  your  sins,  according  to  the  plain  declaration  of  God's 
Word.  Let  this  encourage  you  to  seek  witli  confidence  for  the  evidence  of 
the  Spirit,  to  proclaim  that  justification  to  your  heart.  The  evidence  of  the 
Word  is  given  to  hold  up  the  heart  in  a  season  of  doubts  and  fears,  and  the 
evidence  of  the  Spirit  comes  to  scatter  those  fears.  Remember  also  that 
salvation  does  not  depend  on  the  strength  of  faith,  but  the  reality  of  it.  In 
the  gospels,  Jesus  often  rebukes  weak  faith,  but  never  rejects  it.  Weak  faith 
brings  but  little  comfort,  yet  is  as  much  entitled  to  salvation  as  strong. 

"  I  have  had  much  of  my  ner\'ous  fever  this  summer  ;  never  once  stirred 
out  of  my  parish,  and  never  further  in  it  than  to  my  church  !  Through  mercy 
I  am  somewhat  better ;  and  when  alone,  with  a  Bible  before  me,  am  com- 
posed and  comfortable,  yet  scarce  able  to  bear  visits,  so  weak  are  my  spirits. 

.  .  .   Give  my  love  to  Mr.  G ,  and  tell  him  from  first  to  last  he  has  been 

the  friend  of  my  heart.  I  send  my  kind  respects  to  your  partner.  Grace 
and  peace  be  with  you  both,  and  with  your  affectionate  servant, 

"John  Berridge." 

I  close  my  account  of  the  good  old  Vicar  of  Everton  with 
one  remark.  The  man  who  could  write  such  letters  as  these  is 
not  one  who  ought  to  be  lightly  esteemed.  John  Berridge  is  a 
minister  who  has  never  been  rightly  valued  on  account  of  his 
one  besetting  infirmity.  The  one  "  dead  fly  in  his  ointment " 
has  made  the  Church  ignore  his  many  gifts  and  graces.  Yet 
he  was  a  man  of  whom  the  world  was  not  worthy.  Good 
judges  of  men,  such  as  John  Thornton,  Lady  Huntingdon, 
Wesley,  Venn,  Fletcher,  John  Newton,  Rowland  Hill,  Charles 


A  GREAT  AND  GOOD  MAN.  -'^'S 

Simeon,  Tones  of  Creatoii,  were  all  agreed  about  him,  and  all 
held  him  in  honour.  Let  us  reform  our  judgment  of  the  good 
man,  and  cast  our  prejudices  aside.  Whatever  some  may 
please  to  say,  we  may  rest  assured  that  there  were  few  greater, 
better,  holier,  and  more  useful  ministers  in  the  i8th  century 
than  old  John  Berridge. 


CHAPTER  I. 

porn  at  Barnes,  Survey,  1734 — His  Ancestors — Curious  Anecdotes  of  his  Boyhood  uii 
Youth — Enters  St,  John's,  Cambridge,  1742— Fellow  of  Queen's,  1749— Curate  of  West 
Horsley,  1750 — Coiate  of  Clapham,  1754 — Change  in  his  Religious  View^— Becomes 
acquainted  with  Wbitefield  and  Lady  Huntingdon — Married,  1757 — Vicar  of  Hudders- 
field,  1759. 

[HE  seventh  spiritual  hero  of  the  i8th  centur}'  to  whom 
I  wish  to  direct  the  attention  of  my  readers,  is  one 
better  known  than  several  of  his  contemporaries. 
The  man  I  mean  is  Henry  Venn,  for  some  time  Vicar  of  Hud- 
dersfield,  in  Yorkshire,  and  afterwards  Vicar  of  Yelling,  in 
Huntingdonshire.  He  is  the  only  English  minister  of  the 
eighteenth  century  whom  I  consider  worthy  to  be  ranked  with 
the  six  whose  memoirs  I  have  already  put  together — viz., 
Whitefield,  Wesley,  Grimshaw,  Romaine,  Rowlands,  and  Ber- 
ridge.  These  seven  men  appear  to  me,  in  some  respects,  to 
stand  alone  in  the  religious  history  of  England  at  this 
period.  Beside  them,  no  doubt,  there  were  many  others  of 
eminent  grace  and  gifts.  But  none  attained  to  the  degree  of 
the  first  seven. 

One  reason  why  Henry  Venn  is  better  known  than  many 
of  his  day,  is  the  excellence  of  the  only  biography  of  him. 
Few  men  certainly  have  been  so  fortunate  in  their  bio- 
graphers  as  the  evangelical  Vicar  of  Huddersfield.      In  the 


THE  FAMJL  Y-NAME  OF  VE.VN. 

whole  range  of  Christian  memoirs,  I  know  few  volumes  so  truly 
valuable  as  the  single  volume  of  "  Henry  Venn's  Life  and 
Letters."  I  never  take  it  down  from  my  shelves  without  think- 
ing of  the  words  which  our  great  poet  puts  in  the  mouth  of 
Queen  Katherine  : — 

"  After  my  death  I  wish  no  other  herald. 
No  other  speaker  of  ray  living  actions, 
To  keep  mine  honour  from  corruption, 
But  such  an  honest  chronicler  as——." 

Henry  VIII. ^  Act  iv.  sc.  2. 

In  fact,  almo^-t  the  only  fault  I  find  with  the  book  is  one  which 
is  most  rare  in  a  biography — it  is  too  short ! 

Another  reason  why  Henry  Venn's  name  is  so  well  known  tc 
Englisii  evangelical  Christians,  is  the  happy  circumstance  that 
he  left  behind  him  children  who  followed  him  "  even  as  he  fol- 
lowed Christ."  His  son,  and  his  son's  song,  have  all  been 
thoroughly  Hke-minded  with  him.  For  more  than  a  century 
there  has  never  been  wanting  a  minister  of  his  name  within  the 
pale  of  the  Church  of  England,  to  preach  the  same  doctrine 
which  he  preached  in  the  pulpit  of  Huddersfield.  The  name 
of  "  Venn "  has  consequently  never  ceased  to  be  before  the 
public.  When  Whitefield  and  Wesley  and  Berridge  were  laid 
in  their  graves,  they  left  no  sons  "  to  keep  their  name  in 
remembrance,"  however  numerous  their  spiritual  children  may 
have  been.  But  the  family-name  of  Venn  has  been  so  much  in 
men's  mouths  for  three  generations,  that  there  are  few  English 
Christians  who  are  not  acquainted  with  it. 

While,  however,  I  fully  admit  that  Henry  Venn's  name  is 
well  known  in  this  country,  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  there  is 
much  confusion  in  men's  minds  as  to  the  period  of  his  ministry, 
and  the  time  when  he  died.  Some,  I  know,  are  in  the  habit  of 
speaking  of  him  as  a  contemporary  of  Scott,  and  Cecil,  and 
Simeon.  Even  a  writer  like  Sir  James  Stephen,  in  an  article 
contributed  to  the  Ed'mhurgh  Reinew^  speaks  of  him  as  the 


»£<>  EIRTJI  OF  HENRY  VENN. 

"  last  of  four  evangelical  fathers,"  of  whom  Scott,  Newton,  and 
Milner  were  the  first  three !  All  these  ideas  about  Venn  are 
totally  inaccurate.  The  authors  of  them,  I  suspect,  confound 
Henry  Venn  with  his  son  John  Venn  of  Clapham.  Henry 
Venn  belonged  to  an  earlier  generation,  and  was  well  known 
and  popular  long  before  Newton,  or  Scott,  or  Cecil,  or  Simeon, 
or  Milner,  were  ever  heard  of.  To  class  him  with  these  good 
men  is  an  entire  mistake.  His  true  place  is  with  Whitefield, 
and  Wesley,  and  Grimshaw,  and  Rowlands,  and  Romaine,  and 
Berridge.  These  were  the  men  by  whose  side  he  laboured. 
These  were  the  men  with  whom  he  must  be  ranked.  To  clear 
up  Heniy  Venn's  true  history,  and  to  convey  some  correct 
information  about  the  main  facts  of  his  life  and  ministry,  is  the 
object  that  I  set  before  me  in  the  present  memoir.  Once  for 
nil,  I  wish  it  to  be  understood  that  the  men  I  undertake  to 
write  about  in  this  work  are  men  of  the  iSth  century.  The 
men  of  the  19th  century  are  men  that  I  purposely  leave  alone. 

Henry  Venn  was  born  at  Barnes,  in  Surrey,  on  the  2nd  of 
March  1724 — within  twenty-one  years  of  the  birth  of  John 
Wesley.  He  was  the  descendant  of  a  long  line  of  clergymen, 
reaching  downwards  in  unbroken  succession  from  the  time  of 
the  Reformation.  WiUiam  Venn  died  vicar  of  Otterton,  Devon- 
shire, in  162 1.  Richard  Venn,  his  son,  succeeded  him  at 
Otterton  ;  and  after  suffering  greatly  for  his  steadfast  adherence 
to  the  Church  of  England  in  the  Commonwealth  times,  died 
quietly  in  pos.session  of  his  living.  After  him,  his  son,  Dennis 
Venn,  died  vicar  of  Holberton,  in  Devonshire,  in  1691.  And 
finally  his  son,  Richard  Venn,  rector  of  St.  Antholin's,  in  the 
City  of  London,  was  the  father  of  the  subject  of  this  memoir. 
These  facts  are  full  of  interest.  At  the  present  day  the  name  of 
Venn  has  appeared  for  seven  generations  in  the  clergy  list  of 
the  Church  of  England  ! 

Henry  Venn's  father  is  said  to  have  been  "  an  exemplary  and 
learned  minister,  very  zealous  for  the  interests  of  the  Church  of 


HIS  EARLY  YEARS.  3. "J 7 

England,  and  remarkable  for  great  liberality  towards  the  j^oor, 
and  especially  towards  distressed  clergymen,"  Little  is  known, 
about  him,  except  the  fact  that  he  was  the  son  of  a  very  strong- 
minded  mother,  who  said  that  "  Richard  should  not  go  to 
school  till  he  had  learned  to  say  *  No.' "  He  was  once  brought 
into  much  public  notice,  and  incurred  obloquy,  on  account  of 
the  opposition  which  he  made,  in  conjunction  with  Bishop  Gib- 
son, to  the  appointment  of  Dr.  Rundle  to  the  Bishopric  oi 
Gloucester.  The  grounds  of  his  objection  were  certain  expres- 
sions which  he  had  heard  Dr.  Rundle  use,  of  a  deistical  ten- 
dency ;  and  the  result  of  his  opposition  was,  that  Dr.  Rundle 
was  actually  kept  out  of  the  see  of  Gloucester,  and  was  obliged 
to  content  himself  with  the  Irish  bishopric  of  Derry.*  When 
we  remember  what  times  they  were  when  these  things  happened, 
and  what  kind  of  a  man  Dr.  Rundle's  patron.  Sir  Robert 
Walpole,  was,  it  is  impossible  not  to  admire  the  courage  and 
conscientiousness  which  Richard  Venn  displayed  in  the  affair. 
He  died  at  the  early  age  of  forty-eight,  when  his  son  Henry 
was  only  fifteen  years  old. 

The  facts  recorded  about  Henry  Venn,  as  a  boy,  are  few,  but 
interesting.  They  are  enough  to  show  that  from  his  earliest 
childhood  he  was  a  "  thorough  "  and  decided  character,  and 
one  who  never  did  anything  by  halves.  In  fact,  Dr.  Gloucester 
Ridley  was  so  struck  with  his  energy  of  character  when  young, 
that  he  said,  "  This  boy  will  go  up  Holborn,  and  either  stop  at 
Ely  Place  (then  the  London  palace  of  the  Bishop  of  Ely),  or  gc 
on  to  Tyburn  1"  (the  place  where  criminals  were  hanged.)  The 
following  three  anecdotes  will  show  what  kind  of  a  boy  he  was. 
I  give  them  in  his  son's  own  words  : — 

"  While  he  was  yet  a  child.  Sir  Robert  Walpole  attempted  to 
introduce  more  extensively  the  system  of  Excise.     A  violent 

•  It  is  only  fair  and  just  to  the  character  of  one  long  dead  to  say,  tliat  living  Jjscend- 
nnls  or  connections  of  Dr.  Rundle  deny  tlic  correctness  of  the  sUtteiueiit  here  mj.dc  al»o«f 
his  opinions.     I  can  only  say  that  my  authority  is  Mr.  Vean's  biography. 

a!»5)  IX 


afS  ANECDOTES  OF  HENRY  VENN. 

opposition  was  excited,  and  the  popular  feeling  ran  strongly 
against  the  measure.  Young  Henry  Venn  caught  the  alarm, 
and  could  not  sleep  in  his  bed  lest  the  Excise  Bill  should  pass ; 
and  on  the  day  when  it  was  to  be  submitted  to  Parliament,  his 
boyish  zeal  made  him  leave  his  father's  house  early,  and  wander 
through  the  streets,  crying  'No  Excise!'  till  the  evening,  when 
he  returned  home  exhausted  with  fatigue,  and  with  his  voice 
totally  lost  by  his  patriotic  exertions." 

"  A  gentleman,  who  was  reported  to  be  an  Arian,  called  one 
day  upon  his  father.  Young  Henry  Venn,  then  a  mere  child, 
came  into  the  room,  and  with  a  grave  countenance  earnestly 
surveyed  him.  The  gentleman,  observing  the  notice  which  the 
child  took  of  him,  began  to  show  him  some  civil  attentions,  but 
found  all  his  friendly  o-.'ertures  sternly  rejected.  At  length, 
upon  his  earnestly  soliciting  him  to  come  to  him,  the  boy  indig- 
nantly replied,  '■  I  will  not  come  near  you  ;  for  you  are  an  Arian.'" 

"  As  he  adopted  with  all  his  heart  the  opinions  which  he 
imbibed,  he  early  entertained  a  most  vehement  dislike  of  all 
Dissenters.  It  happened  that  a  Dissenting  minister's  son,  two 
or  three  years  older  than  himself,  lived  in  the  same  street  in 
London  with  his  father ;  and  young  Henry  Venn,  in  his  zeal 
for  the  Church,  made  no  scruple  to  attack  and  fight  the  unfor- 
tunate Nonconformist  whenever  he  met  him.  It  was  a  curious 
circumstance,  that,  many  years  after,  he  became  acquainted 
with  this  very  individual,  who  was  then  a  Dissenting  minister. 
He  frankly  confessed  that  young  Venn  had  been  the  terror  of 
his  youthful  days,  and  acknowledged  that  he  never  dared  leave 
his  father's  door  till  he  had  carefully  looked  on  every  side  to  see 
that  this  young  champion  of  the  Church  was  not  in  the  street." 

Henry  Venn's  education  began  at  the  age  of  twelve,  in  a 
school  at  Mortlake,  near  Barnes.  From  this  school  he  was 
removed  to  one  kept  by  a  Mr.  Crolt,  at  Fulham,  but  only 
stayed  there  a  it-^  months.  He  left  at  his  own  request  under 
very  singular  circumstances.     He  complained  to  his  mother,  as 


ENTEJ^S  ST.  JOHN'S  COLLEGE.  259 

▼cry  few  boys  ever  do,  "  that  his  master  was  too  indulgent,  and 
the  disciphne  was  not  sufficiently  strict."  From  Fulham  he 
went  to  a  school  at  Bristol,  kept  by  Mr.  Catcott,  author  of  a 
work  on  the  Deluge,  and  an  excellent  scholar,  though  a  severe 
master.  From  thence  he  removed  to  a  school  kept  by  Dr.  Pit- 
man at  Markgate  Street,  in  Hertfordshire,  and  there  finished 
his  early  education. 

In  June  1742,  at  the  age  of  seventeen,  Henry  Venn  entered 
St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.  He  only  continued  a  member 
of  that  house  three  months,  as  he  removed  to  Jesus  College  in 
September,  on  obtaining  a  scholarship  there,  and  remained  on 
the  books  of  Jesus  for  seven  years.  In  the  year  1745,  he  tooJ: 
the  degree  of  B.A.  In  1747,  he  was  appointed  by  Dr.  Battic, 
who  had  been  a  ward  of  his  father's,  to  one  of  the  university 
scholarships  which  he  had  just  founded  ;  and  in  June  the  same 
year  he  was  ordained  deacon  by  Bishop  Gibson,  without  a  title, 
from  the  respect  which  the  bishop  bore  to  his  father's  memory. 
In  1749,  he  became  M.A.,  and  was  elected  Fellow  of  Queen's 
College.  This  was  the  last  of  the  many  steps  and  changes  in 
his  educational  career.  At  this  date  his  ministerial  life  begins; 
and  although  he  held  his  fellowship  until  his  marriage,  in  1757, 
from  this  time  he  had  little  more  close  connection  with  Cam- 
bridge. 

Henry  Venn's  ministerial  life  began  in  1749,  when  he  was 
twenty-five  years  old.*  He  first  served  the  curacy  of  Barton, 
near  Cambridge,  and  afterwards  officiated  for  various  friends, 
at  Wadenhoe  in  Northamptonshire,  and  Little  Hedingham  in 
Essex,  and  other  places  of  which  I  cannot  find  out  the  names. 
In  1750  he  ceased  to  reside  at  Cambridge,  and  became  curate 
of  Mr.  Langley,  rector  of  St.  Matthew,  Friday  Street,  London, 
and  West  Horsley,  near  Guildford.     Venn's  duty  was  to  serve 

*  By  a  comparison  of  dates  it  would  appear  that  Henry  Venn  became  a  Fellow,  was  or- 
dained, and  took  a  curacy  near  Cambridge  in  the  verj'  same  year  that  the  famous  John 
•Berridjje  became  curate  of  Staplcford,  near  Cacihridge.  But  I  c.in  find  no  yiroor  th.il 
they  were  friends  at  this  time> 


26o  ANECDOTE  OF  A  CRICKET-MATCH. 

the  church  in  London  during  part  of  the  summer,  and  to  reside 
the  remainder  of  the  year  at  Horsley.  In  this  position  he  re- 
mained continuously  for  four  years,  until  he  became  curate  of 
Clapham  in  1754. 

I  can  find  no  evidence  that  Venn  had  any  distinct  theologi- 
cal views  for  some  little  time  after  he  was  ordained.  In  fact, 
he  appears,  like  too  many,  to  have  taken  on  him  the  holy  office 
of  a  minister  without  any  adequate  conception  of  its  duties  and 
responsibilities.  It  is  clear  that  he  was  moral  and  conscien- 
tious, and  had  a  high  idea  of  the  deportment  suited  to  the 
clerical  life.  But  it  is  equally  clear  that  he  knew  nothing 
whatever  of  evangelical  religion  ;  and  in  aftertime  he  regarded 
his  college  days  as  "  days  of  vanity  and  ignorance." 

One  thing,  however,  is  very  plain  in  Venn's  early  history — he 
was  scrupulously  honest  and  conscientious  in  acting  up  faith- 
fully to  anything  which  he  was  convinced  was  right.  Indeed, 
he  used  often  to  say  "  that  he  owed  the  salvation  of  his  soul  to 
the  resolute  self-denial  which  he  exercised,  in  following  the 
dictates  of  conscience  in  a  point  which  seemed  itself  of  only 
small  importance." 

"  I'he  case,"  says  his  son,  "  was  this  :  He  was  extrer^Jy  fonci 
of  cricket,  and  was  reckoned  one  of  the  best  players  in  •  the 
university.  In  the  week  before  he  was  ordained  he  played  in  a 
match  between  Surrey  and  All  England,  which  excited  great 
interest,  and  was  attended  by  a  very  numerous  body  of  specta- 
tors. \Vhen  the  game  terminated  in  favour  of  the  side  on  which 
he  was  playing,  he  threw  down  his  bat,  saying,  '  Whoever  wants 
a  bat  which  has  done  me  good  service  may  take  that,  as  I  have 
no  further  occasion  for  it.'  His  friends  inquiring  the  reason,  he 
replied,  '  Because  I  am  to  be  ordained  on  Sunday ;  and  I  will 
never  have  it  said  of  me,  "Well  struck,  parson.'"  To  this 
resolution,  notwithstanding  the  remonstrances  of  friends,  he 
strictly  adhered ;  and,  though  his  health  suffered  by  a  sudde» 
transition  from  a  course  of  most  violent  exercise  to  a  life  ol 


FIRST  RELIGIOUS  IMPRESSIONS.  2bl 

comparative  inactivity,  he  never  could  be  persuaded  to  play  any 
more.  From  being  faithful  in  a  little,  more  grace  was  imparted 
to  him." 

"  His  first  considerable  religious  impressions,"  adds  his  son, 
"  arose  from  an  expression  in  the  form  of  prayer,  which  he  had 
been  accustomed  to  use  daily,  but,  like  most  persons,  without 
paying  much  attention  to  it — '  That  I  may  live  to  the  glory  of 
thy  name.'  The  thought  powerfully  struck  his  mind,  '  What  is 
it  to  live  to  the  glory  of  God  1  Do  I  live  as  I  pray  ?  What 
course  of  life  ought  I  to  pursue  to  glorify  God  V  After  much 
reflection,  he  came  to  the  conclusion  that  to  live  to  God's  glory 
required  that  he  should  live  a  life  of  piety  and  religion  in  a 
degree  in  which  he  had  not  yet  lived  ;  and  that  he  ought  to  be 
more  strict  in  prayer,  more  diligent  in  reading  the  Scriptures  and 
pious  books,  and  more  generally  holy  in  his  conduct.  And, 
seeing  the  reasonableness  of  such  a  course  of  life,  he  showed  his 
honesty  and  uprightness  by  immediately  and  steadily  pursuing 
it.  He  set  apart  stated  seasons  for  meditation  and  prayer,  and 
kept  a  strict  account  of  the  manner  in  which  he  spent  his  time 
and  regulated  his  conduct  I  have  heard  him  say  that,  at  this 
period,  he  used  to  walk  almost  every  evening  in  the  cloisters  of 
Trinity  College  while  the  great  bell  of  St.  Mary's  was  tolling  at 
nine  o'clock,  and  amidst  the  solemn  tones  of  the  bells,  and  in 
the  stillness  and  darkness  of  the  night,  he  would  indulge  in 
impressive  reflections  on  death  and  judgment,  heaven  and 
hell."* 

"  In  this  frame  of  mind,"  his  son  continues,  "  Law's  *  Serious 
Call  to  a  Devout  and  Holy  Life '  was  particularly  useful  to  him. 
He  read  it  repeatedly,  with  peculiar  interest,  and  immediately 
began,  with  great  sincerity,  to  frame  his  Ufe  according  to  the 
Christian  model  there  delineated.     He  kept  a  diary  of  the  state 


*  Tlie  close  resemblance  between  Henry  Venn's  experience  at  Cambridge,  and  George 
Wliitcfield's  at  Oxford,  cannot  fail  to  strike  any  one  who  reads  attentively  the  biographies 
»f  the  two  nje'i 


262  ZEAL  WITHOUT  KNOWLEDGE. 

of  his  mind — a  practice  from  which  he  derived  great  benefit, 
though  not  in  the  way  he  expected,  for  it  chiefly  made  him 
better  acquainted  with  his  own  deficiencies.  He  also  allotted 
the  hours  of  the  day,  as  far  as  was  consistent  with  the  duties  of 
his  station,  to  particular  acts  of  meditation  and  devotion.  He 
kept  frequent  fasts ;  and  was  accustomed  often  to  take  solitary 
walks,  in  which  his  soul  was  engaged  in  prayer  and  communion 
with  God.  I  have  heard  him  mention,  that  in  these  retired  walks 
in  the  meadow  behind  Jesus  College  he  had  such  a  view  of  the 
goodness,  mercy,  and  glory  of  God,  as  elevated  his  soul  above 
the  world,  and  made  him  aspire  toward  God  as  his  supreme 
good." 

Such  was  the  religious  condition  of  Henry  Venn's  mind  when 
he  first  began  the  active  work  of  the  Christian  ministry. 
Earnest,  zealous,  moral,  conscientious,  and  scrupulously  deter- 
mined to  do  his  duty,  he  put  his  hand  to  the  plough  and  went 
forward.  At  Barton  he  distributed  religious  tracts  and  con- 
versed with  the  poor  in  such  an  affectionate  manner,  that  some 
remembered  him  after  an  interval  of  thirty  years.  At  Horsley 
he  instructed  many  of  the  poor  on  the  week-days  at  his  own 
home.  His  family  prayers  were  attended  by  thirty  or  forty  poor 
neighbours,  and  the  number  of  communicants  increased  from 
twelve  to  sixty.  In  fact,  the  neighbouring  clergy  began  to  regard 
him  as  an  enthusiast  and  a  Methodist.  But  his  zeal,  unhappily, 
was  so  far  entirely  without  knowledge.  He  knew  nothing  what- 
ever of  the  real  gospel  of  Christ,  and,  of  course,  could  tell  his 
hearers  nothing  about  it.  The  consequence  was,  that  for  nearly 
four  years  of  his  ministerial  life  his  labours  were  in  vaia. 

Henry  Venn's  four  years  at  Horsley,  however,  were  by  no 
means  thrown  away.  If  he  did  little  good  to  others,  he  cer- 
tainly learned  lessons  there  of  lasting  benefit  to  his  soul.  The 
solitude  and  seclusion  of  his  position  gave  him  abundant  tims 
for  reading,  meditation,  and  prayer ;  and  in  the  honest  use  of 
such  means  as  he  had,  God  was  graciously  pleased  to  show  liiw 


CHANGE  m  HIS  RELIGIOUS  VIEWS.  263 

more  light,  and  to  lead  him  onward  towards  the  full  knowledge 
of  the  gospel.  Little  by  little  he  began  to  find  out  liiat  "  Law's" 
divinity  was  very  defective,  and  that  his  favourite  author  did  not 
give  suftioent  honour  to  Christ.  Little  by  little  he  began  to 
discover  that  he  was,. in  reality,  trying  to  "  workout  a  righteous- 
ness" of  his  own,  while,  in  truth,  he  had  nothing  to  boast  of; 
and  that,  with  all  his  straining  after  perfection,  he  was  nothing 
better  than  a  poor  weak  sinner.  Little  by  little  he  began  to 
see  that  true  Christianity  was  a  scheme  providing  for  man's 
wants  as  a  ruined,  fallen,  and  corrupt  creature ;  and  that  the 
root  of  all  vital  religion  is  faith  in  the  blood  and  righteousness 
and  mediation  and  mercy  of  a  Divine  Saviour — Christ  the 
Lord.  The  scales  began  to  fall  from  his  eyes.  The  tone  of 
"?is  preaching  began  sensibly  to  alter.  And  though,  when  h^ 
left  Horsley  for  Clapham  he  had  not  even  yet  attained  full 
light,  it  is  perfectly  evident  that  he  went  out  of  the  parish  in  a 
totally  different  state  of  mind  from  that  with  which  he  entered. 
It  was  true  that  even  now  he  "saw  men  as  trees,  walking;" 
but  it  is  no  less  true  that  he  could  have  said,  "  I  was  blind,  and 
now  I  see." 

I  pity  the  man  who  can  read  the  story  of  Henry  Venn's  reli- 
gious experience  without  deep  interest  The  steps  by  which 
God  leads  his  children  on  from  one  degree  of  liglit  to  another 
are  all  full  of  instruction.  Seldom  does  He  seem  to  bring  his 
people  into  the  full  enjoyment  of  spiritual  knowledge  all  at 
once.  We  must  not,  therefore,  "  despise  the  day  of  small 
.things."  We  should  rather  respect  those  who  fight  their  way 
out  of  darkness  and  grope  after  truth.  What  has  been  won  by 
hard  fighting  is  often  that  which  wears  the  longest.  Theological 
principles  taken  up  second-hand  have  often  no  root,  and  en 
dure  but  for  a  little  season.  Striking  and  curious  is  the  simi- 
larity in  the  experience  of  Whitefiekl,  Berridge,  and  Venn. 
They  all  had  to  fight  hard  for  spiritual  light ;  and  having  found 
it,  they  held  it  fast,  and  never  let  it  efo. 


a64  CURATE  OF  CLAPHAM. 

The  five  years  during  which  Henry  Venn  was  curate  of  Clap- 
ham  completely  settled  his  theological  creed,  and  fonned  a 
turning-point  in  his  religious  history.  His  work  there  was  very 
heavy,  as  he  held  two  lectureships  in  London,  beside  his  curacy. 
His  regular  duty  on  Sunday  consisted  of  a  full  service  at  Clap- 
ham  in  the  morning ;  a  sermon  in  the  afternoon  at  St.  Alban's, 
Wood  Street ;  and  another  in  the  evening  at  Swithin's,  London 
Stone.  On  Tuesday  morning,  he  preached  again  at  Swithin's ; 
on  Wednesday  morning,  at  seven  o'clock,  at  his  father's  old 
church,  St.  Antholin's  ;  and  on  Thursday  evening  at  Clapham. 
To  preach  six  sermons  every  week  was  undoubtedly  a  heavy 
demand  on  a  curate  of  only  four  years'  standing  !  Yet  it  is  not 
unlikely  that  the  very  necessity  for  exertion  which  his  position 
entailed  on  him  was  the  means  of  calling  forth  latent  power. 
Men  never  know  how  much  they  can  do,  until  they  are  put 
under  the  screw,  and  obliged  to  exert  themselves.  At  any  rate 
Venn  was  compelled  to  learn  how  to  preach  from  notes,  from 
sheer  inability  to  write  six  sermons  a-week,  and  thus  attained  a 
facility  in  extemporaneous  speaking  which  he  afterwards  found 
most  useful. 

In  a  spiritual  point  of  view,  Venn's  character  was  greatly 
influenced,  during  his  five  years'  residence  at  Clapham,  by  three 
circumstances.  The  first  of  these  was  a  severe  illness  of  eight 
months'  duration,  which  laid  him  aside  from  work  in  1756,  and 
gave  him  time  for  reflection  and  self-examination.  The  second 
was  his  marriage,  in  1757,  to  the  daughter  of  Dr.  Bishop, 
minister  of  the  Tower  Church,  Ipswich  ;  a  lady  who,  from  her 
piety  and  good  sense,  seems  to  have  been  admirably  qualified 
to  be  a  clergyman's  wife.  The  third,  and  probably  the  most 
important  circumstance  of  his  position,  was  the  friendship  that 
he  formed  with  several  eminent  Christians,  who  were  of  great 
use  to  his  soul.  At  Horsley  he  seems  to  have  had  no  help 
from  any  one,  and  whatever  he  learned  there  he  did  not  learn 
from  man.     At  Clapliam,  on  the  contrary,  he  at  once  becam^p 


LETTER  OF  LADY  HUN  TING DOiV.  265 

intimate  with  the  well-known  layman  John  Thornton  and  Dr. 
Haweis,  and  afterwards  with  George  Whitefield  and  Lady  Hunt- 
ingdon. 

To  Lady  Huntingdon,  Henry  Venn  seems  to  have  been  under 
peculiar  obligations  for  advice  and  counsel.  The  following 
extract  from  a  letter  which  she  addressed  to  him  about  the 
defects  in  his  first  preaching  at  Claphara,  is  an  interesting 
example  of  her  faithfulness,  and  throws  much  light  on  the 
precise  state  of  her  correspondent's  mind  at  this  period.  She 
says  :  "  O  my  friend,  we  can  make  no  atonement  to  a  violated 
law ;  we  have  no  inward  holiness  of  our  own  ;  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  is  '  the  Lord  our  righteousness.'  Cling  not  to  such 
beggarly  elements,  such  filthy  rags,  mere  cobwebs  of  Pharisaical 
pride ;  but  look  to  him  who  hath  wrought  out  a  perfect  right- 
eousness for  his  people.  You  find  it  a  hard  task  to  come 
naked  and  miserable  to  Christ ;  to  come  divested  of  every 
recommendation  but  that  of  abject  wretchedness  and  misery, 
and  receive  from  the  outstretched  hand  of  our  Immanuel  the 
riches  of  redeeming  grace.  But  if  you  come  at  all  you  must 
come  thus  ;  and,  like  the  dying  thief,  the  cry  of  your  heart  must 
be,  '  Lord,  remember  me.'  There  must  be  no  conditions  \ 
Christ  and  Christ  alone  must  be  the  only  mediator  between 
Cod  and  sinful  men ;  no  miserable  performance  can  be  placed 
between  the  sinner  and  the  Saviour.  And  now,  my  dear  friend, 
no  longer  let  false  doctrine  disgrace  your  pulpit.  Preach  Christ 
crucified  as  the  only  foundation  of  the  sinner's  hope.  Preach 
him  as  the  Author  and  Finisher  as  well  as  the  sole  Object  of 
faith,  that  faith  which  is  the  gift  of  God.  Exhort  Christless  sin- 
ners to  fly  to  the  City  of  Refuge,-  to  look  to  Him  who  is 
exalted  as  Prince  and  Saviour,  to  give  repentance  and  the  re- 
mission of  sins.  Go  on,  then,  and  may  your  bow  abide  in 
strength.  Be  bold,  be  firm,  be  decided.  Let  Christ  be  the 
Alpha  and  Omega  of  all  you  advance  in  your  addresses  to  your 
«feliow-men.     Leave  { he  consequences  to  your  Divine  Master. 


266  TESTIMONY  OF  GEORGE  WHITEFIELD. 

Vi^^\  his  gracious  benediction  rest  upon  your  labours  !  and  nuiy 
you  be  blessed  to  the  conversion  of  very  many,  who  shall  be 
vour  joy  and  crown  of  rejoicing  in  the  great  day  Avhen  the  Lord 
shall  appear." — The  date  of  this  faithful  letter  is  not  given.  I 
am  inclined,  however,  to  conjecture  that  it  was  written  between 
the  time  of  Venn's  illness  in  1756  and  his  marriage  in  1757. 
At  any  rate,  it  is  a  remarkable  fact,  recorded  by  his  son,  that 
he  used  to  observe  that  after  1756  he  was  no  longer  able 
to  preach  the  sermons  which  he  had  previously  composed. 
Lady  Huntingdon's  faithful  letter  was  probably  not  written  in 
▼ain. 

Whatever  defects  there  may  have  been  in  Venn's  doctrinal 
views  during  the  first  few  years  of  his  Clapham  ministry 5,  they  aj*- 
pear  to  have  completely  vanished  after  his  restoration  to  health 
\n  1757.  He  was  soon  recognized  as  a  worthy  fellow-labourer 
with  that  noble  little  company  of  evangelists  which,  under  the 
leading  of  Whitefield  and  Wesley,  was  beginning  to  shake  the 
land  ;  and  from  his  gifts  as  a  preacher  took  no  mean  position 
among  them.  Whitefield  seems  especially  to  have  delighted 
in  him.  In  a  letter  written  some  time  in  1757,  he  says  to  Lady 
Huntingdon  :  "  The  worthy  Venn  is  valiant  for  the  truth,  a  son 
of  thunder.  He  labours  abundantly,  and  his  ministry  has  been 
owned  of  the  Lord  to  the  conversion  of  sinners.  Thanks  be  to 
God  for  such  an  instrument  to  strengthen  our  hands  !  I  know 
the  intelligence  will  rejoice  your  ladyship.  Your  exertions  in 
bringing  him  to  a  clearer  knowledge  of  the  everlasting  gospel 
have  indeed  been  blessed.  He  owes  your  ladyship  much, 
under  God,  and  I  believe  his  whole  soul  is  gratitude  to  the 
Divine  Author  of  mercies,  and  to  you  the  honoured  instrument 
in  leading  him  to  the  fountain  of  truth."  Testimony  like  this 
is  unexceptionable.  George  Whitefield  was  one  of  the  last 
men  on  earth  to  be  satisfied  with  any  preaching  which  was  not 
the  full  gospel.  We  cannot  for  a  moment  doubt  that  during 
the  last  two  years  of  Venn's  curacy  at  Claphara.  H/<»  <».t  length 


VICAR  OF  HUDDERSFIELD.  20  f 

w:ilked  m  tVie  full  light  ot  Christ's  truth,  and  "  declared-  all  the 
counsel  of  God." 

In  the  year  1759,  Henrj'  Venn  was  appointed  vicar  of  Hud- 
dersfield,  in  Yorkshire,  by  Sir  John  Ramsden,  at  the  soHcitation 
of  Lord  Dartmouth,  tie  accepted  the  appointment  from  the 
purest  of  all  motives,  a  desire  to  do  good  to  souls.  The  town 
itself  presented  no  great  attractions.  In  point  of  income  he 
was  positively  a  loser  by  the  move  from  Ciapham.  But  he  felt 
deeply  that  the  offer  opened  "  a  great  and  effectual  door "  01 
usefulness,  and  he  did  not  dare  to  turn  away  from  it.  He 
seems  also  to  have  had  a  strong  impression  that  he  had  not 
been  successful  at  Ciapham,  and  that  this  was  an  indication 
that  he  ought  not  to  refuse  a  change.  His  wife  was  averse  to 
his  moving;  and  her  opinion  no  doubt  placed  him  in  much 
perplexity.  But  the  result  showed  beyond  doubt  that  he  de- 
cided rightly.  In  leaving  Ciapham  for  Yorkshire,  he  was  in 
God's  way. 

-  Henry  Venn  became  vicar  of  Huddersfield  at  the  age  of 
thirty-five,  and  continued  there  only  twelve  years.  He  went 
there  a  poor  man,  without  rank  or  influence,  and  with  nothing 
but  God's  truth  on  his  side.  He  found  the  place  a  huge,  dark, 
ignorant,  immoral,  irreligious,  manufacturing  town.  He  left  it 
shaken  to  the  centre  by  the  lever  of  the  gospel,  and  leavened 
with  the  influence  of  many  faithful  servants  of  Jesus  Christ, 
whom  he  had  been  the  means  of  turning  from  darkness  to  light 
Few  modern  ministers  appear  to  have  had  so  powerful  an  in- 
fluence on  a  town  population  as  Henry  Venn  had  on  Hudders- 
field. The  nearest  approach  to  it  seems  to  have  been  the  work 
of  Robert  M'Cheyne  at  Dundee. 

The  story  of  Henry  Venn's  Hfe  from  the  time  of  his  settle- 
ment at  Huddersfield  is  a  subject  which  I  must  reserve  foi 
another  chapter.  I  do  not  feel  that  I  could  possibly  do  justice* 
to  it  now.  How  he  lived,  and  worked,  and  preached,  and 
prospered  in  his  great  manufacturing  parish — how  he  turned 


268  VENN'S  MINISTR Y  AT  HUDDERSFIELD. 

the  world  upside  down  throughout  the  district  around,  and  be- 
came a  centre  of  light  and  life  to  hundreds — how  his  health 
finally  gave  way  under  the  abundance  of  his  labours,  and 
obhged  him  to  leave  Huddersfield — how  he  spent  the  last  twenty 
years  of  his  life  in  the  comparative  retirement  of  a  little  rural 
parish  in  Huntingdonshire, — all  these  are  matters  which  I  can- 
not enter  into  now.  I  hope  to  tell  my  readers  something  about 
them  in  another  chapter. 


CHAPTER  II. 

Mode  of  Working  at  Huddersfield — Effect  of  his  Ministry — Fniits  found  in  1824 — Exti»- 
parochial  Labours — Friendly  relation  with  ^Vh!^e^leld — Health  Fails — Wife  Dies — 
Leaves  Huddersfield  for  Yelling,  1771 — Description  of  Yelling — Second  Marriage — 
Description  of  Life  at  Yelling — Dies,  ..'97. 

Henry  Venn  was  Vicar  of  Huddersfield  from  1759  to  1771. 
These  twelve  years,  we  need  not  doubt,  were  the  period  of  his 
greatest  public  usefulness.  In  the  full  vigour  of  his  bodily  and 
mental  faculties,  with  his  mind  thoroughly  made  up  about  all 
the  leading  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  with  his  heart  thoroughly 
set  on  his  Master's  business,  he  entered  his  new  sphere  with 
peculiar  power  and  acceptance,  and  soon  "  made  full  proof  of 
his  ministry."  His  time  there  was  certainly  short,  if  measured 
by  years  alone,  in  consequence  of  his  failing  health ;  but  it 
measured  by  action  and  usefulness,  like  Edward  the  Sixth's 
reign,  it  was  very  long  indeed. 

For  more  than  one  reason  a  peculiar  interest  attaches  10 
Venn's  ministry  at  Huddersfield.  For  one  thing,  he  was  the 
only  one  of  the  seven  spiritual  heroes  of  the  1 8th  century  who 
ever  became  incumbent  of  a  large  town  population.  Wesley 
and  Whitefield  were  itinerant  evangelists,  whose  parish  v-'c^^  the 
world.  Romaine  was  the  rector  of  a  little  confined  district  in 
the  City.  Rowlands  lived  and  died  among  Welsh  mountain^, 
Grimshaw  on  Yorkshire  moors,  and  Ikrridge  on  Bedfordsliire 


HIS  MODE  OF  WORKING.  269 

plains.     Venn  was  the  only  man  among  the  seven  who  could 
number  his  lawful   parishioners   by  thousands. — For   another 
thing,  he  was  the  first  evangelical  clergyman  in  the  Church  of 
England  who   proved   that   the  manufacturing  masses  of  our 
fellow-countrymen  can  be  thoroughly  reached  by  the  gospel. 
He  proved  to  a  demonstration  that  the  working-classes  in  our 
great  northern  towns  are  to  be  got  at  just  hke  other  men,  if 
they  are  approached  in  the  proper  way.     He  proved  that  the 
preaching  of  the  cross  suits  the  wants  of  all  Adam's  children, 
and  that  it  can  "  turn  the  world  upside  down  "  among  looms 
and  coal-mines,  just  as  thoroughly  as  it  can  in  watering-places, 
country  parishes,  or  metropolitan  chapels-of-ease.    We  all  know 
this  now.     Nobody  would  dream  of  denying  it.     But  we  must 
remember   it  was  not  so   well  known    at    this    time.      Let 
honour  be  given  where  honour  is  due.     The  first  clergyman  in 
England  who  fairly  proved  the  power  of  evangelical  aggression 
on  a  manufacturing  parish,  was  Henry  Venn. 
-  A  clergyman's  work  in  a  large  town  district  in  the  last  cen- 
tury was  very  unlike  what  it  is  in  these  times.     A  vast  quantity 
of  religious  machinery,  with  which  every  one  is  familiar  now,  in 
those  days  did  not   exist.     City  missions,   Scripture   readers' 
societies,  Pastoral  aid  societies,  Bible  women,  mothers'  meet- 
ings, were  utterly  unknown.     Even  schools  for  the  children  of 
the  poor  were  few,  and  comparatively  defective,  and  utterly  out 
of  proportion  to  the  wants  of  the  population.     In  short,  the 
evangelical  minister  of  a  great  town  in  the   i8th  century  was 
almost  entirely  shut  up  to  the  use  of  one  weapon.     The  good 
«ld  apostolical  plan  of  incessant  preaching,  both  "  publicly  and 
from  house  to  house,"  was  nearly  the  only  machine  that  he 
could  use.     He  was  forced  to  be  pre-eminently  a  man  of  one 
thing,  and  a  soldier  with  one  weapon,  a  perpetual  preacher  01 
God's  Word.      Whether  in  the  long  run  the  minister  of  these 
days  did  not  do  more  good  with  his  one  weapon  than  many  do 
in  modem  times  with  an  immense  train  of  parochial  machinery, 


Z10  HIS  POPULARITY. 

is  a  question  which  admits  of  much  doubt.  My  own  private 
opinion  is,  that  we  have  too  much  lost  sight  of  apostolical  sim- 
plicity in  our  ministerial  work.  We  want  more  men  of  "  one 
thing"  and  "one  book,"  men  who  make  everything  secondary 
to  preaching  the  Word.  It  is  hard  to  have  many  irons  in  the 
fire  at  once,  and  to  keep  them  all  hot.  It  is  quite  possible  to 
make  an  idol  of  parochial  machinery,  and  for  the  sake  of  it  to 
slight  the  pulpit. 

These  things  ought  to  be  carefully  remembered  in  forming  an 
estimate  of  Venn's  ministry  at  Huddersfield.  Let  us  never 
forget  that  he  went  to  his  great  Yorkshire  parish,  like  David 
against  Goliath,  with  nothing  but  his  sling  and  stones,  and  an 
unwavering  faith  in  the  power  of  God.  He  went  there  with  no 
sympathizing  London  committee  to  correspond  with  him,  en- 
courage him,  and  assist  him  with  funds.  He  went  there  with 
no  long-tried  plans  and  approved  modes  of  evangelical  aggres- 
sion in  his  pocket.  He  went  there  with  nothing  but  his  Bible, 
and  his  Master  at  his  side.  Bearing  these  things  in  mind,  I 
think  the  following  extracts  from  his  admirable  biography  ought 
to  possess  a  pecuhar  interest  in  our  eyes. 

His  son,  John  Venn,  says  :  **  As  soon  as  he  began  lo  preach 
at  Huddersfield,  the  church  became  crowded  to  such  an  extent 
that  many  were  not  able  to  procure  admission.  Numbers  be- 
came deeply  impressed  with  concern  about  their  immortal  souls; 
persons  flocked  from  the  distant  hamlets,  inquiring'what  they 
must  do  to  be  saved.  He  found  them  in  general  utterly  igno- 
rant of  their  state  by  nature,  and  of  the  redemption  that  is  in 
Christ  Jesus.  His  bowels  yearned  over  his  flock,  and  he  was 
never  satisfied  with  his  labours  among  them,  though  they  were 
continued  to  a  degree  ruinous  to  his  health.  On  the  Sunday 
he  would  often  address  the  congregation  from  the  desk,  briefly 
explaining  the  psalms  and  the  lessons.  He  would  frequently 
begin  the  service  with  a  solemn  and  most  impressive  address, 
exhorting  the  worshippers  to  consider  themselves  as  in   the 


HIS  REVERENCE  EOR  THE  SABBATH.  27 1 

presence  of  the  great  God  of  heaven,  whose  eye  was  in  a  par- 
ticular manner  upon  them,  while  they  drew  nigh  to  him  in  his 
own  house.  His  whole  soul  was  engaged  in  preaching ;  and  as 
at  this  time  he  only  used  short  notes  in  the  pulpit,  ample  room 
was  left  to  indulge  the  feelings  of  compassion,  tenderness,  and 
love,  with  which  his  heart  overflowed  towards  his  people.  In 
the  week  he  statedly  visited  the  different  hamlets  in  his  exten- 
sive parish ;  and  collecting  some  of  the  inhabitants  at  a  private 
house,  he  addressed  them  with  a  kindness  and  earnestness 
which  moved  every  heart."  A  letter  written  in  1762  to  Lady 
Huntingdon,  informs  us  that  in  that  year,  beside  his  stated  work 
on  the  Lord's  day,  the  Vicar  of  Huddersfield  generally  preached 
eight  or  ten  sermons  in  the  week  in  distant  parts  of  the  parish, 
when  many  came  to  hear  who  would  not  come  to  charch.  It 
also  mentions  that  his  outdoor  preaching  was  found  especially 
useful. 

His  grandson,  Henry  Venn,  has  gathered  some  additional 
facts  about  his  Huddersfield  ministry,  which  are  well  worth 
recording.  He  tells  us  that  "  Mr.  Venn  made  a  great  point  of 
the  due  observance  of  the  Sabbath,  both  in  the  town  and  parish. 
He  induced  several  of  the  most  respectable  and  influential  in- 
habitants to  perambulate  the  town,  and  by  persuasion,  rather 
than  by  legal  intimidation,  to  repress  the  open  violation  of  the 
day.  By  such  means  a  great  and  evident  reformation  was  ac- 
complished." 

"  He  endeavoured  to  preserve  the  utmost  reverence  and  de- 
votion in  public  worship,  constantly  pressing  this  matter  upon 
his  people.  He  read  the  service  with  peculiar  solemnity  and 
effect.  The  Te  Deum,  especially,  was  recited  with  a  triumphant 
air  and  tone,  which  often  produced  a  perceptible  sensation 
throughout  the  whole  congregation.  He  succeeded  in  inducing 
the  people  to  join  in  the  responses  and  singing.  Twice  in  the 
course  of  his  ministry  at  Huddersfield  he  preached  a  course  of 
sermons  in  explanation  of  the  Liturgy.     On  one  occasion,  as 


27 «  EFFECTS  OF  HIS  MINISTRY. 

he  went  up  to  church,  he  found  a  considerable  number  of  per- 
sons in  the  churchyard,  waiting  for  the  commencement  of  the 
service.  He  stopped  to  address  them,  saying,  he  hoped  they 
were  preparing  their  hearts  for  the  service  of  God,  and  that  he 
had  himself  much  to  do  to  preserve  his  heart  in  a  right  frame. 
He  concluded  by  waving  his  hand  for  them  to  go  into  the 
church  before  him,  and  waited  till  they  had  all  entered." 

"  He  took  great  pains  in  catechizing  the  younger  members 
of  his  congregation,  chiefly  those  who  were  above  fourteen  years- 
of  age.  The  number  was  often  very  considerable  ;  and  he  wrote 
out  for  their  use  a  very  copious  Explanation  of  the  Church 
Catechism,  in  the  way  of  questions  and  answers."* 

The  immediate  effects  produced  by  Henry  Venn's  preaching 
appear  to  have  been  singularly  deep,  powerful,  and  permanent 
Both  his  son  and  grandson  have  supplied  some  striking  illus- 
trations of  them. 

His  son  says  :  "  A  club,  chiefly  composed  of  Socinians,  in  a 
neighbouring  market-town,  having  heard  much  censure  and 
ridicule  bestowed  upon  the  preaching  of  Henry  Venn,  sent  two 
of  their  ablest  members  to  hear  this  strange  preacher,  detect  his 
absurdities,  and  furnish  matter  of  merriment  for  the  next  meet- 
ing. They  accordingly  went  to  Huddersfield  Church;  but 
were  greatly  struck,  on  entering,  by  seeing  the  multitude  that 
was  assembled  together,  and  by  observing  the  devotion  of  their 
behaviour,  and  their  anxiety  to  attend  the  worship  of  God. 
When  Mr.  Venn  ascended  the  reading-desk,  he  addressed  his 
flock,  as  usual,  with  a  solemnity  and  dignity  which  showed  him 
to  be  deeply  interested  in  the  work  in  which  he  was  engaged. 
The  subsequent  earnestness  of  his  preaching,  and  the  solemn 
appeals  he  made  to  conscience,  deeply  impressed  the  visitors, 

■*  I  cannot  ma  e  out  whether  this  Explanation  of  the  Church  Catechism  was  ever  pub- 
lished. It  certainly  does  not  appear  in  a  complete  inanusciipt  catalogue  of  Mr.  Venn's 
writings  which,  by  the  kindness  of  one  of  his  descendants,  is  now  lying  before  me.  If  it 
was  ever  published,  it  seems  a  pity  that  it  has  fallen  o<tt  of  sipht,  and  is  not  better  known. 
Something,  perhaps,  would  be  known  of  it  in  the  town  of  lluddersfleld  at  this  day  Can 
•ny  reader  throw  light  on  the  point  \ 


FRUITS  FOUND  IN  1824.  273 

so  that  one  of  them  observed,  as  they  left  the  church,  *  Surely 
God  is  in  this  place  !  There  is  no  matter  for  laughter  here  !' 
This  gentleman  immediately  called  on  Mr.  Venn,  told  him  who 
he  was,  and  the  purpose  for  which  he  had  come,  and  earnestly 
begged  his  forgiveness  and  his  prayers.  He  requested  Mr, 
Venn  to  visit  him  without  delay,  and  left  the  Socinian  congre- 
gation ;  and  from  that  time  to  the  hour  of  his  death  became 
one  of  Mr,  Venn's  most  faithful  and  affectionate  friends."* 

"  Another  gentleman,  highly  respectable  for  his  character, 
talents,  and  piety,  the  late  William  Hey,  Esq.,  of  Leeds,  used 
frequently  to  go  to  Huddersfield  to  hear  Mr.  Venn  preach,  and 
he  assured  me  that  once  returning  home  with  an  intimate  friend, 
they  neither  of  them  opened  their  lips  to  each  other  till  they 
came  within  a  mile  of  Leeds,  a  distance  of  fifteen  miles,  so 
deeply  were  they  impressed  by  the  truths  which  they  had  heard, 
and  the  manner  in  which  they  had  been  delivered." 

Henry  Venn's  grandson  visited  Huddersfield  in  1824,  fifty- 
three  years  after  his  honoured  grandfather  had  left  the  place. 
On  inquiry  he  found  that  even  after  the  lapse  of  half  a  century, 
the  fruits  of  his  wonderful  ministry  were  yet  remaining  on  earth. 
The  memorials  he  gathered  together  from  these  survivors  of 
the  old  congregation  are  so  deeply  interesting  that  I  am  sure 
my  readers  will  be  glad  to  hear  them,  though  in  a  somewhat 
abridged  form. 

Mr.  Venn's  grandson  says  :  "  Through  the  kind  assistance  of 
Benjamin  Hudson,  Esq.,  of  Huddersfield,  I  saw  all  the  old 
people  then  living  in  the  town  and  neighbourhood  who  had 
received  their  first  religious  impressions  under  my  grandfather's 
ministry,  and  still  maintained  a  religious  character.  They  were 
all  in  the  middle  or  lower  ranks  of  life  ;  none  of  a  superior  class 
had  survived.  What  1  am  about  to  record  must,  therefore,  be 
received  as  the  genuine  and  unstudied  testimony  of  persons  of 
plain,  unpolished  sense. 

*  This  gentleman  was  James  Kershaw,  Esq.,  of  Ilalifyix. 


a74  TESTIMONY  OF  LIVING  WITNESSES. 

"  Mr.  William  Brook  of  Longwood  gave  me  the  following 
account  ot  the  first  sermon  he  heard  at  Huddersfield  Church  : 

*  I  was  first  led  to  go  by  listening  with  an  uncle  of  mine,  named 
W.  Mellor,  at  the  door  of  a  prayer-meeting  :  we  thought  there 
must  be  something  uncommon  to  make  people  so  earnest.  My 
uncle  was  about  nineteen,  and  I  was  about  sixteen  ;  and  we 
went  together  to  the  church  one  Thursday  evening.  There  was 
a  great  crowd  within  the  church,  all  silent,  and  many  weeping. 
The  text  was,  "  Thou  art  weighed  in  the  balances,  and  art  found 
wanting."  W.  Mellor  was  deeply  attentive  ;  and  when  we  came 
out  of  church  we  did  not  say  a  word  to  each  other  till  we  got 
some  way  into  the  fields.  Then  W.  Mellor  stopped,  leaned  his 
back  against  a  wall,  and  burst  into  tears,  saying,  "  I  can't  stand 
this."  His  conviction  of  sin  was  from  that  time  most  powerful, 
and  he  became  quite  a  changed  character.  I  was  not  so  much 
affected  at  that  time ;  but  I  could  not  after  that  sermon  be  easy 
in  sin.  I  began  to  pray  regularly ;  and  so,  by  degrees,  I  was 
brought  to  know  myself,  and  to  seek  salvation  in  earnest.  The 
people  used  to  go  from  Longwood  in  droves,  to  Huddersfield 
Church,  three  miles  off.  Some  of  them  came  out  of  church  to- 
gether, whose  ways  home  were  in  this  direction ;  and  they  used 
to  stop  at  the  Firs'  End,  about  a  mile  off,  and  talk  over,  for 
some  time,  what  they  had  heard,  before  they  separated  to  go  to 
their  homes.  That  place  has  been  to, me  like  a  little  heaven 
below ! 

"  *  I  never  heard  a  minister  like  him.  He  was  most  powerful 
in  unfolding  the  terrors  of  the  law.  When  doing  so,  he  had  a 
stem  look  that  would  make  you  tremble.  Then  he  would  turn 
off  to  the  offers  of  grace,  and  begin  to  smile,  and  go  on  entreat- 
ing till  his  eyes  filled  with  tears.' 

"  The  next  person  I  saw  was  George  Crow,  aged  eighty-two, 
of  Lockwood,  a  hamlet  about  a  mile  from  the  town.  When  I 
asked  him  whether  he  ever  thought  of  old  times,  he  answered, 

*  Ah,  yes  !  and  shall  do  to  the  last.     I  thought  when  Mr.  Venn 


ELLEN  ROEB UCK  AND  JOHN  STARKE  Y.  275 

went  I  should  be  like  Rachel  for  the  rest  of  my  days,  weeping 
and  refusing  to  be  comforted.  I  was  abidingly  impressed  the 
first  time  I  heard  him,  at  an  early  period  of  his  ministry.  He 
was  such  a  preacher  as  I  never  heard  before  or  since ;  he  struck 
upon  the  passions  like  no  other  man.  Nobody  could  help 
being  affected  :  the  most  wicked  and  ill-conditioned  men  went 
to  hear  him,  and  fell  like  slaked  lime  in  a  moment,  even  though 
they  were  not  converted.  I  could  have  heard  him  preach  all 
the  night  through.' 

"  I  also  visited  Ellen  Roebuck,  eighty-five,  living  at  Almond- 
bury.  She  was  very  deaf  and  infirm,  but  when  she  understood 
the  object  of  my  visit  she  talked  with  great  energy.  '  I  well 
remember  his  first  coming  to  Huddersfield,  and  the  first  sermon 
he  preached.  It  was  on  that  text,  "My  heart's  desire  and 
prayer  to  God  for  Israel  is  that  they  may  be  saved  :"  and  it  was 
as  true  of  himself  as  it  was  of  St.  Paul.  He  took  every  method 
for  instructing  the  people  ;  he  left  nothing  unturned.  Always 
at  work !  it  was  a  wonder  he  had  not  done  for  himself  sooner. 
The  lads  he  catechized  used  to  tell  him  that  people  said  he  was 
teaching  a  new  doctrine,  and  leading  us  into  error;  but  he 
always  replied,  "  Never  mind  them  ;  do  not  answer  them;  read 
your  Bibles,  and  press  forward,  dear  lads ;  press  forward,  and 
you  cannot  miss  heaven." ' 

"  I  saw  also  John  Starkey  of  Cawcliff,  aged  eighty,  As  I 
conversed  with  him,  he  seemed  gradually  to  wake  up,  till  his 
countenance  glistened  with  joy.  He  said,  'I  esteemed  Mr. 
Venn  too  much  for  a  man.  I  almost  forgot  that  he  was  a 
creature  and  an  instrument.  His  going  away  went  nearer  to 
my  heart  than  anything.  He  was  a  wonderful  preacher.  When 
he  got  warm  with  his  subject,  he  looked  as  if  he  would  jump 
out  of  his  pulpit.  He  made  many  weep.  I  have  often  wept 
at  his  sermons.  I  could  have  stood  to  hear  him  till  morning 
When  he  came  up  to  the  church,  he  used  to  go  round  the 
churchyard  and  drive  us  all  in  before  him.' '' 


276  EXTRA-PAROCHIAL  LABOURS. 

I  make  no  excuse  for  making  the  above  extracts.  They 
speak  for  themselves.  I  pity  the  man  who  can  read  thera 
without  interest.  If  after  fifty  years  such  living  witnesses  to 
the  power  of  Henry  Venn's  ministry  could  be  found,  what  may 
we  suppose  must  have  been  the  effect  of  his  preaching  in  his 
day  and  generation  %  If  the  direct  good  he  did  was  so  marked 
and  unmistakable,  what  a  vast  amount  of  indirect  good  must 
have  been  done  by  his  presence  in  the  district  where  God 
placed  him  ? 

We  must  not  for  a  moment  suppose  that  Henry  Venn's 
labours  in  Christ's  cause  were  entirely  confined  to  Huddersfield 
during  the  time  that  he  was  vicar  of  that  parish.  So  far  from 
this  being  the  case,  there  is  abundant  evidence  that  he  occa- 
sionally did  the  work  of  an  evangelist  in  many  parts  of  England 
very  distant  from  Yorkshire.  We  possess  no  journal  of  his 
movements,  but  a  close  examination  of  that  interesting  but 
oddly-arranged  book,  "  Lady  Huntingdon's  Life  and  Times," 
shows  plainly  that  the  Vicar  of  Huddersfield  preached  every 
year  in  many  pulpits  besides  his  own.  It  could  hardly  be 
otherwise.  He  was  on  terms  of  intimate  friendship  with  all  the 
leading  evangelists  of  his  day,  such  as  Wesley,  Whitefield,  Grim- 
shaw,  and  Fletcher.  These  apostolic  men  not  unfrequently 
found  their  way  to  Huddersfield  vicarage,  and  preached  for  him 
in  his  pulpit.  We  cannot  wonder  that,  so  long  as  health  per- 
mitted, Venn  helped  them  in  return.  In  fact,  he  seems  fre- 
quently to  have  made  excursions  through  various  parts  of 
England,  and  to  have  laboured  in  every  way  to  preach  the 
gospel,  as  an  itinerant,  so  far  as  parochial  engagements  would 
allow  him.  We  hear  of  him  constantly  in  Lady  Huntingdon's 
chapel  at  Oathall  near  Brighton,  and  at  Bath.  At  one  time  he 
is  at  Bretby  near  Burton-on-Trent.  At  another  he  is  at 
Fletcher's  famous  establishment  at  Trevecca  in  South  Wales. 
Occasionally  we  read  of  his  preaching  at  Bristol,  Chelten- 
ham, Gloucester,  Worcester,  and  London.      The  half  of  his 


FRIENDL  Y  RELA  TION  WITH  WHITEFIELD.         277 

labours,  probably,  outside  his  own  pansh,  is  entirely  un- 
known. 

The  truth  must  be  spoken  on  this  point.  It  is  vain  to 
attempt  to  draw  any  broad  hne  of  distinction  between  Henry 
Venn  and  his  great  contemporaries  in  the  revival  of  the  last 
century.  No  doubt  he  had  a  large  town  parish,  and  of  course 
found  it  more  difficult  than  others  to  be  long  absent  from  home. 
But  in  all  spiritual  points,  in  matters  of  doctrine  and  practice, 
and  in  his  judgment  of  what  the  times  required,  he  was  entirely 
one  with  Whitefield  and  Grimshaw.  He  delighted  in  their 
labours.  He  stood  by  their  side  and  helped  them,  whenever 
he  had  an  opportunity.  When  Grimshaw  died,  it  was  Henry 
Venn  who  preached  his  funeral  sermon  in  Luddenden  Church. 
When  Whitefield  died,  the  man  who  preached  the  noblest 
funeral  sermon  in  Lady  Huntingdon's  chapel  at  Bath  was  the 
same  Henry  Venn.  Conduct  like  this,  I  am  afraid,  will  not 
recommend  my  hero  to  some  Churchmen.  They  will  think  he 
would  have  done  better  had  he  confined  his  labours  to  Hud- 
dersfield,  and  abstained  from  apparent  irregularities.  I  content 
myself  with  saying  that  I  cannot  agree  with  them.  I  think  that 
in  keeping  up  intimate  relations  with  the  itinerant  evangelists  of 
8t  century,  Venn  did  what  was  best  and  wisest  in  the  days  in 
which  he  lived.  I  think  his  unhesitating  attachment  to  White- 
field  to  the  very  last  a  singularly  noble  trait  in  his  character.  It 
ought  never  to  be  forgotten  that  the  last  sermon  preached  by 
Whitefield  in  Yorkshire,  before  he  sailed  for  America  to  die, 
was  delivered  in  the  pulpit  of  Huddersfield  Church. 

An  extract  from  a  letter  written  by  Venn  to  Lady  Hunting- 
don, about  the  year  1768,  will  give  a  very  clear  idea  of  the 
unhesitating  course  of  action  which  the  Vicar  of  Huddersfield 
adopted,  and  the  boldness  with  which  he  supported  Whitefield. 
It  was  written  on  the  occasion  of  Whitefield  preaching  on  a 
tombstone  in  the  churchyard  of  Cheltenham  Parish  Church, 
after  permission  had  been  refiised  to  preach  in  the  church. 


278  LETTER  TO  LADY  HUNTINGDON. 

Venn  says :  "To  give  your  ladyship  any  just  description  of 
what  our  eyes  have  witnessed  and  our  hearts  have  felt  within 
the  last  few  days  at  Cheltenham,  exceeds  my  feeble  powers. 
My  inmost  soul  is  penetrated  with  an  overwhelming  sense  of 
the  power  and  presence  of  Jehovah,  who  has  visited  us  with  an 
effusion  of  his  Spirit  in  a  very  eminent  manner.  There  was  a 
visible  appearance  of  much  soul-concern  among  the  crowd  that 
filled  every  part  of  the  burial-ground.  Many  were  overcome 
with  fainting ;  others  sobbed  deeply  j  some  wept  silently  ;  and 
a  solemn  concern  appeared  on  the  countenance  of  almost  the 
whole  assembly.  But  when  he  pressed  the  injunction  of  the 
text  (Isa.  Iv.  i)  on  the  unconverted  and  ungodly,  his  words 
seemed  to  act  like  a  sword,  and  many  burst  out  into  piercing 
cries.  At  this  juncture  Mr.  Whitefield  made  an  awful  pause  of 
a  few  seconds,  and  wept  himself  During  this  interval  Mr. 
Madan  and  myself  stood  up  and  requested  the  people,  as  much 
as  possible,  to  restrain  themselves  from  making  a  noise.  Oh, 
with  what  eloquence,  what  energy,  what  melting  tenderness,  did 
Mr.  Whitefield  beseech  sinners  to  be  reconciled  to  God,  to 
come  to  Him  for  life  everlasting,  and  to  rest  their  weary  souls 
on  Christ  the  Saviour !  When  the  sermon  was  ended  the 
people  seemed  chained  to  the  ground.  Mr.  Madan,  Mr. 
Talbot,  and  myself,  found  ample  employment  in  trying  to  com- 
fort those  who  seemed  broken  down  under  a  sense  of  guilt. 
We  separated  in  different  directions  among  the  crowd,  and  each 
was  quickly  surrounded  by  an  attentive  audience  still  eager  to 
hear  all  the  words  of  this  life.  Of  such  a  season  it  may  well  be 
said,  I  have  heard  thee  in  a  time  accepted,  and  in  the  day  of 
salvation  I  have  succoured  thee ;  behold  !  now  is  the  accepted 
time — behold  !  now  is  the  day  of  salvation  ! " 

In  the  year  1771,  Henry  Venn's  useful  Yorkshire  ministry 
came  to  an  end.  Most  reluctantly  he  left  Huddersfield,  and 
became  the  rector  of  Yelling,  a  small  country  living  in  Hunting- 
donshire.    This  happened  when  he  was  only  forty-seven  years 


BECOMES  RECTOR  OF  YELLING.  279 

old.  There  were  many  who  blamed  him  for  the  step,  and 
thought  that  he  ought  to  have  died  at  his  post  in  Yorkshire. 
But  really,  when  the  circumstances  of  the  case  are  fairly  con- 
sidered, it  seems  impossible  to  say  that  he  was  wrong.  His 
health  during  the  latter  period  of  his  residence  at  Huddersfield 
failed  so  completely,  that  his  public  usefulness  was  almost  at  an 
end.  He  had  a  cough  and  spitting  of  blood,  beside  other 
symptoms  of  approaching  consumption.  He  was  only  able  to 
preach  once  a  fortnight  \  and  even  then  the  exertion  rendered 
him  incapable  of  rising  from  his  couch  for  several  days.  In 
short,  it  is  very  evident  that  if  he  had  continued  at  Hudders- 
field much  longer,  he  would  have  died.  Just  at  this  crisis,  his 
friend  the  Lord  Chief  Baron  Smythe,  who  was  one  of  the  Com^ 
missioners  of  the  Great  Seal,  offered  him  the  Chancellor's  living 
of  Yelling.  The  offer  appears  to  me  to  have  been  a  providential 
opening,  and  I  think  Venn  was  quite  right  to  accept  it. 

It  is  easy  to  find  fault  with  Venn  for  "  overworking  "  himself 
.at  Huddersfield,  and  to  hold  him  up  as  a  beacon  and  warning 
to  young  ministers  who  are  full  of  zeal  and  abundant  in  labours. 
1  venture  to  doubt,  however,  whether  it  is  quite  just  and  fair. 
It  was  not  "  overworking "  alone  that  made  his  health  break 
down.  There  were  mental  causes  as  well  as  physical.  Nothing, 
I  suspect,  had  so  much  to  do  with  his  removal  from  Hudders- 
field as  the  death  of  his  wife  in  1767,  leaving  him  a  widower 
with  five  young  children.  Up  to  this  time,  his  position  at 
Huddersfield  had  been  one  of  many  trials,  partly  from  the  bitter 
opposition  of  many  who  hated  evangelical  religion,  partly  from 
the  straitened  circumstances  to  which  his  very  scanty  income 
often  reduced  him.  But  so  long  as  his  wife  lived,  none  of  these 
things  seemed  to  have  moved  him.  Mrs.  Venn  was  a  woman 
of  rare  prudence,  calmness,  good  sense,  aftection,  and  sympathy 
She  was,  in  fact,  her  husband's  right  hand.  When  she  died, 
such  a  load  of  care  and  anxiety  was  accumulated  on  his  head, 
that  his  health  gradually  gave  way.     People  who  have  not  been 


a  8o  HIS  FEELINGS  AT  PAR  TING. 

placed  in  similar  circumstances,  may  probably  not  understand 
all  this.  Those  who  have  had  this  cross  to  carry,  can  testify 
that  there  is  no  position  in  this  world  so  trying  to  body  and 
soul  as  that  of  the  minister  who  is  left  a  widower,  with  a  young 
family  and  a  large  congregation.  There  are  anxieties  in  such 
cases  which  no  one  knows  but  he  who  has  gone  through  them; 
anxieties  which  can  crush  the  strongest  spirit,  and  wear  out  the 
strongest  constitution.  This,  I  strongly  suspect,  was  one  chief 
secret  of  Venn's  removal  from  Huddersfield.  He  left  it,  no 
doubt,  because  he  felt  himself  too  ill  to  do  any  more  work 
there.  But  the  true  cause  probably  of  his  breaking  down  was 
the  load  of  care  entailed  on  him  by  the  death  of  his  wife.  It 
was  just  one  of  those  secret  blows  from  which  a  man's  bodily 
health  never  recovers. 

Venn's  own  private  feelings,  on  leaving  Huddersfield,  are  best 
described  in  a  letter  which  he  wrote  at  the  time  to  Lady 
Huntingdon  : — "  No  human  being,"  he  says,  "  can  tell  how 
keenly  I  feel  this  separation  from  a  people  I  have  dearly  loved. 
But  the  shattered  state  of  my  health,  occasioned  by  my  un- 
pardonable length  and  loudness  in  speaking,  has  reduced  me  to 
a  state  which  incapacitates  me  for  the  charge  of  so  large  a 
parish.  Providence  has  put  it  into  the  heart  of  the  Lord  Com- 
missioner to  offer  this  small  living  to  me.  Pray  for  me,  my 
most  faithful  friend,  that  God's  blessing  may  go  with  me,  and 
render  my  feeble  attempts  to  speak  of  his  love  and  mercy  effi- 
cacious to  the  conversion  of  souls.  At  YeUing,  as  at  Hudders- 
field, I  shall  still  be  your  ladyship's  willing  servant  in  the  service 
of  the  gospel ;  and  when  I  can  be  of  any  use  in  furthering  your 
plans  .for  the  salvation  of  souls  and  the  glory  of  Christ,  I  am 
your  obedient  servant  at  command." 

It  is  recorded  that  the  last  two  or  three  months  of  Venn's 
residence  at  Huddersfield  were  peculiarly  aftecting.  At  an 
early  hour  the  church  was  crowded  when  he  pleached,  so  that 
vast  numbers  were  compelled  to  go  away.     Many  came  from 


DESCRIPTION  OF  YELLING.  281 

a  great  distance  to  take  leave  of  him,  and  tell  him  how  much 
they  owed  him  for  benefits  received  under  his  ministry. 
Mothers  held  up  their  children,  saying,  "  There  is  the  man  who 
has  been  our  faithful  minister  and  our  best  friend  !"  The 
whole  parish  was  deeply  moved;  and  when  he  preached  his 
farewell  sermon  (Col.  iii.  2)  he  could  hardly  speak  for  deep 
emotion. 

The  parish  of  YelHng,  to  which  Henry  Venn  retired  on 
leaving  Huddersfield,  is  a  Httle  agricultural  district  on  the 
south-east  border  of  Huntingdonshire,  about  seven  miles  south 
of  Huntingdon,  five  east  of  St.  Neots,  and  twelve  miles  west  of 
Cambridge.  At  this  present  day  it  has  a  population  of  about 
400  souls.  It  would  be  difficult  to  imagine  a  greater  contrast 
than  the  great  evangelist  of  Yorkshire  found  between  his  new 
cure  and  his  old.  Vast  indeed  is  the  transition  from  the  w^arm- 
hearted  and  intelligent  worshippers  of  a  northern  manufacturing 
district  to  the  dull,  and  cold,  and  impassive  inhabitants  of  a 
purely  agricultural  parish  in  the  south  of  England  !  Venn  felt  it 
deeply.  He  says  himself  in  a  letter  to  Stillingfleet,  "  Your  letter 
found  me  under  great  searchings  of  heart,  upon  the  point  of 
beginning  my  ministry  in  this  place.  What  a  change  from 
thousands  to  a  company  of  one  hundred!  from  a  people 
generally  enlightened,  and  many  converted,  to  one  yet  sitting 
in  darkness,  and  ignorant  of  the  first  principles  of  the  gospel ! 
from  a  house  resounding  with  the  voice  of  thanksgiving,  like 
the  noise  of  many  waters,  to  one  where  the  solitary  singers 
please  themselves  with  empty  sounds,  or  gratify  their  vanity  by 
the  imagination  of  their  own  excellence!  from  a  Bethel  to 
myself,  and  many  more,  to  a  nominal  worship  of  the  God  of 
Christians  !  A  change  painful  indeed,  yet  unavoidable.  With 
a  heavy  heart,  therefore,  did  I  begin  yesterday  to  address  my 
new  hearers." 

Trying,  however,  as  the  change  was  to  Henry  Venn's  mind, 
there  can  be  little  doubt  that  it  was  exceedingly  beneficial  to 


«82  HIS  SECOND  MARRIAGE. 

his  body.  The  comparative  rest  and  entire  change  of  his  new 
position  in  all  probability  saved  his  life.  Little  by  little  his 
constitution  ralHed  and  recovered  his  tone,  until  he  was  able  to 
get  through  the  work  of  his  small  parish  with  comparative  ease. 
In  short,  after  going  away  from  Huddersfield,  apparently  to 
die,  he  lived  on  no  less  than  twenty-six  years,  to  the  great  joy 
of  his  friends,  the  great  advantage  of  his  family,  and  the  great 
benefit  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  How  little  man  knows  what 
is  best  for  his  fellow-creatures  !  If  the  Vicar  of  Huddersfield 
had  remained  at  his  post,  and  died  in  harness,  his  children 
would  have  lost  the  best  training  that  children  perhaps  ever 
had,  and  the  world  would  have  lost  a  quantity  of  most  valuable 
correspondence. 

Venn's  life  at  Yelling  was  singularly  quiet  and  uneventful. 
His  second  marriage,  soon  after  his  settlement  there,  appears 
to  have  added  much  to  his  happiness.  The  lady  whom  he 
married  was  the  widow  of  Mr.  Smith  of  Kensington,  and 
daughter  of  the  Rev.  James  Ascough,  Vicar  of  Highworth, 
Wilts.  In  her  he  had  the  comfort  of  finding  a  thorough  help, 
and  a  most  wise  and  affectionate  stepmother  to  his  children. 
She  lived  with  him  twenty-one  years,  and  was  buried  at  Yelling. 
The  domestic  arrangements  and  employments  at  his  country 
home  were  truly  simple  and  edifying.  The  following  sketch, 
drawn  out  by  himself  for  a  Huddersfield  friend,  gives  a  pleasing 
impression  of  the  way  in  which  his  life  went  on  :  "  You  tell  me 
you  have  no  idea  how  we  go  on.  Take  the  following  sketch. 
I  am  up  one  of  the  first  in  the  house,  soon  after  five  o'clock ; 
and  when  prayer  and  reading  the  blessed  Word  is  done  my 
daughters  make  their  appearance,  and  I  teach  them  till  Mrs. 
Venn  comes  down  at  half-past  eight.  Then  family  prayer 
begins,  which  is  often  very  sweet,  as  my  own  servants  are  all, 
I  believe,  born  of  God.  The  children  begin  to  sing  prettily  ] 
and  our  praises,  I  trust,  are  heard  on  high.  From  breakfast 
we  are  all  employed  tLX  we  ride  out,  in  fine  weath(^r,  two  hours 


LIFE  AT  YELLING.  2S3 

for  health,  and  after  dinner  employed  again.  At  six,  I  have 
always  one  hour  for  solemn  meditation  and  walking  in  my 
house  till  seven.  We  have  then  sometimes  twenty,  and  some- 
times more,  of  the  people,  to  whom  I  expound  God's  AVord. 
Several  appear  much  affected ;  and  sometimes  Jesus  stands  in 
the  midst,  and  says,  '  Peace  be  unto  you  ! '  Our  devotions  end 
at  eight,  we  sup  and  go  to  rest  at  ten.  On  Sundays  I  am  still 
enabled  to  speak  six  hours,  at  three  different  times,  to  my  own 
great  surprise.     Oh  the  goodness  of  God  in  raising  me  up  !" 

Quiet,  however,  as  Henry  Venn's  life  was  at  YeUing,  we 
must  not  suppose  that  he  had  no  opportunities  of  being  useful 
to  souls.  Far  from  it.  He  was  within  reach  of  good  old  John 
Bemdge,  and  the  two  fellow-labourers  often  met  and  strength- 
ened one  another's  hands.  Though  he  seldom  came  before  the 
public  as  he  did  in  his  Huddersfield  days,  he  still  found  many 
ways  of  doing  his  Master's  business,  and  proclaiming  the  gospel 
which  he  loved.  The  value  of  his  preaching  was  soon  dis- 
covered even  in  his  secluded  neighbourhood,  and  he  had  the 
comfort  of  seeing  fruit  of  his  ministry  in  Huntingdonshire  a-s 
real  and  true,  if  not  so  abundant,  as  in  Yorkshire.  Occasion- 
ally he  preached  out  of  his  own  parish,  though  not  perhaps  so 
often  as  his  friend  and  neighbour  Berridge  could  have  wished 
him.  He  delighted  in  the  society  of  the  good  Vicar  of  Ever- 
ton  whenever  he  could  have  it.  "  Just  such  a  Calvinist  as  Mr. 
Berridge  is,"  he  used  to  say,  "  I  wish  all  ministers  of  Christ  to 
be."  Sometimes  he  preached  in  London,  and  was  not  ashamed 
to  appear  in  the  pulpit  of  Surrey  Chapel  so  late  as  1786.  His 
vicinity  to  Cambridge  gave  him  many  opportunities  of  seeing 
members  of  the  University  who  valued  evangelical  truth,  and 
men  like  Simeon,  ]  Dwett,  Robinson,  and  Farish,  long  testified 
their  deep  sense  of  the  advantage  they  derived  from  his  society 
and  conversation.  Above  all,  the  leisure  that  he  enjoyed  at 
Yelling  enabled  him  to  keep  up  a  very  extensive  correspondence. 
He  lived  in  the  good  old  time  when  letters  were  really  well  thought 


284  RETIRES  FROM  THE  MINISTRY. 

over  and  worth  reading,  and  the  letters  that  left  Yelling  parsonage 
are  a  proof  to  this  day  how  wisely  and  well  he  used  his  pen. 

On  the  whole,  the  evening  of  Henry  Venn's  life  seems  to 
have  been  a  singularly  happy  one.  He  had  the  immense 
comfort  of  seeing  his  four  children  walking  in  their  father's 
footsteps,  clinging  firmly  to  the  doctrines  he  had  loved  and 
preached,  and  steadily  serving  their  father's  God.  Not  least, 
he  had  the  joy  of  seeing  his  son  John  an  able  minister  of  the 
New  Testament,  and  of  leaving  him  rector  of  Clapham,  and  a 
man  honoured  by  all  who  knew  him.  Indeed,  it  is  recorded 
that  there  were  few  texts  so  frequently  on  Henry  Venn's  lips, 
in  his  latter  years,  as  the  saying  of  Solomon,  "  A  wise  son 
maketh  a  glad  father." 

At  the  age  of  sixty- eight,  he  withdrew  almost  entirely  from 
the  public  work  of  the  ministr)^  His  constitution  had  never 
entirely  recovered  from  the  effect  of  his  work  at  Huddersfield, 
and  old  age  came  prematurely  upon  him.  Yet  even  then  he 
was  never  idle.  In  fact,  he  knew  not  what  it  was  to  have  a 
tedious  or  a  vacant  hour. 

His  last  days  are  so  beautifully  described  by  his  grandson, 
in  his  admirable  biography,  that  I  shall  give  the  account  just 
as  he  has  set  it  down.  He  tells  us  that  "  he  found  constant 
employment  in  reading  and  writing,  and  in  the  exercise  of 
prayer  and  meditation.  He  often  declared  that  he  never  felt 
more  fervency  of  devotion  than  whilst  implonng  spiritual  bless- 
ings for  his  children  and  friends,  and  especially  for  the  success 
of  those  who  were  still  engaged  in  the  ministry  of  the  blessed 
gospel,  from  which  he  was  himself  laid  aside.  For  himself,  his 
prayer  was,  that  he  might  die  to  the  glory  of  Christ.  *  There 
are  some  moments/  he  once  said,  '  when  I  am  afraid  of  what 
is  to  come  in  the  last  agonies ;  but  I  trust  in  the  Lord  to  hold 
me  up.  I  have  a  great  work  before  me,  to  suffer  and  to  die 
to  his  glory.'  But  the  spread  of  his  Redeemer's  kingdom  lay 
nearer  to  his  heart  than  any  earthly  or  personal  concerns.    Even 


HIS  DEA  TH,  a85 

when  the  decay  of  strength  produced  occasional  torpor,  this 
subject  would  rouse  him  to  a  degree  of  fervency  and  joy,  from 
which  his  bodily  frame  would  afterwards  suffer.  I  have  under- 
stood that  nothing  so  powerfully  excited  his  spirits  as  the  pre- 
sence  of  young  ministers  whose  hearts  he  beheved  to  be  devotea 
to  Christ. 

"  About  six  months  before  his  death  he  finally  left  Yelling, 
and  settled  at  Clapham,  near  his  son.  His  health  from  this 
time  rapidly  failed,  and  he  was  often  on  the  brink  of  the  grave. 
A  medical  friend,  named  Pearson,  who  often  visited  him, 
observed  that  the  near  prospect  of  death  so  elated  his  mind 
with  joy,  that  it  actually  proved  a  stimulus  to  life.  On  one 
occasion  Mr.  Venn  remarked  some  fatal  appearances,  and  said, 
*  Surely  these  are  good  symptoms.'  Mr.  Pearson  replied,  *  Sir, 
in  this  state  of  joyous  excitement  you  cannot  die  ! ' 

"At  length,  on  the  24th  of  June  1797,  his  happy  spirit  was 
released,  and,  at  the  age  of  seventy-three,  Henry  Venn  entered 
into  the  long  anticipated  joy  of  his  Lord." 

I  have  yet  more  to  say  about  this  good  man.  His  preaching, 
his  literary  remains,  his  correspondence,  and  the  leading  features 
of  his  character,  all  seem  to  deserve  further  notice.  But  I  must 
reserve  all  to  another  chapter. 


CHAPTER  III. 

Hb  Preaching  Analysed — His  Literary  Remains  examined — Extraordinary  Power  as  a 
Letter-writer — Soundness  of  Judgment  about  Doctrine — Wisdom  and  Good  Sens* 
about  Duties — Prudent  Management  of  his  Children — Unworldliness  and  Cheerful- 
ness— Catholicity  and  Kindliness  of  Spirit — Testimony  of  Cowper,  Simeon,  and  Si' 
James  Stephen. 

It  is  no  easy  matter,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  nineteenth  century, 
to  form  a  correct  estimate  of  Henry  Venn's  gifts  and  character. 
In  fact,  the  materials  for  forming  it  are  singularly  scanty.  He 
was  peculiarly  a  man  of  one  thing,  absorbed  in  the  direct  wori 


a86  HENRY  VENN'S  BIOGRAPHY. 

of  his  calling,  always  about  his  Master's  business,  and  regard- 
less of  the  verdict  of  posterity.  He  spent  the  greater  part  of 
his  life  in  Yorkshire  and  Bedfordshire,  in  days  when  the  public 
press  was  in  its  infancy,  and  there  was  but  little  communica- 
tion between  county  and  county.  The  only  trustworthy  bio- 
graphy of  the  man  is  a  short  account  begun  by  his  son,  but  not 
completed,  and  finished  by  a  grandson  who  never  saw  him. 
As  a  specimen  of  biography,  Venn's  "  Life "  is  beyond  all 
praise;  but  still  it  is  the  work  of  a  loving  relative,  and  not  of  a 
bystander.  Under  these  circumstances  I  feel  unusual  difficulty 
in  handling  the  subject  of  this  chapter.  I  cannot  help  thinking 
that  the  famous  Vicar  of  Huddersfield  was  a  man  who  is  scarcely 
understood  by  the  present  generation.  However,  I  must  throw 
myself  on  the  indulgence  of  my  readers,  and  do  the  best  I  can. 

There  are  two  things  which  I  propose  to  do  in  this  chapter,  I 
will  first  give  some  account  of  my  hero,  as  a  preacher,  a  writer, 
and  a  correspondent.  I  will  then  point  out  certain  prominent 
features  in  his  character,  which  appear  to  me  of  such  rare  beauty 
and  excellence  that  they  deserve  the  special  notice  of  Christians. 

As  a  preacher,  I  venture  to  think  we  know  next  to  nothing 
of  what  Venn  was.  His  sermons  still  extant,  consisting  of 
fourteen  preached  at  Clapham,  before  he  removed  to  Hudders- 
field, and  eight  single  discourses  preached  on  various  special 
occasions  between  1758  and  1785,  most  certainly  fail  to  give 
us  any  idea  of  his  pulpit  powers.  Perhaps  the  best  of  them 
are  his  funeral  sermons  for  Grimshaw  and  Whitefield.  In 
doctrine  they  are  all,  no  doubt,  sound,  scriptural,  and  evan- 
gelical. But  it  is  useless  to  deny  that,  at  this  day,  they  seem, 
as  you  read  them,  rather  tame  and  commonplace.  There  is 
nothing  striking,  brilliant,  or  powerful  about  them.  There  is 
nothing  that  appears  likely  to  lay  hold  of  men's  minds,  to  arrest 
or  to  keep  up  attention.  In  short,  you  find  it  hard  to  believe 
that  the  man  who  preached  these  sermons  could  ever  have  been 
considered  a  great  preacher. 


VENN  AS  A  PREACHER  387 

Yet  it  IS  clear  as  daylight  that  Henr>'  Venn  was  a  great 
preacher.  The  extraordinary  effects  that  his  sermons  produced 
at  Huddersfield — his  undeniable  popularity  with  congregations 
accustomed  to  hear  such  mighty  orators  as  Whitefield — the 
high  opinion  entertained  of  his  powers  by  Lady  Huntingdon 
and  other  good  judges — all  these  are  facts  that  cannot  possibly 
be  explained  away.  The  Vicar  of  Huddersfield  may  not  have 
possessed  the  glowing  eloquence  of  Rowlands  or  Whitefield. 
But  for  all  that  he  must  evidently  have  been  a  man  of  great 
pulpit  powers. 

The  truth  of  the  matter,  I  suspect,  is  simply  this.  Venn's 
sermons  were  precisely  of  that  sort  which  are  excellent  to  hear, 
but  not  excellent  to  read.  Listened  to,  they  are  clear,  satisfy- 
ing, interesting,  and  instructive.  Written  down,  they  seem 
poor,  and  ungrammatical,  and  diffuse,  and  commonplace. 
Whether  men  will  believe  it  or  not,  it  is  a  fact  that  English  for 
hearing,  and  English  for  reading,  are  almost  two  different  lan- 
guages, and  that  speeches  and  sermons  which  sound  admirable 
when  you  listen  to  them,  seem  curiously  fiat  and  Hfeless  when 
you  sit  down  to  read  them  in  cold  blood.  Of  all  the  illustra- 
tions of  this  principle  in  rhetoric,  I  venture  the  conjecture  that 
there  seldom  was  a  more  remarkable  one  than  Venn.  To  read 
his  sermons  over,  there  seems  no  more  life  or  fire  in  them  than 
there  is  in  an  empty  stove  in  July.  And  yet  the  Vicar  of 
Huddersfield,  by  the  universal  testimony  of  all  his  contempo- 
raries, was  a  mighty  preacher. 

Let  us  add  to  all  this  that  Venn's  action  and  delivery,  by  all 
accounts,  were  singularly  lively  and  forcible.  The  witness  of 
his  hearers  at  Huddersfield,  on  this  point,  was  unanimous.  His 
face,  his  voice,  his  hands,  his  eyes,  his  whole  manner  in  preach- 
ing, arrested  attention,  and  clothed  all  that  he  said  with  power. 
Who  can  deny  the  immense  effect  of  good  deHvery?  The 
ancients  went  so  far  as  to  call  it  the  first,  second,  and  third 
qualification  of  a  good  orator.     Who  can  fail  to  see,  from  the 


t88  HIS  EARLIER  SERMONS. 

traditional  account,  already  quoted,  that  Venn  had  a  peculias 
gift  of  delivery  ?  The  sermons  of  a  man  who  "  looked  as  if  he 
would  jump  out  of  the  pulpit,"  may  contain  nothing  that  is 
original  or  remarkable,  but  they  are  just  the  sermons  that  often 
turn  the  world  upside  down.  Printed  sermons  can  show  us  a 
preacher's  matter,  but  they  cannot  show  us  his  manner  as 
delivered.  Second-rate  matter,  if  only  well  delivered,  will  never 
fail  to  beat  first-rate  matter  badly  delivered,  as  long  as  the 
world  stands. 

After  all,  we  must  never  forget  that  we  know  nothing  of  the 
nature  of  Venn's  sermons  in  the  days  of  his  greatest  power. 
They  were  extempore  sermons,  or  sermons  preached  from  notes; 
and  that  fact  alone  speaks  volumes.  Not  one  of  these  ser- 
mons, I  believe,  was  taken  down  shorthand,  as  most  of  White- 
field's  were,  and  the  consequence  is  that  we  have  not  an  idea 
what  they  were  like.  But  every  intelligent  hearer  of  the  present 
day  knows  well  that  a  man  may  be  a  most  powerful  extempore 
preacher,  who  is  a  very  dull  and  uninteresting  writer.  There 
are  scores  of  men  whom  it  is  very  pleasant  to  hear,  but  very 
wearying  to  read.  Perhaps  if  we  possessed  good  shorthand 
reports  of  some  of  Venn's  best  Huddersfield  sermons,  we  should 
see  at  a  glance  the  secrets  of  his  popularity  as  a  preacher.  As 
matters  stand,  I  must  frankly  confess  it  is  a  subject  which  is 
now  wrapped  in  some  obscurity.  I  have  done  my  best  to  throw 
some  conjectural  light  upon  it,  and  must  leave  it  here.  I  only 
wish  to  remind  my  readers,  in  passing  on,  that  there  are  few 
things  so  little  understood  in  the  world  as  the  true  causes  of 
pulpit  power. 

As  a  writer,  Venn's  reputation  rests  almost  entirely  on  two 
works,  which  are  pretty  well  known, — "  The  Complete  Duty  of 
Man,"  and  "  Mistakes  in  Religion."  The  first  of  them  is  a 
"  System  of  doctrinal  and  practical  Christianity,"  and  was 
intended  to  supply  something  better  than  that  mischievous  and 
defective  volume,  the  "  Whole  Duty  of  Man."     The  second  oi 


mS  LITER AR  Y  REMAINS.  289 

them  is  a  collection  of  essays  on  the  prophecy  of  Zacharias 
(the  father  of  John  Baptist),  in  which  the  erroneousness  of 
many  common  views  of  reHgion  is  faithfully  and  scripturally 
exposed.  Besides  these,  Venn  published  two  or  three  smaller 
pamphlets,  which  are  but  little  known. 

The  two  works  above-named  were  undoubtedly  very  useful 
in  their  day,  and  are  still  to  b  e  found  on  the  shelves  of  most 
collectors  of  religious  literature.  They  are  sound,  scriptural, 
and  evangelical.  But  I  strongly  suspect  that  they  stick  to  the 
shelves  on  which  they  stand,  and  are  books  which  most  people 
know  better  by  name  than  by  reading.  The  plain  truth  is,  that 
every  age  has  its  own  peculiar  style  of  writing.  Popular  as  the 
"  Spectator,"  and  "  Tatler,"  and  "  Rambler,"  were  in  their  times, 
it  may  well  be  doubted  whether  they  would  be  much  read  if 
pubHshed  now.  Even  the  pens  of  Addison,  Johnson,  and 
Steele,  would  not  command  success.  The  same  remark  applies 
to  the  sound  and  scriptural  writings  of  Henry  Venn.  They  did 
good  service  in  their  day,  when  men  loved  a  somewhat  stiff 
and  classical  style,  and  would  have  turned  with  disdain  from 
any  other  sort  of  English  composition  as  unworthy  of  an. 
educated  person.  But  like  the  jawbone  of  an  ass,  which 
Samson  once  used  so  effectively,  they  are  now  laid  aside. 
Their  work  is  done.  Like  the  famous  long-bows  which  our 
forefathers  used  at  Cressy  and  Agincourt,  we  still  view  them 
with  respect,  and  are  proud  of  the  victories  which  they  won. 
But  we  do  not  use  them  ourselves.  Rifled  artillery  and  breech- 
loaders have  superseded  them.  The  fashion  of  our  weapons 
is  changed. 

After  all,  a  close  examination  of  Venn's  two  volumes  will 
soon  show  an  intelligent  reader  why  they  are  no  longer 
popular.  The  composition  is  of  that  stately  and  somewhat 
high-flown  style  which  was  thought  the  standard  of  excellence 
in  the  last  century.  The  sentences  are  often  very  long,  and 
somewhat   involved.      The   words  are  frequently  of  Latin  or 


290  VENN  AS  A  LETTER-WRITER. 

French  origin.  There  is  a  curious  absence  of  that  rich  fund 
of  ready,  happy  illustration,  which  Whitefield  and  Rowlands 
had  at  their  finger  ends.  The  appeals  to  the  imagination 
are  few,  and  come  in  stiffly  and  awkwardly  when  they  do 
come,  like  men  dressed  in  new  or  borrowed  clothes.  In  short, 
the  style  of  the  books  is  neither  Saxon,  nor  sparkling,  nor 
racy,  nor  pithy,  nor  anecdotal,  nor  pictorial.  We  must  not 
wonder  that  they  are  no  longer  popular.  Let  us  thank  God 
for  them.  They  were  read  in  their  day  and  generation  by 
hundreds,  who  would  probably  have  read  no  other  evangelical 
literature.  They  may  still  do  good  to  good  men,  and  be  liked 
by  those  who  are  really  hungering  for  spiritual  food.  But  we 
must  not  insist  on  everybody  admiring  "them,  or  call  people 
graceless  and  ungodly  because  they  do  not  take  pleasure  in 
reading  them.  We  must  not  count  it  a  strange  thing  if  many 
call  them  heavy,  and  dry,  and  cold. 

As  a  correspondent  and  letter-writer,  Henry  Venn  deserves  the 
highest  admiration.  Nothing  gives  me  such  a  high  idea  of  his 
mental  and  spiritual  stature,  as  the  collection  of  letters  which 
accompanies  his  biography.  I  never  wonder  at  his  reputation 
when  I  read  these  letters.  I  consider  them  above  all  praise, 
and  commend  them  to  the  special  attention  of  all  who  want 
to  form  a  just  estimate  of  the  seventh  great  evangelist  of 
England  at  this  period.  The  true  measure  of  the  Vicar 
of  Huddersfield  and  Yelling  is  to  be  found  in  his  letters 
much  more  than  his  books  or  printed  sermons. 

Letter-writing,  we  must  never  forget,  was  a  much  more  im- 
portant business  in  the  last  century  than  it  is  at  the  present  day. 
The  daily  newspaper  was  a  very  different  affair  from  what  it  is 
now.  Periodicals  and  cheap  publications  had  a  very  limited 
circulation.  The  result  was,  that  letters  became  most  powerful 
instruments  either  for  good  or  evil.  Men  of  the  world,  like 
Lord  Hervey,  Lord  Chesterfield,  or  Horace  Walpole,  were  not 
ashamed  to  throw  their  whole  minds  into  their  correspondence. 


SUPERIOR  TO  HIS  PUBLISHED  WORKS.  291 

Religious  men  entered  so  fully  into  doctrinal,  practical,  and  ex- 
perimental questions  with  their  correspondents,  that  their  letters 
were  almost  as  useful  as  their  sermons.  John  Newton's  well- 
known  volume  of  letters,  called  "  Cardiphonia,"  has  perhaps 
done  as  much  good  to  Christ's  cause  as  anything  that  ever  came 
from  his  pen.  In  days  like  those,  it  is  no  mean  praise  to  say 
that  Henry  Venn  was  second  to  none  as  a  letter-writer.  Com- 
pare the  letters  that  he  wrote  after  settling  down  in  Huntingdon- 
shire, with  the  very  best  that  Newton  published,  and  I  venture 
to  say  boldly  that  no  impartial  judge  would  hesitate  to  pro- 
nounce that  the  epistolary  mine  at  Yelling  yielded  quite  as  rich 
metal  as  that  at  Olney. 

It  is  curious,  indeed,  to  observe  how  free  Venn's  letters  are, 
comparatively,  from  the  faults  which  impair  the  usefulness  of 
his  books  and  printed  sermons.     There  is  a  striking  absence 
of  that  stiif  and  laboured  mode  of  expression  to  which  I  have 
already  adverted.     He  writes  easily,  naturally,  and  pleasantly, 
and  makes  you  feel  that  you  would  like  to  hear  again  from 
such  a  correspondent.     Like  the  letters  of  Mrs.  Savage  (Matthew 
Henry's  sister),  you  cannot  help  regretting  that  the  editor  made 
so  small  and  limited  a  selection  from  the  stock  he  had  in  hand. 
You  close  the  volume  with  the  impression  that  you  would  have 
liked  it  better  if  it  had  been  twice  as  long.     For  my  own  part, 
I  confess  to  a  strong  suspicion  that  we  have  in  Venn's  published 
correspondence  the  real  key  of  Venn's  popularity  as  a  preacher. 
I  suspect  that  his  extempore  sermons  must  have  closely  re- 
sembled his  letters.     I  give  it,  of  course,  as  my  own  private 
conjecture,  and  nothing  more.     All  I  say  is,  that  if  the  vicar 
of  Huddersfield  preached  in  his  pulpit  in  the  same  clear,  pithy, 
and  direct  fashion  that  he  wrote  to  his  friends,  I  do  not  won- 
der that  he  was  a  preacher  of  mighty  power.     Once  more,  I 
advise  those  who  want  to  know  the  secret  of  Venn's  reputation 
to  study  his  letters. 

It  only  remains  for  me  now  to  point  out  what  seem  to  me  to 


292  HIS  SOUNDNESS  OF  JUDGMENT. 

have  been  the  prominent  features  in  Henry  Venn's  character. 
I  approach  this  subject  with  much  diffidence.  I  have  no  other 
means  of  forming  an  opinion  than  a  close  examination  of  ray- 
hero's  hfe  and  letters.  I  am  very  sensible  that  I  may  err  in  my 
judgment,  and  may  say  too  much  of  some  points  and  too  little 
of  others.  But  after  dwelling  so  much  on  this  good  man's  life 
and  ministry,  I  cannot  help  inviting  the  attention  of  my  readers 
to  some  characteristics  which  appear  to  me  to  stand  out  with 
peculiar  brightness,  as  we  look  at  him  from  a  distance. 

I.  The  first  excellency  that  I  notice  in  Venn's  character  is 
the  soundness  of  his  judgment  on  difficult  and  disputable  points  in 
theology.  He  lived  in  a  day  when  the  controversy  between  Cal- 
vinism and  Arminianism  was  at  its  height,  and  when  violent  and 
exaggerated  statements  were  continually  made  on  both  sides. 
In  a  day  like  this,  he  seems  to  me  to  have  been  singularly 
happy  in  observing  the  proportion  of  truth  in  doctrine.  I  can 
put  my  finger  on  no  leading  minister  of  last  century  whose 
views  of  the  gospel  appear  to  have  been  so  truly  scriptural  and 
well  balanced.  Of  course  he  was  alternately  claimed  as  an  ally, 
or  abused  as  an  enemy,  by  extreme  partisans  on  both  sides. 
But  I  can  find  no  man  of  that  era  who  seems  to  have  under- 
stood so  thoroughly  the  relative  value  of  every  part  and  portion 
of  evangelical  Christianity. 

Let  us  hear  what  he  says  about  Calvinism  :  "  As  to  Calvin- 
ism, you  know  I  am  moderate.  Those  who  exalt  the  Lord 
Jesus  as  all  their  salvation,  and  abase  man,  I  rejoice  in.  I 
would  not  have  them  advance  further  till  they  see  more  of  the 
plan  of  sovereign  grace,  so  connected  with  what  is  indisputable, 
that  they  cannot  refuse  their  assent.  Difficulties,  distressing 
difficulties,  are  on  every  side,  whether  we  receive  that  scheme 
or  no.  We  must  be  as  little  children ;  we  must  be  daily  exer- 
cising ourselves  in  humble  love  and  prayer ;  we  must  be  look- 
ing up  to  our  Saviour  for  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  after  this  has 
been  our  employment  for  many  years,  we  shall  find  how  much 


THE  DOCTRINE  OF  ASSURANCE.  293 

truth  there  is  in  that  divine  assertion,  '  If  any  man  think  that 
he  knoweth  anything  yet  as  he  ought  to  know,  that  man  know- 
eth  nothing.'  I  used  to  please  myself  with  the  imagination,  fif- 
teen years  ago,  that  by  prayer  for  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  reading 
diligently  the  lively  oracles,  I  should  be  able  to  understand  all 
Scripture,  and  to  give  it  all  one  clear  and  consistent  meaning. 
That  it  is  perfectly  consistent  I  am  very  sure ;  but  it  is  not  so 
to  any  mortal's  apprehension  here.  We  are  so  proud,  that  we 
must  have  something  to  humble  us ;  <\nd  this  is  one  means  to 
that  end." — (15///  Feb.  1772.) 

Let  us  hear  what  he  says  about  assurance  :  "  I  believe  that 
the  knowledge  of  our  acceptance  with  God  is  to  be  constantly 
urged  as  one  of  the  greatest  motives  to  lead  a  strict  life,  and  to 
abstain  from  all  appearance  of  evil,  seeing  the  Holy  Ghost, 
whose  testimony  alone  can  satisfy  the  conscience,  will  never 
dwell  with  the  slothful  or  lukewarm,  much  less  with  presumptu- 
ous offenders.  Scripturally  to  state,  and  firmly  to  maintain  by 
sound  argument,  the  knowledge  of  salvation,  is,  I  believe, 
a  most  useful  way  of  preaching — guarding  against  hypocrites, 
who  will  sometimes  speak  great  swelHng  words  about  these 
matters,  though  themselves  the  servants  of  corruption,  and  con- 
scious of  the  lie  they  tell  in  speaking  of  their  joy  in  the  Lord. 
I  judge  that  one  great  reason  of  the  worldliness  prevailing 
amongst  orthodox  Dissenters  is  their  teachers  not  pressing  this 
point  j  and  that,  amidst  very  much  error,  one  great  cause  of 
Mr.  Wesley's  success,  some  years  ago,  was  his  urging  Chris- 
tians not  to  rest  without  joy  in  God  from  receiving  the  atone- 
ment."—(1775.) 

Let  us  hear  what  he  says  about  holiness  :  "  True  hoHness 
is  quite  of  another  character  than  we,  for  a  long  time,  in  any 
degree  conceive.  It  is  not  serving  God  without  defect,  but 
with  deep  self-abasement,  with  astonishment  at  his  infinite  con- 
descension and  love  to  sinners,  to  ungodly  enemies,  and  to  men 
who  in  their  lost  estate  are  exceedingly  vile.     It  is  pleasing  to 


294  ON  WEAK  FAITH. 

consider  how  we  are  all  led  into  this  point,  however  we  may 
differ  in  others  ;  and  were  it  not  for  the  demon  of  controversy, 
and  a  hurry  of  employment  which  leaves  no  time  for  self-know- 
ledge or  devout  meditation  on  the  oracles  of  God,  I  am  per- 
suaded we  should  very  soon  be  so  grounded  on  this  matter, 
that  bystanders  would  no  longer  reproach  us  for  our  divisions." 
—(1776.) 

Let  us  hear  what  he  says  about  weak  faith  :  "  Weak  faith 
seeks  salvation  only  in  Christ,  and  yields  subjection  to  him, 
and  brings  the  soul  to  his  feet,  though  without  assurance  of 
being  as  yet  saved  by  him.  There  is  not  one  duty  a  weak 
believer  slights.  Weak  faith  is  attended  with  sorrow  and  humili- 
ation ;  as  ia  his  case  he  said  with  tears,  '  Lord,  I  believe ; 
help  thou  mine  unbeHef '  It  produces  new  desires  and  affec- 
tions, new  principles  and  purposes,  and  a  new  practice,  though 
not  in  such  strength  and  vigour  as  is  found  in  old  established 
believers.  Ask  the  weakest  and  most  disconsolate  behever, 
whether  he  would  forsake  and  give  up  his  hope  in  Christ ;  and 
he  will  eagerly  reply,  '  Not  for  the  whole  world  ! '  There  is, 
therefore,  no  reason  why  weak  believers  should  conclude  against 
themselves  ;  for  weak  faith  unites  as  really  with  Christ  as  strong 
faith,  just  as  the  least  bud  in  the  vine  draws  sap  and  life  from 
the  root  no  less  than  the  strongest  branch.  Weak  believers, 
therefore,  have  abundant  cause  to  be  thankful ;  and  while  they 
reach  after  growth  in  grace,  ought  not  to  overlook  what  they 
have  already  received." — (1784.) 

Hear,  lastly,  what  he  says  about  indwelling  sin  : — "  I  sympa- 
thize with  you  in  your  troubles  from  the  corruption  ^}i  nature. 
I  feel  myself  harassed  with  hardness  of  heart  and  t  ..jldness  of 
affection  toward  God  and  man,  and  by  slightly  performing 
secret  duties,  when  I  know  so  well  that  God  is  *  a  rewarder 
(only)  of  those  who  diligently  seek  him.'  How  totally  does  the 
estimate  I  made  of  myself  thirty-five  years  ago  differ  from  what 
I  know  now  to  be  my  real  condition  !     I  then  confidently 


HIS  WISDOM  AND  GOOD  SENS£.  295 

expected  to  be  holy  very  soon,  even  as  St.  Paul  was  ;  an^.  then 
there  would  be  no  other  difference  here  between  me  and  angels 
than  that  I,  by  watching,  fasting,  and  praying  without  ceasing, 
had  conquered  and  eradicated  sin,  which  they  had  never  even 
known.  Now,  when  I  compare  myself  with  the  great  apostle, 
I  can  scarcely  perceive  a  diminutive  feature  or  two  of  what 
shines  so  prominently  in  that  noble  saint" — (1787.) 

2.  The  second  excellency  that  I  notice  in  Venn  is  his  singular 
wisdom  afid  good  sense  ift  offering  advice  to  others  about  duties 
This  is  a  rare  qualification.  I  sometimes  think  it  is  almost 
easier  to  find  a  man  of  grace  than  a  man  of  sense.  How  few 
are  the  people  to  whom  we  can  turn  for  counsel  on  practical 
questions  in  rehgion,  and  feel  a  confidence  that  they  will  advise 
us  well  !  The  vicar  of  Huddersfield  appears  to  me  to  have 
possessed  the  spirit  of  counsel  and  of  a  sound  mind  in  an  emi- 
nent degree.  His  letters  to  Jonathan  Scott,  John  Brasier,  and 
Lady  Mary  Fitzgerald,  containing  directions  for  living  a  Chris- 
tian life,  and  a  solution  of  doubts  and  fears,  ought  to  be  read 
in  their  entirety  to  be  fully  appreciated.  They  are  so  thoroughly 
good  all  the  way  through  that  it  is  not  fair  to  quote  from  them. 
I  know  nothing  in  the  English  language,  of  a  short  kind,  so 
likely  to  be  useful  to  those  who  are  beginning  a  Christian  life. 
His  letter  to  a  clergyman  on  the  study  of  Hebrew  and  the  value 
of  translations  of  the  Bible,  is  a  model  of  sensible  advice,  and 
furnishes  abundant  proof  that  evangelical  clergymen  of  the  last 
century  were  not,  as  their  enemies  often  insinuated,  "  unlearned 
and  ignorant  men."  Last,  but  not  least,  his  letters  to  his  son 
and  other  clergymen  on  the  ministerial  oflice  and  its  duties  and 
trials,  and  the  mistakes  of  young  ministers,  are  a  magazine  of 
Christian  wisdom  which  will  amply  repay  examination.  Indeed, 
there  are  few  books  which  I  would  so  strongly  recommend  to 
the  attention  of  young  clergymen  as  "  Venn's  Life  and  Letters." 
The  truth  is,  the  whole  volume  is  full  of  strong  Christian  a:ood 
sense,  and  it  is  difficult,  in  giving  selections  from  it,  to  know 


29^        EXTRACTS  FROM  HIS  LIFE  AND  LETTERS. 

where  to  begin  and  where  to  stop.     The  following  quotations 
must  suffice. 

To  a  friend  at  Huddersfield  he  says,  in  1763  : — "The  first 
thing  I  would  press  upon  you  is  to  beg  of  God  more  light. 
There  is  not  a  more  false  maxim  than  this,  though  common  in 
almost  every  mouth,  that  '  Men  know  enough  if  they  would 
but  practice  better.'  God  says,  on  the  contrary,  '  My  people 
are  destroyed  for  lack  of  knowledge.'  And  as  at  first  men  live 
in  sin  easy  and  well  pleased,  because  they  know  not  what  they 
do ;  so  after  they  are  alive  and  awake  they  do  little  for  God, 
and  gain  little  victory  over  sin,  through  the  ignorance  that  is  in 
them.  They  have  no  comfort,  no  establishment,  no  certainty 
that  they  are  in  the  right  path,  even  when  they  are  going  to 
God,  because  the  eyes  of  their  understanding  are  so  little 
enlightened  to  discern  the  things  that  make  for  their  peace. 
In  all  your  prayers,  therefore,  call  much  upon  God  for  divine 
teaching." 

To  a  rich  widow  residing  in  London  he  says  : — "In  the  day 
when  the  eternal  state  of  man  is  determined,  the  greater  part  of 
those  that  are  lost  will  perish,  not  through  any  gross  and  scan- 
dalous iniquity,  but  through  a  deadness  to  God  and  his  love,  an 
ignorance  of  their  own  sinfulness,  and,  in  consequence  of  that, 
through  reigning  pride  and  self-sufficiency.  Now,  the  one 
great  source  of  all  this  miserable  disorder,  or  that  at  least  by 
which  it  is  maintained  and  strengthened,  is  keeping  much  com- 
pany with  those  whom  the  Scripture  marks  out  as  engaged  in 
talk  without  sense — company,  not  with  near  relatives  or  chosen 
friends,  not  with  those  for  whom  we  have  any  real  regard,  but 
with  those  who  come  to  see  us  and  we  go  to  see  them,  only 
because  the  providence  of  God  has  brought  us  into  one  town. 
It  is  this  that  devours  infinitely  precious  time,  and  engages  us 
in  mere  trifling,  when  we  otherwise  should  be  drawing  nigh  to 
God  and  growing  rich  in  divine  knowledge  and  grace  ;  and 
•uch  slaves  are  we  naturally  to  the  love  of  esteem,  so  eagerly 


tjy>   THE  DUTY  OF  PARENTS.  297 

desirous  of  having  every  one's  good  word,  that  we  are  content 
to  go  on  in  the  circle  of  fashionable  folly,  while  our  hearts  con- 
demn us,  and  a  secret  voice  whispers,  *  This  manner  of  spend- 
ing time  can  never  be  right.'  " 

To  the  same  lady  he  says  : — "  You  certainly  judge  right  not 

to  restrain  your  son  from  balls,  cards,  &c.,  since  a  mother  will 

never  be  judged,  by  a  son  of  his  age,  capable  of  determining  for 

him  ;  and  perhaps,  after  your  most  strict  injunctions  to  have 

done  with  such  sinful  vanities,  he  would  be  tempted  even  to 

violate  your  authority.      The  duty  you  are  called  of  God  to 

exercise  now  is  to  bear  the  cross  borne  at  different  times  and 

in  divers  measures  by  all  the  disciples  of  a  crucified  Saviour. 

True,  it  is  painful  to  see  one's  dear  child  a  lover  of  pleasure 

more  than  of  God — painful  to  see  a  young  creature,  born  for 

communion  with  God  and  acquaintance  with  heavenly  joys, 

wedded  to  trivial  gratifications  and  the  objects  of  sense  alone. 

But  such  are  we !     God  prevented  us  with  his  goodness,  and 

sounded  an  alarm  in  our  souls,  or  we  had  been  such  to  this 

hour.     He  expects,  then,  that  your  experience  should  teach 

you  to   wait    for  patience    till   mercy   apprehend    him   also. 

From  the  whole,  you  see  you  are  to  learn  two  most  important 

lessons  from  the  painful  situation  you  remain  in  with  regard  to 

your  son.    The  one  is,  your  own  weakness  and  mability  to  give 

a  single  ray  of  light,  or  to  excite  the  faintest  conviction  of  sin,  or 

to  communicate  the  least  particle  of  spiritual  good,  to  one  who 

is  dearer  to  you  than  life.     How  ought  this  to  take  away  every 

proud  thought  of  our  own  sufficiency,  and  to  keep  us  earnest 

importunate  suppliants  at  the  door  of  Almighty  mercy  and  free 

grace  !     The  other  lesson  is,  that  your  own  conversion,  and 

reception   of   the   Lord  Jesus   Christ   as    your  portion    and 

righteousness,  ought  to  be  marvellous  in  your  eyes.     You  have 

many  kind  thoughts  and  the  highest  esteem  for  me,  for  which  I 

desire  to  retain  a  dear  sense  in  my  mind ;  but  you  know  I  am 

merely  a  voice  which  said,  *  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  I' " 


29^  HIS  PRUDENT  MANAGEMENl 

3.  The  third  excellency  which  strikes  me  in  Venn's  character 
is  his  singular  prudence  and  tenderness  in  the  management  of  his 
children.  Few  ministers,  perhaps,  have  ever  been  more  success- 
ful than  he  was  in  the  education  and  training  of  his  family ; 
few,  perhaps,  ever  trained  their  sons  and  daughters  with  such 
unwearying  pains,  diligence,  affection,  watchfulness,  and  prayer. 
The  families  of  pious  ministers,  like  the  sons  of  Samuel  and 
David,  have  often  brought  discredit  on  their  father's  house ;  or, 
like  the  children  of  Moses,  have  not  been  in  any  way  remark- 
able. The  family  of  Henry  Venn  forms  a  bright  exception. 
All  turned  out  well  ;  all  proved  Christians  of  no  common 
degree  ;  and  all  gladdened  their  father's  heart  in  his  old  age. 

It  would  be  impossible,  in  the  narrow  limits  of  this  work, 
to  give  any  adequate  idea  of  Venn's  dealing  with  his  children. 
Those  who  feel  an  interest  in  the  subject,  and  would  like  to 
know  a  most  successful  parent's  mode  of  communication  with 
his  children,  would  do  well  to  study  the  hundred  pages  of 
letters  to  his  children  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  volume  of 
his  life  and  letters.  Rarely  indeed  does  a  father  succeed  in 
uniting  faithfulness,  spirituality,  and  deep  familiar  affection  so 
completely,  in  his  correspondence  with  sons  and  daughters,  as 
Henry  Venn  did.     I  can  only  find  room  for  three  specimens. 

To  his  daughter  Catherine  he  says,  in  1781,  writing  on  the 
due  observance  of  the  Sabbath  : — "  When  I  was  of  your  age,  I 
was,  alas  !  a  mere  pretender  to  religion.  Though  I  constantly 
went  to  the  house  of  God  on  the  Sabbath,  I  saw  not  the  glory 
of  the  Lord — I  understood  not  his  Word  —  I  did  not  hear  it 
when  it  was  read — I  asked  for  nothing — I  wanted  nothing  for 
my  soul, — so  foolish  and  ignorant  was  I !  I  was  glad  when  the 
worship  was  over  and  the  day  was  over,  that  my  mouth  might 
pour  out  foolishness,  and  that  I  might  return  to  my  sports  and 
amusements.  Oh,  what  a  wicked  stupidity  of  soul  !  I  am 
astonished  how  God  could  bear  with  me.  Had  he  said  :  *  I 
swear  thou  shalt  never  ascend  into  the  hill  of  the  Lord,  nor  see 


OF  HIS  CHILDREN.  299 

my  face,  who  findest  it  such  a  weariness  to  be  at  church,  and 
art  so  proud  and  profane  in  spirit.  No  :  dwell  for  ever  with 
those  whom  you  are  like  ;  dwell  with  the  devil  and  his  angels, 
and  with  all  who  have  departed  this  life  enemies  to  my  name 
and  glory.'  Oh  !  had  the  Lord  spoken  thus  to  me  in  dis- 
pleasure, I  had  received  the  due  reward  of  my  deeds.  But 
adore  him  for  his  love  to  your  father.  In  this  state  he  opened 
my  eyes  and  allured  my  heart,  and  gave  me  to  seek  him  and 
his  strength  and  face,  and  to  join  all  his  saints  who  keep  holy 
his  day,  and  to  be  glad  to  hear  them  say,  '  Come,  and  let  us  go 
up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord.'  Nay,  more  than  this,  he  gave 
me  your  blessed  mother  for  a  companion,  who  loved  exceedingly 
the  house  and  day  of  the  Lord  ;  and  repaired  to  you  and  me 
her  loss,  by  giving  me  another  of  his  dear  children  who  sancti- 
fies each  Sabbath  with  delight,  and  reverences  God's  house 
with  her  whole  heart.  Thus,  instead  of  casting  me  into  hell, 
he  has  made  me  the  father  of  one  dear  saint  in  glory,  and  of 
four  more — all  of  whom,  I  trust,  fear  and  love  the  God  of  their 
father  and  mother,  and  all  of  whom,  I  have  a  lively  hope,  I 
shall  meet  in  the  courts  above." 

To  his  daughter  Jane  he  writes,  in  1785  : — "A  great  part  of 
our  warfare  is  to  overcome  our  natural  propensity  to  seek 
happiness  in  meat  and  drink,  in  dress  and  show ;  which  only 
nourish  our  disease,  and  keep  us  from  communion  with  God  as 
our  chief  good.  More  than  thirty-seven  years  ago  he  was 
pleased,  in  his  adorable  mercy,  to  give  me  a  demonstration 
that  all  was  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit  but  himself.  From 
that  hour  (such  is  the  energy  of  divine  teaching),  rising  up  and 
lying  down,  going  out  and  coming  in,  I  have  felt  this  truth.  I 
began  and  continued  to  seek  the  Lord  and  his  strength  and 
his  face  evermore.  I  was  then  led  to  know  how  the  poverty 
and  emptiness  of  all  terrestrial  good  could  be  well  supplied 
from  the  fulness  of  an  adorable  Jesus.  And,  oh  !  how  unspeak- 
ably blessed  I  am  that  I  see  my  children  impressed  with  the 


$00  ADVICE  TO  HIS  SOM 

same  precious  and  invaluable  feelings,  and  that  I  hope,  upon 
the  best  grounds,  that  we  shall  enjoy  an  eternity  together  in 
glory,  where  you  shall  know  your  father,  not  the  poor,  polluted, 
/las/y^  sinful  creature  he  now  is,  but  holy,  without  spot,  wrinkle, 
or  any  such  thing ;  and  when  I  shall  know  ray  dear  children, 
not  as  emerging  from  a  sea  of  corruption,  and  struggling  against 
the  law  of  sin  in  their  members,  and  needing  frequent  intima- 
tions to  do  what  is  right,  but  when  naturally  and  continually 
all  within  and  without  will  be  perfectly  holy.  Oh  !  what  a 
meeting  will  that  be,  when  all  my  prayers  for  your  precious 
souls  ever  since  you  were  bom,  when  all  my  poor  yet  well- 
meant  instructions  and  lessons  from  God's  Word,  and  all  your 
own  petitions,  shall  be  fully  answered,  and  we  shall  dwell  in  a 
perfect  union  together !" 

To  his  son  John,  on  his  appointment  to  the  rectory  of 
Clapham,  he  writes,  in  1792  : — "Children,  the  old  adage  says, 
are  careful  comforts.  I  find  the  truth  of  this  now,  particularly 
respecting  you.  I  was  careful  to  see  you  called  out  to  useful- 
ness ;  and  now  providentially  a  great  door  is  found,  I  am  in 
daily  concern  lest  you  should  be  hurt  and  suffer  loss  in  your 
new  station.  You  must  beware  of  company ;  you  must  be 
much  in  secret  and  retirement.  Visiting  friends,  and  being 
seldom  in  a  solemn  spirit  before  the  throne  of  grace,  ruin  most 
of  those  who  perish  among  professors  of  godliness." 

The  following  facts,  communicated  to  me  by  a  connection  of 
Henry  Venn's,  are  in  themselves  so  deeply  interesting,  and 
throw  so  much  light  on  his  mode  of  dealing  with  little  children, 
that  I  make  no  apology  for  introducing  them  here.  It  appears 
that  one  of  his  daughters  married  a  widower  with  a  family  of 
young  children.  These  motherless  little  ones  excited  a  strong 
interest  in  his  heart,  and  he  took  one  of  them,  only  three  years 
old,  to  his  home  at  Yelling,  and  endeavoured  to  train  the  child 
for  God.     My  correspondent  says  : — 

"  The  first  thing  he  found  out  was  that  the  poor  child  was 


FRUIT  OF  BIBLE  STORIES.  Z9\ 

afraid  of  the  dark.  That  very  evening  he  took  him  by  the 
hand,  led  him  into  his  study,  where  the  shutters  were  already 
closed,  and  seating  him  on  his  knee,  with  his  arm  close  round 
him,  he  told  the  timid  boy  so  wonderful  a  story  out  of  God's 
Book  as  to  make  the  child  forget  all  beside.  This  he  repeated 
day  by  day,  till  the  evening  story  came  to  be  anxiously  expected. 
*  You  will  sit  by  my  side  to-day,  John,  and  hold  my  hands, 
while  you  hear  a  new  Bible  story,'  said  the  venerable  man, 
after  many  a  story  had  been  told  on  the  knee ;  *  and  to-morrow 
you  will  like  to  sit  by  me  without  holding  my  hands,  will  you 
notf  This  point  once  gained,  a  seat  at  a  httle  distance  was 
chosen,  still  in  the  dark ;  then  one  opposite ;  then  one  at  the 
furthest  end  of  the  study ;  till,  before  winter  closed,  my  father 
had  entirely  forgotten  his  fears  of  the  dark,  nor  did  they  at  any 
period  of  his  life  ever  recur  to  him." 

The  advice  given  by  this  more  than  grandfather  to  the  child, 
when  he  left  Yelling  for  school,  was  often  quoted ;  and  though 
for  a  time  he  threw  off  the  restraints  of  religion,  and  sought 
happiness  in  the  world,  the  closing  words  of  his  venerable  friend 
were  never  forgotten,  and  in  after-life  were  repeated  to  his 
children  and  grandchildren  scores  if  not  hundreds  of  times  : 
"  Remember,  little  John,  if  anything  could  make  heaven  not 
heaven  to  me,  it  would  be  the  not  having  you  with  me  there." 

God's  blessing  did  follow  that  Christian  teaching ;  and  after 
a  long  life  spent,  first  in  actively  doing,  and  then  in  suffering, 
his  Father's  will,  that  "  Little  John"  rejoined  his  loved  and 
honoured  teacher  in  the  skies,  frequently  saying,  "  When  I  get 
to  heaven,  how  I  shall  bless  God  for  the  early  lesson  of  dear 
old  Henry  Venn !" 

4.  The  fourth  excellency  that  I  notice  in  Venn  is  his  singular 
unworldliness  and  cheerfulness  of  spirit.  He  had  his  share  of 
worldly  trials  ;  and  these,  too,  of  all  sorts  and  descriptions 
Sickness  and  severe  bodily  trials — the  loss  of  his  wife  in  the 
middle  of  his  abundant  labours  at  Huddersfield — straitened 


302       HIS  UNWORLDLINESS  AND  CHEERFULNESS, 

circumstances,  arising  out  of  the  extreme  scantiness  of  his 
professional  income, — all  these  things  broke  in  upon  him  from 
time  to  time,  and  sorely  tried  his  faith.  But  he  seems  to  have 
been  wonderfully  strengthened  throughout  all  his  troubles.  He 
preserved  a  cheerful  frame  of  mind  under  every  cross  and  trial, 
and  was  always  able  to  see  blue  sky  even  in  the  gloomiest  day. 

His  very  portrait  gives  one  the  impression  of  a  happy  Chris- 
tian. As  we  look  at  it,  we  can  well  understand  the  story  that 
on  more  than  one  occasion  he  was  asked  to  preach  by  clergy- 
men who  did  not  know  him,  under  the  idea  that  he  was  a  jolly 
parson  of  the  old  school,  and  not  a  Methodist  preacher  !  * 
They  judged  of  him  by  his  smiling  face,  and  could  not  imagine 
that  the  man  who  had  such  a  countenance  could  be  the  friend 
of  Whitefield,  Berridge,  and  Wesley.  Striking,  indeed,  is  the 
lesson  that  the  incident  contains.  Well  would  it  be  for  the 
Church  of  Christ  if  all  preachers  of  the  gospel  were  more  care- 
ful to  recommend  their  principles  by  their  demeanour,  and  to 
show  by  their  bearing  that  their  Master's  service  is  truly  happy. 

One  single  extract  from  his  correspondence  will  suffice  to 
show  the  vicar  of  Huddersfield's  unworldly  spirit.  He  heard 
that  a  lady,  who  knew  and  valued  him,  had  made  a  will, 
leaving  him  a  large  sum  of  money.  He  at  once  wrote  her  a 
letter,  positively  declining  to  accept  it,  of  which  the  following 
extract  is  a  part :  "  I  understand  by  my  wife  your  most  kind 
and  generous  intention  toward  me  in  your  will.  The  legacy 
would  be  exceedingly  acceptable  ;  and  I  can  assure  you  the 
person  from  whom  it  would  come  would  greatly  enhance  the 
benefit.  I  love  my  sweet  children  as  much  as  is  lawful ;  and 
as  I  know  it  would  give  you  pleasure  to  administer  to  the 
comfort  of  me  and  mine,  I  should  with  greater  joy  accept  of 
your  liberality. 

"  But  an  insurmountable  bar  stands  in  the  way — the  love  of 

•  All  Evangelical  clergymen  a  hundred  years  ago  were  called  "Methodists."     Many 
people  in  the  present  day  are  not  aware  of  this  lact. 


HIS  CATHOLICITY.  303 

Him  to  whom  we  are  both  indebted,  not  for  a  transient  benefit, 
for  silver  or  gold,  but,  for  an  'inheritance  incorruptible,  unde- 
filed,  and  that  fadeth  not  away,  reserved  in  heaven  for  you.' 
His  honour,  his  cause,  is,  and  must  be,  dearer  to  his  people 
than  wife,  children,  or  life  itself  It  is  the  pious  resolve  of  his 
saints,  '  I  count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the 
knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord.'  To  be,  therefore,  a 
stumbling-block  in  the  way  of  any  that  are  seeking  him,  to  give 
the  least  countenance  to  any  that  would  gladly  bring  his 
followers  into  contempt,  would  grieve  me  while  in  health, 
darken  my  mind  in  sickness,  and  load  me  with  self-condemna- 
tion on  my  death-bed.  After  the  most  mature  deliberation, 
therefore,  it  is  our  request  that  you  will  not  leave  us  any  other 
token  of  your  regard  than  something  of  little  value." 

5.  The  last  excellency  that  I  note  in  Henry  Venn  is  his 
extraordinary  catholicity  and  kindliness  of  spirit,  and  his  readijiess 
to  love  and  honour  his  brethren.  Jealousy  among  ministers  of 
Christ  is,  unhappily,  a  very  common  feeling.  Nowhere,  per- 
haps, will  you  find  men  so  slow  to  recognize  the  gifts  of  others, 
and  so  quick  to  detect  their  faults,  as  in  the  ranks  of  preachers 
of  religion.  Of  all  the  men  of  last  century  who  attained 
eminent  usefulness,  I  find  none  so  free  from  jealousy  as  Henry 
Venn.  He  seems  to  delight  in  speaking  well  of  his  fellow- 
labourers,  and  to  rejoice  in  their  gifts  and  success. 

It  would  be  taking  up  too  much  room  to  quote  all  the 
expressions  he  uses  about  his  contemporaries.  Let  it  suffice  to 
say  that  I  find  in  his  "  Life "  repeated  kind  words  about  the 
following  men, — Whitefield,  Wesley,  Grimshaw,  Romaine, 
Walker,  Conyers,  Hervey,  Howell  Harris,  Berridge,  Fletcher, 
Robinson,  Newton,  Adams,  Cecil,  Scott,  and  Abraham  Booth 
the  Baptist.  That  list  alone  is  enough  to  show  the  largeness 
and  warmth  of  Venn's  heart.  To  suppose  that  he  agreed  with 
all  these  good  men  in  all  things,  is  simply  unreasonable.  But 
he  had  a  quick  eye  to  see  grace,  and  a  ready  mind  to  acknow- 


304  TESTIMONY  OF  CHARLES  SIMEON. 

ledge  and  admire  it.  Well  would  it  be  for  the  Church  of 
Christ,  if  all  ministers  were  more  of  his  frame  and  spirit  in  this 
matter !  Envy  and  jealousy  are  too  often  the  greatest  blots  on 
the  character  of  great  men. 

It  only  remains  for  me,  now,  to  conclude  my  account  of 
Henry  Venn  by  quoting  the  language  used  about  him  by  three 
good  judges,  though  very  different  men. 

Let  us  hear  what  Cowper  the  poet  thought  of  him.  He  says, 
in  a  letter  to  Newton,  written  in  1791:  "I  am  sorry  that  Mr. 
Venn's  labours  below  are  so  near  to  a  conclusion.  I  have  seen 
few  men  whom  I  could  have  loved  more,  had  opportunity  been 
given  me  to  know  him  better ;  so  at  least  I  have  thought  as 
often  as  I  have  seen  him." 

Let  us  hear  what  Charles  Simeon  of  Cambridge  thought  of 
him.  He  says :  "  I  most  gladly  bear  my  testimony  that  not 
the  half,  nor  the  hundredth  part,  of  what  might  have  been  justly 
said  of  that  blessed  man  of  God  has  been  spoken.  If  any 
person  now  living,  except  his  children,  is  qualified  to  bear  this 
testimony,  it  is  I,  who,  from  my  first  entrance  into  orders  to 
his  dying  hour,  had  most  intimate  access  to  him,  and  enjoyed 
most  of  his  company  and  conversation.  How  great  a  blessing 
his  conversation  and  example  have  been  to  me  will  never  be 
known  till  the  day  of  judgment.  I  dislike  the  language  of 
panegyric,  and  therefore  forbear  to  expatiate  on  a  character 
which,  in  my  estimation,  was  above  all  praise.  Scarcely  ever 
did  I  visit  him  but  he  prayed  with  me,  at  noon-day,  as  well  as 
at  common  seasons  of  family-worship.  Scarcely  ever  did  I 
dine  with  him  but  his  ardour  in  returning  thanks,  sometimes  in 
an  appropriate  hymn,  sometimes  in  prayer,  has  inflamed  the 
souls  of  all  present.  In  all  the  twenty-four  years  that  I  knew 
him,  I  never  remember  him  to  have  spoken  unkindly  of  any 
one  but  once ;  and  then  I  was  struck  with  the  humiliation  he 
expressed  for  it  in  prayer  next  day." 

Let  us  hear,  lastly,  what  Sir  James  Stephen  thought  of  Henry 


TESTIMONY  OF  SIR  JAMES  STEPIIEI^.  305 

Venn.  In  his  "Essays  on  Ecclesiastical  Biography"  (amidst 
some  things  I  cannot  subscribe  to),  he  concludes  his  account 
of  the  vicar  of  Huddersfield  and  Yelling  with  the  following 
passage :  "  With  a  well-stored  memory,  he  was  an  independent, 
if  not  an  original,  thinker.  With  deep  and  even  vehement 
attachments,  he  knew  how  to  maintain,  on  fit  occasions,  even 
to  those  he  loved  most,  a  judicial  gravity,  and  even  a  judicial 
sternness.  He  acted  with  indefatigable  energy  in  the  throng  of 
men,  and  yet  in  solitude  could  meditate  with  unwearied  per- 
severance. He  was  at  once  a  preacher  at  whose  voice  multi- 
tudes wept  and  trembled,  and  a  companion  to  whose  privacy 
the  wise  resorted  for  instruction,  the  wretched  for  comfort,  and 
all  for  sympathy.  In  all  the  exigencies,  and  in  all  relations  of 
life,  the  firmest  reliance  might  always  be  placed  on  his  counsel, 
his  support,  and  his  example.  Like  St.  Paul,  he  became  all 
things  to  all  men,  and  for  the  same  reason,  that  he  might  by 
any  means  save  some." 

Such  was  the  last  of  the  seven  great  spiritual  heroes  of  the 
1 8th  century.  I  have  dwelt  long  on  his  history,  but  I  feel  that 
he  deserves  it.  He  was  not  the  commanding  preacher  that 
cithei  Whitefield  or  Rowlands  was.  He  did  not  possess  the 
polish  of  Romaine,  or  t/ie  originality  of  Grimshaw  or  Berridge, 
I^ut,  take  him  for  all  in  all,  Henry  Venn  was  a  great  man. 


IM) 


Malhcr  oi  Cntro  anb  bis  P^imstrg. 

Bora  at  Exeter,  1714— Educated  at  Exeter  College,  Oxford — Ordained,  1737 — Curate  of 
Truro,  1746 — At  First  verj'  ignorant  of  the  Gospel — Mf.  Cuaon's  Influence — Effect  of 
his  Preaching — Opposition— Self-denial  and  Holy  I  ii'e—ReniarLible  Effect  on  Soldiers 
— Private  Unity  Meetings — Died,  1761 — Literary  Km.dns — Preaching. 

N  intelligent  Christian  needs  not  to  be  reminded  that 
the  Church  of  Christ  has  always  recognized  two 
classes  of  prophetical  writers  in  the  Old  Testament. 
There  are  four  who  are  called  "the  greater"  prophets,  and 
twelve  who  are  called  "the  less."  All  wrote  by  direct  and 
equal  inspiration  of  God ;  "  all  spake  as  they  were  moved  by 
the  Holy  Ghost;"  ^nd  yet  we  do  not  hesitate  to  assign  a 
higher  importance  to  one  class  than  to  the  other. 

A  well-informed  man  knows  well,  that  in  the  solar  system 
some  planets  exceed  others  in  size  and  glory.  All  are  bright, 
and  beautiful,  and  perfect.  All  proclaim  to  the  student  of  the 
heavens  that  the  Hand  which  made  them  was  divine.  Yet  the 
glory  of  such  bodies  as  Jupiter  and  Saturn  is  far  greater  than 
that  of  Mars,  or  Venus,  or  the  Moon.  ^ 

Thoughts  such  as  these  come  across  my  mind  as  I  turn  from 
the  seven  leading  champions  of  the  revival  of  English  religion 
in  the  i8th  century  to  some  of  their  lesser  contemporaries. 
There  were  not  a  few  eminent  ministers  in  our  country  who 
were  entirely  of  one  mind  with  Whitefield  and  his  fellow- 
workers,  and  yet  never  attained  to  their  greatness.  They 
sympathized  with  the  great  leaders  in  all  matters  o(  doctrine. 


GIFTS  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT.  307 

They  co-operated  with  them  in  the  main,  and  rejoiced  in  their 
success.  They  cheerfully  bore  their  share  of  the  reproach  cast 
on  "  Methodism  "  or  evangelical  religion.  They  shrank  from 
no  sacrifices,  and  spared  no  pains  in  setting  forward  Christ's 
gospel.  But  they  did  not  possess  the  extraordinary  public 
gifts  of  their  seven  brethren,  and  did  not  therefore  leave  so 
deep  a  mark  on  their  generation.  Like  Silas  and  Timotheus 
in  St.  Paul's  days,  they  did  good  work  in  their  own  positions*, 
but  not  work  that  attracted  so  much  public  attention  as  that 
of  the  mighty  "  masters  of  assemblies  "  whom  I  have  described 
in  preceding  chapters. 

But  we  must  beware  that  we  do  not  undervalue  men  merely 
because  they  do  not  occupy  prominent  positions  in  the  Church 
of  Christ.  Various  and  manifold  are  the  gifts  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  he  divides  them  to  every  man  severally  as  he  tliinks 
fit  One  minister  is  called  to  preach  to  thousands,  and  shake 
the  world  like  a  "  son  of  thunder ; "  while  another  is  called  to 
write  hymns  or  compose  books  in  an  obscure  comer  of  the 

4 

earth.  One  man  has  gifts  of  voice,  and  delivery,  and  action, 
and  fluency,  and  memory,  and  invention,  which  fit  him  to  stand 
up  before  multitudes— like  Paul  on  Mars'  Hill,  or  Luther  at 
Worms,  or  Whitefield  in  Moorfields — and  to  carry  all  before 
him.  Another  is  shy,  and  gentle,  and  retiring,  and  can  only 
make  his  mind  work  in  solitude,  quiet,  and  silence.  Yet  each 
may  be  an  instrument  of  mighty  influence  in  God's  hand.  The 
last  day,  indeed,  may  prove  that  the  work  of  him  whose  voice 
was  never  "heard  in  the  street,'  and  who  dwelt  among  his  own 
people,  produced  more  permanent  effect  on  souls  than  the 
most  brilliant  open-air  sermons.  I  fear  that  we  are  all  apt  to 
exaggerate  the  value  of  public  gifts,  and  to  depreciate  gifts 
which  make  no  show  before  the  world.  Yet  a  time  may  come 
when  the  last  shall  be  found  first,  and  the  first  last. 

Remembering  these  things,  I  wish  to  give  some  account  of 
four  men  of  the  1 8th century  who  are  far  less  known  than  some 


3o8  BIRTH  OF  SAMUEL  WALKER. 

of  their  contemporaries,  and  yet  were  eminently  useful  in  theif 
iay  and  generation.  The  first  whom  I  will  introduce  to  my 
readers  is  Samuel  Walker,  the  curate  of  Truro,  in  Cornwall. 

Walker  was  born  at  Exeter  in  17 14,  and  died  in  1761,  at  the 
early  age  of  forty-seven.  Partly  from  the  circumstance  that  his 
ministerial  life  was  entirely  spent  in  one  of  the  most  remote 
corners  of  England,  before  railways  were  invented,  and  partly 
from  his  habits  of  mind,  which  made  him  entirely  decline  all 
public  work  of  an  aggressive  and  extra-parochial  kind,  he  is  a 
man  whose  name  is  scarcely  known  to  many  Christians.  Yet 
he  was  one  who,  in  his  day,  was  most  highly  esteemed  by  such 
men  as  Wesley,  Whitefield,  Romaine,  and  Venn,  for  his  emi- 
nent spirituality  and  soundness  of  judgment.  Above  all,  he 
was  one  who  cultivated  his  own  corner  of  the  Lord's  vineyard 
with  such  singular  success,  that  there  were  few  places  in  Eng- 
land where  such  striking  results  could  be  shown  from  preaching 
the  gospel  as  at  Truro. 

The  facts  of  Walker's  life  of  which  any  record  remains  are 
few,  and  soon  told.  His  family  resided  at  Exeter,  and  was 
well  connected.  He  was  lineally  descended  from  the  good 
Bishop  Hall,  who  was  for  a  time  Bishop  of  Exeter,  and  whose 
grand-daughter  married  a  Walker.  His  grandfather.  Sir  Thomas 
Walker,  was  member  of  Parliament  for  Exeter.  John  Walker, 
Rector  of  St.  Mary  the  More,  in  Exeter,  who  wrote  a  well- 
known  volume  about  the  "Sufferings  of  the  Ejected  Clergy" 
under  the  Commonwealth,  was  also  a  relative  of  the  subject  of 
this  chapter ;  in  fact,  the  first  edition  of  the  work  was  published 
in  the  very  year  that  Samuel  Walker  was  born. 

We  know  little  of  Walker's  boyhood  and  youth,  beyond  the 
fact  that  he  was  educated  at  Exeter  Grammar  School,  and  was 
there  for  ten  years — from  the  age  of  eight  till  he  was  eighteen. 
He  went  to  Exeter  College,  Oxford,  in  1732,  and  in  due  course 
of  time  took  his  degi^ee  of  B.A.  in  that  university.  He  seems 
to  have  made  good  use  of  his  time  while  he  was  at  college,  and 


EDUCA  TED  A  T  EXE TER  COLLEGE.  3 ^9 

to  have  acquired  much  knowledge,  which  he  found  valuable  in 
after-life.  His  biographer  particularly  mentions  that  "  he  culti- 
vated logic  with  much  success,  and  always  considered  his  early 
devotion  to  that  science  as  the  foundation  of  the  facility  he 
afterwards  attained  in  a  clear  and  methodical  arrangement  of 
his  ideas.  When  complimented  by  his  friends,  who  admired 
the  lucid  and  argumentative  mode  in  which  he  treated  every 
subject,  he  always  observed  that  logic  had  been  his  favourite 
pursuit  in  youth,  and  that  he  recommended  it  to  young  divines." 
Beside  being  a  reading  man,  he  seems  to  have  been  thoroughly 
correct  and  moral  in  life ;  and  though  utterly  destitute  of  spirit- 
ual light  or  religion,  he  was  mercifully  preserved  from  the 
excesses  into  which  many  young  men  plunge  at  college,  to 
their  own  subsequent  bitter  sorrow.  We  know  nothing  more 
of  Walker's  university  life.  We  have  no  account  of  his  com- 
panions, friends,  or  acquaintances.  It  is  a  curious  fact,  how- 
ever, that  it  is  clear,  from  a  comparison  of  dates,  that  he  must 
have  been  an  undergraduate  of  Exeter  College  at  the  very  time 
when  the  so-called  Methodist  movement  began,  and  when 
Wesley,  Whitefield,  and  Hervey  were  commencing  their  line  of 
action  as  aggressive  evangelists  at  Oxford.  It  is  another 
curious  fact  that  Lincoln  College,  of  which  John  Wesley  was  a 
Resident  Fellow,  stands  within  fifty  yards  of  Exeter  College. 
Romaine  also  was  at  Christ  Church  at  the  same  time.  But 
there  is  not  the  slightest  proof  that  Walker  was  acquainted 
with  any  of  these  good  men. 

Walker  entered  the  ministry  at  the  age  of  twenty-three,  in 
the  year  1737.  He  was  first  curate  of  Dodescomb  Leigh,  neai 
Exeter,  but  only  remained  there  one  year.  He  then  travelled 
on  the  Continent  for  two  years,  in  the  capacity  of  private  tutor 
to  ihe  younger  brother  of  Lord  Rolle.  On  the  termination  of 
this  engagement  he  became  first  curate,  and  immediately  afte'r 
vicar,  of  Lanlivery,  near  Lostwithiel,  in  Cornwall.  He  only 
held  this  living  during  the  minority  of  a  nephew  of  the  patron. 


3IO  BECOMES  CURATE  OF  TRURO. 

and  finally  resigned  it  in  the  year  1746.  He  then  accepted 
the  office  of  stipendiary  curate  of  Truro,  in  Cornwall,  and 
occupied  that  position  for  fifteen  years,  until  the  time  of  his 
death  in  1761. 

It  is  past  all  doubt  that  Walker  was  profoundly  ignorant  of 
spiritual  religion  at  the  time  of  his  ordination.  Like  hundreds 
of  clergymen,  he  undertook  an  office  for  which  he  was  certainly 
not  "  inwardly  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost,"  and  professed  him- 
self a  teacher  of  others  while  he  himself  knew  nothing  of  the 
truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  He  says,  in  a  letter  dated  1756:  "The 
week  before  my  ordination  I  spent  with  the  other  candidates 
— as  dissolute,  I  fear,  as  myself — in  a  very  light  and  unbecom- 
ing manner ;  dining,  supping,  drinking,  and  laughing  together, 
when,  God  knows,  we  should  all  have  been  on  our  knees,  and 
warning  each  other  to  fear  for  our  souls  in  the  view  of  what  we 
were  about  to  put  our  hands  to.  I  cannot  but  attribute  the 
many  careless,  ungodly  years  I  spent  in  pleasure  after  that  time 
to  this  profane  introduction  ;  and,  believe  me,  the  review  shocks 
me.  While  I  write,  I  tremble  in  the  recollection  of  the  wounds 
I  then  gave  Jesus." 

In  this  painful  and  unsatisfactory  state  of  mind  Walker  spent 
the  first  two  years  of  his  ministerial  life.  Throughout  that  time 
he  was  diligent  and  conscientious  in  the  discharge  of  the 
outward  duties  of  his  office.  He  preached,  visited,  catechised, 
reproved,  exhorted,  and  rebuked,  but  did  no  good  at  all. 
Ignorant  alike  of  his  own  heart's  disease  and  of  the  glorious 
remedy  provided  by  Christ's  gospel,  he  laboured  entirely  in  vain. 
In  fact,  he  said  himself,  in  after-years,  "  that  though  he  was  well 
thought  of,  and,  indeed,  esteemed  beyond  most  of  his  brethren 
for  regularity,  decency,  and  endeavour  to  keep  up  external 
attendance,  and  even  for  his  public  addresses,  yet  he  felt  he 
ought  to  go  sorrowing  to  the  grave,  upon  a  review  of  the  years 
so  misspent." 

The  circumstances  under  which  a  complete  change  came 


A  CCOUNT  OF  UIS  CONVERSION.  3 1 1 

over  Walker's  heart,  character,  and  ministerial  lite,  were  verj- 
remarkable.  They  supply  a  most  instructive  illustration  of 
God's  plan  of  leading  people  to  Christ  by  ways  "  which  they 
know  not."  Walker  had  come  to  Truro  in  1746,  with  peculiar 
pleasure,  on  account  of  the  notorious  gaieties  and  festivities  of 
the  place,  in  which  the  young  curate  at  that  time  took  great 
delight.  He  entered  the  place  a  dancing,  card-playing,  party- 
going  clergyman,  and  was  known  only  in  that  character  for  the 
first  twelve  months  of  his  ministry.  It  is  said  that  at  this  period 
"  his  only  ambition  was  to  be  courted  for  his  gaiety  and  admired 
for  his  eloquence,  and  to  become  the  reformer  of  the  vicious  by 
the  power  of  persuasion  and  example."  Ignorant  he  was  not 
altogether,  for,  like  every  well-read  man,  he  had  historical  no- 
tions of  the  leading  doctrines  of  the  Christian  religion.  But,  to 
use  his  own  words,  "  what  he  knew  notionally,  he  neither  felt 
nor  sought  practically."  He  acknowledges  that,  even  in  the 
midst  of  all  his  official  decorum,  he  "  was  actuated  by  two  hid- 
den principles,  as  contrary  to  God  as  darkness  is  to  light — a 
desire  of  reputation  and  a  love  of  pleasure."  Such  were  the 
beginnings  of  Walker's  ministry !  Such  was  the  unpromising 
material  which  God  was  pleased  to  take  in  hand,  and  mould  and 
fashion  into  a  goodly  vessel  of  grace  ! 

The  manner  of  Walker's  conversion  is  thus  described  by  one 
of  his  biographers.  "  He  had  been  at  least  a  year  in  his  curacy 
at  Truro  before  he  fell  under  any  suspicion  or  uneasiness  about 
himself  or  his  preaching.  The  first  impression  that  he  was  in 
error  arose  from  a  conversation  between  liimself  and  a  few  of 
his  parishioners  on  the  subject  of  justifying  and  saving  faith,  to  ( 
which  he  was  judiciously  led  by  a  pious  individual.  This  was  a 
Mr.  Conon,  master  of  the  Grammar  School  at  Truro,  who,  he 
often  said,  was  the  first  person  he  had  ever  met  truly  possessed 
of  the  mind  of  Christ,  and  by  whose  means  he  became  sensible 
that  all  was  wrong  within  and  without."  Mr.  Conon  was  one 
iii  those  rare  servants  of  God  who,  like  Job,  are  found  in  places 


3'^  PREACHES  THE  GOSPEL. 

where  you  would  think  no  good  thing  could  grow,  and  who  serve 
to  show  tliat  grace  and  not  place  makes  the  Christian.  Inter- 
course between  this  good  man  and  the  curate  of  Truro  gradually 
ripened  into  intimacy,  and  the  result  was  the  total  conversion  of 
the  minister  through  the  pious  instrumentality  of  one  of  his 
hearers. 

The  change  that  had  come  over  the  curate  of  Truro  was  soon 
apparent,  both  in  his  preaching  and  practice.  It  could  not  be 
hid.  He  ceased  to  take  part  in  the  frivolous  worldly  amuse- 
ments which  at  one  time  absorbed  his  attention.  He  frankly 
acknowledges  that  he  did  not  take  up  this  new  line  of  action 
without  a  mighty  inward  struggle,  and  that  it  was  "  long  before 
he  could  bring  himself  to  any  reasonable  measure  of  indifference 
about  ^e  esteem  of  the  world,  and  then  only  with  heait-felt 
pangs  of  fear  and  disquietude."  But  he  fought  hard,  and  by 
God's  grace  was  more  than  conqueror.  At  the  same  time,  says 
his  biographer,  "  lie  began  to  preach  as  he  felt,  declared  the 
alteration  in  his  views,  and  faithfully  pointed  out  the  evil  of  the 
empty  pleasures  in  which  the  inhabitants  of  his  parish  were 
absorbed,  and  the  danger  of  resting  on  the  mere  formalities  of 
Sabbath  worship  for  salvation.  Repentance,  faith,  and  the  new 
birth  became  the  topics  of  his  sermons — truths  which,  though 
treated  with  all  the  power  of  his  highly  cultivated  mind,  brought 
down  on  him  hatred  as  an  enthusiast,  derision  as  a  madman, 
and  vehement  opposition  as  the  destroyer  of  harmless  joys.  An 
infidel  went  even  so  far  as  to  insult  him  in  the  pulpit,  an  affront 
which  he  bore  with  singular  patience  and  dignity." 

The  effects  of  Walker's  new  style  of  preaching  seem  to  have 
been  very  deep  and  extraordinary.  Astonishment  and  oirprise 
were  the  first  prevailing  feelings  in  the  minds  of  all.  \  .'o  hear 
their  curate  denouncing  the  very  practices  in  which  he  had 
lately  indulged  himself,  and  pressing  home  the  very  doctrines 
which  he  had  neglected  or  despised,  was  enough  to  make  men's 
hair  stand  on  end !     Anger  and  irritation  were  naturally  excited 


EFFECT  OF  HIS  PRE  A  CHIXG.  3 » 3 

Ml  the  hearts  of  hundreds  who  loved  pleasure  more  than  God, 
and  were  determined  to  cling  to  the  world.  But  all  alike  seem 
to  have  been  thoroughly  aroused  and  impressed.  His  biographer 
says  :  "  The  earnestness  of  the  preacher,  and  the  striking  altera- 
tion of  his  habits  as  well  as  of  his  sermons,  stirred  up  the  curio- 
sity of  the  people,  who,  while  they  were  enraged  at  the  fidelity, 
were  enchained  by  the  eloquence  and  trembled  at  the  sternness 
of  their  reprover.  Even  out  of  the  pulpit  they  feared  the  pre- 
sence of  their  minister.  The  Sabbath  loiterers  would  retire  at 
his  approach,  saying,  *  Let  us  go  ;  here  comes  Walker.'  His 
manner  is  said  to  have  been  commanding  and  solemn  in  the 
extreme,  and  his  life  so  truly  consistent  that  at  length  he  awed 
into  silence  those  who  were  at  first  most  clamorous  agamst 
him.  At  last  such  crowds  attended  his  ministry,  that  the 
thoroughfares  of  the  town  seemed  to  be  deserted  during  the 
hours  of  service,  so  that  it  was  said  you  might  fire  a  cannon 
down  every  street  of  Truro  in  church  time,  without  a  chance 
of  killing  a  single  human  being." 

No  well-informed  Christian  will  be  surprised  to  hear  that  a 
man  preaching  and  living  as  Walker  did,  was  assailed  by  every 
kind  of  persecution.  The  great  enemy  of  souls  will  never  allow 
his  kingdom  to  be  pulled  down  without  a  struggle  to  preserve 
it.  If  he  cannot  prevent  a  faithful  minister  working,  he  will 
labour  in  every  way  to  hinder  and  impede  his  work.  The 
worldly  portion  of  the  Truro  people  resolved  to  get  rid  of  a 
man  who  pricked  their  consciences  and  made  them  uncomfort- 
able. They  first  tried  to  injure  the  curate  of  Truro  with  the 
bishop  of  the  diocese ;  but  in  this  attempt,  happily,  they  failed. 
They  then  endeavoured  to  prevail  on  the  rector  of  Truro  to  dis- 
miss him  from  his  cure,  a  move  which  led  to  the  following 
remarkable  result.  His  biographer  says :  "  Mr.  Walker's 
enemies,  being  some  of  the  wealthiest  inhabitants  of  Truro, 
found  tlie  rector  only  too  willing  to  listen  to  their  complaints, 
and  he  promised  that  he  would  go  to  his  curate  and  give  him 


3^1  THE  CURATE  AND  THE  RECTOR, 

notice  to  quit  his  charge.  He  went ;  but  like  the  Gaul  who  wafa 
sent  to  the  Roman  hero  to  despatch  him  in  prison,  he  retired 
startled  and  abashed  at  his  lofty  tone  and  high  bearing.  On 
entering  Walker's  apartment,  he  was  received  with  an  elegance 
and  dignity  of  manner  which  were  natural  to  one  who  had  long 
been  the  charm  of  society,  and  became  so  embarrassed  as  to  be 
perfectly  unable  to  advert  to  his  errand.  He  at  length  made 
some  remark  which  afforded  an  opportunity  of  speaking  of  the 
ministerial  office  and  character,  which  Walker  immediately 
embraced,  and  enlarged  on  the  subject  with  such  acuteness  of 
reasoning  and  solemnity  of  appeal  to  his  rector,  as  a  fellow- 
labourer  in  the  gospel,  that  he  retreated  overwhelmed  with  con- 
fusion, and  unable  to  say  a  word  about  the  intended  dismissal 
He  was  in  consequence  reproached  with  a  breach  of  his  pro 
mise,  and  went  a  second  time  to  fulfil  it.  He  again  retreated 
without  daring  to  allude  to  the  object  of  his  visit.  He  was 
pressed  to  go  a  third  time  by  one  of  his  principal  parishioners, 
but  replied,  '  Do  you  go  and  dismiss  him,  if  you  can ;  I  cannot, 
r  feel  in  his  presence  as  if  he  were  a  being  of  superior  order, 
and  I  am  so  abashed  that  I  am  uneasy  till  I  can  retire.'  A 
short  time  after  this  the  rector  was  taken  ill,  when  he  sent  for 
Mr.  Walker,  entreated  his  prayers,  acknowledged  the  propriety 
of  his  conduct,  and  promised  him  his  hearty  support  if  he  re- 
covered." From  this  time  to  the  end  of  his  ministry,  no  weapon 
formed  against  the  curate  of  Truro  seemed  to  prosper.  He 
held  on  his  way  without  let  or  hindrance,  though  not,  of  course, 
without  much  hatred,  opposition,  and  petty  persecution.  Bui 
nothing  that  his  opponents  could  do,  or  devise,  was  able  to  stop 
or  silence  him.  So  true  is  that  word  of  Scripture  :  "  When  a 
man's  ways  please  the  Lord,  he  maketh  even  his  enemies  to  be 
at  peace  with  him"  (Prov.  xvi.  7). 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Walker's  position  at  Truro  was 
greatly  strengthened  by  his  eminent  holiness,  self-denial,  and 
consistency  of  life.     Whatever  his  enemies  thought  of  his  preach- 


SELF-DENIAL  AND  HOLY  LIFE.  3M 

ing,  they  could  not  deny  that  he  was  a  singularly  holy  man. 
Like  Daniel,  they  could  find  no  fault  in  him  except  concerning 
the  law  of  his  God.  Two  remarkable  instances  of  his  self- 
denial  and  disinterestedness  deserve  special  mention.  One  is 
his  voluntary  resignation  of  the  vicarage  of  Talland,  to  which  he 
had  been  appointed  about  the  time  of  his  coming  to  Truro,  with 
the  bishop's  license  of  non-residence.  On  becoming  a  con- 
verted man,  his  conscience  told  him  that  ne  ought  not  to  receive 
an  income  for  which  he  discharged  no  ministerial  duty.  Acting 
on  this  principle,  he  cheerfully  gave  up  the  preferment  unasked 
and  unpersuaded,  relinquished  all  his  accustomed  comforts,  and 
went  into  humble  lodgings  of  the  plainest  kind.  The  other 
instance  is  even  more  singular.  He  refused  the  opportunity  of 
marr)nng  a  lady  eminently  suited  to  be  his  wife,  who  would 
have  readily  accepted  his  hand,  on  the  sole  ground  that  she  had 
too  much  fortune.  To  a  friend  who  seriously  advised  him  to 
propose  to  her,  he  made  the  following  remarkable  reply  :  "  I  cer- 
tainly never  saw  a  woman  whom  I  thought  comparable  to  Miss 

,  and  I  believe  I  should  enjoy  as  much  liappiness  in  union 

with  her  as  it  is  possible  to  enjoy  in  this  world.  I  have  reason 
also  to  think  that  she  would  not  reject  my  suit.  Still  it  must 
never  be  !  What  would  the  world  say  of  me  %  Would  not  they 
imagine  that  the  hope  of  obtaining  such  a  prize  influenced  my 
profession  of  religion  %  It  is  easy,  they  would  say,  to  preacli 
self-denial  and  heavenly-mindedness,  but  has  not  the  preacher 
taken  care  to  get  as  much  of  this  world's  good  as  he  could 
possibly  obtain  ]  It  must  never  be  !  I  can  never  suffer  any 
temporal  happiness  or  advantage  to  be  a  hindrance  to  my  use- 
fulness." Conscientiousness  like  this  is  certainly  very  rare,  and 
>o  many  persons  may  seem  totally  incomprehensible  and  absurd. 
Whether,  also,  in  Walkers  behaviour  to  the  lady,  there 
was  not  something  of  morbid  scrupulosity,  and  whether  a  happy 
marriage  might  not  have  lengthened  his  life  and  usefulness,  are 
questions  which  admit  of  doubt.     But  there  is  no  denying  that 


3 1 6  RESUL  TS  OF  HJS  MINIS  TK  Y. 

not  a  few  evangelical  ministers  have  withered  their  own  useful 
ness  by  marrying  wealthy  wives.  And  one  thing  is  ver)'  certain, 
that  Walker's  character  for  eminent  disinterestedness  and  un- 
worldliness  became  so  thoroughly  established,  that  in  this 
material  point  the  breath  of  slander  never  touchetl  him  to  the 
very  end  of  his  days. 

The  direct  visible  effects  of  Walker's  ministry  at  Truro  were 
very  remarkable  and  extensive.  Worldliness  and  wickedness 
were  checked  to  an  extraordinary  extent,  and  even  those  who 
loved  sin  were  ashamed  to  commit  it  so  openly  as  they  had 
done  in  time  past.  Not  long  after  he  began  to  preach  the  real 
gospel  and  to  call  men  to  repentance,  the  theatre  and  cockpit 
in  the  town  were  both  forsaken,  and  given  up  to  other  pur- 
poses ;  and  similar  reforms  extended  to  places  in  the  neighbour- 
hood through  his  instrumentality.  The  influence  of  his  ministry, 
in  fact,  was  singularly  felt  by  many  who  were  never  converted. 
He  said  himself  that  he  had  reason  to  think  almost  all  his 
hearers  at  Truro  were,  at  one  time  or  other,  awakened  more  or 
less,  "  although  I  fear  many  of  them  have  rejected  the  counsel 
of  God  against  themselves." 

Of  positive  spiritual  results  in  the  saving  of  souls  by  any  one's 
ministry,  a  wise  man  will  always  speak  cautiously.  We  see 
through  a  glass  darkly,  and  are  easily  deceived  in  such  matters. 
Yet  I  see  every  reason  to  believe  that  Walker's  ministry  at 
Truro  was  really  the  means  of  turning  hundreds  from  darkness 
to  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God.  It  is  a  certain 
fact  that  in  1754,  after  he  had  preached  the  gospel  only  seven 
years  at  Tniro,  he  recorded  that  no  less  than  eight  hundred 
persons  had  made  particular  application  to  him,  from  time  to 
time,  inquiring  what  they  must  do  to  be  saved.  Making  every 
allowance  for  many  of  this  number  who  doubtless  drew  back 
after  their  first  convictions,  and  returned  to  their  sins,  this  simple 
fact  ought  to  fill  our  minds  with  astonishment.  The  parish  of 
Tniro,  even  at  this  day,  does  not  con  tarn  more  than  ten  thou- 


REMARKABLE  EFFECT  ON  SOLDIEKS.  3 '  7 

sand  people.  A  hundred  years  ago  it  must  have  been  a  much 
smaller  place.  The  ministry  which  in  seven  years  could  arrest 
the  attention  of  eight  hundred  persons  in  such  a  parish,  must 
have  been  one  of  singular  power,  and  singularly  blessed  of 
God. 

One  of  the  most  interesting  examples  of  his  ministerial  suc- 
cess was  the  extraordinary  effect  that  he  produced  on  a  regi- 
ment of  soldiers  which  was  quartered  in  Truro  in  1756.  As 
soon  as  they  arrived,  Walker  set  up  a  sermon  for  their  special 
benefit  on  Sunday  afternoon,  which  was  called  "  the  soldiers' 
sermon."  After  a  little  time  the  number  of  attendants  became 
very  large  ;  and  the  mere  fact  that  it  was  a  voluntary  service, 
specially  intended  for  soldiers,  no  doubt  helped  greatly  to  bring 
hearers.  The  attention  of  the  men  was  thoroughly  arrested, 
and  within  three  weeks  no  less  than  a  hundred  of  them  came  to 
Walker's  house,  asking  what  they  must  do  to  be  saved.  He 
himself  says  to  a  correspondent :  "  The  effects  of  the  soldiers' 
sennon  have  been  very  striking.  You  would  have  seen  their 
countenances  changing,  tears  often  bursting  from  their  eyes,  and 
confessions  of  their  exceeding  sinfulness  and  danger  breaking 
from  their  mouths.  I  have  scarcely  heard  such  a  thing  as  self- 
excusing  from  any  of  them  ;  while  the  desire  to  be  instructed, 
and  uncommon  thankfulness  for  any  pains  for  them  used  by  any 
of  us,  have  been  very  remarkable." 

His  biographer  says :  "  Mr.  Walker's  exertions  in  the  regi- 
ment at  first  met  with  great  opposition.  The  commander 
publicly  forbade  his  men  to  go  to  him  for  private  instruction, 
though,  at  last,  no  less  than  two  hundred  and  fifty  of  them 
sought  the  persevering  servant  of  Christ  for  that  purpose. 
Those  also  whom  rehgion  had  separated  from  the  sinful  habits 
and  company  of  their  unawakened  comrades,  were  much 
derided ;  but  grace  enabled  them  to  stand.  A  great  alteration, 
however,  soon  took  place.  Punishment  diminished,  and  order 
prevailed  in  the  regiment,  to  a  degree  never  before  witnessed ; 


3l8  AN  AFFECTING  FAREWELL. 

and  at  length  the  commander  discovered  the  excellent  cause  of 
this  salutary  change.  Genuine  zeal  had  now  its  full  triumph 
and  rich  reward.  The  officers  waited  on  Mr.  Walker  in  a 
body,  to  acknowledge  the  good  effects  of  his  wise  and  sedulous 
exertions,  and  to  thank  him  for  the  reformation  he  had  pro- 
duced in  their  ranks." 

"  These  interesting  men  left  Truro  after  nine  weeks'  stay. 
The  parting  scene  was  indescribably  affecting.  They  assembled 
the  last  evening  in  the  society-room,  to  hear  their  beloved 
minister's  farewell  prayer  and  exhortation.  *  Had  you,'  said 
Walker  to  a  friend,  *  but  seen  their  countenances,  what  thank- 
fulness, love,  sorrow,  and  joy  sat  upon  them  !  They  hoped 
they  might  bring  forth  some  fruit ;  they  hoped  to  meet  us  again 
at  the  right  hand  of  Jesus  at  the  great  day.'  It  was  an  hour  of 
mingled  distress  and  comfort ;  the  hearts  of  many  were  so  full, 
that  they  clasped  the  hand  of  the  beloved  instrument  of  their 
conversion,  and  turned  away  without  a  word.  They  began 
their  morning  march  praising  God  for  having  brought  them 
under  the  sound  of  the  gospel ;  and  as  they  slowly  passed 
along,  turned  round  to  catch  occasional  glimpses  of  the  town, 
as  it  gradually  receded  from  their  sight,  exclaiming,  '  God  bless 
Truro  !'  They  saw  their  spiritual  leader  no  more  upon  earth, 
but  were  consoled  by  the  hope  of  a  triumphant  meeting 
amongst  the  armies  of  heaven." 

One  grand  peculiarity  of  Walker's  ministry  at  Truro  was  the 
system  of  private  meetings  for  mutual  edification  among  the 
spiritual  members  of  his  congregation,  which  he  succeeded  in 
instituting.  He  seems  to  have  been  deeply  impressed  with  the 
necessity  of  following  up  the  work  done  in  the  pulpit,  and  with 
the  desirableness  of  stirring  up  real  Christians  to  be  useful  to 
one  another.  Thexe  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  was  right.  *  Edify 
one  another,'  is  an  apostolic  principle  far  too  much  overlooked 
(I  Thess.  V,  ii).  Most  Christians  are  far  too  ready  to  leave 
everything  to  be  done  by  their  minister,  and   forget   that  a 


PRIVATE  UXITY  MEETINGS.  319 

minister  has  only  one  body  and  one  tongue,  and  cannot  be 
everywhere,  and  do  everything.  Above  all,  most  Christians 
forget  that  the  mutual  conference  of  believers  is  a  valuable 
means  of  grace,  and  that  in  trying  to  water  others  we  are  likely 
to  be  watered  ourselves.  But  the  best  and  wisest  manner  ot 
conducting  these  meetings  for  mutual  edification  is  a  subject 
of  vast  difficulty,  and  one  on  which  good  men  differ  widely. 
Scores  of  excellent  ministers  have  attempted  to  do  something 
in  this  direction,  and  have  completely  failed.  It  was  precisely 
here  that  Walker  seems  to  have  been  eminently  gifted,  and  to 
have  obtained  extraordinary  success. 

My  limited  space  makes  it  quite  impossible  to  give  a  full 
account  of  all  the  plans  and  arrangements  that  Walker  made 
for  the  conduct  of  these  religious  societies.  Those  who  wish 
to  know  more  about  them  will  find  them  fully  described  in 
Sidney's  "  Life  of  Walker."  One  leading  feature  of  his  system 
deserves,  however,  to  be  specially  noticed  :  I  mean  his  careful 
classification  of  the  members  of  his  societies.  He  always 
formed  them  into  two  divisions,  one  composed  entirely  of 
men,  into  which  no  female  was  admitted ;  the  other  of  mar- 
ried men,  their  wives,  and  unmarried  women,  from  which  all 
single  men  were  excluded.  The  wisdom  and  good  sense  of 
this  classification  will  be  obvious  to  every  reflecting  Christian. 
It  is  the  very  neglect  of  it,  however  simple  it  may  appear, 
which  has  been  the  ruin  of  many  similar  private  movements 
among  religious  people.  The  rules  drawn  up  for  the  manage- 
ment of  meetings  are  marked  throughout  by  like  soundness  of 
judgment.  The  objects  to  be  kept  steadily  in  view — the  admis- 
sion of  members,  the  hours  to  be  kept,  the  mode  of  proceeding, 
the  things  to  be  habitually  avoided  by  members — are  all  most 
rarefully  defined,  and  give  one  a  most  favourable  idea  of 
VValker's  rare  Christian  good  sense.  I  have  only  room  to  quote 
two  rules,  which  are  a  good  specimen  of  the  tone  and  spirit 
running  through  all  the  regulations. 


320  KULES  OF  THE  SOCIETY. 

One  rule  is  :  "  That  ever\'  member  of  this  Society  do  esteem 
himself  peculiarly  obliged  to  live  in  an  inoffensive  and  orderly 
manner,  to  the  glory  of  God  and  the  edification  of  his  neigh- 
bours \  that  he  study  to  advance,  in  himself  and  others,  humility 
and  meekness,  faith  in  Christ,  love  to  God,  gospel  repentance, 
and  new  obeaience,  in  which  things  Christian  edification  con- 
sists, and  not  in  vain  janglings.  And  that  in  all  his  conversa- 
tion and  articles  of  faith  he  stick  close  to  the  plain  and  divine 
meaning  of  Holy  Scripture,  carefully  avoiding  all  intricate  niceties 
and  refinements  upon  it." 

The  other  rule,  or  rather  explanatory  definition,  is  :  "  By  a 
disorderly  caniage  we  mean  not  only  the  commission  of  gross 
and  scandalous  sins,  but  also  what  are  esteemed  matters  of 
little  moment  in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  such  as  the  light  use  of 
the  words,  Lord^  God^Jesus^  &c.,  in  ordinary  conversation,  which 
we  cannot  but  interpret  as  an  evidence  of  the  want  of  God's 
presence  in  the  heart ;  the  buying  and  selling  of  goods  which 
have  not  paid  custom  ;  the  doing  needless  work  on  the  Lord's 
day ;  the  frequenting  ale-houses  or  taverns  without  necessary 
business.  And  considering  the  consequence  of  vain  amuse- 
ments so  generally  practised,  we  do,  in  charity  to  the  souls  of 
others,  as  vvell  as  to  avoid  the  danger  of  such  things  ourselves, 
think  ourselves  obliged  to  use  particular  caution  about  many  of 
them,  however  innocent  they  may  be  in  themselves,  such  as 
cards,  dancings,  clubs  for  entertainments,  play-houses,  sports  at 
festivals  and  parish  feasts,  and  as  much  as  may  be  parish  feasts 
(Jiemselves,  lest  by  joining  therein  we  are  a  hindrance  to  our- 
selves and  others."  This  is  sound  speech  that  cannot  be  con- 
demned. Regulations  such  as  these  need  no  comment.  What 
ever  objections  may  be  made  against  private  societies  such  as 
Walker  formed  at  Truro,  as  tending  to  create  a  church  within  a 
church,  one  thing  at  least  is  sure — A  system  wh/ch  produced 
such  a  high  standard  of  life  and  practice  in  the  mt  mbers  of  the 
Society,  deserves  serious  consideration. 


ms  DEATH.  321 

Walker's  most  useful  career  was  brought  to  a  termination  io 
the  year  1761.  He  died  at  the  early  age  of  forty-seven,  of  pul- 
monary consumption,  accelerated,  if  not  brought  on,  by  his 
over-abundant  labours  in  the  cause  of  Christ  at  Truro.  It  is 
impossible  to  wonder  at  his  breaking  down  at  a  comparatively 
early  age,  when  we  consider  the  immense  amount  of  ministerial 
labour  which  he  regularly  carried  on,  single-handed  and  unas- 
sisted, for  nearly  fourteen  years,  in  his  large  Cornish  parish. 
He  says  himself,  in  a  letter  dated  1755  :  "  My  stated  business 
(beside  the  Sunday  duty,  prayers  Wednesdays  and  Fridays,, 
burials,  baptisms,  and  attendance  on  the  sick)  is,  on  Mondays, 
Wednesdays,  and  Fridays,  to  talk  with  such  as  apply  to  me  in 
private  from  six  to  ten  in  the  evening ;  Tuesday,  to  attend  the 
society ;  and  Thursday,  a  lecture  in  church  in  the  evening. 
Saturday,  and  as  much  of  Friday  as  I  can  give,  is  bestowed  in 
preparing  the  Sunday's  sermons.  To  all  this  must  be  added 
what  I  may  well  call  the  care  of  the  church,  that  is,  of  above  a 
hundred  people,  who,  on  one  account  and  another,  continually 
need  my  direction.  You  will  not  wonder  if  my  strength  proves 
unequal  to  this  labour,  and  I  find  myself  debilitated,  and  under 
necessity  of  making  my  time  shorter  by  lying  in  bed  longer 
than  formerly.  In  short,  what  I  am  going  through  seems  evi- 
dently to  be  hastening  my  end,  though  there  be  no  immediate 
danger."  The  plain  truth  is,  that  so  far  from  wondering  that 
such  a  man  died  so  soon,  we  should  rather  wonder  that  he 
worked  and  lived  so  long. 

He  died  at  Blackheath,  near  London,  after  a  long  and  suffer- 
ing illness  of  more  than  a  year's  duration,  in  which  he  received 
every  attention  that  could  be  bestowed  on  his  poor  earthly 
tabernacle  from  the  kindness  of  Lord  Dartmouth.  He  died  in 
the  full  enjoyment  of  the  peace  he  had  so  faithfully  preached 
to  others,  and  his  death-bed  was  without  a  cloud.  He  had 
never  married,  and,  hke  Berridge,  had  neither  brother,  sister,. 
^lor  near  relative  to  stand  by  him  as  he  went  down  into  the 

{1»5J  21 


32  2  TOUCHING  LETTER  TO  MR.   CONON. 

river.  But  he  had  that  which  is  far  better  than  earthly  relatives, 
the  strong  consolation  of  a  lively  hope,  and  the  presence  of 
that  Saviour  who  "  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother,"  and  who  has 
said,  "  I  will  never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee." 

The  following  letter,  written  on  his  death-bed  to  his  beloved 
friend  Mr.  Conon,  only  a  fortnight  before  he  died,  gives  a  most 
pleasing  impression  of  Walker's  happy  frame  of  mind  in  the 
prospect  of  eternity.     He  says  : — 

"  My  dearest,  most  faithful  friend, — My  disorder,  though  by 
no  means  affording  the  least  prospect  of  recovery,  yet  seems  to 
affect  me  at  present  more  with  weakness  than  with  that  violent 
heat  which  rendered  me  incapable  of  thought  I  can  now, 
blessed  be  God,  think  a  little ;  and  with  what  comfort  do  I 
both  receive  your  thoughts  and  communicate  mine  to  you  ! 
Oh,  my  dear  friend,  what  do  we  owe  to  the  Lord  for  one 
another !  More  than  I  could  have  conceived,  had  not  God  sent 
me  to  die  elsewhere.  We  shall  have  time  to  praise  the  Lord, 
when  we  meet  in  the  other  world.  I  stand  and  look  upon  that 
world  with  an  established  heart.  I  see  the  way  prepared, 
opened,  and  assured  unto  me  in  Jesus  Christ.  For  ever  blessed 
be  the  name  of  God,  that  I  can  look  upon  death,  that  intro- 
duces that  glorious  scene,  without  any  kind  of  fear.  I  find  my 
grand  duty  still  is  submission,  both  as  to  time  and  circum- 
stances. Why  should  I  not  say  to  you  that  I  find  nothing 
come  so  near  my  heart,  as  the  fear  lest  my  will  should  thwart 
God's  will  in  any  circumstances  1  Thus,  I  think,  I  am  enabled 
to  watch  and  pray  in  some  poor  measure.  Well,  my  dear 
friend,  I  am  but  stepping  a  little  before  you.  You  will  soon 
also  get  your  release,  and  then  we  shall  triumph  for  ever  in  the 
name,  love,  and  power  of  the  Lamb.  Adieu  !  Yours  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  for  ever.     Amen." 

The  above  touching  letter  was  probably  the  last  that  Walker 
wrote.  One  week  later,  Mr.  Burnet,  a  dear  and  valued  friend 
both  of  Walker's  and  Venn's,  gave  the  following  account  of  hiro 


VISIT  OF  MR.  BURNET.  3^3 

in  a  letter  to  a  friend.  He  says :  "  On  Saturday,  the  nth  July, 
I  reached  Mr.  Walker's  lodging  at  Blackheath.  There  I  saw 
the  dear  man  lying  on  his  bed  of  sickness,  pining  away  in  the 
last  stage  of  consumption,  burnt  up  with  raging  fever,  and 
ivasted  almost  to  a  skeleton.  He  was  perfectly  sensible,  and 
so  was  able  to  express  himself  much  to  our  satisfaction.  The 
first  thing  which  struck  me  exceedingly  was  his  patient  submis- 
sion under  God's  hand,  and  his  thankful  tender  concern  for  all 
those  who  were  near  to  him.  So  little  was  his  mind  engaged 
with  things  merely  pertaining  to  himself,  that  in  the  smallest 
things  concerning  my  own  convenience  and  comfort  he  behaved 
as  if  I  had  been  the  sick  person.  He  said  he  had  been  uneasy, 
at  the  beginning  of  his  sickness,  at  the  want  of  sensible  frames 
of  feeling,  but  was  relieved  by  that  Scripture,  '  They  that  wor- 
ship God  must  worship  him  in  spirit,'  with  the  noble  powers  of 
the  soul ;  and  that  he  now  found  experimentally  the  worship  of 
God's  Spirit  on  his  heart  in  a  degree  he  had  never  before 
experienced.  '  I  am  now  enabled,'  he  said,  *  to  see  when  it  was 
that  the  Lord  Jesus  first  laid  efi"ectual  hold  of  my  heart,  which 
I  was  never  able  to  discover  before.  I  have  a  perfect  satisfac- 
tion in  the  principles  I  have  preached,  and  the  methods  I  have 
generally  taken.  I  have  no  doubt  respecting  my  state  in  Christ, 
or  my  future  glory.  Behold,  I  am  going  down  to  the  gates  of 
the  grave,  and  holy  angels  wait  for  me.  Why  do  you  trouble 
yourselves,  and  weep?  Cannot  you  rejoice  with  me?  I  am 
going  to  heaven.  Christ  died  :  my  Lord  !  Oh,  had  I  strength 
to  express  myself,  I  could  tell  you  enough  to  make  your  hearts 
weep  for  joy.  God  is  all  love  to  me,  and  my  trials  are  very 
slight.'" 

On  Tuesday,  July  the  14th,  Walker  dictated  the  following 
words  to  Mr.  Conon :  "  My  dearest  Friend, — ^With  great  con- 
fusion of  thought,  I  have  no  doubts,  great  confidence,  great 
submission,  no  complaining.  As  to  actual  views  of  the  joys 
that  are  coming,  I  have  none ;  but  a  steadfast  belief  of  them 


3  24  HIS  LITER AR  V  REMAINS. 

in  Christ."  The  same  day,  when  one  sitting  by  his  bedside 
observed  that  his  soul  was  ripe  for  heaven  and  eternity,  he 
kiterrupted  him  by  saying,  "  that  the  body  of  sin  was  not  yet 
done  away,  but  that  he  should  continue  a  sinner  to  the  last 
gasp,  and  desired  that  he  would  pray  for  him  as  such." 

On  Sunday,  July  the  19th,  in  the  same  happy  and  peaceful 
frame  of  mind,  the  holy  curate  of  Truro  fell  asleep  in  Christ, 
and  went  home.  "  Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and 
let  my  last  end  be  like  his." 

Walker's  literary  remains  are  not  many,  but  they  deserve  far 
more  attention  than  many  writings  of  the  period  when  he  lived. 
His  "  Lectures  on  the  Church  Catechism,"  his  "  Nine  Sermons 
on  the  Covenant  of  Grace,"  and  his  eleven  sermons  entitled 
"The  Christian,"  are  all  excellent  books,  and  ought  to  be 
better  known  and  more  read  than  they  are  in  the  present  day. 
His  sermons  give  me  a  most  favourable  impression  of  his 
powers  as  a  preacher.  For  simplicity,  directness,  vivacity,  and 
home  appeals  to  the  heart  and  conscience,  I  am  disposed  to 
assign  them  a  very  high  rank  among  the  sermons  of  a  hundred 
years  ago.  It  is  my  deliberate  impression,  that  if  he  had  been 
an  itinerant  like  Whitefield,  an  \  had  not  confined  himself  to  his 
pulpit  at  Truro,  he  would  probably  have  been  reckoned  one 
of  the  best  preachers  of  his  day. 

The  following  extract  from  the  last  sermon  preached  by 
Walker  at  Truro  is  not  only  interesting  in  itself,  but  is  also  a 
very  fair  specimen  of  his  style  of  preaching.  The  subject  was 
the  second  coming  of  Christ  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead. 
He  said  at  the  conclusion :  "  Can  I  think  of  this  day,  so 
honourable  to  him  whom  my  soul  loveth,  without  longing  and 
wishing  for  its  appearing?  When  I  consider  that  his  people 
shall  partake  with  him  in  the  glories  of  that  day,  and  hear  him 
say  those  ravishing  words  never  to  be  recalled,  'Come,  ye 
blessed  of  my  father,'  can  I  do  other  than  say,  '  Come,  Lord 
Jesus,  come  quickly  V    Surely  I  should  rejoice  to  see  and  be 


WALKER'S  LAST  SERMON.  325 

for  ever  with  the  Lord ;  to  behold  his  beauty  as  the  express 
image  of  his  father's  person ;  to  contemplate  with  endless  and 
insatiable  transport  the  glory  which  the  Father  hath  given  him ; 
to  make  my  acknowledgment,  amid  the  praises  of  heaven, 
among  the  multitude  which  no  man  can  number,  as  saved,  for 
ever  saved,  by  his  love  and  care,  his  power  and  grace.  What ! 
when  the  least  beam  of  his  glory  let  in  upon  my  soul  now  turns 
my  earth  into  heaven,  and  makes  me  cry  out  with  Peter,  *  It  is 
good  for  us  to  be  here,'  can  I  wish  to  delay  his  coming  %  When- 
remaining  in  this  vale  of  misery,  I  groan  under  corruptions,  and 
am  burdened  with  a  corruptible  body,  can  I  say,  *  This  is  better 
than  to  be  fashioned  in  soul  and  body  like  unto  the  Lord  V 
When  I  find  here  nothing  but  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit, 
shall  I  be  averse  to  the  Lord's  coming  to  change  my  sorrows 
into  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory  %  Here,  beset  as  I  am 
with  enemies,  would  I  not  long  for  that  blessed  day  when  I 
shall  see  them  again  no  more  for  ever  ?  And  would  I  not  be 
glad  to  be  taken  from  a  world  lying  in  wickedness,  into  that 
new  heaven  and  earth  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness  %  I  know 
that  my  redeemer  liveth.  I  know  that  he  shall  stand  at  the 
latter  day  upon  the  earth.  I  have  a  humble  confidence  that  he 
will  own  me  among  the  children.  And  shall  I,  like  those  who 
know  no  better  joys  than  this  world  can  afford  them,  are  ignor- 
ant of  a  Redeemer's  righteousness,  and  lie  under  the  uncon- 
scious guilt  of  unnumbered  and  unpardoned  sin — shall  I,  like 
them,  cleave  to  this  base  hfe  as  my  all  for  happiness,  and  not 
wait,  and  wish,  and  long  for  the  day  of  my  Master's  glorious 
appearing  %  No  1  I  will  not  abide  in  that  low  measure  of  faith, 
which  only  begets  a  hope  that  I  may  be  well  when  the  Lord 
comes,  but  knows  not  what  it  is  to  love  the  day  of  his  appear- 
ing. My  endeavour  shall  be  to  be  strong  in  the  faith,  and 
abounding  in  hope  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  always 
fruitful  in  good  works,  and  hasting  unto  the  day  of  the  Lord. 
"  A*  for  vou,  my  dear  hearers,  I  am  grieved  at  heart  foi 


WALKER'S  LAST  SERMON. 

many,  very  many  of  yon,  to  think  how  you  will  make  your 
appearance  before  Christ's  judgment-seat.  You  have  no  works 
to  speak  there  for  your  belonging  to  Christ ;  I  can  see  none. 
I  see  works  of  various  kinds  that  prove  you  do  not  belong  to 
him.  If  a  life  of  pleasure,  idleness,  indulgence,  drunkenness, 
pride,  covetousness,  would  recommend  you  to  the  favour  of  the 
Judge,  few  would  be  better  received  than  numbers  of  you  !  In 
the  name  of  God,  my  friends,  when  you  know  this  moment  in 
your  own  consciences  that  if,  as  you  have  been  and  are,  you 
should  be  called  to  judgment,  you  would  be  surely  cast  into 
hell,  why  will  you  live  at  such  a  rate  %  Well !  we  shall  all 
be  soon  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ.  There  the  con- 
troversy between  me,  persuading  you  by  the  terrors  of  the 
Lord  to  repent,  and  you,  determined  to  abide  in  your  sins,  will 
be  decided.  There  it  will  appear  whether  your  blood  will  be 
upon  your  o\vn  heads  for  your  obstinate  impenitences,  or  upon 
mine  for  not  giving  you  warning.  Christ  will  certainly  either 
acquit  or  condemn  me  on  this  account ;  and  if  I  should  be 
acquitted,  what  will  become  of  you  ?  I  tremble  to  think  how 
many  words  of  mine  will  be  brought  up  against  you  on  that  day 
What  will  you  say,  what  will  you  answer,  how  will  you  excuse 
yourselves  %  Oh,  sirs,  if  you  will  not  be  prevailed  upon,  you 
will,  with  eternal  self-reproach,  curse  the  day  that  you  knew  me, 
or  heard  one  word  from  my  mouth.  Why,  why  will  ye  die  with 
so  aggravated  a  destruction  %  May  the  Lord  incline  you  to 
think  !  May  he  cause  this  word  to  sink  deep  into  your  hearts ! 
May  he  show  you  all  your  dangers,  and  with  an  outstretched 
arm  bring  you  out  of  the  hands  of  the  devil,  and  translate  you 
into  the  kingdom  of  his  dear  Son." 

The  letters  which  Mr.  Sidney  has  collected  in  his  biographj 
of  Walker  are  all  interesting,  especially  those  addressed  to  the 
two  Wesleys,  and  to  Mr.  Adam  of  Winteringham,  author  of 
"  Private  Thoughts  upon  Religion."  Indeed,  the  whole  book  is 
valuable.     I  only  regret  that  the  author  should  have  thought  it 


ins  BIOGRAPHY.  327 

necessary  to  elaborate  so  carefully  his  favourite  idea,  that  Mr. 
Walker  was  a  sound  Churchman  and  not  a  Dissenter.  It  may 
be  perfectly  true,  no  doubt.  But  it  is  too  often  pressed  and 
thrust  upon  our  notice.  Walker  lived  in  a  day  when  the  very 
existence  of  Christianity  in  England  was  at  stake,  and  when  the 
main  business  of  true-hearted  Christians  was  to  preserve  the 
very  foundations  of  revealed  religion  from  being  swept  B.way. 
To  my  eyes.  Walker's  thorough  Christianity  is  a  far  more  con- 
spicuous object  than  his  Churchman  ship. 

After  all,  I  leave  the  subject  of  this  chapter  with  a  very  deep 
conviction  that  we  know  comparatively  very  little  about  Walker. 
The  half  of  his  work,  I  suspect,  has  never  yet  been  recorded. 
He  lived  near  the  Land's  End.  He  seldom  left  his  own  parish. 
His  life  was  never  fully  written  till  fifty  or  sixty  years  after  he 
was  dead.  What  wonder,  then,  if  we  know  but  little  of  the 
man  !  Yet  I  venture  the  surmise  that  in  the  last  day,  when  the 
secrets  of  all  ministries  shall  be  disclosed,  few  will  be  found  to 
have  done  better  work  for  Christ  in  their  day  and  generation 
than  Walker  of  'i'ruro. 


XL 

jurats  ''§ttbt\i  of  Mtsim  gnbtll  nnb  bis 
glirxistrn. 

Born  near  Northampton,  1713— -Educated  at  Lincoln  College,  Oxford — Intiiiiacy  with 
John  Wesley — Ordained,  1736 — Curate  of  Dumnier,  1738;  of  Bidcford,  1740;  and  of 
Weston  Favell,  1743 — Early  Religious  History — Correspondence  with  Whiteficld— 
Studious  Habit  at  Weston  Favell — Literary  Remains  Analyzed — Correspondence- 
Humour — Private  life — Charity — Self-denial — Died,  1758 — Testimony  of  Romainc, 
Venn,  ('owper,  Cecil,  Bickersteth,  and  Daniel  Wilson. 

[HERE  is  a  striking  chapter  m  the  Book  of  Judges,  in 
which  Deborah  and  Barak  sing  a  triumphal  hymn 
after  the  defeat  of  the  hosts  of  Sisera.  In  one  part 
of  this  hymn  they  recount  the  names  of  the  tribes  who  came 
forward  most  readily  to  do  battle  for  the  freedom  of  Israel. 
Some  of  the  tribes  are  mentioned  in  high  praise.  Others  are 
dismissed  with  expressions  of  reproach.  None  are  so  much 
commended  as  Zebulun  and  Naphtali.  They  were  "  a  people 
who  jeoparded  their  lives  unto  the  death  in  the  high  places  of 
the  field."  But  a  sentence  is  used  in  the  account  of  Zebulun, 
which  deserves  special  notice :  "  Out  of  Zebulun,"  it  is  said, 
"  came  down  they  that  handle  the  pen  of  the  writer  "  (Judges 
V.  14). 

The  expression  is  a  strange  one.  It  cannot  be  denied  that 
the  meaning  of  it  is  involved  in  some  obscurity.  There  is 
■jome  probability  in  the  conjecture  of  those  who  think  it  signi- 
fies scribes,  who  mustered  the  levies  of  Zebulun,  and  wrote 
iiown   the   names  of  those  who  went   to  war  ^compare  Jer. 


REV.   JAMES    HERVEY. 


Face  p.  328 


BIRTH  OF  JAMES  HERVEW  3^9 

lii.  25).  But  be  the  precise  meaning  what  it  may,  one  thing  is 
abundantly  clear.  The  zeal  of  Zebulun  in  God's  cause  was 
such  that,  among  her  warriors  in  the  day  of  battle,  there  were 
some  who  were  more  accustomed  to  wield  the  pen  than  the 
sword.  When  God's  work  was  to  be  done,  the  soldier  and  the 
writer  stood  shoulder  to  shoulder,  and  side  by  side. 

The  expression  has  often  recurred  to  my  mind  of  late,  in 
studying  the  history  of  English  religion  in  the  i8th  century. 
I  am  struck  with  the  variety  of  instruments  which  God  em- 
ployed in  carrying  on  the  great  revival  of  Christianity  which 
then  took  place.  I  see  some  men  who  were  mighty  with  the 
tongue,  and  bowed  the  hearts  of  assemblies  by  their  preaching, 
as  the  trees  of  the  wood  are  bowed  by  the  wind.  I  see  others 
who  were  mighty  in  government,  and  skilful  in  organizing,  direct- 
ing, methodizing,  and  administering.  But,  besides  these,  I  see 
others  who  were  mighty  with  the  pen,  and  did  work  for  Christ  as 
real  and  lasting  as  any  of  their  contemporaries.  They  made  no 
pubhc  show.  They  did  not  cry,  or  strive,  or  let  their  voice  be 
heard  in  the  street.  But  they  laboured  in  their  way  most 
effectually  for  the  advancement  of  pure  evangelical  religion. 
They  reached  minds  which  were  never  brought  under  the  in- 
fluence of  Whitefield,  Wesley,  or  Romaine.  They  produced 
results  in  many  quarters  which  will  never  be  fully  known  till 
^he  judgment  day.  Foremost,  perhaps,  in  this  class  of  men  in 
the  last  century,  was  the  subject  of  my  present  paper,  James 
Hervey  of  Weston  Favell,  the  author  of  "  Theron  and  Aspasio." 

James  Hervey  was  born  on  February  26,  17 13,  at  Harding- 
stone,  near  Northampton.  His  father  was  rector  of  the  neigh- 
bouring parishes  of  Collingtree  and  Weston  Favell,  but  appears 
for  some  reason  to  have  resided  out  of  his  parish.  About  his 
parents  I  can  find  no  certain  information,  either  as  to  their 
religious  opinions  or  their  practice.  The  parishes  of  which  his 
father  was  rector  are  small  rural  places,  very  near  the  town  of 
Northampton,  on  the  south-eastern  side.     The  date  of  his  birth 


330  EDUCA  TED  A  T  LINCOLN  COLLEGE, 

deserves  notice  on  one  account.  It  shows  that  he  was  one  of 
the  little  band  whom  God  sent  into  the  world  at  a  special  time, 
to  do  a  special  work  together  in  England.  Whitefield,  Wesley, 
Grimshaw,  Berridge,  Rowlands,  Romaine,  Venn,  Walker,  and 
Hervey,  were  all  born  in  the  first  twenty  years  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  between  1700  and  1720. 

The  facts  and  events  of  Hervey's  life  are  singularly  few.  He 
fl'as  educated  at  the  Grammar  School  of  Northampton,  and 
remained  there  from  the  time  he  was  seven  years  old  till  he 
was  seventeen.  Two  things  only  are  recorded  about  his  school- 
boy life.  One  is,  that  he  was  very  skilful  and  dexterous  in  all 
games  and  recreations.  The  other  is,  that  he  made  great  pro- 
gress in  Latin  and  Greek,  and  would  have  got  on  even  faster 
than  he  did,  if  his  schoolmaster  had  allowed  him.  But  it 
appears  that  this  worthy  pedagogue  made  it  a  rule  never  to  allow 
any  of  his  pupils  to  learn  quicker  than  his  own  son  !  The 
fiction  of  "  Do-the-boys  Hall,"  it  may  be  feared,  is  built  on  a 
very  broad  foundation  of  facts.  Obscure  Yorkshire  schools 
are  not  the  only  academies  where  little  boys  are  victimized 
and  unfairly  used 

In  the  year  1731,  Hervey  was  sent  to  Oxford,  and  entered 
at  Lincoln  College.  The  first  two  years  of  his  University  life 
appear  to  have  been  spent  in  idleness.  Like  many  young  men, 
he  suffered  much  from  the  want  of  some  wise  friend  to  advise 
and  direct  him  in  his  studies.  In  1733,  however,  he  became 
acquainted  with  the  two  Wesleys,  Whitefield,  Ingham,  and 
other  steady  young  men,  and  derived  great  benefit  from  their 
society.  Under  their  influence  and  example,  he  began  a  steady 
course  of  reading,  and  made  himself  master  of  such  books  as 
"  Derham's  Astro-Theology,"  "  Ray's  Wisdom  of  God  in  Crea. 
tion,"  and  other  works  of  a  similar  kind.  He  also  commenced 
the  study  of  the  Hebrew  language.  Nor  was  this  all.  He 
began  to  follow  his  new  companions  in  their  efforts  to  attain- 
and  promote  a  high  standard  of  religion.    Like  them,  he  began* 


INTIMACY  WITH  JOTm  WESLEY.  33 » 

to  live  by  method,  received  the  communion  every  Sabbath^ 
visited  the  sick  and  the  prisoners  in  jail,  and  read  to  poor 
people.  The  last  three  years  of  his  Oxford  life  were  thus  use- 
fully employed,  and  the  result  was  that  he  left  the  University, 
in  1736,  with  a  good  foundation  of  steady  habits  of  living,  and 
with  a  very  fair  amount  of  knowledge  and  scholarship.  His 
literary  remains,  indeed,  supply  abundant  proof  that,  consider- 
ing the  times  he  lived  in,  he  was  a  well-read  and  well-educated' 
man. 

No  one  seems  to  have  been  more  useful  to  Hervey,  at  this 
period  of  his  life,  than  John  Wesley.  At  a  later  date,  after 
doctrinal  differences  had  separated  the  two  men,  the  Rector  of 
Weston  Favell  bore  grateful  and  honourable  testimony  to  this 
fact.  He  says,  in  one  of  his  letters  :  "  I  heartily  thank  you,  as- 
for  all  other  favours,  so  especially  for  teaching  me  Hebrew.  I 
have  cultivated  this  study,  according  to  your  advice.  I  can 
never  forget  that  tender-hearted  and  generous  P'ellow  of 
-Lincoln,  who  condescended  to  take  such  compassionate  notice 
of  a  poor  undergraduate,  whom  almost  everybody  contemned, 
and  whose  soul  no  man  cared  for."  Happy  is  that  college 
where  Fellows  show  kindness  to  undergraduates,  and  do  not 
neglect  them  !  Attentions  of  this  kind  cost  little ;  but  they  are 
worth  much,  gain  influence,  and  bear  fruit  after  many  days. 

In  the  year  1736,  Hervey  was  ordained  a  minister  by  Dr. 
Potter,  Bishop  of  Oxford,  and  in  1736  became  curate  to  his 
father  at  Weston  Favell.  He  seems  to  have  filled  this  position 
for  a  very  short  time.  In  1738,  we  find  him  Curate  of  Dum- 
mer,  near  Basingstoke,  in  Hampshire,  a  position,  singularly 
enough,  which  Whitefield  had  also  occupied  about  the  same 
year.  In  1740,  he  removed  to  Bideford,  in  North  Devonshire, 
and  remained  there  till  August  1743.  He  then  returned  ta 
Weston  Favell,  and  became  once  more  curate  to  his  father. 
This  was  his  last  move.  On  the  death  of  his  father,  in  175^. 
he  succeeded  him  .as  Rector  of  Weston  Favell  and  CoUingtree. 


33»  EARLY  RELIGIOUS  HISTORY, 

iDut  only  survived  him  six  years.  He  finally  died,  at  Wesion 
FavcU.  on  Christmas-day  1758,  of  pulmonary  consumption,  at 
■the  comparatively  early  age  of  forty-five.  Unlike  most  ministers, 
he  preached  the  gospel  amongst  the  people  who  had  known 
him  from  his  earliest  infancy,  and  was  buried  within  a  very  few 
miles  from  the  place  where  he  had  been  born.  In  hfe  and 
death  he  "  dwelt  among  his  own  people." 

The  spiritual  history  of  Hervey  presents  several  interesting 
features.     I  can  find  no  evidence  that  he  knew  anything  of 
vital  religion  when  he  was  a  boy  or  a  young  man.     Though 
mercifully  kept  from  the  excess  of  riot  and  immorality  into 
which  the  young  frequently  run,  he  seems  to  have  been  utterly 
careless  and  thoughtless  about  his  soul.     The  beginning  of  a 
work  of  grace  in  his  heart  may  undoubtedly  be  traced  to  his  resi- 
dence at  Oxford,  and  his  intercourse  with  Wesley  and  Whitefield, 
which  he  commenced  at  the  age  of  twenty.     Yet  even  then  he 
seems  to  have  been  much  in  the  dark  for  some  years,  and  to 
have  been  comparatively  ignorant  of  the  distinctive  doctrines 
of  real  Christianity.     His  college  friends,  it  must  be  admitted, 
knew  little  more  than  he  did.     Their  early  struggles  after  light 
were  made  through  a  fog  of  mysticism  and  asceticism  which 
impeded  their  course  for  years.     The  freeness  and  simphcity  of 
the  gospel,  the  finished  work  of  Christ  on  the  cross,  the  real 
meaning  of  justification  by  faith  without  the  deeds  of  the  law, 
the  folly  of  putting  doing  before  believing,  all  these  were  sub- 
jects which  this  little  band  of  young  men  at  Oxford  were  very 
slow  to  understand.     Each  and  all  in  their   turns  struggled 
through  their  mental  difticulties,  and  came  out  on  the  right 
side.     But  one  of  the  last  to  reach  "  terra  firma,"  and  grasp 
the  whole   truth   as   it   is  in  Jesus,  undoubtedly  was  James 
Hervey.     In  fact,  it  was  not  till  the  year  1741,  five  years  after 
he  had  been  ordained,  that  he  thoroughly  received  the  whole 
gospel  into  his  heart,  and  embraced  the  whole  system  of  evan- 
gelical doctrine.     Tv^o  sennons  preached  by  Hervey  at  Bide- 


NO  T  THOROUGHL  Y  ENLIGHTENED.  333- 

ford  about  the  year  1 741,  in  which  he  plainly  avowed  his  change 
of  sentiments,  were  commonly  called  his  "  Recantation " 
sermons. 

The  state  of  Hervey's  heart  during  the  seven  years  preceding 
"741  must  have  been  one  of  continual  conflict  and  inward  dis- 
satisfaction. Enlightened  enough  to  feel  the  value  of  his  soul,, 
and  to  see  something  of  the  sinfulness  of  sin,  he  was  still  un- 
acquainted with  tlie  way  of  peace.  His  letters  written  at  this 
period,  both  before  and  after  ordination,  exhibit  a  mind  full  of 
pious  thoughts,  holy  desires,  and  high  aspirations,  but  with 
everything  out  of  proportion  and  out  of  place.  The  writer  says 
excellent  things  about  the  soul,  and  sin,  and  God,  and  the 
Bible,  and  the  world,  and  duty,  and  even  says  much  about 
Christ.  You  cannot  help  admiring  his  evident  sincerity,  purity 
of  mind,  and  zeal  to  do  good.  But  you  cannot  help  feeling 
that  he  has  not  got  hold  of  things  by  the  right  end,  and  does- 
not  see  the  whole  of  religion.  He  is  like  an  excellent  and 
well-formed  ship  without  a  compass  and  rudder.  He  has  not 
yet  got  his  feet  upon  the  Rock.  He  is  incessantly  putting 
things  in  their  wrong  places.  The  last  are  too  often  first,  and 
the  first  are  too  often  last.  He  does  not  say  things  that  are 
not  true,  but  he  does  not  say  them  in  the  right  way,  and  at  the 
same  time  leaves  out  much  that  ought  to  be  said. 

The  unsatisfactory  character  of  Hervey's  theology  at  the 
beginning  of  his  ministry  is  well  illustrated  by  the  following 
anecdote.  In  one  of  the  Northamptonshire  parishes  where  he 
preached  before  17  41,  there  lived  a  ploughman  who  usually 
attended  the  ministry  of  Dr.  Doddridge,  and  was  well-inforaied 
in  the  doctrines  of  grace.  Hervey  being  ordered  by  his  physi- 
cians, for  the  benefit  of  his  health,  to  follow  the  plough,  in 
order  to  smell  the  fresh  earth,  frequently  accompanied  this 
ploughman  when  he  was  working.  Knowing  that  he  was  a 
serious  man,  he  said  to  him  one  morning,  "  What  do  you  think 
is  the  hardest  thing  in  religion  % " — The  ploughman  replied  ; 


334  HERVEY  AND  THE  PLOUGHMAN. 

"  Sir,  I  am  a  poor  man,  and  you  are  a  minister ;  I  beg  leave 
to  return  the  question." — Then  said  Mr.  Hervey:  '-'I  think  the 
hardest  thing  is  to  deny  sinful st\( ;''  grounding  his  opinion  on 
our  Lord's  admonition,  "  If  any  man  will  come  after  me,  let 
him  deny  himself."  "I  argued,"  said  Mr.  Hervey,  "upon  the 
import  and  extent  of  the  duty,  showing  that  merely  to  forbear 
sinful  actions  is  little,  and  that  we  must  deny  admittance  and 
entertainment  to  evil  imaginations  and  quench  irregular  desires. 
In  this  way  I  shot  my  random  bolt." — The  ploughman  quietly 
replied  :  "  Sir,  there  is  another  instance  of  self-denial  to  which 
the  injunction  of  Christ  equally  extends,  which  is  the  hardest 
thing  in  religion,  and  that  is,  to  deny  righteous  self  You  know 
I  do  not  come  to  hear  you  preach,  but  go  every' Sunday  with 
my  family  to  hear  Dr.  Doddridge  at  Northampton.  We  rise 
early  in  the  morning,  and  have  prayer  before  we  set  out,  in 
which  I  find  pleasure.  Walking  there  and  back  I  find  pleasure. 
Under  the  sermon  I  find  pleasure.  When  at  the  Lord's  Table 
I  find  pleasure.  We  return,  read  a  portion  of  Scripture,  and 
go  to  prayer  in  the  evening,  and  I  find  pleasure.  But  yet, 
to  this  moment,  I  find  it  the  hardest  thing  to  deny  righteous 
self,  I  mean  to  renounce  my  own  strength  and  righteousness, 
and  not  to  lean  on  that  for  holiness  or  rely  on  this  for  justifica- 
tion." In  repeating  this  story  to  a  friend,  Mr.  Hervey  observed, 
"I  then  hated  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  I  looked  at  the 
man  with  astonishment  and  disdain,  and  thought  him  an  old 
fool,  and  wondered  at  what  I  fancied  the  motley  mixture  of 
piety  and  oddity  in  his  notions.  I  have  since  seen  clearly  who 
was  the  fool ;  not  the  wise  old  ploughman,  but  the  proud 
James  Hervey.  I  now  discern  sense,  solidity,  and  truth  in  his 
observations." 

During  this  period  of  Hervey's  life,  his  old  Oxford  friend,  the 
famous  George  Whitefield,  frequently  corresponded  with  him. 
That  mighty  man  of  God  had  been  brought  into  the  full  light 
of  the  gospel,  and,  like  the  Samaritan  woman,  burned  with 


CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  WHITEFIELD.  335 

desire  to  bring  all  whom  he  knew  and  loved  into  the  same 
glorious  liberty.  The  following  letter,  while  it  shows  White- 
tield's  deep  concern  for  his  friend's  salvation,  makes  Her\'ey's 
defective  religious  principles  at  this  period  very  evident :  "  I 
long  to  have  my  dear  friend  come  forth  and  preach  the  truth  as 
it  is  in  Jesus ;  not  a  righteousness  or  holiness  of  our  own. 
whereby  we  make  ourselves  meet,  but  the  righteousness  of 
another,  even  the  Lord  our  righteousness ;  upon  the  imputa- 
tion and  apprehending  of  which  by  faith  we  shall  be  made  meet 
by  his  Holy  Spirit  to  live  with  and  enjoy  God.  Dear  Mr. 
Hervey,  it  is  an  excellent  thing  to  be  convinced  of  the  freeness 
and  riches  of  God's  grace  in  Christ  Jesus.  It  is  sweet  to  know 
and  preach  that  Christ  justifies  the  ungodly,  and  that  all  good 
works  are  not  so  much  as  partly  the  cause,  but  the  effect  of  oui 
justification.  Till  convinced  of  these  truths,  you  must  own  free 
will  is  in  man,  which  is  directly  contrary  to  the  Holy  Scriptures 
and  to  the  Articles  of  our  Church.  Let  me  advise  dear  Mr. 
Hervey,  laying  aside  all  prejudices,  to  read  and  pray  over  St. 
Paul's  Epistles  to  tlie  Romans  and  Galatians,  and  tlien  to  tell 
me  what  he  thinks  of  this  doctrine.  Most  of  our  old  friends 
are  now  happily  enlightened.  God  sets  his  seal  to  such  preach- 
ing in  an  extraordinary  manner,  and  I  am  persuaded  the  gates 
of  hell  will  never  be  able  to  prevail  against  it.  O  that  dear  Mr. 
Hervey  would  also  join  with  us !  O  that  the  Lord  would  open 
his  eyes  to  behold  arigiit  this  mystery  of  godliness?  How 
would  it  rejoice  my  heart !  How  would  it  comfort  his  own 
soul !  He  would  no  longer  groan  under  a  spirit  of  bondage  , 
no,  he  would  be  brought  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children 
of  God."     This  letter  was  dated  Philadelphia,  November  ro, 

1739- 

Hervey's  excellent  biographer,  John  Brown  of  Whitburn, 
gives  the  following  clear  account  of  his  state  of  mind  at  this 
period :  "  It  is  evident  that  he  was  seeking  salvation ;  but  he 
sought  it,  as  it  were,  by  the  works  of  the  law.     One  of  his 


33^  QUOTATIONS  FROM  HIS  BIOGRAPHY. 

leading  errors  was,  that  he  had  low,  scanty,  inadeq'Ute  apprehen- 
sions of  the  love  of  God.  From  this  unavoidably  followed  » 
disesteem  of  imputed  righteousness,  a  conceit  of  personal  qualifi- 
cations, a  spirit  of  legal  bondage,  and  a  tincture  of  Pharisaical 
pride.  He  conceived  faith  to  be  no  more  than  a  mere  believing 
of  promises  if  he  did  well,  and  of  threatenings  if  he  did  ill.  He 
wished  for  a  salvation  to  b2  bestowed  upon  some  sincere,  pious, 
and  worthy  persons,  and  was  distressed  because  he  could  not 
find  himself  of  that  number.  To  use  his  own  words,  when  he 
felt  he  was  deplorably  deficient  in  duty,  he  would  comfort  him- 
self with  saying, '  Soul,  thy  God  only  requires  sincere  obedience, 
and  perhaps  to-morrow  may  be  more  abundant  in  acts  of  holi- 
ness.' When  overcome  by  sin,  he  would  call  to  mind  his 
righteous  deeds,  and  so  think  to  commute  with  divine  justice, 
and  quit  scores  for  his  offences  by  his  duties.  In  order  to  be 
reconciled  to  God,  and  to  ease  his  conscience,  he  would  promise 
stricter  watchfulness,  more  alms,  and  renewed  fastings.  Over- 
looking entirely  the  active  obedience  of  our  Redeemer,  he  fondly 
imagined  that  through  the  death  of  Christ  he  might  have  pardon 
of  his  sins,  and  could  by  his  own  doings  secure  eternai  hfe." 

"  For  some  time,"  continues  his  biographer,  "  letters  from 
Whitefield  were  disregarded,  or  answered  with  stubborn  silence  j 
but  at  length,  by  this  and  other  means,  a  saving  change  took 
place  in  Mr.  Hervey's  mind.  Says  he.  The  two  great  com- 
mandnr^ nts — Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy 
heart ;  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself — made  the  first 
awakening  impression  on  my  heart.  Amazing  !  thought  I ;  are 
these  commands  of  God  as  obligatory  as  the  prohibition  of 
adultery  or  the  observation  of  the  Sabbath?  Then  has  my 
whole  life  been  a  continued  act  of  disobedience  ;  not  a  day  nor 
an  hour  in  which  I  have  performed  my  duty !  This  conviction 
struck  me  as  the  handwriting  upon  the  wall  struck  the  presump- 
tuous monarch.  It  pursued  me,  as  Saul  pursued  the  Christians, 
not  only  to  my  own  house,  but  to  distant  cities ;  nor  even  gave 


OBTAINS  CLEARER  LIGHT.  337 

up  the  great  controversy  till,  under  the  influence  of  the  Spirit, 
it  brought  me,  weary  and  heavy  laden,  to  Jesus  Christ.  Then 
God,  who  commanded  the  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness,  shincd 
into  my  heart,  and  gave  me  the  light  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the 
face  of  Jesus  Christ." 

After  all,  it  would  be  difficult  to  give  a  more  vivid  and  in- 
teresting account  of  the  change  which  came  over  Hervey  than 
that  which  lie  himself  gives  in  a  letter  to  his  faithful  friend, 
George  Whitefield.  He  says :  "  You  are  pleased  to  ask  how 
the  Holy  Ghost  convinced  me  of  self-righteousness,  and  drove 
me  out  of  my  false  rest.  Indeed,  sir,  I  cannot  tell.  The  hght 
was  not  instantaneous ;  it  did  not  flash  upon  my  soul,  but  arose 
like  the  dawning  of  the  day.  A  little  book  by  Jenks,  upon 
*  Submission  to  the  Righteousness  of  God,'  was  made  service- 
able to  me.  Your  journals,  dear  sir,  and  sermons,  especially 
that  sweet  sermon  on  the  text,  '  What  think  ye  of  Christ  f  were 
a  means  of  bringing  me  to  the  knowledge  of  the  trutli.  Another 
piece  has  been  also  like  precious  eye-salve  to  my  dim  and 
clouded  understanding — I  mean  Marshall's  '  Gospel  Mystery 
of  Sanctification.'  These,  blessed  be  He  who  is  a  light  to  them 
that  sit  in  darkness,  have  in  some  degree  convinced  me  of  my 
former  errors.  I  now  begin  to  see  I  have  been  labouring  in 
the  fire,  and  wearying  myself  for  very  vanity,  while  I  have 
attempted  to  establish  my  own  righteousness.  I  trusted  I  knew 
not  what,  while  I  trusted  in  some  imaginary  good  deeds  of  my 
own.  These  are  no  hiding-place  from  the  storm ;  they  are  a 
refuge  of  lies.  If  I  had  the  meekness  of  Moses  and  the  patience 
of  Job,  the  zeal  of  Paul  and  the  love  of  John,  I  durst  not 
advance  the  least  plea  to  eternal  \\it  on  this  footing.  As  for  my 
own  beggarly  performances,  wretched  righteousnesses,  gracious 
Emmanuel !  I  am  ashamed,  I  am  grieved  that  I  should  thrust 
them  into  the  plan  of  thy  divine,  thy  inconceivably  precious 
obedience  1  My  schemes  are  altered.  I  now  desire  to  work  in 
my  blessed  Master's  service,  not  for  life,  but  from  life  and 
(iM)  22 


33 8  OPERATIONS  OF  THE  SPIRIT. 

salvation.  I  would  study  to  please  him  in  righteousness  and 
holiness  all  the  days  of  my  life." 

In  another  letter  to  Whitefield,  of  about  the  same  date, 
Hervey  says :  "  I  own,  with  shame  and  sorrow,  I  have  been  a 
blind  leader  of  the  bhnd.  My  tongue  and  my  pen  have  per- 
verted the  good  ways  of  the  Lord,  have  darkened  the  glory  of 
redeeming  merit  and  sovereign  grace.  I  have  dared  to  invade 
the  glories  of  an  all-sufficient  Saviour,  and  to  pluck  the  crown 
off  his  head.  My  writings  and  discourses  have  derogated  from 
the  honour,  the  everlasting,  incommunicable  honour  of  Jesus. 
They  presumed  to  give  works  a  share  in  the  redemption  and 
recovery  of  a  lost  sinner.  They  have  placed  filthy  rags  on  the 
throne  of  the  Lamb,  and  by  that  means  have  debased  the 
Saviour  and  exalted  the  sinner.  But  I  trust  the  divine  truth 
begins  to  dawn  upon  my  soul.  Oh,  may  it,  like  the  rising  sun, 
shine  more  and  more  till  the  day  break  in  all  its  brightness, 
and  the  shadows  flee  away !  Now,  was  I  possessed  of  all  the 
righteous  acts  that  have  made  saints  and  martyrs  famous  in  all 
generations,  could  they  be  transferred  to  me,  and  might  I  call 
them  my  own,  I  would  renounce  them  all  that  I  might  win 
Christ." 

I  make  no  excuse  for  the  length  at  which  I  have  dwelt  on 
this  portion  of  Hervey's  history.  A  mere  worldly  man  may  see 
nothing  interesting  in  it;  but  a  true  Christian,  unless  I  am 
greatly  mistaken,  will  find  it  full  of  instruction.  It  is  useful  to 
mark  the  diversities  of  the  operation  of  the  Spirit  How  slowly 
and  gradually  he  carries  on  his  work  in  some  hearts,  compared 
to  the  rapid  progress  he  makes  in  others  I  It  is  useful  to  mark 
the  extent  of  his  operations.  How  thoroughly  he  can  turn 
upside  down  a  man's  theological  opinions  !  How  little  we  know 
what  a  young  self-righteous  minister  may  one  day,  by  God's 
grace,  become !  Well  would  it  be  for  the  Christian  Church  if 
there  were  more  ministers  in  her  pale  taught  of  God,  and  brought 
to  lit  at  the  feet  of  Christ,  like  James  Hervey. 


HIS  STUDIOUS  HA  JUTS.  339 

The  last  seventeen  years  of  Hervey's  life  were  spent  in  com- 
parative retirement  at  Weston  Favell.  "  My  house,"  he  writes 
to  a  friend,  "  is  quite  retired.  It  faces  the  garden  and  the  field, 
so  that  we  liear  none  of  the  tumultuous  din  of  the  world,  and 
see  nothing  but  the  wonderful  and  charming  works  of  the 
Creator.  Oh,  that  I  may  be  enabled  to  improve  this  advan- 
tageous solitude  !"  Willing  as  he  doubtless  was  to  go  forth  into 
public  and  do  the  work  of  an  evangelist,  like  his  beloved  friend 
Whitefield,  his  delicate  health  made  it  quite  impossible.  From 
his  youth  up  he  had  shown  a  decided  tendency  to  pulmonary 
consumption.  He  had  neither  voice  nor  physical  strength  to 
preach  in  the  open  air,  address  large  congregations,  and  arrest 
the  attention  of  multitudes,  like  many  of  his  contemporaries. 
He  saw  this  clearly,  and  wisely  submitted  to  God's  appoint- 
ment. Those  whom  he  could  not  reach  with  his  voice,  he 
resolved  to  approach  by  his  pen.  From  his  isolated  study  in 
his  Northamptonshire  parish  he  sent  forth  arrows  which  were 
sharp  in  the  hearts  of  the  King's  enemies.  In  a  word,  he 
became  a  diligent  writer  on  behalf  of  the  gospel  from  the  time 
of  his  conversion  till  he  was  laid  in  his  grave.  Ill  health,  no 
doubt,  often  stopped  his  labour,  and  laid  him  aside.  But, 
though  faint,  he  was  always  pursuing.  Delicate  and  weak  as 
he  always  was,  his  pen  was  very  seldom  idle,  and  he  was  always 
doing  "  what  he  could."  The  work  to  which  he  devoted  him- 
self required  a  large  measure  of  faith  and  patience.  He 
laboured  on  un cheered  by  admiring  crowds,  and  unaided  by 
the  animal  excitement  which  often  carries  forward  the  wearied 
preacher.  But  while  health  and  strength  lasted  he  never  ceased 
to  labour,  and  seldom  laboured  in  vain.  Hundreds  were 
reached  by  Hervey's  writings,  who  would  never  have  conde- 
scended to  listen  to  Whitefield's  voice. 

The  very  retirement  of  Weston  Favell  was  not  without  its 
advantages.  It  gave  the  worthy  rector  unbroken  leisure  for 
writing.     He  could  sit  down  in  his  study  without  fear  of  behig 


34^  mS  LOVE  OF  THE  PURITANS. 

disturbed  by  the  endless  petty  interruptions  which  disturb  the 
dweller  in  large  towns,  and  make  the  continuous  flow  of  thought 
almost  impossible.  Above  all,  it  gave  him  plenty  of  time  for 
reading  and  storing  his  mind.  It  has  been  well  said  that 
"reading  maketh  a  full  man,"  and  no  one  can  look  through 
Hervey's  literary  remains  without  seeing  abundant  evidence 
that  he  was  a  great  reader.  With  Greek  and  Roman  classical 
writers  he  was  familiar  from  his  youth.  The  following  theolo- 
gical writers  are  said  to  have  been  among  his  special  favourites : 
Chrj'sostom,  Gerhard,  Alting,  Owen,  Manton,  Goodwin,  Rey- 
nolds, Hall,  Beveridge,  Bunyan,  Hopkins,  Howe,  Bates,  Flavel, 
Caryl,  Poole,  Chamock,  Traill,  Turretine,  Witsius,  Vitringa, 
Hurrion,  Leighton,  Polhill,  Gill,  Brine,  Guyse,  Boston,  Rawlins, 
Coles,  Jenks,  Marshall,  Erskine,  Milton,  Young,  and  Watts. 
The  names  of  these  authors  speak  for  themselves.  The  man 
who  was  familiar  with  their  works  was  likely  to  be  full  of  matter, 
and  when  he  wrote  for  the  press  he  had  a  fair  right  to  claim  a 
patient  hearing.  The  ways  of  God's  providence  are  mysterious 
and  truly  instructive.  If  Hervey  had  not  been  kept  at  home 
by  ill  health,  he  would  probably  never  have  had  time  for  much 
reading.  If  he  had  not  had  time  to  be  a  reader,  he  would 
never  have  written  what  he  did. 

The  English  Puritans  appear  to  have  been  special  favourites 
with  Hervey.  Again  and  again,  in  his  biography,  we  find  him 
speaking  of  them  in  terms  of  the  highest  commendation.  For 
instance,  he  says  in  one  place,  "  Be  not  ashamed  of  the  name 
Puritan.  The  Puritans  were  the  soundest  preachers,  and,  I 
believe,  the  truest  followers  of  Christ  in  their  day."  Again 
"  For  my  part  I  esteem  the  Puritans  as  some  of  the  most  zealous 
Christians  that  ever  appeared  in  our  land."  Again  :  '*'  The 
Puritans,  one  and  all  of  them,  glory  in  the  righteousness  of  their 
great  Mediator ;  they  extol  his  imputed  righteousness  in  almost 
every  page,  and  pour  contempt  on  all  other  works  compared 
with  their  Lord's.     For  my  part  I  know  no  set  of  writers  in  the 


NIS  LITERARY  WORKS,  34 » 

world  so  remarkable  for  this  doctrine  and  diction.  It  quite 
distinguishes  them  from  the  generality  of  our  modem  treatises." 
I  make  no  apology  for  these  quotations.  They  throw  broad, 
clear  light  on  Hervey's  theological  opinions.  Nothing  brings 
out  a  man's  distinctive  religious  views  so  thoroughly  as  his 
choice  of  books.  Tell  me  what  divines  a  minister  loves  to  read, 
and  I  will  soon  tell  you  to  what  school  of  theology  he  belongs. 

The  principal  literary  works  which  Hervey  published  in  his 
life-time,  were  two  volumes  of  "  Meditations  and  Contempla- 
tions," and  three  volumes  of  "  Dialogues  and  Letters"  between 
two  fictitious  persons,  whom  he  named  "  Theron  and  Aspasio." 
The  "  Meditations "  are  soliloquies  and  thoughts  arising  out  of 
such  subjects  as  the  tombs,  a  flower-garden,  creation,  night,  and 
the  starry  heavens.  The  "  Dialogues"  touch  on  many  points 
of  theology,  but  especially  upon  the  great  doctrine  of  justifica- 
tion by  faith  in  the  imputed  righteousness  of  Christ.  If  life  had 
been  continued,  Hervey  intended  to  have  added  a  fourth  volume 
.of  "  Dialogues,"  of  which  the  subject  was  to  have  been  Chris- 
tian holiness.  But  his  early  death  cut  short  the  design,  and  he 
was  only  able  to  tell  his  friends  that  they  must  regard  his  favourite 
book,  Marshall  on  Sanctification,  as  his  deputy  and  representa- 
tive. His  words  were, — "  I  do,  by  these  presents,  depute 
Marshall  to  supply  my  lack  of  service.  Marshall  expresses  my 
thoughts,  prosecutes  my  schemes,  and  not  only  pursues  the  same 
end,  but  proceeds  in  the  same  way.  I  shall  therefore  rejoice  in 
the  prospect  of  having  the  *  Gospel  Mystery  of  Sanctification* 
stand  as  a  fourth  volume  to  *  Theron  and  Aspasio.'" 

Both  the  works  above  mentioned  attained  an  extraordinary 
degree  of  popularity  from  the  moment  they  were  published,  and 
procured  for  the  author  a  world-wide  reputation.  They  formed, 
in  fact,  the  whole  foundation  of  his  fame.  Thousands  and  tens 
of  thousands  of  Christians  have  never  known  anything  of  Hervey 
except  as  "  the  author  of  Theron  and  Aspasio."  His  first  work, 
the  Meditations,  ran  through  twenty  editions  in  a  very  short  time, 


342  STYLE  OF  HIS  WRITINGS, 

and  was  translated  into  the  Dutch  language !  Theron  and 
Aspasio  met  with  acceptance  all  over  England  and  Scotland, 
and  obliged  even  worldly  critics  to  take  notice  of  it.  All  these 
are  plain  facts  which  admit  of  no  controversy.  They  are  facts 
which  arouse  in  our  minds  a  little  curiosity.     We  naturally  want 

to  know  what  kind  of  religious  writing  was  popular  in  England 

in  the  i8th  century. 
The  first  thought  that  will  probably  start  up  within  us  as  we  read 

Hervey's  Meditations  and  Dialogues,  will  be  unmixed  surprise 
and  amazement.  The  style  is  so  peculiar,  that  we  marvel  how 
our  forefathers  could  possibly  have  liked  it.  From  first  to  last 
the  author  writes  in  such  a  florid,  high  flown,  luxuriant,  bom- 
bastic, stilted  fashion,  that  he  almost  takes  your  breath  away. 
You  can  hardly  believe  that  he  is  in  earnest,  and  that  the  whole 
thing  is  not  an  assumed  mannerism  and  affectation.  The  long 
words,  the  grandiose  mode  of  expressing  thoughts,  the  starched 
and  painted  dress  of  the  sentences — all,  all  is  so  utterly  unlike 
the  writing  of  the  present  century,  that  the  reader  stands  dumb- 
founded, and  hardly  knows  whether  he  ought  to  laugh  or  to  cry. 
In  the  whole  range  of  popular  English  books,  I  do  not  hesi- 
tate to  say  that  I  do  not  know  a  style  of  writing  less  to  be 
admired  than  the  style  of  "  Theron  and  Aspasio."  One  cannot 
help  inwardly  feeling,  What  a  strange  standard  of  public  taste 
must  have  prevailed,  when  such  writing  as  this  was  deliberately 
published  and  universally  admired  ! 

However,  first  impressions  are  not  always  correct  We  must 
not  hastily  condemn  Hervey's  writings  as  worthless,  because 
their  style  is  not  to  our  mind.  A  little  calm  consideration  will 
probably  show  us  that  there  is  far  more  to  be  said  for  them  than 
at  first  sight  appears.  A  second  look  at  the  rector  of  Weston 
FavcU's  writings  will  very  likely  modify  our  verdict  about  them. 
To  those  who  are  disposed  to  think  lightly  of  Hervey's  writings 
I  venture  to  submit  the  following  considerations. 

For  one  thing,  we  must  in  common  fairness  remember  the 


ANALYSIS  OF  HIS  WRITINGS.  343 

times  in  which  Hervey  wrote.  The  middle  of  the  1 8th  century 
was  an  era  in  English  literature,  when  no  writing  would  go  down 
with  the  public  that  was  not  somewhat  stilted,  classical,  long- 
worded,  and  stiif.  The  short,  plain,  cut-and-thrust  style  of  the 
present  day  would  have  been  condemned  as  indicative  of  a 
vulgar,  uneducated  mind.  Poor  Hervey  wrote  in  days  when 
moral  essays  were  framed  on  the  model  of  the  Spectator,  the 
TatleTy  and  the  Rambler,  and  fictions  were  written  like  "  Sir 
Charles  Grandison  "  and  "  Clarissa  Harlow."  If  he  wanted  to 
get  the  ear  of  the  public,  he  had  no  alternative  but  to  write 
according  to  the  public  taste.  Let  us  grant  that  his  style  of 
English  composition  is  far  too  ornate  and  florid  ;  but  let  us  not 
forget  to  lay  the  blame  at  the  right  door.  His  faults  were  the 
faults  of  his  day.  If  he  had  written  Theron  and  Aspasio  in  a 
plain  unadorned  style,  it  is  probable  that  the  book  would  have 
fallen  unnoticed  to  the  ground. 

For  another  thing,  we  must  do  Hervey  the  justice  to  remem- 
ber, that  under  all  the  gaudy  ornamentation  of  his  compositions 
his  Master's  business  is  never  forgotten.  The  more  we  read  his 
books  the  more  we  must  admit,  that  although  he  may  offend  our 
tastes,  he  is  always  most  faithful  to  Christ's  truth.  It  is  impos- 
sible not  to  admire  the  vein  of  piety  which  runs  through  every 
page,  and  the  ability  with  which  he  defends  doctrines  which  the 
heart  of  man  naturally  detests.  The  only  wonder  is  that  books 
containing  so  much  scriptural  truth  should  ever  have  become  so 
extensively  popular.  Even  Whitefiekl  did  not  expect  so  much 
acceptance  for  them.  "  I  foretell  the  fate  of  these  volumes," 
he  said  in  a  letter ;  "  nothing  but  your  scenery  can  screen  you. 
Self  will  never  consent  to  die,  though  slain  in  so  genteel  a  man- 
ner, without  showing  some  resentment  against  the  artful  mur- 
derer." In  fact,  I  always  feel  that  God  gave  a  special  blessing 
to  Hervey's  writings  on  account  of  his  eminent  faithfulness  to 
the  gospel  in  evil  time^  I  look  at  them  with  reverence  and 
respect  as  weapons  which  did  good  service  in  their  day,  thou 


344  HIS  VIE WS  A  TTA  CITED. 

the  fashion  of  them  may  not  suit  my  taste.  To  use  the  authors 
own  words,  they  were  an  "  attempt  to  dress  the  good  old  truths 
of  the  Reformation  in  such  drapery  of  language  as  to  allure 
people  of  all  conditions."  God  was  pleased  to  honour  the 
eflfort  in  its  day,  and  we  need  not  be  ashamed  to  honour  it 
also. 

No  well-informed  Christian  will  be  surprised  to  hear  that 
ilervey's  writings  did  not  please  everybody.  Of  course  they 
were  far  too  Scriptural  to  escape  the  enmity  of  the  children  of 
this  world.  But  this  unhappily  was  not  all  the  enmity  that  the 
author  of  "  Theron  and  Aspasio"  had  to  endure.  His  clear  and 
sharply  cut  statements  about  justification  gave  great  offence  to 
Christians  of  the  Arminian  school  of  theology.  John  Wesley 
openly  assaulted  his  views  of  imputed  righteousness.  Sande- 
man,  a  Scotch  Independent,  fiercely  attacked  his  views  of  faith. 
In  short,  the  amiable  rector  of  Weston  Favell  had  to  learn,  like 
many  other  good  men,  that  the  most  beautiful  writing  will  not 
command  universal  acceptance.  The  way  of  accurate  Scrip- 
tural divinity  is  a  way  which  many  will  always  call  "  heresy," 
and  speak  against. 

I  will  not  weary  my  readers  by  entering  into  the  details  of 
Ilervey's  controversial  campaigns.  Without  pretending  to  en- 
dorse every  sentence  that  he  wrote,  I  feel  no  doubt  that  on  the 
whole  lie  was  right,  and  his  adversaries  wrong.  Cudworth, 
Ryland,  and  others,  ably  defended  him.  The  only  remark  that 
I  make  is,  that  Hervey's  spirit  and  temper,  under  the  assaults 
made  ui)on  him,  were  beyond  all  praise.  Never  was  there  a 
divine  so  utterly  free  from  "  odium  theologicum."  Well  would 
it  have  been  for  the  credit  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  if  the  con- 
troversialists of  the  last  century  had  all  been  as  meek,  and 
gentle,  and  amiable,  and  kind-tempered  as  the  author  of  "Theron 
and  Aspasio." 

The  I^Urs  which  Hervey  wrote,  on  a  great  variety  of  subjects, 
are  exceedingly  good,  and  wil!  repay  an  attentive  perusal     Sit- 


HIS  CORRESPONDENCE.  345 

ting  in  his  quiet  country  parsonage,  lie  had  time  to  think  over 
all  that  he  wrote  ;  and  his  correspondence,  like  his  contemporary 
Venn's,  is  one  of  the  best  part  of  his  literary  remains.  Those 
who  read  his  letters  will  find  their  style,  as  a  general  rule,  very 
different  from  that  of  "  Theron  and  Aspasio."  The  writer 
seems  to  come  down  from  his  high  horse,  and  to  deal  familiarly 
and  easily  with  men.  The  following  letter  to  a  dying  young 
lady  is  a  beautiful  specimen  of  his  epistolary  style,  and  is  so 
good  all  through  that  my  readers  will  probably  not  blame  me  if 
I  give  it  to  them  whole  and  entire.  A  fac-simile  of  it  faces  the 
title-page  of  my  copy  of  Brown's  life  of  Hervey,  and  is  a  per- 
fect specimen  of  small,  delicate,  finished,  copper-plate  hand- 
writing : 

"  Dear  Miss  Sarah, — So  you  are  going  to  leave  us,  and 
will  be  at  your  eternal  home  before  us  !  I  heartily  wish  you  an 
easy,  a  comfortable,  and  a  lightsome  journey.  Fear  not.  He 
that  died  for  you  on  the  cross  will  be  with  you  when  you  walk 
through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death.     (Ps.  xxiii.  4.) 

"  People  that  travel  often  sing  by  the  way,  to  render  their 
journey  more  pleasant.  Let  me  furnish  you  with  a  song  most 
exactly  and  charmingly  suited  to  your  purpose  :  *  Who  shall  lay 
anything  to  my  charge  7  It  is  God  that  justifieth  me.  Who  is 
he  that  condenmeth  me  ?  It  is  Christ  that  died;  yea,  rather,  that 
is  risen  again,  who  is  rven  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who  also 
maketh  intercession  for  me.'  Shall  the  law  lay  anything  to  my 
charge  1  That  has  been  fully  satisfied  by  the  obedience  an4 
death  of  my  divine  Lord.  Shall  sin  condemn  me  1  That  has 
all  been  fully  borne,  all  been  abolished,  by  the  Lamb  of  God 
which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world.  Shall  Satan  accuse 
me  1  What  will  that  avail  when  the  Judge  himself  justifies  me, 
the  Judge  himself  pronounces  me  righteous!  (See  Rom.  viii, 
33)  34 ;  Gal.  iii.  13  ;  i  Pet.  ii,  24;  Daniel  ix.  24;  John  i.  29.) 

"  But  shall  I  be  pronounced  righteous  who  have  been  and 
am  a  poor  sinner  1     Hear  what  the  Holy  Ghost  saith  :  '  Christ 


346  Lti.TTER  ro  A    YOUNG  LADY. 

loved  the  Church  and  gave  himself  for  it^  that  he  might  present  it  to 
himself  a  glorious  Church,  not  having  spot  or  wrinkle^  or  any  such 
thing*  What  reason  have  they  to  be  afraid  or  ashamed  who 
have  neither  spot  nor  wrinkle,  nor  any  blemish  1  And  such  will 
be  the  appearance  of  those  who  are  washed  in  Christ's  blood, 
and  clothed  in  Christ's  righteousness.  They  will  be  presented 
faultless  and  with  exceeding  joy  before  the  throne.  (See  Eph.  v. 
25,  27;  Jude  24.) 

"  But  what  shall  I  do  for  my  kind  companions  and  dear 
friends  ]  You  will  exchange  them  for  better,  far  better.  You 
will  go  to  Mount  Zion,  to  the  city  of  the  living  God,  the  heavenly 
Jerusalem.  You  will  go  to  an  innumerable  company  of  angels, 
to  the  general  assembly  and  Church  of  the  first-born  which  are 
written  in  heaven,  and  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect. 
You  will  go  to  God,  your  reconciled  God,  the  Judge  of  all,  and 
to  Jesus  the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant,  and  to  the  blood 
of  sprinkling  that  speaketh  better  things  for  you  than  your 
heart  can  wish  or  your  thoughts  imagine,  (See  Heb.  xii. 
22-24.) 

"  Perhaps  your  spirits  are  weak.  Therefore  I  will  not  tire 
you.  The  Lord  Jesus  make  these  sweet  texts  a  cordial  to  your 
soul.  I  hope  to  follow  you  ere  long,  to  find  you  in  the  man- 
sions of  peace  and  joy,  and  to  join  with  you  in  singing  praise, 
everlasting  praise,  to  him  who  hath  loved  us,  and  washed  us 
from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood.     (Rev.  L  5.) 

"  Into  his  hands,  his  ever  merciful  and  most  compassionate 
hands,  I  commend  your  spirit. — Your  truly  affectionate  friend, 

"J.  Hervey. 

"  Westoh,  April  vA,  1755." 

I  make  no  comment  on  this  letter ;  it  needs  none.  There 
are  not  many  such  letters  written  in  these  days  of  universal 
hurry,  under  the  influences  of  railway  travelling,  electric  tele- 
graphs, and  penny  post.  The  faculty  of  writing  such  letters  is 
fast  dying  out  of  the  world.     But  my  readers  will  probably  agree 


HIS  PUBJJSIIED  SERMONS.  34 > 

Aith  me  that  the  man  who  could  write  to  his  friends  in  this 
fashion  was  no  common  correspondent 

The  published  strtnons  of  James  Hervey  are  very  few  in  num- 
ber. It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  we  have  no  more  of  them. 
The  few  published  are  so  extremely  good,  both  as  to  matter  and 
composition,  that  one  feels  sorry  he  did  not  give  the  world  a 
hundred  more  of  the  same  sort  Of  course,  he  could  never  be 
a  popular  preacher.  His  weak  health,  feeble  voice,  and  deli- 
cate constitution,  made  this  impossible.  He  often  lamented 
his  inabiHty  to  serve  his  people  better  in  the  pulpit,  comparing 
himself  to  a  soldier  wounded,  bleeding,  and  disabled,  and  only 
not  slain.  He  would  frequently  say,  "  My  preaching  is  not  like 
sending  an  arrow  from  a  bow,  for  which  some  strength  of  arm  is 
necessary,  but  like  pulling  the  trigger  of  a  gun  ready  charged, 
which  the  feeblest  finger  can  do."  This  remark  was  most  true. 
No  doubt,  his  want  of  a  striking  action  and  delivery  robbed  his 
sermons  of  effectiveness.  But  they  were  always  full  of  excellent 
stuff,  excellently  put  together. 

The  reader  of  Mervey's  Sermons  will  discover  at  once  that  they 
are  written  in  a  style  very  unlike  that  of  "Theron  and  Aspasio." 
He  will  find  comparatively  little  of  that  luxuriancy  and  orna- 
mentation to  which  I  have  already  alluded.  He  will  see,  to  his 
surprise,  a  mode  of  address  eminently  simple,  perspicuous, 
pointed,  and  direct,  though  never  degenerating  into  rant  and 
vulgarity.  The  rector  of  Weston  Favell  had  evidently  most 
just  and  wise  views  of  the  wants  of  a  mixed  country  congrega- 
tion. He  knew  that,  next  to  proclaiming  sound  doctrine,  a 
minister's  first  aim  should  be  to  be  understood.  When,  there- 
fore, he  got  up  into  his  Northamptonshire  pulpit,  he  deliberately 
left  behind  his  flowers  and  feathers,  his  paint  and  his  gilding, 
his  fine  words  and  long  sentences,  his  classical  allusions  and 
elaborate  arguments.  Usefulness  was  the  one  thing  that  he 
desired  to  obtain,  and  to  obtain  it  he  was  not  ashamed  to  speak 
very  plain  English  to  plain  men.     The  following  paragraph* 


34«  SPECIMEN  OF  HIS  SERMONS. 

from  a  sermon  preached  by  him  in  1757,  on  "The  Means  of 
Safety,"  from  Hebrews  xi.  28,  will  probably  be  read  with  interest, 
as  conveying  a  fair  idea  of  his  style  of  preaching  : — 

•'*  Let  me  give  a  word  of  direction.  Fly  to  Christ,  alarmed 
linners?  Come  under  the  covert  of  his  blood.  Appropriate 
the  blessed  Jesus ;  look  unto  him,  and  )iis  merits  are  your  own. 
Thus  sprinkle  his  blood  :  sprinkle  it  upon  your  hntel  and  door- 
posts ;  upon  all  you  are,  upon  all  you  have,  and  all  you  do ; 
upon  your  consciences,  that  they  may  be  purged  ;  upon  your 
souls,  that  they  may  be  sanctified ;  upon  your  works,  that  they 
may  be  accepted.  Say,  every  one  of  you,  I  am  a  poor,  guilty, 
helpless  creature ;  but  in  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  full  of  grace  and 
truth,  I  have  righteousness  and  strength.  I  am  a  poor,  polluted, 
loathsome  creature  ;  but  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  image  of  the 
invisible  God  and  the  brightness  of  his  Father's  glory,  has  loved 
me  and  washed  me  from  my  filthiness  in  his  own  blood.  I  am 
by  nature  a  perverse,  depraved  creature,  and  by  evil  practices  a 
lost,  damnable  sinner;  but  Jesus  Christ  who  made  the  world, 
Jesus  Christ  whom  heaven  and  earth  adore,  Jesus  Christ  him- 
self came  from  the  mansions  of  bliss  on  purpose  to  save  me,  to 
give  himself  for  me.  And  how  can  I  perish  who  have  such  a 
ransom  \ 

"  Should  you  say.  Have  I  a  warrant  for  such  a  trusti  I 
reply,  You  have  the  best  of  warrants,  our  Lord's  express  per- 
mission, *  Whosoever  will  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely.' 
It  is  not  said,  this  or  that  person  only,  but  ivhosoroery  including 
you  and  me,  excluding  no  individual  man  or  woman.  It  is  not 
said,  whosoever  is  worthy,  but  whosoever  is  willing.  Wilt  thou 
be  made  whole?  was  our  Lord's  question  to  the  impotent  man 
at  the  pool  of  Bethesda.  Wilt  thou,  all  terms  and  conditions 
apart,  inherit  grace  and  glory  1  is  his  most  benevolent  address 
to  sinful  men  in  all  ages. 

"  You  have  our  Lord's  most  gracious  invitation ;  *  Come 
unto  me.'     And  whom  does  he  calU     The  righteous?     Na 


FREE  GRACE.  349 

The  excellent  ?  Quite  the  reverse.  He  calls  sinners,  miserable 
sinners,  even  the  most  miserable  of  sinners.  Those  who  are 
weary  and  heavy-laden,  overwhelmed  with  iniquities,  bowed 
down  to  the  brink  of  hell,  and  ready  to  think,  *  There  is  no 
hope.'  Yet  them  he  encourages,  them  he  invites  ;  to  them  he 
.ieclares,  *■  I  will  give  you  rest,'  rest  in  the  enjoyment  of  peace 
with  God,  and  peace  in  your  own  consciences.  Observe  and 
admire  the  riches  of  your  Redeemer's  grace.  He  says  not,  Ye 
are  vile,  wretched,  polluted  by  sin,  and  enslaved  to  the  devil, 
therefore  keep  at  a  distance ;  but  therefore  come.  Come,  and 
be  cleansed  by  my  blood ;  come,  and  be  made  free  by  my 
Spirit.  He  says  not,  Furnish  yourselves  with  this  or  that  or 
the  other  recommending  accomplishment ;  but  only  come. 
Come  just  as  you  are,  poor,  undone,  guilty  creatures.  Yea, 
come  to  me  for  pardon  and  recovery ;  to  me,  who  have  given 
myself,  my  life,  my  all  for  your  ransom. 

"Should  you  still  question  whether  these  inestimable  bless- 
ings are  free  for  you?  Remember,  brethren,  they  are  free  for 
sinners.  Is  this  your  character?  Then  they  are  as  free  for 
your  acceptance  as  for  any  person  in  the  world.  To  us  eternal 
life  is  given — not  to  us  who  had  deserved  it  by  our  goodness, 
but  us  who  had  forfeited  it  by  our  sins.  To  you  is  preached 
the  forgiveness  of  sins — not  to  you  whose  transgressions  are 
inconsiderable,  but  you  whose  iniquities  are  more  in  number 
than  the  hairs  of  your  head.  Even  to  you  who  are  the  lost 
and  perishing  sinner  of  Adam's  family,  is  the  word  of  this  salva- 
tion sent.  And  by  God's  commission  we  publish  it,  that  as  sinners 
you  may  receive  it,  that  receiving  it  you  may  commence  be- 
lieving, and  that  believing  you  may  have  life  through  his  name. 

"  Come  then,  fellow-sinners,  believe  the  record  of  heaven. 
Set  to  your  seal  that  God  is  true.  Honour  his  word,  which 
cannot  lie.  Honour  his  grace,  which  is  absolutely  free.  Honour 
his  dear  Son,  who  has  obtained  eternal  redemption  for  such 
unworthy  creatures  as  you  and  I. 


35©  HIS  PRIVATE  LIFE, 

I  have  only  two  remarks  to  make  on  the  above  extract 
before  I  pass  on.  If  any  reader  of  Hervey's  works  has  imbibed 
the  idea  that  he  could  only  write  English  after  the  model  of 
"  Theron  and  Aspasio,"  I  advise  him  to  alter  his  estimate  of 
the  good  man's  powers.  The  rector  of  Weston  Favell  could  be 
plain  enough  to  suit  the  humblest  intellect,  when  he  pleased. 
If  any  one  thinks  that  the  English  pulpit  of  the  present  day  is 
greatly  in  advance  of  the  last  century,  I  venture  to  think  that 
he  has  something  yet  to  learn.  My  own  deliberate  opinion  is, 
that  it  w^ould  be  a  great  blessing  to  this  country,  if  we  had 
more  of  such  direct  preaching  as  some  parishes  in  Northamp- 
tonshire in  the  i8th  century. 

The/>ri7'a/d  life  of  Hcrvey  was  in  thorough  harmony  with  his 
writing  and  preaching.  It  is  the  universal  testimony  of  all  who 
knew  him,  that  he  was  an  eminently  holy  man.  Even  the 
clergy  of  the  neighbourhood,  who  disliked  his  theology,  and 
had  no  sympathy  with  his  ways  and  opinions,  could  find  no 
fault  in  his  daily  walk.  In  fact,  they  used  to  call  him  "  Saint 
James."  He  never  married,  and  by  reason  of  ill  health  seldom 
left  home,  and  was  confined  to  the  house.  But  in-doors  or 
out-of-doors,  he  was  always  full  of  his  Master's  business,  always 
redeeming  the  time,  always  reading,  writing,  or  speaking  about 
Christ,  and  always  behaving  like  a  man  who  had  recently  come 
from  his  Lord's  presence  to  say  something,  and  was  soon  going 
back  again. 

His  humility  was  eminent.  He  never  considered  himself  a* 
James  Hervey,  the  celebrated  writer,  but  as  a  poor  guilty  sinner, 
equally  indebted  to  divine  grace  with  the  lowest  day-labourer 
in  his  parish.  To  two  malefactors  condemned  to  be  hanged, 
he  said:  "You  have  just  the  same  foundation  for  hope  as  I 
must  have  when  I  shall  depart  this  life.  When  I  shall  be 
summoned  to  the  great  tribunal,  what  will  be  my  plea,  and 
what  my  dependence?  Nothing  but  Christ  I  am  a  poor 
unworthy  sinner ;  but  worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain.     This 


HlCi  i^^iARITY  AND  SELF-DEXIAL.  351 

is  my  only  hope,  and  this  is  as  free  for  you  as  it  is  for  your 
friend  and  fellow-sinner  James  Hervey."  On  publishing  his 
famous  Fast-day  Sermons,  he  observes:  "May  the  Lord  Jesus 
himself,  who  was  crucified  in  weakness,  vouchsafe  to  work  by 
weakness,  or,  in  other  words,  by  James  Hervey  ! " — When  near 

his  death  he  wTote  to  a  friend  :  "  I  beseech  Mr. to  unite 

his  supplication  with  yours,  for  I  am  fearful  lest  I  should  dis- 
grace the  gospel  in  my  languishing  moments.  Pray  for  me, 
the  weakest  of  ministers  and  the  weakest  of  Christians." 

His  charity  and  self-denial  were  most  eminent  He  literally 
gave  away  almost  all  that  he  had,  and  lived  on  a  mere  fraction 
of  his  income.  In  his  giving  he  was  always  discreet  "  I  am 
God's  steward,"  he  said,  "for  his  poor,  and  I  must  husband 
the  little  pittance  I  have  to  bestow  on  them,  and  make  it  go  as 
far  as  possible."  But  when  money  was  likely  to  be  particularly 
serviceable,  as  in  the  case  of  long  sickness  or  sudden  losses,  he 
would  give  away  five,  toi,  or  fifteen  guineas  at  a  time,  taking 
care  it  should  not  be  known  from  whom  the  money  came.  His 
income  was  never  large,  and  it  might  be  wondered  how  he 
managed  to  spare  such  sums  for  charitable  uses.  But  he  saved 
up  nothing,  and  gave  away  all  the  profits  arising  from  his  books 
— which  were  sometimes  large  suras — in  doing  good.  In  fact, 
this  was  his  bank  for  the  poor.  "  I  have  devoted  this  fund," 
he  said,  "  to  God.  I  will,  on  no  account,  apply  it  to  any 
worldly  uses.  I  write,  not  for  profit  or  fame,  but  to  serve  the 
cause  of  God ;  and,  as  he  has  blessed  my  attempt,  I  think  my- 
self bound  to  relieve  the  distresses  of  my  fellow-creatures  with 
the  profit  that  comes  from  that  quarter."  He  carried  out  this 
principle  to  the  very  last  Even  after  his  death,  he  was  found 
to  have  ordered  all  profits  arising  from  any  future  sale  of  his 
books  to  be  constantly  applied  to  charitable  uses. 

But  space  would  fail  me  if  I  were  to  dwell  particularly  on  all 
the  leading  features  of  Hervey's  private  character.  The  picture 
is  far  too  large  to  go  into  the  frame  of  a  short  memoir  like 


353  HIS  LAST  ILLXRSS. 

His  spirit  of  Catholic  love  to  all  God's  people  of  every  denom 
ination — his  delight  in  the  society  and  conversation  of  godly 
people — his  faithfulness  in  reproving  sin — his  singular  love  ta 
Christ,  and  delight  in  his  finished  work  and  atonement — his 
devotional  diligence — his  veneration  for  the  Scriptures — his 
meekness,  gentleness,  and  tenderness  of  spirit — all  these  are 
points  on  which  much  might  be  written,  and  much  will  be 
found  in  the  pages  of  his  biography.  So  far  as  I  can  judge, 
he  appears  to  have  been  a  man  of  as  eminently  saintly  character 
as  any  that  this  country  can  point  to,  and  one  worthy  to  be 
ranked  by  the  side  of  Bradford,  Baxter,  and  George  Herbert. 
Few  evangelical  men,  at  any  rate,  in  the  i8th  century,  can  be 
named,  who  seem  to  have  had  so  few  enemies,  and  to  have 
lost  so  few  friends.  None,  certainly,  were  so  universally 
lamented. 

The  closing  scene  of  James  Hervey's  life  was  curiously 
beautiful.  He  died,  as  he  had  lived  for  seventeen  years,  in  the 
full  faith  and  peace  of  Christ's  gospel.  His  life  had  long  been 
a  continual  struggle  with  disease ;  and  when  his  last  illness 
came  upon  him,  it  found  him  thoroughly  prepared.  Invalids 
have  one  great  advantage  over  strong  peopie,  at  any  rate — a 
sudden  accession  of  pains  and  ailments  does  not  startle  them, 
and  they  are  seldom  taken  by  surprise.  The  holy  rector  of 
Weston  Favell  had  looked  death  in  the  face  so  long  that  he  was 
no  stranger  to  him ;  and  when  he  went  down  into  the  cold 
waters  of  the  great  river,  he  walked  calmly,  quietly,  and  undis- 
turbed. Those  glorious  evangelical  doctrines  which  he  had 
proclaimed  and  defended  as  truths  while  he  lived,  he  found  to 
be  strong  consolations  when  he  died. 

His  last  attack  of  illness  began  in  October  1758,  and  carried 
him  off  on  Christmas  day.  Disease  of  the  lungs,  with  all  its 
distressing  accompaniments,  was  the  agent  employed  to  take 
down  his  earthly  tabernacle ;  and  he  seems  to  have  gone 
through   even   more  than    the   ordinary  suffering  which  such 


D  YING  SA  YINGS,  3  55 

disease  entails.  But  nothing  shook  the  dying  sufferer's  faith. 
He  had  his  days  of  conflict  and  inward  struggle,  like  most  of 
Christ's  faithful  soldiers ;  but  he  always  came  out  more  than 
conqueror,  through  Him  that  loved  him.  An  abundant  entrance 
into  rest  was  ministered  to  him.  He  entered  harbour  at  last^ 
not  like  a  shipwrecked  sailor  clinging  to  a  broken  plank,  but 
like  a  stately  ship,  with  all  her  sails  expanded,  and  wafted 
forward  by  a  prosperous  gale. 

The  dying  sayings  of  eminent  saints,  when  God  permits 
them  to  say  much,  are  always  instructive.  It  was  eminently 
the  case  with  James  Hervey.  Like  dying  Jacob,  he  was 
enabled  to  speak  to  all  around  him,  and  to  testify  his  deep 
sense  of  the  value  of  Christ's  great  salvation.  Like  Christiana, 
in  "  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  he  was  enabled  to  speak  comfortably 
to  those  who  stood  near  him,  and  followed  him  to  the  river- 
side. To  his  doctor  he  wrote,  at  an  early  period  of  his  last 
illness:  "I  now  spend  almost  all  my  whole  time  in  reading. 
and  praying  over  the  Bible.  Indeed,  you  cannot  conceive  ho\f 
the  springs  of  life  in  me  are  relaxed,  and  relaxing.  *  What  thou 
doest,  do  quickly,*  is  a  proper  admonition  for  me  as  I  approacii 
dissolution.  My  dear  friend,  attend  to  the  one  thing  needful 
I  have  no  heart  to  take  any  medicine;  all  but  Christ  is  to  me 
unprofitable.  Blessed  be  God  for  pardon  and  salvation  through 
his  blood !  Let  me  prescribe  this  for  my  dear  friend.  My 
cough  is  very  troublesome  ;  I  can  get  little  rest ;  but  my  never- 
failing  remedy  is  the  love  of  Christ." 

On  the  15th  of  December — the  month  that  he  died — he- 
spoke  very  strongly  to  his  curate,  Mr.  Maddock,  about  the 
assurance  of  faith,  and  the  great  love  of  God  in  Christ.  "  Oh!" 
said  he,  "  how  much  has  Christ  done  for  me,  and  how  little- 
have  I  done  for  so  loving  a  Saviour !  If  I  preached  even  once 
a  week  it  was  but  a  burden  to  me.  I  have  not  visited  the 
people  of  my  parish  as  I  ought  to  have  done,  and  thus  preached 
from  house  to  house.  I  have  not  taken  every  opportunity  of 
195)  23 


354  LAST  WORDS. 

speaking  for  Christ.  Do  not  think  I  am  afraid  to  die.  I  assure 
you  I  am  not.  I  know  what  my  Saviour  has  done  for  me. 
I  want  to  be  gone.  But  I  wonder  and  lament  to  think  of  the 
love  of  Christ  in  doing  so  much  for  me,  and  how  little  I  have 
done  for  him  ! " 

On  the  25th  of  December — the  day  that  he  died — his  loving 
friend  and  physician,  Dr.  Stonehouse,  came  to  see  him  about 
three  hours  before  he  expired.  Hervey  seized  the  opportunity, 
spoke  strongly  and  affectionately  to  him  about  his  soul's  con- 
cerns, and  entreated  him  not  to  be  overcharged  with  the  cares 
of  this  life.  Seeing  his  great  weakness  and  prostration,  the 
doctor  begged  him  to  spare  himself  "  No,  doctor,"  replied 
the  dying  man,  with  ardour,  "  no  !  You  tell  me  I  have  but  a 
few  minutes  to  live ;  let  me  spend  them  in  adoring  our  great 
Redeemer."  He  then  repeated  the  words,  "  Though  my  heart 
and  my  flesh  fail,  God  is  the  strength  of  my  heart,  and  my 
portion  for  ever ;"  and  also  dwelt,  in  a  delightful  manner,  on 
St.  Paul's  words,  "  All  things  are  yours  ;  whether  life,  or  things 
present,  or  things  to  come."  "  Here,"  he  exclaimed,  "  here  is 
the  treasury  of  a  Christian !  Death  is  reckoned  among  this 
inventory ;  and  a  noble  treasure  it  is.  How  thankful  I  am  for 
death,  as  it  is  the  passage  through  which  I  go  to  the  Lord  and 
Giver  of  eternal  life,  and  as  it  frees  me  from  all  the  misery 
which  you  see  me  now  endure,  and  which  I  am  willing  to 
endure  as  long  as  God  thinks  fit !  I  know  that  he  will  by-and- 
by,  in  his  own  good  time,  dismiss  me  from  the  body.  These 
light  afflictions  are  but  for  a  moment,  and  then  comes  an 
eternal  weight  of  glory.  Oh,  welcome,  welcome  death !  Thou 
mayst  well  be  reckoned  among  the  treasures  of  the  Christian  ! 
To  live  is  Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain  !"  After  this  he  lay  for  a 
considerable  time  without  seeming  to  breathe,  and  his  friends 
thought  he  was  gone.  But  he  revived  a  little,  and,  being  raised 
in  his  chair,  said  : — "  Lord,  now  lettcst  thou  thy  servant  depart 
in  peace,  according  to  thy  most  holy  and  comfortable  words; 


ESTIMATE  OF  HIS  WORTH.  355 

for  mine  eyes  have  seen  thy  most  holy  and  comfortable  salva- 
ticm  !  Here,  doctor,  is  my  cordial.  What  are  all  the  cordials 
given  to  support  the  dying,  in  comparison  of  that  which  arises 
from  the  promises  of  salvation  by  Christ  ?  This,  this  supports 
me!" 

He  said  little  after  this,  and  was  rapidly  drawing  near  his  end. 
About  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  he  said :  "  The  conflict  is 
over;  now  all  is  done."  After  that  time  he  scarcely  spoke  any- 
thing intelligible,  except  the  words,  " Precious  salvation!"  At 
last,  about  four  o'clock,  without  a  sigh  or  a  groan,  he  shut  his 
eyes  and  departed,  on  Christmas-day  1758,  in  the  forty-fifth  yeaj 
of  his  age.  Never,  perhaps,  was  there  a  more  triumphant 
illustration  of  the  saying  of  a  great  spiritual  champion  of  the 
1 8th century, — "The  world  may  not  like  our  methodists  and 
evangelical  people,  but  the  world  cannot  deny  that  they  die 
well!" 

I  leave  James  Hervey  here,  having  traced  his  history  from  his 
cradle  to  his  grave.  He  was  a  man  of  whom  the  world  was  not 
worthy,  and  one  to  whom  even  the  Church  of  God  has  never 
given  his  due  measure  of  honour.  I  am  well  aware  that  he  was 
not  perfect.  I  do  not  pretend  to  say  that  I  can  subscribe 
mtirely  to  everything  he  wrote,  either  about  the  nature  of  faith 
or  about  assurance ;  but  whatever  his  faults  and  defects,  I  do 
believe  that  he  was  one  of  the  holiest  and  best  ministers  in  Eng- 
land at  this  period,  and  that  he  did  a  work  in  his  time 
which  will  be  seen  to  have  borne  good  fruit  in  the  last 
great  day. 

I  know  well  that  Hervey  was  only  a  writer,  and  nothing  but 
a  writer.  I  know  well  that  the  value  of  his  works  has  almost 
passed  away.  Like  our  old  wooden  three-deckers,  they  did 
good  service  in  their  time,  but  are  now  comparatively  obsolete 
and  laid  aside.  But  I  believe  the  day  will  never  come  when  the 
Church  will  not  require  pens  as  well  as  tongues,  able  writers  as 
well  as  able  preachers ;  and  I  venture  to  think  it  would  be  well 


356  TESTIMONY  OF  WILLIAM  ROMAINE, 

for  the  Church  of  our  day,  if  we  had  a  few  more  hard  students 
and  careful  writers  of  the  stamp  of  James  Hervey.  I  therefore 
boldly  claim  for  him  a  high  place  among  the  spiritual  heroes  of 
the  1 8th  century.  Let  us  admire  Whitefield  and  Wesley;  but 
let  us  not  grudge  Hervey  his  crown.  He  deserves  to  be  had  in 
remembrance. 

I  now  conclude  this  sketch  with  a  few  testimonies  to  Herve/s 
merits,  which,  to  say  the  least,  demand  serious  attention.  The 
witnesses  are  all  men  of  mark,  and  men  who  had  many  oppor- 
tunities of  weighing  the  merits  of  preachers  and  writers.  Let 
us  hear  what  they  thought  of  the  subject  before  us,  the  rector 
of  Weston  Favell. 

My  first  witness  shall  be  William  Romaine.  He  says :  "  I 
never  saw  one  who  came  up  so  near  to  the  Scripture  character 
of  a  Christian,  as  Mr.  Hervey.  God  enriched  him  with  great 
gifts  and  great  graces.  He  had  a  fine  understanding  and  a  great 
memory.  He  was  very  well  skilled  in  Hebrew,  and  an  excellent 
critic  in  Greek. — ^There  was  great  experience  of  heart-love  upon 
his  tongue.  He  used  to  speak  of  the  love  of  the  adorable 
Redeemer  like  one  who  had  seen  him  face  to  face  in  the  fulness 
of  his  glory.  As  to  his  writings,  I  leave  them  to  speak  for 
themselves.     They  stand  in  no  need  of  my  praises." 

My  next  witness  shall  be  Henry  Venn.  He  says :  "  Mr. 
Hervey  was  the  most  extraordinary  man  I  ever  saw  in  my  life, 
as  much  beyond  most  of  the  excellent  as  the  swan  for  white- 
ness and  stately  figure  is  beyond  the  common  fowl.  His 
Meditations  and  Contemplations  deserve  your  most  sincere 
regard.  You  may  look  upon  them  as  you  would  upon  Aaron's 
rod,  by  which  such  wonders  were  wrought  These  Thoughts 
have  been  the  means  of  giving  sight  to  the  blind,  hfe  to  souls 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  and  winning  the  young,  the  gay, 
and  the  rich,  to  see  greater  charms  in  a  crucified  Saviour  than 
in  all  that  dazzles  vain  minds." 

My  next  witness  shall  be  Cowpcr  the  poet.     He  says  :  "  Per- 


VENN,  COWPERy   &*c,  357 

haps  I  may  be  partial  to  Hervey;  but  I  think  him  one  of  the 
most  Scriptural  writers  in  the  world." 

My  next  witness  shall  be  Richard  Cecil.  He  says  :  "  Let  us 
do  the  world  justice.  It  has  seldom  found  considerate,  gentle, 
but  earnest,  heavenly,  and  enlightened  teachers.  When  it  has 
found  such,  truth  has  received  a  very  general  attention.  Such 
a  man  was  Hervey,  and  his  works  have  met  their  reward." 

My  next  witness  shall  be  the  late  Edward  Bickersteth.  He 
says :  "  Few  books  have  been  so  useful  as  Hervey's  '  Theron 
and  Aspasio;'  though  like  every  human  writing,  it  is  not  free 
from  error.  But,  with  a  few  exceptions,  the  clear  statements  oi 
divine  truth  in  the  book,  and  the  Christian  addresses  of  the 
author,  full  of  kindness  and  affection,  gentleness  and  sweetness 
of  spirit,  draw  out  your  best  feeUngs,  and  win  you  over  to  evan- 
gelical principles." 

My  last  witness  shall  be  Daniel  Wilson,  Bishop  of  Calcutta. 
He  says  in  his  Journal,  July  24,  1846:  ''  I  have  been  reading 
tranquilly  and  pleasantly  a  volume  of  Hervey's  Letters,  full  of 
that  thorough  devotedness  of  heart,  deadness  to  all  earthly 
things,  and  longings  after  grace  and  holiness,  which  character- 
ized the  leaders  of  the  revival  in  our  church. — Oh !  that  the 
spirit  of  Hervey  might  pervade  our  younger  clergy  and  myself. 
To  walk  with  God  is  the  only  spring  of  happiness  and  use- 
fulness." 

Testimonies  like  these  deserve  serious  attention.  My  firm 
belief  is,  that  they  are  well  deserved. 


XIL 

Bom  at  Famham,  1740 — Ordained,  1762 — ^Vicar  of  Broad  Hembitry,  Devonshire,  tt^S— 
Removes  to  London,  1775 — Dies,  1778 — Conversion,  i7s6~His  Preaching — His  Writ- 
ings as  a  Controversialist — His  Hymns. 

PERFECT  orchestra  contains  many  various  instru- 
ments of  music.  Each  of  these  instruments  has  it» 
own  merit  and  value;  but  some  of  them  are  curiously 
unlike  others.  Some  of  them  are  dependent  on  a  player's 
breath,  and  some  on  his  skill  of  hand.  Some  of  them  are  large, 
and  some  of  them  are  small.  Some  of  them  produce  very 
gentle  sounds,  and  some  of  them  very  loud.  But  all  of  them 
are  useful  in  their  place  and  way.  Composers  like  Handel,  and 
Mozart,  and  Mendelssohn,  find  work  for  all.  There  is  work 
for  the  flageolet  as  well  as  for  the  trumpet,  and  work  for  the 
violoncello  as  well  as  for  the  organ.  Separately  and  alone^ 
some  of  the  instruments  may  appear  harsh  and  unpleasant. 
Combined  together  and  properly  played,  they  fill  the  ear  with 
one  mighty  volume  of  harmonious  sounds. 

Thoughts  such  as  these  come  across  my  mind  when  I  survey 
the  spiritual  champions  of  England  of  the  i8th  century.  I  see 
among  the  leaders  of  religious  revival  in  that  day  men  of  singu- 
larly varied  characteristics.  They  were  each  in  their  way  emi- 
nent instruments  for  good  in  the  hands  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
From  each  of  them  sounded  forth  the  word  of  God  throughout 
the  land  with  no  uncertain  sound.  Yet  some  of  these  good 
men  were  strangely  compounded,  peculiarly  constituted,  and 


BIR  TH  OF  A  UGUSTUS  M.   TO  PL  AD  Y.  35^ 

oddly  framed.  And  to  none,  perhaps,  does  the  remark  apply 
more  thoroughly  than  to  the  subject  of  these  remarks,  the  well- 
known  hymn-writer,  Augustus  Toplady. 

I  should  think  no  account  of  English  religion  in  the  1 8th  cen- 
tury complete  which  did  not  supply  some  information  about  this 
remarkable  man.  In  some  respects,  I  am  bold  to  say,  not  one 
of  his  contemporaries  surpassed  him,  and  hardly  any  equalled 
him.  He  was  a  man  of  rare  grace  and  gifts,  and  one  who  left 
his  mark  very  deeply  on  his  own  generation.  For  soundness 
in  the  faith,  singleness  of  eye,  and  devotedness  of  life,  he  de- 
serves to  be  ranked  with  Whitefield,  or  Grimshaw,  or  Romaine. 
Yet  with  all  this,  he  was  a  man  in  whom  there  was  a  most 
extraordinary  mixture  of  grace  and  infirmity.  Hundreds,  un- 
happily, know  much  of  his  infirmities  who  know  little  of  his 
graces.  I  shall  endeavour  in  the  following  pages  to  supply 
a  few  materials  for  forming  a  just  estimate  of  his  character. 

Augustus  Montague  Toplady  was  born  at  Farnham,  in  Surrey, 
on  the  4th  of  November  1740.  He  was  the  only  son  of  Major 
Richard  Toplady,  who  died  at  the  siege  of  Carthagena  shortly 
after  his  birth,  so  that  he  never  saw  his  father.  His  mother's 
maiden  name  was  Catherine  Bates,  of  whom  nothing  is  known 
except  that  she  had  a  brother  who  was  rector  of  St.  Paul's, 
Deptford.  About  the  history  of  his  family  I  can  discover 
nothing.  I  only  conjecture  that  some  of  them  must  have  been 
natives  of  Ireland.  Who  his  parents  were,  and  what  they 
were  doing  at  Farnham,  when  he  was  bom,  and  what  kind  of 
people  they  were,  are  all  matters  about  whidi  no  record  seems 
to  exist. 

Few  spiritual  heroes  of  the  last  century,  I  must  freely  con- 
fess, have  suffered  more  from  the  want  of  a  good  biographer 
than  Toplady.  Be  the  cause  what  it  may,  a  real  life  of  the 
man  was  never  written.  The  only  memoir  of  him  is  as  meagre 
a  production  as  can  possibly  be  conceived.  It  is  perhaps  only 
fair  to  remember  that  he  was  an  only  child,  and  that  he  died 


Soo  HIS  ORDINATION, 

unmarried;  so  that  he  had  neither  brother,  sister,  son  nor 
iaughter,  to  gather  up  his  remains.  Moreover,  he  was  one 
who  lived  much  in  his  study  and  among  his  books,  spent 
much  time  in  private  communion  with  God,  and  went  very 
little  into  society.  Like  Romaine,  he  was  not  what  the  world 
would  call  a  genial  man — had  very  few  intimate  friends — and 
was,  probably,  more  feared  and  admired  than  loved.  But  be 
the  reasons  wliat  they  may,  the  fact  is  undeniable  that  there 
is  no  good  biography  of  Toplady.  The  result  is,  that  there  is 
hardly  any  man  of  his  calibre  in  the  i8th  century  of  whom  so 
very  little  is  known. 

The  principal  facts  of  Toplady's  life  are  few,  and  soon  told. 
He  was  brought  up  by  his  widowed  mother  with  the  utmost 
care  and  tenderness,  and  retained  throughout  hfe  a  deep  and 
grateful  sense  of  his  obligations  to  her.  For  some  reason, 
^viiich  we  do  not  know  now,  she  appears  to  have  settled  at 
Exeter  after  her  husband's  death;  and  to  this  circumstance 
we  may  probably  trace  her  son's  subsequent  appointment  to 
cures  of  souls  in  Devonshire.  Young  Toplady  was  sent  at  an 
early  age  to  Westminster  School,  and  showed  considerable 
ability  there.  After  passing  through  Westminster,  he  was 
entered  as  a  student  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin,  and  took  his 
degree  there  as  Bachelor  of  Arts.  He  was  ordained  a  clergy- 
man in  the  year  1762;  but  I  am  unable  to  ascertain  where,  or 
by  what  bishop  he  was  ordained.  Shortly  after  his  ordination 
he  was  appointed  to  the  living  of  Blagdon,  in  Somersetshire, 
but  did  not  hold  it  long.  He  was  then  appointed  to  Venn- 
Ottery,  with  Harpford,  in  Devonshire,  a  small  parish  near  Sid- 
mouth.  This  post  he  finally  exchanged,  in  1768,  for  the  rural 
parish  of  Broad  Hembury,  near  Honiton,  in  Devonshire,  a 
cure  which  he  retained  until  his  death.  In  the  year  1775  ^^ 
was  compelled,  by  the  state  of  his  health,  to  remove  from 
Devonshire  to  London,  and  became  for  a  short  time  preacher 
at  a  Chapel  in  Orange  Street,  Leicester  Square.     He  seems^ 


HIS  CONVERSION.  3^' 

jhowever,  to  have  derived  no  material  benefit  fiom  the  change 
of  climate;  and  at  last  died  of  decline,  like  Walker  and  Hervey, 
in  the  year  1778,  at  the  early  age  of  thirty-eight. 

The  story  of  Toplady's  inner  life  and  religious  history  is 
simple  and  short;  but  it  presents  some  features  of  great  interest 
The  work  of  God  seems  to  have  begun  in  his  heart,  when  he 
was  only  sixteen  years  old,  under  the  following  circumstances. 
He  was  staying  at  a  place  called  Codymain,  in  Ireland,  and 
was  there  led  by  God's  providence  to  hear  a  layman  named 
Morris  preach  in  a  bam.  The  text — Ephesians  ii.  13,  "Ye 
who  sometimes  were  far  off  are  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of 
Christ " — and  the  address  founded  on  it,  came  home  to  young 
Toplady's  conscience  with  such  power,  that  from  that  time  he 
became  a  new  man,  and  a  thorough-going  professor  of  vital 
-Christianity.     This  was  in  August  1756. 

He  himself  in  after-life  referred  frequently  to  the  circum- 
stance of  his  conversion  with  special  thankfulness.  He  says 
in  1768:  "Strange  that  I,  who  had  so  long  sat  under  the 
means  of  grace  in  England,  should  be  brought  nigh  to  God  in 
an  obscure  part  of  Ireland,  amidst  a  handful  of  God's  people 
met  together  in  a  barn,  and  under  the  ministry  of  one  who 
<:ould  hardly  spell  his  name  !  Surely  it  was  the  Lord's  doing, 
and  is  marvellous  !  The  excellency  of  such  power  must  be  of 
•God,  and  cannot  be  of  man.  The  regenerating  Spirit  breathes 
not  only  on  whom,  but  likewise  when,  where,  and  as  he  listeth." 

{Although  converted  and  made  a  new  creature  in  Christ 
Jesus,  Toplady  does  not  seem  to  have  come  to  a  full  know- 
ledge of  the  gospel  in  all  its  perfection  for  at  least  two  years. 
Like  most  of  God's  children,  he  had  to  fight  his  way  into  full 
light  through  many  defective  opinions,  and  was  only  by  slow 
degrees  brought  to  complete  establishment  in  the  faitli.  His 
-experience  in  this  matter,  be  it  remembered,  is  only  that  of  the 
vast  majority  of  true  Christians.  Like  infants,  when  they  are 
bom  into  the  world,  God's  children  are  not  bom  again  in  the 


362  GRAD  UA  LL  V  ENLIGHTENED. 

full  possession  of  all  their  spiritual  faculties ;  and  it  is  welt 
and  wisely  ordered  that  it  is  so.  What  we  win  easily,  we  sel- 
dom value  sufficiently.  The  very  fact  that  believers  have  to 
sti-uggle  and  fight  hard  before  they  get  hold  of  real  soundness 
in  the  faith,  helps  to  make  them  prize  it  more  when  they  have 
attained  it.  The  truths  that  cost  us  a  battle  are  precisely 
\hose  which  we  grasp  most  firmiy,  and  never  let  go. 

Toplady's  own  account  of  his  early  experience  on  this  point 
is  distinct  and  explicit  He  says  :  "Though  awakened  in  1756, 
I  was  not  led  into  a  clear  and  full  view  of  all  the  doctrines  of 
grace  till  the  year  1758,  when,  through  the  great  goodness  of 
God,  my  Arminian  prejudices  received  an  effectual  shock  in 
reading  Dr.  Manton's  sermons  on  the  seventeenth  chapter  of 
St.  John.  I  shall  remember  the  years  1756  and  1758  with 
gratitude  and  joy  in  the  heaven  of  heavens  to  all  eternity." 

In  the  year  1774,  Toplady  gave  the  following  curious  account 
of  his  experience  at  this  period  of  his  life  : — "  It  pleased  God 
to  deliver  me  from  the  Arminian  snare  before  I  was  quite 
eighteen.  Up  to  that  period  there  was  not  (I  confess  it  with 
abasement)  a  more  haughty  and  violent  free-wilier  within  the 
compass  of  the  four  seas.  One  instance  of  my  warm  and  ignorant 
zeal  occurs  now  to  my  memory.  About  a  year  before  divine 
goodness  gave  me  eyes  to  discern  and  a  heart  to  embrace  the 
truth,  I  was  haranguing  one  day  in  company  on  the  universality 
of  grace  and  the  power  of  free  agency.  A  good  old  gentleman,. 
now  with  God,  rose  from  his  chair,  and  coming  to  me,  held  me 
by  one  of  my  coat-buttons,  while  he  mildly  said  : — '  My  dear 
«iir,  there  are  marks  of  spirituality  in  your  conversation,  though 
tinged  with  an  unhappy  mixture  of  pride  and  self-righteousness. 
You  have  been  speaking  largely  in  favour  of  free-will ;  but  from 
arguments  let  us  come  to  experience.  Do  let  me  ask  you  one 
question,  How  was  it  with  you  when  the  Lord  laid  hold  on  you^ 
in  effectual  calling?  Had  you  any  hand  in  obtaining  that 
frace?     Nay,  would  you  not  have  resisted  and  baffled  it,  '\t 


CALVINlSrJC  IN  HIS  VIEWS.  363 

God's  Spirit  had  left  you  alone  in  the  hand  of  your  own  counsel? ' 
— I  felt  the  conclusiveness  of  these  simple  but  forcible  interro- 
gations more  strongly  than  I  was  then  willing  to  acknowledge. 
But,  blessed  be  God,  I  have  since  been  enabled  to  acknowledge 
the  freeness  of  his  grace,  and  to  sing,  what  I  trust  will  be  my 
everlasting  song,  '  Not  unto  me^  Lord,  not  unto  me;  but  unto  thy 
name  give  the  glory*  '* 

From  this  time  to  the  end  of  his  life,  a  period  of  twenty  years, 
Toplady  held  right  onward  in  his  Christian  course,  and  nevei 
seems  to  have  swerved  or  turned  aside  for  a  single  day.  His 
attachment  to  Calvinistic  views  of  theology  grew  with  his 
growth,  and  strengthened  with  his  strength,  and  undoubtedly 
made  him  think  too  hardly  of  all  who  favoured  Arminianism. 
It  is  more  than  probable,  too,  that  it  gave  him  the  reputation 
of  being  a  narrow-minded  and  sour  divine,  and  made  many 
keep  aloof  from  him,  and  depreciate  him.  But  no  one  ever 
pretended  to  doubt  his  extraordinary  devotedness  and  single- 
ness of  eye,  or  to  question  his  purity  and  holiness  of  life.  From 
one  cause  or  another,  however,  he  appears  always  to  have  stood 
alone,  and  to  have  had  little  intercourse  with  his  fellow-men. 
The  result  was,  that  throughout  life  he  appears  to  have  been 
little  known  and  little  understood,  but  most  loved  where  he  was 
most  known. 

One  would  like  much  to  hear  what  young  Toplady  was  doing 
between  the  date  of  his  conversion  in  1756,  and  his  ordination 
in  1762.  We  can  only  guess,  from  the  fact  that  he  studied 
Manton  on  the  seventeenth  of  John  before  he  was  eighteen,  that 
he  was  probably  reading  hard,  and  storing  his  mind  with  know- 
ledge, which  he  turned  to  good  account  in  after-life.  But  there 
is  an  utter  dearth  of  all  information  about  our  hero  at  this  period 
of  his  life.  We  only  know  that  he  took  upon  himself  the  office 
of  a  minister,  not  only  as  scholar,  and  as  an  outward  professor 
of  religion,  but  as  an  honest  man.  He  says  himself,  that  "  he" 
subscribed  the  articles  and  liturgy  from  principle ;  and  that  he 


304  LETTER  TO  LADY  HUNTING D0^. 

did  not  believe  them  merely  because  he  subscribed  them,  but 
subscribed  them  because  he  believed  them." 

One  would  like,  furthermore,  to  know  exactly  where  he  began 
his  ministry,  and  in  what  parish  he  was  first  heard  as  a  preacher 
of  the  gospel.  But  I  can  find  out  nothing  about  these  points. 
One  interesting  fact  about  his  early  preaching  I  gather  from  a 
curious  letter  which  he  wrote  to  Lady  Huntingdon  in  1774.  In 
that  letter  he  says :  "  As  to  the  doctrines  of  special  and  dis- 
criminating grace,  I  have  thus  much  to  observe.  For  the  first 
four  years  after  I  was  in  orders,  I  dwelt  chiefly  on  the  general 
outlines  of  the  gospel  in  this  remote  comer  of  my  public 
ministry.  I  preached  of  little  else  but  of  justification  by  faith 
only,  in  the  righteousness  and  atonement  of  Christ,  and  of  that 
personal  holiness  without  which  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord. 
My  reasons  for  thus  narrowing  the  truths  of  God  were  these 
two  (I  speak  it  with  humiliation  and  repentance) : — i.  I  thought 
these  points  were  sufficient  to  convey  as  clear  an  idea  as  was 
absolutely  necessary  of  salvation  j  2.  And  secondly,  I  was  partly 
afraid  to  go  any  further. 

"  God  himself  (for  none  but  he  could  do  it)  gradually  freed 
me  from  that  fear.  And  as  he  never  at  any  time  permitted  me 
to  deliver,  or  even  to  insinuate  anything  contradictory  to  his 
truth,  so  has  he  been  graciously  pleased,  for  seven  or  eight 
years  past,  to  open  my  mouth  to  make  known  the  entire 
mystery  of  the  gospel,  as  far  as  his  Spirit  has  enlightened  me 
into  it  The  consequence  of  my  first  plan  of  operations  was, 
that  the  generality  of  my  hearers  were  pleased,  but  only  few 
were  converted.  The  result  of  my  latter  deliverance  from 
worldly  wisdom  and  worldly  fear  is,  that  multitudes  have  been 
very  angry ;  but  the  conversions  which  God  has  given  me  reason 
to  hope  he  has  wrought,  have  been  at  least  three  for  one  before. 
Thus  I  can  testify,  so  far  as  I  have  been  concerned,  the  useful- 
tiess  of  preaching  predestination  ;  or,  in  other  words,  of  tracing 
salvation  and  redemption  to  their  first  source." 


READY-MADE  SERMONS.  365, 

An  anecdote  related  by  Toplady  himself  deserves  repetition, 
as  a  curious  illustration  of  the  habits  of  clergymen  at  the  time 
when  he  was  ordained,  and  his  superiority  to  the  habits  of  his 
contemporaries.  He  says :  "  I  was  buying  some  books  in  the 
spring  of  1762,  a  month  or  two  before  I  was  ordained,  from  a 
very  respectable  London  bookseller.  After  the  business  was 
over,  he  took  me  to  the  furthest  end  of  his  long  shop,  and  said 
in  a  low  voice,  '  Sir,  you  will  soon  be  ordained,  and  I  suppose 
you  have  not  laid  in  a  very  great  stock  of  sermons.  I  can 
supply  you  with  as  many  sets  as  you  please,  all  original,  very 
excellent  ones,  and  they  will  come  for  a  trifle.'  My  answer 
was  :  *  I  certainly  shall  never  be  a  customer  to  you  in  that  way ; 
for  I  am  of  opinion  that  the  man  who  cannot,  or  will  not 
make  his  own  sermons,  is  quite  unfit  to  wear  the  gown.  How 
could  you  think  of  ray  buying  ready-made  sermons  ?  I  would 
much  sooner  buy  ready-made  clothes."  His  answer  shocked 
me.  *  Nay,  young  gentleman,  do  not  be  surprised  at  my  offer- 
ing you  ready-made  sermons,  for  I  assure  you  I  have  sold  ready- 
made  sermons  to  many  a  bishop  in  my  time.'  My  reply  was : 
*  My  good  sir,  if  you  have  any  concern  for  the  credit  of  the 
Church  of  England,  never  tell  that  news  to  anybody  else  hence- 
fbrward  for  ever.' " 

The  manner  of  Toplady 's  life,  during  the  fifteen  or  sixteen 
years  of  his  short  ministry  may  be  gathered  from  a  diary  which 
he  wrote  in  1768,  and  kept  up  for  about  a  year.  This  diary  Is 
a  far  more  interesting  record  of  a  good  man's  life  than  such 
documents  ordinarily  are,  and  gives  a  very  favourable  impression 
of  the  writer's  character  and  habits.  It  leaves  the  impression 
that  he  was  eminently  a  man  of  one  thing,  and  entirely  engrossed 
with  his  Master's  business — much  alone,  keeping  little  company, 
and  always  either  preaching,  visiting  his  people,  reading,  writing, 
or  praying.  If  it  had  been  kept  up  for  a  few  years  longer,  it 
would  have  thrown  immense  light  on  many  things  in  Toplady's 
ministerial  history.     But  even  in  its  present  state  it  is  the  most 


> 


366  HIS  LOVE  OF  STUDY. 

valuable  record  we  possess  about  him,  and  there  seems  no 
reason  to  doubt  that  it  is  a  tolerably  accurate  picture  of  his 
mode  of  living  from  the  time  of  his  ordination  to  his  death. 

So  little  is  known  of  the  particular  events  of  the  last  fifteen 
years  of  Toplady's  life,  that  it  is  impossible  to  do  more  than 
give  a  general  sketch  of  his  proceedings.  He  seems  to  have 
attained  a  high  reputation  at  a  very  early  date  as  a  thorough- 
going supporter  of  Calvinistic  opinions,  and  a  leading  opponent 
of  Arminianism.  His  correspondence  shows  that  he  was  on 
intimate  terms  with  Lady  Huntingdon,  Sir  R.  Hill,  Whitefield, 
Romaine,  Berridge,  Dr.  Gill,  Ambrose  Serle,  and  other  eminent 
Christians  of  those  times.  But  how  and  when  he  formed  ac- 
quaintance with  them,  we  have  no  information.  His  pen  was 
constantly  employed  in  defence  of  evangelical  religion  from  the 
time  of  his  removal  to  Broad  Hembury  in  1768.  His  early 
habits  of  study  were  kept  up  with  unabated  diligence.  No  man 
among  the  spiritual  heroes  of  1 8th  century  seems  to  have  read 
more  than  he  did,  or  to  have  had  a  more  extensive  knowledge 
of  divinity.  His  bitterest  adversaries  in  controversy  could  never 
deny  that  he  was  a  scholar,  and  a  ripe  one.  Indeed,  it  admits 
of  grave  question  whether  he  did  not  shorten  his  life  by  his 
habits  of  constant  study.  He  says  himself,  in  a  letter  to  a 
relative,  dated  March  19, 1775: — "Though  I  cannot  entirely  agree 
with  you  in  supposing  that  extreme  study  has  been  the  cause 
of  my  late  indisposition,  I  must  yet  confess  that  the  hill  of 
science,  like  that  of  virtue,  is  in  some  instances  climbed  with 
labour.  But  when  we  get  a  little  way  up,  the  lovely  prospects 
which  open  to  the  eye  make  infinite  amends  for  the  steepness 
of  the  ascent.  In  short,  I  am  wedded  to  these  pursuits,  as  a 
man  stipulates  to  take  his  wife ;  viz.,  for  better,  for  worse,  until 
death  us  do  part  My  thirst  for  knowledge  is  literally  inextin- 
guishable. And  if  I  thus  drink  myself  into  a  superior  world,  I 
cannot  help  it" 

One  feature  in  Toplady's  character,  I  may  here  remark,  can 


F!EMOVES  TO  LONDON.  30/ 

ihardly  fail  to  strike  an  attentive  reader  of  his  remains.  That 
feature  is  the  eminent  spirituahty  of  the  tone  of  his  religion. 
There  can  be  no  greater  mistake  than  to  regard  him  as  a 
mere  student  and  deep  reader,  or  as  a  hard  and  dry  contro- 
versial divine.  Such  an  estimate  of  him  is  thoroughly  unjust. 
His  letters  and  remains  supply  abundant  evidence  that  he 
was  one  who  lived  in  very  close  communion  with  God,  and 
had  very  deep  experience  of  divine  things.  Living  much 
alone,  seldom  going  into  society,  and  possessing  few  friends, 
he  was  a  man  little  understood  by  many,  who  only  knew  him 
by  his  controversial  writings,  and  specially  by  his  unflinching 
advocacy  of  Calvinism.  Yet  really,  if  the  truth  be  spoken,  I 
hardly  find  any  man  of  the  i8th  century  who  seems  to  have 
soared  so  high  and  aimed  so  loftily,  in  his  personal  dealings 
with  his  Saviour,  as  Toplady.  There  is  an  unction  and  savour 
about  some  of  his  remains  which  few  of  his  contemporaries 
equalled,  and  none  surpassed.  I  grant  freely  that  he  left  behind 
him  many  things  which  cannot  be  much  commended.  But  he  left 
behind  him  some  things  which  will  live,  as  long  as  English  is 
spoken,  in  the  hearts  of  all  true  Christians.  His  writings  contain 
"  thoughts  that  breathe  and  words  that  burn,"  if  any  writings 
of  his  age.  And  it  never  ought  to  be  forgotten,  that  the  man  who 
penned  them  was  lying  in  his  grave  before  he  was  thirty-nine  1 

The  last  three  years  of  Toplady's  life  were  spent  in  London. 
He  removed  there  by  medical  advice  in  the  year  1775,  under 
the  idea  that  the  moist  air  of  Broad  Hembury  was  injurious  to 
his  health.  Whether  the  advice  was  sound  or  not  may  now, 
perhaps,  admit  of  question.  At  any  rate,  the  change  of  climate 
did  him  no  good.  Little  by  little  the  insidious  disease  of  the 
chest,  under  which  he  laboured,  made  progress,  and  wasted  his 
strength.  He  was  certainly  able  to  preach  at  Orange  Street 
Chapel  in  the  years  1776  and  1777;  but  it  is  equally  certain 
that  throughout  this  period  he  was  gradually  drawing;  near  to 
his  end.     He  was  never,  perhaps,  more  thoroughly  appreciated 


368  HIS  LAST  ADDRESS. 

than  he  was  during  these  last  three  years  of  his  ministry.  A 
picked  London  congregation,  such  as  he  had,  was  able  to 
value  gifts  and  powers  which  were  connpletely  thrown  away  on 
a  rural  parish  in  Devonshire.  His  stores  of  theological  reading 
and  distinct  doctrinal  statement  were  rightly  appraised  by  his 
metropohtan  hearers.  In  short,  if  he  had  lived  longer  he  might, 
humanly  speaking,  have  done  a  mighty  work  in  London.  But 
He  who  holds  the  stars  in  his  right  hand,  and  knows  best 
what  is  good  for  his  Church,  saw  fit  to  withdraw  him  soon 
from  his  new  sphere  of  usefulness.  He  seemed  as  if  he  came 
to  London  only  to  be  known  and  higlily  valued,  and  then  to  die. 
The  closing  scene  of  the  good  man's  life  was  singularly  beau- 
tiful, and  at  the  same  time  singularly  characteristic.  He  died 
as  he  had  lived,  in  the  full  hope  and  peace  of  the  gospel,  and 
with  an  unwavering  confidence  in  the  truth  of  the  doctrines 
which  he  had  for  fifteen  years  advocated  both  with  his  tongue 
and  with  his  pen.  About  two  months  before  his  death  he  was 
greatly  pained  by  hearing  that  he  was  reported  to  have  receded 
from  his  Calvinistic  opinions,  and  to  have  expressed  a  desire  to 
recant  them  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  John  Wesley.  So  much 
was  he  moved  by  this  rumour,  that  he  resolved  to  appear 
before  his  congregation  once  more,  and  to  give  a  pubHc 
denial  to  it  before  he  died.  His  physician  in  vain  remonstrated 
with  him.  He  was  told  that  it  would  be  dangerous  to  make 
the  attempt,  and  that  he  might  probably  die  in  the  pulpit.  But 
the  vicar  of  Broad  Hembury  was  not  a  man  to  be  influenced  by 
such  considerations.  He  replied  that  "  he  would  rather  die  in 
the  harness  than  die  in  the  stall."  He  actually  carried  his 
resolution  into  effect  On  Sunday,  June  the  14th,  in  the  last 
stage  of  consumption,  and  only  two  months  before  he  died,  lie 
ascended  his  puipit  in  Orange  Street  Chapel,  after  his  assistant 
had  preached,  to  the  astonishment  of  his  people,  and  gave  a 
short  but  affecting  exhortation  founded  on  2  Pet.  i.  13,  14 :  "I 
think  it  meet,  as  long  as  I  am  in  this  tabernacle,  to  stir  you  up 


REDUCED    FACSIMILE    OF    PORTRAIT    (1783). 

Face  p.  369. 


HIS  LATTER  DA  YS.  J.'x^ 

by  putting  you  in  remembrance."     He  then  closed  his  achiress 
with  the  following  remarkable  declaration  : — 

"  It  having  been  industriously  circulated  by  some  malicious 
and  unprincipled  persons  that  during  my  present  long  and 
severe  illness  I  expressed  a  strong  desire  of  seeing  Mr.  John 
Wesley  before  I  die,  and  revoking  some  particulars  relative  to 
him  which  occur  in  my  writings, — Now  I  do  publicly  and  most 
solemnly  aver  that  I  have  not  nor  ever  had  any  such  intention 
or  desire ;  and  that  I  most  sincerely  hope  my  last  hours  will  be 
much  better  employed  than  in  communing  with  such  a  man. 
So  certain  and  so  satisfied  am  I  of  the  truth  of  all  that  I  have 
ever  written,  that  were  I  now  sitting  up  in  my  dying  bed  with  a 
pen  and  ink  in  my  hand,  and  all  the  religious  and  controversial 
writings  I  ever  published,  especially  those  relating  to  Mr.  John 
Wesley  and  the  Arminian  controversy,  whether  respecting  fact 
or  doctrine,  could  be  at  once  displayed  to  my  view,  I  should 
not  strike  out  a  single  line  relative  to  him  or  them." 

The  last  days  of  Toplady's  life  were  spent  in  great  peace.  He 
went  down  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  with  abounding 
consolations,  and  was  enabled  to  say  many  edifying  things  to 
all  around  him.  The  following  recollections,  jotted  down  by 
friends  who  ministered  to  him,  and  communicated  to  his  bio- 
grapher, can  hardly  fail  to  be  interesting  to  a  Christian  reader. 

One  friend  observes  : — "  A  remarkable  jealousy  was  apparent 
in  his  whole  conduct  as  he  drew  near  his  end,  for  fear  of  receiv- 
ing any  part  of  that  honour  which  is  due  to  Christ  alone. 
He  desired  to  be  nothing,  and  that  Jesus  might  be  all  and  in  all. 
His  feelings  were  so  very  tender  upon  this  subject,  that  I  once 
undesignedly  put  him  almost  in  an  agony  by  remarking  the  great 
loss  which  the  Church  of  Christ  would  sustain  by  his  death  at 
this  particular  juncture.  The  utmost  distress  was  immediately 
visible  in  his  countenance,  and  he  exclaimed,  '  What !  by  my 
death  7  No,  no !  Jesus  Christ  is  able,  and  will,  by  proper 
instruments,  defend  his  own  truths.     And  with  regard  to  what 

(195)  24 


370  HIS  FIRM  CONFIDENCE. 

little  I  have  been  enabled  to  do  in  this  way,  not  to  me,  not  to 
me,  but  to  his  own  name,  and  to  that  only,  be  the  glory.' 

"  The  more  his  bodily  strength  was  impaired  the  more  vigor- 
ous, lively,  and  rejoicing  his  mind  seemed  to  be.  From  the 
whole  turn  of  his  conversation  during  our  interview,  he  appeared 
not  merely  placid  and  serene,  but  he  evidently  possessed  the 
fullest  assurance  of  the  most  triumphant  faith.  He  repeatedly 
told  me  that  he  had  not  had  the  least  shadow  of  a  doubt 
respecting  his  eternal  salvation  for  near  two  years  past.  It  is 
no  wonder,  therefore,  that  he  so  earnestly  longed  to  be  dissolved 
and  to  be  with  Christ.  His  soul  seemed  to  be  constantly 
panting  heavenward,  and  his  desire  increased  the  nearer  his 
dissolution  approached.  A  short  time  before  his  death,  at  his 
request,  I  felt  his  pulse,  and  he  desired  to  know  what  I  thought 
of  it  I  told  him  that  his  heart  and  arteries  evidently  beat 
almost  every  day  weaker  and  weaker.  He  replied  immediately, 
with  the  sweetest  smile  on  his  countenance,  *  Why,  that  is  a 
good  sign  that  my  death  is  fast  approaching ;  and,  blessed  be 
God,  I  can  add  that  my  heart  beats  every  day  stronger  and 
stronger  for  glory.' 

"A  few  days  before  his  dissolution  I  found  him  sitting  up  in 
his  arm-chair,  but  scarcely  able  to  move  or  speak.  I  addressed 
him  very  softly,  and  asked  if  his  consolations  continued  to  abound 
as  they  had  hitherto  done.  He  quickly  replied,  '  O  my  dear 
sir,  it  is  impossible  to  describe  how  good  God  is  to  me.  Since 
I  have  been  sitting  in  this  chair  this  afternoon  I  have  enjoyed 
such  a  season,  such  sweet  communion  with  God,  and  such 
delightful  manifestation  of  his  presence  with  and  love  to  my 
soul,  that  it  is  impossible  for  words  or  any  language  to  express 
them.  I  have  had  peace  and  joy  unutterable,  and  I  fear  not 
but  that  God's  consolation  and  support  will  continue.'  But  he 
immediately  recollected  himself,  and  added,  *  What  have  I 
said  ?  God  may,  to  be  sure,  as  a  sovereign,  hide  his  face  and 
his  smiles  from  me ;  however,  I  believe  he  will  not ;  and  if  he 


HIS  DEATH.  371 

should,  yet  will  I  trust  him.  I  know  I  am  safe  and  secure,  for 
his  love  and  his  covenant  are  everlasting  ! ' " 

To  another  friend,  speaking  about  his  dying  avowal  in  the 
pulpit  of  his  church  in  Orange  Street,  he  said  :  "  My  dear 
friend,  these  great  and  glorious  truths  which  the  Lord  in  rich 
mercy  has  given  me  to  beHeve,  and  which  he  has  enabled  me 
{though  very  feebly)  to  defend,  are  not,  as  those  who  oppose 
them  say,  dry  doctrines  or  mere  speculative  points.  No  !  being 
brought  into  practical  and  heartfelt  experience,  they  are  the 
very  joy  and  support  of  my  soul;  and  the  consolations  flowing 
from  them  carry  me  far  above  the  things  of  time  and  sense. 
So  far  as  I  know  my  own  heart,  I  have  no  desire  but  to  be 
entirely  passive,  to  live,  to  die,  to  be,  to  do,  to  suffer  whatever 
is  God's  blessed  will  concerning  me,  being  perfectly  satisfied 
that  as  he  ever  has,  so  he  ever  will  do  that  which  is  best  con- 
cerning me,  and  that  he  deals  out  in  number,  weight,  and 
measure,  whatever  will  conduce  most  to  his  own  glory  and  to 
the  good  of  his  people." 

Another  of  his  friends  mentioning  the  report  that  was  spread 
abroad  of  his  recanting  his  former  principles,  he  said  with  some 
vehemence  and  emotion,  "  I  recant  my  former  principles  !  God 
forbid  that  I  should  be  so  vile  an  apostate ! "  To  which  he 
presently  added,  with  great  apparent  humility,  "  And  yet  that 
apostate  I  should  soon  be,  if  I  were  left  to  myself" 

Within  an  hour  of  his  death,  he  called  his  friends  and  his 
servant  to  him,  and  asked  them  if  they  could  give  him  up. 
Upon  their  answering  that  they  could,  since  it  pleased  the  Lord 
to  be  so  gracious  to  him,  he  replied  :  "  Oh,  what  a  blessing  it 
is  that  you  are  made  willing  to  give  me  up  into  the  hands  of 
my  dear  Redeemer,  and  to  part  with  me  !  It  will  not  be  long 
before  God  takes  me ;  for  no  mortal  man  can  live,  after  the 
glories  which  God  has  manifested  to  my  soul."  Soon  after  this 
he  closed  his  eyes,  and  quietly  fell  asleep  in  Christ  on  Tuesday^ 
August  II,  1778,  in  the  thirty-eighth  year  of  his  age. 


372  ins  BURIAL. 

He  was  buried  in  Tottenham  Court  Chapel,  under  the  gaK 
lery,  opposite  the  pulpit,  in  the  presence  of  thousands  of  people, 
who  came  together  from  all  parts  of  London  to  do  him  honour. 
His  high  reputation  as  a  champion  of  truth,  the  unjust  misre- 
presentations circulated  about  his  change  of  opinion,  his  effec- 
tiveness as  a  preacher,  and  his  comparative  youthfulness, 
combined  to  draw  forth  a  more  than  ordinary  expression  of 
sympathy.  "  Devout  men  carried  him  to  his  burial,  and  made 
great  lamentation  over  him."  Foremost  among  the  mourners 
was  one  at  that  time  young  in  the  ministry,  who  lived  long 
enough  to  be  a  connecting  link  between  the  i8th  and  the 
19th  century — the  well-known  and  eccentric  Rowland  Hill. 
Before  the  burial-service  commenced,  he  could  not  refrain  from 
transgressing  one  of  Toplady's  last  requests,  that  no  funeral- 
sermon  should  be  preached  for  him,  and  affectionately  declared 
to  the  vast  assembly  the  love  and  veneration  he  felt  for  the 
deceased,  and  the  high  sense  he  entertained  of  his  graces,  gifts, 
and  usefulness.  And  thus,  amidst  the  tears  and  thanksgivings 
of  true-hearted  mourners,  the  much-abused  vicar  of  Broad  Hem- 
bury  was  gathered  to  his  people.* 

The  following  passage  from  Toplady's  last  will,  made  and 
signed  six  months  before  his  decease,  is  so  remarkable  and 
characteristic,  that  I  cannot  refrain  from  giving  it  to  my  readers 
"  I  most  humbly  commit  my  soul  to  Almighty  God,  whom 
honour,  and  have  long  experienced  to  be  my  ever  gracious  and 
infinitely  merciful  Father.  Nor  have  I  the  least  doubt  of  my 
election,  justification,  and  eternal  happiness,  through  the  riches 
of  his  everlasting  and  unchangeable  kindness  to  me  in  Christ 
Jesus,  his  co-equal  Son,  my  only,  my  assured,  and  my  all-suffi- 
cient Saviour ;  washed  in  whose  propitiatory  blood,  and  clothed 
with  whose  imputed  righteousness,   I  trust  to  ^tand  perfect, 


*  It  is  a  curious  fact  t^at  Toplacly  expressly  desired  that  he  might  be  buried  at  lea^t 
nine  feet,  and,  if  possible,  twelve  feet,  under  jjround  !  He  assigried  no  reason.  Perhapt 
t  was  because  he  wished  to  be  buried  inside  his  church. 


C/  i  O  7U  TION  FROM  HIS  WILL,  373 

fiinless,  and  complete;  and  do  verily  believe  that  I  most  cer- 
tainly shall  so  stand,  in  the  hour  of  death,  and  in  the  kingdom 
of  heaven,  and  at  the  last  judgment,  and  in  the  ultimate  state 
of  endless  glory.  Neither  can  I  write  this  my  last  will  without 
rendering  the  deepest,  the  most  solemn,  and  the  most  ardent 
thanks  to  the  adorable  Trinity  in  Unity,  for  their  eternal, 
unmerited,  irreversible,  and  inexhaustible  love  to  me  a  sinner. 
I  bless  God  the  Father  for  having  wrtten  from  everlasting  my 
unworthy  name  in  the  book  of  life — even  for  appointing  me  to 
obtain  salvation  through  Jesus  Christ  my  Lord.  I  adore  God 
the  Son  for  having  vouchsafed  to  redeem  me  by  his  own  most 
precious  death,  and  for  having  obeyed  the  whole  law  for  my 
justification.  I  admire  and  revere  the  gracious  benignity  of 
God  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  converted  me  to  the  saving  know- 
ledge of  Christ  more  than  twenty-two  years  ago,  and  whose 
enlightening,  supporting,  comforting,  and  sanctifying  agency  is, 
and  (I  doubt  not)  vill  be  my  strength  and  song  in  the  hours  of 
my  earthly  pilgrimage." 

Having  now  traced  Toplady's  history  from  his  cradle  to  his 
grave,  it  only  remains  for  me  to  offer  some  general  estimate  of 
his  worth  and  attainments.  To  do  this,  I  frankly  confess,  is  no 
easy  task.  Not  only  is  his  biography  a  miserably  deficient  one 
— this  alone  is  bad  enough — but  his  literary  remains  have  been 
edited  in  such  a  slovenly,  careless,  ignorant  manner,  without 
order  or  arrangement,  that  they  do  not  fairly  represent  tlie 
author's  merits.  Certainly  the  reputation  of  great  writers  and 
ministers  may  suffer  sadly  from  the  treatment  of  injudicious 
friends.  If  ever  there  was  a  man  who  fell  into  the  hands  of  the 
Philistines  after  his  death,  that  man,  so  far  as  I  can  judge,  was 
Augustus  Toplady.  I  shall  do  the  best  1  can  with  the  mate- 
rials at  my  disposal ;  but  I  trust  my  readers  will  remember  that 
ihey  are  exceedingly  scanty. 

I.  As  2i preacher,  I  should  be  disposed  to  assign  t)  Toplady 
a  very  high  place  among  the  second  class  men  of  the  iSthcen- 


374  TOPl.ADY  AS  A  PREACHER. 

tury.  His  constitutional  delicacy  and  weakness  of  lungs,  in  all 
probability,  made  it  impossible  for  him  to  do  the  things  that 
Whitefield  and  Berridge  did.  Constant  open-air  addresses, 
impassioned  extempore  appeals  to  thousands  of  hearers,  were 
a  style  of  thing  entirely  out  of  his  line.  Yet  there  is  pretty  good 
evidence  that  he  had  no  mean  reputation  as  a  pulpit  orator, 
and  possessed  no  mean  powers.  The  mere  fact  that  Lady 
Huntingdon  occasionally  selected  him  to  preach  in  her  chapels 
at  Bath  and  Brighton,  of  itself  speaks  volumes.  The  additional 
fact  that  at  one  of  the  great  Methodist  gatherings  at  Trevecca 
he  was  put  forward  as  one  of  the  leading  preachers,  is  enough 
to  show  that  his  sermons  possessed  high  merit.  The  follow- 
ing notes  about  preaching,  which  he  records  in  his  diary,  as 
having  received  them  from  an  old  friend,  will  probably  throw 
much  light  on  the  general  turn  of  his  ministrations  : — (i.)  Preach 
Christ  crucified,  and  dwell  chiefly  on  the  blessings  resulting 
from  his  righteousness,  atonement,  and  intercession.  (2.)  Avoid 
all  needless  controversies  in  the  pulpit ;  except  it  be  when  your 
subject  necessarily  requires  it,  or  when  the  truths  of  God  are 
likely  to  suffer  by  your  silence.  (3.)  When  you  ascend  the 
pulpit,  leave  your  learning  behind  you  :  endeavour  to  preach 
more  to  the  hearts  of  your  people  than  to  their  heads,  (4.)  Do 
not  affect  much  oratory.  Seek  rather  to  profit  than  to  be 
admired. 

Specimens  ofToplad/s  ordinary  preaching  are  unfortunately 
very  rare.  There  are  but  ten  sermons  in  the  collection  of  his 
works,  and  out  of  these  the  great  majority  were  preached  on 
special  occasions,  and  cannot,  therefore,  be  regarded  as  fair 
samples  of  his  pulpit  work.  In  all  of  them  there  is  a  certain 
absence  of  fire,  animation,  and  directness.  But  in  all  there  is 
abundance  of  excellent  matter,  and  a  quiet,  decided,  knock- 
down, sledge-hammer  style  of  putting  things  which,  I  can  well 
believe,  would  be  extremely  effective,  and  especially  with  edu- 
cated congregations.     The  three  following  extracts  may  perhaps 


EXTRA  CT  FROM  SERMON.  3  7 5 

give  soiiie  idea  of  what  Toplady  was  in  the  pulpit  of  Orange 
Street  Chapel.  Of  his  ministry  in  Broad  Hembury,  I  suspect 
we  know  next  to  nothing  at  all. 

The  first  extract  forms  the  conclusion  of  a  sermon  preached 
in    1774   at   the  Lock    Chapel,    entitled   "  Good  News   from 
Heaven  :" — "  I  perceive  the  elements  are  upon  the  sacramental 
table.     And  I  doubt  not  many  of  you  mean  to  present  your- 
selves at  that  throne  of  grace  which  God  has  mercifully  erected 
through  the  righteousness  and  sufferings  of  his  co-equal  Son. 
Oh,  beware  of  coming  with  one  sentiment  on  your  lips  and 
another  in  your  hearts  !    Take  heed  of  saying  with  your  mouths, 
*  We  do  not  come  to  this  thy  table,  O  Lord,  trusting  in  our 
own  righteousness,'  while  perhaps  you  have  in  reality  some 
secret  reserves  in  favour  of  that  very  self-righteousness  which 
you  profess  to  renounce,  and  are  thinking  that  Christ's  merits 
alone  will  not  save  you  unless  you  add  something  or  other  to 
make  it  effectual.     Oh,  be  not  so  deceived  !    God  will  not  thus 
be  mocked,  nor  will  Christ  thus  be  insulted  with  impunity. 
Call  your  works  what  you  will — whether  terms,  causes,  condi- 
tions, or  supplements — the  matter  comes  to  the  same  point, 
and  Christ  is  equally  thrust  out  of  his  mediatorial  throne  by 
these  or  any  similar  views  of  human  obedience.     If  you  do  not 
wholly  depend  on  Jesus  as  the  Lord  your  righteousness — if  you 
mix  your  faith  in  him  with  anything  else — if  the  finished  work 
of  the  crucified  God  be  not  alone  your  acknowledged  anchor 
and  foundation  of  acceptance  with  the  Father,  both  here  and 
ever — come  to  his  table  and  receive  the  symbols  of  his  body 
and  blood  at  your  peril !    Leave  your  own  righteousness  behind 
you,  or  you  have  no  business  here.     You  are  without  the  wed- 
ding garment,  and  God  will  say  to  you,  *  Friend,  how  camest 
thou  here  ]'     If  you  go  on,  moreover,  to  live  and  die  in  this 
state  of  unbelief,  you  will  be  found  speechless  and  excuseless  in 
the  day  of  judgment ;  and  the  slighted  Saviour  will  say  to  his 
ungeis  concerning  you,  '  Bind  him  hand  and  foot,  and  cast  him 


37^  SERMON  ON  FREE  WILL, 

into  outer  darkness, ....  for  many  are  called,  but  few  are 
chosen." 

My  second  extract  is  from  a  sermon  on  "  Free  Will,"  preached 
at  St.  Anne's,  Blackfriars,  in  1774: — "I  know  it  is  growing 
very  fashionable  to  talk  against  spiritual  feelings.  But  I  dare 
not  join  the  cry.  On  the  contrary,  I  adopt  the  apostle's 
prayer  that  our  love  to  God  and  the  manifestation  of  his  love 
to  us  may  abound  yet  more  and  more  in  knowledge  and  'n  all 
feeling.  And  it  is  no  enthusiastic  wish  in  behalf  of  you  and 
myself,  that  we  may  be  of  the  number  of  those  godly  persons 
who,  as  our  Church  justly  expresses  it,  *  feel  in  themselves  the 
workings  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  mortifying  the  works  of  the 
flesh,  and  drawing  up  their  minds  to  high  and  heavenly  things.* 
Indeed,  the  great  business  of  God's  Spirit  is  to  draw  up  and  to 
bring  down — to  draw  up  our  affections  to  Christ,  and  to  bring 
down  the  unsearchable  riclies  of  grace  into  our  hearts.  The 
knowledge  of  this,  and  earnest  desire  for  it,  are  all  the  feelings 
I  plead  for ;  and  for  these  feelings  I  wish  ever  to  plead,  satis- 
fied as  I  am  that  without  some  experience  and  enjoyment  of 
them  we  cannot  be  happy  living  or  dying. 

"  Let  me  ask  you,  as  it  were  one  by  one,  has  the  Holy  Spirit 
begun  to  reveal  these  deep  things  of  God  in  your  soul  ?  If  so, 
give  him  the  glory  of  it.  And  as  you  prize  communion  with 
him,  as  ever  you  value  the  comforts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  endea- 
vour to  be  found  in  God's  way,  even  the  highway  of  humble 
faith  and  obedient  love,  sitting  at  the  feet  of  Clirist,  and  im- 
bibing those  sweet  sanctifying  communications  of  grace  which 
are  at  once  an  earnest  of  and  a  preparation  for  complete  heaven 
when  you  die.  God  forbid  that  we  should  eyer  think  lightly  of 
religious  feelings.  If  we  do  not  in  some  measure  feel  ourselves 
sinners,  and  feel  that  Christ  is  precious,  I  doubt  the  Spirit  of 
God  has  never  been  savingly  at  work  upon  our  souls." 

My  last  extract  shall  be  from  a  sermon  preached  at  St.  Anne's, 
Blackfriars  (Romaine's  church,  be  it  remembered),  in   1770, 


TOPLADY  AS  A   WRITER.  377 

entitled,  "A  Caveat  against  Unsound  Doctrine:" — "Faith  is 
the  eye  of  the  soul,  and  the  eye  is  said  to  see  almost  every 
object  but  itself;  so  that  you  may  have  real  faith  without  being 
.able  to  discern  it.  God  will  not  despise  the  day  of  small  things. 
Little  faith  goes  to  heaven  no  less  than  great  faith ;  though  not 
so  comfortably,  yet  altogether  as  surely.  If  you  come  merely 
as  a  sinner  to  Jesus,  and  throw  yourself,  at  all  events,  for  salva- 
tion on  his  alone  blood  and  righteousness,  and  the  grace  and 
promise  of  God  in  him,  thou  art  as  truly  a  believer  as  the  most 
triumphant  saint  that  ever  lived.  Amidst  all  your  weakness, 
distresses,  and  temptations,  remember  that  God  will  not  cast 
out  nor  cast  off  the  meanest  and  unworthiest  soul  that  seeks 
salvation  only  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous.  When 
you  cannot  follow  the  Rock,  the  Rock  shall  follow  you,  nor 
ever  leave  you  for  a  single  moment  on  this  side  the  heavenly 
Canaan.  If  you  feel  your  absolute  want  of  Christ,  you  may  on 
all  occasions  and  in  every  exigence  betake  yourself  to  the 
covenant-love  and  faithfulness  of  God  for  pardon,  sanctification, 
and  safety,  and  with  the  same  fulness  of  right  and  title  as  a 
traveller  leans  upon  his  own  staff,  or  as  a  weary  labourer  throws 
himself  upon  his  own  bed,  or  as  an  opulent  nobleman  draws 
upon  his  own  banker  for  whatsoever  sum  he  wants." 

I  make  no  comment  on  these  extracts.  They  speak  for 
themselves.  Most  Christians,  I  suspect,  will  agree  with  me, 
that  the  man  who  could  speak  to  congregations  in  this  fashion 
was  no  ordinary  preacher.  The  hearers  of  such  sermons  could 
never  say,  "  The  hungry  sheep  look  up,  and  are  not  fed."  I 
am  bold  to  say  that  the  Church  of  the  present  century  would 
be  in  a  far  more  healthy  condition  if  it  had  more  preaching»like 
Toplady's. 

2.  As  a  writer  of  miscellaneous  papers  on  religious  subjects,  I 
do  not  think  Toplady  has  ever  been  duly  appreciated.  His  pen 
seems  to  have  been  never  idle,  and  his  collected  works  contain 
a  large  number  of  short  useful  essays  on  a  great  variety  of  sub- 


378  TOPLAD  V  AS  A  CONTRO  VERS! A  LIST. 

jects.  Any  one  who  takes  the  trouble  to  look  at  them  will  be 
surprised  to  find  that  the  worthy  vicar  of  Broad  Hembury  was- 
conversant  with  many  things  beside  the  Calvinistic  contro- 
versy, and  could  write  about  them  in  a  very  interesting  manner. 
He  will  find  short  and  well-written  biographies  of  Bishop  Je welly 
Bishop  Carleton,  Bishop  Wilson,  John  Knox,  Fox  the  Martyr- 
ologist,  Lord  Harrington,  Witsius,  Allsop,  and  Dr.  Watts.  He 
w'll  find  a  very  valuable  collection  of  extracts  from  the  works 
of  eminent  Christians,  and  of  anecdotes,  incidents,  and  historical 
passages,  gathered  by  Toplady  himself.  He  will  find  a  sketch 
of  natural  history,  and  some  curious  observations  on  birds, 
meteors,  animal  sagacity,  and  the  solar  system.  These  papers, 
n'>  doubt,  are  of  various  merit ;  but  they  all  show  the  singular 
activity  and  fertility  of  the  author's  mind,  and  are  certainly  far 
more  deserving  of  republication  than  many  of  the  reprints  of 
modern  days.  Of  Toplady's  "  Family  Prayers "  I  shall  say 
nothing.  They  are  probably  so  well  known  that  I  need  not 
commend  them.  Of  his  seventy-eight  letters  to  friends,  I  will 
only  say  that  they  are  excellent  specimens  of  the  correspondence 
of  the  last  century — sensible,  well  composed,  full  of  thought  and 
matter,  and  supplying  abundant  proof  that  their  writer  was  a 
Christian,  a  scholar,  and  a  gentleman.  I  cannot,  however,  do 
more  than  refer  to  all  these  productions  of  Toplady's  pen. 
Those  who  wish  to  know  more  must  examine  his  works  for 
themselves.  If  they  do,  I  venture  to  predict  that  they  will 
agree  with  me  that  liis  miscellaneous  writings  are  neither  suffi- 
ciently known  nor  valued. 

3.  As  a  controversialist,  I  find  it  rather  difficult  to  give  a  right 
estimate  of  Toplady.  In  fact,  the  subject  is  a  painful  one,  and 
one  which  I  would  gladly  avoid.  But  I  feel  that  I  should  not 
be  dealing  fairly  and  honestly  with  my  readers,  if  I  did  not  say 
something  about  it.  In  fact,  the  vicar  of  Broad  Hembury  took 
such  a  very  prominent  part  in  the  doctrinal  controversies  of  thi* 
century,  and  was  so  thoroughly  recognized  as  the  champion 


HIS  WR1TL\GS  SUU'AD  AND  SCRIPTURAL.  37> 

and  Standard-bearer  of  Calvinistic  theology,  that  no  memoir  of 
him  could  be  regarded  as  complete,  which  did  not  take  up  this- 
part  of  his  character. 

I  begin  by  saying  that,  on  the  whole,  Toplady's  controversial 
writings  appear  to  me  to  be  in  principle  scriptural,  sound,  and 
true.  I  do  not,  for  a  moment,  mean  that  I  can  endorse  all  he 
says.  I  consider  that  his  statements  are  often  extreme,  and 
that  he  is  frequently  more  systematic  and  narrow  than  the  Bible. 
He  often  seems  to  me,  in  fact,  to  go  further  than  Scripture,  and 
to  draw  conclusions  which  Scripture  has  not  drawn,  and  to 
settle  points  which  for  some  wise  reason  Scripture  has  not 
settled.  Still,  for  all  this,  I  will  never  shrink  from  saying  that 
the  cause  for  which  Toplady  contended  all  his  life  was  decidedly 
the  cause  of  God's  truth.  He  was  a  bold  defender  of  Calvinistic 
views  about  election,  predestination,  perseverance,  human  im- 
potency,  and  irresistible  grace.  On  all  these  subjects  I  hold 
firmly  that  Calvin's  theology  is  much  more  scriptural  than  the 
theology  of  Arminius.  In  a  word,  I  believe  that  Ca:lvinistic 
divinity  is  the  divinity  of  the  Bible,  of  Augustine,  and  of  the- 
Thirty-nine  Articles  of  my  own  Church,  and  of  the  Scotch  Con- 
fession of  Faith.  While,  therefore,  I  repeat  that  I  cannot 
endorse  all  the  sentiments  of  Toplady's  controversial  writings, 
I  do  claim  for  them  the  merit  of  being  in  principle  scriptural, 
sound,  and  true.  Well  would  it  be  for  the  Churches,  if  we  had 
a  good  deal  more  of  clear,  distinct,  sharply-cut  doctrine  in  the 
present  day !  Vagueness  and  indistinctness  are  marks  of  ouf 
degenerate  condition. 

But  I  go  further  than  this.  I  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that 
Toplady's  controversial  works  display  extraordinary  ability. 
For  example,  his  "  Historic  Proof  of  the  Doctrinal  Calvinism 
of  the  Church  of  England"  is  a  treatise  that  displays  a  prodi- 
gious amount  of  research  and  reading.  It  is  a  book  that  na 
one  could  have  written  who  had  not  studied  much,  thought 
much,  and  thoroughly  investigated  an  enormous  mass  of  theo- 


.380  HIS  VIOLENT  LANGUAGE. 

logical  literature.  You  see  at  once  that  the  author  has 
iCorapletely  digested  what  he  has  read,  and  is  able  to  concen- 
trate all  his  reading  on  every  point  which  he  handles.  The 
best  proof  of  the  book's  ability  is  the  simple  fact  that  down  to 
the  present  day  it  has  never  been  really  answered.  It  has  been 
reviled,  sneered  at,  abused,  and  held  up  to  scorn.  But  abuse 
is  not  argument.  The  book  remains  to  this  hour  unanswered, 
-.and  that  for  the  simplest  of  all  reasons,  that  it  is  unanswerable. 
It  proves  irrefragably,  whether  men  like  it  or  not,  that  Calvinism 
is  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  England,  and  that  all  her  lead- 
ing divines,  until  Laud's  time,  were  Calvinists.  All  this  is  done 
logically,  clearly,  and  powerfully.  No  one,  1  venture  to  think, 
could  read  the  book  through,  and  not  feel  obliged  to  admit  that 
the  author  was  an  able  man. 

While,  however,  I  claim  for  Toplady's  controversial  writings 
the  merit  of  soundness  and  ability,  I  must  with  sorrow  admit 
that  I  cannot  praise  his  spirit  and  language  when  speaking  of  his 
opponents.  I  am  obliged  to  confess  that  he  often  uses  expres- 
sions about  them  so  violent  and  so  bitter,  that  one  feels  jjer- 
fectly  ashamed.  Never,  I  regret  to  say,  did  an  advocate  of 
truth  appear  to  me  so  entirely  to  forget  the  text,  "  In  meekness 
instructing  those  that  oppose  themselves,"  as  the  vicar  of  Broad 
Hembur)'.  Arminianism  seems  to  have  precisely  the  same 
effect  on  him  that  a  scarlet  cloak  has  on  a  bull.  He  appears  to 
think  it  impossible  that  an  Arminian  can  be  saved,  and  never 
-shrinks  with  classing  Arminians  with  Pelagians,  Socinians, 
Papists,  and  heretics.  He  says  things  about  Wesley  and  Sellon 
which  never  ought  to  have  been  said.  All  this  is  melancholy 
work  indeed  !  But  those  who  are  familiar  with  Toplady's  con- 
troversial writings  know  well  that  I  am  stating  simple  truths. 

I  will  not  stain  my  paper  nor  waste  my  readers'  time  by  sui> 

jiplying  proofs  of  Toplady's  controversial  bitterness.      It  would  be 

very  unprofitable  to  do  so.     The  epithets  he  applies  to  his 

.adversaries  are  perfectly  amazing  and  astonishing.     It  rousi  n> 


A  BEACON  TO  THE  CHURCH.  S^l' 

fairness  be  remembered  that  the  language  of  his  opponents  was- 
exceedingly  violent,  and  was  enough  to  provoke  any  man.  It 
must  not  be  forgotten,  moreover,  that  a  hundred  years  ago  men 
said  things  in  controversy  that  were  not  considered  so  bad  as 
they  are  now,  from  the  different  standard  of  taste  that  prevailed. 
Men  were  perhaps  more  honest  and  outspoken  than  they  are  now, 
and  their  bark  was  worse  than  their  bite.  But  all  these  considera- 
tions only  palliate  the  case.  The  fact  remains,  that  as  a  contro- 
versialist Toplady  was  extremely  bitter  and  intemperate,  and- 
caused  his  good  to  be  evil  spoken  of.  He  carried  the  principle,- 
"  Rebuke  them  sharply,  that  they  may  be  sound  in  the  faith," 
to  an  absurd  extreme.  He  forgot  the  example  of  his  Master, 
who  "when  he  was  reviled,  reviled  not  again  ;"  and  he  entirely 
marred  the  value  of  his  arguments  by  the  violence  and  uncharit- 
ableness  with  which  he  maintained  them.  Thousands  who- 
neither  cared  nor  understood  anything  about  his  favourite  cause, 
could  understand  that  no  cause  ought  to  be  defended  in  such  a 
spirit  and  temper. 

I  leave  this  painful  subject  with  the  general  remark,  that 
Toplady  is  a  standing  beacon  to  the  Church,  to  show  us  the 
evils  of  controversy.  "The  beginning  of  strife  is  like  letting 
out  water."  "  In  the  multitude  of  words  there  wanteth  not  sin." 
We  must  never  shrink  from  controversy,  if  need  be,  in  defence 
of  Christ's  gospel,  but  we  must  never  take  it  up  without  jealous 
watchfulness  over  our  own  hearts,  and  over  the  manner  in  which 
we  carry  it  on.  Above  all,  we  must  strive  to  think  as  charitably 
as  possible  of  our  opponent.  It  was  Calvin  himself  who  said  of 
Luther,  "  He  may  call  me  a  devil  if  he  will ;  but  I  shall  always 
call  him  a  good  servant  of  Jesus  Christ."  Well  would  it  have 
been  for  Toplady's  reputation,  if  he  had  been  more  like  Calvin  ! 
Perhaps  when  we  open  our  eyes  in  heaven  we  shall  be  amazed 
to  find  how  many  things  there  were  which  both  Calvinists  and 
Arminians  did  not  thoroughly  understand. 

4.  There  is  only  one  point  about  Toplady  on  whrch  I  wish- 


382  TOPLADV  AS  A  HYMN-WRITER. 

to  say  something,  and  that  is  liis  character  as  a  hymn-writer. 
This  is  a  point,  I  am  thankful  to  say,  on  which  I  find  no  diffi- 
culty at  all.  I  give  it  as  my  decided  opinion  that  he  was  one 
of  the  best  hymn-wiiters  in  the  English  language.  I  am 
quite  aware  that  this  may  seem  extravagant  praise ;  but  I 
speak  deliberately.  I  hold  that  there  are  no  hymns  better  than 
his. 

Good  hymns  are  an  immense  blessing  to  the  Church  of 
Christ  I  believe  the  last  day  alone  will  show  the  world  the 
real  amount  of  good  they  have  done.  They  suit  all,  both  rich 
and  poor.  There  is  an  elevating,  stirring,  soothing,  spiritualizing, 
effect  about  a  thoroughly  good  hymn,  which  nothing  else  can 
produce.  It  sticks  in  men's  memories  when  texts  are  forgotten. 
It  trains  men  for  heaven,  where  praise  is  one  of  the  principal 
occupations.  Preaching  and  praying  shall  one  day  cease  for 
ever ;  but  praise  shall  never  die.  The  makers  of  good  ballads 
are  said  to  sway  national  opinion.  The  writers  of  good  hymns, 
in  like  manner,  are  those  who  leave  the  deepest  marks  on  the 
face  of  the  Church.  Thousands  of  Christians  rejoice  in  the 
"  Te  Deum,"  and  "  Just  as  I  am,"  who  neither  prize  the  Thirty- 
nine  Articles,  nor  know  anything  about  the  first  four  councils, 
nor  understand  the  Athanasian  Creed. 

But  really  good  hymns  are  exceedingly  rare.  There  are  only 
a  few  men  in  any  age  who  can  write  them.  You  may  name 
hundreds  of  first-rate  preachers  for  one  first-rate  writer  of  hymns. 
Hundreds  of  so-called  hymns  fill  up  our  collections  of  congre- 
gational psalmody,  which  are  really  not  hymns  at  all.  They 
are  very  sound,  very  scriptural,  very  proper,  very  correct,  very 
tolerably  rhymed ;  but  they  are  not  real,  live,  genuine  hymns. 
There  is  no  life  about  them.  At  best  they  are  tame,  pointless, 
weak,  and  milk-and-watery.  In  many  cases,  if  written  out 
straight,  without  respect  of  lines,  they  would  make  excellent 
prose.  But  poetry  they  are  not.  It  may  be  a  startling  asser- 
tion to  some  ears  to  say  that  there  are  not  more  than  two 


THEIR  BE  A  UTY  A  ND  PA  THOS.  3^3 

hundred  first-rate  hymns  in  the  English  language ;  but  startling 
as  it  may  sound,  I  believe  it  is  true. 

Of  all  English  hymn-writers,  none,  perhaps,  have  succeeded 
so  thoroughly  in  combining  truth,  poetry,  life,  warmth,  fire, 
depth,  solemnity,  and  unction,  as  Toplady  has.  I  pity  the  man 
who  does  not  know,  or,  knowing,  does  not  admire  those  glorious 
hymns  of  his  beginning,  "Rock  of  Ages,  cleft  for  me;"  or, 
"Holy  Ghost,  dispel  our  sadness;"  or,  "A  debtor  to  mercy 
alone  ;"  or,  "  Your  harps,  ye  trembling  saints  ;"  or,  "  Christ, 
whose  glory  fills  the  skies;"  or,  "When  languor  and  disease 
invade  ;"  or,  "  Deathless  principle,  arise."  The  writer  of  these 
seven  hymns  alone  has  laid  the  Church  under  perpetual  obliga- 
tions to  him.  Heretics  have  been  heard  in  absent  moments 
whispering  over  "  Rock  of  Ages,"  as  if  they  clung  to  it  when 
they  had  let  slip  all  things  beside.  Great  statesmen  have  been 
known  to  turn  it  into  Latin,  as  if  to  perpetuate  its  fame.  The 
only  matter  of  regret  is,  that  the  writer  of  such  excellent  hymns 
should  have  written  so  few.  If  he  had  lived  longer,  written 
more  hymns,  and  handled  fewer  controversies,  his  memory  would 
have  been  had  in  greater  honour,  and  men  would  have  been 
better  pleased. 

That  hymns  of  such  singular  beauty  and  pathos  should  have 
come  fi-om  the  same  pen  which  indited  such  bitter  controversial 
writings,  is  certainly  a  strange  anomaly.  I  do  not  pretend  to 
explain  it,  or  to  offer  any  solution.  I  only  lay  it  before  ray 
readers  as  a  naked  fact.  To  say  the  least,  it  should  teach  us 
not  to  be  hasty  in  censuring  a  man  before  we  know  all  sides 
of  his  character.  The  best  saints  of  God  are  neither  so  very 
good,  nor  the  faultiest  so  very  faulty,  as  they  appear.  He  that 
only  reads  Toplady's  hymns  will  find  it  hard  to  believe  that  he 
could  compose  his  controversial  writings.  He  that  only  reads  his 
controversial  writings  will  hardly  believe  that  he  composed  his 
hymns.  Yet  the  fact  remains,  that  the  same  man  composed  both. 
Alas  !  the  holiest  among  us  all  is  a  very  poor  mixed  creature  1 


$84  A  GREAT  AX D  GOOD  MAN. 

I  now  leave  the  subject  of  this  chapter  here.  I  ask  my 
readers  to  put  a  favourable  construction  on  Toplady's  life,  and 
to  judge  him  with  righteous  judgment.  I  fear  he  is  a  man  who 
has  never  been  fairly  estimated,  and  has  never  had  many  friends. 
Ministers  of  his  decided,  sharply-cut,  doctrinal  opinions  are 
never  very  popular.  But  I  plead  strongly  that  Toplady's  undeni- 
able faults  should  never  make  us  forget  his  equally  undeniable 
excellencies.  With  all  his  infirmities,  I  firmly  believe  that 
he  was  a  good  man  and  a  great  man,  and  did  a  work  for  Christ 
a  hundred  years  ago,  which  will  never  be  overthrown.  He  will 
stand  in  his  lot  at  the  last  day  in  a  high  place,  when  many^ 
perhaps,  whom  the  world  liked  better  shall  be  put  to  shame. 


XIII. 


CHAPTER  I. 

BoTT:  in  Switzerland,  1729 — Educated  at  Geneva  and  Leuizburg — Wishes  to  be  a  Soldier— 
iiecomes  a  Tutor  in  England,  1750 — Private  Tutor  in  Mr.  Hill's  Family,  175a — Be- 
comes Acquainted  with  Methodists — Inward  Conflict  —  Ordained  1757 — Vicar  ol 
Madeley,  1760 — Correspondence  with  Charles  Wesley  and  Lady  Huntingdon. 

BELIEVE  that  no  one  ever  reads  his  Bible  with  atten- 
tion without  being  struck  with  the  deep  beauty  of  the 
fourteenth  chapter  of  St.  John's  gospel.  I  suspect 
that  few  readers  of  that  marvellous  chapter  fail  to  notice  the 
wondrous  saying  of  our  Lord,  "  In  my  Father's  house  are  many 
mansions  :  if  it  were  not  so,  I  would  have  told  you."  Cold  and 
dull  must  be  the  heart  that  is  not  roused  and  stirred  by  these 
words. 

This  beautiful  saying,  of  late  years,  has  been  painfully  wrested 
from  its  true  meaning.  Men  of  whom  better  things  might  have 
been  expected,  have  misapplied  it  sadly,  and  imposed  a  false 
sense  on  it.  They  have  dared  to  say  that  men  of  all  faiths  and 
creeds  will  find  a  place  in  heaven  at  last ;  and  that  "  every  man 
shall  be  saved  by  the  law  or  sect  which  he  professeth,  so  that 
he  be  diligent  to  frame  his  mind  according  to  that  law  and  the 
light  of  nature."  They  would  fain  have  us  believe  that  the 
inhabitants  of  heaven  will  be  a  mixed  body,  including  heathen 

idolaters  and  Mohammedans  as  well  as  Christians,  and  corapris- 

(195)  25 


386  OUR  FATHER'S  HOUSE. 

ing  members  of  every  religious  denomination  in  the  world,  how- 
ever opposite  and  antagonistic  their  respective  opinions  may  be. 
Miserable  indeed  is  such  theology  !  Wretched  is  the  prospect 
which  it  holds  out  to  us  of  eternity  !  Small  could  be  the  har- 
mony in  such  a  heterogeneous  assembly !  At  this  rate,  heaven 
would  be  no  heaven  at  all. 

But  we  must  not  allow  human  misinterpretations  to  make  us 
overlook  great  truths.  It  is  true,  in  a  most  comfortable  sense, 
that  "  in  our  Father's  house  there  are  many  mansions,"  and  that 
all  who  are  washed  in  Christ's  blood,  and  renewed  by  Christ's 
Spirit,  Avill  find  a  place  in  heaven,  though  they  may  not  see  eye 
to  eye  upon  earth.  There  is  room  in  our  Father's  house  for  all 
who  hold  the  Head,  however  much  they  may  differ  on  points 
of  minor  importance.  There  is  room  for  Calvinists  and  room 
for  Arminians,  room  for  Episcopalians  and  room  for  Presby- 
terians, room  for  Thomas  Cranmer  and  room  for  John  Knox, 
room  for  John  Bunyan  and  room  for  George  Herbert,  room  for 
Henry  Martyn  and  room  for  Dr.  Judson,  room  for  Edward 
Bickersteth  and  room  for  Robert  M'Cheyne,  room  for  Chalmers 
of  Edinburgh,  and  room  for  Daniel  Wilson  of  Calcutta.  Yes  ! 
thank  God,  our  Father's  house  is  a  very  wide  one.  There  is 
room  in  it  for  all  who  are  true-hearted  behevers  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ, 

Thoughts  such  as  these  come  crowding  over  my  mind  as  I 
take  up  my  pen  to  write  an  account  of  the  eleventh  spiritual 
hero  of  the  eighteenth  century,  whom  I  want  to  introduce  to  my 
readers.  The  man  whom  I  mean  is  the  well-known  Fletcher, 
vic:ir  of  Madeley.  I  cannot  forget  that  there  was  a  doctrinal 
gulf  between  him  and  my  last  hero,  Toplady,  and  that  while  one 
was  a  Calvinist  of  Calvinists,  the  other  was  an  Arminian  of 
Arminians.  But  I  will  never  shut  my  eyes  to  the  fact  that 
Fletcher  was  a  Christian  as  well  as  an  Arminian.  Mistaken,  as 
I  think  he  was,  on  some  points,  he  was  certainly  thoroughly 
rigiit  on  others.     He  was  a  man  of  rare  grace,  and  a  minister  of 


BIRTH  OF  JOHN  WILLIAM  FLETCHER.  3»7 

rare  usefulness.  In  short,  I  think  that  no  account  of  English 
religion  a  hundred  years  ago  could  be  considered  just,  fair, 
and  complete,  which  did  not  supply  some  information  about 
Fletcher  of  Madeley. 

John  William  Fletcher  was  a  native  of  Switzerland,  and  was 
bom  at  Nyon,  in  that  country,  on  the  12th  of  September  1729. 
His  real  name  was  De  La  Flechiere,  and  he  is  probably  known 
by  that  name  among  his  own  countrymen  to  this  day.  In 
England,  however,  he  was  always  called  Fletcher,  and,  for  con- 
venience' sake,  I  shall  only  speak  of  him  by  that  name.  His 
father  was  first  an  officer  in  the  French  army,  and  afterwards  a 
colonel  in  the  militia  of  his  own  country.  The  family  is  said 
to  have  been  one  of  the  most  respectable  in  the  canton  of 
Berne,  and  a  branch  of  an  earldom  of  Savoy. 

Fletcher  appears  to  have  been  remarkable  for  cleverness  even 
when  a  boy.  At  the  first  school  which  he  went  to  at  Geneva, 
he  carried  away  all  the  prizes,  and  was  complimented  by  the 
teachers  and  managers  in  a  very  flattering  manner.  During  his 
residence  at  Geneva,  his  biographer  records  that  "  he  allowed 
himself  but  litde  time  either  for  recreation,  refreshment,  or  rest 
After  studying  hard  all  day,  he  would  often  consume  the  greater 
part  of  the  night  in  writing  down  whatever  had  occurred  in  the 
course  of  his  reading  which  seemed  worthy  of  observation. 
Here  he  acquired  that  true  classical  taste  which  was  so  frequently 
and  justly  admired  by  his  friends,  and  which  all  his  studied 
plainness  could  never  entirely  conceal.  Here,  also,  he  laid  the 
foundation  of  that  extensive  and  accurate  knowledge  for  which 
he  was  afterwards  distinguished,  both  in  philosophy  and  theo- 
logy." 

From  Geneva  his  father  sent  him  to  a  small  Swiss  town  called 
Leutzburg,  where  he  not  only  acquired  the  German  language, 
but  also  diligently  prosecuted  his  former  studies.  On  leaving 
Leutzburg,  he  continued  some  timp  at  home,  studying  the 
Hebrew  language,  and  perfecting  his  acquaintance  with  mathe- 


SSS  WISHES  TO  BE  A  SOLDIER. 

matics.  Such  was  Fletcher's  early  training  and  education.  I 
ask  the  reader's  special  attention  to  it.  It  supplies  one  among 
many  proofs  that  those  who  call  the  leaders  of  the  English 
revival  of  religion  in  the  1 8th  century  "poor,  ignorant,  illiterate 
fanatics,"  are  only  exposing  their  own  ignorance.  They  know 
neither  what  they  say,  nor  whereof  they  affirm.  In  the  mere 
matter  of  learning,  Wesley,  Romaine,  Berridge,  Hervey,  Top- 
lady,  and  Fletcher,  were  second  to  few  men  in  their  day. 

Young  Fletcher's  education  being  completed,  his  parents 
hoped  that  he  would  at  once  turn  his  attention  to  the  ministry, 
a  profession  for  which  they  considered  him  to  be  eminently 
well  fitted.  In  this  expectation,  however,  they  were  at  first 
curiously  disappointed.  Partly  from  a  sense  of  unfitness,  partly 
from  scruples  about  the  doctrine  of  predestination,  young 
Fletcher  announced  that  he  had  given  up  all  idea  of  being 
ordained,  and  wished  to  go  into  the  army.  His  theological 
studies  were  laid  aside  for  the  miUtary  works  of  Vauban  and 
Cohom,  and,  in  spite  of  all  the  remonstrances  of  his  friends,  he 
seemed  determined  to  become  a  soldier. 

This  strange  determination,  however,  was  frustrated  by  a 
singular  train  of  providences.  The  same  overruling  hand  which 
would  not  allow  Jonah  to  go  to  Tarshish,  and  sent  him  to 
Nineveh  in  spite  of  himself,  was  able  to  prevent  the  young 
Swiss  student  carrying  out  his  military  intentions.  At  first,  it 
seems,  on  his  parents  flatly  refusing  their  consent  to  his  entering 
the  army,  young  Fletcher  went  away  to  Lisbon,  and,  like  many 
of  his  countrymen,  offered  his  services  to  a  foreign  flag.  At 
Lisbon,  on  his  offer  being  accepted,  he  soon  gathered  a  com- 
pany of  Swiss  recruits,  and  engaged  a  passage  on  board  a  Por- 
tuguese man-of-war  which  was  about  to  sail  for  Brazil.  He  then 
wrote  to  his  parents,  asking  them  to  send  him  money,  but  met 
with  a  decided  refusal.  Unmoved  by  this,  he  determined  to  go 
without  the  money,  as  soon  as  the  ship  sailed.  But,  on  the 
morning  that  he  ought  to  have  put  to  sea,  the  servant  at  break- 


OBTAINS  A   TUTORSHIP.  3^9 

fast  let  the  kettle  fall  and  scalded  his  leg  so  severely  that  he  had 
to  keep  his  bed  for  a  considerable  time.  In  the  meanwhile  the 
ship  sailed  for  Brazil,  and,  curiously  enough,  was  never  heard  of 
any  more ! 

Fletcher  returned  to  Switzerland,  in  no  wise  shaken  or  deterred 
by  his  Lisbon  disappointment.  Being  informed  that  his  uncle, 
then  a  colonel  in  the  Dutch  service,  had  procured  a  commission 
for  him,  he  joyfully  set  out  for  Flanders.  But  just  at  that  time 
a  peace  was  concluded,  and  the  continental  armies  were  reduced; 
and  his  uncle  dying  shortly  after,  his  expectations  were  com- 
pletely blasted,  and  he  gave  up  all  thought  of  being  a  soldier. 

Being  now  disengaged  from  business,  and  all  mihtary  pros- 
pects seeming  completely  at  an  end,  young  Fletcher  thought  it 
would  not  be  amiss  to  spend  a  little  time  in  England.  He 
arrived  in  this  country,  almost  totally  ignorant  of  our  language, 
sometime  in  the  year  1750,  and  began  at  once  to  inquire  for 
some  one  who  could  instruct  him  in  the  English  tongue.  For 
this  purpose  he  was  recommended  to  a  boarding-school,  kept 
by  a  Mr.  Burchell,  at  South  Mimms,  and  afterwards  at  Hatfield, 
in  Hertfordshire.  With  this  gentleman  he  remained  eighteen 
months,  and  not  only  acquired  a  complete  mastery  of  English, 
but  also  became  exceedingly  popular  as  a  clever,  amiable,  and 
agreeable  man,  both  in  his  tutor's  family  and  throughout  the 
neighbourhood  in  which  he  resided.  While  staying  at  Mr. 
Burchell's,  Mr.  Dechamps,  a  French  minister  to  whom  he  had 
been  recommended,  procured  him  the  situation  of  private  tutor 
in  the  family  of  Mr.  Hill  of  Tern  Hall,  in  Shropshire.  His 
acceptance  of  this  post  in  the  year  1752,  in  the  twenty-second 
year  of  his  age,  was  the  turning-point  in  his  life,  and  affected 

his  whole  course,  both  spiritually  and  temporally,  to  the  very  end 

of  his  days. 

Up  to  this  time,  there  is  not  the  slightest  evidence  that 

Fletcher  knew  anything  of  spiritual  md  experimental  religion. 

As  a  well-educated  man,  he  was  of  course  acquainted  with  the 


39©  REBUKED  BY  A  SERVANT, 

facts  and  evidences  of  Christianity.  But  he  appears  to  have 
been  profoundly  ignorant  of  the  inward  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
£nd  of  the  distinctive  doctrines  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.  Hap- 
pily for  him,  he  seems  to  have  been  carefully  and  morally  brought 
up,  and  lo  have  had  a  good  deal  of  rehgion  of  a  certain  sort 
when  he  was  a  boy.  From  an  early  period  of  life,  he  was 
familiar  with  the  letter  of  Scripture,  and  to  this  circumstance  he 
traced  his  preservation  from  infidelity,  and  from  many  vices  into 
which  young  men  too  often  fall.  Beside  this,  a  succession  of 
providential  escapes  from  death,  which  his  biographers  have 
carefully  recorded,  undoubtedly  had  a  restraining  effect  upon 
him.  Nevertheless,  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  he  really 
experienced  a  work  of  grace  in  his  heart  until  he  had  been 
some  time  an  inmate  of  Mr.  Hill's  house.  Up  to  this  time  he 
had,  after  a  fashion,  believed  in  God  and  feared  God  ;  but  he 
had  never  felt  his  love  in  Christ  Jesus  shed  abroad  in  his  heart 
by  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  had  never  really  seen  his  own  sinful- 
ness, nor  the  preciousness  of  Christ's  atoning  blood. 

The  first  thing  which  awakened  Fletcher  to  a  right  conviction 
of  his  fallen  state,  was  the  simple  remark  of  a  servant  in  Mr. 
Hill's  household.  This  man,  coming  up  into  his  room  one 
Sunday  evening,  in  order  to  make  up  the  fire,  found  him  writing 
some  music,  and,  looking  at  him  with  concern,  said,  "  Sir,  I  am 
sorry  to  see  you  so  employed  on  the  Lord's  day."  At  first  his 
pride  was  aroused  and  his  resentment  moved,  to  hear  a  reproof 
given  by  a  servant.  But,  upon  reflection,  he  felt  the  reproof 
was  just,  put  away  his  music,  and  from  that  very  hour  became 
a  strict  observer  of  the  Lord's  day.  How  true  is  that  word  of 
Solomon,  "  Reproofs  of  instruction  are  the  way  of  life  ! "  (Prov. 
vi.  23.) 

The  next  step  in  his  spiritual  history  was  his  becoming  ac- 
quainted with  the  people  called  Methodists.  The  way  in  which 
this  was  brought  about  he  afterwards  related  to  John  Wesley, 
in  the  following  words: — "When  Mr.   Hill  went  to  London  to 


JOINS  THE  METHODISTS.  391 

attend  Parliament,  he  took  his  family  and  me  with  him.  On 
one  occasion,  while  they  stopped  at  St.  Alban's,  I  walked  out 
into  the  town,  and  did  not  return  till  they  were  set  out  for 
London.  A  horse  being  left  for  me,  I  rode  after  them  and 
overtook  them  in  the  evening.  Mr.  Hill  asked  me  why  I  stayed 
behind.  I  said,  *  As  I  was  walking  I  met  with  a  poor  old 
woman,  who  talked  so  sweetly  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  I  knew  not 
how  the  time  passed  away.'  Said  Mrs.  Hill,  *  I  shall  wonder  if 
our  tutor  does  not  turn  Methodist  by-and-by.'  *  Methodist, 
madam,'  said  I ;  '  pray  what  is  that  ? '  She  replied,  *  Why,  the 
Methodists  are  a  people  that  do  nothing  but  pray ;  they  are 
praying  all  day  and  all  night'  'Are  they?'  said  I;  'then,  by 
the  help  of  God,  I  will  find  them  out,  if  they  be  above  ground.' 
I  did  find  them  out  not  long  after,  and  was  admitted  into  the 
society." 

The  third  important  step  in  Fletcher's  spiritual  history  was 
hearing  those  clergymen  who  were  called  Methodists  preach 
dUbont  faith.  Under  the  influence  of  newly  awakened  feelings, 
he  had  begun  to  strive  diligently  to  make  himself  acceptable  to 
God  by  his  doings.  But  hearing  a  sermon  one  day  preached 
by  a  clergyman  named  Green,  he  became  convinced  that  he  did 
not  understand  the  nature  of  saving  faith.  This  conviction  was 
only  attained  through  much  humiliation  of  soul.  "  Is  it  possible,'* 
he  thought,  "  that  I,  who  have  always  been  accounted  so  reli- 
gious, who  have  made  divinity  my  study,  and  received  the  pre- 
mium oi piety  (so-called)  from  a  Swiss  university  for  my  writings 
on  divine  subjects — is  it  possible  that  I  should  yet  be  so  igno- 
rant as  not  to  know  what  faith  is  ?"  But  the  more  he  examined 
himself  and  considered  the  subject,  the  more  he  was  convinced 
of  the  momentous  tmth.  The  more  he  saw  his  sinfulness,  and 
the  entire  corruption  and  depravity  of  his  whole  nature,  the 
more  his  hope  of  being  able  to  reconcile  himself  to  God  by  hi» 
own  works  began  to  die  away.  He  still  sought,  by  the  most 
rigorous  austerities,  to  conquer  this  evil  nature,  and  to  bring 


392  INWARD  STRUGGLES. 

into  his  soul  a  heaven-born  peace.  But  alas  !  the  more  he  strove 
the  more  he  saw  and  felt  that  all  his  soul  was  sinful.  In  short,  like 
Bunyan's  Christian,  before  he  saw  the  way  to  the  wicket-gate,  he 
felt  his  imminent  danger,  and  yet  knew  not  which  way  to  flee. 

How  long  this  inward  struggle  continued  in  Fletcher's  mind 
is  not  quite  clear.  It  seems  probable  that  it  was  at  least  two 
years  before  his  soul  found  peace  and  was  set  at  liberty,  and  his 
burden  rolled  away.  Evangelists  were  rare  in  these  days,  and 
there  were  few  to  help  an  anxious  conscience  into  the  light. 
His  diary  shows  that  he  went  through  an  immense  amount  of 
inward  conflict.  At  one  time  we  find  him  saying,  "  I  almost 
gave  up  all  hope,  and  resolved  to  sin  on  and  go  to 
hell."  At  another  time  he  says,  "  If  I  go  to  hell,  I 
will  serve  God  even  there ;  and  since  I  cannot  be  an  in- 
stance of  his  mercy  in  heaven,  I  will  be  a  monument  of  his 
justice  in  hell ;  and  if  I  show  forth  his  glory  one  way  or  the 
other,  I  am  content."  At  another  time  he  says,  "  I  have  re- 
,covered  my  ground.  I  thought  Christ  died  for  all,  and  there- 
fore he  died  for  me.  He  died  to  pluck  such  sinners  as  I  am 
as  brands  out  of  the  burning.  And  as  I  sincerely  desire  to  be 
his,  he  will  surely  take  me."  At  another  time  he  records,  "  I 
heard  a  sermon  on  justification  by  faith,  but  my  heart  was  not 
moved  in  the  least  I  was  only  still  more  convinced  that  I  was 
an  unbeliever,  that  I  am  not  justified  by  faith,  and  that  till  I 
am,  I  shall  never  have  peace  with  God."  At  another  time  he 
says,  "  I  have  found  relief  in  Mr.  Wesley's  journal,  when  I 
heard  that  we  should  not  build  on  what  we  feel,  but  go  to  Christ 
with  all  our  sins  and  all  our  hardness  of  heart." 

Mental  struggles  like  these  are  no  strange  things  to  many 
of  God's  people.  They  are  deep  waters  through  which 
some  of  the  best  and  holiest  saints  have  had  to  pass,  in  the 
beginning  of  their  journey  towards  heaven.  John  Bunyan's 
little  book  called  "  Grace  Abounding,"  is  a  striking  account  of 
the  inward  agony  which  the  author  of  "  Pilgrim's  Progress  "  had 


OB  TA  INS  PEA  CB.  393 

to  endure  before  he  found  peace.  There  are  many  points  of 
resemblance  between  his  experience  and  that  of  Fletcher.  It  is 
a  pleasant  thought,  however,  that  sooner  or  later  these  painful 
struggles  end  in  solid  peace.  The  greater  the  conflict  at  first, 
the  greater  sometimes  is  the  peace  at  the  last.  The  men  that 
God  intends  to  use  most  as  instruments  to  do  his  work,  are 
often  tempered  for  his  service  by  being  frequently  put  into  the 
fire.  The  truths  that  we  have  got  hold  of  by  tremendous 
exertion  are  precisely  the  truths  which  we  afterwards  grasp  most 
firmly,  and  proclaim  most  positively  and  powerfully.  The  man 
who  has  embraced  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  alone, 
through  a  hand-to-hand  fight  with  Satan,  and  a  contest  even 
unto  death,  is  precisely  the  man  to  preach  the  doctrine  to  his 
fellow-men  with  unction,  with  demonstration  of  the  Spirit,  and 
with  crushing  power.  This  was  the  experience  of  that  mighty 
evangelist,  George  Whitefield.  This  was  the  experience  of 
Fletcher  of  Madeley. 

Once  set  free  from  the  burden  of  sin  unforgiven,  and  feeling 
the  blessedness  of  peace  with  God,  we  need  not  wonder  that 
Fletcher  longed  to  tell  others  of  the  way  to  life.  Long  before 
he  was  ordained  a  minister,  he  began  to  speak  to  others  about 
their  souls,  according  as  he  had  opportunity.  Both  in  London, 
when  he  accompanied  Mr.  Hill,  and  even  during  the  sitting  of 
Parliament,  and  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Tern  Hall,  he  seized 
every  occasion  of  trying  to  do  spiritual  good.  And  even  at  this 
early  period  his  labours  were  not  in  vain.  His  biographer  says : 
"  Though  he  was  at  present  by  no  means  perfect  in  the  English 
tongue,  particularly  in  the  pronunciation  of  it,  yet  the  earnest- 
ness with  which  he  spoke,  then  seldom  to  be  found  in  English 
preaching,  and  the  unspeakably  tender  affection  to  poor,  un- 
done sinners,  which  breathed  in  every  word  and  question,  drew 
multitudes  of  people  to  hear  him,  and  few  went  empty  away." 

We  can  easily  understand  that  Fletcher's  views  about  taking 
orders  now  went  through  a  complete  change.     Little  by  littie 


394  ffIS  ORDINATION. 

his  doubts,  and  fears,  and  scruples  as  to  his  fitness  for  the 
ministerial  office  melted  away.  Correspondence  with  John 
Wesley  encouraged  him  to  go  forward  with  the  idea  of  being 
ordained.  Difficulties  which  seemed  likely  at  one  time  to  put 
an  insuperable  barrier  in  his  way,  were  unexpectedly  removed. 
A  gentleman  whom  he  hardly  knew  offered  him  a  living  which 
was  likely  to  be  soon  vacant.  A  clergyman  whom  he  had  never 
even  spoken  to,  of  his  own  accord  offered  him  a  title  to  orders; 
and  at  length,  in  the  year  1757,  he  was  ordained  deacon  on 
Sunday  the  6th  of  March,  and  priest  on  the  following  Sunday, 
by  the  Bishop  of  Bangor,  in  the  Chapel  Royal  at  St.  James's. 
How  Fletcher  got  over  the  difficulty  of  being  a  foreigner,  and 
of  not  having  taken  an  University  degree,  I  am  unable  to  ex- 
plain, I  can  only  suppose  that  the  influence  of  the  family  of 
the  Hills,  in  which  he  was  still  tutor,  made  a  bishop  of  those 
days  ready  to  ordain  him  as  a  "  literate  person."  On  what 
title  he  was  ordained,  I  am  also  unable  to  say.  But,  putting 
things  together,  I  conjecture  that  he  was  nominated  curate 
of  Madeley,  the  parish  of  which  he  afterwards  became  vicar. 
The  whole  matter  of  his  ordination  seems  to  have  been  attended 
with  strange  irregularities,  judged  by  the  standard  of  the  oresent 
day.  But  things  were  strangely  managed  in  the  Church  of 
England  in  the  eighteenth  century. 

With  characteristic  energy,  Fletcher  lost  no  time  in  beginning 
the  work  of  the  ministry.  The  very  day  that  he  was  ordained 
priest,  he  came  straight  from  the  Chapel  Royal  to  West  Street 
Chapel,  and  assisted  John  Wesley  in  the  administration  of  the 
Lord's  Supper,  Throughout  the  next  two  months,  until  Mr. 
Hill's  family  left  London  for  Shropshire,  he  preached  in  many 
London  pulpits  both  in  the  English  and  French  language, 
according  as  he  had  opportunity.  Labouring  in  this  way,  he 
soon  became  well  known  as  a  fellow-labourer  of  the  leading  evan- 
gelists of  the  day,  and  rapidly  attained  a  very  high  reputation. 

In  the  month  of  May  1757  he  went  down  into  Shropshire 


RETAINS  ms  TUTORSHIP.  395 

with  Mr.  Hill's  family,  and  found  comparatively  few  openings 
for  the  exercise  of  his  ministry.  In  fact,  a  friend  says  that  he 
did  not  preach  more  than  six  times  in  six  months ;  partly,  no 
doubt,  from  his  time  being  occupied  with  the  education  of  his 
young  pupils,  and  partly,  in  all  probability,  because  the  Shrop- 
shire clergy  were  afraid  of  him,  and  would  not  admit  him  into 
their  pulpits.  The  only  churches  in  which  he  preached  were 
Atcham,  Wroxeter,  Madeley,  and  St.  Alkmunds,  and  the  Abbey 
Church,  Shrewsbury. 

Whatever  the  cause  may  have  been,  I  cannot  discover  that 
Fletcher  had  any  regular  stated  ministerial  work  for  the  first 
three  years  after  his  ordination.  From  March  1757  to  the 
latter  part  of  1760,  he  seems  to  have  retained  his  position  as 
tutor  in  Mr.  Hill's  family,  and  in  that  capacity  to  have  gone 
regularly  to  London  for  one  part  of  the  year,  and  to  have  been 
generally  in  Shropshire  for  the  other.  Wherever  he  w^as,  he 
appears  to  have  found  time  for  itinerating  and  preaching  a  good 
deal,  and  it  is  only  natural  to  suppose  that  he  was  not  required 
to  devote  himself  entirely  to  the  superintendence  of  Mr.  Hill's 
sons. 

I  must  confess  my  inability  to  trace  out  Fletcher's  history 
very  accurately  during  the  first  three  years  of  his  ministry.  The 
memoirs  of  men  of  that  day  are  so  often  written  with  a  reckless 
neglect  of  dates,  that  at  this  distance  of  time  it  is  impossible  to 
follow  their  movements.  Sometimes  I  read  of  his  being  at 
Bristol,  preaching  for  John  Wesley  at  Kingswood  ;  sometimes  I 
find  him  in  London,  preaching  in  Lady  Huntingdon's  drawing- 
room  ;  sometimes  he  is  at  Brighton,  occupying  the  pulpit  of 
j^ady  Huntingdon's  Chapel;  sometimes  he  is  at  Tunbridge, 
preaching  to  French  prisoners ;  sometimes  he  is  itinerating 
about  the  country,  and  appearing  in  all  sorts  of  strange  and 
"unexpected  places.  But  the  order  and  reasons  of  his  move- 
ments during  these  three  years  are  matters  which  I  cannot  pre- 
tend to  explain.     One  thing  only  is  very  clear.     He  became 


396       INTERVIEW  WITH  BERRIDGE  OF  EVER  TON. 

notorious  as  a  public  supporter  of  the  great  religious  revival  of 
which  Lady  Huntingdon  was  the  mainspring,  and  formed 
friendships  with  all  its  leading  agents  which  lasted  till  death. 

It  was  about  this  period  of  his  life  that  Fletcher  became 
acquainted  with  the  famous  Berridge  of  Everton.  This  took 
place  under  such  singular  circumstances  that  I  shall  give  them 
at  length  in  the  words  of  Lady  Huntingdon's  biographer.  It 
appears  that  he  went  to  Everton  vicarage  uninvited  and  unex- 
pectedly, and  "  introduced  himself  as  a  raw  convert  who  had 
taken  the  liberty  to  wait  on  Berridge  for  the  benefit  of  his  in 
struction  and  advice.  From  his  accent  and  manner  the  shrewd 
vicar  of  Everton  perceived  at  once  that  he  was  a  foreigner,  and 
inquired  from  what  country  he  came.  *  I  am  a  Swiss,  from  the 
canton  of  Berne,'  was  the  reply.    *  From  Berne  I'  said  Berridge  ; 

*  then  probably  you  can  give  me  some  account  of  a  young  fel- 
low-countryman of  yours,  one  John  Fletcher,  who  has  lately 
preached  a  few  times  for  Mr.  Wesley,  and  of  whose  talents, 
learning,  and  piety,  he  speaks  in  high  terms.  Do  you  know 
him?'  'Yes,  sir,'  said  Fletcher;  *  I  know  him  intimately ;  and 
did  the  Messrs.  Wesley  know  him  as  well  as  I  do,  they  would 
not  speak  of  him  in  such  terms,  for  which  he  is  more  obliged 
to  their  partial  friendship  than  to  his  own  merits.'  '  You  sur- 
prise me,'  said  Berridge,  '  by  speaking  so  coldly  of  a  country- 
man in  whose  praise  they  are  so  warm.'  '  I  have  the  best 
reason,*  he  rejoined,  *  for  speaking  as  I  do,  for  I  am  myself 
John  Fletcher.'      *  If  you  are  John  Fletcher,'    said  his  host, 

*  you  must  do  me  the  favour  to  take  my  pulpit  to-morrow,  and 
when  we  are  better  acquainted,  without  implicitly  receiving 
either  your  statement  or  that  of  your  friends,  I  shall  be  able  to 
judge  for  myself.'  Thus  commenced  an  intimacy  between 
Fletcher  and  Berridge,  which  no  subsequent  controversy  could 
ever  entirely  interrupt." 

The  turning-point  in  Fletcher's  ministerial  history  was  his 
appointment  to  the  vicarage  of  Madeley,  in  October  1760. 


VICAR  OF  MADELEY.  397 

Madeley  is  a  large  and  unattractive  parish  near  Wellington,  in 
Shropshire,  containing  at  this  time  between  eight  and  nine 
thousand  inhabitants,  employed  almost  entirely  in  collieries  and 
ironworks.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  it  was  very  dif- 
ferent at  this  period  from  what  it  is  now,  though  the 
population  has  probably  increased.  The  circumstances  under 
which  he  obtained  the  living  were  very  remarkable,  and  are  well 
described  in  his  own  letters. 

The  first  link  in  the  chain  of  providence  which  took  him  to 
Madeley,  was  the  offer  of  the  living  of  Dunham  in  Cheshire  by 
his  friend  Mr.  Hill.  He  told  Fletcher  that  the  parish  was 
small,  the  duty  light,  and  the  income  good — ;!^40o  a-year — 
and  that  it  was  situated  in  a  fine  sporting  country.  After  thank- 
ing Mr.  Hill  most  cordially  for  his  kindness,  Fletcher  replied, 
"  Alas,  sir !  Dunham  will  not  suit  me.  There  is  too  much 
money,  and  too  little  work."  "  Few  clergymen  make  such 
objections,"  said  Mr.  Hill ;  "  it  is  a  pity  to  resign  such  a  living, 
as  I  do  not  know  that  I  can  find  you  another.  What  shall  we 
do  1  Would  you  like  Madeley  % "  "  That,  sir,  would  be  the  very 
place  for  me."  "  My  object,  Mr.  Fletcher,  is  to  make  you 
comfortable  in  your  own  way.  If  you  prefer  Madeley,  I  shall 
find  no  difficulty  in  persuading  Chambers,  the  present  vicar,  to 
exchange  it  for  Dunham,  which  is  worth  twice  as  much,  and  in 
getting  Madeley  for  you."  In  this  way,  curious  as  it  now 
appears,  John  Fletcher,  in  the  month  of  October  1760,  found 
himself  in  the  strange  position  of  an  English  incumbent,  and 
vicar  of  a  large  parish  in  Shropshire. 

He  did  not  go  to  Madeley  without  many  doubts  and  mis- 
givings. Not  a  few  of  his  best  friends  thought  it  a  move  of 
very  questionable  wisdom.  Even  now,  one  cannot  help  fancy- 
ing that  his  valuable  life  would  have  been  longer,  and  his  extra- 
parochial  usefulness  greatly  increased,  if  he  had  been  content 
with  the  lighter  work  and  smaller  population  of  Dunham.  But 
we  must  not  forget  that  the  "  steps  of  a  good  man  are  ordered 


39^^        CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  CHARLES  WESLE  Y 

by  the  Lord."  It  is  place  that  often  draws  out  grace.  For 
anything  we  know,  Fletcher  might  have  sunk  into  comparative 
indolence  and  obscurity,  if  he  had  not  been  planted  at  Madeley. 
His  letters,  however,  at  this  period,  show  plainly  that  the  move 
was  not  made  without  great  anxiety  and  exercise  of  soul. 

To  Charles  Wesley  he  writes  :  "  My  heart  revolts  at  the  idea 
of  being  at  Madeley  alone — opposed  by  my  superiors,  hated  by 
my  neighbours,  and  despised  by  all  the  world ;  without  piety, 
without  talents,  without  resolution,  how  shall  I  repel  the  assaults 
and  surmount  the  obstacles  which  I  foresee  if  I  discharge  my 
duty  at  Madeley  with  fidelity]  On  the  other  hand,  to  reject 
this  presentation,  bum  the  certificate,  and  leave  in  the  desert 
these  sheep  whom  the  Lord  has  evidently  brought  me  into  the 
world  to  feed,  appears  to  me  nothing  but  obstinacy  and  refined 
self-love.  I  will  hold  a  middle  course  between  these  extremes. 
I  will  be  wholly  passive  in  the  steps  I  must  take,  and  yet  active 
in  praying  the  Lord  to  deliver  me  from  the  evil  one,  and  to 
conduct  me  in  the  way  that  he  would  have  me  go.  If  you  can 
see  anything  better,  inform  me  of  it  speedily ;  and  at  the  same 
time  remember  me  in  all  your  prayers,  that  if  this  matter  be  not 
of  the  Lord,  the  enmity  of  the  Bishop  of  Lichfield — who  must 
countersign  my  testimonials,  the  threats  of  the  Bishop  of  Here- 
ford's chaplain  who  was  a  witness  to  my  preaching  at  West 
Street  Chapel,  the  objections  drawn  from  my  not  being  natural- 
ized, or  some  other  obstacle,  may  prevent  the  kind  intention  of 
Mr.  Hill." 

It  is  written  that  "  when  a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord,  he 
maketh  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him."  This  text  was 
eminently  illustrated  in  the  matter  of  Fletcher's  appointment  to 
Madeley.  Obstacles  which  at  one  time  seemed  insuperable, 
melted  away  in  a  most  extraordinary  manner,  and,  almost  in 
spite  of  himself,  he  was  instituted  into  possession  of  the  living. 
In  a  letter  to  Lady  Huntingdon,  on  the  3rd  of  October,  he  says, 
"  I  seem  to  be  the  prisoner  of  God's  providence,  who  is  going, 


AND  LADY  HUNTINGDON.  399 

in  all  probability,  to  cast  my  lot  for  life  among  the  colliers  and 
forgemen  of  Madeley.  The  two  thousand  souls  of  that  parish, 
for  whom  I  was  called  into  the  ministry,  are  many  sheep  in  the 
wilderness,  which,  after  all,  I  cannot  sacrifice  to  my  own  private 
choice.  When  I  was  once  suffered  to  attend  them  for  a  few 
days,  some  began  to  return  to  the  Shepherd  of  their  souls,  and 
I  found  it  in  my  heart  to  spend  and  be  spent  for  them.  When 
I  was  afterwards  sent  away  from  them,  that  zeal,  it  is  true, 
cooled  to  such  a  degree  that  I  have  wished  a  thousand  times 
they  might  never  be  committed  to  my  charge.  But  the  impres- 
sion of  the  tears  of  those  who,  when  I  left  them,  ran  after  me 
crying,  '  Who  shall  now  show  us  the  way  to  heaven  ]'  never 
quite  wore  off  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart ;  and,  upon  second 
thoughts,  I  always  concluded  that  if  the  Lord  made  my  way 
plain  to  this  church,  I  could  not  run  away  from  it  without  dis- 
obeying the  order  of  providence.  That  time  is  come,  the 
church  is  vacated,  the  presentation  to  it  brought  unasked  into 
my  hands;  the  difficulty  of  getting  proper  testimonials,  which  I 
looked  upon  as  insurmountable,  vanishes  at  once;  the  three 
clergymen  who  had  opposed  me  with  most  bitterness  signed 
them; — the  Bishop  of  Lichfield  countersigns  them  without  the 
least  objection;  the  lord  of  the  manor,  my  great  opponent, 
leaves  the  parish;  and  the  very  man,  the  vicar,  who  told  ms  I 
should  never  preach  in  that  church,  now  recommends  me  to  it, 
and  tells  me  he  will  induct  me  himself.  Are  not  these  intima- 
tions of  the  will  of  God  r' 

On  the  28th  of  October  1760,  he  writes  to  J^ady  Huntingdon 
as  follows : — "  Since  I  had  the  honour  to  write  last,  all  the  little 
circumstances  of  my  institution  and  induction  have  taken  such 
an  easy  turn  that  I  question  whether  any  clergyman  noted  for 
good  fellowship  ever  got  over  them  with  less  trouble.  I  preached 
last  Sunday,  for  the  first  time,  in  my  church,  and  shall  con- 
tinue to  do  so,  though  I  propose  staying  with  Mr.  Hill  till  he 
leaves  the  country,  partly  to  comply  with  him  to  the  last,  and 


400  FLETCHER'S  CORRESPONDENCE. 

partly  to  avoid  falling  out  wiih  my  predecessor,  who  is  still  at 
Madeley,  but  who  will  remove  about  the  same  time.  If  I  know 
anything  of  myself,  I  shall  be  much  more  ready  to  resign  my 
benefice,  when  I  have  had  a  fair  trial  of  my  unprofitableness  to 
the  people  committed  to  my  care,  than  I  was  to  accept  it. 
Mr,  John  Wesley  bids  me  do  it  without  a  trial.  He  will  have 
me  see  in  this  appointment  to  Madeley  '  the  snare  of  the  devil, 
and  fly  from  it  at  the  peril  of  my  soul'  I  answer,  I  cannot  see 
it  in  that  light.  He  says,  '  Others  may  do  well  in  a  living;  you 
cannot,  for  it  is  not  your  calling.'  I  tell  him  I  readily  own  I 
am  not  fit  either  to  plant  or  water  any  part  of  the  Lord's  vine- 
yard, but  that  if  I  am  called  at  all,  I  am  called  to  preach  at 
Madeley,  where  I  was  first  sent  into  the  ministry,  and  where  a 
chain  of  providences  I  could  not  break  has  again  fastened  me. 
I  tell  him,  that  though  I  should  be  as  unsuccessful  as  Noah 
before  the  flood,  yet  I  am  determined  to  try  to  be  to  them  a 
preacher  of  Christ's  righteousness;  and  that,  notwithstanding 
my  universal  inability,  I  am  not  quite  without  hope  that  he  who 
reproved  a  prophet's  madness  by  the  mouth  of  an  ass,  may  re- 
prove a  collier's  profaneness  even  by  my  mouth." 

The  doubts  and  misgivings  with  which  Fletcher  accepted  the 
living  of  Madeley,  appear  to  have  clung  to  him  for  several 
months  after  he  entered  on  the  duties  of  his  parish.  Great 
allowance  must,  of  course,  be  made  for  the  natural  ignorance 
of  a  young  Swiss  about  the  habits  and  customs  of  a  neglected 
mining  population  in  England.  But,  judging  from  the  three 
following  letters,  he  seems  for  some  time  to  have  gone  through 
great  exercise  of  mind  after  commencing  his  residence  at 
Madeley.  I  make  no  excuse  for  inserting  these  letters  at 
length. 

On  the  19th  of  November  1760,  he  writes  to  Lady  Hunting- 
don as  follows : — "  I  have  hitherto  written  my  sermons,  but  I 
am  carried  so  far  beyond  my  notes  when  in  the  pulpit,  that  I 
propose  preaching  with  only  my  sermon-cover  in  my  hand  next 


LE  TTER  TO  LADY  HUN  TING D  ON,  40  « 

Friday,  when  I  shall  venture  on  an  evening  lecture  for  tlie 
first  time.  I  question  whether  I  shall  have  half-a-dozen  hearers, 
as  the  god  of  a  busy  world  is  doubly  the  god  of  this  part 
of  the  world;  but  I  am  resolved  to  try.  The  weather  and 
the  roads  are  so  bad,  that  the  way  to  church  is  almost  impracti- 
cable; nevertheless,  all  the  seats  were  full  last  Sunday.  Some 
begin  to  come  from  the  adjacent  parishes,  and  some  more,  as 
they  say,  threaten  to  come  when  the  season  permits.  I  can- 
not yet  discern  any  deep  work,  or,  indeed,  anything  but  what 
will  always  attend  the  crying  down  man's  righteousness  and 
exalting  Christ's — I  mean  a  general  liking  among  the  poor, 
and  offence  and  ridicule  and  opposition  among  the  respectable 
and  rich  people.  Should  the  Lord  vouchsafe  to  plant  the 
gospel  in  this  country,  my  parish  seems  to  be  the  best  centre 
of  a  work,  as  it  lies  just  among  the  most  populous,  profane, 
and  ignorant  parts.  But  it  is  well  if,  after  all,  there  is  any 
work  in  my  parish.  I  despair  of  this  when  I  look  at  myself, 
and  fall  in  with  Mr.  John  Wesley's  opinion  about  me.  Yet 
sometimes,  too,  I  hope  the  Lord  has  not  sent  me  here  for 
nothing;  and  I  beg  for  strength  to  stand  still  and  see  the 
salvation  of  the  Lord.  Nevertheless,  I  am  still  fully  deter- 
mined to  resign  my  living  after  a  while,  if  the  Lord  does  not 
think  me  worthy  to  be  his  instrument.  If  your  Ladyship  could 
at  any  time  spare  me  a  minute,  I  should  be  glad  to  know 
whether  you  do  not  think  I  should  then  be  at  full  liberty  to 
do  it  before  God.  I  abhor  the  title  of  a  living  for  a  living's 
sake.     It  is  death  to  me. 

"  There  are  three  meetings  in  my  parish — a  Papist,  Quaker, 
and  Baptist ;  and  they  begin  to  call  the  fourth  the  Methodist 
one — I  mean  the  church.  But  the  bulk  of  the  inhabitants 
are  stupid  heathens,  who  seem  past  all  curiosity,  as  well  as 
all  sense  of  godliness.  I  am  ready  to  run  after  them  into 
their  pits  and  forges,  and  I  only  wait  for  God's  providence  to 

show  me  the  way.     I  am  often  reduced  to  great  perplexity, 
(195)  26 


402  FLETCHER'S  CORRESPONDENCE. 

but  the  end  of  it  is  sweet.  I  am  driven  to  the  Lord,  and  he 
comforts,  encourages,  and  teaches  me.  I  sometimes  feel  that 
zeal  which  forced  Paul  to  wish  to  be  accursed  for  his  brethren's 
sakes,  but  I  want  to  feel  it  without  interruption.  The  devil, 
my  friends,  and  my  heart,  have  pushed  hard  at  me  to  make 
me  fall  into  worldly  cares,  and  creature  snares — first  by  the 
thought  of  marrying,  then  by  the  offer  of  several  boarders,  one 
of  whom  offered  me  sixty  pounds  a-year;  but  I  have  been 
enabled  to  cry,  'Nothing  but  Jesus,  and  the  service  of  his 
people;'  and  I  trust  the  Lord  will  keep  me  in  the  same  mind." 

On  the  6th  of  January  1761,  he  writes  to  Lady  Huntingdon 
again,  even  in  a  lower  key  and  a  more  depressed  frame  of 
mind.  He  says: — "  I  had  a  secret  expectation  to  be  the  instru- 
ment of  a  work  in  this  part  of  our  Church,  and  I  did  not 
despair  of  soon  becoming  a  little  Berridge  I  Thus  warmed 
with  sparks  of  my  own  kindling,  I  looked  out  to  see  the 
rocks  broken  in  pieces  and  the  water  flowing  out;  but,  to  the 
great  disappointment  of  my  hopes,  I  am  now  forced  to  look 
within,  and  to  see  the  need  I  have  of  being  broken,  and  of 
repenting  myself  If  my  being  stationed  in  this  howling  wil- 
derness is  to  answer  no  public  end  as  to  the  gospel  of  Christ, 
I  will  not  give  up  the  hope  that  it  may  answer  a  private  end  as 
to  myself,  in  humbling  me  under  a  sense  of  universal  unprofit- 
ableness. If  I  preach  the  gospel  ten  years  here,  and  see  no 
fruit  of  my  labours,  in  either  case  I  promise  to  bless  God,  if  I 
can  only  say  from  my  heart,  *  I  am  nothing,  I  have  nothing,  I 
can  do  nothing.' 

"  As  to  my  parish,  all  that  I  see  hitherto  in  it  is  nothing  but 
what  one  may  expect  from  speaking  plainly,  and  with  some 
degree  of  earnestness.  Many  cry  out,  *  He  is  a  Methodist,  a 
downright  Methodist;'  while  some  of  the  poorer  sort  say,  'Nay, 
but  he  speaketh  the  truth.'  Some  of  the  best  farmers  and  most 
respectable  tradesmen  talk  often  among  themselves,  I  hear, 
al)Out  turning  me  out  of  my  living  as  a  Methodist  or  a  Baptist, 


LETTER  TO  LADY  HUNTINGDON.  4^3 

and  spread  about  such  stories  as  your  Ladyship  may  guess  at 
without  my  writing  them.  My  Friday  lecture  took  better  thar 
I  expected,  and  I  propose  to  continue  it  till  the  congregation 
desert  me.  The  number  of  hearers  then  is  larger  than  that 
which  my  predecessor  had  on  Sunday.  The  number  of  com- 
municants is  increased  from  thirty  to  above  a  hundred,  and  a 
few  seem  to  seek  grace  in  the  means.  May  they  do  it  in 
sincerity ! " 

The  last  letterwhich  I  shall  quote  in  this  memoir  was  addressed 
to  Lady  Huntingdon  on  the  27th  of  April  1761.  He  says: — 
"I  learn  by  slow  experience,  that  in  me  dwelleth  no  good 
thing.  This  I  find  cannot  be  learned  of  man,  nor  by  man.  It 
is  a  lesson  that  grace  alone  teaches  effectually  in  the  furnace  of 
affliction.  I  am  still  at  the  first  line ;  but  I  think  I  read  it  and 
understand  it  in  a  manner  quite  different  from  what  I  did  before. 
Surely  the  Saviour  speaks  as  no  man  ever  spake ;  and  he  teaches 
with  authority,  not  as  the  scribes.  His  words  are  recorded  ii 
the  heart,  w^iile  those  of  men  only  graze  the  surface  of  the 
understanding.  I  have  met  with  several  trials  since  Providence 
cast  me,  I  shall  not  say  into  this  part  of  the  Lord's  vineyard, 
but  into  this  part  of  our  spiritual  Sodom.  Nevertheless,  they 
did  not  work  upon  me  as  they  ought  to  have  done.  I  stood 
out  against  them  in  a  kind  of  self-resolution,  supported  by 
human  fortitude  rather  than  divine  humility;  and  so  they  did 
not  bring  down  the  pride  of  nature,  but  rather  increased  it. 
The  old  man,  if  he  cannot  have  his  own  food,  will  live  quietly 
and  comfortably  on  spiritual  food ;  yea,  he  is  often  pampered 
by  what  the  natural  mind  supposes  will  poison  him. 

"  Of  late  I  have  met  with  a  trial  that,  by  God's  infinite 
mercy,  has  found  its  way  to  my  heart.  Oh,  may  the  wound  be 
deep  enough  to  let  in  the  mind  of  Jesus !  A  young  woman, 
daughter  of  one  of  my  most  substantial  parishioners,  giving 
place  to  Satan  by  pride  and  impatience,  is  driven  in  her  con- 
victions into  a  kind  of  madness.     I  could  not  bear  patiently 


404  FLETCHER'S  CORRESPONDENCE. 

enough,  before  this,  the  reports  that  went  about  that  I  drove 
people  mad;  but  the  fear  of  having  this  laid  to  my  charge, 
backed  with  so  glaring  an  instance,  has  thrown  me  into  some 
agonies  of  soul. 

"  Why  God  permits  these  offences  to  arise,  has  not  a  little 
staggered  me.  Once  I  was  for  taking  to  my  heels,  and  hire- 
ling-like, flying  at  the  first  approach  of  the  wolf.  But,  thanks 
to  divine  grace,  I  now  try  to  commit  to  the  Lord  the  keeping 
of  his  own  work,  and  pray  for  a  blind  faith  in  him  who  calls 
light  out  of  darkness.  Had  not  this  trial  staggered  me,  I 
should  have  great  hopes  that  a  few  living  stones  may  be 
gathered  here  for  the  temple  of  the  Lord.  There  is  a  consider- 
able stir  about  religion  in  the  neighbourhood ;  and  though 
most  people  rise  up  against  it,  yet  some  begin  to  inquire  in 
earnest  what  they  must  do  to  be  saved ;  and  some  get  a  sight 
of  the  way.  My  church  is  full,  notwithstanding  the  oaths  that 
some  of  my  parishioners  have  sworn  never  to  hear  me  preach 
again.  I  am  insensibly  led  into  exhorting  sometimes  in  my 
house  and  elsewhere.  I  preach  on  Sunday  morning  and  Fri- 
day evening;  and  on  Sunday  evening,  after  catechising  or 
preaching  to  the  children,  I  read  one  of  the  Homilies,  or  a 
sermon  of  Archbishop  Usher,  insisting  on  all  that  confirms 
what  I  advanced  in  the  morning,  which  greatly  stops  the  mouth 
of  the  gainsayers,  till  God  shall  turn  their  hearts." 

Such  were  the  beginnings  of  Fletcher's  ministry  of  Madeley. 
His  subsequent  history  would  occupy  far  more  room  than  can 
be  assigned  to  it  in  this  chapter.  How  he  persevered  in  his 
evangelistic  work  at  Madeley  for  twenty-five  years — how  he 
became  the  principal  of  Lady  Huntingdon's  College  at  Tre- 
vecca — how  his  health  broke  down  under  the  abundance  of  his 
labours — how  he  lived  on  through  evil  report  and  good  report — 
how  he  married — how  he  died — how  he  preached  and  how  he 
wrote, — all  these  are  matters  which  I  think  it  best  to  reserve 
for  another  distinct  chapter. 


DUTIES  OF  A  I'ARISH  CLERGYMAN.  405 


CHAPTER  IL 

Ministerial  Labours  at  Madeley — Superintendent  of  Trevecca  College,  1768 — Resigns  Tre- 
vecca,  1771 — Laid  aside  by  ill  health,  1776 — Goes  to  Clifton,  Newington,  and  Switzer- 
land— Returns  to  Madeley,  1781 — Marries— Dies,  1785 — His  Preaching — Writing- 
Private  Character — Testimony  of  Wesley  and  Venn. 

The  position  of  a  parish  clergyman  in  the  Church  of  England 
who  does  his  duty,  is  one  of  peculiar  difficulties  and  discourage- 
ments. He  has  not  to  deal  with  a  voluntary  congregation, 
whose  members  have  no  connection  with  him  beyond  that  of 
free  choice  and  inclination.  He  has  the  nominal  charge  of  all 
who  reside  within  certain  territorial  boundaries,  and,  whether 
they  hke  him  or  not,  in  the  eye  of  the  law  he  is  bound  to  do 
what  he  can  for  their  soul§. 

The  larger  the  population  of  an  English  parish,  the  greater 
are  the  English  clergyman's  difficulties.  Many  a  clergyman 
finds  himself  placed  in  the  midst  of  dense  masses  of  people 
whose  spiritual  necessities  he  is  utterly  unable  to  overtake.  He 
sees  around  him  hundreds  of  immortal  souls  continually  pass- 
ing out  of  time  into  eternity — ignorant,  immoral,  without  God, 
without  Christ,  and  without  hope — and  yet  has  neither  time 
nor  strength  to  get  at  half  of  them !  A  position  like  this  is 
dreadfully  trying  and  crushing  to  the  spirit  of  a  conscientious 
man.  Yet  this  is  the  position  in  which  Fletcher  found  him- 
self at  Madeley.  Who  can  wonder  that  at  first  he  felt  sorely 
cast  down,  and  half  inclined  to  think,  with  Wesley,  that  he  had 
mistaken  his  calling  % 

These  first  feelings  of  discouragement,  however,  gradually 
passed  away.  Little  by  little  he  became  fitted  to  his  post,  and 
saw  clearly  that  he  was  where  God  would  have  him  be.  Once 
settled  down  in  his  work  at  Madeley,  he  never  gave  it  up,  and 
for  twenty-five  years  did  the  work  of  an  evangelist  among 
his  semi-heathen  parishioners  in  a  way  that  few  have  ever 
equalled,  and  none  probably  have  surpassed.     No  other  cure 


4o6  HIS  MINISTERIAL  LABOURS. 

ever  tempted  him  away.  Where  he  began  his  ministry,  there 
he  ended  it.  Madeley  was  his  first  charge,  and  Madeley  was 
his  last. 

The  machinery  which  Fletcher  used  in  doing  his  work  at 
Madeley  was  very  simple  and  apostolic.  He  was  instant  in 
season  and  out  of  season,  always  "preaching  the  Word." 
Publicly  in  church,  privately  fi-om  house  to  house,  by  the  road- 
side, in  the  fields,  at  the  coal-pit  mouth,  he  was  continually 
lifting  up  his  voice,  and  "  teaching  and  preaching  Jesus  Christ." 
He  counted  the  day  lost  in  which  he  was  not  actually  employed 
in  doing  his  Master's  business.  A  warfare  of  holy  aggression 
on  sin  and  Satan's  kingdom  was  constantly  kept  up  throughout 
the  district,  and  no  one  was  let  alone.  So  great  indeed  was  his 
zeal,  that  people  who  were  determined  to  have  their  sins  agreed 
to  lock  their  doors,  and  refuse  him  admission.  Like  Ahab, 
they  hated  him  because  he  did  not  speak  good  of  their  condi- 
tion, but  evil.  Even  John  Wesley,  who  thought  him  wrong  in 
going  to  Madeley,  bore  this  testimony  to  his  work :  "  From  the 
beginning  of  his  settling  there,  he  was  a  laborious  workman  in 
the  Lord's  vineyard,  endeavouring  to  spread  the  truth  of  the 
gospel  and  to  suppress  vice  in  every  possible  way.  Those  sin- 
ners who  tried  to  hide  themselves  from  him  he  pursued  to 
every  corner  of  his  parish,  by  all  sorts  of  means,  public  and 
private,  early  and  late,  in  season  and  out  of  season,  entreating 
and  warning  them  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come.  Some  made 
it  an  excuse  for  not  attending  the  church  service  on  a  Sunday 
morning,  that  they  could  not  awake  early  enough  to  get  their 
families  ready.  He  provided  for  this  also.  Taking  a  bell  in 
his  hand,  he  set  out  every  Sunday  for  some  months  at  five  in 
the  morning,  and  went  round  the  most  distant  parts  of  the 
parish  inviting  all  the  inhabitants  to  the  house  of  God." 

He  found  abundance  of  organized  wickedness  in  his  neglected, 
overgrown  parish.  It  was  a  common  thing  for  young  men  and 
women  to  meet  in   large  bodies  on  stated  evenings  for  what 


HIS  CARE  OF  THE  SICK.  4^7 

they  called  "  recreation.*'  This  recreation  usually  consisted  in 
dancing,  drinking,  revelling,  and  immorality,  and  continued 
all  night.  Against  these  licentious  assemblies  Fletcher  reso- 
lutely  set  his  face,  and  used  every  exertion  to  put  them  down. 
He  would  often  burst  suddenly  into  the  room  where  the  dis- 
orderly company  were  assembled,  rebuke  the  thoughtless  revel- 
lers with  a  holy  indignation,  and  beard  Satan  in  his  high  places. 
Nor  was  his  labour  altogether  in  vain  in  this  unpromising  field. 
After  standing  the  first  outbursts  of  rudeness  and  brutality,  he 
generally  found  his  exhortations  received  with  silent  submission; 
and  in  some  cases  he  had  the  comfort  of  seeing  a  reformation 
in  the  behaviour  of  the  revellers. 

Cases  of  sickness  in  a  mining  district  like  Madeley  were 
necessarily  very  frequent,  and  coal-pit  accidents,  we  need  not 
doubt,  were  very  many  and  often  fatal.  In  attending  such  cases 
Fletcher  was  peculiarly  zealous  and  indefatigable.  "It  was  a 
work,"  says  Wesley,  "  for  which  he  was  always  ready.  If  he 
heard  a  knock  at  his  door  in  the  coldest  winter  night,  his  win- 
dow was  thrown  open  in  a  moment.  And  when  he  understood 
that  some  one  was  hurt  in  a  pit,  or  that  a  neighbour  was  likely 
to  die,  no  consideration  was  ever  had  of  the  darkness  of  the 
night  or  the  severity  of  the  weather.  One  answer  was  always 
given:  *  I  will  attend  you  immediately.'  " 

"  In  all  labour  there  is  profit."  It  will  not  surprise  a;.y  Chris- 
tian to  hear  that  Fletcher's  labours  at  Madeley  produced  an 
immense  effect  on  many  souls.  At  first,  indeed,  he  seemed  to 
labour  in  vain,  and  to  spend  his  strength  for  nothing.  People 
were  not  converted  in  masses,  and  all  at  once.  But  gradually 
a  large  number  of  hearers  were  led  by  the  Spirit  to  Christ,  and 
became  witnesses  for  God  in  the  midst  of  the  sin  and  darkness 
around  them.  With  success,  no  doubt,  came  opposition  and 
persecution  of  no  common  kind.  This,  however,  will  nofc  sur- 
prise any  Bible-reading  Christian.  Satan  will  never  allow  his 
kingdom  to  be  pulled  down  without  a  mighty  struggle,  and 


4o8  A  PROVIDENTIAL  ESCAPE. 

never  is  his  wrath  so  great  as  when  he  sees  he  has  but  *'  a  short 
time."  Let  a  great  and  effectual  door  be  opened  to  the  gos» 
pel,  and  there  will  never  fail  to  be  "  many  adversaries."  It  is 
an  invariable  mark  of  a  real  work  of  God,  that  it  is  carried  on 
"  through  much  persecution." 

One  Sunday,  for  instance,  after  doing  his  usual  duty  at 
Madeley,  Fletcher  was  on  the  point  of  going  to  a  place  called 
Madeley  Wood,  to  preach  and  catechise.  But,  just  as  he  was 
setting  out,  he  received  a  sudden  notice  that  a  child  was  to  be 
buried,  and  had  to  wait  for  the  funeral.  This  waiting  till  the 
child  was  brought  prevented  his  going  to  the  Wood  till  some 
time  after  the  appointed  hour.  Herein  the  providence  of  God 
appeared  in  a  very  remarkable  manner.  At  the  hour  origin- 
ally appointed  for  his  preaching,  some  colliers,  who  neither 
feared  God  nor  man,  were  baiting  a  bull  just  by  the  place  where 
he  was  expected.  Having  had  plenty  to  drink,  they  had  all 
agreed,  as  soon  as  he  came,  to  "bait  the  parson."  Part  of 
them  were  then  appointed  to  pull  him  off  his  horse,  and  the 
rest  to  set  the  dogs  upon  him.  But  in  the  meantime  the  bull 
broke  loose,  and  threw  down  the  booth  in  which  the  ring- 
leaders were  drinking,  and  the  people  were  dispersed.  The 
result  was  that  the  godly  people  who  had  come  together  to 
hear  him  preach  were  enabled  to  hold  their  meeting  m  quiet- 
ness and  safety. 

To  enter  into  all  the  details  of  Fletcher's  history  during  the 
twenty-five  years  of  his  ministry  at  Madeley,  would  be  clearly 
impossible  in  the  narrow  limits  of  a  brief  and  condensed  memoir. 
In  fact,  to  attempt  it  would  be  only  telling  the  same  story  over 
and  over  again.  Throughout  this  whole  period,  with  little  in- 
termission, he  was  always  doing  one  and  the  same  thing — 
always  preaching,  always  teaching,  always  trying  to  awaken 
sinners,  always  trying  to  build  up  saints ;  but  always  one  and 
the  same  man,  giving  himself  up  wholly  to  his  Master's  busi- 
aess.     Sometimes  he  found  time  to  take  a  few  Sundays  at  Ladv 


SUPERINTENDENT  OF  TREVECCA  COLLEGE.       409 

Huntingdon's  chapel  at  Bath.  Sometimes  he  exchanged  duties 
for  a  little  season  with  friends,  such  as  Mr.  Sellon,  at  Bredon, 
in  Leicestershire.  Sometimes  he  wrote  long  controversial 
treatises,  in  defence  of  what  he  believed  was  Christ's  truth, 
against  what  he  called  Calvinism  and  Antinomianism.  Some- 
times he  was  entirely  laid  aside  from  work  by  ill  health.  But 
wherever  he  was,  and  in  whatever  condition,  John  Fletcher 
was  unmistakably  the  "  man  of  God,"  always  the  minister  of 
Christ,  always  delighting  in  work,  always  insatiably  desirous  to 
do  good  to  souls.  I  find  no  man  of  the  1 8th  century,  whatever 
his  defects  may  have  been  in  doctrine,  to  whom  the  scrip- 
tural motto  might  be  so  justly  applied,  "  One  thing  I  do." 

About  the  year  1768  Fletcher  was  invited  by  Lady  Hunting- 
don to  become  superintendent  of  her  Training  College  for 
young  ministers  at  Trevecca,  in  Wales.  He  accepted  this 
important  post  with  the  distinct  understanding  that  he  was  not 
to  be  generally  resident  there.  He  felt  strongly  that  his  duty 
to  his  flock  at  Madeley  would  not  admit  of  this.  But  it  was 
settled  that  he  should  attend  as  often  as  he  could,  should  give 
advice  about  the  appointment  of  masters  and  the  admission  or 
exclusion  of  students,  should  oversee  their  studies  and  conduct, 
and  should  judge  of  their  fitness  for  the  .work  of  the  ministry. 

Whether  a  native  of  Switzerland,  who  had  never  seen  Eng- 
land or  spoken  the  English  language  till  he  was  twenty-one, 
was  exactly  the  man  to  be  head  of  a  training  college,  may 
admit  of  some  doubt.  In  all  probability,  however,  Fletcher 
was  the  best  man  among  the  evangelists  of  the  day  whom  Lady 
Huntingdon  could  find.  His  reputation  as  tutor  to  Mr.  Hill's 
son  was  probably  a  strong  recommendation.  His  learning  and 
scholarship  were  undeniable.  His  character  as  a  holy,  decided 
man  stood  very  high.  In  short,  if  he  were  not  the  fittest  person 
in  the  world  to  be  principal  of  a  college,  it  would  not  be  very 
easy  to  say  who,  in  that  day,  was  more  fit. 

Fletcher,  at  any  rate,  appears  to  have  done  what  he  could  to 


410  HIS  COURSE  OF  STUDY. 

give  the  new  Institution  success.  A  letter  to  Lady  Huntingdon, 
dated  January  1768,  gives  a  very  favourable  idea  of  his  sound 
judgment.  He  evidently  sees  the  materials  he  had  to  work 
upon,  and  wisely  resolves  not  to  pitch  the  standard  of  attain- 
ments required  too  high.  He  proposes  to  instruct  all  the 
students  in  grammar,  logic,  rhetoric,  ecclesiastical  history,  geo- 
graphy, a  little  natural  philosophy,  and  a  great  deal  of  practical 
divinity.  The  books  he  specially  wishes  to  have  in  the  library 
are, — Henry's  and  Gill's  Commentaries  on  the  Bible,  Baxter's 
Works,  Reach  on  Metaphors,  Taylor  on  Types,  Gurnall's 
Christian  Armoury,  Edwards  on  Preaching,  Wesley's  Christian 
Library,  Usher's  Body  of  Divinity,  Scapula's  Greek  Lexicon, 
Lyttleton's  Latin  Dictionary,  and  Johnson's  English  Dictionary. 
Short  and  scanty  as  this  list  may  appear  for  the  beginning  of  a. 
college  library,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  it  was  well  selected, 
considering  the  times.  The  mention  of  Gill's  Commentary  is 
also  an  interesting  fact.  It  is  enough  to  show  that  Fletcher's 
Arminianism  did  not  prevent  him  valuing  the  works  of  a  tho- 
roughly Calvinistic  writer. 

The  best  account  of  Fletcher's  proceedings  as  I'rincipal  of 
Trevecca  is  to  be  found  in  the  writings  of  one  of  the  under- 
masters ;  and  it  is  so  interesting,  that  I  shall  make  no  apology^ 
for  giving  it  entire.  He  says  : — "  I  went  to  reside  at  Trevecca 
in  1770.  The  young  men  whom  I  found  there  were  serious, 
and  made  considerable  progress  in  learning,  and  many  of  them 
seemed  to  have  talents  for  the  ministry.  Mr.  Fletcher  visited 
us  frequently,  and  was  received  as  an  angel  of  God.  It  is  not 
possible  for  me  to  describe  the  veneration  in  which  we  all  held 
him.  Like  Elijah  in  the  school  of  the  prophets,  he  was  revered, 
he  was  loved,  he  was  almost  adored ;  and  that  not  only  by 
every  student,  but  by  every  member  of  the  family.  And  indeed 
he  was  worthy.  Prayer,  praise,  love,  and  zeal,  all-ardent,  ele- 
vated above  what  we  would  think  attainable  in  this  state  of 
frailty,  was  the  element  in  which  he  continually  lived.     And  as 


HIS  EARA'ESTNESS  ANO  PRAYERFULNESS.         \\t 

to  Others,  his  one  employment  was  to  call,  entreat,  and  urge 
tliem  to  ascend  with  him  to  the  glorious  source  of  being  and 
blessedness.  He  had  leisure,  comparatively,  for  nothing  else. 
Languages,  art,  sciences,  grammar,  electricity,  logic,  even 
divinity  itself,  so-called,  were  all  laid  aside  when  he  appeared 
in  the  school-room  among  the  students.  His  full  heart  would 
not  suffer  him  to  be  silent ;  he  must  speak.  The  students  were 
readier  to  hearken  to  this  servant  and  minister  of  Christ  than 
to  attend  to  Sallust,  Virgil,  Cicero,  or  any  Latin  or  Greek  his- 
torian, poet,  or  philosopher  they  had  been  engaged  in  reading. 
And  they  seldom  hearkened  long  before  they  were  all  in  tears, 
and  every  heart  caught  fire  from  the  flame  which  burned  in  his 
soul.  Such  seasons  generally  terminated  in  this.  Being  con- 
vinced that  to  be  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  was  a  better  quali- 
fication for  the  ministry  of  the  gospel  than  any  classical  learning, 
after  speaking  awhile  in  the  school-room  he  used  often  to  say, 
'  As  many  of  you  as  are  athirst  for  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit, 
follow  me  into  my  room.'  On  this  many  of  us  have  instantly 
followed  him,  and  there  continued  for  two  or  three  hours, 
wrestling,  like  Jacob,  for  the  blessing ;  and  praying  one  after 
-another,  till  we  could  not  bear  to  kneel  any  longer."  I  make 
no  comment  on  this  curious  account.  I  dare  not  say  that  I 
think  it  would  be  well  to  be  incessantly  converting  college- 
lectures  into  prayer-meetings.  But  I  will  not  shrink  from  say- 
ing, that  a  few  more  head-masters  of  schools  and  principals  of 
colleges  as  spiritual-minded  and  prayerful  as  the  Vicar  of 
Madeley,  would  be  an  immense  blessing  to  the  Church  of 
Christ.  Head-masters  and  principals  too  often  go  into  the 
very  opposite  extreme  from  that  into  which  Fletcher  went. 
Too  often  they  are  cold,  dry,  hard,  and  unsympathizing,  and 
seem  to  forget  entirely  that  young  men  have  hearts,  and  con- 
sciences, and  souls. 

Fletcher's  connection  with  Trevecca  College  only  lasted  three 
years.    It  came  to  an  end  in  1771,  in  consequence  of  his  steady 


412  J^ES/GJVS  TREVECCA. 

adherence  to  Arminian  principles,  and  his  firm  determination 
to  stand  by  John  Wesley  in  matters  of  doctrine.  He  parted 
from  the  Institution  on  good  terms  with  Lady  Huntingdon,  and 
without  any  bitterness  or  asperity  on  either  side.  Whether,  in 
point  of  fact,  there  was  so  very  much  difference  in  doctrinal 
views  between  him  and  Lady  Huntingdon's  party,  as  he  sup- 
posed, is  a  matter  on  which  I  feel  considerable  doubt.  At  any 
rate,  I  suspect  it  was  greatly  exaggerated.  There  is  no  getting 
over  the  remarkable  fact  that  for  three  years  he  took  a  leading 
part  in  the  great  anniversary  gatherings  at  the  college,  and 
preached  side  by  side  with  men  like  Whitefield,  Rowlands, 
Berridge,  and  Venn.  That  simple  fact  speaks  volumes.  In 
days  of  controversy,  bystanders  are  fond  of  exaggerating  differ- 
ences, and  blowing  up  the  fire  of  division.  When  men  can 
preach  and  pray  together  with  freedom,  w^e  may  rest  assured 
that  in  heart  they  do  not  greatly  differ.  Let  us  try  to  believe 
that  all  was  ordered  for  good.  It  is  pretty  certain  that  Fletcher 
could  not  long  have  retained  his  double  position  as  Principal 
of  Trevecca  and  Vicar  of  Madeley.  The  double  responsibility 
would  have  killed  him.  It  is  far  from  improbable  that  he  saw 
this  himself,  and  was  not  sorry  to  have  a  door  opened  for 
retiring. 

About  the  year  1776,  Fletcher's  health  failed  so  much  that 
he  was  completely  laid  aside  from  public  work,  and  obliged  to 
leave  Madeley  entirely  for  the  long  space  of  five  years.  He 
had  never  been  very  strong  at  any  time,  and  for  some  years 
before  1776  he  had  many  premonitory  symptoms  of  consump- 
tion. Like  many  unmarried  ministers,  he  had  lived  alone  and 
taken  no  care  of  himself,  and  at  the  age  of  forty-seven  he  seemed 
to  be  breaking  down  entirely  under  the  abundance  of  his 
labours.  He  felt  himself  that  he  had  often  been  imprudent, 
and  taxed  his  constitution  too  much.  But  it  is  just  one  of 
those  lessons  which  ministers  generally  find  out  too  late,  when 
the  mischief  is  done.    Over-laziness  is  so  much  more  a  besetting 


LAID  ASIDE  BY  ILL  HEALTH.  4^3 

sin  than  over-zeal,  that  a  conscientious  man  may  well  be  ex- 
cused if  he  turns  a  deaf  ear  to  the  suggestion,  "  Spare  thyself," 
and  suspects  it  to  be  a  temptation  of  the  devil.  Such,  I  have 
little  doubt,  was  the  case  with  Fletcher. 

The  first  two  years  of  Fletcher's  forced  retirement  from  work 
was  spent  in  England, — partly  at  Brislington,  near  Bristol; 
partly  at  Newington,  near  London ;  and  partly  at  other  places, 
— but  always  at  the  house  of  loving  friends.  His  one  employ- 
ment was  that  most  wearing  and  depressing  one,  the  search  for 
health ;  and  many,  strange,  and  various  were  the  remedies  he 
seems  to  have  tried  in  order  to  obtain  it.  At  no  time  of  his 
life,  perhaps,  did  his  graces  shine  more  than  they  did  at  this. 
He  gave  full  proof  that  he  could  bear  God's  will  as  well  as  do 
it,  suffer  patiently  as  well  as  work  actively,  sit  still  and  do 
nothing  as  well  as  run  about  and  do  a  great  deal.  Let  me  here 
express  my  own  firm  conviction,  that  this  is  the  highest  point 
of  excellence  in  a  Christian.  Self-conceit,  and  the  love  of 
the  praise  of  men,  will  often  help  us  to  preach,  and  speak,  and 
write,  and  make  a  great  noise  in  the  world.  Nothing  but  great 
grace  will  enable  us  to  be  content  to  do  nothing,  and  to  sit  still 
and  wait.  No  wonder  that  one  who  came  to  visit  him  at  New- 
ington, when  he  was  thought  to  be  dying,  said  afterwards,  "  I 
went  to  see  a  man  that  had  one  foot  in  the  grave,  but  I  found 
a  man  that  had  one  foot  in  heaven." 

The  last  three  years  of  Fletcher's  period  of  ill  health  were 
spent  on  the  Continent, — partly  in  the  south  of  France,  and 
partly  in  Switzerland.  This  Continental  tour  was  a  wisely- 
devised  plan,  and  answered  perfectly.  The  return  to  his  native 
air,  the  entire  change  of  scene  and  occupation,  the  freedom 
from  a  thousand  causes  of  care  and  anxiety  in  England,  the 
society  of  his  valued  and  kind  travelling  companion,  Mr.  Ire- 
land of  Brislington, — all  these  things  acted  with  mighty  power 
on  Fletcher's  shattered  constitution.  Little  by  little  he  began 
to  rally.     Little  by  little  he  lost  the  many  unfavourable  symp- 


414  ffIS  MARRIAGE. 

toms  with  which  he  had  left  England.  At  last,  to  his  own  great 
delight,  he  was  able  to  preach  without  difficulty ;  and  at  length, 
in  the  month  of  June  178 1,  like  one  miraculously  raised  from 
the  dead,  he  found  himself  once  more  in  his  vicarage  at 
Madeley. 

In  the  latter  end  of  1781,  the  same  year  that  he  returned  to 
Madeley,  Fletcher  was  married.  He  was  now  in  the  decline  of 
life,  a  man  of  broken  health,  in  the  fifty-second  year  of  his  age. 
and  the  step  probably  took  his  friends  by  surprise.  But  it  seems 
to  have  been  a  wise  and  well-ordered  step,  and  one  that  added 
much  to  the  comfort  of  his  latter  days.  The  lady  of  his  choice, 
a  Miss  Bosanquet,  was  one  whom  he  had  known  well  as  a 
decided  Christian  for  at  least  twenty  years,  and  she  appears  in 
every  respect,  both  in  age  and  character,  to  have  been  eminently 
calculated  to  be  a  help-meet  for  him.  The  account  of  the 
wedding,  which  is  given  at  great  length  by  Fletcher's  biographer, 
Mr.  Benson,  is  very  curious  indeed,  and  deserves  an  attentive 
perusal.  Seldom,  perhaps,  was  a  marriage  ever  celebrated  in 
a  fashion  so  utterly  unlike  the  fashion  of  this  world.  But 
Fletcher  was  no  common  man,  and  his  wedding  was  no  com- 
mon wedding. 

The  Vicar  of  Madeley's  letter  to  a  friend,  written  shortly 
after  his  marriage,  is  interesting ;  and  the  more  so  as  it  throws 
some  light  on  his  motives  for  changing  his  state.  He  says : 
"  I  am  married  in  my  old  age,  and  have  a  new  opportunity  of 
considering  a  great  mystery,  in  the  most  perfect  type  of  our 
Lord's  mystical  union  with  his  Church.  I  have  now  a  new  call 
to  pray  for  a  fulness  of  Christ's  holy,  gentle,  meek,  loving  spirit, 
that  I  may  love  my  wife  as  he  loved  his  spouse  the  Church. 
But  the  emblem  is  greatly  deficient.  The  Lamb  is  worthy  of 
his  spouse,  and  more  than  worthy  :  whereas  I  must  acknow- 
ledge myself  unworthy  of  the  yoke-fellow  whom  Heaven  has 
reserved  for  me.  She  is  a  person  after  my  own  heart ;  and  I 
maice  no  doubt  we  shall  increase  tne  number  of  the  happy 


LETTERS  ON  THE  SUBJECT  4^5 

marriages  in  the  Church  militant.  Indeed,  they  are  not  so 
many  birtrit  may  be  worth  a  Christian's  while  to  add  one  more 
to  the  number.  God  declared  that  it  was  '  not  good  for  man,* 
a  social  being,  '  to  live  alone ; '  and  therefore  he  gave  him  a 
help-meet  for  him.  For  the  same  reason  our  Lord  sent  forth 
his  disciples  two  and  two.  Had  I  searched  the  three  king- 
doms, I  could  not  have  found  one  brother  willing  to  share, 
gratis,  my  weal,  woe,  and  labour,  and  complaisant  enough  to 
unite  his  fortune  to  mine.  But  God  has  found  me  a  partner, 
*  a  sister,  a  wife,'  to  use  St.  Paul's  language,  who  is  not  afraid  to 
face  with  me  the  colliers  and  bargemen  of  my  parish,  until 
death  part  us.  Buried  together  in  our  country  village,  we  shall 
help  one  another  to  trim  our  lamps,  and  to  wait,  as  I  trust  you 
do  continually,  for  the  coming  of  the  heavenly  Bridegroom." 

In  another  letter,  written  in  the  beginning  of  1782,  he  says  : 
"  Strangely  restored  to  health  and  strength,  considering  my 
years,  by  the  good  nursing  of  my  dear  partner,  I  ventured  to 
preach  of  late  as  often  as  I  did  formerly  :  and,  after  having  read 
prayers,  I  preached  twice  on  Christmas-day.  I  did  last  Sunday 
what  I  had  never  done :  I  continued  doing  duty  from  ten  till 
past  four  in  the  afternoon,  owing  to  christenings,  churchings, 
and  the  sacrament,  which  I  administered  to  a  churchful  of 
people ;  so  that  I  was  obliged  to  go  from  the  communion-table 
to  begin  the  evening  service,  and  then  to  visit  some  sick.  This 
has  brought  back  upon  me  one  of  my  old  dangerous  symptoms, 
so  that  I  had  flattered  myself  in  vain  to  do  the  whole  duty  of 
my  parish.  But  my  dear  wife  nurses  me  with  the  tenderest 
care,  gives  me  up  to  God  with  the  greatest  resignation,  and 
helps  me  to  rejoice  that  life  and  death,  health  and  sickness, 
work  all  for  our  good,  and  are  all  sure,  as  blessed  instruments, 
to  forward  us  in  our  journey  to  heaven." 

Fletcher's  most  useful  ministry  did  not  last  long  after  his 
return  to  Madeley.  He  died  on  Saturday  the  14th  of  August 
1785,  after  a  short  illness  of  only  ten  days'   duration— appa- 


4 1 6  A TTA CKED  BY  FE VER. 

rently  a  typhus  fever — in  the  fifty-sixth  year  of  his  age.  His 
constitution  was  probably  broken  down  by  his  long-continued 
labours  in  Christ's  cause,  and  a  constant  tendency  to  consump- 
tion ;  and  when  the  last  enemy  came,  he  had  no  strength  or 
stamina  to  enable  him  to  resist  disease.  Even  to  the  last  he 
was  the  same  man  that  he  had  been  for  twenty-five  years,  and 
his  obstinate  determination  to  work  on  to  the  uttermost  in  all 
probability  made  his  attack  of  fever  terminate  fatally.  Though 
taken  ill  on  Thursday  the  4th  of  August,  he  persisted  in  taking 
the  full  morning  duty  on  the  following  Sunday  in  his  church. 
He  read  prayers,  preached,  and  administered  the  Lord's  Supper, 
though  he  nearly  fainted  several  times  in  the  service.  From 
the  church  he  was  supported  into  his  bedroom,  where  he  lay 
for  some  time  in  a  swoon,  and  from  that  time  he  never  left  his 
house  alive.  Never,  perhaps,  was  there  a  more  striking  instance 
of  the  "ruling  passion  being  strong  in  death."  Like  White- 
field,  he  almost  died  in  harness. 

All  through  the  early  part  of  the  week  he  lay  very  ill,  able  to 
speak  little,  but  full  of  joy  and  peace,  and  delighting  gready  in 
hearing  his  wife  read  hymns  and  treatises  on  faith  and  love. 
On  Thursday  and  Friday  he  spoke  very  little,  but  seemed  to 
take  pecuhar  pleasure  in  the  text,  "  God  is  love,"  and  in  the 
verse  of  a  hymn  containing  these  words, — 

"  The  blood  of  Christ  through  earth  and  skies, 
Mercy — free,  boundless  mercy  cries  ; 
Mercy's  full  power  I  soon  shall  prove — 
Loved  with  an  everlasting  love." 

On  Saturday  afternoon  the  fever  seemed  to  leave  him  for  a 
little  time,  and  he  became  so  much  more  like  himself  that  a 
friend  said,  "  Do  you  think  the  Lord  will  raise  you  up  % "  He 
strove  to  answer,  but  could  only  just  pronounce  the  words, 
"  Raise  me  up  in  the  resurrection."  To  another  who  asked  the 
same  question,  he  said,  "  I  leave  it  all  to  God." 

On  Saturday  evening  the  fever  returned   again,  and  with 


HIS  DEATH.  417 

greater  violence  than  ever.  It  became  evident  that  he  was 
dying  very  fast.  His  wife  then  said,  "  My  dear  creature,  I  ask 
not  for  myself — I  know  thy  soul — but  I  ask  for  the  sake  of 
others  : — If  Jesus  be  very  present  with  thee,  lift  up  thy  right 
hand."  Immediately  he  did  so.  "  If  the  prospect  of  glory 
sweetly  open  before  thee,  repeat  the  sign."  He  instantly  raised 
his  hand  again,  and  in  half  a  minute  raised  it  a  second  time. 
He  then  threw  it  up,  as  if  he  would  reach  the  top  of  the  bed. 
After  this  he  moved  and  spoke  no  more,  excepting  when  Mrs. 
Fletcher  said,  "Art  thou  in  pain?"  when  he  answered,  "No." 
From  that  time  he  lay  in  a  kind  of  sleep,  though  with  his  eyes 
open  and  fixed,  sitting  upright  in  his  bed,  with  his  head  leaning 
on  pillows.  Eighteen  hours  he  continued  in  this  position, 
breathing  quietly  like  a  person  in  common  sleep,  and  with  a 
countenance  so  calm  and  composed  that  not  a  trace  of  death 
could  be  seen  on  it.  During  this  period  many  of  his  mourning 
parishioners,  who  had  assembled  for  Sunday  service,  were 
permitted  to  walk  through  the  house,  and  past  the  open  door 
of  his  bedroom,  and  to  see  his  much-loved  face  once  more. 
At  length,  at  half-past  ten  on  Sunday  night,  August  14th,  he 
fell  asleep  in  Christ,  without  a  struggle  or  groan,  and  entered 
into  the  joy  of  his  Lord.  On  the  17th,  he  was  buried  in 
Madeley  churchyard,  amidst  the  tears  and  lamentations  of 
thousands,  of  whom  many  never  knew  the  true  value  of  their 
vicar  until  they  had  lost  him. 

I  have  now  followed  JFletcher  from  his  cradle  to  his  grave. 
It  only  remains  for  me  to  offer  some  estimate  of  his  real  worth 
as  a  preacher,  a  writer,  and  a  man. 

As  ^preacher,  I  am  disposed  to  assign  Fletcher  a  very  high 
rank.  Even  in  the  i8th  century,  when  there  were  "giants  of 
pulpit  power  on  the  earth,"  I  suspect  there  were  not  half-a-dozen 
men  superior  to  the  Vicar  of  Madeley.  He  was  naturally  an 
eloquent  man.  He  had  a  mind  well  trained  and  stored  with 
scriptural  matter.      He  was  eminently  direct,  bold,  and   con- 

(195)  27 


4l8  FLETCHER  AS  A  PREACHER. 

science-Stirring,  in  his  way  of  putting  things.  Not  least,  he  had 
a  very  fine  voice,  and  a  singularly  fervent  and  attractive  manner. 
It  is  recorded  that  many  English  people  used  to  go  to  hear  him 
preach  in  French  to  the  French  congregations  in  London,  though 
they  could  not  understand  a  word  that  he  said.  "  We  go," 
they  used  to  say,  "  to  look  at  him,  for  heaven  seems  to  beam 
from  his  countenance."  A  minister  possessing  such  qualifica- 
tions as  these  must  have  been  a  man  of  no  common  power  in 
the  pulpit.  John  Wesley,  who  was  no  mean  judge,  used  to 
say,  that  if  Fletcher  had  had  more  physical  strength,  he  would 
have  been  the  first  preacher  in  England.  This  is  probably 
saying  too  much.  Nothing,  I  suspect,  would  ever  have  made 
Fletcher  equal  Whitefield  or  Rowlands.  But  we  need  not  hesi- 
tate to  place  him  in  the  first  class  among  the  Christian  orators 
of  England  in  the  i8th  century. 

The  following  passage  will  probably  convey  a  pretty  correct 
idea  of  what  Fletcher  was  as  a  preacher.  I  have  taken  it  from 
his  "  Address  to  a  serious  reader  who  inquires  what  must  he  do 
to  be  saved."  The  address  was  certainly  not  published  in  the 
form  of  a  sermon ;  but  if  it  had  not  been  preached,  I  am 
greatly  mistaken.  Ministers  who  spend  their  whole  life  in 
preaching,  as  Fletcher  did,  have  seldom  time  to  think  and 
compose  in  more  than  one  style.  To  that  rule  Henry  Venn 
was  perhaps  the  only  exception  among  the  great  men  of  the 
last  century.  But  that  Fletcher  had  preached  the  following 
passage  in  Madeley  pulpit  before  he  committed  it  to  the  press, 
I  feel  thoroughly  persuaded  in  my  own  mind.  After  quoting  a 
long  list  of  encouraging  promises  and  invitations  in  Scripture, 
he  goes  on, — 

"  Are  these,  O  sinner,  the  gracious  sayings  of  God  to  thee  1 
the  compassionate  expostulations  of  God,  become  incarnate  for 
thee  1  Did  God  so  love  thee  as  to  set  forth  his  only-begotten 
Son,  as  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood,  thus  to  declare 
His  righteousness  for  the  remission  of  sins  that  are  pasti     May 


QUOTA  TION  FROM  AN  ADDRESS.  4 1 9 

the  Almighty  now  be  just,  and  yet  the  justiher  of  him  that 
believeth  in  Jesus?  Is  there  no  difference,  no  respect  of 
persons,  with  him  ?  And  is  the  same  Lord  over  all  rich  unto 
all  that  call  upon  him  ?  Then  shout,  ye  heavens  !  triumph, 
thou  earth  !  and  thou,  happy  sinner,  know  the  day  of  thy  visi- 
tation ;  be  wise,  ponder  these  things,  and  thou  shalt  understand 
the  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord. 

"  Be  no  longer  afraid  that  it  will  be  presumption  in  thee  to 
beheve,  and  that  God  will  be  offended  with  thee  if  thou  makest 
so  free  with  Jesus  ls  to  wash  instantly  in  the  fountain  of  his 
atoning  blood.  He  not  only  gives  thee  leave  to  believe,  but 
he  invites  thee  to  do  it  freely.  Nay,  he  commands  thee  to 
believe ;  for  '  this  is  his  commandment,  that  we  should  believe 
on  the  name  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ.'  He  even  enforces  the 
precept  by  a  double  promise,  that  if  thou  behevest  thou  '  shalt 
not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life.'  And  that  nothing  may 
be  wanting  to  stir  thee  up  to  this  important  business,  he  is 
gracious  enough  to  threaten  the  neglect  of  it  with  the  most 
dreadful  punishment  \  for  '  he  that  believeth  not  shall  not  enter 
into  his  rest,'  and  '  shall  be  damned ; '  and  he  that  to  the  end 
remains  'fearful  and  unbelieving'  'shall  be  cast  into  the  lake 
that  burneth  with  fire  and  brimstone,  which  is  the  second 
death.'  How  canst  thou  doubt,  then,  whether  thou  art  welcome 
to  receive  the  Son  by  believing  on  his  name  ? 

"  Come  to  him  just  as  thou  art,  and  he  will  make  thee 
what  thou  shouldst  be.  When  he  counsels  thee  to  buy  of  him 
the  gold  of  faith,  and  the  garment  of  salvation,  take  him  at  his 
gospel-word.  Come  without  regarding  thy  stuff — the  poorer 
thou  art  the  better — the  oil  of  his  grace  flows  most  abundantly 
into  empty  vessels — his  charity  is  most  glorified  in  the  relief  of 
the  most  miserable  objects — his  royal  bounty  scorns  the  vile 
compensation  of  thy  wretched  merits — he  sells  like  a  king,  like 
the  King  of  kings,  *  without  money  and  without  price.' 

"*Ask   and  have,'  and   'take  freely,'  are  the   encouraging 


420  QUOTA TION  FROM  AN  ADDRESS. 

mottoes  written  upon  all  the  unsearchable  treasures  of  his 
grace. 

"  Be  of  good  comfort,  then ;  rise,  he  calleth  thee — stretch 
out  thy  withered  hand,  and  he  will  restore  it — open  thy  mouth 
wide,  and  he  will  fill  it — bring  an  empty  vessel,  a  poor  hungry 
heart,  and  he  will  give  into  thy  bosom  good  measure,  pressed 
down,  shaken  together  and  running  over. 

"  And  now,  what  meanest  thou,  sleeper  ?  Why  tarriest  thou  1 
Arise,  and  wash  away  thy  sins,  calling  on  the  name  of  the  Lord. 
Lose  not  time  in  conferring  with  flesh  and  blood ;  much  less 
in  parleying  with  Satan,  or  consulting  thy  unbelieving  heart 
These  delays  lead  to  ruin ;  the  Philistines  are  upon  thee, 
instantly  shake  thyself;  if  thou  art  not  altogether  blinded  by 
the  god  of  this  world,  and  led  captive  by  him  at  his  will,  this 
moment,  in  the  powerful  name  of  Jesus,  burst  the  bonds  of 
spiritual  sloth — break,  like  a  desperate  soul,  out  of  the  prison 
of  unbelief — escape  for  thy  life — look  not  behind  thee — stay 
not  in  all  the  plain.  This  one  thing  do ;  leaving  the  things 
that  are  behind — Sodom  and  her  ways — press  forwards  towards 
Zoar,  and  escape  to  the  mount  of  God,  lest  thou  be  consumed. 
By  the  new  and  living  way  consecrated  for  us,  in  full  assurance 
of  faith,  fly  to  the  Father  of  mercies,  pass  through  the  crowd  of 
Laodicean  professors,  press  through  the  opening  door  of  hope, 
take  the  kingdom  of  heaven  by  violence. 

"With  halting,  yet  wrestling,  Jacob,  say  to  the  Friend  of 
sinners,  *  I  will  not  let  thee  go  unless  thou  bless  me.'  If  he 
makes  as  if  he  would  go  farther,  with  the  two  mournful  disciples, 
'  constrain  him  to  stay ; '  or  rather,  with  the  distressed  women 
of  Canaan,  *  follow  him  whithersoever  he  goeth,'  take  no  denial. 
Through  the  veil,  that  is  to  say,  his  flesh,  torn  from  the  crown 
of  his  head  to  the  sole  of  his  feet — through  this  mysterious 
veil,  rent  from  the  top  to  the  bottom,  rush  into  the  blood- 
besprinkled  sanctuary  ;  embrace  the  horns  of  the  golden  altar ; 
lay  all  thy  guilt  on  the  head  of  the  sin-atoning  victim ;  read  thy 


FLETCHER  AS  A   WHITER.  A2\ 

name  on  the  breast  of  thy  merciful  high-priest.  Claim  the 
safety,  demand  the  blessings,  receive  the  consolations  bestowed 
on  all  that  fly  to  him  for  refuge,  and  begin  a  new,  delightful 
life,  under  the  healing  and  peaceful  shadow  of  his  wings." 

As  a  writer,  Pletcher's  reputation  will  never  perhaps  stand  so 
high  as  it  deserves.  Unfortunately,  a  very  large  portion  of  his 
literary  remains  consists  of  controversial  treatises  against  Cal- 
vinism, and  in  defence  of  Arminianism.  In  these  treatises  I 
must  plainly  say  the  worthy  Vicar  of  Madeley  says  many  things 
with  which  I  cannot  agree,  because  I  cannot  reconcile  them 
with  the  statements  of  Scripture.  Yet,  even  when  I  do  not 
agree  with  him,  I  feel  bound  as  an  honest  man  to  admit  that 
Fletcher  is  a  very  able  adversary,  and  makes  the  best  that  can 
be  made  of  a  bad  cause,  and  writes  with  courtesy.  Indeed,  I 
never  can  help  suspecting  that  he  was  not  nearly  so  much  an 
Arminian  in  his  heart  as  he  thought  he  was,  and  that  he  was 
pushed  into  saying  things,  in  the  heat  of  controversy,  which  he 
afterwards  regretted. 

The  following  passage,  from  Fletcher's  "  Checks  to  Antino- 
mianism,"  will  convey  a  very  fair  idea  of  his  power  as  a  writer, 
and  will  show  how  thoroughly  his  mind  was  saturated  and  imbued 
with  Scripture.  It  is  almost  needless  to  remark  that,  hke  many 
controversialists,  he  was  constantly  fighting  shadows  of  his  own 
creation,  and  that  his  Calvinistic  antagonists  hated  Antinomian- 
ism  and  unholy  living  quite  as  much  as  he  did.  But  the 
passage  is  a  good  specimen  of  his  style  of  writing.  He  is  giving 
a  long  catalogue  of  the  melancholy  inconsistencies  of  professors 
of  religion,  and  says  : — 

"Who  can  number  the  'adulterers  and  adulteresses'  who 
know  not  that  the  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  against  Godt 
— the  concealed  idolaters,  who  have  their  '  chambers  of  imagery' 
within,  and  'set  up  their  idols  in  their  hearts?'- — the  envious 
Cains,  who  carry  murder  in  their  breast?' — the  profane  Esaus, 
who  give  up  their  birthright  for  a  sensual  gratification ;  and 


42  2  SPE  CIMEJSr  OF  HIS  STYLE. 

covetous  Judases,  who  *  sell  the  truth'  which  they  should  '  buy/ 
and  part  with  Christ  *  for  filthy  lucre's  sake  V — '  the  sons  of  God, 
who  look  at  the  fair  daughters  of  men,  and  take  to  themselves 
wives  of  all  which  they  choose?' — the  gay  Dinahs,  who  *  visit 
the  daughters  of  the  land,'  and  come  home  polluted  in  body  or 
in  soul  1 — the  prophets  of  Bethel,  *  who  deceive  the  prophets  of 
Judah,'  entice  them  out  of  the  way  of  self-denial,  and  bring  the 
roaring  lion  and  death  upon  them  ? — the  fickle  Marcuses,  who 
depart  when  they  should  *go  to  the  work?' — the  self-made 
prophets,  who  '  run  before  they  are  sent,'  and  scatter  instead  of 
'  profiting  the  people  ?' — the  spiritual  Absaloms,  who  rise  against 
their  fathers  in  the  gospel,  and,  in  order  to  *  reign  without  them,* 
raise  a  rebellion  against  them  ? — the  furious  Zedekiahs,  who 
*  make  themselves  horns  of  iron  to  push'  the  true  servants  of 
the  Lord,  because  they  will  not  '  prophesy  smooth  things  and 
deceit'  as  they  do  Who  can  count  the  fretful  Jonahs,  who 
are  'angry  to  death'  when  the  'worm'  of  disappointment 
'  smites  the  gourd'  of  their  creature-happiness  ? — the  weak  Aarons, 
who  dare  not  resist  a  multitude,  and  are  carried  by  the  stream 
into  the  greatest  absurdities? — the  jealous  Miriams,  who  rise 
against  the  ministers  that  God  honours  ? — the  crafty  Zibas,  who 
calumniate  and  supplant  their  brethren  ? — the  treacherous  Joabs, 
who  *■  kiss'  them  to  get  an  opportunity  of  '  stabbing  them  under 
the  fifth  rib  V — the  busy  sons  of  Zeruiah,  who  perpetually  stir 
up  resentment  and  wrath  ? — the  mischievous  Doegs,  who  carry 
about  poisonous  scandal,  and  blow  up  the  fire  of  discord  ? — the 
hypocritical  Gehazis,  who  look  like  saints  before  their  masters 
and  ministers,  and  yet  can  impudently  lie  and  impiously  cheat] 
— the  Gibeonites,  always  busy  in  hewing  wood  and  drawing 
water,  in  going  through  the  drudgery  of  outward  services,  with- 
out ever  aspiring  at  the  adoption  of  sons  ? — the  halting  Naamans, 
who  serve  the  Lord  and  bow  to  Rimmon? — the  backsliding 
Solomons,  who  once  '  chose  wisdom,'  but  now  pursue  folly 
in  her  most  extravagant  and  impious  forms  1 — the  apostatizing 


FLETCHER  AS  A  MAN.  423 

Alexanders,  who  '  tread  under  foot  the  Son  of  God,  and  count 
the  blood  of  the  covenant,  wherewith  they  are  sanctified,  an 
unholy  thing?' — and,  to  include  multitudes  in  one  class,  the 
Samaritans,  who,  by  a  common  mixture  of  truth  and  error, 
of  heavenly  and  earthly  mindedness,  '  worship  the  Lord  and 
serve  their  gods  ;'  are  one  day  for  God,  and  the  next  for  mam- 
mon ? — or  the  thousands  in  Israel  who  '  halt  between  two 
opinions,'  crying  out,  when  Elijah  prevails,  '  The  Lord  he  is  the 
God  !'  and  when  Jezebel  triumphs,  returning  to  the  old  song, 
*0  Baal,  save  us  !'  O  trinity  of  the  world,  money,  pleasure,  and 
honour,  make  us  happy  !" 

But  it  really  is  not  fair  to  judge  Fletcher,  as  a  writer,  by  his 
controversial  treatises  alone.  Out  of  the  eight  volumes  of  his 
works,  at  least  four  contain  many  admirable  things,  which  are 
far  less  known  than  they  ought  to  be.  His  admirable  "  Letter 
to  Mr.  Prothero  in  Defence  of  Experimental  ReHgion ;"  his 
"  Critical  Vindication  of  the  Catholic  P'aith,  in  reply  to  Priest- 
ley ;"  his  "  Portrait  of  St.  Paul ;"  his  "  Pastoral  Epistles"  to  his 
flock  at  Madeley,  are,  generally  speaking,  all  worthy  of  high 
praise.  Last,  but  not  least,  his  letters  to  friends,  like  most  of 
the  letters  of  the  spiritual  heroes  of  this  century,  are  often 
most  excellent.  If  a  volume  of  letters  by  Whitefield,  Venn, 
and  their  contemporaries,  could  be  compiled  and  published — 
and  I  have  long  regretted  that  the  thing  has  not  been  done — I 
am  bold  to  say  that  Fletcher's  letters  would  occupy  a  very  pro- 
minent place  among  them. 

As  a  man,  Pletcher's  character  stands  above  all  praise.  I  can 
find  very  few  men  of  the  i8th  century  about  whom  there  ic 
so  striking  an  agreement  on  all  sides  that  he  was  pre-eminently 
and  peculiarly  a  most  holy  man,  a  saint  indeed,  a  living  epistle 
of  Christ.  His  deep  humility,  his  extraordinary  self-denial,  his 
unwearied  diligence,  his  courage  in  Christ's  cause,  his  constant 
spirituality  of  tone,  his  fervent  love  to  God  and  man,  his  single- 
ness of  eye,  are  features  in  his  character  so  strongly  marked  and 


424  TESTIMONY  OF ')OHN  WESLEY 

developed,  that  even  his  adversaries  never  pretended  to  deny 
them.  Wrong  as  he  was  in  some  of  his  views  of  doctrine,  his 
worst  foes  never  ventured  to  doubt  his  singular  holiness  of  life. 
In  this  respect,  at  any  rate,  the  Vicar  of  Madeley  ranked  high 
among  his  contemporaries.  Like  every  earthen  vessel,  he  had 
his  cracks  and  flaws,  no  doubt,  and  no  one  knew  it  better  than 
himself;  but  they  were  cracks  and  flaws  which  were  far  less 
visible  than,  unhappily,  they  are  in  many  of  God's  saints. 

Let  us  hear  what  John  Wesley  thought  of  Fletcher.  No 
doubt  he  was  an  Arminian,  like  Fletcher,  and  likely  to  think 
well  of  him.  But  Wesley  was  a  calm,  cool-blooded  man,  and 
not  one  to  speak  strongly  in  any  one's  praise  without  good 
reason.     This  is  his  testimony  :— 

"  I  was  intimately  acquainted  with  Mr.  Fletcher  for  thirty 
years.  I  conversed  with  him  morning,  noon,  and  night,  with- 
out the  least  reserve,  during  a  journey  of  many  hundred  miles ; 
and  in  all  that  time  I  never  heard  him  speak  an  improper  word, 
or  do  an  improper  action.  To  conclude,  within  fourscore  years 
I  have  known  many  excellent  men,  holy  in  heart  and  life ;  but 
one  equal  to  him  I  have  not  known,  one  so  uniformly  devoted 
to  God.  So  unblamable  a  man,  in  every  respect,  I  have  not 
found,  either  in  Europe  or  America,  nor  do  I  expect  to  find 
another  such  on  this  side  eternity." 

Let  us  hear,  finally,  what  Henry  Venn  thought  of  Fletcher. 
His  testimony,  at  any  rate,  is  unexceptionable.  Though  not  an 
extreme  Calvinist,  he  certainly  was  not  in  the  least  an  Arminian. 
He  had  little  or  no  direct  connection  with  the  Vicar  of  Made- 
ley,  and  did  not  move  in  the  same  path.  Above  all,  he  was  a 
man  of  rare  good  sense  as  well  as  grace,  and  one  whose  gift  of 
sound  judgment  was  great  and  extraordinary. 

His  testimony  was  as  follows  : — "  Mr.  Fletcher  was  a  lumi- 
nary. A  luminary,  did  I  say  1  He  was  a  sun.  I  have  known 
all  the  great  men  for  these  fifty  years,  but  I  have  known  none 
like  him.    I  was  intimately  acquainted  with  him,  and  was  undei 


AND  HENRY  VENN.  4*5 

the  same  roof  with  him  once  for  six  weeks,  during  which  I  never 
heard  him  say  a  single  word  which  was  not  proper  to  be  spoken, 
and  which  had  not  a  tendency  to  minister  grace  to  the  hearers. 
One  time  meeting  him  when  he  was  very  ill  with  a  hectic  fever, 
which  he  had  brought  on  himself  by  excessive  labour,  I  said, 
*  I  am  sorry  to  find  you  so  ill'  Mr.  Fletcher  answered  with 
great  sweetness  and  energy,  '  Sorry,  sir !  Why  are  you  sorry  % 
It  is  the  chastisement  of  my  heavenly  Father,  and  I  rejoice  in  it, 
I  love  the  rod  of  my  God,  and  rejoice  therein,  as  an  expression 
of  his  love  and  affection  towards  me.'  " 

With  John  Fletcher  I  now  close  my  biographical  accounts  of 
the  ministers  who  were  prime  movers  in  the  revival  of  English 
religion  in  the  i8th  century.  I  have  shown,  I  think,  that  in 
the  best  sense  "  there  were  giants  in  those  days."  The  Vicar 
of  Madeley,  my  readers  will  probably  agree  with  me,  was  not  the 
least  of  them. 


XIV. 

..|Y   contribution  to  the  religious  history   of  England 
\\      in  the  i8th  century  is  now  concluded.    I  have  fairly 


^iSi  exhausted  the  list  of  leading  ministers  who  were  the 
spiritual  reformers  of  our  land  at  this  period.  That  there 
were  other  great  and  good  men  beside  the  eleven  whom  I  have 
selected,  I  do  not  for  a  moment  deny.  I  only  say  that  there 
were  none  equal  to  them  in  public  usefulness.  There  were 
other  labourers  in  the  gospel-field  of  England  whose  record 
is  on  high.     But  they  "  attained  not  to  the  first "  eleven. 

In  compiling  these  biographies  I  am  very  sensible  of  many 
deficiencies.  I  know  they  might  have  been  made  larger.  But 
I  cannot  forget  that  we  do  not  live  in  a  reading  age,  and  that 
"  great  books  are  gieat  evils."  I  know  they  might  have  been  bet- 
ter written.  But  I  hope  the  reader  will  remember  that  their 
preparation  has  been  carried  on  under  immense  difficulties,  and 
under  the  daily  pressure  of  other  ministerial  duties.  I  have,  at 
any  rate,  the  satisfaction  of  feeling  that  this  volume  contains  a 
mass  of  facts  which  have  never  been  brought  together  before, 
and  throws  light  on  some  points  in  English  Church  history 
which  have  never  yet  been  rightly  understood. 

There  are  a  few  general  statistics  about  my  eleven  heroes 
which  deserve  notice.  Reading  their  lives  singly  and  one  by 
one,  we  may  possibly  overlook  them.  Viewed  altogether  and 
in  combination,  they  will  probably  be  thought  interesting. 

For  one  thing,  every  one  of  the  eleven  leading  ministers  in 


LEADERS    OF    THE    18TH    CENTURY.  427 

the  revival  of  this  century  was  an  ordained  clergyman  of  the 
Church  of  England.  This  is  a  fact  which  ought  not  to  be  over- 
looked. I  am  not  what  is  called  a  High  Churchman.  I  do 
not  hold  the  divine  right  of  Episcopacy.  I  desire  to  regard  all 
ministers  who  love  Christ  and  preach  the  truth  as  my  brethren. 
But  still,  honoui-  should  be  given  where  honour  is  due.  It  is  a 
total  mistake  to  suppose,  as  many  do,  that  English  religion 
at  this  period  was  revived  by  Dissenters.  Nothing  of  the 
kind !  The  men  who  did  the  mighty  work  of  that  day,  and 
plucked  Christianity  out  of  the  dust,  were  all  clergymen  of  the 
Church  of  England — clergymen  of  whom  the  Church  was  un- 
worthy, but  still  clergymen  as  really  and  truly  as  George  Her- 
bert, or  Andrews,  or  Bull.  Let  that  fact  never  be  forgotten. 
Well  would  it  have  been  for  the  Church  of  England  if  she 
had  more  children  like  Rowlands  and  Berridge,  and  fewer  like 
Laud. 

For  another  thing,  the  greater  part  of  the  leaders  of  the 
revival  of  English  religion  in  this  century  were  University  mep. 
Five  of  them — namely,  Wesley,  Whitefield,  Romaine,  Hervey, 
and  Walker — took  their  degrees  at  Oxford.  Three  of  them — 
namely,  Grimshaw,  Berridge,  and  Venn — took  their  degrees  at 
Cambridge.  Toplady  was  educated  at  Trinity  College,  Dublin. 
Rowlands  and  Fletcher  alone  were  at  no  University  at  all.  Let 
this  fact  also  be  carefully  remembered.  The  common  notion 
that  the  men  who  turned  England  upside  down  at  this  time 
were  mere  common-place,  illiterate,  ignorant,  uneducated  fana- 
tics, is  a  stupid  mistake.  So  far  from  this  being  the  case,  the 
eleven  clergymen  described  m  this  volume  were  in  all  proba- 
bility better  read  and  more  furnished  with  knowledge  than  most 
ministers  of  their  day. 

For  another  thing,  the  majority  of  the  eleven  clergymen  who 
led  the  revival  of  this  century  were  married  men.  Of  the  four 
who  never  married,  three  died  at  a  comparatively  early  age,  of 
consumption,   namely,  Hervey,  Toplady,  and  Walker.      The 


428  LESSONS  LEARNED  FROM  THu, 

most  eminent  one  of  the  eleven  who  died  unmarried  was  Ber- 
ridge,  and  he,  we  have  seen,  was  so  quaint,  that  he  was  always 
unlike  other  men.  This  fact  is  one  that  ought  not  to  be  over- 
looked. In  a  day  when  celibacy  is  held  up  to  admiration  as 
the  grand  secret  of  exalted  spirituality,  it  is  worth  remembering 
that  devoted  servants  of  God  like  Grimshaw,  Rowlands,  Venn, 
and  Romaine,  could  walk  with  God  like  Enoch,  and  yet,  like 
Enoch,  "  live  according  to  God's  ordinance  in  the  holy  estate  of 
matrimony."  The  minister  who  has  no  sons  and  daughters  of 
his  own,  suffers  immense  loss  in  the  study  of  liuman  nature. 

It  only  remains  for  me  now  to  point  out  a  few  practical 
lessons  which  appear  to  flow  naturally  from  the  biographies 
which  fill  the  pages  of  this  book.  They  are  lessons  which  are 
strongly  impressed  on  my  own  mind.  Thankful  should  I  be 
if  I  could  impress  them  on  the  minds  of  others ! 

I.  In  the  first  place,  would  we  know  the  right  instrumentality 
for  doing  good  in  the  present  day  ?  Evil  is  about  us  and  upon 
us  on  every  side,  evil  from  Romanism,  evil  from  infidelity, 
evil  from  tractarianism,  evil  from  neologianism,  evil  amidst  the 
working  classes,  evil  amidst  the  educated  bodies.  What  is  the 
true  remedy  for  the  disease  \  What  is  the  weapon  to  be  wielded 
if  we  would  meet  the  foe  1  Can  anything  be  done  ?  Is  there 
no  hope? 

I  answer  boldly  that  the  true  remedy  for  all  the  evils  of  our 
day  is  the  same  remedy  that  proved  effectual  at  this  time 
— the  same  pure  unadulterated  doctrine  that  the  men  of 
whom  I  have  been  writing  used  to  preach,  and  the  same  kind 
of  preachers.  I  am  bold  to  say  that  we  want  nothing  new — 
no  new  systems,  no  new  school  of  teaching,  no  new  theology, 
no  new  ceremonial,  no  new  gospel.  We  want  nothing  but  the 
old  truths  rightly  preached  and  rightly  brought  home  to  con- 
sciences, minds,  and  wills.  The  evangelical  system  of  theology 
revived  England  in  the  i8th  century,  and  I  have  faith  to 
believe  that  it  could  revive  it  again. 


PRECEDING  BIOGRAPHIES.  429 

There  never  has  been  good  done  in  the  world  excepting  by 
the  faithful  preaching  of  evangeHcal  truth.  From  the  days  of 
the  apostles  down  to  this  time,  there  have  been  no  victories 
won,  no  spiritual  successes  obtained,  except  by  the  doctrines 
which  wrought  deliverance  at  this  period.  Where  are 
the  conquests  of  neologianism  and  tracrananism  over  heathen- 
ism, irreligion,  immorality?  Where  are  the  nations  they  have 
Christianized,  the  parishes  they  have  evangelized,  the  towns 
they  have  turned  from  darkness  to  light  ]  You  may  well  ask 
where?  You  will  get  no  answer.  The  good  that  has  been 
done  in  the  world,  however  small,  has  always  been  done  by 
evangelical  doctrines ;  and  if  men  who  are  not  called  "  evan- 
gelical" have  had  successes,  they  have  had  them  by  using 
evangelical  weapons.  They  have  ploughed  with  our  heifer,  or 
they  would  never  have  had  any  harvest  to  show  at  all. 

I  repeat  it  emphatically,  for  I  believe  it  sincerely.  The  first 
want  of  our  day  is  a  return  to  the  old,  simple,  and  sharply-cut 
doctrines  of  our  fathers  in  theiSthcentury ;  and  the  second  want 
is  a  generation  of  like-minded  and  like-gifted  men  to  preach 
them.  Give  me  in  any  county  of  England  and  Wales  a  man 
like  Grimshaw  or  Rowlands  or  Whitefield,  and  there  is  nothing 
in  the  present  day  which  would  make  me  afraid.  I  confidently 
believe  that  in  the  face  of  such  men  and  such  preaching  ritual- 
ism, neologianism,  and  infidelity  would  be  paralyzed  and  wither 
away. 

2.  Would  we  know,  in  the  next  place,  why  the  ministers  who 
profess  to  follow  the  evangelical  fathers  of  this  century  are  so 
much  less  successful  than  they  were  ?  The  question  is  a  deli- 
cate and  interesting  one,  and  ought  not  to  be  shelved.  The 
suspicion  naturally  crosses  some  minds,  that  the  doctrines  which 
won  victories  then  are  worn  out,  and  have  lost  their  power 
I  believe  that  theory  to  be  an  entire  mistake.  The  answer 
which  I  give  to  the  enquiry  is  one  of  a  very  different 
kind. 


430  NOT  UP  TO  THE  STANDARD 

I  am  obliged  then  to  say  plainly,  that,  in  my  judgment,  wc 
have  among  us  neither  the  men  nor  the  doctrines  of  the  days 
gone  by.  We  have  none  who  preach  with  such  peculiar  powei 
as  Whitefield  or  Rowlands.  ^Ve  have  none  who  in  self-denial, 
singleness  of  eye,  diligence,  holy  boldness,  and  unworldliness, 
come  up  to  the  level  of  Grimshaw,  Walker,  Venn,  and  Fletcher. 
It  is  a  humbling  conclusion;  but  I  have  long  felt  that  it  is  the 
truth.  We  lack  both  the  men  and  the  message  of  theiSthcentury. 
What  wonder  if  we  do  not  see  this  century's  results.  Give 
us  like  men  and  a  like  message,  and  I  have  no  fear  that  the 
Holy  Ghost  would  grant  us  like  results. 

Wherein  do  evangelical  Churchmen  fall  short  of  their  great 
predecessors  in  theiSthcentury  %  Let  us  look  this  question  fairly 
in  the  face.  Let  us  come  to  particulars.  They  fall  short  in 
doctrine.  They  are  neither  so  full  nor  so  distinct,  nor  so  bold, 
nor  so  uncompromising.  They  are  afraid  of  strong  statements. 
They  are  too  ready  to  fence,  and  guard,  and  qualify  all  their 
teaching,  as  if  Christ's  gospel  was  a  little  baby,  and  could  not 
be  trusted  to  walk  alone.  They  fall  short  as  preachers.  They 
have  neither  the  fervour,  nor  fire,  nor  thought,  nor  illus- 
tration, nor  directness,  nor  holy  boldness,  nor  grand  simplicity 
of  language  which  characterized  the  last  century.  Above 
all,  they  fall  short  in  life.  They  are  not  men  of  one  thing, 
separate  from  the  world,  unmistakable  men  of  God,  minis- 
ters of  Christ  everywhere,  indifferent  to  man's  opinion,  regard- 
less who  is  offended,  if  they  only  preach  truth,  always  about 
their  Father's  business,  as  Grimshaw  and  Fletcher  used  to  be. 
They  do  not  make  the  world  feel  that  a  prophet  is  among  them, 
and  carry  about  with  them  their  Master's  presence,  as  Moses 
when  he  came  down  from  the  mount.  I  write  these  things  with 
sorrow.  I  desire  to  take  my  full  share  of  blame.  But  I  do 
believe  I  am  speaking  the  truth. 

It  is  no  use  trying  to  evade  the  truth  on  this  subject.  I  fear 
that,  as  a  general  rule,  the  evangelical  ministry  in  England  has 


OF  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  431 

fallen  far  below  the  standard  of  the  last  century,  and  that  the 
simple  account  of  the  want  of  success  to  which  so  many  point  is, 
the  low  standard  both  of  doctrine  and  life  which  prevails.  E^e 
and  popularity,  and  the  absence  of  persecution,  are  ruinous  to 
some.  Political  questions  eat  out  the  vitality  of  others.  An 
extravagant  and  excessive  attention  to  the  petty  details  of  parish 
machinery  withers  up  the  ministry  of  others.  An  absurd  strain- 
ing after  the  reputation  of  being  "  intellectual "  and  original  is 
the  curse  of  others.  A  desire  to  seem  charitable  and  liberal, 
and  keep  in  with  everybody,  paralyzes  the  ministry  of  others. 
The  plague  is  abroad.  We  want  a  revival  among  evangelical 
ministers.  Once  let  the  evangelical  ministry  of  England  return 
to  the  ways  of  the  1 8th century,  and  I  firmly  believe  we  should 
have  as  much  success  as  before.  We  are  where  we  are,  because 
we  have  come  short  of  our  fathers. 

3.  Last  of  all  comes  the  all-important  question,  What  ought 
we  to  do  ?  I  answer  confidently,  There  are  three  things  which 
we  shall  do  well  to  remember,  if  we  wish  our  work  to  prosper. 

First,  let  us  resolve  to  cast  in  our  lot  boldly  on  the  side  of  what 
I  must  call  "  evangelical"  religion  in  England.  Let  us  not  be 
moved  by  the  sneers  and  contempt  which  are  poured  on  it  in 
some  quarters.  Let  us  cleave  to  it,  hold  it  fast,  and  never  let 
it  go.  Let  us  beware  of  the  plausible  charity  which  says,  "  All 
earnest  men  hold  the  truth.  No  earnest  man  can  err."  Let  us 
beware  of  the  idolatry  of  intellect,  which  says,  "  A  man  cannot 
make  mistakes  in  doctrine  if  he  is  a  clever  man."  Of  both  these 
dangers  let  us  beware.  Let  us  lay  hold  firmly  on  evangelical 
religion  as  the  truth  of  God,  and  never  be  ashamed  to  confess 
it.  Let  us  stand  by  it,  and  it  will  stand  by  us  in  the  hour  of 
sickness  and  on  the  bed  of  death,  in  the  swellings  of  Jordan, 
and  in  the  day  of  judgment. 

Next,  let  us  resolve  to  work  heartily  for  evangelical  truth, 
each  in  his  own  place.  There  is  always  work  for  every  one 
before  his  own  door.     Let  us  never  stand  still  because  we  are 


432  WORK'  AND  PR  A  YER. 

ia  a  minority.  What  though  we  stand  alone  in  a  house  of 
business,  alone  in  the  banking-house,  alone  in  a  regiment,  alone 
in  a  ship,  alone  in  a  family!  What  of  it  %  Let  us  think  of  the 
little  company  who  shook  England  at  this  trying  period,  and 
work  on.  It  is  truth,  not  numbers,  which  shall  always  in  the  end 
prevail.  The  three  hundred  at  Thermopylae  were  better  than 
the  million  of  Persians.  A  small  minority  of  evangelical  Chris- 
tians with  the  gospel  in  their  hearts  are  stronger  than  a  host  of 
6ervants  of  the  Pope,  the  devil,  and  the  world. 

And  let  us  pray,  last  of  all,  as  well  as  work.  Let  us  pray 
night  and  day  that  God  would  revive  his  work  in  England,  and 
raise  up  many  more  instruments  to  do  his  will.  Let  us  pray  with 
the  abiding  thought  that  God's  arm  is  not  shortened,  that  what  he 
has  done  he  can  do  again,  and  that  the  same  God  who  wrought 
JO  mightily  for  England  in  the  i8th  century  can  do  greater 
things  still.  Let  us  ask  Him  who  holds  the  stars  in  his  right 
hand  to  revive  his  work  among  our  ministers,  and  to  raise  up 
men  for  our  times.  He  can  do  it.  He  is  willing  to  do  it.  He 
waits  to  be  entreated.  Then  let  all  who  pray  cry  night  and  day 
to  the  Lord  of  the  harvest,  "  Lord,  send  forth  more  labourers 
into  thy  harvest." 


ALL  PRICES  ARE  NET 

y/orks  by  Bishop  J.  C.  Ryle,  D.D. 

Published  by 

CHAS.   J.   THYNNE  &  JAR  VIS    LTD. 

EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS   ON   THE   GOSPELS. 

Designed  for  family  and  private  reading,  with  the  text  of  Holy  Scrip- 
ture complete,  short  expositions,  a  full  commentary  and  many  Notes. 
This  work  is  now  practically  out  of  print  except  for  a  few  odd  volumes. 

It  is  contemplated  to  issue  a  revised  edition,  complete  in  4  volumes,  at 

(if  possible)  one  guinea  the  set. 

A  new  edition  of  "  Principles  for  Churchmen  "  is  in  preparation,  and  wiU, 

it  is  hoped,  prove  of  great  service  in  the  present  condition  of  the  Church  of 

England,  containing,  as  it  does,  clear  and  Scriptural  statements  on  manj' 

x-bjects  of  Controversy. 
For  these  publications  and  others  the  Publishers  will  greatly  esteem  the 

iipport  and  co-operation  of  the  Evangelical  public. 

Bsthany. 

Being  Expository  Thoughts,  with  Notes,  on  the  Eleventh  Chapter 
of  St.  John's  Gospel.  "  The  heart  of  the  wise  is  in  the  house  of 
mourning"  (Eccles.  vii.  4).     Small  4to,  cloth,  gilt,  2S.  6d. 

Uniform  Series  of  the  Bishop's  Works 

Light  from  Old  Times;    or,  Protestant  Facts  and  Men. 

Fifth  Edition.     Illustrated.     Price  5s.     With  gilt  edges,  6s.  6d. 


CONTENTS 


Introduction  for  Our  Own  Days. 
John  Wycliffe. 

Why  were  our  Reformers  Burned  ? 
John  Rogers,  Martyr. 
John  Hooper,  Bishop  and  Martyr. 

Rowland  Taylor,  Martyr.  I     William  Gumall. 

Hugh  Latimer,  Bishop  and  Martyr.  '     James  II.  and  the  Seven  Bishops. 

And  8  full-page  Illustrations. 


John  Bradford,  Martyr. 

Nicholas  Ridley,  Bishop  and  Martyr. 

Samuel  Ward. 

Archbishop  Laud. 

Richard  Baxter. 


Eioliness  : 

Its  Nature,  Hindrances,  Difficulties  and  Roots.  With  Preface,  Intro- 
ductory Essays,  and  Supplementary  Extracts  from  old  Writers, 
Fifth  and  Enlarged  Edition.  Price  5s.  With  gilt  edges,  6s.  6d. 
[he  Christian  Leaders  of  the  Eighteeenth  Century.  Being  an  account 
of  the  Life  and  Ministry  of  G.  Whitefield,  J.  Wesley,  W,  Grimshaw, 
W.  Romaine,  D.  Rowlands,  J.  Berridge,  H.  Venn,  W.  Walker,  J, 
Hervey,  Toplady,  and  Fletcher,  together  with  a  sketch  of  the  Con- 
dition of  Religion  in  England  in  the  i8th  Century,  With  Portrait, 
Illustrations.    Price  5s.    With  gilt  edges,  6s.  6d. 


ALL  PRICES  ARE  NET 


I 


The  Christian  Race,  and  other  Sermons,  setting  forth  the  great  doctrines 
of  Sin,  Redemption,  Regeneration  and  Sanctification,  and  the  duties 
of  the  Christian  Life.  With  Prefatory  Note  by  the  Ven.  Archdeacon 
Madden,  M.A.,    8vo,  cloth,  gilt,  5s. 

Each  Volume  of  this  Series  can  also  be  supplied,  bound  in  half  persian  morocco,  gilt 
top,  7/6d  ;    half  morocco,  gilt  edges,  lO/6d  ;    whole  morocco,  gilt  edges,  l£s. 

HYMNS  FOR  THE  CHURCH  ON  EARTH. 

Eighth  Enlarged  Edition.  Containing  Four  Hundred  Hymns,  for 
the  most  part  of  modern  date.  Selected  and  Arranged  by  Bishop 
Ryle.  In  large  type  and  on  light  paper.  Crown  8vo,  limp  cloth,  4s. 
"With  gilt  edges,  5s.    Limp  roan,  gilt  edges,  9s.    Morocco,  gilt  edges,  15s. 

"  The  comfort  of  invalids  and  the  edification  of  Christians  in  private  have  been  the 
two  principal  objects  I  have  had  in  view  in  preparing  this  collection.  I  hold  strongly 
that  holy  thoughts  often  abide  for  ever  in  men's  memories  under  the  form  of  poetry, 
which  pass  away  and  are  forgotten  under  the  form  of  prose." — Extract  from  Preface. 


KNOTS    UNTIED 

BEING  PLAIN  STATEMENTS    ON   DISPUTED   POINTS 
IN  RELIGION  FROM  AN  EVANGELICAL  STANDPOINT 

Edited  by  Rev.  C.  SYDNEY  CARTER,  M.A.,  Litt.  D. 

TWENTY-NINTH  EDITION 

Cloth,  gold  lettered,  3s.  6d. 

Half  leather,  gilt  top,  6s. 

Half  leather,  gilt  edges,  7s.  6d. 

Whole  morocco,  gilt  edges,  15s. 

Contents. — ^EvangeUcal  Rehgion — One  Way  of  Salvation — Private  Judgment 
— The  Thirty-nine  Articles — Baptism — Regeneration — The  Lord's  Supper — 
The  Real  Presence  —  The  Church — The  Priest  —  Worship  —  The  Sabbath — 
Pharisees  and  Sadducees — Fallibility  of  Ministers — Apostolic  Fears — Idolatry. 

Is  All  Scripture  Inspired  ? — An  attempt  to  answer  the  question  with 
quotations  from  eminent  theologians.  Fourth  edition.  Paper  boards,  is. 

The  Lessons  of  English  Church  History. 

An  argument  against  Romanism  and  Ritualism.     With  an  Appendix 
of  Opinions  of  English  Divines  on  the  Lord's  Supper.    Paper  cover,  gd. 

The  First  Bishop  of  Liverpool.  Biographical  Sketch  of  Bishop  J.  C.  Ryle. 
By  W.  F.  Machray.  With  the  Bishop's  Farewell  Letter  to  the  Diocese 
of  Liverpool.    Paper  cover,  4d. 


ALL  PRICES  ARE  NET 

Home  Truths. 

Being  the  Miscellaneous  Writings  of  Bishop  J.  C.  Ryle.      Series  i. 
Cloth  gilt,  2S. 

CHURCH    REFORM.    By  Bishop  J.  C.  Ryle. 

Being  Papers  on  the  subject,  Revised  and  Enlarged,  with  full  Notes 
and   Introduction.     Crown   8vo,   cloth,   gilt,   2s.   6d. 

Contents. — Introduction — Our  Dioceses  and  Bishops — Convocation — 
Cathedral  Reiorm— Public  Worship — The  Ministerial  Office — The  Position  of 
the  Laity — Practical  Conclusions. 

Visitation  Charges,  Diocesan  Addresses,  and  Special  Sermons.  Six  Triennial 
Charges  of  the  Bishop,  and  Ten  Special  Addresses  and  Sermons.  Dark 
blue  cloth,  gilt,  3s.  6d. 

The  Two  Bears.  And  other  Sermons  for  Children.  Second  Edition. 
Duxeen  binding,  is,  6d. 

John  Hooper,  Bishop  and  Martyr.    Paper  cover,  6d. 

George  Whitefield.    His  Life  and  Times.    Crown  8vo,  6d. 

Archbishop  Laud,  and  His  Times.    Paper  wrapper,  6d. 

"  Light  from  Old  Times  "  Reprints,  No.  1.      The  reign  of  James  II  and  the 
Trial  of  the  Seven  Bishops.     Foreword  by  Bishop  Knox.    6d. 

"  Light  from  Old  Times  "  Reprints,  No.  2.    Bishops  Latimer  and  Ridley.  Their 
Lives  and  their  Writings  and  Martyrdom.     Illustrated,  gd. 

"  Light  from  Old  Times  "  Reprints,  No.  3.  Why  were  our  English  Reformers 
Burned  ?  Foreword  by  Bishop  E.  A.  Knox.  Portrait  of  Archbishop 
Cranmer.    4d. 

SMALL   BOOKS   ON   IMPORTANT   SUBJECTS 

BY    BISHOP    J.    C.    RYLE.      Price  6d.  each. 

Thoughts  on  Baptism. 

For  the  Use  of  Churchmen  and  Candidates  for  Confirmation, 

Thoughts  on  the  Supper  of  the  Lord. 

For  Present  and  Future  Communicants. 

Thoughts  on  Prayer.    Second  Edition. 

Thoughts  on  the  Prayer-Book  and  on  Church  and  Dissent.    Second  Edition. 

Thoughts  for  Parents.     . 

Being  a  few  words  on  Proverbs  xxii,  6. 


ALL  PRICES  ARE   NET 

SMALL    BOOKS    ON    IMPORTANT    SUBJECTS 

(Continued).  Price  6d.  each. 

Thoughts  and  Questions  about  Holiness. 

Its  Nature,  and  Questionable  Modern  Ideas  examined. 

Thoughts  on  Worldly  Conformity. 

What  it  is,  and  What  it  is  not. 

Thoughts  about  Sunday. 

Its  Institution,  Privileges  and  Due  Observance. 

Questions  and  Answers  about  the  Lord's  Supper. 

Being   a   Manual   of   Information   for   Churchmen   about   Points   in 
Dispute  at  the  present  day. 

This  work  consists  of  fifty  questions  and  answeis  about  the  Lord's  Supper,   It  contains, 
in  addition,  some  valuable  extracts  from  the  writings  of  standard  British  divines. 

Higher  Criticism. 

Thoughts  on  Modern  Theories  about  the  Old  Testament. 


Thoughts  for  Young  Men. 

Frdm  many  Points  of  View  (Titus  ii.  6) .    Eighth  Edition.    Cloth,  is.  6d. 
With  gilt  edges,  2s. 
Contents. — Dangers  of  Young  Men — General  Counsels^— Special  Rules — Exbortatioo. 

Thoughts  on  Immortality. 

With  some  Remarks  on  "  Eternal  Hope,"  and  Kindred  Subjects. 
Cloth,  9d, 

Simplicity  in  Preaching. 

A  few  short  Hints  on  a  great  Subject.    Cloth,  gd. 

Regeneration. 

What  it  means  ;    its  Necessity,  Marks  and  Evidences,  and  Objections 
met.    With  copious  Notes.    104  pp.  fcap.  8vo.    Fifth  Edition.  Cloth,  is. 

Assurance  (2  Timothy  iv.  6,  7,  8).  The  full-grown  faith  of  the  believer. 
With  Notes  and  Extracts  from  English  Divines.  Ninth  Edition. 
Paper  boards,  is. 

TRACTS 

What  is  Evangelical  Religion  ?    2d 

Rights  and  Duties  of  Lay  Churchman.    2d. 

What  is  Real  Happiness.    2d. 

What  do  we  owe  to  the  Reformation  ?    2d. 

What  is  Written  about  the  Lord's  Supper  ?    2d. 

The  Holy  Communion.    2d. 

The  Thirty-Nine  Articles.    2d. 


^f^^ 


1^ 


i 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


m^k-i 


^>ref,.^^^>;'4y-^. 


m 


SH:fe.-„ ., 


/i-;^ 


;^r- :1^'  5 


