32 


Va: 


a 


THE ANCIENT SCRIPTURES AND 
THE MODERN JEW 


HE ANCIENT SCRIP- 
TURES AND THE | 


MODERN JEW By 
DAVID BARON, Author of “ Rays 
of Messiah’s Glory,” &c. + æ a 


SECOND EDITION 


LONDON: HODDER AND 
STOUGHTON ww & 27 
PATERNOSTER ROW MCMI 


‘Three Shillings and Sixpence 


PREFACE TO THE SECOND 
EDITION 


HE printing of a second edition of this book 
within the same year that the first edition was 
published is a matter of thankfulness to the author, 
who has received a large number of appreciative letters 
about it; and it may be regarded as a proof of growing 
interest in the stupendous question with which it deals. 
The press notices, too, have, on the whole, been favour- 
able. What adverse criticism there has been, has, so far 
as I know, been directed almost entirely against the 
expository part of the volume, partly on account of 
my attitude in relation to the views of a certain school 
of modern criticism with regard to the Old Testament 
Scriptures. Some of my reviewers have also expressed 
regret that the subject of the “Modern Jew,” which is 
so interesting in itself, should not have been treated 
independently of the Scriptures. But “I believe, and 
therefore have I spoken.” The Jew still remains the 


most irrefutable witness to the historical character and ) 


vii 


viii PREFACE 


supernatural element of the Scripture narrative, and it 
is only in the light of the revealed plan, that we can 
see light, on the very comprehensive and perplexing 
“ Jewish Question,” which, apart from Scripture, will for 


ever remain an enigma beyond solution. 


September, 29th, 1901. 


PREFACE 


NE or two explanations are all that is necessary 
by way of preface to this work. It will be noticed 
that it is divided into two parts. The first consists of 
connected expositions of some of the most striking pro- 
phetic utterances in the ancient Scriptures. They are in- 
dependent Bible Studies of very solemn and momentous 
subjects, but arranged in a continuous and progressive 
order, showing that the revolving centuries unfold an 
eternal purpose, and that prophecy was history written 
in advance, in order, as I said elsewhere, “that in suc- 
ceeding ages men, by comparing the Divine forecasts in 
Scripture with the actual condition of things, might 
learn to know that there is an omniscient’ God ; one 
who first makes His counsel known, and then causes all 
things to work together towards the carrying out, and 
fulfilment, of that which He declared beforehand, should 
come to pass.” 
I have had no controversial end in view in writing 
these pages, my aim being simply, by the help of God, 
ix 


x PREFACE 


to show the harmonies of Scripture, and to unfold His 
wonderful and gracious purposes as revealed in His 
holy Word. While so engaged my eyes and heart have 
been continually lifted up to the God of Israel, not only 
for light and guidance, but that He would condescend 
to use this inadequate and unworthy effort, as a means 
of blessing and spiritual profit to His people. 

` It was my intention, had time permitted, to add four 
or five other expositions to the first part of the volume, 
but much pressure of other work, in this country and 
abroad, has prevented my doing so at present. 

In the second part, in which I have embodied material 
from some of my articles in The Scattered Nation, and 
from one or two previously published booklets, my aim 
has been to present from a Christian and Bible stand- 
point an all-round view of “The Jewish Question” 
—a question which will press itself more and more upon 
the attention of the nations, and the development of 
which must be watched with the greatest possible inte- 
rest by all intelligent observers of the signs of the times, 
who believe in the words of the Psalmist, that “ when 
the Lord shall rebuild Zion, He shall appear in His 
glory.” 

To those who are themselves “ watchmen on the walls 
of Zion,” some of the facts in the second part may be 
already familiar, but I venture in all modesty to quote 
the following words of Pascal, as applicable to this part 
of the book : “ Let no one say I have said nothing new. 
The disposition of my matter is new. In playing tennis 
two men play with the same ball, but one places it 
better. It might as truly be said that my words have 


PREFACE xi 


been used before. And if the same thoughts in a diffe- 
rent arrangement do not form a different discourse, so 
neither do the same words in a different arrangement 
form different thoughts.” 

As will be seen, I have allowed one of the most 
eloquent of modern Jews himself to state the case of 
the “general condition” of his nation at the end of the 
nineteenth century, the remarkable address quoted, being 
as far as possible, a literal rendering by Mrs. Baron, of 
that which Dr. Max Nordau delivered at the first 
Zionist Congress in Basle. 

I have also embodied a short article, or rather 
address, on “The Religious Condition of the Jews 
from a Christian Point of View,” by my esteemed friend 
and fellow-worker in the “ Hebrew Christian Testimony 
to Israel,” the Rev. C. A. Schönberger. 

I need only add that to many of my readers I shall 
not appear altogether a stranger. It is about sixteen 
years since my first attempt towards the elucidation of 
parts of the Hebrew Scriptures was published in “ Rays 
of Messiah’s Glory,” and although there are passages 
in that book (at present out of print), which require re- 
writing, and I am even more conscious now than I was 
at the time of its publication of imperfections in its plan 
and composition, the Lord has been pleased to put His 
seal upon that unworthy effort to magnify His Word, 
and Him who is its very life and substance. Many 
- have been the testimonies, some even from very highly 
honoured servants of Christ, to light and blessing 
received through its pages. Since then some of my 
smaller publications have had a fairly large circulation 


xii ‘PREFACE 


both in England and America, one of them, “The 
Jewish Problem; or, Israel’s Present and Future,” 
having been translated into six different languages. 
And now I commend this book, the result of spare 
moments saved in a very busy life of service for Christ 
among: His own nation, to Him who condescends to 
bless the things that are weak and small, and pray that 
wherever it goes it may carry a blessing with it, not 
only to Christians, but to my own brethren and “kins- 
men according to the flesh,” for whom my heart does 
not cease to yearn, with the yearning of Him who shed 
tears over Jerusalem, and who died for “that nation,” 
and not for that nation only, but. that also He should 
gather together in one the children of God that were 


scattered abroad. 
DAVID BARON. 


23, BoscasTLE Roap, LONDON, N.W. 
November 3rd, 1900. 


Il. 


HI, 


IV. 


I. 


CONTENTS 


PART I 


THE ANCIENT SCRIPTURES. 


THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” . 


THE “ICHABOD” PERIOD AND THE RETURN OF 
THE GLORY OF JEHOVAH. : 


THE SILENCE OF GOD: HOW IT SHALL BE BROKEN 


1. In Relation to the Church, 77. 
11. In Relation to Israel, 83. 
1, In Relation to Christendom, 90o. 


THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL . 
(A Prophetic Drama of the End of the Age.) 


PART II 
THE MODERN JEW 


A BIRD’S-EYE VIEW OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 


(Numbers and Distribution of the Jewish People.) 
xiii 


PAGE 


4I 


63 


99 


. 133 


xiv 


II. 


III. 


IV. 


Viz 


VII. 


VIII 


CONTENTS 


THE GENERAL CONDITIONS OF THE JEWS AT THE 
CLOSE OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY FROM A 
JEWISH POINT OF VIEW . . . . 


THE RELIGIOUS CONDITION OF THE JEWS AND 
CAUSES OF JEWISH UNBELIEF IN CHRIST, FROM 


A CHRISTIAN POINT OF VIEW . * . 


RELIGIOUS DIVISIONS AND SECTS AMONG THE 


JEWISH PEOPLE . . . . 


THE PRESENT ATTITUDE OF THE JEWS IN RE- 


LATION TO CHRISTIANITY . . 
ANTI-SEMITISM « ` : . . 


ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 


(The Zionist Movement.) 


ISRAEL'S MISSION TO THE WORLD, AND THE 


CHURCH’S MISSION TO ISRAEL . . ` 


ANGLO-ISRAELISM AND THE TRUE HISTORY OF 


THE TEN “LOST” TRIBES k ; A 


(A Letter to an Inquirer.) 


PAGE 


147 


167 


181 


TOJ 


207 


AZN 


259 


277 


+ 


ai , ‘PART I prey 


THE ANCIENT SCRIPTURES 


“ And the Lord said unto me, Go yet, love a woman beloved of 
her friend and an adulteress, even as the Lord loveth the children 
of Israel, though they turn unto other gods, and love cakes of 
raisins. So I bought her to me for fifteen pieces of silver, and an 
homer of barley, and an half homer of barley : and I said unto 
her, Thou shalt abide for me many days ; thou shalt not play the 
harlot, and thou shalt not be any man’s wife: so will I also be 
toward thee. 

“ For the children of Israel shall abide many days without king, 
and without prince, and without sacrifice, and without an image, 
and without ephod or teraphim : afterward shall the children of 
Israel return, and seek the Lord their God, and David their king ; 
and shall come with fear unto the Lord and to His goodness in 
the latter days,”—HosEa iii. 


I 
THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 


HE short chapter of five verses (Hosea iii.), 

which is to form our first subject, divides itself 
naturally into two parts, the first three verses being 
the record of a symbolical transaction, and the last 
two verses a verbal prophecy. The two parts are, 
however, vitally connected, for the symbolism of the 
first verses serves as an illustration of the truth presented 
in the prophecy, while the prophecy is an explanation 
of the symbolical transaction. There is, in fact, but 
one great truth in reference to Israel in this chapter 
which the Spirit of God wants to teach us in a twofold 
way; first by an illustration, and then by a verbal 
explanation. 

If we want to know the meaning of the seemingly 
strange transaction recorded in the first part of the 
chapter, we find it in a sentence in the first verse, which 
says that it is “according to,” or “like unto, the love 
of Jehovah for the children of Israel”; and being an 
illustration of so lofty and glorious a theme, it is 
worthy a careful consideration. 

The prophet is told to go again and love a woman 1 


* Some have supposed the transaction to have been ideal and 
that it did not form an actual experience of the prophet's life ; but 
3 


ae es 


etnias 


4 THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 


who is beloved of her “ friend,” or her “ husband ” (asit 
is rightly rendered in the margin of the Revised Version), 
but who is an adulteress. There can be little doubt 
that the “woman” is Gomer, of whom we read in the 
first chapter; and the “friend” or “husband” is the 
prophet, who went through this sad experience in his 
wedded life in order that himself and his family might 
serve as “signs and wonders in Israel” (Isa. viii. 18), in 
order to set forth realistically before their very eyes 
Jehovah’s attitude to and dealings with His faithless 
people. 

To begin with, when the prophet first took her into 
marriage relationship with him there was nothing lovable 
about Gomer; she was, in fact, a poor fallen woman. 
It was. undeserved favour and great condescension 
manifested on the part of the prophet which placed her 
in the position of his wedded wife; but it is just for 
this very reason that this transaction seems, though 
imperfectly, to set forth “the love of Jehovah towards 
the children of Israel.” Why did God first choose Israel 
to be a people unto Himself? Was it because of any- 
thing good or lovable in them? No; wholly of grace 
and sovereign was the love of Jehovah towards the 
children. of Israel. In Deuteronomy, after warning 
them not to think that it was because of anything in 
them—not because of their goodness, or righteousness, 
for they were a “stiff-necked people”; not because they 
were greater or more in number, for they were “fewest _ 
of all people,” God condescends to give a reason for His 
choice, and it is a strange and wonderful reason. “I 
loved you,” He says, “ because I loved you,” because I 


while the truth it is meant to illustrate would not be affected, 
even though it were a figure without actuality in real life, the 
whole account is so realistic, and even passionate, that it seems 
to me impossible to regard it as anything but literal history. 


THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 5 


` chose to love you, and “ because I would keep the oath 
which I had sworn unto your fathers,” which oath and 
promise was also wholly of grace and not of merit. 

But let us proceed to the second stage of the prophet’s 
relation and attitude to this woman. 

After she became his wedded wife she forsook him 
and went to another man, but in spite of the intensity 
of her guilt and her ingratitude, the prophet did not 
cease to love her. This is touchingly expressed by the 
words, “ beloved by her mate, yet an adulteress” ; and 
in this, too, it resembles God’s dealings with and 
attitude to Israel. Wonderful was the relationship into 
which the stiff-necked nation was brought. Well might 
Moses in his last words exclaim, “ Happy art thou, O 
Israel, who is a people like unto thee!” “For thy 
Maker is thy husband: Jehovah of Sabbaoth is His 
name.” But instead of entering into the blessedness of 
this relationship with Jehovah, Israel “looked to other 
gods,” and committed spiritual adultery with idols; and 
instead of finding all their joy in fellowship with Him, 
they became sensual, and “loved flagons of wine” or 
“cakes of raisins.” And yet, although the condition of 
Israel is well illustrated by this poor adulteress, the blessed 
truth which this transaction is meant to teach, and which 
Christians are so slow to learn, is that Jehovah still loves 
Israel. Yes, even now, while righteously given over 
into the hands of her enemies, a proverb and a byword 
among the nations, Israel is, and remains, “the dearly 
beloved of His soul” (Jer. xii. 7), and God narrowly and 
jealously watches the conduct of the nations toward 
them (Zech. i. 14, 15) ; for, although fellowship is broken 
off, and “in a little wrath He has hid His face from 
them for a moment,” the marriage bond between 
Jehovah and the nation He has betrothed unto Him for 
ever (Hosea ii. 19) is indissoluble, and His “gifts and 


6 THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 


calling are without repentance.” “Jehovah, the God of 
Israel saith that He hateth putting away” (Mal. ii. 16). 
This, His wonderful covenant faithfulness, is Jehovah’s 
secret towards them that fear Him. “I am Jehovah,” 
He says, “I change not; therefore ye sons of Jacob 
are not consumed.” 

And this infinite grace and “love of Jehovah” toward 
the children of Israel find their parallel also in the 
experience of the Church. 

Why did God call ws from among Jew and Gentile 
during this present dispensation to be “a chosen 
generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation”? Was 
it because we were better or wiser than the rest of the 
world? Oh, no, “for ye see your calling, brethren,” 
says the Apostle, echoing the warnings which were 
given to Israel of old, “how that not many wise men 
after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are 
called, but God hath chosen the weak things of the 
world to confound the things which are mighty, and 
base things of the world, and things which are despised 
hath God chosen, and things which are not, to bring to 
nought things that are, that no flesh should glory in 
His presence.” Was it for our goodness or righteous- 
ness? Oh, no; “but God commendeth (or displays) His 
own lové toward us” (Rom. v. 8)—a love inconceivable 
by man—“in that while we were yet sinners,” utterly lost 
and utterly wretched, “ Christ died for us.” 

Israel’s history and God’s dealings with them is no 
encouragement to the Christian to think lightly of sin 
and of backsliding from God, for we see that God is a 
jealous God, visiting the sins of His people even more 
than on the sins of the world; but it also displays 
the marvellous faithfulness of Jehovah and His love 
towards His redeemed, which all the many waters of 
their sins and backslidings cannot quench, 


THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 7 


In the second verse we get a glimpse of the innate 
worthlessness of -Israel and all such as are typified by 
poor Gomer. Sin, in her case, as it always does, im- 
plied a certain kind of bondage, so that she had to-be 
bought back from the sharer of her guilt. But what is 
the price she is valued at? Just half the price of a 
dead slave (Exod. xxi. 32), with an homer and a half of 
barley thrown into the bargain. The redemption price 
which the great God actually pays for those as worth- 
less as this poor woman is more than tongue can tell. 
It cannot be estimated by all the precious but corrup- 
tible things known to man. It cannot be valued with 
the gold of Ophir, with the precious onyx or the 
sapphire; the gold and the crystal cannot equal it, 
and “the exchange of it shall not be for vessels of 
fine gold.” It is nothing less than the precious blood 
of Christ, “as a lamb without blemish and with- 
out spot.” 

We must touch on one more significant item in the 
symbolism before we proceed with the verbal prophecy. 

Having bought Gomer back, the prophet gives her a 
charge. “And I said unto her, Thou shalt abide (or 
remain) for me many days . . . so will I also be towards 
thee.” There was to be a neutral period. She was no 
more to follow sin, but she was not yet to enter into her 
conjugal rights. Meanwhile her husband would be her 
guardian, and ultimately there would be a full restora- 
tion of the fellowship implied in the marriage relation- 
ship. The symbolical significance of this is, I believe, 
as follows. A remnant of the nation was brought back 


z Keil, in loc., thinks, however, that the “ homer” and “lethech,” 
which together made fifteen baths or ephas of barley, might also 
be valued at fifteen shekels, so that the silver and barley together 
may perhaps have been equal to the full price, or rather the full 
amount of compensation for a slave if gored to death, 


8 THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 


from Babylon after the seventy years’ bondage, and then 
commenced the neutral period during which Israel is 
neither guilty of their old besetting sin of idolatry— 
which, as already explained, is regarded as spiritual 
adultery—nor are they living in fellowship with Jehovah ; 
for, although there has been an outward return, there 
has never yet taken place that national change of heart 
for which God is waiting before He can return unto 
them in mercies. Indeed, soon after the commencement 
of this period Israel, though no longer guilty of idolatry, 
showed how their heart was still alienated from God by 
disowning Him who is “ the brightness of His glory and 
an exact representation of His very Being.” But there 
is hope in their end. Israel, though sitting desolate and, 
to human view, forsaken, abides through these “many 
days” for God, who will yet fully restore the blessings 
of the relationship into which He once entered with 
them, even as He announces through this same prophet : 
“I will betroth thee unto Me for ever ; yea, I will betroth 
thee unto Me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in 
lovingkindness, and in mercies. I will even betroth thee 
unto Me in faithfulness: and thou shalt know Jehovah” 
(Hosea ii. 19, 20). 

We now come to the verbal message which explains 
the symbolism of the first part of this chapter. The - 
connection will be seen at a glance if we compare the 
words addressed to Gomer in verse 3, “Many days 
shalt thou abide for me,” with the first words of verse 4, 
“For many days shall the children of Israel abide.” 
Israel, then, stands in relation to this woman as anti- 
type to type, and the many days of the neutral 
condition of Gomer was but a foreshadowing of the 
“many days” of the neutral condition of Israel in 
relation to Jehovah and to idolatry. The fourth verse 
is, I might say, the great prophecy in the Old Testa- 


THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 9 


ment, with regard to the Interregnum, a period covered 
by the image of Daniel ii. and the New Testament 
expression, “the times of the Gentiles”—the time 
during which the sceptre is departed from Judah, and 
representative governmental power is entrusted to the 
Gentile nations until those times are fulfilled, and Zion 
becomes the centre of government for the earth, and 
the place whence God’s law will go forth, as never 
before, to all nations. 

It is of interest to observe that the most authoritative 
Jewish commentators have themselves admitted that 
the fourth verse of our chapter gives a graphic 
description of the present condition of the Jewish 
people. I translate the following passage from one of 
the greatest of Rabbinic writerst Speaking on the 
expression “ many days,” he says: “These are the days 
of this present captivity, in which we are in the power 
of the Gentiles, and in the power of their kings and 
princes, and we are ‘without a sacrifice and without an 
image,’ ze. without a sacrifice to God, and without an 
image to false gods; and ‘without an ephod, and 
without teraphim,’ ze, without an ephod to God, by 
means of which we could foretell the future, as with the 
Urim and Thummim; and without teraphim to false 
gods. And this is the present condition of all the 
children of Israel in this present captivity.” 

To this interpretation every critical Bible student, 
whether Jew or Christian, must subscribe. We shall 
see presently what this admission on the part of a 
great non-Christian Jew implies, 

* Kimchi, commonly called by the Jews “ Redak,” from the 
initial letters of “ Rabbi David Kimchi,’ was born in Narbonne 
in 1160, and died about 1235. So great was his fame that the 
Jews applied to him, by a play of words, a Talmudic saying 


(Aboth, iii. 17), adapted to mean, “No Kimchi, no understanding 
of the Scriptures,” 


10 THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 


The order of the words in the fourth verse is some- 
what different in the original from what it is in the 
A.V. It begins with the expression, “many days ”— 
“Many days shall the children of Israel abide”—and- 
then it goes on to describe the special conditions under 
which they will abide. The words “Yamim rabbim ” 
(“many days”) are a Hebrew idiom denoting a long, 
indefinite period, embracing days, years, centuries, or 
even millenniums, and the first item in this remarkable 
prophecy really is, that for a long, unmeasured period 
the children of Israel would “ abide,” that is, remain or 
continue to exist. I have elsewhere dealt fully with 
the marvel of the continued existence of the Jewish 
nation, but I would here in passing simply remind my 
readers that if the Jewish people, in spite of all the 
forces which have for many centuries been brought to 
bear against them with terrible severity, still lives, it is 
to testify to the truth of this and other statements of 
the Word of God. God has said, “ Many days shall the 
children of Israel abide,” and therefore no force in the 
universe is able to move them. God has called them 


* See my book, “The Jewish Problem.” “The world has by — 
this time discovered,” said Lord Beaconsfield, “ that it is impos- 
sible to destroy the Jews. The attempt to extirpate them has 
been made under the most favourable auspices and on the 
largest scale; the most considerable means that man could 
command have been pertinaciously applied to this object for 
the longest period of recorded time. Egyptian Pharaohs, 
Assyrian kings, Roman emperors, Scandinavian crusaders, 
Gothic princes, and holy inquisitors have alike devoted their 
energies to the fulfilment of this common purpose. Expatria- 
tion, exile, captivity, confiscation, torture on the most ingenious 
and massacre on the most extensive scale, a curious system of 
degrading customs and debasing laws which would have broken 
the heart of another people, have been tried, and in vain. The 
Jews, after all this havoc, probably more numerous at this date 
than they were during the reign of Solomon the wise, are found 
in all lands, and prospering in most.” 


THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” II 


“Am Olam,” the “everlasting people” (Isa. xliv. 7, 
Hebrew), and therefore the Jewish nation has proved 
indestructible. 

But the marvel of Israels continued existence be- 
comes intensified if we examine the conditions under 
which they abide. Apart from the little word trans- 
lated “ without,’ which in the Hebrew is repeated five 
times, there are but six words used by the pen of inspi- 
ration to portray the condition of Israel during the 
Interregnum, and these six words contain more than 
a whole volume that could be written by the most 
eloquent human pen. 

The six words are arranged in three couplets, or 
pairs of contrasts, which graphically describe a neutral 
state. The three pairs of contrasts, or opposites, are 
these :— 

I. “Without a king and without a prince.” 

II. “ Without a sacrifice and without an image.” 

III. “ Without an ephod and without teraphim,” 

Let us examine each one separately. 

“ Without a king and without a prince? What this 
means is, without the king of God’s appointment, 
and without a prince of their own choice. When 
Hosea uttered this prediction he could already 
almost hear the sound of the steps of the Assyrian 
army on its way finally to overthrow the kingdom of 
the ten tribes. Hosea’s ministry, which commenced 
in the reign of Jeroboam II., extended into-the reign 
of Hoshea, the last king who reigned in Israel—a 
period of about sixty years—so that the prophet may 
himself have witnessed the fulfilment of the threatening 
part of his prophecies, in the overthrow of Samaria, and 
the captivity of the ten tribes. But the prophecy with 
which we are dealing is not limited to the northern 
kingdom of the ten tribes, the term “the children of 


12 THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 


Israel” being, I believe, used in the proper and larger 
sense as embracing all the descendants of the one man 
who by the Divine authority was called “ Israel.” 

‘The geographical centre of prophecy, except when 
otherwise stated, is always Jerusalem, and in Divine 
forecasts of the chief outlines of Jewish history the 
schism between the ten tribes and the two, which was 
permitted by God as a punishment on the house of 
David, and was to be but temporary in its character, is 
overlooked. We know that Samaria was finally over- 
thrown in the year 721 B.C., when the history of the 
ten tribes as a separate kingdom terminated for ever. 
When the great restoration takes place God says, “I 
will make them oze nation in the land upon the moun- 
tains of Israel; and one king shall be king to them all: 
and they shall be no more two nations, neither shall 
they be divided into two kingdoms any more at all” 
(Ezek. xxxvii. 22). The one king who shall be “king to 
them all” is the true David, “ David’s greater Son,” who 
will raise up the tabernacle of David, and “close up the 
breaches thereof,’ caused by the defection of the ten 
tribes ; and He is “ the Lion of the tribe of Judah.” 

Judah continued as a kingdorn about one hundred and 
thirty years longer after the captivity of the ten tribes, 
until the sceptre was finally plucked out of the hands of 
the house of David by Nebuchadnezzar, that “head of 
gold” of Daniel’s great vision, the first king of. the four 
great world-powers, whose united course makes up “the 
times of the Gentiles.” 

Now, there is a point in connection with this subject 
which is of immense interest, showing also that prophecy 
does indeed emanate from the omniscient God who alone 
knows the end from the beginning, About the time of 
the final overthrow of Judah, in the reign of the last 
king who sat on the throne of David, another prophet 


THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 13 


was sent by God with the following mysterious and 
startling message on this subject: “Thus saith the 
Lord God: Remove the mitre, and take off the crown: 
this shall not be” (or, “is no more it”—I no longer recog- 
nise it): “exalt the low, abase the high” (let anarchy 
and usurpation of the throne of David continue). “I 
will overturn, overturn, overturn it: this also” (whatever 
men may put up instead of Davidic rule on Mount Zion) 
“shall not be” (shall not be permitted to continue long) 
“until He come whose right it is; to Him it shall be 
given” (Ezek. xxi. 25-27). And as God has spoken 
by the mouth of His prophet so it has been. Centuries 
elapsed between Ezekiel’s prophecy and the coming of 
our Lord Jesus. Nineteen centuries have elapsed since, 
but there has been no restoration of the throne of David ; 
no one of the seed of David reigning over Israel on 
Mount Zion. 

Some might think of the Hasmonean and Herodian 
kings of Jerusalem as militating against the truth of this 
assertion, but these were but incidents in the process of 
the overturning and usurpation foretold in the above 
prophecy, The Hasmoneans were priests of the tribe 
of Levi, who, though heroes and martyrs for Israel’s 
faith and worship, had no right to assume royalty, which 
dignity in Israel God promised and confirmed by oath 
as an everlasting possession to the house of David; 
and as for Herod, he was an Idumzan and Roman 
vassal. “This also shall not be, until He come whose 
right it is; to Him it shall be given.” Who is it whose 
right it is? Who is the true and lawful King of Israel? 
Of course every Christian answers, “ Jesus,’ He was 
born “King of the Jews” (Matt. ii. 2), and even on the 
cross on which He died was written “ Jesus of Nazareth, 
King of the Jews.” This is truth, but not the whole 
truth. The rightful King of Israel is Jehovah, for the 


14 THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 


uniqueness of Israel’s high calling consisted more par- 
ticularly in this, that it was destined to be a theocracy— 
that is, a people whose visible head and leader is God. 
If we want to know what is implied in a theocracy we 
find it expressed in one verse by the prophet Isaiah 
when speaking of a future time when it shall be fully 
realised: “ For Jehovah is our judge, Jehovah is our law- 
giver (or war prince), Jehovah is our King; and He will 


bring us salvation,” or “ He also will be our Saviour” | 


(Isa. xxxiii. 22). “Jehovah is our king”: hence at an 
early period of Israe’ls history when they came to 
Samuel saying: “Make us a king to judge us like all 
the nations”; and Samuel, in not altogether unselfish 
displeasure, prayed to God about it, the Lord answered 
him saying, “ Hearken to the voice of the people... 
for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected 
Me, that I should not reign over them” (1 Sam. viii. 7). 
Well, God “gave them a king in His anger, and took 
him away in His wrath.” Saul, at the time of his 
election, was just such a one as answered to man’s ideal 
of a leader and king, but although he was granted a fair 
trial, he proved a failure, and serves as an object-lesson 
that man’s rule is not like God’s. Eventually God 
Himself appointed a royal family in Israel; but what 
was God’s purpose in the establishment of the Davidic 
house? Was it not that from that family there 
should ultimately spring one in whom the theocratic 
ideal would, be fully realised; one who, “although of 
their brethren,” and “from the midst of them” (Deut. 
xviii. 15-18) should yet be Jehovah-Zidkenu — the 
mighty God, whose reign would be ¢he reign of God, and 
whose kingdom would be “the kingdom of heaven” on 
earth? In the interval the mere human kings of the 
house of David were regarded as types, and God’s repre- 


sentatives. Thus we read that when Solomon com- 


J 


THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” i5 


menced his rule “ he sat on the throne of Jehovah as king 
instead of David his father (1 Chron. xxix. 23). The 
throne was Jehovah’s, and Solomon and his successors 
only occupied it until the real king, Jehovah’s true 
representative should appear. Hence it is that even 
when Israel had kings they were always pointed onward 
to another king: “ Behold a king shall reign in righteous- 
ness, and princes shall rule in judgment”; or, in the 
words of Jeremiah, “Behold the days come, saith the 
Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous branch 
and a king shall reign and prosper.” Did they not have 
kings at the time these prophecies were uttered? Yes; 
but those kings were mere shadows filling up the gap in 
time until the true king should be manifested, “ He who 
is the blessed and only potentate, King of kings and 
Lord of lords.” This also is the reason why in the Old 
Testament the coming of the Messiah is sometimes 
spoken of as the advent of God: “Sing and rejoice, O 
daughter of Zion, for lo, I come, and I will dwell in the 
midst of thee, saith Jehovah,’ and yet He who was 
thus to come is the sent One, “the man whose name is 
the Branch.” 

In the fulness of time one in whom this ideal was 
fully realised did appear, and before His birth the fol- 
lowing announcement was made to His mother: “ Be- 
hold thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a 
Son, and shalt call His name Jesus” (what can,be more 
human? but it goes on); “He shall be great, and shall 
be called the Son of the Highest, and the Lord God 
shall give unto Him the throne of His father David, and 
He shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of 
' His kingdom there shall be no end.” Here is that One 
_ for whose manifestation the ages were waiting, the “ Im- 
manuel,” God in man, “He whose right it is,” not merely 
because through His mother He is the true Son of 


16 THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 


David, but because He is the Son of the Highest ; the 
irradiated brightness of His glory, and exact representa- 
tion of the very Being of God, who, as we have seen, is 
the true King of Israel. Oh, if Israel had known the 
day of their visitation! if they had recognised that the 
child born in such humble circumstances in one of their 
families was none other than the long-expected Messiah, 
“the Lord of glory,” the long indefinite period of the 
“many days” would have terminated, and Israel would 
no longer have been without the longed for king. But 
Israel did not know, neither did they understand, and 
instead of hailing Him with acclamation, they said, 
“ Not this man—we will not have this man to reign over 
us.” Early in the ministry of the Lord Jesus, impressed 
by His miracle-working power, they would have taken 
Him by force and made Him king, but their ideals of 
the Messianic kingdom were altogether different from 
His. They wanted a kingdom, but Christ preached the 
kingdom of heaven, or of God; and so afterwards, when 
they saw that their carnal expectations would not be 
realised, they did indeed put a crown on His head, but 
it was of thorns. They handed Him over to Pilate, and 
when that weak Roman functionary ironically remon- 
strated with them, saying, “ Shall I crucify your king?” 
they replied, “We have no king but Cæsar”; and 
having thus deliberately put themselves afresh under the 
yoke of Gentile rule, they are permitted to have a good 
long taste of it, in order that they may learn the differ- 
ence between the rule of God and the yoke of the 
Gentiles. This is why the children of Israel still “abide 
without a king,” and until they bow their knee in lowly 
homage before Him whom in ignorance they once 
despised and scorned, they will continue so to remain. 
Anyhow, this is an indisputable fact, that the Lord Jesus 
of Nazareth is the last in Jewish history whose descent 


THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 17 


from the royal line of David can now be established 
by sufficiently authentic proof. There are Jews and 
Gentiles at the present day who cavil at the New 
Testament genealogies, overlooking the fact that there 
is ample proof in the New Testament of the Davidic 
descent of our Lord, apart even from the genealogical 
records. But the difficulties in the genealogies arise not 
from inaccuracies, but from obscurities, which could, I 
believe, easily be cleared up if the national and tribal 
records from which they were compiled were still 
extant to appeal to. But since the destruction of the 
second Temple all these national genealogical records 
have perished, and apart from a few worthless traditions 
there is nothing that any Jew now on the face of the 
earth can appeal to to prove even from which tribe, not 
to say from which family, he springs. There is neither 
a tribe of Judah nor a separate Davidic family now 
existing, and yet the true king of Israel must prove 
Himself a son of David ! 1 

There is also this fact to be remembered, that when 
the claims of our Lord Jesus to Davidic descent were 
first asserted, they could easily have been disproved had 
it been possible to do so. Now, the Scribes and Phari- 
sees among whom Christ moved were not at all slow to 
bring up anything they could possibly adduce which 
they thought would disprove His claims. Wilfully 
ignorant, for instance, that He was born in Bethlehem, 
they stigmatised Him as a “Nazarene,” and said, 
“ Search and see, for out of Galilee ariseth no prophet” ; 
yet although he was universally addressed as “Son of 
David” even by the beggars who sat by the wayside, 
and by a poor Gentile woman on the borders of Tyre 
and Sidon, His enemies never even ventured to whisper 


* See for an examination of this subject, “ Die Worte Jesu,” 
by Professor Gustaf Dalman, pp. 260-266. 
3 


18 THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 


that He was not of the house of David. Afterwards, 
when Paul and the other apostles went everywhere pro- — 
claiming “Jesus Christ of the seed of David” as the 
very foundation of the gospel which they preached 
(2 Tim. ii. 8), if the Pharisees could have proved this 
one statement to be untrue, it would for ever have closed 
the mouths of these men, whom they regarded as a 
trouble and danger to the nation. They had serious 
consultations as to what could be done to put a stop to 
the wonderful movement in favour of Jesus of Nazareth. 
They threatened the apostles, they beat them, they again 
and again cast them into prison, but they never once 
dared say that He whom they preached as the seed of 
David and heir to His throne (Acts ii. 25-30) was not of 
the house of David at all. On the other hand we find 
that down to the sixth century, when the Talmud 
Babylon was compiled, the fact that Christ was of the 
Royal Davidic house was written deep on the conscious- 
ness of the Jewish nation, and shines out even from 
beneath the blasphemous legends which the Rabbis in- 
vented about Him in self-justification.: And not only 


1 The following passage from Talmud, Sanhedrin, fol. 43, @., 
is most striking. ‘There is a. tradition: On the eve of the 
Sabbath and the Passover they hung Jesus. And the herald 
went forth before him for forty days crying, ‘Jesus goeth to be 
executed, because he has practised sorcery and seduced Israel 
and estranged them from God. Let any one who can bring 
forward any justifying plea for him come and give information 
concerning it,’ but no justifying plea was found for him, and so 
he was hung on the eve of Sabbath and the Passover. Ulla said, 
‘But doest thou think that he belongs to those for whom a 
justifying plea is to be sought? He was a very seducer, and the 
Allmerciful has said, “Thou shalt not spare him, nor conceal 
him.”’ But the case of Jesus stood differently because he stood 
near to the kingdom.” 

Laible, in “ Jesus Christ in the Talmud,” renders the last words, 
“for his place was near those in power,” but this is unsatisfactory. 

The name actually used in the original in this passage just 


THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 19 


is Israel “ without a king ” (or tke king of God’s appoint- 
ment); they are also without a prince of their own 
choice, the Dispersion having made it an impossibility 
for them to have one head to rule and guide them ; and 
it is an interesting fact that although since the modern 
emancipation of the Jews they have a large share in the 
government of all civilised nations—a share altogether 
out of proportion to their actual numbers, and men of 
Jewish birth have been successful leaders of great parties, 
and even prime ministers—they themselves are under 
Gentile rule, and cannot be governed by one of their own 
nation. 


quoted is WY5 “ Yeshu,” which is an abbreviation of “Yemakh 
Shemoh vezikhroh,’—* Let his name and his memory be blotted 
out.” This blasphemous substitution of “ Yeshu” for the precious 
name “Jesus” often occurs in Rabbinic literature, but Christian 
friends will remember that it is not our Lord Jesus as we know 
Him that poor Israel in ignorance thus blasphemes, but the cari- 
cature of Him as presented to them by apostate, persecuting 
Christendom in the dark ages. Often the only way left to the 
Jews to avenge their terrible sufferings and massacres was to 
write blasphemously of Him in whose name they were ignorantly 
perpetrated. Over against poor Israel’s ignorant blasphemy of 
` “Yemakh Shemoh vezikhroh” God has uttered His decree that 
the name of Jesus “ shall endure for ever ; His name shall be con- 
tinued as long as the sun; and men shall be blessed in Him; all 
nations shall call Him blessed” (Psa. lxxii. 17). 

That the legend refers to a well-known custom in the procedure 
of the Sanhedrim in trials for life, there is I think, no doubt, be- 
cause one of their great maxims was, that “they sat to justify and 
not to condemn.” That this humane custom of calling on those 
who had anything to bring forward in favour of the accused to 
come and declare it, was not observed in the trial of Jesus of 
Nazareth, for reasons well known to readers of the Gospel, is 
certain, but, as I have already stated, from beneath the blas- 
phemous legend invented as a justification for poor Israel’s blind 

‘leaders in reference to their conduct to the Holy One, there 
shines out this truth, that up to the sixth century, when the 
Talmud was compiled, it was admitted by His enemies that He 
was not only of the Davidic house, but that “he stood near to the 
kingdom,” 


20 THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 


II. “ Without a sacrifice and without an image.” 
“Without a sacrifice to God,” as Kimchi well. para- 
phrases it, “and without an image to false gods.” 

There is a striking fact which we may notice, by the 
way, in connection with this pair of contrasts, and that 
is, that the prophet Hosea, in search for one word by 
which to characterise the true religion of Israel in 
contrast to idolatry, lays his finger on the word 
“zebbach” (“sacrifice”). . There are men at the present. 
day, both Jews and Christians, and some who are even 
occupying the position of teachers, who represent that the 
Old Testament Scriptures, instead of being a coherent, 
harmonious, though progressive, and (apart from the 


1 The following is from an excellent booklet, “ Bible Study,” 
by Rev. David M. McIntyre, Glasgow: “An immense amount 
of research has been expended during recent years in deter- 
mining the personal element which is apparent in all the Sacred 
Writings. One thought which has been persistently worked out 
is the progress of doctrine. That progress is not a development 
from barbarism, for the first Word of Scripture is an utterance 
of God, the first promise has in it the anticipation of completed 
redemption, the first act of worship looks steadfastly to Calvary. - 
We acknowledge that there is in the earlier Scriptures imma- 
turity, but it is such as is seen in the sprouting seed, the up- 
springing blade, the unripe ear—immaturity which contains ‘the 
promise and potency’ of perfected life. We frankly confess 
that the doctrine moves forward into fuller light and more 
measured statement, but it moves along the high level of inspira- 
tion from the first. The progress of doctrine of which we speak 
is a progress'that is sensible neither of conflict nor of reconcilia- 
tion. The promise of the end is in the opening chapters; the 
resonance of the first word vibrates in the last, It is a progress 
presided over by one mind—and that the mind of Christ. The 
two elements in this progress are, a fuller content of truth, and 
a closer relation to the Person of the Redeemer, We may 
realise its character by placing together the first utterance 
addressed to faith, and the last—‘In the beginning God created 
the heavens and the earth.’ ‘He which testifieth these thing 


>” 


saith, Surely, I come quickly. ‘ 


THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 21 


New Testament) relatively incomplete, revelation from 
God, consist of a patchwork of “ codes,” not one of them 
of so early a date as was believed for millenniums by 
both Jews and Christians, until these very modern 
gentlemen, possessed of a powerful intuitive faculty for 
discernment, were raised up to detect the fraud. Thus 
they have asserted that while, in the writings attributed 
to Moses (which according to them consist for the 
most part of clumsily forged documents in the Exilic 
and post-Exilic periods), stress is laid on sacrifice as a 
divinely appointed institution, the prophets -utterly 
repudiate the idea of a Divine appointment, or a Divine 
regulation of sacrifice, The reasoning upon which this 
theory has been based I will not stop here to examine, 
but this I will solemnly state, that those who would 
put Moses against the prophets, and the prophets 
against Moses, are equally ignorant of the spirit of both. 
There are grand underlying harmonies in the Scrip- 
tures where “the natural man” professes to see only 
contradictions. 

Here is a prophet, and a pre-Exilic prophet too, who 
characterises the true religion of Israel by the one 
word “sacrifice” ; and truly there is no other word that 
could so well summarise the Divine system as unfolded 
in Moses and the prophets as the word “zebbach,” 
which here and elsewhere (see Isa. i. 11) stands for 
slain sacrifices in general, and not for the “peace- 
offering,” in which sense it is sometimes used.t 

. There are Jews and Christians at the present day 


+ « I} (zebbach), a sacrifice (whether the act of sacrificing, &c.), 
an offering, a victim ; opposed both to 712’2 (mincha), a bloodless 
offering when so contrasted (1 Sam. ii. 29; Psa. xl. 7); and to 
mw (ohloh) a burnt-offering, holocaust ; so that Mt (zebbach) 
denotes sacrifices of which but part were consumed, such as 
expiatory or eucharistic offerings ” (Gesenius), 


ET unnai a e 


er ell 


22 THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 


who boast that they no longer believe in the necessity 
of sacrifice and that which sacrifices prefigured; but 
such Jews have as little in common with the teaching 
of the Old Testament as this kind of Christians have 
with the doctrines of the New Testament. Let any 
honest-minded man turn over the pages of the Old 
Testament, and I can confidently declare that from 
Genesis to Malachi he will meet in every part one 
prominently outstanding object, and that object is an 
altar, with which of course is bound up both priest and 
sacrifice. On that altar there is an inscription which 
explains the meaning of the whole sacrificial system of 


| the Old Testament, and it reads thus: “ The life of the 


flesh is in the blood: and I have given it to you upon 
the altar to make an atonement for your souls: for it is 
the blood whic’: by reason of the life maketh atone- 
ment”.(Levit. xvii. 11, Hebrew)—that is, life covereth 
life; the life of the innocent offering in the blood 
poured out on this altar “ covereth ” 1 the life forfeited 
by the guilty offerer. And turning from the Old to 
the New Testament there still meets us on almost every 
page one prominent outstanding object ; and the most 
prominent object on the pages of the New Testament 
is across. And what is the cross? It is an altar, on 
which the most stupendous of all sacrifices was offered 
—the one sacrifice to which all the sacrifices of the 
Mosaic economy pointed—even Christ, “ who: through 
the eternal; Spirit offered Himself without spot unto 
God,” so that in Him we might find “redemption by 
His blood, the forgiveness of sins according to the 
riches of His grace.” And on the New Testament 
altar, too, there is an inscription. I do not refer to the 
actual inscription placed upon the cross by Pilate, 
perhaps in mockery, which nevertheless describes the 
* The primary idea of the Hebrew “ khapare.” 


THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 23 


royal character of the victim, but to His own, and to 
the Apostle’s statements which explain the terrible 
necessity and true significance of Calvary ; and this is 
how it reads: “The Son of Man came not to be 
ministered unto, but to minister, and to give His life 
a ransom for many.” “He who knew no sin was made 
sin on our behalf that we might be made the righteous- 
ness of God in Him.” “And without shedding of blood 
there is no remission” (Matt. xx. 28; 2 Cor. v. 21; 
Heb. ix. 22). On this, as on every other essential 
doctrine, there is perfect accord between the teaching 
of the Old and the New Testament. 

And Israel now is “ without a sacrifice.” Ever since 
the destruction of the second Temple, soon after the 
coming of Christ, they have not been permitted to offer 
any kind of bloody sacrifice. There is no morning or 
evening lamb of burnt-offering ; they still observe the 
“Day of Atonement,” but where is the blood of atone- 
ment, and where the priest who on that day was to 
make an atonement for them to cleanse them, that 
they may be clean from their sins before the Lord? 
(Lev. xvi. 30). The Jews still keep the feast of 
Unleavened Bread, but where is the “ Zebbach Pesach ” 
(Exod. xii. 27), “the sacrifice of the Passover,” the blood 
of which sprinkled on the doorposts sheltered Israel’s 
firstborn in Egypt? On the Passover evening when 
gathered around the “ Saider”—the solemn family ritual 
in commemoration of the deliverance of the nation from 
Egyptian bondage—a piece of half-burnt shankbone is 
all that lies on the table to remind them of the lamb 
appointed by God, which they once used to offer and 
feed on. There is perhaps no more striking com- 
mentary on this item of Hosea’s prophecy, and no 
more pathetic picture of Israel’s present condition, than 
is presented by their liturgies. In that lying before 


mee ini, 
and 


24 THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 


me, which is in daily use among millions of Jews in 
Russia, Galicia, and throughout Eastern Europe, after 
prescribing certain portions dealing with the sacrificial 
regulations in Leviticus, and in the Mishna to be recited, 
there follows this prayer, which I translate: “Lord of 
the universe, Thou hast commanded us to offer a 
continual sacrifice in its appointed season, and that 
the priests should stand in their service, and the 
Levites in their ministry, and Israel in their ap- 
pointed place, But now, through our iniquity, the 
Temple is destroyed, and the continual sacrifice has 
ceased, and we have neither priest in his service or 
Levite. in his ministry. ,.. Therefore let it please 
Thee, O Lord our God, and the God of our fathers, 
that the words of our lips (by which is meant the 
repetition of the portions of Scripture where sacrifices 
are commanded), may be esteemed and received and 
acceptable before Thee, as if we had offered the con- 
tinual sacrifice, and as if we stood in our appointed 
position.” After reading the Mishna connected with 
the pouring and sprinkling of the blood of the different 
sin-offerings, there follows this prayer: “ May it please 
Thee, O Lord our God, and the God of our fathers, that 
if I am. guilty of (a sin for which I ought to bring) a 
sin-offering, that this ritual may be acceptable before 
Thee as if I had brought a sin-offering.” 

The same prayer follows after the recital of the 
portion dealing with the trespass-offering, the peace- 
offering, and the other offerings. 

From this, as well as from some other customs, we 
see that deep down in the consciousness of the Jewish 
nation the belief is rooted that sacrifices are a necessity 
as the ground of fellowship with the “Holy One of 
Israel,” and at the same time there is the liturgic 
solemn confession of the patent fact that for these 


THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 25 


“many days” they are “without a sacrifice.” As to 
the prayer that the mere recital of the command may 
be acceptable as if the offering was actually presented, 
as well might we believe that the mere reading over 
of a creditor’s account is equal to the paying of it! 


And not only is the present condition of Israel 
characterised as “without a sacrifice,” they are also 
“without an image.”! In the past, and until the 
“many days” of the Interregnum period set in, it 
was either the one or the other, for whenever they 
forsook Jehovah they always turned to idols, but now 


* The marginal reading and reference to Isa, xix. 19, 19 in 
the A.V. is misleading, for it leads unlearned readers to think the 
“image” is an emblem associated with the worship of Jehovah. 
M2315 (Mazehvah), which is from 232 (Nozab), is used thirty-one 
times in the Old Testament, and means (1) a pillar or monument; 
(2) a standing image or pillar devoted to idolatrous uses, In 
Genesis, where it is found nine times, it is used exclusively in the 
first sense (Gen. xxviii, 18-22, xxxi. 13, 45, 51, 52, XXXV. 14, 20); 
but from Exodus onward, from the time of the Divine appoint- 
ment of one sanctuary when the putting up of a Mazehvah was 
strictly forbidden (Lev. xxvi. 1), and in all the other books of the 
Old Testament, excepting Isa. xix. 19, 19, where it is used in 
the first sense of a pillar or monument which Egypt will erect to 
the true God, and Exod. xxiv. 4 (where it is used of the twelve 
pillars of the altar which Moses built at the foot of Mount Sinai, 
as representing the twelve tribes of Israel), the word is always 
used to describe an idolatrous object or the image of an idol; 
and in the prophets it is used as the emblem of Baal worship. It 
was for raising Mazehboth that Israel was finally carried into 
captivity—“ and they set them up Mazehboth (“ images,” A.V.), 
and Asherim upon every high hill, and under every green tree, and 
they burnt incense in all high places as did the nations whom 
the Lord carried away before them ; and wrought wicked things 
to provoke the Lord to anger .. . therefore the Lord was angry 
with Israel and removed them out of His sight” (2 Kings xvii. 
I0, 11, 18). That Hosea used Mazehvah as a symbol of idolatry 
may be seen from the only other passage in his prophecy where 
this word is used, namely, in chap. x. I, 2. 


26 THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 


it is necther the one wor the other. In Babylon Israel ~ 
was finally purged of all idolatrous tendencies, and 
since then they have manifested the greatest abhor- 
rence of everything bearing the remotest resemblance 
to idolatry. Of course there is another kind of idolatry: 
there are the “idols of the heart” (Ezek. xiv. 4), which 
are quite as hateful in the sight of God as images of 
wood and stone, but with this our passage does not 
deal. 

As a matter of fact, as far as the gross forms of 
idolatry are concerned, the Jews now are entirely free 
from it, and have been for these “many days” since 
the Babylonian Captivity; and even their prejudice 
against Christianity is partly due to the fact that the 
outward aspect of it, especially in countries where the 
Latin and Greek Churches prevail, has led them to 
regard it as idolatrous—an estimation which is, alas! to 
a large extent justified. 

Ill. “ Without an ephod and teraphim.” ‘This is the 
last of the three couplets, and on this point, too, we 
can have no better explanation than the words of the 
great Jewish commentator: “Without an ephod to 
God, by means of which we could foretell the future as 
with the Urim and Thummim, and without teraphim to 
false gods.” 

In the ephod, as already stated, were set the Urim 
and Thummim, through which, in some mysterious way 
not at present fully known to us,* God revealed His will 
to Israel. At the consecration of Joshua as the suc- 
cessor of Moses, God commanded that he should stand 
before Eleazar the priest, who shall inquire for him by 
the judgment of Urim before the Lord (Numb. xxvii. 21). 
Later on, in times of perplexity, David, for instance, had 

* See Appendix I., “Urim and Thummim,” at the end of the 
book. 


THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 27 


only to say to Abiathar the priest, “Bring hither the 
ephod,” and by its means he inquired of the Lord God 
of Israel, who condescended in this manner to make 
known His will to His servant (1 Sam. xxiii. 9-12, 
XXX 7, 8). 

From this we see that though the ephod formed part 
of the high priest’s outfit, it was a phase of the priesthood 
which reminds us of the prophetic office inasmuch as 
through it God spoke—a prefigurement in this respect 
of the time when both offices shall meet in one glorious 
Person, through whom God was to speak His last words, 
and who, though the great prophet, shall also be “a 
priest upon His throne.” In fact, on carefully analysing 
this remarkable prophecy, we find each of the three great 
Messianic offices referred to in the three pairs of 
contrasts which we are considering. The first speaks 
plainly of the “King”; the second of “sacrifice,” with 
which of course is bound up the idea of priesthood; and 
in this last we have a reference to the revealing of the 
mind of God, which is more properly connected with the 
prophetic office. 

Is it accidental that just these three great offices 
which man needs for his relations with God are those 
which Israel is now “ without,” but which on the other 
hand have always been associated by the Church with 
Jesus Christ? Oh, no; it is for the very reason that 
they are all merged and fulfilled in Christ,-that poor 
Christless Israel, so long as they reject Him, is deprived 
of the blessings which flow from them. 

But at any rate, thus much even a Jew does not deny, 
that this prophetic word in the last couplet brings 
before us another patent fact. Israel now is “without 
an ephod.” As they are without a king and a priest, so 
it is also the time of God’s long silence, and in ignorance 
of the cause they continue to cry out, “ Why withdrawest 


28 THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 


Thou Thy hand? O God, how long shall the adversary 
reproach? .., We see not oursigns; there is no more 
any prophet, neither is there among us any that knoweth 
how long” (Psa, Ixxiv. 9-11). Yes, there is neither 
sound nor hearing, nor is there one among them who 
can tell what Israel ought to do. 

But not only are they “ without an ephod,” but as in 
the other pairs of contrasts, so here too, they are also 
without that which is the direct antithesis to it, namely, - 
the “ teraphim,” or speaking oracles of the heathen.t 

Apart from our passage there are only seven other 
scriptures in the Hebrew Bible where the teraphim 
are introduced, but these suffice to show that they were 
not only zdols, the use of which is classed together 
by God with “witchcraft, stubbornness, and iniquity” 
(1 Sam. xv. 23), but that they were a peculiar kind of 
idols, namely, those used for oracular responses. The 
first mention of the teraphim is in connection with 
Jacob’s flight from Laban, in Gen, xxxi. and in the 
light of the other passages there seems probability in 
the explanation of Aben Ezra? that Rachel stole them 
in order that her father might not discover the direction 
of their flight by means of these oracles, 

The second place where we find them is in that 
strange narrative about the Ephraimite Micah, and the 
Danite expedition to Laish in Judg. xvii. and xviii. 
where we get a sad and characteristic glimpse of the 
condition of some among the tribes in those days, “ when 
there was no king in Israel and every man did that 
which was right in his own eyes,” This narrative 
supplies an illustration of the fact that not only is 


t See Appendix II., “ Dean Farrar on the Teraphim,” at the end 
of the book. 

? See Aben Ezra in loc. Gesenius traces “Teraphim” to the 
unused root “Toraph,” which in the Syriac has the significance 
of “to inquire.” 


THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 29 


man incapable of himself to find God, but that, left- 
to himself, he is incapable of retaining the know- 
ledge of God in its original purity even when once 
divinely communicated; and that even the things 
revealed, apart from the continued teaching of God’s 
Spirit, are liable to become corrupted and distorted in 
his mind. Here we have a sad instance of a certain 
knowledge of Jehovah mixed up with the worship of 
“a graven image and a molten image,’ which were 
abomination in His sight, and the illegitimate use of the 
divinely instituted ephod, which was only to be borne 
by the high priest, joined together with the pagan 
teraphim. But the point to be noted is that here 
also these teraphim were used for oracular consulta- 
tions, for it was of them that the apostate Levite of 
Bethlehem asked for counsel for the idolatrous Danites 
(Judg. xviii. 5, 6). 

In Ezek. xxi. 21 we find the exact antithesis to 
David’s consulting the ephod in the pagan king of 
Babylon “consulting with images” (literally, “ tera- 
phim”) in reference to his projected invasion of 
Palestine.t Now it is clear that in olden times, when- 
ever by apostasy and disobedience fellowship with 
Jehovah was interrupted, and when in consequence 
there was no revelation from Him, “neither by dreams, 
nor by Urim, nor by prophets,” Israel turned to the 
pagan teraphim, or like poor Saul they “sought unto 


1 The only other instances where teraphim are mentioned are 
I1 Sam. xix. 13-16, from which we gather, first, the sad fact that 
idolatry was practised by Michal, the daughter of Saul, and, 
secondly, that the teraphim must have had some resemblance 
to the human form since the idol could be mistaken for the body 
of David. There were no doubt larger ones in the temples, and 
smaller ones of all sizes, and for idolatrous purposes in the 
houses. The last mention of these is in Zech. x. 2, which is 
referred to below. 


30 THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 


such as had familiar spirits, and wizards that peep and 
that mutter.” But ever since the Babylonish Captivity 
Israel has been free from this, as from the other forms of 
gross and outward idolatry. 

A parallelism, in its spiritual significance, is to be 
found in Christendom. What the ephod or the prophet 
was in olden times, Holy Scripture is now. It is even 
“a more sure word ” than voices from heaven, or answers 
by Urim and Thummim. The Scriptures, first spoken by 
holy men of God as they were moved by the Holy 
Spirit, are now “ the oracles of God,’ themselves speaking 
with voices which carry their own conviction to hearts 
honestly seeking for truth, and ever confirming them- 
selves in the world’s history and in the Christian’s 
experience; but men in the present day, even in 
Christendom, stumbling at the supernatural element 
in them, as if there could be a revelation of the Infinite 
and Everlasting One without such element, turn away 
from these oracles often on the flimsiest grounds, and 
instead are giving heed on the one hand to the specula- 
tions of a “science falsely so called,” and on the other 
hand “ to seducing spirits and doctrines of devils,” and 
are thus in a measure already supplying an illustration 
of the solemn words of the apostle, that if men receive 
not the love of the truth that they might be saved, “God 
shall for this cause send them strong delusion that they 
should believe a lie” (2 Thess. ii, 11,12). For of the 
modern Christian teraphim it is as true as of the ancient 
pagan; to adopt the language where they are last 
mentioned in Scripture, “they speak vanity,’ or 
“wickedness”; and as for their “diviners,” or false 
prophets representing them, “they see a lie, and tell 
false dreams; they comfort in vain” (Zech. x. 2); for 
it is a comfort not well founded, and will not stand the 
test of death or of a judgment to come. 


THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” | 31 


“ AFTERWARDS.” 


But the prophecy does not stop with describing the 
present—it goes on to the future. “ Afterwards,” it says, 
after the “many days” of the Interregnum when the 
“times of the Gentiles” shall be fulfilled, and the period 
for the treading down of Jerusalem accomplished, “ shall 
the children of Israel,” that is, “all Israel,” as the great 
apostle to the Gentiles assures us, in contrast to the 
remnant who seek and find God now—“ return, and 


seek Jehovah their God and David their king.” They / 


shall “return ” to their land, but, better still, to their God. 

The word translated here “ return ” is the Hebrew for 
repentance, Itis the word the prophets so often used 
when they cried, “ Turn ye; turn ye, for why will ye die 
O house of Israel?” but they have never yet as a nation 
returned to God, neither will they return until the Spirit 
is poured upon them from on high, and the work of grace 
begins in their hearts. Then “a voice will be heard upon 
the high places, even the weeping and supplication of 
the children of Israel, because they have perverted their 
way and have forgotten Jehovah their God.” And in 
the midst of this weeping and supplication the voice of 
God will finally break in saying, “ Return, ye backsliding 
children ; I will heal your backslidings,” and then will 
come the immediate glad response, “Behold we come 
unto Thee, for Thou art Jehovah our God” (Jer. iii. 21,22; 
see also Zech. chaps. xii. to xiv.) And not only will they 
“return,” but they will seek “ Jehovah their God.” Now 
and for a long season Israel hath been “without the 
true God,” and without a priest to teach them the true 
meaning of the law. These words from 2 Chron. xv. 3 
proclaim a present as well as an historic fact, and por- 
tray perhaps the saddest feature in connection with the 


present condition of Israel. In spite of religiousness 


ON 


ey 


inneni emt 


32 THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD ’ 


and great zeal, Israel is now “without the true God,” and 
if we inquire for the reason it is found in the words of 
our Lord, “I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; no 
man cometh unto the Father but by Me”; and again, 
“This is life eternal, that they might know Thee, the 
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom Thou hast sent.” 
“No man hath seen God at any time,” nor can we see 
or truly know Him except the only-begotten of the 
Father declare Him unto us; and by rejecting Him 
even the revelation in the scriptures of Moses and the 
prophets has become obscured to Israel, for that too was 
a revelation of God in Christ. Therefore the prophet 
says that they will not only seek Jehovah their God, but 
also “ David their King.” 

Now it is unnecessary to prove that “David” here 
stands for David’s greater son, or Messiah. The Jews 
themselves have so understood it. Even the Rabbis, in 
commenting on the parallel passage in Jer. xxx.,, 
where we read that “In that day ... they shall serve 
Jehovah their God and David their king whom I will 
raise up unto them,” have said, “David their king whom 
I will raise up unto them,” and not “whom I Aave 
raised up unto them”—showing that it is not King 
David who reigned in Jerusalem some four hundred 
years before who is meant, but the Messiah who is to 
be of David's seed, as it is written in Jer. xxiii. 5, 6, and 
other scriptures. In truth, He is the true David, the 
“Beloved,” the King and Man after God’s own heart, in 
whom the promises of the kingdom are centred. There 
are a number of passages where the name David is applied 
to Messiah the king in the prophecies, but those in our 
passage in Hosea iii. and in Jer. xxx. 9 are especially 
remarkable: “They shall seek Jehovah their God and 
David their king”; “They skall serve Jehovah their 
God and David their king,” showing that there is 


THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 33 


neither true seeking nor true serving of Jehovah God 
if we do not also seek and serve David (Messiah) 
the king, notwithstanding all that poor Israel now 
thinks to the contrary. 

Now let us return for a moment to the first of the 
three pairs of contrasts in the fourth verse of our chapter 
—“ Without a king and without a prince ”—and by com- 
paring that statement with another prophecy of Israel’s 
future, observe a most beautiful truth about the Lord 
Jesus in relation to that nation.t In Ezek. xxxvii. 21-25 
we read, “Thus saith the Lord God, Behold I will take 
the children of Israel from among the nations, whither 
they be gone, and will gather them on every side, and 
bring them into their own land. And I will make them 
one nation in the land upon the mountains of Israel : 
and one king shall be king to them all: and they shall 
be no more two nations, neither shall they be divided 
into two kingdoms any more at all. Neither shall they 
defile themselves any more with their idols, nor with their 
detestable things, nor with any of their transgressions ; 
but I will save them out of all their dwelling-places 
wherein they have sinned, and will cleanse them; so 
shall they be My people, and I will be their God. And 
David, My servant, shall be king over them, and they all 
shall have one shepherd; they shall also walk in My 
judgments, and observe My statutes and do them. And 
they shall dwell in the land that I have given unto Jacob 
My servant wherein your fathers have dwelt; and they 
shall dwell therein, even they, and their children, and 
their children’s children for ever : and My servant David 
shall be their prince for ever ” (Ezek. xxxvii. 21-25). 

And David My servant shall be King over them... 

* This section is transferred here from my book, “The 


Jewish Problem,” as it is important to the context and a full 
understanding of this prophecy. 


4 


34 THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 


and My servant David shall be their Prince for ever.” 
Here is both Israel’s King and Prince in the same 
person. 

But, you say, do not the two terms substantially mean | 
the same thing? No; the word in the original trans- 
lated “ prince” in this passage does not mean prince in 
an hereditary sense of the word. “Nassi,” the term 
used, signifies one exalted, or elected by the freewill of the 
people. What a glimpse we get here of the change that 
will come over Israel at the appearing of Jesus Christ! 
At His first coming Israel as a nation deliberately 
rejected Him. “Not this man, but Barabbas!” they said ; 
and as to Christ, “Crucify Him! Crucify Him! We 
| will not have this man to reign over us!” was their cry. 
|. But the national verdict with regard to Jesus Christ 
: will be revoked ; the grand mistake of the Jewish people 
< shall yet be acknowledged and repented of. Instead of 
1: “Crucify Him!” they will cry “Hosannah! Blessed is 
| He that cometh in the name of the Lord!” They will 
| recognise His claims, not only as “the King,” the One 
` whose right it is to reign over them; but they will 
deliberately declare Him their “ Nassi,” their elected, or 
exalted one. . 

This simply means that Israel will ratify God’s choice. 
David himself, whose name Messiah bears, is a beautiful 
type of Christ in this,as in many other respects. In 
I Sam. xvi. we read of his being chosen and anointed.. 
king over Israel by the command of God. But what 
followed? Did he at once commence his reign? For 
fifteen years he was a fugitive; his claims were un- 
recognised ; his home was the cave of Adullam or the 
wilderness of Judah. There was another king who 
hated David and disputed his sovereignty. Meanwhile, 
instead of a throne on Mount Zion and the hosts of 
Israel, his court was outside the camp, and his following 


THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 35 


consisted of his brethren and all his father’s house: 
“ And every one that was in distress, and every one that 
was in debt, and every one that was discontented ”—a 
strange, typical lot, not at first numbering altogether 


more than about “four hundred men.” But at last, » 


after years of rejection, the people’s heart turned to- 
ward him, “and the men of Judah came, and ”—as if 
he had never been anointed king before—“ there (in 
Hebron) they anointed David king over the house of 
Judah” (2 Sam. ii. 4). 

Thus it is with Christ. From His incarnation He 
was designated King of the Jews. Jehovah Himself 
has anointed Him as His king on the holy hill of Zion ; 
and it was even then announced that “the Lord God 
shall give unto Him the throne of His father David, and 
He shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever ; and of 
His kingdom there shall be no end.” But my people 
knew not the day of their visitation ; and for all these 
centuries have resolutely, as a nation, refused to acknow- 
ledge His claims. Meanwhile, also, the god of this 
world, “the prince of the power of the air,” is permitted 
in the infinite wisdom of God to usurp Christ’s 
sovereignty over the nations; and the followers of our 
blessed, glorious Master are a mere handful of individuals 
from all nations, who spiritually are like that motley 
crowd in the cave of Adullam, “in distress, in debt, and 
discontented, or bitter of soul,” because of a sense of sin 
and sorrow. These are painfully conscious that Jesus 
Christ is not yet accepted king over the earth; for 
instead of a crown, which will come by and by, we have 
to take up His cross and follow Him “without the camp, 
bearing His reproach.” But as sure as there was a 
cross planted for Him on that Golgotha, outside the 
walls of Jerusalem, so surely, if the word and oath of 
our God stand for anything, is there yet to be a glorious 


| 


36 THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 


throne for our Redeemer and Master on Mount Zion. 
“The stone which the builders have rejected has become 
the headstone of the corner ;” and, however marvellous 
and improbable in our eyes, Israel shall yet “serve 
Jehovah their God and David their king,” and delibe- 
rately elect Him, whom during centuries of unbelief 
they have despised and rejected, as their “ Nassi”— 
their freely chosen ruler and Prince. 

Another beautiful glimpse into the time and circum- 
stances of Israel’s seeking and finding Christ, is to be 


found in the words of the same prophet at the end of 


the fifth and the beginning of the sixth chapters: “I 
will go and return to My place till they declare them- 
selves guilty, and seek My face; in their affliction they 
will seek Me early.” In their fulness these words can 
only be understood in the light of New Testament 
history. It is our Lord Jesus who, by His spirit, 
speaks through the mouth of the prophet. He was the 
Lamb of God, but by reason of their unbelief and the 
judgments which have befallen them in consequence of 
His rejection, His first coming to them, as depicted in 
the preceding verse, has been “as a lion, and as a young 
lion to the house of Judah: He has torn and gone: 
away.” Whither has He gone? The answer is: “to 
My place”—to “the glory which He had with the 
Father before the world was” (John xvii. 5). Having 
come from God He went, when His mission of suffering 
and death was accomplished, to God (John xiii. 3), and 
there, at His Father’s right hand, He will remain “ till 
they declare themselves guilty.” The word here is the 
same, and seems to me to be designedly taken by the 
prophet from Gen. xlii., where we read the confession 
of Joseph’s brethren in the midst of their trouble in — 
Egypt. “We are verily guilty,’ they said one to 
another, “concerning our brother, in that we saw the 


j 


THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 37 


anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would 
not hear; therefore is this tribulation come upon us. . 
Behold, also his blood is required” (Gen. xlii. 21, 22). 
So it will be with Israel in relation to the Messiah, the 
Beloved of the Father, whom also they sold for thirty 
pieces of silver, and whom they have believed all this 
time to be dead. The day is drawing nigh when this 
greater than Joseph, who meanwhile has been exalted 
a Prince and a Saviour, will reveal Himself to His own 
brethren, but not until, by the aid of the “ spirit of grace 
and supplications which will be poured out upon them,” 
“they declare themselves guilty” of the most terrible 
crime in their national history, even the rejection and 
crucifixion of the Son of God, and their own brother 
according to the flesh. 

And it was in the time of trouble that this heart- 
searching among Joseph’s brethren took place, and 
the confession was wrung from them. So it will be 
with Israel. “In their affliction,’ in their tribulation 
(the word being the same as is used to describe “ Jacob’s 
trouble” in Jer. xxx. 7, and other scriptures) “they will 
seek Me early.” Then the prophet, reaching out to- 
wards these promises from afar, and eager to hasten 
that longed-for time, says: “Come, and let us return 
to the Lord, for He hath torn, and He will heal us; 
He hath smitten, and He will bind us up. After 
two days will He revive us, in the third day He will 
raise us up, and we shall live in His sight.” 

“ One day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and 
a thousand years as one day.” For nearly two such 
millennial days since the Dayspring from on high has 
visited us, has the national history of Israel been sus- 
pended, and the nation itself been as dead, but the third 
is the resurrection day, when the Lord will quicken and 
help Israel “at the breaking in of the morning” (Psa. 


Suk 


38 THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 


xlvi. 5, Hebrew). “Then shall we know if we follow 
on to know the Lord. His going forth is prepared as 
the morning, and He shall come unto us as the rain, as 
the latter and former rain unto the earth.” 

And when once Israel learns to know God in the 
face of Jesus Christ, and has unveiled to them His 
absolute truth and righteousness, as well as His infinite 
love, “they shall fear toward Jehovah and His good- 
ness in the latter days.” His love and forgiveness 
which they will experience on the ground of re- 
demption will not make them think lightly of sin, 
or to have low views of God’s holiness. A filial fear 
will take possession of their hearts in relation to Him, 
in whom alone they will find, even as we do now, 
all their blessedness; in the loss of whose fellowship 
they will have discovered the cause of all their misery. 
Yes, this is the effect which the grace of God has on the 
regenerate heart: “ With Thee there is forgiveness that 
Thou mayest be feared.” This is not the terror of the 
ungodly, but a fear springing from a sense of forgive- 
ness and acceptance—a fear which dreads to. offend 
against love so wonderful, and which cannot bear to. 
think even of the osstbclty of being once again 
excluded from the fellowship of Him whose loving- 
kindness is better than life. 

And all this will take place in the “latter days.” 
This brings us to the same landmark of time as indi- 
cated in the inspired forecast of the history of Israel 
given by Moses at the very beginning of their national — 
career (Deut. iv. 30). 

“In the latter,” or “ last days,” “the days of Messiah,” 
as Jewish commentators themselves explain, which 
to them will not begin until they shall say: “Blessed 
is He that cometh in the name of Jehovah!” Israel’s 
sin and sorrow shall end ; the yoke of Gentile rule shall 


THE INTERREGNUM AND “AFTERWARD” 39 


be broken ; men shall no more serve themselves of him, 
but “they shall serve Jehovah their God, and David 
- their king, whom God will raise up unto them.” 

For thus said Jehovah: “ Like as I have brought all 
this great evil upon this people, so will I bring upon 
them all the good that I have promised them.” 


II 


THE “ICHABOD” PERIOD AND THE RETURN OF 
THE GLORY OF JEHOVAH 


“Comfort ye, comfort ye My people, saith your God, Speak 
ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare 
is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned; that she hath 
received of the Lord’s hand double for all her sins. 

“The voice of one that crieth, Prepare ye in the wilderness 
the way of the Lord, make straight in the desert a high way 
for our God. 

“Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill 
shall be made low : and the crooked shall be made straight, and 
the rough places plain: and the glory of the Lord shall be 
revealed, and all flesh shall see it together : for the mouth of the 
Lord hath spoken it. 

“The voice of one saying, Cry. And one said, What shall I 
cry? All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the 
flower of the field: the grass withereth, the flower fadeth ; 
because the breath of the Lord bloweth upon it: surely the 
people is grass. The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: but 
the word of our God shall stand for ever. 

“O thou that tellest good tidings to Zion, get thee up into the ` 
high mountain ; O thou that tellest good tidings to Jerusalem, 
lift up thy voice with strength; lift it up, be not afraid; say 
unto the cities of Judah, Behold, your God! Behold, the Lord 
God will come as a mighty one, and His arm shall rule for Him : 
behold, His reward is with Him, and His recompense before Him. 
He shall feed His flock like a shepherd, He shall gather the lambs 
in His arm, and carry them in His bosom, and shall gently lead 
those that give suck.’ —Isa. xl. 1-11. 


II 


THE “ICHABOD” PERIOD AND THE RETURN OF 
THE GLORY OF JEHOVAH 


ITH the fortieth chapter begins the second half 

of the Book of Isaiah, the last twenty-seven 
chapters forming a separate and continuous prophecy 
by itself. This grand prophetic Messianic epic of the 
Old Testament, the centre and heart of which is Christ, 
forms one of the very richest portions of God’s self- 
revelation. Sublimely grand is its very style and 
language. “There is in fact no more Johannic book 
in the whole of the Old Testament than this book of 
consolation,” says a great German Bible student: “It 
is like the product of an Old Testament gift of tongues. 
The fleshly body of speech has become changed into 
a glorified body, and we hear, as it were, spiritual voices 
from the world beyond, or world of glory.” 

It is remarkable and masterly in its structure, for as 
we proceed we find the one larger cycle of twenty-seven 
chapters divided into three smaller cycles of nine 
chapters, each interlinked with the other, and ending 
with the same refrain of peace and blessedness to the 
righteous, and “no peace to the wicked.” 2 

* Delitzsch. 

2 See Appendix III. on the structure of the second half of 


Isaiah at the end of the book. 
43 


44 THE “ICHABOD” PERIOD AND 


Wonderful also is its comprehensiveness, the whole 
order of the New Testament being anticipated in it. It 
begins where the New Testament begins—with the 
ministry of John the Baptist, the voice crying in the 
wilderness, and it ends where the New Testament ends, 
with the new heavens and the new earth, wherein shall 
dwell righteousness. A certain school of modern 
criticism, of some of the representations of which I 
am bold to say that they apply to the study of Scripture 
a wisdom which is certainly not from above, claim most 
positively to have discovered another author for these 
last twenty-seven chapters ; or to speak more accurately, 
being positive only in putting aside the claims of the 
Son of Amoz under whose name they stand, and who 
was believed to be the writer by the compilers of the 
Old Testament canon, and by the Apostles of the New 
Testament, these gentlemen are at a loss to find the 
real author, and not unfrequently call their pseudo 
Isaiah by the significant name of the “Great Unknown.” 1 
On my shelf yonder there stands a book on Messianic 
prophecy by a clever writer, and in the section devoted 
to the second half of Isaiah I was greatly struck when 
reading it with the frequent repetition of the phrase the 
“Great Unknown.” The words impressed me as of 
solemn significance. Prophecy is not of man’s origina- 
tion, but emanates from the Great Omniscient God. 
“Holy men,” Scripture assures us, “spake as they were 
moved (or borne along) by the Holy Ghost.” Now 
God forbid that I should characterise alike all who 
have been entrapped by the novelties and the daring 


« “Great” the writer of these chapters certainly was, but for 
that very reason we may doubt his being unknown, or that there 
was any necessity of a work which bears on its very face the 
true prophetic stamp being smuggled in under another name to 
give it authority. 


THE RETURN OF THE GLORY OF JEHOVAH 45 


of this school, but of many of them I must utter the 
sad conviction that it is the Holy Spirit, the real author 
of prophecy, who is the “Great Unknown,” or they would 
not speak and write of Scripture as they do. Once 
granted that prophecy is supernatural in its essence, 
and that there is nothing improbable in the fact that 
one speaking from the mouth of God could definitely 
foretell things to come, and speak of things and persons 
which as yet were not, as though they were—and most 
of the arguments in favour of a later date and different 
author for these chapters fall to the ground. As to the 
supposed differences in language and style, I can only 
state that to one dissimilarity it would be easy to point 
out many marked features both of style and language 
which are peculiar alike to both parts of the Book of 
Isaiah. One little link which binds together the two 
halves of this prophecy shines out in connection with 
the subject we are about to consider, namely, the 
Revelation of the glory of Jehovah. 

Isaiah’s earlier prophecies terminate with the thirty- 
fifth chapter, that wonderfully sublime paragraph which 
contains, in germ, most of the leading thoughts of the 
last twenty-seven chapters.t Following that, we have four 
chapters of contemporary history, containing the account 


* Delitzsch, who to the grief of many, finally gave way in a 
measure, to the rationalistic pressure around him, and accepted 
the theory of a later authorship of the last twenty-seven chapters 
of Isaiah, says in his commentary on the thirty-fifth chapter that 
it is “like a mosaic” from passages in the second half of the 
book, and continues: “ We have intentionally avoided crowding 
together the parallel passages from chapters xl.-Ixvi. The whole 
chapter is, in every part, both in thought and language, a prelude 
of that book of consolation for the exiles in their captivity. Not 
only in its spiritual New Testament thoughts, but also in its 
ethereal language, soaring high as it does in majestic softness and 
light, the prophecy has now reached the highest point of its 
development.” 


46 THE “ICHABOD” PERIOD AND 


of Sennacherib’s invasion ; the destruction of his army ; 
Hezekiah’s sickness and recovery; and of the embassy 
sent by Merodach-baladan, ostensibly to congratulate 
Hezekiah on his recovery, but in reality, as we know 
also from 2 Chron. xxxii, 31, to “inquire of the wonder 
that was done in the land,” in the great reverse which 
befell the arms of Assyria, whom Babylon, till then a 
subject power, was before long to supersede. In that 
thirty-ninth chapter we have a most striking definite an- 
nouncement to Hezekiah of the seventy years’ captivity 
among the very people whose ambassadors he had tried 
to impress with the importance of his kingdom, and the 
riches of his treasures. “Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah, 
Hear the word of Jehovah of Hosts. Behold the days 
come, that all that is in thine house, and that which thy 
fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall be 
carried to Babylon: nothing shall be left, saith the 
Lord. And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, 
which thou shalt beget, shall they take away; and 
they shall be eunuchs in the palace of the King of 
Babylon.” 

This announcement forms at once the threshold and 
the standpoint of the last great prophecy written at 
a later period of the prophet’s life. 

The captivity has become ideally a present fact to 
the prophet, and in vision he already beholds the land 
desolate, the Temple destroyed, the people pining in 
Chaldean bondage; and it is just like God, to open up 
in advance, a stream of consolation, to accompany the 
faithful remnant all through the weary wilderness march 
of the shorter, and of the present much longer captivity. 
But to return from the short digression. What is the 
climax to which we are gradually led up in the earlier 
prophecies of Isaiah? It is found in the second verse 
of the thirty-fifth chapter, “They shall see the glory of 


THE RETURN OF THE GLORY OF JEHOVAH 47 


Jehovah, the excellency” (or “the majesty”) “of our 
God.” And what is the great theme of the last twenty- 
seven chapters? It is the same. The central thought 
of the prologue, or introduction, consisting of the first 
eleven verses of chapter forty is: “And the glory of 
Jehovah shall be revealed and all flesh shall see it 
together,” which is explained in the last of the brief 
four sections into which the introduction is divided, by 
the words: “Behold the Lord God will come with 
strength and His own arm shall rule for Him; behold 
His reward is with Him and His work before Him.” It 
is from this blessed announcement that the streams of 
comfort flow ; it is for this glorious culmination that the 
way is to be prepared, and all the twenty-seven chapters 
but unfold the process by which this grand consumma- 
tion will finally be brought about. 

“The glory of Jehovah shall be revealed.” 

I wonder if we all understand what is meant by the 
expression, “The glory of Jehovah.” I fear that some 
expressions that are much on our lips, are but little 
understood by us. Let me then state at the outset that 
the words, “Khebod Jehovah” (the glory of Jehovah), 
in the Hebrew scriptures, always mean the glory of the 
personal presence of Jehovah; the glory surrounding 
and attendant on the visible manifestations of Jehovah 
on the earth. In order to elucidate this..important 
subject, let me draw your attention to several different 
scriptures. 

No sooner did God bring Israel out of Egypt than, in 
keeping with His purpose of a theocracy, He Himself 
came, and took His place at the head of that nation, 
and the visible symbol of His as yet invisible presence 
was the pillar of cloud, which at night turned into a . 
pillar of fire. The first mention of this symbolical cloud 
is in Exod. xiii, 21, 22, where we read: “And Jehovah 


48 THE “ICHABOD” PERIOD AND 


went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud to lead 
them the way; and by night in a pillar of fire to give 
them light; to go by day and by night. He took not 
away the pillar of the cloud by day, nor the pillar of 
fire by night from before the people.” In verse 19 of 
the following chapter we have this pillar of cloud 
associated with the Angel of Jehovah, for we read: “ And 
the angel of God which went before the camp of Israel 
removed and went behind them; and the pillar of the 
cloud went from before their face and stood behind 
them.” 

Now I need only point out in passing that there is 
only one Being in the Old Testament who bears the 
name of the “ Angel of Jehovah,” and that is Messiah, 
the Son of God, the second Person in the Blessed 
Trinity. The word angel, either in the Hebrew or 
Greek, does not in itself denote the nature or quality of 
the messenger. It may be one of the heavenly 
messengers or spiritual intelligences whom we usually 
call by this name. It may be a man, or it may be He 
who pre-eminently is the Messenger of God to man, of 
whom we read “last of all He sent His Son.” It was 
this Divine Angel or Messenger of Jehovah, who, when 
the time arrived for the bringing Israel out of Egypt, 
appeared to Moses in the burning bush, and said of 
Himself, “I am the God of thy father, the God of 
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,” so 
that Moses, recognising Him to be God, was afraid and 
hid his face (Exod. iii. 2-6). And it was He also who 
“in His love and in His pity redeemed them, and bare 
them, and carried them” all the days of old, and went 
before them in His pillar of cloud all through their 
wilderness journeys. 

He is called the “ Angel of God’s Presence” (or “of 
His face,” Isa. Ixiii. 9), because He is the only face or 


THE RETURN OF THE GLORY OF JEHOVAH 49 


personal manifestation of God which man has ever seen, 
or can see, and who, after His incarnation, could there- 
fore say in answer to the yearning desire of man, “Show 
us the Father and it sufficeth us,” “He that hath seen 
Me hath seen the Father”; and He is “the Angel of 
the Covenant,” even the Divine Lord who was suddenly 
to come to His Temple to inaugurate the new dispensa- 
tion. When once the Tabernacle was built for His 
dwelling-place, the symbol of His special presence in 
the midst of His redeemed people was always asso- 
ciated with the sanctuary. Thus we read of its dedica- 
tion in Exod. xl. 33-35: “Moses finished the work” 
(that is, of putting the Tabernacle together). “Then a 
cloud covered the tent of meeting, and the glory of 
Jehovah filled the Tabernacle. And Moses was not 
able to enter into the tent of meeting because the cloud 
abode thereon, and the glory of Jehovah filled the 
Tabernacle.” “So it was always; the cloud covered it 
by day and the appearance of fire by night” (Numb. 
ing, (16), 

When in process of time, after the establishment of 
the kingdom of Israel, the permanent “House” or 
“Palace” * of Israel’s true King took the place of the 
movable tent, we read the same thing in connection 
with the consecration of the Temple as we do of the 
Tabernacle. 

“And it came to pass when the priests were come 
out of the holy place that the cloud filled the house of 
Jehovah so that the priests could not stand to minister 
because of the cloud; for the glory of Jehovah had 
filled the house of Jehovah” (1 Kings viii. 10-11). 
“So it was always.” I would not assert that all through 
the frequent lapses into apostacy, and in the latter evil 

* During the time of the Theocracy there was only one word 
for Temple and Palace. 


5 


go THE “ICHABOD” PERIOD AND 


days of the history of the kingdom, the people could 
always see the symbol of God’s presence with them, 
but so long as the first Temple stood He did not finally 
withdraw from the people He was pleased to call His 
inheritance; and Israels high priests on entering once 
a year into the Holy of Holies were conscious that 
there, “between the Cherubim,’ God dwelt as in no 
other nation, although His presence fills the universe. 
Thus it continued until.a particular point in the history 
of Israel, recorded in the Book of Ezekiel. The prophecy 
of Ezekiel forms a very important link in the progress 
of Old Testament revelation, but it is specially im- 
portant for the light it throws on two great events 
in Jewish history. One of these events is the de- 
parture of governmental power from Judah. This 
is announced in the remarkable passage in chapter 
xxi, 26, 27, and was explained in a preceding section 
of this work. 

But secondly, simultaneous with the removal of 
governmental power the prophet saw the departure of 
the glory of Jehovah from Israel. The connection is 
most significant. The true King of Israel, as already 
explained, was Jehovah, and the removal of crown and 
mitre, and the departure of the sceptre from Judah 
therefore really meant the withdrawal of God from 
them. We all remember the touching account the 
prophet gives of the departure of the glory in three 
earlier chapters.? 

First he sees it in its wonted place between the 
Cherubim in the Holy of Holies- then he sees it lift 
itself from off the cherub and move to the threshold, 
where it evidently remained for awhile. Then he sees 
it move again, this time mounted on the Cherubim, the 


* See “ Without a King and without a eae page 13. 
a Ezek. ix, xi, x1, 


THE RETURN OF THE GLORY OF JEHOVAH 51 


symbols of God’s executive power on the earth, and 
passing out by the east gate it “stood,” or remained 
hovering, over the court, “So that the court was full of 
the brightness of the glory of Jehovah.” Again he sees 
it depart from the court of the temple and stand over 
the city. Have you ever asked yourself the reason of 
this slow and deliberate departure of the glory from 
Israel? Why not depart from them at one bound? 
Oh, my dear friends, in symbolical language God the 
Father thus spoke to His rebellious but beloved people 
the very words that Jesus spoke to Israel centuries 
later: “O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the 
prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, 
how often would I have gathered thy children together 
even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings 
and ye would not.” He did not want to leave them. 
Oh, if they had but repented and cleansed their way, 
then would He not have taken His presence from among 
them. “For the space of three years and a half, said 
Rabbi Youchanan, the Shekhinah was sitting upon the 
Mount of Olives thinking peradventure Israel might 
repent;”* but instead of repenting they only grew 
bolder in their sins, and, as God Himself pathetically 
complains to the prophet, they literally drove Him from 
their midst by their wickedness. “Son of man,” he 
says, “seest thou what they do, even the great abomina- 
tions that the house of Israel committeth here, that J 
should go far off from my sanctuary” (Ezek. viii. 6). So 
that the prophet again sees the glory of Jehovah going 


* Quoted by M. Margoliouth in his “Lord’s Prayer,” from the 
Preface to the Kabbalistic commentary on the Book of Lamen- 
tations, Aychah Rabatha, He also points out “ that this was just 
the time that our Saviour laboured personally to bring His. own 
to repentance and while on the Mount of Olives wept over the 
holy city.” 


s2 THE “ICHABOD” PERIOD AND 


up from the midst of the city to the Mount of Olives 
(chap. xi. 23), and after it “stood” there for some time 
it finally departed. 

Since that event there is one word written across 
Jewish history, and that one word is “I-chabod”— 
where is the glory? For the Lord has withdrawn 
Himself, and the glory of Jehovah has departed from 
His land, and from His people. 

They then went to Babylon, and when the seventy 
years were expired the comparative handful who 
returned commenced to build a Temple, and while they 
were engaged in that task the first of that great trio of 
post-Exilic prophets, “ Haggai, the messenger of Jehovah, 
in Jehovah’s message” (chap. i. 13), was commissioned 
to make to them the following announcement: “Who 
is left among you that saw this house in her first glory? 
and how do ye see it now? Is it not in your eyes in 
comparison of it as nothing? Yet now be strong; O 
Zerubbabel, saith the Lord; and be strong, O Joshua, 
son of Josedech, the high priest ; and be strong, all ye 
people of the land, saith the Lord, and work: for I am. 
with you, saith the Lord of hosts: according to the 
word that I covenanted with you when ye came out of 
Egypt, so My Spirit remaineth among you: fear ye not. 
For thus saith the Lord of hosts, Yet once, it is a 
little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, 
and the sea and the dry land; and I will shake all 
nations, and the desire of all nations shall come: and I 
will fill this house with glory, saith the Lord of hosts. 
The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, saith the Lord 
of hosts. The glory of this latter house shall be 
greater than of the former, saith the Lord of hosts; 
and in this place will I give peace, saith the Lord of 
hosts ” (Haggai ii. 3-9). 

Now it is certainly true that in its fulness this, like 


THE RETURN OF THE GLORY OF JEHOVAH 353 


every other prophecy in the Old Testament which 
announces Messiah’s advent, looks on to the second 
coming and to a time yet future. 

There is truth even in the rendering of the ninth 
verse of this passage adopted in the margin of the 
Revised Version, which, instead of “the glory of this 
latter house,” translates it “the latter glory of this 
house,” which is more literal, and corresponds with the 
third verse of the same chapter, though the inference 
drawn from it by some, that the primary reference of 
the “latter” or “last” glory of “this house” is to the 
Temple yet to be built in the future, is very doubtful. 
The Temple of Solomon and the one they were then 
building was, in a sense, the same house, because there 
was a living link connecting the two, in the lives of 
some of the old men, who had returned from the seventy 
years’ exile, to whom the prophet was speaking, who 
had seen “this house” (Solomon’s Temple) in its first 
glory, before it was destroyed by the Chaldeans, and 
were now eye-witnesses of its restoration, though on a 
much smaller scale. But there is no such link between 
the second Temple and a temple yet to be built more 
than nineteen centuries later. Anyhow, the fact remains 
that it was to encourage them in the task in which they 
were then engaged that Haggai was sent, and when the 
prophet spoke of “the house, this one,” those who 
heard it could only have understood it as referring 
primarily to the Temple they were then building. But 
then there are two important questions which naturally 
suggest themselves to every intelligent student. First, 
What is the glory promised in Haggai’s prophecy? 
Second, Where was the glory? As to the first point a 
great deal of learned trash has been written, the under- 
lying fallacy of which is the assumption that it is an 
outward or material glory that the prophet is here 


54 THE “ICHABOD” PERIOD AND 


speaking about, overlooking the fact that the expression 
Khebod Jehovah (“the glory of Jehovah”), when 
used in connection with Beth Jehovah (“the House 
of Jehovah”), has a technical meaning, and signifies 
the glory of the manifestation, or personal presence 
of Jehovah, which filled the Temple, which was His 
dwelling-place. 

But then comes the second question. Where was the 
glory? When the Tabernacle was finished we read of 
its consecration. “ A cloud covered the tent of meeting, 
and the glory of Jehovah filled the Tabernacle.” This, 
by the way, shows us what true consecration means. 
Any thing or place or person of which God takes pos- 
session becomes consecrated and holy. The Tabernacle 
was planned and made under Divine superintendence. 
When all was finished Moses put it together, but it was 
not yet holy to the Lord until the symbolical cloud of 
His presence came and covered it and His glory filled 
it. Thus it became consecrated and holy and no Israelite 
dared enter it, and even Israel’s high priest only once 
a year, and that on the ground of shed blood. But this 
is a digression. When Solomon’s Temple was finished 
we again read of its consecration, the symbolical cloud 
and the glory of Jehovah filled the house, so that the 
priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud. 
But when the second Temple was built we never read of 
any such occurrence in connection with it, and as a 
matter of fact, it never was after this manner formally 
taken possession of by God, nor was it in this sense ever 
consecrated. Where was the glory? According to 
Jewish historians themselves there were five things 
present in the first Temple which were lacking in -the 
second Temple. I. The ark and its contents. II. The 
holy fire which descended from heaven to consume the 
sacrifices in token of God’s acceptance. III. The Urim 


THE RETURN OF THE GLORY OF JEHOVAH ‘55 


and Thummim. IV. The spirit of prophecy. V. The 
Shekhina glory. As a matter of fact we know from 
Jewish as well as from heathen writers that the Holy 
of Holies in the second Temple, through the nearly five 
centuries of its existence, was a vacuum—an empty 
place, waiting for God to come and take manifest pos- 
session of it. Where, we ask again, was the glory? 
Nearly five centuries elapsed, and in the interval Herod, 
to gain favour with the Jews, was, at the cost of great 
labour and expense, completing considerable alterations 
and enlargement of the Temple; but Josephus, who is 
our authority on this subject, and who gives us the full 
account of the alterations carried out by Herod, is 
careful to emphasise that it was still the same house, 
and that in the history of the Jews hitherto there have 
been only two Temples—the one built by Solomon and 
destroyed by the Babylonians, and the other built by 
Zerubbabel and afterwards enlarged and beautified by 
Herod.? One day to “this house” a poor young woman 


* The canon of the Old Testament being closed with Malachi, 
who prophesied soon after the completion of the second Temple, 
the subsequent silent centuries of its existence may well, from 
their standpoint, be characterised by the absence of “the spirit 
of prophecy.” 

2 This is what Josephus says, speaking of the destruction of the 
second Temple: “Now, although any one would justly lament 
the destruction of such a work as this was, since it was the most 
admirable of all the works that we have seen or heard of, both 
for its curious structure and its magnitude, and also for the vast 
wealth bestowed upon it, as well as for the glorious reputation it 
had for its holiness, yet might such a one comfort himself with 
this thought, that it was fate that decreed it so to be, which is 
inevitable, both as to living creatures and as to works and places 
also. However, one cannot but wonder at the accuracy of this 
period thereto relating ; for the same month and day were now 
observed, as I said before, wherein the holy house was burnt 
formerly by the Babylonians. Now the number of years that 
passed from its first foundation, which was laid by King Solomon, 


56 THE “ICHABOD” PERIOD AND 


of the House of David brought her first-born child to be 
presented to the Lord “and to offer a sacrifice accord- 
ing to that which is said in the Word of the Lord, a pair 
of turtle-doves or two young pigeons.” At the very 
same time an aged man, to whom it was revealed by 
the Holy Ghost that he should not see death before he 
had seen the Lord’s Christ, was led by the Spirit into 
the Temple, and seeing the Child Jesus, he took Him 
up in his arms and blessed God and said: “ Lord, now 
lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace according to 
Thy word, for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation, which 
Thou hast prepared before the face of all people, a light 
to lighten the Gentiles and che glory of His people 
Israel.” The central promise in Haggai’s prophecy in 
relation to “this house” had to wait long for its fulfil- 
ment, but here at last was the greater glory; here was 
- the real Presence. Later, after His entry on the Mes- 
sianic office, when Christ, with a scourge of cords, drove 
before Him out of the Temple the money-changers and 
sellers of doves. saying, “ Make not my Fathers house 
a house of merchandise ”—that was its consecration. 
But there were not many, alas, whose eyes were 
opened to recognise the Divine glory of this holy 
Child. There was an aged Simeon ; there was “ Anna, 
a prophetess” ; there were those “that looked for re- 
demption in Jerusalem,” to whom this holy woman 
probably prophesied the near approach of the Saviour, 
After His entrance on His public work there was a 
Nathaniel, a Peter,a John, and the company of other 
till this its destruction, which happened in the second year of the 
reign of Vespasian, are collected to be one thousand one hundred 
and thirty, besides seven months and fifteen days ; and from the 
second building of it, which was done by Haggai, in the second 
year of Cyrus the king, till its destruction under Vespasian, there 


were six hundred and thirty-nine years and forty-five days” 
(“ Wars,” vi. 6-8), 


THE RETURN OF THE GLORY OF JEHOVAH 57 


apostles and disciples to whom it was given “to be- 
hold His glory, the glory of the only begotten of the 
Father, full of grace and truth”; but as to the nation, 
they saw in Him no form nor comeliness, and when 
they beheld Him they saw no beauty in Him to desire 
Him, and what was foretold by Isaiah came to pass: 
“He was despised and rejected of men; a man of 
sorrows and acquainted with grief, and there was, as it 
were, the hiding of the face from Him; He was despised 
and we esteemed Him not.” 

In the end, after He had for three and a half 
years with outstretched arms continued to call Israel 
to Himself, but without response — that which was 
symbolised by the departure of the Glory from the 
Mount of Olives, received a second, personal, and 
more striking fulfilment, when Jesus, also slowly and 
reluctantly, after shedding tears of sorrow for Jerusalem, 
and from the same spot whence the prophet saw the 
Glory depart, finally ascended out of sight. He led 
His disciples out as far as Bethany (on the Mount of 
Olives), and He lifted up His hands and blessed them, 
“ And it came to pass while He blessed them He was 
parted from them and carried up into heaven.” And 
since that event—since the departure of Jesus from 
Israel and the world, the word I have already quoted 
is written more legibly and in letters of fire across the 
eighteen or nineteen centuries of Jewish history: “ Icha- 
bod.” Where is the glory? The Temple destroyed; 
the land a continual desolation ; the people given over 
to be tossed to and fro among the nations. But will the 
present state of things continue for ever? Will man 
on earth no more behold the visible display of God’s 
glory? For answer we take up the words of the fortieth 
chapter of Isaiah with which we started: “And the 
glory of Jehovah shall be revealed, and all flesh 


58 THE “ICHABOD” PERIOD AND 


shall see it together, for the mouth of Jehovah hath 
spoken it.” 

Ezekiel, who saw the departure of the glory of 
Jehovah, also, in his visions of the future, beheld its 
return ; and from the same direction whence it departed. 
“ Afterwards,” we read, “He brought me to the gate, 
even the gate that looketh toward the east, and behold 
the glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the 
east, and His voice was like the noise of many waters, 
and the earth shined with His glory.... And the 
glory of Jehovah came into the house by the way of 
the gate whose prospect is toward the east. So the - 
Spirit took me up and brought me into the inner court ; 
and behold the glory of Jehovah filled the house.” And 
what is this but the same announcement in symbolical 
language made to the “men of Galilee,” just as the 
Lord was departing from them, that “this same Jesus 
which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come 
in like manner, as ye have seen Him go into heaven”? 
As man in the glorified body He ascended, and “ this 
same Jesus,” as the “Son of Man,” Jdodily, He shall 
return. V7zszbly, with a cloud He was received out of 
their sight, and “in like manner,” visibly, “with the clouds 
of heaven,” He will descend again. It was from the 
Mount of Olives they saw Him finally depart; and on 
the same spot, “upon the Mount of Olives, which is 
before Jerusalem on the east,’ His blessed feet “shall 
stand in that:day” (Zech. xiv. 4). 

Then, and not till then, will Isaiah’s prophecy be ful- 
filled. “And the glory of Jehovah shall be revealed, 
and all flesh shall see it together, for the mouth of 
Jehovah hath spoken it.” 

But let us for a moment touch on the difference 
between the past and the future. 

I. In the past Israel saw the glory of the personal 


THE RETURN OF THE GLORY OF JEHOVAH 59 


presence of Jehovah only in symbol, and then the glory 
was always associated with the cloud, which while re- 
vealing also concealed ; for man was not yet able to bear 
the full unveiling of His majesty, and even Israel’s 
prophets, who heard His voice, and were borne along 
by His power, had wonderingly to cry: “Verily Thou 
art a God that hidest Thyself, O God of Israel the 
Saviour!” And even when in the fulness of time He 
came, in whom all the attributes of Jehovah were em- 
bodied, who was “the effulgence of His glory and an 
exact representation of His very being,” we still observe 
the same principle at work of concealing while revealing 
Himself; for there was the “emptying of Himself” ; 
there was the veiling of His glory; there was “the 
hiding of His power.” How else could man have 
approached Him and lived? How else could He have 
patiently endured the contradiction of sinners, and the 
dulness and frowardness of His own disciples, during 
those years of suffering as the Lamb of God? But 
by and by, “the glory of Jehovah shall be unveiled, 
and will be no longer in symbol, but in bodily presence. 
There will be no longer a cloud to hide His glory from 
our eyes; no longer as in a glass darkly, but face to 
face, for “ He shall be manifested and we shall see Him 
as He is.” 

II. In the past it was only men of Israel who beheld 
even the symbolical or veiled glory of God, but. by and 
by “all flesh shall see it together,” for the mouth of 
Jehovah hath spoken it. “Behold He cometh with 
clouds ; and every eye shall see Him; and they also 
which pierced Him, and all the tribes of the earth shall 
mourn because of Him. Even so. Amen.” 

We shall behold the unveiled glory of that face once 
so marred for us, and beholding it shall be finally and 
everlastingly conformed to that same image to be for 


60 THE “ICHABOD” PERIOD AND 


ever “like Him” (1 John iii. 2); the escaped of Israel 
“shall look upon Him whom they have pierced,” now 
manifested in His true glory and power, and shall 
“mourn” and be saved (Zech. xii.); while a Christ- 
rejecting world will behold Him too, and seek to hide 
themselves in the caves and the rocks of the moun- 
tains; and say to the mountains and to the rocks, 
“Fall on us and hide us from the face of Him that 
sitteth on the throne and from the wrath of the Lamb” 
—“at the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven, 
with the angels of His power, in flaming fire, rendering 
vengeance to them that know not God, and to them 
that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus ... when 
He shall come to be glorified in His saints and to be 
marvelled at in all them that believe . . . in that day” 
(2 Thess. i. 6-10, R.V.). 


This is the hope of Israel and of this sin-burdened 
earth. Not till then will the world be filled with the 
knowledge of the glory of Jehovah as the waters cover 
the sea; not till then will the inhabitants of the earth 
learn righteousness, or the dream of universal peace be ~ 
realised. 

And it is the hope of the Church. “ For the grace of 
God, bringing salvation,” says the apostle (Titus ii. 
11-15), “hath appeared to all men.” This is a terse 
summary of all that is implied in the first Advent. It 
was a marvellous display of the grace or undeserved 
favour of God to man; a glorious Epiphany, as the 
word is in the original, on the darkness and hopeless- 
ness of the world. But no sooner does grace bring 
salvation to us than it becomes our school of discipline, 
and the great Teacher in that school is the Holy Spirit. 
And these are the lessons which we have to learn, by 
means and processes often very trying to flesh and 


THE RETURN OF THE GLORY OF JEHOVAH 61 


blood, namely, that “denying ourselves in reference to 
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, 
righteously, and godly.” This sums up the whole of 
Christian character and conduct both from the negative 
and positive side in relation “to this present age.” But 
what is our attitude and expectation in relation to the 
future? Here it is: “ Looking for” (or “ awaiting with 
expectation”) “the blessed hope and the appearing of 
the glory of our great God and our Saviour Jesus 
Christ.” Here is the same blessed hope of the 
appearing of the glory of the personal presence of the 
great God and our Saviour brought over from the Old 
Testament into the pages of the New, and all those who 
have become subjects of grace are pointed to it as the 
goal and consummation of their blessedness, and are 
told eagerly to look for it. Two Epiphanies are spoken 
of in this comprehensive scripture. 

One is already past, and that was the Epiphany of 
Grace, which shone forth at the incarnation and cul- 
minated on Calvary; but the other, to which both 
apostles and prophets bear witness, is yet future, and 
is the Epiphany of the Glory, when Christ shall come to 
claim His own, and when our eyes shall behold the 
King in His beauty. 

“And now, little children, abide in Him, that when 
He shall be manifested we may have confidence, and 
not be shamed away from Him at His coming.” 


III 


mE SILENCE OF GOD—HOW IT SHALL BE 
BROKEN 


“ God, even God, the Lord, hath spoken, and called the earth 
from the rising of the sun to the going down thereof. 

“ Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God hath shined forth. 

“Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence: a fire shall 
devour before Him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about 
Him. 

“ He shall call to the heavens above, and to the earth, that He 
may judge His people. 

“ Gather My saints unto Me ; those that have made a covenant 
with Me by sacrifice. 

“ And the heavens shall declare His righteousness ; for God is 
Judge Himself. Selah. 

“ Hear, O My people, and I will speak; O Israel, and I will 
testify unto thee : I am God, even thy God. 

“I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices; and thy burnt- 
offerings are continually before Me. 

“I will take no bullock out of thy house, nor he-goats out of 
thy folds. 

“For every beast of the forest is Mine, and the cattle upon a 
thousand hills. 

“I know all the fowls of the mountains: and the wild beasts 
of the field are Mine. 

“Tf I were hungry, I would not tell thee: for the world is 
~ Mine and the fulness thereof. 

“ Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats ? 

“Offer unto God the sacrifice of thanksgiving ; and pay thy 
vows to the Most High : 

“And call upon Me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, 
and thou shalt glorify Me. 

“But unto the wicked God saith, What hast thou to do to 
declare My statutes, and that thou hast taken My covenant in thy 
mouth ? 

i “ Seeing thou hatest instruction, and castest My words behind 
thee. i 

“When thou sawest a thief, thou consentedst with him, and 
hast been partaker with adulterers. 

“ Thou givest thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frameth deceit. 

“ Thou sittest and speakest against thy brother ; thou slanderest 
thine own mother’s son. 

“These things hast thou done, and I kept silence; thou 
thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thyself : 

“ But I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine 
eyes. 

Me Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in 
pieces, and there be none to deliver : 

“ Whoso offereth the sacrifice of thanksgiving glorifieth Me ; 
and to him that ordereth his conversation aright will I show the 
salvation of God.’—Psa. 1. (R.V.). 


ITI 
THE SILENCE OF GOD—HOW IT SHALL BE BROKEN 


The Second Advent in Relation to the Church, Israel, 
and Christendom 


T must be obvious, even to the most superficial 

student of the Scriptures, that we have in the Old 
Testament two distinct series of prophecies referring to 
the coming and person of the Messiah; the one de- 
scribing Him as coming in humiliation, “lowly and 
riding upon an ass”; “a man of sorrows and acquainted 
with grief; led as a lamb to the slaughter, and pouring 
out His soul unto death ;” while the other series speak 
of Him as coming in visible power and great glory, and 
receiving dominion and a kingdom, so that “all peoples, 
nations, and languages should serve Him.” “His 
dominion is an everlasting dominion which shall not 
pass away, and His kingdom that which shall not be 
destroyed.” 

The Jews many centuries ago puzzled over the 
apparent discrepancies in the picture of Messiah, drawn 
by the prophets on the pages of Scripture, and at last 
- invented a characteristic solution of their own. There 
must be two different persons, they said; and they 
called the one Messiah Ben-Joseph, who must suffer and 


die; and the other Messiah Ben-David, who should 
6 s 


66 THE SILENCE OF GOD 


come in power and reign.t Of course this explanation 
is absurd, for there is no trace of two Messiahs or of a 
Messiah Ben-Joseph anywhere in the Old Testament. 
Christian commentators and theologians have had their 
own way of explaining the difference, and this has been 
by applying two different principles and methods of 
interpretation. The prophecies of Messiah’s suffering, 
they said, must be taken literally; but those speaking 
of His coming in manifest glory, and of a throne on 
Mount Zion, must be explained spiritually, or referred 
to the reign of Christ in heaven. But the system of the 
two principles is scarcely more satisfactory, and has 
even less consistency about it, than the Jewish one of 
the two persons ; for if a prophecy of a glorious appear- 
ing of Messiah to reign over the earth is not to be taken 
literally, why should one describing an advent in suffer- 
ing be so explained? The true solution which should 
commend itself to the minds of all God’s people is that 
there is but one person, Jesus Christ ; one principle of 
interpretation for all prophecy, whether fulfilled or un- 
fulfilled, to believe and take God’s Word as it stands, 
but that there are two advents—one in humiliation, the 
other in glory ; one to suffer and die, the other to take 
unto Himself His kingdom and reign. 

To the two distinct series of prophecies announcing 
two different advents, two well-known prophetic scrip- 
tures may be taken as key passages. The first is Micah 
v. 2, which tells us that “the Ruler in Israel,’ whose 
origin is Divine, and whose goings forth are from the 
days of eternity, will be born as a child in Bethlehem 
Ephratha. The second is Dan. vii. 13, 14, where we see 
Him no longer as a child born on earth of a Jewish 


* See on this subject of the Jewish doctrine of two Messiahs a 
note on p. 44 of my book, “ Rays of Messiah’s Glory.” 


HOW IT SHALL BE BROKEN 67 


virgin, but as “the Son of Man,” coming with the 
clouds of heaven to receive the homage of the world. 

These two scriptures, which are only representative, 
each in its line, of many others, cannot surely describe 
the same advent, and we may also ask the question 
how, as Son of Man, can Messiah come with clouds from 
heaven, except He was first taken up into heaven—for 
the very name “Man” implies a human origin? The 
answer is simple and fully supplied by Scripture. 
Though “God blessed for ever,’ He is made of a 
woman, and “took -hold of the seed of Abraham,” and 
being found in fashion as a man, He, for our salvation, 
“humbled Himself and became obedient unto death, 
even the death of the cross.” “ He was buried according 
to the Scriptures,” but He was not left in Sheol, nor 
did God suffer His Holy One to see corruption. “On 
the third day He rose again,” also “according to the 
Scriptures,” and in accordance also with that which 
prophets and psalmists sang`in advance, “He ascended 
on high, leading captivity captive,’ and there as the 
God-man, at the right hand of the Majesty, He now sits 
as our blessed High Priest, waiting until His enemies 
shall be made His footstool, when He shall descend 
again in power and great glory. To this truth both 
apostles and prophets bear witness, 


This, however, is only a word of introduction to the 
exposition of one of the most sublime scriptures in the 
Bible, with regard to which the testimony of the Church 
throughout the ages has been almost universally agreed 
that it refers to the second series of prophecies of which 
we have spoken, and describes the appearing in glory of 
the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ. 

In order to impress us with the power and majesty of 
the glorious Being whose advent the psalm announces, 


68 THE SILENCE OF GOD 


He is introduced by an array of Divine titles, the order 
and conjunction of which is only paralleled in one other 
passage in the Old Testament.t El]—Elohim—Jehovah 
are the three august and blessed names with which this 
Psalm commences, and they are in keeping with the 
great subject it teaches, for while He is represented as 
appearing at last as the El and Elohim, the mighty 
and awful God of power and judgment, the terror of 
the ungodly, He also comes as the faithful covenant 
Jehovah of redemption, to gather His saints, and to 
consummate His everlasting purposes of love and 
mercy towards them. 

This glorious Lord of Majesty “hath spoken.” It is 
from the mountain-top of prophetic vision that the 
inspired psalmist describes the certainties of the future. 
The Divine programme here unfolded is so certain of 
accomplishment, that in relation to the Church, to Israel, 
and the world, from the standpoint of God’s purpose it 
can already be announced as past, or in the very act of 
accomplishment. 

The first verse is His call of attention to the whole 
universe in reference to the great events which are about 
to take place. 

When He came the first time the words of Isaiah 
were fulfilled in Him, “ He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor 
cause His voice to be heard in the street.” He was led 
as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her 
shearers is dumb, so He opened not His mouth; but 
now He comes speaking, and at His voice the earth 
trembles “from the rising of the sun until the going 
down thereof.” 

The chief and central act of the prophetic drama which 
is unfolded in this Psalm is that announced at the end 


* Twice repeated in solemn oath by the two and a half tribes 
in Joshua xxii. 22. 


HOW IT SHALL BE BROKEN 69 


of the second verse, “God hath shined!” And what 
is this but an Old Testament proclamation of the 
Epiphany, or shining forth of our great God and Saviour 
Jesus Christ ? 

In the Psalms this expression is found three! times, 
and these are all based on that remarkable passage, 
in Deut. xxxiii. 2: “Jehovah came from Sinai, burst 
forth (as the rising sun) from Seir unto them; He 
shined forth from Mount Paran, and He came from 
the myriads of His holy ones; from His right hand 
went forth a fiery law unto them.” The imagery of this 
passage is beautiful, the figure being borrowed from the 
breaking of the dawn and the progressive splendour of 
the sun rising. Oh, what a wonderful event in the 
history of the world and of Israel was the revelation of 
the glory of Jehovah on Sinai! What a bursting forth 
of light on the moral darkness of this earth! Butalas! 
by reason of the weakness of the flesh it was not the 
light of life; but rather of death, for it revealed to us 
our sin and utter helplessness, and the perfect holiness 
of the God who is “a consuming fire.” 

But the law contained not only the promise, but was 
in itself also a preparation for the gospel ; and, there- 
fore, in the fulness of time, though not attended by 
outward splendour as on Sinai, another Epiphany 
(2 Tim. i. 10) of God our Saviour took ‘place, bring- 
ing not “a fiery law,” but the gospel of His grace, which 
abolished death and brought life and immortality to 
light. The acceptable year of the Lord ushered in by 
that Epiphany is rapidly running to its close, and 
although for nigh nineteen centuries favour has been 
preached to the wicked, yet has he not learned righteous- 
ness, and men are beginning to ask if the faith founded 
by the Son of God has not already proved a failure, 


“Psal 2, REL Ty XEiV.-T, 


70 THE SILENCE OF GOD 


and scoffers boldly say, “Where is the promise of the 
coming, and what sign is there of any change or inter- 
ruption of the present state of things?” Even the 
professing Church, lost for the most part in worldliness 
and error, seeks to strike its roots in the earth, crying 
peace and progress, and acting as if all things will for 
ever continue as they are. 

But, as already shown, this earth shall yet again see 
the glory of the personal presence of the Lord, and, as 
sure as there was an appearing of Christ in humiliation, 
so surely will there be a shining forth of the Son of 
God in glory and majesty, and this time in the com- 
bined character of Lawgiver, Judge, and Saviour. 

The centre of the future Epiphany of God’s glory will 
be “Zion,” even as Zion was the focus of all God’s 
revelations in the past. The earthly centre for the 
carrying out of His gracious purposes in relation to the 
nations, has never been, and never can be changed, for 
‘Jehovah hath chosen Zion; He hath desired it for His 
habitation. This is My rest for ever: here will I dwell}; 
for I have desired it” (Psa. cxxxii. 13, 14). Yes, to 
Zion shall come the Redeemer, but from Zion, and Israel 
as the centre, His glory will radiate to earth’s utmost 
limits. And Zion shall then be “the perfection of 
beauty.” The word “Zion” comes from a root which 
means a dry, barren place or arid wilderness, and in this 
its original condition it is a type of Israel. If the 
renown of the moral beauty of Israel in the past went 
forth among the nations, there is no praise due to them, 
for in themselves they ever formed most unpromising 
material. “From Me is thy fruit found,” God says; and 
it is wholly owing to the power and skill of the great 
Husbandman that so barren a plot of ground was trans- 
formed into a fruitful garden. “Thy beauty is perfect 
through My comeliness which I put upon thee,” saith 
the Lord (Ezek. xvi. 14). 


HOW IT SHALL BE BROKEN ae e7t 


At present the land and the people are seen again in 
their naturally barren and desolate condition. “They 
called thee an outcast, saying, This is Zion (a barren, 
unpromising plot of ground), which no man seeketh 
after” (Jer. xxx. 17); but as surely as this has been ful- 
filled, so surely will Zion, covered once again with God’s 
glory, be the very “perfection of beauty,” and “a praise 
in the midst of the earth.” 

The Epiphany of the second verse is explained by the 
Parousia which is the subject of the third verse : “Our 
God shall come (or ‘cometh’), and shall not keep silence.” 
Oh, what a startling announcement to some! “Behold 
He cometh with clouds, and every eye shall see Him, 
and they also which pierced Him, and all the tribes of 
the land shall wail because of Him. Even so. Amen!” 
But this verse chiefly describes he manner of the mani- 
festation of the awful presence and majesty of God : 
“ He shall not keep silence.” 1 

Compare this with what He says in verse 21: “This 
hast thou done, and I kept silence.” Or rather, contrast 
this announcement of a visible manifestation and inter- 
position on the part of the great God, with the present 
long period of silence. In looking back on the ages 
that are past we see that God has His times for speak- 
ing and His times also for keeping silence. 

There are notable pauses, during which God seemed 
to have withdrawn Himself from man in so far as visible 
interposition was concerned. 


1 In my remarks on this sentence of the psalm I take the liberty 
of making free use of notes made many years ago in my inter- 
leaved Bible of a powerful address, to which it was my privilege 
to listen, by that true father in Christ, the late Dr. Horatius Bonar, 
who, together with his two worthy brothers, Andrew and John, 
were the representatives in Scotland of those who waited for the 
Lord’s appearing. 


72 - THE SILENCE OF GOD 


In Eden we hear “the voice of the Lord God walking 
in the garden in the cool of the day,” but soon that 
blessed converse ceases on account of the Fall. The last 
echoes of that voice die away, and there ensues a period 
of silence during which men lived and the world made 
progress, in the sense in which it always does, until the 
silence was broken, and Enoch, the seventh from Adam, 
prophesied, saying: “Behold, the Lord cometh with ten 
thousands of His saints to execute judgment upon all, 
and to convince all that are ungodly among men, of all 
their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed, 
and of all their hard speeches which ungodly men have 
spoken against Him.” After Enoch another pause of 
long centuries set in, and the earth again went on 
developing in the old way, until the wickedness of man 
was great in the earth, and until it became manifest in 
the sight of the heavens that “every imagination of the 
thoughts of man’s heart was only evil continually.” 

Again God spoke, and again it was in judgment. 
He sent the Flood; but it was judgment blended with 
mercy, for a few—that is to say eight souls, were saved 
by means of the ark, which He commanded Noah to 
build. 

After the Deluge the world began anew; man had a 
fresh chance. God withdrew Himself from open inter- 
position, and for a space of long centuries there was 
silence. But what was the result of the new test? 
The world again made progress, and man developed 
what was in him, until by the end of the time “ dark- 
ness covered the earth and gross darkness the peoples.” 
But in the midst of the universal darkness the God of 
glory appeared unto our father Abraham, saying, “ Get 
thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and 
from thy father’s house.” From this point of time 
onward, from Abraham to Malachi, a period of more 


HOW IT SHALL BE BROKEN 73 


than fifteen hundred years, may pre-eminently be called 
a time of God’s speaking.. There were, indeed, in the 
course of this age both longer and shorter spells of 
silence, but it nevertheless remains a fact that the chief 
characteristic of the period of Israel’s national history, 
up to the point when “the times of the Gentiles” set in 
with the destruction of the first Temple, was that it was a 
time of God’s self-revelation, and manifest interpositions. 

At sundry times and in divers portions and ways 
God spake unto the fathers by the prophets. Won- 
derful, astonishing fact! fifteen long centuries at one 
stretch bearing witness to the fact that the great God 
hath spoken! Was it a long successional lie? Was it 
a continual self-deception as infidels and rationalists 
would have us believe? Oh no; the whole history 
and continued existence of Israel, the Divine and won- 
derful character of the words preserved to us, and the 
consciousness of the Christian cry aloud against so 
monstrous a supposition. 

But after this long period of speaking there followed 
again a long interval of about four centuries which was 
suddenly broken by the cry, “ Repent, for the kingdom 
of heaven is at hand!” From this time there recom- 
menced another period of revelation on the part of God, 
during which He spoke His most wonderful words of 
all through His Son, and through the apostles by the 
Spirit. But the period of New Testament history, 
lasting about ninety years, soon ends. The last 
echoes of that voice die away on the barren rock 
of Patmos in the words, “Surely I come quickly. 
Amen. Even so, come, Lord Jesus,” and there sets in 
this long silence, the longest silence the world has yet 
experienced. How wonderful, how long, how deep, 
how mysterious is this silence! How often have the 
hearts of God’s people grown impatient under the long 


74 THE SILENCE OF GOD 


strain! How often has the Church cried, “ How long, 
O Lord, how long?” but there is neither audible voice 
nor sound. Will this long silence never again be broken? 
Will God never again outwardly and manifestly inter- 
pose in the affairs of man and in the government of the 
world? The answer of this sublime scripture is, “ Our 
God cometh, and shall not keep silence.” But before 
considering further this great and awful event, let me 
remind you that there is deep significance even in 
God’s silence. 

(a) The silence of God is designed to drive man to 
that. which He has spoken; He would remind us of 
His Word, which in His good providence is preserved 
to us, and which is sufficient and profitable for doctrine, 
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteous- 
ness, that the man of God may be perfect, throughly 
furnished unto all good works. Out of it He still speaks 
_ by His Spirit, although not by audible voice, to all who 
have ears to hear. In it He tells thee, O man, what is 
good, and what the Lord requires of thee. 

(6) The time of God’s silence is another testing-time 
for man under more favourable circumstances than in 
preceding ages. It is a time of opportunity for the full 
development of good and evil, so that when God again 
interposes it may be manifest to principalities and powers 
that “He is justified when He speaks, and clear when 
He judges.” 

And what has been the result? While God has been 
silent, man has taken the opportunity of speaking, and 
his words are ever more foolish, proud, and blas- 
phemous against the Most High, as may be seen from 
the press and the literature of the present day. But 
out of his own mouth man shall be judged, and all his 
thoughts and words shall be “set in order” before him, 
and rise up in judgment against him. 


HOW IT SHALL BE BROKEN 78 


(c) The period of God’s silence is the period of His 
longsuffering, which, in the riches of His goodness, is 
designed to lead men to repentance. The continued 
length of that period gives us a glimpse into the in- 

finitude of the patience and forbearance of the everlasting 
God, but man should be the last to complain about it, 
since it lengthens the time in which God commendeth 
His love and undeserved favour to men, and in which 
peace and pardon is proclaimed to the vilest sinner. 

The Christian, too, becomes more reconciled to the 
long delay in his Masters return by the thought that 
in the interval the acceptable year of the Lord is still 
running its course, and that by the preaching of the 
gospel multitudes of souls are being gathered into the 
company of the redeemed, to the praise and glory of 
Him who died to save them. 

But the time of God’s long-suffering, protracted as it 
is, has its limit. Itis a set time appointed in the eternal 
counsel of God, and at the exact “day and hour,” 
known to the Father, it shall cease, the long silence 
shall be broken, and to the world the day of vengeance 
shall commence by the coming of our God. Then 
“Jehovah shall cause His glorious voice to be heard 
and shall show the lighting down of His arm, with the 
indignation of His anger, and with the flame of a 
devouring fire, with scatterings and tempest and hail- 
stones” (Isa. xxx. 30). 

“A fire shall devour before Him, and it shall be very 
tempestuous round about Him.” This is explained in 
another scripture in Isaiah (Ixvi. 15, 16): “ For, behold, 
the Lord will come with fire, and with His chariots like 
a whirlwind, to render His anger with fury and His 
rebuke with flames of fire. For by fire and by His 
sword will the Lord plead with all flesh: and the slain 
of the Lord shall be many”—and forms also the basis 


76 THE SILENCE OF GOD 


of that sublime and terrible description of the descent 
of the Son of God “in flaming fire taking vengeance on 
them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel 
of our Lord Jesus Christ: who shall be punished with 
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, 
and from the glory of His power” (2 Thess. i. 8, 9). 


The main object of His coming is stated in the fourth 
verse: “ He shall call to the heavens from above, and to 
the earth that He may judge His people.” In this term 
both His earthly and His heavenly people are included. 
In times past the heavens and the earth are often called 
upon as witnesses of Israel’s apostasy and consequent 
punishment. 

Thus at the very beginning of their history Moses 
again and again says, “I call heaven and earth to 
witness against you this day that ye shall soon utterly 
perish from off the land whereunto ye go over Jordan 
to possess it.” Thus Isaiah cries, “ Hear, O heavens, 
and give ear, O earth: for Jehovah hath spoken, I have 
nourished and brought up children, and they have re- 
belled against Me.” And the same heavens and earth 
which were witnesses of the commencement of God’s 
controversy with Israel, shall also behold both the 
climax of judgment on their apostasy, and also the 
faithfulness of the Righteous Judge in executing 
vengeance on their enemies in the day when their 
transgressions shall have an end, and His own covenant 
people be finally delivered. 

And professing Christendom shall thea be judged 
too, for “when the Son of Man shall come in His glory, 
and all the holy angels with Him, then shall He sit 
upon the throne of His glory, and before Him shall be 
gathered all nations, and He shall separate them one 
from another as a shepherd divideth his sheep from 


HOW IT SHALL BE BROKEN 77. 


his goats. And He shall set His sheep on His right 
hand, but the goats on the left. Then shall the King 
say unto them on His right hand, Come, ye blessed of 
My Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from 
the foundation of the world ... and to them on His 
left hand, Depart from Me, ye cursed, into everlasting 
fire prepared for the devil and his angels... and 
these shall go away into everlasting punishment, but 
the righteous into life eternal.” And the individual 
Christian also, though free from all condemnation in 
his person, shall then be judged in his works, “for we 
must all be made manifest before the judgment-seat 
of Christ, that every one may receive the things done 
in His body according to that he hath done, whether 
it be good or bad” (2 Cor. v. 10). 

But the great and solemn event of His glorious 
appearing is viewed in this psalm in relation to three 
different sections of humanity, namely, the Church, 
Israel, and the apostate nations of Christendom. 
Indeed, the psalm divides itself into three almost 
equal parts, the key words of which are, “the saints” 
(verse 5), “Israel” (verse 7), and “ the wicked ” (verse 16). 


I. IN RELATION TO THE CHURCH. 


To the redeemed the central point in “that blessed 
hope ” of Christ’s return is “our gathering together unto 
Him” (2 Thess. ii. 1). Oh, it is Himself we long to 
see; to behold that brow once crowned with thorns, and 
that face once marred by sorrow and suffering more 
than that of any other man! It is for the fulfilment of 
His sweetest and most precious of promises, “I will 
come again and receive you unto Myself,” that our 
hearts yearn. And this blessed consummation is 
brought before us in the fifth verse, where the inspired 
Psalmist, lifted by the Spirit of God, like the Apostle 


78 THE SILENCE OF GOD 


John, into the very midst of the apocalyptic events 
hears the very words of command to the angelic hosts 
as they fall from the lips of the descending Lord, 
“Gather My saints together unto Me.” ; 

Yes, the hour is come when in His progress to the 
earth, attended by the hosts of heaven, there shall be a 
pause, and He shall send His angels with a great sound 
of a trumpet, and they shall gather together His elect 
from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the 
other (Matt. xxiv. 31); for this Divine proclamation 
for the gathering of His saints, is not their gathering 
unto Him in death, as some have misinterpreted it, but 
is the same as announced by the apostle, when “the 
Lord Himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, 
with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of 
God ; and the dead in Christ shall rise first, Then, we 
which are alive and remain shall be caught up together 
with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air ; and 
so shall we ever be with the Lord” (1 Thess. iv. 13—18). 

“ The first experience which is before the redeemed is . 
resurrection” (1 Cor. xv. 51-55), but along with the 
resurrection of the sleeping saints comes the transfor- 
mation of the living. The earth being still the place of 
imperfection and sin—the scene of death and judgment 
—the Church is to be taken out of it, We shall meet 
Him in the air, When Christ descends the Church 
ascends, The earth’s atmosphere is about two hundred 
miles in height—room enough for the Church to meet 
Christ in it. I suppose the rapture of the Church will 
resemble somewhat the ascension of Jesus after His 
resurrection. 

And after the transformation comes the meeting. Oh, 
most inexpressible and indescribable glory! We are to 
see Jesus face to face—the glorious Son of God, the 
brightness of the Father’s glory. 


HOW IT SHALL BE BROKEN 79 


We talk of access to kings and queens, but what will 
it be to be ushered into the presence of the King of kings 
and Lord of lords! We could not bear the glory and 
the brightness now, but then we shall be fitter for it; 
for we shall be made like Him (1 John iii, 2), We shall 
see Jesus!—that Jesus whom we know (oh, so im- 
perfectly !) now, and love, though not having seen as yet, 
“The same Jesus” who is already familiarised to us— 
who spoke the Sermon on the Mount ; who wept at the 
grave of Lazarus; who prayed in the upper chamber at 
Jerusalem; who spoke the loved 14th, and prayed 
the wonderful 17th of John, “The same Jesus” 
that wept over Jerusalem—the Christ of infinite com- 
passion, tenderness, pity, and truth, The Jesus who is 
the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever—of Bethlehem 
and of the bosom of the Father, the Redeemer, Life, 
and Righteousness of His people, Him we are to see, 
and when we see Him we shall be like Him—evermore 
see Him and evermore be like Him!” 

And if we want to know who are the “saints” who 
shall thus be gathered to Him, the answer is, “ Those 
that have made a covenant with Me by sacrifice ;” or, 
literally, “Those that have cut My covenant over the 
sacrifice.” The expression “cut” is explained by the 
ancient custom of cutting the slain animals and 
arranging the pieces so that the covenanting parties 
could pass through the midst. In this way they pledged 
their lives to the fulfilment of the contract and called 
down the fate of the slain sacrifices on themselves in 
case of unfaithfulness, But note the expression, “My 
covenant.” Ah, in that word “ My,” lies the safety and 
blessedness of God’s redeemed people, for, when God 
made promise to Abraham, in which promise are con- 
tained the blessings of the gospel to all who are of faith 

* H. Grattan Guinness, 


85 - THE SILENCE OF GOD 


(Gal. iii. 8; Rom. iv. 9-25), and ratified the promise by 
covenant oath, “ He sware by Himself” (Heb. vi. 13-20). 
He only, made promise, and pledged Himself to its 
fulfilment, for on that solemn night when the original 
unconditional covenant was made with the father of 
the faithful, after the animals were slain, and Abraham 
“divided them in the midst and laid each piece one 
against the other,” a deep sleep came upon him, so that 
he was prevented from making any oath or promise: 
“ And it came to pass that when the sun went down, and 
it was dark, behold a smoking furnace and a burning 
lamp that passed between those pieces.” These were 
the symbols of God’s presence, but Abraham did not 
pass through. The unconditional covenant of grace is 
therefore not a contract between two parties as the con- 
ditional covenant of the law was, but a gracious promise 
dependent on the faithfulness of God only for its fulfil- 
ment, and it is called a “covenant” for the probable 
reason, that the promise of gospel blessings to man 
is the outcome of a covenant in the eternal counsels 
between the Father and the Son, in reference to man’s — 
redemption. 

It is therefore called “ His covenant,” and we enter 
into its gracious contents of blessings “over the sacri- 
fice.” The true ratification of the covenant was not 
with the blood of animals, At the original “cutting of 
the covenant ” with Abraham there were indeed animal 
sacrifices, and in connection with the Sinaitic covenant 
of the law we read that after Moses had spoken every 
precept to the people “he took the blood of calves and 
of goats, with water and scarlet wool and hyssop, and 
sprinkled both the book and all the people, saying, 
This is the blood of the covenant which God hath 
enjoined unto you”; but what were all the Levitical 
sacrifices but types and shadows of the true Lamb of 


HOW IT SHALL BE BROKEN 81 


God? and what was the constant shedding of the blood 
of bulls and goats but a constant reminder before the 
throne of God of the precious blood of Christ, which in 
the fulness of time would be shed once and for all for 
the remission of sins? It is in the death of the Lord 
Jesus Christ that all the promises of God became “yea 
and amen” to us, and it is only through the rent 
veil of His flesh that we enter into all the blessings of 
the covenant of God’s grace. Hear, therefore, the great 
High Priest Himself, on the very eve of His vicarious 
death, proclaiming, “This is the blood of the new 
covenant which is shed for many for the remission of 
sins !” 

And this, be it noted, is the chief and primary feature 
of all true saintship, for, in the verse in our psalm 
God’s people are so called, not because of their con- 
dition, but on account of their relation to Him. Every 
one of the redeemed is constituted a “saint” by reason 
of the blood-mark upon him, and then sent forth in the 
power of God’s Spirit to live in accordance with his new 
state. 

But the ground of his safety and hope of being 
gathered unto Christ at His appearing, is never his 
personal attainment in holiness, his attitude of ex- 
pectancy, or his zeal in his Master’s cause, though these 
will come into the question of rewards, but only and 
alone the grace of God. 

All the “saints,” therefore, from righteous Abel and 
those who “through faith obtained a good report” to 
the last sinner who to the end of this age shall be 
found to have sheltered under the precious blood and 
perfect righteousness of our Saviour Jesus Christ, shall 
be His “at His coming” (1 Cor. xv. 23). 

Oh! what a glorious meeting that will be when those 
who in the age before His advent “rejoiced to see His 

' 7 


82 THE SILENCE OF GOD 


day,” and were by faith justified on the ground of 
redemption yet to be accomplished, and we, who since 
Calvary have been privileged to live in a dispensation 
of greater light and privilege, but not, alas! of greater 
devotion or faithfulness, meet around the blessed person 
of the Redeemer to unite in the one song, “ Worthy is 
the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, 
and wisdom, and strength, and honour and glory ”—“ for 
Thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us unto God by Thy 
blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and 
nation, and thou madest them unto our God a kingdom 
and priests ; and they reign on the earth.” 

And in that great day “the heavens shall declare His _ 
righteousness ; for God is Judge Himself” ! 

Yes, when the intricate drama of the conflict between 
good and evil, which the great and all-wise God permits 
to be enacted on earth during time shall be finished, 
and when He at last again in the person of His Son 
appears as the Judge and King of the earth, “the 
heavens ”—principalities, powers, and heavenly intelli- 
gences, shall declare His righteousness, shall vindicate 
His glorious character, and magnify His justice in all 
His dealings with men and angels, while the redeemed 
Church shall sing the song of Moses the servant of 
God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, “Great and 
marvellous are Thy works, Lord God Almighty ; just 
and true are Thy ways, Thou King of nations! Who ' 
shall not fear Thee, O Lord, and glorify Thy name? 
for Thou only art holy: for all nations shall come and 
worship before Thee; for Thy judgments (or, literally, 
‘ Thy righteousnesses’) are made manifest !” b 

In relation to the Church especially His righteousness 
shall then be declared, and it shall be manifested how 
that He is just, and the justifier of them which believe 
in Jesus, 


HOW IT SHALL BE BROKEN 83 


“For God is Judge Himself.” This is a solemn 
announcement of varying import. To God’s people it 
is full of comfort, for it reminds them of the challenge, 
“Who shall lay anything to the charge of God’s elect? 
It is God who justifieth” ; while to the godless it is a 
statement full of terror, for it proclaims the fact that 
He, who is about to sit in judgment, is Elohim—the 
searcher of hearts, from whom nothing can be hid; 
whose knowledge is infinite, whose righteousness is 
inflexible, and whose vengeance is terrible. This first - 
section, with the prologue of the first four verses, 
which contain a summary of the great truths in rela- 
tion to the Church, Israel, and the nations, more fully 
developed in the whole psalm, appropriately ends with 
a “Selah.” This word, which is of doubtful derivation, 
was doubtless employed in the ritual use of the Psalms 
in the Temple worship to mark a pause. Probably the 
word indicated that the Levitical singers should pause 
while the players on instruments played an interlude or 
symphony. Once or twice we find it coupled with 
“ Higgaion,” the meaning of which has been suggested 
by two German scholars to be “ pause,” or “ pause and 
meditate.” Do the same, therefore, dear reader. “Pause” 
and consider, meditate on the great fact, awful circum- 
stances, and solemn issues to yourself, and to all men of 
His glorious appearing. 


II. IN RELATION TO ISRAEL. 


Let us now briefly examine the section devoted to 
the Jewish nation, consisting of verses 7—16. 

It begins with a solemn address: “Hear, O My 
people,” and in the very form of this address we can 
read the promise of grace, for it shows that the 
“Lo-Ammi” period (Hosea i. 9, 10) is at an end, and 

that Israel has again become “ Ammi” (“My people”). 


84 THE SILENCE OF GOD 


When God is displeased with them He says, “ This 
people”; or speaking to Moses with reference to their 
sudden apostasy, He says, “thy people”; but when- 
ever He speaks of them in grace, He always acknow- 
ledges the covenant indissoluble relationship that has 
been established between Him and the nation, and says, 
“My people.” 

If we want to know the exact prophetic point of time 
when Israel as a nation will truly become “ Ammi,” 
God’s own acknowledged people, we must go to the 
Book of Zechariah. There we read how that in the 
midst of their final great sorrow, when “it shall come to 
pass that in all the land, saith the Lord, two parts 
therein shall be cut off and die, but the third part shall 
be left therein,” and when even this third part shall 
be brought into the fire to be refined as silver is 
refined, and to be tried as gold is tried, then “he shall 
call on My name, and I will answer him; I will say, 
Ammi Hu (‘it is My people’); and he shall say, Jehovah 
Elohoi (‘Jehovah is my God.’)” 

The address continues, “O Israel, I will testify against 
thee,” or “ protest unto thee.” 

The form of speech implies a strong desire on the 
part of the speaker, to obtain at last Israel’s ear and 
heart for His message. The words translated “I will 
testify against thee” is a form of speech used for God’s 
gracious reasonings with man with a view to bringing 
him to Himself. Thus we find the same words in 
Neh. ix. 29: “And testifiedst against (or ‘to’) them 
that Thou mightest bring them again unto Thy law.’ 
But the subject of His solemn testimony or protestation 
to them in this psalm is not the law, as in the passage 
just quoted, but chiefly and foremost concerning His 
own glorious Person. “I am God, even thy God,” or, 
as in the Hebrew, where the order of the words is more 


HOW IT SHALL BE BROKEN 85 


forcible, “ God, thy God, I am.” But we might ask, 
What does it mean? Did not Israel know all along 
that God was God? Alas! no, never yet has Israel asa 
nation truly known or understood Him; never yet have 
they fully entered into the blessedness or responded to 
the obligations implied in the relationship, “ Thy God.” 
This blessing of full knowledge and recognition of 
Jehovah or Elohim as their own, is ever held out in the 
prophets as the yet future experience of Israel. It is the 
constant refrain which runs through Ezekiel’s visions 
of the future: “And they shall know that I am the 
Lord”; even as it is the climax of the visions of the 
son of Amoz that in the day in the which the glory 
of Jehovah shall be revealed, Israel and all flesh 
“shall know that I Jehovah am thy Saviour, and thy 
Redeemer the Mighty One of Jacob.” But there is a 
special secret here which Israel in particular has yet to 
learn. He who appears here in Divine power and 
majesty is the long-rejected Messiah. It is the greater 
than Joseph discovering Himself at last to His own 
brethren, saying not only, “I am Joseph” (Gen. xlv. 3); 
not only in His human character, “Iam Jesus”; but, “I 
am God.” 

In the days of His flesh, when He claimed to be the 
Son of God, or when He said, “I and My Father are 
one,” the Jews took up stones to stone Him, and when 
He appealed to them for which of His good works they 
were ready to stone Him, they replied, “For a good 
work we stone Thee not, but for blasphemy, and because 
Thou, being a man, makest Thyself God.” Alas! their 
eyes were holden then, and they knew not that His 
name was Immanuel, and that veiled in flesh there 
stood among them One whose goings forth are from of 
old, even from everlasting, and in whom dwells all the 
fulness of the Godhead bodily ; but “in that day” when 


86 THE SILENCE OF GOD 


the spirit of grace and of supplications is poured upon 
them, and Messiah appears to them, saying, “ God, even 
thy God, I am,” Israel will respond, “This is our God ; 
we have waited for Him, and He will save us; this 
is Jehovah; we have waited for Him; we will be glad 
and rejoice in His salvation.” 

Yes, long-doubting Israel, like doubting Thomas, 
shall yet look up with adoration to the crucified, risen 
Jesus, and say, “My Lord and my God!” 

Having revealed to them His glorious Person, He 
proceeds to instruct them in the subject of true spiritual 
worship and service. These two ever go together. 
Only He who knows God aright as Spirit, can worship 
Him in spirit and in truth. The temptation of Israel in 
the past, as alas! of so many in Christendom at the 
present day, was to trust to outward form and mere 
ceremonial. Now these God puts aside as secondary 
in their nature. “Not in reference to thy sacrifices,” 
He says, “will I reprove thee, and as to thy burnt- 
offerings, they are ever before Me. I will take no 
bullock out of thine house, nor rams out of thy folds.” 
Do you think you put the great God under obligation 
to you because you bring Him an animal sacrifice? 
“ Behold, every beast of the forest is Mine, and the cattle 
upon a thousand hills. I know all the fowls of the 
mountains, and the wild beasts of the field are ready at 
My hand.” Even that which by My appointment of | 
grace you bring to My altar is out of Mine own bounty. 
Or, have you sunk to the degradation of the heathen, 
who thought that their gods needed to be supplied by 
them with food and drink? “Behold, if I were hungry 
I would not tell thee, for the inhabited world is Mine 
and the fulness thereof: will I eat the flesh of strong 
bulls, or drink the blood of rams?” The very idea of 
_ such a thing is blasphemous, Nay, I will tell thee the 


HOW IT SHALL BE BROKEN 87 


sacrifices which refresh the heart of God : “Sacrifice to 
God praise,” or thanksgiving in acknowledgment of 
His mercies, and “ pay thy vows” of national obedience 
and loyalty to the Most High. Or in the words of 
another Messianic psalm, “ Praise the name of God with 
a song, magnify Him with thanksgiving (or ‘by con- 
fessing’ His mercies); = this shall please Jehovah 
better than an ox or bull that hath horns and hoofs.” 
These verses contain nothing against the truth, pro- 
claimed by Moses and the prophets, of the Divine 
appointment of animal sacrifices as a means of 
approaching God; but they preach against the per- 
version and misuse of that blessed institution, and the 
trusting to mere outward form and ordinances, without 
exercise of heart, which is always a sign of apostasy 
from the living God—a feature which is, as already 
remarked, noticeable in Christendom of the present day 
as it was in Israel of old. 

The significance which God intended that Israel 
should see in the Levitical sacrifices was a threefold 
one, z¢, a moral, a symbolical, and a typical one. 
Symbolically that animal led forth to death by the 
offerer, and slain on God’s altar, was meant to teach 
him that this is just what he himself deserved, but that 
God in His infinite mercy accepted the death of the 
innocent victim instead. And this again with a heart 
rightly exercised, would have the moral effect of 
impressing him with the holiness of God and the 
awfulness of sin. Apart from these there was also 
the great typical truth continually set forth by the 
whole sacrificial and ritual system of the sufferings 
and substitutionary death and the various aspects of 
the character and redeeming work of the Messiah, who, 


* This is the significance of the Hebrew word. ‘Todo also 
means confession (Psa. xix. 30, 31). 


88 THE SILENCE OF GOD 


already in the Old Testament, is the Lamb who should 
be led to the slaughter, and who by His righteousness 
would justify the many (Isa. liii.). But when these 
moral and spiritual truths were lost sight of, then 
sacrifices became a form of mere outward ritual, and 
in that case were “vain oblations,” and highly dis- 
pleasing to God. 

But in the day when Israel shall recognise Christ, and 
in Him learn to know God, and the true meaning of 
the sacrificial system, they will also know what it is, 
with or without divinely instituted ritual, to worship 
God in the spirit and truth, and by Him they will 
offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is 
the fruit of their lips by giving thanks, or “ confessing ” 
His name (Heb. xiii. 15). 

The address to Israel concludes with an exhortation 
which is at the same time a prophecy and a promise: 
“ And call upon Me in the day of trouble ; I will deliver 
thee, and thou shalt glorify Me.” 

This is often used by Christians with reference to 
themselves, and with perfect right, for in principle the 
exhortation and promise is true to every child of God. 
“God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in 
trouble.” No one who trusts Him has ever called on 
Him in trouble without being delivered or “ succoured,” 
as the word in our psalm also means, It is true we may 
not always be delivered from the trouble, but, blessed 
be God, there is such a thing as being delivered zz it; 
and to receive for an answer, “My grace is sufficient for 
thee” (even with the thorn in thy flesh); “for My 
strength is made perfect in weakness.” In view of the 
relation of the sufferings of this present time “to the 
glory which shall be revealed in us” by and by, we 
do not always know which is the greater deliverance, 
whether to have God specially near and present with 


HOW IT SHALL BE BROKEN 89 


us in the trouble (Psa. xci. 15), or to have it removed 
from us. But He knoweth our frame and remembers 
the weakness of our flesh, and graciously permits us to 
ask that, “if it be possible,” the cup of suffering may 
pass from us, though, in the power of His Spirit we too 
should ever be ready to add, “ O, my Father, if this cup 
may not pass from me, Thy will be done.” And He 


_ will déliver us, if not by removing the burden, by 


sending an angel from heaven to strengthen us to 
endure it, so that we shall be able all the more to 
glorify Him. But, though there is this general principle 
in this passage applicable to the saints of God in all 
ages, it has primary and special significance in relation 
to Israel at the climax of their national history, and is 
in strict harmony with all the rest of this sublime 
prophecy which deals with the great events of the 
time of the end. 

As we have shown elsewhere, there is a culminating 
sorrow for Israel after a representative section is back 
in- the land. “For then shall be the great tribulation 
such as was not since the beginning of the world to this 
time, no, nor ever shall be” (Matt. xxiv. 21). “Alas! 
for that day is great, for there is none like it; it is even 
the time of Jacob’s trouble; dut he shall be saved out of 
zt” (Jer. xxx, 7). For, in the very midst of that great 
day of “trouble,” or “tribulation,” or “affliction,” * the 
spirit of grace and of supplications shall be poured on 
the saved remnant, and, as we have already seen, Israel 
shall call on the name of their Redeemer and “ de saved,” 
not only from outward trouble, but also from their sin 
and unbelief. 


* The word is the same as in Deut. iv. 30, Hosea v. 15, and 
other scriptures which bring us up to the same prophetic point 
of time when Israel’s sorrows come to a climax after their restora- 
tion to the land. 


90 THE SILENCE OF GOD 


It is to that blessed event that the prophecy and 
promise of this verse in our psalm primarily refers. 
Israel on the day of his greatest trouble, shall call on 
the name of Jesus and be delivered, and then from that 
“day” on, throughout the remaining years of their 
separate national existence on earth, “they shall glorify 
Him,” or, as the word literally means, “honour” Him 
with that filial loving regard that a son owes to his. 
father. 

Then shall the chief end in Israel’s call as God’s first- 
born son among the nations be realised, and “this 
people” which He has “formed for Himself” shall in 
a special manner show forth His praise. 


III. IN RELATION TO CHRISTENDOM. 


We now come to the last section of this psalm 
(verses 16-23), addressed to a third party which is 
distinct from “His saints” (verse 5) and “ Israel” 
(verse 7). “But to the wicked God saith, What hast 
thou to do to declare My statutes, or that thou shouldest 
take My covenant in thy mouth?” Who are these? 
Not the nations who have not heard of the fame or 
glory of Christ, but professors in Christendom who 
know in a manner God’s statutes, and who unworthily 
take His holy covenant in their mouth (verse 16). This 
feature marks them off at once from the heathen, and 
from those who are truly God’s.. The distinguishing 
characteristic of those who are true subjects of the new 
covenant ‘of grace is this: “I will put My law zm their 
inward parts, and will write it zz their hearts ; and I will 
be their God, and they shall be My people”. (Jer. xxxi. 
33); but these have the covenant only in their south. 


* The word is the same as in the command “ Honour thy father 
and mother.” 


HOW IT SHALL BE BROKEN gl 


They cry indeed, “Lord, Lord,” and are often so like 
the real and true that it is impossible for man to distin- 
guish (Matt. xiii. 24-30), but they are the tares among 
the wheat ; the foolish virgins, who merely imitate the 
wise ; the goats among Christ’s true sheep, to whom He 
shall say in that day, “I never knew you; depart from 
Me, ye workers of iniquity.” They are those represented 
by the evil servant who says in his heart, “My Lord 
delayeth His coming,” and begins to smite the true 
men-servants and maidens in Christ’s Church, and to 
eat and drink and be drunken; to whom the Lord will 
“come in a day when he looketh not for Him, and at 
an hour when he is not aware, and will cut him in 
sunder, and will appoint him his portion with the un- 
believers (Luke xii. 45, 46). They are the same of 
whom the apostle warns us as especially manifesting 
themselves in the perilous times of the “last days,” 
when “men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, 
ostentatious, arrogant, defamers, disobedient to parents, 
unthankful, irreligious, without natural affection, truce- 
breakers, intriguers, without self-control, fierce, despisers 
of good men, traitors, reckless, puffed up, lovers of 
pleasure rather than lovers of God, having a form of 
godliness but denying the power thereof” (2 Tim. iii. 1-5). 
The very fact of their knowing and speaking of God’s 
statutes is an aggravation of their guilt, and will increase 
their condemnation, for they are like that servant who 
knew his lord’s will, and prepared not himself, neither 
did according to his will, and who shall be beaten with 
many stripes (Luke xii. 47). Better far had it been for 
them had they been born in heathen lands, and never 
heard of God’s grace or covenant faithfulness, instead of 
hearing it and responding only with their mouth. 

But the address continues: “And thou hatest in- 
struction, and castest My words behind thee.” Here 


92 THE SILENCE OF GOD 


are other striking features of apostate professors. 
They have God’s statutes in their mouth, and it 
may be are very careful in chanting the responses as 
the solemn words of the Ten Commandments are 
read out to them in the church on a Sunday. They 
know also that “instruction in righteousness” is one 
of the chief ends for which these statutes were given 
by God, yet in their heart they hate instruction ; nay, in 
wilful rebellion they cast God’s words behind their back 
in contemptuous disregard, This is no poetic fancy or 
exaggeration, but a graphic picture of what may already 
be seen even in Protestant Christendom, and what is 
becoming more and more manifest as the time of the 
end draws nigh. 

Alas! Christendom is guilty of the v very same things 
which characterised the last stages of Israel’s previous 
apostasy which culminated in judgment. They also 
were disobedient and rebelled against God by “casting 
His laws behind their back” (Nehem. ix. 26), wherefore 
they were given into the hands of their enemies, and 
wrath came upon them to the uttermost ; and this toa 
more terrible degree will be the lot of Christendom. 

The casting God’s laws behind their back is naturally 
followed by definite breaches of the commandments, as 
is brought out in the following verses: “ When thou 
sawest a thief then thou consentest with him, and with 
adulterers is thy portion. Thy mouth hast thou sent 
out to evil, and thy tongue frameth deceit. Thou sittest 
down deliberately to speak against thy brother, and 
thine own mother’s son thou woundest by slander.” 
Here is the direct violation of the commands, “ Thou 
shalt not steal”; “Thou shalt not commit adultery” 
“Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.” 
Atheists and sceptics may insist that man can properly 
fulfil his obligations to his fellow-men without the recog- 


HOW IT SHALL BE BROKEN 93 


nition of the authority of God or His Word, and may 
attempt to separate faith from ethics, but Scripture, and 
also history and experience, testify to the contrary. 

Men who turn their back upon the living God, and 
question the Divine authority of His revelation, are sure 
in time to break loose against their fellows. The 
‘commandments which the wicked are here accused of 
breaking, are all taken from the second table, on which 
is inscribed man’s duty to man, and their violation is 
traced to the fact of their first alienating their hearts 
from all allegiance to God and then casting His law 
behind their back, 

It would seem almost incredible that such flagrant 
wickedness could exist alongside outward profession of 
religion, but experience of what is actually going on in 
our midst, and the world’s “progress” as chronicled 
even in the secular press of this Protestant country, 
where the Bible has been an open book for centuries, 
and where almost everybody takes God’s covenant in 
their mouth, proves the literalness and accuracy of this 
Divine forecast. Is it not but yesterday that we read of 
a prominent legislator being convicted of the vilest un- 
cleanness only a few days after he had made a speech 
at the laying of the foundation-stone of a chapel? And 
still more recently have we not read of one guilty of 
defrauding the public presenting a gold communion 
service to the Cathedral Church of London?! 


* While preparing these notes my eyes are directed to an 
article in the current number of a widely-circulated news- 
paper, the usual tone of which is rationalistic and abstract 
Unitarian, I quote a few sentences as a testimony from a mouth- 
piece of the world concerning its morals: “The revelations of 
the past few weeks might well give pause toany one who strongly 
believes in the progress of the world. The case (then 
before the Courts), followed by an article in The Times, which 
it is not extravagant to term the most startling journalistic article 


94 THE SILENCE OF GOD > 


And even among those who “declare God's statutes” 
as teachers and preachers, are there not some, even as in 
the apostle’s time, who profess the truth in hypocrisy, 
and who, though transforming themselves as angels of 
light, and with feigned words make merchandise of 
many, are enemies of the Cross of Christ, “ whose end is 
destruction, whose god is their belly,’ and whose real 
care is for “earthly things”? Such are but samples and 
illustrations of “the wicked ” in this solemn scripture to 
whom the words of warning are addressed. 

But what shall be said of the still more apostate 
“Christian” nations of the Continent, where the most 
shameless immoralities are often found hand in hand 
with the most incredible superstition, and where the 
name “Christian” to a pious Jew is the very synonym 
of lawless wickedness ? 

But we proceed to the solemn closing words of the 
address to this class of “the wicked”: “These things 
hast thou done, and I kept silence; thou thoughtést 
therefore that I am become one altogether like unto 
thee, but I will reprove thee (or convince thee by 
reasoning), and set (all thy deeds and words) in order 
before thine eyes.” 

The word translated “these things” is emphatic, as if 
to express, “To such lengths didst thou presume in thy 
wickedness, and I kept silence.” Man has always 


of the year, revealed a deep-set corruption in our modern society 

-more characteristic, we would fain hope, of old Rome, in its 
corrupt and licentious decay, than of modern England. . . . The 
Emperor Augustus vainly tried by law to stem the foul flood of 
gross degradation, which was the real cause of old Rome’s down- 
fall. For that Niagara London society, or a portion of it which 
is called ‘smart,’ seems to be steering straight... . If we turn 
from that sink of corruption to the financial world, the prospect is 
no brighter... . The race for wealth which characterises the 
present generation is not short of appalling,” 


HOW IT SHALL BE BROKEN 05 


misunderstood and misinterpreted the marvellous 
patience and long-suffering of the everlasting God. 
“Because sentence against an evil work is not 
executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of 
men is fully set in them to do evil” (Eccles. viii. 11). 
Because the thunderbolts of God’s wrath do not 
immediately fall, even the righteous have been some- 
times tempted to say, “ How doth God know? and is 
there knowledge in the Most High?” 

The wicked, not knowing that it is infinite goodness 
which is the cause of infinite patience on the part of the 
Righteous and Holy One, have blasphemously insulted 
His majesty by lowering the standard of His absolute 
holiness, as the One who is of purer eyes than to behold 
iniquity, and who cannot look upon evil except to 
abhor it. They think, or hope, that they will find God 
altogether like unto themselves in their abominable 
complacency and compromise with sin. But God, who 
takes note of what man ¢hznks, as well as of his words 
and deeds, warns him that he is mistaken. Far from 
thinking lightly of, or overlooking “ the ungodly deeds 
which they have ungodly committed, and all their 
hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken 
against Him,” a full and minute record of them is kept 
in His book, and “in that day” when the book of God 
is opened, they will be “set in order” (or “in regular 
array”) before their eyes, and oh! what a terrible 
indictment of professing Christendom, both collectively 
and individually, that record will be found to contain! 
“The encouragement of anti-Christianity for the sake 
of gain, the coalition of Christian governments with the 
guilds of Mammon against justice, truth, religion, 
humanity, and liberty ; their covenants made and 
broken ; their rivalries and envies, highway robbery and 
rapacity ; their greed of gold and lust of supremacy ; 


96 THE SILENCE OF GOD 


their defiance of Christian sentiment and of every 
appeal to virtue; their despotism, pride, mis-govern- 
ment, duplicity, oppression of the weak, and guilty trade 
with the strong, and, most of all, their shedding of 
innocent blood — all are here recorded with a pen 
unerring. - No injustice is forgotten, no massacre or 
devastated homes, no crimsoned fields strewn with 
upturned faces of the dead. Nor is the name of one. 
who took part in producing such scenes, or consented to 
the wrongs that begat them, misspelled, or his place of 
residence misread. The whole apostasy of Christendom, 
the Horn’s loud-mouthed arrogance, and the words of 
the cry, ‘We will not have this Man to reign over us,’ 
are written in the ‘ Books,’ and judgment by the records 
must pass on the kingdoms whose boast was their 
Christianity, culture, civilisation.” 1 

And not only these collective and national sins of 
Christendom, for which every member of the evil con- 
federacy is more or less responsible, will then rise up in 
judgment against them, but remember, man’s individual 
open and secret sins, are recorded too, and will then be 
“set in order before his eyes,” so that the opened book 
of his own conscience may attest the faithful accuracy 
of the terrible record kept by God, for although, as 
has been well observed, “sin does not purpose to 
remember or be remembered, it registers itself with 
perfect and unfailing regularity in two books—the book | 
of God, which shall be opened in that day, and on our 
own character, mind, and imagination. Only the blood 
of Christ can blot out sin from the one book, only the 
Spirit of God from the other.” 2 

We come now to the two last verses which form the 
epilogue to this wonderful psalm, and which are especi- 


z “Daniel’s Great Prophecy,” by Dr. Nathaniel West. 
2 Adolph Saphir in “The Lord's Prayer.” 


HOW IT SHALL BE BROKEN 97 


ally addressed to the last two classes dealt with, namely, 
“Israel” and “the wicked.” “Now consider this, ye 
that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be 
none to deliver.” 

This is God’s last word to the wiclfed, and it is a 
word of warning mixed with entreaty, for the first 
words of this verse might be properly rendered, “ Con- 
sider, I entreat you,” and shows God’s heart of yearning 
even for the lost. Like the God of grace that He is, 
He cannot let them go on the way to perdition, even 
after they have spurned His authority, and cast His 
words behind their back, without a final appeal. “ Con- 
sider,” or “be wise and repent, “for as I live, saith the 
Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the 
wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and 
live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why 
will ye die, oh house of Israel?” And oh sinners of 
all nations, “give glory to Jehovah your God before He 
cause darkness, and before your feet stumble upon the 
dark mountains, and while ye look for light He-turn it 
into the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness.” 
Oh, be wise and consider; flee for refuge to the only 
hope set before you in the blood and righteousness of. 
Christ, before God arises terribly to shake the earth, and 
to tear you in pieces with “none to deliver.” But if ye 
will not, hear, “My soul, shall weep in secret places for 
your pride, and Mine eye shall weep sore and run down 
with tears,” because of the hardness of your heart, and 
because of your deliberate choice of darkness rather 
than the light, and of death rather than life, 

The last words to Israel, which are also of application 
to us, are, “Whoso offereth (or ‘sacrificeth’) praise 
glorifieth Me, and prepareth a way in which I may show 
him the salvation of God,” 1 

* This is the rendering of Delitzsch and the margin of the 


Revised Version, and I think it is the most satisfactory, 
8 


98 THE SILENCE OF GOD 


The first part of this verse is a condensation of what 
He has already taught them in verses 14, 15, where, 
as we have seen, Israel’s deliverance and salvation will 
come when they turn from mere outward and lifeless 
form and ceremony to worship God in the spirit and 
truth, and to praise Him for redemption already accom- 
plished. But thus also with hearts and souls humbled 
and attuned to God, a way will be prepared for more 
and more of the fulness of God’s grace and salvation to 
be revealed to them. 

In connection with the building of Solomon’s Temple 
we read: “It came to pass, as the trumpeters and 
singers were as one, to make one sound to be heard in 
praising and thanking the Lord; and when they lifted 
up their voice with the trumpets and cymbals and 
instruments of music, and praised the Lord, saying, 
For He is good; for His mercy endureth for ever: 
that then the house was filled with a cloud, even the 
house of the Lord ; so that the priests could not stand 
to minister by reason of the cloud: for the glory of the 
Lord had filled the house of God” (2 Chron. v. 13, 14). 

So also by and by, after Christ’s manifestation to 
them, when Israel with one heart and voice lift up their 
sculs in praise and adoration to Jehovah, the God of 
their fathers, for all His wonderful dealings with them, 
and especially for His unspeakable gift of His only- 
begotten Son, and the individual and national blessings ' 
purchased by His precious blood, God’s glory will 
appear in their midst and the fulness and riches of His 
salvation be manifested to them. 


IV 


THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 


O praise the Lord, all ye nations ; 

Laud Him, all ye peoples. 

For His mercy is great toward us ; 

And the truth of the Lord endureth for ever. 
Praise ye the Lord. 


O give thanks unto the Lord ; for He is good : 

For His mercy endureth for ever. 

Let Israel now say, 

That His mercy endureth for ever. 

Let the house of Aaron now say, 

That His mercy endureth for ever. 

Let them now that fear the Lord say, 

That His mercy endureth for ever. 

Out of my distress I called upon the Lord: 

The Lord answered me, and set me in a large place. 
The Lord is on my side ; I will not fear : 

What can man do unto me? 

The Lord is on my side among them that help me: 
Therefore shall I see my desire upon them that hate me. 
It is better to trust in the Lord 

Than to put confidence in man. 

It is better to trust in the Lord 

Than to put confidence in princes. 

All nations compassed me about : 

In the name of the Lord I will cut them off. 


They compassed me about ; yea, they compassed me about : 


In the name of the Lord I will cut them off. 
They compassed me about like bees ; 


They are quenched as the fire of thorns: 

In the name of the Lord I will cut them off. 

Thou didst thrust sore at me that I might fall : 

But the Lord helped me. 

The Lord is my strength and song ; 

And He is become my salvation. 

The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the tents of the righteous: 
The right hand of the Lord doeth valiantly. 

The right hand of the Lord is exalted : 

The right hand of the Lord doeth valiantly. 

I shall not die, but live, 

And declare the works of the Lord. 

The Lord hath chastened me sore : 

But he hath not given me over unto death. 

Open to me the gates of righteousness : 

I will enter into them, I will give thanks unto the Lord. 
This is the gate of the Lord ; 

‘The righteous shall enter into it. 

I will give thanks unto Thee, for Thou hast answered me, 
And art become my salvation. 

The stone which the builders rejected 

Is become the head of the corner. 

This is the Lord’s doing ; 

It is marvellous in our eyes. 

This is the day which the Lord hath made 

We will rejoice and be glad in it. 

Save now, we beseech Thee, O Lord : 

O Lord, we beseech Thee, send now prosperity. 

Blessed be He that cometh in the name of the Lord : 
We have blessed you out of the house of the Lord. ~ 
The Lord is God, and He hath given us light : 

Bind the sacrifice with cords, even unto the horns of the altar. 
Thou art my God, and I will give thanks unto Thee : 
Thou art my God, I will exalt Thee. 

O give thanks unto the Lord ; for He is good : 

For His mercy endureth for ever,—PsALms cxvii. and cxviii. 


IV 
THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 
A Prophetic Drama of the End of the Age 


HE series of six psalms beginning with the 113th 
and ending with the 118th constituted “the 
Hallel.”* Hallel means praise, and although the whole 
collection of Psalms abounds in praise, this series was 
particularly so-called, because they formed the special 
praise, sung in the Temple courts in circumstances of 
great joy and solemnity, on the three great “feasts of 
the Lord ”—Passover, Pentecost, and Tabernacles. But 
it was with the Paschal feast that the Hallel was more 
especially associated, and even to this day it forms the 
chief feature in the Haggadah? used in every pious 
Jewish home on the evening of the Passover, when they 
meet to “show” or “tell forth” the wonders of the 
Exodus from Egypt, and to express their hopes of 
another greater national redemption yet to come. In 
connection with that feast the Hallel used to be divided 
into two parts: the first part, consisting of Psalms 113 
and 114, being usually sung at an early part of the 
* See my articles on “The Commencement of the Hallel” in 
Nos. 21 and 22 of The Scattered Nation. 


2 Special liturgy. The word literally means the “telling,” or 


“ showing” forth. 
tor 


102 THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 


supper, and the second part, consisting of the last four 
psalms of this series, was sung at the end. 

On the night on which our Lord was betrayed, when 
He turned the service in commemoration of deliverance 
from Egyptian bondage into the blessed ordinance which 
should henceforth “show” or “tell forth” the greater 
spiritual redemption accomplished by the breaking of 
His own body and the shedding of His own blood—this 
was doubtless the “hymn” or “ psalm” (Matt. xxvi. 30) 
which they sang before He went forth to Gethsemane 
and Golgotha. 


The 117th forms a fit and solemn introduction to the 
118th Psalm, which is the climax of the Hallel. It will 
not be without profit if we briefly study the introduction 
first. Though it is the shortest psalm in the collection, 
it is most comprehensive. It is a psalm for Israel, yet it 
is universal and cosmopolitan, embracing in its scope “all _ 
nations and peoples,” so that in the Epistle to the Romans 
it forms part of the Apostle’s argument that Gentiles 
too are called upon to glorify God for His mercy. 
It is a thoroughly evangelical psalm, for it sings of 
grace and truth; it is a beautiful psalm of praise, for it 
begins with a Hallelujah and ends with a Hallelujah, 
and there is a third fervent call to praise in between. 

But above all it is a prophetic psalm. The speaker is 
Israel, or that godly remnant of Israel who on that day 
will be made subject to God’s grace, It is Israel, I say, 
who is here calling on the other nations, and in the lan- 
guage of David saying: 


“O magnify the Lord with me and let us exalt His name 
together nien ' 
“ O praise Jehovah, all ye nations ; laud Him ye peoples,” 


The ground on which they are to praise Him is given 


bar 


THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 103 


in the second verse : “ For His merciful kindness is great 
toward us, and the truth of Jehovah endureth for ever.” 

The expression “ merciful kindness,” is, I think, the 
solitary instance in the Authorised Version of such a 
rendering of the word “hessed,” which I prefer to trans- 
late by the word “grace.” There is also an idiom in this 
verse which brings out a beautiful truth. 

The words rendered “great toward us” are literally 
“prevailed over us” or “overcome us.” The figure 
which the idiom brings to my mind is that of a man 
who has been resisting some one who has been trying to 
overpower him, but is finally overcome and is thankful 
for it. 

I am always reminded by this verse of the solemn 
transaction in Jacob’s history recorded in Gen. xxxii. On 
“that night,” we read, “Jacob was left alone, and there 
wrestled a man with him until the breaking of the day. 
And when He saw that He prevailed not against him, He 
touched the hollow of his thigh; and the hollow of 
Jacob’s thigh was out of joint as He wrestled with him. 
And He said, Let me go, for the day breaketh. And he 
said, I will not let thee go, except Thou bless me. And 
He said, What is thy name? And he said, Jacob. And 
He said, Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but 
Israel: for as a prince hast thou power with God and 
with man, and hast prevailed. And Jacob asked Him 
and said, Tell me, I pray Thee, Thy name. And He 
said, Wherefore dost thou ask after my name?” (which 
was not yet to be revealed). “And He blessed him there. 
And Jacob called the name of the place Peniel; for I 
have seen God face to face and my life is preserved. 
And as he passed over Peniel the sun rose upon him, and 
he halted upon his thigh.” 

This symbolical transaction isa parable of the history 
and experience of the Jewish nation, Now is the “night” 


104 THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 


period of Israel’s history, and a long, dark and dreary 
night it has proved. And it is the “Jacob” period of 
Israel’s history. Not yet have they become a nation of 


“ Israelites ”—“ princes in all the earth” (Psa. xlv. 16), 
“having power with God and with man, and pre- 
vailing.” 


There are, indeed, and ever have been from among 
them, those to whom the Lord already bears witness 
saying, “ Behold Israelites indeed, in whom there is no 
guile,” but as far as the majority of them is concerned 
the name “ Jacob” as yet describes them. 

And there is a man wrestling with them. Oh, 
although in the darkness of the night they see Him 
not, it is the Divine Angel of the Covenant (Hosea xii. 
3, 5), “the man Christ Jesus.” What are all His 
dealings with them, what are all their sorrows and 
sufferings, but His wrestlings with them in order to 
deliver them from their stubbornness, so that “ their 
uncircumcised hearts be humbled,” and they acquiesce in 
the justice and love of God in all His ways with them ? 

But so far they are resisting and cannot be prevailed 
over, until in the darkest hour of their night, in “the 
time of Jacob’s trouble,” their thigh will be put out 
of joint. Then all their self-strength and resisting 
power will be gone, and all that they will be able to 
do will be to cling to Him and cry, “ We will not let 
Thee go except Thou bless us.” Then Jacob will 
become “Israel,” and the “wonderful” name of the 
Divine Angel, which to them is still “secret,” will be 
revealed to them as “ Jesus.” 

Looking upon Him, Israel will cry also “ Peniel”— 
“the face of God”; for the “little moment” during 
which He has hid His face from them in anger will be 
at an end, and they shall behold “the Glory of God in 
the Face of Jesus Christ.” 


THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 105 


It is at this prophetic point of time that Israel calls 
on all nations and peoples to praise Jehovah because 
His grace, which they have so long withstood, has finally 
“overcome” them, and they see as never before, that 
His “truth” or “ faithfulness” endureth for ever. Israel 
will then be brought into the same frame of mind as the 
Apostle Paul, whose history and conversion is typical 
of that of His people, in reference to whom he speaks 
of himself as “one born out of due time,’ and who 
gloried in the fact that his mighty Conqueror, whom he 
had so long resisted, was now leading him about in 
triumph? as a trophy of His victorious power, so that 
after the manner of the captives chosen to follow the 
triumphal procession, he might chant the praises of the 
Victor in all the cities of the Greek and Roman world ; 
for he learned the secret which we too must learn, that 
“our only true triumphs are God’s triumphs over us; 
that His defeats of us are our only true victories,” 


How grace finally prevails we see in the next psalm. 
The 118th is not merely a “general” psalm of praise 
and prayer ; it is a prophetic drama, with many tragical 
points in it, which will be literally enacted in the future 
history of Israel, immediately before, and at, the Second 
Advent of our Lord Jesus. 

If we want rightly to understand this psalm and its 
chronological relation to the “things to come,” we must 
be lifted by the hand of God into the future, and pre- 
suppose several events which are most clearly revealed 
in other parts of Scripture. 

I will remind the reader here of only one or two, with 
regard to which there can be no controversy. One of 
these events is the restoration of the Jews to Palestine in 


This is the true sense of 2 Cor. ii. 14. 


106 THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 


a condition of unbeliefz Not a complete restoration of 
the whole nation, which will not take place until after their 
conversion, but of a representative and influential section. 

It seems from Scripture that in relation to Israel and 
the land, there will be a restoration, before the Second 
Advent of our Lord, of the state of things as they existed 
at the time of His First Advent, when the threads of 
God’s dealings with them nationally were finally dropped, 
not to be taken up again “until the times of the Gentiles 
shall be fulfilled.” 

There was at that time a number of Jews in Palestine 
representative of the nation, but compared with the 
number of their brethren, who were already a diaspora 
among the nations, they were a mere minority, and 
those not in a politically independent condition. 

So it will beagain. There will be at first, as compared 
with the whole nation, only a representative minority in 
Palestine, and a Jewish state will be formed probably 
under Turkish suzerainty. The nucleus of this politi- 
cally dependent Jewish state is already to be seen in 
the 120,000 Jews who have wandered back from all 
regions of the earth to the land of their fathers. 
Already Jerusalem is almost a Jewish city, while the 
thirty and more Jewish colonies? which dot the land 
“are so many milestones marking the advance which 
Israel is making toward national rehabilitation.” And 
in no other country in the world do the Jews to the 
same extent represent the nation. 

If any one wants to see the whole Jewish people in 
miniature, let him go to Jerusalem and to the other 
Jewish ‘settlements in Palestine. There you can see 
them from East and West, from India and from the 


* Those who need or desire proofs for such a restoration will 
find it in my small hook, “ The Jewish Problem,” 
2 See Appendix iv, 


THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 107 


burning plains of Southern Arabia ; from the extreme 
North of Siberia and the Caucasus ; there you can hear 
them speaking nearly all languages under heaven. 
Around this nucleus, a large number more, from all 
parts of the world, will be gathered, and there is no 
doubt that before long this part of the Zionist pro- 
gramme will be realised, and Palestine will become the 
“openly recognised, legally assured home” of the Jews, 

But what follows? After a brief interval of outward 
prosperity there comes a night of anguish. “These are 
the words that Jehovah spake concerning Israel and 
concerning Judah,” just after commanding the prophet 
to “write in a book” the fact that He would bring 
again the captivity of His people, and cause them to 
return to the land that He gave to their fathers: “We 
have heard a cry of terror, fear, and no peace. Ask 
now and see. Is it a man travailing with child? 
Wherefore do I see every man with his hands on his 
loins like a woman in childbirth and every face turned 
to paleness? Alas! for that day is great, so that none 
is like it ; it is even the time of Jacob’s trouble; but he 
shall be saved out of it” (Jer. xxx. 4-7). 

The cause and occasion of the night of sorrow for 
Jacob is the yet future siege and final gathering of the 
nations against Jerusalem. . In some of the prophecies 
this solemn event is set forth with such clearness that 
it reads like history. “Behold I will make Jerusalem 
a cup of reeling unto all the peoples round about... 
and in that day will I make Jerusalem a burdensome 
stone for all peoples; all that burden themselves with 
it shall be cut to pieces, and all the nations of the earth 
shall be gathered against it. . . . Behold the day of the 
Lord cometh, and thy spoil shall be divided in the midst 
of thee, for I will gather all nations against Jerusalem 
to battle: and the city shall be taken and the houses 


108 THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 


rifled and the women ravished, and half of the city shall 
go into captivity ” (Zech. xii. 2, 3; xiv. I, 2). 
And not only will this be the case with Jerusalem, 
but it “shall come to pass that zz all the land, saith 
Jehovah, two parts therein shall be cut off,... and I 
will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine 
them as silver is refined and will try them as gold is 
tried.” It is the time of Jacob’s greatest trouble—the 
very darkest hour of Israel’s long night of sorrow. 
The enemy thinks his end almost accomplished ; he 
has but to lift his hand for one final blow, and Israel 
will be no more—when suddenly in the clouds of heaven, 
attended by His angelic hosts and “all the saints with 
Him,” Israel’s true Messiah and Deliverer appears, 
“and His feet shall stand in that day upon the mount 
of Olives which is before Jerusalem on the East.” The 
enemies’ hand stretched out to give the final blow 
becomes suddenly withered : “ And the multitude of all 
the nations that fight against Ariel, even all that fight 
against her and her stronghold, and that distress her, 
shall be as a dream, a vision of the night. And it shall 
be as when an hungry man dreameth, and, behold, he 
eateth; but he awaketh, and his soul is empty: or as 
when a thirsty man dreameth, and, behold, he drinketh; 
but he awaketh, and, behold, he is faint, and his soul 
hath appetite: so shall the multitude of all nations be 
that fight against mount Zion” (Isa. xxix. 7, 8). But ` 
simultaneous with their outward deliverance there takes 
place also Israel’s spiritual redemption: “And I will 
pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants 
of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplication ; 
and they shall look unto Me whom they have pierced : 
and they shall mourn for him as one mourneth for his 
only son, and shall be in bitterness for him as one that 
is in bitterness for his firstborn, ., , In that day there 


7 


THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL tog 


shall be a fountain opened to the house of David and 
to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for unclean- 
ness.” 

Now, imagine Israel, at that time overwhelmed with 
the sense of God’s marvellous grace in their deliverance, 
joining together in this glorious song of praise and 
triumph :— 


“O give thanks (or literally ‘confess’) unto Jehovah; for He is 
good : 
For His mercy endureth for ever. 
Let Israel now say, 
That His mercy endureth for ever. 
Let the house of Aaron now say, 
That His mercy endureth for ever. 
Let them now that fear Jehovah say, 
That His mercy endureth for ever.” 


The ground of this universal call to the entire nation 
solemnly to confess “the ever gracious goodness of 
God” is given in the narrative of praise which follows: 
“Out of my distress (or ‘Out of the straitness,’ or 
‘siege’t) I called upon Jah?; Jah answered me in 
(or ‘ with’) a large place”—by breaking the enemies 
lines which pressed me on every side :— 


“Jehovah is on my side—I will not fear, 
What can man do unto me? 
Jehovah is for me as my help, 
Therefore I shall see my desire upon them that hate me. 
It is better to trust (or ‘to hide one’s self’) in Jehovah 
Than to put confidence in man.” 


This 8th verse is said to be the middle verse of the 
Bible, and if so, there is no grander truth which could 
be more appropriately enshrined in this central position. 


* The Hebrew word can also be propetly so rendered. 
2 An abbreviation of n}n'—“ Jehovah.” 


t16 THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 


It is the lesson above all others, which God desires to 
teach us through all His dealings with us: it is the truth 
which Israel will learn when they are at last brought 
to an end of themselves, and experience to the full the 
bitter disappointment of misplaced confidence in man. 

In times past they always sought an arm of flesh to 
lean on, and when national danger threatened “they 
called to Egypt, they went to Assyria” (Hosea vii. 11) 
and trusted in their own strength, or in human alliances ; 
but in that day Israel will say: “ Assur shall not save 
us; we will not ride upon (or put our confidence in) 
horses (which come from Egypt); neither shall we say 
to the work of our hands, Ye are our gods: for in Thee 
the fatherless findeth mercy ” :— 


“It is better to trust in Jehovah than to put confidence 

in man— 

Yea, it is better to trust in Jehovah than to put con- 
fidence in princes, 

Put not your trust in princes, 

Nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help. 

His breath goeth forth, he returneth to his earth ; 

In that very day his thoughts perish. 

Happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help, 

Whose hope is in the Lord his God: 

Which made heaven and earth, 

The sea, and all that in them is: 

Which keepeth truth for ever” (Psa. cxlvi. 3-6). 


The verses now following must seem hyperbole to ' 
those not seeing the solemn prophetic import of this 
psalm, but they are plain enough in the light of the 
other scriptures already indicated. We regard the con- 
clusion of the Hallel as “the prophetic expression by 
the Spirit of Christ, of that exultant strain of anticipative 
triumph wherein the virgin daughter of Israel will laugh 
to scorn the congregated armies” of the final Gentile 
confederacy. 


ii 


THE CONCLUSION ÒF THE HALLEL itt 


“All nations compassed me about; yea, they com- 
passed me about: 

“In the name of Jehovah I will destroy them” (or, 
literally, “ cut them off.”) 

“They compassed me about ; yea, they compassed me 
about. But verily in the name of Jehovah I will cut 
them off. They compassed me about like bees”— 
completely, persistently, full of hatred—like the 
Amorites who, “as bees” (Deut. i. 44), chased and beat 
down our fathers in Seir—but suddenly—“ they are 
quenched as the fire of thorns. In the name of Jehovah 
I will verily cut them off.” 

Then, turning to the leader of this confederacy—the 
future king of the united armies of the apostate nations, 
or, it may be, addressing Gentile power as personified— 
Israel says :— 


“ Thou hast thrust sore at me that I might fall, 
But Jehovah helped me. 
My strength and song is Jah, 
And He is become my salvation.” 


This last verse is here transferred bodily from “the 
song of Moses and the children of Israel” (Exod. xv.) 
which they sang at the overthrow of their enemies in 
the waters of the Red Sea, and which is typical of the 
final overthrow of the nations which shall be confederate 
against Jehovah and against His anointed. 

It is also incorporated a third time by Isaiah at the 
end of that section of his prophecy called “the Book 
of Immanuel,” which closes with that beautiful little 
millennial song of confidence and triumph (Isa. xii. 2) 
which Israel shall sing “in that day,” the last words of 
which are: “Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of 
Zion ; for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst 
of thee.” 


1i2 THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 


The day when Jehovah will become Israel’s “ salva- 
tion” is that in which they will recognise their 
“ Jeschua ”—their Jesus, whose very name in Hebrew 
is here used, and which, being interpreted, means 
“God’s salvation.” Then also, and as a blessed con- 
sequence, there will be— 

“The voice of rejoicing and salvation in the tents of 
the righteous (because)— 


“The right hand of Jehovah doeth valiantly. 
The right hand of Jehovah is exalted : . 
The right hand of Jehovah doeth valiantly.” 


The “right hand,” which is a figure for energetic 
interposition, united to the almighty “arm,” which in 
Scripture is the emblem of effectual power that carries 
through the thing designed, may well be used as a title 
of the Messiah, who is God’s visible executive power in 
delivering His people, and in executing vengeance on 
the nations. 

This, again, has for its basis the “ Song of Moses” in 
Exod. xv., where we read— 


“ Thy right hand, O Jehovah, is glorious in power, 
Thy right hand dasheth in pieces the enemy. 
And in the greatness of Thine excellency 
Thou overthrowest them that rise up against Thee ”— 


which overthrow of Pharaoh and his host, forms but the 
historical foreground of the final overthrow of the con- — 
federated anti-Christian world powers, at the time of the 
end. 

The next verse brings us to Israel’s final shout of 
triumph, even as it has been their defiant answer to the 
nations all through the ages, who sought their exter- 
mination. j 

“I shall not die but live, 
And declare the works of Jah.” 


THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 113 


The cries of “Down with the Jews!” “Death to the 
Jews!” now raised by anti-Semitic mobs in the streets of 
Paris, Berlin, or Vienna, have been reverberating from 
age to age among the Gentile nations who have been 
brought in contact with this “ Peculiar People.” 


“Many a time (or ‘O how greatly !’) have they afflicted me 
from my youth up, 
Let Israel now say: 
O how greatly have they afflicted me from my youth up: 
Yet they have not prevailed against me !”— 


is the similar song of Israel in the 129th Psalm. 

Israel’s national youth or childhood was in Egypt, and 
already there “the plowers plowed on his back, and 
made long their furrows.” Pharaoh cried, “ Death to the 
Jews!” and brought out an edict for their extermination. 
“But the more they afflicted them, the more they 
multiplied and grew,” and Israel passed through the 
baptism of suffering in Egypt with the defiant shout, 
“T shall not die but live, and declare the works of 
Jehovah.” 

Then, not to mention Canaanites, Philistines, 
Midianites, and the other small powers who were ever 
ready to afflict and harass them, there commenced 
the march of the great world powers—Syria, Assyria, 
Babylon, Persia, Greece, and savage Rome, who each in 
turn took up the cry, “ Death to the Jews!” But where 
are all these powers? They have crumbled away and 
died, but Israel lives, and, they have not “ prevailed over 
him.” 

Then came the centuries of Dispersion, when it might 
be supposed that a comparative handful of men scattered 
on the great ocean of humanity would soon be swallowed 
up of the multitude. As a matter of fact, every force was 
brought to bear against them with terrible severity. Their 

9 


114 THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 


enemies were united, and seemed confident of success, 
The crusaders went from west to east with the cry, 
“ Hierosolyma est perdita !” 1 and perpetrated wholesale 
massacres of the Jews as a commencement of their 
“holy” wars. Again and again apostate Christendom 
in the dark ages showed its zeal for the Jewish Messiah, 
who teaches His followers to love even their enemies, by 
burning whole communities of Jews, numbering some- 
times thousands of souls, on one huge scaffold. But in 
spite of it all, Israel lives; “ they have not prevailed 
over him”; for there are more Jews in the world after 
all the centuries of banishments, massacres, and untold 
sufferings, than there have been at any previous point 
of the world’s history, and the Jews at the present day, 
as is proved from official statistics, in some parts of the 
world increase in proportion to their Gentile neighbours 
at the ratio of three to one. Well might the eloquent 
Michael Beers, in his “ Appeal to the Justice of Kings,” 
make use of the following language : 

“ Braving all kinds of torments—the pangs of death, 
and still more terrible pangs of life—we have with- 
stood the impetuous storm of time, sweeping indiscri- 
minately in its course, nations, religions, and countries. 
What has become of those celebrated empires whose 
very name still excites our admiration by the idea of 
splendid greatness attached to them, and whose power 
embraced the whole surface of the known globe? They 
are only remembered as monuments of the vanity of 
human greatness. Rome and Greece are no more; 
their descendants, mixed with other nations, have lost 
even the traces of their origin; while a population of a 
few millions of men so often subjugated, stands the test 

"Or “Hep! Hep!” which is an abbreviation formed from 


the three initial letters of this Latin phrase. The English corrup- 
tion of it is “ Hip ! Hip !” 


THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 115 


of revolving ages, and the fiery ordeal of eighteen 
centuries of persecution. We still preserve laws that 
were given to usin the first days of the world, in the 
infancy of nature. The last followers of a religion 
which had embraced the universe have disappeared 
these eighteen centuries, and our temples are still stand- 
ing. We alone have been spared by the indiscriminating 
hand of time, like a column left standing amid the 
wreck of worlds and the ruins of nature. The history 
of our people connects present times with the first ages 
of the world, by the testimony it bears to the existence 
of those early periods. It begins at the cradle of man- 
kind; it is likely to be preserved to the very day of 
universal destruction.” 1 

The sorrows of Israel and the hatred of the nations is 
yet, as we have already seen, to reach a climax, when 
the cry of the confederated armies under the leadership 
of anti-Christ, will be: “ Come, let us destroy them from 
being a nation, that the name of Israel be no more in 
remembrance ”—one more blow and the Jewish nation 
will be no more ; but even then the answer of the saved 
remnant, the nucleus of the blessed nation, will be: 
“I shall not die but live, and declare the works of 
Jehovah.” Israel is indestructible. The bush may burn 
but can never be consumed, because the Angel of God’s 
Presence is in it. : 

And if we ask why this miraculous preservation ? 
the answer is given in the words, “And declare the 
works of Jehovah.” This was the purpose of God 
from the very beginning in the call and election of 
Israel. 

“This people,” He says, “have I formed for Myself; 


t These remarks are here transferred from my notes on the 
129th Psalm which appeared in The Scatlered Nation, October, 


1899. 


116 THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 


they shall show forth (or ‘declare’)! My praise” (Isa. 

xliii. 21). In a measure this has been fulfilled in the past, 
for it is through the lips of Jewish prophets and apostles 
that the wonderful “works” and the “praises” of 
Jehovah have been “declared” to the world; but in 
its fulness this prophecy will only be realised in the 
future, after the final deliverance and conversion of the 
nation. 

Now poor Israel is “dumb,” and the Church has taken 
his place as God’s witness to the world, with the result 
that, after an opportunity of two millenniums in which to 
evangelise the nations, about two-thirds of the human 
race have never heard of the precious name of our 
Redeemer. 

But wait till “the eyes” of blind Israel “shall be 
opened” to behold their glorious Messiah, and the 
tongue of the nationally dumb man is unloosed to sing 
His praises (Isa. xxxv. 5, 6)—then it will not be long 
before the earth shall be filled with the knowledge 
of the glory of Jehovah as the waters cover the sea. 
Not as though the Word of God has proved of none 
effect, for the number of God’s elect are being gathered, 
but it is reserved for repentant Israel in the future to 
“declare the works of Jehovah” on a scale and in a 
manner such as the world has not known before. 
“Beautiful upon the mountains” will be the feet of 
Jewish evangelists, with souls fired with love to the 
once despised Jesus, bringing “ good tidings,” publishing 
peace to the nations, who will name them “ priests of 
Jehovah and ministers of our God” (Isa. lxi. 6), and the 
result will be that “many peoples shall go and say, 
Come ye and let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, 
the house of the God of Jacob ; and He will teach us of 
His ways, and we will walk in His paths ; for out of Zion 


« The word is the same as in our psalm, 


THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 117 


shall go forth the law, and the word of Jehovah from 
Jerusalem.” í 

Continuing the retrospect of his national toy, 
Israel says :— 


“Jah hath chastened me sore, 
But hath not given me over unto death.” 


This is in agreement with the word of the Lord to 
them in Jeremiah xxx. 11: “ For I am with thee, saith 
Jehovah, to save thee; for I will make an end of all 
the nations whither I have scattered thee, but I will 
not make a full end of thee; but I will correct thee in 
measure, and not leave thee altogether unpunished.” 

“Sore” indeed have been the chastisements which 

God has sent upon Israel, and terrible the corrections, 
but He never has and never will give them over “unto 
death,” because He has sworn that as long as the sun 
and the moon endure, and the seasons continue, so long 
shall Israel abide “a nation before Him for ever” (Jer. 
xxxi. 35-37); and therefore, whenever they are in 
-special danger, and it seems as if there were no more 
help or deliverance, the covenant-keeping Jehovah 
appears on their behalf, and the mighty God of Jacob 
becomes their Refuge. 

The next three verses follow in beautiful sequence. 
It is the custom in Israel to this day for any man or 
community who has escaped some terrible danger to go 
in solemn procession to the synagogue, to recite a special 
form of thanksgiving to God; and this, in the day of 
their marvellous deliverance, will be done by the whole 
nation :— 


“ Open to me the gates of righteousness : 
I will enter into them that I may give thanks unto Jah :” 


118 THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 


And the response of those who receive the solemn pro- 
cession (probably the Levites) will be— 


“This is the gate of Jehovah.” 


“The righteous (or ‘the righteous nation, Isa. xxvi. 2) 
may enter there, which having done,” “all Israel” as one 
man will say— 


“I give thanks unto Thee, for Thou hast answered me, 
And art become my salvation.” 


A faint idea of what will then take place may be 
gathered from the following graphic and pathetic picture 
given by Motley of the thanksgiving service after one 
of the most famous sieges and wonderful deliverances 
in profane history. 

It was in 1574. For one hundred and thirty-one days 
the citizens of Leyden “had literally been living in the 
jaws of death.” Thousands and thousands of the popula- 
tion of the devoted city had died of famine and pestilence, 
and yet the survivors, with their noble Burgomaster 
Van der Werf, held out against the Spanish tyrant. 
At last, on an October morning, when there seemed 
no more hope of their holding out, the relieving flotilla 
which had been so wearisomely long in coming overland, 
flooded by the breaking of the dykes, at last arrived, 
helped on by a providential storm, which sent a panic 
among the besiegers, causing them to flee at the very 
moment when an extraordinary accident had laid bare 
a whole side of the city for their entrance. This is what 
followed after the starving crowd, looking more like 
ghosts than men, had eagerly snatched at the bread 
which was thrown to them on to the quays from the 
ships. “The Admiral, stepping ashore, was welcomed by 
the magistracy, and a solemn procession was immediately 


THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 119 


formed. Magistrates and citizens, wild Zealanders, 
emaciated burgher guards, sailors, soldiers, women, 
children—nearly every living person within the walls— 
all repaired without delay to the great church, stout 
Admiral Boisot leading the way. The starving and 
heroic city, which had been so firm in its resistance to 
an earthly king, now bent itself in humble gratitude 
before the King of kings. After prayers, the whole 
vast congregation joined in the thanksgiving hymn. 
Thousands of voices raised the song, but few were able 
to carry it to its conclusion, for the universal emotion, 
deepened by the music, became too full for utterance. 
The hymn was abruptly suspended, while the multitude 
wept like children.” 

So it will be with the spared remnant of Israel in 
the day of their final national deliverance, when in 
solemn procession they enter through “the gates of 
righteousness” to “give thanks unto Jah.” They too 
will mingle weeping and “ confessions” with their 
thanksgiving, for “in that day there shall be a 
great mourning in Jerusalem as the mourning of 
Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon. And the 
whole land shall mourn... every family apart and 
their wives apart” (Zech. xii.). 

But the great comforter will be in their midst, and 
“as him whom his mother comforteth, so.will He com- 
fort them, and they shall be comforted in Jerusalem,” 
so that the note of praise will predominate, and the 
Hallel will then be sung as never before in their 
whole history. 

We now come to the passage in this psalm which is 
the most familiar and most often quoted, but the full 
significance of which can never be fully understood if 
taken away from its context. It is, indeed, a most pre- 
cious jewel in itself, but it is the striking setting of 


120 THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 


it which enhances its beauty and manifests its full 
brilliancy. 


“ The stone which the builders refused 

_Is become the head stone of the corner: 
This is the Lord’s doing, 
It is marvellous in our eyes.” 


That it is a glorious Messianic prophecy, of the suffer- 
ings of Christ and the glory that should follow, no one 
to whom the authority of our Saviour is worth anything 
can doubt, for He more than once uses and applies it 
to Himself. 

During the last three or four days before His cruci- 
fixion, His mind seemed specially to dwell on this climax 
of the Hallel, as we may judge from the solemn way in 
which he uses it in His last prophetic words to the 
Jewish nation (Matt. xxi. 42; xxiii. 39); and on the 
night on which He was betrayed, as He led His disciples 
in singing this “hymn” or psalm (Matt. xxvi. 30) in the 
upper room where He celebrated the Passover with them 
for the last time, we may be permitted reverently to 
imagine the thrill that went through His human soul on 
- reaching these words, just as He was girding Himself to 
go forth to Gethsemane and Calvary for the joy that 
was set before Him, to endure the cross, despising the 
shame. 

But, I repeat, it is only in the light of the full context 
of the prophetic drama unfolded in this psalm that this 
passage can be understood. It is one of Israel’s thank- 
ful “confessions” summing up their whole attitude to 
their Messiah—from His first appearance in humiliation, 
to His second advent in glory 

According to a tradition, the figure employed in this 
ode, the groundwork of this short but comprehensive 
parable, was an actual occurrence, a real historical trans- . 


THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 121 


action, which was well known to them at that time. 
In connection with the building of the Temple by 
Solomon, we read in 1 Kings vi. 7: “And the house 
when it was in building was built of stone made ready 
before it was brought thither; so that there was neither 
hammer, nor axe, nor any tool of iron heard in the house 
while it was in building.” For a long time it was 
generally supposed that the huge blocks -of stone as 
well as the timber for the Temple were brought from 
Phenicia, until the discovery in 1852 of the vast sub- 
terranean quarries, which in one direction alone stretch 
213 yards in a straight line beneath the city of 
Jerusalem. 

I shall never forget my rambles there one night, 
accompanied by a small party of friends well provided 
with torches. On the sides are still seen niches for the 
lamps of the quarry men, and traces of their work look- 
ing almost as fresh as if they had been done yesterday, 
though the hands that made them have crumbled to 
dust. probably three thousand years ago. Here and 
there the rocky ground on which Jerusalem stands above 
is supported by huge pillars. The process of quarrying 
in those days was by water power, the blocks being 
separated from the rock by means of wooden wedges 
which were driven in, and wetted so as to cause them 
to swell. j 

We came to oné place which we named the workshop 
—a huge hall strewn with chips and rock-dust. Here, 
most probably, in this subterranean place, every stone 
of the Temple “ was made ready before it was brought 
thither,” and prepared and marked for the position it 
was to occupy in the building above. The object lesson 
learned in those midnight hours is still fresh in my heart. 
I thought that it beautifully illustrated the process in 
connection with the spiritual Temple which is now being 


122 THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 


built “for an habitation of God through the Spirit.” 
Now is the quarrying time—the breaking away of the 
“living stones” from the hard rock of “this present evil 
world.” Then there is the blow of the hammer, and the 
cutting of the sharp “tool of iron,’ which sometimes 
enters our very soul; and the unpleasant painful 
gratings of the polishing instrument. But we may be 
sure that the great Master Worker, who has us in hand, 
gives not one unnecessary blow with the hammer, or 
one needless cut with the chisel, “for He doth not afflict 
willingly, nor grieve the children of men.” 1 

In view of the fact that “the sufferings of this present 
time” are designed by Him to fit us for the position we 
are to occupy in that Temple of which it is written that 
“every wit of it uttereth His glory,” 2 we would rather, 
by His grace, not forego any part of the necessary 
preparation however painful the process, remembering 
that our “light affliction which (compared with the 
eternity of blessedness) is but for a moment, worketh for 
us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.” 

But to return to the tradition in reference to the 
Headstone of the corner, which is as follows, In 
planning and preparing the stones in this subter- 
ranean workshop, one was marked to occupy this 
crowning position, but “the builders,” when they were 
actually putting the structure of the Temple together 
on Mount Moriah, and came to the point when the | 
crowning stone should be put on which should give the 
building the look of finish and completion, looked upon 
it, and regarding it as too insignificant for this place of 
honour, “refused” or literally “despised” it. They 
took up one stone after another which they thought 
more worthy of this commanding position, but they did 
not fit. At last driven by necessity, or by Divine inter- 


* Lam. iii. 33, margin. 2 Psa, xxix. 9. 


THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 123 


position, they after all took up the stone with the mark 
on, and placed it there, and lo ! it fitted beautifully, and 
they sang: “The stone which the builders rejected is 
after all become the Headstone of the corner, This is 
the Lord’s doing ; it is marvellous in our eyes.” 

Now this probable actual occurrence in connection 
with the building of the Temple, the Spirit of God 
makes use of in this prophetic drama as emblematic of 
Israel’s attitude in relation to their Messiah. Already 
from “the days of eternity,” our Lord Jesus was ap- 
pointed to be Israel’s head and crown of glory, and 
“ Him hath God the Father sealed,” as the rightful King 
of Zion, from the day of His birth in time. 

But when He was manifested to Israel, and when 
they should have welcomed Him with shouts of joyous 
acclamation, the “ builders” — those pharisaic and 
sadducean priests and lawyers who looked for earthly 
pomp and grandeur of which they saw none in Christ— 
“despised” Him, and said, “ We will not have this man 
to rule over us,” and the words of Isaiah have been 
literally fulfilled: “He was despised and rejected of 
‘men; a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief; and 
as one from whom men hide their face, He was despised, 
and we esteemed Him not.” 

Since then Israel has tried to substitute others in 
His place, and has been innumerable times deceived by 
false messiahs and prophets; but just as in the individual 
heart there is a place which only He can fill, so also 
does the Jewish “ House” (Matt. xxiii. 38) remain “deso- 
late” and forsaken ever since they rejected Him. 

But this terrible unnatural antagonism to Christ on 
the part of “His own” nation, will not last for ever. 
Oh, there is a day coming when the eyes of “the blind 
shall be opened,” and Israel shall recognise that He is 
just the very One whom they have needed, and for 


124 THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 


whom they have been waiting through the ages, and 
with lowly and contrite hearts will hail Him as their 
King and Redeemer. Then, in a sense more glorious 
than in connection with the building of the Temple, they 
will sing : ; 
“The stone which the builders despised, 

Is become the Headstone of the corner ; 

This is Jehovah’s doing, 

It is marvellous in our eyes,” 


Yes, then the mystery of Israel will at last be solved, 
and it will be seen that the whole thing was of Jehovah 
—that even their guilty unbelief and rejection of Him 
was overruled to the enrichment of the Gentiles, and 
the consequent temporary “casting away of them” to 
the “reconciling of the world.” Then the great Joseph 
will say to His brethren: “But as for you, ye thought 
evil against me; but God meant it unto good, to bring 
to pass as it is this day, to save much people alive.” 
The joyous song continues : 


“This is the day which Jehovah hath made ; 
We will rejoice and be glad in it.” 


Not the Sabbath, or Lord’s Day, is here meant, in 
which sense the passage is sometimes quoted, but the 
great Day of Israel’s national deliverance and conversion 
so full of momentous issues to the world—the day of 
joy which will succeed their present long night of dark- 
ness and sorrow—the day appointed by Jehovah, in 
which the nation “shall be born” into true spiritual 
life, and rejoice and be glad in their long rejected 
Messiah, “with joy unspeakable and full of glory.” 

The drama is drawing to a close, amid the shouts of 
“Hosanna” to the Son of David on the part of the 
saved remnant of Israel, and their reverent salutation to 
the long absent King. 


THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 125 


“Save now, we beseech Thee, O Jehovah (or 
“ Hosanna,” which is a contraction of the two Hebrew 
words used): O Jehovah, we beseech Thee send now 
prosperity. Blessed is He that cometh in the Name 
of Jehovah.” The meaning of which prayer is: Oh, let 
Thy people “now” at last enter into the spiritual 
“salvation,” and the whole land into the outward 
“prosperity ” which Thou hast long promised to charac- 
terise the blessed reign of Messiah over His people 
Israel. 

That the Jews generally at the time of Christ 
regarded this part of the Hallel as Messianic, is proved 
by the spontaneous manner in which they used it at 
His. Triumphal entry into the city, when “the multi- 
tudes that went before, and that followed, cried, saying, 
Hosanna to the.Son of David! 


“ Blessed is He that cometh in the Name of the Lord: 
Hosanna in the highest !” 


But, alas! the true glory and spiritual significance of 
Messiah’s person and work were then “hid” from the mass 
of Israel. It is probable that only three or four days later, 
when their expectations that He would now at last reveal 
Himself in His true character as Deliverer from the 
Roman yoke, and establish an outward visible kingdom 
were finally dashed to the ground, by His arrest and 
mock trials before the Jewish and Roman tribunals, 
some of the very crowds who thus hailed Him as the 
Son of David, cried with the priests and lawyers, “Let 
Him be crucified !” 

Christ Himself, although it was necessary to allow 
this public homage as a sign and pledge of the time 
when He shall appear in His glory as Israel’s true King, 
knew that He was going up to Jerusalem this time, not 


126 THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 


to be received and acclaimed as the expected Deliverer, 
but to be officially rejected. Three times over on His 
last journey He had warned His disciples as to what 
was awaiting Him: 

“ Behold, we go up to Jerusalem ; and the Son of Man 
shall be betrayed unto the chief priests, and unto the 
scribes, and they shall condemn Him to death; and 
_ shall deliver Him to the Gentiles to mock, and to- 
scourge, and to crucify Him; and the third day He 
shall rise again.” 

Therefore it was, that during this so-called triumphal 
entry, as the procession was descending the western 
brow of the Mount of Olives, that as “He beheld the 
city He wept over it, saying, If thou hadst known, even 
thou, in this thy day, the things which belong unto 
peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes” (Luke 
xix. 41-44). 

The people might cry “Hosanna! Blessed be. the 
Kingdom of our father David that cometh in the Name 
of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest!” (Mark xi. 
9-10); but He knew full well that “the Kingdom” they 
were expecting was not like the one He then came to 
inaugurate, and that before that part of the Hallel 
could be fulfilled the stone must first be despised by the 
“ builders,” and Israel must in consequence be left for a 
long time in desolation and sorrow, until, in brokenness 
of heart, they return and “seek Jehovah their God and 
David their King.” 

Anyhow, it is clear that our Lord applied the words 
used by the triumphal procession from this part of the 
Hallel to a time yet future, for in His solemn words of 
farewell to the Jewish nation, uttered subsequently to 
His public entrance, after pouring out His heart’s pity 
in the memorable lamentation—‘O Jerusalem, Jeru- 
salem, .. . how often would I have gathered thy 


THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 127 


children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens 
under her wings, and ye would not! Behold, your 
house is left unto you desolate”—He adds, “For I 
say unto you, ye shall not see Me henceforth until 
ye shall say, Blessed is He that cometh in the Name of 
the Lord” (Matt. xxiii. 37-39). 

It is noteworthy that while the Hallel as a whole was 
the great song of praise at all the three great festivals, 
the Hosanna verses were especially associated not 
with the Passover, but with the Feast of Tabernacles. 
On the seventh day—called “ Hoshanna-rabba,” the 
great Hosanna—“ that great” and most solemn day in 
this festival, a procession of priests was formed to the 
pool of Siloah, to draw water in a golden pitcher to be 
poured as a sacred libation on the altar—the vessel 
containing it being borne aloft to be seen by all.? 
The joyous crowds of worshippers on that day, seen 
from one of the flat roofs of Jerusalem overlooking the 
Temple area, would resemble a forest in motion, for all 
carried palm branches in their hands which were more 
than a man’s height in length. Willow branches also 
surrounded the high altar and drooped their green ends 
over the smoking surface of the fire which had been 
kindled for the morning sacrifice. Great silence would 
fall on the assembled throng as the choir of Levites 
commenced to sing the Hallel, to each lirie of which 
the people had to respond with “Hallelujah.” Soon 
the whole crowd fell into order, and, led by the 
priests, marched in procession round the altar. Seven 
times they encompassed it. As the singers reached 
these verses and joined in the words, “Ana Adonai 
Hoschio-na!” (“ Hosanna!—make Thy salvation now 
manifest, O Lord”), “Ana Adonai Hatzlicha-na!” 


* See “Israels Hosannah,” by Professor Gustaf Dalman, in 
No. 14 of The Scattered Nation. 


128 THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 


(“O Lord, send now prosperity !”), the people waved 
their palm branches and accompanied the song with 
loud exclamations of joy. And as they reached the 
words, “Blessed is He that cometh in the Name of 
Jehovah,” the godly and spiritual among them would in 
their hearts greet the coming Messiah and King to 
whom they well knew that these words applied. 

Now of the sacred calendar of the history of redemp- 
tion prefigured in the “Feasts of the Lord,” which 
Israel was called to celebrate, the Passover has been 
fulfilled, the Feast of Pentecost is fulfilling itself 
throughout this dispensation, but the Feast of Taber- 
nacles, the last in the cycle, which celebrated the 
completion of the harvest and the ingathering of the 
vintage, will not be fulfilled until after Israel’s great 
national Day of Atonement, which will take place when 
they look upon Him who was pierced and mourn, is 
passed. 

Then when the number of God’s elect from all the 
nations in this dispensation is complete, when the times 
of the Gentiles shall be fulfilled, when the long-absent 
Master shall return to the now “desolate” house of 
Israel, when Israel’s unbelief and consequent sorrows 
shall be ended, and the “Stone” once despised shall at 
last be exalted by them to be the “ Head stone of the 
corner”—it is then that the Hosanna will at last be 
sung to the Blessed One who cometh in the name of 
Jehovah, and that “salvation” and “ prosperity” shall 
at last come to Israel and to the world. 

After the joyous and solemn acclamation of their King 
by the multitude, a voice proceeds from the’ Temple, 
“We have blessed you out of the house of Jehovah.” 
This is supposed to be the voice of the priests or 
Levites from within the Temple, uttering benediction 
on the assembled multitudes without; which is pro- 


THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 129 


bable, but in its fullest sense it may be regarded as 
the voice of saved Israel, who, immediately they them- 
selves enter into blessing, will begin to bless the nations, 
by whom they shall be called “the priests of Jehovah; 
ministers of our God.” 

Yet once again, before the curtain finally falls on this 
prophetic drama, we hear the shout of happy Israel, and 
this time they acclaim their Deliverer not only as coming 
“in the name of Jehovah,” but as Jehovah Himself. 

The twenty-seventh verse reads literally thus :— 


“ El (the Mighty One) is Jehovah, 
And He hath shined upon us!” 


“Great is the mystery of Godliness, God manifest in 
the flesh!” “The Son of David,” in whose Epiphany 
or “shining forth” (compare Titus ii. 11) the nation now 
rejoices, is “the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ,” 
the brightness of the Father’s glory and the express 
image of His Person, and overwhelmed with the 
visible display of His Divine power and glory, long 
doubting Israel bow their knees at last before Him, 
crying like Thomas of old, My Lord and my God— 
“Thou art my God, and I will give thanks unto Thee ; 
Thou art my God, and I will exalt Thee!” 

I have left out part of the twenty-seventh verse, which 
needs explanation. They are the words :— 


“ Bind the sacrifice with cords, 
Even up to the horns of the altar.” 


The word “chag,” primarily meaning “feast,” and 

here translated “sacrifice,” describes the special sac- 

rificial offerings at the great feasts, and the word in 

the original translated “unto” cannot mean “on” or 

“to,” but “up to” or “until,” “the horns of the altar” ; 
10 


130 THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 


the explanation of the idiom being that there was so 
vast a number of sacrificial offerings on those festivals, 
that “the whole space of the court of the priests was 
full of them, and the binding of them consequently had 
to go on as far as to the horns of the altar.” 1 

But it may be asked, How does this fit in with the 
sequence of events in connection with Israel’s future ? 
Is there to be a restoration of a sacrificial ritual after 
the one great offering on Calvary and after the glorious 
Epiphany of Christ? 

The answer must be that there is no other consistent 
or satisfactory explanation of the last eight chapters of 
Ezekiel, and many passages in the other prophets and 
the Psalms, except on the supposition that some of the 
divinely appointed feasts and a modified form of the 
sacrificial ritual will, for a time at any rate, be restored 
in the millennial dispensation as ordinances of com- 
memoration. It is a difficult subject, I admit, one on 
which even the most spiritual must speak with dif- 
fidence and pray for more light, but the following 
considerations may be suggested :— 


t Dr. Andrew Bonar, in “Christ and the Church in the Book 
of Psalms,” has a very ingenious rendering and explanation of 
this verse, He translates :— 


“ Bind the sacrifice with strong cords! ` 
Let us away to the horns of the altar !” 


And adds, “The last line is peculiar, for ‘to the horns’ can 
scarcely be connected with the verb to bind in the sense of hold 
fast the victim till you reach the horns of the altar. 

“The word ‘ad’ (up to, or until) is rather a particle of locality. 
In Lam. iii. 40 it occurs thus, ‘Let us search and try our ways; 
and let us return (let us go) to the Lord!’ And so we take it 
here, The restored and grateful people are hastening to bring 
their offerings of praise to their God and King, stimulating one 
another’s zeal; ‘Sursum Corda!’ to the altar! to the altar! 
whose horns hold up to view the blood of sacrifice,” 


THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 131 


I. The sacrifices and all the divinely appointed ob- 
servances were types, that is pictures of Christ and His 
one perfect offering ; but is it not possible for a type to 
point backward as well as onward? The ordinance of 
the Lord’s Supper points backward to the cross, and 
onward to His coming in glory, 

II. Israel as a nation has never yet understood the 
typical character of the sacrificial ritual, and “to this 
day when Moses is read this veil is on their hearts.” 
Nevertheless, when as a nation “they shall turn to the 
Lord ” the veil shall be taken away, and in the light of 
the full knowledge of Christ they will go back to these 
types in order to keep before them the all-sufficiency 
and perfection of the great Antitype, who will not be 
always present with them on earth, but with the Church 
in the heavenly Jerusalem. 

III. Jerusalem during the millennium will be the 
school where representatives from all the nations will 
go up to be taught in the ways of the Lord; and it 
is beautiful to contemplate how by means of a divinely 
appointed ritual and sacrificial system converted Israel 
will realistically set forth to the whole world the atoning 
work of their glorious Messiah. That a sacrificial ritual 
has no place in the present dispensation is clear from 
the Epistle to the Hebrews and other New Testament 
scriptures. Those who endeavour to introduce into the 
Church a sacrificial ritual and a priesthood distinct from 
the great assembly of God’s redeemed people, are either 
going back to the “ weak and beggarly elements” of the 
law, and are two thousand years behind time, or they 
anticipate the millennium, when such a priesthood will 
again be introduced. In either case the system is out 
of time and out of place, for even the millennium can 
present no parallel to the Church of this dispensation, 
Then God will deal with nations as nations, but the 


132 .THE CONCLUSION OF THE HALLEL 


. Church of this dispensation is an election of individuals 
from all peoples. Among the millennial nations there 
will be differences and distinctions even as regard their 
relationship to God; thus not only will Israel be the 
priests of the Lord to the other nations, but even Egypt 
and Assyria, &c., are to occupy positions different from 
the rest of mankind (Isa. xix. 24, 25), while it is the 
peculiar glory of the Church that in that holy congrega- 
tion, composed of individuals of every nationality, “there 
is no difference,” for there is neither Jew nor Greek, 
there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor 
female ; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus” (Rom. x. 12; 
Gal. iii. 28; 1 Cor. xii. 13). The home, calling, and 
blessings of Israel and the other nations in the mil- 
lennium will be earthly, and there will be a priesthood 
to correspond with such a state of things; but ours is a 
heavenly calling, and our peculiar blessings are spiritual 
in heavenly places in Christ Jesus (Eph. i. 3, ii. 6; 
Phil. iii. 20; Col. iii. 1-6). But to return to the last 
two lines of the Hallel. It ends as it began, forming a 
complete circle of praise, and it leaves happy Israel 
calling upon the nations to magnify Jehovah with them 
and to exalt His name together :— 


“ O give thanks unto Jehovah for He is good ; 
For His mercy endureth for ever !” 


PART II 


THE MODERN JEW 


\ 


A BIRD’S-EYE VIEW OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 


Numbers and Distribution of the Jewish People 


HE subject of Jewish statistics is a very difficult 

one, for in some parts of the world where they 
are scattered, it is almost impossible to obtain exact 
data as to their actual numbers. 

From earliest times in their national history, the Jews 
have had a religious aversion to being systematically 
counted, and in modern times, especially in countries 
where they are only “aliens,” with scarcely any civil 
rights, and where the forced military service without 
any chance for a Jew of rising above the ranks is 
greatly hated, the ancient superstitious feeling against 
registration is strengthened by the desire to save as 
many of their sons as possible from military bondage, 
or themselves from the extortions and persecutions of 
corrupt officials. 

That the difficulty is a very ancient and continuous 
one may be gathered from the conflicting figures which 
are handed down to us by contemporaries of different 
periods of their history since the destruction of their 
Temple, and the desolation of their land, by the legions 
of Vespasian and Titus. Take, for instance, the number 


given of those who left Spain to commence their 
135 


136 A BIRD'S-EYE VIEW OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 


unparalleled and woeful experiences after the cruel edict 
of expulsion, which was signed by Ferdinand and 
Isabella at Granada in March, 1492. Zurita reckons 
their number at 170,000; Cardoso at 120,000; Abar- 
banel, the Jew, who was Minister of State in the 
Spanish Court at the time, in the Preface to his 
Commentary to the Book of Kings, puts them down 
at 300,000; while Miguel de Barrais and Mariana give 
us as high a figure as ae ay Now all these were 
contemporaries. 

In an old history of Poland it is related that King 
Sigismund Augustus (1548-1572), alarmed at the fact 
that the Jews were increasing so rapidly in his kingdom, 
and also desiring to replenish his empty coffers, deter- 
mined on subjecting them to a capitation tax, from 
which, at a florin per head, he calculated on receiving 
about 200,000 florins. His surprise and that of his 
court, however, was very great, on finding that the 
registration roll did not contain more than about 17,000 
names. Of course scarcely a tenth of their actual 
number was returned by the Jews. Sigismund com- 
plained of this to his friend, the Bishop of Cracow, a 
prelate remarkable for the fact that in his superstitious 
age he did not believe in magic. “ Bishop,” said the 
king, “you, who do not believe in magic, or that the 
Evil One has anything to do with human affairs, tell 
me, I beseech you, how the Jews who yesterday were 
200,000, have to-day, that a capitation tax is wanted, 
been able to conceal themselves so as to count scarcely 
17,000?” The bishop is said to have replied that his 
Majesty must be aware that the Jews are clever enough 
for anything without requiring the help of the devil; 
but if he had been less prejudiced he might have told 
him that if he had tried the same process of persecution 
and extortion on his Orthodox Catholic subjects, he 


A BIRD'S-EYE VIEW OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 137 


would have found them equally clever in concealing 
themselves, with or without the help of the devil. I 
only mention these instances as illustrations of the 
difficulty connected with the subject of Jewish statistics. 

The tables in the footnotes are taken from “The 
Jewish Year Book” for 1899-1900, a fairly reliable 
work, edited by Mr. Joseph Jacobs, who bases his 
calculations on a statistical article by I. Loeb in “ Dict. 
de Géographie,” 1879.1 

Some of the figures are obviously below the actual 
number, and the totals put down for Africa and Asia 


ought, according to my estimation, to be .at least 
doubled. 


* For the sake of comparison I give here also Professor Gustaf H. 
Dalman’s figures in his “ Kurzgefasstes Handbuch Der Mission 
Unter Israel,’ published Berlin, 1893, which are based on Pro- 
fessor Juraschek’s “ Geographisch-Statistischen Tabellen über alle 
Lander der Erde,” compared with the “Annuaire des Archives 
Israélite” for 1886-1891. Professor Dalman’s tables are as 
follows :— 

(a) Europe: Austro-Hungary, 1,652,000; Belgium, 5,000; 
Bulgaria, 24,000; Denmark, 4,000; Germany, 579,000; France, 
80,000; Greece, 6,000; Great Britain, 60,000; Italy, 45,000; 
Luxemburg, 850; Netherlands, 90,100 ; Portugal, 300 ; Roumania, 
400,000 ; Russia, 3,236,000 ; Sweden, 3,800 ; Switzerland, 8,800; 
Servia, 4,400 ; Spain, 6,900 ; Paes in Europe, 94,600. Total 
number of Jews in Europe, 6,301,550. 

(b) Asia: Afghanistan, 14,000; British India, 26,000; Persia, 
19,000; Russian-Asia, 40,000; Turkish Possessions, 195,000 ; 
Palestine, 50,000. Total number of Jews in Asia, 294,000. 

(c) Africa: Abyssinia, 200,000 ; Egypt, 8,000 : Algeria, 48,500 ; 
Morocco, 200,000 ; Tripoli, 6,000; Tunis, 45,000. Total number 
in Africa, 507,500. 

(d) America: British North America, 2,500 ; Dutch Possessions, 
2,700 ; Central and South America, 50,000; United States, 300,000. 
Total number in America, 356,200. 

(e) Australia and Polynesia : 16,000 Jews. 

Professor Dalman estimates the total number of Jews in the 
whole world between seven and half and eight millions, but his 
figures are in many cases below the actual number, 


138 A BIRD’S-EYE VIEW OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 


At the end of these tables, however, Mr. Jacobs says, 
“There are probably eleven millions of Jews existing in 
the world at this present time” (1898). 


Fews in Europe. 


Country. 1881. 1891. 
Austro-Hungary s.e s.e 1,643,708 snese 1,860,106 
BYAFA e ods cc Eene amo 3,000 
Denmarkies -ataa G a 4,080 
England, ic: me me e 60,000* ...... 101,189 
IRIE Gaye sc. sod de 63 000 eaea 72,000 
Germany s.an aeee ee aes Me OL OTS ented 567,884 
Greece ma a e aes 2052 R 5,792 
Holand aet Ea aTe 81,603 uaeceras 97,324 
keba on oo a 40430 Wmeiest oe ~ 50,000% 
Luxembourg. e Gish Se 1,000* 
Norway 5g cop s: 34 senses 
Portugal Pecsa ea a i ZOO eere ° 300 
Roumania car acct: Teen? OS OOO UE eae 300,000* 
FRUSSIA ese) ao ao on 520045 oo 4,500,000* 
Servia ga ! Goo tone ae BY osacos 4,052 
Spain Oo» Gis: tng. 6 T5002) RR 2,500* 
SHC miam. Gna conn | coo CHOCB! goo a 3,402 
Switzerland M. ae: eGR S 8,069 
Turkey 55 coo. 006, Hc TL5, 0008 Eeee 120,000% 

Total ... 5,408,957 7,701,206 


* Estimated numbers. 
+ M. Loeb omitted 1,000,000 in Poland, 1881. 


Fews in Asia (after I. Loeb). 
Turkey im Asian ess ascites ese nT 50,000 
IRVIN Pook odd!) sot doo. oso. acy uno Sones 
RUSSIA: in Asias eoe aeae sees connec 7, OUKS 
Turkestan, Afghanistan mo coh co, EEE 
India and China. se.. sa eea too) mace) T0000 


260,000 


1 In “The Jewish Year Book” for 1900-1901, edited by Rev. 
Isidore Harris, M.A., other tables are given, but the totals are 
about the same. The new editor adds: “ The Jewish population 
of the world at the present time can hardly be less than eleven 
millions, and in all likelihood it is in excess of that number, 


A BIRD'S-EYE VIEW OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 139 


Personally, I believe that the actual number cannot 
be much under ¢welve millions. 

Note this remarkable fact: Less than two hundred 
years ago the historian Basnage, who devoted much 
time and careful labour to this subject, estimated that 
the number of Jews had in his day, after centuries of 
untold sufferings, dispersions, and massacres, been 


Fews in Africa (after I. Loeb). 


Egypt ee -es BA INN ae 8,000 
Abyssinia, Fellashas tse see ose see 50,000 
Mapo ns ost, | AAT can) "oS iG taco sad 100000 
Tunis ce av Rog. Gen . coo cdaee | Gee) 
Algeria and eaters Gre de oto, tea 43500 
Morocco ... n Sa beets LOG;OOO: 
*Cape of Good Hope coo Waco. sos AE 1,500 

318,000 

Fews in America. 

EUe States stan oe) ee ee seek eee (750,000 
Canada eter 2 tho. re” e asa ed Kod 7,000 
Bones hoe nd sodas Bt. cha Loc 3,000 
South America esa Ta ae aea oss, 12,000 

772,000 


Fews in Australasia. 
PRMISiLal asic, ae arene mea Eee esse LG) 208 


Fews in the World. 


URODE Ceo asa. csc yi cess nsi ae ose 17701,2600 
Asia e docs son EO y Sarpenece 260,000 
wipte E Ee E a lace) EOE 
America Pon On: cop aio! ron ea 772000 
PNEISUGALASIA geek lech aso aR veces ses 15,268 

9,066,534 


* There are now probably some 20,000 in South Africa. 

2In 1882 a statistical inquiry established that there were 
250,000 Jews in the United States. Between that date and 1891 
380,000 were added by immigration, not to mention the natural 
increase. 


140 A BIRD’'S-EYE VIEW OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 


reduced to about 3,000,000! in fulfilment of the 
inspired prediction, that among the nations where they 
would be scattered, in case of apostacy from God, they 
would become “ few in number ” (Deut. iv. 27). 

But in less than two centuries they have multiplied 
again fourfold. 

This rapid increase, which has been specially notice- 
able since their so-called emancipation in this nine- 
teenth century, is a great puzzle to statisticians and 
statesmen who study the Jewish Question apart from 
Holy Scripture. 

The following is from a recent work which must be 
described as anti-Jewish in its tendency and un- 
satisfactory in many respects, except for some of 
its statistical information :— 

“The first complete census of the Russian Empire 
was taken in February, 1897. The figures are not yet 
complete, but the Central Statistical Commission of the 
Minister of the Interior annually publishes figures of the 
rate of increase of the Russian population which de- 
monstrate the overwhelming importance of the Jewish 
Question to the ruler and people of Russia. In most of 
the text-books published on the subject of the Jewish 
population in the world the number of Jews in Russia 
is greatly underrated. 

“The late Sir Robert Morier, G.C.B., as British 
Ambassador for many years at St. Petersburg, gave 
great attention to the subject. In 1891 he was of 
“ opinion that the Jewish population in Russia was 
about 5,250,000, the figures being arrived at by the 
statistics of birth-rate, death-rate, and conscription. 
The totals of the deaths, births, and marriages of the 


* See his “ History of the Jews from Jesus Christ to the Present 
Time.” English translation by Theo. Taylor, published London, 
1708, chap. xxxiv., pp. 744-748. 


A BIRD'S-EYE VIEW OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 141 


various religions in European Russia supply the abso- 
lute data. These figures have been elaborated by Mr. 
E. J. Dillon. The figures of the birth- and death- 
rates, when compared, establish the ratio between the 
two. For every 100 Russian Jews who died during the 
decade ending 1892, the number born was 171'42. The 
number of Orthodox Christians per cent. born in Russia 
during the same period was only 13814 per cent. 
This fecundity of the Jewish race is attributable to the 
universal practice of marriage, and to the phenomenally 
low death-rate ; 407 Orthodox Russian infants died out 
of every thousand. Only 232 Jewish children died. 
But these figures do not really indicate the rapidity 
with which the Jewish population is growing. Military 
service is immensely unpopular among the Jews, and 
they resort to many devices in order to free their sons 
from liability to serve in the army. One method is the 
concealment of the births of their children, and the 
number of Jews is therefore greater, and the death- 
rate is therefore lower than the official statistics actually 
show. 

“This relatively small death-rate of the Jews is 
noticeable, not only in Russia, but. also in New York 
and Roumania. The Jews form but one-fifth of the urban 
population of Roumania, but they contribute no less than 
63 per cent. of the entire annual increase, whereas the 
Orthodox Christians, who amount to 72 per cent. of the 
inhabitants of the towns and cities, contribute no more 
than 39°9 per cent. to the total increase. Both in 
Russia and Roumania the Jewish element is better 
fitted for the struggle for existence than any of the 
Christian sects. The devotion bestowed by Jewish 
parents on their children, the respect and tenderness 
paid to women during the critical events of their family 
life, enable the Jewish element in Poland to increase 


142 A BIRD’S-EYE VIEW OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 


twice as rapidly as the Christian sects. One-third of the 
population of Warsaw is Jewish, but the Hebrew increase 
is equal to that of the Christians, who form two-thirds 
of the population. The more Jews there are in a city 
the smaller the death-rate among the children. In 
Warsaw the Jews are one-third of the population, and 
the death-rate of 1,000 children during the first year of 
their lives is only 187. In Moscow, where the Jews are 
only 2 per cent., the death-rate of infants is 391. 

“The Russian people, with the exception of the Jews, 
have the highest birth-rate and the highest death-rate of 
all the peoples of Europe. Of all the races and religious 
faiths professed in Russia the Jewish element is the most 
fruitful. 

“In the cities and towns of the sixteen provinces 
which constitute the Jewish Pale, the Israelitish increase 
is four times more rapid than that of their Christian 
fellow-subjects. Their net annual increase amounts to 
71'4 as compared with that of all the Christian de- 
nominations, which is only 17 souls, Their annual 
increase appears to amount to 80,000 a year, a rate 
which will continue to increase in the absence of pesti- 
lence, famine, or extermination.” 1 

The rapid increase of the Jews at the present day is a 
most significant sign of the times. The only parallel to 
it is to be found in the history of the last days of their 
sojourn in Egypt, in reference to which we read that 
“the more they afflicted them the more they multi- 
plied and grew.” The same God who caused them 
to multiply so marvellously after centuries of cruel 
bondage, just before the deliverance from Egypt, is 
repeating the miracle now that the time is drawing 
nigh for the “dayspring from on high” once again to 
visit them. Anyhow, it is a powerful reminder to all 

7 “The Modern Jew,” by Arnold White. 


A BIRD’S-EYE VIEW OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 143 


intelligent observers, even apart from prophecy, that the 
Jewish nation is not dead, nor is it likely to become 
defunct from exhausted vitality. 

The perplexity of some even Christian people on 
witnessing the revival of the Jewish nationality is very 
natural, because they can find no place for a revived 
literal Israel in their political or theological programmes, 
The attitude of such Christians in relation to the Jews 
has been humorously illustrated by that prominent 
Jewish witness for Christ, the late Joseph Rabinowitch, 
in the following story: During the last Russo-Turkish 
war, after a great battle, a certain number of men in a 
particular regiment were returned in the list as dead, 
and an officer with a company of soldiers were com- 
missioned to attend to the sad duty of seeing them 
decently buried, While engaged in this task they came 
across a poor man who was badly wounded, and left on 
the field for dead, but who had life enough in him 
to refuse to be buried. But the amusing part of the 
business was that the officer in command seemed very 
much perplexed. He asked the poor man’s name, 
looked at his list, and then said, “ Well, I do not know 
what to do with you; in my list you are put down as 
dead.” This, Mr. Rabinowitch said, is the attitude of 
many Christians in relation to the Jew. In their 
political and religious creeds the Jews as a nation are 
put down as dead, and even many true Christians, when 
reading in the Scriptures the exceeding great and 
precious promises which God made to Israel, say, “Oh 
yes, /srae/—that is a nation that once lived, but died 
some nineteen centuries ago, when they rejected Christ, 
and now ‘Israel’ means no longer Israel, but the Church 
which has entered into their inheritance.” But Israel, 
though seriously wounded, is not dead, and refuses to be 
buried ; and the remarkable signs of vitality which as a 


144 A BIRD’S-EYE VIEW OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 


people they are now manifesting, are in themselves 
sufficient to show that they are not merely a nation of 
the past, but pre-eminently the nation of the future. 

In reference to their distribution, there is this re- 
markable fact to be noted—that although scattered 
over the whole surface of the globe, in fulfilment of 
the Word of God, “Lo, I will command and I will 
sift (or toss) the house of Israel among all nations, like 
as corn is sifted in a sieve,” yet the great du/k—more than 
two-thirds of the entire nation—have for many centuries 
past been located in Europe, and more especially in 
Central and South-Eastern Europe. Thus in the two 
great empires of Austria and Russia alone there are at 
least six and a half million of the Diaspora. Is ita mere 
coincidence that God, who has foreordained the course 
of Israel’s wanderings, has in His providence arranged 
it so that the bulk of the nation should, during all these 
centuries, have been sojourners in that part of the world 
where the name of Jesus of Nazareth, the rejection of 
whom brought about their banishment, is at least 
nominally professed? I humbly believe that God had 
a design in it. Israel, even in unbelief, is God’s witness, 
and He intended that they should be a continual object- 
lesson and a reminder to the so-called Christian nations 
that “they also, if they abide not in His goodness, shall 
be cut off” (Rom. xi. 22). 

Then what a splendid opportunity was given to 
Christendom by the preaching of the gospel, and the 
exhibition of the power of Christ in their life, to pro- 
voke Israel to a holy emulation, and to make them feel 
that they have committed a grievous mistake in reject- 
ing their own Messiah and King, in whom the Gentiles 
have found life and salvation! But alas! Christendom, 
instead of being able to impress the Jew with the attrac- 
tiveness of Christ, and the transforming power of His 


A BIRD'S-EYE VIEW OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 145 


gospel, has, on account of its idolatries and cruelties, 
proved a great repellent force and stumbling-block to 
the Dispersion in their midst. In one of his last 
addresses on the Jewish Question, the late Dr. Adolph 
Saphir pointed out the sad fact that, instead of the pro- 
fessing Church proving itself a power in the conversion 
of the Jews, it, from a very early period of its history, 
became corrupted by the great errors of Rabbinism. 
The two outstanding errors of modern Judaism are 
these: They have perverted and made of none effect 
the Word of God by their traditions, which they have 
exalted to an almost higher place than the Scriptures ; 
and secondly, being ignorant of the righteousness of 
God, they set about seeking to establish their own 
righteousness. 

Now these are also the two outstanding errors of 
Christendom. There is a Christian as well as a 
Jewish Talmud, and Christendom also, since it lost 
the understanding of Scripture, has departed from the 
simplicity of the gospel, and has substituted for it 
a system of salvation by works, which is not different 
from Rabbinism. 


II 


II 


THE GENERAL CONDITION OF THE JEWS AT 
THE CLOSE OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY 
FROM A JEWISH POINT OF VIEW 


ee ee ae a ee OL ee 


II 


THE GENERAL CONDITION OF THE JEWS AT THE 
CLOSE OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY FROM 
A JEWISH POINT OF VIEW 


HE following comprehensive survey was given 

by Dr. Max Nordau, at the first Zionist Con- 

gress in Basle, in August, 1897. It has been translated 

by Mrs. Baron, from a special report in German. The 
footnotes are mine. 

“ This picture might almost be tinted as a monochrome, 
for wherever Jews are dwelling in any number among 
the nations, there Jewish misery prevails. This misery 
is not that of mere common poverty, which, according 
to the unchanging lot of earth, is ever our unfailing 
companion. It is a peculiar misery which befalls the 
Jews, not as men, but as Jews, and from which they 
would not suffer were they not Jews. Jewish distress 
is of two kinds, physical and moral. 

“In Eastern Europe, in North Africa, in Western Asia, 
exactly in those lands where the overwhelming majority 
of Jews, probably nine-tenths: of them dwell, Jewish 
misery is to be understood literally. It is a daily 
physical oppression, a terror of the day to follow, a 
torturous struggle to support a bare existence. In 


Western Europe the battle of life is of late somewhat 
149 


130 GENERAL CONDITION OF THE JEWS AT THE 


easier, although indications are not lacking to show that 
even here it may become more severe. But still, for the 
time being the question of food and shelter, of safety 
of body and life, is less anxious. Here the misery is 
of a moral description, and consists in daily mortifica- 
tion of self-respect and sense of honour, in the rough 
suppression of their effort to attain complete mental 
rest and satisfaction which none who is not a Jew 
need deny himself. 

“In Russia, where the Jewish population is over five 
millions, and which is the home of more than half of the 
Jewish race, our brethren are subject to many legal 
restraints. Only a small Jewish sect, the Karaites, 
enjoys the same privileges as the Christian subjects 
of the Czar. To the rest of the Jews residence in 
a number of the provinces is prohibited. Freedom of 
movement is only enjoyed by certain classes of Jews, 
such as merchants of the first guild, possessors of aca- 
demical titles, and so forth. But in order to belong to 
the first guild,a man must be rich, and there are few 


* This estimate of the number of Jews in the world, given at 
the first Zionist Congress in August, 1897, is considerably below 
the actual figure. At the fourth Congress in London in August, 
1900, Dr. Nordau in a speech corrected his estimate in the fol- 
lowing passage : “ When we began to preach Zionism, and to try 
to win followers and supporters for that movement, the wiseacres 
of our nation always urged the politico-anthropological argument, 
‘You speak of the Jewish nation ; there is no such thing ; Israel 
is not a nation.’ We admit that as regards Western Jewry... 
that in those there is not left the slightest trace of Jewish national 
feeling, so speaking from their own sentiment they are right 
to deny the existence of a Jewish nation. But how many Fews 
are therein the world? According to the latest statistics, we muster 
about 12,000,000. Out of that number, perhaps, 300,000 have lost 
the national feeling. But the 11,700,000 who remain feel so con- 
vinced that they are a nation, that they would simply burst out 


into roars of laughter were anybody to seriously contend that 
they are not a nation.” 


CLOSE OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY- 151 


Russian Jews indeed who are rich; and also very few 
are the Russian Jews who can obtain an academical 
title, for the State, middle, and high schools admit but 
a very limited number of Jewish students, and foreign 
diplomas are not recognised by the law. To Jews in 
Russia many trades are closed which are free to all 
Russians, These unhappy ones are packed together 
in a few provinces where no opportunity is permitted 
them to exercise their talents and to prove their cap- 
abilities by lawful means. Education as provided by the 
State is very little accessible to them ; schools of their 
own they cannot provide, they are too poor for that. 
Whoever can leaves the land to seek abroad the oppor- 
tunities which are denied to him at home; he who is not 
sufficiently young and courageous for this, remains in 
his misery and pines away intellectually, morally, 
physically. 

“Of Roumania, with its quarter of a million Jews, we 
learn that our brethren there are also without rights. 
They are only permitted to live in towns, and are at 
the mercy of every whim of the civil authorities, and 
even of the lower officials, and from time to time they 
suffer terribly from the bloodthirsty mob, and are in the 
worst possible circumstances.t Our Roumanian informant 
places the number of Roumanian Jews who are entirely 
without means of support at one-half of the Jewish 
population. 

“Horrible are the conditions which our reporter from 
Galicia reveals to us. Of the 772,000 Jews of Galicia, 

* Since then the condition of things in Roumania has become 
still less tolerable, and the year 1go0 has witnessed the sad and 
pathetic spectacle of a tremendous exodus of Jews from that 
Balkan State which has the unenviable fame of being the most 
anti-Jewish in Europe. Hundreds of these Roumanian refugees 


have wandered across the whole of Europe on foot, from the 
Black Sea to the North Sea, some of them dying by the way. 


152 GENERAL CONDITION OF THE JEWS AT THE 


Dr. Salz estimates that 70 per cent. are literally beggars 
by profession, who ask alms mostly without receiving 
them. 

“Of Western Austria, with its 400,000 Jews, Dr. 
Mintz informs us that of 25,000 Jewish householders 
in Vienna, 15,000, on account of poverty, cannot be 
assessed at all for Jewish communal purposes, Of 
the 10,000 who are so assessed, 90 per cent, have 
only the lowest possible tax laid upon them, and of this 
category of the lowest assessed, three-quarters are un- 
equal to fulfil their obligation. The written law in 
Austria, unlike that of Russia and Roumania, knows no 
difference between Jew and Christian. But the public 
authorities boldly treat the law as a dead letter, and 
custom recreates the Jewish ban, which the law had 
abolished. : The sentiment of society which is inimical 
to the Jew makes it exceedingly difficult for him to make 
a living, and in the near future this will become wholly 
impossible. 

“The same cry of distress greets us from Bulgaria. 
Again we find a hypocritical law which recognises no 
difference of privilege on account of difference of 
creed, but which is set aside by the authorities; again 
an enmity in all circles which everywhere repulses the 
Jews; again misery and wretchedness, with no ‘hope of 
improvement. 

“In Hungary the Jews make no complaint. They 
enjoy full rights of citizenship, can work and trade 
freely, and their condition continually improves. It is 
true that this happy state of things has not lasted 
sufficiently long for the majority of the Jews in Hun- 
gary to have worked their way out of the deepest 
poverty and attained to even a commencement of 
comfort. And we are assured by observers of the 
times that in Hungary also hatred of the Jew begins 


CLOSE OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY 153 


to make its appearance, which may break out destruc- 
tively at the first opportunity. 

“The 150,000 Jews of Morocco, and the Jews of Persia, 
whose number is unknown to me, I must leave out of 
count. Those whose plight is most miserable are power- 
less even to resist their wretchedness. They bear it with 
a dull endurance, and do not complain or attract our 
notice except when the rabble storms their Ghetto, 
plundering, abusing, and murdering. 

“The lands of which I have made mention determine 
the lot of over seven millions of Jews, and, with the 
exception of Hungary, they all oppress the Jew, and 
official and social disfavour reduce him to a condition 
of wretchedness and professional beggary, without pos- 
sible hope either by personal or united effort of being 
able to rise a single grade in the social scale. Those 
‘practical’ people who will have nothing whatever to 
do with useless visions, and direct all their effort to 
the seemingly attainable, imagine that the cessation 
of legal oppression would terminate the woes of the 
Jews in Eastern Europe. Galicia is itself a contradic- 
tion of this view; and not Galicia only, for salvation 
by means of legal emancipation has been attempted in 
all the higher civilised states. Let us see what the 
experiment teaches. : 

“The Jews of Western Europe suffer from no legal 
restrictions. They are free to go and come and develop 
their resources in the same way as their Christian 
compatriots. The social consequences of such free- 
dom ought without doubt to be the most favourable. 
Diligence, endurance, sobriety, and thrift, which are 
characteristics of the Jews, quickly brought about an 
amendment of their extreme poverty, which in many 


* The actual number of Jews in Morocco is at least 200,000. 


154 GENERAL CONDITION OF THE JEWS AT THE 


lands would be entirely at an end were it not for Jewish 
immigration from the East. 

“The emancipated Jews of the past succeeded in a 
fairly short time in attaining to a measure of prosperity ; 
at any rate, the struggle for daily bread does not assume 
such dreadful forms as have been described in Russia, 
Roumania, and Galicia. But among these the second 
phase of Jewish misery appears, ze, the moral. 

“The Jew of the West has daily bread—but man does 
not live by bread alone. The Western Jew no longer 
finds his body and life endangered by the mob, but 
wounds of the flesh are not the only ones which give 
pain, and of which one may bleed to death. 

“The Western Jew looked on emancipation as truly 
effecting his deliverance, and hastened to draw from it 
all possible inferences. The nations let him know that 
he was mistaken in being so ingeniously logical. The 
law magnanimously established the theory of equality. 
Government and society so practised this equality as to - 
make it a mockery, corresponding to the appointment of 
Sancho Panza to the brilliant post of viceroy of the 
island Barataria. The Jew naively remarks, “I am a 
man, and to me no man is a stranger.” The answer 
returned is, “Softly; your manhood is matter for cir- 
cumspection ; you lack a right sense of honour, the sense 
of duty, of morality, love of Fatherland, and love of 
the ideal. On account of this we must withhold our- 
selves from dealings with you which presuppose these 
qualities.” None have ever attempted to substantially 
prove these accusations. At the most, now and again 
some individual Jew, an outcast from his race, and a 
reproach to humanity, has been triumphantly pointed 
out as a sample of Jewish character. But this is in 
accordance with a well-known law of psychology. 

“It is the usual practice of the human conscience to 


CLOSE OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY ~ 155 


seek some apparently reasonable foundation for the 
prejudices which have stirred up its passions, Folk-lore 
has long recognised this law of psychology, and has 
intentionally embodied it in expressive form. 

“The proverb runs thus: ‘If a man wants to drown a 
dog, he says it is mad. All manner of crimes are 
imputed to the Jews because their enemies would justify 
themselves in their abhorrence of the Jew. 

“I must give utterance to the painful truth: the nations 
who have emancipated the Jews have been self-deceived 
as to their true sentiments. In order for the emancipa- 
tion to have been complete it must have been perfected 
in goodwill ere ever it found expressioninlaw. But this 
was not the case. The opposite was the case. The 
history of Jewish emancipation is one of the most 
remarkable chapters in the history of European thought. 
It is not come of the perception that a race has been 
shamefully sinned against, and that it is high time to 
atone for a thousand years of injustice ; it is simply the 
outcome of the straight-ruled geometrical manner of 
thought of French rationalism of the eighteenth century. 
This rationalism was simply bare logic without the 
slightest reference to living sensibility; its principles 
were of the certainty of a mathematical axiom, and 
consisted in efforts to realise these visions of pure 
reason and to make them of account in the world. 
“Sooner let the colonies perish than one principle of 
reason,” was the well-known cry, which shows the effect 
of rationalism on politics, 

“The philosophy of Rousseau and the encyclopzdists 
had led to the Declaration of the Rights of Man. From 
the Declaration of the Rights of Man, the inflexible 
logic of the men of the great Revolution had led on to 
Jewish emancipation. They established a legalised 
equality. To every man by nature certain rights belong ; 


156 GENERAL CONDITION OF THE JEWS AT THE 


Jews are men; it follows that they have human rights: 
And so the equal right of the Jew was proclaimed in 
France, and this from no sentiment of brotherly feeling 
for the Jew, but because logic required that it should be. 
Popular sentiment was against it, but the philosophy of 
the Revolution commanded that principle should rule’ 
over sentiment. Forgive me the expression which is free 
from any ingratitude, the men of 1792 emancipated the 
Jews purely from chivalry of principle. 

“The rest of Western Europe imitated the example 
of France, again, not from the force of sentiment, 
but because the civilised nations experienced a kind 
of moral obligation to make the attainments of the 
great Revolution their own. As France at the great 
Revolution gave to the world the metrical system of 
weights and measures, so it created also a kind of 
intellectual measure, which was willingly or unwillingly 
accepted by the other lands as the normal standard of 
civilisation. 

“ A state which laid claim toa high grade of civilisation — 
must necessarily have accepted some of the reforms of 
the great Revolution, such as representation of the 
people, freedom of the press, trial by jury, division of 
power, and so forth. Jewish emancipation became one 
of the indispensable signs of a highly civilised state, 
something like the piano which on no account must be 
missing in the drawing-room, though no single member 
of the family can play it. Thus in Eastern Europe 
Jewish emancipation came to pass not from heart com- 
pulsion, but merely in imitation of a fashion of the 
period ; not because the nations had resolved to extend 
the hand of brotherhood to the Jew, but because the 
leading spirits had recognised a certain European ideal 
of civilisation which required that their statutes should 
embrace Jewish emancipation, 


CLOSE OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY ~ 157 


“One land only remained uninfluenced by European 
thought, and this land was England. The English nation 
does not endure that important changes should be im- 
posed upon it from without; it develops them from 
within. In England Jewish emancipation is a reality— 
it is not merely decreed, but it is experienced. Long 
before it had become law it was perfected in the con- 
science of the nation. Without doubt a great and 
thoughtful nation will not be diverted from its course 
whether good or evil by any intellectual tendency of the 
time, and so it comes to pass that in England there are 
still individual instances of anti-Semitism. But then it 
is but an imitation of an old-world fashion re-dressed in 
modern foppish garb, giving itself out as the latest 
novelty from abroad and as something worthy of note. 
The account given by Mr. de Haas in his interesting 
report on the condition of the Jews in England is the 
most comforting in detail of all which will be laid before 
you. 

“Emancipation has wrought a complete change in the 
character of the Jew and made an entirely different 
man of him. 

“In pre-emancipation times the Jew without rights 
was an alien among the nations, but he never for a 
moment thought of resenting this. He felt -himself to 
belong to a peculiar people who had nothing in common 
with the races of the lands in which they dwelt. He did 
not love the prescribed yellow badge on his mantle which 
proclaimed his nationality, because it excited the mob to 
treat him with violence, and justified their excesses in 
advance to the magistrates; but of his own will he 
accentuated his peculiarity far more than the yellow 
badge could ever have done for him. When he was not 
confined in Ghetto walls by the civil authorities he made 
himself a Ghetto. He desired to dwell with his own, 


158 GENERAL CONDITION OF THE JEWS AT THE 


and to have none other than business connection with 
the Christian people of the lands. 

“ To-day there is a suggestion of disgrace and humilia- 
tion in the word Ghetto, but whatever may have been its 
sense in the intention of the nations, it is not difficult to 
perceive that to the Jew of the past the Ghetto was no 
prison but a place of refuge. It expresses an historical 
truth to say that the Ghetto alone gave a chance to the 
Jew of surviving the horrible persecutions of the Middle 
Ages. Here he lived in a world of his own, where he 
dwelt apart, and which mentally and morally was his 
Fatherland. Here there dwelt also those for whose good 
esteem he cared, and with whom he could be of account; 
here also was that public opinion whose approval was 
the aim of his ambition and whose contempt or disfavour 
was the punishment of unworthiness. Here all virtues 
peculiarly Jewish were appreciated, and more especially 
by their development was that admiration to be attained 
which is the eager desire of the human heart. What did 
it matter to them that outside the Ghetto men despised 
what they valued so much. They cared nothing for 
the opinion of those outside, for it was. the opinion 
of ignorant foes, The Jew strove to please his own 
people, and the approval of these brethren was to 
him the whole sum of life. And thus the life of the 
Ghetto Jew was not stunted or crippled, but whole. 
Their condition outside the Ghetto was insecure, often 
seriously endangered, but within they developed their 
own peculiar life and thought, and there was nothing 
incomplete about them. They were harmonious beings 
in whom none of the usual elements of ordinary social 
life were wanting. The Jews were painfully aware of 
the value of the Ghetto as regards their religious life, 
and their one care was to compass it about with an 
invisible wall far higher and more impenetrable than the 


CLOSE OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY— 159 


stone walls which met the eye. All Jewish customs and 
practices were unconsciously directed to this one object 
of keeping the Jews distinct from the other peoples, to 
cherish the Jewish community, and to keep continually 
before the individual Jew the thought that to give up his 
distinctive peculiarities were to perish and be utterly 
lost. 

“The aim at enforced separation was the origin of 
most of the ritual laws, the observation of which was 
considered by the average Jew as equivalent to his 
religion, and other purely external and strange marks 
of difference, principally of garb, and personal appear- 
ance which are common among Jews, were, when first 
received, religiously imposed, in order the more surely 
to guard their isolation. The Kaftan, temple locks, fur 
caps, and jargon, have certainly nothing in common 
with religion, yet in the East if a Jew attire himself in 
Western habit, and speak any language correctly, he is 
regarded with mistrust, as already almost an apostate 
from the faith, for he has destroyed those links which 
united him to his race, and they are aware that these 
alone secure adherence to their community, apart from 
which the individual Jew must perish morally and 
spiritually beyond hope of recovery, 

“This was the pyschology of the Jew of the Ghetto. 
Then came emancipation. 

“ The law assured them that they were fully recognised 
citizens of the land of their birth. During its brief 
existence, it gave rise to expressions of sentiment from 
Christians, which gave the law a sound of hearty good- 
will, 

“ Intoxicated with joy, the Jew hastened to break all 
bridges behind him. He had now another home, and 
no longer needed the Ghetto; he had other associations, 
and needed no more to cling to the community of his 


160 GENERAL CONDITION OF THE JEWS AT THE 


own faith. He adjusted his life immediately to the new 
order of things. Formerly all his effort was directed 
towards maintaining the strictest separation, now he did 
his utmost to approach, and to be in outward seeming like 
his neighbours. Instead of finding his safety, as hereto- 
fore, in legal observance, he gave himself up to mimicry 
of his Gentile countrymen. For one or two generations, 
according to the land in which he dwelt, this worked 
exceedingly well. The Jew might believe himself 
German, French, Italian, &c., and drew all the require- 
ments of his life from the same national source as his 
Gentile compatriots, a thing indispensable for the all- 
round development of the individual. 

“ After a slumber of from thirty to sixty years anti- 
Semitism broke out afresh in the heart of the nations of 
Western Europe, revealing to the terrified Jew his actual 
position. He could still vote at the election of repre- 
sentatives of the people, but he found himself rudely 
excluded from all societies and assemblies of his — 
Christian countrymen. He could still go where he 
would, but everywhere he met the warning: “No 
entrance to the Jew.” He could still fulfil his duties 
as a citizen, but those privileges which are far more 
esteemed than the power to vote—the acknowledged 
rights of talent and ability—were unceremoniously denied 
to him. 

“ This is the present condition of the emancipated Jew 
of Western Europe. His Jewish separatism is lost, but 
the nations make it plain to him that they still hold 
aloof from him. He shuns his fellow-Jew, for anti- 
Semitism has made him sick of them; and his fellow- 
countrymen repulse him when he would be one with 
them. 

“He has lost his Ghetto home, and the land of his 
birth denies him a home, He has no ground beneath 


CLOSE OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY 161 


his feet, no claim on any society to which he can 
belong as a full privileged and welcome member. 
Neither his personality or his services give him any 
claim on the justice, not to say goodwill of his Christian 
countrymen, while he has lost cohesion with his Jewish 
compatriots. He feels that the world is cruel to him, 
that there is no place on earth where he can find 
true sympathy when he desires and longs for it. 

“This is Jewish suffering in its moral aspect, which is 
far more bitter to endure than the physical, because it 
touches men of finer calibre and greater pride. 

“The emancipated Jew is unstable, uncertain in his 
relations with other men; anxious in dealing with 
strangers, mistrustful even of the secret feelings of- 
friends. He misuses his best powers in the wearisome 
attempt to conceal his own proper being, for he fears to 
be known as a Jew, and has never the joy of confessing 
himself for what he is in truth, which every thought and 
sentiment, every tone of voice, and every gesture of eye 
or finger, proclaims him to be. He is crippled in soul ; 
his outer life is not genuine, and consequently he is 
ridiculous, and abhorrent to all right-minded people, 
as everything that is false must be. All the Jews of 
Western Europe groan under this burden, and seek 
relief or escape from it. They no longer hold that faith 
which gives patience to endure all trial because it 
recognises in it punishment from the hand of God who 
nevertheless loves them. They cherish no more the 
hope of the coming of Messiah, who should miraculously 
deliver and raise them to glory. Many seek to save 
themselves by forsaking Judaism, but anti-Semitism has 
no faith in the power of baptism to change the Jew, and 
even this hope of safety is but a poor one. Neither is 
it exactly recommendable that those whom it concerns 


should enter the Christian Church mostly still unbelievers 
I2 


162 GENERAL CONDITION OF THE JEWS AT THE 


at heart with a blasphemous lie upon their lips. Of the 
minority of true believers I say nothing. A new sect 
of Marranos has thus come into existence, of far worse 
character than the old, in whom there was a yearning 
after truth, heart-breaking pangs of conscience and 
repentance, which frequently led them to seek atone- 
ment and purification by giving themselves up delibe- 
rately and of their own free-will to the sufferings of 
martyrdom.? 

“The new Marranos take leave of Judaism in anger 
and exasperation, and at heart, unconsciously to them- 
selves, and to their own shame and humiliation, they 
carry over towards the Christian Church the hatred 
which impelled them to that lie. I dread the future 


z It is well that Dr. Nordau acknowledges that there is at 
least “a minority” among Jews who have become Christians 
from conviction. For the rest he may be assured that right- 
minded Protestant Christians deplore even more than he does, 
the fact that Jews should nominally profess Christianity for the 
sake of worldly advantage and be received into the Church with . 
minds unconvinced and hearts unsubdued to the gospel. Hypo- 
crisy is detestable, whether practised by Jew or Gentile. 

2 The Marranos were those who in Spain at the time of the 
Inquisition nominally adopted Christianity, but in their hearts 
remained Jews and hated the Romish system which compelled 
them to live a lie. Many of them afterwards escaped more 
particularly to Holland, where they threw off the mask and went 
to the other'extreme of Jewish fanaticism. Many of them were 
put to most cruel deaths by the Inquisition. Most of the Sep- 
hardi (or “ Spanish”) Jews in Holland and England.are descen- 
dants of Marranos. It is a sad fact that thousands of Jews, who, 
however, have long ceased to cherish the Hope of Israel— 
harassed by legal and social disabilities—are being baptized and 
received into the Greek and Roman Catholic communions, without 
a spark of faith in their hearts and without any real acquaintance 
with the doctrines of Christianity. This can be no matter of 
congratulation -to earnest-minded Christians, but rather of 
humiliation, that Churches which claim to be “Christian ” should 
have sunk so low as to be satisfied with such a mere outward 
adherence, 


CLOSE OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY 163 


development of this new sect of Marranos, whose mind 
is poisoned alike against those of its own blood and 
those who are not of kin, and whose self-esteem is 
disturbed by the consciousness of a lie at heart. Other 
Jews there are who anticipate relief from Zionism, 
which, to them, is no fulfilment of a mystic passage of 
Scripture, but the way to an existence in which the Jew 
at last shall acquire the right to enjoy these simplest 
original necessities of being which are matter of course 
to all men beside himself in both hemispheres, z.e. a 
secure social standing ; a kindly fellowship: the possi- 
bility of using his energies to develop his own proper 
being, instead of misusing them to his own suppression, 
falsification, or disguisement. 

“ Finally, there are other Jews who are indignant at 
the lies of the Marranos, but who are too much attached 
to the lands of their birth not to feel the renunciation 
which Zionism involves, as too hard and cruel for them 
to accept. 

“These madly throw themselves away with the hidden 
hope that in the remodelling which must follow the 
dissolution of the present order of things, hatred of the 
Jew may not be considered a commodity worth retain- 
ing. Such is the aspect which Israel presents at the 
close of the nineteenth century. 

“To put it in one word, the Jews in their majority are 
a race of despised beggars. More diligent and inventive 
than the generality of Europeans, not to speak of lazy 
Asiatics and Africans, the Jew is condemned to the 
direst poverty, since he is not permitted the free use 
of his abilities. Consumed with the fever of uncontrol- 
lable thirst for knowledge, wherever this knowledge is 
attainable to others, he finds himself repulsed, a very 
Tantalus of knowledge in our most matter-of-fact 
times. 


164 GENERAL CONDITION OF THE JEWS AT THE 


“ Gifted with enormous energy, by means of which 
he always rises from the miry depths into which he 
has been thrown, and in which his foes would fain bury 
him once for all, he dashes his skull against the impene- 
trable icy barrier of hatred and scorn which encompasses 
him. Essentially a social being, whose very religion 
recommends eating with three and praying in company 
with ten, as pleasing to God, he finds himself excluded 
from ordinary intercourse with his fellow-countrymen, 
and condemned to a tragic isolation. 

“One charge brought against the Jew is that he is 
ambitious. He, however, only strives for superiority 
because equality is denied him. He is reproached for 
his fellow-feeling with Jews the wide world over, but it 
is rather his misfortune that all Jewish solidarity ceased 
with the first sweet word of emancipation; that in 
order to make room for the sole sway of love of 
fatherland he tore the last rays of Jewish unity from 
his heart. 

“Dazed with the storm of anti-Semitic accusations, he 
is beside himself, and often nigh believing himself the 
physical and mental monster which his deadly enemies 
represent him to be. Not seldom do we hear him say 
that he must learn from his foes, and seek to cure 
himself of the evils which they point out, not considering 
that the reproaches of the anti-Semites can work him 
no good, since they are not the result of observation of 
actual characteristics, but come of the working out of a 
law of psychology by which children, savages, and fools 
make other beings or things responsible for their own 
sufferings, and visit ill-will upon them. At the time of 
the Black Death the Jews were accused of poisoning 
the wells ; to-day the corn merchants accuse them of 
beating down the price of grain; the artisans, of 
destroying small trades; and the Conservatives that 


CLOSE OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY 165 


they are in their principles opposed to a constitutional 
form of government. 

“Where no Jews exist, other associations, mostly 
foreigners, or even native minorities or societies, are 
accused of these evils. 

“Tn truth this hatred of the Jews proves nothing 
against the accused; it proves only that they were 
already hated when their enemies, in their misfortune, 
began to look about for a scapegoat. 

“This picture would be imperfect were I not to add 
another feature. A saying held to be true by grave and 
thoughtful men, not necessarily anti-Semites, is that the 
Jews possess all the riches of the earth, and have all 
power and rule in their hands. These unhappy ones 
the possessors of power! These who are not even ina 
position to protect their co-religionists against a miser- 
able rabble of Arabs, Moors, or Persians, who thirst for 
their blood! These Jews, the personification of Mam- 
mon, of whom by far the greater number own not even 
a stone whereon to lay their head, or rag to cover their 
nakedness! This is the mockery which drops poison 
into the wound which hatred has struck. True, there 
are some few Jews superfluously rich whose rumoured 
millions attract attention far and wide, but what has 
Israel to do with these? Most of them—a minority, I 
willingly except—belong to the lowest grades in Jewry, 
with a moral adaptation for callings in which millions 
are quickly made—ask me not how! 

“Tn an ordinary independent Jewish community such 
men could never rise to the esteem of their brethren, or 
receive from them titles of honour such as those with 
which they are decorated by Christian societies. 

“These money-pots, who despise what we honour and 
honour what we despise, know nothing of the Judaism 
of the prophets and the Tanaim; of Hillel, Philo, 


166 GENERAL CONDITION OF THE JEWS 


Ibn Gabirol, Jehuda Halevy, Ben Maimon, Spinoza, 
and Heine, 

“These Jews are the principal excuse for this new 
Jew-hatred, the causes of which are more economic than 
religious in their nature. For Judaism which suffers on 
their account, they have done nothing beyond throwing 
an alms which cost them nothing, and which keeps | 
alive the cancer of Schnorring from which Judaism 
suffers. For ideal purposes they have never stretched 
out a helping hand, nor ever will. 

“Many of them forsake Judaism, and we wish them 
good speed, only regretting that they are at all of 
Jewish blood, though but of the dregs, 

“No one should be indifferent to the suffering of the 
Jews, neither Christian nor Jew. It is a great sin to let 
a nation whose worst enemies do not deny that it is 
highly gifted to perish mentally and physically. It is. 
a sin against the nation, and a sin against civilisation 
in general, in whose service it would be no indifferent 
co-worker, 

“Tt may also become a grave danger to the nations to 
have embittered men of indomitable will, the weight of 
whose influence for good or evil is far above that of 
average men, and thus to render them opposed to the 
constituted order of things, 

“ Micro-biology tells us that there exist tiny organisms 
which are perfectly harmless, so long as they live in the 
open air, but become the cause of frightful disease when 
deprived of oxygen. 

“Governments and nations may well beware lest the 
Jews in like case become a cause of danger to them. 
Sorely may they have to repent any attempt to exter- 
minate the Jew, who, as a result of their own guilt, has 
become an occasion of hurt to them,” 


Ill 


THE RELIGIOUS CONDITION OF THE JEWS AND 
CAUSES OF JEWISH UNBELIEF IN CGHRIST, 
FROM A CHRISTIAN POINT OF VIEW 


r4 


II 


THE RELIGIOUS CONDITION. OF THE JEWS AND 
CAUSES OF JEWISH UNBELIEF IN CHRIST, FROM 
A CHRISTIAN POINT OF VIEW 


HAVE special pleasure in embodying in my bird’s- 

eye view of the Jewish nation the following able 

summary of their religious condition by my dear friend, 
Rev. C. A. Schönberger :— 


The present condition of the Jews is intimately 
connected with their past history, with the dealings of 
God, of the Lord Jesus, and of the Apostles with 
them, as narrated in the Old Testament Scriptures, 
the Gospels, the book of Acts, and the Epistles. All 
ended, as we know, in the judgment which ultimately 
came upon them in the destruction of Jerusalem and 
the Temple, and in their forced dispersion among all 
the nations of the earth, 

We know that Jesus was że Christ, the promised 
Messiah, that He came to His “own” and His own 
received Him not. How easy should it have been for 
them to receive Him, for He declared unto them the 
glad tidings of salvation. He brought to them she 
Julness of truth and grace of that God who had been 


previously declared to them by Moses and the Prophets, 
169 


l 


170 RELIGIOUS CONDITION OF THE JEWS AND 


He honoured the law, revealing its depth, and came not 
to destroy but to fulfil it. Asan Israelite He came to 
Israelites. As a Prophet He spake to them as to a 
people who had been educated and trained by Prophets. 
He did everything that superhuman wisdom and love 
could devise in order to win them to Himself, to gather 
them as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, 
but—they would not. He was “rejected and despised” 
by the very people whose “Crown and Glory” He was 
to be. Rejecting Him, they rejected Jehovah Himself, 
the counsel of God and eternal life. How can we 
understand this? What can be the true explanation? 
Well, it is this: their hearts were not right with God ; 
they had the form of godliness, but knew not, and 
denied the power thereof. They boasted of the 
Temple, and all the while their hearts did not thirst 
after true communion with the living God. They 
boasted of the predictions of a Messiah which were 
given to them, but they did not sigh with broken and 
contrite hearts after true redemption. They were 
zealous for the law of God without understanding the 
spirituality of that law, and instead of its leading them 
to humble themselves and lament their unworthiness, 
they rather boasted and prided themselves in the way 
in which they kept it: and thus it was that hardness as 
well as blindness of heart fell upon them, and that the 
judgment of God visited His own beloved nation. Zé ~ 
was a terrible visitation. No other nation has ever 
tasted the bitterness of the cup of the indignation of 
the Lord like Israel. The word of Amos became true 
to the letter—‘ You only have I known of all the 
families of the earth: therefore I will punish you for 
all your iniquities.” They were driven away from their 
beloved city, and having seen the Temple, the sanctuary 
of the Most High, in which the glory of the Lord was 


CAUSES OF JEWISH UNBELIEF IN CHRIST 171 


revealed, demolished, they wandered fugitives and exiles, 
till they were scattered over the whole earth, 

God’s judgment of Israel is the most terrible thing in 
history—yet they have been preserved to this very day 
through the power of that very God who punished them 
so terribly. Here they are—a monument of the truth 
of God’s Word—a monument, also, of God’s faithful- 
ness. None of the persecutions which they have 
endured have availed to destroy them, neither have 
they broken their energy or subdued their indomitable 
will, or crushed their power of mind; and no sooner 
was the great pressure which the nations—so-called 
Christian nations—put upon them, removed, than we 
see them prosper in every country, and take leading 
positions in every sphere of life, in commerce and 
politics, as well as in literature and art, showing that 
the Lord God has made them to be a peculiar people, 
a nation to be perpetuated, and that it was He who 
gave them nerve to endure, in order that in the future, 
when His grace shall melt their hearts, they may be a 
mighty instrument to show forth His praise. There is 
still visible among scattered Israel something of blessing 
and influence, the effect of God’s training through so 
many centuries. Their history since the rejection of 
Christ is unspeakably sad, yet we cannot help noticing 
that in the midst of Christless Israel some traces of the 
grandeur and beauty of their Father’s house still linger. 
Behold their zeal for God, their zeal for the Scriptures, 
their zeal for the Sabbath day; behold the sacrifices 
which they make in order to carry out the injunctions 
of the law. Yes, there are many features in the Jewish 
character which we cannot explain in any other way 
than this—that there is still a blessing resting on them, 
that the voice of God which was heard upon Sinai has 
still its echo in their hearts and consciences, and that 


a 
172 RELIGIOUS CONDITION OF THE JEWS AND 


the prayers which have been offered up on their behalf 
by patriarchs, kings, prophets and saints, are still held 
in remembrance before the throne of God. 

But when we look more closely at their religious 
condition, we find that without Jesus, who is both the 
centre of the Scriptures, and the key to open them, they 
are not able to understand che full and true meaning of 
the Scriptures. They reverence them, they have counted 
all the verses of the holy Book, and the exact number 
of its letters, and which is the middle verse and letter of 
each particular book of the Scriptures. They have 
watched over every iota and tittle of that record which 
they believe, and justly believe, was given them by God 
Himself. They hold in high esteem their Rabbis, who 
devote their lives to the study of the law and oracles of 
God ; and yet not knowing the centre and star of the 
Scriptures, not knowing that Jesus is the Messiah, not 
knowing the counsel of God, that through suffering He 
should enter into glory, they are not able to understand 
the scope of the Scriptures. All their minute knowledge 
of the letter does not help them. They cannot enter 
into the spirit of it. Both the Law and the Prophets 
must remain an enigma to them, for as the greater and 
more vital part of the law has vanished, as the Levitical 
dispensation has disappeared, as the Temple has been 
destroyed, as the sacrifices are no more offered, as the 
Priesthood, with its head, the High Priest, no more 
exists, oh! how impossible it is for them to account 
for the removal of things which God established, the 
discontinuance of those holy symbols which God Him- 
self instituted, and the absence of the glory. 

Israel at present is exactly in the same condition as 
their ancestors were in the wilderness, when Moses 
tarried in the mount and the people said, “We do not 
know what has become of this Moses,” and appealed to 


CAUSES OF JEWISH UNBELIEF IN CHRIST 173 


Aaron, “ Now go and make us gods, for gods we must 
have.” And so it is that Israel for the last eighteen 
centuries says “Moses” —the whole Levitical dis- 
pensation, has been taken from us, our Temple is 
destroyed, our sacrifices are no longer offered, our whole 
holy ritual is gone. What shall we do? We do not 
understand it. We must make some substitute for that 
which we have lost. We must invent something to take 
the place of these sacrifices. We must adopt some 
theory instead of the theory which God has given to us 
in His own Word. And thus it is that the Bible has 
become a sealed book to them. 

Look at the Law of Moses, of which they pride them- 
selves and boast to this very day. We know that that 
Law is so deep that it takes cognisance of the inmost 
secret springs of our life ; that it isso high that it aims 
at nothing less than love to God with all our heart, with 
all our soul, and with all our strength ; that it is so broad 
and comprehensive that it takes notice of all the details 
of our daily life, of our thoughts and hidden motives, as 
well as of our outward actions; that it is, indeed, che 
Law of God, divine and wonderful. But, alas! “the 
People of the Law” did not and do not understand its 
true meaning. Why was Jesus so delighted when that 
sctibe said to Him that to love God with all the heart 
and to love our neighbours as ourselves was the whole 
law? Why was the Saviour so pleased with him that 
He replied, “Thou art not far from the kingdom of 
God”? Why? Because it was a rare thing to find a 
man who in sincerity of heart and mind understood the 
drift of the Law, its true meaning and original purpose, 
and who was thus able to condense all the different 
precepts and injunctions into this, its real aim—love to 
God and to our neighbour. 

This had been and yet is the fatal error of Israel, that 


174 RELIGIOUS CONDITION OF THE JEWS AND 


instead of understanding the unity of the Law, they have 
regarded the Law as a compact which God made with 
them, in which He laid down a number of regulations ; 
and that if they observed so many of the 613 command- 
ments into which the scribes have divided it, they gave 
themselves credit for honouring it, forgetting that they 
could not break one commandment without breaking 
all, as it is so beautifully brought out in the Epistle of 
James—“ Do you not know that the Law is one?” Do 
you not know that the Law is like a body, like a living 
organism, and that if you break one commandment you 
break the whole Law? That if you transgress the will 
of God in one particular point you sin against God ? 
But Israel did not understand the unity of the Law, 
or its spirituality, and thus the purpose of the Law 
was not attained in them. What was the real purpose 
of the Law? The Law was not given that people 
should be saved by it, or feel comfortable under it. It 
was given to show people how utterly corrupt is the 
heart from which comes our outer life; to show people 
how exceedingly sinful sin is in the sight of God. It 
was not given for life, but for death, to bring people to 
despair about the depravity of their moral nature. In 
one word—it was given that the heart should be broken, 
and not that it should become proud. In that Pharisee 
who went into the Temple to pray, enumerating before 
God his good deeds, and thanking God that he was not 
like other people, we have a striking example of mis- 
conception of the Law. In that man and all like him, 
the object of the Law is frustrated. He thought he had 
a surplus of credit in his account with God. He came 
as one eminent, distinguished, superior to all others, who 
had only to thank God for his own excellences, This 
Pharisee so much misunderstood the meaning of the 
Law that he exactly answers to those Romanists who 


CAUSES OF JEWISH UNBELIEF IN CHRIST 175 


imagine that they can do more than both the Law and 
the Gospel require, and that their so-called saints have 
actually surpassed the requirements of God, and have 
thus accumulated merits beyond their own need, which 
may avail for others also. To such as these the Law in 
the one case, and the Gospel in the other, have become 
a cause of pride in the sight of God, instead of humility, 
and thus it is with the Jews to thisday. They are still 
going about to establish a righteousness of their own, 
through their own works and merits,and they do not 
know that there is only one true righteousness for 
sinners, even the righteousness of God for us. They 
have the Scriptures, yet are not able to understand 
them, seeing that the typical dispensation has dis- 
appeared without being fulfilled. They have the Law, 
but are not humbled by it, since it has not wrought in 
them knowledge and conviction of their sin. Oh! what 
a sad picture of Israel! The truth which God ever 
impressed upon Israel was that in themselves they had 
nothing but what was bad, but that He was their salva- 
tion, He and He alone. This is almost entirely hidden 
from their eyes. That one expression which runs 
through the whole of the Old Testament, “My 
righteousness,” is sealed to them; they do not under- 
stand it. “Jehovah Zidkenu” (Jehovah our righteous- 
ness) they do not know, their supposed own righteousness 
stands in the way ; they think that this is sufficient, and 
sometimes they think it more than sufficient. 

This misunderstanding of the law and the sad frustra- 
tion of its object, dates far back in the history of Israel. 
The prophets had to contend with those who either made 
the law void or made it merely external, and the false 
prophets and their followers did their best to blind the 
people to its unity and spirituality. Soon after the 
return from Babylon the scribes and teachers of the law 


176 RELIGIOUS CONDITION OF THE JEWS AND 


abounded, and in the course of time they acquired great 
power and influence—until at last we have those doctors 
of the law, the Pharisees and Scribes, who are pictured to 
us in the Gospels, and concerning whom Jesus said that 
they made the Word of God void through their traditions. 
Tradition! Why is it so dangerous? Because it is 
heaped upon the Word; because ultimately the Word 
of God becomes hidden by it, and lost sight of. They 
did not only corrupt the Word of God by their tra- 


ditions, but these theologians and teachers put them- 


selves between God and the people, drawing away the 
hearts of the people from God. And so it is that Israel 
is not only not able to understand the true meaning of 
the Scriptures, but is altogether misled by the traditions 
and additions of the elders, following much more their 
self-invented laws and regulations than the pure and 
God-ward teaching of the Word of the living God. 
This is just what Isaiah said: “O my people, they which 
lead thee cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy 
paths.” And again: “For the leaders of this people 
cause them to err; and they that are led of them are 
destroyed.” Just what Jesus said also: “ Blind leaders 
of the blind.” And again: “Your house shall be left 
unto you desolate.” 

The house is there, the foundations, the wail the 
chambers. Allis there; the name of Jehovah, the Ten 
Commandments, the Sabbath, Passover, Pentecost, the 
Day of Atonement, the Festival of Tabernacles. It is 
all there, but it is desolate! Æe is not there. His life- 
giving Spirit is not there. They celebrate the Passover, 
but where is the Lamb which God has ordained for Him- 
self as a sacrifice? They keep the Day of Atonement, 
but where is that blood without the shedding of which 
there is no remission of sin? They read the law of 
Moses, they peruse the words of the prophets, but a vail 


CAUSES OF JEWISH UNBELIEF IN CHRIST 177 


is on their hearts, they cannot see Him of whom Moses 
and the Prophets testify. They weep, they mourn and 
lament over the destruction of Jerusalem, but they have 
not yet acknowleged the one great national sin on 
account of which this evil has come upon them. 
Joseph’s brethren—as recently shown in the Zionist 
Congress at Basle—are in sore distress, but they have 
never yet confessed what they have done to their brother 
Joseph-Jesus. 

Oh, it is very sad! And well may we have continual 
sorrow in our hearts on account of Israel. But there 
is yet another aspect of Israel which is still more 
melancholy. They have not learned faith in Christ 
from Christians, but that which they žave taken in, is 
the unbelief of the so-called Christian world. The more 
educated Jews are well acquainted with everything that 
is said and written by nominal Christians and anti- 
Christians against Christ and Christianity. Masses of 
Jews all over the world speak now on this wise: “We 
do not see any miracles nowadays, so we do not believe 
that miracles have ever been. Moses, David, the 
Prophets, and Jesus were great men, wise men, men of 
great moral force and character. We respect, we honour 
them—but there has been great progress in everything 
since their day, and we are not bound to receive what 
they teach, especially as regards the supernatural.” <A 
considerable number of Jews in all lands are decidedly 
rationalistic and not a few of them are outspoken 
agnostics, who have renounced all the promises of God 
to their fathers and are sunk in utter worldliness. They 
say : “ Things remain as they were from the beginning: 
Where is the promise of the Messiah’s kingdom of 
righteousness and peace ?” 

Thus in proportion as the old-fashioned Talmudism 


lost its hold upon the minds of the Jews, the influences 
13 


178 RELIGIOUS CONDITION OF THE JEWS AND 


of rationalism and scepticism have wrought great havoc 
among them, leading to downright unbelief in all positive 
and revealed religion. There are now everywhere Jews 
to be found who believe in the Old Testament just as 
little as in the New. And yet they keep together. What 
power is it that holds them together? We know from 
the Word of God that it is God, the God of Israel, who 
keeps them together. Within the last twenty years the 
national consciousness of the Jews has been once more 
roused from its slumber, and now—as was lately shown 
at the Zionist Congress—it is more vigorous than ever 
before. They feel that they are a nation, and separate 
from the other nations. They feel they are still “a peculiar 
people,” though dispersed among so many nations, 
They feel something ofthe peculiar position which God 
has assigned to them in the world, although they do not 
know exactly what it is. Thus we have this strange and 
contradictory condition of things. 

On the one hand they seem to be falling away from 
their old faith, and on the other they are drawing more 
closely together, reviving their national feeling. «But 
Israel’s nationality is unlike all other nationalities. It is 
more than natural, there is something in zź which zs 
beyond nature. 

Verily “the dry and dead bones” of Wobders vision 
and “their coming together” were presented to us in that 
much spoken of Zionist Congress, but until the Spirit of 
the Lord breathe upon them there will be no life. Jesus, 
and Jesus alone, the “ Prince of Life,” the “ Living One,” 
can bring life to this nation. Zhe truth and mystery of 
Israel is Jesus. What Israel is without Him is manifest, 
what Israel shall be when it will see and acknowledge 
and adore Him is beyond human thought, but it 
is described with prophetic and apostolic pens in 
the Scriptures. ' Without Him they do not know the 


CAUSES OF JEWISH UNBELIEF IN CHRIST 179 


way of God, nor the truth of God, nor that life which 
is life indeed. 

Jesus is the Way: “No man cometh to the Father 
but by Me.” There is no other way. Jesus is zke Truth, 
the full and whole truth of God: “The law was given 
by Moses; grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.” And 
Jesus is Z7fe: “This is life eternal that they might 
know Thee, the only true God and Jesus Christ whom 
Thou hast sent.” Although the Jews have the law, 
they cannot come to God, because Jesus is the Way, 
Although they have the Old Testament, they do not 
know the truth, because Jesus is re Truth and Life! 
Until we come to see Jesus, until we come to the 
atonement He made for us, until we come to know the 
“Lamb of God,’ we do not know God the Father. 
Yes, there are sighs; there are misgivings; there are 
fears; there are mournings; there are longings, in the 
human heart towards God—but adoption and true 
spiritual life there is none, where Christ has not kindled 
it. Israel in its present state, the Christless Israel, shows 
this to the whole world. Notwithstanding the great 
activity and energy of the religious life of the Jews, they 
have—we say it with great sorrow—no life indeed—what 
they have is all carnal—and this accounts for the 
phenomena that they have not been of much spiritual 
use to the world since Christs coming. Jn Christ alone 
will Israel live again and be a blessing to the world. 


RELIGIOUS DIVISIONS AND SECTS AMONG THE 
JEWISH PEOPLE 


1V 


RELIGIOUS DIVISIONS AND SECTS AMONG THE 
JEWISH PEOPLE 


ELIGIOUSLY, the Jewish nation over the whole 
globe may be divided into four classes. Without 
attempting to describe, I may just enumerate them, as 
this may help to form a sound judgment on the question 
of Jewish evangelisation. 

(a) First, there are the ordinary Zalmudical or Con- 
servative Jews, embracing by far the largest part of the 
whole nation, and answering in many respects to the 
Pharisees in the days of Christ. Of most of these it may 
be said that they have a zeal for God, but not according 
to knowledge. They still cling toand are buoyed up in 
all times of persecution and suffering, by the hope of the 
speedy coming of the long looked-for Messiah, and a 
restoration to their own land. Their education is purely 
religious, or “Jewish.” It begins with the Hebrew 
alphabet, goes on to the Prayer-Book, and from that to 
the Hebrew Scriptures, and culminates with that 
“encyclopedia of human wisdom and human folly,” as 
Dean Milman has well styled the Talmud, in which the 
mental ingenuity of the Jew finds sufficient scope for all 
the rest of his life. 


Of this class of Jews, forming, as we have said, the 
183 


184 RELIGIOUS DIVISIONS AND SECTS 


bulk of the nation, it may truly be said that they are 
“a people dwelling alone and not reckoned among the 
nations,” of whose history, ways of thinking, and even 
language, they are ignorant. They move in a world of 
ideas of their own which are scarcely comprehensible to 
the ordinary Gentile. 

Like the Pharisees of old, they are often indiscrimi- 
nately condemned as hypocrites or fanatics; but the 
truth is that, as amongst the Pharisees in the days of 
Christ, so among the Talmudical Jews, there are many 
Nathanaels, of whom it may be said that they are 
“according to the law, blameless ”—men walking con- 
sistently according to the light they have, and whose 
lives are noble examples of religious zeal and unselfish- 
ness; though, alas! it is true also that the minds of 
most have been perverted and their sense of sin blunted 
by the traditions of men, so that they are vainly going 
about seeking to establish a righteousness of their own, 

(6) Next we have the famous sect of the Chassidim, 
which originated with that remarkable man Rabbi Israel 
Baalshem during the eighteenth century, and which has a 
following of perhaps three or four hundred thousand, with 
Galicia and Southern Russia as its strongholds. These 
have turned somewhat from the letter of Talmudism, and 
have gone in for the mysticism of the Kabbalah. They 
are ascetic in practice, and their particular tenets are 
“that purity and holiness, and not learning or knowledge 
of the Talmud, is the great requisite for obtaining a high 
spiritual life, and that the Holy Spirit operates still 
through certain chosen vehicles. called Zadikim 
(righteous ones), who are endowed with miraculous 
gifts, and who are particularly qualified to be media- 
tors. between God and their believing disciples.” To 
the Chassid, the Zadik, or miracle-working Rabbi, is 
the same as the Pope to the bigoted Roman Catholic. 


d 


AMONG THE JEWISH PEOPLE 185 


Many will sell all they have and undergo all sorts of 
privation in order to make a pilgrimage to the man 
whom they believe to stand in the nearest possible 
relationship to God. To get the Rabbi’s blessing is 
worth more to them than the whole world. 

There is nothing in a Chassid’s estimation which the 
Zadik cannot attain by his prayers, and many are the 
books which contain the records of the miracles which 
he works. As to his cabalistic wisdom, it is simply 
wonderful. j 

A story`is told of a number of Chassidim on their 
way to Zadagora, to visit the great Rabbi, who fell in 
with another party who were returning after having 
seen him. Those going interrogated the party re- 
turning, who expressed their admiration as follows:— 

“On Freitag zu nacht (commencement of Sabbath) 
the Rabbi preached! Oh, so wonderfully! Only the 
greatest saints present could understand what he said! 
On Sabbath morning, the Rabbi spoke again, and 
this time it was marvellous! He spoke so wonder- 
fully that not even the greatest saints present could 
understand him. Only he himself knew what he said! 
Again on Sabbath evening the Rabbi spoke, and truly 
this time it surpassed all in wonder, for no saint could 
understand, nezther could he understand himself what he 
said—God only could understand !” 

Awed and delighted with this description, proving the 
extraordinary sanctity of the man they were going to 
see, the interrogators pressed on their way. 

The Chassidic Jews hold the maxim that “ Sepipene 
is to be interpreted, not according to the letter, but 
according to the spirit,” around which has grown the 
huge pile of Cabalistic literature, much of which stands 
in the same relation to Judaism as the writings of 
Swedenborg to: Christianity. 


186 RELIGIOUS DIVISIONS AND SECTS 


The following extract from my journal of a visit to 
the Bukowina in 1898, when my companion, a Swedish 
missionary, and myself paid a visit to Zadagora, the 
seat of perhaps the most noted of the Jewish popes, 
may be of interest: “There are quite a number of 
‘Zadikim’ in Galicia and Russia, and while there is no 
doubt that some are downright impostors, who trade on 
the ignorant credulity of their devotees, there are others 
whose days and nights are wholly given over to religious 
and ascetic practices, and who are mistakenly seeking 
holiness and purity by a life of mere outward obser- 
vances. Among all these Zadikim the one in Zadagora 
has been perhaps the most famous, though in recent 
years, owing to a dispute among the brothers as to the 
succession, and owing to the fact that one of the sons of 
the late Zadik was suspected of being ‘ apikoress,’ or, as 
some say, a secret Christian, on which account he met 
an untimely end, the family has lost somewhat in 
prestige. But still the road from Czernowitz to 
Zadagora, especially on a Friday, or before a great 
festival, may be seen lined with vehicles carrying 
pilgrims to this Jewish pope, who lives like a king in 
a palace, while the town itself is one of the poorest and 
filthiest in Galicia. 

“Tt was about eleven o’clock when we arrived, and 
accompanied by Mr. Reichman, colporteur of the British 
and Foreign Bible Society in Czernowitz, who came 
with us, made our way first of all to the palace, and 
the splendid private synagogue of the Rabbi, which 
stands opposite to it. The Rabbi, we found on inquiry, 
was still at his morning prayers, all by himself in a room 
adjoining the synagogue, but we might see the eldest 
son and future Zadik in the Beth-hammedrash. But 
already before we entered, some in talith (praying- 
shawl) and phylacteries came to the threshold gazing 


AMONG THE JEWISH PEOPLE 187 


at the three strangers without peyoth (side-locks), which 
to the Chassid is a sure sign of apostasy. 

“Inside by a corner of the ‘Oren Kédesh’ (‘the 
ark of the law’), the Rabbis eldest son, and heir- 
apparent, in a fine talith, and extra large phylacteries, 
stood, screened off from the others, finishing his prayers; 
while the gabbai (his attendant) was at hand waiting to 
carry his praying-bag and escort him to his house. On 
a long table to one side were lying about volumes of the 
Talmud and Cabalistic works, and while looking at 
some of them a number of ‘saints’ gathered round to 
gaze at us. After a little the Schamess (beadle) came 
to tell us that the Rabbi would soon be going across 
from his praying-room to his palace, and that if we 
would stand by the entrance we could see him well. As 
to speaking with him, such a privilege is not granted to 
every one, and certainly not without an appointment, 
and a good deal of backsheesh to the Gabbaim, or body- 
guard, who are sometimes great rogues. 

“I happened to stand close to the side entrance of his 
private synagogue, when suddenly the door opened and 
the Zadik himself, a finely-built, tall man in silk kaftan, 
and with long beard and peyoth, walked out; as he 
passed me he steadily gazed at me for a moment, and 
then stopped and held out his hand, saying, ‘Schalom 
aleichem. I had just time to answer, ‘Schalom-al-yedai- 
sar-Ha-Schalom’ (‘Peace through the Prince of peace’), 
when he was surrounded by two or three of the zealous 
Gabbaim, and passed on. The surprise among the 
company of the Chassidim, who stood looking on, was 
very great. That the Zadik should give his hand and say 
‘Schalom’ to a suspicious stranger, perhaps an ‘apikoress’ 
was something wonderful. On the piece of road between 
the synagogue and his palace the Rabbi was besieged 
by a number of women, who stood with pieces of paper 


188 RELIGIOUS DIVISIONS AND SECTS 


in their hands, on which were written requests for par- 
ticular objects, for which they wanted his intercession ; 
these they thrust on him imploringly. Some of these 
poor women had no doubt come long distances, and it 
was rather sad to see the stalwart, stout Gabbaim push 
them aside rather pitilessly, so that only two or three of 
the papers reached the Rabbi’s hands. We were sad 
too, beyond measure, to see the credulity of these 
people, and their readiness to put confidence in their 
poor blind leaders, while all the time forgetting the true 
‘Zadik, the alone ‘righteous One, who is at the right 
hand of the Father, and whose intercession alone can 
prevail.” 7 

(c) Thirdly, we have the ever-growing Reformed 
section, of which the Jewish philosopher, Moses Men- 
delssohn, who was born in Dessau, Prussia, in 1729, is 
generally regarded as the father. This division includes 
Jews of very diverse opinions, ranging from those who 
only reject the traditions of the Rabbis, to those who 
have thrown overboard all revealed religion, and are 
avowedly rationalistic if not infidel. 

The strongholds of Reformed Judaism are Germany, 
Austria-Hungary, and America, though their “Temples” 
are multiplying even in Russia and Chassidic. Galicia, 
As the Talmudic and Chassidic Jews may be said to be 
the representatives of the Pharisees of the time of 
Christ, so these Reformed Jews are in true succession of 
Sadducees, as may be gathered from the following Con- 
fession of Faith, or rather of unbelief, drawn up in 1888 
by Dr. Krauskopf, head of the “Reformed” Jewish 
Community of Philadelphia: “ We discard the belief in 
a God who is man magnified, who has his abode some- 
where in the interstellar spaces. We discard the belief 
that the Bible was written by God, and that its teachings 
are therefore infallible. . , . We discard the belief in the 


AMONG THE JEWISH PEOPLE 189 


coming of a human Messiah who will lead us back to 
Palestine. . . . We discard the belief in bodily resurrec- 
tion, hell torments, all Biblical and Rabbinical beliefs, 
rites, and ceremonies and institutions, which neither 
elevate nor sanctify our lives.” 

(d) The fourth religious division is numerically small, 
but is in some respects the most interesting section of 
the dispersed people. I refer to the Kavaim, who may 
be styled the Protestants among the Jews, having never 
submitted to the yoke of the Talmud, and kept only to 
the written law and the prophets, and who have in con- 
sequence been much persecuted by the Rabbis and their 
followers, who have sometimes shown more bitterness 
against them than even against the Gentiles. Their 
stronghold is in the Crimea on the Black Sea, but there 
are small communities of them in other parts of Northern 
and Eastern Europe, and in the Orient. They are in 
many respects different from Talmudic Jews, with whom 
they do not intermarry, and they have also been treated 
differently by the governments in the lands where they 
are settled. Thus, for instance, in Russia they enjoy 
full civil rights, while the four or five million of their 
Rabbinic brethren do not. 

Without entering into the somewhat difficult question 
of their origin, and the history of the development of 
their doctrines, I append here an extract from my 
journal written in Cairo on March 13, 1898: “Nine 
years ago, when I first came in contact with the Karaites 
in Cairo, I had a most interesting experience with the 
Rabbi in the synagogue, where I met him by appoint- 
ment, accompanied by two English Christian gentlemen. 
Unlike what is customary on entering the synagogues 
of the Talmudic Jews, we had to take off our boots at 
the door, and walk inside in our socks. This practice, 
the Rabbi told us, they base on God’s command to 
Moses in Exod. iii. 5.” 


190 RELIGIOUS DIVISIONS AND SECTS 


The following is a note in my diary written at that 
time :— 

“The synagogue is a plain but substantial structure, 
looking almost new. It was built thirty-five years 
ago by special permission obtained from the Sultan 
of Turkey, by their chief Rabbi in Constantinople. Up 
to that time they used to meet in a catacomb, in the 
ground just below where their synagogue now stands, 
Until they received permission to build the synagogue 
they had no civil rights whatever, and the other Jews 
even intrigued against them with the authorities to 
have them expelled from the city, but now, thanks 
partly to the American and to some of the European 
Consuls, their existence is recognised, and their religion 
tolerated. 

“This small Karaite community has the honour of 
possessing one of the oldest manuscripts of the Old 
Testament in existence. It is a copy made in Tiberias, 
on the Lake of Galilee, by a learned Karaite Rabbi, 
who must have been a grand scribe, for it is beautifully 
written in the large square Hebrew characters, 

“Tt is not a scroll, as is often the case with old 
Hebrew manuscripts, but written on separate large 
square leaves of parchment, in a case of thin wood 
covered with a thin coating of leather. Originally it 
was a complete copy of the Old Testament Scriptures, 
but now the whole book of Job, part of the Pentateuch, 
and other fragments are missing. The first page, how- 
ever, which has been photographed for the Bodleian 
Library, and on which is the Jewish date (which I am 
sorry I neglected to copy) is preserved all right. It 
begins with a preface by the copyist, which ends with a 
prayer, in which the passage occurs, ‘This is the Word 
of God; may nothing be taken from it, and nothing be 
added to it, 


AMONG THE JEWISH PEOPLE IQI 


“I well remember a touching incident of this first 
visit. We were examining the old manuscript and 
some of their printed books, when I suddenly asked the 
Rabbi to tell us what he thought was the greatest need 
of the Jewish people. Without a moment’s hesitation 
he replied, ‘The coming of the King Messiah, the Son 
of David.’ ‘We, and millions of others, I said, ‘believe 
that the Son of David has already appeared in the time 
of the second Temple? He remained silent for a 
moment, and then said, ‘I know that the Protestants 
believe this, but our eyes have not yet seen the salvation 
of God.’ There was something pathetic in his tone, and 
I could not but lift up my heart to God that the time 
may soon come when he, and all Israel, will ‘see the 
salvation of God’ in the Person of Jesus, who was so 
called because ‘ He shall save His people from their sin,’ 
Before we parted on that occasion I offered him a New 
Testament. He thanked me, saying that he had one 
given him twenty years before in Constantinople, by a 
friend now dead, which he would read. You can 
imagine that I was eager to see this old man again. 
With that object in view we went to the Karaite 
synagogue on Friday evening, at the commencement of 
the Sabbath, and it was a touching sight which there 
met our view. Unlike the different sects of Rabbinical 
Jews, the Karaites kneel in prayer. There was no 
candle or any artificial light in the building, as they are 
very strict in reference to the command, ‘ Thou shalt 
kindle no fire in thy dwellings on the Sabbath day. It 
was service time, and the plain but neat and pleasant 
building, in which there are no seats, was fairly filled 
with men, all bending low on their knees, while my old 
friend the Rabbi, whom we could discern in the dim 
light at the other end of the building before the ark 
of the law, also on his knees, was leading their prayers, 


192 RELIGIOUS DIVISIONS AND SECTS 


to which the whole congregation responded now and 
again. Some of their prayers are expressive of an 
intense longing for the appearing of the Deliverer, and 
for ‘the raising up of the horn of David.’ Poor Israel ! 
If they would but look up and around them, they would 
see the very One for whom they have so long been 
waiting and praying, looking down upon them with 
infinite compassion from the right hand of the Father, 
saying, ‘Oh, that My people had hearkened to My 
voice, and that Israel had known the day of His 
visitation—then had their peace been as a river, and 
their righteousness as the waves of the sea’; then would 
Israel, instead of being a proverb and a by-word, bea 
praise and glory in the midst of the earth. But yet for 
a little while longer these things are hid from their eyes, 
until the Spirit be poured upon them from on high, and 
Israel looks upon ‘Him whom they have pierced.’ We 
waited till service was over, and then spoke a few words 
to the Rabbi, who appointed to meet us at his house 
this morning. 

“The people all waited till the Rabbi passed to his 
house, which is a little distance off, before they dispersed. 
His noble, patriarchal figure in flowing Sabbath robes 
and turban, walking with slow steps in all Oriental 
dignity, brought up to one’s mind an ideal picture 
of our father Abraham, or of the high priest Aaron. 

“At ten this morning we arrived at his house, and 
were kindly welcomed by him on the threshold. His 
wife soon brought us lemonade, and we felt quite at 
home. Mr. Gordon drew out his sympathy by telling 
him that we feel much drawn to the Karaite Jews, 
because we too reject the Talmud and Rabbinical 
tradition, and take our stand on the Word of God, the 
difference between us and them being that we have not 
only the Old, but also the New Testament, in which we 


AMONG THE JEWISH PEOPLE 193 


find the completion and hope given to our fathers. He 
told us that about thirty-five years ago, when he was a 
teacher in Constantinople, he had a friend, a Hebrew 
Christian, whom, said he, ‘I loved as a brother, who 
used to talk to him of these same things. It was this 
same friend, now many years dead, who gave him the 
New Testament. We were very happy to find that he 
was not now unacquainted with the contents of that 
blessed Book, and that he spoke of it with respect. In 
the course of our interview I had the privilege of 
reading to him several long passages out of the Gospels 
and portions of Rom. ix., x., and xi, from which we 
wanted to show him what Christians believe in reference 
to Israel’s future, and how that future is wholly bound 
up with Christ. We remained about an hour and a half 
with him, and before parting we presented him with 
several Hebrew pamphlets, setting. forth the claims of 
our Lord Jesus, which he very gladly accepted.” 
- The following short entry in my journal, written on 
May 17, 1897, refers to a visit paid to another Karaite 
community in quite a different part of the world:— - 

“ At 2.5 we arrived in Halicz, which is about 2} miles 
from the railway station. : Í 

“It is beautifully situated on the right bank of the 
Dniester within sight of the Carpathians, and is com- 
manded by a hill which is crowned by a picturesque 
ruin of an ancient castle. Halicz was once the residence 
of the great Ruthanian lords, and from its name is 
supposed to be derived ‘Galicia, the name of the 
province, which was written at one time ‘ Haliczia.’ 
There are a considerable number of Jews in Halicz, 
but our interest centred chiefly on the Karaite com- 
munity. 

“Tt seems difficult to ascertain how this small com- 
munity found its way to the borders of the Bukowina, 

14 


194 RELIGIOUS DIVISIONS AND SECTS 


they themselves not being very enlightened in their 
history ; but this much is clear, that they were invited 
to settle there by a Polish king during the period of 
the Tartar invasion, to act as interpreters, Tartar 
being the language which the Karaim speak among 
themselves. 

“Their quarter, which is inhabited exclusively by 
them, looks most picturesque, consisting of a very 
irregular long street of low, white houses. One is 
struck with the neatness and cleanliness of their 
dwellings both inside and out, as compared with the 
other Jews. The most prominent building is their 
temple, or synagogue, which has a very interesting in- 
scription outside, which is painted in the spaces of the 
design known as the ‘Magin David’ (Shield of David, 
the traditional coat-of-arms of the Davidic house), a 
double crossed triangle. 

“In the centre are the words, ‘ This is the house of 
Jehovah, the great God? In the outside spaces of the 
double triangle there is the pathetic prayer of Psa. 
Ixxxiv. 9, ‘Behold, O God, our shield, and look upon 
the face of Thine Anointed.’ In the inside spaces there 
is the other similar passage from Psa. lxxxix. 18, ‘ For 
with Jehovah is our Shield, and with the Holy One of 
Israel is our King, and below, in a straight line, are 
the words, ‘For Jehovah God is a Sun and Shield.’ 

“We could not help longing for the day when Israel, 
with eyes open to the glory of Christ, will turn the 
above into prayers of their hearts, and ask God to look, 
not on them and their sins, but on the face of His 
Anointed, who is both Israel’s Sun and Shield ! 

“After awhile the Haham, or one who temporarily 
acts as such, brought the keys and took us inside the 
synagogue. Several of his congregation followed. They 
seemed suspicious of us at first, the reason being, as I 


AMONG THE JEWISH PEOPLE 195 


afterwards gathered, that some unscrupulous Jews who 
had visited the place had abused the confidence of the 
simple-minded Karaim, and stolen some of their valuable 
books and manuscripts. However, they soon convinced 
themselves that we were not of that class, and became 
quite frank and at ease in their manner. They showed 
us their remaining treasures in the way of books and 
manuscripts, and as they were explaining to us the 
history of an old copy of the Torah, we opened: it at 
several places on the reader’s desk, and pointed them to 
a few Messianic passages, which we explained as proving 
the claims of Israel’s true King, who is now at the right 
hand of God, and who will soon be manifested in the 
clouds of heaven.” 

In this classification I have not included the black 
Fallashas in Abyssinia, whose origin and history are 
subjects of great uncertainty, and who religiously cannot 
be included in the category enumerated above, inasmuch 
as they observe a sacrificial cult based on the law of 
Moses, ignoring the fact that, apart from the valueless- 
ness of any sacrificial system now that the great Anti- 
type has appeared, it is enjoined in that very law to 
which they seem to cleave, that the divinely appointed 
sanctuary in Jerusalem is the only place where sacrifices 
can be offered ; and even there only by priests of the 
house of Aaron. I have also omitted the other small 
section of black Jews, namely, the Beni-Israel in India, 
whose origin is likewise a subject of doubt, many 
Western Jews even disputing their geniune Israelitish 
descent. 

The whole Jewish nation, at any rate in Europe, is 
usually divided into two great bodies or families. 
The division which consists of the great bulk of the 
people who for many centuries resided chiefly in Poland 
and the north-westerly countries of Europe, and whose 


196 RELIGIOUS DIVISIONS AND SECTS 


language varies from the lowest jargon, the “ Jiidisch” 
or “Yiddish,” to the most polished German, are called 
Ashkenazim (or “German,” as the word means); while 
the other, who number perhaps not more than about 
one million, consisting of those whose home, till their 
cruel banishment in 1492, was Spain and Portugal and 
other places where the languages of these countries are 
spoken, but who are now spread chiefly over North 
Africa, Egypt, and the countries under Turkish sway, 
and who speak Judea-Spanish, are called “Sephardim” 
(Spanish). 


Vv 


E PRESENT ATTITUDE OF THE ee IN 
RELATION G4 CHRISTIANITY 


vV 


THE PRESENT ATTITUDE OF THE JEWS IN RELATION 
TO CHRISTIANITY 


NE of the first questions which arise in our 
minds, after a bird’s-eye view of the nation as 
a whole is presented to us, is, “What attitude do these 
different sections assume to Christianity?” I say to 
“Christianity” ; and looking over its history in relation 
to the Jews, one becomes painfully impressed with the 
fact that the term “Christianity ” must be distinguished 
from Christ and the gospel. 

It may sound like exaggeration in the ears of 
Christians in England and America, when I say that 
millions of Jews are as ignorant of Christ as are the 
unevangelised tribes in Central Africa; and as to the 
New Testament, except to a growing minority, its very 
existence is unknown. 

It is a fact that the great bulk of the “orthodox” 
Jews think and speak of the New Testament, when 
they first come in contact with it, as a modern produc- 
tion written by some missionary, so little do they know 
of its history and contents. In one of my missionary 
journeys about sixteen years ago I spent two or three 
days in the ancient town of Thorn on the Vistula. On 


the Sunday morning I went out by the riverside, where 
199 


200 THE PRESENT ATTITUDE OF THE JEWS 


I met a party of Galician Jewish “Chassidim,” wood 
merchants, who owned some of the huge rafts that 
are being continually floated down the river from Russia 
and Galicia to Memel for export. After a few words of 
salutation I pulled out a Hebrew New Testament from 
my pocket, and asked them if they had ever seen this 
book, or heard of Him of whom it speaks. Taking 
it out of my hand, and coming across the name of Jesus, 
which in the Hebrew is “Jeschua,” he looked up and 
said, “I know; it is about Joshua” ; whereupon another 
took it out of his hand, and turning over some pages 
and seeing it was in the sacred tongue, and that some 
of the names such as Abraham, Moses, David, &c., were 
familiar to him from the Old Testament, he put it to 
his lips and reverently kissed it. 

They had never in their lifetime either seen or heard 
of the book before, and if they had known that it was 
the book on which the so-called Christians around 
them, whom they call “Goim,” are supposed to base 
their religion, they would most probably have thrown it 
to the ground and spat upon it. 

“ Christianity,” or more correctly, “ Christendom,” the 
seven or eight millions of Jews in Central and Eastern 
Europe have seen and, alas! fe/¢, and it they hate with 
great detestation and abhorrence; so that I can testify 
to this fact from experience, that there is less opposition 
to the gospel when first preached, on the part of the 
Jews who live in Mohammedan countries, like Morocco 
and Asia Minor, than there is on the part of those who 
live in Christendom. 

In 1899, while on a Mission journey in Slavonia, we 
visited in a town on the Danube a rich and learned Jew 
who is well known in that district. Before we parted, 
after a long discussion, the venerable old man stood 
up quite excited and said, “Look here, what I have 


IN RELATION TO CHRISTIANITY 201 


read of the New Testament I like very much, but I 
don’t see what this book has to do with the Christians 
around me. Christianity as you represent it I know 
nothing about, but I will tell you this, that ¿f the Christ 
whom the Christians around me worship was what they 
represent Him to be, then He deserved to be crucified? 
This is the language of a typical Jew speaking in the 
bitterness of his soul; and what wonder, seeing that the 
outward aspect of Christendom and the cruelty of 
Christians has led the Jews in those parts to associate 
two ideas with the holy name of our Saviour, namely, 
idolatry and cruelty. 

The attitude of the Reformed and more enlightened 
Jews in countries like Germany, Austro-Hungary, 
England and America is somewhat different. Most of 
these are intelligent and educated, and are brought in 
constant touch with “Christian” thought and literature ; 
though it is asad fact, greatly to be deplored, that the 
so-called Christian books which this class of Jews read, 
are written almost exclusively from the neological and 
rationalistic point of view, and only help to spread 
unbelief amongst them. Hence it is that though un- 
consciously they have been permeated with Western 
ideas, and cannot but see and feel that the coming 
of Christ has wonderfully affected the history of the 
world, speaking generally, the tendency of this class 
is towards rationalism and negation, and, from a gospel 
point of view, they are less hopeful than even the most 
bigoted of their orthodox brethren, who still tenaciously 
cling to the hope of Israel. 

Some prominent leaders of this “Reformed” or 
“ Progressive” school have taken up the untenable and 
inconsistent position of regarding the Lord Jesus as 
a great and good man, and have even extolled the 
ethical teaching of Christ as in advance of Moses and 


202 THE PRESENT ATTITUDE OF THE JEWS 


the prophets, while they repudiate utterly His claims 
of divinity, and regard Christian doctrine, especially the 
great and central fact of atonement, “as a return to 
the crude and barbaric ideas of primitive times, and 
altogether opposed to progressive views of religion.” 

The attitude of these “enlightened ” rationalistic Jews 
to the Person of our Lord Jesus, may be summed up in 
a letter of one of the best known Jewish writers, Dr. 
Max Nordau, in answer to one addressed to him by 
Pére Hyacinthe of Paris, in which he compared Dreyfus 
with Christ, and invited the Jewish people to revise the 
judgment which condemned Jesus of Nazareth, even as 
France ought to have revised that against Alfred Dreyfus. 
Nordau’s reply was as follows :— 

“I can only answer for myself, having no authority 
to speak for my brethren. It is not for me to discuss 
the question whether Jesus is a historical figure or a 
legendary synthesis of several real personages, or even 
a mythical incarnation of the thought and sentiment of 
the epoch in which tradition places His existence. In 
any case, He whom we see through the recitals of the 
‘Gospels is a figure typically and ideally Jewish. He 
observes the law; He teaches the moral of Hillel, ‘ Love 
thy neighbour as thyself.’ He is constantly preoccupied 
with eternal things; He feels Himself in spiritual com- 
munication with God. He has contempt for what is 
mortal in Himself, and for all the ephemeral con- 
tingencies of eternal life. The same traits characterised 
the best Jews at the time of the Roman Conquest, and 
more particularly the Essenes, whose religious life was 
so intense. Like His origin, like His moral physiog- 
nomy, the language of Jesus is absolutely Jewish. For 
each of His parables we can cite one or more parallel 
passages from the Talmud. His prayer, the finest 
which a believer had ever invented, is a résumé of 


IN RELATION TO CHRISTIANITY 203 


Jewish ideas on the relation of man to his Creator. 
The Sermon on the Mount is the quintessence of 
Rabbinical ethics, and is adorned with images and 
comparisons familiar to the Rabbis. Jesus is soul of 
our soul, as He is flesh of our flesh. Who then could 
think of excluding Him from the people of Israel? 
St. Peter will remain the only Jew who has said of 
the Son of David,‘ I know not the man.’ If the Jews 
up to the present time have not publicly rendered 
homage to the sublime moral beauty of the figure of 
Jesus, it is because their tormentors have always 
persecuted, tortured, assassinated them in His name. 
The Jews have drawn their conclusions from the 
disciples as to the Master which was wrong—a wrong 
pardonable in the eternal victims of the implacably cruel 
hatred of those who called themselves Christians. Every 
time that a Jew mounted to the sources and contem- 
plated Christ alone without His pretended faithful, he 
cried, with tenderness and admiration, ‘Putting aside 
the Messianic mission this man is ours. He honours 
our race, and we claim Him as we claim the Gospels— 
flowers of Jewish literature and only Jewish.’ 

“The revision of His trial has long since been made. 
The most learned authorities on Jewish criminal law 
and procedure have proved irrefutably that the trial 
of Jesus, as it is presented to us by tradition, could 
never have taken place, at least before a Jewish tribunal. 
If Jesus was condemned to death, He was so condemned 
by Roman judges, and no Jew, faithful to the law of his 
nation, could have taken the least part in the condemna- 
tion. Before a Jewish tribunal, a holy man, professing 
the Essene or Ebionite doctrine, even emancipating 
himself from the law of the Sabbath, even exalting the 
spirit and denouncing the letter, even proclaiming him- 
self the promised anointed of the Lord, could never 


204 THE PRESENT ATTITUDE OF-.THE JEWS 


have been condemned to death on the cross, which is 
not the form of execution admitted by the Jewish law, 
and He could never have been executed on the Friday 
before Passover, the law absolutely prohibiting any 
execution on suchaday. If the Jews had condemned 
Jesus in the conditions in which the trial was accom- 
plished according to tradition, they would have com- 
mitted a series of crimes each of which exposed itself 
to the severest punishment according to the Jewish law. 
Therefore, it is certain that all the story of the trial of 
Jesus is only a vengeance of those who wished to punish 
the Jews for not having recognised the Divine mission of 
Christ. 

“To sum up, we claim as ours Jesus, His moral 
doctrines, His conception of life,and the Gospels, except 
that of St. John. We are under no need to revise His 
trial, seeing that, according to the Jewish law, Jesus 
could never have been condemned to death and crucified. 
But were we to make all the amends for a crime which 
our fathers never committed nineteen centuries ago, or 
at all, and for which, even if they had committed it, 
we should certainly not be responsible, that would 
change nothing of the disposition and spirit of the 
anti-Semites.” 

In spite of the almost patronising and merely literary 
homage “to the sublime moral beauty of the figure of 
Jesus,” this is one of the most daring epistles which has 
ever issued from the pen of man in relation to Jesus of 
Nazareth. Putting aside the attempt to revive the 
so-called “mythical theory ” of the life of Jesus, which 
is now discarded by every critical scholar of any note, 
Dr. Nordau’s letter is a cool and flippant denial of the 
history of the last nineteen centuries, and is full of 
assertions which are contrary to facts, and could only 
be made by one who, though a brilliant writer and 


IN RELATION TO CHRISTIANITY 205 


orator, has evidently only a second-hand acquaintance 
with Jewish history and Jewish literature, and whose 
sources for the unhistorical picture of Christ which he 
draws are the daring fancies of Renan and the 
absurdities of Strauss. Take, for instance, the asser- 
tions that “the most learned authorities on Jewish 
criminal law and procedure have proved irrefutably 
that the trial of Jesus, as it is presented to us by tradi- 
tion, could never have taken place before a Jewish 
tribunal. That He could never have been crucified 
. . . that He could never have been executed on the 
Friday before Passover,” &c. 

That the proceedings at the trial of Jesus were for the 
most part in flagrant contradiction with the established 
laws of procedure both of the Jewish and Roman 
tribunals, and that the record of it is a humiliating 
story to Gentile as well as Jew, are facts of which the 
whole world is aware, but that the most learned autho- 
rities on Jewish criminal law have repudiated that trial 
is not true. 

Perhaps the most illustrious exponent of Terik law 
and procedure is Moses Maimonides, and he, far from 
repudiating, speaks of Christ and His death as historic 
facts, and adds that the Jews, by handing Jesus over to 
be crucified, “have done to Him as He deserved.” Ina 
passage also from the Talmud, which is already quoted 
in this volume,? the trial of Jesus is not only acknow- 
ledged as an historic fact, but it is expressly said that it 
was on the Passover Eve that Jesus was led forth to be 
“hanged,” or crucified. 


* See especially the “ Iggeret Teman,” the letter addressed by 
Maimonides to the Jewish communities in Yemen, written in 
Arabic in 1172, and translated into Hebrew in 1210 by Samuel 
Ibn Tabon, now printed from a MS, in the possession of the late 
Dr, Jellineck, Vienna, 1873. 2 See page 18. 


206 THE PRESENT ATTITUDE OF THE JEWS 


But I quote Dr. Nordau’s letter here, not to refute the 
false assertions which are made in it—for to do that in 
detail would require a good- sized treatise—but only as 
an example of the attitude of this class of Jews ue 
Christ and Christianity. 

Reformed Judaism speaks sometimes in vague and 
impudent terms of its future mission on earth, when 
Christianity shall have become effete, regardless of the 
fact that it is in itself utterly apostate from God, and 
has nothing but cold negations and abstractions to offer 
which have never yet brought hope and comfort to any. 
man. 

The Christian standing on the impregnable rock of 
New Testament truth, against which even the gates of 
hell shall never prevail, can well afford to smile at such 
vain, empty boasting ; but I refer to it simply to show 
the spirit of this type of rationalistic Judaism, which 
is in a measure responsible for provoking unenlightened 
Christians in Germany and other lands to join in the 
anti-Semitic agitation—a movement altogether opposed 
to the spirit of Christ, and fraught with many dangers 
to Christendom itself, 


ANTI-SEMITISM — 


== 


VI 
ANTI-SEMITISM 


HERE are many difficult problems grouped 

around the name “Jew” powerfully affecting 
the world and the Church, and as, in Europe especially, 
the issues involved become intensified from year to year, 
the nations of Christendom, in the midst of whom the 
mass of the Diaspora has been located since the 
destruction of the second Temple, are earnestly begin- 
ning to find solutions, and it is more and more obvious 
that “the Jewish question” is fast becoming an inter- 
national one. 

To the Bible student, with the key of the future in 
his hand, it is very interesting to watch.some of the 
more recent phases in the development of this “ques- 
tion,” and to observe how the great God is, in His 
providence, now rapidly preparing the way for its final 
and only possible solution. Anti-Semitism, though no 
doubt a symptom of the diseased moral, political, and 
economic systems of Christendom, for which Jew and 
Gentile must bear equal blame, is nevertheless of great 
significance, and an unmistakable sign of the times when 
viewed from a Scriptural standpoint. 

What is anti-Semitism ? 

Before me lies the 17th edition of the “Anti- 


15 209 


210 ANTI-SEMITISM 


Semiten-Katechismus,” a small book of four hundred 
closely-printed pages compiled by Theodor Fritsch, 
and published in Leipzig. It is one of the very vilest 
products of the nineteenth century, and carries its con- 
demnation within itself. 

The first part is in the form of a catechism, contain- 
ing twenty-one questions and answers, and the first 
question is, “Was Versteht man unter Antisemitismus?” 
(What is to be understood by anti-Semitism?) And 
then the answer, “Anti” means against, and “Semitism” 
describes the character of the Semitic race. Anti- 
Semitism, therefore, signifies waging war with Semitism. 
As in Europe the Semitic race is almost exclusively 
represented by the Jews, we understand the term 
Semites as referring in its narrower sense to the Jews. 
An anti-Semite, therefore, in our case means an oppo- 
nent of the Jews (“ Judengegner”). 

Into the long indictment which this oracle of anti- 
Semitism contains I will not enter. The fact is that the 
professional “ Judengegner” on the Continent, has been 
morally blinded by his hatred and prejudice to the 
extent of being no longer able to distinguish between 
light and darkness, truth and falsehood, and often allows 
himself to be carried by his passions to the greatest 
lengths of injustice and villainy. In the eyes of the 
anti-Semite it is not only a question whether Jews, 
like other men, are sinners, or are greater sinners than 
others, but the Jew himself, from the sole of his foot to 
the crown of his head, his very existence is an un- 
pardonable crime. His very virtues are brought up as 
accusations against him, and the whole literature of the 
world, from the writings of Cicero down to the ravings 
of the unspeakable Edouard Drummond of Paris, are 
ransacked, and often misquoted, in order to prove that 
every Jew who has ever had the impudence to live, has 


ANTI-SEMITISM ait 


been nothing else than an unmitigated rascal, to whom 
all the woes which have ever come upon the uncircum- 
cised are to be traced. 

For samples of anti-Semitic accuracy in quoting 
ancient or modern writers commend me to the collection 
of passages from Talmudic works and from the Bible 
which takes up a good part of this handbook. The 
promises of God to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and 
passages from the prophets, are quoted as proofs of 
Jewish pride and arrogance, and when the prophets 
utter curses and scathing denunciations on account of 
sin, it is still brought up in proof against the Jews that 
they are, and ever have been, the very worst nation 
under heaven. It reminds one of the story told of the 
Roman Emperor, who, walking one day with his retinue, 
happened to meet a poor Jew on the roadside, who most 
humbly bowed and saluted. The Emperor stopped 
and cried out, “What, you, a Jew, have the impudence 
to salute the Roman Emperor! Off with his head!” A 
little further on he met another Jew, who, observing 
from a distance what had been done to his unfortunate 
brother, simply stopped on the roadside, and in fear and 
trembling allowed the tyrant to pass by without saluting, 
whereupon the Emperor turned round. and cried: 
“What, you, a Jew, have the impudence not to salute 
the Roman Emperor! Off with his head!” 

An instance how an anti-Semite reads Jewish history 
is supplied by the brief summary of the life of Joseph, 
who in words of Scripture is made out to be first an 
ungrateful profligate, who immorally assaulted the 
chaste and virtuous wife of his master Potiphar, and 
later on robbed and despoiled the famished Egyptians 
for his own ends, and for the enrichment of his tribe. 

How is it done? Very easily: all you have to do is 
to string together some half-sentences broken off from 


212 ANTI-SEMITISM 


their context, and quote a lie as if it were a truth, and 
the thing is done. 

But, as an instance how the anti-Semitic Diabolus 
can quote Scripture for his own ends, I will translate 
the section on Joseph verbally just as it stands. 


“Foseph in Egypten. 


“The Hebrew slave which thou hast brought unto us came in 
unto me to mock me ; and it came to pass as I lifted up my voice 
and cried that he left his garment with me and fled. 

« . . Let him appoint officers over the land, and take up the 
fifth part in the seven plenteous years (without payment). 

“., , . And Joseph gathered corn as the sand of the sea very 
much until he left off numbering, for it was without number. 

«.,. And Joseph gathered up all the money that was found 
in the land of Egypt and in the land of Canaan for the corn 
which they brought. 

“... Joseph said, Give your cattle, and I will give you for 
your cattle if you have no more money. 

«... We will not hide from my lord how that our money is 
spent ; my lord also hath our herds of cattle ; there is not ought 
left in the sight of my lord but our bodies and our lands. 

“,.. And he made it a law that they should give from every- 
thing a fifth. And so Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt in the 
country of Goshen, and they ruled over it and grew and multipled 
greatly.” 


It is a sad fact that perhaps ninety-nine out of every 
hundred “Christian” readers of this vile production in 
Germany and Austria are so ignorant of Bible history 
that they are taken in by these parodies of Jewish 
characters as if they were actual history. I may mention 
that my first acquaintance with this “ Antisemiten- 
Katechismus” was in the drawing-room of a Christian 
Hospitz in Berlin, where it was evidently kept for the 
enlightenment of benighted Christian travellers. But. 
is there no ground for the accusations of anti-Semites? 
I am not one to hide up the sins of my people. There 
were no greater patriots than the prophets, yet they 


ANTI-SEMITISM 213 


speak of Israel as “a sinful nation ; a people laden with 
iniquity,” and many centuries of wanderings and oppres- 
sions have not tended to ennoble them. No, Israel ina 
state of apostasy from their God are not a blessing among 
the nations as they yet shall be (Zech. viii.), but this I 
say, that false accusations by anti-Semites through the 
ages, of crimes which they knew in their conscience 
they were not guilty of, has been Satan’s chief means of 
hardening Israel’s heart into a Pharisaic self-conscious- 
ness, and of blinding their eyes to their real state of 
need before a holy God. 

The true underlying causes and effects of modern 
anti-Semitism have been well summarised by Dr. Herzl 
in that remarkable pamphlet, “ Der Juden Staat,” which 
has given birth to the Zionist movement. “Modern 
anti-Semitism,” he says, “is not to be confounded with 
the religious persecution of the Jews of former times. 
It does occasionally take a somewhat religious bias, 
but the main current of the aggressive movement has 
now changed. In the principal countries where anti- 
Semitism prevails it does so as a result of the emanci- 
pation of the Jews. 

“When civilised nations awoke to the inhumanity of 
exclusive legislation, and enfranchised us, our enfran- 
chisement came too late. It was no longer possible 
legally to remove our disabilities in our old homes. For 
we had, curiously enough, developed while in the Ghetto 
into a bourgeois people, and we stepped out of it only to 
enter into fierce competition. with the middle classes. 
Hence our emancipation set us suddenly within this 
middle-class circle, where we have a double pressure to 
sustain, from within and from without. The Christian 
bourgeoisie would not be unwilling to cast us as a sacri- 
fice to Socialism, though that would not greatly improve 
matters, At the same time, the equal rights of Jews 


214 ANTI-SEMITISM 


before the law cannot be withdrawn where they have 
once been conceded. Not only because their withdrawal 
would be opposed to the spirit of our age, but also 
because it would immediately drive all Jews, rich and 
poor alike, into the ranks of the revolutionary party. 

“ Nothing effectual can really be done to our injury. 
In old days our jewels were seized. How is our movable 
property to be got hold of now? It is comprised in 
printed papers which are scattered over the world, locked 
-up maybe in the coffers of Christians. It is of course 
possible to get at shares and debentures in railways, 
banks and industrial undertakings of all descriptions, by 
taxation, and where the progressive income-tax is in 
force, all our realised property can eventually be laid 
hold of. But all these efforts cannot be directed against 
Jews alone, and where they have nevertheless been made, 
severe economic crises, with far-reaching effects, have 
been their immediate consequence. The very impossi- 
bility of getting at the Jews nourishes and embitters 
hatred of them. Anti-Semitism increases day by day 
and hour by hour among the nations; indeed, it is 
bound to increase, because the causes of its growth con- 
tinue to exist, and cannot be removed. Its remote cause 
is our loss ofi the power of assimilation during the Middle 
Ages ; its immediate cause is our excessive production 
of mediocre intellects, who cannot find an outlet down- 
wards or upwards—that is to say, no wholesome outlet 
in either direction. When we sink, we become a revolu- 
tionary proletariat, the subordinate officers of the 
revolutionary party ; when we rise, there rises also our 
terrible power of the purse. 


EFFECTS OF ANTI-SEMITISM. 


“The oppression we endure does not improve us, for 
we are not a whit better than ordinary people. It is 


ANTI-SEMITISM 215 


true that we do not love our enemies ; but he alone who 
can conquer himself dare reproach us with that fault. 
Oppression naturally creates hostility against oppressors, 
and our hostility aggravates the pressure. 

“It is impossible to escape from this eternal round. 
‘No!’ some soft-hearted visionaries will say; ‘no, it 
is possible! Possible by means of the ultimate perfec- 
tion of humanity,’ Is it worth while pointing out the 
sentimental folly of this view? He who would found 
his hope for improved conditions on the ultimate per- 
fection of humanity would indeed be painting a Utopia! 

“ I referred previously to our ‘assimilation. I do not 
for a moment wish to imply that I desire such an end. 
Our national character is too historically famous, and, 
spite of every degradation, too fine, to make its annihila- 
tion desirable. We might, perhaps, be able to merge 
ourselves entirely into surrounding races, if these were to 
leave us in peace for a space of two generations. But 
they will not leave us in peace. 

“For a little period they manage to tolerate us, and 
then their hostility breaks out again and again. The 
world is provoked by our prosperity, because it has for 
many centuries been accustomed to consider us as the 
most contemptible among the poverty-stricken. 

“Tt forgets, in its ignorance and narrowness of heart, 
that prosperity weakens our Judaism and extinguishes 
our peculiarities. It is only pressure that forces us back 
to the parent stem; it is only hatred encompassing us 
that makes us strangers once more, 

“Thus, whether we like it or not, we are now, and shall 
henceforth remain, an historic group with unmistakable 
characteristics common to us all.” 

To turn again to the oracle of anti-Semitism to which 
I have already referred, in answer to the question, “ Wie 
soll die Judenfrage nun gelöst werden?” (How shall the 


216 ANTI-SEMITISM 


Jewish Question be solved ?) we have the following para- 
graph : “ Either the Jews must procure some territory for 
themselves—best if it were out of Europe (means they 
have plenty) and be allowed a definite period, say ten 
years, to depart from our midst, or, if they remain, the - 
following enactment should be made: ‘The Jews are 
only allowed to occupy themselves with agriculture or 
productive manual labour, in which they are to have 
only Jews as their assistants. From every other sphere 
and occupation they must be excluded, and for a non- 
Jew to be in any way in the employment of a Jew should 
be highly punishable to both parties,’ 

“The laws emancipating the Jews, and which granted 
them civil rights, should be repealed, and they should 
only be allowed to exist as aliens under special law” 
(“ Judenrecht ”). 

I hold in my hand three curios of modern anti- 
Semitism. One is an exact imitation of a German 
railway ticket. On the front we read these words: 
“Nach Jerusalem (to Jerusalem). There, but not return, 
4th class, 20 mark.” Across one end the route and date 
are as usual indicated, which are “ Germany—Palestine,” 
and across the other end, which usually has the initials 
of the railway company, the word “ Isaac” is spelt out. 
Turning it over, on the reverse side we find the following 
inscription. First, in large letters, there is the Hebrew 
word “Kosher” (“clean”), a word with which things lawful 
for Jews to eat are usually sealed, and then this admoni- 
tion, “ Fahre hin mit 100,000 Deiner Briider and taufe in 
Jordan Dich doch—Kehre niemals wieder” (“Go with 
100,000 of thy brethren and immerse thyself in the 
Jordan, but never return ”). 

The second curio is an anti-Semitic bronze medal 
bearing the arms of the city of Berlin, with the date, 
beneath which are the words, “Hep! Hep!” On the 


ANTI-SEMITISM 217 


obverse side are the names of the three best known 
and most violent German Jew-haters, for whom it calls 
“Hoch!” (“ Hurrah!”) “ Vivant sequentes.” 

The third is a ticket to a public concert in Vienna, 
the price of which is a florin, but beneath there is this 
saving clause, “ Fiir Juden ist diese karte ungiltig,” which 
is equivalent to “ Jews are excluded.” 


The first of these curios expresses the aim and object 
of anti-Semitism, which is to drive them out of 
Christendom : “ Go to Jerusalem, and never return ;” and 
the other two show us the weapons of anti-Semitism, by 
which they seek to accomplish their object, namely, by 
insult and exclusion, and if that will not answer, then 
“Hep! Hep!” This apparently harmless word is the 
symbol of blood and death to the Jews. It is formed as 
already explained,* of the initial letters of the Latin 
phrase, “ Hierosolyma est Perdita !” and was the watch- 
cry of the Crusaders in their attacks and wholesale 
massacres of the Jewish communities in their bloody 
march to the East. 

The Dreyfus case and the cries of “ A bas les Juifs !” 
“Mort aux Juifs !” which have so recently rung through 
the streets of the city which calls itself “the mother of 
civilisation,” are but symptoms of the implacable hatred 
of the Jew which underlies anti-Semitism. Nor are 
Paris and Berlin alone in their attempt to revive the cry 
of “Hep! Hep!” 

During several recent visits to Austria I had occasion 
to observe the consternation manifested in large Jewish 
circles at the developments of the anti-Jewish campaign 
in that tottering Empire. In Vienna a great municipal 
war which has helped to demoralise all the political 
parties, has ended, in spite of interpositions of the 


z See page 114. 


218 ANTI-SEMITISM 


Emperor, in the repeated election of a burgomaster and 
a vast-majority of councillors who are avowedly pledged 
to make the life of the 125,000 in that city, and the 
nearly two million Jews in the Empire generally, as 
wretched as possible. Mr. Arnold White, in his 
“Modern Jew,” speaks of the leader of the anti- 
Semites in Austria “as a man of great personal. 
charm.” This is a matter of taste, but his spirit in 
relation to the Jews may be judged from some of his 
public utterances, which breathe of fire and sword. 

It is not so long ago that a notorious Roman Catholic 
vicar near Vienna ended a series of weekly harangues 
against the Jews, delivered in his parish church, with the 
words, “ Verbrennt die Juden zur Ehre Gottes. Amen.” 
(“Burn the Jews to the glory of God. Amen.”) 

“No one can deny the gravity of the Jews’ situation,” 
says Dr. Theodore Herzl, in that statesmanlike pamphlet 
from which I have already quoted. 

“Wherever they live in perceptible numbers, they are 
more or less persecuted. Their equality before the law, 
granted by statute, has become practically a dead letter. 
They are debarred from filling even moderately high 
positions, either in the army or in any public or private 
capacity. And attempts are made to crowd them out 
of business also. ‘No dealing with Jews!’ 

“ Attacks in Parliaments, in assemblies, in the press, in 
the pulpit, in the streets, on journeys—for example, their 
exclusion from certain hotels—even in places of recrea- 
tion, become daily more numerous ; the forms of perse- 
cution varying according to the countries in which they 
occur. In Russia, impositions are levied on Jewish 
villages ; in Roumania, a few human beings are done to 
death; in Germany, they get a good beating when 
the occasion serves; in Austria, anti-Semites exercise 
terrorism over all public life; in Paris, they are shut out 


ANTI-SEMITISM 219 


of the so-called best social circles and excluded from 
clubs. Shades of anti-Jewish feeling are innumerable. 
But this is not to be an attempt to make out a doleful 
category of Jewish hardships ; it is futile to linger over 
details, however painful they may be. 

“I do not intend to awaken sympathetic emotions 
on our behalf. That would be a foolish, futile, and 
undignified proceeding. I shall content myself with 
putting the following questions to the Jews: Is it 
true that in countries where we live in perceptible 
numbers the position of Jewish lawyers, doctors, men of 
science, teachers, and officials of all descriptions, becomes 
daily more intolerable? True that the Jewish middle 
classes are seriously threatened? True that the mobare 
incited against our wealthy representatives? True that 
our poor endure greater sufferings than any other 
proletariat ? 

“I think that this external pressure makes itself felt 
everywhere. In our upper classes it causes disagree- 
ables, in our middle classes continual and grave anxieties, 
in our lower classes absolute despair. 

“Everything tends, in fact, to one and the same 
conclusion, which is clearly enunciated in that classic 
Berlin phrase : ‘Juden ’raus /’ (‘Out with the Jews !’).” 


But what is the meaning of anti-Semitism in relation 
to Israel’s future? A full answer to this question is 
given us in the Word of God. In Psa. cv., which 
sings the story of Israels future redemption as pre- 
figured by their past history, we have these words: 
“Tsrael also came into Egypt, and Jacob sojourned in 
the land of Ham, and He increased His people greatly, 
and made them stronger than their enemies. He turned 
their heart to hate His people, to deal subtilly with His 
servants, He sent Moses His servant, and Aaron whom 


220 ANTI-SEMITISM 


He had chosen.” Then there follows a list of the 
plagues which He poured out upon Egypt, culminating 
in the slaying of all the firstborn in their land, “the 
chief of all their strength,” so that “Egypt was glad 
when they departed, for the fear of them fell upon 
them. ... For He remembered His holy promise, and 
Abraham His servant. And He brought forth His 
people with joy and His chosen with gladness.” 

It is remarkable how history repeats itself, and in 
relation to Israel the words of the preacher may 
especially be applied: “The thing that hath been, it 
is that which shall be... and there is nothing new 
under the sun.” 

If we substitute the word “nations” for Egypt we 
have an epitome of the origin, development, and issues 
not only of the ancient but also of the modern phase of 
the Jewish Question in the three or four verses of the 
psalm which I have quoted. 

I. The origin of the Jewish Question in Egypt is 
summed up in the words: “He increased His people 
greatly, and made them stronger than their enemies.” 
This is brought out still more clearly in the original 
account in Exodus, where we read: “ And the children 
of Israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly, and 
multiplied, and waxed exceedingly mighty, and the land 
was filled with them.” It was on that account that the 
new Pharaoh who knew not Joseph became alarmed and 
took counsel with his people, saying, “Come on, let us 
deal wisely with them,” the results of which were measures 
of repression, and when these did not answer, the pro- 
mulgation of an edict for their extermination. 

The modern phase of the Jewish Question originated 
and becomes from year to year intensified from the same 
cause. 

We have already seen how since the commencement 


ANTI-SEMITISM 221 


of the nineteenth century, the Jews are multiplying at a 
rate which is perfectly marvellous. Look, for instance, at 
the following comparative table in reference to Austria, 
where the Jewish problem is assuming a more and more 
acute phase :— 


Fews in Austria at various times (exclusive of Hungary). 


Maria Theresa’s Reign oes ro Sdn 200,000. 
1830 wes ae a8 Ts és Fre 355,000. 
1850 oof sce jas a Z ans 476,000. 
1869 aac ai z Ane thes seen 822000. 
1880 ae de fe ies ‘ise sa §1,000}000; 
18go rs 43 a <r ac pet T EAS, OSs 


According to the same authority there were in 
Hungary in the reign of Joseph II. 25,000 Jews; at 
the end of the last century there were 50,000; in 1830, 
100,000 ; in 1847, 270,000; in 1870, 500,000; in 1883, 
700,000 ; whilst at the present time the number has 

reached 1,000,000. 
` And not only is it in point of numbers that God 
is again causing His people “to increase greatly,” 
but by their superior wits and energy and by their 
habits of frugality and thriftiness He makes them 
“stronger than their enemies,” so that in those regions 
where the bulk of the nation is to be found, wherever 
the Jew has a fair chance he naturally places his Gentile 
neighbour in a less favourable position in the struggle 
for existence. The superior ability of the Jew is openly 
acknowledged by anti-Semites, and often appealed to 
as a ground for the restrictive and repressive laws 
which are in vogue against them in some countries. 

The following is taken from a chapter which sum- 
marises “the case for Russian anti-Semitism” in a work 
from which I have already quoted? more than once :— 


x “The Modern Jew,” by Arnold White, 


232 ANTI-SEMITISM 


“But there is still another element which the rulers of 
Russia are constrained to take into their consideration. 
The intellect of the Jew is masterful. His assiduity, 
his deadly resolve to get on, his self-denial and ambition 
surmount all natural obstacles. If all careers in the 
Russian Empire were thrown open to the Russian Jew 
not a decade would go by before the whole Russian 
administration from Port Arthur to Eydtkuhnen, and 
from Archangel to Yalta, must pass into Hebraic hands. 
This is a sober statement of facts.” 

The same is true of other Continental countries. 
The following is a passage from an apology for anti- 
Semitism in Austria, which, though somewhat exag- 
gerated, is largely true :— 

“The Jews are all powerfully represented in every 
walk in life that leads to influence and fortune. In the 
professions of law, medicine, and literature their numbers 
are out of all proportion to their quota of the popula- 
tion. Finance and commerce are practically in their 
hands. The great business houses, the banks, the 
railways that do not belong to the State, are all con- 
trolled by them. The Produce Exchange, and of course 
the Bourse at Vienna, Prague, or Budapest, are deserted 
on Jewish holidays. The press, with the exception of 
the Czech organs, is almost exclusively in the hands of 
Jews.” 

The proportion of Jews in the Austrian Universities 
is far in excess of what might. be expected from their 
actual number in the country. For instance, in the 
Vienna University in 1887-88, out of 6,530 students 
there were 2,500 Jews—z.e., 40 per cent. In Vienna 
itself one person in every ten is a Jew, but the propor- 
tion of the Jewish population in the whole Empire is 
only 5 per cent. It is a notorious fact that an increas- 
ingly large proportion of the great specialists and best 


ANTI-SEMITISM - 423 


known Professors in Vienna are Jews or of Jewish 
origin. At the end of 1887, out of 660 qualified 
attorneys in Vienna 350 were Jews. Indeed, the faculty 
of law may almost be said to be a monopoly of the Jews 
in Austria, and also in Germany, where they form not 
only a large percentage of the attorneys, but also of the 
judges of the highest courts, and have, as in England 
and France, supplied from their ranks ministers of 
justice and judges of appeal. In Berlin 120 of the 
Professors and Privatdocenten are Jews, and in the 
whole of Germany there are about 400 Jewish Professors. 

II. The next step in the old Jewish Question in 
Egypt was that “ He turned their heart” (that is, of the 
Egyptians) “to hate His people, to deal subtilly with His 
servants.” This is how the great God causes the wrath 
of man to praise Him, and when His purpose is accom- 
plished “restrains the remainder.” Pharaoh and his 
councillors said, “Come on, let us deal wisely with 
them,” and attempted to solve the Jewish Question in 
their own way, namely, by persecution and extermina- 
tion ; but God turned the wisdom of the Egyptians into 
foolishness. “The more they afflicted them, the more 
they multiplied and grew.” Instead of succeeding in 
drowning them in the Nile, Pharaoh and his host were 
in the end drowned in the Red Sea. But what is the 
meaning of His “turning their heart to hate His 
people”? It had a double significance. 

(a) In relation to Israel it was the means which God 
employed to stir up their nest and to make them willing 
to leave the land in which, until the persecutions broke 
out, they had been content to live for centuries. “For 
He remembered His holy promise, and Abraham His 
servant,” and the time had come according to. His 
own Divine forecast to Abraham (Gen. xv. 13, 14) that 
they should come out of Egypt, and take possession of 


224 ANTI-SEMITISM 


the lands of the Amorites, whose iniquity was now full. 
(4) In relation to Egypt it was “an evident token of 
perdition” and precursor of the plagues which came 
upon it. The judicial hardening of the heart of Pharaoh 
and the Egyptians was in itself part of the punishment | 
from a righteous God upon a cruel nation sinking lower 
and lower to the most contemptible depths of idolatry. 
God has often chastened His people “with the rod of 
men, and with the stripes of the children. of men,” but 
He has no pleasure in the scourge which He employs, 
and-as a rule uses for the chastisement of His people 
men or nations whom He designs to give up to destruc- 
tion for their wickedness. 

Now, in these respects, too, the ancient Jewish 
` Question in Egypt finds its parallel in the modern 
phases of the problem which are accentuated by anti- 
Semitism. The millions of the poor and less cultured 
orthodox Talmudic Jews in Russia, Galicia, and Rou- 
mania have long ago been convinced that these lands 
cannot much longer remain their resting-places, and 
that it is about time for them to “arise and depart” 
toward that land for which they have never ceased to 
cherish a yearning desire ; hence the many colonising 
schemes and, the more than thirty Jewish colonies which 
already exist in Palestine, consisting almost entirely of 
Russian and Roumanian Jews. The remarkable thing 
is that, as the result of the newest phases of the anti- 
Jewish movement on the Continent, the more cultured, 
wealthy, and rationalistic Jews are at last digesting the 
truths that it is not by the so-called “reform” move- 
ment which aims at assimilation with the nations that 
the Jewish Question will be solved ; for, after all their 
efforts in this direction for more than half a century and 
their desperate eagerness to strip themselves of all that 
is true and false in orthodox Judaism, as a kind of 


ANTI-SEMITISM 225 


peace-offering to the mysterious, deep-seated antipathy 
of the Gentiles, they find that it is just against them- 
selves, more even than against the less cultured of their 
brethren in Russia and Eastern Europe, that the 
bitterest animosity is manifested, and that Christendom, 
though it is itself for the most part apostate from truth 
and from the faith of Christ, is even less reconciled to 
the rationalism and neology of the modern cultivated 
“ Israelite,” than it is to the Talmudism of the more 
consistent orthodox “Jew” who still wears his kaftan 
and peyoth. 

What is this but a repetition of the warning words 
which God in His providence has so often spoken to 
Israel: “And that which cometh into your mind shall 
not be at all; in that ye say, We will be as the nations, 
as the families of the countries.” 

And in relation to the nations it is again an omen 
of approaching judgment which will culminate in the 
overthrow and destruction of the armies of the great 
confederacy, as shown in another part of this volume. 
“Jehovah frustrateth the counsel of the nations: He 
maketh the devices of the peoples of none effect. The 
counsel of Jehovah standeth for ever, the thoughts of 
His heart to all generations.” 


16 


VII 


ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 


[Since writing the following analysis of Zionism in Basle in 
August, 1899, the fourth Congress, at which I was also present, 
was held this year in London. I prefer, however, to give my 
notes of the third Congress (which I have corrected where 
necessary and brought up to date) because on the whole it 
gives a better insight into the aims and spirit of the movement - 
than the proceedings in London. It was written in the form of 
a journal for The Scattered Nation, but it will be found not the 
less interesting on that account.] 


VII 
ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 


The Zionist Movement 


BASLE, August 15th. 
HIS is the first day of the great public meetings 
of the Zionist Congress. 

We began the day by a united prayer-meeting in my 
room in the Hotel Victoria, at 8.30, at which eight 
Hebrew Christian brethren were present. 

It was good for us, as those who anticipate our nation 
in allegiance to Zion’s- true King, in whom we have 
found life and salvation, to meet at the throne of grace 
to plead for our people, and especially for the delegates 
and leaders in this Zionist movement ; and that the day 
may be hastened when all Israel shall understand that 
wonderful inscription which was written on the Cross: 
“Jesus Nazarenus Rex Judeorum.” 

9.45 am. I am now in my place at the journalists’ 
table, in the body of the Congress Hall, among the 
delegates. What a splendidly convenient building is 
this Stadt Casino, popularly known as the “Jewish 
House of Commons.” 

This large hall would seat about 2,000 people, and 
there are quite a number of other smaller halls and 
rooms in the building besides. 


229 


230 ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 


In the body of the hall only delegates and journalists 
are admitted, the former all wearing the Zionist badge— 
a large gold or gilt pin in the shape of a Magen David 
(traditional shape of the shield of David) with a blue 
silk rosette for background. 

The legend on the pin is the same as on the Zionist 
medal, designed by the renowned Jewish sculptor Beer. 
It is that of a poor wandering family, father, mother, 
with a babe at the breast, and two other children besides, 
the eldest of whom, a boy, has already a wanderer’s 
staff in his hand. 

This group is meant to represent the whole “tribe of 
the wandering foot and weary breast.” To them, in 
their hopelessness and dejection, an angel appears, 
in the shape of a graceful female figure, representing 
Zionism, or “the National Idea,’ who lays her right 
hand on the shoulder of the dejected man, and with 
her left points eastward, where the sun of hope may 
be seen rising on their ancient fatherland, on the other 
side of the Mediterranean Sea. On the other side of 
this medal are words in Hebrew taken from Ezek. xxxvii., 
“Behold I will take the children of Israel from the 
midst of the nations and will bring them to their own 
land.” 

It is the appointed hour, 10 a.m., and the Congress is 
not yet opened. But look around at this indescribable 
scene of life and animation. There are, I should sup- 
pose, about 250 delegates, and they are all on their 
feet, divided into groups of twos and threes, noisily 
arguing and discussing with one another in almost all 
languages under heaven with an energy which is truly 
remarkable. 

Most of the delegates seem young or middle-aged 
men, only a few grey or white heads being visible in 


ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 231 


the company, and one is struck with the readiness, 
ability, and purposefulness which are written on most 
of the faces. A large proportion of them, as we see 
from looking over the list of names, are doctors of 
medicine or law, several professors, and a number of 
editors and literary men. There are also several lady 
delegates. 

Another feature which I note is the great variety of 
types which is represented here, from the Russian and 
Polish Rabbis in their long kaftans and peyoth, who are 
beginning to take their places at the back of the plat- 
form, to the most polished English gentleman, and men 
known in the fashionable saloons of Paris and Vienna. 
In fact, it is like the whole Diaspora in miniature. 

Next to me there sit several delegates from the Trans- 
vaal, while at several tables, a little to the left, is a large 
delegation from America and Canada. 

But already, from the predominance of the Russian 
language in a large part of the hall, one is made aware 
that probably one-third of the whole number of the 
delegates are from Russia; and no wonder, for nowhere 
in the world is the Jewish Question more pressing 
than in this great country of the North, where there 
are between four and five million Jews in a more or 
less chronic state of wretchedness. 

It is twenty minutes past the time; still the formal 
proceedings of the Congress are not opened, the reason, 
I am told, being that some of the leaders are still 
engaged in committee-rooms, discussing programmes 
and resolutions, which are to be presented for the 
consideration of the Congress. 

Meanwhile we might look round again on this extra- 
ordinary scene and ask by what right does this “ Jewish 
Parliament” meet? 


232 ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 


What proportion of the Jewish nation does it actually 
represent ? 

And what is its aim and object? 

Answers to these questions are found in the “ Or- 
ganisations-Statut”” and other official documents of the — 
Congress, At the first two Congresses the representa- 
tive character of some of the delegates was somewhat 
questionable. 

Any “Verein,” or Association of Jews, professing 
adherence to the programme formulated at the first 
Basle Congress in 1897, could send a delegate. 

But some of these “vereine” may perhaps have con- 
sisted of only ten or a dozen Jews, and it was therefore 
necessary, in order to test the real strength and progress 
of Zionism, to formulate the “ Organisations-Statut,” 
which now lies before me, and from which I translate 
the following items :— i 

(1) The Zionist Organisation embraces those . Jews 
who approve of the programme of the Zionist Con- 
gress, and are annual subscribers of the shekel to its 
funds. 

(2) The chief organ of the Zionist organisation is 
the Congress, which is constituted of the delegates 
elected by tonstituencies of the required number of 
electors. 

(3) The Executive Council of the Congress is the 
“ Aktions-Comite,” which has its chief seat in Vienna, 
with Dr. Theodore Herzl as President. 

For election purposes the Zionistic Organisation is 
divided into “countries,” “districts,” and “ associations,” 
and each hundred shekel-paying members have a right 
to elect a delegate. There is no doubt that masses of 
Jews all over the world sympathise with this Zionist 
movement who are not yet formally enrolled members 
or shekel-payers, but I am informed that the delegates 


ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 233 


already in Basle this time represent 2,200! mandates, 
of as many different constituencies. The minimum of 
the shekel is 1s. in England, 25 cents in America, and 
the equivalent sum in other countries. Some of the 
more popular Zionist leaders represent quite a number 
of different constituencies, but their vote only counts 
as one. So much for the actual representative character 
of the Congress. 

As to the aim and objects of Zionism, these have been 
formulated at the first Congress. 

“Zionism strives to procure for the Jewish people an 
openly recognised and legally assured home (6ffentlich- 
rechtlich gesicherten Heimatstatte) in Palestine. 

With a view to the realisation of this object, one of 
the means Congress contemplates using is the cen- 
tralisation of the entire Jewish people, by means of a 
general institution agreeable to the laws of the lands in 
which they are now dispersed, and to strengthen in 
them patriotic sentiments and a Jewish national self- 
consciousness,” 

There is much from the Christian standpoint to 
criticise and to lament in the fact that the means 
proposed for the accomplishment of this great end are 
entirely material and political; and that, so far, there 
is an utter forgetfulness of the cause of the long break 
in Jewish national history, and an ignoring of the words 
of their own prophets, that though He has doubtless 
used the nations to carry out His will, it was, all the 
same, God who scattered Israel on account of sin 
(Jer. xxxi. 10; Amos ix. 9), and therefore, though He 
may again use means to gather them, without God, and 
without repentance, they will never be restored in 
blessing ; nevertheless, even to the Christian, Zionism 


z At the fourth Congress in London in August, 1900, there were 
about 400 delegates present. 


234 ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 


is a movement which must be followed with the deepest 
interest, for what we are now beginning to see is nothing 
less than, to use the title of Professor Heman’s book on 
the subject—“ Das Erwachen der Jüdischen Nation ”— 
“The Awakening of the Jewish Nation,” after a sleep 
of nineteen centuries. A national awakening which, in 
spite of the dark but short night of trouble which still 
lies ahead, I greet as preparatory to the great spiritual 
awakening of Israel, the issues of which to the world 
will be as “life from the dead.” 

It is from this point of view that this Jewish Parlia- 
ment is nothing short of a miracle, which, unknown as 
yet to the great actors, is brought about by the power of 
God. Here is a people which for two thousand years 
has been supposed to be dead, and whom the nations 
have done their utmost to bury out of sight, who have 
even said to themselves, “Our bones are dried and our 
hope is lost; we are cut off from our parts” (Ezek. 
xxxvii. 11), beginning to live and move and to have a 
corporate being. 

What is this but the forming again of a living national 
body out of the “very dry dead bones, which for cen- 
turies were strewn over ‘the open valley’ of Ezekiel’s 
vision, preparatory to the time when the blessed Breath 
will come from the four winds, and breathe upon these 
slain, that spiritually, as well as nationally, they may 
live?” 


x * * * * 


10.30 a.m. A scene of great enthusiasm greeted Dr. 
Herzl a few minues ago, as he at last made his appear- 
ance, followed by Dr. Max Nordau, and other leaders of 
the movement. The whole assembly rise to their feet 
clapping, cheering vociferously, and waving handker- 
chiefs. These Zionists are evidently proud of their 


ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 235 


leader, who by his book “ Der Juden Staat” may be said 
to have brought the whole movement into being. 

He is a fine-looking man, with noble features and 
faultless bearing. “Just look at him,” whispers one 
close by. “Does he not look like a king?” 

Dr. Herzl reads the opening address in German. His 
first word is one of thanks “an die schöne, freie Stadt” 
Basle, which receives them so hospitably for now the 
third time. 

“Basle, the Basle Congress, the Basle Programme— 
these words,” he says, “already sound familiarly every- 
where among our people, carrying with them comfort 
and hope.” ! 

* I append the first part of Dr. Herzl’s opening speech at the 
fourth Congress in London in August, 1900 :— 

“Ladies and Gentlemen,—I feel that there is no necessity for 


me to justify the holding of the Congress in London. England 
is one of the last remaining places on earth where there is freedom 


from Jew-hatred. This one fact will give you some idea as to 


the terrible state in which the Jewish nation finds itself. Through- 
out the wide world there is but one spot left in which God's 
ancient people is not detested and persecuted. But, from the 
fact that Jews in this glorious land enjoy full freedom and com- 
plete human rights, we must not allow ourselves to draw false 
conclusions. 

“He would be a poor friend of the Jews in England, as well as 
of the Jews who reside in other countries, who should advise the 
persecuted to flee hither. Our brethren here would tremble in 
their joy, if their position meant the attraction to these shores of 
our desperate brethren in other lands. Such an immigration 
would mean disaster equally for the Jews here, as for those who 
would come here. For the latter, with their miserable bundles, 
would bring with them that from which they flee—I mean anti- 
Semitism, Still, I doubt not that for the next few days we shall 
be allowed to set up the nomad-tent of our discussions, because 
we wish to enter into oe debate upon the settlement of the 
Jewish Question. 

“Between the rval of Congress and Congress, our oppo- 
nents are industriously busy, endeavouring to cover our conten- 
tions and aims with a tissue of subtle misrepresentation.. So that, 


236 ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 


“For the third time,’ he continues, “we are here to 
discuss the grievances and the aspirations of our nation, 
which desires to be revivified. At the outset it might 
have seemed, perhaps it still seems so to some, that very 
little can be achieved by our coming here and making 
speeches—speeches full of sighs. But those who are in 
doubt overlook the fact that in all representative bodies 
nothing is done except to make speeches. And who 


at every gathering, our first business is to clear away, with a few 
sharp axe-strokes, the fungus that has attached itself to the tree 
of Zionism. Notwithstanding all, we are happy to note that our 
tree is sound, is healthy, and is flourishing. Zionism seeks to 
find for the Jewish people a public, legally secured home in 
Palestine. This programme we established three years ago for 
ever. It must have responded to a very deep need, a very ancient 
yearning of our people, otherwise there is to be found no reason- 
able explanation as to why it has effected what it has, and met 
with the reception that has been accorded to it. I need not 
specially detail those effects at this time of day. Everybody 
knows them, everybody sees them, and everybody hears them. 
Four years ago one might have felt hesitation to speak of a Jewish 
nation, fearing to appear ridiculous. To-day he makes himself 
ridiculous who denies the existence of the Jewish nation. 

“One glance at this great hall, filled with delegates from all 
parts of the world, is sufficient, were there nothing else, to prove 
it. This fact means, not alone much for us, it also means some- 
thing for others. It not only opens up to every country a prospect 
of the settlement of the Jewish Question in a manner worthy of 
mankind, but it also contains at the same time the elements of a 
great perspective for the Orient. 

“Our reappearance in the land of our fathers, prophesied by 
Holy Writ, sung by our poets, yearned for midst tears by our 
stricken nation, and jeered at by miserable scoffers—that return 
is a matter of political moment to the Powers that have interests 
in Asia. Permit me to quote a few words of the opening speech 
of the second Congress. In the year 1898, when that second 
Congress was held at Basle, the following words were said :— 

“The land of Palestine is not only the home of the highest 
ideas and of the most unhappy nation, but it is also by reason of 
its geographical position, of immense importance to the whole of 
Europe. In time, and to my mind the time is not far distant, a 


bt 


ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 237 


will deny that speeches from such places exercise the 
strongest influence on the present and the future of the 
people? Possessed of this knowledge, we have exerted 
ourselves to establish for ourselves a place from which 
our words will be heard—this Jewish Tribune. As our 
people have no desire to return to the life of the past, 
but rather to awaken to the life of the present, it must 
before all possess a modern organ, in order to be able to 
give expression to the wish for existence. This tribune 
is therefore a precious possession, which we have 
acquired. Let us guard it effectually! Through the 
earnestness and the tranquillity of our deliberations we 
can raise the authority of this tribune ever higher. 
Through indiscretion and disputes we should speedily 
destroy it. The tribune must be as elevated as the 
speeches that are delivered in it.” 


road of civilisation and commerce will lead to Asia. Asia is the 
diplomatic problem of the next decade.’ 

“These words of 1898 to-day sound banal, so amply have they 
been confirmed by the events of the last few months. The 
Asiatic problem grows from day to day more serious, and will, I 
fear, for some time be deeply tinged with blood. 

“Tt is thus of increasing importance to the nations of civilisation 
that on the road to Asia—the shortest road to Asia—there should 
be set up a post of civilisation which would be at the service of 
civilised mankind. This post is Palestine-—and we are those 
who are ready with our blood and our substance to provide this 
post for civilisation. Any student of politics must perceive, quick 
as lightning, that here is presented a valuable opportunity for 
providing an easy approach to Asia, On this post of civilisation, 
which will be speedily set up by the powerless Jewish people, 
under the suzerainty of His Imperial Majesty the Sultan, no 
Power need look with apprehension. The Jews would be helped, 
others also, and at the same time; but the greatest gainer of all 
would be the Turkish Empire. England, great England, free 
England, England commanding all the seas, will understand our 
aims. We may be certain that from here the Zionist idea wiil 
take its flight to higher and more distant regions,” 


` 


238 ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 


After referring, in passing, to the aims and objects of 
Zionism, he said :— 

“We must continue our work assiduously, even if 
there have been no outward visible signs of -progress 
during the past year. Even if nothing had happened 
which denoted a strengthening of our movement, an 
increase in its importance and its means, even then we 
should have to go on working indefatigably. . But the 
past year was not a bad one for our movement. It was 
a good one. We have accomplished something, we have 
gone one step forward. 

“ An important event which as usual was partly passed 
over in silence and partly made public in a distorted 
form was the reception of the Zionist deputation by the 
German Emperor in Jerusalem. The fact alone that 
the German Emperor had given his attention to our 
National Idea would have sufficed to give us confidence, 
Insignificant movements are not noticed in such high 
quarters.” 

Turning to the mass of Zionists who keep aloof from: 
the Basle Congress, and who think they can accomplish 
their ends by a process of slow colonisation, he 
says :— 

“Some people wish to plant a population in the 
country without having beforehand made their entire 
plan public. If any one enters in the night and in the 
mist he must not wonder if he is met with the challenge, 
‘Halt! who goes there?’ All the worse is it for him if 
he cannot give a satisfactory and precise answer. More- 
over, his position is not such in which the answer will have 
no suspicious ring about it. We act differently. We 
declare our views in the open daylight, because, thank 
God, we have nothing to be afraid of, and we desire to 
obtain sanction before we undertake at all this most 
difficult of all experiments. For it is not a question 


} 


ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 239 


only of getting people in, but also of their remaining, 
and remaining in security. 

“ What is to be the nature of our present endeavours? 
We will say it in one word: a Charter! Our exertions 
are directed towards obtaining a Charter from the 
Turkish Government: a Charter under the sovereignty 
of his Majesty the Sultan. Not until we are in posses- 
sion of this Charter, which must embody the necessary 
public legal guarantees, can we commence a great 
practical colonisation. In return for the grant of this 
Charter we shall afford the Turkish Government great 
advantages. These transactions can, however, not 
emanate from Congresses which do not possess the 
necessary legal qualifications for such a purpose. For 
the purpose of these arrangements a special partnership 
must be created. This is the Jewish Colonial Bank. If 
any one should still put the question whether the Zionist 
movement is to be regarded as a serious factor, the hun- 

‘dred thousand subscribers? to the Jewish Colonial Bank 

have supplied the answer. The reply has come from 
Siberia, from the borders of China, and from the 
southernmost part of Argentina, from Canada, and the 
Transvaal. To-day the Colonial Bank exists.” 

The last words of Dr. Herzl’s opening address are 
pathetic. 

“Our appeal for support,” he says, “ goes forth to the 
upright of all creeds and nations, but we require no 
other external help than moral aid.... A people is 
contending here for its existence, its honour, and its 
freedom. It desires to emerge from darkness into sun- 
shine. The present situation of the Jews tends towards 
three directions. The first is apathetic submission to 
insult and misery. The other is a revolt against a 


* There are now about 300,000 subscribers to the “ Jewish 
Colonial Bank.” 


240 ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 


stepmotherly society. Ours is the third way: To soar 
upwards, to a higher degree of civilisation, to promote 
the general welfare, to prepare new paths for intercourse 
among the nations, and to seek an awakening for social 
justice. And just as our beloved poet gave forth songs 
out of his woes, so do we prepare out of our sufferings 
progress for mankind whom we serve.” 

Dr. Herzl’s address is received with great acclamation, 
and after the nomination lists for the election of Presi- 
dent, Vice-Presidents, Assessors, and Secretaries for this 
third Congress are submitted to the delegates by Herr 
York Steiner, there is another scene of wild enthusiasm 
as the great orator of the Zionist movement, Dr. Max 
Nordau, ascends the tribune to speak on “ The general 
condition of the Jews.” To me it is a sign of the times 
in itself to behold this world-famed author of such 
terrible books as “ Die Conventionellen Liigen der Cul- 
turmenschheit” and “ Paradoxe,” who did so much to 
destroy the faith of Jew and Christian, with a view to 
remove what was thought to be the only cause of separa- 
tion and estrangement between the two, now standing 
in this tribune, and with fiery eloquence, preaching the 
doctrine of Jewish nationalism and separation, and pro- 
claiming thé fact in the face of the whole world, that the 
only solution of the ever more perplexing Jewish 
Question is that of a great exodus. But in this respect 
Dr. Nordau (like some of the other leaders) represents, 
in his own person, one of the most significant facts in 
connection with this Zionist movement, and this is the 
confession that it is zsmpossible for the Jews to amal- 
gamate with the nations, even if they would. 

This, indeed, was the pathetic cry of the founder of 
the movement in his original manifesto. 

“We have honestly striven everywhere,” he says, “to 
merge ourselves in the social life of surrounding com- 


ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 241 


munities, and to preserve only the faith of our fathers. 
It has not been permitted to us. In vain are we loyal 
patriots, in some places our loyalty running to extremes; 
in vain do we make the same sacrifices of life and pro- 
perty as our fellow-citizens; in vain do we strive to 
increase the fame of our native land in science and art, 
or her wealth by trade and commerce. In countries 
where we have lived for centuries we are still cried down 
as strangers; and often by those whose ancestors were 
not yet domiciled in the land where Jews had already 
made experience of suffering. 

“We are one people—our enemies have made us one 
in our despite, as repeatedly happens in history. Dis- 
tress binds us together, and thus united, we suddenly 
discover our strength. Yes, we are strong enough to 
form a State, and a model State.” 

But it is a greater power than “our enemies” who is 
keeping Israel distinct “in their own despite,” and who, 
all through the ages, has continued to stir up the Jewish 
nest, whenever they have wanted to assimilate with the 
nations. It is the power of God, who swore, that “as 
long as sun and moon endure, Israel would abide a 
nation before Him for ever”—of the irresistible Ruler 
among the nations, who has warned them long in 
advance that “that which cometh into your mind shall 
not be at all, that ye say we will be as the nations, as 
the families of the countries. ... As I live, saith the 
Lord God, surely with a mighty hand, and with a 
stretched-out arm, and with fury poured out, will I rule 
over you ; and I will bring you out from the people, and 
will gather you out of the countries wherein ye are 
scattered, with a mighty hand, and with a stretched-out 
arm, and with fury poured out.” 

But it is hard to recognise the famous agnostic in the 
Zionist orator. Is it because the very association with 

17 : 


242 ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 


Zionism has drawn him and some of the other leaders 
back to a measure of faith in the God of their fathers, 
whose hand is so clearly to be discerned in the history 
of their nation ? 

Or is it, as Professor Heman suggests, that the agnos- 
ticism and “ Freigeist” of these cultured modern Jews 
is a mere outward garment, put on so as to be in 
fashion with the unbelieving Gentile world around them, 
but in reality covering hearts full of religious dissatisfac- 
tion, and longings for light and truth which neither 
effete Rabbinism, nor the corrupt forms of Christianity 
with which they are acquainted could supply ? 

Anyhow, as I am carefully following this masterly 
address of Dr. Nordau, there seems nothing in it to 
which—from a Jewish point of view—even the most 
orthodox of them could object, and as a matter of fact 
the Russian and Galician Rabbis in their long kaftans 
are among the loudest in their applause. 

Some of the passages in this speech are touchingly 
picturesque, 

Speaking of the origin of the Zionist movement and 
of the enthusiasm which pervaded the first two national 
assemblies in Basle, he says :— 

“It seemed as if we were witnessing a miracle which 
affected ourselves and all around us. We felt ourselves 
part and parcel of a fairy tale, in which we saw our 
brethren, thousands of years buried, again become flesh 
and blood. We wanted, in the joy of this reunion, to 
rehearse the sad history of the hundreds of years in 
which we had been dead and in our tomb, in a grave 
which lacked the peace of the grave. In these three 
years the general condition of the Jewish nation in all 
lands has been ascertained. No modification occurs, 
or is likely to occur, unless Jews themselves bring it to 
pass,” 


ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 243 


Discussing the various proposed solutions of the 
Jewish Question, he says :— 

“Three things only can effect an improvement of 
their condition. Firstly, an entire change of the human 
nature of to-day, as it shows itself in its treatment of 
their helpless minority ; secondly, the self-effacement 
of the minority, implying change of faith, customs, 
traditions, and—even of their features; thirdly, trans- 
planting the Jewish nation to their own land, there to 
be no more a minority, tolerated merely, but a majority, 
with full exercise of civil rights. 

“You have already judged that this last-named third 
way is the only worthy one, the only one which promises 
any success, and we have voiced our Zionism in a last 
effort to apply a remedy for the sufferings of the Jewish 
nation.” 

What strikes me in hearing and observing these 
leaders of Zionism is that they have evidently looked 
into the very soul of their people’s long-continued 
misery, and are burdened with its weight. 

Listen to this pathetic plaint :— 

“We are living like Troglodytes, in perpetual dark- 
ness. To us the sun of justice is not shining. We are 
living like the creatures in the depths of the ocean. 
Upon us press the weight of a thousand atmospheres of 
mistrust and disdain. We have lived for centuries in a 
glacial period, surrounded by the bitter cold of malice 
and hatred. Those are the permanent powers which 
have permanently influenced us, without noise, without 
incident, to give rise to sensational reports, yet under 
which we have retrograded steadily, gradually, and 
unmistakably.” 

This, alas! is all true, but oh! when will Israel 
acknowledge the cause of it all? When will they see 
not only the rod, but Him who uses it? 


244 ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 


“Who among you will give ear to this? Who gave 
Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? Did not 
Jehovah, He against whom we have sinned? For 
they would not walk in His ways, neither were they 
obedient unto His law. Therefore He hath poured 
upon him the fury of His anger, and the strength of 
battle, and it hath set him on fire round about, yet he 
knew it not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not to 
heart” (Isa. xlii. 22-25). 

Perhaps no part of Dr. Nordau’s address was so 
loudly applauded by the entire Congress as his laconic 
reference to the so-called “ Protest-Rabbis,” of the 
Continent and England, who have ranged themselves in 
bitter opposition to the Zionists. I mention it because 
in this growing estrangement between the masses of the 
Jewish people, and these modern Rabbis, lies another 
point of great significance in connection with this- 
Zionist movement. 

And what is the meaning of this opposition on the 
part of the Rabbis? 

The answer is very simple: they are angry because 
the Zionists have unmasked the hollowness of their 
pretensions, and have shown them up to the world as 
strutting about with a lie in their right hand. These 
modern “reformed” Rabbis have tried to deceive them- 
selves and their followers into the belief, that their 
dispersion among the nations, instead of being a punish- 
ment for apostasy from their God, was, on the contrary, 
a blessing—in fact the realisation of the Messianic ideal, 
for only as a Diaspora can they fulfil their mission of 
bearing witness to the nations. 

It may be news to the so-called Christian nations of 
Europe and America to learn, that these modern Rabbis 
are the true lights of the world, the salt of the earth, who 
must remain scattered to illumine the nations, and to 


/ 


ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 245 


preserve them from corruption ; and that it is to them, 
and to the Rabbis who preceded them, that the nations 
owe what knowledge they possess of the true and living 
God—but so they speak and write of themselves. 

Now it was bad enough to hear it from missionaries 
and Christians that this is all false; that neither from 
the “orthodox” Talmudic, who are the successors of the 
Pharisees, nor yet from the “progressive” or “ reformed” 
Rabbis, who are no improvement on the Sadducees of 
the time of our Lord, did the Gentiles learn to know of 
the true and living God of Israel, but from the Jewish 
apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ, the true light of the 
world, whose true glory these Rabbis have done their 
utmost to hide and misrepresent before their nation ; 
that since the rejection of Christ and the destruction of 
Jerusalem, while the gospel of Christ has continued its 
triumphal march among the nations, the Synagogue has 
been struck with impotence, and unbelieving Israel with 
barrenness ; that the Jews in their dispersion have 
indeed a mission, but quite different from that of which 
these modern Rabbis and their disciples boast—the 
mission, namely, of witnessing to God's righteous severity, 
as a warning to these “Christian” nations that they 
also, if they continue not in God’s goodness, shall be 
“cut off.” (Rom. xi. 22.) 

It was bad enough, I say, to hear all this from 
Christians, but for these leaders of Zionism to come and 
tell them-—“A plague on you and your so-called mission; 
the nations do not want us in their midst; your 
antagonism to the national movement on the ground of 
‘the Messianic’ idea and patriotic love to the countries 
which have granted you civil rights, is but veiled 
hypocrisy, covering your selfishness, and fear lest your 
comfortable nests should be stirred. Should not the 
shepherds feed the flocks? but ye modern ‘ progressive’ 


246 ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 


Rabbis and your rich worldly-minded followers, who by 
their wealth, and at the cost of the sacrifice of Jewish 
principles, have succeeded in gaining for themselves a 
position in Gentile society—what have ye done for the 
masses of your people ? ” 

In the words of Dr. Herzl’s opening address—* You 
are satisfied because your powers of imagination have 
been weakened by your favourable circumstances, and 
therefore are not able to understand us Zionists, But the 
poor and the wretched understand us; they have the 
imagination created by distress. They know from the 
experience of to-day and yesterday what the pangs of 
hunger will be to-morrow. In this condition there are 
many hundreds of thousands of our people.... Judaism 
is an immense hostelry of misery, with branches through- 
out the world, and you not only do nothing yourselves, 
but hinder others, who by this national movement try 
to bring to them a ray of hope.” No wonder that a 
number of these modern Rabbis hate Zionism, and 
have bound themselves into a union in order to “protest” 
and oppose; and no wonder also that when Dr, Max 
Nordau, towards the end of his address, said, “I will 
not speak, of the so-called Protest-Rabbis of the West. 
With those we have already settled, and I hope that 
soon the whole Jewish people will have settled with 
them,’—the whole Congress cheered and applauded. 

With Dr. Nordau’s speech, the first public session of 
the Congress, which in some respects turned out to be 
the most interesting, was brought to a close. 


BASLE, August 17th, 

I have been at almost all the meetings in the Congress 
Hall from the beginning, and have followed with the 
utmost interest all the long and sometimes very agitated 
discussions on the subjects of “Organisation,” “Finance,” 


ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 247 


“The Colonial Bank,” &c., but, excepting the first sitting, 
I find only very few notes in my diary apart from those 
relating to conversations on religious and spiritual topics, 
with some of the delegates and visitors, which are not 
meant for the public eye or ear. 

The fact is that many of these discussions in Congress 
relate to what I may call inner Zionism, and though of 
very great importance for the future working of the 
movement, it is of no special interest to the outside 
world, or to those who watch Zionism from the stand- 
point of the Kingdom of God. 

A few impressions and incidents, however, I must 
record, First, I am more and more impressed with the 
dead earnestness of these elected representatives of the 
Diaspora. From the eagerness, and air of seriousness, in 
all their discussions, especially in their committee-rooms; 
and in the intervals between the public meetings, you 
might think that not only are they themselves on the 
very eve of the proposed exodus to Palestine, and that 
there is not a moment to lose in making the necessary 
arrangements, but that on this exodus depends the 
destiny of the nations, and that the settlement can 
brook not a moment’s delay. 

Yesterday, after a sitting which lasted almost con- 
tinuously from 10 a.m. to 9 p.m., with one or two short 
breaks, they assembled again at 10 p.m., for further dis- 
cussion on some points connected with “The Jewish 
Colonial Trust,” and continued till a quarter past one 
in the morning, and to-day, when I arrived at the Town 
Casino about half an hour before the Congress opened 
at 10 a.m., the delegates were all in or about the build- 
ing, and there was as much hurry and bustle and noisy 
discussion as-if they had only just assembled for the 
first time, after a comfortable night in bed. 

After carefully studying the various elements of which 


248 ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 


the Congress is made up, I am of the conviction that if 
Zionism does not as yet sufficiently represent the wealth 
and material resources of the Jewish nation, it does cer- 
tainly represent a large proportion of its heart and 
brain; and as I look upon those hundreds of earnest, 
intelligent faces, gathered from all parts of the earth, 
and listen to the able, and often impassioned speeches 
made in different languages, I feel in my soul that Israel 
is God’s great reserve force for the future blessing of the 
world, and my heart goes out in yearning for the time 
when “the Spirit shall be poured upon us from on high,” 
and when these remarkable gifts, and this zeal and 
ability, shall be consecrated to the service of making 
known their long-rejected Messiah and King among the 
nations. 

One or two incidents in the continuous excitement of 
the last three days are specially worth noticing. One 
occurred yesterday morning, when, in the midst of an 
agitated discussion on the question of finance, a chassidic 
Rabbi—I am not certain whether from Roumania or 
Galicia—ascended the tribune, pulled out a manuscript 
from his pocket, and after reading in Hebrew and 
German Isa, Ix. 1-3, “Arise, shine, for thy light is 
come, and the glory of Jehovah is risen upon thee,” &c., 
began to preach a sermon, the substance of which was 
a glorification of Israel. 

Personally, the picturesque figure, in the long kaftan 
and peyoth, whose face and voice reminded me very 
much of dear old Rabbi Lichtenstein, was a great object 
of interest to me; but the Congress, bent on business, 
was in no mood for a sermon, and vociferously called 
on the chairman, who happened to be Professor 
Mandelstamm, to call the Rabbi to order, and to 
remind him of the particular point under discussion, 
But in vain, The chairman kept knocking with his 


ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 249 


hammer; Dr. Herzl himself more than once quietly 
whispered from behind to the Rabbi to come to the 
point ; but what did he know or care about finance? 

Was he not a duly elected delegate? 

He had laboured perhaps for months to prepare his 
sermon, and in as good German as possible, and now, 
with such a splendid opportunity before him, was he 
to be debarred from delivering it? So the chairman 
remonstrated, the delegates laughed, talked, shouted 
noisily, but the Rabbi bravely proceeded, until his voice 
was finally drowned, and he had with a sigh, and an 
expression of great sadness on his face, to fold his 
manuscript together, and descend from the tribune. 


DIE CULTURFRAGE, 


Quite a different reception was accorded this afternoon 


_to another but much better known Rabbi, Dr. Gaster, 


the Haham of the Sephardi Jews in London. Dr. 
Gaster, who is a scholar, and a native of Roumania, 
from which country he was banished for being a for- 
midable champion of the cause of his oppressed 
brethren, represents “die Culturfrage” in the Zionist 
movement, but after reading his previous speeches, and 
listening to him very closely to-day, I am still at a 
loss clearly to define what is meant by it. 

Perhaps I am very dense, but I was glad to find that 
the president of the Congress was equally slow of com- 
prehension, for yesterday morning, in a most able reply 
to a number of criticisms from delegates on various 
shortcomings of the executive committee (one of which 
was that the culture question was not included in the 
agenda), Dr. Herzl humorously said, “Meine Herrn, 
I will repeat a question that I asked Dr. Gaster him- 
self this morning, in the course of private conversation, 


250 ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 


and that was: ‘Please tell me what is this Culturfrage ? 
I have listened to many addresses on it, but I do not 
understand it.’” 

Dr. Herzl did not repeat Dr. Gaster’s answer to his 
question, but proceeded to observe that if a particular 
phase of the Jewish “religion” is meant, then he is 
determined that it shall be excluded from the dis- 
cussions of the Congress, “because we Zionists respect 
every form of religious belief Our movement is a 
national one, and religious discussions would only 
divide us.” 

In justice to Dr. Herzl, and the other Zionist leaders, 
I must say that this does not necessarily imply that 
they are anti-religious, but that they have no regard 
for the strife between the various religious factions in 
modern Judaism. 

For my own part, I do not know what I would rather 
choose, whether to have religion altogether left out of 
their deliberations, or to have it brought up by men, 
whether “orthodox” or “progressive,” whose concep- 
tions of God and spiritual truth are as opposed to the 
principles of Israel’s true “religion” revealed in Old 
and New Testament, as darkness to light. 

For the present, Zionism, like all Israel, is religiously 
a heterogeneous mass, embracing in its following all 
shades of belief and unbelief, held together only by the 
“National Idea.” One can understand, therefore, the 
anxiety of the responsible leaders to keep questions 
of cult out of its programme. 

But let me give a few of the more striking passages 
of Dr. Gaster’s speech. I suppose in answer to Dr. 
Herzl’s question as to “what is really meant,’ he 
said :— 

“Asa matter of fact, our culture question is one of 
the greatest prophetic dreams of our people, the greatest 


/ 


ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 251 


prophetic vision which our people have cherished 
throughout thousands of years ; the greatest ideal which 
has hovered before the spiritual sight, and which has 
deeply influenced the lives of our people. We have 
always had a great ideal before us, which is not to be 
compared with the ideals that have influenced other 
nations, and we have pursued this ideal, undismayed, 
through thousands of years. For we dream of possess- 
ing our own state on earth, where justice and love shall 
reign, and we name this heavenly state on earth the 
ideal of the Jewish people. It is entirely different to 
the efforts of the whole world, and therefore we have 
remained different, and—I assert it here—on a higher 
plane than all other nations of the world, for there is 
no other nation that can compare with ours. All the 
attempts that have been made against us, to degrade 
and persecute us, have failed, and we, as Zionists, now 
declare we remain as true to our ideal as were our 
ancestors thousands of years ago, You will naturally 
ask me, What is the connection between this heavenly 
state on earth with Zionism? In fact the connection 
is of the closest. The one is hope, the ‘other is reality. 
We have now before our spiritual eyes the picture of 
the glorious future, and this is the secret of our eternity 
and indestructibleness. If our bodies have been broken, 
our spirit has never been broken.” 

This is partially true. The establishment of God’s 
kingdom on earth, with Israel as the centre, was the 
divinely communicated “ ideal” of Israel’s prophets and 
seers, but between the present and the time when that 
ideal shall be realised lies Israel’s repentance and conver- 
sion, about which Dr. Gaster, and the other repre- 
sentatives of the “ Culturfrage” say, as yet, not a word ; 
the time when Israel’s proud spirit shall at last de broken 
before God, and when in true contrition of heart they 


252 ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 


shall turn not only to Zion, but to Zion’s true King, 
through whom alone, and never through Israel apart 
from Him, will this prophetic “dream” be fulfilled. 

Then Israel will no longer boast as if by their innate 
goodness and power they were on “a higher plane than 
all other nations,” but in the spirit of Paul, the type of 
his nation, they will say, “I thank Christ Jesus our 
Lord, who hath enabled me, for that He counted me 
faithful, putting me into the ministry, who was before a 
blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious; but I 
obtained mercy because I did it ignorantly in unbelief 
... By grace I am what I am.” 

To me, one of the saddest passages in Dr. Gaster’s 
speech was the following, because it reveals an utterly 
mistaken view as to the real character and influence of 
Rabbinic Judaism :— 

“When the Temple of ancient times was destroyed,” 
he said, “the leaders of the spiritual party asked of the 
Roman conquerors not the liberation of the Jewish 
people from slavery ; they asked that the Jewish spirit 
should be liberated ; they prayed for one modest thing, 
only to open a school. This school has never ceased to 
exist. Its doors, once opened, have never been closed, 
and through these portals the spirit of mankind has 
been re-created to return here in a purified form. We 
have acquired knowledge from all quarters; but we have 
also worked in every direction as spiritual teachers of 
the highest teachings.” 

Was this so? I ask again. Was it from the portals of 
the synagogue or Beth-Hammedrash that the power 
went forth for the re-creation “of the spirit of man- 
kind”? 

I have already shown up this delusion. 

The utmost which the synagogue has done since 
the destruction of the second Temple was to shut 


ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 253 


zm its antiquated doors, and preserve in isolation those 
within. 

Not from the synagogue, where the quibblings of 
Rabbis took the place of the reading of God’s pure Word 
in Moses and the prophets, but from the new “ House,” 
the Ecclesia of the living God, of which Christ became 
the head, and the Jewish Apostles the stewards, did 
blessing and renewal come to the nations, and, it is a 
pity that Dr. Gaster—being an historian—does not seem 
to be aware of it. 

And as to the effects of Talmudism upon the Jews 
themselves, was it really “a liberation of the spirit”? 
This is not the place to analyse the Talmud, or to show 
the part it has played in moulding Jewish character, 
even if I were able for such a task, but we know some- 
thing of the Talmud and its effects on the masses of the 
Diaspora, and I must endorse the conviction of many 
others who are capable of judging, that instead of “a 
liberation,” the Talmud has brought poor Israel into a 
spiritual and even mental bondage, corresponding only 
to the outward bodily captivity, in which they have 
been since the Temple was destroyed by their Roman 
conquerors. 

The concluding passage of Dr. Gaster’s speech was 
a fine piece of oratory, with a germ of truth wrongly 
apprehended. 

“ And now, in conclusion,” he said, “ what is there left 
for me to say? 

“Only to remind you of an old legend, the legend of 
the Phoenix, to which our wise men long ago compared 
our people. The Phcenix is immortal, but in a specified 
time it grows old and weak, and is consumed inwardly ; 
it becomes ashes, and only a very small germ remains. 
This the priest takes to Heliopolis, the City of the Sun, 
where he guards the germ and gradually the Phoenix 


2s4 ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 


develops, and when it is fully matured, it shakes its 
pinions and takes flight to the sun to thank God for 
having permitted it to be born again. 

“We also have been burnt and scattered like the ashes 
of the earth. Only the germ remains, and now we 
Zionists, the priests of the new age, we come to bring 
the germ to the City of the Sun, of truth, of fidelity, of 
devotion. We preserve it and shall preserve it, until 
Judaism, like the Phcenix, rises again from its ashes and 
soars upwards to the sun of truth, carrying the nations 
with it.” 

This reminded me of Isaiah vi., where to the prophet’s 
question “ Lord how long?” God says: “ Until cities be 
waste without habitation, and houses without men, and 
the land becomes utterly waste, and Jehovah have 
removed men far away, and the forsaken places be 
many in the midst of the land. And if there be yet a 
tenth in it, it shall again be eaten up; as a terebinth, 
and as an oak, whose stock remaineth when they are 
felled, so the holy seed is the stock thereof.” 

There is, indeed, an indestructible germ—“a holy 
seed ”—in Israel, which always survives the terrible 
judgments and desolations which befall them, and over 
this germ Israels Shepherd and Great High Priest is 
watching. Before long He will carry it back to the city 
of God, and there under the rays of the sun of righteous- 
ness it will take root and live anew. Then “ Israel shall 
blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with 
fruit.” 

FRIDAY, August 18th. 

It is the last day of the Congress, and being the eve of 
the Sabbath, a number of the delegates have already 
left, but still there is as much bustle and hurry as ever. 
The chief feature of the morning sitting was a speech in 
German by Sir Francis Montefiore, nephew and heir of 


ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 255 


the famous Sir Moses, whose name is still held in the 
highest esteem by the Jews in all parts of the world. 

Sir Francis is a fair-haired thorough English gentle- 
man, whose advocacy of Zionism shows that not a// the 
Jewish monied aristocracy hold aloof from the move- 
ment. “I am with you,” he said ; “my services, I can 
assure you, are ever at your command. For I shall 
indeed consider it the highest of all privileges if only, 
and in any way, be it even in the humblest of capacities, 
I can do but the least thing to further and promote this 
great and glorious cause,” and to these assurances the 
delegates responded with tremendous cheering. The 
final sitting in the afternoon was taken up with election 
of committees and the reading of the report of the 
Palestine Colonisation Committee, after which there 
followed a scene of tumult, occasioned by Mr. Davis 
Trietsch, who, from the tribune, tried to unfold his plan 
for the temporary colonisation of Cyprus. 

The Russian delegates in particular, who will hear of 
no other land but Palestine, worked themselves up into 
a frenzy, and there was confusion till their motion was 
carried by Congress that Mr. Trietsch should not be 
heard. 

When calm was restored, Dr. Herzl dismissed the 
Congress with a brief and dignified speech, followed by 
tremendous cheering, during which all rose to their feet. 
A resolution of thanks to the president, and the third 
Zionist Congress passes into history, having certainly put 
the Zionist movement on a more consolidated basis than 
before.t 


t I subjoin the following account of a pathetic incident at the 
close of the fourth Congress in London in 1900 : “At the close 
there was a very strange scene. The members rose and started 
singing a national Hebrew song. It was all in the minor key, 
ending with a refrain which sounded like the sad wail of a woman 


256 ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 


Before leaving Basle, let me bear my testimony to the 
kindness and courtesy of the officials and leaders of the 
Congress to the few Jewish Christians who were present 
in their midst. 

A spirit of tolerance has characterised the Zionist 
movement from the beginning, on which account it has 
attracted the sympathy of intelligent Christians, who 
have never ceased to cherish the hope of Israel’s re- 
storation and future blessing. 


A REMARKABLE SCENE. 

As an illustration of this spirit of tolerance, I may 
refer to a scene which I witnessed in the course of this 
morning, when, during a pause in the proceedings of 
Congress, I found in the spacious lobby leading to the 
galleries of the large hall, a tall Franciscan monk, 
surrounded by quite a large number of delegates, who 
were noisily disputing with him on religious topics; while 
on the outskirts of the little crowd was a dear, earnest 
Gentile Christian “ Brother,” with an open New Testa- 
ment in his hand, in which he was pointing out some 
particular passages to the Jews. 


in distress, or the moan of a suffering patient racked with pain. 
it reminded one of some of the sad plaintive songs of the negro 
slaves on the American plantations. It was weird and made one 
shudder—so might slaves sing in their despondency when filled 
with an insatiable craving after freedom. But suddenly from 
another part of the hall came other sounds and another song. 
For a time it; was difficult to distinguish it, both seemed mingled, 
but gradually the Hebrew slave dirge died away, the minor key 
gave way to the major, and England’s National Anthem burst 
forth, and was taken up quickly by the Jew from Russia and New 
York, Roumania and South Africa, Jerusalem and Paris ; it was 
the song of a free nation, a nation that had never known slavery, 
a nation that had helped many to freedom. Would it begin the 
new century by helping the nation longest enslaved to a home 
they would never leave again, to a freedom they would never 
forfeit ?” 


ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 257 


It was indeed a case of extremes meeting; to see 
these two men—the one with the rosary and cross hang- 
ing from his neck, and the other with the Word of God 
—both arguing with the Jews. 

Before I was recognised by some in the party, I 
managed to overhear fragments of the discussion. The 
monk must be very different from the majority of his 
confraternity and of the Roman Church in general if 
what he said was true. 

He assured them that he was a great lover of the 
Jews, and that he believed they would soon go back to 
Palestine. 

“What about Deckert?” interrupted an Austrian 
delegate. 

Deckert, I should explain, is that Catholic parish 
priest near Vienna referred to in another part? who not 
long ago preached a series of sermons against the Jews 
in his church, and ended one with the words: “Verbrennt 
die Juden zur Ehre Gottes. Amen.” (“Burn the Jews 
for the glory of God. Amen.”) 

The Franciscan professed not to know anything about 
this Deckert nor of any hatred on the part of the Roman 
Catholic Church toward the Jews. 

“You speak of love,” interrupted another Jew, “ but 
all we know is that for centuries we have experienced 
from the Christians nothing but hatred and cruelty.” 

The dear “ Brother” with the New Testament—-whose 
name, according to his own writing in my notebook, 
is Herr Alfred Rosshard, of Papperswyl—gave me quite 
a hug when he discovered who I was, and pressed me to 
come and stay with him in his home. His words of 
testimony seemed much more effective than the monk’s, 
When one of the Jews in the group appealed to him 
what he thought of the anti-Semites, he replied, “The 

* See page 218. 
18 


258 ZIONISM AND THE ZIONIST CONGRESS 


anti-Semites—they are*only a scourge in the hand of — 
our God, but as soon as you return to Him, He will 
throw the hateful scourge from Him, and visit upon 
them all their own cruelty. No true Christian who loves 
his Saviour and his Bible can hate the Jews, but there 
are many false Christians, even as Christ foretold. But 
you must not judge Him by these false professors.” To 
this I could only say “ Amen.” 


VIII 


ISRAEL’S MISSION TO THE WORLD, AND THE 
CHURCH’S MISSION TO ISRAEL 


“Ye are My witnesses, saith the Lord, and My servant whom I 
have chosen ; that ye may know and believe Me, and under- 
stand that I am He; before Me there was no God formed, 
neither shall there be after Me. I, even I, am the Lord, and 
beside Me there is no Saviour. I have declared, and have saved, 
and I have showed when there was no strange God among you; 
therefore ye are My witnesses, saith the Lord, that I am God.”— 
Isa. xliii. 10-12. : 

“Ye shall be witnesses unto Me, both in Jerusalem and in all 
Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth.” 
—Acts i. 8, 


VIPI 


ISRAEL’S MISSION TO THE WORLD, AND THE 
CHURCH’S MISSION TO ISRAEL ! 


S we look at the passage quoted from Acts i. “Ye 

shall be witnesses unto Me,” we cannot but be 
reminded of the very similar words addressed by God 
through the prophet Isaiah, to Israel as a nation, and 
we may well ask how is it, that instead of Israel at the 
present time witnessing for God among the nations, it is 
necessary that witness should be borne to Israel about 
their own God, their own Messiah, and their own 
Scriptures? The answer is given by the Apostle Paul 
in Rom. xi. 25, “Blindness in part is happened to 
Israel.” It is true that certain leaders among modern 
Jews claim still to have a mission, even at this present 
day, in their dispersion among the nations—a mission, 
as they say, to bear witness to the unity of God. But 
if we examine this supposed witness that the modern 
Jew gives to the unity of God, we find it very defective ; 
for it is not a testimony to God as He has been pleased 
to reveal Himself in His word—that is, as the infinite, 


1 The first part of this chapter was an address delivered at the 
Mildmay Conference in June, 1897, the subject that year being 
“The Evangelisation of Our Own Generation.” It was afterwards 
written out in full for the Missionary Review of the World, from 


which excellent magazine it is reproduced here. 
261 


262 ISRAEL'S MISSION TO THE WORLD, AND 


yet personal, triune, holy, loving God—but a testimony 
to an abstract formula with regard to the unicity of the 
Godhead. Of a personal, living God, modern Judaism 
knows, alas, very little. As a matter of fact, it is not 
due to the testimony to the unity of God, as given by 
the synagogue, that Gentiles have been brought to 
believe in one living and true God, but to the more 
truly Jewish testimony as given by the Jewish Apostles 
of the New Covenant, who went about preaching one 
God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; one 
Mediator between God and man, Jesus Christ the 
righteous; and one Holy Spirit, by whom the know- 
ledge of God is communicated to man ; and these three, 
one blessed Trinity. 

But, speaking generally, it is the boast of modern 
Jews that they are not a missionary people. Thousands 
of times have I had it thrown in my teeth by Jews in 
various parts of the world, who have said, “ Why do 
Christians trouble themselves with trying to convert us? 
We do not try to convert anybody.” My reply usually — 
is: “Why don’t you? If you boast of the fact that you 
are not a missionary people, you simply boast of your 
shame ; you simply testify to the fact that you are not 
now answering the purpose for which God called Israel 
into existence. Was not the very purpose of God in 
creating the Jewish nation that they might be wit- 
nesses for Him, to make known His name among the 
nations? The fact that you are not now a missionary 
people is accounted for by the reason that you have no 
mission. In this respect it is true that the Kingdom of 
God has been taken from you and given to a nation 
bringing forth the fruits thereof. If you had a message 
you could not be silent, even if you tried, for you would 
find the word of God like a burning fire in your heart 
shut up in your bones, so that you would weary in for- 


THE CHURCH'S MISSION TO ISRAEL 263 


bearing to run and communicate it to others.” Israel 
at the present day has no message. The Jews do not, 
and cannot, bear witness for God, excepting that passive 
testimony which the diaspora gives to the righteous 
severity of God—a testimony which, would to God 
Christendom took to heart, because it contains the 
solemn lesson to them, that they also, if they continue 
not in His goodness, shall be cut off. 


But has the purpose of God in relation to Israel in 
this respect, that they should be His witnesses, been 
frustrated, or has it been already accomplished in the 
testimony that the Jews gave in the past? No; the 
Jew has yet a future of testimony for God on the earth. 
“Blindness in part,” as the Apostle Paul says, “has 
happened unto Israel,” and it is “in part” in a double 
sense. It is partial in its extent, for there is the 
remnant, according to the election of grace, who are not 
blinded, but can behold the glory of God in the face of 
Jesus Christ even now, and it is partial also in its 
duration. There is a great contrast in the Word of 
God in this respect, between the condition of the Jew 
now, and the condition of the Jew in the future. 
“Blindness in part has happened unto Israel,’ says 
the Apostle Paul in Romans xi.; but we read of a 
wonderful transformation that is to come over the 
Jewish people. “Then,” says the prophet, Isaiah 
XXXV. 5, 6, “the eyes of the blind shall be opened.” 
The very nation that has been destined by God to 
point all the other nations to the Sun of Righteous- 
ness, has been itself struck blind, but it is only for a 
time. : 

The present condition of Israel may be very beauti- 
fully illustrated by a touching incident which I heard 
not long ago. It was about a child who met with an 


264 ISRAEL’S MISSION TO THE WORLD, AND 


accident and suddenly lost his eyesight. At first he did 
not know what had happened to him, and used to 
follow his mother about the house, crying: “ Mother, 
mother, when will it be day? When will the sun 
shine?” The poor mother. had not the heart to tell 
her child all at once that it was day, that the sun was 
shining, but that something had happened to his eyes. 
This is the condition of the Jews to-day. “We wait for 


light, but behold obscurity ; for brightness, but we walk 


in darkness.” But “the eyes of the blind shall be 
opened.” Soon the cry will go forth, “ Arise, shine, for 
thy light has come; the glory of Jehovah is risen upon 


thee.” And then “the Gentiles shall come to thy light - 


and kings to the brightness of thy rising.” 

The prophet continues: “Then the lame man shall leap 
as an hart.” I never read this verse in Isaiah xxxv. 
without being reminded of Acts iii, where we have the 
account of a notable miracle that was wrought in the 
name of our Lord Jesus Christ. We read there about a 
poor man who was carried every day to the gate of the 
temple called Beautiful, where he begged for alms of 
those who were going to worship God. One day Peter 
and John came along, and he asked alms from them 
also; but Peter, fastening his eyes upon him, with John, 
said : “ Look on us!” expect something different from 
us than you would from others; and we read that he 
gave heed to them, expecting something from them. 
But Peter said: “Silver and gold have I none, but such 
as I have give I unto thee: in the name of Jesus Christ 
of Nazareth, rise up and walk!” and he took him by the 
right hand, and the lame man, leaping up, stood and 
walked, and entered with them into the temple, walking 
and leaping and praising God. 

My dear friends, that lame man is a type and parable 
of Israel. Israel is that lame man. Beautiful upon 


THE CHURCH'S MISSION TO ISRAEL 265 


the mountains should be the feet of Jewish evangelists 
and preachers bearing the glad tidings of Messiah’s 
Gospel to the nations ; but Israel is lame now and out- 
side the temple of God ; that is, out of communion with 
God, because the temple was the visible symbol of 
fellowship with Jehovah. - They are like the poor lame 
man also in this respect, that all their thoughts are 
fixed on money. Money, money; alms, business. I 
do not wish to say here, because it would not be true, 
that the Jew is exceptional in this respect. It is the 
tendency of the human heart that knows not the 
treasure that is at the right hand of God, to cleave unto 
the dust, and the Jew and Gentile are alike in this 
respect. I am only touching upon the fact that the 
Jew, like the Gentile, is at present occupied with 
worldly things, and he will readily deal with Christians 
in business. Peter and John have come to Israel and 
have said, “ Look on us,” and, blessed be God, there is a 
remnant whose eyes have been opened by the Spirit of 
God to see that power to heal lies only in the name of 
Jesus, and they are leaping and rejoicing. But as far as 
the nation is concerned, Israel is still sitting lame, 
incapable of going on an errand for God among the 
nations. For centuries it has been in that condition; 
but will it always remain so? Oh, no! There is a 
greater One yet than Peter and John to pass Israel 
again. We sometimes sing a hymn, “ Jesus of Nazareth 
passeth by.” He passed by Israel once, and Israel was 
then already sick; but Israel let Him pass without 
as much as touching the hem of His garment, and 
Jesus returned unto His place until they acknowledge 
their offence and seek His face. When He departed, 
He said: “Your house is left unto you desolate, for I 
say unto you, ye shall not see Me henceforth, until ye 
' shall say, Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the 


266 ISRAEL'S MISSION TO THE WORLD, AND 


Lord.” Yes, Jesus will yet pass Israel again, and they 
will assuredly use the words of the prophecy from 
Psalm cxviii. which He quoted. Jesus will say to 
Israel, “Look on Me,” and the spirit of grace and 
supplication will be poured out upon the Jewish nation, 
and they shall look on Him whom they have pierced. 
Jesus will again take Israel by the hand. “I will build 
again the tabernacle of David, which has fallen; I will 
build again the ruins thereof ;” and then “shall the lame 
man leap as an hart,” and a tremendous sensation will be 
created on the earth. This is the hope of missions, and 
of the evangelisation of the world. When this national 
lame man is healed, all the peoples of the earth will see 
this wonderful miracle performed by Jesus Christ of 
Nazareth. We read in the same prophecy that at that 
time in the wilderness shall waters break out. This is a 
picture of Israel’s present condition—a wilderness, a 
howling desert, spiritually ; but God has said that out 
of this wilderness rivers will spring up for the refreshing 
of the whole world. 

Now, in the interval between Israel’s rejection and 
Israel’s reception of Christ, when the Jews shall be 
reinstated as the witnesses of Jehovah on the earth, 
the Church, which is made up of Jews and Gentiles, 
is put into the very position of Israel, both in 
relation to privilege and to responsibility. (æ) In 
relation to ‘privilege: “Ye shall be a peculiar treasure 
unto Me above all people ... and ye shall be unto 
Me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation,” was 
God’s word to Israel in Exodus, the Book of Redemp- 
tion: “Ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, 
a holy nation, a purchased possession,” says Peter, to 
all who have been redeemed with precious blood, 
whether Jew or Gentile. 

(4) In relation to responsibility: “Ye are My 


THE CHURCH’S MISSION TO ISRAEL 267 


Witnesses,” saith Jehovah, “and My servants ... This 
people have I formed for Myself; they shall show 
forth My praise,” are God’s words to Israel: “ Ye 
shall be witnesses unto Me both in Jerusalem and in 
all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost 
parts of the earth,” were the parting words of the 
ascending Christ to the Church: “That ye should 
show forth the praises of Him who hath called you out 
of darkness into His marvellous light.” 

Yes, one of the chief ends of the Church’s existence 
on earth is, that she may bear witness to the nations ; 
and in her witness she dare not lose sight of the Jew, 
for, as the late Professor Franz Delitzsch once said, at a 
great missionary meeting, “Gentlemen, if you speak 
about the evangelisation of the world, and forget the 
Jew, you are like a bird that tries to fly with one of its 
wings clipped.” 

But generally I find that in speaking to Christians 
about the Jew, it is very easy to carry them with you if 
you speak of the Jews of the past—the Jew of Bible 
history—or the prophetic Jew of the future; but when 
it comes to the actual Jew of the present day, and you 
want them to enter into the thoughts and mind of God 
in reference to Israel of the present, that is a most 
difficult task. Let me illustrate it practically. At the 
present day there is, perhaps, no country in the world 
where such a lively interest is taken in the Jew, and 
where so much is done in proportion for Jewish missions, 
as in Norway, although in Norway itself there are 
scarcely any Jews. You will ask how this interest 
in Israel originated in Norway. Well, it originated, 
for the most part, in the prayers and devotion of 
a noble-minded Christian lady. About fifty years 
ago, when the cause of foreign missions was taking 
hold of Christians in Norway, this lady’s heart was 


268 ISRAEL'S MISSION TO THE WORLD, AND 


moved by the Spirit of God with compassion for 
Israel. One day, as the pastor of her church was 
coming down from the pulpit, she said to him: “I am 
very glad to hear you always pray for the heathen, but 
I wish you would also include poor scattered Israel.” 
The pastor turned round rather hotly, and said: “The 
Jews! We have nothing to do with them. They have 
been cast off, and now it is the time of the Gentiles.” 
She tried to reason with him, but it was of no avail. 
But one day she called on her pastor, and said to him: 
“I have a very sad story to relate to you, and I am sure 
it will draw out your sympathy.” He said: “What is 
it?” She replied: “Not far from here there lives a good 
man and his wife. They have one son, whom they love 
as their own lives. They did everything possible for 
him, but the son turned out most unworthy of his 
parents’ love; he returned it only with disobedience 
_ and ingratitude. After a time, when his conduct became 
no longer tolerable, with great grief of heart, they let him 
go, and he is now a wanderer. Instead of this son of 
theirs they adopted a poor gipsy boy. Him they put in 
their own son’s room, gave their own son’s clothing and 
books—in fact, they treated him in every possible way 
as their own child. The boy was very happy, but the 
parents could not forget their own child. In the evening 
sometimes a mist steals over the mother’s eyes, and a 
sigh escapes from the heart of the father, and when the 
boy asks, “What is the matter?” the father answers, 
“ Oh, our son, our son; would that he would come back ; 
there is room in our hearts for him as well as you.” 
But this the boy does not like, and now it has come to 
this, that every time the parents mention their son, he 
gets into a temper. What do you think of it?” The 
pastor stood up and said: “Oh, the ungrateful youth ; 
if I were the parents, I would let him go; he is not a 


=" 


THE CHURCH’S MISSION TO ISRAEL ^ 269 


bit better than the other.” The lady paused a minute or 
two, and then said: “Dear pastor, forgive me; Israel 
is that wandering son, and we are the gipsy boy; and 
although God was obliged to send the Jews into captivity, 
and has ‘given over the dearly beloved of His soul into 
the hands of her enemies,’ His heart has not ceased to 
yearn for them, and His ‘hands are still outstretched 
all the day long to His disobedient and gainsaying 
people? Hearken! ‘Is Ephraim my dear son? Is he 
a pleasant child? for, since I spake against him, I do 
earnestly remember him still. Therefore my bowels are 
troubled for him. I will surely have mercy on him, 
saith Jehovah.’” 

The pastor’s heart was won, and the result was the 
first society that was established in Norway for the 


> evangelisation of the Jews. 


May God give us the same spirit of compassion, that 
our hearts may go out in pity with His for this poor 
national Prodigal Son! 

Our testimony to-day to the Jews is with regard to 
Jesus Christ, that “this Jesus,” whom they crucified and 
think to be dead, is Israel’s true Messiah, exalted to the 
right hand of God, a prince and a Saviour. If time 
permitted, I should like to speak of the peculiar 
methods which we should adopt in our testimony to 
the Jew; and also as to the right kind of witnesses who 
should be sent forth by the Church, because I believe 
that, to this day, God has His instruments adapted for 
this work, and for that work, and it is not every one 
who is called of God to be a missionary to the Jews. 

On this point it will not be out of place if I quote 
from a report of Professor Gustaf Dalman of the 
Leipzig Institutum Delitzschianum, as to the necessary 
qualifications of a properly equipped missionary to the 
Jews, with which I most heartily concur, 


270 ISRAEL’S MISSION TO THE WORLD, AND 


“1, The missionary among the Jews must have a 
thorough knowledge of their languages. This com- 
prises not only a knowledge of the languages of Jewish 
literature, Hebrew and Aramaic; and, if possible, a 
good practical acquaintance with the former, which is 
most extensively used by the Jews in their written 
communications, but also ability at least to speak 
German, and to understand Hebrew-German, or ‘ Yid- 
dish,’ the vernacular spoken by two-thirds of the Jewish 
people. 

“2. The missionary must be acquainted with the 
religion of the Jews. Without this knowledge he will 
find it impossible to set forth our holy religion to Jews 
in such a way as to commend it to them, or even to be 
understood by them, much less to bring it home to 
heart and conscience. Those who are not cognizant of 
the world of Jewish religious thought, cannot conceive 
how unintelligible the terminology of our holy faith is 
to the Jew. Even the great scriptural key-words of 
Christianity—Sin, repentance, faith, righteousness, Re- 
deemer, Christ-Messiah have a different meaning to the ` 
Jew, while, of course, all ecclesiastical terms are utterly 
incomprehensible to him. And thus experience has 
shown that the plainest and most heartfelt Gospel 
message coming from an untrained, though earnest 
Gentile Christian, will sound as a dark riddle in Jewish 
ears. 

“3. The missionary should have studied the doctrines 
and sacred documents of the Christian faith in their 
bearings on Israel. Tracing the history of Israel 
through the Old Testament, and viewing their election 
and future in the light of law and prophecy, and noting 
the differences between the Jewish and Christian con- 
ceptions of Bible doctrine and statement, he should 
seek to obtain such a grasp of the Scriptures as to 


THE CHURCH'S MISSION TO ISRAEL 271 


be able to meet and answer any difficulty or objection 
that may be propounded by the inquirer or caviller. 

“4. The missionary must be conversant with the 
history of the mission to Israel, its nature, aims, and 
methods, and the lines on which the work has hitherto 
been carried on. Practical knowledge and insight is 
best obtained by commencing work under the super- 
vision of experienced missionaries, 

“Even for the Hebrew-Christian candidate special 
training is most desirable and necessary. As a rule, 
his knowledge of Jewish and Hebrew matters is 
insufficient and incomplete, in spite of his former sur- 
roundings, and though his own faith be firm and clearly 
evinced, yet in the nature of things his grasp of 
Scripture truth cannot be such as to fit him, without 
any further training, for the work of an evangelist 
among his brethren. We cannot fix a high enough 
standard of attainment for those who desire to devote 
themselves to this work. A training that may fully 
qualify a man to go out and proclaim the Gospel to 
the uncivilised heathen world, is utterly insufficient for 
a worker among the Jews, although we would never 
have ourselves or others forget, that technical qualifica- 
tions and even Scriptural knowledge are worthless, 
unless accompanied by a living faith and the burning 
desire to promote the interests of Christ’s kingdom 
among His brethren according to the flesh. Better to 
send out no missionaries at all than to send out such as 
are spiritually and intellectually unfit for their task.” 

Tremendous injury to the Jewish mission has resulted 
from two causes :— 

(1) The putting into the work of “workers,” both 
Jews and Gentiles, who were utterly unfit for the holy 
and delicate task of holding up the banner of Christ 
before the Jews; sometimes mere novices, whose cha- 


272 ISRAEL'S MISSION TO THE WORLD, AND 


racters were not sufficiently tested; or even brilliant 
impostors, who captivated the hearts of some whose 
zeal for the Jewish cause is not according to knowledge. 
In this part of the Lord’s vineyard more particularly, 
we need not only the spirit of love and of wisdom and 
power, but also of æ sound mind, a spirit of Scriptural 
sobriety, not dissociated from a true Holy Ghost 
enthusiasm, for the salvation of a people in whom is 
bound up the hope of the world, but in whose midst 
Satan is entrenched more powerfully at the present day 
than in any other nation. 

(2) There is also a great lack of knowledge of the 
peculiar people, and of God’s present and future 
purposes in and through them, which is accountable for 
certain methods in some Jewish missions, which, how- 
ever much momentary sensation they may create, and 
however much interest they may arouse among Gentile 
Christians, can only work disastrously as far as the Jews 
themselves are concerned. I am not speaking as a 
theorist, but from knowledge and experience. After 
being permitted to serve the Lord in the evangelisation 
of my people for over twenty years, I am more and 
more convinced that in the Jewish mission, as in the 
Lord’s work generally, it is not sensation, but self- - 
sacrificing hard toil, and patient continuance in well- 
doing that will accomplish anything of permanent value 
for the glory of Christ. 

Then, as to the manner of presenting the Gospel to 
the Jews, a great deal might very usefully be said. 
For instance, Jewish opposition is sometimes owing to 
the fact that Christianity has been presented to them 
as a system, altogether detached from, and, to some 
extent, opposed to Moses and the prophets. Now, in 
order to remove such impressions, it is of the utmost 
importance in dealing with Jews to show them that the 


THE CHURCH’S MISSION TO ISRAEL 273 


New Testament is in historic continuity, and true order 
of sequence to the Old Testament, and that there is not 
a single essential doctrine in the New Testament, the 
roots of which are not to be found in Moses and the 
prophets. This will not be successfully accomplished 
by always pointing the Jews to a few well-known 
Messianic passages, but by a methodic unfolding of 
Scripture as a whole. Indeed, if there is one need 
greater than another in the Jewish field at the present 
day, it is that of men mighty in Scriptures, who, in the 
power of the Spirit, can show to Israel how that, not 
only an isolated passage here and there, but that zz the 
whole “ scroll of the book ct ts written of Him.” 

It is not my intention to enter into a review of Jewisi 
missions, and into what has been accomplished within 
this century, so eventful in the history of Jewish emanci- 
pation and evangelisation. All I can do now is just 
briefly to remark on the great change in relation to the 
Gospel which is at present undoubtedly passing over 
the Jewish nation. 

Putting aside the vague, exaggerated reports based on 
no solid foundation, which lead those unacquainted with 
the facts of the case to believe that untold thousands of 
Jews are now pressing into the Church, and that we are 
on the verge of the entire nation becoming Christian, I 
have no hesitation in saying that the tone and attitude 
of large numbers of Jews in relation to Christ, in coun- 
tries where hard, persevering Gospel work has been 
carried on for some time, have undergone a remarkable 
change. 

It is a great thing in itself that the Christ-question is 
becoming familiarised in the minds of Jews, and that 
Talmudic Judaism is putting out its hand, however 
tremblingly, to receive the New Testament, and listening, 
though as yet with hesitating ear, as to who this Jesus of 

19 


274 ISRAEL’S MISSION TO THE WORLD, AND 


Nazareth, whom it has hitherto hated without knowing 
why, really was. 

To an eagerness.on the part of many Jews in all parts 
of the world to hear of Christ and to receive the New 
Testament, I can bear personal testimony. In Ger- 
many, Austria, and the Balkan States, North Africa, in 
many places on the Mediterranean coast as well as in 
Egypt, Palestine, and Asia Minor, we have had Jews 
flock to us in some places from early morning till late 
at night to hear and dispute about Christ. Even in 
centres of Chassidic Jewish bigotry, in Galicia and 
Roumania, we have had our rooms packed with Jews in 
their long kaftans and peyoth, eagerly and respectfully 
discussing the claims of Christ, some of whom gratefully 
accepted the New Testament, which but a few years 
ago they would not even touch with their hands because 
they regarded it as an unclean thing. I cannot here 
enter into the causes which by the overruling providence 
of God have brought this change about, but I may just 
mention two. 

I. It is the outcome of nearly a century’s prayerful ~ 
toil on the part of Jewish missions and societies, some 
of whom, alas! have not continued long in their first 
love and zeal, and are now in danger of degenerating 
into mere “organisations.” What she has sown in tears 
more than half a century ago the Church of Christ is 
now permitted to reap in joy. It is a remarkable fact 
that however much interest in the Jewish mission cause 
has lacked in guanitzty, it has not lacked in guality. The 
sympathies of some of the holiest as well as the ablest 
of the servants of Christ within this century, have been 
enlisted in this truly Christ-like work, so full of hope for 
the world and in reflex blessing to the Church itself. 

While painfully conscious of the inadequacy and 
questionable means and methods which have sometimes 


THE CHURCH'S MISSION TO ISRAEL 275 


been adopted, I am struck, in studying the history of 
Jewish missions, with the amount of self-sacrificing love, 
devotion, and sanctified ability which have been brought 
to this task. 

We sometimes hear it said that the most notable con- 
versions from among Jews—my friends Joseph Rabino- 
witz and Rabbi Lichtenstein for example—are not the 
results of missions to the Jews, but of the study of the 
New Testament. Every conversion, if true, is directly 
the result of the Word of God applied by the Spirit of 
God ; but how came it that Rabinowitz and Lichtenstein 
had New Testaments to read? Until this century, until 
the Jewish mission saw to its translation and printing, 
there was no Hebrew New Testament for use among the 
Jews. 

II. Secondly, anti-Semitism and the grosser forms of 
persecution to which the Jews have been subjected in 
Russia and other countries, have contributed indirectly 
to bring about this spirit of change in the Jewish world 
in relation to the Gospel. Our God ever brings good 
out of evil and causes the wrath of men to praise Him. 
The whole movement, based for the most part on 
shallowness, lies, and inhumanity, by which these 
already apostate nations are hastening the filling of the 
cup of their iniquity, has nevertheless served to remind 
backslidden, apostate Israel of the long-standing con- 
troversy between them and their God, and has caused 
some to ask themselves what the sin can be which has 
brought upon them the retribution of so many long 
centuries, and in this indirect way their hearts have 
been to some extent prepared to listen to the claims of 
Christ. 

As may be said of all missions, so may it perhaps 
more especially be said of the Jews, the present is un- 
doubtedly a great day of opportunity for the Church of 


276 ISRAEL'S MISSION TO THE WORLD 


God. A door is open as never before, and, blessed be 
God, the Church is awaking to a sense of her duty to 
the Jew, for never before has there been such an interest 
manifested in missions to the Jews. 

What is needed at this juncture above all things are 
the right kind of /abourers—men of God and with the 
fitness and ability for this peculiar work ; men with the 


faith of Abraham, and with the sincerity, and missionary - 


zeal, and unquenchable love for Israel which charac- 
terised the Apostle Paul; men who from the present 
darkness can look to the coming dawn when “all Israel 
shall be saved” and “the glory of the Lord cover the 
earth as the waters cover the sea,” 


IX 


ANGLO-ISRAELISM AND THE TRUE HISTORY 
OF THE TEN “LOST” TRIBES 


fa i 
aa) 
Se 
i 
+4 


nl 


Ef 


IX 


ANGLO-ISRAELISM AND THE TRUE HISTORY OF THE 
TEN “LOST” TRIBES 


(A Letter to an Inquirer) 


EAR Friend,—1i shall endeavour to comply with 

your request, and to give you in this letter a few 
reasons for my strong aversion to the Anglo-Israelite 
theory, which I cannot help regarding as one of the 
saddest symptoms of the mental and spiritual shallow- 
ness of the present day. I am not a man delighting in 
controversy, and I only consent to your wish because I 
believe that you, like many other simple-minded Chris- 
tians, are perplexed and imposed upon by the plausi- 
bilities of the supposed “ Identifications,” and are not 
able to detect the fallacies and perversions of Scripture 
and history upon which the whole theory’is based. 

The theory is, that the “lost” Israelites who were 
carried captive by the Assyrians under Sargon, are 
identical with the Saxz, or Scythians, who appear asa 
conquering horde there about the same time. These 
Scythians next swarmed westward into Northern Europe, 
and became the progenitors in particular of the Saxon 
invaders of England. The Anglo-Saxons therefore are 
the “lost” ten tribes, now identified. They are the 


Israel of the Bible, to whom belong the covenants and 
279 


280 ANGLO-ISRAELISM AND THE TRUE HISTORY 


the blessings. It is owing to this fact that the British 
Empire is so great and prosperous. 

As to the Jews, they are not Israel at all, but, as the 
descendants of Judah, are still under the curse. In fact, 
the Anglo-Israelite by another and more mischievous 
method is doing exactly what the allegorising, or so- 
called spiritualising, school of interpreters did. The 
method was to apply all the promises in the Bible to the 
“ spiritual” Israel, or the Church, and all the curses to 
the literal Israel, or the Jews ; but by this new system, 
while the curses are still left to the Jew, all the blessings 
. are applied not even to those “in Christ,” but indis- 
criminately to a nation, which, as a nation, is as apostate 
from God as any other of which “ Christendom ” is com- 
posed, though I thankfully recognise the fact that there 
are many of God’s true people in it. 

The supposed ethnological and philological proofs for 
the British-Israel theory have been again and again 
demolished by competent authorities. Thus Professor 
Rawlinson, commenting on Hine’s “ Identifications,” 
said that the pamphlet is not calculated to produce the 
slightest effect on the opinion of those competent to 
form one. “Such effect as it may have, can only be on 
the ignorant and unlearned—on those who are unaware 
of the absolute and entire diversity in language, physical 
type, religious opinions, and manners and customs, 
between the Israelites and the various races from whom 
the English nation can be shown historically to be 
descended.” Asa matter of fact, there is as little abso- 
lute proof that the Anglo-Saxons are the Saxe, or 
Scythians, as that the Saxz are the Israelites, 

The Scriptural “Identifications” with which Anglo- 
Israel literature abound, turn out on examination to be 
mere verbal, and sometimes very childish quibblings on 
the English letter, depending for their success on the 


OF THE TEN “LOST” TRIBES 281 


reader’s ignorance of Hebrew exegesis. Some of their 
interpretations I can only characterise as bordering on 
blasphemy. Let me quote one or two examples. 

I. Great Britain is declared to be the stone cut out with- 
out hands which smote the image of Nebuchadnezzar. 

“We will see what is to be the future of the British 
Empire, or, in other words, the stone that smote the 
image. It is to become a great mountain and fill the 
whole earth. Our Colonial Empire, then, will continue 
to grow till it covers the whole world. We have tried 
to avoid extending our Empire many and many a time, 
and yet God has caused it to grow larger and larger, 
and I believe will still do so. We are already by far the 
greatest empire there is, or ever has been, and we shall 
yet be far greater. ; 

“The British Empire, again, can never be conquered. 
Daniel says, ‘The God of Heaven shall set up a king- 
dom which shall never be destroyed: it shall stand for 
ever. Consequently we shall never be conquered ; we 

- must continue till the end of time, so that we are to 
continue to exist as the last Kingdom or Empire this 
world is to see.” 

Il. The smoke of London identified with the Shekhinah 
glory? 

“ During their wanderings in the desert His presence 
was manifested by the pillar of cloud by day and the 
pillar of fire by night, and during the captivity of the 
Two Tribes of Judah in Babylon He was with them, 
until, at the expiration of the seventy years, He stirred 
up Cyrus to release them. The same Lord still watches 


z “Nebuchadnezzar’s Dream” in “The British Empire of 
Ephraim.” A whole collection of similar perversions of Scripture 
may be found in an excellent pamphlet by Pastor Frank H 
White, called “ Anglo-Israelism Examined.” 

2 From an article in The Banner of Israel, 


282 ANGLO-ISRAELISM AND THE TRUE HISTORY 


over the Ten Lost Tribes of Israel in England, and con- 
tinues to bless them. The same miracles that were 
wrought in Egypt were intended to foreshadow the 
realisation of God’s future dealings with the Israelites ; 
and if a gigantic panoramic view of England could be 
taken from an elevation above the centre of the island 
at midnight, a temporal pillar of fire would be as remark- 
able from the blazing furnaces, the gas, and steam. 
engines, as the pillar of cloud and smoke arising from 
the same sources in the daytime, marking the chief 
position and prosperity of Israel.” 

Once again the solemn words of the apostle are ful- 
filled in the teachers of Anglo-Israelism: “ Professing 
themselves to be wise they became fools,” or how else 
could they descend to such impious trivialities, or dare 
to liken the glory of the Personal Presence of the uncor- 
ruptible Jehovah, of which the shekhinah cloud was the 
visible symbol, to the smoke ascending from “blazing 
furnaces” and “steam engines.” 

Ill. Edward Hine, author of the forty-seven “ Identi- 
fications; ts the promised Deliverer who should come out 
of Zion. 

The following is taken from an article on Romans xi. 
25-27, which appeared in “ Life from the Dead,” which 
was edited by Edward Hine himself :— 

“ Are the British people identical with the lost Ten 
Tribes of Israel? And is the nation, by the identity, 
being led to glory? If these things are so, then where 
is the Deliverer? He must have already come out of 
Zion. He must be doing his great work; he must be 
amongst us. It is our impression that, by the glory of 
the work of the identity, we have come to the time 
of Israel’s national salvation by the Deliverer out of 
Zion, and that Edward Hine and that Deliverer are 
identical.” 


OF THE TEN “LOST” TRIBES 283 


I have said above that Anglo-Israelism applies the 
promises given to converted Israel indiscriminately to the 
English nation. It does not stop even here, as the above 
extracts show, but goes on to rob Christ Himself of His 
glory by applying to the British people prophecies 
which belong, not even to Israel, but to Israel’s Saviour. 
I have seen, for instance, again and again, the second 
Psalm, with the address of the Father to the Son, “ Ask 
of Me and I will give Thee the heathen (or ‘ nations’) 
for Thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the 
earth for Thy possession,” interpreted of the British 
Empire; while not long ago a champion of the British- 
Israel theory preached on the words of the Lord in 
Matthew, “Therefore say I unto you, the Kingdom of 
God shall be taken from you and given to a nation 
bringing forth the fruits thereof ”—taking it for granted 
that England is that “nation,” which, as a nation, is 
bringing forth the fruits of God’s kingdora. 

Now I need not explain to you that this is an utterly 
unspiritual and baseless assumption, for it is the Church 
—God’s elect and converted people out of all nations, 
which is that “nation,” which during the period of 
Israel’s national unbelief, bears fruit unto God; as is 
clear from 1 Peter ii. 9, where believers in Christ are 
addressed as, “a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, 
a holy nation (eOvoc) that ye should show forth the 
praises of Him who hath called you out of darkness into 
His marvellous light.” 

But now discarding the whole heap of Anglo-Israel 
trash, let us glance at the question of the so-called 
“lost” ten tribes in the light of Scripture history and 
prophecy. Anglo-Israelism first of all loses the ten 
tribes, for whom it claims a different destiny from the 
Jews, whom it supposes to be descendants of the two 
tribes only, and then it identifies this “lost” Israel with 


4 


284 ANGLO-ISRAELISM AND THE TRUE HISTORY 


the British race. But there is as little historical reason 
for the supposition that the ten tribes are lost, in the 
sense in which Anglo-Israelism uses the term, as there is 
Scriptural basis for a separate destiny for “ Israel” apart 
from “ Judah.” 

The most superficial reader of the Old Testament 
knows the origin and cause of the unfortunate schism 
which took place in the history of the elect nation 
after the death of Solomon. But this evil was to 
last only for a limited time; for at the very com- 
mencement of this new and parenthetical chapter of the 
nation’s history it was announced by God that He would 
in this way afflict the seed of David, but xot for ever. 
(1 Kings xi. 39.) 

A separate kingdom, comprising ten of the twelve 
tribes, was set up under Jeroboam in 975 B.C., and its 
whole history, of about 250 years, is one long, dark tale 
of usurpation, anarchy, and apostasy, unrelieved by the 
occasional gracious visitations of national revival which 
light up the annals of the Judean kingdom under the 
house of David. After many warnings and premoni-— 
tory judgments the kingdom of the ten tribes was finally 
overthrown in the year 721 B.C, when its capital, . 
Samaria, was destroyed, and the bulk of the people 
carried captives by the Assyrians, and made to settle 
in “ Halah and Habor, and by the river Gozan, and in 
the cities of the Medes” (2 Kings xvii. 6; 1 Chron. v. 26). 

Before passing on I would beg you to notice two or 
three facts. 

I. Firstly, the kingdom of “ Judah” after the schism 
consisted not only of Judah and Benjamin, but also of 
the Levites who remained faithful to the house of 
David and the theocratic centre.t Even those who were 

* According to Gratz, “ History of the Jews,” vol. i. p. 186, the 


tribe of Simeon, which was merely a subsidiary of that of Judah, 
also remained faithful to the House of David, but this is doubtful. 


OF THE TEN “LOST” TRIBES 285 


in the northern cities forsook all in order to come to 
Jerusalem, as we read 2 Chron. xi. 14: “And Rehoboam 
dwelt in Jerusalem, and built cities for defence in 
Judah ... and the priests and Levites that were in 
all Israel resorted to him out of all their coasts. For 
the Levites left their suburbs, and their possessions, and 
came to Judah and Jerusalem; for Jeroboam and his 
sons had cast them off from executing the priest’s office 
unto the Lord.” 

II. Apart from Judah, Benjamin, and Levi there 
were in the southern kingdom of Judah after the 
schism, many out of the other ten tribes whose hearts 
clung to Jehovah, and the only earthly centre of His 
worship which He appointed. Immediately after the 
rebellion, we read that “after them” (that is following 
the example of the Levites) “out of all the tribes of 
Israel, such as set their hearts to seek Jehovah, the God 
of Israel, came to Jerusalem to sacrifice to Jehovah, 
God of their fathers. So they strengthened the kingdom 
of Judah ” (2 Chron. xi. 16). 

In every reign of the kingdom of Israel numbers of 
_the religious and more spiritual of the ten tribes must 
have seceded and joined “Judah.” This we find to 
have been more especially the case during the times of 
national revival in the southern kingdom, and in the 
reigns of those kings who feared and sought the Lord. 

Thus, for instance, we read of Asa, that “he gathered 
all Judah and Benjamin, with the strangers with them 
out of Ephraim and Manasseh, and out of Simeon ; for 
they fell to him out of all Israel in abundance, when they 
saw that Jehovah his God was with him, so they 
gathered themselves together at Jerusalem... and 
they entered into a covenant to seek Jehovah God of 
their fathers with all their heart, and with all their soul” 
(2 Chron. xv. 9-15). 


286 ANGLO-ISRAELISM AND THE TRUE HISTORY 


There are also several other mentions of “ the children 
of Israel that dwelt in the cities of Judah” and were 
subjects and members of that kingdom. 

III. The final overthrow of the northern kingdom 
took place, as we have seen, in the year 721 B.C., but 
when we read that the “king of Assyria took Samaria 
and carried Israel away into Assyria,” we are not to 
understand that he cleared the whole land of all the 
people, but that he took the strength of the nation with 
him. There were, no doubt, many of the people left in 
the land, even as was the case after the overthrow of the 
southern kingdom by the Babylonians later on (2 Kings 
xxv.12). The historical proof for my assertion is found 
in the fact that about a century after the fall of Samaria 
we find in the reign of Josiah some of Manasseh and 
Ephraim, “and a remnant of all Israel” in the land, 
who contributed to the collection made by the Levites 
for the repair of the house of the Lord in Jerusalem, 
and joined in the celebration of the great Passover in 
the eighteenth year of that zealous and promising young 
king. 

These were the component elements of which the 
southern kingdom of “Judah” was made up, when 
it, too, reached the stage, when, on account of its idola- 
tries and apostasy from the living God, “there was no 
more remedy” (or “healing” 2 Chron. xxxvi..16), It 
consisted, as we have seen, of Judah, Benjamin, Levi, 
and many out of all the other ten tribes of Israel, “in 
abundance.” 

Jerusalem was finally taken in 588 B.C, by Nebu- 
chadnezzar—just 133 years after the capture of Samaria 
by the Assyrians. Meanwhile the Babylonian Empire 
succeeded the Assyrian; but although dynasties had 
changed, and Babylon, which had sometimes, even under 
the Assyrian régime, been one of the capitals of the 


OF THE TEN “LOST”. TRIBES 287 


Empire, now took the place of Nineveh, the region over 
which Nebuchadnezzar now bore rule was the very 
same over which Shalmaneser and Sargon reigned 
before him, only somewhat extended.: 

The exact location of the exiles of the southern 
kingdom we are not told, beyond the Scripture state- 
ments that all the three parties of captives carried off 
by Nebuchadnezzar (that in the first invasion in the 
reign of Jehoiakim, 606 B.C., and in the second, in the 
reign of Jehoiachin, 599 B.C., and in the final overthrow 
of Jerusalem, in the reign of Zedekiah, 588 B.C.), were 
taken “to Babylon” (2 Kings xxiv. and xxv. ; Daniel i.), 

- Now Babylon stands not only for the city, but also for 
the whole land, in which the territories of the Assyrian 
Empire, and the colonies of exiles from the northern 
kingdom of “Israel” were included. Thus, for instance, 
we find Ezekiel, who was one of the 10,000 exiles carried 
off by Nebuchadnezzar with Jehoiachin, by the river 
Chebar in the district of Gozan—one of the very parts 
where the exiles of the ten tribes were settled by the 
Assyrians more than a century previous. 

With the captivity the divisions and rivalry between 
“Judah” and “Israel” were ended, and the members 
of all the tribes who looked forward to a national future 
were conscious not only of one common destiny, but 
that that destiny was bound up with the promises to 
the house of David, and with Zion or Jerusalem as its 
centre, in accordance with the prophecies of Joel, Amos, 
and Hosea, and of the other inspired messengers who 
ministered and testified more especially among them 
until the fall of Samaria. This conviction of a common 
and united future, no doubt, facilitated the merging 
process, which cannot be said to have begun with the 


* See 2 Kings xxiii, 29, where the King of Babylon is called 
“King of Assyria.” 


288 ANGLO-ISRAELISM AND THE TRUE HISTORY 


captivity, for it commenced almost immediately after 
the rebellion under Jeroboam, but which was certainly 
strengthened by it. 

Glimpses into the feeling of the members of the two 
kingdoms for one another, and their hopes and aspira- 
tions for unity, we get in the writings of Jeremiah, 
Ezekiel, and Daniel, who prophesied during the period 
of exile. The most striking prophecy in relation to 
this subject is Ezek. xxxvii. 15-28: “The word of the 
Lord came again unto me, saying, Moreover, thou son of 
man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, For Judah, 
and for the children of Israel his companions (that is, 
those of Israel who before the captivity fell away from 
the ten tribes and joined the southern kingdom): then 
take another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the 
stick of Ephraim, and all the house of Israel his 
companions: and join them one to another into one 
stick; and they shall become one in thine hand.” 
Then follows the Divine interpretation of this symbol : 
“Behold, I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the 
hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his com- 
panions, and I will put them with him (or literally, I 
will add them upon, or to him), namely, with the stick 
of Judah, and make them one stick, and they shall be 
one in my hand. And the sticks whereon thou writest 
shall be in thy hand before their eyes. And say unto 
them, Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I will take the 
children of Israel from among the nations, whither they 
be gone, and will gather them on every side, and bring 
them into their own land; and I will make them one 
nation in the land upon the mountains of Israel ; and 
one king shall be king to them all: and they shall be 
no more two nations, neither shall they be divided into 
two kingdoms any more at all: neither shall they defile 
themselves any more with their idols, nor with their 


OF THE TEN “LOST” TRIBES 289 


detestable things, nor with any of their transgressions : 
but I will save them out of all their dwelling-places 
wherein they have sinned, and will cleanse them; so 
shall they be My people, and I will be their God. And 
My servant David shall be king over them ; and they all 
shall have one shepherd; they shall also walk in My 
judgments, and observe My statutes,and do them. And 
they shall dwell in the land which I have given unto 
Jacob My servant, wherein your fathers dwelt ; and they 
shall dwell therein, they, and their children, and their 
children’s children for ever: and David My servant shall 
be their prince for ever” (Ezek. xxxvii. 20-25, R.V.). 

Likewise Jeremiah in his great prophecy of the 
restoration (chaps. xxx. and xxxiii.) and future blessing, 
links the destinies of “Judah” and “Israel,” or Israel 
and. Judah together; and speaks of one common 
experience from that time on for the whole people. 
“For, lo, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will 
turn again the captivity of My people Israel and Judah, 
saith the Lord: and I will cause them to return to the 
land that I gave to their fathers, and they shall possess 
it. And these are the words that the Lord spake con- 
cerning Israel and Judah” (Jer. xxx. 3, 4, R.V.). 

Now let it be remembered that the foreground and 
commencement of the restoration and future in these 
prophecies, especially to all the exiles at that time, was 
the restoration from Babylon, or Assyria, as it was 
sometimes called. So, Daniel also, towards the end of 
the seventy years’ captivity, includes not only the men 
of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem in his intercessory 
prayer, but “all Israel that are near, or far off, from all 
the countries whither thou hast driven them,” who, he 
confesses, were alike involved in sin and judgment, and 
equally cast on the mercy of God on the ground of 


promises made to the fathers. 
20 


490 ANGLO-ISRAELISM AND THE TRUE HISTORY 


Now let us go a step farther. Just seventy years 
had elapsed since the first band of captives were carried 
away to Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar in the year 606 B.C. 
“ That the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah 
might be fulfilled, the Lord stirred up the spirit of 
Cyrus, king of Persia, that he issued a proclamation 
throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing, 
saying: Thus saith Cyrus, king of Persia, the Lord God 
of heaven hath given me all the kingdoms of the earth ; 
and he hath charged me to build him a house at 
Jerusalem that is in Judah. Who is there among you 
of all his people? His God be with him, and let him 
go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah.” 

This proclamation, which was in reference to all the 
people “of the Lord God of heaven,” was issued in the 
year 536, two years after the conquest of Babylon by 
Cyrus, and was, we are told, promulgated “ throughout 
all his kingdom,” which was the same as that over which 
Nebuchadnezzar and his successors reigned before him, 
only again somewhat extended, even as the kingdom of 
Babylon was identical with that of Assyria, as already 
pointed out. Indeed, Cyrus and Darius I. are called 
indifferently by the sacred historians by the title of 
“king of Persia” (Ezra iv. 5), “king of Babylon” 
(Ezra v. 13), and the “king of Assyria” (Ezra vi. 22). 

The first response to this proclamation was a caravan 
of “ forty-two thousand three hundred and sixty, beside 
their servants and their maids, of whom there were 
seven thousand three hundred and thirty-seven, and 
two hundred singing men and singing women,” who, 
under the leadership of Zerubbabel, who was a lineal 
descendant of the royal house of David, and of Joshua 
the high priest, made their way from “Babylon to 
Jerusalem.” 

Now the leading spirits of this returned party of 


OF THE TEN “LOST” TRIBES 291 


exiles were, no doubt, “the chief of the fathers of Judah 
and Benjamin, and the priests and Levites”; at the 
same time they included “all those” from all the other 
tribes without distinction, “whose spirit God had raised 
to go up to build the house of the Lord, which is in 
Jerusalem” (Ezra i. 5). 

They are no longer counted after their tribal origin, 
but in families, and after the cities to which they 
originally belonged, which, for the most part, are not 
easy to identify ; hence it is difficult to say how many 
belonged to “Judah,” and how many to “Israel,” but 
that there were a good many in this company of those 
who belonged to the northern kingdom of the ten tribes, 
is incidentally brought out by the mention of two 
hundred and twenty-three men of Ai and Bethel 
alone. Now, Bethel was the very centre of the ancient 
rival idolatrous worship instituted by Jeroboam, and 
though on the boundary of Benjamin, belonged to 
“Ephraim.” Between the first organised large party 
of immigrants under Zerubbabel and Joshua, and the 
second under Ezra, a period of fifty-eight years elapsed, 
but we are not to suppose that in the interval there 
` were no additions to the community, which now repre- 
sented the whole united nation in Jerusalem. We read, 
for instance, incidentally, in Zech. vi. 9, 15, of a party of 
four prominent men who arrived in Jerusalemin 519 as 
representatives of “the captivity ” (that is, of those who 
still remained in those parts where they were exiles), 
bringing with them a present of silver and gold for the 
Temple, the building of which was resumed about five 
months before, as a result of the stirring appeals of 
Haggai. This shows that there was continual inter- 
course and communication between the community in 
Palestine and the majority of the people who were still 
“in Babylon” ; and we may be certain that little parties 


292 ANGLO-ISRAELISM AND THE TRUE HISTORY 


and individuals, “whose spirit God had raised,” con- 
tinually found their way to the holy city. 

In 458 B.C. Ezra, “ the scribe of the law of the God of 
heaven,” in accordance with the decree of Artaxerxes 
Longimanus, organised another large caravan of those 
whose hearts were made willing to return to the land of 
their fathers. Part of this most favourable royal pro- 
clamation, was as follows: “I make a decree that all they © 
of the people of Israel, and of his priests and Levites in 
my realm, which are minded of their own free will to go 
up to Jerusalem, go up with thee” ; and in response to 
it “this Ezra went up from Babylon... and there 
went up (with him) of the children of Israel, and of the 
priests and of the Levites, and the singers and the 
porters, and the Nethinim, unto Jerusalem in the seventh 
year of Artaxerxes the king” (Ezra vii. 7). 

This party consisted of about one thousand eight 
hundred families ; and apart from the priests, Levites, 
and Nethinim, was made up of “the children of Israel,” 
irrespective of tribal distinctions, from all parts of the 
realm of “Babylon,” or Assyria, now under the pnay of 
the Medo-Persians. 

The narratives contained in the books of Ezra and 
Nehemiah, under whose administration the position 
of the restored remnant became consolidated, covers 
a period of about 115 years, and brings us down to 
about 420 B.C. Jewish history during the second 
period of the Persian supremacy is wrapped some- 
what in obscurity, but we know that nearly through- 
out the whole period of its existence it was more or 
less friendly to the Hebrews. There was certainly no 
revocation of the edicts of Cyrus and of Artaxerxes 
permitting those “which were minded of their own free 
will to go and join their brethren in Palestine; and that 
there were many other large and small parties of exiles 


OF THE TENS“ LOST- TRIBES 293 


who did so, subsequent to those mentioned in Ezra and 
Nehemiah, may be taken for granted.t Anyhow it is a 
fact that the remnant in the land grew and grew until, 
about a century and a half later, in the time of the 
Maccabees, and again about a century and a half later 
still, in the time of our Lord, we find “the Jews” in 
Palestine a comparatively large nation, numbering 
millions ; while from the time of the downfall of the 
Persian Empire, we hear but very little more of the 
Israelite exiles in ancient Assyria or Babylon. By the 
conquest of Alexander, who to this day is a great 
favourite among the scattered nation, the regions of 
ancient Babylonia and Media were brought compara- 
tively near, and a highway opened between East and 
West. From about this time settlements of “Jews” 
began to multiply in Asia Minor, Cyprus, Crete, on the 
coasts and islands of the Ægean, in Macedonia and other 
parts of Southern Europe, in Egypt and the whole 
northern coast of Africa, whilst some made their way 
further and further eastward as far as India and China. 
There is not the least possibility of doubt that many 
of the settlements of the Diaspora in the time of our 
Lord both north, south, and west, as well as east 
of Palestine, were made up of those who had never 
returned to the land of their fathers since the time 
of the Assyrian and Babylonian exiles, and who were 
not only descendants of Judah, as Anglo-Israelism 
ignorantly presupposes, but of all” the twelve tribes 
scattered abroad (James i. 1). 

As a matter of fact, long before the destruction of 
the second Temple by Titus, we read of currents and 
counter-currents in the dispersion of the “Jewish” 

1 It is inconceivable,” says Dr. Pusey, “that, as the material 


prosperity of Palestine returned, even many of the ten tribes 
should not have returned to their country.” 


294 ANGLO-ISRAELISM AND THE TRUE HISTORY 


people. Thus Artaxerxes III., Ochus, on his way to 
re-conquer Egypt, “having taken Apodasmus in Judea, 
conveyed the Jewish population into Hyrcania near the 
Caspian Sea.” When he made himself master of Egypt 
we read of his finding Jews there, and, being incensed 
against them on account of a stubborn defence against 
him of places entrusted to their keeping, “he sent part 
of them into Hyrcania, in the neighbourhood of the 
country which the tribes already inhabited, and left the 
rest at Babylon”; while soon after many thousands 
were taken to Egypt by Alexander ; and Ptolemy Soter, 
one of his chief generals, who had become King of 
Egypt, and had invaded Syria and taken Jerusalem in 
301 B.C., carried off one hundred thousand of them, and 
forced them to settle chiefly in Alexandria and Cyrene, 

To summarise the state of things in connection with 
the Hebrew race at the time of Christ, it was briefly 
this :— 

I. For some six centuries before, ever since the partial 
restoration in the days of Cyrus and his successors, the | 
descendants of Abraham were no longer known as 
divided into tribes, but as one people, although up to 
the time of the destruction of the second Temple, tribal 
and family genealogies were for the most part preserved, 
especially among those who were settled in the land. 

II. Part of the nation was in Palestine, but by far the 
larger number were scattered far and wide, and formed 
innumerable communities in many different lands, north 
and south, east and west.t But wherever dispersed and to 
whatever tribe they may have belonged, they all looked 
to Palestine and Jerusalem as their national centre, and, 


* Thus Strabo (quoted by Josephus in “Ant.” xiv. 7, 2) could 
already say in his day that “these Jew had already gotten into 
all cities ; and it is hard to find a place in the habitable earth 
that hath not admitted this race and is not mastered by it.” 


OF THE TEN “LOST” TRIBES 205 


3 


with the exception of those (and they were no doubt 
many) who had ceased to cherish “the Hope of Israel” 
and were gradually assimilating with their Gentile 
neighbours, were all one in heart with their brethren 
in the Holy Land. “They felt they were of the same 
stock, stood on the same ground, cherished the same 
memories, grew up under the same institutions, and 
anticipated the same future. They had one common 
centre of worship in Jerusalem, which they upheld by 
their offerings; and they made pilgrimages thither 
annually in great numbers at the high festivals.” Thus 
Philo could represent to the Roman Emperor Caligula 
that “Jerusalem ought not to be considered only as the 
metropolis of Judea, but as the centre of a nation 
dispersed in infinite places, who were able to supply 
him with potent succours for his defence. He reckoned 
among the places that were still stored with Jews, the 
isles of Cyprus and Candia, Egypt, Macedonia and 
Bithynia, to which he added the empire of the Persians, 
and all the cities of the East, except that of Babylon from 
whence they were then expelled.” 

There is ample confirmation on this point in the New 
Testament. Thus, for instance, we are incidentally told 
in the second chapter of the Acts of the Apostles that 
among the representatives from the Diaspora who were 
found in Jerusalem at that memorable feast of Pentecost, 
who were doubtless there also during the previous Pass- 
over, when the crucifixion took place, were “ Parthians 
and Medes and Elamites, and dwellers in Mesopotamia, 
in Judea and Cappadocia, in Pontus and Asia, in 
Phrygia and Pamphylia, in Egypt and parts of Libya 
and Cyrene, and sojourners from Rome, Cretans and 
Arabians ”—all of them either Jews or proselytes 
miraculously hearing in their own tongues the mighty 
works of God, 


290 ANGLO-ISRAELISM AND THE TRUE HISTORY 


Here it is to be noted that, at the commencement of 
the Christian era, we find in this motley and cosmo- 
politan Jewish crowd representatives from Israelitish 
settlements in the very parts where they were carried 
by the Assyrians and Babylonians some seven centuries 
before, but who are all called “ Jews,” and all alike 
regarded Jerusalem as their national metropolis.? 

III. The name of “Jew” and “Israelite” became 
synonymous terms from about the time of the Captivity. 
It is one of the absurd fallacies of Anglo-Israelism to 
presuppose that the term “Jew” stands for a bodily 
descendant of “Judah.” It stands for all those from 
among the sons of Jacob who acknowledged themselves, 
or were considered, subjects of the theocratic kingdom 
of Judah, which they expected to be established by the 
promised “Son of David”—the Lion of the tribe of 
Judah—whose reign is to extend not only over “all the 
tribes of the land,’ but also “ from sea to sea, and from 
the river unto the ends of the earth.” 

“That the name ‘Jews, ” writes a Continental Bible 
scholar, “became general for all Israelites who were 
anxious to preserve their theocratic nationality, was 
the more natural, since the political independence of 
the ten tribes was destroyed.” Yes, and without any 
hope of a restoration to a separate national existence, 

z “Everywhere we have distinct notices of these wanderers,” 
says Dr. Edersheim, “and everywhere they appear as in closest 
connection with the Rabbinical hierarchy of Palestine. Thus 
the Mishnah, in an extremely curious section, tells us how on 
Sabbaths the Jewesses of Arabia might wear their long veils, and 
those of India the kerchiefs round their head, customary in those 
countries, without incurring the guilt of desecrating the holy day 
- by needlessly carrying what, in the eyes of the law, would be 
a burden ; while in a rubric for the Day of Atonement we have 
it noted that the dress which the High Priest wore ‘ between the 


evenings’ of the great feast—that is, as afternoon darkened into 
evening—was of most costly Indian stuff.” 


OF THE TEN “LOST” TRIBES 207 


What hopes and promises they had were, as we have 
seen, linked with the Kingdom of Judah and the House 
of David. 

Anglo-Israelism teaches that members of the ten 
tribes are never called “Jews,” and that “Jews” are not 
“Tsraelites,” but both assertions are false. Who were 
they that came back to the land after the “ Babylonian ” 
exile? Anglo-Israelites say they were only the exiles 
from the southern kingdom of Judah, and call them 
“Jews.” I have-already shown this to be a fallacy, but 
I might add the significant fact that in the Book of 
Ezra this remnant is only called eight times by the 
name “ Jews,” and no less than forty times by the name 
_ “Israel.” In the Book of Nehemiah they are called 
“Jews” eleven times, and “Israel” twenty-two times. 
As to those who remained behind in the one hundred 
and twenty-seven provinces of the Persian Empire, 
which included all the territories of ancient Assyria, 
Anglo-Israelites would say they were of the kingdom 
of “Israel”; but in the Book of Esther, where we get a 
vivid glimpse of them at a period subsequent to the 
partial restoration under Zerubbabel and Joshua, they 
are called forty-five times by the name “ Jews,” and not 
once by the name “ Israel”! 

In the New Testament the same people who are 
called “ Jews” one hundred and seventy-four times are 
also called “Israel” no fewer than seventy-five times. 
Anglo-Israelism asserts that a “Jew” is only a descen- 
dant of Judah, and is not an “ Israelite” ; but Paul says 
more than once: “I am a man which ama Jew.” Yet 
he says: “For I also am an Israelite.” “Are they 
Israelites? so am 1?” (Acts xxi. 39; xxii. 3; Rom. 
SA2 Cor: xi. (22; Phil. iit, 5): 

Our Lord was of the house of David, and of the tribe 
of Judah after the flesh—“a Jew,” yet it says that it is 


298 ANGLO-ISRAELISM AND THE TRUE HISTORY 


of “ Jsrael” “that He came, who is over all, God blessed 
for ever” (Rom. ix. 4, 5). Devout Anna was a “ Jewess” 
in Jerusalem, yet she was “of the tribe of Aser.” But 
enough on this point. 

IV. From the time of the return of the first remnant 
after the Babylonian exile, sacred historians, prophets, 
apostles, and the Lord Himself, regarded the “Jews” in 
the land as representatives of “all Israel,” and the only 
people in the line of the covenants and the promises 
which God made with the fathers. 

At the dedication of the Temple, which was at last 
finished “on the third day of the month Adar, which 
was in the sixth year in the reign of Darius the king,” 
they offered “for a sin-offering for all Israel, twelve 
he-goats according to the number of the tribes of Israel” 
(Ezra vi. 17). 

Similarly on the arrival of Ezra with the new caravan 
of immigrants they “offered burnt-offerings unto the 
God of Israel, twelve bullocks for all Israel... and 
twelve he-goats for sin-offering ” (Ezra viii. 35), showing 
that the returned exiles regarded themselves as the — 
nucleus and representatives of the whole nation. In 
the post-Exilic prophets we have no longer two king- 
doms, but one people—one in interests and destiny, 
although they had formerly for a time been divided. 

To show that the revived nation was made up of 
members of the Northern, as well as the Southern 
kingdoms, the prophet Zechariah calls them by the 
comprehensive name of “ Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem ” 
(Zech, i. 19), or, “the house of Judah, and the house of 
Joseph” (Zech. x. 6). In the prophecy occasioned by 
the question addressed by the deputation from Bethel, 
in reference to the continuation of the observance of the 
fasts, he says: “And it shall come to pass that as ye 
were a curse among the nations O house of Judah and 


OF THE TEN “LOST” TRIBES 299 


house of Israel, so will I save you, and ye shall be a 
blessing ; fear not, and let your hands be strong” (Zech. 
viii. 13). 

Here the formerly two houses are included ; together 
they are for a time among the nations “a curse,’ and 
together they shall be saved, and be “a blessing.” 

Malachi, nearly a century later, when the people in 
the land had become a prosperous nation, and when, in 
consequence, the majority was rapidly falling into a 
state of religious formality and godlessness, addresses 
ther as “ Israel,” or “ Jacob,” which surely includes all 
his descendants, in contrast to Esau and his descendants 
(Mal. i. 1-3). 

In the last words of the last of the post-Exilic 
prophets we have the expression “all Israel” addressed 
to the people in the land, and then the long period of 
silence sets in, lasting about four centuries, during parts 
of which Jewish national history is lost somewhat in 
obscurity. When the threads of that history are taken 
up again in the New Testament, what do we find? Is 
there one hint or reference in the whole book to an 
Israel apart from “that nation ” of the “ Jews,” to whom, 
and of whom, the Lord and His apostles speak? There 
is, indeed, reference and mention of the Diaspora, 
“the dispersed among the Gentiles” (John vii. 35), 
forming, as we have seen, the greater part of the nation, 
and some of them still settled in the ancient regions of 
Assyria and Babylon, but wherever they were, they are 
all interchangeably called “ Jews,” or “ Israelites,” who 
regarded Jerusalem, with which they were in constant 
communication as the centre, not only of their religion, 
but of their national hopes and destiny. 

The “Israelites” who in the time of Christ were dis- 
persed among the Parthians, Medes, and Elamites 
(Acts ii.), were as much one with the sojourners in 


300 ANGLO-ISRAELISM AND THE TRUE HISTORY 


Egypt, Greece, and Rome, as the “Jews” in Bagdad, 
Persia, or on the Caspian Sea to-day, are one with their 
wandering brethren in London, Berlin, New York, or 
Australia, although they then, as now (apart from the 
Hebrew which ever remains the sacred tongue, and 
thoroughly understood only by the minority), spoke 
different languages, and dressed differently, and con- 
formed to different social and family customs. 

But let me give you a few definite passages from the 
New Testament in justification of my statement that 
the Lord Jesus and the apostles, equally with the post- 
Exilic prophets centuries before, regarded the “Jews” 
as representatives of “all Israel,” and as the only people 
in the line of the “covenant, and the promises which 
God made unto the fathers.” 

(a) In Matthew x. we have the record of the choice, and 
of the first commission given to the apostles. “These 
twelve,” we read, “Jesus sent forth, and commanded 
them saying, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and 
into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not; but go - 
rather zo the lost sheep of the house of Israel” Of 
course the merest child knows that this journey of the 
twelve did not extend beyond the limits of Palestine, 
but the “Jews” dwelling in it are regarded as the house 
of Israel, although many members of that “house” were 
also scattered in other lands. 

In this charge of the Lord to the apostles, we see 
also by the way, in what sense Israel is regarded as 
“lost.” Now Anglo-Israelites are very fond of this 
word, but they use it in an unbiblical and unspiritual 
‘sense. The ten tribes were in the time of Christ, even 
as they still are, “lost”; but not because they have 
forgotten their ational or tribal identity, but because 
they “all like sheep have gone astray, and have turned 
every one to his own way.” Or, as Jeremiah patheti- 


OF THE TEN “LOST” TRIBES 301 


cally puts it: “My people hath been lost sheep; their 
shepherds [their false teachers and leaders] have caused 
them to go astray, they have turned them away on the 
mountains ; they have gone from mountain to hill, they 
have forgotten [not their national origin, but] their 
resting place,” viz., Jehovah, who is the true dwelling- 
place of His people in all generations. 

(4) On the first day of Pentecost, Peter with the 
eleven, addressed the “men of Judea,” and the great 
multitude from among the dispersed “Jews,” as “Ye 
men of Israel,” and wound up his powerful speech with 
the words: “Let al the house of Israel, therefore, know 
assuredly that God hath made Him both Lord and 
Christ—this Jesus whom ye crucified.” In the third of 
Acts, as “all the people ran together unto them in the 
porch that is called Solomon’s, greatly wondering,” at the 
notable miracle in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, 
Peter said: “ Ye men of Israel, why marvel ye at this 
man? ... The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of 
Jacob, the God of our fathers, hath glorified His servant 
Jesus, whom ye delivered up and denied before the face 
of Pilate when he had determined to release Him... . 
Repent ye, therefore, and turn again that your sins may 
be blotted out, that so there may come seasons of 
refreshing from the presence of the Lord. ... Ye are 
the sons of the prophets and of the covenant which God 
made with your fathers, saying unto Abraham, ‘and in 
thy seed shall the nations of the earth be blessed.’” 

From Acts xiii. onward, we find Paul among the 
“Jews” in the dispersion, and how does he address 
them? By the same name as Peter addressed their - 
brethren in Palestine: “ Men of Israel . . . the God of 
this people Israel chose our fathers, and exhorted the 
people when they sojourned in the land of Egypt” 
(Act xiii. 16-17); and when he was at last brought to 


402. ANGLO-ISRAELISM AND THE TRUE HISTORY 


Rome, “and gathered the chief of the Jews” in that city 
to him, he assured them that he had neither done any- 
thing “against the people, or the customs of our fathers,” 
nor did he come to Rome “to accuse my nation,” but 
“because of the Lope of Israel am I bound by this chain,” 
namely, “the hope of the promise made of God unto 
our fathers; as he had previously explained before 
Festus and Agrippa—unto which our twelve tribes, 
earnestly serving God night and day, hope to attain” 
(Acts xxviii. 17-20; xxvi. 6-7). 

Paul knew of no “lost ten tribes,” but on his testimony 
the “Jews” in Palestine and in the dispersion were the 
“ Israel” of all the twelve tribes, to whom the “hope of 
the promise made of God unto the fathers” belonged. 

(c) And, as it is in the Gospels, and in the Acts of the 
Apostles, so also in the Epistles. It would be easy to 
multiply passages, but one more must suffice. 

The ix., x., and xi. of Romans form the prophetic, or 
“ dispensational” section of that great epistle, and was 
written for the special instruction of Gentile believers in 
the “mystery” of God with Israel. Now I cannot, of 
course, stop here to give you an analysis of that won- 
derful and comprehensive scripture, which is also a 
vindication of God’s ways with man; but there is not 
a hint or suggestion in it of a “lost Israel,” apart from 
the one nation whose whole history he summarises from 
the beginning to the end, and which is now, alas! 
divided into the small minority—the “remnant accord- 
ing to the election of grace” who believe, and the 
majority who believe not, until the day of grace for 
the whole nation shall come, and “so ai Israel shall 
be saved, even as it is written, ‘There shall come out 
of Zion the Deliverer; He shall turn away ungodliness 
from Jacob,’ ” 

But in the touching introduction to this section 


OF THE TEN “LOST” TRIBES 303 


(Rom. ix. 1-6), in which the Apostle gives utterance to 
his “ great sorrow and unceasing pain of heart” because 
of the unbelief of his own nation, “his brethren and 
his kinsmen according to the flesh,” for whose sake he 
had been wishing, if it were possible, even to be himself 
“anathema from Christ”—how does he call these un- 
believing “ Jews” who had rejected their Messiah, and 
were blindly persecuting His servants? Here are his 
words: “ Who are Israelites ; whose is the adoption, 
and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of 
the law, and the service of God, and the promises ; whose 
are the fathers, and of whom is Christ as concerning the 
Jesh, who ts over all, God blessed tor ever. Amen.” 

Now I must try to draw this very long letter to an end. 
I have not followed Anglo-Israelism in all its crooked 
paths of misinterpretation of Scripture and history; I 
have only shown you the baselessness of its foundations, 
and that the premises upon which the whole theory 
rests are misleading and false. I have also given youa 
summary of the true history of the tribes, which I trust 
may prove helpful to you in the study of God’s Word ; 
and the conclusion at which you and every unbiassed 
person must arrive on a careful examination of the facts 
which I have adduced is, that the whole supposition of 
“lost tribes,” in the sense in which Anglo-Israelism uses 
the term, is a fancy which originated in ignorance ; and 
that “the Jews” are the whole, and the only national 
Israel, representing not only the “two tribes,” but “al the 
twelve tribes,’ who were “ scattered abroad.” 


I have thought it necessary to enter all the more fully 
into this point, because even some otherwise sober- 
minded teachers and writers, who are not Anglo- 
Israelites, have fallen into some confusion in dealing with 
this subject ; and no wonder, for already Josephus, who 


304 ANGLO-ISRAELISM AND THE TRUE HISTORY 


vaguely locates a separate multitude belonging to the 
ten tribes somewhere beyond the Euphrates (“ Antiq.” 
xi, I-2)—a Jewish tradition which locates a mighty king- 
dom of the ten tribes beyond the fabled miraculous river 
Sabbatyon, which no one can cross because it throws up 
stones all the week, and only rests on the Sabbath; and 
the Talmud (Jer. Sanhedrin, 29, c.), which speaks of three 
localities whither they had been banished, viz. the 
district around the above wonderful Sabbatyon, Daphne 
near Antioch, and the third locality could neither be 
seen nor named because it was continually hidden by 
a cloud—all these show how early people’s minds 
became muddled on this subject Some Christian 
writers have accepted the view that while some of the 
“ten tribes” amalgamated with the “Jews,” there is 
nevertheless a distinct people somewhere, who are 
descendants of the Israel of the ancient northern 
kingdom, which is to be brought to light in the 
future, and, together with “Judah,” will be restored 
to Palestine, and enter into the enjoyment of the 
promises. Thus the Nestorians who inhabit the inac- 
cessible mountains of Kurdistan (which is part of 
ancient Assyria), the Afghans, and even the North 
American Indians, have been variously identified as 
that people; but this view rests upon what I believe 


It has also been supposed that the references by Agrippa in 
his remarkable oration (reported by Josephus’ “ Wars,” ii., xvi. 4) 
—to those who dwelt “as far as beyond the Euphrates,” and to 
“those of your nation who dwell in Adiabene,” upon whom the 
Jews might rely for help in their struggle against Rome, but 
would not be permitted by the Parthians to render them any 
assistance—were to some unknown settlements belonging to the 
ten tribes. But this is a mistake. These dwellers in Adiabene 
might or might not have belonged to the ten tribes, but they 
formed part of the known Dispersion and of “your nation ”— 
the Jews. 


OF THE TEN “LOST” TRIBES 305 


to be a misconception of the meaning and scope of 
some of the prophecies, 

Even if it were true that the Nestorians, or the 
Afghans, or some other Eastern tribes are descen- 
dants of the original Israelitish exiles in Assyria, having 
more or less mixed themselves up by intermarriage 
with the surrounding nations, and having given up 
the distinctive national rites and ordinances, they have, 
like many “Jews” in modern times (who gradually 
assimilate with Gentile nations) cut themselves off 
from the hope of Israel, and are no longer in the line 
of the purpose which God has in and through that 
“peculiar” and separate people. 


In conclusion, let me very briefly call your attention 
to the remarkable prophecy in Amos ix., which will 
show you that the view which I have enunciated in my 
letter is the only one in keeping with the sure word of 
prophecy. 

The prophet Amos, though himself a Judean, his 
native village Tekoa being about twelve miles south 
of Jerusalem, was commissioned by God to prophesy 
more particularly to the northern or ten-tribed king- 
dom; and for that purpose he went and took up his 
abode in Bethel, which was the centre of the idolatrous 
worship set up by Jeroboam in opposition to the worship 
and service of the Divinely appointed sanctuary in 
Jerusalem. There, his duty was to announce the 
coming judgment of God on the Israel of the ten 
tribes, on account of their apostasy. The last para- 
graph of his book (chap. ix. 8-15), uttered not more 
than about seven years before the final overthrow of 
Samaria in 721 B.C., is one of the most remarkable 
and comprehensive prophecies in the Old Testament, 
and this is the inspired forecast of the history of the 

21 


306 ANGLO-ISRAELISM AND THE TRUE HISTORY 


ten-tribed kingdom which is given in it: “Behold the 

eyes of the Lord God are upon the sinful kingdom, 
and I will destroy it from off the face of the earth; 
saving that I will not utterly destroy the house of 
Jacob, saith the Lord. For lo, I will command and I 
will sift (or ‘toss’) the house of Israel among all the 
nations, like as corn is sifted (or ‘tossed’ about) in a 
sieve, yet shall not the least grain fall upon the earth. 
All the sinners of thy people shall die by the sword, 
which say: The evil shall not overtake or prevent us.” 

Here, then, we have the whole subject as to what is 
to become of the ten tribes in a nutshell. 

(a) First, as a kingdom they were to be destroyed from 
off the face of the earth, never to be restored ; for its very 
existence as a separate kingdom was only permitted of 
God for a definite period as a punishment on the house 
of David : and when, after a period of about two hun- 
dred and fifty years of unbroken apostasy, it was finally 
broken up by the Assyrians, there was an end of it, 
without any promise of a future independent political 
existence. 

(6) But when it was destroyed as a kingdom, what 
became of them as a people? This prophecy tells us: 
“Saving that I will not utterly destroy the house of 
Jacob, saith the Lord ”—that is, they are to return to 
the house of Jacob. They are to form part of the one 
family made up of all the descendants of Jacob without 
distinction of tribes. But as one house of Jacob, or 
“of Israel” (as the next verse interchangeably calls 
them), something terrible and unique is to befall them; 
and what is it? To be “lost” for some two thousand 
six hundred years, and then to be identified with the 
Anglo-Saxon race? Oh no! this is what was to 
happen: “For lo, I will command and I will sift (or 
‘toss’) the house of Israel among all nations even as corn 


OF THE TEN “LOST” TRIBES 307 


is tossed about in a sieve ”—or, in the words of Hosea, 
another prophet who spoke primarily to the ten tribes, 
“My God will cast them away” (not for ever, as the 
whole book shows, but for a time), “because they did not 
hearken unto Him; and they shall be wanderers among 
the nations.” 

I draw your attention all the more to this point, 
because a good deal has been made by some writers 
of the expression in Isa. xi. where Israel is called 
“outcast,” from which they infer that “Israel” is to be 
found somewhere in one place, in contradistinction to 
the “dispersed of Judah.” But this is a fallacy. In 
Jer. xxx. Judah and Israel are together called “an 
outcast,” but it by no means implies that they are 
therefore to be sought for and found in one particular 
region of the world. 

It is clear from the prophecies of Amos and Hosea, 
which, as we have seen, were primarily addressed to the 
ten tribes, that if they were in the first instance “cast 
out” by force, from their own land, as the word in the 
Hebrew means, it was with a view that they should be 
“tossed about ” and “ wander” among “all nations.” 

Now note, Anglo-Israelism tells you to identify the 
ten tribes with one nation, but if you are on the line 
of Scripture and true history, you will seek for them 
“among all nations.” And which people -is it that is 
known all over the earth as “ the tribe of the weary foot 
and wandering breast”? Anglo-Israelites call them 
“Jews” in the limited sense of being descendants of 
“Judah”; but God’s Word tells us that it is “ the house 
of Israel,’ or “the house of Jacob”; and, as a matter of 
fact, since “Judah” joined their brethren of the ten 
tribes on the destruction of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans 
in 588 B.C. the two have kept on their weary march 
together—* wandering among the nations.” Eastward 


308 ANGLO-ISRAELISM AND THE TRUE HISTORY 


and westward (only a remnant of all the tribes returning 
to the land for a time), nowhere finding ease for any 
length of time, nor do the soles of their feet have rest, 
even as Moses, at the very beginning of their history, 
and long before the division among the tribes, pro- 
phesied would be their united experience in case they 
apostatised from Jehovah their God. And thus they 
will continue ever more mixed up and intermingled 
among themselves, with all genealogies lost, and not 
one of them either east or west being able to prove 
of what tribe or family he comes—until the day when 
He that scattered Israel will gather him, and by His 
own Divine power and omniscience separate them again 
into their tribes and families. 

My last words on this subject must be those ot 
warning and entreaty. Do not think, as so many do, 
that Anglo-Israelism, even if not true, is only a harmless 
speculation. I consider it nothing short of one of the 
latter-day delusions by which the Evil One seeks to 
divert the attention of men from things spiritual and | 
eternal. Here are a few of its dangers :— 

I. It goes, sometimes to the length of blasphemi (as 
shown in the extracts I have copied for you at the 
beginning of this letter), in misrepresenting and mis- 
applying Scripture. One of its foundation fallacies is 
that it anticipates the millennium, and interprets pro- 
mises — which will only be fulfilled in that blessed 
period, after Israel as a nation is converted — to the 
British nation at the present time. But by this process 
it makes all prophetic Scripture meaningless, 

II. It fosters national pride, and nationalises God’s 
blessings in this dispensation, which is individual and 
elective in its character. It diverts man’s attention from 
the one thing needful, and from the only means by 
which he can find acceptance with God. This it does 


OF THE TEN “LOST” TRIBES 309 


by teaching that “a nation composed of millions of 
practical unbelievers in Christ, and ripe for apostasy, 
in virtue of a certain fanciful identity between the 
mixed race composing that nation and a people carried 
into captivity two thousand five hundred years ago, is 
in the enjoyment of God’s special blessing and will 
enjoy it on the same grounds for ever, thus laying 
another foundation for acceptance with God beside that 
which he has laid, even Christ Jesus.” After all, in 
this dispensation it is a question only as to whether 
men are “in Christ” or not. If they are Christians, 
whether Jews or Gentiles, their destiny is not linked 
either with Palestine or with England, but with that 
inheritance which is incorruptible, and undefiled, and 
which fadeth not away ; and if they are not Christians, 
then, instead of occupying their thoughts with vain 
speculations as to a supposed identity of the British 
race with the “lost” ten tribes, it is their duty to seek 
the one and only Saviour whom we must learn to know 
not after the flesh, but in the Spirit, and without whom 
a man, whether an Israelite or not, is undone. 

III. Then, finally, it not only robs the Jewish nation— 
the true Israel—of many promises in relation to their 
future by applying them to the British race in the 
present time, but it diverts attention from them as she 
people in whom is bound up the purpose of God in 
relation to the nations, and whose “receiving again” 
to the heart of God, after the long centuries of unbelief, 
will be as “life from the dead to the whole world.” 

Excuse such a very long epistle, and praying that 
you may be led in all things by the Spirit of Truth, 


I am, 
Faithfully yours, 


DAVID BARON, 


APPENDICES SS 


APPENDIX I 
THE URIM AND THUMMIM 


NOTE TO CHAPTER I., PAGE 26. 


Ae that has been written on the subject, from Philo and 
Josephus down to this day, is more or less conjectural and 
much of it pure fancy. Apart from the views quoted below, it 
has been maintained by some that the response to an appeal to 
the Urim and Thummim was given by an audible voice to the 
high priest arrayed in full pontificals, and standing in the holy 
place with his face turned towards the ark ; while some com- 
mentators have given it as their opinion that the Urim and 
Thummim were two small oracular images which were placed 
in the cavity or pouch formed by the folds of the breastplate 
and which uttered oracles by a voice—a view most objection- 
- able, and altogether abhorrent to the spirit of Scripture. 

The most thorough handling of this difficult subject is that by 
a Hebrew Christian brother,t which I reproduce. It gathers up 
the Jewish and Rabbinic views and may be taken as the most 
probable explanation. 


The white linen habiliments of the priests signified purity and 
sanctity. They consisted of a coat, a girdle, and bonnet, and 
were common to priest and high priest, as described in Exod. 
xxviii, 40-43. There were several other garments peculiar to 
the high priest, when engaged in his holy office, especially when 
he had to enter into the Most Holy, on the Day of Atonement. 
Some of these glorious and significant garments deserve par- 
ticular notice and attention. The high priest first put on a long 
robe, which was called “the Robe of the Ephod,” or Meeil. 


1 Benjamin Weiss in his book, “ A Christian Jew on the Old Testament.” 
313 


314 APPENDIX 


This vestment was of blue colour, and did not consist of several 
pieces sewed together; it was woven throughout (Exod. xxxix. 
31, 32). It had apertures left for the neck and for the hands. 
Such seems to have been the coat of our Saviour for which the 
soldiers cast lots (see John xix. 23, 24). At the bottom of this 
garment were fringes like the pomegranates of blue, of purple, 
and of scarlet, round about the hem thereof. Between every 
two pomegranates a golden bell was fastened ; so that between 
every two bells there was a pomegranate, and between every two 
pomegranates a bell. This long and curious robe was tied round 
about with a girdle, which was woven and embroidered with the 
same colours as those of the robe. The reason for putting bells 
on the hem of this robe is given in the following words: “And 
his sound shall be heard when he goeth in unto the sanctuary 
before the Lord, and when he cometh out, that he die not” 
(Exod. xxviii. 35). This makes it evident that the sound of the 
bells was intended to impress upon the Israelites who stood in 
the outer court when the high priest entered the Most Holy, the 
awful holiness of that place, and to show unto them the shortness 
of time which the mortal high priest was allowed to remain in 
the presence of the Shechinah. Otherwise we can give no 
explanation why the sound was to be heard, “ when he goeth in 
unto the sanctuary before the Lord, and when he cometh out, 
that he die not.” ; 

Over the long garment described above the high priest put on ~ 
another short coat, called “Ephod.” This was woven of blue, of 
purple, of scarlet, and of fine twined linen, and woven with gold 
threads, and curiously embroidered. It covered his front from his 
neck unto his girdle, where it was tied round about with a girdle 
of the same materials, and of the same workmanship. It had 
also two shoulder-pieces, which were to be joined behind, with 
two precious buttons. These two buttons were made of two 
onyx stones, set in sockets of gold. On these two precious stones 
the names of the twelve tribes of Israel were engraven—six 
names on each of them, according to the birth of Jacob’s twelve 
sons. See Exod. xxviii. 6-12. Inthe 12th verse we read, “ And 
thou shalt put the two stones upon the shoulders of the ephod, 
for stones of memorial unto the children of Israel; and Aaron 
shall bear their names before the Lord, upon his two shoulders, 
for a memorial.” - An express intimation was thus made unto 
Israel that they could not stand before the holy Jehovah in them- 
selves, They required a Mediator to carry them, to atone for 
them, and to reconcile them to the Holy One of Israel. But 


THE URIM AND THUMMIM 315 


even the high priest himself (type as well as antitype) could not 
appear with their names, to reconcile them to God, without the 
blood of atonement, In the above-described ephod there was 
left a square aperture over the breast. Into this aperture was 
placed a most wonderful piece of ornament. 

This ornament was the Choshen Mishpat, “the breastplate 
- of judgment,” which, according to the description in Exodus, 
was made as follows: Its materials were the same as those 
of the ephod, and were wrought with cunning work. It 
was made four-square and doubled. It was a span in length 
and a span in breadth. This breastplate filled up exactly 
the aperture left in the ephod and was fastened to it 
by golden rings and chains above, and by the girdle of 
the ephod below. Into the front of this breastplate four 
rows of precious stones were inserted ; each of these rows had 
three different stones, making twelve in all, according to the 
number of the tribes of Israel. On these stones the twelve 
names of the tribes of Israel were graven, one name upon each 
stone. Thus one had the name “Reuben” on it, in Hebrew 
letters, another “ Simeon,” a third, “ Levi,’ and so on. The four 
rows of precious stones were set in ouches of gold, and so 
fastened that they could not fall out. 

In Exod, xxviii., from verse 15 to 28, a minute description is 
given of this breastplate, and also of the stones and their different 
names. Inthe 29th verse we have the reason given for which 
that glorious ornament was made. “And Aaron shall bear the 
names of the children of Israel, in the breastplate of judgment, 
upon his heart, when he goeth in unto the sanctuary, for a 
memorial before the Lord continually.’ The expression “Aaron 
shall bear the names of Israel upon his breast before the Lord,” 
is exactly the same with the reason given in the 12th verse, 
concerning the two stones of the ephod—“ And ‘Aaron shall bear 
their names before the Lord, upon his two shoulders, for a 
memorial.” 

So we see clearly that both the two stones of the ephod, with 
the names of the tribes of Israel on them, and the twelve stones 
of the breastplate with the same names, served the selfsame 
purpose, namely, that Aaron might bear the names of Israel as a 
memorial before the Lord. 

Now there remains one thing to be considered. It is this. 
Why was this ornament, with the twelve precious stones, 
called Choshen Mishpat, “the breastplate of judgment,” while 
the two stones of the ephod, which had also the twelve names 


316 APPENDIX 


of the tribes of Israel engraven on them, and which had 
seemingly the same signification as the twelve stones of the 
breastplate, were called only Avneh Sicharon, “stones of 
memorial,” and not “stones of judgment”? This question will 
be answered when we read Exod. xxviii. 30—“ And thou 
shalt put into the breastplate of judgment the Urim and the 
Thummim, and they shall be upon Aaron’s heart, when he goeth 
in before the Lord, and Aaron shall bear the judgment of the 
children of Israel upon his heart before the Lord continually.” 


From this verse we draw the following conclusions; 1st. The ~ 


breastplate, without the Urim and Thummim within it, had the 
same signification as the two stones of the ephod. So these 
twelve stones could also have been called Avneh Sicharon, 
“stones of memorial,” as the some signification is ascribed to 
both. In verse 12 we are told that the two stones of the ephod 
were for a memorial, and in verse 29 we are told that the 
twelve stones of the breastplate were for the same purpose. 
2nd. We sce, from the 30th verse, that the ornament with the 
twelve stones received the name Choshen Mishpat, “the breast- 
plate of judgment,’ only because the Urim and Thummim 
were put into it. When we read that Moses was commanded to 
put the Urim and Thummim into the breastplate there is no 
mention made any more of a memorial, as is done in verse 29. 
We merely read, “And Aaron shall bear the judgment of the 
children of Israel upon his heart before Jehovah continually.” 
As soon as the Urim and Thummim were put into the breast- 
plate it was changed from a “ breastplate of memorial” into a 
“breastplate of judgment.” 

In Deut. xxxiii. we are told that Moses blessed the children of 
Israel before his death. In the 8th verse we read, “And of Levi 
he said, Letthy Thummim and thy Urim be with thy holy one” 
(viz., with the priests of Levi’s tribe). And again, “ They shall 
teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law” (Dent. xxxiii. 
8-10). From this it is evident that the priests were to be 
instructed by the Urim and Thummim in all matters of 
judgment. . . 

Therefore, when the Urim and Thummim were put into the 
breastplate it was called “the breastplate of judgment,” Israel 
was commanded to have recourse with every hard matter of 
judgment, which could not be decided in the small towns, unto 
Jerusalem, unto the priests of the tribe of Levi, and unto the 
judge who was in office at that time (Deut. xvii. 8-11). In the 
12th verse we read, “And the man that will do presumptuously, 


THE URIM AND THUMMIM 317 


and willnot hearken unto the priest that standeth to minister there 
before the Lord’ thy God, or unto the judge, even that man shall 
die.” When the prophet Malachi complains that Israel has 
neglected to obey the priests, and has therefore violated the law, 
he speaks thus, in the name of God: “The law of truth was in 
his mouth (namely, in the mouth of the high priest), and iniquity 
was not found in his lips; he walked with me in peace and 
equity and did turn many away from sin. For the priest’s lips 
should keep knowledge, and they (Israel) should seek the law at 
his mouth : for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts.” All 
these expressions refer to the oracle of the Urim and Thummim, 
by which the priest was instructed of God in every matter of 
judgment. 

Every hard thing and every doubtful argument about the law 
was settled by it; and as this oracle was directed by God there 
was no fear of the priest erring; as the prophet says, “The law 
of truth was in his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord 
of hosts.” 

There was no need of instruction by the Urim and Thummim, 
all the days of Moses, with whom the Lord spoke in an audible 
voice from between the cherubim, out of the Most Holy. This 
oracle, therefore, was intended for the future after the death of 
Moses, as we read, “And there arose not a prophet since in Israel 
like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face” (Deut. xxxiv. 
10). This evidently refers to the great privilege which the Lord 
was pleased to bestow upon Moses in speaking unto him in an 
audible voice (see Numb. xii. 6-9), When Moses ordained 
Joshua to be the leader of Israel in his place, we read as follows : 
“ And he (Joshua) shall stand before Eliezer the priest, who shall 
ask counsel for him after the judgment of the Urim before the 
Lord ; at his word shall they go out, and at his word shall they 
come in, both he and all the children of Israel with him, even 
all the congregation ” (Numb. xxvii. 21). Here we see, first, that 
the audible voice, in which the Lord spoke to Moses, was to 
cease after Moses was dead ; secondly, that Joshua was to stand 
before the priest, who was to ask for him the judgments or 
directions of the Urim. 

How absurd, then, is the opinion of some who maintain that 
the answer of the Urim was also by an audible voice! If such 
had been the case, would not the voice rather have continued to 
speak from between the cherubim? Such an opinion is surely 
against all testimony of Scripture, which says that after Moses 
there arose none unto whom the Lord spake directly. The 


318 APPENDIX 


manner of the visions of the prophets is described in the twelfth 
chapter of Numbers, “If there be a prophet among you, I the 
Lord will make Myself known unto him in a vision, and will 
speak unto him in a dream” (see verses 6-8). By the Urim and 
Thummim, therefore, must have been given signs and directions 
only, as it is said, “ He shall ask counsel for him (viz., the priest 
shall ask for Joshua) after the judgment (or directions) of the 
Urim,” not “after the words of the Urim,” for it never answered 
by words. We have seen now how Joshua was ordered by God 
to come before the priest with every doubtful matter, and ask 
direction of the Urim. Let us now see what was the first difficulty 
in judgment that occurred in the times of Joshua, and how he 
asked counsel of the Urim. When Achan committed a trespass, 
in that he took of the accursed things of Jericho, the wrath of 
God was kindled against Israel, and they were defeated in their 
expedition against Ai. Joshua, therefore, rent his garments, and 
cast himself down in dust and ashes before the ark of the Lord 
(see Josh. vii. 7-9). Then we read in verse to, “And the Lord 
said unto Joshua, Get thee up, wherefore liest thou thus upon thy 
face? Israel hath sinned; they have also transgressed My 
covenant which I commanded them; for they have even taken 
of the accursed thing, and have also stolen, and dissembled also, 
and have put among their own stuff.” It was evident that the 
Lord spoke these words unto Joshua in the same manner as he 
spoke to the other prophets, namely, in a vision. When Joshua 
lay upon his face mourning and supplicating, he fell into a 
trance, and the Lord communicated unto him the reason of the 
punishment which he had sent upon Israel. But the name of the 
criminal the Lord did not tell unto him. 

As this was a public affair, the searching and finding out of 
the guilty individual was to be done by the oracle Urim, and 
publicly. Therefore the Lord was pleased, to show unto Joshua, 
for the first time, how to use the oracle and how to find out the 
guilty person who had the accursed things. We read: “Up, 
sanctify the people, and say, Sanctify yourselves against to- 
morrow: for thus says the Lord God of Israel, there is an 
accursed thing in the midst of thee, O Israel; thou canst not 
stand before thine enemies, until ye take away the accursed thing 
from among you. In the morning, therefore, ye shall be brought 
according to your tribes, and it shall be that the tribe which the 
Lord taketh shall come according to the families thereof ; and 
the family which the Lord shall take shall come by households ; 
and the household which the Lord shall take shall come man by 
man” (Josh, vii. 13, 14). 


THE URIM AND THUMMIM 319 


From this direction given unto Joshua, we see that there was 
no such a thing as an audible voice here. Had this been the 
case, what need was there of so much trouble? The oracle 
could have said at once who the guilty person was, and to what 
tribe he belonged. We also see that the oracle was to be asked 
single questions; and only single answers were to be expected, 
as the words of verse 14 show. The tribes were first to present 
themselves, and the oracle was to indicate the tribe to which the 
guilty person belonged. That tribe was then to present itself, 
and the oracle was to indicate the family of which the guilty 
person was a member. That family was then to present itself, 
and the oracle was to point out the guilty individual. 

We shall now describe the nature and construction of that 
wonderful oracle, and the manner in which its answers were 
given. We have already seen how the breastplate of judgment 
was made like a four-square box, a span in length, and a span in 
breadth. Into the front of it were inserted twelve precious stones 
of different natures and colours. They were set in golden frames, 
and were fastened to the breastplate, and formed the splendid 
front of the same. On each of these twelve stones the name of 
one of the sons of Jacob was engraven in Hebrew letters, One 
bore the name “ Reuben,” the other “Simeon,” and so on. The 
front of this breastplate which contained these gems was not very 
thick, and the breastplate itself was empty within. Into the 
inside of the breastplate the Lord commanded Moses to put 
the Urim and the Thummim. The Hebrew word “ Urim” 
signifies “lights,” or “illuminators.” It was no more than a 
lamp, with twelve lights, put into the breastplate. Within, each 
light was directed towards one of the precious stones, by which 
means the brilliancy and lustre of the gems were heightened to 
a great degree. But all the letters of the Hebrew alphabet did 
not occur in the twelve names on the breastplate: These four, 
p.¥%0.n, were wanting. To supply this defect Moses was 
directed to make another stone with these four letters on it. 
This stone was called “Thummim,” which signifies “the com- 
pleters,” or “ the perfecters”; inasmuch as these four letters upon 
it completed the alphabet, and perfected the oracle for the 
purpose of giving answers, These lights and perfecters were 
put into the breastplate whenever the high priest had to enter 
the Most Holy, or when a matter of difficulty occurred in Church 
or State affairs. The Urim, or illuminating lights, were supplied 
with holy oil, and kindled with that sacred fire which came down 
from heaven upon the altar at the dedication of the tabernacle 


320 APPENDIX 


(Lev. ix. 24). This fire was carefully preserved in the tabernacle 
till the time of Solomon. When that king dedicated the 
Temple and brought sacrifices upon the new altar which he 
had made, fire came down again from heaven upon the altar 
(2 Chron. vii. 1-3). 

The wonderful manner in which the Divine revelations were 
made by this oracle may be explained in the following illustra- 
tion. When Joshua came unto Eleazar the high priest (according 
to his received commandment, Numb. xxvii. 21) that he might 
ask counsel for him, according to the judgment of the Urim, 
before the Lord, the high priest put on his holy pontifical robes, 
and above it the ephod with the breastplate, which was illumi- 
nated by the Urim, and had the Thummim joined to it, on the 
side thereof. The high priest then directed his face towards the 
Most Holy, entreating the Lord to reveal the guilty individuals, 
while Joshua presented himself with the twelve elders of the 
tribes of Israel, in the open court of the tabernacle. Then the 
high priest put the simple question, “ Which of the twelve tribes 
have sinned?” He looked upon the illuminated breastplate with 
its brilliant stones and saw that the first stone in the second row, 
which bore the name of Judah, was darkened and ceased to shine. 

Then he called with a loud voice, “Judah!” The eleven princes 
were then dismissed, and the prince of Judah presented himself 
again with the fathers of the families of his tribe. The priest 
then again put the question, “ Which family has sinned?” He- 
looked again upon the breastplate and found that the family of 
the Zarchites was taken. But as this name is composed of four 
different letters, 7,1, which were not to be found complete 
in any of the twelve names of the breastplate, he found these 
different letters in different names. Thus he had to look over 
all the stones. He then saw, first, that the letter },in the name 
joist (Zebulun), was taken (viz., darkened); he next saw 
that the letter 9, in the name 3in5 (Reuben), was taken. And 
when he saw no more letters upon the breastplate taken, and 
could make nothing of the two letters, 9, }, which he had already 
got, he looked upon the Thummim on the right side of the 
breastplate and found that of its four letters the letter M was 
taken, But no name was yet completed. He therefore looked 
once more upon the twelve stones, and found that the letter 
s in the name Joseph, was taken. Now he had a complete 
name, ‘Mt (Zarchi); he therefore called aloud that “Zarchi” 
was taken. In the same manner, when the family of the 
Zarchites appeared man by man, and when the priest asked, 


THE URIM AND THUMMIM 321 


“Which man has sinned?” he looked upon the stones and saw 
letter after letter taken, of which, when he put them together in 
the same order in which they were taken, he made the name 
at (Zabdi). He then communicated this name unto the 
public, and when they brought the household of Zabdi man by 
man, Achan was taken. When he was examined by Joshua he 
confessed his crime, in consequence of which he and all those 
who were involved in his crime were put to death as the Lord 
had commanded. 

Such wonderful services this holy breastplate, and the Urim 
and Thummim, rendered unto Israel all the time of Joshua. By 
it the land of Canaan was divided (Josh. xviii. 6-10). By it 
Israel was directed in battle. By it every difficulty was removed, 
and every great and hard matter of controversy in judgment was 
decided, After the death of Joshua Israel asked the Lord which 
tribe should go first to fight against the Canaanites. The Lord’s 
answer by this oracle was quite brief. “ Jehudah yaleh” (“Judah 
shall go”) (Judges i. 1-12). When Israel asked again who should 
go first to fight against Benjamin, the answer was, “ Judah first ” 
(Judges xx. 18). That this was done by the oracle is evident 
from the ninth verse of the same chapter, where Israel says, “ We 
will go up by lot against it” Compare this with verse 18, “ And 
the children of Israel arose, and went up to the house of God” 
(or to Bethel, where the tabernacle stood at that time, as verse 27 
shows), “and asked counsel of God.” Compare this with Numb. 
xxvii. 21, “ Who shall ask counsel for him, after the judgment of 
` the Urim, before the Lord.” In every passage in the Old Testa- 
ment scriptures where it is said that Israel or any person asked 
the Lord, and He answered, reference is made to the oracle 
Urim and Thummim, except in the lifetime of Moses, with whom 
the Lord spake face to face. King Saul, in his victorious war 
against the Philistines, asked the Lord if he should pursue his 
enemies the second day, but received no answer, because 
Jonathan his son had ignorantly transgressed against his father’s 
oath in eating of the honey. Then Saul brought the people 
before the oracle, and said unto them, “ Be ye on one side, and I 
and Jonathan, my son, on the other.” He then said, “ Lord God 
of Israel, give a perfect lot.” So Jonathan and Saul were taken. 
Again the priest asked between Saul and Jonathan, and Jonathan 
alone was taken, Jonathan then confessed his guilt, and his 
readiness to die for it; but Israel prevailed with his father to 
spare his life (1 Sam. xiv. 18-20, 26-46). In Saul’s last and 
unfortunate battle the Lord would not answer him by the Urim 


22 


322 APPENDIX 


and Thummim because of his manifold transgressions (1 Sam, 
xxviii. 6). He therefore betook himself in his despair to the 
witch of Endor (xxviii. 7-25). When he destroyed the priests of 
Noph, Abiathar, the son of the slain high priest, escaped and fled 
unto David, with the ephod and the oracle, Urim and Thummim. 
This rendered great and important services unto David, for he 
was instructed by it in all his afflictions and dangers. 

David was the first person who consulted it without the taber- 
nacle and was answered by it, for all the former consultations 
took place in the tabernacle, or at least before the ark of the 
covenant. But the Lord was pleased to answer David by this 
oracle in any place. According to the documents whence we 
have drawn the above information, this oracle ceased to answer 
after the death of David. Afterwards there was no other means 
of receiving instructions than by the prophets. Ezra and Nehe- 
miah indeed wished that the Urim and Thummim would be 
restored unto Israel in the second Temple (Ezra ii, 62-64; Neh. 
vii. 64-66), but neither ark nor cherubim, nor Urim and Thummim, 
were ever restored unto Israel. 


1 Josephus indeed speaks of the breastplate occasionally shining during the 
second Temple, which shining, he says, ceased two hundred years before be 
commenced his work. But Josephus might have saved himself the trouble of 
making such an assertion, for we affirm on undeniable authority that neither 
were Urim and Thummim in the second Temple at all, nor did they in the 
first Temple return answers by shiring, as that historian seems to imagine. 
Josephus would have acted much more OE As if he had let this matter alone 
altogether, 


APPENDIX II 
DEAN FARRAR ON THE “TERAPHIM” 


NOTE TO CHAPTER I., PAGE 28. 


AN example of the handling of Scripture by the “modern” 
4 å critical school may be found in an article on the “Teraphim”’ 
by Dean Farrar in the third edition of Kitto’s “ Cyclopedia,” 
which manifests the greatest confusion of thought imaginable. 
After summarising the earlier passages where the word is found, 
he comes to Hosea iii. 4, of which he says, “Here it would 
certainly be the prima facie impression of every unbiassed reader 
that the malzébah and the teraphim are mentioned without blame 
as ordinary parts of religious worship. 

“Without, however, entering into the question (which perhaps 
cannot be decided) whether Hosea did or did not mean to com- 
mend or tolerate these material adjuncts to a monotheistic 
worship, it is certainly not surprising that the reverence paid to 
the teraphim should have continued in Israel side by side with 
that paid to the calves, which beyond all doubt were intended to 
be mere Elohistic symbols.” 

This is unpardonable ignorance on the part of a would-be 
teacher, for it confounds God and Belial, and the symbols of the 
worship of Jehovah with the symbols of idolatry. 

There cannot be the least question as to whether the prophet 
“did or did not mean to commend or tolerate these material 
adjuncts to a monotheistic worship,” since he treats them not as 
appositions but as oppositions of the symbols of the worship of 
the true and living God. On this point the unconverted Rabbi 
whom I have quoted on page g has more spiritual and historical 
insight than the prominent Church dignitary. It is “certainly 
not at all surprising that the reverence paid to the teraphim 
should have continued in Israel side by side with that paid to 

323 


324 APPENDIX 


the calves” set up by Jeroboam, for both alike were idolatrous 
practices equally abominable in the sight of God, and a violation 
of His law. 

Further down in his article, after summarising Spencer's 
absurd arguments to the effect that the teraphim and Urim and 
Thummim were identical, he says, “ On the other hand, if in the 
above passages we have convincing proof that the use of teraphim 
was common, if not universal, among the early Hebrews, there 
are other passages which show that it was condemned, and that 
strongly, by the stricter Jehovists.” Some of “the main and 
certain results” which he gathers from his whole review of the 
subject are, “that the resort to teraphim was not a practice con- 
fined to Jews; that their use continued down to the latest period 
of Jewish history ; and lastly, that although the more enlightened 
prophets and strictest later kings regarded them as idolatrous, 
the priests were much less averse to such images, and their cult 
was not considered in any way repugnant to the pious worship 
of Elohim, nay, even to the worship of him under the awful title 
of Jehovah. In fact they involved a monotheistic idolatry very 
different indeed from polytheism ; and the tolerance of them by 
priests, as compared with the denunciation of them by the 
keener insight and more vivid inspiration of the prophets, offers 
a close analogy to the views of the: Roman Catholics respecting 
pictures and images as compared with the views of Protestants. 
It was against this use of idolatrous symbols and emblems in a 
monotheistic worship that the Second Commandment was 
directed, whereas the first is aimed against the graver sin of 
direct polytheism. But the whole history of Israel shows how 
early and how utterly the law must have fallen into desuetude, 
The worship of the golden calf, and of the calves at Dan and 
Bethel, against which, so far as we know, neither Elijah nor 
Elisha said a single word; the tolerance of high places, teraphim 
and beetytia ; the offering of incense for centuries to the brazen 
serpent destroyed by Hezekiah ; the occasional glimpses of the 
most startling irregularities, sanctioned apparently even in the 
Temple worship itself, prove most decisively that a pure mono- 
theism and an independence of symbols was the result of a slow 
and painful course of God’s disciplinal dealings among the 
noblest thinkers of a single nation, and not, as is so constantly 
and erroneously urged, the instinct of the whole Semitic race ; 
in other words, one single branch of the Semites was under God's ~ 
providence educated into pure monotheism only by centuries of 
misfortune and series of inspired men,” : 


DEAN FARRAR ON THE “TERAPHIM” 325 


This is a fine specimen of the new method: first misunder- 
stand Scripture statements, and then represent the Bible as made 
up of conflicting “Codes,” some written by more “tolerant 
priests” and “Eloists,” and some by “the stricter Jehovists,” 
who differ on the legitimacy of such a cardinal point as idolatry 
which is most solemnly forbidden in the Ten Commandments. 
But some, at any rate, of Dr. Farrar’s “ certain results” are drawn 
purely from his own imagination. 

There is not the slightest ground on a careful examination of 
the eight scriptures in question in which the teraphim are men- 
tioned for the assertion that there is any difference of opinion in 
reference to them among the inspired writers. They all alike 
regarded them in the same light as iniquity, witchcraft, idolatry, 
and other “abominations” (1 Sam. xv. 23.; 2 Kings xxiii. 24), and 
if one or another simply refer to them in passing as a matter of 
history, as they do to some of the other notorious sins of Israel, 
without stopping at the time to denounce them, it is no more fair 
to argue from the negative that they approve of them, than is the 
Dean’s astounding conclusion that Elijah and Elisha did not 
object to the worship of the calves at Dan and Bethel because, 
“so far as we know, they said not a single word against it” ! 

It never seems to have struck the writer that in their faithful 
witness to the one true and living God, and in their denunciations 
of all apostasy from Him, this sin too was included. We might 
as well argue that because, “so far as we know,” they did not 
say a single word in particular against breaches of some of the 
other of the Ten Commandments of which Israel was guilty, 
that therefore they approved of those transgressions ! 

The only grounds which Dean Farrar adduces (in a note) for 
the assertion that “the priests were much less averse to such 
‘images’ and more tolerant to ‘monotheistic’ idolatry ”—which, 
by the way, is an absurd paradox—are the conduct of Aaron in 
the matter of the golden calf; the story of the vagrant Levite 
Jonathan in those wild and ignorant times, “who for his board 
and clothing and ten pieces of silver a year hired himself out to 
the Ephraimite Micah to become the obscure priest” of a cult in 
which the imperfect knowledge of Jehovah was mixed up with a 
“ graven image and a molten image,” which are an abomination 
in His sight ; and finally the conduct of the pliable priest Urijah, 
who at the command of the wicked King Ahaz introduced into 
the Temple of God analtar after the fashion of an idolatrous altar 
which the king saw in Damascus. 

Now it would be quite as fair and logical to argue from the 


326 APPENDIX 


fact that because two or three priests were guilty of the crime of 
murder or adultery that therefore the priests as an order were 
“less averse” and “more tolerant” of these sins than “the 
keener-sighted” prophets ! 

As to Aaron’s conduct, into which, according to his excuse 
to Moses, he was driven out of fear for the people. Moses, too, 
was a priest, and what he and the whole tribe of the Levites 
thought of it is answered by their slanghter among the people in 
one day of three thousand men. And as to Jonathan, whom 
-Dean Farrar quotes as an example of the priests, the inspired 
(priestly) chronicler (1 Chron. xxiii. 15, 17) is so ashamed of him 
that he does not record his name among the sons of Gershom, 
and therefore stops with the firstborn. That Gershom had other 
sons may be inferred from the fact that of his brother Eliezer, 
who only had one son, the fact is recorded. 

This desire to efface Jonathan from the priestly register, or at 
any rate from the register of the family of Moses to which he 
really belonged, is to be observed from the insertion of the hang- 
ing Hebrew letter nun, by which the name of “ Moses” is turned 
into “ Manasseh” (see the Hebrew of Judges xviii. 30), by which 
the early scribes meant to convey the hint that he was more 
worthy to be a descendant of the wicked and idolatrous king of 
that name than of the great lawgiver. 

Then, finally, as to Urijah, who introduced that unauthorised 
altar into the Temple, the connection of which with the subject 
of the teraphim I fail to see, he was as much a model priest as 
Ahaz, by whose command he acted, was a model king. 

In the last paragraph of Dr. Farrar’s article which I have 
quoted, we observe in veiled language the great fallacy common 
to this school of writers. Instead of judging the conduct and 
failures of Israel by the divinely revealed law, which was perfect 
from the beginning, they are apt to form certain notions about 
the law from the conduct of the people ; thus the non-observance 
or transgression of certain laws has been used by these writers as 
a proof of their non-existence at the time, and as an argument 
for the theory of a much later origin. 

It was not the result “of a dow and painful course” of disci- 
pline “among the noblest thinkers” that men finally arrived at 
“a pure monotheism and independence of symbols,” but as the 
result of a self-revelation on the part of the true and living God, 
to which man is ever slow to respond. 

As already said in the section in Chapter I. which I have 
devoted to this subject, the history of Israel as of Christendom 


DEAN FARRAR ON THE “ TERAPHIM” 327 


teaches man the humbling lesson that not only can he not by 
searching find God, but that even when the knowledge of God 
is divinely communicated to him he is unable, left to himself, to 
retain that knowledge in his heart, and is apt to fall back into 
idolatry whether literal or spiritual, 


APPENDIX III 


THE STRUCTURE OF THE SECOND HALF OF THE 
BOOK OF ISAIAH 


NOTE TO CHAPTER II., PAGE 43. 


HE Book of Consolations,” as the Rabbis call the second 

half of Isaiah, consists for the most part of the general 
announcement of a glorious future of salvation and peace, but 
often the salvation which the prophet foretells, is defined and 
specified. The message embraces a twofold promise. 

First, the certain restoration from the Babylonish captivity, 
which is portrayed in terms which far exceed what actually took 
place at that restoration, and which will only be exhausted and 
fulfilled in the greater restoration of Israel “from all the four 
corners of the earth.” The very instrument who should be the 
means of the minor restoration (Cyrus) is foretold, and called by 
name more than 150 years before he was born.” 

But the theme with which the prophet’s soul is full and to 
which his thoughts ever recur, even while he deals with the 
minor deliverance, is the grand redemption and salvation to be 
accomplished by one greater than Cyrus, even by Messiah—a 
salvation of which Israel is the centre, and all the ends of the 
earth the circumference. 

In dealing with this greater salvation the relation of time is 
not observed. “Now, the prophet beholds the author of it in 
His humiliation and suffering, then the most distant future of 
Messiah’s kingdom presents itself to his enraptured eye—the 
time when Israel shall walk in the light of Jehovah and all the 
Gentile world shall be converted to Him; when all that is 
opposed to God shall be destroyed ; when inward and outward 
peace shall prevail and all evil caused by sin shall be removed.” 


Elevated above time and space, his own soul full of rapturous 
328 


SECOND HALF OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH 329 


enthusiasm for the Redeemer-King, Isaiah in these twenty-seven 
chapters surveys the whole development of the Messianic king- 
dom from its small beginning to its glorious end, and gives us 
the fullest portrayal of Messiah’s person and mission, humiliation 
and exaltation to be found in the Old Testament, 

On examining this glorious prophecy closely we find that the 
twenty-seven chapters range themselves into three equal smaller 
cycles of nine chapters each, all ending with nearly the same 
solemn refrain, “there is no peace saith my God to the wicked.” 
The subject is the development and certain overthrow of the 
evil and the wicked, who are excluded from all the blessings 
of Messiah’s kingdom ; and the sufferings but final glory of the 
righteous remnant who are the subjects of that kingdom, whose 
King is described as passing through the same path of suffering 
to the glory that should follow. The subject treated throughout 
the three sections becomes developed and intensified as we go 
along until it reaches its climax in the last chapter. The first 
section is brought to a close at the end of chapter xlviii., where 
the blessedness of the righteous who are “redeemed ” (verse 20) 
and peacefully led and satisfied even in the desert, is contrasted 
with the state of the wicked to whom “there is no peace.” 

In the second division the same subject becomes intensified, 

‘there is development of both evil and good, righteousness and 
wickedness, and it ends with chapter lvii. where “Peace! peace!” 
is announced to the righteous, but the wicked have not only 
“no peace,” but having grown in wickedness, have become like 
the troubled sea when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire 
and dirt. 

In the last division the destiny of both is brought to a climax 
and become fixed for ever. “Therefore thus saith Jehovah God, 
Behold My servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry; behold 
My servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty; behold My 
servants shall rejoice, but ye Shall be ashamed; behold My 
servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of 
heart and shall howl for vexation of spirit, And ye shall leave 
your name for a curse unto My chosen, for the Lord God shall 
slay thee and call His servants by another name.” This contrast 
is continued until finally we find the righteous dwelling for ever 
in the new heavens and the new earth wherein shall dwell 
righteousness, while as to the wicked who have transgressed 
against God, “ their worm shall not die neither shall their fire be 
quenched, and they shall be an abhorring to all flesh.” 

The heart and Messianic climax of the whole prophecy is to 


330 APPENDIX 


be found in its inmost centre, which, instead of a prophecy 
uttered centuries in advance, reads like an historic summary of 
the Gospel narrative of the sufferings of Christ and the glory 
that-should follow. Taking our position at this central point we 
are almost overwhelmed with the evidence of design in the very 
structure of this prophecy, for on closer examination we find 
that each book is subdivided into three sections of three 
chapters each, nearly corresponding to the divisions in the 
Authorised Version. Thus the middle book is xlix-—lvii. The 
middle section of the middle book is chapters lii., liii., liv., and 
chapter liii. is the middle-chapter of the middle section of the 
middle book—forming, as it were, the heart and centre of this 
wonderful Messianic poem, as well as the heart and centre of 
all Old Testament prophecy. The central verse of this central 
paragraph, which begins properly with chapter lii. 13, is: “He 
was wounded for our transgressions, He was bruised for our 
_iniquities, the chastisement with the view to our peace was upon 
Him, and with His stripes we are healed.” The doctrine it 
enshrines (substitution) is the essence of the teaching in Old and 
New Testaments, as well as the central truth of the prophecy. 
It is moreover, the essence of the message of comfort with 
which the prophet begins (xl. 1, 2), solving the problem as to 
how “her iniquity is pardoned.” 


