THE    LIBRARY

brigha:.:  young  u:  i varsity

PROVO,  UTAH


^


r


I


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2011  with  funding  from
Brigham  Young  University


http://www.archive.org/details/preacherscomplet20newy


THE  PREACHER'S  COMMENTARY


ON    THE


MINOR  PROPHETS.


4


THE


§xmhtts  (Eomplet*  ^omiletical

COMMENTARY


OH   THE


OLD    TESTAMENT

CON  AN  ORIGINAL  PLAN).

ith  (Erittcai  znb  (Explatmtcrg  &ott*f  iribitzs,  &z.f  &&


BY


VARIOUS  AUTHORS.


«*.


TSTeto  ITortt

TUNK   &   WAGNALLS   COMPANY

London  and  Toronto

1892


A


%

V/50


HOMILETICAL    COMMENTARY


ON   THB


MINOR    PROPHETS.


BT


REV.   JAMES    WOLFENDALE.


l$m  ¥orfc

FUNK   &   WAGNALLS   COMPANY

London  and  Toronto

1892


'fHE    LI  BR
IGHAi.    YC  U   IV  fY

PROVO,  UTAH


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY


ON


H  O  S  E  A.


The  Prophet.  Hosea  =  salvation,  deliverance,  from  the  same  root  as  Joshua  and
Jesus ;  the  son  of  Beeri,  a  native  of  Israel,  whose  sins  and  fates  he  chiefly  records.
The  name  in  marked  contrast  to  his  mission — announcement  of  ruin ;  yet  in
harmony  with  his  vocation  and  the  object  of  his  book — to  proclaim  deliverance
after  judgment.  Nothing  known  concerning  the  circumstances  of  his  life.  His
character  and  disposition  gathered  from  his  prophecy.

The  Age.  More  or  less  contemporary  with  Isaiah,  Amos,  Jonah,  Joel,  and
Nahum.  Probably  entered  upon  his  work  in  the  last  year  of  Jeroboam,  and
ended  it  at  the  beginning  of  Hezekiah's  reign,  i.  e.,  about  60  years,  from  784 — 722
B.C.  "  The  shortest  duration  must  have  been  some  65  years  "  [Pusey"].  Others
give  a  much  longer  period.  This  is  the  darkest  period  in  the  history  of  Israel.  The
obligations  of  the  law  were  relaxed  and  the  claims  of  religion  disregarded.  Baal
was  a  rival  to  Jehovah,  and  in  the  dark  recesses  of  groves  were  practised  the  cruel
rites  of  idolatry.  The  land  was  distracted  by  domestic  broils  and  foreign  inva-
sion. Might  was  marshalled  against  right.  Princes  and  priests  were  accused  of
bribery  and  impiety.  Murder  and  bloodshed  were  steps  to  the  throne ;  stream
met  stream  and  deluged  the  land  like  a  flood.  "  Eemonstrance  was  useless ;  the
knowledge  of  God  was  wilfully  rejected  ;  the  people  hated  rebuke ;  the  more  they
were  called  the  more  they  refused ;  they  forbade  their  prophets  to  prophesy ;  and
their  false  prophets  hated  God  greatly.  All  attempts  to  heal  this  disease  only
showed  its  incurableness  "  [Pusey].  Foreign  nations  are  unheeded.  Lycurgus  the
famous  legislator,  and  Hesiod  the  Greek  poet,  lived  during  his  ministry,  but  the
prophet  was  intensely  concerned  with  his  own  people.  The  threatened  invasion
came,  and  he  saw  the  murder  of  the  tribes  and  the  ravages  of  the  enemy.  In-
vitations and  warnings  are  replete  with  tenderness  and  woe.  All  is  shrouded  in
darkness  and  gloom.  Visions  send  forth  lightning  and  thunder;  but  the  sun
breaks  forth  at  last,  and  rainbow  colours  expand  until  encircled  with  brilliancy
and  hope.     God  in  wrath  remembers  mercy.

The  Book  written  by  the  author  whose  name  it  bears — the  first  of  the  twelve

1


INTRODUCTION  AND  PREFACE.


minor  prophets,  probably  so  placed  on  account  of  length,  and  resemblance  to  the
greater  prophets  in  earnest  tone  and  vivid  representation.    Its  Contents.  Externally
set  forth  national  apostasy,  prevailing  corruption  and  judgments  from  God  on  ac
count  of  that  apostasy.    Severe  threatenings  are  mixed  with  gracious  promises.  Israel
chastised  would  return  in  penitence  to  God ;  the  kingdom  would  be  restored  and  the
people  united  under  one  head.     Internally  truths  are^presented,  in  form  and  lan-
guage peculiar.     Israel  is  viewed  in  the  light  of  Jehovah's  love.     This  love  is  often
wounded  and  chastises ;  is  ever  active  and  unchangeable,  calls  and  heals.    Its  Style
is  bold,  often  abrupt,  and  for  the  most  part  mere  hints.     There  are  changes  in
figure,  anomalies  in  gender,  number,  and  person.     We  have  fragments,  a  general
summary,  and  fourteen  short  chapters  include  all  that  is  left  of  perhaps  the  longest
ministry  in  Old  Testament  record.     "Each  verse  forms  a  whole  for  itself,  like  one
heavy  toll  in  a  funeral  knell.     The  prophet  has  not  been  careful  about  order  and
symmetry,  so  that  each  sentence  went  home  to  the  soul"  [Pusey].     Messianic
references,  not  very  numerous,  lie  in  allusions,  and  may  be  gathered  from  New  Testa-
ment citations.     Its  Analysis  rather  difficult — the  following  may  help  the  student.
First  Period  or  Division,  before  the  fall  of  Jehu's  house,  chaps,  i.  ii.  and  iii.     Israel's
sin  and  rejection,  chap.  i. ;  Israel's  chastisement  and  conversion,  chap.  ii.  ;  Israel's
deeper  guilt,  prolonged  punishment,  and  final  restoration,  chap.  iii.   Second  Period  or
Division,  after  the  fall  of  Jehu's  house.    I.  The  Threatenings  against  the  idolatrous
people,  chap,  iv. ;  against  conniving  priests,  chaps,  v.  and  vi. ;  against  the  royal
court  for  unholy  alliance,   chap.   vii.  ;  judgment  ending  in  Assyrian  bondage,
chaps,  viii. — x.     II.   The  Promises.     God  will  have  mercy,  chap.  xi. ;  complaint
resumed,  chap.  xii. ;  Israel's  deeper  fall,  chap.  xiii. ;  Israel's  conversion  and  richer
blessings,  chap.  xiv.     Keil's  division  has  much  to  recommend  it.     Each  of  the  two
main  sections,  chaps,  i. — iii.,  iv. — xiv.,  is  divided  into  three  smaller  ones,  (i.  2 —
ii.  3),  (ii.  4 — 25),  (iii.),  (iv. — vi.  3),  (vi.  4 — xi.  11),  (xii.  11 — xiv.).  In  the  Criticism
we  seek  to  bring  out  the  meaning  of  the  text,  in  the  Homiletics  to  frame  and
apply  that  meaning  for  improvement  in  pulpit  ministrations  and  the  practical  pur-
suits of  life.


chap,  i.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.


CHAPTER  I.

Critical  Notes. — 2.  By]  Lit.  in  Hosea,  the  preposition  expresses  close  relationship  with
another;  cf.  Num.  xii.  6,  8;  Heb.  ii.  1.  First  in  us  and  then  through  us  is  the  Divine  order;  per-
sonal enlightenment  and  then  public  service.  Wife  of  whore.]  A  vision,  some;  externally  acted,  others ;
taken  in  a  real  sense  by  most  interpreters.  The  plural  indicates  not  merely  incidental,  but  con-
tinual and  manifold  acts  [Pusey],  Take]  i.  e.  marry  one  whose  livelihood  is  gained  by  prostitution,
and  whose  whole  element  is  whoredom.  Cf.  men  of  blood,  Ps.  v.  7 ;  man  of  sorrows,  Is.  liii.  3.
This  is  a  symbol  of  Israel  in  its  state  of  idolatry.  Land]  Israel,  indirectly  Judah,  wife  and  children,
equally  grieved  the  husband  and  father,  Ezek.  xvi.  8,  15.  Committed]  is  whoring,  whoring  away,
from  Jehovah,  lit.  from  after  Jehovah  ;  the  composite  preposition  denoting  more  than  absence  from
God,  signifies  opposed  to  walking  with  him  ;  the  breaking  of  the  marriage  vow,  cut  off  from  loving  re-
lationship (Ps.  lxxiii.  27).  3.  Gom.]  The  name  of  a  nation  (Gen.  x.  2,  3) ;  symbolically  G.  =  completion ;
i.e.  completely  given  up  to  whoredom.  Dib.]  =daughter  of  grape-cakes,  indicating  pleasure  and  sensu-
ality. "  The  sweetness  of  sins  is  the  parent  of  destruction  "  [Puseg].  4.  Jez.]  =  1  will  sow,  scatter  or
disperse,  like  a  seedsman,  which  happened  by  the  Assyrians  (2  Kings  xvii.  5,  6).  Avenge]  Ileb.  visit.
Jehu  commanded  to  destroy  the  house  of  Ahab,  externally  obeyed,  and  rewarded  in  measure.  He
acted  not  from  principle,  or  as  he  pretended  out  of  zeal,  but  to  serve  his  own  political  ends  (2  Kings
ix.  10,  36;  x.  16).  "And  so  the  blood  which  was  shed  according  to  the  rigbJeous  judgment  of
God,  became  sin  to  him  who  shed  it,  in  order  to  fulfil,  not  the  will  of  God,  but  his  own  "  [Pusey].
Jez.  symbol  of  past  sins,  intermediate  punishment  and  final  overthrow.  5.  Bow]  Might,  military
prowess  (Gen.  xlix.  24  ;  Jer.  xlix.  35).  6.  Daughter]  A  symbol  of  a  degenerate  race,  some ;  of  the
totality  of  men  and  women  of  the  nation,  others  ;  seems  to  intensify  Lo-ruh.]  =  not  pitied,  lit.  I
will  not  add  any  more  to.  The  original  expresses  tender  yearning  towards  one  (Rom.  ix.  25 ;
1  Pet.  ii.  10) ;  but  God  would  not  continue  to  show  compassion  as  he  had  done ;  Divine  mercy  ex-
hausted and  Israel  was  left  in  a  defenceless  state.  I  will  utterly]  Lit.  taking  away,  I  will  take
away  everything  they  have.  Marg.  another  sense,  to  take  away,  i.  e.  to  forgive  sin.  7.  The  Lord
their  God]  More  emphatic  than  " through  me"  (Gen.  xix.  24).  Judah  worshipped  God;  Israel
turned  to  idols.  One  a  witness  for  God,  the  other  apostates  from  God.  Judah  saved  in  marked
contrast  to  Israel  punished.  9.  Lo-am.]  =  not  my  people ;  the  covenant  relation  dissolved.  Son
may  typify  the  revival  of  strength  in  the  reign  of  Jeroboam  II.,  but  prosperity  brought  no  revival
of  piety.  They  were  not  God's  people.  Not  be  your  God]  Lit.  I  will  not  be  to  you  or  for  you  ;
"for  you  by  providence,  to  you  by  love"  [Pusey].  Deprivation  of  all  that  God  can  be  to  them.
When  God  ceases  to  belong  to  men,  to  compassionate  them,  rejection  follows.  11.  Gathered
together]  in  one  body.  One  head]  Zerubbabel  typically,  Christ  really  (Jer.  iii.  18 ;  Ezek.  xxxiv.
23).  Go  up]  from  Babylon,  from  whence  God  restored  the  two  tribes ;  typ.  =  deliverance  from  sin
and  moral  dignity ;  go  up  from  sinful  life,  join  the  Christian  Church  and  march  to  the  land  of  pro-
mise. Great,  &c]  Not  as  ver.  4.  God  will  increase  in  mercy,  not  scatter  in  displeasure.  Where
Israel  was  overthrown,  victory  shall  be  achieved.  Instead  of  no  mercy  and  not  my  people,  we  have
mercy  and  my  people.  Great  and  glorious  the  day  when  the  fortunes  of  Israel  shall  be  reversed  and
the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  come  in.

HOMILETICS.

The  First  Communications. — Verse  1.

I.  The  chosen  servant.  1.  His  human  descent,  "Son  of  B."  The  Jews  say
that  the  prophet  whose  father  is  named  was  the  son  of  a  prophet.  Nothing
recorded  of  Ber.  Hosea  dignified  and  distinguished  not  by  noble  birth  nor
worldly  grandeur.  Rank  and  riches  are  not  moral  worth.  Life  outlined  by  noble
deeds ;  greatness  acquired  by  religious  service.  Character  in  its  noblest  embodi-
ments, exhibits  the  highest  qualities,  commands  the  greatest  influence  and  admira-
tion. Apostles  of  great  thoughts  and  rulers  of  the  human  mind  have  sprung
from  no  exclusive  rank  in  life,  but  have  been  called  from  schools  of  the  prophets
and  workshops  of  the  poor.  2.  His  spiritual  training.  God  spoke  in  Hosea;
gave  him  knowledge  and  experience  first,  then  commissioned  him  to  teach  others.
Personal  dedication  before  public  duty ;  fellowship  in  private  before  reward  in
public.  We  must  speak  what  we  know ;  be  blessed  ourselves  before  we  can  bless
others.  This  is  a  law  of  Christian  economy.  We  can  only  teach  others  as  we  are
taught  ourselves.  Our  influence  upon  others  must  be  measured  by  the  Divine
gifts  within  us.  The  best  proof  of  Christianity  is  the  energy  with  which  we  can
Christianize.  God  bestows  blessings  not  to  nurse  in  our  bosoms  but  to  radiate  in
beneficent  influence  to  others.  "  I  will  bless  thee  and  make  thy  name  great,  and
thou  shalt  be  a  blessing."     3.  His  outward  call.     Probably  when  a  youno-  man,


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY;  HOSE  A.  \c*k*.  l


and  hence  the  length  of  his  ministry.  Samuel  and  Timothy  given  to  God  when
young.  Jeremiah  consecrated  from  the  womb.  An  honour  and  privilege  to  serve
God  in  youth.  Energy  and  enthusiasm  are  necessary  as  well  as  talent  and  experience.
"I   remember   thee,    the   kindness   of  thy   youth."     II.  The    Divine   message.

1.  Its  nature.  A  u  word,"  the  expression  of  the  mind  and  purpose  of  God.  The
power  of  a  word  to  influence  character  and  change  the  destinies  of  life.  Words
of  monarchs  have  decided  the  fate  of  empires.  The  word  of  God,  judgment  or
mercy,  the  message  of  life  or  death  to  a  people.  "  To  the  one  we  are  the  savour
of  death  unto  death,  and  to  the  other  of  life  unto  life."  2.  Its  origin.  "  The
word  of  the  Lord."  Not  by  man  nor  from  man,  not  self-originated  ;  it  was  first
God's  and  then  became  the  prophet's.  "  For  the  prophecy  came  not  in  old  time
by  the  will  of  man."  Men  not  left  to  their  own  devices  and  must  not  declare  their
own  opinions.  God  finds  the  message  and  speaks  with  Divine  certainty  and
authority.  All  teaching  deserving  the  name  comes  to  us  not  as  the  product  of
human  thought  but  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  "  Preach  the  preaching  I  bid  thee."
The  Bible  is  pre-eminently  the  prophetic  word.  "  Ye  do  well  that  ye  take  heed
to  it."  3.  Its  medium.  Through  Hosea.  God's  message  through  men  and  to
men.  Man  in  his  moral  nature  is  renewed,  elevated,  and  qualified  to  teach  and
bless  a  fallen  people.  This  displays  Divine  wisdom  and  love,  creates  sympathy
for  our  fellow-creatures,  humanizes  the  Bible,  and  renders  the  gospel  more  charming
and  attractive.  III.  The  dark  days.  1.  Days  of  prevalent  idolatry.  "The
land  hath  committed  whoredoms."  Idolatry  was  made  the  national  religion.
The  worship  of  Baal  was  a  rival  to  the  worship  of  God.  Calf-worship  led  to  sin,
licentiousness  and  sensuality.  The  first  in  rank  were  first  in  excess.  Sad  when
men  of  high  position  fall  into  vice  !  Now,  even,  men  profess  to  own  God,  talk  of
"nature"  and  "natural  laws,"  yet  forget  God,  or  "change  their  glory  (i.e.  their
God)  into  the  similitude "   of  an  ox,  a  man,  a  hero,   or  an  abstract  principle.

2.  Days  of  political  anarchy.  Kings  came  to  the  throne  by  the  murder  of  their
predecessors  and  were  in  turn  murdered  by  their  successors.  Military  despotism
disturbed   the   peace,    and   horrible  slaughter   stained   the  people   of  the  land.

3.  Days  of  threatened  judgment.  Hosea  sent  to  urge  to  repentance,  for  captivity
was  imminent,  certain,  and  irreversible ;  but  God  was  forsaken,  the  nation  was
insensible  of  its  moral  and  political  decay,  and  judgments  lost  their  terror.  In
spite  of  warning  after  warning  the  people  sought  to  prop  themselves  up  by  alliance
with  Egypt  and  Assyria.  When  a  nation  is  rotten  at  the  core  no  outward  power
or  splendour  can  prevent  its  decay.  It  carries  within  it  the  seeds  of  death.
The  sky  grew  darker  and  darker ;  the  thunder  at  last  resounded  ;  calamities
could  not  be  averted  ;  then  judgments  fell  upon  them  without  mercy  in  dispersion
and  destruction.  4.  Days  of  little  success.  Israel  was  not  converted  but  taken
into  captivity,  yet  Hosea  laboured  on  year  after  year,  through  good  and  evil  report
(Amos  vii.  10,  12).  No  abatement  of  his  earnestness  and  efforts.  He  was  faithful
to  his  trust  and  to  his  God.  It  is  often  the  lot  of  God's  servants  to  labour  long
and  see  little  fruit.  Isaiah  cried,  "  I  have  laboured  in  vain,  I  have  spent  my
strength  for  nought,  and  in  vain."  We  must  be  content  to  toil  on  and  deliver
our  message  to  the  greatest  sinners  in  the  darkest  days,  and  feel  like  the  prophet
named,  "  surely  my  judgment  is  with  the  Lord,  and  my  work  with  my  God."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

In  the  days  of  ver.  1. — Hosea's  min-  time  and  sphere,  in  chequered  scenes
istry.  1 .  A  type  of  God's  long-suffering  and  great  discouragements.  God  gives
and  mercy ;  waiting  long,  sending  pro-  to  every  servant  his  special  place  and
phets,  and  offering  grace  to  a  sinful  peculiar  gifts.  In  hope  and  humble  con-
people,  until  beyond  the  reach  of  lidence  he  must  labour  on.
mercy.     2.  A    type  of  service  fixed  in         The  days  of  Jeroboam  II,   days  of


CHAP.  I.]


JIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.


prosperity  and  political  pre-eminence.
He  reigned  41  years;  recovered  lost  cities
(2  Kings  xiv.  28  ;  Amos  i.  3,  5) ;  was
victorious  in  war  (2  Kings  xiii.  4  ;  xiv.
26) ;  and  enjoyed  the  teacning  of  Hosea,
Joel  (iii.  16),  Amos  (i.  1),  and  Jonah
(2  Kings  xiv.  25).  But  idolatry  was
mixed  with  the  worship  of  Jehovah ;
drunkenness  and  oppression  prevailed  in
the  country,  and  the  prophets  predicted
its  downfall.  1.  Temporal  prosperity  is
no  guarantee  for  public  morality.  The
kingdom,  amid  splendour  and  popul-
arity, rotten  at  the  core,  decaying  in
vigour,  and  under  the  judgment  of  God.
2.  Temporal  prosperity  is  no  security
against  public  calamity.  "Temporal
prosperity  is  no  proof  either  of  stability
or  of  the  favour  of  God.  Where  the
law  of  God  is  observed,  there,  even
amid  the  pressure  of  outward  calamity,
is  the  assurance  of  ultimate  prosperity.
Where  God  is  disobeyed,  there  is  the
pledge  of  coming  destruction.  The
seasons  when  men  feel  most  secure
against  future  chastisements,  are  often
the  preludes  of  the  most  signal  revolu-
tions "  [Pusey],

Kings  rise  and  empires  fall,  but
God's  purpose  is  the  same;  carried  on
through  all  times  and  by  all  agencies.


Kings  die  and  are  buried  in  the  dust ;
prophets  live  in  all  ages  and  rewarded
in  eternity.  "  Monarchs  have  their  times
and  their  turns,  their  rise  and  their
ruin"  [Trapp].

Men  pass  away  —  notwithstanding
wealth  and  talent.  Nations  pass  away —
notwithstanding  political  power  and
military  glory.  God  is  eternal  and
carries  on  his  work.

The  perpetuity  of  truth.  Although
these  kings  successively  appeared  and
passed  away,  the  ministry  of  Hosea
kept  on.  1.  The  "  Word  of  the  Lord  "
is  adapted  to  all  generations.  It  is
congruous  with  all  intellects,  it  chimes
in  with  all  hearts,  it  provides  for  the
common  wants  of  all.  2.  The  "  Word
of  the  Lord  "  is  necessary  for  all  gener-
ations. All  men  in  all  ages  and  lands
want  it,  it  is  as  indispensable  to  their
happiness  as  air  is  to  their  life.  Gener-
ations may  appear  in  the  distant  future,
who  may  not  require  our  forms  of
government,  our  social  institutions,  our
artistic  devices,  our  mechanical  inven-
tions, and  who  may  despise  our  liter-
ary productions,  but  no  generation  will
ever  appear  who  will  not  require  the
"  Word  of  the  Lord  "  [Homilist].


HOMILETICS.

The  Symbolic  Marriage. —  Verse  2.

Whether  this  be  regarded  as  a  real  and  external  transaction,  or  a  spiritual
scenery,  or  allegorical  description,  all  agree  in  taking  it  as  a  type  of  God's  dealings
with  unfaithful  Israel.  Divine  truth  was  to  be  acted,  embodied  in  sensible  signs
and  prophetic  life.  Hosea  commanded  to  marry  a  prostitute  and  beget  children,
whose  names,  called  by  God  himself,  were  to  set  forth  the  evils  of  departure  from
him.  I.  A  type  of  Israel's  fallen  condition.  It  was  the  chosen  people,  specially
created  and  brought  into  covenant  relation  to  God.  This  relation,  often  represented
under  the  figure  of  marriage,  they  vowed  to  keep.  But  the  contract  was  broken,
they  had  fallen  away  from  God,  and  gone  a  whoring  after  other  gods.  Idolatry
was  not  accidental,  but  prevalent ;  the  whole  land  was  polluted,  and  the  sin  national.
The  idolatry  of  foreign  nations  was  regarded  as  an  abomination,  but  the  sin  of
Israel  a  more  glaring  enormity  and  greater  moral  guilt.  Three  things  are  con-
demned in  Scripture  as  idolatry.  1.  The  worshipping  of  a  false  god;  2.  the
worshipping  of  the  true  God  through  an  image ;  3.  the  indulgence  of  those
passions  which  draw  the  soul  from  God.  Israel  were  guilty  of  the  first  in  bowing
the  knee  to  Baal,  and  of  the  second  in  setting  up  the  golden  calves.  Men  now
often  guilty  of  the  third.  Lust,  covetousness,  and  pleasure  allure  their  hearts,
and  they  set  up  gold,  honour,  popular  applause,  and  worldly  distinction,  and  cry,
"These  be  thy  gods."  II.  A  type  o  God's  love  to  sinners.  1.  Love  to  the
unfaithful.     Israel  had  fallen,  but  God  loved  her  with  a  tender  love,  and  sought


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  HOSE  J.  [chap.  I.


to  restore  her  to  himself.  Many  have  made  a  profession,  Christians  have  left  their
first  love,  broken  their  engagement  with  God,  and  fallen  into  disgrace.  Love  is
wounded,  and  deeply  wounded,  at  such  treatment,  but  it  remains  love,  cannot
suffer  apostasy  from  him,  and  seeks  to  restore  and  save.  "  Thou  hast  left  thy  first
love.  Remember,  therefore,  from  whence  thou  art  fallen,  and  repent  and  do  the
first  works."  2.  Love  to  the  unworthy.  We  shrink  from  the  unchaste  and  con-
demn the  outcast,  but  they  are  not  beyond  hope.  The  drunkard,  the  thief,  and
the  idolater  are  renewed  and  restored  to  God,  formed  into  a  church,  and  sanctified
for  his  service.  "  Love,"  it  has  been  said,  "  descends  more  abundantly  than  it
ascends.  The  love  of  parents  for  their  children  has  always  been  far  more  powerful
than  that  of  children  for  their  parents  ;  and  who  among  the  sons  of  men  ever
loved  God  with  a  thousandth  part  of  the  love  which  God  has  manifested  to  us  ? "
III.  A  type  of  moral  life  unstained  by  surrounding  evils.  The  prophet  was
holy,  separated  from  sinners,  and  dared  not  associate  with  adulterers.  1.  In  the
family  was  a  "  wife  of  whoredoms  "  and  "  children  of  whoredoms."  2.  In  the
land  corruption  and  abominations  were  prevalent.  What  a  trial  of  patience  !
What  a  test  of  character  this  would  be !  Christians  are  often  so  placed,  but  must
be  "  the  salt  of  the  earth,"  preserve  from  corruption,  and  incite  men  to  live  godly
in  dangers  by  which  they  are  surrounded.  Even  in  Sardis  were  a  few  who  had
not  denied  their  garments.  "  To  keep  himself  unspotted  from  the  world."  IV.
A  type  of  parental  sin  portrayed  in  children's  character.  Parents  leave  behind
them  legacies  of  gnilt  and  shame  ;  contaminate  their  offspring  by  their  influence
and  example.  Children  inherit  the  lands  and  the  lusts  of  their  ancestors,  and
are  often  cursed  with  the  consequences  of  parental  folly.  Drunkenness,  de-
bauchery, and  adultery  entail  on  human  life  their  ruinous  and  loathsome  effects.
Men  transmit  to  remote  posterity  guilt  and  misery,  and  God  visits  "  the  iniquity
of  the  fathers  upon  the  children  unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation."  This
should  excite  pity  for  children  and  caution  in  parents  for  their  solemn  charge  and
responsibility.

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Go,  take,  ver.  3. — 1.  A  people  sunk  way  on  their   children.      Sin    is    con-

into  sin  and  idolatry   need   desperate  tagious,  and  unless  the  entail  is  cut  off

and  extraordinary  efforts  to  save  them,  by  grace,  hereditary  [Pusey~\.
2.  Men  employed  in  saving  them  must         Depart  from    God. — 7".    God   is   the

deny  themselves,  and  adopt  the  means  great  end  of  life.    Man  restless  and  in-

God  directs.      Hosea  takes   a   strange  sufficient  without  God.     Natural  bodies

wife.     Ezekiel  loses  his  own,  xxiv.  16,  seek  a  natural  resting-place;    sensitive

17.      Our  will  must   be   merged   into  creatures   seek   good  adapted    to    their

God's.     "  This  figure  was  proposed   to  rank  and  being :  so  the  soul  longs  for

the  people  that  they  might  perceive  in  God.     Echoes  of  God  resound  through

the  looking-glass  of  this  allegory,  first,  its  depths,  and  it  is  made  to  turn    in-

their  duty  towards  God  ;  second,  their  stinctively  towards  Himself.    Some  have

disloyalty ;  thirdly,  their  penalty  for  the  found  and  walk  with  God,  like  Enoch  ;

same"  [Trapp],  some  walk  near  to  him  and  others  are

Idolatry  is  spiritual  whoredom.  It  far  from  him.  "  Without  God  in  the
defiles  the  soul,  God's  bridal-bed.  It  world."  God  should  be  the  supreme
breaks  the  marriage-knot,  and  discoven-  object  of  life  and  affection.  This  pur-
ants.  It  enrageth  God,  who  in  this  case  suit  should  be  earnest  and  continued,
will  take  no  ransom.  It  subjecteth  men  "  My  soul  folio weth  hard  after  (is  glued)
to  the  deepest  displeasure  of  God,  it  to  thee."  The  renewed  soul  is  acquaint-
besots  them  and  unmans  them  [Trapp],  ed  with  God,  and  follows  him  with  in-

CJiildren  of  whoredom.     The  sins  of  tensity  of  feeling  and  desire.    When  the

{Mil-cuts  also  descend   in  a   mysterious  Christian  has  lost  God,  he  never  rests


chap,  i.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.


satisfied  until  lie  has  found  him  again,  life  without  putting  an  idol  in  his  place.

When  he  has  found  and  enjoys  him  he  *  Little  children,  keep  yourselves  from

longs  to  enjoy  him  more.     And  though  idols."

he  can  never  attain  to  God  in  perfec-  III.  This  departure  involves  others  in
tion,  yet  he  follows  on,  first,  as  a  its  consequences.  Every  individual  is  a
necessary  discipline,  and  then  as  a  centre  of  moral  influence.  Every  word
necessary  preparation  for  the  future,  and  deed  sends  forth  more  than  electric
"  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  fluid.  He  may  choose  what  he  will  do,
Lord."  but  having  done,  he  cannot  stay  the
//.  Departure  from  God  is  idolatry,  consequences  of  the  act.  Kings  and
Sin  hinders  and  indisposes  in  the  pur-  priests,  ministers  and  parents,  influence
suit  after  God.  It  is  a  violation  of  his  others  for  good  or  evil,  produce  effects
law  and  rejection  of  his  love  and  which  do  not  terminate  on  themselves,
authority.  It  renounces  all  subjection  but  extend  to  society,  and  are  transmit-
to  him,  and  casts  him  off  entirely.  This  ted  to  posterity  as  mighty,  indestructible
is  to  prefer  the  creature  to  the  Creator,  forces  of  existence.  "  When  one  mem-
in  whom  all  joys  and  blessings  consist,  ber  suffers,  all  suffer  with  it."  By
If  we  seek  anything  out  of  God,  we  turn  neglect  of  duty,  wrong  example,  and
from  following  him,  and  take  something  leading  others  into  sin  we  injure  our
else  to  be  our  god.  This  is  to  make  an  fellow-creatures,  and  leave  an  active
idol,  and  prefer  emptiness  and  vanity,  influence,  which  does  not  cease  when  we
An  idol  is  nothing.  Men  have  many  repent  or  die.  Wealth,  language,  and
idols.  When  they  do  not  worship  God,  customs  influence  the  health  and  morals
they  worship  themselves,  their  fellow-  of  society.  And  as  the  seed  sown  will
creatures,  their  works,  and  their  sub-  produce  the  harvest,  so  licentiousness
stance.  It  is  not  necessary  that  each  and  idolatry  sow  their  fruits  in  families,
one  should  sing  a  psalm  and  offer  a  churches,  nations,  and  fill  "  the  earth
prayer  to  deify  self.  The  outward  life  with  violence."  "  The  land  hath  corn-
is  a  psalm,  and  the  inward  life  a  prayer,  mitted  great  whoredom."
Man  cannot  dethrone  God  in  heart  and

HOMILETICS.
The  Three  Judgments. —  Verses  3 — 9.

The  names  of  the  three  children  given  by  God  himself  were  to  be  significant.
The  life  of  the  prophet  was  to  be  a  living  sermon  before  the  people.  His
marriage  preached  God's  mercy,  and  his  children  God's  judgment.  If  they
refused  his  words,  they  should  see  his  actions.  In  the  first  name  we  have  a
warning  of  terrible  judgment,  in  the  second  its  connection  with  the  Divine  nature,
in  the  third  the  result.  Destruction,  cessation  of  mercy,  and  rejection,  would  be
dreadful  to  any  nation,  but  to  Israel  they  involved  the  loss  of  special  privileges
and  distinctions,  their  social,  political,  and  theocratical  position.

Jezreel;  or  Divine  Retribution. — Verses  3 — 5.

I.  The  destruction  of  the  Royal  Family.  "  Upon  the  house  of  Jehu."  J.
anointed  at  God's  command  to  execute  judgment  upon  the  house  of  Ahab  (2
Kings  ix.  6,  7)  ;  was  rewarded  in  measure  for  his  conduct,  yet  served  his  own
ends,  and  in  executing  judgment  upon  others,  brought  it  upon  himself  and
family.  God  loves  justice,  and  will  punish  those  who  administer  it  from  wrong
motives  and  feelings.  Kings  and  men  in  authority  must  not  fall  short  of  duty,
nor  exceed  it  in  any  respect.  "  So  awful  a  thing  it  is  to  be  the  instrument  of
God  in  punishing  or  reproving  others  if  we  do  not  by  his  grace  keep  our  own
hearts  and  hands  pure  from  sin  "  [Pusey],  that  we  may  be  rejected  ourselves.
The    slaughter    of   the   Gibeonites  by  Saul,   the  conduct   of    Anialek   towards


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   HOSEA.  [chap.  z.


Israel,  seemed  to  be  forgotten,  but  punishment  came  at  last.  Jehu's  house  is
visited,  his  progeny  extinguished  in  the  fourth  generation  for  his  offences.  If  we
judge  others  we  should  not  do  the  same  things  ourselves.  II.  The  destruction
of  the  Regal  Sovereignty.  "  And  will  cause  to  cease  the  kingdom  of  the
house  of  Israel."  The  strength  of  the  kingdom  was  paralyzed  after  the
destruction  of  the  house  of  Jehu.  Of  five  kings  that  followed  Zechariah,
only  one  died  a  natural  death,  the  others  were  murdered  and  dethroned.
The  kingdom  was  distracted  and  broken,  and  in  about  50  years  completely
destroyed  by  the  captivity  of  the  ten  tribes.  Kingdoms  are  built  up,  extended,
and  established  by  God  j  but  the  immorality  of  the  rulers  and  the  idolatry  of
the  people  will  sow  the  seeds  of  decay  and  death.  When  God  has  numbered
their  days,  no  power,  no  splendour  can  hold  them  up.  Foreign  invasion  and  civil
revolution  may  overturn.  That  kingdom  is  the  strongest,  the  most  splendid  and
secure,  which  makes  God  its  sovereign.  The  skill  of  parliaments,  the  valour  of
soldiers,  and  the  power  of  wealth  are  no  security  against  the  judgment  of  God.
"Pat  them  in  fear,  0  Lord;  that  the  nations  may  know  themselves  to  be  but
men."  III.  The  destruction  of  Military  Prowess.  "  I  will  break  the  bow  of
Israel."  The  bow  was  the  special  pride  of  Jehu  (2  Kings  ix.  24)  ;  the  military
strength  upon  which  Israel  relied,  and  for  which  it  was  famous  (Jer.  xlix.  35).
1.  This  strength  shall  be  broken.  When  God  blows  with  the  blast  of  his  anger,
individual  health,  family  prosperity,  and  national  glory  fade  like  a  flower.  The
strength  of  body,  the  vigour  of  mind,  and  the  power  of  numbers  are  weak  before
him.  God  can  humble  the  pride  of  men  and  nations,  and  take  from  them
whatever  they  make  their  strength  and  defence.  2.  This  strength  shall  be  irre-
parably broken.  All  power  and  projects  defeated.  When  God  breaks  none  can
piece ;  when  man  pieces  God  can  break.  "  The  shield,  the  sword,  and  the
battle,"  weapons  offensive  and  defensive,  God  can  dash  in  pieces.  In  the  spiritual
conflicts  of  this  and  every  age,  no  weapon  formed  against  his  people  and  his
purpose  shall  prosper.  IV.  The  destruction  of  National  Prestige.  "  In  the
valley  of  Jezreel."  This  valley  was  the  very  centre  and  security  of  the  king-
dom, their  Marathon  and  their  Waterloo.  It  was  the  scene  of  their  exploits  and
skill ;  the  place  of  Ahab's  wickedness  and  Jehu's  zeal.  Here  God  had  executed
judgments  against  the  enemies,  and  delivered  his  people  from  danger.  In  this
very  spot  in  which  the  nation's  history  was  localized  the  nation's  glory  should
fade  away,  and  the  nation's  guilt  be  punished.  Places  of  carnal  security  often
exposed  to  shame  and  destruction.  "  Thus  it  is  ever  ;  when  retribution  comes  it
seems  to  despise  the  very  things  in  which  its  victim  gloried.  A  noble  lineage,
great  wealth,  patrimonial  possessions,  elevated  positions,  brilliant  genius,  and
distinguished  abilities  ;  these  are  the  modern  Jezreels  of  sinners.  In  these  they
boast.  But  what  are  these  1  God,  when  he  comes  to  judgment,  will  strike  them
in  those  very  places,  he  will  break  their  bow  in  the  valley  of  Jezreel  "  [The
Homilist].

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Jehvts  conduct.  1.  Service  insincere,  the  sight  of  God.  His  piety  gave  way
God's  will  done  half  way,  not  fully,  to  policy,  and  policy  stained  his  piety.
He  killed  the  priests,  but  clave  to  the  "  By  the  ends,  and  not  by  the  works
calves.  2.  Service  from  wrong  motives,  done,  are  virtues  distinguished  from
He  acted  not,  as  he  pretended,  out  of  vices.  Two  things  make  a  good  Chris-
zeal  for  God,  but  served  his  own  poli-  tian,  and  declare  him  so — good  actions
tical  ends,  and  did  God's  will  from  and  good  aims.  And  although  a  good
selfish  and  base  motives.  3.  Service  aim  doth  not  make  a  bad  action  good
diverted  of  real  virtue.  It  had  no  prin-  (as  in  Uzziah),  yet  a  bad  aim  makes  a
ciple  in  it,  and  of  was  no  true  worth  in  good   action    bad,    as    here    in   Jehu  "


CHAP.    I.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   HOSE  A.


\Trapp\.  4.  Service  involving  his  house
and  kingdom  in  ruin.  "  The  massacre
therefore,"  says  Calvin,  "was  a  crime
so  far  as  Jehu  was  concerned,  but  with
God  it  was  a  righteous  vengeance."
Even  if  he  did  not  make  God's  com-
mand a  mere  pretext,  yet  his  conduct
was  an  act  of  blood-guiltiness  which
called  for  vengeance  upon  posterity.
Things  done  by  God's  desire  or  com-
mand may  become  crimes  in  the  per-
former, if  he  acts  from  evil  and  selfish
designs,  and  not  from  love  to  God.
Religion  must  never  be  a  cloak  for  the
lusts  of  an  evil  and  ambitious  heart.
Retribution  will  swiftly  follow.  "  Be
sure  your  sins  will  find  you  out."

Jehu's  character.  J.  was  one  of  those
quick,  ambitious  men,  whom  God  raises
up  to  change  the  fate  of  empires  and
execute  judgment  upon  the  earth.  His
zeal  was  great  so  long  as  it  squared  with
his  own  interests,  but  cooled  wonder-
fully when  directed  against  them.  He
was  not  a  great  or  good  man,  but  an
agent  for  the  accomplishment  of  great
purposes.  In  his  sudden  elevation  to
the  throne;  in  the  ruthlessness  with
which  he  carried  out  his  purposes  ;  in
the  union  of  profound  dissimulation
with  fanatic  zeal,  he  is  not  without  his
likeness  in  modern  times.

Jehu's  punishment.  "  I  will  visit,"
&c  1.  God's  government.  God  su-
preme, exalted  above  the  heavens,  and
ruleth  over  the  kings  and  nations  of
the  earth.  2.  God's  purpose.  "  I  will
visit."  This  purpose  not  capricious  and
arbitrary ;  in  harmony  with  fixed  prin-
ciples, and  regards  moral  conduct  and
desert.  3.  God's  providence.  il  I  will
visit."  The  providence  fulfils  the  pur-
pose of  God  in  the  events  of  history
and  by  the  agencies  of  men.  (1.)  It  is
active.     "  I  will  visit."     "  My  Father


worketh."  "  All  things  ivork  together."
(2.)  It  is  just  as  well  as  benevolent.
4.  God's  power.  "  I  will  avenge."
God  omnipotent  can  easily  destroy  or
punish.  God's  providence  and  pre-
sence are  sensibly  felt  among  men.
Hence  the  ruin  of  the  wicked  certain,
irresistible,  terrible,  and  complete.

The  destruction  of  the  kingdom.  1.
God  is  the  Creator  and  Destroyer  of
nations.  Men  build  often  upon  weak
foundations,  with  unsuitable  materials,
and  for  base  designs.  "  Except  the
Lord  build,"  &c.  2.  When  God  deter-
mines to  destroy  nations  no  power  can
avail  against  him.  "  I  will  break  the
bow."  No  bow  can  abide  in  strength
without  him.  Seeming  prosperity  or
outward  grandeur  of  no  account  with
him.  3.  The  destruction  of  nations
is  not  always  by  outward  force.  God
has  many  ways,  and  can  work  without
means.  Loss  in  battle,  invaded  borders,
and  mercantile  panics  may  be  recovered.
But  vital  corruption  and  decay  of  reli-
gion reach  the  very  heart  of  a  nation.
Nothing  can  preserve  a  people  wholly
given  to  whoredom  and  idolatry.  4.  De-
struction of  national  existence.  "  If  all
the  historians  who  recorded  the  ultimate
extinction  of  nations  were  inspired  of
God  to  give  the  true  reasons  of  their
fall,  we  should  often  meet  this  testi-
mony :  "  Perished  of  national  pride,
producing  contempt  of  God  and  of
fundamental  morality  ! "'  [Cowles].

Yet  a  little  while.  Space  for  repent-
ance in  human  life  and  national  afflic-
tion. Men  perish  not  without  warning.
Judgment  lingers  long,  but  falls  heavily
at  last.  God's  measurement  of  time
disregarded  and  sinned  away  can  never
be  given  again.  "  I  gave  her  space  to
repent  of  her  fornication."


HOMILET1CS.
Judgment  and  Mercy. —  Verses  6,  7.

The  second  judgment,  the  punishment  foretold  in  the  name  of  the  daughter,  is
greater  than  that  of  the  first.  God  would  scatter,  now  Israel  will  be  unpitied.
By  reference  to  the  opposite  lot  of  Judah,  all  false  hope  in  God's  mercy  is  taken
away.  Those  who  forsake  God,  forsake  their  own  mercy,  and  may  reckon  upon
nothing  but  judgment.


10  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  [chap.  I.


I.  Judgment  without  Mercy.  Israel  owed  its  preservation  and  prosperity  amid
anarchy  and  prevailing  idolatry  entirely  to  God's  mercy.  God  long-suffering,  but
sinners  may  exhaust  his  patience.  1.  Mercy  may  be  withheld  from  men.  When
former  mercies  are  received  with  ingratitude,  or  abused,  God  will  add  no  more
(Ps.  lix.  5).  Goodness  and  mercy  should  lead  to  repentance,  but  if  despised,  men
will  treasure  up  wrath  for  themselves  against  the  day  of  wrath  (Eom.  ii.  4,  5).
Day  by  day,  hour  by  hour,  individuals  may  be  heaping  up  this  awful  treasure.
The  cup  may  soon  be  filled,  God's  forbearance  withheld,  and  judgment  without
mercy.  2.  Mercy  tvith  held  from  men  will  lead  to  utter  ruin.  "I  will  utterly
take  them  away."  The  ten  tribes  never  returned  (except  very  few)  from  captivity.
Judgment  fell  upon  the  Churches  in  Asia  Minor,  and  now  they  are  warnings  to
others.  The  long-suffering  of  God  waited  in  vain  in  the  days  of  Noah  ;  the  flood
came  and  destroyed  an  ungodly  world.  Because  sentence  is  not  suddenly  executed,
men  plunge  into  deep  sin,  ripen  themselves  for  greater  judgment,  which  comes  in
ten-fold  vengeance  and  utterly  takes  them  away.  3.  Mercy  withheld  from  us  and
given  to  others  is  a  sad  ingredient  in  the  cup  of  sorrow.  This  life  is  often
embittered  by  opposite  lots.  The  sobriety  of  one  condemns  the  drunkenness  of
another.  The  spendthrift  sees  in  the  happiness  and  prosperity  of  his  neighbour
what  he  might  have  been  himself.  There  is  a  necessary  and  natural  connection
between  conduct  and  reward  here.  So  in  the  future  ;  condition  will  result  from
character  ;  tli6  fruit  will  grow  from  the  tree.  "  Say  to  the  righteous,  it  shall  be
weD  with  him.  Woe  unto  the  wicked  !  it  shall  be  ill  with  him  "  (Is.  iii.  10,  11).
One  thing  is  set  against  another  to  teach  men  righteousness.  II.  Mercy  in  the
midst  of  Judgment.  "  I  will  have  mercy  upon  the  house  of  Judah."  Mercy  was
wonderfully  shown  to  Judah  in  her  danger  from  Assyrians,  in  deliverance  from
Babylon,  in  her  beaten  and  plundered  condition  at  the  present  by  Israel  (2  Kings
xiv.  12).  This  a  type  of  God's  dealings  now.  None  deserve  mercy,  all  are  alike
guilty.  1 .  Mercy  Divine  in  its  source.  Israel  had  no  mercy  upon  Judah  ;  men
have  no  mercy  upon  one  another,  but  God  shows  mercy.  "  /  will  have  mercy."
2.  Mercy  sovereign  in  its  objects.  Upon  Judah,  not  Israel.  God  has  mercy  upon
whom  he  will  have  mercy  (Eom.  ix.  15).  Often  sinners  beyond  all  others,  liars,
thieves,  and  drunkards  are  chosen.  Paul,  Bunyan,  and  Newton  become  patterns
of  mercy  unto  others.  In  this  there  is  no  unrighteousness  in  God,  nor  injury  to
man.  3.  Mercy  without  human  merit.  Man  clings  to  means,  and  wants  to  be
saved  by  works.  Not  by  works  of  the  law,  lest  man  should  boast,  but  entirely
of  grace,  through. ^faith.  Human  efforts,  instrumentalities  of  men,  the  power  of
intellect,  and  the  energy  of  will  avail  nothing.  Not  by  bow  nor  by  sword,  not  by
horses  and  chariots,  on  which  nations  rely  in  battle.  God  needs  no  creature
helps  ;  exalted  in  power,  he  will  magnify  his  grace.  It  is  salvation  complete,
without  sorrow,  humiliation,  and  bloodshed.  "  By  the  Lord  their  God,"  whom
they  worshipped  when  Israel  committed  whoredom.

This  passage  leads  us  to  contemplate  God's  mercy.  Mercy  is  a  modification  of  goodness.  God
is  good  to  all,  but  is  only  merciful  to  the  suffering  sinner.  Mercy  not  only  implies  suffering,  but
suffering  arising  from  sin.  If  suffering  were  a  necessity  springing  out  of  the  constitution  of  things,
its  removal  or  mitigation  would  be  an  act  of  justice  rather  than  mercy.  Earth  is  a  sphere  where
God  shows  his  mercy,  for  here  is  suffering  springing  from  sin.     Here  we  have —

I.  Mercy  withheld  from  some.  "  For  1  will  no  more  have  mercy  upon  the  house  of  Israel,"
&c.  When  mercy  has  been  abused  the  time  comes  when  it  is  withheld,  and  the  subjects  are  left
abandoned  of  God.  "When  mercy  is  withheld  from  nations  they  perish,  from  churches  they  decay,
from  families  they  sink  to  corruption,  from  individuals  they  are  lost.  "  My  spirit  shall  not  always
strive  with  men."  II.  Mercy  bestowed  upon  others.  "  I  will  have  mercy  upon  the  house  of
Judah."  This  mercy  was  signally  shown  to  Judah,  when  in  one  night  one  hundred  and  eighty-five
thousand  wtfrimra  woe  slain.  Looking  at  the  words  in  their  spiritual  application  they  suggest  two
remarks  in  relation  to  man's  deliverance.  First,  It  is  of  mercy.  The  deliverance  of  man  from  the
guilt,  the  power,  and  consequence  of  sin,  is  entirely  of  God's  mercy,  free,  sovereign,  boundless
mercy.  Secondly,  Man's  deliverance  is :  By  moral  means.  "  Will  not  save  them  oy  bow,"  &o.
No  raaterial  force  can  deliver  the  soul  from  its  spiritual  difficulties  and  perils.     Moral  means  alone


chap.  Lj  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  11


can  effect  the  object.  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  my  spirit,  saith  the  Lord."  Conclu-
sion: Use  mercy  rightly  while  you  have  it.  Its  grand  design  is  to  produce  reformation  of
character,  and  meetness  for  the  high  service  and  lofty  fellowship  with  the  great  God,  here  and
yonder,  now  and  for  ever  [The  Homilisf].

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  7.  Mercy  upon  the  house  of  into  animal  life  by  the  pressure  of
Judah.  When  Divine  justice  is  glorified  labour  and  materialism.  Neglect  of
in  some,  yet  there  are  others  in  whom  national  worship  would  break  down
free  grace  is  glorified.  And  though  moral  barriers,  and  flood  the  land  with
some  through  unbelief  are  broken  off,  amusements  and  wickedness.  The
yet  God  will  have  a  Church  in  this  human  race  feel  the  necessity  of  a  purer
world  till  the  end  of  time.  It  aggra-  and  better  life.  Hence  whatever  inter-
vates  the  rejection  of  Israel  that  God  feres  with  Sabbath  observances,  wh at-
will  have  mercy  on  Judah,  and  not  on  ever  hinders  the  worship  of  God  and
them,  and  magnifies  God's  mercy  to  the  moral  culture  of  men,  should  be
Judah,  that  though  they  also  have  done  avoided.  Without  national  worship —
wickedly,  yet  God  did  not  reject  them  1.  Many  would  observe  no  worship  at
as  he  rejected  Israel  [Matt.  Henry],  all.    2.  Men  would  have  no  opportuni-

The  Lord  their  God.    The  antithesis  ties  for  moral  and  religious  instruction

is  not  merely  to  the  false  gods  of  the  at  all.     3.  Generous  feelings  would  not

heathen,  but  to  the  conduct  of  Israel  be  cherished,   the   mutual   equality  of

who   cast   off    Jehovah.      Hence   God  men  in  the  sight  of  God  would  be  for-

withheld  mercy  from  Israel,  but  gave  gotten,  the  highest  ranks  would  not  be

it  to  Judah,  who  owned  him  as  theirs,  inspired  with  humility  and   condescen-

and  whom  they  outwardly  worshipped  sion,   nor  the   lowest   with  feelings  of

in   pursuance   of     the   covenant    with  gratitude  and   love.       4.    The    people

them.    Notice  the  benefits   of  national  would  have  no  regard  for  God  ;   event-

worship.     Even  outward  forms  of  wor-  ually  cast  off  all  fear  and  restraint ;  and

ship  and    Sabbath  observance    remind  judgment  without  mercy  would  strip  us

us  of  the  reality,  tend  to  ameliorate  the  of  our  national  prestige  and  position,

prejudices    and    intone     the    spirit   of  When  utterly  taken  away  no  bow  could

society.     Men  are  in  danger  of  sinking  defend  us,  and  no  battle  save  us.

HOM1LETIGS.

A  Cast  ofp  People. — Verses  8,  9.

The  third  judgment  is  the  most  severe  of  all.  Lo-ammi,  not  my  people.
God  ceases  to  compassionate  the  rebellious  tribes,  the  state  of  rejection  ensues,
and  they  are  no  longer  "  my  people,"  Jehovah  will  not  belong  to  them.  "  I  will
not  be  your  God."     Notice  the  gradual  steps  to  this  result.

1.  Fellowship  with  God  is  interrupted.  God  was  the  God  of
Israel,  but  they  did  not  own  him  as  such — did  not  worship  him,  but
committed  whoredom.  The  service  of  Jehovah  was  irksome.  Idolatry  weaned
their  hearts  from  him,  and  they  neglected  religious  privileges  and  despised  re-
ligious teaching.  Neglect  of  public  worship  and  private  devotion,  contempt
for  the  ordinances  of  the  gospel,  any  wilful  interruptions  of  communion  with
God,  are  signs  of  declension  and  steps  to  utter  abandonment  of  God.  II.
The  Covenant  relation  is  dissolved.  Israel  would  not  have  God,  and  Gt  d
would  have  nothing  to  do  with  them  ;  would  not  be  to  them  what  he  had  b;  en,
and  what  they  vainly  expected  he  would  be.  They  deprived  themselves  of  his
love  and  mercy,  of  his  providence  and  protection.  Many  despise  God  ami
contemn  his  laws.  They  despise  the  authority  of  the  Father,  the  death  of  the
Son,  and  the  influence  of  the  Spirit.     They  disregard  every  office  they  sustain.


12  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ROSEA.  [chap,  l


and  dishonour  every  relation  they  bear  to  us.  They  break  from  their  allegiance,
and  live  alienated  from  God  by  wicked  works.  They  are  "  without  God  in
the  world."  To  be  without  food  and  shelter  is  sad  enough  ;  to  be  without  friends
and  supporters  is  sadder  still ;  but  to  be  without  God,  the  sublimest  being,  the
greatest  good,  is  the  real  and  awful  condition  of  those  whom  God  disowns.
III.  Utter  rejection  results.  "  Not  my  people."  Forget  God,  and  you  will
depart  from  him.  Cast  off  God,  and  he  will  forsake  you  for  ever  (2  Chron.  xv.  2).
When  God  deserts  in  providence,  and  withholds  his  grace  in  Christ,  men  are
doomed  to  be  cut  off  from  hope  here,  and  eternal  life  hereafter.  "  I  will  not  be
your  God,"  describe  their  dreadful  condition  ;  1.  Disowned,  2.  Disinherited,  and
3.  Cursed.

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Not  be  your  God.     1.  In  the  exigen-  merits  of  God.      1.    Gradual  in  their

cies  of  life ;   to  supply  your  need.     2.  manifestation.      2.     Intenser    in   their

In  the  providences  of   life;    to   guide  degree.      3.  Corrective  in  their  design,

your  steps.     3.    In  the  end  of  life ;   at  4.    Suspended  in  their  operations.     5.

the  solemn  hour  of  death.    Continuance  Certain  in  their  event.     6.  Destructive

in   sin   after   once   smiting   will   bring  in  their  consequence,
greater  judgment  upon  nations,  churches,         A  cast-off  people.      1.    Not  a  privi-

and  individuals.      No   limits  must  be  leged  people,   do   not   belong  to  "the

set  to  God's  mercy,  yet  it  often  happens  commonwealth  of  Israel,  and  strangers

when  God  contends  with  nations  that  from  the  covenants  of  promise."    2.  Not

they  prove  so  obstinate  in  sin,  so  incess-  a  pitied  people,  destitute  of  mercy  and

ant  in  departing  from  God,  that  nothing  grace  to  help,  exposed  to  wrath,  and  in

but  rejection  ends  it  for  a  time.     "  The  danger  of  perishing.     3.    Not  a  people

same  is  seen  in  individuals.     God  often  at  all,  lacking  everything  which  makes

first  chastens  them  lightly,  then   more  a  people,  spiritually  dead.    God's  people

heavily,  and  brings  them  down  in  their  the  only  real  people,  the  only  persons

iniquities;     but  if    they   still    harden  worthy  to  be  called  a  people,
themselves,  he  withdraws  both  his  chas-         Ver.  4 — 10  may  be  taken  as  A  graphic

tisements  and  his  grace,  so  that  the  sinner  picture  of  family  life.     1.  The  mother's

even   prospers   in   this  world,  but,  re-  life  a  life  of   apostasy  from  God.     2.

maining  finally  impenitent,  is  cast  off  for  The  father's  life  a   life  of   service  for

ever "  [Pusey\  God.     3.    The  children's  lives  lives  of

The    Three    Judgments.       1.    Three  judgments  from  God.     What  a  differ-

warnings  to  the  impenitent.     2.   Three  ence  in  the   moral  character,   spiritual

opportunities  of  repentance.     3.   Three  condition,  and    future   destiny  in   the

degrees  of  chastisement — or,  The  Judg-  same  family.

HOMILETICS.
The  Good  Time  coming. — Verses  10, 11 ;  eh.  ii.  1.

Though  excluded  from  the  love  of  God,  Israel  was  not  always  to  be  so.  The  hand
which  wounds  will  heal,  and  mercy  rejoiceth  against  judgment.  The  spiritual
Israel,  the  Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews,  shall  be  restored  to  God  and  become  numerous
as  the  sand  (Gen.  xxxii.  12;  Eom.  ix.  25,  26).  Light  springs  out  of  darkness,
and  life  out  of  death.  Promise  of  blessings  follows  threat  of  punishments,  and  a
glorious  future  opens  out  to  the  penitent  believer.

I.  Israel  shall  be  increased  in  number.  1.  This  increase  from  God.  God
the  source  of  all  increase  in  families,  churches,  and  nations.  Health,  favourable
cirou instances,  do  not  account  for  increase.  Modern  calculations  must  not  be
applied.     God  who  multiplied  Israel  in  Egypt  by  special  miracle  increases  the


chap.  I.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HO  SB  A.  13


number  of  his  people.  "  I  will  increase  them  with  men  like  a  flock."  2.
Tliis  increase  is  innumerable  "  as  the  sand  of  the  sea."  It  is  a  law  of  nature,  a
rule  of  providence,  to  promote  growth  from  small  beginnings.  The  oak  from
an  acorn.  A  Syrian  ready  to  perish  became  a  great  and  populous  nation,  Deut.
xxvi.  5.  God's  people,  few  in  number  at  present,  shall  be  increased  to  "a
multitude  which  no  man  can  number."  "  A  little  one  shall  become  a  thousand,
and  a  small  one  a  strong  nation ;  I  the  Lord  will  hasten  it  in  his  time."  3.  This
increase  notwithstanding  persecution  and  sorrow.  God's  people  often  severely
persecuted  and  oppressed  ;  their  number  diminished  ;  but  God  replaces  things
temporal  by  things  spiritual,  outward  gifts  by  inward  graces,  and  restores  four-
fold what  he  takes  away.  The  Church  can  never  be  crushed  by  force.  Omni-
potence defends  her,  and  the  purpose  of  God  will  never  be  frustrated.  "  Israel
shall  be  as  the  sand,"  "  it  shall  come  to  pass."  II.  Israel  shall  be  restored  to
spiritual  dignity.  1.  They  shall  be  restored  to  right  relation  to  God.  "The  sons
of  the  living  God."  This  the  goal  of  their  Divine  calling,  but  from  this  relation
they  had  fallen.  The  external  relation  only  a  faint  emblem  of  the  spiritual.
Not  merely  a  people,  but  the  people,  the  subjects,  the  sons  of  the  living
God.  God  owns  his  people,  they  are  reconciled  to  him,  and  possess  the
spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  they  say,  Abba,  Father.  This  is  their  unspeakable  joy
now,  but  is  only  a  foretaste  of  what  they  shall  be  (1  John  iii.  2).  2.  This  restor-
ation is  by  a  method  least  expected.  "  In  the  place  where  it  was  said,  Ye  are  not
my  people,"  &c.  Mercy  when  judgment  is  expected,  love  beyond  description
and  degree.  Love  without  a  parallel  and  example.  Love  to  the  sinful,  restoration
to  the  fallen.  The  place  of  rejection,  the  place  of  redemption  ;  in  the  place  where
there  was  nothing  good  and  encouraging,  there  shall  be  a  change  for  the  better — a
people  shall  be  formed,  increase  given,  and  a  nation  gathered  together  under  the
benediction  and  protection  of  God.  III.  Israel  shall  be  united  under  one
government.  "The  children  of  Israel  shall  be  gathered  together  and  appoint
themselves  one  head."  1.  United  under  one  head.  This  head  not  the  pope,  nor
Zerubbabel  as  chief,  nor  Joshua  as  priest.  Christ,  the  head  of  the  Church,  shall
be  the  head  of  every  man.  He,  "  the  one  King,  shall  be  the  King  to  them  all "
(Ezek.  xxxiv.  23).  Men  may  gather  together  into  societies  and  creeds,  but  no
true  unity,  no  real  allegiance,  except  in  Christ.  He  gathers  together  by  his  word
and  love  the  children  of  God  which  are  scattered  abroad  (Johnxi.  52).  2.  United
by  Divine  influence.  "  They  shall  be  gathered."  God  only  knows  where,  and
how,  to  find  his  people.  He  follows  them  in  their  wanderings,  restores  them
when  fallen,  and  leads  them  into  green  pastures,  and  beside  the  still  waters.
Men  are  drawn  to  Christ,  disposed  to  join  together,  and  made  willing  in  the  day
of  his  power.  3.  United  by  voluntary  consent.  We  have  first  the  act  of  God,
without  whom  we  can  do  nothing,  and  then  follows  their  own  act.  "  They
appoint  themselves  one  head."  No  outward  force  can  constrain.  If  we  do  not
act  willingly,  there  can  be  no  friendship  and  loyalty.  God's  service  is  a  choice,  a
free  service,  "  Choose  you  this  day."  "  Will  ye  be  my  disciples  1"  4.  United  in
true  love.  "  The  children  of  Judah  and  the  children  of  Israel,"  who  lived  apart
and  at  enmity.  In  the  gospel  only  we  have  a  basis  for  a  common  brotherhood
and  fraternity  ;  in  Christ  only  have  wre  bonds  to  cement  and  preserve  it.  In  him
Jew  and  Gentile,  bond  and  free,  live  at  peace ;  "  no  more  two  nations,  neither
shall  they  be  divided  into  two  kingdoms."  "In  those  days  the  house  of  Judah
shall  walk  with  the  house  of  Israel "  (Jer.  iii.  18).  "  Ephraim  shall  not  envy
Judah,  and  Judah  shall  not  vex  Ephraim"  (Is.  xi.  12,  13).  5.  United  in  great
joy.  Taking  ver.  1  in  chap.  ii.  in  connection  with  these,  we  have  a  declaration  of
joy.  Those  who  called  the  children  of  the  prophet  not  my  people,  and  unfavoured,
are  now  to  call  them  the  opposite  names,  the  son  to  his  brethren,  the  daughter  to
her  sisters :  or  the  people  who  have  obtained  mercy  are  summoned  to  salute  one
another  with  the  new  name  and  new  dignity.     Those  who  have  obtained  mercy


14  IIOMLLETIC  COMMENTARY :   ROSEA.  [chap.  I.


may  rejoice,  and  rejoice  in  God.  This  privilege  is  insured  to  them.  They  must
cherish  mutual  love  among  themselves,  encourage  one  another  in  trouble,  and
rejoice  together  in  hope.  God's  blessings  must  be  commended  to  others.  God's
family  is  the  only  happy  family.  They  "  sing  unto  him  a  new  song."  6.  United
in  great  glory.  "  They  shall  come  up  out  of  the  land."  They  shall  be  delivered
from  captivity,  and  led  into  the  land  of  promise ;  rise  up  and  march  forth  to
victory,  and  be  re-instated  in  splendour  and  power.  Egypt  is  a  type  of  heathen
lands  into  which  Israel  is  driven ;  Canaan  a  type  of  the  land  of  the  Lord ;  the
guidance  of  Israel  through  the  wilderness,  and  their  deliverance  from  captivity,  a
figurative  representation  of  re- union  with  God,  and  restoration  to  full  enjoyment
of  salvation.  "  Great  shall  be  the  day  of  Jezreel."  This  grand  picture  has  not
yet  been  realized ;  but  under  the  leadership  of  the  Messiah  the  destiny  of  the
human  race  shall  be  accomplished.  "  This  seed  is  now  sown,"  says  Matt.  Henry,  "  in
the  earth  and  buried  in  the  clods,  but  great  shall  be  its  day  when  the  harvest
comes."  Look  joyfully,  pray  continually,  and  labour  earnestly  for  that  day  when
God  shall  sow  and  give  the  full  increase  of  the  Redeemer's  work  (John  xii.  24).

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  10.    Places  of  sorrow,  places  of  highest  estimations,  most  vigorous  affec-

joy.     Where  the  fathers  are  cast  off  for  tions,    and   utmost   endeavours   of   un-

unbelief,  the   children    shall   there   be  feigned  obedience,  they  set  him  up  in

restored  in  mercy — places  of  death,  places  their   hearts,    and   serve   him  in   their

of  resurrection.  lives  [Trapp].

The  living  God.       "The  world  has  The  Headship  of  Clirist  is:    1.  The

abounded  with  dead  gods  ;  there  is  but  fulfilment  of  ancient  prophecy.     2.  The

one  living  God.    He  is  the  living  one.  He  bond  of  connection  with  God.     3.  The

is  life,  the  primal  fount  of  all  existence,  unity  of  all  ranks.     4.   The  centre  and

Christ    calls    him    the   living   Father,  support  of  all  virtues.     He  is  King  of

As  the  living  Father  sent  me,  I  live  in  the  Jews,  Head  of  the  human  race,  and

the  Father,  so  he  that  eateth  with  me  Lord  of  all  creation.     When  mankind

shall  live  by  me"  [Dr  Thomas].     If  we  depart  from  God,  they  lose  the  bond  of

expect  God  to  be  a  living  God  to  us,  it  unity  and  of  peace.     They  are  divided

becomes  us  not  to  have  dead  hearts  in  then  into  parties,  which  contend   with

his  service.     If  God   be  active  for  our  and  exterminate  each  other.     But  when

good,  let  us  be  active  for  his  honour  these  have  again  united  themselves  with

[Burroughs],  the  Lord,  the  unity  of  the  members  is

Sons    of    the    living    God.       1.    A  restored.      Therefore    there   is   liberty,

unique    relation.      2.    A   distinguished  equality,    and    fraternity   only   in  the

privilege.     3.  A  blessed  prospect.  Lord  [Lange].

One  Head,  ver.  1 1 .     Saints  are  said  Great   days   of   the    Church,      The

to  appoint  Clirist  their  head,  and  indeed  Sabbath — the  resurrection  of  Christ —

to  set  the  crown  upon  his  head  (Cant,  the  day  of  Pentecost — the  day  of  re-

iii.  11),  when  they  choose  him  and  em-  vivals,  and  the  gathering  together  of  all

brace  him  for  their  sovereign,  when  with  nations.

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  I.

Our  Age  and  Work,  ver.  1.     Every  If  we  had  great  opportunities,  and  great

great  man  is  the  son  of  his  age,  but  not  duties,  we  could  do  something  in  life,

its    pupil    [Guesses    at    Truth].      The  and   make   a   mark   after  death.      The

dream,    the   common   mistake,  of    the  littleness  of  our  trust  is  often  an  excuse

present  day,  is  the   belief  that  a  man  for  its  neglect,  like  the  servant  with  one

cannot   be    useful   and   noble   without  pound  who  hid  his  Lord's  money.      But

great  endowments  and  a  grand  sphere,  with  moderate  powers,  in  a  small  sphere,


ch^p.  1.1  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  HOSEA.  15


we  may  be  faithful  to  duty,  and  secure  Medes.     Kings  are  but  puppets  in  his

our  reward.     We  must  live  and  act  in  hand  ;  they  serve  his  purpose  when  they

the  present ;  realize  what  God  has  given  rise   and   when   they   fall.      A    certain

us  to  do  to-day,  and  do  not  look  beyond  author  [Timbs]  has  issued  a  work  called

it.    "  David  after  he  had  served  his  own  "  Historic  Mnepins,"  a  fit  name  of  scorn

generation,  by  the  will  of  God,  fell  on  for  all  the  great  ones  of  the  earth.    God

sleep."  only  is  :  all  power  belongs  to  him  ;   all

Mother's    conduct.       "I   am   a   mis-  else  is  shadow,  coming  and  going,  un-

sionary  in  my  nursery,"  once  observed  substantial,    misty,    dream-like    [Spur-

a  Christian  mother.    "  Six  pair  of  little  geon].

eyes  are  daily  watching  mamma's  looks,  Here  he  exalts  necriected  worms

and  listening  to  her  words,  and  I  wish  To  sceptres  and  a  crown  ;

my  children  never  to  see   in   me    that  Anon  the  following  page  he  turns

which  they  may  not   imitate."      "  The  And  treads  the  monarch  down'

mother  lives  again,"  says  Smiles,  "  in  Mercy.    In  the  reign  of  the  first  Napo-

her     children.        They     unconsciously  leon,  there  was  an  insurrection  at  Paris,

mould    themselves   after    her    manner,  One    of    the   ring-leaders  was  brought

her  speech,  her  conduct,  and  her  method  before  the  Emperor ;  and  as  this  was  his

of  life.     Her  habits  become  theirs,  and  second  offence  against  the  government,  he

her   character    is    visibly   repeated    in  was  sentenced  to  be  transported.  The  day

them."  after   the   trial,  it  was   told  Napoleon

Retribution,  ver.  4,  5.     That  God  is  that  the  child  of  the  convicted  man  was

revealed  in  nature  as  a  God  of  retribu-  waiting  to  see  him.     "  Bring  her  in,"

tion,     the     writings    of     the    heathen  said  Napoleon ;  and  a  tearful,  trembling

abundantly   show.      The    attribute   of  little  girl,  on  being  led  in,  cast  herself

retributive  justice  they  made  a  separate  at  his  feet  and  implored  him  to  have

deity,    whose    conclusions   and   awards  mercy  on  her  father.     "  My  child,"  said

would  be  full  and  perfect  only  in  the  the  emperor,   touched   by  her  distress,

future  world.    They  gathered  this,  first,  Cl  this  is  the  second  time  your  father  has

from    the    admonitions    of    conscience  been  guilty  of  treason ;    I  cannot  save

within  them ;  second,  from  those  judg-  him."      "  Oh,  sir  ! "   said  the  kneeling

ments  of  God,  from  time  to  time  falling  child,   "it  is  not  justice  we  want,  but

upon  mortals,  so   extreme   and  awful,  mercy  and  pardon."     Napoleon,  much

that   even   the   most   darkened    minds  moved,  raised  the  girl  to  her  feet,  and

were   compelled   to   interpret   them   as  said,  "  For  your  sake  I  will  release  your

God's   testimony,   both    of    his   wrath  father."      We   deserve  judgment,   but

against  sin,  and   his   determination   to  our  great  want  from  the  Lord  our  God

punish   it.      But   by  far  the  most  re-  is  mercy.    "  I  will  have  mercy  "  [Ameri-

markable  of  these  judgments  are  related  can  Paper].

in  the  Scriptures ;  and  the  sacred  writer  Free   as  the  sun   that   shineth,  and

adds  to  the  enumeration  of  them,  that  gilds  the  mountain's  brow,  and  makes

they  happened  as  examples,  and  are  to  glad  the  valleys,  without  fee  or  reward,

be  regarded  as  proving  this  great  truth,  so  free  is  the  mercy  of  God  to  every

that  God  is  reserving  the  unjust  to  the  needy  sinner.      Free  as  the  air  which

day  of  judgment  to  be  punished.    God's  belts    the    earth,    and    penetrates    the

judgments  awaken  men's  conscience  and  peasant's  cottage,  as  well  as  the  royal

set  it  powerfully  at  work.     They  reveal  palace,  without   purchase  or  premium,

a   God  who  can  and  will   punish    sin  so  free  is  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ.

[Cheever].  It  tarrieth  not  for  thee ;   it  cometh  to

Judgment    and    Mercy,    ver.    6 — 9.  thee  as  thou  art.     It  waylay eth  thee  in

The  changes  of  providence  are  not  the  love :    it  -meeteth   thee   in   tenderness

tricks  of  fortune.     Empires  rise  and  fall  [Spurgeon].

at  God's  bidding.    A  dungeon  here,  and  Forsaken,  ver.  8,  9.     To  be  forsaken

there  a  throne,  his  will  assigns.    Assyria  of   God  implies  utter   loneliness,  utter

yields  to  Babylon,  and  Babylon  to  the  helplessness,  utter   friendlessness,  utter


16


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.


[CHAP.    II.


hopelessness,    and    unutterable    agony
[Spurgeon].

Future  increase,  ver.  10,  11.  Pro-
phecy predicts  a  bright  and  blessed
future.  Everything  in  the  conditions  of
the  human  mind  and  of  universal  society
indicates  a  coming  change,  a  glorious
transformation.  The  nations  are  looking
and  yearning  for  their  redemption.  The
world  must  be  subject  to  Christ.  Every
knee  must  bow  to  him,  and  every
tongue  confess  that  he  is  Lord.     His


name  is  the  only  perfect  symbol  of
freedom  and  life.  Under  his  love  and
reign  every  fetter  of  mind  shall  be
broken;  the  heart  shall  be  purified,
social  happiness  will  be  diffused,  order
and  harmony  will  be  restored,  and  the
whole  race  be  again  bound  in  one  grand
unity.  Heaven  will  be  reflected  on
earth,  and  earth  will  be  wedded  to
heaven.  God  shall  descend  and  dwell
with  men,  and  men  shall  become  the
sons,  and  rise  into  the  life  of  God.


CHAPTER  II.


Critical  Notes. — 2.  Plead]  Jehovah  makes  the  demand,  urges  individual  Israelites  to  reason
with  the  mother,  i.  e.  the  nation  viewed  as  one.     The  children  were  seduced,  in  danger  of  punish-
ment, and  as  penitents  must  protest  against  her  conduct.    Wife]  Forfeited  all  claims  to  my  protection.
Sight]  Lit.  from  her  face,  the  seat  of  modesty  and  shame  (Jer.  iii.  8  ;  vi.  15).    "  The  eyes  are  windows
through  which  death,  i.  e.  lawless  desire,  enters  into  the  soul,  and  takes  it  captive  "  [Pusey].  3.  Strip]
Nudity,  the  ancient  punishment  of  an  adulteress  (Ezek.  xvi.  37).     Set]  Lit.  fix  her  as  a  gazing-stock,
in  a  state  of  helplessness  and  misery.     Wilderness]  Reduced  to  want ;  an  outward  type  of  inward
distress  (Jer.  ii.  6).    4.  Children]  inherit  the  nature,  and  exposed  to  the  judgment,  of  their  mother.
Many  imagine  because  free  from  the  guilt  and  stain  of  sin  they  will  not  share  its  punishment.     5.
Done  shamefully]    Heb.  to  practise  shame  (2  Sara.  xix.  5).     "  She  made  shameful  everything
which  she  could  make  shameful — her  acts,  her  children,  and  herself"  [Pusey],    The  reproach  of  the
mother  should  rouse  the  sons  from  spiritual  apathy.     Lovers]  Idols  and  idolatrous  nations  whose
alliance  they  courted,  and  to  whom  they  ascribed  the  gifts  of  life,  bread  and  water  (Jer.  xliv.  17)  ;  a
picture  of  life  estranged  from  God.     6.  Hedge  and  make]  Build  a  wall,  a  double  enclosure  of
stones  and  thorns.     In  the  East  cattle  are  fenced  with  thorns  and  closes.     God  with  determined  pur-
pose will  interpose   between    Israel  and  her  idols.      Behold,  I  will  hedge]   Exile  and  distress,
and  the  inability  of  her  gods  to  help,  would  prove  the  folly  of  her  conduct  (Job  xix.  18  ;  Lam.  iii.
7 — 9).    7.  Follow  after  and  seek]  In  eager  pursuit  and  diligent  search.     "  They  express  together  a
pursuit,  whose  minuteness  is  not  hindered  by  its  vehemence,  nor  its  extent  and  wideness  by  its
exactness.     She  shall  seek  far  and  wide,  minutely  and  carefully,  everywhere  and  in  all  things,  and
shall  fail  in  all  "  [Pusey].     Not  find]  deliverance  from  calamity.     8.  Not  know]  Wilful  ignorance
and  ingratitude,  for  she  was  taught  by  the  law  and  the  providence  of  God.     Prepared]  Made  and
mended  images  of  Baal,  and  devoted  them  to  the  support  and  extension  of  idolatry.     9.  Return]  As
if  absent  from  men  when  they  abuse  his  gifts :    turn  from  love  to  displeasure ;    from  bestowing
bounties  to  withholding  them.     Recover]  Because  "J"  emphatic,  the  givei    not  acknowledged.
Nakedness]  The  result  of  gifts  withheld.     Take  away]  by  dearth  and  unfruitful  seasons,  vermin,
judgments,  &c.     10.  Discover  her  lewdness]  Lit.  uncover  her  shame.     Sin  decked  out  in  gaudy
colours,  and  covered  with  showy  masks,  shall  be  stripped  and  exposed  to  public  shame.     None  can
avert  the  threatened  punishment.     11.  Feast  days]  and  festivals  retained  in  worship  should  cease
because  abused.     12.  Vines  and  fig-trees]  Esteemed  rewards,  wages  of  prostitution  (Deut.  xxiii.
19;  lsa.  xxiii.   17);  the  choicest  produce  of  earth,  denoting  sustenance  and  prosperity,  would  be
destroyed  by  Assyria  (ch.  ix.  4, 5).   14.  Therefore]  Nevertheless  a  promise  of  conversion  (ver.  14—17)  ;
and  assurance  of  renewed  covenant  (ver.  18—23).    Misery  draws  mercy.    Allure]  in  a  friendly  sense  ;
decoy  by  words,  persuade  by  love.    God  outbids  the  idols  and  displays  his  attractive  grace.    Wilder-
ness] The  way  from  Egypt  to  Canaan  a  type  of  temporal  want  and  distress,  needful  discipline,  and
miraculous  deliverance.    Solitude  leads  to  enjoyment  and  fellowship  with  God.    Speak  comfortably]
Lit.  to  her  heart  in  friendly  feeling ;  to  mitigate  her  grief  and  heal  her  wounds.     15.  Achor]  Where
Achan  troubled  Israel  (Josh.  vii.  11—15) ;  the  borders  of  Canaan  and  the  place  of  cleansing  and
success.     A  door  of  hope]    Hope  dawned  in  despair,  and  sorrow  turned  into  joy.     Sing]  When
God  speaks  comfortably  the  Church  responds  gratefully,  like  Israel  at  the  Red  Sea  (Ex.  xv. ;  cf.
Isa.  xi.   15,  16).    Youth]    Days  of  blessed  experience  and  vigour  of  life,  when  delivered  from
bondage  and   unwasted   by  sin.     16.  Ishi]    An  appellation  of  love.     Baali]   An  appellation  of
rub.     B.  applied  to  idols  is  now  disowned  by  God,  and  not  to  be  taken  on  their  lips  (Ex.  xxiii.
13).     18.  Beasts]  Lit.  (Job  ▼.  23;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  25);  or  figurative  of  peace,  safety,  and  gospei


chap,  ii.]  H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  17


times-  the  re-established  Jews  at  friends  with  the  heathen  nations.  Bow]  War  extinguished,
and  its  instruments  destroyed  (Ps.  xlvi.  9;  Ezek.  xxxix.  9,  10).  19.  Betroth]  Make  a  new
covenant  with  Jew  and  Gentile;  three  times  repeated.  God  not  only  forgives,  but  espouses
afresh  and  for  ever.  In  right]  In  justice  to  himself  and  his  law ;  by  purifying  from  sin  (Is.  l.
27).  In  judgment]  Vindicating  his  cause,  and  showing  right  from  wrong.  20.  In  faithfulness]
(Ps.  cxi.  9  ;  John  xiii.  1.)  Shalt  know]  experimentally  and  be  saved ;  the  consequence  of  the  union,
not  mere  acknowledgment  of  God,  but  a  taste  of  his  love.  21.  I  will  hear]  The  heavens  pray  to
God,  to  give  to  earth  its  fertility ;  toe  earth  and  all  creatures  desire  to  satisfy  the  wants  of  God's
people  ;  God  is  no  longer  scattering,  but  providing  and  planting.  22  Jez.  =]  the  seed  of  God.  23.
Will  sow]  A  promise  antithetic  to  the  threat  (Deut.  xxviii.  23  ;  Lev.  xxvi.  19) ;  expressive  of  pro-
digious converts  and  innumerable  blessings  on  the  earth  (Rom.  xi.  12—15).  The  children  now
change  names  to  show  mercy  and  prove  restoration.  "  And  with  tenderness  I  will  cherish  her  that
had  been  Lo-Ruhamah  (the  not-beloved),  and  I  will  say  to  Lo-Ammi  (to  the  no-people-of-mine),
Ammi  (my  own  people)  art  thou  ;  and  he  shall  say,  My  God"  [Horslei/].

This  chapter  is  an  enlargement  and  application  of  the  first,  the  symbol  of  the  one  is  expounded  by
the  other.  The  sinful  conduct  of  the  nation  is  condemned,  punishment  is  threatened,  but  salvation
is  proclaimed  in  promise  of  restitution  and  the  blessings  of  peace  and  subsistence.  The  remnant
among  Israel,  for  whose  sake  God  preserved  a  corrupt  people,  must  prove  living  witnesses  for  him,
testify  to  his  goodness  and  grace,  and  urge  others  to  turn  to  Jehovah.  The  penitent  must  plead
with  the  impenitent,  the  converted  with  the  unconverted,  and  the  children  with  the  parents.

HOMILETIQS.
Filial  Expostulation. — Verses  1 — 5.

The  mother  is  the  representative  of  the  nation,  of  the  ungodly  in  all  nations  and
families.  The  sons  must  plead  with  them.  They  are  involved  in  judgments,  left
orphans,  and  without  protection,  by  the  conduct  of  their  mother.

I.  Charge  her  with  dissolution  of  the  Marriage  Contract.     "  She  is  not  my
wife."     A  spiritual  union  was  formed  between  God  and  his  people,  under  terms  of
great  endearment  and  oneness.     But  she  was  no  longer  united  to  God  by  faith  and
love,  and  God  would  own  her  no  longer.  Churches  and  individuals  who  give  them-
selves to  God  must  not  decline  in  love.     This  will  forfeit  the  honour,  the  protection
of  God,  and  his  covenant  relation ;  provoke  him  to  anger,  and  lead  to  divorcement.
How  touching  is  the  rebuke  uttered  by  the  complaint,  Thou  no  longer  lovest  me  !
"  She  is  not  my  wife,  I  am  not  her  husband!"     The  history  of  the  Church  is  a  sad
commentary  upon  these  words.     The  Church  at  Ephesus  was  not  wanting  in  purity
of  doctrine,  nor  in  severity  of  discipline.     The  Lord  disclosed  the  heart  and  pub-
lished the  fault.     "  Nevertheless  I  have  somewhat  against  thee,  because  thou  hast
left  thy  first  love."     II.  Urge  her  to  put  away  Sin.    The  idolatry  is  described  as
whoredom  and  adultery ;  a  breach  of  fidelity  which  Israel  owed  to  God  ;  an  act  of
apostasy  from  God ;  more  culpable  than  heathenish  idolatry  and  superstitions.     1.
A  public  sin.     Israel,  like  a  barefaced  harlot,  displayed  her  sins  in  public  before
men.     Publicity  tempts  the  weak,  taints  the  innocent,  and  leads  to  ruin.     Wicked-
ness like  this  is  the  most  dissolute,  and  its  woe  will  be  the  most  intense.     Some  sin
secretly,  but  others  proclaim  their  sin  to  the  world — they  glory  in  their  shame.     2.
A  shameful  sin.     The  face  and  the  breasts  are  those  parts  of  the  body  which  dis-
play want  of  chastity,  and  depict  boldness  and  shamelessness.    Many  neither  shame
nor  blush  at  their  vice.     Boldness  without  confession  of  wrong,  wickedness  done
with  desire  of  recognition,  impudence  in  sin,  will  lead  to  hardness  of  heart.     Those
who  will  not  blush  will  soon  be  unable  to  blush.     "  Were  they  ashamed  when  they
had  committed  abomination  1     Nay,  they  were  not  at  all  ashamed,  neither  could
they  blush :  therefore  they  shall  fall  among  them  that  fall."     III.  Warn  her  of
Danger.     Sin  always  involves  risk,  and  brings  its  consequences  upon  ourselves  and
others.     Every  one  is  in  duty  bound,  in  his  house,  among  his  friends  and  relations,
and  in  his  country,  to  labour  for  the  happiness  and  good  of  all,  to  check  the  wicked-
ness and  ward  off  the  dangers  by  which  he  is  surrounded.     1.  She  mil  expose
herself.  "  Lest  I  strip  her  naked,  and  set  her  as  in  the  day  that  sho  was  born,"  &c
(a)  Expose  herself  to  nakedness  and  helplessness,     Israel  taken  when  weak  and


IWMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.  lchap.  ii.


few  in  number  ;  trained,  fed,  and  clothed  by  God  like  a  little  child  ;  married  to  God,
and  adorned  as  a  bride  j  should  now  be  stripped,  deprived  of  every  ornament,  as  an
adulterous  wife;  of  all  temporal  and  spiritual  blessings  as  a  people;  and  left  naked
and  helpless,  a  gazing-stock  to  others.     When  God  ceases  to  care  and  provide  for  a
people,  withholds  the  gifts  of  nature  and  of  grace,  they  will  become  defiled  by  sin,
cast  out  and  loathsome.     Like  Adam  and  Eve,  they  will  lose  their  innocence,  and
learn  their  nakedness.     Divine  judgments  strip  men  of  natural  defence,  family
honour,    and   leave    them    "  naked   unto   their   shame   amongst   their   enemies "
(Ex.  xxii.  25).     (h)  Expose  herself  to  want  and  distress.     "  Make  her  as  a  wilder-
ness, and  set  her  like  a  dry  land."     Incursions  and  hostilities  of  the  enemy  could
lay  her  waste  as  a  wilderness ;  or  put  her  in  great  straits  and  distress,  as  in  the
desert  when  they  came  out  of  Egypt.     Idolatry  desolates  the  land  and  brings  the
devouring  sword.     She  would  be  like  a  dry  land,  destitute  of  food  and  the  main-
tenance of  life.     Well-watered  gardens  become  deserts  through  sin.     The  outward
is  a  type  of  the  inward.     "  Mind  hath  its  deserts  no  less  than  Eegion,"  says
Bacon.     "  Everything  that  I  love,"  said  ]STapoleon,  "  everything  that  belongs  to
me,  is  stricken.     Heaven  and  mankind  unite  to  afflict  me."      The  soul  of  the
sinner  is  desolate  and  unfruitful  in  the  ways  and  works  of  God;  devoid  of  God's
presence  and   blessing ;  unrelieved  by  green  pastures  and  living  rills.      "  Your
house  is  left  unto  you  desolate,"  are  words  which  describe  the  doom  of  all  with-
out Christ.     Hungry  and  thirsty,  they  are  not  satisfied,  but  perish  like  a  traveller
in  want.     "  Slay  her  with  thirst."      2.  She  ivould  endanger  her  children.     "  I
will  not  have  mercy  upon  her  children" — children  of  whoredom  inheriting  the
nature  and  suffering  from  the  conduct  of  their  mother.     There  is  no  security  in
sin.     The  rising  generation  do  not  escape.     Parents  entail  a  curse  upon  their
offspring,  and  individuals  are  involved  in  national  calamities.     As  good  is  dif-
fused on  every  hand,  so  evil  has  its  consequences ;  consequences  which  have  their
influences,  results  themselves  pregnant  with  other  results,  in  endless  succession.
Our  endeavour  should  be  to  guard  ourselves  from  the  evil  of  others,  and  guard
against  detriment  from  our  own  acts.     "  This  man  perished  not  alone   in  his
iniquity."      IV.  Reprove  her  for  Folly.     She  had  acted  shamefully  in  word  and
deed,  towards  herself  and  her  children.     The  course  of  sin  is  a  course  of  shame.
The  sinner  forgets  his  best  friend,  and  forsakes  his  own  mercy.     "  What  fruit  had
ye  then  in  those  things  whereof  ye  are  now  ashamed  1 "     The  conduct  of  Israel  was
an  affront  to  God  and  a  reproach  to  man.     To  fall  down  to  any  image,  ancient  or
modern,  is  to  turn  our  glory  into  shame.     This  was — 1.  An  ungrateful  sin.      God
set  before  them  his  law  and  judgments,  promised  blessings  for  obedience,  and  had
given  them  the  necessities  and  the  luxuries  of  life ;  "  more  than  corn,  wine,  and
oil "  (Ps.  iv.  7)  ;  but  they  claimed  these  gifts  as  their  own ;  "  my  bread  and  my
water ;  "  or  ascribed  them  to  the  lovers  they  followed.     Men  care  for  the  things  of
time  and  sense,  lands,  houses,  and  life,  and  forget  the  claims,  the  prior  right  of
God.     These  things  are  only  lent  us,  must  not  be  held  upon  wrong  tenure  and  made
our  gods.     "  Seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteousness."     2.  An  ag-
gravated sin.     Amid  Divine  chastisement  Israel  encouraged  herself  in  idolatry.
She  called  the  objects  of  her  choice  "  lovers,"  and  drew  others  to  follow  her  in  pur-
suit.    She  waits  not  for  invitation  and  allurement,  but  eager  and  unbidden,  contrary
to  natural  feeling  and  covenant  pledge,  she  cries,  "  I  will  go."     She  was  obstinate
in  pursuit,  and  avowed  her  determination.     Abuse  is  added  to  ingratitude  ;  God  is
forsaken  for  the  pleasures  of  life,  and  men  attribute  present  happiness  and  pros-
perity to  sin,  rather  than  to  his  goodness  and  forbearance.     Take  heed  lest  ye  be
fattened  and  fitted  for  slaughter.     Aggravated  sin  ripens  for  judgment.     He  that
despises  God's  reproof  "  shall  suddenly  be  destroyed,  and  that  without  remedy."
3.  A  delusive  sin.     Idols  do  not  give  the  necessities  and  enjoyments  of  life.      God
alone  can  fill  men's  "hearts  with  food  and  gladness"  (Acts  xiv.  17).  The  heathens
had  a  goddess  of  corn  and  gods  of  wine  from  whom  they  expected  these  gifts ;  so


CHAP.  II.]


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.


19


men  now  make  tlieir  gods,  and  fancy  that  these  gods  will  help  them.  They  delude
themselves  hy  error  and  folly ;  make  things  outside  of  God  their  lovers  ;  and  deify
their  talents  or  the  laws  of  nature.  We  belong  to  God,  and  all  things  are  at  his
disposal.  If  we  do  not  trust  in  him,  we  "  observe  lying  vanities."  Man  must  have
a  god,  and  if  he  will  not  love  and  serve  the  true  and  living  God,  he  makes  a  fool
of  himself,  and  pays  homage  to  a  lie  and  a  delusion.  "  As  they  did  not  like  to  re-
tain God  in  their  knowledge,  God  gave  them  over  to  a  reprobate  mind."


HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Ver.  1  may  be  taken  as  (in  last
chapter),  1.  A  declaration  of  joy.
Wrath  passed  away  and  mercy  re-
membered. 2.  A  declaration  of  Chris-
tian experience,  (a)  To  encourage  others.
(b)  To  glorify  God.  God's  grace  is  magni-
fied ;  God's  word  is  proved  to  be  faith-
ful; God's  name  made  known,  and  others
are  induced  to  repent  and  trust  in  him.
"  Say  ye  to  your  brethren,  Ammi."  3.
An  exhortation  to  the  converted  to  plead
with  the  unconverted.  The  few  faithful
in  faithless  Israel  must  plead  with  others.
Those  who  know  God  must  expostulate
with  those  who  do  not  know  him ;
children  with  parents ;  relatives  with
relatives,  (a)  This  a  natural  order.
We  naturally  feel  for  friends  and  rela-
tives. We  may  not  forget  others,  but
we  begin  at  home.  Andrew  was  ac-
quainted with  Jesus  and  related  to  Peter.
"  He  first  findeth  his  own  brother
Simon."  Paul  could  wish  himself  ac-
cursed for  his  kindred  in  the  flesh  (Rom.
ix.  3).  (b)  This  a  Divine  order.  "  Go
home  to  thy  friends,  and  tell  them  how
great  things  the  Lord  hath  done  for
thee"  (Mark  v.  19).  "  Let  them  (chil-
dren) learn  first  to  show  piety  at  home  "
(1  Tim.  v.  4).  (c)  This  the  most  suc-
cessful order.  We  have  greater  sympathy
for  friends,  more  love  to  our  own,  than
others.  They  are  more  likely  to  be
influenced  and  persuaded  by  us  than
others.  "  Plead  with  your  mother,
plead  "  earnestly,  faithfully,  and  continu-
ally.

Yer.  3.  The  folly  of  sin.  1.  It  strips
men  of  blessings.     2.  Exposes  them  to


shame  and  danger.  3.  Leaves  them
helpless  and  distressed.  The  sinner  is
naked ;  bereft  of  grace,  love,  and  protec-
tion ;  and  exposed  to  famine  and  peril.
A  Christian  Church  which  throws  off
the  ornaments  of  Divine  grace  and
Divine  ordinances  will  be  stripped  of
outward  privileges — spiritual  gifts  de-
spised will  lead  to  withdrawal  of  tem-
poral gifts.1

Yer.  4.  Mercy  withheld  from  children,
churches,  or  nations,  is  a  sad  addition  to
their  trouble.  There  is  nothing  to  moder-
ate, prevent,  or  remove  their  sorrow.

Yer.  5.  "I  will  go."  The  infatu-
ation of  the  sinner,  who  hardens,  em-
boldens himself  in  sin,  and  rushes,  heed-
less of  warnings  and  judgments,  to  shame
and  destruction.  Steps  in  apostasy  from
God.  1.  Renouncing  obedience.  2.
Loving  idols.  3.  Ascribing  God's  gifts
to  idols.  4.  Justifying  this  course  from
benefits  received.  "  We  too  have  our
idols,  which  our  natural  hearts  madly
run  after,  turning  away  from  God.
Whatever  we  make  our  chief  good,  out-
side of  God,  is  an  idol.  How  apt,  more-
over, we  are  to  take  God's  gifts,  our
food,  clothing,  comforts,  and  luxuries,
as  if  they  were  our  own  by  some  peculiar
right;  calling  them  'my  bread,  my
water,  my  wool,  my  flax,'  and  to  attri-
bute our  possession  of  them  to  our  gold,
our  industry,  and  our  talents,  making
these  our  gods  "  [Fausset's  Com.].  God
is  the  real  giver  of  all  temporal  and
spiritual  blessings.  If,  therefore,  thou
hast  any  want,  seek  its  supply  from
God  [Lange\.2


1  "  Sin  is  a  wasting  plague  to  souls,  countries,  and  enjoyments,  for  so  is  imported  in  the  words,
and  '  make  her  as  a  wilderness,'  "  &c.  [Hxfcheson].

9  u  As  it  is  a  great  sin  to  depart  from  God  and  his  true  worship,  so  especially  is  it  a  shameful  way
of  departing  from  him  when  men's  ends  are  so  low  and  base  that  they  will  follow  any  way  of  religion
for  interest  and  advantage,  and  account  the  thriving  way  best.  Israel  thought  she  throve  best  in
and  because  of  her  idolatry,  '  they  give  me  my  bread,'   '  &c.  [Hutchesori],


SO  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  [chap.  il


HOMILETICS.
The  Unsuccessful  Pursuit. — Verses  6,  7.

Though  Israel  is  dishonoured  and  fallen,  she  is  not  left  to  herself.  God's  mercy-
yearns  over  and  seeks  to  check  her  in  sin  and  recall  her  to  himself.  God  even  now
lias  not  written  a  hill  of  divorcement,  nor  cast  away  the  people  whom  he  did  fore-
know. Through  eighteen  hundred  years  they  have  heen  wandering  without  a
dwelling-place  and  a  temple ;  but  the  day  will  come,  when  she  will  "  no  more  be
termed  Forsaken,"  nor  "  the  land  be  termed  Desolate ;  but  she  will  be  called
Hephzi-bah  and  the  land  Beulah."  Men  are  prone  to  wander.  They  are  disap-
pointed in  their  wanderings,  and  God  rouses,  instructs,  and  restores  his  backsliding
people.

I.  A  pursuit  after  wrong  objects.     Man  is  a  creature  of  strong  affections.    His
feelings  cling  round  the  objects  of  his  choice  like  ivy  round  a  tree.     Through  sin
these  affections  are  misplaced.     He  loves  the  things  which  he  should  hate,  and
hates  the  things  which  he  should  love ;  forsakes  the  true  God,  and  pursues  lovers
of  his  own.     He  must  love,  he  will  worship,  something ;  "  that  I  may  win  "  is  the
desire  of  every  sou].     Wealth,  honour,  position,  and  learning  are  eagerly  sought,
loved  for  their  own  sake  and  for  the  sake  of  what  they  are  thought  to  give.    Thus
men  are  seeking  happiness  where  it  cannot  be  found ;  committing  two  evils,  forsak-
ing the  fountain  of  living  waters,  and  hewing  out  cisterns  for  themselves,  broken
cisterns  which  will  hold  no  water.     "  Who  will  show  us  any  good  1 "  is  the  cry  of
the  many.  "  Lord,  lift  thou  upon  us  the  light  of  thy  countenance,"  is  the  prayer  of
the  few.     II.  A  pursuit  with  intense  anxiety.     Man's  spiritual  desires  are  in-
satiable, yet  ever  seek  gratification.     They  forbid  him  to  rest,  and  compel  him  to
seek  supply.    Inward  sense  of  want,  incapacity  for  alliance  with  sin,  and  instinctive
longing  for  God,  the  "  first  good,  first  perfect,  and  first  fair  " — of  whom  all  created
beauty  and  good  are  mere  shadows — make  men  restless  and  discontented.     But  in-
stead of  lifting  the  soul  to  God,  they  look  to  the  creature  for  satisfaction  ;  "  seek  "
and  "follow  after"  in  eager  pursuit  of  what  they  love  ;  labour  harder  in  sin,  and
seeking  pleasure,  than  in  serving  God.    They  weary  themselves  in  pursuit,  rendered
more  eager  by  thorn-hedges  and  hindrances.     Vexation  and  disappointment  excite
to  desperate  tenacity ;  affliction  and  remorse  are  often  no  check  to  the  sinner ;
fuel  is  added  to  the  fire,  and  with  renewed  ardour  onward  he  goes  to  ruin  and
despair.     "  I  will  go  after  my  lovers."     The  impenitent  struggle  on  after  that
which  God  is  taking  from  them,  and  will  not  give  up,  until  the  pursuit  is  found
hopeless  and  exhaustive,  and  God  in  preserving  mercy  brings  him  back.     "  Turn
ye,  turn  ye  from  your  evil  ways  ;  for  why  will  ye  die,  0  house  of  Israel  ?  "     III.
A  pursuit  under  Divine  restraint.     God  governs  the  world,  and  seeks  the  good
of  his  creatures.     The  way  of  transgressors  is  rendered  hard  "  through  much  tribu-
lation."    It  is  a  warfare  against  conscience,  reason,  and  revelation.    In  consciousness
of  guilt  we  may  discern  our  relationship  to  God.     The  trouble  and  anguish  of
spirit   springing  from  this  consciousness,  "  the  inward  unrest  which    sometimes
seizes  the  slave  of  sin  are  proofs  that  he  has  not  quite  broken  away  from  God."
God  works  within  by  his  Spirit  and  without  by  his  providences.  Hedges  and  walls
are  fixed  up  to  restrain  men  in  sin.     1.   The  restraints  of  God's  providence  are
various  in  their  nature.     God  sought  to  cut  off  Israel  from  idolatry  by  solitude  and
allliction.     Like  a  thorn-hedge,  affliction  is  painful.     "  No  chastening  for  the  present
seemeth  to  be  joyous,  but  grievous."     Conscience,  the  Divine  officer,  warns  and
checks  the  sinner.    Disappointments  in  pursuits,  pains  attending  pleasures,  Divine
judgments,  and  special  manifestations,  turn  men  from  their  purpose.     Saul  was
overcome  by  light  from  heaven  ;  Balaam  was  met  by  an  angel,  and  David  by
Abigail  (1  Sam.  xxv.  32).     2.   The  restraints  of  God's  providence  are  merciful  in
their  design,  "  that  she  shall  not  find  her  paths."     (a)  Given  to  withdraw  men  from,


chap.  iL]  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :  HOSE  J.  21


sinful  pursuits.  "  She  shall  not  overtake  them ;  and  she  shall  seek  them,  but  shall
not  find  them."  (b)  Given  to  restore  men  to  God.  "  Then  shall  she  say,  I  will  go
and  return."  Strong  barriers  and  painful  providences  are  not  sufficient.  If  God
did  not  mercifully  interfere  we  should  all  go  astray.  Let  us  repent  of  sin,  be
thankful  for  correction,  and  admire  the  wondrous  grace  of  God.  "  Before  I  was
afflicted  I  went  astray,  but  now  have  I  kept  thy  word."  IV.  A  pursuit  ending
in  failure.  "  She  shall  not  overtake  "  what  she  follows ;  "  she  shall  not  find  "
what  she  seeks.  Failure  and  disappointment  after  all  her  eagerness  and  effort !
Egypt  and  Assyria  were  trusted  in  vain.  Worldly  alliances  were  of  no  service  ;
did  not  give  the  anticipated  deliverance.  Idols  were  impotent ;  foreign  nations
were  a  broken  reed,  a  source  of  sorrow  and  bitterness  of  spirit.  Israel  was  obliged
to  confess,  "  it  was  better  with  me  than  now"  The  sinner  gains  nothing,  but  loses
everything,  by  forsaking  God.  He  pursues  phantoms  of  bliss.  The  pursuit  will  dis-
gust, and  end  in  failure.  "  Why  did  the  cannon-balls  spare  me  to  die  in  this  manner  1
I  am  no  longer  the  Great  Napoleon.  How  fallen  and  disappointed  I  am  ! "  cried
Napoleon  in  his  latter  end.  Nothing  can  take  the  place  of  God — nothing  can  satisfy
but  bread.  A  sinful  life  can  never  give  peace  of  conscience  and  peace  with  God.
The  beast  may  be  satisfied  with  what  it  finds  on  earth,  for  its  nature  aspires  no
higher ;  but  man  is  linked  to  God,  longs  for  him,  and  cannot  be  contented  without
him.  Though  the  heart  once  alienated  from  him  turns  further  away,  and  moves
not  towards  him  until  renewed,  yet  even  in  its  wandering  it  retains  its  nature  and
necessities.  God  is  its  centre,  and  it  is  restless  and  void  till  it  meets  with  him
again.  Men  go  here  and  there,  do  this  and  that,  in  quest  of  good,  as  moments
dictate  and  circumstances  call  forth,  but  all  in  vain.  They  faint  in  mind  and  fail
in  hope.  God  never  created  man  to  find  rest  and  happiness  in  utter  rejection  of
himself.  "  Thou  madest  us  for  thyself,  and  our  heart  is  restless  until  it  repose  in
thee  "  [Augustine].  "  Wherefore  do  ye  spend  money  for  that  which  is  not  bread]
and  your  labour  for  that  which  satisfieth  not  1  hearken  diligently  unto  me,  and  eat
ye  that  which  is  good,  and  let  your  soul  delight  itself  in  fatness."

The  Backslider's  Way  hedged  up. —  Verses  5 — 7.

Consider  the  text,  and  seek  to  arouse  and  restore  backsliders,  who  have  left  their
first  love,  and  may  have  forsaken  the  Church  of  God,  given  up  their  profession
and  all  attendance  upon  Divine  worship.

I.  While  sinful  men  are  in  prosperity  they  pervert  the  mercies  of  God
to  their  own  injury,  making  them  instruments  of  sin  and  weapons  of  war-
fare against  God.  While  Israel  enjoyed  abundance  of  temporal  comforts
they  ascribed  all  these  blessings  to  false  gods.  Prosperous  sinners  make  three
great  mistakes.  At  the  outset  they  give  their  temporal  mercies  the  first  place
in  their  hearts.  Business  prospers,  but  they  consider  not  their  soul.  They
say,  "  We  must  live"  but  they  forget  that  they  must  die.  Such  folly  most
shameful,  base  ingratitude,  in  one  who  has  known,  or  professed  to  have  known,
better.  One  error  leads  to  another,  and  hence  such  people  hold  their  temporal
things  upon  a  wrong  tenure.  Observe  how  many  times  the  word  "  my  "  is  found
in  the  text.  "  Give  me  my  bread,"  &c.  They  were  not  hers,  but  God's,  who
expressly  claims  them,  and  threatens  to  take  them  all  away  (verse  9).  The  back-
slider once  professed  himself  to  be  God's  servant ;  nothing  is  his  now — houses,
lands,  profits,  and  children,  only  lent  for  a  season.  He  is  but  God's  under-bailifT,
possesses  only  as  tenant-at-will,  or  as  a  borrower,  holding  a  loan.  Then,  further,
backsliders  are  apt  to  ascribe  their  prosperity  and  their  mercies  to  their  sins.  I
have  even  heard  one  say,  "  Ever  since  I  gave  up  a  profession  of  religion  I  have
made  more  headway  in  business  than  I  did  before."  Some  apostates  have  boasted,
"  Since  I  broke  through  puritanical  restraint,  and  went  out  into  worldly  company,
I  have  been  better  in  spirits,  and  better  in  purse  than  ever  I  was  before."     Thus


22  H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :  HOSEA.  [chap.  ii.


they  ascribe  the  mercies  which  God  has  given  them  to  their  sins,  and  wickedly
bow  down  to  their  lusts,  as  Israel  did  before  the  golden  calf,  and  cry,  "  These  be
thy  gods,  0  Israel !  "     These  things  are  given  to  try  you,  to  see  how  far  you  will
go,  and  to  what  extravagances  of  ingratitude  you  will  descend.     II.  Turn  from
the  gloomy  side,  and  observe  that  the  Lord  interposes  adversity  in  order  to
bring  back  his  wandering  children.     Consider  the  hindrances  which  a  God  of
love  puts  in  the  way.     You  see  an  unexpected  hindrance,  for  it  is  placed  right  in
the  man's  way.     "  I  will  hedge  up  thy  way  " — it  was  his  way,  his  habit ;  he  had
fallen  into  it,  and  he  meant  to  keep  on ;  but  suddenly  he  met  with  an  unlooked-
for  obstacle.     This  hedge  is  placed  in  your  way  in  different  shapes.     Business
grows  slack  ;  bad  debts  multiply ;  bankruptcy  stares  you  in  the  face ;  and  where
you  had  enough  to  lavish  on  pleasure  you  have  not  enough  to  supply  your  need .
You  thought  you  would  live  a  millioimaire  ;  more  likely  now  to  die  a  pauper.     Or
sudden  sickness  falls  upon  a  strong  healthy  person.     Possibly  the  hedge  is  of  other
thorns.     The  first-born  son,  the  expected  heir,  the  joy  of  the  father's  heart,  falls
like  a  withered  flower ;  his  wife  is  cut  off  as  a  lily  snapped  from  its  stalk.     These
are  walls  across  the  way  of  those  whom  God  ordains  to  bless.     Observe,  it  has  a
very  disappointing  impediment.     The  prosperous  sinner  is  stopped  when  securely
pursuing  his  way.     "  Why,"  says  the  man,  "  if  it  had  not  been  for  that  I  should
have  made  a  fortune."     "  Why  did  death  come  just  when  my  fair  girl  looked  so
lovely,  and  when  my  dear  boy  had  grown  so  engaging  1     Ah  !    this  is   trouble
indeed.     To  meet  with  misfortune  just  when  I  built  that  new  house,  and  held  my
head  so  high,  and  expected  to  see  my  daughters  so  respectably  married ;  this  is
very  disappointing."     The  man  kicks,  and  though  once  professed  to  be  a  child  of
God,  he  is  ready  to  curse  God  and  die.     If  he  knew  the  Divine  nature,  he  would
thank   God   for  his  troubles  on  bended   knees.      What  painful  hindrances  our
heavenly  Father  often  uses.     He  hedges  the  sinner's  path,  not  with  rhododendrons
and  azaleas,  not  with  roses  and  laurels,  but  with  thorns — prickly  thorns,  which
curse  the  soil  and  tear  the  flesh,  are  God's  instruments  of  restraint.     Furthermore,
the  fence  is  effectual ;  if  the  thorn  hedge  will  not  suffice,  it  is  written,  "  I  will
make  a  wall."     Some  are  so  desperate  in  sin  that  they  break  through  ordinary
restraints ;  then  a  wall  shall  be  tried,  through  which  there  is  no  breaking,  over
which  there  is  no  climbing.     III.  You  would  think  that  the  sinner  would  now
stop,  but  instead  of  that,  according  to  the  text,  even  though  (*od  walls  up  the
way  of  sin,  men  will  try  to  follow  it,  but  this  resolve  shall  be  in  vain.     He  is
desperately  set  on  destruction,  as  though  it  were  to  be  desired.     What  a  creature  is
man,  though  he  knows  that  sin  will  be  his  ruin,  yet  he  hugs  it  as  though  it  were
his  chief  mercy;  heaps  to  himself   destruction  as  though  it  were  gold.     If  the
righteous  were  half  as  intent  in  seeking  after  goodness  as  the  wicked  are  in  hunting
sin,  how  much  more  active  would  they  be.     Truly  this  love  is  so  strange,  that  if
we  did  not  see  it  in  ourselves  we  should  wonder  at  it.     It  is  in  you,  Christians,  as
in  the  worst  of  men,  and  but  for  Divine  mercy  you  would  have  plunged  on  from
bad  to  worse.      IV.  Consider  that  the  backslider's  failure  is  followed  by  a
blessed  result.     Observe,  here   is  repentance  attended  with    sorrow.     The  poor
creature  deeply  feels  to  the  very  soul  the  wretchedness  of  her  condition.     It  is  an
active  repentance.     It  is  not  merely  "  I  will  return,"  but,  "  I  will  go  and  return."
There  is  much  earnestness  in  a  sinner  seeking  Christ ;  but  more,  if  possible,  in  a
backslider  returning  from  the  error  of  his  ways  j  for  he  has  not  only  the  guilt  of
sin  to  mourn  over,  but  the  double  guilt  of  having  despised  the  Saviour,  of  having
known  the  way  of  righteousness  and  turned  from  it.     The  confession  which  this
poor  soul  makes  of  folly  u  one  which  is  sustained  by  the  best  of  reasons.     "Then
was  it  better  with  me  than  now."     Backslider,  what  have  you  gained]     Have  you
gained  anything  more  comfortable  than  the  light  of  your  Father 's  face  ?     Before,
you  had  the  privilege  of  going  to  the  throne"  of  grace,  you  could  tell  your  wants
before  God,  and  spread  your  sorrows  tliere  ;  but  now  you  have  no  throne  of  grace


chap,  n  ]


riOMILETIG  COMMENTARY  .  HOSE  A.


23


to  go  to.  Then  you  had  God's  p?-omiscs  to  fall  buck  upon.  Once  you  had  com-
munion with  Christ.  What  can  the  world  afford  you  comparable  to  this]  There
is  no  room  to  entertain  a  comparison  for  a  moment.  Lastly,  this  repentance  was
acceptable.  It  is  not  often  that  a  husband  is  willing  to  take  back  his  wife  when
she  has  so  grossly  sinned,  as  the  metaphor  here  implies ;  yet  God  is  willing  to
receive  the  sinner,  though  his  sin  is  even  more  aggravated.  "  lie  turn  unto  me,  for
I  am  married  unto  thee."  V.  Observe  that  there  is  an  awful  contrast  to  all
this.  Some  prosper  until,  like  a  wide-spread  tree,  they  are  cut  dowrn  and  cast  into
the  fire.  There  are  backsliders  who,  never  having  had  the  root  of  the  matter  in
them,  go  back  unto  their  own  ways  and  continue  there  for  ever.  Never  trine  with
backsliding.  Chosen  vessels,  notwithstanding  their  backslidings,  are  brought  back  ;
but,  ah  !  remember  that  nine  out  of  ten  of  those  who  backslide  never  were  God's
people.  You  must  be  born  again,  and  only  the  man  who  continues  to  the  end
shall  be  saved.  VI.  We  conclude  with  this — is  not  this  subject  a  very  solemn
warning1  to  the  people  of  God  %  If  one  man  falls,  another  may.  If  one  professor
turns  out  to  be  a  hypocrite,  another  may.  There  must  be  the  continual  keeping
and  anointing  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  No  man  backslides  at  once.  Do  not  forsake
the  assembling  of  yourselves  together.  Wake  up  your  coldness  in  private  prayer.
If  love  to  Christ  has  grown  cold,  pray  to  the  Master  to  inflame  your  heart  again.
Let  us  trust  the  Saviour.  There  is  the  sinner's  hope ;  there  is  the  saint's  strength
[Spurgeon].

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND    OUTLINES.


Ver.  6.  Subject: — Divine  Restraints.
I.  These  restraints  are  manifold.  "  I
will  hedge  up  thy  way  with  thorns,  and
make  a  wall."  The  first  metaphor  is
from  a  husbandman  who  plants  a  prickly
hedge  to  prevent  cattle  from  breaking
away.  The  other  from  architecture.  If
thorns  are  insufficient,  high  and  mass-
ive walls  must  be  built.  1.  There  is
the  restraint  of  affliction.  When  the
wicked  purpose  some  great  crime,  afflic-
tion comes,  breaks  their  plans,  and
strikes  them  down.  2.  There  is  the
restraint  of  public  sentiment.  Public
opinion,  as  it  gets  enlightened  and  strong,
is  a  tremendous  check  to  the  wicked.
The  most  daring  cower  before  the  public
voice.  3.  There  is  the  restraint  of  con-
science. Conscience  is  a  Divine  officer
holding  the  sinner.

II.  These  restraints  are  necessary.  It
is  necessary  that  God  should  plant
thorny  hedges  and  build  massive  walls
around  the  sinner.  1.  It  is  neces-
sary for  the  sinner  himself.  Were  it
not  for  these  he  would  go  galloping  to
perdition.  "0,  unhappy  men,"  says
Luther,  "  when  God  leaves  them  to
themselves,  and  does  not  resist  them  in
their  lusts.  You  bless  yourselves  many
times  that  in  the  way  of  sin  you  find  no


difficulty.  Bless  thyself !  Thou  hast
cause  to  howl  and  wring  thy  hands,  thou
hast  the  curse  of  God  on  thee.  A  dread-
ful curse  to  make  pleasant  the  way  of
sin."  2.  It  is  necessary  for  the
ivorld.  What  would  become  of  the
world  if  the  wicked  were  not  reined  in?
Were  it  not  for  restraints  the  Caesars,  the
Alexanders,  and  the  Napoleons  would
soon  turn  it  into  a  Pandemonium.
3.  It  is  necessary  for  the  Church.
Had  wicked' men  their  full  fling,  how
long  would  the  Church  last?  The  flames
of  martyrdom  would  soon  blaze  to  heaven
and  consume  Zion  to  ashes.  Thank  God
for  thorny  hedges  and  massive  walls,
for  all  the  restraints  he  puts  on  sinful
men  [The  Homilist].

The  Danger  of  outward  Prosperity —
sufferings  a  specific  against  apostasy.

Divine  Chastisements.  1.  Love,  their
source.  2.  Sorrow,  their  means.  3.
Good,  their  end.  "  Crosses  and  obstacles
in  an  evil  course  are  a  great  blessing,
and  are  so  to  be  accounted.  They  are
God's  hedges,  to  keep  us  from  trans-
gressing, to  restrain  us  from  wandering
out  of  the  green  pastures,  to  withdraw
man  from  his  purpose  (Job  xxxiii.  17),  to
make  the  way  of  sin  difficult,  that  we
may  not  go  on   in  it,  and  to  keep  us


21  H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  J  [chap.  n


from  it  whether  we  will  or  not.  We  their  own  disadvantage  in  forsaking
have  reason  to  bless  God  both  for  re-  him:  for  so  much  is  imported  as  the
straining  grace  and  for  restraining  pro-  reason  for  her  return,  "  for  then  was  it
vidences  "  [Matt.  Henry],  better  with  me  than  now"  [Hutcheson].
Yer.  7.  The  Course  of  Sin.  1.  A  I  icill  go  and  return.  1.  The
course  of  labour  —  unrequited  toil —  sinner's  wandering.  2.  The  sinner's
vexation  of  spirit  and  bitter  bondage.  penitence.  3.  The  sinner's  return  to  God.
Sinners  labour  harder  than  saints,  and  "By  this  text  we  may  gather  what  true
receive  nothing  but  exhaustion  and  repentance  is :  namely,  when  a  sinner
fatigue.  2.  A  course  of  failure.  Loss  not  only  confesseth  himself  guilty  and
of  health  and  peace — all  loss  and  no  worthy  of  punishment,  but  truly  dis-
gain.  3.  The  service  of  God  the  only  pleaseth  himself  and  seriously  returns
true  gain.  "It  was  better  with  me."  to  God.  Here  we  have  two  essential
Godliness  is  profitable  to  all  things —  parts  of  true  repentance—  namely,  con-
body  and  soul,  this  world  and  the  next.  trition  and  conversion ;  or  humiliation
Sin  suicidal.  God's  service  real  ad-  and  reformation.  The  former  is  called
vantage.  Those  who  embrace  God,  would  in  Scripture  repentance  for  sin,  the  latter
take  him  up  as  the  best  of  choices,  and  repentance  from  sin  :  and  the  one  with-
his  way  as  the  shortest  cut  to  do  well  out  the  other  is  to  no  purpose  or  profit"
and  to  be  well :   they  are  sensible  of  [Trapp],

HOMILKTICS.
God  Dishonoured  in  His  Gifts  to  Men. — Verses  8,  9.

Israel  is  still  accused  and  threatened.  Gcd  will  disgust  the  idolatrous  nation,  put
to  shame  its  delusive  fancy  that  all  prosperity  came  from  idols,  and  bring  it  to  an
acknowledgment  of  dependence  upon  him.  In  gross  and  affected  ignorance  she
fathered  all  gifts  upon  her  gods.

Here  we  have — I.  The  Gifts  of  Life  bestowed  in  alunc'ancr.  Israel  was
greatly  blessed  with  "  corn,  and  wine,  and  oil,"  the  fruits  of  the  land.
These  productions  were  the  foundation  of  the  nation's  wealth  and  prosperity,
and  the  means  by  which  "  silver  and  gold "  were  multiplied.  Money  was
superabundant  in  Solomon's  reign.  "  The  king  made  silver  to  be  in  Jerusalem
as  stones  "  (1  Kings  x.  27).  Wool  and  flax  for  clothing  and  ornament.  God  be-
stows necessities  and  luxuries  upon  men;  honour  and  position,  leaders  and  genius,
upon  nations.  The  earth  yields  its  increase,  and  corn  and  wine,  bread  and  water,
are  spread  before  us  in  the  wilderness.  The  sun  sheds  forth  its  light  and  heat,
flowers  send  forth  fragrance,  and  herbs  grow  for  man  and  beast.  All  our  possessions
and  enjoyments  come  from  him.  Amid  ingratitude,  atheism,  and  vice,  life  springs
up  ever  new,  food  is  given  as  plentifully  to  sustain  it,  and  joy  and  blessings  are
poured  over  all  existence.  God  "  is  kind  unto  the  unthankful  and  the  evil."  He
makes  the  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good,  and  sends  rain  on  the  just  and
on  the  unjust.  II.  The  Gifts  of  Life  received  with  ingratitude.  "  She  did  not
know."  She  would  not  know.  It  was  not  a  mere  weakness  or  infirmity,  but
wilful  ignorance.  God  had  taught  her  by  Moses  and  the  prophets.  In  their  feasts
and  offerings  of  first-fruits,  in  their  eventful  history  and  the  wonders  of  providence,
the  goodness  of  God  was  impressed  upon  their  minds.  But  when  the  heart  is  not
touched,  the  memory  will  fail.  The  ingratitude  of  man  to  man  is  base.  Pitt  was
soured  in  temper  by  the  ingratitude  which  he  experienced.  "  All  the  eers  whom
he  had  made  deserted  him,"  says  a  writer,  "  and  half  of  those  whom  he  had  served
returned  his  kindness  by  going  over  to  his  enemies."  Divine  favours  are  frozen  by
human  ingratitude  and  turned  intoa  cause  of  rebellion.  There  was  no  excuse  for  Israel,
and  none  for  men  now.  1.  Ignorant  of  the  Divine  source  from  whence  they  come.
"  /gave  her  corn."     "  God  is  the  giver  of  every  good  and  perfect  gift."     "A  man  can


cuaf.  ii.]  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  HOSE  J.  25


receive  nothing  except  it  be  given  him  from  heaven."  But  men  do  not  acknowledge
God;  attribute  their  comforts  to  secondary  causes,  their  own  skill,  their  fellow-men,  or
"  good  luck."  The  ox  knows  its  owner,  and  the  ass  his  master's  crib,  and  both  are
grateful  for  help  :  but  intelligent  beings  receive  gifts  from  God,  and  hoard  up  for
posterity ;  forget  their  relation,  and  pay  no  dues  to  their  benefactor ;  but  live  in
known  sin  and  wilful  disregard  of  his  love.  What  tables  are  spread  for  us  without
grace  before  meat  or  gratitude  after.  2.  Ignorant  of  the  benevolent  purpose  for
which  they  are  sent.  Grass  for  cattle,  corn  and  wine  to  gladden  human  hearts,
flax  and  wool  to  clothe  and  beautify  human  bodies,  and  all  things  richly  to  enjoy.
God  has  never  left  "  himself  without  witness,  in  that  he  did  good,  and  gave  us  rain
from  heaven,  and  fruitful  seasons,  filling  our  hearts  with  food  and  gladness."  But
we  claim  his  bounties  as  our  own,  forget  the  end  for  which  they  are  bestowed,  and
under  a  formal  and  false  religion,  employ  them  for  selfish  and  unworthy  ends.
"  Despisest  thou  the  riches  of  his  goodness,  and  forbearance,  and  long-suffering  ;  not
knowing  that  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth  thee  to  repentance  ?  "  III.  The  Gifts
of  Life  basely  abused.  Israel  first  made  golden  calves,  then  mended  or  made
images  of  Baal  with  the  gold  and  silver  which  God  had  given  them.  God's  gifts
were  turned  into  human  idols,  worshipped  by  men's  own  hands,  and  turned  into
food  for  sinful  lusts.  In  modern  idolatry  God's  blessings  are  abused  and  employed
to  maintain  and  spread  the  worship  of  Baal  and  Bacchus.  Gold  and  silver,  houses
and  land,  children  and  earthly  comforts,  take  the  place  of  God ;  all  are  taken  as  our
special  right,  attributed  to  our  intellect  and  industry,  and  employed  in  the  service
of  idolatry.  In  providence  God  is  displaced  by  fortune  or  fate  ;  in  business  talent
and  tact  is  all ;  in  pursuit  of  pleasure  and  gain,  the  heart  and  understanding,  the
soul  and  body,  are  wholly  devoted  to  unworthy  objects.  "  Covetousness  is  idolatry."
Men  are  "  lovers  of  pleasure  more  than  lovers  of  God."  Christians  are  cautioned
against  "  the  worship  of  angels,"  and  of  some  it  is  said  "  their  god  is  their  belly."
Self-will,  excessive  thirst  of  aggrandizement,  love  of  applause,  undue  veneration
of  creatures,  greedy  indulgence  in  lust  and  animal  appetite,  and  inordinate  attach-
ments of  every  kind,  are  dishonouring  to  God  and  injurious  to  man,  prove  a
tendency  to  depart  from  God,  and  display  the  actual  and  continual  forgetting  of
God's  claims,  who  says  to  each  individual  person,  "  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God."
"Thou  shalt  have  no  other  god  before  me."  IV.  The  Gifts  of  Life  justly  withheld.
"  Therefore  will  I  return  and  take  away  my  corn."  These  things  were  God's,  not
theirs — they  were  only  stewards  in  trust.  He  reserves  all  power  to  himself,  and
retains  supreme  authority  over  men.  If  they  do  not  give  him  his  due,  unjustly
withhold  their  gratitude  and  homage,  then  he  will  claim  his  own  and  take  from
them  what  he  bestowed  for  their  welfare.  God  is  the  sole  proprietor,  has  incontest-
able right,  and  to  him  we  must  give  an  account.  1.  Gifts  abused  will  be  taken
away  from  men.  Ingratitude  and  sinful  appropriation  will  rob  us  of  enjoyments
and  necessities  of  life.  Idleness  and  neglect  will  forfeit  all  reward.-  Take  from  him
that  which  he  hath  (Luke  viii.  18  ;  xix.  24,  26).  Keeping,  hiding  our  talents,  and
non-employment  of  our  time  will  bring — (a)  Divine  denunciation,  (b)  Divine  de-
privation, and  (c)  Divine  displeasure.  2.  Gifts  abused  will  be  taken  away  from  men
unexpectedly.  "  In  the  time  thereof,"  and  "in  the  season  thereof."  Just  when
they  expect  them  and  when  men  think  they  are  sure  of  them.  God  will  blast  the
harvest  when  it  is  ready  for  reaping.  The  meat  shall  be  taken  from  their  months
(Joel  i.  16);  drunkards  will  awake  and  weep  (ver.  5,  11);  and  husbandmen  howl.
In  the  fulness  of  sufficiency  men  are  put  into  straits  (Job  xx.  22,  23);  and  when
they  are  just  about  to  realize  their  hopes  they  will  be  disappointed.  Unseasonable
weather,  wicked  men,  and  mysterious  providences  snatch  away  abused  mercies.
This  punishment  is  more  signal  and  severe  than  gradual  decay  or  long-looked  for
visitation.  It  is  not  the  work  of  chance,  but  a  solemn,  significant  judgment  of  God
which  leaves  the  sinner  in  want  and  distress,  in  shame  and  utter  destitution.


W  IIOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.  [chap.  n.


HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  8.  Ignorance  of  God.     1.  Nega-  imitate  those  lights  of  heaven  and  rivers

tive,   inexcusable.     2.  Affected,  sinful,  of  earth,  do  all  the  good  we  can  with

3.  Wilful,  hopeless.    "  There  remaineth  those  good  things,  corn,  wine,  silver  and

no  sacrifice  if  we  sin  wilfully,"  &c.  gold,  &c,  which  God  hath  given  us,  and

Ingratitude.      1.    Its   source,    wilful  then  reflect  back  towards  and  return  all

ignorance.     2.  Its  fruit,    (a)   forgetful-  the  glory  and  praise  unto  the  sun  of  our

ness  of  Divine  benefits,  (b)  worship  of  righteousness  and  the  sea  of  our  salva-

idols  —  coarse    and    refined.      3.    Its  tion.     Let  us  ever  send  back  (as  the

punishment,  withdrawal  of  all  gifts,  re-  beams  of  the  moon  and  stars  return  to

suiting  in  poverty  and  distress.     "Were  the  face  of  the  sun,  which  gave  them

men  but  sensible  of  what  God  doth  for  their  beauty)  to  God's  own  glorious  self

them  every  day  and  hour,   they  could  the  honour  of  all  his  gifts,  by  a  fruitful

not  in  equity  and  common  ingenuity  improvement  of  them  and  fresh  songs

serve  him  as  they  do.     He  preserveth  of  praise"  [Trapp\.  God  manifests  great

and  provideth  for  us  all ;  lays  us  down  kindness,  whereof  little  notice  is  taken,

and  takes  us  up,  commanding  the  best  and  wherein  his  hand  is  not  seen  nor

of  creatures  to  cater  for  us  (Hos.  ii.  21),  acknowledged  \IIutcheson\.
and  to  bring  us  in  the  best  of  best  for         When  men  will  not  know  God  as  the

our  subsistence  (Ps.  viii.).     Every  good  giver  of  all  their  temporal  blessings,  they

gift  and  perfect,  temporal,  spiritual,  and  shall  be  compelled  to  know  him  as  the

eternal,    cometh   from   the   Father    of  withholder  of  them  [Fausset].     Those

lights  (Jas.  i.  17),  as  naturally  and  as  who  abuse  the  mercies  God  gives  them

constantly  as  light  doth  from  the  sun,  to  his  dishonour,  cannot  expect  to  enjoy

or  water  from  the  sea.    Let  us  therefore  them  long  [Matt.  Henry].

H0M1LETIGS.
The  Exposure  of  Folly. — Verse  10.

Warning  follows  warning,  but  amid  judgment  and  corruption  Israel  forgets  God
and  gives  up  herself  to  mirth  and  idolatry.  Pleasures  allure  men  astray.  But  sin
and  mirth  will  be  separated,  and  those  who  refuse  Divine  mercy  will  feel  Divine
justice.

Notice :— I.  Folly  decked  in  gaudy  colours.  "Lewdness"  means  folly;
for  sin  is  real  folly,  as  holiness  is  essential  wisdom.  Foolishness  is  the  natural
tendency,  the  mighty  propensity  to  evil;  bound  up  in  the  heart,  incorporated  in  the
thoughts,  and  manifest  in  the  life  of  the  sinner.  But  the  folly  of  sin  is  often  veiled
in  darkness,  decked  in  ornament  and  trickery,  to  attract  and  deceive.  It  dazzles
by  its  glitter  and  ensnares  by  its  mask.  The  outside  is  attractive,  but  the  inside  is
deceptive.  There  is  no  substance,  no  enjoyment  in  sin;  all  is  shadow  and  empti-
ness. Men  think  themselves  wise  in  their  folly,  and  are  praised  for  their  worldly
policy  (Ps.  xlix.  18).  They  call  themselves  happy,  when  applauded  by  others  and
blessed  with  temporal  prosperity.  But  fame  and  success,  wealth  and  worldly  pos-
sessions, are  impotent  in  the  tomb.  The  dying  worldling  "  shall  carry  nothing
away:  his  glory  shall  not  descend  after  him."  The  pleasures  of  sin  and  the  pride
of  life  are  only  rainbow  colours  to  the  bubble,  giving  it  tint,  but  no  substance  and
reality.  There  is  no  utility,  no  rest,  no  gain  in  sin.  It  is  not  a  casual  step  from
the  path  of  wisdom,  but  the  regular  and  usual  course  of  folly.  Essential  folly,
folly  in  the  grain,  folly  in  its  nature,  folly  in  its  dress,  and  folly  in  its  end.
"  Nought  but  itself  coidd  be  its  parallel."  It  has  the  fascination  and  the  fangs  of
a  serpent.  "  It  biteth  like  a  serpent,  and  stingeth  like  an  adder."  It  deceives  and
destroys.  In  whatever  guise  folly  presents  itself,  gross  and  repellent,  subtle  and
seductive,  it  must  be  shunned.  "  Abstain  from  all  appearance  of  evil,"  or  as  some,
"  from  everything  that  not  only  is  evil,  but  that  looks  like  evil."     II.  Folly  ex-


chap.  ii. J  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  27


posed  to  public  shame.  "  Now  will  I  discover  her  lewdness  in  the  sight  of  her
lovers."  Darkness  and  secresy  are  no  hiding-place  to  God.  His  eyes  penetrate
every  place,  and  his  hand  can  reach  every  person.  Secret  sins  shall  be  discovered
and  their  perpetrators  exposed.  The  mask  shall  be  torn  away,  and  sin  in  its  nature
and  consequences  shall  appear  offensive,  lewd,  "  exceeding  sinful."  Men  may  deny  the
fact  and  excuse  the  fault  of  sin ;  may  cover  crime  with  lies,  and  self-righteousness
with  professional  virtues  ;  but  a  God  of  truth  will  bring  "  to  light  the  hidden
things  of  darkness."  Virtues  are  hidden  and  oppressed  ;  wickedness  rules ;  and  every
day  cries  out  for  redress  and  retribution.  Evil-doers  shun  the  light  and  love  dark-
ness. They  never  will,  never  did,  appreciate  the  light  of  holiness  and  rectitude.  It
reveals  their  folly  and  kindles  remorse  in  their  bosom.  As  foul  birds  of  night,  they
hide  themselves  from  its  beams.  The  wicked  cover  their  sins  from  themselves  and
others.  They  banish  serious  thoughts  from  their  minds,  stiHe  convictions,  and  put
on  a  cheerful  appearance.  But  "  he  that  covereth  his  sins  shall  not  prosper."  An
offended  God,  who  summoned  Adam  from  his  hiding-place,  will  call  and  condemn
the  sinner.  In  public,  "  in  the  sight  of  her  lovers"  before  men  on  earth  and  angels
in  eternity,  they  will  be  put  to  shame  and  confusion  of  face.  The  darkest  deeds
are  "set  in  the  light  of  God's  countenance,"  and  will  "  be  proclaimed  upon  the
house-tops."  "  There  is  no  darkness,  nor  shadow  of  death,  where  the  workers  of
iniquity  may  hide  themselves."  III.  Folly  bereft  of  every  defence.  "  None  shall
deliver  her  out  of  mine  hand."  When  God  begins  to  work,  who  shall  let  or  hinder
him?  Men  say,  "It  was  an  oversight,"  "  I  could  not  help  it,"  therefore  forget  it.
They  plead  ignorance,  custom,  temptation,  infirmity,  necessity,  and  fatalism  even,  to
excuse  or  palliate  their  guilt.  This  will  never  succeed.  It  was  hopeless  for  Israel
to  trust  to  their  idols  and  alliances.  The  strongest  army,  the  most  popular  idol,  are
nothing  before  God.  "  All  nations  before  him  are  as  nothing  ;  and  they  are  counted
to  him  less  than  nothing  and  vanity."  The  allurements  of  vice  will  deceive.  Re-
liance on  temporal  prosperity,  outward  formality,  and  religious  ceremony  will  be  in
vain.  It  is  only  faith  in  Christ,  not  confidence  in  men,  that  can  deliver  us.  The
wicked  "strengthened  himself  in  his  wickedness  "  (Ps.  lii.  7)  j  but  he  can  neither
outwit  nor  overcome  his  Judge.  Given  to  wickedness,  the  sinner  and  the  false  pro-
fessor shall  find  that  "none  shall  deliver"  "The  wicked  is  driven  away  in  his
wickedness"  (Prov.  xiv.  32);  "  neither  shall  wickedness  deliver  those  that  are  given
to  it "  (Ecc.  viii.  8).

Mirth  turned  into  Mourning. —  Verse  11.

Israel  had  forsaken  the  temple  of  God,  and  worshipped  idols  under  the  form  of  a
calf — had  changed  some  festivals,  and  kept  up  all  in  outward  form.  The  monthly
and  yearly  feasts  were  celebrated  with  mirth.  God  had  commanded  them  to  rejoice
in  their  feasts  (Deut.  xvi.  14) ;  but  their  hymns  and  instrumental  music,  their
priests  and  sacrifices,  were  licentiousness  and  falsehood,  luxury  and  excess  of  every
description  and  degree.  Their  joy  must  cease  and  their  mirth  would  be  turned  into
mourning.

I.  Mirth  connected  with  wickedness.  1.  //  is  a  most  prevalent  connection.
"  The  notes  of  jollity  and  fun  are  heard  everywhere  through  society.  At
theatres,  taverns,  divans,  and  social  festivities,  it  flares  and  rattles.  The  drunkard
has  his  mirth,  the  liar  his  mirth,  the  debaucher  his  mirth,  the  blasphemer  his
mirth,  the  sabbath-breaker  his  mirth.  The  union  of  sin  and  mirth  is,  alas,  very
common.  "  We  meet  it  everywhere  ;  in  the  dance  and  in  the  song,  in  the  joke  and
in  the  gibe  "  [Dr  Tho?aas].  2.  It  is  a  most  unreasonable  connection.  Wickedness
and  mirth,  how  incongruous  !  "  Sorrow  is  better  than  laughter  "  to  the  wicked.
"  For  by  the  sadness  of  the  countenance  the  heart  is  made  better."  The  condition
and  prospects  of  a  sinner  should  make  him  weep  rather  than  rejoice.  Sin  can  never
give  true  happiness.     The  world  can  never  be  our  home,  and  the  heart  cannot  rest


98  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  [chap,  il


there.  Its  resources  are  poor  ;  its  pleasures  are  not  solid ;  and  when  its  "joys  are
all  packed  up  and  gone,"  then  will  be  the  days  of  mourning.  Even  in  laughter  the
heart  is  sorrowful ;  and  the  end  of  that  mirth  is  heaviness.  II.  Mirth  connected
with  false  religion.  If  sin  and  mirth  are  unreasonable,  how  much  more  mirth  and
idolatry!  Israel  turned  "her  feast  days,  her  new  moons,  and  her  sabbaths"  into
days  of  making  merry.  On  the  Sabbath  they  should  have  owned  God  as  their
Creator;  on  other  festive  days  they  shoidd  have  thanked  him  for  the  gifts  of  Nature
and  the  wonders  of  Providence.  But  the  worship  of  God  was  blended  with  the
service  of  idols ;  and  feigned  joy  under  the  form  of  true  joy.  As  Israel  of  old
"  made  a  calf  in  Horeb,"  the  place  of  solemnities  and  law :  so  men  now  worship
"graven  images;"  cling  to  forms  of  their  own  device;  and  change  true  joy  into
false  mirth.  Joy  becomes  a  feast ;  but  the  revelry  that  marked  heathen  festivals
can  never  become  the  house  of  God.  Communion  with  God  can  never  be  enjoyed
through  consecrated  symbols.  "  Neither  be  ye  idolaters,  as  were  some  of  them ;  as
it  is  written,  The  people  sat  down  to  eat  and  drink,  and  rose  up  to  play."  III.
Mirth  turned  into  mourning.  Their  songs  were  to  cease,  and  their  music  and
dancing  turned  into  weeping  and  wailing.  "  I  will  turn  your  feasts  into  mourning,
and  all  your  songs  into  lamentation"  (Amos  viii.  10).  The  mirthful  songs  of  sin-
ners suddenly  change  into  shrieks  of  agony  and  death.  Many  a  sigh  is  heard  amid
loudest  laughter.  The  smiles  of  mirth  are  counterfeits  to  hide  hearts  of  woe.
Belshazzar's  impious  feast  to  a  thousand  lords  ended  by  his  own  destruction  and
that  of  his  empire.  "  Be  merry  and  wise."  M  Fly  the  pleasure  which  bites  to-mor-
row." Mirth  pursued,  possessed,  and  enjoyed  without  God  is  vanity  (Ecc.  vii.  6).
1.  It  is  of  short  duration.  It  is  but  "the  crackling  of  thorns  under  a  pot,"  ablaze
for  a  moment,  an  excitement  which  cannot  last.  2.  It  is  certain  in  its  termin-
ation. I  "  will  cause  her  mirth  to  cease."  It  may  be  attractive  in  its  appearance,
supported  by  its  resources,  and  spread  by  its  devotees ;  but  the  solemn  warning  is
read,  "Woe  unto  you  that  laugh  now;  for  ye  shall  mourn  and  weep."

Prosperity  turned  into  Adversity. —  Verses  12,  13.

Festive  rejoicing  was  to  end.  Israel  loved  new  moons  and  sabbath  days  not  for
the  sake  of  religious  worship,  but  for  sinful  pleasures  and  delight.  The  vine  and
fig-tree,  the  choicest  productions  of  the  land,  and  the  source  of  great  wealth  and
sustenance,  were  to  be  taken  away.  Orchards,  gardens,  and  vineyards  were  to  be
neglected,  deprived  of  defences,  and  exposed  to  wild  beasts.

I.  Prosperity  in  rich  abundance.  God  is  the  Giver.  There  is  no  moment
in  all  history,  in  all  departments  of  life,  in  which  he  is  not  giving  with
a  liberal  and  powerful  hand.  He  is  the  author  of  abundance  everywhere —
abundant  light,  abundant  rain,  and  abundant  joys.  Israel  had  a  land  flowing
with  milk  and  honey.  The  necessities  and  luxuries  of  life  are  given  to
men  in  abundance.  Giving  doth  not  impoverish  him,  nor  withholding  make
him  rich.  But  even  to  those  who  abuse  his  gifts,  to  the  wicked  and  unthank-
ful, God  bestows  prosperity.  The  ungodly  prosper  on  earth.  They  are  suc-
cessful in  business.  Their  bread  seems  to  be  gained  without  care,  and  their
wines  without  stint.  They  are  often  in  great  power,  ruling  with  the  might  of
Caesar  and  the  wealth  of  Croesus.  "  Spreading  themselves  like  a  green  bay  tree,"
they  are  rooted  in  the  world,  add  house  to  house,  and  field  to  field,  rise  higher  and
higher  in  splendour  and  pride.  "They  are  not  in  trouble  as  other  men;  neither  are
they  plagued  like  other  men."  They  escape  many  anxious  cares  and  killing  toil.
God's  people  smart  under  the  rod  while  the  wicked  escape.  But  to  the  eye  of  faith
and  in  the  sanctuary  of  God  these  perplexities  are  unriddled.  "  Fret  not  thyself
because  of  evil-doers,  neither  be  thou  envious  at  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked."  II.
Prosperity  greatly  abused.  1.  Ascribed  to  wrong  sources.  A  man  can  receive
nothing  except  it  be  given  him  from  heaven ;  but  he  looks  to  sinful  and  secondary


chap.  II.]  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  29


causes,  and  boasts  as  if  he  had  received  nothing.  Israel  thought  all  their  prosperity-
was  bestowed  by  their  idols.  "  These  are  rny  rewards  that  my  lovers  have  given
me."  Men  look  to  their  neighbour's,  or  thank  their  stars,  for  their  good  fortune.
They  attribute  success  in  business  to  their  diligence  and  talent  ;  believe  themselves
to  be  the  architects  of  their  own  fortunes;  and  cry  in  the  spirit  of  Nebuchadnezzar,
"Is  not  this  great  Babylon  that  I  have  built,"  &c.  2.  Leading  to  sinful  practices.
"  Wherein  she  burned  incense  to  them,  and  she  decked  herself  with  her  earrings
and  her  jewels."  Like  harlots,  the  Israelites  adorned  themselves  to  attract  admirers  ;
and  like  heathens,  they  burned  incense  to  idol  gods.  One  sin  leads  to  another.
Prosperity  begets  pride,  and  pride  begets  ingratitude.  Then  when  God  is  deserted,  hi?
power,  goodness,  and  love  are  attributed  to  another;  sacrifices  are  offered  and
incense  burned  to  unworthy  deities.  Ancient  and  modern  idolatry  have  filled  the
world  with  corrupt  practices  and  tendencies.  Impurity,  unchastity  of  every  descrip-
tion, is  most  deteriorating.  In  dishonouring  God,  men  have  "  dishonoured  their
own  bodies  "  (Rom.  i.  24).  Moral  corruption  is  followed  by  physical  debasement.
The  grossness  of  Pagan  idolatry  is  only  equalled  by  the  degrading  immoralities
which  it  fostered  and  consecrated.  Gluttony,  drunkenness,  and  every  "  sin  without
the  body,"  only  injures,  does  not  alienate  the  body  from  God :  "  but  he  that  com-
mitteth  fornication  sinneth  against  his  own  body,"  commits  sacrilege,  and  makes  it
like  a  harlot's  body  (1  Cor.  vi.  18,  19).  III.  Prosperity  visited  by  Divine
judgment.  "  I  will  destroy  her  vines  and  her  fig-trees."  What  God  gives  he  can
easily  take  away — turn  our  joy  into  mourning — our  prosperity  into  adversity.  1.
Temporal  judgment.  Before,  God  had  threatened  only  to  take  away  the  fruits  in
their  season;  now  he  will  take  away  not  only  fruit,  but  the  trees  that  bare  it.
Present  enjoyments  and  future  prospects  can  be  cut  off;  beauty,  wealth,  and  honour
wither  like  a  flower;  famine  and  sword  can  turn  our  vineyards  into  a  desert.  "  He
smote  their  vines  also  and  their  fig-trees;  and  brake  the  trees  of  their  coast."  2.
Spiritual  judgment.  "  I  will  visit  upon  her  the  days  of  Baalim."  Take  one  step
to  idolatry,  we  may  be  given  up  to  more.  God  may  seem  to  wink  for  a  time,  but
a  continual  course  of  impenitence  will  be  visited  with  severe  punishment.  Change
Jehovah  for  Baal,  you  change  prosperity  for  adversity,  honour  for  shame,  real  en-
joyment for  sensual  pleasure.  God's  presence  is  seen  and  God's  voice  is  heard  in
all  the  vicissitudes  of  men.  Woe  to  men  when  their  table  becomes  a  snare,  "and
that  which  should  have  been  for  their  welfare  a  trap,"  a  retribution  for  their
departure  from  God,  and  their  inhumanity  to  themselves  (Ps.  lxix.  22).

Restoration  to  God. —  Verses  14 — 16.

"  Therefore"  a  treatment  not  as  we  should  expect,  not  after  the  manner  of  men,
but  according  to  Divine  mercy.  This  is  not  an  inference  from  the  13th  verse,  but
from  the  whole  section.  Because  Israel  had  been  punished  severely  for  sin  and  for-
getf ulness  of  God  ;  because  reduced  to  distress  and  longing  to  return  to  God — I  will
go  and  return,  ver.  7 — "  therefore  "  God  allures  and  restores  the  sinner  to  himself.

I.  The  nature  of  restoration  to  God.  1.  From  bondage  to  liberty.  Israel
in  Egypt,  under  severe,  helpless,  degrading  servitude,  a  type  of  the  sinner  undei
the  dominion,  authority,  and  consequence  of  sin.  Heavy  tribute,  cruel  task-
masters, unrequited  toil,  render  life  bitter  and  distressing.  Sin  makes  the  sinner
serve  with  rigour  and  sigh  for  freedom.  Israel  redeemed  and  led  into  the  wilder-
ness a  type  of  separation  from  sin  and  restoration  to  God.  An  entire  separation
to  devote  oneself  to  God  (Ex.  v.  3).  2.  From  darkness  to  light.  Egypt  not  only
a  place  of  bondage,  but  of  darkness.  Sin  is  moral  darkness.  The  valley  of  Achor
is  a  place  of  Divine  chastisement  and  suffering.  Sin  brings  trouble,  penitence
bursts  the  clouds  and  brings  hope.  Put  away  the  accursed  thing  :  God  will  show
mercy.  The  sinner  when  restored  is  turned  from  the  darkness  of  ignorance  and  doubt,
fear  and  despair,  to  the  light  of  truth  and  joy,  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God


30  HOM1LETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  [chap,  n.


(Acts  xxvi.  18).  II.  The  method  of  restoration  to  God.  1.  By  Divine  attrac-
tion from  without.  God  seeks  to  counteract  the  effects  of  sin  by  showing  its
exceeding  sinfulness  ;  to  allure  to  virtue  by  displaying  its  beauty  ;  to  persuado  men
hy  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  God  in  Christ  is  placable.  Hard  thoughts  of  God
are  sinful.  Truth  is  beautiful,  and  the  promises  are  encouraging.  Though  deep
and  fixed  dislike  be  rooted  in  the  heart,  yet  "  God  is  love."  This  is  the  special
revelation,  the  grand  fact  of  the  gospel.  It  is  the  expression  of  God's  love  to  me —
"  He  hath  loved  me."  This  Divine  truth  imparts  new  ideas  to  the  mind,  and  stays
the  progress  of  the  sinner,  like  that  of  Saul  in  his  departure  from  God.  2.  By
Divine  operation  within.  "And  speak  comfortably  unto  her."  The  truth  of
God  alone  is  not  sufficient.  The  Spirit  must  enlighten  the  mind  and  work  in  the
heart.  The  ear  may  be  touched,  but  the  soul  not  comforted.  When  truth  is  near
it  does  not  attract,  nor  kindle  sympathy  in  the  heart.  Men  know  the  truth,  but
do  not  practise  it.  God,  Christ,  and  moral  virtue  do  not  attract.  The  Spirit
renews  the  disposition  and  begets  love ;  makes  us  willing,  and  draws  us  with  the
cords  of  a  man  and  bands  of  love.  God  speaks  friendly,  and  draws  effectually
when  he  writes  his  laws  in  our  hearts  (2  Cor.  iii.  10).  III.  The  results  of
restoration  to  God.  God  does  not  speak  in  vain.  As  in  the  first  creation  he  spake
and  it  was  done,  so  in  the  second  his  will  is  obeyed.  "  I  will  draw  all  men  unto
me."  1.  Response  for  reluctance.  The  sinner  is  unwilling  to  return;  the  penitent
fears  and  hesitates  ;  but  when  God  said,  "  Seek  ye  my  face,"  my  heart  said  unto
thee,  "Thy  face,  Lord,  will  I  seek."  Where  other  voices  fail  God's  voice  is
effectual.  There  is  a  true  response,  a  prompt  and  ready  response.  The  inmost
soul  is  moved,  and,  like  the  echo  among  the  Alps,  repeats  the  notes  of  Divine  music.
There  is  no  delay  nor  denial,  for  this  savours  of  distrust,  and  displeases  God.
There  is  full  and  complete,  hearty  and  sincere  return.  The  resolution  is  no  sooner
made,  "  I  will  go,"  than  carried  out.  The  heart  is  in  tune  with  God,  and  sings  for
joy,  like  Israel  in  her  days  of  youth  and  deliverance.  Israel  at  the  Red  Sea  was  a
young  and  joyful  nation,  redeemed  from  bondage  and  ready  to  sacrifice.  "  I  will
sing  unto  the  Lord  "  (Ex.  xv.).  Man  never  rises  to  his  dignity  until  he  realizes  his
relation  to  God.  Then  he  utters  emotions  in  songs  of  praise,  and  music  becomes
the  handmaid  of  memory  and  the  instrument  of  praise.  2.  Riches  for  poverty .  "  I
will  give  her  vineyards  from  thence."  The  wilderness  had  no  supply  of  bread  and
water,  no  fertile  plains  and  fruitful  fields.  It  yielded  nothing,  yet  Israel  lacked
nothing.  Water  gushed  out  from  the  rock,  and  manna  fell  from  the  clouds.  The
sinner  is  in  a  dry  and  thirsty  land  where  no  water  is ;  barren  and  unfruitful  in
heart  and  life ;  poor  in  spirit  and  prospect,  in  a  wretched  and  forlorn  condition ,
"  wretched  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and  naked."  But  when  restored  to
God,  he  is  rich  in  experience  and  life,  spiritual  joy  and  hope,  rich  in  faith  and  rich
in  God.  3.  Sonship  for  slavery.  "Thou  shalt  call  me  Ishi,  and  shalt  call  me  no
more  Baali."  Baal  indicated  lordship,  and  was  a  name  given  to  idols.  God  would
disown  the  title,  lest  his  people  should  be  reminded  of  their  former  condition —
preferred  the  tender  name  of  love  to  prove  closer  relationship.  "Thy  Maker
(thy  Baal)  is  thy  husband."  God  would  have  Israel  forsake  everything  which
kept  up  the  reputation  and  put  them  in  mind  of  idolatry.  He  was  married  again
to  them.  The  Church  calls  him  by  right  names  when  in  true  relation.  The  sinner
when  restored  to  Divine  favour,  the  son  when  introduced  into  the  family  of  God,
is  not  under  the  spirit  of  bondage  again  to  fear,  but  the  spirit  of  adoption  by  which
he  cries,  Abba,  Father.  God  is  not  cold  towards  us ;  be  not  lukewarm  towards
him.     "  Be  ye  therefore  followers  of  God  as  dear  children."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.    14.    "I  will   allure  her"  $c.      They  are  innumerable,  yet  so  frequently
The   attractions   of    Divine    love.     1.      overlooked.     2.  They  are  powerful,  yet


CHAP.    II.]


HOMTLETIG  COMMENTARY ':  HOSE  A.


31


so  frequently  resisted.  3.  Rich  in  bless-
ing, yet  so  frequently  unemployed.
"  Christ  works  upon  his  people  fortiter,
but  yet  suaviter ;  powerfully,  but  yet
sweetly ;  he  inclineth  their  hearts  to
his  testimonies,  and  not  to  covetousness
(Ps.  cxix.  36),  and  brings  them  to  the
obedience  of  faith.  If  he  do  seduce
them  it  is  for  no  hurt,  it  is  but  to  speak
a  word  in  private  to  them,  as  one  friend
may  with  another;  it  is  but  to  give
them  his  loves,  as  he  speaks  in  the
Canticles ;  to  show  them  his  glory,  as
he  did  Moses ;  to  spread  before  them
his  beauty,  and  so  to  catch  them  by
guile  as  St  Paul  did  the  Corinthians
(2  Epist.  xii.  16);  to  steal  away  their
hearts  before  they  are  aware,  according
to  that,  Cant.  vi.  12,  that  they  thence-
forth may  be  an  Aminadab,  a  willing
people,  a  free-hearted  people  (Ps.  ex.  3),
waiting  for  the  law  (Isa.  xlii.  4),  and
walking  by  the  rule  (Gal.  vi.  16)"
[Trapp].

The  valley  of  Achor.  1.  An  asser-
tion of  God's  rights.  2.  A  warning  to
sinners  (cf.  Jos.  vii.  25,  26).

A  door  of  Rope.  1.  Trouble  turned
into  joy.  2.  Judgment  turned  into
mercy.     3.  Despair  turned  into  hope.

Up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt.  Moral
life  an  elevation  in  character,  purpose,
and  pursuit;  an  advancement  towards
God  and  heaven.  "  Such  as  are  con-
verted to  Christ,  should  resolve  on  a
journey  and  progress,  as  having  more
before  them  of  duty  and  exercise  and
enjoyments ;  for  after  she  is  '  allured/
Israel  is  to  remove  and  come  to  a  wilder-
ness, whether  we  understand  it  of  the
progress  of  the  godly  toward  heaven,  or
toward  wonted  enjoyments  "  [Hutcheson.]

Vineyards  from  thence.  Observe  the
Author  of  these  favours.  /  will  do  it.
Every  good  gift  is  from  God ;  and  his
people  acknowledge  that  all  they  enjoy
is  not  only  from  his  agency,  but  from  his
grace.  Observe  also  the  richness  of  the
supplies.  I  will  give  her,  not  her  corn,
which  is  for  necessity,  but  grapes,  which
are  for  delight.  Yea,  it  is  not  a  vine,
but  a  vineyard  ;  yea,  vineyards  !  As  if
he  could  not  do  too  much  for  them,  he
engages  to  give  ;  concerned  not  only  for
their  safety,  but  welfare ;  not  only  for


their  relief,  but  enjoyment ;  not  only
for  their  tasting  consolation,  but  being
filled  with  joy  and  peace  in  believing.
Observe  also  the  strangeness  of  the  way
in  which  these  indulgences  are  to  be
communicated.  Whence  are  these  sup-
plies to  come  1  Erom  a  wilderness.
Loneliness  and  mazes,  danger  and
beasts  of  prey,  sand,  and  briers,  and
thorns  only  in  a  wilderness.  "  He  only
doeth  wondrous  things ; "  turns  the
shadow  of  death  into  morning,  makes
rivers  in  high  places  and  streams  in  the
desert.  He  makes  the  wilderness  to
rejoice  and  blossom  as  the  rose,  and
gives  us  vineyards  from  thence.

Earth  is  a  wilderness.  It  was  not
designed  to  be  such,  but  sin  entered
into  the  world,  cursed  the  ground,  and
the  Eall  left  it  such.  Such  it  would  be
now  but  for  Divine  grace.  Men  of  the
world  are  discontented  and  miserable ;
to  the  Christian  the  curse  is  turned
into  a  blessing.  He  has  before  him  a
land  of  promise,  a  thousand  succours
and  delights,  and  in  Divine  ordinances
he  has  comforts,  vineyards  from  thence.
Solitude  is  a  wilderness.  There  is
much  to  be  done,  gained,  and  enjoyed
alone.  There  we  gain  our  best  know-
ledge and  richest  experience  ;  enjoy  the
freedom  of  prayer  and  intercourse  with
God.  Outward  trouble  is  a  wilderness.
Many  afraid  to  be  brought  into  it,  but
God  has  given  them  vineyards  from
thence.  What  proofs  of  God's  presence
in  trouble  !  What  discoveries  and  sup-
ports !  As  the  sufferings  of  Christ  have
abounded,  so  the  consolations  have  also
abounded  by  Christ.  The  state  of  mind
produced  by  conviction  of  sin.  A
wounded  spirit,  who  can  bear?  Wlio
does  not  remember  the.  surprise,  the  con-
fusion of  mind,  the  terror,  the  anguish,
and  self-despair  he  once  felt  1  and  who
can  forget  the  feelings  induced  by  a
discovery  of  the  cross  and  the  joy  of
God's  salvation  1  Many  are  afraid  when
their  friends  tremble  at  God's  word  and
are  broken  in  heart.  Christians  hail  it
as  a  token  for  good,  and  know  that  he
gave  them  their  vineyards  from  thence.
The  same  may  be  said  of  self-abasement,
and  distress  of  soul,  which  a  believer
may  feel,  when  he  sees  his  unworthi-


32  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.  [chap.  11.


ness,  depravity,  and  guilt.     The  experi-  speak  comfortably — and  give  her  vine-

ence  is  lamentable,  but  will  not  hurt  yards."       3.  The    results     of     revival,

him.     He  giveth  grace  unto  the  humble.  "  Youth,"  and  renewed  vigour.   "Sing,"

The   valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  is  joy,  and  rejoicing.     God's  presence  re-

the  last  wilderness.     There  is  much  to  stored  his  ancient  peopk?  from  literal

render   it   awful   and    uninviting,    but  captivity,  and  his  spiritual  seed    from

when    entered    the   gloom   flies   away,  sorrow  and  distress.     "  God's  dealings

The  place  has  Ven  made  glad  for  those  with  his  people  will  furnish  them  with  joy

subject  to  its  bondage  and  fear.     They  and  refreshment;  'she  shall  sing.'     Not

have    had   a   peaceful   and    delightful  only  should  they  rejoice  when  all  things

entrance   into    the  joy  of   their   Lord,  are  performed  according  to  promise,  but

And  what  vineyards  does  he  give  them  when  the  Lord  gives  any  pledge  of  his

from  thence  I  [Jay] .  love,  or  begun    evidences   of   it,    they

Ver.  15.    A  revived  Church.     1.  The  ought  to  cherish  it  by  joy  and  praise,

frequent  condition  of  the  Church.     In  though   full   fruition  be    wanting:    for

the  land  of  Egypt ;  in  bondage  to  sin,  even    '  there '    on   the    border    of    her

to  sen  ^e,  and  to  materialism.     2.  The  wilderness,    in   the   valley   of   Achor "

means   of  revival.      "I   will   allure —  [Hutchesonj.

HOMILETICS.
The  Good  Time  Coming. —  Verses  17 — 20.

When  the  cry  of  trouble  is  turned  into  the  song  of  joy,  and  nations  cease  to
worship  idols  and  serve  the  true  God,  then  God  restores  them  to  his  favour,  and
renews  to  them  his  covenant.  Idolatry  shall  cease,  and  perfect  peace — peace  with
God,  peace  among  men,  and  peace  with  the  beasts  of  the  field — shall  follow.  God
predicts  a  memorable  time  to  be  enjoyed  by  men.

I.  Abolition  of  idolatry.  "In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  I  will  cut  off
tne  names  of  the  idols  out  of  the  land,  and  they  shall  no  more  be  remembered."
God  abhors  idolatry,  and  warns  his  people  against  its  evils  (Ex.  xxiii.  13;  Deut.
xii.  3).  God's  name  must  be  remembered,  and  his  worship  be  upheld  by  his  word
and  grace.  People  must  not  devote  themselves  to  any  false  god.  The  non-existence
of  other  gods  must  be  recognized — they  are  nonentities.  "  Thou  shalt  have  no
other  gods."  The  Church  shall  be  purified  from  error  and  false  worship.  Heathen
nations  shall  abandon  their  gods  many  and  lords  many — shall  negi'jct  their  offer-
ings, and  close  their  pagodas  and  temples.  At  the  present  time,  at  home  and  abroad,
the  signs  are  cheering ;  but  "  in  that  day  a  man  shall  cast  his  idols  of  silver,  and
his  idols  of  gold,  which  they  made  each  one  for  himself  to  worship,  to  the  moles
and  to  the  bats."  1.  This  abolition  is  by  Divine  agency.  "  /  will  take  away  the
names  of  Baalim."  Atheism,  Foly theism,  and  superstitions  of  every  kind  can  only
be  abolished  by  Divine  power.  Education,  civilization,  ar?d  commerce  cannot  renew
the  heart  and  reform  the  habits  of  people.  Our  hearts  are  sinful,  prejudices  and
heathen  customs  are  deeply  rooted,  and  the  Gospel  alone  can  renew  and  deliver.
2.  This  abolition  is  seen  in  the  purity  of  language.  The  names  shall  be  taken  "out
of  her  mouth,  and  they  shall  no  more  be  remembered  by  their  name."  The  names
detested  and  disowned  shall  be  disused.  There  must  be  no  mixture  in  life  or  lip  of
idolatry  and  true  religion.  God's  name  must  not  be  desecrated  and  Baal's  name  be
reverenced.  "  Call  me  no  more  Baali."  God's  grace  in  the  heart  purifies  the  lan-
guage of  the  lip.  "  I  will  turn  to  the  people  a  pure  language."  The  liar  speaks  the
truth,  the  swearer  forsakes  his  oaths,  and  the  penitent  separates  himself  from  every
pollution  of  word  and  deed.  A  Christian  spirit  governs  the  tongue,  selects  the
holiest  themes  in  conversation,  and  clothes  the  fittest  words  with  impressive  forms.
"  No  corrupt  speech  "  proceeds  out  of  the  mouth  of  a  true  believer.  His  conversa-
tion ift  neither  corrupt  nor  insipid,  but  hallowed  with  pungency  to  excite  interest;


chap.  ii.J  H0M1LETW  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  33


and  preserved  with  flavour  to  influence  for  good.     A  man's  tongue  is  an  index  to
his  life  ;  a  test  of  his  godliness.     "  The  mouth  of  the  righteous  speaketh  wisdom."
II.  Cessation  of  war.     "  I  will  break  the  bow  and  the  sword,  and  the  battle  out
of  the  earth."     Warriors  and  warlike  statesmen  have  been  too  long  the  idols  and
too  much  the  gods  of  mankind.     Alexander  and  Napoleon  have  been  extolled  :  but
military  fame  is  delusive  and  false  ;  war  is  inhuman  and  criminal.     Science  and
philosophy,  legislation  and  commercial  treaties,  may  mitigate,  but  cannot  prevent
or  abolish  it.     Nations  often  defy  these,  and  armies  are  not  checked  by  paper  or
parchment.     This  is  to  act  like  the  Xerxes  of  morality,  and  throw  our  idle  chains
into  the  tempestuous  ocean  of  strife.  Morality  and  religion  forbid  war.  Christianity^
in  its  principles  and  obligations,  produces  peace.     Christ  the  Prince  of  Peace  shall
break  the  bow  and  the  sword;  establish  the  government  of  peace  and  good  will
towards  men — spiritual  foes  are  already  despoiled  of  their  power  to  hurt  and  destroy.
The  goodness  of  the  cause  is  certain,  though  its  success  for  a  time  be  doubtful.  God
has  spoken  the  word,  and  it  shall  come  to  pass.     "  They  shall  beat  their  swords  into
ploughshares,  and  their  spears  into  priming-hooks  :  nation  shall  not  lift  up  sword
against  nation,  neither  shall  they  learn  war  any  more."     In  this  belief  the  Christian
may  rejoice.     Many  are  asking,  "  Shall  the  sword  devour  for  ever?"  and  others,
whatever  be  their  differences  in  opinion,  cry  in  practice,  "  I  am  for  peace."     III.
Security  from  wild  beasts.     "  In  that  day  will  I  make  a  covenant  for  them  with
the  beasts  of  the  field."  When  man  was  subject  and  loyal  to  his  Maker,  all  creatures
were  subject  to  him.     When  he  rebelled,  the  harmony  of  creation  was  broken,  and
peace  with  inferior  creatures  destroyed.     Man  is  still  lord  of  creation  ;  but  nature
is  an  unwilling  servant,  and  must  be  restrained  and  subjugated  by  force.     Man's
fear  over  beasts  of  the  earth  has  gradually  diminished,  and  the  enmity  between  the
tame  and  wild,  between  the  friendly  innocence  and  the  hostile  dread  of  the  species
has  gradually  increased.     This  lost  dominion  will  be  regained  in  Christ.     Though
to  longer  ruling  by  the  sympathy  of  a  spiritual  power,  yet  he  is  legally  authorized
to  exercise  forcible  dominion  over  three  classes  most  injurious  to  him  (Gen.  ix.   2).
Though  nothing  in  the  sight  of  the  starry  universe,  and  "  a  little  lower  than  the
angels,"  yet  all  things  will  be  put  under  his  feet.     In  the  mean  time  God  protects
the  dwellings  and  the  fields  of  man.     Savage  beasts  are  under  his  control,  linked
into  Divine  covenant,  and  made  man's  servants.     Prowling  creatures  of  the  field,
ravenous  fowls  of  the  air,  and  creeping  scorpions  of  the  earth,  are  prevented  from
touching  men.     "  Thou  shalt  tread  upon  the  lion  and  the  adder,"  not  accidentally,
but  intentionally,  in  power  and  conquest.  "  I  have  an  impression,"  says  Dr  Thomas,
"  that  were  man  to  possess  and  manifest  the  moral  majesty  of  goodness,  the  wildest
and  most  savage  creatures  would  stand  in  awe  of  him."      God  shall  replace  the
sceptre  in  man's  hand.     The  promise  to  Israel  was,  "  I  will  cause  the  evil  beast  to
cease  out-  of  the  land  " — the  promise  to  us  is,  '  The  beasts  of  the  field  shall  be  at
peace  with  thee."     IV.  Perfect  peace  and  tranquillity.     "And  will  make  them
to  lie  safely."    Man  is  not  secure,  is  not  at  peace  with  all  creation,  yet.  Beasts  may
devour  and  war  destroy  him.    Dangers  threaten,  above,  below,  and  all  around  him.
God  only  can  protect  him  and  make  him  dwell  securely.     But  outward  peace  can
neither  give  nor  destroy  inward  confidence  and  rest.     God  keeps  from  fear  and
alarms  by  night  and  by  day,  and  makes  us  "  take  our  rest  in  safety"  (Job  xi.  18).
Short-lived  is  the  rest,  insecure  is  the  safety,  of  the  wicked ;  but  the  righteous  "  lie
down  safely,"  in  confidence  and  calm  repose.     He  is  fearless  and  courageous,  for
only  "  perfect  love  casteth  out  fear."     He  is  often  at  peace  with  his  neighbours,  and
always  at  peace  with  his  conscience  and  God.     As  a  loving  parent  puts  to  rest  and
watches  Tver  her  darling  babe,  so   God  sends  to  sleep  and  keeps  in  rest  his  own
children        This  rest  is  only  a  foretaste  of  everlasting  rest,  unfading  peace  in  Christ.
Tenures  differ,  but  nothing  can  equal  the  safety  which  the  believer  has  in  his
covenant  God.     By  special  promise  his  security  is  fixed,  and  by  special  presence
his  safety  is  secured.     What  would  some  men  give  for  a  good  night's  rest !      They

3


34  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  J.  [chap.  ii.


are  tossed  about  by  troublous  thoughts,  waking  at  every  stir,  and  unsettled  in  every
place.  "  When  thou  liest  down,  thou  shalt  not  be  afraid :  yea,  thou  shalt  lie  down,
and  thy  sleep  shall  be  sweet."  V.  Covenant  blessings  renewed.  "  And  I  will
betroth  thee  unto  me  for  ever."  God  promises  to  restore  Israel  and  treat  her  as  a
spotless  virgin.  In  a  threefold  repetition  he  declares  his  love  to  the  unfaithful  and
unworthy.  He  forgets  the  past,  forgives  sin,  and  espouses  afresh,  and  that  for  ever.
There  is  no  divorce  for  adultery.  He  only  is  unchangeable,  and  his  mercy,  grace,
and  goodness  abound  to  the  chief  of  sinners.  It  is  mercy  to  bring  back,  but  love
beyond  degree  to  betroth  and  endow  with  bridal  gifts.  Notice — 1.  The  method
of  the  engagement.  "  God  betroths  his  Church  to  himself  in  righteousness  and  judg-
ment, not  by  doing  her  justice,  and  faithfully  fulfilling  the  obligations  which  he
undertook  at  the  conclusion  of  the  covenant,  but  by  purifying  her,  through  the
medium  of  just  judgment,  from  all  the  uncleanness  and  ungodliness  that  adhere  to
her  still  (Is.  i.  27),  that  he  may  wipe  out  everything  that  can  injure  the  covenant
on  the  part  of  the  Church.  But  with  the  existing  sinfulness  of  human  nature,
justice  and  judgment  will  not  suffice  to  secure  the  lasting  continuance  of  the
covenant ;  and  therefore  God  also  promises  to  show  mercy  and  compassion.  But
even  the  love  and  compassion  of  God  have  their  limits  j  the  Lord  still  further  adds,
"  in  faithfulness  or  constancy,"  and  thereby  gives  the  promise  that  he  will  no  more
withdraw  his  mercy  from  her "  \_KeiT\.  The  covenant  is  founded  upon  a  firm
basis  —  "in  righteousness,  and  in  judgment,  and  in  loving-kindness,  and  in
mercies."  In  the  faithfulness  of  God  the  pledge  is  sure;  God  will  keep  his  covenant
for  ever  (Ps.  cxi.  9).  2.  The  result  of  the  engagement.  "  Thou  shalt  know  the
Lord."  The  complaint  was  that  Israel  did  not  know  God,  nor  recognize  his  pro-
vidence in  the  blessings  of  life  (ver.  8).  The  consequence  of  this  union  would  be  a
real  and  experimental  knowledge  of  God;  not  intellectually  merely,  but  living,
personal  relation  to  him.  Many  acknowledge  God,  but  do  not  know  him.  True
knowledge  includes  love  and  life.  "  And  this  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know
thee,  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  thou  hast  sent."  When  restored
to  God,  we  know  him  not  merely  as  God,  as  revealed  in  his  word,  but  what  he  is
to  us,  as  our  God  in  Christ.  We  discover  more  of  his  grace  and  love,  enjoy  more
of  his  favour,  and  we  love  God  because  he  first  loved  us.

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  17.     That  which  is  very  inno-  bird,  and  reptile  is  named.     Together

cent  in  itself  should,  when  it  has  been  the  words  express  that  God  would  with-

abused  in  idolatry,  be  abolished,  and  the  hold  the  power  irom  all  enemies,  visible

very  use  of  it  taken  away,  that  nothing  or  invisible;  worldly  or  spiritual.  Each

may  be  done  to  keep  idols  in  remem-  also  may  denote  some  separate  form  of

brance,  much  less  to  keep  them  in  reput-  the  enemy  \Pusey~\.

ation.  God  foretells  much  more  the  great-

To  remember  with  delight  sins  past  is  ness  of  what  he  would  do  for  man,  than
to  re-commit  them ;  and  herein  the  the  little  which  man  receives.  The
deceitful  heart  is  with  all  care  to  be  gospel  brings  peace  within,  and  since
looked  unto,  that  when  we  call  to  mind  wars  and  fightings  come  from  evil  pas-
former  evil  practices,  though  with  an  sions  and  lust,  it  brings  peace  as  far  as
intent  to  be  humbled  for  them,  we  be  it  prevails  without  also;  peace,  as  the
not  insnared  and  drawn  to  commit  them  borders  of  the  Church  (Ps.  cxlvii.  1 4) ;
afresh  by  being  tickled  in  the  thought  peace  in  the  world,  so  far  as  it  is  won
of  them  \Tra2Jp\  to  Christ  by  the  Church;  peace  to  the

Ver.  18.  The  blessings  of  God  do  not  soul  of  the  believer,  so  far  as  he  loves

correspond   only,  they  go   beyond   the  God  and  obeys  the  gospel  \_Pusey\.

punishment.      The   protection   is   com-  Ver.   19,   20.     In   the   covenant   of

plete.     Every   kind   of   animal,   beast,  grace,  there  is  God's  part  and  there  is


CHAP.  II.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.


35


our  part.  But  God  undertakes  for  the
latter  as  well  as  the  former — engages  to
do  all  that  is  necessary  for  his  people
and  in  them.  Here  is  the  nature  of  the
connection  he  will  establish  with  them.
"  I  will  betroth  thee  unto  me."  And
the  manner  of  it.  In  righteousness,  &c.
1.  In  righteousness.  He  is  holy  in  all
his  ways,  and  righteous  in  all  his  works.
The  soul  that  sinneth  shall  die.  Right-
eousness, then,  seems  to  require  the
punishment  of  the  sinner.  The  awakened
soul  wants  to  see  how  God  can  be  just
and  the  justifier.  He  has  provided  for
this  in  the  gospel.  Though  sin  is
pardoned,  yet  it  is  condemned.  The
transgressor  escapes,  but  the  curse  falls
upon  another.  The  law  is  magnified  and
honoured  in  Christ.  In  the  destruction
of  sinners  justice  would  have  been  dis-
played passively,  but  now  actively —
would  have  been  hated,  but  now  loved
by  them.  For  righteousness  means  not
only  the  way  in  which  the  guilty  are
made  just,  but  the  depraved  holy.  This
is  from  the  same  gracious  agency,  and
equally  necessary  with  the  former ;  for
God  could  not  admit  men  into  com-
munion with  himself  in  a  state  of  sin.
"  How  can  two  walk  together  except  they
be  agreed  1"  2.  In  judgment.  The
heathens  placed  Mercury,  the  god  of
wisdom,  by  the  side  of  Yenus,  the  god-
dess of  marriage :  and  for  good  reason,
for  there  is  nothing  in  which  judgment
is  so  needful.  Hence  the  wretched  con-
sequences of  hasty  matches.  But  God
knows  what  he  does  and  why  he  does
it — has  reasons  which  justify  the  measure
of  his  infinite  understanding,  and  salva-
tion is  called  his  counsel.  This  is  true
in  contriving,  procuring,  and  applying
it.  The  place,  time,  and  manner  of
conversion  known  to  him.  We  know
but  little  now,  yet  there  are  openings
which  carry  the  mind  in  contemplation
and  surprise,  and  which  assure  us  more
remains  for  our  discovery  and  rapture  in
the  world  of  b'ght.  This  applies  also  to
God's  people  as  well  as  to  God  himself.
In  their  choice  of  him  and  love  to  him
wisdom  is  seen.  The  world  may  censure,
but  they  can  give  a  reason  of  the  hope
within  them.  The  spiritual  judgeth  all
things,  thouj(l   he  himself  is  judged  of


no  man.  3.  In  loving-kindness.  With-
out this  persons  had  better  never  come
together  —  it  is  daily  and  mutually
needed.  The  law  of  kindness  should
rule  in  looks,  words,  and  actions.  This
seldom  wanting  in  the  female,  often  in
the  male  side.  Hence  men  commanded
to  love  their  wives.  God  says  to  his
Church,  ';  You  shall  find  me  full  of
tenderness  and  compassion,"  &c.  Strange
to  apply  the  exercise  of  this  quality  to
them  as  well  as  to  him,  yet  he  has
sanctioned  it.  "I  remember  thee,  the
kindness  of  thy  youth,"  &c.  He  takes
at  their  hand  everything  they  do  for
him  ;  their  disposition  makes  them
afraid  to  grieve  his  Holy  Spirit,  and
anxious  to  walk  "  worthy  of  him  unto
all  pleasing."  4.  In  mercies.  This  is
distinguishable  from  the  former.  That
was  the  effect,  this  shows  the  cause,  and
mentioned  in  addition  to  loving-kind-
ness, to  remind  us  that  all  we  possess,
or  expect,  springs  from  the  free,  unde-
served grace  of  God,  and  to  meet  dis-
couragement from  a  sense  of  unworthi-
ness  and  ill-deservings.  God  will  not
cast  away  his  people,  but  have  mercy
upon  them  according  to  the  multitude
of  his  tender  mercies.  The  more  cheer-
ful and  vigorous  will  they  be,  the  more
they  remember  this  truth.  Fruits  that
grow  in  the  sun  are  richer  and  riper
than  those  which  grow  in  the  shade.
The  best  frame  we  can  be  in  is  to  be
upheld  by  a  free  spirit,  and  act  under  a
full  sense  of  our  Divine  privileges.  Let
us  therefore  sing  of  God's  mercy  for
ever,  and  if  he  seems  to  have  forgotten
to  be  gracious,  plead  and  say,  "  Where
is  thy  zeal,  and  thy  strength,  the  sound-
ing of  thy  bowels,  and  of  thy  mercies
toward  me  1 "  Here  again  is  imported,
not  only  that  we  receive,  but  exercise
mercy,  not  towards  him  personally,  but
towards  his  creatures  that  need  it.
What  is  done  to  them  he  considers  as
done  to  himself.  What  so  just  and
proper  as  that  they  who  are  forgiven
should  forgive  1  And  they  which  live
by  mercy  should  be  merciful  1  [Jay].

I  will  betroth  thee  unto  me  for  ever.
Christians  are  not  only  pardoned,  but
employed  in  God's  service — not  only
reconciled,  but  admitted  into  friendship


36


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.


[chap,  il


and  intimacy.  Yea,  they  are  not  only
friends  and  favourites,  but  his  bride.
Observe  the  permanency  of  the  relation.
"  Permanency  adds  bliss  to  bliss."
Every  enjoyment  and  possession  is  im-
paired in  value  without  it.  The  more
important  any  acquisition,  the  more
necessary  to  our  happiness,  the  more
alive  we  are  to  keep  it ;  the  more  averse
to  its  absence,  the  more  painful  the  loss.
Yet  whatever  we  are  attached  to  here,
we  set  our  hearts  on  that  which  is  not.
Jews  are  said  always  to  throw  a  glass
on  the  ground  in  their  nuptial  ceremony,
to  indicate  that  the  union  formed  was
brittle  as  glass.  The  apostle  reminds
us  that  time  is  short,  and  that  they  who
have  wives  will  be  as  though  they  had
none.  We  take  each  other  "  till  death
do  us  part  " — the  relation  is  terminated
by  the  death  of  either.  But  Christians
can  never  be  in  a  widowed  state — never
lose  their  defence,  glory,  and  joy.
Nothing  is  precarious  in  the  transactions
of  God  with  his  people.  "  I  know  that
whatsoever   God  doeth  it  shall  be  for


ever,"  &c.  How  delightful  in  a  world
of  changes  to  know  that  he  changeth
not,  and  therefore  we  shall  not  be  con-
sumed. Many  a  persuasion  fails,  fo-
the  confidence  may  be  strong  and  the
foundation  weak.  But  here  the  full
assurance  of  faith  can  never  do  justice
to  the  certainty  of  the  event.  "  I  am
persuaded  that  neither  death  nor  life,"
&c.  [Jay].

The  Harmony  of  the  Divine  Attri-
butes in  Salvation.  Mercy  founded  on
righteousness,  and  truth  vindicating
mercy.  Justice  honoured  in  mercy.
Loving-kindness  which  is  faithful.
"  Eternal  love  and  immutable  faithful-
ness are  the  body-guards  of  Jesus'
throne,  and  they  are  both  the  providers
and  the  preservers  of  all  those  who  in
him  are  made  kings  and  priests  unto
God.  We  cannot  keep  ourselves,  and
nothing  short  of  Divine  mercy  and  truth
can  do  it ;  but  these  both  can  and  will,
nor  shall  the  least  of  God's  people  be
suffered  to  perish"  [Spurgeon"].


HOMILETICS.
The  Universe  Governed  in  the  Interests  of  Humanity. —  Verses  21 — 23.

In  these  verses  we  have  an  unbroken  chain  of  causation.  The  prophet  repre-
sents God  as  listening  to  the  prayer  of  the  heavens,  to  allow  them  to  give  fertility
to  the  earth.  The  heavens  fulfil  the  desire  of  the  earth,  and  the  earth  yields  its
increase  to  the  nation ;  all  things  in  heaven  and  earth  depend  upon  God,  "  so  that
without  his  bidding  not  a  drop  of  rain  falls  from  heaven,"  says  Calvin,  u  and  the
earth  produces  no  germ,  and  consequently  all  nature  would  be  barren,  unless  he
gave  it  fertility  by  his  blessing."

I.  All  things  are  subordinate  to  God.  1.  God  is  the  Creator  of  all  things.
All  things  were  made  by  him  at  first.  He  only  has  absolute  being  and  original
essence.  Creation  is  derived  from  him,  The  Great  Eirst  Cause.  "  In  the  beginning
God  created  the  heaven  and  the  earth."  By  this  simple  expression  Atheism,  Polythe-
ism, Pantheism,  and  Materialism  are  denied,  and  that  philosophy  which  sees  nothing
apart  and  distinct  from  matter  is  reproved.  We  have  no  chance  work,  no  "  theory  of
development "  here.  Matter  is  not  eternal.  The  world  had  a  birthday.  In  the
beginning  God ;  God  before  primordial  matter ;  God  before  its  arrangement  into
shape  and  order ;  God  first,  and  last,  and  everywhere ;  God  before  all  things ;
God  the  cause  of  all  things,  and  God  the  meaning  of  all  things.  2.  God  is  the
Conserver  of  all  things.  That  which  was  dependent  at  first  cannot  afterwards
become  independent.  It  requires  the  same  hand  to  sustain  as  to  create  a  thing.
God  did  not  create  the  world  like  a  carpenter  builds  a  house,  to  stand  still.  Having
its  very  being  from  him,  that  being  cannot  be,  or  continue  to  be,  without  him.
11  By  him  all  things  consist,"  or  stand  together.  God  is  "  the  Conservation  and
Correlation  of  forces/'  Not  an  atom  is  permitted  to  fall  out  of  existence.  Things
may  travel  far,  and  take  different  shapes ;  but  nothing  is  destroyed.  The  tiniest
dew-drop  is  long-lived  as  the  mighty  ocean,  and  the  feeblest  nebule  indestructible  as


chap,  ii.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  HOSE  J.  37


the  everlasting  hills.  As  in  matter,  so  in  mind  and  morals.  "  I  know  whatsoever
God  doeth,  it  shall  be  for  ever.  Nothing  can  be  put  to  it,  nor  anything  taken  from
it."  3.  God  is  the  Governor  of  all  thi  ,gs.  Creation  carries  with  it  the  idea  oi
control  and  superintendence.  We  are  under  law,  mild,  gracious,  paternal  law.
But  laws  of  themselves  are  impotent  without  the  law-giver.  Second  causes  depend
upon  the  First  Cause,  and  cannot  put  forth  any  causation  without  God.  God  works,
and  is  ever  active  in  his  dominions.  We  are  not  the  inhabitants  of  a  fatherless
world,  nor  is  the  earth  a  little  province  in  a  forsaken  universe.  God  directs  and
controls  all  forces,  all  agencies,  and  all  events,  for  the  accomplishment  of  his  design.
There  are  no  localities  with  God.  He  is  everywhere  present,  and  ruleth  over  all.
In  effecting  his  great  designs  he  is  independent  also  of  every  other  creature,  and
renders  the  purpose  nd  plans  of  every  other  power  subordinate  and  auxiliary  to
his  own.  Here  one  sovereign  forms  an  alliance  with  others  for  mutual  interests
and  protection.  If  one  were  to  oppose  another  the  opposition  might  endanger  all
states  under  the  alliance.  But  were  all  kings  and  kingdoms  of  the  universe  to
unite  agairst  him,  they  could  not  succeed.  His  throne  is  above  the  heavens,  above
the  accidents  and  contingences  of  earth.  The  frame  of  nature  might  be  unhinged,
and  „he  universe  fall  into  commotion,  but  he  reigns  undisturbed,  God  over  all,  and
olessed  for  evermore.  II.  All  things  co-operate,  or  work  together.  God  hears
the  heavens  ;  they  hear  the  earth  j  and  "  the  earth  shall  hear  the  corn,  and  the
wine,  and  the  oil,  and  they  shall  hear  Jezreel."  Here  we  have  the  connection  and
concatenation  of  all  things.  "  God  is  not  the  author  of  confusion."  Providence,
therefore,  which  is  God's  will  in  action,  is  consistent  with  itself.  It  is  the  glory  of
creation  that  it  everywhere  "  marches  in  time,  moving  to  the  music  of  law."  Here
is  the  true  "  music  of  the  spheres."  A  consummate  harmony  of  relationships  so  dom-
inates over  the  whole,  that  we  have  never  an  organic  demand  without  the  means  of
satisfying  it,  that  amid  innumerable  changes  and  intermediate  ends  we  find  designs
of  final  residts.  The  world  is  not  a  machine,  and  the  action  of  God  interference ;
things  are  not  like  particles  of  dust  driven  in  a  whirlwind  :  but  "  all  things  work
together,"  work  in  harmony,  subserve  the  ends  for  which  they  were  made,  and
never  cease  to  conform  to  God's  will,  and  be  a  reflex  of  his  wisdom  and  goodness.
The  principle  of  mediation  is  seen  everywhere  in  God's  government.  "  I  will  hear
the  heavens."  Heaven  intercedes  for  earth,  and  the  earth  for  men  upon  it.  In
the  common  intercourse  and  concerns  of  life,  one  man  is  blessed  through  another
and  for  the  sake  of  another.  Our  material  and  spiritual  gifts  come  through  the
medium  and  mediation  of  another.  But  this  regular  system  of  established  agency
connects  the  result  with  the  sovereign  will  of  God.  The  first  power  is  a  link
placed  at  the  foot  of  the  eternal  throne.  "  I  will  act  upon  the  heavens,  the  powers
of  nature  above  us ;  they  shall  act  upon  the  earth,  the  powers  and  sources  of
vegetation  beneath  us  ;  the  earth  shall  act  upon  the  corn,  and  the  wine,  and  the
oil ;  the  results  of  their  combined  and  mysterious  influence.  Thus  the  chain  is
complete  and  unbroken.

Where  one  step  broken,  the  great  scale's  destroyed :
From  nature's  chain  whatever  link  you  strike,
Tenth,  or  ten  thousandth,  breaks  the  chain  alike.

III.  All  things  are  governed  in  the  interests  of  the  Christian  Church.

"  They  shall  hear  Jezreel."  Jez.  means  the  seed  of  God,  the  nation  pardoned  and
restored  to  God.  All  things  not  only  work  together,  but  good  is  the  result,  and
this  good  is  "to  them  that  love  God,  to  them  who  are  the  called  according  to  his
purpose "  (Rom.  viii.  28).  The  universe  in  all  its  operations  and  departments
contributes  to  the  interests  of  God's  people.  Events  do  not  happen  in  human
society  and  the  Christian  Church  as  if  left  to  the  mere  causalities  of  nature,  and
were  not  under  Divine  control.  Human  happiness  is  promoted  and  human  wants
supplied,  and  men  in  Christ  are  the  objects  of  God's  eternal  purpose.     1.  Human


38


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A,


[chap.  II.


wants  are  satisfied.  Corn,  wine,  and  oil  are  given  to  Jezreel.  Chastisements  are
removed,  Divine  favour  is  restored,  and  men  are  daily  loaded  with  benefits  and
blessings.  The  gifts  of  nature  are  emblems  of  the  gifts  of  grace.  Constant  bread,
common  mercies,  and  spiritual  joys  are  bestowed  with  a  liberal  hand.  "  Thou
openest  thine  hand,  and  satisfiest  the  desire  of  every  living  thing."  2.  There  is
spiritual  increase  in  the  Church.  "  I  will  sow  her  unto  me  in  the  earth."  Per-
secution and  affliction  did  not  diminish  Israel.  "  The  blood  of  the  martyrs  is  the
seed  of  the  Church."  God  restored  her,  and  in  her  dispersion  she  was  the  means
of  scattering  the  knowledge  of  God  and  the  seeds  of  Divine  truth.  Gentiles  were
converted  to  God,  and  the  earth  will  yet  be  the  scene  of  an  increase  richer  than  any
yet  enjoyed.  The  fields  are  already  white  unto  harvest.  3.  There  is  restoration  to
friendship  with  God.  Mercy  for  those  that  were  unpitied,  that  had  not  obtained
mercy,  and  those  that  were  not  God's  people  were  to  become  his  people.  God
would  anew  declare  them  his  people,  and  they  would  affectionately  respond  to  the
call.  Jew  and  Gentile,  bond  and  free,  Barbarian  and  Scythian,  will  be  one  in
Christ.  "  All  that  see  them  shall  acknowledge  them,  that  they  are  the  seed  which
the  Lord  hath  blessed."


HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  GUT  LINES.


Ver.  21,  22.  All  nature  is  closed
and  would  refuse  her  office  to  those
who  rebel  against  her  God,  so  when  he
hath  withdrawn  his  curse,  and  is  recon-
ciled to  man,  all  shall  combine  together
for  man's  good,  and  by  a  kind  of  har-
mony all  parts  thereof  join  their  minis-
tries for  the  service  of  those  who  are  at
unity  with  him.  And,  as  an  image  of
love,  all,  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest,
are  bound  together,  each  depending  on
the  ministry  of  that  beyond  it,  and  the
highest  on  God.  At  each  link  the
chain  might  have  been  broken ;  but
God,  who  knit  their  services  together,
and  had  before  withheld  the  rain,  and
made  the  earth  barren,  and  laid  waste
the  trees,  now  made  each  to  supply  the
other,  and  led  the  thoughts  of  man
through  the  course  of  causes  and  effects
up  to  himself,  who  ever  causes  all  which
come  to  pass  [Pusey].

Learn — 1.  The  un worthiness  of  man.
A  dependent,  sinful  creature.  2.  The
dignity  of  man.  All  creatures  employed
to  help  him.

1.  The  abundance  of    God's  gifts —


and  oil."  2.  The  good-
in  supplying  them — "  I
3.  The  medium  through


"  corn,   wine,

ness  of   God

will   hear."

which  they  come — "  heaven  and  earth."

4.  The  certainty  of  their  bestowment —

"  It  shall  come  to  pass."

Ver.  23.  "/  ivill  sow  her"  The
Church  the  channel  of  blessings  to  the
world.  The  Church  can  only  bless  the
world  as  she  is  blessed  herself.

A  beautiful  earth.  1.  The  residence
of  the  Church  of  God — "  I  will  sow
her  unto  me  in  the  earth."  2.  The
theatre  of  the  mercy  of  God — "  I  will
have  mercy  upon  her  that  had  not  ob-
tained mercy."  3.  The  scene  of  obedi-
ence and  love  to  God — "  Thou  art  my
people .  .  .  Thou  art  my  God."

God's  mercy.  1.  The  sum  of  human
wants — "  not  obtained
my  people."  2.
it  comes — free  grace,
mercy."  3.  The  result
ment — "  Thou  art  my  people."  4.  The
evidence  of  its  possession — "  Thou  art
my  God."


mercy,"    "  not
The  source  from  which
"  I  will    have
of  its  bestow-


ILLUSTRATIGNS  TO  CHAPTER  II.


Ver.  1 — 5.  Mothers  and  children.
"When  a  mother  once  asked  a  clergyman
when  she  should  begin  the  education  of
her  child,  then  four  years  old,  he  replied,
"  Madam,  if  you  have  not  begun  already,


you  have  lost  those  four  years.  From
the  first  smile  that  gleams  upon  an  in-
fant's cheek  your  opportunity  begins."
The  mother  lives  again  in  her  children.
They  unconsciously  mould  themselves


CHAP.  II. J


B0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.


so


after  her  manner,  her  speech,  her  con-
duct, and  her  method  of  life.  Her
habits  oecome  theirs,  and  her  character
is  visibly  repeated  in  them"  [Smiles].
Children  may  be  strangled,  but  deeds
never  :  they  have  an  indestructible  life,
both  in  and  out  of  our  consciousness
[George  Eliot].

Ver.  6,  7.  Affliction.  The  hedge
stops  or  gives  a  turn.  God,  in  pursuance
of  his  covenant,  and  with  a  gracious
meaning  to  a  revolting  people,  hedges
them  up  by  affliction  to  stop  them  from
undoing.  It  is  a  mercy  to  be  kept  out
of  the  pond,  though  it  be  by  a  thorn
hedge,  sharpest  troubles.  Tins  stop  the
Lord  doth  often  give,  though  not  al-
ways to  sinners ;  he  sometimes  lets
them  run  on  to  fill  up  their  measure  of
sin  and  to  receive  their  full  measure  of
punishment.  Reproof  for  sin  is  a  great
favour.  Though  God  is  angry  for  what
we  have  done,  yet  it  is  a  mercy  that  he
will  not  let  us  do  more,  and  so  make
ourselves  vile  and  miserable  [Caryl].

Ver.  8,  9.  Ingratitude.  When  I
consider  how  the  goodness  of  God  is
abused  and  perverted  by  the  greatest
part  of  mankind,  I  cannot  but  be  of  his
mind  that  said,  "The  greatest  miracle
in  the  world  is  God's  patience  and
bounty  to  an  ungrateful  man."  Oh !
what  would  God  not  do  for  his  crea-
tures, if  thankful,  that  thus  heaps  the
coals  of  his  mercies  upon  the  heads  of
his  enemies  1  But  think  not,  sinners,
that  you  shall  escape  thus.  God's  mill
goes  slow,  but  it  grinds  small ;  the  more
admirable  his  patience  and  bounty  now
is,  the  more  dreadful  and  insupportable
will  that  fury  be  which  ariseth  out  of
his  abused  goodness  [Gurnall].

Ver.  10,  11.  Mirth.  Mirth  is  a  vain
and  unprofitable  passion,  not  fit  for  a
wise  man's  entertainment  [Bp.  Hall].

Often  when  in  the  full  enjoyment  of
all  that  this  world  could  bestow,  my
conscience  told  me,  that  in  the  true
sense  of  the  word  I  was  not  a  Christian.
I  laughed.  I  sang.  I  was  apparently
gay  and  happy.  But  the  thought  would
steal  across  me, — what  madness  is  all
this !  to  continue  easy  in  a  state,  in
which  a  sudden  call  out  of  the  world
would  consign  me  to  everlasting  misery,


and  that  when  eternal  happiness  is
within  my  grasp  [  Wilberforce].  Mirth
at  a  funeral  is  scarce  more  indecent  or
unnatural  than  a  perpetual  flight  of
gaiety  and  burst  of  exultation  in  a
world  like  this ;  a  world  which  may
seem  a  paradise  to  fools,  but  is  an  hos-
pital with  the  wise  [Dr  Young].

Forgetfidness  of  God,  ver.  13.  Sucn
is  the  character  of  all  engrossing  passion,
such  is  the  source  of  sin  to  which  the
soul  gives  way,  in  avarice,  ambition,
worldliness,  sensual  sin,  godless  science.
The  soul  at  last  does  not  rebel  against
God;  it  forgets  him.  It  is  taken  up
with  other  things,  with  itself,  with  the
subjects  of  its  thoughts,  the  objects  of
its  affections,  and  it  has  no  time  for
God,  because  it  has  no  love  for  him
[Pusey].

The  gradations  of  sin.  1.  Neglecting
God.  Neglect  of  his  word,  house,  and
service.  2.  Forgetting  God.  Forgetting
his  love,  goodness,  and  claims.  3.
Departing  from  God.  Departing  into
danger,  error,  and  punishment.

Forgetfulness  of  God — a  sign  of  care-
lessness— a  mark  of  ingratitude  and
contempt — springs  from  unbelief  and
disobedience  to  God's  command  (Deut.
iv.  9  ;  viii.  14).

Idolatry  in  the  Church — the  top-
stone,  the  height  of  all  crime — hated  by
God,  and  pursued  by  the  sinner.  Pro-
fessed believers  are  too  slow  after  God,
but  sinners  hasten  after  their  lovers.
Let  their  zeal  rebuke  our  tardiness ;
their  punishment  turn  our  steps  to  God
and  duty

The  two  masters.  1.  Jehovah  for-
gotten, Baal  loved  and  worshipped.  2.
The  sacred  days  of  Jehovah  turned  into
festive  days  of  Baal.  3.  The  gifts  of
Jehovah  devoted  to  the  service  and  sup-
port of  Baal.  "  No  man  can  serve  two
masters,"  &c.  Which  are  you  serving  1
"  Choose  you  this  day,"  &c.

Ver.  18.  Covenant  with  beasts.  To
men  who  dwell  in  God  the  most  evil
forces  become  harmless ;  they  wear  a
charmed  life,  and  defy  the  deadliest  ills.
Their  feet  come  into  contact  with  the
worst  of  foes ;  even  Satan  himself  nib-
bles at  their  heel,  but  in  Christ  Jesus
they  have  the  assured  hope  of  bruising


40


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.


[CHAP.   111.


Satan  under  their  feet  shortly.  The
people  of  God  are  the  real  "  George  and
the  Dragon,"  the  true  lion-kings  and
serpent-tamers.  Their  dominion  over
the  powers  of  darkness  makes  them  cry,
"  Lord,  even  the  devils  are  subject  unto
us  through  thy  word  "  [Spurgeon].

Ver.  21,  22.  Providence  is  God  in
motion ;  God  teaching  by  facts,  and
God  fulfilling,  explaining,  enforcing  his
own  word.  Providence  is  God  render-
ing natural  events  subservient  to  spirit-
ual purposes ;  rousing  our  attention
when  we  are  careless ;  reminding  us  of
our  obligations  when  we  are  ungrateful ;
recalling  our  confidence  when  we  depart
from  him  by  dependence  upon  his  crea-
tures. Whoso  is  wise,  and  will  observe
these  things,  even  they  shall  understand
the  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord  [The
Pathway].

Ver.  23.  My  God.     All  in  this  life


that  is  truly  good  is  included  in  this,
my  God  !  if  said  not  from  habit,  but
with  a  full  title  to  its  use.  This  is  a
word  of  faith,  by  which  we  place  our
whole  reliance  upon  the  almighty,  true,
and  compassionate  God ;  it  is  a  word  of
hope,  by  which  we  provide  ourselves
with  all  good  perpetually  in  God,  who
is  a  Rock  of  Eternity ;  a  word  of  love
and  fellowship,  by  which  we  delight
ourselves  in  the  goodness  of  God,  and
give  ourselves  wholly  up  to  him  [Eieger.]
"  This  God  is  our  God."  Is  it  so  ?  Then
infinite  riches,  infinite  beauty,  infinite
excellence  is  ours.  Is  it  so  %  Then  all  he
has  is  ours;  his  infinite  resources  are
ours ;  his  providence,  his  Son,  his  Spirit,
his  heaven,  are  ours  (1  Cor.  iii.  23).  If
the  character  of  God  be  paternal,  then
your  character  should  be  filial,  and  the
leading  features  of  that  are  dependence
and  love.


CHAPTER  III.


Critical  Notes. — 1.]  The  significant  pair  is  introduced  again  with  a  fresh  application.  In  a
second  symbolic  marriage,  the  faithful,  chastening  love  of  God  is  set  forth  to  adulterous  Israel.
Love]  Not  take,  as  ch.  i.  2.  Woman]  Many  think  another  person,  not  his  former  wife ;  others,  that
she  was  his  former  wife,  but  unfaithful  and  living  with  another  man,  an  adulteress.  This  love
greater,  higher  than  the  former.  One  proved  disturbed  relation,  and  the  other  restoration  to  God.
Friend]  Heb.  neighbour,  and  husband  (Jer.  iii.  20;  Cant.  v.  17);  the  prophet  himself  intended.
Accord]  Hos.  must  frame  his  life  to  represent  the  ingratitude  of  men  and  the  wonderful  love  of  God.
Who  look]  Lit.  they  are  looking;  a  continuous  act  and  a  contemporary  circumstance.  God  was  lov-
ing them  while  they  were  looking  to  idols.  Flagons  of  wine]  Lit.  of  grapes,  used  in  idolatry  (Jer.
vii.  18;  xliv.  19)  ;  or  drunkenness  and  vice  sanctioned  by  it— a  figurative  representation  of  service,
which  appeals  to  sense,  gratifies  carnal  desire  and  sensual  indulgence  (cf.  Job  xx.  12).  2.  Bought
her]  with  money  and  grain.  Money  half  the  price  of  a  common  slave  (Ex.  xxxi.  32)  ;  the  grain  of
the  coarsest  kind,  not  wheat,  but  barley,  the  food  of  animals,  and  the  offering  of  one  accused  of
idolatry,  an  expression  of  worthlessness  and  degradation.  3.  Abide  for  me]  Lit.  "  many  days  wilt
thou  sit  for  me  ;  "  in  a  state  of  solitude  and  widowhood,  debarred  from  intercourse  with  any  man,  and
detained  until  restored  to  God  himself  (Deut.  xxi.  13).  Now  God  will  have  no  more  conjugal  inter-
course with  Israel  than  any  other  people.  He  will  cut  off  idolatry  and  suspend  his  relation  to  them
for  an  indefinite  time.  4.  Without  a  king]  Without  civil  polity.  Sac]  Without  national  worship
and  religion.  Image]  Lit.  monument,  consecrated  to  Baal  (Ex.  xxiii.  24) ;  pillars  forbidden  to  be
reared  (Lev.  xxvi.  1;  Deut.  xvi.  22);  widely  spread  in  Israel  (2  Kings  iii.  2;  xvii.  10)  and  in
Judah  (1  Kings  xiv.  23  ;  2  Chron.  xvi.  2).  Ephod]  Shoulder-dress  of  the  high  priest,  to  which  the
Urim  and  Thummim  were  attached,  and  the  medium  of  revelation  between  God  and  his  people.
Teraphim]  Penates  worshipped  as  the  givers  of  earthly  prosperity  and  revealers  of  future  events.
This  threat  fulfilled  in  the  ten  tribes,  in  Assyrian  captivity,  and  in  the  present  time  they  are  without
monarchy,  priesthood,  and  the  worship  of  Jehovah.  Judah  after  her  captivity  had  a  government,
but  not  an  independent  king;  she  rejected  Christ,  and  then  she  was  doomed  to  the  judgment  of  God,
and  efforts  to  restore  her  have  yet  failed.  5.  Seek]  Heb.  a  diligent,  intensive  search,  a  religious
search  used  in  regard  to  God  [1'uscy].     David  their  king]  i.e.  the  Seed,  the  Son  of  D.,  the  Messiah


I


chap.  in. J  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.  41


(Ezek.  xxxiv.  23;  Amos  ix.  11).  Fear  the  Lord]  Lit.  "will  tremble  towards  Jehovah  and  towards
his  goodness ;"  stronger  than  seeking  one  upon  whom  they  depend.  Tremble  with  distress  and
anguish,  conscious  of  guilt  and  umvorthiness,  and  utterly  unable  to  help  themselves.  Goodness]  In
gifts  of  which  they  had  been  deprived.  This  fulfilled  in  the  gathering  round  David's  greater  Son,
and  in  the  universal  conversion  of  Israel  to  God.

HOMILETICS.
The  Wondrous  Love. — Verses  1 — 5.

In  this  chapter  God's  grace  is  marvellously  set  forth  to  his  ancient  people.
Though  fallen  and  unfaithful,  the  prophet  is  commanded  to  love.  "  Go  yet"  give
them  line  upon  line,  precept  upon  precept,  sign  after  sign,  and  act  after  act,  to
remind  them  of  this  truth.  Not  only  must  the  disposition  exist  to  love,  but  an
attestation  of  it.  Hosea  must  again  represent  the  conduct  of  God  in  displaying  his
love  and  urging  to  penitence.  Men  are  repeatedly  urged  to  believe  the  gospel  and
welcome  the  Saviour.  God  multiplies  mercies  when  judgments  are  richly  deserved.
The  grand  truth  of  these  verses  is  the  lesson  which  John  taught  so  affectionately
afterwards,  "  God  is  love."

I.  Love  in  its  highest  form.  Israel  had  fallen  into  idolatry,  and  was  guilty  of
adultery.  Lust  and  sensuality  were  mixed  with  illicit  worship.  God,  their  chief
good,  was  forsaken  and  lovers  trusted.  1.  Love  to  the  guilty  sinner.  Men  have
gone  astray  from  God,  and  live  having  no  hope,  and  without  God  in  the  world.
Alienated  from  God  by  wicked  works,  they  do  not  seek  nor  serve  God.  God  is
not  in  all  their  thoughts.  They  are  given  to  pleasure,  gratification,  and  shame.
Some  men  are  not  even  moral.  They  are  corrupted  by  their  worldly,  selfish  prin-
ciples. Loving  sin,  and  rendering  homage  to  improper,  unholy  objects,  they  have
become  like  the  gods  they  worship.  Man  is  lost,  spiritually  lost;  lost  to  God  and
to  his  highest  interests — unholy  in  character,  helpless  in  condition,  and  unlike  God
in  everything.  "  There  is  none  righteous,  no,  not  one:  there  is  none  that  under-
standeth,  there  is  none  that  seeketh  after  God.  They  are  all  gone  (aside)  out  of  the
way,"  apostatized  from  God,  from  his  laws,  and  from  principles  of  truth  and  right;
"  they  are  together  become  (filthy)  unprofitable,"  in  their  conduct  and  practice.
They  are  depraved  in  heart  and  defiled  in  life  (Ps.  xiv.  2,  3 ;  cf.  Rom.  iii.  12,  13).
Yet  man  thus  lost  and  depraved  is  the  object  of  Christ's  care.  God  loves  us,  even
in  our  weakness  and  worldliness,  in  our  "crimes  and  carnality."  "The  Son  of
Man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost."  Christ  seeks  to  bring  us
back  to  God,  to  deliver  us  from  our  sins,  to  correct  the  sinful  and  selfish  principles
of  our  nature,  and  to  make  us  sons  of  God.  The  most  distant  and  degraded,  the
most  wretched  and  licentious,  all  who  are  conscious  of  their  lost  and  ruined  con-
dition, may  come  to  God.  Poor  Joseph,  with  a  parcel  of  yarn  hanging  over  his
shoulders,  heard  the  message  of  joy  from  the  text :  "  This  is  a  faithful,"  &c.  John
Newton  in  preaching  to  the  prisoners  at  Newgate  wept,  and  they  wept  with  him,
as  he  enlarged  on  "  this  faithful  saying."  "  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy
of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners."  2.  Love  to  the
unfaithful  professor.  God's  love  is  not  simply  to  the  wretched  and  perishing.  To
love  the  distressed  is  comparatively  easy;  but  to  love  the  unfaithful  and  the
adulteress,  those  who  add  guilt  to  nnworthiness,  idolatry  to  apostasy,  and  provo-
cation to  ingratitude,  is  more  than  humanity  can  do.  Men  respect  the  just  and
love  the  good  ;  but  God  commendeth  his  love  toward  us,  in  that  while  we  were
yet  sinners.  We  may  even  love  when  immorality  is  allied  to  woe,  and  hatred  to
personal  offensiveness ;  but  love  in  its  purest,  freest  form,  love  in  God,  passes  over
demerit  and  offence,  withstands  provocation  and  insult,  and  blesses  those  that
curse.  The  unworthy  servant  is  sent  away  from  our  employ.  The  unfaithful
friend  is  forsaken  and  condemned.  But  what  shall  we  say  of  unfaithful  Israel?
What  shall  be  done  to  those  who  have  loved  and  forsaken  their  love,  sworn  alle-
giance, yet  broken  off  and  are  guilty  of  fornication  1  •    "Go  yet,  love  a  woman"


42  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  [chap,  hi


most  guilty  and  most  unworthy;  love  with  a  definite  and  Divine  love,  "according
to  the  love  of  the  Lord  toward  the  children  of  Israel /"  a  love  without  a  parallel
and  beyond  expression.  "  I  know  that  the  mercy  of  God  is  infinite,"  said  a  brother
of  "Whitfield,  the  great  preacher,  to  Lady  Huntingdon ;  "  but,  my  lad}',  there  is  no
mercy  for  me,  a  backslider,  a  wretch,  entirely  lost."  "  I  am  glad  to  hear  it,  Mr
Whitfield,"  said  she.  "  I  am  glad  that  you  are  a  lost  man."  "  What  !  glad  that
I  am  a  lost  man,  my  lady  !  "  "  Yes,  truly  glad;  for  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to
save  the  lost."  He  blessed  God  for  his  love,  and  the  same  evening  died  in  peace.
God  still  yearns  over  those  who  have  fallen  a  second  time.  The  backslider  and
unfaithful  professor  may  yet  return.  God  remembers  his  covenant  and  will  ever
fulfil  his  word.  "  Return,  thou  backsliding  Israel,  saith  the  Lord ;  and  I  will  not
cause  mine  anger  to  fall  upon  you  ;  for  I  am  merciful,  saith  the  Lord,  ami  I  will
not  keep  mine  anger  for  ever.  Only  acknowledge  thine  iniquity,  that  thou  hast
transgressed  against  the  Lord  thy  God."  II.  Love  in  its  active  operation.  All
feeling,  all  emotion  in  the  heart  demands  and  seeks  an  outward  expression.  Feel-
ing will  not  slumber  in  the  soul  any  more  than  ignited  gunpowder  will  smoulder
away  without  explosion.  Man  is  not  a  mere  block,  to  move  and  be  moved  by  at-
traction and  force.  Nor  is  he  a  mere  physical  structure  ;  but  a  being  of  sympathy
and  emotion.  Love  is  one  of  the  strongest  passions,  and  on  whatever  object  it  is
fixed,  will  lead  to  intense  energy  and  activity.  There  may  be  pity  without  help  ;
benevolence  which  merely  wishes  good  to  be  done.  We  may  feel  for  the  sufferer
and  not  interpose  ;  retain  our  sentiment  and  say,  "  Be  ye  warmed,  be  ye  clothed,"
without  giving  "  the  things  needful  for  the  body."  Love  is  deeds,  not  desires,  nor
words.  Its  objects  are  out  of  itself,  and  according  to  its  strength  and  opportunity
it  reaches  others.  "  God  so  loved  the  world,"  that  "  he  gave  "  something,  he  did
something.  "  In  this  was  manifested  the  love  of  God  toward  us."  "  Hereby  per-
ceive we  the  love  of  God,  because  he  laid  down  his  life  for  us."  Measure  the  love
by  the  gift  and  the  deed.  Things  may  represent  feeling  and  value,  desire  and
delight,  but  persons  are  the  greatest  sacrifice.  In  giving  a  person,  God  gave  the
greatest  of  all  persons — "  his  only  begotten  Son."  Christ  shed  his  precious  blood  to
redeem  men  from  sin  and  death.  Damon  had  great  affection  for  his  friend  Pythias.
When  Shelley  gave  Leigh  Hunt  a  thousand  pounds  to  liberate  him,  the  act  was  a
proof  of  no  common  friendship,  and  showed  that  he  valued  his  friend  more  than
his  gold.  God's  love  excels  all  other,  seeks  to  restore  the  fallen  and  most  degraded
to  himself.  He  is  not  satisfied  with  anything  less  than  complete  restoration,  com-
plete salvation.  The  prophet  bought  the  "  woman  beloved,"  redeemed  her  from
slavery  and  idolatry,  and  eventually  took  her  to  himself.  Life  must  be  supported,
a  bridal  gift  bestowed,  and  she  must  be  re-instated  in  his  heart  and  home.  "  If
the  casting  away  of  them  be  the  reconciling  of  the  world,  what  shall  the  receiving
of  them  be  but  life  from  the  dead1?"  III.  Love  in  its  necessary  discipline.
According  to  Scripture,  all  suffering  under  God's  administration  has  a  moral  endt
and  must  not  be  viewed  by  itself,  without  any  reference  to  results.  In  some  cases
it  is  judicial,  penal,  and  exemplary  in  solemn  terms.  But  in  its  bearing  upon  God's
people,  it  is  corrective,  given  for  a  gracious  purpose  and  a  blessed  experience,  pro-
gressive sanctification  and  final  perfection.  "  God  chastens  us  not  for  his  pleasure,
but  for  our  profit,  that  we  might  be  partakers  of  his  holiness."  This  design  should
help  us  to  bear  it  even  most  frequent  and  severe.  "  My  son,  thank  God  for
me,"  said  Dr  Arnold  on  his  death-bed.  "  Thank  God,  Tom,  for  giving  me  this
pain.  I  have  suffered  so  little  pain  in  my  life,  that  I  feel  it  is  very  good  for  me
now  God  has  given  it  me,  and  I  do  so  thank  him  for  it."  That  man  should  be
capable  of  Divine  holiness  and  fellowship  with  God,  proves  the  capacity  of  his
mental  and  the  dignity  of  his  moral  nature.  Affliction  is  chosen  as  a  suitable  and
sovereign  remedy  to  cure  our  evils.  We  are  estranged  from  God  and  given  to  the
creature.  Our  attachments  to  wealth,  power,  and  ambition,  to  pleasure  and
sensual  indulgence,  are  not  easily  broken.     God's  method  of  weaning  from  the


chap.  ni.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  1I0SEA.  43


world,  and  breaking  up  unhallowed  and  degrading  attachment  to  sin,  is  by  remov-
ing the  object  from  us,  visiting  us  with  sickness,  or  smiting  with  a  curse,  what  we
love  instead  of  him.  Israel,  like  a  captive  woman  remaining  in  the  house,  separated
from  her  master,  bewailing  her  captivity,  was  to  sit  for  many  days  in  solitary
discipline  (Deut.  xxi.  13;  Ex.  xxiv.  14;  Jer.  iii.  2);  weaned  or  free  from  idolatry,
yet  not  immediately  received  into  friendship  and  favour  with  God.  They  were  also
to  abide  many  days  without  prince  or  priest,  temple  or  sacrifice.  Hence — 1.  Love
disciplines  by  solitude  "  Thou  shalt  abide  (remain  quiet)  for  me  many  days."
God  often  withdraws  us  from  scenes  of  pleasure  and  mirth,  deprives  us  of  friends
and  means  of  grace,  and  confines  us  to  beds  of  sickness  and  solitude.  Sequestered
from  the  excitements  of  life,  cut  off  from  the  objects  of  our  love,  we  should  "  be
still  and  know  that  I  am  God."  Murmur  not,  nor  complain  ;  but  submit  in
patience  and  hope.  "  So  will  I  also  be  for  thee."  Our  deepest  experience,  our
spiritual  discipline,  must  be  in  solitude.  We  must  suffer  alone,  and  get  wisdom
alone.  We  must  learn  the  evil  of  our  ways  and  God's  displeasure  against  sin,  not
in  the  friction  of  society,  but  in  the  lonely  chamber  and  the  closet.  This  is  the  ex-
perience of  all  good  men.  Our  affections  are  kindled,  our  resolutions  fortified,  and
our  hearts  prepared,  in  solitude.  Christ  began  public  life  with  forty  days  in  the
wilderness,  was  made  perfect  through  suffering,  and  had  to  tread  the  wine-press
alone.  Solitude  and  suffering  alone  are  means  of  education  ;  designed  by  God
to  chasten  and  refine,  to  awaken,  convert,  and  restore  the  sinner  and  the  backslider
to  himself.  Afflictions  are  not  messengers  of  his  avenging  wrath,  but  tokens  of
parental  love  ;  and  in  sending  them  he  acts  not  as  an  angry  judge,  but  a  kind  and
forgiving  father ;  correcting  in  love,  and  designing  to  bring  forth  "  the  peaceable
fruit  of  righteousness  in  them  which  are  exercised  thereby."  2.  Love  disciplines
by  deprivation.  First,  By  depriving  of  the  supports  of  life.  "  Without  a  king
and  without  a  prince."  A  king  was  Israel's  special  choice,  and  a  king  was  Israel's
support.  The  court  of  Solomon  was  the  glory  of  Israel,  and  Solomon's  son  was
the  favourite  king.  Kings  and  princes  were  commanders  and  leaders  of  the  people.
When  these  were  slain,  when  civil  governments  were  overturned,  they  were  left
without  support  and  defence.  God  not  only  gives,  but  takes  away.  Kings,  princes,
magistrates,  and  judges,  are  ordained  of  God,  and  are  often  taken  away  by  his
providence  for  the  sins  of  the  people.  Individuals  are  often  bereft  of  bread,
friendship,  and  support,  and  families  of  honour  and  prosperity,  that  they  may
know  that  Jehovah  alone  can  deliver  and  save.  Second,  By  depriving  of  the  en-
joyments of  life.  "  And  without  sacrifice,  and  without  an  image,  and  without  an
ephod."  Sacrifice  was  the  distinctive  feature  in  the  Jewish  religion.  To  take
away  sacrifice  was  to  rob  them  of  their  prestige  and  religion,  their  enjoyments  and
freedom.  They  had  no  legal  priesthood,  no  liberty  of  public  worship,  and  no
oracle  to  guide  them  in  duty  and  distress.  To  be  deprived  of  religious  teachers
and  religious  ordinances  is  sad  indeed.  But  comforts  die,  riches  fly  away,  friends
forsake  us,  and  our  enjoyments  often  decay.  Our  lovers  disappoint  us,  and  we
are  compelled  to  "  return  and  seek  the  Lord  our  God,"  who  afflicts  in  mercy  and
draws  in  love.  IV.  Love  in  its  blessed  results.  After  a  time  of  Divine  chastise-
ment and  discipline,  Israel  will  "  turn  and  seek  Jehovah  their  God,  and  David
their  king,  and  will  go  trembling  to  Jehovah  and  to  his  goodness."  Jehovah
will  be  found  of  them  that  seek  him  with  solicitude.  He  is  our  only  hope  and
dependence.  If  we  abandon  idols  and  turn  to  him,  we  shall  again  taste  his  good-
ness and  rejoice  in  the  light  of  his  countenance.  1.  Love  draivs  the  penitent.
When  the  sinner  discovers  his  folly,  and  repents  of  his  sin;  when  he  feels  his
helplessness,  and  cries  for  mercy  ;  he  needs  some  encouragement  and  hope.  The
Bible  reveals  a  God  of  love.  God  in  Christ  upholds  the  law  in  love,  atones
for  sin,  and  loves  the  sinner.  Mercy  invites,  and  the  weary  and  heavy  laden  come
and  find  rest  in  Jesus.  Hope  beams  upon  the  soul.  The  love  of  God  warms  and
breaks  up  the  heart,  like  the  spring  breaking  up  frozen  watery     This  love  reaches


44


HOMILETIC  COVMEXTJRV:  HOSE  J.


[CHAP.    III.


and  draws  the  contrite  sinner,  and  he  resolves  to  return  to  his  home  and  his  rest.
"  I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love,  therefore  with  loving-kindness  have
/  drawn  thee."     2.    Love  turns  the   backslider.     Professing  Christians   are  often
unfaithful  to  their  vows  and  their  God.     They  fall  into  error  and  backslide  from
God.     "  Israel  slideth  back  as  a  backsliding  heifer."     "  My  people  are  bent  to
backslide  from   me."     But  God  still  watches  over  them,  seeks  to  chastise  and  cor-
rect them,  and  restore  them  to  his  favour.     Peter  denied  his  Master,  but  was  over-
come by  the  look  of  love,  and  went  out  and  wept  bitterly.     He  felt  his  guilt  and
was  despairing  of  mercy,  but  the  message  of  joy  encouraged  him — "  Go   and  tell
Peter."     The  description  of  the  world  without  God,  is  the  personal  experience,  the
humble  confession,  of  God's  people — "  All  we,  like  sheep,  have  gone  astray."  They
are  led  away  by  open  sins  or  "  secret  faults  ; "  by  sense,  fancy,  or  appetite  ;  and
are  found  in  crooked  paths  of  sin  and  shame.      Strange  tendency  to  wander  from
a  God  so  good,  and  privileges  so  great!     What  can  induce  men  to  turn  their  backs
upon  their  best  friend,  and  sin  against  the  most  precious  love  that  was  ever  known  1
There  is  no  enjoyment  in  distance  from  God.     The  child  of  God  cannot  be  happy
separated  from  God,  and  will  not  entirely  lose  remembrance   of  forsaken  blessing.
God  seeks  his  own.   Christ,  the  good  shepherd,  goes  after  that  which  is  lost,  until
he  finds  and  restores  it.     "  I  have  gone  astray  like  a  lost  sheep  :  seek  thy  servant ;
for  I  do  not  forget  thy  commandment."     3.   Love  begets  loyalty.     Israel  shall  not
only  seek  the  Lord  their  God,  but  "  David  their  king."     A  prince  shall  rule  over
them  again,  and  they  shall  be  a  loving,  loyal  people.    Love  subdues  the  haughtiest,
brings  back  the  most  distant,  and  wins  all  favours.     Love  overcomes  apathy  and
awfapathy.     Severity  creates  hatred  ;  mercy,  love,  kindness  ;  "  a  kiss  for  a  blow  "
will  ever  be  found  the  best  antidote  to  crime.     Enmity  to  God  is  the  nature,  the
very  essence,  of  the  carnal  mind.  Destroy  its  enmity,  and  you  destroy  its  life  and
power.     God  destroys  by  his  love,  disarms  all  opposition,  and  begets  love  in  return.
"  Truth  is  light,  but  love  is  life."     "  Love  is  power."     Knowledge  does  not  impart
power  to  obey.     Nothing  but  love,  an  appreciation   of  the  Divine  character  and
goodness,  can  beget  true  loyalty  in   the  heart.     We  have  the  manifestation  and
method  of  love  in  the  gospel.     New  life  is  quickened  within  us,  and  God  speaks
with  power  to  our  hearts.     New   affections  expel  meaner  ones ;  moral  activity  is
guided  by  faith.     We  love  and  labour  most  earnestly  for  God,  who  lias  blessed  us.
"We  love  him  because  he  first  loved  us."


HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Truly  the  prophet  in  two  respects  has
set  forth  great  tilings.  For,  in  the  first
place,  he  could  not  describe  sin  as  being
more  dreadful  than  he  here  pictures  it
in  the  sin  of  the  adulteress.  And,  again,
he  extols  highly  the  love  of  God  by  this
image,  when  he  says  that  he  is  animated
by  love  toward  the  adulteress  [Luther].

Looking  unto  other  gods.  Placing
our  affections  and  confidence  in  other
tilings — preference  for  the  creature  in-
stead of  the  Creator,  who  is  infinite  in
goodness  and  resources.

Flagons  of  wine.  1 .  A  type  of  sin —
sweet,  sensual,  and  unwholesome  food.
2.  An  image  of  idol  worship — ileshly  in
its  nature,  poor  in  its  consequences.
"  The    solemn    and    strict  religion   of


Jehovah  is  plain  but  wholesome  food  ;
whereas  idolatry  is  relaxing  food,  which
is  only  sought  after  by  epicures  and
men  of  depraved  tastes"  [Hengsten-
berg].  Compare  Job  xx.  12,  where
sin  is  figuratively  described  as  food
which  is  sweet  as  new  honey  in  the
mouth,  but  turns  into  gall  in. the  belly.
Yer.  4.  In  this  condition  Jews  have
ever  since  remained :  free  from  idolatry,
and  in  a  state  of  waiting  for  God,  yet
looking  in  vain  for  a  Messiah,  since  they
had  not  and  would  not  receive  him  who
came  unto  them ;  praying  to  God,  yet
without  sacrifice  for  sin;  not  owned  by
God,  yet  kept  distinct  and  apart  by  his
providence,  for  a  future  yet  to  be  re-
vealed.    God  has  been  towards  them,


CHAP.  III.]


H0M1LET1C  COMMENTARY :  1108 EA.


45


He  has  preserved  them  from  mingling
with  idolaters  and  Mohammedans.  Op-
pression has  not  extinguished  them,
favour  has  not  bribed  them.  He  has
kept  them  from  abandoning  their
mangled  worship,  or  the  Scriptures
which  they  understand  not,  and  whose
true  meaning  they  believe  not;  they
have  fed  on  the  raisin-husks  of  a  barren
ritual  and  unspiritual  legalism,  since
the  Holy  Spirit  they  have  grieved
away.  Yet  they  exist  still,  a  monu-
ment to  us  of  God's  abiding  wrath  on
sin,  as  Lot's  wife  was  to  them,  encrusted,
stiff,  lifeless,  only  that  we  know  that


the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son
of  God,  and  they  that  hear  shall  live
[Pusey].  1.  Cutting  short  of  outward
mercies,  should  cut  off  from  sin  and
humble  us  that  we  may  be  ripe  for
mercy ;  and  whatever  our  frame  and
carriage  may  be,  yet  by  affliction  God
will  cut  short  occasions  of  sin,  as  the
adulteress  is  shut  up  and  dieted,  is
secluded  from  her  lovers.  2.  The  Lord
may  intend  much  good  to  them  whom
he  brings  into  contempt,  and  to  a  low
condition ;  for  he  sequesters  and  shuts
up  Israel  with  an  eye  to  marry  her
[Hutcheson].


HOMILETICS.
"  Fear  the  Lord  and  His  Goodness."

This  is  the  drift  of  the  discourse,  the  right  and  proper  result  of  the  goodness
of  God  upon  our  hearts.  I  address  myself  first  of  all  to  God's  people;  secondly,  to
such  as  are  yet  unreconciled  to  him.

I.  First,  to  God's  people.  You  have  received  of  this  goodness  two  ways;  the
first  and  the  higher  is  his  spiritual  goodness;  the  second  form  is  the  providential
bounty  of  God  toward  you.  First  survey  the  spiritual  goodness  of  God  to  you.
It  was  no  small  goodness  to  choose  you  at  first — no  slight  goodness  which  ordained
a  covenant  on  your  behalf  with  Christ  Jesus,  and  which  fulfilled  that  covenant.
Think  of  God's  goodness  to  you  when  unconverted  :  what  long-suffering !  what
tenderness  !  You  have  been  filled  with  joy  and  peace  in  believing ;  led  first  into
one  truth  and  then  other,  and  God  has  outdone  all  you  asked  or  thought.  All  this
should  constrain  you  to  fear  the  Lord.  First,  there  should  be  a  fear  of  admiration.
Saints  who  have  tasted  the  Lord's  goodness  should  fear  him  with  worshipful  fear
of  adoration.  The  goodness  of  God  to  us  should  suggest  aspiration.  The  great-
ness of  it  should  suggest  to  us  great  service;  the  continuance  of  it  should  move  us
to  persevere  in  honouring  him ;  the  disinterestedness  of  the  love  of  God  should
make  us  ready  for  any  self-denials ;  and  above  all,  the  singularity  and  speciality  of
his  goodness  should  determine  us  to  be  singular  and  remarkable  in  our  consecration
to  him.  We  should  also  fear  the  Lord  and  his  goodness  in  the  sense  of  affection.
We  must  fear  him  with  humiliation.  The  goodness  of  God  ought  to  make  us  fear
him  with  a  sacred  anxiety,  an  anxiety  of  a  double  character.  Am  I  really  his  1  or
if  I  be  his,  and  have  such  goodness  bestowed  upon  me,  am  I  rendering  to  him  what
he  may  expect  1  We  should  fear  the  Lord,  lastly,  with  the  fear  of  resignation.  Now
for  the  goodness  of  God  in  providential  matters.  Fear  God  much  more  than  ever
before,  lest  these  temporals  should,  become  your  god.  Fear  God,  lest  you  should  un-
dervalue your  responsibilities.  Fear  God  and  his  goodness,  lest  he  turn  his  hand
and  make  you  poor.  You  should  fear  the  Lord  now,  especially  while  you  have
your  children  about  you,  and  you  are  in  health,  because  you  will  have  to  leave  all
these  things  very  soon.  Fear  God  and  his  goodness,  because  he  is  better  than  all
his  gifts  of  providence.  II.  A  few  solemn  words  to  such  as  are  not  God's  people,
but  enemies  to  God,  careless  and  yet  prosperous.  You  have  provoked  God,  and
if  justice  had  been  done,  where  would  you  have  been  1  Will  you  not  fear  and
serve  him  out  of  gratitude  1  Do  you  not  feel  ashamed  that  so  good  a  God  should
be  so  ill  repaid  %  Ought  you  not  also  to  fear  God  out  of  hope  ?  If  he  has  dealt
so  mercifully  with  you  in  temporals,  have  you  not  every  reason  to  expect  that  he
will  do  as  well  for  you  in  spirituals  1     Should  you  not  fear  the  Lord  and  his  good-


46


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  HOSE  A.


\C\US.  IT


ness  out  of  great  admiration  ?  for  how  well,  how  kindly,  how  strangely  well  has  ho
dealt  with  you  !  Lastly,  let  me  say  you  may  well  fear  God  out  of  apprehension
concerning  his  goodness,  for  the  goodness  which  he  now  renders  to  you  will  pass
away  ere  long.  There  is  trouble  for  you  in  store  except  you  turn  and  repent ;  first
one  rod — sickness  to  the  child;  then  others — such  as  loss  in  business,  sickness  to
yourself,  death  to  your  wife,  &e.  Woe  to  that  man  whom  neither  goodness  nor
severity  can  move ;  whom  neither  loving-kindness  can  draw,  nor  justice  drive.
For  such  there  remaineth  nothing  but  cast  away  for  ever,  from  God  whom  he
would  not  love,  from  Christ  whom  he  would  not  accept,  from  mercy  which  he
despised,  from  love  which  he  rejected  [Spurgeon].

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  III.


Affliction  a  discipline.  This  sorrow
comes  not  from  the  ground,  nor  yet
affliction  from  the  dust.  It  has  been
beautifully  said,  that  sorrow  is  the  river
of  God's  love  flowing  through  shaded
scenery.  In  all  sorrow  there  is  a  limit
— namely,  that  fixed  by  considerations
for  our  own  good.  God  is  encompassing
#ur  path  with  thorns,  lest  we  should
wander  into  regions  that  chill  or  scorch
us  to  the  death.  By  some  high  method
he  overrules  our  narrow  wishes  and
petty  aims,  and  subordinates  them  to
his  own  vast  and  beneficent  designs.
Misfortunes  have  been  angels'  visits  un-
awares. Amid  the  changes  and  the
chances  of  this  mortal  life  let  us  walk
humbly  with  God  and  fix  our  hearts  and
hopes  in  him.

The  power  of  love.  Is  there  not  an
invincible  power  in  tender ness?      The


old  fable  tells  us  of  the  sun  and  the
wind  Avhich  strove  to  see  which  could
first  remove  the  traveller's  cloak.  The
wind  blustered,  but  the  traveller  only
wrapped  his  cloak  more  tightly  about
him,  but  when  the  sun  shone  warm  and
soft  upon  his  head,  the  traveller  speedily
cast  olf  his  cloak.  If  God  had  dealt
roughly  with  you,  I  should  not  have
wondered  if  you  had  said — "  I  will  not
serve  him  ; "  but  after  his  being  so  kind
with  you,  off  with  that  cloak  of  in-
difference and  be  his  servant.  Will  not
the  warmth  of  God's  love  thaw  your
soul  1  The  chilling  frost  of  threatenings
might  have  hardened  you  into  a  rock  of
ice,  but  this  sunshine  of  prosperity  and
love  which  the  Lord  has  given  you,
will  it  not  melt  you,  will  it  not  bring
you  to  Jesus  1  [Sj/urgeonj.


CHAPTEE  IV.


Critical  Notes. — 1.  Controv.]  =  a  legal  action  (cf.  Mic.  vi.  2  ;  Joel  iii.  2),  or  ground  of
complaint  with  the  ten  tribes  (ver.  15).  Truth]  i.  e.  truthfulness  in  word  or  deed,  no  conscience
nor  uprightness  (Prov.  iii.  3;  Jer.  iii.  4).  Mercy]  Affection,  tenderness,  and  love;  no  compassion
to  the  needy.  Truth  and  love  cannot  be  separated.  "Truth  cannot  be  sustained  without  mercy;
and  mercy  without  truth  makes  men  negligent ;  so  that  the  one  ought  to  be  mingled  with  the  other."
No  know.]  which  produces  love  and  fear ;  wilfully  ignorant;  hence  injustice  the  upper  hand.  2.
Swearing]  a  breach  of  the  second,  stealing  of  the  eighth  commandment.  In  II eb.  these  nouns  of
action  give  emphasis  and  picture  the  scene,  nothing  but  evil,  and  that  continually.  Break]  out
like  waters  beyond  all  bounds  and  restraint  (2  Sam.  v.  20).  Blood]  Lit.  bloods,  shed  with  violence.
Toucheth]  "  Murder  was  so  common,  that  no  space  was  left  between  its  acts"  [lleiiders<m'].  3.
Mourn]  by  drought  (1  Kings  xviii.  17,  18).  As  a  consequence  vegetation  scorched,  animal  Life  wastes
away,  and  pools  dry,  the  greatest  calamity  that  could  happen  in  the  East.  4.  Strive]  Lit.  only
man,  let  him  not  strive,  and  let  not  man  reprove.  God  had  taken  the  matter  in  his  own  hands,
reproof  would  only  aggravate  their  guilt,  man  must  not  interfere.  Some  give,  let  none  reprove  one
another;  each  must  look  to  his  own  sins.  Priest]  The  judge  and  tribunal  to  decide  law-suits
(Dent.  xvii.  12,  13),  to  dispute  with  whom  was  the  highest  contumacy.  5.]  People  and  prophet
would  fall  by  night  and  day  without  intermission.  Mother]  The  whole  nation  destroyed.  6.  Know.]
Lit.  the  knowledge  of  God  (ver.  1),  which  is  life  to  the  soul.    Keject]  Utterly  reject  thee  from  being


chap,  lv.j  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.  47


a  priestly  nation  (Ex.  xix.  6) ;  deprived  of  priestly  rank,  and  made  like  heathens.  God  repays  in
kind ;  despise  the  truth,  this  will  suppress  it.  7.  Increased]  in  numher  and  wealth.  Shame]  i.  e.
dishonoured  by  the  loss  of  all.  Some,  in  proportion  as  priests  were  elevated  in  power  and  dignity
above  the  people,  they  surpassed  them  in  sin.  8.  They]  The  priests  made  gain  on  the  sins  of  the
people,  lived  upon  them.  Set  their  heart]  Lusted  after,  strongly  desired,  instead  of  checking  iniquity.
Thev  encouraged  idolatry  for  selfish  ends.  9.  Punish]  Visit  upon  them.  Reward]  Make  to  return
upon  them  their  doings ;  rank  and  wealth  will  not  preserve  them  from  sharing  the  fate  of  the  nation.
Presumptuous  sins  return  to  their  own  bosom  (Prov.  i.  31).  10.  Enough]  Not  be  satisfied.  Left  off]
seeping,  observing  Jehovah  (Zech.  xi.  11).  All  other  means  of  increase  failed.  Potygamy  against
the  law,  and  will  bring  the  curse  of  God.  12.  My  people]  Their  wood,  give  keenness  to  the  re-
proach. God's  people  seek  to  be  instructed  by  a  staff,  depend  on  wooden  idols  constantly  and  entirely!
From  under]  his  authority  and  subjection.  13.  Tops]  Thought  to  be  near  God  and  heaven  (Deut.
xii.  2).  Shadow]  screening  from  the  heat  of  the  sun,  and  filling  the  mind  with  certain  awe.  God
delivers  up  to  vile  affections  as  a  punishment  for  idolatry  (Rom.  i.  26).  14.]  God  turns  from  the
reckless  nation  as  unworthy  of  being  mentioned,  and  speaks  in  the  third  person.  They]  Husbands
and  fathers  go  aside  to  be  alone  with  harlots.  Sacrifice]  Come  to  the  altar  with  them  instead  of
their  own  wives,  "  the  climax  of  shameless  licentiousness."  The  young  cannot  be  blamed,  for  the  older
are  much  worse.  Ver.  15 — 19  a  warning  to  Judah  not  to  partake  of  Israel's  guilt.  15.  Come  not]
by  pilgrimages  to  places  of  idolatrous  worship.  Swear  not]  in  temples  of  idols.  "  The  confession
of  Jehovah  is  hypocrisy  in  the  mouth  of  an  idolater ;  pretended  piety,  which  is  more  dangerous  than
open  ungodliness,  because  it  lulls  the  conscience  to  sleep  "  [Keel'].  16.  Backsliding  heifer]  Stub-
born and  refractory  (Jer.  vii.  24).  As  a  lamb]  Free  play.  If  Israel  would  not  submit  to  the  yoke,
they  might  go  where  they  liked,  become  prey  of  wolves  in  the  field,  be  given  up  to  exile  and  disper-
sion. 17.  Joined]  Closely  and  voluntarily  bound,  and  cannot  give  them  up  (cf.  Num.  xxv.  3;
1  Cor.  vi.  16,  17).  Alone]  Lit.  give  him  rest  from  all  further  expostulation,  which  he  will  not  hear
[Pusey~].  Give  him  up  as  incorrigible  [JBoothr.].  Have  nothing  to  do  with  him.  He  is  bent
on  his  ruin,  let  him  suffer  the  consequences  (Jer.  vii.  16) ;  punishment  cannot  long  be  delayed.  18.
Sour]  A  metaphor  for  degeneracy  in  principle  (Is.  i.  22)  ;  turned,  as  we  say  of  milk.  They  had  lost
all  their  life  and  taste  of  goodness  [Pusei/].  Rulers]  Lit.  shields,  protectors,  and  supporters  of
the  state.  Love]  Avarice  and  luxury.  No  remedy  against  corruption  when  rulers  are  bribed.  19.
Bound  her  up]  A  tempest  will  suddenly  and  violently  seize  them,  wrap  them  up,  and  carry  them
away  (Ps.  xviii.  11  ;  civ.  3;  Is.  lvii.  13).  Ashamed]  of  idols  and  disappointed  in  hope.  Disap
pointment  is  certain  to  those  who  seek  out  of  God  what  can  only  be  found  in  him.

HOMILETICS
God's  Controversy  with  a  Guilty  People. —  Verses  1 — 5.

The  prophet  now  begins  to  speak  more  plainly.  Israel  was  bound  to  God  by-
legal  covenant.  God  only  wishes  justice  to  be  done,  and  will  not  subject  them  to
disadvantages.  But  they  have  infringed  upon  his  rights,  neglected  their  obliga-
tions, and  forgotten  their  relation  to  him.  Hence  the  suit-at-law.  The  land,
swept  of  fidelity,  goodness,  and  love,  is  brought  to  shame  and  desolation.

I.  The  nation  summoned  into  court.  "  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  cnil-
dren  of  Israel. n  The  whole  people,  with  prophets  and  priests,  are  called  to  the
judgment-seat  of  God  to  make  their  defence  or  hear  their  indictment.  Men  are
inattentive  and  negligent.  They  disregard  the  word  of  God,  and  forget  things
which  make  for  their  peace.  If  Demosthenes  had  need  to  reprove  the  Athenian
senate  for  inattention  to  his  speech  on  important  affairs,  how  much  greater
reproof  do  the  careless  and  indifferent  require  now.  It  is  sad  to  be  given  up  to  a
spirit  of  slumber,  to  have  eyes  and  not  see,  ears  and  not  hear.  None  so  deaf  as
those  who  will  not  hear.  God  speaks  loudly  and  continually  in  his  providence
and  word — "  once,  yea,  twice,  yet  man  perceiveth  it  not."  In  creation  wisdom,
power,  and  goodness  are  manifest ;  in  works  of  judgment  and  mercy  God's  voice
is  heard ;  by  his  prophets  and  his  Son  God  expostulates,  but  men  neglect  the
warnings.  This  needful  admonition  suggests  a  sad  condition.  One  would  think
that  every  one  would  gather  round  the  feet  of  Jesus,  and,  like  Samuel,  cry,  "  Speak,
Lord,  for  thy  servant  heareth  !  "  But  sinners  are — 1 .  Ignorant ;  2.  Careless  ;  3.
Obdurate.  God's  cause  will  be  pleaded  by  the  words  of  his  mouth,  and  the
wonders  of  his  providence.  He  speaks  with  authority,  demands  fair  hearing,  and
gives  fair  warning.  "  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear."  II.  The  nation
accused  of  guilt.  The  indictment  of  Israel  is  given  negatively  and  positively.
We  have  the  absence  of  virtue  and  the  presence  of  evil.     There  must  be  one  or  the


48  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.  [.chap.  iv.


other.     The  human  mind  does  not  like  a  vacuum.     Dethrone  good,  you  set  up
evil.      A  mind  unoccupied  and  a  life  of  sin  are  the  impersonations  of  wretchedness.
Some  object  must  engage  attention.     The  heart  must  have  something  really  good,
or  thought  to  be  good,  to  lay  hold  of.     Wrest  it  away  from  one  thing,  without
the  substitution  of  another,  you  leave  a  void  as  painful  as  hunger.     It  may  be  dis-
possessed of  one  thing,  but  it  cannot  be  desolated  of  all.     If  grace  does  not  abound
in  thought  and  conduct,  sin  will  much  more  abound.     In  Israel  there  was — 1.   A
declension  of  religion,     "  There  is  no  truth,  nor  mercy,  nor  knowledge  of  God  in
the  land".  .  .  (a)   "No  truth."      Truth  is  the  bond  of  union  and  the  basis  of
human  happiness.     "  Without  this  virtue,"  says  Jeremy  Collier,  "  there  is  no  reliance
upon  language,  no  confidence  in  friendship,  and  no  security  in  promises  and  oaths."
Neither  talent  nor  genius  can  be  trusted  unless  based  on  truthfulness.     This  is
the  foundation  of  personal  excellence  and  human  character ;  this  is  the  health  and
ornament  of  the  nation  ;  loyal  adherence  to  truth  is  the  secret  of  a  nation's  power
and  a  nation's  glory.     When  there  is  no  truth,  but  falsehood  j  when  men's  acts  are  at
variance  with  their  words  ;  then  there  is  no  respect,  nor  honesty,  nor  security.
What  a  sad  state  of  society  !     We  depart  from  truth  when  we  state  as  true  what
we  do  not  know  to  be  true,  when  we  intentionally  produce  a  false  impression,
when  we  deceive  and  designedly  mislead.     Often  painful  wrongs  are  inflicted  by
covert  innuendos  and  malignant  insinuations.    Half  a  fact  is  a  whole  falsehood,  and
he  who  colours  truth  by  false  methods  of  telling  it  is  a  liar.     "  Of  all  duties,"  says
a  writer,  "  the  love  of  truth,  with  faith  and  constancy  in  it,  ranks  first  and  highest.
Truth  is  God.     To  love  God   and  to  love  truth  are  one  and  the  same."      (b)
"  Nor  mercy."     Mercy  is  pity  or  compassion  which  one  man  shows  toward  another
in  misery;  clemency  towards  our  neighbours  (Prov.  xx.  28;  Luke  x.  37).     "  Let
not  mercy  and  truth  forsake  thee ;  bind  them  about  thy  neck  ;  write  them  upon
the  table  of  thine  heart."     Mercy  and  truth  are  the  glorious  perfections  of  God
always  in  harmony  and  action.     We  rest  upon  them  for  salvation,  and  should  copy
'them  in  life.     The  want  of  one  neutralizes  the  effect  of  the  other.     A  man  may  be
truthful,  and  yet  not  merciful.     Just  in  his  dealings  to  others,  yet  "  as  hard  as
flint."     Mercy  has  been  urged  upon  man  from  the  very  beginning  to  counteract
his  selfishness  and  cruelty.    "  It  becomes  the  throned  monarch  better  than  his  crown/'
and  "  earthly  power  doth  then   show  likest  God's  when  mercy  seasons  justice."
Kindness  evokes  kindness,  and  our  own  happiness  is  increased  by  our  benevolence.
"  Kind  words  cost  little."     Friendly  conduct  may  meet  with  ungrateful  return ;
but  absence  of  gratitude  on  the  part  of  the  receiver  cannot  destroy  the  pleasure  of
the  giver.     "  Blessed  are  the  merciful,  for  they  shall  obtain  mercy."     (c)  "  Nor
knowledge  of  God."     There  was  no  sense  of  honesty  and  obligation,  no  justice  nor
humanity.     Truth  and  benevolence  had  been  disregarded.     The  fragmentary  man
was  seen  in  disordered  society  and  ignorance  of  God  in  a  land  specially  his  own,
and  which  should  have  presented  his  glory  and  preserved  his  name.     The  know-
ledge of  God  is  a  necessity  of  our  moral  nature,  and  lies  at  the  foundation  of  all
morality  and  religion.     Man  can  have  no  obligation  to  mere  laws  of  nature,  and
feel  no  sense  of  responsibility  to  an  impersonal  being.     God  has  revealed  himself
in  his  works  and  word.     We  are  related  to  him  as  intelligent  and  moral  beings.
We  owe  duty  to  ourselves  and  our  fellow-men  because  God  wills  and  commands  it.
But  God  is  not  recognized,  and  then  forgotten  in  motive  and  duty.     God  is  not
seen  through  his  works,  and  in  Israel  and  England  we  have  a  succession  of  human
beings  instructed  in  the  laws  and  duties  of  society,  with  the  character  and  even  the
existence  of  the  law-giver  omitted.     We  have  the  means  of  knowing  and  worship-
ping God,  but  no  true,  practical  knowledge  of  God.    The  supreme  influence  of  God
is  lost  in  the  family  and  in  the  land,  in  custom  and  law,  hence  a  spirit  of  subor-
dination and  licentiousness.     We  have  sound  creeds  but  ungodly  lives  ;  theoretic,
but  little  practical  knowledge  of  God.     If  men  "  hold  the  truth  in  unrighteousness,"
check  the  development  of  it  in  their  lives,  and  reject  the  knowledge  of  God ;  they


chap,  iv.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.  49


begin  the  downward  course  to  idolatry  and  grossest  sin.  The  history  of  the
heathen  world  and  the  results  of  the  French  Eevolution  prove  this  knowledge  to
be  the  safeguard  of  the  people,  to  be  necessary  (1)  to  preserve  mental  vigour.
If  the  knowledge  of  God  is  not  thought  worth  keeping  in  the  mind,  then  the  mind
itself  will  become  worthless  and  degenerate,  "  a  reprobate  mind  "  (Eom.  i.  28).  (2)
to  preserve  true  morality.  Progressive  vice,  penal  suffering,  and  fearful  lusts  are
the  certain  results  of  rejecting  the  knowledge  of  God.  "  If  there  be  not  a  God,
we  must  invent  one,"  cried  one  of  the  leading  spirits  of  France.  "  Some  have  not
the  knowledge  of  God :  I  speak  this  to  your  shame."  2.  A  corrupt  morality.
"  Swearing,  and  lying,  and  killing,  and  stealing,  and  committing  adultery,"  were
common  practices.  These,  and  nothing  but  these,  were  seen  all  around.  Eeligion
and  morality  are  bound  together.  Without  the  one  there  can  be  no  true  existence
of  the  other.  Ignorance  of  God  is  a  source  of  wrong  practice,  a  source  of  all  evils.
Where  there  is  no  love  and  truth,  no  regard  to  God,  there  will  be  vices  contrary
to  these  virtues.  When  the  soul  or  the  land  is  empty  of  good,  it  will  be  full  of
evil.  Evils  of  every  description  abounded  in  Israel.  Society  was  penetrated
with  vice  and  profligacy.  Perjury  and  falsehood  corrupted  the  morals  and  manners
of  the  people.  Eeligion  and  virtue  were  swamped.  Family  and  home  were  alike
tainted.  Domestic  purity,  religious  sanctity,  no  longer  restrained  and  bound  society
together.  The  laws  by  which  God  had  fenced  the  estate,  the  life,  and  character  of
men  were  broken ;  violence  and  bloodshed  knew  no  bounds,  carried  everything
before  them,  and  like  a  flood  swept  the  nation  to  ruin.  III.  The  nation  punished.
"  Therefore  shall  the  land  mourn,  and  every  one  that  dwelleth  therein  shall
languish,  with  the  beasts  of  the  field,  and  with  the  fowls  of  heaven  ;  yea,  the  fishes
of  the  sea  also  shall  be  taken  away,"  &c.  General  depravity  produces  general
punishment.  God  in  judgment  sent  a  universal  drought,  such  as  that  which  pre-
vailed in  the  reign  of  Ahab.  Vegetation  was  to  suffer,  animal  life  decay,  and  sea
and  land  groaned  beneath  the  visitation.  If  man  will  not  love  God,  neither  shall
God's  creatures  help  man.  For  man's  interests  and  theirs  are  bound  together  in
the  wondrous  providence  of  God.  1.  Marts  sins  affect  inanimate  creation.  Man
was  not  made  for  the  earth,  but  the  earth  was  made  for  man.  By  successive  steps
and  srradual  events  the  earth  was  prepared  and  fitted  to  be  his  residence.  For  him
power  had  stilled  the  conflict  of  chaos  and  restored  "  the  reign  of  law."  For  his
sake  goodness  had  beautified  the  earth  and  clothed  it  with  vegetation.  In  wisdom
the  various  animals  were  subject  to  his  control,  and  he  had  dominion  over  all  the
earth.  Man  had  to  replenish,  subdue,  and  govern  the  earth  (Gen.  i.  28).  (a)  Man
is  related  to  material  creation  by  his  physical  nature.  His  name  (Adam),  man,  is
formed  from  the  (adamah)  material  of  which  his  body  is  composed.  He  is  related
to  the  physical  laws  of  the  universe  as  &  physical  being,  and  is  amenable  to  gravita-
tion, mechanical  force,  and  chemical  action.  As  an  organized  being  he  is  subject
to  organic  laws.  Every  great  characteristic  by  which  vegetable  life  is  distinguished
from  inorganic  matter  and  animal  life,  is  found  in  him.  He  also  possesses  animal
instincts  like  the  inferior  creatures.  Thus  man's  constitution  in  its  threefold  cha-
racter, of  physical,  organic,  and  sentient,  "took  up  the  strain  of  creation  which
had  preseded  his  coming,  in  praise  of  the  power,  and  wisdom,  and  goodness  of
God."  (b)  Man  has  brought  a  curse  upon  material  creation  by  Ms  first  sin.  The
earth  is  not  like  the  garden  of  Eden  in  which  he  was  placed  at  first;  "cursed  is
the  ground  for  thy  sake."  It  does  not  yield  its  produce  with  its  original  ease  and
abundance.  We  have  disorder  and  decay,  malformation  and  barrenness.  "  Thorns
and  thistles  shall  it  bring  forth,"  with  all  our  toil  and  daily  labour.  When  man
fell  from  his  original  position  with  God,  the  earth  lost  its  fruitfulness  and  dignity,
and  now  "  the  wholo  creation  groaneth  and  tnivaileth  in  pain  "  under  its  bondage
and  corruption,  and  is  waiting  for  its  freedom  and  greater  blessing  (Eom.  viii.  20
— 22).  (c)  Alan  injures  material  creation  by  his  immoral  conduct.  Material  forces
are  largoly  at  his  command.     He  can  change  and  create ;  beautify  and  adorn ;

4


50  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.  [chap.  iv.


impair  and  destroy.  Solomon  saw  the  field  of  the  slothful  "  all  grown  over  with
thorns,  and  nettles  had  covered  the  face  thereof,  and  the  stone  wall  thereof  was
broken  down"  (Prov.  xxiv.  30,  31).  A  life  of  mere  animal  sensual  indulgence,
manual  or  mental  sloth  will  bring  to  poverty.  Idleness  and  neglect  will  bring
drought  and  failure  of  crops  (Hag.  i.  2 — 11).  Vice,  idolatry,  and  licentiousness
will  spread  their  effects  and  spoil  the  face  of  nature.  Creation  is  in  sympathy
with  man,  responds  to  his  moral  life,  and  is  blessed  or  wasted  by  his  moral  conduct.
In  peace  and  plenty,  under  the  benediction  and  providence  of  God,  the  valleys
shout  and  sing  for  joy.  In  famine  and  war,  under  the  curse  and  sin  of  man,  "  the
land  shall  mourn,  and  every  one  that  dwelleth  therein  shall  languish."  "  How
long  shall  the  land  mourn  and  the  herbs  of  every  field  wither,  for  the  wickedness
of  them  that  dwell  therein  1 "  ( Jer.  xii.  4  ;  Ps.  cvii.  34).  2.  Alan's  sins  affect  the
animal  creation.  We  should  regard  the  animal  world  with  due  feeling.  Life  in
its  lowest  form  is  the  gift  of  God.  We  should  not  abuse  any  creature  which  God
pronounced  good  and  intended  for  our  welfare.  The  inferior  creatures  have  been
useful  to  man  and  subservient  to  his  interests  in  many  ways,  (a)  They  have  been
a  sourco  of  sustenance,  (b)  A  source  of  commerce,  (c)  The  means  of  training  his
powers  of  body  and  mind.  But  they  have  been  punished  for  man's  idolatry.  Their
growth  and  continuance  have  been  hindered  by  man's  sin.  As  necessities  of  life
they  have  been  cut  off,  and  as  objects  of  adoration  they  have  been  smitten  with  the
plague.  "  He  turned  their  waters  into  blood  and  slew  their  fish "  (Ps.  cv.  29).
Internal  blessing  and  outward  prosperity  shall  go  hand  in  hand  when  man  is
restored  to  right  relation  with  God.  Then  shall  the  original  promise  be  fulfilled,
and  God  will  give  peace  in  the  land;  rid  it  of  evil  beasts:  and  its  inhabitants
shall  lie  down,  and  nothing  shall  disturb  their  rest  (Lev.  xxvi.  6).  IV.  The
nation  punished  without  mercy.  They  had  rejected  God,  and  God  would  leave
them  to  their  fate.  They  had  despised  the  priests,  and  he  would  slay  their
prophets.  By  degrees  they  had  hardened  themselves  and  grown  stubborn  in  sin,
and  thus  ripened  themselves  for  destruction.  When  the  Lord  has  a  controversy
with  a  people  and  they  will  not  hear,  it  is  useless  to  strive  with  them.  They  who
resist  the  Spirit  and  the  ministers  of  God,  resist  God  himself.  "  He  that  despiseth
you  despiseth  me."  Their  state  is  most  desperate  and  deplorable.  1.  Punishment
without  intermission.  "  Therefore  shalt  thou  fall  in  the  day,  and  the  prophet  also
shall  fall  with  thee  in  the  night."  There  would  be  no  time  free  from  destruction,
night  and  day  calamities  should  never  cease.  Darkness  would  be  no  protection,
and  day  would  be  no  security.  Terror  by  night  found  them  helpless  and
exposed.  Arrows  from  cunning  foes  and  with  deadly  aims  flew  by  day.  Pestilence,
shrouded  in  mystery,  inarched  on  unseen,  to  infect  the  home  and  alarm  the  city.
Destruction  wasted  at  noon-day,  and  there  was  no  shield  nor  buckler.  This  re-
minds us  of  the  Great  Plague  of  London,  when  evil  befell  the  city,  and  its  inhabit-
ants were  stricken  with  death.  2.  Punishment  without  exemption.  People  and
prophets  fell  together.  God's  judgments  are  impartial.  Rank  and  title,  wealth
and  worldly  distinctions,  are  of  no  avail.  "  Label  men  how  you  please,"  says
Herbert  Spencer,  "  with  titles  of  '  upper,'  and  '  middle,'  and  '  lower,'  you  cannot
prevent  them  from  being  units  of  the  same  society,  acted  upon  by  the  same  spirit
of  the  age,  moulded  after  the  same  type  of  character.  The  mechanical  law,  that
action  and  reaction  are  equal,  has  its  moral  analogue.  The  deed  of  one  man  to
another  tends  to  produce  a  like  effect  upon  both,  be  the  deed  good  or  bad.  In
whatever  rank  you  see  corruption,  be  assured  it  equally  pervades  all  ranks ;  be
assured  it  is  the  symptom  of  a  bad  social  diathesis.  Whilst  the  virus  of  depravity
exists  in  one  part  of  the  body-politic,  no  other  part  can  remain  healthy."  Man's
evil  character  and  influence  blend  and  bind  him  up  with  others.  Not  a  particle  is
lost,  but  the  whole  is  taken  up  and  produces  its  results  in  the  general  community.
Collectively  and  individually  the  destruction  of  all  is  declared.  Root  and  branch
they  were  to  be  cut  off.     As  a  nation  they  coidd  not  escape.     "  I  will  destroy  thy


chap.  iv.  J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.  51


mother,"  and  as  individuals  they  could  not  flatter  themselves  with  hope.  "  Tliou
shalt  fall."  3.  Punishment  without  human  sympathy.  "  Let  no  man  strive  nor
reprove  another."  Man  is  forbidden  to  interfere  or  aid.  God  will  implead  them,
and  none  can  contradict  or  evade  his  judgments.  We  know  not  how  to  judge.
We  condemn  and  acquit  without  cause.  We  are  ignorant  and  helpless  ourselves.
"  None  can  by  any  means  redeem  his  brother,  nor  give  to  God  a  ransom  for  him."
All  are  alike  guilty,  condemned  and  exposed  to  death.  Christ  alone  can  deliver
us.  The  redemption  of  the  soul  is  precious,  but  human  efforts,  gold  and  silver,  and
a  world  of  rabies,  could  not  purchase  it.  Riches  cannot  ward  off  judgment,  nor
tears  avail  with  God.  The  Scripture  hath  concluded,  shut  up  as  in  a  prison,  all  in
unbelief,  not  that  God  might  condemn,  but  that  he  might  have  mercy  upon  all
men  (Gal.  iii.  22).  4.  Punishment  without  Divine  help.  Criminals  are  sometimes
recommended  to  mercy  and  delivered  from  punishment ;  but  Israel  was  stubborn
and  incorrigible,  and  God  forbids  any  to  remonstrate  or  reprove.  Christian  reproof
and  expostulation  bring  sinners  to  repentance  and  are  of  immense  service  in  setting
them  right.  It  is  one  of  the  duties  of  friendship.  u  Faithful  are  the  wounds  of  a
friend."  But  when  men  hate  reproof  and  defy  the  judgments  of  God,  then  they
are  let  alone  to  reap  their  folly.  Their  doom  is  certain  :  "  Thou  shalt  fall,"  and  "  I
will  destroy."  "  He  that  is  filthy,  let  him  be  filthy  still."  "The  fruit  of  sin  in
time,"  says  Chalmers,  "  when  arrived  at  full  and  finished  maturity,  is  just  the  fruit
of  sin  through  eternity.  It  is  merely  the  sinner  reaping  what  he  has  sown.  It
makes  no  violent  or  desultory  step,  from  sin  in  time  to  hell  in  eternity.  The  one
emerges  from  the  other,  as  does  the  fruit  from  the  flower.  It  is  simply  that  the
sinner  be  filled  with  his  own  ways,  and  that  he  eat  the  fruit  of  his  own  devices"

A   TERRIBLE    DEPRIVATION. Verses  3 5.

The  words  lead  us  to  consider  a  lamentable  deprivation — a  deprivation  that
comes  upon  the  people  in  consequence  of  their  heinous  iniquities.  Two  remarks
are  suggested  concerning  this  deprivation.

I.  It  is  a  deprivation  both  of  material  and  spiritual  good.  First:  Of
material  good.  (1)  A  deprivation  of  health.  "Every  one  that  dwelleth  therein
shall  languish."  The  physical  frame  loses  its  wonted  elasticity  and  vigour,  and
succumbs  to  decay  and  depression.  "  Languish,"  like  a  dying  man  on  his  couch.
Sin  is  inimical  to  the  bodily  health  and  vigour  of  men  and  nations ;  it  insidiously
saps  the  constitution.  (2)  A  deprivation  of  the  means  of  subsistence.  "  The  beasts
of  the  field  and  the  fowls  of  heaven ;  yea,  the  fishes  of  the  sea  also  shall  be
taken  away."  Literally  this  refers  to  one  of  those  droughts  that  occasionally  occur
in  the  East,  and  is  ever  one  of  the  greatest  calamities.  What  a  dependent  creature
man  is  !  The  beasts  of  the  field,  the  fowls  of  heaven,  and  the  fish  of  the  sea  can
do  better  without  him,  but  he  cannot  do  without  them.  How  soon  the  Eternal
can  destroy  those  means  of  his  subsistence  !  One  hot  blast  of  pestilential  air  coidd
do  the  whole.  It  is  a  deprivation,  secondly:  Of  spiritual  good.  '  Let  no  man
strive  nor  reprove  another;  for  thy  people  are  as  they  that  strive  with  the  priest."
The  meaning  seems  to  be  that  their  presumptuous  guilt  was  as  great  as  that  of  one
who  refused  to  obey  the  priest  when  giving  judgment  in  the  name  of  Jehovah,  and
who,  according  to  law,  for  that  cause  was  to  be  put  to  death  (Deut.  xvii.  12).  One
of  the  greatest  spiritual  blessings  of  mankind  is  the  strife  and  reproof  of  godly
men.  The  expostulations  and  admonitions  of  Christly  friends,  parents,  teachers,
what  on  earth  is  more  valuable,  is  so  essential  as  these  1  Yet  these  are  to  be  taken
awa}r.  "  Let  no  man  strive  nor  reprove  another."  The  time  comes  with  the  sinner
when  God  says,  "  My  spirit  shall  no  more  strive  with  thee;  Ephraim  is  joined  to
idols,  let  him  alone."  Men  have  become  so  dog-like  in  nature  that  holy  things  are
not  to  be  presented  to  them ;  so  swinish,  that  you  are  to  cast  before  them  no  more
pearls  (Matt.  vii.  6).  II.  It  is  a  deprivation  leading  to  a  terrible  doom.  First :
The  destruction  of  priests  and  people.     "  Theretore  shalt  thou  fall  in  the  day,  and


52


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.


[chap.  IV.


the  prophet  also  shall  fall  with  thee  in  the  night."  The  meaning  is  that  no  time,
night  or  day,  shall  be  free  from  slaughter,  both  of  the  people  and  the  priests.  This
was  literally  true  of  the  ten  tribes  at  this  time.  And  it  is  true  in  a  more  general
and  universal  sense.  God's  law  is,  that  "evil  shall  slay  the  wicked ; "  and  it  is
always  slaying  them,  whether  they  be  priests  or  people — the  laity  or  the  clergy.
If  they  are  not  true  to  God,  day  and  night  they  are  being  slain.  Secondly  :  The
destruction  of  the  social  state.  "  And  I  will  destroy  thy  mother."  Who  was  the
mother  1  The  Israelitish  state.  And  it  was  destroyed.  England  is  our  mother,
and  our  mother  will  be  destroyed  unless  we  banish  sin  from  our  midst  [The
Homilist\.

HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


An  expostulating  God,  ver.  1.  "Hear
ye  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  children  of
Israel,"  &c.  1.  It  is  a  marvellous  con-
troversy. God  might  forsake,  but  he
strives  with  men.  Princes  might  hold
a  controversy  with  princes,  and  nations
with  nations,  but  for  God  to  plead  with
his  creatures  is  wondrous  love.  2.  It
is  a  just  controversy.  There  is  abundant
riason  for  it.  We  have  broken  his
covenant,  reproached  his  name,  and
been  ungrateful  for  his  favours.  The
demands  of  moral  government,  the
interests  of  the  universe,  require  some
rectification,  some  settlement  of  matters.

3.  It  is  a  continual  controversy.  God  is
speaking  now  day  by  day  by  his  word
aod  servants,  carrying  on  the  contro-
versy yet  with  the  most  guilty  and  re-
bellious, seeking  to  convince  them  of
sin,    and   leave   them   without   excuse.

4.  It  is  a  hopeless  controversy.  The
sinner  has  no  excuse,  no  argument  or
right  on  his  side.  He  has  sinned  against
light  and  truth,  the  voice  of  conscience
and  the  warnings  of  providence.  "  Let
them  bring  forth  their  witnesses,"  as  I
do  mine,  "  that  they  may  be  justified  "
in  their  works  and  ways.  "  Or  let  them
hear  and  say  it  is  truth ; "  let  them  hear
the  arguments  on  my  side,  and  say,  after
due  consideration,  if  truth  is  not  with
me,  and  that  I  am  perfectly  reasonable
in  my  requirements.  The  sinner  is
"  speechless  "  now  and  will  have  no  plea
at  the  judgment  day.  The  potsherd  of
the  earth  may  strive  with  the  potsherds,
but  man  is  unequal  in  strife  with  God.
"  Woe  unto  him  that  striveth  with  his
Maker  ! "

Truth  and  mercy.     1.  Rooted  in  the
knowledjge  of  God.     2.  Related  one  to


another.  3.  Opposite  to  the  five  sins
mentioned  in  verse  2,  swearing,  lying,
killing,  stealing,  and  incontinency.
"  Truth  and  love  are  mutually  condi-
tions, the  one  of  the  other.  *  Truth
cannot  be  sustained  without  mercy ;  and
mercy  without  truth  makes  men  negli-
gent ;  so  that  the  one  ought  to  be
mingled  with  the  other '  [Jerome].  They
both  have  their  roots  in  the  knowledge
of  God,  of  which  they  are  the  fruit  ( Jer.
xxii.  16  ;  Isa.  xi.  9) ;  for  the  knowledge
of  God  is  not  merely  '  an  acquaintance
with  his  nature  and  will '  [Hitzig],  but
knowledge  of  the  love,  faithfulness,  and
compassion  of  God,  resting  upon  the
experience  of  the  heart.  Such  know-
ledge not  only  produces  fear  of  God,  but
also  love  and  truthfulness  towards
brethren  (cf.  Eph.  iv.  32;  Col.  iii.  12).
Where  this  is  wanting  injustice  gains
the  upper  hand  "  [Keil].

Speculative  and  practical  knowledge
are  bound  up  together  through  the  one-
ness of  the  relation  of  the  soul  to  God,
whether  in  its  thoughts  of  him  or  acts
towards  him.  Wrong  practice  corrupts
belief,  and  misbelief  corrupts  practice
[Pusey],

Priest-strivers.  1.  Strife  against  the
means  of  knowledge.  Priests  were  re-
positories of  knowledge,  the  oracles  and
guides  of  the  people  (Mai.  ii.  7).  2.
Strife  against  Divine  authority.  All
difficult  cases  were  taken  to  the  priests
(Deut.  xvii.  8 — 12),  who  pronounced
judgment,  and  those  who  refused  the
sentence  were  put  to  death.  They  re-
presented God's  authority,  and  spoke  in
God's  name.  3.  Strife  against  spiritual
interests,  (a)  Even  here  they,  priest-
strivers,  are  often  left  alone.     Let  noi


chai\  iv.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY "•  IIOSEA.  53


man  strive  with  those  who  strive  with  priest,  so  would,  and  did,  they  reject
God;  reproof  will  only  irritate  and  not  the  prophets.  St  Stephen  gives  it  as  a
correct  them,  (b)  Hereafter  they  suffer  characteristic  of  the  Jews,  "  Ye  stiff-
the  consequence  of  their  evil  ways,  necked  and  uncircumcised  in  heart  and
"  To  strive  then  with  the  priest  was  the  ears,  ye  do  always  resist  the  Holy  Ghost ;
highest  contumacy,  and  such  was  their  as  your  fathers  did,  so  do  ye"  [Pusey].
whole  life  and  conduct.  It  was  the  Ver.  5.  When  false  prophets  flatter
character  of  the  whole  kingdom  of  and  soothe  the  people  in  sin,  when  sin-
Israel.  For  they  had  thrown  off  the  ners  rebel  agairst  Divine  authority  and
authority  of  the  family  of  Aaron  which  reject  Divine  teaching,  they  hasten  on
God  had  appointed.  Their  political  their  ruin.  No  degree  of  prosperity,  no
existence  was  based  upon  the  rejection  human  aid,  and  no  mere  Church  or
of  that  authority.  The  national  character  State  can  save  them  from  sudden,  unex-
innuences  the  individual.  When  the  pected,  and  fearful  fall.  "Thou  shalt
whole  policy  is  formed  on  disobedience  fall  in  the  day,  and  I  will  destroy  thy
and  revolt,  individuals  will  not  tolerate  mother."
interference.     As  they  had  rejected  the

HOMILET1CS.
Ignorance  op  God  :  A  Warning  to  the  People. —  Verse  6.

The  prophet  had  complained  that  there  was  no  knowledge  of  God  in  the  land.
This  was  a  serious  offence  in  a  land  of  privileges  and  religious  teachers,  and  an
eiTor  fatal  to  the  people.  All  were  ignorant.  The  people  and  the  priests  were  all
to  blame.  In  spite  of  warning  and  judgment,  by  the  destruction  of  one  dynasty
after  another,  they  would  not  desist  from  the  sin  of  Jeroboam.  God  therefore
would  deprive  the  nation  of  its  priestly  honour,  strip  it  of  its  priestly  rank,  and
make  it  like  a  heathen  nation.  The  words  contain  a  warning  to  people  and
priests.

I.  Ignorance  of  God  is  inexcusable.  Israel  had  abundant  means  and  oppor-
tunities of  knowing  God.  "For  did  Israel  not  know?"  and  "have  they  not
i—11"(Eom.  x.  18,  19).  The  sound  of  the  gospel  was  heard,  and  was  sent
forth  like  the  voice  of  nature  in  all  the  land.  The  conversion  of  the  Gentiles  and
the  universality  of  Christianity  were  predicted  ;  they  had  the  oracles  of  God,  and
were  highly  exalted  above  other  people.  They  had  no  excuse  therefore  for  their
unbelief.  They  possessed  the  law  of  God,  but  neglected  to  look  into  it,  and  for-
sook it.  In  this  Israel  are  like  many  now,  who,  in  the  midst  of  religious  ordinances,
in  a  land  of  Bibles  and  Christian  Sabbaths,  disregard,  neglect  their  salvation,  and
live  in  total  ignorance  of  God.  There  is  a  natural  distaste  for  spiritual  things,  in-
attention to  religious  duties,  and  an  absorption  in  things  of  this  world,  which  beget
indifference  and  lead  to  unbelief.  There  are  persons  who  are  moral  but  not  devout,
honest  but  not  prayerful,  benevolent  but  not  converted,  amiable  but  not  decided,
noniiml  Christians  who  are  not  real  Christians.  Those  who  forget  God  are  more
numerous  than  the  profligate  and  profane.  Ignorance  of  God  seems  a  small  sin,
but  ignorance  is  allied  with  wickedness.  To  forget  God  is  to  exclude  the  essential
parts  of  religion.  It  implies  that  his  goodness,  holiness,  and  claims  are  of  no
value  to  us  ;  it  is  to  exclude  God  from  our  thoughts  and  give  him  no  place  in  our
heart  and  conduct.  Hence  to  be  ignorant  of  God  is  not  to  love  and  fear  him  ;  not
to  live  in  subjection  to  his  law,  nor  to  aim  at  his  glory  as  the  chief  end  of  life.
Yet  this  is  the  real,  the  sad  state  of  thousands  in  Christian  England  !  II.  Ig-
norance of  God  is  wilful.  u  Thou  hast  rejected  knowledge."  To  forget  is  an
act  of  negligence ;  to  reject  is  a  calm,  deliberate  sin,  a  positive  refusal  of  God's
kind  offers.  Not  the  mere  absence  of  knowledge,  a  deprivation  of  it;  but  a  denial
of  it,  an  affected  ignorance.  They  hated  the  light  and  loved  the  darkness.  There
is  no  guilt  in  rejecting  some  things,  but  to  refuse  the  offers  of  mercy  and  despise


54  H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.  [chap.  iv.


the  revelations  of  God's  love  in  his  Son,  is  to  sin  away  all  mercy.     "  For  if  we  sin
wilfully  after  that  we  have  received  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  there  remaineth  no
more  sacrifice  for  sin."   Deliberately  and  knowingly  to  forsake  God  and  the  services
of  the  sanctuary,  is  to  make  common  cause  with  ungodly  men   and  anti-christian
synagogues.     To  suppress  by  an  act  of  self-will   your  better  knowledge  and  con-
viction, is  to  reserve  yourself  for  future  punishment  and  rejection.     If  the  apostate
under  the  Old  Testament  was  punished  with  severe  penalty,  how  much  greater  the
punishment  of  the  sinner  against  greater  privileges  and  fuller  light !     "  Behold,  I
will  bring  evil  upon  this  people,  even  the  fruit  of  their  thoughts,  because  they  have
not  hearkened  unto  my  words,  nor  to  my  law,  but  rejected  it."     III.  Ignorance  of
God  is   destructive.     A  man  may  be  ignorant  of  mathematics,  astronomy,  and
geology,  without  suffering  much  ;  but  to  be  ignorant  of  God,  the  chief  and  highest
good,  is  to  rob  ourselves  of  happiness  and  expose  ourselves  to  death.     "  My  people
are  destroyed  for  lack  of  knowledge."      1.  Ignorance  perpetuates  folly.     Ignorant
men  fall  into  temptations,  seek  sensual  gratifications,  and  live  in  error.   Knowledge
is  valuable  for  its  own  sake,  and  when  rightly  used,  preserves  from  many  "foolish
lusts."     "  Be   assured,"  says  Dr  Chalmers,   "  it  is  not  because  the  people  know
much,  that  they  ever  become  the  willing  subjects  of  any  factious  or  unprincipled
demagogue.     It  is  just  because  they  know  too  little.     It  is  just  because  ignorance
is  the  field   on  which   the  quackery  of  a  political  impostor  ever  reaps  its  most
abuudant  harvest."     2.  Ignorance  destroys  present  enjoyment.     The  animal  has  all
the  instincts   necessary  to  make   it   happy  ;  but  man's  true  enjoyment  is  in  the
knowledge  and  love  of  God.     Human  beings  to  fulfil  their  vocations  must  have
knowledge.     We  are  dependent  for  happiness  upon  knowledge.     Every  evil  that
curses  mankind  is  connected  with  ignorance.   Hence  knowledge  is  light.   Ignorance
is  a  blind  guide,  and  its  results  are  often  more  fearful  than  the  cause  itself.     Ex-
clude knowledge  from  the  mind,  you  turn  it  into  a  world  of  darkness,  and  rob  it  ot
its  native  element.      Thus  driven  from  light,  no  brilliant  genius,  no  flashes  of
fancy,  can  enlighten  it.     These  will  scathe  like  the  lightning,  rather  than  bless
and  cheer,  and  leave  the  gloom  more  horrible.     Knowledge  is  life  and  health.
u  That  the  soul  be  without  knowledge,  it  is  not  good."     The  words  of  God  are  the
health  and  life  of  the  soul.     "  They  are  life  unto  those  that  find  them,  and  health
to  all  their  flesh."  Wisdom  is  the  indispensable  condition  of  physical  and  spiritual
health.     It  promotes  temperance,  and  gives  self-restraint.     It  teaches  submission  to
the  Divine  will,  and  leads  to  the  emancipation  of  our  noblest  powers  and  capacities.
It  secures  the  fullest  and  freest  development  of  body  and  mind  in  personal  life  and
activity  for  God.     Ignorance  is  sickness,  decay,  and  death.     Knowledge  unites  to
God,  but  ignorance  cuts  off  from  God.     "  My  people  are  cut  off  for  lack  of  know-
ledge "     Cut  off  from  the  source  of  life  and  enjoyment,  like  a  branch  lopped  off
from  the  tree.  Man  cannot  bear  fruit  of  himself,  hence  he  will  perish  if  not  united
to  God  in  knowledge  and  faith.     3.  Ignorance  destroys  future  happiness.    Eternal
life  is  suspended  in  knowledge,  for  men  " perish  for  lack  of  knowledge."     On  the
other  hand,  "  This  is  life  eternal,  to  know  thee  the  only  true  God  and  Jesus  Christ
whom  thou  hast  sent."  Knowledge  of  all  kinds  is  the  proper  wealth  of  our  rational
nature  :  but  to  captivate  us  with  the  knowledge  of  God,  it  is  set  forth  as  the  only
wealth  worth  possessing — the  only  science  which  conducts  to  life.     And  this  life
not  mere  unending  existence,  but  growing  knowledge  and  conformity  to  Christ.
.Religion  on  earth  consists  in  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  blessedness  in  heaven  con-
sists in  the  vision  of  God.     Well  may  we  pray  with  Professor  Hall,  "  0  Lord,
remove  our  ignorance,  that  we  may  know  thee ;  our  idleness,  that  we  may  seek
thee  ;  our  unbelief,  that  we  may  find  and  enjoy  thee."


Ignorance  of  God  :  A  Warning  to  the  Priests.

I.  Priests  blamed  for  the  ignorance  of  the  people.     They  were  appointed  to
teach  and  warn  the  people ;  but  were  unfaithful  to  their  trust,  and  suffered  the


CHAP.  IV.]


H0MJLET1C  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.


55


nation  to  sin.  1.  They  neglected  study.  "  Thou  hast  rejected  knowledge."  They  had
the  means,  but  did  not  improve  them.  They  had  the  law,  but  did  not  read  it.  The
preacher  shoidd  be  wise  and  teach  the  people  knowledge  (Ecc.  xii.  9);  should  study  to
make  provision  for  their  wants  (Matt.  xiii.  52)  ;  and  make  full  proof  of  his  ministry.
But  an  idle,  ignorant  minister,  is  a  disgrace  to  the  community,  and  a  curse  to  the
Church.  2.  They  lived  inmnsistent  lives.  They  professed  to  belong  to  God,  but
worshipped  the  calves  of  Jeroboam.  Through  poverty,  fear,  or  shame,  they  with-
held, suppressed  the  truth,  and  connived  at  the  nation's  sin.  They  shared  in  the
rejection  of  God's  truth,  and  brought  themselves  under  God's  curse.  "  I  will  also
reject  thee."  II.  Priests  punished  for  the  ignorance  of  the  people.  It  was  their
duty  to  remove  it,  but  they  encouraged  it  to  answer  their  own  selfish  ends.  Hence
the}7"  were  guilty,  partook  of  the  sins  of  the  people,  and  were  deprived  of  their  honour.
1.  They  were  cast  out  of  office  themselves.  "  Thou  shalt  be  no  priest  to  me."  Sad
fall !  God  will  not  retain  idle  and  ungodly  men  in  office.  Those  that  have  no
love  for  Christ  and  immortal  souls,  will  have  no  love  for  their  work,  and  display  no
activity  in  it.  "  Consider  this,"  says  Bishop  Taylor,  "  which  is  a  great  truth —
that  every  degree  of  love  to  the  world  is  so  much  taken  from  the  love  of  God."
"  Take  heed  unto  thyself,"  lest  thou  miscarry  and  become  a  castaway.  2.  They
deprived  their  posterity  of  honour.  "  I  will  also  forget  thy  children."  What  will
the  rising  generation  be  without  the  means  of  knowing  and  loving  God1?  What
will  the  nation  become  when  its  "  candlestick  is  removed  out  of  its  place  "  1  It  is
sad  to  be  forgotten  of  God.  The  sun  does  not  shine  on  more  wretched  creatures,
than  on  the  awful  masses  of  our  fellow-creatures  growing  up  in  ignorance  and
estrangement  from  God.  "  Where  there  is  no  vision,  the  people  perish."  God  only
knows  how  far  the  ministers  of  his  word  are  the  cause  of  this  destruction.  "  When
I  say  unto  the  wicked,  Thou  shalt  surely  die;  and  thou  givest  him  not  warning,  nor
speakest  to  warn  the  wicked  from  his  wicked  way,  to  save  his  life ;  the  same  wicked
man  shall  die  in  his  iniquity ;  but  his  blood  will  I  require  at  thine  hand  "  (Ezek.
iii  18  ;  cf.  Ps.  li.  14  ;  Acts  xx.  26).

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Rejecting  knowledge.  Proves — 1.  A
wrong  spirit  :  (a)  hating  to  be  taught,
(b)  despising  the  teacher,  (c)  resolved  to
sin.  2 .  A  mournful  indication :  (a)
pride,  (A)  contempt  of  God,  (c)  indiffer-
ence to  truth.  3.  A  fatal  result:  (a)
deadness  of  conscience,  (h)  unbelief  of
heart,  (c)  utter  rejection  of  God.

Forgetting  God.  1.  The  course,  for-
getting his  love  and  goodness,  word  and
power,  justice  and  grace.  2.  The  re-
sult: {(()  awful,  (h)  unexpected,  (c)  uni-
versal, (d)  inevitable.  "  Ignorance  is  so
far  from  being  the  mother  of  devotion,
that  it  is  the  mother  of  destruction ;
lack  of  knowledge  is  ruining  to  any
person  or  people  [Matt.  Henry]."

Parents  who  are  careless  as  to  them-


selves, as  to  their  own  lives,  as  to  their
own  shame  even,  still  long  that  their
children  should  not  be  as  themselves.
God  tries  to  touch  their  hearts  where  they
are  least  steeled  against  him.  He  says
not  /  will  forget  thee,  but  I  will  forget
those  nearest  thy  heart,  thy  children
[Pusey].

It  is  the  righteous  judgment  oi  God
upon  negligent  parents  and  unfaithful
ministers,  to  requite  their  children,  for
their  treatment  to  his.  "  I  will  also
forget  thy  children."  Parents  cannot
do  wrong  without  injuring  their  child-
ren. Ministers  cannot  neglect  their  duty
without  robbing  their  people.  The  ini-
quities of  the  fathers  and  teachers  shall
be  visited  on  their  children.


HOMILETIGS.
The  Danger  of  Worldly  Prosperity. — Verses  7 — 9.

The  increase  in  ay  refer  to  number,  or  wealth,  power,  and  dignity.     Israel  had
grown  into  a  strong  and  powerful  nation,  but  increase  of  greatness  was  attended


56  HOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.  [chap.  tv.


with  increase  of  sin.  Its  prosperity  was  attributed  to  idols  (ii.  7),  thought  to  he
the  fruit  of  their  worship,  and  strengthened  them  in  their  delusion.  God  would
therefore  turn  their  glory  into  shame  and  make  them  a  warning  to  others.

I.  In  worldly  prosperity  men  forget  God.  The  standard  of  revolt  was  erected
in  the  first  sin.  The  history  of  man  since  has  been  an  endeavour  to  build  an
empire,  governed  by  laws  and  replenished  with  resources,  independent  of  God.
Having  by  apostasy  cut  himself  off  from  the  true  God,  he  has  joined  himself  to
idols,  or  in  his  own  sufficiency  deified  himself  and  made  himself  his  own  first  and
last,  all  in  all.  1.  God  is  not  recognized.  The  gifts  are  received  with  ingratitude
or  attributed  to  human  skill  and  effort.  God  is  shut  out  entirely  from  men's
thoughts  and  business.  When  men  do  not  fear,  they  sink  into  utter  forget  fulness
of  God,  into  practical  atheism.  "Because  they  have  left  off  to  take  to  the  Lord,"
ver.  10.  2.  God  is  forsaken.  "As  they  were  increased  so  they  sinned  against
me."  It  is  easy  to  forsake  God  when  once  he  is  forgotten.  Worldlings  make  theii
prosperity  minister  to  their  pride  and  ingratitude.  Increase  of  wealth  occasions
increase  of  pomp  u  Jeshurun  waxed  fat  and  kicked,  then  he  forsook  God  which
made  him,  and  lightly  esteemed  the  rock  of  his  salvation."  An  abundant  popula-
tion begets  haughty  self-reliance,  and  tempts  nations  to  war.  Eiches  and  wealth
are  not  evil  in  themselves.  Nor  is  the  mere  possession  of  them  wrong.  In  almost
every  stage  of  civilization  they  procure  the  necessities  and  conveniences  of
life,  and  may  be  made  the  means  of  doing  good.  But  to  'desire  them  for  their  own
sake,  to  put  them  in  the  place  of  the  highest  good,  and  to  let  them  beget  a  rapacious
worldly  spirit,  is  to  abuse  them  and  sin  against  God.  "  A  man's  life  consisteth  not
in  the  abundance  of  the  things  which  he  possesseth."  II.  In  worldly  prosperity
men  become  covetons.  "  They  eat  up  the  sin  of  my  people,  and  they  set  their
heart  on  their  iniquity."  The  priests  made  a  gain  of  the  sins  of  the  people.  They
encouraged  idolatry,  which  involved  desertion  of  God,  and  connived  at  sinful
customs.  The  more  the  people  sinned,  the  more  sin-offerings  were  presented.
Their  fees  and  support  were  derived  from  the  calf  worship.  They  set  their  heart,
i.  e.  their  longing  desire,  upon  their  iniquity,  had  an  interest  in  its  growth,  and  did
all  in  their  power  to  uphold  and  increase  it.  1.  False  religionists  feed  upon  sin.
Religious  teachers  are  most  assuming  in  their  authority  and  dictatorial  in  their  con-
duct. They  feed  upon  the  ignorance  and  are  worshipped  by  the  superstitions  cf
the  people.  Servility  and  flattery  exalt  them  and  puff  them  up  with  pride  A
train  of  followers,  a  multitude  of  dependants,  look  up  to  them  when  they  go  out  and
when  they  come  in.  "  Self,  is  Dives  in  the  mansion,  clothed  in  purple,  and  faring
sumptuously  every  day — the  cause  of  Christ,  is  Lazarus  lying  at  his  gate,  and  fed
only  with  the  crumbs  which  fall  from  his  table."  Religious  professors  are  satisfied
with  forms  and  ceremonies,  anxious  for  the  reputation  without  performing  the
duties  of  Cliristians,  and  feed  upon  merit,  not  upon  Christ.  They  turn  religion  into
traffic,  and  "  suppose  that  gain  is  godliness."  2.  Covetous  men  feed  upon  sin
Every  passion  seeks  to  justify  itself,  but  covetousness  is  defended  and  espoused  bj
all  the  passions.  Covetousness  was  manifest  in  the  first  transgression,  and  has
maintained  a  fatal  ascendency  ever  since.  It  turned  the  nations  of  old  into  rapacity,
arrogance,  and  pride,  which  braved  the  very  throne  of  God.  Alas  !  it  changes  the
priests  and  ministers  of  God  into  mercenary  hirelings,  "  The  heads  of  Zion  judge
for  reward,  and  the  prophets  therefore  divine  for  money."  All  covetous  men  seek
to  feed,  to  support  themselves,  by  fraud  and  deceit ;  by  worldly  lusts  and  pleasure ;
by  idolatry  and  selfishness.  "  The  covetous  man  lives  as  if  the  world  was  made
altogether  for  Mm,"  says  South,  "and  not  he  for  the  world;  to  take  in  everything
and  part  with  nothing."  Worldly  men  have  perverted  spiritual  appetites,  relish
only  inferior  and  sinful  pursuits,  and  feed  upon  ashes  (Is.  xl.  20).  III.  In  worldly
prosperity  men  are  mined.  "  I  will  punish  them  for  their  ways."  "  Therefore
will  I  change  their  glory  into  shame."  Sin  brings  its  own  punishment.  The  very
objects  which  excite  it  form  a  rod  for  its  chastisement.     God  is  perpetually  remind-


chap,  iv.]  H0M1LET1C  COMMENTARY.  HOSE  A.  57


ing  men  that  pursuit  of  worldly  good  is  attended  with  great  anxiety  and  exhaust-
ing toil — that  its  possession  is  often  a  mortification  and  its  loss  an  anguish — that  it
is  dangerous  and  destructive,  leading  men  "  into  temptation  and  a  snare,  and  pierc-
ing them  through  with  many  sorrows."  1.  Ruin  instead  of  glory.  I  will  change
their  glory  into  shame.  God  overrules  the  purposes  and  pursuits  of  men.  They
reap  what  they  do  not  sow,  and  are  rewarded  with  the  opposite  of  what  they  anti-
cipate. God  can  strip  worldly  prosperity  of  all  its  glory,  turn  the  ornaments  of
character,  and  the  acquisitions  of  fortune,  into  a  curse  instead  of  a  blessing.  2.
Glory  the  means  of  ruin.  Beauty  is  often  the  cause  of  pride.  Pride  and  a  haughty
spirit  come  before  a  fall.  Ambition,  power,  and  population  drive  nations  to  war
and  destruction.  "  Ambition  overleaps  itself,  and  falls  on  the  contrary  side."
Amaziah  would  take  no  warning,  lost  his  own  wealth,  and  wasted  the  treasures  in
God's  temple,  and  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  were  broken  down,  and  the  city  exposed
to  shame  and  contempt  (2  Kings  xiv.  10).  3.  Ruin  upon  ail  the  people.  "Like
people,  like  priest."  Priest  and  people  were  alike  in  sin  and  must  suffer  in  punish-
ment. "  As  with  the  people,  so  with  the  priest"  (Is.  xxiv.  2).  Prosperity  would
not  exempt  the  one,  nor  sanctity  secure  the  other.  None  would  escape,  all  must
be  carried  away  into  disgrace  and  death.  The  people  shelter  themselves  under  the
example  of  the  priest:  and  the  priest  excuses  himself  by  the  power  of  number,  the
weakness  of  our  nature,  and  the  strength  of  temptation;  but  God  "  will  punish  them
for  their  ways."  The  wicked  may  prosper  and  rule  for  a  while;  but  God  will  visit
them.  They  act  foolishly  by  turning  God's  mercies  to  their  own  destruction,  and
because  they  prosper  confirm  themselves  in  their  folly.  Their  fame  will  become
infamous,  their  disgrace  conspicuous,  and  their  "  shame  will  be  their  promotion  "
(Prov.  iii.  35).     "  The  prosperity  of  fools  shall  destroy  them."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

A  just  retribution  :  if  we  turn  God's  apparel,  and  covetousness,  so  prevalent,

glory  into  shame  by  idolatry   (Ps.  cvi.  Ministers  conniving  at  the  corrupt  ways

20 ;  Jer.  ii.  2  ;  Eom.   i.   23  ;  Phil.   iii.  of  the  people,  and  the  people  screening

19) ;  God  vr)l  takeaway  glory  and  give  their    sin    behind   the   worldliness   of

us  our  shame.     "  Such  is  the  course  of  ministers,  are  both  alike  in  guilt,  and

sin  and  chastisement.     God  bestows  on  shall  therefore  be  also  alike  in  punish-

man  gifts,  which  may  be  to  him  matter  ment.     God  will  make  their  sin  their

of   praise   and   glory,    if  only   ordered  punishment;    their  own    presumptuous

aright  to  their  highest  and  only   true  doings  shall  be  their  reward  [Fausset].
end,  the  glory  of  God;  man  perverts  Like  priests  like  'people.     1.   Like  in

them  to  vain  glory  and  thereby  to  sin  ;  moral  character — good  or  bad.     2.  Like

God  turns  the  gifts,  so  abused,  to  shame  "  in  moral  conduct— consistent  or  incon-

[Pusey].  sistent.       3.    Like   in  moral  destiny —

In  our  own  days  Christian  ministers  saved  or  lost.     "Let  your  life  be  a  com-

and  Christian  laymen,  from  fear  of  man  mentary  on  your  sermons  "  [Lamont].

and    love   of   popularity,    shrink    from  "The  life  of  a  pious  clergyman  is  visible

denouncing  the  fashionable    sins    and  rhetoric "  [Hooker].

follies  of  all  classes,  the  spurious  liberal-  „  ,ir,          ,.                    . .  .    .,  .    .

,.   .          .,7            r.         ,  "  when  nations  are  to  perish  in  their  sins,

ism   m  religion,    the   equivocal   amuse-  'Tis  in  the  Church  the  leprosy  begins."

ments,   luxury,  absence  of  modesty  in  [Cowper,]

HOMILETICS.

Sinful  Indulgences. —  Verses  10 — 14.

Goil  will  visit  the  priests  for  their  presumptuous  sins.  Those  who  eat  up  greedily
the  sin  of  the  people  shall  receive  neither  enjoyment  nor  sustenance.  Insatiable
desire  is  its  own  tormentor.     Sensual  indulgence  can  never  satisfy  the  cravings  of


58  HOMILETJC  COMMENTARY :  HOSEA.  [cuap.  iv


the  soul.     "  Ye  eat,  but  ye  have  not  enough;  ye  drink,  but  ye  are  not  filled  with
drink."

I.  Sensual  indulgences  do  not  satisfy  our  wants.     "  For  they  shall  eat  and
not  have  enough."     The  food  of  the  priests  did  not  nourish  their  bodies,  nor  satisfy
their  greedy  appetites.     Sinful    desires   are  never   satisfied.     The  more  they  are
gratified  the  more  intensely  do  they  crave,  and  cry,  like  the  horse-leech,  "Give,  give."
Every  indulgence  creates  the  appetite.     Men  seek  happiness  in  created  good,  and
are  wretched  because  they  do  not  find  it.     God  made  man  upright,  with  a  healthy
spiritual  appetite,  that  sought  its  support  and  fruition  in  him.     But  deceived  by
sin,  man  sought  out  many  inventions,  prepared  many  idols,  and  substituted  many
pleasures  for  God,  which  cannot  appease  his  hunger.  The  debaucheries  of  drunken-
ness, gluttony,  and  lust,  are  husks  only  fit  for  swine.     The  cares  and  toils  of  sin,
the  pursuit  of  wealth  and  honour,  of  fame  and  fashion,  indicate  the  disease,  but
give  no  satisfaction  to  the  soul.     Even  amid  the  surfeits  of  earth's  richest  feasts
men  cry,  "  Who  will  show  us  any  good  'I  "     Charles  the  Fifth,  after  a  life  spent  in
military  pursuits  and  the  active,  energetic  prosecution  of  ambitious  designs,  resigned
his  crown  sated  with  its  enjoyment.     The  poet  Campbell,  who  sung  in  early  youth
"  The  Pleasures  of  Hope,"  in  the  evening  of  life  said  to  a  circle  of  friends,  "  As
for  fame,  it  is  a  bubble  that  must  soon  burst.     Earned  for  others,  shared  with
others,  it  was  sweet ;  but,  at  my  age,  to  my  own  solitary  experience,  it  is  bitter.
Left  in  my  chamber  alone  with  myself,  is  it  wonderful  my  philosophy  at  times
takes  fright ;  that  I  rush  into  company  ;  resort  to  that  which  blunts  but  heals  no
pang ;  and  then,  sick  of  the  world,  and  dissatisfied  with  myself,  shrink  back  into
solitude  1 "     They  spend  their  lives  and  waste  their  substance  in  that  which  disap-
points; "confessing  all  the  time,"  says  a  writer,  "that  they  fail  even  when  in
form  they  succeed,  and  showing  by  their  symptoms  of  disappointment  and  dissatisfac-
tion   that  their  objects,   whether  gained  or  lost,  have  no  relation  to  their  wants."
Nothing  can  satisfy  the  immortal  soul  that  is  not  adapted  to  its  nature  and  consti-
tution.    The  enjoyment  must  be  lasting  and  real,  but  the  pleasures  of  sin  are
short-lived  and  only  "  for  a  season."     They  gratify  and  excite,  but  never  satisfy  the
mind.     Our  thirst  dries  up  all  earthly  things,  and  our  hunger  craves  for  fuller  joys
than  sensual  indulgences.    We  must  go  out  of  ourselves,  beyond  the  things  of  sense,
and  feed  on  God,  the  only  good.     II.  Sensual  indulgences  are  pursued  by  un-
lawful means.     "  They  shall  commit  whoredom  and  shall  not  increase."     1.   They
are   increased  by  sinful  methods.     Whoredom  was  not  the  way  to  increase  their
offspring.     Children  are  a  heritage  from  God.     Polygamy  is  against  the  law  of  God
and  the  welfare  of  humanity.     The  fruit  of  illicit  intercourse  God  will  turn  to
decay.     Those  who  seek  to  increase  in  their  families,  to  prosper  in  their  business,
and  secure  worldly  wealth,  by  unlawful  means,  fight  against  God.     Dishonest  ways
can  never  prosper.     Nothing  can  succeed  without  God.     He  can  desert  the  means
or  curse  the  issue.     "  Treasures  of  wickedness  profit  nothing  (Prov.   x.  2) ;  ill-
gotten  gains  are  a  dangerous  and  uncertain  possession  (xiii.  1 1 ;  xxi.  6) ;  and  the
wages  of  unrighteousness  will  be  the  reward  of  those  who  follow  ways  of  covetous-
ness  and  sin."     2.  They  are  sought  in  foryetfulness  of  God.   "  They  have  left  off  to
take  heed  to  the  Lord."     Once  they  regarded  God's  authority  and  law,  but  now
they  take  no  heed  at  all.     God  is  neither  acknowledged  in  worship  nor  discerned
in  providence.     They  live  in  total  forge tfulness  and  disregard.     Men  should  "  take
heed,"  look  to  God,   "  as  the  eyes  of  servants  look  unto  the  hands  of  their  masters,"
for  support,  direction,  and  duty.  .  But  when  the  eye  is  fixed  on  lower  objects,  and
the  heart  centred  on  sinful  pursuits,  God  is  forgotten  and  forsaken.     The  lawless
and  hopeless  ways  of  men  spring  from  disregard  to  God  and  neglect  of  his  word.
When  the  eye  ceases  to  watch  God,  they  fall  into  error,  wander  amid  the  pomps,
and  vanities,  and  lusts  of  the  world.     "  Show  me  what  thou  truly  lovest,"  says
Fichte,  "  show  me  what  thou  seekest  and  strivest  for  with  thy  whole  heart,  when
thou  hopest  to  attain  to  true  enjoyment,  and  thou  hast  hereby  shown  me  thy  lifa


chap,  iv.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  59


"What  thou  lovest  is  that  thou  livest.  This  very  love  is  thy  life,  thy  root,  the
seal,  the  central  point  of  thy  being."  III.  Sensual  indulgences  injure  the
spiritual  nature.  They  w  ?re  so  attached  to  whoredom  and  wine  that  they  seemed
to  have  lost  all  sense  of  moral  duty  and  religious  obligation,  and  given  themselves
up  to  "  work  all  manner  of  sin  even  with  greediness."  I.  Sensual  indulgence*
darken  the  understanding.  They  "  take  away  the  heart  "  from  God  their  Bene-
factor. Sinful  passions  brutalize  men,  and  "  a  brutish  man  knoweth  not."
The  unbelieving  heart  does  not  know  nor  understand  God  and  his  word.  Men
may  parade  their  intellect,  and  boast  of  their  gifts,  but  estrangement  from  God
degrades  their  condition,  and  sinks  them  in  the  rank  of  being.  If  we  have  no
sanctified  principle  within  us,  we  look  at  God's  works,  interpret  God's  ways,  and
receive  God's  blessing,  just  like  the  beasts  of  the  field.  We  extract  no  useful  and
spiritual  thoughts  from  them.  We  are  content  with  the  natural  use,  nay,  we
degrade  the  natural  use  of  things.  Vain  imaginations  darken  the  foolish  heart
(Rom.  i.  22).  When  the  light  and  life  of  God  have  departed  from  the  soul,  when
the  wicked  have  cast  out  the  knowledge  of  God,  God  will  give  "  them  over  to  a
reprobate  mind ; "  a  mind  void  of  judgment  and  perception,  weakened  in  power  to
apprehend  and  approve  of  the  truth  and  goodness  of  God  (Rom.  i.  28).  When  once
sinful  indulgence  darkens  the  mind,  it  becomes  stupid,  and  its  active  powers  are
suffered  to  sleep  in  stupidity.  Men  could  not  preserve  the  truth  and  philosophy,
could  not  retain  the  knowledge  of  God,  without  moral  aid.  Habits  of  sense  and
sin,  of  indulgence  and  passion,  destroy  the  perception  of  the  mind  and  blunt  the
understanding.  Sensual  life  impairs  and  paralyzes  the  intuitive  powers  and  bedims
the  judgment.  What  a  sad  picture  to  see  the  decay  of  knowledge,  to  see  the  moral
sense  extinguished  in  man,  the  king  and  lord,  the  minister  and  interpreter,  of
nature  !  It  is  melancholy  to  see  the  fair  creation,  which  God  pronounced  good,
poisoned  and  cursed  by  disease  and  death.  But  to  make  religion  degenerate  into
idolatry,  to  pervert  the  moral  instincts  of  our  nature,  and  confound  by  evil  habits
and  constant  crimes  the  distinction  between  right  and  wrong,  light  and  darkness,
is  sad  beyond  degree  !  "If  the  light  that  is  in  thee  be  darkness,  how  great  is  that
darkness  ! "  2.  Sensual  indidgences  deaden  the  affections.  Man  is  a  creature  of
appetites  and  instinctive  desires,  in  common  with  the  mere  animal.  If  he  were
nothing  more,  he  would  be  innocent  in  the  abandonment  of  himself  to  their  gratifi-
cation. But  they  need  controlling,  lest  his  higher  interests  be  endangered — his  in-
stincts and  affections  must  be  subordinated  to  a  sense  of  duty  and  the  love  of  God.
If  the  sensuous  predominate  over  the  spiritual,  and  self-indulgence  and  self-gratifi-
cation become  the  law  of  life,  then  his  nobler  feelings  are  crushed  and  his  affections
vitiated.  "  Fleshly  lusts  "  war  against  the  soul,  the  very  centre  and  citadel  of
man's  nature.  The  "  divers  lusts  and  pleasures,"  to  which  natural  man  is  a  slave,
are  dishonourable  to  the  Christian  and  perilous  to  all.  They  disturb  the  peace  of
the  soul  by  corroding  care  and  by  the  tumult  of  passion — they  darken  its  vision,
and  taint  its  powers  with  corruption — they  threaten  its  life,  and  intercept  its  com-
munication with  God  and  spiritual  influences.  To  be  carnally-minded  is  death.
In  spiritual  death  men  are  "  past  feeling  "  and  beyond  the  charms  of  life.  The
conscience  is  stifled,  the  heart  hardened  through  the  deceitfulness  of  sin,  and  they
are  left  without  moral  sense,  and  shame,  and  hope.  3.  Sensual  indulgences  debase
the  moral  nature.  Every  created  object  expresses  some  thought,  some  quality  of
the  Divine  nature.  The  moral  character  of  God  was  revealed  in  the  moral  nature
of  man.  "  God  created  man  in  his  own  image,  in  the  image  of  God  created  he
him,"  in  knowledge  and  true  holiness.  "Man,"  says  Clement,  "  is  the  most  beautiful
hymn  to  the  praise  of  the  Deity."  Divine  properties  in  him  were  incarnated  and
humanized,  and  lodged  in  him  were  principles  before  at  large.  He  was  "crowned
with  glory  and  honour."  But  he  voluntarily  broke  away  from  God,  deranged  the
harmony  of  his  moral  nature,  disturbed  the  peace  of  the  universe,  and  exposed
himself  to  death.     Sin  has  defaced  God's  image,  and  man  has  lost  his  original


to  ROMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA  [chap.  it.


righteousness.      The  understanding  is  blinded  by  ignorance  and  prejudice.     The
heart  is  alienated  from  God  by  wicked  works.   The  affections  are  disordered,  and  the
desires  corrupted.     Man  is  now  subject  to  sense  and  a  slave  to  sin.     He  denies  him-
self by  the  filthiness  of  the   flesh,  and  deforms  himself  by  sensual   indulgence.
Luxury  and  lusts  bind  the  will  and  make  him  unable  and  indisposed  to  restore
himself.     He  has  become  the  sport  and  prey  of  his  passions.     There  is  a  tendency
to  animalism,  and  an  immortal  being  is  compelled  to  ride  on  the  back  of  lusts  and
"  presumptuous  sins."     There  is  a  loss  of  the  consciousness  of  God  and  a  forgetful-
ness  of  the  presence  of  God.     The  supernatural  tie  is  broken,  and  man  wanders  into
error  and  lives  in  earthly,  sensual,  and  devilish  sins.     Any  idol  debases  the  moral
nature,  and  changes  the  glory  which  distinguishes  man  "  into  the  similitude  of  an
ox  "  (Ps.  cvi.  20).     IV.  Sensual  indulgences  are  oftenconnected  with  supersti-
tion.    "  My  people  ask  counsel  at  their  stocks,  and  their  staff  declareth  unto  them."
It  was  a  sad  fall  for  the  people  of  the  living  God  to  consult  a  heathen  staff  and  say
to  mere  wood,  My  father  (Jer.  ii.  27).    But  the  descent  is  easy  and  gradual.  There
is  a  tendency  in  man  to  depart  from  God,  to  acquire  and  foster  false  ideas  of  God,
even  in  the  midst  of  the  clearest  indications  of  his  existence  and  the  tenderest
reasons  for  clinging  to  him.     Guilt,  fear,  and  despair  isolate  the  soul  and  turn  it
from  God — make  it  drop,  and  cut  it  off  as  a  plant  from  the  light  of  the  sun.    Then
we  approach  God  in  terror.     We  create  gods  of  our  own  fancy,  philosophy,  and
early  prepossessions.     "  Fear  made  the  gods,"  says  a  heathen  writer.     It  is  certain
that  superstition,  polytheism,  and  atheism  are  only  the  counterpart  and  exponent
of  the  moral  condition  of  nations.     Our  nature  is  religious,  and  the  corrupt  heart
will  produce  gods  like  itself.     The  philosopher  contemplates  nature,  rejects  a  per-
sonal God,  and  becomes  a  pantheist.     The  wicked  wishes  there  to  be  no  God;
governed  by  his  wishes,  and  led  to  believe  against  all  moral  evidence,  he  says  there
is  no  God,  and  becomes  an  atheist.  The  ignorant  multitude,  dreading  God,  become
superstitious,  and  foster  and  express  their  religious  feeling  in  figurative  representa-
tions "  made  by  art  and  man's  device."     Men  associate  their  notions  of  Deity  with
the  palpable  realities  by  which  they  are  surrounded,  and  in  every  light  of  heaven
and  every  element  of  nature  they  behold  the  presence  of  a  presiding  power.     The
grove  and   the  mountain,   the  valley  and  the   stream,  have  been  peopled  with
divinities.     The  pride  of  monarchs  and  the  ambition  of  heroes,  the  veneration  of
priests  and  the  licentiousness  of  people,  have  swelled  the  catalogue  of  gods.     In
Egypt  and  Assyria,  in  Greece  and  Rome,  in  their  palmiest  days,  idolatry  was  sup-
ported by  the  deepest  principles,  the  most  violent  passions,  and  the  most  obvious
interest  of  legislator  and  prince,  sculptor  and  poet.     Originating  in  the  depraved
propensities  of  fallen  nature,  depending  upon  their  activity  for  existence  and  sup-
port, it  afforded  a  patron  for  every  vice,  a  plea  for  every  cruelty;  it  consecrated
every  lust  and  sanctioned  every  crime.     Its  terrible  effects  are  written  in  the
destruction  of  institutions,  the  corruption  of  morals,  and  the  doom  of  nations.
Modern  civilization  fares  no  better.     If  men  do  not  consult  blocks  of  wood  and
stone,  they  kneel  before  statues  and  pictures,  endow  human  conceptions  with  the
attributes  of  Divinity,  and  set  the  creature  on  the  throne  of  the  Creator.     We  have
Ritualism  and  Romanism,  priestcraft  and  priesthood,  sacrifice  and  offering,  with
their  deadly  evils.     The  mind  is  filled  with  narrow  conceptions,  the  eyes  are  habitu-
ated to  artistic  nullities,  and  the  morals  are  polluted  by  gross  caricatures  and  sen-
suous worship.     In  the  bosom  of  the  Christian  Church  untaught  myriads  are  sink-
ing into  modern  heathenism,  and  believe  "  the  Godhead  is  like  unto  gold,  or  silver,
or  stone."     We  have  material  idolatry  and  superstition  in  the  present  day.     The
gods  of  sensualism  are  represented  by  lovers  of  pleasure  more  than  lovers  of  God —
by  those  who  seek  enjoyment  in  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  the
pride  of  hfe.     The  worshippers  of  the  golden  calf  bow  down  to  riches  and  worldly
success.  Devotees  of  literature  and  science  deify  Nature  and  turn  her  into  a  temple
of  adoration.     Worldliness,  idolatry,  and  sx^perstition,  in  their  most  refined  and


rn\p.  iv.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  fll


plausible  forms,  vitiate  our  conceptions  of  God,  lower  the  standard  of  morality,
wounds  society  at  its  core,  and  spread  dire  results  in  families  and  nations.  They
have  breathed  pestilence  in  the  ordinances  of  the  Christian  Church— corrupting
their  simplicity,  polluting  their  sanctity,  and  tarnishing  their  glory.  Though  up-
held by  the  traditions  of  antiquity,  the  suggestions  of  expediency,  or  the  dictates
of  human  authority,  they  entice,  deceive,  debase,  and  are  rebellious  against  the
authority,  the  absolute  and  sole  right  of  God  to  claim  our  homage.  "  Thou  shalt
not  make  unto  thee  any  graven  image,  or  any  likeness  of  anything  that  is  in  heaven
above,  or  that  is  in  the  earth  beneath."  V.  Sensual  indulgences  affect  posterity.
"  Therefore  the  people  that  doth  not  understand  shall  fall."  Sin  and  suffering  are
inseparable.  The  moral  order  of  the  universe  must  dissolve  and  perish  before  a
breach  of  God's  law  can  bring  anything  but  evil  and  distress.  Under  the  moral
government  of  God,  the  consequences  of  an  act  do  not  pass  away  with  the  trans-
gressor. We  are  taught  to  calculate  upon  remote  results,  impressed  with  our
responsibility  and  aided  in  duty.  The  Jews  were  commanded  to  obey  God — taught
that  obedience  would  secure,  and  disobedience  would  forfeit,  their  privileges  to  their
posterity,  and  reminded  that  the  principle  of  involving  their  children  in  the  tem-
poral condition  of  the  fathers  was  a  just  and  merciful  provision.  Eeligion  appeals
to  the  strongest  instincts  of  our  nature,  guards  its  purity  by  enlisting  the  affection
of  parents  for  their  offspring,  and  grafting  on  that  affection  a  salutary  fear  of  the
visitations  of  God.  1.  By  the  influence  of  example  sensual  indulgence  affects
posterity.  "  Therefore  your  daughters  shall  commit  whoredom,  and  your  spouses
shall  commit  adultery."  Children  naturally  imitate,  do  as  you  do,  not  as  you
say,  and  "  catch  the  infection "  of  parents.  Hence  a  wise  man  speaks  of  his
children  as  his  "  future  state."  According  to  example,  will  this  future  be  good  or
evil,  a  success  or  a  failure.  If  parents  drink  and  swear,  neglect  the  house  and
forsake  the  service  of  God,  will  their  children  walk  in  any  other  way  %  If  fathers
and  mothers  are  spendthrifts,  pleasure-seekers,  and  indulgent  in  vice,  their  children
will  follow  their  steps,  and  God  recompenses  parents  in  their  children.  The  child
copies  the  foibles  of  the  father  and  pleases  him ;  he  copies  his  vices  and  punishes
him.  Men  may  love  their  sins,  but  they  will  be  alarmed  when  they  see  them  in
their  posterity.  Antipathies  are  imbibed,  reproduced,  and  intensified.  Lusts  are
bred  and  born,  and  bring  forth  death  in  the  rising  generation.  In  the  French
Eevolution,  the  children  amused  themselves  by  killing  birds  and  small  animals  with
little  guillotines.  This  was  the  natural  result  of  what  they  had  seen.  Children
live  again  the  lives  of  their  parents,  act  their  deeds,  and  are  rewarded  or  punished
by  their  example.  "  God  layeth  up  his  iniquity  for  his  children."  2.  By  a  natural
law  sensual  indulgence  affects  posterity.  Parents  and  children,  the  present  and
the  future  generation,  are  bound  together  not  by  accidental  circumstances,  but  by
organic  unity.  The  existing  generation  is  giving  the  impress  of  its  character  to  the
one  that  is  to  follow  it.  No  man  liveth  unto  himself.  Every  action  in  this  life
is  the  beginning  of  a  chain  of  results,  the  end  of  which  cannot  be  seen.  As  in  the
natural,  so  in  the  moral  world,  there  is  a  "  conservation  of  force."  Example  is
contagious.  Men  beneficially  or  perniciously  influence  others,  raise  them  up  or
bring  them  down  to  their  own  standard  of  morality.  Good  and  evil  are  diffusive,
and  seeds  of  conduct  ripen  and  reappear  in  the  life  of  others.  "  That  which  is  born
of  evil  begets  evil,"  says  Euskin,  "  and  that  which  is  born  of  valour  and  honour
teaches  valour  and  honour."  The  sensualist  and  the  sabbath-breaker,  the  drunkard
and  the  glutton,  are  spreading  "  the  savour  of  death  unto  death  !"  The  wicked  and
licentious  are  influencing  the  morals  of  those  around  them.  The  health  and  hap-
piness, the  honour  and  the  degradation,  of  posterity  are  in  the  power  of  the  present.
When  children  are  "born  thieves,"  or  "born  liars,"  their  parents  and  progenitors
are  to  blame.  Drunkards  beget  drunkards ;  dishonesty  and  lusts  are  hereditary
vices.  Sensual  and  vicious  parents  beget  sensual  and  vicious  children.  Diseased
parents  transmit  weakened  constitutions  and  diseased  tendencies  to  their  offspring.


62


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.


[chap,  it


Thus  "the  evil  that  men  do,"  as  well  as  the  good  they  do,  "lives  after  them."
The  law  of  influence  is  a  continuous,  ever-increasing  power,  working  consequences
to  the  end  of  time.  "  Thou  recompensest  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  into  the  bosom
of  their  children  after  them."


HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Yer.  10.  Take  heed  to  the  Lord.  1.
God  the  object  of  love,  regard,  and  life.
2.  When  men  do  not  take  heed,  disre-
gard God,  they  fall  into  sin,  wander  into
the  vanities  and  lusts  of  the  world.  3.
Culpable  neglect  of  God,  persisted  in,  is
lawless  and  hopeless,  involves  the  loss
of  blessing,  and  ruin.  "  As  the  true
cause  of  all  men's  departure  is  their  not
serious  minding  of  God,  that  they  might
observe  and  love  him,  so  where  this
neglect  is  he  cares  not  for  external  form
and  performance,  and  especially  is  he
provoked  when  men  make  apostasy  from
better  things  to  this  temper,  for  it  is
challenged  as  the  root  of  their  miscar-
riage and  God's  judgments,  because
they  have  left  off,"  &c.  [Hutcheson\.

Yer.  11.  The  Triple  Association.
Whoredom,  voluptuousness,  and  drunk-
enness— their  influence  upon  individu-
als, families,  and  societies.  "As  it  is
God's  judgment  on  unfaithful  ministers
and  people  that  they  are  given  up  to
sensuality,  so  that  will  soon  besot  them
and  make  them  sapless  in  their  doctrine
and  careless  in  their  duty"  [Hutcheson\.

The  Threefold  Apostasy.  1.  By
whoredom,  or  illicit  worship  rendered  to
heathen  gods  by  the  chosen  people.
This  worship  was  spiritual  fornication,
and  by  it  their  hearts  were  captivated,
taken  away  from  that  exclusive  trust
and  allegiance  which  they  owed  to  God,
their  covenant  King.  2.  By  yayin,
wine — the  type  of  sensual  gratification
— their  hearts  had  been  taken  away
from  supreme  affection  to  God,  their
Divine  Redeemer  and  Benefactor.  3.
By  tirosh,  the  fruit  of  the  vine — the
type  of  natural  earthly  good  —  their
hearts  had  been  captivated  from  God,
the  infinite  goodness  and  Fountain  of
spiritual  joy.  This  was  the  apostasy  of
which  the  children  of  Abraham  had
been  guilty;  they  went  after  strange  gods
instead  of  the  true  God;  their  best
affections  centred  in  sensual  pleasures,


instead  of  being  fixed  upon  the  Divine
love;  and  their  estimate  of  good  was
limited  to  earthly  things  (represented  by
tirosh,  one  of  the  most  delicious  of
natural  elements),  instead  of  embracing
him  "  from  whom  all  blessings  flow."
Or  taking  the  ascending  scale,  their
understanding  was  darkened,  for  they
esteemed  temporal  good  above  the  Giver
of  eternal  good;  their  affections  were
sensualized,  by  being  exclusively  en-
gaged with  animal  delights;  and  their
spiritual  nature  was  debased,  by  being
prostrated  before  stupid  idols  [Temp.
Commentary'].

Yer.  12.  Idolatry  does  not  consist
merely  in  calling  upon  idols,  but  also  in
trust  in  our  own  righteousness,  works,
and  service,  in  riches  and  human  in-
fluence and  power.  And  this,  as  it  is
the  most  common,  is  also  the  most
harmful  idolatry  [Luther].

Idolatry  never  stands  alone.  All  the
sins  of  Israel  were  centred  in  it.  By
association  even  good  was  magnetized
with  evil,  and  confirmed  it.  In  heathen
nations  it  is  connected  with  cruel  and
barbarous  rites — in  modern  times,  las-
civiousness  and  intemperance,  with  all
their  attendant  evils,  follow  in  its  train.

Yer.  13,  14.  When  men  forsake
God,  mark  the  steps  of  degradation.  1.
They  worship  sticks  and  stocks,  inferior
creatures.  2.  They  seek  counsel  and
direction  from  them,  and  take  any  al-
lusion for  response.  3.  They  set  up
human  ordinances  for  Divine,  the
creature  for  the  Creator,  and  consecrate
mountains  and  hills,  groves  and  valleys,
as  temples  of  superstition.  4.  They
forsake  God's  direction,  go  from  under
his  providence  and  protection.  God
will  not  accept  any  but  spiritual  wor-
ship, and  all  who  forsake  him  shall
perish.  5.  They  bring  ruin  upon  them-
selves. "  The  people  that  doth  not  un-
derstand shall  fall"  and  be  confounded
(Prov.  x.  8,   10).     "  Ignorance  which


chap.it.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ROSEA.  63


we  might  avoid  or  cure,  if  we  would,  is  often  to  the  children,  both  in  the  way

itself  a  sin.    It  cannot  excuse  sin.  They  of    nature,   that   the    children    inherit

shall,  he  says,  fall  or  be  cast  headlong.  strong  temptations  to  their  parents'  sin,

Those  who  blind  their  eyes,  so  as  not  to  and   by   way  of    example,    that    they

see   or   understand    God's    will,    bring  greedily  imitate,  often  exaggerate  them,

themselves  to  sudden  ruin,  which  they  Wouldest  thou  not  have  children  which

hide  from  themselves,  until  they  fall  thou  wouldest  wish  unborn,  reform  thy-

headlong  in  it  "  [Pusey].  self  [Pusey].
The  sins  of  the  fathers  descend  very

HOMILETICS.
The  Doom  op  some  a  Warning  to  others. — Verses  15 — 17.

A  different  turn  is  now  given  to  the  prophecy.  Israel  had  sinned,  would  not
heed,  and  must  be  punished ;  but  Judah,  who  had  the  law  and  the  temple  of  God,
ought  not  to  prove  so  stubborn  and  incorrigible.  God  specially  warns  his  own,  and
if  they  sin  their  condemnation  will  be  greater.  The  idea  is  that  we  must  not  par-
take of  other  men's  sins  lest  we  share  in  their  punishment.

I.  The  provoking  sin.  Israel  had  played  the  harlot,  backslided  from  God,  and
continued  in  idolatry,  heedless  of  Divine  warning  and  judgment.  1.  Israel  were
yuilty  of  idolatry.  They  knew  Jehovah,  but  set  up  idols.  They  had  made  graven
images  and  worshipped  golden  calves  in  opposition  to  God's  command.  They  did
not  intend  to  worship  the  images  themselves,  but  God  through  the  images.  One
step  led  to  another  in  the  corrupting  practices.  Papists  and  Eitualists  spring  from
ranks  which  some  would  call  earnest  and  devout.  Men  make  gods,  honour  and
serve  them,  and  fall  into  gross  superstitions  and  idolatry.  The  proneness  of  the
Jews  to  polytheism  is  instructive  to  us.  Churches  favoured  with  the  purest
worship,  nations  enriched  with  the  oracles  of  God,  individuals  privileged  with
means  of  grace,  may  fall  into  formalism,  perfect  apathy  in  religion,  and  undue
veneration  of  the  creature.  Formalism,  corrupt  worship,  and  entire  abandonment
of  God  are  the  steps  which  lead  to  idolatry.  God  has  real  claims  upon  all  his
creatures.  "  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  but  Me."  Obedience  to  his  law  is  not
merely  an  integral  part  of  true  morality,  but  essential  to  all  religion.  Regard  to
him,  therefore,  is  our  first  and  highest  duty.  Disregard  to  God  accounts  for
idolatry  in  all  its  forms,  for  moral  evil  in  all  its  features.  2.  Israel  were  guilty  of
neglecting  Divine  warnings.  They  listened  not  to  the  prophets.  Servant  after
servant  was  sent  by  God,  but  all  to  no  purpose.  They  despised  the  message,  and
persecuted  the  messenger.  A  person  unwarned  may  have  some  excuse ;  but  "  fore-
warned, forearmed,"  yet  Israel  repented  not  nor  turned  from  danger.  Many  sit
under  the  sound  of  the  gospel,  but  take  no  heed.  If  you  despise  exhortations,
warnings,  and  reproofs,  neglect  privileges  which  exalt  you  to  heaven,  how  can  you
escape  at  last  1  You  incur  sevenfold  guilt  by  such  conduct.  Continuance  in  sin
after  Divine  admonition  will  provoke  God  to  anger.  "  Ephraim  is  joined  to  idols ;
let  him  alone."  3.  Israel  were  guilty  of  despising  Divine  chastisements.  God  not
only  warns,  but  chastises  the  sinner  to  wean  him  from  his  sins.  Personal  health
fails,  business  prospects  fade  away,  and  family  circumstances  change,  but  prayer  is
not  made  to  the  God  of  our  life,  and  comfort  is  not  sought  in  him  (Ps.  xlii.  8).
Grievous  sickness,  personal  and  domestic  troubles,  do  not  convert  men,  nor  turn
them  from  the  error  of  their  ways.  Trials  ought  to  make  us  think,  they  are  the
strokes  of  a  loving  hand,  designed  to  purify  our  hearts  and  lives.  The  gem  cannot
be  polished  without  friction,  nor  man  perfected  without  affliction.  "  Sweet
indeed  "  should  be  "  the  uses  of  adversity,"  but  they  often  fail  to  correct.  They
do  not  remind  of  neglected  duty,  nor  separate  the  sinner  from  his  sin.  Pharaoh,
Jehoram,  and  the  Jews,  are  solemn  warnings.  "  0  God,  I  have  made  an  ill  use  of
thy  mercies,"  says  Bp  Hall,  "  if  I  have  not  learnt  to  be  content  with  thy  correction."


64  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  [chap,  it,


The  intractable  ox  resisting  the  yoke  is  an  apt  image  of  the  impenitent  casting  off
Divine  restraints.  Conviction  follows  upon  conviction,  chastening  upon  chasten-
ing, still  he  rebels,  hardens  his  neck,  and  invites  threatened  judgments.  Ahab
would  not  be  corrected,  and  "  the  bow  drawn  at  a  venture  "  performed  its  mission.
Pharaoh  grew  more  stubborn  under  the  rod,  and  madly  rushed  to  ruin.  "  If  men
will  harden  their  hearts,  God  will  harden  his  hand,"  says  Ho  Ave.  Unheeded  re-
proof ripens  us  for  judgment.  "  He  that  being  often  reproved  hardeneth  his  neck,
shall  suddenly  be  destroyed,  and  that  without  remedy."  II.  The  fearful  doom.
"  The  Lord  will  feed  them  as  a  lamb  in  a  large  place."  Scatter  them  into  exile
and  expose  them  to  danger,  as  a  lamb  becomes  the  prey  to  wild  beasts.  And  this
"  noio."  The  judgment  is  immediate  and  at  hand,  no  longer  delayed.  "  Ephraim
is  joined  to  idols,"  in  love  with  his  sins  ;  "  let  him  alone,"  let  him  rest  from  further
correction  and  expostulation,  and  take  the  consequences  of  his  folly.  This  is  the
last  and  most  hopeless  state  of  guilt.  1.  Let  alone  by  man.  The  godly  must  not
reprove  nor  exhort  some  men.  They  feel  on  account  of  the  sins,  and  are  deeply
anxious  for  the  welfare,  of  their  fellow-creatures.  But  there  are  sins  beyond  hope,
total  apostasy  and  final  impenitence.  " There  is  a  sin  unto  death;  I  do  not  say
that  he  shall  pray  for  it."  Apostasy  and  idolatry  are  not  only  sins  against  God,
but  destructive  to  men.  The  intercession  of  Moses  and  Samuel  would  not  avail
(Jer.  xv.  1),  when  God  is  angry.  "  Therefore  pray  not  thou  for  this  people,  neither
lift  up  a  cry  nor  prayer  for  them,  neither  make  intercession  to  me ;  for  I  will  not
hear  thee."  2.  Let  alone  by  God.  It  is  sad  to  be  without  the  sympathy  and
prayers  of  men ;  but  to  be  left  of  God  is  a  most  awful  condition.  It  is  something
more  than  being  without  the  warnings  of  the  minister,  and  the  exhortations  of  a
mother  or  friend.  One  let  alone  is  not  troubled  with  the  power  of  truth,  the
checks  of  conscience,  and  the  restraints  of  providence.  He  is  undisturbed  and  un-
fettered in  his  course  of  sin.  He  goes  from  bad  to  worse,  and  his  end  is  destruc-
tion. Like  the  adder,  he  cannot  and  will  not  hear  the  wisest  charmer.  The  will
is  averse,  the  purpose  is  fixed,  and  the  ear  is  deaf.  As  stones  fall  to  the  ground,
sparks  fly  upward,  and  rivers  roll  to  the  ocean,  so  silly  men  run  from  God,  and
beyond  the  reach  of  mercy.  "  The  soul  that  sinneth  presumptuously  shall  have  no
atonement ;  it  shall  be  cut  off  from  the  midst  of  my  people."  3.  Let  alone  without
any  pity  and  protection.  "  As  a  lamb  in  a  large  place."  A  lamb  exposed  to  peril
is  a  most  helpless  and  pitiable  creature.  What  more  lamentable  to  behold  than
the  sinner  let  alone,  exposed  to  temptation  and  death.  This  made  Christ  weep
over  the  guilty  city,  and  Paul  wish  that  he  was  accursed  for  his  kindred  in  the
flesh.  "  The  large  place  "  of  Israel  were  the  territories  of  the  Medes,  where  they
were  deprived  of  temple  worship,  prophetic  teaching,  and  Divine  protection.  The
large  place  of  the  sinner  is  the  broadway  to  destruction ;  to  places  where  strong
drink  drowns  reason  and  conscience ;  where  sensibility  is  consumed  by  burning
passions  ;  where  tender  memories  are  quenched,  conscience  benumbed,  and  every
noble  feeling  destroyed.  The  man  who  ruins  his  health  and  his  happiness,  his
circumstances  and  his  life,  and  who  implicates  his  family  and  his  fellow-creatures
by  the  unbridled  gratification  of  sense,  is  to  be  pitied  for  his  folly.  Woe  to  that
man  who  has  forsaken  Christ,  and  whom  God  permits  to  go  the  downward  road,
unpitied,  unprotected,  and  unsaved  !  III.  The  kindly  warning.  "  Though  thou,
Israel,  play  the  harlot,  yet  let  not  Judah  offend."  Israel  and  Judah  were  at  variance,
and  such  warm  sympathy  could  not  be  expected  from  those  at  enmity  with  each
other.  But  the  heart  of  the  prophet  beats  warmly  for  Judah,  who  alone  represented
the  people  of  God.  God  is  anxious  to  preserve  Judah  from  the  ways  of  Israel.
Spiritual,  theocratic  feelings  are  stronger  than  natural  feelings,  and  must  prevail.
Christianity  is  not  insensible  to  private  friendship  and  the  claims  of  kindred  ;  but
it  kindles  within  us  the  fire  of  universal  benevolence.  1.  A  needful  warning,  (a)
Proximity  to  Itrael  endangered  Judah.  Temptations  are  near,  friends  and  neigh-
bours entice,  and  the  Christian  is  in  danger  of  conforming  to  the  world.     Like  a


chap.  rv.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.  65


rebellious  province,  the  world  has  customs,  statutes,  and  pursuits,  contrary  to  the
law  of  God.  Friendship  with  it  is  forbidden.  Its  pomp  and  vanities  must  be
renounced.  "We  must  "  come  out  from  the  world,  and  be  separate,"  that  is,  bo
Christians  wholly  or  not  at  all.  (b)  The  mixture  of  idolatry  with  the  worship  of
God  endangered  Judah.  "  Come  not  ye  unto  Gilgal,"  &c.  Gilgal  and  Bethaven  were
places  of  note  and  great  resort.  Here  people  were  accustomed  to  "  swear  the  Lord
liveth,"  or  associate  the  living  God  with  idols.  Formulas  of  Christian  worship
were  employed  to  justify  the  service  of  idols.  Man  will  worship  something.
"When  the  worship  of  Jehovah  is  forsaken  then  the  devices  of  man  are  chosen.
Examples  and  places  infect.  God  will  not  divide  his  claims  with  idols.  Supersti-
tions are  not  more  warranted  or  imitable  because  they  are  practised  under  the  pre-
tence of  serving  God.  Aaron's  golden  calf  was  no  excuse  for  the  neglect  of  Jehovah.
"We  must  have  no  halting,  no  mixture  in  religion.  Either  Baal  or  the  Lord  must
be  our  master  and  God.  We  cannot  serve  two  masters.  To  swear  by  idols,  by
heaven  or  earth,  or  any  creature,  dishonours  our  nature,  offends  our  God,  and  makes
us  a  warning  to  others.  "  Come  out  of  her,  my  people,  that  ye  be  not  partakers  of
her  sins,  and  that  ye  receive  not  of  her  plagues."  2.  A  timely  warning.  God  warns
before  he  strikes.  Spaces  for  repentance  are  given  men,  and  they  are  urged  to  flee
from  the  judgment  before  it  is  too  late.  Though  Israel  is  given  up,  yet  Judah
must  be  cautioned.  This  indicates  Divine  wisdom,  love,  and  forbearance.  "  Sentence
against  an  evil  work  is  not  executed  speedily."  "  The  long-suffering  of  God  waited
in  the  days  of  Noah."  Provocations  are  given,  yet  God  forbears  to  punish.  But
we  must  not  question  his  providence,  disregard  his  word,  and  abuse  his  mercy.
There  is  clear  and  constant  warning.  The  impenitent  are  without  excuse,  and  the
punishment  will  be  complete.  Punishment  lingers  long,  but  falls  heavily  at  last.
"  Woe  unto  the  wicked,  it  shall  be  ill  with  him."  3.  A  reasonable  warning.  Let
not  Judah  offend,  "  though  Israel  play  the  harlot."  The  separation  of  Israel  from
Judah  was  most  unrighteous  and  disastrous  in  its  results  on  both  kingdoms ;  but
Israel's  departure  from  God  was  most  aggravating  and  hazardous.  It  was  harlotry
and  wantonness.  God's  service  is  a  reasonable  service,  in  harmony  with  our
mental  and  moral  constitution.  God  is  no  hard  task-master,  demanding  impossi-
bilities and  requiring  bricks  without  straw.  "  His  commandments  are  not  grievous."
He  treats  men  as  rational  and  responsible  beings,  beseeching  them  to  repent,  and
warning  them  of  the  consequences  of  neglect.

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.   15.   Places   of  good   reputation  God  lets  him  alone,  gives  him  his  wish,

become  infamous,  lose   all   honour,  by  liberty  brings  no  security  and  happiness,

connection  with  idolatry  and  immoral-  like  a  lamb  bleating  alone,  bewraying

ity.     Bethel,  the  house  of  God,  becomes  its  solitude,  and  he  wanders  about  to

Beth-aven,  the  house  of  idols,  the  house  destruction.     How  much  better  to  be  in

of  vanity.     Places   consecrated  by  the  God's  fold,  daily  fed,  and  led  into  green

piety  of  our  forefathers  and  the  mercy  pastures,  and  beside  the  still  waters  !

of  God  are  turned  into  scenes  of  cor-  Ver.    17.    "  Ephraim  is  joined"  &c.

ruption  and  vice.     We  are  forbidden  to  I.  The  Alliance. — 1.  Unholy.   2.  Euin-

go  to  such  places  lest  we  should  be  in-  ous.     II.  The  Abandonment. — 1.  Just,

fected.      Christians  must   not  sanction  2.   Severe.     3.  Hopeless.     "  A  man  may

worldly   customs    and    amusements   in  be  given  up  to  Satan  for  the  destruction

which  God  has  no  place.     Abstain  from  of  the  flesh,  that  the  soul  may  be  saved ;

the  very  appearance  of  evil.  but  to  be  given  up  to  sin  is  a  thousand

Ver.   1 6.    The   sinner,  like  Israel,  is  times  worse,  because  that  is  the  fruit  of

often  fretful  under  Divine  restraint,  im-  Divine  anger,  in  order  to  the  damnation

patient  in  the  narrowness  of  God's  ways,  of  the  soul  "  [John  Shower].    Ah,  Lord  !

and  is  bent  on  backsliding ;  but  when  this  mercy  1  humbly  beg,  that  whatever

5


66  HOMTLETIG  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  [chap.  tv.


thou  givest  me  up  to,  thou  wilt  not  give  good  in  his  own  eyes."  Do  anything
me  up  to  the  ways  of  mine  own  heart ;  with  me,  lay  what  burden  thou  wilt
if  thou  wilt  give  me  up  to  be  afflicted,  upon  me,  so  that  thou  dost  not  give  me
or  tempted,  or  reproached,  &c,  I  will  up  to  the  ways  of  my  own  heart-
patiently  sit  down  and  say,  "It  is  the  [Brooks].  Deliver  me,  0  Lord,  from
Lord ;  let  him  do  with  me  what  seems  that  evil  man,  myself  [Augustine].

HOMILET1GS.

The  Bitterness  and  the  Punishment  of  Sin. — Verses  18,  19.

In  these  verses  we  have  another  triplet  of  vice.  The  people  are  guilty  of  intem-
perance and  adultery.  The  princes  and  leaders  are  covetous,  pervert  justice,  and
cry,  "  Give,  give."  The  whole  nation  had  become  sapless  and  corrupt.  "Drink"
is  here  put  for  the  effect  of  sweet  intoxicating  wine.  As  sourness  was  opposed  to
sweetness,  so  sin  is  opposed  to  holiness  and  idolatry  to  the  service  of  God.  The
verses  set  forth  the  bitterness  and  the  punishment  of  sin.

I.  The  Bitterness  of  Sin.  "  Their  drink  is  sour,"  their  delights  are  insipid  and
dead.  Man's  spiritual  appetite  is  strong,  and  God  has  made  abundant  provision
for  our  happiness.  But  men  indulge  in  sin,  are  not  satisfied  with  healthful  refresh-
ment, and  "  add  drunkenness  to  thirst."  The  appetite,  cloyed  with  indulgence,  turns
with  disgust  from  the  sweetest  dainties,  while  "  every  bitter  thing  is  sweet"  to  the
hungry  soul  (Pro v.  xxvii.  7).  So  in  spiritual  things.  The  sinner  has  no  relish,
and  feels  no  need  for  the  bread  of  life.  He  seeks  to  quench  his  thirst  by  intoxi-
cating pleasure  or  sensual  indulgence.  This  may  make  him  merry,  but  cannot
make  him  happy.  Whatever  be  the  relish  and  allurements  of  sin,  "  at  the  last  it
biteth  like  a  serpent  and  stingeth  like  an  adder."  There  is  poison  in  the  cup.
Like  the  little  book  which  the  Apostle  John  had  to  take,  sin  is  sweet  as  honey  in
the  mouth,  but  when  committed,  bitter  in  the  belly  (Rev.  x.  9).  "  Life,  they  say,
is  sweet ;  I  have  found  it  bitter/'  said  a  young  artist  in  the  closing  scenes  of  death.
Lord  Chesterfield  echoed  the  sentiment,  when  he  said,  "  I  have  run  the  silly  rounds
of  business  and  of  pleasure,  and  have  done  with  them  all.  I  have  enjoyed  all  the
pleasures  of  the  world  and  know  their  futility,  and  do  not  regret  their  loss.  I
appraise  them  at  their  real  value,  which  is  very  low ;  whereas  those  who  have  not
experienced  them  always  overrate  them.  They  only  see  the  gay  outside,  and  are
dazzled  with  their  glare  ;  but  I  have  been  behind  the  scenes.  I  look  back  on  all
that  is  passed  as  one  of  those  romantic  dreams  which  opium  commonly  produces,
and  I  have  no  wish  to  repeat  the  nauseous  dose."  This  Marah  is  never  dry.  No
art  can  sweeten,  no  draughts  exhaust  its  perennial  waters  of  bitterness.  The  bitter-
ness of  sin  consists — 1.  In  its  ivretchedness.  Byron  described  himself  as  a  man
whose  happiness  was  gone  and  could  not  be  restored.  "  If  I  were  to  live  over
again,"  he  writes,  "  I  do  not  know  what  I  would  change  in  my  life,  except  not  to
have  lived  at  all."  2.  In  its  dissatisfaction.  After  all  toil  and  labour  "  the  good  "
is  ever  absent.  The  thing  which  was  expected  to  give  joy  palls  on  the  instant  it  is
obtained,  like  the  apples  of  the  Dead  Sea,  which  turn  to  ashes  when  tasted.  On
and  on !  the  spirit  still  cries,  "  Give,  give."  3.  In  its  disappointment.  Solomon
had  tried  everything,  but  unalloyed  happiness  was  still  beyond  his  grasp.  He
drank  from  broken  cisterns,  tasted  the  wormwood  and  the  gall,  and  gives  the
verdict — "  All  was  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit,  and  there  was  no  profit  under  the
sun."  II.  The  Punishment  of  Sin.  "  The  wind  hath  boimd  her  up  in  her  wings."
The  simple  meaning  of  this  is  that  they  would  be  carried  away  with  a  swift  and
shameful  destruction.  So  sudden  is  the  overthrow  of  the  wicked,  that  his  designs
are  baffled,  his  life  upset,  and  he  himself  overwhelmed  with  the  tempest.  "  He
shall  take  them  away  as  with  a  whirlwind."  1.  This  destruction  is  sudden.  The
wind  may  sleep  and  be  forgotten,  but  justice  never  fails.     The  sky  is  clear,  men


chap,  iv.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ROSEA.  67


settle  down,  and  undisturbed  pursue  their  folly ;  but  "  when  they  shall  say  peace
and  safety,  then  sudden  destruction  cometh  upon  them."  In  their  revelries  they
will  be  surprised,  and,  like  Belshazzar,  "  they  shall  not  escape."  2.  This  destruction
is  violent.  What  more  violent  than  mighty  winds  tearing  up  the  mountains  and
rending  the  rocks  (Job  xxviii.  9).  The  wicked  cannot  stand  before  the  tempest
of  God's  wrath  and  the  thunder  of  his  power.  Cambyses,  invading  Ethiopia,  sent
a  detachment  to  ravage  the  country.  Herodotus  says  that  "  after  they  had  left
Oasis,  they  halted  to  take  some  repast,  when  a  strong  south  wind  arose  and  over-
whelmed them  beneath  a  mountain  of  sand."  Plutarch,  in  the  Life,  speaking  of  the
design  of  Alexander  "  to  visit  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Amnion,"  adds,  "  it  was  a  long
and  laborious  journey,  and  they  might  be  surprised  by  a  violent  south  wind  amidst
the  wastes  of  sand,  as  it  happened  long  before  to  the  army  of  Cambyses.  The
wind  raised  the  sand,  and  rolled  it  in  such  waves,  that  it  devoured  full  50,000
men."  3.  This  destruction  is  shameful.  "  They  shall  be  ashamed  because  of  their
sacrifices."  Ashamed  on  account  of  their  sacrifices,  or  of  them,  and  should  forsake
them  and  turn  to  God.  But  in  any  case  both  they  and  their  sacrifices  woidd  be
put  to  shame,  (a)  They  would  be  disappointed  in  their  sacrifices.  They  had
brought  nothing  but  evil,  and  not  any  good.  Nothing  good  should  be  sought,  or
can  be  found,  away  from  God.  (b)  They  would  be  detected  on  hill  and  in  dale,  in
public  and  private  worship.  They  could  not  hide  their  shameful  ways  from  God.
Justice  would  discover  them.  "  As  the  thief  is  ashamed  when  he  is  found,  so  is
the  house  of  Israel  ashamed."  (c)  They  would  be  exposed  in  their  shame.  Exposed
without  refuge  to  Divine  judgment.  Shame  and  confusion  of  face  will  be  the  final
issue  of  all  the  lofty  expectations  and  the  sinful  ways  of  the  ungodly.  Shame  is
their  present  fruit,  and  what  will  be  the  results  in  eternity  "  of  those  things  whereof
ye  are  now  ashamed  1 "  "  Many  that  sleep  in  the  dust  of  the  earth  shall  awake ;
some  to  everlasting  life,  and  some  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt."  Avoid  the
guilt  if  you  wish  to  escape  the  doom  of  Israel.

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  IV.

Ver.  1 — 5.     When  God  has  a  "  con-  themselves  surrounded  by  the  salt  sea.

troversy "  with  a  people  he  appeals  to  How  often  are  men  ignorant  of  their

conscience  as  a  witness  to  his  cause.     He  mercies  !     How   sad    that   they  should

demands  and  should  secure  earnest  heed,  perish  for  lack  of  knowledge  !    Jesus  is

The  speaker  is  great.    The  cause  is  most  near  the  seeker  even  when  he  is  tossed

important,  and  concerns  our  spiritual  and  upon  the  oceans  of  doubt.      The  sinner

eternal  welfare.     If  we  cannot  plead  ex-  has  but  to  stoop  down  and  drink  and

cuse  now,  how  can  we  stand  before  the  live ;   and  yet  he  is  ready  to  perish,  as  if

judgment-seat  at  last  %  salvation  were  hard  to  find  [Spurgeon].

Consideration   is    the    duty    of    the  Those  are  marked   for  ruin  that  are

Church.     Eaith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  deaf  to  reproof  and  reject  good  counsel,

every  faculty  of  the  mind  should  be  bent  "  Therefore,"  says  Bp  Pilkington,  "  let

to  receive  Divine  teaching.  every  one  keep  himself  in  God's  school-

Yer.  6.  Knowledge.     Some  years  ago  house  and  learn  his   lesson  diligently.

a  vessel  sailing  on  the  northern  coast  of  For  as  the  body  is  nourished  with  meat,

South  America  was  seen  to  make  signals  so  is  the  soul  with  the  word  of  God."

of   distress.     When  hailed  by  another  Ver.   7.   Gratitude.      Special  favours

vessel,    they    reported     themselves    as  call  for  great  gratitude,  as  those  who  rent

"  dying  for  water  ! "     "  Dip  it  up,  then,"  the  largest  farms  generally  pay  the  most

was  the  response ;  "  you  are  in  the  mouth  for  them.     There  is  ingratitude  in  con-

of  the  Amazon  river."     There  was  fresh  cealing  a  benefit  or  forgetting  it,  as  well

water  all  around  them,  they  had  nothing  as  not  making  a  return  for  it ;  but  the

to  do  but  to  dip  it  up,  and  yet  they  were  worst  ingratitude  is  returning  evil  for

dying  of  thirst,  because  they  thought  good.    Prosperity.     No  sooner  does  the


68


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:  HOSEJ.


[chap.  IV.


warm  aspect  of  good  fortune  shine,  than
all  the  plans  of  virtue,  raised  like  a
beautiful  frost-work  in  the  winter  season
of  adversity,  thaw  and  disappear  [War-
burtonj.

Ver.  8,  9.  Covetousness  never  judges
anything  unlawful.  Blood  is  not  too
sacred  for  it  to  buy,  nor  religion  too
Divine  for  it  to  sell.  It  has  turned  the
priests  and  ministers  of  God  into  mer-
cenary hirelings.  In  Popery  every
shrine  has  its  gift,  every  confession  its
cost,  every  prayer  its  charge,  and  every
benediction  its  price  \WUson\.

Ver.  10,  11.  Sin  is  a  disease  equally
dangerous,  whether  it  works  secretly
within,  or  breaks  out  into  odious  displays
of  vice.  Yielding  to  immoral  pleasure
corrupts  the  mind  ;  living  to  animal  and
trifling  ones  debases  it ;  and  both  in
their  degree  disqualify  it  for  its  genuine
good,  and  consign  it  over  to  wretchedness
[Wilson].

Ver.  12 — 14.  Idolatry  is  the  adoption
of  a  false  god.  Apostasy  is  the  rejection
of  the  true  God.  The  idols  of  the
heathen  stood,  so  to  speak,  between
heaven  and  earth,  obscuring  the  vision
of  God,  intercepting  and  appropriating
the  incense  which  should  have  ascended
to  the  eternal  throne.  If  we  look  upon
the  world  as  a  musical  instrument,  well-
tuned,  and  harmoniously  struck,  we
ought  not  to  worship  the  instrument,
but  the  Being  that  makes  the  music.

Ver.  15 — 17.  If  sin  be  fashionable,
Christians  should  be  out  of  fashion.  If
others  be  punished  for  it,  we  should
take  warning  from  them.  Three  things
arise   from   sin,  viz.    fear,  shame,  and


punishment.  The  first  arises  from  the
guilt  of  sin,  the  second  from  its  defile
ment,  and  the  third  from  its  demerit.
A  sinful  life  is  the  death  of  the  soul.
Look  at  sin  in  its  guilt,  malignity,  and
curse.  Abhor  it,  oppose  it,  and  dread  it
more  than  death  [Wilson].

Ver.  18,  19.  Pleasure  taken  into  the
soul  is  like  liquor  poured  into  a  vessel
so  much  of  it  as  it  fills  it  also  seasons
the  touch  and  the  tincture  go  together
It  is  certain  sin  has  no  real  pleasures  to  be
stow  j  they  are  all  embittered,  either  by
the  strokes  of  providence  from  without,
or  the  accusations  of  conscience  from
within.  The  fine  colours  of  the  serpent
do  by  no  means  make  amends  for  the
smart  and  poison  of  his  sting.

Penalties  are  often  so  long  delayed,
that  men  think  they  shall  escape  them  ;
but  they  are  certain  to  follow.  "When
the  whirlwind  sweeps  through  the  forest,
at  its  first  breath  that  giant  tree,  with
all  its  boughs,  falls  crashing  to  the
ground.  But  it  had  been  preparing  to
fall  twenty  years.  Twenty  years  before
it  received  a  gash,  the  water  commenced
to  settle  in  it  at  some  notch,  and  from
thence  decay  began  to  reach  in  towards
the  heart  of  the  tree.  Every  year  the
work  of  death  progressed,  till  at  length
it  stood  all  rottenness,  and  the  first  gale
felled  it  to  the  ground.  There  are  men,
who  for  twenty  years  shame  the  day  and
the  night  with  debaucheries,  who  yet
seem  strong  and  vigorous,  but  in  reality
are  full  of  weakness  and  decay.  They
have  been  preparing  to  fall,  and  the  first
storm  will  strike  them  down  in  a
moment  [Beecher].


CHAPTER  V.


Critical  Notes. — 1.  Hear]  A  fresh  beginning  of  reproof,  connected  with  chapter  iv.,  addressed
to  the  priests,  the  royal  family,  and  the  whole  kingdom.  Judg.]  Lit.  the  judgment  announced  in
preceding  chapter.  You]  Priests  and  court.  Snare]  A  net  laid  to  entice  the  people,  like  birds  in
a  trap.  Miz.  and  Tab.  ]  Noted  places,  and  peculiarly  adapted  for  bird-catching.  2.  Profound]
Lit.  they  have  made  slaughter  deep,  i.  e.  they  have  sunk  deeply  into  it.  Their  sacrifices  were
slaughter,  butcheries,  and  not  offerings  to  God  (cf.  Is.  xxxi.  6).  Some,  that  the  allusion  is  to  deep
pits  covered  over  for  beasts  to  fall  in.  Others  give  the  sense  of  stretching  out  (Ps.  ci.  3).  They
have  deepened  to  stretch  out  excesses,  i.  e.  they  have  gone  to  great  lengths,  are  deeply  sunken  in
excesses.  The  ringleaders  laid  deep  designs  to  ensnare  in  idolatry.  Rebuker]  Lit.  a  rebuke  or  cor-
rection.    God's  attributes  and  conduct  had  taken  the  form  of  rebuke  only  towards  them.     3.  Know]


I


chap,  v.]  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :  ROSEA.  69


their  plans,  deceit,  and  profound  cunning  (Eev.  ii.  29).  All  things  are  naked  and  opened  to  God.
Now]  Even  at  the  present  time,  when  they  forget  me.  Their  wickedness  is  done  in  public  and  is
undeniable.  4.  Will  not  frame]  Heb.  give  their  doings.  Margin,  will  not  suffer  them.  They  are
slaves,  not  free  to  turn  from  evil  habits.  Their  works  stand  in  the  way,  prevent  them  from  return-
ing. Habit  is  a  second  nature  domineering  over  men's  thoughts  and  ways.  In  them]  The  know-
ledge of  God  was  wanting,  the  evil  spirit  had  taken  possession  of  their  very  centre,  had  its  seat
within  them,  and  held  resistless  sway  over  them.  5  Pride]  The  haughtiness  of  Is.  shall  be  a  wit-
ness before  God  of  their  folly.  Others  refer  it  to  Jehovah,  the  glory  of  Is.,  who  will  witness  by
judgments  and  the  destruction  of  their  false  glory  (ch.  vii.  10  ;  Amos  viii.  7).  Jud.]  shall  fall,
because  participating  in  Israel's  guilt.  6.  Flocks]  to  propitiate  God.  Sacrifices  of  no  avail.  He
has  withdrawn  from  them  and  will  not  hear  prayer.  7.  Gives  the  reason.  Treacher.]  Acted  faithlessly
in  the  marriage  contract  (Jer.  iii.  20).  Strange  children]  Aliens,  that  have  not  sprung  from
conjugal  union  (ch.  i.  2;  cf.  Deut.  xxv.  5).  Month]  A  very  brief  time;  judgment  is  sudden  and
near.  Others,  the  new  moon,  the  festal  season  for  sacrifices,  will  devour  them.  "  Your  sacrificial
feasts  shall  not  bring  deliverance,  but  ruin  "  [Keil~\.  8.  The  evil  denounced  is  vividly  described  as
actually  come.  9.  Shall  surely  be]  Lit.  established  or  well  grounded  in  God's  purpose.  On  lofty
summits  the  invasion  of  the  enemy  is  announced,  Jud.  is  menaced,  and  Is.  is  occupied,  destruction  is
sure  and  permanent.  The  kingdom  shall  be  overcome  and  for  ever  laid  waste.  10.  Bound]
Removers  of  land-marks  were  to  be  cursed  (Deut.  xix.  14  ;  xxvii.  17).  Princes  of  Jud.  had  removed
the  boundaries  of  truth  between  Jehovah  and  Baal,  the  worship  of  God  and  idolatry.  "  If  he  who
removes  his  neighbour's  boundary  is  cursed,  how  much  more  he  who  removes  the  border  of  his  God  "
[Hengsten.~\.  God's  anger  would  fall  upon  them  like  water  in  full  stream  (Ps.  lxix.  25  ;  Jer.  x.  25).
11.  Oppressed]  with  heavy  calamity.  Broken]  Crushed  in  contest  with  God.  Command.]  The
statutes  of  Jeroboam  and  Omri  (I  Kings  xii.  28;  Mic.  vi.  16).  12.  Moth  and  rottenness]  Destruc-
tive powers,  one  injuring  cloths,  the  other  wood  and  flesh  ;  slowly  but  surely  do  they  work  (Job  xiii.
28).  The  sinner  has  foes  within  and  without ;  conscience  gnaws  like  a  worm,  and  Divine  judgment
falls  like  a  plague.  13.  Sick.]  Not  civil  war  between  the  two  kingdoms,  for  both  were  wounded.
Apostasy  with  its  train  of  moral  corruptions  was  the  disease  of  the  body  politic  (Is.  i.  6).  Eph.]  with
whom  the  prophecy  has  chiefly  to  do,  sought  help  and  found  none  from  Assyria.  14.  Lion]  A  fierce,
roaring  lion.  Young  lion]  An  emblem  of  strength  and  ferocity.  They  can  no  more  defend  them-
selves from  God's  judgments  than  from  fierce  lions  which  attack.  Tear]  to  pieces.  Go  away]
leisurely  back  into  its  cave  with  its  prey.  15.  Acknowledge]  i.  e.  feel  the  guilt  and  punishment  of
sin  ;  repent  and  return  to  God.  The  Heb.  includes  the  idea  of  suffering.  Afflict.]  awakens  the  need
of  mercy,  and  urges  to  God.    Seek]  most  earnestly  and  urgently  (cf.  ii.  9  ;  Deut.  iv.  29,  30).

HOMILETIGS.
National  Sins  and  Divine  Detection. —  Verses  1 — 3.

In  this  chapter  God  proceeds  in  the  same  method  and  carries  on  the  same  con-
troversy as  before.  The  kingdoms  are  first  cited  and  then  accused.  AH  ranks  are
guilty  of  idolatry  and  pollutions,  of  obstinacy  and  impenitency  in  guilt.  It  is  not
an  ordinary  challenge,  as  of  one  displeased  only,  but  the  judicial  procedure  and
sentence  of  the  Supreme  Judge.  " Hear  ye  this"  The  words  set  forth  national
sins,  the  Divine  detection,  and  open  rebuke  of  them.

I.  The  national  sins.  All  ranks  are  accused :  the  priests,  the  rulers,  and  the
people.  Though  some  were  enticed  by  others,  that  does  not  render  them  without
■excuse.  The  prophet  rebukes  all,  without  respect  of  persons,  and  shows  how  justly
God  was  angry  with  their  sins.  1.  The  priests  to  ere  guilty.  They  used  their  sacred
office  and  their  high  position  to  ensnare  the  people.  (1.)  They  corrupted  the  law
of  God.  They  were  the  depositaries  of  this  sacred  trust;  were  appointed  to
expound  and  keep  unsullied  the  truth  of  God.  They  had  to  teach  the  statutes
which  the  Lord  had  spoken  unto  them  by  Moses  (Lev.  x.  11).  The  people
inquired  from  them,  and  they  gave  judgment  (Deut.  xvii.  9,  11).  They  were  the
messengers  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  should  have  preserved  knowledge  (Mai.  ii.  7).
But  instead  of  feeding  the  people  they  starved  them,  lead  them  into  error  and  sin.
There  was  neither  freshness  nor  power  in  their  ministry.  The  science  of  salvation,
the  word  and  the  work  of  God,  were  not  the  study  of  their  life.  When  ministers
study  and  prepare  to  consume  it  upon  pride  and  self-confidence ;  when  they  seek
to  please  the  fancy  rather  than  gain  the  souls  of  men ;  when  they  grow  cold  and
careless  of  their  own,  then  they  get  dull  and  pitiless  concerning  the  souls  of  others.
Unto  them  are  committed  the  oracles  of  God.     These  oracles  they  must  consult


70  EOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.  [chap.  v.


and  declare  to  the  people.  Their  word  and  doctrine,  their  life  and  example,  like
the  breastplate  of  Aaron,  must  be  a  bright  reflection  of  them.  The  truth  of  God
must  not  be  mixed  with  human  tradition,  nor  displaced  by  commandments  of  mrni.
To  teach  the  law  to  others  and  profane  it  ourselves  is  mockery.

"  T  venerate  the  man  whose  heart  is  warm,
Whose  hands  are  pure,  whose  doctrine  and  whose  life
Coincident,  exhibit  lucid  proof
That  he  is  honest  in  the  sacred  cause."

(2.)  They  corrupted  the  worship  of  God.  The  spirituality  of  God  is  a  practical
truth  demanding  corresponding  spirituality  in  worship.  God  has  absolute  and
sole  right  to  prescribe  how  he  will  be  worshipped.  But  the  history  of  mankind
abundantly  proves  a  disposition  in  human  beings  to  devise  and  act  for  themselves
in  this  respect.  In  the  patriarchal  and  prophetic  periods  the  worship  of  God  was
mixed  with  idolatry.  Heroes  and  beasts  have  been  deified.  The  heavens  and  the
earth,  the  ocean  and  the  air,  have  been  peopled  with  gods.  Even  now  men  are
dissatisfied  with  the  simplicity  and  forgetful  of  the  authority  of  Divine  institutes.
Worship  is  thought  to  consist  in  words,  forms,  and  gestures.  The  body  assumes
the  posture  and  the  lips  utter  the  language  of  devotion,  but  often  there  is  neither
prayer  nor  praise.  It  is  sad  when  the  priests  of  God  are  guilty  of  innovation,  and
teach  that  "fear  towards  him  was  taught  by  the  precepts  of  men"  (Isa.  xxix.  13).
The  apostles  were  exceedingly  jealous  of  any  detect,  redundancy,  or  admixture  in
the  worship  of  God.  But  Jewish  priests  debased  the  institutions  and  corrupted
the  law  of  God.  They  had  embraced  and  strengthened  the  idolatry  by  which  they
were  surrounded,  and  by  apostasy  had  seduced  the  people.  Their  teaching  was  a
snare  and  their  lives  a  curse.  (3.)  They  despised  the  reproof  of  God.  "  Though  I
have  been  a  rebuker  of  them  all."  God  by  his  prophet  and  by  his  providence  had
sought  to  correct  them  in  vain.  Rebuke  after  rebuke  had  been  given,  forbidding
idolatry  and  urging  amendment,  but  Israel  was  immersed  in  sin ;  kings  and  priests
revolted  more  and  more.  God  warns  his  Church  and  his  servants,  and  gives  smaller
corrections  to  reclaim  them ;  but  if  these  are  despised,  the  sin  becomes  more
aggravated  and  the  punishment  more  severe.  Apostates  and  revolters  are  often
given  up  to  gross  superstitions,  cruel  rites,  and  deeper  courses.  They  may  have
ability  to  adorn  and  defend  their  crafty  designs,  but  they  will  be  caught  by  their
own  deceits.  The  rebuke  of  the  formalist  is  solemn ;  but  to  immoral  teachers,  who
make  grace  a  cover  for  sin,  and  soundness  of  creed  for  rottenness  of  life,  God
speaks  in  thunder.  Scribes  and  Pharisees  were  openly  reproved  for  rejecting  the
law  and  misleading  the  people.  "  Unto  the  wicked  God  saith,  What  hast  thou  to
do  to  declare  my  statutes,  or  that  thou  shouldest  take  my  covenant  in  thy  mouth  %
seeing  thou  hatest  instruction,  and  castest  my  words  behind  thee."  2.  The  rulers
were  guilty.  "  Give  ye  ear,  0  house  of  the  king."  The  priest  had  to  teach  and
the  king  enforce  the  law;  but  king  and  priest  were  alike  guilty  for  corrupting  it..
Both  had  been  crafty  and  cruel  in  carrying  out  their  designs,  by  patronizing
idolatry  and  leading  the  nation  from  Jehovah.  Monarchs  fulfil  a  high  vocation
as  representatives  of  God  and  his  law.  They  should  care  for  the  purity  of  religion
and  the  administration  of  justice.  If  they  neglect  and  violate  the  law,  pervert
justice,  and  encourage  vice,  they  are  recreant  to  God,  from  whom  they  receive
authority  and  to  whom  they  are  responsible.  They  are  not  to  assume  undue
authority,  but  to  establish  and  preserve  good  and  just  laws ;  to  govern  in  wisdom,
equity,  and  love ;  to  punish  evil-doers  and  encourage  them  that  do  well.  Asa
removed  wickedness  from  the  throne,  and  Amaziah  punished  it  with  death.
Nehemiah  was  a  great  reformer,  and  Alfred  the  Great  a  witness  for  truth  in  an  age
of  darkness.  But  the  court  of  Israel  was  as  corrupt  as  the  priesthood.  Instead  of
being  benefactors,  they  were  contaminators  to  their  race.  Priests  in  their  saintly  robes
and  kings  in  their  royal  garbs  have  oft  been  foes  in  human  forms ;  solemn  warn-
ings to  the  ungodly  and  profane.     They  are  the  greatest  sinners,  in  seducing  others,


chap,  v.]  TIOMILimC  COMMENTARY:  HOST) A.  71


and  must  suffer  the  severest  punishment.  (1.)  They  enticed  to  idolatry  ;  (2.)  They
enticed  to  destruction.  "Judgment  is  toward  you."  3.  The  People  were  guilty.
Though  ensnared  by  their  teachers  and  princes,  they  were  to  blame  and  had  no  excuse
for  their  sin.  We  are  to  think  and  act  for  ourselves.  Neither  the  enticement  of
the  priest  nor  the  terror  of  the  king  can  force  us  to  do  wrong ;  neither  the  laws
nor  the  lives  of  superiors  can  make  us  bow  down  to  sin.  Like  the  three  Hebrew
youths,  we  should  not  regard  the  fashions  of  the  court  nor  the  dictum  of  the  priest.
We  must  not  partake  of  other  men's  sins  lest  we  share  other  men's  sufferings.
Ephraim  was  duped  willingly  and  therefore  inexcusably.  "  He  willingly  walked
after  the  commandment "  and  was  "  oppressed  and  broken  in  judgment "  (verse  11).
(1.)  The  people  followed  bad  examples;  (2.)  Voluntarily  corrupted  themselves  by
idolatry.  National  sins  are  the  sum  of  individual  contributions.  God  here  arraigns
and  condemns  all  classes  in  the  threefold  summons.  The  privileges  of  the  priest,
the  dignity  of  the  prince,  and  the  number  of  the  people,  cannot  excuse  and  do  not
exempt  them  from  Divine  judgments.  "  Daniel  Webster,"  says  Dr  Thomas,  "  was
once  asked,  'What  is  the  most  important  thought  you  ever  entertained]'  He
replied  after  a  moment's  reflection,  '  The  most  important  thought  I  ever  had  was
my  individual  responsibility  to  God.'  "  "  Every  one  of  us  shall  give  an  account  of
himself  to  God."  II.  The  Divine  detection.  "  I  know  Ephraim,  and  Israel  is  not
hid  from  me."  God  intimately  knows  and  observes  the  conduct  of  men.  His
knowledge  is  without  defect  and  his  judgment  without  error.  Nothing  can  be
hid  or  concealed  from  him.  Men  may  deceive  themselves,  think  God  does  not
notice  them,  and  vail  their  ways  from  others,  but  the  omniscient  eye  of  God  pene-
trates the  covering  and  brings  all  things  to  light.  By  his  word  and  providence
he  discovers  sin,  puts  it  before  us  in  true  colours,  and  warns  us  to  flee  from  it.  All
excuses  and  plausible  pretexts  are  torn  away,  and  the  sinner  is  exposed  in  nakedness
and  danger.  "  All  things  are  naked  and  opened  unto  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom
we  have  to  do."  1.  Sin  is  detected  notwithstanding  human  ingenuity  to  cove?'  it.
Men  excuse  and  plead  infirmity  and  mistake.  ( 1 . )  Sin  is  often  covered  by  ignorance.
Ignorance  itself  is  a  sin  when  it  can  be  removed.  Ignorance  in  daily  calling  is
"  not  bliss,"  for  lessened  power  involves  lessened  earnings  and  fewer  comforts  and
conveniences  of  life.  Men  always  pay  for  ignorance.  They  cannot  justify  them-
selves when  they  sin  against  light  and  truth.  Ministers  will  not  be  able  to  plead
at  last,  "We  knew  it  not."  They  should  watch  for  souls  as  those  that  must  give
account.  (2.)  Sin  is  often  covered  by  cunning  craft.  Jewish  leaders  were  crafty  in
their  designs  and  deep  in  their  schemes.  They  pretended  friendship  and  goodwill,
but  they  were  snares  and  nets  to  the  people  (Ecc.  vii.  26).  Their  rulers  with
great  subtlety  laid  hold  of  Israel's  love  for  idols  and  reverence  for  their  ancestors,
and  sought  to  replace  the  presence  of  God  by  the  symbols  of  nature.  Around  the
worship  of  Baal  were  gathered  the  rites  of  Moses.  The  services  were  decked  out
'and  adorned  with  feasts  and  fasts,  instrumental  music  and  songs ;  upheld  by  tithes,
by  civil  authority,  by  prophet,  priest,  and  king.  Leaders  sought  to  please  that
they  might  ruin ;  to  flatter  that  they  might  devour ;  but  "  God  taketh  the  wise  in
their  own  craftiness."  2.  Sin  is  detected  notwithstanding  State  policy  to  uphold  it.
In  Israel  selfish  interests  were  put  before  eternal;  policy  before  principle;  and  the
welfare  of  the  State  must  be  upheld  though  the  people  be  ruined.  In  these
modern  days  expediency  is  often  put  before  morality,  State  revenues  before  virtue.
and  immorality  sanctioned  by  legislators  and  teachers.  We  shall  do  well  to  heed
what  a  writer  says  concerning  England.  "  We  may  succeed  for  a  time  by  fraud,
by  surprise,  by  violence,  but  we  can  succeed  permanently  only  by  means  directly
opposite.  It  is  not  alone  the  courage,  the  intelligence,  the  activity  of  the  merchant
and  manufacturer  which  maintain  the  superiority  of  their  productions  and  the
character  of  their  country  ;  it  is  far  more  their  wisdom,  their  economy,  and  above
all  their  probity.  If  ever  in  the  British  Islands  the  useful  citizen  should  lose  these
virtues,  we  may  be  sure  that,  for  England,  as  for  every  other  country,  the  vessels


72  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EOSEA.  [chaf.  v.


of  a  degenerate  commerce,  repulsed  from  every  shore,  would  speedily  disappear
from  those  seas  whose  surface  they  now  cover  with  the  treasures  of  the  universe,
bartered  for  the  treasures  of  the  industry  of  the  three  kingdoms."  Eeligion  raises,
strengthens,  and  dignifies  a  nation.  Its  industry  and  civilization  depend  upon  true
character  and  not  false  policy.  Even  in  war  Napoleon  said  the  moral  was  ten  to
one  to  the  physical.  State  policy  is  often  State  folly  and  God-dishonouring  policy.
"  It  is  an  abomination  to  kings  to  commit  wickedness,  for  the  throne  is  established
by  righteousness."  III.  The  solemn  call.  "Hear  ye  this."  1.  A  universal
call.  A  call  to  all  classes  in  Israel  to  hear  and  consider  their  ways.  2.  An  urgent
call.  "For  judgment  is  toward  you."  The  judges  are  summoned  before  the
Judge  of  judges  and  the  King  of  kings.  This  is  a  matter  that  must  be  attended
to.  All  ranks  are  guilty  when  God  has  a  controversy  with  a  nation.  3.  A
present  call.  Hear  and  repent  now;  delays  are  dangerous.  "Now  is  the  accepted
time."  Indifference,  moral  insensibility,  are  seen  on  every  hand.  Ignorance,
carelessness,  and  opposition  to  the  gospel  abound.  The  authority  of  the  caller,
and  the  interests  at  stake,  urge  attention  to  the  message :  "  Unto  you,  0  men,  I
call ;  and  my  voice  is  to  the  sons  of  men.'"

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Kings  and  priests  snares  to  the  people,  overcome  by  "  the  snare  of  the  fowler"

by  erroneous  doctrine,  fraudulent  coun-  We  are  foolish  and  weak,  and  apt  to  be

sels,  evil  example,  and  subtle  edicts,  and  lured  to  destruction   by  cunning   foes,

by  employing  exalted  position  to  lead  Hence   the   need    of   (a)   watchfulness,

astray.  (b)   prayer,   and    (c)    dependence  upon

Men-trappers  —  their  motive,  efforts,  God.

pretences,  and  punishment.     Why  not  Cunning  policy.     1.  Most  impudent,

attack  openly  1     Why  plot  and  scheme  ]  2.    Most    guilty.     3.    Most    degrading.

Because  subtlety  is  the  nature  of  sin  and  4.  Most  ruinous.

the  serpent,  and  most  likely  to  succeed.  Hear    ye    this.      Preachers     should

"  Great  ill  is  an  achievement  of   great  rebuke  the  sins  of  rulers  as  well  as  those

powers.     Plain  sense  but  rarely  leads  us  of  subjects,  so  that  they  bear  not  the

far  astray."  guilt  of  the  souls  that  are  lost,  whose

Silly  people — led  astray;  like  beasts  blood  God  will  require  at  their  hands

and   birds,  always   exposed   and  easily  \Lange\.

HOMILETICS.
The  Power  of  Evil  Habits. —  Verse  4.

The  prophet  makes  a  fourth  charge  of  obstinacy  through  affected  ignorance  of
God  and  long  custom  in  sin.  God  had  been  "their  God "  by  covenant  and  tender
care,  but  they  despised  and  abused  his  mercy,  and  "would  not,"  could  not  turn  unto
him.  They  were  so  habituated  to  evil  practices  that  they  were  not  only  indisposed
but  ill-affected  towards  God.  They  lost  all  power  to  return,  and  were  perfect  slaves
to  evil  habits.  They  were  possessed  by  the  spirit  of  whoredom,  an  evil  spirit
which  impelled  and  carried  them  on  to  sin.

I.  The  spring  of  evil  habits.  "The  spirit  of  whoredom  is  in  the  midst  of  them."
In  their  centre  and  seat  a  mighty  power  held  resistless  and  triumphant  sway.
Sinful  habits  spring  from  sinful  nature.  1.  They  spring  from  ignorance  of  God.
"  They  have  not  known  the  Lord."  They  might  have  known  him,  for  they  had
the  law  and  the  prophets  of  God.  They  were  wilfully,  shamefully  ignorant.
Some  have  not  knowledge  of  God — I  speak  this  to  your  shame.  Sin  at  first  was
the  cause  of  ignorance,  but  now  ignorance  is  the  cause  of  sin.  Swearing,  lying,
and  murder  abounded  in  the  land  "  because  there  was  no  knowledge  of  God."  All
sins  are  seminally  lodged  in  this  one.     It  leads  to  error  (Matt.  xxii.  29),  persecu-


chap,  v.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.  73


tion  (John  xvi.  2,  3),  and  to  rejection  of  Christ.  Aristotle  says  ignorance  is  the
mother  of  all  misrule  in  the  world.  As  certain  epidemics  are  generated  and
"become  active  during  night,  in  places  not  visited  by  the  beams  of  the  sun,  so
mental  and  moral  ignorance  spread  pernicious  influence  and  scatter  seeds  of  death.
That  ignorance  which  keeps  men  slaves  to  evil  makes  them  hate  the  freedom  of
truth.  Sinners  dread,  decline  to  know  God,  lest  they  be  disturbed  in  their  sinful
ways.  They  are  ignorant  of  his  beauty  and  excellency,  goodness  and  love;
they  despise  his  mercy  and  forbearance ;  providential  warnings  and  judgments
fail  to  convince  them  of  sin  and  bring  them  to  repentance.  Knowledge  is  the  life
of  the  soul — the  life  of  intelligence  to  know  God ;  the  life  of  power  to  love  him.
2.  They  spring  from  an  evil  heart  towards  God.  The  heart  of  the  Jews  was
alienated  and  perverse.  Love  which  appealed  to  their  affections  could  not  reclaim
them.  The  heart  is  the  source,  the  mainspring  of  human  conduct,  and  when  that
is  defiled  the  character  and  the  life  will  be  defiled.  "Asa  man  thinketh  in  his
heart  so  is  he."  His  thoughts  and  feelings  identify  him  with  his  moral  self,  and
discriminates  him  from  others.  They  place  him  in  a  distinct  relation  to  God,  and
morally  fix  him  in  "  his  own  place."  This  "  hidden  man  of  the  heart "  subordin-
ates the  outer  man  and  the  outer  world  to  itself.  Habits  result  from  acts  repeated ;
and  from  habit  results  character  and  its  consolidation.  Like  the  gradual  growth  of
an  everlasting  mountain,  character  is  always  acquiring  a  bolder  outline  and  firmer
base.     It  is  the  slow  and  conscious  product  of  man's  voluntary  nature.

Each  man  makes  his  own  stature,  builds  himself;

Virtue  alone  outbuilds  the  pyramids :

Her  monuments  shall  last,  when  Egypt's  fall.

II.  The  result  of  evil  habits.  "  They  will  not  frame  their  doings  to  turn  unto
their  God."  If  their  habits  of  sin  had  not  got  the  mastery  over  them  they  rendered
them  indisposed  to  return.  But  the  margin  gives  another  sense.  Their  doings
would  not  suffer  them,  and  they  could  not  turn  inwardly,  while  they  did  not  turn
outwardly.  1 .  Habits  influence  the  will.  "  They  will  not."  The  more  they  sinned
the  more  disposed  they  were  to  sin,  and  the  less  power  they  had  to  do  right.  This
is  just  the  result  of  habit.  By  repetition  of  evil,  moral  power  is  diminished.  The
wili  becomes  impotent  and  the  conscience  seared.  But  moral  power  is  required  to
resist  evil  passions  which  prompt  to  repetitions  of  acts,  hence  the  less  the  power  to
resist  the  easier  the  repetition  of  an  act.  Thus  evil  begets  a  tendency  to  evil ;  goes
on  repeating  and  enlarging  itself ;  binding  the  will,  alienating  the  heart,  and  driv-
ing men  from  God.  "  It  is  a  people  that  do  err  in  their  heart,  and  they  have  not
known  my  ways."  "Ye  will  not  come  unto  me."  2.  Habits  enslave  the  life.  There
was  not  simply  the  tendency,  but  the  tyranny  of  sin.  We  may  calculate  the
immediate  effects  of  an  act,  but  if  the  act  lead  to  the  habit  the  ultimate  results
must  not  be  overlooked.  Drunkenness  and  sensuality  have  sprung  from  repeated
acts.  Perverted  judgment  at  the  beginning  of  life  may  disqualify  a  man  for
believing  the  gospel  at  the  close.  Men  may  not  mean  to  plunge  deeply  into  vice,
but  when  the  steps  are  taken  and  repeated  they  are  fastened  with  their  own  chain.
Habit  is  stronger  than  reason  and  stronger  than  taste.  When  a  man  gives  himself
up  to  its  power  he  loses  freedom  and  self-control,  and  it  governs  him  "with
authority."  Wicked  men  allow  free  will  to  be  inactive  ;  give  bridle  to  desire  and
passion ;  acquire  habits  of  vice;  and  at  last  are  bound  by  chains  of  iron.  Augus-
tine thus  speaks  of  the  force  of  habit  in  his  Confessions :  "  My  will  the  enemy  held,
and  thence  had  made  a  chain  for  me,  and  bound  me.  For  of  a  froward  will  was  a
lust  made;  and  a  lust  served  became  custom;  and  custom  not  resisted  became
necessity.  By  which  links,  as  it  were,  joined  together  (whence  I  called  it  a  chain)
a  hard  bondage  held  me  enthralled."  Most  people  think  lightly  of  sins,  believe
they  can  give  them  up  easily,  but  Saul  found  his  evil  passions  his  torment  and
captivity.  He  had  convictions  of  duty,  but  his  very  efforts  to  extricate  himself
from  evil  increased  his  guilt  and  misery,  and  he  rushed  from  habitual  crime  to


74  HOHILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  [chap.  y.


endless  misery  (1  Chron.  x.  13,  14).  "  A  rooted  habit  becomes  a  governing  prin-
ciple. Every  lust  we  entertain  deals  with  us  as  Delilah  did  with  Samson  :  not
only  robs  us  of  our  strength,  but  leaves  us  fast  bound,"  says  Tillotson.  "  His  own
iniquities  shall  take  the  wicked  himself;  and  he  shall  be  holden  with  the  cords  of
his  sins."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

The  longer  the   continuance   in   sin,

the   more    difficult   is   the  return.     He     4<  He  is  the  freeman  whom  the  truth  makes  free,

n  .,        .      .     . ,  -     .  And  all  are  slaves  beside.'

who  commits  sm  is  the  servant  of  sin.

At  first  he  will  not  return,  at  last  he  Frame  their  doings,  i.  e.  take  neces-
cannot.  The  heart  is  hardened.  The  sary  steps  to  conversion.  1.  By  con-
spirit  of  whoredom  :  not  single  sins  that  sideration.  2.  By  amendment  of  life,
are  committed,  but  an  evil  spirit  rising  "  They  might  have  sought  and  yet  not
up  and  taking  possession  of  the  soul,  made  speed,  because  of  their  unsound-
The  more  men  sin  against  God,  the  ness  and  formality  in  their  way,  but
more  they  lose  the  knowledge  of  him,  they  were  either  so  ignorant,  or  malicious
and  the  more  difficult  it  is  for  them  to  and  impious,  as  they  did  not  so  much
return ;  and  so  the  chastisement  of  God  as  endeavour  to  bend  their  course  that
must  be  more  severe  to  bring  them  back  way  "  [Hutcheson].
to  him  [Lange].  Men  "  know  not  the  Lord,"  or  else
The  slavery  of  sin.  Men  in  bondage  they  would  not  persistently  and  suicid-
to  conscious  guilt  and  innumerable  ally  turn  from  him.  They  may  have
habits.  They  are  often  the  dupes  of  ig-  intellectual  but  not  practical  knowledge,
norance,  prejudice,  and  passion.  1.  There  A  man  really  knows  no  more  than  he
is  the  slave  of  ignorance.  2.  There  puts  into  practice.  Eli's  two  sons
is  the  slave  of  superstition.  3.  There  "  knew  not  God,"  because  they  loved
is  the  slave  of  bigotry.  4.  There  is  the  and  obeyed  him  not.  Ignorance  of
slave  of  passion.  5.  There  is  the  slave  God,  affected  or  acquired,  is  "  the
of  sensual  appetites.  6.  The  slave  of  mother"  of  mischief  and  misery,  not
evil  habits.  "  of  devotion."

HOMILETIGS.
God  Testifying  against  Man. —  Verses  5 — 7.

The  power  and  pride  of  Israel  were  great.  They  boasted  of  their  kings,  their
privileges,  and  even  of  their  sins.  This  pride  testified  against  them  in  the  sight  of
God.  Pride  never  conceals  itself,  but  rises  in  rebellion  and  pleads  for  punishment.
Or  if  God  himself  be  their  boast  and  pride,  he  would  witness  against  them  for
their  presumptuous  sins  and  self-reliance.  "  They  know  not  Jehovah ;  they  do  not
concern  themselves  about  him ;  therefore  he  himself  will  bear  witness  by  judg-
ments, by  the  destruction  of  their  false  glory  (cf.  ch.  ii.  10 — 14),  against  the
face  of  Israel,  i.  e.  bear  witness  to  their  face."  God  witnesses  against  man's  sin
in  the  following  ways  :

I.  God  testifies  against  sin  by  the  ministry  of  the  word.  God  has  three
grand  witnesses  in  the  world ;  the  Holy  Scripture,  Christian  Church,  and  the  Christian
Ministry.  All  testify  to  his  existence,  love,  and  truth.  But  the  ministry  is  a
special  agency,  a  Divine  appointment  to  bring  sinners  to  Christ ;  a  monument  of
truth,  and  the  means  to  spread  it.  The  true  cause  of  man's  wretchedness  and  the
only  cure  must  be  kept  in  view.  Ministers  must  proclaim  the  guilt  and  the  conse-
quent danger  of  men,  their  inability  to  renew  and  save  themselves — must  ever  testify
to  the  justice  of  God  in  punishing  the  impenitent,  and  the  love  of  God  in  Christ.
Boldness  in  the  commission  must  be  met  by  boldness  in  the  reproof  of  sin.  Sinners
are  careless,  and  must  be  roused  by  Divine  threatenings.  Ministers  must  reprove
and  rebuke,  curse  and  condemn  all  sin  ;  save  themselves  and  those  that  hear  them.
Their  testimony  against  iniquity  must  be  constant  and  clear.     "  Do  you  not  know


CHAP.  T.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  75


that  my  life  has  been  licentious,  and  that  I  have  violated  the  commandments  of
God?"  said  a  dying  nobleman  to  his  clergyman,  for  whom  he  sent.  "  You  have  neg-
lected to  warn  and  instruct  me,  and  now  my  soul  will  be  lost  !  "  "  The  Lord  testi-
fied against  Israel  and  against  Judah  by  all  the  prophets  and  by  all  the  seers,
saying,  Turn  ye  from  your  evil  ways,  and  keep  my  commandments  and  my  statutes."

II.  God  testifies  against  sin  by  the  witness  of  conscience.  Fallen  as  human
nature  is,  God  has  not  left  himself  without  a  witness  in  its  centre  and  seat.  Con-
science, the  vicegerent  of  God  enthroned  within,  pronounces  sentence,  and  acquits
or  condemns.  A  guilty  conscience  needs  no  accuser.  It  is  the  harbinger  of  wrath,
and  makes  "  the  wicked  flee  when  no  man  pursueth."  ''Conscience  doth  make
cowards  of  us  all."  The  victim  of  remorse  withers  beneath  an  influence  unseen,
and  shrinks  from  an  anticipation  of  judgment  to  come.  Adam  tried  to  hide  him-
self from  God.  Cain  was  terrified  at  his  own  guilt.  Infidels  have  often  felt  that
"  the  sound  of  a  shaken  leaf  shall  chase  them."  "  There  is  no  man  that  is  know-
ingly wicked,"  says  Tillotson,  "  but  is  guilty  to  himself ;  and  there  is  no  man  that
carries  guilt  about  him,  but  he  receives  a  sting  into  his  soul."  Conscience  allows
no  excuse,  no  compromise.  There  is  nothing  but  right  or  wrong  in  its  court.
Moral  government  is  administered  by  moral  sanctions,  and  the  wisdom  of  God  is
seen  in  fixing  a  tribunal  in  the  bosom  of  every  human  being.  "  He  that  will  not
hearken  to  the  warnings  of  conscience  must  feel  the  woundings  of  conscience."

III.  God  testifies  against  sin  by  the  judgments  of  providence.  "  Therefore
shall  Israel  and  Ephraim  fall  in  their  iniquity."  Pride  always  comes  before  de-
struction, and  a  haughty  spirit  before  a  fall.  Sin  ever  brings  ruin  upon  churches
and  nations.  Men  combine  and  exalt  themselves  in  wickedness,  but  in  the  pro-
vidence of  God  they  fall,  and  great  is  their  fall.  The  destruction  of  the  cities  of  the
plain  by  lire  and  of  the  world  by  flood  are  solemn  lessons  in  history.  1.  Judgments
come  suddenly.  The  festal  season  on  which  they  prided  themselves  and  offered
sacrifices  to  God  would  bring  no  joy  nor  deliverance.  Judgment  would  be  sudden
and  surprising.  Rapidly  and  unexpectedly  the  end  would  come.  Invasion  would
sweep  away  their  garrisons  and  resources.  The  month,  the  moon  waxing  till  full
and  waning  away,  would  measure  the  time.  Men  may  indulge  in  luxury,  intem-
perance, and  vice  j  but  the  day  of  retribution  will  carry  them  away.  Cruel  devices
will  be  detected,  and  wicked  men  "  fall "  helpless  and  undone.  Easy  transitions
from  one  thing  to  another  cause  no  terror  ;  but  in  everything  sudden  and  unex-
pected attention  is  roused  and  nature  startled.  God  warns,  "  but  evil  men "  are
wilfully  ignorant,  and  "  understand  not  judgment."  "  Desolation  shall  come  upon
thee  suddenly  which  thou  shalt  not  know."  2.  Judgments  come  impartially.  There
is  no  respect  of  persons  with  God's  providence.  Special  promises  and  special  privi-
leges may  be  given  to  some  ;  but  they  do  not  escape  the  general  calamity.  Judah
and  Ephraim  were  alike  guilty  and  alike  punished.  National  judgments  are  uni-
versal, spare  neither  saints  nor  sinners,  young  nor  old,  rich  nor  poor.  They  fall  on
all  ranks  impartially.  The  priest  cannot  protect  the  prince ;  nor  the  prince  the
priest.  Those  who  entice  will  not  be  able  to  deliver  the  enticed  ;  nor  the  enticed
excuse  for  being  misled.  When  God  pleads,  "  it  shall  be  as  with  the  people,  so
with  the  priest ;  as  with  the  servant,  so  with  his  master  ;  as  with  the  maid,  so  with
her  mistress  ;  as  with  the  buyer,  so  with  the  seller  ;  as  with  the  lender,  so  with  the
borrower  j  as  with  the  taker  of  usury,  so  with  the  giver  of  usury  to  him."  3.  Judg-
ments come  unavoidably.  They  cannot  be  warded  off  by  any  device  or  desire  of
man.  The  sentence  is  uttered  and  must  be  fulfilled.  God  cannot  change  nor  be
defeated  in  his  purpose.  He  withdrew  from  Israel  and  would  not  aid  them.  (1.)
Late  repentance  cannot  ward  off  judgment.  The  people  had  been  careless  and  in-
different in  their  prosperity.  Now  when  judgments  are  threatened  they  are  alarmed,
and  vow  to  God  in  sacrifice.  Many  repent  of  sin,  but  their  sorrow  is  that  of
Judas,  not  of  Peter.  They  are  sorry  for  the  consequences  of  sins,  but  not  for  the
sins  themselves ;  confess  their  wrong,  but  do  not  wish  to  forsake  it.     They  vow


76  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A,  [chap.  v.


and  resolve,  pay  homage  to  God,  and  wish  to  escape,  but  they  cannot  Nothing
could  rouse  them  when  punishment  was  only  predicted,  but  when  it  comes,  then
they  bestir  themselves  and  cry  for  mercy.  They  are  "  lashed  from  sins  to  sighs  ;
and  by  degrees  from  sighs  to  vows;  from  vows  to  bended  knees."  Life  is  often
spent  in  sin,  and  then  offered  to  God  in  its  dregs  and  decrepitude.  "True  repentance
is  never  too  late,  but  late  repentance  is  seldom  true."  "  Ah  !  Mr  Hervey,"  said  a
dying  man,  "  the  day  in  which  I  ought  to  have  worked  is  over,  and  now  I  see  a
horrible  night  approaching,  bringing  with  it  the  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever.
Woe  is  me  !  When  God  called  I  refused.  Now  I  am  in  sore  anguish,  and  yet
this  is  but  the  beginning  of  sorrows.  I  shall  be  destroyed  with  everlasting  destruc-
tion." (2.)  Outward  reformation  cannot  ward  off  judgments.  Many  are  penitent,
give  up  some  sins,  but  not  all.  They  make  great  sacrifices,  and  put  forth  desperate
efforts  to  amend  their  lives.  Whatever  will  shelter  them  from  present  calamity
they  earnestly  seek.  "  They  go  with  their  flocks  and  with  their  herds  to  seek  the
Lord,"  but  do  not  devote  themselves  to  him.  Good  works  cannot  compensate  for
evil  works.  Tears  may  be  abundant  and  sorrow  deep,  but  no  art  can  evade  and  no
power  resist  the  punishment.  Superstition  and  Infidelity  have  devised  means  to
allay  the  anguish  of  a  wounded  spirit ;  but  their  rites  and  sophistries,  salvos  and
palliatives,  have  been  in  vain.  The  bitterness  of  the  spendthrift  cannot  recover  his
lost  property ;  nor  the  sorrow  of  the  sensualist  restore  the  bloom  of  his  cheek.
The  sinner  cannot  repair  the  injury  done  to  himself  and  others,  nor  reinstate
himself  in  holiness  before  God.  Justice  is  immutable,  and  punishment  is  certain
to  follow  the  violation  of  moral  as  of  physical  law.  It  is  sad  to  think  that  many
"fall  "  without  deliverance,  and  seek  when  it  is  too  late.  Sin  brings  judgments
which  cannot  be  averted  by  formal  worship  and  outward  reformation.  "  I  have
no  pleasure  in  you,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  neither  will  I  accept  an  offering  at  your
hand."     "  To  what  purpose  is  the  multitude  of  your  sacrifices  unto  me  ] "  &c.

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.   5.     Tfie   Pride    of   Israel.     1.  to  that  judgment  it  is  too  late  to  pray.

Pride  their  greatest  sin.     2.  Pride  their  It  is  not  too  late  for  other  mercy  or  for

continual  sin.     3.  Pride  their  destruc-  final  forgiveness,  so  long  as  man's  state

tive  sin.  of  probation  lasts  ;  but  it  is  too  late  as

Ver.    6.     TJiey  shall  not  find  him.  to  this  one.   And  thus  each  judgment  in

God  is  not  found — 1.  When  not  sought  time  is  a  picture  of  the  eternal  judg-

earnestly  ;  2.  When  not  sought  with  a  ment,  when  the  day  of  mercy  is  past  for

pure  motive ;  3.  When  sought  in  slavish  ever  to  those  who  have  finally  in  this  life

fear  ;  4.  When  sought  too  iate.     When  hardened  themselves  against  it "  [Pusey].

the  judgments  of  God  are  drawing  near  Ver.  7.     Treacherously.     Men  cloak

fear  impels  the  most  reluctant  and  the  their  sins  and  act  deceitfully  in  God's

most  reprobate  to   seek  God;  but  the  service — 1.  When  they  vow  and  do  not

words  of  Christ  prove  true — "  Ye  shall  perform ;    2.    When  they  pray  and  do

seek  me,  and  shall  not  find  me  ;  and  not  labour ;  3.  When  the  outward  per-

where  I  am,  thither  ye  cannot  come."  formance  does  not  agree  with  the  inward

God   waits    long    for   sinners  :      He  condition.     In  the  sanctuary  they  are


<<


threatens  long   before  he  strikes :     He  often  one  thing,  in  daily  life  another,

strikes  and  pierces  in  lesser  degrees  and  "  Measure  not  men  by  Sundays,"  says

with    increasing    severity,    before    the  Fuller,  "without  regarding  what  they

final  blow  comes.     In  this  life  he  places  do  all  the  week  after."
man  in  a  new  state  of  trial  even  after  1 .  He  that  serves  God  with  the  body,

his  first  judgments  have  fallen  upon  the  without  the  soul,  serves  God  deceitfully.

sinner.     But   the   general   rule   of    his  2.  He  that  serves  God  with  the  soul,

dealings  is  this  ;  that  when  the  time  of  without  the  body,  when  both  can    be

pacb  judgment  is  actually  come,  then  as  conjoined,  doth  the  work  of  the  Lord


chap.  v.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.  77


deceitfully.  3.  They  are  deceitful  in  Israel  were  transmitted  to  their  children,
the  Lord's  work  that  reserve  one  faculty  who  were  regarded  by  God  as  the  off-
for  sin,  or  one  sin  for  themselves,  or  one  spring  of  idolatry.  When  children,  the
action  to  please  their  appetite  and  many  hope  of  the  future,  are  reared  in  apo-
for  religion.  4.  And  they  who  think  stasy  there  is  little  prospect  of  nation-
God  sufficiently  served  with  abstaining  al  amendment.  Godless  children  are
from  evil,  and  converse  not  in  the  ac-  punished  like  Godless  parents,  the  rising
quisition  and  pursuit  of  holy  charity  and  generation  suffer  with  the  present,  may
religion  [Jer.  Taylor].  be  cut  off,  and  both  may  perish  with  their
The  unfaithfulness  and  treachery  of  portions  and  possessions.

HOMILETICS.
"An  Earnest  Ministry  the  want  op  the  Times." — Verses  8 — 11.

The  prophet  is  now  commanded  to  warn  the  people — to  sound  the  horn,  and
stand  upon  the  most  prominent  places  on  the  borders  of  Benjamin.  The  judgment
is  certain ;  the  enemy  is  near,  and  the  nation  must  be  roused  from  its  slumbers.
With  intense  feeling  and  earnestness  the  alarm  is  given.  Hence  the  title  of  our
subject  borrowed  from  Angell  James.

I.  The  nature  of  an  earnest  ministry.  Life  is  earnest  and  happy  only  in
the  degree  in  which  it  is  consecrated  to  action.  Action  and  enjoyment  are  contin-
gent upon  each  other.  When  we  are  unfit  for  work  we  are  incapable  of  pleasure
and  success.  Hence  the  advice,  "  Be  in  earnest."  Earnestness  in  the  Christian
ministry  is  not  mere  activity,  noise,  and  bustle.  It  is  the  pursuit  of  a  certain  object,
and  the  determination  to  accomplish  it ;  an  endeavour  to  realize  our  aspirations.
"  This  one  thing  I  do."  1.  It  is  specific  in  design.  One  thing  filled  and  fired  the
mind  of  Hosea.  He  saw  the  danger,  and  longed  to  deliver  his  people  from  it.
Amid  many  inferior  designs,  the  preacher  has  one  chiefly  in  view.  His  mind  is
not  intently  employed  nor  his  heart  deeply  engaged  on  a  multiplicity  of  objects.
He  has  not  energy  and  time  thus  to  divide.  He  has  selected  his  object,  made  up
his  mind,  and  cannot  be  driven  from  it.  His  sermons  are  preached  and  his  efforts
directed  to  the  conversion  of  sinners.  When  a  few  friends  stood  round  the  bed  of
Dr  Beecher,  one  put  the  question,  "  Dr  B.,  you  know  a  great  many  things,  tell  us
which  is  the  greatest  of  all  things."  In  a  moment  he  brightened  up  and  replied,
"  It  is  not  theology,  it  is  not  controversy,  but  it  is  to  save  souls."  JSTo  earnest
minister  will  be  satisfied  without  this.  Applause,  honour,  and  position  sink  into  in-
significance. He  cries  out,  "  My  little  children,  of  whom  I  travail  in  birth  again,
until  Christ  be  formed  in  you."  2.  It  is  enthusiastic  in  feeling.  "  0  Benjamin,"
cried  the  prophet.  The  heart  yearns  "  when  thought  "  is  "  enkindled  to  a  high
degree."  The  abstractions  of  the  intellect  kindle  the  affections  of  the  heart.
Where  there  is  no  feeling,  there  can  be  no  fervour  of  spirit.  "  We  want  men  with
burning  hearts,"  said  a  heathen  to  a  missionary.  Ministers  are  the  best  orators
when  they  feel.  The  spring  of  power  is  within,  and  the  life  that  quickens  dwells
in  the  soul.  Feeble  preachers  result  from  feeble  Christians.  There  is  often  cold
orthodoxy  without  fire.  The  soul  is  not  poured  into  duty,  and  all  is  routine  and
form.  "  The  wildest  enthusiasm  is  more  rational  than  indifference,"  says  Paley.
It  is  said  of  Baxter  when  he  preached,  "  you  might  find  his  very  spirit  drenched
therein."  Noise  and  display  may  attract  attention,  just  as  Eastern  mourners  wail-
ing for  the  dead  stir  the  sympathies  of  the  multitude.  But  the  man  whose  soul  is
profoundly  moved  is  "  pressed  in  spirit  "  and  often  of  "  silent  tears."  He  speaks
in  words  that  burn  and  thoughts  that  breathe.  "  0  that  I  was  all  heart  and  soul
and  spirit,"  said  Rowland  Hill,  "  to  tell  the  glorious  gospel  of  Christ  to  perishing
multitudes."  3.  It  is  conducted  under  Divine  guidance.  We  all  feel  the  need  of
direction  in  the  choice  of  a  sphere  and  the  discharge  of  duty.  But  in  the  ordinary
and  the  special  work,  in  the  cottage  and  in  the  pulpit,  the  minister  must  seek


78  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ROSEA.  [chap.  v.


Divine  aid.  In  the  study  of  the  word  and  the  discovery  of  truth  :  in  matter,
manner,  and  results,  our  sufficiency  must  come  from  God.  God  directed  the  pro-
phet to  speak.  The  Spirit  guided  the  apostles  to  persons  and  places,  and  in  public
and  private  efforts  "  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  with  them."  We  must  not  only
recognize,  but  honour  the  Holy  Spirit  by  seeking  his  direction  and  speaking  under
his  inspiration.  If  Pericles  never  ascended  the  rostrum  without  imploring  a
blessing  from  the  gods,  does  he  not  condemn  many  Christian  ministers  1  "  I  forgot
explicitly  and  expressly,  when  I  began,  to  crave  help  from  God,  and  the  chariot-
wheels  drove  accordingly.  Lord,  forgive  my  omissions,  and  keep  me  in  the  way  of
duty,"  wrote  Philip  Henry.  In  a  large  town  or  a  country  village,  in  the  beginning
and  at  the  end  of  our  ministry,  we  must  "  stand  and  wait,"  eager  for  work —

11  Ready  to  run  at  his  command  ;
At  his  command  stand  still."

4.  It  is  characterized  by  constant  activity.  "Work  is  the  law  of  our  being,  the
living  principle  that  carries  men  and  nations  onward.  Nothing  but  constant  toil
maintains  their  authority  and  extends  their  dominion.  "  We  must  work  (Labor e-
mus),"  said  the  Emperor  Severus  on  his  death-bed  at  York,  where  he  had  been
carried  on  a  litter  from  the  foot  of  the  Grampians.  A  fervent  spirit  will  prompt
to  active  life.  Hearty  relish  for  our  work,  and  a  sense  of  its  importance,  will  inspire
with  ardour.  The  nation  requires  a  living  ministry,  earnest  men,  men  that  will
pray  and  labour,  watch  and  weep  for  souls.  "  Oh  that  I  were  a  flame  of  fire  in  my
Master's  cause,"  cried  Brainerd.

"  Wake,  ere  the  earthly  charm  unnerve  thee  quite,
And  be  thy  thoughts  to  work  Divine  addrest  :
Do  something,  do  it  soon — with  all  thy  might !
An  angel's  wing  would  droop  if  long  at  rest,
And  God  himself  inactive  were  no  longer  blest."

III.  The  necessity  of  an  earnest  ministry.  Ephraim  was  not  merely  to  be  chastised,
wasted  by  famine,  but  destroyed;  to  become  a  desolation,  an  entire  waste.  When
Judah  had  removed  the  bounds,  broken  through  all  restraints  human  and  Divine,
then  destruction  like  a  flood  would  overwhelm  the  land.  Yet  they  were  careless
and  insensible  to  danger.  Men  now  are  asleep  in  sin,  heedless  of  Divine  warning.
Ministers  must  "  cry  aloud  and  spare  not."  "  I  love  those  that  thunder  out  the
word,"  said  Whitfield.  "  The  Christian  world  is  in  a  deep  sleep.  Nothing  but  a
loud  voice  can  awaken  them  out  of  it."  1.  Earnestness  is  demanded  by  the  spirit-
ual  condition  of  men.  "  Ephraim  shall  be  desolate  ; "  "I  will  pour  out  my  wrath
upon  them  like  water."  God  rebuked,  judgments  were  threatened,  but  they  were
impenitent  and  presumptuous.  (1)  The  danger  is  real.  It  is  not  imaginative,  not
an  alarm  to  frighten.  Sin  and  punishment,  heaven  and  hell,  are  awful  realities.
The  truth  must  be  told.  Without  Christ  the  sinner  cannot  escape — will  be  lost,
eternally  lost.  (2)  The  danger  is  near:  Not  like  an  enemy  afar  off,  but  on  the  borders,
in  the  land,  spreading  desolation  on  every  hand.  Sin  enters  the  heart,  exposes  to
present  danger  and  eternal  death.  (3)  The  danger  is  overwhelming.  "  Ephraim
is  oppressed  and  broken  in  judgment,"  crushed  by  his  own  folly  and  oppressed  by
captivity.  Danger  within  and  without,  nothing  but  danger  !  Who  can  withstand
when  God  pours  out  his  wrath  like  a  deep  and  irresistible  flood  1  (a)  It  was  severe —
"a  flood."  (b)  It  was  fixed — u  which  shall  surely  be."  (c)  It  was  perpetual — the
desolation  was  for  ever,  the  grandeur  of  the  nation  was  never  restored.  "  Flee  from
the  wrath  to  come."  2.  Earnestness  is  demanded  by  the  activity  of  the  age.  The
features  of  the  age  are  peculiar  and  not  a  little  hostile  to  the  gospel,  notwithstand-
ing great  revivals.  Earnestness  marks  every  department  of  life.  Eestlessness  and
energy  are  found  in  trade  and  commerce,  science  and  literature.  Rationalism^  Ritu-
alism, and  Scepticism  are  seen  in  battle  arrayed.  We  must  meet  this  activity,  which
is  the  boast,  before  it  becomes  the  bane,  of  the  age ;  direct  it  to  its  proper  ends ;
and  turn  its  turbid  currents  into  streams  of  life.     What  but  an  earnest  ministry  can


CHAP.   V.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  J.


79


intone  society,  rouse  and  help  God's  people  to  bear  up  against  Mammon  and  the
selfish  spirit  of  the  day  ?  Energy  in  politics,  education,  and  philanthropy  necessi-
tate deeper  feeling  in  the  preacher.  Tame  and  spiritless  sermons,  common-place
performances  on  Sunday,  will  not  break  the  spell  of  six  days'  excitement  and  influ-
We  require  a  Whitfield  and  a  Wesley,  sons  of  thunder,  the  spirit  of  Luther,


ence.


to  rebuke  this  material  and  utilitarian  age.  "  Nothing  is  more  indecent,"  says
Baxter,  "  than  a  dead  preacher  speaking  to  dead  sinners  the  living  truth  of  the
living  God."     The  earnestness  of  this  holy  man  was  exemplified  in  his  own  lines —

"  I'll  preach  as  though  I  ne'er  should  preach  again ;
And  as  a  dying  man  to  dying  men  !  "

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND    OUTLINES.


Ver.  9.  I.  Days  of  rebuke.  1.  Days  of
solemn  warning ;  2.  Days  of  grievous
affliction ;  3.  Days  of  actual  calamities,  to
individuals  and  families,  churches  and
nations.  II.  Days  of  rebuke  unheeded.
Followed  by — 1 .  Severer  threatening — 2.
Awful  destruction.  The  scattered  sons  of
Israel  were  made  preachers  to  the  nations
around,  Divine  warnings  to  all  people.
Or,  I.  The  cause  of  rebuke — "  iniquity  "
(ver.  5).  God  pronounced  sentence  upon
the  nation  ;  individuals  contribute  to
national  guilt,  and  must  feel  their  re-
sponsibility. God  is  angry  with  sin,  and
seeks  to  purge  his  people  from  it,  to  take
away  the  evils,  not  the  comforts  of  life  ;
the  dross,  not  the  gold.  II.  The  design
of  rebuke.  Trials  are  not  penal  afflic-
tions to  God's  people,  but  fatherly  cor-
rections, friendly  rebukes.  III.  The
effect  of  rebuke — "  desolate  in  the  day
of  rebuke."  Ephraim  was  not  restored.
The  wicked  are  consumed,  utterly  de-
stroyed, when  rebuked  in  wrath  and  hot
displeasure.  The  believer  is  chastened,
but  not  destroyed  ;  treated  not  as  an
enemy,  but  as  an  erring  child.  "  God
may  rebuke  when  he  is  angry,  and  yet
restrain  in  his  anger ;  but  to  rebuke  in
his  anger,  is  to  let  loose  the  reins  to  his
anger,  and  to  make  it  outrun  his  mercy.
Then  what  a  miserable  case  to  be  in !  to
have  his  anger  assault  me  and  not  his
mercy  relieve  me."

Ver.  10.  Bounds.  The  land-mark
was  a  memorial  of  antiquity  and  the
rights  of  man  (Pro v.  xxii.  28).  Its  re-
moval was  forbidden  as  selfish  and  un-
just invasion  of  property  (Deut.  xix.  4) ;
irreverence  for  well-established  princi-
ples ;  love  for  rash  innovation  ;  branded
with  a  curse  (Deut.  xxvii.  17) ;  and  re-


garded as  the  cause  of  national  provoca-
tion. The  heathen  admitted  the  sanctity
of  land-marks,  and  honoured  them  as
gods,  without  which  every  field  would  be
subject  to  contention.  God  himself  has
set  bounds  in  the  physical  and  moral
world ;  locating  each  nation ;  restraining
each  part ;  and  governing  the  whole.
Hence  removal  of  bounds  is — 1.  En-
croachment upon  Divine  authority;  2.
Destruction  of  moral  distinctions ;  3.
Exposure  to  moral  guilt.  Some  remove
bounds  and  set  up  others.  Israel  re-
moved the  law  of  God  and  set  up  their
own  will  (ver.  11).  Rome  takes  away
Scripture  and  sets  up  tradition.  Philo-
sophy rejects  the  gospel  and  substitutes
science.  The  application  must  not  be
absolute  and  universal.  We  are  not  to
be  too  conservative  in  politics  and  re-
ligion, nor  yet  too  rash  with  innovations  ;
but  seek  the  mean  between  blind  rever-
enc3  for  antiquity  and  love  of  novelties.
Ver.  11.  Notice— I.  The  object  of
pursuit — "  the  commandment."  An  ob-
ject  sinful,    ensnaring,    and  dangerous.

II.  The  method  of  pursuit — "  willingly"
A  method  easy  to  comply  with,  fashion-
able, and  upheld   by   State   authority.

III.  The  results  of  pursuit — "oppressed"
from  without,  "  broken  in  judgment "
from  within,  (a)  A  natural  result ;  (b)
A  just  result.  "  Ephraim  preferred
man's  commands  and  laws  to  God's  \  they
obeyed  man  and  set  God  at  nought,
therefore  they  should  suffer  at  man's
hands,  who,  while  he  equally  neglected
God's  will,  enforced  his  own.  For  this
sin  God  judged  them  justly,  even  through
the  unjust  judgment  of  man.  God
mostly  punishes,  thro'  their  own  choice,
those  who  choose  against  his.     The  Jews


80  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.  [chap.  y.


said,  We  have  no  king  but  Caesar,  and  on  the  rent  under  pretence  of  ridding  the

Caesar  destroyed  them  [Pusey],  people  of  great  oppressions,  and  invented

The   commandment  of  men,   though  a  way  of  religion  pretending  the  peo-

enforced  by  authority,  terror,  and  danger,  pie's  ease,  yet  by  him  and  his  successors

is  no  excuse  for  sin.     Sin  does  not  cease  "  Ephraim  is  oppressed  and  broken  in

to  be  voluntary,  inexcusable,  and  aggra-  judgment;  "   not  only  in  the  righteous

vating    on    that   account.       Oppressors  judgment  of  God,  but  in  the  adminis-

corrupt  the  worship  of  God,  natter  and  tration  of  justice  they  were  crushed  by

carry  away  the  people,  till  their  own  corrupt  rulers,  who  were  great  bribers

ends  be  accomplished,  but  they  will  crush  (ch.  iv.  18)  \_Hutcheson\.
them  in  the  long  run.     Jeroboam  carried

HOMILETICS.

Destruction  Slow  and  Sure. —  Verse  12.

The  ten  tribes  are  compared  to  a  garment  eaten  by  the  moth,  and  Judah  is  con-
sumed by  rottenness.  The  moth  is  injurious  to  clothing.  The  worm  penetrates
both  wood  and  flesh.  Both  prefigure  the  inward  and  outward  corruption  of  Israel ;
destruction  slowly  and  surety  progressing  (Job  xiii.  28).

I.  Destruction  small  in  its  beginning.     The  moth  is  a  small  and  mischievous
creature.     Touch  it,  and  you  kill  it ;  permit  it  to  live,  and  it  makes  havoc  in  the
dwelling.     Sins  of  youth  may  be  despised  and  indulged,  but  they  harden  the  heart
and  prepare  for  greater  sins.     Nations  are  not  destroyed  at  once  ;  families  and
churches  are  not  always  suddenly  overcome.     Some  moral  disease,  like  the  moth,
quietly  gnaws  away  their  beauty  and  vitality.     Pride,  intemperance,  and  vice  prey
upon  their  reputation  and  royalty.  They  are  crushed  Avith  the  moth.  II.  Destruction
slow  in  its  progress.  Little  by  little  the  hardest  wood  is  pierced.   Silently  and  slowly
do  rottenness  and  decay  work  their  end.  Yonder  river  rolling  to  the  sea,  rises  from  some
small  spot,  and  widens  as  it  flows  to  join  the  mighty  deep.  The  inhabitants  of  primeval
forests  are  often  startled  by  the  fall  of  some  giant  tree.     For  centuries  it  was  strong
and  grand  in  its  foliage,  but  fell  a  victim  to  rottenness  and  decay.     Insects  came  and
gradually  bored  its  sides  and  peeled  its  bark ;  the  wind  and  air  got  access  to  its  centre
and  heart.  Now  it  lies  a  helpless  trunk,  to  blend  in  common  dust — "  the  place  thereof
knows  it  no  more."     Family  honour,  mercantile  prosperity,  and  national  enterprises,
may  be  upheld  and  flourish  for  a  season.     But  secret  sins  and  religious  declensions,
luxury  and  effeminacy,  are,  like  the  moth,  slowly  working  out  destruction.     Eotten-
ness  entered  the  nations  of  antiquity,  and  their  grandeur  decayed  like  a  flower.
Superstition  and   priestly  ambition,  a  sectarian  and  worldly  spirit,  will  destroy
spiritual  life  in  our  modern  churches ;  lukewarmness  and  pride  will  hasten  their
ruin,  and  make  them  "  desolate  in  the  day  of  rebuke."     III.  Destruction  sure  in
its  end.     Wherever  the  moth  dwells  destruction  is  costly  and  sure.     The  house  of
the  moth  is  not  a  mansion  of  iron,  a  lasting  habitation  which  never  falls  to  ruin.
The  most  precious  stores  are  devoured.     Rich  perfumes  and  purple  apparel  are  con-
sumed and  frittered  away.     "  The  moth,"  says  Dr  Thomas,  "  is  often  so  small  and
secret  in  its  workings  that  medical  science  can  seldom  find  it  out,  and  when  it  finds
it  out,  though  it  may  check  it  for  a  time,  it  cannot  destroy  it :  the  moth  defies  all
medicine."     So  the  judgments  of  God  upon  sin  may  be  small  in  beginning,  but  in-
crease in  severity,  and  at  length  bring  death  and  destruction.     At  first  God  tries
gentle  measures,  mild  chastisements,  then  loss  and  decay  in  bodily  health,  family
prestige,  and  national  glory ;  finally,  after  respite  and  space  for  repentance,  calamities
wear  out  and  destroy  the  impenitent.     "  For  the  moth  shall  eat  them  up  like  a
garment,  and  the  worm  shall  eat  them  like  wool."


CHAP,  v.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ROSEA.  81

HOMILETICS.
National  Sickness  and  Spurious  Eemedies. —  Verse  13.

At  length  Ephraim  saw  the  sickness  within  and  felt  the  wounds  inflicted  from
without.  But  instead  of  returning  to  God,  they  sought  help  from  Assyria,  "  sent
to  King  Jared,"  but  were  grievously  disappointed.  Idolatry  and  corruption,
apostasy  from  God,  could  not  be  cured  with  earthly  bandages.  The  whole  head  was
sick,  and  the  heart  faint.  The  wounds  and  bruises  and  putrefying  sores  could  not  be
closed,  bound  up,  nor  mollified  with  worldly  alliance.  God  had  stricken  them,  and
lie  only  could  cure  them,  but  they  refused  to  return  (cf.  Is.  i.  6 ;  Jer.  v.  3).  In
the  moral  condition  of  Israel  we  have  a  picture  of  humanity.

I.  Men  are  morally  sick.  The  heart  is  depraved,  "  deceitful  above  all  things,  and
desperately  wicked."  Sin  impairs  the  energy  of  the  mind,  and  robs  the  soul  of  enjoy-
ment and  bliss.  The  political  head  and  the  moral  heart  of  nations  are  sick  and
wounded.  The  politics,  the  philosophy,  and  the  religion  of  the  world  require  moral
purity  and  spiritual  health.  Ceaseless  activity  without  and  unspirituality  within
crave  for  satisfaction  and  God.  The  life-blood  is  impure,  the  very  heart  is  diseased,  and
the  evils  of  the  day  are  the  expressions,  the  signs  of  its  moral  maladies.  Everywhere
we  have  sighs  of  the  heart,  efforts  of  the  mind,  and  strivings  for  forms  of  liberty,  states
of  life,  and  conditions  of  happiness  which  are  considered  the  true  harmony  of  moral
being,  the  panacea  for  moral  ills.  1.  This  sickness  must  be  seen.  Ephraim  did  not  at
first  discern  his  condition.  Men  are  often  insensible  to  disease,  take  little  warning
of  Divine  judgments,  until  they  are  roused  by  some  sudden  stroke.  Men  may  fancy
themselves  healthy  because  insensible  ;  but  apathy  may  suppress  the  natural  feeling
and  cravings  of  the  heart.  A  sound  body  suffers  pain,  if  injured ;  but  a  frame  be-
numbed by  sickness  or  death  has  lost  all  feeling.  "  Health  has  no  feeling  of  sick-
ness," says  Augustine,  "  but  yet  it  feels  pain  when  it  is  wounded.  But  stupidity
feels  no  pain;  it  has  lost  the  feeling  of  pain;  and  the  more  insensible,  so  much  the
worse."  2.  This  sickness  must  he  seen  in  its  true  light.  According  to  our  view
of  afflictions  so  we  think  and  act.  They  are  designed  to  teach  reflection  and
humility  ;  to  strengthen  penitence,  faith,  and  patience;  to  promote  the  health  and
sanctification  of  the  soul.  But  if  we  see  the  distress  and  not  the  causes  of  it ;  if
we  feel  no  guilt,  no  need  of  a  physician ;  then  our  temper  is  soured,  our  lot  embit-
tered, we  forsake  the  true  remedy,  and  pine  away  and  die.  II.  Men  morally  sick
often  seek  wrong  remedies.  "  Then  sent  Ephraim  to  the  Assyrian."  This  only
invited  the  enemy  into  their  kingdom  and  increased  their  distress.  After  they
had  paid  money  and  spent  all  they  had  they  were  no  better,  but  worse.  Mark  v.  26.
1.  Individuals  often  fly  to  wrong  sources.  Music  and  merry  company,  novels
and  scenes  of  amusement,  are  tried  in  vain,  and  found  to  be  miserable  comforters
with  all  their  attractions.  Impressions  remain,  the  conscience  is  still  wounded  and
disappointment  is  the  result.  2.  Nations  suffering  heavy  calamities  trust  to  impotent
remedies.  Commercial  prosperity,  military  prowess,  political  liberty,  and  intellec-
tual culture,  may  uphold  the  outward  show,  but  can  never  cure  the  inward  disorders
of  a  kingdom.  In  national  judgments,  amid  general  dissolution  of  manners,  reliance
on  arts  and  arms,  wealth  and  allies,  will  not  save  us.  The  experience  of  Ephraim
will  be  the  result  of  all  application  to  an  arm  of  flesh.  "  Yet  could  he  not  heal
you,  nor  cure  you  of  your  wound."  III.  When  men  in  moral  sickness  apply  to
wrong  means  for  relief  they  will  be  disappointed.  Human  aid  will  be  useless
when  God  is  slighted  ;  the  philosopher  and  the  legislator,  the  warrior  and  the  poet,
will  not  avail.  "  Thy  bruise  is  incurable,  and  thy  wound  is  grievous."  Scripture
is  emphatic  on  this  point.  "  Lo,  thou  trustest  in  the  staff  of  this  broken  reed,
on  Egypt ;  whereon  if  a  man  lean,  it  will  go  into  his  hand  and  pierce  it "  (Is.  xxxvi.
6 ;  Ezek.  xxix.  6,  7).  "  Cease  ye  from  man,  whose  breath  is  in  his  nostrils ;  for
wherein  is  he  to  be  accounted  of?"    (Is.  ii.  22.)    "  It  is  better  to  trust  in  the  Lord

6


89  I10MILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.  [chap.  v.


than  to  put  confidence  in  princes."  "  Put  not  your  confidence  in  princes,  nor  in
the  son  of  man,  in  whom  there  is  no  help."  History  gives  warning  sufficient.
Nations  that  have  relied  upon  human  genius,  arms  and  confederacies,  have  failed  in
efforts  to  remedy  their  evils.  Unholy  alliance  with  Egypt  and  Assyria  could  not
preserve  Israel  from  their  doom.  Policy  without  principle,  alliance  without  God,
shall  be  broken.  Moral  maladies  can  only  be  cured  by  moral  means.  There  is  but
one  physician,  all  others  are  physicians  of  no  value.  "  I  kill,  and  I  make  alive  ;
I  wound,  and  I  heal :  neither  is  there  any  that  can  deliver  out  of  my  hand."

Destruction  Open  and  Violent. — Verses  14,  15.

God,  who  had  been  as  a  "moth"  gradually  eating  away  and  destroying  the  nation,
would  now  change  his  procedure,  and  attack  as  a  fierce  lion,  tear  to  pieces,  and  none
could  rescue.  If  nations  take  no  heed  to  small  judgments  they  cannot  escape  great
ones.  The  lion,  an  image  of  strength,  seizes  its  prey,  and  carries  it  away  in  safety
(Is.  v.  29).  As  the  lion  withdraws  into  its  cave,  so  God  withdraws  his  help,  and
retires  from  Israel  until  they  repent  and  seek  his  face.  I.  God's  judgments  are  often
severe.  "  I,  even  I  will  tear."  Here  are  no  soft  metaphors.  The  destruction  is
most  painful  and  severe.  Like  a  lion  or  an  eagle  God  tears  to  pieces ;  tears  the
garment,  tears  body  and  soul.  Punishment  sometimes  falls  upon  men  like  wild
beasts  upon  their  victims,  to  crush  and  destroy.  The  lion  is  cruel  and  ferocious ;
rends  its  prey  (Deut.  xxxiii.  20  ;  Ps.  vii.  2)  ;  and  carries  it  in  triumph  to  its  den
(Nah.  ii.  12).  This  is  not  an  overdrawn  picture  of  danger  and  the  anger  of  God
against  presumptuous  sins.  "  Consider  this,  ye  that  forget  God,  lest  I  tear  you  in
pieces,  and  there  be  none  to  deliver."  II.  God's  judgments  are  often  irresist  ble.
"  None  shall  rescue  him."  The  shepherd  can  neither  defend  nor  interfere.  In  a  trial
of  strength  God  is  omnipotent  and  cannot  be  overcome.  Assyria  was  no  protection
to  Israel.  In  national  calamity  none  can  plead.  At  the  day  of  wrath  no  hope,  no
refuge  can  be  found  without  God.  III.  God's  judgments  are  often  irrevocable.
"  I  will  go  and  return  to  my  place."  None  can  ward  off  Divine  judgments  ;  none
can  bring  back  when  God  retires  from  men.  When  God  deserts  a  society  or  a
people,  the  mightiest  and  most  learned  are  no  defence.  Noble  institutions,  religious
ordinances,  and  great  men,  wealthy  citizens  and  abundant  revenues,  are  not  the
chief  strength,  the  real  power  of  a  nation.  God  can  consume  these  like  a  flower,
and  no  fasting  nor  penitence  can  purchase  favours  once  withdrawn.  Riches  melt,
power  decays,  and  happiness  turns  to  misery  before  the  wrath  of  God.  Nothing
can  revive  a  nation  when  God  destroys  it ;  nothing  can  change  his  purp*  se  when
carried  out  in  his  providence.  To  be  forsaken  of  God  at  any  time  is  av  ful  woe  ;
but  in  trouble  to  have  his  countenance  turned  from  us  and  against  us,  to  have
frowns  instead  of  smiles,  must  be  hell,  and  not  heaven,  "  When  distress  and
anguish  cometh  upon  you.  Then  shall  they  call  upon  me,  but  I  will  not  answer ;
they  shall  seek  me  early,  but  they  shall  not  find  me."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  13.  Man  cannot  have  two  objects  kindness,  and  the  faithfulness  of  man

of  trust — God  and  himself,  or  fellow-  are  helpless.     God  alone  should  be  our

man.      Half   of    salvation    cannot    be  hope  and  trust  (Jer.  xvii.  7).

ascribed  to  one  and  half  to  the  other.  To  Yer.   1 4.     When  we  strengthen  our-

put  confidence  in  man,  and  expect  him  selves  in  sin  by  outward  helps  against

to  do  what  God  alone  can  do,  is  idolatry  the  providence  and  corrections  of  God,  we

or  departure  from  God,  cleaving  to  the  challenge  him  to  a  trial  of  strength,  turn

cistern  and  forsaking  the  fountain,  lean-  the  "  moth  "  into  a  "  lion,"  and  bring

ing  upon  a  broken  reed  which  will  fail  greater  judgments  upon  ourselves.     God

and  pierce  the  hand.     The  power,  the  can  tear  a  nation  to  pieces  by  sword,


CHA*.  V.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  HOSE  J.


83


famine,  and  civil  discord.  "  What  is
stronger  than  a  lion  1 "  "  It  is  a  fearful
thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living
God."

Ver.  15.  God's  retirement  from  men.
I.  The  cause.  Offended  at  sin,  driven
away  by  men  forgetting  and  forsaking
him.  Sin  separates  between  God  and
man,  and  hides  his  face  from  us.  II.
The  design.  "  Till  they  acknowledge
their  offence,"  &c.  1.  To  lead  to  repent-
ance, sorrow,  confession  and  forsaking
of  sin.  2.  To  bring  back  to  God.  "In
their  affliction  they  will  seek  me  early."
The  desertion  is  not  always  final  nor
total.  God  withdraws  his  aid  in  duty
and  his  comforts  in  life  not  to  cast  off
entirely,  but  to  beget  penitence  and  hope,
to  induce  return  and  amendment  of  life.
"  We  smart  under  dreadful  desertions.
Some  of  us  have  had  to  cry  with  the
Master  on  the  cross,  *  My  God,  my  God,
why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  1 '  We
know  why  he  has  forsaken  us  :  it  is  be-
cause we  have  forsaken  him,  and  there-
fore he  has  hidden  the  light  of  his
countenance  from  us  until  we  could
scarcely  believe  ourselves  to  be  his
children  at  all.  We  have  turned  to
prayer,  and  found  words  and  even  desires
fail  us  when  on  our  knees.  We  have
searched  the  Scriptures  with  no  consola-
tory result :  every  text  of  Scripture  has
looked  black  upon  us ;  every  promise
blockaded  its  ports  against  us.  We
have  tried  to  raise  a  single  thought
heavenward,  but  have  been  so  distracted
under  a  sense  of  the  Lord's  wrath,  which
lay  heavy  upon  us,  that  we  could  not
even  aspire  for  a  moment;  we  could  only
say,  *  Why  art  thou  cast  down,  0  my
soul  1     Why  art  thou  disquieted  within


me  ? '  Such  suffering  of  soul  will  often
be  to  the  erring  Christian  the  very  best
thing  that  could  befall  him.  He  has
walked  contrary  to  his  God,  and  if  his
God  did  not  walk  contrary  to  him  he
would  be  at  peace  in  his  sin;  and  re-
member, no  condition  can  be  more  dan-
gerous, not  to  say  damnable,  than  for
a  man  who  is  no  longer  agreed  with  his
God  to  believe  that  all  is  well,  and  go
on  softly  and  delicately  in  the  way
which  tends  to  destruction  "   [Spurgeon],

True  repentance,  in  its  first  step,
leads  to  conviction  of  sin,  confession  of
guilt,  and  acceptance  of  punishment  as
due  to  our  sin.  Then  to  seek  the  face
of  God.  "  Without  the  latter,  despair,
not  repentance,  would  be  the  result,  as  in
the  case  of  Judah's  remorse.  Without
the  former  step,  to  seek  God's  face  would
be  presumption."  Unsanctified  affliction
only  hardens,  but  blessed,  will  lead  the
chastened  penitent  earnestlv  and  dili-
gently to  seek  and  serve  God.

True  seekers  after  God.  1.  They
seek  him,  sensible  of  their  distance  and
their  guilt.  2.  They  seek  him  when
they  do  not  enjoy  him.  3.  They  seek
him  (a)  early,  i.e.  diligently.  Former
negligence  is  followed  by  double  dili-
gence ;  (b)  earnestly  intent  on  finding
God  ;  (c)  perseveringly,  though  he  has
withdrawn  from  them.  They  seek  until
they  find  him.  "  All  these  duties  re-
quired in  right  seeking  of  God  ought
to  be  especially  set  about  in  sad  times.
Times  wherein  affliction  press  men  hard
on  all  hands  ought  to  be  times  of  seek-
ing God  indeed,  and  ought  to  put  an
edge  on  diligence  and  duties,  otherwise
it  may  draw  to  a  sad  account "  [Hutche-
son].


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  V.


Ver.  1 — 3.  Inferiors  are  very  apt  to
be  formed  up  according  to  the  mould  and
manners  of  those  above  them.  The  ex-
ample of  kings  and  princes  are  seldom
unconformed  to  by  their  subjects.  There
is  a  great  power  in  example;  what  is
done  persuades,  as  well  as  what  is
spoken.  And  the  errors  of  those  that
rule,  become  rules  of  error ;  men  sin
with  a  kind  of  authority,  through  the
sins  of  those  who  are  in  authority.    Jero-


boam made  Israel  to  sin,  not  only  by
commanding  them  to  worship  the  calves
at  Dan  and  Bethel,  but  by  commending
that  idolatrous  worship  to  them  in  his
own  practice  and  example  [Caryl'].

The  common  people  are  like  tem-
pered wax,  easily  receiving  impressions
from  the  seals  of  great  men's  vices  ;  they
care  not  to  sin  by  prescription,  and
damn  themselves  with  authority
[Harding],


84


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.


[chap.  t.


Ver.  4.  Nothing  but  the  hand  of
God  can  hold  man  from  ruining  him-
self. The  heart  of  man  is  so  set  upon  sin,
that  he  would  rather  lose  his  soul  than
his  lusts.  'Tis  as  easy  to  stay  the  motion
of  the  sun,  or  to  turn  back  the  course  of
nature,  as  to  stay  or  turn  back  the
natural  motion  or  course  of  the  heart
in  sinning.  An  almighty  power  must  do
the  latter  as  well  as  the  former   [Ca7'yl~\.

Other  tyrants  can  but  tyrannize  over
our  bodies,  but  sin  is  a  tyrant  over  body
and  soul.  It  is  the  worst  and  greatest
tyrant  in  the  world.  It  hath  a  kind  of
jurisdiction  in  most  men's  hearts :  it  sets
up  the  law  of  pride,  the  law  of  passion,
the  law  of  oppression,  the  law  of  form-
ality, the  law  of  carnal  reason,  the  law
of  unbelief,  and  strictly  commands  sub-
jection to  them.  Other  tyrants  have  been
brought  down  and  brought  under  by
human  power,  but  this  cannot,  except  by
Divine  [Brooks],

Ver.  5 — 7.  Our  consciences  (which
are  God's)  keep  a  record,  write  our  lives
and  count  our  steps.  Many  cannot
read  the  book  of  conscience,  and  so  know
little  that  is  in  it.  But  a  time  will  come
(if  conscience  be  not  purged  by  the  blood
of  Christ)  when  they  shall  perfectly
read  all  their  sins  in  this  book  within  ;
and  if  conscience,  which  is  God's  deputy,
testifieth  against  sin  and  marketh  it,  how
much  more  God,  who  is  the  Judge  of
conscience.  God  needs  not  judge  upon
information,  but  upon  observation.  He
will  reprove  every  man  whom  he  doth
not  pardon,  and  is  able  to  set  before  us
in  order  whatsoever  any  of  us  have  done
[Caryl].

Though  repentance  be  never  too  late,
yet  late  repentance  is  seldom  true
[Brooks].  Mercy,  in  this  the  day  of  her
reign,  sovereignly  seizes  judgment  before
its  time,  and  works  that  mighty  lever  to
move  mankind.  The  terrors  of  the
Lord  are  not  permitted  to  sleep  unnoticed
and  unknown,  till  the  day  when  they
shall  overwhelm  and  overflow  all  his
enemies  ;  they  are  summoned  forth  in
the  interval,  and  numbered  among  the
all  things  that  work  together  for  good.
Though  kept  like  a  reserve  in  the  rear,
their  grim  hosts  are  exposed  to  view,  in
order   that   they  may  co-operate   with


kindlier  agencies  in  persuading  men  to
yield,  and  fight  against  God  no  more
[Arnof].

Ver.  8 — 11.  Brainerd  had  such
intense  compassion  for  souls,  and  was
so  earnest  for  their  salvation,  that  he
said,  "  I  cared  not  where  or  how  I
lived,  or  what  hardships  I  went  through,
so  that  I  could  but  gain  souls  to  Christ.
While  I  was  asleep  I  dreamed  of  these
things,  and  when  I  awoke  the  first  thing
I  thought  of  was  this  great  work.  All
my  desire  was  for  the  conversion  of  the
heathen,  and  all  my  hope  was  in  God."
It  is  amazing  what  difference  heat  makes
on  both  mental  and  material  objects.
The  only  difference  between  ice  and
steam  is,  that  the  one  has  less  and  the
other  more  heat.  Now  earnestness  con-
verts ordinary  qualities  into  powerful  and
elastic  forces.  It  enhances  everything
it  touches,  turns  bricks  to  marble,  and
copper  into  gold.  It  changes  liking
into  love,  joy  into  ecstasy,  and  expecta-
tion into  hope.  It  stamps  on  every
virtue  its  currency,  whether  in  heaven  or
in  earth.  Love,  pity,  kindness  are  all
cold  and  worthless  unless  they  bear  the
impress  of  a  fervent  spirit  [Dulce
Domum].

Ver.  11 — 14.  Vice  is  sometimes
punished  instantly  and  sometimes  gra-
dually. This  seems  to  be  the  method
of  Divine  procedure.  We  have  slow
and  rapid  consumption  in  the  bodies  of
men.  We  have  the  gradual  decay  and
the  sudden  overthrow  of  empires,  the
seed-time  of  evil  and  the  harvest  of
judgment.  The  changes  of  circumstances
are  so  various  and  frequent,  so  great  and
sudden,  that  the  same  person,  the  same
people,  afford  an  example  of  the  greatest-
prosperity  and  the  greatest  misery.
Henry  the  Fourth  of  France  was  de-
spatched by  a  sacrilegious  hand  in  his
carriage,  in  the  midst  of  popular  applause
and  the  triumphs  of  peace.  Like  Herod,
the  grandson  of  Herod  the  Great,  he
found  but  one  step  between  adoration
and  oblivion.  The  ruin  which  God  in-
flicts upon  the  impenitent  and  presump-
tuous sinners  is  often  beyond  precedent
most  sudden  and  most  fearful.  What
folly,  then,  to  trust  in  man,  when  God
can  easily  destroy  him  !


CHAP.  TL]  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :  HOSE  A.  86


Ver.   15.     To  afflictions,  instrument-  his  providence.     Afflictions  dispose  us

ally,  many  have  to  date  the  awakening  to    pray;    and    we   are   sure    to  want

and  conversion  of  their  souls.     "  Happy  nothing    if  we   find   God   in   prayer "

is  that  condition  which  forces  us  to  trust  [Bishop  Wilson] .
in  God  only,  and  to  be  in  the  hand  of


CHAPTER  VI.

Critical  Notes. — 1.]  Contains  an  appeal  addressed  by  Israelites  one  to  another.     Some,  as
spoken  by  the  prophet  to  the  exiled  and  smitten  people.     2.  Two  days.]     A  proverbial  way  of  ex-
pressing the  certainty  of  an  event  in  the  time  specified  ;  primarily  applied  to  the  conversion  of  Is.  :
in  fulness  only  realized  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ.     3.  Then]  i.  e.  the  consequence  of  following,
hunting  and  zealous  seeking  after,  would  be  knowledge  in  its  practical  results  (ch.  iv.  16  ;  Jer.  xxii.
15,16).     Going  forth]  Heb.  rising,  applied  to  the  sun  (Ps.  xix.  23;  Gen.  xix.  23);  setting  forth
transition  from  night  to  day  ;  the  dawn  of  salvation  before  the  orbed  glory  of  heaven  (Is.  liii.  8 ;
lx.  2).     Prepared]  Lit.  fixed,  certain  as  the  morning,  an  established  law  of  nature,  a  special  appoint-
ment of  God  (Gen.  viii.  22).  The  rain]  Reviving  and  refreshing  blessings  (Deut.  xxxii.  2  ;  Is.  Iv.  10).
The  latter]  Lit.  the  crop-rain  which  fell  in  the  middle  of  March  or  April  to  ripen  the  grain  for
harvest.     Former]  Spring  rain,  which  fell  from  middle  of  Oct.  to  middle  of  Dec.     Rain  generally,  and
these  two  specially,  promised  by  God  (Deut.  xi.  14)  ;   great  blessings,  without  which  would  happen
the  greatest  calamity  in   Pal.     The   blessings   of    Messiah  are  compared   to  rain  (Ps.   lxxii.  6  ;
2  Sam.  xxiii.  4).     4.]  Begins  a  bitter  complaint.     What]   Both  in  mercy  and  judgment  (Is.  v.  4).
God  was  constant    and    kind,  Is.  inconstant.     Goodness]  Godliness,   Heb.    mercy,   kindness,   all
virtues  towards  God  and  man  ;  love  which  fulfils  the  law  (Rom.  xiii.  10).     Morning  cloud]  Evan-
escent and  uncertain.  Dew]  Generated  by  the  cold  of  the  night,  it  appears  with  the  dawn;  yet  appears
only  to  disappear.    The  Jewish  people  a  type  of  many  amending  and  relapsing.  God's  mercy  is  first
set  forth,  and  then  men  are  upbraided  for  neglecting  it,  committing  those  sins  which  will  be  their
ruin.    Israel's  piety  was  "  quickly  assumed  and  quickly  disused."     5.  Hewed]  Cut  off,  cut  down  like
a  tree  (Is.  x.  15)  ;  or  to  hew  out  a  stone  into  the  right  shape.     Israel  was  obdurate,  and  was  hewed
by  the  prophet,  and  hammered  with  the  word  (Jer.  xxiii.  29).     Slain]  The  word  has  power  to  kill  and
to  make  alive  (Is.  xi.  4 ;  xlix.  2).     "  The  stone  which  will  not  take  the  form  which  should  have  been
imparted  to  it,  is  destroyed  by  the  strokes  which  should  have  moulded  it"  [Pusey].    Thy  judgments]
Lit.  that  thy  judgments  might  be  as  the  light.     Penal  justice  is  conspicuous,  clear  as  the  sun  ;  every
one  should  take  heed  (Zeph.  iii.  5) ;  lightening  (Hender.  trans. ;  cf.  marg.  Job  xxxvii.  3,   15).
6.  Sac]  which  they  brought.  Mercy]  which  they  lacked  ;  a  comparison  by  negatives ;  things  less
worthy  are  rejected.     Moral  obedience  is  better  than  ritual  offerings  (Mat.  ix.  13).    Knowl.]  experi-
mental and  practical,  which  is  more  than  empty  service.     Internal  is  put  before  external  worship  ;
the   prophet,  a  teacher  and  interpreter  of  the  law,  rebukes  apostasy.     7.  They]  Eph.  and  Jud.,
God's  professed  people.  Like  men]  Lit.  like  Adam  in  covenant  relation  to  God,  have  wilfully  trans-
gressed, are  guilty  of  a  breach  of  fidelity.    Others,  like  men  generally,  who  break  lightly  every  day
compacts  with  their  fellows.     God  sought  to  preserve  Adam  and  Israel  in  intimate  relation  to  him-
self.    Sin  is  a  violation  of  the  covenant — Israel  contradicted  their  destiny  as  the  people  of  God.
There]  Wherever  and  whenever  sin  is  committed,  the  place  is  known  to  God  and  pointed  out  by  the
Divine  finger.     8.   Gilead]  A  city  of  refuge,  the  residence  of  priests,  and  the  centre  or  metropolis  of
the  hilly  region  beyond  Jordan,  yet  polluted  and  the  leader  of  ruin !     9.]  Even  pi-iests  acted  like
predatory  bands,  to  murder  and  surprise  travellers  on  the  way.     Destruction  was  met  where  safety
was  sought.  By  consent]  Lit.  with  one  shoulder,  as  oxen  yoked  together  (Zeph.  iii.  9).  The  sanctity
of  the  place  and  the  privileges  of  the  priesthood  did  not  check  them  in  banding  together  for  mischief.
Lewdness]  Heb.  from  a  root  to  form  deliberate  purpose  ;  deliberate  crime,  enormity  (Marg.).     "  The
word  literally  means,   a  thing  thought  of,  especially  an  evil,   and  so,   deliberate  wickedness,  be-
thought of  and  contrived.     They  did  deliberate  wickedness,  gave  themselves  to  do  it,  and  nothing
else"    [Puseg].     10.  Horrible  thing]    Heb.    from  a   word  meaning    to   shudder,   be  astonished.
Whoredom]  spiritual  and  literal  singled  out  as  the  chief  sin — '•  In  another  nation,  idolatry  was  error.
In  Israel,  which  had  the  knowledge  of  the  one  true  God,  and  had  received  the  law,  it  was  horror  "
[Pusey].   11.   Harvest]  Not  a  harvest  of  joy,  a  promise  of  ingathering  of  Israel,  but  a  ripeness  for
Divine  judgments  to  be  inflicted  by  Assyrians.     When]  I  would,  upon  their  repentance,  have  turned
away  the  captivity  of  my  people.     Judgment  might  have  been  averted,  but  will  end  in  captivity.
The  Heb.  is  used  of  restoration  also  (Deut.  xxx.  3 ;  Ps.  xiv.  7)  ;  hence  many  take  it  in  this  sense,  as
in  harmony  with  the  beginning  of  the  chapter — "  a  promise  of  restoring  their  captivity  in  due  time,
which  yet  imports  a  sentence  of  banishment  for  sin  to  be  inflicted  before  "  \PLutcheson\


86  HOMILEl'W  COMMENTARY :  ROSEA.  [cua*.  VL


HOMILETICS.
National  Amendment. —  Verses  1 — 3.

Man's  miseries  are  often  messengers  of  mercy.  When  mild  measures  did  not
move  Israel,  God  tried  severe.  Vengeance  came  at  length,  and  they  were  carried
captives  by  a  cruel  people,  brought  to  a  penitent  state  of  mind,  and  they  resolve
to  return  to  God.

I.  Return  to  God  is  a  necessity.  "  My  people  are  destroyed  for  lack  of  know-
ledge." An  intimate  acquaintance  and  fellowship  with  God  are  a  moral  necessity.
Man  cries  for  God  as  Father,  Friend,  and  Helper.  1.  Man  has  capacity  to  turn  to
God  and  enjoy  him.  He  has  power  to  discern  right  and  wrong  ;  to  recognize  the
character  and  appreciate  the  claims  of  God.  We  have  reason,  conscience,  and  a
moral  nature.  Though  fallen  and  sinful,  we  have  not  lost  our  religious  cravings  and
necessities.  "The  notion  of  a  God,"  says  Tillotson,  "  is  so  inseparable  from  human
nature,  that  to  obliterate  the  one  you  must  destroy  the  other."  The  word  of  God
appeals  to  our  helpless  condition,  and  invites  us  to  return  to  God.  The  grace  and
the  Spirit  of  God  are  promised  to  aid  us  in  returning.  Our  life  and  enjoyment
consist  in  friendship  with  God.  "This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know  thee."
2.  Man  lives  in  distance  from  God.  Not  a  mere  natural,  but  moral  distance ;  an
alienation  of  heart  and  life  from  God.  In  affection  and  purpose,  in  thought  and
deed,  man  is  at  variance  with  his  Maker.  To  be  absent  from  a  friend  is  grief ;
to  be  without  food  and  shelter  is  sad  ;  but  to  be  without  God  is  the  greatest  infelicity.
"  Having  no  hope  and  without  God  in  the  world."  3.  Man  suffers  in  distance  from
God.  Sin  wounds  the  spirit  and  brings  judgments  upon  the  life.  It  vexes  and
enslaves  ;  torments  the  conscience,  and  exposes  to  condemnation  and  death.  Like
Ezekiel's  roll,  within  and  without  it  has  written,  "  Lamentation  and  mourning  and
woe."  From  its  guilt  springs  fear ;  shame  from  its  defilement ;  and  destruction
from  its  punishment.  "  It  is  that  which  puts  thee  out  of  the  possession  and  en-
joyment of  thyself,  which  doth  alienate  and  separate  thee  from  God,  the  fountain
of  bliss  and  happiness,  which  provokes  him  to  be  thine  enemy,  and  lays  thee  open
every  moment  to  the  fierce  revenge  of  his  justice."  Man  has  felt  his  distance  and
his  misery,  but  could  not  heal  his  diseases  and  restore  himself  to  God.  Bleeding
and  burdened,  the  soul  longs  for  restoration  to  its  centre.  "  Oh  that  I  knew  where
I  might  find  him  !  that  I  might  come  even  to  his  seat !  "  II.  Return  to  God  is  en-
couraged. "  Come,  and  let  us  return,"  says  the  prophet.  1.  Mercy  is  held  out.
"  He  will  heal  us  "  and  "  he  will  bind  us  up."  The  Assyrian  could  not  heal,  but
they  are  persuaded  that  God  who  had  smitten  them  could.  He  was  Israel's  phy-
sician in  the  time  of  Moses,  and  preserved  them  from  the  diseases  of  Egypt,  the
death  of  the  first-born,  and  the  destruction  which  overtook  Pharaoh.  No  sickness
baffles  his  skill.  He  gives  efficacy  to  medicine  for  the  body,  and  his  grace  renews
and  sanctities  the  soul.  As  Christ  drove  out  demons  and  diseases  from  men,  so
God  heals  all  our  infirmities  of  body,  mind,  and  heart,  until  sin  is  eradicated,  and
"  the  inhabitants  shall  no  more  say,  I  am  sick."  2.  The  certainty  of  this  mercy  is
relied  upon.  "  After  two  days  will  he  revive  us."  The  time  is  short,  but  God  who
promises  will  fulfil  the  promise.  None  need  hesitate  or  despair  of  God's  mercy.
It  is  offered  to  all,  and  may  be  received  with  faith.  A  firm  persuasion  of  mercy
will  draw  the  penitent  to  God  ;  without  this  he  would  despair  or  go  from  him.  But
the  torn  shall  be  healed,  the  dead  quickened,  and  the  humble  and  contrite  received.
"  We  shall  live  in  his  sight."  His  face  will  no  longer  be  turned  away  in  displeasure
nor  anger.  The  returning  sinner,  who  seeks  his  face,  shall  know  God's  will,  feel
his  love,  and  rejoice  in  the  light  of  his  countenance.  "  For  a  small  moment  have  I
forsaken  thee,  but  with  great  mercies  will  I  gather  thee."  Ill,  Return  to  God  should
be  urged  as  a  social  duty.  "  Come,  and  let  us  return."  We  should  not  only  seek
God  ourselves,  but  try  to  induce  others ;  in  times  of  sorrow  urge  repentance,  and  of


CHAP,  vi.j  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  UOSEA.  87


revival  incite  to  duty.  The  sympathy  of  numbers  is  great.  "  I  was  glad  when
they  said  unto  me,  Let  us  go  into  the  house  of  the  Lord."  In  business  and  common
themes  men  unite  and  take  counsel ;  should  not  Christians  aid  and  mutually  cheer
each  other  1  Sin  has  separated  men  or  debases  their  intercourse ;  but  religion
unites  them  in  love  and  confidence.  Jewish  doctors  say  that  men  are  to  go  in
haste  and  with  speed  together  to  the  synagogue,  but  return  very  leisurely.  So  we
should  "  walk  in  company,"  and  with  enthusiasm  to  God,  but  never  forsake  him.
This  duty  is  urged  for  many  reasons.  1.  All  have  need  to  be  stirred  up.  The
careless  and  impenitent  must  be  roused  from  slumber,  the  inquirer  directed,  and
Christians  excited  to  greater  love  and  activity.  "  That  they  may  all  call  upon  the
name  of  the  Lord,  to  serve  him  with  one  consent."  2.  As  social  creatures  ice  can
influence  one  another  for  good.  Example  is  most  potent.  Precept  points  out  the
way,  but  example  carries  us  along.  Great  is  the  power  of  goodness  to  charm  and
command.  The  pious  man  is  a  king,  drawing  all  hearts  after  him.  We  all  love
the  brave  and  the  magnanimous ;  derive  inspiration  from  them  ;  and  incited  to
action  by  them.  "  We  live  in  an  age  that  hath  more  need  of  good  examples
than  precepts,"  said  George  Herbert.  And  entering  upon  the  duties  of  life  he
resolved  :  "  Above  all,  I  will  be  sure  to  live  well,  because  the  virtuous  life  of  a
clergyman  is  the  most  powerful  eloquence,  to  persuade  all  who  see  it  to  reverence
and  love,  and  at  least  to  desire  to  live  like  him."  3.  It  should  be  our  aim  to  stir
up  others  to  do  good.  The  humblest  and  most  obscure  may  do  this.  Wealth  and
position  are  not  necessary.  A  warm  heart  will  create  and  communicate  enthusiasm,
energy  and  zeal  will  evoke  courage  and  devotion  in  the  cause  of  God.  If  we
return  to  God  others  will  follow  our  example.  By  prayer  and  holy  life  we  may
persuade  men  and  help  on  that  happy  time  when  "  the  inhabitants  of  one  city  shall
go  to  another,  saying,  Let  us  go  speedily  to  pray  before  the  Lord,  and  to  seek  the
Lord  of  Hosts  ;  I  will  go  also  "  (Zech.  viii.  21).  IV.  Return  to  God  will  result
in  great  blessings  to  a  people.  "  Bliss  from  the  Creator  and  duty  from  the
creature  answer  to  one  another,"  says  a  writer.  We  live  in  love,  action,  and  God.  Life
is  a  delight  and  success  in  the  degree  in  which  it  is  consecrated  to  God.  The
greatest  happiness  is  found  in  God's  presence  and  service.  1.  Quickened  life.  He
"  will  revive  us."  "  He  will  raise  us  up."  Spiritual  death  is  overcome  by  God's
grace.  The  sinner  is  raised  from  a  death  of  trespasses  and  sins ;  the  saint  is
revived  in  heart,  hope,  and  duty.  Action  begets  strength,  and  faith  leads  to  con-
version from  sin  and  deliverance  in  trouble.  Spiritual  life  is  first  imparted,  then
supported  and  increased.  "  For  in  him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being."
2.  Practical  knowledge.  "  Then  shall  we  know  if  we  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord."
True  knowledge  is  obtained  by  experiment.  Experiment  is  a  test  of  scientific  truth.
In  Chemistry  it  is  a  guide,  discoverer,  and  test.  The  existence  of  light,  heat,  and
electricity  is  indebted  to  it.  Christianity  claims  to  be  tested  by  experiment,  and
when  thus  tested  it  is  found  to  be  true.  No  learning  and  wealth  are  required.
Love,  and  you  shall  know  God  ;  believe,  and  you  shall  feel.  "  If  any  man  will  do
his  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine,  whether  it  be  of  God."  This  know  is  (a)
experimental,  (b)  practical,  and  (c)  progressive ;  beginning  in  the  heart,  mani-
fest in  the  life,  seen  in  duty  and  daily  progress.  3.  Constant  fertility .  "  He  shall
come  unto  us  as  the  rain  ; "  in  its  refreshing  fertilizing  showers.  The  early  and
latter  rain,  beginning  the  good  work  in  the  heart,  carrying  it  on  in  the  Christian
Church,  and  reviving  it  in  the  nation.  Both  are  required  and  given  ;  rain  from  the
first  to  the  last ;  one  shower  falling  after  another  upon  thirsty  pastures  and  desert
ground,  filling  the  pools  and  clothing  the  hills  with  verdure.  "  He  shall  come  down
like  rain  upon  the  mown  grass  :  as  showers  that  water  the  earth."

Man's  Highest  Social  Action. —  Verse  1.

Man  as  a  member  of  society  has  much  to  do  with  his  fellow-men  ;  he  should  con-
tribute to  the  advancement  of  general  knowledge,  to  the  progress  of  political  purity


88  UOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  HOST! A.  [chap.  vi.


and  freedom,  and  to  the  augmentation  of  the  general  health  and  comfort  of  the
kingdom.  But  there  is  a  higher  work  than  this  for  him  in  society  :  it  is  that  of
stimulating  the  community  to  which  he  "belongs  "to  return  unto  the  Lord."  Taking
the  words  in  this  application  they  imply — I.  That  society  is  away  from  God.  Not
locally,  for  the  Great  Spirit  is  with  all  and  in  all,  hut  morally.  Away  from  him
in  its  thoughts  ;  it  practically  ignores  his  existence  and  claims.  Away  from  him
in  its  sympathies :  its  heart  is  on  those  things  which  are  repugnant  to  his  holy
nature.  Away  from  him  in  its  pursuits :  its  pursuits  are  selfish  and  carnal  grati-
fications and  aggrandizements.  Far  gone,  in  truth,  is  society  from  its  centre — God.
It  is  like  the  prodigal  in  "a  far  country."  II.  That  estrangement  from  God  is  the
source  of  all  Us  trials.  Because  the  prodigal  left  his  father's  home  he  was  reduced
to  the  utmost  infamy  and  wretchedness.  Moral  separation  from  God  is  ruin.  Cut
the  branch  from  the  root,  and  it  withers ;  the  river  from  its  source,  and  it  dries  up ;
the  planet  from  the  sun,  and  it  rushes  to  ruin.  Society  has  left  God,  its  root,
source,  centre, — hence  the  terrible  evil  with  which  he  by  his  government  "  hath
torn  "  it.  Nothing  will  remove  its  evils  but  a  return  to  God.  Legislation,  com-
merce, science,  literature,  art,  none  of  these  will  help  it  so  long  as  it  continues  from
him.  III.  That  return  to  Him  is  a  possible  work.  Were  it  not  there  would  be  no
meaning  in  the  language,  "  Come  and  let  us,"  &c.  With  some  estranged  spirits  in
the  universe  a  return  may  be  impossible  for  ever ;  not  so  with  human  spirits  on
earth.  There  is  a  way,  a  true  and  living  way,  by  which  all  may  return  ;  repent-
ance towards  God  and  faith  in  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.

Conclusion.  Who  are  the  greatest  social  benefactors  %  Those  who  are  the  most
successful  in  exciting  and  stimulating  their  fellow-men  to  come  back  to  God,  the
Great  Father  of  love  who  awaits  their  return.  He  says,  "  Come  now,  let  us  reason
together,"  &c.  To  bring  society  back  to  God  is  pre-eminently  the  work  of  the
gospel  minister  ;  to  this  he  consecrates  his  power,  his  time,  his  all  [The  Homilist].

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.   3.  We  follow  on,  confessing  that  II.  The  method  of  attaining  this  end.

it  is  he  who  maketh  us  to  follow  him,  "  If  we  follow  on,"  &c.     1.  We  must

and  draweth  us  to  him.       We  know,  in  not   be   satisfied   with    present    attain-

order  to  follow ;  we  follow,  in  order  to  ments.     "  This  one   thing   I   do,"  &c.

know.     Light  prepares  the  way  for  love.  2.  We  must  meditate  more.     Study  the

Love   opens   the   mind   for   new  love.  works  and  ways,  the  word  and  Christ  of

The  gifts  of  God  are  interwoven.     They  God.     "  Some  have  not  the  knowledge

multiply  and  reproduce  each  other,  until  of  God ;  I  speak  this  to  your  shame."

we  come  to  the  perfect  state  of  eternity.  3.  We  must  practise  more.     This  a  law

For  we  know  in  part  only ;  then  shall  of  nature.     To  get  more  you  must  use

we  know,  even  as  we  are  known  [Pusey].  what  you  have.     "To  him   that  hath

I.   The  end  in  view — to  ll  know  the  shall  be  given,"  &c.
Lord."     It  is  objected  that  we  cannot  III.  The  success  guaranteed.     If  we

know  him.     We  are   only  finite    crea-  follow  on   to    know,    "  then    shall  we

tures :   he  is   infinite  and   omnipotent.  know."     1.  It   is  not  a  vain   pursuit.

We  cannot  know  God  perfectly,  only  in  2.   Success  is  promised.     3.  Success  is

part.     None  by  searching  can  find  out  realized.     This   proved   from    personal

God  to   perfection.     But  God   has   re-  experience  and  the  fulfilment  of  God's

vealed  himself  in  his  works,  word,  and  word.     If  probability  actuates  men  in

Son.     1.  We  are  capable   of   knowing  pursuits  of  earth,  how  earnestly  should

and  loving  God.     2.  The  knowledge  of  we  follow  God,  who  gives  such  blessings

God  is  a  moral  necessity.     "  My  people  and  gain.

perish  for  lack  of  knowledge."  3.  A  Whether  we  consider  these  words  as
personal,  practical,  and  experimental  an  excitement  and  encouragement  ad-
knowledge  of  God  should  be  our  aim.  dressed  by  the  godly  to  one  another,  or


CHAP.    VI.  J


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.


89


to  their  own  souls,  they  remind  us  of
an  important  aim  ;  a  necessary  duty  ;
and  an  assured  privilege.  The  aim  is
"to  know  the  Lord."  Nothing  can  be
moral  or  religious  in  disposition  and  act,
that  is  not  founded  in  knowledge ;  be-
cause it  must  be  destitute  of  principle
and  motive  ;  and  the  Lord  looketh  at
the  heart.  Real  repentance  must  spring
from  proper  views  of  the  evil  of  sin  in
Christ.  Faith  is  impossible  without
knowledge.  It  is  not  a  philosophical
knowledge  of  God  as  the  Almighty,  the
maker  and  upholder  of  all  things ;  nor
a  knowledge  of  him  as  holy  in  his  ways
and  righteous  in  his  works.  Such
views  would  gender  dread  and  aversion
in  the  mind  of  the  sinner.  The  grand
thing  is  to  know  that  he  is  reconcilable,
and  that  he  has  given  proofs  of  his  love
in  Christ.  Neither  is  this  knowledge
speculative,  but  experimental.  The
necessary  duty  is  "to  follow  on "  to
know  the  Lord.  This  includes  the
practice  of  what  we  already  know.  Neg-
lect only  increases  sin  and  condemnation.
It  also  includes  diligent  use  of  appointed
means.  Hearing  and  reading  the  word,
and  prayer.  It  means  perseverance  in  this
course.  Nor  shall  this  be  in  vain.  "  Then
shall  we  know,"  &c.  The  privilege  is  sure
as  the  word  of  God,  confirmed  by  history
and  experience,  can  make  it.  Let  this
full  assurance  of  hope  influence  us  first
in  regard  to  ourselves.  Keep  the  way.
Perplexities  will  be  solved  and  doubts
removed.  Ye  shall  know  more  of  him
in  his  word,  providence,  and  grace  ;  more
of  him  as  the  strength  of  your  heart,  and
your  portion  for  ever.  Second,  in  regard
to  others.  Be  not  impatient  if  they  can-
not embrace  your  views.  In  grace,  as  in
nature,  there  must  be  infancy  before
manhood.  God  will  enlighten  them
and  finish  his  work.  If  their  heart  be
broken  off  from  sin  and  the  world,  and
they  are  asking  the  way  to  Zion  with
their  faces  thitherward,  they  shall  not
err  therein.  "  Who  hath  despised  the
day  of  small  things  ? "  [Jay].

God  as  the  morning.  I.  Prepared  as
the  morning.  It  is  fixed  and  regulated
in  its  hours — prepared  and  in  readiness.


Nothing  can  hinder  its  rising.  "  Seed
time  and  harvest,"  &c.  II.  Gradual  as
the  morning.  Light  comes  in  no  haste.
God  is  never  in  a  hurry.  What  a  dif-
ference between  the  dawn  of  light  and
perfect  day !  Fretfulness  and  im-
patience will  only  cloud  its  brightness
and  darken  the  soul.  III.  Silent  as  the
morning.  Silent  in  its  progress  and
influence ;  gliding  over  city  and  hill,
glittering  on  the  dew-drops,  and  bright-
ening the  landscape  all  around.  IV.
Joyous  as  the  morning.  Night  a  time
of  fear  and  danger ;  the  sun  brings
morning  and  revives  all  nature.  The
birds  sing,  flowers  open,  our  health  and
spirits  are  improved.  "  Truly  the  light
is  sweet,"  &c.

God,  as  rain.  1.  Divine  in  its
origin.  2.  Refreshing  in  its  nature.
3.  Comprehensive  in  its  end.  The  early
and  latter  rain,  as  the  beginning  and
end ;  the  sum  and  substance  of  Christian
experience  and  national  revivals.  "  Both
together  stand  as  the  beginning  and
the  end.  If  either  were  withheld  the
harvest  failed.  Wonderful  likeness  of
him  who  is  the  beginning  and  the  end
of  our  spiritual  life ;  from  whom  we
receive  it,  by  whom  it  is  preserved
unto  the  end  ;  through  whom  the  soul,
enriched  by  him,  hath  abundance  of
all  spiritual  blessings,  graces,  and  con-
solations, and  yieldeth  all  manner  of
fruit,  each  after  its  kind,  to  the  praise  of
him  who  hath  given  it  life  and  fruitf ill-
ness "  [Pusey].

Christ  the  Day-Daion  and  the  Rain.
Looking  upon  his  personal  coming,  as
represented  by  the  morning,  and  his
coming  in  the  Holy  Spirit  as  symbolized
by  the  rain,  we  have — I.  The  common
resemblances  which  they  have.  1.  The
same  manifest  origin.  2.  The  same
mode  of  operation  on  the  part  of  God.

3.  The  same  form  of  approach  to  us.

4.  The  same  object  and  end.  II.  The
points    of    distinction     between     them.

1.  A  general  and  yet  a  special  aspect.

2.  Constant  and  yet  variable.  3.  With
gladness,  yet  also  with  trouble.  4.  But
they  tend  to  a  final  and  perfect  union
[John  Ker\.


90  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  [chap.  vi.


HOMILETICS.

Justice  or  Mercy  1 —  Verses  4,  5.

These  words  express  intense  love,  parental  discipline,  and  reluctance  to  punish
any  more.  God  hesitates,  seems  perplexed,  and  condescends  to  ask  the  sinner  him-
self, to  specify  a  mode  of  treatment  which  will  answer  the  purpose.  "  What  shall
I  do  V*  When  justice  was  about  to  punish  it  was  prevented  by  repentance.  When
mercy  was  about  to  bless  it  was  hindered  by  fickleness  and  relapse.  God's  kindness
was  constant,  but  their  goodness  was  evanescent  as  the  dew.  "  What  could  have
been  done  more  to  my  vineyard  that  I  have  not  done  in  it  ]  "  Nothing  more  to
bring  Israel  to  himself  could  he  have  done,  therefore  nothing  remains  but  to  adopt
the  treatment  mentioned.     God  knows  best  what  will  answer  the  end  in  view.

I.  Justice  and  Mercy  had  failed.  Warnings  had  been  given  and  judgments  had
fallen  heavily  upon  the  nation,  but  that  did  not  answer.  Mercy  had  shone  forth  in  all
its  splendour,  like  the  noon-day  sun,  but  that  prevailed  not.  Gentle  means  did
not  win  them.  The  greater  his  favours,  the  more  they  forgot  him  and  sacrificed  to
other  gods.  Then  vengeance  came,  and  they  were  torn  by  the  enemy  and  carried
into  captivity.  This  is  a  picture  of  many  whom  God  has  blessed  with  mercy  upon
mercy.  Long  health,  continued  prosperity,  and  all  the  world  calls  good,  have  been
poured  out  upon  them.  Their  cup  has  run  over.  But  they  have  forsaken  God  and
abused  his  mercies.  Now  he  is  changing  his  ways  with  them.  Health  has
decayed,  business  has  failed,  children  have  been  taken  in  youth  and  hope,  and  all  is
black  and  threatening.  "  His  wrath  lieth  hard  upon  me,  I  cannot  look  up."  But
do  not  envy,  and  misconstrue  this  chastisement.  There  is  goodness  and  loving-
kindness  in  this  treatment.  It  is  designed  to  draw  you  to  God  and  wean  you  from
sin.  "  It  lightens  the  stroke,"  said  an  afflicted  Christian,  "  to  draw  near  to  him
who  handles  the  rod."  II.  Mercy  was  withheld.  Their  goodness  was  like  the
morning  cloud  and  early  dew ;  which  promised  only  to  disappoint.  Mercy  was
withheld,  from  their  false  and  hypocritical  conduct.  1.  They  were  vain  in  their  pre-
tences. Professing  to  worship  God  and  offer  sacrifices,  when  their  hearts  were  far
from  him.  Their  religion  was  outward  show  and  formality,  empty  sound  and
waterless  as  a  cloud.  Like  the  morning  cloud,  full  of  colour,  yet  driven  away  by
the  heat  of  day.  Except  your  righteousness  exceed  the  righteousness  of  the
Scribes  and  Pharisees,  in  origin,  principle,  and  aim,  you  "  shall  in  no  case  enter
into  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  2.  They  were  fickle  in  their  principles.  Sound
principles  are  a  necessity  in  life.  Without  principles  a  man  is  like  a  cloud  driven  by
every  gust  of  wind ;  like  a  ship  without  rudder  or  compass,  drifted  hither  and  thither
by  every  tide.  There  can  be  no  rule,  order,  or  government  without  true  principle.
"  Moral  principles,"  says  Hume,  "  are  social  and  universal.  They  form,  in  a  manner,
the  part  of  humankind  against  vice  and  disorder,  its  common  enemy."  But  the  good-
ness of  some  is  like  the  "  early  dew,"  sparkling  as  diamonds  for  a  while,  but  not  to
last.  Keverence  and  religion  disappear  in  extremes ;  we  have  the  form,  but  not
the  power  of  godliness.  3.  They  were  unstable  in  their  conduct.  Eepenting  and
relapsing ;  smitten  and  returning ;  resolving  and  forgetting ;  ever  beginning  and
never  finishing.  There  was  a  fair  show  of  leaves,  but  not  any  fruit.  Most  men
are  good  for  a  time.  In  visitation  from  God,  at  the  prayer-meeting  or  in  the  class,
they  are  under  deep  impressions ;  but  these  wear  away,  and  the  last  condition  of
these  men  is  worse  than  the  first.  There  must  be  no  sham,  but  reality.  Principle
must  be  powerful  and  supreme.  Goodness  must  endure  under  the  burning  heat  of
the  sun.  It  is  the  incorruptible  seed  which  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever.  III.
Justice  is  the  only  alternative.  u  Therefore  have  I  hewed  them,"  &c.  Kings
and  rulers,  prophets  and  priests,  past  misery  and  present  mercy,  seemed  not  to  in-,
fluence  them.  What  more  shall  I  do  1  Iniquities  had  not  exhausted,  but  only
limited  God's  love.     "  How  often  would  I  have  gathered  thy  children  together,


chap.  M.J  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.  91


even  as  a  hen  gathereth  her  chickens,"  &c.  There  remains  nothing  but  further
chastisement  in  their  desperate  condition,  a  just  retribution  in  kind.  "  There-
fore they  shall  be  as  the  morning  cloud,  and  as  the  early  dew  that  passeth
away"  (ch.  xiii.  3).  1.  The  word  which  might  have  saved  shall  punish  them,  (a)
God  would  "  hew"  them  by  the  prophets.  God's  work  is  identified  with  that  of
his  servants.  The  word  is  the  instrument  for  the  accomplishment  of  his  will.  The
word  disturbs  in  sin  and  produces  conviction  ;  it  reproves  and  corrects,  and  "  like  a
hammer  that  breaketh  the  rock  in  pieces,"  (b)  God  "slays  "  them  by  the  words  of
his  mouth.  Denunciations  of  wrath  had  disquieted  them  and  broken  their  spirits.
The  word  had  been  "  quick  and  powerful,  and  sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword,"
to  slay  their  hopes  and  joys.  Men  will  either  be  better  or  worse,  quickened  or
slain,  under  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  "  To  the  one  we  are  a  savour  of  death
unto  death,  and  to  the  other  the  savour  of  life  unto  life."  2.  The  judgments
which  they  unheeded  shall  consume  them.  "  And  thy  judgments  are  as  the  light
that  goeth  forth."  They  might  have  been  delightful  as  the  morning,  but  they  shall
be  terrible  as  lightning,  (a)  Clear  and  visible ;  palpable  to  the  senses,  and  a  warning
to  those  who  see  them.  They  will  break  out  like  day-light  upon  all  men.  (b)  Just
and  equitable.  What  they  deserved,  and  what  they  should  not  murmur  at.  They
despised  the  mercy,  and  now  they  must  behold  the  severity  of  God.  (c)  Terrible
and  severe  ;  sudden  and  overpowering  as  lightning.  Christ  comes  the  first  time
to  save,  the  second  to  judge  and  destroy.  Duty  is  clear.  The  sinner  is  without
excuse.     God  at  last  will  be  a  consuming  fire.

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  4.    Morning  cloud.    Evanescent  men  or  make  them  alive.     IV.  A  sug-

goodness,   generated    by   the    chill    of  gestion  concerning  the  ministry.      Min-

afrliction,  full  of  promise,  but  vanishes  isters  have  not  to  soothe  men  in  sin,  nor

away.      Many  in  childhood  affectionate  fear    to   wound    the    conscience.      As

and  beautiful,  do  not  always  realize  what  hewers  of  wood  and  stone-masons,  they

they  promise.     Men  in  sickness  and  be-  have  to  cut  and  hammer  men.     They

reavement  vow  what  they  do  not  per-  meet  with  rough  stones  and   obdurate

form.     The   evening   does    not   accord  hearts   which   must    be   humbled   and

with  "  the  morning  of  life."    Dawn  does  hammered.     Luther   said  that  faithful

not  ripen  into  day.  ministers  labour  and  sweat  more  in  a  day

Ver.    5.      "Hewed     them."      Moral  than  husbandmen  do  in  a  month.    With

statuary.     What  sculpture  is  to  a  block  hard  blows  and  sharp  instruments  have

of  marble  education  is  to  the  mind  and  they  to  work,  for  men  neither  receive

religion  to  the  character  and  life.     The  the   image  nor  submit   to   the  will  of

word  presents  us  with  — I.  An  insight  God.

into  human  nature.  Rough  and  deformed.  Judgments  as  the  light.  1.  Revealing
Hardened  through  the  deceitfulness  of  sin  and  exposing  the  works  of  darkness
sin.  II.  An  expression  of  God's  design.  (Eph.  v.  13).  2.  Warning  men  in  duty
God,  the  Great  Sculptor,  seeks  to  correct,  and  danger,  ignorance  and  sin.  3.  De-
cut  into  shape  and  symmetry.  To  bring  stroying  rebels,  on  whom  they  burst  with
"  an  angel  out  of  the  stone,"  make  sudden  terror.  "  In  this  life  also  God's
"  corner  stones,  polished  after  the  simili-  final  judgments  are  as  a  light  which
tude  of  a  palace,"  to  prepare  "  lively  goeth  forth,  enlightening  not  the  sinner
stones "  for  his  great  spiritual  temple  who  perishes,  but  others  heretofore  in
(1  Pet.  ii.  5  ;  Eph.  ii.  21).  III.  A  descrip-  the  darkness  of  ignorance,  on  whom  they
tion  of  the  word.  A  hammer  wielded  burst  with  a  sudden  blaze  of  light,  and
by  a  Divine  hand,  authoritative  and  who  reverence  them,  owning  that  the
efficient  in  breaking  the  rock,  the  hardest  judgments  of  the  Lord  are  true  and
heart,  to  pieces.  Hence  (a)  energetic  in  righteous  altogether  "  [Pusey].
its  nature,  (b)  varied  in  its  effects,  to  slay


93  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ROSEA.  [chap.  vi.


HOMILETIGS.
Mercy  and  not  Sacrifice. —  Verse  6.

There  are  two  sides  of  religion,  the  outward  and  the  inward.  Israel  depended
upon  sacrifices,  ritual  forms,  rather  than  moral  life,  the  knowledge  and  love  of  God.
If  men  offer  "  sacrifice  "  to  God  without  joining  it  with  "  mercy  "  to  men,  or  offer  it
in  fanatical  zeal  and  unmercifulness,  he  will  reject  it.  He  prefers  "mercy"  which
contains  cheerfulness  and  self-sacrifice.  Looking  at  these  words  in  their  connection
learn —

I.  God  desires  to  give  mercy  rather  than  accept  sacrifice.  Israel  would  give
to  God  rather  than  seek  the  healing  mercy  required.  But  God  will  take  nothing
from  them,  desires  to  impart  mercy  to  them.  It  is  for  us,  first  and  above  all,  to
seek  pardon  ;  confess  and  forsake  sin.  "  The  less  is  blessed  of  the  better,"  without
any  contradiction.  God  requires  no  sacrifice  from  us.  Our  offerings  cannot  enrich
or  bless  him.  Pagan  sacrifices  were  considered  feasts  to  the  gods.  "  If  I  were
hungry,"  says  God,  "  I  would  not  tell  thee ;  for  the  wo/  Id  is  mine,  and  the  fulness
thereof."  He  can  provide  for  himself,  and  will  never  be  suppliant  to  his  own  crea-
tures. "  The  cattle  upon  a  thousand  hills  "  are  his  gifts,  are  not  our  own ;  and
faith  in  the  offering  without  love  in  the  heart  represents  God  as  beholden  to  man.
"  Thou  desirest  not  sacrifice,  else  would  I  give  it :  thou  delightest  not  in  burnt-
offering."  No  form  of  burnt-offerings  can  purchase  Divine  favour;  no  banners
and  music  and  incense  will  be  acceptable  "  without  truth  in  the  inward  parts."
God  will  have  mercy  and  accept  a  broken  spirit.  "  A  broken  and  a  contrite  heart,
0  God,  thou  wilt  not  despise."  II.  God  stamps  mercy  with  more  value  than
sacrifice.  God  does  not  reject  all,  only  heartless  sacrifices.  They  must  not  be  neg-
lected nor  despised,  but  offered  in  the  right  spirit.  Christ  commends  the  scribe  for
giving  due  place  and  proportion  to  the  ceremonial  and  moral  service.  Sacrifice  is
good  for  its  own  sake,  required  by  God  and  reasonable  in  man.  But  "  go  ye  and
learn  what  that  meaneth,  I  will  have  mercy  and  not  sacrifice  "  (Matt.  ix.  13).  The
ritual  must  not  be  esteemed  above  the  moral.  We  must  not  be  religious  before  God
and  immoral  before  men  ;  alive  to  the  letter,  but  dead  to  the  spirit  of  the  law ;
scrupulous  in  the  formalities,  but  negligent  in  the  moralities  of  life.  He  who  finds
mercy  from  God,  will  be  kind  and  compassionate  to  men.  We  must  "  do  justly,
love  mercy,  and  walk  humbly  with  God."  "The  tithing  of  cummin  must  not  be
neglected,"  says  Gurnal,  "  but  take  heed  thou  doest  not  neglect  the  weightiest
things  of  the  law— judgment,  mercy,  and  faith  :  making  your  preciseness  in  the  less
a  blind  for  your  horrible  wickedness  in  the  greater."  "To  do  justice  and  judg-
ment is  more  acceptable  to  the  Lord  than  sacrifice."  III.  Sacrifice  must  not  be  sub-
stituted for  mercy.  No  amount  of  offerings  can  replace  the  everlasting  principles
of  morality.  But  how  easy  to  present  the  one  for  "  the  living  sacrifice  "  of  the
other.  The  Corban  gift  stands  in  the  place  of  filial  piety.  The  present  on  the
altar  atones  for  the  offence  to  a  brother.  Love  to  God  whom  we  have  not  seen
covers  charity  to  man  whom  we  see  day  by  day.  Temple  service  is  honoured
above  godly  life,  and  sacrifice  is  offered  before  mercy.  God  delights  in  showing
mercy,  and  "earthly  power  doth  then  show  likest  God's  when  mercy  seasons  justice."
God  is  better  pleased  with  the  relief  of  suffering  than  gold  and  silver  offered
in  the  church.  Transient  enthusiasm,  fashionable  benevolence,  and  party  spirit
must  not  supersede  love  to  God  and  man.  The  first  commandment  is  like  unto  the
second.  One  cannot  supersede  and  must  not  be  placed  instead  of  the  other.  "  To
love  him  with  all  the  heart,  and  all  the  understanding,  and  with  all  the  soul,  and
with  all  the  strength,  and  to  love  his  neighbour  as  himself,  is  more  than  all  burnt-
offerings  and  sacrifices."  IV.  Sacrifice  and  mercy  must  ever  be  united  together.
One  is  the  outward  form  and  fruit  of  the  other.  "  He  who  prays  as  he  ought,  will
endeavour  to  live  as  he  prays,"  says  Dr  Owen.     There  is  a  balance  of  moral  as  of


chap,  vi.,  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.  93


natural  forces.  Keligion  unites  what  philosophy  could  not — supreme  devotion  to
God  and  paramount  obligation  to  man.  Faith  and  works,  piety  and  charity,  con-
templation and  activity,  heaven  and  earth,  are  reconciled  in  Christian  life.  The
life  hidden  with  God  is  the  life  that  diffuses  blessings  among  men.  Without  love
to  man,  love  to  God  grows  languid.  They  are  inseparable  and  essential  to  each  other.
This  union  was  perfect  in  the  life  of  Christ,  and  constitutes  the  keystone  of  morality.
All  true  philanthropists  have  worked  in  his  spirit  and  carried  out  his  teaching.
Howard  in  the  prisons  of  Europe,  Judson  in  benighted  Burmah,  and  Florence
Nightingale  in  the  Crimea,  were  devoted  to  God  in  their  sacrifices  for  humanity.
A  life  of  purity  is  a  life  of  public  duty.  The  man  who  loves  God  will  not  serve  his
country  less.  "  Allow  them  to  pray  to  God,  they  will  not  fight  the  worse  for  it,"
was  said  of  some.  The  heat  and  the  light  can  never  be  separated  from  the  sun  ;
benevolence  to  men  can  never  be  cut  off  from  love  to  God.  What  God  has  joined
together  let  not  man  put  asunder.  "Pure  religion  and  undented  before  God  and
the  Father,  is  this,  To  visit  the  fatherless  and  widows  in  their  affliction,  and  to
keep  himself  unspotted  from  the  world."

Covenant  Breakers. —  Verse  7.

In  this  verse  we  have  a  reference  to  the  fall  of  man  and  the  first  covenant  with
Adam.  God  stood  in  covenant  relation  to  man.  Israel  was  bound  by  God's  good-
ness and  their  own  oath.  But  they  sinned  after  the  similitude  of  Adam's  trans-
gression. God  was  constant  and  faithful,  but  they  were  inconstant  and  treacher-
ous, they  broke  the  covenant.     Notice —

I.  The  guilt  of  which  they  were  accused.  They  "have  transgressed
the  covenant."  1.  Out  of  irreverence  to  its  authority.  If  it  be  only  a  man's
covenant,  there  is  something  sacred  and  binding  (Gal.  iii.  15).  But  God's  word  is
supreme  and  of  Divine  authority.  2.  In  forgetfulness  of  their  oivn  promise  and
privileges.  Israel  solemnly  took  an  oath  to  keep  all  the  words  of  the  law — not  to
forsake  God  ;  but  they  sacrificed  to  other  gods,  and  were  base  and  perfidious  in  their
conduct.  Men  who  break  their  promise  and  despise  their  obligation  bring  shame
and  disgrace  upon  themselves,  and  deserve  not  the  confidence  and  esteem  of  their
fellow-men.  Truthfulness  should  shine  in  every  word  and  deed.  II.  The  spirit
in  which  they  indulged.  "  They  dealt  treacherously."  They  not  only  rebelled,
but  aggravated  their  guilt  by  falsehood  and  treacherous  dealing.  They  disregarded
most  singular  privileges,  thought  most  sacred  obligations  of  no  consequence,  and
covered  most  heinous  sins  in  the  garb  of  religious  forms.  They  sinned  (a)  wilfully,
(b)  obstinately,  and  (c)  deceitfully.  "  For  the  house  of  Judah  and  the  house  of
Israel  have  dealt  very  treacherously  against  me,  saith  the  Lord."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Transgressing  like  Adam.  1.  Yiolat-  have  his  sin  covered.  Neither  Adam
ing  sacred  obligations.  2.  Justifying  nor  the  woman  denied  what  they  had
sin  when  committed — -charging  it  upon  done  ;  but  both  thought  they  were  very
God  or  their  own  nature,  upon  circum-  pardonable  in  doing  it.  Both  made  a
stances  or  fate.  "  Man,  as  man,  that  is  confession,  yet  theirs  was  a  faulty  con-
as  sinful  man,  desireth  that  there  might  fession.  They  covered  while  they  ac-
be  a  seal  set  or  a  vail  put  upon  all  his  knowledged  their  sin,  and  hid  it  in  their
sins.  It  is  as  natural  to  man  to  be  a  sin-  bosoms  while  they  held  it  out  upon
coverer  as  a  sin-committer ;  and  he  had  their  tongues.  Thus  did  Adam  the
rather  make  some  poor  shift  of  his  own  first  man,  and  thus  do  the  sons  of
to  cover  it  than  go  to  God  (whose  privi-  Adam  excuse  their  sins,  and  increase
lege   and   glory  it  is  to  cover  sin)  to  their  guilt  and  punishment "  [Caryl].


91  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  [chap.  \h


H0MILET1CS.
A  sad  Transformation. — Verses  8 — 11.

We  have  now  particular  proofs  of  the  charges  brought  against  Israel.  Special
places,  certain  persons,  and  the  whole  people  are  faithless  and  polluted.  The  best
become  the  worst.

I.  Sacred  places  become  polluted  with  sin.  Regarding  G-ilead  as  a  city  of
refuge,  or  the  country  beyond  Jordan,  it  "  is  a  city  of  them  that  work  iniquity."
God  had  hallowed  the  place,  and  made  it  a  city  of  safety ;  an  institution  of  heaven,
designed  for  special  good.  But  this  place  of  justice  and  protection,  the  glory  of  the
land  and  the  centre  of  distinguished  privileges,  was  polluted  with  crime.  Its  in-
habitants had  stained  its  name  and  filled  it  with  blood.  Cities  are  blessed  or
cursed  by  the  character  and  conduct  of  the  inhabitants.  Wealth  and  population,
genius  and  prosperity,  fade  away  by  vice  and  debauchery.  Great  cities  may  be
filled  with  great  sins  ;  exalted  to  heaven  with  privileges,  they  may  be  cast  down  to
hell  for  abusing  them.  Rome  and  Paris  have  been  by- words,  and  Nero  and  Robes-
pierre have  left  a  stain  in  history.  "  By  the  blessing  of  the  upright  the  city  is  ex-
alted ;  but  it  is  overthrown  by  the  mouth  of  the  wicked."  II.  Ministers  of
religion  become  abettors  of  murder.  The  priests,  who  should  have  been  ex-
amples of  virtue,  fostered  abominable  sins  and  were  guilty  of  murder.  It  was  their
duty  to  save  life,  but  they  killed  both  body  and  soul.  They  were — 1.  Cruel  in
their  designs.  They  sought  to  lie  in  wait  and  murder  pilgrims  on  their  way  to  the
city.  2.  Crafty  in  their  designs.  They  plot  "  as  troops  of  robbers  wait  for  a
man."  3.  Deliberate  in  their  designs.  They  thought  of  their  schemes,  and  deliber-
ately adopted  and  carried  them  out.  4.  Confederate  in  their  designs.  "  By  con-
sent." They  were  one  in  sympathy,  agreed  in  sentiment,  and  banded  together  in
purpose.  They  were  taken  from  the  lowest  of  the  people,  intruders  in  office,  and
were  a  curse  to  the  land.  Of  all  societies  of  men,  none  are  more  vile  and  mis-
chievous than  ministers  corrupted  by  office  or  evil.  The  sweetest  wine  becomes
the  sourest  vinegar,  the  whitest  ivory  burnt  becomes  the  blackest  coal ;  so  the  best
men,  the  noblest  institutions,  may  be  transformed  into  the  most  disgraceful  and
criminal.  "  Her  priests  have  violated  my  law,  and  have  profaned  mine  holy
things  :  they  have  put  no  difference  between  the  holy  and  profane."  III.  The
noblest  design  perverted  to  destruction.  The  way  to  the  cities  of  refuge,  by
God's  command,  was  to  be  prepared  (Deut.  xix.  3) ;  clear  and  kept  open  without
hindrance  or  danger  to  fugitives  ;  but  it  was  filled  with  robbers  and  tracked  with
blood.  Those  who  fled  for  life  met  with  death.  What  power  in  the  human  will
and  in  human  conduct  to  corrupt  the  ordinances  and  hinder  the  designs  of  God  !
Means  of  grace  perverted  to  motives  of  crime,  and  sacred  places  changed  to  scenes
of  corruption.  The  devil  gets  into  the  church,  and  the  foulest  crimes  are  committed
in  the  garb  of  religion  and  a  good  name.  In  Christendom  now  we  see  religion
made  the  tool  of  priests  and  governments :  its  sanctions  brougnt  to  support
schemes  of  aggrandizement  and  oppression ;  and  plans  that  display  God's  wisdom
and  benevolence  employed  to  prostrate  our  nature,  to  pollute  the  land,  and  make  it
"  desolate  and  a  perpetual  hissing."  IV.  A  chosen  people  degraded  with
punishment.  All  these  crimes  were  done  "  in  the  house  of  Israel,"  an  elect  nation.
Whoredom  was  widespread,  and  the  whole  land  was  defiled.  1 .  The  enormity  of  their
sin  ioos  great.  "  An  horrible  thing,"  enough  to  make  one  shudder ;  "a  thing  in
Israel,  at  which  both  the  ears  of  every  one  that  heareth  shall  tingle."  Ordinary
sins  are  evil,  but  the  sins  of  Israel  were  gross  abominations.  Sins  against  light
and  privileges,  the  warnings  of  prophets  and  the  judgments  of  God.  Heathen
nations  could  not  commit  such  crimes,  the  greatness  of  which  can  only  be  estimated
by  God.  But  ancient  Israel  and  modern  Churches,  pre-eminent  above  other  peoples,
exchange  God  for  vain  idols.     Holy  heaven  is  amazed  at  the  monstrous  folly  of


CHAP.  VI.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.


95


men.  "  Hath  a  nation  changed  their  gods,  which  are  yet  no  gods  1  but  my  people
have  changed  their  glory  for  that  which  doth  not  profit.  Be  astonished,  0  ye
heavens,  at  this,  and  be  ye  horribly  afraid ;  be  ye  very  desolate,  saith  the  Lord."
2.  TJie  punishment  of  their  sin  was  disgraceful.  The  people  of  God  were  bereft  of
their  glory  and  defence ;  carried  captives  and  humbled  by  a  foreign  foe.  The  seed
was  reaped  in  an  awful  "  harvest "  of  punishment  by  both  Ephraim  and  Judah.  God
is  no  respecter  of  persons — the  highest  and  the  lowest,  the  priest  and  the  peasant,
are  alike  judged  for  their  sins.  He  makes  them  "  base  and  contemptible  before  all
the  people."  Sin  sinks  the  most  exalted  to  the  most  degraded.  It  is  a  blot  in  the
escutcheon  of  the  mightiest  nation  which  no  worldly  glory  can  efface.  "  Bighteous-
ness  exalteth  a  nation  :  but  sin  is  a  reproach  to  any  people."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


The  substance  of  these  verses  may  be
summed  up  in  few  words.  1.  Man  has
a  tendency  to  abuse  the  best  and  highest
things.  This  is  proved  from  history,
Scripture,  and  observation.  2.  When  the
best  and  highest  things  are  abused  they
become  the  worst.  Moral  order  and  dis-
tinctions are  confounded.  A  downward
course  is  begun.  Conscience  must  be
quieted,  moral  feelings  be  suppressed,  and
bold  extravagance  required  to  cover  and
defend  sin.  3.  Abuse  of  the  best  and
highest  things  greatly  increases  the
guilt.  When  men  check  religious  im-
pulse and  resist  good  they  go  at  a  faster


rate  than  merely  doing  wrong.  The
effect  of  sin  must  be  measured  by  the
power  of  moral  sensibility.  Perfection
of  guilt  and  punishment  is  gained  by
using  the  truth  and  ordinances  of  God,
to  do  the  bidding  of  selfishness  and
lust.

/  have  seen  an  horrible  thing.  God  dis-
cerns sin  when  covered  by  craft  and
counsel,  by  excuse  and  ignorance.  The
smallest  sins  and  the  most  horrible
crimes  are  detected  by  him,  and  will  be
discovered  to  the  perpetrators.  Men
may  cover  their  ways  and  hide  their  sins,
but  they  cannot  prosper.


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  VI.


Ver.  1 — 3.  Conversion.  In  con-
version the  sinner  has  a  deep  sense  of
his  distance  and  desert,  a  full  persuasion
that  God  will  forgive  and  restore  him,
and  perseverance  in  seeking  God.  He
will  strive  to  return  and  carry  out  his
resolution  like  the  prodigal,  in  confession
of  sin.  "  I  will  return  to  my  home ;  my
father  will  forgive  me,"  said  a  wandering
disobedient  son.  He  was  forgiven,  and
restored  to  parental  favour.

Morning.  The  morning  breaketh
forth  in  crimson,  and  the  beauteous
flowers  of  the  field  spread  wide  their
odorous  cups  to  drink  the  blooming
influence  of  the  rising  genial  sun
[G.  S.  Green].

Rain.  What  would  nature  be  with-
out rain?  We  are  entirely  depend-
ent on  the  grace  of  God.  But  under
the  influences  of  his  word  and  Spirit  we
revive  and  groAv  as  the  corn.  These
influences  are  always  needful;  but  ob-
serve, there  are  two  seasons  when  they


are  peculiarly  experienced.  The  one  is
connected  with  the  beginning  of  the
Divine  life — this  may  be  called  the
former  rain.  The  other  with  the  close
of  it — this  may  be  called  the  latter  rain
[Jay].

Ver.  4.  Transitoriness.  When  Da-
guerre  was  working  at  his  sun-pictures,
his  great  difficulty  was  to  fix  them.
The  light  came  and  imprinted  the  image ;
but  when  the  tablet  was  drawn  from  the
camera,  the  image  had  vanished.  Our
lamentation  is  like  his,  our  want  the
same,  a  fixing  solution  that  shall  arrest
and  detain  the  fugitive  impressions.
He  discovered  the  chemical  power  winch
turned  the  evanescent  into  the  durable.
There  is  a  Divine  agency  at  hand  that
can  fix  the  truth  upon  the  heart  of
man, — God's  Holy  Spirit  [J.  Stoughton].

Ver.  5.  I  presume  the  Lord  sees  I
require  more  hammering  and  hewing
than  almost  any  other  stone  that  was
ever  selected  for  his  spiritual  building,


96


110MILETIC  COMMENTARY;  ROSEA.


[chap.  vii.


and  that  is  the  secret  reason  of  his  deal-
ings with  me.  Let  me  be  broken  into
a  thousand  pieces,  if  I  may  but  be  made
up  again,  and  formed  by  his  hand  for
purposes  of  mercy  [R.  Halt].

Ver.  6.  The  outward  service  of
ancient  religion,  the  rites,  ceremonies,
and  ceremonial  restraints  of  the  old  law,
had  morality  for  their  end.  They  were
the  letter,  of  which  morality  was  the
spirit ;  the  enigma,  of  which  morality  was
the  meaning.  But  morality  itself  is  the
service  and  ceremonial  of  the  Christian
religion  [Coleridge].  The  artist  may
mould  matter  into  forms  of  surprising
beauty,  and  make  us  feel  their  elevating
and  purifying  influences  :  but  what  is
the  marble  Moses  of  a  Michael  Angelo,
or  the  cold  statue  of  his  living  Christ,
compared  to  the  embodiment  of  Jesus
in  the  sculpture  of  a  holy  life  1     What


are  all  the  forms  of  moral  beauty  in  the
Pharisee  of  religion,  compared  with  the
true  and  holy  life  of  the  heart  of  the
devoted  Christian?  [Bishop  Thompson].
Yer.  8 — -11.  Best  and  toorst.  The
best  things  when  abused  become  the
worst :  there  is  no  devil  like  a  fallen
angel ;  no  enemy  to  the  gospel  like  an
apostate  Christian ;  no  hate  like  the
"  theological  hate ; "  no  war  like  a  re-
ligious war ;  and  no  corruption  like  re-
ligious corruption.  The  reasons  are  not
far  to  seek.  The  best  things  are  the
strongest :  they  can  do  most  always,
most  evil  when  used  in  an  evil  way.
Bad  men  know  this :  Simon  the  magician
was  not  the  only  one  that  has  cast  a
covetous  look  at  Christianity  and  said,
"  Give  me  also  this  power "  [A.  J,
Morris].


CHAPTER  VII.


Critical  Notes. — 1.]  Exposure  of  wickedness  continued.  Healed]  politically  and  morally.  The
danger  of  a  wound  only  discovered  when  prohed  and  healing  attempted.  Spoileth]  Heb.  strippeth  off
a  garment :  plunder  extensive  and  without  resistance.  Falsehood]  Deception  toward  God  and  man,
"  Falsehood  was  the  whole  habit  and  tissue  of  their  lives"  [Pusey'].  2.  Consider]  Lit.  say  not  to
themselves  in  serious  reflection.  Rem.]  Notice  and  punish  (Deut.  xxxii.  34  ;  Ps.  xc.  8).  Beset]  as
fetters  and  witnesses  against  them  (Ps.  ix.  16  ;  Prov.  v.  22).  3.  Lies]  People  conformed  to  wicked  laws
and  seductive  rites  of  kings  and  princes ;  flattered  and  pleased  them  with  applause  and  immoral-
ities (Acts  xii.  13).  4.  Oven]  "  In  this  passionate  career  the  nation  resembled  a  furnace  which  a
baker  heats  in  the  evening  and  leaves  burning  all  night  while  the  dough  is  leavening,  and  then  causes
to  burn  with  a  still  brighter  flame  in  the  morning  when  the  dough  is  ready  for  baking  "  \Keil\

5.  Day]  Birth  or  coronation  day,  probably  a  feast  day.  Bottles]  Lit.  with  heat  through  wine  ;  bottles,
not  glasses,  drunkenness,  excess,  and  debauchery.  Hand]  In  token  of  fellowship,  health-drinking.
Scorners]  Ridicule  of  sacred  things,  derision  of  God,  natural  at  intoxicating  feasts  (Dan.  v.  3,  4).

6.  Ready]  Lit.  applied  (marg.  brought  near)  their  heart  to  sin.  For]  The  reason  for  the  open  sin ;
their  heart  is  ready,  and  only  waiting  for  the  spark  to  kindle  it.  7.  Devoured]  Results  of  their  con-
duct stated.  Judges  and  kings,  inflamed  by  the  passion,  here  consumed  and  fell  into  the  abyss,  the
six  last  kings  in  succession  (2  Kings  xv.  10,  14,  25),  b.  c.  772.  None  sought  help  from  God  in
national  calamity.  8.  Mixed]  by  leagues  and  adoption  of  idolatrous  customs.  The  Heb.  indicates
a  mixing  which  disorders  and  involves  confusion.  A  cake]  burned  at  the  bottom  and  sad  at  the  top,
— an  image  of  worthlessness.  One  side  scorched  and  black,  the  other  unbaked  and  doughy  ;  the  whole
spoiled  and  only  fit  to  cast  away.  9.  Gray  hairs]  Symptoms  of  age  and  declining  strength.  "  Thy
gray  hairs  are  thy  passing  bell  "  \Pumj\  Wisdom  is  not  always  found  with  age  (Job  xxxii.  7  ;  Prov.
xxiii.  35).  Israel  indifferent,  though  ripe  for  destruction.  11.  Dove]  A  type  of  simplicity  (Matt.  x.  16).
Silly]  Simplicity.  Without  heart]  Lit.  without  understanding,  easily  taken  in  the  net  (Ezek.  xii.
13).  12.  Congregation]  i  e.  the  threatenings  of  the  law  read  to  them  by  teachers  in  assemblies  (Lev.
xxvi.  14 ;  Dent,  xxviii.  15).  13.  Fled]  As  birds  from  their  nests  (Prov.  xxvii.  8  ;  Is.  xvi.  2).  Re-
deemed] from  Egyp  first,  and  constantly  afterwards,  "  habitual,  oft-renewed  deliverance. "  /  and  they
both  emphatic,  /redeemed,  they  lied.  God's  mercy  overflowed  man's  ingratitude.  14.  Cried]  in
anguish,  not  in  penitence.  Howled]  in  deep  affliction  and  despair.  Assemble]  Crowd  together
in  idol  temple  to  deprecate  famine  and  depart  from  God.  Rebel]  Lit.  withdraw  themselves.  Against]
From  me  ;  they  cast  off  all  allegiance  to  God.  15.  Bound]  Weakened  and  relaxed,  an  image  from
surgery  {chastened,  marg.).  "  Instructing  the  arms,  according  to  the  analogy  of  Ps.  xviii.  35,  ii
equivalent  to  showing  where  and  how  strength  is  to  be  acquired.     The  Lord  has  not  contented  him-


chap,  vii.]  HOMTLETIO  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.  97


self  with  merely  instructing,  he  has  also  strengthened  their  arms  and  given  them  power  to  fight  and
victory  over  their  foes  (cf.  2  Kings  xiv.  25,  26)"  \Keil\  16.  Deceitful]  Which  cannot  carry  the
arrow;  too  slack  or  ill-constructed,  which  the  archer  fears  will  miss  its  aim.  Rage]  Blasphemy
against  God.  Derision]  Egypt,  on  which  they  depended,  will  ridicule  them  for  their  boasting  and
failure  (Is.   xxx.  35).

HOMILETICS.
A  sad  Discovery. — Verse  1.

The  exposure  of  moral  depravity  is  continued.  The  efforts  of  God  to  heal  are
frustrated  by  the  disease.  Greater  iniquity  is  discovered.  The  grace  of  God  is
turned  into  lasciviousness.

I.  A  disease  malignant  in  its  working".  1.  It  was  secretly  hidden.  It  broke
out  in  one  place  when  the  physician  was  curing  another.  "  When  I  would  have
healed  Israel,  then  the  iniquity  of  Ephraim  was  discovered."  Sin  is  never  hid  from
God.  It  lies  concealed  in  the  heart  of  man,  and  only  waits  for  a  chance  to  break
out  in  acts.  "  Who  can  understand  his  errors  %  cleanse  thou  me  from  secret  faults."
2.  It  was  openly  violent.  The  thief  cometh  in,  and  the  troop  of  robbers  spoileth
without.  They  were  infested  with  thieves  within  and  spoiled  by  foreign  invaders
from  without.  Wounded  afresh  day  by  day.  No  place  was  secure  and  free  from
sin.  Secret  sins  indulged  in  become  stronger  and  more  violent  in  their  manifesta-
tions. Spots  break  out  in  the  character  and  errors  in  the  life,  like  some  malignant
humour  in  the  body.  The  body  is  robbed  of  its  beauty,  the  mind  of  its  vigour,  and
the  life  spoiled  in  its  influence  and  end.  II.  A  disease  complicated  in  its
symptoms.  Within  and  without,  politically  and  religiously,  the  disease  was
spreading.  1.  There  was  falsehood  toioard  God.  u  For  they  commit  falsehood."
Falsehood  in  their  worship  and  profession,  in  their  principles  and  practices.
They  said  they  were  willing  to  be  healed  and  to  be  ruled  by  God :  "  neverthe-
less they  did  flatter  him  with  their  mouth,  and  they  lied  unto  him  with
their  tongues."  2.  There  was  treachery  toward  man.  Take  away  the  fear  of  God
and  there  will  be  no  regard  to  man.  "  He  cannot  be  faithful  to  me  who  is  unfaith-
ful to  God,"  said  the  father  of  Constantine  the  Great.  Religion  is  the  basis  and
cement  of  society.  If  we  throw  off  fidelity  to  truth  and  God,  what  is  there  to  bridle
passion  and  check  corruption  1  Treachery  destroys  all  principles  of  confidence  and
security  by  which  society  is  bound  together.  The  Romans  even  disdained  to
practise  it  towards  their  enemies.  How  disgraceful  for  a  Christian  people  to  be
guilty  of  it.  "  Why  do  we  deal  treacherously  every  man  against  his  brother?"  III.
A  disease  incurable  in  its  nature.  "  When  I  would  have  healed " — by  the
teachings  of  the  prophets  and  the  chastisements  of  Providence — "  they  would  not
hearken  nor  be  amended."  The  disease  defied  all  remedy,  was  more  irritated  by  it
and  laid  open  in  its  extent  and  malignity.  Many  distempered  churches  and  afflicted
nations  neglect  the  hopeful  crisis,  then  go  from  bad  to  worse,  and  never  get  cured.
Their  wickedness  is  incorrigible  and  their  disease  incurable.  When  once  inwardly
rotten  and  corrupt,  the  foulness  will  break  out  and  be  externally  visible.  No
earthly  physician  can  sew  up  or  heal  the  wound.  Death  in  the  body  can  never
be  cured.  There  is  no  death  so  sad  and  momentous  in  its  results  as  the  death  of
things  which  die  within.  "  The  greatest  epoch  in  a  man's  life  is  by  no  means  the
day  of  his  physical  death,  but  the  day  in  which  he  died  to  something  more  import-
ant to  him  than  the  whole  world."  "  We  would  have  healed  Babylon,  but  she  is
not  healed  ;  forsake  her."


Divine  Remembrance  op  Sin. —  Verses  2,  3.

God  saw  the  wickedness  of  Israel.  All  things  are  naked  and  opened  before  him.
The  manifold  and  intricate  ways  of  sin,  with  their  surroundings  and  consequences,
are  known  to  him.     "  They  are  before  my  face."

7


98  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  [cha?.  vn.


I.  God  remembers  the  sins  of  men.  "  I  remembered  all  their  wickedness."
These  words  are  full  of  awful  truth,  confirmed  by  Scripture  and  every-day  experi-
ence. God  is  omnipresent ;  beholds  us  everywhere ;  and  we  can  never  sin  with
security.  If  I  wished  to  escape  inspection,  "  whither  shall  I  go  from  thy  Spirit?  or
whither  shall  I  flee  from  thy  presence  %  "  God  is  omniscient,  having  infinite  and
intimate  knowledge  of  the  affairs  of  men.  He  needs  no  light  to  discern  sin,  but
the  light  of  his  countenance.  Our  open  transgressions  and  secret  sins  are  before
his  face.  u  Thou  hast  set  our  iniquities  before  thee,  our  secret  sins  in  the  light  of
thy  countenance."  But  this  knowledge  is  remembrance.  Not  that  God  ever  forgets.
Though  punishment  does  not  always  immediately  follow  transgression,  yet  the  sin
itself  is  not  forgotten  or  buried  in  oblivion.  God  sees  and  knows  it.  Men  may  wink
at  sin  and  forget  it,  but  God  never  does.  God's  remembrance  is — 1.  Minute, — even
the  most  secret  things  are  known  to  him.  2.  Constant, — "remember"  continually.
3.  Individual, — "their  wickedness."  4.  Universal, — "  all  their  wickedness."  III.
Men  think  that  God  is  indifferent  to  their  sins.  "  They  consider  not  in  their
hearts."  They  forget  God,  and  think  that  God  forgets  them.  "  They  say,  The  Lord
shall  not  see,  neither  shall  the  God  of  Jacob  regard  it."  1.  Men  forget  God  in  their
thoughts.  "They  consider  not."  If  they  acknowledge  him  in  words,  they  do  not
wish  to  have  him  near  to  them.  They  do  not  speak  to  their  own  hearts,  nor  listen
to  the  voice  of  conscience  within.  The  young  and  old,  the  rich  and  poor,  the  gay  and
busy,  shun  acquaintance  with  him — put  him  in  the  background  of  life,  and  curtain
him  out  of  sight  lest  he  should  trouble  them.  They  desire  not  the  knowledge  of
his  ways,  wish  to  remain  ignorant,  and  say,  "Depart  from  us."  A  French  philo-
sopher even  declared,  "  that  the  first  duty  of  an  intelligent  and  free  man  is  to  chase
incessantly  from  the  mind  and  conscience  the  idea  of  God."  Practical  atheism
abounds  now  in  the  world.  Men  abandon  faith  in  the  unseen  and  spiritual,  and
virtually  say,  No  God.  "  The  wicked,  through  the  pride  of  his  countenance,  will
not  seek  after  God,  God  is  not  in  all  his  thoughts."  2.  Men  disregard.  God  in
their  ways.  If  God  is  not  in  our  thoughts  he  will  not  be  in  our  ways.  Conduct
results  from  thoughts,  as  fruit  from  a  tree.  Thought  may  not  always  be  embodied
in  deed ;  may  inadequately  be  represented  by  a  man's  life ;  but  the  connection  of  one
with  the  other  is  like  cause  and  effect.  "  For  as  he  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is
he/'  "  There  are  many  devices  in  a  man's  heart "  which  lead  him  to  act  independ-
ently and  forgetfully  of  God.  Scientific  men  talk  of  "generative  powers,"  "vital
energies,"  and  "  eternal  laws."  We  have  the  designs  of  Balak  and  Balaam,  of
Haman  and  Herod.  Men  take  no  account  of  God  in  their  daily  duties  and  avocations,
their  plans  and  pursuits.  Self  is  their  oracle  and  self  their  counsellor,  "  for  they
have  perverted  their  way  and  forgotten  the  Lord  their  God."  III.  When  men  dis-
regard God  in  their  ways,  they  become  more  wicked  in  their  lives.  Due  re-
gard to  God  is  essential  to  the  order  and  harmony  of  society.  What  a  desolation
would  happen  to  a  world  without  the  knowledge  of  God  !  The  French  Revolu-
tion is  a  lesson  to  all  nations  in  this  respect.  The  results  of  idolatry  have  been  sad
in  the  extreme.  Even  among  the  chosen  people,  amid  light  and  privileges,  when
God  was  forsaken,  every  barrier  was  removed.  Falsehood  and  injustice,  cruelty
and  sensuality,  increased  more  and  more.  They  gave  full  play  to  passions  and
lusts ;  perpetrated  sins  without  fear  or  shame ;  and  indulged  in  unbridled  folly.
Two  things  are  specially  pointed  out.  1.  The  highest  ranks  were  corrupted.  "  They
made  the  king  glad  with  their  wickedness."  Those  who  should  have  been  models
of  truth  and  virtue,  encouraged  the  people  to  sin  by  their  example  and  influence.
Their  unjust  laws  and  customs  were  eagerly  obeyed ;  they  were  pleased  with  the
flattery,  made  glad  with  the  homage  of  the  people.  In  pomp  and  unbounded  arro-
gance they  proceeded  further  in  sins,  like  Herod ;  and  not  only  did  the  same,  but
had  pleasure  in  them  that  did  them.  2.  The  lowest  ranks  were  servile.  "  And
the  princes  with  their  lies.'*  An  unhappy  complaisance  was  the  ruling  character
of  Israel.     Their  consciences  were  versatile  and  accommodating  to  the  circum-


chap,  vii.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  99


stances  of  the  day.  They  approved  and  followed  whatever  was  commanded  by
those  in  power;  acquiesced  in  legalized  idolatry,  and  preferred  their  kings  to
their  God.  They  pleased  the  king,  but  they  were  not  sincere.  They  flattered  the
prince,  but  they  lied  in  their  hearts.  They  conformed  to  the  customs,  but  cursed
the  persons  of  their  rulers.  Even  now,  men  bow  in  homage  to  those  who  crush
them  to  poverty ;  lose  their  manhood  by  worshipping  the  rich  and  the  mighty.
"It  is  the  voice  of  a  god,  and  not  of  a  man."  Wicked  sovereigns  and  wicked
people  are  a  curse  to  each  other.  When  kings  and  princes  are  corrupted  the  people
will  be  corrupted.  Ahab  preferred  falsehood  to  truth,  and  was  surrounded  by
lying  prophets.  "  Lies  will  be  told  to  those  that  are  ready  to  hearken  to  them."
The  sinful  ruler  is  a  tool  for  all  kinds  of  wickedness.  He  drives  the  godly  from
his  presence,  and  ever  finds  those  that  minister  to  his  folly.  "  If  a  ruler  hearken
to  lies,  all  his  servants  are  wicked  "  (Prov.  xxix.  12).

Encircled  in  Sin. — Verse  2.

If  the  sinner  pays  no  regard  to  reason  and  the  All-seeing  eye  of  God,  he  cannot
hide  his  sins.  They  will  chain  and  imprison  him,  go  with  him  and  encircle  him  at
all  times.  His  sins  become  a  constant  torment  and  a  deadly  punishment.  "  Now
their  own  doings  have  beset  them  about."     The  sinner  is  beset —

I.  By  the  sting  of  conscience.  He  seeks  to  hide  his  sins,  but  conscience  de-
tects them,  brings  them  to  remembrance,  and  accuses  him  of  guilt.  The  conscious-
ness of  sin  haunts  him  continually,  and  his  sin  is  ever  before  him.  II.  By  the
force  of  habit.  Sin  by  repetition  grows  into  habit.  Habit  becomes  a  ruling
power,  and  cannot  be  given  up  easily.  "  A  rooted  habit,"  says  Tillotson,  "  becomes
a  governing  principle.  Every  lust  we  entertain  deals  with  us  as  Delilah  did  with
Samson  ;  not  only  robs  us  of  our  strength,  but  leaves  us  fast  bound."  III.  By  the
influence  of  example.  The  doings  of  men  live  before  them  in  their  effects  upon
others.  They  cannot  die,  but  they  encircle  them  in  the  bands  of  associates  and
companions.  Example  is  repeated  and  imitated  by  others ;  goes  forth  with  self-
propagating  power,  and  may  descend  from  one  generation  to  another.  "  The  evil
that  men  do  lives  after  them."  IV.  By  the  consequences  of  natural  law.
Punishment  follows  sin  by  a  natural  law,  the  law  of  causation.  Even  now  men
are  encircled  by  their  own  doings,  in  loss  of  health  and  position ;  in  decay  of  in-
tellect and  disorders  of  mind ;  in  the  torments  of  conscience  and  the  tyranny  of
habit ;  in  misery,  despair,  and  death.  In  the  future,  punishment  awaits  the  sinner.
"  Is  not  this  laid  up  in  store  with  me  and  sealed  up  among  my  treasures  ?  "  Un-
less repented  of,  and  washed  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  sins  are  destined  to  be  cited
against  the  sinner.  In  time  and  eternity  "  his  own  iniquities  shall  take  the  wicked
himself,  and  he  shall  be  holden  with  the  cords  of  his  sins."

Sin  a  Furnace  op  Fire. — Verses  4 — 7.

The  passion  of  Israel  for  idolatry  is  likened  to  a  furnace,  heated  by  the  baker,
and  left  burning  during  the  process  of  fermentation.  There  is  little  or  no  cess-
ation to  their  indulgence.  All  are  guilty,  and  fan  the  flames  which  consume  them
without  reflection  and  return  to  God.     Keeping  up  the  figure,  sin  is  like  a  furnace,

I.  In  the  method  by  which  it  is  kindled.  Man  is  capable  of  warmth  and
enthusiasm.  We  are  made  for  fervour.  We  feel  the  glow  of  friendship  and  the
power  of  principles  fondly  cherished  and  firmly  defended.  We  have  properties  not
simply  attributed  to  matter,  but  possessed  by  the  Seraphim  of  heaven  and  attri-
buted to  God  himself.  "  The  zeal  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts."  We  are  more  influenced
by  evil  than  good.  The  heart,  with  its  affections,  is  kindled  into  a  passion;
the  temperament  warmed,  and  men  are  "set  on  fire"  with  lust,  and  "set  on
fire  of  hell"  Like  "  an  oven  heated  by  the  baker,"  they  burn  with  hatred,
envy,  and  adultery ;  "  burned  in  their  lusts  one  toward  another."     In  whatever


100  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  [chap.  vii.


light  we  look  at  sin  "it  is  a  fire  that  consumeth  to  destruction,  and  would
root  out  all  mine  increase"  (Job  xxxi.  12).  II.  In  the  fuel  by  which
it  is  fed.  The  same  material  that  kindles  must  keep  alive  the  fire.  It  is
heated  and  fed  by  lust ;  by  constant  and  unnatural  excitement.  Eespites  only
ferment ;  the  flames  slumber  to  break  out  into  greater  fury.  Anger,  ambition,
and  filthy  lusts  fill  the  soul,  and  the  fire  burns  upon  the  altar  and  never  goes  out.
Certain  sins  are  mentioned  in  the  text.  1.  Prevalent  adultery.  They  are  all  adul-
terers. "  Given  up  to  vile  affections,  and  punished  with  impurities  of  heart  and
life."  "  It  is  better  to  marry  than  burn  "  (1  Cor.  vii.  9).  2.  Excessive  drink.
The  princes  made  the  king  "sick,"  heated  him  "with  bottles  of  wine."  Intem-
perance in  any  is  degrading,  but  especially  in  men  of  place  and  power.  Priest  and
prophet  "err  through  strong  drink"  (Is.  xxviii.  7;  lvi.  11,  12).  The  glory  of
Benhadad  (1  Kings  xx.  16),  of  Belshazzar,  and  of  "the  princes  of  Israel,"  was
covered  with  shame.  Philip  of  Macedon,  when  drunk,  unjustly  condemned  a
woman.  She  boldly  said,  "  I  appeal  to  Philip ;  but  it  shall  be  when  he  is  sober."
Roused  by  the  appeal,  the  king  examined  the  case,  and  reversed  his  judgment.
"  It  is  not  for  kings,  0  Lemuel,  it  is  not  for  kings  to  drink  wine  ;  nor  for  princes
strong  drink  :  lest  they  drink,  and  forget  the  law,  and  pervert  the  judgment  of  any
of  the  afflicted"  (Prov.  xxxi.  4,  5).  3.  Impious  scorning .  "He  stretched  out  his
hand "  in  friendship,  and  associated  "  with  scorners."  The  king  jested  with
drunkards,  praised  idols,  and  scoffed  at  God.  Atheists  and  scoffers,  wine  and  mirth,
are  often  found  together.  "  Hypocritical  mockers  at  feasts  "  give  license  to  their
tongue,  and  lose  control  over  their  conduct.  "  Wine  is  a  mocker,  strong  drink  is
raging;  and  whosoever  is  deceived  thereby  is  not  wise."  III.  In  the  results  which
it  produces.  These  are  innumerable.  The  temptations  to  criminality  are  fearful.
Every  kind  of  "  wickedness  burneth  as  the  fire  "  (Is.  ix.  18).  "  Can  a  man  take
fire  in  his  bosom  and  his  clothes  not  be  burned?  Can  one  go  upon  hot  coals
and  his  feet  not  be  burned  1 "  1.  It  influences  the  heart.  "  For  they  have  made
ready  their  heart."  It  hardens  and  encrusts  it ;  disposes  it  to  prepare,  practise,
and  perfect  evil.  The  heart  is  brought  nigh,  stirred  up  to  sin,  though  the  occasion
for  it  be  taken  away.  This  oven,  once  heated,  gives  no  breathing  time,  no  real
rest.  Corrupt  passions  burn  with  intense  heat,  until  extinguished  and  overcome
by  the  grace  of  God.  2.  It  consumes  its  abettors.  The  fire  "devoured  their  judges;
all  their  kings  are  fallen."  Jeroboam  and  other  kings  corrupted  the  people  to
establish  their  own  authority  ;  were  flattered  and  slain  by  those  who  flattered  them.
Their  sins  returned  to  their  own  bosom.  The  flames,  like  the  furnace  of  Nebuchad-
nezzar, devoured  those  who  were  thrown  into  them  and  those  who  kindled  them.
It  is  ever  thus  with  sin.  The  heathens  taught  that  "  the  artificers  of  death
perished  by  their  own  art."  "  Kindle  not  the  coals  of  a  sinner,  lest  thou  be  burnt
with  the  flame  of  his  fire  "  (Ecclus.  viii.  10).

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  5.  The  day  of  our  king.     Birth-  anti-religions   carousal ;    making   them-

days   and    coronation-days    of    rulers;  selves  like  the  brutes  that  perish,  and

national  fasts  and  feasts  spent  in  drunk-  tempting  their  king  first  to  forget  his

enness   and  rioting — scenes  of  revelry,  royal  dignity,  and  then  to  blaspheme

scenes  of  dehauchery,  scoffing,  and  mur-  the  majesty  of  God  "  [Fusey].

der.    Drinking  healths  and  taking  lives !  Drink,    debauchery,    and    scoffing  a

Kings  falling  in   feasting   and   mirth !  triple  association   in    feasting   without

What  a  portrait  history  gives  of  human  God.     "  Fools  make  a  mock  at  sin."

folly   and  God's   providence!     "Their  Ver.  6.     Their  heart   like   an  oven.

holy  days,  like  those  of  so  many  English  Men  who  are  wicked  and  vile  may  seem

now,  were  days  of  excess.     Their  festi-  to  be  lying  by  and  doing  nothing,  yet —

val  they  turned  into  an  irreligious  and  1.  Their  hearts  are  bent  on  their  course;


chap,  vii.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY;  HOSEA.  101


their  oven  is  heating  while  they  sleep.  None  that  calleth  on  me.     God  can

2.  Their  designs  are  still  going  on  ;  the  correct  the  evils  and  subdne  the  sedition

heat  is  tending  to  burning  as  a  flaming  of  a  nation.    But  mark  the  stupidity  and

fire  while  the  baker  sleeps.     3.  Iniquity  perversity  of  sin  which  make  people  in-

that  is  hatched,  through  abundance  of  sensible  in  danger  and  neglect  God  in

lust,  is  most  violently  executed,  when  trouble.     Not  even   distress,  in  which

opportunity  offers  ;  and  the  more  vio-  generally  men  betake  themselves  to  God,

lently  that  it  hath   been  long  delayed  awakened   any  sense  of   sin   in  them.

[Hutcheson].  "  Those  are  not  only  heated  with  sin,

Ver.  7.      Kings  are  fallen.      Those  but  hardened  in  sin,  that  continued  to

who    murdered    others    are    murdered  live  without  prayers,  even  when  they

themselves.     Plots  of  sin  recoil  on  those  are  in  trouble  and  distress."
who  originate  them.

HOMILETICS.

The  Christian  Church  endangered  and  injured  by  Worldly  Association.

—  Verses  8,  9.

From  the  internal  corruption,  the  prophet  passes  on  to  the  foreign  policy  of  Israel,
and  unfolds  its  disastrous  effects.  God  separated  the  nation  to  be  his  peculiar
people ;  to  train  them  up  in  virtue ;  and  make  them  a  blessing  to  the  world.  But
they  mixed  themselves  with  other  nations  in  social  customs  and  political  leagues.
In  the  application  of  these  words  learn —

I.  That  the  Christian  Church  is  in  danger  of  unlawful  association  with  the
world.  "  Ephraim,  he  hath  mixed  himself  among  the  people."  We  are  not  to  shut
ourselves  out  from  all  intercourse  and  innocent  association  with  the  world.  Family
ties,  business  and  spiritual  engagements,  bind  us  to  it.  But  we  must  not  "  be
conformed  to  this  world,"  in  its  evil  customs  and  pursuits,  its  principles  and  spirit.
We  have  no  need  to  go  out  of  the  world  literally  ;  but  keep  ourselves  from  its  evil ;
separate  ourselves  from  its  frivolities,  and  be  Christians  entirely.  1.  The  Christian
Church  is  endangered  by  outward  proximity  to  the  world.  The  world  is  near,
present  with  us,  and  appeals  to  our  senses.  It  influences  more  than  things
spiritual  and  unseen.  Its  wondrous  forms  and  fair  pretences  gradually  get  hold
upon  and  eventually  overcome  the  careless  professor.  Demas-like,  he  forsakes
God,  having  loved  this  present  world.  Its  pursuits  and  demands  engross  our  atten-
tion. Before  we  are  aware  we  are  brought  under  its  spell ;  walking  according  to
rules,  and  governed  by  "the  prince  of  this  world."  2.  The  Christian  GJiurch  is
endangered  by  the  inward  tendency  to  love  the  world.  There  are  snares  and  dangers
within  us,  from  natural  cravings  and  corrupt  desires.  We  are  fond  of  its  company
and  eager  for  its  rewards.  Its  attractions  are  strong,  because  resistance  is  weak ;
its  trifles  realities,  because  we  prefer  toys  to  eternal  treasures.  "  Love  not  the  world,
neither  the  things  that  are  in  the  world."  II.  The  Christian  Church  is  injured
by  association  with  the  world.  Contact  with  it  wears  away  seriousness  of  mind,  in-
disposes for  religious  duties,  neutralizes  religious  influence,  and  expels  religious
sentiment.  Professors  who  needlessly  mix  up  with  sinful  practices  and  company  ar3
sure  to  suffer  in  their  character  and  condition.  The  text  specifies — 1.  Moral  deterio-
ration. "Ephraim  is  a  cake  not  turned."  They  had  been  mixed  up  and  steeped
with  heathen  idolatries  and  vices,  and  had  become  worthless.  The  fire  of  Divine
judgment  made  only  an  outward  impression  upon  them,  and  they  were  more  hope-
lessly spoiled  by  their  conduct.  Burned  on  one  side  and  dough  on  the  other,
perfectly  useless.  Many  Christians  now  are  utterly  worthless  in  their  lives  and  ex-
amples. Many  societies  have  lost  their  prominence  and  savour;  sunk  into  degrada-
tion, and  do  not  answer  the  end  for  which  they  were  created.  Inward  corruption
will  never  overcome  outward  temptation.  If  individuals,  churches,  and  nations
do  not  contain  power  to  prevent  deterioration  and  impart  life,  they  will  become


02  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  [chap.  \ii.


morally  insipid,  and  fit  for  nothing  but  the  fate  which  history  and  Scripture  declare
awaits  them.  2.  Social  injury.  "  Strangers  have  devoured  his  strength."  Foreign
powers,  Assyria  and  Egypt,  whose  aid  Israel  had  invoked,  robbed  them  of  money,
wasted  their  treasures,  and  diminished  their  numbers.  Like  Samson,  bereft  of  his
strength  by  sensual  pleasure,  Israel  was  stripped  of  social  privilege  and  power.  Sad
to  think  of  many  socially  and  individually  ruined  by  unlawful  connections  and
sinful  lusts.  Intellect  and  memory,  dignity  and  manhood  :  the  health  of  the  body
and  the  happiness  of  the  soul  "  devoured  "  by  strangers  to  God  and  his  people  !
"  Evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners."  3.  Unnatural  decay .  "  Gray  hairs
are  here  and  there  upon  him."  Loss  of  inward  strength  and  outward  beauty  will
soon  bring  age  and  decay.  "Men  get  old  before  they  are  young."  A  general
laxity  of  morals  may  sap  and  undermine  our  commerce.  The  body  politic  may
be  covered  with  marks  of  hoary  age  and  ripening  for  destruction.  Christian
churches  may  decay  through  discord,  worldliness,  and  pride.  Families  and  indi-
viduals may  fall  by  sin  and  die  while  young.  Gray  hairs  are  forerunners  and  fore-
warners  of  death.  4.  Religious  insensibility.  "  Yet  he  knoweth  it  not."  To  be
insensible  of  disease  and  decay  is  the  worst  symptom  of  all.  Men  hide  from  them-
selves tokens  of  death,  and  it  comes  upon  them  unawares.  They  think  that  out-
ward forms,  orthodox  creeds,  and  the  course  of  time  will  recover  their  strength.
They  are  insensible  and  stupefied  in  sin,  and  sleep  quietly  amid  dangers  and  death.
"  They  have  stricken  me,  shalt  thou  say,  and  I  was  not  sick  :  they  have  beaten
me,  and  I  felt  it  not ;  when  shall  I  awake  !M     (Prov.  xxiii.  35  :  Is.  xlii.  25.)

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES,

Ver.  8.    A  cake  not  turned.    Soft  and  winters.     Gray  hairs  are  associated  with

pliable  under  Divine  chastisement,  hard-  — (1)  Parental  honours,  (2)  the  ripe  wis

ened  and  cold  in  sin — half-heartedness,  dom  of  age,  and  (3)  the  piety  of  vener-

half-baked  and  half-burned,  displeasing  able  men.    II.  But  in  the  text  they  are

to  God — hypocrisy,  hot  in  forms,  dead  in  signs  of  decay,   premonitory  symptoms

spirit,  rejected  by  God.    "  Such  were  the  of  dissolution  :   and  teach  that  men  live

people  ;    such   are  too  many    so-called  in  ignorance  and  act  in  disregard  of  signs

Christians;  they  united  in   themselves  that  should  warn  and  alarm   them.    1.

hypocrisy  and  ungodliness,  outward  per-  This  appears  in  the  history  of  States.     In

f  ormance  and  inward  lukewarmness ;  the  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  in  England,  ille-

one  overdone,  but  without  any  whole-  gitimacy,  drunkenness,  continental  mor-

some  effect  on  the  other.     The  one  was  ality,   Sabbath-breaking,  and  irreligious

scorched  and  black  ;  the  other,  steamed,  customs    are  signs  of  national    decay ;

damp,  and  lukewarm;  the  whole  worth-  which,  but  for  thousands  of  good  and

less,  spoiled  irremediably,  fit  only  to  be  earnest  men,  who  know  it,  would  bring

cast  away."     "  Thou  art  neither  cold  nor  death  upon  us.     2.  This  applies  to  the

hot :     I  would  thou  wert  cold  or   hot.  false  security  of  sinners.  3.  This  appears

So  then  because  thou  art  lukewarm,  and  in  men's  insensibility  to  the  lapse  and

neither  cold  nor  hot,    I  will  spue  thee  lessons  of  time  [From  Dr.  Guthrie"],

out  of  my  mouth."  I.  Explain  the  ignorance  here  mention-

Yer.  9.  Gray  hairs.      I.  Gray  hairs  ed,  or  show  how  it  is  that  many  a  man

are  a  sign  of  decay.     God  for  wise  pur-  is  backsliding  and  declining  in  grace,  and

poses  gives  distinctive  features  to  human  yet  knows  it  not.     This  is  often  caused

life.     Nature  teaches  us  to  reverence  age  by  a  want  of  acquaintance  with  one's  own

in  the  pages  of  an  old  book  ;   in  the  leaf-  soul.     Some  there  are  who  do  not  want

less  branches  of  an  old  tree ;  in  the  silent,  to  know  any  evil  thing  of  themselves.

deserted  halls   of  an  old  roofless  ruin  ;  Many  see  not  the  gray  hairs  because  they

still  more  in  one  whose  head  is  white  with  do  not  look  into  the  glass  to  see  them.

the   snows  of   fourscore  or  a    hundred  There  are  some  who  look  into  the  glass


ciiAP.  vil]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.  103


to  see  whether  there  are  gray  hairs  com-  the  suspension  of  communion  with  God.

ing,  but  they  use  a  false  mirror,  one  III.  Kecommend  certain  remedies  for  this

which  does  not  truly  reflect  the  image.  decay.     Inquire  whether  you  be  a  child

II.  I  am  to  hold  up  the  looking-glass.  One  of  God  or  not.     Next  remember  what

of  the  gray  hairs  which  marks  decay  is  will  he  the  result  of  decays  in  grace.     I

a  want  of  holy  grief  for  daily  sin.     A  recommend  to  every  believer    a  daily

second  gray  hair  is  the  absence  of  lament-  self-examination.    Then  with  repentance

ation  in  the  soul  when  Jesus  Christ  is  join  much  supplication  and  renewed  faith

dishonoured.     A  third  gray  hair  in  the  and  daily  watchful  activity  [Spur geonj.

Christian,  a  very  plain  one,  and  marking  Ver.  10.  Pride  prevented  humility  and

that  the  disease  is  gone  far,  is  the  indulg-  confession.     2.  Eeturn  to  God,  who  had

ence   of  certain  minor  sins.     Covetous-  afflicted  them.  3.  Testified  against  them

ness  is  a  very  common  gray  hair  upon  in  their  stupidity  and  rebellion  against

the  heads  of  professors.     With  some  it  God.  "  Men  complain  of  their  '  fortune/

is  not  quite  covetousness,  but  worldliness.  or  '  fate,'  or  '  stars,'  and  go  on  the  more

Another  gray  hair  is  pride.    Neglect  of  obstinately  to  build  up  what   God  de-

prayer  another.  It  is  a  gray  hair  when  we  stroys,  to  prop  up  by  human  means  or

have  no  delight  in  listening  to  the  word,  human  aid  what,  by  God's  providence,

And  another  is,  want  of  love  to    God.  is  failing ;  they  venture  more  desperately,

Want  of  love  to  perishing  sinners  is  a  sad  in  order  to  recover  past  losses,  until  the

gray  hair  to  be  found,  I  fear,  in  some  min-  crash  at  last  becomes  hopeless  and  final "

isters,  as  well  as  in  the  people.  Another  is  [Pusey].

HOMILETICS
The  Silliness  op  the  Sinner. —  Verses  11 — 13.

Ephraim  was  stricken  and  afflicted,  stupefied  and  insensible,  because  without  heart
or  understanding  they  revolted  against  their  best  interests.  Like  a  silly  dove,  simple,
and  liable  to  be  befooled  (Job  xxxi.  27) ;  easily  seduced,  and  trusting  to  its  rapidity
of  flight  instead  of  taking  the  nearest  shelter.  Israel  negotiated  with  others,  depend-
ed not  upon  God,  and  was  caught  in  the  net.     Looking  at  sin  generally —

I.  The  sinner  is  silly  in  boasting  of  knowledge  without  wisdom.  There  is
a  great  difference  between  knowledge  and  wisdom.  The  knowledge  of  this  world
and  the  wisdom  from  above  are  not  always  found  together.  The  world  may  consider
men  wise  and  cunning,  but  a  wicked  man  is  not  a  wise  man.  Sin  is  folly,  and  folly
denotes  insipidity,  which  is  opposed  to  wisdom  derived  from  tasting  or  experience.
There  is  no  true  knowledge  without  godliness.  There  may  be  intellect  and  useful
learning,  but  men  are  brutish  and  foolish  through  sin.  "  The  ox  knoweth  his  owner,"
— we  know  not  our  owner, — "  and  the  ass  his  master's  crib  ; "  but  we  are  insensible  of
our  dependence  upon  God;  "  do  not  know  "  nor  consider.  We  "  lack  wisdom."
Some  are  totally  ignorant.  Others,  gifted  with  genius  and  erudition,  "  think  highly  of
themselves."  All  are  liable  to  be  duped  by  their  own  fancy  or  snared  by  their  own
understanding.  "Ahead  full  of  vain  and  unprofitable  notions,  meeting  with  a
heart  full  of  pride  and  self-conceit,  disposes  a  man  directly  to  be  an  atheist,"  says
Philip  Henry.  Men  are  silly  for  boasting  of  knowledge,  and  ensnared  by  leaning
to  their  counsels.  "  Behold,  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  that  is  wisdom  :  and  to  depart
from  evil  is  understanding  "  (Job  xxviii.  28).  II.  The  sinner  is  silly  in  depend-
ing upon  human  and  forsaking  Divine  aid.  "  They  call  to  Egypt,  they  go  to  As-
syria." 1.  They  called  not  upon  God,  who  could  help  them  as  he  had  done  in  the  past.

2.  They  called  to  Egypt,  delusive  in  promising   and  disappointing  in  execution.

3.  They  go  to  Assyria,  a  powerful  oppressor;  sought  each  by  turns  to  help  against
the  other.  Thus  men,  troubled  and  oppressed,  seek  relief  from  one  thing  and  then
another,  only  to  display  their  folly  and  bring  on  thf  ir  ruin.  u  What  else  is  almost  the
whole  history  of  Christian  states  ? "  asks  a  writer.    "  The  '  balance  of  power,'  which


104  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  HOSEA.  [chap.  vti.


has  been  the  pride  of  the  later  policy  of  Europe,  which  has  been  idolized  as  a  god,  to
which  statesmen  have  looked  as  a  deliverance  oat  of  all  their  troubles;  as  if  it  were
a  sort  of  Divine  Providence,  regulating  the  affairs  of  men,  and  dispensing  with  the
interference  of  God;  what  is  it  but  the  self-same  wisdom  which  balanced  Egypt
against  Assyria  1 "  Men  flee  like  a  bird  from  their  nest  and  security  (ver.  13),  only
to  be  caught  in  the  net  of  "  destruction."  III.  The  sinner  is  silly  in  not  discovering
his  danger.  The  dove  has  neither  courage  to  stay  in  its  resting-place  when  fright-
ened, nor  sense  to  discern  its  peril  when  it  flies  away.  Instead  of  remaining  in  pro-
tection it  flies  away  and  is  caught  in  the  net.  So  men  in  sin  rush  from  God  into
risks,  seek  no  place  of  safety,  and  have  no  sense  of  loss.  As  "  the  ox  goeth  to  the
slaughter,"  unconscious  of  its  fate,  and  dreaming  of  pasture  ;  "  as  a  fool  to  the  cor-
rection of  the  stocks,"  careless  and  unfeeling ;  "as  a  bird  hasteth  to  the
snare,  and  knoweth  not  that  it  is  for  his  life,"  so  blindfolded  and  silly  men  go
to  their  falL  They  soar  upward,  "as  the  fowls  of  heaven,"  in  freedom,  independence,
and  pride,  but  the  net  is  "  spread  upon  them."  They  are  humiliated  and  over-
whelmed. 1.  The  danger  may  be  seen.  It  is  open  and  exposed.  The  net  is  spread
out  to  surround  them  and  hold  them  down.  But  "  man  also  knoweth  not  his  time  ;
as  the  fishes  that  are  taken  in  an  evil  net,  and  as  the  birds  that  are  caught  in  the  snare,
so  are  the  sons  of  men  snared  in  an  evil  time,  when  it  falleth  suddenly  upon  them."
2.  The  danger  is  not  without  warning.  "  Their  congregation  hath  heard."  In  the
law  and  by  the  prophets,  by  judgment  and  mercy,  God  had  forewarned  Israel.  So
men  now  sin  against  light  and  truth,  in  the  face  of  God's  word  and  God's  providence.
If  you  add  blows  to  reproofs,  so  incurable  is  the  folly  of  some  that  they  will  not
grow  wiser  and  better.     "  Yet  will  his  foolishness  not  depart  from  him."

The  Fowler  of  Retribution. — Verse  12.

As  they  go  to  Egypt  and  Asshur  for  help,  God  will  spread  his  net  over  them  like  a
bird-catcher,  and  bring  them  down  to  the  earth  like  flying  birds,  i.  e.  bring  them
from  the  open  air — freedom — into  the  net  of  captivity  or  exile.  Here  the  work  of
retribution  is  spoken  of  as  the  work  of  the  fowler,  and  includes  two  things — entrap-
ment and  abasement.  I.  Entrapment.  The  literal  reference  here  is  2  Kings  xvii  4.
The  retributive  providence  of  God  employed  Assyrians  to  ensnare  Israel.  This
entrapment  of  providence  was  seen  in  the  case  of  Joseph's  brethren  and  the  cruci-
fixion of  Christ.  Popery  confined  Luther  in  Wartburg  Castle,  where  he  trans-
lated the  Bible,  which  shattered  the  whole  system.  Anglican  bigots  imprisoned
Bunyan  in  Bedford  jail ;  there  he  produced  a  book  which  has  given  him  immortal
fame.  The  net  that  entangles  sinners  is  not  made  in  heaven,  but  on  earth,  by
themselves.  Righteous  providence  permits  them  so  to  be  ensnared  as  to  render  that
enthralment  painful  and  lasting.  II.  Abasement.  "  I  will  bring  them  down,"  &c.
However  high  they  may  tower,  retribution  has  missiles  to  bring  them  down.  Men  in
worldly  prosperity,  pride  and  ambition,  soar  like  eagles  above  the  rest.  An  ancient
philosopher,  when  asked  what  Jupiter  did  in  heaven,  replied,  "  He  pulls  down
the  haughty,  and  exalts  the  humble."  Read  the  words — "  The  pride  of  thine  heart
hath  deceived  thee,"  &c.  (Obad.  3,  4).  Ponder  well  thy  condition,  sinner.  Retri-
butive justice  is  upon  thee  wherever  thou  art  and  whatever  thou  dost.  If  down
grovelling  in  the  earth,  working  out  thy  sordid  soul,  it  has  nets  that  will  ensnare
thee  there.  If  high  up  in  the  heavens  of  worldly  prosperity  and  haughty  ambition,
proudly  exulting  in  superiority,  it  has  shots  that  will  reach  thee  and  bring  thee
down  to  the  dust  [The  Homilist].

Man's  Weal  and  Woe. —  Verse  13.

There  are  but  two  conditions  in  which  men  are  found,  near  to  or  distant  from
God.  There  can  be  no  neutrality  in  religion.  We  must  either  be  for  or  against  God.
If  to  depart  from  God  be  woe ;  to  be  intimate  with  him,  to  know  and  love  him,
must  be  man's  weal,  moral  health,  wholeness,  and  happiness.     Hence —


chap.  vii. J  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  105


I.  God  is  the  chief  good  of  men.  "Who  will  show  us  any  good?"  is  the
cry  of  the  "  many  "  in  disappointment  or  unbelief.  Man  wants  good  :  hates  evil  as
evil,  because  it  brings  woe,  suffering,  and  death.  He  wishes  to  find  that  supreme
good  which  he  craves  for,  which  alone  will  satisfy  his  heart.  This  is  not  found  in
the  creature,  in  the  pleasures  of  sense  and  sin.  God  alone  can  satisfy  the  soul.  He  is
the  chief,  the  only  good  of  men.  But  the  summum  bonum,  the  well-being  of  man,
is  not  mere  happiness,  it  is  right  character,  the  perfection  and  harmony  of  being.
Happiness  and  joy  are  secondary  and  incidental  to  this.  The  only  blessedness  is
the  blessedness  of  the  godly.  We  have  not  found  this  until  restored  and  reconciled
to  God.  To  seek  the  chief  good  of  man  without  God,  without  conformity  to  his
will,  is  to  subvert  supreme  reason,  break  down  the  eternal  laws  of  the  universe,  and
seek  the  impossible.  "  Fear  God  and  keep  his  commandments ;  for  this  is  the
whole  of  man  " — not  his  duty  merely  (duty  is  interpolated),  but  his  health  and
happiness — the  sum  of  all  that  God  requires — the  end  and  perfection  of  his  being.
II.  Departure  from  God  brings  misery  npon  men.  "  Woe  unto  them,  for  they
have  fled  from  me."  1.  Forsaking  God  involves  misery.  "  Woe  unto  them."  Those
who  sin  against  God  wrong  their  own  soul  (Prov.  viii.  32) ;  rob  it  of  happiness  and
vigour,  and  are  tempted  to  soul-murder.  They  forsake  their  own  mercy  (Jon.  ii.  8) ;
the  God  of  my  mercy  (Ps.  lix.  17),  the  personal  knowledge  of  whom  is  the  con-
dition of  happiness.  Estrangement  from  God  involves  misery  and  deep  distress
(Jer.  ii.  13  ;  xvii.  13).  Therefore  the  laws  of  God  are  (a)  the  expression  of  benevolent
design,  (b)  in  harmony  with  our  moral  constitution,  and  (c)  should  be  constantly
obeyed.  2.  Forsaking  God  involves  destruction.  "  Destruction  unto  them,  because
they  have  transgressed  against  me."  God  is  not  only  the  happiness,  but  the  pro-
tection of  the  soul.  "  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord,"  and  those  who  forget  or  forsake
him  bring  present  woe  and  future  -destruction  upon  themselves,  God  has  con-
nected our  safety  with  the  keeping  of  his  law.  Obey  and  we  shall  be  saved ;
but  disobedience  to  all  laws,  physical  and  moral,  will  result  in  pain  and  death.
Sinners  die  because  they  will  die  :  put  from  them  that  which  will  be  their  life,
and  love  that  which  will  be  their  death.     "  They  that  hate  me  love  death."

God's  Ways  and  Man's  Ways.

I.  God's  ways  towards  man.     God's  ways  to  train  the  believer  and  save  the
sinner  are  manifold  and  wonderful.     There  are  three  specially  indicated  in  the
text.     1.  We  have  love.    The  prophet  speaks  not  mechanically.    The  man's  soul  is
touched,  and  we  see  the  sympathy  of  God  in  his  pleadings  and  expostulations.
With  melting  overtures  he  pours  out  the  tenderest  feelings  of  Divine  love.     "  How
shall  I  give  thee  up,  EphraimT  &c.     It  is  not  a  love  cold  and  indifferent  to  the
sins  and  sorrows  of  men.     Some  men  with  a  selfish  stoical  heart  behold  the  misery
around  them  without  the  slightest  feeling.     Some  are  annoyed,  and  others  endeav-
our to  shun  it.  But  few  are  pained  at  the  sight,  try  to  bear  or  remove  it.  God's  love
is  wounded  with  the  sins  of  his  people,  bursts  forth  into  deep  emotion.     His  "  soul
was  grieved  for  the  misery  of  Israel."     Like  a  father's  pity  and  a  mother's  tender
care,  this  love  is  heard  in  the  cry,  "  0  Israel,  return  unto  the, Lord  thy  God.;  for
thou  hast  fallen  by  thine  iniquity."     2.  We  have  laio.     "  They  have  transgressed."
Sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  law,  "for  where  no  law  is  there  can  be  no  trans-
gression."    Law  is  found  in  all  departments  of  the  universe  ;  is  essential  to  order
and  good  government.     God  has  expressed  his  love  in  law,  and  entered  into  human
history  with  authority  and  redeeming  grace.     Love  is  the  natural,  the  parental
feeling  of  God.     But  positive  law  is  required  to  direct  and  control  the  actions  of
men.     "  Thou  shalt  not  "  is  a  necessary  part  of  education ;  a  boundary  line  be-
tween right  and  wrong — an  essential  condition  of  a  happy  life.     God  has  written
the  words  on  the  shore  of  every  sea,  in  the  constitution  of  every  moral  being,  and
in  the  history  of  every  nation.      Passions  must  be  curbed ;  order  must  be  pre-


106  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.  [chap.  vn.


served,  lest  confusion  and  death  should  spread  in  God's  dominions.     3.  We  have
providence.     Love  may  exist  in  the  heart  and  not  be  displayed  in  outward  act.
Providence  is  God's   love  in  action,  written  in  facts.      Divine  agency  is   dis-
played in  human  history,  delivering  men  from  sin.     God  had  redeemed  Israel
from  captivity  and  bondage.     He  made  known  to  them  what  he  promised  to  be,
and  what  he  was  by  what  he  did.     Thought  and  character  are  known  best  when
expressed  in  deeds.     A  mother's  love  is  not  known  simply  by  word  ;  but  when  she
cares  for  her  child,  walks  with  it,  and  delivers  it  in  danger,  then  she  gives  life  and
meaning  to  her  words.     So  God  fulfils  his  promise,  honours  his  law,  and  redeems
his  people.     The  name  Redeemer  should  therefore  be  above  every  name,  should
quicken  and  inspire  our  hearts  with  love.     In  the  death  of  Jesus  we  have  love  his-
torical and  supernatural ;    redemption  and  moral  influence  spreading  themselves
through  all  time  and  reaching  to  all  people.     God's  providence  in  Israel  and  God's
love  in  Christ  have  become  history  and  action  in  the  past,  energy  in  the  present,
and  promise  for  the  future.     "  He  saved  them  for  his  name's  sake,  that  he  might
make  his  mighty  power  to  be  known."     II.  Man's  ways  towards  God.     Such
treatment  from  God  ought  to  excite  gratitude  and  service.     The  truths  of  the  Bible
and  the  blessings  of  providence  should  not  be  entertained  as  mere  external  verities,
but  should  become  living  and  abiding  sources  of  thought  and  feeling  ;  motives  to
action  and  praise.     The  mercies   we  receive  should  be  specially  acknowledged.
"  Bless  the  Lord,  0  my  soul,  and  forget  not  all  his  benefits."     Israel  were  guilty
of  three  glaring  sins.     1.   There  was  apostasy  from  God.     "For  they  have  fled
from  me."     God  had  made  them  a  peculiar  people,  gave  them  a  special  covenant,
and  took  them  into  intimate  relationship  with  himself ;  but  they  forsook  him,  and
were  guilty  of  religious  defection.     It  was  not  a  partial,  but  a  complete  falling
away.     They  turned  from  God  in  their  hearts,  and  wandered  from  him  in  their
ways.     T\\qj  fled  in  fear  and  anger,  as  if  God  was  a  cruel  and  inveterate  enemy.
God  called  unto  them,  but  they  refused  to  come  :  he  sought  to  reclaim  them,  but
they  wandered  further  from  him.     The  instinct  of  the  bird  teaches  that  its  only
place  of  safety  and  rest  is  the  nest.     Seldom  does  she  return  without  injury  or  in-
convenience to  herself.     So  man,  wandering  from  "  the  precincts,"  remains  not  under
"  the  protection"  of  God.      To  leave  his  place  and  duties  in  society  exposes  him
to  temptation.     He  has  no  true  rest,  and  only  changes  imaginary  for  real  troubles.
The  discontented  man,  the  unsteady  professor,  departing  from  God,  wanders  from
his  proper  place  and  position.     Man  is  a  fugitive,  wandering  from  his  home,  broken
away  from  the  law  of  holy  and  blessed  allegiance.     Sin  has  separated  him  from
God.      Where  art  thou  ?  was  the  significant  question  put  to  rouse  our  first  parent
to  a  sense  of  guilt.     Like  a  kind  father,  God  calls  now  to  men,  holds  out  his  arms
of  love  to  embrace  them  in  return.     "  But  to  Israel  he  saith,  All  day  long  I  have
stretched  forth  my  hands  unto  a  disobedient  and  gainsaying  people."    2.   There  was
rebellion  against  God.     It  was  no  ordinary  crime  of  which  they  were  guilty.     To
apostasy  they  added  open  rebellion.      "  They  have  transgressed."     Once  depart
from  God,  the  way  is  open  for  all  sins  and  temptations.     When  Israel  had  fled  from
God,  they  sinned  wilfully  and  presumptuously,  with  a  high  hand  and  a  stiff  neck.
They  broke  the  law  and  thwarted  the  design  of  Divine  love.     Many  now  have
no  determination,  no  decision  for  God  :  changeful  as  the  waves  and  fickle  as  the
winds.      Their    heart   is  not  right,   neither   are  they  stedfast  in  his  covenant.
They  detract  from  the  authority  of  God,  and  continually  break  the  bonds  of  law;
they  set  up  self  and  refuse  to  yield  to  God  ;  and,  like  a  refractory  horse  and  un-
tamed bullock,  constantly  reject  the  bridle  and  draw  back.     "  A  stubborn  and
rebellious  generation."      3.  There  ivas  contradiction  to  God.     "  They  have  spoken
lies  against  me."     Oft  as  he  redeemed  them  so  often  did  they  traduce  him.     Their
whole  life  was  a  contradiction  to  his  will,  character,  and  conduct.     They  spoko
lies  in  their  lips  and  profession,  added  insult  to  ingratitude.      They  belied  his
prophets,  and  set  up  false  gods  in  opposition  to  the  true.     They  denied  the  pro-


chap,  vn.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.  107


vidence  and  power  of  God,  robbed  him  of  the  glory  of  their  deliverance,  and  ascribed
all  their  blessings  to  idols.  "  Nevertheless  they  did  flatter  him  with  their  mouth,
and  they  lied  unto  him  with  their  tongues."  Thus  Israel  treated  God  for  his  kind-
ness, and  provoked  him  to  anger  by  their  sins.  Well  might  God  say,  "My  thoughts
are  not  your  thoughts,  neither  are  your  ways  my  ways."

HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Spoken  lies.      1.    Men  lie  in  thought,  and  career  he  has  "belied  the  Lord."

When  they  have  hard  or  slight  thoughts  Yet  this  lying  to  God  is — 1.  A  common

of  God — when  they  think  that  prosperity  sin.     2.  A  hateful  sin.     3.  A  dangerous

is  given  by  idols,  is  gained  by  their  own  sin.

skill.     2.  Men  lie  in  word.     When  they  The  visible  Church  doth  lie  against

declare  that  God  does  not  see  them  and  God,   having  been   delivered    of  him,

will  not  punish  their  sin.     3.  Men  lie  either   when   she   denieth  him   in  her

in  worship.  When  they  represent  God  in  practice  (Tit.  i.  16  ;  Ps.  xiv.  1);  or  when

graven  images,  offer   prayers  which  do  being  delivered  she  doth  belie  her  those

not  come  from  the  heart,  and  defraud  professions  and  promises  she  made  in

God  of  his  due.     4.  Men  lie  in  conduct,  trouble  ;  or,  when  she  cleaves  still  to

When  they  profess  one  thing  and  are  false  doctrine  or  corrupt  religion,  pre-

really  another  —  when  they  substitute  tending  it  to  be  the  truth,  and  constructs

error   for    truth,  and   deny   the   Holy  of  God's  delivering  her,  as  if  it  were  a

One.  testimony  that  he  favoured  her  way ;  or

Sin  is  emphatically  a  lie.  The  sinner  is  when  in  her  prosperity  she  forgets  God,

antagonistic    to  God   and   his  ways,  a  ascribing  all  her  deliverances  to  her  idols,

contradiction  to  God  in  his  character  as  all  her  afflictions  to  him,  as  chap.  ii.

and  condition.     In  his  whole  conduct  5;  Jer.  xliv.  17,  18  [Hutcheson].

HOMILETICS.
The  Howling  of  Distress. —  Verse  14.

If  the  sinner  will  not  take  warning,  but  madly  rush  on,  he  must  take  the  con-
sequence of  his  folly.  But  when  sorrow  and  punishment  come  upon  him,  he  frets
and  cries  to  God  in  distress.  When  Israel  suffered,  they  wept  for  their  sins.  God
reproves  them  ;  they  should  have  turned  to  him  before.  It  is  often  too  late  to  re-
pent when  the  deed  is  done.

I.  Men  are  often  in  great  distress.  Suffering  of  some  kind  we  cannot  avoid  ;
it  is  incident  to  our  mortal  state.  The  ills  that  flesh  is  heir  to  are  many.  But
sin  brings  suffering ;  neglect  of  Divine  warnings  brings  Divine  chastisement.  1.  Men
often  lack  the  necessities  of  life.  "  Corn  and  wine  "  are  not  always  given,  often  in
justice  withheld,  and  then  famine  results.  The  Irish  famine  through  failure  of
potatoes  created  great  distress.  The  luxuries  and  the  necessities  are  taken  away  to
humble  our  pride,  punish  our  sin,  and  teach  us  dependence  upon  God.  "  The  Lord
gave  "  is  the  language  of  Scripture  ;  that  of  atheism  and  pride,  u  My  own  hand  hath
gotten  me  this  wealth"  (Deut.  viii.  17).  Heathens  even  acknowledged  God  as
"  the  Giver  of  good  things."  He  has  the  right  to  withdraw  at  his  pleasure.  God's
hand  must  be  seen  in  losses  as  well  as  gains.  "  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord
hath  taken  away."  2.  Men  are  often  put  on  beds  of  affliction.  "  They  howled  upon
their  beds."  Active  energetic  persons  are  confined  to  their  habitations,  thrown
helpless  on  their  beds,  and  led  to  cry  for  mercy.  Many  have  wearisome  nights  and
days ;  bitter  pains  and  sorrows ;  then  they  cry  for  mercy  in  sickness,  which  they
despised  in  health.  Their  punishment  is  greater  than  they  can  bear.  A  sick  bed
is  a  place  of  trial  and  a  school  of  discipline.  II.  Men  cry  to  God  in  great  dis-
tress. In  prosperity  and  freedom  they  are  right  enough.  Even  beasts  do  not
utter  their  cry  when  they  have  food.     But  how  natural  to  feel  and  complain  under


108  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.  [chap,  vu


severe  suffering !  It  is  not  palatable  to  reap  the  reward  of  our  own  doings.  Hence —
1.  Men  cry,  but  it  is  not  the  cry  of  penitence.  It  is  the  howling  of  anguish  ;  the
cry  of  despair  ;  mere  noise  without  spiritual  feeling.  2.  They  cry  to  God.  Like  the
atheist  on  the  iEgean  Sea,  they  may  forget  or  ridicule  the  idea  of  God  in  calm  and
sunshine.  When  the  storms  come  they  change  their  creed  and  cry  to  their  God.  Men
may  live  without  God,  but  they  never  want  to  suffer  or  die  without  him.  "  Then
they  cry  unto  the  Lord  in  their  trouble."  3.  Their  cry  is  insincere,  (a)  It  is  not
from  the  heart.  u  They  have  not  cried  unto  me  with  their  heart."  Their  tears
were  wrung  from  them  on  account  of  distress  and  not  sin.  Their  hearts  were  not
set  on  God,  and  they  could  not  pray  unto  him.  The  howling  of  the  ancient  heathen
or  the  modern  Indian  is  not  true  devotion.  The  prayer  from  a  sense  of  pain  and
want  is  not  the  prayer  of  "  a  broken  and  contrite  spirit,"  which  is  acceptable
to  God.

Pleads  he  in  earnest  ?  look  upon  his  face  :

His  eyes  do  drop  no  tears,  his  prayers  are  in  jest ;

His  words  come  from  his  mouth,  ours  from  our  breast :

He  prays  but  faintly,  and  would  be  denied  :

We  pray  with,  heart  and  soul,  and  all  beside.

(b)  Their  cry  is  public  clamour.  "  They  assemble  themselves,"  gather  tumul-
tuously  together,  to  join  in  stormy  debate  or  clamour  to  their  gods.  They  thought
more  of  corn  and  wine  than  pardon  of  sin  and  peace  with  God.  Men  are  more  anxious
for  the  body  than  the  soul,  and  when  deprived  of  the  blessings  of  this  life  fret  and
murmur  against  God.  4.  Their  cry  ended  in  rebellion.  tl  They  rebel  against  me,"
turn  away  from  God,  and  then  turn  round  to  insult  him  to  his  face.  This  proved
the  insincerity  of  their  prayer.  Sanctified  afflictions  improve  and  wean  from  the
world  ;  unsanctified  afflictions  harden  and  lead  to  ungodliness.  The  iron  when
heated  by  the  fire  is  soft  and  flexible,  but  afterwards  goes  hard  and  cold.  When
God  slays  men,  then  they  seek  him,  return  and  inquire  early  after  him.  When  re-
stored they  forget  their  vows  and  prayers,  and  live  in  estrangement  from  him.
"  For  all  this  they  sinned  still,  and  believed  not  for  his  wondrous  works "
(Ps.  lxxviii.  32,  34).

The  Ungrateful  Return. —  Verses  15,  16.

God  tried  all  ways  with  his  people,  but  of  no  use.  He  chastised  them  in  judg-
ment and  remembered  mercy.  He  gave  them  into  the  hands  of  enemies ;  they  cried
in  distress,  and  he  delivered  them.  Whatever  God  did,  they  were  still  the  same.
Four  words  sum  up  the  varied  methods  of  God  to  restore  them  ;  the  one  result  was
shameful  abuse  ending  in  fresh  rebellion.

I.  God's  kindness  to  man.  ( '  I  have  bound  and  strengthened  their  arms."  In  what-
ever sense  we  take  the  words,  the  fact  of  ingratitude  remains.  1.  God  chastised  them.
Time  after  time  were  they  afflicted,  but  God  withdraws  his  displeasure.  Men  see  the
greatness  of  Divine  compassion,  but  never  feel  all  the  power  of  Divine  anger.  "  He
being  full  of  compassion,  forgave  their  iniquity,  and  destroyed  them  not ;  yea,  many  a
time  turned  he  his  anger  away, and  did  not  stir  up  all  his  wrath."  2.  God  taught  them.
Taught  them  to  walk  by  their  arms,  as  parents  teach  their  children  (ch.  xi.  3  ;  Deut.  i.
31) ;  taught  them  to  war  (Ps.  xviii.  34)  ;  gave  them  victory  over  enemies  (2  Kings
xiv.  25,  26) ;  "  girded  them  with  strength  for  battle."  To  him  they  owed  all  their
military  skill,  strength,  and  success.  All  warlike  prowess  is  the  gift  of  God.  The  Lord
is  mighty  in  battle,  and  "  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  great  Drill-Master  of  heavenly  sol-
diers." God  taught  and  instructed  Israel  by  his  prophets  and  providence,  by  his  word
and  worship,  and  by  a  peculiar  mode  of  discipline  trained  them  up  for  his  service  and
honour.  3.  God  strengthened  them.  Weak  within  and  wounded  without,  like  a  kind
physician  he  bound  up  their  wounds  and  healed  their  sores.  He  strengthened  their
arms  and  relieved  them  in  sickness.  God  often  restores  individuals  and  reinstates
nations  in  prosperity  and  health,  but  what  thanks  has  he  ?    "  0  Israel,  thou  hast  de-


chap,  vil]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  109


stroyed  thyself,  but  in  me  is  thine  help."  II.  Man's  ingratitude  to  God.  Men  like
Hezekiah  render  not  again  according  to  the  benefit  done  unto  them  (2  Chr.  xxxii.  25).
God  intends  to  do  them  good,  but  they  hate  and  forsake  him.  1.  In  wicked  thoughts.
"  Yet  do  they  imagine  mischief  against  me."  Right  thoughts  of  God  are  essential
to  right  conduct.  If  we  think  evil  in  our  hearts,  evil  will  be  manifest  in  our  lives.
"  The  thought  of  foolishness  is  sin."  Men  think  lightly  of  the  responsibility  of
thought,  and  declare  that  thoughts  can  hurt  no  one.  As  the  thought  is  the  fountain
of  the  act,  God  counts  it  as  the  act,  and  holds  us  responsible  for  it.  Bunyan,  unlike
many  professors,  was  deeply  troubled  in  remembrance  of  one  sinful  thought.  Yet
how  men  devise  wickedness  in  their  hearts  !  One  meditates  on  objects  of  lust  and
avarice  ;  another  on  schemes  of  ambition.  Some  think  in  envy,  and  others  in
malice  and  revenge  "  0  Jerusalem,  wash  thine  heart  from  wickedness,  that  thou
mayest  be  saved.  How  long  shall  vain  thoughts  lodge  within  thee  1 "  2.  In  evil
conduct.  "  They  return,  but  not  to  the  Most  High."  The  health  restored  and  the
life  preserved  from  death  should  be  given  to  God.  God's  kindness  should  beget
loving  thoughts  and  constant  gratitude  to  him.  But  the  conversion  of  many  is  feigned
and  hypocritical ;  a  turning  point  in  life,  but  not  return  to  God  in  acknowledgment
of  his  majesty,  and  dependence  upon  his  word.  Man  changes  from  one  thing  to
another :  turns  "  from  the  sins  of  youth  to  the  sins  of  age,  from  the  sins  of  pros-
perity to  the  sins  of  adversity  ;  but  he  himself  remains  unchanged,"  says  a  writer.
True  turning  is  upwards,  in  recognition  of  God's  presence  and  holiness.  The  sinner
looks  forward  and  round,  but  forgets  God  in  thought  and  conduct.  The  prodigal
must  come  home.  The  penitent  must  return  not  half  way,  but  entirely  up  to  God.
To  forsake  some  sins  and  indulge  in  others,  to  denounce  earthly  things  without
devoting  ourselves  entirely  to  God,  is  not  genuine  conversion  nor  guarantee  of
amendment.  "  If  thou  wilt  return,  0  Israel,  saith  the  Lord,  return  unto  me."
3.  In  blasphemous  language.  "  For  the  rage  of  their  tongue."  The  princes  were  en-
raged themselves,  and  gave  vent  to  their  anger  against  God  and  his  providence  to
others.  The  tongue,  that  unruly  member,  uttered  lies  and  blasphemy.  The  nearer
destruction  approached  the  more  madly  princes  and  politicians  contradicted  the
prediction.  "  Their  tongue  is  as  an  arrow  shot  out ;  it  speaketh  deceit."  Thus  did
Israel  and  thus  do  men  treat  the  kindness  of  God.  In  evil  thought,  rebellious  con-
duct, and  abusive  language  do  they  manifest  ingratitude.  Mark  the  fearful  grada-
tions of  their  sin.  (a)  Surrounded  by  mercies,  they  design  mischief .  (b)  Invited  to
return,  they  turn  further  away  from  God.  (c)  Then  insults  were  added  to  ingratitude
and  rebellion,  (d)  Finally  their  language  and  conduct  drew  down  God's  anger  upon
them,  and  were  the  instruments  of  their  own  destruction.  To  render  good  for  evil
is  God-like,  but  to  render  evil  for  good  is  devilish.  What  should  we  do  with  an
undutiful,  rebellious  child  nourished  up  in  tender  care  1  Could  any  virtue  atone  for
this  unnatural  conduct  %  Yet  God  complains.  "  I  have  nourished  and  brought  up
children,  and  they  have  rebelled  against  me."  Rewarding  evil  for  good  is  con-
demned by  the  heathen,  hateful  to  God,  and  will  bring  destruction  to  the  sinner
himself  and  his  house.  "  Whoso  rewardeth  evil  for  good,  evil  shall  not  depart
from  his  house."

HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND    OUTLINES.

Ver.  15.    Mischief.     Sin  is  essentially  Subject.  Divine  dispensations  abused,

mischief;    mischievous    in   its    designs  I.   God's    dispensations   with    men   are

and  consequences — to   God    and    man.  characterized  by  variety.    II.  Thatwhat-

In  one  sense  man  can  do  no  hurt  to  ever  the  character  of  the  Divine  dispensa-

God,  but  so  bold  is  he  in  his  sins  that  tions  they  are  often  perverted.  Observe —

he  tries,  by  robbing  God  of  his  glory  and  First,    The    force   of   the   human  will,

abusing  his  gifts.   "  Man  would  dethrone  Secondly,  The  depravity  of  the  human

God  if  he  could  "  [Pusey~\.  heart  [The  Homilist].


110


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  J


(.CHAP.    VII.


Ver.  16.  A  deceitful  bow.  1.  Mis-
directed in  its  aim.  Looked  more  to
selfish  and  sinful  things  than  things  of
God.  2.  Treacherous  in  its  acting.
When  bent,  would  suddenly  start  aside
and  recover  its  former  position.  Not
to  be  depended  upon.  The  bow  of
Jonathan  "  turned  not  back  "  (2  Sam.  i.
22).  3.  Unfit  for  use.  Israel  boasted
of  the  bow,  and  sang  the  song  of  the  bow,
and  a  deceitful  bow  is  made  a  type  of
their  own  unstedfastness  and  degenerate
condition.  God  can  turn  man's  glory
into  shame,  and  cast  them  away  as  unfit
for  his  purpose  in  the  earth.  "  They
were  turned  aside  like  a  deceitful  bow  "
(Ps.  lxxviii.  57).

Men's  shortcoming,  in  the  matter  of
repentance    and    conversion    to    God,


showeth  from  their  want  of  straightn^ss
in  not  intending  what  they  pretend  to,
which  is  also  a  great  sin :  therefore  it  is
added  they  are  like  a  deceitful  bow,  that
is,  as  a  bow  which  hath  a  throw  in  it
does  never  direct  the  arrow  to  the  mark,
however  it  seem  to  aim  at  it ;  so,  how-
ever they  pretend  true  repentance,  yet
they  do  not  intend  it,  but  only  to  deceive
and  flatter  God  till  they  might  get  out
of  trouble  [Hutcheson].

Return.  True  repentance  consists —
1.  In  decided  turning  away  from  evil.
Not  half  turning,  nor  halting  short  of
God.  2  In  decided  turning  to  God.
Positive  devotion  to  God,  so  that  he
only  is  served  and  worshipped.  It  is
not  outward  reformation,  but  inward
renewal.


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  VII.


Ver.  1.  If  we  had  eyes  like  those  of
God,  we  should  think  very  differently
of  ourselves.  The  transgressions  which
we  see  and  confess  are  but  like  the
farmer's  small  sample  which  he  brings  to
market,  when  be  has  left  his  granary
full  at  home.  We  have  but  a  few  sins
which  we  can  observe  and  detect,  com-
pared with  those  which  are  hidden  from
ourselves  and  unseen  by  our  fellow-
creatures  [Sturgeon].

Ver.  2.  Habits.  As  impossible  as
it  is  for  a  blackamoor  to  cast  away  his
skin  and  to  become  white,  and  for  a
leopard  to  put  away  his  spots ;  so  im-
possible is  it  for  them  that  ensnare
themselves,  and  accustom  themselves
with  evil  doing,  to  change  their  custom
and  do  well  [Cawdry].

Ver.  4 — 7.  Fire.  Some  few  years
ago  a  noble  steamer  moored  in  one  of
the  harbours  of  the  United  States  was
discovered  to  be  on  fire.  The  engines
were  instantly  started,  and  the  prow  of
the  vessel  directed  to  the  shore.  But
the  flames  soon  rendered  the  helm  use-
less, and  such  of  the  crew  as  were  on
board  were  obliged  to  jump  into  the
small  boat,  and  leave  the  steamer  to  her
fate.  Soon  the  engines  worked  more
fiercely ;  the  wheels  revolved  with  fearful
speed  and  hurried  the  vessel  through
the  water.     The  sight  was  terrible.     At


last  came  one  tremendous  shock,  and  all
was  darkness  and  ruin.  Such  is  man,
when  seized  and  heated  by  an  evil,
passion,  whether  the  spirit  of  pride  or  of
envy.  He  grows  worse  and  worse,
and  is  consumed  in  eternal  ruin,  unless
God  interpose.

Ver.  5.  Feasting.  Times  of  festivity
require  a  double  guard.  "  Blasphemy
is  wit,  and  ribaldry  eloquence,  to  a  man
that  is  turned  into  a  brute  "  [Lawson],

Ver.  8.  The  World  and  The  Church.
Companions  may  be  compared  to  the
river  Thames,  which  is  a  sweet  and
pretty  river  enough  near  its  source ;  but
in  the  great  metropolis  it  has  kept  com-
pany with  drains  and  sewers,  under  the
belief  that  its  current  was  too  powerful
and  pure  to  be  injured  by  them.  It  was
meant  that  the  river  should  purify  the
sewer,  but,  instead  of  that,  the  sewer
has  corrupted  the  river  [Union  Maga-
zine].

Ver.  10.  Pride  is  observed  to  defeat
its  own  ends,  by  bringing  the  man  who
seeks  esteem  and  reverence  into  con-
tempt [Boliny broke].

"  Pride  hath  no  other  glass
To  show  itself,  but  pride  ;  for  supple  knees
Feed  arrogance,  and  are  the  proud  man's  fees."

Shakspeare.

Ver.  12.  Retribution.  As  some
eagle  pierced  with  a  shaft  feathered  from


chap,  viii.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ':  HOSE  J.  Ill


its  own  wing,  so  many  a  sufferer,  even      the   sweetness   of   the   forbidden   fruit
in  this  present  time,  sees   and  cannot      again  comes  to  mind ;   and  as  the  dog


leny  that  it  was  his  own  sin  that  fledged  returneth  to  his  vomit," — to  the  food

the  arrow  of  God's  judgment,  which  has  which  had  caused  his  sickness, — "  so  a

pierced   him   and   brought   him   down  fool  returneth  to  his  folly  "  [Bridge].
[Trench],  Ver.    15,   16.     Ingratitude.     At  the

Ver.  13.  Woe.  The  iniquity  of  a  battle  of  the  Alma,  in  September,  1854,
bad  man  will  itself  be  his  ruin.  Those  a  wounded  Russian  was  piteously  calling
wicked  devices  by  which  he  designed  for  water.  Captain  Eddington,  whose
and  expected  to  secure  himself  becoming  heart  was  kind  and  charitable,  ran  up  to
the  instruments  of  his  destruction.  The  him,  and  stooping,  gave  him  the  much-
essence  of  all  wickedness  is  forsaking  desired  beverage.  The  wounded  man
God.  revived.     The   Captain  ran  forward  to

Ver.  14.       Cried.     Many  have  been  join  his  regiment,  when  the  wretch  who

greatly  afflicted  and  cried  to  God ;  been  had  just  been  restored  by  his  kindness

humbled,  yet  not  made  humble;  humbled  fired  and  shot  him  who  had  been  his

by  force  in  their  outward  condition,  but  friend  in  time  of  need.     So  many  seek

not  humbled  in  their  inward  temper,  to  injure  God  by  returning  him  evil  for

:But  when  the  sickness  has  passed  away,  good  [Biblical  Treasury].


CHAPTER  VIII.


Critical  Notes. — 1.]  Abruptness  indicating  sudden  judgment.  Eagle]  Swift  and  alarming
(Deut.  xxviii.  49).  He]  Shalmanezer,  king  of  Assyria.  House]  Not  the  temple,  norland,  but  Israel
viewed  as  the  residence  of  God  and  one  family  (Num.  xii.  7 ;  Jer.  xii.  7).  2.  We]  Heb.  joins  Israel
with  the  last  clause,  "  We  know  thee,  we  Israel"  a  plea  of  descent  to  move  God  to  mercy ;  but
hypocrisy,  the  cry  of  fear  and  not  love.  Dead  knowledge  cannot  deliver.  3.  Cast  off]  implies  dislike,
the  breaking  of  relative  bonds.  Good]  {tob)  may  include  God,  the  supremely  good,  and  all  the
blessings  of  salvation.  Pursue]  in  retribution  for  rejecting  God.  4.  Kings]  The  self-authorized  schism
from  the  house  of  David.  All  their  princes  not  from  God.  Many  and  violent  were  the  usurpations
and  dethronements.  Knew]  Approved  (Ps.  i.  6;  Matt.  xxv.  12).  Idols]  and  calf-worship  a  further
sin.  They]  i.  e.  the  gold  and  silver,  as  verse  6  \Keil\  Lit.  that  he  may  be  cut  off.  The  whole  people
destroyed  \JBusey\  Though  forewarned,  yet  heedless  (Jer.  vii.  15  ;  xliv..  8).  5.  Cast  off]  disgusts.
Israel  had  cast  off  God  ;  calf-worship  would  cast  off  them  or  be  the  means  of  God  casting  them  off.
How  long]  Lit.  how  long  will  they  not  be  able  innocency  to  endure  (cf.  Is.  i.  14 ;  Ps.  ci.  5) ;  they  were
incapable  of  purity  before  God  (Jer.  xix.  4).  6.  For]  The  reason  of  displeasure.  It  also]  The  calf  as
well  as  the  kings  set  up,  made  by  Israel,  not  by  God.  It  deserved  not  their  homage,  no  creature  can  be
God ;  idol  worship  therefore  folly  in  the  extreme.  7.  Wind]  an  image  of  labour  in  vain,  from  which
ruin  springs  as  naturally  as  harvest  from  evil  sowing;  as  the  wind  becomes  a  tempest  (Prov.  xxii.  8;
Gal.  vi.  7).  Whirlwind]  Intensive  form,  a  mighty  whirlwind.  Three  things  first — no  stalk,  no  yield,
devoured  by  strangers.  Israel's  efforts  in  every  direction  were  fruitless.  8.  Swallowed]  up  as  de-
voured by  beasts  of  prey.  Vessel]  worthless  and  dishonoured  (2  Tim.  ii.  20) ;  and  broken  (Ps.  xxxi.
12;  Jer.  xxii.  28;  xlviii.  38).  9.  Assy-]  to  gain  friendship  and  alliance.  Wild  ass]  A  comparison
which  shows  their  folly,  not  as  a  paramour  burning  in  lust,  but  heady,  obstinate,  and  undisciplined ;
outstripping  the  swiftest  horse  in  pursuit  of  lust,  hunger,  and  thirst.  "  Whilst  even  a  wild  ass,  that
stupid  animal,  keeps  by  itself,  to  maintain  its  independence,  Ephraim  tries  to  form  unnatural
alliances  with  the  nations  of  the  world,  that  is  to  say,  alliances  that  are  quite  incompatible  with  its
vocation  "  \Keil\  10.  Hired]  by  presents.  Gather]  them  among  the  nations.  Now]  They  shall  not  go
as  suppliants,  but  captives  ;  the  nations  will  oppress  and  not  help  them  (Ezek.  xvi.  37).  Sorrow]
(not,  as  margin,  begin).  A  little]  The  greater  judgment,  the  deportation,  suspended.  Burden]  Tribute
imposed  on  Israel  (2  Kings  xv.  19,  20).  11.  Many]  Israel  should  only  have  one  altar  (Deut.  xii.  3,
6).  To  sin]  Altars  made  by  them  should  be  the  source  of  their  punishment;  they  shall  go  where
there  is  nothing  but  altars.  12.  Written]  Lit.  I  write.  Israel  could  not  plead  ignorance;  no  excuse
for  men  now,  with  the  written  word.  Great]  Deut.  iv.  6,  8.  Wondrous  things  (Ps.  cxix.  18 ;
cxlvii.  19,  20),  a  great  many  things,  expressing  the  care  and  condescension  of  God  and  the  compre-
hensiveness of  his  word.  All  the  greater  is  that  guilt  which  regards  these  commands  as  strange,  no
concern  of  theirs,  though  specially  for  them.     13.   Sacrifices]  multiplied  with  the  altars.     iSlain-


112  EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY;  HOSEA.  [chap.  vm.


offerings  were  presented  for  gifts.  Offerings  which  shonld  he  hurnt  for  me  they  slay  and  devour.
They  profaned  the  sacrifice,  and  were  concerned  only  about  the  flesh.  Rem-]  Sins  for  which  sacrifices
were  thought  to  atone.  To  Eg-]  A  type  of  renewed  bondage,  like  that  from  which  they  were
delivered;  abandonment  to  abject  condition  (Deut.  xxviii.  68).  14.  Forgotten]  Deut.  xxxii.  18.
Israel  reared  idol  temples :  Judah  increased  fortified  cities;  the  sin  of  both,  forgetfulness  of  God  and
deification  of  self  as  displayed  in  their  buildings.  God  would  destroy  all  these  castles  of  security
(Jer.  xvii.  27  ;  Amos  ii.  5).  Nothing  can  protect  in  judgment  but  the  refuge,  the  hiding-place
which  he  has  provided.

HOMILETICS.

A  Corrupt  Church. —  Verse  1.

Judgment  is  again  threatened  upon  Israel  for  their  sins.  They  were  corrupt
notwithstanding  all  profession  to  the  contrary.  They  had  forsaken  God  and  cast
off  all  good  ;  they  had  changed  the  civil  government,  and  maintained  the  golden  calf,
and  were  bringing  upon  them  destruction  swift  and  sure.  Taking  the  house  of  God
as  meaning  the  family  of  Israel,  the  professed  people  of  God,  we  have  a  corrupt
Church  endangered  and  warned.

I.  The  sins  of  a  corrupt  Church.  "  They  have  transgressed  my  covenant,  and
trespassed  against  my  law."  1 .  The  covenant  was  broken.  In  condescension  God
made  a  covenant  with  them,  to  which  they  consented,  and  for  the  keeping  of  which
he  promised  them  rewards.  They  transgressed  not  the  mere  command,  but  their
own  original  contract ;  revolted  from  their  allegiance  ;  and  in  effect  declared  that  they
would  no  longer  be  God's  chosen  people.  They  acted  foolishly  and  deceitfully.
2.  The  law  was  transgressed.  Divine  authority  was  disregarded.  Their  sins  were
malignant  and  defied  the  bounds  of  law.  All  sin  is  lawless.  When  men  break
their  own,  God's  laws  cannot  bind  them.  Those  who  have  no  respect  for  human
stipidations  will  have  no  regard  for  Divine  covenants.  Israel  were  the  professed
children  of  God,  yet  how  grievously  they  sinned.  "  God  help  me,  my  own  children
have  forsaken  me,"  cried  James  II.  He  could  bear  the  defection  of  a  kingdom  and
the  desertion  of  an  army,  but  burst  into  tears  and  wept  in  agony  at  the  disloyalty
of  his  family.  II.  The  danger  of  a  corrupt  Church.  1 .  Its  si?is  are  great.  The
sins  of  a  people  who  profess  much,  the  defections  of  a  Church  which  belongs  to  God,
are  more  aggravating  than  ordinary  transgressions.  Israel  were  guilty  of  apostasy
from  God  and  sins  against  their  neighbour.  The  Church  can  have  no  pretence  of
ignorance,  nothing  to  excuse  or  extenuate  her  sins.  She  has  the  covenant,  the  law,
and  the  gospel.  "Woe  unto  thee,  Chorazin  ;  woe  unto  thee,  Bethsaida,"  &c.  2.  Its
danger  is  imminent.  "  He  shall  come  as  an  eagle  against  the  house  of  the  Lord."
Their  fair  titles  and  exalted  privileges  will  not  keep  off  the  stroke.  Enemies  are
ever  prepared  to  execute  judgments.  The  eagles  gather  where  the  carcass  is  found.
The  destruction  is — (a)  near,  (b)  swift,  (c)  certain,  and  (d)  violent.  Swift  as  an
eagle  swooping  on  its  prey  does  retribution  come  upon  false  professors  and  conven-
tional churches  (Deut.  xxviii.  49  ;  Is.  v.  26).  III.  The  warning  of  a  corrupt
Church.  "  Set  the  trumpet  to  thy  mouth."  So  God  bids  Isaiah,  l<  Cry  aloud,
spare  not,  lift  up  thy  voice  like  a  trumpet."  As  the  sound  of  a  war-trumpet  would
startle  a  sleeping  army,  so  God  would  have  religious  teachers  to  rouse  a  sleeping
Church.  They  are  "  watchmen,"  and  must  warn  of  coming  judgments.  There
must  be  no  cowardly  silence,  when  the  house  of  God  is  imperilled  by  sin  and
destruction.  Augustine  prayed,  "  Lord,  deliver  me  from  other  men's  sins."  David
cried,  "  Deliver  me  from  blood-guiltiness."  Men  are  asleep,  and  the  danger  is  nigh.
The  trumpet  must  neither  be  silent  nor  give  any  uncertain  sound.  "  Then  whosoever
heareth  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  and  taketh  not  warning  ;  if  the  sword  come  and
take  him  away,  his  blood  shall  be  upon  his  own  head."

Vain  Religion. — Verse  2.

Israel  in  the  hour  of  need  call  upon  God,  plead  their  knowledge  of  him  as  the
covenant  people,  and  depend  upon  help  for  the  sake  of  their  relationship  to  him


chap.  viii. J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  113


God  denies  this  claim,  and  will  reject  all  who  honour  him  with  their  lips  merely,
when  their  hearts  are  far  from  him.  Knowledge  without  practice  is  all  in  vain.
God  will  not  own  those  who  only  profess,  who  cry,  "  My  God,"  and  do  not  forsake
iniquity.

I.  The  religion  of  natural  descent.  "  We  Israel"  the  seed  of  Jacob,
who  was  called  Israel.  This  was  the  boast  of  the  Jews.  "  We  be  Abraham's
seed."  Natural  relationship  and  noble  birth  avail  nothing  before  God.  Yet  men
boast  of  their  ancestry  and  pious  parents,  and  trust  God  will  regard  them  on  that
account.  God  has  a  peerage  of  his  own.  The  grace  of  God  can  create  children  of
Abraham  from  stones  of  the  wilderness  :  the  outcasts  and  the  heathen.  "  Whose
son  art  thou  "  spiritually !  The  son  of  God,  or  the  son  of  the  Devil?  "  He  is  a
Jew  which  is  on^.  inwardly."  II.  The  religion  of  formalism.  "  My  God,  we
know  thee."  Kn  wledge  is  a  necessity,  and  may  be  acquired  by  all.  The  know-
ledge of  God  is  within  the  reach  of  every  one.  There  is  no  excuse  for  ignorance
of  God.  But  many  profess  and  use  the  name  of  God  who  do  not  know  him;  ortho-
dox in  their  creed,  but  sinful  in  their  life.  "  They  profess  that  they  know  God  ;
but  in  works  they  deny  him."  They  cry,  "  Lord,  Lord,"  in  their  devotions,  but  in
their  lives  are  sinful  and  iniquitous.  The  religion  of  many  is  mere  profession  and
words ;  a  matter  of  form  and  ceremony.  We  as  a  nation  say,  "  My  God,"  boast
of  our  morality  and  knowledge,  build  temples  to  God  and  swear  by  his  altar ;  but
our  conduct  contradicts  our  profession.  To  know  God's  will  and  do  it  not  involves
greater  punishment ;  to  possess  great  advantages  and  not  to  use  them  brings
greater  responsibility  at  the  judgment-day.  "  Many,"  presumptuously  boasting
of  their  profession  and  work,  "  will  say  to  me  in  that  day,  Lord,  Lord,  have  we  not
prophesied  in  thy  name  1  and  in  thy  name  cast  out  devils  1  and  in  thy  name  done
many  wonderful  works  1 "  III.  The  religion  of  merit.  The  spirit  of  the  text
is  a  spirit  of  pride  and  superior  merit.  We  are  Israel  and  we  know  thee,  and  have
therefore  a  claim  to  thy  mercy.  God  answers  the  plea  in  verse  3.  Israel  indeed  !
then  why  cast  off  good,  and  sin  against  me  !  You  have  no  plea  to  urge  and  no
merit  to  secure  my  favour.  It  was  a  plea  of  hypocrisy  and  fear.  There  is  a  fearful
tendency  in  men  to  cling  to  good  works,  and  hope  to  merit  Divine  mercy  through
religious  duties.  They  mention  benevolent  deeds,  devotional  forms,  and  social
morality,  in  hope  of  procuring  God's  favour.  The  Papist  repeats  his  prayers,  counts
his  beads,  and  makes  his  stated  confessions,  and  feels  that  he  is  at  peace  with  his
Maker.  The  Protestant  paces  the  round  of  religious  duties  in  self-righteousness  and
pride,  and  soothes  his  soul  with  the  hope  of  heaven.  Merit  we  have  none.  The  most
holy  and  devout  only  do  their  duty.  There  are  no  works  of  supererogation.  Sal-
vation is  of  grace,  not  by  works,  lest  any  man  should  boast.

Therefore,  Jew,
Though  justice  be  thy  plea,  consider  this, —
That  in  the  course  of  justice  none  of  us
Should  see  salvation :  we  do  pray  for  mercy,
And  that  same  prayer  doth  teach  us  all  to  render
The  deeds  of  mercy.

Forsaking  Good  and  Pursuing  Evil,  the  Surest  Way  to  Euin. — Verses  3—5.

These  words  declare  the  true  position  of  Israel.  They  were  only  Israel  in  name,
and  not  in  reality.  They  had  cast  off  God,  and  with  him  everything  good.  They
set  up  their  own  kings  and  institutions,  did  not  seek  to  please,  and  were  therefore
disowned  of  God.  Like  sinners  now,  they  pursued  ways,  the  ends  of  which  were
death,  and  were  so  infatuated  in  their  folly,  that  they  seemed  to  act  with  a  view  to
be  "  cut  off"  and  utterly  rejected.

I.  The  abandonment  of  good.  "  Israel  hath  cast  off  the  thing  that  is  good."  1.
God,  the  chief  good,  was  cast  off.  He  was  forgotten  in  his  law,  resisted  in  his
demands,  and  forsaken  in  his  worship.    A  thing  cast  off  indicates  supreme  contempt,

8


U4  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   HOSE  A.  [chap.  Yin.


utter  abhorrence.    We  neither  think  of  it  nor  care  for  it.    This  casting  off  of  God —
(a)  Is  most  unreasonable.     It  is  to  forget  our  highest  interests  and  wound  our  own
souls ;  to  offend  our  best  friend,  and  involve  ourselves  in  the  greatest  misery,    (b)  h
most  ungrateful.     "  Is  not  God  thy  father  that  hath  made  thee  % "     Should  we,
then,  despise  a  father's  love  and  reject  our  greatest  benefactor  1     "  Hear,  0  heavens,
and  give  ear,  0  earth,  for  the  Lord  hath  spoken.     I  have  nourished  and  brought
up  children,  and  they  have  rebelled  against  me."     2.  All  good  was  cast  off.     It  is
good  to  draw  near  to  God  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  28),  and  is  best  for  us  to  do  so,  and  therefore
perilous  to  forsake  God.     It  is  our  honour,  peace,  safety,  and  riches  to  love  and
worship  him.    Those  who  are  far  from  him,  those  who  reject  him,  cast  off  all  that  is
good.    They  despise  good  in  this  world  and  in  that  which  is  to  come.    How  sad  the
condition  when  men  say,  "  Depart  from  us ;  for  we  desire  not  the  knowledge  of  thy
ways.     What  is  the  Almighty,  that  we  should  serve  him  1     Who  is  the  Lord,  that
we  should  obey  his  voice  1 "     II.  Evil  pursued.    Forsaking  God  opens  up  the  way  to
the  pursuit  of  evil.    Spiritual  good  is  the  only  safeguard  of  the  soul.     Cast  off  this,
and  you  open  the  way  for  the  ravages  of  sin.  Israel  had  committed  two  evils.   1.  They
were  guilty  of  civil  apostasy.     In  founding  the  kingdom  by  Jeroboam,  and  in  suc-
cessive rule,  they  had  set  up  kings  without  Divine  authority  (1  Kings  xi.  27 — 40).
They  rebelled  against  the  royal  house  of  David,  encouraged  successful  conspiracies,
and  sought  their  own  selfish  ends.   Men  now  in  family  affairs,  national  politics,  and
religious  life,  set  up  their  own  and  consult  not  God's  will.    They  do  not  acknowledge
God  in  all  their  ways  ;  they  act  without  his  license  and  approval.    As  they  begin,  so
they  continue.     They  made  and  removed  princes,  as  the  Roman  armies  did  em-
perors of  old.     In  the  "  vicissitudes  of  families  "  and  nations  we  have  the  rise  and
the  fall  of  the  mighty ;  the  misfortunes  of  all  who  live  and  rule  without  God.    Self-
will  will  ever  bring  self-destruction.     But  God,  whose  power  we  cannot  resist,  and
whose  wisdom  we  should  not  dispute,  will  accomplish  his  own  will  in  the  affairs
of  men.     2.  They  were  guilty  of  religious  apostasy.     "  Of  their  silver  and  their
gold  have  they  made  them  idols."     1.   This  idolatry  was  encouraged  by  nobility.
The  kings  and  princes  whom  they  set  up  patronized  their  customs  and  pleased  their
minds.     They  were  ambitious  in  their  aims,  thought  themselves  absolute  and  free
in  their  rule,  and  sought  to  gratify  their  own  lusts.     2.  This  idolatry  was  supported
by  wealth.     The  gold  and  silver  which  God  gave  were  devoted  to  the  making  of  the
calves  or  the  support  of  their  worship.     One  sinful  change  brings  another.     Civil
rebellion  must  be  upheld  by  ecclesiastical  defection.     Usurp  the  throne  of  men,  and
the  next  step  is  to  set  up  idols  on  the  throne  of  God.     Withhold  talents  and  wealth
from  God,  or  be  niggardly  in  maintaining  the  true,  and  you  will  be  lavish  in  up-
holding a  false  religion  and  a  selfish  scheme.     Men  employ  their  wealth  against
God ;  are  constantly  setting  up  their  own  kings,  casting  off  Jehovah,  and  ungrate-
fully abusing  the  gifts  of  his  providence  and  grace.      III.  Certain  ruin  results.
The  course  men  pursue  will  determine  their  fate.     Fallen  angels  cast  off  allegiance
to  God,  and  were  driven  from  him.     Many  devout  men,  once  true  worshippers  of
God,  have  fallen  into  sin  and  idolatry.     The  gods  you  make  will  govern  your  life,
fashion  your  character,  and  determine  your  destiny.     Forsake  all  good  and  cast  off
God,  you  imperil  your  soul.     Such  conduct  is  ruinous  and  most  destructive,  attracts
God's  vengeance,  and  brings  down  his  wrath  upon  the  sinner.     If  they  forsake  him
he  will  turn  his  back  upon  them,  and  "  woe  unto  them  when  I  depart  from  them."
"  Woe  "  in  trial  and  distress,  "  woe  "  in  the  hour  of  death,  "  woe  "  in  the  eternal
world.    "  Woe  unto  the  wicked,  for  it  will  be  ill  with  them."    1.   This  is  the  fulfil-
ment of  God's  word.      God  denounced  a  curse   upon  them  if  they  forsook  him
(Deut.  xxviii.  15,  25).     2.   This  is  the  natural  retribution  of  Divine  providence.    All
the  idols  of  men — wealth,  ambition,  and  beauty — will  fail  them  in  the  hour  of  need.
They  will  be  "  cast  off  "  by  the  gods  in  whom  they  trusted.    "  Thy  calf,  0  Samaria,
hath  cast  thee  off."      But  "  the  Lord  will  not  cast  off  his  faithful  people,  neithei
will  he  forsake  his  inheritance."


0*at.  thi.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  HOSEA.  115


HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  2.  Cry,  My  God.  Men  are  ready  as  obnoxious.   Many  boasters  of  the  law

enough  to  cry  to  God  in  affliction,  when  did  this  practically.    In  these  days  many

they   forget  him   in   health.      Trouble  cannot  endure  practical  duty  and  respon-

drives  the  stoutest  sinners  and  the  most  sibility,  contemptuously  treat  and  despise

corrupt  Church  to  prayer.  "  But  religion,  the  law  of  God,  as  Moses  indignantly

which  is  the  best  armour,  is  the  worst  dashed   it   on   the   ground.      //.    The

cloak;  and  will  serve  hypocrites  as  the  spirit  indicated.    1.  Pride.   2.  Contempt

disguise   Ahab   put  on,  and  perished "  of  Divine  authority.    3.   Indifference  to

[Trapp].  Divine   truth.      4.    Atheism   of   heart.

Ver.  3.   Casting  off  God.     First,  the  5.  Deadness  of  conscience  and  all  moral

good  God,  who  is  good,  original,  univers-  feeling.      III.     What    this    leads    to.

al,  all-sufficient    and  satisfactory,  pro-  Sooner  or  later  it  leads  to  (1)  open  trans-

portionate  and  fitting  to  our  soul.      He  gression,  and  (2)  outward  rejection.    If

both  is  good  and  doeth  good  (Ps.  cxix.  men  cast  away  the  thing  that  is  good

68),  and  that  both  naturally,  abundantly,  there  is  no  wonder  when  evils  pursue

freely,  and  constantly  (Ps.  lxxxvi.   5).  and  overthrow  them  (Ps.  cxl.  11;  Prov.

Israel  cast,  or  rather  kicked  him  off,  as  v.  14).

the  word  signifieth.  So  do  all  gross  When  men  once  begin  to  turn  theii
hypocrites  ;  they  are  rank  atheists,  back  on  their  own  happiness  and  on  the
practical  atheists,  though  professed  way  of  God,  they  will  still  grow  more
Christians.  Secondly,  they  reject  Christ  averse  from  it,  till  they  become  to
as  a  Sovereign,  though  content  to  have  abominate  and  abhor  it ;  and  this  fills  up
him  a  Saviour.  They  will  not  submit  the  measure  of  their  iniquity.  God  will
to  the  laws  of  his  kingdom,  nor  receive  not  let  sin  thrive  in  their  hands,  but
him  in  all  his  offices  and  efficacies,  will  send  on  judgments,  and  let  them
Thirdly,  hypocrites  reject  the  good  Spirit  feel  their  loss  in  their  strokes  who  would
of  God,  the  fruit  whereof  is  all  godli-  not  see  their  prejudice  in  forsaking  what
ness,  righteousness,  and  truth  (Eph.  v.  9).  was  good  [Hutcheson].
When  God  striveth  with  them,  by  yield-  Yer.  4.  Set  up  kings.  Such  were
ing  to  Satan's  suggestions  they  grieve  all  their  kings  except  Jehu  and  his  house.
that  Spirit,  by  grieving  resist  him,  and  During  253  years,  for  which  the  king-
by  resisting  quench  him,  and  by  quench-  dom  of  Israel  lasted,  eighteen  kings
ing  him  oppose  him  maliciously  and  reigned  over  it  out  of  ten  different
do  despite  unto  him,  and  so  cast  them-  families,  and  no  family  came  to  a  close,
selves  into  the  punishing  hands  of  the  save  by  a  violent  death.  The  like  self-
living  God  (Heb.  x.  29,  31).  Lastly,  will  and  independence  closed  the  exist-
they  cast  off  the  good  word  and  true  ence  of  the  Jewish  people  [Pusey].
worship  of  God ;  those  right  judgments,  In  the  government  of  nations  and  the
true  laws,  good  statutes  and  command-  choice  of  rulers,  in  family  duties  and  in
ments  (Neh.  ix.  13);  they  put  the  individual  life,  God  should  be  consulted
promises  far  from  them,  and  judge  them-  and  pleased.  For  he  can  put  down  what
selves  unworthy  of  eternal  life  (Acts  xiii.  we  set  up,  and  set  up  what  we  put  down.
46) ;  they  hate  instruction,  and  cast  God's  Yer.  5.  Cast  thee  off.  Eejected  by
words  behind  them  (Ps.  1.  17).  In  a  one's  own  God,  disappointed  in  one's
word,  "  he  hath  left  off  to  be  wise,  and  own  choice  !  If  Samaria  had  been  firm
to  do  good ;  he  setteth  himself  in  a  way  and  faithful  to  the  God  of  Israel  it
that  is  not  good ;  he  abhorreth  not  evil  "  would  have  been  of  great  service,  a
(Ps.  xxxvi.  3,  4)  [Trapp].  powerful  help  in  need ;    but   the  calf

J.  The  thing  cast  off — "  Good," — God,  was  a  broken  reed,  a  miserable  comforter.

Christian  worship,  the  Scripture.       De-  So  this  will  ever  be  the  case.     Beauty

spising  them,  throwing   them  away  as  and  fame  may  fade  like  flowers.    Eiches

worthless,  putting    them  out  of    sight  take  unto  themsel  res  wings  and  fly  away.


»•  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  [chap.  titi.


Idols  will  be  shivered  to  pieces,  and  the  ,,nn  „  ~

_,  i      ±       +  j  4.i,j--ij  0  Cromwell,  Cromwell,

men  who  trusted  on  them  disappointed  Had  I  but  served  my  God  with  half  the  zeal

for  ever.     All  fail  and  nothing  abides,  I  served  my  kin#,  he  would  not  in  mine  age

•'we  God,  the  only  true  and  permanent  Have  left  me  naked  to  mine  enemies."

good.

HOMILETICS.

Idolatry;  Its  Origin,  Effects,  and  Destiny. —  Verses  5,  6.

These  words  describe  the  cause  and  nature  of  Israel's  sin,  and  justify  God's  angei
against  them.

I.  Idolatry  in  its  origin.     Idols  are  the  device  of  man.      "The  workman
made  it."     Man  in  his  natural  and  primeval  condition  had  a  knowledge  of  God
sufficient  for  the  condition  in  which  he  was  placed.     But  sin  alienated  him  from  God
and  robbed  him  of  fellowship  with  God.     There  is  a  natural  tendency  in  man  to
embody  in  living  forms  (eidola)  the  image  of  God,  to  imagine  and  honour  other
gods.     Dissatisfied  with  the  law,  and  forgetful  of  the  claims  of  the  true  God,  he
has  wandered  in  the  conjectures  of  reason  and  the  creations  of  fancy  ;  in  the  beasts
of  the  field  and  the  fish  of  the  sea,  in  all  the  lights  of  heaven  and  in  all  the  elements
of  nature,  he  beheld  the  movements  of  a  false  deity ;  and  associated  vague  notions
of  power  and  wisdom  with  the  realities  by  which  he  is  surrounded.     Hence  the
creation  of  gods  many  and  lords  many.     They  are  things  made,  the  work  of  men's
hands.  "They  have  mouths,  but  they  speak  not;  eyes  have  they,  but  they  see  not;  they
have  ears,  but  they  hear  not."     They  are  not  gods,  but  vanities,  and  have  become  a
crime  and  a  curse  to  heathendom.     "  They  that  make  them  are  like  unto  them,  so
is  every  one  that  trusteth  in  them."     But  "  from  Israel  was  it  also,"  who  boasted  of
the  knowledge  and  law  of  God.     Israel  knew  her  sin,  and  felt  that  calf-worship  was
not  the  worship  of  Jehovah.  This  rendered  her  inexcusable  and  aggravated  her  guilt.
Now  among  people  to  whom  the  oracles  of  God  are  committed,  even  in  the  Christian
Church,  we  have  idolatry.     Men  cut  and  carve  gods  of  their  own  fancy.     The  wife
of  their  bosom,  the  child  of  their  loins,  may  be  a  god.  An  image  of  gold  or  of  clay; —
business,  fame,  and  success,  may  be  set  up,  take  the  place  of  God  in  our  affections,
and  unduly  absorb  homage  and  attention  due  to  God.     "  Little  children,  keep  your-
selves from  idols."     II.  Idolatry  in  its  effects.     1.  It  is  dishonouring  to  human
nature.     Man  assimilates  himself  to  the  moral  character  of  the  object  which  he  wor-
ships, becomes  like  the  thing  which  he  loves.   He  looks  upon  his  God  as  the  stand-
ard of  virtue  ;  abandons  everything  in  life  which  offends  ;  and  desires  favour  by
conformity  to  the  will  and  character  of  his  deity.     The  history  of  idolatry  confirms
this  truth.    When  men  have  bowed  down  to  the  brutes,  they  have  lowered  themselves
in  the  depths  of  vice.     The  more  they  worshipped  the  more  they  resembled  the
objects  of  their  worship.     Medhurst  says  that  in  China  the  priests  teach  this  doc-
trine of   assimilation.      "  Think  of   Buddha  and  you  will  be  transformed  into
Buddha.      If  men  pray  to  Buddha  and  do   not  become   Buddha,  it  is  because
the  mouth  prays,  and  not  the  mind."  Our  character  and  conduct  can  never  rise  higher
than  our  aims.    If  we  follow  earthly  objects  we  become  earthly  and  grovelling.    The
pleasure-seeker  becomes  light  and  frivolous ;  the  mammon-worshipper  sordid  and  mean.
"  My  people  have  changed  their  glory  for  that  which  doth  not  profit."     2.  It  is  dis-
pleasing to  God.     "  Mine  anger  is  kindled  against  them."     God  here  speaks  after
the  manner  of  men  to  remind  us  of  his  claims.     As  men  who  incensed  will  execute
their  displeasure,  so  God  will  punish  idolatry.    It  forbids  his  worship  and  denies  his
existence.    It  is  degrading  to  his  creatures  and  calamitous  to  the  universe.    Its  tem-
poral consequences  have  been  awful  to  its  votaries.     What  then  must  be  its  eternal  ?
"  They  that  make  a  graven   image  are  all  of  them  vanity  ;  and  their  delectable
things  shall  not  profit ;  and  they  are  their  own  witnesses ;  they  see  not,  nor  know ;
that  they  may  be  ashamed."     3.  It  is  a  hindrance  to  moral  purity.     "  How  long


chap,  viii.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  117


will  it  be  ere  they  attain  to  innocency  ? "  God  is  the  fountain  of  ail  goodness,  and
his  will  the  standard  of  all  virtue.  When  God's  will  is  rejected  there  is  no  check
to  moral  pollutions,  and  no  motives  to  moral  purity.  The  knowledge  of  God  is
essential  to  holiness  and  progress  !  inseparable  from  the  welfare  of  men :  and
necessary  to  extricate  a  fallen  world  from  the  evils  of  idolatry.  (1)  Purity  of  heart
is  necessary  to  purity  of  life.  This  is  only  gained  by  the  love  and  worship  of  a
pure  object.  A  sinful  object  defiles  physically  and  spiritually.  God  is  opposed  to  sin,
revealed  as  our  example,  renews  the  heart,  and  satisfies  the  conscience  in  Christ.
"I  am  the  Almighty  God ;  walk  before  me,  and  be  thou  perfect."  (2)  Purity  of  the
object  worshipped  must  therefore  have  sufficient  influence  to  beget  holy  life.  The
mere  representation  of  God,  the  presentation  of  a  holy  object  would  not  touch  the
heart,  change  the  opinions,  and  draw  men  from  evil  practices.  A  display  of  power
and  persuasion  alone  can  overcome  evil  habits,  wean  men's  affections  from  idols,  and
fix  them  on  God.  God  has  interposed  by  his  Son  and  his  Spirit,  and  sinners  are
converted  from  the  error  of  their  ways.  We  have  one  true  and  living  God  made
known  to  us  as  the  object  of  supreme  love  and  regard.  "  Thou  shalt  worship  the
Lord  thy  God,  and  him  only  shalt  thou  serve."  III.  Idolatry  in  its  destination.
"  The  calf  of  Samaria  shall  be  broken  in  pieces."  In  origin  it  is  a  thing  of  nought,
the  work  of  men's  hands  and  ingenuity.  In  its  end  it  shall  be  nought.  Idolatry
is  a  nullity,  and  is  doomed  to  destruction  by  its  inherent  weakness  and  God's  pur-
pose. 1.  Idolatry  is  doomed  to  destruction  by  its  own  weakness.  With  all  its  splei .
did  rites  and  forms,  its  ancient  priesthood  and  prevalence,  it  is  coming  to  nought.
It  cannot  satisfy  the  heart  and  the  conscience.  The  heathens  are  closing  their  temples
and  pagodas,  breaking  their  gods  and  forsaking  their  worship.  Deserted  by
devotees,  and  their  altars  bereft  of  gifts  and  offerings,  idols  shall  pine  away  and
idol- worship  perish  by  mere  inanition.  Idolatry  in  the  old  Konian  Empire  was  thus
destroyed,  and  this  will  be  the  process  everywhere.  Its  seat  is  in  the  soul,  and  out-
ward force  cannot  overturn  it.  But  the  gods  of  the  heathen  will  be  starved  to
death,  by  the  failure  of  their  revenue  and  offerings.  "  The  Lord  will  be  terrible
unto  them  :  for  he  will  famish  all  the  gods  of  the  earth  ;  and  men  shall  worship
him,  every  one  from  his  place,  even  all  the  isles  of  the  heathen."  2.  Idolatry  is
doomed  to  destruction  by  the  power  of  the  gospel.  God  has  purposed  to  send  the
gospel  to  all  the  nations  of  the  earth.  "  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  all  the  earth
shall  be  filled  with  my  glory."  Nothing  can  frustrate  this  design  nor  rob  the
nations  of  this  glory.  What  a  conception  !  What  is  there  in  patriotism,  philo-
sophy, or  philanthropy,  to  equal  it  1  The  mighty  scheme,  as  a  mere  system  of  social
government  and  social  culture,  stands  forth  in  peerless  grandeur.  But  how  blessed
that  day  when  "  a  man  shall  cast  his  idols  of  silver  and  his  idols  of  gold,  which
they  made  each  one  for  himself  to  worship,  to  the  moles  and  to  the  bats  :  to  go  into
the  clefts  of  the  rocks,  and  into  the  tops  of  the  ragged  rocks,  for  fear  of  the  Lord,
and  for  the  glory  of  his  majesty,  when  he  ariseth  to  shake  terribly  the  earth."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Yer.  5.   u  How  longP     The  hardness  as  could  not  abide  it :  they  were  inve-

of  heart  and  the  stubborn  holding  out  terate  and  incurable,  their  diseases  in-

of  the  sinner  a  matter  of  astonishment  grained,  and  not  easily  stirred  by  any

even  to  God.     Continuance  in  sin  and  potion.     Secondly,   that   God   is    most

aggravation  of  guilt  only  make  the  case  patient,  who  though  he  thinks  overlong

worse.     God's    patience    will  end,  and  of  the  time  that  men  continue  in  sin,

God's  anger  will  be  the  hotter.     By  this  and  therefore  cries,    How  long  1    &c,

powerful    expression   three   things    are  yet  bears  with  their  evil  manners  and

intimated.     First,  that  these  Israelites  inviteth  them  to  better.     Thirdly,  that

were  refractory  and  desperate  ;  not  only  he  will  at  length  break  off  his  patience

unclean,  but  enemies  to  innocency,  such  and  proceed  to  punishment,  since  there


118


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  HOSEJ.


[chap.  vm.


is  no  other  remedy  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.
16  ;  Prov.  xxix.  1)  [Trapp].

The  attainment  of  innocency.  I.  The
thing  to  be  attained — "  Innocency."
Man  was  originally  innocent  in  body  and
soul,  created  in  the  image  of  God.  But
this  holiness  he  lost  through  sin  and  can
never  perfectly,  only  comparatively  at-
tain it  in  this  world.  Sinless  perfection
is  a  delusion  (1  Jn.  i.  8).  II.  The  method
of  attaining  it.  "  How  shall  man  be
just  with  God  1 "  Our  guilt  is  removed
in  Christ,  our  natures  renewed  by
grace,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  imparts
Divine  enlightenment  and  transforms
into  the  Divine  nature.  Believers  in
Christ  are  justified  before  God,  Their
faith  works  by  love,  and  overcomes  sin
and  the  world.  All  men  may  secure
this  privilege.  III.  The  reason  why
men  do  not  attain  it.  1.  Some  despise
and  do  not  feel  their  need  of  it.  2.
Others  despond  in  seeking  it.  God  is
able  and  willing  to  save.  Examples  of
men  most  degraded  and  abandoned  en-
couraged.  "  How  long,"  then,  before
you  accept  the  proffered  mercy  and  find
peace  with  God  !

Ver.  6.  Not  God.  Such  is  the  be-
witching nature  of  idolatry,  though  men
pretend  that  they  worship  God  in  the


image,  and  the  deceitfulness  of  the
human  heart;  that  they  are  gradually
led  to  deify  their  idol.  God  therefore
proves  that  it  is  not  God  (Ex.  xxxii.
4,  5  ;  1  Kings  xii.  28).

Whatever  estimation  men  have  of
images,  or  whatever  excellency  or
Divinity  they  conceive  in  or  represented
by  them,  yet  it  is  sufficient  to  refute
them,  that  themselves,  who  are  but  vain
and  empty  things,  gave  all  the  excellency
they  have;  for  the  workman  made  it
[Hutchesori].

The  workman  was  rather  a  god  to  his
idol,  than  it  to  him ;  for  he  made  it ;  it
was  a  thing  made.  To  say  that  it  was
made,  was  to  deny  that  it  was  God.
Hence  the  prophets  so  often  urge  this
special  proof  of  the  vanity  of  idols.  No
creature  can  be  God.  Nor  can  there  be
anything  between  God  and  a  creature ;
and  that  which  is  not  a  creature  is  God.
God  himself  could  not  make  a  creature
who  should  be  God  \_Pusey\

Broken  in  pieces.  Deifying  any  crea-
ture makes  way  for  the  destruction  of  it.
If  they  had  made  vessels  and  ornaments
for  themselves  of  their  silver  and  gold,
they  might  have  remained  ;  but  if  they
make  gods  of  them,  they  shall  be
broken  to  pieces  [Mt.  Henry].


HOMILET1CS.

A  Picture  op  Ungodly  Life. — Verses  7,  8.

Israel  is  still  threatened.  Their  continual  labour  is  all  in  vain.  They  reap
no  reward,  will  be  grievously  disappointed,  and  not  only  the  harvest,  but  they
themselves  will  be  devoured.     Such  will  be  the  result  of  their  ungodly  conduct.

I.  Laborious  in  its  efforts.  "  For  they  sow  the  wind."  1.  Effort  is  put  forth
by  all  men.  They  live  and  labour  for  good — seek  to  gain  happiness  and  have  a
seed-time  in  life.  2.  Painful  are  the  efforts  of  the  ungodly.  They  "plough  iniquity,"
and  practice  it  day  by  day.  "  They  sow  the  wind,"  most  earnestly  and  persever-
ingly,  in  hope  of  profit.  Sinners  are  sore  labourers.  They  put  themselves  to  trouble
and  expense  to  make  and  worship  their  idols,  to  pursue  their  aims,  but  all  in  vain.
They  are  labouring  for  the  wind  (Ecc.  v.  16)  ;  "  embracing  a  shadow  ;  grasping  the
air ;  wearying  themselves  for  that  which  hath  no  substance  nor  true  felicity  in  it."
II.  Disappointment  in  its  results.  "  It  hath  no  stalk :  the  bud  shall  yield
no  meal,"  &c.  First  no  ear,  or  if  an  ear,  no  yield,  or  if  it  advance  thus  far,  the
enemy  will  devour  the  produce.  1 .  Vanity  is  reaped.  He  that  soweth  iniquity
shall  reap  vanity  (Prov.  xxii.  8).  There  is  a  harvest  in  sin,  and  men  reap  what
they  sow  (Gal.  vi.  7,  8).  Vanity,  emptiness,  and  vexation  result  from  sin.  Satan
is  a  hard  task-master.  His  service  is  slavery  and  the  wages  miserable.  "  Where-
fore do  ye  spend  money  for  that  which  is  not  bread  %  and  your  labour  for  that
which  satisfieth  not?"  2.  Divine  retribution  is  reaped.  "They  shall  reap  the
whirlwind."     The  wind  sown  and  penned  up  in  ungodly  life,  will  be  reinforced  in


chap,  nil.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.  119


strength  and  "burst  forth  into  a  mighty  tempest.  Men  sow  and  cultivate  -what  at
last  will  make  them  the  sport  and  mockery  of  its  resistless  violence.  They  will  be
carried  away  with  their  own  folly  like  chaff  before  the  wind.  The  whirlwind  will
overthrow  their  dwellings,  wreck  their  hopes,  and  drive  them  away  in  their
wickedness.  Sennacherib  in  olden  time  reaped  the  whirlwind  (Is.  x.  5 — 12,  24,
25  ;  xxx.  31).  Napoleon,  robbed  of  empire,  shorn  of  greatness,  and  driven  into  exile,
reaped  the  harvest  of  his  own  sowing.  Spain  with  its  Inquisition,  and  France
with  its  Black  Bartholomew,  countries  remarkable  for  persecution,  reaped  the  whirl-
wind in  bloody  revolutions  and  civil  wars.  The  ungodly  are  consumed  by  Divine
judgments  in  this  life  and  by  Divine  wrath  in  that  which  is  to  come.  "  They  that
plow  iniquity  and  sow  wickedness,  reap  the  same.  By  the  blast  of  God  they  perish,
and  by  the  breath  of  his  nostrils  are  they  consumed."  III.  Destructive  in  its  end.
"  Israel  is  swallowed  up."  Not  mere  disappointment,  but  destruction  will  be  the
result  of  sin.  Israel  were  carried  away,  the  whole  nation  were  swallowed  up  by
foes.  They  lost  their  privileges  and  honour.  Their  land  was  devoured  and  eaten
up  by  strangers.  They  were  dishonoured  by  God,  and  despised  by  men  as  a  broken
vessel.  Sin  and  idolatry  in  gross  or  refined  forms  will  bring  misery  and  degra-
dation. They  undermine  the  foundations  of  moral  life,  beget  more  place  for  vanity
and  more  thirst  for  pleasure.  Those  who  do  not  love  and  serve  God  will
be  given  up  by  God.  There  will  come,  though  long  delayed,  a  terrible  day  of
wrath,  a  harvest  of  whirlwinds  to  consume  their  glory  and  destroy  their  hopes.
"  Be  not  deceived  :  God  is  not  mocked  :  for  whatsoever  a  man  soweth  that  shall  he
also  reap."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.    7.      "  They  have  sown"      1 .  toind,  and  shall  reap  the  whirlwind m

Human  life  a  sowing  time.     "  Behold  a  [Hutchesori].

sower  went  forth  to  sow."     The  relation  Ver.  8.     Sinful  courses  persisted  in

of  men  one  to  another  like  that  of  seed  may  consume  the  Church,  deprive  of  re-

and  soil.     Men  are  sowing  by  thoughts,  ligious  ordinances,  and  gratify  the  wishes

words,  and  deeds.    In  each  a  permanent  of  the  enemy,  who  greedily  devour  God's

influence,  a  germ  of  imperishable  life,  people  (Ps.  xiv.  4).

2.  The  kind  of  life — ^moral  seed.    Some  When  professors  decline  in  religion

sow  good  seed,  others   worthless  seed,  and  despise  God,  then  God  will  despise

The  pleasure-seeker  and  the  man  of  the  them  before  others.     So  long  as  Israel

world,  the  hypocrite  and  the  false  pro-  was  consecrated  to  the  Lord  those  who

fessor,  are  sowing  "the  wind."     3.  The  sought  to  injure  her  were  injured  them-

accompaniments  of    life — the    harvest,  selves  (Jer.  ii.  3)  ;  but  when  they  made

The  harvest  is  good  or  bad,  the  same  leagues     with     idolaters     they     were

in  measure  and  quality  as  the  sowing,  swallowed  up  by  them.      "  For  them

Men  reap  to-day  what  they  had  sown  that    honour  me   I   will   honour,  and

yesterday,  will   reap  in  eternity  what  they  that  despise  me  shall  be  lightly

they  sow  in  time.     God's  laws  are  un-  esteemed."

changeable  and  will  never  be  reversed.  Dishonoured  vessels.      1.    A   useless

*  For  he  that  soweth  to  his  flesh  shall  vessel.      Empty    of    everything    good,

of  the  flesh  reap  corruption  ;   but   he  filled  with  everything  bad,  and  taking

that  soweth  to  the  spirit  shall  of  the  the  place  of  vessels  more  useful   and

spirit  reap  life  everlasting."  worthy.     2.  A  broken  vessel.     Broken

Not  only  may  men  expect  to  reap  as  in   credit   and    reputations,   broken  to

they  sow,  but  sinful  and  vain  courses  pieces  in  hopes  and  fortunes  ;  broken

will  bring  further  disadvantages,  and  by  their  own  conduct  and  by  the  judg-

raise   violent   tempests,    either   in    the  ments  of  God  upon  that  conduct.     3.

undertaker's  conscience,  or  outward  con-  A  vessel  put  to  some  vile  purpose.  Israel

dition,  or  both  :  for  "  they  have  sown  the  given  to  idolatry;     Men  dishonouring


120  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA,  [chap.  viil


body  and   soul  by  sin,  making   theni  of  tbem  ;  despised  and  mingled  among

objects  of  loathing  and  disgust  before  them,  yet  not  united  with  them  ;  having

others.     "  There  are  not  only  vessels  of  an  existence,  yet  among  that  large  whole,

gold  and  silver,  but  also  of  wood  and  of  the  nations,  in  whom  their  natural  exist-

earth  :  and  some  to  honour,  and  some  ence  has  been  at  once  preserved  and

to   dishonour"   (2    Tim.    ii.    20).     All  lost;   everywhere  had    in    dishonour;

men  are  vessels  of  mercy,  or  vessels  of  the    Heathen    and    the    Mohammedan

wrath  fitted  to  destruction   (Rom.   ix.  have  alike  despised,  outraged,  insulted

22).  them;    avenging    upon    them,    uncon-

Such  has  been  the  history  of  the  ten  sciously,  the  dishonour  which  they  did

tribes  ever  since  ;  swallowed  up,  not  de-  to  God  [Pusey~].
stroyed ;   among  the  nations,  yet    not

HOMILETICS.

The  Folly  op  Worldly  Alliance. — Verses  9,  10.

A  fourth  sin  is  laid  to  the  charge  of  Israel  in  seeking  aid  from  Assyrians.  This
sin  is  reproved  by  two  similitudes — a  wild  ass  loving  its  freedom,  and  a  harlot
suing  for  paramours.  It  is  folly  to  seek  help  in  civil  defection  and  religious
apostasy.

I.  The  alliance  is  unnatural.     1.  It  is  against  the  habits  of  nature.     The  wild
ass,  taken  in  its  love  for  solitude,  or  its  headstrong  perversity  in  pursuing  its  lust,
reproves  this  conduct.  *  Israel  Avas  a  holy  people,  separated  from  others  for  a  special
purpose,  and  intended  to  be  the  people  of  God.     "  Lo,  the  people  shall  dwell  alone,
and  shall  not  be  reckoned  among  the  nations."     God's  people  should  never  mix  up
with  worldly  men.     Their  name  and  their  nature  should  separate  them  from  sin.
They  stand  upon  a  moral  elevation ;  to  trust  to  worldly  alliance  and  hire  foreign
aid  is  to  sacrifice  their  principles  and  degrade  their  nature  ;  to  acknowledge  the
superiority  of  the  world,  and   sink  themselves   below  their  true  position.     The
sympathies  and  aspirations  of  the  new  man  are  with  God  and  not  the  world.     "  If
any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him."     2.  It  reserves  the
customs  of  men.     "  Ephraim  hath  hired  lovers."     The  ordinary  way  is  for  lovers  to
hire  her  (Ezek.  xvi.  33,  34).     When  Churches  are  deserted,  and  professors  are  for-
saken by  God,  they  often  go  further  wrong  than  others,  more  bent  on  wickedness
than  ordinary  transgressors.     What  folly  to  purchase  the  aid  of  an  enemy !  what
value  is  that  affection  which  can  only  be  enlisted  by  gold  and  hire  1     The  world
should  be  taught  to  admire  the  Church  as  a  wise  and  understanding  people  ;  but
when  they  despise  their  own  dignity,  they  pay  dearly  for  the  alliance  of  "  the
nations."     "  The    contrary  is  in   thee   from   other   women,  in   thy  whoredoms,
whereas  more  followeth  thee  to  commit  whoredoms  ;  and  in  that  thou  givest  a
reward,   and  no  reward  is  given  unto  thee,  therefore  thou  art   contrary."     II.
The  alliance   is  unfaithful.     As   a  man  should  cleave  to  his  wife,  so  Israel
should   cling   to    God.     But   how  loathing   and   immodest   to   forsake   God,   to
whom  we  are  bound  by  marriage  covenant,  and  tempt  and  hire  other  lovers  !     Such
was  the  baseness  of  Judah,  and  such  the  unfaithfulness  of  many  now.    When  God
likens  the  idolatry  of  his  ancient  people  to  adultery  and  harlotry,  the  Christian
Church  of  the  present  age  should  take  the  warning  and  remain  faithful  to  God.
III.  The  alliance  is  destructive.    "  Yea,  though  they  have  hired  among  the  nations,
now  will  I  gather  them."     The  sin  of  Israel  brought  its  own  punishment.     They
sought  to  secure  themselves  by  hired  kings,  sent  presents  to  them  and  made  leagues
with  them  against  God's  will  :  but  their  policy  deceived  them.     God  would  gather
those  very  nations,  not  to  help,  but  to  destroy  Israel.     When  nations  rely  on  hired
levies,  and  Churches  have  recourse  to  ungodly  powers,  to  save   from   anticipated
judgments,  God  in  just  retribution  makes  these  very  powers  the  instruments  of


chap,  viil]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.  121


his  purpose.  Providing  for  their  own  glory  and  safety  makes  them  easier  prey  to
their  enemies.  There  is  no  security  but  in  God  himself.  "  I  will  gather  all  thy
lovers,  with  whom  thou  hast  taken  pleasure,  and  all  them  that  thou  hast
loved,  with  all  them  that  thou  hast  hated ;  I  will  even  gather  them  round  about
against  thee."

HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  9.  A  ivild  ass  typical  of  the  will  I  gather  them,"  &c.  1.  The  be-
sinner.  1.  In  its  disregard  for  its  ginning  of  sin  is  the  beginning  of  sorrow.
owner.  "  Neither  regardeth  he  the  cry-  Men  do  not  believe  this.  It  may  be
ing  of  the  driver  "  (Job  xxxix.  8).  2.  contrary  to  their  experience  and  observ-
In  its  obstinate  course.  It  is  most  un-  ation,  but  the  fact  is  declared  in  God's
ruly  and  stubborn,  intense  in  its  thirst  word,  and  written  in  our  moral  nature
and  swift  in  its  pursuit.  Self-will,  and  constitution.  Now  "  they  shall
frowardness,  and  intractableness  the  com-  sorrow  a  little."  2.  The  end  of  sin
plaints  against  Israel.  Men  now  throw  will  be  the  greatest  sorrow.  Israel
off  God's  yoke,  seek  to  be  free  and  un-  sorrowed  "  a  little  "  under  the  bondage
controlled,  to  pursue  their  folly  without  and  heavy  taxes  of  Assyria,  but  their
restraint.  "  The  heart  of  man  is  fully  set  future  punishment  was  the  greater
in  them  to  do  evil."  3.  In  its  constant  calamity.  Now  sorrow  is  a  little,  a  drop
danger.  "  The  wild  ass  is  the  lion's  prey  before  the  storm,  hereafter  it  will  be  a
in  the  wilderness"  (Eccles.  xiii.  19).  tempest.  God  suspends  the  greatest
Men  who  rush  from  God  are  exposed  to  judgments  to  prove  his  compassion  for
danger  from  themselves  and  others  in  men,  give  time  for  repentance,  and  oppor-
tune and  in  eternity.  Apart  from  grace,  tunity  to  return  to  him.  Here  only  we
man  after  his  hard  and  impenitent  heart  have  "  the  beginning  of  sorrows  ;  "  what
treasures  up  wrath  against  the  day  of  then  will  be  the  end  "  of  them  that
wrath  "  (Eom.  ii.  5).  obey  not  the  gospel  of  God  1 "

Ver.  10.     Sin  and  soitow.     "Now

HOMILETICS.
Aggravated  Guilt. —  Verses  11 — 13.

"  The  prophet  had  first  shown  them  their  folly  in  forsaking  God  for  the  help  of
man ;  now  he  shows  them  the  folly  of  attempting  to  secure  themselves  by  their
great  show,  pretences  of  religion,  and  devotion  in  a  false  way.  God  had  appointed
one  altar  at  Jerusalem.  There  he  willed  the  sacrifice  to  be  offered,  which  he  would
accept.  To  multiply  altars,  much  more  to  set  up  altars  against  the  one  altar,  was
to  multiply  sin.  Hosea  charges  Israel  elsewhere  with  this  multiplying  of  altars  as
a  grievous  sin  (x.  1  ;  xii.  11)."

I.  In  multiplying  altars.  "  Ephraim  hath  made  many  altars."  Opposing  the
commandment  of  God  (Deut.  xii.  5),  strengthening  the  habit  of  sin  (1  Kings  xii.
30),  repeating  their  own  folly,  and  increasing  their  own  punishment.  "  Altars
shall  be  unto  him  to  sin."  II.  In  despising  the  law.  God  had  given  the  law,
written  and  expounded  it  by  Moses  and  the  prophets,  and  continually  renewed  the
knowledge  of  it,  so  that  they  had  no  excuse  for  their  sin.  God  has  written  the
law  for  us  by  his  providence  and  gospel.  His  agency  is  ever  fulfilling  it ;  yet
men  deny  it,  count  it  a  strange  thing,  a  word  with  which  they  have  nothing  to  do.
The  excuses  which  men  make  for  rejecting  it  are  not  pleas,  but  sins  in  the  sight
of  God.  III.  In  offering  lifeless  sacrifices.  u  They  sacrifice  flesh  for  the  sacri-
fices of  mine  offerings."  1.  It  was  mere  external  worship.  It  was  more  flesh,  not
a  true  sacrifice.  External  worship  without  internal  ceremony,  withodt  sanctity,
is  like  a  dead  carcase,  not  a  living  sacrifice.  The  Lord  accepts  it  not.  2.  It
was  mere  selfish  worship, — "  and  eat  it."     Sacrifices  winch  should  have  been  burnt


122  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EOSEA.  [chap.  Yin.


for  God  they  slaughtered  and  devoured.  They  were  concerned  only  about  temporal
affairs.  We  cannot  atone  for  contempt  of  God  by  forms  of  our  own.  "  Dissembled
holiness  is  double  iniquity."  There  is  only  one  sacrifice  for  sin;  if  that  be  rejected,
sins  will  be  remembered  and  punished.  The  devices  of  selfishness  and  will-worship
can  never  avert,  will  only  hasten,  the  penal  consequences  of  sin.  "The  sacrifice  of
the  wicked  is  abomination,  how  much  more  when  he  bringeth  it  with  a  wicked
mind  1 "

Perversion  of  Worship. —  Verses  11,  12.

The  passage  leads  us  to  notice  the  perversion  of  worship.  This  is  one  of  the
oldest,  the  most  prevalent  and  the  most  hateful  sins  amongst  mankind.  Men  have
perverted  worship,  not  only  by  making  false  gods,  but  by  making  false  altars  for
the  true  God.  There  is  only  one  altar  in  true  worship,  and  that  altar  is  Christ
(Heb.  xiii.  10).  Two  remarks  in  relation  to  false  worship.  I.  It  is  a  great  sin.
First,  It  is  a  very  propagative  sin.  "  Ephraim  hath  made  many  altars."  "  If
men  leave  the  rule,"  says  an  old  author,  "  they  know  not  where  to  stay,  hence  the
multiplying  of  things  thus  amongst  the  Papists,  five  hundred  altars  in  some  one
temple."  How  sublimely  antagonistic  the  Jews  were  to  the  introduction  of  any
altar  but  one  (Jos.  xxii.  11),  but  now  they  had  "  many."  Once  admit  a  wrong  thing
in  worship,  and  that  one  thing  will  multiply  itself;  superstition  will  give  it  fertility.
The  Eomish  Church  is  a  sad  illustration  of  this,  and  the  Anglican  Church  in  some
sections  is  multiplying  examples.  Secondly,  It  is  a  self-punishing  sin.  "Altars
shall  be  unto  him  to  sin."  The  idea  probably  is,  "  As  you  have  gone  on  persisting
to  multiply  altars  against  my  will,  I  will  let  you  alone,  you  shall  go  on,  your  altars
shall  be  a  sin  unto  you."  "That  is,  thus  seeing  they  will  have  them,  they  shall
have  them ;  they  shall  have  enough  of  them.  They  refuse  to  see  the  light,
they  are  prejudiced  against  the  way  of  God's  worship  ;  let  them  have  their  desires  ;
let  them  have  governors  to  establish  by  their  authority,  and  teachers  to  defend  by
subtle  arguments  what  they  wish  for ;  they  multiply  altars  to  sin,  and  they  shall
be  to  sin,  even  to  harden  them.  This  is  the  judgment  of  God,  to  give  men  their
heart's  desire  in  what  is  evil.  And  as  it  shall  be  to  them  for  sin,  so  it
shall  be  to  them  for  misery,  the  fruit  of  sin."  II.  It  is  a  sin  against  great
light  "  I  have  written  to  him  the  great  things  of  my  law,"  &c.  They  could
not  say  they  sinned  in  ignorance  ;  God  gave  them  directions  most  concise  and
abundant  concerning  the  nature  and  object  of  true  worship.  Some  translate
the  words — "  I  may  prescribe  my  laws  to  them  by  myriads,  they  will  treat  it  as  a
strange  thing."  First,  God  has  given  us  laws  concerning  worship.  Secondly,
Those  laws  are  oft-repeated.  By  myriads  or  by  thousands.  We  have  "  line  upon
line,"  and  *  precept  upon  precept."  Thirdly,  These  oft-repeated  laws  leave  false
worshippers  without  excuse  [The  Homilistj.

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.    13.     Many   altars.     Altars   to  ill  sin  is  and  how  displeased  he  is  with

God,  altars  to  man,  altars  to  pleasure,  &c.  it ;  for  the  words  import  that  they  shall

Sin  its  own  punishment.     It  has  fruity  be  given  up  to  that  sin ;  and  as  they

and  the  fruit  shall  not  only  be  gathered,  sinned  and  cared  not,  so  the  Lord  would

but  eaten.     Men  constantly  live  in  the  make  it  to  be  seen  to  be  sin  indeed,  and

fruit  of  their  own  doings  (Prov.  i.  31).  make    them    feel    how    sad   that   is"

Many  altars,  many  sins,  and  many  punish-  [Hutcheson].

ments.     "As   men   are  most  fearfully  Ver.     12.      Scripture    slighted.       I.

plagued  when   they  go  on  in  sin  and  Divine  in  their  origin.  God  the  author —

perish,  so  when  they  do  not  stand  in  "  I  have  written."  "  Given  by  inspiration

awe  of  the   sin  of  their   course,    it  is  of  God  " — the  grandest  and  sublimest

righteous  of  God  to  make  them  feel  how  origin  from  whence  anything  can  come.


chap,  viii.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  IIOSEA.  123


Then    regard    its    authority,    love    its  a  revelation  from  God.     2.  Others  dis-

truthfulness,    and    obey    its    precepts,  regard  it  as  a  standard  of  duty.     3.  By

77.  Excellent  in  its  nature — "  the  great  all  it  is  neglected  and  unread.     It  is  a

things  of   my  law."     The  word   gives  book  unknown,  misunderstood,  and  de-

the  idea  of  things  heaped  together,  then  spised.  Men  excuse  themselves ;  consider

greatness  and  increase  from  the  overflow,  the    Scripture  unreasonable  in  its  de-

Hence  the  contents  of  Scripture — 1 .  Are  mands,  an  enemy  to  liberty,  progress,  and

great,  containing  the  great  things  of  God  science.  But  given  by  inspiration  of  God,

(Acts  ii.  11).     2.   Wonderful  (Ps.  cxix.  profitable  for  doctrine  and  correction  (2

18;   Deut.   iv.    6,   8).      3.   Varied,  or  Tim.  iii.  16),  the  Bible  can  never  be  set

manifold  (Eph.  iii.  10).  III.  Specific  in  aside  as  useless  and  effete.  God  writes  to

its  form.    "  I  have  written"   Nature  and  warn  us  of  this  danger  and  deprive  us

philosophy  teach  us  to  record  our  laws  of  excuse.

and  hand  them  down  to  future  genera-  Yer.  13.  Many  engage  only  in  the
tions  in  a  permanent  form.  A  written  external  duties  of  religion.  Disregard-
revelation  is  necessary  for  all  ages,  and  ing  God's  rule,  they  fix  up  their  own,  and
has  manifold  advantages  above  an  oral  obey  that  no  further  than  personal  ends
one.  God  uttered  his  word  at  first,  uphold  them.  All  is  not  given  to  God ;
writes  it  afresh  in  the  wonders  of  his  they  must  eat  part  and  share  with  him.
providence,  the  work  of  his  Spirit,  and  God  will  have  all  or  none.  The  sacrifice
the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  The  Bible  must  be  burnt,  and  self  devoted  entirely
is  a  revelation  of  God's  will,  full  and  to  him.

free,  adapted  to  our  wants  and  circum-         God   does   not  connive  at  sin — will

stances,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  remember  and  visit  it  with  judgments

IV.  Despised  in  its  mission.    Accounted,  here  and  punishment  hereafter.     "  God

reckoned  as  or  like  a  strange  thing  ;  as  seems  to  man  to  forget  his  sins,  when  he

if  an  alien,  or  something  with  which  men  forbears  to  punish  them  ;  to  remember

have  no  concern.     1.  Some  reject  it  as  them,  when  he  punishes."

HOMILETICS.

Castles  of  False  Security. — Verse  14.

The  sin  of  Judah  and  Israel  is  here  traced  to  one  cause — forgetfulness  of  God.
Though  he  made  and  established  them  as  a  nation,  their  self-confidence  and  idolatry
led  them  to  forsake  and  offend  God,  to  build  temples  and  palaces,  which  he  destroyed
by  fire.

I.  Men  build  temples  in  forgetfulness  of  God.  "  Israel  hath  forgotten  his
Maker,  and  buildeth  temples."  There  was  only  one  temple,  to  build  more  was  to
disobey  God.  Yet  they  build  in  professed  recognition  of  God,  act  religiously,  but
sin  wilfully.  Giving  land,  building  churches  and  benevolent  institutions,  not  always
a  proof  of  religious  prosperity.  1.  Temples  are  built  in  superstition.  Like  the
monasteries  of  the  middle  ages,  for  the  remission  of  sins,  the  redemption  of  souls,
and  the  honour  of  saints.  2.  Temples  are  built  in  spite.  Men  have  grievances,
secede  from  other  places  and  build  for  themselves.  3.  Temples  are  built  in
the  interests  of  sectarianism.  All  sects  rival  each  other  in  this  respect,  and
seek  to  cover  the  land  with  their  churches  and  chapels.  Temples  built  in
forgetfulness  of  God,  to  commemorate  man,  are  not  required  at  our  hands.  "  Ye
have  not  looked  unto  the  Maker  thereof,  neither  had  respect  unto  him  that
fashioned  it  long  ago."  II.  Men  increase  national  defences  in  forgetfulness  of
God.  "  Judah  hath  multiplied  defenced  cities."  Nebuchadnezzar  erected  Babylon
in  self-confidence  and  pride.  Samaria  and  Jerusalem  were  strongly  fortified,  but
destroyed  at  last.  The  strength  of  a  nation  depend  not  upon  the  skill  of  its  par-
liament and  the  splendour  of  its  fleets  ;  nor  the  valour  of  its  soldiers  and  the  num-
ber of  its  fortifications.     God  alone  is  our  defence ;  for  he  can  "  impoverish  the


124


TIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.


[chap   vm.


fenced  cities,  wherein  thou  trustedst."  Men  who  found  empires  and  build  cities  in
opposition  to  him  can  never  succeed.  The  Eoman  Empire  crumbled  away  by  the
weight  of  its  greatness.  The  kingdoms  of  Alexander,  Ctesar,  and  ^Napoleon  came  to
nought.  Babylon  and  Carthage,  Macedon  and  Persia,  Greece  and  Rome  were  built,
prospered  for  a  while,  and  then  declined.  The  safety  of  a  nation  is  in  the  moral  con-
duct of  its  people  and  the  guardianship  of  God.  "  Except  the  Lord  build  the  house,
they  labour  in  vain  that  build  it :  except  the  Lord  keep  the  city,  the  watchman
waketh  but  in  vain."

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  VIIL


Ver.  2.  Hope.  There  are  few  men,
even  among  the  most  worldly,  who  do  not
expect  to  be  converted  before  they  die ;
but  it  is  a  selfish,  mean,  sordid  conver-
sion they  want — just  to  escape  hell  and  to
secure  heaven.  They  desire  just  experi-
ence enough  to  make  a  key  to  turn  the
lock  of  the  gate  of  the  celestial  city.
They  wish  "  a  hope,"  just  as  men  get  a
title  to  an  estate.  No  matter  whether
they  improve  the  property  or  not,  if
they  have  the  title  safe.  A  "  hope  "  to
them  is  like  a  passport,  which  one  keeps
quietly  in  his  pocket  till  the  time  for  the
journey,  and  then  produces  it  [Beecher].

Ver.  3,  4.  Casting  off  good.  When
children  get  high  notions  and  despise
home,  when  they  throw  off  parental  au-
thority and  restraint,  they  become  way-
ward and  self-willed ;  make  the  path  of
life  difficult,  which  their  parents  had
pioneered  and  made  easy.  So  one  who
casts  off  the  fear  of  God  and  sets  up  his
own,  or  the  authority  of  others,  insults
his  Maker  and  injures  himself,  makes
his  future  miserable,  and  may  be  cast  off
himself  at  last.

Ver.  5,  6.  Idolatry.  Travellers  tell
us  that  there  is  a  tribe  in  Africa  so  given
to  superstition  that  they  fill  their  huts
and  hovels  with  so  many  idols,  that  they
do  not  even  leave  room  for  their  families.
How  many  men  there  are  who  fill  their
hearts  with  the  idols  of  sin,  so  that
there  is  no  room  for  the  living  God,  or
for  any  of  his  holy  principles  [Bate].

Man,  that  aspires  to  rule  the  very  wind,
And  make  the  sea  confess  his  majesty;
Whose  intellect  can  fill  a  little  scroll
With  words  that  are  immortal;  who  can  build
Cities,  the  mighty  and  the  beautiful :
Yet  man, — this  glorious  creature, — can  debase
His  spirit  down  to  worship  wood  and  stone,
And  hold  the  very  beasts  which  bear  his  yoke,
And  tremble  at  his  eye,  for  sacred  things.

[LandonJ]


Ver.  9.  Love —

Our  passions  are  seducers  ;  but  of  all,

The  strongest  love.     He  first  approaches  us

In  childish  play,  wantoning  in  our  walks  ;

If  heedlessly  we  wander  after  him,

As  he  will  pick  out  all  the  dancing  way,

"We're  lost,  and  hardly  to  return  again.

[Southey.~\

Ver.  10,  11.  Sin  increased.  Sin  is
like  a  stone  which  is  cast  into  water,  and
multiplies  itself  by  infinite  circles  [Basil].
All  sin  and  wickedness  in  man's  spirit
hath  the  central  force  and  energy  of  hell
in  it,  and  is  perpetually  pressing  down
towards  it  as  towards  its  own  place.  The
devilish  nature  is  always  within  the
central  attractions  of  hell,  and  its  own
weight  instigates  and  accelerates  its
motion  thither  [John  Smith].

Ver.  12.  Scripture.  I  am  of  opinion
that  the  Holy  Scriptures  contain  more
sublimity  and  beauty,  more  pure  moral-
ity, more  important  history,  and  finer
strains  of  poetry  and  eloquence,  than
can  be  collected  from  all  other  books  in
any  age  or  language  [Sir  W.  Jones].
There  are  many  books  which  are  good
and  sound,  but,  like  half-pence,  there  goes
a  great  quantity  to  a  little  amount.
There  are  a  few  silver  books,  and  a  very
few  golden  books ;  but  I  have  one  book
worth  more  than  all,  called  the  Bible,  and
that  is  a  book  of  bank-notes  [J.  New-
ton].

There  is  not  a  more  evident  testimony
of  a  corrupt  and  depraved  disposition
than  an  irreverent  treatment  of  sacred
things,  a  contempt  of  anything  that
carries  on  it  a  Divine  impression,  or  an
obstinate  neglect  of  any  of  those
ordinances  which  the  wisdom  of  God
has  appointed  to  support  and  preserve
his  religion  in  the  world   [Bp  Gibson],

Ver.   13.    Sacrifice.     He  was  a  man


chap.  IX.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ':  HOSE  A.  125


who  stole  tlie  livery  of  heaven  to  serve  The  gods  themselves  throw  incense,

the  devil  in  [Pollock].  [Shakespeare.]

Where  the  fear  of  God  is,  there  is  the  Yer.  1 4.  Defence.  When  Nice-
keeping  of  his  commands;  and  where  the  phorus  Phocas  had  built  a  strong  wall
keeping  of  the  commandments,  there  is  about  his  palace  for  his  own  security,  in
the  cleansing  of  the  flesh ;  which  flesh  the  night  time,  he  heard  a  voice  crying
is  a  cloud  before  the  soul's  eye,  and  to  him,  "  0  Emperor !  though  thou
suffers  it  not  purely  to  see  the  beam  of  build  thy  wall  as  high  as  the  clouds,
heavenly  light,  and  worship  God  upon  yet,  if  sin  be  within,  it  will  overthrow
such  sacrifices.  it "  [Foster].


CHAPTER  IX.


Critical  Notes.]  Israel  had  fallen  away  from  God,  would  not  enjoy  the  produce  of  the  field,
but  would  be  taken  captive  into  Assyria,  and  be  unable  to  keep  the  feasts.  1.  Rejoice]  Lit.  to  exulta-
tion (Job  iii.  22).  Their  rejoicings  are  out  of  place ;  festivity  and  mirth  are  reproved.  The  blessings
of  harvest  were  attributed  unto  the  gods  of  the  heathen,  and  would  be  taken  away.  Reward]  Lit.
hire.  In  reward  for  idolatry  thou  hast  desired  temporal  prosperity,  corn  on  every  threshing-floor.
2.  Feed]  Crops  were  abundant,  but  they  would  be  no  better  for  their  plenty.  3.  Land]  which  God
sware  to  give  their  fathers  (Deut.  xxx.  20).  Egypt]  A  state  of  bondage  and  oppression  in  Assyria.
Unclean]  A  sore  trial,  seen  in  the  case  of  Daniel  (ch.  i.  8).  Eleazar  and  the  Maccabees  (2  Mace,
vi.  7).  They  had  wilfully  transgressed  the  law,  and  would  be  forced  to  live  in  its  habitual  breach ;
had  lived  as  heathen,  and  must  be  in  the  condition  of  heathen.  4.  Wine]  i.e.  drink-offerings,  con-
nected with  burnt- offerings  and  peace-offerings,  betokened  joy  in  sacrifice.  Hence  public  service
would  cease  ;  they  would  no  longer  have  the  means  for  reconciliation,  for  pleasing  God ;  and  if  they
should  attempt  to  sacrifice,  so  far  from  being  acceptable,  their  sacrifices  would  defile  them  as  the  bread
of  mourning  ;  food  which  contracted  pollution  by  being  in  the  place  of  death.  The  dead  denied  for
seven  days  the  house  and  all  that  was  in  it  (Num.  xix.  14).  In  offering  tithes  a  man  had  to  declare
that  he  had  not  touched  the  bread  (Deut.  xxvi.  14).  Sacrifice  could  only  be  offered  in  God's  land  :
in  captivity  it  would  be  a  fresh  sin  to  Israel.  Their  soul]  i.e.  for  themselves,  for  the  support  of  animal
life,  and  not  for  worship.  5.  Solemn  day]  God  "  singles  out  the  great  festivals  which  commemor-
ated his  great  doings  for  his  people  as  though  they  had  no  more  share  in  these  mercies."  Sad  to  be
deprived  of  ordinary  sacrifice,  how  much  more  to  be  excluded  from  feasts  of  joy !  6.  Gather  them]
in  one  common  grave — none  shall  escape.  Memphis]  called  Noph  (Is.  xix.  13  ;  Jer.  ii.  16  ;  Ezek.
xxx.  13) ;  at  this  time  the  capital  of  Egypt ;  the  seat  of  idolatry,  the  house  of  the  celebrated  Apis,
the  original  of  Jeroboam's  calf;  a  favourite  burial-place  of  the  Egyptians.  "It  embraced  a  circuit
of  about  nineteen  miles,  with  magnificent  buildings  ;  it  declined  after  the  building  of  Alexandria  ;  its
very  ruins  gradually  perished,  after  Cairo  rose  in  its  neighbourhood"  \Fusey\  Pleasant  places]  Heb.
the  desire.  Silver  should  be  desired,  but  not  found,  or  nettles  should  possess  their  pleasant  houses.  In
cither  sense  thorns  indicate  utter  desolation  (Is.xxxiv.  13).  7.  Visitation]  Vengeancenow  at  hand.
Fool]  False  prophets  who  predicted  prosperity  will  be  convicted  of  folly.  The  event  will  test  them.
Mad]  A  man  of  the  spirit,  lit.  maddened;  pretending  to  inspiration  (Lam.  ii.  14;  Ezek.  xiii.  3;  Mic.  iii.
1 1) .  Those  who  mock  the  true  prophets  shall  themselves  become  fools.  Multitude]  Manifold  iniquity.
Hatred]  Great  enmity  to  good  men  and  God.  The  punishment  in  proportion  to  the  sin.  8.  The
watchman]  Looking  out,  waiting  for  Divine  revelation  (Heb.  ii.  1).  The  true  prophet  always  consults
God.  Ephraim  or  Israel  was  designed  to  be  the  watchman  of  God,  to  witness  among  the  nations  for
him  ;  but  was  led  by  false  prophets,  whose  words  were  "a  snare  of  the  fowler."  In]  Lit.  upon  all
his  ways,  i.e.  wherever  the  people  went  they  were  beset  with  false  prophets,  who  hated  intensely  the
house  of  God.  9.  Deeply]  Lit.  gone  deep,  they  are  corrupted ;  deeply  immersed  themselves  in
wickedness.  Days]  when  Benjamin  espoused  the  children  of  Belial  (Jud.  xix.  22  ;  Gen.  xix.  4).
10.  Like  grapes]  with  which  the  traveller  delights  to  quench  his  thirst.  Grapes  and  early  figs  a
great  delicacy  in  the  East  (Is.  xxviii.  4;  Jer.  xxiv.  2) ;  so  God  delighted  in  Israel  at  first.  He  gave
them  richness  and  pleasantness,  but  they  corrupted  themselves,  and  no  longer  answered  his  good
pleasure.  Baal-peor]  The  Moabite  idol  to  whom  young  females  prostituted  themselves  (Num.  xxv.
3).  Shame]  that  foul  idol  (Jer.  xi.  13).  11.  Their  glory]  Children  the  glory  of  parents,  sterility
a  reproach.  Eph.]=  fruitfulness  (Gen.  xli.  52,  marg.),  which  characteristic  should  cease;  licen-
tious worship  would  diminish  the  people :  leave  them  childless,  by  threefold  gradation.  "  First,
when  their  parents  should  have  joy  in  their  birth,  they  were  to  come  into  the  world  only  to  go  out
of  it;  then  their  mother's  womb  was  to  be  itself  their  grave  ;  then,  stricken  with  barrenness,  the


126  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  [chap,  ix.


womb  itself  was  to  refuse  to  conceive  them."  Cf.  the  threefold  stages  of  failure  (ch.  viii.  7).  12.
Bereave]  them,  though  they  should  rear  children  (Job  xxvii.  14).  A  man]  Lit.  from  man.  Woe]
Lit.  for  woe.  God's  departure  the  source  of  all  evil  (1  Sam.  iv.  21;  xxviii.  15,  16).  Loss  of  children
sad,  but  loss  of  God  beyond  description.  13.  Planted]  Ephraim  chosen,  and  carefully  put  in  soil
to  grow  and  nourish,  like  Tyre,  a  royal  city  strongly  built  and  pleasantly  situated.  The  image  sug-
gested from  the  name,  a  fruitful  tree  (Ezek.  xxvi.  27,  28).  Children]  brought  forth  only  to  be  slain.
14.  Give]  As  if  overwhelmed,  the  prophet  deliberates ;  prays  in  compassion,  let  this  never  happen  ;
then  leaves  it  with  God.  Miscarrying]  Barrenness,  usually  counted  misfortune  (Jobiii.  3;  Jer.  xx.
14),  will  be  a  blessing,  so  great  will  be  their  calamity.  15.  Gilgal]  where  they  rejected  God  and
chose  a  king  (1  Sam.  viii.  7  ;  cf.  1  Sam.  xi.  14,  15).  Hated]  Punished  their  sin  (Mai.  i.  3).  16.
Smitten]  Under  the  image  of  a  tree,  repeats  the  sentence  of  God.  Smitten  from  above,  by  blasting
and  mildew  (Am.  iv.  9).  Root]  withered,  and  fruit  impossible.  Though]  Before  they  are  entirely
dead,  fruit  may  appear,  yet  will  I  slay  the  beloved  (lit.  the  desires)  fruit  of  their  bodies.  17.  My
God]  not  theirs;  supporting  my  authority  and  directing  my  course.  Will  cast]  Lit.  despises  them,
and  banishes  them  among  the  nations  (Deut.  xxviii.  65)}  a  monument  of  his  anger  and  a  warning  to
all  people  (Rom.  xi.  20,  21).

HOMILETIGS.
The  Sinner's  Life  a  Joyless  Life. — Verses  1 — 4.

Israel  is  forbidden  to  rejoice  like  other  nations.  They  had  forsaken  God,  and
sinned  wilfully  against  light  and  warning.  Their  prosperity  was  attributed  to
wrong  sources.  The  judgment  of  God  was  threatened  against  them.  Other  people
might  enjoy  the  results  of  their  labours,  but  they  would  be  deprived  of  the  fruits  of
the  earth  and  the  services  of  religion.  Thus  God  breaks  into  the  mirth  and  festivity
of  the  sinner.  There  is  no  cause  of  joy  in  his  present  condition  or  future
prospects.

I.  His  present  condition  affords  no  joy.  "  Kejoice  not,  0  Israel,  for  joy."
All  men  seek  to  be  happy.  The  wicked  even  have  a  kind  of  joy,  a  superficial,
short-lived  pleasure.  But  true  joy  is  the  good  man's  portion.  "  I  have  enjoyed
almost  a  fearful  amount  of  happiness,"  exclaimed  Dr  Arnold  in  reviewing  the
past.  1.  The  sinner  forsakes  God,  the  fountain  of  joy.  "  Thou  hast  gone  a  whoring
from  thy  God."  All  true  joy  springs  from  him,  and  is  enjoyed  only  in  him,  in
living  for  him.  What  joy  so  pure  as  "  the  joy  of  the  Lord  "  ?  Carnal  joy  is  a
mere  flash,  which  leaves  the  mind  in  deeper  darkness  and  greater  misery.  Joy  in
God  is  like  the  light  of  the  sun,  healthy  and  lasting.  It  may  be  overclouded
with  mists  and  storms,  but  breaks  out  in  greater  splendour  and  sweetness.  In
God's  presence  only  "  is  fulness  of  joy"  (Ps.  xvi.  11);  pleasures  which
satisfy;  enough  to  fill  every  soul  with  "joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory."  Joy
is  forbidden,  withheld  from  the  wicked.  The  sense  of  sin  robs  them  of  peace  (Is.
xlviii.  22)  ;  their  present  possessions  are  no  security  nor  advantage  to  them.  Living
in  distance  from  God  and  at  enmity  with  him,  gloomy  feelings  damp  their  joy  and
act  as  an  alloy  to  their  comforts.  "  In  the  transgression  of  an  evil  man  there  is  a
snare;  but  the  righteous  doth  sing  and  rejoice."  2.  The  sinner  fails  in  his  efforts
to  securejoy.  "  The  floor  and  the  winefat  shall  not  feed  them,  and  the  new  wine
shall  fail  in  her."  Israel  doted  on  prosperity  which  could  not  sustain  them.  The
fruits  of  the  earth  would  fail,  and  all  their  efforts  would  end  in  bitter  disappoint-
ment. The  sinner  turns  away  from  God,  and  becomes  restless  and  dissatisfied.  He
loves  to  hire  himself  to  sin  and  degradation.  He  tries  first  one  thing  and  then
another,  but  all  plans  and  policies  utterly  "  fail  them."  Men  have  recourse  to  every
mean  shift,  submit  to  the  lowest  drudgery,  and  suffer  the  greatest  hardship  in  pur-
suit of  sin.  Like  the  prodigal,  they  become  wanderers,  spendthrifts,  and  slaves.
But  the  solemn  pause  comes.  They  are  arrested,  alarmed,  and  astonished.  Their
pleasures  forsake  them,  and  hopes  vanish  like  vain  shadows.  God  curses  the  bless-
ings and  frustrates  the  efforts  of  the  sinner.  "Doomed  to  disappointment  as
usual,"  many  continually  exclaim.  "  The  wicked  man  travelleth  with  pain  all
his  days."    II.  His  future  prospects  afford  no  joy.    Israel  was  to  be  deprived


CHAP.  IX.  I  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY;  HOSEA.  127


of  inheritance,  carried  into  bondage,  robbed  of  sacrifices  and  public  service.  All
their  religious  efforts  would  be  rejected  and  turned  into  defilement  and  mourn-
ing. It  was  a  sad  prospect  to  be  driven  from  the  house  of  God  and  a
land  of  plenty !  What  brighter  future  has  the  sinner  before  him  as  long
as  he  remains  from  God  1  1.  The  sinner's  future  will  be  one  of  bondage.  "  Ephraim
shall  return  to  Egypt."  They  knew  how  hardly  Egypt  had  dealt  with  their  fathers,
and  how  treacherously  with  them.  They  had  been  warned  not  to  go,  but  were
determined  to  go.  Against  their  own  will  God  would  send  them  into  banishment
and  distress.  The  sinner  will  be  held  in  bondage  by  lusts  which  he  indulges ;
driven  by  former  habits  into  greater  misery  ;  and  find  what  he  thought  a  place  of
refuge  to  bo  a  place  of  exile.  Captivity  and  exile  were  additions  to  the  scarcity  of
home.  Euture  miseries  will  succeed  present  distress  to  the  unbeliever.  He  cannot
expect  freedom  and  joy  in  the  service  of  sin  and  Satan.  The  prospect  will  be  no
better  than  the  retrospect,  and  the  future  worse  than  the  present.  "  I  know  that
it  shall  be  well  unto  them  that  fear  God,  which  fear  before  him.  But  it  shall  not
be  well  with  the  wicked"  (Ecc.  viii.  12,  13).  2.  The  sinner's  future  will  be  one  of
bitterness  and  sorrow.  It  was  hard  when  Israel  had  to  "  eat  unclean  things,"  things
forbidden  by  their  law,  when  they  were  forced  to  eat  or  starve,  when  their  bread  was
polluted  and  their  sacrifices  "  as  the  bread  of  mourners."  Sin  brings  bitterness  now
and  hereafter,  (a)  Bitterness  in  the  spirit  of  the  sinner,  (b)  Bitterness  in  his/or-
lorn  condition.  Erom  affluence  and  privileges  he  comes  to  poverty  and  want.  His
experience  and  his  prospects  are  bitter,  bitterness  and  sorrow  past,  present,  and  future.
"  Let  us  live  on  the  past,"  exclaimed  Napoleon,  but  the  retrospect  was  a  course  of
selfish  aggrandizement.  In  thoughts  of  thft  future  he  sickened  and  pined  for  death.
"  I  am  no  longer  the  Great  JSTapoleon.  How  fallen  I  am  !  "  "  Thy  way  and  thy
doings  have  procured  these  things  unto  thee  ;  this  is  thy  wickedness,  because  it  is
bitter,  because  it  reacheth  unto  thine  heart."  3.  The  sinner's  future  will  be  one  of
exclusion  from  God's  inheritance.  "  They  shall  not  dwell  in  the  Lord's  land."  God
had  chosen  Canaan  to  be  the  residence  of  his  glory  and  the  possession  of  his  people.
But  as  sin  drove  man  from  Paradise,  so  idolatry  drove  the  Jews  out  of  Canaan.
They  were  disinherited,  deprived  of  God's  favour  and  protection.  This  is  a  warn-
ing to  all  who  live  in  the  bosom  of  the  Church  and  under  the  sound  of  the
gospel.  Many  professors  forfeit  present  enjoyment  and  sin  away  precious  privileges.
Sinners  cannot  enter  the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth,  and  will  be  excluded  from
heaven  at  last.  We  cannot  dwell  with  God  unless  we  are  subject  to  his  authority
and  obedient  to  his  will.  "  If  thine  heart  turn  away  so  that  thou  wilt  not  hear,
but  shalt  be  drawn  away  and  worship  other  gods,  and  serve  them ;  I  denounce
unto  you  this  day,  that  ye  shall  surely  perish,  and  that  ye  shall  not  prolong  your
days  upon  the  land,  whither  thou  passest  over  Jordan  to  go  to  possess  it."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  1.     Israel  over  wished  to  joy  as  abused  their  plenty  and  ascribed  it  to

other  nations.     When  they  cried  for  a  their  idols ;  therefore  shall  they  be  cut

king,  they  forsook  God  and  sought  to  short  either  in  their  store,  as  Hag.  iii.

exult  in  their  own  ways.    But  the  greater  6,  10;  ii.  16,  or  in  their  strength,  as

the  privileges,  the  greater  the  guilt  in  Hos.  iv.  10 ;  viii.  7.     Oneway  or  other

despising   them.      Other   nations   were  their  hopes  shall  be  frustrated,  the  crea-

idolators,  but  Israel's  sin  was  "  whoring  ture  shall  lie  to  them  and  not  answer

from  thy  God."  their  expectation  [Trapp].

There  is  always  a  snare  in  the  ways  Shall  fail.     Lit.  "  shall  He  to  her."

of  sin,  always  a  song  in  the  service  of  Israel  had  lied  to  God  (Hos.  vii.  13).

God  [Bridge].  So  the  fruits  of  the  earth  would  disap-

Ver.  2.  Not  feed  them.     Punishment  point  and  requite  her.    Men  reap  as  they

attendeth  sin  at  the  heels.     They  had  sow.     The  punishment  as  the  crime.


128


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.


[CHAP.  IX.


a  When  the  blessings  of  God  have  been
abused  by  sin  he  in  mercy  takes  them
away.  He  cuts  them  off,  in  order  to
show  that  he  alone,  who  now  withheld
them,  had  before  given  them.  When
they  thought  themselves  most  secure,
when  the  corn  was  stored  on  the  floor,
and  the  grapes  were  in  the  press,  then
God  would  deprive  them  of  them."

Yer.  3.  Not  dwell  in  the  land.  1.
The  Assyrian  captivity  was  a  mark  of
God's  displeasure,  the  loss  of  liberty  and
surrender  to  a  foreign  enemy.  Men  are
only  free  through  God,  and  only  remain
free  as  long  as  they  serve  him.  By
apostasy  nations  lose  their  independent
existence  and  individuals  their  freedom
and  enjoyment.  2.  This  captivity  a
great  contrast  to  Israel's  former  condition
as  God's  people.  They  ignored  the  law,
and  God  abandons  them.  They  are
"  not  my  people."  3.  This  captivity  was
the  loss  of  their  possession.  No
possessions  are  secure  to  those  who  for-
sake God.  4.  With  the  loss  of  the  land
there  is  peculiar  distress,  the  loss  of
sacrifice,  and  the  sanctification  of  life
connected  with  it.  Thus  men  are  exiled
in  lands  of  impurity,  fall  into  bondage,
and  deprived  of  the  means  of  serving
God.  That  which  they  are  now  able  to
do,  or  wish  to  do,  is  not  acceptable  to
God,  and  will  occasion  bitter  sorrow.
"  The  seeds  of  our  punishment  are  sown
when  we  sin."     They  shall  eat  unclean


things.      Learn — 1.    Sin    brings    want.
Like  the  prodigal,  they  were  necessitated
to  eat  unclean  things,  the  husks  of  swine,
because  they  had  nothing  else.     2.  Sin
brings  disgrace.     Perhaps  the  Assyrians
despised  them,  forced  them  to  eat  meats
forbidden  by  the  law,  in  scorn  to  their
religion  and  the  profession  of  it.     Those
who  willingly  slight  the  word  will  never
be  honoured  to  bear  witness  to  it,  or  if
tested  for  its  principles,  will  renounce
their  profession  of  it.     A  French  Pro-
testant Bishop  in  the  sixteenth  century,
regarded  as  a  pillar  of  the  Reformation,
recanted  and  brought,  disgrace  upon  him-
self and  others.     His  apostasy  staggered
many  Christians,  and  was  a  misfortune  to
his  country.     When  we  forsake  God  we
are  left  to  the  mercy  of  the  ungodly.     3.
Sin  leads  to  conformity  to  the  world.
Israel    voluntarily    might   conform    to
heathen    customs,    as    they    were    not
humbled  by  any  affliction.    Driven  from
the  land,  deprived  of  their  own  ritual,
they  adopted  the  religion  of  Assyria,  and
God  left  them,  gave  them  up  to  their
own  course.     They  would  then  appear
outwardly   what    they   were   inwardly.
Men  who  have  only  outward  profession
will  soon  cast  off  that  when  tempted  or
thrown  into  the  world.     "  Be  not  con-
formed   to    this    world :    but    be    ye
transformed  by  the  renewing  of  your
mind,"  &c.


HOMILETICS.
The  Solemn  Days  of  Life. —  Verse  5.

Israel  had  sinned  away  their  privileges,  and  deprived  themselves  of  sacrifices  and
feasts.  What  would  they  do  "  in  the  solemn  day  "  when  it  was  impossible  to  re-
joice before  the  Lord  (Num.  x.  10)  1  In  captivity  they  would  not  be  able  to  cele-
brate the  festivals.  The  temple  would  be  in  ruins,  and  they  would  be  exiled  into
a  foreign  country.  "  The  more  solemn  the  day,  the  more  total  man's  exclusion,  the
more  manifest  God's  withdrawal."  There  are  solemn  days  in  our  life  which  we
must  all  meet.     How  shall  we  meet  them  1

I.  The  day  of  affliction  is  a  solemn  day.  "  Man  is  born  unto  trouble  as  the
sparks  fly  upward."  Suffering  is  the  law  of  our  being,  and  co-extensive  with  our
race.  As  certain  as  we  are  born  to  live  we  are  born  to  trouble,  and  our  days  are
"  full  of  trouble."  No  wealth  can  purchase,  no  power  effect,  deliverance  from  the
common  lot.  Reverses  of  fortune,  poverty  and  want,  disquietude  and  fear,  prey
upon  the  mind.  Inward  consumption  and  outward  accidents  lay  men  on  beds  of
sickness.  They  caiuiot  go  to  places  of  amusement,  nor  enjoy  company  of  pleasure ;
they  are  shut  out  from  Christian  fellowship,  and  deprived  of  all  the  means  of  grace ;
they  are  on  "  the  bed  of  languishing  "  and  sorrow.     When  the  world  deserts  them,


chap.  ix. J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  129


and  remembrance  of  the  past  distresses  them,  what  will  they  do  1  When  a  Christian
is  sick  God  gives  ease  and  health  to  his  soul.  "  Thou  wilt  make  all  his  bed  in
sickness."  But  "  in  the  day  of  adversity  "  what  will  the  sinner  do  %  II.  The  day
of  death  is  a  solemn  day.  "  What  man  is  he  that  liveth,  and  shall  not  see  death  1
shall  he  deliver  his  soul  from  the  hand  of  the  grave  1 "  Neither  by  wisdom  nor
strength  can  we  avoid  the  common  doom.  Death  spares  no  rank  nor  condition,
calls  with  impartial  step  at  the  cottage  of  the  poor  and  the  palace  of  the  prince.
"  There  is  no  man  that  hath  power  over  the  spirit  to  retain  the  spirit ;  neither  hath
he  power  in  the  day  of  death  ;  and  there  is  no  discharge  in  that  war."  Charles
V.  was  advised  to  retire  from  danger  at  the  battle  of  Tunis,  but  refused,  and  said
that  an  emperor  was  never  slain  with  great  shot.  William  Eufus  declared  that
kings  were  never  drowned.  But  the  hero  of  a  thousand  fights  can  claim  no  exemp-
tion here.  What  a  solemn  day  is  this  day !  What  will  you  do  when  the  physician's
skill  is  of  no  avail  %  when  millions  of  money  would  not  buy  an  inch  of  time  1
when  there  is  no  help  from  earth  or  heaven  %  The  wicked  may  strengthen
himself  in  wickedness,  but  he  can  neither  outwit  nor  overcome  his  enemy.  His
"  covenant  with  death  and  with  hell  shall  be  disannulled."  "  The  wicked  is
driven  away  in  his  wickedness  :  but  the  righteous  hath  hope  in  his  death."
III.  The  day  of  judgment  will  be  a  solemn  day.  "  It  is  appointed  unto  men  once
to  die,  but  after  this  the  judgment."  "  We  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment-
seat  of  Christ."  That  will  be  the  most  solemn  day,  when  the  eternal  destinies  of
men  are  fixed  by  the  Great  Judge.  Every  work,  great  and  small,  public  and  private ;
every  secret  thing,  good  or  bad,  the  hidden  thoughts  of  the  heart  and  the  forgotten
sins  of  youth;  "  every  idle  word  that  men  shall  speak,  they  shall  give  account  there-
of in  the  day  of  judgment."  Simeon,  a  holy  bishop,  was  saluted  on  his  way  to
martyrdom  by  Urthazanes,  a  Persian  courtier,  and  an  apostate.  But  the
courtier  was  frowned  upon  by  the  bishop,  and  cried,  "  How  shall  I  appear  before
the  great  God  of  heaven,  whom  I  have  denied,  when  Simeon,  but  a  man,  will  not
endure  to  look  upon  me  1  If  he  frown,  how  will  God  behold  me  when  I  come  be-
fore his  tribunal  1 "  This  led  to  his  reclamation.  How  will  you  appear  before  the
Judge]  What  will  you  do  in  that  solemn  day  1  Will  you  call  to  the  rocks  and  to
the  mountains  to  fall  upon  you  and  hide  you  1  Make  your  peace  with  God,  and  pre-
pare to  meet  him,  "  that  ye  may  be  able  to  withstand  in  the  evil  day,  and  having
done  all,  to  stand."

"  At  his  call  the  dead  awaken,

Rise  to  life  from  earth  and  sea ;
All  the  powers  of  Nature,  shaken
By  his  looks,  prepare  to  flee :
Careless  sinner,
What  will  then  become  of  thee ! "

A  Sad  Picture. — Verses  6,  7.

Israel  fled  to  Egypt  because  of  the  destruction  of  their  own  land,  hoping  to  find
help  in  time  of  need.  But  they  were  disappointed.  In  Egypt  they  found  their
graves  (Ex.  xiv.  11);  they  were  gathered  and  buried  together  (Jer.  viii.  2;  Job
xxvii.  15).  Their  tents  were  overrun  with  nettles,  their  treasures  of  silver  were  in
ruins,  and  the  land  desolate  and  without  inhabitants.  A  sad  picture  of  the  conse-
quences of  sin.

I.  Expected  refuge  turned  into  destruction.  "  Memphis  shall  bury  them."
Men  run  away  from  one  trouble  only  to  get  into  another.  Wealth,  friends,  and  the
world  are  tried  and  fail.  Places  of  refuge  prove  places  of  death.  They  are  received
and  gathered  only  to  be  buried.  Those  who  flee  from  God,  expecting  life,  will  be
certain  to  meet  their  death.  They  flee  from  the  smoke  only  to  fall  into  the  fire.
They  seek  good  and  find  evil.  Calamity  sooner  or  later  overtakes  the  Christless
and  impenitent  from  which  they  cannot  escape.     They  choose  death  and  obtain

9


180  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  (.chap,  ix,


their  choice.  "  The  eyes  of  the  wicked  shall  fail  and  they  shall  not  escape,  and
their  hope  the  giving  up  of  the  ghost "  (Job  xi.  20).  II.  Fruitful  land  turned
into  desolation.  1 .  Silver,  once  treasured,  had  gone.  2.  Nettles  and  thorns  grew
amid  their  habitations.  3.  The  land  was  swept  of  its  inhabitants.  What  a  scene
of  desolation  and  sadness  !  Sin  has  cursed  the  ground  on  which  we  tread,  and
drained  many  a  nation  of  its  prosperity.  The  cities  of  the  plain  were  destroyed
and  "the  garden  of  the  Lord"  turned  into  barrenness  (Gen.  xiii.  10).  Where  is
the  glory  of  Greece,  once  so  famous  for  arts  and  sciences  1  What  will  become  of
"  England,  great,  glorious,  and  free,"  if  she  forsakes  God,  her  defence  1  God  can
empty  our  stores,  demolish  our  temples,  and  diminish  our  people.  Let  us  take
warning.  "  He  turneth  rivers  into  a  wilderness,  and  the  water-springs  into  dry
ground ;  a  fruitful  land  into  barrenness,  for  the  wickedness  of  them  that  dwell
therein."

HOMILETIOS.
Days  of  Visitation. — Verses  7 — 9.

Israel's  sin  is  one,  but  the  tendencies  and  the  manifestations  are  many.  God
had  shown  them  what  little  cause  for  joy  they  had,  warned  them  of  the  coming
day ;  and  now,  lest  they  should  slight  the  warning,  declares  that  retribution  is
near.     "  The  days  of  visitation  are  come."

I.  Days  of  retribution  for  guilt.  "The  days  of  recompence  are  come."
Men  deny  such  days,  and  seek  to  delay  them,  but  they  come.  They  come  to  re-
compense, to  reward  men  for  their  ways,  and  fix  their  doom.  "  For  the  Lord  God
of  recompences  shall  surely  requite  "  (Jer.  li.  56).  There  is  retribution  enough  to
prove  a  moral  government  among  men — that  justice  sees  and  will  avenge  the  wrong,
and  that  hereafter  right  will  be  dealt  to  all.  Nature  tells  us  that  every  law  must
have  a  penalty,  or  it  is  no  law.  Reason  teaches  that  under  no  government,  human
or  Divine,  should  the  just  be  as  the  unjust.  As  there  is  no  law  without  penalty,
so  there  is  no  penalty  inflicted  but  for  law  violated.  "For  the  multitude  of
thine  iniquity  "  are  the  days  of  visitation  come.  "  Punishment  ripens  on  the
tree  of  evil."  "  Punishment  is  justice  for  the  unjust."  "  Be  sure  your  sin
will  find  you  out."  II.  Days  of  bitter  experience.  "  Israel  shall  know
it."  Men  will  not  heed  Divine  warning.  They  must  know  by  feeling  the
results  of  their  sins.  They  cannot  check  the  consequences,  not  confine  them
to  the  outer  world  when  they  come.  They  must  experience  the  bitterness
of  their  course.  A  man  of  sin  is  a  man  of  pains.  He  lives  in  sin,  eats  it  up,
and  it  is  bitter  in  his  belly  (Eev.  x.  9).  He  tastes  the  wormwood  and  the  gall,
and  drinks  the  bitter  for  the  sweet.  "  Everything  that  I  love,  everything  that
belongs  to  me,  is  stricken,"  cried  Napoleon.  "  Heaven  and  mankind  unite  to
afflict  me."  Lord  Byron  declared  that  his  days  were  "  in  the  yellow  leaf  " — "  the
flowers  "  and  the  fruits  were  gone,  and  "  the  worm,  the  canker,  and  the  grief  are
mine  alone."  The  poet  Burns  said  in  dying  hours,  "  I  close  my  eyes  in  misery,  and
open  them  without  hope."

When  haughty  guilt  exults  with  impious  joy,
Mistake  shall  blast,  or  accident  destroy  ;
"Weak  man,  with  erring  rage,  may  throw  the  dart,
But  Heaven  shall  guide  it  to  the  guilty  heart.

III.  Days  of  discriminating  character.  "  The  prophet  is  a  fool,  the  spiritual
man  is  mad."  The  man  pretending  to  have  spiritual  inspiration,  the  prophets  pre-
dicting prosperity,  were  mad,  and  retribution  would  convince  them  of  their  folly.
The  event  would  show  what  spirit  was  in  them.  1.  Character  in  public  teachers
is  discriminated.  Some  called  the  prophets  of  God  mad  men,  as  Festus  thought  Paul.
Elisha  (2  Kings  ix.  11),  Jeremiah  (xxix.  5),  and  Christ  himself  were  called  mad.


CHAP.  IX.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  131


For  ao-es  the  early  Christian  teachers  were  considered  under  the  influence  of
phrenzy  or  madness.  True  prophets  have  never  been  understood ;  often  called
fools  and  fanatics  by  those  who  pretend  to  higher  revelations  and  superior  wisdom.
False  teachers  commend  themselves,  glory  in  appearance,  and  condemn  others.
Real  prophets  proclaim  their  message,  are  "  beside  "  themselves  to  God  and  "  sober  "
to  men.  They  are  contradicted  in  words  and  blackened  in  character ;  but  God  and
time  defend  their  cause.  The  flatterer  will  be  unmasked,  the  contrast  between  the
false  prophet  and  the  true  "  watchman  "  shall  be  manifest,  and  it  shall  be  seen  that
one  walked  "with  God"  and  the  other  was  "a  snare"  to  the  people  "in all  his
ways."  "  Woe  unto  the  foolish  prophets,  that  follow  their  own  spirit  and  have  seen
nothing."  2.  Character  in  private  individuals  is  discriminated.  Christians  have
often  to  bear  reproach  and  maintain  a  dignified  silence  ;  but  days  of  God's  visita-
tion, times  of  persecution,  defend  their  character,  and  rank  them  in  their  position.
The  wicked  tremble  and  fear,  the  false  professor  forsakes  God,  but  the  righteous
suffer  and  are  glorified.  Days  of  retribution  sift  character  and  conduct.  Men  are
forced  to  confess  that  the  wicked  have  not  the  best  of  it — that  there  is  a  God  to
recompense  truth  and  justice,  and  reverse  the  judgments  of  men.  "  Then  shall  ye
return  (to  a  better  state  of  mind),  and  discern  between  the  righteous  and  the
wicked,  between  him  that  serveth  God  and  him  that  serveth  him  not."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Yer.  7.     If  we  apply  the  words  to  condemn  the  government  as  harsh  and
religious  teachers — 1.  It   is  an   unrea-  despotic.     God's  moral  government  ad-
sonable  charge.  Wise  men  have  grounds  mits  not  of  this  distinction.     His  nature
for  their  judgment ;  but  it  is  most  un-  and  office,  his  person  and  his  throne,  are
just  to  condemn  without  a  cause.    These  inseparable.     No  neutrality  in   human
men  are  servants  of  God,  pure  in  their  affection  and  conduct.     Either  at  peace
life  and  noble  in  their  aim.     2.  It  is  a  or  at  war  with  God.     2.  Against  God's
common  charge.      In  every  age   when  Law.     The  law  demands  supreme  and
selfishness  reigns  supreme  and  scepticism  universal  obedience — not  only  takes  cog-
abounds,  men  of  deep  convictions  and  nizance  of  external  actions,  but  touches
unwearied  zeal  for  God  have  been  re-  the  inward  springs  of  all  action,  weighs
garded  as  fanatics  and  madmen.     But  the  motives  and  thoughts  concealed  in
what    appears    insanity   to    some    are  the  heart.     Its  rigour  never  relaxes,  its
"words    of    truth   and   soberness"   to  demands  never  cease.     Hence  the  en-
others.      3.   It  is  a  dangerous  charge,  mity  and  resistance.     3.  Against  God's
Those  who  deal  plentifully  in  terms  of  servants.     Ahab     said     of    Michaiah,
folly  may  have  them  flung   upon  them-  "I     hate    him"    (1    Kings   xxii.    8).
selves.     Events  may  reverse  the  judg-  They  hated  so   intensely  (ver.  8)  that
ments  of  men,  and  those  who  call  others  their  whole  soul  was  turned  into  hatred ;
fools  may  prove  to  be  the  greatest  fools  they  were  hatred,  as  we  say,  personified;
themselves.    "Judge  not,  that  ye  be  not  hatred  was  embodied  in  them,  and  they
judged.     Eor  with  what  judgment   ye  ensouled  with  hate.    They  were  also  the
judge,  ye  shall  be  judged :    and  with  source  of  hatred  against  God  and  man.
what  measure  ye  mete,"  &c.  And  this,  each  false  prophet  was  in  the
TJie  great  hatred.     1.  Against  God.  house  of  his  God!  for  God  was  still  his
The  carnal  mind  at  hostility  with  God.  God,  although  not  owned  by  him.    God
The  question  at    issue,  the  casus  belli,  is  the  sinner's  God  to  avenge,  if  he  will
who  shall  govern — God  or  the  sinner?  not  allow  him  to  be  his  God  to  convert
Many  think  they  can  adore  and  love  and  pardon  [Pusey].
God  as  Creator  and  Benefactor,  while  Ver.  8.      Watchmen  and  fowlers.  1.
they   rebel   against   him   as    Lawgiver.  Watchmen  walking  with  God,  warning
Many  may  love  Cromwell,  the  Queen,  or  of  danger,  and  urging  the  people  to  duty,
any   ruler,  for  piety  and  courage,   yet  2.  Watchmen  neglecting  their  duty,  and


132  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  [chap,  ix


sleeping   at   their  post.     3.  Watchmen  ment.     4.  Days  which  epitomize  Israel's

turned  into    fowlers,   predicting   peace,  history  in  guilt  and  judgment  (Bom.  i.

nattering  the  people  and  leading  them  32).

to  destruction.     u  Son  of  man,  I  have  Sins  and  punishment.     1.  Contempt

made  thee  a  watchman  unto  the  house  of  God  and  his  law  will  draw  men  into

of  Israel ;    therefore  hear  the  word  at  bominable  wickedness.     2.  When  men

my  mouth,  and  give  them  warning  from  have    plunged  into  deeper  wickedness

me."  they    cannot    recover    themselves.     3.

Ver.  9.  Deeply  corrupted.     Sin  cor-  There  is  no  wicked  course  into  which

rupts — (1)  the  understanding,    (2)    the  men    have    fallen    which  the    Church,

affections,  and  (3)  the  life.   Sin  corrupts  departing    from  God,  may  not  fall  into

everything  it  touches.     The  touch  and  again.     4.  Whatever  patience  God  may

the  taint  go  together.   It  leads  from  bad  have,  sinners  of  one  age  who  fall  into

to  worse,  and  makes  men  totally  and  guilt  will  be  visited  by  the  same  mea-

entirely  depraved,  if  not  forsaken.  sure  as  another.     As  God  spared  not  in

Days  of  Gibeah    (Judges   xix.).     1.  the  days  of  Gibeah,  so  now  "he  will

Days  of  great  lewdness.     2.   Days   of  remember  their  iniquity,  he   will  visit

great  shame.     3.  Days  of  great  punish-  their  sins."


HOMILETICS.
Honoured  and  Dishonoured. — Verse  10.

These  words  indicate  the  great  honour  that  God  put  upon  his  people,  the  great
worth  which  they  had  in  his  sight  when  he  chose  them,  and  the  great  care  that  he
took  with  them  in  training  them  up  for  his  purpose  and  good  pleasure.     But  they
despised  this  dignity,  consecrated  themselves  to  Baal-Peor,  and  became  as  abomin
able  as  the  idol  they  loved.

I.  God's  grace  honours  a  worthless  people.  What  refreshing  grapes  and  the
first  ripe  figs  are  to  the  weary  traveller,  such  was  Israel  at  first  to  God.  1.  By
nature  we  are  in  a  helpless  condition.  Education,  wealth,  and  outward  distinctions
avail  not  before  God.  Israel  was  found  in  the  wilderness  ;  in  a  barren,  wild,  and
solitary  place.  2.  God  in  love  seeks  men  in  their  helpless  condition.  God  could
not  have  found  Israel,  unless  he  had  sought.  "  I  have  found  him  in  the  wilder-
ness" (Deut.  xxxii.  10).  God  goes  after  men  like  the  shepherd  after  the  lost
sheep  until  he  finds  them.  In  love  and  kindness  he  restores  and  exalts  them )
makes  them  holy  and  acceptable  in  his  sight.  They  are  not  found  until  restored.
"  I  can  wander,  but  cannot  find  my  way  back,"  was  the  confession  of  Augustine.
*  I  have  gone  astray  like  a  lost  sheep ;  seek.thy  servant."  3.  When  God  finds
men  he  trains  and  cultures  them  for  himself.  Grapes  and  figs  indicate  continual
care  and  kindness.  Israel  were  planted  and  trained  for  God.  Their  "  first  ripe  "
buds  and  future  prosperity  came  from  him.  He  gave  them  riches  and  wealth,
pleasantness  and  odour  in  the  sight  of  others.  They  were  precious  in  his  sight  and
honourable  (Is.  xliii.  4).  God  honours  nations,  Churches,  and  families  now,  pre-
serves them  carefully,  and  prefers  them  constantly  if  they  obey  him.  "  The  vine-
yard of  the  Lord  of  Hosts  is  the  house  of  Israel,  and  the  men  of  Judah  his  pleasant
plant"  (Is.  v.  1,  7).  Men  are  dignified,  nations  are  honoured,  not  by  wealth,  fleets,
and  outward  splendour — God's  presence  makes  them  glorious,  God's  grace  roots
them,  causes  them  to  blossom,  bud,  and  fill  the  world  with  fruit  and  sweetness  (Is,
xxvii.  6).  II.  A  people  honoured  by  God's  grace  may  dishonour  themselves  by
idolatry.  "  But  they  went  unto  Baal-Peor,  and  separated  themselves  unto  that  shame,"
— and  that  was  a  most  shameful  and  abominable  idol.  They  joined  the  Moabites  in
worshipping,  in  sacrificing,  and  eating  to  a  god,"  the  filthiest  and  foulest  of  the  heathen


1


riiap.  ix.]  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY .  ROSEA.  133


gods  (!N~um.  xxv.  2,  3;  Ps.  cvi.  28).  They  separated  themselves,  as  Nazarites,  united,
devoted  themselves  to  shame.  The  very  people  whom  God  exalted  and  blessed
forsook  him,  sank  below  others,  and  dishonoured  their  own  nature  (Jer.  ii.  21).
Is  England  free  1  are  Christian  Churches  free  from  idolatry,  debasing  in  its  influ-
ence and  tendencies  1  We  hate  cruel  rites  and  bow  not  to  Pagan  gods ;  but  do  we
not  dishonour  God  and  blaspheme  his  name  among  others  by  formalism,  hypocrisy,
and  ungodly  lives  1  We  clothe  our  evil  imaginations,  our  depraved  affections,  with
attributes  of  power  and  wisdom,  "  and  change  the  glory  of  the  uncorruptible  God
into  an  image  like  to  corruptible  man."  III.  The  dishonour  of  a  people  will  be
according  to  the  nature  of  the  objects  they  worship.  "  Their  abominations  were
according  as  they  loved."  If  history  proclaims  one  truth  more  loudly  than  another,
it  is  that  man  becomes  assimilated  to  the  moral  character  of  the  objects  which  he
worships.  The  gods  and  hero-kings,  Odin  and  Thor,  of  the  Scythians  were  blood-
thirsty and  cruel — turned  "  the  milk  of  human  kindness  "  into  gall  in  the  bosoms  of
their  votaries,  and  made  them  revel  in  slaughter  and  scenes  of  blood.  Because
heathen  deities  have  destroyed  themselves  suicide  has  been  recommended,  and  a
natural  death  thought  to  exclude  from  eternal  happiness.  The  more  men  worship
such  idols  the  more  they  resemble  them.  Hence  the  notion  that  the  gods  did  not
like  the  service,  would  not  accept  the  sacrifice,  of  those  who  were  unlike  them.
Israel  became  like  their  loves — shame  was  the  object  of  their  worship, and  they  had
as  many  abominable  idols  as  they  had  loves.  Their  deities  corrupted  their  passions ;
their  passions  multiplied  their  deities,  and  corrupted  their  minds  and  lives.
"  Man,"  says  an  author,  "  first  makes  his  god  like  his  own  corrupt  self,  or  to  some
corruption  in  himself ;  and  then,  worshipping  this  ideal  of  his  own,  he  becomes
the  more  corrupt  through  copying  that  corruption.  He  makes  his  god  in  his  own
image  and  likeness,  the  essence  and  concentration  of  his  own  bad  passions,  and
then  conforms  himself  to  the  likeness,  not  of  God,  but  of  what  was  most  evil  in
himself."  Concerning  all  false  gods  the  Psalmist  says,  "  They  that  make  them  are
like  unto  them  ;  so  is  every  one  that  trusteth  in  them."  Love  the  world,  you  be-
come worldly  ;  love  God,  you  become  godly.  Love  has  a  transforndng  power  which
nothing  else  has.  "  Nothing  else  makes  good  or  evil  actions,"  says  Augustine,
"  but  good  or  evil  affections.  What  a  man's  love  is,  that  he  is."  "  Love  the  Lord
thy  God."

Separated  unto  Shame. —  Verse  10.

Idolatry  is  not  a  harmless  mistake,  misdirected  aim,  but  a  serious  evil,  the  source
of  all  evils.  Its  consequences  are  degradation  and  shame.  All  sin  is  shame,  and
those  who  separate,  devote  themselves  to  sin,  separate  themselves  to  shame.

I.  This  shame  is  a  common  experience.  Adam  and  Eve  were  ashamed,  and
hid  themselves  in  the  garden.  Men  blush  now  when  caught  in  the  act  of  sin.  They
excuse,  palliate,  and  apologize  for  their  guilt.  They  were  ignorant,  tempted,  and
surprised.  They  are  afraid  to  confess,  and  seek  to  cover  their  shame.  If  men  do
not  appear  to  blush,  they  feel  ashamed.  They  may  be  light  before  men,  but
serious  before  God — laugh  in  public,  and  sigh  in  secret.  There  are  sad  hearts
beneath  cheerful  faces.  "The  conscious  mind  is  its  own  awful  world."  II.  This
shame  is  a  penal  suffering'.  It  is  the  result  of  wrong-doing,  of  broken  law.  The
violation  of  all  natural  laws  brings  suffering — sin  brings  suffering,  and  this  suffer-
ing is  shame.  It  is  not  a  shame  to  labour,  to  be  poor  and  afflicted ;  but  it  is  a
shame  to  sin,  and  sin  will  expose  a  man  to  shame.  The  wicked  are  often  put  to
shame  before  men.  They  lose  respect  and  honour,  get  exposed  to  contempt  and
danger.  They  will  be  cursed  by  God  in  his  providence.  "  Then  time  turns
torment,  when  man  turns  a  fool."  "A  wicked  man  is  loathsome,  and  cometh  to
Bhame."  III.  This  shame  is  a  threatened  punishment.  Believers  will  "  have  con-


134  fTOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  [chap.  ix.


fidence,  and  not  be  ashamed  "  before  Christ  at  his  coming.  But  the  wicked  will  "  rise
to  everlasting  shame  and  contempt."  Once  great  men  of  the  world  seemed  wise,
and  those  who  denied  sinful  lusts  were  fools ;  but  at  the  judgment  day  all  things
will  be  unmasked  and  realities  seen  in  their  true  light.  Shame  will  then  be  infam-
ous, and  disgrace  conspicuous  to  the  universe.  "  The  wise  shall  inherit  glory ;  but
shame  shall  be  the  promotion  of  fools."  IV.  This  shame  is  often  a  penitential
feeling.  When  sin  is  seen  in  the  light  of  Divine  love,  judged  by  the  sufferings  of
Christ,  it  is  felt  to  be  exceedingly  sinful.  The  penitent  regards  its  pollution,  not
its  punishment,  feels  ashamed,  reproached,  and  self-condemned.  The  publican  and
the  Psalmist,  Ezra  and  Nehemiah,  Job  and  Isaiah,  all  felt  ashamed  for  their  iniqui-
ties, and  cried  to  God  for  cleansing  and  pardon.  This  is  a  painful,  but  hopeful
experience.  It  attracts  the  notice  of  God.  "  He  looketh  upon  men,  and  if  any  say,
I  have  sinned  and  perverted  that  which  was  right,  and  it  profited  me  not ;  he  will
deliver  his  soul  from  going  into  the  pit,  and  his  life  shall  see  the  light."

The  Glory  and  Grief  of  a  People. — Verses  11 — 14.

Ephraim  had  parted  with  God,  the  true  glory,  and  now  all  in  which  they  gloried
should  be  taken  from  them.  Their  posterity  should  be  cut  off,  their  prosperity
would  decay,  and  God  himself  would  depart  from  them.  The  most  powerful  tribe
of  the  people  became  the  most  miserable,  and  all  its  glory  was  turned  into  grief.

I.  The  glory  of  a  people.  Fruitfulness  and  strength  were  promised  to  Ephraim
in  great  abundance  (Gen.  xlviii.  19).  Moses  had  assigned  tens  of  thousands  to  him,
while  to  Manasseh  thousands  only  were  promised  (Deut.  xxxiii.  17).  She  was
proud  of  her  offspring  and  increase,  of  her  wealth  and  situation.  1.  Posterity  is
considered  the  glory  of  a  people.  In  families  "  children  are  an  heritage  from  the
Lord."  We  boast  of  our  sons  and  daughters.  In  them  we  love  to  see  our  image,
hope  to  perpetuate  our  name,  and  secure  our  fortunes.  Like  Cornelia,  the  mother
of  the  Gracchi,  when  asked  to  display  our  jewels  we  point  to  our  sons  and  say,
"These  are  my  jewels."  In  nations  posterity  are  the  hope  and  foundation  of  the
future.  Prom  the  rising  generation,  fathers  and  mothers,  leaders  and  teachers,  are
to  spring.  As  "  the  child  is  father  of  the  man,"  so  children  are  the  nation's  popula-
tion and  prosperity  in  the  bud.  Hence  to  our  posterity  are  entrusted  the  interests
of  our  commerce,  the  defence  of  our  throne,  and  the  glory  of  our  name.  In  them
are  the  germs  of  national  virtues  and  vices,  feelings  and  sentiments  which  will
determine  the  character  and  decide  the  fate  of  this  empire.  "  The  worth  of  a
state,  in  the  long  run,  is  the  worth  of  the  individuals  comprising  it,"  says  J.  S.
Mill.  II.  Outward  prosperity  is  considered  the  glory  of  a  people.  "  Ephraim,
as  I  saw  Tyrus,  is  planted  in  a  pleasant  place."  Ephraim,  like  Tyre,  was  populous
and  wealthy  \  strong  and  beautifully  situated ;  planted  with  care,  and  defended  by
God.  Beauty  and  strength  surrounded  her.  "Thou  hast  been  in  Eden,  the  garden
of  God;  every  precious  stone  was  thy  covering,"  &c.  (Ezek.  xxviii.  2,  13).  So  now
nations  trust  to  the  abundance  of  their  revenues,  the  beauty  of  their  public  build-
ings, and  the  strength  of  their  fortifications.  England  relies  on  its  wealth  and
position,  its  armies  and  its  fleets,  its  philosophy  and  its  morality.  But  our  chief
strength,  our  real  power,  consists  in  the  characters  of  the  rising  generation,  the  en-
lightenment of  our  citizens,  and  the  integrity  of  our  conduct.  The  nation  that  has
no  higher  god  than  pleasure,  gold,  or  position,  is  poor  indeed.  Heathen  deities
often  imaged  human  virtues,  but  these  are  vanities  to  depend  upon,  and  will  cause
a  people's  downfall.  Glory  is  false  glory  when  attributed  to  numbers  and  wealth,
to  outward  prosperity  and  empire,  to  anything  short  of  God.  God  warns  us  as  he
did  Israel.  "  If  thou  wilt  not  observe  to  do  all  the  words  of  this  law — ye  shall  be
left  few  in  number — the  Lord  will  rejoice  over  you  to  destroy  you,  and  to  bring
you  to  nought"  (Deut.  xxviii.  58,  62,  63).  III.  The  glory  of  a  people  turned
into  grief.     The  glory  departed  from  Ephraim  in  the  destruction  of  their  children.


chip.  IX.]  II0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  135


the  decay  of  national  prosperity,  and  the  departure  of  God  from  their  midst.     1.
The  loss  of  children  brings  grief.     "  Though  they  bring  up  their  children,  yet  will
I  bereave  them."     This  carriage  and  abortion,  death  at  the  very  birth  of  their
offspring,  would  diminish  their  number,  and  weaken  their  nation,    (a.)  They  would
die  suddenly.     "  Their  glory  shall  fly  away  like  a  bird."    Swiftly  cut  off,  like  Job's
family,  by  tornado,  whirlwind,  or  accident,  (b.)  They  would  die  violently.  "  Ephraim
shall  bring  forth  his  children  to  the  murderer."     If  any  grew  up  to  manhood,  they
were  to  be  cut  off  by  the  sword,  (c.)  They  were  to  die  hopelessly.  "  There  shall  not
be  a  man  left."     They  were  reduced  in  every  stage  from  conception  to  maturity — to
die  suddenly  and  prematurely  by  ruthless  hands  and  sword.     Thus  the  beauty  of
all  earthly  blessings  is  quickly  blasted  (Is.  lx.  6,  8).    Accidents  and  diseases,  "the
pestilence  that  walketh  in   darkness,  and  the  destruction  that  wasteth  at  noon-
day," cut  down  the  hopes  of  our  life.     We  mourn  like  Burke  at  the  loss  of  his  only
son :   "  They  who  should  have  succeeded  me  have  gone  before  me.     They  who
should  have  been  to  me  as  posterity  are  in  the  place  of  ancestors."     "  Thou  shalt
beget  sons  and  daughters,  but  thou  shalt  not  enjoy  them ;  for  they  shall  go  into
captivity."     2.  The  decay  of  national  prosperity  brings  grief.     Strong  and  rich,
proud  and  secure,  as  Tyre  was,  Ephraim's  glory  would  fade  away  like  a  flower.
Eiches  take    unto  themselves  wings  and  fly  away.      Trade    may    prosper    and
mechanism  flourish ;  the  dew   may    couch   beneath,  and  the  sun  shine   above ;
the    chief  things    of  the    ancient  mountains   and   the    precious    things    of    the
lasting   hills   may   abound   (Deut.    xxxiii.    13 — 16) ;    but    the   greatness    of    a
nation   depends   not   on   the   wealth  of   its   population,   nor   the   extent  of   its
territories.     Idleness  and  love  of  pleasure,  idolatry  and  forgetfulness  of  God,  will
cause  inevitable  decay.    The  fatal  weakness  of  Athens  were  free  men,  outnumbered
by  slaves,  citizens,  corrupt  in  morals,  and  women  unchaste  in  conduct.  The  decline
and  fall  of  Eome  may  be  traced  to  the  general  corruption  of  the  people.     Ephraim
fell  into  sin,  and  her  glory  departed  from  her.     3.  The  departure  of  God  from  a
people  brings  grief.     "  Woe  also  to  them  when  I  depart  from  them."     The  loss  of
children  was  grievous  ;  the  decay  of  present  prosperity  and  future  hope  sad  enough  ;
but  God's  departure  was  the  source  of  all  evil  to  them.     When  God  withdraws  his
presence  and  providence  nothing  can  sustain  a  Church  or  people.     When  Cain  was
cut  off,  and  Saul  forsaken  by  God,  they  became  more  wicked  and  miserable.     When
the  ark  of  God  was  taken  Ichabod  was  pronounced,  for  the  glory  had  departed
from  Israel  (1  Sam.  iv.  21,  24).     Pestilence  and  famine  can  turn  a  nation's  glory
into  grief.     Withdrawment  of  Divine  favour  can  change  the  pride  of  the  Church
into  shame,  and  the  hope  of  the  family  into  grief.     God's  favour  is  the  sublimest  of
all  joys,  all  triumphs,  and  all  delights.  But  woe  unto  any  with  whom  God  is  angry
and  from  whom  God  departs.    Present  afflictions  only  foreshadow  future  judgments.
Their  sun  will  set,  and  darkness  cover  their  lands.     "  I  will  forsake  them,  and  I
will  hide  my  face  from  them,  and  they  shall  be  devoured,  and  many  evils  and
troubles  shall  befall  them ;  so  that  they  will  say  in  that  day,  Are  not  these  evils
come  upon  us,  because  our  God  is  not  among- us"  (Deut.  xxxi.  17)?

HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND   OUTLINES,

Ver.  12.     Bring  up  their  children,  reserved!      "This   is   a  sore   vanity;"

How   soon  could   our   God   insensibly  but  the  best  remedy  of  it  is  submission

waste  the  most  populous  nations  !    Nay,  and  confidence  in  God,  and  a  conscien-

how  often  does  ha  thus  decrease  them  !  tious  performance  of  our  duty  :  especi-

and  what  awful  instances  of  this  has  our  ally  in  training  up  our  families  in  the

eventful  age  exhibited  !     What  an  alloy  fear  of  God,  and  in  seeking  for  them,  as

it  is   to   our   comfort  in   our   beloved  well  as  ourselves,  "  first  the  kingdom  of

children  to   reflect  for  what   purposes  God  and  his  righteousness,"  and  setting

they  may  possibly  be  brought  up  and  them  a  good  example.     Surely  it  is  far


136  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  [chap.  ix.


more  desirable  to  be  written  childless,  millions  yet  unborn.     Think  how  much

than  to  bring  up  children  in  the  service  depends  upon  early  training !

of  sin  and  Satan  [Scott],  God's  departure.     They  had  departed

The  destiny  of  the  rising  generation  and  turned  away  from  or  against  God.

and  the  fate  of  the   nation   is  in  the  It  had  been  their  characteristic  (ch.  iv.

"Home  School."      The  great   German  16).     Now  God  himself  would  requite

teacher  Frbbel  declared  that  the  great  them,  as  they  had  requited  him.     He

motto  of  the  people  should  be,  "  Let  us  would  depart  from  them.     This  is  the

live  for  our  children."     If  Simon  had  last  state  of  privation,  which  forms  "  the

thought  of  what  Judas  might  have  been,  punishment  of  loss  "  in  hell.      When

would  not  this  have  affected  his  treat-  the  soul  has  lost  God,  what  has  it  [Pusey]1

ment   of   the  boy?    What  if  the  mo-  Woe  unto  them.     1.  In  personal  be-

ther  of   Napoleon,  and   of  his  brother  reavement.      2.    In    national    distress,

kings  and  sister  queens,  had  foreseen  3.  In  the  hour  of  death.     4.  In  the  day

what  became  of  those  around  her  hum-  of  judgment.     "  It  shall  be  well  with

ble  fireside  in  Corsica  1   We  do  not  know  them  that  fear  God.  .  .  But  it  shall  not

what  part  our  children  may  play  in  life,  be  well  with  the  wicked  "  (Ecc.  viii.  12.

what  joy  or  sorrow  they  may  cause  to  13).

HOMILETICS.
Great  Wickedness  and  Great  Punishment. — Verses  15 — 17.

In  the  last  part  of  this  chapter  God  accuses  Israel  of  idolatry,  condemns  their
princes  for  abetting  it,  and  threatens  to  cast  them  off  for  ever,  for  "  the  wicked-
ness of  their  doings."     Notice —

I.  Their  great  wickedness.     The  expressions  indicate — 1.  Their  wickedness
began  ivith  forgetfulness  of  God.     (( They  did  not  hearken  unto  him."     They  re-
belled against  God,  would  not  do  what  he  commanded,  nor  abstain  from  what  he
forbade.     God  makes  himself  known  by  judgment  and  mercy ;  but  men  disregard
his  voice,  and  pursue  their  ends.  2.  Their  wickedness  was  encouraged  by  their  rulers.
"All  their  princes  are  revolters."     Political  power  had  no  check  upon  the  general
corruption.     Not  one  rebuked  offence,  recalled  to  virtue,  or  warned  of  danger.    All
had  departed,  were  alienated  in  heart  and  mind  from  God.     Judges  turned  aside,
and  persisted  in  sinful  ways.     Princes  committed  "  the  sin  of  Jeroboam,  who  made
Israel  to  sin."     "  He  who  knows  how  to  dissemble  knows  how  to  reign,"  is  the
saying  of  many.     But  the  words  of  Louis  IX.  of  France  are  more  becoming  a
prince.     "  If  truth  be  banished  from  all  the  rest  of  the  world,  it  ought  to  be  found
in  the  breast  of  princes."     3.  Their  wickedness  was  malicious  in  its  design.     "  The
wickedness  of  their  doings."     Their  sins  were  not  infirmities,  but  presumptuous,
daring  evils ;  not  common  sins,  but  the  wickedness  of  their  wicked  works,  the
essence  of  wickedness  which  excited  the  anger  of  God.     All  sins  are  evils ;  but
some  are  "  presumptuous  sins,"  sins  of  greater  rebellion  and  mischief  than  others.
Sins  against  light  and  truth,  against  Divine  warnings,  and  in  religious  privileges
are  more  wicked  than  others.     Men  sin  from  choice,  with  eagerness,  deliberation,
and  design.     "  God  overthroweth  the   wicked   for  their  wickedness."     4.  Their
wickedness  was  corrupt  in  its  practice.     Gilgal  was  the  centre  and  scene  of  their
corrupt  practices.     Here  God  gave  their  ancestors  the  first-fruits  of  Canaan,  renewed
his  covenant  with  them,  and  rolled  away  their  reproach.  The  service  and  sanctuary
of  God  once  made  the  place  holy.     Now  it  is  a  place  of  idolatry,  chosen  as  a  pre-
text to  cover  their  sin  and  to  make  it  acceptable  to  the  people.     The  nature  of  the
place  adds  to  the  guilt  of  the  sin.    Sins  in  England  are  worse  than  sins  in  heathen
lands,  and  sins  in  the  house  of  God  are  more  abominable  than  sins  in  the  world.
Provocations  turn  God's  former  loving-kindness  into  anger,  and  the  place  of  sanctity
may  become  the  place  of  rejection,     "  In  the  land  of  uprightness  they  will  deal  un-


chap,  ix.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  137


justly"  (Is.  xxvi.  10);  " the  faithful  city  is  become  an  harlot"  (Is.  i.  21).  II.
Great  punishment.  Great  must  be  that  wickedness  which  provokes  God  to  hate
and  reject  his  people.  The  judgments  were  national,  and  involved  every  individual
in  the  loss  of  outward  privileges  and  position.  1.  Exclusion  from  the  house  of  God.
"  I  will  drive  them  out  of  mine  house."  He  will  drive  them  from  the  privileges  of
his  house,  and  drive  them  out  of  his  land  (ch.  viii.  1).  God  will  disinherit  them,
and  they  shall  never  be  restored  to  the  kingdom.  God  deprives  sinful  nations  of
their  prestige  and  position,  removes  their  candlestick  for  their  ingratitude,  and  re-
jects them  for  their  wickedness.  Unfaithful  professors  will  be  driven  from  his
house  and  robbed  of  the  means  of  grace.  2.  Smitten  by  the  judgments  of  God.
"  Ephraim  is  smitten,  their  root  is  dried  up,  they  shall  bear  no  fruit."  Their
national  prosperity  was  smitten,  by  visitation  from  God,  by  blasting  and  mildew
(Am.  iv.  9).  If  a  tree  be  cut  down  it  may  sometimes  sprout  again  (Job  xiv.  7) ;
but  there  was  not  hope  for  Ephraim.  Eoot  and  branch  should  wither  away  and
die.  Nations  have  nourishing  trade,  and  nobility  grand  mottoes ;  but  God  can
destroy  their  prosperity,  pluck  them  up  by  their  roots,  and  leave  them  without
power  to  revive,  inwardly  or  outwardly.  He  can  overturn  a  people  as  easily  as
men  uproot  a  tree.  "  Utrecht  planted  me,  Louvain  watered  me,  and  Cresar  gave
the  increase,"  was  the  inscription  on  the  gates  of  the  college,  built  by  Pope  Adrian.
But  to  reprove  his  folly,  some  one  wrote  underneath,  "  Here  God  did  nothing."  We
cannot  nourish  without  God.  God  shall  destroy  thee  for  ever ;  he  shall  take  thee
away,  and  pluck  thee  out  of  thy  dwelling-place,  and  root  thee  out  of  the  land  of
the  living.  3.  Rejected  in  the  providence  of  God.  "  My  God  will  cast  them
away."  This  is  the  climax — hated,  forsaken,  and  cast  away.  They  became  objects
of  aversion  to  God,  and  "  wanderers  among  the  "nations  "  of  the  earth,  (a.)  They
were  divorced  from  God.  "  I  will  love  them  no  more."  They  were  not  any  longer
his  people,  and  shared  not  his  love.  God  put  the  spouse  out  of  his  house  (b.)
They  were  forsaken  of  God.  They  first  forsook  him,  and  he  forsook  them.  Cain
was  a  fugitive  and  a  vagabond  in  the  earth.  If  God  scatters  his  own  elect,  because
they  did  not  hearken  unto  him,  what  impunity  can  any  Christian  nation  or  indi-
vidual professor  have,  if  they  neglect  Divine  warnings,  and  do  not  bring  forth
fruits  according  to  their  high  calling  1  "  If  ye  transgress,  I  will  scatter  you  abroad
among  the  nations  "  (Neh.  i.  8).  "  And  among  these  nations  thou  shalt  find  no
ease,  neither  shall  the  sole  of  thy  foot  have  rest :  but  the  Lord  shall  give  thee  there
a  trembling  heart,  and  failing  of  eyes,  and  sorrow  of  mind  "  (Deut.  xxviii.  65).

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  15.   TJie  great  wickedness — idola-  by  the  same  shall    he  be   punished"

try.     1.  Turning  places  of  worship  and  (Wisd.  xi.  16).

renown  into  scenes  of  corruption.     2.  Yer.   16.   Men,  Churches,  and  nations

Masking  present  error  under  the  garb  of  like  trees.     1.  Planted  and  intended  to

former  custom.     Plato  was  reproving  a  flourish,  watered  and  cared  for  by  God.

boy  for  playing  at  some  foolish  game  on  2.    Sin  brings  judgments  which  smite

one  occasion.     "  Thou  reprovest   me,"  the  root  and  wither  the  branches.     It

said  the  youth,  "  for  a  very  little  thing."  corrupts  and  cuts  off  the  offspring.     It

"  But  custom,"  replied  Plato,  "  is  not  a  leaves    men   to  mourn   with   Edmund

little  thing."     Bad  custom,  consolidated  Burke  at  the  loss  of  his  only  son  :  "  The

into  habit,  becomes  a  tyrant  and  a  curse,  storm  has  gone  over  me,  and   I  am  like

3.  Originating  God's  anger,  and  4.  Ter-  one  of  those  old  oaks  which  the  hurri-

minating  in   man's   rejection.     "  Bind  cane  scatters  around  me.     I  am  stripped

not  one  sin  upon  another,  for  in  one  of  all  my  honours  ;  I  am  torn  up  by  the

thou  shalt  not  be  unpunished  "  (Ecclus.  roots ;    I  lie   prostrate  on   the   earth. "

vii.  8).      '  Wherewithal  a  man  sinneth,  Men  give  themselves   deadly  wounds.


138


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  HOSE  A.


[CHAP.  IX.


Professors   are    cursed  as  the  fig-tree,     rael,  as  a  reed  is  shaken  in  the  water,"
smitten  as   the  vine,  and  beaten  to  the     &c.  (1  Kings  xiv.  15).
ground.     "  For  the  Lord  shall  smite  Is-


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  IX.


Ver.  1 — 4.  Joy.  The  joy  of  the  un-
godly is  superficial,  but  for  a  moment,
and  not  to  be  compared  with  the  rejoic-
ing of  the  godly.  It  is  like  water  taken
from  the  surface,  instead  of  the  deep
well,  and  will  end  quickly  and  abruptly.
"  He  that  makes  this  mirth  and  he  that
likes  it — both  are  fools,  and  their  pleas-
antness will  soon  have  an  end  "  [Pemble].

Ver.  5 — 7.  While  the  sun  shines
upon  the  earthly  horizon  the  evil  days
are  put  to  a  distance.  We  scarcely  ad-
mit the  possibility  of  a  change  of  scene.
We  exclude  the  prospect  of  dark  days  as
an  unwelcome  intruder.  The  young
revel  in  their  pleasure,  as  if  it  would
never  end.  But  oh  !  the  folly,  the  pre-
sumption of  creatures  born  for  an  eternal
existence,  and  to  whom  the  present  life
is  but  the  preparation  time  for  a  never-
ending  one,  and  to  whom  death  is  but
the  door  of  eternity,  so  wilfully  shutting
their  eyes  to  this  near  approach,  deter-
mining to  live  for  this  life  only,  and  to
let  eternity  take  its  chance  [Bridges],
In  the  day  of  prosperity  there  is  a  for-
getfulness  of  affliction  ;  and  in  the  day
of  affliction  there  is  no  more  remem-
brance of  prosperity  (Ecclus.  xi.  25).

Ver.  9,  10.  Corrupt.  "  0  Lord,  abhor
me  not,  though  I  be  most  abhorrible,"
said  the  dying  Thos.  Scott.  "  My  re-
pentance needs  to  be  repented  of ;  my
tears  want  washing,  and  the  very  wash-
ing of  my  tears  needs  still  to  be  washed
over  again  with  the  blood  of  my  Re-
deemer "  [Bp.  Beveridge],  There  is  no
vice  that  doth  so  cover  a  man  with  shame


as  to  be  found  false  and  perfidious
[Bacon].  The  disposition  of  a  liar  is
dishonourable,  and  his  shame  is  ever
with  him  (Ecclus.  xx.  26).

Ver.  11, 12.  Children.  "  Better  is  it
to  have  no  children,  and  to  have  virtue  :
for  the  memorial  thereof  is  immortal ;
because  it  is  known  with  God  and  with
men"  (Wis.  of  Sol.  iv.  1).  "  Our  chil-
dren that  lie  in  the  cradle  are  ours,  and
bear  in  them  those  lives  which  shall  yet
make  them  to  appear,  the  boy  like  the
father,  and  the  daughter  like  the  mo-
ther "  [Beecher],  Glory  or  shame  lies
in  the  future  of  your  child,  according  to
your  conduct  and  training.

Ver.  13,  16.  Boot.  Any  number  of
depraved  units  cannot  form  a  great  na-
tion. The  people  may  seem  to  be
highly  civilized,  and  yet  be  ready  to  fall
to  pieces  at  the  first  touch  of  adversity.
Without  integrity  of  individual  charac-
ter they  can  have  no  real  strength,  co-
hesion, or  soundness.  They  may  be  rich,
polite,  and  artistic,  and  yet  hovering  on
the  brink  of  ruin.  If  living  for  them-
selves only,  and  with  no  end  but  plea-
sure, each  little  self  his  own  little  god,
such  a  nation  is  doomed,  and  its  decay
is  inevitable  [Smiles],

This  is  the  state  of  man  :  To  day  he  puts  forth
The  tender  leaves  of  hope,  to-morrow  blossoms,
And   hears  his   blushing   honours   thick  upon

him :
The  third  day  comes  a  frost,  a  killing  frost ;
And,— when  he  thinks,  good  easy  man,  full

surely
His  greatness  is  a  ripening, — nips  his  root,
And  then  he  falls,  as  I  do  [Shakespeare},


chap,  x.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.  189


CHAFFEE  X.

Critical  Notes. — 1.  Empty]  Luxuriant.  Lit.  poureth  out,  emptying  itself  into  leaves;  stretch-
ing itself  far  and  wide  towards  foreign  alliances  (Ps.  lxxx.  9,  12) ;  outwardly  prosperous,  but  no  ripe
grapes,  sound  fruit  to  God.  Bringeth]  Lit.  sets  or  prepares  fruit  from  and  to  itself.  Altars]  mul-
tiplied as  his  fruit.  The  greater  prosperity,  the  greater  ingratitude  and  idolatry.  2.  Divided]  by
themselves  between  God  and  idols  (1  Kings  xviii.  21).  He]  Emphat.  Jehovah,  not  the  enemy.
Break]  Heb.  behead — a  bold  expression.  As  victims  are  beheaded,  so  the  horns  of  the  altar  shall  be
broken  off  (Am.  iii.  14).  3.  Now]  Lit.  soon.  King]  Words  of  despair.  Deprived  of  a  king,  or  in
a  state  of  anarchy:  forsaken  of  God  for  their  sin,  what  could  a  king  do  ?  To  us]  Lit.  for  us  (ch.
xiii.  10)  ?  Whatever  we  have  will  not  avail,  if  God  help  not.  4.  Words]  without  substance  and
sincerity,  nothing  but  vain  talk  (Is.  lviii.  13).  Falsely]  Their  covenants  lack  truth,  and  easily
broken  (2  Kings  xvii.  4).  Judgment]  A  good  and  healthy  plant  to  society,  springs  up  and  spreads  far
and  wide,  like  bitter  and  poisonous  hemlock  in  the  field.-  They  prepared  the  soil  for  judgment  by
cultivating  injustice.  Perverted  justice  is  like  rank  poison,  injurious  to  community.  5.  People]  of
the  calf  and  idolatrous  priests  shall  mourn  for  the  golden  calf ;  their  glory  can  neither  help  itself  nor
them.  6.  It]  Emphat.  It  itself,  as  well  as  Israel,  shall  be  carried  into  exile.  7.  Sam-]  The  capital
and  the  kingdom  itself  destroyed.  Foam]  A  straw  or  bubble  on  the  water,  empty,  light,  and  worthless  ;
others,  like  a  splinter  carried  away  by  the  current.  8.  Sin]  The  altars,  the  buildings  connected  with
image  worship.  Thorn]  The  place  shall  be  desolate,  wild  briars  shall  grow  where  the  victims  were
once  offered.  Altars  were  graves  of  idols,  and  monuments  of  death.  The  inhabitants  in  hopeless
despair  will  pray  for  swift  destruction.  Fall]  To  bury  us  from  impending  ruin,  to  escape  more  ter-
rible doom.  Spoken  of  Jerusalem  (Luke  xxiii.  30),  and  of  the  judgment- day  (Rev.  vi.  *16).  9.]  A
return  to  earlier  days  to  prove  deeper  guilt.  Stood]  As  at  the  beginning,  so  now  they  stand,  persist-
ing in  their  sin.  Others,  though  smitten  in  Gibeah,  yet  they  avenged  the  sacred  character  of  God's  law  ;
but  now  none  of  the  ten  tribes  took  the  side  of  God.  The  battle  shall  overtake  and  utterly  destroy  them.
10.  Desire]  After  the  manner  of  men,  God  longs  to  punish  in  severity,  to  impress  the  mind.  No
longer  joy  over  them  (Deut.  xxviii.  63),  but  justice  without  mercy.  Bind]  Lit.  at  their  binding,
*'.  e.  when  God  would  bind  them  like  oxen  ploughing  side  by  side.  Two]  transgressions.  Forsaking
God,  and  revolting  against  the  house  of  David.  "  The  breach  of  both  tables  of  God's  law,  or  as
Jer.  ii.  13  "  [Pusey].  11.  Taught]  Trained,  accustomed  to  work.  Threshing  easier  than  ploughing ;
an  image  of  freedom  and  enjoyment  (Deut.  xxv.  4 ;  xxxii.  15),  of  productive  labour  and  prosperity.
Now  put  under  the  yoke,  and  employed  in  servile  work.  Ride]  Not  mounted,  but  drive  in  harness.
12.]  A  call  to  repentance.  Sowing  and  reaping  ==  moral  conduct.  In]  Lit.  for  right,  which  must  be
the  fruit.  Reap]  in  the  proportion  of  mercy,  not  justice ;  mercy  from  God  and  from  man  ;  mercy  in
both  this  and  the  world  to  come.  Fallow]  Plough  virgin  soil,  cultivate  fresh  land  (Jer.  iv.  3).
New  soil  required,  begin  anew.  Seek]  With  anxiety  and  diligence  persevere  till  you  find  God.
Rain]  in  copious  blessings  (Ps.  lxxii.  6  ;  Is.  xlv.  8).  Righteousness]  which  he  will  teach  you,  and
generate  by  the  Holy  Spirit  (Ps.  Ii.  12).  13.]  Another  reason  for  reformation.  Ploughed]  Been  at
pains  to  sow  wickedness  and  reaped  the  fruit  of  it.  Iniquity]  itself  is  the  soil  which  they  cultivated,
the  seed  and  the  fruit ;  its  own  natural  reward.  Lies]  A  just  reward  for  their  idolatry,  the  fruit  was
bitter  and  unprofitable.  Thy  way]  Perverse  way  (Is.  lvii.  10;  Jer.  ii.  23) ;  they  trusted  to  Egypt
and  their  calves,  not  to  Jehovah.  14.  Tumult]  War  (Am.  ii.  2).  People]  Lit.  peoples,  "not,  as  God
willed  them  to  be,  one  people,  for  they  had  no  principle  of  oneness  or  stability,  who  had  no  legiti-
mate succession,  either  of  kings  or  of  priests  "  [Pnsey].  Against  all  Israel  and  the  tribes  connected
with  her  should  tumultuous  war  arise.  Shal-]  Shalmanezer  king  of  Assyria.  The  mother]  and
children,  inhuman  cruelty,  commonly  practised  (2  Kings  viii.  12  ;  Is.  xiii.  16  ;  Ps.  cxxxvii.  8).
15.  Bethel]  The  seat  of  idolatry  prepares  this  destruction  for  the  people.  Wick-]  Lit.  the  evil  of  your
evil.  "Wickedness  in  its  second  potency,  extreme  wickedness  "  [Keil],  Morning]  In  the  hope
from  alliance  with  Egypt  against  Assyria,  when  prosperity  was  expected  to  dawn;  or  suddenly  and
surely  shall  the  kingdom  be  utterly  cut  off.

HOMILETICS.

The  Abuse  op  Outward  Prosperity. —  Verses  1 — 4.

Israel  is  now  accused  of  fruitlessness  and  selfishness.  God  blessed  them  with
abundant  prosperity,  but  it  was  abused.  The  increase  of  their  wealth  only  tended
to  the  increase  of  sin ;  the  multiplication  of  images ;  the  spread  of  deceit  and  per-
jury. They  were  good  for  nothing,  a  degenerate  vine,  luxuriant  in  leaves,  but
empty  before  God  (Ezek.  xv.  3,  5).


140  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.  [chjj>.  x.


I.  Outward  prosperity  used  for  selfish  ends.  "  He  bringeth  forth  fruit  unto
himself."  Whatever  fruit  they  had  was  expended  on  self.  "  Life,"  says  Carlyle,
"  begins  with  renunciation."  The  worldly  man  believes  that  life  begins  in  getting,
is  enjoyed  by  keeping,  and  that  he  who  renounces  most  will  have  the  least.  Men,
like  Israel,  seek  refuge  from  trouble  and  pleasure  in  life,  by  living  in  a  world  of
their  own.  1.  Self  was  considered  the  source  of  their  prosperity.  Man  is  his  own
creator  and  redeemer,  self-sufficient  and  strong,  in  their  estimation.  All  selfishness
is  self-assertion,  a  practical  repudiation  of  our  helpless  and  sinful  condition.  The
gospel  alone  can  break  down  the  rule  of  self,  and  bring  Christ  as  the  object  of  love
and  obedience.  2.  Self  was  considered  the  end  of  their  prosperity.  Israel  refused
culture.  Men  are  self-willed,  live  not  for  God,  but  for  their  own  lusts  and  aggran-
dizement. They  detest  and  will  not  forgive  in  others  what  they  indulge  in  them-
selves. Grasping  in  their  disposition,  using  God's  gifts  for  self,  they  dedicate
wealth  and  business  to  self.  Everything  is  expended  for  gratification,  honour,  and
position.  Prosperity  is  abused,  the  right  of  our  fellow-men  and  the  claims  of  God
are  disregarded.  Men  deny  their  stewardship,  and  retributive  justice  takes  their
unlawful  gains.  "  When  ye  did  eat,  and  when  ye  did  drink,  did  not  ye  eat  for
yourselves,  and  drink  for  yourselves?"  (Zech.  vii.  6).  II.  Outward  prosperity
used  in  disregard  to  God.  In  living  for  self  they  had  no  regard  to  the  claims  of
their  God.  Reason  and  revelation  teach  that  God  should  be  the  supreme  object
of  affection.      But  selfishness  seeks  to  rival  God  and  alienate  our  love  from  him.

1.  This  disregard  springs  from  divided  allegiance.  "  Their  heart  is  divided."  "  They
were  fearers  of  the  Lord,  and  tbey  were  servers  of  their  gods  "  (2  Kings  xvii.  32,
33).  They  would  give  up  neither,  but  tried  to  worship  both.  We  cannot  serve
God  and  Mammon  (Matt.  vi.  24).  One  object  must  be  supreme  in  our  mind.  If
we  cast  off  God,  then  Mammon  will  govern,  in  some  form,  our  thoughts,  feelings,
and  purposes.  A  divided  heart  is  a  faulty  heart.  God  will  not  have  part,  but  the
whole  service.  There  must  be  no  baiting  between  God  and  Baal.  Decision  must
be  made  now  before  it  be  too  late.     "  How  long  halt  ye  between  two  opinions  % "

2.  This  disregard  is  clothed  in  the  forms  of  devotion.     They  had  altars  and  idols,  a
fair  show  of  profession,  and  outward  forms ;  but  their  piety  emptied  itself  in  tran-
sient feelings  and  false  notions.     Like  many  now  who  make  a  fair  show  in  the
flesh,  but  do  not  produce  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  love,  joy,  and  peace.  "  Fruits  unto
holiness  and  to  God  "  are  acceptable ;  but  fruits  unto  selfishness  are  "  nigh  unto
cursing,  whose  end  is  to  be  burned  "  (Heb.  vi.  8).     What  a  mockery  to  put  on  the
garb  of  religion,  when  the  heart  is  divided  and  alienated  from  God  !     Alas  !  what
empty  vines  in  the  Christian  Church  in  this  very  day  !    Those  who  seek  their  own
credit  or  worldly  profit  in  religious  duties  will  be  accounted  unfaithful  branches.
But  all  who  abide  in  Christ,  will  bring  forth  fruit  to  the  glory  of  God  and  the
benefit  of  men.     3.  This  disregard  is  in  proportion  to  their  outward  prosperity.
"  According  to  the  goodness  of  his  land  they  have  made  goodly  images."    Enriched
by  the  produce  of  their  land,  they  made  beautiful  images,  increased  their  ingratitude
and  sin.     The  greater  God's  blessings  to  men,  the  more  they  abuse  his  gifts.     The
more  God  lavishes  favours  upon  them,  the  more  determined  are  they  to  adore
themselves  and  worship  their  idols.      Flourishing  trade  begets   wealth;    wealth
begets  pride ;  and  pride  self-sufficiency.     Men  grow  in  sensuality,   avarice,  and
wickedness.     Prosperity  destroys  the  piety  of  some  men.     The  sun  shines,  dulls
and  extinguishes  the  fire.     The  insidious  influence  of  prosperity  may  be  seen  in
William,  Duke  of  Normandy,  whose  bravery  and  candour  gained  respect  at  a  dis-
tance, but  in  the  possession  of  power  fell  into  contempt  among  his  friends  and  subjects.
Macaulay  gives  an  instance  in  the  Earl  of  Tarrington,  who  rose  into  a  hero  in
poverty  and  exile,  but  sank  again  into  a  voluptuary  in  prosperity.     "  I  was  ruined
by  too  easy  success  in  early  life,"  said  some  one.     "  In  all  time  of  our  wealth,  good
Lord,  deliver  us."     "  The  prosperity  of  fools  shall  destroy  them."     III.   Outward
prosperity  abused  will  bring  punishment.     "  He  shall  break  down  their  altars,"


chap.  x.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.  141


&c."  The  sin  of  Israel  became  the  very  means  of  their  punishment.  The  gold
with  which  they  beautified  their  idols  tempted  the  invader,  and  involved  them  in
hopeless  ruin.  Their  own  idols  became  their  own  misery.  All  who  pursue  plea-
sure and  ambition,  who  give  themselves  to  earthly  idols,  will,  through  their  heart-
lessness  and  idolatry,  lose  both  God  and  their  own  selves,  and  become  a  castaway
at  last.  Kings  and  princes,  creature-comforts  and  creature- confidences,  will  not
avail,  when  God  is  lost.  "  Because  we  feared  not  the  Lord,  what  then  should  a
king  do  for  us  1 "  Every  idolized  dependence  will  soon  be  torn  away  from  those
who  fear  not  God.  Nothing  can  help  them  in  their  distress.  Suffering  and  remorse,
regrets  and  unavailing  self-reproach  for  ever,  will  be  their  portion.  "  If  the  Lord
do  not  help  thee,  whence  shall  I  helo  thee  1 "  (2  Kings  vi.  27).

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Yer.  1.   Vine.    The  Christian  Church  3.    A  man  dangerous  to  the  world.     4.

is  a  vine  brought  out  of  Egypt,  an  un-  The  most  solemn  is,  reprobate  in  the

friendly  soil,  displacing  old  trees,  and  sight  of  God.      IV.    Its  future  conse-

planted  in  its  position  by  God's  hand  quences.     Terrible  will  be  the  condition

(Ps.  lxxx.  8 — 11).     Hence  the  parallel  of   the  hypocrite  at  the  judgment-day.

between  the  Church  and  a  vine.      1.  Its  He  will  be  separated  from  the  righteous

transplanting  from  an  unfruitful  to  a  and  found  among  those  whom  he  taught

fertile  soil.     2.  Its  careful  keeping.     3.  and  reproved.     If  your  heart  is  broken>

Its  grand  design — to  bear  fruit.     Then  it  differs  from  a  divided  heart.     There

(a)  it  is   beautiful,   (V)  useful,   (c)   ac-  is  hope  and  pardon  for  you.     God  can

ceptable  to  God.     If  empty  and  fruit-  give  a  new  heart  [Spurgeonj.

less,  it  is  just  the  reverse  of  all  this,  en-  1.  The  sin — a  divided  heart.     2.  The

tirely  worthless.     The  sap  of  life,  the  guilt — "  found  faulty."  3.  The  punish-

energies  of  mind,  in  some  men  and  in,  ment — "  he  shall  break  down,"  &c.  God

some    Churches,    spent    in    ambitious  will  convince  the  most  obstinate  of  their

schemes,  luxuriant  leaves  and  professions.  guilt,  if  not  by  the  word  now,  by  his

The  grace  and  gifts  of  God  are  received  judgments  hereafter.     If  they  do  not

in  vain.     All  things  "  bloom  their  hour  suppress,  but  constantly  maintain  their

and  fade."  sins,  God  will  take  the  work  in  his  own

XT  „  .     .    ,  .         .    _,     „  .  .,     .  hands,  destroy  the  monuments  of  idola-

Nothmg  but  leaves !    The  Spirit  grieves  .    ,i    .     *  <  rr     i.  n

Over  a  wasted  life  ;  try  at  their  own  expense.     "He  shall

O'er  sins  indulged  while  conscience  slept,  break  down.  .  .  He  shall  spoil."
O'er  vows  and  promises  unkept ;  The  state  of  the  heart  is  the  source

And  reaps  from  years  of  strife—  0f  tne  ev^      ^S  long   as  this  does  not

Nothing  but  leaves    nothing  but  leaves  r    i  ,      -i  •  i  -n  -u

8  belong  to  him,  so  long  will  men  rob

Yer.  2.  A  divided  heart.  I.  A  him  of  his  own.  God  will  have  the
fearful  disease.  1.  It  affects  a  vital  heart  as  his  alone,  and  suffers  none  to
part.  2.  It  affects  after  the  most  deadly  share  that  possession  [Lange],
fashion — a  divided  heart.  3.  It  is  pe-  Yer.  3.  If  men  fear  not  God,  but
culiarly  loathsome.  4.  It  is  one  dim-  seek  to  ward  off  his  judgments,  by  con-
cult  to  cure.  It  is  chronic,  got  into  the  tinuing  in  sin  and  trusting  to  kings  and
very  nature  of  man.  5.  It  is  a  nattering  great  men  ;  their  defence  will  become  a
disease.  II  Its  usual  symptoms.  1.  snare,  and  their  confidence  will  be  turned
One  of  the  most  frequent  informality  in  into  disappointment.  Men  cannot  shel-
religious  worship.  2.  Another,  incon-  ter  when  God  is  angry.  "  What  then
sistency.  3.  Another,  variableness  in  ob-  should  a  king  do  for  us  1 "  "  These  are
ject.  4.  Frivolity  in  religion  is  another  words  of  despair,  not  of  repentance  ;  of
symptom.  III.  Its  sad  effects.  1 .  A  men  terrified  by  the  consciousness  of
divided  heart  makes  the  man  himself  guilt,  but  not  coming  forth  out  of  its
unhappy.    2.  He  is  useless  in  the  Church.  darkness  ;    describing  their  condition,


142  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.  rCHAP.  x.


not  confessing  the  iniquity,  which  beyond  hope  of  remedy.  They  groan
brought  it  on  them.  Without  love  the  fcr  their  losses,  their  sufferings,  their
memory  of  their  evil  deeds  crushes  them      fears,  but  do  not  repent."


HOMILETICS.
Perjury  joined  to  Hypocrisy. — Verse  4.

Their  dissimulation  of  heart  was  seen  in  their  lives  and  general  conduct.  They
made  no  conscience  of  their  duty.  There  was  no  dependence  upon  anything  they
said  or  did.     The  whole  nation  was  corrupt.

I.  There  was  no  truth  in  their  words.  "They  have  spoken  words."  Mere
words,  empty  vain  words,  without  any  truth  or  substance.  Great  swelling  words,
full  of  noise  and  profession,  to  gain  their  point  and  bear  down  the  prophets  j  words
foolish  as  they  were  bombastic,  to  veil  their  deceit  and  decoy  to  sin.  The  mouth
should  always  express  the  heart.  Pythagoras  said  he  would  rather  his  disciples
should  throw  stones  at  random  than  utter  a  false  word.  "  Speak  fitly,  or  be  silent
wisely,"  says  Geo.  Herbert.  "  The  turn  of  a  sentence,"  says  Bentham,  "  has  decided
the  fate  of  many  a  friendship,  and,  for  aught  that  we  know,  the  fate  of  many  a
kingdom."  "  By  thy  words  thou  shalt  be  justified,  and  by  thy  words  thou  shalt
be  condemned."  II.  There  was  no  sanctity  in  their  oaths.  "  Swearing
falsely."  Whatever  be  the  form  of  an  oath,  the  signification  is  the  same.  We  call
God  to  witness,  or  notice  what  we  say.  The  offender  therefore  sins  in  the  presence
of  God,  and  in  defiance  of  the  sanctions  of  religion.  His  sin  implies  contempt  of
God's  power  and  justice,  man's  wants  and  confidence.  "  Perjury,  therefore,"  says
Paley,  "  in  its  general  consequence,  strikes  at  the  security  of  reputation,  property,
and  even  of  life  itself.  A  lie  cannot  do  the  same  mischief,  because  the  same  credit
is  not  given  to  it."  "  Thou  shalt  not  forswear  thyself,  but  shalt  perform  unto  the
Lord  thine  oaths."  III.  There  was  no  faithfulness  in  their  covenants.
"  Falsely  in  making  a  covenant."  In  their  agreements  one  with  another,  in  their
allegiance  to  their  kings,  they  could  not  be  depended  upon.  In  treaties  with
foreign  nations  they  concealed  their  "treacherous  intentions,  and  observed  them  only
so  long  as  they  were  benefited  by  them.  In  covenanting  with  God  they  promised
to  be  faithful,  yet  supported  idolatry  and  rebelled  against  their  lawful  sovereign.
They  uttered  and  acted  lies.  No  considerations  can  justify  the  sacrifice  of  truth,  which
ought  to  be  supreme  in  all  the  engagements  and  relations  of  life.  Truth  is  the  very
bond  of  society,  without  which  it  will  dissolve  into  anarchy  and  chaos,  or  cease  to
exist.  A  household  cannot  be  governed  by  lying  and  perjury ;  neither  can  a
nation.  Sir  Thos.  Browne  was  once  asked,  "Do  the  devils  lie  1 "  "  No,"  he  answered,
"for  then  even  hell  could  not  subsist."  IV.  There  was  no  justice  in  their
judgments.  "  Thus  judgment  springe th  up  as  hemlock  in  the  furrows  of  the  field."
An  unjust  king  sets  a  bad  example  to  his  people.  A  corrupt  court  will  make  a
corrupt  nation.  If  the  fountain  be  bitter,  the  streams  cannot  be  sweet.  How  sad
when  judgment  is  perverted  by  those  who  should  administer  it !  when  injustice  like
a  bitter  plant  poisons  the  life,  and  spreads  in  the  manners  of  a  nation.  If  men  sow
injustice,  they  will  reap  a  harvest,  full  and  obnoxious,  "  as  hemlock  in  the  furrows
of  the  field."  Penn's  advice  to  his  children  was  good  :  "  Let  justice  have  its  im-
partial course ,  and  the  law  free  passage.  Though  to  your  loss,  protect  no  man
against  it,  for  you  are  not  above  the  law,  but  the  law  above  you.  Live,  therefore,
the  lives  yourselves  you  would  have  the  people  live,  and  then  you  have  right  and
boldness  to  punish  the  transgressor.  Use  no  tricks,  fly  to  no  devices  to  support  or
cover  injustice ;  but  let  your  hearts  be  upright  before  the  Lord,  trusting  in  him
above  the  contrivances  of  men,  and  none  shall  be  able  to  hurt  or  supplant  you."
"  We  will  sell  justice  to  none,"  is  an  article  in  the  Magna  Charta.     Want  of  up-


chap,  x.]  HOMTLETIG  COMMENTARY:  HOSEJ.  143


Tightness  will  overthrow  a  people,  "  turn  judgment  into  wormwood  "  and  gall ;  but
"  the  king  by  judgment  established  the  land  "  (Prov.  xxix.  4 ;  Amos  v.  7).

The  Vanity  of  Earthly  Glory. —  Verses  5 — 8.

God  was  the  true  glory  of  Israel.  But  they  had  exchanged  God  for  the  golden
calves,  and  turned  their  glory  into  shame.  A  day  of  visitation  was  near.  Their
gods  would  be  taken  away  and  given  to  others.  They  would  be  left  in  sorrow  and
shame,  in  captivity  and  helplessness.  All  earthly  glory  departs  from  us.  God
alone  abides  with  us  a  rock  and  defence.

I.  Earthly  glory  is  unsatisfactory  in  its  nature.  "  Like  foam  upon  the  water."
(a)  It  is  superficial.  It  is  only  the  outside,  the  surface  of  things.  It  does  not
belong  to  the  man  himself,  and  does  not  enter  the  heart.  Honour  and  applause,
position  and  wealth,  obstinately  remain  outside,  and  only  gild  the  surface.  Like
flowers  in  the  icy  regions,  they  may  cover  the  ground,  when  the  soil  underneath  may
be  intensely  frozen,  (b)  It  is  light.  Like  a  straw  in  the  balance  of  blessings.  It
stands  for  nothing  in  the  sight  of  God  and  in  the  estimation  of  a  true  man.  It  may
be  admired  and  envied  by  the  vulgar  crowd ;  but  it  is  only  "vanity  turned  into  a
god."  (c)  It  is  unsatisfactory.  What  avails  the  pomp  and  grandeur  of  earth  %
Men  have  shared  all  the  glory  the  world  can  give,  and  have  been  willing  to  resign
it  for  real  happiness.  Goethe  possessed  splendid  health  and  power,  gained  more
success  and  sufficiency  than  most  men,  and  yet  confessed  that  in  the  course  of  his
whole  life  he  had  not  enjoyed  five  weeks  of  genuine  happiness.  The  Caliph
mentioned  by  Gibbon,  who  expended  three  millions  on  the  palace  of  Zehra,  declared
that  he  had  lived  50  years  in  victory  or  peace,  beloved  by  subjects,  feared  by
enemies,  and  respected  by  all — that  riches,  honour,  power,  and  pleasure  had  waited
on  his  call,  and  that  no  earthly  blessings  were  wanting  to  his  felicity.  But  "  in  this
situation  I  have  diligently  numbered  the  days  of  pure  and  genuine  happiness  which
have  fallen  to  my  lot — they  amount  to  fourteen."  Such  estimates  may  be  exagger-
ated, but  on  all  earthly  glory  is  written  "  vanity  of  vanities."  II.  Earthly  glory
is  uncertain  in  its  tenure.  "  For  the  glory  thereof,  because  it  is  departed  from  it."
Kings  and  princes  may  be  dethroned  ;  palaces  and  high  places  consumed  by  fire  ;
children  and  friends  cut  off  by  death ;  change  in  condition,  disappointment  in  pur-
pose, failure  in  life,  may  eclipse  all  our  glory,  and  leave  us  in  privation  and  sorrow,
(a)  It  is  hard  to  secure.  What  intense  anxiety  and  self-denial,  what  severe  toil  and
pressure,  it  costs  !  If  gained  at  all,  it  is  often  at  the  sacrifice  of  comfort  and
life,  (b)  It  is  difficult  to  retain.  When  we  do  secure  it,  how  often,  how  suddenly,
does  it  elude  our  grasp  !  It  is  transitory  in  its  existence,  often  taken  away  and
given  to  others,  "  carried  into  Assyria  for  a  present  to  king  Jared."  If  it  does  not
leave  us,  we  have  often  to  leave  it,  just  when  we  should  enjoy  it.  Notwithstanding
anxiety  and  effort  to  get  it,  elation  and  pride  in  possessing  it,  men  must  leave  their
glory.  Power  and  personal  attire,  rank  and  riches,  must  all  be  left  behind.  "  And
where  will  ye  leave  your  glory  1 "  III.  Earthly  glory  will  leave  its  devotees  in
shame.  "  Ephraim  shall  receive  shame,  and  Israel  shall  be  ashamed  of  his  own
counsel."  This  will  be  the  end,  the  portion  of  all  pursuits  apart  from  God.  1.
This  shame  often  reverses  the  skilful  policy  of  a  nation.  The  special  counsel  of
Israel  was  that  which  Jeroboam  took,  worldly  wise,  and  admirably  suited  their
immediate  design.  It  was  artfully  devised,  long  in  its  existence,  and  successful  in
its  stroke.  The  people  were  separated  from  Jehovah,  and  a  kingdom  founded  apart
from  Judah.  But  the  policy  of  rulers  often  becomes  their  destruction  and
shame.  Success  which  may  uphold  a  family  or  a  kingdom,  ultimately  becomes
fatal,  "  o'erleaps  itself,  and  falls  on  the  other  side."  "  He  taketh  the  wise  in  their
own  craftiness."  2.  This  shame  often  covers  all  ranks  of  the  nation,  {a)  Kings
are  dethroned.  "  Her  king  is  cut  off"  (ver.  8).  Hoshea  seemed  in  a  hopeful  way
of  regaining  peace  and  prosperity.     But  these  promising  appearances  were  like  the


144  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA,  [chap.  x.


bubble  on  the  water,  they  soon  vanished  and  came  to  nothing.  The  king  was
slaughtered.  Whatever  we  set  up  and  adore  instead  of  God  may  be  carried  away
by  the  current  of  affairs  and  leave  us  vexed  and  disappointed,  (b)  Priests  will
mourn.  "  The  priests  thereof  that  rejoiced  in  it."  Their  gains  and  their  glory
were  all  taken  away  with  their  idolatrous  worship.  Men  who  derive  credit  and
emoluments  from  illicit  trades  and  sinful  practices  will  regret  their  choice,  and  turn
their  joy  into  shame,  (c)  The  people  grieved.  "  The  people  thereof  shall  mourn
over  it."  They  would  regret  the  loss  of  their  idols.  They  were  in  "fear"  when
they  saw  the  judgment  of  God  against  them  (Ex.  xii.  12).  Their  protectors  were
destroyed  and  they  were  undone.  Ignorant,  deluded  people  will  lament  bitterly  at
the  loss  of  their  idols.  u  You  have  taken  away  my  gods,  and  what  have  I  more?"
3.  This  shame  often  dishonours  the  whole  land  of  the  nation,  (a)  Its  high  places  are
destroyed  (ver.  8).  Mountains  of  defence,  palaces  of  splendour,  and  shrines  of  religion,
if  consecrated  to  evil,  will  be  levelled  to  the  ground.  Whatever  place  or  power
creates  and  upholds  idolatry  will  be  destroyed.  Houses  of  iniquity  will  be  thrown
down,  and  one  stone  shall  not  be  left  upon  another,  (b)  Its  altars  are  desecrated.
"  Thorns  and  thistles  shall  come  up  on  their  altars."  The  fires  of  idolatry  should
be  extinguished,  the  altars  should  be  broken  and  covered  with  briars.  Monuments
of  wickedness  are  often  the  grave-stones  of  hope  and  monuments  of  desolation.  Seats
of  idolatry  will  defeat  the  governors,  tarnish  the  glory,  and  terminate  the  existence
of  a  nation  which  rears  and  relies  upon  them.  "  Let  him  that  glorieth  glory  in  this,
that  he  understandeth  and  knoweth  me,  that  I  am  the  Lord  which  exercise  loving
kindness,  judgment,  and  righteousness  in  the  earth  :  for  in  these  things  I  delight,
saith  the  Lord."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  5.    1.  The  vanity  of  idols,  when  their  religion,  because  they  are  subdued

those  who  worship  them  cannot  depend  \Hutcheson\

upon  them,  but  have  to  be  concerned  Without  the  grace  of  God  men  mourn,

about    them   in    sorrow  and    affliction.  not  their  sins,  but  their  idols  [Pusey].

2.   The  ignominy  of    idols,  when  they  Yer.    7.      Kings  cut  off.     1.    God's

turn   Bethel    into  Beth-aven,  places  of  judgments  against  human  authority.     2.

holiness  into  scenes  of  degradation.  3.  The  The  highest  human  authority  unable  to

power   of   idols,  when  they  corrupt  the  ward  off  God's  judgments.     Men  of  the

priesthood  and  draw  away  the  people.  4.  greatest  weight  but  vain  show  (Ps.  lxii.

The  glory  of  idols,  a  borrowed  glory,  no-  9).     Only  like  grass  (Jas.  iv.  14),  and

thing  to  commend  it  but  novelty  and  evanescent  as  spray  on  the  surface  of  the

success,  will  at  length  vanish  away  by  sea.

the  judgments  of  God.  The  kingdoms  of  the  earth  are  like

Yer.    6.     Men    cast   down   by  their  "  foam  upon  the  waters."     1.   For  their

own  counsels.     1.  Because  actuated  by  seeming  brightness.     2.   For  their  great

false  principles.     2.  Because  they  aim  eminence.     3.  For  their  instability  and

at  corrupt  ends.     3.  Because  they  dis-  inability  to  resist.     4.  For  their  sudden

regard  God.      Plans  likely  to  succeed,  fall  and  disappearance  yirapp].

hindered  and  rendered  abortive  by  God's  Separated    from    God,    all    seeming

providence.     Pharaoh  counselled  against  power  is  weakness,  all  apparent  stability

Israel  to  his  own  destruction.     The  de-  is  fluctuating  and  perishing  as  the  foam,

struction  of  the  wicked  caused  by  their  "  One  moment  white,  then  gone  for  ever."

own  sin  (Job  xviii.  7).     Take  counsel  Let  England  beware  of  all  complicity

from  God,  and    consult  his  word  (Ps.  with  Eomish  idolatry,  on  the  false  plea

lxxiii.  24 ;  cxix.  24).  of   state  expediency.     For  idolatry  in

It  is  one  of  the  saddest  ingredients  of  any  form,  whether  veneration  of  images,

a  conquered  people's  affliction  when  con-  adoration   of  the  mass,  or   worship  of

querors  take  occasion  to  triumph  over  mammon  —  another    of    our    national


chap.  x.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  H08EA.  145


temptations — is  sure  to  make  the  great       God  is  the  only  true  basis  of  solidity
est  seeming  stability  to  become  frailty      and  permanence  [Faussei].
and  transitoriness  itself.      The  fear  of

HOMILETICS.

Death  sometimes  preferable  to  Life. — Verse  8.

The  high  places  of  Israel  were  so  defenceless,  their  lot  was  so  severe,  and  their
punishment  so  great,  that  they  preferred  death,  entire  destruction,  to  life.  Present
death  would  be  chosen,  rather  than  future  miseries,  and  the  shame  that  those
miseries  would  bring  upon  them.     Men  sometimes  prefer  death  to  life.

I.  In  personal  distress.  Men  in  disappointment  and  fretfulness  have  wished
for  death.  Impatient  of  life,  they  have  prayed  God  to  take  it  away.  Elijah  (1  Kings
xix.  4)  and  Jonah  (iv.  3)  are  striking  examples.  But  in  poverty  and  deep  affliction  it
would  often  be  a  relief  to  die.  The  soldier  on  the  battle-field,  wounded  and
burning  with  thirst,  feels  that  death  would  lessen  his  misery.  "When  victims
of  painful  and  incurable  disease,  and  bereft  of  those  we  love  dearest,  life
seems  to  us  to  have  lost  everything  attractive  and  desirable.  Job  cursed  the
day  of  his  birth,  and  would  rather  have  been  shut  up  in  the  womb
(iii.  11,  20).  Bitter  sorrows,  added  to  a  bitter  spirit,  make  life  a  torment,  not
a  blessing.  Wherefore  is  life  given  "  unto  the  bitter  in  soul  ] "  Take  it  away,
suggests  Satan  often,  it  is  better  to  die  than  live  in  such  circumstances.  If  life  is
a  grief,  better  not  have  been  born,  or  rid  yourself  of  the  trouble  by  suicide,  was  the
doctrine  of  heathen  philosophy.  In  times  of  outward  trouble  and  inward  conflict
God  alone  can  "  administer  to  a  mind  diseased."  Grace  helps  a  man  to  live  in  the
greatest  privations  and  to  die  in  the  greatest  comforts.  We  are  only  prepared  to
die  when  we  are  prepared  to  live.  "All  the  days  of  my  appointed  time  will  I  wait,
till  my  change  come."  II.  In  national  calamity.  Israel's  glory  was  consumed ;
her  seats  of  idolatry,  Samaria  and  Bethel,  were  destroyed,  and  there  was  no  way  to
break  through  the  danger  nor  escape  the  judgment.  They  were  surrounded  by  evils
worse  than  death.  Annihilation  would  have  been  a  blessing.  Nations  are  some-
times covered  with  shame  and  dishonour.  Famine,  sword,  and  pestilence  have  de-
stroyed their  population.  Their  idolized  gods  are  worthless  as  refuse  in  the  street ;
their  defenced  cities  and  mighty  men  are  laid  in  the  dust,  and  the  remnant  left  to
misery  and  despair.  The  chosen  people  becomes  an  "  evil  family,"  and  the  splendid
nation  shall  be  "  for  dung  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  And  death  shall  be  chosen
rather  than  life,  by  all  the  residue  of  them  that  remain  "  (Jer.  viii.  3).  III.  At  the
day  of  judgment.  These  words  predict  the  awful  misery  of  some  at  the  great  day
of  accounts.  The  ungodly  will  seek  annihilation,  not  from  the  torment  of  suffering,
but  from  the  wrath  of  God  before  whom  they  stand.  Opportunities  lost  and  judg-
ments despised.  Life  spent  and  hope  for  ever  gone ;  despair  will  seize  the  soul.
There  will  be  no  shelter,  and  prayer  will  be  in  vain  to  the  mountains  and  hills.  By
the  aid  of  death  they  cannot  escape  death  (Bev.  vi.  16).  "  In  those  days  shall  men
seek  death,  and  shall  not  find  it ;  and  shall  desire  to  die,  and  death  shall  flee
from  them."

Imitating  the  Sins  and  Suffering  the  Punishment  of  others. — Verses  9,  10.

In  the  days  of  Gibeah,  grievous  sins  were  committed  and  punished.  But  Israel
had  not  heeded  the  warning.  They  had  now  no  zeal  for  God,  nor  fear  of  judgment.
They  had  sinned  and  continued  to  sin  in  imitation  of  former  days.  The  terrible
battle  in  Gibeah  did  not  overtake  some  ;  now  not  a  mere  battle,  but  something  far
worse  shall  come  upon  them.  Though  God  "  doth  not  afflict  willingly,  nor  grieve
the  children  of  men,"  yet  he  longs,  has  determined  to  punish,  and  will  gather
heathen  nations  against  them  in  overwhelming  numbers.  Those  who  partake  in
other  men's  sins  will  suffer  other  men's  punishment,

10


146  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.  [chap.  X.


I.  We  commit  other  men's  sins  by  patronizing  their  works.  The  sins  of
Gibeah,  the  calves  of  Jeroboam,  were  all  upheld  and  patronized  by  high  and  low  in
Israel.  Kings  and  priests  not  only  consented,  but  contrived  to  make  the  people
sin.  The  people  approved  and  carried  out  the  bidding  of  their  superiors.  All  were
guilty.  We  may  be  afraid  to  resist  and  reprove,  but  if  we  silently  consent  and
support  evil  deeds,  we  are  guilty  of  partaking  in  them.  Saul  did  not  stone  Stephen,
but  consented,  approved  of  his  death,  and  accused  himself  of  the  deed  (Acts  xxii.
20).  "  Neither  be  partaker  of  other  men's  sins."  II.  We  commit  other  men's  sins
by  following  their  example.  If  you  sin  because  another  sins,  you  are  guilty  of
your  own  act,  and  will  share  in  the  punishment  of  their  sins.  Bad  examples  are
not  landmarks  to  guide,  but  warnings  to  caution.  Nothing  forces  you  to  walk  in
their  steps,  for  then  you  would  not  be  responsible  and  free.  Examples  draw  men,
and  by  imitating  them  they  fall  into  habitual  sin.  The  eye  and  the  ear  are  inured.
Many  have  fallen  into  habits  of  swearing,  drinking,  and  scoffing  by  the  practice  of
others.  Young  men  indulge  in  filthy  conversation,  because  incited  by  their  evil
companions.  Infidelity  is  a  repetition  of  the  first  lie,  and  imbibed  by  others  from
example.  By  imitating  evil  examples  we  establish  and  perpetuate  national  sins,  in-
fluence national  opinions  and  customs,  and  decide  national  destiny.  "  0  Israel,
thou  hast  sinned  from  the  days  of  Gibeah."  III.  We  suffer  the  punishment  by
committing  the  sins  of  others.  "  The  people  shall  be  gathered  against  them."
Israel  could  not  escape.  By  their  idolatry  they  had  bound  themselves  in  slavery.
The  Assyrians,  with  their  allies,  would  gather  against  them  at  God's  call.  God  had
determined  to  punish,  and  appeared  to  take  pleasure  in  so  doing.  In  every  age,  in
every  Church,  those  who  copy  the  example  and  emulate  the  crimes  of  antiquity  will
be  bound  by  their  own  fetters  and  delivered  into  the  hands  of  their  enemies.  If
nations  revive  in  this  the  sins  of  a  former  age,  and  commit  them  in  succeeding  ages,
they  will  fill  up  the  measure  of  their  iniquity.  The  sins  of  fathers  and  predecessors
will  be  visited  upon  their  children.  1.  This  punishment  is  determined  by  God.
"  It  is  my  desire  that  I  should  chastise  them."  2.  This  punishment  will  not  be
avoided  by  their  own  defence.  They  would  unite  their  strength,  fix  themselves  for
defence  like  oxen  yoked  together  in  the  plough.  "As  the  Lord  rejoiced  over  you
to  do  you  good,  and  to  multiply  you ;  so  the  Lord  will  rejoice  over  you  to  destroy
you,  and  to  bring  you  to  nought ;  and  ye  shall  be  plucked  from  off  the  land,  whither
thou  goest  to  possess  it."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES

Ver.  9.  From  the  days,  &c.     I.  Sin  want  a  weapon  to  chastise  his  rebels,

aggravated.      1.  By   continuance   from  All  creatures  in  heaven  and  earth  will

age    to    age.      2.  By  neglect    of    Di-  present  their  service.     How  ready  are

vine  warning,    (a)  In  preserving  some,  the  Assyrians  here  to  be  the  rod  in  his

"did   not  overtake,"   (b)  in  punishing  hand  [Trappj.

others.       Benjamin    did    not    escape.  0  the  venomous  nature  of  sin  that

Reduced  to  six  hundred  men.     II.  Sin  maketh  the  merciful  God  to  desire  and

ripened    for    punishment.       1.    When  to  delight  in    men's  miseries ;   to  take

imitated    and  propagated  by  posterity.  comfort  in  their  punishments  (Ezek.  v.

2.  When  provoking  God  to  anger.  13,  15),  to  laugh  at  their  destruction.

Conjunction  of  strength  and  forces  to  And  although  he  bear  long  with  men's  evil

uphold  sinful  courses  will  not  avail  any  manners  (Acts  xiii.  18),  yet  he  beareth

nation  against  God's  wrath.  them  as  a  burden  whereof  he  desireth  to

Ver.  10.  God  can  bring  in  his  armies  be   eased    (Is.    i.    24),    as   a    servitude

at  his  pleasure,  for  all  creatures  are  at  whereof  he  desireth  to  be  freed  [Trajpp],
his  beck  and   check.     He  never   need


chap,  x.]  H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :  HOSEA.  147


HOMILETICS.
Seeking  to  enjoy  the  Comforts  and  refusing  the  Duties  of  Eeligion.- — Verse  11.

The  metaphors  in  this  and  the  next  verse  are  taken  from  husbandry.  Israel,  like
an  ox,  was  trained  to  tread  out  corn,  and  loved  this  easy  luxuriant  service.  God
had  forbidden  to  muzzle  the  ox  (Deut.  xxv.  4).  It  enjoyed  freedom  and  partook
of  the  results  of  its  labour.  Israel  served  in  ease,  waxed  fat  and  kicked  in  pros-
perity, but  refused  in  adversity.  This  is  typical  of  many  who  serve  God  for  selfish
ends,  who  seek  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  religion,  but  refuse  its  duties.  Now  this
conduct  does  not  commend  itself.

I.  It  is  unreasonable.  We  do  not  expect  wages  without  work,  nor  can  we  reap
without  sowing.  Besides,  the  joy  is  in  the  labour  itself.  We  work  with  delight
when  the  heart  is  willing.  In  all  labour  performed  in  a  spirit  of  love  there  is
profit.  The  service  of  God  is  a  reasonable,  a  most  delightful  service.  He  is  not  a
taskmaster,  for  his  yoke  is  easy  and  his  burden  light.  II.  It  is  ungrateful.  1.
It  is  not  returning  according  to  benefits  received.  If  God  has  blessed  us  with  gifts
and  graces,  health  and  strength,  should  we  refuse  to  thank  him  1  Are  we  not  under
deep  obligation  to  make  some  return  1  2.  It  is  manifesting  the  disobedience  of  a
child.  Children  are  indebted  to  parents,  should  be  dutiful  and  obedient.  But  if
after  all  the  care  and  special  training  of  the  child,  he  is  rebellious  and  selfish,  how
unkind,  how  unreasonable !  Yet  God  prospers  and  blesses  men,  trains  them  up  in
ease  and  comfort,  but  they  forget  and  forsake  him.  3.  It  indicates  the  stubbornness
of  a  beast.  A  pampered  horse  kicks  and  refuses  to  draw.  The  wild  ass  loves  to
roam  in  freedom  and  shuns  the  yoke.  So  many  love  the  privileges  and  cherish  not
the  spirit  of  the  gospel ;  seek  their  own  ease  in  Zion,  and  labour  not  for  the  good
of  others.  III.  It  is  selfish.  Eeligion  is  not  a  rapture,  but  a  habit ;  not  a  sen-
timent, but  a  life.  Many  nurse  their  feelings  and  forget  their  duties.  Like
Peter,  they  would  always  dwell  on  the  mount,  and  forsake  the  market-place  and
the  shop.  Instead  of  living  on  earth,  amid  the  dangers  and  trials  of  service,  they
seek  to  rise  into  ecstasy,  and  soar  into  the  third  heavens.  There  is  nothing  hon-
ourable or  honest  in  this.  It  is  selfish  and  crafty  to  shun  our  daily  duty.  We
must  deny  ourselves,  count  our  master  worthy  of  all  honour  and  homage,  "  that
the  name  of  God  be  not  blasphemed."  IV.  It  is  impossible.  1.  It  violates  the
order  of  nature.  Everywhere  action  and  enjoyment  go  together.  The  lark  sings
when  it  soars  aloft  on  its  wings.  The  child  laughs  merrily  when  it  plays.  The
beauty  and  vigour  of  the  body  result  from  exercise.  So  the  happiness  of  re-
ligion springs  from  a  consciousness  of  duty  done.  The  sphere  of  activity  is  higher
than  that  of  passivity.  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  receive,  and  the  highest
blessedness  consists  in  the  legitimate  exercise  of  the  highest  powers.  This  is  the
law  of  our  being,  and  makes  us  like  God,  who  is  M  blessed  for  evermore."  2.  It  con-
tradicts the  will  of  God.  God's  law  is  the  rule  of  our  life  and  obedience  the
source  of  our  happiness.  God  is  only  pleased  with  those  who  love  and  obey  him.
"  Ye  are  my  friends,  if  ye  do  whatsoever  I  command  you."  We  must  not  seek  our
own  will,  but  follow  him  who  "  pleased  not  himself."  We  cannot  possess  the  com-
forts unless  we  live  the  life  of  the  righteous.  We  cannot  eat  unless  we  work.  The
pleasures  of  religion  must  not  be  separated  from  the  duties  of  religion.  "  If  ye
know  these  things  happy  are  ve  if  ye  do  them."

HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Spiritual  husbandry.     1.  Some  tread  when  sown.     Men  are  often  united,  as

out  corn,  to  provide  seed  for  the  fields  well  as  separated,  in  the  work  of  God.

of  labour.     2.  Some  plough,  to  prepare  Each  a  work  of  his   own,   yet  all  co-

the  ground  to  receive  it.     3.  Others  har-  operate  for  the  general  good.
row,  break  the  clods  to  cover  the  seed         Methods  of  training  men  for  God 's


148


HOMILETIC  COmiENTART:  UOSEA.


[CHAP.    X.


service.  1.  By  gentle  work,  attractive
enjoyments,  an  easy  yoke.  2.  By  harder
bondage,  if  easy  labour  will  not  win.
When  mild  measures  fail,  God  often  tries
harsh  measures.  Men  have  to  plough,
break  up  clods,  if  they  love  the  ease
and  shun  the  toils  of  religion.  3.  Yet
even  then  God  displays  mercy,  handles
them  gently,  as  we  put  the  yoke  tenderly
on  a  young  untamed  animal  to  inure  it


to  labour.  In  judgment  God  remem-
bers mercy.  But  if  the  mercy  be  de-
spised and  the  work  refused,  the  judg-
ment will  be  the  heavier.  God  would
set  a  rider  in  Ephraim  to  tame  and  sub-
due them.  "  Thou  hast  caused  men  to
ride  over  our  heads."

The  gods  aro  just,  and  all  our  pleasant  vices
Make  instruments  to  scourge  us.


HOM1LETICS.

The  Call  to  Eeformation  of  Life. — Verses  12, 13.

God  calls  the  people  to  repentance  in  figurative  language.  Sowing  and  reaping
denote  spiritual  and  moral  conduct,  closely  related  as  labour  and  reward.  Israel
are  to   give  up  their  former  habits,  begin  afresh,  and  enjoy  the  blessings  promised.

I.  A  present  duty.  "  Sow  to  yourselves  in  righteousness."  All  life  is  a  moral
sowing  and  reaping.  The  works  of  time  are  the  seeds  for  eternity.  But  this  sowing
must  be  no  surface  work.  1.  Fallow  ground  must  be  broken  up.  "  Breakup  the
fallow  ground."  Virgin  soil  must  be  ploughed,  and  life  must  be  entirely  new.  The
sinner  must  forsake  old  habits  and  practices,  turn  up  the  weeds  and  roots  of  evil
within,  and  be  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  his  mind.  The  heart  must  be  cleansed  from
lusts  and  corruption.  Old  things  must  pass  away,  and  all  things  become  new.  The
Christian  must  break  up  all  formality,  and  cultivate  new  ground.  He  must  grow
in  grace  and  holiness,  forget  the  things  behind,  and  look  forward  to  those  before.
The  Church  must  stir  up  decaying  piety  and  dying  members  ;  grow  in  numbers  and
in  beauty,  and  by  prayer  and  effort  become  a  fruitful  field.  2.  Proper  seed  must
be  soum.  (a)  Sow  in  righteousness.  Return  to  the  practice  of  righteousness  and
obedience  to  the  law,  which  is  the  rule  of  righteousness.  Abound  in  works  of  piety
as  the  fruit,  the  proof  of  your  penitence.  Sow  to  the  spirit  (Gal.  vi.  7,  8),  and  not
to  the  flesh,  (b)  Sow  with  intelligence.  Understand  the  nature  of  the  work  you
have  to  do.  Grow  in  personal  acquaintance  with  God  and  his  word.  Abound  in
wisdom  and  in  knowledge,  (c)  Sow  with  diligence.  Put  forth  constant  and  earnest,
not  mere  occasional,  effort.  We  must  plough,  sow,  and  continue  to  labour,  to  reap
the  benefit.  "  In  the  morning  sow  thy  seed ;  and  in  the  evening  withhold  not
thine  hand  "  (Ecc.  xi.  6).  The  exercise  of  charity  and  penitence  must  be  ever
active ;  not  fitful  impulse,  but  daily  habits ;  not  confined  to  outward  formalities,
but  thorough  inward  feeling.  If  righteousness  be  our  aim,  God  will  make  it  our
portion.  He  will  not  reward  with  ciphers  instead  of  gold,  like  the  world.  "  The
wicked  worketh  a  deceitful  work  (which  disappoints)  ;  but  to  him  that  soweth
righteousness  shall  be  a  sure  reward"  (Prov.  xi.  18).  3.  '  God  must  be  sought.
"  Seek  the  Lord."  Husbandmen  depend  upon  God,  who  gives  seed-time  and  harvest.
He  should  therefore  be  sought  and  served.  He  alone  gives  strength  to  secure
righteousness,  and  creates  it  within  the  soul  by  the  Holy  Spirit  (Ps.  li.  12).  (a)
Seek  diligently.  Do  not  leave  off,  nor  desist,  but  persevere  until  you  find  him.
(b)  Seek  earnestly.  There  are  difficulties  in  the  way,  reluctance  and  opposition  to
overcome.  Do  not  rest  satisfied  without  a  personal  acquaintance,  nor  stop  short  of
attaining  the  object.  Though  not  found  immediately,  "seek  the  Lord,  till  he
come."  II.  An  urgent  reason.  "  For  it  is  time  to  seek  the  Lord."  It  is  always
time  to  seek  the  Lord.  But  the  unconverted  especially  are  urged  to  do  so.  1.  The
Scriptures  urge  them.  "  Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  he  may  be  found,  call  ye  upon  him
while  he  is  near."  "  Behold,  now  is  the  accepted  time  ;  behold,  now  is  the  day  of
salvation."  "  Wherefore,  as  the  Holy  Ghost  saith,  to-day,  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice."
2.  Common  observation  urges  them.     Much  of  their  time  has  been  spent  in  sin  and


chap,  x.]  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEJ.  149


wretchedness.  Life  is  uncertain,  and  opportunities  are  few.  He  that  loses  time
loses  wealth,  life,  and  all.  "  I  have  lost  a  day,"  cried  the  ancient  Emperor.  Time
lost  can  never  be  regained.  "  Millions  of  money  for  an  inch  of  time,"  cried  Eliza-
beth, but  her  days  were  spent  and  could  not  be  recalled.  "  Eedeeming  the  time,
because  the  days  are  evil."  3.  Past  experience  urges  them.  "  Ye  have  plowed
wickedness,"  &c.  The  past  had  been  spent  in  labour  and  intense  thirst  for  happi-
ness, but  they  had  reaped  nothing  but  sorrow  and  disappointment,  (a)  Their  efforts
were  fruitless.  They  ploughed  and  sowed,  and  reaped  what  they  sowed.  The  harvests
of  their  ill-doings  were  .iniquity  and  the  results  of  iniquity.  The  sinner  gains
nothing  with  all  his  toil.  He  spends  his  money  for  that  which  is  not  bread,  and  his
labour  for  that  which  satisfieth  not  (Is.  lv.  2).  "  They  that  plough  iniquity  and
sow  wickedness,  reap  the  same."  (b)  Their  confidence. ensnared  them.  They  trusted
in  their  own  devices  and  in  the  number  of  their  mighty  men ;  but  their  valiant  men
were  slain,  the  kingdom  came  to  nought,  and  their  civil  and  sacred  projects  were
lying  vanities.  Men's  carnal  confidences  draw  them  into  sinful  courses ;  whatever
fruit  they  promise,  or  whatever  present  comforts  they  bring,  they  will  end  in  bitter
experience.  They  are  lies,  and  will  deceive.  "  Ye  have  eaten  the  fruit  of  lies."
III.  A  blessed  result.  "Till  he  come  and  rain  righteousness  upon  you."  1.  If
they  seek  the  Lord  he  will  be  found.  Those  who  humbly  and  earnestly  seek  God
shall  not  seek  in  vain.  He  will  "  come  "  to  them,  annihilating  the  distance,  hasten-
ing the  meeting,  and  removing  every  impediment.  "  Seek,  and  ye  shall  find."  2.
If  they  sow  in  righteous  works  they  shall  "  reap  in  mercy."  Be  merciful  to  men,
and  they  will  be  merciful  to  you.  Abound  in  acts  of  love  and  piety  towards  God,
and  he  will  return  good  measure,  pressed  down  and  running  over.  As  children  of
misery,  we  all  need  mercy.  If  we  give  it,  we  shall  get  it  both  from  God  and  man.
Mercy  is  its  own  reward.  The  merciful  shall  obtain  mercy  (Matt.  v.  7).  3.  If
they  turn  from  sin,  Divine  blessitigs  shall  be  given  in  rich  abundance.  "And  rain
righteousness  upon  you."  God  will  work  righteousness  within  us,  help  us  to  lead
a  righteous  and  holy  life,  and  be  faithful  in  keeping  his  righteous  promise.
Blessings,  like  showers,  shall  be  given,  rich  in  abundance,  and  refreshing  in  their
consequence.  God  will  come  in  Christ  as  the  Lord  our  righteousness,  and  grant  us
abundant  mercy.  "  I  will  cause  the  shower  to  come  down  in  his  season ;  there  shall
be  showers  of  blessings"  (Ezek.  xxxiv.  26).

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Moral  husbandry.     1.   Ploughing  in  xix.   8).      2.    By  faith.     (1)  In   God

penitence  or  "  iniquity."    2.  Sowing  "  in  (Heb.  xi.  6).     (2)  In   Christ  (Acts  xx.

righteousness  "  or  sin.     3.  Reaping  "  in  21).   III.   Wlien  we  are  to  seek  the  Lord.

mercy  "  or  wickedness.  Now  I  "  It  is  time."    1.  To  some  of  you

The    activity  of   the  wicked.     They  these  words  contain  a  reproof.     2.  For

plough,  sow,  and  harrow  mischief  to  them-  many  of  you  these  words  contain  a  warn-

selves  and  others.     If  they  would  work  ing.     (1)  You  will  never  have  a  better

as  hard  for  heaven  as  they  do  for  hell  time.     Facilities  for  seeking  the  Lord

they  could  not  lightly  miss  it.  decrease  with  delay.     (2)  You  may  not

Seeking  the  Lord  an  immediate  duty,  have  another  opportunity.     Many  have

I   Whom  we  are  to  seek.     The  Lord,  waited  for  the  "  convenient  season,"  and

This  implies — 1.  That  man  is  removed  been  visited  with  "  sudden  destruction."

from  God  by  sin.     2.  That  man  may  get  (3)  To  all  these  words  contain  a  welcome,

near  to  God  by  seeking.     3.  That  it  is  "  It  is  time"  i.  e.  not  too  late.  You  may

his  duty  to  do  so.  77.  How  we  are  to  seek  have  long  put  off,  yet  just  in  time — it

the  Lord.     1.  By  repentance.     (1)  The  may  be  only  just  [The  Sfudy\.
heart   broken  for   sin.     (2)  The   heart  The  fruit  of  lies.     Sin  a  lie  in  its

broken  from  sin.     Genuine  repentance  promises,  appearance,  and   results.      It

accompanied  by  reformation  of  life  (Lu.  looks  fair,  excites  desire,  but  is  rotten,


150  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.  [chap,  x


deadly  poison  within.     It  lies,  (1)  as  a         Rain  righteousness.     The  liberality  of

fact,  and  (2)  as  a  doctrine.     "  Ye  shall  Divine  gifts.     Thou,  0  God,  didst  send

not  surely  die."     "Ye  shall  be  as  God,"  a  plentiful  rain,  lit.  a  rain  of  liberalities

said  the  "  father  of  lies"  at  first.      Men  (Ps.  lxviii.  9).     Goodness  free  and  full

have  eaten  the  fruit  of  lies  ever  since,  provided   for  his  people.     1.  God  the

which  has  "  brought  death  and  all  our  source  until  "  he  come."     2.    Blessings

woe  into  the  world."     1.  Israel's  history  plenteous  "  rain."     3.  The  Church  re-

the  fruit  of  lies.      They  believed  not  vived.    Or,  I.  God's  mercy  compared  to

God,  rejected  good  and  tasted  bitter  evil.  a  shower.      1.    Direct  from  above,  not

2.  The  world's  history  the  fruit  of  lies,  through  human  mediums.     2.  Given  in

The  race  has  eaten  the  results  of  sin  and  freeness.     3.  No  substitute  for  it.     II.

deception.     3.  The  sinner's  history  the  This  mercy  is  promised   (1)   To  those

fruit  of  lies.     What  is  pleasure,  gaiety,  who  repent  and  return  to  him.      (2)

and  the  world  but  lies  1     Men  are  daily  To  those  who  pray  and  long  for  it.    III.

fed  by  lies.     "  Every  sin  is  a  lie,"  says  This  shower  of  mercy  is  wanted  now,

Augustine.     Its  fruit  will  neither  profit  to  convert  the  sinner  and   confirm  the

nor  satisfy.     It  is  not  only  empty  but  Church.     Seek  it  in  time  and  we  shall

mischievous  (Is.  xliv.  20  ;  lix.  4,  5).  not  fail.

HOMILETICS.
The  Evil  op  Evils. — Verses  14,  15.

Therefore,  such  the  fruit  of  departing  from  God,  and  trusting  in  idols  and  mighty
men.  Tumults  from  within  would  prepare  the  nation  for  invasion  without.  The
king  would  be  cut  off  and  the  kingdom  destroyed  by  a  sudden  stroke.  Idolatry  and
the  corruption  of  pure  religion  will  bring  judgment  upon  the  Church.  Sin  is  the
evil  of  evils,  the  source  of  all  sorrows.

I.  It  creates  national  wars.  Nations  get  angry  and  disagree.  High  attitudes
and  great  tones  are  assumed,  and  war  must  support  the  dignity  and  maintain  the
interests  of  the  throne.  Insults  to  flags  and  ambassadors,  petty  offences  to  rulers,
the  policy  of  cabinets  and  the  intrigue  of  courts,  have  been  motives  to  war.  1.  We  have
aggressive  war.  Nations  are  not  satisfied  with  their  natural  boundaries ;  for  gain
and  self-aggrandizement  they  must  invade  the  territories  of  others.  Ambition,
passion  for  empire  and  glory,  desire  for  vengeance  and  plunder,  lead  them  to  unjust
and  unnatural  aggression.  2.  We  have  civil  war.  "  Therefore  shall  a  tumult  arise
among  thy  people."  Nations,  one  in  language  and  interests,  are  divided  by  enmity
and  tumult.  In  Israel  there  was  no  central  principle,  no  oneness  nor  stability.  Con-
fused noise  and  war  sprang  from  the  midst  of  their  own  ranks  (Am.  ii.  2).  There
were  peoples,  not,  as  God  willed  them  to  be,  one,  but  many.  Foreign  wars  are
dreadful  enough,  but  civil  wars  are  fratricidal  and  abominably  wicked.  France,
England,  and  America  have  been  rent  asunder  by  civil  discord,  and  bled  to  the  core
through  the  evil  of  evils.  II.  It  creates  social  revolutions.  1.  Kings  are  de-
throned. "The king  of  Israel  shall  utterly  be  cut  off."  Israel,  like  the  dislocated
state  of  Rome  under  the  first  emperors,  was  distracted  by  anarchy  and  usurpation.
There  was  no  legitimate  succession  of  kings  or  priests,  for  they  made  both,  but  not
through  God.  "  Each  successor  had  the  same  right  as  his  predecessor,  the  right  of
might,  and  furnished  an  example  and  precedent  and  sanction  to  the  murder  of  him-
self or  of  his  son."  Monarchs  are  exalted  and  dethroned  by  political  factions  and
civil  broils.  They  rise  suddenly  from  the  ranks,  crown  themselves  with  honour,
and  are  "  cut  off  "  in  their  projects.  Sin  creates  wars  which  mingle  royal  blood
with  common  gore,  and  starts  revolutions  which  sweep  monarchies  and  republics  to
destruction,  like  chaff  before  the  storm.  2.  Subjects  are  enslaved.  Obedience  to
arbitrary  power  begets  servility  and  slavery.  Subsidies  have  been  given  for  the
loan  or  purchase  of  armies.  Men  have  been  hired  to  slaughter  their  fellow-men !
The  people  have  been  reduced  to  bondage,  intellectual,  political,  and  moral  degrad-


chap   X.]  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  J.  161


ation.  Taxes,  laws,  and  princes  have  fettered  their  freedom.  Immorality  and
crime  have  undermined  the  health,  and  polluted  the  character  of  the  people.  The
rule  of  the  oppressor  "is  like  a  sweeping  rain  which  leaveth  no  food"  in  fertile
districts  (Prov.  xxviii.  3).  III.  It  leads  to  cruel  deeds.  In  the  wickedness  of
Israel  there  was  an  essence  of  wickedness,  malice  within  malice.  This  brought —
1.  The  devastation  of  land.  The  day  of  battle  spoiled  all  the  fortresses  of  Israel.
Their  strongholds  were  taken  by  the  enemy,  and  their  fair  cities  levelled  to  the
ground.  Their  land  was  swept  by  foreign  invasion  and  domestic  strife,  filled  with
violence,  and  "  wasting  and  destruction  within  their  borders  "  (Is.  lx.  18).  2.  The
murder  of  its  inhabitants.  With  inhuman  cruelty  "the  mother  was  dashed  to
pieces  upon  her  children."  Neither  sex  nor  age  are  spared  by  barbarity.  Men  like
Herod  have  been  ferocious  as  brutes.  Nations  ancient  and  modern  have  stained
their  names  with  crimes  dark  as  hell.  "  In  Rama  was  there  a  voice  heard,  lament-
ation, and  weeping,  and  great  mourning ;  Rachel  weeping  for  her  children,  and
would  not  be  comforted,  because  they  are  not."  Such  are  some  of  the  ravages  pro-
duced by  sin.  Wars  which  ravaged  fields  and  sacked  cities ;  kings  dethroned  and
palaces  plundered ;  people  enslaved  and  virtue  violated ;  families  murdered  and
hearts  broken  in  agony  and  despair ;  crimes  arresting  the  pursuits  of  commerce  and
arts,  extinguishing  the  lights  of  science  and  religion,  and  filling  kingdoms  with
pestilence  and  murder.  These  and  a  thousand  other  evils  spring  directly  or  indi-
rectly from  the  evil  of  all  evils.     "  That  sin  might  appear  exceeding  sinfuL"

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO   CHAPTER  X.

»
Ver.  1.  Fruit  for  self  .     Selfishness  is  human  happiness.     Without    this  vir-
tue universal  form  of  human  depravity,  tue  there  is  no  reliance  on  language,  no
Every  sin  that  can  be  named  is  only  a  confidence  in  friendship,  no  security  in
modification  of  it.      What  is  avarice,  promises  and  oaths."
but  selfishness  grasping,  and  hoarding?  Ver.  5 — 7.  " Earthly  glory  is  a  mere
What    is    prodigality,  but    selfishness  shadow  which  eludes  our  effort,  or,  if
decorating  and  indulging  itself — a  man  caught,  shrinks  to  nothing  in  the  grasp."
sacrificing  to  himself  as  his  own  God  ?  It  is  transitory,  a  garland  which  withers
And  what  is  idolatry,  but  that  God  en-  on  the  brow.  "  Is  this  all  \ "  cried  Csesar
shrined  man,  worshipping  the  reflection  in  the  midst  of  all  his  glory,
of  his  own  image  [Harris]  %


Ver.  2.   Divided  heart     In  matters  Glory  is  like  a  circle  in  the  water,

/».                       ji.-i,          i.vj  Which  never  ceases  to  enlarge  itself,

of  great  concern  and  which  must  be  done  Tm  b   broad         di     g  dg         t'Q         ht

there  is  no  surer  argument  of  a  weak

mind  than  irresolution ;   to    be  deter-  Ver.  8.     Impatient  of  life.     A  lady

mined  where  the  case  is  so  plain  and  the  once    said    to    Fred.    Robertson  :    "  I

necessity  so  urgent.     To  be  always  in-  thought  you  of  all  people  were  like  St.

tending  to  lead  a  new  life,  but  never  to  Paul,  and  that  you  would  wish  for  a

find  time  to  set  about  it,  this  is  as  if  a  heavenlier  life  as  much  as  he  did."     He

man  should  put  off  eating  and  drinking  replied  in  words  as  true  of  others  as  of

and  sleeping  from  one  day  and  night  to  himself  :    "  First   of   all,    you  thought

another,  till  he  is  starved  and  destroyed  wrong ;  next,  if  I  do  wish  to  die,  it  is

[Tillotson\.  when  I  am  in  pain,  or  out  of  conceit

Ver.  4.  Truthful.     Above  all  things  with  life,  which  happens  pretty  often,

speak  the  truth  in  words  and  actions,  but  which  I  do  not  consider  spirituality.

Let  your  word  be  your  bond.     Every  It  is  only  an  ungracious  way  of  saying,

violation  of  truth  is  moral  suicide  in  the  *  I  am  dissatisfied  with  what  Thou  hast

liar  and  a  stab  at  the  health  of  human  given  me,  and  do  not  like  the  duties  that

society.     u  Truth,"  says  Jeremy  Collier,  are  mine  at  all.    I  am  in  pain,  and  want

"  is  the  bond  of  union  and  the  basis  of  to  be  out  of  pain  ; '  and  I  suppose  a


152


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.


[CHAP.  XI.


great  many  people  could  say  the  same
piece  of  sublime  discontent "  [Silver].

Ver.  9,  10.  Example.  For  good  or
evil  we  act  and  influence  men  on  earth.
This  influence  will  survive  and  affect
others  when  we  are  gone.  "  Oh  that  my
influence  could  be  gathered  up  and  buried
with  me,"  cried  a  dying  man.  Men
imitate  and  follow  our  example,  and  a
bad  example,  a  life  of  sin,  are  most  per-
nicious to  posterity.  "  I  have  thought
some  of  nature's  journeymen  had  made
men,  and  not  made  them  well,  they
imitated  humanity  so  abominably "
[Shakespeare].

Yer.  11.  Duty  and  delight.  Those
who  give  to  God  only  the  shadow  of
duty  can  never  expect  from  him  a  real
reward  [Flavel].  Employment  is  the
salt  of  life.  As  salt  gives  relish  to  food,
so  employment  prevents  insipid  and  un-
wholesome feelings,  and  gives  pleasure
to  life.  Life  is  a  delight  Justin  the  de-
gree that  it  is  consecrated  to  action.

Life  is  duty — noblest  therefore
He  who  best  that  course  selects ;

Never  waiting,  asking  "wherefore?"
Acting  as  his  heart  directs.

Ver.  12,  13.  Time.  A  dying  noble-
man in  a  letter  to  a  profligate  companion
confessed,  "  I  never  awaked  till  now.    I


have  pursued  shadows,  and  entertained
myself  with  dreams.  I  have  been  trea-
suring up  dust  and  sporting  myself  with
the  wind.  1  look  back  upon  my  past  life,
and,  but  for  memorials  of  infamy  and
guilt,  it  is  all  a  blank,  a  perfect  vacancy.
Oh,  my  friend,  with  what  horror  I  recall
those  hours  of  vanity  we  have  wasted
together.  Let  me  dwell  with  hermits,
let  me  rest  on  the  cold  earth,  may  1  but
once  more  stand  a  candidate  for  an  im-
mortal crown,  and  have  my  probation  for
celestial  happiness."

Then  time  turns  torment,when  man  turns  a  fool.

[Young.]

Yer.  14,  15.  The  evil  of  sin.  It  de-
bases body,  mind,  and  soul,  robs  of  do-
mestic peace  and  enjoyment,  and  spreads
contagion  all  around.  It  is  rebellion
against  God  and  injurious  to  man.
Once  all  the  evil  in  the  world  was  com-
prehended in  one  sinful  thought,  but
now  its  results  are  a  horrid  progeny  of
evils.  Ambition.  If  kings  would  only
determine  not  to  extend  their  dominions
until  they  had  filled  them  with  happi-
ness, they  would  find  the  smallest  terri-
tories too  large,  and  the  longest  life  too
short,  for  the  full  accomplishment  of  so
grand  and  noble  an  ambition  [Col ton].


CHAPTER  XL


Critical  Notes.  1.]  The  prophet  shows  how  Israel  had  repaid  God's  lore  in  the  past  with  ingrati-
tude and  unfaithfulness.  Child]  "  First-born  son  "  (Ex.  iv.  22),  the  infancy  in  Egypt  and  the
wilderness;  son  by  election.  Called]  Brought  safely  out,  typical  of  Christ's  call  (Matt,  ii,  15),  and
of  redemption  through  him.  2.  They]  Moses,  Aaron,  and  prophets  ;  many  calls,  but  Israel  drew  back
from  them,  went  after  gods.  3.  I  taught]  Lit.  set  Ephraim  on  his  feet  (cf.  Deut.  i.  31  ;  viii.  2,
5  ;  Neh.  ix.  21  ;  Is.  lxiii.  9).  God  supported  them  as  a  nurse  her  child,  gently  taught  them  to  walk,
and  carried  them  when  tired  (Num.  xi.  12.  See  Acts  xiii.  18,  marg.).  Knew]  Ignored  God's
kindness,  perceived  not  God's  design  to  restore  them  (Ex.  xv.  26).  4.  Cords  of  a  man]  Par.  to
"  bands  of  love,"  "  cords  with  which  men  are  led,  more  especially  children  that  are  weak  upon  their
feet,  in  contrast  with  ropes,  with  which  men  coutrol  wild,  unmanageable  beasts  (Ps.  xxxii.  9),  are  a
figurative  representation  of  the  paternal  humane  guidance  of  Israel  "  \Keil\.  Take  off]  Heb.  lift
up,  i.  e.  push  the  yoke  higher  up,  to  relieve  oxen,  that  they  might  eat  with  comfort  and  ease.  Pusey
gives,  "  I  was  regarded  by  them  as  putting  the  yoke  on,  ever  placing  some  new  yoke  or  constraint
upon  them,"  but  the  words  indicate  God's  continued  goodness.  Laid  meat]  Gave  means  of  grace
and  manifestations  of  mercy  in  abundance ;  manna  in  the  desert.  5.  Shall  not]  An  apparent  con-
tradiction to  viii.  13 ;  ix.  3 ;  but  Egypt  there  is  a  type  of  bondage,  here  the  hope  of  relief  against
Assyria.  They  would  no  longer  go  to  Egypt  for  help,  but  be  taken  captive  to  Assyria.  6.  Abide]
Lit.  to  whirl  round,  turn  in  a  circle,  indicating  the  violence  and  extent  of  punishment,  often  the
sense  of  falling  and  staying  until  the  mission  is  fulfilled  (Jer.  xxiii.  19;  xxx.  23;  Lam.  iv.  6,  2
Sam,  iii.  29).    Branches]   Some,  villages  which  are  branches,  dependencies  upon  cities ;  mighty


chap,  xi.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.  153


men,  others.  Baddim]  Sig.  poles  (Ex.  xxv  13),  made  of  branches,  firmness  derived  from  being
woven  together;  bars  or  bolts  by  which  gates  were  fastened  together  (Jobxvii.  16).  7.  Bent]  Lit.
hung  suspended  on  backsliding,  "impaled  or  fastened  upon  apostasy  as  upon  a  stake,  so  that  it  can-
not get  loose  "  [KeW],  None]  Lit.  together  they  exalted  not,  they  were  all  bent  downwards,  and
did  not .  rise,  lift  themselves  upwards  to  exalt  and  love  God.  8.  Ad.  and  Zeb.]  Two  cities  de-
stroyed with  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  (Deut.  xxix.  23).  Turned]  Heb.  upon  me  (1  Sam.  xxv.  36;
Jer.  viii.  18).  Repentings]  My  strong  compassions  are  excited,  glow  with  love  and  heat.  Joseph's
bowels  (were  hot),  did  yearn  (Gen.  xliii.  30  ;  Lu.  xxiv.  32  ;  1  Kings  iii.  26).  In  all  three  places
the  same  word  found.  9.  Execute]  As  fierce  conquerors  often  do  ;  after  destroying  cities,  he  will
abate  his  anger  and  show  mercy.  For  I  am  God]  I  do  not  change  my  purpose  like  man  (1  Sam.  xv.
29  ;  Num.  xxiii.  19 ;  Mai.  iii.  6).  The  holy,  the  pure  and  perfect  one,  and  known  to  be  such  in  the
midst  of  thee.  10.  They]  A  remnant  should  walk  after  the  Lord.  Roar]  in  judgments  on  the  foe
(Is.  xxxi.  4;  Jer.  xxv.  26 — 30).  Tremble]  Hasten,  like  birds  in  rapid  flight  from  western  parts
called  the  sea  (Is.  xi.  11;  xxiv.  14;  Zech.  viii.  7).  11.  As  a  dove]  Ch.  vii.  11  ;  Is.  lx.  8.
Houses]  from  whence  they  will  not  be  driven  again  (Ezek.  xxviii.  26).  The  idea  is  this  : — when
God  shall  call,  like  the  roaring  of  a  lion,  in  loud  and  far-reaching  tones,  Israel  will  hear,  return,
walk  with  God,  and  remaim  faithful  to  him.  12.  Ephraim]  is  charged  with  lying  and  deceit  again.
Jud.  rulethj  not  without  God,  as  Ephraim,  but  by  a  legitimate  succession  of  kings  and  priests,  and
was  outwardly  faithful  by  maintaining  the  worship  oi  God.  Saints]  The  priests  and  Levites,
fathers  and  prophets,  who  kept  the  worship  of  God  pure  and  holy  :  others,  with  God,  the  Most
Holy  One.     God  will  never  be  without  witnesses  in  the  direst  age  and  the  darkest  nation

HOMILETICS.

God's  Paternal  Care  and  Man's  Ungrateful  Keturn. —  Verses  1 — 4.

There  is  a  wonderful  cluster  of  blessings  in  these  verses,  every  one  of  which  is
significant,  and  the  whole  especially  puts  men  under  deep  obligation.

I.  God's  great  kindness.  God  loved,  trained,  and  treated  his  people  with  the
greatest  care,  though  they  sinned  and  rebelled  against  him.  This  kindness  is  dis-
played— 1 .  In  the  love  of  a  parent  towards  a  son.  "  When  Israel  was  a  child
then  I  loved  him."  (a)  This  love  is  free.  God  loved  them  not  because  they  were
better  and  more  numerous  than  others.  He  loved  them  of  his  own  free  will,  and
chose  them  because  he  loved  them  (Deut.  vii.  7,  8).  (b)  This  love  is  undeserved,
"  When  a  child,"  wayward  and  self-willed,  foolish  and  disobedient.  We  love
children  because  they  are  like  us,  or  because  they  please  us.  But  God  loves  men
that  are  unlike  him  in  character  and  helpless  in  condition  (Rom.  v.  6).  This  love
is  sovereign  and  undeserved ;  "for  we  were  by  nature  children  of  wrath,  even  as
others."  When  forlorn  and  outcast,  God  loves  men  and  adopts  them  into  his
family.  2.  In  the  power  of  a  redeemer  to  a  captive.  (l  And  called  my  son  out  of
Egypt."  God  not  only  called  by  the  voice  of  his  servants,  but  gave  power  to  obey
the  call.  Men  are  called  for  years,  but  do  not,  are  unwilling  and  unable  to  come
to  God.  The  Spirit  makes  us  willing  in  the  day  of  God's  power ;  reluctance  is
overcome ;  we  rise  and  obey  the  call.  Power  in  a  redeemer  is  a  necessity.  We
cannot  trust  a  Saviour  who  cannot  deliver  us.  But  in  Christ  omnipotence  is  linked
with  love,  power  is  employed  for  the  ends  of  mercy  and  the  salvation  of  man.
Redemption  from  Egypt  is  a  type  of  deliverance  from  sin,  death,  and  hell.  "For  he
shall  save  his  people  from  their  sins."  3.  In  the  tenderness  of  a  nurse  for  a  child.
" 1  taught  Ephraim  also  to  go,  taking  them  by  their  arms."  Like  a  mother  or
nurse,  training  a  child  in  leading-strings,  God  carries  men  when  young,  upholds
them  when  weak,  and  teaches  them  gradually  and  gently  to  walk  in  his  commands.
He  takes  them  by  their  arms,  lifts  them  up  from  dust  and  despair,  and  teaches  them
"  to  go  "  in  pursuit  of  better  things.  It  is  the  privilege  of  God's  people  not  only  to
be  loved  and  delivered,  but  taught  and  guided.  When  weak  and  weary,  in  paths
rough  and  dark,  God  is  with  them,  leading  them  about,  and  instructing  them  and
keeping  them  as  the  apple  of  his  eye  (Deut.  xxxii.  10).  u  In  the  wilderness  where
thou  hast  seen  how  that  the  Lord  thy  God  bare  thee,  as  a  man  doth  bear  his  son,
in  all  the  way  that  ye  went,  until  ye  came  into  this  place  "  (Deut.  i.  31  ;  Acts  xiii.
18).  4.  In  the  skill  of  a  physician  towards  the  sick.  "  I  healed  them."  God's  people
are  not  only  cared  for,  but  cured  in  sickness  and  sorrow.     Sin  is  self-injury,  but


154  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  [chap,  xl


God  is  our  happiness  and  health.  Men  inflict  wounds  upon  heart  and  mind,  de-
stroy themselves,  but  in  God  is  their  help  (Hos.  xiii.  9).  God  cures  their  sicknesses
and  pardons  their  sins,  aids  their  infirmities  and  heals  their  diseases  (Ps.  ciii.  3).
JSro  other  physician  can  close  our  wounds  and  putrefying  sores,  no  earthly  ointment
can  mollify  our  bruises.  "  I  am  the  Lord  that  healeth  thee."  5.  In  the  kindness
of  a  master  towards  his  servants.  1.  Kindness  in  drawing  men  into  his  service.  They
are  alienated  and  distant  from  God,  naturally  ill-disposed  and  unable  to  come  to
him.  All  who  come  are  drawn,  "  Draw  me  and  I  will  run  after  thee."  Compulsory
piety  tends  to  infidelity.  Lord  Bolingbroke  was  compelled  to  peruse  volumes  of
controversial  Divinity  when  far  too  young  to  understand  them.  This  perhaps  im-
planted in  his  mind  seeds  of  aversion  to  the  truths  of  the  Bible,  (a)  This  drawing
is  by  love,  "  with  bands  of  love."  Love  only  can  draw,  cruelty  drives.  God  uses
no  violence  nor  force,  never  tries  harsh  when  gentle  means  will  do.  The  law  affects
us  like  frost  the  stream ;  it  hardens  and  stagnates  the  soul :  but  the  love  of  God,
like  the  shining  sun  and  the  gentle  shower,  melts  the  cold  and  breaks  the  heart  into
gushing  streams.  Teachers  who  rule  with  a  rod,  and  parents  who  govern  with  a
frown,  will  not  win  affection  and  obedience.  God  draws  by  loving-kindness,  and
wins  to  his  service  by  love.  "  I  treat  my  enemies  so  well  that  I  compel  them  to  be
my  friends,"  said  Alexander  the  Great.  "  No  cord  or  cable,"  says  Burton,  "  can
draw  so  forcibly,  or  bind  so  fast,  as  love  can  do  with  only  a  silken  thread."  (b)
This  drawing  is  in  harmony  with  our  moral  nature.  "  With  cords  of  a  man."  Men
are  not  used  like  dumb  driven  cattle,  but  treated  as  responsible  and  rational  crea-
tures. In  the  promises  of  the  gospel,  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  character  of
Christ,  we  are  looked  upon  as  men,  and  not  machines  nor  brutes.  All  God's  dealings
are  in  harmony  with  our  mental  and  moral  constitution.  "  The  love  of  Christ  con-
straineth  us"  (2  Cor.  v.  14;  1  Johniv.  19).  2.  Kindness  in  refreshing  men  in  his
service,  (a)  God  relieves  in  distress.  "  I  was  to  them  as  they  that  take  off  the
yoke."  Like  a  merciful  man  who  regardeth  the  life  of  his  beast,  he  eased  them  of
their  burdens,  and  helped  them  in  distress.  Christ  delivers  from  the  yoke  of  bondage,
and  from  the  hands  of  our  enemies  (Lev.  xxvi.  13).  (b)  God  provides  in  want.
"  And  I  laid  meat  unto  them."  Manna  from  heaven,  water  from  the  rock,  and  "  food
convenient  for  them,"  were  provided  for  his  ancient  people.  In  Christ  there  is  no
starvation  nor  stint.  Blessings  in  abundance  are  given  through  him.  Pardon,  peace,
and  joy ;  relief  from  harassing  care,  and  rest  in  perfect  security.  "  Take  my  yoke
upon  you,  and  learn  of  me,  and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls."  II.  Man's
ungrateful  return.  God  has  put  men  under  deep  obligations  by  his  goodness.
If  the  kind  deeds  of  men  bind  us  to  think  of  them  and  love  them,  how  much  do  we
owe  to  God,  to  whose  ceaseless  bounty  we  owe  every  comfort  of  life?  What  he
bestows  upon  us  in  kindness  and  constant  care  should  be  given  back  in  sacrifice,
incense,  and  devotion.  "  How  unsuitable  it  is,"  says  Edwards,  *'  for  us  who  live
only  by  kindness  to  be  unkind."

I've  heard  of  hearts  unkind,  kind  deeds

With  coldness  still  returning;
Alas !  the  gratitude  of  men

Hath  oftener  left  me  mourning.

1 .  They  reject  Divine  teaching.  "  As  they  called  them,  so  they  went  from  them."
Moses  and  Aaron,  prophets  and  apostles,  were  unheeded.  The  more  they  were
admonished  the  more  careless  they  grew ;  the  more  pressing  the  teacher  the  more
refractory  the  taught.  Foolishness  is  bound  in  the  hearts  of  children.  When  they
are  taught  to  go,  they  go  from  God  into  ways  of  sin.  Divine  instruction  is  needful
and  constantly  given,  yet  many  turn  away  in  contempt.  Christ  is  preached  and  the
gospel  offered,  but  men  go  to  their  merchandise  and  their  farms.  "  Lo,  they  have
rejected  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  what  wisdom  is  in  them  1 K  2.  They  despise
Divine  favours.  "  They  knew  not  that  I  healed  them."  They  look  to  men  as  the
source  of  blessings,  as  though  by  their  own  power  and  goodness  they  procure  them.


chap.  XL]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ':  UOSEA.  155


Ourselves  and  others  are  thanked,  and  God  forgotten.  We  do  not  see  the  end  of
Divine  chastisement,  nor  acknowledge  Divine  goodness  in  our  prosperity.  God  is
constantly  ignored,  and  wilful  ignorance  leads  to  base  ingratitude.  "The  ox
knoweth  his  owner,  and  the  ass  his  master's  crib ;  but  Israel  doth  not  know,  my
people  doth  not  consider."  3.  They  cling  to  their  wicked  course.  "  They  sacrificed
unto  Baalam,"  went  from  one  god  to  another,  "  and  burned  incense  to  graven
images."  When  men  forsake  the  true  God,  they  cut,  and  grave,  and  adore  idols  of
their  own.  This  is  self-abasement  and  self-destruction ;  a  just  ground  of  complaint
with  God,  and  a  sad  perversion  in  man.  "  I  have  nourished  and  brought  up  children,
and  they  have  rebelled  against  me."

Blow,  blow,  thou  winter  wind,
Thou  art  not  so  unkind
As  man's  ingratitude.

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Yer.  1.     The  chap,  begins  with  love  ;  "  He  did  not  say  lead,  but  draw  him.

ancient,  sovereign,  electing   love.     The  This  violence  is  done  to  the  heart,  not

next  sweet  word  is  sonship.     We  see  to  the  body.     Why  marvel  1     Believe,

immediately  after   in  the  same  verse,  and  thou  comest ;   love,  and   thou  art

calling,  salvation,  deliverance.    "  I  called  drawn.     Think  it  not  a  rough  and  un-

my  son  out  of  Egypt  "  \_Spurgeon\.  easy  violence  :  it  is  sweet,  alluring ;  the

Yer.  1,  3  &  4.     God's  children  young  sweetness  draws  thee  "  [Augustine'] .  "All

to  be  cared  for ;  weak  to  be  strength-  the  methods  and  parts  of  God's  govern-

ened  ;  ignorant  to  be  taught ;  needy  to  ment  are  twined  together    as   twisted

be  fed ;  tired  to  be  refreshed.  cords  of  love  from  God,  so  ordered  that

Holding  up.  1.  To  teach  dependence,  they  ought  to  draw  man  with  all  his

2.  To  sustain  the  steps.     3.  To  regulate  heart  to  love  him  again."
the  walk.     God  keeps  from  falling,  lifts  God's  love  in  his  word  and  in  his  pro-

up  when  down,  gently,  kindly,  and  gra-  vidence  lays  us  under  strong  obligation

dually  leads  along  in  the  path  of  virtue,  to  duty.     How  thankful  should  we  be

What  love  and  care  !    Be  not  afraid  to  that  all  things  are  prepared  and  provided

trust  in  God,  he  may  chide,  but  will  never  for  us  day  after  day.     But  how  aggra-

forsake  you.     He  keepeth  the  feet  of  his  vating  that  guilt  which  despises  such

saints  (1  Sam.  ii.  9).     He  guideth  their  love.     "  To  sin  against  mercy  is  to  sin

feet  in  the  way  of  peace  (Lu.  i.  79).  against  humanity  ;  and  as  no  surfeit  is

Yer.  4.  Christian  life  a  drawing  from  more  dangerous  than  that  of  bread,  so

sin  and  the  world  to  God,  greater  faith  no  judgment  is  more  terrible  than  that

and  attainments,  to  more  intimate  fel-  which  grows  out  of  love  felt  and  slighted"

lowship  on  earth,  and  heaven  at  length.  [Trapp],

HOMILETIGS.
The  Short-sighted  Policy  of  Sinners. — Verses  5,  6.

Israel  were  rebelling  against  Assyria,  and  looking  to  Egypt  for  help.  They  had
forsaken  God  and  desired  to  escape  his  judgments.  But  they  should  have  what
they  did  not  wish,  and  be  deprived  of  what  they  sought  to  have.  There  was  no
refuge  nor  retiring  place  ;  Assyria  would  take  them  captive,  and  the  sword  would
perpetually  rest  on  their  cities  and  people.  This  punishment  would  be  the  result
of  their  own  short-sighted  policy.

I.  In  refusing  Divine  and  following  their  own  counsels.  "  They  refused
to  return  "  to  God  and  his  ways,  and  were  defeated  by  adopting  their  own  plans.
God's  counsel  is  continually  given  to  guide  and  correct  us,  and  to  reject  this  counsel
is  folly  in  the  extreme.  1.  It  is  the  only  safe  counsel.  Human  guides  may  err.
The  wisest  only  guess.    We  require  certainty  and  security.     Many  stumble,  but  in


156  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  [chap.  xi.


God  "  shalt  thou  walk  in  thy  way  safely,  and  thy  foot  shall  not  stumble."  2.  It
is  the  only  firm  counsel.  Man's  instructions  change,  and  his  purpose  can  be  frus-
trated. He  may  adjust  circumstances  and  take  precautions,  yet  not  escape.  God
has  knowledge  to  foresee  and  power  to  overcome  opposition.  "  The  counsel  of  the
Lord,  that  shall  stand."  3.  It  is  the  only  rational  counsel.  It  is  the  only  probable
way  to  succeed  according  to  our  desire.  The  wisdom  of  the  fool  is  conceit  and  self-
delusion.  He  wanders  into  danger,  and  wrongs  his  own  soul.  "  The  way  of  a  fool
is  right  in  his  own  eyes ;  but  he  that  hearkeneth  unto  counsel  is  wise."  II.  In
bringing  destruction  upon  them  when  they  expected  safety.  They  were
trusting  to  Egypt,  and  depending  upon  their  mighty  men  and  fortified  cities,  but  the
sword  would  devour  them.  1.  The  destruction  was  violent.  The  sword  fell,
whirled  down  upon  them  in  all  its  weight,  like  "  a  whirlwind  of  the  Lord  gone  forth
in  fury,  a  grievous  whirlwind  which  fell  grievously  upon  the  head  of  the  wicked  "
(Jer.  xxiii.  19).  2.  The  destruction  was  extensive.  It  "  shall  abide  on  his  cities
and  shall  consume  his  branches,  and  devour  them  "  like  flames  of  fire.  Whether
branches  mean  mighty  men,  villages,  or  bars  of  the  cities,  it  is  all  one.  Power  could
not  defend  the  mighty,  and  defenced  places  were  levelled  to  the  ground.  Princes
and  people,  storehouses  of  wealth  and  palaces  of  splendour,  fall  through  the  sins  of
the  nation.  3.  The  destruction  ivas  lasting.  The  sword  abode  upon  them  as  long
as  they  continued  their  rebellion  against  God.  Israel's  kings  were  inaugurated  by
blood,  and  by  God's  appointment  they  should  reap  just  retribution.  "  Now,  there-
fore, the  sword  shall  never  depart  from  thy  house."  III.  In  rushing  into  the
bondage  from  which  they  seek  to  escape.  They  sought  to  avoid  Assyria  by
flying  to  Egypt,  but  this  was  the  very  means  to  bring  them  into  bondage.  We
cannot  escape  God's  presence,  nor  shun  the  consequences  of  broken  law.  What
appears  the  nearest  refuge  is  often  the  remotest  hope  and  the  swiftest  punishment.
Persons  to  whom  we  fly  for  help  are  often  the  weakest  to  defend,  and  rushing  from
one  danger  the  surest  way  to  fall  into  another.  Men  fall  by  their  own  counsel  and
are  taken  in  their  own  craftiness.  They  mistake  if  they  think  to  avoid  the  judg-
ments of  God  by  cunning  artifice  and  deceit,  to  promote  their  true  interests  by
refusing  to  follow  Divine  counsel  (Job  v.  13;  xviii.  7).  "Thine  own  wickedness
shall  correct  thee,  and  thy  backslidings  shall  reprove  thee."

Bent  on  Backsliding. — Verse  7,

In  all  men  there  is  a  tendency  to  sin.  The  principle  of  evil  is  within  us.  But
sad  must  it  be  for  the  Christian  Church,  for  those  who  profess  to  own  God,  to  re-
fuse allegiance  to  him,  and  dethrone  him  in  their  hearts.  How  grieving  to  God  for
his  own  chosen  people  to  backslide  from  him,  and  to  be  bent,  given  up  entirely,  to
this  fixed  course  of  aversion  from  God.

I.  They  were  constant  in  backsliding.  Prophets  and  teachers  continually
"  called  them,"  but  they  did  not  forsake  their  ways.  God  calls  men  by  his  word
and  by  his  servants,  but  they  turn  away  from  him.  They  may  halt  betimes,  veer
round  in  a  circle  of  duties,  but  their  continual  thoughts  and  daily  life  are  departure
from  God.  II.  They  were  unanimous  in  backsliding.  "  None  at  all  would
exalt  him,"  all  together  they  apostatized.  They  refused  as  one  man  to  return.  Evil
majorities  and  idolatrous  customs  influence  in  the  wrong  direction.  The  lower  learn
from  the  higher  classes,  and  the  country's  creed  becomes  the  prevalent  practice.
When  all  ranks  patronize  evils,  they  are  established  by  general  consent.  Those  who
corrupt  the  faith  or  taint  the  morals  of  the  community  may  commit  an  injury  or
spread  a  disease  which  will  ruin  generations  to  come.  III.  They  were  obstinate
in  backsliding.  "They  would  not."  They  were  obstinate  as  an  ox,  which  refused
to  be  driven  out  of  the  wrong  into  the  right  path.  When  the  will  is  bent  in  sin,
the  current  of  life  follows,  overturning  all  obstacles  and  defying  all  counsels.  "  Ever
weaker"  the  will  "grows  through  acted  crime,"  until  men  get  stubborn  and  insens-


3HAP.  XI.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  FWSEA.  157


ible,  unable  and  unwilling  to  repent.  "  Ye  will  not  come."  Well  might  Edward
VI.  pray,  "  Order  my  living,  so  that  I  may  do  that  which  thou  requirest  of  me,
%nd  give  me  grace  that  I  may  know  it,  and  have  will  and  power  to  do  it."  IV.
They  were  fixed  in  backsliding.  By  continual  practice  it  had  become  a  settled
habit.  Their  whole  life  was  centred  and  fastened  in  this  course.  They  were  fixed
and  immoveable  in  adherence  to  their  sins.  The  sinner  may  habituate  himself  to
evil  until  he  is  impaled  on  it,  unable  to  resist  and  overcome  it.  It  may  so  abso-
lutely possess  a  man  that  he  cannot  break  its  dominion,  nor  free  himself  from  its
power.  The  condition  of  men  is  the  consequence  of  life,  and  the  cords  of  sin  the
result  of  evil  habits.  "  His  own  iniquities  shall  take  the  wicked  himself,  and  he
shall  be  holden  with  the  cords  of  his  sins."

Divine  Justice  and  Divine  Mercy  in  apparent  Conflict  for  the  Sinner. —

Verses  8,  9.

This  passage  is  one  of  the  most  mysterious  and  interesting  in  the  Bible.  There
actually  seems  a  struggle  between  one  attribute  and  another.  Justice  and  mercy
are  in  conflict ;  righteousness  and  peace  kiss  each  other  for  the  good  of  the  sinner.
God  is  represented  after  the  manner  of  men,  as  kindling  in  compassion,  yearning  to
bless,  while  anxious  to  show  justice  ;  and  at  length,  though  punishing  in  measure,
determining  to  mitigate  the  sentence.     "  How  shall  I  give  thee  up,  Ephraim  1 "

I.  Justice  is  deserved.  They  deserved  to  be  treated  like  Admah  and  the  other
cities  of  the  plain.  1.  They  had  forgotten  God.  Favoured  with  sensible  manifest-
ations and  unspeakable  privileges,  they  ignored  his  presence  and  disregarded  his
works.  The  memory  of  God's  mercies  is  soon  effaced,  written  in  water,  not  on
marble,  and  one  generation  after  another  needs  renewal  of  the  blessings.  "  Can  a
maid  forget  her  ornaments,  or  a  bride  her  attire]  Yet  my  people  have  forgotten
me  days  without  number."  2.  They  had  ill  requited  God.  They  repaid  with
the  mouth,  not  with  the  heart.  There  was  no  depth  in  their  penitence,  nor  firm-
ness in  their  conduct,  "  for  their  heart  was  not  right  with  him."  They  changed
from  reverence  to  apostasy,  from  fair  profession  to  base  ingratitude.  The  favours
of  men  touch  us,  but  the  love  of  God  kindles  no  fire  upon  the  altar  within.  Love
free,  abundant,  and  precious  is  the  only  friendship  for  which  men  make  no  returns.
This  seems  a  miracle,  a  monster  of  stupidity,  if  we  argued  against  experience.
"Annihilate  not  the  mercies  of  God  by  the  oblivion  of  ingratitude."  II.  Mercy
prompts  to  save.  Mercy  exists  with  justice  in  the  purpose,  and  one  attribute
does  not  destroy  another  in  the  work  of  God.  1.  God  is  merciful.  If  God  were
just,  and  dealt  with  us  after  our  sins,  mercy  would  be  unknown.  Justice  might
sweep  the  earth,  or  rear  its  monuments  of  vengeance.

"When  we  slip  a  little
Out  of  the  way  of  virtue,  are  we  lost  ?
Is  there  no  medicine  called  sweet  mercy  ?

Yes,  God  is  more  compassionate  than  a  tender  father.  "  My  heart  is  turned  within
me"  with  deep  compassion.  Give  up  1  No,  how  can  I  do  that  ?  I  delight  in
mercy.  "  My  repentings  are  kindled  together"  I  have  punished  enough.  "  Is
Ephraim  my  dear  son  1  Is  he  a  pleasant  child  1  For  since  I  spake  against  him,  I
do  earnestly  remember  him  still :  therefore  my  bowels  are  troubled  for  him  ;  I  will
surely  have  mercy  upon  him,  vsaith  the  Lord."  2.  God's  m,ercy  shall  be  seen.  "  I
will  not  execute  the  fierceness  of  mine  anger."  Mercy  prevails  over  the  rigour  of
justice.  God  will  not  "  destroy  Ephraim,"  as  soldiers  that  return  a  second  time  to
pillage  a  city  they  have  wasted.  God's  mercy  is  seen — (a)  In  Christ,  who  came
not  to  destroy  men's  lives,  but  to  save  them,  (b)  In  Christian  experience,  in  the
forgiveness  of  sin,  the  bestowment  of  grace,  and  the  gift  of  glory.  Mercy  now
\b  proclaimed  to  all.      God  is  just,  and  yet  the  justifier   of  him  that  believeth.


158  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY .    HOSEA.  [chap.  xi.


"For  I  will  not  contend  for  ever  with  my  people,  neither  will  I  be  always  wroth :
for  the  human  spirit  would  fail,  be  crushed  before  me"  (Is.  lvii.  16).  III.  God
determines  to  exercise  mercy  and  not  justice.  "  I  will  not  execute,"  &c.  The
reasons  for  this  choice  are  given.  1.  God  is  unchangeable  in  his  covenant  mercy.
"  For  I  am  God,  and  not  man."  Man  is  fitful  and  swayed  by  human  passion.
"  Man  punishes,  to  destroy ;  God  smites,  to  amend,"  says  Jerome.  Men  are  angry,
vindictive,  and  cruel  one  to  another;  implacable,  unmerciful  (Rom.  i.  31);  but
God  is  compassionate  and  forgiving.  Men  are  mutable,  the  truest  friends  are  un-
certain ;  but  God  is  not  man.  "  I  am  Jehovah,  I  change  not ;  therefore  ye  sons  of
Jacob  are  not  consumed."  2.  God  is  revealed  among  men  to  be  a  God  of  mercy.
"  The  Holy  One  in  the  midst  of  thee."  Hence  his  procedure  does  not  contradict
his  known  character.  God  is  holy  and  just,  true  and  faithful,  and  that  might  be
considered  a  reason  for  rejecting  a  rebellious  people.  But  how  can  this  happen?
How  can  justice  be  reconciled  with  mercy,  and  the  providence  proclaim  the  love
of  God?  The  difficulty  is  solved  in  Jesus  Christ.  In  him  God  is  "faithful  and
just  to  forgive  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness."  His  holiness
is  the  defence  of  his  people,  and  an  argument  for  a  consecrated  life.  In  a  corrupt
Church  and  a  degenerate  age  let  us  "  give  thanks  at  the  remembrance  of  his
holiness."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND    OUTLINES.

Mercy  interposeth  her   four   several  God's  mercy — 1.  Springs  from  him-

Miows"  (in  the  original  only  two,  but  self.     "  Repentings  kindled    together."

the  other  two  necessarily  understood,  and  2.  Contrasted  with  men's  conduct.     "  I

by  interpreters  fitly  supplied)  for  such  am  God  and  not  man."     3.  Overcoming

pathetical  interrogations  as  the  like  are  God's  justice.     "  I    will   not  execute."

not  to  be  found  in  the  whole  book  of  4.   Supplying  man's  need.      "  Greater  is

God,  and  not  to  be  answered  by  any  but  the  mercy  of  God  than  the  misery  of

God  himself ;   as  he  doth  to  each  par-  all  men/'  says  Augustine,
ticular   in   the  following   words  :  "  My  /  am   God,  fyc.     God  unchangeable,

heart  is  turned  within  me,"  that  is  the  1.  An  encouragement  to  the  penitent,

first  answer ;  the  second,  "  My  repent-  2.  A  warning  to  the  sinner.     As  God  is

ings  are  kindled  together;"  the  third,  in    mercy,    so   in   power.     Let   all   be

"  I  will  not  execute  the  fierceness  of  my  thankful  that  while  man's  pity  is  soon

wrath ; "  the  fourth,  "  I  will  not  return  exhausted  God's  pity  is  great,  and  dis-

to  destroy  Ephraim."  And  why  1  First,  played  to  those  who  carefully  seek  it

"  I  am  God  and  not  man  ; "  secondly,  the  with  tears.
"  Holy  One  in  the  midst  of  thee  "  [Trapp~\.

HOMILETICS.
The  Penitent's  Return  to  God. —  Verses  10,  11.

God  will  pity  his  people  once  more.  They  shall  hasten  to  him  in  fear  and
trembling,  be  recalled  from  exile  and  bondage,  and  restored  to  their  inheritance
and  their  God.

I.  It  is  a  return  from  great  distance.  Man  wilfully  departed  from  God,  lives
now  without  desire  to  return,  and  is  alienated  from  God  in  life  and  affection.
Distance  from  God  is  the  moral  condition,  the  natural  law,  and  the  penal  conse-
quence of  sin.  "  Why  standest  thou  afar  off,  0  Lord  1 "  II.  It  is  a  return  in
deep  penitence.  "  They  shall  tremble  as  a  bird."  The  contrite  heart  trembles  in
fear.  The  sinner  almost  despairs  in  remembrance  of  his  desert,  and  the  holiness  of
God  ;  or  if  moved  by  fear,  he  is  conscious  of  guilt,  greatly  mourns  his  sin,  and
returns  to  confess  to  God  and  cry,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  III.  It  is  a
return  in  swift  obedience.     "  As  a  dove  out  of  the  land  of  Assyria,"  remarkable


chap.  XL]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA-  159


for  its  swift  flight,  its  rapid  and  constant  speed  when  flying  to  its  cot.  The  sinner
makes  haste  from  his  danger  to  his  rest.  There  is  no  time,  no  reason  for  delay.
God  draws,  and  he  runs.  Like  the  prodigal,  he  resolves  and  executes.  "  I  will
arise  and  go."  No  sooner  said  than  done.  Like  the  manslayer  of  old,  he  has  "fled
for  refuge  to  lay  hold  upon  the  hope  set  before  us."  IV.  It  is  a  return  through
severe  discipline.  The  inward  experiences  and  the  outward  conditions  of  the
penitent  have  been  most  bitter  and  distressing.  But  many  have  been  brought
through  severe  trials  and  strange  providences  to  God.  Pain  and  sufferings  have
punished  them  for  their  sins.  God  has  not  only  roared,  but  torn  them  to  the
astonishment  of  others.  The  call  has  been  loud  and  the  impressions  deep.  In  fear
and  trembling,  they  have  returned  to  "  the  lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah."  V.  It  is  a
return  to  intimate  friendship  with  God.  "  They  shall  walk  after  the  Lord."
Walking  with  God  includes  friendship  with  God  ;  for  how  can  two  walk  together
except  there  be  agreement  between  them  1  It  includes  obedience,  love,  and  constant
activity  in  God's  service.  Some  turn  away  and  flee  from  God.  They  are  not  near
in  thought  nor  deed.  But  the  humbled  penitents  wish  to  please  God  and  walk
with  him.  They  desire  the  abiding  presence,  and  seek  to  dwell  in  "  the  everlasting
habitations  "  of  God.  They  follow  after  him  with  intense  thirst  and  determined
pursuit.  The  will,  the  word,  and  the  character  of  God  are  their  constant  rule  and
delight.     Many  nations  shall  say,  We  will  walk  in  his  paths  (Mic.  iv.  2).

Israel's  Return  to  God  Predicted.

God  would  not  destroy  all  Israel,  a  remnant  should  be  preserved  and  walk  after
him.  Hence  many  take  the  words  as  a  prediction  of  the  future  restoration  and
return  of  God's  people.

I.  They  shall  be  gathered  from  distant  places.  "  From  the  west,"  "  out  of
Egypt,"  and  "  out  of  the  land  of  Assyria."  No  distance  destroys  God's  love,  no
bondage  limits  his  power,  and  no  enemy  can  keep  his  people  when  he  calls  them  to
hunself.  Many  shall  come  from  east  and  west,  and  sit  down  with  Abraham,  Isaac,
and  Jacob,  in  the  kingdom  of  God  (Matt.  viii.  11).  II.  They  shall  be  joined
together  in  great  numbers.  "  As  a  dove  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt."  Doves  not
only  fly  swiftly,  but  flock  together.  The  sympathy  of  numbers  is  great  in  every
undertaking,  but  especially  in  the  service  of  God,  where  that  sympathy  is  purified
and  rightly  directed.  "  Who  are  these  that  fly  as  a  cloud,  and  as  doves  to  their
windows  "  (Is.  lx.  8)  1  are  words  which  describe  the  future  converts  to  God.  III.
They  shall  be  restored  to  great  privileges.  1.  Fellowship  with  God.  "They
shall  walk  after  the  Lord."  They  would  be  many  days  without  leaders  and  sacri-
fices, but  afterward  should  return  and  seek  the  Lord  God  and  David  their  king
(ch.  iii.  4,  5).  They  would  live  in  loyal  obedience  to  Jehovah,  their  lawful
sovereign,  and  walk  with  him  in  sweet  friendship  and  joy.  2.  Security  in  their
own  habitations.  "  I  will  place  them  in  their  houses."  They  would  dwell  securely,
not  in  defenced  cities,  but  in  their  homes,  under  their  own  vines  and  fig-trees  (Mic.
iv.  4).  Man,  like  a  bird,  needs  a  shelter.  Security  and  peace  are  only  found  in  God.
He  can  place  them  in  Christ,  in  the  Christian  Church,  and  in  his  eternal  kingdom.
"  In  my  Father's  house  are  many  mansions.   .  .  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you."

The  True  and  the  False  Worshipper. — Verse  12.

The  prophet  makes  another  charge  against  Israel.  Lying  and  deceit  are  applied
to  their  idolatrous  worship  and  hypocritical  pretences.  Epbraim  compassed,  sur-
rounded God  with  lies  ;  but  Judah  maintained  the  worship  of  God,  and  walked  after
the  example  of  godly  priests  and  forefathers.  The  words  distinguish  the  true  from
the  false  worshipper.

I.  The  false  worshipper.  He  draws  near  to  God  with  his  people,  and  honours
God  with  the  lip,  but  his  worship  is  all  pretence  and  hypocrisy.  1.  He  lies  to  God
in  worship.     Israel  lied  in  setting  up  and  honouring  the  golden  calves.     All  tbeir


160  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.  [chap.  xi.


prayers,  repentance,  and  sacrifices  were  lies.  When  the  heart  is  not  right  with  God,
when  worship  is  mere  formality  and  custom,  then  all  prayers,  offerings,  and  pro-
fessions are  lies  and  deceit.  All  half-heartedness  and  unbelief,  all  counterfeits  in
religion,  are  falsehoods  to  besiege  God  and  deceive  men.  2.  He  lies  to  God  in  daily
life.  He  surrounds  God  in  manifold,  not  isolated  acts.  Lying  is  a  general  custom
with  him.  He  keeps  up  religious  forms  and  assumptions,  lives  a  moral  life  out-
wardly, and  "  fills  up  some  radical  defect  with  some  shallow  pretence."  But  he
professes  and  does  not  practise  ;  has  the  form  without  the  power  of  godliness ;  and
"  seems  a  saint,  when  most  he  plays  the  devil."  All  his  life  is  a  disguise.  He  is
darkness  disguised  in  garments  of  light ;  the  devil's  servant  dressed  in  Christ's
livery  ;  falsehood  practised  "  under  saintly  show."  Thus  men  worship  God  in  lies,
transact  business  and  deceive  their  fellow-men  with  fair  promises  and  pretences.

0  hypocrite,  thy  boldness  strikes  at  heaven,
And  makes  its  fervid  saints  appear  impostors.

II.  The  true  worshipper.  1.  He  is  acceptable  to  God.  God  looks  for  attach-
ment and  fidelity  in  his  people.  He  is  their  true  and  rightful  Lord,  and  will  bless
all  who  honour  him.  Some  are  accused  by  conscience,  and  condemned  by  God  for
deceit  and  hypocrisy ;  others  are  commended  and  blessed  in  their  approaches  to
him.  Their  prayers  are  heard,  their  gifts  accepted,  and  their  sacrifices  are  well-
pleasing  to  God.  2.  He  walks  in  the  steps  of  good  men.  Judah  was  "  faithful
with  the  saints."  If  we  take  the  margin,  he  was  faithful  with  God,  the  Holy  One  ;
far  from  false  and  fraudulent  dealings  by  which  Ephraim  circumvented  God.  Or
take  saints  as  describing  the  priests  and  Levites,  the  fathers  and  prophets,  who
handed  down  and  defended  the  pure  worship  of  God.  They  did  not  set  at  nought,
but  followed  good  examples.  We  should  be  loyal  to  the  kings  and  faithful  to  the
priests  whom  God  has  appointed  to  rule  over  us.  We  should  hold  to  the  principles
and  walk  in  the  steps  of  God's  people,  the  good  old  way  in  which  our  forefathers
walked  before  us.  "  Whose  faith  follow,  considering  the  end  of  their  conversation."
3.  He  is  dignified  by  ruling  with  God.  "  Judah  yet  ruleth  with  God."  Obedience
to  God's  peopie  is  co-operation  with  God's  work.  Ephraim  sought  to  rule  without
God,  and  cast  off  the  worship  of  God.  But  to  submit  to  God  is  to  conquer  ;  to  serve
God  is  to  reign  over  sin  and  the  world,  the  flesh  and  the  devil.  In  persevering
prayer  we  have  power  with  God ;  in  holy,  consistent  life  we  prevail  with  men  ;  and
in  God's  service  we  have  true  liberty,  real  dignity,  and  everlasting  dominion.  "The
saints  of  the  Most  High  shall  take  the  kingdom,  and  possess  the  kingdom  for  ever,
even  for  ever  and  ever."

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XL

Ver.  1,4.  Drew  them.  No  being  ever  in  which   God   deals   with   us.     "  He

yet  drew  another  to  him  by  a  display  of  works  in  us  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good

authority  and  terror.     God  himself  never  pleasure  "  [Jay].

drew  one  soul  to  him  by  the  law,  which  Who  overcomes

is  only  a  system  of  authority  and  terror ;  By  force,  hath  overcome  but  half  his  foe.

but  by  the  gospel,  which  is  his   scheme  [Milton].

of    mercy  and    grace.     The  whole    of  Ver.    5,   6.     Shall  consume.      Guilt

Christianity  may  be  considered  an  in-  and   punishment   are   bound    together,

finite  expediency,  devised  by  the  only  One  should  act  as  a  warning  to  the  other,

wise  God,  to  dispossess  our  minds  of  bad  The  threat  of  punishment  is  a  merciful

and  unworthy  thoughts,  to  fix  in  our  declaration  to  some,  though  a  terror  to

trembling  bosoms  confidence,  and  thus  others.     If  there  are  rocks  and  shoals  in

to  cause  us  to  return  to  him.     When  we  the  ocean  of  life,  it  is  not  cruelty  to  chart

wish  to  influence  a  man  we  reason  with  them  down  ;  it  is  an  eminent  and  great

him,  inform  his  mind — we  argue  and  mercy  [Beecher].

persuade.     This  is  precisely  the  method  Ver.  7.     Backsliding.     It  is  not  one


CHAP.    XII.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ';  HOSE  A.


161


of  the  least  miseries  of  a  backsliding
state,  that  every  state  of  departure  from
Grod  disposes  the  soul  to  a  greater  de-
gree of  alienation.  As  it  is  said  of  a
sheep,  that  having  once  wandered  from
the  fold,  it  never  thinks  of  returning,
but  "  wanders  on  still  more  and  more
astray ; "  so  it  may  be  affirmed  of  the
wanderer,  that  in  most  cases  his  back-
slidings  are  multiplied,  until  frequent
disappointments  and  direct  extremities
force  him  to  retrace  his  steps,  or  the
strong  hand  of  the  Good  Shepherd  brings
him  back.

Yer.  8,  9.  The  perfections  of  God
afford  a  refuge  for  the  sinner.  God  is
just.  Nothing  that  he  does  can  be  un-
just, arbitrary,  or  hard.  But  naked  jus-
tice affords  no  comfort.  It  may  fix  the
sword  to  keep  the  gate  of  Eden,  send  the
surging  sea  over  Sodom,  Gomorrah,  and
Zeboim,  and  smite  the  shepherd  and  not
the  sheep  with  the  sword,  but  it  exacts
full  and  perfect  obedience  to  the  law,
and  punishment  for  every  sin..  Where,
then,  can  we  look  1  Justice  no  longer
appals  when  satisfied  in  Christ.  It  is
the  love,  the  mercy  of  God,  which  is  our
citadel.     And  God  will  never  cease  to


be  merciful  to  his  Church.  He  is  per-
petually and  gloriously  displaying  his
mercy  to  men.  To  destroy  them  would
frustrate  the  Divine  plan  and  rob  them
of  hope  and  consolation.  The  Eternal
One  is  ever  the  same.  No  centuries,
no  sidereal  cycles,  measure  him  whose
name  is  /  am  that  I  am.  Our  lives
vanish  every  moment ;  not  so  with  God.
His  mercy  is  everlasting — his  mercy  en-
dure th  for  ever  [J.  W.  Alexander].

Ver.  10,  11.     Repentance.

At  length  corrected  by  the  filial  rod
Of  his  offended,  but  his  gracious  God,
And  lashed  from  sins  to  sighs ;  and  by  degrees
From  sighs  to  vows,  from  vows  to  bended  knees;
From  bended  knees  to  a  true  pensive  breast ;
From  thence  to  torments  not  to  be  expressed ;
Returns,  and  (from  his  sinful  self  exiled)
Finds  a  glad  Father,  he  a  welcome  child.

[Quarto.]

Yer.  12.     The  hypocrite.

His  virtues  being  overdone,  his  face

Too  grave,  his  prayers  too  long,  his  charities

Too  pompously  attended,  and  his  speech

L;trded  too  frequently,  and  out  of  time,

With  serious  phraseology — were  rents

That  in  his  garments  opened  in  spite  of  him,

Through  which  the   well-accustomed  eye  could

see
The  rottenness  of  his  heart  [Pottok],


CHAPTER  XII.


Critical  Notes.]  1.  Feed]  To  eat  or  graze.  Wind]  What  is  empty  and  vain  ;  to  hun  after
nothing,  labour  in  vain.  East]  A  fierce  and  destructive  wind,  oppressive  and  violent  (Job  xxvii.  21)  ;
Figurative  of  that  destruction  which  sinners  bring  upon  themselves.  Increaseth]  i.e.  continually,
multiplies  lies  and  violence  by  their  sins  (ch.  iv.  2),  by  which  the  kingdom  is  desolated.  To  this
they  add  gifts,  to  win  alliance  with  Assyria  and  Egypt,  but  all  in  vain.  God  will  visit  both  king-
doms. 2.  Jud.]  Whose  guilt  was  not  open  apostasy.  Jacob]  The  ten  tribes  or  chief  part  of  Israel.
God  will  punish,  will  visit  according  to  their  deeds.  The  original  indicates  a  purpose  to  visit.  If
God  spares  not  the  favoured,  how  shall  the  deserving  escape  ?  3.]  Jacob  was  their  forefather  ;  they
should  imitate  his  good,  not  his  bad  qualities.  They  are  descendants,  but  their  ways  contrast  with
his  (Mic.  ii.  7).  He  secured  the  birth- right  and  the  blessing  with  it;  wrestled  with  God  and  pre-
vailed in  prayer.  He  wrestled  in  the  womb,  and  as  an  adult  he  wrestled  with  man  and  with  God.  Took]
To  hold  the  heel  (Gen.  xxv.  26).  Strength]  In  his  manly  vigour  he  behaved  himself  princely  with
God  (Gen.  xxxii.  24 — 29),  and  acquired  the  name  of  prince.  This  strength  given  in  conscious  weak-
ness. 4.  Angel]  In  human  form  God  wrestled,  put  Jacob's  thigh  out  of  joint,  but  did  not  prevail.
Jacob  could  no  longer  stand.  Wept]  and  poured  out  intense  desires  in  supplication,  and  though
wounded,  was  not  overcome  in  conflict,  but  found  God  and  talked  with  him  at  Bethel.  There]  he
speaks  to  us  by  Jacob,  girt  with  his  spirit  and  might  we  may  prevail.  5.  Lord]  A  name  which  im-
plies constancy,  by  which  God  is  distinguished  and  ever  remembered  (Ex.  iii.  15  ;  Ps.  cxxxv.  13).
6.  Turn]  Lit.  thou  shalt  turn,  so  turn  as  to  enter  into  vital  fellowship  with  God  (Is.  x.  22).  Thou]
who  wishest  to  be  a  true  descendant,  pray  and  act  as  Jacob.     7.  Merchant]  Marg.  a  Canaanite,  a

11


162  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  HOSE  A.  [chap,  xii


heathen,  unlike  Israel,  to  whom  Canaanites  were  a  reproach  (Ezek.  xvi.  3).  Oppress]  Lit.  deceive.
Men  whose  trade  is  deceit,  whose  balances  are  unjust,  cannot  love  mercy  and  do  judgment.  8.  Eph.
said,  in  a  spirit  of  disregard  to  the  prophets,  and  in  self-justification,  "I  am  become  rich
God  prospers  me  ;  this  is  a  proof  that  he  is  not  displeased,  and  that  there  is  no  iniquity  in  me."  But
these  riches  were  not  enjoyed  on  account  of  sin.  Their  attitude  towards  God  and  man  was  the  very
opposite  of  right.  9.  I]  God  meets  their  delusion  by  reminding  them  that  he  had  been  their  guide,
defence,  and  source  of  prosperity,  from  wandering  in  the  wilderness,  and  to  settlement  in  tents  now.
Others  take  this  as  a  threat  to  reduce  them  to  their  ancient  helpless  condition.  10.  By  prophets]  who
left  no  means  untried,  speaking  in  metaphors  and  methods  adapted  to  rouse  the  attention  (Num.  xii.  6,
8  ;  Joel  ii.  28).  11.  Vanity]  The  question  strengthens  the  affirmation.  All  was  to  no  purpose.
"Warnings  unheeded,  altars  as  numerous  as  heaps  of  stones  gathered  out  of  the  field,  and  scenes  of
solemn  history  were  corrupted  and  ruined.  12.  Jacob]  was  a  fugitive  and  a  servant,  in  a  low  con-
dition (Gen.  xxx.  31  ;  1  Sam.  xvii.  20) ;  did  not  marry  an  idolatress:  his  honest  poverty  reproves
your  ungodly  gains,  and  his  faith  in  God  your  idolatry  and  unbelief.  13.  Israel]  as  represented
in  Jacob,  the  individual,  and  in  the  nation  in  Egypt,  has  been  preserved  (Nam.  xii.  6,  8  ;  Deut.  xviii.
15,  18),  kept  by  God,  as  Israel  kept  his  flock  (Ps.  lxxx.  1 ;  Is.  lxiii.  11).  14.  Anger]  Lit.  with
bitterness,  instead  of  gratitude  and  praise,  hence  punishment.  Blood]  Blood-guiltiness  a  grave  crime
(Lev.  xx.  9).  Leave]  The  opposite  of  taking  away  or  forgiving.  Return]  Dishonour  to  God  re-
payed  to  Eph.     His]  For  God  does  not  give  up  his  rights,  though  men  set  aside  his  dominion.

HOMILETICS.
Feeding  upon  the  Wind. — Verse  1.

God  has  still  complaints  to  make  against  his  people.  They  turn  from  him,  seek
satisfaction  in  idolatry  and  in  creature  confidence.  This  is  to  feed  upon  the  wind
and  to  chase  after  the  east  wind.     A  course  most  unprofitable  and  most  injurious.

I.  This  conduct  is  most  unprofitable.  In  every  department  of  business  men
look  for  profit.  "  What  shall  I  gain  by  this  ? "  is  an  all-important  question.  In  a
course  of  sin,  in  seeking  safety  and  felicity  from  the  creature  instead  of  the  Creator,
there  is  no  gain  whatever.  1.  It  is  labour  without  satisfaction.  The  wind  will  not
satisfy  the  hungry  man.  Pleasure  and  mirth,  worldly  honours  and  religious  form-
alities, are  empty  husks.  Men  can  only  feed  upon  bread.  Grass  for  cattle,  straw
for  swine,  but  %t  food  for  man."  Sensitive  joys  gratify  the  passions,  intensify  the
eagerness  and  increase  the  speed  with  which  men  seek  pleasure ;  but  it  is  only
spending  money  for  that  which  is  not  bread,  and  -labour  for  that  which  satisfieth
not.  2.  It  is  labour  in  vain.  The  sinner  delighte  in  vain  things,  and  pursues,
hunts  after  emptiness  and  vanity.  He  spends  his  strength  for  nought,  bestows  the
gifts  of  body  and  mind  upon  those  who  cannot  help  him,  and  seeks  to  support
himself  in  things  worthless  and  unsubstantial.  His  appetite  is  strengthened,  not
satisfied ;  his  capacities  enlarged,  not  filled  ;"an  aching  void,"  a  blank,  is  left  behind
which  the  world  cannot  fill.  The  wisest  man  took  an  inventory  of  pleasures  and
the  best  things  in  the  world,  and  gives  the  sum  total  as  "  vanity  of  vanities.1'

The  world's  all  title-page,  without  contents.

II.  This  conduct  is  most  injurious.  It  is  not  only  feeding  upon  wind,  but
following  after  what  is  most  pernicious,  "  the  east  wind"  the  most  destructive  of
alL  1.  It  increases  injury  by  increasing  lies.  "He  daily  increaseth  lies."  Men
lie  in  false  speech,  false  dealing,  and  false  worship.  They  lie  to  themselves  and  to
others  by  declaring  the  sufficiency  of  human  help,  and  making  covenant  with  man
in  forgetfulness  of  God.  All  things  which  prop  up  the  false  notions  and  the  false
systems  of  men  are  lies  and  delusion.  The  house  built  upon  this  foundation  will
fall,  and  great  will  be  the  fall  of  it.  2.  It  brings  ruin  instead  of  shelter.  He  daily
increaseth  u  desolation."  The  Cretians  were  always  liars,  and  must  be  rebuked
sharply  (Tit.  i.  13).  Multiplying  lies  will  multiply  sorrows  and  punishments,  (a)
This  ruin  is  certain.  "  He  that  speaketh  lies  shall  not  escape"  (Pro v.  xix.  5).
Not  escape  by  devices  of  his  own,  nor  "  covenant  with  the  Assyrians."  Egypt  with-
held its  aid,  and  Assyria  was  turned  against  Ephraim — everything  false  is  a  broken
reed,  a  rotten  support,  (b)  The  ruin  is  great.  "  He  that  speaketh  lies  shall
perish  "  (Prov.xix.  9).     God  is  faithful  and  true;  repeats  denunciations  against  lies


chap,  xn.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.  163


and  deceit,  and  warns  all  of  their  danger.  "  I  will  be  a  swift  witness  against  false
swearers,  and  them  that  fear  not  me,  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts."  What  folly,  there-
fore, to  expect  from  the  world  what  it  cannot  give,  what  is  not  in  it.  What
infatuation  to  be  willing  to  be  deceived  with  the  very  shadow  of  profit.  In  labour
like  this  there  is  no  happiness  "under  the  sun."  "I  have  no  comfort,"  said  one,
"in  all  this,  because  I  meet  death  in  every  walk."  As  a  punishment  for  this
perversity  God  says,  u  Behold,  it  is  not  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts  that  the  people  shall
labour  in  the  very  fire,  and  the  people  shall  weary  themselves  for  very  vanity."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

1.  Men  are  so  naturally  averse  to  God  If  Ephraim  first  feed  upon  the  wind,  and

that  they  fly  to  any  source   for  help.  then  fall  under  the  east  wind,  it  must

Israel   sometimes    went   to    Egypt   and  needs  go  hard  with  him."
sometimes  to  Assyria  ;  to  one  or  both  Ver.  2.     A   controversy  with  Judali.

according  to   their   need.      2.    Human  J.  adhered  to  the  house  of  David  and

helps  will  be  of  no  avail  in  the  day  of  priesthood  of  Aaron — did  not  publicly

trouble.     Israel's  allies  could  not  ward  commit  idolatry,  and  was  not  so  guilty

off  the  judgments  of  God.     3.  Men  who  as   Israel ;   yet  God  blamed   them  and

deal  falsely  with  God  will  deal  falsely  would    punish    them.     Professors   may

with  their  fellow-men.     If  the  covenant  have  true  forms  and  sound  creeds,  but

of  God  be  despised,  the  contracts  with  ungodly  lives.     Men  may  glory  in  titles

man  will  not  be  treated  with  sanctity.  and  descent,  as  Israel  gloried  in  Jacob —

A  man's  word  will  not  always  be  his  be  commended  for  some  things,  and  sadly

bond.     4.   Men  who  forsake  God   will  guilty  in  others.     But  God  is  impartial,

find    their    own    ways   expensive    and  and  will  not  spare  any  sins,  but  measure

ruinous.    They  get  nothing  whatever  but  out  judgment  according  to  the  degree

"  wind,"  and  they  bring  upon  themselves  and  obstinacy  of  guilt.     He  admonishes

the  tempestuous  and  stormy  wind  (Jonah  Judah,  and  indicates  his  purpose  to  visit

and  Job,  xv.  2).     Oil  and  labour   are  Israel  "  according  to  his  doings."    "  The

lost,  solemn  leagues  and  covenants  are  justice  of  God  falls  more   severely  on

broken,  and  the  more  they  increase  lies  those  who  degenerate  from  a  holy  parent

the    further   they  run  from   their   own  than  on  those  who  have  no  incitement

mercies.    "  An  empty  body  meeting  with  to  good  from  the  piety  of  their  hojw«  "
tempests  will  have  much  ado  to  bear  up.

HOMILETICS.
Imitating  the  Examples  op  Progenitors. —  Verses  3,  4.

The  Jews  boasted  of  their  relation  to  Jacob,  but  did  not  walk  in  his  steps.
Their  trusting  in  man  was  a  contrast  to  his  believing  in  God.  The  prophet  reproves
them  for  their  apostasy,  show/s  how  justly  they  were  accused,  and  urges  them  to
imitate  the  virtues,  not  the  faults  of  their  ancestor.  We  must  not  live  under  the
shadow,  but  walk  after  the  example  of  good  men.

I.  In  Jacob  we  have  an  example  of  anxiety  for  God's  blessing.  He  was
eager  to  secure  the  birthright  and  the  blessing  connected  with  it.  1 .  In  the  womb,
"he  took  his  brother  by  the  heel"  (Gen.  xxv.  26).  He  was  to  have  precedence
over  the  first-born  by  nature,  and  there  was  unconscious  striving  for  Divine  favour
in  store  for  him.  Early  indications  of  piety  are  encouraging.  Some  are  chosen
from  the  womb,  and  preserved  from  sins  of  youth  and  riper  age.  Potential  develop-
ment of  children  demands  reverence  and  care  in  parents  and  teachers.  Luther's
schoolmaster  took  off  his  hat  and  bowed  to  his  scholars  when  he  entered  the
school-room  and  thought  of  their  destiny.  The  solemn  possibilities  of  the  future
should  stimulate  parents  to  train  up  children  in  the  fear  of  God  and  the  love  of
truth.     "  Even  a  child  is  known  by  his  doings."     2.  In  after  years  "he  had  power


164  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.  [chap.  xii.


with  God."     In  the  womb  he  seized  the  heel ;  in  manhood  he  cherished  the  same
spirit,  and  became  a  prince  with  God.     One  struggle  was  the  beginning  of  the  other.
The  possession  of  God's  promise  was  the  object  of  both.     Having  striven  for  it  in
secret,  he  secured  it  in  public.     What  he  sought  in  childhood  he  gained  in  man-
hood.    Early  impressions  are  the  elementary  tissue  out  of  which  mature  life  and
conduct  are  developed  and  organized.      In  this  instance  "  the  child  is  father  of
the  man."     Strength  with  God  and  power  among  men  are  the  result  of  prayer  and
providential  discipline.     Those  who  are  filled  with  true  ambition,  who  seek  to  be
great  by  following  the  example  and  serving  the  God  of  their  forefathers,  shall  have
the  precedency.     But  profane  persons  like  Esau,  worldly-minded  in  their  desires,
and  leagued  with  sin  in  their  pursuits,  will  forfeit  their  birthrights  and  blessings.
"  The  elder  shall  serve  the  younger."     II.  In  Jacob  we  have  an  example  of
power  with  God.    "  By  his  strength  he  had  power  with  God."     1.  Power  through
prayer.     In  great  fear  and  distress,  he  was  no  match  for  the  armed  force  of  his
angry  brother.     He  could  neither  resist  nor  flee.     He  found  succour  and  strength
in    God.      He   acted  princely,   was   strong   in  faith,  and    prevailed    over   man.
In  prayer  our  own  strength  is   increased,    and  more  is  given   to   us   by  God.
We  are  strengthened  with  might  by  the  Spirit  in  the  inner  man  (Eph.  iii.  16).
The  nature  of   this  prayer  is    briefly  described.      (1)  Supplicating  prayer.     He
"  made  supplication  unto    him."     Supplication   is  earnest,  constant  prayer,  and
often    accompanied    with  crying  (Ps.   xxviii.   2 ;    Jer.  iii.    21).      (2)    Wrestling
prayer.     "  There  wrestled  a  man  with  him  until  the  breaking  of  the  day."     The
word  indicates  a  twisting  of  bodily  limbs ;  intense  energy  and  exertion  to  prevail.
Jacob's  prayer  was  a  struggle  with  the  angel,  physically  and  spiritually,  in  faith  and
determination.   (3)  Prevailing  prayer.   "  He  had  power  over  the  angel  and  prevailed."
He  conquered,  received  a  new  name,  "  for  as  a  prince  hast  thou  power  with  God
and  with  men  "  (Gen.  xxxii.  28).    Luther  on  one  occasion  had  wrestled  hard  with
God,  and  came  leaping  out  of  his  closet,  shouting,  "  Vicimus,  vicimus.     We  have
conquered,  we  have  conquered !  "     2.  Power  through  human  tears.     "  He  wept
and  made  supplication."     Vehement  desires  and  earnest  prayers  often  find  vent  in
tears.     Hence  "  to  implore  means  to  ask  with  tears,"  says  one.     His  tears  were  not
mere  signs  of  weakness,  but  of  strength ;  not  the  relief  of  nature,  but  the  expression
of  spirit.     Esau  wept  in  anger  and  disappointment ;  Jacob  in  prayer  and  penitence.
The  tears  of  one  were  music  to  God  ;  the  cry  of  the  other,  complaint  to  men.     He
was  a  type  of  Christ,  "  who  in  the  days  of  his  flesh  offered  up  prayers  and  suppli-
cations, with  strong  crying  and  tears,  unto  him  that  was  able  to  save  him  from
death,  and  was  heard  in  that  he  feared."     3.  Power  through  Divine  aid.     Jacob's
purpose  was  strong,  and  his  natural  power  great ;  but  power  to  prevail  was  the  gift
of  God.     His  physical  strength  was  impaired  ;  but  though  thrown  in  the  contest,
he  would  not  give  up.     "I  will   not  let  thee  go  except  thou  bless  me."     The
blessing  was  all,  the  injured  thigh  was  nothing  to  him.     From  night  till  break  of
day  he  wrestled  with  human  tears  and  Divine  energy.  His  spirit  and  perseverance
put  to  shame  his  degenerate  sons.     It  is  folly  boasting  of  ancestral  glory  without
possessing  ancestral  virtues.     Let  us  imitate  the  life  and  remember  the  prayers  of
our  fathers.     They  were  girt  with  the  might  of  faith,  and  victorious  over  the  Lord
of  hosts.     "  Out  of  weakness  "  they  were  "  made  strong,"  and  "  waxed  valiant  in
fight  "  with  evil.     Their  glory  is  not  the  glory  of  the  warrior,  but  the  splendour,  of
princes  with  God.     Their  new  name  supersedes  the  old.  as  the  sun  exceeds  the
stars.     "  For  by  it  the  elders  obtained  a  good  report."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  3,  4.  The  wonderful  combat.  II.  The  object  of  the  combat.  "  Ble^<»
I  The  combatants.  Jacob  a  man,  and  me."  In  the  night  of  sorrow  and  in
the  angel,  "  the  angel  of  the  covenant."      the  weakness  of  nature  "  turn  to  him


chap,  xii.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ROSEA.  165


that  smiteth."     The  blessing  of  the  Lord  ling  with  his  brother  in  the  womb,  the

maketh  rich.     J/7.   The  issue  of  the  com-  other  by  wrestling  with  the  angel  at  Pe-

bat.     "  Power  over  the  angel  and  pre-  niel.     Jacob  signifies  a  supplanter;  Is-

vailed."     Persevering,  wrestling  prayer  rael  means  a  prince  with  God — and  the

will  always  prevail.      "  The  father  in  reason  of  the  new  name  was,  that  he  had

wrestling  with his  child  is  willing  enough  "power  with  God  and  with  men,  and

for  his  child's  comfort  and  encouragement  had  prevailed  "  [Jay~\.
to  take  a  fall  now  and  then  ;  so  it  was  Ver.  4.  Bethel.     Kevelations  of  God

between  the  angel  and  Jacob.     In  this  to  men.     1.  God  reveals  himself  by  his

blessed  story,  as  in   a  crystal  glass,  we  word.     "  He  spake."  ,  2.  The  revelations

see  the  great  power  and  pre  valency  of  of  one  age  are  designed  for  the  instruc-

private  prayer;    it  conquers    the    con-  tion  of    another.      "  Spake    with    us."

queror  ;  it  is  so  omnipotent,  that  it  over-  Most  important  lessons  from  this  place,
comes  an  omnipotent  God  "   [Brooks],  Bethel  in  Jacob's  time  and  Bethel  in

Jacob  was  knighted  on  the  field.     He  Israel's  time  ;  or  Bethel  in  its  ruin  and

had  two  names,  and  both  of  them  were  Bethel  in  its  royalty,
gained  by  wrestling ;  the  one  by  wrest-


HOMILETICS.
The  Memorial  Name. —  Verse  5.

When  Jacob  felt  the  power  of  his  antagonist  he  asked,  "  Tell  me,  I  pray  thee,
thy  name."  To  those  who  neglect  what  is  plain  and  useful,  and  pry  into  things
which  do  not  concern  them,  the  revelation  is  withheld  ;  but  to  the  earnest
petitioner  God  gives  blessings  and  encouragement.  Here  the  name  is  unfolded  in
significance  and  splendour.

I.  The  name  in  its  absolute  perfection.  "The  Lord."  Jehovah,  the  true  and
living  God,  distinguished  from  idols,  and  deserving  the  homage  of  his  creatures.
1.  Lord  by  creation.  Greater  proprietary  right  over  us  than  we  have  over  one
another.  The  Lord  our  Maker.  2.  Lord  by  redemption.  This  is  a  greater  claim
than  creation.  He  had  only  to  speak  to  make  us  ;  he  suffered,  gave  his  Son,  to  re-
deem us.  "  Ye  are  not  your  own,  for  ye  are  bought  with  a  price."  3.  Lord  by
choice.  His  people  do  not  resist  his  claims,  nor  serve  other  gods.  They  willingly
submit  to  him  as  their  "  Master  and  Lord."  II.  The  name  in  its  universal  rela-
tion. "  God  of  Hosts."  Of  all  things  visible  and  invisible,  of  angels  and  heavenly
spirits,  of  all  creation,  "  the  host  of  heaven  and  earth  "  (Gen.  ii.  1).  This  indicates
— 1.  Supreme  government.  He  has  all  power,  directs  and  sustains  all  creatures,  and
rules  all  things  by  his  own  will.  2.  Supreme  order.  "  Order  is  heaven's  first  law."
He  keeps  all  things  in  subordination,  and  by  him  all  things  consist  or  stand  to-
gether. 3.  Constant  obedience.  He  leads  his  people,  his  armies,  organized  and
equipped,  like  Israel  leaving  Egypt.  He  reigns  over  them,  enthroned  in  affection,
and  renders  their  service  natural,  pleasant,  and  delightful.  "  A  son  honoureth  his
father,  and  a  servant  his  master  "  (Mai.  i.  6).  4.  Continual  triumph.  The  hosts
of  the  Lord  are  in  a  state  of  martial  discipline,  to  contend  for  the  cause  and  fight
the  battles  of  their  captain.  The  cause  of  truth  is  a  warfare.  Christian  life  is
"  fighting  the  good  fight  of  faith."  The  world  is  a  foe  to  the  believer,  and  sin  is
deadly  opposed  to  holiness.  But  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  has  omnipotent  power  and
infinite  resources.  He  will  rule  until  all  enemies  are  put  under  his  feet.  III.  The
name  in  its  continual  manifestation.  "  The  Lord  is  his  memorial."  The  name
Jehovah  expresses  his  nature,  and  will  ever  be  what  it  has  been,  a  memorial  to  men.
God  is  ever  to  be  remembered  in  his  merciful  and  unchanging  attributes  (Ex.  iii.
15).  We  need  no  images  nor  unlawful  helps  to  remind  us  of  God.  His  works
and  ways  declare  his  wisdom,  truth,  and  love.  He  will  be  to  us  what  he  was  to
Jacob  and  Moses,  and  all  his  people  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.     In


166  H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :  HOSE  J.  [chap,  xii,


this  name  lies  a  fulness  and  sufficiency  which  the  exigencies  of  life  will  reveal.
How  little  have  we  known  of  it  in  prayer  and  practical  lite  !  Seek  to  know  more,
and  get  hope,  strength,  and  success  in  Christian  Avork.  "  Thy  name,  0  Lord,  en-
dureth  for  ever,  and  thy  memorial,  0  Lord,  throughout  all  generations."

True  Conversion  to  God. —  Verse  6.

"  Therefore  "  to  this  God,  who  rules  heaven  and  earth,  Israel  had  only  to  turn
in  truth,  and  they  would  find  in  him  what  Jacob  found.  God  offers  himself  to  his
apostate  people,  and  all  may  claim  a  covenant  right  in  him  if  they  sincerely  return
to  him.     This  return  or  conversion  to  God  is  described.

I.  Induced  by  the  revelation  of  God's  character.  "  Therefore,"  if  God  is
good,  and  able  to  save,  they  need  not  seek  help  from  any  other  source.  1.  Revela-
tions in  his  word.  "  Thy  God."  We  may  disown,  but  can  never  cast  off,  our
relationship  to  God  as  dependent,  guilty  creatures.  He  claims  us  in  our  sin,  and
does  not  reject  us  when  we  return  to  him.  He  is  a  God  of  love,  not  revengeful  and
unmerciful.  The  revelations  of  his  word  are  suited  to  quicken  our  hearts,  to
destroy  our  "  enmity  with  God,"  and  draw  us  to  him  in  penitence  and  faith.  We
clothe  God  in  attributes  of  vengeance  and  thunder.  But  a  persuasion  of  personal
love  wrought  in  the  soul  will  induce  the  sinner  to  return.  "  He  hath  loved  me."
This  is  "  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus,"  and  revealed  only  in
him.  2.  Revelations  of  his  mercy  to  others.  What  God  has  done  for  others  he
can  do  for  us.  Paul  obtained  mercy  for  a  pattern  to  others.  Bunyan  and  New-
ton were  sinners  saved  by  grace.  Men  in  every  age  and  in  every  degree  of  guilt
have  been  monuments  of  God's  mercy,  and  living  examples  of  the  power  of  God's
word.  "  To  show  in  the  ages  to  come  the  exceeding  riches  of  his  grace  in  his
kindness  toward  us  by  Christ  Jesus."  II.  Evidenced  by  the  practical  duties
of  life.  When  the  sinner  turns  to  God,  he  will  bring  forth  fruits  meet  for  repent-
ance (Matt.  hi.  8).  His  life  will  not  be  empty  profession,  but  filled  with  fruits  of
righteousness  to  God  and  man.  1.  Duties  to  man.  The  duties  of  the  second
table,  the  weightier  matters  of  the  law,  must  not  be  overlooked.  For  if  we  disre-
gard man,  whatever  professions  we  make  before  God,  our  religion  is  vain.  "  He
that  loveth  not  his  brother  whom  he  hath  seen,  how  can  he  love  God  whom  he  hath
not  seen  1"  (a)  Mercy.  Men  are  weak  and  miserable,  and  need  sympathy  and
compassion.  We  must  not  treat  them  with  cruelty  and  injustice.  Mercy  wins  and
11  blesseth  him  that  gives  and  him  that  takes."  On  one  occasion  the  ministers  of
Alphonsus,  king  of  Naples,  complained  that  his  lenity  did  not  become  a  prince.
"  What,  then,"  said  he,  "  would  you  have  lions  and  tigers  reign  over  you?  Know
you  not  that  cruelty  is  the  attribute  of  wild  beasts — clemency  that  of  man  ?  "
"  Blessed  are  the  merciful,  for  they  shall  obtain  mercy."  (b)  Judgment.  Justice,
by  which  we  give  to  all  men  their  due.  It  is  opposed  to  dishonesty,  fraud,  and  un-
fairness of  any  kind.  "  A  just  man,"  says  Jeremy  Taylor,  "  does  justice  to  every
man  and  to  every  thing  ;  and  then,  if  he  be  also  wise,  he  knows  there  is  a  debt  of
mercy  and  compassion  due  to  the  infirmities  of  man's  nature,  and  that  is  to  be  paid  ;
and  he  that  is  cruel  and  ungentle  to  a  sinning  person,  and  does  the  worst  to  him,
dies  in  his  debt  and  is  unjust."  "  All  things  whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should
do  unto  you,  do  ye  even  so  unto  them,  for  this  is  the  law  and  the  prophets."  2.
Duties  to  God.  To  cherish  and  keep  up  the  fruits  of  conversion,  we  must  "  wait,"
in  communion  with  God.  He  only  who  begins  can  perfect  the  good  work.  Our
sufficiency  in  every  duty  can  only  come  from  God.  Hence,  "  wait  on  thy  God  con-
tinually." (a)  Wait  in  dependence  upon  God.  Such  as  turn  to  God  truly  will
be  careful  to  keep  closely  to  God,  and  will  feel  their  need  of  God  daily.  In  him
we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being  naturally  and  spiritually.  Dependence  is
essential  to  spiritual  life.  Just  as  human  wants  promote  human  efforts  and
energies,  so  trust  in  God  will  prompt  to  love  and  duty,     (b)   Wait  with  hope  in


chap,  xil]  H0M1LET1G  COMMENTARY :  HOSEA.  167


God.  Waiting  implies  hoping.  The  longer  we  wait  the  more  we  prove  that  our
expectation  is  not  crushed.  The  hopeless  will  be  a  lifeless  soul ;  but  hope  kindles
desire,  and  makes  "expectation  rise."  'w  If  we  hope  for  that  we  see  not,  then  do
we  with  patience  wait  for  it."  (c)  Wait  continually  upon  God.  There  must  be
no  cessation,  no  interruption  of  this  duty.  The  greatest  joy  destroys  not  our
dependence ;  the  greatest  failure  should  not  drive  us  to  despair.  Sad  desertions
and  apparent  rejections  do  not  warrant  us  to  give  up.  "  Wait  on  the  Lord  :  be  of
good  courage,  and  he  shall  strengthen  thine  heart :  wait,  I  say,  on  the  Lord."

Prosperity  Unlawfully  Gained  and  Abused  will  be  taken  away  by  God. —

Verses  7 — 9.

Israel  was  not  like  Jacob,  who  wrestled  with  God,  but  like  a  merchant  who
sought  to  become  rich  by  fraud  and  oppression.  Instead  of  keeping  judgment  and
mercy  (ver.  6),  Ephraim  prided  himself  in  deceit,  and  justified  his  wickedness  by  its
success.  But  God  threatens  to  punish  by  stripping  them  of  wealth,  and  throwing
them  into  privation  and  distress.

T.  Prosperity  acquired  by  unlawful  means.  When  men  make  haste  to  be
rich,  they  rush  into  danger,  and  care  nothing  for  the  means,  so  that  they  accomplish
the  end.  Trade  is  lawful,  necessary,  and  advantageous.  Prosperity  is  a  cause  for
gratitude ;  but  how  many  have  become  Canaanites  in  their  character  and  conduct.
1.  Deceit.  "  The  balances  of  deceit  are  in  his  hand."  Fraud  is  sadly  too  common
now.  Short  weight  and  short  measure,  trickery  and  false  dealing,  evading  legal
duties,  taking  advantage  of  the  unwary,  are  a  flagrant  breach  of  the  golden  rule,
and  an  abomination  to  the  God  of  truth  (Pro v.  xx.  10).  "  That  no  man  go  beyond
and  defraud  his  brother  in  any  matter."  2.  Oppression.  "  He  loveth  to  oppress."
Oppression  assumes  many  forms.  When  artisans  are  compelled  to  buy  at  a  loss  at
their  master's  premises,  when  their  lawful  wages  are  withheld,  or  their  proper
rights  trampled  upon,  there  is  oppression.  In  all  abuse  of  power  and  insolent
treatment  of  others  we  see  oppressive  conduct.  A  bargain  is  sometimes  unmerciful
as  a  robbery,  and  wealth  gained  by  oppression  is  of  little  value.  "  Better  is  a  little
with  righteousness,  than  great  revenues  without  right."  II.  Prosperity  considered
to  justify  wicked  conduct.  "  Ephraim  said,  Yet  I  am  rich."  I  have  succeeded  ;
I  must  be  right.  If  God  prospers  me,  it  is  a  proof  that  I  am  innocent,  and  that  he
is  not  displeased  with  me.  Men  have  pleas  for  their  sins,  and  excuses  to  ward  off
conviction  from  the  word.  Here  we  have — 1.  Prosperity  defended  in  pride.  "I
am  rich."  Wealthy  men  are  apt  to  be  proud,  to  forget  God,  and  claim  honour  and
reverence  from  their  fellow-men.  Oppressors  are  esteemed  great  by  the  world  ;  but
men  are  to  be  judged  by  God's  rule,  not  by  man's  rule.  "  Envy  thou  not  the
oppressor,  and  choose  none  of  his  ways."  2.  Prosperity  defended  in  self-
righteousness.  "They  shall  find  none  iniquity  in  me."  They  protest  their
innocence,  and  declare  none  can  find  any  sin  in  their  buying  and  selling.
None  suspect  themselves  less  than  the  self-righteous  and  the  proud.  They
see  fraud  and  deceit  in  other  traders,  but  not  in  themselves.  They  glorify
themselves,  build  up  their  fortunes,  defend  them  by  wickedness,  and  deceive
their  own  souls.  "Thou  say  est  I  am  rich  and  increased  with  goods,  and  have
need  of  nothing ;  and  knowest  not  that  thou  art  wretched,  and  miserable,  and
poor,  and  blind,  and  naked."  III.  Prosperity  abused  will  be  taken  away  by  God.
God  reminds  them  of  forgotten  mercy.  In  all  their  history  he  never  left  himself
without  witness  of  his  goodness.  1.  Past  prosperity  was  the  gift  of  God.  In  one
brief  sentence  he  reviews  the  past  and  comprehends  the  present.  "I  that  am  the
Lord  thy  God  from  the  land  of  Egypt."  They  were  in  bondage  and  slavery,  and
God  delivered  them.  They  depended  upon  him  for  food,  clothing,  and  guidance  in
the  wilderness.  And  they  were  grateful  to  God  once,  commemorated  his  goodness
in  feasts  of  tabernacles  ;  but  now  these  mercies  are  all  forgotten.  They  boasted  in
their  wealth,  and  sought  it  independently  of  God.     God  will  therefore  teach  them


168


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  HOSE  A.


[CHA.P    XII.


dependence  upon  him.  2.  Present  'prosperity  is  the  gift  of  God.  From  Egypt  up
to  the  present  time  have  "  I  the  Lord  thy  God  "  taken  an  interest  in  thee.  Israel's
possession  of  the  land  and  deliverance  from  enemies,  all  their  glory  and  wealth,  had
come  from  God.  We  have  nothing  that  Ave  have  not  received,  and  we  should  not
boast  as  if  we  had  not  received  it.  Our  skill  and  fortunes  are  from  God,  on  whom
we  all  depended.  If  we  attribute  all  to  self,  and  nothing  to  him,  he  will  claim  his
own,  and  rob  us  of  our  enjoyments.  3.  God  who  gives  prosperity  can  easily  take
it  away.  He  "  will  yet  make  thee  to  dwell  in  tabernacles  as  in  the  days  "  of  old.
What  a  helpless  people  Israel  were,  when  kings  and  nobles,  rich  and  poor,  left  their
palaces  to  dwell  in  booths  !  How  unsettled  their  residence,  and  how  slight  the
tenure  of  their  worldly  wealth  which  they  held  at  the  command  of  God  !  In  God
alone  is  power  and  stability,  true  riches  and  happiness.  If  we  indulge  in  oppres-
sion, pride,  and  deceit — defend  acts  of  injustice,  and  trust  to  unlawful  gains,  God
will  reduce  us  to  poverty  and  want.  "  Wealth  gotten  by  vanity  shall  be  diminish-
ed." Eevenues  without  right  can  never  be  kept.  When  the  judgment  of  God  falls
upon  dishonest  trades  there  will  be  no  shelter.  "  Riches  profit  not  in  the  day  of
wrath."


HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Ver.  8.  The  shadoio  taken  for  the
substance.  c<  I  have  found  substance."
1.  It  is  folly  to  take  wealth  and
worldly  honours  as  substance,  for  they
are  emptiness  and  vanity,  things  that  are
not  (Prov.  xxiii.  5;  xxvii.  4).  2.  It  is
wrong  to  think  that  we  gain  substance
and  prosperity  by  our  own  industry  and
skill.  u  I  have  found  it."  We  say  con-
cerning our  houses  and  fortunes,  Look
what  "I  have  built  for  the  house  of  the
kingdom,  by  the  might  of  my  power,
and  for  the  honour  of  my  majesty."
3.  It  is  selfish  to  think  that  all  our  sub-
stance is  given  for  our  own  use  merely.
"  I  have  found  me  out  substance."
Wealth,  time,  talents,  and  all  are  given
in  trust,  to  be  employed  for  the  good  of
others  and  the  glory  of  God.  4.  It  is
deceptive  to  think  that  wealth  sinfully
acquired  will  increase  our  happiness  and
protect  our  souls.  The  love  of  ease  and
oppression,  pride  and  dishonesty,  ripen


for  destruction.  "  The  prosperity  of
fools  shall  destroy  them."  "  In  all
time  of  our  wealth,  good  Lord,  deliver
us."

il  Find  none  iniquity  in  me"  Charac-
ters innocent  before  men  ungodly  in
the  sight  of  God.  Men  considered  suc-
cessful, remarkable  for  business  tact,  and
held  up  as  examples,  condemned  and
punished  by  God.

Honesty  is  the  best  policy.  1.  As  a
matter  of  policy.  2.  As  a  matter  of
principle.  Character  is  property.  A
man  may  not  be  rich  in  this  world,  yet
be  rich  towards  God  and  in  the  general
good  will  of  men.  "  As  a  man  can  never
be  truly  honest  unless  he  be  religious,
so,  on  the  other  hand,  whatever  show  of
religion  he  may  make,  he  cannot  be
truly  religious  in  God's  judgment  un-
less he  is  honest  in  his  conversation  to-
wards his  neighbour  "  [Bp  Mant\.


HOMILETICS.
God's  Method  of  Teaching  the  People. —  Verse  10.

Yer.  10  expands  ver.  9,  and  further  proves  that  the  people  had  no  excuse  for
their  ignorance  and  sin.  God  had  taught  them  from  the  first,  "  at  sundry  times
and  in  divers  manners,"  by  the  prophets.  Prophet  succeeded  prophet,  and  precept
upon  precept,  line  upon  line,  were  given  to  impress  Israel,  and  wean  them  from
their  sin.     God  speaks  to  men  now  by  his  word  and  providence.

L  The  ministry  of  the  prophets.  "  I  have  also  spoken  by  the  prophets."  Is-
rael at  Sinai  requested  that  God  would  speak  to  them  through  human  messengers,
and  from  Moses  to   Malachi  they  had  proofs  of  mercy  and  condescension      The


chap,  xii.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.  l«y


ministry  of  the  gospel  is  a  singular  mercy  (Is.  xxx.  20),  and  suffers  us  not  to  walk
in  our  own  ways  as  other  nations  do  (Acts  xiv.  16).  The  prophets  were  "holy
men  of  God,"  exalted  to  dignity  and  consecrated  to  office.  They  had  Divine  teach-
ing and  Divine  authority  in  their  message.  To  reject  them  was  to  despise  God.
The  eminence  of  their  position  and  the  solemnity  of  their  words,  aggravate  the
guilt  of  sinners.  God  reveals  his  will  and  speaks  to  us  in  his  word,  and  by  his
servants  now.  Time  after  time,  by  minister  after  minister,  does  he  urge  men  to
repent  and  turn  to  him.  Fearful  will  be  the  punishment  of  those  who  disobey
his  voice.  "  The  Lord  hath  sent  unto  you  all  his  servants  the  prophets,  rising  early
and  sending  them,  but  ye  have  not  hearkened,  nor  inclined  your  ear  to  hear."  II.
Visions  of  the  night.  The  prophets  were  seers,  highly  privileged,  and  favoured
with  visions  and  dreams  of  the  night,  "  when  deep  sleep  falleth  upon  men  "  (Job
iv.  13).  These  visions  were — 1.  Continual.  "  I  have  repeatedly  and  continually"
instructed  them  by  visions.  Ezekiel  and  Daniel,  Paul  and  John,  had  wonderful
visions.  "  If  there  be  a  prophet  among  you,  I  the  Lord  will  make  myself  known
unto  him  in  a  vision,  and  will  speak  unto  him  in  a  dream  "  (Num.  xii.  6 — 8).  2.
Multiplied.  "  I  have  multiplied  visions."  No  age  was  left  without  its  vision  of
the  future.  There  were  manifold  dreams,  and  often  a  repetition  of  the  same.  If
men  disregard,  God  speaks  once,  yea  twice,  that  he  may  bless  them  with  light  and
truth.  Such  communications  prove  the  dignity  of  our  nature,  the  weakness  of  our
fallen  condition,  and  the  connection  of  oar  souls  with  the  invisible  world.  They
are  only  given  in  secret,  and  require  special  strength  and  preparation  to  receive
them  (Dan.  x.  7,  8,  17 — 19).  III.  Similitudes  of  nature.  "And  used  simili-
tudes." All  nature  is  a  similitude  or  parable.  Christ  directs  our  attention  to  the
grass  of  the  field  and  the  face  of  the  sky,  the  earthly  and  heavenly  sides  of  crea-
tion. God  himself  employed  them  (Is.  liv.  5  ;  v.  1),  and  taught  the  prophets  to  use
them.  Christ  taught  by  parables,  and  his  servants  cannot  do  better  than  imitate
him.  The  manner  as  well  as  the  matter  of  preaching  must  commend  itself  to  the
people.  Material  signs  symbolize  spiritual  truths.  "  Things  take  the  signature
of  thought,"  and  we  may  find  theology  "  wrought  in  each  flower,  inscribed  on  every
tree."

Tongues  in  trees  ;  books  in  the  running  brooks  ;

Sermons  in  stones ;  and  good  in  everything.

This  method  is  simple  and  attractive,  impressive  and  successful.  The  great  teacher
sanctions  and  commends  it,  and  "  the  common  people  heard  him  gladly."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

The  frequency  and  continuance  of  a  the  most  wooing,  winning,  and  convinc-

ministry  indicate  God's  care  and  kind-  ing  way  that  may  be.     Only  in  using

ness  to  a  people.     But  the  more  means  of  similes,  they  must — 1.    Bring  them

of  grace  we  have,  the  more  earnest  and  from  things  known  and  familiar,  things

powerful  the  sermons  we  hear,  the  great-  that  their  hearers  are  most  acquainted

er  our  account   if    we    persist  in  sin.  with  and   accustomed  to.     2.    Similes

"  Ministers  must  turn  themselves  into  all  must  be  very  natural,  plain,  and  proper,

forms  and    shapes,  both  of    spirit  and  3.    They  must    not   be  too  far    urged

speech,  for  the  reaching  of  their  hearer's  [Trapp].
hearts ;  they  must  come   unto  them  in

HOMILET1CS.

Sins    Reproved    by  the    Virtues   of    Progenitors,  and    Punished    by   the

Providence  of  God. —  Verses  11 — 14.

Israel  did  not  permit  themselves  to  be  warned  and  taught,  gave  themselves  up
to  idolatry  and  superstition.     Conduct  which  contrasted  greatly  with  Jacob  their


170  EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  Tchap.  xn


ancestor.  He  had  become  rich  by  God's  blessing  on  honest  toil,  but  they  were
given  to  wicked  customs,  which  provoked  God  to  anger,  destroyed  the  nation,  and
banished  the  people  out  of  the  land.

I.  Sins  reproved  by  ancestral  virtues.  Jacob  is  again  referred  to  that  they
might  learn  his  humiliation  and  servitude.  1.  Jacob's  conduct  reproves  them.
His  faith  reproved  their  unbelief,  and  his  devotion  to  God  their  idolatry.  He  fled
from  an  angry  brother,  and  served  a  covetous  uncle  for  a  wife,  rather  than  marry
an  idolatress  (Gen.  xxviii.  5).  He  laboured  with  diligence,  endured  injustice,  and
trusted  in  God.  But  they  were  dishonest  in  their  trade,  and  insolent  in  their  be-
haviour. Honest  poverty  is  better  than  dishonestly-gotten  wealth.  "  I  have
searched  carefully  through  all  the  traditions  of  our  family,"  said  Livingstone's  an-
cestor to  his  children  round  his  death-bed,  "  and  I  never  could  discover  that  there
was  a  dishonest  man  among  our  forefathers.  If,  therefore,  any  of  you  should  take
to  dishonest  ways,  it  will  not  be  because  it  was  in  our  blood.  I  leave  this  precept
with  you — Be  honest."  2.  Jacob's  blessing  reproves  them.  He  set  out  with  his
staff  alone,  and  became  two  bands  (Gen.  xxxii.  10).  The  Syrian  ready  to  perish
became  a  mighty  nation  (Deut.  xxvi.  25).  God  preserved  the  fugitive  and  exalted
him  to  honour.  But  Israel,  forsakingGod  and  enriching  himself,  would  be  dishonoured
and  driven  into  exile.  God  alone  is  the  source  of  wealth,  and  honest  toil  the
spring  of  national  prosperity.  "  Not  what  I  have,  but  what  I  do,  is  my  king-
dom," says  Carlyle.  "  A  faithful  man  shall  abound  with  blessings  :  but  he  that
maketh  haste  to  be  rich  shall  not  be  innocent  "  (Prov.  xxviii.  22,  23;  x.  22).  II.
Sins  punished  by  God's  providence.  Israel's  ingratitude  and  corrupt  practices
brought  severe  judgment  upon  them.  1.  The  desert  of  their  sins,  (a)  It  was
found  in  places  of  sacred  note.  In  Gilead  and  Gilgal,  sacred  in  history  and  beau-
tiful by  nature,  "  only  man  was  vile."  Spots  of  signal  blessing  may  become  scenes
of  pollution  and  guilt.  Home,  the  house  of  God  and  the  closet,  may  be  conse-
crated to  idols,  (b)  It  was  prevalent  as  the  stones  in  the  field.  In  east  and  west,
in  palace  and  eottage,  it  abounded.  Like  a  malignant  disease,  it  spread  around,
(c)  It  was  morally  corrupting.  Their  altars  were  like  heaps  of  dung-hills  ;  their
worship  was  vanity,  and  their  sacrifices  worthless.  Endless  gifts  and  innumerable
altars  only  corrupted  the  morals,  and  cursed  the  people.  Mere  forms  will  not
satisfy  the  conscience.  Moral  decay  will  bring  physical  decay,  and  worthlessness
will  be  punished  by  vanity,  (d)  It  provoked  God  to  anger  (ver.  14).  The  provo-
cations were  most  bitter  and  grievous.  All  sin  is  offensive  to  God,  but  sins  against
light  and  truth,  sins  in  religious  privileges  and  in  Divine  warnings,  are  exceeding
sinful,  (e)  It  was  constantly  committed.  Committed  against  the  goodness  of  God,
in  delivering  them  from  bondage,  guiding  them  like  a  shepherd,  and  teaching  them
with  a  prophet.  God  keeps  and  blesses  men,  but  they  despise  his  love,  and  bring
condemnation  upon  themselves.  2.  The  punishment  of  their  sins.  "  Therefore
shall  he  leave  his  blood  upon  him."  (a)  The  penalty  shall  not  be  taken  away.
His  blood  shall  rest  upon  his  own  head  ;  for  he  is  guilty  and  deserves  death  ( Lev.
xx.  9  ;  Josh.  ii.  9  ;  2  Sam.  i.  10).  Blood  had  been  shed  profusely,  and  the
guilt  of  his  sin  remained  upon  his  soul,  and  punishment  cannot  be  longer  delayed.
(b)  The  dishonour  done  to  God  shall  be  given  to  him.  Idolatry  is  an  insult  to
our  Maker,  robbing  him  of  his  glory,  and  giving  it  to  the  likeness  of  a  man  or  a
beast.  Those  who  reproach  God  will  be  dishonoured  themselves.  For  centuries
shame  and  reproach  have  been  the  lot  of  God's  unbelieving  people.  What  a  warn-
ing to  us  !  What  an  aggravation  of  misery  to  be  inflicted  by  God  who  desired
to  bless  !  If  "  his  Lord  "  turns  against  the  sinner,  who  can  deliver  him  1  Shame
and  contempt  on  earth,  "  shame  and  everlasting  contempt  "  hereafter  !  "  Them
that  honour  me,  I  will  honour ;  and  they  that  despise  me  shall  be  lightly
esteemed."


CHAP.  XII.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ':  ROSEA.


171


HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Ver.  10 — 14.  Memorials  of  God's
goodness  to  a  people.  I.  He  raised  them
from  meanness  to  honour.  Jacob  a
poor  fugitive,  Israel  a  mighty  nation.  II.
He  raised  them  from  bondage  to  liberty.
"  Brought  Israel  out  of  Egypt,"  and  gave
them  freedom  to  worship  God.  He  thus
acquires  special  gratitude  and  service.
III.  He  taught  them  by  nis  prophets.
By  Moses  (ver.  1 3)  and  by  the  ministry
of  others  (ver.  10).  IV.  He  guided  them
by  his  providence.  As  Jacob  kept
sheep,  so  Israel  was  kept  and  preserved
by  God.  Special  care  and  kindness
were  displayed  towards  them  as  a  flock
(Ps.  lxxx.  1  ;  Is.  lxiii.  11).

Ver.  11.  Certain  places  and  certain
altars  do  not  palliate  guilt,  but  testify
against  it,  and  prove  all  forms  to  be  vain
and  deceitful.  Considering  the  mean-
ness of  our  origin,  we  should  magnify
God's  grace  in  present  prosperity.  The
Atheist  expects  riches  from  diligence
alone ;  the  slothful  without  it ;  but  the
true  Christian  from  the  blessing  of  God
with  it.  "The  blessing  of  the  Lord,  it
maketh  rich,  and  he  addeth  no  sorrow
with  it."


Ver.  12,  13.  Scripture  narratives  are
useful  to  remind  of  sin,  warn  us  of
danger,  and  urge  us  to  God.  They  were
written  for  our  learning  (Rom.  xv.  4).

Ver.  13.  "By  a  prophet  of  the
Lord"  God  chooses  the  humblest  in-
struments to  do  the  mightiest  works.
"  A  prophet  he  is  purposely  called,  and
his  name  concealed  :  1.  To  show  that
the  work  was  done,  not  by  might  nor
by  power,  but  by  God's  Spirit  (Zech.  iv.
6).  2.  To  show  what  God  will  do  for
his  people  by  the  prayers,  and  for  the
sake  of  his  prophets,  when  they  are
most  shiftless  and  hopeless.  3.  To  let
this  unworthy  people  see  how  much  God
had  done  for  them  once  by  a  prophet,
how  little  soever  now  they  set  by  such."

Heirs  of  grace  may  suffer  humiliation
and  distress.  In  Christ  the  fullest
measure  was  seen.  His  people  must
have  their  portion.

Ver.  14.  "  Let  us  remember  if  we  will
not  have  God  for  our  God  in  service,  we
must  have  him  in  spite  of  ourselves  as
our  Lord  to  judge  and  punish  us.  Let
us  rather  prove  his  love  than  his  aveng-
ing justice  "  [Fausset].


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XII.


Ver.  1.  Wind.  Plants  can  feed  upon
ashes,  the  worm  upon  earth,  but  man's
spiritual  appetite  requires  higher  and
more  nutritious  food.  Wind  will  not
nourish.  To  chase  after  worldly  plea-
sure, and  depend  upon  worldly  aid  in
time  of  distress,  will  disappoint  and  toss
the  soul  in  disquietude  and  misery.  The
sinner's  labours  are  a  great  nothing.
"  My  life  is  wind."

Ver.  2.  Recompense.  God  would
have  us  read  our  sins  in  our  judgments,
that  we  might  both  repent  of  our  sins
and  give  glory  to  his  justice  [Bp  Hall],

Ver.  3,  4.  Power.  We  might  be  like
Bartholomew,  who  is  said  to  have  had
a  hundred  prayers  for  the  morning,  and
as  many  for  the  evening,  and  all  be  of
no  avail.  "  Fervency  of  spirit "  is  that
which  avails  much  [Bp  Hall].  He  that
has  never  prayed,  can  never  conceive ;


and  he  that  has  prayed  as  he  ought,  can
never  forget  how  much  is  to  be  gained
by  prayer  [Dr  Young].

Prayer  ardent  opens  heaven,  lets  down  a  stream
Of  glory  on  the  consecrated  hour
Of  man,  in  audience  with  Deity.

Ver.  5.  God.  When  holy  Augustine
walked  by  the  sea-side,  wrapt  in  the
meditation  of  God  and  of  his  ways,  he
heard  a  voice  which  bade  him  lade  the
ocean  with  a  cockle-shell.  We  may
sooner  drain  the  ocean  with  such  a  shell,
or  with  a  spoon,  than  the  perfections  of
God  with  our  largest  understandings
[Caryl].  A  king  is  there  where  his
court  is,  where  his  train  and  retinue  are  ;
so  God  the  Lord  of  Hosts  is  there  spe-
cially present  where  the  heavenly  guard,
the  blessed  angels,  keep  their  station  and
rendezvous  [Mede].

Ver.  6.     Judgment.     The  one  thing


172


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ROSEA.


[chap.  xii.


constantly  reiterated  by  our  master ;  the
order  of  all  others  that  is  given  ofteneafc,
"  Do  justice  and  judgment."  That's
your  Bible  order  ;  that's  the  u  service  of
God,"  not  praying  or  psalm-singing.
Unless  we  perform  Divine  service  in
every  willing  act  of  life  we  never  per-
form it  at  all.  The  one  Divine  work —
the  one  ordered  sacrifice — is  to  do  jus-
tice ;  and  it  is  the  last  we  are  ever  in-
clined to  do  [Buskin].

Ver.  7,  8.  Rich.  Endeavour  to  be
honestly  rich,  or  contentedly  poor  ;  but
be  sure  that  your  riches  be  justly  got,  or
you  spoil  all  [Izaak  Walton].  He  that
resteth  upon  gains  certain,  shall  hardly
grow  to  great  riches ;  and  he  that  puts
all  upon  adventures,  doth  oftentimes
break  and  come  to  poverty.  It  is  good,
therefore,  to  guard  adventures  with  cer-
tainties that  may  uphold  losses  [Bacori].

Yer.  10.  Similitudes.  I  remember
well,  how  once  God  preached  to  me  by
a  similitude  in  the  depth  of  winter.
The  earth  had  been  black,  and  there  was
scarcely  a  green  thing  or  flower  to  be
seen.  There  was  nothing  but  blackness
as  you  looked  around — bare  hedges,  leaf-
less trees,  and  black,  black  earth  wherever
you  looked.  On  a  sudden  God  spake
and  unlocked  the  treasures  of  snow,  and
white  flakes  descended,  until  there  was
no  blackness  to  be  seen,  all  was  one
sheet  of  dazzling  whiteness.  I  was
seeking  the  Saviour,  and  it  was  then  I
found  him.  I  remember  well  that  ser-
mon.    "  Come  now  and  let  us  reason


together ;  though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,
they  shall  be  as  snow ;  though  they  be
red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  whiter
than  wool  "  [Spurgeon].

Ver.  11 — 14.  Vanity.  In  his  re-
ligion. His  holiness  is  vain  conceit ;
his  natural  light,  Egyptian  darkness ;
his  religious  forms,  "  a  vain  show  in  the
flesh."  In  outward  circumstances.  His
rank,  a  bauble ;  his  beauty,  a  fading
flower ;  his  wealth  but  glittering  dust.
"  All  is  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit."
Jacob's  life.  No  kind  of  studious  en-
tertainment doth  so  generally  delight
as  history,  or  the  tradition  of  remarkable
examples :  even  those  who  have  an
abhorrency  or  indisposition  toward  other
studies  are  yet  often  much  taken  with
historical  narrations.  And  such  are
those  which  present  to  us  the  lives  and
examples  of  holy  men,  abounding  with
wonders  of  providence  and  grace :  no
attempts  so  gallant,  no  exploits  so  illus-
trious as  those  which  have  been  achieved
by  the  faith  and  patience,  by  the  pru-
dence and  courage  of  the  ancient  saints ;
they  do  far  surpass  the  most  famous
achievements  of  pagan  heroes.  No
triumphs  are  comparable  to  those  of
piety ;  no  trophies  are  so  magnificent
and  durable  as  those  which  victorious
faith  erecteth ;  that  history  therefore
which  reports  the  res  gestae,  the  acts
and  sufferings  of  most  pious  men,  must
in  reason  be  esteemed,  not  only  the
most  useful,  but  also  the  most  pleasant
[Barrow].


CHAPTER  XIII.


Critical  Notes.]  1.  Eph.]  formerly  enjoyed  great  distinction  in  Israel.  Men  listened  with  fear
and  trembling  to  him  (Job  xxix.  21)  ;  he  exalted  himself,  secured  the  rule  among  the  tribes,  and
then  seceded  and  established  a  separate  kingdom.  By  the  introduction  of  the  worship  of  Baal  and
the  custom  of  calf-worship  he  offended  and  died.  Two  conditions  of  Eph.  are  contrasted,  prosperity
and  destruction.  2.  Sin]  Add  sin  to  sin,  i.e.  continue  in  former  transgressions.  "  This  seems  to
be  a  third  stage  in  sin.  First,  under  Jeroboam,  was  the  worship  of  the  calves.  Then,  under  Ahab,
the  worship  of  Baal.  Thirdly,  the  multiplying  of  other  idols  (2  Kings  xvii.  9,  10),  penetrating  and
pervading  the  private  life,  even  of  their  less  wealthy  people  "  [Pusey\  Say  of  them]  Such  things
as  these  mentioned.  Kiss]  An  act  of  adoration  (Pg.  ii.  2;  cvi.  20).  3.  Therefore]  punishment  shall
be  swift.  Their  goodness  is  fleeting  as  the  dew,  and  the  morning  cloud ;  their  prosperity  worthless
as  the  cha^f  or  the  smoke.  4.  Yet]  Another  contrast  between  the  idolatry  of  Israel  and  the  mercy
of  God  U  -nem  (cf.  xii.  10).  5.  Know]  i.e.  cared  f«r  them,  and  loved  them  as  his  own  (Ps.  cxliv.
3;  Amos  iii.  2).     6.]  A  reproof  from  cattle  growing  wauton  in  abundant  pasture  ;  the  very  thing


chap.   xiit.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  110SEJ.  173


against  which  they  were  warned  (Beut.  viii.  11 ;  xxxii.  15).  7.  Therefore]  Israel,  the  flock  in  the
field,  shall  be  devoured  by  wild  beasts,  fierce  as  a  lion,  swift  as  a  leopard,  and  savage  as  a  bear  robbed
of  her  whelps  (1  Sam.  xvii.  34  ;  2  Sam.  xvii.  8).  9.]  This  destruction  is  entirely  their  own.  Against
God,  men  are  against  their  own  help  and  welfare.  10.  Where]  thy  king  to  save  when  Assyrians  attack
cities?  "Where  thy  judges  who  surround  the  king  and  help  to  administer  right  ?  God  gave  and  God
punished  them  through  a  king.  12.  Bound  up]  like  money  in  a  bajr,  and  put  in  secret  places  (Job
xiv.  17  ;  1  Sam.  xxv.  29).  The  punishment  preserved,  kept  in  store,  is  certain  to  come  (Job  xxi.
19).  13.]  Pains  and  violent  agony,  sorrows  like  a  woman  in  child-birth  shall  come  (Jer.  xxx.  6).
Unwise]  in  not  foreseeing  and  escaping  the  danger  (Prov.  xxii.  3).  14.]  Maybe  applied  to  Israel's
deliverance  from  Assyria,  then  to  future  times  of  restoration,  which  typify  redemption  in  Christ  and
resurrection  from  death  at  last.  Believers  should  never  despair.  15.]  The  name  Eph.  shall  become
a  truth,  and  the  blessings  promised  shall  not  be  lost  (Gen.  xlviii.  4,  20  ;  xlix.  22),  say  some.  But
promises  are  only  fulfilled  when  persons  keep  to  the  conditions.  In  Ephraim  and  in  the  Christian
Church  those  only  are  saved  who  walk  with  God.  Whatever  be  the  appearance  of  the  fruitful
field,  judgments  will  be  like  a  fearful  tempest  which  will  destroy  all  before  them  (Jer.  iv.  11 ;  xviii.
17;  Ezek.  xix.  12).  He]  The  conqueror  will  plunder  and  destroy  all  costly  vessels.  16.  Her  God]
An  aggravation  of  guilt  because  against  him  who  made  himself  her  God.  The  destruction  was  com-
plete. The  living  children  dashed  to  pieces,  and  the  unborn  to  be  destroyed  in  their  mother's  womb
(2  Kings  viii.  12  ;  xv.  16  ;  Amos  i.  13).  Not  a  memorial  left  of  all  the  outward  pomp  and  pros-
perity.    When  God  is  forsaken  for  the  world,  the  choice  will  be  regretted.

HOMILETICS.
Self-estimation  the  Measure  op  Eeligious  Influence. —  Verses  1 — 3.

God  raised  Ephraim  to  chief  power,  and  Judah  was  afraid  of  him.  Through
God's  goodness  he  was  respected ;  but  when  he  sinned,  he  lost  his  reputation  and
honour.  When  he  exalted  himself,  he  offended  and  died.  When  we  walk  humbly
before  God  we  prosper ;  but  when  we  are  proud  and  forsake  him  we  die.

I.  Humility  exalts.  "  When  Ephraim  spake "  all  reverently  feared  him.
"  Princes  refrained  talking,  and  laid  their  hand  on  their  mouth."  Men  whom  God
blesses  have  mighty  influence.  1.  Humility  exalts  before  God.  God  looks  upon
the  contrite,  and  dwells  with  the  humble.  The  world  counts  nothing  great
without  display.  The  "  honour  that  cometh  from  God  only  "  is  despised.  Men
like  Job,  Isaiah,  and  Paul,  who  abhor  themselves  in  dust  and  ashes,  are  considered
weak-minded.  Humility  is  not  a  heathen,  but  a  Christian,  virtue.  Conscious  de-
pendence upon  God,  as  the  animating  principle  of  life  in  all  its  relations  and  duties,
is  opposed  to  the  self-esteem  and  self-confidence  of  modern  philosophy.  True
humility  will  lead  to  dependence  upon  God,  and  those  who  trust  most  in  God  will
he  the  strongest  and  most  honoured  by  God.  Such  "the  king  delighteth  to
honour."  2.  Humility  exalts  before  men.  Self-conceit  will  lower  men  in  the
estimation  of  others ;  but  a  true  spirit  and  noble  life  will  gain  real  worth.  The
dogmatical  opinion,  the  fancied  superiority,  the  over-weening  pride  of  men  will
clothe  them  with  shame  (Prov.  xxvi.  12  ;  xxix.  20).  We  lost  our  position  through \
pride,  and  must  recover  it  by  humility.  He  that  would  build  a  lasting  fame  must '
begin  low.  David  was  as  distinguished  in  retirement  as  in  the  court  of  Saul.
Washington  as  a  private  citizen  was  admired  as  much  as  Washington,  the  com-
mander of  an  army.  Some  become  great  by  elevation,  others  by  condescension.
We  stoop  to  conquer,  and  "  before  honour  is  humility."  When  God  exalts  and
magnifies  men,  they  are  formidable,  as  Joshua  and  Moses.  When  crowned  with
virtues,  and  strong  in  faith,  they  are  greater  than  Alexander  and  Caasar.  "It  is  an
uncontro verted  truth,"  said  Swift,  "  that  no  man  ever  made  an  ill  figure  who  under-
stood his  own  talen'ts,  nor  a  good  one  who  mistook  them."  "Everyone  that
exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased  ;  and  he  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted."
II.  Self -exaltation  destroys.  The  proud  and  insolent  fall  into  danger.  "  A
man's  pride  shall  bring  him  low  ;  but  honour  shall  uphold  the  humble  in  spirit."
1.  Self-exaltation  tends  to  idolatry.  Man  unduly  values  himself,  and  raises  himself
to  lofty  heights  only  to  fall  from  them.  Men  are  proud  of  rank,  talent,  and  success.
They  adore  their  gold  and  silver,  and  make  idols  of  vanities.  Disaffected  toward
God,  they  run  to  excess,  unchecked  by  Divine  goodness,  and  emboldened  by  human


174  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  [chap.  xiii.


flattery.  They  lean  "  to  their  own  understanding,"  and  reject  the  word  of  God.
They  cut  out  and  carve  images  of  their  own,  multiply  and  deify  gods  with  their  own
fancies,  and  worship  them.  "  Go  not  after  other  gods  to  serve  them,  and  to
worship  them,  and  provoke  me  not  to  anger  with  the  works  of  your  hands."  2.
Self-exaltation  tends  to  self -degradation.  "  Let  the  men  that  sacrifice  kiss  the
calves."  What  a  degradation  for  king  and  counsellors,  priests  and  people,  to  fall
down  to  calves !  What  do  we  see  now  ]  The  objects  may  be  changed,  but  the
same  spirit  is  displayed.  We  have  rivals  of  the  Living  God  in  the  forms  of
human  device.  Potentates  and  princes  kiss  the  feet  of  the  Pope.  Rich  and  poor
adore  the  consecrated  wafer,  and  fall  before  the  golden  crucifix.  In  the  Christian
Church,  we  have  "  craftsmen,"  and  gods  that  oppose  and  exalt  themselves  "  above
all  that  is  called  God."  Mortals  sitting  "as  God  in  the  temple  of  God,"  and
demanding  the  homage  and  service  which  are  due  to  God.  God  has  made  us  for
himself,  and  to  kiss  any  idol  is  to  degrade  our  mental  and  moral  nature.  "  Stand
up  ;  I  myself  also  am  a  man."  3.  Self -exaltation  tends  to  self-destruction.  "  When
he  offended  in  Baal,  he  died  "  by  the  judgments  of  God,  which  he  brought  upon
himself.  (1)  It  increases  sin.  "  They  sin  more  and  more."  They  added  one  sin
to  another,  until  it  became  habitual  and  universal.  Sin  is  essentially  cumulative
in  its  nature  and  consequences.  One  sin  contains  and  brings  on  another.  The
perversion  of  religion  leads  to  more  ungodliness.  To  the  guilt  of  idolatry  is  added
obstinate  persistence  in  evil  courses.  Under  the  pretence  of  ignorance  and  infirmity,
idolators  pursue  their  malicious  designs.  2.  It  brings  destruction.  "  He  died."
Death,  spiritual  and  eternal,  is  the  penalty  of  sin,  Israel  died  as  a  kingdom  and
nation.  God  is  the  fountain  of  all  life,  and  departure  from  him  is  real  death.
"  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."  All  prosperity  and  reputation  based  on  wickedness,
will  violently  and  swiftly  pass  away  like  the  morning  cloud  and  the  early  dew.
Every  fleeting  object  in  nature  preaches  the  vanity  of  idolatry,  and  the  transient
hopes  built  upon  it.  Judgments  upon  the  proud  and  impenitent  will  bring  utter
desolation.  "  As  the  whirlwind  passeth,  so  is  the  wicked  no  more ;  but  the
righteous  is  an  everlasting  foundation."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.   1.     Natural  conscience  cannot  their  own  understanding."     2.  An  idol

but  stoop  to  the  image  of  God  in  whom-  is  the  work  of  man.     "  All  of  it  the

soever  found.    When  Ephraim  was  first  work  of  the  craftsmen,"  who  completed

in  the  throne  he  became  formidable  ;  with  their  hands  what  they  conceived

but  when  he  fell  openly  from  God  he  with  their  minds.     Diana  was  said  to

grew  feeble;  first  he  was  a  terror  and  have  come  from  Jupiter  (Acts  xix.  35);

then  a  scorn  [Trapp].  but  men  stamp  their  names  upon  and

Ver.  2.  Idolatry.  I.  Its  origin.  A  give  their  hearts  to  their  own  workman-
human  creation.  "  God  hath  made  man  ship  (Is.  xliv.  9).  The  scene  at  Sinai
upright ;  but  they  have  sought  out  many  is  often  repeated  in  history  and  experi-
inventions."  Discontent  with  God,  ence.  "  These  be  thy  Gods,  0  Israel."
they  have  invented  a  new  mode  of  hap-  //.  Its  expense.  "  Molten  images  of
piness.  The  first  invention  was  the  their  silver."  Wood  and  stone  were  not
parent  of  many,  all  marked  by  the  same  good  enough.  Gold  and  silver  were
folly  and  lies.  Craftsmen  now  make  thought  to  honour  and  exalt  the  gods.
their  own  deities,  and  worship  crea-  Wealth  is  often  lavished  on  selfish  ends,
tures  inferior  to  themselves.  1.  An  and  men  spare  no  expense  to  decoiate
idol  is  the  conception  of  man.  It  and  support  their  own  idols.  They  tax
was  the  device  of  the  human  mind.  their  minds  and  spend  their  silver  in
It  represents  what  the  mind  has  the  service  of  sin.  What  a  blessing  if
imagined,  and  is  no  better,  no  higher  men  would  devote  as  much  time  and
than  its  creator.     "  Idols  according  to  energy  in  the  service  of  God  as  in  the


chap  xin.]


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  J


175


cause  of  idolatry  !  III.  Its  degradation.
"Men  kiss  the  calves."  1.  It  degrades
human  nature.  When  we  exclude
spiritual  interests,  inferior  matters  be-
come great,  and  the  same  energy  of
mind  that  might  be  employed  for  good
will  be  expended  in  evil.  The  mind
contracts  its  dimensions,  impairs  its
powers,  by  devoting  itself  to  objects  be-
low itself,  and  lowers  itself  to  the  level
of  those  objects.  But  applied  to  higher
objects,  it  is  expanded,  elevated,  and
strengthened.  God's  service  dignities
human  nature  by  giving  it  useful  ac-
tivity, wise  direction,  and  Divine  influ-
ence. 2.  It  degrades  the  Divine  nature.
The  conceptions  and  ideas  of  a  corrupt
mind  are  in  harmony  with  that  mind.
Its  worship  is  "  according  to  the  flesh."
As  man  cannot  rise  to  God,  God  is
brought  down  to  the  level  of  sinful  man.
"  And  changed  the  glory  of  the  uncor-
ruptible God  into  an  image  made  like
to  corruptible  man,  and  to  birds,  and
four-footed  beasts,  and  creeping  things."
IV.  Its  guilt.  "  They  add  sin  to  sin."
Idolatry  is  not  a  mere  mistake,  nor  in-
firmity, but  a  guilty  departure  from  God.
1 .  Men  sin  by  forgetting  God.  We  never
forget  anything  in  which  we  take  great
interest.  The  carnal  mind  takes  no
interest  in  God,  is  enmity  against  God,
and  is  not  subjecl  to  the  law  of  God.
God  is  excluded  from  the  thoughts  and
life  of  the  wicked.  2.  Men  sin  by  sub-
stituting idols  for  God.  Men  will
worship  something.  If  the  true  God  is
forsaken,  they  make  gods  of  their  own.


This  provokes  God  to  anger,  and  brings
misery  upon  them.  Impenitence  after
Divine  chastisement,  perseverance  in
known  sin  after  Divine  warning,  will
aggravate  human  guilt,  and  result  in
"  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment  and
fiery  indignation,  which  will  devour  the
adversary."  '*  Kiss  the  Son,  lest  he  be
angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way."

Ver.  3.  The  prosperity  of 'the  wicked.
I.  It  is  of  short  duration.  It  may
nourish  and  make  a  fair  show  for  a  while ;
but  it  vanishes  away.  It  is  evanescent
''as  the  early  dew"  which  glistens  only
to  pass  away.  It  is  deceptive  "  as  the
morning  cloud."  You  admire  its  beauty
and  changing  hues.  But  its  existence  is
short ;  it  is  only  a  temporary  substance,
and  like  men's  goodness,  "it  goeth
away"  (ch.  vi.  4).  II.  It  is  worthless
in  its  nature.  If  it  continues  long  it
does  not  satisfy.  Like  chaff,  it  is  light
and  unsubstantial ;  lifted  up,  the  sport
of  every  wind,  and  carried  along  to  be
seen  no  more.  "As  smoke  out  of  the
chimney,"  empty,  baseless,  and  inflated,
it  disappears  for  ever.  Such  the  pros-
perity of  Ephraim,  and  such  the  pros-
perity built  on  any  wickedness.  The
wicked  may  seem  to  live  and  nourish ;
but  they  sin,  die,  and  perish  eternally.
"  Virtue  makes  man  upright  and  stable  ;
vice,  empty  and  unstable,"  says  an
author.  "  They  are  as  stubble  before
the  wind,  and  as  chaff  that  the  storm
carrieth  away"  (Job  xxi.  18 ;  Ps.  i.  4  ;
xxxv.  5 ;  Prov.  xiv.  32).


HOMILETICS.

God  the  only  Saviour. —  Verse  4.

The  people  may  be  worthless,  and  driven  away  like  smoke,  but  God  is  the  same
as  of  old.  None  else  should  be  their  Saviour.  They  should  know  and  worship
no  other  but  Jehovah.

I.  This  character  of  God  is  declared  in  his  word.  Since  we  cannot  know
God  but  by  revelation,  how  precious  is  that  volume  in  which  all  manifestations  of
him  are  embodied.  We  are  constantly  reminded  of  his  attributes  and  relations.
The  knowledge  of  them  is  of  supreme  consequence,  and  repeatedly  set  before  us,
that  we  may  not  forget.  "  There  is  one  God  ;  and  there  is  none  other  god  but
he."  "  I  am  the  Lord,  and  there  is  none  else  :  there  is  no  god  beside  me."  "  Thou
shalthave  none  other  gods  but  me."  "  Is  there  a  god  besides  me  *?  Yea,  there  is  no
god  ;  I  know  not  any."  "  I  am  the  Lord,  that  is  my  name ;  and  my  glory  wilJ
I  not  give  to  another ;  neither  my  praise  to  graven  images."  II.  This  character
of  God  is  displayed  in  his  providence.     "  The  Lord  thy  God  from  the  land  of


176  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  [chap,  xiii


Egypt."  Israel  are  not  only  reminded  of  God's  revelations  previously  given,  but
of  his  character  displayed  in  his  providence  towards  them.  The  events  of  their
history  are  briefly  stated,  and  their  own  experience  testifies  to  the  truth  of  God's  word.
He  had  guided  and  provided  for  them  unceasingly,  and  saved  when  there  was  no
strange  God  among  them.  Men  have  abundant  proofs  in  their  own  lives  that  God
alone  can  save.  In  sickness  and  distress,  in  domestic  and  national  history,  the
goodness  of  God  has  been  displayed.  The  sinner  and  the  saint  have  been  delivered
from  dangers,  and  can  declare  this.  "  Ye  are  even  my  witnesses.  Is  there  a  Goil
beside  me  % "  III.  In  proportion  as  we  know  this  character  of  God  are  we  ob
ligated  to  him.  "  Thou  shalt  know  no  God  but  me."  It  is  not  enough  to  ac-
knowledge God  as  a  Saviour.  His  claims  and  glory  must  not  be  shared  with
another.  He  has  natural  and  moral  rights  over  us.  We  owe  duties  and  homage
to  him.  We  must  evince  our  belief,  and  express  our  regard,  by  constant  obedience
to  his  law,  studious  efforts  to  do  and  delight  in  his  will,  in  enjoyments  and  suffer-
ings, and  recognizing  his  presence  in  his  word,  providence,  and  grace.  We  are  for-
bidden to  indulge  in  atheism,  polytheism,  and  idolatry.  We  must  know  and  fear
God  only.     We  must  love  and  serve  him,  with  all  our  heart,  soul,  and  strength.

No  Saviour  beside  God. —  Verse  4.

There  is  no  Saviour  beside  me.

I.  What  the  words  imply.  That  God  is — 1.  A  powerful  Saviour,  proved  from
the  nature  of  redemption  and  the  events  of  providence.  No  sins  can  limit  his
grace,  no  enemy  baffle  his  skill.  Save  to  the  uttermost  (Heb.  vii.  25).  2.  A  con-
stant Saviour.  Present  with  Israel  in  Egypt,  the  wilderness,  and  the  land  of  Ca-
naan. Present  with  us  in  every  time  of  need.  3.  An  only  Saviour.  No  other  could
do  what  he  did  for  Israel.  No  other  can  pardon  our  sins,  renew  our  hearts,  and
save  our  souls.  There  is  salvation  in  none  other,  "  for  there  is  none  other  name
under  heaven  given  among  men,  whereby  we  must  be  saved."  II.  What  the
words  forbid.  They  forbid — 1.  The  worship  of  images.  We  are  not  to  make  any
likeness  of  things  in  heaven  above,  earth  beneath,  or  in  the  waters  under  the  earth.
God  is  the  object  of  supreme  worship  and  affection  ;  incapable  of  representation
to  the  senses,  like  false  deities  of  men.  2.  The  worship  of  God  by  images.  We
dishonour  God  when  we  attempt  to  worship  him  "  in  gold,  or  silver,  or  stone,
graven  by  art  and  man's  device  "  (Acts  xvii.  29).  3.  All  hypocrisy  and  formal-
ity in  worship.  Excessive  use  of  forms  and  ceremonies  is  forbidden.  God  is  a
spirit,  and  all  worship  must  be  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  Is  he  the  only  Saviour  %
Then  let  us  thank  him  and  trust  him  more.  In  private  and  in  public,  let  us
earnestly  and  constantly  look  to  him.  "  Whosoever  shall  call  upon  the  name  of  the
Lord  shall  be  saved."

Help  in  the  Exigencies  op  Life. — Verse  5.

God  loved  and  provided  for  his  people  in  the  wilderness.  "  In  the  land  of
great  drought "  and  danger  he  never  forsook  them.  Hence  they  should  know  and
follow  him.     God  is  with  his  children  now  in  the  exigencies  of  life.

I.  Our  sinful  condition  is  a  wilderness.  A  barren  and  unfruitful  land,  where
no  water  is.  Without  God  the  sinner  is  destitute  of  happiness  and  hope.  He  can
neither  quench  his  thirst  nor  satisfy  his  desires  in  sin.  But  God  leads  his  people
from  sin  to  Christ.  He  knows  the  anguish  and  despair  of  the  penitent,  and  gives
joy  and  peace  in  believing.  II.  Our  outward  circumstances  are  a  wilderness.
What  uncertainty  and  change  !  What  disappointment  and  sorrows !  We  are
often  led  into  solitude  and  distress,  and  have  to  cry  unto  God.  We  are  often
thrown  into  danger  and  surrounded  by  enemies.  "  They  wandered  in  the  wilder-
ness in  a  solitary  way  :  they  found  no  city  to  dwell  in.  Hungry  and  thirsty,  their
soul  fainted  in  them.      Then  they  cried  unto  the  Lord  in  their  trouble,  and  he  de-


chap,  xiil]  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  177


livered  them  out  of  their  distresses."  III.  Our  inward  experience  is  a  wilder-
ness. We  are  not  self-sufficient.  We  do  not  carry  our  own  resources  within  us.
We  have  neither  power  to  defend  nor  wisdom  to  guide  us.  Day  by  day  we  de-
pend upon  God,  and  have  to  live  by  faith,  hope,  and  obedience.  But  God  knows
our  emptiness,  and  sends  manna  from  heaven.  His  presence  is  continually  with
us,  and  he  provides  a  table  in  the  wilderness.  We  are  brought  safely  "  through
a  land  of  deserts  and  of  pits  ;  through  a  land  of  drought  and  of  the  shadow  of
death ;  through  a  land  that  no  man  passed  through,  and  where  no  man  dwelt."
"  Happy  art  thou,  0  Israel ;  who  is  like  unto  thee,  0  people  saved  of  the  Lord?"
God's  goodness  forms  a  marked  contrast  to  the  conduct  of  our  fellow-creatures.  We
should  show  pity  to  one  another.  But,  alas  !  we  scarcely  know  a  friend  in  trouble !
God's  goodness  should  lead  us  to  know  and  love  him.  Does  God  know  that  we  are
weaned  from  the  world — in  love  with  the  means  of  grace,  and  ready  to  follow  and
seek  him  at  all  times  1

Divine  Goodness  turned  into  Divine  Wrath. —  Verses  5 — 8.

God  knew  and  loved  Israel  in  the  wilderness,  commended  them  in  their  Iotv
estate,  but  complained  of  them  in  their  prosperity.  When  they  were  delivered  from
the  privations  and  hardships  of  the  desert,  fixed  in  the  land  of  vineyards  and  fig-
trees,  they  forgot  God  in  prosperity  and  pride,  and  brought  upon  them  righteous
displeasure.

I.  Goodness  displayed  to  the  helpless.  "  I  did  know  thee  in  the  wilderness.''
When  Israel  were  a  helpless  and  dependent  people,  they  often  cried  to  God  in  dis-
tress, and  he  heard  and  helped  them.  Their  situation  yielded  no  supplies,  but
God  permitted  them  to  want  no  good  thing.  He  gave  them  water  from  the  rock
and  bread  from  heaven  ;  suffered  not  their  raiment  to  wax  old  upon  them,  noi
their  foot  to  swell  in  travelling ;  sent  them  his  Holy  Spirit  to  instruct,  and  ordin-
ances to  bless  them.  "  He  hath  not  dealt  so  with  any  nation."  We  are  under
the  immediate  care  of  God,  who  provides  for  us  and  defends  us.  Some  one  says,
"  Life  is  a  great  want,  and  therefore  should  be  one  continual  prayer."  II.  Good-
ness displayed  to  the  ungrateful.  "  Therefore  have  they  forgotten  me  "  (ver.  6)
Their  luxury,  sensuality,  and  pride,  made  them  insolent  and  secure.  Worldly
prosperity  often  feeds  men's  pride,  and  makes  them  forget  the  giver  of  it.  They
remember  God  in  want  and  sickness,  but  forsake  him  in  plenty  and  ease.  "  Je-
shurun  waxed  fat  and  kicked"  (Deut.  xxxii.  15,  18).  Men  seek  pasture,  self-
gratification,  and  not  God.  They  abuse  every  gift,  because  their  hearts  are  exalted
against  him.  Prosperity,  which  ought  to  draw  them  to  him,  alienates  them  from
him.  They  are  ungrateful  in  proportion  as  they  should  love  and  praise  him.  Thus
selfishness  ever  tends  to  hardness  of  heart  and  ingratitude.  "  If  a  man  lacks  grati-
tude," says  Pitt,  "when  there  is  infinite  obligations  to  excite  and  quicken  it,  he
will  be  likely  to  want  all  other  virtues  towards  his  fellow-oreatures,  whose  utmost
gifts  are  poor  compared  with  those  he  daily  receives  from  his  never-failing  Al-
mighty Friend."  "  Then  beware  lest  thou  forget  the  Lord  which  brought  thee  forth
out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  from  the  house  of  bondage."  III.  Goodness  turned  to
wrath.  "Therefore  I  will  be  unto  them  as  a  lion,"  &c.  Those  who  forget  God
in  the  gifts  of  his  providence,  wax  fat  and  get  proud  in  their  prosperity,  only  pre-
pare themselves  a  prey  to  retribution.  Ingratitude  at  all  times  is  most  base.
Capt.  Speke  found  in  the  natives  of  central  Africa  the  belief  that  "  ingratitude,
or  neglecting  to  thank  a  person  for  a  benefit  conferred,  is  punishable."  If  ingra-
titude from  man  to  man  be  odious,  in  the  sight  of  God  it  is  without  excuse  and
despicable.  Its  guilt  is  increased  in  a  fourfold  proportion,  and  must  be  estimated
by  the  greatness  of  the  giver,  the  unworthiness  of  the  receiver,  and  by  the  number
and  excellency  of  the  blessings  bestowed.  The  ungrateful  are  "a  generation  of
vipers,"  who  sting  the  bosom  in  which  they  have  been  nursed.  How  "  sharper
than  a  serpent's  tooth"  is  an  ungrateful  child  !     1.    Wrath  most  severe,     "  I  will

12


178  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.  [.chap.  xiii


meet  them  as  a  bear  that  is  bereaved  of  her  whelps."  God  is  not  overcome  and
carried  away  by  passion  as  men.  He  is  not  vindictive  in  feeling,  and  unjust  in
his  proceedings.  But  these  figures  set  forth  his  determined  opposition  to  wicked-
ness, and  the  righteous  visitation  of  judgment  upon  those  who  turn  mercy  into
wrath.  His  anger  will  be  fierce  as  a  leopard  watching  by  the  way  to  seize  upon
travellers  ;  furious  as  a  bear  enraged  by  the  loss  of  her  young ;  strong  as  a  lion,
the  most  terrible  beast  of  the  forest.  2.  Wrath  most  destructive.  The  very  vitals
are  destroyed.  "  Rend  the  caul,"  devour  them  "  and  tear  them."  The  indignation,
the  punishment,  seems  almost  beyond  description.  God  can  torture  the  soul,  and
cause  his  anger  to  burn  against  the  sinner.  "  Who  knoweth  the  power  of  his
wrath  1  "  He  should  be  feared  according  to  his  anger,  and  praised  for  his  goodness
(Ps.  xc.  11).  His  mercy  should  lead  us  to  repentance  and  gratitude.  Those  who
despise  "  the  riches  of  his  goodness,  and  forbearance,  and  long-suffering,"  treasure
up  unto  themselves  "  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath,  and  the  revelation  of  the
righteous  judgment  of  God."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Yer.  6.     Therefore  have  they  forgotten  spirit.     This  consists  not  only  in  avoid-

rne.     Ingratitude.     1.    A  common  sin.  ing  drunkenness  and    gluttony,  but  in

2.   Most  unnatural.     3.  Most  unreason-  not  "filling  ourselves  according  to  our

able.     4.  Most  dangerous.     "How  shall  pasture."

I  pardon   thee   for  this  1    thy  children  Secondly — Pride.     "  They  were  filled,

have  forsaken  me,  and  sworn  by  them  and  their  heart  was  exalted"     Hezekiah

that  are  no  gods :  when  I  fed  them  to  the  rendered  not  according  to  the  benefits

full  they  committed  adultery  "  (Jer.  v.  7).  received  ;  for  "  his  heart  was  lifted  up."

Forgotten  me.     Forgotten  their  depend-  The  apostle  charges  them  that  are  rich

ence  upon  me  ;  their  relationship  to  me  ;  in  the  world  not  "  to  trust  in  uncertain

their  duties  to  me.     If  not  theoretically,  riches,"  and  shows  the  tendency  there

men  practically  forget  God  (Ps.  x.  4).  always  is  in  worldly  success  to  gender

Sins  often  connected  with  ingratitude,  vanity  and  false  confidence.     Hence  it

pride,  hard-heartedness,  selfishness,  and  is  said,  "  Pride  compasseth  them  about

idolatry.     If  men  take  gifts  and  feed  as  a  chain  j  violence  covereth  them  as  a

upon  them,  in  forgetfulness  of  the  Giver,  garment."     They  think  highly  of  their

it  need  not  be  thought  strange  if  God  understanding,  as  if  wisdom  grew  with

withholds    them.       Prosperity    abused  wealth.      They   speak   with   authority,

will  be  taken  away.     "  When  God  gives  and  answer  roughly.

thee  prosperity,  do  thou  enjoy  it  with  a  Thirdly —  Unmindf illness    of    God.

cheerful  and  thankful  heart,"  says  Bp  "  Therefore  have    they   forgotten   me."

Reynolds.     "  In  all  time  of  our  wealth,  How  common  for  men  in  the  midst  of

good  Lord,  deliver  us,"  is  a  prayer  never  their  sufficiency  to  lose  the  sense  of  their

out  of  season  in  times  of  ease  and  plenty,  obligations  to    God,    dependence   upon

First — Selfish  indulgence.  "  Accord-  and  need  of  him  !  Hence  the  prayer  of
ing  to  their  pasture,  so  were  they  filled."  Agar  against  being  rich,  "  Lest  I  should
God  "  giveth  us  richly  all  things  to  en-  be  full  and  deny  thee,  and  say,  Who  is
joy."  But  the  enjoyment  of  Christians  the  Lord  1 "  Hence  the  caution  to  the
differs  from  the  excess  of  the  sensual.  Jews  when  they  entered  Canaan,  "  Lest
We  are  not  to  feast  without  fear  j  to  thou  forget  the  Lord  which  brought  thee
make  provision  for  the  flesh,  to  fultil  the  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt."  The
lusts  thereof.  Many  mistake  and  sup-  admonition  was  unavailable.  This  gives
pose  everything  their  own.  They  are  us  a  very  humbling  view  of  human
only  stewards.  The  first  lesson  in  the  nature.  View  it,  not  in  the  dregs  of
school  of  Christ  is  self-denial.  Where  society,  but  as  seen  in  common  and  re-
does this  appear  in  the  lives  of  some  1  putable  life.  It  will  not  appear  so
Temperance  is  one  of  the  graces  of  the  innocent,  so  amiable  so  noble  as  some


chap,  xui.]  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.  179


represent  it  to  be.     Lord,  what  is  man,  snares  and  discharge  its  duties.     It  was

that  thou  art  mindful  of  him1?     Let  the  said  of  Yespasian,  that  he  was  even  a

fact  arouse  us  to  caution  and  circurn-  better  man  for  being  an  emperor.     So

spection,  if  Providence  smiles  upon  us,  theprosperity  of  some, instead  of  destroy-

and  we  are  placed  in  easy  and  comfort-  ing  them,  displays  and  increases  their

able  circumstances.     Watch  and  pray,  excellency ;  they  are  rich,  not  only  in

lest  ye   enter   into    temptation.     Seek  temporal  things,  but  in  faith  and  good

grace  which  only  can  help  to  manage  a  works  [Jay].
full  estate  properly,  so  as  to  elude  its

HOMILETICS.
Moral  Suicide  and  Divine  Help. — Verse  9.

The  prophet  once  more  refers  to  the  cause  of  their  sorrow,  and  declares  God  to
be  their  only  help  when  they  were  ruined  and  undone.

I.  Moral  suicide.  "  0  Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed  thyself."  Many  moral  as
well  as  physical  evils  may  be  traced  to  want  of  well-trained  spiritual  power,  well
exercised  self-control,  and  to  absence  of  life  in  the  soul.  Solomon  contrasts  the
influence  of  sin  with  the  health  of  a  true  heart.  "A  sound  heart  is  the  life  of  the  flesh;
but  envy  is  the  rottenness  of  the  bones  "  (Prov.  xiv.  30  ;  xvii.  22).  Sin  is  madness,
and  not  medicine  ;  death,  and  not  life.  1.  All  sin  is  destructive.  It  is  essentially
death.  It  ruins  the  soul.  "  The  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die"  It  often  destroys
reputation  and  character.  It  always  destroys  liberty,  peace,  and  happiness.  It  is  con-
trary to  the  constitution  and  health  of  the  soul ;  hence  the  misery  which  is  ever  felt.
It  wounds  the  conscience,  impairs  the  judgment,  and  brings  disease  and  manifold
deaths.  He  who  forsakes  God  and  worships  idols  "  destroy eth  his  own  soul.  A  wound
and  dishonour  shall  he  get"  (Prov.  vi.  32,  33;  v.  22,  23).  2.  Voluntary  sin  is  volun-
tary destruction.  "  Thou  hast  destroyed  thy  self. n  The  sinner  commits  moral  suicide,
and  has  no  one  to  blame  but  himself.  Circumstances  do  not  force  him  to  sin.  Fate,
admitting  such  a  thing,  does  not  compel  him.  God  destroys  him  not ;  for  he  is  not-
willing  that  any  should  perish,  but  that  all  men  should  be  saved  (Jer.  xxvii.  13  >
Ezek.  xviii.  31).  Men  are  the  authors  of  their  own  destruction.  They  may  blame
whom  they  like,  but  the  guilt  rests  upon  their  own  head.  Every  bait  to  sin  is  the
temptation  to  suicide — to  self-murder.  Sinners  die  because  they  will  die  and  no',
live.  They  are  inexcusable,  and  make  their  doom  more  intolerable,  because  the:  •
choose  death  rather  than  life.  "  He  that  sinneth  against  me  wrongeth  his  own  soul ,
all  they  that  hate  me  love  death."  II.  Divine  help.  "  In  me  is  thine  help."  A
wise  man  will  call  the  best  medical  help  he  can  find  in  times  of  sickness  arid
danger.  This  disease  defies  the  skill  of  man.  There  is  a  consumption  of  the
body  which  no  man  can  cure  ;  and  there  is  a  consumption  of  the  soul  more  deadly
in  its  nature.  Man  may  destroy  himself,  but  God  only  can  restore  him.  1.  Help
the  most  free.  We  might  have  been  left  to  perish  in  our  sin,  but  God  loved  us
and  saved  us  in  our  blood  (Ezek.  xvi.  6).  God  was  not  desired,  not  constrained
to  do  anything.  Desert  there  was  none.  "  According  to  his  mercy  he  saved  us."
"  By  grace  are  ye  saved  through  faith,  and  that  not  of  ourselves,  it  is  the  gift  of
God;  not  of  works,  lest  any  man  should  boast."  2  Help  the  most  suitable.  As
the  beauties  of  nature  are  adapted  to  the  senses,  and  food  to  the  taste,  so  the  gospel
is  suited  to  our  wants  and  woes,  our  weakness  and  danger.  3.  Help  the  most
efficient.  Nothing  less  than  an  Almighty  Saviour  would  do  for  mankind.  The
wounds  are  sore  and  the  breach  is  great,  who  can  heal  thee]  (Lam.  ii.  13).  "  I
am  the  Lord  that  healeth  thee."  The  blood  of  Christ  cleanses  from  all  sin.  The
grace  of  God  subdues  the  proudest  rebel  and  upholds  the  weakest  believer.  God  is
mighty  to  save.  "  I  looked,  and  there  was  none  to  help  ;  and  I  wondered  that  there
was  none  to  uphold  ;  therefore  mine  own  arm  brought  salvation  unto  me."  4.  Help
the  most  extensive,    God  can  not  only  help  beyond  desert,  but  save  to  the  uttermost


180  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  [chap,  xin.


fr


all  that  come  unto  him.  None  are  excluded,  except  those  who  exclude  themselves
from  his  help.  Everywhere  the  invitations  of  Scripture  are  full,  free,  and  universal.
"  Whosoever  will,  let  him  come  and  take  of  the  water  of  life  freely."  "  Let  him
take  hold  of  my  strength."

I  know  the  grace  is  only  thine,
The  gift  of  faith  is  all  Divine  ;

But  if  on  thee  we  call,
Thou  wilt  the  benefit  bestow,
And  give  us  hearts  to  feel  and  know,

That  thou  hast  died  for  all.

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Themalady  is  of  no  ordinary  character,  disahles  from  duty,  and  ends  in  death
It  is  not  a  mere  slight  indisposition—         Secondly,  God,  the  sole  restorer,  work-

a  trifling  attack — a  little   derangement  ing  in  us  perfect  soundness,  saving  u*

of    the   system,    but    a   sickness   unto  and  granting  us  help  in  time  of  need,
death — an  incurable  disease.  Nothing  can  destroy  us  before  God

Tlie  physician  is  able,  kind,  and  free,  but  sin,  the  only  real  evil ;  and  sin  is

"  Without  money  and  without  price "  wholly  from  us,  God  can  have  no  part

cures  are  given.     Others  heal  the  hurt  in  it.      But  every  aid  to  withdraw  us

slightly  (Jer.  vi.  14),  or    physicians  of  from  sin,  or  to  hinder  us  from  falling

no  value ;  but  God  heals,  and  we  are  into  it,  comes  from  God  alone,  the  sole

healed  (Jer.  xvii.  14).     We  hear  much  source  of  our  salvation.     The  soul,  then,

of  "  the  cure  of  souls,"  let  us  not  forget  must  ever  bless  God,  in  its  ills  and  its

to  care  for  them.     God  has  healed  and  good;  in  its  ills,  by  confessing  that  itself

will  heal  by  his  word,  Spirit,  and  grace,  is  the  only  cause  of  its  suffering ;  in  its

u  Lord,  be  merciful  unto  me ;  heal  my  good,  owning  that,  when  altogether  un-

soul,  for  I  have  sinned  against  thee."  worthy  of  it,  God  prevented  it  by  his

First,  Sin,  self-destruction.  It  destroys  grace,  and  preserves  it  each  instant  by

the  health  and  moral  beauty  of  the  soul ;  his  Almighty  goodness  [St  Bernard].

HOMILETICS.
God  the  only  King. — Verses  10,  11.

God  shows  again  how  he  will  help  them.  When  their  kings  and  princes — whom
they  sinfully  sought,  and  whom  God  would  take  away  in  displeasure — could  not
save  them  even  in  one  city,  he  would  prove  their  King  and  Helper.

I.  God  is  our  lawful  king.  "  I  will  be  thy  king,"  &c.  God  proclaims  him-
self the  source  of  wisdom  and  counsel,  of  power  and  authority.  1.  Man  requires
a  king.  Our  moral  constitution  is  a  witness  that  we  are  under  authority,  made  to
obey  laws,  and  are  only  happy  in  loyal  obedience.  To  satisfy  his  wants,  man  has
often  gone  to  his  fellow-men,  trusting  to  them,  because  thought  to  be  great,  wise,
and  even  divine.  Hence  nations  and  ages  have  had  their  heroes,  poets,  orators,  and
prophets.  But  man  still  cries  for  a  king.  No  human  person  can  satisfy  the  to-
tality of  his  nature,  remove  his  guilt  and  fear,  and  reconcile  the  conflict  between
conscience  and  heart.  God  alone  is  the  rest  and  satisfaction  of  the  soul.  No  code
of  laws,  no  idea  of  society,  though  pure  and  transcendant  as  that  of  Plato,  can
supply  the  want  of  a  king.  God  in  Christ  reveals  his  claims,  and  demands  our
homage  and  obedience.  He  is  our  Divine  lawgiver  and  sovereign  Lord.  "  Behold
your  king  !  "  2.  God  alone  should  be  our  king.  "  We  are  the  people  of  his  pas-
ture and  the  sheep  of  his  hand."  He  feeds  and  guides  us  by  his  special  providence,
like  a  shepherd  leading  his  flock.  He  has  dominion  over  heaven  and  earth,  there-
foie  worship  is  due  to  him.  He  demands  obedience,  and  to  refuse  is  most  unrea-
sonable and  most  insulting.     "  For  God  is  the  king  of  all  the  earth."     II.  God  is


chap,  m]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSEA.  181


often  rejected  by  the  choice  of  an  unlawful  king.  "  Thou  saidst,  Give  me  a
king  and  princes."  Israel  rejected  God  and  demanded  Saul,  and  subsequently
chose  Jeroboam  to  free  them  from  the  taxes  imposed  by  Behoboam.  They  de-
spised God,  and  looked  to  man  for  help.  "  Nay,  but  we  will  have  a  king  over  us,
that  we  may  also  be  like  other  nations,  and  that  our  king  may  judge  us,  and  go  out
before  us,  and  fight  our  battles."  God  is  often  put  in  competition  with  others.
Half-prayers  and  half-allegiance  are  given  to  him.  Some  other  god  is  sought  and
served  with  him.  God  is  sometimes  rejected,  and  an  idol  set  up  to  govern  our
hearts  and  lives.  In  distress  and  social  pressure  we  flee  to  man.  Pleasure,  pas-
sions, and  the  world  rule  over  us.  God  is  dethroned,  and  our  affections  are
centered  on  self,  or  an  unlawful  sovereign.  The  heart  can  only  have  one  power
supreme,  one  king  enthroned  at  once.  Whatever  monarch  that  may  be,  it  dictates
to  every  faculty  and  every  effort,  saying,  "Do  this,"  and  it  does  it.  Obedience  is
willingly  and  continually  given.  As  the  beginning,  such  will  be  the  end ;  as  the  rule,
such  will  be  the  result.  u  But  where  are  thy  gods  that  thou  hast  made  thee  1  let
them  arise,  if  they  can  save  thee  in  the  time  of  thy  trouble  ;  for  according  to  the
number  of  thy  cities  are  thy  gods,  0  Judah."  III.  When  God  is  rejected  and
another  king  chosen  the  end  will  be  misery.  "  Where  is  any  other  that  will
save  thee  in  all  thy  cities  ? "  God  was  against  Israel  and  their  kings.  As  they
began  by  rejecting  God,  so  they  end  in  rejection  by  God.  Civil  commotions,
anarchy  and  murder,  were  the  repeated  issue.  Not  one  in  all  their  cities  could  help
them  when  God  had  forsaken  them.  Sinful  rulers  will  be  tyrants,  and  their  rule
will  ever  prove  impotent  and  destructive.  1.  Sometimes  our  supports  are  taken
away.  "  I  gave  thee  a  king  in  mine  anger,  and  took  him  away  in  my  wrath."
What  God  gives  or  permits  us  to  take  to  ourselves  he  can  take  away.  By  rejecting
God  we  cannot  defeat  his  purpose.  We  may  have  our  wish  granted,  yet  be  disap-
pointed in  our  choice.  The  gift  and  its  loss  will  be  a  grief  to  us.  What  we  inor-
dinately desire,  what  we  are  determined  to  have  in  opposition  to  God's  will,  whether
granted,  withheld,  or  taken  away,  will  be  the  occasion  of  wrath  and  tribulation  to
our  souls.  u  Take  heed  to  yourselves,  that  your  heart  be  not  deceived,  and  ye  turn
aside  and  serve  other  gods  and  worship  them,  and  then  the  Lord's  wrath  be  kindled
against  you."  2.  If  our  supports  are  not  taken  away  they  are  rendered  impotent.
"  Where  is  any  that  may  save  thee?"  Kings  and  princes  may  be  shorn  of  power.
Danger  may  threaten  every  city  in  the  nation,  and  blessings  unlawfully  gained  or
ungratefully  abused  afford  no  shelter.  All  courses  and  carnal  policies  of  men  will
not  avail  against  God.  If  we  forsake  God  disappointment  will  meet  us  in  every
condition,  and  a  way  which  is  cursed  at  the  beginning  will  be  more  cursed  at  the  end.
In  anger  a  king  was  given  ;  in  wrath  was  he  taken  away.  There  is  no  help  but  in
God.     "  I  will  be  thy  king/

Iniquity  reserved  for  Future  Punishment. — Verses  12,  13.

The  nation  had  accumulated  wickedness  from  time  to  time.  This  sin,  though
spared,  was  not  forgotten,  but  sealed  up  and  reserved  for  future  judgment.  The
affairs  were  coming  to  a  crisis,  like  a  woman  in  travail,  and  could  not  be  avoided.
Unless  they  rescued  themselves  from  the  danger,  the  result  would  be  that  individ-
ual citizens  and  political  existence  would  entirely  perish.  Hence,  they  should  not
neglect  the  means,  but  earnestly  seek  God  before  it  was  too  late.

I.  Iniquity  is  treasured  up  by  God.  "  The  iniquity  of  Ephraimis  bound  up."
Men  treasure  or  seal  up  what  they  want  to  keep.  Sin  is  hid  by  a  wonderful  pro-
vidence to  be  accounted  for  at  a  future  time.  "  My  transgression  is  sealed  up  in  a
bag,  and  thou  sewest  up  mine  iniquity."  1.  God  does  not  forget  iniquity.  He
numbers  our  steps,  keeps  a  strict  account  of  our  actions,  and  brings  sin  to  our  re-
membrance. We  are  not  to  presume  on  God's  forbearance,  and  think  because  sin
is  not  punished  it  is  forgotten  (Ecc.  viii.  11).  This  is  to  ignore  the  future  and
treasure  up  "  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath  "  (Rom.  ii.  5).     2.  God  does  not  for-


182  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  A.  [chap.  xiii.


give  iniquity  without  repentance.  If  sin  is  not  confessed  and  forsaken,  it  is  stored
up.  Unrepented  sin  is  an  ever-increasing  store,  hid  from  the  sight  of  men,  but  of
which  God  will  lose  nothing.  Sinners  may  excuse  and  defend  themselves  in  pride
and  self-righteousness,  but  a  day  of  accounts  will  come.  "Is  not  this  laid  up  in
store  with  me,  and  sealed  up  among  my  treasures  ?  To  me  belongeth  vengeance  and
recompense."  II.  Iniquity  treasured  up  by  God  will  be  punished.  "  The
sorrows  of  a  travailing  woman  shall  come  upon  him."  1.  This  punishment  is  cer-
tain, "  shall  come."  There  is  an  order  of  sequence  in  moral  as  in  physical  law,
and  we  inevitably  suffer  if  we  break  that  order.  Eesults  are  fixed  and  certain.
Punishment  may  be  long  delayed,  but  cannot  be  avoided.  Delay  does  not  diminish
its  certainty  either  here  or  hereafter.  "  Evil  pursueth  sinners."  2.  This  punish-
ment is  distressing.  Agony  unexpected  and  inevitable.  Sorrows  often  in  this  life,
and  in  the  life  to  come  the  full  cup  of  bitterness.  "  Avenging  deities  are  shod
with  wool,"  but  they  never  pause  nor  mitigate  their  judgments.  We  may  doubt
or  deny  the  fact,  but  we  see  day  by  day  that  "  the  mill  of  God  grinds  late,  but
grinds  to  powder."  "  Never  sin  went  unpunished,"  says  one,  "  and  the  end  of  all
*in,  if  it  be  not  repentance,  is  hell."  III.  If  men  do  not  escape  from  iniquity
treasured  up  they  are  foolish.  "  For  he  should  not  stay  long  in  the  place."  He
that  lingers  between  death  and  life,  and  vacillates  between  God  and  the  world,  "  is
an  unwise  son."  If  we  "  stay  long,"  and  delay  in  anything,  we  never  bring  forth
results.  Decision  is  necessary.  Despatch  is  better  than  discourse.  Men  who  halt
are  at  the  mercy  of  every  temptation  and  fall  before  the  foe.  "  I  never  defer  till
to-morrow  what  can  be  done  to-day,"  declared  one.  But  when  immortal  interests
are  at  stake,  what  folly  to  hesitate  or  resist.  How  fatally  "  unwise,"  to  put  off
repentance  and  return  to  God.  Judgment  is  impending,  to-morrow  may  be  too
late.  "  A  prudent  man  foreseeth  the  evil,  and  hideth  himself :  but  the  simple  pass
on,  and  are  punished."

Lose  this  day,  loitering,  'twill  be  the  same  story
To-morrow,  and  the  next  more  dilatory.
The  indecision  brings  its  own  delays,
And  days  are  lost  lamenting  o'er  lost  days.
Are  you  in  earnest  P  seize  this  very  minute !
What  you  can  do,  or  think  you  can,  begin  it !
Boldness  has  genius,  power  and  magic  in  it !
Only  engage,  and  then  the  mind  grows  heated  ;
Begin  it,  and  the  work  will  be  completed!

The  Great  Conquest. —  Verse  14.

To  preserve  his  people  from  despair,  God  promises  to  help  them.  Though  like
dead  men  in  the  grave,  he  will  redeem  them,  and  they  shall  triumph  over  death
and  destruction.     He  will  never  repent  of  this  purpose  concerning  them.

I.  The  mighty  enemies.  1.  We  have  death.  "  I  will  redeem  them  from  death."
(a)  Death  as  a  spiritual  condition.  Sinners  are  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  Sense-
less and  helpless  in  their  spiritual  condition.  But  the  Holy  Spirit  quickens,  and
Christ  redeems  them  from  their  danger.  The  sentence  against  them  is  blotted
out,  the  curse  of  sin  removed,  and  they  are  delivered,  raised  to  newness  of  life  in
Christ  Jesus,  (b)  Death  as  a  reigning  power.  Men  live  in  captivity,  are  held  in
bondage,  all  their  lifetime  through  the  fear  of  death.  It  is  a  universal  and  resist-
less foe.  It  spares  no  rank  and  pauses  for  no  request.  It  rends  our  hearts  with
grief,  fills  our  homes  with  sorrow,  and  the  grave  with  its  victims,  (c)  Death  as  a
mortal  enemy.  An  enemy  to  Christ  and  his  people.  Till  death  is  conquered,
Christ  cannot  realize  his  hopes  nor  his  people  gain  their  inheritance.  The  media-
torial glory  will  never  be  acquired  without  this  conquest.  "  The  last  enemy  that
shall  be  destroyed  is  death."  2.  We  have  the  grave.  "  The  power  of  the  grave."
Like  death,  the  grave  has  a  mighty  power,  and  is  a  triumphant  foe.  "  The  king
of  *-    vs  "  makes  this  his  palace.  "  The  grave  is  my  house  "  (Job  xvii.  13)  ;  "  cry-


chap,  xiii.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY.   HOSE  A.  183


ing,  Give,  give  "  (Prov.  xxx.  15).  It  has  received  its  countless  millions,  and  still
craves  and  yawns  for  more.  "  Hell  and  destruction  are  never  full."  (a)  As  a
mighty  terror,  and  (b)  a  final-resting  place,  it  must  be  conquered  to  gain  the  crown
and  the  kingdom.  II.  The  glorious  conqueror,  "/will  ransom, /will  redeem,"  says
God.  None  but  God  could  deliver  from  such  a  state  of  misery  and  death.  God
in  Christ  conquers  death  and  hell.  "  He  will  swallow  up  death  in  victory  "  (Is.
xxv.  8).  The  Captain  of  our  salvation  has  entered  into  the  conflict  for  us,  and
come  out  victorious.  "  He  hath  abolished  death,  and  brought  life  and  immortality
to  light."  "  He  hath  destroyed  him  that  had  the  power  of  death"  (Heb.  ii.  14),
and  his  victory  becomes  ours  by  faith.  "  I  am  the  resurrection  and  the  life  :  whoso
believeth  in  me  shall  never  die."  III.  The  wonderful  method  of  conquest.  "  I
will  ransom"  "  I  will  redeem."  1.  Christ  has  paid  a  price  for  our  deliverance.
He  hath  redeemed  us  by  his  blood.  "  Who  gave  himself  a  ransom  for  all  "  (1  Tim.
ii.  6  ;  Matt.  xx.  28).  He  became  near  of  kin,  by  taking  our  nature  and  suffering
in  our  stead.  The  first  and  second  death  are  overcome  by  him.  He  is  the  plague
of  death  and  the  destruction  of  the  grave.  Death  the  curse  is  turned  into  a  bless-
ing ;  death  an  enemy  is  changed  into  a  friend,  and  the  grave  is  made  the  portal  to
glor-  "  Thou  wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us  to  God  by  thy  blood."  2.  Christ
does  now  morally  deliver  us.  The  blessing  is  not  a  prospective  one.  It  is  en-
joyed in  the  present  time,  as  an  earnest  and  foretaste.  The  Spirit  enlightens  and
grace  redeems  from  the  power  of  sin  and  corruption.  The  people  of  God  are  free
and  live  without  fear  of  death.  The  weakest  believer  confronts  his  deadliest  foe,
answers  every  accusation  by  pointing  to  "  the  salvation  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
who  died  for  us."  We  are  not  merely  conquerors,  but  triumphant,  "more  than
conquerors  through  him  that  loved  us."  The  benefits  of  redemption  have  become
"  powers  in  the  world  to  come,"  and  powers  in  the  heart  and  life  of  a  Christian.
We  have  read  and  often  seen  the  glorious  victories  over  death  and  hell.  "  Is
this  dying  1  How  have  I  dreaded  as  an  enemy  this  smiling  friend  ?  "  cried  Dr
Goodwin.  "  The  battle's  fought, — the  battle's  fought,  and  the  victory  is  won,
— the  victory  is  won  for  ever  !  "  said  Dr  Payson.  "  Victory  !  glory  !  hallelujah  I  "
were  the  words  of  another.  "  0  death,  where  is  thy  sting  1  0  grave,  where  is
thy  victory  1  "  3.  This  proceeding  of  God  will  never  be  reversed.  "Repentance
shall  be  hid  from  mine  eyes."  God  is  unchangeable  in  his  nature  and  promise.
"The  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without  repentance"  (Rom.  xi.  29).  He
never  revokes  what  he  once  gave  to  his  people.  Though  they  sin  and  fall  into
danger,  he  will  love  and  deliver  them  still  if  they  call  upon  him.  "  My  covenant
will  I  not  break,  nor  alter  the  thing  that  is  gone  out  of  my  lips  "  (Ps.  lxxxix.
34).  Alterations  and  after-thoughts  belong  to  us.  God  dwells  upon  his  covenant,
and  repeats  it  continually,  that  we  may  love  and  obey  it.

Earthly  For  .stains  op  Enjoyments  Fail. —  Verses  15,  16.

The  prophet  had  spoken  of  the  blessings  of  the  righteous,  now  he  pictures  the
desolations  of  the  wicked.  The  pomp  and  luxuries  of  sin,  the  glory  and  vanity  of
the  world,  .shall  perish,  and  leave  not  a  wreck  behind.  Its  springs  of  joy  shall  be
dried  up,  and  its  fruitful  scenes  made  desolate  as  a  ruined  city.

I.  Earthly  prosperity  is  a  fountain  which  fails.  "  Though  he  be  fruitful
among  his  brethren,  an  east  wind  shall  come,"  (fee.  Men  may  be  planted  in  favour-
able circumstances,  grow  and  nourish  for  awhile,  but  the  "  wind  of  the  Lord "
comes,  and  their  leaves  wither.  Cities  may  be  populous  and  powerful,  but  the
enemy  can  destroy  them.  "  Samaria  shall  become  desolate."  All  fair  scenes  and
national  fruitf n Iness  can  be  laid  waste  as  the  wilderness.  "  The  treasure  of  all
pleasant  vessels  "  can  be  taken  away,  and  the  infant  of  days,  with  the  women  of
beauty,  be  "  dashed  to  pieces  "  by  deeds  of  barbarity.  II.  Earthly  pleasure  is
a  fountain  which  fails.     "  His  springs  shall  become  dry."     The  pleasures  of  the


184  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  HOSEA.  [chap.  xm.


world  are  soon  exhausted.  They  are  shallow  and  deceitful ;  "  as  a  stream  of  brooks
they  pass  away  "  (Job  vi.  15).  As  rivers  roll  their  hasty  current  to  the  sea  j  so  the
sum  of  sinful  pleasures  ends  in  endless  sorrow  and  desolation.  III.  Earthly  joy
is  a  fountain  which  fails.  The  joys  which  spring  from  domestic  prosperity  and
success  in  business  are  soon  cut  up  and  withered  at  the  root.  "  Joy  hath  passed
me  like  a  ship  at  sea,"  said  David  Scott  the  painter.  "  Folly"  is  always  " joy  to
him  that  is  without  wisdom."  "  No  joys  are  sweet  and  flourish  long,  but  such  as
have  self-approbation  for  their  root,  and  the  Divine  favour  for  their  shelter,"  says
an  old  divine.  If  our  prosperity  springs  from  Christ,  and  is  rooted  within  us,
nothing  can  destroy  it.  But  if  it  is  centered  in  the  world,  and  enjoyed  without
God,  then  it  will  be  cast  up  by  the  roots,  and  consumed  by  the  blasts  from
heaven.

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

1.  Often  the  most  outwardly  prosper-  certain  riches  of  the  world ;  the  wrath  of

ous,  by  abuse  of  prosperity,  ripen  most  God  will  wither  its  branches ;  the  springs

for  the  judgments  of  God.     God  may  be  that  watered  it  will  become  dry,  and  it

preparing  the  wind  "from  the  wilderness."  shall  be  spoiled,  and  come  to  nothing.

2.  When  these  judgments  do  fall  upon  "In  short,  'tribulation  and  anguish  '  be-

them,  they  are  the  most  destructive.     A  long  to  those  who  have  rebelled  against

very  great  wind,  "the  wind  of  the  Lord:"  God,  and  are  fixed  immoveably  on  all

"  an  east  wind  shall  come,"  which  is  most  who  impenitently  persist  in  rebellion  ;

terrible  and  tempestuous.  3.  Nothing  will  and  their  woes  will  be  far  more  terrible

be  left  to  defend  them.  Adults  shall  "  fall  than  any  that  are  experienced  in  that

by  the  sword,"  the  beauty  of  the  present,  cruelty  and    carnage  which   sometimes

and  the  seed  and  hope  of  the  next  gener-  attend  the  storming  of  populous  cities,

ation  shall  be  cut  off.     Without  fruit-  From  such  miseries  and  murders,  and

fulness  in  good  works,  springing  from  from  sin,  the  fruitful  parent  of  all  sorrow,

the  Spirit  of  Christ,  all  other  fruitful-  '  Good  Lord,  we  beseech  thee  to  deliver

ness  will  be  found  as  empty  as  the  un-  us  '  "  [Scott],

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XIII.

Ver.   1 — 3.      Humility.      The  more  Kiss.     Read  the  first  chapter  of  the

God    honoureth    men,   the    more  they  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  and  see  if  there

should  humble  themselves.     The  more  is      one     exaggerating      touch.       That

bounty  God  shows,  the  more  humility  chapter  is  a  terrible  but  true  picture  of

he  requires.      Humility  teaches   us  in  the   lower  strata  of  humanity.     What

our  works  to  draw  strength  from  God,  were    the    deities    in  heathen    times  1

not  from  ourselves  ;    in  our  graces  to  Jupiter  was  a  monster,  Mercury  a  thief,

ascribe    their    goodness    to    God,   and  Mars  a  sort  of  cannibal,  who  drank  the

their  weakness  to  ourselves  [Reynolds],  blood  of  his  victims.      Such  the  gods

Praise  is  a  comely  garment.    But  though  of  the   heathen ;    and   like   gods    like

thyself  doth  wear  it,  another  must  put  people.

it  on,  or  else  it  will  never  sit  well  on  Yer.  4.  Thy  God.  The  claims  of
thee.  Praise  is  sweet  music,  but  it  is  God  are  enforced  by  reference  to  that
never  tuneable  in  thine  own  mouth,  particular  event  by  which  the  Hebrews
If  it  cometh  from  the  mouth  of  another  were  separated  from  the  nations,  to  re-
it  soundeth  most  tuneably  in  the  ears  of  mind  them,  and  the  world  by  them,  that
all  that  hear  it  [Jennin].  the  character  of  God  is  displayed  in  the

When  people  once  fall  into  the  habit  agency  of  his  providence,  and  that  in

of  admiring  and  encouraging  ability  as  proportion   to   our   knowledge   of  that

such,  without  reference  to  moral  charac-  character   are   our   obligations  to  him.

ter,    they  are   on   the   highway  to   all  Each  individual  is  here  addressed,  that

sorts  of  degradation.  each   may  feel   that   he  has  means  oi


CHAP.    XIII.J


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.


185


knowing,  and  constantly  surrounded
with  motives  for  personally  loving
God.

Ver.  5.  Know  thee.  This  cannot
mean  a  mere  acquaintance  with  their
condition  and  circumstances ;  for  what
can  be  hid  from  him  whose  understand-
ing is  infinite  1  But  it  intends  two
things.  First :  He  knew  them  so  as  to
provide  for  them.  Secondly  :  He  knew
them  so  as  to  approve  of  them  and  ac-
knowledge them.  The  word  know  has
this  meaning  often.  "  The  Lord  know-
eth  the  way  of  the  righteous  "  [Jay'].

Ver.  6.  Pastures.  A  curious  instance
of  a  change  of  instinct  is  mentioned  by
Darwin.  The  bees  carried  to  Barbadoes
and  the  Western  Islands  ceased  to  lay
up  honey  after  the  first  year.  They
found  the  weather  so  fine,  and  the
materials  for  honey  so  plentiful,  that
they  became  exceedingly  profligate,  and
ate  up  their  capital,  worked  no  more,
and  amused  themselves  by  flying  about
the  sugar-houses  and  stinging  the  negroes
[Bib.  Treasury].

Yer.  8.  Bear.  When  the  female
is  robbed  of  her  whelps  she  is  said  to  be
more  fierce  than  any  other  animal ;
hence  many  sayings  refer  to  her  rage,
and  are  applied  to  the  fury  of  violent
men.  "  I  will  tear  thee  to  pieces  as  a
bear  which  has  cubbed  ;  "  "  Begone,  or
I  will  jump  upon  thee  as  a  bear."  When
a  termagant  goes  with  her  children  to
scold,  it  is  said,  "  There  goes  the  she-
bear  and  her  whelps  "  [Roberts]

Ver.    10,    11.      King.      Edward  the


Black  Prince,  having  conquered  and
taken  prisoner  King  John  of  France,
nobly  condescended  to  wait  on  his  royal
captive  the  same  night  at  supper.
Christ  having  first  subdued  his  people
by  his  grace,  waits  on  them  afterwards
to  the  end  of  their  lives  [  Whitecross],

Under  which  king,  Bezonian  ?  speak  or  die.

King  Henry  IV.

Ver.  12.  Bound,  up,  as  indictments
drawn  up  and  tied  together  against  the
day  of  trial  j  or  as  bills  and  bonds  tied
up  that  they  may  be  ready  against  the
day  of  account,  when  all  must  be  paid
[Poole].

Ver.  14.  Triumph.  In  this  world,
he  that  is  to-day  conqueror  may  to-
morrow himself  be  defeated.  Pompey
is  eclipsed  by  Caesar,  and  then  falls  by
the  hands  of  conspirators ;  Napoleon
conquered  nearly  all  Europe,  and  was
then  himself  conquered.  But  the
Christian's  conquest  of  death  is  absolute.
The  result  is  final.  He  has  vanquished
the  last  enemy,  and  has  no  more  battles
to  fight  [Foster]

Ver.  15,  16.  The  world  has  delusive
charms  to  flatter  with  a  face  of  substan-
tial bliss,  when  in  reality  it  is  a  fleeting
shadow  [  Wilson],  I  am  more  and  more
convinced  of  this  world's  tastelessness
and  treachery — that  it  is  with  God  alone
that  any  satisfying  converse  is  to  be
had  [Chalmers],

We  should  not  stoop  so  greedily  to  swallow
The  bubbles  of  the  world  so  light  and  hollow ;
To  drink  its  frothy  draughts,  in  lightsome  mood,
And  live  upon  such  empty,  airy  food.


CHAPTER  XIV.


Critical  Notes.]  The  guilt  of  the  sinful  nation  and  the  punishment  awaiting  have  been  de-
scribed :  now  there  is  a  call  to  conversion,  and  a  promise  that  God  will  bless  abundantly.  1.  Return]
Heb  intensive,  expressing  strong  desire.  TTnto]  Lit.  up  to,  not  merely  towards  the  Lord.  "Great
is  repentance  which  maketh  men  to  reach  quite  up  to  the  throne  of  glory,"  is  a  Jewish  saying.
2.  Words]  Not  empty,  yet  outward  gifts  not  required  ;  only  words,  and  these  even  found.  Rec-]
Lit.  receive  the  good,  viz.  the  words  of  sincere  repentance,  given  by  thyself  (1  Chron.  xxix.  14).
Calves]  i.  e.  our  lips  shall  be  for  calves.  Instead  of  offering  sacrifice  we  give  thanksgiving  and
praise,  the  fruit  of  our  lips  (Heb.  xiii.  5).  3.  Save]  Israel  relied  upon  Assyria  and  Egypt ;  now
horses  (warlike  power)  and  the  work  of  our  hands  (idolatry)  are  entirely  renounced.  Father-
less] Descriptive  of  Israel's  condition  without  God;  a  reason  for  turning  from  idols,  and  an  induce-
ment to  prayer  (Ex.  xxii.  22  ;  Deut.  x.  18).     4.]  Promise  of  mercy  follows.     First  heal  all  injury


186  H0M1LETJC  COMMENTARY:    IIOSEA.  [chap.  xiv.


caused  by  apostasy.  Freely]  Gratuitously  and  with  perfect  spontaneity  (Ezek.  xvi.  60—63).  "  The
word  means  impelled  thereto  by  Himself  alone,  and  so  moved  by  His  own  essential  bountifulness,
the  exceeding  greatness  of  His  goodness,  largely,  bountifully  "  [Pus  eg].  5.]  This  love  will  be
manifest  in  great  blessings.  Dew]  Not  the  early,  but  constant,  refreshing,  and  enlivening  dew  (ch.
vi.  3,  4  ;  Prov.  xix.  12 ;  Job  xxix.  19 ;  Is.  xxvi.  19)  ;  thro'  which  Israel  will  grow  splendidly,  deeply
root  itself,  and  spread  abundantly.  Lily]  A  beautiful  and  most  productive  plant,  6.  Smell]  like
Leb.,  rendered  fragrant  by  its  cedars  and  spices  (Cant.  iv.  11).  "  The  rooting  indicates  stability,  the
spreading  of  the  branches,  propagation  and  the  multitude  of  inhabitants  ;  the  splendour  of  the
olive,  beauty  and  glory,  and  that  constant  and  lasting;  the  fragrance,  hilarity  and  loveliness"
[Rosemniiller].  7.]  Hence  Israel  compared  to  a  tree.  Return]  Those  forced  to  leave  shall  return  and
dwell  in  safety.  Others  take  His  shadow,  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty  (Ps.  xvii.  8  ;  xci.  1).  Revive
as  the  corn]  Enjoy  a  second  life  and  great  increase.  Others,  will  revive,  i.  e.  cause  the  corn  to  grow,
culture  it  for  support.  Scent]  The  fame  of  Israel  (Cant.  i.  3),  like  wine  of  Leb.,  celebrated  for  aroma
and  flavour.  8.]  God  speaks  now.  Idols]  Eph.,  I  have  no  longer  to  plead  with  thee,  on  account  of
idols.  I  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  them,  and  thou  hast  not.  I  have  answered  and  observed
him,  i.e.  answered  and  cared  for  him,  when  idols  did  not.  I  am  like  a  green  fir,  green  winter  and
summer  alike,  and  whatever  fruit  thou  yieldest,  it  is  from  me.  Some  represent  Eph.  speaking,  and
acknowledging  its  flourishing  condition  ;  but  God  reminds  him  that  it  is  owing  to  his  blessing.
Both  senses  represent  God  as  the  shelter  and  the  life  of  the  nation.  9.]  A  most  important  concluding
lesson.  Wise]  Those  who  are  not,  cavil  at  God's  word,  and  his  providence  to  them  is  a  complete
riddle.  The  prudent— "properly  gifted  with  understanding,  the  form  of  the  word  expressing  that
he  was  endowed  with  this  understanding,  as  a  gift  of  God  " — shall  know  and  discern.  Right]
Straight  and  direct,  leading  to  the  object.  Ways  which  lead  some  to  life  and  others  to  death,  ac-
cording to  the  attitudes  which  men  assume  towards  God.  The  just,  the  righteous,  walk  in  them  and
live ;  sinners  deviate  from  them,  stumble  and  perish.  Moses  announced  to  Israel  that  this  would  be
the  result  to  them  (Deut.  xxx.  19,  20) ;  Paul  tells  us  that  such  will  be  the  effect  of  the  gospel  at  all
times  (1  Cor.  i.  18).

HOMILETICS.
Real  Conversion  to  God  Described. —  Verses  1 — 3.

There  is  a  change  in  the  words  of  the  prophet  now.  Wrath  and  threatening  are
past,  and  "  sweetness  and  light,"  like  the  sun,  burst  from  the  dark  clouds.  Every  word
of  the  invitation  is  full  of  mercy,  urgent  upon  Israel  and  upon  all  who  have  gone
astray.  God  is  still  unchangeable  and  true  to  his  covenant.  There  is  hope  for  all
who  sincerely  repent  and  return  to  him.  The  character  of  this  return  is  clearly
described  in  the  text.

I.  Its  necessity.  "  For  thou  hast  fallen."  This  is  the  first  dawn  of  light  upon
tne  sinner.  God  discovers  to  him  the  abyss  into  which  he  has  fallen.  1.  He  has
fallen  by  iniquity :  not  a  mere  stumble,  but  a  fall.  All  sin  is  a  deep  fall.  A
fall  from  God  into  idolatry;  from  holiness  into  guilt;  from  honour  to  disgrace.  A
fall  from  which  we  cannot  raise  ourselves.  It  is  a  pit  of  distress,  "  an  horrible  pit
and  miry  clay  "  (Ps.  xl.  2),  out  of  which  God  alone  can  deliver  us.  "  Remember
therefore  from  whence  thou  art  fallen,  and  repent,  and  do  thy  first  works."  2.  He
has  fallen  by  his  own  iniquity.  Nations  often  ascribe  their  calamity  to  civil  dis-
sension, foolish  rules,  and  disuse  of  military  discipline  :  to  the  cruelty  of  the  enemy
and  reverse  of  fortune ;  but  the  fall  is  caused  by  opposition  to  God,  and  contempt
of  his  word.  Individuals  blame  their  circumstances  and  their  fate  ;  but  sin  is  their
own  act  and  deed.  The  fall  is  the  result  of  their  own  conduct.  The  sinner  eats
the  fruit  of  his  own  way,  and  is  filled  with  his  own  devices.  But  though  fallen  he
need  not  stay  in  his  sin.  The  way  of  return  is  open.  The  invitation  is  given.
"Return  unto  the  Lord  thy  God."  II.  Its  nature.  "Return  (up  to)  the  Lord
thy  God."  True  conversion  is  abandonment  of  all  sin  and  restoration  to  all  good.
1.  Idolatry  is  abandoned.  "  Neither  will  we  say  any  more  to  the  work  of  our
hands,  Ye  are  our  gods."  It  is  folly  to  trust  to  creatures  which  God  has  made.
How  much  greater  folly  to  adore  things  which  we  ourselves  have  made.  The  peni-
tent renounces  all  idolatry,  and  views  God  as  the  Lord  his  God.  Williams  gives  a
graphic  account  in  his  missionary  enterprises  of  the  conversion  of  a  chief  from
idolatry.  Romatane  decreed  the  destruction  of  his  temples,  the  conflagration  of  his
gods,  and  the  erection  of  a  house  for  God.     We  must  not  pride  ourselves  in  monu-


chap,  xiv.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  HOSEA.  18%


ments  of  genius,  gains  of  the  world,  and  external  performances  in  religion.  Conse-
cration to  God  excludes  every  kind  of  worship  to  strange  gods.  "  Make  no  mention
of  the  name  of  other  gods,  neither  let  it  be  heard  out  of  thy  mouth  "  (Ex.  xxiii.  13).
'2.  Former  sins  are  renounced.  Israel  were  guilty  of  two  things — reliance  upon
foreign  aid  and  upon  their  own  warlike  strength,  (a)  Human  dependence  is  re-
nounced. "  Asshur  shall  not  save  us."  They  will  betake  themselves  no  more  to
an  arm  of  flesh  :  for  vain  is  the  help  of  man.  Human  helps  must  never  take  the
place  of  God.  All  merit  and  self-righteousness  must  be  renounced.  The  best  proof  of
true  repentance  is  utter  forsaking  of  former  sin.  (b)  Dependence  upon  self  is  re-
nounced. The  horse  was  a  symbol  of  their  own,  as  well  as  foreign  strength.  "  A.
horse  is  a  vain  thing  for  safety,  neither  shall  he  deliver  any  by  his  great  strength."
The  strongest  self-defences  are  nothing  when  most  needed.  Sennacherib  with  all
his  cavalry  was  no  match  for  the  angel  of  God.  We  must  not  look  to  creature
strength,  to  personal  merit,  for  salvation.  u  The  sufficiency  of  my  merit  is
to  know  that  my  merit  is  not  sufficient,"  says  Quarles.  "  Some  put  their  trust  in
chariots,  and  some  in  horses,  but  we  will  remember  the  name  of  the  Lord  our
God."  3.  Entire  return  to  God  is  seen.  The  true  penitent  rises  up  from  his
fall,  feels  that  he  cannot  stay  in  distance,  and  returns  right  up  to  God.  Many
vow  and  never  perform,  resolve  and  resolve  again,  but  never  forsake  their  sins.
Others  shed  tears,  feel  desires,  and  take  some  steps  towards  repentance,  and  con-
clude that  they  are  safe.  The  prodigal  started  home,  did  not  merely  turn  his
face,  nor  stop  half-way;  but  "came  to  his  father,"  up  to  his  father's  house,  quite
home. — Many  come  out  of  Egypt  who  never  enter  Canaan  \  put  on  garments  of
sorrow,  who  never  rend  their  hearts  and  return  to  God.  Half-conversions  are  un-
safe ;  " almost  a  Christian  "  is  not  enough.  Nothing  short  of  actual  conversion  will
do  ;  an  entire  change  is  necessary.  Whatever  distance  we  travel,  however  high  we
mount  in  religion,  if  we  come  short  of  Christ  we  cannot  be  saved.  "  If  thou  wilt
return,  0  Israel,  saith  the  Lord,  return  unto  me"  (Jer.  iv.  1).  III.  Its  method.
"  Take  with  you  words  and  turn  to  the  Lord."  Words  are  not  necessary  to  God.
We  do  not  induce  him  to  bless  us  by  mere  words.  We  may  argue  and  persuade
men  to  grant  a  thing  ;  but  words  without  meaning  are  sounding  brass  and  tinkling
cymbal.  1.  Take  words  of  confession.  God  does  not  require  costly  gifts ;  nor
burnt-offerings  of  goats  and  bullocks ;  but  a  humble  and  contrite  heart ;  a  full  and
free  confession  of  sin.  "If  we  confess  our  sins,  he  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us
our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness."  2.  Take  words  of  prayer.
"  Say  unto  him."  God  himself  supplies  the  words  and  directs  our  hearts.  We  are
sensible  of  inaptitude  and  ignorance  ;  but  he  bestows  the  spirit  of  prayer,  and  orders
our  speech  before  him  (Job  xxxvii.  19).  Method  is  helpful  in  everything,  and  the
ordering  of  words  in  prayer,  words  marshalled  like  military  ranks,  may  quicken  and
discipline.  "Method  is  the  soul  of  business."  Ask  for  two  things.  (a)  Take
away  iniquity.  The  true  penitent  is  most  concerned  about  sin,  desires  to  be  free
from  its  consequences  and  dominion,  to  be  entirely  cleansed  and  preserved  in  the
future.  "All  iniquity."  We  must  not  have  partial  zeal,  but  strike  at  all  sin,  great
and  small.  God  must  take  it  away  from  our  hearts  and  lives.  We  can  neither
remove  its  guilt  nor  destroy  its  power.  God's  grace  can  deliver,  renew  and  save.
"  If  the  Son  make  you  free,  ye  shall  be  free  indeed."  (b)  Receive  us  graciously.
When  God  has  pardoned  sin  and  imparted  grace,  he  accepts  our  imperfect  services.
"  Give  what  thou  demandest  and  then  require  what  thou  wilt,"  says  Augustine.
The  gifts  are  from  God  and  then  received  by  him.  "  For  all  things  come  of  thee,
and  of  thine  own  have  we  given  thee."  3.  Take  words  of  thanksgiving.  "So  will
we  render  the  calves,  i.e.  the  fruit,  of  our  lips,  giving  thanks  to  his  name"  (Heb.  xiii.
15).  Those  that  receive  much  from  God  "  will  offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise  to  God
continually."  The  expressions  of  the  lips  will  spring  from  a  grateful  heart.  Lip
service  without  sincerity  of  heart  is  an  abomination  to  God  :  but  a  holy  life  is  a
perpetual  thank-offering.     The  sacrifices  of  the  law  are  abolished  ;  but  God's  good-


188


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.


[CHAP.    XIV.


ness  lays  us  under  deep  obligation  to  praise  him.  The  penitent  feels  that  he  can-
not praise  too  much,  and  resolves  that  the  language  of  his  lips  and  the  fruit  of  his
life  shall  be  given  to  God.  "  Excellent  speech  become th  not  a  fool  :  much  less
do  lying  lips  a  prince."  IV.  Its  motive.  1.  God  will  hear  prayer.  This  we  may
presume,  and  hence  the  request.  "  Take  words."  But  this  truth  is  specially  re-
vealed and  taught  in  the  word  of  God.  The  grand  fact  which  distinguishes  God
from  heathen  deities  is  the  fact  that  he  is  accessible.  "  0  thou  that  hearest
prayer  !  "  We  have  every  encouragement  and  every  motive  to  pray.  "  It  is  the
first  thing  wherewith  a  righteous  life  beginneth,  and  the  last  wherewith  it  doth  end.
So  much  of  our  lives  is  celestial  and  divine  as  we  spend  in  the  exercise  of  prayer,"
writes  Hooker.  2.  God  will  have  mercy  upon  the  miserable.  "  With  thee  the
fatherless  findeth  mercy."  Men  without  God  are  fatherless  ;  orphans  in  a  sinful
world.  Israel  was  helpless,  and  the  prey  to  every  oppressor.  The  sinner  forsaking
God  forsakes  his  own  mercy.  Christ  does  not  leave  his  people  orphans,  or  com-
fortless (John  xiv.  18).  God,  "  the  Father  of  the  fatherless,"  will  have  compassion  on
returning  sinners.  Men  are  cruel,  but  God  is  kind,  and  reserves  his  greatest  mercy
for  greatest  need.  God  governs  not  as  an  absolute  monarch,  but  as  a  tender  father.
He  has  greater  pleasure  in  showing  his  goodness  than  his  power.  "  The  poor  com-
mitteth  himself  unto  thee  :  thou  art  the  helper  of  the  fatherless."


HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND    OUTLINES.


Ver.  1.  Fallen.  The  holy  contrast-
ed with  the  sinful  state  of  man.  Fall-
en in  nature  and  condition,  in  pursuit
and  desire.  God  calls  men  to  him  by
his  prophets  and  his  providence.  "  0
Israel"  "  It  is  well  to  hear  when  God
calls  through  his  deeds ;  but  it  is  better
to  hear  his  words."

Return.  1.  The  object.  "The  Lord
thy  God," — not  to  a  strange  god.  The
God  of  mercy,  and  the  fountain  of  all
good.  2.  The  reason.  "  Thou  hast
fallen."  Thoughts  of  a  fall  should  make
us  think  of  rising  from  our  sad  condition.

Ver.  2.  Take  words.  The  influence
of  words  in  prayer — 1.  Not  necessary
to  inform  God  of  our  wants.  2.  A
means  of  stirring  up  and  relieving  our
own  hearts.  Words  require  more  exer-
tion than  thoughts,  and  influence  our
minds  by  their  sounds.  3.  Exercise  a
power  over  others  often  when  uttered —
prompts  them  to  kindred  feelings  and
acts,  and  quickens  them  with  pathos,
passion,  and  thought.  4.  When  our
words  accord  with  our  hearts  and  the
Scriptures  we  shall  be  encouraged.  5.
God  supplies  us  with  words  adapted
to  our  varied  feelings  and  necessities.
Come  to  God  with  his  own  words.
Plead  help  in  his  own  promises,  and
you  shall  fmd  it.     "  Men  must  as  well


look  to  their  words,  as  to  their  feet,
when  they  come  before  God ;  and  see
that  their  affections  in  prayer  be  not
without  answerable  expressions  in  lips."

Say  unto  him.  Mentally  and  vocally,
with  spirit  and  speech.  Prayer  is  not
the  labour  of  the  lips,  but  the  travail  of
the  heart,  and  God  hath  promised  to
answer  his  people  before  they  call
(Is.  lxv.  24).  By  calling  upon  his  name
we  neither  inform  him  of  what  he  knows
not,  nor  move  him  to  show  us  more
mercy  than  he  intendeth.  But  yet
prayers  are  necessary,  as  a  means  which
God  will  have  used,  that  he  may  receive
what  he  of  free  mercy  giveth.  Besides,
it  prepare  th  us  holily  to  enjoy  the
things  received ;  and  makes  us  ready
either  to  wait  for  them  or  to  want  them  ;
and  to  be  content,  that  he  may  be  glori-
fied, though  we  be  not  gratified  [Trapp\.

Prayer  to  God  to  take  away  all  in-
iquity, contains  a  confession  of  sin  and
expresses  our  faith,  that  we  place  our
whole  hope  of  recovering  our  lost  purity
and  of  obtaining  salvation  in  the  mercy
of  Christ.  Receive  good.  What  other
good  can  we  offer,  than  detestation  of
our  past  sin,  with  burning  desire  of
holiness?  This  is  the  burnt-offering.
Lastly,  we  will  repay  the  calves  of  our  lipsf
is  the  promise  of  that  solemn  vow,  most


chap,  xrv.]  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :  HOSEa.  189


acceptable    to    God,  whereby  we    bind  vidence  (Ps.  lxviii.  4,5  ;  xxvii.  10).  1.  A

ourselves  to  keep  in  continual  remem-  description    of   the    sinner's    condition,

brance  all  the  benefits  of  God,  and  to  Without  the  love,  help,  and  guidance  of

render  ceaseless  praise  to  the  Lord,  who  a  father.     2.  A  display  of  God's  mercy,

has  bestowed  on  us  such  priceless  gifts  When  earthly  fathers  sleep  in  the  grave,

[Pusey].  God    watches    over  and    provides    for

Ver.   3.       Fatherless.      A    plea    for  orphan   children.     This    should    be    a

orphans.      God   takes  special   care    of  motive  to  penitence,  prayer,  and  daily

them  in  his  law  (Ex.  xxii.  22)  and  pro-  trust  in  God.

HOMILETICS.
Health  and  Divine  Favour. —  Verse  4.

In  response  to  penitential  return  to  God,  he  will  heal  the  wounds  of  his  people
and  bestow  upon  them  the  blessings  of  his  grace.

I.  We  have  health.  "  I  will  heal  their  backsliding."  1.  The  disease.  "  Back-
sliding." All  sin  is  a  disease  ;  backsliding  is  the  most  dangerous.  It  endangers
present  holiness,  joy,  and  usefulness,  and  imperils  the  future.  It  begins  almost  im-
perceptibly, first  in  the  heart,  then  in  the  closet,  and  then  in  the  Church.  Private
prayer  loses  its  relish,  spiritual  enjoyments  cease,  and  then  the  means  of  grace  are
neglected.  As  a  sheep  that  wanders  from  the  fold  never  seeks  to  return,  so  the
backslider  "wanders  on  still  more  and  more  astray,"  till  the  Divine  shepherd  brings
him  back.  "  If  any  man  draw  back,  my  soul  shall  have  no  pleasure  in  him."  2.
The  cure.  "I  will  heal."  Apostasy  is  no  ordinary  wound,  but  God  can  heal  it.
(a)  By  the  pardon  of  sin.  The  blood  of  Christ  cleanses  from  all  sin.  (b)  By  re-
moving the  effects  of  sin.  Taking  away  its  guilt,  power,  and  dominion  ;  destroying
the  bent,  the  tendency  within  us  to  go  back,  (c)  By  restoring  to  all  good.  God
himself  and  lost  comfort  are  regained.  The  cure  is  efficient.  It  is  restoration  to
perfect  soundness.  The  cure  is  certain.  "  I  will  heal."  God  is  a  physician  that
never  fails.  Cases  helpless  and  hopeless  can  be  healed  by  him.  Christ  cured  most
desperate  diseases,  so  backsliding  children  may  be  restored,  "  For  I  am  the  Lord
that  healeth  thee."  IL  We  have  Divine  favour.  "  I  will  love  them."  I.  Anger
is  turned  away  !  "  Mine  anger  is  turned  away  from  him."  God  is  displeased  with
sin,  but  his  anger  will  be  turned  away  from  those  who  repent.  This  is  a  proof  and
an  assurance  of  his  love.  The  clouds  with  which  a  guilty  conscience  covers  God
shall  disperse,  and  sunshine  beam  forth  in  brightness  and  beauty  again.  2.  Love
is  manifest.  "  I  will  love  them."  (a)  Love  in  its  widest  scope.  "  Them."  Who]
Moralists  and  worldly  lespectable  1  No  !  but  those  who  have  despised  his  authority
and  trifled  with  former  mercies.  Backsliders  from  God.  (b)  Love  in  its  gracious
nature.  "  Freely."  Spontaneously  and  liberally,  because  he  will  love.  Freely,
without  money  and  without  price ;  freely,  without  inducement  and  without  merit ;
freely,  without  reluctance  and  stint,  (c)  Love  in  its  loftiest  source.  "  /  will  love
them."  God  is  love — pure,  unchanging  benignity,  the  fountain,  the  fulness  of  love.
A  word  to  the  sinner — God  loves  thee.  A  direction  to  the  penitent — believe  and  re-
turn to  God.  To  the  Christian — "  love  so  amazing,  so  Divine,  demands  thy  soul,  thy
life,  thy  all."

Grace  Abounding. —  Verse  4.

This  sentence  is  a  body  of  divinity  in  miniature.  The  sense  hinges  upon  the  word
"  freely."  Here  is  the  glorious,  the  suitable,  the  Divine  way  by  which  love
streams  from  heaven  to  earth.  In  the  text  we  have  two  great  doctrines.  I  will
announce,  establish,  and  apply  the  first.

I.  The  first  great  doctrine  is  this,  that  there  is  nothing  in  man  to  attract  the
love  of  God  to  him.     We  have  to  establish  this  doctrine.     Our  first  argument


190  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ROSEA.  [chap.  xrv.


is  found  in  the  origin  of  that  love.  Our  second,  that  the  whole  plan  of  Divine  good-
ness is  entirely  opposed  to  the  old  covenant  of  works.  Thirdly,  the  substance  of  God's
love,  clearly  proves  that  it  cannot  be  man's  goodness  which  makes  God  love  him.
Remember,  further,  the  objects  of  God's  love,  and  we  shall  soon  see  that  it  could  not
be  anything  in  them  which  constrains  God  to  love  them.  We  are  informed  in
Scripture  that  the  love  of  God  and  the  fruit  of  the  love  of  God  are  a  gift.  But  what
practical  use  of  this  doctrine  1  It  offers  comfort  to  those  who  do  not  feel  fit  to  come
to  Christ.  The  text  is  a  death-blow  to  all  kinds  of  fitness  and  unworthiness.  It
invites  backsliders  to  return.  The  text  specially  written  for  them.  II.  Nothing
in  man  can  be  an  effectual  bar  to  God's  love.  If  anything  in  man  to  bar  God's
grace,  then  this  would  have  been  a  hindrance  to  its  coming  to  any  of  the  human
race,  it  would  have  prevented  the  salvation  of  those  undoubtedly  saved,  it  would
mar  the  sovereignty  of  God,  be  a  great  slur  upon  the  grace  of  God,  and  detract
glory  from  the  gospel.  The  love  of  God  has  provided  means  to  meet  the
extremest  case.  They  are  twofold — the  power  of  Christ  and  the  power  of  the  Spirit
Spurgeon].

.Reviving  Grace. —  Verses  5 — 7.

The  promise  of  good  is  continued.  The  supply  is  unfailing,  and  many  images  are
given  to  exhibit  the  manifold  grace  of  God  and  the  results  of  that  grace.  "We
have  refreshing  influence,  luxuriant  growth,  and  social  usefulness,  in  a  sevenfold
metaphor.

I.  Refreshing  influence.  "  I  will  be  as  the  dew  unto  Israel."  This  is  a  great
contrast  to  the  desolation  of  sin  (ch.  xiii.  15).  Spots  most  barren  revive  and  flourish
by  God's  blessing.  The  "  liquid  diamonds  of  the  morn "  descend  on  the  mown
grass  to  quicken  and  refresh  it  (Ps.  lxxii.  6).  Drops  of  dew  are  "fruitful  nourishers  of
herbs  and  flowers."  Gardens  and  vineyards  parched  with  heat  shall  flourish  again.
This  heavenly  baptism  of  dew  shall  invigorate  dying  plants,  renew  vegetation,  and
beautify  the  garden  of  the  Lord.  "  Times  of  refreshing  from  the  presence  of  the
Lord  "  shall  come,  and  the  Church  shall  grow  in  beauty,  strength,  and  fruitfulness.
This  influence  will  be — 1.  A  constant,  2.  An  efficient,  3.  An  abundant  blessing.
"  Thy  people  shall  be  willing  in  the  day  of  thy  power,  in  the  beauties  of  holiness
from  the  womb  of  the  morning  :  thou  hast  the  dew  of  thy  youth."  II.  Luxuriant
growth.  The  prophet  dwells  with  delight  and  at  some  length  on  the  idea  of
fruitfulness.  This  Divine  influence  is  given  to  promote  the  growth  of  the  Church.
We  are  chosen  to  "  bring  forth  fruit,  and  that  our  fruit  should  remain."  God  is
"  glorified  "  when  we  "  bear  much  fruit."  What  God  promises  to  give  we  should
earnestly  desire  to  have.  1.  Beauty  in  growth.  "  He  shall  grow  as  the  lily."
The  lily  is  the  fairest  of  flowers.  Solomon  in  all  his  glory  was  not  clothed  like  one
of  these  plants.  God  seeks  to  make  his  people  morally  beautiful  and  pure  in  their
lives.  The  beauty  of  lioliness  is  comely  to  God  and  useful  to  man.  Eut  this  beauty
is  permanent.  The  beauty  of  the  lily  soon  decays,  but  that  of  "  the  olive  tree  "
lasts  for  ever.  What  a  lustre  from  the  life  of  one  "  beautified  with  salvation  "  !
His  outward  conduct  is  attractive  in  every  part,  and  his  inward  dispositions  of  love
and  humility  are  well-pleasing  to  God  himself.  Man  transformed  into  God's  image
is  more  attractive  and  more  durable  than  natural  beauty.  "  God  in  the  redemption
of  the  soul,"  says  Emerson,  "  has  solved  the  problem  of  restoring  to  the  most
original  internal  beauty."

Beauty  is  truth,  truth  beauty, — that  is  all
Ye  know  on  earth,  and  all  ye  need  to  know.

2.  Rooted  in  growth.  u  Cast  forth  his  roots  as  Lebanon."  There  must  be  down-
ward as  well  as  upward  growth.  God's  people  must  not  be  all  foliage  and  pro-
fession. All  spiritual  growth  is  growth  at  the  root.  The  root  of  the  matter  must
1m-  within,  to  "spread  its  branches,"  and  manifest  its  vigour  in  every  good  word  and


chap,  xiv.]  IWMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HOSE  J.  191


work.  This  alone  can  give  stability  to  principle  and  character.  The  seed,  without
root  withered  away  (Matt.  xiii.  6).  We  must  be  rooted  and  grounded  in  love  (Eph.
iii.  17).  If  only  like  a  lily,  we  may  he  wafted  by  the  wind,  and  in  danger  of  being
carried  away.  But  if  firm  at  the  root,  we  shall  be  immovable  as  cedars  of  Lebanon,
which  storms  of  centuries  could  not  uproot.  "  They  that  trust  in  the  Lord  shall  be
as  mount  Zion,  which  cannot  be  removed,  but  abideth  for  ever."  3.  Expansive  in
growth.  "  His  branches  shall  spread."  True  religion  will  manifest  itself  in  open
profession.  It  leads  its  possessors  to  come  forth  from  obscurity,  and  openly  confess
Christ  before  men.  "  His  branches,"  his  acts  and  example,  are  seen  in  the  family,
the  prayer-meeting,  and  the  house  of  God.  But  like  the  trees  of  Lebanon,  his
branches  widely  spread,  to  offer  shade  and  shelter  from  the  burning  heat  and
terrible  storm.  His  religion  is  luxuriant  and  his  heart  expansive.  He  outgrows
the  narrowness  of  a  creed  and  the  boundaries  of  a  sect.  His  sympathies  and  efforts
are  world-wide  :  his  outstretched  arms  afford  grace  and  protection  to  all.  "  It  be-
cometh  a  tree,  so  that  the  birds  of  the  air  come  and  lodge  in  the  branches  thereof."

4.  Fragrant  in  growth.  "  And  his  smell  as  Lebanon."  This  is  twice  mentioned,
and  is  worthy  of  notice.  "  The  scent  of  Lebanon's  wine  has  a  remarkable  aroma."
Christian  influence,  like  the  name  of  Christ,  "  is  as  ointment  poured  forth."  His
conversation  is  refreshing  and  delightful ;  his  prayers  are  sweet  odours  (Rev.  v.  8) ;
and  his  deeds  of  charity  are  an  odour  of  good  smell  (Phil.  iv.  18).  In  proportion
as  a  Christian  lives  near  to  God,  does  the  smell  of  life  reveal  itself  to  man.
"  Thanks  be  to  God  which  maketh  manifest  the  savour  of  his  knowledge  by  us  in
every  place."  The  Church  shall  yet  revive,  and  be  like  "  the  smell  of  a  field  which
the  Lord  hath  blessed."  "  How  much  better  is  thy  love  than  wine  !  and  the  smell
of  thine  ointments  than  allspices!"  (Cant.  iv.  10).  III.  Social  usefulness.
The  corn  and  the  vine  are  emblems  of  Christian  usefulness.  They  are  often
unpromising  in  appearance,  but  revived  by  the  genial  influence  of  the  sun  and
the  rain,  and  bless  others  with  their  fruitfulness.  In  others  restored  to  God
there  will  be  a  revival  of  religion.     They  shall  be  for  protection  and   progress.

1.  The  Church  blessed  shall  protect  others.  "  They  that  dwell  under  his  shadow
shall  return."  Religion  is  not  selfishness.  It  is  intended  for  others.  Ministers,
parents,  and  Sunday-school  teachers  have  men  dwelling  under  their  shadow
requiring  sympathy  and  instruction.  Where  can  we  flee  for  help,  in  exposure
and  penitence,  but  to  the  people  of  God  1  If  you  want  to  do  good  to  others,  and
be  eminently  useful  in  bringing  them  to  Christ,  live  to  him  yourself,  and  be
rich  and  fragrant  in  the  odour  of  his  grace.  Live  under  his  shadow,  and  others
"  shall  return  "  to  dwell  with  you.  Lord  Peterborough  said  of  the  home  of  Penelon,
"  If   I    stay  here   any  longer   I   shall  become  a  Christian   in  spite    of  myself."

2.  The  Church  blessed  sJiall  contribute  to  the  progress  of  others.  "  They  shall  revive
the  corn."  In  whatever  sense  we  take  these  words,  the  thought  is  this — quickened
themselves,  they  shall  quicken  and  advance  others.  They  revive  and  cultivate
everything  good  and  useful.  God's  people  help  on,  and  never  hinder,  the  progress
of  the  world.  They  are  *  greater  blessings  to  it  than  corn  and  wine.  Delivered
from  sin  and  misery,  they  grow  to  maturity,  as  "  corn  "  ripens  for  harvest ;  bear
fruit  as  "the  vine,"  and  are  delightful  to  all  around  them,  through  examjjle,  con-
verse, and  prayer.  Thus  the  cause  of  God  revives  in  one  place  after  another ;
believers  ripen  for  heaven,  and  grow  more  useful  on  earth  ;  God  is  glorified,  and
sinners  are  saved.

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Dew.  1.  The  dew  falls  very   quietly  Beautiful  as  the  dew;  sheddingaglory

and    gently.        2.  The    dew    falls   very  over  every  common  thing.     Invisible  as

copiously.      3.  The  dew  is  very  refresh-  dew;  not  in  thunder  and  power.      Pene-

ing.       4.   The    dew  is  very    fertilizing,  trating    as  the  dew ;  insinuating  itself

5.  The  dew  is  very  near  [Dr.  lialeigh}.  into  every  plant  on  which  it  falls,  and


192


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ROSEA.


[CHAP.  XIV.


maintaining  its  vegetative  powers.
1.  As  dew  is  the  purest  water  in  nature,
so  the  presence  of  God  is  the  greatest
blessing.  2.  As  dew  is  necessary  to  the
growth  and  beauty  of  herbs  and  plants,
so  the  blessing  of  God  is  necessary  for
the  beauty  of  the  heart  and  life.  3.  As
dew  falls  most  copiously  in  the  night,
so  God's  presence  is  most  felt  in  dark-
ness and  trouble.

Yer.  5.  As  the  lily.  1.  In  silence
as  a  lily.  2.  In  beauty  as  a  lily.  3.  In
purity  as  a  lily.  4.  In  fruitfulness  as  a
lily.  *

Happy  are  the  pure,  whose  heart
Freely  blooms  in  every  part ;
Godly  acts  are  living  gems,
Fit  for  crowns  and  diadems.

Learn — 1.  That  God  can  make  his
Church  beautiful  and  pleasant.  2.  That
beauty  and  apparent  excellency  are  worth
little  without  root  and  stability.  3.  That
no  pretence  of  root  and  stability  should
hinder  visible  fruits  of  grace.  4.  That
visible  fruits  of  grace  must  not  consist
in  profession  or  ostentation,  but  in  living,
green,  and  permanent  deeds.  5.  That  a
Church  thus  fruitful  will  be  acceptable


to  God,  and  useful  to  others.  6.  That
it  is  our  duty  to  seek  these  things,  for
God  has  promised  to  bestow  them.

Christian  fruitfulness  is  a  manifold
and  various  thing.  It  is  not  all  of  one
kind.  One  life  is  not  meant  exactly  to
be  like  another  life.  Each  is  cast  in  its
own  type,  and  when  the  life  is  cast,  the
type  or  mould  is  broken.  Of  course  it
is  broken,  because  it  was  composed  in
part  of  circumstances  which  never  were
before,  nor  ever  can  be  again.  Let  each
"  planted  "  soul  rejoice  to  feel  rooted  in
him  !  and  then  let  each  grow  freely  ac-
cording to  his  will — not  fearing,  but
gladly  daring  to  branch,  and  blossom,
and  fructify,  according  to  the  law  of  in-
dividual life.  The  lily  !  the  olive  tree  !
the  corn  !  the  vine  !  the  cedar  !  all  these
are  growing  in  God's  garden  ;  and  there
is  room  and  dew  for  them  all  [Baleigh],

Types  of  Christian  character  found  in
the  vegetable  kingdom.  The  lily  in  its
beauty  ;  the  olive  in  its  greenness  ;  the
cedar  in  its  firmness ;  the  vine  with
its  clusters ;  and  the  corn  with  its
bounty  ;  all  set  forth  the  variety  and
completeness  of  Christian  character.


HOM1LETICS.

God  in  Eelation  to  a  Converted  People. —  Verse  8.

These  words  represent  Ephraim  in  hi&  return  to  God ;  and  God  in  his  kindness
to  Ephraim.  God  has  nothing  to  do  with  idols,  therefore  his  people  do  not  put
them  in  competition  with  him ;  entirely  renounce  them  ;  return  unto  him,  and  are
accepted  and  blessed.

I.  God  attracts  a  converted  people.  "  Ephraim  shall  say,  What  have  I  to  do
any  more  with  idols'?"  Once  he  was  "joined  to  idols,"  and  in  the  midst  of  Divine
chastisement  stupidly  resolved,  "  I  will  go  after  my  lovers."  Now  he  renounces
all  former  sins  and  depends  upon  God.  The  world  has  no  attraction  to  the  true
convert.  He  forsakes  his  evil  ways  and  companions ;  parts  with  everything  which
disputes  allegiance  with  God ;  and  makes  no  idol  of  opinions,  parties,  or  means.
He  has  been  drawn  to  God  in  love  and  power.  He  turns  away  from  the  glitter
which  fascinates  to  the  treasure  which  enriches.  He  envies  not,  he  seeks  not,
the  worldling's  portion.  God  is  all  in  all  to  him.  M  Whom  have  I  in  heaven
but  thee?  and  there  is  none  upon  earth  that  I  desire  beside  thee."  II.  God  accepts
a  converted  people.  "/"  is  here  emphatic.  I  have  heard  the  confession  and  ac-
cepted it.  God  had  hid  his  face  before,  or  observed  them  only  in  his  displeasure  ;
now  he  watches  over  them  and  provides  for  them.  1.  God  hears  their  prayers.
"  I  have  heard  him."  Prayer  is  an  indication  of  a  change  of  heart.  Saul  was  no
sooner  converted,  than  he  cried,  "  Lord  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  1  "  Angels
in  heaven  say  of  such  a  one,  "  Behold,  he  prayeth."  Prayer  is  the  first  breathing
of  Divine  life,  and  then  becomes  "the  Christian's  native  air."  He  may  be  despised,
and  considered  weak  in  mind,  or  disordered  in  imagination,  by  the  world  :  but  God


chap,  xiv.]  H0M1LET1C  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.  193


regards  and  hears  him.  "  Before  they  call,  I  will  answer;  and  while  they  are  yet
speaking  I  will  hear."  2.  God  delights  in  their  character.  "  And  observed  him."
God  is  everywhere  and  observes  all  men.  But  more  is  intended  here  than  mere
observation.  He  is  anxious  about  his  people,  cares  for  them  and  provides  for  them.
He  delights  in  them,  and  seeks  to  do  them  good.  He  sees  the  penitent  a  great  way
off,  and  desires  his  return.  He  knows  and  approves  of  his  conduct.  He  is
acquainted  with  all  the  remorse,  the  contrition,  and  the  resolutions  of  the  returning
sinner.  "  Is  Ephraim  my  dear  son  1  I  s  he  a  pleasant  child  1  For  since  I  spake
against  him,  I  do  earnestly  remember  him  still ;  therefore  my  bowels  are  troubled  for
him  ;  I  will  surely  have  mercy  upon  him,  saith  the  Lord."  III.  God  beautifies  a
converted  people.  He  is  "  like  a  green  fir-tree  "  unto  them.  The  fir  is  tall  and
stately ;  beautiful  in  appearance,  fragrant,  and  useful.  Without  pressing  the
metaphor  ,  it  pictures  the  constant  shelter,  the  lasting  beauty,  and  the  perpetual
life  of  God  to  the  soul.  Created  beauty  is  a  faint  image  of  moral  life.  Christians
are  beautified,  winter  and  summer  ;  are  ever  fresh  and  ever  nourishing  by  sap  and
virtue  from  God.  God  is  the  same  to  the  soul  at  all  times  and  in  all  places  :  the
constant  shade  and  the  undying  verdure  of  his  people.  In  the  restoration  of  God's
image  to  man  and  the  godly  life  of  a  believer  we  have  the  embodiment  of  "  the
sublime  and  beautiful."  "  He  will  beautify  the  meek  with  salvation."  IV.  God
fertilizes  a  converted  people.  "  From  me  is  thy  fruit  found."  Before  conversion
they  have  neither  beauty,  enjoyment,  nor  fruit  in  life.  But  God  supplies  all  de-
ficiency in  them.  He  affords  repast  as  well  as  repose.  The  fir-tree  may  be  a
shelter  and  evergreen,  but  yields  no  fruit.  Fruit  and  shelter  are  united  in  God.
"  I  sat  down  under  his  shadow  with  great  delight,  and  his  fruit  was  sweet  to  my
taste."  1.  The  fruit  they  enjoy  comes  from  God.  In  pardon  and  peace,  in  the
comforts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  foretastes  of  heaven  :  they  have  the  earnest,
the  first-fruits  of  eternal  bliss.  They  possess  it  in  their  hearts,  but  God  is  the
source  and  giver.  The  Church  is  not  the  fountain  of  sufficiency  ;  the  creed  not  the
supply  of  grace.  In  God  is  our  joy,  from  God  our  life,  and  to  God  must  be  our
praise.  "All  my  springs  are  in  thee."  2.  The  fruit  they  produce  comes  from  God.
Grace  in  the  heart  leads  to  activity  in  the  life.  We  receive  the  gifts,  but  he  im-
parts them.  We  repent  and  believe,  but  faith  and  repentance  are  produced  by  him.
We  obey,  but  he  inclines  and  helps  us.  "  As  the  branch  cannot  bear  fruit  of  it-
self, except  it  abide  in  the  vine  ;  no  more  can  ye,  except  ye  abide  in  me."  God
therefore  is  the  source  of  all  fruits  in  this  life  and  that  which  is  to  come.  "  With-
out me  ye  can  do  nothing."  The  fruits  of  the  Spirit  result  from  the  work  of  the
Spirit.  "The  fruits  of  righteousness  which  are  by  Jesus  Christ  to  the  glory  and
praise  of  God."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Idols.  The  language  expresses  former  with  God.  "I  have  heard  him;"  there-
attachment,  present  aversion  and  rejec-  fore  the  response  should  be,  "  What  have
tion.  "What  have  I  to  do  any  more  I  to  do  any  more  with  idols?"
with  idols  1"  1.  They  have  been  a  source  1.  God  is  a  protection  to  his  people,
of  pain.  2.  A  source  of  shame.  3.  A  "  like  a  green  fir-tree."  They  often  en-
source  of  degradation.  The  more  peni-  counter  blasts  and  dangers  in  returning
tent  we  are,  and  the  more  we  taste  of  to  him  ;  but  he  shelters  them  from  the
God's  goodness,  the  more  useless  do  idols  storm  (Is.  iv.  6).  ?-.  l~U)d  is  a  support  to
appear,  and  the  more  do  we  loathe  former  his  people.  Without  him  they  are  bar-
sins.  "  What  fruit  had  ye  in  those  ren  in  their  souls,  and  unfruitful  in  their
things,  whereof  ye  are  now  ashamed  ? "  lives.     Support  in  penitence  and  duty

Those  who  pray  oftenest  and  secure  springs  from  him.     "  From  me  is  thy

greatest  blessings  will  see  the  emptiness  fruit  found. ':
and  vanity  of  everything  in  competition         Human  nature,  by  itself,  can  as  little


194  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ROSEA.  [chap.  xrv.


bear  fruit  well  pleasing  to  God  as  the  grace,    is    a    miracle    of    grace.      The

pine  or  cypress  can  bear  fruit  for  human  presence  of  works  of  grace  attests  the

use.      As  it  were  a  miracle  in  nature,  immediate   working   of  God  the   Holy

were   these  trees  to  bring  forth   such  Ghost,  as  much  as  any  miracle  in  nature

fruit,  so,  for  man  to  bring  forth  fruits  of  [Pusey].

HOMILETICS.
The  Ways  of  God  and  the  Destinies  op  Men. —  Verse  9.

In  this  epilogue  the  prophet  sums  up  his  teachiug,  and  seeks  to  "  justify  the
ways  of  God  to  man."  The  dealings  of  God  with  men  are  often  mysterious  and
difficult  to  understand;  but  are  right  in  themselves,  designed  to  lead  to  life,  and
will  influence  men  according  to  their  treatment  of  them.

I.  The  ways  of  God  in  their  aspects  towards  men.  These  ways  indicate  the
ways  of  Providence  and  the  paths  of  duty;  God's  treatment  of  men  and  his
requirements  from  them.  1.  They  are  right  in  themselves.  "  The  ways  of  the
Lord  are  right."  No  fault  can  be  found  with  them,  (a)  They  are  conformed  to
the  will  of  God,  which  is  holy  and  just ;  the  standard  of  righteousness  to  the
universe,  (b)  They  are  the  most  direct  and  straight  line  to  a  right  end.  They
never  deviate  from  truth  and  duty.  They  are  more  holy  and  more  trustworthy
than  any  code  of  morals.  Invincible  in  power  and  unimpeachable  in  justice.
"  The  judgments  of  the  Lord  are  true  and  righteous  altogether."  (c)  They  are
proved  to  be  right  by  our  moral  nature.  The  written  word  accords  with  the
human  conscience ;  the  law  without  is  confirmed  by  the  testimony  within.  We
have  a  sense  of  obligation,  approve  the  right,  though  we  follow  the  wrong.  We
are  filled  with  remorse  and  delight.  The  work  of  the  law  is  written  in  our
hearts,  our  conscience  bears  witness,  and  our  thoughts  accuse  or  excuse  us  con-
tinually (Rom.  ii.  15).  2.  They  are  difficult  to  be  understood.  "Who  is  wise1?"
Mystery  and  majesty,  justice  and  mercy,  are  displayed  in  God's  providence.  We
are  finite  creatures,  and  should  not  presume  to  penetrate  "  the  clouds  and  darkness
round  about  him."  There  are  "  things  hard  to  be  understood  "  in  the  works  as
well  as  in  the  word  of  God.  We  may  go  forward  and  backward,  on  the  right
hand  and  on  the  left,  and  yet  not  perceive  God  (Job  xxiii.  8 — 10).  "It  is  the
glory  of  God  to  conceal  a  thing"  (Prov.  xxv.  2).  "Little  can  we  at  the  beginning
of  any  action  guess  at  God's  intention  in  the  conclusion,"  says  Bp  Hall.  "His
judgments  are  unsearchable,  and  his  ways  past  finding  out."  Some  are  obvious
and  plain ;  written  with  beams  of  light  and  love ;  and  he  that  runs  may  read.
Others  are  obscure  and  beyond  our  comprehension.  "  Lo !  these  are  parts  of  his
ways ;  but  how  little  a  portion  is  heard  of  him  ! "  3.  Yet  enough  may  be  known
for  the  duties  of  life.  The  question  indicates  that  some  know,  that  all  who  wish
may  know,  and  do  right.  "The  prudent  shall  know  them."  God's  ways  are
unsearchable  to  the  intellectual  and  the  theorist,  but  intelligible  to  the  humble
and  the  obedient.  We  know  a  part,  and  that  is  enough  to  practise.  Aristotle
teaches  that  the  end  of  moral  science  is  not  knowledge,  but  practice.  "  Those  have
the  best  knowledge  who  know  their  duty,"  says  Matt.  Henry.  "  Let  no  man,"  says
South,  "  presume  that  he  can  see  beforehand  into  the  ways  of  Providence.  His
part  is  to  contemplate  them  in  the  past,  and  trust  in  them  for  the  future  :  but  so
trusting,  to  act  always  upon  motives  of  human  prudence,  directed  by  religious
principles."  II.  The  ways  of  God  in  their  requirements  from  men.  "  Who  is
wise  and  prudent  ?"  1.  They  require  to  be  known.  Many  have  a  slight  acquaint-
ance with  them,  but  few  study  them.  The  wise  alone  meditate  upon  them  and
understand  them.  The  proud  and  self-conceited  often  scoff  and  ridicule.  A  right
and  teachable  disposition  is  required.  "  He  that  comes  to  seek  after  knowledge
with  a  mind  to  scorn  and  censure,  shall  be  sure  to  find  enough  for  his  humour,


citAP.  xiv.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY,   HOSEA.  195


but  none  for  his  instruction "  [Bacon].  True  wisdom  is  to  understand  what  we
have  to  do,  and  "  knowledge  is  easy  unto  him  that  understandeth  "  this.  A  true
heart  and  a  ready  mind,  a  single  eye  and  a  right  motive,  will  make  the  path  of
duty  easy.  "  If  any  man  will "  (is  willing,  wishes  to)  "  do  his  will,  he  shall  know
of  the  doctrine,  whether  it  he  of  God."  2.  They  require  to  be  observed.  "  The
just  shall  ivalk  in  them."  We  are  not  to  speculate,  hut  to  obey  ;  not  to  stand,  hut
walk  in  the  way;  not  merely  continue,  but  advance  in  it.  Delay  and  sloth
create  difficulty,  raise  "  a  hedge  of  thorns,"  and  harass  to  the  end  of  the  journey.
Exertion  and  hope  will  make  the  way  plain  and  prosperous  (Prov.  xv.  19).  Wait
not  for  louder  calls  and  greater  opportunities.  " Duties  are  ours,  events  are  God's."
"  To  wait  for  God's  performance  and  do  nothing  is  to  abuse  that  Divine  providence
which  will  always  so  work  as  not  to  allow  us  to  remain  in  inactivity  "  [Bp  Hall].
"Whoso  is  wise  and  will  observe  these  things,  even  they  shall  understand  the
lovingkindness  of  the  Lord."

Act  an  honest  part.
Look  before  thee  as  thou  goest,
Do  the  duty  which  thou  knowest.

III.  The  ways  of  God  in  their  influence  upon  men.  "  Transgressors  shall  fall
therein."  Truth  will  influence  according  to  the  method  in  which  it  is  received.
The  best  blessings  may  be  perverted  by  malicious  dispositions.  "  The  things
which  shoidd  have  been  for  bis  wealth  become  to  him  an  occasion  of  falling"  (Ps.
lxix.  22).  "  Christ  himself  is  set  for  the  rising  and  falling  of  many"  (Luke  ii.
34).  Hence  the  ways  of  God  influence  men  in  two  methods.  1.  The  righteous
walk  in  them  and  live.  The  wise  discern  their  rectitude  and  desire  to  secure  their
end.  The  righteous  walk  in  them,  become  like  them,  and  live  in  them.  There  is
much  to  discourage  and  oppose ;  but  the  sincere  persevere  in  holiness,  add  strength
to  strength,  and  enjoy  foretastes  of  heaven.  "  The  righteous  also  shall  hold"  (take
firm  hold)  "on  his  way,  and  he  that  is  of  clean  hands  shall  be  stronger  and  stronger."
2.  The  ungodly  deviate  from  them  and  perish.  If  God's  ways  lead  to  life,  depart-
ing from  them  must  be  death.  The  disobedient  stumble  at  the  word  and  the  ways
of  God.  They  are  offended  at  the  requirements  and  the  providence  of  God.  They
transgress,  fall,  and  perish.  This  is  the  sum  of  Hosea's  ministry ;  the  fulfilment
of  ancient  prediction  (Deut.  xxx.  19,  20);  and  the  general  effect  of  gospel  preach-
ing (1  Cor.  i.  18).  God's  ways  are  just  and  true.  Those  who  walk  in  them  shall
live,  and  those  who  depart  from  them  shall  perish.  "  Whoso  readeth,  let  him
understand."

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XIV.

Ver.  2.     "  Words  are  the  daughters  permitted  to  mount ;  and  thus  accoutred,

of   earth,  and   deeds   are   the   sons   of  galloped  to  the  shrine  at  Godmundham,

heaven."  where  the  chief  idol  stood,  hurled  his

Yer.  3.      Gods.     At  the  introduction  lance  into  the  enclosure,  and  profaned

of    Christianity   into    this    country,    a  the    consecrated   shrine.      The    people,

general  council  was  summoned  to  con-  encouraged    by   the   example    of    their

sider  the  new  doctrines  of  Paulinus.    All  priest,  destroyed  the  sacred  temple,

present  were  unanimous  as  to  the  utter  Ver.    4.     "  We   would    always   look

inefficiency   of    the   gods   whom    they  hopefully  at  a  sinner  under  correction.

worshipped.       Coin,    the    pagan    high-  For   surely   so    long   as    the   physician

priest,  in  an  eloquent  harangue  proposed  administers    the    medicine    there   is  no

their  overthrow,  and  casting  aside  his  ground    for    despondency "     [Bridges].

priestly  garments,  called  for  arms,  which  "  Consumption,  when  it  once  comes  to

Saxon  priests  were  forbidden  to  wield,  be   really  consumption,    is    beyond   all

and  for  a  horse,  which  they  were  not  doubt    utterly   incurable    by    ordinary


196


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY .   HOSE  A.


[CHAF.  XIV.


medicine ;  and  though  many  remedies
may  assist  the  sufferer  and  prolong  his
life,  yet,  as  a  rule,  consumption  is  the
herald  of  death ;  and  so  backsliding  is
incurable  by  any  human  means,  and
would  be  the  forerunner  of  total  apos-
tasy were  it  not  for  Divine  grace"
[Spurgeon].

Ver.  5 — 7.  "How  full  of  beauty  and
poetry  is  this  passage !  There  is  no
book  so  poetic  in  its  character  as  the
Book  of  inspiration.  Apart  from  the
sublimity  of  the  matters  treated  and
the  glory  of  the  doctrines,  the  style
itself  is  enough  to  make  the  book  pre-
cious to  every  reader.  It  is  a  wondrous
book ;  it  is  the  book  of  God :  yea,  as
Herbert  says,  ■  the  god  of  books.'  It
is  a  book  full  of  stars :  every  page
blazes  with  light;  from  almost  every
sentence  there  beams  forth  some  beauti-
ful metaphor,  some  glorious  figure"
[Spurgeon],


Smell.  Whitfield  speaks  of  one  young
man  who  said,  "I  will  not  leave  my
old  father's  house,  for  there  is  not  a
chair  or  a  table  there  but  smells  of  his
piety."

Ver.  9.  Providences  are  sometimes
dark  texts,  which  require  an  expositor
(Gen.  xlii.  36).  They  that  would  judge
aright  of  any  one  of  the  Lord's  dis-
pensations must  be  careful  students  of
them  all.  They  must  not  slight  any
work  of  his,  because  all,  though  they
may  be  many  and  difficult  to  us,  make
but  one  entire  work  in  God's  hand.
And  every  part  of  that  work  is  a  com-
mentary, clearing  the  nature  and  use  of
the  whole  and  God's  intent  therein
[Nisbet].

Just  are  the  ways  of  God,
And  justifiable  to  men ;
Unless  there  be-  who  think  not  God  at  all.


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY


ON


JOEL.


INTRODUCTION.

The  Person.  Joel  (Jehovah  is  God),  is  distinguished  from  others  of  that  name  as
11  the  son  of  Pethuel."  This  is  the  only  direct  notice  of  him ;  all  other  incidents
must  be  gathered  from  his  prophecy.  He  was  commissioned  to  Judah,  probably
lived  in  Jerusalem,  for  he  was  familiar  with  the  temple,  priests,  and  ordinances  of
worship.

The  Time.  Nowhere  expressly  stated  and  cannot  be  fixed  with  certainty.  He
makes  no  allusion  to  idolatry.  The  temple  service  seems  to  be  flourishing,  and  the
only  enemies  mentioned  are  the  Phoenicians  and  Philistines,  the  Edomites  and
Egyptians.  Amos  alludes  to  the  words  of  Joel,  which  must  have  therefore  been
written  and  known  before  that  time.  He  was  probably  the  earliest  of  the  prophets,
and  delivered  his  predictions  in  the  early  days  of  Joash,  king  of  Judah,  b.  c.  870 —
865.  His  style  belongs  to  an  early  date,  and  the  time  agrees  with  the  state  of  things
under  Jehoiada,  the  high  priest  who  placed  Joash  on  the  throne  (2  Kings  xi.  17,
18;  xii.  2—16;  2  Chron.  xxiv.  4—14).

The  Book.  The  order  of  0.  T.  books  not  arranged  according  to  date,  but  for
convenience.  Joel  is  free  from  local  circumstances,  political  and  geographical  al-
lusions, ltd  style  is  animated  and  finished,  proves  the  prophet  to  be  an  accom-
plished man.  "  He  has  no  abrupt  transitions,  is  everywhere  connected,  and  finishes
whatever  he  takes  up.  In  description  he  is  graphic  and  perspicuous,  in  arrange-
ment lucid,  in  imagery  original,  copious,  and  varied."  He  was  accustomed  to  think
clearly  and  speak  logically.  Ewald  says  that  "  he  was  in  early  times  the
highest  model,  so  that  his  successors  all  followed  his  elevated  precedent."  He  had
an  eye  for  the  beautiful  in  nature,  and  in  love  with  its  wondrous  scenes.  He
watched  the  ways  of  insects  and  read  the  lessons  of  the  stars.  Like  Christ,  he
saw  the  image  of  the  invisible  God  in  creation,  and  taught  us  ever  to  reveal  it
in  our  ministry.  Its  contents  most  easily  and  naturally  divided  into  two  parts.
Part  First.  Lessons  of  Providence ;  devastation  by  locusts ;  general  drought
and  summons  to  repentance  (chap.  i. — ii.  18).  The  description  was  held  to  be  too
terrible  for  locusts.  But  naturalists  and  travellers  have  confirmed  its  truth,  and  we
have  no  need  to  imagine  armies  or  invasions  to  account  for  the  destruction.  "  Where
they  swarm  and  descend,  all  vegetation  instantly  vanishes  ;  they  spare  neither  bark


198  INTRODUCTION.


nor  root,  much  less  leaf  and  flower.  They  darken  the  air,  so  that  the  sun  and  even
men  at  a  little  distance  become  invisible.  They  advance  in  a  close  military  array,
which  yields  to  no  obstacle  of  stream  or  fire.  As  they  advance  a  peculiar  roaring
noise  is  heard,  like  that  of  a  torrent  or  waterfall."  No  sooner  do  they  settle  to  eat,
than,  as  Yolney  puts  it,  the  grating  sound  of  their  mandibles  reminds  one  of  the
foraging  of  an  invisible  army.  In  these  calamities  the  prophet  saw  the  providence
of  God,  and  a  reason  for  national  humiliation.  Hence  the  moral  lessons  from  these
natural  events.  Part  Second.  Lessons  for  the  future  ;  deliverance  from  judgment
and  promise  of  fertile  seasons  to  Israel ;  the  day  of  the  Lord  introduced  by  the  out-
pouring of  the  Spirit ;  a  day  of  destruction  to  all  enemies,  but  to  the  Church  a  day
of  salvation  (chap.  ii.  19 — iii.).  Joel  is  the  prophet  of  judgment,  the  prophet  of
repentance,  and  the  prophet  of  hope.  His  truths  are  spiritual,  relate  to  all  times,  and
belong  to  all  individuals.  There  is  a  dreadful  judgment  before  men ;  but  they
need  not  despair.  God  will  save  them  if  they  repent  and  believe.  But  how  is  repent-
ance possible  1  The  Holy  Spirit  will  bestow  it  and  aid  us  to  live  to  God.  This
relation  deepens  our  responsibility  before  our  Judge.  Grace  is  offered,  a  renewed
life  is  possible,  and  if  we  use  our  privileges  aright,  the  day  of  judgment  will  be  to
us  a  day  of  deliverance  and  blessedness.  Thus  these  doctrines  form  an  inseparable
whole;  revealing  God  in  nature  and  grace,  predicting  the  Saviour,  giving  the
Holy  Spirit,  and  offering  eternal  glory  to  all.


;jhap.  I.]  EOMILETLC  COMMENTARY :   JOEL.  199


CHAPTER  I.

Critical  Notes.]  The  prophecy  opens  with  lamentation  over  the  land,  made  desolate  by  sue-
cessive  swarms  of  locusts.  Ver.  2 — 4  contain  the  spirited  introduction.  Old  men]  are  called  upon
to  note  the  unusual  course  of  nature.  Inhabitants]  of  Judah,  whatever  part  they  occupy,  and  what-
ever calamities  they  have  witnessed,  are  asked  to  say  if  in  their  own,  or  in  the  days  of  their  fathers,
there  had  ever  been  a  calamity  so  sweeping  and  so  terrible.  Children]  must  he  impressed  with  a
sense  of  national  disaster,  and  admonished  hy  the  providence  of  God  (Ex.  xiii.  8 ;  Josh.  iv.  6,  7  ;
Ps.  lxxviii.  6,  8;  ver.  4).  The  four  names  of  the  locusts  have  heen  thought  to  be  four  different  species
indicated  hy  the  etymology  of  the  words,  the  gnawer  (gazam) ;  the  multiplier  farbeh) ;  the
licker  (yeleq)  •,  the  devourer  (chazil).  Some  critics  say  that  four  is  the  symbol  of  universality.
5.  Drunkards]  An  appeal  to  different  classes.  "Wine-bibbers  indulging  in  their  favourite  liquor  must
be  roused  from  stupor  to  "  weep  andhoivl*'  though  usually  jolly  in  national  calamity.  6.  A  nation]
Lit.  some;  four  successive  empires;  symbolically  others.  The  epithets  describe  their  number
and  savage  hostility.  7.  Vine]  and  fig-trees,  common  and  greatly  valued  in  the  days  of  Solomon
(1  Kings  iv.  25),  now  destroyed.  8.  A  virgin]  The  impersonated  nation  to  lament  with  the  sorrow
and  despair  of  a  young  girl,  whose  hopes  have  been  blighted,  and  her  beloved  taken  away  by  a  stroke
(Ezek.  xvi.  8).  9.]  The  cessation  of  temple  service  would  be  the  greatest  sorrow,  and  would  impress
the  nation  with  a  sense  of  Divine  displeasure.  Cut  off]  by  locusts,  who  have  eaten  up  the  vine,  the
olive,  and  the  wheat,  for  sacrificial  use.  Priests]  lost  not  merely  subsistence,  but  appointed  offerings
to  Jehovah.  10.  The  field]  Nature  sympathizing  in  the  woes  of  men;  the  open  uninclosed  coun-
try and  the  land,  Heb.  rich  red  soil,  fenced  and  cultivated,  feel  the  loss.  11.]  The  third  appeal
to  husbandmen  and  vinedressers.  Wheat  and  barley  destroyed  before  their  eyes ;  vines  languish  and
choice  fruit-trees  perish.  12.  Joy]  The  joy  of  harvest  withered  away  (Ps.  iv.  7  ;  Is.  ix.  3).  13.]
A  summons  to  repentance.  Priests]  first ;  they  have  been  negligent,  and  must  set  the  example  of
penitence.  Sackcloth]  Outward  garments  must  indicate  inward  grief  (Is.  xxxii.  11;  Jer.  iv.  8).
14.  Sanctify]  Set  apart,  hallow  days  of  fasting.  Solemn  assem.]  Lit.  proclaim  a  restraint,  i.e.
let  young  and  old  cease  manual  labour  to  fast  and  pray  (2  Chron.  xx.  3 — 13).  Elders]  in  office
and  age.  Cry]  Not  a  mere  formal  fast,  but  intense  and  earnest  prayer  for  mercy  and  help.  15.  The
day]  of  anger  (Is.  xiii.  9)  and  ill  omen ;  evil  in  itself,  and  foreshadowing  greater  evils  ;  a  transition
from  invading  locusts  to  the  day  of  judgment  upon  all  ungodly  men.  Present  calamities  are  clothed
in  greater  terror  when  regarded  as  a  type  of  the  last  judgment.  Joel  would  have  the  people  thus  to
regard  them.  Hence  present  suffering  should  quicken  to  penitence  and  faith.  Destruction]  An
aspect  of  the  last  day  seen  now.  16.]  Food  cut  off,  the  joy  of  festivals  and  sacrifices  banished.  17.
Seed]  decayed  under  the  clods.  Garners]  Storehouses  went  to  ruin  and  prospects  of  future  harvest
were  blighted.  18.]  From  the  homestead  attention  is  directed  to  the  fields.  Cattle]  bewildered
because  the  plains  often  cropped  yield  no  pasture.  Sheep]  seem  to  mourn  the  guilt  of  man.  19.]
Beasts  cry  to  God,  but  man  hears  not ;  the  prophet  is  touched  and  cries  for  the  impenitent.  To
thee]  beasts  even  lift  their  heads  in  dumb  appeal,  and  to  thee  I  cry,  for  thou  art  the  only  hope
(Is.  xv.  5  ;  Jer.  xxiii.  9),  amid  the  insensibility  of  man,  the  distress  of  nations,  and  the  judgments  of
providence.

HOMILETIGS.
God's  Message  demands  Earnest  Attention.-^  Verses  1 — 4.

Since  the  establishment  of  the  kingdom  Judah  had  seen  partial  and  temporary-
judgments,  but  none  that  threatened  such  destruction  as  this  fearful  plague  of
locusts.  Hence  the  prophet  calls  attention  to  it,  and  urges  them  to  consider  its
design  and  transmit  its  record  to  posterity.  Generations  to  come  must  know  the
judgments  of  God.

I.  The  message.  "  Hear  this"  recorded  in  ver.  4.  The  visitation  is  unparalleled
and  never  to  be  forgotten  in  history.  1.  It  was  terrible.  Not  a  mere  visit  of  flying
insects,  but  a  succession,  plague  was  to  succeed  plague,  each  more  destructive  than
its  predecessor.  In  ordinary  providences  God  testifies  against  sin.  But  some  ages
and  churches  are  made  warnings  to  all  generations  by  the  justice  of  God.  God's
penal  resources  are  unlimited,  and  great  as  afflictions  may  have  been  in  the  past,
the  future  may  bring  upon  guilty  sinners  greater  still       "  Why  should  ye  be


200  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.  [ciiap.  i.


stricken  any  more  % "  2.  It  was  unprecedented.  "  Hath  this  been  in  your  days,
or  even  in  the  days  of  your  fathers  %  "  Old  men  who  could  remember  events  years
ago,  accustomed  to  extraordinary  things  in  nature,  had  never  seen  anything  like  this
Even  in  the  days  of  their  fathers,  in  the  records  of  the  nation,  was  there  any  judg
ment  so  terrible  in  its  consequences.  Neither  the  present  nor  the  past  generations
had  known  such  a  calamity.  The  plague  of  Egypt  lasted  only  a  few  days  and  con-
sisted of  few  insects ;  but  for  multitude  and  mischief,  this  was  unprecedented.
"Very  grievous  were  they;  before  them  there  were  no  such  locusts  as  they,  neither
after  them  shall  be  such."  3.  It  was  ever  to  be  remembered.  "Tell  ye  your
children  of  it,"  &c.  Four  generations  were  to  note  it.  "This  shall  be  written  for  the
generation  to  come."  National  disasters  live  in  the  records  of  the  past,  and  present
calamities  are  to  be  fixed  in  the  memories  of  the  future.  Greece  and  Rome,  France
and  England,  have  each  their  record  written  in  bitter  experience.  Woe  is  pronounced
upon  those  who  "  regard  not  the  work  of  the  Lord,  neither  consider  the  operation
of  his  hands  "  (Is.  v.  12).  II.  The  hearers.  This  calamity  was  so  striking  that
the  attention  of  the  present  and  all  future  generations  is  directed  to  it.  1.  Old
men.  "  Hear  this,  ye  old  man."  "  Days  should  speak  and  multitude  of  years
should  teach  wisdom,"  and  none  are  too  old  to  learn.  Men  of  the  greatest  age  and
ripest  experience  have  more  to  learn  in  life,  especially  if  their  lot  has  fallen  in
grievous  times.  If  our  stock  of  knowledge  be  not  increasing  it  is  wasting.  All
should  hear  the  voice  of  judgments.  "  A  wise  man  will  hear,  and  will  increase
learning  ;  and  a  man  of  understanding  shall  attain  unto  wise  counsels."  2.  All  the
inhabitants  of  the  land.  Lest  any  should  escape,  all  the  people  are  urged  to  give
earnest  attention.  What  concerns  one  concerns  all.  None  like  to  hear  evil  tidings,
but  they  must  be  pressed  upon  men  sometimes.  When  God  speaks,  when  vital
interests  are  at  stake,  all  should  hear.  "  Hear  this,  all  ye  people  ;  give  ear,  all  ye
inhabitants  of  the  world."  3.  Cliildren  of  another  generation.  God's  dealings  with
the  present  age  have  a  relation  to  the  future.  The  events  of  one  nation  are  lessons
to  all  nations.  Whatever  concerns  humanity  concerns  all  men.  Generation  must
declare  to  generation  the  wonders  of  God's  love  and  the  might  of  his  judgments.
Our  woes  must  be  warnings  to  posterity,  and  our  corrections  their  instructions
(1  Cor.  x.  6).  If  the  memory  of  God's  love  does  not  stir  up  to  gratitude,  the
memory  of  woe  must  entreat  them  to  repentance.  "  Take  heed  to  thyself,  lest  thou
forget  the  things  which  thine  eyes  have  seen ;  but  teach  them  thy  sons,  and  thy
sons'  sons  "  (Deut.  iv.  9  ;  vi.  6,7;  xi.  19).  III.  The  purpose.  The  present
generation  must  hear  and  the  future  be  taught  for  a  wise  purpose.  People  are
negligent,  persist  in  sin,  and  bring  punishment  upon  themselves.  Hence  they  must
be  taught, — 1.  That  God  watches  over  men's  conduct.  This  fact  is  constantly
impressed  upon  our  minds  by  God's  ways  in  providence  and  in  creation.  Men
cannot  sin  and  defy  the  visitations  of  God  with  impunity.  Our  children  may  learn
this  lesson,  future  generations  may  read  it  in  our  history  without  our  experience.
2.  Tltat  God  directs  the  events  of  history.  All  events  are  under  his  control  and
are  overruled  for  the  fulfilment  of  his  will.  Yet  men  "  regard  not  the  works  of
the  Lord,  nor  the  operation  of  his  hands"  (Ps.  xxviii.  5).  Israel  forgot  God  in  his
dealings  with  them.  Even  at  the  Red  Sea,  amid  the  greatest  displays  of  mercy
and  judgment,  they  could  not  discern  him  (Ps.  lxxxviii.  11  ;  cvi.  13).  3.  That
God  warns  men  of  their  danger.  Those  who  forget  God's  works  are  in  great  danger,
and  have  need  of  Divine  teaching.  Israel  was  a  favoured  nation,  a  standing  testi-
mony of  God's  truth  and  existence  to  idolatrous  peoples.  Israel's  sufferings  were  a
warning  to  all  nations  to  avoid  Israel's  guilt.  God  designs  to  educate  the  world  in
the  knowledge  of  his  love  and  power.  The  lessons  are  given  to  one  man  to  relate  to
another,  written  in  the  experience  of  one  age  that  another  may  be  impressed;  "  that
they  might  set  their  hope  in  God,  and  not  forget  the  works  of  God,  but  keep  his
commandments."


chap.  1.1  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JOEL.  201


HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.     1.     It   is   a   mercy   that   God  an  influence  as  long  as  the  race  shall

reveals  his  word  to  the  Church,  when  he  last.

is  about  to  inflict  punishment  upon  it.  1.    God's  word  explains  God's    pro-

This  word  is  not  to  be  sought  in  wild  vidence,  that  we  may  know  the  author,

fanatic  spirits,  but  in  chosen  servants  of  cause,  and  design  of  our  affliction.     2.

God.     The  word  of  the  Lord  that  came  What  we  learn   in  the  school  of    pro-

to  Joel.  vidence  we  should  transmit  to  posterity.

Individuality  merged  in  Divine  com-  "  That   the  generation  to   come  might

mission.     Little   known    of    the  birth,  know   them,   even  the  children  which

life,  and  deeds  of  Joel.    Some  known  by  should  be  born  ;  who  should  arise  and

personal   service   rather   than   personal  declare   them   to  their   children "    (Ps.

history — David's  mighty  men.     Others  lxviii.  6).

content  to  live  and  act  in  obscurity,  and  I.   What   is   to    be  told  ?     This,  i.e.

wish  to  be  known  only  by  efforts  to  save  the  judgments   of    God    upon    Israel,

the  souls  of  men.  II.    To    whom   are   they   to    be   made

Ver.  2.     Hear  God's  word  addressed  known]     (a)  Your  children,     (b)  Their

to  all  classes.     1.  The  common  dangers  children,  and    (c)  Another  generation,

of  men.     2.  The  common  needs  of  men.  Four  generations  are  to  keep  up  the  re-

3.  The  common  privileges  of  men.    Take  membrance.     III.  How  are  they  to  be

heed  how  ye  hear.  known  1     "  Tell,  Heb.  cipher  them  up

Ver.  3.    Tell  your  children.    Parental  diligently,  after  the  manner  of  arithme-

duty.      1.    A   necessary    duty.     2.    A  ticians ;    reckon   up    the   several   years

personal  duty.     3.  A  solemn  duty.     4.  with  the  several  calamities   thereof  to

A  duty  commanded  by  God  (Deut.vi.  7).  your  children  and  nephews,  that  they

As  far  as  life  and  means  permit  we  must  'may  hear  and  fear,  and  do  no  more  so  "

prepare  for  the  instruction  of  the  future  (Deut.  xix.  20).

youth,  and  transmit  the  doings  of  God  Family   Peligion.      I.    The    fathers'

by  succeeding  families.     The  word   of  knowledge  the  children's  heritage.     II.

God   is   for  this  and  every  age.     The  The  fathers'  fall  the  children's  preserv-

doctrines  of  that  word  are  not  effete,  but  ation  [Treasury  of  David],
adapted  to  our  wants,  and  will   exert

HOMILETIGS.

National  Calamities. —  Verses  4,  6,  7.

These  verses  set  forth  that  terrible  calamity  which  was  coming  upon  a  land  which
God  once  protected  and  blessed,  but  which  was  devastated  by  a  nation  of  savage  and
innumerable  hosts.

I.  Calamities  by  diminutive  creatures.  In  one  sense  nothing  is  insignificant
in  the  hands  of  God.  "  A  fly  with  God's  message  could  choke  a  king,"  says  Jeiemy
Taylor.  Armed  with  his  vengeance,  the  meanest  creatures  become  the  mightiest.
In  the  East  so  proverbial  is  the  power  of  the  locusts,  that  the  insects  are  made  to
say  to  Mahomet,  "  We  are  the  army  of  the  great  God ;  we  produce  ninety-nine
eggs ;  if  the  hundred  were  completed  we  should  consume  the  whole  earth  and  all
that  is  in  it."  "In  every  stage  of  their  existence,"  says  Dr  Thompson,  "  these
locusts  give  a  most  impressive  view  of  the  power  of  God  to  punish  a  wicked  world."
All  creatures  are  under  God's  control.  The  lion  from  the  forest  and  the  wind  from
heaven  do  his  bidding.  Hosts  of  angels  and  swarms  of  insects  can  punish  a  guilty
people.  II.  Calamities  in  dreadful  succession.  Whatever  time  intervened,
calamity  followed  calamity,  each  destructive,  but  all  together  most  terrible  in  their
consequences.  Travellers  tell  us  that  swarm  succeeds  swarm,  darken  the  sun,  ex-
tend hundreds  of  miles,  and  devour  every  green  thing.  Volney  says  that  "  the
quantity  of  these  insects  is  a  thing  incredible  to  any  one  who  has  not  seen  it  him-
self."    The  judgments  of  God  are  often  linked  together  like  a  chain,  each  one  draw-


202  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.  [chap.  i.


iug  on  the  other.  Yet,  says  one,  "  at  each  link  of  the  lengthening  chain,  allowing
space  and  time  for  repentance  to  break  it  through."  If  men  like  Pharaoh  harden
their  hearts  they  will  be  destroyed.  "  By  executing  thy  judgments  upon  them  by
little  and  little  thou  gavest  them  place  of  repentance,  not  being  ignorant  that  they
were  a  naughty  generation  "  (Wisd.  xii.  10).  III.  Calamities  most  destructive.
1.  Fierce  as  a  lion.  "Whose  teeth  are  the  teeth  of  a  lion,"  &c.  Nothing  can  resist
their  bite.  "  They  gnaw  even  the  doors  of  houses,"  says  Pliny.  The  sharp  and
prominent  eye-teeth  of  the  lion  and  lioness  are  ascribed  to  them.  "  They  appear
to  be  created  for  a  scourge,"  says  a  traveller,  "  since  to  strength  incredible  for  so
small  a  creature  they  add  saw-like  teeth,  admirably  calculated  to  eat  up  all  the  herbs
in  the  land."  2.  Destructive  to  all  vegetation.  One  feature  is  presented  after  another
in  a  way  to  rouse  attention,  (a)  All  tender  herbs  were  destroyed.  What  was  left
by  the  palmer-worm  was  eaten  by  the  locust;  "  and  that  which  the  locust  hath  left
hath  the  canker-worm  eaten ;  and  that  which  the  canker-worm  hath  left  hath  the
caterpiller  eaten."  (b)  Choice  fruit  trees,  such  as  vines  and  fig-trees,  were  destroyed.
The  vine  is  most  prominent  as  the  more  noble  and  valuable  tree.  It  flourished
from  time  immemorial,  was  most  fruitful,  and  a  source  of  wealth  to  the  people.
These  were  the  trees  of  Judea,  and  to  have  them  destroyed  was  a  calamity  not
common  to  a  people  whose  common  drink  was  wine,  (c)  Desolation  was  extreme.
Young  shoots  and  even  the  bark  of  trees  were  not  spared.  Drooping  vines  and
injured  fig-trees,  with  their  leafless  branches  and  peeled  bark,  were  effects  of  wasting
plagues  for  many  years.  This  picture  is  not  exaggerated  in  the  least.  It  is  fear-
fully accurate,  and  an  awful  symbol  of  the  desolation  of  churches  and  nations  caused
by  sin.  The  Christian  Church  is  God's  vineyard.  If  it  yields  not  fruit,  it  may  be
laid  waste.  Prevailing  sins  will  be  visited  by  corresponding  judgments.  How
great  must  be  that  guilt  which  leads  God  to  punish  his  own  land  !  "  I  will  lay  it
waste  :  it  shall  not  be  pruned,  nor  digged  ;  but  there  shall  come  up  briars  and
thorns."

A  Solemn  Warning  to  Drunkards. —  Verse  5.

All  classes  are  called  upon  to  repent.  The  wine-bibbers  are  to  wake  up  to  a
recognition  of  the  hand  of  God,  to  "  weep  and  wail,"  for  the  judgment  has  -touched
what  they  most  love.  Drunkenness  is  the  greatest  curse  of  this  land,  and  the
greatest  hindrance  to  the  gospel.  In  a  community  educated,  wise,  and  pious,  it  is
a  source  of  powerful  mischief;  but  among  the  masses  of  mankind,  governed  by
appetite  and  not  intelligence,  it  has  been  terribly  destructive.

I.  Drunkards  frustrate  the  design  of  nature.  Whatever  produce  of  the  earth
is  fit  for  food  is  placed  at  man's  disposal.  He  should  co-operate  with  God  in  the
laws  of  providence,  for  the  growth  and  increase  of  this  food.  All  waste  in  nature  is
condemnable.  Yet  the  sole  end  for  which  some  cultivate  the  fig-tree  and  the  vine,  the
garden  and  the  farm,  is  selfish  indulgence.  Nature's  gifts  are  abused,  and  the  benevo-
lent design  of  God  is  nullified  and  reversed.  Drunkards  virtually  say  concerning
fruit  and  grain,  "  To  me  they  shall  not  be  for  meat."  II.  Drunkards  render
themselves  insensible  to  danger.  "  Awake,  ye  drunkards."  All  sin  stupefies ;
but  drunkenness  intoxicates  the  mind,  lulls  the  conscience,  hardens  the  heart,  and
turns  into  society  a  sordid,  selfish  animal.  This  delirium  is  the  most  solemn  feature
of  the  case.  The  victim  having  lost  all  sensibility  and  will,  has  no  power  to  awake,
and  sleeps  quietly  like  one  "  lying  down  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,  or  upon  the  top
of  the  mast."  The  senses  even  seem  stupefied.  He  maybe  "stricken  and  beaten,"
but  he  feels  it  not  (Prov.  xxv.  35),  more  senseless  than  the  brute  who  satisfies
nature,  not  lust ;  he  is  lost  to  shame,  enslaved  by  appetite,  and  seeks  relief  from
temporary  awakening,  by  yielding  himself  again  to  his  ruinous  sin.  "  When  shall
I  awake  1!     I  will  seek  it  yet  again." —

With  ceaseless,  ravenous,  and  remorseless  rage,
By  day  and  night — on  Sabbath  and  on  work  day,
The  monster  feeds  and  feasts  and  fattens  on  its  prey.


CHAP.  I. J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JOEL.  203


III.  Drunkards  will  be  roused  from  sottish  slumber.  "  For  it  is  cut  off  from
your  mouth."  Locusts  were  to  destroy  the  vines,  the  grapes  would  cease  to  grow,
and  the  sweetness  and  strength  "  of  the  new  wine  "  would  be  taken  from  them.
"Take  away  my  wine,  you  take  away  my  life,"  said  one.  God  will  deprive
men  of  idolized  indulgence,  and  force  them  to  "  weep  and  howl "  by  Ins  judg-
ments. The  more  inordinately  they  lust,  the  more  pinching  will  be  their  distress.
"A  wilful  waste  will  bring  a  woeful  want."  If  temporal  sufferings  do  not  rouse
the  drunkard,  the  epicure,  and  the  sensualist  to  a  sense  of  their  sin  and  danger,
what  must  be  their  feelings  when  weeping  and  howling  will  be  without  hope  and
intermission  %  Let  weeping  for  things  temporal  beget  care  not  to  lose  things  eter-
nal. "  Tor  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord  there  is  a  cup,  and  the  wine  is  red  :  it  is  full
of  mixture  ;  and  he  poureth  out  of  the  same  :  but  the  dregs  thereof,  all  the  wicked
of  the  earth  shall  wring  them  out,  and  drink  them."

National  Lamentation. — Verses  8 — 10.

The  second  appeal  is  to  the  impersonated  nation,  clothed  in  sackcloth,  and
weeping  for  her  lord,  which  death  has  taken  away.  The  land  is  desolated,  public
worship  is  interrupted,  and  the  temple  forsaken  by  God  and  man.  The  nation's
hope  is  cut  off,  and  she  is  left  as  "  a  virgin  "  to  lament  in  passionate  grief  and  utter
despair.

I.  The  character  of  this  lamentation.  "  Like  a  virgin  girded  with  sackcloth
for  the  husband  of  her  youth."  Between  young  persons  that  are  married  or  about
to  be  married  there  is  great  love,  and  therefore  great  grief  when  separated  by  death.
Virgin  love  is  purest  and  most  sincere.  "  She  must  weep  or  she  will  die."  The
affections  in  youth  are  strongest  and  most  capable  of  resentment.  "  I  remember
thee,  the  kindness  of  thy  youth,  the  love  of  thine  espousals  "  (Jer.  ii.  2  ;  Is.  lxii.  5).
The  Church  unfaithful  to  her  Lord  and  Master,  the  professor  who  gives  his  heart
to  the  world,  will  lose  the  protection  and  blessings  of  Christ,  our  Divine  Head  and
Redeemer.  The  more  wedded  to  the  creatures  the  more  bitter  their  loss.  It  is  not
mere  conventional  grief  that  God  commands,  but  that  of  one  who  has  lost  all  joy
and  who  clothes  herself  with  penitence —

Give  sorrow  words  ;  the  grief  that  does  not  speak

Whispers  the  o'er-fraught  heart,  and  bids  it  break  [Shakespere].

II.  The  reason  of  this  lamentation.  1.  TJie  land  is  devastated.  "  The  field  is
wasted,  the  land  mourneth  ;  for  the  corn  is  wasted."  The  cultivated  and  the  open
lands  were  unproductive.  The  luxuries  and  the  necessities,  the  corn  and  the  wine :
bread  that  strengthens  man's  heart,  wine  that  maketh  glad  the  heart,  and  oil  to
make  his  face  to  shine,  were  all  taken  away  (Ps.  civ.  15).  Nature  shouts  and  sings
for  joy  under  the  benediction  of  God  (Ps.  lxv.  13) ;  the  valleys  are  covered  with
corn  and  all  is  vocal  with  praise.  But  under  man's  sin  creation  mourns  in  sorrow
and  casts  off  its  beauty  and  f ruitf ulness ;  "groaneth  and  travaileth  in  paintogethei
until  now  "  (Rom.  viii.  22).  "How  long  shall  the  land  mourn  and  the  herbs  of
every  field  wither,  for  the  wickedness  of  them  that  dwell  therein "  (Jer.  xii.  4)  1
2.  The  temple  was  forsaken.  The  locusts  devoured  the  vine,  the  olive,  and  everything
that  constituted  the  meat  and  drink  offerings  in  the  house  of  God.  (a)  Forsaken
by  God  ;  for  God  was  supposed  to  have  forsaken  the  temple  when  the  altar  was  not
duly  furnished.  He  was  offended  at  the  nation,  and  could  not  dwell  with  a  sinful
people,  (b)  Forsaken  by  men.  The  priests  could  no  longer  present  the  accustomed
offerings.  Public  worship  was  suspended.  The  temple  is  the  residence  of  God.
Divine  worship  must  be  kept  up  in  due  order  and  regular  time.  On  the  continu-
ance of  our  morning  and  evening  service  depends  the  continuance  of  God's  presence
with  us.  Suspend  the  one,  we  suspend  the  other.  Terrible  must  be  that  scourge
which  robs  us  of  the  benefits  of  Divine  ordinances,  and  drives  God  from  his  own
temple;  when  "joy  and  gladness  are  cut  off  from  the  house  of  the  Lord."     III.


204  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY     JOEL.  [chap,  l


The  extent  of  this  lamentation.  1.  The  priests  mourned.  "The  priests,  the
Lord's  ministers,  mourn."  Some  would  spiritually  lament  the  suspension  of  God's
offerings.  True  ministers  feel  deeply  the  ungodliness  of  men ;  set  the  first  example
of  penitence  and  confession ;  and  mourn  greatly  interrupted  fellowship  with  God.
Others  mourn  naturally  for  the  loss  of  their  perquisites  and  the  means  of  self-
indulgence.  When  the  house  of  God  is  forsaken  and  holy  communions  become
rare,  the  ministers  of  the  sanctuary  should  mourn.  2.  The  nation  mourned.  Priest
and  people,  rich  and  poor,  were  to  lament  the  judgments  that  had  fallen  upon  them.
Vegetation  had  languished,  the  land  was  ravaged,  and  the  temple  forsaken.  Judea
was  to  lament  like  a  virgin,  and  all  were  to  bow  to  the  dust  in  sackcloth  and  ashes.
"  In  that  day  did  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  call  to  weeping,  and  to  mourning,  and  to
baldness,  and  to  girding  with  sackcloth."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.   9.     Poverty  and  Eeligion.     1.  for  his  goodness  in  filling  our  hearts

Poverty  the  result  of  sin.     2.  Poverty  with  food  and  gladness  !     But   cleave

bringing  Divine  judgments.    3.  Poverty  not    too   closely  to   temporal  blessings,

prejudicial  to  public  worship.     u  Want  which  may  be  cut  off  by  judgment,  and

of  means  of  livelihood  must  exert  a  very  taken  suddenly  away.     God  takes  from

prejudicial  influence  on  the  public  serv-  an  ungodly  people  the  means  of  grati-

ice  of    God.     Under  the   old  economy  fying  their  lusts,  and  will  bring  them

there  would  be  of  necessity  a  failure  of  to  repentance  by  deep  afflictions.     The

tithes   and   offerings.      So    now,  when  prosperity  of  the  Church  depends  not  on

people  have  a  hard  and  constant  struggle  a  grand  ceremonial,  or  crowds  of  admir-

for  the  bare  means  of  subsistence,  they  ing  devotees,  or  the  countenance  of  the

will  be  far  behind  others  in  knowledge  State,  however   desirable  these   things

of  the  truth,  in  the  proper  training  of  may  be,  but  only  on  the  favour  of  God,

children,  and  in  mutual  love  [Lange].  whose  blessing  and  whose  Spirit  will  be

Yer.  10.     What  reason  we  have  to  withdrawn,   if  we  defile  his  sanctuary

praise  God  for  bountiful   seasons,  and  with  superstitious  rites  [Robinson.']

HOMILETICS.
Disappointed  Husbandmen. —  Verses  11,  12.

The  next  picture  is  a  group  of  husbandmen  and  vine-dressers,  pale  and  sick  in
disappointed  toils.  Wheat  and  barley  the  most  important  field  crops  ;  the  vine,
fig,  and  pomegranate,  the  choice  fruit-trees  of  the  land,  were  destroyed.  The  date-
palm,  "  which  has  neither  a  fresh  green  rind,  nor  tender  juicy  leaves,  and  therefore
not  easily  injured  by  the  locusts,"  and  all  other  trees  wither  away.  Joy  is  turned
into  shame,  labour  is  lost,  and  mourning  results.

I.  Wasted  labour.  "  The  harvest  of  the  field  is  perished."  The  husbandman
ploughs,  sows,  and  labours  in  hope.  He  waits  "  for  the  precious  fruit  of  the  earth,
and  hath  long  patience  for  it,  until  he  receive  the  early  and  latter  rain."  Between
seed-time  and  harvest  there  is  a  time  of  trial,  an  opportunity  for  faith.  In  all  true
labour  we  must  expect  fruit,  and  receive  it  as  the  precious  gift  of  God.  But  unsuc-
cessful labour  will  shame  our  skill  and  faith,  and  confound  our  hopes.  Sin  will
prevent  results,  and  God  will  blight  our  harvests.  1.  Husbandmen  will  he  disap-
pointed  in  anticipation.  2.  Vine-dressers  will  be  robbed  of  choice  fruits.  "  The
ground  was  chapt,  for  there  was  no  rain  in  the  earth,  the  plowmen  were  ashamed,
they  covered  their  heads  "  (Jer.  xiv.  3,  4).  II.  Withered  joy.  "  Because  joy  is
withered  away."  The  loss  of  harvest  is  the  withering  of  joy  and  enjoyments.  1.
The  joy  of  men  is  withered.  "Withered  away  from  the  sons  of  men."  The  joy
that  depends  upon  the  creature  is  uncertain  and  unsatisfactory.  Those  that  place
happiness  in  the  delights  of  sense  may  be  deprived  of  them.     Wine  and  oil  may


chap.  I.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JOEL.  205


delight,  but  not  satisfy ;  they  have  their  vacuity  and  indigence.  All  outward  com-
forts sooner  cloy  than  cheer,  and  weary  than  fill.  Christ  in  the  heart  is  better  than
harvests  in  the  barn  and  wine  in  the  vat.  "  It  is  better,"  says  one,  "to  feel  God's
favour  one  hour  in  our  repenting  souls,  than  to  sit  whole  ages  under  the  warmest
sunshine  that  this  world  atlbrdeth."  "  Nature's  common  joys  are  common  cheats."
2.  The  joy  of  nature  is  withered.  Joel  again  declares  the  sympathy  of  nature  with
man.  "  The  trees  of  the  field  are  withered,  because  (for)  joy,"  &c,  as  if  it  were
impossible  for  the  natural  world  to  rejoice  when  the  hearts  of  men  were  sad  and
sinful.  Poets  in  all  ages  have  taught  "that  one  life  beats  throughout  the  universe,
revealing  itself  in  subtle  and  manifold  interchanges  of  sympathy  ;  that  therefore
Nature  feels  with  her  foster-child  man,  rejoicing  when  he  rejoices,  weeping  when  he
weeps."  Scripture  shows  that  sin  may  turn  a  paradise  into  a  wilderness,  and  "  a
fruitful  land  into  barrenness,  for  the  wickedness  of  them  that  dwell  therein  "  (Ps.
cvii.  34).  What  a  picture  of  demoralization,  sensuality,  and  judgment  in  the  language
of  Isaiah  !  "  All  the  merry-hearted  do  sigh.  There  is  a  crying  for  wine  in  the  streets,
all  joy  is  darkened,  the  mirth  of  the  land  is  gone."

Ministers  op  the  Sanctuary  an  Example  op  Penitence  and  Piety  in  the  Day

op  Calamity. —  Verses  13,  14.

The  fourth  call  is  to  priests  of  the  temple,  who  are  first  to  humble  themselves  in
private  as  a  preparation  for  public  confession.  A  fast  must  be  appointed,  and  they
must  lead  the  princes  and  people  in  solemn  prayer  before  Almighty  God.  When
judgment  begins  at  the  house  of  God,  penitence  should  begin  also,  for  priests  are
often  the  first  and  greatest  cause  of  sorrow.

I.  They  must  mourn  for  sin.  "  Lament "  and  howl.  In  all  true  penitence
there  will  be  a  due  sense  of  guilt.  Physical  evil  may  cause  sorrow,  the  destruction
of  vegetation  and  vineyards  may  create  lamentation ;  but  moral  evil  compels  us  to
feel  guilty;  and  justice  cries  for  punishment.  1.  Mourn  in  sackcloth.  "Gird
yourselves."  Outward  garments  are  of  no  avail  without  inward  contrition.  We
must  rend  our  hearts,  not  our  garments.  Yet  by  outward  acts  we  must  incite  others,
testify  our  abject  condition  before  God,  and  renounce  all  carnal  customs  and  delights.
"  For  this  gird  you  with  sackcloth,  lament  and  howl ;  for  the  fierce  anger  of  the
Lord  is  not  turned  back  from  us."  2.  Mourn  continually.  "  Come,  lie  all  night
in  sackcloth."  Day  and  night  was  the  temple  service.  So  there  must  not  be
occasional  grief,  but  lamentation  without  intermission.  Guilt  often  disturbs  the
sleep  of  night,  and  men  lie  not  at  ease,  but  in  sorrow.  Instead  of  going  to  rest  and
employing  the  night  in  Psalmody,  many  have  more  reason  to  confess  their  sins  and
deprecate  the  wrath  of  God.  "  All  the  night  make  I  my  bed  to  swim  :  I  water  my
couch  with  tears."  3.  Mourn  with  others.  All  classes,  the  princes,  and  elders,  and
all  the  people,  were  to  mourn  universally.  Chiefs  in  authority,  and  elders  in  sanctity
and  grey  hairs,  were  to  form  one  band  and  lament  with  one  heart  and  voice.  The
example  of  old  men  must  stimulate  the  young  to  repentance  ;  and  the  authority  of
priests  must  urge  others  to  the  fear  and  worship  of  God.  All  had  contributed  to
national  guilt,  all  were  equally  exposed,  and  all  must  join  together  in  national
humiliation.  The  more  public  and  prevalent,  the  more  pleasing  and  acceptable  to
God  is  national  sorrow.  "  Then  all  the  children  of  Israel,  and  all  the  people,  went
up,  and  came  unto  the  house  of  God  and  wept,  and  sat  there  before  the  Lord  "
(Judg.  xx.  26;  2  Chron.  xxx.  3 ;  Jon.  iii.  5,  7,  8).  II.  They  must  sanctify  a  fast.
"  Sanctify  ye  a  fast."  1.  Universal  cessation  from  labour.  The  day  must  be  fixed,
set  apart  and  solemnly  observed.  "  Proclaim  a  restraint,"  let  manual  labour  cease,
and  hallow  the  fast  with  acts  of  devotion  and  fruits  meet  for  repentance.  No
servile  work  must  be  done,  the  time  must  be  consecrated,  like  the  Sabbath,  not  to
eating,  and  drinking,  and  seeking  pleasure,  but  to  supplication  and  obedience.  2.
Universal  worship.  The  elders  and  all  the  inhabitants  were  to  assemble  in  the
house  of  God.     England  did  well  to  observe  a  day  of  thanksgiving  for  the  restora


206  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JOEL.  [chap.  i.


tion  of  the  Prince  of  Wales.  What  a  spectacle  to  continental  nations  !  Fasting
without  devotion  was  only  a  form  of  sorrow.  Festive  joys  must  give  place  to  re-
ligious worship.  Fasting  must  be  connected  with  the  mortification  of  the  flesh,  the
contrition  of  the  spirit,  and  humiliation  in  the  house  of  God.  Here  all  were  com-
manded to  repair  to  confess  their  guilt  and  obey  their  laws.  The  house  of  God  is  the
house  of  prayer ;  the  place  in  which  he  has  put  his  name,  and  the  centre  of  Divine
influence  and  Christian  friendship.  Here  the  world  loses  its  charms,  trials  are  for-
gotten, the  mind  is  elevated,  and  sympathies  "  meet  and  mingle  into  bliss."  "  I
have  hallowed  this  house,  which  thou  hast  built,  to  put  my  name  there  for  ever  ;
and  mine  eyes  and  mine  heart  shall  be  there  perpetually  "  (1  Kings  ix.  3).  "What
prayer  and  supplication  soever  be  made  by  any  man,  or  by  all  thy  people  Israel,  in
this  house.  Then  hear  thou  in  heaven  thy  dwelling-place  "  (viii.  38  ;  2  Chron.  vi.
33).  3.  Universal  supplication.  "  And  cry  unto  the  Lord."  (a)  Supplication
must  be  united.  All  must  not  merely  be  present,  but  all  must  join  together  in
prayer.  Attendance  must  be  devout,  the  time  must  be  spent  before  God,  not  in
gazing  at  men.  United  prayer  has  power  with  God  and  influence  upon  men.  It
is  thus  that  heaven  is  taken  by  violence  and  national  calamities  averted.  (l>)  Sup-
plication must  be  earnest.  "  Cry  unto  the  Lord."  It  is  not  a  listless,  irreverent
prayer,  but  a  loud  earnest  cry.  No  formal  customary  supplication  will  suffice ;  the
distress  is  great,  the  routine  of  life  and  worship  must  be  disregarded,  and  the  "cry"
must  be  with  impassioned  earnestness  and  repetition.  Cold  prayers  are  a  mockery
and  never  climb  to  heaven.  "  So  long  as  the  light  shines  bright  and  the  fires  of
devotion  and  desires  flame  out,"  says  Jeremy  Taylor,  "  so  long  the  mind  of  a  man
stands  close  to  the  altar  and  waits  upon  the  sacrifice;  but  as  the  fires  die  and  desires
decay,  so  the  mind  steals  away  and  walks  abroad."  We  are  taken  from  the  fields
to  the  sanctuary  in  this  picture.  A  train  of  priests,  clothed  in  sackcloth  and  worn
with  vigils,  stand  between  the  porch  and  the  altar,  weeping  and  making  supplica-
tion to  God ;  a  large  assembly,  led  by  the  elders,  gather  round  them,  bend  their
heads  in  passionate  grief,  and  unite  in  earnest  cry  for  mercy  and  deliverance.  Priest
and  peasant,  kings  and  princes,  old  and  young,  bow  in  confession,  petition,  and
humiliation  before  their  Maker,  and  thus  own  their  dependence  and  set  an  example
to  others.  "Let  the  priests,  the  ministers  of  the  Lord,  weep  between  the  porch  and
the  altar,  and  let  them  say,  Spare  thy  people,  0  Lord."

The  Terrible  Day. —  Verse  15.

The  prophet  urges  them  to  repentance  by  fresh  motives  and  more  calamities.
Judgments  had  fallen  upon  the  city  and  the  field,  in  the  temple  and  the  vineyard.
Hints  are  now  given  at  the  truths  typified  by  the  plagues.  Trouble  is  not  only  at
a  distance  but  near.  So  great  is  this  trouble  that  men  will  cry,  "  Alas  for  the
day!"

I.  This  day  is  a  day  of  terror.     1.   On  account  of  the  evils  which  attmd  it.

(a)  The  chastisement  of  God's  people  for  their  sins.  What  can  people  expect  but
desolating  strokes  when  they  continue  to  sin  1     "  In  the  day  of  adversity  consider."

(b)  The  destruction  of  sinners  for  their  guilt.  All  the  enemies  of  God's  kingdom
will  be  destroyed.  "Behold,  the  day  of  the  Lord  cometh,  cruel  both  with  wrath  and
tierce  anger,  to  lay  the  land  desolate,  and  he  shall  destroy  the  sinners  thereof  out
of  it  "  (Is.  xiii.  G,  9).  (c)  The  desolation  of  the  land  (ver.  10 — 12).  2.  On  account
of  the  evils  which  it  predicts.  "  As  a  destruction  from  the  Almighty  shall  it  come."
In  every  judgment  almighty  power  is  seen.  This  aspect  of  the  day  was  seen  in
present  events.  Vegetation  was  consumed,  and  the  face  of  nature  blackened  by  fire ;
flocks  and  herds  roamed  disconsolate  over  wasted  fields  ;  food  was  cut  off  before  the
eyes  of  the  people,  and  joy  and  gladness  departed  from  the  house  of  God.  1  ut
present  calamities  predicted  greater  evils  to  come — evils  beyond  description,  dis-
plays of  power  never  seen  before.  "  Alas  !  for  that  day  is  great,  so  that  l.one  is
like  it ;  it  is  even  the  tini"  of  Jacob's  trouble  "  (Jer.  xxx.  7).     II.  This  day  is  near.


chap.  I.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  JOEL.  207


"  The  day  of  the  Lord  is  at  hand."  Sinners  put  evil  days  far  away,  and  think  they
will  not  come.  "  Evil  tidings  to-morrow,"  said  one  in  festive  joy.  The  word  of
God  declares  that  they  are  present  and  pressing — that  it  is  folly  to  delay  repentance,
and  that  judgments  may  fall  suddenly  upon  men  to  overwhelm  them  (Ecc.  ix.  12  ;
Is.  xxviii.  15).  The  antediluvians  disregarded  the  warnings  of  Noah,  and  were
swept  away  by  the  flood.  Men  now  cry,  "  Where  is  the  promise  of  his  coming?
for  since  the  fathers  fell  asleep,  all  things  continue  as  they  were  from  the  beginning
of  the  creation."  Some  put  off  the  day  in  a  sort  of  philosophic  argument.  "  The
course  of  nature  has  remained  the  same  for  ages,  and  therefore  not  likely  to  change."
Others  live  in  stolid  indifference,  quench  their  forebodings  of  evil,  and  deceive  them-
selves by  lies.  Alas,  some  change  the  threatened  vengeance  into  mirthful  jest,  and
ridicule  the  devout  anticipations  of  the  godly.  "  The  Lord  of  that  servant  shall  come
in  a  day  when  he  looketh  not  for  him,  and  in  an  hour  that  he  is  not  aware  of."
III.  This  day  should  be  regarded  by  men.  Destruction  from  the  Almighty
shall  come.  There  is  no  uncertainty,  no  delay.  In  this  light  the  prophet  regarded
and  desired  the  people  to  regard  the  day.  Present  adversity  should  quicken  us  to
a  profound  sense  of  the  moral  government  of  God,  to  continual  recognition  of  his
purpose  in  life,  and  to  live  so  that  we  may  escape  the  dangers  of  that  eventful  day.
Heed  not  the  sneering  infidelity  of  the  times.  Go  to  your  beds  to-night,  enter  upon
your  duties  to-morrow,  as  in  sight  of  the  judgment-seat.  Live  daily  under  the
powers  of  the  world  to  come.  Grow  in  love  for  the  appearing  of  Christ.  The
promise  will  not  fail.  "  For  yourselves  know  perfectly  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  so
cometh  as  a  thief  in  the  night.  For  when  they  shall  say,  Peace  and  safety ;  then
destruction  cometh  upon  them,  as  travail  upon  a  woman  with  child ;  and  they  shall
not  escape.'

The  Day  op  Judgment.

I.  The  day  of  judgment  written  in  the  convictions  of  men.  Natural  theology
teaches  a  retributive  providence.  The  writings  of  the  heathen  are  full  of  ideas  of
God  as  a  God  of  justice.  Retributive  justice  was  made  a  separate  deity,  whose
awards  would  only  be  full  and  perfect  in  a  future  life.  There  is  a  sense  of  future
judgment  in  the  heart.  Every  sin  committed  carries  with  it  a  monition,  a  predic-
tion of  this  judgment.  The  idea  is  inwrought  in  the  consciousness  of  mankind,  and
clearly  taught  in  the  writings  of  ancient  philosophy.  Seneca  says,  "The  good  man
God  accustoms  to  hardships,  and  prepares  him  for  himself.  But  the  luxurious,  whom
he  seems  to  indulge  and  to  spare,  he  reserves  for  evils  to  come.  For  you  are  mis-
taken if  you  think  any  one  excepted.  The  man  who  has  been  long  spared  will  at
last  have  his  portion  of  misery ;  and  though  he  seems  to  have  escaped  it,  it  is  only
delayed  for  a  time."  "Thus  ought  we  always  to  believe,"  says  Plato,  "those  ancient
and  sacred  words,  which  declare  to  us  that  the  soul  is  immortal,  that  judges  are
appointed,  and  that  they  pass  the  highest  sentences  of  condemnation  when  the
spirit  is  separate  from  the  body."  Thus  it  is  a  dictate  of  natural  religion,  that  the
future  state  will  be  one  of  misery  to  the  wicked.  The  day  of  the  Lord  is  fore-
shadowed in  our  moral  constitution.  All  men  fear  it  and  all  men  believe  it.  It  is
a  mark  of  the  Divine  origin  and  moral  nature  of  man,  which  nothing  can  destroy.
"  That  which  may  be  known  of  God  is  manifest  in  them  ;  for  God  hath  showed  i\
unto  them."  II.  The  day  of  judgment  prefigured  in  the  events  of  history
The  judgments  of  God,  extreme  and  awful,  have  even  been  regarded  by  the  darkest
minds  as  evidences  of  God's  anger  against  sin,  and  his  determination  to  punish  it.
Heathen  seers  and  Jewish  prophets  bid  us  regard  the  inner  meaning  of  calamity
and  look  at  it,  in  some  sense  as  a  part  and  prediction  of  another.  The  vicissitudes
of  life,  the  unequal  conditions  of  men,  and  the  providences  of  God,  point  to  a  day
when  all  things  will  be  rectified  and  each  one  receive  his  due.  Each  particular
judgment  is  a  warning  of  its  approach  and  a  pledge  of  its  certainty.  Present
chastisements  must  be  viewed  as  steps  in  a  progressive  plan,  realized  in  the  final


20S  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.  [ohap.  I.


day  ;  the  beginning  and  the  anticipation  of  "  the  day  of  the  Lord."  The  history
of  the  world,  through  the  government  of  God,  is  turned  "into  a  continuous  judgment,
which  will  conclude  at  the  end  of  this  course  of  the  world  with  a  great  and  universal
act  of  judgment,  through  which  everything  that  has  been  brought  to  eternity  by  the
stream  of  time  unjudged  and  unadjusted  will  be  judged  and  adjusted  once  for  all,
to  bring  to  an  end  the  whole  development  of  the  world  in  accordance  with  its  Divine
appointment,  and  perfect  the  kingdom  of  God  by  the  annihilation  of  its  foes."
"  All  these  are  the  beginning  of  sorrows."  III.  The  day  of  judgment  predicted
in  Scripture.  What  is  rendered  possible  by  the  creed  of  the  atheist,  and  probable
from  the  teachings  of  nature,  is  morally  certain  from  Divine  revelation.  Scripture
confirms  natural  theology  in  this  respect,  and  teaches  distinctly  that  God  designs  to
impress  upon  our  minds  that  he  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty,  but  reserve  them
to  the  da)'  of  punishment.  The  judgments  of  God  are  said  to  have  happened  as
examples,  warnings  to  us  to  repent  of  the  sins  and  avoid  the  dangers  which
brought  them  on.  Earnest  and  emphatic  declarations  are  given  in  Old  and  JSTew
Testaments.  u  He  hath  prepared  his  throne  for  judgment.  And  he  shall  judge  the
world  in  righteousness,  he  shall  minister  judgment  to  the  people  in  uprightness."
"  He  hath  appointed  a  day,  in  the  which  he  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness
by  that  man  whom  he  hath  ordained."  "  For  we  must  all  stand  before  the  judg-
ment-seat of  Christ."

Great  National  Calamities. —  Verses  16 — 18.

As  a  proof  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  approaching  the  prophet  sets  in  detail
the  judgments  that  were  upon  the  land.  Present  prospects  were  cut  off,  all  future
hope  frustrated,  rotten  seed,  withered  fruits,  and  desolate  land,  cause  man  and  beast
to  mourn.

I.  Human  sustenance  taken  away.  "  Is  not  the  meat  cut  off  before  your
eyes  ? "  When  the  fruits  were  ripe,  the  corn  ready  for  the  reaper,  and  the  grapes
longing  to  be  pressed ;  when  everything  was  set  before  their  eyes  for  their  enjoy-
ment, they  were  taken  away.  God  can  easily  disappoint  our  expectations.  Meat
is  often  cut  off  from  our  eyes  by  sin.  True  sustenance  is  in  God  and  in  his  word.
Man's  life,  even  his  physical  life,  is  not  dependent  for  its  continuance  upon  bread
alone.  God  has  but  to  will  to  the  subject  elements,  material  and  spiritual,  and
any  other  means  will  suffice,  as  well  as  bread,  to  sustain  life.  "  Man  shall  not  live
by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God."  II.
Festive  joy  cut  off.  "  Joy  and  gladness  from  the  house  of  our  God."  Pinched  by
famine,  the  offerings  for  the  priest  and  the  temple  had  perished.  Annual  leasts
and  national  thanksgivings  had  departed.  The  joy,,  all  the  deeper  because  it  was
"  the  joy  of  the  Lord,"  the  gladness,  all  the  more  pure  and  sweet  because  it  was
"gladness  in  the  house  of  their  God,"  had  ceased  perforce.  How  sad  to  be  deprived
of  necessary  food  and  the  ordinances  of  God's  house  !  When  the  body  is  not  fed
the  mind  will  starve,  the  morals  will  suffer.  As  the  brain  depends  upon  the  blood
for  its  nourishment,  so  the  soul  depends  upon  God  for  its  health.  He  imparts  to
those  who  love  him  a  joy  of  exuberance  in  all  the  good  things  of  life.  None  are  poor
but  those  who  sin  and  despise  the  warnings  of  God's  providence.  "The  Lord  will  not
suffer  the  soul  of  the  righteous  to  famish  ;  but  he  casteth  away  the  substance  of  the
wicked."  III.  National  drought  prevailed.  The  land  greatly  suffered,  cattle
and  herds  were  distressed,  and  groaned  out  their  life  through  want  of  pasture.  1 .
Tlie  cattle  suffered.  "  How  do  the  beasts  groan  !  the  herds  of  cattle  are  per-
plexed." Touch  after  touch  is  given.  Not  only  do  men  suffer,  but  innocent  cattle
groan  who  depend  upon  their  care.  The  herds  of  oxen  find  the  oft-cropped  plains
destitute  of  pasture.  The  sheep,  which  can  feed  where  herds  cannot,  wander  in
their  pitiful  distress  and  bleat  in  vain.  "  Thou  hidest  thy  face,  they  are  troubled :
thou  takest  away  their  breath,  they  die,  and  return  to  their  dust."  2.  The  home-
steads were  destroyed.     "  The  barns  are  broken  down."     It  is  not  enough  to  lose


chap.  I.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.  209


joy  and  mirth.  The  very  *  seed  is  rotten  under  the  clods."  The  prospects  of  the
harvest  are  destroyed.  Vegetation  and  grass,  smitten  by  the  burning  sun,  have
withered.  The  husbandmen  despair,  and  suffer  their  "  barns  "  to  break  down,  and
their  "  garners "  to  become  heaps  of  ruins.  Thus  one  mischief  is  heaped  upon
another.  All  nature  is  touched  in  sympathy  and  robed  in  mourning  for  man's
guilt.  "  Therefore  shall  the  land  mourn,  and  every  one  that  dwelleth  therein
shall  languish,  with  the  beasts  of  the  field  and  with  the  fowls  of  heaven"  (Hos.  iv.  3).

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

The  husbandman  was  called  to  mourn-  the  Spirit  of  God  who  speaks  by  the
ing  for  a  threefold  calamity  that  lay  mouth  of  his  prophet ;  for  it  is  to  be
upon  his  tillage  (Amos  v.  16).  First,  feared  that  we  do  not  make  enough  of
immoderate  rain  in  or  about  seeding  j  the  humanity  of  God,  of  his  intense  de-
secondly,  locusts  and  other  vermin  at  light  in  trees  and  flowers,  in  herds  and
spring  \  thirdly,  extreme  drought  after  flocks  ;  of  his  humane  care  for  them,  of
all  (ver.  19,  20).  Thus  God  folio weth  his  tender  sympathy  with  them.  The
sinners  with  one  plague  in  the  neck  of  Psalms  and  Prophecies  are  full  of  this
another  (as  he  did  Pharaoh,  that  sturdy  Divine  humanity,  no  Prophecy  fuller,
rebel),  till  he  has  made  his  foes  his  perhaps,  than  that  of  Joel ;  and  in  no
footstools.  To  multiply  sin  is  to  mul-  passage  of  Joel's  is  that  tender,  intense
tiply  sorrow  (Ps.  xvi.  4) ;  to  heap  up  humanity  more  beautifully  and  pathetic-
wickedness  is  to  heap  up  wrath  (Rom.  ally  expressed  than  in  the  verses  (18 —
ii.  5)  [Trapp].  20)  we  have  just  considered  [Cox],

Let  us  here  recall  the  fact,  that  it  is

HOMILETICS.

Stupidity  in  National  Calamities  reproved  by  Brutes  and  Good  Men. —

Verses  19,  20.

The  fact  that  irrational  creatures  suffer  with  man  should  make  him  cautious  in
his  conduct.  If  the  people  neglect  the  warnings  of  the  prophet,  they  should  heed
the  cries  of  the  brute  creation.  Both  the  animal  and  vegetable  world  are  included
in  man's  destiny  for  good  or  for  evil.  Should  we  be  silent  when  beasts  implore
help?

I.  Some  men  are  insensible  to  sin  in  great  national  calamities.  The  drought
had  consumed  the  pastures  of  the  field,  burned  the  trees  of  the  forest,  and  dried  up
the  waterbrooks,  but  Israel  did  not  see  the  hand  of  God  in  this.  Man  is  a  creature
of  emotion,  and  is  bound  to  acquaint  himself  with  all  the  phenomena  calculated  to
move  him ;  to  estimate  them  according  to  their  design,  and  to  carry  out  the
emotions  which  they  produce  into  final  acts.  Every  object  is  adapted  to  pro-
duce a  certain  state  of  mind.  The  hand  of  God  in  history,  the  judgments  of  God
in  nations,  should  be  read  and  observed  by  us.  If  we  discern  not  the  presence  of
God,  if  through  selfishness  and  hardness  of  heart  we  despise  the  chastisements  of
God,  we  aggravate  our  sin  and  unbelief.  God  has  placed  us  in  certain  relations  to
himself  and  his  works  as  sentient  and  intelligent  beings.  We  have  capacities  higher
than  brutes,  can  see  and  hear  God  in  his  dispensations,  and  live  habitually  under  a
sense  of  duty.  But  the  complaint  is  often  made,  "  Israel  doth  not  know,  my
people  doth  not  consider."  "  For  God  speaketh  once,  yea,  twice,  yet  man  perceiveth
it  not,"  II.  This  insensibility  to  sin  in  great  national  calamities  is  censurable.
Men  ought  to  feel  in  distress.  If  they  do  not  they  violate  their  own  nature  and
disregard  the  voice  of  God.  1.  Brutes  reprove  insensible  men.  "The  beasts  of
the  field  cry  also  unto  thee."  They  depend  upon  God,  and  he  gives  them  their
meat  in  due  season  (Ps.  cxlv.  15).  When  young  lions  lack  and  suffer  hunger,
they  "seek  their  meat  from  God  "  (Ps.  civ.  21).     They  enjoy  the  gifts  of  nature

14


210  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.  Tchap.  I.


with  sensitive  pleasure  and  apparent  gratitude.     But  men  are  heedless  of  their
groans,  stupid  in  their  folly,  and  turn  not  to  God  in  their  trouble.     "  The  stork  in
the  heaven  knoweth  her  appointed  times ;  and  the  turtle,  and  the  crane,  and  the
swallow  observe  the  time  of  their  coming ;  but  my  people  know  not  the  judgment
of  God."     2.   God's  people  reprove  insensible  men.     The  prophet  stirs  them  up  by
his  own  example.     If  no  one  else  will  call  upon  God,  "0  Lord,  to  thee  will  I  cry."
When  others  are  unmoved  God's  people  are  touched  with  national  calamities.
They  set  others  an  example,  and  seek  to  provoke  them  to  repentance  and  return  to
God.     1.  An  example  of  penitence.     The  heart  of  the  prophet  was  deeply  moved
for  innocent  creatures  and  for  ungodly  men.     We  hear  his  sighs,  see  his  tears,  and
dwell  upon  his  words.    He  comes  before  us,  au  embodiment  of  the  spiritual  and  per-
sonal duty  he  teaches.     He  is  the  prophet  of  repentance,  and  sees  in  the  j  udgments
of  God  motives  to  repentance.     National  sins  brought  national  affliction,  and  should
cause  national  humiliation.     2.  An  example  of  patriotism.     God's  people  are  as
keenly  alive  to  the  interests  and  dangers  of  the  nations  as  others.     The  Hebrew
prophets  were  patriots  and  statesmen,  to  whom  nothing  that  affected  the  national
welfare  was  alien  or  indifferent.     "  May  Heaven  save  my  country,"  cried  a  British
legislator.     So  good  men  see  God  in  everything  \  point  out  the  real  causes  of  suffer-
ing ;  the  operation  of  moral  under  physical  law ;  and  lament  the  state  of  the  coun-
try and  the  condition  of  the  people.     "For  the  mountains  will  I  take  up  a  weeping
and,  wailing,  and  for  the  habitations  of  the  wilderness  a  lamentation,  because  they
are  burned  up,  so  that  none  can  pass  through  them ;  neither  can  men  hear  the
voice  of  the  cattle."     3.  An  example  of  prayer.     The  prophet  turned  to  God,  our
only  hope  in  distress.     In  public  calamity  men  write  pamphlets,  make  speeches,  and
enact  laws  to  meet  and  overcome  it.     But  the  man  of  God  goes  to  the  root  of  evil,
and  points  out  its  only  cure.     He  holds  the  principles  of  Divine  life  in  his  soul,
believes  that  individual  circumstances  and  national  events  are  controlled  by  God's
will,  and  sees  in  present  visitations  the  future  results  to  the  wicked  and  the  righteous.
God  was  working  out  his  mysterious  purposes,  and  he  prays  that  the  visitations  of
anger  may  be  turned  into  corrective  discipline.     As  Abraham  prayed  for  the  cities
of  the  plain  and  Moses  for  the  tribes  of  Israel,  so  Joel  betakes  himself  to  Jehovah.
"  0  Lord,  to  thee   I  will  cry  :  for  the  fire  hath  devoured  the  pastures  of  the
wilderness."

Lord,  what  a  change  within  us  one  short  hour

Spent  in  thy  presence  will  prevail  to  make  ,

What  heavy  burdens  from  our  bosoms  take  ;

What  parched  grounds  refresht  as  with  a  shower!

We  kneel,  and  all  around  us  seems  to  lower  ;

We  rise,  and  all — the  distant  and  the  near —

Stands  forth  in  sunny  outline,  brave  and  clear — [Trench],

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

There  is  an  order  in  these  distresses.  plying    their     wants.       An     argument

First  he  points  out  the  insensate  things  against  cruelty  to  animals  and  a  motive

wasted  ;  then  those  afflicted,  which  have  to   prayer.     If  God  hears  the  cries  of

sense  only ;  then   those  endowed  with  dumb   animals  will   he   not   hear    our

reason  ;  so  that  to  the  order  of  calamity  prayers  1

there  may  be  consorted  an  order  of  pity,  The  double  purpose  of  Divine  judg-

sparing  first    the    creature,    then    the  ments  upon  a  nation — 1.    Kestoration

things    sentient,    then   things   rational  of  land.     2.  Improvement  of  men.
[Pusey].  1.    A    suffering   world   in   sympathy

Beasts  cry.     I.    The  dependence  of  with  suffering  man.     What  a  mystery

all  creatures  upon  God.     II.  The  com-  man's  sin,  desolating  the  land,  blighting

passion  of    God  to  all  creatures — 1.  In  the  trees,  and  adding  to  the  groans  of

removing  their  sufferings.     2.  In   sup-  the  brute  creation  !   The  whole  creation,


CHAP.    I.J


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.


211


animate  and  inanimate,  touched  by  the
fall  of  man !  What  evidences  of  sin  !
What  motives  to  repentance  !  2.  A
beneficent  world  in  sympathy  with  re-
stored man.     A  cheering  thought  that


true  penitence  and  restoration  to  God
will  give  pasture  to  flocks,  beauty  to
flowers,  and  freshness  to  the  landscape.
"New  heavens  and  a  new  earth,  wherein
dwelleth  righteousness."


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  I.


Ver.  1 — 4.  The  Jewish  theocracy  is
passed  away,  but  God  is  still  the  moral
governor  of  the  world  ;  and  in  perfect
harmony  with  the  principles  of  the  New
Testament,  which  teach  us  not  to  pro-
nounce a  man  to  be  a  sinner  above  other
men,  because  on  him  the  tower  of  Siloam
falls,  we  may  interpret  the  prevalence
of  natural  evils  in  any  country  as  meant
by  God  to  call  the  attention  of  the  peo-
ple to  those  moral  evils  which  abound
amongst  them.  So  that  if  untimely
weather  come,  or  malignant  diseases
come,  or  any  form  of  calamity  come  ; —
if  people  ask  one  another,  "  Hath  this
been  in  your  days,  or  even  in  the  days
of  your  fathers?  Did  you  ever  know
such  a  season,  such  weather,  such  sick-
ness, or  such  death  ?  " — it  is  only  the
province  of  religious  duty  to  look  on  such
things  as  the  working  out  of  great  laws,
of  moral  righteousness  ; — to  recognize
man's  sin  as  the  awful  fact  lying  under
what  man  calls  his  misfortunes,  and  by
timely  repentance  to  secure  forgiveness  ;
and  thus  turn  the  visitation  into  a
blessed  chastisement  [Stoughton],

Yer.  4,  6,  7.  Locusts.  The  insect
that  destroyed  all  the  peach-trees  in  St.
Helena  was  imported  from  the  Cape,
says  Kirby  and  Spence.  "  We  know,"
says  Burke,  "  that  a  swarm  of  locusts,
however  individually  despicable,  can
render  a  country  more  desolate  than
Gengis  Khan  or  Tamerlane.  When
God  Almighty  chose  to  humble  the
pride  and  presumption  of  Pharaoh  and
bring  him  to  shame,  he  did  not  effect
his  purpose  with  tigers  and  lions.  He
sent  lice,  mice,  frogs,  and  everything
loathsome  and  contemptible,  to  pollute
and  destroy  the  country."

Ver.  5.  Drunkards.  Be  sober  in
diet.  Nature  is  content  with  a  little  ;
but  where  sobriety  wanteth,  nothing  is
enough.  The  body  must  have  sufficient
lest  it  faint  in  necessary  duties ;   but


beware  of  gluttony  and  drunkenness.
Christ  saith,  "  Take  heed,  overload  not
your  hearts  with  these  burdens  of  ex-
cess." "  Be  not  drunken  with  wine."
These  lessons  are  fit  for  England,  where
ancient  sobriety  hath  given  place  to  super-
fluity, where  many  such  men  are  as  fare
daintily  day  by  day.  God  grant  their
end  be  not  like  his,  who  riotously  wast-
ing here  the  creatures  of  God,  wanted
afterwards  a  drop  of  water  when  he
would  gladly  have  had  it  [Sandys],

Ver.  8 — 10.  When  we  bear  in  mind
that  in  spite  of  the  help  given  them
from  this  country  one  fourth  part  of
the  people  of  Ireland  died  in  one  year
(1847)  through  the  failure  of  a  single
article  of  food,  we  may  have  some  idea
of  the  distress  of  successive  years.  Not
all  the  vast  wealth  of  England  would
restore  the  withered  joy  that  would  re-
sult from  the  failure  of  the  harvest  and
the  destruction  of  herbs  for  a  single
year.  The  blight  of  a  fly  might  consume
cereal  crops  and  prove  more  terrible  than
destructive  war.

Ver.  13,  14.  Ministers.  A  country
parson  fighting  against  the  devil  in  his
parish  has  nobler  ideas  than  Alexander
had  [Adam].  Example  works  more
than  precept;  for  words  without  practice
are  but  counsels  without  effect.  But
when  we  do  as  we  say,  we  illustrate  and
confirm  the  rule  which  we  prescribe.
"  Men  believe  more  by  the  eyes  than  by
the  ears,"  says  Seneca.

Ver.  15.  Judgment  will  assign  to
every  one  a  place  according  to  character ;
ranks  will  be  adjusted  and  precedency
set  right ;  virtue  will  be  rewarded  and
vice  punished.  Thoughts  of  this  day
should  restrain  from  vice  and  urge  to
virtue,  preserve  human  society  and  de-
fend religion,  vindicate  the  character  of
God,  and  justify  his  providence  to  men.

Ver.  16 — 18.  Nature  presents  two
aspects  towards  us.     If  we  sin  and  op-


212  H0M1LETW  COMMENTARY :  JOhL.  [chap.  ii.


pose  her,  she  is  stern,  implacable,  and  and  is  an  important  means  of  its  im-

destructive,  charged  with    storms   and  provement.      The    progressiveness     of

thunder,  famine  and  pestilence  ;  if  we  creation  is  made  subservient  to  the  moral

yield  and  obey,  we  secure  her  blessings,  education  and  advancement  of  the  human

co-operate  with  her  laws,  and  command  race.     A  single  alteration   throws   the

her  forces.     Love  and  serve  God,  and  whole  into  disorder.     What  a  picture,

nature  shall  be  at  peace  with  thee.  then,  for  man  to  be  ungrateful,  insensi-

Ver.  19,  20.   Animal  sensibility  forms  ble,  and  rebellious  in  the  sufferings  of

a  perpetual  appeal  to  human  sensibility,  nature  for  his  conduct !


CHAPTER  IX


Critical  Notes.]  This  chapter  still  urges  repentance,  directs  for  a  meeting  of  the  people,  and
assures  that  God  will  have  compassion.  1.  Blow]  Priests  must  sound  an  alarm,  as  if  foreign  in-
vasion nigh.  2.  Darkness]  Four  terms  used  to  indicate  the  intense  calamity  (Ex.  x.  22  ;  Is.  viii.  22) .
Swarms  of  locusts  literally  obscure  the  sun.  People]  numerous  and  most  formidable.  Like]  Ex-
pressive of  extraordinary  judgments  (cf.  2  Kings  xviii.  5 ;  xxiii.  5).  3.  Fire]  They  consume.  Eden]
Fruitfulness.  Nothing]  No  herb,  plant,  nor  tree,  shall  escape.  "  The  word  used  elsewhere  of  persons
who  escape,  suggests  that  we  should  not  linger  by  the  type  of  locusts  only,  but  think  of  enemies  more
terrible,  who  destroy  not  harvests  only,  but  men,  bodies  and  souls."  4.  Appearance]  like  horses
prepared  for  battle  (Job  xxxix.  20  ;  Rev.  ix.  7);  swiftness  and  sound  like  chariots  on  rough  mountain-
tops.  6.  Pained]  with  terror.  "  More  terrible  than  the  locusts,"  says  an  Arab  proverb.  Blackness]
from  anxiety  and  fear  (Lam.  iv.  8).  Heb.  flames  (Is.  xiii.  8),  to  glow  with  heat:  some  to  lose  colour,
to  grow  pale  (Jer.  xxx.  6).  7 — 9]  depict  their  military  order  and  discipline ;  it  is  vain  to  resist
(Ex.  x.  6).  A  picture  perfectly  true  to  nature,  says  Jerome  and  others.  10.]  Heaven  and  earth  feel
their  presence  like  a  tempest-cloud  of  Divine  wrath,  covering  all  in  darkness  (Matt.  xxiv.  29).  11.]
"Lord  of  the  locusts,"  say  Mohammedans,  commands  and  makes  the  meanest  the  instruments  of  venge-
ance (Rev.  xviii.  8).  12.  Therefore]  repent  with  heart  undivided,  and  with  fasting,  for  heinous
sins  demand  extraordinary  penitence.  Mourning]  Lit.  beating  on  the  breast,  like  the  publican
(Lu.  xviii.  13  ;  xxiii.  48).  13.  Not  garments]  as  customary  in  great  sorrow  (Gen.  xxxvii.  29  ;
Job  i.  20).  External  repentance  will  avail  nothing  (Ps.  Ii.  19 ;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  26).  14.  Knoweth]
if  the  least  chance,  secure  it.  God  may  restore  blessings  sufficient  to  maintain  his  worship  and  sup-
ply our  wants  (Jon.  iii.  9).  15.  Blow]  Convene  the  people.  16,  17.]  No  age  and  condition  ex-
empted, for  all  deserve  punishment ;  the  joy  of  the  bride  and  bridegroom  even  must  give  place  to
penitential  mourning.  17.]  The  priests  must  take  their  position,  and  pray  to  God  on  behalf  of  his
covenant  people.  18.  Then]  No  longer  threatenings,  but  promises.  Jealous]  of  dishonour  to  them,
love  and  pity  lor  their  welfare.  19,  20.]  Renewed  fertility  and  removal  of  the  cause  of  desolation  ;
answer  to  prayer  and  bestowment  of  great  things  (Ps.  cxxvi.  2,  3) ;  expressive  of  a  universal  truth.
21.  Fear  not]  as  in  ch.  i.,  on  account  of  judgments,  but  rejoice  in  the  destruction  of  the  hosts.
22.]  Verdant  pastures  and  trees  laden  with  fruit  shall  be  given.  Beasts  of  the  field  shall  no  longer
wnnt.  23.  Rain]  The  former  moderately,  lit.  according  to  right,  i.e.  in  due  measure,  not  in  ex-
tremes to  injure  (Deut.  xi.  14  ;  Prov.  xvi.  15).  The  rain]  Generically,  showers.  The  latter  rain]
to  mature  the  crops  ;  rain  in  season,  rain  in  opposition  to  drought,  and  rain  a  type  of  all  blessings.
24 — 27.]  Effects  of  the  rain — abundance  of  all  kinds  of  food ;  reparation  of  damage  by  locusts  ;  re-
demption of  Israel  from  the  heathen  ;  vindication  of  God  and  gratitude  for  his  grace.  28 — 32.
Afterward]  These  outward  things  are  only  a  type  of  spiritual  gifts,  a  prospect  of  richer  blessings  ;
and  a  grander  dispensation  is  held  out,  a  dispensation  remarkable  for  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  its  sign
and  substance.  This  gift  shall  be  poured  out  in  copious  and  refreshing  showers  upon  all  flesh,  Jew
and  Gentile  (Acts  x.  44  ;  xi.  17),  upon  servants  and  handmaids,  the  most  degraded  and  despised
(Acts  ii.  18).  As  the  result,  sons  and  daughters  shall  prophesy ;  dreams  to  the  old  and  visions  to  the
young  ;  all  shall  know  Divine  things  clearly.  30,  31.]  These  manifestations,  full  of  joy  to  believers,
will  be  menacing  to  unbelievers.  This  day  of  the  Lord  will  be  attended  by  convulsions  on  earth,
prognostications  in  heaven  ;  to  God's  children,  to  all  who  call  upon  him,  it  will  be  a  day  of  redemp-
tion ;  but  these  will  be  a  remnant  only.    Seek  to  belong  to  it  (Acta  ii.  40).


cimlp.  n.j  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.  ^13


E0MILETIC8.

The  Alarm  in  Zion. — Verse  1.

In  the  dreadful  calamities  described  what  must  be  done  1  Jehovah  shows  that
the  danger  can  only  be  averted  by  repentance,  humiliation,  and  reformation  of
conduct.  In  this  verse  the  prophet  interprets  present  chastisements,  and  lays  a
foundation  for  intimations  which  follow.  Alarm  must  be  given,  the  people  roused,
and  called  to  solemn  assembly.

I.  The  place  of  alarm.  "In  Zion."  Zion  was  once  the  seat  of  Divine
government  and  consecrated  by  God's  presence.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  now  the
holy  mount,  the  city  of  the  living  God,  and  the  school  of  instruction  to  the  universe.
It  is  the  spiritual  palace  of  the  Great  King,  who  rules  his  people  by  his  Spirit,  and
governs  the  world  by  his  providence.  Here  he  displays  tokens  of  love  and  judg-
ment. Great  everywhere,  his  judgments  are  specially  great  here.  It  is  a  solemn
thing  when  judgment  begins  in  the  house  of  God.  But  he  will  not  permit  sin  in
his  own  residence.  The  Church  must  be  conspicuous  in  its  elevation,  adorned  with
holiness,  and  loyal  in  obedience.  "  For  out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the  law,  and  the
word  of  God  from  Jerusalem."  II.  The  means  of  the  alarm.  In  times  of  old  it
was  the  duty  of  the  priests  to  warn  the  people  and  blow  the  trumpet  (Num.  x.  8).
Ministers  now  must  sound  the  alarm  and  declare  the  wrath  of  God  against  the  un-
righteousness of  men.  The  watchmen  of  Zion  must  be  awake,  sound  and  "  take
the  alarm  they  give."  They  must  be  "  sons  of  thunder."  They  must  not  hesitate
nor  seek  to  hide  the  truth.  The  blast  must  wax  louder  and  louder  to  startle  thought-
less men.  Ministers  must  never  grow  cold,  careless  of  their  own,  and  pitiless  of
the  danger  of  others.  When  Perkins  of  Cambridge  uttered  the  word  damned,  a
solemn  awe  struck  his  hearers  and  the  echo  of  it  lasted  many  days.  Whitfield
brought  tears  in  the  eyes  of  old  people,  when  he  cried  in  the  spirit  of  his  Master,
"  0  Glasgow,  Glasgow  !  "  "  Blow  the  trumpet,  and  warn  the  people  ;  then  who-
soever heareth  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  and  taketh  not  warning,  if  the  sword
come,  and  take  him  away,  his  blood  shall  be  upon  his  own  head."  III.  The  reasons
for  alarm.  "  For  the  day  of  the  Lord  cometh."  1.  The  danger  is  near.  "The  day
cometh."  Many  ridicule  and  call  earnest  men  enthusiasts.  Others  cry,  "Be  calm,
there  is  no  need  for  that  ado  ; "  but  the  prophet  of  God  sees  the  danger  and  urges
swift  escape.  The  day  "  is  nigh  at  hand,"  and  not  afar  off;  seen  in  present  judg-
ments and  will  come  in  sudden  terror.  Men  are  warned  now  of  judgment  to  come
and  of  enemies  gathering  together  for  fearful  destruction.  "  The  great  day  of  the
Lord  is  near,  it  is  near  and  hasteth  greatly,  even  the  voice  of  the  day  of  the  Lord  ;
the  mighty  man  shall  cry  there  bitterly."  2.  The  people  are  careless.  "  Let  all
the  inhabitants  of  the  land  tremble."  Though  danger  is  nigh  yet  men  neglect  or
despise  it.  They  should  tremble,  start  up  from  apathy  and  sullen  indifference,  and
haste  to  the  refuge.  How  stupid  for  persons  in  face  of  impending  ruin  to  sit  in
ease  !  They  provide  in  summer  for  winter,  in  youth  and  health  for  age  and  sick-
ness, but  strive  not  to  escape  spiritual  death.  They  seek  to  ward  off  temporal  evils,
but  eternal  destruction  is  not  foreseen  and  prepared  for.  Few  hear  the  distant
thunder  which  betokens  the  coming  storm.  In  their  fancied  security  they  laugh  at
those  who  prepare  for  the  evil  day,  laugh  on  the  brink  of  that  day  which,  unless
sovereign  grace  intervene,  will  make  them  wise  too  late.  "  Lord,  when  thy  hand
is  lifted  up  they  will  not  see,  but  they  shall  see,  and  be  ashamed  for  their  envy  at
the  people;  yea,  the  fire  of  thine  enemies  shall  devour  them."

The  Dark  Day. —  Verses  2,  11.

With  four  terms  the  day  of  Jehovah  is  described  as  a  day  of  judgment.  "  A
day  of  darkness  and  of  gloominess,  a  day  of  clouds  and  thick  darkness."    Darkness


214  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.  [chap.  n.


fell  upon  Egypt  (Ex.  x.  22),  and  enveloped  Sinai  at  the  giving  of  the  law  (Deut.
iv.  11).     This  typical  of  the  mysteries  of  God  and  the  miseries  of  men.

I.  The  profound  mystery  of  the  day.  As  clouds  of  locusts  darken  the  sky,  so
obscurity  hangs  over  all  Divine  proceedings.  We  know  that  all  calamities  are  judg-
ments of  some  sort  ;  that  we  are  tried  and  judged  now,  "  already  made  manifest  to
God,"  and  that  a  day  is  nigh  when  all  must  stand  before  the  judgment-seat  of
Christ.  But  when  and  how  the  day  will  come  no  man  knoweth.  God  veils  his
purpose  and  splendour.  "  Clouds  and  darkness  are  round  about  him."  Wisdom
prepares  for  events,  folly  rushes  on  and  falls  into  the  confusion.  Walk  by  faith,
do  present  duty,  and  cease  to  speculate.  "  Ye  men  of  Galilee,  why  stand  ye  gazing
up  into  heaven  %  this  same  Jesus,  which  is  taken  up  from  you  into  heaven,  shall  so
come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  him  go  into  heaven."  II.  The  great  misery
of  the  day.  As  clouds  indicate  obscurity,  so  darkness  denotes  misery.  The  dark-
ness of  the  locusts  would  be  unparalleled.  "  There  hath  not  been  ever  the  like,
neither  shall  be  any  more  after  it."  Present  punishments  are  only  the  beginning,
the  foretastes  of  eternal.  If  justice  and  judgment  distress  men  now,  what  will
they  be  at  the  day  of  final  accounts  1  The  destruction  of  the  temple,  and  the  re-
jection of  the  Jews,  signal  visitations  upon  churches  and  nations,  are  faint  sym-
bols of  the  terror  of  that  day.  "  That  day  is  a  day  of  wrath,  a  day  of  trouble  and
distress,  a  day  of  wasteness  and  desolation,  a  day  of  darkness  and  gloominess,  a  day
of  clouds  and  thick  darkness."  III.  The  overwhelming  destruction  of  the  day.
So  great  and  terrible  is  the  day,  that  the  words  are  wrung  from  the  prophet,  "  Who
can  abide  it  1  "  The  displays  of  power  will  be  omnipotent.  "  Who  knoweth  the
power  of  thine  anger  1 "  It  consumes  like  a  fire  and  none  escape  or  resist  it.  God
has  not  diminished  in  majesty  and  might.  As  he  discomfited  Egyptians,  so  will  he
overcome  his  enemies  at  last.  "  He  ruleth  by  his  power  for  ever."  "  Who  may
abide  the  day  of  his  coming  1  and  who  shall  stand  when  he  appeareth  %  "  There
is  only  one  way  of  escape.     Eepent  and  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  you  shall

be  saved.

Bold  shall  I  stand  in  that  great  day,
For  who  aught  to  my  charge  shall  lay  ?
Fully  absolved  through  Christ  I  am,
From  sin  and  fear,  from  guilt  and  shame.

The  Army  of  the  Lord. —  Verses  4 — 11.

The  locusts  are  led  by  Jehovah,  under  his  command,  and  sent  to  execute
his  will.  u  Lord  of  the  Locusts  "  is  one  of  the  names  of  God  in  Mohammedan
writings.

I.  Numerous  and  strong.  "  A  great  people  and  strong  "  (ver.  2).  "  What  more
countless  or  mightier  than  the  locusts  1 "  asks  Jerome.  Each  small  and  contempt-
ible in  itself,  is  made  powerful  by  the  strength  of  God.  All  agencies,  human  and
Divine,  are  pliable  to  his  hand,  when  he  wants  instruments  of  displeasure.  II.
Courageous  and  swift.  "  As  the  appearance  of  horses  ;  and  as  horsemen,  so  shall
they  run."  Their  heads  are  exceedingly  like  that  of  a  horse.  In  flying  they  make
a  noise  like  rushing  wind,  and  loud  "  as  dashing  waters,"  says  a  traveller.  Like  war-
chariots  rattling  on  rough  mountain-tops,  they  speed  to  do  their  work.  "The  shapes
of  the  locusts  were  like  unto  horses  prepared  unto  battle  "  (Eev.  ix.  7).  "  And
the  sound  of  their  wings  was  as  the  sound  of  chariots,  of  many  horses  running  to
battle"  (ver.  9).  III.  Universal  and  ill-omened.  As  "a  morning  spread  upon
the  mountains,"  like  dawn  ushering  in  a  day  of  darkness  and  gloom.  Or  with
yellow  lustre  on  their  wings,  produced  by  the  rays  of  the  sun,  they  sweep  down
the  mountains  and  announce  the  advent  of  terrible  calamity.  Travellers  have
noticed  this  feature.  "  The  day  before  the  arrival  of  the  locusts,"  says  one,  "  we
could  infer  that  they  were  coming,  from  a  yellow  reflection  in  the  sky,  proceeding
from  their  yellow  wings.     As  soon  as  this  light  appeared  no  one  had  the  slightest


chap.  ii.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL  215


doubt  that  an  enormous  swarm  of  locusts  was  approaching."  IV.  Orderly  and
well-equipped.  "  Neither  shall  one  thrust  another."  All  keep  their  rank,  inarch
'in  ease  and  battle-array.  "  They  charge  like  heroes,"  mount  the  walls  and  assail
fortified  cities  with  dauntless  might.  Like  David's  army,  "  they  know  how  to
keep  rank,"  and  diverge  not  to  the  left  or  right.  They  close  up  as  comrades  fall,
and  keep  unbroken  in  military  array  (ver.  7,  8).  Having  surmounted  the  walls,
they  storm  and  sack,  "  and  rush  through  the  city  "  in  fearful  speed.  "  The  locusts
have  no  king,  yet  go  they  forth  all  of  them  by  bands."  V.  Terrible  and  destruc-
tive. 1.  The  land  is  desolated.  Like  a  devouring  lire,  they  consume  every  green
thing  on  the  earth.  "  Yea,  and  nothing  shall  escape  them."  "  Thus  the  land  was
desolate  after  them,  that  no  man  passed  through  nor  returned ;  for  they  laid  the
pleasant  land  desolate."  2.  The  inhabitants  are  alarmed.  They  inspire  terror,  as
universal  and  abject  as  that  caused  by  an  invading  army.  "  Before  their  face  the
people  shall  be  much  pained,  all  faces  shall  gather  blackness."  In  the  agony  of
despair  Eastern  nations  wait  their  approach  to-day.  "  They  shall  be  amazed  one
at  another  ;  their  faces  shall  be  as  flames."  3.  Portentous  signs  in  heaven  and  earth
appear.  "  The  earth  shall  quake  and  the  heavens  shall  tremble"  (ver.  10).  Take
tins  in  connection  with  the  next,  and  we  see  the  terrible  day,  the  dissolution  of
the  social  fabric,  symbolized  by  signs.  Sun  and  moon  grow  dark  and  stars  with-
draw their  light,  because  Jehovah  comes  to  judge  (Is.  xiii.  13 ;  Jer.  x.  10  ;  Nah.
i.  5,  6).  Nature  is  clothed  in  mourning,  the  universe  trembles  from  predictions
of  judgment  to  come.  Three  sentences  give  the  reason,  for  God  does  this —
(a)  Because  his  army  "  is  very  great."  (b)  Because  this  powerful  army  "  executeth
his  word."  (c)  Because  the  day  of  judgment  is  so  great  and  terrible  that  no  one
can  stand  before  the  wrath  of  the  Judge.

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  7.     They  are  on  God's  message  terrible — 1.  In  the  country.     The  gar-

and  they  linger  not,  but  rejoice  to  run  den  of  Eden  was  turned  into  a  desolate

their   course   (Ps.    xix.    6).     Men   can  wilderness.     In  front  and  rear  the  army

mount  a  wall  few  at  a  time,  the  locusts  was  like  a  devouring  fire.     No  green

scale  much  more  steadily,   more    com-  thing  escaped.     2.  In  the  city.     They

pactly,  more  determinately  and  irresisti-  climbed  the  wall,  and,  as  a  thief,  entered

bly.     The  picture  unites  the  countless  the  windows  and  ransacked  the  place,

multitude,  condensed  march,  and  entire  No  fortifications  nor  force  can  resist  the

security  of  the  locusts  with  the  might  of  commissions  of  God  (Jer.  ix.  21).     If

warriors  [Pusey],  the  weakest  creatures  cannot  be  turned

On  his  icays.     So  each  Divine  judg-  aside,  and  the  smallest  judgments  cannot

ment  is  directed,  not  by  chance ;  adapted  be  resisted,  what  of  the  greatest  1  what

and    weighed   by    infinite    skill ;    and  of  the  last  of  all  %

reaches  in  time  and  method  just  that  They   shall    not    break   their   ranks.

person  for  whom  it  is  intended.    Nothing  Ver.  7.     Unity  is  strength.     The  weak-

is  lost,  nothing  escapes.  est  efforts  and  agencies  combined  are

The  judgments  of  God.    I.  The  nature  powerful  for  good  or  evil.     Rank  and

of  the  judgments.     A  day  of  darkness  order  are  necessary  to  accomplish  any

and  gloom,  none  like  them  before  or  victory.  Confusion  and  disorder  weak  en;

since.     Most  awful  and  extraordinary,  but  when  each  goes  on  his  way,  patiently

II.    The    executors   of   the  judgments.  and  perseveringly  does  his  duty,  success

Not  lions  and  beasts  of  savage  name,  will   be    gained.       Small   armies,    well

but  small  and  insignificant   creatures,  disciplined  and   marshalled  for  battle,

united,  ranked,  and  commanded  by  the  have  vanquished  and  scattered  hosts  of

Divine  leader ;  swift,  furious,  and  irre-  disorderly  foes,

sistible  in  attack.     III.  The  effects  of  The  least  confusion  but  in  on6)  not  all

the    judgments.      Ihe    execution    most  That  system  only,  but  the  whole  must  talL


216  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.  [chap.  II.


Learn — 1.  The  resources  of  God  to  will.     Sun,  moon,  and  stars   cease   to

punish  are  abundant.     2.  The  power  of  shine,  and  darkness  covers  the  earth.    3.

God  to  punish  is — (a)  omnipotent,  and  The   hosts  of  heaven.      Angels,  armed

(b)  irresistible.     3.  The  times  of  God  to  with  vengeance,  destroy  the  first-born  of

punish  are  ominous.  Egypt  and  the  army  of    Sennacherib.

Ver.  11.  The  camp  of  God.    1.  Bird*  The  resources  of  the  universe  are  under

and  beasts  of  prey.     The  meanest  and  his  command  to  bless  or  to  destroy,
mightiest   creature.      The   lion   in   the

forest  and  the  moth  in  the  sun.     2.   The  What  is  creation  less

elements  of  nature.      Winds  and  tern-  Than  a  capacious  reservoir  of  means,

pests,  thunder  and  lightning,  obey  his  Formed  for  his  use>  and  ready  at  his  will  ?

HOMILETICS.
Space  for  Personal  Eepentance. — Verses  12 — 14.

The  design  of  chastisement  is  not  destruction,  but  salvation.  Mercy  rejoiceth
against  judgment.  The  attainment  of  salvation  is  only  by  repentance  and  return
to  God.  Hence  the  prophet  in  God's  name  urges  personal  and  national  amend-
ment.    Personal  repentance  is  described  in  these  words.

I.  Its  nature.  "  Turn  ye  even  to  me."  I.  It  is  return  to  God.  Eeturn
quite  up  to  God,  not  half-way  (Hos.  xiv.  2).  Half  conversion,  and  half  amend-
ment will  not  avail.  The  whole  distance  must  be  overcome  and  God  must
be  gained.  Many  are  near  to  Christ,  but  not  in  him.  All  are  alienated  from
God  ;  and  true  reformation  is  not  forsaking  one  habit  to  form  another  ;  changing
one  church  or  creed  for  another;  but  turning  round  in  thought  and  feeling
and  coming  to  God.  2.  It  is  a  sincere  return.  It  is  real,  not  affected.  "  With
all  your  heart."  The  mind  and  affections  have  been  stolen  from  God,  now
all  are  centred  upon  him.  Outward  expressions  are  worthless,  mere  trappings  of
sorrow.  "  Eend  your  heart  and  not  your  garments."  Partial  feeling  and  feigned
sorrow  God  will  not  accept.  He  requires  truth  in  the  inward  parts.  "  The  sacri-
fices of  God  are  a  broken  spirit ;  a  broken  and  a  contrite  heart,  0  God,  thou  wilt  not
despise."  3.  It  is  a  sorrowful  return.  "  With  fasting,  and  with  weeping,  and  with
mourning."  There  may  not  always  be  striking  outward  signs.  But  deep  sorrow
and  contrition  of  spirit  are  accompanied  with  humiliation,  self-denial,  and  prayer.
The  penitent  weeps,  mourns,  and  strikes  his  breast  like  the  publican.  Signs  of
grief  often  stir  up  the  heart  to  more  grief,  and  indicate  to  others  the  sincerity  of  con-
version. Penitence  must  not  be  slight  and  superficial,  but  deep  and  real.  "  Bring
forth  therefore  fruits  meet  for  repentance."  II.  Its  motive.  "  For  he  is  gracious
and  merciful,"  &c.  Hope  of  acceptance  is  held  out.  This  hope  is  grounded  on  the
gracious  character  of  God,  revealed  on  Sinai  (Ex.  xxxiv.  6,  7),  and  reproduced  here
to  encourage  repentance.  1.  God  is  gracious  and  merciful.  Though  mercy  has  been
despised  and  grace  abused,  he  delights  not  in  the  death  of  sinners,  but  wishes  all
to  turn  and  live.  If  he  were  not  merciful  we  could  not  hope  for  pardon ;  and  if  he
were  only  merciful  and  not  gracious  we  could  not  expect  to  receive  anything  from
him.  2.  God  is  slow  to  anger  and  of  great  kindness.  He  can  be  angry  and  deal
out  punishment,  but  he  pauses,  lingers  long,  and  gives  opportunity  to  escape.  His
kindness  is  beyond  human  pity.  He  is  longsuffering  under  the  greatest  provoca-
tions (Ps.  ciii.  15).  3.  God  repents  of  the  evil.  If  he  repents  of  the  punishments
inflicted,  will  they  not  be  accepted  when  they  repent  and  return  1  Evils  are  against
his  will,  his  strange  work,  therefore  on  the  first  tokens  of  sorrow  he  will  take  them
away.  "  For  thou,  Lord,  art  good,  and  ready  to  forgive,  and  plenteous  in  mercy
unto  them  that  call  upon  thee."  4.  God  is  a  covenant  God.  "  Turn  unto  the
Lord  your  God."  They  had  turned  away  from  God,  but  they  were  still  his  people.
He  is  interested  in  their  welfare,  and  unchangeable  in  his  love  and  purpose.  God
must  be  approached  as  a  covenant  God.     His  Divine  nature  and  mercy,  his  cove-


chap.   IT.1  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  JOEL.  217


nant  relations  and  promises,  are  all  brought  forth  to  urge  men  to  return  unto  him.
His  goodness  and  mercy  never  fail.  "  Despisest  thou  the  riches  of  his  goodness,
and  forbearance,  and  long-suffering,  not  knowing  that  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth
thee  to  repentance  1 "  III.  Its  necessity.  "  Therefore  also  now."  Noiv,  though
it  be  late  it  is  not  too  late.  Now,  though  the  day  is  near  and  locusts  are  at  hand.
"  Noio  is  the  day  of  grace,  the  visitation  from  God."  "  Now  or  never."  Sinners
should  not  delay.  Time  is  precious,  opportunities  may  not  be  given  again.  Re-
pentance is  a  spiritual,  a  personal,  an  immediate  duty.  "  Now  is  the  accepted  time,
to-day  is  the  day  of  salvation."  "  God  now  commandeth  all  men  everywhere  to
repentance."  IV.  Its  possibility.  "Who  knoweth  if  he  will  return  and  repent,"
&c.  Judgments  may  be  taken  away,  the  meat-offering  restored,  and  a  blessing
left  behind.  Space  is  given  men  for  repentance.  We  are  not  to  be  too  confident
lest  we  be  careless.  But  there  is  no  doubt  in  the  prophet's  mind.  God  will  return.
He  never  changes  nor  lies  (1  Sam.  xii.  22).  His  favour  is  not  like  the  shifting
clouds,  nor  the  winter's  sun  casting  occasional  light,  but  withholding  heat  and  joy.
If  we  return  to  God  he  will  return  to  us.  "  Therefore  say  thou  unto  them,  Thus
saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts ;  Turn  ye  unto  me,  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  and  I  will  turn
unto  you,  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  12.  Although  all  sorrow  for  sin  Ver.    13.      God's    character    in    its

hath  not  the  same  expression,  nor  the  relation  to  our  character  and  condition,

same  degree  of  pungency  and  sensitive  Grace  to  the  unworthy,  mercy  to  the

trouble,  yet  it  is  not    a    godly  sorrow  miserable,  long-suffering  to  provocation,

unless  it  really  produces  these  effects,  truth  to  the  promise,  and  change  towards

i.  e.  (1)  that  it  makes  us  really  to  hate  the  penitent.      "  Thou,  0  Lord,  art  a

and  (2)  actually  to  decline  sin  ;  and  (3)  God  full  of  compassion  and  gracious,

produces  in  us  a  fear  of  God's  anger,  a  long-suffering  and  plenteous   in  mercy

sense  of  the  guilt  of  his  displeasure  ;  (4)  and  truth  "  (Ps.  lxxxvi.  15).

and  then  such  consequent  trouble  as  can  Ver.    14.     Prospects    opened   up  by

consist  with  such  apprehension  of  the  repentance.     1.  Remission  of  temporal

Divine  displeasure  [Jeremy  Taylor],  calamities.     2.  Restoration  of  fruit  and

Repentance  is — 1.  A  change  of  mind,  subsistence.     3.    Spiritual  blessings  left

a  turning  of  the  soul  to  God.     2.  A  real  behind  dreadful  curses.     The  storm  will

turning,  not  resting  in  shadows,  not  rent-  pass  away  and  the  sun  will  shine  again ;

ing  the  mantle  only,  but  the  offering  of  flowers  and  fruit  shall  come,  birds  shall

the  heart  to  God.     3.  This  is  a  personal  sing,  and  joy  and  peace  crown  the  land,

duty.     It  cannot  be  done  by  represent-  "  Then  shall  the  earth  yield  her  increase ;

ation  or  in  the  mass ;  but  by  each  alone,  and  God,  even  our  own  God,  shall  bless

the  children  alone,  the  parents  alone,  us.  God  shall  bless  us ;  and  all  the  ends

and  the  priests  alone.     4.  God  will  be  of  the  earth  shall  fear  him."
satisfied  with  this,  but  with  nothing  less.

HOMILETICS.

A  Call  to  Public  Repentance. —  Verses  15 — 17.

Once  more  a  day  must  be  set  apart  for  public  fasting  and  humiliation.  Personal
repentance  when  genuine  will  lead  to  public  confession.  A  sense  of  sin  in  the
hearts  of  individuals  will  produce  fruit  and  find  expression  in  the  actions  of  the
community.  Hence  all  the  nation  are  summoned  to  solemn  assembly.  "  Blow  the
trumpet  in  Zion."

I.  Great  national  danger  urged  them  to  public  assembly.  The  nation  is
endangered  by  sin,  sorrow  has  fallen  upon  all  ranks,  and  sympathy  unites  thmn  into


218  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JOEL.  [chap,  n


one.     Assemblies  are  called  for  scientific  and  political  purposes ;  but  no  assembly
so  solemn  as  that  called  by  natural  calamity.     Affliction  cements  the  hearts  and
binds  the  hopes  of  nations.     It  is  in  vain  to  sound  an  alarm  for  war,  to  blow  the
trumpet  and  muster  our  armies,  without  the  favour  of  God.     The  most  effectual  call
is  that  of  a  Church  or  a  nation  to  repentance.     The  most  powerful  defence  is  uni-
versal penitence  and  prayer  to  God.     By  this  alone  can  we  overcome  our  enemies
and  avert  the  judgment  of  God.      "  Let  tyrants  fear,"  cried  Queen  Elizabeth  when
threatened  with  the  Spanish  invasion ;  "I  put  my  trust  in  God,  and  in  the  loyal
hearts  and  good  will  of  my  subjects."     "For  the  Lord  is  our  defence;  and  the
Holy  One  of  Israel  is  our  king."    II.  None  of  the  nation  were  exempt  from  the
call  to  public  assembly.     "  Gather  the  people."     1.  The  aged  must  assemble.
"  Assemble  the  elders."     Men  of  understanding  and  ripe  in  years  must  be  active
and  eminent  examples  in  times  of  fasting  and  humiliation.     Wisdom  and  experi-
ence belong  to  them,  advice  and  help  are  expected  from  them.    2.  Children  must  not
be  exempt.     "  Gather  the  children  and  those  that  suck  the  breasts."     The  youngest
and  most  helpless  were  involved  in  parental  danger,  and  must  touch  parental
hearts.     The  sight  would  be  very  affecting,  and  if  God  spared  Nineveh  for  the  sake
of  the  children,  he  might  spare  Israel.     The  prayers  of  the  aged  and  the  cries  of
the  young  may  not  avail  with  men,  but  they  are  power  with  God.     "  All  Judah
stood  before  the  Lord,  with  their  little  ones,  their  wives  and  their  children  "  (2  Chi.
xx.  13).     3.  The  newly  married  must  obey  the  call.     "  Let  the  bridegroom  go  forth
of  his  chamber  and  the  bride  out  of  her  closet."     Marriage  joy  must  give  place  to
national  fasts,  and  feasting  must  be  turned  into  mourning.     There  is  a  time  for  all
tilings,  and  private  interests  must  give  place  to  public  duties.     The  raptures  of
love  must  be  forgotten  in  the  guilt  of  the  nation.     It  is  mockery  to  spend  time  in
making  merry  which  ought  to  be  consecrated  to  God  in  sorrow.     All  unfit  for  battle
and  all  exempt  from  war  (Deut.   xxiv.   5) ;  all  classes  of  the  community,  the
aged  and  the  young,  the  mirthful  and  the  mournful,  the  priests  and  the  people,
were  required  to  attend.     "  In   that   day  did   the    Lord  God    of   hosts    call   to
weeping,   and   to   mourning,  and  to  baldness,  and    to    girding    with    sackcloth "
(Is.  xxii.  12).     III.  National  confession  was  the  object  of  public  assembly.
It  was  not  an  assembly  for  social  entertainment  and  mirth.     Not  mere  attend-
ance and  cessation  from  toil  were  required.     It  was   "  a  solemn  assembly,"  a
meeting  for  deep  humiliation  before  God.      1.   Confession  teas  made  through  their
public  representatives.    The  priests,  "the  ministers  of  the  Lord  "  in  dignity  and  office,
must  set  the  example,  lead  the  assembly  in  weeping  and  prayer.     In  front  of  the
Holy  Place,  in  which  Jehovah  was  enshrined,  they  must  bend  and  plead  for  the
people.     Ministers  should  ever  be  intercessors  for  the  nation,  feel  the  condition  of
men,  and  urge  them  by  precept  and  example  to  devote  themselves  to  God.     2.
Confession  was  made  on  national  grounds.    Prayer  is  based  on  grounds  which  should
never  be  forgotten  by  God's  people  in  like  circumstances.     It  is  a  special  liturgy
for  the  solemn  occasion.     And  God  who  reads  the  heart  in  the  words  will  surely
hear  the  words  whicli  he  himself  breathes  in  the  heart.     Mercy  is  the  common
cry.     Punishment  is  deserved,  but  all  were  earnest  in  praying  for  deliverance  from
famine  and  reproach.     "  Spare  thy  people,  0  Lord."     (1)   God's  covenant  relation
is  pleaded.     Spare  us,  not  because  we  weep  and  fast,  not  because  we  deserve  mercy,
but  because  we  are  thine  heritage,  though  unworthy  of  the  name.     Thou  hast  chosen
us  for  thyself,  remember  and  keep  thy  word  with  us  and  our  fathers.     The  cove-
nant of  God  is  not  to  be  renounced  and  forgotten  by  the  penitent,  but  pleaded  to
secure  a  perpetual  interest  in  God.     (2)  God's  honour  among  the  heathen  is  con-
cerned.    "  Wherefore  should  they  say  among  the  people,  Where  is  their  God  ?  "
If  God  does  not  fulfil  his  word  and  protect  us,  if  we  are  utterly  ruined  by  judg-
ments,  and  insulted  by  idolaters,  the  enemies  would  rejoice  and  blasphemously
inquire  what  God  could  do  for  his  people  1     The  penitent  is  humbled  for  his  own
■in ;  but  when  God  is  reproached,  and  his  love  called  in  question  because  he  appears


CHAP.   II.]


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.


219


severe,  this  is  an  addition  to  his  sorrow,  a  sword  in  his  bones  (Ps.  xlii.  10).  He
therefore  pleads  that  God  would  defend  his  own  glory,  and  not  permit  men  to  be
confirmed  in  their  error  and  folly  (Ezek.  xx.  5;  xxxvi.  21,  23).  "Wherefore
should  the  heathen  say,  Where  is  their  God  %  Let  him  be  known  among  the  heathen
in  our  sight  by  the  revenging  of  the  blood  of  thy  servants  which  is  shed "  (Ps.
lxxix.  10).

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Yer.  15.  Sanctify  a  fast.  Care
should  be  taken  both  by  ministers  and
people  in  their  stations,  that  every  duty
be  not  profanely  gone  about,  nor  exter-
nal performances  rested  in  ;  but  that  it
may  be  done  in  a  spiritual  and  sancti-
fied manner,  that  there  should  be  clue
preparation  for  it,  and  that  the  congre-
gation come  purified  (as  the  word  signi-
fieth),  according  to  the  law,  and  fast  in
a  sanctified  manner  \Hutchesoii\.

Ver.  16.  Gather  the  people.  1.  In
times  of  calamity  fasting  may  be  appro-
priate. 2.  In  times  of  national  calamity
the  nation,  all  the  people,  should  join.

3.  Men  of  superior  rank  should  use  their
influence  and  stimulate  others  to  attend
God's  house  and  regard  God's  word.  By
penitence  and  prayer  an  entire  com-
munity may  be  saved  from  distress.

Gather  the  children.  Anniversary
Sermon.  I.  Islany  gatherings  fovchildren.
Exeter  Hall  meetings  ;  the  Great  Exhi-
bition ;  children  in  Peel  Park ;  Man-
chester ;  annual  sermons  and  festivities.
II.  Many  purposes  for  which  children
are  gathered.  1.  School  education.  2.
Social  enjoyment.    3.  Christian  worship.

4.  Solemn  fasting  and  humiliation,  in  the
text.  III.  Many  advantages  result  from
gatherings  of  children.  1.  It  is  the  ful-
filment of  Scripture.  2.  Necessary  for
children  themselves.  3.  Beneficial  in
many  ways  to  parents.

Ver.  17.  Weeping  priests  and  guilty
people.  The  sins  of  the  people  and  the
sufferings  consequent  upon  them  should
weigh  upon  the  hearts  of  ministers.     If


God  frowns  upon  a  people,  if  error  and
evils  abound  in  a  community,  are  not
the  shepherds  to  blame  1  Of  all  mem-
bers of  a  stricken  Church,  ministers  have
the  greatest  cause  to  mourn.

Reproach  of  Israel.  1.  Departure
from  God.  2.  Exposure  to  Divine  judg-
ment. 3.  Enslaved  by  the  heathen.
Christians  should  maintain  their  credit
and  character,  and  especially  deprecate
reproach  cast  on  the  character  and  con-
duct of  God.

Where  is  their  God? — 1.  The  spirit  of
the  question.  A  question  often  put — 1.
In  ignorance.  2.  In  atheism.  3.  In
ridicule.  Carnal  men  ignorant  of  the
character  of  God,  the  mysteries  of  his
providence,  and  regardless  of  his  people.
II.  The  substance  of  the  question.  1.
This  question  rcilects  upon  God.  God's
presence,  God's  providence,  and  God's
word.  2.  This  question  rcilects  upon
God's  people.  They  are  considered
worthless,  forsaken,  and  despised.  It  is
the  most  bitter  of  all  taunts.

Spare  thy  people.  I.  The  prayer.
Spare,  deliver  from  trouble,  pardon  sin
and  help  in  future.  II.  The  plea.  1.
Thy  people,  words  of  interest,  submission
and  affection.  2.  Thy  people  in  danger,
"  that  the  heathen  should  not  rule  over
them."  God  alone  has  the  sole  rmht  to
the  homage  and  service  of  his  people.
We  may  always  plead  the  interest  which
God  takes  in  our  spiritual  welfare,  as
the  reason  for  averting  judgments  from
the  Church  and  the  nation  which  our
sins  have  merited.


HOMILET1CS.

Restoration  of  Lost  Blessings. — Verses  18 — 20.

These  verses  form  a  transition  from  one  part  of  the  prophecy  to  the  other  When
God's  people  returned  to  him  in  penitence,  "then"  he  would  be  jealous  for  that  land  in
which  the  temple  stood,  and  for  that  people  whom  he  still  loved.  lie  would  hear
their  prayer,  remove  the  curse,  and  restore  the  blessings,  material  and  spiritual.


220  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.  [chap,  il


There  is  no  contingency,  no  uncertainty  in  the  promises.  The  predictions  are
absolute,  the  condition  of  repentance  on  which  they  rest  being  complied  with.  Israel
was  thus  encouraged  by  Divine,  not  human,  security  for  the  fulfilment  of  God's
word.  Chastisement  leads  to  repentance,  and  restoration  of  lost  blessings  the
result.

I.  This  restoration  depends  upon  the  sincere  repentance  of  men.  "  Then  will
the  Lord  be  jealous."  God's  promises  indicate  conditions,  and  are  adapted  to  certain
states  of  mind.  1.  Blessings  are  restored  through  penitence.  They  pie-suppose
repentance,  the  efforts  and  the  faithfulness  of  men.  The  removal  of  judgments
and  restoration  of  blessings  were  the  result  of  the  penitence  and  return  of  Israel.
God  waits  to  be  gracious,  and  when  sinners  humble  themselves  and  seek  Divine
favours  they  will  be  given.  "  For  the  Lord  shall  judge  his  people,  and  repent  him-
self for  his  servants,  when  he  seeth  that  their  power  is  gone,  and  there  is  none  shut
up  or  left."  2.  Blessings  are  restored  in  prayer.  "  The  Lord  will  answer  and  say."
Infidels  object  to  prayer  for  daily  food  and  propitious  weather.  Why  should  we
pray  for  rain  or  sunshine,  say  they,  when  both  depend  upon  laws  of  meteorology  1
The  laws  of  nature  are  not  incapable  of  modification.  Every  time  we  throw  a  stone
or  build  a  house,  when  we  graft  a  tree,  or  restore  a  limb,  laws  are  suspended  and
varied.  If  we  can  direct  the  hidden  forces  of  creation,  and  make  them  subservient
to  useful  purposes,  shall  the  God  of  nature  be  powerless  !  But  prayer  itself  is  one
of  the  most  natural  and  prevalent  laws  of  nature.  We  have  proof  in  Scripture  and
in  our  own  experience  that  in  the  history  of  men  and  the  events  of  providence
God  has  changed  his  proceedings  in  answer  to  fervent  prayer.  "  The  earth  shall
hear  the  corn,  and  the  wine,  and  the  oil,  and  they  shall  hear  Jezreel."  II.  Restor-
ation springs  from  Divine  pity  to  men.  The  Lord  will  display  his  love,  "  and
pity  his  people."  Before,  God  was  set  upon  their  destruction.  He  was  at  the
head  of  a  great  army,  giving  the  word  and  combining  the  strength  of  the  enemy.
Now  he  is  full  of  tender  compassion,  which  resents  injury  done  to  them  as  if  done
to  himself.  God  spares  a  people  whom  he  may  justly  destroy.  Humble  penitents
are  permitted  and  encouraged  to  plead  an  interest  in  him.  Natural  affection
prompts  parents  to  help  their  children  in  distress ;  so  God  gives  his  people  room
in  his  pity,  and  blessings  in  their  trouble.  Compassionate  kindness  to  the  suffer-
ing is  a  dictate  of  humanity  and  one  of  the  first  principles  of  religion  (Jas.  i.  27  \
Matt.  ix.  13).  "To  him  that  is  afflicted,  pity  should  be  showed"  (Job  vi.  14).
That  pity  which  we  should  display  towards  our  neighbour  God  will  show  to  us.
He  is  ready  to  turn  away  his  anger  and  have  mercy  on  us.  "  Ye  have  seen  that
the  Lord  is  very  pitiful."

He  hath  a  tear  for  pity,  and  a  hand
Open  as  day  for  melting  charity.

III.  Restoration  is  in  rich  variety.  Calamities  were  not  simply  removed,  but
abundance  of  temporal  and  spiritual  favours  were  bestowed.  1.  Material  blessings
were  restored.  "  I  will  send  you  corn,  and  wine,  and  oil,  and  ye  shall  be  satisfied
therewith."  The  material  condition  of  a  nation  and  the  outward  prosperity  of  a
people  depend  upon  God.  He  can  send  famine,  pestilence,  and  war.  He  alone  can
take  them  away.  All  human  efforts  are  perfectly  impotent  without  Divine  co-oper-
ation. The  husbandman  may  plough  and  sow,  but  God  "  causes  the  sun  to  rise  and
set."  Parliament  may  legislate  and  the  nation  employ  its  resources,  but  God  alone
can  remove  oppression  and  restore  fertility  in  the  land.  It  is  good  for  a  people  to
hearken  to  God  in  distress,  to  recognize  their  dependence  upon  him  in  the  seasons
and  operations  of  nature,  and  call  upon  him  as  the  Giver  of  every  good  and  perfect
gift.  "  Oh  that  my  people  had  hearkened  unto  me  !  He  should  have  fed  them
also  with  the  finest  of  the  wheat ;  and  with  honey  out  of  the  rock  should  I  have
satisfied  thee."  2.  National  reproach  teas  removed.  "  I  will  no  more  make  you  a
reproach  among  the  heathen."     Ecproach  is  a  sad  thing  for  the  people  of  God


chap.  n.  J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.  221


But  in  due  time  he  will  take  away  all  visible  signs  of  judgment.  His  people  shall
not  suffer  in  reputation  and  on  account  of  apparent  unfaithfulness  to  them.  They
shall  be  free  from  insult  and  tyranny,  and  shall  enjoy  the  credit  and  comforts  of
their  religion.  The  best  of  men  may  have  the  bitterest  foes,  and  be  subject  to  the
most  cruel  taunts.  But  the  brutality  of  the  enemy  will  move  the  pity  of  God.
He  will  not  long  endure  to  see  his  children  ill-entreated.  His  love  will  rouse  his
anger,  and  then  it  will  be  worse  for  the  scorner  and  reviler.  3.  The  mighty  enemy
was  destroyed.  "  I  will  remove  far  off  from  you  the  northern  army."  Whether  "  the
Northerner  "  (Heb.)  means  the  pest  of  locusts  or  the  Assyrian  army,  God  promises  de-
liverance from  them.  As  locusts  were  driven  with  the  wind,  to  perish  in  the  Arabian
Desert,  in  the  Dead  Sea,  and  in  the  Mediterranean,  to  breed  pestilence  by  the  stench
from  their  putrifying  bodies,  so  the  enemy  shall  be  driven  every  way  but  the  one  from
which  he  came.  The  destroyer  shall  do  no  further  mischief,  (a)  The  destruction
is  entire.  They  shall  perish  for  lack  of  sustenance.  Nothing  shall  remain  but  their
ill  savour,  (b)  The  destruction  is  deserved.  "  Because  he  hath  done  great  things,"
magnified  himself  against  God.  Pride  and  violence  against  God's  people  have  ever
been  the  features  and  forerunners  of  destruction,  (c)  The  destruction  is  fearful.
The  countless  hosts,  full  of  life  and  activity,  were  scattered  by  the  word  of  God  on
the  waves  of  the  sea,  and  thrown  upon  the  shore  a  putrifying  mass.  Human  malice
and  pride  shall  be  destroyed.  God  takes  away  their  breath  and  they  become  a
carcase.  Sennacherib's  army  in  the  evening  inspired  terror,  "  and  before  the  morn-
ing he  is  not"  (Is.  xvii.  14).  "  And  when  they  rose  early  in  the  morning,  behold,
they  were  all  dead  corpses  "  (Is.  xxxvii.  36).

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

God's  favours  towards  penitent  sinners.  Abundance  enjoyed.     3.  Blessings  per-

1.  Zeal  against  them  turned  into  pity  petuated.

for  them.     2.   Their  prayers  answered  Divine  favours.      1.  Their  source —

in  abundant  blessings.      Material   and  God's  pity.     2.  Their   subjects — God's

spiritual  good.     3.  Their  condition  re-  people.     3.  Their  result — "  Ye  shall  be

versed.      (a)    Freedom   for   oppression.  satisfied."

(b)  Honour  for  reproach,     (c)  Feasting  Yer.   19.     I  will  send  you  com.     God

for  fasting,     (d)  The  removal  of  every-  averts   the   failure    of   crops    and    the

thing  sad,  and  the  bestowment  of  every-  scarcity  of   food.     These  evils  neither

thing  joyful.  come  nor  cease  by  accident.     God  gives

The   excellent   condition   of  restored  us  our  daily  bread.     He  opens  his  hand

sinners.      1.     Enemies    subdued.       2.  and  we  are  satisfied  with  food  [Lange],

HOMILETICS.
The  Great  Things  op  God. — Verses  21 — 27.

The  locusts  seemed  to  exult  in  the  ruin  they  caused  ;  but  Jehovah  doomed  them
to  destruction,  recovered  the  land  from  barrenness,  and  crowned  it  with  beauty.
The  enemy  had  done  great  things  against  them ;  now  God  would  do  great
things  for  them.  No  longer  wasted  fields  and  withered  harvests.  Joy  is  to  suc-
ceed sorrow.  The  blessings  are  to  be  wide  as  the  judgments,  and  man  and  beasts
are  to  rejoice  in  the  restoration  of  fruitful  seasons  and  spiritual  privileges.

I.  Great  temporal  blessings.  The  seed  shall  be  prosperous,  and  the  vine  give
her  fruit ;  the  ground  shall  give  her  increase,  and  the  heavens  their  dew  again  (Zech.
viii.  12).  1.  Copious  rain.  The  plague  of  locusts  and  of  drought  had  caused  the
land  to  mourn.  "  The  garden  of  Eden  "  had  become  "  a  desolate  wilderness."  The
only  hope  of  recovery  was  in  abundant  and  copious  rain.  Rain  is  promised  by
words  multiplied  in  wonderful  emphasis.     First,  showers  in  general,  then  in  due


222  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.  (chap,  n.


season,  early  and  latter  rain  for  autumn  and  spring.     Eain  in  mercy  and  moderation.
God  sends  or  withholds  the  rain  in  sovereign  wisdom.     It  comes  not  by  chance,
but  Divine  commission.     It  is  given  in  due  measure,  and  sent  in  special  direction.
"  He  causes  it  to  rain  upon  one  city,  and  not  upon  another."     2.  Fruitful  seasons.
"  The  pastures  of  the  wilderness  do  spring,  for  the  tree  beareth  her  fruit,  the  fig-tree
and  the  vine  do  yield  their  strength."    Grass  will  spring,  tender  herbs  bud,  and  fruit-
trees  yield  their  fruit.     Living  pastures  shall  satisfy  groaning  beasts,  and  universal
fear  shall  give  place  to  universal  joy.    God  never  left  us  without  witness  of  his  good-
ness and  mercy,  "  in  that  he  did  good,  and  gave  us  rain  from  heaven,  and  fruitful
seasons,  filling  our  hearts  with  food  and  gladness."    3.  Replenished  granaries.    "  And
the  floors  shall  be  full  of  wheat,"  &c.     Barns  shall  no  longer  fall  into  decay,  but
wine,  grain,  and  oil  shall  be  given  in  abundance.    Every  trace  of  ruin  shall  disappear.
"I  will  restore  to  you  the  years  that  the  locust  hath  eaten."     The  devastation  of
former  years  shall  be  undone.     Threefold  blessings  shall  benefit  the  three  depart-
ments of  nature.     The  parched  ground  shall  robe  itself  in  living  verdure,  flowers
adorn  the  field,  and  trees  rustle  with  foliage.     The  herds  of  oxen  and  flocks  of
sheep  shall  no  longer  roam  in  agony  and  distress.     Husbandmen,  vine-dressers,  and
ministers  of  the  altar  must  cease  to  weep,  rejoice  in  God,  and  eat  their  bread  in
gratitude.     "  Your  threshing  shall  reach  unto  the  vintage,  and  the  vintage  shall
reach  unto  the  sowing  time ;  and  ye  shall  eat  your  bread  to  the  full,  and  dwell  in
your  land  safely"  (Lev.  xxvi.  5).     II.  Great  spiritual  blessings.     "And  ye  shall
know  that  I  am  in  the  midst  of  Israel,"  &c»     1.  Restoration  of  national  praise.
Through  the  sins  of  the  people  and  the  consequent  judgments  of  God,  sacrifices  had
ceased  to  be  offered  and  joy  had  been  cut  off  from  the  temple  (ch.  i.  16).     The  loss
of  religious  privileges  is  a  most  grievous  calamity.     There  is  no  place  like  the  house
of  God  to  Christians.     They  prefer  Jerusalem  above  their  chief  joy.     Loss  of  bread
is  nothing  to  loss  of  the  worship  of  God.     It  is  a  loss  of  social  help  and  natural  in-
fluence.    Worship  is  man's  greatest  dignity  and  supreme  good.     When  a  nation
gives  praise  to  God  they  reap  the  highest  enjoyments.     "They  shall  praise  the
Lord  that  seek  him  ;  your  heart  shall  live  for  ever."     2.  Manifestation  of  Divine
presence.     "  Ye  shall  know  that  I  am  in  the  midst  of  Israel."     Men  do  not  always
know,  nations  do  not  often  recognize  God.     In  prosperity  and  plenty  they  forget
him.     Harvests  are  expected  as  a  matter  of  course.     Human  ingenuity  and  natural
laws  produce  results.     Creation  is  a  mere  machine  without  maker  and  controller.
Thus  the  blessings  of  God  are  received  in  a  forgetful,  selfish  spirit.     But  God  inter-
rupts the  sequence  of  events,  judgments  are  sent,  to  bring  nations  to  regard  Him.
He  withdraws  his  presence  and  permits  plagues  to  bring  them  to  repentance.     "  Are
not  these  evils  come  upon  us  because  our  God  is  not  among  us  1 "     The  heathen
taunts,  "  Where  is  their  God  ] "     But  God  is  sought  in  distress  and  found,  and
loving  fellowship  is  restored.     God  is  in  the  midst  of  the  nation ;  she  shall  not
he  moved ;  "  God  shall  help  her,  and  that  right  early."     3.  Revival  of  national
joy.    "  Be  glad  then,  ye  children  of  Zion,  and  rejoice  in  the  Lord  your  God."   Israel
were  not  only  to  rejoice  in  God,  but  in  God  as  the  Lord  their  God.     The  world
may  be  unable  to  rejoice,  but  God  shall  have  their  share  of  gladness.     God  pro-
mises and  puts  joy  into  their  hearts;  a  joy  greater  than  that  created  by  corn  and
wine.      Abundant  crops  and  splendid  seasons  give  uncertain  gladness  ;  but  the
manifestation  of  God's  presence  is  a  source  of  pure  and  permanent  joy.     "  In  thy
presence  is  fulness  of  joy."     Better  empty  barns  than  forsaken  temples.     Joy  un-
speakable and  full  of  glory  is  the  heritage  and  honour  of  that  nation  with  whom
God  delights  to  dwell.     "  For,  behold,  I  create  Jerusalem  a  rejoicing,  and  her  people
a  joy.M

A  Deity  believed  is  joy  begun  ;
A  Deity  adored  is  joy  advanced ;
A  Deity  beloved  is  joy  matured ;
Each  branch  of  piety  delight  inspires.


chap,  n.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.


223


4.  Deliverance  from  national  shame.  "  And  my  people  shall  never  be  ashamed."
Pitied,  delivered,  and  honoured,  the  people  would  be  free  from  reproach.  God's
honour  is  linked  with  our  honour,  though  we  suffer  reproach  for  a  time ;  if  we  be
ashamed  of  our  sins  against  God,  we  shall  never  be  ashamed  to  glory  in  him.  He
will  never  render  his  grace  and  purpose  void.  By  the  performance  of  his  word
and  the  destruction  of  his  foe  he  will  wipe  away  all  dishonour.  In  Christ  especi-
ally are  these  words  realized.  He  suffers  when  we  suffer,  and  relieves  in  poverty
and  tribulation.  In  him  God  returns  to  men,  and  turns  again  the  captivity  of  Zion.
Then  we  sing  and  cease  to  fear ;  we  "  obtain  joy  and  gladness,  and  sorrow  and
sighing  shall  flee  away."


HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Ver.  23.  Kain  a  symbol  of  spiritual
blessings.  I.  TJieir  source.  "  He  hath
given  you,"  "  he  will  cause  to  come  down."
The  laws  of  nature  and  heathen  gods
do  not  bestow  rain.  It  comes  from
heaven  (Acts  xiv.  17;  Is.  lv.  10).  II.
Their  method  of  bestoivment.  1 .  In  due
season.  The  influence  of  the  Spirit,  like
early  rain  in  seed-time,  waters  instruction
given,  and  like  latter  rain  matures  the
soul  in  growth,  and  ripens  it  for  heaven.
2.  In  rich  abundance.  Like  copious
showers,  blessings  shall  descend  and  flow
down  to  men.  177.  Their  blessed  residts.
1.  Barren  land  rejoices.  Pastures  revive
and  trees  bring  forth  fruit.  The  little
hills  shout  and  sing  for  joy  (Ps.  lxv.
12,  13).  Gospel  blessings  refresh
thirsty  souls  and  quicken  desolate
churches.  2.  God's  people  are  glad.
"Be  glad  then,  ye  children  of  Zion."
Joy  springs  from  their  hearts  and  har-
vests are  reaped  from  their  labours.

By  heaven's  influence,  corn  and  plants  do  spring;
God's  showers  of  grace  do  make  his  valleys  sing.

Yer.  26.  Spiritual  feasting.  1.  The
guests.  "  Ye  shall  eat."  God's  people
shall  never  want,  though  sometimes  poor
and  persecuted.  2.  The  provision.  Not
mere  temporal  blessings  (ver.  24) ;  but
joy  in  God's  presence,  all  spiritual
blessings  in  Christ  Jesus.  Plenty  of  it;
not  the  least  scarcity.     3.   The  result,

(a)  Satisfaction.  "Be  satisfied."  Nothing
but  this  will  satisfy.  "  The  meek  shall
eat   and   be   satisfied "    (Ps.  xxii.   26).

(b)  Praise.  u  And  praise  the  name  of  the
Lord."  Thanksgiving  shall  come  after
the  fast.  They  shall  never  die  of  grief.
Immortal   joys  shall  be    their  portion.


<l  Whosoever  eateth  of  this  bread  shall
live  for  ever."

/.  The  toondrous  dealing  of  God.
Israel  in  the  wilderness  and  Israel  de-
livered from  the  plague  a  type  of  God's
dealings  with  us.  He  smites  by  wonders
and  he  recovers  by  wonders.  "  God
hath  dealt  wondrously  with  you."  1.
In  the  bounties  of  nature.  How  wonder-
ful to  quicken  the  earth  and  send  the
beauties  of  spring,  to  give  sunshine  and
shower,  bread  and  sustenance,  manna
from  heaven  and  waters  from  the  rock.

2.  In  the  blessings  of  providence,  (a)
Common  mercies.  Health  and  habita-
tions. Thousands  worse  off  than  you.
Many  in  poverty,  prison,  and  disgrace.
You  have  a  goodly  heritage  among  men.
(b)  Special  mercies.  Eemoval  of  family
reproach  and  personal  shame,  deliver-
ance from  sickness  and  judgment.  You
are   a  wonder  to  many   (Ps.  lxxi.  7).

3.  In  the  gifts  of  grace,  (a)  In  the  gift
of  Christ.  Wondrous  love,  &c.  (b)  In
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  enlighten
and  teach,  (c)  In  continued  grace  to
renew  and  strengthen.  "  Thy  love  to
me  was  wonderful."  //.  The  consequent
gratitude  of  man.  "  Praise  the  name  of
the  Lord  your  God."  1.  By  acknow-
ledging your  obligations.     "  Your  God."

2.  By  remembering  his  works.  Israel
forgat  God  even  at  the  Bed  Sea,  the
most  signal  spot  of  their  pilgrimage.
"  Talk  ye  of  all  his  wondrous  works."

3.  By  obeying  his  word.  Show  your
gratitude  in  practical  conduct.  Let  lips
and  life  praise  the  Lord.  "  The  Lord
hath  done  great  things  for  us>  whereof
we  are  glad."


22i  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.  [chap.  H.

HOMILETICS.

The  New  Dispensation. —  Verses  28 — 32.

By  a  natural  transition  the  prophet  rises  from  the  temporal  to  the  spiritual,  from
showers  of  rain  to  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit.  One  blessing  u first "  (ver.  23),
then  "  afterward "  (ver.  28)  a  second  and  greater  blessing.  The  words  have
special  reference  to  the  new  dispensation,  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit.  There
are  three  distinct  features  connected  together :  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  the
judgment  upon  the  ungodly  world,  and  the  salvation  of  a  faithful  few.

I.  The  outpouring  of  the  Spirit.     "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  afterward  that  I
will  pour  out  my  Spirit  upon  all  flesh."     The  outward  blessings  were  typical  of
extraordinary  spiritual  blessings.     Joel  felt  the  need  of  spiritual  influence,  and  be-
lieved that  it  would  bring  true  enlightenment.     We  have  not  only  a  supernatural
prediction,  but  a  gleam  of  his  own  pure  spiritual  life.     1.   The  extent  of  the  com-
munications.    i(  Upon  all  flesh."    It  was  not  to  be  confined  within  the  narrow  bounds
of  Judea,  not  limited  to  one,  but  extended  to  all  races.     It  was  to  be  given  to  the
pious  and  to  those  deemed  incapable  of  spiritual  life.    (1)  Without  distinction  of  sex.
"  Your  sons  and  your  daughters  shall  prophesy."     Not  only  parents,  but  children
would  receive  this  gift.     Four  sisters  in  one  family  were  prophetesses  (Acts  xxi.  9).
The  young  are  capable  of  Divine  teaching,  and  God  has  promised  to  continue  his  pre-
sence and  propagate  his  word  from  one  generation  to  another.     "  All  thy  children
shall  be  taught  of  the  Lord ;  and  great  shall  be  the  peace  of  thy  children."     (2)
Without  distinction  of  age.     "  Your  old  men  shall  dream  dreams,  your  young  men
shall  see  visions."    God  adapts  his  grace  to  the  condition  of  men.    The  inexperienced
and  the  infirm  ;  extremes  in  life  may  possess  it.     (3)    Without  distinction  of  rank.
"  And  also  upon  the  servants  and  upon  the  handmaids."     This  was  something  un-
expected and  had  never  been  seen  before.     "  Even  the  slaves,"  bondsmen  and
bondswomen,  are  to  share  in  the  gift.    The  lowest  are  exalted,  and  the  gospel  breaks
the  fetters  of  slavery.     "  Prophecy,"  said  the  Jews,  "  doth  not  reside  except  on  the
wise,  and  mighty,  and  rich  ; "  but  the  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  unto  them.    In
Christ  "  there  is  neither  Jew  nor  Greek,  there  is  neither  bond  nor  free,  there  is
neither  male  nor  female  :  for  ye  are  all  one."     2.   The  form  of  the  communications.
"  Shall  prophesy,  dream  dreams,  and  see  visions."     These  were  the  three  modes  by
which  God  revealed  his  will  to  men  in  the  0.  T.  days  (Num.  xii.  6).   They  are  physic-
al rather  than  spiritual ;  do  not  necessarily  involve  renovation  of  moral  nature,  but
are  made  the  symbols  of  fuller  manifestation  of  miraculous  gifts  to  some,  and  the  out-
pouring of  the  Spirit  to  all.     Yet  taking  into  account  the  effects  of  this  outpouring,
we  have  reason  to  find  a  spiritual  meaning.     The  Spirit  would  burst  through  every
barrier  and  quicken  the  energies  of  life  in  all  classes.     Men  would  have  the  power
to  see  and  apply  the  truth  of  God  to  the  facts  of  human  life,  past,  present,  and
future.     Spiritual  light  would  not  be  confined  to  a  select  few.     Dreams  and  visions
should  be  given  to  others,   and  the  mysteries  of  salvation  be  proclaimed  to  all
nations.     By  these  gifts  the  Church  is  founded,  the  ministry  taught,  and  the  Scrip-
tures expounded  in  all  ages.     "  Hear  now  my  words  :  If  there  be  a  prophet  among
you,  I  the  Lord  will  make  myself  known  unto  him  in  a  vision,  and  will  speak  unto
hi  in  in  a  dream."     II.  The  dreadful  judgment.     Judgment  is  connected  with  the
outpouring  of  the  Spirit.     When  God  comes  in  the  majesty  of  his  power  heaven
and  earth  quakes.     "  Each  revelation  of  God  prepares  the  way  for  another,"  savs
an  author,  "  until  that  last  revelation  of  his  love  and  of  his  wrath  in  the  great  day."
"  I  will  show  wonders  in  the  heavens  and  in  the  earth."     1.  In  the  earth.     "  Elood
and  fire,  and  pillars  of  smoke."     Blood  and  fire  were  manifest  in  the  plagues  of
Egypt,  and  smoke  ascended  like  the  smoke  of  a  smelting-f  urnace  in  the  descent  of
Jehovah  on  Sinai  (Ex.  xix.  18).     Pillars  of  cloud  roll  up  from  burning  towns  in
times  of  war  (Is.  ix.  17).     2.  In  the  heavens.    "  The  sun  shall  be  turned  into  dark-


chap,  n.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.  225


ness  and  the  moon  into  "blood."  The  darkening  and  extinction  of  the  lights  of
heaven  are  often  mentioned  as  harbingers  of  approaching  judgment  (Is.  xiii.  10  ;
Jer.  iv.  23  ;  Ezek.  xxxii.  1 — 8  ;  Matt.  xxiv.  29).  The  language  may  be  figurative
to  a  certain  extent ;  but  strange  phenomena  in  the  physical  creation  have  been  ob-
served to  precede  great  catastrophes  of  the  moral  world.  In  the  judgment  on
Jerusalem,  Josephus  tells  of  physical  prodigies,  massacres  and  conflagrations.
Humboldt  cites  cases  of  remarkable  obscuration  of  the  sun,  in  very  eventful  years.
But  whether  we  understand  the  words  naturally  or  symbolically,  they  teach  that
the  judgment  day  does  not  come  without  warning.  1.  Foreseen  by  God 's  people.
These  signs  have  no  terror  for  them.  They  call  upon  God,  and  find  in  Him  that
refuge  of  which  Mount  Zion  was  only  a  type.  2.  Heeded  by  the  penitent.  For
among  those  who  do  not  pray  to  God,  some  shall  be  called  from  their  sins  to  find
peace  and  security  in  him.  "  The  remnant  whom  the  Lord  shall  call."  3.  Neg-
lected by  the  ungodly.  Understood  and  improved  by  right-minded  persons ;  un-
heeded and  often  despised  by  enemies  of  God.  Thus  there  is  a  gradual  process  of
separation  among  men,  a  ripening  for  "  the  great  and  terrible  day  of  the  Lord."
"Watch  ye  therefore  and  pray  always,  that  ye  may  be  accounted  worthy  to  escape
all  these  things  that  shall  come  to  pass,  and  to  stand  before  the  Son  of  man  "  (Luke
xxi.  36).

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  29.  Pour  out  my  Spirit.  Pour  words  in  our  mouths,  and  read  and  hear
out  like  a  rain-fall,  or  water-fall.  The  them,  and  yet  their  true,  full  meaning
Spirit  was  not  entirely  wanting  in  the  never  strikes  us.  The  truth  is  familiar
nation  before  this  ;  but  the  prediction  to  us,  it  is  daily  confessed  and  repeated
indicates — 1.  A  greater  measure.  Not  by  rote,  but  has  never  reached  our
merely  drop  by  drop,  but  pour  out  in  hearts ;  then  perhaps  at  length  some-
greater  abundance.  2.  A  wider  extent,  thing  wakens  us  up,  and  henceforward
Not  confined  to  members  of  the  covenant  the  truth  is  a  living  reality,  influencing
nation,  but  upon  "all  flesh."  This  a  and  moulding  our  lives"  (ver.  30,  31).
great  contrast  to  Gen.  vi.  3.  "This  Physical  phenomena  serve —  1.  To
word  '  flesh '  (basar),  as  contrasted  with  awaken  men's  minds  from  lethargy.
*  the  spirit,'  denotes  human  nature  so  They  quicken  attention  and  put  them
sunk  in  bondage  to  its  lower  elements  as  into  attitudes  of  fear  and  expectation,
to  be  incapable  of  spiritual  life.  But  Thus  they  urge  repentance,  and  provide
according  to  Joel,  even  this  impenetrable  space  for  it  to  those  who  are  induced  to
1  flesh '  is  to  be  penetrated  by  the  Di-  profit  by  them.  2.  To  prepare  God's
vine  Spirit ;  even  the  *  natural  man  '  is  people  for  approaching  trouble.  They
to  be  transformed  into  '  a  spiritual  man ; '  stimulate  prayer,  hope,  and  effort.  In
even  the  incorrigible  are  to  be  recovered  deliverance  from  Egypt  (Deut.  vi.  22)  ;
to  obedience  "  [Coa:].  in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  (Matt.

In  those    days.      This  special   truth  xxiv.  29)  ;  and  before  the  final  judg-

connected  with  one  special  time,  con-  ment,  God  displays  signs  and  wonders

cerning  which  he   knows  little.      The  to  the  joy  of  his  people  and  the  terror

prophets  sought  diligently  to  know  this  of  his  enemies.

time  (1  Pet.  i.  10).     Apostles  evidently  Ver.  31.   The  terrible  day.     1.  Great

studied  the  prophet  Joel ;  but  how  re-  in  its  nature.     The  last  day.     The  end

luctant  was  Peter  to  learn,   and  how  of  time  and  the  beginning  of  eternity,

astonished    beyond    degree    that    God  2.  Great  in  its  design.     To  give  to  all

would  pour  out  his  Spirit  upon  the  Gen-  their  due.     Great  things  will  be  done,

tiles.     "  It  needed,"  says  one,  "  an  ex-  Men  judged,  angels  ranked,  and  all  ac-

press   revelation    and   direct  command  counts  settled.     3.  Great  in  its  bearings.

before  he  could  be  persuaded  that  all  Great    to   believers,    terrible   to    unbe-

flesh   meant   more   than   Jewish   flesh.  lievers.      Men   separated   and   sent   to

Sot  often  all  our  lives  through,  we  have  their  own  place.

15


226


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.


[chap,  n,


Call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord.
"  Implies  light  faith  to  call  upon  him  as
he  is ;  right  trust  in  him,  leaning  upon
him ;  right  devotion,  calling  upon  him
as  he  has  appointed ;  right  life,  ourselves
who  call  upon  him  being,  or  becoming,
by  his  grace  what  he  wills"  [Pusey],

Ver  28 — 31.  The  gospel  dispensation
is  characterized  —  1.  By  spirituality.
2.  By  liberty.  3.  By  power.  4.  By
expansiveness  [Pulpit  Analyst].

Shall  be  saved.    1.  The  danger.    The
word  delivered  means  safety  by  escape.
"  Those  who  should  be  saved,"  i.e.  those
who  were  escaping  from  perils  imminent
and  terrible  (Acts  ii.  47).    The  condition
of  the  Church  is  often  desperate;  but
that  of  the  sinner  is  more   desperate.
2.  The  Saviour.     "  The  Lord."     None
other  than  Jesus.     "  For  there  is  none
other  name  under  heaven  given  among
men,  whereby  we  must  be  saved  "  (Acts
iv.  12;  ii.  36).     3.   TJie  encouragement.
(1)  Whosoever,  Jew  or  Gentile.    "Thank
God  for  that  whosoever,"  said  an  aged
person,  "  for  it  includes  me."     (2)  As
the  Lord  hath  said.     God  has  promised
to  save  all  that  call  upon  him  (Bom.  x.
13).     4.  TJie  result.      Those  who   are
delivered  are  only  a  "remnant"  a  part  of
the  whole.     History  and  Scripture  con-
firm these  words.     In  the  flood  and  de-
struction of  the  cities  of  the  plain ;  in  the
entrance  into  Canaan  and  the  return  from
captivity ;  in  the  first  preaching  of  the
gospel  and  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,
a   remnant   only   was    saved.     One   is


tempted  to  ask  with  the  disciples,
"  Are  there  few  to  be  saved  1 "  but  the
answer  is,  that  has  nothing  to  do  with
you.     "  Strive  ye."

The  remnant  saved.     I.  TJie  blessing
given.  Salvation.   Not  merely  promised,
but  actually  given  and  cheerfully  en-
joyed, not  in  word,  but  in  deed.    Human
beings  redeemed  and  human  nature  re-
newed.    77.   The  source  from  whence  it
comes.     "  In   mount   Zion   and   in  Je-
rusalem," i.  e.   from  God  himself  who
dwelt   and   was   worshipped    in   these
places.     The   Church   is  the   place   of
safety,  and  where   God  may  be  most
easily  found.   III.  The  method  by  which
it  is  secured.     1.   God  calls  men  to  him.
2.  Men  call  upon  God  in  prayer.     One
description  is  a  counterpart  of  the  other ;
both  go  together,  one  is  the  human,  and
the  other    the    Divine  side    of   salva-
tion.    Deliverance   depends   not   upon
the  worshippers  alone,  but  upon  God
also.     Those  only  are  saved  whom  God
calls  to  himself,  and  who  call  upon  or
choose  him  to  be  their  God.      It  is  all
of  grace.     God  must  first  call  by  his
grace ;  then  we  obey  his  call,  and  call
upon  him  ;  and  he  has  said,  "  Call  upon
me  in  the  day  of  trouble,  and   I  will
deliver  thee  and  thou  shalt  glorify  me."
God   accounts    our    salvation  his    own
glory.     "  The  promise  is  unto  you  and
to  your  children,  and  to  all  that  are  afar
off,  even  as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God
shall  call."


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO    CHAPTER  II.


Ver.  1 — 3.  Alarm.  We  might
reasonably  expect  that  the  world  would
gather  round  the  feet  of  the  teacher.
There  is  need  for  alarm,  for  men  are
indifferent.  There  is  a  way  of  escape,
but  men  know  or  heed  it  not.  Multi-
tudes pass  on  and  perish  in  the  evil  day.
Noah  regarded  the  signs  of  the  times,  and
"  moved  with  fear,  prepared  an  ark  for
the  saving  of  his  house."  "He  that
hearkeneth  unto  counsel  is  wise."

Be  wise  to-day  ;  'tis  madness  to  defer :
Next  day  the  fatal  precedent  will  plead ;
Thus  on,  till  wisdom  is  pushed  out  of  life.

[Young.']

Ver.  4 — 11.  Locusts.  The  head  is
exceedingly  like  that  of  a  horse  [Theo-


doret].  Their  noise  is  like  the  rushing
of  a  wind  [Forbes].  When  they  alight
and  feed,  the  plains  are  all  covered.
They  make  a  murmuring  noise  as  they
eat,  and  they  devour  herbs,  trees,  and
forage  without  restraint.  "  They  over-
shadow the  sun," says  Pliny,  "thenations
looking  up  with  anxiety,  lest  they  should
cover  their  lands."  "The  height  of
walls  cannot  hinder  the  charge  of  the
mighty  ;  they  enter  not  by  the  gates,
but  over  the  walls.  They  fly,  by  the
disposal  of  God  ordaining,  in  such  order,
as  to  hold  each  his  place,  like  the  minute
pieces  of  mosaic,  fixed  in  the  pavement
by  the  artist's  hands,  so  as  not  to  in-
cline to  one  another  a  hair's  breadth  "


CHAP.   II.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL


227


[Jerome],  Nothing  in  their  habits  is
more  striking  than  the  pertinacity
with  which  they  all  pursue  the  same
line  of  march,  like  a  disciplined  army
[Thompson].  They  teach  us  the  ne-
cessity of  unity,  steadfastness,  and
order.  Many  prefer  an  individual
course  instead  of  going  by  bands.  They
belong  to  no  cohort,  and  are  under  no
discipline.  The  strength  of  the  Church
lies  in  united,  concentrated  action.
Every  soldier  well-disciplined  and  in  his
ranks ;  every  officer  at  his  post,  and  ready
for  the  contest ;  each  under  rule,  helpful
to  each  other  and  to  the  common  cause.

Ver.  11.  Voice.  Lest  God  should
be  forgotten,  he  is  represented  as  com-
manding a  mighty  army  in  the  midst  of
judgments.  Their  presence  indicates  his
presence  and  power.  "  The  Lord  of
hosts  mustereth  the  host  of  the  battle  "
(Is.  xiii.  4).  He  called  the  Medes  and
Persians  to  execute  judgments  upon
Babylon.  "  He  sent  forth  his  armies
and  destroyed "  Jerusalem,  "  and  burnt
up  their  city"  (Matt.  xxii.  7).  Hence
the  threefold  ground  of  terror.  1.  His
camp  is  very  great.  2.  He  has  strength
to  accomplish  his  purpose  by  the  weakest
instruments.  3.  When  this  purpose  is
accomplished,  it  will  be  a  terrible  day  to
the  enemies.

Ver.  1 2 — 1 4.  Fasting  and  penitence.
Men  accused  in  times  past  were  wont
humbly  to  abase  themselves  before  the
judge,  with  long  beards,  uncombed  hair,
and  black  array,  that  they  might  secure
his  mercy.  So  when  pestilence,  famine,
or  war  begin  to  rage,  or  any  calamity
hangs  over  us,  it  becomes  us  to  present
ourselves  in  piteous  array,  with  fasting
and  prayer,  before  the  Judge  of  all  the
earth,  that  his  anger  may  be  turned  away
from  us  [Cawdray].  But  no  amount  of
fasting  will  do  without  true  penitence.
Lifeless  repentance  is  fruitless.  No  out-
ward propriety  and  offerings  will  wash
away  the  stain  of  sin.  We  must  not
only  confess  but  forsake  our  sins  and
turn  unto  God.  God  will  have  mercy
upon  the  penitent.

The  fruitless  showers  of  worldly  woe
Fall  dark  to  earth  and  never  rise  ;

While  tears  that  from  repentance  flow,
In  bright  exhalement  reach  the  skies.


Ver.  15 — 17.  In  this  assembly
kings  and  priests  lead  the  way ;  nobles
and  common  people  promptly  join.  The
whole  multitude  bow  like  one  man,  and
fall  prostrate  at  the  footstool  of  mercy.
All  acknowledge  their  guilt  and  are
sensible  of  their  danger.  All  repent  and
pray  that  God  would  spare  his  people.
Though  repentance  is  now  put  in  the
inward  dispositions  of  the  soul,  yet  on
occasion  of  national  humiliation,  and
peculiar  religious  solemnity,  it  may  be
suitable  to  testify  by  our  deportment
and  dress,  the  seriousness  and  sadness  of
our  minds.  Splendour  and  gaiety  of
apparel,  if  ever  becoming  Christians,
should  be  laid  aside  at  such  seasons.  It
is  well  when  the  government  of  a  nation,
in  its  spiritual  and  political  authorities,
takes  the  lead  in  the  promotion  of  piety
and  regard  to  the  doctrines  and  duties  of
religion.  It  is  most  touching  and  in-
structive to  see  all  classes  of  the  com-
munity lift  up  their  hearts  in  prayer  for
mercy  and  deliverance.

Ver.  20.  The  south  and  east  winds
drive  the  clouds  of  locusts  with  violence
into  the  Mediterranean,  and  drown  them
in  such  quantities  that  when  their  dead
are  cast  on  to  the  shore,  they  infect  the
air  to  a  great  distance  [Volney].  Won-
derful image  of  the  instantaneousness,
ease,  completeness,  of  the  destruction  of
God's  enemies;  a  mass  of  active  life
exchanged,  in  a  moment,  into  a  mass  of
death  [Pusey],

Ver.  22 — 25.  It  is  too  clear  for  either
argument  or  illustration,  that  if  you
change  the  moral  character  of  any
country  from  ignorance  to  intelligence,
from  indolence  to  industry,  from  intem-
perance to  self-discipline,  from  sensual-
ness  to  spirituality,  from  enmity  to
love,  that  the  whole  material  region  in
which  they  live  may  abound  with
plentif  ulness  and  beauty.  Such  a  change
throughout  the  whole  human  population
to-day  will  give  to  all  a  new  heaven  and
earth  [Dr  Thomas].

Ver.  26,  27.  In  the  midst  It  was
to  induce  this  devout  and  thankful
recognition  of  the  Divine  presence  that
the  judgment  had  been  sent.  Dulled
by  routine,  blinded  by  use  and  wont,  the
Jews  had  come  to  regard  the  succession


228


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.


[CHAP.  II.


of  the  seasons  and  the  bounty  of  the
year  in  a  hard  mechanical  way,  as  though
Nature  were  a  mere  engine  or  machine.
It  was  to  convince  them  of  his  presence
in  Nature,  to  make  them  pure,  strong,
and  happy,  that  God  interrupted  the
usual  sequence  of  events,  first  by  dis-
asters over  which  they  had  no  control ;
by  plagues  (literally  "blows"),  which
they  understood  as  judgments ;  and  then
by  acts  of  grace  and  good  will,  which
they  understood  as  signs  of  his  returning
favour.  Terrified  by  disasters,  and  at-
tracted by  blessings  which  seemed  to
them  answers  to  repentance  and  prayer,
as  they  "  ate  and  were  satisfied,"  the
people  "praised  the  name  of  Jehovah
their  God"  who  had  dealt  wondrously
with  them ;  they  felt,  they  acknowledged
that  he  was  "in  the  midst  of"  them,
in  their  fields  and  in  their  vineyards
as  well  as  in  the  temple,  and  that
Jehovah  was  their  God  and  none  else,
since  only  he  could  send  them  rain  and
fruitful  seasons,  and  fill  their  hearts  with
gladness  [Samuel  Cox].

Ver.  28 — 32.  So  large  a  promise
naturally  awakens  inquiry.  We  ask,
"  When  was  it  or  will  it  be  fulfilled  1 "
Joel  expected  and  saw  a  fulfilment  of  it
in  his  day.     The  people  saw  God  in  the


ordinances  of  the  sanctuary,  but  not  in
the  fields  and  laws  of  Nature.  The
beneficent  order  of  Nature  was  inter-
rupted. This  was  taken  as  a  judgment,
and  led  to  repentance  and  recognition  of
God.  Were  not  the  same  conditions
repeated  in  St  Peter's  time  with  the
like  results  "}  The  Jews  came  up  to  the
temple  to  worship,  but  failed  to  see
"  God  manifest  in  the  flesh."  Judg-
ment came  upon  them.  They  awoke
to  a  consciousness  of  their  sin,  repented,
and  turned  unto  the  Lord.  The  Spirit
came  down  upon  them,  and  this  new
accession  of  life  was  a  judgment  to  the
men  of  that  generation,  trying  what
manner  of  spirit  they  were  of,  revealing
the  evil  spirit  by  which  they  were  ani-
mated, who  opposed  themselves  to  the
power  and  grace  of  God.  None  the
less  may  we  say,  "  This  is  that  which
was  spoken  by  the  prophet  Joel,"  in
every  new  crisis  of  the  religious  life,  in
a  man,  in  the  race,  or  in  the  world.  In
all  ages  the  same  sequence  recurs — sin,
judgment,  repentance,  a  new  spirit,  and
in  this  new  spirit  a  new  test  and
criterion  to  which  men  are  brought,  and
by  which  they  are  either  approved  or
condemned  [Samuel  Gox\.


CHAPTEK  IIL


Critical  Notes.]  For]  Explanatory  of  judgment  predicted  (ch.  ii.  31).  Those  days]  Viz.  the
outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  further  described  by  the  words  "when  I  shall  bring,"  &c,  redemption  from
distress  of  every  kind  ;  including  gathering  together  of  the  dispersed,  elevation  into  new  and  greater
glory,  exceeding  earlier  political  or  spiritual  condition.  2.  Valley  of  Jehoshaphat]  where  confeder-
ate foes  were  overthrown,  say  some  (Ps.  lxxxiii.  6 — 8 ;  2  Chron.  xx.  22—26)  ;  others  think  it  is
near  Jerusalem  (cf.  Zech.  xiv.  4),  and  the  term  given  to  indicate  the  judgments  of  God  upon  the
nations  there.  The  ultimate  events  are  still  future,  and  fill  up  the  space  between  the  restoration  of
the  Jews  and  the  second  advent  of  Christ.  Plead]  Not  merely  argue  against  enemies,  but  deal  with
them  in  judgments  (Is.  lxvi.  16  ;  Ezek.  xxxviii.  22).  3.  Lots]  A  common  way  of  dividing  captives
(Nah.  iii.  10).  The  harlot  was  not  paid  in  money,  but  with  a  boy;  and  a  girl  was  of*  so  little  value,
that  they  sold  her  for  a  drink  of  wine.  This  depicts  the  ignominious  treatment  of  Israel^  by  the
enemy.  4.  With  me]  i.e.  my  people,  with  whom  God  identifies  himself.  Recompense]  "  If  ye  in-
jure me"  (my  people)  "in  revenge  for  fancied  wrongs"  (Ezek.xxv.15 — 17),  "  1  will  requite  you  in  your
own  coin  swiftly  and  speedily."  5.  Taken]  Not  only  plundered  the  temple  and  its  treasury,  but
palaces  and  houses  of  rich,  which  always  followed  conquest  of  towns  (1  Kings  xiv.  26  ;  2  Kings
xiv.  14).  Your  temples]  Spoils  of  war  were  often  hanged  up  in  heathen  temples.  They  spoiled
Jehovah's  temple  and  profaned  their  own.     6.  Far]  Captive  Jews  cut  off  from  all  hope  of  return.


chap,  in.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.  229


7,  8.]  The  nations  repaid  by  the  lex  talionis.  God's  people  would  regain  liberty,  and  sell  their  enemiea
as  they  had  been  sold  by  them.  9.]  A  call  to  war  (Ezek.  xxxviii.  7).  Prepare]  Lit.  sanctify,  for
heathen  war  began  with  religious  ceremonies  (Jer.  vi.  4 ;  1  Sam.  vii.  8,  9).  Wake  up]  Arouse  the
neroes  from  sleep  ;  forge  tools  of  peaceful  agriculture  into  weapons,  and  the  weakest  must  be  a  hero.
11.  Assemble]  Hasten,  quickly  as  possible  meet  together.  12.  Wakened]  Not  now  to  war  with
God  and  his  people,  but  to  be  judged  (Is.  ii.  4;  Ps.  ex.  6).  13.]  The  judgment  compared  to  a  double
figure.  14.]  A  description  of  the  streaming  of  nations  into  the  valley  of  judgment.  Multitudes,
multitudes]  Heb.  immense  multitudes  ;  akin  to  our  hum,  noisy  crowds  (2  Kings  iii.  16).  15 — 17.]
Dreadful  commotions  will  happen  before  that  day.  Out  of  Zion  Jehovah  will  destroy  his  enemies,
protect  his  people,  and  purify  his  sanctuary.  18.]  After  judgment  upon  all  nations,  the  land  of
Jehovah  shall  overflow  with  Divine  blessings ;  but  the  seat  of  the  world  will  become  Wren  waste.
Drop]  Poetic  for  great  fertility,  happy  times  and  plenty.  Valley  of  Shittim]  Even  the  arid  desert
shall  be  fertilized  with  blessings  from  Jerusalem  (Zech.  xiv.  8  ;  Rev.  xxii.  2).  19.  Egypt  and
Edom]  Both  remarkable  for  enmity  to  Jews  and  emblems  of  enemies  to  God's  people.  They  have
been  desolate  for  centuries  (Is.  xix.  1;  Jer.  xlix.  17;  Obad.  10).  20.  Dwell]  Abide;  the  true
Church  shall  never  be  destroyed,  but  all  false,  persecuting  people  will  be  annihilated  (Amos  ix.  15).
21.  Cleanse]  "Wipe  away  blood-guiltiness,  the  climax  of  her  sin,  and  for  long  not  purged  away,  but
visited  with  judgment.  Amid  extraordinary  manifestations  of  wrath  in  the  destruction  of  the  wicked,
Israel  will  be  saved,  and  learn  anew  that  Jehovah  is  their  holy  God  and  King.

HOMILETICS.

Punishment  upon  the  Persecutors  op  God's  People. —  Verses  1 — 3.

The  prophecy  from  ch.  ii.  28  to  the  end  of  this  hook  constitutes  one  whole,
emhracing  the  Messianic  period,  from  the  day  of  Pentecost  to  the  final  triumph  and
consummation  of  the  kingdom.  The  events  of  the  past  are  framed  to  describe  the
revelations  of  the  future.  In  the  second  division  (ch.  iii.  1 — 21)  we  are  intro-
duced to  events  which  issue  in  the  restoration  of  Israel,  which  form  the  crisis  of  the
destiny  of  the  world,  and  which  describe  the  final  conflict  of  good  and  evil.  Israel,
viewed  as  the  representative  of  God's  kingdom,  are  persecuted  by  the  Gentile  nations
who  are  enemies  to  God.  But  he  will  deliver  them  from  oppression  and  destroy
their  persecutors.

I.  The  cruel  treatment  of  God's  people.  God's  people,  consecrated  to  him  by
covenant,  have  ever  been  despised  by  the  world.  Ungodly  men  belong  to  a  system
entirely  opposed  to  their  spiritual  interests,  and  established  upon  laws  and  insti-
tutions which  resist  the  authority  of  God.  The  indignities  done  to  Israel  are  speci-
fied in  the  text,  and  typical  of  many  forms  of  persecution.  1.  They  were  robbed
of  their  own  land.  "  And  parted  my  land."  All  the  earth  is  the  Lord's,  but  he
locates  his  people,  and  dwells  with  them  in  certain  places.  The  land  belonged  to
him  as  well  as  the  people,  and  when  they  cannot  defend  it,  he  will  assert  his  rights
to  it  and  regain  it.  The  enemy  acted  on  the  ancient  motto,  "  Conquer  and  divide."
They  parted  the  land  and  shared  it  amongst  them.  But  those  that  enrich  them-
selves by  robbing  God's  people  will  be  spoiled  of  their  own  treasures.  Wealth  and
reputation  taken  from  others  will  not  fit  well  on  ourselves.

Who  steals  my  purse,  steals  trash  ;
But  he  that  filches  from  me  my  good  name,
Robs  me  of  that  which  not  enriches  him,
And  makes  me  poor  indeed. —

2.  They  were  scattered  in  other  lands.  "  Whom  they  have  scattered  among  the
nations."  God's  people  were  driven  by  violence  into  heathen  nations  and  enslaved.
The  disciples  were  persecuted  and  fled  from  city  to  city.  The  early  Christians  were
banished  to  mines  of  other  countries,  and  islands  of  the  sea.  "  In  the  world  ye  shall
have  tribulation."  Christ  had  it,  and  his  people  cannot  expect  any  better  treatment.
Scorn  and  ridicule,  social  calumny  and  religious  degradation,  cannot  be  avoided.
The  good  will  ever  excite  the  ill,  and  "  all  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  shall
suffer  persecution."  3.  They  were  Indignantly  treated.  "  They  have  cast  lots  for
my  people,"  &c.     (a)  They  despised  them.     Treated  them  all  alike,  honourable  and


230  1I0MILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.  [chap,  iil


dishonourable.  They  were  all  worthless,  despised,  and  distributed  by  lot,  a  greater
indignity  than  captivity  and  slavery.  To  trample  on  the  weak  and  the  fallen  is  most
inhuman.  "  How  unsuitable  is  it  for  us,  who  live  only  by  kindness,  to  be  unkind,"
says  Edwards.  "  And  they  cast  lots  for  her  honourable  men,  and  all  her  great  men
were  bound  in  chains."  (b)  They  sold  them  as  slaves.  They  were  disposed  of  to
slave-dealers  at  most  ridiculous  prices.  A  boy  was  given  instead  of  money  for  the
hire  of  a  harlot,  and  a  girl  was  sold  for  a  drink  of  wine  in  revelry.  This  was  done
by  Assyrians,  Chaldees,  and  Eomans.  Enmity  to  God  and  persecution  of  his
people  have  often  been  connected  with  scenes  of  sensuality.  But  how  barbarous
for  men  to  sport  with  their  own  species,  and  prefer  a  moment's  gratification  to  the
permanent  interests  of  men.  What  inhumanity  to  subject  young,  innocent  children
to  extreme  hardship  and  anguish  from  such  base  motives  I  Let  us  thank  God
that  the  horrors  of  slavery  are  past,  that  we  live  in  a  land  of  personal  liberty  and
religious  laws.  II.  The  punishment  of  their  enemies.  "  I  will  gather  all  nations,"
&c.  God  may  suffer  enemies  to  prevail  for  a  time,  but  the  year  of  recompenses
will  come.  God  will  avenge  his  own  elect.  1.  The  time  is  fixed.  "  In  those  days
and  in  that  time."  The  day,  the  hour  may  be  unknown  to  us ;  but  they  are  fixer,
immutably  in  the  purpose  and  providence  of  God.  There  is  a  year  of  the  redeemed,
an  acceptable  year  for  the  opening  of  the  prison  to  them  that  are  bound,  for  the
bringing  again  of  the  captivity  of  Zion  (Jer.  xxx.  3).  2.  The  place  is  fixed.  The
valley  of  Jehoshaphat  may  mean  the  valley  in  which  God  destroyed  the  numerous
enemies  of  that  prince  (2  Chron.  xx.  26 — 28) ;  or,  in  allusion  to  the  word  (meaning
11  the  Lord  hath  judged  "),  it  may  refer  to  any  scene  when  God  will  deal  out  retri-
bution and  execute  his  enemies.  In  due  time  and  in  some  great  valley  God  will
punish  sinners  and  reckon  with  nations  for  their  infamous  conduct.  God  is
gathering  men  now  in  mysterious  ways,  will  soon  plead  with  them,  accuse  and
condemn  them,  and  "  there  shall  be  tribulation,  such  as  there  had  not  been  from  the
beginning  of  the  world."  3.  The  reason  is  assigned.  "  For  my  people."  God's
people  are  precious  in  his  sight,  whatever  be  their  treatment  and  outward  con-
dition in  the  world,  (a)  They  are  his  people.  They  have  given  themselves  to
him,  and  belong  entirely  to  him.  Others  refuse  allegiance  and  forget  God,  "  but
the  Lord's  portion  is  his  people ;  Jacob  is  the  lot  of  his  inheritance."  (b)  They
are  his  heritage.  He  chose  Israel  as  his  heritage  and  peculiar  treasure,  his  portion
and  treasure  above  other  people  (Deut.  xxxii.  9).  When  weak  and  desponding  in
trial  he  assured  them  of  his  love  and  defence.  The  most  precious  things  in  the
universe  are  holy  people.  God  claims  them  for  his  own,  will  never  permit  them  to
be  lost,  but  will  vindicate  their  cause  and  redeem  them  from  death.  "  He  that
toucheth  you,  toucheth  the  apple  of  my  eye."  "  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  unto
one  of  the  least  of  these  my  brethren,  ye  have  done  it  unto  me."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.    1.       /.     The     sad     condition,  slavery.     III.   The  time  of  the  change.

M  Captivity  of  Judah."     The  Church  is  "  In   those   days  and    in    that    time."

often  oppressed  and  persecuted  by  ene-  God  has  his  own  times  of  deliverance,

niies,  thrown  into  captivity  by  backslid-  His  people  should  have  patience    and

ings,  and  bound  fast  by  things  of  time  hope,  for  they  shall  not  sorrow  a  day

and   sense.     The    sinner   is  under  the  longer  than  he  has  purposed.     Divine

bondage  of  sin,  captivated  by  lust,  and  decrees  have  fixed  the  time  for  blessing

lashed  by  a  guilty  conscience.     II.  The  the  Church,  and  neither  Rome  nor  in-

blessed  change.     "  Bring  again  the  cap-  fidels   can   hinder    the   work.     "  Thou

tivity."     Sins  are  forgiven,  and  perse-  shalt  arise  and  have  mercy  upon  Zion ;

cutors    are   overthrown.     God's   power  for  the  time  to  favour  her,  yea,  the  set

redeemed  Israel  from  literal,  and  God's  time,  is  come"  (Ps.  cii.  13).     IV.  The

grace     delivers     men    from    spiritual,  author  of  the  change.     "  I  shall  bring


CHIP.   III.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.


231


again."  It  is  God's  work  and  not  man's.
He  makes,  keeps,  and  saves  the  Church.
He  purchased  and  will  defend  his
people.  He  will  in  judgment  and  in
grace  destroy  the  wicked,  and  bless  the
righteous.  "When  the  Lord  bringeth
back  the  captivity  of  his  people,  Jacob
shall  rejoice,  and  Israel  shall  be  glad."

Ver.  2.  1.  The  assembly.  "  All
nations."  2.  The  place.  "  The  valley
of  Jehoshaphat."  3.  The  purpose.  I
"  will  plead."  4.  The  reason.  "  For
my  people."  "  Here  the  fate  of  whole
nations  is  obviously  bound  up  with  that
of  Israel,  and  is  to  depend  on  the  re-
lations they  have  sustained  to  the  people
of  God  "  [&  Cox].

Valley.  In  the  days  of  Joel  valleys
were    the    usual    fields    of    "  battle,"


mountainous  and  wooded  country  being
unfavourable  to  the  movements,  tactics,
and  strategical  combinations  of  ancient
military  art.  Naturally,  therefore,  the
Prophet  would  select  some  valley  as  the
arena  of  the  final  conflict.  But  this
conflict  was  also  to  be  a  judgment.  Was
it  possible  to  select  a  valley  whose  very
name  should  convey  the  idea  of  judg-
ment and  of  Divine  judgment  1  Yes ;
close  outside  the  eastern  wall  of  Jerusa-
lem lay  a  valley,  known  as  the  "  valley
of  Jehoshaphat. "  ' '  Jehoshaphat  means,
Jehovah  judges.  Here  ready  to  his
hand  were  the  very  symbols  the  Prophet
required.  The  scene  of  the  final  con-
flict and  the  final  judgment  would  be  the
valley  in  which  Jehovah  judgeth  and
will  judge  [8.  Gox\.


HOMILETICS.

Righteous  Recompense. — Verses  4 — 8.

Before  depicting  final  judgment  upon  hostile  nations  of  the  world,  Joel  glances
at  the  enmity  which  the  neighbouring  peoples  displayed  towards  Israel,  and  fore-
tells a  righteous  retribution  for  sins  they  had  committed  against  God's  people.

I.  The  sins  of  which  they  were  guilty.  In  their  idolatries  they  grievously
sinned ;  but  their  greatest  offence  was  insult  to  God  and  his  people.  1.  They  sold
the  people  as  slaves  in  captivity.  They  had  scattered  them  among  the  nations,  and
forced  them  to  seek  for  shelter  where  they  could,  (a)  It  was  cruel  captivity.
They  were  dispersed  and  divided  for  fear  of  incorporation  with  the  common  in-
habitants, (b)  It  was  hopeless  captivity.  "  Ye  have  sold  them  unto  the  Grecians
that  ye  might  remove  them  far  from  their  border."  By  selling  their  fighting  men
they  would  weaken  the  Jews,  and  taking  them  afar  would  render  more  hopeless
the  return  to  the  land  they  loved.  They  displayed  great  malice,  were  delighted
with  the  distress  of  the  persecuted,  and  sought  to  triumph  over  God  himself.
Traffic  in  the  souls  of  men,  slave-dealing  and  men-stealing,  is  the  worst  kind  of
traffic,  branded  with  infamy,  and  will  bring  down  the  curse  of  Heaven.  What  has
become  of  American  slave-trade,  "  State  rights,"  and  secession  1  God  has  broken
in  pieces  the  oppressor ;  and  well  did  Abraham  Lincoln  say  :  "  This  is  a  world  of
compensations,  and  he  who  would  be  no  slave  must  consent  to  have  no  slave.  Those
who  deny  freedom  to  others  deserve  it  not  for  themselves,  and  under  a  just  God
cannot  long  retain  it."  2.  They  plundered  the  temple  and  palaces  of  the  land.
"  Ye  have  taken  my  silver  and  my  gold."  The  vessels  of  the  temple  and  the
treasures  of  the  palace  were  carried  away,  and  the  land  treated  as  conquered
territory.  The  Prophet  says  my  gold.  All  the  wealth  bestowed  upon  Israel  and
upon  us,  in  the  providence  of  God,  belongs  to  him,  and  should  be  recognized  as
the  gift  of  God  (Hos.  ii.  8).  If  we  are  his  people,  what  we  have  we  hold  from
him,  and  should  devote  to  him.  "The  silver  is  mine,  and  the  gcH  is  mine,  saith
the  Lord  of  Hosts"  (Hag.  ii.  8).  3.  They  profaned  the  sacred  things  of  God.
"  And  have  carried  into  your  temples  my  goodly  pleasant  things."  They  dedicated
the  spoils  to  their  gods,  hung  up  the  vessels  of  the  holy  sanctuary  on  the  walls  of
their  temples,  and  attributed  victory  over  God's  people  to  the  power  of  their  idols.
The  ark  was  put  in  the  temple  of  Dagon,  the  gold  and  silver  adorned  Belshazzar's


232  HOMILSTIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.  [chap.  m.


feast,  but  God  maintained  his  honour,  and  defended  his  cause.  Eobbery  itself  is
most  unjust,  but  when  the  spoils  are  consecrated  to  idolatry,  and  given  to  support
cruelty  and  false  religion,  this  will  prove  most  destructive  to  the  worshipper.  "  He
entangleth  his  soul  in  the  snares  of  death  who  resumeth  unto  a  profane  use  that
which  is  once  consecrated  unto  God,"  says  Bishop  Hall.  "  It  is  a  snare  to  the  man
who  devoureth  that  which  is  holy."  II.  Divine  recompense  upon  these  sins.
"  Will  ye  render  a  recompense  I"  &c,  indicate  that  they  had  no  cause  to  retaliate
upon  God  or  his  people  ;  that  if  repayment  is  the  question,  God  will  very  speedily
settle  that  for  them,  and  bring  back  their  doings  upon  their  own  heads  (Isa.  v.  26).

1.  Retribution  is  declared.  The  life  as  well  as  the  death  of  his  saints  is  precious
in  the  sight  of  God.  Those  who  injure  them  injure  him.  He  will  not  suffer  them
to  be  insulted  and  enslaved.  He  will  demand  an  account  for  them.  Suffering  and
blood  cry  to  Heaven  for  justice.  Martyred  saints  and  God's  captives  will  not  be
forgotten.  He  will  honour,  spare,  and  avenge  them.  "  When  he  maketh  in-
quisition for  blood,  he  remembereth  them  :  he  forgetteth  not  the  cry  of  the  humble."

2.  Retribution  in  kind.  "And  I  will  sell  your  sons  and  your  daughters-  into  the
land,"  &c.  As  they  had  sold  and  scattered  the  Jews,  so  they  would  "  be  paid  back
in  their  own  coin ; "  they  in  turn  would  be  sold  by  the  Jews.  Here  we  have  the
true  lex  talionis.  The  rod  which  men  make  to  smite  others,  shall  smite  them-
selves. "  Curses  are  like  young  chickens,  they  always  come  home  to  roost."  "  As
he  loveth  cursing,  so  let  it  come  to  him"  (Ps.  cix.  17).  Dogs  licked  the  blood  of
Ahab  in  the  vineyard  of  Naboth.  The  evil  deeds  of  persecutors  will  fall  upon
themselves  in  this  world,  or  that  which  is  to  come.  "  His  mischief  shall  return
upon  his  own  head,  and  his  violent  dealing  upon  his  own  pate."  3.  Retribution
with  certainty.  "  For  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it."  This  was  fulfilled  in  the  time  of
Alexander  the  Great  and  his  successors,  when  Jewish  prisoners  were  set  at  liberty,
and  Phoenician  territories  were  under  Jewish  sway.  Sooner  or  later  retribution
will  come,  and  there  is  no  escape.  No  idols  can  deliver  them.  The  inhabitants
of  Tyre  chained  their  gods,  that  they  might  not  forsake  them  when  besieged  by
Alexander,  but  the  word  was  spoken,  and  the  city  is  no  more.  4.  Retribution
with  speed.  "  Swiftly  and  speedily  will  I  return  your  recompense."  God  threatens
these  piratical  slave-dealers  with  the  vengeance  of  their  captives,  whom  he  redeems.
When  they  pride  themselves  in  triumph  and  forgetfulness,  a  sudden  change  shall
come.  With  ease  and  speed  God  will  send  the  punishment  and  "judge  his  people."
God  seems  to  delay,  but  at  length  unexpectedly  does  he  surprise  men.  And  when
once  he  begins,  he  hastens  on  and  makes  short  work  in  the  execution  of  his  judg-
ments. "According  to  their  deeds,  accordingly  he  will  repay  fury  to  his
adversaries,  recompense  to  his  enemies."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  4.  What  have  ye  to  do  with  3.  These  words,  what  are  ye  to  me  1
me?  1.  The  words  and  also  show  that  also  declare  that  those  nations  had  no
there  is  something  additional  to  the  part  in  God.  God  accounts  them  aliens,
deeds  of  those  spoken  of  before.  Those  What  are  ye  to  me  ?  Nothing.  4.  But
instanced  before  were  great  oppressors,  the  words  convey,  besides,  that  they
such  as  dispersed  the  former  people  of  would  have  to  do  with  God  for  harassing
God,  and  divided  their  land.  In  addition  his  people  without  cause.  They  ob-
to  these,  God  condemns  here  another  truded  themselves,  as  it  were,  upon  God
class,  those  who,  without  having  power  and  his  judgments;  they  challenged  God;
to  destroy,  harass  and  vex  his  heritage.  they  thrust  themselves  in,  to  their  de-
2.  The  words,  what  are  ye  to  me?  are  struction,  where  they  had  no  great  tempt-
like  that  other  phrase  (Jos.  xxii.  24  j  ation  to  meddle,  nothing  but  inbred
Matt.  viii.  29),  what  is  there  to  thee  and  malice  to  impel  them.  They  stand
me?  i.e.  what  have   we  in  common  1  among  the  most  inveterate  and  unpro-


chap,  m.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL  233


voked  enemies  of  God  and  his  people  Retributive  judgment.  I.  Often  given
\Pusey\.  by  men.  In  society  men  reap  as  they
Ver.  7.  I  will  raise.  I.  Deliverance  sow.  Kindness  begets  love,  and  cruelty
of  God's  people.  Though  carried  far  begets  hatred.  The  suspicious  are  sus-
away  and  put  under  grievous  bondage,  pected,  the  dishonest  robbed,  and  the
God  will  gather  them  again.  Neither  tyrants  in  turn  led  into  captivity.
former  judgment  nor  present  distress  "  There  is  an  important  element,"  says  a
shall  hinder.  Though  like  men  asleep,  writer,  "  of  the  judicial  action  of  God  in
he  will  raise  or  awake  them,  as  the  word  the  retributive  instincts  of  men.  It  is
imports.  Though  their  condition  be  one  of  his  ways  of  bringing  the  self-con-
hopeless  as  the  dead,  he  can  deliver  ceited  and  the  censorious  to  his  bar.
them  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  11,  12).  The  He  whose  hand  or  tongue  is  against
might  of  the  foe  and  the  wonderf  ulness  every  man,  need  not  wonder  that  Divine
of  the  promise  should  not  impede  our  providence  should  so  balance  the  scales
faith.  "  Behold,  I  will  raise."  II  of  justice,  that  every  man's  hand  or
Destruction  of  Gods  enemies.  li  I  will  tongue  will  be  ultimately  against  him.
return  your  recompense."  1.  The  agent.  He  reaps  what  he  sows."  II.  Always
God  himself,  not  chance,  nor  mere  change  administered  by  God.  "  The  Lord  hath
of  circumstances,  "/will  sell."  2.  The  spoken  it."  All  retribution  comes  from
instrument.  The  Church,  the  people  him,  given  by  men  or  laws  of  nature,
themselves  who  were  persecuted.  What  In  the  present  it  is  true — "  With  the
wisdom,  power,  and  providence!  3.  merciful,  thou  wilt  show  thyself  merciful;
The  measure.  God  repaid  in  the  same  with  an  upright  man,  thou  wilt  show  thy-
proportion  which  they  gave  to  his  people.  self  upright ;  with  the  pure,  thou  wilt
The  guilt  of  these  nations  was  great,  show  thyself  pure;  with  the  fro  ward,  thou
beyond  ordinary  persecution,  hence  the  wilt  show  thyself  fro  ward."  But  the
retribution  severe,  and  in  kind  upon  Bible  predicts  a  retribution,  most  just,
their  own  heads.  History  confirms  the  adequate,  and  terrible.  The  innocent
fact  that  men  get  back  what  they  give  will  then  be  cleared,  and  the  persecutor
to  others,  (a)  in  quality,  good  or  bad;  condemned.
(b)  in  quantity,  so  much,  whatever  the

measure   may   be.      "  For    with   what  0h ,  blind  to  truth  and  God>8  whole  scheme

judgment  ye  judge,  ye  shall  be  judged  :  below,

and  with  what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  Who  fancy  bliss  to  vice,  to  virtue  woe.
be  measured  to  you  again."

HOMILETICS.
The  Holy  War. —  Verses  9 — 12.

God  is  now  about  to  execute  the  sentence,  and  all  nations  are  summoned
together.  At  God's  command,  yet  of  their  own  accord,  they  assemble  in  the
valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  to  receive  righteous  retribution.

I.  The  solemn  preparation.  "  Proclaim  ye  this  among  the  Gentiles."  The
combatants  are  mighty,  and  the  results  will  be  decisive.  Every  preparation  is
needful  for  this  moral  warfare.  1.  This  warfare  is  moral.  "  Prepare,  i.  e.  sanctify,
war."  It  is  a  holy  war,  a  crusade  between  good  and  evil.  Not  like  those  in  which
the  pilgrims  of  Europe  sought  to  rescue  the  holy  sepulchre  from  the  hands  of
infidel  Turks.  God's  people  and  God's  enemies  are  in  battle-array.  Moral  powers
and  evil  principles  are  engaged  in  mortal  contest ;  the  kingdom  of  darkness  and
the  kingdom  of  light  are  striving  for  dominion.  "  For  we  wrestle  not  against  flesh
and  blood,  but  against  principalities,  against  powers,  against  the  rulers  of  the  dark-
ness of  this  world,  against  spiritual  wickedness  in  high  places."  2.  This  warfare
is  close,  "  Let  all  the  men  of  war  draw  near."  The  armies  are  not  spectators,  nor
do  they  stand  afar  off,  daring  and  defying   one  another,  like  Israel  and  the


234  HOMLETTC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.  [CHAP.  in.


Philistines  did  (1  Sain.  xvii.  3),  and  the  Turks  and  the  Christians  in  the  reign  of
Baldwin  II. ,  king  of  Jerusalem.  They  " come  up"  into  close  quarters,  and  fight
for  life.  The  enemy  is  bold,  comes  up  into  the  very  presence  of  God,  and  insults
his  people.  We  must  not  hesitate  nor  fear.  "  Into  the  ranks  of  the  enemy,"
cried  a  general,  on  the  field  of  battle.  Stand  still,  and  you  are  overcome ;  fight,
and  you  conquer.  "  Quit  yourselves  like  men,  and  fight."  3.  This  warfare  is
urgent.  "  Assemble  yourselves  and  come."  The  nations  must  hasten  and  come
speedily.  All  "  round  about "  must  gather  themselves  together,  and  draw  closer
and  closer  in  the  contest.  Christian  life  is  urgent  and  important.  The  gospel  de-
mands immediate  and  earnest  decision  for  God.  There  must  be  no  delay.  Judg-
ment delays  not.  "  Now  is  the  accepted  time."  4.  This  warfare  demands  sacrifice.
"  Beat  your  ploughshares  into  swords,"  &c.  The  tools  of  peaceful  agriculture  must
be  forged  into  weapons  of  war,  the  reverse  of  the  time  when  instruments  of  war  will
be  turned  into  implements  of  agriculture  (Isa.  ii.  4;  Mic.  iv.  3).  All  was  iin-
settled ;  the  means  of  subsistence  and  the  care  of  health  were  to  give  way  to  war.
In  spiritual  warfare,  ease  and  pleasure,  sin  and  the  world,  must  be  given  up.  All
must  be  equipped.  The  aim  is  not  temporary ;  it  requires  a  weapon  and  strength
to  use  it.  "  He  that  hath  no  sword,  let  him  sell  his  garment  and  buy  one."  God
has  provided  a  complete  armour  in  which  he  must  fight,  and  by  which  alone  he
can  triumph.  The  self-willed,  who  fight  in  their  own  way,  and  with  their  own
weapons,  will  never  conquer.  "  Put  on,  therefore,  the  whole  armour  of  God,  that
ye  may  be  able  to  stand."  II.  The  mighty  hosts.  "  Come,  all  ye  heathen."
"  Multitudes,  multitudes,  in  the  valley  of  decision."  1.  A  universal  gathering.
"  All  nations."  Not  simply  all  the  heathens,  but  all  nations  of  the  world  are  con-
cerned in  this  warfare,  and  will  stand  before  the  throne  of  God  at  last.  All  the
generations  of  men,  innumerable  angels  will  appear  before  the  Great  Judge.  Our
Lord  directs  our  attention  to  this  very  thought  of  Joel.  u  When  the  Son  of  man
shall  come  in  his  glory,  and  all  the  holy  angels,  with  him,  then  shall  he  sit  on  the
throne  of  his  glory,  and  before  him  shall  be  gathered  all  nations."  2.  An  im-
posing gathering.  "  Wake  up  the  mighty  men,  let  all  the  men  of  war  draw  near."
Heroes,  men  of  valour  and  experience,  will  be  there,  and,  like  Homer's  gods,  engaged
in  the  conflict.  The  Great  God  who  calls  it,  the  solemn  purpose  for  which  it  is
called,  and  the  method  of  dealing  with  it,  will  make  that  assembly  most  awful.
The  Judge  will  be  clothed  in  majesty  and  terror.  Angels  and  millions  of  the
human  race  will  stand  before  the  great  tribunal.  The  splendour  of  the  great  white
throne  will  eclipse  the  sun.

No  sun  had  e'er  dawned  on

So  fearful  a  day,
No  trumpet  had  marshalled

So  dread  an  array.

3.  An  enthusiastic  gathering.  The  whole  nations  are  seized  with  warlike  enthu-
siasm, and  rise  from  slumber  at  the  summons.  Even  "  the  weak  "  one  must  "  say,
I  am  strong."  None,  however  apparently  unfit,  was  to  be  spared,  and  none  left
behind.  Inspired  with  ardour,  and  drawn  by  numbers,  they  gather  "  to  the  battle
of  that  great  day  of  God  Almighty"  (Eev.  xvi.  14;  xx.  8).  III.  The  great
defeat.  Ostensibly  the  nations  assemble  to  destroy  God's  people,  but  are  over-
come themselves.  God  sits  upon  the  throne  to  judge  "  the  heathen  round  about."
The  conflict  is  instigated  by  the  very  parties  whose  doom  is  settled  for  ever.
1.  Their  resistance  was  in  vain.  Let  the  mighty  men  "  wake  up  "  to  gather  their
resources  and  strengthen  their  ranks,  all  is  futile.  Men  may  resolve,  and  eagerly
undertake  opposition  to  God,  but  they  will  be  disappointed.  *  The  heathen  rage,"
but  their  rage  displays  their  folly.  God  is  omnipotent,  and  can  overcome  the
mightiest  hero.  "  The  people  imagine  a  vain  thing,"  for  "  He  that  sitteth  in  the
heavens  shall  laugh :  the  Lord  shall  have  them  in  derision."  2.  Their  overthrow
was  great.    There  was  not  mere  failure,  but  terrible  disaster.     God's  mighty  ones


chai\  m.]  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.  235


came  down,  the  powers  of  nature  robed  themselves  in  opposition,  the  sentence  was
passed,  and  execution  followed.  The  purpose  was  defeated,  and  those  who  mustered
for  victory  were  overthrown  with  disgrace.  Popery  has  hastened  its  downfall,  by
trying  to  break  the  power  of  Protestantism.  The  French  were  crushed  in  their
efforts  to  destroy  the  political  influence  of  Germany.  Those  who  fight  against  God,
despite  imperial  strength,  will  be  broken  in  pieces.  The  ruin  of  sinners  will  be
eternal  if  God  shall  smite  them.  "  Associate  yourselves,  0  ye  people,  and  ye  shall  be
broken  in  pieces ;  and  give  ear,  all  ye  of  far  countries  :  gird  yourselves,  and  ye  shall
be  broken  in  pieces ;  gird  yourselves,  and  ye  shall  be  broken  in  pieces."  (Is.  viii.  9.)

The  Terrible  Overthrow. — Verses  13 — 16.

The  prophet  earnestly  besought  God  to  call  his  "  mighty  ones  "  in  the  final  scene.
God  responds,  brings  his  messengers,  and  bids  them  put  in  the  sickle,  for  all  things,
good  and  evil,  are  ready  for  judgment.  Three  things  are  to  be  noted  in  the  descrip-
tion of  this  judgment.

I.  It  is  a  moral  result.  As  ripe  corn  is  ready  for  harvest,  and  full  vats  and
winepresses  for  treading  out,  so  men  prepare  for  judgment.  1.  Sin  ripens  men
for  destruction.  It  unfits  the  soul  for  the  enjoyment  of  God,  creates  many  horrors
and  foretastes  of  hell,  and  renders  men  ready  for  destruction.  2.  Holiness  ripens
men  for  glory.  It  fits  the  soul  for  the  society  of  the  blessed,  makes  meet  for  the
heavenly  inheritance,  and  will  be  consummated  in  God's  presence.  Thus  judgment
is  only  a  harvest  for  which  men  are  ripening  in  the  present  life.  The  wicked  are
filling  up  the  measure  of  their  iniquity  (Gen.  xv.  16) ;  the  righteous  are  reserved
for  degrees  of  holiness  which  will  perfect  their  character  (Eph.  iv.  7 — 13).  Both
will  reap  as  they  sow.  "  For  whatsoever  a  man  soweth  that  shall  he  also  reap.
For  he  that  soweth  to  his  flesh,  shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption ;  but  he  that
soweth  to  the  Spirit,  shall  of  the  Spirit  reap  life  everlasting."  II.  It  is  universal.
The  prophet  seems  amazed  at  the  great  throng  assembling  together.  "  Multitudes,
multitudes,  in  the  valley  of  decision."  It  is  one  living,  surging  mass,  an  innu-
merable army,  rushing  blindly  on  to  their  own  destruction.  Or,  to  take  the  figure  of
the  text,  vast  numbers  are  ripe  for  judgment.  Angels  and  wicked  spirits,  good  men
and  bad,  will  be  present.  None  will  be  forgotten,  none  can  escape.  "  We  must
all  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ."  III.  It  is  awful.  It  is  attended
and  followed  by  convulsions,  in  which  the  framework  of  society  shall  be  shaken,
and  by  symbolic  signs  in  heaven  and  earth.  Countless  multitudes  assemble  in  the
valley,  the  heavens  above  darken  with  the  frown,  and  the  earth  beneath  trembles
at  the  thunder  of  God.  "  The  wickedness  "  of  men  "  is  great,"  and  ripe  for  harvest.
The  day  of  judgment,  the  day  of  decision  and  separation,  has  come.  The  grain
must  be  gathered  into  the  garner,  and  the  wine  into  the  vats  ;  the  worthless  chaff
consumed,  and  the  wheat  preserved.  "  Thrust  in  thy  sickle  and  reap ;  for  the  time
is  come  for  thee  to  reap  ;  for  the  harvest  of  the  earth  is  ripe  "  (Kev.  xiv.  15).

HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.    13.      May  be   taken   literally  righteous  and  the  wicked,  growing  to-

as  a  harvest  sermon,  in  proving  (1)  the  gether  like  tares  and  wheat  for  their

power,  (2)  the  providence,  and  (3)  the  proper  end.     II.  The  state  of  maturity,

goodness  of  God.     We  think  nothing  1.    Wilful  ignorance,  sin  against    con-

of  God's  mercy,  because  the  effects  of  it  viction,     and     total     insensibility,     in

are   common.      How   faithful    to    the  some.     2.   Growing  likeness  to  Christ,

promise,  "  While  the  earth  remaineth,  and  sincere  desire  to  be  with  him,  in

seedtime  and  harvest,"  &c.     Every  har-  others.     III.  The  reaping.     Not  before

vest  should  remind  us  of  the  truth  of  the  corn  is  ripe,  is  the  sickle  put  in.

God.     The  harvest  a  type  of  final  judg-  There  are  stages  of  growth  in  sin  and

ment.     I.  The  ripening  process       The  grace.     In  gradual  law  ano*  due  season


236


U0M1LET1C  COMMENTARY :  JOEL.


[chap.  in.


judgment  comes.  Every  act  and  every-
day promotes  maturity.  "  The  harvest
is  the  end  of  the  world  ;  the  reapers  are
the  angels."

Consider    the    text   as   addressed —
First,  to  ministers  of  the  Word.    We  are
allowed   such   an    application.      "The
harvest  truly  is  plenteous,"  &c.     Means
of  usefulness  and  opportunities  are  in-
tended by  harvest ;  by  labourers,  those
whose  office  it  is  to  make  use  of  them.
When  the  grain  is  ripe,  if  not  gathered
in,  it  is  liable  to  perish.     The  season
for   saving   it   is  short  and  uncertain.
Men  therefore  forego  ease,  and  endure
fatigue,  to  secure  it.    What  is  the  safety
of    grain   to   the   salvation   of    souls  !
How  many  destroyed  for  lack  of  know-
ledge !     We    have    religious    freedom,
means  and  opportunities  for  doing  good.
There  are  loud  calls  to  preachers,  parents,
and  Christians  generally.    But  the  time
for  work  will  not  continue.     "  Whatso-
ever   thy   hand    findeth    to    do,"   &c.
Secondly,  as  addressed  to  public  judg-
ments.    The  people  spoken  of  were  ripe
for  ruin.    So  with  the  Canaanites,  when
their  iniquity  was  full,  and  Joshua  and
his  army  were  the  reapers.     So  with  the
Jews,  when  Nebuchadnezzar  was  called
to  punish  and  the  Romans  to  destroy
them.     So  with  many  nations  and  com-
munities since.      We   have   reason   for
apprehension   if  we  estimate  our  con-
dition by  our  guilt,  and  our  guilt  by  our
privileges.     God  is  never  at  a  loss  for
instruments.     Hearts,  events,  elements,
are  all  his ;  but  threatenings  are  merci-
fully   conditional.       "  If    that    nation
against  whom  I  have  pronounced  turn
from  their  evil,  I  will  repent  of  the  evil
I   thought  to  do  them."     Thirdly,  as
addressed  to  the  messengers  of  death —
accidents,  diseases,  whatever  can  bring
us  to    the    grave.     This    regards   indi-
viduals.     We  know  our  own  destiny,
whatever  be  that  of  nations.     It  is  ap-
pointed unto    each   once  to  die.     But
when  men  are  ripe   it   is  not  easy  to
decide.     It  is  certain  that  sin  ripens  for
hell,  but  the  most  grossly  and  openly


vicious  are  not  always  the  most  guilty
before  God.  It  is  wise  to  keep  from
every  approximation  to  such  a  dreadful
state.  Surely  when  a  man  is  insensible
under  the  word  ;  incorrigible  under  tho
rebukes  of  providence ;  when  conscience
ceases  to  reprove,  and  he  can  turn  Divine
things  into  ridicule,  he  must  be  "  nigh
unto  cursing."  Holiness  ripens  for
glory,  but  when  matured  and  meet  for
it  we  cannot  ascertain.  We  should
think  favourably  of  one  dissatisfied  with
himself,  and  who  esteemed  the  Lord
Jesus ;  who  was  anxious  to  resemble
him  and  trusted  to  him  in  all  things.
But  God  knows  them  that  are  his ;
chooses  the  proper  time  for  removing
them  ;  the  wheat  for  the  barn,  and  the
chaff  for  the  burning.  But  the  end  of
all  things  is  at  hand.  Fourthly,  God
thus  addresses  his  angels  at  the  last  day.
We  are  sure  of  the  event  if  ignorant  of
the  period.  Then  cometh  the  end;  his
purposes  will  be  accomplished,  his
promises  and  threatenings  verified,  and
all  will  be  ripe.  Time  will  be  no  longer.
The  earth  will  be  cleared  of  all  the  pro-
duce, and  the  fields  in  which  it  grew
will  be  destroyed.  "  Wherefore,  be-
loved, seeing  that  ye  look  for  such
things,  be  diligent  that  ye  may  be  found
of  him  in  peace,  without  spot,  and
blameless"  [t/iay].

Yer.  14.  The  day  of  the  Lord.  1.
Near ;  comes  suddenly,  and  may  find
many  unprepared.  2.  Decisive  ;  cannot
be  repeated.  Every  one's  doom  will  be
fixed,  and  the  struggle  between  Satan
and  God  end.    "  The  valley  of  decision."

Yer.  1 6.  The  different  aspects  of  the
day  to  men.  I.  A  terror  to  God's
enemies.  "  The  Lord  shall  roar."  Now
he  speaks  in  mercy,  then  his  terrible  voice
will  be  like  a  roaring  lion  (Is.  xlii.  13,
14;  Jer.  xxv.  30;  Amos  i.  2).  II.  A
hope  to  God's  people.  The  material
universe  may  be  destroyed,  but  God  will
be  the  refuge  of  his  people.  "  Happy
is  he  that  hath  the  God  of  Jacob  for  his
help,  whose  hope  is  in  the  Lord  his
God  "  (Ps.  cxlvi.  5  ;  Jer.  xiv.  8;  xvii.  7).


chap,  m.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.  237


HOMILETICS.

The  Unprofanbd  City. — Verse  17.

The  scenes  which  now  follow  lie  beyond  the  bounds  of  time.  To  the  trembling
universe  and  the  terrors  of  judgment  there  succeeds  "a  kingdom  which  cannot  be
moved."  God  will  dwell  with  his  people.  Zion  will  become  a  holy  mount,  a
sanctuary  no  more  profaned  by  alien  and  unrighteous  feet.  As  a  description  of
heaven,  the  text  sets  forth : —

I.  Its  distinguished  glory.  "  I  am  the  Lord  your  God  dwelling  in  Zion."  1.
It  is  the  residence  of  God.  God  dwelt  with  man  in  Eden  ;  but  sin  drove  man  from
God's  presence.  The  tabernacle  and  the  temple  were  the  house  of  God;  but  the
symbols  of  the  one  and  the  glory  of  the  other  have  departed.  These  were  only
figures  of  the  true  residence.  Heaven  is  "  the  palace  of  the  great  King,"  the  pa-
vilion of  his  splendour,  and  the  place  where  his  honour  dwelleth.  The  Elysian  fields
of  Paganism,  and  the  Paradise  of  Mohammedanism,  were  cold  and  revolting ;  but
"  glorious  things  are  spoken  of  thee,  0  city  of  God."  2.  It  is  the  permanent  re-
sidence of  God.  "  God  dwelling  in  Zion."  "  Permanency  adds  bliss  to  bliss,"  says
the  poet.  Fellowship  with  God  on  earth  is  short,  and  often  interrupted.  In  heaven
he  will  dwell  for  ever  with  his  people.  It  is  this  which  makes  heaven  itself.
What  would  be  all  its  glory  and  company  without  the  presence  of  God  ?  Could
the  angels  and  the  harps  be  a  substitute  for  him  1  0  blissful  thought,  to  be  "  for
ever  with  the  Lord,"  in  the  "  city  of  the  living  God,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem."

Come,  join  our  wing,  and  we  will  guide  the  flight,
To  mysteries  of  everlasting  bliss,
The  tree  and  fount  of  bliss,  the  eternal  throne,
And  presence-chamber  of  the  King  of  kings.

II.  Its  happy  citizens.  "  So  shall  ye  know  that  I  am  the  Lord  your  God."
1.  They  are  enriched.  God  is  their  portion.  In  heaven  there  will  be  access
to  the  most  holy,  and  residence  with  the  most  dignified  society.  Patriarchs
and  prophets,  apostles  and  martyrs,  will  be  there,  but  the  presence  of  Christ
will  be  "  unto  thee  an  everlasting  light,  and  thy  God  thy  glory."  Your  God,
as  much  your  own  as  if  possessed  by  none  besides,  filling  all  with  gladness,  and
fully  possessed  and  enjoyed  by  each.  "Thou  art  my  portion,  0  Lord."  2.
They  are  intelligent.  God  is  known  to  be  their  God.  He  is  not  simply  with  them,
but  known,  seen  to  be  with  them.  It  is  a  personal,  experimental,  pre-eminent,  and
perfect  knowledge.  We  know  but  little  here,  and  that  superficially.  "  But  when
that  which  is  perfect  is  come,  then  that  which  is  in  part  shall  be  done  away."  In
heaven  the  mental  powers  will  be  glorified,  study  will  be  a  delight,  and  knowledge
will  be  acquired  in  direct  converse  with  the  objects  of  knowledge.  We  shall  know
by  experience,  by  sight,  face  to  face,  what  we  only  believe  now.  "  We  see  through
a  glass  darkly  ;  but  then  face  to  face  :  now  I  know  in  part ;  but  then  shall  I  know
as  also  I  am  known."  3.  They  are  holy.  The  place  is  God's  "  holy  mount,"  and
none  can  enter  it  but  those  who  are  holy.  Only  those  who  awake  in  his  likeness
will  behold  his  face  in  righteousness.  "  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the
Lord."  Heaven  would  be  hell  to  the  alienated  heart,  the  unrenewed  sinner  ;  but
"  blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  God."  To  see  God  and  be  like
him  is  the  earnest  desire  of  God's  people.  This  desire  will  be  gratified  in  his
"  holy  mount."  And  if  the  glad  smile  of  a  friend  begets  joy  in  the  heart,  how  will
the  light  of  God's  countenance  quicken  souls  in  heaven  to  a  sense  of  his  love  !
As  the  light  of  the  sun  transcribes  its  joyous  image  upon  one  who  contemplates  it,
so  the  holiness  which  beams  from  the  presence  of  God  will  purify  those  upon  whom
it  shines.  "  One  sight  of  his  glorious  majesty,"  says  one,  "  presently  subdues  and
works  the  soul  to  a  full  subjection.  One  sight  of  his  purity  makes  it  pure.  One
sight  of  his  loveliness  tirns  it  into  love."     The  saints  thus  become  assimilated  to


238  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.  [chap,  iii


God,  whom  they  perpetually  love  and  adore.  "  "We  shall  be  like  him,  for  we  shall
see  him  as  he  is."  III.  Its  eternal  security.  "  And  there  shall  no  strangers  pass
through  her  any  more."  Mount  Zion,  literally  and  spiritually,  was  a  place  of  beauty
and  stability.  "  And  he  built  his  sanctuary  like  high  palaces,  like  the  earth  which
he  hath  established  for  ever."  1.  No  foe  to  fear.  There  will  be  no  enemy  to  en-
counter. Death  and  hell  will  be  overcome.  Its  possessors  will  never  be  subdued
and  taken  captive.  "  The  wicked  shall  no  more  pass  through  thee  "  (Nah.  i.  15).
"  In  that  day  there  shall  be  no  more  the  Canaanite  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  of
hosts."  2.  Nothing  to  defile.  Profane  nations  and  ungodly  men  can  never  enter.
There  is  nothing  in  heavenly  blessedness  compared  to  its  moral  and  holy  character.
There  will  be  nothing  to  defile,  or  capable  of  being  defiled.  Not  an  act,  word,  or
look  will  be  contaminated  by  evil.  "  There  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  it  anything
that  defileth,  neither  whatsoever  maketh  a  lie ;  but  they  which  are  written  in  the
Lamb's  book  of  life."  3.  Nothing  to  corrupt  nor  decay.  The  locust  and  cater-
pillar will  not  destroy.  The  worm  will  not  devour  the  heart  of  ripening  fruit.
"  The  sun  shall  not  smite  by  day,  nor  the  moon  by  night."  On  earth,  everything
is  subject  to  vicissitude  and  decay  ;  but  the  joys  of  heaven  are  abiding  and  secure.
"  Where  neither  moth  nor  rust  doth  corrupt,  and  where  thieves  do  not  break  through
nor  steal."  This  inheritance  will  never  wear  and  waste  under  the  gnawing  influ-
ence of  time,  nor  be  destroyed  by  the  constant  friction  of  disturbing  forces.  It  is
"  an  inheritance  incorruptible  and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away,  reserved  in
heaven  for  you."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Many  take  the  words  as  a  description  cious    kingdom,   in    all    directions,   is

of  Zion  in  the  millennium.     TJie  metro-  supplied,  preserved,  sanctified,  and  built

polls  of  a  converted  world.  1.  Its  gran-  up  by  blessings  and  gifts.      For  this

deur.     God  will  dwell  there.      2.  Its  reason  that  place  is  called,  in  the  Epistle

sanctity.      "Then   shall   Jerusalem  be  to  the  Galatians,  Jerusalem,  which  is

holy."     3.    Its  security.      4.    Its  per-  above  and  free,  the  mother  of  all  his

petuity.    It  will  be  the  scene  of  delight-  believing  children,  the  true  and  eternal

ful  privileges  and  blessings.  It  will  be  metropolis  of  Christendom  [Harbaugtij.
invested  with  absolute  and   inviolable  The  words  prove — 1.  That  interest  in

safety.     It  will  possess  renown  and  em-  God  is  the  ground  of  encouragement  to

pire  throughout  the  whole  world.  the  Church.     2.  That  interest  in  God

This  heavenly  city,  where  Christ's  is  sweetened  by  God's  gracious  presence
throne  is,  is  called  Zion,  because  there  with  his  people.  3.  That  interest  in
all  the  expectations  which  the  0.  T.  God  is  confirmed  by  experimental  know-
saints  connected  with  the  earthly  Zion  ledge.  "They  shall  know"  (1  Cor.  ii.
will  be  fulfilled,  and  because,  also,  there  1 2).  4.  That  interest  in  God  is  evi-
everything  which  the  Jews  associated  denced  by  holy  life.  Sanctification  is
with  the  shadowy  picture  of  the  earthly  the  fruit  and  end  of  God's  presence  (Ps.
Zion  is  for  ever  perfected  in  a  glorious  xciii.  5).
actualization.     From  thence  God's  gra-

HOMILETIOS.

The  New  World. —  Verses  18 — 21.

In  these  verses,  says  Lowth,  "  either  the  times  of  the  Messiah  are  described,
or  we  have  a  description  of  Jerusalem  after  its  final  restoration,  when  a  golden  age
shall  commence  among  its  inhabitants,  and  when  the  knowledge  of  God  and  his
Christ  shall  a  second  time  be  widely  diffused  from  it."

I.  The  scene  of  manifold  blessings.  These  blessings  are  predicted  under
significant  figures.     "  The  mountains  drop  down  new  wine  and  the  hills  flow  with


chap.  III.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.  239


milk"  in  rich  abundance.  Divine  influences  will  attend  the  preaching  of  the
word,  converts  shall  rapidly  increase  in  number  and  fruitfulness,  the  ordinances
of  religion  shall  water  the  land  and  make  it  exceedingly  productive.  "All  the
rivers  of  Judah  "  shall  make  glad  this  world  of  beauty,  and  streams  of  pure  water
shall  quench  the  thirst  and  quicken  the  virtues  of  its  people.  II.  The  abode  of
perfect  happiness.  1.  Freedom  from  foes.  Inveterate  enemies,  as  Egypt  and
Edom,  will  be  destroyed.  All  opposition,  violence,  and  cruelty  to  God's  people
will  be  at  an  end.  They  shall  be  free  from  injury  and  perpetuated  to  the  end  of
time.  2.  Freedom  from  barrenness.  "A  fountain  shall  come  forth  of  the  house
of  the  Lord  "  to  fertilize  the  most  unproductive  regions.  Temporal  blessings  shall
be  accompanied  with  spiritual  blessings  without  stint  or  measure.  The  vivifying
and  refreshing  waters  of  life  shall  flow  from  Christ  to  bless  the  capital  and  the
world.  "  And  it  shall  be  in  that  day,  that  living  waters  shall  go  out  from  Jeru-
salem ;  half  of  them  toward  the  former  sea,  and  half  of  them  toward  the  hinder
sea  :  in  summer  and  in  winter  shall  it  be  "  (Zech.  xiv.  8).  III.  The  residence  of
righteous  people.  The  inhabitants  will  be  purged  and  cleansed  from  sin.  Pollu-
tion in  general  shall  be  wiped  away.  Special  sins,  such  as  shedding  innocent
blood,  shall  be  forgiven.  Knowledge  shall  spread,  and  every  one  shall  know  the
Lord  from  the  least  to  the  greatest.  There  will  be  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth
wherein  dwelleth  righteousness.  No  strangers  will  defile  nor  disturb  the  peace
and  prosperity  of  these  happy  regions.  God  will  dwell  and  make  his  Church  a  fit
residence  for  his  presence  and  praise.  In  his  presence  will  be  fulness  cf  joy,
and  at  his  right  hand  pleasures  for  evermore.  Seek  to  be  numbered  with  the
saints  in  glory.  While  on  earth  prepare  for  this  glorious  era.  Help  it  on  by
daily  effort  and  incessant  prayer.

Teach  us  in  watchfulness  and  prayer

To  wait  for  the  appointed  hour ;
And  fit  us  by  thy  grace  to  share

The  triumphs  of  thy  conquering  power.

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  18.     The  glorious  fountain.     I.  the  tabernacles  of  the  Most  High"  (Ps.

Its  source.     "The  house  of  the  Lord."  xlvi.  4).
All  springs  of  grace,  comfort,  and  glory  Or  if  Zion's  hill

are  in  God.      These  blessings  take  their  Delight  thee  more,  or  SiWs  fount  that  flowed

rise  in  the  sanctuary,  like  the  waters  of  Hard  b)r  the  oracle  of  God,  I  thence

Ezekiel  (xlvii.  1),  or  those  from  under  Itlvoke  thine  aid  to  my  adventur™s  song,
the  threshold  of  the  temple.   The  ordin-  Ver.  19.    1.  The  desolation.    In  con-

ances  of  God's  house  are  like  fountains  trast  to  the  fruitfulness  of  the  Church,

of  joy  and  refreshment  to  thirsty  souls.  the  curse  falls  upon  open  enemies  and

II.  Its  abundance.  It  is  a  fountain,  treacherous  friends.  The  low  condition
not  a  mere  spring.  An  abundance  to  of  Egypt  and  Edom  for  centuries  proves
fill  all  the  rivers,  lit.  channels  of  Judah.  the  truth  of  this  prediction  (Is.  xix.  1  ;
Eivers  of  living  water  flow  from  the  Jer.  xlix.  17).  So  at  the  second  coming
Spirit  (John  vii.  38).  There  is  no  scarcity  of  Christ  all  foes  of  Israel  typified  by
of  gospel  blessings  to  sinners  and  saints.  these  nations   shall   be   destroyed.      2.

III.  Its  fertility.  It  creates  fertility  in  The  cause  of  the  desolation,  (a)  Vio-
the  king's  gardens  (2  Kings  xxv.  4;  lence  to  God's  people  (Ezek.  xxv.  12,  13).
Jer.  xxxix.  4).  The  waters  in  Christ  (b)  Shedding  innocent  blood.  How
vivify  and  refresh  the  barren  spots  in  highly  does  God  esteem  the  death  of
the  Church.  Valleys  of  Shittim,  arid  his  people,  the  blood  of  the  faithful,
deserts,  shall  be  fruitful.  "  There  is  a  The  warning  is  repeated  time  after  time
river,  the  streams  whereof  shall  make  to  deter  nations  from  the  danger.  In
glad  the  city  of  God,  the  holy  place  of  every  place  where  his  cause  and  crown


240


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.


Lchap.  m.


have  been  disregarded  ruin  has  followed.
Sin  blights  nations,  destroys  their  pa-
laces, and  desolates  their  land.  "  Come,
behold  the  works  of  the  Lord,  what  de-
solations he  hath  made  in  the  earth."
"The  three  words  of  Joel,  Egypt  shall
become  desolation,  are  more  comprehen-
sive than  any  prophecy,  except  those  by
Ezekiel.  They  foretell  that  abiding
condition,  not  only  by  force  of  the
words,  but  by  the  contrast  with  an
abiding  condition  of  bliss.  The  words
say,  not  only  '  it  shall  be  desolated,'
as  by  a  passing  scourge  sweeping  over
it,  but  it  shall  '  itself  pass  over  into  that
state ; '  it  shall  become  what  it  had  not
been ;  and  this  in  contrast  with  the
abiding  condition  of  God's  people.  The
contrast  is  like  that  of  the  Psalmist
(Ps.  cvii.  33 — 35).  Judah  should  over-
flow with  blessing,  and  the  streams  of
God's  grace  should  pass  beyond  its
bounds,  and  carry  fruitfulness  to  what
now  was  dry  and  barren.  But  what
should  reject  his  grace  should  be  itself
rejected"  [Pusey].

Ver.  20.  The  perpetuity  of  the
Church.  Egypt  and  Edom,  all  enemies
of  God,  will  come  to  an  end.  But  the
gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against
her.  No  enemy  can  destroy,  no  ages
consume  her.  She  knows  no  injury,  nor
decay.  The  Church  of  God  shall  abide
in  him  and  by  him  on  earth,  and  shall
dwell  with  him  for  ever.

Ver.  21.  This  verse  has  been  inter-
preted in  various  ways.  God  would
cleanse,  or  pronounce  the  blood  which
had   been  shed   by  the  enemies  to  be


innocent.     This   cleansing    or   sentence
would   be   accomplished   by   punishing
those  who  shed  it.     "I  will  exact  full
atonement  of  their  enemies  for  all  their
oppressions  and  violence."    Or  the  mean-
ing may  be,  "I  will  blot  out  their  own
transgressions,  so  far  as  these  have  not
already   been  purged   away."      In  one
case,  the  principle  is  that  guilt  cannot
be  cleansed  without  complete   satisfac-
tion.    In  the  other,  that  security  with
God  can  only  be  enjoyed  by  removal  of
all    transgression.      Hence    peace    and
security   with    God    by  atonement   for
guilt.     1.  To  the    sinner.     Guilt  must
be  removed,  justice  satisfied,  and  every-
thing  taken  away  which  renders    him
unfit    for    God's    presence.       Without
shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission
of  sins.     2.  To  the  Church.     The  secur-
ity and  happiness  of  the  Church  depend
upon   God's   presence.      God    will   not
dwell  with  a  worldly  people.     "  Holi-
ness  becometh    thine   house,    0    Lord,
for   ever."     God   will   not   dwell   with
evil,  nor  will  he  tolerate  it  in  the  be-
liever,   or   in   his   house.      Only    when
cleansed  from  blood  are  we  fit  for  the
dwelling  of  the  Holy  God  and  King.

The  crown  and  seal.  For  the  Lord
dwelleth  in  Zion.  1.  To  sanctify.  2.
To  be  praised.  3.  To  defend.  "  And
the  nam  \  of  the  city  from  that  day  shall
be,  The  Lord  is  there  "  (Ezek.  xlviii.
35).

The  Church  has  all  her  foes  defied,
And  laughed  to  scorn  their  rage ;

E'en  thus  for  aye,  she  shall  abide
Secure  from  age  to  age.


HOM1LETICS.
The  Final  Scene. — iii.  1 — 21.

The  whole  of  this  chapter  may  be  summed  up  into  two  parts,  of  unequal  length
and  graphic  description.

I.  God's  judgment  upon  the  nations.  Ver.  1 — 16.  1.  The  verdict  pronounced
in  time  and  place  with  its  nature  and  ground  (ver.  1 — 8).  2.  The  sentence  exe-
cuted (ver.  9 — 16).  The  call  to  hear  it  (ver  9 — 11);  the  throne  from  which  it  is
given  (ver.  11  &  12) \  and  the  dreadful  overthrow  which  it  specifies  (ver.  13 — 16).
II.  The  final  glory  of  God's  kingdom.  Ver.  17 — 21.  1.  The  presence  of  God
in  it  (ver.  17).  2.  Its  abundant  blessings  (ver.  18).  3.  Its  perpetual  blessedness
(ver.  19 — 21).  This  is  contrasted  with  the  destruction  of  its  enemies,  and  all  that
oppress  its  subjects.  "  In  fine,"  says  a  writer,  "  the  closing  chapter  of  Joel's  pro-
phecy is  a  brief  apocalypse,  cast  in  the  forms  of  Hebrew  thought  and  story  indeed,


chap,  m.]


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:  JOEL.


241


and  only  dimly  bodied  out,  yet  setting  forth,  in  language  which  even  the  Jews
could  not  and  do  not  mistake,  the  terrors  of  the  last  judgment,  the  issue  of  the  time-
long  struggle  of  good  with  evil,  and  the  golden  age  of  peace  and  fruitful  service,
which  is  to  succeed  to  the  conflicts  and  storms  of  time."

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  III.


Ver.  1 — 3.  Persecution.  Oh,  if
when  we  oppress  and  goad  our  fellow-
creatures,  we  bestowed  but  one  thought
upon  the  dark  evidences  of  human  error,
which,  like  dense  and  heavy  clouds,  are
rising  slowly,  it  is  true,  but  not  less
surely,  to  heaven,  to  pour  their  after-
vengeance  on  our  heads — if  we  heard
but  one  instant,  in  imagination,  the  deep
testimony  of  dead  men's  voices,  which
no  power  can  stifle,  and  no  pride  can
shut  out,  where  would  be  the  injury  and
injustice,  the  suffering,  misery,  cruelty,
and  wrong,  that  each  day's  life  brings
with  it  [Dickens]  1

Sold  a  girl  for  wine.  A  woman  in
Glasgow,  some  time  since,  in  order  to
gratify  her  immoderate  craving  for  ardent
spirits,  was  said  to  have  offered  her  own
child  for  sale  as  a  subject  for  dissection
[  Whitecross],

Ver.  4 — 8.  Retribution.  Society  is
like  the  echoing  hills.  It  gives  back  to
the  speaker  his  words,  groan  for  groan,
song  for  song.  Wouldest  thou  have
thy  social  scenes  to  resound  with  music  ?
then  speak  ever  in  the  melodious  strains
of  truth  and  love.  "  With  what  mea-
sure ye  mete,  it  shall  be  measured  to  you
again  "  [Br  Thomas].

Ver.  9 — 12.  Here,  as  in  other  re-
spects, the  predictions  and  promises  are
but  partially  fulfilled  in  the  literal  Is-
rael. Their  real  accomplishment,  their
awful  completion,  will  be  when  Zion's
King  conies  in  glory  and  majesty,  with
a  rod  of  iron,  to  dash  in  pieces  the  great
antichristian  confederacy  of  kings  and
peoples,  and  to  take  possession  of  his  long-
promised  and  dearly-bought  inheritance.
The  signs  of  the  times  seem  to  indicate
that  the  coining  of  the  Lord  draws
nigh.

Ver.  12 — 14.  Judgment  day.
Spencer  says  that  two  soldiers  entered
the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  when  one  of
them  said,  "  In  this  place  shall  be  the
general  judgment,  and  I  will  now  take
my  place  where  I  shall  then  sit."    He


then  sat  down  upon  a  stone,  and  looked
up  to  heaven  as  if  to  receive  his  sen-
tence ;  when  such  dismay  overwhelmed
him,  that  he  fell  to  the  earth  trembling,
and  ever  after  remembered  the  day  of
judgment  with  horror.

Ver.  15,  16.  How  sublime  is  this
description  !  How  should  we  adore  the
God  before  whom  the  unconscious  earth
and  sky  do  reverence,  and  act  as  if  they
knew  their  Maker  !  Though  the  solid
world  is  convulsed  at  God's  presence,
saints  do  not  fear.  God  is  their  refuge
and  strength  (Ps.  xlvi.  1 ).  The  enemy
will  be  destroyed,  but  the  Church  shall
be  saved.  "  She  shall  not  be  removed ;
God  shall  help  her."

The  heavens  and  earth  shall  pass  away,
And  be  to  dissolution  brought,

But  Zion's  strength  shall  ne'er  decay,
For  her  Redeemer  changeth  not.

Ver.  19.  A  French  traveller  thus
describes  this  desolation — "  Instead  of
those  ancient  cultivated  and  fertile
plains,  one  only  finds,  here  and  there,
canals  filled  up,  or  cut  in  two,  whose
numerous  ramifications,  crossing  each
other  in  every  direction,  exhibit  only
some  scarcely  distinguishable  traces  of
a  system  of  irrigation  :  instead  of  those
villages  and  populous  cities,  one  sees
only  masses  of  bare  and  arid  ruins,  rem-
nants of  ancient  habitations  reduced  to
ashes ;  lastly,  one  finds  only  lagoons,
miry  and  pestilential,  or  sterile  sands,
which  extend  themselves,  and  unceas-
ingly invade  a  land,  which  the  industry
of  man  had  gained  from  the  desert  and
the  sea."

Ver.  20,  21.     The  human  mind  has

ever  conceived  a  reward  for  the  righteous

and  punishment  for  the  wicked  in  a

future  state.     Heaven  is  all  the  more

resplendent  by  contrast  with  the  dark

back-ground  of  another  state.

If  there's  a  Power  above  us
(And  that  there  is,  all  Nature  cries  aloud,
Through  all  her  works),  He  must  delight  in

virtue,
And  they,  whom  he  delights  in,  most  be  happy ,

16


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY


ON


AMOS.


INTKODUCTION

The  Prophet.  Amos  was  a  native  of  Tekoah,  a  village  six  miles  south  of  Beth-
lehem, whose  ruins  are  still  preserved  in  the  modern  name  of  Tekua.  He  was  a
herdsman,  not  a  wealthy  sheep-owner  ;  in  rather  indigent  circumstances,  hut  culti-
vated sycamores  for  his  support  (ch.  i.  1  ;  vii.  14,  15).  He  rejected  the  summons
to  Judah  and  eat  "bread  there.  He  did  not  prophesy  for  bread.  He  was  satisfied
with  his  simple  fare.  He  was  neither  a  prophet,  nor  the  pupil  of  a  prophet.  He
was  "  a  self-made  man,"  employed  in  humble  life,  among  ordinary  men.

The  Time.  Somewhat  earlier  than  Hosea,  yet  contemporary  with  him.  Younger
than  Joel,  whose  writings  he  read  when  composing  his  own,  and  from  whom  he
quotes  in  exact  words  (ch.  i.  2 ;  ix.  13).  It  is  stated  that  he  prophesied  in  the
days  of  Uzziah,  king  of  Judah,  &c.  (i.  1).  This  earthquake  appears  to  be  the  same
as  that  mentioned  in  Zech.  xiv.  5,  and  Josephus  (Ant.  ix.  10.  4),  as  a  token  of  Divine
displeasure,  in  addition  to  leprosy,  against  Uzziah,  for  usurping  the  priest's  office.
Jotham  his  son  acted  as  regent  during  the  latter  part  of  his  reign  (2  Kings  xv.  33).
As  Uzziah  and  Jeroboam  were  contemporaries  for  about  27  years  (B.  C.  808 — 782),
the  latter  part  of  this  period  will  fix  the  date  of  Amos.  This  agrees  with  ch.  vii.
10.  This  was  a  period  of  national  splendour  and  prosperity.  Under  Jeroboam  II.
the  kingdom  of  Israel  was  restored  to  its  ancient  limits,  and  stood  at  the  zenith  of
its  power.  But  this  restoration  was  followed  by  the  prevalence  of  luxury,  licen-
tiousness, and  vice,  which  provoked  the  judgment  of  God.  The  poor  were  oppressed
(viii.  4) ;  the  ordinances  of  religion  felt  burdensome  (viii.  5) ;  and  idleness
and  extravagance  were  common  (iii.  15).  The  idolatry  of  the  golden  calf  was
practised  at  Bethel  and  Gilgal,  Dan  and  Beersheba  ;  was  offensively  united  with
the  true  worship  of  Jehovah,  and  was  the  source  of  all  their  prevalent  evils.  In
the  midst  of  this  vice  and  prosperity,  the  prophet  was  called  from  his  seclusion  to
proclaim  judgments,  most  unlikely  and  most  terrible,  the  fall  of  the  kingdom  of
Israel.  Judgments  upon  individual  nations,  typical  of  hostile  forms  to  God,  and
his  Church  in  every  age :  j  udgments  upon  all  kinds  of  corrupt  religion  in  the
Church,  are  given  with  special  emphasis,  and  comprehensive  fulness.  In  a  time
of  moral  corruption,  and  political  security,  he  was  sent  to  remind  nations  of  a  retri-
butive law,  and  a  God  of  justice.


INTRODUCTION.  243


The  Book.  We  have  nine  chapters,  taking  up  the  words  of  Joel,  and  containing
threatenings  against  the  kingdom  of  Israel  chiefly.  Surrounding  nations  are
briefly  noticed,  and  a  promise  of  deliverance  and  prosperity  is  given  to  Israel.  Its
Analysis  is  simple.  First,  a  solemn  prelude  (ch.  i. — ii.  1 — 5)  to  the  main  subject.
Nation  after  nation  is  summoned  to  judgment,  with  a  striking  idiomatic  expression
("For  three  transgressions,"  &c),  similar  to  Prov.  xxx.  15,  18,  21.  After  the  in-
troduction, we  have  two  parts.  In  chaps.  Hi. — vi.  loe  have  special  charges  and
threats.  Chap.  iii.  sets  forth  the  certainty  of  coming  judgment ;  for  the  prophet
of  Jehovah  cannot  speak  in  vain.  Chap.  iv.  declares  that  since  previous  visitations
had  been  in  vain  God  must  punish.  In  chap.  v.  we  have  the  outcry  of  calamity
with  calls  to  seek  the  Lord  and  escape.  Woe  is  pronounced  upon  those  who  desire
the  day  to  come,  who  are  not  yet  prepared  for  it.  Chap.  vi.  rouses  those  who  fancy
the  day  is  far  off,  and  who  continue  in  folly  until  overtaken.  Then  chaps,  vii. —
ix.  recount  Jive  visions.  The  first  two  threaten  judgments  (chap.  vii.  1 — 6);  the
next  two  point  out  the  ripeness  of  the  people  for  them  (ch.  vii.  7 — 9  ;  viii.  1 — 3).
Between  these  a  conversation  between  the  prophet  and  the  priest  of  Bethel  is  given
(ch.  vii.  10 — 17).  The  substance  of  the  fourth  vision  ends  in  a  simple  prophetic
address  (ch.  viii.  4 — 14).  The  fifth  vision  (ch.  ix.  1),  the  overthrow  and  ruin  of
Israel,  is  expanded  to  an  address  (ver.  2 — 10),  to  which  is  appended  the  promise  of
restoration  to  the  fallen  kingdom,  its  extension  in  Gentile  nations,  and  its  eternal
glorification.  The  close  points  to  the  beginning  of  the  book,  which  seems  "  a
grand  panorama  of  God's  judicial  majesty."

Its  Style  indicates  vigour  of  mind  and  great  moral  culture.  Images  are  taken
from  country  life  in  abundance  and  originality.  The  earth  with  its  vineyards,
the  heavens  with  lights,  and  cities  in  their  luxury,  impart  beauty  to  his  conceptions.
Historical  events  and  national  customs  show  that  he  was  a  student  of  the  law
as  well  as  "  a  child  of  nature."  He  read  the  relations  of  the  physical  to  the  moral,
and  wonderfully  combined  the  justice  and  the  mercy  of  God.  Minute  concep-
tions express  the  deep  experience  of  the  writer.  He  was  a  man  of  prayer  and
moral  courage.  He  scorned  mere  forms  of  worship,  and  felt  that  repentance  was
spiritual  work.  He  valued  Divine  revelation,  and  for  the  thunder  of  reproof  or
the  gentle  tones  of  mercy  to  be  silent  was  to  him  the  greatest  of  evils.  We  shall
try  to  bring  out  the  hidden  beauties  of  his  language,  apply  his  lessons  to  events  of
the  present  day,  and  by  God's  help,  in  a  method  in  which  no  other  writer  has  yet
done,  expound  the  prophecy  to  aid  the  mission  of  the  pulpit.


244  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  [chap.  i.


CHAPTER  L

Critical  Notes.]  Amos]  Different  from  the  father  of  Isaiah,  AmoU.  Tek.]  2  Chron.  xx.  20
Earth.]  2  Chron.  xxvi.  16.  A  premonitory  sign  in  nature  of  revolutions  in  guilty  kingdoms  (Matt,
xxiv.  7,  8).  2.  Roar]  Cf.  Joel  iii.  16  ;  Jer.  xxv.  30.  God  will  spread  terror  like  beasts  of  prey
(Ps.  xviii.  3).  Zion]  Seat  of  government  from  whence  they  revolted.  Hab.]  Poetical  for  inhabit-
ants. Carmel]  whose  summit  abounded  in  olives  and  rich  pastures  ;  owing  to  its  nearness  to  the
sea,  renewed  its  freshness  and  verdure  (Song  vii.  5;  Is.  xxxiii.  9;  Jer.  1.  19).  3.  Three]  The
numbers  serve  to  denote  the  multiplicity  of  sins,  "  ungodliness  in  its  worst  form  "  [Luther].  Turn]
Reverse,  to  make  a  thing  go  back,  to  withdraw  it  (Num.  xxiii.  20;  Is.  xliii.  13).  4.  A  fire]
Material,  as  cities  burned  in  war  (Ps.  lxxviii.  63)  ;  or  an  emblem  of  God's  judgments.  5.  Bar]  of
its  gates  (Jer.  li.  30).  Inhab.]  Subject.  Him  that  holdeth]  Ruler.  Saith]  Strengthens  the  threat,
which  was  fulfilled  when  the  Assyrian  king  conquered  Damascus  and  broke  up  the  kingdom  (2  Kings
xvi.  9).  6.  Whole  captivity]  i.  e.  left  none,  but  sold  them  to  Edomites,  the  most  deadly  enemies  to
Israel :  hence  the  greatness  of  the  sin.  7.  Fire  on  the  wall]  An  enemy  shall  destroy  it.  Fulfilled
by  Hezekiah  (2  Kings  xviii.  8),  Sennacherib  (Is.  xlvii.  1),  and  by  Alexander  the  Great.  9,  10.
Tyrus]  The  crime  here  is  sale  of  prisoners,  like  the  preceding,  to  Edom  ;  a  violation  of  the  covenant
of  David  and  Solomon  with  the  king  of  Tyre  (2  Sam.  v.  11  ;  1  Kings  v.  1  ;  ix.  11).  11,  12.  Edom]
No  particular  crime,  but  implacable  hatred  charged,  which  broke  out  into  acts  of  cruelty.  13 — 15.
Ammon}  Ammonites  joined  the  Chaldeans  to  invade  and  plunder  Judea.  Hazael  perpetrated  the
cruelty  predicted  (2  Kings  viii.  12).  Ripped  up]  A  cruel  act,  done  to  leave  Israel  without  heir,  so  as
to  secure  the  inheritance.  The  punishment  is  by  foreign  invasion,  swift,  sudden,  and  resistless  as
a  tempest;  violent  and  terrific  as  a  whirlwind.  King]  "Their  Moloch  (the  idol  of  Ammon)  and
his  priests  "  [Grotius  and  XXX].  Or,  as  the  English,  their  king  and  his  princes  would  go  together
into  captivity.  The  reigning  head  and  those  who  shared  his  counsels  were  removed.  Their  idols
and  their  earthly  kings  were  unable  either  to  save  themselves,  or  those  who  submitted  to  them.
"Hand  in  hand  the  wicked  shall  not  be  unpunished"  (Prov.  xi.  21).

HOMILETICS.
The  Man  and  his  Message. — Verses  1,  2.

Amos  uttered  words  which  were  the  embodiment  of  Divine  communications  in
vision.  When  engaged  in  the  daily  routine  of  homely  duties  he  received  a  Divine
summons,  "  Go,  prophesy  unto  my  people  Israel."  His  predictions  are  wonder-
ful. It  was  a  strange  event  for  a  prophet  to  be  sent  out  of  Judah  into  the  king-
dom of  the  ten  tribes.  For  a  man  of  no  training  and  position,  to  rise  up  from  the
rank  of  a  shepherd,  and  foretell  the  destruction  of  a  prosperous  and  powerful
nation.     This  would  demand  universal  attention.

I.  The  Word  of  God  often  comes  to  men  of  humble  birth.  "  The  words  of
Amos,  who  was  among  the  herdmen  of  Tekoa."  Amos  was  only  a  common
shepherd  and  a  fig-cultivator.  A  man  of  no  learning  and  connection  in  life.  Yet
the  call  came  to  him.  We  pander  to  the  prejudice  of  sects,  regard  the  opinion  of
the  great,  and  fear  the  scorn  of  the  ignorant.  Most  popular  and  talented  men  of
the  times  are  sought  to  render  our  cause  welcome  to  the  people.  But  God
"  chooses  the  foolish  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  wise."  The  proud  and
mighty  are  passed  by,  and  men  from  the  dunghill  are  exalted  to  the  throne  and
the  ministry.  Elisha  from  the  plough,  David  from  the  sheepfold,  Matthew  from
the  receipt  of  custom,  and  Peter  from  the  fishing-net,  are  selected  to  be  messengers
for  God.  Christ  made  publicans  and  fishermen  apostles  to  men.  The  philoso-
phers of  Greece  and  the  senators  of  Rome  were  passed  by.  "He  hath  put  down
the  mighty  from  their  seats,  and  exalted  them  of  low  degree."  Men  of  the  greatest
eminence  and  usefulness  have  risen  from  the  lowest  ranks.  God  knows  the  "  right
men  "  for  the  times,  finds  them,  and  puts  them  into  "  the  right  place."  Many  are
now  cultivating  high  qualities  in  humble  callings,  despised  and  unknown,  but
whom  God  is  preparing  for  more  honourable  spheres.


chap.  L]  JIOMlUmC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  215


This  law,  though  custom  now  directs  the  course,

As  nature's  institute,  is  yet  in  force,

Uncancelled,  though  diffused :  and  he  whose  mind

Is  virtuous,  is  alone  of  noble  kind ;

Though  poor  in  fortune,  of  celestial  race,

And  he  commits  the  crime  who  calls  him  base*

II.  The  call  from  God  often  takes  men  from  a  lower  to  a  higher  sphere  of  life.

A  humble  shepherd  was  sent  to  warn  the  kings  of  Israel.     Some  men  are  discon-
tented in  their  place,  think  they  deserve  a  higher,  and  cherish  ambitious  schemes
for  the  future.     But  if  we  are  not  faithful  in  little  we  shall  not  be  in  great  things.
"  First  deserve  and  then  desire."     If  we  fill  our  present  position  with  diligence,
faith,  and  earnestness,  we  are  on  the  way  to  honour.     "  Merit  well  the  honour  and
you  shall  obtain  it."     "  The  force  of  his  own  merit  makes  his  way."     Moses  was
a  faithful  servant  in  his  own  house  before   he   became  master  in   Israel.     Our
secular  avocations  are  sacred  and  should  not  be  despised,  filled  with  grand  possi-
bilities and  elevate  to  higher  blessings.     God  speaks  to  men  in  business,  awakens
dormant  powers,  and  calls  to  distinguished  honour.     Cincinnatus  was  called  from
the  plough  to  the  dictatorship.     Matthew  from  the  toll-booth,  and  Peter  from  his
boat,  were  called  to  follow  Christ  and  become  historians  and  ambassadors  of  the
age.     Work  in  your  daily  tasks  and  trust  God  for  the  future.     "  For  promotion
cometh  neither  from  the  east,  nor  from  the  west,  nor  from  the  south.     But  God  is
the  judge :  he  putteth  down  one  and  setteth  up  another."     III.  The  call  from
God  often  comes  to  men  in  special  times.     "  In  the  days  of  Uzziah  king  of
Judah,  and  in  the  days  of  Jeroboam."     "  Judge  a  man  by  the  times  in  which  he
lived,"  is  a  common  saying.     If  we  thus  estimate  the  prophet  Amos,  we  learn  his
moral  courage  and  intense  feeling  as  he  delivers  the  burden  of  the  Lord.     He  was
accused  of  conspiracy  and  advised  to  flee,  but  defends  his  innocence  and  authority,
and  with  the  heroism  of  God's  servant  repeats  the  unpleasant  message,  and  unfolds
the  Divine  displeasure.     In  shepherd's  dress  he  denounced  the  idolatry  of  the
court,  foretold  the  destruction  of  the  kingdom  and  the  captivity  of  the  people.     1.
Times  of  natural  prosperity.     During   the  vigorous  reign  of  Jeroboam  II.  the
kingdom  of  Israel  enlarged  its  dominions  by  the  subjugation  of  adjoining  states.
With  greater  security  from  without,  and  firmer  administration  within,  there  were
profound  peace,  material  prosperity,  and  social  gratification.     Uzziah  also  had  sub-
dued the  Edomites  and  the  Philistines,  and  made  the  Ammonites  pay  tribute.
He  fortified  Jerusalem,  and  raised  a  powerful  army.     His  name  had  spread  even
to  Egypt  (2  Chron.  xxvi.).     Under  these  kings  the  two  kingdoms  had  reached
the   summit   of    their   power    and   splendour.      2.   Times   of  moral   corruption,
National  prosperity  is  no  guarantee  for  pure  religion.     It  often  begets  indifference,
love  of  ease,  and  maturity  for  judgment.     "  Prosperous  times  "  are  very  often  the
least   prosperous.     Idolatry  was  sanctioned   by  the  State,  and  mixed  with  the
worship  of  God.     The  luxuries,  debaucheries,  and  reckless  conduct  of  the  rich  were
upheld  by  oppressing  the  poor  (ch.  ii.  7,  8 ;  iii.  9).     Perversion  of  justice  (ch.  ii.
7 ;  v.  7),  bribery  (ch.  ii.  6  ;  v.  12),  and  false  measures  abounded.     In  business  a
griping,  hardfisted  bargain  was  sought  (ch.  viii.  5,  6).     Everywhere  in  the  events
of  life,  sin  showed  itself  in  the  vile  price  given  for  articles  of  luxury  (ch.  ii.  6 ;
viii.  6).     In  the  palace  and  the  sanctuary,  from  the  metropolis  to  the  borders,
moral  corruption  prevailed.     But  Amos  thundered  out  the  word  of  God  amid  the
splendour  and  wickedness  that  surrounded  him.     He  sets  before  them  their  sins
and  pronounces  God's  sentence  upon  them.     "  Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord  God.
Therefore  thus  will  I  do  unto  thee,  0  Israel.    Therefore  the  Lord,  the  God  of  hosts,
the  Lord  saith   thus"   (iii.   11;    iv.   12;    v.   16).     3.   Times  of  physical  events.
"  Two   years   before  the  earthquake."     Earthquakes  are  sometimes  natural  har-
bingers  of    coming    revolutions.      When   men  are   steeped    in   sin   and    living
in  utter  carelessness  God  has  many  means  to  rouse  them  from  sleep.      When


346  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  [chap.  1.


they  disregard  his  word,  unnatural  and  extraordinary  signs  proclaim  his
anger.  This  earthquake  must  have  been  very  great.  It  is  described  as  "the
earthquake,"  and  was  vividly  remembered  in  the  days  of  Zechariah.  Whole
cities,  like  Lisbon,  are  destroyed  by  earthquakes  in  the  East,  says  a  writer.
Josephus  says  that  in  one,  a  little  before  the  time  of  Christ,  "  some  ten  thousand
were  buried  under  the  ruined  houses."  Eeferring  to  this  he  says,  "  By  it  half
of  a  mountain  was  removed  and  carried  to  a  plain  four  furlongs  off,  and  spoiled
the  king's  gardens."  But  in  this  shaking  of  the  earth  we  hear  the  voice  of  God
warning  nations  of  their  danger,  before  the  flash  falls  and  the  fire  consumes
them.  IV.  The  call  which  comes  from  God  to  men  is  often  a  call  to  deliver
an  unpleasant  message.  "  The  Lord  will  roar  from  Zion  and  utter  his  voice  from
Jerusalem."  Many  are  willing  to  deliver  pleasant  tidings,  to  preach  "  smooth
things ; "  but  few  have  the  courage  and  self-denial  to  go  in  the  face  of  public
opinion,  and  declare  the  truth  at  the  risk  of  their  lives.  Amos  had  to  denounce
judgments,  which  are  often  as  necessary  as  mercies.  They  both  have  one  aim,  and
to  separate  them  indicates  perverted  views  of  the  Divine  character  and  procedure.
1.  Judgments  authoritative  in  their  origin.  "  From  Zion  "  and  from  Jerusalem,
where  God  dwelt  and  was  worshipped.  Neither  in  Bethel  nor  in  Dan,  nor  in  the
cities  of  Samaria  and  Jezreel,  but  in  the  cities  of  Israel  did  God  manifest  himself.
Zion  was  the  seat  of  government  and  the  centre  of  mercy.  From  thence  issued
edicts  and  decrees  for  Israel  and  the  world.  At  the  very  beginning,  therefore,
the  prophet  warned  Israel,  and  declared  the  name  and  authority  of  Jehovah,  King
in  Zion.  "  The  Lord  shall  roar  from  on  high,  and  utter  his  voice  from  his  holy
habitation."  2.  Judgments  loud  in  their  nature.  Jehovah  will  roar  against  them
as  a  lion,  terrible  to  shepherds  and  their  flocks.  His  voice  must  be  heard,  and  the
message  demands  attention.  God  roars  before  he  tears,  and  warns  before  he  strikes.
"  Thus  hath  the  Lord  spoken  unto  me,  Like  as  the  lion  and  the  young  lion  roaring
on  his  prey,  when  a  multitude  of  shepherds  is  called  forth  against  him,  he  will  not
be  afraid  of  their  voice,  nor  abase  himself  for  the  noise  of  them  :  so  shall  the  Lord
of  hosts  come  down  to  fight  for  mount  Zion,  and  for  the  hill  thereof."  3.  Judg-
ments specific  in  their  design.  "  Concerning  Israel."  "  All  troubles,"  says  Bishop
Reynolds,  "  have  their  commission  and  instructions  from  him — what  to  do,  whither
to  go,  whom  to  touch,  and  whom  to  pass  over."  The  storm  passed  over  adjacent
countries,  but  at  last  falls  down  in  terrific  power  and  darkness  upon  the  kingdom
of  Israel.  None  are  beyond  the  reach  or  can  escape  from  the  punishment  of  God.
The  arrows  of  the  Almighty  never  miss  their  mark,  and  stick  fast  into  those  at
whom  they  are  shot.  Sent  in  love  or  judgment,  they  cause  a  wound  which  only
he  can  heal.  Under  his  power  and  presence  men  are  stricken  down,  and  the  slain
of  the  Lord  are  many  when  he  leads  in  war.  Those  who  sin  against  light  and
privileges  deserve  greater  judgment  than  others.  Israel's  advantages  were  great,
and  Israel's  sins  were  grievous.  "  Go,  prophesy  unto  my  people  Israel."  4.  Judg-
ments terrible  in  their  consequence.  This  is  read  in  the  terms  which  describe  them.
Not  only  like  the  roaring  of  a  lion  from  his  secret  place  ;  but  like  the  outburst  of
a  thunder-storm,  which  sweeps  over  the  land,  and  carries  desolation  in  its  train.
(a)  The  land  is  smitten.  Its  fruitful  portions  are  made  barren.  The  summit  of
Carmel,  denoted  for  its  fertility  and  excellency,  was  consumed  by  drought.  All
herbage  and  verdure  withered  like  a  flower.  "  Sharon  is  like  a  wilderness  ;  and
Bashan  and  Carmel  shake  off  their  fruits  "  (Isa.  xxxiii.  9).  (b)  The  habitations  of
men  suffer.  "  The  habitations  of  the  shepherds  shall  mourn."  This  is  not  mere
poetic  personification.  The  shepherds  mourn  at  withered  pastures,  and  their  habit-
ations are  made  desolate  by  the  general  calamity.  Nature,  beasts  and  men,  feel
the  visitation,  and  mourn  in  sorrow.  God  can  blight  the  fairest  blessings  of  men.
When  "  the  earth  mourneth  and  languisheth,"  let  us  weep  in  penitence  and  turn
from  sin.


CHAP.  I.]


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  AMOS.


24?


HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


The  same  lessons  are  here  repeated
and  enforced  that  we  have  found  else-
where. 1.  Those  who  take  no  heed  to
one  message  may  have  others  louder.
(a)  Given  by  strange  men.  (b)  Confirmed
by  extraordinary  signs  in  nature.  2.
But  God  is  slow  to  anger,  and  waits
patiently.  Before  the  last  punishment
is  inflicted  real  space  is  given  for  repent-
ance. "  Two  years  before  the  earthquake."
3.  If  all  warning  is  despised,  the  minis-
try of  the  prophet  and  the  sufferings  of
nature,  then  there  is  "  fearful  looking
for  of  judgment,"  &c.  The  populous
cities,  the  peaceful  homes,  and  the  fruit-
ful fields  will  all  suffer  when  God  speaks
in  wrath.

The  shepherd  has  shaken,  not  one
country,  but  the  world  ;  not  by  a  pass-
ing earthquake,  but  by  the  awe  of  God,
which,  with  electric  force,  streamed
through  his  words  \Pusey\

Ver.  1.  It  is  observable  that  Amos,
the  shepherd  of  Tekoa,  south  of  Beth-
lehem in  Judah,  directs  his  prophecies
specially  to  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel.  He
thus  presents  an  example  of  Divine
kindness  and  tender  sympathy  for  aliens
and  rebels  ;  and  in  this  respect  is  like
the  Good  Shepherd,  who  was  born  at
Bethlehem,  and  laid  down  his  life  for
his  sheep  when  they  had  gone  astray
[Wordsworth].

God  chooses  instruments  for  important
service  from  inferior  stations  in  society.


1.  Men  should  not  be  ashamed  of  their
mean  extraction,  or  low  occupations  in
life.  Some  have  childishly  wished  to
blot  out  every  incident  concerning  their
origin.  Rousseau,  a  French  lyric  poet,
is  said  to  have  been  ashamed  that
he    was    the    son    of    a     shoemaker.

2.  Men  should  not  be  repioached  for
former  life,  if  they  earnestly  discharge
the  duties  of  their  present  position.  3.
God  thus  magnifies  his  grace,  and  re-
bukes human  pride.  It  is  a  false  notion
of  true  dignity  and  usefulness,  to  sup-
pose that  they  belong  to  an  illustrious
pedigree  or  a  long  purse.

Honour  and  shame  from  no  condition  rise :
Act  well  your  part — there  all  the  honour  lies.

Ver.  2.  Hoar  from  zion.  Thus
Amos  joins  on  his  own  prophecy  of
judgment  to  that  of  Joel  (iii.  16).  God
roared  out  of  Zion  by  the  voice  of  Joel,
and  of  Amos  himself,  denouncing  his
judgments.  And  God  roared  by  the
voice  of  the  earthquake,  confirming
that  denunciation  by  a  solemn  peal  of
subterranean  thunder.  The  earthquake,
as  it  were,  an  Amen  to  the  prophecy
[Wordsivorth].

Mourn.  Amos,  like  Joel,  notes  the
sympathy  of  the  natural  world  with  man
in  his  sorrow.  He  also  displays  his  own
sympathy  for  the  class  to  which  he  be-
longed, by  remembering  the  home  which
he  loved  and  now  left.


HOMILETICS.
The  Judgment  on  Damascus. — Verses  3 — 5.

The  prophet  having  declared  the  object  of  his  mission,  and  the  authority  by
which  he  was  sent,  now  gives  the  several  messages  in  order.  First  to  the  sur-
rounding nations,  grouped  together  into  two  classes.  Damascus  (Syria),  Gaza
(Philistia),  and  Tyre,  more  distantly  related  to  Israel ;  Edom,  Amnion,  and  Moab
allied  in  origin,  and  nearer  to  Israel.  Then  to  Judah,  and  finally  to  Israel  herself,
the  chief  transgressor.     In  the  succession  of  groups  we  see  a  climax  of  guilt.

I.  The  guilt  of  Damascus.  "  For  three  transgressions  of  Damascus  and  for
four."  All  the  judgments  are  introduced  by  the  same  formula,  which  does  not
mean  that  four  transgressions  were  added  to  three,  but  that  there  was  a  series  of
sins,  each  one  greater  than  the  one  before  it,  and  the  last  the  greatest,  the  climax
of  all.  All  these  nations  were  guilty  of  multiplied  sins.  We  notice  those  specially
mentioned  in  each  case.     Damascus,  that  is,  the  Syrians  under  the  reign  of  Hazael,


248  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  [chap.  i.


invaded  and  subdued  the  eastern  regions  of  Israel.  They  treated  the  captured
Gileadites  with  great  cruelty,  and  crushed  them  under  iron  threshing-machines
(2  Kings  x.  32,  33  ;  viii.  12).  Elisha  foretold  this  cruelty,  and  Hazael  actually
did  it,  though  he  stood  aghast  at  the  prediction.  The  women  of  Israel  were  thrown
like  sheaves  on  the  threshing-floor.  II.  The  punishment  of  Damascus.  1.  It  is
irreversible.  "  I  will  not  turn  away  the  punishment  thereof."  There  are  ante-
cedent stages  when  the  consequences  may  be  averted.  There  are  times  of  warning
and  patient  waiting.  But  when  men  abuse  God's  patience,  and  continue  in  sin
till  there  be  no  remedy,  they  must  reap  what  they  deserve.  2.  It  is  wide-spread.
(a)  The  royal  palaces  are  destroyed.  "  I  will  send  a  fire  into  the  house  of  Hazael,
which  shall  devour  the  palaces  of  Benhadad."  Royal  palaces,  though  richly
furnished  and  strongly  built,  avail  nothing  before  God.  The  habitations  of  the
rich  are  no  protection  against  the  wrath  of  God.  They  turn  to  dust  and  ashes
before  the  fire,  (b)  The  capital  is  made  defenceless.  "  I  will  break  also  the  bar
of  Damascus."  The  bar,  the  gates  of  the  city  were  broken.  It  was  exposed  to
the  enemy,  who  could  go  in  and  out  at  pleasure.  The  seat  of  empire  and  the
empire  itself  was  shorn  of  its  strength.  All  means  of  resistance  were  shivered
Disgrace  and  ruin  followed.  "  Behold,  Damascus  is  taken  away  from  being  a  city,
and  it  shall  be  a  ruinous  heap"  (Is.  xvii.  1).  (c)  The  inhabitants  greatly  suffered.
Some  were  cut  off  by  the  sword.  The  people  from  the  plain  of  Aven  and  princes
from  the  house  of  Eden,  the  inhabitants  of  the  valley  and  the  cities,  were  put  to
death.  Neither  their  wealth  nor  their  gods  could  protect  them.  Others  were
taken  captives  to  the  land  of  Kir,  an  Assyrian  province  on  the  banks  of  the  river
Kir,  the  modern  Georgia.  This  was  accomplished  when  the  king  of  Assyria  took
Damascus,  and  carried  away  its  people  into  captivity  (2  Kings  xvi.  9).  How  easily
can  God  uproot  and  transplant  a  nation  that  sins  against  him,  and  acts  with  cruelty
towards  his  people  !  Those  who  abuse  the  power  which  God  bestows  upon  them
to  uproot  others,  shall  themselves  be  uprooted.

The  Judgment  on  Gaza. —  Verses  6 — 8.

In  similar  terms  as  before,  the  special  sins  of  the  leading  and  most  influential
city  of  the  Philistines  are  mentioned.  Sin  in  every  place  grows  and  ripens  for
punishment.

I.  The  sins  of  Gaza.  "For  three  transgressions,"  &c.  1.  The  provocations
were  great  in  kind.  They  are  called  transgressions,  or  rebellions.  2.  The  provoca-
tions were  multiplied  in  number.  The  sins  were  not  few,  but  many,  and  multi-
plied. "  For  three  and  for  four,"  that  is,  for  continued  provocations  against  God.
Sin  was  continually  added  to  sin.  3.  The  provocations  reached  a  climax  in  their
cruelty  towards  the  Jews.  "  Because  they  carried  away  captive  the  whole  captivity,
to  deliver  them  up  to  Edom."  (a)  This  captivity  was  most  complete.  The  term
"  whole  captivity  "  means  "  a  full  captivity."  The  captives  were  numerous.  They
took  all  they  could  and  left  none  behind.  They  intended  to  destroy  Israel  entirely.
"  They  have  said,  Come  and  let  us  cut  them  off  from  being  a  nation ;  that  the
name  of  Israel  may  be  no  more  in  remembrance  "  (Ps.  lxxxiii.  4).  (b)  This  cap-
tivity was  most  cruel.  The  Philistines  appear  to  have  sold  their  victims  partly  to
the  Edomites,  the  bitterest  foes  of  Israel,  and  partly  to  the  Phoenicians,  who  resold
them  to  Edom  (ver.  9)  and  to  the  Grecians  (Joel  iii.  6).  Amos  emphasizes  the
hatred  of  the  Philistines.  They  were  not  satisfied  with  taking  them  captives
themselves,  but  added  affliction  to  affliction,  by  delivering  the  Jews  into  the  hands
of  implacable  foes.  Fugitives  who  flee  to  us  for  refuge  should  never  be  treated
with  cruelty  nor  robbed  of  their  liberty.  "  It  was  like  driving  the  shrinking  flock
of  sheep  to  the  butcher's  shambles,"  says  a  writer,  reeking  with  the  gore  of  their
companions.  Yet  were  they  driven  there  to  the  slaughter.  Open  markets  there
were  for  Jewish  slaves  in  abundance.  "  Sell  us  only  not  to  slaughter,"  "  Spare
the  gray-headed,"  "  Spare  my  child,"  would  go  up  in  the  ears  of  those,  who  though


chap.  I.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  249


enemies  understood  their  speech.  But  no  !  Such  was  the  compact  of  Tyre,  and
Philistia,  and  Edom  against  the  people  of  God.  Not  one  was  to  be  spared ;  it  was
to  be  a  complete  captivity,  and  that  to  Edom.  The  bond  was  fulfilled.  u  Whoso
stoppeth  his  ears  at  the  cry  of  the  poor,  he  too  shall  cry  and  not  be  heard."  II.
The  doom  of  Gaza.  "  Behold,  I  will  send  a  fire  on  the  wall  of  Gaza,  which  shall
devour  the  palaces  thereof."  The  sentence  upon  Gaza  stands  out  prominently,
because  the  first  city  in  power  and  in  sin.  It  was  the  merchant  city  of  the  five.
Each  had  its  own  petty  king.  But  all  formed  one  whole,  and  were  involved  in
one  sin  and  ruin.  As  they  had  treated  Israel,  so  God  would  deal  with  them.
Measure  for  measure.  "  He  shall  have  judgment  without  mercy  that  hath
showed  no  mercy."  1.  Gaza  and  affiliated  cities  would  be  destroyed.  The
ravages  of  fire  and  sword  would  devour  the  palaces  of  the  land.  Cities
strong  by  nature  and  art  would  be  smitten  by  the  fire,  when  human  foresight
would  pronounce  them  impregnable  and  secure.  2.  The  people  were  doomed  to
perish.  So  complete  would  be  the  destruction  that  "  the  remnant,"  those  who
were  left  after  one  destruction,  should  fall  in  the  other.  The  political  strength
which  escaped  one  calamity  should  be  overtaken  in  another.  God  will  make  a
full  end  of  those  who  sought  to  exterminate  his  people.  Judgment  upon  judg-
ment fell  upon  Philistia,  until  they  ceased  to  be  a  nation  (Jer.  xlvii.).  Cruelty
to  the  helpless,  and  persecution  of  God's  people,  ripen  nations  and  individuals  foi
destruction  with  great  rapidity.  Flourishing  families  and  magnificent  palaces  are
destroyed,  as  if  by  tremendous  fire.  Fortified  cities  are  leveled  to  the  dust,  fertile
regions  are  depopulated,  princes  are  dethroned,  and  mighty  empires  are  reduced  to
slavery  and  ruin.  "  Rejoice  not  thou,  whole  Philistia,  because  the  rod  of  him
that  smote  thee  is  broken  :  for  out  of  the  serpent's  root  shall  come  forth  a  cocka-
trice, and  his  fruit  shall  be  a  fiery  flying  serpent."

The  Judgment  on  Tyre. — Verses  9,  10.

The  third  people  spoken  against  are  the  inhabitants  of  Tyre.

I.  The  ground  of  the  judgment.  Like  other  nations  they  were  guilty  of  many
sins.  1.  They  trafficked  in  human  souls.  If  they  did  not  carry  away,  "they
delivered  up  the  whole  captivity  "  to  the  mortal  enemy  of  the  Jews.  They  sold
their  captives  to  Grecians  far  away  (Joel  iii.  3),  and  cared  not  for  the  hardships  of
those  who  fled  to  them  for  shelter.  2.  They  violated  the  sacred  covenant.  "  And
remembered  not  the  brotherly  covenant."  David  and  Solomon  entered  into  a
friendly  alliance  with  the  king  of  Tyre  (2  Sam.  v.  11 ;  1  Kings  v.  15).  Hiram
supplied  Solomon  with  timber  and  carpenters  in  return  for  oil  and  corn ;  recog-
nized David  as  chosen  of  God,  and  was  "  ever  a  lover  of  David  "  (1  Kings  v.  1).
The  covenant  no  doubt  recognized  God  as  the  true  God,  and  guaranteed  religious
privileges,  undisturbed  peace  and  safety.  No  king  of  Israel  or  Judah  had  ever
made  war  with  Phoenicia.  Yet  they  forgot  this  friendly  feeling,  and  remembered
not  the  brotherly  covenant.  They  sinned  in  helping  Edom  in  their  vile  trade ;  in
forgetting  their  solemn  obligation,  and  in  disregarding  God  for  the  sake  of  mer-
cantile gain.  A  costlier  object  than  man  does  not  exist.  He  who  seeks  to
enrich  himself  by  the  possession  and  traffic  of  his  fellow-creatures  will  be  branded
as  a  pest  to  humanity.

God  gave  us  over  beast,  fish,  fowl,
Dominion  absolute ;  that  right  we  hold
By  his  donation ;  but  man  over  man
He  made  not  lord,  such  title  to  himself
Eeserving — human  left  for  human  free.

II.  The  nature  of  the  punishment.  "  I  will  send  a  fire  on  the  wall  of  Tyros,
which  shall  devour  the  palaces  thereof."  Many  parts  of  Tyre  were  burnt  by  fiery
missiles  of  the  Chaldeans  under  Nebuchadnezzar.  He  took  it  after  a  thirteen
\eais' siege.     Alexander  of   Macedon  subsequently  overthrew  it.     "Note,"  says


250  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  [CHAT.  I.


one,  "  that  though  the  crime  charged  may  have  been  immediately  due  to  the  greed
of  the  merchants  of  Tyre,  acting  in  their  private  capacity,  the  whole  community  is
held  responsible  for  their  deeds.  It  is  the  duty  of  every  State  to  restrain  and
punish  the  unjust  aggressions  of  its  citizens  on  other  communities,  and  if  it  fails  to
do  so,  it  must  abide  the  consequences."

The  Judgment  op  Edom. —  Verses  11*12.

Edom  and  the  two  following  nations  were  related  to  Israel  by  lineal  descent.
But  they  set  aside  the  ties  of  blood,  and  perpetrated  abominable  cruelties.

I.  The  reason  of  the  judgment.  A  relentless  hatred  towards  God's  people,
breaking  out  in  acts  of  cruelty,  from  one  generation  to  another.  1.  It  was  un-
natural hatred.  "Did  cast  off  all  pity."  His  better  feelings  were  subdued.
Natural  pity  for  a  brother  in  distress  was  stifled  or  suppressed  as  if  pity  were  evil
in  itself,  and  to  be  extinguished  within  us.  This  is  most  sinful  and  unnatural.
It  corrupts,  deadens  a  man's  feelings,  and  "  steels  him  against  sympathy  with
others."  "For  pity  melts  the  mind  to  love."  "Compassion  is  an  emotion  of
which  we  ought  never  to  be  ashamed,"  says  Blair.  "  Graceful  is  the  tear  of  sym-
pathy, and  the  heart  that  melts  at  the  tale  of  woe  ;  we  should  not  permit  ease  and
indulgence  to  contract  our  affections,  and  wrap  us  up  in  a  selfish  enjoyment.  But
we  should  accustom  ourselves  to  think  of  the  distresses  of  human  life,  of  the  solitary
cottage,  the  dying  parent,  and  the  weeping  orphan."  2.  It  was  cruel  hatred.  "  He
did  pursue  his  brother  with  the  sword."  His  malice  destroyed  his  compassion.  He
cast  off  the  pity  of  man  and  indulged  in  the  fierceness  of  a  beast.  His  anger  was
insatiable  and  knew  no  bounds.  "  Fierce  are  the  wars  of  brethren ;  and  they  who
love  exceedingly  also  hate  exceedingly,"  says  the  proverb.  No  hatred  seems  so
intense  as  that  between  relations  and  brothers.  To  slay  a  neighbour  is  to  slay  a
man,  and  to  pursue  a  brother  is  fratricide.  "  Wrath  is  cruel,  and  anger  is  outrage-
ous ;  but  avIio  is  able  to  stand  before  envy  % "  3.  It  was  perpetual  hatred.  "  His
anger  did  tear  perpetually,  and  he  kept  his  wrath  for  ever."  Their  enmity  was
intensified  by  their  kinship,  and  the  murderous  thoughts  of  Esau  towards  Jacob
seemed  to  be  revived  in  posterity,  and  become  a  prominent  feature  in  national
character  (Ezek.  xxxv.  5  ;  Obad.  1).  Wrath  was  not  kept  in  restraint,  but  let
loose  like  a  raging  beast.  It  was  hereditary,  full  of  revenge,  which  they  gratified
by  outrageous  cruelties.  "  Thou  hast  had  a  perpetual  hatred,  and  hast  shed  the
blood  of  the  children  of  Israel,  by  the  force  of  the  sword  in  the  time  of  their
calamity."  II.  The  character  of  the  judgment.  Their  cities  would  be  over-
thrown, and  their  capital  destroyed  oy  fire.  God  may  forbear  awhile,  even  with
the  worst  persecutors,  but  their  cruelty  will  at  length  bring  vengeance  to  their  own
doors.  "  The  fire  of  our  anger  against  our  brethren  kindles  the  fire  of  God's
anger  against  us,"  says  an  old  writer.  "  For  I  have  sworn  by  myself,  saith  the
Lord,  that  Bozrah  shall  become  a  desolation,  a  reproach,  a  waste,  and  a  curse "
(Jer.  xlix.  13).

The  Judgment  on  Ammon. —  Verses  13 — 15.

In  the  fifth  place  the  Ammonites  are  accused  of  guilt,  and  their  punishment  is
described.

I.  Their  crimes,  consisted  in  most  atrocious  deeds  towards  the  Gileadites.  1.
Barbarous  cruelty.  "  They  have  ripped  up  the  women  with  child."  Hazael  and
Ammon  were  guilty  of  this  barbarity.  Probably  Syria  and  Ammon  were  leagued
together  for  the  extermination  of  Israel.  The  offspring  of  the  incest  of  Lot  ever
retained  the  stamp  of  their  origin,  and  were  noted  for  sensuality  and  ferocity.
One  would  think  that  human  beings  could  not  become  so  inhuman,  but  history
opens  its  pages  of  darkness  and  blood.  2.  Unbounded  selfishness.  "  That  they
might  enlarge  their  border."  These  deeds  were  not  only  performed  in  rage,  but  in
deliberate  design  to  extirpate  the  people  and  take  possession  of  the  land.     Covet-


chap.   I.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  AMOS..  251


ousness  leads  to  great  cruelty,  and  those  that  seek  to  extend  their  borders  often
use  unscrupulous  means  to  accomplish  their  design.  Pharaoh  killed  the  Israelites,
and  Ammon  displayed  unwonted  ferocity  towards  the  women  of  Gilead.  But
neither  their  kings  nor  their  idols  could  protect  them  from  the  coming  storm.  II.
Their  punishment.  Their  attempts  to  exterminate  others  recoiled  upon  them-
selves. 1.  Their  chief  city  was  burned.  "I  will  kindle  a  fire  in  the  wall  of
Rabbah."  It  was  a  strong  city  with  a  stronger  citadel,  but  it  was  utterly  destroyed.
Its  ruins  still  exist,  some  of  which  perhaps  date  back  to  this  prophecy.  "  I  will
make  Eabbah  a  stable  for  camels,  and  the  Ammonites  a  couching  place  for  flocks."
2.  War  desolated  the  country.  "  Shouting  in  the  day  of  battle."  Foreign
invasion  would  sweep  the  land  like  a  storm,  (a)  Swift  as  a  tempest,  (b)  Violent
as  a  whirlwind.  The  onset  would  be  irresistible.  Like  the  hurricane  carrying  the
caravans  of  the  desert,  so  the  enemy  would  carry  the  walls  and  fortress  of  the
city.  3.  Kings  and  princes  were  taken  into  captivity.  There  would  be  no  one
left  to  resist  and  renew  the  revolt.  On  every  side  waste  land  and  ruined  cities.
All  defences,  human  and  religious,  were  impotent.  Inhabitants  and  gods  were
carried  into  a  foreign  country.  Kings  and  counsellors,  priests  and  people,  linked
together  and  driven  to  one  common  destruction.  "  Cry,  ye  daughters  of  Eabbah,
gird  you  with  sackcloth ;  lament  and  run  to  and  fro  by  the  hedges  ,  for  their  king
shall  go  into  captivity,  and  his  priests  and  his  princes  together  "  (Jer.  xlix.  3).

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  I.

Ver.  1.    Station  in  life.    Low  station  carried  the  town  of  Jaffa  by  assault,  and

is  no  obstacle  to  God's  favour.     St  John  many  of  the  garrison  were  put  to  the

was   the   son   of  a  fisherman ;    recom-  sword.     But  the  greater  part  fled  into

mended    to    our    Saviour    neither    by  mosques,   implored    mercy   from   their

refinement  of  education  nor  by  honour-  pursuers,  and  were  granted  their  lives,

able  employment,  he  was  diligently  en-  But  Napoleon  expressed  resentment  at

gaged    in   the   labours   of    an  humble  the  conduct  of  the  troops,  lost  all  pity,

occupation  when  chosen  to  accompany  and  to  relieve  himself  of  the  care  of  his

his  Lord.     For  those,  indeed,  whom  it  prisoners,  ordered  nearly  4000  to  march

hath  pleased  God  to  place  in  the  higher  on  rising   ground   to   be  shot.     When

states  of  life  it  is  right  that  they  should  Bonaparte  saw  the  smoke  from  volleys

endeavour  to  perform  the  duties  of  their  of  musketry  and  grape,  it  is  said  that

stations,  by  a  due  cultivation  of  their  he  could  not  contain  his  joy.
talents,  by  the  acquirement  of  suitable

accomplishments,  and  by  acting  up  to  Pity  is  tne  virtue  of  the  law,

the  rank  in  society  to   which  by  the  And  none  but  tyrants  use  {t  cruellv'

good  providence  of  God  they  are  born  Ver#  u      Heathenism  is  cruei    and

and  designated [[Bp  Manton].  multitudes   of   victims   have   been   de-

Ver.    9.      Brotherly    covenant       Be  gt        d  under  the  sanction  of  the      dg

Steadfast  m  thy  covenant,  and  be  con-  ButJwhat  can  we  say  when  kings  and

versant  therein,  and  wax  old  in  thy  enli  lltened  nations  commit  such  deeds
work  (Lccles.  xi.  20).     Remember  thy  these]

covenants,  and  bear  no  malice  to  thy

neighbour  (Ibid,  xxviii.  7).  "WhatvriH  not  ambition  and  reyenge  descend

Ver.  11.     Cast  off  pity.     Bonaparte  to?"  [Milton.]


252  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;  AMOS.  [chap,  u.


CHAPTEE  II.

Critical  Notes.]  Bones]  An  act  of  cruelty  revenged ;  others,  an  iniult  to  the  remains  of  a
dead  king,  probably  the  king  joined  in  alliance  with  Jehoshaphat  and  Jehoram  (2  Kings  iii.  9).
2.  Kir.]  A  principal  city  of  Moab,  the  plural  form  indicates  the  acropolis  and  town  (cf.  Jer.  xlviii.
24,  41).  Tumult]  These  expressions  describe  the  city  taken  by  storm.  Trumpet]  The  signal  for
assault.  3.  Judge]  Supreme  magistrate  (Deut.  xvii.  9).  4.  Judah]  condemned  for  idolatry  and
despising  the  law,  i- e.  the  instructions  and  revelations  given  by  God  to  his  people.  Command.]
Separate  precepts.  Lies]  Their  idols,  which  not  only  deceive,  "but  as  fabrications  and  nonentities,
having  no  reality  in  themselves,  and  therefore  quite  unable  to  perform  what  was  expected  of  them  "
[Keil].  Fathers]  Forefathers  generally.  6.  Israel]  The  ten  tribes  the  main  object  of  the  pro-
phecy. First,  prevalent  crimes  of  injustice  and  oppression,  shameless  immorality,  and  daring  con-
tempt of  God.  6 — 8.  Sold]  Perverted  their  cause,  and  gave  an  unjust  sentence  for  a  small  bribe
(Deut.  xvi.  9).  Shoes]  Lit.  sandals.  Needless  ornament  was  thought  more  valuable  than  man.
Pant]  Eagerly  thirst  (Ecc.  i.  5)  for  this  object,  i.  e.  they  long  to  see  the  head  of  the  poor  covered
with  dust  or  earth,  or  to  reduce  them  to  such  misery  that  they  scatter  dust  upon  their  head  (cf.
Job  ii.  12  ;  2  Sam.  i.  2).  Turn]  Bend,  bring  them  into  a  trap,  cast  them  into  destruction,  by
impediments  laid  in  their  path.  Unto]  Not  so  much  as  named  among  the  Gentiles  (1  Cor.  v.  1).
Clothes]  pawned ;  upper  garments  or  square  piece  of  cloth,  to  wrap  all  around  and  serve  the  poor
for  a  counterpane.  If  a  poor  man  was  necessitated  t*  pledge  this  garment,  it  was  returned  to  him
before  night  (Ex.  xxii.  25) ;  and  a  garment  so  pawned  was  not  to  be  slept  upon  (Deut.  xxiv.  12,  13).
Godless  usurers  kept  them  to  stretch  themselves  upon  at  feasts,  at  sacrificial  meals  in  the  temple.
Wine]  bought  with  money  of  those  whom  they  unjustly  fined.  9 — 12.  Yet]  Former  benefits  make
ingratitude  more  base.  Israel  delivered  from  Egypt  and  from  the  most  powerful  enemy  of  all  the
Canaanites.  Roots]  Destroyed  utterly,  no  fruit  above,  no  root  from  which  to  spring  beneath.
liaised  up]  additional  privileges  ;  furnished  with  religious  instructors  and  examples  of  self-restraint.
Gave]  Tempted  the  Nazarite  to  break  his  vow.  13 — 16.]  Judgment  the  inevitable  consequence.
Press]  I  will  depress  your  place,  i.  e.  make  it  narrow,  opposite  to  enlarging  or  relieving  (Ps.  iv.  1  ;
Prov.  iv.  12)  ;  others,  I  will  press  you  down.  It  is  a  rustic  figure,  a  cart  full  of  sheaves  sets  forth
the  pressure  of  their  provocations.  God  was  weary  of  them  (Is.  xliii.  24;  Mai.  ii.  17),  overlaid
with  their  wickedness  \Bp  Halt].  Neither  agility  of  man  or  horse,  neither  courage  nor  valour,
would  deliver  them ;  few  would  escape,  and  those  few  would  be  fugitives  in  other  countries,  or
naked  captives  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy.

HOMILETICS.
The  Judgment  on  Moab. — Verses  1 — 3.

I.  The  punishment  of  Moab.  Moab  was  to  be  laid  waste  by  the  fire  of  war,
and  its  palaces  to  be  destroyed.  1.  A  tumultuous  destruction.  "  Moab  shall  die
with  tumult."  The  sound  of  the  trumpet  would  stir  up  the  assailants.  Noise
and  commotion  would  be  heard  in  the  streets,  and  as  they  had  raised  tumults
themselves  so  they  would  perish  by  tumults.  "  Every  battle  of  the  warrior  is
with  confused  noise."  2.  An  entire  destruction.  God  will  cut  off  its  rulers.  The
chief  magistrate,  the  princes  and  the  rulers  of  all  ranks,  shall  be  taken.  Those
who  are  high  in  rank  and  authority  are  bound  to  do  justice  to  the  people.  Judges
should  learn  that  there  is  one  above  them,  from  whose  judgment  they  cannot  escape.
II.  The  reason  of  this  punishment.  "  Because  he  burned  the  bones  of  the  king
of  Edom  into  lime."  The  king  of  Moab,  either  when  he  sought  to  avenge  himself
on  Edom  (after  the  raising  of  the  siege,  2  Kings  iii.  27),  or  at  some  other  time,  let
out  his  fury  on  the  very  dead.  The  malice  which  vents  itself  on  the  insensible
corpse  is  the  vindictive  rage  of  one,  that  would  never  cease  to  hurt  if  possible.
"  Hatred  which  death  cannot  extinguish,"  says  Pusey,  "  is  the  beginning  of  the
eternal  hate  of  hell."  To  rage  against  the  living,  or  to  express  malignant  spite
against  the  remains  of  the  dead,  is  odious  to  God.  He  is  Lord  of  the  living  and  the
dead.  His  dominion  and  providence  extend  beyond  the  grave,  and  he  will  avenge
insults  to  heathen  or  Christian.


chap,  il]  H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:   AMOS.  253


The  Judgment  on  Judah. —  Verses  4,  5.

I.  The  charge  against  Judah.     The  guilt  here  is  not  as  in  other  cases.     Othei

nations  were  judged  for  injuries  done  to  man ;  but  Judah  for  insults  to  God.  They
despised  the  law,  deceived  themselves  and  one  another  with  false  excuses  and  the
customs  of  progenitors.  Disregard  to  God  is  manifested  in  two  chief  forms.  I.
Contempt  for  the  law  of  God.  "  They  have  despised  the  law  of  the  Lord,  and
have  not  kept  his  commandments."  The  law  as  a  rule  of  life  and  the  command-
ments in  their  special  bearing  were  treated  with  contempt.  The  wisdom  of  God
was  despised  by  the  pride  of  man.  They  first  neglected,  then  set  aside,  the  law.
If  men  have  no  regard  for  the  law,  and  make  no  conscience  of  its  authority,  they
will  soon  resist  it.  If  we  do  not  keep  we  virtually  despise  God's  law.  2.  Wor-
ship of  idols.  Man  will  either  worship  God  or  love  a  lie.  If  he  tries  to  explain
away  the  claims  of  God  and  to  justify  his  sins,  he  will  "  err  "  by  his  lies  and  soon
lose  power  to  discriminate  between  good  and  evil,  (a)  Idolatry  is  a  lie.  The
idols  themselves  are  lies.  They  can  do  nothing,  but  lie  and  deceive.  "  For  an
idol  is  nothing  in  the  world  "  (1  Cor.  viii.  4).  The  pretences  under  which  men
worship  them  are  lies;  snares  to  mislead  and  cause  "to  err."  (b)  Lies  lead  men
astray.  "  Their  lies  caused  them  to  err."  God's  law  is  the  truth,  but  when  the
truth  is  changed  into  a  lie,  there  is  danger  of  sin  becoming  hereditary.  The  word
points  the  way  to  temporal  and  eternal  safety  ;  but  if  despised,  men  wander  into  dark-
ness and  idolatry,  (c)  Lies  are  sometimes  defended  by  custom.  "  After  the  which
their  fathers  have  walked."  Men  get  accustomed  to  evils  that  are  common.  These
evils  acquire  prominence  and  authority.  u  The  popular  error  of  one  generation
becomes  the  axiom  of  the  next.  Human  opinion  is  as  dogmatic  as  revelation.
The  second  generation  of  error  demands  as  implicit  submission  as  God's  truth.
The  transmission  of  error  against  himself,  God  says,  aggravates  its  evil,  and  does
not  excuse  it."  Thus  children  walk  in  the  steps  and  fill  up  the  measure  of  the
guilt  of  their  fathers.  Human  opinion  must  not  be  exalted  above  God's  word.
Scripture,  and  Scripture  alone,  is  the  law  of  truth,  and  the  rule  of  life.  False
doctrines,  delusive  rites  and  idolatries,  violate  the  word  of  God,  perpetuate  human
tradition  in  the  Church,  and  cause  one  generation  after  another  to  err  from  the
truth.  II.  The  calamities  upon  Judah.  In  few  words  and  little  detail,  the
destruction  by  fire  is  said  to  extend  not  only  to  the  cities  of  Judah,  but  to  the
palaces  of  Jerusalem.  Jorusalem  was  burnt  with  fire  by  the  Chaldaeans  (2  Kings
xxv.  9;  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  19),  and  afterwards  by  the  Romans.  Two  centuries
elapsed  before  the  first  fire  destroyed  the  city,  but  God  sent  it.  Let  us  beware  of
treating  the  word  with  contempt,  of  thinking  because  long  delayed  the  judgment
will  never  come.  God's  anger  will  consume  dead  members  in  the  Church,  and
purify  it  from  all  idolatry  and  abominations.  "  Theu  will  I  kindle  a  fire  in  the
gates  thereof,  and  it  shall  devour  the  palaces  of  Jerusalem,  and  it  shall  not  be
quenched."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

1.  A  visible  Church  which  does  not  "  Man  first   in  act  despises  God's   law

keep  up  communion  with  God,  nor  im-  (and  whoso  does  not  keep  it,  despises

prove  her  spiritual  advantages,  may  fall  it),  and  then  he  must  needs  be  deceived

into   provocations   nothing   inferior  in  by  some  idol  of  his  own,  which  becomes

number  and  heinousness  to  the  iniqui-  his  god.     He  first  chooses  wilfully  his

ties  of  nations  about  her.     2.    And  if  own  lie,  i.  e.  whatever  he  chooses  out  of

God   does  not  spare   heathens  without  God,  and  then  his  own  lie  deceives  him.

law  and   with  but  little  knowledge  of  So,  morally,  liars  at  last  believe  them-

God,  far  less  will  he  spare  his  people  selves "  \_Pusey\
who   are    lewd    as    they   [Hutcheson].  Judgments  of  God  compared  to  fire.


254  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  [chap.  11.


1.  Fire  consumes  (Ps.  xviii.  8  ;  Jer.  xv.  4.  Fire  refines.     The  judgments  of  God

14).      2.    Fire    breaks    out    suddenly.  are   intended    to    try   men,    to    purify

The  destruction  of  these  cities  is  certain  churches   and   nations.      "  The   Lord's

and    inevitable.      3.    Fire    is    violent,  fire   is   in    Zion,   and    his   furnace   in

Sodom  and  the   great  fire  in  London.  Jerusalem  "  (Is.  xxxL  9 ;  Zech.  xiii.  9).

HOMILETICS.
The  Judgment  upon  Israel. — Verses  6 — 16.

The  storm  which  has  been  gathering  all  around,  and  threatening  nation  after
nation,  now  falls  upon  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel.  Their  sins  are  minutely  specified,
and  the  terrific  consequences  follow.

I.  The  guilt  of  Israel.  Several  atrocious  crimes  are  charged  upon  them,  some
of  which  are  sanctioned  and  upheld  by  persons  of  rank  and  authority.  1.  They
perverted  justice.  The  smallest  bribe  would  induce  the  judges  to  give  up  a  poor
man  to  the  will  of  his  oppressor.  The  debtor  and  the  insolvent  received  no  mercy
from  his  creditor.  The  righteousness  of  a  man's  character  or  cause  was  no  plea  for
justice.  Magistrates  neither  feared  God  nor  regarded  man.  Man  made  in  God's
image  was  sold  for  some  worthless  price  or  some  trivial  ornament.  All  nations
more  or  less  have  honoured  the  sentiment  of  justice.  In  the  administration  of  law
it  is  the  glory  of  a  people,  and  in  commercial  life  the  bonds  of  society.  In  a  moral
sense  it  gains  respect  from  man  and  approval  from  God.  But  injustice  in  what-
ever form  or  degree,  bribery  for  any  cause,  drags  the  ermine  in  the  dust,  and  damages
the  interests  of  a  nation.  The  national  character  of  Rome  in  the  degenerate
period  when  the  judges  received  bribes  had  lost  its  purity  and  honour.  When  the
Jews  sold  the  righteous  Son  of  God  for  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  they  perverted  judg-
ment, disgraced  humanity,  and  filled  up  the  measure  of  their  iniquity.  "  And  thou
shalt  take  no  gift :  for  the  gift  blindeth  the  wise  and  perverteth  the  words  of  the
righteous."  2.  They  oppressed  the  poor.  "  That  pant  after  the  dust  of  the  earth
on  the  head  of  the  poor."  They  brought  the  poor  into  such  misery  that  they
strewed  dust  on  their  heads  in  sorrow,  or  they  sank  into  the  dust  and  perished
through  oppression.  The  least  property  of  the  poor  excited  their  cupidity,  and  some
think  that  they  "  grudged  him  even  the  dust  which  as  a  mourner  he  strewed  on
his  head,  since  it  too  was  earth."  They  turned  "  aside  the  way  of  the  meek,"  in-
jured their  character,  invaded  their  rights,  and  put  hindrances  in  their  path.  It  is
sad  when  men  take  pleasure  in  trampling  upon  the  poor,  and  grudge  servants  the
smallest  luxury  and  advantage.  Those  who  rob  others  to  increase  their  own  store,
who  act  unjustly  and  over-reach  the  simple  and  meek,  "  will  receive  the  greater
condemnation."  God  will  reckon  with  them.  "  Eiches  profit  not  in  the  day  of
wrath."  "  What  shall  I  do  when  God  riseth  up?  and  when  he  visiteth  what  shall
I  answer  him  1 "  3.  They  practised  incest.  "  A  man  and  his  father  will  go  in  unto
the  same  maid."  Prostitution  was  a  part  of  the  filthy  worship  of  idols,  and  the
damsel  spoken  of  is  probably  one  of  the  prostitutes  belonging  to  the  temple.  This
sin  was  most  abominable  and  worthy  of  death.  Cf.  Lev.  xviii.  7,  15  ;  xx.  11.  Or
if  prostitution  is  not  intended,  we  have  a  daring  contempt  of  the  commands  of  God
(Lev.  xxii.  32).  Modesty  will  have  little  influence  upon  those  who  disregard  jus-
tice. The  name  of  God  will  be  profaned  by  those  who  honour  not  the  nature  of
man.  Father  and  son  forget  their  filial  duties  and  disgrace  themselves  by  the  same
crime.  "  I  am  the  Lord,  and  ye  shall  not  defile  my  holy  name !  For  I  will  be
sanctified  among  the  children  of  Israel."  4.  They  desecrated  the  sanctuary.  (1)
By  unlawfully  keeping  the  pledges  of  the  poor.  "  They  lay  themselves  down  upon
clothes  laid  to  pledge."  If  a  poor  man  pawned  his  upper  dress  which  was  his  only
bed,  it  was  to  be  returned  to  him  before  night  (Ex.  xxii.  25)  ;  and  a  garment  so
pledged  was  not  to  be  slept  on  (Deut.  xxiv.  12,  13).     But  creditors  kept  the  gar-


chap.  n.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  255


ments,  treated  them  as  their  own  property,  and  stretched  themselves  in  luxuriant
ease  "  by  every  altar."  In  shameless  publicity  and  hard-heartedness  they  lay  on
the  garments  of  the  poor  .and  despoiled.  They  avowed  their  sins  and  insulted  the
true  God  by  the  altars  of  false  gods.  (2)  By  drunken  feasts  in  idolatrous  temples.
"  They  drink  the  wine  of  the  condemned  in  the  house  of  their  God."  They  fined
the  poor,  and  were  paid  in  liquor  or  expended  the  money  in  wine.  What  they  got
by  injustice  they  spent  in  sensuality.  They  added  revelry  to  oppression,  and  the
wine  which  they  poured  out  in  libations  or  drank  at  idolatrous  feasts  was  the  price
of  innocent  blood.  Idols  may  not  refuse  such  abominable  sacrifices,  but  God  will
not  accept  them.  "  For  I  the  Lord  love  judgment,  I  hate  robbery  for  burnt-
offering.*'

Not  such  the  service  the  benignant  Father

Requireth  at  his  earthly  children's  hands  :
Not  the  poor  offering  of  vain  rites,  but  rather

The  simple  duty  man  from  man  demands  [  Whittier],

II.  The  aggravation  of  Israel's  guilt.  God's  benefits  should  strengthen  our  grati-
tude. He  requires  much  from  those  to  whom  much  is  given.  Israel's  guilt  is
measured  by  Israel's  privileges.  They  despised  the  blessings  and  neglected  the
warnings  they  received  from  God  (ver.  9 — 11).  1.  Israel  was  indebted  to  God  for
its  national  existence.  He  created  them  for  his  own  peculiar  people,  preserved  them
from  danger,  and  kept  them  in  continued  existence.  (1)  He  redeemed  them  from
bondage.  "  I  brought  you  up  from  the  land  of  Egypt."  Mercies  to  our  ancestors
are  blessings  to  us,  for  we  could  not  exist  without  them.  Past  deliverances  should
never  be  forgotten.  They  should  keep  alive  our  gratitude  and  bind  us  to  duty.
God  dates  our  benefits  that  we  may  remember  them.  If  we  despise  his  kindness,
we  aggravate  our  guilt.  England  has  a  wonderful  past,  and  the  present  generation
should  not  forget  God's  benefits.  "  He  hath  not  dealt  so  with  any  nation."  (2)
He  defended  them  in  danger.  "  Yet  destroyed  I  the  Amorite  before  them,"  &c.
The  Amorites  were  the  most  powerful  of  the  Canaanites  and  most  terrible  to  Israel.
Joshua,  rehearsing  God's  kindness,  places  the  destruction  of  the  Amorites  as  one  of
the  most  prominent  deeds  to  Israel.  "  I  brought  you  into  the  land  of  the  Amorites
which  dwelt  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan,  and  I  destroyed  them  before  you."  The
greater  the  danger,  the  greater  should  be  our  gratitude  for  deliverance.  The  more
God  displays  his  love  and  power  towards  us,  the  more  should  we  keep  his  law  and
praise  his  name.  (3)  He  guided  them  in  their  journeys.  "  Led  you  forty  years
through  the  wilderness."  This  reminded  them  of  innumerable  blessings  in  the
course  of  their  existence.  Manna  from  heaven  and  water  from  the  rock  ;  deliver-
ance from  serpents  and  manifold  perils ;  provoking  sins  and  unqualified  mercy ;
human  guides  and  Divine  presence.  God  led  them  and  gave  them  possession  of  the
land,  for  they  did  not  get  it  by  their  own  numbers  and  skill.  Thus  were  they
raised  up  and  defended;  planted  in  their  inheritance  and  preserved  in  their  exist-
ence. What  echoes  of  the  past  resounded  in  their  laws  !  The  mercies  of  to-day
remind  us  of  the  miracles  of  yesterday.  Past  and  present,  memory  and  law,
remind  us  of  our  duty.  "  And  thou  shalt  remember  all  the  way  which  the  Lord
thy  God  led  thee  these  forty  years  in  the  wilderness."  2.  Israel  teas  indebted  to
God  for  inspired  teachers.  u  And  1  raised  up  of  your  sons  for  prophets."  From
the  beginning  to  the  end  of  their  existence  they  were  not  left  without  light  and
instruction.  Men  of  sanctity  and  power,  like  Elijah  and  Elisha,  were  sent  unto
them,  filled  with  wisdom  and  the  Holy  Spirit.  Messenger  after  messenger  rebuked
their  sins  and  revealed  the  will  of  God.  They  were  never  left  without  a  witness
of  God's  presence  and  a  prophet  to  teach  them.  "  Since  the  day  that  your  fathers
came  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  unto  this  day,  I  have  even  sent  unto  you  all
my  servants  the  prophets,  daily  rising  up  early  and  sending  them."  3.  Israel  was
indebted  to  God  for  noble  examples.  "  And  of  your  young  men  foi  Nazarites."
Prophets  instruct,  examples  show  that  these  instructions  may  be  put  into  practice.


256  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  [chap,  ii


They  are  visible  illustrations  both  of  the  possibility  of  doing  what  is  enjoined  and
of  the  method  in  which  it  is  done.  Hence  the  proverbs,  "  Example  is  more  power-
ful than  precept ;  "  "Precepts  lead,  examples  draw  ;  "  "Every  art  is  best  taught  by
example."  The  Nazarites  were  noble  specimens  of  temperance  and  self-control,  ex-
amples of  men  who  vow  and  are  able  by  God's  grace  to  keep  the  vow.  We  are
more  apt  to  learn  through  the  eye  than  the  ear,  and  what  is  seen  in  fact  makes  a
deeper  impression  upon  the  mind.  Israel  were  blessed  with  men,  living  among
them  day  by  day,  to  quicken  attention  and  incite  to  the  obedience  of  that  law
which  they  despised.  Men  who  counteracted  the  evil  and  gave  an  impulse  to  the
virtuous  tendencies  of  the  age.  Young  men  who  are  examples  of  self-denial  and
devotedness  to  God  are  an  honour  to  any  country.  They  are  monuments  of  God's
grace,  living  reproofs  of  the  impiety  of  the  day,  and  deserve  to  be  imitated  in  their
spirit  and  conduct.  "  I  have  given  you  an  example  that  ye  should  do  as  I  have
done."  4.  Israel  did  not  acknowledgeher  indebtedness  to  God  for iheseprivileges.  They
sought  not  to  walk  in  the  light,  but  to  extinguish  it.  They  perverted  God's  gifts
into  occasions  for  greater  sin.  (a)  They  tempted  the  Nazarite  to  break  his  vow.
"  But  ye  gave  the  Nazarites  wine  to  drink."  It  is  a  horrid  sin  when  men  will
neither  be  holy  themselves,  nor  let  others  keep  the  law  of  God.  It  is  the  height
of  ingratitude  to  abuse  the  temperate  and  seek  to  destroy  their  character.  Yet  such
crimes  are  committed  in  England  to-day.  Sons  of  temperance  are  tempted  to  break
their  pledge  (Num.  vi.  2,  3) ;  self-denial  is  considered  weakness,  and  pious  men  are
exposed  to  ridicule  and  contempt.  Young  men  are  often  surprised  and  allured,  re-
proached and  frightened,  into  sin.  "  And  so,"  says  a  quaint  author,  "  many  do  the
tempter's  work."  (b)  They  sought  to  silence  the  prophet  in  his  teaching.  "Com-
manded the  prophets,  saying,  Prophesy  not."  The  guilty  conscience  hates  reproof.
The  godly  teacher  irritates  the  sinner,  and  God's  servants  are  often  threatened  if
they  hold  not  their  tongue.  Jezebel  swore  by  her  gods  to  destroy  Elijah  (1  Kings
xix.  2,  3).  Amaziah  silenced  the  prophet :  "Art  thou  made  of  the  king's  counsel?
forbear.  Why  shouldest  thou  be  smitten  1  '  Jeremiah  had  to  face  hatred,  mock-
ery, and  imprisonment.  The  chief  priests  sought  to  silence  the  apostles,  first  by
command,  then  by  scourges,  and  lastly  by  persecution.  If  God's  ministers  will  not
preach  evil  tidings,  they  will  be  unmolested ;  but  when  they  proclaim  the  judg-
ments of  God  on  the  sins  of  men,  then  nations  rise  up  in  authority  and  opposition.
"Wherefore  dost  thou  prophesy?"  (Jer.  xxxii.  3).  Those  who  deaden  the  voice
of  God  within,  and  silence  the  word  of  God  without  them,  leave  no  means  of  access
to  the  soul  or  the  people.  Dreadful  is  the  doom  of  those  who  harden  themselves
against  the  gospel,  and  refuse  its  last  offers  of  mercy  from  its  faithful  ministers.
Such  were  Israel's  guilt  and  Israel's  punishment.  "  They  would  none  of  my  coun-
sel: they  despised  all  my  reproof  :  therefore  shall  they  eat  of  the  fruit  of  their
own  way,  and  be  filled  with  their  own  devices."  III.  The  severe  punishment  for
Israel's  guilt  (ver.  13 — 16).  Base  contempt  for  covenant  mercies  God  will  visit
with  severe  punishment.  The  long-suffering  of  God  will  at  length  be  wearied  out
by  obstinaate  sinners  and  ungrateful  nations.  1.  Punishment  most  crushing.
Taking  the  words  as  alluding  "  to  the  force  of  war,  under  which  even  the  bravest
and  most  able  heroes  will  succumb."  God  threatens  to  oppress  them  most  heavily.
As  the  cart  full  of  sheaves  presses  the  ground  j  so  God  would  press  them  down,
by  war  and  the  effects  of  war.  This  is  a  fit  retribution  for  their  own  oppression,
robbery,  and  injustice  to  the  poor.  Judgments  in  number  and  variety  would  fill
the  land,  and  distress  would  overcome  its  inhabitants.  Bradford  the  martyr  said,
"  He  that  will  not  tremble  in  threatening  shall  be  crushed  in  pieces  in  feeling."
Men  through  their  own  sins  often  have  to  say,  "  We  were  pressed  out  of  measure
above  strength,  insomuch  that  we  despaired  even  of  life."  2.  Punishment  most
inevitable.  The  judgments  are  fixed  and  inevitable,  and  none  can  escape  except  by
repentance,  the  door  of  which  is  never  shut  in  these  Divine  threatenings.  (1)  The
swift  cannot  flee  away.     "  The  flight  shall  perish  from  the  swift."     Men  are  afraid


chap.  II.]  U0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :  AMOS.  257


and  wish  to  escape  from  the  judgments  of  God.  But  it  is  too  late,  and  the  escape
is  impossible.  "  He  that  is  swift  of  foot  shall  not  deliver  himself."  A  horse  will
be  a  vain  thing  in  that  day  for  safety.  "  Neither  shall  he  that  rideth  the  horse
deliver  himself"  from  his  pursuers.  (2)  The  strong  cannot  defend  themselves.
"  The  strong  shall  not  strengthen  his  force  "  against  the  power  of  God.  Military
hosts  are  not  a  match  for  an  angry  God.  "  The  mighty,"  who  may  have  protected
others,  shall  not  M  deliver  himself"  then.  "  There  is  no  king  saved  by  the  multi-
tude of  a  host ;  a  mighty  man  is  not  delivered  by  much  strength  "  (Ps.  xxxiii.  16).
Weapons  of  war  will  be  of  no  avail.  "  Neither  shall  he  stand  that  handleth  the
bow."  3.  The  courageous  cannot  withstand  the  attack.  "  He  that  is  courageous
among  the  mighty  shall  flee  away."  The  most  spirited  and  brave,  the  most  firm-
souled  and  mighty,  cannot  deliver  themselves.  What  a  picture.  Fear  will  disable
the  skilled  archer.  The  strong  will  be  bereft  of  his  might.  Panic  will  seize  all
ranks,  and  those  who  flee  cannot  escape.  "  A  kingdom  for  a  horse,"  cried  one  in
battle,  but  in  the  day  of  judgment  every  means  of  strength,  resistance,  and  escape
will  fail.  Those  who  make  not  God  their  refuge,  shall  find  none  for  themselves  in
the  day  of  visitation.  "  Many  among  them  shall  stumble  and  fall,  and  be  broken,
and  be  snared,  and  be  taken"  (Is.  viii.  15  ;  Amos  ix.  2).

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Yer.  7.  God  had  laid  down  the  fies  them  into  sons  of  Anak.  "  /  de-
equality  of  man,  made  in  his  own  image,  stroyed  "  (emphatic).  God  uproots  all
and  had  forbidden  to  favour  either  poor  fears,  extirpates  all  enemies,  and  leaves
( Ex.  xxiii.  3)  or  rich  (lb.  6).  Amos  neither  "  fruit  from  above  "  nor  "  roots
calls  these  by  different  names,  which  from  beneath."  Not  merely  cut  down,
entitled  them  to  human  sympathy  ;  but  plucked  up,  and  no  chance  of  spring-
poor,  depressed,  lowly  ;  poor,  in  their  ing  into  existence  again.  A  complete
absolute  condition  ;  depressed,  as  having  and  irrecoverable  destruction.  This —
been  brought  low  ;  lowly,  as  having  the  1 .  Displays  power.  2.  Should  excite
special  grace  of  their  state,  the  wonder-  confidence  ;  and  3.  Stimulate  progress,
ful  meekness  and  lowliness  of  the  godly  Ver.  10.  God's  fidelity  towards
poor  [Pusey],  Israel  contrasted  with  Israel's  conduct

Ver.  9.     God  removes  difficulties  out  towards  God  (Deut.  ii.  7  ;  viii.  2.     Cf.

of  the  way.     The  pilgrim  often  magni-  Mic.  vi.  4).

HOMILETICS.
Christian  Pilgrimage. —  Verse  10.

Life  is  a  pilgrimage  ;  but  all  pilgrims  do  not  consider  themselves  "  strangers  "  on
earth.  Had  God  intended  this  world  to  be  the  home  of  his  people,  he  would  have
made  better  accommodation.     But  they  seek  a  country,  even  a  heavenly  one.

I.  The  destination.  "  To  possess  the  land  of  the  Amorite."  Canaan  was
promised  to  the  Jews,  and  though  in  the  possession  of  the  enemies,  yet  God  drove
out  the  heathen  and  planted  them  (Ps.  xliv.  2).  A  people  numerous,  warlike,
and  strongly  fortified,  were  overturned  by  a  feeble  nation.  The  oaks  of  Bashan
were  torn  up  to  plant  his  chosen  vine.  God  now  gives  his  people  inheritance  of
faith  and  knowledge,  puts  them  in  possession  of  wealth  and  vantage-ground  on
earth,  and  will  give  them  rest  in  heaven.  II.  The  starting-point.  "  I  brought
you  up  from  the  land  of  Egypt."  The  local  and  political  elevation  of  Israel  set
forth  the  deliverance  and  dignity  of  the  Christian.  All  are  found  in  the  house  of
bondage,  under  the  dominion  and  lash  of  sin.  Egypt  is  the  starting-place  of  Israel ;
the  City  of  Destruction,  for  the  Pilgrim.  All  are  found  in  a  state  of  degradation
and  alienation  from  God.     From  a  lower  God's  people  are  called  to  a  higher  con-

17


258  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  [chap.  ii.


dition,  translated  from  the  kingdom  of  darkness  into  the  kingdom  of  light.  III.
The  way.  "  Through  the  wilderness."  After  leaving  Egypt,  Israel  were  literally
in  the  wilderness.  A  dreary  solitary  place,  full  of  privations  and  perils.  The
world  comparatively  is  a  wilderness.  It  is  not  the  rest,  the  home  of  God's  people.
It  is  polluted  by  sin,  and  unsuited  to  their  moral  nature.  We  must  not  form  at-
tachments and  secure  possessions  which  bind  us  here.  "  Here  we  have  no  continu-
ing city."  We  must  avoid  the  company  and  renounce  the  maxims  of  the  world.
Our  happiness  is  not  here ;  it  is  more  elevated  and  on  high.

All,  all  on  earth  is  shadow ;  all  beyond
Is  substance  :  the  reverse  is  Folly's  creed1;
How  solid  all,  where  change  shall  be  no  more !

IV.  The  leader.  "  I  brought  you  up."  Their  safety  and  joy  sprung  from  God's
care.  The  pillar  of  fire  by  night  and  the  pillar  of  cloud  by  day,  went  before  them
and  never  left  them.  Moses  and  Aaron  could  not  guide  them.  Hence  the  request,
"  If  thy  presence  go  not  with  us,"  &c.  God  conducts  his  children  now  by  his
Spirit,  providence,  and  word.  He  will  never  leave  nor  forsake  them  till  they  have
entered  the  land  of  promise.  He  "  led  them  up  through  the  wilderness,  for  his
mercy  endureth  for  ever."  V.  The  time.  "  Forty  years  through  the  wilderness."
A  considerable  period,  but  appointed  by  God.  What  scenes  and  memories  would
it  recall !  What  proofs  of  God's  power,  goodness,  and  truth  !  What  displays  of  in-
gratitude, impatience,  and  rebellion  !  Thus  God  reminds  us  of  important  crises  in
our  life,  that  we  may  thank  him  for  his  goodness,  note  the  progression  of  time,  and
prepare  for  our  journey's  end.  "  These  forty  years  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  been
with  thee  ;  thou  hast  lacked  nothing."

Our  life  is  a  dream  ;  our  time  as  a  shadow

Glides  swiftly  away ;
And  the  fugitive  moment  refuses  to  stay.

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.    11.     1.    The  gift  of  prophecy  us  with  benefits,  but  we  heap  up  sins

and  the  institution  of  the  Nazarites  are  upon  him.     II.  The  pressure  of  insults,

considered  special  blessings  to  the  na-  Insult  to  his   Being,  Word,  and  provi-

tion.     2.  This  effort  to  purify  society  dence.     In  whatever  light  we  look  upon

from  a  special  evil  is  said  to  be  of  Divine  evil,  it  is  a  burden  to  God  and  his  works,

origin.     "/  raised  up  your  young  men."  God  faints  not  in  the  upholding  and

3.  This  method  of  sobering  the  people  government  of  the  world.     But  he  grows

must  be  as  wise  and  necessary  now  as  wear*/ with  our  iniquities  (Isa.  xliii.  24) ;

then.     "  We  learn  from  these  verses  the  and  creation  groans  beneath  its  weight

importance    attached   by   God    to    the  (Rom.  viii.  22).     In  another  sense  he

Kazarite  class,  and  also  that  their  pre-  carries  our  sins  and  will  take  them  from

eminent   characteristic    was    abstinence  us.      Then  if   delivered  from   sin,  we

from  wine.      Jehovah  claims  to  have  shall  not  be  crushed  by  judgments,
raised  up  a  succession  of  prophets  and  The  judgments  of  God.     With  what

Nazarites,  and  the  attempt  to  subvert  patience  God    bears  with    man's  sin !

the  fidelity  of  the  Nazarites  is  coupled  Three  transgressions  are  followed  by  a

as  a  sin  with  the  impious  effort  to  silence  fourth  ;  sin  is  multiplied  by  sin,  before

the  teachers  of  the  nation,  and  the  organs  he  inflicts  punishments  ;  but  impenitent

of  the  Almighty  "  [Temp.  Com.~\.  sinners  may  be  sure,  that   if    Divine

Ver.  13.  God  pressed  down  with  patience  lingers,  not  willing  that  any
man's  iniquity  is  the  sense  in  which  should  perish,  yet  their  judgment  "  lin-
many  take  these  words.  I.  The  pres-  gereth  not,  and  their  damnation  slum-
sure  of  ingratitude.     God  <laily  loadeth  bereth  not."


chap.  n.j


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.


269


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  II.


Ver.  1 — 3.  Bones  burned.  "  The
wickedness  appears  to  have  consisted  in
a  wanton  violation  of  the  sanctity  of  the
tomb,  by  the  disinterment  and  burning
of  the  royal  remains.  It  was  indicative
of  an  enmity  which  was  not  satisfied
with  inflicting  every  possible  injury
upon  its  victim  while  living,  but  pur-
sued him  even  into  the  regions  of  the
dead."  To  exhume,  burn,  and  disperse
the  bones  of  the  dead,  has  often  been
adopted  as  a  way  of  showing  indignity.
The  bones  of  Wycliffe  were  disinterred
and  burnt,  and  Cromwell's  remains  were
most  indignantly  treated.

Ver.  4,  5.  Evil  examples.  As  com-
panions are  the  objects  of  choice,  admir-
ation, and  affection,  the  repulsiveness  of
vice  is  lost  sight  of  amidst  so  much  that
is  attractive.  In  short,  though  the  vices
of  a  companion  be  gross  and  palpable  to
others,  yet,  as  Shakspeare  says,  "  a
friendly  eye  cannot  see  such  faults "
\Brewer\

Evil  examples  are  like  pestilential
diseases —

The  virtuous  son  is  ill  at  ease
"When  the  lewd  father  gave  the  dire  disease.

[Pope.]

Ver.  6 — 8.  Oppression.  To  rob  and
oppress  the  rich  is  a  great  sin ;  but  to
rob  and  oppress  the  poor  is  a  greater :
but  to  rob  and  oppress  the  poor,  because
he  is  poor  and  wants  money  to  bay
justice,  is  the  top  of  all  inhumanity  and
impiety.  To  oppress  any  one  is  a  sin ;
but  to  oppress  the  oppressed  is  the
height  of  sin.  Poverty  and  want  should
be  motives  to  pity  ;  but  oppressors  make
them  whetstones  of  their  cruelty  and
severity,  and  therefore  the  Lord  will
plead  the  cause  of  his  poor  oppressed
against  their  oppressors  without  fee  or
fear  [Brooks].

Ver.  9,  10.  Wilderness.  An  Em-
peror of  Persia,  who  designed  to  go  on


a  journey  into  Media,  durst  not  proceed
on  account  of  the  vast  quantity  of  scor-
pions that  were  lying  round  about  the
road.  He  sent  a  great  number  of  stout
fellows  to  destroy  these  terrible  creatures,
promising  a  superior  reward  to  him
who  killed  most.  Till  this  execution
was  over  he  durst  not  venture  his  digni-
fied person  abroad  [Whitecross],

Ver.  12.  A  man  once  called  upon  a
publican  to  settle  an  account,  in  a  village
near  Elgin,  and  was  asked  to  take  a
dram.  The  man  was  a  member  of  a
Temperance  Society  and  declined.  The
publican  first  began  to  ridicule  and  then
to  tempt  him,  saying  that  he  woidd  give
him  a  real  good  one,  and  that  besides,  a
gin  dram  would  not  be  objected  to.  The
simple  man  at  length  yielded,  and  having
yielded  was  more  ready  to  sink  before
other  less  powerful  temptations.  He
did  so,  and  is  no  longer  a  temperate  man
nor  a  member  of  a  society.  The  con-
duct of  the  publican  was  most  atrocious
in  tempting  a  man,  when  he  knew  his
conscientious  reasons  for  total  abstinence.
If  his  unhappy  victim  die  the  death  of
the  drunkard,  who  will  say  he  is  guilt-
less of  the  loss  of  that  man's  soul  ?
[Whitecross\

Ver.  14—16.  Swift.  The  mighty
hosts  of  Persia  were  no  defence  at  the
battle  of  Arbela.  Napoleon  led  more
than  half  a  million  of  men  into  Eussia,
but  coidd  not  escape  the  danger  by  re-
treat. His  valiant  guards  could  neither
uphold  his  empire  nor  protect  his  per-
son at  Waterloo,  when  he  cried  out —
"  It  is  all  over ;  save  yourselves  who
can."

11  Not  the  chief  his  serried  lances,

Not  his  strength  secures  the  brave ;
All  in  vain  the  war-horse  prances,
Weak  his  force  his  lord  to  save."

[Richard  Mant.]


260  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  AMOS.  [chap.  hi.


CHAPTER  III.


Critical  Notes.]  Hear]  Cf.  beginning  of  chaps,  v.  &  vi.,  indicating  this  chap,  to  be  one
whole  address.  Whole]  Though  the  ten  tribes  threatened,  yet  all  Israel  are  concerned  and  warned.
2.  Known]  Not  only  love  and  care,  but  gracious  fellowship  and  treatment  (Ex.  xix.  5;  Deut.  iv.
20)  ;  "including  both  the  motive  and  result  of  election."  3.  Two]  The  prophet  and  the  Spirit  of
God.  Israel  did  not  believe  that  God  threatened  such  denunciations  by  the  prophets  (ch.  vi.  1 — 3 ;
i.  7,  8).  Amos  spoke  because  God  commanded  him.  4.  Lion]  roars  when  the  prey  is  before  it,
before  it  actually  seizes  it,  and  there  is  no  possibility  of  escape.  u  After  the  roar  there  immediately
follows  both  slaughter  and  laceration.  For  as  a  rule  it  only  roars  with  that  sharp  roar  when  it  has
the  prey  in  sight,  upon  which  it  immediately  springs."  A  young  lion]  which  goes  in  pursuit  of  prey,
and  is  distinguished  from  the  one  that  lies  silent  until  the  old  one  brings  prey  near ;  then  the  scent
rouses  him.  5.  Bird]  God  not  only  has  the  nation  ripe  for  judgment  in  his  power,  but  the  judg-
ment is  deserved.  As  birds  are  not  taken  without  the  net  of  th  fowler,  and  he  does  not  take  it  up
until  he  has  secured  his  prey,  so  God  not  only  threatens,  but  is  prepared  to  execute.  6.  Trumpet]
blown  in  the  city  alarms  every  one  ;  the  coming  evil  should  rouse  from  self-security  (Ezek.  xxxiii.
I — 5).  7.  Lord]  This  explains  all  the  similes.  God  is  the  author  of  these  calamities.  Pro-
phets] being  servants  of  God,  must  obey  him  in  setting  forth  judgments  upon  Israel  (Jer.  xx.  9;
Ezek.  ix.  11).  8.]  As  when  the  lion  roars  all  men  fear,  so  when  God  speaks  I  must  prophesy  (Acts
iv.  20 ;  v.  29).  9.  Publish]  upon  (the  floor  of)  the  palaces,  some  ;  others,  over  them,  to  call  the
princes  and  inhabitants  to  hear  and  see  the  acts  of  violence,  and  testify  against  Israel.  "  Ashdod,
one  of  the  Philistian  capitals,  is  mentioned  by  way  of  example,  as  a  chief  city  of  the  uncircumcised,
who  were  regarded  by  Israel  as  godless  heathen ;  and  Egypt  is  mentioned  along  with  it  as  the  nation
whose  unrighteousness  and  ungodliness  had  once  been  experienced  by  Israel  to  satiety.  If  therefore
such  heathen  as  these  are  called  to  behold  the  unrighteous  and  dissolute  conduct  to  be  seen  in  the
palaces,  it  must  have  been  great  indeed"  [Keil].  Tumults]  Heb.  denotes  a  state  of  confusion  and
noise  in  which  order  and  justice  are  overthrown  by  open  violence.  10.  Begard  not]  Not  merely
ignorant,  but  cherish  a  state  of  mind  hostile  to  knowledge.  Moral  corruption  blinded  the  power  of
discernment,  so  that  the  magnates  of  Samaria  had  no  regard  for  right.  11.]  Whatever  was  boasted  of
would  be  removed.  12.]  By  an  appropriate  and  pastoral  image  the  prophet  declares  that  if  a  scanty
remnant  escape  it  will  only  be  by  miracle,  like  fragments  of  sheep  left  by  the  lion.  Grandees  who
sit  on  costly  divans  and  rest  in  ease  will  escape  with  great  difficulty  (ch.  vi.  1 — 4).  13.  Hear]
Addressed  to  heathen  who  have  now  to  witness  the  punishment  upon  Israel.  14.  Altars]  Venge-
ance upon  the  centre  from  which  spread  the  evils  (1  Kings  xii.  32).  Horns]  destroyed  in  utter
contempt  and  desolation  (Ex.  xxvii.  2).  15.  Houses]  Eastern  monarchs  have  summer  and  winter
residences  :  the  former  upon  mountains  or  in  forests,  the  latter  in  cities  and  sheltered  situations
( Judg.  iii.  20  ;  Jer.  xxxvi.  22).  Ivory]  Houses  and  palaces  richly  ornamented  with  this  material
will  be  entirely  ruined.  Samaria  is  threatened  with  the  overthrow  of  its  palaces,  and  the  extermina-
tion of  its  people.  Nothing  will  avail  if  righteousness  be  wanting  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  (Prov.  x.  2).

HOMILETICS.

God's  Chastisement  op  a  Covenant  People. —  Verses  1,  2.

Before  the  end  of  chastisement  can  be  answered  its  nature  must  be  discerned.
In  itself  it  may  seem  of  no  moment,  but  when  viewed  as  the  expression  of  God's
purpose  it  is  significant.  Israel  therefore  should  hear,  for  God  Himself  speaks  and
will  punish.  Thrice  does  Amos  address  the  same  solemn  call  to  a  nation  whose
former  favours  do  not  exempt  from  impending  ruin — "  Hear  this  word."

I.  The  grounds  for  chastisement.  God  always  deals  wisely,  and  often  gives
reasons  for  certain  proceedings  against  us.  The  grounds  of  Israel's  punishment  are
specified.  1.  Peculiar  relationship  abused.  (I)  Individually  abused — "children  of
Israel."  Each  member  of  the  tribes,  every  person  in  the  nation,  was  owned  and  cared
for  by  God.  (2)  Socially  abused — "  the  whole  family."  God  separated  them  from
others,  and  united  them  into  one  family.  This  was  a  natural  protest  against  self-
ishness, a  merciful  design  to  secure  obedience  to  the  Supreme  Lawgiver,  and  a
method  of  Divine  mercy  to  mankind.  "  At  that  time  will  I  be  the  God  of  all  the
families  of  Israel."     But  Israel  cherished  not  the  disposition  of  children  and  dis-


chap.  iii.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  261


owned  their  relation  to  God.  "If  I  be  your  father  where  is  mine  honour?"  2.
Distinguished  privileges  neglected.  "  Which  I  brought  up  from  the  land  of  Egypt."
They  were  redeemed  from  bondage  and  brought  up,  led  to  Canaan.  This  redemp-
tion was  like  a  second  creation,  and  a  special  ground  for  gratitude.  But  God's
goodness  to  the  nation  was  forgotten,  and  his  gifts  despised.  Remarkable  deliver-
ances are  remembered  by  God,  and  should  be  improved  by  us.  3.  Special  obliga-
tions denied.  God  blessed  and  loved  them  like  no  other  people.  "  You  only  have
I  known  of  all  the  families  of  the  earth."  Others  were  aliens ;  they  were  children.
They  were  distinguished  by  rank  and  favour,  "  made  a  special  people  unto  himself,
above  all  people  that  are  upon  the  face  of  the  earth."  But  they  dishonoured  their
character,  and  violated  their  obligations  to  God.  Iniquity  in  some  is  disobedience
to  express  commands,  revolt  against  Divine  authority,  and  the  addition  of  ingrati-
tude to  sin.  "  Forget  not  all  his  benefits."  II.  The  design  of  chastisement.
The  nearer  to  God  the  greater  the  fall  from  him.  Professors  can  either  praise  or
profane  the  name  of  God.  Their  sins  are  more  provoking  than  those  of  other  men.
They  are  against  greater  light,  a  higher  principle  of  life,  and  more  exalted  relation-
ship. God  will  not  wink  at  sin  in  his  most  favoured  children.  "  Therefore  will
I  punish  you  for  all  your  iniquities."  1.  Punishment  to  purify  moral  character.
God  will  have  all  his  children  to  be  like  him.  Bastards  may  escape,  but  sons  must
be  chastised.  Luther  cried,  "  Strike  on,  Lord,  strike  on,  for  now  I  know  that  I
am  thy  child."  "  As  a  man  chasteneth  his  son,  so  the  Lord  thy  God  chasteneth
thee."  2.  Punishment  to  fit  for  greater  service.  Afflictions  remind  us  of  forgotten
duty,  give  discipline  for  future  life,  and  fit  us  for  a  world  of  sin  and  sorrow.  They
make  us  more  fervent  and  holy,  stronger  with  God  and  more  pitiful  to  men.

"  More  skilful  in  self-knowledge,  ever  more  pure
As  tempted  more  ;  more  able  to  endure
As  more  exposed  to  suffering  and  distress  ;
Thence  also  more  alive  to  tenderness"  [Wordsworth],

3.  Punishment  to  warn  others  of  danger.  "  Against  the  whole  family  "  was  the
judgment  denounced.  They  were  the  elect  and  beloved  of  God,  but  their  sins
only  deepened  their  guilt  and  made  them  a  warning  to  others.  The  lessons
imparted  to  one  people  are  for  the  benefit  of  another.  There  is  unity  and  aim  in
the  moral  life  of  all  nations.  Exalted  privileges  everywhere  bring  heavier  respon-
sibility, and  shameful  abuse  severer  punishment.  Hear  this  word  of  the  Lord.
For  "  the  time  is  come  that  judgment  must  begin  at  the  house  of  God ;  and  if  it
first  begin  at  us,  what  shall  the  end  be  of  them  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  God]"

Divine  Intentions  and  Executions. —  Verses  3 — 8.

In  a  few  similes  drawn  from  daily  life,  the  prophet  answers  objections  which
break  the  force  of  his  threatenings  and  establishes  his  right  to  prophesy.  The
words  might  be  taken  to  describe  the  nature  of  the  punishment  mentioned  in  vers.
1  &  2.  1.  It  is  from  God  and  not  any  secondary  source.  2.  It  is  deserved.  3.
It  is  prepared.  4.  It  will  certainly  be  executed.  5.  There  is  no  possibility  of
escape.  "  As  the  net  does  not  spring  up  without  catching  the  bird,  that  has  sent
it  up  by  flying  upon  it,  can  ye  imagine  that  when  the  destruction  passes  by,  ye
will  not  be  seized  by  it,  but  will  escape  without  injury"  \Hitzig\1  We  shall  take
the  words  as  a  solemn  warning  to  rouse  careless  sinners,  and  show  that  word  and
deed  are  one  with  God.     He  will  execute  what  he  threatens.

I.  Threatening  is  identified  with  execution..  Threats  are  not  simply  to
frighten  men.  Punishment  will  not  come,  unless  it  has  been  prepared.  1.  Pun-
ishment is  intended.  You  have  no  need  to  presume  on  God's  favours  and  God's
presence  with  you.  You  do  not  agree  and  walk  with  God.  You  forget  his  law,
and  dishonour  his  name.  There  is  a  reason  for  the  severity.  If  you  walk  con-
trary to  God,  he  will  not  walk  with  you.     If    we   grieve  the  Holy  Spirit  and


262  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;  AMOS,     '  [chap.  in.


offend  God,  they  will  depart  from  us.  2.  Punishment  will  be  executed.  God  will
not  warn  of  calamity  unless  there  be  fit  objects  of  his  indignation.  His  threats
are  not  empty  sounds.  He  has  said  and  will  do,  spoken  and  will  perform.  The
lion  only  roars  when  he  is  about  to  spring  on  his  prey,  and  God  only  threatens  when
he  is  about  to  punish.  He  can  neither  lie  nor  change  ;  he  is  faithful  and  true.
II.  Execution  must  be  traced  to  God  himself.  The  word  and  the  providence  of
God  declare  this.  1.  God's  servant  declares  the  truth.  God  has  revealed  his
secrets  to  the  prophet,  and  he  utters  the  purpose  of  God  and  not  his  own.  What
right  had  he  to  speak  ?  some  would  say,  and  the  reply  is  :  he  was  the  servant  of
God,  specially  called  and  qualified.  He  shunned  not  "  to  declare  the  whole  coun-
sel of  God."  His  strength  consisted  in  knowing  that  he  was  doing  his  Master's
will,  and  speaking  his  Master's  word.  "  The  Lord  hath  spoken,  who  can  but  pro-
phesy1?" 2.  God's  providence  entrapped  the  nation.  Calamities  which  bei'all  nations
and  kingdoms  do  not  happen  by  chance.  God's  hand  must  be  seen  in  them.  If
a  bird  is  caught  in  the  snare,  the  snare  was  designed  for  it.  So  when  a  people
are  involved  in  judgments,  God  has  prepared  the  peril  and  misery  for  them.  And
as  no  fowler  takes  up  the  net  without  securing  the  prey,  neither  will  God  with-
draw his  judgments  until  he  has  accomplished  his  purpose.  Men  may  resist  this
truth,  but  it  is  seen  every  day.  Misfortunes  as  punishments  are  not  casual,  but
come  from  God.  They  have  a  real  author,  a  definite  cause,  and  a  special  aim.
God  sends  them  in  righteous  retribution,  determines  beforehand  who  shall  suffer,
and  who  escape.  "  He  that  chastiseth  the  heathen,  shall  not  he  correct  ?  he  that
teacheth  man  knowledge,  shall  he  not  know"  (Ps.  xciv.  7,  9  j  Mic.  vi.  9)?  III.
Warning  is  given  before  the  execution  of  threatening.  In  the  last  image  the
prophet  seeks  to  rouse  them  to  a  sense  of  danger  before  it  be  too  late.  Repent-
ance may  break  the  snare,  and  men  may  be  delivered  in  mercy.  1.  The  alarm  is
given.  "  Shall  a  trumpet  be  blown  in  the  city,  and  the  people  not  be  afraid?"
They  heed  the  sound  which  warns  of  approaching  danger,  tremble  in  fear,  and  seek
to  escape.  Or  when  the  punishment  has  actually  come,  they  ascribe  it  to  the  right
source,  and  humble  themselves  before  God.  "  Shall  there  be  evil  in  a  city  and
the  Lord  hath  not  done  it?"  2.  The  danger  is  made  known.  "  The  lion  hath
roared,  who  will  not  fear? "  &c.  God  speaks  through  his  servants,  who  reveal  his
hatred  to  sin,  and  his  justice  in  punishing  it.  He  has  always  warned  of  the  danger
before  it  actually  comes.  "  Thou  shalt  hear  the  word  at  my  mouth,  and  warn
them  from  me."  The  living  ministry  and  the  written  scripture  are  a  perpetual
warning  to  men  of  a  judgment  to  come.  Be  not  found  unprepared.  We  may
repent  now,  but  if  we  obstinately  continue  in  sin  God  will  be  just  in  the  punish-
ment of  it.  "  I  will  bring  evil  upon  this  people,  even  the  fruit  of  their  thoughts,
because  they  have  not  hearkened  unto  my  words  nor  to  my  law,  but  rejected  it."

Walking  in  Agreement  with  God. — Verse  3.

Taking  these  words  generally  we  learn —

I.  Agreement  with  God  is  necessary  to  walking  with  God.  "  Can  two  walk
together  except  they  be  agreed?"  God  and  the  sinner  are  not  in  agreement.
They  are  at  variance  in  heart  and  life.  There  is  nothing  common  between  them.
They  are  opposite,  as  two  travellers  walking  in  different  directions.  Those  who
justify  self  and  disobey  God,  must  recognize  their  guilt,  and  avail  themselves  of
the  blood  of  Jesus.  They  must  agree  with  God — 1.  In  disposition.  2.  In  cha-
racter. 3.  In  conduct.  There  is  a  basis  for  friendship  in  Christ,  and  men  may
live  at  peace  with  God.  "  Be  ye  reconciled  to  God."  II.  Agreement  with  God
will  show  itself  in  walking  with  God.  Friendship  naturally  develops  itself  in
unity  of  mind  and  pursuit,  in  acts  of  gratitude  and  love.  David  and  Jonathan
were  real  friends,  and  walked  together.  Abraham  was  the  friend  of  God  because
he  obeyed  God  and  had  perfect  confidence  in  him.  If  we  are  agreed  with  God,
we  shall  seek  to  please  and  obey  him.     Our  life  will  be  like  that  of  Enoch,  a  con-


chap,  in.]  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  AMOS.  2e3


stant,  habitual,  daily  walk  with  God.  Walking  together  is  a  common  act  of
human  fellowship,  indicating  "  evenness  and  similarity  of  gait,"  interchange  of
thought  and  opinion,  and  anxious  desire  to  "  keep  step."  Walking  implies  action
and  progress.  Our  life  should  be  devoted  to  God,  and  our  deeds  performed
through  and  for  God.  If  we  are  God's  people,  his  will  will  be  the  rule  and  his
glory  the  end  of  our  life  in  all  things.  "  Ye  are  my  friends  if  ye  do  whatsoever
things  I  command  you."  III.  Disagreement  with  God  will  interrupt  walking
with  God.  "  Can  two  walk  together  except  they  be  agreed  1 "  When  com-
panions disagree  they  never  walk  together.  Sin  is  disagreement  with  God,
separates  from  him,  and  puts  us  in  opposition  to  his  will  and  word.  It  is  a  breach
of  the  agreement,  and  a  step  in  a  crooked  direction ;  "  For  what  fellowship  hath
righteousness  with  unrighteousness  It  and  what  communion  hath  light  with  dark-
ness 1 "  Outward  profession,  without  love  and  conformity  to  God,  will  prevent  us
walking  with  God.  Insincerity  of  any  kind  will  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit  and  offend
God.  God  will  never  walk  with  us  unless  we  walk  with  him.  God  is  ready  to
walk  with  us,  "  But  if  ye  walk  contrary  unto  me  "  (margin,  "  at  adventures  with
me,"  or  another  reading,  "  at  hap-hazard  with  me,"  in  jerking,  spasmodic  fashion),
"then  will  I  also  walk  contrary  unto  you"  (Lev.  xxvi.).

"  My  business  now  is  with  my  God  to  walk,

And  guided  by  his  holy  eye  to  go  ;

Sweet  fellowship  with  him  to  cultivate,

And  his  unclouded  countenance  to  know"  [/.  F.  Elwiri\.

Preparation  for  Eevival. —  Verse  3.

The  believer  is  agreed  with  God  concerning  the  Divine  law  ;  that  it  is  "  holy,
and  just,  and  good  " — that  a  breach  of  the  law  should  be  visited  with  penalty ;
agreed  with  God  in  the  atonement  for  sin  which  God  has  provided  in  Christ ;  and  at
one  with  God  in  his  love  of  holiness.  This  agreement  gives  us  power  to  walk  with
God.  As  a  Church  our  hearts  are  set  upon  a  revival  of  religion  in  our  midst.  We
need  as  the  first  and  most  essential  thing  that  God  should  walk  with  us.  If  we
desire  his  presence  we  must  perfectly  agree  with  him  both  in  the  design  of  the
work  and  the  method  of  it.

I.  Let  us  avow  our  desire  that  in  our  present  efforts  we  may  walk  with
God,  otherwise  our  strivings  after  revival  will  be  wearisome,  and  always  end  in
disappointment  If  we  are  not  favoured  by  God's  presence  in  our  attempts  at
revival,  prayer  will  be  greatly  dishonoured  and  the  Church  left  in  a  worse  condition
than  it  was  before.  Consider  the  blessings  which  flow  from  God's  presence  upon
the  ministry,  the  Church,  and  the  congregation,  and  let  this  confirm  your  desire.
II.  If  we  would  have  the  presence  of  God,  it  is  necessary  that  we  should  be
agreed  with  him.  We  must  be  agreed  with  him  as  to  the  end  of  our  Christian
existence  ;  as  to  real  desirableness  and  necessity  of  the  conversion  of  souls ;  as  to
the  means  to  be  used  in  revival,  ami  as  to  our  utter  helplessness  in  this  work.  If
any  good  should  be  done  all  the  glory  must  be  given  to  him.  III.  Let  us  put
away  all  those  things  which  offend  our  God.  Before  God  appeared  at  Sinai
Israel  had  to  cleanse  themselves  for  three  days.  So  here.  Is  there  pride  in  me  %
Am  I  slothful  ?  Am  I  guilty  of  worldliness  ?  Am  I  covetous  ?  Am  I  of  an  angry
spirit  1  Is  there  any  lust  in  me  1  If  so  God  will  not  walk  with  me.  If  the
Master's  spirit  is  in  you,  and  you  long  to  see  brighter  and  better  days,  lift  up  your
heads  with  confidence  in  him  who  will  walk  with  us  if  we  be  agreed  with  him
[Spurgeon].

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  3 — 7.  In  these  verses  are  Five  vernment  in  the  affairs  of  the  world  and
Parables   all  showing  God's  moral  go-      of  his  Church ;  and  that  nothing  in  the


264


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.


[CHAP.  Ill


history  of  either  happens  by  chance,  but
is  ordered  by  him,  using  the  natural
elements  and  the  greatest  nations  of  the
world  as  instruments  for  the  punish-
ment of  sins  committed  after  deliberate
warning,  and  for  the  manifestation  of
his  power  and  glory  [Wordsworth].

Yer.  3.  Walking  with  God.  1.  As
individuals  we  must  be  reconciled  with
him.  2.  As  churches,  co-operate  with
him.    3.  As  a  nation,  promote  his  glory.

Yer.  6.  The  voice  of  God  in  the  city.
No  chance,  fate,  nor  second  cause  has
sent  the  evil.  It  must  all  be  traced  to
God.  His  voice  must  be  heard — 1.  In
the  consciences  of  its  people.  They  have
a  presentiment  of  danger  at  the  sound
of  the  trumpet,  hasten  together  and
devise  means  of  escape.  However  stupid
and  blind  in  sin,  God  has  a  witness
within  men,  that  sin  brings  sorrow,  and
is  the  cause  of  their  misery.  Hence
the  appeal,  "  Shall  there  be  evil  in  a
city,  and  the  Lord  hath  not  done  it1?"
2.  In  judgments  upon  its  sins.  Drunk-
enness, debauchery,  neglect  of  God's
house,  and  contempt  of  his  word.  "  Evil
is  of  two  sorts,  evil  of  sin  and  evil  of
punishment.  There  is  no  other;  for
evil  of  nature,  or  evil  of  fortune,  are
evils,  by  God's  providence,  punishing
the  evil  of  sin.  Evil  which  is  sin  the
Lord  hath  not  done;  evil  which  is
punishment  for  sin  the  Lord  bringeth.
The  providence  of  God  governing  and
controlling  all  things,  man  doth  ill
which  he  wills,  so  as  to  suffer  ills  which
he  wills  not "  [Pusey].

Yer.  7.  In  this  verse  a  high  honour
is  vindicated  to  the  prophetical  office.
The  holy  men  of  God  were,  by  inspira-
tion, entrusted  with  a  knowledge  of  thti
Divine  purposes,  in  so  far  as  it  was
necessary  for  them  to  divulge  them  to
the  world  [A,  Elzas].

God? 8  secrets  with  his  servants.  1.
In  the  spiritual  insight  into  his  word.


Our  darkness  does  not  comprehend  the
light.  God  imparts  understanding,  the
threatenings  become  more  solemn,  and
the  promises  more  precious.  2.  In  the
revelation  of  his  will  to  man.  God  has
spoken  to  men  through  patriarchs,  pro-
phets, and  apostles.  He  speaks  to  us
by  the  ministrv  now,  and  does  nothing
without  disclosing  it  to  his  servants.
This  has  ever  been  the  law  of  the  Divine
procedure.  Nothing  is  coming  upon
men  which  has  not  been  revealed.  "  The
grand  outlines  of  the  plan  of  Divine
providence,  and  the  events  of  history,
to  this  day  and  to  the  end  of  the  world,
were  made  known  to  the  prophets  of
Israel  and  Judah,  and  a  very  large  pro-
portion of  them,  many  ages  before  they
took  place ;  so  that  a  general  history  of
mankind,  as  to  the  most  important  facts,
might  be  composed  from  their  writings  "
[Scott  in  loco].

Yer.  8.  Who  can  but.  The  intensity
of  feeling  expressed  in  these  words  in-
dicates— 1.  An  inward  struggle.  Shall
I  keep  back  or  proclaim  the  unwelcome
truth1?  Shall  I  alienate  some,  harden
others,  and  render  myself  unpopular
(Jer.  xx.  9  ;  Ezek.  xxxiii.  7)  ]  Here
under  depressing  influence.  To  such  in-
quiries the  answer  is,  "  The  Lord  God
hath  spoken."  2.  The  declaration  of  a
necessity.  Every  true  servant  must  utter
the  word  given  to  him.  Moses,  though
slow  of  tongue  ;  Isaiah,  of  polluted  lips;
and  Jeremiah,  though  a  child,  were  not
excused.  The  apostles  were  influenced
by  this  spirit  (Acts  iv.  20)  ;  and  Paul  ex-
claimed, "  Necessity  is  laid  upon  me,
yea,  woe  is  unto  me,  if  I  preach  not  the
gospel."  3.  The  assertion  of  a  law.
God  calls  and  commands  his  prophets,
their  own  spirits  prompt  them  :  hence
they  cannot  hesitate  or  refuse ;  they
must  speak,  whether  men  will  hear  or
forbear.     "  Who  can  but  prophesy  ] "


HOMILETICS.

National  Calamities. —  Verses  9 — 12.

The  sins  of  Israel  are  to  be  punished,  and  heathen  nations  are  summoned  to
witness.  This  turn  in  the  address  indicates  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  the  sins,
■uch  as  to  surprise  the  heathen  and  put  Israel  to  shame.


chap.  in. J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  AMOS.  265


I.  National  guilt.     Sin  brings  shame.     From  the  heights  around  the  injustice
of  Israel  is  beheld.     1.  Moral  sensibility  impaired.  "  They  know  not  to  do  right."
God  has  planted  a  sense  of  right  in  the  breast  of  every  one.     This  should  be
cultivated  and  strengthened.     Indulgence  in  sin  blunts  this  moral  sensibility,  and
men  at  length  become  unable  to  do  and  perceive  good.     The  love  of  evil  blinds
the  power  of  discernment,  and  brings  moral  corruption  (Jer.  iv.  22).     "  I  would
have  you  wise  unto  that  which  is  good,  and  simple  concerning  evil."     2.  Public
justice  perverted.     Courts  of  law  were  the  scenes  of  injustice,  and  the  rights  of  the
people  were  neither  known  nor  cared  for.     The  poor  were  oppressed.     God  and
his  law  were  set  at  nought,  violence  and  robbery  prevailed,  and  evil  customs  reigned
supreme.     3.  Shameless  fraud  committed.     "  Who  store  up  violence  and  robbery
in  their  palaces."     One  sin  leads  to  another.     Kiches  gained  by  fraud  will  never
be  used  as  means  of  benevolence  and  justice.     All  oppression  is  cruel ;  but  to
defraud  the  poor  to  increase  unrighteous  wealth  is  aggravation  most  insulting  to
God  (Ps.  xi.  5  ;  xii.  5).     Men  may  store  up  their  treasures,  and  fill  their  palaces,
to  crush  the  poor  and  cheapen  their  luxuries.     But  "  sin  pays  its  servants  very
bad  wages,"  says  a  quaint  author;  "  for  it  gives  the  very  reverse  of  what  it  pro-
mised.    While  the  sin  of  oppression  promises  mountains  of  gold,  it  brings  them
poverty  and  ruin.     Injuries  done  to  the  poor  are  sorely  resented  by  the  God  of
mercy,   who  is  the   poor  man's  friend,  and  will  break  in  pieces  his  oppressor."
"  The  robbery  of  the  wicked  shall  destroy  them,  because  they  refuse  to  do  judg-
ment."   II.  National  disorder.    "  Behold  the  great  tumults  in  the  midst  thereof."
Injustice  and  cruelty  in  the  upper  will  ever  bring  alarm  and  confusion  in  the  lower
classes.     A  people  intent  on  gain,  turning  law  upside  down,  will  create  great
tumults.     National  honour  has  been  stained,  and  a  reign  of  terror  introduced  by
national  disorders.     Tumults  have  darkened  the  pages  in  the  history  of  Greece,
lost  some  of  the  noblest  sons  of  Rome,  and  been  terrible  punishments  to  France.
Let  England  remember  that  licentiousness  and  cruelty,  fraud  and  oppression,  will
create  confusion  in  the  people  ;  that  wealth  unlawfully  gained,  and  unjustly  stored;
that  mammon  and  pleasure  habitually  worshipped,  will  only  "  treasure  up  wrath
against  the  day  of  wrath  and  revelation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of    God."
III.  National  disgrace.     It  is  a  shame  to  any  person  to  have  his  guilt  and
punishment  revealed  to  others.     "  Every  nation,"  says  Ryan,  "  is  ashamed  when
its  disgrace  is  proclaimed  to  other  nations,  and  especially  if  those  nations  are
remarkable  for  their  hostility  to  it.     Of  all  nations  that  have  ever  existed,  the
Israelites  were  most  vulnerable  in  this  respect.     The  position  which  they  were
taught  to  maintain,  the  exclusiveness  of  that  system  which  was  given  to  them  of
God,  made  them  conspicuous  objects  of  attention  to  other  people,  and  exposed
them  most  completely  to  the  language  of  reproach  and  scorn  in  the  day  of  their
humiliation."     But  God  puts  men  to  shame  now,  to  keep  them  from  everlasting
shame  and  contempt.     IV.  National  invasion.     Civil  discord  would  be  followed
by  the  ravages  of  an  invading  enemy.     "  An  adversary  "  would  hem  them  in  on
all  sides,  encircle  the  land  and  assault  their  habitations.     1.  Power  which  they
abused  shall  be  taken  away.     "  He  shall  bring  down  thy  strength  from  thee."
They  would  be  bereft  of  all  strength  and  resources  on  which  they  depended  (Prov.
x.  15).     When  God  is  angry  strength  will   prove  weakness,  and  wealth  end  in
poverty.     2.  Palaces  which  they  stored  shall  be  destroyed.     "  Thy  palaces  shall  be
destroyed."     Palaces  are  no  defence  to  fraud  and  oppression.     3.  There  would  be
a  general  and  complete  overthrow  of  the  kingdom,  with  only  a  remnant  of  escape.
The  rulers  had  been  guilty  of  oppression  and  robbery ;  disregarded  these  evils  in
others,  notwithstanding  the  tumults  and  disorders  they  created;  and  filled  their
palaces  with  the  fruits   of  robbery.      But   as  an  appropriate   punishment  their
violence  should  be  broken,  and  their  wealth  stolen  from  them.     "The  spoilers
must  themselves  be  spoiled."

**  To  wrong-doers  the  revolution  of  time  brings  retribution  "  [SAafopear*].


266


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.


[chap.  III.


HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Ver.  9,  10.  God's  assessors  in  judg-
ment The  character  assigned  to  the
inhabitants  of  Philistia  and  Egypt  is
virtually  that  of  assessors,  who  not  only
take  cognizance  of,  but  concur  in  the
judgment  executed  (cf.  ver.  13,  lit.
"  Hear  ye  and  testify  against  the  house
of  Jacob").  From  this  we  learn  that
in  the  execution  of  his  righteous  judg-
ments God  desires  to  obtain  a  verdict
in  the  impartial  human  conscience.
What  is  here  figuratively  represented
by  the  neighbouring  nations  taking
their  stand  on  the  mountains  of  Sa-
maria takes  place  inwardly  and  silently
in  the  minds  of  men.  It  is  analogous
to  what  in  modern  times  is  termed  the
verdict  of  public  opinion.  No  institu-
tion is  in  danger  until  a  sentence  has
been  recorded  against  it  in  the  tribunal
of  conscience  and  right  reason.  And
the  like  may  be  said  of  the  general  sta-
bility and  independence  of  nations.  In
such  a  case  as  the  present  two  important
ends  are  served.  1.  The  witnesses  or
jurors  give  a  human  attestation  to  the
righteousness  of  the  Divine  procedure,
and  thus  justify  the  ways  of  God.  That
they  are  themselves  guilty  and  sinful
makes  their  verdict  all  the  more  em-
phatic. 2.  They  thus  obtain  a  truer
and  deeper  acquaintance  with  God  and
his  ways,  and  what  they  have  seen  in
others  becomes  a  warning  to  themselves
[The  Preacher's  Lantern,  vol.  iv.].

"Heaven  gives  the  needful  but  neglected  call.
What  day,  what  hour,  but  knocks  at  human

hearts,
To  wake  the  soul  to  a  sense  of  future  scenes  ?"

[Young. ~\

Vers.  10,  11.  Righteous  requital.  1.
Requital  from  God.  "Thus  saith  the
Lord  God."  "  There  was  no  human
redress.  The  oppressor  was  mighty,
but  mightier  the  avenger  of  the  poor.
Man   would   not   help,    therefore   God


would.  An  adversary  there  shall  be
even  round  about  the  land;  lit.  an
enemy,  and  around  the  land  "  [Pusey],

2.  Requital  by  means  of  their  own
sons.  "  Man's  sins  are  in  God's  pro-
vidence the  means  of  his  punishment.
Their  spoiling  should  invite  the  spoiler,
their  oppressions  should  attract  the  op-
pressor ;  and  they,  with  all  which  they
held  to  be  their  strength,  should  go
forth  into  captivity  "  [Pusey].

"  The  cries  of  orphans  and  the  oppressor's  rage
Doth  reach  the  stars  "  [Dryden].

3.  Requital  justified  by  human  tes-
timony. "Publish  in  the  palaces  of
Ashdod."  The  transgressions  of  which
Israel  were  guilty  were  to  be  manifest
to  others,  and  attested  by  the  human
conscience.  "  The  Lord  will  be  justified
in  his  sayings  and  in  his  works,  when
he  executeth  judgment  on  us,  and  shall
be  cleared,  even  by  the  most  unjust
judges,  when  he  is  judged."

Ver.  12.  The  miserable  remnant.  1.
A  remnant  robbed  of  glory.  Bereft  of
the  national  glory  which  once  belonged
to  them,  yet  just  enough  to  show  that
they  had  once  been  a  part  of  it.  2.  A
remnant  saved.  After  God's  righteous
vengeance  had  accomplished  its  end,  a
remnant  only  shall  be  saved  (Joel  ii.  32).
"  Taken  out  for  the  good  of  others,  not
their  own."  3.  A  remnant  injured  by
violence,  rescued  from  danger,  like  a
sheep  almost  devoured  by  the  lion;
taken  at  the  last  extremity,  a  monu-
ment of  God's  mercy,  and  a  proof  of
exposure  to  violence  and  risk.

As  shepherds,  ministers  of  God  have
to  defend  the  flock  against  wild  beasts
and  robbers.  Carelessness  should  not
permit  one  to  be  lost  or  injured.  The
Good  Shepherd  seeks  to  rescue  all.  Let
none  sit  in  ease  and  carnal  security,  lest
they  be  destroyed  by  the  lion  going
about  seeking  whom  he  may  devour.


HOMILETIGS.

Divine  Visitation. —  Verses  13,  14.

These  verses  renew  and  raise  the  threatening  to  a  higher  degree.  God  will
visit  the  transgressions  of  Israel  upon  him,  and  utter  destruction  will  be  the  con-
sequence of  moral  corruption.


chap   in.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  AMOS.  267


I.  The  seats  of  idolatry  overturned.  A  people  guilty  of  false  worship  are  in-
capable of  seeing  the  evil  and  the  danger  of  it.  Sentence  must  be  uttered  against
the  house  of  Jacob,  for  they  cannot  escape  Divine  judgments.  1.  The  centres  of
idolatry  destroyed.  "  The  altars  of  Bethel "  were  the  source  of  their  sins,  the
fountain-head  of  their  superstitions.  A  special  judgment  is  pronounced  against
Bethel  the  religious,  and  Samaria  the  political,  seats  of  corruption.  2.  The  objects
of  idolatry  destroyed.  Destruction  is  threatened  against  the  horns  of  the  altar,
and  all  attractions  to  idolatry.  These  were  to  "  be  cut  off"  with  violence  and  "  fall
to  the  ground."  3.  The  votaries  of  idolatry  destroyed.  The  teachers  and  sup-
porters were  to  have  their  punishment  according  to  their  prominence.  Their  sup-
port was  withheld,  and  their  doctrines  proved  false.  Their  religion  was  not  de-
fence, and  all  their  hopes  were  disappointed.  Natural  religion  can  never  be  a
substitute  for  revealed.  Those  who  trust  in  the  former  and  reject  the  latter  will
sink  into  ignorance  and  sin.  Every  kind  of  false  worship,  instead  of  helping,
will  become  an  object  of  Divine  displeasure.  "  So  shall  Bethel  do  unto  you  be-
cause of  your  great  wickedness."  II.  The  palaces  of  grandeur  pulled  down.
"  The  great  houses  shall  have  an  end,  saith  the  Lord."  The  mansions  of  the  rich,
with  their  pomp  and  splendour,  extravagance  and  folly,  shall  be  spoiled  by  the
enemy.  The  capital  shall  be  robbed,  and  all  its  magnificent  palaces  destroyed.
Pride  is  not  in  keeping  with  prosperity.  Prodigality  to  ingratitude  will  only
increase  misery.  Habitations  decorated  with  art  and  inlaid  with  ivory,  which
exclude  the  presence  of  God,  will  have  an  end  and  dissolve  to  dust.  III.  The
retreats  of  luxury  destroyed.  Luxury  and  pride  generally  follow  idolatry.  But
we  have  "  the  same  minute  filling  up  of  the  picture,"  says  one,  "  in  the  threat-
enings  against  the  luxurious  retreats  of  the  rich.  '  The  winter  house/  with  its
comfortable  shelter  from  the  influences  of  cold  ;  '  the  summer  house/  with  all  its
spacious  provision  to  secure  a  cool  retreat  from  oppressive  heat ;  'the  house  of
ivory/  which  might  show  the  refined  taste  of  its  possessor;  and  '  the  great  house/
which  would  display  his  wealth  and  give  room  for  his  revelry — all  were  marked,
like  trees  in  a  forest ;  their  end  was  determined,  it  would  quickly  come."  The
palace  of  the  prince  and  the  cottage  of  the  poor,  the  spacious  mansion  and  the
fortified  castle,  will  one  day  come  to  ruin.  Let  us  "build  high,"  and  secure  "that
house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.   13.    Divine    visitation.      /.  In  roused  from  their  slumber  and  quicken

relation  to  the  prophets  of  God.     A  new  attention  to  the  word  and  authority  of

charge  is  given  to  Amos  and  the  rest  of  God.      In  the  space  of  six  verses  the

God's  servants,  to  understand  the  mes-  prophet   earnestly    repeats    the    words,

sage   themselves    and    proclaim   it    to  "saith  the  Lord."      Men  of  our  time

others.     "  It  is  of  little  avail  to  testify,  should  not  question  nor  limit  the  mes-

unless  we  first  hear ;   nor  can  man  bear  sage  of  the  gospel.      Be  imbued  with

witness  to  what  he  doth  not  know ;  nor  the  spirit  of  Samuel,  "  Speak,  Lord,  for

will   words   make  an   impression,  i.  e.  thy  servant  heareth."     ///.  In  relation

leave  a  trace  of  themselves — be  stamped  to  their  design.      The   punishment  of

in  or  on  men's  souls — unless  the  soul  sin  and  the  correction  of  God's  people,

which  utters  them  have  first  hearkened  Sin  is  the  procuring  cause  of  all  punish-

unto  them"  [Pusey].     II.  In  relation  ment.     God  may  endure  long,  but  will

to  others.      w  In  the  house  of  Jacob  "  at  length  vindicate  his  holiness  and  visit

the  testimony  must  be  given ;  but  Phi-  "the   transgressions"  upon  those  who

listines  and  Egyptians,  as  ver.  9,  are  commit  thrui.

called  upon  to  witness.     Not  only  God's  Vers.   14,  15.     We  are  strongly  re-
servants,  but  others  have  need  to  be  minded   here  of  what  in  recent  years


268  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  [chap.  ill.


befell  Paris  and  Eome,  which  have  oc-  in     Israel     by    Samaria     and    Bethel

cupied  analogous  positions  in  the  Tapal  [Preacher* e  Lantern,  vol.  iv.].
world,  to  those  which  were  then  held

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO    CHAPTER  III

Vers.  1,  2.  Special  favours.    Men  are  an   awakening    should    be  the    result

not  to  be  envied  simply  because  they  [Ibid.].

are     endowed    with     special     favours.  Ver.    9.    Samaria.      The  metropolis

Those   very   endowments,   unless    they  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel  was  built  on  a

are   faithfully  used,  only  augment  re-  round  hill,  near  the  middle  of  a  large

sponsibility,  deepen  guilt,  and  ensure  a  valley,    surrounded    by    mountains    on

more  terrible  retribution.     Where  much  every  side,  by  which  it  was  completely

has  been  given  much  will  be  required.  overlooked.     From  these  elevations  per-

It  will  be  more   tolerable   for  Sodom  sons  might  distinctly  see  what  was  done

and  Gomorrah  in  the  day  of  judgment,  in  the  city  [Elzaz\.

&c.  [Dr  Tliomas].  Vers.  10,  11.  They  might  seem  to  be

Ver.  3.  When  God  walks  with  a  secure  and  at  ease  in  Samaria  and
nation  that  nation  prospers,  but  if  that  Damascus,  but  vain  would  every  such
nation  falls  to  words  with  God,  quarrels  remedy  against  fear  and  sorrow  prove,
with  him  about  his  will  and  law,  and  From  the  strong  city,  from  the  soft
rushes  perversely  into  sinful  courses ; —  couch,  they  would  be  dragged  to  misery
nay,  if  there  be  some  in  it  who  have  no  and  destruction.  In  about  40  years
God  at  all,  who  do  their  best  to  ex-  after  the  time  of  this  prophecy  we  read
tirpate  Ids  very  name  from  the  earth  (2  Kings  xvii  3)  of  a  siege  of  Samaria
which  he  himself  has  made,  then  we  which  lasted  three  years,  at  the  end  of
cannot  expect  that  God  should  continue  which  the  city  was  taken  ;  and  after  the
to  walk  with  such  offenders.  Consider  horrors  of  war,  the  spoiling  of  their
whether  there  has  not  been  enough  in  palaces  and  their  wealth,  the  remnant
England,  and  especially  in  this  great  was  dragged  into  a  distant  land,  to  en-
city,  to  make  God  angry  with  us  ?  Has  dure  the  miseries  of  captivity  and  exile
there  not   been  grievous  disagreement  [Ryan].

between  the  dwellers  in  this  city  and  Vers.  14,  15.    Visit,      The  sins  of  a

God  [Spurgeon]  1  nation  draw  judgment   after   them    as

Vers.  3 — 6.    The   first  question  was  the  moon  draws  after  it  the  billows  that

taken  from  travellers,  the  second  from  beat  upon  the  shore.      Let  no  nation

wild  beasts,  the  third  from  fowlers ;  the  hope  to  escape  judgment  until  it  gets

fourth  question  implies  that  inasmuch  rid  of  sin.      Judgments  are  but  sins

as  God  had  a  purpose  in  sending  tribu-  ripened  into  a  harvest,  subterranean  fires

lation,  he  will  not  remove  it  until  that  breaking  into  volcanoes  [Dr  Thomas].
design  is  answered ;   and  the  fifth,  that


CHAPTER  IV.


Cbitioal  Notes.]  Kine]  Fat  and  wanton,  yet  effeminate  and  luxuriant ;  reproved  not  for  fierce-
ness, but  unfeeling  insolence  and  oppression.  Say]  (1)  Wives  here  intended,  voluptuous  women
after  the  analogy  of  Is.  iii.  16  ;  xxxii.  9 — 13.  "  The  sin  of  these  women  consisted  in  the  tyrannical
oppression  of  the  poor,  whilst  they  asked  their  lords,  i.  e.  their  husbands,  to  procure  them  the
means  of  debauchery  "  \Keil\  (2)  Others,  princely  oppressors,  who  say  to  their  king,  with  whom
they  indulge  in  drink,  and  whom  they  ask  to  seal  the  bargain  with  wine.     Oppress]  Lit.  con-


chap.  IV.]  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :  AMOS.  269


tinually  oppress.  Crush]  Heb.  expresses  vehemence.  2.  Holiness]  which  binds  him  to  punish
(Ps.  lxxxix.  35).  Hooks]  Invaders  and  spoilers  compared  to  fishers  (Jer.  xvi.  16;  Heb.  i.  15).
3  Breaches]  of  city  walls  broken  by  the  enemy.  Every]  one  before  her,  e.  e.  without  looking  to
right  or  left  (cf.  Josh.  vi.  5,  20),  as  cows  through  a  gap  or  fence.  Cast]  "  The  word  may  describe
the  headlong  motion  of  the  animal,  and  the  desperate  gestures  of  the  hopeless  "  \_Pusey\  4.  Gil-
gal]  The  scene  of  idolatry.  Multiply]  Irony.  Since  you  will  not  be  reformed,  go  on,  try  whether
God  likes  your  sacrifices ;  eager  as  you  are  in  worship,  you  will  not  prevent  punishment.  Your
tithe  and  incense  only  increase  guilt.  5.  Leaven]  against  the  law  (Lev.  ii.  11).  Liketh]  This  is
what  you  love.  6.  Teeth]  Famine,  as  threatened  in  the  law  (Deut.  xxviii.  48,  57  ;  cf.  2  Kings
viii.  1).  7.  Yet  three]  The  latter  rain,  which  fell  in  latter  part  of  February  and  beginning  of
March,  when  most  required  (1  Kings  xvii.  1).  One  city]  Distress  so  great  that  people  from  one
place  had  to  go  a  great  distance  for  supply,  yet  could  not  get  enough  to  satisfy.  8.  Wandered]
Heb.  indicates  the  trembling,  unsteady  gait  of  those  exhausted  in  quest  of  food  (Ps.  lix.  15;
cix.  10  ;  Jer.  xiv.  1—6).  9.  Blasting]  Lit.  an  exceeding  scorching.  Mildew]  Heb.  intensive.
The  mention  of  these  would  remind  them  of  other  judgments  (Deut.  xxviii.  22).  10.  Manner]
i.  e.  the  way  in  which  God  punished  Egypt  (Ex.  ix.  3).  "  Palestine  was  by  nature  healthy.  Hence
on  account  of  the  terribleness  of  the  scourge,  God  often  speaks  of  it  as  of  his  own  special  sending"
[Pusey].  11.  Firebrand]  Proverbial  for  escape  from  imminent  danger.  Yet]  after  all  corrective
measures,  obstinately  impenitent,  and  determined  to  persist  in  wicked  courses !  12.  Therefore]
punishments  must  be  continued.  This]  not  expressed,  but  discerned  from  what  follows— all  kinds
of  things  imagined  in  the  uncertainty ;  but  the  last  the  greatest  calamity.  Prepare]  "  When  thou
seest  that  thou  hast  resorted  in  vain  to  all  kinds  of  subterfuges,  since  thou  never  wilt  be  able  to
escape  from  the  hand  of  thy  judge  ;  see  now  at  length  that  thou  dost  avert  this  last  destruction
which  is  hanging  over  thee"  [Calvin].  13]  To  give  greater  emphasis  to  the  command,  God  is
described  as  Almighty,  reading  the  thoughts  of  men,  creating  prosperity  and  adversity  as  he  changes
light  and  darkness,  subjecting  all  things  to  his  control,  and  ruling  as  the  Lord  of  Hosts.  What  an
argument  for  being  at  peace  with  him.

HOMILETICS.
Sad  Pictures  of  Human  Life. —  Verses  1 — 3.

Punishment  is  the  leading  thought  in  chap,  iii.,  but  in  this  sin  is  the  prominent
thought,  and  its  consequences  incidental  to  prove  its  exceeding  sinfulness.  Civil
injustice  and  oppression  were  very  common.  The  king  and  his  ministers  are
spoken  of  in  terms  of  contempt,  for  sharp  rebuke  often  becomes  an  imperative  duty.

I.  Insolent  abuse  of  prosperity.  Bashan  was  a  place  of  rich  soil  and  pastur-
age (Mic.  vii.  14  ;  Jer.  1.  19).  Animals  fed  there  were  among  the  strongest  and
fattest  (Deut.  xxxii.  14).  Bulls  furnished  a  type  of  the  mighty,  fierce,  and  unfeel-
ing men  of  earth  ;  kine  may  indicate  the  luxury  and  effeminacy  of  men  or  women
— a  life  of  wantonness  and  brutish  feeling.  Amos  points  out  the  princes  and
judges  as  ringleaders  in  provocation  and  insolence.  They  grew  fat  and  prosperous,
abused  their  place  and  power,  and  made  themselves  base  and  contemptible.  In
their  pleasure  and  grandeur  they  despised  the  herdman  and  the  poor.  They
thought  more  highly  of  themselves  than  they  ought  to  do.  Like  beasts,  they
found  their  enjoyments  in  self-indulgence  and  luxury.  Men  who  wallow  in  riches
and  surfeit  themselves  in  pleasure  fatten  themselves  for  slaughter.  Those  who
live  a  brutish  life  will  die  a  brutish  death.  Men  in  worldly  honour,  without  true
wisdom,  are  worse  than  beasts  that  perish.  Their  eminence  is  their  peril,  and  their
fall  is  disgraceful.  "  Man  that  is  in  honour  and  understandeth  not,  is  like  the
beasts  that  perish."  II.  Might  ruling  over  right.  Men  in  prosperity  and  high
rank  often  become  extravagant  and  tyrannical.  They  lose  the  tenderness  of  their
own,  and  have  no  sympathy  with  the  nature  of  others.  Might  overcomes  right.
1 .  In  oppressing  the  poor.  The  poor  are  always  with  us  to  kindle  our  sympathies,
teach  our  dependence,  and  fulfil  the  purpose  of  God.  In  true  philanthropy  there
is  present  blessedness  and  godlike  action.  "  Blessed  is  he  that  considereth  the
poor  ;  the  Lord  will  deliver  him  in  time  of  trouble."  The  poor  must  be  defended,
provided  for,  and  not  oppressed.  They  are  not  of  a  lower  grade  than  ourselves.
If  we  mock  or  oppress  them  we  reproach  God.  "  He  that  oppresseth  the  poor
reproacheth  his  Maker."     2.  In  crushing  the  needy.     Society  is  a  medium  for


2/70  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  [chap.  iv.


illustrating  the  attributes  of  humanity,  and  building  up  the  moral  history  of  the
world.     It  is  composed  of  all  classes,  and  bound  together  by  all  ties.     He  who  is
charitable  to  the  needy  exhibits  moral  likeness  to  God,  and  administers  to  the
glory  of  Christ  in  heaven  (Matt.  xxv.  40).     But  when  men  gratify  pride  in  selfish-
ness, disregard  the  rights  of  the  poor,  and,  like  powerful  cattle,  trample  the  weak
under-foot,  it  is  a  mark  of  an  unfeeling  heart  and  social  corruption — a  way  to
obliterate  the  moral  character  of  society,  and  a  prelude  to  Divine  judgment.     It  is
sad  when  men  vent  their  wantonness  where  there  is  no  power  to  resist.     Not  the
wolf  with  the  wolf,  but  the  wolf  with  the  defenceless  lamb,  "  devouring  the  poor
and  needy  from  off  the  earth."  Yet  they  are  found  among  the  rulers  of  God's  own
people,  among  the  teachers  of  religion,  and  in  the  common  ranks  of  life.     "  Judge
righteously  and  plead  the  cause  of  the  poor  and  needy."     III.  Confederacy  in
wickedness.     "  Bring,  and  let  us  drink."     The  wicked  encourage  and  strengthen
one  another  in  sin.     "  Come  on,"  said  Pharaoh,  "  let  us  deal  wisely  with  them."
The  king  and  his  courtiers  in  Israel  practised  oppression  themselves,  abetted  it
and  connived  at  it  in  others.     A  sinful  course  cannot  long  prosper.     Articles  of
luxury  are  dearly  bought  by  oppression.     Proud  combinations  against  the  laws  of
humanity  and  the  providence  of  God  shall  be  broken  as  tow.     The  builders  of
Babel  were  confounded.     The  conspiracies  of  Voltaire  and  his  infidel  school  have
been  overthrown.     In  our  day  all  social  compacts  and  private  bargains  in  the
cause  of  injustice  will  be  crushed  by  the  irresistible  power  of  God.     "  Though
hand  join  in  hand,  the  wicked  shall  not  be  unpunished."     IV.  Debauchery  in
social  conduct.     "  Let  us  drink."     Men  reap  a  poor  harvest  from  cruelty  and
oppression  when  they  spend  it  to  gratify  their  lusts.     Making  merry  at  the  cost  of
extortion  will  only  mingle  bitterness  with  wine.     Tyrants  to  the  poor  are  often
slaves  to  their  own  passions.  "  Cruelty  and  sensuality  are  well  matched.  Inflamed
passions  crave  for  inflaming  drink,  and  this  again  sets  on  fire  the  whole  course  of
nature,  and  disposes  to  deeds  of  violence  and  shame.     Nor  must  it  be  forgotten
that  men  and  women  naturally  mild  and  kind  commit  the  most  ferocious  (other-
wise unaccountable)  acts  under  the  influence  of  alcoholic  drink,  which  exerts  all
the  foreign  tyranny  of    diabolical  possession."     V.  Life  terminating  in  great
calamities.     Consider  the  end  of  these  proud  oppressors.     "  So  the  days  shall
come  upon  you  that  he  will  take  you  away  with  hooks  and  your  children  with  fish-
hooks."    Led  as  an  ox  to  the  slaughter,  taken  as  fish  out  of  the  water,  neither
power   nor   number   can   keep   them    from  sudden  and  violent  destruction.     1.
Calamities  fixed  in  time.     The  days  hold  on  their  steady  course  and  advance
closer  and  closer  to  the  sinner.     They  are  determined  in  God's  purpose  and   will
be  fitted  in  God's  providence.     2.  Calamities  with  great  sacrifice.     From  security
they  shall  violently  be  taken  away  to  a  land  of  oppression.  Their  stores  of  violence
would  be  cast  away  from  their  palaces.     When  life  is  at  stake,  treasures  of  gold
are  of  no  worth.     "  A  thousand  pounds  for  any  one  who  will  save  my  life,"  cried
a  young  lady  in  the  wreck  of  the  London.     It  is  too  late  often,  and  none  can  flee
away.     3.   Calamities  from  which  none  can  escape.     They  shall  rush  from  one
palace  to  another.     Some  think  to  be  the  meaning,  cast  themselves  into  one  place
after  another  and  find  no  shelter.     In  wild  confusion,  without  help  and  hope,
they  will  run  through  the  breach  of  the  city,  like  a  herd  of  cows  through  a  fence.
4.   Calamities  entailed  upon  posterity.     "  Your  children  with  fish-hooks."     People
may  survive  in  their  descendants  sometimes,  but  reckless  must  be  that  life  which
sweeps  away  posterity.     Sinners  entangle  themselves  in  their  own  devices,  and
bring  the  judgments  of  God  upon  their  families.     Kiches  are  small,  and  strong
palaces  are  defenceless  in  the  hour  of  death.     Those  who  boast  of  wealth,  and  act
in  cruelty  towards  others,  will  be  carried  away  without  ransom  and  without  hope.

"  To  the  vile  dust  from  whence  they  sprung,
Unwept,  unhonour'd,  and  unsung; "


chap,  iv.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  271


HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  1.  God's  intimate  acquaintance  which  they  had  profaned  in  themselves,

with  men.     1 .  He  discerns  their  charac-  and  which  they  had  caused  to  be  pro-

ter.       "Ye  kine  of   Bashan."      Pride,  faned  in  others.      God  sware  by  him-

wantonness,  and  effeminacy.     2.  He  de-  self.     For  he  is  the  supreme  uncreated

tects  their  sins.     Specifies  one  by  one.  Justice   and    Holiness.       This    justice

3.  He  knows  their  residence.     "  In  the  each,  in  his  degree,  should  imitate  and

mountain  of  Samaria."      "  God  knows  maintain  on  earth,  and  these  they  had

where  men  live.     Let  us  seek  to  make  sacrilegiously  violated  and  overthrown  "

our  houses  such  as  he  will  look  on  with  [Pusey].

pleasure"  [Hall  in  loco].     "  I  know  thy  Vers.  1 — 3.  From  the  whole  learn —

abode,  and  thy  going   out  and  thy  com-  1.  In  proportion  to  the  prosperity  here

ing  in,  and  thy  rage  against  me  "  (Is.  will  be  the  misery  of  the  wicked  here-

xxxvii.  28).  after.     2.  In  proportion  to  their  luxury

Vers.  2,  3.     1.  Destruction  inevitable.  here  will  be  their  poverty  hereafter.     3.

"  Saith  the  Lord."     2.  Destruction  by  In  proportion  to  their  sins  here,  will  be

meanest  instruments.     Fish  dragged  by  their  punishment   hereafter   [Treasury

the  hook,  Herod  destroyed  by  worms.  of  David].
3.  Destruction  vindicated  by  God's  cha-  «  0  iuxury  j

racter.      Holiness  is  offended   by  sin,  Bane  of  elated  life,  of  affluent  states,

and  pledged  to  vindicate  its  own  hon-  What  dreary  change,  what  ruin  is  not  thine  ?  *
our.      "God  swears   by  that   holiness  [i>y«r.J

HOMILETIGS.

Ungodly  Life  and  Formal  Worship. —  Vet  *es  4,  5.

The  prophet  again  turns  to  the  people,  and  in  bitter  in  uy  bids  them  pursue
their  course.  The  words  describe  the  worship  of  Israel,  and  afford  a  specimen  of
address  to  desperate  sinners.

I.  The  spirit  in  which  they  are  uttered.  1.  A  spirit  ol  irony.  "Come  to
Bethel,"  offer  your  sacrifices,  and  go  on  in  your  sin.  It  is  sometimes  right  to
cherish  this  spirit.  Elijah  to  the  prophets  of  Baal  (1  Kings  xviii.  27);  Micaiah
to  the  priests  of  Ahab  (xxii.  15) ;  and  Christ  himself  (Matt.  vi.  2)  found  it  neces-
sary. "  Scorns  and  taunts  are  the  best  answers  for  serious  idolatry,"  says  Bishop
Hall.  "  Holiness  will  bear  us  out,  in  disdainful  scoffs  and  bitterness,  against  wil-
ful superstition."  2.  A  spirit  of  reproof.  Multiply  your  sacrifices,  and  what
better  will  you  be  1  What  will  they  avail  you  in  the  day  of  adversity  ]  When
will  you  learn  wisdom  1  "  You  shall  be  ashamed  of  Bethel,  your  confidence."  II.
The  moral  condition  which  they  indicate.  Their  conduct  was  in  direct  opposi-
tion to  God's  will.  They  thought  great  devotion  would  make  up  for  ungodly  life,
1.  A  self-righteous  spirit.  They  boasted  of  their  ritual,  and  proclaimed  their  zeal
and  offerings.  "  So  well  did  they  count  themselves  to  stand  with  God,  that  there
is  no  mention  of  sin-offering  or  trespass-offering."  They  sought  the  praise  of  men,
and  not  the  approval  of  God.  Their  motives  to  goodness  were  derived  from  their
fellow-creatures  and  not  from  their  Maker.  Like  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  they
worshipped  to  be  seen  of  men.  2.  An  infatuated  mind.  Go  on ;  you  are  resolved
to  have  your  own  way,  whatever  God  and  conscience  say ;  and  you  may  take  it.
Thus  some  darken  their  foolish  minds,  befool  themselves,  and  are  given  up  to
strong  delusions,  to  believe  a  lie.  3.  An  incorrigible  life.  Go  on ;  neither  judg-
ment nor  mercy  has  any  influence  upon  you  ;  take  the  consequences.  They  seemed
judicially  given  up  to  sin.  "  Ephraim  is  joined  to  idols ;  let  him  alone."  This
is  an  awful  condition,  but  only  a  type  of  that  just  sentence  which  will  at  last  be
passed  against  all  transgressors.     "  He  that  is  unjust  let  him  be  unjust  still,  and


272  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  [chap.  rv.


he  who  is  filthy  let  him  be  filthy  still."  III.  The  character  of  the  worship  they
describe.  The  most  wicked  do  not  entirely  abandon  Christian  worship.  Fashion
and  the  force  of  habit  constrain  them.  Israel  kept  up  thank-offerings,  but  clung  to
their  sins.  1.  Corrupt  worship.  The  worship  of  God  was  mixed  with  that  of
idols.  The  altar  of  God  and  the  altar  at  Bethel  had  each  their  gifts.  So  now  the
adoration  of  self  and  graven  images  is  combined  with  the  worship  of  the  sanctuary.
Money,  pleasure,  and  popularity  rival  God.  Unworthy  motives  and  glaring  errors
are  cherished  in  his  service.  But  God  will  not  permit  contamination.  We  must
worship  him  in  the  beauty  of  holiness.  2.  Formal  worship.  They  were  devout
in  sacrifices  of  thanksgiving  and  free-will  offerings;  zealous  in  their  tithes,  punc-
tual in  their  ritual,  and  superabundant  in  their  diligence.  They  were  precise  in
their  formalities,  but  insincere  in  their  hearts.  They  kept  the  letter  but  violated
the  spirit.  Mint  and  cummin  were  paid,  but  the  weightier  matters  of  the  law,
judgment  and  mercy,  were  neglected.  Sacrifices  to  God  are  an  insult  when  the
heart  is  alienated  and  withheld.  "  Thou  desirest  truth  in  the  inward  parts."  3.
Will-worship..  They  did  what  God  commanded,  but  in  their  own  way,  and  at
their  own  places.  The  preference  for  Bethel  and  Gilgal,  for  priests  of  the  people
instead  of  the  sons  of  Levi,  the  setting  up  of  the  golden  calves,  and  the  use  of
leaven  in  their  worship,  made  it  mere  will-worship,  unacceptable  and  dishonouring
to  God.  The  end  of  true  worship  is  to  please  God,  but  if  we  please  ourselves  we
offend  him.  "  The  command,  therefore,  to  please  themselves,  as  they  will  have  it
so,  marks  the  utter  rejection  of  the  worshippers."  4.  Sinful  worship.  All  their
work  was  transgression,  and  the  repetition  of  their  service  was  a  multiplying  of
transgression :  their  worship  only  added  more  sin  to  their  violence  and  frauds.
Corrupt  religion  aggravates  guilt ;  diligence  in  superstitious  devotions  ripens  for
destruction  ;  and  self-will  in  anti-scriptural  forms  leads  to  utter  rejection  of  God.
"Though  ye  offer  me  burnt-offerings  and  your  meat-offerings,  I  will  not  accept
them."

M  The  holier  worship  which  he  deigns  to  bless
.Restores  the  lost,  and  binds  the  spirit  broken,
And  feeds  the  widow  and  the  fatherless  "  [  Whittier].

The  Corrective  Measures  of  God's  Providence. —  Verses  § — 11.

In  these  verses  God  describes  the  different  corrective  measures  which  he  em-
ployed for  the  purpose  of  effecting  a  change  in  the  Israelites,  and  at  the  close  of
each  mentioned  in  the  series,  the  obstinate  impenitence,  under  the  influence  of
which  they  persisted  in  their  wicked  courses,  is  emphatically  marked  by  the  de-
claration, Yet  ye  have  not  returned  unto  me,  saith  the  Lord  ;  such  repetition  gives
great  force  to  the  reprehension  \_Elzas~\.  The  verses  naturally  suggest  the  divisions
of  the  outline.

I.  Famine.  Cleanness  of  teeth  and  want  of  bread  indicate  scarcity  of  flesh
and  dearth  of  corn.  The  famine  was  everywhere,  "  in  all  your  places."  This  was
no  accidental  failure  of  crops,  nor  owing  to  a  combination  of  second  causes.  It
was  the  work  of  God  himself,  who  gives  daily  bread.  "  Man's  life,"  says  Calvin,
"  is  not  shut  up  in  bread,  but  hangs  on  the  sovereign  will  and  good  pleasure  of
God."  II.  Dearth  and  scarcity  of  water.  They  would  remember  times  of
plenty,  when  they  had  water  "  every  man  from  his  own  well  and  from  his  own
cistern."  How  minute  the  circumstances  of  the  calamity.  1.  Tlie  time  is  specified.
"  Three  months  to  the  harvest."  A  time  when  most  needed  to  ripen  corn  and
grain.  "  This  is  utterly  ruinous  to  the  hopes  of  the  farmer.  A  little  earlier  or  a
little  later  would  not  be  so  fatal,  but  drought  three  months  before  harvest  is  entirely
destructive  "  [The  Laud  and  the  Book].  2.  The  inequality  is  given.  In  one  city
and  not  in  another ;  upon  one  field  to  fertilize  it ;  not  upon  another,  which
remained  unproductive.     Thus  were  they  urged  to  reflect  upon  God.     In  sovereign


chap,  iv.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  273


mercy  he  holds  the  key  of  the  clouds,  to  open  and  shut  at  pleasure.  Every  drop
of  rain  is  measured  and  sent  by  Divine  direction  to  its  destination.  He  gives  rain
from  heaven  and  fruitful  seasons  (Acts  xiv.  17).  3.  The  distress  is  noticed.  In-
habitants in  some  places  were  frustrated  in  their  hopes;  necessitated  to  go  far
away  to  seek  for  water,  and  found  only  a  scanty  and  insufficient  supply.  Water,
free  to  all  now,  was  withheld  from  them.  In  trembling  fear,  and  weak  through
toil,  they  begged  from  city  to  city.  God  can  wither  our  harvests,  withhold  Divine
influence  from  our  schools  and  churches,  and  create  natural  and  spiritual  distress
throughout  the  nation.  u  Thou  art  the  land  that  is  not  cleansed,  nor  rained  upon
in  the  day  of  indignation."  III.  Blasting  and  mildew.  Blight  would  follow
from  scarcity  of  rain.  1 .  Vegetation  suffered.  The  gardens  which  they  cultivated
in  neglect  of  God,  the  fruit  which  was  appearing  to  reward  their  toil,  and  the
olive  trees  which  they  watched  with  care,  were  smitten  by  the  blast.  2.  Insects
abounded.  "  The  palmer-worm "  and  putrefaction  devoured  the  fruits  of  the
ground.  Malignant  air  and  voracious  animals  destroyed  fruitful  fields  and  pros-
perous vineyards.  "  The  Lord  shall  smite  thee  .  .  .  with  blasting  and  with  mil-
dew ;  and  they  shall  pursue  thee  until  thou  perish "  (Deut.  xxviii.  22).  IV.
Pestilence  and  sword.  Pestilence  such  as  visited  Egypt  fell  upon  them.  Young
men,  the  hope  of  the  country,  were  slain  in  war.  Horses  on  which  they  de-
pended were  taken  from  them  by  a  victorious  foe.  The  mighty  hosts  which  they
assembled  in  pride  were  like  sheep  for  the  slaughter.  The  stench  of  men  and
horses,  unburied  on  the  field,  poisoned  the  air  and  polluted  the  land.  Yet  this
did  not  humble  nor  reclaim  them.  "  He  made  a  way  to  his  anger ;  he  spared  not
their  soul  from  death,  but  gave  their  life  over  to  the  pestilence "  (Ps.  lxxviii.  50).
V.  Total  overthrow  by  earthquake.  They  seemed  insensible,  but  th6  solid
ground  beneath  them  trembled  with  unwonted  motion.  The  houses  above  their
heads  fell  in  utter  confusion.  Some  of  the  inhabitants  were  buried  in  the  ruins
or  smitten  by  the  lightning.  Others  who  narrowly  escaped  were  like  brands
plucked  out  of  the  fire.  Some  were  overthrown  like  the  people  in  Sodom ;  but
few,  like  Lot,  were  rescued  from  the  danger.  Yet  notwithstanding  these  terrible
judgments  and  displays  of  Divine  anger  Israel  did  not  return  to  God.  These
last  chastisements,  which  typify  more  than  anything  else  the  great  judgment-day,
have  failed.  Therefore  they  must  prepare  to  meet  God  as  the  Judge  and  Ruler
of  the  Universe.

"  Not  thou,  0  Lord,  from  us,  but  we
Withdraw  ourselves  from  thee  "  [French],

Chastisements  without  Reformation. — Verse  11.

"  Yet  have  ye  not  returned  unto  me,"  is  the  cry  full  of  grief  and  tenderness
repeatedly  uttered.  God  designed  to  bring  them  to  repentance,  but  they  were  in-
corrigible and  chastised  in  vain.

I.  Man  is  distant  from  God.  This  is  not  a  natural  fact  merely.  Estrange-
ment from  God  is  a  state  of  mind.  The  miser  loving  gold,  the  worldling  drinking
pleasure,  and  the  atheist  denying  God — each  has  a  specific  state  of  mind  character-
ized by  the  distinct  evil.  In  the  heart  is  fixed  opposition  to  God.  The  will  and
the  word  of  God  are  distasteful  to  the  sinner.  The  lower  sentiments  and  nobler
faculties  are  influenced  by  his  apostasy.  The  mind  is  ingrossed  with  things  like
our  nature.  Men  talk  of  fancied  reverence  and  adoration  for  God  ;  but  spiritually
they  live  "having  no  hope,  and  without  God  in  the  world."  II.  God  seeks  to
bring  man  to  himself.  The  Scriptures  abound  with  facts  and  figures  to  illustrate
this  truth.  God  seeks  to  recover  the  fallen  and  save  the  lost.  1.  By  mercy.
Mercies  given  in  Christ  and  multiplied  day  by  day.  Good  beyond  desert  and
degree  to  bring  to  God.  "The  goodness  of  God  leadeth  thee  to  repentance."
2-  By  judgment.  Judgments  national  and  personal,  severe,  many  and  long-con-
tinued.    God  chastens  in  body  and  mind,  in  social  and  family  circumstances,  that

18


274


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.


[CHAP.  IV.


we  may  not  go  astray.  "  Man's  wisdom  consists  in  observing  God's  unalterable
appointments  and  suiting  himself  to  them,"  says  Scott.  "  In  the  day  of  adversity
consider."  III.  Man  is  often  chastised  without  returning  to  God.  The  in-
numerable judgments  of  Israel  begot  no  repentance.  Nothing  external  will  make
us  wise  without  due  improvement  of  it.  Sensibility  to  bodily  pain  is  one  thing,
sorrow  of  heart  another.  "  I  will  at  this  time  send  all  my  plagues  upon  thy  heart."
God  visits  us  in  many  ways,  sends  bereavement  in  the  family  and  disappointment
in  business.  And  perhaps  there  is  room  for  repetition  day  by  day.  The  same
judgments  have  continue  I  and  new  ones  been  inflicted,  but  we  have  not  returned
to  God.  This  proves — 1.  Great  guilt.  2.  Great  provocation.  3.  Great  danger.
The  voice  resounds  still  in  Scripture  and  providence.  "  Yet  ye  have  not  returned
unto  me."


HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Vers.   1 — 11.      The    three    charges.

I.  Oppression  of  the  poor  (vers.  1 — 3).

II.  Corruption  of  worship  (vers.  4,  5).

III.  Incorrigibleness  under  Divine  judg-
ments (vers.  6 — 11).  Learn — 1.  That
God  has  various  judgments  to  exercise
a  sinful  nation.  2.  That  judgments
are  changed,  not  removed,  until  a  return
to  God.  3.  That  God  is  earnest  in
bringing  men  to  repentance.  "  A  course
of  sin  will  not  prove  a  thriving  way  in
the  end  to  any,  but  especially  to  the
Church,  which  the  Lord  will  either
make  a  theatre  of  mercy,  or  a  field  of
blood,  and  he  hath  many  rods  for  that
end  ;  for  as  they  liked  their  way  of  sin
(ver.  5),  so  he  also  chooseth  their  judg-
ments and  pours  out  a  quiver-full  of
them  upon  them"  [Hutcheson].

Ver.  7.  Withered.  So  will  it  ever  be
in  the  Church,  which  is  God's  vineyard,
if  ministers  give  no  doctrine  and  God
no  blessing,  fitly  resembled  to  rain
on  regard,  1.  of  cooling  heat  ;  2.
quenching  thirst ;  3.  cleansing  the  air ;
4.  allaying  the  winds ;  5.  mollifying
and  mellowing  the  parched  earth ;
6.  causing  all  things  to  grow  and
fructify.  This  rain  of  righteousness
goes  sometimes  by  coasts  as  here  ;  God


withholding  showers,  though  clouds  be
full  and  likely  enough  to  drop  down  in
abundance  (see  Ezek.  iii.  26 ;  Hos.  ix.
7  ;  Prov.  xvi.  1)  [Trapp],

Ver.  10.  After  the  manner  of  Egypt.
1.  Slaughter  of  young  men.  2.  The
land  filled  with  pestilence  and  locusts.
3.  Harassed  in  this  defenceless  con-
dition by  the  incursions  from  Assyria.

Ver.  11.  A  firebrand  plucked.  1.  A
scene  of  danger — "  burning."  2.  An
act  of  mercy — "plucked."  3.  A  present
uncertainty.  Once  in  danger,  now  res-
cued. Will  you  continue  where  you  are,
or  escape  entirely  to  refuge  ]

The  words  will  apply — 1.  Tempor-
ally. "  They  may  recall  a  striking  de-
liverance in  God's  providence,  when
others  were  taken  and  they  were  left.
A  shipwreck — a  battle — an  awful  acci-
dent involving  loss  of  human  life — a
sickness  from  which  many  others
around  them  died  "  [Ryan].  2.  Spirit-
ually. Every  sinner  saved  is  a  fire-
brand plucked  from  the  burning.  This
should  prompt — 1.  To  gratitude.  2.  To
earnestness  in  rescuing  others  from
"  the  wrath  of  God,"  which  "  is  revealed
from  heaven  against  all  ungodliness  and
unrighteousness  of  men."


HOMILETIGS.
The  Firemen  of  God,  or  the  Strange  Parallel  between  Fire  and  Sin.

Yire — what  is  there  in  the  moral  world  to  which  it  answers  1  But  one  thing,
that  is,  wickedness — sin  against  God — sin  in  a  man's  life.  Against  this  evil  God  calls
all  his  servants  to  be  firemen.  "  Put  out  the  fires. of  sin,"  is  a  nobler  motto  than
any  blazoned  on  the  symbols  of  commerce  and  art.

L  Consider  the  analogy  between  fire  and  sin.     1.  You  cannot  weigh  fire  in


chap.  IV.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  275


the  scales.  You  cannot  grasp  it,  yet  it  exists — you  can  feel  and  see  it  work.
You  cannot  rate  sin  by  horse  power,  but  you  feel  its  withering,  burning  influence
in  the  soul.  2.  Fire  becomes  sometimes  almost  invisible.  So  with '  sin.  In  the
glare  and  noon-day  of  busy  life  some  fail  to  see  it.  The  dimness  of  religious  truth
to  the  mind  is  a  terrible  monitor  of  what  sin  is  doing  in  the  heart.  3.  Sin  is  like
fire  in  its  attractions.  A  child  loves  to  play  with  fire,  unconscious  of  danger.
Men  toy  with  sin,  which  has  indulgence  for  appetite,  mirth  to  amuse,  feasts  for
gluttons,  and  revelry  for  the  reckless.  4.  Sin  consumes  like  fire.  It  burns  down
men  instead  of  houses ;  the  man  vanishes,  and  only  the  animal,  the  brute,  the
sensualist  is  left.  5.  Sin  spreads  like  a  fire.  Wicked  thoughts,  evil  suggestions,
are  the  sparks  that  kindle  the  fires  of  sin  in  the  soul  and  set  communities  in  a
blaze.  6.  Sin  inflicts  pain  like  a  fire.  It  burns,  stings,  and  agonizes  its  victim.
Here,  in  the  naked  conscience  and  despairing  death,  is  the  germ  of  the  fire  that  is
never  quenched.  7.  Sin,  like  fire,  defaces  what  it  touches.  8.  Sin  must  be  resisted
like  fire.  It  is  an  evil  to  be  put  out  in  heart  and  life.  9.  Sin,  like  fire,  if  you  wait
too  long  to  put  it  out,  will  render  attempts  useless.  The  soul  should  not  be  left  till
sin  has  mastery.  In  this  world  men  are  often  beyond  reasonable  prospect  of
repentance.  II.  Sin  is  the  fire,  but  the  sinner  is  the  fuel.  Ye  were  as  a  fire-
brand. 1.  A  firebrand  is  combustible,  or  it  never  would  have  been  a  firebrand.
So  with  the  sinner's  heart.  2.  A  firebrand  has  been  already  exposed  to  the  fire.
It  is  charred  and  blackened,  and  bears  the  marks  of  sin.  So  the  sinner.  3.  A  fire-
brand has  offered  no  effectual  resistance  to  the  flames.  The  sinner  has  not  resisted
sin.  He  is  bound,  and  by  the  grace  of  God  can  resist.  4.  A  firebrand  is  ready  to
be  kindled  anew,  after  it  has  been  once  quenched.  A  spark  may  kindle  the  soul.
5.  A  firebrand  is  in  the  process  of  being  consumed,  and  a  little  longer  will  finish  it.
So  with  the  sinful  heart.  6.  A  firebrand  only  needs  to  be  let  alone,  and  it  will
burn  to  ashes.  Leave  the  soul  to  sin — the  ruinous  power  of  its  own  lusts — and  its
ruin  will  be  complete.  7.  A  firebrand  is  a  dangerous  thing,  if  its  sparks  and
coals  come  in  contact  with  anything  else.  The  sinner  destroyeth  much  good.
III.  But  even  firebrands  may  be  saved.  Sinners  are  sometimes  plucked  out  of
a  desperate  condition — Mary  Magdalen,  the  thief  on  the  cross,  Saul  of  Tarsus —
but  the  work  is  God's.  A  converted  soul  is  a  miracle  of  grace.  Firemen !
guardians  of  our  dwellings  against  a  subtle  and  dangerous  foe,  be  ready  to  rush  to
the  scene  of  conflagration,  when  the  alarm  is  given,  night  or  day  !  The  fires  of  sin
burn  all  around,  and  perhaps  within  you  unchecked.  Be  God's  firemen,  and  help  to
quench  it.  Nothing  but  the  blood  of  Christ  can  put  out  the  fires.  Eepent  and
believe,  and  you  shall  be  saved.     [From  TJie  Preacher's  Treasury.]

Threatened  Evil  escaped  by  Eeturn  to  God. —  Verse  12.

"  When  he  has  said,  '  This  will  I  do  to  thee,'  he  is  silent  as  to  what  he  will  do,
in  order  that  whilst  Israel  is  left  in  uncertainty  as  to  the  particular  kind  of
punishment  (which  is  all  the  more  terrible  because  all  kinds  of  things  are  imagined),
it  may  repent  of  its  sins,  and  so  avert  the  things  which  God  threatens  here"
[Jerome],     The  words  indicate —

I.  An  expression  of  anger.  "  Therefore"  since  ye  persist  in  rebellion,  regard-
less of  former  judgments  and  respites,  "  thus  will  I  do."  Judgment  must  follow
judgment  until  there  is  a  full  end.  God's  hand  is  still  lifted  up,  and  the  threat
is  the  more  severe,  because  nothing  is  mentioned.  If  a  smitten  people  continue
impenitent,  and  will  not  be  corrected  nor  reclaimed,  God  will  prosecute  his  work
and  inflict  more  plagues.  His  judgments  are  sadder  or  lighter  according  to  our
conduct  under  them,  and  terrible  are  those  strokes  which  follow  inflicted  chastise-
ment. "  Thou  hast  called  as  in  a  solemn  day  my  terrors  round  about,  so  that  in
the  day  of  the  Lord's  anger  none  escaped  nor  remained"  (Lam.  ii.  22).  II.  An
exhortation  to  repentance.     When  God  is  about  to  strike  he  waits  to  be  pre-


2Jo  BOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY :  AMOS.  [chap.  rv.


vented.  Though  hardened  in  sin,  and  insensible  under  Divine  correction,  men  may
repent,  and  are  exhorted  to  return  to  God.  Repentance  is  not  impossible.  Set  about
it,  prepare  to  meet  God,  and  he  will  pardon  you.  "  If  then  their  uncircumcised
hearts  be  humbled,  and  they  then  accept  of  the  punishment  of  their  iniquity  :  then
will  I  remember  my  covenant."  III.  A  motive  to  reconciliation.  God  can  still
be  met — though  punishment  is  threatened,  God's  design  and  feelings  may  be  seen
in  it.  He  chastens  to  restore.  Sins  may  abound,  but  "  His  mercy  endureth  for
ever."  He  is  willing  to  be  thy  God.  He  waits  to  be  gracious  and  to  be  reconciled
to  thee.  "  Noah,  moved  with  fear,  prepared  an  ark  to  the  saving  of  his  house."
Josiah  endeavoured  to  ward  off  the  threatened  judgment  by  humiliation  before
God.  But  some  foresee  impending  evil  and  escape  not  (Prov.  xxii.  3).  There
is  a  hiding-place  in  Christ.  Let  chastisements  awaken  you  from  slumber,  and  urge
you  to  lay  hold  of  the  hope  set  before  you.  "  We  pray  you  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye
reconciled  to  God."

Preparation  to  meet  God.

I.  The  solemn  event.  Not  an  ordinary  event,  not  the  meeting  of  man  with
man,  but  of  man  with  his  Maker.  We  have  to  meet  God  on  earth,  and  especially
at  the  judgment-day,  when  the  atheist  and  the  scorner,  the  righteous  and  the
wicked,  each  one  will  see  him  for  himself  and  not  for  another.  II.  The  needfnl
preparation.  If  in  judgment,  prepare,  for  how  can  we  contend  against  him  %  If
in  penitence,  prepare,  for  he  will  meet  us  in  forgiveness.  A  preparation  of  heart  and
life  are  necessary.  The  sinner  must  be  reconciled ;  the  soul  must  be  renewed  and
the  life  be  holy.  "  Holiness,  without  which  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."
III.  The  motives  to  enforce  the  preparation.  1.  The  greatness  of  God.
If  he  be  such  as  here  described,  what  folly  to  oppose  him,  and  what  an  argument
to  make  our  peace  with  him.  2.  The  providence  of  God.  "  Because  I  will  do
this,  therefore  prepare ; "  that  is,  God's  providential  dealings  with  us  are  a  motive
to  urge  preparation  to  meet  him.  God  comes  near  in  judgments  and  great
events.  We  should  consider  our  ways.  The  doctrines  of  the  gospel  and  the
providences  of  life  often  fail  to  rouse  attention.  Men  sleep  unconscious  of  the
presence  of  God  and  the  impending  danger.  If  we  do  not  meet  him  as  a  Friend
we  shall  have  to  meet  him  as  a  Judge.     u  Prepare  to  meet  thy  God."

Prepare  to  meet  thy  God. — Verses  12,  13.

Man  forgets  God.  Scripture  denounces  this,  and  the  great  aim  of  its  precepts,
history,  threatenings,  and  promises,  is  to  produce  and  cherish  the  habit  of  remember-
ing God.  The  text  calls  to  remember  God,  is  often  applied  exclusively  to  the
meeting  of  God  in  another  world  ;  but  from  the  context  it  applies  to  what  goes  on
in  this  world  also.  Consider,  therefore,  how  to  meet  God  as  he  comes  near.
I.  During  our  time  of  probation  on  earth.  It  is  common  for  those  who  dispute
the  reality  of  God's  coming  to  assert  that  he  is  too  highly  exalted  to  notice  insig-
nificant creatures.  But  in  Scripture  God's  greatness  and  man's  littleness  often
combine  to  illustrate  this  truth.  1.  In  the  way  of  repentance.  A  sinful  course  is
turning  back  from  God,  fleeing  from  a  God  of  mercy  to  a  God  of  anger.  He  calls
the  careless  and  impenitent  to  meet  him.  (1)  Quickly.  Now  a  day  of  grace  in
which  outward  calls  combine  with  inward  connections.  This  time  is  precious,  and
will  be  succeeded  by  "  a  night  wherein  no  man  can  work."  (2)  Carefully.  "  Let
us  search  and  try  our  ways."  Rush  not  carelessly  and  without  thought  to  the
throne  of  God.  "  Take  with  you  words."  (3)  Decidedly.  With  the  firm  conviction
that  in  no  other  way  can  peace  and  salvation  be  found.  2.  In  the  way  of  temporal
blessings.  It  may  please  him  to  let  our  life  pass  peaceably  on — to  keep  off  appre-
hended danger — to  make  the  cup  of  sorrow  pass  from  us,  that  we  drink  it  not.
Awful  accidents  and  fearful  calamities  may  have  plunged  others  into  misery,  but  we


cha*.  rv.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  277


go  on  from  day  to  day  in  security  and  peace.  Meet  God  in  a  spirit  of  gratitude
and  praise.  3.  In  the  way  of  temporal  sorrow.  (1)  Endeavour  to  turn  judgment
aside  by  liumble  prayer  (Amos  vii.  2 — 6).  (2)  To  hear  it  as  coming  from  God.
We  do  not  meet  God  if  we  look  to  second  causes ;  nor  profit  if  we  do  not  see  his
hand  and  will.  4.  In  the  use  of  the  means  of  grace  God  meets  Ids  people.  There
is  no  perad venture  like  Balaam's  in  the  believing  use  of  means.  Special  blessings
rest  upon  family  worship,  social  and  public  worship,  and  when  we  obey  the  in-
junction "  this  do  in  remembrance  of  me."  But  we  lose  much  from  not  pre-
paring to  meet  God  in  ordinances.  Prepare  with  reverence  and  godly  fear,  and  with
earnest  expectation.  5.  We  meet  God  in  the  works  of  righteousness  (Is.  lxiv.  5).
Thus  we  see  it  our  duty  to  meet  God  during  the  time  of  probation.  In  Christ  we
meet  him  in  repentance,  and  find  him  reconciled — in  prosperity  he  calls  for  gratitude
and  praise — in  judgment  we  bow  with  submission  and  endeavour  to  turn  it  aside
— in  the  means  of  grace  we  should  meet  him  with  glad  reverence,  and  earnest
expectation  of  good  things  from  his  Fatherly  bounty.  II.  Prepare  to  meet  him
after  the  time  of  trial  is  over.  1 .  Very  solemn  and  awakening  is  the  thought  of
meeting  God  then.  Here  we  meet  him  in  his  works  and  ways,  there  we  shall  meet
God  himself.  Remember  this  in  the  engrossing  concerns  of  uncertain  life.
Eternity,  and  not  time,  is  the  stage  of  our  existence.  2.  After  death  cometh  the
judgment,  when  we  must  "  be  made  manifest  "  before  the  tribunal  of  Christ.  Some
will  meet  God  in  anger,  and  cry  for  rocks  to  fall  on  them  ;  others  will  meet  a  God
in  mercy.  No  righteousness  will  stand  them  but  "  the  righteousness  of  God."
Have  we  that  righteousness  1  Is  the  thought  of  that  day  a  part  of  your  daily
meditation  1  Give  diligence  to  be  found  in  him  in  peace  and  security.  "  Keep
yourselves  in  the  love  of  God,  looking  for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto
eternal  life."  This  waiting  frame  of  mind  will  be  one  of  the  greatest  helps  to
prepare,  and  one  of  the  surest  signs  that  you  are  prepared  to  "  meet  your  God  "
\Ryan\

The  Dispensations  op  Providence  carrying  out  the  Designs  op  Grace.

—  Verse  13.

In  true  repentance  we  must  have  right  views  of  God  and  his  claims.  The
prophet  here  describes  God  in  the  resources  of  creation  and  the  wonders  of  pro-
vidence to  induce  Israel  to  think  of  him  and  prepare  to  meet  him.  "  For  "  if
mercy  move  not,  let  majesty.     God  is  great,  and  can  carry  out  his  designs  of  love —

I.  By  his  mighty  power  in  creation.  "  He  that  formeth  the  mountains,"  &c.
1.  Power  in  the  past.  Before  the  mountains  were  brought  forth  God  was.  He
created  the  solid  parts  of  the  earth,  and  reared  the  everlasting  hills.  "  Which  by
his  strength  setteth  fast  the  mountains."  They  owe  firmness  and  stability  to  him.
The  Alps  and  the  Andes  are  "  girded  "  and  preserved  from  falling  down  by  his
power.  2.  Power  in  the  present.  a  And  createth  the  wind."  The  heathens
believed  in  an  inferior  God,  whom  Jupiter  appointed  a  store-keeper  to  raise  and
still  the  winds  at  pleasure.  But  God  "  bringeth  forth  the  wind  out  of  his
treasuries"  (Jer.  x.  12).  The  winds  and  the  seas  obey  him.  "  He  commandeth
and  raiseth  the  stormy  wind,  which  lifteth  up  the  waves  thereof.  He  maketh  the
storm  a  calm,  so  that  the  waves  thereof  are  still."  The  most  solid  and  the  most
subtle,  the  mildest  and  the  most  terrific,  agents  were  created  by  God.  If  we  read
rightly  we  see  not  only  power  but  mind  in  the  works  of  God.  Men  are  thus
encouraged  to  flee  unto  him.  The  salvation  expected  from  the  hills  typifies
deliverance  from  sin  and  protection  in  Christ  (Ps.  lxxxix.  11,  12).  Control  over
winds  sets  forth  his  dominion  over  minds.  All  creation  manifests  his  beneficence  to
men.  II.  By  his  unceasing  activity  in  providence.  "  That  maketh  the  morn-
ing darkness."  God  not  only  created,  but  governs  all  things  according  to  the
counsel  of  his  will.     He  is  unceasingly  active  for  the  good  of  his  creatures.     "  My


278  BOMILETIC  COM  MEN  TART :  AMOS.  [chap.  IV.


Father  worketh  hitherto  and  I  work."  1.  Literally  God  makes  the  morning  dark.
He  spreads  the  clouds  and  overcasts  the  sky.  He  creates  light  and  darkness,
and  gives  day  and  night.  2.  Providentially  God  makes  the  morning  dark.  The
morning  of  joy  and  prosperity  is  turned  into  the  night  of  sorrow  and  distress.  The
sunshine  of  Divine  favour  may  be  followed  by  retributive  judgments.  It  is  folly
to  trust  in  any  means  of  deliverance  but  his.  Our  expectations  may  be  darkened
by  unlooked-for  changes.  Everything  that  is  joyous  and  beautiful  may  be  effaced
by  darkness.  "  Seek  him  that  .  .  .  turneth  the  shadow  of  death  into  the  morning,
and  maketh  the  day  dark  with  night."

"  For  we  have  also  our  evening  and  our  morn."

III.  By  his  omniscient  presence  with  men.  "  And  declareth  unto  man  what  is  his
thought."  He  can  read  the  heart  and  understand  the  thought  afar  off  (Ps.  cxxxix.
2).  We  hide  our  sins  and  do  not  wish  to  know  our  hearts ;  but  "  God  is  greater
than  our  heart,  and  knoweth  all  things."  He  reads  and  reveals  us  to  ourselves  and
sets  our  sins  in  order  before  us.  "  The  thought  of  God  as  a  Creator  or  Preserver
without,"  says  Pusey,  "  affects  man  but  little.  To  man  a  sinner,  far  more  impress-
ive than  all  majesty  of  creative  power,  is  the  thought  that  God  knows  his  in-
most soul.  God  knows  our  thoughts  more  truly  than  we  know  ourselves."  There
is  no  deceiving  him  in  our  conduct.  We  have  to  do  with  One  who  searches  the
heart.  "  I  the  Lord  search  the  heart,  I  try  the  reins  "  (Jer.  xvii.  10  ;  Ps.  vii.  9).  The
moral  government  of  God  is  ever  administered  on  the  principle  that  man  is  account-
able for  his  thoughts.  The  law  of  God  weighs  the  purposes  of  men  and  the
dispensations  of  God.  "  Give  to  every  man  according  to  his  ways,  and  according  to
the  fruit  of  his  doings."

"  On  human  hearts  he  bends  a  jealous  eye."

IV.  By  his  supreme  control  in  all  things.  "  The  Lord,  the  God  of  hosts,  is  his
name."  Not  only  the  God  of  Israel,  but  the  supreme  Ruler  of  men  and  Disposer
of  all  things.  1.  He  is  supreme  in  the  universe.  "The  Lord  of  hosts."  Head
over  all  principalities  and  powers  in  heaven  and  earth.  He  has  being  in  himself,
and  is  the  fountain  of  being  and  blessedness  to  others.  "  Who  is  over  all,  God
blessed  for  ever."  2.  He  makes  all  things  subservient  to  his  purpose.  "Treadeth
upon  the  high  places  of  the  earth."  He  walks  on  the  sea  (Job  ix.  8),  and  on  the
win^s  of  the  wind  (Ps.  civ.  3).  He  subdues  the  proud  and  dethrones  the  mighty.
Whatever  is  eminent  and  exalts  itself  against  him  he  will  put  down.  He  reigns
above  all  creatures,  controls  the  highest  spheres  of  power,  and  everything  around
him  stands  ready  to  execute  his  will.  Thus  the  prophet  sees  in  the  course  of  nature
the  will  of  God,  links  the  physical  with  the  moral  events,  and  makes  the  one  find
its  loftiest  end  in  the  other.  National  calamities  are  revelations  of  God's  wrath.
But  these  only  endanger  the  material  welfare  of  a  people.  A  God  of  transcendant
greatness  sends  them  to  draw  us  to  himself.  Nothing  will  avail  before  him  but
righteousness  and  truth.     Prepare  to  meet  him  with  joy  and  not  with  grief.

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  IV.

Ver.  1.  There  is  not  a  word  in  our  Vers.  4,  5.  What  a  sting  is  there —

language  which  expresses  more  detest-  "  this  liketh  you  !  "  how  it  should  pierce

able  wickedness  than  oppression  [But-  the  conscience  of    every    sinner — "  for

ler\    Mr  Cecil  says  that  he  often  "  had  this  liketh  you,  0  ye  children  of  Israel !  "

a  sleepless  night  from  having  seen  an  Far  indeed  was  everything  like  levity

instance  of  cruelty  in  the  day."  from  the  prophet's  mind  in  treating  such

"  My  ear  is  pain'd,  a  subject  as  the  sinfulness  of  the  people ;

My  heart  is  sick  with  every  day's  report  far  enough  was  he  from  making  a  mock

Of  wrong  and  outrage  with  which  earth  is  Qf  g^  ag  f00jg  ^     jt  wag  ^ly  sorrow

filled."


CHAP.  IV.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.


279


that  prompted  the  irony ;  it  was  with
deep  solemnity  of  soul  that  he  wielded
that  cutting  weapon — and  withal  he
could  be  touching  and  tender  in  expos-
tulation [Stoughton],

Vers.  6 — 10.  We  look  to  second  causes
and  impute  our  years  of  dearth  to  wet
and  cold,  to  hot  and  parching  seasons,
to  cycles  of  weather,  to  comets,  and
many  other  accidents,  some  real  and
others  imaginary,  and  thus  wilfully  con-
ceal from  our  view  the  power  of  God,
who  blesseth  a  land  and  maketh  it  to
bring  forth  fruit  abundantly,  and  who
"  turneth  a  fruitful  field  into  barrenness
for  the  wickedness  of  them  that  dwell
therein."  The  acts  of  God's  providence
are  as  certainly  a  pavt,  of  his  administra-
tion now  as  in  former  ages,  and  as  directly
affect  each  individual  of  the  race  as  they
did  the  children  of  Abraham.  It  is
to  those  who  are  subdued  under  his  re-
bukes that  he  sends  his  tvord  to  heal
them.  They  who  watch  the  ruling
hand  of  God  shall  become  wiser  in
reading  his  purposes  and  their  own
necessities  [Duncan],

Vers.  12,  13.  The  Eev.  Mr  Madan
was  desired  one  evening,  by  some  of  his
companions  who  were  with  him  at  a


coffee-house,  to  go  and  hear  Mr  John
Wesley,  who  they  were  told  was  to
preach  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  to
return  and  exhibit  his  manners  and  dis-
course for  their  entertainment.  Mr  M.,
educated  for  the  bar,  went  with  that  in-
tention, and  just  as  he  entered  the  place,
Wesley  named  his  text,  "Prepare  to
meet  thy  God,"  with  a  solemnity  of  ac-
cent which  struck  him,  and  which  in-
spired a  seriousness  that  increased  as  the
good  man  exhorted  his  hearers  to  repent-
ance. Mr  M.  returned  to  the  coffee-
room,  and  was  asked,  "  if  he  had  taken
off  the  old  Methodist  ? "  "  No,  gentle-
men," said  he,  "but  he  has  taken  me
off;"  and  from  that  time  he  left  their
company  and  became  a  converted  man
[Whitecross],

Ver.  13.  "I  never  had  a  sight  of  my
soul,"  said  the  Emperor  Aurelius,  "  and
yet  I  have  a  great  value  for  it,  because
it  is  discoverable  by  its  operations  ;  and
by  my  constant  experience  of  the  power
of  God,  I  have  a  proof  of  his  being,  and
a  reason  for  my  veneration"  [White-
cross].  Let  us  incessantly  bear  in  mind,
that  the  only  thing  we  have  really  to  be
afraid  of,  is  fearing  anything  more  than
God  [Book  of  the  Fathers],


CHAPTEE  V.


Critical  Notes.]  This  word]  A  mournful  song  (2  Sam.  i.  17 — 27).  Take  up]  Lit.  lift  up
as  if  to  cast  down  upon  them.  2.  Virgin]  The  Israelite  state  unsubdued  by  foreigners.  Fallen]
Violent  death  (2  Sam.  i.  19 — 25),  a  figure  of  the  overthrow  of  the  kingdom.  Rise]  in  the  existing
order.  3.  Went]  to  war.  The  depopulated  city  is  touchingly  described  (Deut.  xxviii.  62).  4.
Live]  Not  only  remain  alive,  but  possess  real  favour.  5.  Bethel]  "  A  strong  dissuasive  from  idolatry
derived  from  the  predicted  fall  of  the  objects  and  places  of  false  worship."  6.  Lest]  Danger
threatened.  Like  fire]  consuming  everything  before  it  (Deut.  iv.  24:  Is.  x.  17:  Lam.  ii.  3).  7 — 9.]
God  in  his  omnipotence  in  contrast  with  the  ungodly  people,  indicating  that  he  who  can  destroy
should  be  feared.  Wormwood]  Justice -embittered,  corrupted,  and  made  hateful  (cf.  ch.  vi.  12  :  Deut.
xxix.  17).  8.]  God  in  creation,  moral  government,  and  judicial  procedure  described  almost  in  words
like  Job  ix.  9.  10.  Hate]  the  reprover  who  condemns  their  sins ;  Amos  himself,  or  judges  at  the
gate  who  put  down  injustice  (Is.  xxix.  21  :  Jer  xvii.  19).  11.  Take]  Burdensome  taxes  levied  in  kind
from  the  wheat  of  the  needy  to  pamper  the  lusts  of  the  great  [Henderson],  12.  Bribe]  Lit.  a
price  to  deliver  from  sentence.  "  The  judges  allowed  the  rich  murderer  to  purchase  exemption  from
capital  punishment  by  the  payment  of  atonement  money,  whilst  they  bowed  down  the  right  of  the
poor."  This  illegal  (Num.  xxxv.  31).  13.  Silence]  "A  chosen  silence  towards  vile  corrupters  of  law
and  justice  who  will  nothing  mend  though  reproved ;  or  silence  before  God,  owning  his  justice  in
punishing  such  sinners  "  [Poole].     14.  Spoken]  They  fancied  that  God  was  with  them  by  virtue  of


280  I10MILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  [chap.  v.


the  covenant  with  Abraham  (John  viii.  39).  15.  Perhaps]  indicates  difficulty  in  their  case,  not  un-
certainty with  God  (cf.  Gen.  xvi.  2;  Joel  ii.  13).  Peradventure  (Ex.  xxxii.  3).  Remnant]  pre-
served in  the  approaching  judgment,  as  Joel  iii.  5  :  Is.  vi.  13  ;  x.  21 — 23.  16.  Therefore]  if  ye
seek  not  God,  there  will  be  lamentation  not  only  by  professional  mourners,  but  in  the  streets  of  the
city,  in  all  towns  of  the  kingdom,  and  in  places  where  joy  is  expected.  17.  Pass  through]  as  in
Egypt  (Ex.  xii.  12  ;  Nah.  i.  12),  taking  vengeance  and  creating  death  wail.  18.  Woe]  to  the  con-
fident who  deceive  themselves  with  false  hopes.  Desire]  Deriding  the  prediction  of  the  prophet
(Jer.  xvii.  15  ;  Ezek.  xii.  22).  "  It  was  an  impious  daring  of  God  to  do  his  worst  "  [_Ekas\.  19.]
Two  figures  from  pastoral  life  illustrate  the  false  hope  of  escape.  Fleeing  from  a  lion  to  meet  a
bear  means  that  whoever  escapes  one  danger  will  fall  into  another.  The  bear  spares  none,  and  the
serpent's  bite  in  the  hand  is  fatal.  "  In  that  day  every  place  is  full  of  danger  and  death ;  neither
in-doors  nor  out-of-doors  is  any  one  safe ;  for  out-of-doors  lions  and  bears  prowl  about  and  in-doors
snakes  lie  hidden,  even  in  the  holes  of  the  walls  "  [Corn,  d  Lap.].  20.  Bright.]  i.  e.  to  those  who  do
not  turn  from  evil.  21.]  Festivals  and  sacrifices  will  not  avert  judgments.  Your  feasts]  of  human
origin,  not  Divine  appointment  (Is.  i.  10  — 15);  the  expression  of  Divine  abhorrence  is  most  em-
phatic. 23.  Noise]  as  singing  is  contemptuously  called.  24.  Run]  judgments  like  a  flood  over  the
land  [Keil],  Others  take  it  as  an  exhortation  to  practise  justice  and  truth.  25.  Have]  Lit.  Bid  ye,
equivalent  to  denial,  some ;  others,  not  entire  suspension  of  sacrifice,  but  mixed  with  idolatry.  From
of  old  they  had  been  recreant  to  God.  Their  present  offensive  worship  was  only  a  continuation  of  the
idolatry  in  the  wilderness.  Their  sins  were  the  very  sins  of  their  forefathers  (Ezek.  xx.  39).  26.
Borne]  aloft  in  pomp,  the  portable  shrine  or  model  tabernacle.  The  idolatry  censured  is  of  Egyp-
tian origin.  A  literal  god  of  stars  cannot  be  proved  \Lange\,  27.]  Banishment  of  the  people  far
beyond  the  borders  of  their  own  land.  Beyond]  the  capital  of  Syria,  in  which  you  trust  for  help
instead  of  me  (Acts  vii.  43)  :  combines  into  one  the  several  passages  from  prophecy.  A  most  un-
likely event  then ;  but  Thus  saith  the  Lord  indicates  its  certainty.

HOMILETICS.
The  Funeral  Dirge. — Verses  1 — 3.

"  In  order  to  impress  Israel  the  more,  Amos  begins  this  his  third  appeal  by  a
dirge  over  its  destruction,  mourning  over  those  who  were  full  of  life  and  thought
themselves  safe.  A  dirge  like  that  of  David  over  Saul  and  Jonathan,  over  what
once  was  lovely  and  mighty,  but  which  had  perished"  [Pusey].

I.  The  death  of  the  nation.  Israel  was  spiritually  dead  and  debased.  Like
a  virgin,  she  had  lost  her  purity  and  fealty  to  God.  1 .  The  state  ivas  destroyed.
"  She  hath  fallen."  Fallen  by  her  sins  and  from  her  dignity.  (1)  Inwardly  de-
stroyed. "  She  is  forsaken  upon  her  land."  Her  true  interests  were  neglected  by
her  friends.  She  was  forsaken  by  her  own  rulers  and  guides.  With  all  her
strength  and  resources  she  was  morally  helpless  and  none  could  defend  her.  (2)
Violently  destroyed.  "  Cast  down  upon  her  soil."  She  was  prostrated  by  inward
tendency  and  outward  force.  "  Then  will  I  leave  thee  upon  the  land,  I  will  cast
thee  forth  upon  the  open  field"  (Ezek.  xxix.  5  ;  xxxii.  4).  (3)  Hopelessly  destroyed.
"  There  is  none  to  raise  her  up."  Weakened  by  moral  corruption  and  intestine
strife ;  despised  by  men  and  forsaken  by  God,  she  could  rise  no  more.  Nothing
can  prop  up  a  rotten  nation,  nor  save  a  doomed  people.  Ichabod  may  be  written
when  God  lias  departed  from  us.  2.  The  people  were  decimated.  The  city  from
which  thousands  went  equipped  for  war  could  scarcely  muster  one  hundred.  The
people,  cut  off  by  sword  and  pestilence,  could  not  furnish  more  than  a  tithe  of  their
population.  One  common  doom  befell  larger  and  smaller  cities.  The  whole  king-
dom was  helpless  and  ruined.  "  And  ye  shall  be  left  few  in  number,  whereas  ye
were  as  the  stars  of  heaven  for  multitude ;  because  thou  wouldest  not  obey  the
voice  of  the  Lord  thy  God."

"  111  fares  the  land,  to  hastening  ills  a  prey,
Where  wealth  accumulates,  and  men  decay."

II.  The  mourning  for  the  nation.  God  is  gracious  in  showing  to  us  our  sins,
and  if  we  heed  the  accusation  we  may  escape  the  lamentation.  But  people  are
obstinate  and  opposed  to  God.  1.  The  prophet  mourned.  "  This  word  which  I
take  up  against  you."     He  views  the  nation  as  dead,  and  he  attends  the  funeral.


chap,  v.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  AMOS.  281


He  mourns  not  in  poetic  words,  "but  in  deep  feeling.  Every  faithful  minister  at
some  time  or  other  does  the  same.  Samuel  mourned  over  Saul  j  David  wept
because  men  kept  not  the  law  of  God  ;  Jeremiah  grieved,  and  Paul  had  "  great
heaviness  and  continual  sorrow."  Lamentations  over  fallen  churches  and  wails
over  lost  souls  are  most  touching  and  too  common  !  "  I  will  weep  bitterly ;  labour
not  to  comfort  me,  because  of  the  spoiling  of  the  daughter  of  my  people."  2.  The
people  mourned.  Sad  was  the  change  and  most  distressing  the  condition  of  Israel.
Sorrow  entered  every  family ;  the  state  was  deprived  of  its  subjects ;  and  there
was  none  to  help  in  her  degraded  condition.  "  If,"  says  a  writer  on  this  book,  "  an
enemy  who  had  depopulated  our  towns,  and  killed  our  fathers  and  mothers,  were
to  come  to  our  abodes,  how  would  all  rise  to  ruin  such  an  enemy.  We  should  do
as  the  Jews  did  by  Paul  when  they  looked  on  him  as  an  enemy  (Acts  xxi.  27,  28),

*  they  stirred  up  all  the  people  and  laid  hands  on  him,  crying  out,  Men  of  Israel,
help  ! '     So  should  we  encourage  each  other  against  sin  and  suppress  it,  saying  : —

*  Magistrates,  ministers,  men  and  brethren,  help  ;  sin  is  what  destroys  our  people,
wastes  our  cities,  unpeoples  our  towns,  opposeth  the  laws,  and  brings  confusion
everywhere.' "

Seeking  God  and  Eenouncing  Sin. —  Verses  4 — 6.

Departure  from  God  is  the  root  of  all  sorrow.  Ee formation  therefore  must  be
radical  and  not  formal.  God  has  not  utterly  abandoned  Israel.  He  speaks  as
"  our  God,"  ready  on  our  return  to  him  to  deliver  and  bless.  "  Seek  ye  me  and
ye  shall  live."

I.  The  urgent  request.  The  prophet  repeatedly  urges  them  to  seek  God
(vers.  4,  6,  14),  from  whom  they  had  wandered  and  whom  they  had  offended.
1.  God  is  the  object  sought.  We  must  seek  him  not  for  any  selfish  ends,  not  for
gifts,  nor  for  anything  out  of  him.  What  is  the  world  without  him?  All
may  be  found  and  enjoyed  in  him.  Some  pursue  pleasure,  riches,  and
wealth  others  find  in  God  their  chief  good.  "  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but
thee  ?  and  there  is  none  upon  earth  that  I  desire  beside  thee."  2.  God  must
be  sought  earnestly.  The  seeking  is  diligent  and  anxious.  Infinite  good  is  more
desirable  than  created  good.  We  must  not  seek  God  anyhow,  but  with  earnest-
ness and  perseverance.  The  pursuit  is  not  an  indefinite  desire,  the  mere  natural
working  of  the  mind,  but  an  intense  longing  for  God.  "  Ye  shall  seek  me  and
find  me,  when  ye  shall  search  for  me  with  all  your  heart."  II.  The  needful
caution.  "  But  seek  not  Bethel,"  &c.  Israel  sought  God  at  Bethel  ;  but  idolatry
is  opposed  to  seeking  God,  and  must  be  renounced.  The  worship  of  God  cannot
be  reconciled  with  the  worship  of  Baal.  1.  Outward  forms  will  not  avail.  Gilgal
and  Bethel  were  ancient  places,  but  empty  forms.  The  truth  once  taught  there
had  become  powerless,  and  Israel  had  ceased  to  obey.  Men  may  plead  beauty,
antiquity,  and  prevalence  of  forms ;  but  we  are  admonished  to  abandon  them  all
and  trust  to  the  living  God.  Idolatrous  customs  will  ensure  and  increase  our  con-
demnation. They  are  an  abomination  to  God.  "  Seek  ye  me,"  and  "  pass  not  to
Beersheba."  2.  False  hopes  will  disappoint.  Bethel  was  not  the  house  of  God.
Gilgal  would  go  into  captivity,  and  Beersheba  would  soon  be  in  ruins.  The
pleasant  things  of  Gilgal  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  All  hopes  of  re-
sidence there  were  disappointed,  and  bitter  was  the  remorse  of  the  people.  Schemes
of  worldly  happiness  and  forms  of  idolatry  will  utterly  fail.  False  confidences
allure  men  to  destruction,  do  not  avert  danger  nor  quench  the  fire  of  Divine  anger
against  sin.  Idols  of  every  kind  are  vanity.  An  idol  is  nothing  in  the  world
(1  Cor.  viii.  4;  x.  19)  ;  and  "they  that  observe  lying  vanities  forsake  their  own
mercy."  III.  The  encouraging  promise.  "And  ye  shall  live."  1.  Ye  shall
escape  danger.  If  the  fire  broke  out  none  could  quench  it.  Bethel,  the  centre  of
idolatry,  would  be  consumed.     But  if  they  sought  God,  they  would  escape  and  be


282  HOMIIETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  [chap.  v.


delivered  from  calamities.  The  sinner  can  only  be  saved  from  eternal  death  in
Christ.  For  "who  among  us  shall  dwell  with  everlasting  burnings?"  2.  Ye
shall  obtain  God's  favour.  We  may  be  delivered  from  outward  danger,  from  sick-
ness and  distress,  yet  not  redeemed  from  sin — preserved  in  natural  existence,  but
deprived  of  real  enjoyment.  Life  in  any  sense  is  good,  for  "  a  living  dog  is  better
than  a  dead  lion  ! "  The  soul  can  only  live  when  converted,  refreshed,  and  oured  of
its  ills.  "  Your  heart  shall  live  that  seek  God."  In  his  favour  is  life,  and  "  thy
lovingkindness  is  better  than  life."

Divine  Justice  a  Consuming  Fire. —  Verse  6.

This  verse  is  an  awful  picture  of  sin  and  Divine  retribution  which  breaks  forth
in  violence  upon  ungodly  nations.

I.  The  fuel.  "  The  house  of  Joseph."  Sinners  make  themselves  fuel  for  the
flame,  ripen  themselves  for  destruction.  Eotten  and  unfruitful  branches  of  the
Church  will  be  burned.  "  Behold,  they  shall  be  as  stubble,  the  fire  shall  burn
them,  they  shall  not  deliver  themselves  from  the  power  of  the  flame."  II.  The
conflagration.  "  Lest  he  break  out  like  fire."  1.  The  Divine  nature  is  like  fire.
"Our  God  is  a  consuming  fire"  (Heb.  xii.  28,  29  ;  Is.  xxxiii.  14).  Holy  anger
and  holy  love  are  found  in  God.  He  that  is  light  and  love  may  become,  by  the
power  of  his  wrath,  a  consuming  fire.  "  A  fire  goeth  before  him  and  burnetii  his
enemies  round  about"  (Ps.  xcvii.  3  :  Deut.  iv.  24).  2.  The  Divine  procedure  is
like  a  fire.  When  God  is  provoked  to  anger  judgments  will  burn  the  wicked  like
chaff.  Pestilence  and  war  ravage  and  waste  like  fire.  "  The  material  of  sorrow
and  distress  accumulates  from  period  to  period.  Violation  of  God's  laws,  followed
by  disregard  for  social  duties,  prepares  both  governments  and  people  for  tumult  and
war.  The  spark  of  discontent  falls  on  some  portion  of  the  mass,  suddenly  it
blazes  forth,  and  is  rapidly  communicated  from  one  part  to  another,  till  everywhere
the  signs  of  woe  are  seen,  '  blood,  and  fire,  and  vapour  of  smoke.'  "

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  4.  Such  as  find  a  distance  and  genuine  repentance  if  he  has  no  hope

are  seeking   to  make   it  up,   may  not  [^6.].

speed  at  first,  yet  that  should  not  weaken  Ver.  5.  This  is  the  law  of  God's
their  hands,  nor  will  they  be  accounted  dealings  with  man  ;  He  "  curses  our
less  penitent,  or  be  further  from  accept-  blessings,"  if  we  do  not  use  them  aright
ance,  that  they  are  but  pursuers  and  not  (Mai.  ii.  2).  Christ,  the  Corner  Stone,
enjoy ers  ;  for,  approven  repentance  will  break  to  pieces  those  who  fall  upon
here  is  not  to  find  God,  but  to  seek  it ;  and  it  will  grind  to  powder  those
him,  and  these  get  the  promise,  Seek  on  whom  it  falls  (Matt.  xxi.  44).  Our
ye  me,  and  ye  shall  live  [Hutchesoii],  holiest  Gilgals — our  Sacraments,  our
Seek  and  live.  Equally  simple  and  Scriptures,  our  Sermons,  our  Sundays
definite  are  the  monition  and  the  pro-  — which  were  designed  by  God  to  roll
mise.  Man  knows  what  he  has  to  do,  away  from  us  the  reproach  of  Egypt,
and  what  to  expect.  Not  merely  is  will  be  rolled  away  from  us,  if  we  do  not
warning  given,  but  also  promise  and  the  use  them  aright,  and  will  roll  us  down-
reverse.  The  gain  is  certain  if  one  ful-  ward  into  our  destruction  [Wordsworth],
tils  the  condition,  but  the  condition  is  Ver.  6.  Seek.  The  oft  pressing  of  a
indispensable  [Lanr/e].  Ye  shall  live,  duty  imports:  1.  The  excellency;  2.
God's  gracious  promises  must  be  held  The  necessity ;  3.  The  difficulty  of
before  sinners,  lest  in  despair  they  go  doing  it:  else  what  need  so  many
from  sin  to  sin.     For  how  can  one  feel  words  1  [Trapp].


chap,  v.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  283


HOMILETICS.

Judgment  turned  to  Wormwood. —  Verse  7.

The  proper  place  for  these  words,  many  think,  is  after  verse  9.  They  might  be
taken  in  connection  with  the  charges  there,  or  separately  as  here.

I.  The  impartial  administration  of  justice  is  pleasant.  Justice  is  one  of
the  four  cardinal  virtues,  and  regarded  by  Plato  as  including  all  human  duty.  It
was  made  of  first  importance  in  the  Hebrew  code.  Laws  were  given  to  protect
life  and  property,  to  secure  rich  and  poor  against  violence  and  wrong.  It  was  the
duty  of  the  judges  to  interpret  and  administer,  not  to  make  or  give  laws.  When
just  laws  are  obeyed  by  kings  and  princes,  confidence  is  strengthened,  peace  pre-
vails, and  judgment  is  in  sweet  odour.  "  For  law  guards  the  people  and  magis-
trates guard  the  law,"  says  Bacon.  "  National  happiness  must  be  produced  through
the  influence  of  religious  laws,"  says  South.  "  The  king  by  judgment  establisheth
the  land."  II.  The  partial  administration  of  justice  is  bitter.  Let  justice  be
done  though  the  heavens  fall  is  often  the  cry.  But  many  cast  it  down  from  its
lofty  position  and  trample  it  under- foot.  As  God's  vicegerent  it  is  dethroned  in
the  laws  of  the  nation  and  the  hearts  of  the  people.  Partiality  and  injustice  make
void  the  best  laws,  increase  the  burdens,  and  embitter  the  toils  of  life.  They  rob
man,  disorder  society,  and  offend  God.  They  turn  judgment  to  wormwood.  Good
laws  are  a  blessing  or  a  curse,  a  corrupt  spring  or  a  fountain  of  life,  as  they  are
administered.  "  One  foul  sentence  doth  more  hurt  than  many  foul  examples,"
says  Bacon,  "for  these  do  but  corrupt  the  stream,  the  other  corrupteth  the  foun-
tain." "Ye  have  turned  judgment  into  gall  and  the  fruit  of  righteousness  into
hemlock."

w  Laws  grind  the  poor  and  rich  men  make  the  law"  [Goldsmith"].

God  Greatly  to  be  Feared. — Verses  9,  10.

Israel  were  exhorted  to  forsake  unrighteousness  and  seek  God.  The  prophet
tells  them  who  God  is  and  what  he  does,  that  they  might  know  him.  He  is  the
Creator  and  Governor  of  the  universe,  infinite  in  resources  and  omnipotent  in  power.
How  can  they  contend  with  him  ?  Seek  him  in  penitence,  despise  not  judgment,
for  he  is  great  and  greatly  to  be  feared.     For  three  reasons  God  is  to  be  sought.

I.  God  displays  omnipotence  in  the  creation  of  the  world.  "  Seek  him
that  maketh  the  seven  stars  and  Orion."  Amos  read  the  power  of  God  in  the
stars  and  names  those  well  known  to  shepherds.  The  Pleiades  were  arranged  in
their  splendour  and  Orion  was  bound  in  its  place  by  him  (Job  ix.  9).  He  created
the  heavens  and  all  the  hosts  of  them  by  the  breath  of  his  mouth.  He  keeps  the
planets  and  directs  their  motions.  Tempests  and  fogs,  judgments  and  earthquakes,
may  darken  the  sky,  but  do  not  hide  the  power  of  God.  The  Divine  edict  is  still
in  force  (Gen.  i.  3),  preserves  and  marshals  the  constellations  of  heaven.  "  Canst
thou  bind  the  sweet  influences  of  Pleiades  or  loose  the  bands  of  Orion "  (Job
xxxviii.  31)1  II.  God  displays  omnipotence  in  the  government  of  the  world.
He  is  seen  in  all  its  vicissitudes.  In  multitude  and  magnitude,  in  minuteness  and
mystery,  his  works  are  unsearchable.  1.  In  changing  seasons.  Literally  he  turns
night  into  day  by  the  rising,  and  day  into  night  by  the  setting,  sun.  We  find  a
constant  presence,  an  abiding  power,  in  the  seasons  of  the  year.  Creation  "is  but
the  projected  shadow  of  a  throne  that  overlooks  the  high  places  of  the  universe,
filling  them  with  the  changeless  splendour  of  a  Moral  Presence."  In  all  move-
ments there  is  no  caprice  but  unchanging  law.  "  He  appointeth  the  moon  for
seasons,  the  sun  knoweth  his  going  down."  2.  In  benevolent  designs.  Light  and
darkness  are  both  necessary.     Day  and  night  indicate  the  perfection  of  Divine


284  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  I  chap.  v.


arrangement.  God  has  "  set  the  one  over  against  the  other  "  that  we  may  appreci-
ate both.  In  all  changes  of  nature  we  have  benevolent  design.  So  in  spiritual
seasons,  in  prosperity  and  adversity ;  we  have  shadows  of  death  and  days  of  re-
joicing ;  "the  morning  of  hope,  the  noon  of  enjoyment,  and  the  night  of  sorrow."
Each  is  given  in  proportion  to  our  faith  and  the  sovereign  will  of  God,  whose
work  is  perfect  (Deut.  xxxii.  4).  3.  In  great  calamities.  The  flood  may  not  again
destroy,  but  it  typified  fearful  inundations  which  God  "  pours  out  upon  the  face
of  the  earth."  He  sends  rain  in  mercy  and  in  judgment.  He  permits  the  clouds
to  send  their  torrents  and  the  sea  to  burst  its  bounds.  His  power  is  employed  to
bless  or  to  punish,  to  turn  the  sorrow  of  the  penitent  to  joy,  or  the  light  of  the
wicked  into  darkness.  Amos  predicts  a  future  calamity  like  that  in  which  God
brought  in  the  flood  upon  the  world  of  the  ungodly.  "Fear  ye  not  mel  saith  the
Lord ;  will  ye  not  tremble  at  my  presence,  which  have  placed  the  sand  for  the
bound  of  the  sea  by  a  perpetual  decree,  that  it  cannot  pass  it,  and  though  the  waves
thereof  toss  themselves,  yet  can  they  not  prevail ;  though  they  roar,  yet  can  they
not  pass  over  it  1 "  III.  God  displays  omnipotence  in  the  retributions  of  the
world.  Those  that  are  strong  with  sinful  strength,  that  defend  their  spoil,  shall
be  overcome.  Desolation  will  attack  every  place  that  was  deemed  inaccessible.  Man's
might  is  perfect  weakness  with  God.  He  prevails  against  the  drone/,  rescues  the
weakest  saint,  and  destroys  all  vain  confidence.  Then  if  man's  strength  cannot
defend  him  when  God  is  angry — if  God's  power  in  creation  and  in  providence  is
employed  in  giving  retribution  to  men — what  will  be  the  fate  of  those  who  trust
to  their  own  fortress  and  rebel  against  God  1  Learn — 1.  How  ruinous  to  resist  a
God  of  such  majesty  and  power.  2.  To  submit  to  his  chastening  rod.  3.  To  seek
and  adore  him  in  the  most  severe  and  hopeless  trials.  For  "  there  is  no  wisdom,
nor  understanding,  nor  counsel  against  the  Lord."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  8.     The  shadow  of  death  into  It  is  not  enough  to  see  God  in  nature

morning.     This  typifies   redemption —  and  providence  or  second   causes ;  but

1.    From   sin,    which    is    darkness    of  we  ought  so  to  see  him  in  them  as  to

heart    and    life.       2.    From    spiritual  commend  piety  to  our  hearts  and  press

misery   (Is.    ix.    1).     3.   From    sorrow  us  to  it,  therefore  the  exhortation  runs,

and  suffering  ( Job  xvi.  16  ;  Jer.  xiii.  16  ;  "seek  him  that  maketh"  &c.     First,  it

Ps.  xxiv.  4).     4.  From  the  grave  (Job  is   an   argument  to  seek  him,  that  he

iii.  5;  xxxiv.  22;  xxxviii.  17).  "Amos  "  maketh  the  seven  stars  "  &c.     It  is  held

first  sets  forth  the  poioer  of  God,  then  out — 1.  That  God  is  worthy  and  ought

his  goodness.     Out  of  every  extremity  to  be  sought  and  served,   who  is  not

of  ill  God  can,  will,  does  deliver.     He  only  above  men  and  creatures  on  earth,

who  said,  let  there  be  light,  and  there  but  his  power  is  in  the  heavens.     2.  He

was  light,  at  once  changeth  any  depth  is  able  either  to  ruin  or  refresh  men  by

of  darkness  into  light,  the  death  dark-  means  and  second  causes,  which  are  at

ness  of  sin  into  the  dawn  of  grace,  the  a  great  distance  from  them,  even  by  the

hopeless  night  of  ignorance  into  the  day-  influence   of    the   stars.     3.  The   very

star    from  on   high ;  the  night  of    the  vicissitudes  and  change  of  seasons  and

grave    into    the   eternal   morn   of    the  weather  are  God's  works  wherein  he  is

resurrection  which  knoweth  no  setting  "  to  be  seen,  and  which  should  invite  us  to

[Pusey].     So    light,    when    abused    or  seek   him.     Secondly,  his  turning   the

neglected,  He   so  withdraws   it,  as  at  shadow    of    death    into    morning   and

times  to  leave  no  trace  or  gleam  of  it.  making    the    day   dark    with    clouds,

Conscience  becomes  benighted,  so  as  to  teacheth  that  God  can  change  or  settle

sin  undoubtingly  :  faith  is  darkened,  so  conditions,  as  he  please th  ;   and  if  he

that  the  soul  no  more  even  suspects  the  settle,  none  can  shake,  and  if  he  shake,

truth.     Hell  has  no  light  [lb.].  none  can  establish.     And  therefore  the


chap.  V.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  285


short  path  to  well-being  is  to  seek  him.  remarkable  a  way,  that  when  the  weak

Thirdly,  his  calling  for  the  waters  of  the  have  been  spoiled  by  their  oppressors,

sea  and  pouring  them  out,  &c.,  teacheth  and  their  oppressors  have   entrenched

that  God  hath  showers  of  comforts  and  themselves  in  fortified  places,  even  then

deluges  of  miseries  to  pour  out  as  he  he  causes  "  the  spoiled  to  come  against

pleaseth  [Hutcheson].  the   fortress."   Hence — 1.  Let   the   im-

Ver.  9.   He  employs  his  power  and  penitent  tremble.     2.  Let  the  righteous

wisdom  in  vindicating  the  cause  of  those  "  be  still."  3.  Let  those  who  are  moved

who  cannot  help  themselves,  and  in  so  with  fear  repent  and  be  saved  \Ryan\.


HOMILETICS.

Manifold  and  Mighty  Sins. —  Verses  10 — 13.

The  duty  pressed  from  consideration  of  God's  power  is  still  urged  on  account  of
Israel's  sins  and  God's  judgments  upon  them.  These  sins  are  "  manifold "  and
"  mighty,"  countless  in  number  and  aggravating  in  nature.

I.  They  hated  the  public  monitor.  "They  hate  him  that  rebuketh  at  the
gate."  Those  who  reproved  in  God's  house,  in  courts  of  justice  or  in  places  of
concourse,  were  despised.  When  wisdom  lifted  up  her  voice  she  was  not  heard
(Prov.  i.  21).  When  men  are  impatient  under  reproof  and  deaf  to  good  counsel
it  is  an  evil  sign.  1.  They  detested  the  rebuker.  Judges  were  so  wicked,  that
they  could  not  endure  those  who  opposed  or  rebuked  their  unrighteous  decisions.
Claimants  and  witnesses  who  pleaded  for  equity  were  insulted.  Men  who  defended
innocence  and  cried  against  injustice  were  hated  beyond  degree.  2.  They  abhorred
the  upright.  Amid  general  corruption  some  few,  like  Noah,  witnessed  for  God
and  were  exposed  to  ridicule  and  contempt.  Veracity  is  the  bond  of  society,  and
all  who  value  the  interests  of  mankind  will  esteem  a  truthful  man.  The  example,
prayers,  and  life  of  the  upright  are  a  blessing  to  any  community  (Prov.  xi.  11).
To  hate  them  and  put  them  to  silence  is  the  way  to  ruin.  Yet  men  love  darkness
rather  than  light,  and  cannot  endure  those  who  reprove  their  sins.  Ministers  be-
come enemies  because  they  tell  the  truth.  They  i(  make  a  man  an  offender  for  a
word,  and  lay  a  snare  for  him  that  reproveth  in  the  gate,  and  turn  aside  the  just  for
a  thing  of  nought."  II.  They  practised  shameful  oppression.  "  Your  treading
is  upon  the  poor."  The  poor  were  persecuted  as  if  enemies  to  the  State.  If  they
sued  for  justice  they  could  not  get  it.  "  He  remembered  not  to  show  mercy,  but
persecuted  the  poor  and  needy  man,  that  he  might  even  slay  the  broken  in  heart."
1.  Judges  took  unlawful  bribes.  "  They  take  a  bribe."  Injustice  and  violence
were  connived  at ;  the  helpless  were  trampled  in  the  dust,  and  the  rich  unjustly
acquitted.  He  that  rules  over  men  must  be  just  and  rule  in  the  fear  of  God.  "  A
bad  magistrate  deprives  us  of  the  blessing  of  just  laws."  Sir  Matt.  Hale  could
not  be  corrupted,  and  Paul  would  not  bribe  his  judge  for  freedom  (Acts  xxiv.  26).
"A  gift  perverteth  the  ways  of  judgment."  2.  Judges  indulged  in  unbounded
selfishness.  They  imprisoned  the  righteous,  and  would  only  release  him  for  money.
They  robbed  the  poor  to  build  houses,  plant  vineyards,  and  minister  to  their  own
luxury.  Their  mansions  of  hewn  stone  were  monuments  of  extortion.  They
might  preserve  from  disease  (Lev.  xiv.  34 — 38),  and  be  free  from  decay.  But
men  who  secure  themselves  and  enlarge  their  possessions  by  injustice  will  destroy
both.  Those  who  ruin  others  to  live  in  grandeur  and  state  will  find  that  they
build  on  false  foundations  and  will  be  robbed  of  their  possessions.  "  Thou  shalt
build  an  house,  and  thou  shalt  not  dwell  therein  ;  thou  shalt  plant  a  vineyard,  and.
shalt  not  gather  the  grapes  thereof."  III.  They  necessitated  prudent  silence.
"Therefore  the  prudent  shall  keep  silence."  We  must  bear  open  testimony  to
holiness  and  truth ;  but  there  is  "  a  time  to  keep  silence  and  a  time  to  speak."


286  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS,  [chap,  y


When  pearls  are  cast  before  swine,  when  men  are  deaf  to  reproof  and  all  warning
is  useless,  then  servants  of  God  keep  solemn  silence.  In  times  of  iniquity  and
judgment,  of  danger  and  distress,  silence  to  man  may  be  a  duty ;  but  the  prudent
will  speak  to  God  in  secret  prayer.  "  For  the  Lord  our  God  hath  put  us  to  silence
and  given  us  water  of  gall  to  drink,  because  we  have  sinned  against  the  Lord."

"  Bedewed  and  silent  as  a  summer's  night  "

Times  of  Prudent  Silence. —  Verse  13.

The  prudent  man  will  be  well  disciplined  in  mind  and  speech,  will  carefully
watch  for  opportunities  and  improve  them.  Great  wisdom  is  required  to  know
when  and  how  to  speak.     It  is  a  time  to  be  silent —

I.  When  reproof  is  ridiculed.  In  the  treatment  of  a  fool  we  must  restrain  our-
selves, and  neither  indulge  his  folly  nor  cherish  his  spirit.  Pride  should  never  be
reproved  with  pride,  nor  passion  checked  with  passion.  Discretion  is  needful  in
rebuke.  "  Wise  mariners  do  not  hoist  sails  in  every  wind,"  says  Bp  Hall.  Jere-
miah turned  away  from  false  prophets  in  silence  (xxviii.  11).  Christ  sets  us  an
example  in  giving  kind  answers  to  rude  speeches.  "  Speak  not  in  the  ears  of
i  fool ;  for  he  will  despise  the  wisdom  of  thy  words."  II.  When  reproof  would
increase  guilt.  Men  are  often  hardened  and  infatuated ;  deliberately  shut  their
ears  and  refuse  instruction.  Reproof  would  then  only  add  to  their  guilt  and  misery.
Christ  in  mercy  withheld  his  tongue  before  such  persons.  It  is  best  to  "let  them
alone."  Rebuke  might  stir  up  a  torrent  of  abuse  and  frustrate  the  design  in  view.
A  conceited  man  needs  no  direction,  thinks  his  own  way  right,  and  follows  it  to
his  ruin.  '  The  way  of  a  fool  is  right  in  his  own  eyes."  III.  When  reproof  is
silenced  by  calamities.  God's  dealings  in  personal  affliction  and  public  judgments
call  for  silence.  "  It  is  an  evil  time."  We  are  perhaps  to  blame  and  cannot
reprove  others.  Under  his  frown  we  must  hold  our  peace  (Lev.  x.  3).  In  his
mysterious  providence  we  learn  to  be  still  (Ps.  xlvi.  10).  Whatever  social  or
national  yoke  is  put  upon  us  we  must  "sit  alone  and  keep  silence  "  (Lam.  iii.  28).
There  are  times  when  we  must  reverently  adore  God  and  submit  to  his  chastisements ;
when  the  pride  of  the  wicked  and  the  pleading  of  the  righteous  are  put  to  silence.
"  I  was  dumb,  I  opened  not  my  mouth,  because  thou  didst  it "  (Ps.  xxxix.  9 ;
Neh.  ix.  33;  Heb.  xii.  9).

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Yers.   7 — 13.  To   seek  God  and   re-  were  rebuked.     Truthful  witnesses  were

nounce  unrighteousness  and  oppression,  frowned  upon.     The  poor  were  trodden

To  enforce  this  exhortation  three  pic-  under-foot,    and    justice   was    sold   for

tures  are  made  to  pass  in  rapid  succes-  burdens,   or,    as    it    should    rather    be

sion  before  the  eye.     1.   The  righteous  rendered,  "  presents  of  wheat"  (vers.  10,

Judge.     They  are  reminded  that  Jeho-  11  a).  3.   The  judgment  to  be  inflicted.

vah,  whose  omnipotent  power,  as  mani-  Deprivation   of  all  the  fruits   of    their

fested  in  the  heavens  and  on  the  earth,  unjust  gains  and  oppressions.     They  are

is  described  in  majestic  terms,  selects  as  reminded  that  though  the  prudent  found

the  special  object  of  his  vengeance  the  it  necessary  to  keep  silence  in  so  evil  a

strong  oppressor  (vers.  8,  9).     Ver.  9.  time,  and  their  deeds  thus  escaped  public

Literally,  "  That  flasheth  forth  destruc-  exposure,    God     was   acquainted    with

tion  upon  the  strong,   and   destruction  their   "manifold"  and    "mighty"  sins

cometh  upon  the  fortress."     2.  The  sin  (vers.      11    b,    12)     [The     Preacher's

judged.     The  flagrant  maladministration  Lantern].

of    justice.      Claimants  or  others  who  Ver.    12.    "I   know   your  manifold

sought  to  maintain  the  cause  of   right  transgressions,"  &c.  1.   The  sins  of  some

in  the  gate,   or    place  of   public  trial,  men.       Manifold    and    mighty.      Sins


chap,  v.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  287


committed  with  a  mighty  hand  and  a  hid  that  shall  not  be  known."
haughty  spirit.  The  disobedience  of  Ver.  13.  This  may  be  applied  to  ah-
Pharaoh, the  "rage"  of  Sennacherib,  and  stinence  from  speaking  in  three  ways,
the  pride  of  Herod  the  Great.  Sins  in-  1.  From  reviling.  When  injury  is  in-
jurious to  men  and  offensive  to  God.  flicted  the  natural  impulse  is  to  return
The  mighty  sins  of  the  text  and  those  it.  Other  weapons  failing,  the  tongue  is
mentioned  by  James  (v.  7 — 10).  2.  always  ready.  It  must  be  restrained  if
God's  intimate  knowledge  of  these  sins,  we  would  be  disciples  of  Christ.  Vin-
"I  know  your"  sins.  You  may  try  to  dictive  words  are  absolutely  forbidden,
conceal  them,  darkness  and  dissimula-  2.  From  reproof.  It  is  indeed  an  evil
tion  may  hide  them  from  the  gaze  of  time  with  the  sinner  when  reproof  is
men :  but  I  know  them.  Nothing  can  not  to  be  used  (Hos.  iv.  17 ;  Ezek.  iii.
be  hidden  from  the  eye  of  the  great  26).  3.  From  explanation.  The  best
Judge.  He  knows  though  he  does  not  course  is  to  commit  our  cause  to  God.
avenge.  We  should  not  natter  ourselves  The  devil,  who  in  an  evil  time  forges  the
that  God  sees  not  and  will  not  punish  accusations  which  are  often  made  against
our  sins.  All  things  shall  one  day  be  the  people  of  God,  can  suborn  the  wit-
made  manifest.  "  There  is  nothing  nesses  too  \Ryan\
covered  that  shall  not  be  revealed,  and

HOMILETICS.
Seeking  Good  and  Enjoying  God. — Verses  14,  15.

These  words  supplement  the  previous  paragraph,  in  which  Israel  were  exhorted
to  renounce  idolatry,  an  offence  to  God,  a  crime  against  man.  Now  the  order  is
reversed.  Good  must  be  sought  and  evil  avoided,  that  mercy  may  yet  be  shown
to  a  remnant  of  the  people.

I.  The  course  recommended.  "  Seek  good  and  not  evil."  The  negative  and
positive  side  of  human  duty.  1.  Seek  the  good.  Good  is  needful,  and  all  men
seek  it.  "  Who  will  show  us  any  good  1 "  The  soul  is  formed  to  know  and  love
the  good.  As  the  plant  turns  towards  the  sun,  so  the  soul  seeks  for  good.  But
men  seek  in  the  wrong  direction.  They  seek  gratification  in  earthly  things,
and  exclude  God  from  their  pursuits.  They  have  a  desire  for  him,  a  capacity  to
enjoy  him,  but  move  not  in  the  direction  to  him.  Seeking  good  is  defined  as  loving
the  good.  The  right  affection  must  be  cherished.  Depraved  appetites  and  vitiated
tastes  must  be  renewed.  A  change  of  disposition  is  necessary  to  reformation  of
life.  "Be  ye  transformed  by  the  renewing  of  your  mind."  2.  Hate  the  evil.
Aversion  is  needful  as  well  as  affection.  We  have  something  to  hate  and  something
to  love.  Our  sympathies  and  antipathies  are  not  at  variance,  they  differ  in  in-
tensity, gain  power  according  to  their  objects,  and  greatly  influence  our  conduct.  We
evince  the  soundness  of  conversion  by  loathing  and  forsaking  what  God  hates.
We  cannot  love  God  without  hating  evil.  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  seen  by  depart-
ing from  evil.  "  Positive  virtue,"  says  one,  "  promotes  negative  virtue."  "  Ye  that
love  the  Lord,  hate  evil."  3.  Practise  justice.  "Establish  judgment  in  the  gate."
Israel  must  raise  up  and  firmly  support  what  they  had  thrown  down.  In  their
courts  of  law  and  in  common  practice  they  must  be  truthful.  Neither  bribe  nor
self-interest  should  divert  men  from  judgment.  The  penitent  will  be  just  to  man.
In  words  and  deeds  he  will  give  to  all  their  due.  Profession  without  principle  is
an  insult  to  God.  "  What  a  man  is  in  private  duties,  that  he  is  in  the  sight  of
God,  and  no  more,"  says  Dr  Owen.  We  cannot  serve  God,  unless  we  are  right
with  men.  "  Put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from  before  mine  eyes ;  cease  to  do
evil  j  learn  to  do  well."

"  Be  what  thou  seemest,  live  thy  creed,
Hold  ud  to  earth  the  torch  Divine,


288  HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS,  [chip,  v,


Be  what  thou  prayest  to  be  made,

Let  thy  great  Master's  steps  be  thine."

II.  The  benefits  of  adopting  this  course.  Self-interest  is  not  always  the  right
motive  to  urge  ;  but  the  benefits  of  serving  God  are  manifold.  1.  Human  life  is
preserved.  "  Ye  shall  live."  Calamity  would  take  away  their  life,  but  deliverance
would  preserve  it.  In  general,  sin  by  its  own  nature  and  by  the  judgments  of  God
upon  it  brings  men  to  an  untimely  end.  The  wicked  do  not  live  out  half  their
days.  Worldliness  wears  out  the  spring ;  but  piety  contributes  to  the  length  and
enjoyments  of  life.  Religion  promotes  temperance  and  self-control.  It  redeems
body  and  soul  from  morbid  excitement  and  moral  disease.  "  Righteousness  tendeth
to  life."  2.  God1  s  grace  is  received.  "  The  Lord  God  of  Hosts  will  be  gracious,"
&c.  The  sinner  is  not  only  delivered  from  present  danger,  but  blessed  with  grace
to  live  a  holy  life.  God's  grace  is  infinite  and  free.  Former  displeasures  will  not
hinder  him  from  bestowing  it  upon  those  who  seek  it.  Penitent  nations  and  feeble
churches  may  hope  for  his  returning  favour.  "  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons ;
but  in  every  nation,  he  that  feareth  him  and  worketh  righteousness  is  accepted  with
him."  3.  God's  presence  is  enjoyed.  He  "  shall  be  with  you  as  ye  have  spoken."
Israel  boasted  of  being  God's  people,  and  desired  God  to  be  with  them  in  sin.
But  the  "  righteous  Lord  "  cannot  dwell  with  an  unrighteous  people.  It  is  a  de-
lusion to  talk  of  God  if  we  do  not  seek  him,  to  expect  his  presence  when  we  do
not  walk  in  his  commands.  "  If  ye  were  Abraham's  seed  ye  would  do  the  works
of  Abraham."  It  is  only  when  we  repent  and  return  to  God  that  we  enjoy  his
favour.  God  is  always  present  to  protect  in  the  way  of  duty,  as  "the  God  of
Hosts."  "  Thou  meetest  him  that  rejoiceth  and  worketh  righteousness,  those  that
remember  thee  in  thy  ways."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  15.  It  may  be.   I.  If  so,  for  what  The  verse   sets    forth — The  relation

reasons  ?     1.  Men    do  not   deserve  de-  between  the  negative  and  positive  duties

liverance.     "The    expression   'perhaps  of  life;  or — 1.  The  nature  of  true  peni-

he  will  show  favour '  indicates  that  the  tence — seeking  God.     2.  The  evidence

measure  of  Israel's  sins  was  full,  and  no  of    true     penitence — hating    evil.      3.

deliverance  could  be  hoped  for  if  God  The  reward  of    true    penitence — God's

were  to  proceed  to  act  according  to  his  protection  and  favour  in  life ;  or,  1.  God

righteousness "  [Keil].      2.  God  in  so-  the  object  sought.      2.    Evil  the  diffi-

vereign  mercy  has   promised  it.     This  culty  in  the  way.      3.    Divine  favour

is   not    the    language    of    uncertainty,  and  blessings  the  motive  to  urge  the

The  difficulty  is  not  with  God,  but  with  pursuit.

man.     "  Except  ye  repent,"  &c.     II.  If  "  God  gives  encouragement  to  such  as

so,  on  what  conditions  ?    Negatively  and  sincerely  seek  him  ;  yet  he  would  not

positively  stated.     1.  Not  by  presuming  have  them  absolutely  expect  deliverance

on  outward  relation  to  God.     God  must  in  temporal  judgments,  when  provoca-

be  sought  and  found.     2.   By  pursuing  tions  are  come  to  a  height :  and  he  seeth

right,     (a)  Right  towards  God.     "  Hate  it  meet  to  exercise  them  with  uncertain-

the  evil  and  love  the  good."     (b)  Right  ties  that  they  may  be  yet  more  diligent,

towards  man.     "  Establish  judgment."  and  prove  their  real  piety  by  submission

To  these  conditions  the   hope,  though  in  those  things "  \_Hutchesoii\.

humiliating   to    carnal   security,   is    at-  "  Temporal  promises  are  made  with

tached  :    perhaps    God    will    then    be  an,  It  may  be :  and  our  prayers  must  be

gracious  to  a  remnant  of  Joseph.  made  accordingly."


ckai.  v.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ':  AMOS.  289

HOMILETICS.

The  Day  of  The  Lord. — Verses  16 — 20.

Ver.  16.  "  Therefore"  God  foreseeing  that  they  will  not  forsake  sin  continues
the  threatening  (ver.  13).  Israel  misapplied  the  words  of  Joel  (ii.  31 ;  iii.  4),
thought  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  would  be  deliverance  to  them  and  destruction  to
their  enemies.  The  prophet  warns  them  of  false  security.  In  blind  infatuation
they  long  for  its  approach,  but  it  would  be  a  day  of  unmitigated  evil.

I.  The  day  of  the  Lord  described.  A  day  of  universal  darkness  and  distress.
The  judgments  were  extensive  as  the  manifold  guilt.  1.  A  day  of  Divine  dis-
pleasure. God  would  be  with  them  not  in  the  way  they  expected  and  boasted ;  in
judgment,  not  mercy.  "  I  will  pass  through  thee."  There  would  be  a  repetition
of  the  events  in  Egypt.  He  would  not  pass  over  them  in  forgiving  love,  as  the
angel  passed  by  the  blood-stained  doors  ;  but  through  them  in  punishment  severe
and  exact.  Some  as  stubble  or  wood  are  ripe  for  Divine  judgments  (Nah.  i.  10  ;
Jas.  iii.  5).  God  may  have  passed  by  them,  but  soon  will  pass  through  them.
Nations  may  escape  at  one  time  and  fearfully  suffer  at  another.  "  For  there  was
not  a  house  where  there  was  not  one  dead  "  (Ex.  xii.  12,  30).  2.  A  day  of  universal
mourning.  "  Wailing  shall  be  in  all  the  streets."  (a)  Mourning  in  all  places.
In  the  streets  of  the  city,  the  vineyards  of  the  fields,  and  the  highways  of  the
country  ;  in  centres  of  business  and  scenes  of  joy,  would  be  lamentation  and  wailing.
The  hum  of  men  and  the  mirth  of  children  were  turned  into  grief.  There  was  "  i
vintage  not  of  wine,  but  of  woe."  God's  displeasure  turns  joy  into  mourning  ano
robes  all  things  with  darkness  and  death,  (b)  Mourning  by  all  persons.  "The
skilful"  the  professionals  of  lamentation,  and  the  real  mourners,  the  husbandmen
called  from  the  country,  blended  their  cries  together.  Alas  !  Alas  !  The  punish-
ment was  unequalled  and  the  grief  beyond  expression.  Sorrow  will  find  all  that
are  guilty,  and  none  can  escape.  "  Take  up  a  wailing  for  us,  that  our  eyes  may  run
down  with  tears,  and  our  eyelids  gush  out  with  waters.  For  a  voice  of  wailing  is
heard  out  of  Zion,  How  are  we  spoiled  ! "  3.  A  day  of  darkness  without  light
(vers.  18 — 20).  Calamities  darken  the  brightest  day.  The  day  of  present  trouble
is  often  without  light.  But  no  day  so  gloomy  to  impenitent  sinners  as  the  day  of
judgment.  The  word  of  God  and  the  voice  of  conscience  darken  the  prospects  of
the  wicked.  Unless  they  flee  to  Christ  the  future  will  be  "  even  very  dark,  and  no
brightness  in  it."  4.  A  day  of  calamity  without  escape.  Two  comparisons  illus-
trate this,  (a)  No  escape  by  flight.  To  flee  from  the  lion  would  only  be  to  meet
a  bear.  To  escape  from  one  danger  was  only  to  fall  into  another  (cf.  Jer.  xlviii.  44  ;
Is.  xxiv.  18).  "  He  shall  flee  from  the  iron  weapon,  and  the  bow  of  steel  shall
strike  him  through."  (b)  No  escape  by  shelter.  If  a  man  rushed  into  a  house
and  leaned  in  confidence  upon  the  wall  a  serpent  would  bite  him.  Men  often
meet  with  destruction  where  they  expect  safety.  "  Evil  shall  hunt  the  wicked  man
to  overthrow  him."  If  men  escape  present  they  cannot  the  future  judgment.  It
is  vain  to  expect  mercy  at  that  day  if  we  despise  it  now.  Come  to  God  instead  of
fleeing  from  him.  "  Who  may  abide  the  day  of  his  coming  1  and  who  shall  stand
when  he  appeareth  1 "  II.  The  day  of  the  Lord  threatened.  "  The  Lord  saith
thus  " — 1.  Though  long  delayed  it  will  come.  To  prove  his  love  and  give  time  for
repentance  God  delays  his  promise.  But  he  is  not  slack  and  forgetful.  Threaten-
ing may  not  suddenly  be  executed,  for  "he  is  long-suffering  to  us  ward,  not  willing
that  any  should  perish."  Remember  the  nature  of  God  and  his  determination  to
punish.  "  Beloved,  be  not  ignorant  of  this  one  thing,  that  one  day  is  with  the
Lord  as  a  thousand  years,  and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day."  2.  Though  appar-
ently far  off  it  will  come.  All  things  continue  as  they  were,  but  may  unexpectedly
change.  The  flood  interrupted  the  order  of  nature.  If  we  realize  the  past,  it  will
help  us  to  believe  the  future.  "  The  day  of  the  Lord  will  come  as  a  thief  in  the
night."     3.   Though  ridiculed  by  ungodly  men  it  will  come.     "  Scoffers  walking

19


290  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY;   AMOS.  [chap.  v.


after  their  own  lusts  "  cry,  "  Where  is  the  promise  of  his  coming  1 "  Join  not  their
ranks.  Heed  not  their  ridicule.  The  promise  is  uttered  and  cannot  he  retracted.
The  coming  is  gradual,  certain,  and  will  soon  be  felt.  Atheists  should  beware  and
presumptuous  sinners  should  fear.  The  primeval  world  has  changed,  the  deluge  of
Noah  swept  the  earth,  and  a  terrible  day  awaits  impenitent  sinners.  "  A  little
while,  and  he  that  shall  come  will  come  and  will  not  tarry."  III.  The  day  of  the
Lord  desired.  "  You  that  desire  the  day  of  the  Lord."  Their  previous  history
would  lead  them  to  desire  this  time,  and  their  subsequent  life  proved  the  spirit  in
which  they  did  so.  1.  The  day  may  be  desired  in  a  wrong  spirit.  Israel  applied
the  glowing  descriptions  of  future  times  in  a  carnal  sense.  They  expected  a  tem-
poral Messiah,  and  knew  neither  their  own  character  nor  the  nature  of  the  day
coming.  They  were  not  prepared  for  it,  and  what  should  have  been  a  blessing
turned  out  to  be  a  woe  to  the  nation.  "  Darkness  and  not  light."  Men  desire  the
day — (a)  In  a  spirit  of  contempt.  The  Israelites  sarcastically  might  wish  for  the
day  (Is.  v.  19;  Jer.  xvii.  15).  Who  cares  for  the  day]  let  it  come,  (b)  In  a
spirit  of  delusion.  They  desired  some  change,  and  thought  the  next  would  be  for
the  better.  The  prophet  seeks  to  undeceive  them.  Self-deluded  sinners  will  find
out  their  mistake  at  last,  (c)  In  a  spirit  of  folly.  "  To  what  end  is  it  for  you  1 "
What  will  it  profit  you  1  Are  you  ready  for  it  ]  Many  would  be  glad  to  leave
this  world  who  are  not  fit  for  the  next.  They  have  but  little  reason  to  desire
what  will  be  darkness  and  not  light  to  them.  2.  The  day  may  be  desired  in  a
right  spirit.  Some  are  ready  for  the  day,  delighting  themselves  in  God  and  his
service.  They  are  preparing  for  death  and  waiting  for  the  coming  of  Christ.  In
the  common  events  and  mysterious  providences  of  life  they  pray  not  in  scorn,
"  Let  him  make  speed  and  hasten  his  work  that  we  may  see  it;  and  let  the  counsel
of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  draw  nigh  and  come,  that  we  may  know  it."  Woe  to
him  who  desires  when  he  should  dread  the  day  of  the  Lord  !  "  Blessed  is  that
servant "  who  is  ready  and  waiting,  "  and  whom  his  lord  when  he  cometh  shall  find
so  doing."

Death  not  always  Desirahle. —  Verse  18.

We  may  apply  this  to  the  day  of  death.  Often  in  trouble  and  disappointment
men  express  a  wish  that  God  would  take  away  their  life,  supposing  that  it  is
better  for  them  to  die  than  to  live.  We  cannot  be  sure  of  the  sincerity  of  their
desire  ;  and  they  may  not  be  sure  of  it  themselves.  Under  the  pressure  of  present
feeling,  they  imagine  death  would  be  welcome,  and  perhaps  if  it  actually  came
they  would  decline  its  aid.  If  they  xoould  not  they  ought.  For  their  fleeing  from
trouble  is  as  if  a  man  did  flee  from  a  lion  and  a  bear  met  him,  &c.  Let  me  beg
these  sons  of  sorrow  to  inquire — Whether  the  event  they  long  for  will  be  a  real
remedy  for  their  complaints.  Are  they  sure  that  death  will  be  annihilation?
perfectly  sure  that  there  is  nothing  beyond  the  grave  ?  Can  they  prove  that  there
is  no  future  %  or  that  in  this  state  there  is  only  happiness  and  no  misery  1  Judas
hanged  himself,  went  to  his  own  place,  which  was  worse  than  his  former  condition,
with  all  the  horrors  of  its  remorse.  If  Scripture  be  true  all  are  not  happy  at  death ;
none  are  then  happy  without  a  title  to  heaven  and  a  meetness  for  it.  Have  you
this  title  ?  this  meetness  %  Do  you  love  holiness  1  Without  this  could  you  be
happy  in  a  holy  place  %  in  a  holy  state  1  in  holy  employments,  &c.  1  Is  the  Eedeemer
precious  to  your  souls'?  Nothing  can  make  us  happy  but  what  relieves  our  xoants,
fulfils  our  desires,  and  satisfies  our  hope.  Without  holiness  no  man  can  see  the
Lord.

How  absurd,  then,  to  wish  to  leave  this  world  for  another,  before  you  are  sure
the  exchange  will  be  for  your  advantage.  For  advantage  it  cannot  be  if  you  die
unpardoned  and  unrenewed.  Blessed  are  the  dead  that  die  in  the  Lord.  Out  of
him,  out  of  refuge,  and  the  avenger  of  blood  is  upon  you.  Out  of  him,  you  are  out
Of  the  Ark  and  exposed  to  the  Deluge.     The  day  of  your  death  is  not  better  than


03AP.   V.l


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.


291


the  day  of  your  birth.  Your  privations  and  distresses  here  are  only  the  beginnings
of  sorrow,  a  drop  to  the  ocean  compared  with  hell.  And  once  gone  from  time,  no
return.  Therefore  instead  of  wishing  this  important  period  ended,  be  thankful
that  it  is  prolonged,  even  in  a  vale  of  tears  ;  account  that  the  long-suffering  of  God
is  your  salvation,  for  he  is  not  willing  that  any  should  perish.

Eemember  also  that  disappointment  and  sorrow,  which  make  you  impatient,
may  prove  the  greatest  blessing ;  the  valley  of  Achor  a  door  of  hope.  God  does
not  afflict  willingly.  He  renders  earth  desolate  to  induce  you  to  seek  a  better
country.  Away,  then,  with  every  thought  of  desperation.  Arise  and  go  unto  your
Father,  waiting  to  receive  graciously  and  love  freely.  If  tempted  to  despair,  cry,
"  Lord,  I  am  oppressed ;  undertake  for  me."  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour,"  &c.
The  Athenian  said,  "  I  should  have  been  lost,  if  I  had  not  been  lost."  In  affliction
Manasseh  found  his  father's  God.  We  often  pity  those  who  have  seen  tetter  days.
But  if  they  forgot  God  in  prosperity,  and  in  their  adversity  have  thrown  themselves
into  his  arms — these  are  the  bed  days  they  ever  saw.  This  will  be  your  case,
suffering  friend,  if  you  seek  God  and  commit  your  cause  to  him.  He  will  turn  the
shadow  of  death  into  the  morning,  and  you  shall  join  the  multitude  who  say — It  is
good  for  me  that  I  have  been  afflicted  [Jay].

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Yer.  16.  It  costs  men  nothing  to
own  God  as  a  Creator,  the  Cause  of
causes,  the  Orderer  of  all  things  by
certain  fixed  laws.  It  satisfies  certain
intellects  so  to  own  him.  What  man,
a  sinner,  shrinks  from,  is  that  God  is
Lord,  the  absolute  disposer  and  master
of  his  sinful  self  [Pusey].

Woe,  tooe,  going  up  from  every  street
of  a  metropolis,  in  one  unmitigated,
unchanging,  ever-repeated  monotony  of
grief.  Such  were  the  present  fruits  of
sin.  Yet  what  a  mere  shadow  of  the
inward  grief  is  its  outward  utterance
[lb.].

Ver.   17.     If
place  it  would


there  were  joy  in  any
be  in  the  vineyards ;
vineyards  are  places  of  mirth  and  re-
freshing, grapes  make  the  wine,  which
makes  glad  the  heart  of  man.  There-
fore when  he  threatens,  that  in  all  vine-
yards there  shall  be  wailing,  it  is  as
much  as  if  he  said,  There  shall  be  sorrow
in  those  places  where  usually  the  great-
est joy  is  found,  or  there  shall  be  sorrow
in  every  place.  Joy  shall  dislodge  and
give  place  to  sorrow,  for  I  will  pass
through  thee,  saith  the  Lord  [Caryl].

Vers.  17,  18.  I.  The  certainty  of
the  day.  «  Saith  the  Lord."  II.  The
method  of  its  approach.  "  I  will  pass
through."  III.  The  consequences  of  its
arrival.  "  Darkness  and  not  light."
Ver.   18.     To  what  end  is  it  for  you  ?


Self-examination  would  teach  —  that
they  would  gain  nothing  in  the  day —
that  it  should  be  delayed,  rather  than
desired,  if  not  prepared  for  it — that  the
evil  spirit  in  which  it  is  longed  for
should  be  eradicated,  and  that  men
should  seriously  consider  their  ways  and
submit  to  God.

Ver.  19.  The  path  of  light  would
prove  a  path  of  increased  danger — the
place  of  confidence,  expected  shelter
and  repose,  would  become  the  place  of
pain  and  wounding  unto  death  [Ryan].
From  both  lion  and  bear  there  might  bo
escape  by  flight.  When  the  man  had
leaned  his  hand  trustfully  on  the  wall
of  his  own  house,  and  the  serpent  bit
him,  there  was  no  escape.  He  had  fled
from  death  to  death,  from  peril  to
destruction  [Pusey].

Ver.  20.  Shall  not  ?  He  appeals  to
their  own  consciences,  "Is  it  not  so,
as  I  have  said  1  "  Men's  consciences
are  truer  than  their  intellects.  How-
ever they  may  employ  the  subtlety  of
their  intellect  to  dull  their  conscience,
they  feel,  in  their  heart  of  hearts,  that
there  is  a  Judge,  that  guilt  is  punished,
that  they  are  guilty.  The  soul  is  a
witness  to  its  own  deathlessness,  its
own  accountableness,  and  its  own
punishableness  [Pusey].

The  godly  will  have  some  light  in
trouble  (though  temptation  hide  it  from


292  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  Lchap.  v.


them,   Is.   1.    10),  and   may  sometimes  dreadful  a  day  of  vengeance  will  be  to

attain   to    some  measure    of   allowance  the  wicked,  how  grieving  and  perplex-

(Ps.  cxii.  4) ;  and  may  certainly  expect  ing   their   miseries  will   be,  and   how

that  there  will  be  a  clear  and  comfort-  destitute  of  present  comfort  and  future

able  issue  from  their  troubles  (Mic.  vii.  hope  they  are  [Hutcheson],
8) ;   yet  it   is   terrible   to   think   how

HOM1LETICS.
The  Eitual  without  the  Moral. — Verses  21 — 23.

The  judgments  threatened  will  not  be  averted  by  feasts  and  sacrifices.  God  ex-
presses his  abhorrence  to  mere  ceremonial  observances,  and  will  not  accept  heartless
worship.     "  I  hate,  I  despise,"  &c.     Notice —

I.  Religious  assemblies  without  true  worship.  Israel  had  feast  days,  to  ab-
stain from  servile  work  and  rejoice  in  God  ;  solemn  assemblies,  to  worship  God  and
put  themselves  under  some  restraint.  But  in  these  things  they  followed  their  own
device,  or  imitated  the  worship  at  Jerusalem ;  substituted  human  inventions  for
Divine  institutions;  "your feast  days,"  not  mine;  and  thus  prefigured  many  more
who  call  themselves  Christians.  Men  uphold  the  means  of  grace,  attend  the  wor-
ship of  God,  but  the  name  of  God  they  will  not  adore.  They  defend  religion,
appoint  ordinances,  and  put  formal  for  spiritual  service.  They  pervert  the  times
and  the  places  in  which  they  should  meet  God.  Solemn  assemblies,  social  and
private  prayer,  may  prove  a  curse  and  not  a  blessing.  Outward  worship  and
superior  privileges  may  increase  our  condemnation,  and  cause  rejection  in  the  sight
of  God.  "I  despise  your  feast  days."  II.  Daily  sacrifices  without  true
obedience.  They  offered  burnt-offerings,  tokens  of  self-sacrifice ;  peace-offerings,
signs  of  gratitude,  from  fat  beasts,  the  best  they  could  get ;  but  they  wTere  not  re-
garded. "  Hath  the  Lord  as  great  delight  in  burnt-offerings  and  sacrifices  as  in
obeying  the  voice  of  the  Lord  V1  1 .  Their  ritual  was  external.  The  grandeur
of  the  gift  is  nothing  without  the  heart  of  the  giver.  Costly  offerings  are  of  no
value  without  love.  God  hates  dissembled  worship.  It  is  double  iniquity.  "  The
sacrifice  of  the  wicked  is  abomination ;  how  much  more  when  he  bringeth  it
with  a  wicked  mind  % "  2.  Their  conduct  was  immoral.  They  despised  the  poor
and  neglected  judgment ;  cherished  uncharitable  feelings,  and  had  no  desire  to  do
right.  Love  to  God  must  be  seen  in  right  conduct  towards  men ;  true  worship,  in
pure  morality ;  and  faith,  in  good  works.  God  smells  not  the  savour  of  splendid
rituals  without  consistent  lives  (Lev.  xxvi.  31).  He  may  accept  the  moral  without
the  ritual,  but  never  the  ritual  without  the  moral.  "  To  do  justice  and  judgment
is  more  acceptable  to  the  Lord  than  sacrifice."  Ill-  Instrumental  music  with-
out true  melody.  It  was  noise,  not  melody ;  pleasing  to  man,  but  distasteful
to  God.  Church-music  is  often  mere  display — intoned  with  energy,  and  ending  in
self.  Music  is  the  expression  of  emotion,  the  outburst  of  praise  to  God.  When
rightly  conducted  it  will  be  attractive  to  man  and  honouring  to  God.  In  times  of
revival  it  has  elevated  the  heart  and  quickened  the  life.  But  the  best  gifts  of
nature  and  art  may  be  made  instruments  of  evil.  Music  is  abused  when  joined
with  immoral  poetry  and  allurements  of  sin.  When  grace  is  not  in  the  heart
we  do  not  sing  with  the  spirit  and  with  the  understanding.  If  the  life  is  not  in
tune  with  the  lips,  God  says,  "  Take  thou  away  from  me  the  noise  of  thy  songs."


CHAP.  V.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.


293


HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Vers.  21,  22.  Israel  had  feasts  of
solemn  joy  and  the  restraint  of  solemn
assemblies.  They  offered  wliole  burnt-
offerings,  the  token  of  self-sacrifice,  in
which  the  sacrificer  retained  nothing  to
himself,  but  gave  them  freely  to  God.
They  offered  also  peace-offerings,  as
tokens  of  the  willing  thankfulness  of
souls  at  peace  with  God.  What  they
offered  was  the  best  of  its  kind,  fatted
beasts.  Hymns  of  praise,  full-toned
chorus,  instrumental  music  !  What  was
wanting,  Israel  thought,  to  secure  them
the  favour  of  God?  Love  and  obedi-
ence. If  ye  love  me,  keep  my  command-
ments. And  so  those  things,  whereby
they  hoped  to  propitiate  God,  were  the
object  of  his  displeasure  [Pusey].  Here
is  a  warning  to  all  who  think  to  please
God  by  elaborate  musical  services  in
his  house  ;  while  they  do  not  take  heed
to  worship  him  with  their  hearts,  and
to  obey  him  in  their  daily  life
[Wordsworth].

Ver.  24.  The  sound  of  music,  rolling
in  full  chorus,  will  not  profit  in  a
drought  of  justice  and  righteousness.
"  Praise  is  not  seemly  in  the  mouth  of


a  sinner,  for  it  was  not  sent  him  of  the
Lord  "  (Ecclus.  xv.  9).

When  justice  is  duly  administered  it
is  said  to  run  down  as  waters,  &c.
Now  waters  and  streams  run  not  to  one
man's  house,  or  door,  but  the  stream
offers  itself  to  every  man,  it  runs  down
to  the  poor  man's  door  as  well  as  to  the
rich  man's  door,  it  runs  by  the  meanest
cottage  as  well  as  by  the  princely  palace.
Righteousness  must  run  like  a  stream  ;
it  must  be  a  common,  a  universal  good
[Caryl].

The  first  outward  step  in  conversion
is  to  break  off  sin.  He  bids  them  let
judgment,  which  had  hitherto  been  per-
verted in  its  course,  roll  on  like  a
mighty  tide  of  waters,  sweeping  before
it  all  hindrances,  obstructed  by  no
power,  turned  aside  by  no  bribery,  but
pouring  on  in  one  perpetual  flow,  reach-
ing all,  refreshing  all,  and  righteous-
ness like  a  mighty  (or  ceaseless)  stream.
True  righteousness  is  not  fitful,  like  an
intermitting  stream,  vehement  at  one
time,  then  disappearing,  but  continuous,
unfailing  [Pusey].


HOMILETICS.
Judgments  like  a  Flood. —  Verse  24.

The  verse  is  to  be  explained  according  to  Is.  x.  22,  and  threatens  the  flooding
of  the  land  with  judgment,  and  the  punitive  righteousness  of  God  [Keil],  In  this
sense  the  judgments  of  God  are  like  a  flood.

I.  In  the  method  of  coming.  Terrors  and  troubles  are  often  compared  to
waters  in  Scripture.  1.  They  come  suddenly.  All  at  once  they  burst  upon  men
in  sin  and  carnal  security.  When  they  say  peace  then  sudden  destruction  cometh
upon  them.  2.  They  come  super  naturally.  God,  and  not  any  second  cause,  sends
them.  "  God  hath  broken  in  upon  mine  enemies  .  .  .  like  the  breaking  forth  of
waters."  3.  They  come  violently.  They  carry  away  all  opposition,  and  roll  direct
to  their  place.  4.  They  come  abundantly.  One  after  another  in  dreadful  succes-
sion upon  individuals  and  nations,  until  the  purpose  of  God  is  accomplished.  II.
In  the  mischief  they  create.  Floods  and  mighty  streams  are  fearful  in  them-
selves, but  when  sent  by  Almighty  power  to  chastise  who  can  resist  them  1  1.
TJiey  create  consternation.  Men  are  terrified  and  seek  every  possible  way  of  escape.
The  late  floods  in  England  and  France  illustrate  this.  Divine  judgments  are  in-
tended to  rouse  men  from  slumber  and  lead  them  to  God.  "For  when  thy
judgments  are  in  the  earth,  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  will  learn  righteousness."
2.  They  cause  universal  devastation.  They  sweep  the  city  and  the  country,  and
spread  destruction  on  every  hand.  The  mansions  of  the  rich  and  the  dwellings  of
the  poor  are  overcome  with  the  rolling  stream.    So  God's  fierce  anger  goes  over  men


294  H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:   AMOS.  [chap.  v.


as  mighty  waters,  to  drown  their  possessions  and  take  their  comforts.  "  Deep
calleth  unto  deep  at  the  noise  of  thy  waterspouts ;  all  thy  waves  and  thy  billows
are  gone  over  me."

"Wide  o'er  misfortune's  surging  tide
Billows  succeeding  billows  spread ;
Should  one,  its  fury  spent,  subside,
Another  lifts  its  boisterous  head."

Hereditary  Sins  and  Grievous  Punishment. —  Verses  25 — 27.

Hereditary  sin  was  the  second  reason  why  the  day  of  the  Lord  would  be  to  them
a  day  of  distress.  From  the  earliest  period  their  hearts  had  been  alienated.  As
heirs  to  the  guilt  and  imitators  of  the  ways  of  their  fathers,  they  must  be  car-
ried into  a  far  country.  Continued  provocation  will  bring  greater  punishment
than  ever.

I.  The  same  system  of  idolatry  was  practised.  If  we  carefully  compare  the
text  with  Deut.  xxxii.  17,  Josh.  xxiv.  14,  and  Ezek.  xx.  26,  we  find  that  Israel
were  guilty  of  idolatry  in  the  wilderness.  1 .  They  misrepresented  the  true  God
They  made  images  for  themselves  in  direct  opposition  to  God's  command.  In
the  very  tabernacle  of  Jehovah  they  bore  the  shrines  of  Moloch  and  Eemphai*
Amos  declared  the  men  of  his  day  to  be  addicted  to  the  same  sins  and  ideii  i
tied  with  the  same  disgrace.  Some  men  inherit  the  lusts  as  well  as  the  land.;
of  their  ancestors.  The  idolatry  of  the  fathers  is  seen  in  the  worship  of  tin
sons.  Thus  we  forfeit  the  distinction  which  God  gives  and  entail  one  of  out
own.  "I  will  cause  you  to  go  into  captivity."  2.  They  worshipped  false  god*
"Have  ye  offered  unto  met"  Here  lies  the  emphasis.  Notwithstanding  all
their  pretensions  and  sacrifices  they  offered  not  to  God.  "They  sacrificed  nnt«'
devils,  not  to  God;  to  gods  whom  they  knew  not,  to  new  gods,  whom  yom
fathers  feared  not."  We  are  not  safe  because  we  have  a  Protestant  .Bible  and
orthodox  creeds,  abundant  churches,  and  religious  privileges.  The  same  tendency
is  in  our  hearts  to  forget  the  revealed  character  and  despise  the  claims  of  God  -  In
create  and  honour  other  gods,  and  amid  constraining  reasons  for  cleaving  to  God,
make  images  of  things  in  heaven  above  or  in  earth  beneath.  "  Their  heart  was  net
right  with  him,  neither  were  they  steadfast  in  his  covenant."  II.  The  same  per-
verse spirit  was  cherished.  Stephen  quotes  this  charge  against  the  people,  as
a  signal  proof  of  perverseness  of  heart  which  had  always  been  shown  by  the  nation.
Even  in  days  of  wonderful  deliverance  and  multiplied  acts  of  Divine  favour  they
cherished  a  rebellious  heart.  Men  are  found  now  resisting  the  Holy  Spirit  as
their  fathers  from  generations  before  them  have  done.  They  partake  of  the  sins  of
their  progenitors.  1.  In  copying  their  example  ;  2.  In  commending  their  errors  ;
and  3.  In  cherishing  their  spirit.  Thus  we  may  identify  ourselves  with  sins  which
we  do  not  really  commit.  "  Neither  be  partaker  of  other  men's  sins  :  keep  thyself
pure."  III.  The  same  kind  of  punishment  was  inflicted.  If  we  partake  of
other  men's  guilt  we  are  liable  to  the  same  punishment.  Israel  suffered  in  a  simi-
lar way  to  those  in  ancient  days.  1.  They  fell  under  severe  displeasure.  Mur-
muring and  rebellion  brought  upon  a  former  race  the  judgments  of  God.  Their
carcases  fell  in  the  wilderness,  a  warning  to  all  generations  of  idolatry  and  un-
belief. 2.  They  were  excluded  from  the  land  of  promise.  One  race  did  not  enter
Canaan ;  the  other  was  driven  out  of  it  into  exile.  Instead  of  warding  off  the
curse,  they  secured  its  reversion.  The  day  came  when  they  presumptuously  de-
sired and  brought  darkness,  not  light ;  judgment,  not  deliverance.  They  were  car-
ried "  beyond  Damascus,"  beyond  all  hope  of  return  (2  Kings  xvii.  6).  Learn — 1.
That  God  gives  a  record  and  warning  from  the  punishment  of  men's  sins.  2.  That
he  who  commits  and  cherishes  a  sin,  puts  himself  in  the  company  of  those  who
have  been  guilty  of  it  from  the  beginning  of  the  world.  3.  That  it  is  a  principle
with  God  to  punish  more  severely,  if  less  judgment  do  not  work  the  end  for  which


CHAP.    V.j


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.


295


they  are  sent.  4.  If  men  would  seriously  meditate  upon  God's  greatness  and
power,  they  would  not  sleep  securely  under  his  awful  threatenings.  Thus  "  saith
the  Lord,  whose  name  is  the  God  of  Hosts."


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  V.


Vers.  1 — 3.  In  a  piteous  lamentation
of  the  miserable  state  of  the  Church  of
Christ  in  England  in  the  reign  of  Queen
Mary,  written  by  that  worthy  martyr
of  God  Nicholas  Eidley  (Works,  Parker
Society),  we  meet  with  most  affecting
reasons  for  sorrow  and  tears  \Ryan\.

"  If  you  have  tears,  prepare  to  shed  them  now."

[Shakespeare.  ]

Vers.  4 — 6 .  Jeroboam  pretended  that
it  was  too  much  for  Israel  to  go  up  to
Jerusalem.  Yet  Israel  thought  it  not
too  much  to  go  to  the  extremest  point
of  Judah  towards  Idumaea,  perhaps  four
times  as  far  south  of  Jerusalem  as
Jerusalem  lay  from  Bethel.  For  Beer-
sheba  is  thought  to  have  lain  some  30
miles  south  of  Hebron,  which  is  22
miles  south  of  Jerusalem ;  while  Bethel
is  but  1 2  to  the  north.  So  much  pains
will  men  take  in  self-willed  service,  and
yet  not  see  that  it  takes  away  the  ex-
cuse for  neglecting  the  true  [Pusey~\.

Ver.  6.  "Justice  is  the  great  but
simple  principle,  and  the  whole  secret
of  success  in  all  government.  It  is  as
essential  in  the  training  of  an  infant  as
in  the  government  of  a  mighty  nation."

M  Justice,  like  lightning,  ever  should  appear
To  few  men's  ruin,  but  to  all  men's  fear."

[Sivenam.  ]

Vers.  8,  9.  Power  is  that  glorious
attribute  of  God  Almighty  which
furnishes  the  rest  of  his  perfections :
'Twas  power  which  made  his  ideas
fruitful,  and  struck  the  world  out  of  his
thoughts.  'Tis  this  which  is  the  basis
of  all  things ;  which  constitutes  the
vigour  of  second  causes,  and  keeps  the
sun  and  moon  in  repair.  Omniscience
and  goodness,  without  a  corresponding
power,  would  be  strangely  short  of  satis-
faction ;  to  know  everything  without
being  able  to  supply  defects  and  remedy
disorders,  must  be  a  grievance ;  but
when  omnipotence  comes  into  the
nation  the  grandeur  is  perfect  \Jer.
Collier].


Vers.  9—11.

u  It  often  falls,  in  course  of  common  life,
That  right  sometimes  is  overborne  of  wrong,

The  avarice  of  power,  or  guile,  or  strife,

That  weakens  her  and  makes  her  party  strong.
But  Justice,  though  her  doom  she  do  prolong,

Yet  at  the  last  will  make  her  own  cause  right."

[Spenser.]

Ver.  10.  Who  is  there  that  some-
times does  not  merit  a  check  1  and  yet
how  few  will  endure  one  [Feltham].

Ver.  11.     " Built  houses"  Sfc.

"You  take  my  house  when  you  do  take  the  prop
That  doth  sustain  my  house  ;  you  take  my  life
When  you  do  take  the  means  whereby  I  live."

[Shakespeare.]

Ver.  13.  Keep  silence.  Euler  lived
at  Petersburg  during  the  administration
of  Biron,  one  of  the  most  tyrannical
ministers  that  ever  breathed.  On  the
philosopher's  coming  to  Berlin,  after  the
tyrant's  death,  the  late  queen  of  Prussia,
who  could  hardly  get  a  word  out  of
him,  asked  him  the  reason  of  his  silence.
"Because,"  said  he,  "I  come  from  a
place  where  if  a  man  says  a  word  he  is
hanged  "  [  Whitecross].

Vers.  14,  15.  We  must  not  envy  the
doers  of  evil,  but  depart  from  their
spirit  and  example.  As  Lot  left  Sodom
without  casting  a  look  behind,  so  must
we  leave  sin.  No  time  or  parley  is  to
be  held  with  sin,  we  must  turn  away
from  it  without  hesitation,  and  set  our-
selves practically  to  work  in  the  oppo-
site direction  [Spurgeon\.

Vers.  16 — 20.  Ill-gotten  gains  are  a
dangerous  and  uncertain  possession.
God  can  easily  take  them  away,  and
turn  our  joy  into  mourning.  "That
which  is  dyed  with  many  dippings  is
in  the  grain,  and  can  very  hardly  be
washed  out"  [Jer.  Taylor].  Men  do
not  love  to  be  brought  into  contact  with
realities,  or  be  reminded  of  coming
"days  of  darkness."  There  is  an  un-
welcome message  to  the  conscience,
Art  thou  ready  to  meet  this  solemn —
this  hastening  season  1     If  you  regard


296  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  [chap.  vi.


death  as  a  friend,  prepare  to  entertain  Vers.  25— 27.    The  fact  that  physical,

it ;  if  an  enemy,  prepare  to  overcome  it.  mental,  and  moral  qualities  are  heredi-

Vers.  21—23.     A  man  is  not  what  he  tary,  is  proved  in  the  persistent  charac-

saith,  but  what  he  doeth.     To  say  what  teristics  of  races  and  nations.     Jewish

we  do,  and  not  to  do  what  we  say,  is  and  negro  types,  Chinese  and  Japanese,

but  to  undo  ourselves  by  doing  [Dyer].  have  had  the  same  characteristics  for

Hypocrisy  is    filling   up   some   radical  centuries.     So  features  of  morality  are

defect    with    some    shallowy  pretence  stamped  upon  descendants.     By  walk-

[Bhiney].  ing  in  the  steps  of  their  fathers,  nations

11  'Tis  mad  idolatry  an(l  families  reap  the  same  harvest.    We

To  make  the  service  greater  than  the  God."  have  hereditary  transmission  of  sins  and

[Shakespeare.]  punishment.


CHAPTEE  VI.


Critical  Notes.]  Second  woe  denounced.  Ease]  Recklessly  and  carelessly.  Mount.]  not  in
God.  Sam.]  Strong,  which  resisted  for  3  years,  and  was  the  last  city  of  Israel  taken  (2  Kings
xvii.  5,  6).  Chief]  in  influence  and  office,  Heb.  men  designated  (Num.  i.  17  :  1  Chron.  xii.  31).
Came]  for  decision  and  help.  Israel  was  the  chief  of  nations,  and  these  princes  the  distinguished
of  Israel.  Sadly  degenerate  now!  2.  Pass]  Survey  three  neighbouring  kingdoms.  "If  these
kingdoms  are  not  better  and  greater  than  yours,  why  do  ye  worship  their  gods  and  forsake  the  true
God  ?  "  \_Elzas],  3.  Woe]  Charge  first  from  a  general  and  then  a  special  view.  Put  off]  Lit.  with
aversion,  the  day  of  retribution,  though  declared  near  (Ezek.  xii.  21 — 28).  Bring  near]  Suffer
oppression  to  be  enthroned  among  you.  4.]  Luxury  added  to  oppression.  Stretch]  Lit.  pour
themselves  out,  "dissolved,  unnerved,  in  luxury  and  sloth."  Beds]  inlaid  with  ivory.  Lambs]
Choice  and  delicious  in  the  East.  5.]  Like  David  they  employ  themselves  with  music,  but  for  a
different  aim.  6.]  Not  satisfied  with  small  cups,  they  took  the  bowls  used  for  sprinkling  of  blood,  to
indulge  in  excess,  and  used  the  most  costly  oils,  not  for  health  and  cleanliness,  but  wanton  luxury.
Grieved]  not  for  calamities  suffered  in  the  past,  or  threatened  in  future.  7.  Head]  Chiefs  in  trans-
gression must  bejirst  in  the  procession  to  captivity.  Banquet]  Lit.  making  merry  with  shouts.
8.  Sworn]  "Like  ch.  iv.  2,  except  that  it  is  by  himself  instead  of  by  his  holiness,  but  the  sense  is
the  same,  for  the  nephesh  of  Jehovah,  i.  e.  his  inmost  self  or  being,  is  his  holiness  "  [Keil].  9.  Ten]
A  rare  case  (ch.  v.  3).  10.  Uncle]  Any  relative  who  had  to  bury  the  dead  (Gen.  xxv.  9:  Judg.
xvi.  31).  Burn.]  in  case  of  necessity.  Bones]  i.e.  the  dead  body  (Gen.  1.  25:  Ex.  xiii.  19).  Say]
Ask  one  discovered  if  he  is  the  only  survivor.  HoldJ  The  burier  bids  the  survivor  be  silent,  lest  by
invocation  God  should  make  him  a  victim  of  death.  All  hope  from  God  has  utterly  gone.  11.]
Smite]  by  earthquake,  or  by  pestilence  and  sword  during  siege  ;  every  house,  great  and  small.  12.]
As  horses  and  oxen  are  useless  on  a  rock,  so  ye  are  incapable  of  fulfilling  justice  [Grotius],  The
comparison  indicates  the  folly  of  expecting  prosperity  while  committing  acts  of  injustice.  The  in-
terrogative form  gives  strength  to  the  representation.  13.  Nought]  Their  growing  empire,  or
imaginary  strength.  Horns]  A  symbol  of  power;  dominion  rescued  by  Jeroboam  from  the
Syrians  (2  Kings  xiv.  25).  14.]  God's  answer  to  this  presumption.  A  people  J  Not  named,  per-
haps to  awaken  attention ;  probably  Assyria.  Afflict]  Oppress,  crush  down  ;  the  whole  extent  of
territory  said  to  have  been  recovered  by  Jeroboam  II.,  the  region  of  triumphs  a  scene  of  woe.

HOMILETICS.

At  Ease  in  Zion. —  Verse  1.

In  the  first  part  of  this  chapter  woe  is  uttered  against  the  careless  chiefs  of  the
nation,  for  profane  security,  contempt  of  Divine  judgments,  and  heartless  oppres-
eion.  Special  allusion  is  made  to  the  leaders,  but  the  whole  nation  had  sunk  into
godless  conduct  and  shameful  debauchery.


chap,  vl]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  297


I.  At  ease  in  eminent  responsibility.  "At  ease  in  Zion."  Israel  was  ex-
alted as  a  nation  above  others.  Israel's  princes  were  men  of  rank  and  authority;
"  renowned  of  the  congregation,"  and  consulted  by  the  people.  All  were  blessed
with  eminent  privileges  and  great  responsibility.  But  the  honour  was  not  recog-
nized. The  highest  motive  to  action  did  not  confirm  them  in  fidelity  to  God.
They  carelessly  indulged  themselves  and  forgot  their  responsibilities.  Where
much  is  given,  much  will  be  required.  To  be  "  at  ease  in  Zion,"  in  the  midst  of
religious  ordinances  and  gospel  light,  is  especial  danger.  If  we  neglect  or  despise
our  eminent  position,  we  aggravate  our  guilt,  and  increase  the  greatness  of  our
downfall — "  Woe  unto  thee,  Chorazin  !  Woe  unto  thee,  Bethsaida  !  "  &c.  II.  At
ease  in  carnal  security.  "  And  trust  in  the  mountain  of  Samaria."  Zion,  the  centre
of  religion,  and  Samaria,  the  metropolis  of  a  powerful  kingdom,  were  the  security  of
Israel.  Our  own  strength  and  resources  will  prove  a  broken  reed.  Men  may
boast  of  the  places  in  which  they  live,  glory  in  their  eminence,  and  secure  them-
selves in  ease ;  but  vain  confidence  in  the  means  of  grace  will  awfully  disappoint.
We  must  trust  to  no  great  men,  no  high  hills.  "  Our  help  cometh  from  the  Lord,
which  made  heaven  and  earth."  III.  At  ease  in  great  pride.  Connected  with
ease  and  carnal  security  was  a  haughty  spirit.  Israel  prided  themselves  in  their
relation  to  God,  and  disdained  other  nations.  "  The  chief  of  the  nations  to  whom
the  house  of  Israel  came  "  would  think  themselves,  and  expect  others  to  call  them,
great  men.  "  Haughty  because  of  my  holy  mountain."  Many  are  puffed  up  with
pride,  and  rock  themselves  to  sleep  in  religious  privileges.  They  cry  "  The  temple
of  the  Lord  are  we  "  (Jer.  vii.  4),  and  doubt  not  but  God's  sanctuary  will  secure
them  from  judgments  to  come.  But  pride  never  gives  true  rest,  and  those  who
delude  themselves  in  superior  holiness  and  distinguished  titles  shall  be  utterly  for-
gotten (Ps.  cix.  13).  The  greater  their  glory,  the  more  shameful  their  punishment.
"  How  much  she  hath  glorified  herself  and  lived  deliciously,  so  much  torment  and
sorrow  give  her."  IV.  At  ease  in  threatened  judgments.  "  Woe  to  them."
When  God  is  angry  men  have  no  reason  to  sleep.  Reckless  indifference,  in  busi-
ness and  religion,  is  a  forerunner  of  certain  ruin.  Careless  sinners,  sleepers  in
Zion,  are  in  danger  of  eternal  destruction.  When  they  rouse  not  at  the  call  of  the
gospel,  when  deaf  to  the  thunders  of  Divine  judgments,  they  sleep  where  God  will
come  first  and  be  most  severe ;  where  the  calls  are  loudest  and  the  doom  most  hope-
less. Wake  up  at  the  sound  of  "  Woe,"  before  you  feel  its  dreadful  reality.
"What  meanest  thou,  0  sleeper]  arise  and  call  upon  thy  God."

Scourge  for  Slumbering  Souls.

In  itself  considered  it  is  no  ill  thing,  but  a  great  blessing,  to  be  at  ease  in  Zion,
in  a  healthy  sense  of  the  word.  But  there  is  an  ill  sense  in  which  it  is  used,  "  Woe
to  them,"  &c  :  the  ease  of  one  grown  callous,  hardened,  and  sullen,  a  sleep  which
if  not  broken  will  bring  to  the  bed  of  hell.

I.  First,  to  rouse  the  many  at  ease  in  Zion,  we  will  call  out  their  names —
which  are  found  in  the  chapter  before  us.  The  name  of  the  first  sleeper  in  Zion  is
Presumptuous.  His  character  is  described  in  the  first  verse,  "  They  trust  in  the
mountain,"  &c. — boast  of  their  morality  and  self -righteousness.  "  I  am  rich  and
increased  in  good,"  &c.  A  second  is  Not-now,  or  Procrastination.  "  Ye  that  put
far  away  the  evil  day  "  (ver.  3).  The  third  name  is  Evil-doer,  or  Sin-lover.  "  They
cause  the  seat  of  violence  to  come  near."  The  next  is  Love-self.  "  They  lie  upon
beds  of  ivory,"  &c.  Among  those  at  ease  was  one  called  Careless,  an  individual
who  belongs  to  a  large  family.  We  may  give  him  another  name,  giddy,  light-
hearted.  "  That  chant  to  the  sound  of  the  viol."  The  last  name  is  Crossless.
"They  are  not  grieved  for  the  affliction  of  Joseph."  II.  Now  having  men-
tioned their  names  we  shed  some  light  upon  these  sleepers'  eyes.  A  hopeless
errand  !  for  they  sleep  with  the  sun  of  heaven  shining  upon  their  eyelids.  "  At
ease  in  Zion. '     Not  in  Ethiopia,  where  they  have  never  heard  the  gospel ;  not  in


298  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  (.chap.  vi.


Sheba  or  the  ends  of  the  earth,  where  no  warning  prophets  had  been  sent.  In  the
first  place  you  are  asleep,  but  you  know  your  danger.  You  have  frequent  arousings.
Everything  in  this  place  cries  out  against  you.  To  be  at  ease  when  the  House,
the  Gospel,  and  the  Sabbath  are  crying  out  against  us,  is  to  be  at  ease  while  God  is
making  ready  his  sword  against  us.  III.  The  last  point  is,  to  sound  the  trumpet
in  the  ears  of  the  sleepers.  My  trumpet  has  but  one  note,  "  Woe  i  woe  !  woe  !  "
Not  a  living  man  knows  the  full  meaning  of  that  word.  Bring  out  the  gentler
parts  of  the  note ;  and  first,  woe  to  you,  for  noxo  is  it  at  all  likely  that  you  ever  will
be  saved  ?  In  the  innumerable  cases  in  this  place  of  conversion  the  majority
were  persons  who  had  not  long  heard  the  word.  I  think  Christmas  Evans  used
the  simile  of  the  blacksmith's  dog,  which  was  very  frightened  with  the  sparks  at
first,  but  at  last  got  so  accustomed  to  them  that  he  went  to  sleep  under  the  anvil.
11  And  so,"  said  the  good  preacher,  "  there  be  many  that  go  to  sleep  under  the
gospel,  with  the  sparks  of  damnation  flying  about  their  nostrils."  Kemember  you
are  asleep  in  a  place  where  Justice  deals  its  heaviest  blow.  Do  you  tremble?  You
are  saved  the  moment  you  believe  in  Christ.  "There  is  therefore  now  no  con-
demnation," &c.  [Spurgeon].

Ingratitude  for  the  Presence  and  Indifference  to  the  Warnings

of  God.  —  Verses  2,  3.

To  prove  the  ingratitude  of  the  nation,  Amos  shows  that  Israel  was  not  inferior
to  any  heathen  state  in  greatness  and  prosperity — that  this  honour  involved  serious
responsibility,  and  that  to  despise  the  warnings  of  God  who  had  thus  blessed
them  would  bring  great  punishment.  I.  Ingratitude  for  God's  presence.  Israel
were  ungrateful  to  God  for  the  original  gift  and  the  continued  preservation  of  the
land.     The  heathens  had  suffered,  they  had  been  spared,  yet  they  forgot  God.

1.  In  national  prosperity.  "  Pass  ye,"  &c,  look  everywhere  and  see  if  any  kingdom
has  a  "  border  greater  than  your  border."  We  boast  of  our  rank  and  pre-eminence ;
talk  of  our  colonies  and  dependencies,  and  exclaim,  "  Great  and  mighty  England  !  "
But  empire  is  not  greatness.  The  history  of  Gath  and  Hamath,  of  Greece  and
Rome,  remind  us  that  we  stand  by  God's  providence  alone — that  we  fall  when
we  rely  on  our  own  might  and  prosperity.  If  we  trust  to  our  insular  position,  our
popular  platform,  and  our  natural  resources,  we  forget  the  real  and  extract  the  wrong
causes.  2.  In  national  morality.  We  pride  ourselves  in  national  worth,  and  point
to  other  nations,  are  "  they  better  than  these  kingdoms  ? "  Education  and  govern-
ment, society  and  public  sentiment,  are  intoned  and  controlled  by  the  spirit  of
Christianity.  But  morally  we  are  far  from  being  what  we  ought.  Boasting  is  ex-
cluded by  non-recognition  of  God  and  prevalent  evils.  We  are  often  extravagant  and
haughty.  Vice  and  intemperance  abound.  Bacchus  and  Mammon  have  temples
in  every  town,  and  votaries  in  every  street.  There  are  spots  in  our  sun  and  dirt
upon  our  pedestal.  Let  us  not  be  unthankful  to  God,  not  forgetful  of  other
nations.  "  Art  thou  better  than  populous  No,  that  was  situate  among  the  rivers,
that  had  the  waters  round  about  it,  whose  rampart  was  the  sea,"  &c.  (Nah.  iii.  8,  9)  1
II.  Indifference  to  God's  warning.  "  You  put  away  the  evil  day."  As  Israel
despised  the  judgments,  so  men  now  put  away  the  warnings  of  God's  providence.
The  evil  day  frightens  the  ungodly,  and  in  different  ways  they  push  it  from  them
and  assign  it  to  a  distance.  1.  In  carelessness.  Sentence  against  sin  is  not  ex-
ecuted speedily,  and  men  grow  indifferent.  Space  for  escape  is  given,  the  long-
suffering  of  God  is  seen,  and  they  take  liberties.  Sin  blinds  the  mind  and  hardens
the  heart.  Impressions  wear  away,  proofs  of  judgments  grow  weaker,  and  sinners
view  things  with  inverted  glance.  Duty  is  delayed  and  death  is  put  out  of  their
minds.

"  All  men  think  all  men  mortal,  but  themselves."

2.  In  unbelief.  Amid  culture  and  science  scepticism  abounds,  infidelity  spreads,
and  warnings  are  unheeded.    Indulgence  in  sin  opens  up  avenues  to  unbelief.    Led


chap.  VI.]  HOMTLETTC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  299


to  believe  against  all  moral  evidence,  men  speak  as  they  feel,  and  make  evil  days
small  and  distant.  "  Therefore  do  men  take  judgment  to  be  far  off  from  them,"
says  one,  "  because  they  take  sin  to  be  near  them."  Truth  looked  at  from  a  dis-
tance will  gradually  fade  away,  and  lose  its  authority  over  life.  It  will  be  put
farther  and  farther  from  us  until  it  is  denied  altogether,  and  we  sleep  in  false
security.  3.  In  contempt.  Israel  neither  feared  nor  believed  approaching  danger.
In  scorn  they  might  tell  the  prophet  it  was  delayed,  and  would  therefore  not  come
near  them.  Instead  of  preparing  for  it,  they  grew  harder  and  more  eager  in  sin.
"  They  cause  violence  to  come  near."  The  farther  they  put  away  judgment  the
nearer  they  brought  oppression.  Under  colour  of  justice  and  law  the  wicked  fix
up  the  throne  of  iniquity,  disregard  the  voice  of  God,  and  hasten  on  that  last  de-
struction which  they  dream  will  never  come.  Death  is  but  a  step  off,  and  "  the
Judge  standeth  before  the  door."  Eetribution  follows  judgment,  and  if  retri-
bution were  only  temporal  and  mutable  that  would  be  alarming.  But  it  is  eternal
and  irreversible.  Are  we  prepared  for  the  change]  "  Who  may  abide  the  day  of
his  coming  1  and  who  shall  stand  when  he  appeareth  ]  "

A  Eeckless  Community. — Verses  4 — 6.

Israel  not  only  put  away  the  day  of  Divine  retribution,  but  multiplied  the
causes  which  produced  it.  Violence  within  will  bring  violence  from  without  the
land.  When  we  put  away  God  we  invite  destruction.  Luxury,  revelry,  and  de-
bauchery describe  a  reckless  community  and  reign  in  the  present  day.  The  special
sins  condemned  are  depicted  in  a  peculiar  manner.

I.  Self-indulgence.  Men  betray  their  feelings  and  abuse  their  gifts,  show  they
live  like  epicures,  and  pamper  themselves  like  beasts.  This  selfish  indulgence  is
seen — 1.  In  luxurious  ease.  "  That  lie  upon  beds  of  ivory."  Beds  most  expensive
and  scarce,  splendid  and  far-fetched.  They  unnerved  and  relaxed  themselves  upon
couches.  They  humoured  themselves  in  idleness  and  wealth ;  indulged  in  personal
gratification,  abounded  in  superfluities,  and  robbed  the  poor  of  necessities.  2.  In
effeminate  diet.  The  choicest  lambs  and  calves  fed  out  of  the  stall  only  satisfied
their  appetite.  Some  live  to  eat,  and  do  not  eat  to  live;  feed  without  gratitude,  and
indulge  in  lust  without  restraint.  "  Whose  God  is  their  belly,  and  whose  glory  is
in  their  shame."  II.  Profane  revelry.  "That  chant  to  the  sound  of  the  viol."
They  tried  to  lead  a  merry  life  and  a  happy  one.  They  displayed  ingenuity  by  in-
venting instruments  to  drive  away  dull  care.  As  David  improved  and  introduced
musical  instruments  into  the  service  of  God,  so  these  men  devised  and  fitted  them
for  luxury  and  sensuality.  But  artificial  music  creates  no  Divine  harmony.  It
weakens  the  nature  and  ministers  to  the  folly  of  men.  When  men  sing  instead  of
weeping,  when  mirth  is  unseasonable,  unbridled,  and  licentious,  it  is  void  of  every-
thing that  dignifies  the  mind  and  elevates  the  soul  to  God.  "Admonishing  one
another  in  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs,  singing  with  grace  in  your  heart
to  the  Lord."

"  There's  not  a  string  attuned  to  mirth
But  has  its  chord  in  melancholy."

III.  Shameful  debauchery.  Luxury  and  selfishness  lead  to  excess ;  sensuality
and  mirth,  to  irreverence.  This  is  seen — 1.  In  profane  conduct.  They  were  not
satisfied  with  ordinary  vessels,  but  robbed  the  altars  to  "  drink  wine  in  bowls."  In
former  times  princes  of  Israel  manifested  zeal  in  consecrating  silver  bowls  to  God,
now  they  drink  in  honour  of  idolatry.  They  profaned  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary,
and  devoted  to  selfish  what  should  have  been  for  sacred  uses.  2.  In  riotous  ex-
cess. They  drank  out  of  large,  not  small  cups.  This  they  did  habitually  without
measure  or  stint.  They  spent  their  wealth  in  pleasure  and  dissipation  ;  employed
their  ingenuity  to  discover  new  methods  of  self-gratification,  and  drank  wine  to
silence  conscience,  banish  reflection,  and  harden  the  heart,     IV.  Sinful  apathy.


300  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  [chap,  vi.


They  had  no  concern  whatever  for  the  nation  sinking  into  decay  and  suffering
under  the  judgment  of  God.  1.  Their  joy  is  unbridled.  Their  extravagance  is
seen  in  "  the  chief  ointments  with  which  they  anoint  themselves,"  not  for  health
and  comfort,  but  wanton  luxury.  The  custom  of  anointing  was  suspended  in  time
of  mourning  (2  Sam.  xiv.  2),  but  these  neither  grieve  for  themselves  nor  for  the
ruin  of  their  country.  2.  Their  indifference  is  stolid.  Bent  on  personal  gratifi-
cation of  the  most  debasing  kind,  they  were  devoid  of  all  patriotism  and  concern
for  the  injury  to  the  kingdom.  "  They  are  not  grieved  for  the  affliction  of  Joseph."
They  indulged  in  the  heartless  conduct  of  the  sons  of  Jacob  towards  their  brother,
eating  bread  when  Joseph  was  in  the  pit  (Gen.  xxxvii.  24).  Wrath  had  broken  "  out
like  a  fire  in  the  house  of  Joseph"  (ch.  v.  6),  but  they  were  deaf  to  the  warnings
of  God  and  the  remonstrance  of  the  poor.  They  spent  their  time  in  beds  of
indolence  and  ease ;  pampered  their  bodies  with  delicious  viands ;  and  de-
lighted their  souls  in  strains  of  music,  excess  of  wine,  and  costly  perfumes.
Sensuality  results  in  unnatural  feeling  for  kindred  and  country ;  shuts  out  the
sufferings  of  others,  and  leads  to  greater  indulgence.  "  We  are  verily  guilty  con-
cerning our  brother,  in  that  we  saw  the  anguish  of  his  soul  when  he  besought  us
and  we  would  not  hear."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND   OUTLINES.

Ver.  5.     The  use  and  abase  of  music.      lute  and  harp  to  awake  to  the  glory  of

1.  Its  use,  when  devoted  to  the  worship      God."

of  God  and  the  welfare  of  men.     Vocal  Like  David.     Men  abuse  gifts  of  God

and  instrumental  music  may  be  of  im-  by  the  examples  of  saints.  They
mense  service  in  the  culture  of  the  stumble  in  their  infirmities,  and  copy
heart  and  the  training  of  the  young.  their  actions  in  a  wrong  spirit.  David
Our  nature  is  adapted  to  harmony,  and  a  great  lover  of  music,  and  employed  it
God  has  bestowed  means  for  improve-  in  the  praise  of  God.  Imitators  use  it
ment.  for  carnal  pleasure.

Ver.  6.     True  patriotism,  grieving  for
"There  is  in  souls  a  sympathy  with  sounds,  Joseph.      1.   A  country  is  often  deeply

And  as  the  mind  is  pitched  tht  ear  is  pleased."      afflicted  by  inward  calamities  and  out-
ward dangers.     2.  A  lover  of  his  country

2.  Its  abuse  when  employed  in  the  serv-      win  grieye    for    its  affliction.      David

ice  of  Satan  and  ministering  to  licen-  and  jeremiah  noble  examples.     3.   Self-

tiousness  and  lust.    How  often  found  m  ish  indulgence    deprives    men  of  syra-

midnight  revels  and  scenes  of  mtemper-  pathy   with  otheiSj  renders    them  un.

ance  !     "  Debased  music  is  a  mark  of  a  grateful  and  unpatriotic.     "  How  many

nation's  decay  and  promotes  it,"   says  dwell  in  ceiled  houses,  and  sing  to  th*e

one.     The  constitution  of  nations  may  sound    of  the   harpj   and  feast  on  the

be  affected  by  changing  national  music.  richest  dainties,  and   care   nothing  for

"  Give  me  the  making  .of  the  nation's  the  sorrows  0f  Christ,  and  his  Church,

ballads,"  said  Lord  Chatham,  "and  I  care  nay>    rather    rejoice   in  them!"    (Rev.

not  who  makes  the  laws."    David  conse-  xi.  10)  I  Wordsworth .

crated  lyre  and  harp  to  the  service  of  ..  „     ,,      ..  ...        ,       ,     ,

~    ,        J  .     r  ,.       ,  .  "  Breathes  there  a  man  with  soul  so  dead,

God,  now  men  gain  reputation  by  comic  Who  never  to  himself  hath  said>

songs   and  immodest   dancing.       "Bid  This  is  my  own,  my  native  land ! "   [Scott.]

HOMILETICS.

National  Retribution  upon  Sinful  Indulgence. —  Verses  7 — 11.

The  punishment  is  now  threatened.  Their  "  mighty  sins  "  would  bring  heavy
retribution.  Those  pre-eminent  in  crime  would  be  pre-eminent  in  captivity.  The
nation  must  suffer  by  pestilence  and  plague.  The  ruin  will  be  universal,  and  re-
ligious privileges  would  not  avert  it.


chap.  VI.]  H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  301


I.  National  captivity.  Those  who  live  in  luxury  often  lose  their  liberty,
and  the  most  dignified  are  reduced  to  servitude.  1.  Disgraceful  captivity.
The  chief  in  rank  were  chief  in  sin,  and  first  to  go  into  captivity.  Their
disgrace  was  most  conspicuous.  Those  who  delight  only  in  the  pleasures
of  sense  shall  be  removed  from  them.  Those  who  think  themselves  secure,
and  put  the  evil  day  from  them,  will  find  it  nearer  than  they  imagine.  The
banquets  of  luxury  and  wantonness  will  be  removed,  and  men  who  give  themselves
to  mirth  when  God  calls  them  to  mourn  will  not  go  unpunished  in  their  sin
(Is.  xxii.  14).  2.  Mournful  captivity.  The  shouting  of  wine-bibbers  would  cease.
Feasting  would  end  in  weeping,  and  desolation  would  spread  throughout  the  land.
Carnal  ease  and  sinful  excess  often  end  in  hopeless  misery.  II.  National  rejec-
tion. The  cities  and  kingdom  with  all  their  wealth  would  be  delivered  into  the
hands  of  the  enemy.  1.  National  glory  abhorred.  "I  abhor  the  excellency  of
Jacob."  The  house  of  God,  rightly  valued  and  properly  used,  was  their  glory  and
defence.  Their  priesthood,  temple,  and  religious  privileges  raised  them  above
other  nations.  But  these  were  polluted  and  despised.  God  was  dishonoured  by
idolatry  and  provoked  to  anger.  The  strength  of  "  the  city  "  and  splendour  of  the
"  palaces  "  availed  not.  The  glory  departed.  When  God  abhors  he  will  soon  aban-
don. External  services  are  mere  mockery.  When  national  glory  rivals  God,  and  men
blessed  with  distinguished  excellency  take  pleasure  in  things  base  and  inferior,
God  will  reject  them.  "  Therefore  will  I  deliver  up  the  city,  with  all  that  is
therein."  2.  Dreadful  mortality  abounded.  The  inmates  of  some  houses  would
be  entirely  swept  away.  "  Ten  men  in  one  house  shall  die."  Few  if  any  domestics
were  left  to  bury  the  dead.  The  uncle  or  distant  relatives  must  bury  or  burn
them.  God's  arrows  were  so  piercing,  and  his  anger  so  fierce,  that  relatives  and
survivors  were  agreed  to  keep  solemn  silence  under  the  rod.  Pestilence  overtook
those  who  escaped  the  sword.  Hopeless  despair  seized  men.  Cut  off  from  God,
there  was  no  help  in  man.  They  had  to  submit  to  appointed  doom.  3.  Universal
destruction  prevailed.  (1)  Destruction  of  the  population.  "In  the  multitude  of
the  people  is  the  strength  of  the  prince,"  and  God  Almighty  cut  off  that  strength.
(2)  Destruction  of  the  capital.  The  city  or  chief  cities  of  the  kingdom  would  be
destroyed.  They  would  therefore  be  robbed  of  defence,  open  to  danger,  and  become
an  object  of  pity  and  contempt.  "  Like  a  city  that  is  broken  down,  and  without
walls."  (3)  Destruction  most  terrible.  "  He  will  smite  the  great  house  with
breaches,"  &c.  The  mighty  and  the  mean  have  sinned  and  must  be  punished.
God  will  smite  not  some,  but  all  families  and  societies.  "  Princes'  palaces  are  not
above,  the  poor  man's  cottage  is  not  beneath  the  judgment  of  God."  (4)  Destruc-
tion most  certain.  "God  hath  sworn  by  himself "  (ver.  7).  Sensuality  produces
stupidity.  God  seeks  to  rouse  men  by  an  oath  to  end  the  controversy.  "The
Lord  commatideth."  We  should  see  God's  hand  and  purpose  in  great  distress.
He  makes  it  effectual  and  irresistible.  When  nations  are  ripe  for  judgment  foreign
armies  are  only  Divine  instruments.  How  hopeless  the  condition  of  those  who
harden  themselves  under  Divine  chastisements,  and  whose  ruin  God  has  sworn  to
accomplish !

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Mark  the  gradation  of  consequences  "  The  Lord  hath  given  a  commandment

in    the    whole  paragraph.      First   the  concerning  thee,  that  no  more  of  thy

chiefs  are  punished.     Then  the  people,  name   be   sown"    (Nah.    i.     14:    Jer.

influenced  by  their  example,  are  drawn  xlvii.  6).

into  captivity.     The  present  generation  Ver.  10.    What  a  sad  condition  when

are  carried  off  by  death,  appointed  ordin-  men   tremble   at   the    name    of  God!

ances  are  taken  away,  and  tne  rod  of  What  an  exhibition  of  power  upon  an

God  smites  families   great  and  small,  evil  conscience,  when  men  ilee  from


302  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  [chap.  vl


instead  of  turning  to  God.     Ten  right-  to  cavil  against    God's  truth,   will  be
eous  men  would  have  saved  Sodom,  but  forsaken  by  him  at  the  last,  and  will
here  all  were  destroyed.  not  be  able  to  utter  his  name  |"  Words-
He  who  has  obstinately  abused  the  worth],
intellectual  powers  given  him  by  God

HOMILETICS.
A  Hopeless  People. — Verses  12 — 14.

These  verses  are  rather  abrupt,  and  generally  taken  to  show  how  useless  ana
impossible  it  is  to  reform  the  people.  Their  perversion  of  right  and  their  indiffer-
ence to  threatening  rendered  punishment  inevitable,  and  foolish  confidence  in  their
own  power  could  not  avert  it.

I.  Punishment  was  most  inevitable.     Two   illustrations  prove  this.     Their
conduct  was  perilous  and  preposterous.     Horses  cannot  run  with  safety,  nor  can
oxen  plough,  upon  rocks  :  so  in  their  self-chosen  way  they  will  wound  themselves
and  be  disappointed.      1.  Former  attempts  to  reform  had  failed.     God  had  sent
judgment  after  judgment,  prophet  after  prophet,  but  in  vain.     They  had  not  broken
up  their  fallow  ground,  but  were  hard  and  uncultivated  as  a  rock.     They  hindered
the  work  of  God  and  acted  most  perversely.     "  Those  who  will  not  be  tilled  as
fields  shall  be  abandoned  as  rocks,"  says  Calvin.     2.  Special  sins  were  not  forsaken.
"  Ye  have  turned  judgment  into  gall,"  &c.     Power  was  still  abused,  oppression  and
injustice  practised,  and  righteousness  turned  into  hemlock.     Men  who  pervert  jus-
tice, and  despise  ordinances  in  hope  of  advantage,  will  neither  preserve  the  nation
nor  escape  punishment.     They  turn  the  hearts  of  men  and  the  providence  of  God
against  themselves.     It  is  as  impossible  for  them  to  prosper  as  to  reap  a  harvest
from  the  rock.     3.  The  judgments  of  God.  were  disregarded.     They  continued  to
rejoice  in  their  idols  and  wealth  ;  boasted  of  their  own  valour,  and  thought  to
defend  themselves  with  their  own  strength.     u  Have  we  not  taken  to  us  horns]"
i.  e.  acquired  power  and  dominion.  Premeditated  injustice,  wilful  opposition  to  the
word  of  God,  will  lead  to  judicial  blindness  and  destruction.     Those  who  exalt
themselves  in  pride  shall  be  abased.     II.  Punishment  was  most  destructive.
What  they  took  for  their  greatest  gain  would  be  their  greatest  loss.     1.  Their  own
strength  could  not  defend  them.     It  was  "  a  thing  of  nought."     There  was  no  sub-
stance, no  reality  in  it.     Victory  and  dominion,  courage  and  prosperity,  are  non-
entities.    Empire  decays  and  riches  flee  away.     God  only  is  real  and  satisfying
good.     2.   The  whole  country  would  be  desolated.     Under  Jeroboam  II.  they  had
recovered  their  lands,  "from  the  entering  in  of  Hamath,"  &c.  (2  Kings  xiv.  25).
They  were  boasting  of  their  success  and  securing  themselves  in  their  dominions.
But  the  scene  of  their  triumph  would  be  the  scene  of  their  fall.     When  men  give
not  God  the  glory  of  their  possessions,  in  justice  will  he  take  them  away.     3.   The
whole  people  would  be  oppressed,     "  They  shall  afflict  you."     Conquerors  would  take
the  riches  in  which  they  gloried,  treat  them  with  indignity  and  afflict  them  with
shame.    Neither  Judah  nor  Israel  would  be  spared.     It  is  easier  to  turn  the  course  of
nature  than  to  change  God's  law  from  rewarding  the  righteous  and  punishing  the
wicked.     When  God  commands  it  must  be  done,  and  the  scourge  will  be  prevalent
as  the  evil.

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

12.    Horses  upon  a  rock,   &c.     The  ing.     The  course  of  sin,  turning  equity

course  of  the  sinner — 1.  Most  foolish,  into  poison,  will  grievously  disappoint.
2.    Most  dangerous.     3.    Most  useless.  13.   Taken  to  us  horns.     The  language

Horses  stumble  and  wound  themselves.  of    arrogance    and    self-confidence.      1.

No  harvest  is  reaped  from  such  plough-  Men  apt  to  ascribe  possessions  to  their


OHAP.   VI.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.


303


own  efforts.  They  have  done  every  tiling
and  God  nothing.  2.  To  overvalue
them  in  the  enjoyment.  How  many
things  in  which  we  trust  are  things  of
nought.  3.  Hence,  when  we  think  more
of  the  gifts  than  the  Giver,  we  are  taught
our  folly.  To  glory  in  anything,  what-
ever it  may  promise,  will  delude.  God
will  strip  men  of  every  false,  that   he


may  become  their  true  glory.

14./  will  raise  up.  No  foe  could  ever
invade  us  if  the  Lord  did  not  raise  him
up.  War  therefore  is  not  an  accident,
but  a  providential  dispensation.  Pha-
raoh, Hadad,  Rezon,  the  Ghaldees,  are
all  expressly  said  to  have  been  raised  up
by  the  Lord  (Ex.  ix.  16:1  Kings  xi.
14,  23  :  Hab.  i.  6)  [Lange].


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO    CHAPTER  III.


Ver.  1.  Ease.  This  is  carnal  ease,  a
floshly  security  ;  it  is  not  the  confidence
of  a  man  who  is  pardoned,  bat  the  ease
of  a  hardened  wretch  who  has  learned
to  despise  the  gibbet.  It  is  not  the
calm  of  a  soul  at  peace  with  God,  but
the  ease  of  a  madman,  who  because  he
has  hidden  his  sin  from  his  own  eyes,
thinks  he  has  concealed  it  from  God
[Spurgeon].

Vers.  2,  3.  He  that  is  graceless  in  a
day  of  grace  will  be  speechless  in  a  day
of  j  udgm ent  [  Mead] .

"  Heaven  gives  the  needful,  but  neglected  call.
What  day,  what  hour,  but  knocks  at  human

hearts,
To  wake  the  soul  to  sense  of  future  scenes."

[Young. ,]

Vers.  4 — 6.  Pleasure.  Would  you
judge  of  the  lawfulness  or  unlawfulness
of  pleasures,  take  this  rule  : — Whatever
weakens  your  reason,  impairs  the  tender-
ness of  your  conscience,  obscures  your
sense  of  God,  or  takes  off  the  relish  of
spiritual  things ;  in  short,  whatever
increases  the  strength  and  authority  of
your  body  over  your  mind,  that  thing
is  sin  to  you,  however  innocent  it  may
be  in  itself  [Southey].

"In  this  fool's  paradise  he  drank  delight."

[G.  Crabbe.]
Ver.  7.  Banquet.

"  So  comes  a  reckoning  when  the  banquet's  o'er,
The  dreadful  reckoning,  and  men  smile  no  more."

[Guy.-]
Yer.  9.  Die.  How  terrible  the  fea-
tures of  this  plague  !  The  entire  sweep-
ing away  of  all  the  inmates  of  some
houses.  A  solemn  spectacle  for  others
to  witness,  displaying  the  fierceness  and
power  of  God's  anger.  In  the  great
plague  of  Marseilles,  1720,  and  in  that


of  the  village  of  Eyam,  1666,  we  have
similar  scenes.  *  In  1813,"  says  one,
"  such  was  the  violence  with  which  the
plague  raged  at  Malta,  such  the  certain
destruction  which  attended  the  slightest
contact  with  the  infected,  that  at  last
every  better  feeling  of  the  heart  was
extinguished  in  a  desire  of  self-preserva-
tion, and  nobody  could  be  procured  to
perforin  the  melancholy  offices  which
make  up  the  funeral  train  of  sickness  and
death."

Ver.  11.   Great  and  small.

"  With  equal  pace  impartial  fate
Knocks  at  the  palace  as  the  cottage  gate."

[Horace.]

Ver.  1 2,  The  blessings  of  just  admin-
istration are  emphatically  set  forth  by
terms  used  to  describe  the  opposite.
Injustice  is  gall  and  poison,  bitterness
and  death.  How  should  it  commend  to
us  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  that  he  is  to
reign  in  righteousness,  to  judge  in
equity  [Ryan].

Ver.  13.  Nought.  The  more  I  exag-
gerate these  ideal  joys,  the  more  do  I
treasure  up  subjects  of  woe.  Oh  what
vanity  has  God  written  upon  all  things
under  the  sun  !  Adored  be  the  never
failing  mercy  of  God  !  He  has  made
my  happiness  to  depend,  not  on  the
uncertain  connections  of  this  life,  but
upon  his  own  most  blessed  self — a  por-
tion that  never  faileth  [Marty  n].

Ver.  14.  Captivity.  Sell  not  your
liberty  to  gratify  your  luxury  [Matt.
Henry].

"  There  is  a  paradise  that  fears
No  forfeiture,  and  of  its  fruit  He  sends
Large  prelibations  oft  to  saint*  below."

[Coxcper^


*H  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  [chap.  vn.


CHAPTER  VII.


Critical  Notes.!  Showed]  three  visions  in  this  ch.  Locusts  (vers.  1 — 3)  the  first ;  "  all  inward
tuitions  produced  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  which  set  forth  the  primitive  judgments  of  God  "  [KeW].  Begin.]
Time  defined,  as  the  springing  up  of  a  second  crop,  and  this  crop  after  the  king's  mowings.  Some  take
Jehovah  as  King,  the  mowing  the  judgments  executed  upon  Israel.  The  period  is  most  un-
favourable. One  crop  had  been  taken  and  the  second  threatened.  But  this  danger  averted  by
intercession.  2.  Small]  Reduced  in  number  and  strength,  poor  in  means  and  hope,  unable  to  stand.
Vers.  4 — 6 — The  devouring  fire.  Contend]  with  Israel  by  war,  of  which  fire  is  a  symbol  (Ezek.
xxxviii.  22)  ;  represented  as  drying  up  waters  (many  people,  llev.  xvii.  15)  and  devouring  on  dry
land  (Is.  ix.  1).  6.  For  this]  as  well  as  threatenings  of  vision  first.  Vers.  7 — 9 — The  third
vision.  Plumb.]  applied  expressly  to  Israel.  Pass  by]  *'.  e.  forgive  them  any  more  (Prov.  xix.  11 :
Mic.  vii.  18).  God's  patience  is  exhausted.  The  prophet  intercedes  no  more.  9.  Places]  of  idol-
worship  ;  the  royal  family  and  the  monarchy  to  be  overthrown.  10.]  The  prophet  opposed  at
Bethel  on  account  of  these  predictions.  Conspired]  Heb.  banded,  implying  that  others  joined.
There  is  a  charge  of  conspiracy  and  sedition ;  insinuates  that  Amos  prophesies  for  bread  (vers.  10,
11),  and  in  pretended  courtesy  advises  him  to  remove.  Say  nothing  against  the  king,  let  us  alone
in  our  customs,  or  we  will  suppress  you  by  force.  14.  Said]  Indignantly  repudiated  the  charge
against  himself.  He  was  no  scholar  ;  as  a  herdsman  he  was  content  with  a  little,  did  not  seek  a  mere
livelihood,  but  as  the  messenger  of  God  he  spoke  with  dignity  and  authority.  17.  Therefore]  in
return  for  this  opposition  Amaziah  must  bear  his  own  doom.  Wife]  will  be  violently  taken  by  the
enemy.  The  city]  publicly  and  openly  :  she  would  be  dishonoured  at  the  storming  of  the  city.
Land]  possessed  or  assigned  to  others.  Sons]  Children  slain  by  the  foe ;  he  himself  would  die  in
exile  among  the  heathen,  and  the  whole  nation  would  be  carried  away  into  captivity.

HOMILETICS.
The  Scourging  Locusts. —  Verses  1 — 3

The  second  half  of  Amos  begins  with  visions  ;  not  mere  warnings,  but  solemn
predictions,  adapted  to  the  moral  condition  of  the  people.  The  impenitence  of
Israel  is  confirmed,  their  doom  is  fixed,  and  the  sentence  is  irrevocable.

I.  The  judgment  prepared.  "  He  formed  grasshoppers."  1.  Divine  in  its
origin.  God  prepared  the  affliction.  The  prophet  is  most  emphatic  on  this  point.
"  Evil  in  the  city  "  is  from  the  Lord.  "  He  maketh  the  day  dark  with  night."  But
^uch  is  our  stupidity  and  ignorance,  that  we  have  need  continually  to  be  told.  We
require  sensible  evidence  to  show  Goa°s  hand  in  our  lot.  Affliction  comes  not  from
the  dust,  nor  trouble  from  the  ground  (Job  v.  6).  2.  Specific  in  its  character.
Locusts  are  the  creatures  of  God,  and  perfectly  under  his  commands.  Creatures
magnificent  and  minute  display  his  power  and  execute  his  design  (Joel  i.  4).  3.
Special  in  its  design.  God  formed  grasshoppers.  There  was  not  only  power  in  the
act,  wisdom  in  the  shape,  but  purpose  in  the  end  for  which  they  were  sent.  God
is  said  to  frame  evil  against  a  sinful  people  (Jer.  xviii.  11).  These  creatures  were
prepared  and  specially  sent  to  eat  up  the  grass.  In  his  moral  government,  Je-
hovah prepares  instruments,  specially  forms  judgments  for  the  correction  of  his
people.  (1)  On  account  of  disobedience.  (2)  With  a  design  to  restore.  "  Therefore
despise  not  thou  the  chastening  of  the  Almighty."  II.  The  judgment  timed.
"  In  the  beginning  of  the  shooting,"  &c.  It  might  have  been  sent  earlier  and  been
more  severe°  The  former  might  have  been  devoured  with  the  latter  growth.  There
was  mercy  as  well  as  fitness  in  the  time  of  affliction.  "  To  everything  there  is  a
season,"  a  fixed  time,  and  a  determined  purpose.  "As  exactly  and  exquisitely
suited  to  your  case  and  mine,"  writes  one,  ';  every  instant,  as  if  it  had  been  ap-
pointed and  contrived  only  for  that  single  case  ami  that  single  moment."  Every
dispensation  is  most  fitly  chosen.  To  common  observers  it  may  appear  untimely,
for  men  see  not  the  judgments  prepared.     In  Israel  there  might  be  signs  of  abund-


chap.  VII.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  AMOS.  305


ant  crops,  and  some  who  ridiculed  the  calamity  threatened.  Men  watch  the
rising  corn,  but  forget  the  blight  that  may  blast  the  harvests.  Business  may
flourish,  youth  may  bloom  in  beauty  and  strength,  but  God  may  consume  the  fresh
and  verdant  scene.  The  messengers  may  he  formed,  and  only  waiting  the  com-
mand of  their  Creator  to  destroy  the  fruit  of  hand  and  mind.  "  Known  unto  God
are  all  his  works  from  the  beginning  of  the  world."  III.  The  judgment  arrested.
"  It  shall  not  be,  saith  the  Lord."  1.  By  the  intercession  of  the  prophet.  "  Then
said  I,  0  Lord  God,  cease."  The  prophet  saw  God  in  "  the  affliction  of  Joseph,"
and,  unlike  his  countrymen,  was  grieved  and  interceded  with  God.  How  few  that
are  smitten  are  concerned  in  the  judgments  of  God  !  Amos  is  a  type  in  spirit  and
practice  of  all  the  godly  who  pray  for  their  kindred  and  country  in  public  calamity.
Our  best  friends,  our  true  patriots,  are  those  who  feel  deeply  and  pray  earnestly
under  Divine  chastisement.  "  And  Jehoahaz  besought  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord
hearkened  unto  him  :  for  he  saw  the  oppression  of  Israel,  because  the  king  of  Syria
oppressed  them."  2.  By  the  mercy  of  God.  "  The  Lord  repented  for  this  ; "  in
mercy  heard  the  prayer  and  warded  off  the  danger.  Whatever  be  the  conduct  of
men  in  public  distress  God  alone  can  take  distress  away.  But  if  we  confess  our
sins,  humble  ourselves  in  petition  before  him,  he  will  be  gracious.  If  we  stand  in
the  breach,  the  ruin  shall  not  happen.  Prayer  has  often  preserved  nations,  averted
judgments,  and  changed  the  course  of  events.  God  has  not  only  formed  calamities,
but  fitted  a  place  for  prayer.  He  repents  of  the  evil  and  takes  it  away.  "  For  the
Lord  shall  judge  his  people,  and  repent  himself  for  his  servants,  when  he  seeth
that  their  power  is  gone,  and  there  is  none  shut  up  or  left."

God  Contending  with  Fire. — Verse  4.

If  we  take  this  fire  literally  or  metaphorically  it  indicates  the  anger  of  God
against  his  people  and  the  judgments  which  should  consume  them.

I.  God's  action  against  men.  Man  has  challenged  God,  denied  his  authority
and  broken  his  law.  Sin  begets  contention,  creates  a  controversy  between  God
and  man  (Hos.  iv.  1).  God  enters  into  judgment  with  him  ;  pleads  by  insignificant
creatures  and  terrible  calamities,  and  executes  fierce  anger  upon  all  workers  of
iniquity.  Famine,  fire,  and  sword,  devour  rich  and  poor,  money  and  health,  and
consume  everything  before  them  (Ezek.  xxxviii.  22).  "  The  Lord  standeth  up  to
plead,  and  standeth  to  judge  the  people.  By  fire  and  by  sword  will  the  Lord
plead  with  all  flesh  "(Is.  lxvi.  13,  16).  II.  Men's  obstinacy  before  God.  We
do  not  law  or  contend  with  men  until  we  have  tried  other  means.  War  and  law
should  be  the  last  resource.  Judgment  is  God's  strange  work.  But  when  all
means  have  failed  to  win  a  people,  then  he  contends  with  them  in  severest
measures.  He  will  vindicate  his  cause  and  character.  To  strive  against  him  is — 1.
Foolish,  2.  Guilty,  and  3.  Vain.  Terrible  will  be  the  consequence  of  resistance.
"  Behold,  I  will  kindle  a  fire  in  thee,  and  it  shall  devour  every  green  tree  in  thee,
and  every  dry  tree.  .  .  And  all  flesh  shall  see  that  I  the  Lord  have  kindled  it :  it
shall  not  be  quenched  "  (Ezek.  xx.  47,  48).

The  Measuring  Plumbline. — Verses  7 — 9.

In  this  vision  we  have  the  third  stage  of  Divine  judgments  ;  God,  the  builder  of
the  nation,  tests  and  finds  it  degenerate.  He  will  no  longer  spare  nor  seek  to
reform  it.  Retribution  is  neither  removed  nor  mitigated  by  prayer.  The  day  of
decision  has  come,  and  the  kingdom,  except  a  remnant,  must  be  destroyed.  In
the  vision  we  have  the  trial  and  the  verdict.

I.  The  trial  presented.  "  Thus  he  showed  me."  The  judgment  is  pictured
and  then  explained.  1.  The  nation  is  Divinely  tested.  "  Behold,  /  will  set  a
plumbline."  God  himself  stands  upon  the  wall,  plumbline  in  hand,  fixed  in
purpose  and  exact  in  procedure.  He  had  built  them  up,  blessed  them  with  holy
laws  and  good  rulers,  and  formed  them  for  his  praise  and  glory.     But  they  were

20


S06  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  [chap,  vn.


examined,  found  irregular,  and  judged  fit  to  be  pulled  down.  The  hand  which
builds  our  families  and  estates  can  destroy  them,  if  we  deviate  from  rectitude.
"  Judgment  also  will  I  lay  to  the  line,  and  righteousness  to  the  plummet."
2.  The  nation  universally  tested.  "  In  the  midst,"  in  the  very  centre  of  the  king-
dom. Inwardly  as  distinguished  from  outward  judgment ;  wholly  as  distinguished
from  any  part.  In  its  religious  and  civil  capacity,  in  its  priesthood  and  govern-
ment, God  measures  a  nation.  Our  worship  and  conduct  are  weighed  in  the
balance  and  found  wanting.  He  condemns  in  proportion  to  our  guilt.  "  He  shall
stretch  out  upon  it  the  line  of  confusion  and  the  stones  of  emptiness  "  (Is.  xxxiv.
11).  3.  The  nation  justly  condemned.  "  I  will  not  again  pass  by  them."  God
had  exercised  great  care  and  kindness  towards  Israel,  had  been  their  bulwark  and
salvation :  but  since  neither  mercy  nor  judgment  will  mend  them  he  will  forbear
no  longer.  He  built  them  up  in  mercy  and  will  ruin  them  in  justice.  The  works
and  trays  of  men  are  tested  by  the  word  and  providence  of  God ;  if  discovered
unequal,  bending  to  the  right  or  left,  if  they  can  no  more  be  set  upright,  they
will  be  demolished.  All  sin  is  transgression  of  law.  The  clearer  the  law  and  the
greater  the  grace  of  the  lawgiver,  the  more  severe  the  punishment  of  guilt.  God
is  justified  when  he  speaks  and  clear  when  he  judges  (Ps.  li.  4).  II.  The  verdict
given.  "The  punishment  is  specified  in  its  two  chief  effects — the  overthrow  of
their  idolatrous  sanctuaries  and  the  extinction  of  the  dynasty  of  Jeroboam,  which
was  in  effect  the  overthrow  of  the  kingdom.  In  other  words,  their  whole  polity,
ecclesiastical  and  civil,  was  to  be  subverted."  1.  The  destruction  of  the  idolatrous
sanctuaries.  The  centre  and  sanctuaries  of  a  nation  are  its  life  and  worth.  If
these  be  rotten  or  diseased  the  people  will  be  corrupt.  The  great  names  of  Isaac
and  Israel  could  not  protect  the  high  places  and  temples  of  the  land.  The  altars
at  Bethel,  Dan,  and  Gilgal  were  to  be  laid  waste.  If  men  obey  not  Jehovah,  but
sacrifice  on  their  own  hills  and  altars,  they  must  expect  the  overthrow  of  their
high  places.  Specious  imitations  of  godly  progenitors  in  Christian  worship  will
not  justify,  but  hasten  the  punishment  of  idolatry.  2.  The  extinction  of  the  royal
dynasty.  Jeroboam  II.  died  in  peace.  "  The  house  of  Jeroboam  "  is  threatened  in  its
prosperity  and  splendour.  The  kings  of  Israel  were  idolaters  and  drew  the  people
from  God.  The  court  exerted  an  evil  influence  upon  the  sanctuary  and  corrupted
the  people.  Its  guilt  was  the  greater  and  its  judgment  more  certain.  Princes  and
people  had  sinned  and  must  be  punished  together.  The  prediction  of  Samuel
came  to  pass.  "  If  ye  shall  still  do  wickedly,  ye  shall  be  consumed,  both  ye  and
your  king."  3.  The  dissolution  of  the  whole  kingdom.  The  destruction  of  the
ruling  family  was  the  prelude  to  the  ruin  of  the  entire  kingdom.  The  stroke  fell
upon  the  family  of  Jeroboam  (2  Kings  xv.  8 — 10) ;  after  that  the  kingdom
decayed  daily  and  speedily  came  to  ruin.  All  kind  of  idolatry  provokes  God,
destroys  its  votaries,  and  ruins  the  land  in  which  it  is  practised  (Ps.  cvi.  29  :  Amos
ii  4,  5.)

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  8.  Tlie  vision  seen  and  explained.  Ver.  7.    Tlie  plumbline.    1.  Applied

L  It  is  our  duty  to  attend  to  what  God  to  the  body,  which  must  be  kept  healthy

has  revealed.     1.  It  is  worthy  of  atten-  and  erect.     It  is  the  work  of  God,  and

tion — Behold.     2.  We  have  need  to  be  should    be    the    temple   of    the    Holy

quickened  in  our  attention,  even  when  Ghost.     2.  Applied  to  the  soul,  which

the  message  most  concerns  us  and  the  God  made  upright  and  should  not  fall

people.     What  seest  thou?    II.  In  all  into  sin.     3.  Applied  to  the  life,  which

our  attention  we  have  need  of   Divine  should  be  regulated  by  the  law  of  God,

aid  to  explain  the  revelation.     We  may  the  standard  of  right,

see  the  vision,  give  an  account  of  it,  This  is  an  emblem  of  God's  mercy

but  cannot  understand  until  God  inter-  and  justice,  who  is  the  Master-builder

piets  it  to  our  hearts  and  minds.  of    the   Church.       1.    It    denotes   his


cfiAt.  Vii.]  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  307


mercy,  in  that   he  made   this   Church  (cf.  2  Kings  xxi.  13  :  Is.  xxxv.  2  :  Lam.

right  and  firm  like  a  perpendicular  wall,  ii.  8)  ;  that  is,  there  was,  so  to  speak,

made  exactly  by  line  and  rule,  he  had  an  architectural  design  and  plan  in  God's

curiously  built  it,  and  as  carefully  de-  work    of    destroying     Israel,    no    less

fended  it.     2.  It  is  an  emblem  of  his  than  in  his  former  favour  to  Israel  in

justice.     He  stands  upon  the  wall  of  his  building  him  up.     God  does  everything

Church,  continually  trying  and  examin-  according    to    measure,    number,    and

ing  whether  it  continue  right  or  not,  weight  (Wisdom  xi.  20).     As  one  said

bearing  with  its  defects,  until,  like  a  wall  of  old,  "  The  Deity  is  a  perfect  Geome-

quite   bending    and   belching    out,    he  trician,"  and  the  plumbline  of  destruc-

resolves  to  throw  down  all  (Is.  xxx.  13)  tion  was   to  be  co-extensive  with   the

[Hall].     The  wall  of   Israel  had  been  plumbline  of  construction — it  was  to  be

built  by  God  with  a  plumbline,  and  now  total  [Wordsworth],
it  would  be  destroyed  with  a  plumbline

HOM1LETICS.

The  First  Three  Visions. — Verses  1 — 9.

These  visions  are  closely  related  and  mutually  dependent  one  upon  another.
They  may  be  classified  under  three  heads.     "We  shall  compare  them.

I.  They  are  corrective  in  their  design.  God  chastens  whom  he  loves.  Judg-
ments and  mercies  are  sent  to  discipline  our  hearts.  Some  have  more  judgments
than  mercies,  and  others  more  mercies  than  judgments.  Both  are  mixed  in  life  and
regulated  by  infinite  wisdom  and  human  conduct.  II.  They  are  graduated  ac-
cording to  moral  condition.  Progressive  in  their  series,  they  display  God's  justice
in  the  successive  stages  of  sin.  The  underlying  idea  of  the  first  is  external  visita-
tion ;  of  the  second,  inward  decay  b}r  removal  of  Divine  blessings  and  restraint ;  of
the  third,  consummation  of  sin  which  lays  the  nation  prostrate.  Declension  in
communities  and  individuals  is  first  punished  with  outward  chastisements.  If  these
fail  heavier  judgments  follow.  If  judgments  and  mercies  are  unheeded,  and  de-
clension merges  into  apostasy,  nothing  remains  but  destruction.  When  repeated
acts  of  sin  have  produced  confirmed  habits  of  wickedness,  God  says,  "  I  will  not
again  pass  by  them  any  more."  III.  They  are  conditional  in  their  issue.  In
the  first  and  second,  judgment  is  arrested  by  prayer.  The  prophet  was  encouraged
in  duty  and  the  nation  reprieved  in  sorrow.  If  we  saw  sin  as  rebellion  against
God,  and  productive  of  impending  danger,  we  should  be  more  earnest  in  prayer  that
God  would  forgive  and  pass  by.  But  "  reprieves  are  not  pardons."  Many  are
spared,  but  not  reclaimed ;  reduced  to  straits,  but  never  return  to  God.  They  neg-
lect advantages,  sin  away  the  day  of  grace,  until  prayer  does  not  avail.  Total  de-
struction will  come  upon  impenitent  sinners.  "  Though  Moses  and  Samuel  stood
before  me,  yet  my  mind  could  not  be  toward  this  people  :  cast  them  out  of  my
sight  and  let  them  go  forth."

The  Encounter  between  Priest  and  Prophet. —  Verses  10 — 17.

These  verses  contain  an  interesting  episode,  and  present  the  prophet  of  God  un-
daunted in  danger.  We  see  the  issue  of  his  preaching  and  the  requital  for  his
pains.  Amaziah,  the  idolatrous  priest  of  Bethel,  is  greatly  incensed,  resolves  by
force  and  fraud  to  get  rid  of  Amos.

I.  The  conduct  of  the  priest.  Amaziah  must  be  viewed  as  representative  of
the  system  of  which  he  was  no  doubt  the  ecclesiastical  head.  1 .  He  seeks  to  silence
the  prophet  by  civil  power.  He  seems  to  have  been  intimate  with  the  king,  pre-
tends great  kindness  to  him,  when  really  he  consulted  his  own  interests.  If  Amos
prevailed,  his  gods  would  starve,  and  Jerusalem  would  have  all  the  custom.  False
teachers  prove  most  cruel  persecutors.     Their  authority  is  based  on  the  patronage


308  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  [chap.  vn.


of  the  great  and  the  support  of  the  state.     They  are  uncharitable  in  feeling  and
impotent  in  power.     Flattery  may  find  friends,  but  truth  alone  will  stand.     2.  He
brings  false  charges  against  the  prophet's  conduct.     Every  word  has  weight,  like
so  many  daggers,  to  stab  the  prophet.     (1)  He  makes  false  accusation  against  the
character  of  the  prophet.     He  was  the  proud  pompous  hierarch  of  a  popular  religion,
a  system  upheld  by  prestige  and  patronage.     Amos  in  his  estimation  was  a  needy
vagrant,  a  contemptuous  "  seer."     (2)  He  makes  false  accusation  against  the  mo-
tives of  the  prophet.     He  insinuates  Amos  to  be  a  mean,  self-interested  person,
plying  his  vocation  to  "  eat  bread."     Self-interested  persons,  worldly  priests,  mea-
sure others  by  their  own  motives.     Those  who  make  godliness  a  gain,  and  are
governed  by  hopes  of  preferment  and  wealth,  understand  not  the  aims  of  God's
servants,  and  think  to  rule  others  by  inducements  which  influence  them.     (3)  He
makes  false  accusation  against  the  conduct  of  the  prophet.     He  charges  him  with
conspiracy.     "  Amos  hath  conspired  against  thee."     This  was  a  most  dangerous
accusation,  in  the  unsettled  condition  of  the  kingdom.     This  spirit  has  character-
ized a  false  priesthood  in  every  age.     Prophets  and  apostles,  martyrs  and  reform-
ers, and  Christ  himself,  were  all  subject  to  the  same  persecution — the  same  artful
and  malicious  design  to  excite  the  temporal  power  against  them.     3.  He  brings
false  charges  against  the  prophet's  preaching.     In  whatever  spirit  Amaziah  reports
the  words  of  the  prophet,  he  keeps  back  or  perverts  the  truth.     He  artfully  frames
the  language  to  establish  his  charge.     He  makes  a  base  slander.     The  prophet  had
uttered  the  downfall  of  the  house  of  Jeroboam,  but  not  in  a  spirit  of  rebellion  and
treason.      "  Amos  hath  conspired  against  thee."     This  was  done  openly  at  Bethel —
think  of  that  !     "  In  the  midst  of  thy  people  Israel."     "  Commotions  of  the  people
are  dangerous,  0  king  !     The  people  resent  this.     If  thou  dost  not  act  they  will."
"  The  land  is  not  able  to  bear  all  his  words."     God's  people  have  often  been  repre-
sented as  enemies  to  the  state  and  disloyal  to  princes.     The  true  power  of  Chris-
tian character  has  been  felt  and  hated.     But  "  unable  to  resist  the  wisdom  and  the
spirit  "  with  which  servants  of  God  have  spoken,  recourse  has  been  had  to  illegal
methods,  and  men  have  not  dared  to  appeal  to  reason  and  the  word  of  God  (Acts
vi.  10).     "  Blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall  revile  you  and  persecute  you,  and  say
all  manner  of  evil  against  you  falsely  for  my  sake."     4.  He  advises  the  prophet  to
consult  his  own  safety.     "  Flee  thee  away."     As  a  seeming  friend  he  requests  him
to  flee  away  from  danger.     (1)  He  urges  him  in  the  language  of  terror.     It  is  not
safe  to  prophesy  here  against  the  king.     This  is  Bethel,  the  centre  of  worship  and
the  seat  of  government.     He  could  expect  no  encouragement  or  sanction  in  the
court.     He  was  too  blunt,  too  faithful,  to  be  heard.     Go  to  Judah.     (2)  He  urges
him  in  the  language  of  threats.     As  a  haughty  prelate  he  assumes  authority.
"  Prophesy  not  again  any  more,"  in  my  parish  and  jurisdiction.     We  have  enough
of  schism  and  sedition.     I  am  resolved  to  suspend  and  silence  thee.     Prohibition
from  man  will  not  destroy  the  authority  of  God.     Peter  and  John  were  forbidden
to  preach,  Luther  and  Knox  were  threatened,  but  they  could  not  but  speak.
"  We  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  men."     II.  The  behaviour  of  the  prophet.
Amos  was  too  deeply  impressed  with  a  sense  of  duty  to  be  swayed  by  arguments
like  these.     1.  He  repudiates  the  personal  charge.     "  I  was  no  prophet,"  &c      He
was  a  humble  shepherd,  neither  a  prophet  nor  the  son  of  a  prophet  by  profession.
Content  to  cultivate  and  gather  figs,  he  would  never  have  thrust  himself  into  office.
He  was  a  labouring  man,  neither  ashamed  of  his  origin  nor  employ.     Others  may
boast  of  rank  and  authority,  but  God  chooses  the  weak  and  foolish  things  of  the
world  to  confound  the  wise  and  mighty.     2.  He  asserts  Ms  Divine  commission.
"  The  Lord  took  me."     What  the  priest  forbade,  God  commanded.     "  Go,  pro-
phesy." Amaziah  was  in  direct  rebellion  against  God,  Amos  was  acting  in  obedience
to  God.     God  often  calls  men  from  flocks  and  herds  to  stanql  before  priests  and
princes.     They  may  not  be  recognized  by  the  learned  scribe,  the  proud  prelate,  and
the  king's  court :  but  they  are  conscious  of  a  Divine  mission,  and  are  determined  to


chap.  TO.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  309


fulfil  it.  3.  He  refuses  to  leave  the  path  of  duty.  Amaziah  might  be  influenced
by  the  fear  of  man,  Jonah  may  escape  from  Nineveh,  but  Amos  fears  not  the  wrath
of  a  king.  God  sent  him  to  Israel,  not  to  Judah,  and  from  Israel  he  would  not  go.
If  we  are  conscious  of  God's  sanction  we  shall  be  supported  in  trial  and  courageous
in  danger.  This  made  Amos  resolute  against  Amaziah  j  Nathan  free  with  David  ;
Elijah  bold  with  Ahab ;  John  faithful  with  Herod  ;  and  the  apostles  confident
before  the  world.  One  prophet  sent  by  God  shall  overcome  the  hosts  of  Baal,  though
backed  by  the  power  of  king  and  queen.  "  Should  such  a  man  as  I  flee  1"  4.
He  repeats  his  solemn  message.  He  is  not  terrified  by  priest  or  king.  Though
forbidden  to  prophesy,  he  desists  not,  but  denounces  God's  words  and  bids  the
priest  attend  to  the  awful  sentence.  (1)  His  wife  would  be  dishonoured.  She
would  be  openly  and  publicly  insulted  at  the  storming  of  the  city.  (2)  His  chil-
dren would  be  slain  by  the  sword.  He  had  trained  them  up,  and  God  would  cut
them  off,  in  idolatry.  (3)  His  lands  would  be  taken  by  the  enemy.  They  would
be  allotted  to  others  by  line  (Deut.  xxxii.  9  :  2  Sara.  viii.  2  :  Ps.  xvi.  6).  Thus
he  would  lose  his  heirs  and  his  inheritance  also.  (4)  He  would  die  a  captive  in  a
foreign  land.  He  who  now  gloried  in  priesthood  and  position  should  become  an
exile  and  die  in  a  land  polluted  by  idols.  The  greatest  misery  that  could  happen
to  one  expecting  a  grave  in  the  land  of  promise.  (5)  The  kingdom  itself  would  be
destroyed.  "  And  Israel  shall  surely  go  into  captivity."  The  prediction  is  in  the
very  words  of  the  priest  himself  (ver.  11),  and  a  warning  to  all  who  oppose  the
servants  and  abuse  the  gifts  of  God.  If  we  pollute  the  people  of  God,  we
shall  be  dishonoured  ourselves.  Wicked  parents  and  ungodly  ministers  reap
what  they  sow  and  bring  a  curse  upon  posterity.  Sinners  and  seducers  can
never  make  void  the  threatening  of  God.  The  most  haughty  and  powerful  cannot
defy  judgments  which  offend  them.  Opposition  may  provoke  God  to  contend  with
them  as  individuals,  and  bring  ruin  upon  their  families  and  estates,  upon  body  and
soul,  for  time  and  eternity.

A  Political  Priest  and  a  True  Prophet.

Let  us  view  the  transactions  of  this  high  priest,  and  we  shall  find  a  complete
character  of  a  false  prophet,  or  the  perfect  picture  of  a  politician.  1.  They  use  to
flatter  and  delude  great  ones,  making  them  to  believe  that  none  are  their  friends
but  such  as  say  as  they  say,  do  whatever  they  would  have  them  do,  and  humour
them  in  their  sins  ; — that  they  are  their  foes  that,  like  Amos,  deal  faithfully  and
plainly  with  them  ;  and  this  is  no  small  part  of  great  men's  misery,  that  they
have  few  about  them  that  dare  or  will  deal  faithfully  with  them.  They  may
use  the  Litany  (in  this  sense)  with  that  alteration  which  the  poor  curate  used,
when  he  saw  his  lord  come  into  the  Church,  0  God  the  Father  of  Heaven,
have  mercy  upon  us  Right  Honourable  sinners.  Their  state  is  worse  (in  this
respect)  than  that  of  inferior  persons,  who  are  plainly  and  truly  told  of  their  sins,
when  these  are  soothed  up  to  their  destruction.  2.  They  calumniate  and  belie
the  true  prophets.  They  observe  the  rule  of  Machiavel — Lie  lustily,  somewhat
will  stick  though  it  be  never  so  false.  3.  They  labour  with  might  and  main  to
suppress  and  silence  the  true  prophets.  They  know  that  their  kingdom  cannot  long
stand,  if  once  the  faithful  ministers  of  Christ  be  countenanced  \  light  and  darkness,
the  ark  and  Dagon,  Christ  and  Belial,  can  never  subsist  together.  This  made
Amaziah  use  both  force  and  fraud  to  rid  the  land  of  Amos.  4.  They  labour  to  sup-
press good  men  before  they  can  be  heard.  They  must  not  speak  nor  dispute  the
case.  Thus  Amaziah  clandestinely  accuseth  Amos  to  the  king,  when  he  could  make
no  defence  for  himself.  5.  They  usually  mingle  some  truth  with  their  lies.  As  fowlers
do  mix  some  wheat  with  their  chaff,  to  catch  the  birds  the  sooner ;  so  did  Amaziah
mix  some  truth  with  his  lies.  Amos  hath  said  Jeroboam  shall  die  by  the  sword
(that  was  false),  and  Israel  shall  surely  go  into  captivity  (that  was  true)  [Hall],


310


KOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.


[chap.  ra.


Let  us  now  view  the  true  prophet  of  God.     He  is  the  very  opposite  of  a  time-
serving, conventional  priest.

1.  He  is  Divinely  called  to  his  work.  He  is  no  mere  professional  servant.  He
does  not  assume  office  for  his  own  interests,  nor  does  he  run  before  he  is  sent.  He
does  not  always  belong  to  the  regular  order  of  prophets,  nor  is  he  always  qualified
by  human  learning,  but  God  has  appeared  to  him  and  uttered  the  word,  "  Go
prophesy  to  my  people."  2.  He  is  often  persecuted  and  opposed  in  his  work.  He
predicts  judgments  winch  some  cannot  bear.  He  is  called  an  enthusiast  and  "  a
mover  of  sedition,"  denounced,  reproached,  and  hindered  in  his  work.  If  open  vio-
lence does  not  answer,  secret  fraud  is  devised  (Jer.  xi.  19  ;  xii.  6).  Hence  men
display  their  personal  spite  and  vile  ingratitude.  But  they  will  find  it  perilous  to
fight  against  God  and  persecute  his  servants.  3.  He  is  always  faithful  in  doing
his  work.  Truthful  men  are  valiant.  Cowards  fear  and  creep  behind.  God's
servants  stand  their  ground  and  are  faithful  to  their  trust.  They  are  not  deterred
by  false  friends  nor  threatening  foes.  Fidelity  to  conscience  and  God  often  costs
them  their  life.  "  The  wicked  flee  when  no  man  pursueth,  but  the  righteous  are
bold  as  a  lion."     "If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  1 "


HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


The  sins  of  Amaziah.  1.  Contra-
dicting God's  command.  "  Prophesy
not  against  Israel."  2.  Slanderous  report
of  God's  servant.  "  Touch  not  mine
anointed,  and  do  my  prophets  no  harm."
3.  Frustrating  God's  purpose,  (a.)  In
seeking  to  crush  the  truth,  (b.)  In
tempting  the  messenger  to  flee  from
duty.  The  prophet's  defence  proved
the  nature  of  the  charge.  Amaziah
hears  his  doom,  like  Peter  telling
Ananias,  "  Thou  hast  not  lied  unto  men,
but  unto  God."

Ver.  10.  Not  able  to  bear  all  his
words.  Truth  often  an  offence — always
a  power  in  the  land.  The  world  is
compelled  to  confess  their  impotence
against  it.

Ver.  12.  Worldly  advice  to  God's
servants.  "  Flee,"  &c.  This  given  by
Pharisees  to  Christ  (Luke  xiii.  31).  It
is  folly  to  declare  alarming  truths  be-
fore the  great ;  impiety  to  oppose
established  customs  and  eminent  dig-
nitaries ;  and  insolent  to  preach  the
gospel  in  king's  chapels.  Smooth
things  and  popular  heresies  must  pass
current  with  some,  and  royalty  must
pass  undisturbed  to  destruction.

This  was  fit  advice*  for  the  priest  of
Bethel.  Carnal  men  do  not  rise  above
carnal  motives ;  but  true  prophets  con-
sult not  flesh  and  blood,  have  higher
motives  than  safety,  bread,  &c.  Apostles,
Reformers;  and  Missionaries  took   no


counsel  with  advisers  like  Amaziah.
Duty  before  temporal  interests.  Pray
for  help  to  discharge  it.  This  advice
proves  —  1.  Selfishness,  2.  Timidity,
and  3.  Disobedience.

Ver.  13.  Observe,  this  priest  of
Bethel  claims  honour  for  it,  not  because
it  is  the  Lord's  sanctuary,  but  because  it
is  the  king's  sanctuary,  and  not  because
it  is  the  house  of  God,  but  the  house
of  Jeroboam.  All  claims  of  reverence
for  a  Church  simply  and  merely  as  a
national  establishment,  independently  of
Divine  institution,  are  no  better  than
these  assertions  of  Amaziah.  The  first
royal  propounder  of  what  is  now  called
Erastianism,  as  far  as  we  know,  was
Jeroboam  I. ;  the  first  priestly  advocate
of  it,  as  far  as  we  know,  was  Amaziah
[Wordsworth],

Ver.  14.  Herdman.  One  of  that
class  to  which  Abraham,  and  Moses,  and
David  had  belonged ;  but  not  rich  in
fields  and  herds,  in  men-servants  and
maid-servants,  like  the  first ;  nor  learned
in  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians,  like
the  second ;  nor  with  any,  the  most
distant,  intimations  that  he  might  one
day  be  the  shepherd  of  a  people,  like  the
third  [F.  D.  Maurice].

1.  God  loves  to  appear  to  men  dili-
gent in  their  calling.  Moses  keeping
sheep,  David  following  the  ewes,  and
Saul  seeking  the  asses,  &c.  2.  When
God  calls  we  must  be  ready  to  forsake


CHAP,  vn.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.


311


all.  Amos  leaves  his  herds,  disciples
their  nets,  and  Abraham  his  country.
Grace  makes  men  able  to  do  and
willing  to  suffer  what  God  commands.
3.  The  sphere  must  be  left  with  God  to
appoint.  Whatever  the  lot  may  be,  we
must  be  satisfied.  Other  places  may
seem  better,  but  God  knows  best.  4.
When  once  the  place  is  fixed  we  must
not  quit  it  without  Divine  guidance.
.Nothing  warrants  unlawful  fear  in  the
performance  of  duty  or  neglect  of  it.
Providence  must  never  be  construed  to
sanction  flight  or  withdraw  us  from  our
work.  We  may  apparently  do  little
good,  be  permitted  to  prophesy  in  an-
other place  and  be  more  successful.
But  we  must  abide  in  our  calling,  never


give  way  to  corrupt  principles,  and  shun
not  to  declare  the  whole  counsel  of  God.
Ver.  17.  Opposers  of  God's  word  ex-
amples of  his  justice  and  indignation.
Amaziah  led  God's  people  into  idolatry,
and  his  wife  is  an  harlot  in  the  city.
He  destroyed  the  souls  of  the  people,
and  his  own  family  fall  by  the  sword.
Given  to  the  world,  he  was  the  chief
cause  why  Israel  was  despoiled  of  their
inheritance,  and  his  land  is  divided
among  the  conquerors.  He  was  the
chief  cause  of  Israel's  exile,  and  would
not  let  them  believe  it,  the  threatening
was  verified  upon  himself,  and  with-
out recovery  died  in  a  polluted  land
[Hutcheson].


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  VII.


Vers.  1 — 3.  Locusts.  God  hath
armies  of  insects  and  little  contemptible
creatures  wherewith  to  punish  disobe-
dient people.  He  needs  not  men  to
destroy  us,  he  hath  frogs  and  flies,  lice
and  locusts,  and  these  shall  do  it  (Ex.
x.  14  :  2  Chron.  vii.  13  :  Ps.  lxxviii.
40).  Much  of  God's  might  is  seen  in
these  little  armies,  they  all  fulfil  the
word  of  God's  commands.  Let  none,
then,  murmur  at  second  causes,  but  still
look  up  to  the  first,  lest  by  fretting  at
our  troubles  we  double  them  [Hall].

Vers.  4 — 6.  Fire.  The  power  of  this
fire  showed  it  to  be  a  fire  of  God ;  it
was  a  precursor  of  the  great  conflagration
which  will  consume  the  wrorld — even  the
sea  itself — at  the  Great  Day  (2  Pet.  iii.
10).  Compare  Jer.  li.  32,  where  the  fire
of  God  burning  Babylon  is  described
as  burning  its  lakes  and  moats  [Words-
worth"].

"  On  Prague's  proud  arch  the  fires  of  ruin  glow,
His  blood-dyed  waters  murmuring  far  below."

[Campbell.']

By  whom?  The  time  is  come  when
men  will  ask  this  question  in  relation  to
the  Church.  How  can  it  stand  1  The
numbers  are  decreasing  viewed  in  rela-
tion to  the  growth  of  the  population.  By
whom  shall  it  arise  1  Not  by  statesmen,
scientists,  ritualists,  and  priests.  A  new
order  of  men  are  required  to  enable  the


Church  to  stand.     Heaven  raise  them
up  [Dr  Thomas]  !

"More  things  are  wrought  by  prayei
Than  this  world  dreams  of      [Tennyson],

Vers.  7 — 9.  Judgments.  They  are  all
exactly  framed  as  it  were  by  line  and
measure  (Dan.  v.  27).  Justice  is
essential  to  God  ;  he  may  as  soon  cease
to  be  God,  as  cease  to  be  just ;  hence  he
is  called  the  righteous  judge  (Gen.  xviii.
25),  and  the  just  Lord,  who  will  do  no
iniquity  (Zeph.  iii.  5).  He  is  just  in
and  of  himself,  and  just  in  his
laws,  just  in  his  decrees,  just  in  the
execution  of  those  decrees,  just  in  the
government  of  the  world,  just  in  his  re-
wards, and  just  in  his  judgments  ;  he  is
not  only  righteous  in  some,  but  in  all
his  ways  (Ps.  cxlv.  17)  [Hall].

Vers.  10,  11.  Latimer  spoke  his  mind
before  Henry  VIII.  and  was  complained
of  by  his  enemies.  One  of  them
kneeled  before  the  king  and  accused  him
of  seditious  doctrines.  Latimer  turned
first  to  his  accuser  and  asked,  "  What
form  of  preaching  would  you  appoint
me  to  preach  before  a  king  1 "  No
answer  was  given  to  this  and  several
other  questions.  Then  he  turned  to  the
king,  confessed  his  unworthiness  to
preach,  declared  that  he  was  called  to
it,  but  would  give  way  to  his  betters.
"But  if   your  Grace  allow  me  fox  a


312  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  [chap.  vm.


preacher,  I  would  desire  your  Grace  to  but  confinement  in  the  Tower  for  him

discharge  my  conscience,  give  me  leave  [Wliitecross].

to  frame  my  discourse  according  to  mine  Ver.    1 4.     Herdman.      In    Palestine

audience."     The  king  was  pleased  with  at  the  present   day  none  but  the  very

Latimer's  words,  who  was  congratulated  poor  consent  to  be  herdmen,  and  only

by  his  friends,  and  told  with  tears  in  such   gather  sycamore   fruit   or  use  it

their  eyes  that  they  looked  for  nothing  [The  Land  and  Book].


CHAPTER  VIIL


Critical  Notes.]  The  visions  continued  from  ch.  vii.  9.  2.  Summer]  Late  fruit,  fully  ripe
(2  Sam.  xvi.  1  :  Mic.  vii.  1) ;  a  symbol  of  a  people  ripe  for  judgment.  3.  Howl.]  Songs  of  joy
(ch.  vi.  5  :  2  Sam.  xix.  36)  would  be  turned  into  lamentation  on  account  of  the  dead.
Silence]  Lit.  silently,  not  with  customary  rites  and  professional  mourners ;  the  terror  of  God  and
dread  of  the  enemy  would  make  them  afraid  to  speak.  *•  An  admonition  to  bow  beneath  the  over-
whelming severity  of  the  judgment  of  God,  as  in  Zeph.  i.  7  (cf.  Heb.  ii.  20  and  Zech.  ii.  17)."
4.  Hear]  The  nobles  hated  reproof.  Swallow]  Heb.  gape  after,  earnestly  desire  (Job  vii.  2) ;  pant
after  goods  as  wild  beasts  for  prey.  They  sought  to  rid  the  land  of  all  the  poor.  5  and  6  describe
the  method  of  doing  this.  New  moon]  Festivals  were  impatiently  kept ;  they  begrudged  the  regu-
lar holiday  and  suspension  of  trade  (Num.  xxviii.  11:2  Kings  iv.  23).  Set  forth]  Lit.  open  out
to  sell.  Falsifying]  Heb.  perverting  the  balances  of  deceit  (Hos.  xii.  7).  Money  was  weighed.  They
increased  the  price  both  ways,  dishonestly  trading  and  breaking  the  command  (Deut.  xxv.  13 — 15).
6.  Poor]  Made  so  poor  that  he  was  necessitated  to  sell  himself  for  silvei,  which  he  owed,  or  a  pair  of
shoes,  which  he  could  not  pay  for.  7.  Sworn]  to  punish  such  conduct,  by  the  pride,  by  Himself
(Hos.  v.  5 ;  vii.  10).  Forget,  i.  e.  leave  unpunished.  8.  Punishment]  will  be  so  great  that  the  earth
shall  quake,  its  inhabitants  mourn,  and  the  globe  will  rise  and  fall  like  a  flood,  9.  Noon]  Darkness
then  an  emblem  of  great  calamities  (Jer.  xv.  9  :  Ezek.  xxxii.  7 — 10) ;  a  type  of  judgments  upon
ungodly  people  and  of  the  great  day  of  accounts.  10.  Feasts]  will  be  turned  into  mourning  ;  bald-
ness as  a  sign  of  it  (Is.  iii.  24  :  Jer.  xlviii.  37).  Mourning  deep  as  that  for  the  death  of  an  only  son
(Jer.  vi.  26  :  Zech.  xii.  10).  11.  Famine]  The  light  and  comfort  of  God's  word  shall  fail;  they  de-
spise now  what  they  shall  look  for  in  vain  then.  12.  Wander]  Lit.  reel,  like  drunken  men.  Seek]
under  pressure  of  calamity.  13.]  Hunger  and  thirst  so  great  that  the  strongest  give  way  and  faint,
how  much  more  the  weak  (Is.  xl.  30).  14.  SinJ  The  calves  by  which  Samaria  sins.  God]  The  other
golden  calf  at  Dan  (1  Kings  xii.  26—30).  Livethl  Formula  of  the  oath.  Swearing  by  these  objects
shows  that  young  men  and  maidens  journeyed  to  Beersheba  and  worshipped  idols.  The  ground  of
all  their  misery  was  forsaking  God,  who  commands  all  appeals  to  be  made  to  Himself  as  the  Creator
and  Governor  of  all  things  (Deut.  vi.  13  ;  x.  20).

HOMILETICS.
A  Basket  op  Summer  Fruit. —  Verses  1,  2.

Under  a  new  type  the  final  subversion  of  the  state  is  represented.  As  summer
fruits  portend  ripe  harvests,  so  the  sins  of  Israel  ripened  them  for  destruction.
Taking  the  basket  of  fruit  as  an  emblem  of  ripeness  for  judgment,  notice —

I.  A  ripeness  which  is  gradual.  Nothing  is  matured  at  once.  There  must
be  seed-time  before  harvests  ;  buds  and  flowers  before  fruits.  Individual  cha-
racter is  of  slow  growth.  Seeds  of  national  ills  ripen  secretly.  The  interval
between  the  spring  and  the  reaping  time  is  defined  in  nature  and  religion.  II.  A
ripeness  which  is  ruinous.  Men  grow  in  wickedness  as  well  as  in  holiness;
ripen  for  destruction  as  well  as  for  salvation.  God's  dealings  influence  according
to  moral  condition.     The  sun  which  melts  the  wax  hardens  the  clay.     The  dew


chap.  viii.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  313


and  rain  water  the  earth,  but  injure  the  fruit.  God's  mercies  and  judgments
ripen  for  glory  or  for  shame.  A  condition  which  is  spiritually  rotten  can  produce
nothing  but  decay  and  untimely  end.  Some  people  are  like  stubble  laid  out  to
dry  in  the  sun  and  ripen  for  the  fire.  "  They  shall  be  devoured  as  stubble  fully
dry."  III.  A  ripeness  which  terminates  existence.  "The  end  is  come  upon
my  people."  In  summer  nothing  more  is  to  be  done  but  reap  the  crops.  Good  or
bad,  the  time  is  come  and  it  must  be  cut  down.  God's  dealings  with  Israel  were
completed.  They  had  neglected  to  reform.  Their  harvest  was  past  and  their  sum-
mer ended.  A  period  comes  when  God  no  longer  spares  a  people.  The  fruit
must  be  gathered  and  devoured  by  the  enemy.  The  days  are  fulfilled  and  the
end  is  come  (Lam.  iv.  18).  "An  end  is  come,  the  end  is  come;  it  watcheth
for  thee  ;  behold,  it  is  come."

Fruit  from  the  Heavenly  Orchard.

We  may  derive  from  these  words  the  following  lessons.  1.  God  gives  fruit.
"The  fruit  of  the  Spirit,"  &c.  "  The  tree  of  Life  that  beareth  all  manner  of  precious
fruit."  2.  God's  fruit  is  ripe.  "It  is  summer  fruit."  The  fruit  of  sin  is  sour;
sweet  to  the  taste,  but  bitter  afterwards — "  pleasures  of  sin  for  a  season."  Hence —
3.  God's  fruit  is  wholesome,  like  all  ripe  fruit,  regulating  and  adjusting  food  of
other  sort.  Christianity  is  a  grand  controlling  and  regulating  force.  The  soil
that  grows  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  cannot  nourish  growths  of  an  opposite  charac-
ter. 4.  God's  fruit  is  satisfying".  Even  ripe  fruit  is  not  long  satisfying.  Law-
ful pleasures  do  not  bring  contentment.  The  fruit  that  the  soul  craves  grows  not
in  earthly  orchards.  5.  God's  fruit  is  sustaining.  Certain  kinds  of  fruit  will
appease  appetite  for  awhile  without  any  sustentation.  The  fruit  of  God  imparts
strength  that  is  permanent ;  in  care,  sickness,  bereavement,  and  death.  6.  God's
fruit  is  stimulating'.  It  is  the  fruit  of  the  vine,  "  the  true  vine"  yielding  " the
best  wine."  It  is  the  stimulus  of  waning  powers  ;  prompts  to  action  where
energies  would  otherwise  be  dormant.  7.  God's  fruit  is  plentiful.  "  A  basket  of
fruit,"  always  replenished,  multiplying  in  the  use,  like  the  "  twelve  baskets "  of
fragments,  &c.  The  basket  always  filled.  There  is  no  dearth  in  God's  orchard  ;  no
grudging  in  his  supplies ;  enough  for  all,  everywhere,  at  all  times.  8.  God's  fruit
is  cheap.     "  Wine  and  milk,  without  money  and  without  price,"  &c.  [The  Study].

A  Day  of  Sadness. —  Verse  3.

The  prophet  now  describes  the  greatness  of  approaching  judgments  to  rouse
attention  to  a  sense  of  danger— universal  mourning  and  universal  death  would
afflict  the  land.  1.  'Temple  music  would  be  turned  into  grief.  The  songs  and
sacred  solemnities  of  the  temple  would  cease.  Mirthful  music  would  end  in
grievous  misery.  Sin  turns  the  greatest  joy  into  the  greatest  heaviness,  the  loudest
music  into  the  bitterest  howlings.  If  men  do  not  sing  in  a  day  of  grace,  they  will
howl  in  a  time  of  wrath.  "  Those  that  will  not  serve  God  with  gladness  of  heart,"
says  an  old  author,  "  in  the  abundance  of  all  things,  shall  serve  him  in  sadness  of
heart  in  the  want  of  all  things  (Deut.  xxviii.  47,  48)."  2.  Mortality  would  be  pre-
valent in  every  place.  Sin  brings  sword,  pestilence,  and  famine  (Ezek.  xiv.  21);
sweeps  away  its  thousands,  and  fills  the  land  with  lamentation  and  mourning.
History  tells  of  populations  carried  away  by  Divine  judgments  like  leaves  before
the  wind  (Is.  lxiv.  6).  The  picture  in  Israel  is  a  type  of  many  a  fact  in  providence.
Many  dead — dead  in  every  place  and  buried  in  common  pits,  without  customary
rites.  Grief  could  find  no  vent  to  relieve  itself.  The  sorrow  could  not  wear  away
in  utterance.  The  burden  was  intolerable  and  the  silence  universal.  The  living
and  the  dead  were  solemn  as  the  grave.  How  sad  that  everlasting  death  which
awaits  an  ungodly  race  1

"  Death  loves  a  shining  mark,  a  signal  blow"  [Young}.


314


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  AMOS.


[chap.  VIII.


HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Ver.  1.  A  basket,  &c.  1.  A  type
of  God's  goodness  in  nature.  He  gives
fruit  in  due  season,  in  rich  abundance,
&c.  He  never  left  himself  without  a
witness  (Acts  xiv.  17).  2.  A  type  of
human  diligence  in  co-operating  with
God.  Beasts  eat  without  industry.
Man  has  to  till  the  ground  and  cultivate
the  trees.  The  fruit  must  be  gathered
and  the  basket  made.  If  we  do  not
work,  neither  can  we  eat.  "  There  is  a
basket  of  fruit  which  is  so  ripe,  that  it
has  been  gathered,  and  it  is  a  sort  of
fruit — summer  fruit — which  will  not
keep,  which  will  not  lay  by  until
winter,  but  must  be  eaten  at  once.  It
teaches — 1.  That  there  is  a  ripeness  in
God's  purposes.  God  always  times  his
decrees.  In  the  first  and  second  advent
of  Jesus  Christ.  In  our  own  personal
affairs  God  gives  deliverance  not  in  thy
time,  but  in  his.  Trust  him  for  mercy
in  its  time,  &c.  2.  That  nations  have
their  ripeness,  and  that  when  they  come
to  their  ripeness  they  must  be  destroyed.
Sceptics  may  entertain  doubts  concern-
ing individual  transgression  and  per-
sonal punishment,  but  history  proves
that  national  judgments  have  been  sent
from  God.  Take  Babylon,  Greece,  and
Rome.  We  as  a  people  are  guilty,  and
should  not  be  proud  and  self-righteous.
3.  That  there  is  a  ripeness  of  men  as
well  as  of  summer  fruit.  With  the
righteous  a  time  of  ripening  for  heaven,
a  ripening  in  knowledge,  experience,  and
spirituality.  With  the  ungodly  a  ripen-
ing in  the  love  of  sin  and  hardness  of
heart,  a  ripening  for  eternal  judgment !
Take  heed  !  Be  renewed  in  heart  and
ripened  for  eternal  glory  "  [Spurgeo?i\.

Vers.  1,  2.  The  manner  in  which
the  truth  is  conveyed  to  the  prophet's
mind   by   different   representations    re-


minds us  of  the  course  pursued  towards
the  apostles  by  the  Lord,  and  teaches
that  we  should  endeavour  to  answer
the  purpose  of  God,  and  to  let  the  truth
sink  deeply  into  our  minds,  that  being
clearly  understood  it  may  powerfully
affect  us,  and  make  us  ready  to  impart
it  to  others  \Ryan\

First,  those  nearest  destruction  are
often  the  most  negligent  and  stupid.
They  need  to  be  told  often  of  their
danger  and  roused  to  diligence.  God
warns  them  often  and  leaves  them  with-
out excuse.  Second,  the  servants  of
God  have  need  to  be  instructed  that
they  may  warn  others.  Atten'cion  to  the
revelation  must  be  quickened.  Behold.
The  vision  itself  must  be  seen  and  ex-
plained. "What  seest  thouT  They
must  declare  nothing  but  what  they
have  received.  "  Thus  hath  the  Lord
God  showed  unto  me."

Meditate  carefully  on  the  object  pre-
sented to  view.  It  suggests  the  idea  of
a  tree  which  had  been  planted,  tended,
watered  with  the  rain  and  dew ;  it  had
blossomed,  budded,  brought  forth  fruit ;
its  work  was  done ;  the  fruit  was
gathered ;  no  pains  of  the  gardener,  no
change  in  the  season,  no  influence  of
the  sun,  could  now  alter  the  character
of  that  fruit.  At  previous  times,  when
the  leaves  and  blossom  came  forth,  there
would  be  room  for  anxiety  or  hope;
there  would  afterwards  be  room  for
doubt  as  to  its  future  size  and  goodness,
according  to  its  progress  during  the
weeks  of  its  growth, — but  now  all  was
over.  They  were  either  apples  of  Sodom,
or  pleasant  to  the  eye  and  good  for  food.
Now  was  the  time  not  to  cherish  their
growth,  but  to  try  their  quality.  "  The
end  is  come  "  [Byan\.


HOMILETICS.

The  Deeds  of  Covetousness. —  Verses  4 — 6.

After  describing  the  calamities,  Amos  now  sets  forth  the  ground  of  these  calami-
ties. Israel  had  broken  both  tables  of  the  law  and  sinned  against  great  light  and
loye.     They  sought  to  secure  themselves  in  irreligion  towards  God  and  unright*


chap.  Vill.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   AMOS.  316


eous  conduct  towards  men.  In  their  oppressive  and  covetous  rapacity  they  are
summoned  to  hear  threa'tenings  against  their  cruel  deeds.  " Hear  this"  Their
covetousness  is  seen — ■

I.  In  cruelty  to  men.  An  avaricious  man  is  naturally  a  selfish  man.  He
makes  laws  of  his  own  and  regards  not  the  interests  of  others.  He  isolates  him-
self from  the  common  brotherhood,  and  constitutes  himself  an  all-absorbing  and
enlarging  circle.  1.  Oppression  of  the  poor.  "0  ye  that  swallow  up  the  needy."
They  panted  for  the  needy  as  wild  beasts  for  prey,  and  sought  to  rid  the  land  of
the  poor.  Those  who  devour  the  poor  without  pity  or  compassion  are  inhuman
in  their  disposition.  They  have  iron  teeth,  vent  their  wantonness  where  there  is
no  power  to  resist,  and  eat  up  the  people  "  as  they  eat  bread  "  (Ps.  xiv.  4).  "  There
is  a  generation,  whose  teeth  are  as  swords,  and  their  jaw- teeth  as  knives,  to  devour
the  poor  from  off  the  earth,  and  the  needy  from  among  men."  2.  Selling  and  en-
slaving the  poor.  "  Buy  the  poor  for  silver."  The  nobles  of  Israel  oppressed  the
needy,  that  they  might  eventually  trade  in  them.  They  gained  the  purses,  and
then  sought  the  persons  of  their  bondmen.  Corn  was  dear,  and  they  resolved  to
make  merchandise  of  men.  The  mean  and  selfish  estimate  their  fellows  at  a  cor-
temptible  price.  "A  little  silver  or  a  pair  of  shoes."  Human  nature  is  insulted,
the  rights  of  property  disregarded,  and  the  laws  of  liberty  trampled  upon,  by  greedv
oppressors.  "He  that  oppresseth  the  poor  reproacheth  his  Maker;  but  he  that
honoureth  him  hath  mercy  on  the  poor."  II.  In  contempt  for  the  worship  of  God.
"  When  will  the  new  moon  be  gone,  that  we  may  sell  corn  1 "  They  kept  the
Sabbath  with  a  weary,  impatient  spirit.  Eeligious  services  were  too  great  restraints
upon  them.  "  When  will  this  service  be  over,  that  we  may  attend  to  business
again?"  Covetous  men  are  formal  and  hypocritical  in  their  devotion.  Their
hearts  are  in  the  mart,  the  field,  and  the  ways  of  "buying,  and  selling,  and  getting
gain."  The  world  does  not  tire  them,  they  are  not  anxious  for  a  day  of  rest.
Keligion  is  irksome.  It  interrupts  worldly  pursuits  and  is  often  turned  into  means
of  traffic.  Men  crowd  the  temple  with  tables  like  the  money-changers,  and  con-
vert the  Sanctuary  into  a  palace  of  Mammon.  They  reject  the  true  God  and
worship  a  false  one.  They  begrudge  time  for  Christian  worship,  and  like  Doeg  are
detained  before  the  Lord,  when  they  long  to  be  in  the  counting-house.  "  Ye  said
also,  Behold,  what  a  weariness  is  it ! "  III.  In  fraudent  trade  with  men.  If
men  grudge  time  for  God,  they  will  grudge  right  to  man ;  if  they  resist  the  claims
of  piety,  they  will  soon  fall  into  tricks  of  dishonesty.  These  tricks  are  manifold.
A  few  are  given  in  the  text.  1.  False  weights  and  measures.  In  two  ways  they
defrauded  the  poor — (a)  diminishing  the  measure,  "  making  the  ephah  small ; "  and
(b)  increasing  the  price,  "  and  the  shekel  great."  They  doubly  deceived,  by  paring
down  the  quantity  and  by  uneven  balances  obtained  more  silver  for  what  they
sold.  This  was  disobedience  to  the  law  (Lev.  xix.  35,  36),  and  violation  of  the
conditions  on  which  they  held  the  land  (Deut.  xxv.  13 — 15).  In  robbing  God
you  indulge  a  propensity  to  injure  man ;  in  giving  less  and  taking  more  than  you
ought  you  bring  a  double  curse — deprivation  of  blessing  and  increase  of  pains
which  pierce  the  soul  with  many  sorrows.  "  Take  heed  and  beware  of  covetous-
ness." 2.  Adulteration  of  food.  "  Sell  the  refuse  of  the  wheat."  The  bran  or
unfilled  grain  which  fell  through  the  sieve.  The  worst  was  sold  and  the  best  paid
for.  The  poor  are  victimized  now.  Short  weight  and  short  measure  are  too  com-
mon in  England.  Almost  every  article  of  food  is  adulterated,  and  even  poison
sold  for  bread  !  Men  are  hard-hearted,  dishonest,  inexorable  as  the  taskmasters  of
Egypt,  in  driving  bargains  !  We  are  influenced  by  the  spirit  of  gain,  and  worship
too  much  in  the  temple  of  Mammon.  Every  nation  has  its  idol,  and  money  is  our
god.     "  The  love  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  evih"

The  Curse  of  Covetousness. —  Verses  7 — 10.
Good  men  would  rather  be  poor  by  providence  than  rich  by  sin.     He  that


316  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  [chap.  vin.


becomes  rich  by  unlawful  means,  that  hasteth  to  be  rich,  may  haste  to  his  ruin,
and  shall  not  be  innocent  or  unpunished  (Prov.  xxviii.  20  :  1  Tim.  vi.  9 — 11).
Covetousness,  more  than  any  other  sin,  brings  its  own  punishment.  But  in  addi-
tion to  this  God  often  visits  it  with  positive  infliction,  as  in  the  text.

I.  The  certainty  of  the  curse.  "The  Lord  hath  sworn."  If  oaths  among
men  confirm  a  promise,  does  not  God's  oath  indicate  immutable  purpose?  He
swears  that  he  will  never  forget  any  of  their  works.  All  men's  doings  are  known
to  God.  No  lapse  of  times  nor  change  of  circumstances  veil  them  from  his  omni-
scient glance.  Iniquity  is  never  forgotten  until  forgiven  in  Christ.  Flight  of
years  may  efface  the  memory,  but  cannot  ward  off  the  fruit  of  transgression.  God
can  sooner  cease  to  be,  than  forget  to  punish  the  wickedness  of  men.  He  may
seem  to  forget,  but  a  faithful  record  is  kept,  an  immutable  purpose  is  formed,  and
eventually  justice  will  give  its  reward.  "  Woe,  and  a  thousand  woes,  to  the  man
who  is  cut  off  by  an  oath  of  God,  from  all  benefit  of  pardoning  mercy."  II.  The
terribleness  of  the  curse.  Mark  the  emphasis  of  the  question — "  shall  not  ?  "  The
appeal  is  to  human  consciences.  How  can  it  be  otherwise?  Great  sins  bring
grievous  judgments.  1.  Curse  like  an  earthquake — will  bring  terror  and  consterna-
tion. The  land  is  represented  as  shaking,  returning  to  primeval  chaos,  and  suffer-
ing under  the  weight  of  sin.  Wicked  men  are  a  curse  to  the  earth,  and  all
creatures  testify  indignation  against  their  conduct  (Ps.  lx.  1,2:  Rom.  viii.  22).
"  For  this  shall  the  earth  mourn  and  the  heavens  above  be  black."  2.  Curse  like
a  flood — will  rise  up  and  deluge  the  land;  calamities  shall  overflow  them.  Judg-
ments will  be  like  the  breaking  forth  of  waters.  Floods  of  sorrow,  like  the  deluge
of  old,  sweep  impenitent  sinners  from  the  earth.  General  calamities  affect  insensate
earth,  until  it  casts  out  or  drowns  its  wicked  inhabitants.  "  The  Lord  God  of
Hosts  is  he  that  toucheth  the  land  and  it  shall  melt,  and  all  that  dwell  therein
shall  mourn ;  and  it  shall  rise  up  wholly  like  a  flood,  and  shall  be  drowned  as  by
the  flood  of  Egypt."  III.  The  suddenness  of  the  curse.  "The  sun  to  go  down
at  noon."  It  is  not  a  gradual,  a  natural,  but  unlooked-for,  untimely  sinking.  So
the  sun  of  prosperity  rises  and  shines  upon  the  wicked  in  all  its  splendour ;  but
God  darkens  the  sky  in  the  clear  day.  The  darkness  is  blacker  in  contrast  with
the  light ;  the  sorrow  the  sadder  when  it  succeeds  festive  joy.  Thus  prosperity
ends  in  ruin  and  sinful  prospects  fade  away.  "  Her  sun  is  gone  down  while  it  was
yet  day  :  she  hath  been  ashamed  and  confounded."  IV.  The  consequences  of  the
curse.  Prosperity  is  turned  into  misery,  and  mirth  into  mourning.  Their  com-
mon and  holy  feasts,  their  domestic  and  temple  songs,  into  lamentation.  1.  Mourn-
ing universal.  "  Every  one  mourn  "  (ver.  8).  Rich  and  poor  without  exception.
Judgments  were  prevalent  as  the  sins  (Hos.  iv.  3),  penetrated  all  ranks  and  suffered
none  to  escape.  2.  Mourning  with  ceremonial  rites.  Instead  of  gay  attire  they
would  put  on  sackcloth.  It  was  not  the  time  for  ornaments  and  line  clothing.
Baldness  would  be  upon  every  head.  They  would  either  shave  in  sorrow,  or  pull
the  hair  off  their  heads  in  anguish  (Ezra  ix.  3).  Inward  distress  reveaied  itself  in
outward  signs.  3.  Mourning  most  bitter.  "  As  the  mourning  of  an  only  son."
The  death  of  an  only  son  was  regarded  as  the  most  mournful  of  events.  In  Egypt
one  universal  cry  arose  from  the  death  of  the  firstborn.  Parents  may  lose  one  out
of  many  and  be  comforted  in  the  possession  of  others.  But  the  loss  of  an  onl%
child  can  never  be  repaired.  "Make  thee  mourning  as  for  an  only  son,  most
bitter  lamentation :  for  the  spoiler  shall  suddenly  come  upon  us."  4.  Mourning
without  relief.  It  is  not  an  eclipse,  but  a  going  down  of  the  sun.  The  duration
of  sorrow  is  unto  posterity,  tha  end  of  the  kingdom.  The  clouds  will  not  vanish
soon  away.  The  wrath  of  God  would  abide  upon  them.  When  they  looked  for
an  end,  the  day  would  still  be  bitter.  At  evening  time  sometimes  light  will  arise ;
but  to  the  impenitent  the  day  grows  darker,  and  the  night  will  be  darkest  of  alL
Bitterness  will  be  the  issue,  and  the  end  the  beginning  of  sorrows.  *  What  will
ye  do  in  the  end  thereof?"  (Jer.  v.  31).  "This  shall  ye  have  at  my  hand,  you
shall  lie  down  in  sorrow.**


CHAP.    VIII.]


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:   AMOS.


317


HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Vers.  4 — 6.  Covetous  men.  1.  Are
cruel  to  others.  2.  Selfish  in  their  aims.
3.  Dishonest  in  their  conduct.  4.  Weary
in  religious  worship.  They  are  never
at  rest  in  their  minds,  never  satisfied  in
their  possessions,  and  never  idle  in  their
pursuits.

The  value  worldly  men  set  upon  the
poor.  Dross  and  dung,  the  filth  and
offscouring  of  society  (1  Cor.  iv.  13).
Contrast  this  with  God's  judgment  of
the  poor.  He  esteems  them  the  excel-
lent of  the  earth  (Ps.  xvi.  3) ;  the  glory
of  the  world  (Is.  iv.  5) ;  and  too  good
for  ungrateful  men  (Heb.  xi.  38).  If
men  make  a  prey  of  the  poor,  God  will
make  an  example  of  them.

Sin  in  wrong  measures  once  begun
is  unbroken.  All  sin  perpetuates  itself.
It  is  done  again  because  it  has  been
done  before.  But  sins  of  a  man's  daily
occupation  are  continued  of  necessity,
beyond  the  simple  force  of  habit  and
the  ever-increasing  dropsy  of  covetous-
ness.  To  interrupt  sin  is  to  risk  detec-
tion. But  then  how  countless  the  sins
which  their  poor  slaves  must  needs
commit  hourly,  whenever  the  occasion
comes  !  And  yet,  although  among  us
human  law  recognizes  the  Divine  law,
and  annexes  punishment  to  its  breach,
covetousness  sets  both  at  nought.
When  human  law  was  enforced  in  a
city  after  a  time  of  negligence  scarcely
a  weight  was  found  to  be  honest.  Prayer
went  up  to  God  on  the  Sabbath  and
fraud  up  to  God  on  the  other  six  days
\_Pusey\.

Yer.  7.  The  excellency  of  Jacob.  By
this  title  he  would  teach — 1.  That
nothing  beside  God  can  make  a  people
truly  excellent,  enjoy  what  dignity  and
excellency  they  will.  2.  That  it  is
great  ingratitude  of  a  people,  when  being
excellent  through  him,  they  do  not
acknowledge  him,  nor  walk  answerable
[Hutcheson].

The  favour  and  presence  of  God  with
a  people  is  the  glory  and  excellency  of
a  people.  It  is  not  corn,  wine,  women,
health,  wealth,  or  multitude,  that  make
a  nation   happy,    for  then   Turks   and


Tartars,  Barbarians  and  Indians,  would

excel  God's  people,  for  they  abound  in

these  external   comforts ;  but  happy  is

that  people  whose  God  is  the  Lord  (Ps.

cvi.  20  ;  cxlviii.  14  :  Jer.  ii.  11  :  Luke

ii.    32).     Hence    Moses  glories  in  this

above  all  other  privileges  (Deut.  iv.  7,

8).  The  fruition  and  enjoyment  of  God's

favour  is  the  life  of  our  lives,  and  the

honour  of  our  honours ;  without  this  we

may  write  Ichabod  upon  all   that  we

have.     Hence  the   greater  is   their  sin

who  dishonour  him  with  sin  and  turn

the    glory    which    he   hath    put   upon

them  into  shame.     This  makes  the  Lord

to    swear    that  he   will   strip    them  of

their  privileges,  and  make  them  naked

as  in  the   day   when   they   were   born

[Hall].

Vers.  8 — 10.  This  will  be  a  sudden
ruin,  a  check  in  the  midst  of  apparent
prosperity,  irresistible  as  the  waters  of
a  flood,  sudden  as  the  setting  of  the  sun
at  noon,  gloomy  and  dreadful  as  a  dark-
ness which  should  at  once  succeed  to
the  light  of  a  clear  day.  Those  feasts,
which  had  been  the  instruments  of  their
pleasure  and  the  cause  of  much  of  their
sin,  would  be  succeeded  by  mourning  ;
luxurious  and  licentious  music  would
give  place  to  sounds  of  bitter  lamenta-
tion. Instead  of  purple  and  fine  linen,
sackcloth  would  be  their  clothing,  and
delicious  ointments  and  costly  tiaras
would  be  followed  by  baldness  [Ryan].

1.  To  any  man  the  sun  sets  at  noon,
when  he  is  suddenly  snatched  away  by
death  in  the  very  midst  of  his  life.
2.  When  he  is  suddenly  destroyed  in
the  midst  of  earthly  prosperity.  3.  "  But
it  has  still  wider  application.  When
the  Lord  shall  come  to  judgment,  at  a
time  when  the  world,  in  its  self-se-
curity, looketh  not  for  him  (cf.  Matt,
xxiv.  37),  this  earth's  sun  will  set  at
noon,  and  the  earth  be  covered  with
darkness  in  bright  daylight.  Every
judgment  that  falls  upon  an  ungodly
people  or  kingdom,  as  the  ages  roll  away,
is  a  harbinger  of  the  approach  of  the
final  judgment"  [Keil],

Changes  in  human  destiny  and  ea>


818  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS,  [chap,  vm


perience.     Clear  days,  dark  days,  and  sure  and  brings  pain ;  liberty,  and  brings

bitter  days.  bondage ;  happiness,  and  brings  misery.

Sin  is  a  bitter  thing.     Bitter  in  itself  Its  misery  is  personal  and  eternal,  dark-

and  its  consequences.     It  promises  plea-  ness  without  day,  sorrow  without  relief.

HOMILETICS.

A  Famine  op  the  Word. —  Verses  11 — 14.

The  prophet  now  predicts  far  greater  evils  than  temporal  judgments.  A  famine
of  the  word,  one  of  the  saddest  events  that  could  happen  a  Divinely  taught  people.
This  is  the  last  and  sorest  of  all  calamities.  When  God  will  not  speak  to  men  by
his  servants  and  word  it  is  a  sign  that  he  will  punish  and  reject  them.

I.  The  word  of  God  is  the  true  nourishment  of  man.  Every  kind  of  life
requires  nutriment.  Man  has  a  higher  life  than  appetite  and  sensation.  His
spiritual  nature  is  sustained  by  the  word  of  God  alone.  A  real  communication
from  God  is  essential  to  life.  Man  has  ever  longed  for  this.  Speak,  Lord  !  has
always  been  the  cry  of'  humanity.  God  has  spoken.  His  word  satisfies  the  crav-
ings of  the  heart  and  solves  the  problems  of  life.  Here  is  wisdom  for  the  ignorant
and  righteousness  for  the  guilty ;  comfort  for  the  sorrowful  and  redemption  for  the
lost ;  milk  for  babes  and  strong  meat  for  mature  age.  It  is  meat  indeed  and  drink
indeed.  "  I  have  esteemed  the  words  of  his  mouth  more  than  my  necessary  food."
"  Thy  words  were  found  and  I  did  eat  them."  II.  Contempt  of  the  word  of
God  may  bring  a  famine  of  the  word.  "  I  will  send  a  famine."  God  had
raised  up  and  sent  prophets  to  the  people  ;  but  they  despised  religious  instruction,
profaned  God's  sanctuary,  and  persecuted  his  servants.  God  can  withhold  religious
privileges  and  leave  people  in  darkness  according  to  his  good  pleasure.  But  when
they  despise  the  word  he  will  withdraw  it.  He  will  cease  to  give  when  his  gifts
are  scorned ;  to  love,  when  his  love  is  contemned.  1.  With  individuals  there
is  often  a  famine  of  the  word.  A  person  for  a  long  time  enjoys  gospel  light  and
hears  the  Scriptures  explained  and  enforced.  He  trifles  with  these  advantages  and
heeds  not  the  word.  Circumstances  change,  business  calls  elsewhere,  and  in  foreign
lands  or  distant  colonies  he  finds  no  provision.  He  is  not  fed  with  the  bread  of
life.  Many  a  sick  chamber  has  been  embittered  and  many  a  dying  hour  darkened
by  the  remembrance  of  warnings  despised.  "  They  would  none  of  my  counsel :
they  despised  all  my  reproof"  (Pro v.  i.  24 — 31).  2.  In  the  sanctuary  there  is
often  a  famine  of  the  word.  When  the  gospel  is  rejected  and  ministers  silenced  ;
when  the  temple  is  profaned  by  worldly  influences,  and  religious  worship  becomes
a  wearisome  toil ;  God  will  take  his  blessings  away,  and  men  shall  know  the  price
by  seeking  them  and  shall  not  find  them.  The  seven  Churches  of  Asia  Minor  and
the  desolate  shore  of  Northern  Africa  are  solemn  examples  of  this.  3.  In  the
nation  God  can  send  a  famine  of  the  word.  Unto  the  Jews  were  committed  the
oracles  of  God.  They  were  highly  exalted  and  Divinely  instructed.  But  ungod-
liness crept  into  the  temple,  corruption  tainted  the  king,  and  violence  filled  the
land.  Direction  from  God  was  a  part  of  their  blessedness.  The  want  of  that
direction  has  now  left  them  a  wandering,  helpless  people.  In  their  distress  they
cry  as  of  old,  "  We  see  not  our  tokens,  there  is  not  one  prophet  more,  not  one  is
there  among  us  that  understandeth  any  more."  III.  A  famine  of  the  word  is
the  sorest  judgment  upon  any  nation.  It  is  a  miserable  state  to  cry  for  bread
and  have  none.  1.  A  famine  of  the  word  is  a  greater  evil  than  a  famine  of  bread.
The  soul  is  superior  to  the  body,  and  knowledge,  love,  and  truth  are  more  necessary
than  bread.  Man  does  not  live  by  bread  alone.  The  mind  requires  food  and  can-
not feed  upon  husks.  If  hunger  and  thirst  be  painful,  how  much  more  lack  of
spiritual  sustenance  !  Men  have  hunger,  though  not  always  conscious  of  it.  Appe-
tite will  be  quickened  in  trouble,  and  like  Saul  they  will  be  sore  distressed.    "  God


chap,  vm.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  319


is  departed  from  me  and  answereth  me  no  more,  neither  by  prophets,  nor  by  dreams."
2.  A  famine  of  the  word  will  cause  the  strongest  to  succumb.  "  The  fair  virgins
and  the  young  men  faint  for  thirst.  The  beauty  of  the  virgin  and  the  vigour  of
youth  decay  without  knowledge."  All  flesh  is  grass,  and  the  goodliness  thereof  as
the  flower  of  the  field.  But  God's  word  abides  in  its  blessed  nature  and  permanent
results.  Our  choicest  privileges  and  fairest  sex,  our  education  and  wealth,  are  vain
things.  The  withdrawment  of  God  will  cause  them  to  wither  away.  Physical
suffering  will  follow  spiritual  famine.  "  Whoso  despiseth  the  word  shall  be  de-
stroyed ;  yea,  poverty  and  shame  shall  be  to  him  that  refuseth  instruction."  3.  A
famine  of  the  word  will  leave  a  nation  in  a  deplorable  condition.  (1)  In  a  weak
condition.  When  men  faint  and  thirst  they  are  helpless.  Hungry  within  and
scorched  with  the  wrath  of  God  without,  who  can  stand  %  The  wicked  faint  and
sink  under  their  burdens,  and  have  not  a  shower  of  rain  to  quench  their  burning
thirst  (Ezek.  xxii.  24).  (2)  In  &  fallen  condition.  "They  shall  fall."  Fall  into
danger  and  the  darkness  of  idolatry  and  superstition.  Men  who  forsake  God  will
eventually,  like  Saul,  consult  wrong  sources  of  comfort  and  shall  not  find  it.  (3)
In  a  hopeless  condition.  "  Never  rise  up  again."  Without  the  word  we  are  with-
out bread  and  without  strength ;  without  comfort  and  without  hope.  When  the
word  goes,  God  himself  departs,  and  there  is  none  to  deliver  us.  "  God  hath  for-
saken him  j  persecute  and  take  him."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Vers.  11,  12.     The  judgment.     1.  Its  final  end.  2.  The  reason  of  the  calamity .

Author.     "I  will   send."     2.   Its   cer-  Idolatry  in  the  form  of  oaths  and  as-

tainty.     "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."     3.  Its  criptions  of  powers  of  life  to  the  golden

period.     "  The    days    come,"    suddenly  calves.     They  sware — 1.  By  the  sin  of

and  presently.    4.  Its  consequences,    (a)  Samaria.     2.  By  the  god  of  Dan.     3.

Hunger    and    thirst,     (b)     Exile    and  By  the  manner  of  Beersheba.   By  strange

anxiety,     (c)    Unsuccessful  search.     5.  gods  which  they  had   set  up  in   these

Its  importance.     "  Behold,"  calling  at-  places.     The  whole  land   was  infected

tention  to  its  direful  and  dreadful  nature,  by  a  popular,  degrading  system  which

"  Not  a  famine  of  bread,  nor  a  thirst  they  had  set  up,  and  which  was  the  cause

for  water,"  &c.  of  their  final  overthrow.

Yer.  13.  Natural  strength  falls  far  The  judgment  of  men  and  the  judg-
short  of  the  strength  God  gives  to  his  ment  of  God  differ  much.  That  which
weak  people  (Is.  xl.  29 — 31)  j  it  cannot  man  calls  here  by  way  of  honour  a  god,
endure  nor  carry  us  through  calamities  that  God  calls  by  way  of  dishonour  and
and  judgments  for  sin.  Young  men  detestation  a  sin  and  abominable  (Jer.
shall  faint,  and  those  whose  condition  xvi.  18;  xliv.  4).  Thus  the  world  calls
pleads  for  pity  and  respect  shall  not  be  riches  substance,  goods  happiness  (Ps.
spared.  "  In  this  hopelessness  as  to  all  iv.  6),  but  the  Holy  Ghost  calls  them
relief,  those  too  shall  fail  and  sink  under  vanities,  thorns,  husks,  unrighteous
their  sufferings,  in  whom  life  is  freshest  mammon.  That  which  is  highly  es-
and  strongest,  and  hope  most  buoyant.  teemed  in  the  sight  of  carnal,  super-
Hope  mitigates  any  sufferings.  When  stitious  men  is  an  abomination  in  the
hope  is  gone,  the  powers  of  life  which  sight  of  God  [Hall].
it  sustains  give  way  "  [Pusey].  Fall  fatally,  irrecoverably,  as  old  Eli

Yer.  14.     1.   The  calamity.    "  They  did  when  his  neck  was  broken,  but  first

shall  fall  and  never  rise  again."    Though  his    heart.     The   ten    tribes   for   their

a   man  fall,  if  he   has   hope  of  rising  idolatry    and    contempt    of    the   word

again,  it  brings  a  certain  degree  of  com-  never  returned  out  of  captivity.     From

fort  and  strength  :  but  Israel  fell  into  the  famine  foretold  what  could  follow

captivity   and   were   not    restored.     If  but  irreparable  ruin,  though  for  a  time

gentle  means  cure  not,  God  will  make  a  things  might  flourish  (Prov.  xxix.  1)  ]


*20  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  chap.  viii.


Of  that  spiritual  famine  let  us  be  most  may  not  be  now  exactly  with  them  as
impatient,  and  say  as  Luther  did,  I  with  Israel.  They  may  not  be  wholly
would  not  live  in  paradise  without  the  excluded  from  the  warning  voice  of  the
word ;  but  with  it  I  could  make  a  shift  prophets  of  God ;  but  the  time  ap-
to  live  in  hell  [Trapp].  proaches  when  repentance  will  no  more

Two   subjects   in   this   chap,   attract      be  preached  to,  or  be  available  for,  them,
our  notice.    1.  God's  ordinances  slighted.      When  no  deliverer  will  be  exhibited  to

Let  those  who  turn  the  Sabbath  into  a  their  view,  as  exalted  to  be  a  Prince  and

day  of  trade,  and  rob  their  fellow-men  a  Saviour,  to  give  repentance  and  remis-

of   their  comforts  by  their  extortions,  sion  of  sins,  their  souls  will  die  of  an

as  they  rob  God  of  his  honour  by  their  eternal  famine.     No   *  bread   of  life  "

heartless  worship,  see  their  own  portraits  shall  be    presented   to  them  for  food  !

in   the  address  of  the  prophet ;  blush  No  water  of  life  shall  quench  the  ilame

for  shame,  and  tremble  at  the  destiny  which  guilt  shall  enkindle  in  their  con-

of  those  who  continue  in  such  a  state,  sciences  [Cobbin].
2.  Religious  instruction  withdrawn.     It

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO   CHAPTER  VIII.

Vers.  1,  2.     God  hath  done  more  for  the  hand  of  the  oppressor;  and  be  not

Britain,  or  certainly  as  much,  as  he  did  faint-hearted  when  thou  sittest  in  jud<*-

for  Abraham's  race,  and  even  if  we  have  ment  (Eccles.  iv.  11).
not  rebelled  as  often  as  Israel  in  the  Yer.  5.     Sabbath.     In  God's  house

wilderness,  yet  our  little  rebellions  are  and  business  forget  thine  own ;  be  there

great  because  of  the  greatness  of  God's  as  a  member  of  the  Church,  not  of  the

goodness.     Oh,  Christians,  be  in  earnest  commonwealth.     Empty  thyself  of  this

that  the  land  may  be  filled  with  grace ;  world,   thou   art   conversant   with   the

that  the  torrent  of  our  iniquities  may  next.     Let  all  thy  senses  have  no  other

be  dried  up,  lest  haply  that    supposi-  object  but  God;  let  thine  ears  be  open,

tion  of  a  great  historian  should  at  last  but  thine  eyes  shut.     Eemember  God

become  a  fact,  and  the  New  Zealander  regards   the   heart  of  the   worshipper,

should   yet  sit  on  the  broken  arch  of  We   are    never   safe   till  we  love   him

London  Bridge,  wondering  that  so  great  with  our  whole  heart  whom  we  pretend

a  city  could  have  passed  away  [Spur-  to    worship    [Bp    Henshawe],     Deceit,

geon].  Commerce   is   a    providential   appoint-

Yer.  3.  Mirth.  Many  a  sigh  is  ment  for  our  social  intercourse  and
heaved  amid  the  loud  laughter  of  folly,  mutual  helpfulness.  It  is  grounded
Take  the  fullest  cup  of  earth's  best  joys.  with  men  upon  human  faith,  as  with
What  is  this  to  satisfy  desire,  to  allay  God  upon  Divine  faith.  Balances,
trouble,  to  meet  eternity?  Even  the  weights,  money,  are  its  necessary  ma-
present  end  of  this  short-lived  mirth  is  terials.  Impositions,  double-dealings ;
heaviness,  sometimes  so  intolerable,  that  the  hard  bargain  struck  with  self-com-
death  is  fled  to  as  the  cure  of  anguish ;  placent  shrewdness — this  is  the  false
and  to  avoid  the  fear  of  hell  the  balance  forbidden  alike  by  law  (Lev.
wretched  sinner  leaps  into  it.  At  best  xix.  35)  and  gospel  (Matt.  vii.  12).  Men
eternity  will  change  this  mirth,  when  may  commend  its  wisdom;  God  not
that  will  remain  which  would  be  the  only  forbids,  but  abominates  it  [Bridge].
most  desirable  riddance — the  sting  of  A  straight  line  is  the  shortest  in  morals
conscience,  as  enduring  as  the  pleasures  as  in  geometry  [Rahat],  Honesty  is
of  sin  were  momentary  [Bridge].  the  best  policy.

Ver.  4.  Oppression.  Yers.  4 — 6.     Covetoumess.    The  man

,.  «_  *  it  *    f   »»  roi  7  t  wno    se^s    his    heart   on    riches   must

44  Press  not  a  falling  man  too  far"  \Sha/cespeare\.  .,     .  .  ,  °    m     ,

u  necessarily  be  a  stranger  to  peace  and

Deliver  him  that  sufferoth  wrong  from  enjoyment.      Fear,  care,   anxiety,  sus-


chap,  vmj  BOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  321


picion,  and  jealousy  place   him   on   a  tions,  and  to  these  every  ear  is  open.

constant  rack.     To  the  toil  of  getting  is  But  it  is  in  vain.     We  now  need  expect

added  the  trouble  of  keeping  his  pelf,  no  new  revelation  from  God.     We  have

Avarice  is    insatiable   as  the  grave,  or  "his   word"   in    the    Scripture.      But

rather  as  a  gulf  without  bottom.     The  when  this  is  a  long  time  despised,  it  fol-

more  this  passion  is  supplied  with  fresh  lows  at  last  that  there  is  no  one   to

fuel    the    more    vehement    the    flame  preach  it,  and  without  a  living  preacher

[Rusticus].  it  is  finally  lost.     Or  if  it  is  preached  it

Vers.  9,  10.     Go  down.    So  use  pros-  has  no  power  to  console,  and  men  fail

perity  that   adversity    may   not   abuse  to  find  what  they  seek.     Thus  ensues

thee.     If,  in  the  one,  security  admits  a  longing  which  is  not  satisfied.     The

no  fears,  in  the  other,  despair  will  afford  result  is  otherwise  only  when  men  bow

no  hopes.     He  that  in  prosperity  can  in  penitence  under  the  Divine  threaten-

foreteU  a  danger,  can  in  adversity  fore-  ing  as  deserved,  and  under  the  Divine

see  deliverance  [F.  Quarles].  Spirit   inwardly  blame  themselves  for

Yers.  11 — 14.  When  Divine  judg-  previous  apostasy.  But  who  knows
ments  come  upon  a  race  which  has  for-  whether  man  will  find  room  for  repent-
gotten  and  forsaken  God,  the  once  de-  ance?  Before  he  reaches  that  point,
spised  and  hated  word  is  appreciated  while  he  is  in  the  midst  of  his  vain
again.  Men  "  hunger  and  thirst "  for  longing  for  comfort,  he  may  be  snatched
it,  but  often  at  first  not  in  the  right  away  [Lange].

way.     They  desire  as  speedily  as  pos-  «  There 's  not  a  joy  the  world  can  give  like  that

sible  to  hear  of  promises  and  consola-  it  takes  away."


CHAPTER  IX.


Critical  Notes.]  Amos  sees  God  standing,  fixed  in  purpose,  by  the  altar.  Posts]  Thresholds
(Is.  vi.  4).  Cut]  Human  victims  demanded;  wounded  with  fragments  of  broken  columns  (cf.  Ps.
lxviii.  21 ;  Hab.  iii.  13).  Last]  Those  left  cannot  escape.  2.]  The  Lord  everywhere  will  pursue
and  destroy  them  (ch.  ii.  14).  Hell]  Though  they  hide  themselves  in  the  deepest  holes  and  caverns
of  earth.  Climb]  the  greatest  heights  (Job  xx.  6,  7  ;  Jer.  Ii.  53).  3.  Carmel]  One  of  the  highest
mountains,  full  of  caves  and  forests  (Judg.  vi.  2 ;  1  Sam.  xiii.  6).  Serpent]  A  great  sea-monster
(Is.  xxvii.  1).  4.  Go]  willingly  into  captivity  ;  the  sword  shall  slay  them.  Set]  "  God  has  fixed  His
eye  upon  them,  *".  e.  has  taken  them  under  His  special  superintendence  (cf.  Jer.  xxxix.  12)  ;  not  to
shelter,  protect,  and  bless,  but  for  evil,  i.  e.  to  punish  them  "  [Keil].  5.]  God  is  omnipotent,  able  to
execute  judgment.  Toucheth]  Dissolves  the  stability  of  the  earth  (Ps.  xlvi.  7;  lxxv.  4).  6.
Stories]  Lit.  steps,  perhaps  in  allusion  to  Solomon's  throne  (1  Kings  x.  18,  19).  Troop]  Lit.  a  band
dividing  the  waters  above  from  those  beneath  the  heavens  (cf.  Gen.  vii.  11).  Others,  all  the  ele-
ments and  living  creatures,  called  the  host  (Gen.  ii.  1).  God  has  bound  the  waters  by  perpetual
decrees,  and  all  creatures  are  subject  to  his  control  (Ps.  ciii.  20,  21).  7.  As  children]  No  longer
highly  favoured  Israelites,  but  acting  like  Cushites.  Their  election  of  no  avail.  They  had  become
like  the  heathen,  accursed  as  Ham,  black  as  Ethiopians,  whose  skin  symbolized  spiritual  darkness
(Jer.  xiii.  23).  Brought  up]  Israel's  deliverance  from  Egypt  no  more  than  the  bringing  of  As-
syrians out  of  former  dwelling-places.  8.]  Election  therefore  will  not  save  the  idolatrous  nation.
God's  eye  turned  upon  them,  watched  in  order  to  punish  them  (Ps.  xxxiv.  14).  Not  utterly]
Threatening  is  mitigated;  grace  saves  a  few.  9.]  The  figure  explains  how.  For]  God  will  dis-
perse Israel,  shake  them  with  other  nations.  Wheat  and  chaff  are  mixed  together.  The  wicked,
chaff  and  dust,  fall  through  the  sieve  and  perish  ;  the  grain  (solid  grain),  the  godly,  will  be  pre-
served, every  one  shall  be  saved  (Matt.  xxii.  12;  Luke  xxii.  31).  10.  Sinners]  who  say  in  self-con-
fidence. Prevent]  To  meet  one  round  about,  i.  e.  to  come  from  every  side.  All  oelf-secured  sinners  shall
perish,  but  the  righteous  shall  be  delivered.  History  proves,  that  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  the  most
profane  and  idolatrous,  fell  first  by  the  Assyrians ;  that  Judah  continued  long  after,  enjoyed  con-
siderable prosperity  under  Hezekiah  and  Josiah ;  that  a  remnant  of  Israel,  left  by  Assyrians,  were

21


322  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  [chap.  ix.


united  to  Judah,  and  that  others  joined  them.  After  the  sifting-time  comes  the  prosperity.  11.
The  booth]  The  fallen  shepherd,  hut  (not  the  palace),  indicating  the  feeble  condition  of  the  family
and  nation.  "Wall  up]  the  rents ;  the  two  divided  nations  should  become  one.  Raise  up]  Enlarge
and  finish  the  building  as  of  old  (2  Sam.  vii.  11—16).  12.  They]  God's  people  possess  Edom,
the  enemies  of  the  Church,  as  the  gift  of  God  :  some,  "  the  remnant  of  Edom  and  of  all  the
heathen  that  are  or  shall  be  called  by  My  name,  shall  possess  Me,  the  Lord."  There  shall  be  a
grand  future  restoration.  13.]  The  land  shall  be  blessed.  The  plowman  overtakes  the  reaper.  One
harvest  shall  scarcely  be  gathered  before  preparation  shall  be  made  for  another;  a  fulfilment  of  Lev.
xxvi.  5.  Eminences  themselves  shall  drop  down  in  rich  juice  of  grape.  14.]  The  kingdom  shall  be
prosperous;  fallen  cities  rebuilt;  vines  planted  and  enjoyed  no  longer  by  the  enemy.  Reviving
activity  would  be  seen  everywhere.  15.]  All  this  perpetual.  Plant]  Firm  and  lasting  establishment
of  them ;  trees  not  torn  up,  but  firmly  rooted  and  eternally  flourishing  in  joy  and  peace  (Jer.  xxxii.
41).  This  is  a  beautiful  type  of  the  building  up,  enlargement,  and  establishment  of  the  Christian
Church  through  Christ.  In  Him  earth  will  become  an  Eden,  and  the  Lord  will  again  dwell  with
a  holy  people.

HOMILETIGS.

The  Final  Calamity. — Verses  1 — 4.

In  previous  visions  we  see  the  ripeness  of  the  people  and  the  nearness  of  judg-
ment. In  this  God  himself  is  engaged  to  execute  it.  The  temple  at  Bethel  is  a
fitting  emblem  of  the  nation,  which  gathers  round  it.  The  command  is  given  to
smite.  It  shakes,  falls,  and  buries  the  multitude  under  its  ruins.  The  sanctuary
was  overthrown  by  the  judgment  of  God,  and  the  kingdom  of  Israel  totally
destroyed.

I.  The  nature  of  the  calamity.  1.  It  is  moral.  God  stands  upon  the  altar
and  smites  the  idolatrous  temple.  He  is  ready  to  depart  from  them  and  punish
them  for  apostasy.  He  was  forsaking  his  people  because  they  had  forsaken  him.
God  warns  men,  before  he  departs  from  them.  But  idolatry  provokes  him,  and
turns  the  place  of  sacrifice  into  a  throne  of  vengeance.  The  posts  and  pillars  of  the
temple  are  smitten.  "  Begin  at  my  sanctuary  "  (Ezek.  ix.  6).  The  nearer  to  God,
the  greater  the  provocations;  the  higher  the  privileges,  the  nearer  to  judgment
(Dan.  ix.  12 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  17).  2.  It  is  complete.  It  involves  the  utter  destruction
of  the  kingdom,  the  overthrow  of  the  nation  in  its  corporate  existence.  (1)  The
heads  of  the  people.  "  Cut  them  in  the  head,  all  of  them."  Civil  and  religious
leaders  had  neglected  their  duty,  forgotten  their  dignity,  and  disregarded  the  good
of  the  nation.  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons.  Head  or  heel  they  cannot  escape.
"  He  is  terrible  to  the  kings  of  the  earth."  (2)  The  posterity  of  the  people.  "  I
will  slay  the  last  of  them  with  the  sword."  God  will  slay  all  the  remainder,  their
families  and  their  posterity,  all  that  are  left,  unto  the  very  last.  Justice  is  un-
sparing. Great  and  small,  kings  and  common  people,  must  suffer.  Universality  in
sin  brings  universality  in  punishment.  Neither  pre-eminence  nor  poverty  can
protect  from  guilt.  When  the  head  is  smitten,  the  body  faints,  and  every  member
suffers  with  it.  II.  The  certainty  of  the  calamity.  None  can  escape,  for  God
is  Omniscient  (verses  2 — 4),  and  God  is  Omnipotent.  1.  God  has  determined  to
punish.  He  appears  in  an  attitude  of  judgment ;  fixed  in  purpose,  to  prohibit
sacrifices  and  avenge  his  honour.  Israel's  iniquity  was  like  that  of  the  house  of
Eli,  which  "  could  not  be  purged  with  sacrifice  nor  offering  for  ever  "  (1  Sam.  iii.
14).  2.  It  is  impossible  to  escape  punishment.  (1)  The  loftiest  heights  cannot
protect  them,  (a)  (7armeZ,with  its  caves  and  its  forests,  a  hiding-place  for  robbers
and  runaways,  could  afford  no  refuge.  "  I  will  search  and  take  them  out  thence."
(b)  Heaven  itself  could  not  hide  them.  If  they  fixed  their  throne  in  the  stars,
and  climbed  the  highest  regions  of  space,  they  would  fall  into  the  hands  of  God.
From  thence  would  he  humble,  judge,  and  condemn  them.  "  Thence  will  I  bring
them  down."  (2)  The  greatest  depths  cannot  hide  them,  (a)  If  they  were  to
" dig  in  Hell"  in  the  deepest  and  most  secret  places  of  the  earth,  God  would  find
them.     "  Thence  shall  my  hand  take  them."     (b)  "  Though  they  be  hid  in  the


chap.  IX.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS  323


bottom  of  the  sea"  the  deadly  serpent  would  bite  them  (Is.  xxvii.  1).  Diving
would  avail  no  more  than  climbing.  Height  and  depth,  light  and  darkness  are
alike  open  to  the  Omnipresent  God.  Men  would  gladly  hide  themselves  from  God's
presence,  but  they  cannot.  (3)  The  longest  distance  cannot  shelter  them.  Cap-
tivity might  seem  safe,  for  men  do  not  often  slay  those  whom  they  carry  away.
But  God  would  discover  them  among  their  enemies,  and  remotest  countries  could
not  befriend  them.  Sinners  would  gladly  dig  into  hell  or  climb  up  to  heaven  to
escape  from  God's  presence ;  but  God  is  everywhere.  "  If  I  ascend  up  into  heaven,
thou  art  there :  if  I  make  my  bed  in  hell,  behold,  thou  art  there.  If  I  take  the
wings  of  the  morning,  and  dwell  in  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  sea  ;  even  there
shall  thy  hand  lead  me"  (Ps.  cxxxix.  7 — 11).

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  1.  Standing  upon  the  altar,  cerning  his  justice.  All  refuge  is  hope-
The  place  of  mercy  turned  into  judg-  less  and  ruin  is  inevitable.  No  depth
ment.  The  Bible,  the  means  of  grace,  of  delusion  nor  human  devices  can  se-
and  every  altar  of  idolatry,  literal  or  cure  the  sinner  from  the  serpent-bite  of
spiritual,  will  be  smitten  by  God.  conscience  here,  and  no  mountains  nor
Abused  altars  will  be  turned  into  seats  hills  can  hide  from  the  presence  of  God
of  justice,  and  cry  for  vengeance,  not  hereafter.  Only  in  Christ  can  refuge  be
sacrifice.  "  They  were  in  counterfeit  of  found.  Escape  for  thy  life,
the  sacrifices  which  God  had  appointed,  He  contrasts  Mount  Carmel,  which
they  offered  would-be-atoning  sacrifices,  rises  abruptly  out  of  the  sea,  with  depths
and  sinned  in  them;  God  appeared  stand-  of  that  ocean  which  it  overhangs.  Car-
ing, to  behold,  to  judge,  to  condemn "  mel  was  in  two  ways  a  hiding-place.
[Pusey].  1.   Through  its  caves  (some  say  1000,

Vers.  2 — 4.  1.  The  power  of  Divine  some  2000)  with  which  it  is  perforated,
judgments.  2.  The  subservience  of  whose  entrance  sometimes  scarcely  ad-
God's  attributes  in  their  execution.  3.  mits  a  single  man ;  so  close  to  each  other
The  impossibility  of  escaping  them,  that  a  pursuer  would  not  discern  into
"Every  syllable  is  important,  even  which  the  fugitive  had  vanished;  so
though  at  first  it  may  seem  otherwise,  serpentine  within,  that  10  steps  apart,
The  Holy  Spirit  designs  to  shake  off  our  says  a  traveller,  we  could  hear  each
self-flatteries  and  rouse  our  innate  torpor,  others'  voices,  but  could  not  see  each
that  we  may  not  think  of  God  as  of  our-  other.  2.  Its  summit,  about  1800  feet
selves,  but  know  that  his  power  extends  above  the  sea,  is  covered  with  pines  and
to  all  hiding-places "  [Calvin],  oaks,  and  lower  down  with  olive  and

I.  Desperate  efforts  of  sinners  to  escape,  laurel   trees.       These   forests  furnished

They  dig,  they  climb,  and   "they  go  hiding-places   to   robber-hordes   at    the

into  captivity,"  willingly,  in  presump-  time  of  our  Lord.     In  those  caves  Elijah

tion  and  fear.     In  presence  of   danger  probably  at  times  was  hidden  from  the

men  are  roused  to  most  strenuous  efforts,  persecution  of  Ahab  and  Jezebel.     Car-

They  multiply  endless  means,  and  think  mel,  as    the  western  extremity  of   the

they  can  get  out  of   every  trouble   by  land,  projecting  into  the  sea,  was  the  last

turning  away  from  God.     II.  Fruitless  place  which  a  fugitive  would  reach.     If

efforts  of  sinners  to  escape.     What  the  he  found  no  safety  there,  there  was  none

Psalmist   says   of    God's   omnipresence  in  his  whole  land.     Nor  was  there  by

(Ps.  cxxxix.)  the  Prophet  declares  con-  sea  \Pusey\.

HOMILETICb.
God's  Eye  fixed  on  Sinners. — Verse  4.

This  is  a  figurative  expression  setting  forth  a  solemn  thought.  As  we  indicate
pleasure  or  anger  by  the  look  of  the  eye,  or  the  form  of  our  countenance,  so  God


324  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  (.chap.  ix.


in  providence  fixes  his  "  eyes  over  the  righteous,"  but  his  "  face  is  against  them
that  do  evil"  (Ps.  xxxiv.  15).  1.  In  displeasure  at  his  guilt.  God  is  not  indif-
ferent to  human  conduct.  He  sets  his  eye  upon  all  wicked  deeds,  and  will  give  them
no  countenance  nor  support.  If  men  obstinately  rebel  against  him,  he  will  show
his  displeasure  against  them.  "  I  will  set  my  face  against  that  man  "  (Ezek.  xiv.
8  :  Lev.  xx.  3  ;  xxvi.  17).  2.  In  tracking  his  steps.  "  I  will  search  and  take  them
out  thence."  God  discovers  the  hypocrisy  and  linds  out  the  hiding-place  of  men.
They  are  watched  as  by  spies,  guarded  as  by  sentinels ;  hemmed  in  and  forbidden
to  escape.  In  repose  and  occupation,  by  night  and  by  day,  alone  and  with  others,
God  narrowly  looks  into  all  their  paths  (Job  xiii.  27).  3.  In  determination  to
punish  his  sin.  "  For  evil  and  not  for  good."  The  evil  man  is  checkmated  in
life,  followed  by  Nemesis,  the  prediction  and  in  part  the  experience  of  justice.  He
flees  from  himself,  from  conscience,  from  God,  and  meets  them  all !  His  punish-
ment is  everywhere  below,  how  then  can  he  escape  hereafter  1  If  the  eyes  of  Tamer-
lane had  such  power  that  men  could  hardly  endure  to  behold  them,  what  must  the
eyes  of  God  be  ?  If  the  frown  of  Augustus  Caesar  or  Queen  Elizabeth  was  death,
who  can  endure  the  anger  of  God  1  "  For  his  eyes  are  upon  the  ways  of  man,  and
he  seeth  all  his  goings"  (Job  xxxiv.  21,  22).

"  So  writhes  the  mind  remorse  hath  riven,
Unfit  for  earth,  undoomed  for  heaven,
Darkness  above,  despair  beneath,
Around  it  flame,  within  it  death  "  [Byron],

God's  Power  a  Guarantee  op  His  Truth. — Verses  5,  6.

These  words  confirm  the  threat  in  the  preceding  verses ;  describe  the  nature  and
the  works  of  God ;  and  present  him  in  majesty  and  might,  able  and  determined
to  administer  justice.

I.  He  created  the  universe.  "  He  that  buildeth  his  stories  in  the  heaven."
1.  He  made  the  heavens.  He  arranged  them  in  their  place  and  fixed  them  in  their
distance.  The  clouds,  the  aerial  heavens,  are  balanced  by  his  hand  (Job  xxxvii.  1 6).
He  suspends,  condenses,  and  pours  out  their  contents  at  his  pleasure.  The  starry
heavens  derive  their  glory  from  him.  The  heaven  of  heavens  is  the  palace  of  the
Great  King.  Like  a  stately  building,  God  has  reared  (artistically  and  beautifully
put  in  order,  arranged,  Heb.  xi.  3)  the  celestial  spheres  in  stories  one  above  another ;
the  lowest,  like  steps,  leads  to  the  highest,  the  material  to  the  spiritual,  earth  to  heaven.
"  Lift  up  your  eyes  on  high,  and  behold  who  hath  created  these  things,"  &c.  2.  He
founded  the  earth.  He  drew  the  plan  and  prepared  the  place,  provided  the
materials  and  laid  the  foundation.  "  Thou  hast  also  founded  the  earth,"  given  it
order,  beginning,  and  firmness.  The  "  troop  in  the  earth,"  all  the  elements  of
nature  and  all  the  creatures  of  the  world,  are  linked  together  as  bands  of  men
(2  Sam.  ii.  25),  or  yoked  in  submission  to  his  will  (Is.  lviii.  6).  "  When  I  call
unto  them  they  stand  up  together."  II.  He  governs  the  universe.  He  sits
above  earth  and  heaven,  ruling  all  creatures  and  directing  all  agencies.  Men  only
see  law  in  the  evaporation  of  water  from  the  sea,  the  electric  agency  which  binds
it  in  the  cloud,  and  in  the  current  of  air  which  wafts  it  to  the  land.  But  God
creates  rain  and  disperses  it  over  the  earth.  "  He  calleth  for  the  waters  of  the  sea,
and  poureth  them  out  upon  the  face  of  the  earth."  He  creates  the  earthquake  and
the  flood.  Fire  and  frost,  thunder  and  lightning,  promptly  obey  his  command.
"  He  sendeth  out  his  word  and  melteth  them  :  he  causeth  his  wind  to  blow,  and
the  waters  flow."  III.  He  can  destroy  the  universe.  "  The  Lord  God  of  Hosts,
is  he  that  toucheth  the  land."  1.  The  ability  with  which  he  executes  his  word.
Threats  are  formidable  according  to  the  power  of  him  that  threatens.  We  laugh  at
impotence  and  fear  omnipotence.  The  power  which  reared  the  world  is  irresistible.
How  hopeless  the  case  of  those  who  have  the  powers  of  all  creation  against  them  !
"  Who  knoweth  the  power  of  thine  anger  1   even  according  to  thy  fear,  so  is  thy


chap.  IX.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  325


wrath."  2.  The  ease  with  which  he  executes  his  word.  He  only  touches  the  land
and  it  melts  ;  the  lightness  of  the  effort  indicating  the  might  of  the  power.  The
blast  of  God's  breath  melts  the  mightiest  armies  like  wax  before  the  fire  (Ps.  lxviii.
1,  2).  The  highest  and  most  solid  parts  of  the  earth  feel  his  glance.  "He
toucheth  the  hills,  and  they  smoke."  He  merely  breathes,  and  men  perish  (Job  iv.  9) .
Sinai  trembled  j  and  should  we  be  more  insensible  than  material  creation  1  "With
one  touch  the  earth  would  reel  before  him,  or  return  to  chaos.  "  He  uttered  his
voice ;  the  earth  melted."  3.  The  method  in  which  he  executes  his  word.  He
turns  the  land  into  a  sea  by  rain  or  inundations ;  drowns  it  like  the  deluge  of  Noah
or  "  the  flood  of  Egypt."  Think  of  the  disaster  in  Chili  in  1868.  God,  enthroned
above,  "  calleth  for  the  waters  of  the  sea."  They  rise  at  his  bid.  "  He  pours  them
out  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,"  and  "  all  that  dwell  therein  shall  mourn."  The
prophet  wonders  why  men  do  not  fear  God,  whose  power  is  displayed  in  heaven,
earth,  and  sea,  and  with  a  word  of  his  mouth  can  melt  the  wicked  like  snow  before
the  sun.  "  Fear  ye  not  me  1  saith  the  Lord  :  will  ye  not  tremble  at  my  presence  ? "
&c.  (Jer.  v.  22).

"  How  dare  they,  then,  offend,  when  God  shall  see  ;
That  must  alone  both  judge  and  jury  be  ?  "  [T.  Eandolf\


Creation  the  Mirror  and  the  Mind  op  God.

Men  forget  with  whom  they  have  to  do  and  against  whom  they  sin.  The
prophet  therefore  sets  forth  the  majesty  and  power  of  God,  who  was  able  to  do
whatever  he  uttered  against  them.  Sinners  should  fear  to  offend  him,  and  speedily
make  their  peace  with  him.

I.  Creation  reveals  the  nature  of  God.  Every  act  of  God  is  a  manifestation
of  God ;  an  egress  of  his  nature.  Power  is  seen  in  the  creation  and  upholding  of
the  universe  in  all  its  wonderful  changes  and  combinations ;  wisdom,  in  its  design
and  beauty,  the  adaptation  of  means  to  ends ;  benevolence,  in  its  arrangements  and
enjoyments.  Everywhere  we  have  signs  of  the  existence  of  a  Being  of  intelligence
and  goodness.  The  heavens  "  declare  his  glory,"  and  the  earth  affirms  his  "  eternal
power  and  Godhead."  How  strange  to  be  unmindful  of  "  goodness  beyond  thought,
and  power  Divine  1 "     Why  not  discern  him,

"  Who  plann'd,  and  built,  and  still  upholds  a  world
So  clothed  with  beauty,  for  rebellious  man  ?  "

II.  Creation  reveals  the  mind  of  God.  It  has  been  called  Adam's  library.  The
prophet  read  the  mind  of  God  in  the  Book  of  Nature,  and  discovered  laws  for  the
guidance  of  man.  1.  The  works  of  God  subserve  the  purpose  of  God.  God  is  not
merely  present  in  "laws,"  "phenomena,"  or  "second  causes."  He  does  not  govern
the  world  by  proxy,  like  ancient  monarchs  ruling  their  empires.  Ail  things  are
made  to  subserve  the  design  for  which  they  were  created,  never  cease  to  obey  his
will  and  reflect  his  power  and  goodness.  The  earth  trembles,  the  floods  rise,  and
calamities  happen  to  fulfil  the  ends  of  his  administration.  2.  The  works  of  God
reprove  the  indijfere7ice  of  man.  Israel  had  despised  the  word  of  God,  and  are
directed  to  the  ways  of  God,  to  rouse  attention  to  his  will.  Sensible  evidence
should  affect  us.  God  teaches  us  by  signs  in  heaven  above  and  earth  beneath.
We  should  be  stirred  up  to  praise  him  (Prov.  xvi.  4),  warned  of  the  danger  of
offending  him,  and  led  to  fear  him.  If  he  can  alter  the  course  of  nature,  and  turn
established  laws  into  scourges  for  sin,  we  should  not  rebel  against  him.  "  Because
they  regard  not  the  works  of  the  Lord,  nor  the  operation  of  his  hands,  he  shall
destroy  them  and  not  build  them  up."


826


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.


[OMAP.


HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Vers.  5,6.  1.  God's  name.  2.  God's
works  —  Creation  and  providence.
3.  God's  judgments — Earthquakes  and
floods.  4.  God's  design.  "All  that
dwell  therein  shall  mourn."

God  not  seen  in  his  works.  I.  Great
indifference  exists.  Men  see,  but  do  not
observe.  Like  Hamlet's  ghost,  they  have
"  no  speculation  in  their  eyes."  Hence
they  know  nothing  of  the  grandeurs  by
which  they  are  surrounded,  and  never
rise  from  Nature  up  to  Nature's  God.
II.  Defective  knowledge  abounds.  God
is  seen  by  many  in  his  wisdom  and
power,  acknowledged  to  be  the  Creator
and  Governor  of  the  world,  but  not  as  a
God  of  truth  and  justice,  rewarding
virtue  and  punishing  sin.  Divine  per-
fections cannot  be  separated.  Power  is
linked  with  holiness,  and  justice  with
truth.     The     Creator    is     the    Moral


Governor  of  the  universe.  To  think  of
him  at  a  distance,  or  judge  of  his  purpose
by  one  attribute  of  his  being,  is  unreason-
able. We  cannot  shun  his  presence.
We  only  escape  his  anger  by  forsaking
sin  which  causes  it.  "  Because  there  is
wrath,  beware  lest  he  take  thee  away
with  his  stroke :  then  a  great  ransom
cannot  deliver  thee."

Lessons.  1.  God  a  Being  of  infinite
perfection.  2.  All  things  are  under  his
control.  3.  Nothing  can  hinder  the
accomplishment  of  his  purpose.  4.  It
is  ruinous  to  rebel  against  such  a  Being
of  almighty  power  and  majesty.  5.  It
is  blessed  to  have  him  for  our  Saviour
and  Friend.


"  Take  heed :  for  God  holds  vengeance  in  His

hand
To  hurl  upon  their  heads  that  break  His  law."

[Shakespeare.']


HOMILETICS.
God's  Covenant  does  not  Invalidate  His  Word. — Verses  7,  8.

In  these  words  Amos  confirms  the  certainty  of  punishment.  Israel  were  a  sinful
nation,  and  neither  pious  ancestors  nor  covenant  relations  could  prevent  their
destruction.

I.  God's  covenant  may  be  undervalued  and  violated.  Israel  professed  to  be
God's  people,  and  boasted  of  descent  from  holy  progenitors.  A  noble  ancestry  is
of  no  worth  unless  we  follow  their  example.  The  piety  of  predecessors  does  not
justify,  but  aggravates  our  sin.  With  good  patterns  before  them  men  should  live
better.  But  they  degenerate  into  heathens  and  idolaters.  God  values  them  no
more  than  the  most  contemptible  nations  of  the  world.  Their  sins  had  made  them
like  other  people.  The  gold  becomes  dim ;  the  children  of  Israel  become  children
of  the  Ethiopians.  We  may  boast  of  our  election,  and  be  esteemed  by  others  for
our  profession ;  but  if  we  break  God's  covenant,  we  cannot  expect  God's  protection.
What  the  Apostle  says  of  circumcision  applies  to  election.  It  is  a  benefit  to  none
but  those  who  keep  the  law  (Eom.  ii.  25).  It  will  not  avail  us  to  say  "  Abraham
is  our  Father,"  unless  we  do  "  the  works  of  Abraham  "  (John  viii.  39  ;  Bom.  ix.
7,  8).  II.  God's  special  providences  in  fulfilling  his  covenant  may  be  abused.
The  plea  was  that  God  would  not  cast  off  his  people ;  for  he  delivered  them  from
bondage  and  pledged  himself  to  be  their  God.  True,  God  chose  them  that  they
might  love  him,  and  so  long  as  they  kept  his  law  he  protected  and  saved  them.
Special  favours  do  not  exempt  from  Divine  justice.  They  lay  us  under  greater  ob-
ligation to  obey ;  for  those  who  have  much  will  be  punished  more  severely  for  their
sins,  and  from  them  much  will  be  required.  Special  deliverances  may  become  com-
mon providences.  Redemption  from  Egypt  was  no  more  to  Israel  than  the  leading
of  the  Philistines  and  Syrians  out  of  their  former  into  their  present  dwelling-places
Those  who  neglect  or  abuse  their  privileges  are  guilty — 1.  Of  great  ingratitude.  2.
Of  great  rebellion.  When  men  abuse  their  mercies,  and  despise  the  God  of  mercy,
it  is  only  just  with  him  to  strip  them  of  their  honours  and  visit  their  sins.


chap,  ix.]  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  OT


HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

1.  External  privileges  no  ground  for  are  as  bad  as  Infidels  and  Turks.     3.

boasting  before  God.     Others  may  pos-  External    privileges  are   no    guarantee

sess  them.     They  may  be  taken  from  us.  against  punishment  for  sin.     God  ac-

What  was  designed  as  a  favour  may  lose  counts  sin  under  such  circumstances  all

its  result  by  our  conduct.     2.  External  the  baser.     Instead  of  hiding  the  guilty,

privileges  do  not  preserve  from  degenerate  such  gifts  abused  expose  them  to  greater

conduct.     Israel  lost  their  character  and  condemnation.     If  we  live  not  up  to  the

were  esteemed  as  heathens.      Conven-  obligation  of  God's  mercies,  we  forfeit

tional  Christians  and  corrupt  Churches  the  honour  of  them.

HOMILETICS.

The  Sifting  Process. — Verses  8 — 10.

Punishment  is  again  threatened,  but  mitigated.  All  shall  not  be  destroyed.  A
remnant  shall  be  sifted  and  preserved.  But  the  impious  and  proud  will  be  cut  off
with  the  sword.

I.  The  nature  of  the  process.  Like  precious  grain,  God's  people  have  to  be
purified  and  fitted  for  use.  1.  It  is  a  violent  process.  "  I  will  sift,"  i.  e.  cause
them  to  be  moved,  shaken,  or  jostled  about  by  other  nations.  We  have  need  to  be
shaken.  We  get  deeply  rooted  in  our  pursuits,  confirmed  in  our  sins,  and  require
ho  light  measures  to  wean  us  from  the  world.  2.  It  is  an  extensive  process.  Is-
rael were  not  to  be  unsettled  among  one  nation,  but  many.  Their  life  was  to  be
spent  "  among  all  nations."  The  Jews  have  been  found  in  every  country  of  the
globe  almost.  The  whole  earth  in  the  design  of  God  has  thus  become  a  sieve  to
his  people.  Each  change  in  business  and  residence  may  be  a  sifting  to  preserve
from  sin  and  prepare  for  service.  "  Because  they  have  no  changes,  therefore  they
fear  not  God."  II.  The  results  of  the  process.  The  righteous  shall  be  saved  and
the  wicked  destroyed.  1.  The  grain  is  preserved.  "Yet  shall  not  the  least  grain
fall  upon  the  earth."  God's  eye  is  upon  every  one  of  his  people,  in  their  trials.
Like  a  refiner  of  gold,  he  sits  watching  the  process.  Jewish  history  and  Church
history  prove  that  this  sifting  results  not  in  destruction,  but  purification.  "  At  the
present  time  also  there  is  a  remnant  according  to  the  election  of  grace."  Not  one
precious  seed  shall  be  lost.  "  It  is  not  the  will  of  your  heavenly  Father  that  one
of  these  little  ones  should  perish."  2.  The  chaff  is  destroyed.  "  The  sinners  of
my  people  shall  die  by  the  sword."  The  same  process  to  one  will  be  salvation,  to
another  destruction.  Like  chaff,  the  wicked  are  worthless  in  their  character  and
doom,  blown  away  with  the  wind  or  burned  in  the  fire  (Ps.  i.  4).  God  spares  the
wicked  for  the  sake  of  the  godly  now ;  but  a  separation  will  come.  Each  will  go
to  the  place  for  which  he  is  fitted  and  destined.  "  He  will  throughly  purge  his
floor,  and  gather  his  wheat  into  the  garner ;  but  he  will  burn  up  the  chaff  with  un-
quenchable fire."

HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  8.     The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  in  "  When  God  commands,  who  dare  oppose,

every  place,  especially,  1.  Observing  sin-  0r  ask  Him  why>  or  what  He  does  ?"

ners,  2.  Scrutinizing  character,  and  3.  God's  people  are  sifted — 1.  By  God.

dealing  out  justice.  Abraham,  the  Centurion,  and  the  Syro-

Ver.  9.  I  will  sift.     1.  God  the  sifter  phenician  were  tried  and  approved.     2.

of  his  people.     2.  Making  Divine  pur-  By   Satan.      As   Peter,    saved   by   the

poses  real  facts.      "I  will   command."  prayer  of  Christ  (Luke  xxii.  31,   32).

He  wills  and  it  is  done.  "  The  blast  of  temptation  struck  down


328  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  [chip.  ix.


the  leaves ;  but  the  root  stood  fast."  3.  ish  history.  Is  it  of  any  other  what-
By  the  world,  (a)  Its  infidelities,  (b)  «ver  ] "  [Davidson  on  Prophecy].
Its  persecutions,  (c)  Its  opinions.  "In  Yer.  10.  Which  say.  1.  The  impious
the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation,"  &c.  spirit  of  sinners.  Ignorant,  false,  con-
"This  concise  prophecy  contains  a  fident,  and  presumptive.  2.  The  great
draught  of  determinate  history  :  the  disappointment  of  sinners.  Their  say-
kingdom,  the  body  politic,  to  be  destroyed  ings  do  not  make  facts.  Punishment
from  off  the  face  of  the  earth ;  but  the  does  overtake  them,  suddenly  and  griev-
people,  the  stock,  not  to  be  destroyed,  ously.  "  Evil  is  often  nearest  those  that
The  people  to  be  sifted  through  all  put  it  at  the  greatest  distance  from
nations;  but  the  seed  so  sifted  not  to  them."  Hope  of  impunity  is  only  the
perish,  nor  its  least  grain  to  fall  to  the  refuge  of  the  proud  and  rebellious  ;  God
earth.  It  has  a  history  made  up  of  oppo-  by  his  judgments  will  change  their  ver-
site  particulars;  destruction  and  preserva-  diet,  and  prove  it  to  be  a  refuge  of  lies
tion,  scattering  and  particular  custody,  (Is.  xxviii.  15).  Flee  to  Christ,  and  he
combined.     It  is  the  true  outline  of  Jew-  will  be  your  hiding-place  in  the  storm.

HOMILETICS.
The  Fallen  Tabernacle  Reared  and  Enlarged. —  Verses  11,  12.

The  book  which  began  with  dreadful  judgments  ends  in  sublime  visions.  The
prophet  has  bewailed  the  sins  of  different  cities  and  denounced  the  wrath  of
God  against  them.  Now  we  find  him  predicting  blessings  for  the  heathen.  The
funeral  dirge  is  turned  into  a  song  of  mercy.  The  prophet  is  rewarded  for  faith:
ful  service,  and  is  comforted  with  the  thought,  that  after  the  destruction  of  ungodly
elements,  Divine  grace  shall  rear,  enlarge,  and  prosper  a  kingdom  which  shall  never
be  destroyed.  Verses  11 — 15  might  be  taken  together  as  including  the  vision,  but
we  shall  treat  them  separately.  From  verses  11,  12,  we  get  a  description  of  the
restored  tabernacle.

I.  The  fallen  tabernacle  shall  be  reared  up.  "  In  that  day  will  I  raise  up  the
tabernacle  of  David."  1.  Raised  from  its  fallen  condition.  It  was  not  a  mag-
nificent palace,  but  "  the  fallen  hut."  It  had  been  rent  and  ruined  by  divisions
and  wars.  Sin  will  cause  any  kingdom  to  decay  and  any  Church  to  fall.  It  im-
poverishes royalty,  impairs  human  dignity,  and  throws  into  the  lowest  condition.
But  Divine  grace  can  build  up  and  beautify  what  sin  has  pulled  down.  In  the
human  heart,  the  Christian  Church,  and  the  heathen  world  God  is  building  up  a  holy
temple  for  the  perpetual  residence  of  His  Spirit  (Eph.  ii.  22).  2.  Repaired  in  its
breaches.  "And  close  up  the  breaches  thereof."  Sin  breaks  down  moral  barriers,
creates  divisions  in  the  family  and  the  fold.  God  sets  up  new  stones  in  the  walls,
heals  divisions,  and  unites  men  in  love  and  loyalty  to  himself.  3.  Completed  in  its
original  design.  "  I  will  build  it  as  in  the  days  of  old."  God  will  finish  and  com-
plete the  building  according  to  its  ancient  grandeur  in  the  days  of  David  and  Solo-
mon (2  Sam.  vii.  11 — 16) ;  and  in  harmony  with  his  purpose.  The  kingdom  of
David  is  a  type  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  the  Son  of  David.  The  Christian  Church
may  be  reduced  in  circumstances,  and  almost  ruined  in  prospect ;  but  that  is  no
reason  for  despair.  The  humble  cot,  the  shattered  tent,  may  be  raised  to  greater
worth  and  adorned  with  greater  beauty  than  the  temple  of  old.*  "  Thou  shalt  arise
and  have  mercy  upon  Zion :  for  the  time  to  favour  her,  yea,  the  set  time  is  come."
II.  The  fallen  tabernacle  shall  be  greatly  enlarged.  "  That  they  may  possess
the  remnant  of  Edom,"  &c.  Formerly  the  Church  was  confined  in  narrow  limits,
but  now  it  shall  spread  itself  over  all  nations.  1.  The  Edomites,  near  neigh-
bours, yet  bitter  enemies,  shall  become  peaceful  citizens.  2.  The  heathens,  the  Gen-
tiles, should  be  called.  The  prophet  pronounced  woe  upon  these  nations  at  first,
but  now  he  speaks  of  them  as  called  by  the  name  of  Jehovah.  The  most  desper-
ate and  the  most  distant  may  be  converted  to  Christ.     We  should  be  glad  at  the


chap.  DC. J  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.  329


conversion  of  others,  and  remember  that  the  promise  is  unto  us  and  our  children,
and  as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call.  There  is  a  bright  vision  for  the
future.  God  is  daily  increasing  the  number  of  his  people.  Jew  and  Gentile  shall
be  called,  enrolled  in  one  family,  and  be  distinguished  by  one  name.  "  Ask  of  Me,
and  I  shall  give  thee  the  heathen  for  thine  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of
the  earth  for  thy  possession."

The  Spiritual  Glory  of  the  Eaised  Tabernacle. —  Verses  13 — 15.

Behold,  the  days  come,  there  are  more  blessings  in  store  yet.  From  the  fulfilment
of  verses  11,  12,  shall  result  abundance  of  produce  in  the  land,  verse  13,  great
prosperity  in  the  nation,  and  perpetual  duration  of  the  kingdom  [Keil].

I.  The  land  shall  be  blessed  with  the  greatest  fertility.  No  more  curse,  nor
failing  crops.  We  have  in  this  scene — 1.  Earnest  activity.  The  seedsman,  the
ploughman,  and  the  reaper  are  all  engaged  in  their  special  duties.  2.  Abundant
crops.  So  rich  and  productive  is  the  land,  that  the  mountains  drop  down  sweet
wine,  and  all  the  hills  melt  (Joel  iii.  18).  3.  Wonderful  rapidity.  The  harvest
lasts  unto  the  vintage,  and  the  vintage  continues  to  the  seed-time.  There  is  one
continuous  produce,  one  perpetual  round  of  toil  and  success.  II.  The  inhabitants
shall  enjoy  the  greatest  privileges.  As  the  land  of  Israel  shall  be  no  more
smitten  with  drought,  so  the  citizens  shall  enjoy  the  rich  benefits  of  their  peace-
ful labour.  1.  Joy  would  be  restored.  "I  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  my
people."  Misfortune  and  misery  should  once  more  be  turned  into  prosperity.  2.
Freedom  would  be  reclaimed.  "They  shall  build  the  waste  cities."  Delivered
from  the  fear  of  the  enemy,  they  are  active  for  God.  Men  are  captives,  and  only
made  free  in  Christ.  In  the  gospel  Christian  Churches  are  chartered  with  liberty
of  worship  and  action.  Hence  they  build  waste  places,  and  inhabit  them  with  re-
newed blessings.  3.  The  fruits  of  labour  would  be  enjoyed.  Wicked  men  toil  for
others,  and  not  for  themselves.  The  Jews  would  no  longer  sow  and  others  reap.
They  would  build  cities,  plant  vineyards,  and  make  gardens,  and  enjoy  the  fruits
of  their  efforts.  "  My  servants  shall  build  houses  and  inhabit  them,  and  plant  vine-
yards and  eat  the  fruit  of  them."  4.  Perpetual  security  would  be  granted.  They
would  be  no  longer  a  homeless,  wandering  people.  God  would  fix  them,  perpetu-
ally establish  them  in  the  land.  When  God  plants,  man  cannot  uproot  or  destroy.
"  I  will  plant  them  in  this  land  assuredly  with  my  whole  heart  and  my  whole
soul"

HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  12.     The  restoration  was  not  to  related  to   God.     Those  who   sincerely

be  for  themselves  alone.     No  gifts  of  invoke  his  name  and  seek  his  covenanted

God  end  in  the  immediate  object  of  his  mercy  (Acts  xv.  15 — 17).

bounty  and  love.     They  were  restored  Ver.    13.     Mountains.     Symbols    of

in  order  that  they,  the  first  objects  of  barrenness,  idolatry,  and  difficulty  of  cul-

God's  mercies,  might  win  others  to  God ;  tivation  set  forth  the  fertility  and  fulness

not  Edom  only,  but  all   nations  upon  of  the  Christian  Church,

whom   God   says    my   name   is   called  Ver.  15.     1.    The  prosperity  of  the

[Pusey].  Church.     "  I  will  plant  them."     2.  The

The  call  of  the  Gentiles.     1.  The  call  security  of  the  Church.    "  Saith  the  Lord

of  a  remnant  as  in  Edom ;  so  Scripture  thy  God."     3.    The  perpetuity   of  the

everywhere  speaks  of  the  converted  as  a  Church.     "  They  shall  no  more  be  pulled

residue.     2.  The  call  of  those  specially  up."


330


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  AMOS.


[chap.  IX.


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  IX..


Vers.  1 — 4.  Hide  themselves.  God  is
everywhere,  not  as  the  air  is  everywhere.
The  air  is  part  in  one  place  and  part  in
another;  God  is  all  in  every  place.  God
is  wholly  in  the  height  of  heaven,  and
wholly  in  the  depth  of  hell ;  wholly  in
the  length  of  the  earth,  and  wholly  in
the  breadth  of  the  sea.  All  God  is  in
all  things,  and  all  God  is  without  all
things;  He  is  without  all  things,  and
not  shut  out  of  anything.  He  is  in  all
things,  and  not  included  in  anything.
So  the  ancients  speak  of  this  wonderful
mystery  of  God's  omnipresence  [Caryl].

God's  Eye — Sentences —

"  Heaven  hath  its  countless  eyes  to  view  men's

acts.
Can  we  outrun  the  heavens  ?
However  wickedness  outstrips   men,  it  has  no

wings  to  fly  from  God  "  [Shakespeare].

Vers.  5,  6.  Creation.  How  close  does
it  bring  the  Creator  to  us,  to  regard  him,
not  so  much  as  having  made  the  world,
as  still  engaged  in  making  it;  i.  e.  by
supplying  the  life  on  which  its  laws,  and
thus  its  being  and  incidents,  depend.
"Depend  upon  it  (says  an  eloquent
preacher)  it  is  not  the  want  of  greater
miracles,  but  of  the  soul  to  perceive  such
as  are  allowed  us  still,  that  makes  us  push
all  the  sanctities  into  the  far  spaces  we
cannot  reach.  The  devout  feel  that  wher-
ever God's  hand  is  there  is  miracle ;  and  it
is  simply  an  undevoutness  which  imagines
that  only  where  miracle  is,  there  can  be
the  real  hand  of  God  "  [Grindon].

Much  of  the  glory  of  God  in  creation
is  hid  by  a  train  of  second  causes,  through
which  few  look  to  the  first  [Howe],

Ver.  7.     Ethiopians.     Inconsistency


has  been  execrated  in  every  age,  as  the
assassin  of  religious  character  and  peace,
introducing  anarchy  and  confusion  into
the  repose  of  Christian  Churches,  casting
stains  upon  garments  which  ought  to  be
kept  unspotted  from  the  world,  and  by
evil  influence  directly  and  bad  example
indirectly,  throwing  a  reproach  upon  the
cause  of  Christianity,  and  making  the
tongues  of  its  enemies  to  blaspheme
[  W.  S.  M.\

"Like— butoh!  how  different "  [Wordsworth].

Vers.  8— 10.  Sift.  Gold  in  the  ore
is  a  treasure ;  but  it  is  when  it  has  passed
through  the  refiner's  hands,  and  has  re-
ceived the  stamp  of  currency,  that  it  be-
comes of  acknowledged  value,  and  fit  for
adaptation  to  all  the  circumstances  and
conveniences  of  life  [W.  S.  M.\

Fiery  trials  make  golden  Christians ;
sanctified  afflictions  are  spiritual  promo-
tion [Dyer].

Vers.  11 — 15.  Future  days.  Nothing
good  bursts  forth  all  at  once.  The
lightning  may  dart  out  of  a  black  cloud ;
but  the  day  sends  his  bright  heralds  be-
fore him,  to  prepare  the  world  for  his
coining  [Hare].

The  brightest  day  has  not  yet  dawned,
the  widest  conquests  have  not  yet  been
achieved.  Is  not  the  Church  challenged
to  nerve  herself  for  greater  effort,  and  to
array  herself  in  a  more  imposing  habit  1
"  Put  on  thy  strength,  0  Zion ;  put  on
thy  beautiful  garments,  0  Jerusalem  1 ''

"  0  !  scene  surpassing  fable,  and  yet  true,
Scene  of  accomplished  bliss,  which  who  can  see,
Though  tut  in  distant  prospect,  and  not  feel
His  soul  refreshed  with  foretaste  of  the  joy  t"


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY


ON


OB  AD  I  AH.


INTKODUCTION.

This  book  consists  only  of  twenty-one  verses,  and  is  the  shortest  in  the  Bible.

The  Author.  Obadiah  (Servant  of  Jehovah)  is  a  proper  name  frequently  met
with,  but  little  is  known  concerning  our  Author.  Some  identify  him  with  the
pious  courtier  in  the  palace  of  Ahab  (1  Kings  xviii.  3) ;  some  with  the  overseer  of
the  workmen  in  2  Chron.  xxxiv.  1 2 ;  but  the  silence  of  Scripture  is  in  significant
contrast  with  the  anxiety  of  men  to  know  something  of  him.

The  Time.  "  In  all  probability  the  prophecy  was  delivered  between  the  year
B.o.  588,  when  Jerusalem  was  taken  by  the  Chaldeans,  and  the  termination  of  the
siege  of  Tyre  by  Nebuchadnezzar.  During  this  interval,  that  monarch  subdued  the
Idumeans  and  other  neighbouring  nations  "  [A  Elzaz\.  The  contents  of  the  book
and  its  relation  to  the  prophecy  of  Jeremiah  seem  to  confirm  this  view.

The  Book.  "  The  subjects  of  the  prophecy  are  the  judgments  to  be  inflicted  upon
the  Idumeans  on  account  of  their  wanton  and  cruel  conduct  towards  the  Jews  at
the  time  of  the  Chaldean  invasion,  and  the  restoration  of  the  latter  from  captivity.
The  book  may  therefore  be  fitly  divided  into  two  parts  ;  the  first  comprising  verses
1 — 16,  which  contain  a  reprehension  of  the  pride,  self-confidence,  and  unfeeling
cruelty  of  the  former  people,  and  definite  predictions  of  their  destruction  \  the  latter
verses  17 — 21,  in  which  it  is  promised  that  the  Jews  should  not  only  be  restored
to  their  own  land,  but  possess  the  territories  of  the  surrounding  nations,  especially
Idumea  "  [Elzaz],

The  style  is  original  and  fresh.  "  Vividness,  connectedness,  power,  are  charac-
teristics of  it.  As  it  begins  so  it  continues  and  ends.  It  has  no  breaks,  nor  in-
terruptions.  Thought  follows  on  thought,  as  wave  rolls  upon  wave,  but  all  mar-
shalled to  one  end,  marching  on,  column  after  column,  to  the  goal  which  God  hath
appointed  for  them.  Each  verse  grows  out  of  that  which  was  before  it,  and  carries
on  its  thought.  The  cadence  of  the  words  in  the  original  is  a  singular  blending  of
pathos  and  strength.  The  pathos  of  the  cadence  consists  in  a  somewhat  long-sus-
tained measure,  in  which  the  Prophet  dwells  on  the  one  thought  which  he  wishes
to  impress ;  the  force,  in  the  few  brief  words  in  which  he  sums  up  some  sentence  n


332  INTRODUCTION.


\_Pusey\     "  Among  all  the  prophets,"  says  one,  "  he  is  the  briefest  in  number  of
words ;  in  the  grace  of  mysteries  he  is  their  equal."

"  The  reason  why  the  book  occupies  its  present  unchronological  position  in  the
Hebrew  Bible  is  supposed  to  be  the  connection  between  the  subjects  of  which  it
treats  and  the  mention  made  of  '  the  residue  of  Edom,'  at  the  conclusion  of  the
preceding  book  of  Amos  "  [Elzaz].  "  The  chronological  position  of  Obadiah  illus-
trates an  important  truth  concerning  God's  dealings  with  mankind,  viz.  that  he  never
executes  a  judgment,  or  inflicts  a  punishment,  on  a  nation  or  individual,  without
having  given  some  previous  warning  as  to  the  hateful  character  and  dangerous  con-
sequences of  the  sins  for  which  the  judgments  are  inflicted.  He  did  not  denounce
his  judgments  on  Nineveh  by  Nahum,  before  he  had  given  warning  to  Nineveh  by
Jonah ;  and  he  did  not  denounce  his  judgment  upon  Edom  by  Jeremiah,  before
he  had  given  warning  of  the  approaching  visitation  by  Obadiah  "  [  Wordsworth],


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  OB  AMAH.  338


OBADIAH.


Cbitical  Notes.]  Amb.]  God  is  represented  as  summoning  armies  and  setting  them  in  battle
array,  after  the  custom  of  earthly  kings.  3.  Clefts]  Jer.  xlix.  16.  See  Stanley  for  description.
The  position,  strong  by  nature  and  by  art,  was  thought  impregnable,  hence  their  proud  confidence
and  insolence.  4.]  Who  ?  is  the  boast ;  "  thence  will  I"  is  the  answer.  God  can  dislodge  the  high-
est. 5.]  Spoliation  shall  be  complete  ;  not  such  as  thieves  or  grape-gatherers  make,  who  leave
the  rest  when  they  have  had  enough.  6.  Hidden]  places  explored ;  all  treasures  searched  out,  lit.
diligent  and  earnest  tracking  out  (Zeph.  i.  12).  7.]  Edom  would  be  forsaken  by  those  in  whom  they
put  confidence.  Confederates]  Allies  would  drive  back  (brought)  fugitives  to  the  frontier.  Men  at
peace]  with  them,  neighbouring  states,  would  deceive  them  (Ps.  xli.  9).  They  that  eat  bread,  lit.  men
of  bread,  their  dependents,  lay  snares  to  wound.  Treachery  everywhere.  None]  of  the  wisdom
and  tact  for  which  Edom  was  famous  is  left  to  extricate  himself.  8.  Wise  men]  shall  be  bereft  of
discernment.  9.  Thy  mighty]  heroes  are  dismayed,  or  fall  into  despair.  10.  Cause  of  ruin]  Vio-
lence against  the  seed  of  Jacob.  In  different  ways.  11.]  For  taking  a  position.  Stoodest]  not  as  a
looker-on,  but  as  an  enemy ;  an  attitude  of  hostility,  not  sympathy.  12.]  For  malicious  pleasure
in  three  forms — looking  on  with  delight ;  rejoiced  without  reserve  ;  boasting,  spoken  proudly,  lit.
to  make  the  mouth  broad  or  open ;  a  gesture  of  contempt  and  derision  (Ps.  xxxv.  21 ;  Is.  lvii.  4  :  cf.
Ezek.  xxxv.  13,  and  Rev.  xiii.  6).  13.]  For  plundering  Jerusalem.  Gate]  City  (Mic.  i.  9).  14.]
For  seizing  Judean  captives,  to  murder  them  or  deliver  them  up  to  the  enemy.  15.  For]  Resumptive
from  ver.  10.  Righteous  retribution  in  kind.  16.]  The  greatest  crime  the  desecration  of  the
holy  mountain  by  drinking  carousals,  for  which  all  nations  are  to  drink  of  God's  wrath  till  utterly
destroyed.  Not  been]  (Job  x.  19) ;  not  a  trace  of  national  existence  left  (Ps.  xxxvii.  36  ;  Ezek.
xxvi.  21).  17.]  Yet  this  Mount  shall  become  a  sanctuary  for  God  and  his  people,  who  will  possess,
regain  their  possessions.  18.]  Israel,  again  united  and  unassailed,  shall  execute  judgment  upon  others.
A  fire]  Numb.  xxi.  28 ;  Is.  v.  24.  19.]  Extend  its  territory  to  every  region  under  heaven.  20.
Captivity]  Exiles  among  the  Canaanites  shall  possess  the  country  of  the  Canaanites ;  and  those
whom  the  Edomites  had  enslaved  shall  possess  the  cities  of  their  masters.  See  Lowth.  21.  Saviours]
Deliverers  (see  1  Mac.  v.  3 — 5);  Jewish  leaders  and  conquerors  (Judges  iii.  9 ;  Is.  xix.  20);  or
spiritually,  preachers  of  salvation  (cf.  ver.  17  and  Amos  ix.  12).  Judge]  i.e.  to  punish  (1  Sam.
hi.  13).  Kingdom]  shall  become  universal  under  the  Messiah  (Ps.  xxii.  28).  "  The  fulfilment  of
vers.  17 — 21  can  only  belong  to  the  Messianic  times,  and  in  such  a  way  that  it  commenced  with  the
founding  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  on  earth,  advances  with  its  extension  among  all  nations,  and  will
terminate  in  a  complete  fulfilment  at  the  second  coming  of  our  Lord  "   [Keil],

HOMILETICS.
The  Solemn  Message. — Verses  1,  2.

Obadiah  prophesies  against  Edom,  whose  conduct  towards  Jacob  typifies  the
general  attitude  of  hostile  nations  to  God's  people,  and  threatens  retribution  for  all
its  crimes.     These  "verses  are  introductory.

I.  The  nature  of  the  message.  God  speaks  in  manifold  ways  and  divers  forms
*o  adapt  his  revelations  to  men.  1.  A  vision.  God  first  opens  their  eyes,  and  if
they  have  not  real  visions,  they  have  fresh  light  and  new  life  poured  into  the  soul.
All  God's  servants  have  heard  and  seen  God  in  Christ ;  have  enlarged  views  of
truth  and  duty ;  and  rejoice  in  spiritual  illumination.  "  We  speak  that  we  know,
and  testify  that  we  have  seen."  2.  A  report.  To  impress  our  minds  God  often
appeals  to  the  senses,  speaks  to  the  eye  and  ear.  (a)  A  true  report,  not  a  mere
rumour  originating  with  men;  but  authentic  and  Divine.  "  From  the  Lord."  (b)
A  prevalent  report.  "  We  have  heard."  The  prophet  identifies  others,  of  earlier
or  those  of  his  own  date,  with  himself.  God's  judgments  are  known  in  the  earth
by  various  means.  Men  are  not  kept  in  the  dark.  If  the  wicked  despise  them
the  righteous  shall  be  warned.  "  Surely  the  Lord  will  do  nothing,  but  he  revealeth
his  secret  to  his  servants  the  prophets."  3.  A  judgment.  Those  who  desert  God
and  renounce  spiritual  interests  to  gratify  animal  passions  will  be  disgraced.     And


334  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   OBADTAH.


when  posterity  indulge  the  spirit,  perpetuate  and  multiply  the  sins,  of  their  ances-
tors, as  Edomites  walked  in  the  steps  of  Esau,  then  God  will  make  an  example  of
them.  "  And  I  will  lay  my  vengeance  upon  Edom,  by  the  hand  of  my  people
Israel."  II.  The  execution  of  the  message.  God's  word  is  not  empty  sound.
God  changes  not,  and  his  servants  must  not  alter  their  message.  "  Thus  saith  the
Lord  God  concerning  Edom."  1.  By  an  ambassador.  "  An  ambassador  is  sent."
Whether  this  ambassador  be  the  prophet  himself,  or  another  servant,  or  celestial
messenger,  matters  little.  God  has  agents  visible  and  invisible.  Evil  spirits  and
wicked  men  are  permitted  to  stir  up  nations  to  battle.  We  are  ambassadors  from
God  to  beseech  you  to  take  heed  and  escape  the  judgment.  2.  By  other  nations.
There  is  first  a  rumour,  then  the  ambassador,  followed  by  the  gathering  of  nations.
Though  eager  to  accomplish  their  own  ends,  and  engrossed  in  their  own  pursuits,
yet  when  God  calls,  "  Arise  ye,"  they  respond,  "  Let  us  rise  up  against  her  in
battle."  The  Medes  and  Persians,  the  Russians  and  Turks,  are  under  the  control  of
God  Almighty.  He  can  create  war  or  cause  it  to  cease.  He  has  absolute  dominion
over  the  human  heart,  and  can  turn  it  at  his  pleasure.  One  wicked  man  punishes
another  ;  one  sinful  nation  administers  justice  to  another.  "  He  maketh  the  wrath
of  man  to  praise  him."  III.  The  consequences  of  this  execution.  "  Behold,  I
have  made  thee  small  among  the  heathen."  The  greatness  of  the  calamity  is  set
forth  by  its  effects.  1.  Small  in  territory.  Edom  extended  fromDedan  of  Arabia
to  Bozrah  in  the  north  (Jer.  xlix.  8 — 13).  But  the  enemy  "laid  his  mountains
and  his  heritage  waste  for  the  dragons  of  the  wilderness  "  (Mai.  i.  3).  He  was
robbed  of  his  dominions,  and  subdued  by  the  heathen.  2.  Small  in  number.
They  were  noted  for  riches  and  power  (Gen.  xxxvi.  7 — 31);  blessed  with  men  and
possessions  :  but  were  made  small  and  sadly  reduced  in  war  (2  Kings  xiv.  7).  3.
Small  in  honour.  Not  merely  despised,  but  "  greatly  despised."  This  mighty  na-
tion was  made  insignificant  in  itself,  and  despicable  in  the  sight  of  others.  Proud
men  are  worthless  in  character,  and  ridiculed  by  inferiors.  They  wrongly  estimate
themselves,  and  are  lightly  esteemed  by  others.  Humiliation  and  shame  will  ever
be  the  result  of  their  pride  and  defiance  of  God.  God  exalts  and  abases,  makes
great  and  makes  small.  "  For  lo,  I  will  make  thee  small  among  the  heathen,  and
despised  among  men."

11  My  pride  fell  with  my  fortunes  "  [Shakespeare],


Pride  op  Heart. —  Verses  3,  4.

Edom's  dwelling  on  the  rock  which  seemed  impregnable,  fostered  his  pride  and
arrogant  self-confidence.  But  this  natural  fortification  afforded  no  shelter.  God
brought  them  down  from  their  lofty  heights,  and  retribution  found  its  victims.

I.  That  pride  of  heart  is  deceptive.  "  The  pride  of  thine  heart  hath  deceived
thee."  Edom  imagined  that  they  were  secure  in  their  elevated  rocks — that  they
were  out  of  the  reach  of  the  enemy,  and  that  they  occupied  an  impregnable  fortress.
They  were  deceived.  National  fortifications  avail  not  against  the  Divine  hand.  1.
Pride  of  heart  deceives  inert  in  the  commercial  sphere  of  life.  There  are  godless
merchants  who  build  their  nests  in  bright  stars — pride  themselves  on  strong  finan-
cial fortifications — have  a  large  capital,  a  good  stock,  and  a  fine  commercial  reputa-
tion. They  have  no  need  to  be  religious,  or  introduce  religious  sentiments  in  busi-
ness life ;  they  can  do  without  it.  They  say,  "  Who  shall  bring  me  down  ? "
God  sees  their  pride  of  heart,  and  causes  unexpected  calamity  to  work  their  ruin
(Ps.  xxxvii.  35,  36).  2.  Pride  of  heart  deceives  men  in  reference  to  their  intellec-
tual thinkings.  Many  proud  thinkers  reject  the  word  of  God,  imagine  that  they
are  safe  in  the  invincible  battlements  of  logic,  and  their  ability  to  resist  truth  and
God.  3.  Pride  of  heart  deceives  men  in  reference  to  their  moral  safety.  Men  pur-
sue a  continuous  life  of  sin,  openly  blaspheme  the  name  of  God,  and  imagine  that  they
are  safe  in  the  fortifications  of  social  position  and  wealth.    They  vainly  imagine  that


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  OBADIAH.  335


natural  qualifications  and  favourable  circumstances  will  enable  them  to  conduct  life
safely  and  well  in  defiance  of  the  Great  Euler  of  the  Universe.  They  are  deceived.
The  rocky  places  are  no  refuge  for  the  retributive  providence  of  God.  They  may
shield  from  the  assaults  of  men,  but  not  when  God  is  Captain  of  the  assailing  army.
II.  Pride  of  heart  is  presumptive.  "  Who  shall  bring  me  down  to  the  ground  ] "
1.  It  presumes  unduly  upon  the  natural,  temporal,  and  secondary  advantages  it  may
possess.  The  Edomites  presumed  unduly  upon  the  natural  position  of  their  city,
and  upon  their  high  fortification.  They  trusted  exclusively  in  these  for  protection
against  the  foe.  So  many  favoured  with  natural,  intellectual,  and  social  advan-
tages of  life/  are  glad  in  the  enjoyment  of  these  gifts,  but  their  folly  consists  in
placing  undue  confidence  in  them.  The  true  fortifications  of  life  are  not  in  stones
and  rocks,  but  in  love  and  purity  of  soul.  2.  It  presumes  ignorantly,  without  tak-
ing into  view  the  access  which  God  has  to  men,  notwithstanding  their  temporal  for-
tifications. Edom  thought  only  of  elevated  position,  and  not  the  power  of  God  to
touch  them  at  unknown  points,  and  by  imexpected  agencies.  £To  device  can  avert
God's  retributive  touch.  He  can  send  angels  on  his  errands,  who  are  not  hindered
by  the  battlements  of  men.  How  often  do  men  of  social  position  and  intellectual
ability — men  naturally  gifted — look  at  their  own  fortress  unmindful  of  God,  and
become  presumptuous.  3.  It  presumes  unwarrantably  upon  the  inability  of  men
to  achieve  its  ruin.  Edom  never  imagined  for  a  moment  that  God  would  interfere
to  work  their  ruin — did  not  see  the  Divine  purpose  in  the  armies  coming  against
them,  and  scorned  the  idea  of  men  reaching  their  altitudes.  So  men  enjoy  the
protective  advantages  of  life,  underrate  the  power  of  their  fellows,  and  hold  in  con-
tempt the  feeble  instrumentalities  which  shall  ultimately  work  their  ruin.  III.
Pride  of  heart  is  destructive.  "  I  will  bring  thee  down,  saith  the  Lord."  Men
who  boast  of  human  fortifications  which  protect  them  from  injury  are  ignorant  of
the  power  of  God,  or  vainly  imagine  they  can  elude  it — make  lawful  things  the
subject  of  unlawful  boasting — invite  the  scorn  of  men  and  the  retribution  of  God.
God  can  send  darkness  on  the  noblest  intellect,  distress  into  the  most  joyous  home,
failure  into  the  most  successful  business,  and  will  do,  if  pride  of  heart  be  indulged.
Pride  is  the  herald  of  ruin.  1.  Such  men  are  often  brought  to  humiliation  by
commercial  failure.  Their  best  schemes  fail.  Their  largest  speculations  are  un-
successful. 2.  Such  men  are  often  brought  to  humiliation  by  domestic  bereavement.
Their  fortifications  are  sealed  by  the  stern  foe  Death ;  and  the  brightest  lights  of
their  homes  are  put  out.  Thus  are  they  brought  to  the  ground.  3.  Such  men  are
often  brought  down  by  social  slander.  Kumours  get  about  concerning  the  conduct
of  the  proud,  which  endanger  their  reputation,  and  bring  the  haughty  to  the  dust
of  social  execration.  4.  Such  men  are  often  brought  down  by  death.  They  shall
surely  be  brought  down  from  their  nests  in  the  stars,  by  the  last  great  enemy  of
humanity.  Their  destruction  is — 1.  Certain.  2.  Lamentable.  3.  Humiliating.
4.  Unexpected.     5.  Irreparable  [The  Study  and  the  Pulpit],

HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

1.    Natural   advantages    often   beget  think   that  there  is  none  above   them

pride.    2.  Pride  leads  to  insolent  defiance  (Ps.  xii.  14).     God 's  honour  is  concerned

of  God.     3.  Insolent  defiance  of   God  in  putting  down  pride.     "  I  will  bring

leads  to  awful  ruin.  thee  down."  "  iEsop,  when  asked  '  AYhat

Pride  is  the  great  enemy  of  God.     It  doeth    God  1 '    said,    '  He  humbles  the

strikes  at  his  throne  and  glory,  provokes  proud   and   exalts   the   humble.'     And

hi™  to  oppose  and  punish  it.     God  re-  another,

sisteth  (setteth  himself  in  battle  array         <  Whom  morning's  dawn  beholdeth  proud,
against)  the  proud  (Jas.  iv.  6;  Gen.  xi.  The  setting  sun  beholdeth  bo  wed.'' *

4;  cf.  x.  8 — 10).     Pride  has  its  root  in  [Pusey.~\

the  practical  denial  of  God.     The  proud  "  Uo  exaltation  and  power  can  secure


336  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  OBADIAH.


those  whom  God  in  honour  is  concerned  fail ;    or  a  spark  to  fall  in  a  powder

to  bring  down.  magazine ;  water  may  be  wanting ;  there

Fortifications  may  be  constructed  and  may  be  pestilence,  dysentery,  or  mutiny

made  due  use  of,  but  must  not  be  de-  among  the  soldiers,  or  bribes  may  be  used

pended   upon.     For  no  fortification   is  as  scaling  ladders.     Then  all  is  in  vain,

too  strong  or  too  high  when  God  is  angry,  What  the  world  calls  protection,  cannot

and  will  punish.     And  he  has  various  protect  against  God's  judgment ;  death

ways  of  bringing  them  into  the  hands  of  mounts  over  all  rocks  [Lange].
the  enemies.    He  can  cause  provisions  to

HOMILETIQS.
The  Irreparable  Loss. —  Verses  5,  6.

The  prophet  now  depicts  the  utter  overthrow  of  Edom.  The  material  wealth  on
which  they  relied  shall  be  taken  away,  and  nothing  shall  remain  or  be  recovered.

I.  Their  treasures  are  searched  out.  "  How  are  the  things  of  Esau  searched
out ! "  The  most  secret  places,  the  most  hidden  things,  are  diligently  tracked  out.
Everything  safely  stored  up  in  holes  of  the  rock  was  sought  after  and  discovered.
No  place  can  hide  from  God.  No  wealth  can  protect  from  retribution.  Nothing
can  be  concealed  and  kept  on  earth.  Our  best  treasures  are  searched  out,  stolen  by
thieves  or  corroded  by  time.  In  the  judgment  day  the  hidden  things  of  all  men
will  be  brought  to  light,  every  hiding-place  of  sin  exposed,  and  sinners  stripped  of
their  pride  and  self-confidence.  II.  Their  treasures  are  taken  away.  The
grape-gatherer  leaves  some  gleanings,  thieves  and  robbers  retreat  with  what  they
can  carry  with  them  :  but  the  enemy  would  act  much  worse  than  ordinary  plunder-
ers. Nothing  shall  escape  them.  The  devastation  should  be  complete.  A  glean-
ing was  left  in  Israel  (Is.  xvii.  6;  xxiv.  13),  but  Edom  was  utterly  spoiled.
Treasures  ensure  not  from  the  invader,  aggrandize  not  the  possessors,  but  become
the  spoil  of  the  conqueror.  Nations  may  trust  to  their  defences  and  individuals  to
their  wealth,  but  God  can  take  them  all  away.  "  I  have  made  Esau  bare.  I  have
uncovered  his  secret  places,  and  he  shall  not  be  able  to  hide  himself."  III.  The
regret  at  the  loss  is  great.  "  How  art  thou  cut  off ! "  This  parenthetic  sentence
indicates  the  amazement  of  the  prophet  at  the  great  destruction  of  the  ungodly.
Sad  to  see  men  lose  reputation  and  happiness,  the  health  of  the  body  and  the
fortunes  of  the  family,  without  the  least  hope  of  recovery.  What  a  sight  to  behold
men  exposed  to  judgment,  robbed  of  all  defence,  and  stupefied  in  their  sin.  1.  God
pities  such.  Judgment  is  strange  work  to  him.  He  desires  not  the  death  of  any
sinner.  0  Jerusalem,  how  often  would  I  have  gathered  thee  !  2.  God's  servants
pity  such.  Amos  mourns  over  the  destruction  which  he  announces  in  the  name  of
God.  David  and  Jeremiah  wept  because  men  kept  not  the  law.  All  true  prophets
are  in  sympathy  with  the  people  for  whom  they  labour.  A  lost  soul  should  cause
tears  to  flow  like  rivers  of  water.  "  Oh  that  they  were  wise,  that  they  understood
thisl"

Eeliance  on  Broken  Reeds. —  Verses  7 — 9.

The  destruction  threatened  could  not  be  warded  off  by  dependence  upon  allied
armies,  renowned  wisdom,  and  heroic  valour.  Every  object  of  confidence  is  de-
stroyed. Those  very  projects  by  which  they  seek  to  protect  themselves  and  secure
their  treasures  become  the  ruin  of  both.

I.  Human  alliances  disappoint.  Those  who  forsake  God  often  flee  in  vain
confidence  to  man.  But  as  Edom  had  deceived  and  persecuted  his  brother  Jacob,
bo  in  turn  he  is  deceived  and  punished  by  his  friends.  1.  Confederates  are  worth-
less. When  Edom  seeks  for  help  and  support  from  them,  ambassadors  and  fugi-
tives are  sent  back  to  the  frontier  or  delivered  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.


HOMILBTIG  COMMENTARY:  OBADIAH.  W


Allies  will  not  entangle  themselves  in  the  fate  of  Edom.  2.  Neighbours  are  treach-
erous. They  deceive  or  overpower  them.  Men  hide  their  malice  under  a  pretence
ot  ptace.  Their  friendship  is  deceitful  as  a  brook  in  summer,  false  and  perfidious.
Hence  cried  the  heathen,  "  Friends  !  there  is  no  friend  to  be  found."  The  man  of
my  peace,  with  whom  I  had  no  difference,  in  whom  I  trusted,  proved  treacherous.
"  For  it  was  not  an  enemy  that  reproached  me ;  then  I  could  have  borne  it "  (Ps.
lv.  12,  13).  3.  Dependents  forsake  them.  Those  who  had  bread  with  them;
those  entertained  by  them  and  who  lived  by  them,  laid  plots  for  their  overthrow.
While  they  professed  to  aid  they  secretly  desired  to  wound  them.  Unkind  acts
from  those  in  whom  we  put  confidence  are  most  severe.  To  spurn  those  from
whom  we  derive  our  bread  and  being  is  the  height  of  ingratitude  and  malice.
"  All  my  friends  have  forsaken  me,"  cried  a  Prime  Minister  of  England.  "  And
thou,  0  Brutus!"  said  the  dying  Caesar,  "yea,  mine  own  familiar  friend,  in  whom
I  trusted,  which  did  eat  of  my  bread,  hath  lifted  up  his  heel  against  me."  Thus
the  help  of  man  proves  to  be  vain.  When  nations  are  united  in  fear,  they  may  be
severed  and  turned  against  one  another.  "Every  experiment  by  multitudes  or
by  individuals  that  has  a  sensual  and  selfish  aim  will  fail,"  says  Emerson.  The
giants  in  old  time  succeeded  not  in  confederacy  against  the  gods.  The  firmest
friendship,  the  strongest  armies,  are  broken  reeds.  "  Cursed  be  the  man  that  trusteth
in  man  and  maketh  flesh  his  arm,  and  whose  heart  departeth  from  the  Lord."  II.
Worldly  wisdom  failed.  The  prophet  makes  an  appeal  to  Edom,  "  Shall  I  not  ? "
God  will  turn  their  knowledge  into  ignorance,  and  their  wisdom  into  folly.  1.
Wise  men  will  be  destroyed.  They  will  not  have  wit  or  wisdom  enough  to  preserve
themselves.  A  wise  man,  though  poor,  may  defend  a  city  (Prov.  ix.  14,  15).  A
woman's  wisdom  defeated  the  purpose  of  Joab  (2  Sam.  xx.  14 — 22).  Archimedes
saved  Syracuse  from  Eoman  plunder.  Wisdom  is  better  than  strength,  and  its
merits  often  more  brilliant.  Sad  therefore  is  the  loss  of  wise  men.  2.  Wisdom
itself  shall  perish.  "  And  understanding  out  of  the  mount  of  Esau."  "  Know-
ledge is  power,"  and  in  "  the  multitude  of  counsellors  there  is  safety."  But  "  there
is  no  wisdom,  nor  understanding,  nor  counsel  against  the  Lord."  Pharaoh's  device
was  frustrated.  Ahithophel's  counsel  was  befooled  when  it  was  thought  to  be  like
"  the  oracle  of  God."  Worldly  policy  is  weak,  begets  suspicion  and  leads  to  ruin.
"  The  best-laid  schemes "  are  often  overturned  by  accident,  and  the  wisdom  of
legislators  "  made  foolish  "  by  the  providence  of  God.  Trust  not  to  human  wisdom.
It  can  neither  prevent  the  treachery  of  men,  nor  ward  off  the  judgment  of  God.
When  we  seek  protection  in  "  the  wisdom  of  men,"  from  national  distress  and  per-
sonal evil,  we  shall  be  disappointed.  "  There  is  no  understanding  in  them  ; "  they
are  bereft  of  all  prudence  and  help.  "  The  wisdom  of  their  wise  men  shall  perish,
and  the  understanding  of  their  prudent  men  shall  be  hid."  III.  Martial  valour
availed  not.  "  Thy  mighty  men,  0  Teman  !  shall  be  dismayed."  Their  courage
turned  pale.  Heroes  and  valiant  men  were  cowards.  Their  last  hope  was  cut  off,
brave  warriors  were  dismayed  and  trembled  in  despair.  If  the  mighty  fall,  what
becomes  of  the  weak  1  "  Howl,  fir- trees,  if  the  cedars  be  shaken."  When  armies
and  fleets  fail,  the  people  are  defenceless,  and  "  every  one  of  the  mount  of  Esau
may  be  cut  off  by  slaughter."  The  nation  is  panic-stricken,  and  the  rigour  of  death
strikes  them  helpless  (Ps.  lxxvi.  5).  How  terrible  was  the  overthrow  of  Edom !
Its  wealth  and  confederacies,  its  renown  and  its  valour,  availed  not  in  the  day  of
calamity.  "  Cease  ye  from  man,  whose  breath  is  in  his  nostrils  :  for  wherein  is  he
to  be  accounted  of  1 "

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  7.  Edom  is  a  type  of  worldly  both  respects  the  punishment  of  Edom
wisdom  and  secular  policy,  as  well  as  of  is  a  warning  to  all  Machiavellian  politi-
onbrotherly  enmity  to  God's  people.    In     cians  in  these  latter  days  [  Wordsworth],


338  H0MILET1G  COMMENTARY:  OBADIAH.


Ver.  8.      1.  The  judgment.      I  will  that  will  not  use  their  understanding  to

"  destroy  the  wise  men."     2.  The  time,  keep  out  of  the  way  of  sin.     He  that

"  In  that  day."     3.  The  certainty  of  it.  will  be  foolish,  let  him  be  foolish  still

"  Saith  the  Lord."  [Lange].

Edorris  destruction.  1.  Its  outward  1.  Carnal  confidences  of  men.  Good
cause.  2.  Its  moral  necessity  in  God's  situations,  abundant  treasures,  powerful
purpose.  "  The  prophet  sums  up  briefly  allies,  prudence,  and  mighty  men  to  de-
God's  end  in  all  this.     The  immediate  liver  in  extremity.

means  were  man's  treachery,  man's  vio-  2.   The  destruction  of  these  confidences.

lence,  the  failure  of  wisdom  in  the  wise,  Every  one  is  threatened,  and  the  terror

and  of  courage  in  the  brave.     The  end  is  only  the  forerunner  of  the  judgment

of  all  in  God's  will,  was  their  destruction,  of  God.     "  The  death  or  disunity  of  the

All   things    work  together   to    good  to  mighty  often  proves  the  death  and  de-

those  who  love  God,  and  to  evil  to  those  struction  of  the  many  ;  and  it  is  in  vain

who  hate  him "  [Pusey].  to  depend   upon  mighty  men  for   our

Understanding  out  of  Mount  of  Esau,  protection,  if  we  have  not  an  Almighty

God  will  justly  deny  those  understand-  God  for  us,  much  less  if  we  have  an

ing  to  keep  out  of  the  way  of  danger,  Almighty  God  against  us"  [Lange].

HOMILETICS.

Unbrotherly  Conduct  and  its  Consequences. —  Verses  10,  11.

4  The  prophet  shows  the  equity  and  the  cause  of  the  judgment  pronounced  against
Edom.  The  sentence  increases  in  severity  as  special  sins  are  more  aggravated
in  their  quality.  Edom  was  guilty  of  many  sins,  but  none  so  great  as  unnatural
conduct  and  vindictive  spirit  towards  his  brother  Jacob.  This  violence  is  mentioned
in  general  terms  (ver.  10),  and  in  particular  descriptions  (vers.  11 — 14).  In  vers.
10,  11  we  have —

I.  A  brother  in  circumstances  of  distress.  It  was  a  day  of  calamity  with
Judah,  calamity  mentioned  three  times  to  indicate  its  depth  (ver.  13).  All  are  ex-
posed to  danger  and  distress,  require  sympathy  and  aid.  "  A  brother  is  born  for
adversity."  Three  clauses  form  a  climax.  1.  Judah' 's  possessions  were  taken.
"  Strangers  carried  away  his  forces,"  or  substance.  The  country  was  probably
cleared  of  its  produce,  cattle,  and  treasures.  2.  Judah' s  cities  were  destroyed.
"  Foreigners  entered  into  his  gates."  The  gates  were  fortified  and  defended ;  yet
they  were  carried  by  the  enemy.  The  capital  was  taken  and  the  temple  destroyed
by  the  Edomites  (2  Esdras  iv.  45).  3.  Judah's  population  were  made  captives.
"  And  cast  lots  upon  Jerusalem."  When  the  city  was  taken,  the  conquerors  di-
vided the  booty,  slew  some  of  the  prisoners,  and  took  the  others  captive.  Such
distress  should  have  excited  the  pity  and  prompted  the  help  of  the  Edomites  :  but
"  in  the  day  of  Jerusalem  they  cried,  Ease  it,  rase  it,  even  to  the  foundation  there-
of." II.  Unnatural  conduct  towards  a  brother  in  distress.  "Thy  violence
against  thy  brother  Jacob."  "  Violence  includes  all  sorts  of  ill-treatment,  from  one
with  whom  might  is  right."  1.  They  took  up  hostile  attitude  towards  their  brother.
"  Thou  stoodest  on  the  other  side."  Not  mere  spectators  of  the  calamities  of  Jacob,
but  intensely  opposed  to  him.  There  was  lack  of  sympathy  and  positive  cruelty.
All  this  towards  a  brother,  and  a  twin  brother  !  Edom  acted  with  the  enemy,  and
took  the  contrary  side  to  the  dictates  of  nature ;  feasted  his  eyes  with  the  misery,
and  eagerly  sought  the  destruction  of  Jacob.  "  Thou  wast  as  one  of  them."  A
man  should  be  more  affectionate  towards  a  brother  than  a  stranger.  But  often  the
closer  the  relationship  the  greater  the  cruelty.  Ingratitude  is  always  black,  but
doubly  black  in  a  brother.  "  Love  as  brethren."  This  conduct  is — (1)  Most  repre-
hensible ;  (2)  Most  inhuman  ;  (3)  Most  guilty.  III.  Righteous  punishment  for
unnatural  conduct  towards  a  brother  in  distress.     Edom  helped  the  Babylonian*


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  OBADIAH.  339


in  the  overthrow  of  Jerusalem,  exulted  in  the  downfall  of  Jacob,  and  thought  to
secure  his  own  safety  and  prosperity.  They  were  disappointed.  God  in  righteous
retribution  visited  them  with  the  punishment  they  inflicted  on  others.  Two  periods
of  ignominy  are  mentioned  in  their  history.  They  would  suffer  as  a  conquered  people,
and  at  length  be  utterly  extinct.  1.  They  would  suffer  as  a  conquered  people,
"  Shame  shall  cover  thee."  Not  the  shame  of  penitence,  but  the  shame  of  dishonour.
Jacob  was  not  ruined  as  they  expected.  They  were  humbled  and  made  contempt-
ible, and  the  judgment  of  God  confounded  them  for  taking  part  against  those  whom
they  should  have  loved.  Shame  will  ever  be  the  robe  and  the  result  of  social
cruelty.  "  Let  mine  adversaries  be  clothed  with  shame,  and  let  them  cover  them-
selves with  their  own  confusion,  as  with  a  mantle."  2.  They  xoould,  he  cut  off  as  a
nation.  The  sentence  was  centuries  in  fulfilment ;  but  after  repeated  trials  the  end
came  and  God  cut  them  off.  Justice  without  mitigation,  and  ruin  without  recovery,
will  come  upon  nations  and  individuals,  who  rejoice  in  a  brother's  affliction,  and
do  what  they  can  to  increase  it  (Lev.  xxii.  3).  Ages  abate  not  the  force  of  God's
word,  and  years  change  not  the  sinner's  doom.  "  I  will  make  thee  perpetual  deso-
lations, and  thy  cities  shall  not  return :  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord."

Violation  op  Social  Duty. —  Verses  12 — 14.

These  words  describe  what  the  conduct  of  Edom  towards  his  brother  ought  to
have  been ;  and  by  implied  contrast  with  his  actual  conduct  condemns  his  violence,
rapacity,  and  murder.  They  not  only  neglected  social  duty,  but  acted  with  invete-
rate cruelty

I.  In  taking  malicious  pleasure  at  a  brother's  misfortune.  The  various  ways
are  minutely  specified.  1.  With  insolent  looks.  "  Thou  shouldest  not  have  looked"
(a)  With  a  look  of  total  indifference.  Distressed  neighbours  require  relief,  and  we
should  not  be  unconcerned  in  their  sorrows.  The  priest  and  the  Levite  looked  on
the  wounded  Samaritan  and  passed  by.  Forgetfulness  of  our  common  origin  and
our  constant  exposure  to  evil  is  another  form  of  human  hatred,  (b)  With  a  look
of  malignant  joy.  They  looked  with  scornful  eye.  They  looked  and  delighted  in
the  affliction  of  Jacob.  The  Saviour  was  pained  by  the  impudent  gaze  of  the
multitude.  "  They  look  and  stare  upon  me."  Those  who  make  mirth  at  other
men's  misery,  dishonour  their  nature  and  insult  their  God.  This  selfish  cruelty  is
a  fearful  provocation  (Prov.  xvii.  5).  "  Rejoice  not  when  thine  enemy  falleth,
and  let  not  thine  heart  be  glad  when  he  stumbleth."  2.  In  blasphemous  words.
"  Neither  shouldest  thou  have  spoken  proudly."  They  enlarged  the  mouth  (margin)
with  a  flow  of  haughty  words.  They  magnified  themselves  against  God's  people
(Job  xix.  5) ;  and  mocked  them  in  sorrow.  This  spirit  of  Edom  exists  yet;  men
add  insolence  to  pride,  and  affliction  to  affliction.  Mockery  of  God's  people  is
mockery  to  God  himself.  "  Thus  with  your  mouth  ye  have  boasted  against  me,
and  have  multiplied  your  words  against  me  :  I  have  heard  them."  3.  In  cruel  acts,
(a)  Acts  of  selfishness,  (b)  Acts  of  robbery.  "  Nor  have  laid  hands  on  their  sub*
stance."  They  were  drawn  into  the  cities,  "  entering  the  gate  of  God's  people  to  share
the  conqueror's  triumphant  gaze  on  his  calamity."  Then  they  laid  violent  hands  upon
the  spoil.  Keep  away  from  sin  if  you  wish  to  escape  it.  Enter  no  place  to  enrich
yourself  by  the  prey  of  another,  lest  you  be  ruined  yourself.  Wealth,  so  gained,  will
prove  like  the  gold  of  Toulouse,  an  evil  to  all  that  meddle  with  it — "  A  burdensome
stone  for  all  people ;  all  that  burden  themselves  with  it  shall  be  cut  in  pieces."  II.
In  making  common  cause  with  the  enemy.  Instead  of  helping  their  brother,  they
aided  the  enemy.  1.  By  secret  ambush.  They  stood  in  the  cross- way,  the  fork
where  the  roads  met,  or  narrow  mountain  passes,  to  intercept  the  fugitives  (2  Kings
xxv.  4).  The  Chaldeans  were  not  so  well  acquainted  with  the  ways  and  passes  as
the  Edomites.  Hence  they  took  the  cruel  part  to  help  the  foe  and  seek  the  com-
plete destruction  of  their  brethren.  2.  By  cruel  murder.  They  cut  off  those  that
escaped  and  delivered  up  all  that  they  caught.     Every  association  with  thieves  and


340


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   OBADIAR.


robbers  is  a  breach  of  the  commandment ;  and  those  who  join  with  others  in  seek-
ing the  life  of  man  are  not  mere  accessaries,  but  murderers.  Paul  charged  the  murder
of  Stephen  upon  himself.  Malice  in  any  form  contains  the  seeds  of  all  evil,  and  if
not  overcome  by  grace,  will  reign  and  ripen  for  destruction.  Edom  did  not  com-
mence the  war,  but  aided  those  who  did,  and  hence  were  guilty  of  making  common
cause  with  the  enemy.  "  Shouldest  thou  help  the  ungodly  and  love  them  that
hate  the  Lord  1 "  III.  This  neglect  of  duty  was  at  a  time  when  there  was
every  inducement  to  perform  it.  "  In  the  day  of  their  calamity  "  (ver.  13).  "  In
the  day  of  distress."  Such  a  time  should  awaken  sympathy  and  tender  feeling  for
our  brother.  To  increase  the  burdens  and  conspire  against  the  interests  of  men
is  bloodthirsty.  If  you  cannot  relieve  the  distressed,  do  not  display  your  insolence
and  satiate  your  vengeance  by  increasing  their  misery.  This  is  fratricidal  and  will
bring  down  the  judgment  of  Heaven.  One  burns  with  indignation  at  such  in-
humanity. God  will  turn  the  current  of  his  wrath  upon  such  offenders  (Prov.
xxiv.  18).

"  This  deep  disgrace  of  brotherhood
Touches  me  deeper  than  you  can  imagine  "  [Shakespeare"}.


HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Vers.  12 — 14.  Qruelty.  They  were
charged  with  cruelty.  1.  Cruelty  of  the
eye.  2.  Cruelty  of  heart.  3.  Cruelty
of  tongue.  (1)  In  their  anger  they
spake  cruelly,  instigating  their  enemies
to  destroy  them.  (2)  In  their  pride
they  spake  insolently,  expressing  inward
joy  at  their  ruin,  by  speeches  of  scorn
and  disdain,  and  of  triumph  over  them.
4.  Cruelty  of  hands.  Two  things  aggra-
vate this  cruelty  of  Edom.  (1)  Against
a  brother.  (2)  And  in  the  time  in  which
it  was  done.  For  a  Turk  to  oppress  a
Christian,  an  infidel  a  believer,  is  but  a
trespass  against  humanity ;  for  Hebrews
to  strive,  and  one  Christian  to  afflict
another,  woundeth  religion.  Brethren
by  nation,  brethren  by  religion,  should
live  as  brethren  by  nature ;  live  as
brethren,  and  our  Father  will  be  angry
if  we  do  not,  and  the  God  of  peace  will
fight  against  us  [Adapted  from  Marbury].

Nothing  is  more  hateful  to  God  than
unnaturalness.  "  A  brother  is  born  to
adversity"  (Prov.  xvii.  17);  his  birth
binds  him  to  it ;  and  he  must  first  offer
violence  to  himself  that  is  unkind  to  his
distressed  brother;  he  must  tear  the
dictates  of  nature  out  of  his  own  heart
[Trapp].

Violence,  bloodshed,  unrelenting
deadly  hatred  against  the  whole  people,
a  longing  for  their  extermination,  had
been  inveterate  characteristics  of  Esau.
Joel  and  Amos  had  already  denounced


God's  judgments  against  them  for  two
forms  of  this  hatred — the  murder  of
settlers  in  their  own  land,  or  of  those
who  were  sold  to  them  (Joel  iii.  19  :
Am.  i.  6  ;  ix.  1 1).  Obadiah  warns  them
against  yet  a  third — intercepting  their
fugitives  in  their  escape  from  the  more
powerful  enemy.  Stand  not  in  the  cross
way.  Whoso  puts  himself  in  the  situa-
tion to  commit  an  old  sin,  does,  in  fact,
will  to  renew  it,  and  will,  unless  hindered
from  without,  certainly  do  it.  Probably
he  will,  through  sin's  inherent  power  of
growth,  do  worse  [Pusey].

Sin  proceeds  by  degrees;  neither  is  any
man  at  his  worst  at  first.  First  they
looked  at  the  Church's  calamity,  and  then
they  laughed,  and  then  they  insulted,  and
spoke  big  words,  and  then  they  plunder-
ed, and  lastly  they  butchered  some  and
imprisoned  some  [Trapp].

Ver.  12.  The  day  that  he  became  a
stranger.  1.  Judah  (the  Christian
Church)  chastised.  Not  treated  as  a
privileged  people,  but  as  strangers,  and
exercised  with  strange  lots.  (1)  Chas-
tised by  God.  (2)  Persecuted  by  men.
2.  Judah  defended.  The  Church  may
be  deeply  fallen  and  deserve  to  be  chas-
tised ;  but  God  undertakes  for  her,
checks  the  cruelty,  and  punishes  the  in-
solence of  the  enemy.  God  is  faithful,
though  men  are  unfaithful.

However  wicked  men  walk  after  the
lusts  and  passions  of  their  own  hearts,


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  OBADIAH.  341


and  stick  at  nothing  which  they  will,  against  Jacob,  yet  the  Lord  tells  him,
and  have  power  to  effect,  yet  the  Lord  thou  shouldest  not  have  done  thus  and
will  let  them  know,  that  they  stand  thus,  but  wast  obliged  by  the  law  to  do
obliged  by  a  law  to  duty,  the  violation  otherwise,  being  both  a  brother  and  a
whereof  he  will  remark,  aggravate,  and  neighbour  [Ilutchesonj.
punish;  for,  though  Edom satisfied  him-
self  and   his    passion  in  what   he    did  "  So  many  laws  argue  so  many  sins "  [Milton].

HOMILETIGS.
The  Day  op  Ketribution. — Verses  15,  16.

Another  warning  of  judgment  to  come.  All  men  are  amenable  to  law.  God
notices  violations  of  law  and  duty.  He  is  present  in  the  affairs  and  will  adminis-
ter justice  on  the  sins  of  men.     "  For  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  near."

I.  God  governs  men  by  a  law  of  requital.  Human  life  appears  confused,
but  God  has  plan  and  design.  The  wicked  may  triumph  and  the  righteous  suffer,
but  God  will  rectify  matters.  Men  may  disregard  and  deny  the  day  of  retribution,
but  cannot  escape  it.  They  often  suffer  here  in  loss  of  property,  thwarted  plans,
and  bad  repute.  Look  not  then  upon  the  wrath  of  man,  but  the  judgment  of
God.  1.  This  retribution  may  be  near.  "The  day  of  the  Lord  is  near."  2.  It
infixed  in  time.  "The  day  of  the  Lord."  3.  It  is  certain.  "They  shall  drink."
"  Vengeance  is  mine :  I  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord."  II.  This  law  of  retribu-
tion will  be  in  equity.  "  As  thou  hast  done  it  shall  be  done  unto  thee."  It
is  the  lex  talionis.  God  renders  exactly  to  nations  and  individuals  according  to
their  works.  Adonibezek  confessed,  "  As  I  have  done  so  God  hath  requited  me  "
(Jud.  i.  7).  With  the  froward  God  is  froward  (Ps.  xviii.  26) ;  with  the  cruel  he
is  strict,  as  with  Agag  and  Edom.  Men  are  filled  with  their  own  ways  (Pro v.
xiv.  14),  and  reap  exactly  what  they  sow  in  quality  and  quantity.  "  With  what
measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again."  1.  In  personal  experience.
"  Thy  reward  shall  be  upon  thine  own  head."  2.  In  bitter  degree.  "  They  shall
drink  and  swallow  down."  3.  In  long  duration.  "  Drink  continually."  "  His
mischief  shall  return  upon  his  own  head,  and  his  violent  dealings  shall  come  down
upon  his  own  pate."

"  Heaven  is  above  all,  yet  there  sits  a  Judge
That  no  king  can  corrupt"  [Shakespeare],

HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  15.    Tliy  reward,  &c.     1.  Then  have  drunk  the  red  wine  in  the  cup,  the

take  not  the  law  in  your  own  hands,  wicked  must  drink  the  dregs  ;  the  cup

2.  Be  encouraged  in  a  good  cause.     3.  passeth  from  place  to  place  till  all  be

Fear  in  a  bad  cause.  drank  off."

Ver.  16.     As  ye  have  drunk.     A  me-         All  nations  are,  in  the  first  instance,

taphor  found  in  Scripture  and  heathen  all  who  had  been  leagued  against  God's

writers,  in  allusion  to  the  cup  of  poison  people ;  but  the  wide  term  comprehends

given  to  criminals,  or  to  feasts  where  all  who,  in  time,  become  like  them.    It

the  governor  gave  to  each  guest  (John  is  a  rule  of  God's  justice  for  all  times,

ii.  9).     As  God's  people  had  drunk  the  Each  in  turn  drank  continuously,  until

cup  of  affliction,  so  must  the  heathen  it  became  as  though  it  had  never  been,

drink  of  it.     The  cup  of  sorrow.    1.  To  To  swallow  up,  and  be  swallowed  up  in

God's   people — (a)  mixed  with   sweet-  turn,  is  the  world's  history  [Pusey].
ness;  (b)  it  will  soon  be  over.     2.  To  1.  The  Hill  of  Zion  God's  holy  mount.

the  wicked — (a)  full  of  wrath ;  (b)  will  2.  This  mount  polluted  by  the  carousals

last  for  ever.     "  When   God's  people  of  men.    3.  This  mount  vindicated  and


342  EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  OBADIAH.


purified  by  God.     The  Church  may  be  unholy  ;  punish  the  spoiler  and  defend

laid  waste  and  made  desolate,  but  God  the  worshipper.     "  Here  will  I  dwell,

will  purify  it  and  revenge  its  enemies ;  for  I  have  a  delight  therein."
will  make  a  difference  between  holy  and

HOMILETICS.
The  Kingdom  an  Asylum  in  Judgment. —  Verse  17.

Mount  Zion  is  a  type  of  the  Church  of  God.  While  heathen  nations  suffer  in
judgment  it  shall  be  restored,  enlarged,  and  beautified.  It  will  become  the  seat  of
empire,  and  God  shall  reign  over  a  redeemed  race  for  ever  (vers.  17 — 21).

I.  The  Church  of  God  is  a  centre  of  refuge.  "Upon  Mount  Zion  shall  be
deliverance."  The  return  of  the  Jews  is  a  type  of  redemption.  The  Church  of
God  consists  of  those  who  have  fled  for  refuge  in  Christ.  They  are  delivered  from
self  and  sin's  dominion.  The  city  of  God  is  a  sanctuary  undefiled  and  free
(Joel  iii.  17).  It  is  built  upon  a  rock,  and  the  gates  of  hell  cannot  prevail  against
it.  Its  citizens  are  those  "  who  have  escaped  of  Israel,"  those  who  claim  its  pri-
vileges through  Divine  grace.  "  In  Mount  Zion  and  in  Jerusalem  shall  be  de-
liverance, as  the  Lord  hath  said,  and  in  the  remnant  whom  the  Lord  shall  call."
II.  The  Church  of  God  is  a  moral  beauty.  "There  shall  be  holiness."
Physical  beauty  is  seen  in  creation,  moral  in  the  Christian  Church.  In  Christian
life  we  see  "  the  beauty  of  holiness."  1.  Holiness  is  promised.  "  There  shall  be."
God  will  complete  his  work.  First,  deliverance ;  then  holiness,  redemption,  adorn-
ment, and  service.  "  That  we,  being  delivered  out  of  the  hands  of  our  enemies,
might  serve  him  without  fear,  in  holiness  and  righteousness  before  him,  all  the
days  of  our  life."  2.  Holiness  should  be  pursued.  By  this  we  are  qualified  for
enjoyments  on  earth  and  in  heaven.  In  this  consists  the  dignity  of  our  character
and  the  consummation  of  our  bliss.  "  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the
Lord."  III.  The  Church  of  God  is  a  secure  inheritance.  "The  house  of
Jacob  shall  possess  their  possessions."  1.  They  shall  regain  their  own  inheritance.
Recover  their  possessions  from  the  hands  of  Edom  and  Syria.  2.  They  shall
possess  the  territories  of  their  enemies.  The  world  is  the  inheritance  of  the  Church.
"All  things  are  yours."  Ungodly  nations  will  be  judged  and  their  dominions
taken  from  them ;  but  the  Church  will  regain  its  privileges,  enlarge  its  bounds,
and  enjoy  perpetual  security.  "  I  will  make  thine  horn  iron,  and  I  will  make  thy
hoofs  brass ;  and  thou  shalt  beat  in  pieces  many  people ;  and  I  will  consecrate
their  gain  unto  the  Lord,  and  their  substance  unto  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth."

The  Kingdom  Regained  and  Enlarged. —  Verses  18 — 21.

The  holy  land  would  be  repossessed,  and  adjoining  regions  annexed.

I.  The  kingdom  regained.  1.  The  exiles  should  return.  "The  captivity,"
prisoners  of  war,  would  be  reclaimed,  and  wandering  exiles  owned  as  sons  of  Israel.
2.  The  enemies  would  be  subdued.  "  There  shall  not  be  any  remaining  of  the  house
of  Esau."  The  victory  of  the  Church  is  not  by  physical,  but  moral  power ;  not
by  carnal,  but  spiritual  weapons.  The  word  of  God,  the  gospel,  like  a  spirit  of
judgment  and  a  spirit  of  burning,  melts  the  penitent  and  consumes  the  impenitent ;
restores  the  sinner  and  confirms  the  saint.  Multitudes  shall  be  converted,  and
truth,  like  an  unquenchable  fire,  shall  burn  up  error  and  superstition.  Most  distant
tribes  shall  be  brought  to  Christ,  and  most  unlikely  things  shall  come  to  pass.
"  Eor,  behold,  the  day  cometh  that  shall  burn  as  an  oven ;  and  all  the  proud,  yea,
and  all  that  do  wickedly,  shall  be  stubble."  II.  The  kingdom  enlarged.  Judah  and
Israel  shall  become  one,  and  extend  their  boundaries  to  the  four  quarters  of  the  globe.
1.  Union  of  the  tribes.  All  feuds  and  divisions  shall  cease,  and  Jew  and  Gentile
become  one  in  Christ.     2.   Conquest  of  other  nations  (ver.  20).     The  prophet  looks


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  0BAD1AH.


843


beyond  the  return  from  captivity  and  conquest  of  Canaan.  He  points  to  the  ori-
ginal promise  (Gen.  xxviii.  14).  The  gospel  is  aggressive  in  spirit  and  purpose.  All
nations  are  to  be  conquered,  and  Christ  must  have  the  heathen  for  his  inheritance,
and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  his  possession.  III.  The  kingdom  supreme.
When  Israel  takes  possession  of  the  border  nations,  judges  will  ascend  Mount  Zion
to  defend  it  and  govern  their  enemies.  The  mountains  of  Esau  express  the  idea  of
other  lands  in  contrast  to  Zion.  To  judge  means  not  simply  to  settle  disputes,  but
to  exercise  dominion.  Hence  the  kingdom  will  be  supreme  and  Jehovah  will  de-
clare himself  to  be  the  Ruler  of  the  universe.  His  royal  sceptre  does  not  yet  sway
all  the  world.  The  Saviour,  of  whom  others  are  only  types,  is  still  ruling  his
people  and  gaining  his  dominions.  Soon  shall  his  blessings  extend,  remote  as  the
curse.  He  must  reign  till  he  hath  put  all  things  under  him.  Willingly  or  by
force,  they  must  submit.  "  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  are  become  the  kingdoms
of  our  Lord  and  of  his  Christ,  and. he  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Ver.  18.  The  flame  and  the  stubble.
Cf.  Is.  v.  24;  x.  17.  I.  God's  people
like  a  fire.  "  Jacob  a  fire  and  Joseph  a
flame."  1.  In  their  personal  love  to
Christ.  This  is  the  fire  that  he  kindles
in  the  earth.  It  burns  upon  the  altar
within,  and  like  the  fire  of  old,  never
goes  out.  "  The  love  of  Christ  constrain-
eth  us."  2.  In  their  personal  zeal  for
Christ.  They  burn  themselves,  and  seek
to  excite  others  to  love  and  good  works.
The  Psalmist  and  the  Saviour  were  con-
sumed by  the  zeal  of  their  master's  house.
Brainerd  wished  to  be  a  flame  of  fire  in
the  cause  of  God.  Basil  was  represent-
ed as  a  pillar  of  fire,  and  Latimer  longed
for  the  spark  of  the  Spirit  in  the  preach-
ing of  the  day.  II.  The  wicked  like
stubble.  "Esau  for  stubble."  Vital
force  has  forsaken  them.  They  are
empty  and  worthless ;  ready  for  the
touch  of  the  flame.  1.  In  their  moral
character,  and  2.  In  their  moral  condi-
tion. This  fire  shall  eventually  consume
all  hypocrisy,  infidelity,  and  opposition.
"  The  light  of  Israel  shall  be  for  a  fire,
and  his  Holy  One  for  a  flame ;  and  it
shall  burn  and  devour  his  thorns  and
his  briers  in  one  day"  (Is.  x.  17,  18).

Opposers  and  meddlers  will  be  de-
stroyed. "There  shall  not  be  any  re-
maining of  the  house  of  Esau."  Perse-
cution fans  the  flame.  Stubble  can
never  quench  the  fire.     Let  all  enemies


beware.  "  Our  God  is  a  consuming  fire."
Ver.  21.  Mount  Zion.  The  perpe-
tuity of  the  Church.  Mount  Zion.  1.
The  residence  of  God.  2.  The  seat  of
universal  government.  God  the  Head ;
Saviour's  temporal  and  spiritual  vice-
gerents.

God  will  raise  up  rulers  for  his
people.  These  rulers  judge  and  con-
demn the  world,  but  defend  and  save
the  Church.  But  Jehovah  is  supreme,
and  executes  his  judgments  by  all  agen-
cies and  instrumentalities.  Let  none
contest  his  power,  for  his  glory  will  be
revealed  in  the  defeat  of  his  enemies
and  the  salvation  of  his  people.  His
kingdom  can  never  be  destroyed.  "  The
Lord  shall  reign  over  them  in  Mount
Zion  from  henceforth,  even  for  ever "
(Mic.  iv.  7  :  Ps.  xciii.  97  :  Zech.  xiv.  9).
Majestic,  comprehensive  simplicity  of
prophecy !  All  time  and  eternity,  the
struggles  of  time  and  the  rest  of  eternity,
are  summed  up  in  those  three  words;
Zion  and  Edom  retire  from  sight ;  both
are  comprehended  in  that  one  kingdom,
and  "  God  is  all  in  all."  The  strife  is
ended ;  not  that  ancient  strife  only  be-
tween the  evil  and  the  good,  the  op-
pressor and  the  oppressed,  the  subduer
and  the  subdued ;  but  the  whole  strife
and  disobedience  of  the  creature  towards
the  Creator,  man  against  his  God  [Pusey],


844


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   OBADIAH.


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  THE  CHAPTER.


Vers.  1,  2.  The  circumstances  of
Obadiah's  country  and  family  are  de-
signedly passed  over,  that  we  may  not
rest  and  depend  upon  the  outward
respectability  of  men,  but  derive  the
authority  of  such  prophecy,  and  the
certainty  of  its  issues,  from  God  alone.
Preachers  must  be,  not  in  name  alone,
but  also  in  fact,  Obadiahs,  i.  e.  servants
of  God  (1  Cor.  iv.  1)  [Starke],

Vers.  3,  4.  Pride.  God  hath  a  spe-
cial indignation  at  pride  above  all  sins
[Bp  Hall].  "He  that  would  build
lastingly  must  lay  his  foundation  low."
When  pride  cometh,  then  cometh  shame
(Prov.  xi.  2 ;  xxix.  23).

"  In  pride,  in  reasoning  pride,  our  error  lies ;
All  quit  their  sphere,  and  rush  into  the  skies.
Pride  still  is  aiming  at  the  bless'd  abodes ;
Men  would  be  angels,  angels  would  be  gods."

[Pope.]

Vers.  5,  6.  Thieves.  Paulinus,  when
he  was  told  that  the  Goths  had  sacked
Nola  and  plundered  him  of  all  he  had,
lifted  up  his  eyes  to  heaven,  and  said,
"  Lord,  thou  knowest  where  I  have  laid
up  my  treasure  "  [Bib.  Museum].

Yer.  7.  Fickleness.  Clocks  will  go
as  they  are  set ;  but  man,  irregular  man,
is  never  certain  [Massinger].

Ver.  8.  Many  had  proved  themselves
wise  if  they  had  not  thought  themselves
so  [Bp  Hall].  He  that  is  not  wise  will
not  be  taught ;  but  there  is  a  wisdom
which  multiplieth  bitterness  (Ecclus.
xxi.  12).

H  Heaven  is  for  thee  too  high  ;  be  lowly  wise. "

[Milton.]

Ver.  9.

"  "Wherefore  shoulcT  not  strength  and  might
There  fai)  where  virtue  fails?  "  [Milton.]

Vers.  10 — 14.  Neither  shouldest  thou.
There  is  a  debt  of  mercy  and  pity,  of
charity  and  compassion,  of  relief  and
succour,  due  to  human  nature,  and  pay-
able from  one  man  to  another ;  and  such
as  deny  to  pay  it  the  distressed  in  the
time  of  their  abundance  may  justly  ex-
pect it  will   be  denied   themselves  in


time  of  want  [Burkitt].  "  Be  more  glad
to  see  a  man's  amendment  than  his
punishment."  He  that  is  not  concerned
that  his  brother  should  perish,  is  in
great  danger  of  perishing  himself  [Bp
Wilson].

Vers.  15,  16.  Retribution.  To  the
revengeful  God  will  be  robed  in  venge-
ance, and  to  the  merciful  he  will  be  a
God  of  love.  Thus  our  own  characters,
whether  good  or  bad,  will  be  thrown
back  upon  ourselves,  with  the  conscious
force  of  Divinity.  What  is  hell  but
sin's  reflections  of  the  Divine  character —
the  rays  of  the  Eternal  falling  upon  the
soul  through  the  combustible  medium
of  the  moral  corruption,  and  thus  setting
all  on  fire]  Let  us  remember,  then,
that  there  is  to  be  a  Divine  reflection  of
ourselves,  and  that  exactly  with  what
measure  we  mete,  it  will  be  measured  to
us  again  [Dr  Thornas].

Vers.  17 — 21.  The  earth  is  to  come
under  the  dominion  of  Christ,  and  is
given  to  Him  for  this  purpose.  It  is
thus  to  Him  as  Canaan  was  to  the  Jews.
All  opposition  will  be  as  vain  as  it  is
unreasonable.  His  enemies  shall  lick
the  dust.  The  word  is  gone  out  of
God's  mouth  and  shall  not  return,  that
to  Him  every  knee  shall  bow  and  every
tongue  confess  [Jay].  We  see  Jeru-
salem emerging  from  her  ashes  and
standing  more  beautiful  than  ever.
From  Zion  goes  forth  the  law,  and  the
word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem,  and
in  the  Christ  of  the  Jew  all  nations  are
blessed.  The  mountain  of  the  Lord's
house  is  established  on  the  top  of  the
mountains,  and  all  people  are  flowing
into  it.  In  other  words — just  as  the
nations  owe  their  conversion  instrument-
ally  to  the  Jews,  so  do  they  look  to  the
Jewish  Church  as  the  heart  and  centre
of  Christian  life,  and  seek  communion
with  it.  It  is  thus  that  the  union
and  unity  of  the  whole  catholic  Church
will  be  consummated  and  perfected
[Ferguson].


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY


on


JONAH.


INTRODUCTION

Introduction.  Jonah  was  the  author  and  is  the  principal  subject  of  the  book
which  bears  his  name.  He  was  the  son  of  Amittai,  born  at  Gath-Hepher,  a  village  of
Zebulun  (2  Kings  xiv.  25),  and  lived  in  the  reign  of  Jeroboam  II.  In  his  youth  he
was  probably  contemporary  with  Elisha,  and  afterward  with  Hosea  and  Amos,  pro-
phets of  the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes.  He  prophesied  when  Israel  were  oppressed
by  Syria.  "  The  word  of  Jonah  to  Jeroboam  appears  as  the  last  sun-gleam  with  which
Jehovah's  countenance  had  beamed  on  Israel "  \Baumgarten\  Living  among  the
revolted  tribes,  testifying  to  their  iniquity  and  the  patience  of  God,  he  never
thought  of  exercising  his  ministry  among  the  heathen.  The  commission  to
Nineveh  was  a  special  and  extraordinary  event.  In  love  with  his  own  country
and  prejudiced  against  others,  he  naturally  shrunk  from  it.  (Jonah  =  a  dove.)  In  his
sentiments  he  is  an  image  of  the  people  to  whom  he  belonged.  Like  him  they
declined  to  fulfil  their  commission  to  the  Gentiles,  but  had  to  obey  and  set  forth
the  mercy  of  God  to  the  heathen  world.  The  events  of  his  life  were  not  myths,
but  realities,  and  typical  of  the  Saviour's  death  and  resurrection,  the  great  facts  of
our  redemption  (Matt.  xii.  40  :  Luke  xi.  30).

The  Book  is  a  simple  narrative,  with  the  exception  of  (ch.  ii.)  a  prayer  or  thanks-
giving. This  prayer  contains  imagery  peculiar  to  itself,  and  ideas  which  would
naturally  be  suggested  to  a  Jew  in  danger  (cf.  Ps.  xlii.  59).  The  style  is  vivid  and
vigorous.  "  It  is  pure  and  simple  Hebrew,  corresponding  to  the  simplicity  of  the
narrative  and  the  Prophet's  character.  AJthough  written  in  prose,  it  has  poetic
language,  not  in  the  thanksgiving  only,  but  whenever  it  suits  the  subject.  The
thought  of  the  verb  is  carried  on  by  a  noun  formed  from  it.  '  The  men  feared
great  fear  J  &c.  But  in  the  narrative  every  phrase  is  vivid  and  graphic.  There  is
not  a  word  which  does  not  advance  the  history.  There  is  no  reflection.  All
hastens  on  to  the  completion,  and  when  God  has  given  the  key  to  the  whole,  tne
book  closes,  with  His  words  of  exceeding  tenderness  lingering  in  our  ears  "  [Pusey].
The  design  of  Jonah's  mission  partakes  of  the  Christian  character.     For  when  wo


346  IKTROBTTCTTOir


see  that  he  is  sent  not  only  to  carry  the  tidings  of  the  Divine  judgment,  but  also  to
exemplify  the  grant  of  Divine  mercy  to  a  great  heathen  city ;  that  is,  to  be  a
preacher  of  repentance ;  and  that  the  repentance  of  the  Ninevites  through  his
mission  brings  them  to  know  "  a  gracious  God,  and  merciful,  slow  to  anger,  and  of
great  kindness,  and  repenting  Him  of  the  evil "  (Jonah  iv.  2) ;  without  staying  to
discuss  whether  all  this  be  a  formal  type  of  the  genius  of  the  Christian  religion,  it
is  plainly  a  real  example  of  some  of  its  chief  properties,  in  the  manifested  efficacy
of  repentance,  the  grant  of  pardon,  and  the  communication  of  God's  mercy  to  the
heathen  world  [Davison  on  Prophecy,  pp.  200,  201].  The  book  of  Jonah  is  like
a  beautiful  rainbow  of  hope  set  by  God's  hand  in  the  dark  cloud  of  sin  and
suffering.  It  shows  that  whatever  judgments  are  executed  by  him  on  his  bitterest
enemies,  are  not  consequences  of  any  desire  on  his  part  to  punish,  but  are  due  to
their  sins,  evoking  and  arming  the  Divine  justice  against  themselves  [  Wordsworth],


chap.  i.J  H0M1LETW  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.  W*


CHAPTEE  I.

Critical  Notes.]  And  (now)]  a  continuation  of  the  Hebrew  writings,  not  an  independent  part.
2.  That]  Heb.  the  city,  the  great,  the  art,  a  demonstrative  force.  Nineveh]  Cf.  Gen.  x.  11,
Smith's  Bib.  Diet.  Arise]  A  term  of  excitement.  3.  Tarshish]  Tartessus  in  Spain ;  others,
Carthage  ;  probably  Tarsus  in  Cilicia.  Presence]  Lit.  from^  being  in  the  presence,  t.  e.  from
standing  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord  as  His  servant  and  minister  (cf.  Gen.  iv.  16:  Deut.  x.  8).
Joppa]  Now  Jaffa.  4.  Sent  out]  Lit.  to  cast  or  hurl,  passive,  to  be  thrown  prostrate.  "  God
throws  the  wind  down  upon  the  surface  of  the  sea."  "Hurled  a  greate  wynde  into  the  see"
[Goverdale].  Was  like]  Lit.  thought  to  be  broken.  The  ship  personified ;  ship  and  crew  identified
in  the  writer's  mind.  5.  Afraid]  Though  accustomed  to  storms.  Lighten]  The  sailors  and  ship
under  a  burden.  Fast]  A  heavy  sleep,  from  a  word  to  snore.  6.  What]  He  sleeps,  they  pray  (Ps.
cvii.  28).  God]  Lit.  the  God;  other  gods  powerless  (perhaps  the  language  of  hope)  ;  Jonah's  God
could  help  them.  7.  Lots]  A  heathen  mode  of  decision,  often  permitted  by  God.  "  Lots  were  for
(1)  dividing;  (2)  consulting;  (3)  divining "  [Pmey].  Fell  upon]  Prov.  xvi.  33.  8.  Tell]  How
urgent  and  earnest  this  examination !  Fit  questions  for  our  own  hearts  !  9.  Hebrew]  A  name  by
which  an  Israelite  was  known  to  foreigners  (Gen.  xl.  15:  Ex.  iii.  18).  The  God]  Heathens  had
distinct  gods  for  heaven,  earth,  and  sea.  10.  Afraid]  They  had  heard  of,  now  they  felt  the  power
of  Jehovah.  11.  The  sea]  "  Not  only  increasingly  tempestuous,  but,  like  a  thing  alive  and  obeying
its  Master's  will,  it  was  holding  on  its  course,  its  wild  waves  tossing  themselves  and  marching  on  in
battalions  arrayed  for  the  end  for  which  they  were  sent,  pursuing  and  demanding  the  runaway  slave
of  God"  \Fusey\  12]  Jonah  reads  out  his  doom,  conscious  of  being  the  cause  of  suffering  and
peril.  Cast  mej  Suicide  and  guilt  to  have  done  it  himself.  I  know]  t.  e.  am  well  aware.  13.
Rowed  hard]  Lit.  dug,  intense  effort  with  the  oars ;  hence  "  ploughed  the  main  "  [Pusey],  14.
Beseech]  .Repetitions  which  indicate  earnestness  and  a  sense  of  dependence.  15.  Ceased]  Lit.  stood
hushed  immediately,  and  like  a  servant  obeyed  its  commander  (Job  xxxviii.  11).  16.  Offered]  present
sacrifice;  and  vowed  more  when  they  landed.  17.  Fish]  Sea-monster  (Gen.  i.  21:  Job  vii.  12:
Ps.  lxxiv.  13) ;  a  whale  (Matt.  xii.  40).  The  fact  divinely  attested.  Independent  of  this  there  is
no  improbability  in  the  swallowing  up  of  Jonah.  Sharks  swallow  and  retain  a  grown  man  in  their
gtoraach,  and  follow  vessels  many  days  for  what  may  be  thrown  overboard.  Three]  Significant  time  !
11  A  hidden  prophecy."  The  miracle  is  justified  by  the  end  in  view,  to  chastise  and  recover  a
disobedient  prophet,  to  shadow  forth  the  greater  miracle  of  one  laying  down  his  life  and  taking  it
up  again  for  us.

HOMILETICS.
The  Great  Commission. — Verses  1,  2.

"  The  word "  came  suddenly,  unexpectedly,  and  authoritatively  to  Jonah.  He
thought  of  quietly  remaining  in  his  own  land.  For  ages  God  had  confined  his
revelations  to  Israel.  But  he  is  the  Ruler  of  all  nations.  His  kingdom  is  not
local  and  geographical  like  the  gods  of  the  heathens.  Among  the  Gentiles  the
gospel  must  be  preached  (Rom.  iii.  28) ;  and  Jonah  is  sent  to  the  most  renowned
city  of  the  Gentile  world.

I.  The  commission  of  Jonah.  "Go  to  Nineveh,  that  great  city."  1.  It  was
sovereign.  The  word  came  to  Jonah,  apparently  the  most  unlikely  for  the  work.
God  elects  his  own  agents,  appoints  their  duty  and  their  place,  and  gives  no
account  of  his  matters  to  us.  Some  have  more  work  to  do  and  more  honour  than
others.  Let  all  be  content  in  their  sphere,  instead  of  longing  for  greater  dis-
tinction and  condemning  the  less  privileged.  Greater  service  would  bring  greater
responsibility,  and  greater  failure  greater  condemnation.  God  gives  to  every  one
according  to  his  ability,  and  in  sovereign  authority  demands  implicit  obedience.
"Arise,  go."  2.  It  was  arduous.  There  was  great  danger.  Jonah  might  be
ridiculed.  It  was  a  new  and  unheard-of  enterprise.  Nineveh  was  great  in  pride
and  splendour,  wealth  and  population.  For  centuries  it  had  been  growing  in  power
and  population.  The  monarchs  of  Assyria  had  filled  it  with  the  spoils  of  empires.
It  had  no  equal,  and  sat  as  a  queen  in  splendour.     Nahum  predicted  the  destruction


348  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.  [chap.  I.


of  the  city  from  a  distance,  but  Jonah,  must  go  into  it.  It  requires  self-denial  to "
go  as  a  missionary  to  heathens  now,  with  higher  civilization  and  greater  advantages.
Jonah's  mission  was  more  difficult  and  trying.  Social  relations  and  selfish  pursuits
must  give  way  to  every  command  of  God.  3.  It  was  clear.  Though  brief  and
without  explanation,  the  call  was  definite.  With  military  precision  the  word  is
uttered — "  Go  ;  "  the  field  is  revealed — "  Mneveh ; "  and  obedience  is  expected —
"Arise."  The  word  often  comes  to  us  with  positive  demands  upon  our  time  and  purse.
There  has  been  no  doubt  or  uncertainty.  Let  us  feel  its  convincing  and  confirming
power.  4.  It  was  urgent.  Arise.  Delay  strengthens  doubt  and  increases  difficulty.
Carnal  reasoning  and  natural  reluctance  have  few  better  counsellors  than  procrasti-
nation. If  we  loiter,  we  may  desert  the  duty,  and  the  enemy  be  encouraged  to
tempt  again.  Go — the  city  is  exposed  to  judgment,  and  men  may  perish.  The
King's  business  requires  haste.  "  Run,  speak  to  that  young  man."  II.  The  reason
for  Jonah's  commission.  "For  the  wickedness,"  &c.  1.  Great  cities  are  of  ten
filled  with  wickedness.  Power  gives  license  and  custom  begets  authority.  Examples
are  pernicious,  and  evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners.  Nineveh  was  filled
with  pride  and  alienated  from  God.  She  oppressed  the  poor  and  helpless  (Jon.
iii.  8  :  Nah.  iii.  1 — 3).  Blood  and  robbery,  idolatry  and  witchcraft,  stained  her
glory.  "  She  drew  not  near  to  God."  Are  our  great  cities  and  towns  free  from
luxury  and  pomp,  irreligion  and  injustice  3  2.  God  sees  the  wickedness  of  great
cities.  They  are  not  too  great  for  the  omniscient  eye  of  the  Great  Judge.  All
sins  go  up  before  -him,  and  are  registered  for  judgment  in  his  book  of  remembrance.
Enormous  guilt  cries  like  the  blood  of  Abel  for  interference.  God  specially  takes
cognizance  of  places  above  human  restraint,  and  manifests  holy  indignation  at
their  wickedness.  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  Babylon  and  unburied  Nineveh,  are
warnings  to  this  generation.  3.  The  wickedness  of  great  cities  must  be  exposed.
"  Cry  against  it."  Individuals  cannot  hide  themselves  in  communities,  nor  cities
throw  their  responsibility  upon  nations.  Every  sin  is  searched  out,  found,  and
reproved.  Jonah  was  not  to  go  and  teach  philosophy,  palliate,  or  compromise  with
sin,  but  to  cry  against  it.  Denounce  the  idolatry  and  predict  the  ruin  of  Nineveh.
With  intense  feeling  and  earnestness  he  must  give  the  alarm ;  proclaim  with  the
voice  of  the  herald  the  danger.  "  Many  people  cannot  cry  ;  they  have  not  force
of  soul ;  they  are  not  endowed  for  extreme  effort,"  says  one.  We  must  wink  at
no  sin ;  expose  drunkenness  and  profligacy  j  with  lip  and  life,  amid  insult  and  in-
difference, cry  aloud  and  spare  not.  God  may  conceal  the  danger  of  our  duty,  and
touch  our  most  sensitive  feelings  to  test  our  faith  and  discipline  our  hearts,  but  never
flee  away,  lest  he  punish  you.     "  Fear  not  ;  certainly  I  will  be  with  thee."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

The   word.     This    phrase   seems   to  throne  of  judgment :  and  each  crime  of

represent  the  "word  of  the  Lord,"  as  each  member  of   that  vast  community

an  atmosphere  of  kindling  holy  thought,  mounts  upwards,  and  is  registered  in  his

a  sphere  of  spiritual  truth  encompassing  heavenly  court  [Wordsworth].
the  Prophet,  illuminating  and  moving  Let  us  call  on  our  souls,  when  plain

his  whole  soul,  and  finally  taking  shape  in  duty  is  before  us,  to  arise  and  go  about

language  of  exhortation,  or  prediction,  it  :  speedily,  if  we  do  not  wish  Satan  to

or  teaching,  or  resolve,  as  the  case  might  stop  us  from  it  (1  Sam.  xxi.  8  :  Ps.  cxix.

be  [Liddon].  60) ;  heartily,  if  we  desire  God  to  accept

Wickedness.  God  is  brought  before  our  service  (Ecc.  ix.  10) ;  and  cheerfully,
us  in  these  words  as  he  sits  above  this  if  we  would  have  comfort  in  doing  it
waterflood  of  crime,  as  he  remaineth  in  (Rom.  xii.  8).  Jonah  was  called  to
the  moral  world,  a  King  for  ever.  He  immediate  and  hearty  service.  Such
is  the  Great  Judge,  unseen  by  man,  but  should  be  our  obedience  to  every  corn-
witnessing  all  human  acts,  and  words,  mand  of  our  Divine  Master  [Sibthorp],
and   motives;    seated   now    upon    his


chap.  i.J  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.  349


HOMILETICS.
The  Disgraceful  Flight. —  Verse  3.

Jonah  arose  but  to  depart  from  duty.  He  might  be  influenced  by  fear,  indolence,
and  unbelief.  But  the  chief  reason  for  his  flight  seems  to  be  intense  love  for  his
own,  and  deep  hatred  to  a  heathen  country.  He  was  reluctant  to  offer  mercy  to
Nineveh,  and  desired  its  destruction  as  an  enemy.  Whatever  leads  to  prejudice
blinds  the  mind,  sours  the  temper,  and  degrades  the  man  of  God.

I.  Flight  from  duty  is  not  departure  from  God's  control.  Jonah  believed  in
the  Divine  omnipresence  (Ps.  cxxxix.  7,  12),  did  not  cast  off  all  regard  for  God,
but  sought  to  relieve  himself  of  duty  by  quitting  the  land  of  light  and  religious
ordinances.  He  did  not  expect  to  go  where  God  was  not,  but  where  God  would
let  him  alone.  His  creed  was  better  than  his  conduct.  He  left  the  field  of  action
for  the  place  of  retirement.  Many  are  of  Jonah's  temper,  try  his  experiment,  and
feel  the  presence  of  God  too  painful  for  them.  A  scholar  leaves  the  Sabbath
school  to  a^oid  the  contact  of  truth  with  conscience.  A  young  man  brought  up
under  religious  influence  quits  home  and  native  country.  An  ungodly  man  feels
miserable,  shuns  godly  company,  and  stifles  impressions  by  fleeing  into  business,
worldly  society,  and  amusements.  The  believer  knows  his  duty,  but  will  not  do  it.
Such  efforts  often  succeed  in  spite  of  the  restraints  of  providence  and  the  voice  of
conscience.  But  fear  gets  hold  of  men  at  length,  God  meets  them  in  the  way,  and
it  is  impossible  to  escape.  "  Lo,  they  that  be  far  from  thee  shall  perish."  II.
Favourable  circumstances  in  departing  from  God  do  not  always  lead  to  a
successful  issue.  Circumstances  favoured  Jonah's  design,  and  gave  him  an  oppor-
tunity of  escape.  "  He  found  a  ship  going  to  Tarshish."  The  vessel  quickly  sailed.
Jonah  thought  he  was  leaving  his  trouble  by  leaving  his  native  shore,  but  vain  hope
(Amos  ix.  2 — 4  :  Is.  ii.  19 — 22  :  Jer.  xvi.  1 6 — 21).  "  The  ready  way  is  not  always
the  right  way,"  says  an  old  author.  The  greatest  hurry  the  least  speed  in  a  path  of
disobedience.  The  worst  plans  may  prosper  for  a  time,  but  such  prosperity  ends  in
storms  and  darkness.  Talk  not  of  Providence  in  an  evil  course — say  not  when  tempted
that  you  are  tempted  of  God.  God  might  miraculously  interfere  Avith  men's  conduct,
but  this  would  change  the  government  of  the  world,  render  our  probation  useless.
and  afford  no  opportunity  for  human  action  and  Divine  justice.  If  he  thwart  the
ways  of  selfish  men,  you  hear  no  more  of  Providence.  Departure  from  God  is
departure  from  his  love  and  protection — from  Divine  dignity  and  unbounded  bliss.
Follow  the  directions  of  the  word,  and  you  will  enjoy  the  leadings  of  Providence.
"  The  Lord  meeteth  him  that  rejoiceth  and  worketh  righteousness."  III.
Departure  from  God  is  more  expensive  than  obedience  to  God.  Jonah  paid  the
fare,  like  many  who  scruple  not  to  spend  their  money  on  selfish  projects,  but  with-
hold from  the  cause  of  God.  Sin  is  always  expensive,  and  draws  upon  our  purse
and  time.  Sinners  pay  their  fare,  1.  In  bitter  experience.  There  is  peace  in
pleasing  God,  but  conscious  opposition  to  him  brings  an  uneasy  mind.  Jonah
could  not  stay  at  home.  Everything  reminded  him  of  God  and  duty,  and  such
thoughts  are  painful.  Men  seek  a  new  country,  try  fresh  experiments,  to  drown
the  warnings  of  conscience,  but  do  not  succeed.  2.  In  moral  loss.  The  loss  of
Divine  favour  and  a  servant's  dignity.  The  Sabbath-breaker,  the  pleasure-seeker,
and  the  drunkard,  pay  their  fare.  Blasted  prospects,  shattered  constitutions,  and
ruined  families  indicate  the  awful  price  of  sin.  The  pleasures  of  sin  are  dearly
bought,  never  last,  and  always  bring  disappointment.

HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Jonah1  s    disobedience.       1.    It    was     life  into   his  own  hands.      2.    It  was
foolish;  for  he  took  the  difficulties  of     wilfxd.     He  deliberately  paid  his  money.


350  HOMILET1C  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.  [chap,  l


3.  It  was  ungrateful;  for  he  refused  the  takes  in  consummation  of  his  purpose,
honour  of  the  commission.  4.  It  was  and  each  following  fast  on  the  back  of
continuous.  5.  It  was  criminal  [Adapted  its  predecessor,  without  repentance  and,
from  Exert].  as  it  would  almost  seem,  without  re-
There  is  in  the  conduct  of  Jonah  a  flection.  (1)  He  "rose  up  to  flee."
twofold  sin, — disobedience  to  God  and  (2)  He  "  went  to  Joppa."  (3)  He
flight  from  God.  What  God  appoints  "  found  a  ship."  (4)  He  "  paid  the
thee  to  do,  do  without  gainsaying.  He  fare."  (5)  He  "  went  down  into  it."
who  gives  the  burden,  gives  the  shoulders  The  words  are  like  relentless,  consecu-
to  bear  it.  He  who  flees  increases  the  tive,  fast-falling  blows,  under  which  his
burden  and  commits  folly  \_Lange].  whole  character  as  an  obedient  man  of

God  is  beaten  to  death  and  trampled

Take  the  task  he  gives  you  gladly,  under-foot  of  Satan  [Hugh  Martin].

Let  his  work  your  pleasure ,be ;  M     ,      QWR   ^d          ig         wortnless

Answer  quickly  when  he  callefch,  .        ,

"  Here  am  I,  send  me,  send  me  !  "  guide.      He    IS   often   more   diligent    m

working  his  ruin  than  in  seeking  his

Step  by  step  the  disobedient  prophet  salvation.

HOMILETICS.

The  Eetributive  Storm. —  Verses  4,  5.

Sin  is  not  only  an  expensive  pleasure,  but  a  disturbing  element.  In  the  human
heart,  the  domestic  circle,  and  the  Christian  Church,  it  creates  storms.  Some  are
permitted  to  escape  from  God,  not  so  Jonah.  Perverse  and  self-willed  as  he  may
be,  God's  grace  abounds.     God  sends  a  messenger  to  recover  him.

I.  The  storm  and  its  lessons.  Learn — 1.  The  operations  of  nature  are  under
Divine  control.  (1)  In  their  origin.  It  is  distinctly  said,  "the  Lord  sent  out  a
great  wind."  Nature  is  created  and  dependent ;  has  neither  force  nor  will  of  her
own.  All  the  elements  are  God's  messengers  and  obey  him  (Ps.  cxlvii.  15 — 18).
Mark  the  perfect  ease  and  mighty  power  displayed.  He  wills,  he  speaks,  and  calm
and  tempest,  sunshine  and  shower,  are  cast  forth  upon  us  (Gen.  i.  3  :  Job  xxxvii.
1 — 7).  When  we  expect  rest,  lo,  a  messenger  to  rouse  us  to  a  sense  of  danger  !
"Winds  and  tempests  fulfil  his  pleasure."  (2)  In  their  strength.  "A  miglity
tempest  fell  upon  Jonah."  Storms  often  swept  that  sea,  were  known  by  special
names,  as  Euroclydon  off  Crete,  but  none  like  this.  God  gives  force  to  matter  and
motion  to  winds.  He  whispers  in  the  breeze  and  thunders  in  the  hurricane  ;  he
gives  strength  to  the  floods  and  direction  to  the  storm.  Regularity  does  not  exclude
supreme  and  personal  control.  The  sudden  change  in  the  financial  weather  which
melts  our  fortune  like  ice  before  the  spring-time — the  rains  which  frustrate  our
plans,  and  the  clouds  that  enter  our  dwellings,  are  sent  by  God.  "  For  he  com-
mandeth  and  raiseth  the  stormy  wind  which  lifteth  up  the  waves  thereof."  2.
The  operations  of  nature  are  moral  in  their  design.  The  wind  was  sent  after
Jonah  and  fell  upon  him.  It  had  a  special  end,  a  moral  design.  God  is  accom-
plishing many  purposes  in  daily  providence.  By  the  same  process  he  can  punish
the  sinner  and  reclaim  the  backslider.  We  may  see  mischief  in  the  storm.  One
thing  may  engross  our  attention,  but  nothing  deranges  God's  design.  Individual
circumstances  are  adapted  to  individual  character,  and  national  calamities  to  national
morality.  The  elements  are  messengers  of  mercy  and  judgment.  Eire  and  water,
wind  and  malaria,  are  sent  to  reach  the  disobedient.  Fugitives  from  God  will  be
caught  in  their  transgression.  It  is  better  to  be  recovered  by  a  tempest  than  perish
in  a  calm.  II.  The  storm  and  its  effects.  God's  efforts  are  not  powerless.
Nature  roused  to  fury  speaks  with  no  small  voice.  1.  Its  effect  upon  the  ship.
"  The  ship  was  like  to  be  broken."  Often  had  it  ploughed  the  sea,  but  never
tossed  about  as  then.  What  are  works  of  man  when  seized  by  the  hand  of  God  1
Who  can  contend  with  the  Almighty  %     Our  merchant  fleet  and  men  of  war  are


CHAP.  I.j


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.


3ft]


helpless  in  the  raging  of  the  sea.  It  is  needful  for  all,  especially  for  those  who
do  business  on  great  waters,  to  own  dependence  upon  God  and  thank  hi  in  for
a  prosperous  voyage.  2.  Its  effect  upon  the  mariners.  (1)  They  feared.  "The
mariners  were  afraid."  Men  of  careless  and  jovial  spirit  matured  in  peril,  trembled
m  fear.  God  can  damp  the  most  buoyant  spirit  and  rouse  the  most  secure.  (2)
They  prayed.  "  And  cried  each  to  his  God."  Perhaps  of  different  nations  each
had  his  favourite  idol.  They  were  sensible  men,  knew  that  their  own  power  and
wisdom  would  not  avail  in  that  tempest.  Prayer  is  a  law  of  our  constitution  and
the  most  sensible  part  of  our  conduct.  But  many  do  not  pray  until  they  get  on
the  sea.  In  a  calm  they  forget  God ;  in  a  storm,  alarmed  by  danger,  roused  by
affliction,  they  feel  conscious  of  sin,  and  cry  to  God  for  help.  But  better  late  than
never.  When  forced  to  feel  that  we  cannot  flee  from  God,  it  may  be  acceptable  to
return  in  prayer  to  him  (Ps.  cvii.).  "  Lord,  in  trouble  have  they  visited  thee ;
they  poured  out  a  prayer  when  thy  chastening  was  upon  them."  (3)  They  cast  out
their  wares.  God's  purpose  does  not  excuse  man's  neglect.  Men  risk  life  some-
times to  get  wealth;  but  when  life  is  in  danger  they  will  part  with  the  most
valuable  treasures  to  keep  it.  "  All  that  a  man  hath  will  he  give  for  his  life."
Spiritually  we  should  be  anxious  to  save  the  soul.  Every  besetting  sin  in  the  race,
every  cumber  in  the  voyage,  must  be  cast  away.  Worldly  cares  and  pursuits  which
endanger  the  soul  and  raise  the  anger  of  God  must  be  forsaken.  The  crew  with
Paul  threw  overboard  all  the  merchandise.  Lay  aside  all  encumbrance.  Life  is
more  value  than  cargo.  Forsake  all  sin,  and  you  will  pray  with  greater  speed  than
Jonah's  mariners.  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he  gain  the  whole  world  and
lose  his  own  soul  1 "

HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Fear  brings  many  recruits  into  the
army  of  Christ,  who  afterwards  fight
under  his  banner  from  love  of  his  service.
The  cry  of  sorrow  often  turns  into  the
pleading  of  true  contrition  and  filial
dependence  (Acts  xvi.  27 — 34  :  Is.
xxvi.  16 — 18).  To  his  grace  be  the
glory.  It  is  well  to  find  these  heathen
sailors  not  sunk  into  a  stupid  insensi-
bility, nor  bewildered  with  extreme
terror,  two  common  effects  of  imminent
danger  on  bold  and  irreligious  minds,
especially  in  their  profession.  But  one
thing  alone  gives  true  peace  in  danger  :
assurance  of  God's  love  (2  Cor.  v.  5 — 8).
Do  we  enjoy  itl  do  we  seek  it  [Sib-
thorp]  ?

In  the  prayer  of  the  mariners  notice,

1.  The  light  of  nature  which  instructed
them  to  recognize   a    Supreme  Being.

2.  The  power  of  conscience  to  hear  him


speak  in  anger  in  the  storm.  3.  The
impotence  of  idolatry  in  distress.  Their
prayers  were  earnest,  though  ignorant.
But  we  learn  that  the  deities  of  pagan
lands  and  sentimental  religionists  are
deaf  and  dumb  like  the  gods  of  Baal.
"  The  natural  light  of  reason  extends
thus  far,  that  it  considers  God  land,  gra-
cious, merciful,  and  mild.  This  is  a  great
light ;  but  it  fails  in  two  particulars.
In  the  first  place,  it  believes  that  God
has  power  and  knowledge  to  do  and  to
give;  but  that  he  is  willing  also  to  do
such  things  for  it,  it  knows  not ;  there-
fore it  does  not  continue  steadfast  in  its
opinion.  In  the  second  place,  reason
cannot  correctly  bestow  the  predicate  of
Deity  upon  that  being  to  whom  it  be-
longs. It  knows  that  God  is  ;  but  who
and  what  he  is  who  has  a  right  to  be
called  God  it  knows  not  "  \Lange\ —


HOMILETICS.

Contrasts  in  the  Voyage  op  Life. —  Verse  5.

Fatigue  and  sorrow  had  some  influence  upon  Jonah  (Matt.  xxvi.  40 — 45)  ;  but
he  seemed  to  be  stupefied  by  sin,  and  for  a  time  composed  himself  into  deep  sleep.
The  praying  sailors  and  the  sleeping  servant  indicate  great  contrasts  in  moral  life.


352  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.  [chap.


I.  Contrasts  in  the  family.  Diligent  and  idle,  godly  and  ungodly  children
Some  pray,  and  others  live  regardless  of  God.  The  parents  are  asleep  when  they
ought  to  be  alive  to  every  duty,  and  set  an  example  to  their  converted  children.
Children  are  careless  when  mothers  and  fathers  continually  pray  for  them.  II.
Contrasts  in  the  Christian  Church.  Many  Christians  are  active  and  energetic,
praying  for  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the  revival  of  God's  work  :  others  murmur  and  do
little  or  nothing.  They  are  asleep  in  Zion.  III.  Contrasts  in  the  world.  We
have  Pagan  piety  reproving  Christian  indifference  ;  Roman  Catholic  and  ritualistic
zeal  shaming  Protestant  faith;  heathens  and  Mohammedans  provoking  us  to  good
works.     "  Let  us  not  sleep  as  do  others."

The  Sleeper  Roused. — Verse  6.

God  had  other  messengers  beside  wind  and  storm.  He  often  uses  rough  and
uncouth  means,  very  unlikely  instruments.  It  was  not  a  pious  minister,  but  a
wicked  woman,  who  rebuked  Bunyan  for  his  profanity.  Jonah  was  roused,  not  by
a  prophet  of  God,  but  a  heathen  captain,  who  suffered  no  one  in  common  danger
to  desert  his  duty  or  hinder  others  from  performing  it.     "  What  meanest  thou  1 "  &c.

I.  "What  meanest  thou?  "  It  is  most  unreasonable  to  sleep.  The  bird,  the
beast,  and  the  insect,  know  their  own  interest  better ;  flee  from  danger,  and  prepare
for  coming  difficulty  (Is.  i.  3  :  Prov.  vi.  5 — 11 :  Jer.  viii.  7).  Surely  intelligent
beings,  Christian  believers,  may  learn  much  from  animal  creation.  II.  "What
meanest  thou  ?  "  It  is  most  risky  to  sleep.  The  ship  is  in  danger  of  sinking.  Thy
own  life  and  the  lives  of  others  are  at  stake.  All  hands  must  be  at  work.  It  is  no
time  for  sleep  when  the  house  is  on  fire.  We  should  never  sleep  in  self-security
when  men  are  perishing  around  us.  III.  "  What  meanest  thou  ? "  when  others  are
asking  thy  prayers.  Every  man  is  longing  for  deliverance.  1.  Asked  by  those
who  have  prayed  to  their  gods  in  vain.  Each  has  looked  to  his  idol,  and  depended
upon  resources  which  have  disappointed.  Men  turn  to  you  in  penitence  and  bitter
experience,  and  ask  an  interest  in  your  prayers.  Intercessory  prayer  is  genuine
charity.  2.  Asked  by  those  who  believe  that  your  God  can  help.  The  ship-master
was  convinced  that  Jonah's  God  might  possibly  be  more  powerful  than  any  of  the
gods  of  the  crew.  This  is  the  language  of  hope  and  earnestness.  "  Perhaps  God
may  think  upon  us."  The  faith  of  awakened  sinners  should  reprove  our  unbelief
and  neglect.  We  come  not  to  a  God  unknown  and  unrevealed.  There  is  more
than  "  perhaps  "  upon  which  to  ground  our  faith.  We  have  warrant  to  pray,  for  God
will  hear ;  we  are  roused  by  circumstances  around  us  to  call  upon  our  God  in  per-
sonal united  supplication.     "  Let  us  not  sleep  as  do  others."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  5.  Jonah  was  in  a  deep  sleep,  a  censurable  and  absurd  even  to  the  eye  of

sleep  by  which  he  was  fast  held  and  nature  to  be  secure  in  trouble.     3.  Na-

bound ;   a  sleep  as  deep  as  that  from  ture's  light  will  acknowledge  that  he  who

which  Sisera  never  woke.     (The  same  is  the  true  God  hath  power  to  deliver  in

Heb.  word  is  used,  Judg.  iv.  21.)     Had  extreme  danger  [Hutcheson],
God    allowed    the    ship    to    sink,    the  Ver.  6.    What  meanest  thou  ?     Apply

memory  of  Jonah  would  have  been  that  the  words  to  the  sinner.     I.  The  con-

of  a  fugitive  prophet.     As  it  is,  his  deep  dition  indicated.     Sleep  a  state  of — 1.

sleep  stands  as  an  image  of  the  lethargy  Darkness  ;  2.  Danger;  3.  Insensibility;

of  sin  [Pusey].  4.  and  Death.     Yet  the  awful  condition

1.  A  child  of  God  may  so  miscarry  of  many.  The  anger  of  God  is  upon
through  infirmity,  negligence,  and  them.  Death  and  judgment  are  draw-
temptation,  that  he  may  be  blame-  ing  nigh.  Yet  they  sleep  on,  wish  not
worthy  and  reprovable  by  a  Pagan  in  to  be  disturbed  and  roused  to  a  con-
the  light  of   nature.      2.   It  is  deeply  sciousness  of  danger.     II.  The  question


chap.  I.j  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.  353


'pressed.  "  What  meanest  thou  1 "  To  We  see  in  this  instance  the  great  dan-
avoid  the  danger  and  run  away  from  ger  in  which  unconscious  sinners  are
God  1  Is  sleep  better  than  anxiety,  and  often  involved — that  the  solace  sought  by
sin  than  salvation'?  Do  you  mean  to  them  often  departs  from  them — that  a
sleep  as  long  as  God  and  man  will  let  deep  sleep  remains,  and  that  in  the  per-
you,  and  then  just  when  the  ship  is  formance  of  duty  the  godly  are  some-
sinking  try  to  save  yourselves]  Will  times  more  slothful  than  the  ungodly
you  rob  God  of  your  love  and  obedience,  [Lange].

and  expect,  him  to  interpose  at  last  to  A  salutary  admonition,  from  whatever

save    you1?     "  What    meanest    thou]"  quarter  it  may  come,  ought  never  to  be

"  Awake,  thou  that  sleepest,  and  Christ  despised  [Lange].
shall  give  thee  light."

HOMILETICS.

Is  there  not  a  Cause  ] — Verse  7.

When  great  judgments  happen  there  must  be  great  guilt.  When  a  nation,  city,
or  family  is  brought  into  danger,  it  is  wise  to  inquire  into  the  cause.  Here  we
notice —

I.  Social  danger  caused  by  individual  sin.  Nature  teaches  a  connection  between
sin  and  suffering.  They  are  bound  together  under  God's  government.  The  con-
nection is  not  casual.  All  misery  is  the  result  of  sin.  But  while  each  individual
stands  for  himself,  he  is  also  related  to  others.  Nations  suffer  for  the  sins  of
rulers ;  families,  for  the  sins  of  parents  ;  and  the  crew  for  the  sins  of  its  passenger.
"  This  man  perished  not  alone  in  his  iniquity."  II.  Social  danger  prompting
social  sympathy.  "  They  said  one  to  another,  Come."  Great  calamity  begets  great
sympathy.  Common  sufferings  knit  kindred  feelings  and  hearts  in  one.  "  There
was  no  independent  member,  no  mutinous  spirit  amongst  the  crew,"  says  Mr
Exell ;  "  no  one  suggested  another  way  of  relief  ;  all,  as  though  animated  by  one
common  impulse,  at  once  accept  this  test  of  innocence."  III.  Social  danger  re-
moved by  the  providence  of  God.  "  Nature  forces  on  our  heart  a  Creator,  history
a  providence,"  says  Kichter.  In  this  narrative  we  discern  the  power  of  God  over
the  elements  of  nature  and  the  destinies  of  men.  1.  Providence  over  the  phe-
nomena of  nature.  The  storm — no  ordinary  one — was  traced  to  a  cause.  The
mariners,  though  not  true  believers,  were  not  atheists.  Their  gods  could  do  nothing ;
perhaps  Jonah's  God  could  help  them,  whom  they  called  "  the  God."  Jonah  is
reproved  for  want  of  devotion  to  him  and  lackness  of  duty  to  his  fellow-passengers
in  peril.  Among  heathen  nations  there  was  a  general  admission  of  one  supreme
ruler  over  earth  and  sea  ;  a  remnant  of  the  primitive  knowledge  by  which  Jehovah
left  not  himself  without  a  witness.  2.  Providence  over  the  conduct  of  men.  There
must  be  a  cause  for  this  evil  \  they  must  find  it  out,  and  if  possible  remove  it.
They  believe  some  one  is  guilty,  and  do  not  expect  that  the  culprit  will  tell  of
himself.  They  appeal  to  the  higher  power,  in  the  only  way  they  know,  by  lot.
The  evil  is  thought  of,  and  not  so  much  the  storm.  Behind  natural  phenomena,
law,  sequence,  or  cause,  they  discern  moral  designs.  Man  cannot  escape  his  God —
(a)  In  discovering  their  guilt.  Jonah  expected  to  escape,  but  was  found  out  and  his
guilt  made  known.  No  darkness  nor  distance  can  hide  the  sinner.  Murder  will
out ;  and  it  is  true  in  a  measure  with  all  sin.  Sin  tries  to  deceive  with  secrecy  and
then  betrays  to  others.  "  There  is  nothing  that  shall  not  be  revealed."  "  God  will
bring  every  work  into  judgment,  with  every  secret  thing."  (/;)  In  deciding  their
destiny.  No  event  can  escape  the  eye  of  God,  and  no  step  in  life  be  taken  without
his  permission.  God  overruled  the  lot,  and  it  fell  upon  Jonah.  How  completely
are  we  in  the  hands  of  God.  Believers  trying  to  forget  neglect  of  duty,  and  un-
believers refusing  to  follow  Christ,  can  hide  nothing  from  his  all-searching  eye.
"  My  times  are  in  thy  hand."  "  The  lot  is  cast  into  the  lap  ;  but  the  whole  dis-
posing thereof  is  of  the  Lord."

23


354  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.  [chap.  i.


Casting  Lots. —  Verse  7.

The  mariners  have  now  recourse  to  other  means  of  safety  than  their  exertions  or
prayers. — Observe  in  their  conduct,  First,  both  the  power  and  defectiveness  of  con-
science. They  saw  themselves  deserving  of  Divine  anger;  yet  each  thought  him-
self less  guilty  than  his  fellow.  The  lanthorn  light  of  conscience  in  a  natural
man,  gives  a  general  view  of  some  prominent  truths  sufficient  to  cause  him  to  pass
sentence  of  condemnation  on  himself,  but  it  searches  not  the  soul's  recesses,  so  as
to  show  sin  in  its  extent  and  sinfulness.  Ignorance  and  pride  are  impenetrable,
and  these  effects  are  produced  by  the  powerful  aid  of  the  Spirit.  When  that  shines
into  the  soul,  a  man  will  make  St  Paul's  confession  his  own.  Secondly,  the  light
of  nature.  As  conscience  shined  inwardly,  so  this  outwardly,  testifying  to  a  con-
nection between  guilt  and  punishment  (Acts  xxviii.  4).  They  saw  in  the  tempest
an  extraordinary  judgment,  and  surmised  (rightly)  an  extraordinary  cause.  Per-
haps herein  the  light  of  nature  was  aided  by  that  of  tradition  and  some  faint
glimmerings  of  Scriptural  truth.  We  are  very  slow  to  admit  a  connection  between
sin  and  suffering.  We  are  apt  to  lay  the  blame  of  the  latter  anywhere  but  where
it  should  be,  on  our  own  transgressions.  Thirdly,  the  influence  of  superstition.
Lots  have  sometimes  been  used  by  Divine  appointment.  Here  is  a  far  less  clear
warrant  for  them.  Yet  we  may  admit  some  right  principle  among  these  sailors,  of
referring  to  a  higher  Being  what  seemed  beyond  the  reach  of  human  knowledge  to
decide.  But  among  the  heathen  Satan  abused  them  (as  other  things  of  a  similar
kind,  such  as  divination)  to  an  execrable  superstition,  and  the  establishment  of  his
own  dominion  (Esth.  iii.  7  :  Ezek.  xxi.  21 :  Is.  xx.  3).  Both  in  ancient  and  modern
times  they  have  been  abused  to  serve  the  avarice  and  evil  passions  of  men,  and
have  proved  the  source  of  misery,  contention,  and  bloodshed  (Joel  iii.  3  :  Obad.  1 1  :
John  xix.  23).  We  are  seldom  if  ever  warranted  to  have  recourse  to  lots.  We
have  a  full  and  sufficient  guide  in  the  Scriptures,  and  can  never  be  justified  in
using  this  guide,  as  some  do,  in  the  way  of  a  lottery  [Siffihorp].

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

This  evil.    Suffering,  penal  and  social,  greater    with     his    people    and    more

Guilt  disowned  and  discovered  in  the  severely  prosecuted  than  against  Pagans

lot.     "In  this  procedure,  there  are  two  and  gross  idolaters.     For — 1.  Rebellion

things  to   be  attended  to  : — First,  the  is  idolatry  (1  Sam.  xv.  23),  and  so  much

fact  that  each  man  by  making  this  pro-  the  grosser  as  it  is  in  a  child.  2.  Though

posal   and   going   into  it   disowns   the  they  worshipped  that  which  was  no  god,

guilt :  and  second,  the  method  by  which  yet  none  of  them  had  so  behaved  to-

they  propose  to  discover  it  [Martin].  wards  a  supposed  Deity,  as  he  had  done

Upon  Jonah.     1.  Who  is  to  be  pitied  towards  the   true   God.     3.    God   may

for  his  guilt  and  humiliation.     2.  He-  wink  at  sins  in  Pagans,  but  will  not  let

joiced  over,  because  stopped  in  his  wan-  his    own    children  go  on    unreclaimed

dering  from  God  and  about  to  be  re-  (Am.  iii.  2),  it  being  mercy  to  pursue

stored.  them  for  their  folly  and  amend  them

God's      controversy      is     sometimes  \Hutchesori\.

HOMILETICS.

Urgent  Questions. —  Verse  8.

Most  admirable  is  the  dealing  of  these  heathens  with  the  prophet  of  God.  They
are  in  great  danger,  but  press  not  his  ruin  ;  do  not  condemn  him  without  oppor-
tunity to  clear  himself.  They  inquire  concerning  him — (a)  mildly,  (b)  minutely,
(c)  briefly,  and  (d)  urgently.  Their  patience  was  greater  than  many  Christians
would  have  displayed  in  similar  circumstances.

I.  Apply  the  questions  to  Jonah.     "  These  questions  must  have  gone  home  to


chap.  1.1  HOMILimC  COMMENTARY :  JONAH.  355


Jonah's  conscience.  What  is  thy  business  ?  The  office  of  a  prophet  which  he  had
left.  Whence  comest  thou  ?  From  standing  before  God  as  his  minister.  Wliat
thy  country  ?  Of  what  people  art  thou  ?  The  people  of  God  whom  he  had
quitted  for  heathen  ;  not  to  win  them  to  God,  as  he  commanded  ;  bnt  not  knowing
what  they  did  to  abet  him  in  his  flight "  [Posey'].  II.  Apply  the  questions  to  our-
selves. Pause  amid  the  excitements,  hurry,  and  concerns  of  life,  and  ask  what  is  our
present  business — the  work  of  God,  or  the  service  of  Satan  1  What  our  country — the
world,  or  the  kingdom  of  Christ  %  Are  we  content  with  earth,  or  do  we  seek  "  a
better  country  "  %  Of  what  people  ?  Of  the  people  of  God,  or  those  living  with-
out God  1  Some  live  in  holiness  and  others  in  sin ;  some  by  faith  and  others  by
sense.  Whom  dost  thou  join  now,  for  they  are  thine,  and  with  them  thou  shalt
have  thy  portion?  And  whence  comest  thou?  Trace  thy  origin  from  God  as  a
holy  being,  from  thy  parents  as  born  in  sin.  If  saved,  thou  comest  out  of  dark-
ness into  light,  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God.  But  whither  goest  thou  ?
What  is  your  aim,  and  what  will  be  the  end  of  your  life  1

Confession  of  Faith  and  of  Guilt. —  Verses  9,  10.

I.  Jonah  confesses  his  faith.  A  confession  as  unreserved  as  his  guilt  was  ag-
gravating. 1.  He  was  a  Hebrew.  A  name  designating  Abraham's  descendants,
and  indicating  great  privileges  and  advantages.  One  of  the  peculiar  people.  We
have  been  adopted  into  Israel's  position.  To  us  belong  the  oracles  of  God.  Our
sins  are  more  dishonouring  to  God  than  those  of  Pagans.  2.  He  was  a  servant  of
God.  "  I  fear  Jehovah."  He  distinctly  avows  his  religion  besides  his  nationality.
He  thus  confirms  the  light  and  condemns  the  practice  of  the  sailors ;  candidly
confesses  his  own  guilt,  and  puts  to  shame  many  professors,  who  hide  their  light
and  disown  tjieir  Master.  He  feared  ;  though  his  conduct  belied  his  profession,  yet
he  reverently  feared  and  worshipped  Jehovah.  (1)  His  God  was  the  Creator  of
heaven  and  earth.  He  exalts  him  above  the  local  deities  of  heaven,  sea,  and  land ;
directs  the  mariners'  thoughts  from  their  own  lying  vanities  to  the  living  and  true
God.  His  God  did  not  partition  the  universe  into  provinces,  but  governed  all
things  and  could  help  them  in  the  storm.  (2)  His  God  was  Jehovah.  The  great
and  significant  name  by  which  God  (according  to  his  own  use  of  it)  revealed  Him-
self as  the  covenant-making  and  covenant-keeping  God  of  a  chosen  people.  One
God  and  only  One,  Maker  and  Ruler  of  the  universe ;  Guide  and  Saviour  of  men.
Thus  he  invites  all  to  come  and  put  their  trust  under  the  shadow  of  his  wing  (Ex.
vi.  2 — 8 :  Ps.  lxviii.  4 :  Rom.  iii.  1,  2).  II.  Jonah  confesses  his  guilt.  What
a  change  in  the  prophet.  1.  He  makes  a  bold  confession.  He  shrank  from  dis-
tant danger  at  first,  now  lays  himself  open  to  reproach,  contempt,  and  death.
2.  He  makes  &  full  confession.  He  has  no  reserve,  but  severely  condemns  himself
in  the  presence  of  the  crew.  "  It  is  easy  to  keep  the  flag  up  when  it  is  nailed  to
the  mast ;  but  to  hoist  it  in  the  face  of  the  enemy  after  we  have  been  sailing  with
him,  yard-arm  and  yard-arm,  under  false  colours,  is  hard — so  hard  that  many  sur-
render— are  long  led  captive  by  Satan  at  his  will,  and  delivered  only  through  severe
affliction  or  deep  disgrace."  3.  He  made  a  difficult  confession.  He  had  neglected
his  duty  and  hid  his  religion ;  he  had  refused  to  help  the  crew  and  told  them  that
he  was  in  conflict  with  Jehovah;  that  his  conduct  was  wicked,  not  a  revolt
against  the  arbitrary  rule  of  a  local  divinity,  but  against  his  Maker  and  theirs,  and
had  involved  them  in  contest  with  his  infinite  power  and  truth.  This  was  hard,
but  he  did  it,  and  proved  the  sincerity  of  his  penitence  and  the  reality  of  God's
gracious  work  in  his  heart.  "  Happy  is  he  that  hath  the  God  of  Jacob  for  his
help,  whose  hope  is  in  the  Lord  his  God  :  which  made  heaven  and  earth,  the  sea,
and  all  that  therein  is  :  which  keepeth  truth  for  ever."

Aggravations  of  the  Guilt  of  Backsliding. —  Verses  9,  10.
Axe  you  a  true  worshipper  and  servant  of  God  1     Are  you  like  Jonah  overtaken


356


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.


[CHAP.  I.


by  Divine  displeasure  in  a  course  of  disobedience  1  And  are  you  at  last  humbled
to  own  your  guilt  1  Then  you  will  acknowledge  these  three  things  in  the  exceeding
sinfulness  of  your  sin — the  three  elements  which  appear  in  the  guilt  of  Jonah  and
expressly  owned  by  himself.  1.  Against  what  God  is  in  himself.  Jonah  owns  that
he  has  sinned ;  against  "  Jehovah,  the  God  of  heaven,  which  hath  made  the  sea
and  the  dry  land."  2.  Against  what  God  has  been  to  him.  Jonah  confesses  that
he  has  sinned ;  "I  am  an  Hebrew  :  "  a  member  of  the  people  whose  God  Jehovah
is,  for  whom  Jehovah  hath  done  great  things ;  to  whom  he  hath  given  "  the
adoption,  and  the  glory,  and  the  covenants,  and  the  law,  and  the  service  of  God,
and  the  promises,  whose  are  the  fathers,"  &c.  3.  Against  what  he  himself  has
been  to  God.  Jonah  owns  that  he  had  sinned  :  "  I  fear  Jehovah ; "  I  am  one  of
his  servants;  I  have  been  enrolled  among  the  true  Israel — a  true  child  of  the
covenant — a  messenger  of  it  also,  standing  in  the  counsel  and  in  the  secret  of  the
Most  High ;  for  "  the  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  him."  By  all  these
three  considerations  Jonah  ought  to  have  been  restrained  from  sinning  and  retained
in  his  loyalty  to  God.  The  glory  of  God — the  God  of  heaven,  of  the  sea,  and  of
the  dry  land — ought  to  have  restrained  him.  The  graciousness  of  God  towards
himself  ought  to  have  restrained  him.  And  the  grace  of  God  in  himself  ought  to
have  restrained  him.  And  when,  in  the  face  of  all  these  three  considerations,
his  disobedience  breaks  forth  and  carries  him  impetuously  away,  do  they  not  all  go
to  aggravate  the  guilt  which  he  contracts  [Hugh  Martin]  1

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Yer.  8.  Public  insight  into  private
life  [Exell].

Ver.  10.  Feared.  By  receiving  Jonah,
they  had  opposed  God,  whose  power  and
supremacy  they  now  perceived.  Notice
that  God  glorifies  himself  above  idols,
and  often  constrains  men  to  render
homage, — that  the  more  men  see  of
God's  judgments  for  sin,  the  more  they
should  fear  him ;  that  "  such  fear  is  the
beginning  of  conversion,  when  men  turn
from  dwelling  on  the  distresses  which
surround  them  to  God  who  sent  them."

Wliy  hast  thou  done  this  2  1.  Words
of  amazement.  The  worshipper  of  Je-
hovah thinking  to  escape  by  flight !
Convinced  sinners  often  marvel  at  the
inconsistencies   of   professed   believers.


2.  Words  of  humanity.  They  expostu-
late instead  of  punishing  him.  3.  Words
of  rebuke.  None  injure  us  so  much  as
those  who  bring  us  under  the  wrath  of
God.  Let  us  not  add  the  blood  of
others  to  the  guilt  of  our  own  sin.

The  question  for  the  backslider.  "  Why
hast  thou  done  this  ] "  Did  you  not  like
the  work  God  gave  you  to  do  1  Did
not  religion  answer  your  expectations]
After  trial,  have  you  found  that  the
world  is  better  than  Christ  1  Let  all
take  the  warning  against  disobedience,
and  learn  that  happiness  consists  only  in
walking  with  God  and  obeying  his  com-
mands. "  If  his  anger  be  kindled,  yea,
but  a  little,  blessed  are  all  they  that  put
their  trust  in  him."


HOMILETICS.
The  Eequired  Sacrifice. —  Verses  11,  12.

The  sea  still  raged  and  testified  to  the  anger  of  God.  The  light  of  nature  and
the  dictates  of  conscience  taught  the  sailors,  the  law  and  the  history  of  his  nation
taught  Jonah,  that  God  was  just  and  must  be  satisfied.  Hence  the  anxiety  of  the
crew  and  the  submission  of  the  prophet.     Learn : —

I.  That  sin  confessed  does  not  always  bring  iininediats  relief  in  distress.
Jonah  had  honestly  confessed  his  guilt  and  felt  deep  remorse,  but  s<  methiig  more
was  requisite.  God's  purpose  is  not  accomplished  by  mere  acknowled.  ment  of  wrong.
Great  storms  never  come  from  small  sins.  The  servant  of  Jehovah  must  be  cor-
rected and  the  guilty  feel  God's  displeasure.     The  longer  we  remain  in  sin  and  the


CHAP.  I.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.


357


greater  our  reluctance  to  duty,  the  more  tempestuous  will  be  the  sea.  II.  That
men  truly  humbled  in  distress  are  anxious  to  follow  the  revealed  will  of  God.

The  mariners  had  solemnly  appealed  to  God  and  knew  Jonah  to  be  his  servant.  They
fear  God,  do  not  take  the  matter  into  their  own  hands,  but  ask  counsel  through
Jonah.  Tenderness,  humanity,  and  subjection  are  the  kindly  fruits  of  affliction.
The  anxious  enquirer  and  the  restored  servant  desire  to  know  the  revealed  will  of
God,  and  do  nothing  without  his  guidance.  "  Lead  me  in  thy  truth  and  teach  me."
III.  That  those  sensible  of  their  own  desert  are  not  willing  to  involve  others
in  distress.  Jonah  felt  that  he  was  the  cause  of  suffering  and  peril  to  his  fellow-
creatures — that  God's  justice  should  take  him  and  spare  them.  "  Cast  me  forth  into
the  sea ;  and  the  sea  shall  be  calm  to  you"  A  true  penitent  submits  to  be  chastised
for  his  iniquity ;  but  when  others  suffer  with  him,  he  is  concerned.  In  the  provi-
dence of  God  we  often  involve  others  in  danger  by  our  sin,  and  are  called  upon  to
endure  risk  and  self-sacrifice  to  save  them.  "  It  is  I  that  have  sinned  and  done  evil
indeed  ;  but  as  for  these  sheep,  what  have  they  done  ? "


HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Ver.  11.  What  shall  we  do?  The
moral  demeanour  of  these  men  indicates,
1.  Kindly  feeling  towards  Jonah.  2.
Solemn  awe  of  Jehovah.  3.  Natural
horror  against  taking  away  human  life.
It  was  treatment  unexpected  and  unde-
served, a  pattern  to  many  in  more  fa-
vourable circumstances.  "  With  the
well-advised  there  is  wisdom."

Ver.  12.  Jonah's  reply.  "Could
anything  be  more  noble,  upright,  honour-
able 1  There  is,  first,  a  renewed  acknow-
ledgment— frank,  free,  and  full — of  his
own  obnoxiousness  to  the  Divine  anger,
and  of  himself  as  the  source  and  occasion
of  the  present  danger.  '  For  I  know
that  for  my  sake  this  great  tempest  is
upon  you.'  There  is,  secondly,  an  un-
reserved surrender  or  appointment  of
himself  to  death,  as  the  means  of  solving
the  appalling  difficulty,  and  stilling  the
raging  of  the  deep.  '  Take  me  up  and
cast  me  forth  into  the  sea.'  And  there
is,  thirdly, — what  may  be  valued  as
coming  from  a  prophet  of  that  God
'  which  made  the  sea  and  the  dry  land  '
— a  prediction  that  the  expedient  will
be  efficacious  :  '  so  shall  the  sea  be  calm
unto  you ' "  [Hugh  Martin].

Jonah  reads  out  his  own  doom,  and


that  both  as  a  penitent  offender  and  a
prophet  of  the  Lord.  As  the  former,
conscious  that  he  was  the  cause  of  the
sufferings  and  peril  of  his  fellow-
creatures,  he  felt  it  just  that  the  venge-
ance of  God  shoidd  light  on  him,  if
haply  his  mercy  might  spare  them.  As
the  latter,  he  opens  out  the  Divine  will
respecting  himself,  and  unconsciously
instructs  us  respecting  that  great  pro-
pitiation for  the  sins  of  the  world  of
which  he  was  to  be  a  remarkable  type
(Is.  liii.  5  :  Matt.  xii.  40  :  John  xi.  50)
[Sibthorp].  We  see  more  and  more
the  working  of  grace  in  the  prophet's
soul;  (1)  in  his  acknowledgment  of
merited  judgment ;  (2)  his  patient  sub-
mission, and  (3)  tender  regard  for  others.
But  in  the  two  latter  respects  how  was
he  surpassed  by  Jesus  !  Observe  an-
other resemblance  between  Jonah  and
Christ:  both  gave  up  themselves  to
still  the  storm  of  God's  wrath  against
sin ;  yet  herein  is  a  great  difference
between  them.  This  storm  was  of  the
prophet's  own  raising ;  not  so  that  for
which  Christ  gave  himself  to  death.
We  caused  that  tempest ;  het  being  inno-
cent, allayed  it  by  his  own  blood  [Ibid.].


HOMILETIGS.

Labour  in  Vain. —  Verses  12,  13.

We  shall  translate  Jonah's  history  into  spiritual  illustrations  of  man's  experience
and  action  with  regard  to  Christ  and  his  gospel.  We  have  here  a  picture  of  what
most  men  do  before  they  resort  to  God's  remedy ;  that  remedy  is  fairly  imaged  in
the  deliverance  of  the  ship's  company  by  the  sacrifice  of  one  on  their  behalf.


358  30MILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.  [chaf.  i.


I.  Our  first  observation  is,  that  sinners  when  they  are  tossed  upon  the  sea  of
conviction,  make  desperate  efforts  to  save  themselves.  The  men  rowed  hard,
strained  every  sinew,  and  laboured  by  violence.  No  language  can  express  the  earnest
action  with  which  awakened  sinners  unlawfully  struggle  to  obtain  eternal  life.
They  try  moral  reformation.  Others  add  to  their  reformation  a  superstitions  regard
to  the  outward  of  religion.  Many  persons  row  hard  to  get  the  ship  to  land  by  a
riational  belief  in  orthodox  doctrine.  Many  are  resting  upon  their  own  incessant
prayers.  Others  are  toiling  by  a  sort  of  mental  torture.  II.  Like  these  mariners,
the  fleshy  efforts  of  awakened  sinners  must  inevitably  fail. '  "  They  could  not."
With  all  man's  rowing  after  mercy  and  salvation,  he  can  never  find  it  by  his  own
efforts.  First  of  all,  it  is  contrary  to  Gods  law  for  a  sinner  to  get  comfort  by  any-
thing he  can  do  for  and  by  himself.  Because  in  what  he  is  doing  he  is  insulting
God.  He  is  also  in  the  vjay  of  the  curse.  III.  The  soul's  sorrow  will  continue
to  increase  so  long  as  it  relies  upon  its  own  efforts.  It  may  be  overruled  for
good,  but  the  effect  of  all  that  the  creature  does  before  it  believes  is  mischievous.
The  good  effect  lies  in  this  :  the  more  a  man  strives  to  save  himself,  the  more  con-
vinced loill  he  become  of  his  own  impotence.  Another  good  result  follows,  that  a
man  striving  to  save  himself  by  law,  finds  out  the  spirituality  of  that  law,  a
spirituality  which  he  never  saw  before.  But  much  of  this  toil  is  mischievous.  It
makes  unbelief  take  a  firmer  grip.  Giant  Despair's  prisoners  do  not  all  escape  \  he
has  a  yard  full  of  bones,  the  relics  of  willing  prisoners  who  would  not  be  com-
forted. Some  sinners  make  excuses  for  themselves  out  of  their  despair,  and  let
their  doubts  and  fears  grow  till  they  cast  a  thick  shadow  over  them.  IV.  We  will
try  to  explain  God's  plan.  The  way  of  safety  for  sinners  is  to  be  found  in  the
sacrifice  of  another  on  their  behalf.  Leave  out  the  fact  that  Jonah  was  sinful,
and  he  becomes  an  eminent  type  of  Christ.  Substitution  saves  the  mariners :
substitution  saves  sinners.  Jesus  dies,  and  there  is  a  calm.  Conscience  accuses  no
longer.  Judgment  decides  for  and  not  against  the  sinner.  Memory  looks  back
with  sorrow  for  sin,  but  with  no  dread  of  penalty  to  come.  Let  us  enjoy  the  peace
"  that  passeth  all  understanding."  Then  go  to  work  for  God,  not  to  win  life  and
heaven,  for  they  are  ours  already ;  but  loved  by  him,  let  us  love  and  serve  him  with
perfect  heart  [Spurgeon].

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.   12.     Because   of  me.      "True  science  when  duty  and  self-interest  seem

conviction  of   sin  will  produce  honest  to   conflict.     Ill,    The  servant  spared

confession  of  sin  sometimes  to  our  fellow-  from  fear  of   the  master.      "  Do  my

creatures  ;  always  before  God.     Let  it  prophets  no  harm."     If  we  fear  God,

add  to  those  bitter  herbs  of  repentance  men  feel  that  they  offend  him  by  injuring

with  which  we  feast  on  our  Passover  (1  us.     "  He  that  toucheth  you,  toucheth

Cor.  v.  7,  8),  to  reflect  how  often  and  the  apple  of  mine  eye."

largely  our  iniquity  has  aided  to  make  We  have  here  an  admirable  example

the  mass  of  human  guilt  more  offensive  of  dealing  with  an  offending  brother,

and  of  human  misery  more  grievous."  They  dreaded  to  punish  after  his  guilt

Ver.  1 3.  Here  we  find,  /.  Compassion  was  proved  ;    and  they  could  not  tell

displayed  when  undeserved.     1.  In  pity  how  far  he  was  restored  again  into  God's

for  the  sufferer.      2.  In  regard  to  his  favour  as  a  penitent.     Let  us  walk  by

God.      3.    In  fear  of    blood  guiltiness.  the  same  rule  towards  fallen  brethren

II.   Conscience  overcoming  self-interest.  [Jones].

The  men  were  assured  of  calm  by  getting  Learn  also — I.  The  benefits  of  affliction.

rid  of  Jonah ;  but  perhaps  the  force  of  Jonah  is  no  longer  perverse  and  dis-

conscience    showed    that  the   guilt   of  obedient,  and  the  mariners  are  brought

murder  would  rest  upon  them  if  they  to  call  upon  the  true  God.     2.  The  folly

threw  him  overboard      Listen  to  con-  of  fighting  against  God.     Providence


chap.  I.]  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.  359


was  adverse.     They  rowed  against  the  tending  with  the  storm.     "  There  is  no

stream.      No  success   in  opposition  to  wisdom,  nor  understanding,  nor  counsel

God.     Without   his  help   all   schemes  against  the  Lord."
are  like  ploughing  the  deep  and  con-

HOMILETICS.

Pagan  Prayers. —  Verses  13,  14.

The  men  ceased  to  row,  their  labour  was  in  vain.  They  only  increased  their  own
danger  and  prolonged  the  suffering  of  one  they  endeavoured  to  save —

"  At  once  they  plough  the  brine  ;  and  all  the  deep
Yawns  wide  "  [Virg.  JEneid].

They  recognized  the  hand  of  God  in  the  storm,  and  believed  the  power  of  God
supreme.     They  lay  down  their  oars  and  appeal  to  God.

I.'  Prayer  connected  with  labour.  "  It  is  well  to  labour,  and  it  is  well  to  pray,"
said  Luther.  Prayer  strengthens  and  directs  in  labour.  It  sweetens  toil  and  brings
success.  Jupiter  gave  no  help  to  the  waggoner  till  he  put  his  own  shoulders  to  the
wheel.     The  fable  is  abused  when  men  despise  prayer  and  dependance  upon  God.

II.  Prayer  in  trouble.  They  had  done  all  they  could,  but  were  not  relieved.
For  the  first  time  probably  these  heathens  prayed  to  the  God  of  Israel.  Sorrow
and  danger  give  speciality  and  intensity  to  supplication  (Gen  xxxii.  9  :  Is.  xxxvii.
15 — 20).  Pressing  trouble  forces  itself  from  the  heart  to  the  lips.  We  cry  to
God  in  distress,  when  we  have  failed  without  him.  Prayer  is  our  first  and  last
refuge  in  trouble.  It  should  ever  be  the  first  means  we  use  for  deliverance.  "  Call
upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble."

"  The  man  is  praying  who  doth  press  with  might
Out  of  his  darkness  into  God's  own  light"  [Trench].

III.  Prayer  in  the  emergencies  of  life.  There  are  not  only  troubles,  but  special
difficulties  and  dangers  in  life.  These  men  were  perplexed.  The  storm  demands
the  prophet,  but  the  justice  of  God  might  require  his  blood  at  their  hands.  What-
ever be  our  difficulties,  prayer  offers  help  and  leads  us  to  the  great  Disposer  of  all
things  (Prov.  iii.  6  :  1  Pet.  v.  7).  "  He  that  prays  despairs  not ;  but  sad  is  the
condition  of  him  that  cannot  pray,"  says  Jeremy  Taylor.

"  As  when  the  last  sentence  of  the  law  is  carried  out  on  land,  the  offices  of
religion  are  performed  in  the  presence  and  on  behalf  of  the  culprit,  so  here  there
is  prayer,  most  earnest  and  most  appropriate,  preceding  the  last  sad  act  that  shall
part  them  and  their  passenger  for  ever  "  [Raleigh],

I.  The  object  of  their  prayer.  "  0  Jehovah."  The  storm  and  the  confession
of  Jonah  have  weaned  them  from  their  idols.  They  take  in  the  idea  of  God,  dis-
cern his  power,  and  believe  him — 1.  To  be  "  the  hearer  of  prayer.11  2.  To  be  the
Supreme  Ruler  of  all  events.  "  They  had  but  just  known  God,"  says  Pusey,  "  and
they  resolve  the  whole  mystery  of  man's  agency  and  God's  providence  into  three
simple  words, '  As  (thou)  willedst  (thou)  didst.1  "  All  things,  however  adverse,  were
traced  to  God's  sovereign  disposal.  The  storm  and  the  lot,  the  direction  of  the
prophet  and  the  impossibility  to  land  him.  "Our  God  is  in  the  heavens  :  he  hath
done  whatsoever  he  hath  pleased."  II.  The  nature  of  their  prayer.  1.  It  was
intensely  earnest.  "  They  cried11  The  language  is  that  of  earnest  supplication,
the  particle  expressive  of  entreaty  being  repeated.  There  was  no  time  for  formal
prayer.  We  deal  not  in  general  petitions  in  trouble  like  this ;  such  tribulation
becomes  the  tutor  of  prayer,  and  leads  to  maturity  of  knowledge  and  experience.
2.  It  was  wonderfully  submissive.  Till  we  can  say  "  Thy  will  be  done,"  we  have
need  of  more  prayer  and  submission.  If  God  please  himself  let  us  be  satisfied.
We  cannot  alter  circumstances.     But  when  the  will  of  God  is  clearly  made  known


360  HOMILKTW  COMMENTARY:   JONAH.  [ohap.  l


let  us  ever  follow  it.  III.  Ths  purpose  of  their  prayer.  They  think  of
themselves  and  their  passenger.  1.  They  pray  for  the  preservation  of  their  own
life.  "Let  us  not  perish  for  the  life  of  this  man."  They  were  not  prompted  by
fear,  nor  by  selfishness,  for  then  would  they  have  cast  Jonah  into  the  sea.  Truth
has  beamed  upon  them  and  God  is  recognized.  They  felt  his  anger  and  became
executioners  of  his  justice.  In  a  short  time  they  learned  much  of  the  true  God,
and  were  gradually  led  to  worship  him.  2.  They  pray  that  the  guilt  of  murder
may  not  rest  upon  them.  "  Lay  not  upon  us  innocent  blood."  The  light  of  nature,
the  teaching  of  tradition,  and  the  laws  of  their  country,  taught  that  they  forfeited
life  when  they  took  life.  Conscience  speaks,  the  providence  of  God  seems  to  con-
firm the  confession  of  his  servant,  yet  they  are  reluctant  to  cast  him  out.  If  it
must  be  done,  they  pray  to  be  forgiven.  "  The  people  of  God  were  shedding
innocent  blood  like  water,  in  the  cities  of  Palestine  (2  Kings  ix.  7  :  2  Chron.  xxiv.
20  :  Matt,  xxiii.  35) :  these  heathen  sailors  fear  to  pour  that  of  one  guilty  man
into  the  recesses  of  the  deep.  The  offences  of  professors  of  religion  are  often
made  to  stand  out  in  awful  prominency  by  the  restraints  which  nature  and
conscience  put  on  those  of  others  (Rom.  ii.  27  :  1  Cor.  v.  1  :  Matt,  xxvii.  24,  25)."
"  At  the  hand  of  every  man's  brother  will  I  require  the  life  of  man  "  (Gen.  ix.  5,  6).

The  Sacrifice  and  the  Calm. — Verse  15.

A  funeral  at  sea  is  a  solemn  event.  It  is  a  trying  hour  when  the  remains  of  a
friend  or  comrade  have  to  be  cast  into  the  deep.  But  no  funeral  service  like  that
of  Jonah.  Not  in  haste  and  desperation,  but  in  solemn  silence  and  respect  they
lift  him  up  and  cast  him  into  the  sea.  The  yawning  deep  engulfs  the  unresisting
prophet  and  the  angry  ocean  smooths  her  face.

I.  The  sacrifice  offered.  After  they  had  done  all  they  could,  something  else
was  required.  1.  A  sacrifice  caused  by  sin.  Jonah's  disobedience  caused  Jonah's
death.  When  men  run  into  sin,  they  run  into  ruin  here  and  hereafter.  God's
favour  and  heaven  are  cast  away  by  the  wicked.  Whatever  sin  is  the  Jonah,  it
must  be  cast  away  or  it  will  drown  us  in  perdition.  2.  A  sacrifice  required  by  the
will  of  God.  The  sea  did  not  cease  from  raging.  Jonah  had  told  them  what  was
required,  and  the  providence  of  God  confirmed  the  prediction.  God's  law  must  be
honoured  and  sin  punished.  3.  A  sacrifice  offered  for  the  safety  of  others.  Jonah
was  submissive  in  the  face  of  death,  and  far  more  concerned  for  the  lives  of  others
than  for  his  own.  He  thus  becomes  a  type  of  Jesus,  who  was  offered  a  sacrifice  for
our  sins,  "  a  ransom  for  many."  If  he  had  not  suffered  for  us,  the  waterfloods  of
guilt  and  the  waves  of  grief  would  have  compassed  us  and  carried  us  away.  II.
The  calm  which  followed.  "The  sea  stayed  from  her  raging."  1.  A  proof  of
God's  power  over  the  elements  of  nature.  The  wind  ceases,  the  billows  rest,  and
danger  is  past.  "  The  lower  is  subject  to  the  higher,  nature  to  moral  providence,
and  providence  to  God."  "  Thou  rulest  the  raging  of  the  sea  :  when  the  waves
thereof  arise,  thou  stillest  them"  (Ps.  lxxxix.  9;  xciii.  3;  cvii.  29).  2.  A  con-
firmation of  right  conduct.  The-  men  would  hesitate  and  doubt,  but  God  gives
them  immediate  comfort.  They  have  obeyed  his  will,  and  he  will  make  them  know
and  feel  it,  by  outward  calm  and  inward  peace.  When  we  submit  to  God's  will
he  will  not  any  longer  contend  with  us.  3.  A  type  of  peace  through  Christ.
When  he  was  cast  forth  and  sank  into  the  sea  that  threatened  the  world  with  ruin
there  was  a  universal  calm.  God's  justice  was  satisfied  and  his  anger  ceased.
"  Fury  is  not  in  me."  We  may  have  peace  with  God  if  we  cast  out  of  our  hearts
the  sin  which  provokes  his  wrath  (Jer.  iv.  1  :  Is.  lvii.  20,  21).  "  God  hath  recon-
ciled us  to  himself  by  Jesus  Christ."

The  Converted  Heathen.  —  Verses  14  and  16.

Perhaps  these  men  were  more  candid  and  less  depraved  than  heathen  generally.
They  seem  at  any  rate  to  be  prepared   by  education  and  discipline  to  receive  the


chap.  I.]  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY ':  JONAH.  361


truth.     But  under  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit  they  were  converted  through  the
teaching  of  Jonah.

I.  What  led  to  their  conversion  ?  God  prepared  the  way  by  the  presence  of
his  servant  on  board.  But  Jonah  would  not  have  spoken  to  them,  nor  would  they
have  listened  to  him,  but  for  the  storm,  the  danger,  and  the  lot.  Perhaps,  as  in
many  cases,  some  antecedent  preparation  may  be  traced.  In  Christian  countries
many  can  trace  the  leadings  of  Divine  providence  in  bringing  them  to  Christ.  In
heathen  nations  Cod  has  prepared  tribes  and  individuals  to  believe  the  gospel  when
it  has  reached  them.  There  are  preparations  in  language,  changes  of  government,
corruption  and  decay  of  heathenism.  "A  great  door  and  effectual  is  opened."
II.  What  was  the  evidence  of  their  conversion?  When  a  Divine  principle
is  implanted  in  the  heart,  then  life  is  reformed  and  actions  changed.  1.  They
forsake  idolatry.  Their  former  gods  are  abandoned,  and  now  they  seek  to  know
the  true  God.  Every  soul  born  of  God  turns  from  lying  vanities,  and  is  drawn  out
to  God  in  supplication  and  praise.  2.  They  pray  to  Jehovah.  Prayer  is  the  first
act  of  a  converted  sinner.  "  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  V1  Afterwards
it  is  "  the  native  air  "  in  which  he  lives,  moves,  and  has  his  being.  If  gratitude
for  God's  goodness  fills  the  heart,  it  will  be  expressed  in  acts  of  devotion.  Special
revelations  of  God  in  acts  of  grace  or  providence  will  beget  true  fear  in  us.  "  The
men  feared  the  Lord  exceedingly."  III.  What  were  the  fruits  of  their  con-
version ?  When  storms  are  over  and  men  are  delivered  it  is  common  for  them
to  return  to  indifference  or  ridicule.  The  only  sure  and  permanent  sign  of
conversion  is  holy  life.  1.  These  men  feared  Jehovah.  The  storm  was  over,  and
they  were  delivered  from  death ;  but  they  return  not  after  affliction  to  their  former
ways.  Wonderful  events  had  happened.  Wind  and  storm  had  fulfilled  the  word
of  Jehovah,  and  they  felt  a  great  awe.  "  Thou  shalt  fear  the  Lord  thy  God  for
thy  good  always"  (Deut.  vi.  13,  24).  2.  They  offered  sacrifice.  Not  an  offering
in  general,  but  a  slaughtering  of  some  lamb  or  fowl  on  board,  as  a  victim  to  express
their  faith.  They  might  not  comprehend  the  full  meaning  of  the  Jewish  rite.  It
was  forgotten  and  obscured  by  heathen  superstitions.  "  But  a  conscience  could  not
be  quickened  to  a  sense  of  guilt  before  God,  nor  a  hope  of  salvation  from  the  just
punishment  of  sin  be  cherished  by  a  penitent  heart,  without  its  finding  a  natural
expression  in  this  ancient  and  once  universal  form  of  religious  worship."  Ignorant
of  Jewish  customs,  they  fell  back  upon  that  of  their  ancestors,  and  God  accepted
their  offering.  3.  They  vowed  vows.  They  combine  faith  and  works.  They  are
not  only  moved  in  present  gratitude,  but  think  of  the  future.  Many  who  escape
danger,  vow  and  forget  their  vows.  Months  pass,  and  they  evince  that  fear  was
only  a  superficial  thaAving  and  no  real  opening  of  the  heart.  God  requires  present
promise  and  future  performance,  a  dedication  of  the  whole  life  to  him.  If  we  do
not  fulfil  our  voluntary  vows  it  is  clear  that  our  gratitude  is  not  real  and  that  our
service  is  not  a  cleaving  to  God  with  all  our  hearts.  "  Vow  and  pay  unto  the
Lord  your  God :  let  all  that  be  round  about  him  bring  presents  unto  him  that
ought  to  be  feared."

"  But  when  your  ships  rest,  wafted  o'er  the  main,
AdcI  you,  on  altars  raised  along  the  shore,
Pay  your  vow'd  offerings  "  [^Eneid],

The  Great  Miracle. —  Verse  17.

By  the  mariners  Jonah  was  thought  to  be  drowned ;  but  the  providence  of  God
had  provided  a  living  tomb  for  his  servant.  He  is  hurried  through  the  depths  of
the  sea,  in  judgment  and  mercy.  He  owned  the  hand  and  submitted  to  the  will
of  God  :  he  prayed  for  help,  and  was  cast  out  of  his  sepulchre,  a  monument  of
God's  mercy  and  a  type  of  the  Saviour  of  men.     In  this  verse  we  have —

I.  Providential  anticipation.  "  The  Lord  had  prepared  a  great  fish."  This
preparation  was  (1)  miraculous,  and  (2)  merciful  in  its  nature  and  design.     It  also


362  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  JONAH.  [chap.  i.


illustrates  a  principle  which  we  find  in  all  God's  dealings  with  men,  viz.  Anticipa-
tions of  providence.  1.  In  the  scheme  of  redemption  there  was  no  after- thought.
God  provided  a  remedy  before  the  fall.  2.  In  the  conversion  of  sinners  goodness
and  grace  are  prepared  beforehand.  3.  In  the  exigencies  of  Christian  life  God
meets  us  ready  to  help.  In  prayer,  trouble,  and  death  he  prepares,  goes  before
us,  and  stands  ready  to  bless.  "  The  God  of  my  mercy  shall  prevent  (go  before)
me."  II.  Typical  events.  God  had  more  places  to  send  Jonah  than  to  Mneveh.
The  course  of  things  starts  out  in  strange  deviation  from  that  uniformity
which  philosophers  insist  upon.  We  rest  simply  upon  the  Divine  power
which  miraculously  preserved  the  vital  economy  under  the  suspension  of  one  of
its  greatest  functions.  If  men  like  to  deny  or  ridicule  attested  facts  let  them
"sport  themselves  with  their  own  deceivings,"  says  one.  In  "the  three  days  and
three  nights'  "  imprisonment  of  Jonah  Christ  sees  a  type  of  himself  (Matt.  xii.  40).
1.  The  analogies  are  his  confinement  to  the  deep  and  the  grave  that  others  might
be  saved.  2.  The  same  duration  of  time  in  this  dark  retirement ;  and  3.  The
coming  to  light  and  life  again  for  the  reformation  of  mankind.  Learn  from  the
fact — 1.  The  presence  of  God  in  history.  2.  The  purpose  of  God  in  controlling
its  events.  3.  The  power  of  God  in  making  all  things  subservient  to  this  purpose.
"  With  the  Lord  there  is  mercy,  and  with  him  is  plenteous  redemption."

HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

When  the  servants  of  God  run  away  Tlie    Type.    Three   days   and    three

from  an  easy  service,  their  Master  fre-  nights  (Matt.  xii.  40.    Cf.  Eom.  iv.  25 ;

quently  appoints  them  a  harder  task.  vi.  4).     In  comparing   the  two — these

If  Jonah  will  not  preach  up  and  down  two  great  interpositions  of  Godhead  with

the  streets  of  Nineveh,  he  shall  preach  Jonah  and  Jesus  respectively — the  type

from  the  bottom  of  the  sea  [Jones'].  will  illustrate  the  antitype.     But  there

1 .  When  God  pursues  his  rebellious  are  points  in  which  our  clear  knowledge

children  in  a  severe  way,  yet  he  doth  not  of  the  antitype  may  be  carried  back  to

altogether  cast  off  his  mercy  to  them,  illustrate  the  type.     This  is  the  case  in

but  moderates  their  affliction.     2.  God  the  very  first  resemblance.     I.  In  both

may  have  a  mercy  and  proof    of   love  cases  there  is  a  death  and  a  resurrection,

waiting  upon  his  people  in  a  time  and  Jonah  speaks  of  his  burial  in  terms  in

place  where  they  would  be  least  expected,  which  the  Messiah  speaks  of  his  "  hell "

For  Jonah  meets  a  mercy  in  the  raging  and  "  corruption."     In  both  cases  it  is

sea,  into  which  he  was  cast  in  anger,  as  the  language  of  burial  and  resurrection,

to  be   destroyed.      3.    Although  God's  II.    But  secondly :    in  both  cases,  the

mercy  will  not  destroy  his  guilty  people  death  and  burial  are  judicial  processes,

in  their  afflictions,  yet  his  wisdom  sees  Each  of  the  processes  is  an  atonement

fit  not  to  deliver  them  at  first,  but  to  and    expiation,    pacifying    the    Divine

exercise  their  faith  and  heart  [Hutche-  Judge,  satisfying  Divine  justice,  abol-

son\  ishing  guilt,  restoring  peace.     III.  The

Ver.    17.     "From    how    many    un-  burial  and  resurrection  of  Jonah  con-

thought-of,  unimaginable  situations  the  stituted  the  gate  by  which  the  word  of

Sovereign  of  the  world  has  drawn  de-  Jehovah  passed  forth  from  the  Jewish

votional  aspirations  !   but  never,  except  to  the  Gentile  world.     In  like  manner

once,  from  a  situation  like  this "  [John  the   death  and   resurrection   of   Christ

Foster]  !  was  the  breaking  down  of  the  middle

The  sea  and  her  inhabitants  are  God's  wall   of   partition.       IV.    The  analogy

and  lie  at  his  will  (Luke  v.  6  :    John  holds  further  in  this  respect,  that  the

xxi.    6).     The  mightiest   and   meanest  experiences  of  Jonah  and  Christ  consti-

creatures  subserve  his  purposes,  and  are  tute,  each  in  its  own  sphere,  an  enforce-

auxiliaries  or  adversaries  to  man  as  he  ment  of  the  message  which  each  brings

chooses  (Josh.  xxiv.  12  :    2  Kings  xvii.  to  the  Gentiles.     V.  Jonah's  experience

25)  [Sihthorp].  was  his  preparation  for  new  loyalty  and


CHAP.  I.]


H0M1LETIG  COMMENTARY:  JOJVJH.


363


obedience;  and  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ,
Christ's  risen  life  is  the  source  of  new-
ness of  life  and  service.  Jonah  was
a  new  man  on  dry  land,  with  a  new  life
and  a  new  career  opening  before  him.
0  believer  in  a  risen  Christ,  is  not  this
the   type  and   fashion  of  your  life  of


faith  ?  With  what  freshness — as  of  the
morning  light  of  an  eternal  Sabbath ;  and
with  what  force — as  of  the  eternal  power
of  Messiah's  resurrection ;  may  that
blessed  appeal  be  made  to  us,  "If  ye
then  be  risen"  (Col.  iii.  1)  [H.  Martin],


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO   CHAPTER  I.


\


Ver.  1.  The  name  Jonah  signifies  "  a
dove."  But  there  is  not  much  of
.  "  mourning  love,"  of  which  the  dove  has
always  been  taken  as  the  symbol  in  the
record.  The  name  might  express  his
father's  feeling ;  as  applied  to  himself  it
seems  a  misnomer.  The  hawk,  the
raven,  or  the  vulture  would  seem  to  be
more  truly  symbolical.  But  let  us  not
forget  that  he  tells  his  own  tale,  after
the  things  recorded  are  past :  that  he
tells  it  very  expressly  to  the  glory  of
God's  mercy,  with  which  designedly  he
sets  his  own  hardness  and  thoughtless
cruelty  in  contrast  [Raleigh].  There  is
but  one  reason  for  the  mission  stated
here;  but  several  others  in  reserve —
some  gently  hinted,  some  unrevealed
until  after  ages  [Raleigh].

Ver.  2.  "Jonah  and  his  '  arise'  giveth
a  warning  to  us  all,  for  we  have  all  a
Nineveh  to  go  into.  Magistrates,  arise
and  go  to  the  gate  to  execute  God's  judg-
ments. Ministers,  arise  and  go  to  the
gospel  to  do  the  works  of  evangelists.
People,  arise  and  go  to  your  trades,"  &c.
[King].

Ver.  3.  To  leave  the  presence  of  God
is  to  "go  down;"  and  the  history  of
many-  a  day  might,  in  the  evening,  be
written  too  faithfully  in  the  sad  record,
"  I  have  been  going  down."  Down  from
communion,  from  a  conscious  faith,  from
quietness,  and  firm,  steady  obedience.
Down  into  strife  without  victory,  into
toil  without  fruit ;  into  mere  money-
making,  mere  pleasure-seeking,  mere
time-wasting.  The  success  and  glory  of
true  life  can  only  be  found  in  keeping
the  upward  road — in  hearing  and  fol-
lowing the  voice  which  perpetually  says,
"  Come  up  hither"  [Raleigh]  !

Vers.  4,  5.  Storm.  Some  years  ago
an  infidel  embarked  at  Buffalo  with  a
printing-press,  to  set  up  an  iniidel  pub-


lication in  Cleveland.  He  annoyed  the
passengers  by  his  zeal  to  discuss  the
subject  of  religion.  When  a  storm
arose  and  threatened  them  with  de-
struction, he  was  not  only  willing  to
throw  overboard  his  press,  but  was  con-
spicuous for  his  prayers  and  cries  for
mercy.  When  the  storm  was  over,  and
he  found  himself  a  laughing-stock  among
the  wicked  and  an  object  of  pity  to  the
pious,  he  went  back  to  his  infidelity  and
blamed  his  early  education  in  supersti-
tion, as  he  called  it,  for  his  fright  and
prayers  [Mitchell],

Yer.  6.  Sleeper.  The  saint's  sleeping-
time  is  Satan's  tempting-time.,  No
temptation  so  weak  but  is  strong  enough
to  foil  a  Christian  that  is  napping  in
security.  Samson  asleep,  and  Delilah
cut  his  locks.  Noah  asleep,  and  his
graceless  son  has  a  fit  time  to  discover
his  father's  nakedness.  Thus  the
Christian  asleep  in  security  may  soon  be
surprised,  so  as  to  lose  much  of  his
spiritual  strength  [An  old  Divine].

Ver.  7.  Lots.  Eeligion,  even  in  its
rudest  forms,  has  always  been  faithful  to
its  general  principle  thus  far,  that  when
the  anger  of  the  Divinity  has  been  appre-
hended, it  has  been  understood  to  be
against  sins  and  crimes ;  and  also  that
the  Divinity  was  believed  to  know  who
was  the  criminal.  The  mariners,  there-
fore, referred  it  to  the  avenging  Power  to
point  out  the  criminal  by  a  common
ancient  practice.  A  reference  this  not  to
chance,  but  to  a  superior  intelligence.
Could  our  prophet  have  any  doubt  where
the  lot  would  fall  %  No  :  his  conscience
must  have  been  a  prophet  to  him  [John
Foster].

Ver.  8.  How  natural  the  questions  !

"  Say,  strangors,  for  what  cause

Explore  your  ways  unknown  ?  or  whither  tends


364


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.


[chap.  I.


Your  voyage  here  ?    Whence  come  you  ?    From

what  race
Derived  ?  And  bring  you  hither  peace  or  war  ?"

[Trapp's  Virgil.]

Vers.  10,  11.  Let  God  be  clearly-
known  as  he  is  revealed,  and  with  few
exceptions  men  cannot  but  believe  in
him.  A  few  philosophers  will  reason
and  refine,  and  abide  in  intellectual  dis-
belief. A  few  very  wicked  men  will
"  believe  a  lie,"  that  they  may  work  un-
righteousness :  but  the  great  mass  of
men,  like  these  sailors  from  Tarshish,
will  quickly  yield,  at  least  by  intellectual
assent,  to  the  influence  of  the  truth
[Raleigh].

Vers.  12,  13.  Take  me  up,  neverthe-
less the  men  rowed  hard.  Man  has  no
right  to  take  away  his  own  life.  We
should  also  be  careful  of  the  life  of
others.  The  sailors  thought  it  could
not  be  right  nor  pleasing  to  God  to  cast
Jonah  into  the  deep.  It  would  be  a  loss
of  goodness,  thought,  and  self-denying
regard  for  them.  They  were  actuated
by  human  motives,  and  illustrated  the
principle  of  moral  life  that  our  spirit
and  conduct  have  a  tendency  to  repro-
duce themselves  in  others.  Men  have
responsive  feelings,  answer  heart  to
heart,  and  thus  make  life  beautiful.

"  All  life  is  sacred  in  its  kind  to  heaven,
And  all  things  holy,  beautiful,  and  good."

[Bailey.]

Ver.  12.  Be  calm  unto  you.

"  Immortal  hope,

Takes  comfort  from  the  foaming  billows  rage,


And  makes  a  welcome  harbour  of  the  tomb."

[Young.]

Vers.  15,  17.  The  men  must  have
talked  about  the  voyage  and  its  issues,
especially  about  what  took  place  after
Jonah  was  in  the  sea.  He  knew  nothing
about  that,  and  could  only  record  it  here
because  he  had  been  told  it  by  others.
By  whom  1  No  doubt  that  story  was
told  far  and  near,  and  he  might  have
heard  it  from  any  one.  But  most
probably  he  heard  it  from  their  own
lips — from  captain  and  ship's  company,
gathered  together,  perhaps,  on  the  deck
of  that  very  vessel.  It  is  not  improbable
that  the  prophet  took  a  journey  to  Joppa
on  purpose;  that  he  went  to  the  old
place ;  that  he  stood  once  more  on  the
deck  of  the  ship — captain  and  crew
around  him  —  to  tell  and  hear  their
mutual  stories  of  preservation.  You
can  fancy  the  meeting.  You  can  see
the  man.  You  can  imagine  how  the
whole  matter  Avould  be  bruited  abroad
even  as  far  as  Nineveh ;  and  how  the
story  told  there,  and  well  authenticated,
would  prepare  that  great  and  guilty  city
for  receiving  the  message  of  the  prophet
when  he  actually  came  [Raleigh].

Remember,  therefore,  this  advice:
Never  let  the  advantages  with  which  you
begin  life's  voyage  lull  you  into  confidence
and  negligence,  nor  difficulties  lead  you
to  despair  ;  persevere  in  that  path  which
reason  and  justice  point  out,  and  then
despair  not  of  reaching  your  desired
port  [Hamlain],


CHAPTER  H.


Critical  Notes].  Prayed]  Really  praised.  His]  not  only  to  Jehovah  as  the  sailors  did.  "  He
shows  his  faithby  adoring  Him  as  his  God"  [Bnrk].  The  structure  of  this  hymn,  composed  like
many  Psalms,  and  filled  with  allusions  to  them,  falls  into  three  strophes  (vers.  4,  6,  and  8) ;  each  of
which  rises  from  distress  to  deliverance  and  hope  [cf.  Lange].  2.  Cried]  More  definite  than  I's.
xvi.  1,  and  cxx.  1.  Belly]  Womb  of  Sheol,  i.  e.  the  peril  of  death  ;  snares  of  death  (Ps.  xviii.  5) ;
deliverance  out  of  Sheol  (Ps.  xxx.  3).  3.  Deep]  abyss  (Ps.  xlii.  7).  Midst]  Heart  of  the  seas,  in
the  fathomless  depth,  away  from  the  shores.  Floods]  The  stream  or  current  of  the  sea  which
sweeps  along,  as  Ps.  xxiv.  2.  Waves]  from  StrabUr,  to  break  ;  thy  breakers  and  thy  billows  roll.
"  Thy  billows,  because  he  felt  in  his  conscience  that  the  sea  with  its  waves  and  billows  was  the  serv-
ant of  God  and  of  his  wrath  to  punish  sin"  [Luther].     4.  Said]  in  my  heart,  i.  e.  I  thought  that  I


chap.il]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.  365


was  banished  from  thy  protection  and  care  (Ps.  xxxi.  23).  Look]  Lit.  look  intently,  an  assurance
that  he  will  yet  appear  in  the  temple  to  praise  God  (Ps.  v.  8).  5]  This  strophe  opens  like  the  first,
sets  forth  the  peril  of  death,  and  describes  the  thought  of  miraculous  deliverance.  Surrounded]
Pressed  even  to  the  soul  (Ps.  lxix.  2  ;  xviii.  5).  Weeds]  Sea-weeds,  vast  quantities  of  which  were
found  in  the  Mediterranean,  were  bound  about  his  head  "  like  a  grave  band.  A  peril  even  to  the  strong
swimmer,  entangling  him  the  more  he  struggles  to  extricate  himself.  But  to  one  below,  powerless
to  struggle,  it  was  as  his  winding-sheet"  [Pmey].  6.  Bottoms]  Cuttings  off,  ends  or  extremities,
hence  foundations  (cf.  Ps.  xviii.  7 — 15).  It  seemed  as  if  the  earth  itself  formed  the  vault,  the  living
coffin  into  which  he  was  shut  up  (Deut.  iii.  5  :  Job  xxxviii.  10).  "  The  bolts  of  the  sea  are  the  walls
of  the  sea-basin,  which  set  bounds  to  the  sea  thfit  it  cannot  pass  over"  [Keil],  Corruption]  Lit.  the
pit  (Is.  xxxviii.  17  :  Job  xvii.  4).  7.  Fainted]  Heb.  to  cover  one's  self  or  to  veil,  then  to  sink,
to  pine  away  :  Rem.  the  triumph  of  faith  over  sense.  Temple]  from  which  prayers  are  heard  (Ps.
xlii.  6  ;  Ixxiii.  26).  8.]  When  prayer  reaches  to  God  he  helps  and  saves.  Salvation  is  only  from
Him.  Idolaters  forfeit  their  mercy.  Observe]  Lit.  regard,  hold  to,  an  intensive  form  ;  "  pay  deference
to  court,  sue  vanity  of  vanities,  vain  things  which  prove  ruin  at  last"  [Pusey].  Mercy]  Lit.  their
goodness,  i.  e.  God,  their  Benefactor,  the  Author  of  all  mercies  (Ps.  cxliv.  2).  9.  I  will]  The  vow
of  a  pious  man  as  opposed  to  the  life  of  apostates.  As  the  mariners  ended  their  sacrifice  with  vows,
so  Jonah  ends  his  prayer  with  thanksgiving.  Sal.]  Lit.  a  mighty  salvation  (an  intensive  form)  which
God  gives  to  his  people  after  affliction,  "is  wholly  His  ;  all  belongs  to  Him,  so  that  none  can  share
in  bestowing  it"  [Pusey].  10.  Spake]  His  uttered  voice  produces  everything.  In  heaven,  earth,
and  sea,  all  things  submit  to  him.  Land]  Probably  the  coast  of  Palestine.  This  circumstance
typical  of  a  more  wonderful  event,  when  death  will  be  swallowed  up  of  victory  (Is.  xxvi.  19 :  1
Cor.  xv.  54).

HOMILETICS.

In  the  Deep. — Chap.  II.

As  soon  as  the  prophet  was  entombed,  he  knew  that  he  was  in  a  living  grave.
Then  began  that  new  and  bitter  experience  recorded  in  the  prayer  of  this  chapter.
We  have  no  external  history  of  those  days.  But  we  have  a  very  intense  and
clear  history  of  his  inward  life.  Speaking  generally,  there  was  evidently  a  great
and  sudden  quickening  of  consciousness.  The  man  who  speaks  in  this  holy  psalm
hardly  seems  the  same  person  whom  we  have  seen  in  flight — dark,  moody,  silent,
despairing.  Beneath  the  waves  the  whole  man  reveals  himself  to  God.  Men
rescued  from  drowning  have  told  of  quickened  consciousness  in  danger — how  they
have  lived  again  through  years  of  past  moments,  estimated  possible  means  of
escape,  and  pierced  with  anticipative  thought  into  the  two  possible  futures — that  of
time,  and  that  of  eternity.  Then  rapidly  this  new  consciousness  became  distressful.
His  soul  fills  itself  fuller  than  the  sea  with  "  affliction."  The  reserved  sorrow  of
sinning  comes  all  at  once.  If  sinners  knew  the  fruitage  of  their  ungodliness,  what
the  universe  would  be  when  Divine  presence  is  darkened  out  of  them,  and  what
the  bitterness  of  that  moment  when  the  soul  awakes  in  the  thought,  "  God  is  now
away,  ptrhaps  for  ever,"  they  would  stay  the  beginnings  of  departure  as  men  keep
back  from  a  slippery  precipice.  Then  he  began  to  "  look " — upwards  to  earth,
eastwards  to  the  temple,  where  he  knew  that  the  lost  presence  was  richly  mani-
fested. This  is  one  of  the  most  characteristic  acts  of  faith — to  look,  although
death  may  come  in  the  looking.  This  is  a  tough  battle.  It  is  hard  to  fight  above-
ground;  but  to  fight  as  deep  as  ever  plummet  sounded,  where  stretches  the
shadow  of  death,  is  grand.  The  look  soon  became  a  erg.  It  may  have  been
literally  a  vocal  cry.  The  voice  was  much  used  by  Jews  in  gladness,  sorrow,  and
worship — especially  by  great  and  impassioned  souls.  This  may  have  been  Jonah's
habit  on  land,  the  means  of  preserving  his  life  in  the  deep,  and  may  have  so  acted
upon  the  sensations  of  his  submarine  custodian  as  to  induce  at  length  the  disgorge-
ment. But  it  was  the  cry  of  the  soul,  which  rose  from  farthest  depths  in  one  in-
stant, without  injuring  natural  law,  above  all  heights,  to  the  primal  springs  of  power
and  earthly  providence.  He  began  to  be  grateful.  Some  measure  of  gratitude
mingled  with  his  distress  from  the  first,  but  as  he  felt  himself  still  alive  as  time
rolled  on,  then  would  come  a  feeling  of  thankfulness.  There  was  daybreak  in  the
land  of  the  shadow  of  death.  Then,  apparently,  his  soul  passed  into  a  more  active
state  of   renewed  personal  consciousness  to  God.     Religious  thankfulness  nearly


366  HOMlLimC  COMMENTARY:   JONAH.  (OHAP.  n.


always  grows  into  that.  The  voice  of  thanksgiving  begins  with  the  act  of  sacri-
fice. Vows  when  truly  made  are  paid.  The  prophet  resolved  "  I  will" ;  acted  when
deliverance  came.  The  final  state  of  his  mind — that  into  which  all  other  feelings
subside  and  resolve  themselves — is  a  state  of  entire  dependence,  involving  a  quiet
and  trustful  surrender  of  himself  to  God.  I  have  done  all  I  can,  need  not  cry  any
more.  If  God  will  accept  me  for  active  service  I  shall  be  delivered.  If  not,- 1
shall  trust  in  him  :  "  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord  "  [Raleigh'].

Prayer  and  Distress. —  Verses  1 — 4.

Jonah  now  describes  his  mournful  and  dismal  condition.     Let  us  notice  his
sorrows,  prayers,  and  hopes.

I.  The  great  distress.     "I  cried  by  reason  of  my  distress."     1.  Distress  in  the
deep.     Pharaoh's  army  sank  into  the  deep ;  and  the  sea  is  often  as  the  grave.
(a)  Into  the  heart  of  the  seas,  far  away  from  the  shores,  and  down  into  the  fathom-
less bottom,     (b)  Encircled  by  the  floods.     "  The  floods  have  compassed  me  "  (cf .
Ps.  xlvi.  3 ;  lxix.  1,2;  lxxxviii.  6).     (c)  Swept  by  the  billows.     The  broken  surges
and  mountain-billows  rolled  over  his  head.     Sin  casts  into  darkness  and  dismal
gulfs.     The  punishment  of  God  is  often  intense,  but  love  is  seen  in  it  all.     "  Thy
waves."     2.   Distress  in  Sheol.     "  From  the  belly  of  hell."     His  confinement  was
like  the  lower  world,  the  region  of  ghosts.     But  no  abyss  of  grief  is  beyond  Divine
help.     God  can  keep  alive  and  deliver  from  the  pit.     "  0  Lcrd,  thou  hast  brought
up  my  soul  from  the  grave,  thou  hast  kept  me  alive  that  I  should  not  go  down  to
the  pit."     3.  Distress  away  from  God 's  presence.     "  I  am  driven  out  of  thy  sight."
This  was  the  worst  of  all,  yet  only  a  just  retribution  for  one  who  had  fled  from
the  presence  of  God.     Jonah's  sin,  and  the  Divine  judgment  upon  it,  pierced  his
soul,  darkened  his  prospect,  and  led  him  to  despair.     Hope  of   deliverance  for
body  or  soul  seemed  no  longer  cherished.     But  man's  extremity  is  God's  oppor-
tunity.    Bradford  said  the  prison  can  be  made  the  palace  of  the  Great  King.
Seek  to  be  near  God,  and  feel  distressed  at  distance  which  is  (a)  a  penal  conse-
quence of  sin ;  (b)  a  sad  complaint  with  God's  people.     "  Why  standest  thou  afar
off,  0  Lord]"     II.  The  earnest  prayer.     Sorrows  within,  around,  and  above
him,  led  him  to  cry  out  to  God.     The  Church  is  indebted  for  its  best  men,  and  the
world  for  its  best  sayings,  to  affliction.     Many  of  God's  children  have  first  prayed
by  reason  of  distress.     Backsliders  have  been  reclaimed,  and  prayers  quickened
into  cries,  by  poignant  grief.      1.  Its  intensity.     "  I  cried."     Prosperity  tends  to
negligence,  formality,  and  deadness  in  prayer;  distress  makes  it  earnest  and  ardent
(Jas.  v.   13).     "  Many,  silent  with  their  lips,  have  cried  aloud  with  their  heart,"
says  Augustine.     "  Many,  noisy  with  their  lips,  could,  with  heart  turned   away,
obtain  nothing."     2.  Its  directness.     "Unto  Jehovah,  and  Jehovah  as  his  God"
(ver.  1).     Away  from  himself,  and  up  to  the  throne  of  the  Eternal,  were  his  con-
fidence and  desire  fixed.     He  was  yet  the  servant  of  God,  linked   to  him  by  past
discipline  and  future  hope.     The  covenant  of  God  stands  firm,  and  brighter  than
stars  does  it  shine  in  the  depths  of  sorrow.     "  This  God  is  our  God."     3.  Its  place.
"  The   fish's   belly."     What   an   oratory  !     No   place   is  amiss  for   prayer.     The
wilderness  and  the  den,  the  prison,  and  "  the  belly  of  hell."     The  voice  of  a  child
is  heard  wherever  he  cries  in  distress.     "  Call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble,"  &c.
3.  Its  language.     Most  of  its  expressions  are  found  in  the  Psalms.     It  is  well  to
be  conversant  with  Scripture,  which  gives  consolation  and  aids  devotion  in  all  cir-
cumstances.    Our  prayers  would  be  more  refreshing  to  others,  and  more  acceptable
to  God,  if  offered  in  words  of  inspiration.     4.  lis  speed.     "Thou  heardest  my
voice."    God,  who  cast  him  down,  lifted  him  up ;  inspired  his  heart,  and  answered
his  petition.     God  had  called  upon  Jonah,  and  often  calls  to  us,  without  response.
But  when  we  turn  in  penitence  and  prayer  to  him  he  listens.     There  is  a  voice  in
faith  and  prayer  which  God  quickly  hears,  for  "  he  delighteth  in  me  rcy."

"Prayer  ardent  opens  heaven"  [Young].


CHAP.  II.]


HOMILBTIG  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.


367


Eevived  Feeling. —  Verse  4.

By  degrees  Jonah  gained  strength  to  hope  and  pray.  His  despondency  was
only  momentary.  A  ray  of  light  pierced  the  darkness,  and  blessed  his  heart.  "  I
will  look  again"  &c.     Learn—

I.  That  a  servant  of  God  may  be  overcome  with  fear.  Not  only  assaulted
with  temptation  and  despair,  but  overcome  by  them  for  a  time.  Men  change  in
feeling,  rejoice  to-day,  and  doubt  to-morrow.  Light  and  darkness  alternate  in  the
spiritual  as  in  the  natural  world.  But  resist  temptation,  seek  to  gather  strength,
and  look  again.  "  Cast  not  away,  therefore,  your  confidence."  II.  That  the
weakest  act  of  faith  may  be  mighty  in  overcoming  fear.  Faith  in  God  will
sustain  us  in  extremest  sufferings,  and  find  a  way  in  greatest  impediments.  To
remain  in  unbelief,  rest  under  the  waves,  or  trust  in  anything  but  the  promise,  is
folly.  Jonah  looked  not  at  probabilities,  at  things  as  they  really  were,  but  with
fixed  eye  toward  the  holy  temple.  His  faith  pierced  the  darkness,  and  pictured
the  mercy-seat  and  the  Divine  presence.  A  true  retrospect  of  God's  house  will
tinge  the  present  with  hope,  and  dissipate  the  clouds  that  darken  our  horizon.
"  All  things  are  possible  to  him  that  belie  veth."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Yer.  2.  The  affliction.  1.  Its  ac-
knowledged source.  Neither  himself
nor  the  mariners  were  considered.  All
comes  from  God.  "  Thou  hast  cast  me
into  the  deep."  "Thy  waves,"  &c.
"  It  was  not  you,  but  God,  that  sent  me
here."  2.  Its  benevolent  design.  De-
sign there  was,  and  that  design  not
malevolent.  "God  is  love."  He  does
not  afflict  willingly,  but  for  our  future
good  and  his  glory.

"  Now  let  us  thank  the  Eternal  Power,  convinced
That  heaven  but  tries  our  virtue  by  affliction :
That  oft  the  cloud  which  wraps  the  present

hour,
Serves  but  to  brighten  all  our  future  days."

Vers.  2,  3.  The  right  use  of  the
Psalter.  Even  holy  men  of  God,  who
were  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  have
not  refused  to  appeal  to,  and  to  cite
formally,  the  books  of  Scripture,  which
existed  already  in  their  time.  A  strong
argument  for  the  authority  of  the  Holy
Scriptures  [Lange].

Depths.  1.  Sorrow.  2.  Despair.
3.  Desertion.

"  One  woe  doth  tread  upon  another's  heel,
So  fast  they  follow  "  [Shakespeare].

11  Thus  woe  succeeds  woe,  as  wave  a  wave."

[Herrick.]

Look  again.  1.  A  determination  to
remember  God  in  future.  2.  An  ex-
pression of  encouragement  derived  from
displays  of  Divine  providence  and
mercy.     "God  gave  him  no  hope  save


that  he  preserved  him  alive.  For  he
seemed  to  himself  forsaken  of  God.
Wonderful  pattern  of  faith  which  gains
strength  even  from  God's  seeming  de-
sertion "  [Pusey].

Again,  past  experience  in  God's
house.  1.  When  improved,  (a)  A
source  of  comfort  in  distress,  (b)  A
ground  of  hope  for  future  blessings.
2.  When  abused,  (a)  Taken  an  evi-
dence of  present  grace,  (b)  Made  an
excuse  for  further  effort.  If  you  have
not  force  enough  to  contemplate  God
in  heaven,  try  again  by  fresh  exer-
cises of  faith  and  prayer;  you  may
be  refreshed  with  a  more  excellent  view
and  better  hope  than  Moses  had  on
Nebo's  summit.  The  hasty  conclusion.
"  Then  I  said,  I  am  cast  out."  I.  Its
cause.  1.  Consciousness  of  guilt.  2.
Calamity  interpreted  as  visitations  of
God.  II.  Its  folly.  God  reproves,  and
often  severely,  but  never  casts  away
his  children.  When  we  speak  in  haste
we  do  not  consider.  Our  minds  are
then  disturbed,  and  we  distrust  God.
(Cf.  David,  1  Sam.  xxvii.  1  :  Ps.  xxi.
22.)  "  Hasty  words,"  says  one,  "  are  but
for  a  moment  on  the  tongue,  but  they
often  lie  for  years  on  the  conscience."
The  mischief  of  hasty  conclusions  is
great.  "  Waters  flowed  over  mine  head ;
then  I  said,  I  am  cut  off.  I  called
upon  thy  name,  0  Lord,  out  of  the  low
dungeon."


368  UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.  [CHAP.  n.


H0M1LETIGS.
The  horrible  Pit. —  Verses  5,  6.

The  prophet  again  enlarges  on  his  terrible  and  apparently  hopeless  condition,
reviews  the  awful  deep  from  whence  he  was  delivered,  and  admires  the  power  of
God  in  his  salvation.

I.  The  depth  of  the  pit.  The  poet  or  the  painter  can  add  nothing  to  the  de-
scription here  given  of  the  prisoner  in  the  deep.  He  was  cast  down  into  a  dark,
fearful  dungeon,  amid  horrible  gloom  and  rushing  torrents.  Forgotten  of  mankind ;
confined  in  anguish  and  hell.  Sin  always  casts  men  into  extremity  and  death.
II.  The  dangers  of  the  pit.  His  peril  was  imminent.  The  terrors  of  the  Al-
mighty, the  elements  of  nature,  set  themselves  in  array  against  him.  1.  He  was
encompassed  by  icaters.  Excluded  from  the  atmosphere  and  light  on  the  surface,
he  felt  almost  suffocated  beneath  the  waves.  His  very  soul  was  submerged,  and
pressed  by  the  floods  so  that  life  was  almost  extinct.  "  Encompassed  me  even  to
the  soul."  2.  He  was  barred  by  the  earth.  He  was  carried  to  the  base  of  the
rocks,  the  roots  of  the  mountains,  whose  summits  overtopped  the  waves.  3.  He
was  enclosed  in  the  deep.  "  The  deep  closed  me  in."  He  could  sink  no  lower,  and
it  was  impossible  to  rise  higher.  He  was  confined  on  all  sides.  Earth  and  sea
formed  the  vault  within  which  he  was  for  ever  shut.  4.  He  was  wrapped  round
with  sea-iveeds.  The  alga  or  weed  was  bound  about  his  head,  and  made  it  like  a
state  of  death  or  living  corruption.  "As  the  monster  within  which  he  was
caverned  glided  through  the  vast  submarine  forests,  they  seemed  to  enclose  him
in  their  green  and  slippery  coverts,  or  portions  of  sea-weed,  swallowed  by  the  fish,
wrapped  itself  around  bim."  III.  The  deliverance  from  the  pit.  "  Thou  hast
brought  up  my  life."  His  rescue  was  like  a  resurrection  of  the  body,  and  displayed
the  grace  and  power  of  Jehovah.  God  delivered  him  from  sufferings  described
and  recorded  when  he  was  on  dry  land.  His  soul  also  was  recovered  to  true
penitence,  and  the  light  of  God's  coimtenance.  He  could  now  say,  "  0  Lord,  my
God."  "  A  sweet  renewed  sense  of  pardoning  love  is  often  the  pleasant  shore  on
which  we  step  out  of  the  deep  mire  of  our  sorrowful  troubles."  IV.  The  grati-
tude to  the  deliverer.  It  is  a  good  thing  to  give  thanks  to  God  for  blessings
received.  It  is  common  with  God  to  deliver  when  nobody  else  can.  Every  mercy
is  the  expression  of  a  thought,  the  manifestation  of  a  purpose.  God's  mercies  are
innumerable,  and  must  be  publicly  acknowledged  to  quicken  our  own  hearts  and
those  of  others  (Is.  xxxviii.  17).  "He  brought  me  up  also  out  of  an  horrible  pit
out  of  the  miry  clay,  and  set  my  feet  upon  a  rock,  and  established  my  goings '
(Ps.  xl.  2,  3).

HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Yer.    5.     Trials   like   water.     Deep,  phet.     3.    It    was    Divinely    wrought.

heavy,  and  overwhelming.     It  is  sad  to  "  Yet  hast  thou."     4.  It  was  recognized

be  perfectly  sensible  of  your  situation,  and  appreciated  by  Jonah.     "  0  Lord,

yet  not  able  to  do  anything  for  relief ;  to  my   God."     These   words   are   full    of

struggle,  and  become  more  fettered  by  meaning,  and  express  the  faith  and  joy

the  effort.  of  the  Prophet  [Exell].

The  deliverance.  1.  This  deliverance  Vers.  5,  6.  Bringing  up  and  preserv-
was,  humanly  speaking,  most  unlikely,  ation.  Two  great  blessings  traced  to
2.  It  was  highly  benevolent.  "  Brought  the  hand  of  God,  and  prompting  to
up  my  life."  It  was  a  treasure  beyond  gratitude  on  account  of  the  evils  de-
all  price  that  was  restored  to  the  pro-  scribed.


chap.  ii. J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.  369


HOMILETICS.

Kemembrance  of  God. — Verse  7.

Jonah  continues  his  reflections,  and  calls  to  mind  his  past  experience  in  the  deep.

I.  Remembrance  of  God  an  antidote  to  fainting.  Men  faint  through  heat,
thirst,  and  exhaustion  ;  but  the  worst  fainting  is  in  the  mind  (Heb.  xii.  3).  If  the
mind  keeps  strong  we  can  bear  up,  but  if  that  gives  way  we  succumb  to  sorrow.
Natural  infirmities,  trouble  and  temptation,  may  overcome  the  stoutest.  The  soul
is  filled  with  doubt,  the  heart  grows  weak,  and  faints  away.  Above  all,  guilt  brings
fear  and  drives  away  God,  and  casts  dark  shadows  over  our  path.  But  if  we  are
humble  and  turn  to  God  in  our  despondency  our  souls  will  revive,  and  hope  will
dawn  in  regions  of  despair.  Remembrance  of  (a)  God's  power,  (b)  God's  promise,
and  (c)  God's  readiness  to  save,  will  renew  our  strength.  "  God  will  help  and  that
right  early."  II.  Remembrance  of  God  a  stimulant  to  prayer.  "  And  my
prayer  came  unto  thee."  Much  depends  upon  what  men  look  at  in  trouble.  Ac-
cording to  the  object  in  view  will  be  the  direction  of  the  thoughts.  Some  look  at
their  situation,  with  its  attendant  evils,  and  faint.  Others  trust  to  wrong  sources
for  help,  and  are  disappointed.  But  remembrance  of  God  will  invigorate  faith,  and
prompt  to  prayer.  Constant  thoughts  of  God  would  make  life  more  devout  and
successful.  Continual  prayer  to  him  woidd  secure  his  presence,  and  turn  the  depths
of  death  into  a  temple  of  praise.  III.  Remembrance  of  God  a  proof  of  God's
remembrance  of  us.  When  we  truly  remember  and  pray  to  God  in  sorrow,  it  is
an  evidence  that  we  are  not  forsaken  by  him.  The  spirit  of  prayer  is  given  to  be
cultivated,  and  offered  to  him  in  hearty  petitions.  No  greater  mercy  can  we  have
in  trial  than  to  be  kept  prayerful  and  dependent  upon  God.  Contrite  prayer  and
enjoyment  of  God's  favour  are  closely  connected.  Let  us  not  forget  God  whatever
else  is  forgotten.

The  Moral  Contrasts  in  Life. —  Verses  8,  9.

Jonah  now  expresses  his  feelings  in  sacrifice  and  praise,  resolves  to  lead  a  new
life,  and  pay  his  vows  to  God.  This  conduct  stands  in  marked  contrast  to  the
ungodly  who  forget  God,  and  forsake  their  own  interests.

I.  God  is  the  highest  good  of  men.  What  is  the  chief  good  of  humanity  has
been  the  problem  of  ages,  the  aim  of  all  religion  and  philosophy.  Many  have
been  the  theories  concerning  it;  but  the  declaration  of  God's  word  decides  the
question.  1.  God  is  the  supreme  good  in  himself.  David  calls  him,  my  goodness
(Ps.  cxliv.  2),  my  kindness  or  benignity;  the  God  of  my  mercy  (lix.  17).  What
is  comprehended  in  the  summum  bonum  of  man — wisdom  and  justice,  beauty  and
love — belong  to  him.  He  is  the  infinite  excellence  and  the  ultimate  good  of  all
men.  2.  God  is  the  source  of  goodness  to  others.  He  is  good  in  himself,  and  his
tender  mercies  are  over  all  his  works.  He  is  the  source  and  fountain  of  all  our
enjoyments.  When  he  relieves  the  miserable  it  is  mercy  ;  when  he  bestows  favour
upon  the  unworthy  it  is  grace  ;  when  he  supplies  the  indigent  it  is  bounty.  God's
mercy  includes  all  the  forms  of  his  kindness  shown  to  men ;  whether  considered  as
creatures,  as  sinners,  or  as  believers.  "  The  earth  is  full  of  the  goodness  of  the
Lord."  II.  The  wicked  forsake  God,  their  highest  good.  1.  This  conduct  is
wilful.  God  does  not  forsake  them.  They  voluntarily  forsake  him,  and  therefore
should  not  blame  him.  Examples  warn,  hindrances  check  them,  but  they  go  on.
In  opposition  to  light  and  known  results  they  obstinately  choose  death  rather  than
life.  2.  This  conduct  is  injurious.  "  They  forsake  their  own  mercy."  They  take
nothing  from  God,  but  rob  themselves  of  natural  enjoyments,  Divine  favour  which
is  better  than  life,  and  commit  moral  suicide.  Sinners  put  God  from  them,  who
would  be  their  life,  and  destroy  themselves  (Hos.  xiii.  9).  "Ho  that  sinneth
against  me  wrongeth  his  own  soul;  all  they  that  hate  me  love  death."     3.  This

24


370  HOMILETIO  COMMENT! RV :  J  ON  AH.  lchap.  ii.


conduct  is  foolish.  "  They  observe  lying  vanities."  They  forsake  the  true  for  the
false.  (1)  Idols  are  vanities.  The  gods  of  the  heathen,  or  the  idols  of  modern
days,  are  empty  and  vain.  The  worship  of  mammon  and  the  desire  of  fame,  the
gods  of  intellect  and  superstitions,  are  worthless  things.  (2)  Idols  are  lying
vanities.  They  are  both  vanity  and  falsehood.  They  deceive  by  vain  show,  and
in  the  end  disappoint.  (3)  Yet  men  observe  idols.  They  guard  and  love  them,
depend  upon  them,  and  pursue  them  with  eagerness.  Falsehood  can  neither  feed
the  mind  nor  calm  the  conscience.  Everything  apart  from  God  is  vanity  and  lies.
"  0  ye  sons  of  men,  how  long  will  ye  love  vanity  1 "  III.  The  righteous  serve
God,  their  highest  good.  The  grace  that  had  called  forth  prayer  now  ends  in
praise.  Jonah  vows,  and  pays  his  vows.  1.  They  offer  thanksgiving  to  God.
"The  voice  of  praise."  When  we  drink  of  the  stream  we  should  lift  up  our  head
to  heaven.  The  least  mercies  are  great  when  viewed  as  coming  from  God.  Let
this  be  felt,  then  we  shall  enjoy  them,  and  gladly  offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise  and
thanksgiving.  Our  gratitude  will  be  (a)  sincere,  (b)  devout,  and  (c)  continual.
"  Let  us  offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise  to  God  continually;  that  is,  the  fruit  of  our  lips,
giving  thanks  to  his  name."  2.  They  dedicate  their  lives  to  God.  They  renew
their  vows,  and  bind  their  treacherous  heart  the  faster  to  God  and  duty.  Jonah
was  ready  to  go  and  preach  at  Nineveh,  or  serve  God  anywhere,  now.  God's
loving  correction  had  made  him  great  and  bold.  Let  our  oath  of  allegiance  be
renewed  in  every  deliverance  from  trouble.  Do  not  show  coldness  and  ingratitude,
which  sense  of  duty  and  natural  shame  allow  not  to  an  earthly  benefactor.  Our
future  life  should  be  a  hymn  of  praise  and  a  living  sacrifice.  Let  the  power
derived  from  discipline,  the  gratitude  prompted  by  mercy,  be  practical  and  abiding.
"  Whoso  offereth  praise  glorifieth  me ;  and  to  him  that  ordereth  his  conversation
aright  will  I  show  the  salvation  of  God."

HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  8.  Such  were  actual  idols  in  Ver.  9.  Praise.  It  must  be  noticed
which  men  openly  professed  that  they  here  that  the  worship  of  God  especially
trusted.  Such  are  all  things  in  which  consists  in  praises,  as  it  is  said  in  Ps.
men  trust  out  of  God.  One  is  not  more  1. ;  for  there  God  shows  that  he  re-
vain  than  another.  All  have  this  com-  gards  as  nothing  all  sacrifices  except
mon  principle  of  vanity.  It  is,  then,  they  answer  this  end — to  set  forth  the
one  general  maxim,  including  all  men's  praise  of  his  name  [Calvin].
idols — idols  of  the  flesh,  idols  of  intel-  Sacrifice.  Now  to  offer  a  sacrifice  at
lect,  idols  of  ambition,  idols  of  pride,  such  a  confession  or  thanksgiving  added
idols  of  self  and  self-will.  Men  observe  much  to  the  solemnity  thereof ;  and
them  as  gods ;  watch  them,  hang  upon  made  it  more  honourable  in  itself  and
them,  never  lose  sight  of  them,  guard  more  acceptable  to  God  [Trapp].
them  as  though  they  could  keep  them.  Void.  The  Hebrew  word  seemeth  to
But  what  are  they  %  Lying  vanities ;  imply  two  things  :  First,  that  his  vow
breath  and  wind  which  none  can  grasp  till  paid  was  incomplete ;  it  was  an  im-
or  detain,  vanishing  like  air  into  air.  perfect  thing ;  the  better  part  of  it  was
And  what  do  they  who  so  observe  yet  wanting.  Next,  till  that  were  done
them1?  All  alike  forsake  their  own  he  could  not  be  at  peace  within  him-
mercy,  i.  e.  God,  whose  property  is  self ;  for  vows  are  debts ;  and  debts
always  to  have  mercy,  and  who  would  till  they  be  paid  are  a  burden  to  an
be  mercy  to  them  if  they  wanted  honest  mind,  and  do  much  disease  it
[Pusey\  [Ibid.].

HOMILETICS.

Salvation  of  the  Lord. —  Verse  9.
By  salvation  here  we  do  not  understand  Jonah's  deliverance  from  death  merely.


chap.  ti.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.  371


Dr  Gill  says  there  is  something  so  special  in  the  original,  the  word  having  one
more  letter  than  it  usually  has  when  it  only  refers  to  temporal  deliverance,  that
we  must  understand  it  here  as  relating  to  the  great  work  of  the  soul,  which  en-
dureth  for  ever.     That  salvation  I  shall  try  to  show  as  best  I  can.

I.  Expound  the  doctrine  that  salvation  is  of  Jehovah.  To  begin  at  the  be-
ginning, the  plan  of  salvation  is  entirely  of  God.  And  as  in  planning,  so  it  was
of  the  Lord  in  execution.  Salvation,  in  the  application  of  it,  is  from  God.  As  to
the  sustaining  of  the  work  in  a  man's  heart ,  salvation  is  of  -the  Lord.  II.  God
has  hedged  this  doctrine  about  to  prevent  mistake.  Some  say,  salvation  in
some  cases  is  the  result  of  natural  temperament.  Others,  that  the  minister  converts
them.  God  takes  care  that  salvation  is  not  of  man,  for  usually  he  blesses  those  who
seem  most  unlikely  to  be  useful.  III.  What  is,  what  should  be,  the  influence
of  this  doctrine  upon  men  ?  First,  with  sinners  this  doctrine  is  a  great  battering-
ram  against  their  pride.  What  influence  upon  the  saint?  Why,  it  is  the  key-
stone of  all  Divinity.  I  will  defy  you  to  be  heterodox  if  you  believe  it ;  proud,  if
you  feel  it,  you  cannot  be.  You  will  not  be  distrustful.  You  may  always  be
joyful  if  you  keep  it  in  mind.  This  may,  by  grace,  nerve  you  to  work  for  God.
Go  and  preach  the  gospel  everywhere,  recollecting  that  God  is  more  than  a  match
for  man's  sin ;  and  will  ye  be  master  over  the  earth  %  [Spurgeon].

The  Great  Deliverance. —  Verses  9,  10.

These  words  were  the  result  of  recent  experience,  penned  in  grateful  feeling,  and
adapted  to  all  ages.

I.  The  inestimable  blessing.  "  Salvation."  1 .  Its  magnitude.  In  the  inten-
sive form  it  denotes  a  mighty  salvation.  The  force  of  the  Hebrew  may  include
temporal  and  eternal  salvation.  Jonah's  deliverance  was  unknown  in  history,
unparalleled  in  God's  dealings  with  men.  God's  power  is  drawn  out  by  the
emergencies  of  his  people,  often  reserved  for  great  occasions,  and  unlimited  in  its
nature.  "  So  great  a  salvation"  is  offered  in  Christ,  that  men  should  receive  it  and
glorify  him.  2.  Its  fulness.  It  was  a  complete  salvation.  Jonah  was  not  left  in
the  deep,  nor  sent  to  the  surface  to  swim  to  land.  The  fish  vomited  out  and  cast  him
on  dry  land.  He  was  left  in  no  danger,  but  enjoyed  a  perfect  rescue.  "  His  work
is  honourable  and  glorious."  II.  The  Divine  source  from  which  it  comes.  "  Sal-
vation is  of  the  Lord."  It  is  wholly  his  j  and  not  part  his,  and  part  ours.  It  is
specially  and  peculiarly  his.  It  belongs  to  him,  and  no  other.  Hence  understand
the  words,  I.  Affirmatively.  "  To  Jehovah  be  ascribed  salvation."  "Thine  is  the  king-
dom, the  power,  and  the  glory,  for  ever."  2.  Negatively.  There  is  salvation  from  no
other  source.  "  Beside  me  there  is  no  Saviour."  III.  The  wonderful  method  of
its  accomplishment.  God  "  spake  unto  the  fish."  Some  deny  an  active  will  and
a  personal  presence  in  nature.  They  recognize  nothing  but  matter  and  force.  All
creatures  are  controlled  by  law  and  instinct,  say  they.  But  Creation  is  subject  to
God's  will.  A  fish  was  prepared  for  Jonah,  and  at  the  bidding  of  Jehovah  it  dis-
gorged him.  Hence,  notice — 1.  The  power  of  God  over  all  creatures.  The  beasts
of  the  field,  and  the  fish  of  the  sea;  "all  cattle,  creeping  things,  and  flying  fowl,"
are  governed  by  him.  2.  The  ease  with  which  God  governs  all  creatures.  He
has  only  to  speak — the  world  is  created,  the  storm  is  stilled,  and  the  dead  are
raised.  In  heaven  above,  and  in  the  remotest  bounds  of  space,  the  highest  arch-
angel and  the  smallest  atom,  hearken  and  obey  the  voice  of  God.  3.  The  times
in  which  God  accomplishes  his  purpose  in  reference  to  all  creatures.  The  time  of
the  prophet's  deliverance  was  come,  and  the  sea-monster  in  whose  belly  he  had
traversed  the  deep,  could  not  retain  him.  With  unerring  precision  it  bore  him
through  the  trackless  ocean  to  the  destined  shore.  Events  are  subservient  to  God,
and  at  his  pleasure  carry  believers  to  appointed  duty,  needful  trial,  and  purchased
rest.     However  dark  your  position  or  agitated  your  course,  let  faith  realize,  and


372


H0MILET10  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.


[chap.  II.


prayer  ask  for,  the  overruling  will  of  God,  and  all  will  be  well.    "  My  times  are  in
thy  hand."

HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Ver.  9.  Salvation  of  God.  1.  The
feeling  of  assurance.  2.  The  expression
of  gratitude.  3.  The  ground  of  en-
couragement to  others.  Turn  the  prison
of  the  world  into  the  temple  of  God
and  it  will  not  be  able  to  detain  thee
[Lange\.

Ver.  10.  That  time  might  not  efface
his  impressions,  he  would  hasten  to
record,  under  the  teaching  of  the  Holy
Spirit,  for  the  instruction  of  his  own
countrymen  and  the  Israel  of  God  in
all  ages,  the  trials,  mercies,  and  ex-
perience of  the  last  few  eventful  days.
The  record  has  reached  us,  and  besides
other  instruction,  may  remind  us — First,
That  the  troubles  of  believers  have  an
appointed  end,  and  a  joyful  one  :  the
rod  of  their  correction  is  not  for  ever
(Ps.  lxxvii.  7—11  :  Is.  xlix.    14,   15).


Let  them,  then,  believe,  submit,  and
wait.  Secondly,  That  trust  in  God  is
that  grace  which  it  is  their  privilege
and  duty  to  exercise  under  all  circum-
stances, even  under  manifest  chastise-
ments for  admitted  sins.  The  issue  of
such  trust  shall  be  good,  truly  and
thoroughly  good,  and  often,  beyond  all
expectation,  blessed  and  j  oy f ul.  Tit  irdly,
That  Christians  should  not  sorrow  over
departed  Christians,  as  they  who  are
without  hope.  This  extraordinary  cir-
cumstance in  Jonah's  history  was  typical
of  the  far  more  wonderful  and  glorious
event  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  and
those  who  sleep  with  him.  The  grave
shall  disgorge  her  temporary  prey,  and
then  shall  be  brought  to  pass  the  say-
ing, Death  is  swallowed  up  of  victory
[Sibthorp\.


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  II.


Vers.  1  —  4.  Affliction.  Sorrow
sanctifies  the  soul  that  has  passed  through
it,  renders  it  supple  and  sweet,  prompt
with  gentle  sympathy.  Larger  self-
knowledge  has  been  acquired.  One  can
date  from  such  seasons  deeper  emotions,
broader  lines  of  thought,  a  stronger
character,  and  enlarged  experience.  As
Eodgers  sings —

"The  good  are  better  made  by  ill,
As  odours  crushed  are  sweeter  still."

Vers.  5,  6.  Here  his  cry  might  be
as  dolorous  as  that  of  David  in  Ps.
lxix.  Some  of  the  tried  children  of
God  have  found  cause  to  make  it  theirs  :
and  so  would  all,  if  he  gave  the  reins
to  their  soul's  enemies  or  dealt  with
them  as  their  iniquities  deserve.  Let  us
look  at  the  sufferings  of  Abraham,
Joseph,  Job,  David,  Jeremiah,  Paul,
and  others  of  God's  ancient  saints,  and
adore  his  mercy  toward  us.  But  let  us
look  from  them  at  the  Saviour,  and  at
the  deep  and  stormy  waters  he  passed
through  [Sibthorp\.

"Night  brings  out    stars,    as   sorrow   teaches
truth."


Ver.  7.  Remembered.  As  God  doth
plant  and  actuate  grace  in  the  soul,  so
he  is  pleased  to  come  in  with  seasonable
supplies  and  reinforcements  to  the  weak
and  decayed  graces  of  his  people.  Thus
he  feeds  the  believer's  lamp  with  fresh
oil ;  gives  in  more  faith,  more  love,  more
hope,  and  more  desires ;  and  hereby  he
gives  power  to  the  faint,  and  strengthens
the  things  which  remain  and  are  ready
to  die  [John  Willison].

This  truth  the  poet  sings —

"  That  a  sorrow's  crown  of  sorrow  is  remember-
ing happier  things"  [Tennyson].

Ver.  8.  Vanity.  As  well  try  to
fill  the  yawning  chasm  with  a  few
grains  of  sand  as  satisfy  the  gulf  of  the
soul's  desires  with  the  pleasure  of  an
empty  world  [Macduff].

Ver.  9.  Vowed.  The  Archbishop  of
Cologne,  being  asked  by  the  Emperor
Sigismund  how  to  attain  true  happi-
ness, replied,  "  Perform  when  thou  art
well  what  thou  promised  when  thou  wast
sick."

Ver.  10.  Providence.  We  are  not
able  to  account  for  the  method  of  Divine


chap.  ui.J  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :  JONAH.  373


providence  in  many  instances.    We  talk     human  life  is  one  grand  providence  and

of  special  and  general  providence ;    but     purpose.

it  would,  be  better  if  we  could  see  that  "Each  man's  life  is  all  men's  lessons."

[Lord  Lytton.]


CHAPTER  IIL

Critical  Notes.]  2.  Arise]  J.  might  not  imagine  that  God  would  send  him  again.  But  he  appears
to  have  some  settled  home,  and  an  interval  seems  to  have  elapsed  before  the  second  commission,  to
give  time  for  the  report  to  spread.  Preach]  Lit.  proclaim.  3.  Went]  I  am  made  wiser  by  correc-
tion. Great  city]  Lit.  great  to  God.  Some  great  through  God,  i.e.  through  his  favour  ;  others
great  before  God.  "  It  was  most  natural  to  refer  the  size  of  a  city,  of  which  the  Hebrews  could
form  no  adequate  conception,  to  the  Divine  estimation.  I  have  accordingly  rendered  the  words
literally,  as  our  preposition  to  is  often  used  to  note  opinion,  or  estimate  "  [Henderson].  The  Hebrews
expressed  superlative  ideas  by  using  the  name  of  God,  e.  g.  "  mountains  of  God,"  "  cedars  of  God,"
&c.  Three  days]  in  circumference,  or  the  length  of  Jonah's  journey  through  it.  Expositors  differ.
4.  A  day's  journey]  commenced,  when  he  found  opportunity  to  preach.  No  time  to  loiter,  nor
gratify  curiosity.  Cried]  as  a  herald.  Forty  days]  The  measure  of  delays  in  God's  visitations.  A
number  of  frequent  use  in  Scripture.  Overth.]  Lit.  overturned  {evertere),  turning  upside  down,  total
destruction,  as  Sodom  (Gen.  xix.  25  :  Is.  i.  7).  5.  Believed]  Lit.  in  God,  in  his  word;  trusted  in
him.  Sackcloth]  The  attire  of  deep  mourning,  irritating  to  the  body.  Fasting  and  sackcloth  cus-
tomary in  humiliation  (1  Kings  xxi.  27 :  Joel  i.  13).  Penitence  universal.  6.  Word]  The
matter ;  report  of  Jonah's  preaching,  and  its  effects  in  the  city.  Nineveh  never  so  moved  and
shaken.  Laid  aside]  The  king  approved  the  proclaimed  fast,  disdained  not  to  follow  the  example
of  the  people,  but  humbled  himself  with  them  in  common  peril.  Some  think  that  Sardanapalus
was  the  king,  whose  motto  was — "  Eat,  drink,  play:  after  death  there  is  no  pleasure."  7.  Nobles]  The
government  of  Nineveh  was  not  an  absolute  monarchy.  The  nobles  probably  originated  the  decree,
and  the  king  confirmed  it  (cf.  Dan.  vi.).  Beast]  "  It  was  no  arbitrary,  nor  wanton,  nor  careless
act  of  the  king  of  Nineveh  to  make  the  dumb  animals  share  in  the  common  fast.  It  proceeded  pro-
bably from  an  indistinct  consciousness  that  God  cared  for  them  also  and  that  they  were  not  guilty  "
\Elzaz\  8.]  Two  remedies  suggested.  Cry]  to  God  in  prayer.  Turn]  Reform;  for  prayer,  without
amendment  of  life,  is  a  mockery  (Ps.  lvi.  18 :  Is.  lviii.  6).  Violence]  Nineveh's  chief  sin  (Nah.
iii.  1).  The  Assyrian  records  are  nothing  but  a  register  of  military  campaigns,  spoliations,  and
cruelties  [Layard],  "  Nineveh  and  Babylon."  9.  Tell]  (cf.  Joel  ii.  14)  :  to  act  on  a  mere  possi-
bility of  mercy,  an  instance  of  strong  faith  in  idolaters.  We  have  better  hope  of  pardon  (Job
xxxiii.  27:  Jer.  xxxi.  18).  10.]  God  saw  and  removed  judgment  threatened;  but  there  was  no
change  in  him  (Num.  xxiii.  19  :  Jas.  i.  17).  This  repentance  showed  a  susceptibility  in  the
Ninevites  for  the  word  of  God,  and  a  willingness  to  forsake  ungodly  ways.  They  reprove  and  con-
demn many  more  highly  privileged  (Luke  xi.  32).

HOMILETICS.
Jonah  a  Sign  to  the  Ninevites. — Chap.  III.  1,  and  Luke  xi.  30.

Jonah  would  obey  the  second  commission  with  renewed  strength  and  Divine
authority.  He  would  appear  in  Nineveh  as  a  sign,  an  outward  proof  of  a  Divine
purpose  in  his  life  and  work  (cf.  Luke  xi.  30).

I.  A  sign  of  God's  mercy  towards  men.  As  in  a  mirror,  we  see  much  of  God
and  men,  of  sin  and  grace,  in  the  history  of  Jonah.  God  proved  that  he  was
reconciled.  1.  In  forgiving  sin.  2.  In  restoring  a  backslider.  3.  In  reinstating
a  runaway  prophet.  If  we  abuse  the  confidence  of  our  fellow-creatures,  they
seldom  forgive  and  employ  us  again.  But  God  freely  forgives,  restores  to  favour
after  rebellion,  and  grants  commission  to  unworthy  servants.  "  I  have  blotted  out
as  a  thick  cloud  thy  transgressions,  and  as  a  cloud  thy  sins ;  return  unto  me,  for  I
have  redeemed  thee."  II.  A  sign  of  God's  inflexible  justice  towards  men.  God's
servant  must  be  punished  and  corrected.  The  sincerity  of  his  penitence,  and  the
honour  of  his  God,  must  be  vindicated.     Nineveh  must  be  threatened,  and  hei  sin


374  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JONAH.  [chap.  m.


forsaken.  Pardon  gives  no  licence  to  disobedience.  Neither  the  righteous  nor
the  wicked  can  sin  with  impunity.  God  will  be  glorified  in  the  life  of  his  people,
and  the  law  magnified  in  the  destiny  of  nations.  III.  A  sign  of  God's  un-
changeable purpose  towards  men.  God's  plans  are  made  in  wisdom,  and  must
be  accomplished.  Ho  does  not  alter  them  to  gratify  the  whims  and  caprice  of
man.  "  He  is  of  one  mind,  and  who  can  turn  him  1 "  Nineveh  must  be  warned,
and  Jonah  must  go.  All  pleas  and  excuses  are  in  vain.  God  gives  to  every  one
his  work,  and  expects  him  to  do  it.  If  he  runs  away  he  must  be  fetched  back.
Treachery  and  cowardice  God  has  determined  to  scourge.  "  He  that  knoweth  his
Master's  will,  and  doeth  it  not,  shall  be  beaten  with  many  stripes."

The  Second  Call. —  Verses  1,  2.

If  Jonah  doubted  whether  after  sin  like  his  he  would  ever  be  restored  to
favour  and  service  again,  he  had  not  long  to  wait  for  an  answer ;  for  "  The  word  of
the  Lord  came  unto  Jonah  the  second  time."     This  second  call  was —

I.  Divinely  given.  The  prophet  might  be  ready,  but  he  had  need  to  be  certain
that  God  required  him  to  go.  If  we  are  willing,  we  require  instruction  in  duty.
The  spring  of  action  is  not  mere  religious  feeling,  but  apprehension  of  God's  word.
Emotion  will  not  ensure  consistent  life,  without  faith  in  Divine  truth.  God  had
to  speak  again.  "  The  first  verse,"  says  Luther,  "  is  therefore  written  that  we  may
bear  in  mind  that  nothing  is  to  be  undertaken  without  God's  word  and  command.
For  the  first  command  of  God  having  been  violated  by  disobedience,  had  not  God
renewed  it,  Jonah  would  not  have  known  whether  he  should  do  it  or  not."  II.
Urgent  to  immediate  service.  "Arise,  go,"  are  terms  of  incitement,  and  indi-
cate that  he  was  not  girded  for  work,  but  resting  in  contentment  and  ease.  1.  The
duty  was  imperative.  The  more  quickly  we  perform,  the  better  for  our  souls.
Delays  are  signs  of  distrust,  and  impeachment  of  Divine  wisdom.  We  must  prove
the  sincerity  of  our  profession  by  prompt  obedience.  "  Be  ready  to  every  good
work."  2.  The  communication  was  suspended.  The  exact  message  seems  not  to
be  given  at  first.  Immediate  departure  to  Nineveh  was  required,  and  further
revelations  were  delayed.  God  thus  cultivates  the  dependence  and  tries  the  faith
of  his  servants.  His  own  authority  in  prescribing  duty  must  be  sufficient.  His
simple  word  is  entitled  to  respect  and  compliance.  Present  duty  should  be  enough
for  us.  God  will  give  enlarged  views,  greater  strength,  and  more  consolation,  if
we  practise  what  we  already  know.  "  If  any  man  will  do  the  will  of  God,  he
shall  know,"  &c.  III.  Specific  in  directions.  1.  The  destination  was  still  the
same,  "  To  Nineveh,  that  great  city."  The  trial  is  not  abated,  the  dangers  are
not  hidden.  He  is  again  reminded  that  it  was  a  great,  proud,  and  heathen  city,  to
which  he  was  sent.  A  city  whose  inhabitants  were  pre-eminently  wicked  and
violent,  and  whom  he  was  to  threaten  with  speedy  and  complete  ruin.  But  God
had  given  Jonah  proofs  of  his  love,  and  Jonah  should  give  not  less  evidence  of  his
obedience.  2.  The  message  would  be  given  him.  "  The  denunciation  that  I  shall
speak  to  thee."  He  was  not  to  concern  himself  about  his  message  and  its  results.
That  would  be  given  to  him  when  he  was  ready  for  it.  He  is  to  add  nothing,  nor
diminish  nothing.  The  Christian  minister  is  not  left  to  his  own  discretion,  nor
must  he  study  to  gratify  the  taste  of  the  people.  He  must  preach  the  Word — the
message  from  God  to  him — earnestly  and  faithfully.  If  he  tries  to  explain  away
or  soften  down  what  is  severe  to  the  ungodly,  "  he  takes  upon  himself  a  double
responsibility — responsibility  for  the  salvation  of  the  souls  entrusted  to  him,  and
responsibility  for  his  own  disobedience."  Many  may  speak  to  us  smooth  things,
but  we  must  not  please  men,  for  how  can  we  then  be  servants  of  God  ?  Jonah
must  be  faithful :  (1)  In  the  matter  of  his  preaching.  The  unwelcome  message
must  be  delivered.  Nineveh  was  to  be  denounced  for  sin.  (2)  In  the  manner  of
his  preaching.  He  was  to  "cry."  Cry  in  compassion  for  perishing  men,  as  a
proof  of  his  own  sincerity,  to  rouse  a  careless  and  sinful  people.     "  Proclaim  the


chap,  ni.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.  37fi


preaching  that  I  shall  bid  thee."  (3)  A  second  call  summoned  him.  Ingratitude
and  failure  had  disgraced  his  conduct.  But  God  had  chastised  and  forgiven  him.
His  experience  was  a  preparation  for  service.  Before  we  can  proclaim  mercy  to
man  we  must  receive  it  ourselves.  Profound  repentance  and  perfect  restoration  to
Divine  favour  will  qualify  us  for  a  proper  discharge  of  duty.  Repeated  acts  of
grace  to  us  are  a  ground  of  hope  for  others.  Severe  trials  and  deep  sorrow  are
often  forerunners  of  great  trust  and  high  distinction.  "  Restore  unto  me  the  joy
of  thy  salvation,  and  uphold  me  with  thy  free  spirit.  Then  will  I  teach  trans-
gressors thy  ways,  and  sinners  shall  be  converted  unto  thee."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  1.     God  does  not  utterly  reject  and  integrity;  (b)  It  would  inspire  him

him  who  has  failed  once ;  but  he  rather  with    the   assurance   that  he   was   not

gives  him  a  new  opportunity  of  correct-  returning  alone — that  he  had  One  who

ing  former  faults  [Lange].  would  carry  him  through   all   danger,

The    most   prominent  lesson  in  this  and  give  him  success  in  his  work.     3.

verse  is  that  God  gives  to  men  successive  As   an  afflicted   man,  whose    affliction

opportunities  for  the  accomplishment  of  had  been  eminently  blessed.     Like  the

their   life-work.     We  are   not    crushed  Psalmist,  before  he  was  afflicted,  he  went

by  the  weight  of  our  first  sin  or  failure,  astray,  but  was  chastened  and  subdued.

If   so,  few  would   have  anything  like  He  knew  the  "  goodness  and  severity  of

hope  for  the  future.     Life  would  be  a  God,"  and  was  fitted  to  teach  them  to

dreary    foreboding,    lest    any   message  others  [H.  Martin].

committed  to  our  care  should  be  neg-  The  preaching.     Nothing  should  be

lected,   and  entail  final   condemnation,  more  sacred  to  the  preacher  of   God's

The  world  would  be  full  of  wretched  word  than  truth,   and   simplicity,  and

mortals,    upon   whom   would    rest   the  inviolable     sanctity    in     delivering    it

woe  of  unfulfilled  mission  [Exell].  [Pusey].     The   grand  doctrines  of   the

Ver.    2.     Jonah   would    resume   his  New  Testament  are  eternally  fixed.    We

work  with  a  new  obedience.     1.  As  a  must   preach   them   all,  faithfully  and

sinful  man,  whose  sin  had   been  emi-  fully ;  should  we  alter,  add,  or  diminish,

nently  forgiven.     He  would  accept  his  we  do  not  preach  unto  the  people  the

mission  in  a  spirit  of  gratitude,  rever-  preaching  which  the  Lord  bids  us.     If,

ence,  and  submission.     2.  As  a  prayer-  instead    of    this,    we    preach    another

ful  man,  whose  prayer  had  been  emi-  gospel,  we  shall  bring  down  upon  us  a

nently  answered.     Prayer  answered  was  curse  and  not  a  blessing  \Jones\
(a)  a  testimony  to  him  of  his  sincerity

HOMILETICS.
Jonah's  Obedience. —  Verses  3,  4.

God's  chastisement  brings  forth  fruit,  and  secures  dutiful  obedience.  Weak
parents  correct  their  children,  and  leave  them  to  please  themselves  afterwards.
The  results  of  discipline  are  lost.  Chastisement  is  an  evil  unless  it  produces
obedience.     "  Happy  is  the  man  whom  God  correcteth."

I.  Jonah's  obedience  was  prompt.  The  command  was  "  arise,"  and  "  Jonah
arose."  He  consulted  not  his  own  interests  as  before.  Impressed  with  the  mercies
of  God,  and  the  obligation  of  his  vows,  he  promptly  obeys.  He  goes  in  no  rest
less,  turbulent  spirit.  He  is  hearty  and  enthusiastic.  We  are  commonly  re-
luctant, especially  when  danger  threatens.  We  are  too  formal  and  time-serving.
True,  ready  obedience  to  God  is  liberty  and  blessedness.  "  I  made  haste,  and
delayed  not  to  keep  thy  commandments."  II.  Jonah's  obedience  was  complete.
He  neither  delayed  nor  stopped  short  of  his  destination.  "  He  went  to  Nineveh,"
When  he  got  there  he  lingered  not  at  the  gates,  nor  gratified  curiosity  by  survey-


376  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.  [chap,  iil


ing  the  lofty  towers,  the  gorgeous  temples,  and  the  princely  palaces.  Neither  did
he  modify  his  message,  nor  falter  in  its  delivery.  Before  the  mansion  of  the  rich,
and  the  doors  of  the  poor,  in  the  marts,  and  in  the  streets,  he  gave  the  alarm
(Prov.  i.  20).  Like  Caleb,  Ave  must  follow  the  Lord  fully  (Num.  xiv.  24),  or  wholly.
This  requires  (a)  decision  of  character,  (b)  unreserved  obedience,  (c)  undaunted
fortitude,  (d)  unwearied  perseverance.  "  My  foot  hath  held  his  steps,  his  ways
have  I  kept  and  not  declined."  III.  Jonah's  obedience  was  divinely  directed.
"According  to  the  word  of  the  Lord."  Fear,  self-will,  and  prejudice  had  in-
fluenced him  before  ;  now  God's  law  is  supreme  in  his  heart  and  life.  Eeligion  is
the  same  now  ;  for  no  man  can  guide  himself,  nor  be  a  law  to  another.  We  require
a  rule,  (a)  Divine  in  its  sanctions,  (b)  practicable  in  its  requirements,  (c)  plain  in
its  directions,  and  (d)  beneficial  in  its  results.  God's  "  commands  are  not
grievous."  but  easy  and  delightful ;  "  in  keeping  them  there  is  a  great  reward."

*4  His  adorable  will  let  us  gladly  fulfil,
And  our  talents  improve,
By  the  patience  of  hope,  and  the  labour  of  love."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.    3.     According,    &c.     Did   you  xxvii.    32 — 36)    [Sibthorp].     JSvn&teh.,

ever   pass   through   a   painful  crisis,   a  the   city  of  God.     God   cares  also  for

sore   probation   of    patience,    faith,    or  the  heathen  (2  Kings  v.    1  :  Jer.   xxv.

constancy,  keeping  in  view  all  the  while  9)  [Luther].

that  your  purpose  and  procedure,  your  Ver.  4.     Speak  promptly,  and  delay

temper  and  policy,  should  be  "  accord-  not.     In  God's  kingdom  every  moment

ing  to  the  word  of  the  Lord "  1     And  is  precious.     The  time   when   he  puts

did  you  fail  1     No ;  and  you  never  will  his   word   in   thy  mouth   is   the  right

fail  while  the  desire  of  your  heart,  and  time ;  not  that  which  thou  fanciest  for

the  doing  of  your  hand,  are  ruled  and  thyself  [Lange].

ordered  thus.     This  is  the   essence  of  1.  God  is  able  to  reach  and  overthrow

Christianity  —  the     essence    of     faith  the  greatest  persons  or  places  when  he

[Martin].  has  a  controversy  against  them.     2.  The

Great  city.  Great  cities  have  mani-  Lord  often  sees  it  fit,  in  great  wisdom,
f ested  the  pride  of  man,  in  their  erection,  to  conceal  any  thoughts  of  love  to  a
enlargement,  strength,  and  splendour ;  people,  and  holds  out  only  threatenings
the  corruption  of  human  nature,  in  the  and  severity  to  induce  them  more
enormous  mass  of  sin  which  they  foster,  seriously  to  repent  [Hutcheson].
having  often  proved  moral  pests ;  If  God  had  meant  unconditionally  to
vortexes  swallowing  up  the  wealth  of  a  overthrow  them,  he  would  have  over-
nation,  and  vomiting  out  the  crimes  of  thrown  them  without  notice.  Yet,
mankind;  and  the  power,  justice,  anl  always  denotes  some  long»uffering  of
holiness  of  God,  in  their  total  annihila-  God  "  [Pusey].
tion  (Nah.   iii.  8 :  Is.  xiii.   19  :  Ezek.

HOMILETICS.

Jonah's  Preaching. — Verses  4,  5.

We  linger  not  on  the  stir  and  excitement  which  the  preaching  of  Jonah  would
create.  Business  would  be  suspended,  and  crowds  would  gather  round  him.  The
brief  and  alarming  cry  would  toll  forth,  yet  forty  days  and  Nineveh  shall  be  over-
thrown.    Here  we  have  a  description  of  Jonah's  ministry.

I.  It  was  divinely  suggested  in  its  matter.  "  The  preaching  that  I  bid  thee."
He  carried  no  philosophy  or  scientific  theories,  no  inventions  of  his  own  ;  but
ottered  the  denunciation  given  him.     The  minister  may  not  be  specially  guided


chap,  in.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ';  JONAH.  377


like  the  prophet  and  the  apostles,  but  a  revelation  is  given  from  God.  "  If  any  man
speak,  let  him  speak  as  the  oracles  of  God."  The  mind  of  God  is  discovered  in
the  Scriptures.  Here  "  God  speaks  much,  and  man  little,"  says  Chrysostom.  We
must  preach  not  morality,  but  the  gospel.  II.  It  was  intensely  earnest  in  its
spirit.  Jonah  was  no  statue  in  the  streets,  but  a  living  man.  "  The  spirit  and
manner  of  a  minister  often  affect  more  than  the  matter,"  says  Cecil.  "To  feel  is
the  readiest  way  to  the  hearts  of  others."  "  All  men  are  orators  when  they  feel ;
the  language  of  the  heart  has  an  unction  and  an  energy  which  no  eloquence  or
sublimity  can  reach,"  says  Bishop  Hopkins.  The  words  of  Channing  are  weighty —
"  Earnestness  should  characterize  the  ministry ;  and  by  this  I  mean,  not  a  louder
voice  or  a  more  vehement  gesture ;  I  mean  no  tricks  of  oratory ;  but  a  solemn  con-
viction that  religion  is  a  great  concern,  and  a  solemn  purpose  that  its  claims  shall
be  felt  by  others.  The  life  and  sensibility  which  we  would  spread  should  be
strong  in  our  own  breasts.  This  is  the  only  genuine,  unfailing  spring  of  an  earn-
est ministry."  There  must  be  no  weakness  of  heart,  no  feebleness  of  effort.  "  Cry
against  it."  III.  It  was  wisely  practical  in  its  aim.  Jonah  intended  and
earnestly  desired  to  produce  a  reformation  of  life.  If  the  preacher  is  to  be  a  man
of  power  he  must  arrange  his  thoughts,  point  his  language,  and  embue  his  spirit
with  unction.  He  must  get  at  the  consciences  of  men.  An  ancient  father  wept  at
the  applause  given  to  his  sermons,  felt  that  his  words  had  not  gone  deep  enough,
and  exclaimed,  "  Would  to  God  they  had  rather  gone  away  silent  and  thoughtful."
Nathan  said  to  David,  "  Thou  art  the  man."  The  truth  must  be  driven  home,  the
heart  searched,  and  men  roused  to  repentance.  The  word  must  strike  and  stick.
One  remarks  that  "  every  action  is  done  by  the  touch."  In  preaching,  this  doctrine
is  true.  Massillon's  hearers  carried  away  the  arrows  fastened  in  their  consciences,
thought  themselves  to  be  singled  out,  and  never  regarded  others.  Peter's  audience
"  were  pricked  to  the  heart "  by  his  earnest  practical  appeal.  IV.  It  was  wonder-
fully successful  in  its  results.  Nineveh  penitent  is  not  only  a  splendid  specimen
of  the  power  of  the  Divine  word,  but  a  wonderful  achievement  of  an  earnest  man
in  proclaiming  it.  What  Demosthenes  did  in  the  Athenian  Senate,  what
Augustine,  Chrysostom,  and  Luther  achieved  in  days  of  old,  may  be  done  yet  by
the  right  men.  The  revivals  of  Pentecost,  of  Whitfield  and  Wesley,  are  not  to  be
regarded  as  isolated  facts  beyond  accomplishment  now.  The  moral  need  is  the
same,  and  the  word  of  God  can  satisfy  it.  Multitudes  remain  untouched  by  the
most  successful  preacher.  In  our  largest  cities  are  people  living  in  idleness  and
vice.  The  preacher  must  go  forth  to  warn  and  urge  men  to  repentance,  lest  while
they  "  cry  peace  and  safety,  sudden  destruction  come  upon  them."

"The  great  proclaimer,  with  a  voice
More  awful  than  the  sound  of  trumpet,  cry'd
Repentance,  and  heaven's  kingdom  nigh  at  hand
To  all  baptized  "  [Milton].

Nineveh  Warned  and  Nineveh  Reformed. —  Verses  4 — 8.

Jonah's  message  was  like  a  thunderbolt  in  the  guilty  city.  It  was  a  short,
most  impressive,  and  successful  sermon.  It  produced  results  which  the  preaching
of  Noah  for  120  years  did  not  produce,  and  which  have  never  been  equalled  since.

I.  Nineveh  warned.  Jonah  had  no  long  address  to  give,  nor  many  persuasions
to  otter.  He  had  only  to  repeat  one  terrible  denunciation.  "  Yet  forty  days,  and
Nineveh  overthrown."  1.  The  judgment  was  great.  "Overthrown."  Overthrown
by  neighbouring  nations  whom  they  had  made  enemies  by  oppression?  by  con-
spiracy, revolt,  and  massacre  within  1  by  floods,  fire,  or  brimstone  from  heaven  1  by
earthquake  shivering  its  defences,  overturning  its  proud  palaces,  and  burying
everything  in  ruins  1  None  can  tell.  God  has  evils  to  let  loose,  arrows  in  his  quiver,
which  men  know  nothing  of.     A  guilty  conscience  forebodes  the  worst  of  judg-


378  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.  [chap.  hi.


ments.  No  plan  can  defend,  and  no  city  escape,  when  he  determines  to  punish.
2.  TJie  judgment  was  imminent.  Only  "  forty  days."  It  may  begin  before  they  are
over,  but  destruction  will  be  complete  at  the  end  of  them.  It  is  a  fact  that  great
cities  and  kingdoms  have  been  unexpectedly  and  suddenly  overthrown.  Sodom
and  Gomorrah,  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  are  solemn  warnings  in  history.  Shortness
of  time  between  threatening  and  execution  should  give  weight  to  the  message,  and
motives  to  repentance.  3.  The  judgment  was  morally  necessary.  Nineveh  was
reaping  what  she  had  sown.  This  death  suspended  over  the  heads  of  nearly  a
million  people  was  not  a  physical  nor  political  necessity.  It  was  God's  righteous
act  and  vindication  of  moral  law.  "  The  violence  "  of  Nineveh  demanded  a  moral
check,  a  Divine  judgment.     "  Sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death."

"  Justice,  like  lightning,  ever  should  appear
To  few  men's  ruin,  but  to  all  men's  fear"  [Swenam].

II.  Nineveh,  reformed.     Sometimes  searching  appeals,  solemn  warnings,  and
striking  events,  leave  no  influence  behind  them.     But,  in  Nineveh,  a  revolution
happened  without  bloodshed  and  strife,  memorable  in  its  history.     1.  It  was  re-
pentance springing  from  a  right  principle.    They  "  believed  God."   Believed  in  his
existence  and  government  over  the  universe  ;  believed  in  his  purpose  and  power
to  carry  it  out.      They  believed  in  his  justice  and  mercy  towards  men.     They
believed   Jonah's  word  to  be  a  message  from  God  to  them.     The   approaching
judgment  was  real,  and  though  no  promise  of   mercy  was  expressed,  yet  they
looked  to  God  in  faith.     If  men  would  believe  in  God,  social  corruption  would  be
checked ;  selfishness  and   ambition  would   cease   to   rule ;   hatred,  violence,  and
murder  would  be  cured.     2.  It  was  repentance  encouraged  by  the   royal   court.
Alarm  and  sorrow  may  fill  the  city,  and  the  king  and  courtiers  be  exempt.     But
mighty  potentates  cannot  always  be  secure.     In  the  greatest  despotism,  a  popular
movement  cannot  be  altogether  disregarded.     The  word  must  come  to  the  king.
Truth  will  besiege  the  palace-gates,  and  the  monarch  who  defies  it  will  lose  his
kingdom  and  crown.     This  king  was  the  most  powerful  and  despotic  of  the  day.
But  he  is  subdued  by  a  greater  power  than  his  own.     He  joins  the  people  in  con-
fession and  prayer,  sets  an  example  in  reformation,  and  robes  himself  in  "the
king-becoming  graces."     3.  It  was  repentance  prevalent  in  all  ranks.     "  From  the
greatest  of  them  even  to  the  least ;  "  "  both  man  and  beast "  were  influenced  by  the
messenger.     Kings  and  common  people,  serfs  and  priests,  were  moved,  and  bowed
in  humiliation  before  their  offended  God.     The  city  was  one  in  sin,  and  one  in
sorrow.     Individual  opinion  and  acts  must  be  restrained  for  the  common  good.
The   earnest   cries   of   the   people,   and  the  lowing  of   the  hungry  cattle,   adds
solemnity  to  the  scene  (Esther  iv.  1 — 4  :  2  Chron.  xx.  13).     "  Say  unto  the  king
and  to  the  queen,  Humble  yourselves,  sit  down  :  for  your  principalities  shall  come
down,  even  to  the  crown  of  your  glory."     4.  It  was  repentance  marked  by  signs  of
sincerity.     Faith  will  produce  works,  true  penitence  will  evidence  itself  in  amend-
ment of  life.     (1)  It  was  accompanied  by  fasting.     Man  and  beast  were  to  abstain
from  food.     The  irrational  creatures  which  share  the  effects  of  sin,  and  minister  to
the  wants  of  man,  were  to  excite  him  to  mourning,  and  add  to  the  general  depres-
sion.    Nineveh  was  to  learn,  as  we  should,  not  to  sin  by  ill-treatment  of  them,  nor
to  forget  that  in  their  present  condition  we  find  a  memorial  of  guilt,  and  a  reason
for  humiliation.     This  fast  (a)  was  universal,  (b)  and  publicly  proclaimed.     If
fasts  are  not  specially  enjoined  by  God,  yet  cities  and  nations  may  find  it  helpful
to  set  apart  days  of  fasting  and  prayer.     (2)  It  was  accompanied  by  putting  on
sackcloth  and  ashes.     All  classes  united  in  religious  duties,  confessed  guilt,  laid
aside  their  ornaments,  and  prayed  to  God  for  deliverance.     There  was  a  visible  ex-
pression of    sorrow  in  the   rough,  dark,  coarse   garb    which   reproves   mourning
apparel  fashionable  in  cut,  elaborate  in  ornament,  and  unsuitable  in  colour.     (3)  It
was  accompanied  by  outward  reformation.     They  did  not  think  of  mocking  God
by  merely  abstaining  from  food,  and  changing  their  dress.     Outward  forms  convict


chap,  in]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH  379


of  hypocrisy  if  not  followed  by  change  of  heart  and  conduct.  "  Let  them  turn
every  one  from  his  evil  way,"  &c.  Every  one  had  an  evil  way,  and  the  proclama-
tion was  a  general  acknowledgment  of  it.  The  king  and  the  court  specify  one
notorious  sin.  "  The  violence  that  is  in  their  hand  "  (cf.  Nah.  ii.  11,  12  ;  iii.  19).
Special  iniquity,  "  besetting  sins,"  must  be  given  up.  All  are  exhorted  to  individual
repentance  and  amendment  of  life.  "  Cease  to  do  evil,  and  learn  to  do  well."  (4)  It
was  accompanied  by  earnest  prayer,  (a)  They  were  to  cry.  Feeling,  not  form,  was
required,  (b)  To  cry  vehemently  with  all  their  strength  and  soul,  (c)  To  God,  not
to  idols,  which  they  worshipped ;  to  the  true  God  who  alone  can  help  them.  Sloth
and  indifference  are  unbecoming  in  fasting  and  prayer.  Some  professed  Christians
depend  upon  punctual  attendance,  formal  ceremonies,  and  ecstatic  feelings.  "  Rend
your  hearts,  and  not  your  garments."  Religious  duties  should  be  serious  and  earn-
est, sincere,  and  acceptable.

Nineveh's  Repentance  :  Its  Origin  and  Nature. —  Verses  5 — 9.

The  repentance  of  Nineveh  is  one  of  the  most  singular  events  in  history.  A
great  and  proud  city  suddenly  smitten  into  the  most  profound  humiliation,  from
the  greatest  of  its  inhabitants  to  the  least — from  the  king  on  the  throne  to  the
meanest  citizen, — is  a  spectacle  to  which  history  affords  no  parallel.  Cities,
countries,  and  communities  have  oftentimes,  with  not  a  little  unanimity,  given
themselves  to  humiliation  and  fasting.  But  there  is  no  event  on  record  that  can
at  all  be  compared  with  the  fast  and  repentance  of  Nineveh.  The  repentance  of
Nineveh  may  be  considered — first,  in  its  essentials;  and  secondly,  in  its  circum-
stantials. We  confine  our  attention  to  the  essentials.  Here  the  origin  and  nature
of  this  repentance  calls  for  consideration.

I.  The  origin  of  Nineveh's  repentance.  1.  First,  This  repentance  was  prompted
by  faith.  They  believed  Jonah  to  be  a  messenger  from  God  ;  and  they  believed  his
message.  The  hand  of  God  is  seen  in  this,  and  his  power  and  gracious  influence
on  their  hearts.  Observe  how  their  faith  wrought  in  a  manner  suitable  to  the
position  in  which  they  were  placed.  "  They  proclaimed  a  fast."  Generally,  faith
worketh  according  to  the  nature  of  the  thing  believed.  If  that  which  is  believed
be  something  dreadful  and  alarming,  it  worketh  by  fear  ;  and  if  any  possibility  of
escape  seem  left,  it  prompts  to  the  embracing  of  whatever  means  may  realize  it.
This  element  of  fear  was  the  leading  element  in  the  repentance  of  Nineveh.
"  Who  can  tell  if  God  will  turn  and  repent,  and  turn  away  from  his  fierce  anger,
that  we  perish  not?"  2.  Secondly,  an  element  of  hope  mingled  to  bestir  them  to
exertion.  Absence  of  hope  excludes  possibility  of  repentance.  Had  they  viewed
their  doom  as  inevitable  they  would  have  been  paralysed,  infuriated,  or  still  more
estranged  from  God.  Some  faint  hope  remained.  "Who  can  tell  if  God  will
turn'}"  &c.  The  Ninevites  might  gather  hope, — (1)  From  the  general  considera-
tion that  all  threatenings  are  warnings  ;  uttered,  in  order,  if  possible,  not  to  be
executed.  (2)  From  the  history  of  Jonah  himself.  They  knew  of  his  original
commission,  disobedience,  pursuit,  punishment,  and  forgiveness.  He  was  a  sign  to
them.  They  saw  in  his  deliverance  hope  of  forgiveness  through  penitence  and
prayer.  II.  The  nature  of  their  repentance.  The  city  underwent  a  sudden  and
striking  reformation.  Their  haughtiness  and  pride  were  abased ;  their  contempt  of
God  abandoned  ;  their  luxury,  cruelty,  violence,  and  unrighteousness  were  given
up.  And  God  looked  on  with  approbation.  Such  is  the  fast  that  the  Lord  calls
for ;  not  a  formal,  ceremonious,  outward  solemnity  ;  but  a  spiritual  and  moral  re-
formation, outwardly  evidenced  and  certified  by  new  obedience.  This  affords  a
proof  of  God's  unspeakable  goodness,  and  an  encouragement  to  sinners  to  repent
and  turn  to  God  [Martin].


380


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH,


[CHAP.  III.


HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Ver.  6.  Tlie  humbled  court.  The
rich  and  the  great  are  not  often  penitent
before  God.  Those  who  enjoy  the  good
things  of  this  life  feel  no  need  of  re-
ligion. Not  many  mighty,  not  many
noble,  are  called  (1  Cor.  i.  26).  It  is
said  that  the  Countess  of  Huntingdon
thanked  God  for  the  letter  "  m  "  in  this
text.  I.  A  court  influenced  by  the
preaching  of  the  Word.  The  Word  has
strange  effects  in  places,  and  upon  men,
that  are  most  unlikely.  Where  we  look
for  little,  God  can  create  much.  The
successor  of  a  proud  race  of  tyrants  feels
the  truth  proclaimed  by  a  forlorn  man,
trembles  in  spite  of  walls  and  guards,  in
the  presence  of  courtiers  and  nobles  (Ps.
lxxvi.  12  :  Jer.  xiii.  18).  II.  A  court
setting  the  example  in  self-reformation.
In  all  kinds  of  governments  the  court
has  a  mighty  influence.  Its  fashions
and  etiquette  prevail,  its  laws  and  re-
ligion are  the  standard  of  the  people.
Here  the  court  was  in  harmony  with  the
spirit  of  the  people.  Rank,  station,  and
wealth  were  nothing  to  the  safety  of  the
city.  The  authority  of  God  was  supreme
in  the  palace ;  and  in  the  fast  and  the
prayers  the  king  and  princes  took  the
lead  in  its  acknowledgment.  Rank  is
truly  kingly  when  ennobled  by  Divine
grace.

This  great  king  could  not  but  know
himself  to  be  a  great  sinner;  and  that
his  sins  had  done  much  hurt : — 1.  By
imputation:  for  the  people  oft  pray  for
their  rulers'  follies,  as  in  David's  days
(2  Sam.  xxiv.).  2.  By  imitation :  for
magnates  are  magnets,  they  draw  many
by  their  example ;  and  as  bad  humours
flow  from  the  head  to  the  body,  so  do
bad  rulers  corrupt  the  rest  [Trapp\

Yer.  8.  Man  in  his  luxury  and  pride
would  have  everything  reflect  his
glory,    and    minister    to   pomp.     Self-


humiliation  would  have  everything  re-
flect its  lowliness.  Sorrow  would  have
everything  answer  to  its  sorrow.  Men
think  it  strange  that  the  horses  at
Nineveh  were  covered  with  sackcloth,
and  forget  how,  at  the  funerals  of  the
rich,  black  horses  are  chosen,  and  are
clothed  with  black  velvet  \Pusey\

The  mighty  cry.  The  Easterns  are
given  to  expressions  of  feeling  in  anger,
sorrow,  or  devotion.  But  this  cry  de-
notes— 1 .  Intense  earnestness :  not  merely
asking  or  seeking,  but  a  cry.  An  agony,
as  one  in  deep  distress,  or  intently  en-
gaged in  solemn  pursuit  (Gen.  xxxii.  24
— 26).  2.  Deep  fervour.  It  was  not
only  a  cry,  but  a  mighty  cry.  There  was
deep  contrition  for  sin,  and  strong  desire
for  pardon.  Faintheartedness  and  feeble
prayers  gain  no  blessing.  The  effectual
fervent  prayer  avails  much.  The  prayer
that  stirs  and  labours  for  its  ends  (Jas.
v.  1 6  :  Heb.  v.  7).  3.  Great  confidence.
They  believed  that  God  could  and  would
help  them.  They  turn  away  from  idols,
and  look  to  the  God  of  mercy.  4.  Great
perseverance.  Not  once,  but  continually,
did  they  cry,  and  felt  the  necessity  of
Divine  protection  day  by  day.  We
must  always  come  to  God  humbly,
fervently,  and  incessantly.  "  0  Lord,  to
Thee  will  I  cry."

Nineveh's  repentance.  Its  nation-
ality. Its  expressions.  Its  efficacy
[Martin].

The  repentance  of  the  Ninevites  a
model  of  a  genuine  national  repentance.
1.  It  hears  God's  proclamation,  and  asks
not  why1?  (vers.  1 — 4).  2.  It  springs
from  faith,  and  is  accompanied  by  faith
(vers.  5 — 9).  3.  It  bows  itself  under
the  curse  of  the  common  guilt,  and  not
a  single  person  asks,  "  How  much  have
I  deserved  1 "  (ver.  6).  4.  It  is  united
with  the  purpose  of  amendment  [Lange].


HOMILETIGS.

Who  can  tell? — Verse  9.

This  was  the  forlorn  hope  of  Nineveh.     I  shall  notice  three  things.
I.  The  miserable  plight  in  which  the  men  of  Nineveh  found  themselves.
They  were  like  those  in  the  days  of  Noah ;  ate  and  drank,  builded  and  planted.


chap,  ill.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.  3S1


They  fell  into  abominable  sins,  and  their  vices  probably  rivalled  those  of  Sodom.
But  their  boasting  was  cut  off,  and  the  sound  of  their  mirth  ceased.  They
discovered  their  great  sin.  Added  to  this,  they  had  information  as  to  the  shortness
of  their  days.  "  Forty  days."  The  shortness  of  time  should  rouse  us  from
slumber.  The  third  thing  was  the  terrible  character  of  the  judgment.  II.  The
scanty  reasons  they  had  for  their  hope.  Notice  in  Jonah's  message,  there  was
no  proclamation  of  mercy.  It  was  one  short  sentence  of  doom.  Another  thing
would  cut  off  their  hope — they  knew  nothing  of  God  except,  it  may  be,  some
dreadful  legends  they  had  heard  of  his  terrible  acts.  They  lacked  another
encouragement  which  you  and  I  have.  They  had  never  heard  of  the  Cross.
Jonah's  preaching  was  very  powerful,  but  there  was  no  Christ  in  it.  III.  We
have  stronger  reasons  to  compel  ns  to  pray,  and  more  comfortable  argu-
ments to  urge  us  to  trust.  Refer  to  the  Scriptures.  Remember  David,
Manasseh,  and  Saul  of  Tarsus.  Your  only  hope  lies  in  the  mercy  of  God.
Cling  to  it  tenaciously.  Remember,  for  your  encouragement,  God  delights  to
save.  Men  object  not  to  an  expensive  thing  if  it  bring  them  honour ;  but  if
honour  goes  with  a  thing  they  are  ready  enough  to  do  it.  If  God  saves  you,  it
will  honour  him.  In  prayer  you  ask  for  that  which  glorifies  God  and  benefits
yourself.  Come,  humble  sinner,  and  cry  to  Christ,  and  he  will  have  mercy  upon
thee  [8purgeon~\.

Nineveh's  Hope  and  Nineveh's  Reprieve. —  Verses  9 — 10.

Hope  is  the  gift  of  God,  and  a  powerful  principle  in  the  human  mind.  It  is  the
ground  of  support  in  trouble,  and  the  mainspring  of  all  effort.  Fill  the  earth  with
hope,  you  fill  it  with  light,  life,  and  exertion.  Where  hope  dies  a  man  is  buried
in  gloom ;  where  it  lives  he  looks  forward,  and  strives  for  better  things.  "  I  do
hope  good  days,"  says  Shakespeare.

1.  Nineveh's  hope.  "  Who  can  tell?"  are  words  which  express*some  faint  nope.
But  hope  rests  on  some  foundation.  If  not,  it  is  rather  presumption,  and  will
disappoint.  What  were  the  grounds  of  Nineveh's  hope  %  1.  The  light  of  nature
would  prompt  them  to  hope.  It  is  something  not  to  despair.  Nil  desperandum
we  cry.  There  is  hope  in  a  peradventure.  But  there  are  human  feelings  from
which  to  judge  of  the  feelings  of  God  towards  us.  The  tender  parent  is  reluctant
to  punish  the  penitent  child.  We  argue  from  the  knowledge  of  God  within  us
that  he  may  be  merciful.

u  The  miserable  have  no  other  medicine
But  only  hope."  {Shakespeare.]

"  Hope  springs  eternal  in  the  human  breast."  {Pope.']

2.  Jonah's  message  might  encourage  hope.  Why  forty  days  1  If  God  had  been
determined  to  destroy  us,  would  he  have  given  any  time,  any  respite  at  all?
There  must.be  some  secret  thoughts  of  mercy,  though  not  revealed  to  us.  If
God's  messenger  speaks  of  only  judgment,  God's  conduct  indicates  forbearance.
Let  us  indulge  hope,  improve  our  time,  and  seek  deliverance  by  fasting  and  prayer.
"  Who  can  tell  1 "  3.  Jonah's  history  would  encourage  hope.  Here  is  a  man
whom  they  knew  to  have  been  disobedient,  jDunished  and  saved.  If  God  had
mercy  upon  him,  why  not  upon  us  ?  The  forgiveness  of  some  is  a  ground  of  hope
to  others.  Paul  was  a  pattern  of  God's  mercy  to  men.  Jonah  was  a  sign,  an
outward  symbol  of  hope,  to  Nineveh.  At  any  rate,  if  they  must  perish,  it  could
be  no  worse  to  perish  in  repentance  than  in  wickedness.  Who  knows  1  was  the
anxious  question.  God  only  knew.  If  they  acted  thus  in  the  darkness  of  heathen
idolatry,  what  will  become  of  many  living  in  the  light  of  gospel  day  1  You  have
better  hope  than  Nineveh.  "  If  the  wicked  will  turn  from  all  his  sins  that  he
hath  committed,  and  keep  all  my  statutes,  and  do  that  which  is  lawful  and
right,  he  shall  surely  live,  he  shall  not  die."     II.  Nineveh's  reprieve.    The


382  UOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JONAR.  [chap.  in.


night  begins  to  wear  away,  and  the  day  to  dawn  on  the  city.  They  repent,  and  God
repents  of  the  evil  which  he  had  threatened.  Nineveh  guilty  was  destroyed  by
the  penitence  of  its  inhabitants,  and  Nineveh  reformed  was  preserved  by  the
mercy  of  God.  "  God  repented  of  the  evil,"  &c.  This  is  not  the  place  for  the
discussion  of  different  questions  concerning  the  character  and  the  government  of
God.  There  is  no  change  in  his  purpose,  and  no  contradiction  in  his  word.  We
are  repeatedly  assured  that  if  we  turn  to  him,  he  will  be  gracious  to  us  (Job
xxxiii.  27  :  Jer.  xxxi.  18":  Ezek.  xviii.  27).  Luther  says:  "I  stick  to  this  rule,
to  avoid  such  questions  as  entangle  us  with  the  throne  of  the  Divine  majesty  as
much  as  I  can.  It  is  much  better  and  safer  for  me  to  stay  down  by  the  cradle  of
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  has  become  man,  than  to  puzzle  one's  self  with  the
Deity."  1.  God  observed  the  conduct  of  the  Ninevites.  "  God  saw  their  works."
He  discerned  their  feelings,  and  noticed  their  acting.  Their  repentance,  prayer,  and
fasting  were  approved  by  him.  Though  the  amendment  might  be  temporary  and
external  with  many,  yet  this  showed  some  faith  in  his  word,  fear  of  his  name,  and
desire  for  his  mercy.  He  honoured,  accepted,  and  rewarded  it.  There  is  no  im-
posing upon  God.  He  knows  the  heart,  and  observes  the  life.  The  finest  pro-
fession without  practice  provokes  him  to  anger ;  but  the  penitent  suppliant  moves
him  to  mercy.  "Return  unto  me,  and  I  will  return  to  you."  2.  God  granted  a
reprieve  to  the  Ninevites.  The  whole  city  was  preserved,  and  not  one  was  put  to
death.  "  It  was  not  his  repentance  altering  their  predicted  fate,  but  their  repent-
ance accomplishing  his  compassionate  purpose."  For  God  to  destroy  a  penitent,
reformed  people,  would  have  been  apparently  as  inconsistent  as  to  save  the  wicked
city  in  its  impenitence.  "  That  the  righteous  should  be  as  the  wicked,  that  be  far
from  thee  ;  shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  1 "  When  Nineveh  after-
wards filled  up  the  cup  of  its  iniquity,  the  threatened  destruction  came,  and  so
complete  was  the  overthrow  that  we  are  only  now  learning  that  the  shapeless
mounds  of  the  desert  covered  the  palaces  of  mighty  kings.  In  its  repentance
Nineveh  is  an  encouragement  to  seek  God's  mercy ;  in  its  overthrow  a  warning  to
all  those  who  provoke  his  wrath.  "  At  what  instant  I  shall  speak  concerning  a
nation  and  concerning  a  kingdom  to  pluck  up,  and  to  pull  down,  to  destroy  it ;  if
that  nation,  against  whom  I  have  pronounced,  turn  from  their  evil,  I  will  repent  of
the  evil  that  I  thought  to  do  them."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  9.  Who  can  tell?  In  the  true  to  fact,  and  their  reformation  of
development  of  this  hope  within  the  character  not  according  to  the  circum-
heart  of  Nineveh  we  behold  the  truest  stances  of  the  case.  They  believed  in  a
exercise  of  faith  in  God.  It  was  not  Deity  capable  of  anger  and  destruction ;
speculation,  but  a  true  confidence  in  the  the  former  of  which  they  had  excited,
Supreme  Being,  as  arbiter  of  the  moral  and  the  latter  of  which  they  had
destiny  of  men,  that  inspired  and  re-  narrowly  escaped  \ExelX\.
tained  this  hope.  In  the  development  As  soon  as  prayer  took  possession  of
of  this  hope  tve  behold  the  first  dawn  of  them,  it  both  made  them  righteous,  and
a  new  life.  The  Ninevites  are  true  to  forthwith  corrected  the  city  which  had
their  better  nature,  humble  and  expect-  been  habituated  to  live  with  profligacy,
ant.  They  work  out  in  their  conduct  and  wickedness,  and  lawlessness.  More
convictions  placed  by  God  in  their  hearts,  powerful  was  prayer  than  the  long  usage
Their  characters  rise  into  new  light,  and  of  sin.  It  filled  that  city  with  heavenly
receive  the  beauty  of  a  heavenly  life,  laws,  and  brought  along  with  it  temper-
In  the  development  of  this  hope  we  be-  ance,  loving-kindness,  gentleness,  and
hold  a  due  recognition  of  the  anger  of  care  of  the  poor  [Chrysostom\
God.  Had  they  not  credited  the  Divine  Ver.  10.  The  repentance  of  God  is
wrath,  their  faith  would  have  been  un-  included  in  his  gracious  decree.     It  is


chap,  in.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.


383


the  harmonizing  of  wrath  and  forgive-
ness, justice  and  love.  Wrath  is  not  the
final  end ;  but  it  has  for  its  end  and
object,  love.  Woe  to  him  who  makes
light  of  the  wrath  of  God :  he  can
never  taste  of  love  \Lange\

Works.  1.  God  looks  not  at  outward
performance.  "  Bring  forth  fruits  meet
for  repentances."  2.  To  be  acceptable  to
God  we  must  renounce  all  sins.  The
sins  of  the  city  and  the  sins  of  indi-
viduals. If  we  regard  iniquity  in  our
hearts,  God  will  disregard  us  (Ps.  lxvi.
18).  3.  God  will  bless  feeble  efforts  to
forsake  sin  and  reform  life.  Temporal
favours  are  a  type  of  spiritual  blessings,
and  temporary  repentance  an  image  of
true  penitence.     If  men  through  fear  of


judgment  depart  from  evil  and  avert
temporal  evils,  what  will  repentance
unto  life  gain  1

Learn: — 1.    That   God   may   intend
mercy   amid   darkness    and    judgment.

2.  But  men,  sensible  of  their  sins  and
desert,  are  often  uncertain  whether  he
will  have  mercy  or  hot.  The  Christian  in
affliction  and  the  penitent  sinner  seeking
mercy, put  the  question, "  Who  can  tell?"

3.  By  keeping  the  mind  in  suspense
between  hope  and  fear,  judgment  and
mercy,  God  stirs  up  to  greater  diligence.
Be  not  disheartened  nor  deterred  from
duty  in  trouble.  God  will  hear  prayer.
The  answer  will  be  (a)  certain,  (b)  season-
able, and  (c)  compassionate.

"  Repentant  tears."  [Shakespeare.]


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  III.


Vers.  1 — 3.  This  is  substantially  the
same  commission,  and  yet  different.  The
"  second  "  call  to  a  man  is  never  exactly
the  same  as  the  first.  The  third  is
never  a  repetition  of  the  second.  Another
tone  is  in  the  voice  of  the  speaker,  firmer
or  milder.  Other  shades  of  meaning  are
in  the  message.  If  it  is  "the  second
time,"  still  more  if  it  is  the  seventh  time,
or  the  seventy-and-seventh  time,  there
will  be  changes  in  the  message  corre-
sponding with  changes  which  time  has
brought  in  circumstances  and  in  charac-
ter. It  may  seem  a  refinement,  but,  pro-
perly understood,  it  is  but  a  simple  truth,
that  he  never  receives  exactly  the  same
command  or  invitation  from  God  more
than  once.  "  If  slighted  once,  the  season
fair  can  never  be  renewed  "  [Raleigh].

A  great  city.  Nineveh  covered  a
great  extent  of  ground.  Historians  say
that  its  walls  were  480  stadia,  or  60
miles,  in  circumference.  It  was  great  in
population.  Jonah  mentions  120,000
who  could  not  discern  between  their
right  hand  and  their  left.  It  was  great
in  splendour  and  power.  "The  re-
searches in  the  mounds  have  astonished
Europe  with  the  barbaric  grandeur  of  the
statuary,  and  the  full  details  of  life  and
history  sculptured  on  marble,  or  stamped
in  arrow-headed  characters  upon  the
bricks."      But  it  was  morally  great  to


God  on  account  of  the  human  souls,  and
their  spiritual  condition.  In  God's  sight,
grandeur,  territory,  and  architectural
beauty,  are  nothing  to  immortal  souls,
and  the  influence  which  they  exert.  The
material  worlds,  the  sun  with  its  satel-
lites, are  not  so  great  as  a  man.  Try  to
realize  how  great  you  are  in  the  sight  of
God.

Yer.  4.  Yet  forty  days.  Delay  in
the  execution  of  sentence  is  sometimes
an  encouragement  to  sin  (Ecc.  viii.  11) ;
but  gives  space  for  repentance,  and  dis-
plays the  long-suffering  of  God  (see  Ex.
xxxiv.  5,  6  :  Ps.  ciii.,  viii. :  Joel  ii.  13,
14  :  1  Pet.  hi.  20).

Ver.  5.  Fast.  They  did  not  wait
for  supreme  authority.  Time  was  urgent,
and  they  would  lose  none  of  it.  In  this
imminent  peril  of  God's  displeasure,  they
acted  as  men  would  in  a  conflagration.
Men  do  not  wait  for  orders  to  put  out  a
fire,  or  to  prevent  it  from  spreading.
Whoever  proclaimed  a  fast,  it  seems  to
have  been  done  by  acclamation;  one
common  cry  out  of  the  one  common
terror  [Pusey\.

Vers.  5,  6.  The  message  first  kindles
in  the  humbler  hearts.  Poor  men,  and
humble  men,  do  not  think  what  immense
compensation  they  thus  have  for  poverty,
straits,  and  toils,  in  being  kept,  as  to
natural  condition,  so  much  nearer  God


384


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.


[chap.  m.


and  the  powers  of  his  gracious  kingdom.
God's  messengers  reach  them  easily.
Eich  men,  and  those  standing  on  the
elevated  places  of  society,  do  not  think
how  the  earthly  advancement  is  apt  to  be
counterbalanced  by  the  spiritual  disad-
vantage [Raleigh],

"  The  pride  of  kingly  sway."   [Shakespeare.]

Vers.  7,  8.  We  double  the  greater
part  of  our  faults  by  the  excuses  which
we  make  use  of  to  justify  them — excuses
which  are  a  kind  of  patches  when  a  rent
is  made,  far  more  unseemly  and  misbe-
coming than  the  rent  itself  [/Seed].

"  If  hearty  sorrow
Be  a  sufficient  ransom  for  offence,
I  tender  it  here  ;  I  do  as  truly  suffer
As  e'er  I  did  commit."  [Shakespeare.]


Violence.
"  Grieved  at  his  heart  when,  looking  down,  ht


saw


The  whole  earth  filled  with  violence."  [Milton."]

Yer.  9.      Who  can  tell  ?

"  They  have  more  in  them  than  mortal  know-
ledge." [Shakespeare.]

Yer.  10.  Doom  changed.  This  is
ever  God's  manner,  when  men  change
their  deeds  to  change  his  doom  ;  when
they  renounce  their  sins,  to  recall  his
sentence ;  when  they  repent  of  the  evil
they  have  done  against  him,  to  repent
of  the  evil  he  had  said  he  would  do
against  them.  Never  was  a  man  truly
and  inwardly  humbled,  but  God  in  the
riches  of  his  special  mercy  (in  Christ)
truly  pardoned  him  [Bp.  Sanderson],


CHAPTEE  IV.


Critical  Notes.]  Angry]  Lit.  hot  with  anger ;  to  burn  inwardly :  the  verb  usually
restricted  to  anger,  but  (vers.  4  and  9)  rendered  to  grieve.  Jonah's  vexation  grew  to  anger.
Nineveh's  destruction  would  have  been  a  warning  to  Israel,  but  God  had  preserved  it,  and  he
appeared  to  have  no  hope  for  the  reformation  of  his  country.  2.  Word]  Saying  or  cogitation,  i.  e.
Did  I  not  say  to  myself?  Land]  Palestine.  Fled]  I  prevented  to  flee,  i.  e.  I  endeavoured  by  flight  to
prevent.  Gracious]  (cf.  Ex.  xxxiv.  6;  xxxii.  14:  Joel  ii.  13).  3.  Take]  cf.  Elijah's  prayer  (1
Kings  xix.  4).  Better]  than  live  under  the  imputation  of  being  a  false  prophet.  4.  Well]  The
Heb.  adverbial,  "  Is  thine  anger  justly  kindled?"  Art  thou  greatly  or  much  angry?  [XXX  and  Fair-
bairn].  5.  Went  out]  Some  time  before  the  forty  days  expire.  East  side]  Definiteness  in  the
picture.  See]  Watch  what  would  happen,  expecting  Nineveh  to  fall  by  earthquake,  or  be  burned  like
Sodom  [Puscy],  6.  Gourd]  The  "  ricinus  "  or  "  palma  Christi;"  the  word  sig.  an  artificial  covert,
as  a  tent  or  booth  ;  sometimes  a  shelter,  in  the  preparation  of  which  no  art  is  used  (Jer.  xxv.  38  :
Job  xxxviii.  40).  Exceeding]  Lit.  glad  with  great  gladness.  7.  Worm]  Taken  collectively  for  worms
in  Deut.  xxviii.  39  :  Is.  xiv.  11 :  may  be  here.  The  palma  Christi  in  a  short  time  produces  caterpil-
lars, and  where  these  abound  they  strip  the  tree  of  its  leaves  in  one  night,  and  take  away  the  shade.
8.  This  not  sufficient  discipline.  Vehement]  Silent,  i.  e.  deadly  sultry  east  wind.  Wished]  Lit.  he
asked,  as  to  his  soul,  to  die.  9.  Doest  thou  !]  This  question  comprises  the  meaning  of  vers.  9 — 11.
I  do]  To  the  bottom  of  my  soul,  to  weariness  of  life  (cf.  Matt.  xxvi.  38).  "  I  am  very  much  grieved
even  to  death"  [Fairbairn].  10.  Jonah's  attention  is  directed  to  the  contradiction  in  which  he  has
fallen,  by  feeling  compassion  for  the  withering  of  the  miraculous  tree,  and  at  the  same  time  mur-
muring because  God  has  had  compassion  upon  Nineveh  with  its  many  thousands  of  living  beings
[Keil].  The  shrub  was  the  son  of  a  night,  and  perished  in  a  night :  if  he  pitied  this  which  he
neither  planted  nor  cultured,  has  God  not  greater  right  to  pity  creatures  whom  he  has  made  ?  &c.
Pity]  Spared  the  gourd.  11.  Spare]  Pity;  Lit.  to  be  affected  by  the  sight  of  a  thing;  then  to
be  concerned ;  take  pity  or  compassion  upon  one.  Nineveh  contained  an  immense  population,  a
great  number  of  children  ;  and  "  if  this  did  not  produce  a  suitable  impression  upon  the  mind  of
the  prophet,  the  number  even  of  irrational  animals  is  adverted  to,  the  latter  being  far  superior  in
ffcint  of  mechanism  and  utility  to  the  shrub  for  which  he  was  so  much  concerned "  [Flzaz].
"  What  could  Jonah  say  to  this  ?  He  was  obliged  to  keep  silence,  defeated,  as  it  were,  by  his  own
sentence"  [Luther].  The  history  breaks  off  abruptly,  but  an  insight  of  God's  compassion  for  all
nations  is  gained.  Mercy  is  the  last  note  sounded.  Let  us  attend  to  the  sign  H  the  prophet,  and  love
him  who  said,  "  Behold,  a  greater  than  Jonas  is  here ! "


chap,  iv.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.  385

HOMILETICS.

The  Strange  Displeasure. — Verses  1 — 4

God's  servants  should  rejoice  in  the  increase  of  his  people  and  the  success  of
their  labours.  Nineveh  had  repented,  was  saved  and  filled  with  rejoicing,  but  one
individual  was  differently  affected  by  the  display  of  Divine  mercy  towards  a  guilty
city.  Sin  lurks  in  those  that  have  suffered  most,  that  have  undergone  the  severest
discipline  to  wean  them  from  it.  A  fretful  man  is — 1.  At  discord  with  the  joy  of
his  fellow-creatures.  2.  Opposed  to  the  benevolent  designs  of  God.  Notice
Jonah's  strange  displeasure.  "  It  displeased  Jonah  exceedingly,  and  he  was  very
angry."

I.  He  sets  the  welfare  of  his  own  country  above  the  interests  of  humanity.
"  He  is  an  Israelite  and  a  patriot.  He  loved  his  own  people  better  than  the
Ninevites,  and  had  no  idea  of  God  chosing  more  than  one  nation.  He  thought
Nineveh  the  chief  enemy  which  threatened  his  country.  Behold  it  is  spared,  and
likely  to  prosper  !  What  will  become  of  his  brethren  now  ?  His  Jewish  pride
rebelled,  and  he  was  angry."  Professing  Christians  often  cherish  the  same  spirit,
idolize  their  sect  and  creed.  The  sin  of  Jonah  is  a  common  sin.  It  is  seen  in  the
world's  patriotism  and  the  Church's  bigotry;  in  all  sectarianism  and  narrow-mind-
edness ;  in  reluctance  to  missionary  effort,  and  envy  at  the  success  of  others.  We
cry,  "  Charity  begins  at  home ; "  refuse  to  do  God's  work  ourselves,  and  do  not  like
it  done  by  others.  The  disciples  glorified  God  on  Peter's  report.  "  Then  hath
God  also  to  the  Gentiles  granted  repentance  unto  life."  II.  He  frets  at  the  mercy
of  God  to  others.  He  would  rather  have  his  own  will.  God's  dealings  with
Nineveh  did  not  please  him.  When  self  is  exalted,  and  God's  Providence  thwarts
our  wishes,  we  are  displeased.  God  does  not  gratify  our  whims,  hence  we  fret  and
complain  ;  we  get  peevish  and  angry  with  everything  about  us.  "  The  times  are
out  of  joint."  This  temper  darkens  sunshine,  corrodes  enjoyment,  scorns  gratitude,
and  banishes  happiness  from  every  place.  Is  God's  will  not  right,  and  are  his  ways
not  perfect  1  "  Should  it  be  according  to  thy  mind  1 "  III.  He  attempts  to  justify
his  past  conduct.  "  Was  not  this  my  saying  1 "  &c.  We  have  here  the  reason  for
his  flight  to  Tarshish  which  he  is  ready  to  excuse.  He  hastened,  tried  to  be
beforehand  with  God,  to  circumvent  and  defeat  his  designs.  What  folly  and
impiety  to  justify  this  !  Why  should  we  be  ashamed  to  acknowledge  error,  and
forsake  a  wrong  when  detected  in  it?  The  true  penitent  will  sink  self,  think
more  of  God's  truth  than  his  credit ;  be  ready  to  confess  all  and  excuse  nothing.
But  for  the  belief  that  he  would  have  mercy  upon  Nineveh,  Jonah  tells  God  that
he  would  have  obeyed  the  first  commission.  When  men  insist  that  they  have  done
right,  and  call  up  sins  which  should  have  been  forgotten,  and  for  which  they
have  been  chastised,  they  display  ignorance,  pride,  and  self-conceit.  1.  They  make
themselves  disagreeable.  Everybody  dislikes  a  man  that  always  claims  to  be  right,
that  can  never  be  taught  nor  corrected.  2.  They  are  a  curse  to  society.  Their
example  and  influence  are  pernicious.  They  are  never  satisfied  with  the  ways  of
Providence.  God's  plans  are  always  wrong,  and  his  mercy  upon  others  thrown
away.  How  abominable  is  self-assertion,  self -justification,  and  self-will.  "I
knew  beforehand  what  would  happen,  therefore  I  shall  please  myself  now!"
IV.  He  becomes  impatient  of  life  itself.  "  Take,  I  pray  thee,  my  life  from  me,"
&c.  This  is  the  impatient  wish  of  petulance  and  discontent,  not  the  pious  desire
of  Paul  and  God's  people  (Luke  ii.  29  :  1  Cor.  v.  1—3  :  Phil.  i.  18—23).  But  in
this  rash  petition  the  Prophet  stands  not  alone.  Failure  in  business,  disappoint-
ment in  love,  treachery  of  friends,  and  perplexing  providences,  cover  the  sky  with
clouds,  and  oppress  the  spirit  with  gloom.  Moses  and  Elijah,  Job  and  Jeremiah,
prove  that  temptations  to  such  desires  are  powerful  in  the  best  of  men.  Men  pray
for  death  when  not  prepared  to  die.     If  life  is  not  appreciated,  death  is  not  desir-

25


386  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.  [chip,  it


able.  This  desire  chills  our  best  affections,  and  cherishes  our  meanest  interests.
It  indicated — 1.  Lack  of  faith  in  God.  God's  plans  were  better  than  Jonah's.
He  should  have  believed  in  the  wisdom  of  God.  2.  Ingratitude  for  his  own  forgive-
ness. God's  mercy  towards  himself  should  have  made  him  tender-hearted  to  others,
and  glad  to  see  their  repentance.

"  Anger  is  a  short  fit  of  madness  "  [Tillotsoti],

A  Gracious  God. —  Verse  2.

Jonah  seems  to  think  that  God  was  more  merciful  than  just.  But  the  justice
of  God  is  a  proof  and  an  exhibition  of  his  love.  Mercy  and  truth  blend  together
like  rays  from  the  sun,  to  give  life  and  light  to  men.  This  character  of  God  is
described  in  law,  prophets,  and  psalms.  It  is  a  memorial  and  manifestation  of  God
to  all  generations.

I.  God  is  gracious  in  essence.  "Thou  art  a  gracious  God."  God  has  the
disposition  to  goodness.  He  is  gratuitously  benevolent.  This  sheds  lustre  upon  his
nature  and  light  upon  a  fallen  world.  He  seeks  to  subdue  the  enmity  of  man,  and
allure  wanderers  back.  He  needs  nothing  to  excite  his  love.  His  very  nature  is
gracious.  "  God  is  love."  Moses  wondered  how  God  could  show  mercy  and  do  justly ;
desired  some  greater  insight  into  the  Eternal  Mind,  and  longed  to  do  his  duty  to  a
disobedient  people  (Exod.  xxxiii.  17 — 19).  But  Jonah  made  the  revealed  character  of
God  a  ground  for  upbraiding  men  and  neglecting  duty.  How  sublime  the  contrast
between  God's  mercy  and  man's  ways.  "My  ways  are  not  as  your  ways,"  &c.  II.  God
is  gracious  in  acts.  As  the  fountain,  so  the  streams.  The  acts  of  God  partake  of
the  character  of  God.  Benevolent  in  nature,  he  is  benevolent  in  act  and  design.
He  wills  not  that  any  should  perish.  We  are  apt  to  measure  him  by  our  own
feelings,  and  picture  him  as  malevolent  and  vindictive.  1.  He  is  merciful.
Merciful  to  the  miserable  and  undeserving.  Ever  disposed  to  relieve  the  suffering,
pardon  the  guilty,  and  dispense  happiness.  2.  He  is  slow  to  anger.  He  is  not
passionate  and  easily  provoked.  He  restrains  his  wrath,  and  many  a  time  turns
away  his  anger.  He  deals  not  with  men  according  to  their  iniquity,  nor  rewards
them  according  to  their  sins.  He  is  reluctant  to  execute  sentence,  and  spares
offenders.  3.  He  is  of  great  kindness.  Having  long  patience  and  forbearance;  allows
time  for  repentance,  and  seeks  to  pardon  and  sava.  Great  kindness  is  seen  in
great  patience  in  provocation  ;  in  great  gifts  upon  the  unworthy,  and  innumerable
blessings  upon  the  just  and  unjust.  "His  mercy  endureth  for  ever."  4.  He
repents  of  the  evil.  Though  he  threatens,  he  does  not  often  strike.  When  the
evil  has  been  wholly  or  partially  inflicted,  he  will  repent  of  it  and  replace  it  with
good  if  the  sinner  returns  to  him.  Thus  all  patience  and  long-suffering,  all  mercy
and  forgiveness,  are  traced  up  to  God.  He  finds  reason  in  himself  alone  for
sparing  the  guilty  and  saving  the  penitent.  "  Not  for  your  sakes  do  I  this,  be  it
known  unto  you,  0  house  of  Israel,  but  for  mine  own  name's  sake."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  1.     Displeased.    Displeasure  in-  what  we  have  known.     3.  Lack  of  love

dicates — 1.    Lack    of   self-government,  to  men.     Jonah  might  not  be  grieved  to

It  was  a  proverbial  saying  of  the  pious  see  that  mercy  displayed  to  others,  of

Mede  that  "he   who  cannot  hold  his  which  he  shared   so  greatly  himself —

tongue,  can  hold  nothing."     2.  Lack  of  might  not  with  the  ungodly  pine  away

reverence  towards  God.    We  should  con-  because  God  was  honoured  in  the  re-

sider  what  God  requires  from  us,  and  pentance  of  Nineveh ;  but  he  was  not  in

not  what  he  wants  to  do  with  us.     Do  harmony  with  the  interests  of  his  fellow-

we  honour  God  in  feeling  and  action?  creatures.    God  pardoned  the  city,  "but

We  have  known  him,  but  not  practised  it  displeased  Jonah."


our.  it.)


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JONAH.


387


Jonah's  sin — 1.  Sin  against  the  bright-
est illumination.  He  "  knew,"  but  sin-
ned against  the  light  of  nature,  the  voice
of  conscience,  and  the  revealed  will  of
God.  2.  Sin  against  the  greatest  mere ies.
His  life  was  crowned  with  loving-kind-
ness and  tender  mercies.  The  pre-
eminent mercies  of  God  fail  to  persuade
men  to  forsake  sin  and  serve  God.
3.  Sin  against  the  greatest  judgments.
Judgments  had  blended  with  mercy,
but  corrections  had  not  conquered  his
corruptions.  How  hard  to  overcome
pride  and  petulance  within  us  !  But  to
this  day  men,  like  Pharaoh,  harden  them-
selves against  God.  "  Who  is  the  Lord,
that  I  should  obey  him  ? "

Ver.  2.  Jonah's  prayer.  I.  Its  spirit.
Petulant  and  unsubmissive ;  most  un-
grateful and  selfish.  It  is  a  miserable
temper,  painful  to  one's  self,  and  dis-
agreeable to  others.  The  greatest  debtors
should  be  the  most  thankful  men.  II.
Its  purpose.  "  Take  away  my  life."
What  fori  Is  it  of  no  more  service1?
Let  God  judge  of  that.  He  bestows  it;
give  it  to  him  in  return.  There  is  grace
enough  for  us  and  others.  When  we
work  in  a  good  cause,  and  save  great
cities,  life  is  noble,  and  should  be  dig-
nified and  preserved.  Those  who  wish
to  leave  life  because  they  cannot  have
their  own  way  are  not  fit  to  meet  God.
Here  is  Jonah's  integrity  and  Jonah's
safety.  1.  Integrity.  He  is  no  enemy,
but  a  friend  and  child  of  God,  notwith-
standing his  perplexity.  He  cannot
rest  in  distance  from  God.  Sick  at
heart,  he  pours  out  complaint  to  him.
In  every  prayer  of  God's  children  there  is
a  mixture  of  sin.  The  mixture  here  is
conspicuous  and  alarming.  There  is,
however,  an  element  of  grace,  a  secret
seed  of  faith  and  submission  in  making
God  the  counsellor  and  referee.  2.
Safety.  But  for  this  he  would  mentally
and  spiritually  have  fled  again  from  God
as  before.  Now  he  flees  to  God.  He
does  not  seek  a  refuge ;  he  makes  God
his  refuge;  tells  him  the  grounds  of
alarm ;  expostulates  and  seeks  to  make
his  case  clear  before  God.  Though  there
is  excess,  violence,  and  inexcusable  haste
and  passion,  yet  God  condescends  to  his
prayer,  stained  as  it  is  by  grievous  in-


firmity [H.  Martin].  He  prayed  in  a
tumult,  as  if  reproving  God.  We  must
necessarily  recognise  a  certain  amount  of
piety  in  this  prayer  of  Jonah,  and  at  the
same  time  many  faults.  There  was  so
far  piety  in  it,  that  he  directed  his  com-
plaints to  God;  for  hypocrites,  even
when  they  address  God,  are  nevertheless
hostile  to  him.  But  Jonah,  when  he
complains,  although  he  does  not  keep
within  proper  bounds,  but  is  carried
away  by  a  blind  and  vicious  impulse,
is  nevertheless  prepared  to  submit  him-
self to  God  [Calvin].

Yer.  3.  It  is  better  to  die,  &c.  Death
as  a  remedy  for  the  ills  of  life,  in  weari-
ness, impatience,  disappointments,  and
perplexing  providences.  1.  It  is  only
an  imaginary  remedy.  2.  It  would  only
increase  the  evil.  It  would  not  relieve
distress,  nor  bring  extinction.  The  grave
cannot  calm  the  soul,  and  hush  its
sorrows.  "  Hence  death,"  says  one,
"  would  only  have  led  Jonah  from  the
shadow  of  his  trouble  to  its  very  centre,
where  its  sad  meaning  would  have  been
known  to  him."  Paul  had  "  great
heaviness  and  continual  sorrow,"  de-
sired to  be  with  Christ,  which  was
better  than  remaining  here  ;  but  he  did
not  pray  for  death  in  all  his  labours  and
persecutions,  for  his  life  seemed  needful
to  the  Church  on  earth.

"  He  sins  against  this  life  who  slights  the  next."

[  Young. ~]

Here  is  at  least  no  craven  love  of  life !
no  clinging  to  meat  and  drink,  and  mere
foothold  on  the  ground.  This  wounded
spirit,  realising  its  mortality  amid  change
and  adversity,  rises  disdainfully  above
the  mortal  pathway,  and  asks  to  be
liberated  for  the  last  flight  to  immortality
and  heaven.  Hezekiah  "  wept  sore  "
when  the  message  came  to  him,  "  Thou
shalt  die  and  not  live."  Jonah  here
prays,  "  Let  me  die — of  life  I  have  had
enough.  Life  is  nothing  to  me  without
its  uses."  The  Prophet's  attitude  is
nobler  than  the  king's  [Raleigh],

"  What  is't  to  die  ?
To  leave  all  disappointment,  cares,  and  sorrow,
To  leave  all  falsehood,  treachery,  and  unkindness,
All  ignominy,  suffering,  and  despair,
And  be  at  rest  for  ever  "  [Longfellow\


388  H0M1LETIG  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.  [en At-,  iv.


HOMILETICS.
Divine  Eeproop. — Verse  4.

Jonah  had  ground  for  joy  and  not  for  grief.  God  expostulates  with  him  and
leads  him  to  reflection.  The  interrogative  form  proves  the  condescension  and
wisdom  of  God.

I.  The  condescension  of  God.  God  did  not  upbraid  the  prophet  for  ingratitude
and  self-will.  But  he  sought  to  relieve  an  overburdened  spirit,  rouse  a  dormant
conscience,  and  melt  an  impenitent  heart.  When  we  retire  from  duty  in  fretfulness,
God  reasons  with  us.  "  What  doest  thou  here,  Elijah  1 "  When  we  indulge  in
envious  thoughts  of  Providence,  and  hatch  imaginary  ills,  a  voice  speaks,  "  Doest
thou  well  to  be  angry  1 "  God  cares  for  his  servants,  and  seeks  to  relieve  them.
"  The  Lord  thinketh  on  me."  II.  The  wisdom  of  God.  Jehovah  did  not  give
the  verdict,  but  called  upon  Jonah  to  assign  a  cause  for  anger,  or  by  silence
condemn  himself.  On  earth  men  are  left  to  judge  themselves,  to  pass  sentence  on
their  own  conduct.  They  are  completely  in  the  power  of  God,  and  he  need  not
condemn  now.  He  requires  voluntary  obedience.  To  secure  this,  and  prepare  us
for  the  day  of  account,  he  enlightens  the  mind,  quickens  the  conscience,  and  con-
tinually appeals  to  each — "  Doest  thou  well?"

The  Folly  op  a  Fretpul  Mind. — Verses  4  and  9.

There  is  here  no  condemnation  of  lawful  anger.  As  a  natural  emotion,  anger  is
legitimate  and  useful.  "  Be  ye  angry  and  sin  not."  The  blame  is  against  the
cause  of  it.  It  was  the  zeal  of  false  patriotism ;  passionate  grief  excited  by  an  act
of  Divine  mercy.

I.  Doest  thou  well  to  be  angry  without  any  real  cause  for  thine  anger  ?
The  ground  is  imaginary.  Thy  grief  is  unnecessary  and  unreasonable,  unjust  and
wicked.  One  half  of  trouble  rises  from  groundless  causes.  We  picture  the  worst,
and  our  jealousy  is  needless.  Our  reason  for  displeasure  is  future,  of  our  own
portending,  such  as  events  may  negative  and  disappoint  Think  seriously  whether
you  do  right  in  being  angry.  Control  indignation  in  principle,  purpose,  and  degree.
"  The  wrath  of  man  worketh  not  the  righteousness  of  God."  II.  Doest  thon  well
to  be  angry  when  the  dealings  of  God  with  thee  teach  thee  to  be  thankful  ?
Jonah's  temper  was  at  variance  with  his  mercies  and  position  as  God's  servant.
We  might  have  expected  gratitude  from  one  so  highly  favoured.  But  thankfulness
seldom  keeps  pace  with  mercies.  Those  who  receive  most  do  not  always  make  the
best  return.  God's  grace  should  dilute  or  remove  the  acid  in  our  temper,  teach  us
to  bear  with  those  who  are  reformed,  and  make  us  conscious  how  rough  and  sinful
we  ourselves  are  in  the  sight  of  God.  III.  Doest  thou  well  to  be  angry  when
the  consequences  before  God  and  man  are  most  serious?  1.  It  excites  the  anger
of  God.  It  is  presumption  and  self-assertion,  disobedience  to  his  will,  and
impatience  under  his  rule.  The  ungrateful  can  have  no  enjoyment  of  God's
favours.  They  provoke  him  to  take  away  what  they  have,  and  to  give  less  in  the
future.  Their  fretfulness  cannot  improve  their  circumstances.  God's  will  is
supreme,  and  must  be  done.  "  Is  thine  eye  evil  because  I  am  good  ] "  2.  It  is
never  beneficial  to  man.  If  anger  is  not  good  and  just  toward  God,  what  can  it
profit  man  1  It  proves  a  man  to  be  of  narrow  views  and  weak  morals,  (a)  Never
beneficial  to  one  who  indulges  in  it.  An  ill-temper  is  an  affliction  to  its  possessor,
spoils  his  peace,  prayers,  and  business.  It  distracts  from  his  strength  and  beauty,
and  disqualifies  for  Christian  blessing  and  work,  (b)  Never  beneficial  to  others.
It  seems  to  be  owing  to  temper  that  Ed.  Burke  quarrelled  with  Wilbertbrce  and
Fox,  and  gained  the  title  of  "the  inconsistent  and  incomprehensible  Burke."
Exhibition*  of  passion  delight  the  enemy  and  wound  the  friends,  dishonour  Christ
and  give  false  impressions  of  his  religion.      It  leads  us  to  imitate,  repeat,  and


chap.  IV.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.  389

perpetuate  wrong.     It  should  "be  checked,  for  it  is  both  mischievous  to  oneself  and
to  others.     "  Doest  thou  well  to  be  angry  % "

"  When  anger  rushes  unrestrained  to  action
Like  a  hot  steed,  it  stumbles  in  its  way"  [Savage],

Jonah's  Eetirement. — Verse  5.

As  soon  as  Jonah  had  delivered  his  message  he  left  the  city,  remained  outside  on
the  east  side,  and  built  himself  a  temporary  shelter.  The  report  of  the  city's
repentance  reached  him;  dissatisfied  with  himself,  and  displeased  with  God's
dealings,  he  had  neither  comfort  in  duty  nor  retirement.

I.  The  place  of  retirement.  "The  east  side  of  the  city,  and  there  made  him  a
booth."  He  was  not  unmindful  of  personal  ease,  takes  time  and  bestows  trouble
to  build  a  hut.  We  are  often  more  concerned  for  our  own  comfort  than  for  the
interests  of  men.  Selfishness  is  graven  in  the  heart,  drives  men  to  grasp  at
shadows  and  not  substance.  It  leads  them  to  resign  duty,  quit  the  field  of  labour,
and  expect  more  than  they  get.  Adam  parted  with  his  holy  robe,  lost  the  presence
of  his  God,  and  tried  to  make  up  for  the  loss  with  his  own  device.  Selfish  ends  and
worldly  devices  are  nothing  more  than  booths  in  which  men  can  never  rest  and
find  shelter.  The  path  of  obedience  alone  is  the  path  of  happiness.  II.  The
spirit  of  retirement.  Here  we  have  a  noble  man,  a  servant  of  God,  blind  to  the
interests  of  men  and  the  claims  of  duty  through  pride  and  personal  feeling  !  Dis-
appointed in  labour,  he  wished  to  resign  it  j  tired  of  life,  he  prayed  to  leave  it.
There  he  sat,  in  silence  and  disgust.  Heaven  smiles  on  the  city,  joy  and  gladness
fills  its  streets,  but  Jonah  walks  into  solitude  with  a  sullen  temper.  He  is  at
variance  with  God,  regardless  of  man,  and  shut  up  in  selfish  aims.  "Oh  what  a
blessed  thing  it  is  to  lose  one's  will,"  said  Dr.  Payson ;  "  since  I  have  lost  my
will  I  have  found  happiness.  There  can  be  no  such  thing  as  disappointment  to
me,  for  I  have  no  desire  but  that  God's  will  may  be  accomplished."  III.  The
purpose  of  retirement.  "  Till  he  might  see  what  would  become  of  their  city."
Perhaps  he  did  not  wish  its  entire  destruction,  but  he  watched  to  see  what  would
be  done — if  its  repentance  would  last,  and  if  after  all  God  would  f ul  til  the  threat.
Abraham  interceded  for  Sodom,  Christ  wept  over  Jerusalem,  and  we  should
resemble  these  eminent  patterns  of  compassion.  But  if  our  views  of  sin  and  God
are  clouded,  if  we  value  not  the  soul,  and  limit  the  mercy  of  God,  we  shall  be
indifferent  to  the  moral  condition  of  men.  If,  Nero-like,  we  do  not  play  while  the
city  burns,  thousands  may  perish  without  a  sigh  or  a  prayer  for  their  escape.  We
should  have  pity  upon  offenders,  and  haste  to  reclaim  them.  "  Pulling  them  out
of  the  fire."

The  Divine  Correction  op  a  Fretful  Man. — Verses  6 — 10.

God  teaches  not  as  man  teaches.  In  God's  school  the  lessons  are  mercifully
given,  and  wonderfully  adapted  to  our  mind  and  circumstances.  Here  we  have
the  Divine  rebuke  of  Jonah's  petulant  temper.

I.  God  corrects  by  refreshing  the  physical  nature.  The  gourd  was  prepared
"to  be  a  shadow  over  his  head."  The  first  lesson  and  cure  of  despondency  is  to
remove  fatigue  and  bodily  weariness  from  over-work.  Elijah's  despondency  was
partly  physical,  and  the  angel  brought  him  refreshment.  Food  and  rest  are
required,  and  God  seeks  to  quiet  the  mind  by  cooling  the  body.  There  is  an
intimate  connection  between  both,  and  we  often  get  at  one  through  the  other.
Regard  for  the  body  is  urged  from  the  lofty  nature  atid  the  important  use  of  the
soul.  They  are  helpmates  in  God's  service  now,  and  will  be  in  his  kingdom  above.
Fretfulness,  petulance,  and  irritability  oftener  spring  from  physical  weakness  than
moral  unloveliness.  If  God  in  providence  deals  mercifully  we  should  n<>t  be
harsh  with  such  feelings.  II.  God  corrects  by  influencing  the  moral  nature.
The  method  taken  is  worthy  of  special  attention.     Sensible  signs  teach  spiritual


390  KOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.  [chap.  IV.


truths.  A  parable  worked  into  the  form  of  facts  is  given  and  interpreted  by  God
himself.  1.  God  speaks  by  symbol.  "The  Lord  prepared  a  gourd,"  for  all  the
steps  in  the  discipline  of  a  good  man  are  divinely  ordered.  Words  merely  might
not  have  been  sufficient.  The  lesson  is  brought  home  by  means  of  symbol.  Man
has  sympathy  with  nature,  and  God  often  touches  this  sympathy.  Spring  and
autumn,  summer  and  winter,  beget  kindred  feelings  in  our  hearts.  When  flowers
bloom  and  trees  shelter  us,  we  rejoice ;  when  beauty  decays  and  plants  perish,  we
grieve.  God  prepared  a  worm  which  devoured  the  gourd,  exposed  Jonah  to  the
burning  sun  and  the  vehement  wind,  then  there  was  a  change  of  feeling.  He
fainted,  complained  to  God,  defended  excessive  grief,  and  enforced  his  preference
of  death  to  life.  "I  do  well  to  be  angry,  even  unto  death."  Jonah  is  now
prepared,  his  moral  nature  is  truly  touched  and  displayed,  and  if  he  cannot  rejoice
in  Nineveh's  joy  he  must  understand  that  God  does.  2.  God  speaks  by  verbal
communications.  God  now  speaks  to  the  Prophet,  argues  with  him,  and  reasons
from  the  less  to  the  greater.  Anything  to  break  sullen  silence  is  a  blessing.  The
song  of  a  bird,  the  voice  of  a  child,  and  the  ripple  of  a  stream  are  often  music  to
the  soul ;  raise  our  thoughts  from  self  to  God.  God  holds  up  Jonah's  feeling,
makes  his  pity,  not  the  life  of  the  plant,  the  symbol  of  his  love.  Pity  on  a  gourd
for  which  he  did  not  labour,  the  son  of  a  night,  and  the  existence  of  a  day  1
because  it  pleased  his  fancy  and  served  his  wish !  Did  he  want  to  spare  this
short-lived  little  shrub?  shall  not  God,  then,  spare  immortal  souls,  the  work  of
his  hands,  and  rejoice  over  the  humbled,  penitent  city  1  Our  sympathies  with
the  beautiful  and  good  may  be  right,  while  our  moral  nature  is  wrong.  God  trains
this  instinctive  feeling  of  the  mind,  sanctions  its  validity,  and  exercises  and  makes
it  the  type  of  his  own  procedure.  "  If  ye,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give  good
gifts  unto  your  children,  how  much  more  shall  your  Heavenly  Father  give  good
things  to  them  that  ask  him  1 "

Withered  Joys. — Verse  7.

Man  is  capable  of  joy.  True  joys  are  only  found  in  God.  The  worm  of
destruction  gnaws  the  root  of  our  best  and  most  loved  earthly  joy.  Every  creature
has  its  enemy,  and  death  smites  every  gourd  of  life.  Joys  which  specially  decay
may  be  noticed.

I.  Joys  which  are  sinful  in  their  basis.  If  we  regard  our  own  ease  and
comfort,  disregard  the  interests  of  men,  and  disapprove  of  God's  ways,  our  joy  is
selfish  and  will  soon  decay.  If  we  depend  for  happiness  on  anything  beneath  the
soul  we  shall  come  to  grief.  II.  Joys  which  are  gained  without  labour.  Jonah
neither  planted  nor  watered  the  tree  which  gave  him  shelter.  Men  often  seize  that
which  is  cheap,  and  trust  to  that  which  costs  them  nothing.  God  is  constantly
teaching  that  nothing  valuable  is  obtained  without  labour.  The  acquisition  of
lasting  joy  is  not  easy.  It  results,  not  from  sulky  labour  and  melancholy  feeling,
but  from  earnest  duty  and  a  peaceful  heart.

11  Heaven  sells  pleasure ;  effort  is  the  price  ;
The  joys  of  conquest  are  the  joys  of  man  "  [Young],

III.  Joys  which  are  deceitful  in  their  results.  Jonah's  joy  sprang  from  bodily
ease  and  sensual  feeling.  The  comforts  which  removed  his  troubles  were  carnal
and  dying  comforts.  Our  joys  are  often  shadows  of  our  sorrows.  Whatever  be
their  effect  upon  us,  if  they  exclude  God,  and  submission  to  him,  all  creation  is
ready  to  destroy  them.  It  is  not  chance,  but  God  in  justice  and  love,  who  smites
the  gourd  to  free  the  heart.  Wealth,  friendships,  and  honours  seem  to  quicken
our  joy  and  cause  it  to  bloom  in  beauty  and  vigour ;  but  they  bring  decay  and
vexation.     When  we  expect  shelter  and  rest,  lo,  a  worm  at  the  root  I

"  Of  joys  departed
Not  to  return,  how  painful  the  remembrance  "  [Robt.  Blair],


OHAP.   IV.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH


391


HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Ver.  6.  "Exceedingly  glad"  and
"exceedingly  grieved."  Extremes  in
human  feelings — their  causes  and  con-
sequences. It  is  a  law  of  the  mind,
verified  in  ourselves  and  others,  to
be  susceptible  of  sudden  transitions,
elevated  to-day  and  depressed  to-mor-
row.

Ver.  7.  Destruction  is  "  prepared  "
by  God  as  well  as  life ;  trouble  as  well
as  joy.  And  both  are  Divinely  ruled
with  a  view  to  the  education  and  puri-
fication of  human  souls.  Here  are  em-
blems of  the  closely-linked  joy  and
sorrow  of  this  mortal  life.  The  fine
plant,  leafy  green,  types  so  well  our
comforts,  successes,  joys.  The  single
day  of  shade  it  furnished  to  the  heated
Prophet  speaks  touchingly  of  the  tran-
sciency  of  our  pleasures.  The  worm
reminds  us  that  a  small  and  mean
creature  may  be  a  formidable  enemy.
The  place  of  its  operation,  probably
under  the  soil,  shows  us  how  powers
and  agents,  invisible  and  unknown  to
us,  can  touch  and  smite  in  secret  the
springs  of  outward  prosperity.  The
time  when  decay  began — at  the  rising  of
the  morning — makes  us  think  mourn-
fully how  human  helps  and  comforts
often  wither  at  the  very  season  when
they  are  most  needed.  How  often
when  "  the  morning  "  of  family  life  is
"rising"  are  comforts  swept  away!
Ah !  how  often  is  there  removal  of
sheltering  fatherhood,  or  nourishing
motherhood,  or  both !  The  utter  loss
of  what  had  given  such  intense  enjoy-
ment warns  us  not  to  set  our  affections
passionately  upon  anything  which  can
be  utterly  lost,  but  to  lift  our  supreme
affections  to  things  above  the  sphere  of
the  "  worm  "  and  the  "  moth,"  beyond
the  reach  of  the  "rust"  and  the  "thief"
[Raleigh].

The  worm  teaches — 1.  That  things
which  destroy  our  gourds  are  often
little  things.  2.  That  things  which
destroy  our  gourds  are  often  invisible
tilings.  3.  That  things  which  destroy
our  gourds  are  always  prepared  by  God.
Under  his  control  the  meanest  and  most
invisible  creatures  can  accomplish  the


most  wonderful  purposes.  They  destroy
the  largest  armies,  and  demolish  the
strongest  fortresses;  they  overturn
thrones,  and  lay  waste  empires.

Earthly  joys.  It  is  kind  in  God  to
remove  them,  when  he  sees  that  his
gifts  are  occupying  our  affections  to  the
exclusion  of  the  Giver.  It  is  lawful  for
him  to  take  them  at  any  time.  It  will
be  just  to  do  so,  if  we  abuse  and  pervert
them.  Let  us  receive  them  with  thank-
ful acknowledgments  of  their  Author,
hold  them  with  a  readiness  to  relinquish
them  any  moment,  use  them  with  care-
fulness and  moderation  to  his  glory,  and
seek  that,  whatever  they  are  in  kind
and  number,  our  affections  may  be  set
on  things  above  [Sibthorp].

Ver.  8.  In  this  verse  we  have  ex-
emplified the  conduct  of  some  good
people  under  affliction.  We  find  that
the  afflictions  which  come  upon  men  are
Divinely  commissioned — that  they  are
often  very  severe.  "A  vehement  east
wind."  They  are  often  complicated.
Not  only  the  "  wind,"  but  "  the  sun,"
beating  upon  Jonah's  head.  They  often
happen  at  the  most  inopportune  time,
and  have  often  a  most  exhaustive  effect
upon  those  to  whom  they  come.  "  He
fainted."  These  afflictions  often  oc-
casion a  complaining  spirit.  It  is  better
for  me  to  die  than  to  live  \ExelT\.

Ver.  9.  Doest  thou  well  ?  I.  The
question  put.  1.  To  reprove  Jonah.
2.  To  convince  him  of  his  error ;  and  3
To  bring  him  to  a  humble  and  obedient
spirit.  II.  The  answer  given.  Jonah
had  not  dared  to  speak  before  verse  4,
now  he  answers  and  defends  his  wicked
spirit  and  conduct.  We  see  the  old
spirit  and  pride  with  more  actual  sin
and  provocation.  "I  do  ivell"  &c.  A
fearful  outburst !  Resist  passion  at  the
first  rising,  else  who  knows  whither  it
may  transport  us]  "Passions,"  saith
Fuller,  "  like  heavy  bodies  down  steep
hills,  once  in  motion,  move  themselves,
and  know  no  ground  but  the  bottom."

"  We  oft  by  lightning-  read  in  darkest  nights ;
And  by  your  passions  I  read  all  your  natures,
Tho'  you  at  other  times  can  keep  them  dark."

[John  Crowne.]


392  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.  [chap,  it


HOMILETIGS.
God's  Care  for  Children. — Verse  11.

The  mention  of  children  and  cattle  in  the  description  of  the  city  indicates  more
than  its  greatness,  proves  the  tender  mercy  of  God,  and  affords  no  ground  for  the
defence  of  his  innocent  shrub.  God  estimates  cities,  not  according  to  wealth  and
splendour,  but  the  character  of  its  population.  "  Here,"  says  one,  "  was  a  reason
for  sparing  the  city,  and  for  bringing  the  adults  to  repentance  in  order  to
save  it."

I.  Children  have  a  distinct  rank  assigned  to  them.  They  are  distinguished
from  matter,  and  raised  higher  than  brutes.  Hence  they  must  not  be  looked  upon
as  cumber  or  hindrance  to  the  welfare  of  humanity.  Many  regard  them  in  the
mass,  and  give  them  no  distinct  rank  in  the  scale  of  being.  Christianity  differs
in  sublime  distinction  from  ancient  Polytheism  and  modern  materialism  in  its
loving  aspect  towards  little  children — teaches  that  they  are  not  to  be  regarded  as
incipient  organisms  in  human  form,  but  as  immortal  beings,  and  of  celestial  beauty.
"  For  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  II.  Children  have  special  claims  upon
us.  Men  talk  of  them  as  "  little  children,"  so  many  incarnate  trifles  or  common-
places of  humanity.  Such  treatment  is  neither  justified  by  religion  nor  reason.
Life  in  its  lowest  forms  involves  mystery  ;  but  if  we  recognize  infants  as  manifesting
a  Divine  purpose,  and  taking  a  definite  rank  in  creation,  we  shall  feel  that  certain
reverence  is  due  to  them.  Their  innocency  is  pleasing,  and  their  influence  powerful.
Upon  their  character  and  training  depend  the  happiness  of  society  and  the  destiny
of  nations.  Few  parents  are  base  enough  to  injure  their  children,  but  parental
neglect  and  sinful  apathy  prevail  in  every  home.  Children's  claims  are  forgotten
or  ignored,  and  we  are  still  under  the  moral  implication  of  Christ — "  Take  heed
that  ye  despise  not  one  of  these  little  ones."  III.  God's  mercy  to  children  is  an
example  to  us.  Priority  and  prominence  are  given  to  the  children,  and  God  appeals
strongly  to  Jonah's  human  sympathy.  That  heart  must  be  desperately  hard  that
cannot  feel  for  the  injury  and  death  of  infants.  Herod's  outrage  brands  him  with
infamy  in  every  age.  But  God  does  not  play  merely  upon  Jonah's  feelings.  He
shows  his  regard  for  children,  and  reveals  his  true  character  as  a  gracious  God.
Christ  displayed  Divine  love  by  taking  them  into  his  arms  and  blessing  them.
God's  providence  over  children  should  urge  us  to  care  for  them.  His  pity  for
them  in  pain  and  danger  should  be  a  model  for  parental  conduct,  and  an
encouragement  to  cultivate  true  disposition  of  heart.  Christ  recommended  true
virtues;  set  a  child  in  the  midst  of  his  disciples,  and  taught  that  Christian  life  was
a  life  of  childhood.  "  Except  ye  be  converted,  and  become  as  little  children,  ye
shall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven."

God's  Care  for  Oxen. —  Verse  11.

In  addition  to  children  there  were  also  "  much  cattle,"  of  infinitely  more  value
than  Jonah's  gourd,  and  perfectly  innocent  of  the  crimes  of  which  the  Ninevites
were  guilty.

I.  Here  we  have  an  argument  for  mercy  to  beasts.  The  city  must  be  spared
for  the  sake  of  the  cattle  even.  Little  children  and  dumb  creatures  intercede  for
man  and  must  be  pitied.  "  Doth  God  take  care  for  oxen  1 "  Yes,  to  teach  us  to  be
merciful  to  them  (1  Cor.  ix.  9  :  Deut.  xxv.  4).  How  unlike  God  are  those  whc
neglect  them  and  inflict  needless  sufferings  upon  them.  Men  whom  God  preserves
daily  from  the  punishment  of  sin  wreak  their  rage  upon  their  beasts,  starve  and
torture  them  for  selfish  ends,  or  kill  them  in  sport  and  cruelty.  "  A  righteous  man
regardeth  the  life  of  his  beast ;  but  the  tender  mercies  of  the  wicked  are  cruel."
II.  Here  we  have  an  argument  for  mercy  to  men.  God's  care  for  cattle  suggests
his  greater  mercy  to  men.     It  is  a  perversion  of  sympathy  when  persons  bestow


CHAP.  IV.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.


393


upon  brutes  an  extravagance  of  kindness  which  they  refuse  to  children  and  men.
Stables  and  kennels  are  often  more  comfortable  than  cottages ;  animals  are  petted
while  the  poor  starve.  "  God  would  have  us  love  and  pity  not  merely  our  own
gourds,  but  all  his  creatures — men,  women,  children,  and  even  cattle — according
to  their  respective  worth  in  his  sight."  The  selfish  man  shrinks  up  in  envy  and
cold  indifference,  but  "  blessed  are  the  merciful,  for  they  shall  obtain  mercy."

HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Here  we  have  a  picture  of  the  weak
protecting  the  strong,  infants  shielding
the  parents.  Ungodly  families  are  often
spared  for  the  sake  of  the  little  ones  in
them.  Justice  calls  for  the  punishment
of  the  wicked,  but  mercy  delays  lest
the  innocent  should  suffer  with  the
guilty.

Many  great  and  fruitful  truths  lie
couchant  here.  It  is  manifest,  for  ex-
ample, that  infants  are  regarded  by  God
as  personally  innocent.  They  inherit
many  of  the  consequences,  but  do  not
share  the  guilt  of  Adam's  sin.  God  here
seems  to  say  :  "  What  have  they  done  1 "
They  have  had  no  part  in  the  guilt  of
the  city.  Would  you  bring  a  storm  of
judgment  upon  them  ?  It  is  manifest,
also,  that  unconscious  beings  may  have,
really  have,  a  great  moral  power  and
place  in  the  universe.  When  men  or
women  all  through  the  city  were  "  cry-
ing mightily  to  God,"  there  was  a  cry
mightier,  although  inarticulate,  going  up
from  six-score  thousand  unconscious
suppliants.  The  infants  of  Nineveh
did  what  all  her  armed  men  could  not
do — they  helped  to  turn  away  the  wrath
of  God,  and  to  draw  down  his  mercy.
This  reference  to  the  infants  tells  us
that  life  is  good.  It  is  implied  that  it
is  in  itself  a  blessing — a  thing  to  be  de-
sired to  make  one  wise.  The  Prophet
had  said,  "  It  is  better  for  me  to  die
than  to  live."  In  an  indirect  manner
God  says,  "It  is  better  to  live  than  to
die,"  better  even  for  infants  to  live,
although  they  might  die  without  tast-
ing the  bitterness  of  death.     Better  to


live,  even  in  a  place  like  Nineveh,  where
the  wickedness  is  only  arrested  for  a
little,  and  not  extinguished,  than  not  to
live  at  all  [Raleigh],

The  whole  chapter  is  a  wonderful  ex-
hibition of  Divine  mercy.  I.  Mercy  is
displayed.  Displayed  to  Jew  and
Gentile,  young  and  old.  Mercy  to-
wards a  guilty  city,  and  an  ungrate-
ful servant.      II.  Mercy  is  vindicated.

1.  Against    the    ignorance    of    man.

2.  Against  the  selfishness  of  man.  We
substitute  justice  for  love.  It  is  true
that  God  hates  sin  •  but  he  is  merciful,
and  prefers  pity  to  punishment.  As  we
do  not  see  the  world  in  the  blackness  of
a  thunder-storm,  so  we  do  not  know
God  in  the  outpouring  of  his  wrath.
"Fear  never  made  the  childish  nature
good.  March  winds  never  made  the
buds  blossom — only  April  showers ;  it  is
not  the  father's  severity,  but  the  mother's
love,  that  makes  the  child  repent."

The  mercy  of  God  concerns  us  in-
finitely. We  are  personally  interested
in  this  argument  and  in  this  demonstra-
tion, as  much  as  Jonah,  as  much  as  the
Ninevites.  Is  there  anything  else  in
which  we  have  half  the  interest  that  we
all  have  in  this?  This  is  the  very
foundation  of  our  hope ;  it  is  the
bright  charter  of  our  salvation.  We
enter  only  by  this  door.  Without  the
mercy  of  God  we  are  clean  gone  for
ever.  By  this  mercy  we  are  spared.
By  this  mercy,  in  its  forms  of  forbear-
ance, and  forgiveness,  and  renewal,  we
hope  one  day  to  reach  complete  redemp-
tion [Raleigh],


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  IV.

Ver.   1.     Displeased.     Anger  begins  guard   against   your   temper.      It   will

with  folly  and   ends  with   repentance  frustrate  all  your  designs  if  you  listen

[Maunder].      Anger  and  haste   hinder  to  it.     It  will  make  you  lose  the  most

good  counsel  [Fielding].     Be  on  your  important  opportunities,  and  will  inspire


394


H0MILET1G  COMMENTARY:  JONAH.


[chap.  IV.


you  with  the  inclinations  and  aversions
of  a  child,  to  the  prejudice  of  your
greatest  interests  [Fenelon],

Ver.  2,  3.  Life.  Live  virtuously,
my  lord,  and  you  cannot  die  too  soon,
nor  live  too  long  [Lady  Rachel  Russet].

"  So  weak  is  man,
So  ignorant  and  blind,  that  did  not  God
Sometimes  withhold  in  mercy  what  we  ask
"We  should  be  ruined  at  our  own  request."

[JT.  More.]

Ver.  4,  5.  Dost  thou  well  ?  It  would
check  our  angry  complainings  under  the
afflictive  hand  of  God,  and  turn  them
into  praises  for  the  very  moderate
measure  of  trial  with  which  he  visits
us,  to  review  our  own  vileness  and  desert
of  wrath,  and  the  great  grace  shown  to-
wards us  (Ezra  ix.  13 ;  Ps.  ciii.  10 ;  Job
xi.  6)  [Sibthorp].  The  Divine  Being
does  not  always  like  to  use  extreme
penalties,  hut  the  more  gentle,  that  men
may  not  only  be  disciplined  by  pain,
but  also  by  moral  conviction.  Hence
God  frequently  comes  to  the  human
soul  in  the  language  of  this  verse,  and
says,  "Dost  thou  well  to  be  angry?"
And  this  quiet  method  of  correction  is
frequently  effective,  awaking  in  the  soul
thoughts  that  end  in  a  return  to  reason
and  purity  [Exelt],

Ver.  7 — 9.  The  Lord's  servants  are
under  a  continual  course  of  instruction.
Every  circumstance  of  every  day  and
hour  has  its  proper  lesson  for  them,
which  it  is  their  duty,  wisdom,  and
privilege  to  learn.  The  end  of  their
instruction  is  entire  sanctification  and
meetness  for  glory  through  conformity
to  the  image  of  God.  When  they  are
refractory,  as  Jonah  now  was,  God  takes
commonly  some  special  method  to  recall
them  to  duty,  and  pursue  his  object  of
their  growth  in  grace  [8ibthorp\.

Ver.  9 — 1 1 .  The  teachings  of  Nature,
which  unbelievers  vaunt  as  all-sufficient,
have  never  led  mankind  to   a   correct


knowledge  of  God,  nor  produced  holy
feeling ;  and  they  never  can.  But  they
may  prepare  for  the  Word,  and  be  used
to  convey  it,  illustrate  it,  and  fix  it  in
the  memory.  God  schooling  Jonah  in
patient,  tender  love,  and  through  him
preparing  instruction  for  Israel  and  for
us,  uses  Nature  to  prepare  the  way  for
the  lessons  of  the  Word.  As  when  he
sent  Nathan  to  David  with  a  parable,  to
make  David  condemn  himself  out  of  his
own  mouth,  so  to  Jonah  he  sends  the
gourd  and  the  worm,  the  wind  and  the
sunshine,  to  prepare  the  way  for  making
his  better  feelings  condemn  his  worse.
He  will  make  his  pity  for  the  plant  ex-
plain God's  pity  for  Nineveh,  and  con-
demn Jonah's  want  of  pity  for  that
multitude  of  souls  [Mitchel].

This  wonderful  book  of  Jonah  has
given  us  a  picture  of  the  human  heart,
not  in  its  lowest  degradation,  but  taught
by  revelation,  restrained  by  conscience,
influenced  more  or  less  by  piety,  but
stripped  of  its  disguises  and  company
dress.  God  takes  us  behind  the  scenes
to  show  us  how  in  Nature  his  hand  and
purpose  are  working  by  storm  and  sun-
shine, fish  and  worm,  and  so  puts  a
window  for  us  in  the  heart  of  man.
Jonah  speaks  out  to  God,  and  acts  out
before  us,  and  writes  down  for  us  to
read,  without  suppression,  palliation,  or
extenuation,  the  sinful  thoughts  which
other  men  have,  but  do  not  make  known.
We  have  at  once  a  picture  of  God's
character,  and  a  mirror  in  which  to  be-
hold our  own  [Ibid].  In  the  book  of
Jonah  we  have  thus  a  panorama  of
historical  facts,  pregnant  with  the  most
important  instruction.  Its  lessons  con-
stitute the  staple  of  the  teaching  of  the
later  prophets,  and  contain  the  leading
thoughts  which  were  developed  in  their
writings,  imbedded  in  the  mind  of
Israel,  and  expounded  by  Christ  and
his  apostles.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY


ON


MICAH.


INTRODUCTION.

The  Prophet.  Micah  is  an  abbreviated  form  of  Micaiah,  mentioned  in  Jer.
xxvi.  18.  He  was  a  native  of  Moresheth-Gath,  prophesied  in  Judaea,  and  must  be
distinguished  from  Micaiah,  son  of  Imlah,  in  1  Kings  xxii.  8.  Of  his  life  we
know  nothing  but  what  may  be  gathered  from  his  book.  The  Prophet  himself
seems  to  allude  to  his  name  (ch.  vii.  18) ;  tradition  has  many  stories  about  him,
but  we  can  only  affirm  that  he  belongs  to  the  critical  time  in  the  latter  half  of  the
8th  century  b.  o.

The  Period  in  which  Micah  lived  may  be  gathered  from  the  superscription.
The  reigns  of  Jotham,  Ahaz,  and  Hezekiah  are  given,  i.  e.  727 — 698  B.  0.  "  At
that  time  the  Assyrian  kingdom,  just  prior  to  its  fall,  recovered  its  power,  under
Salmanassar,  and  with  irresistible  might  carried  the  profound  commotions  of  God's
judgments,  predicted  by  Amos  (chs.  i.  and  ii.),  over  the  peoples  of  Western  Asia  and
even  to  Africa"  [Lange].  "The  Prophet's  lively  rebukes,  together  with  the
corresponding  picture  of  Isaiah  and  other  writers,  give  a  description  of  the  sins  of
the  age.  He  lingers  in  his  prophecy  among  the  towns  of  the  maritime  plain  (the
Shephelah),  where  his  birth-place  lay.  Among  the  few  places  of  that  neighbour-
hood, which  he  selects  for  warning  and  for  example  of  the  universal  captivity,  is
his  native  village,  '  the  home  he  loved.'  But  the  chief  scene  of  his  ministry  was
Jerusalem.  He  names  it  in  the  beginning  of  his  prophecy  as  the  place  where  the
idolatries,  and  with  the  idolatries  all  the  other  sins  of  Judah,  were  concentrated.
The  two  capitals,  Samaria  and  Jerusalem,  were  the  chief  objects  of  the  Word  of
God  to  him,  because  the  corruption  of  each  kingdom  streamed  forth  from  them.
The  sins  which  he  rebukes  are  chiefly  those  of  the  capital.  Extreme  oppression,
violence  among  the  rich,  bribing  among  judges,  priests,  prophets ;  building  up  the
capital  even  by  cost  of  life,  or  actual  bloodshed ;  spoliation,  expulsion  of  the
powerless  women  and  children  from  their  homes;  covetousness,  cheating  in
dealings,  pride.  These,  of  course,  may  be  manifoldly  repeated  in  lesser  places  of
resort  and  of  judgment.  But  it  is  Zion  and  Jerusalem  which  are  so  built  up  with
blood,  and  must  be  ploughed  as  a  field.  Especially  they  are  the  heads  and  princes
of  the  people  whom  he  upbraids  for  the  perversion  of  justice,  and  for  oppression.
Even  the  good  kings  of  Judah  seem  to  have  been  powerless  to  restrain  the  general
oppression"  \Pwey\.


396  INTRODUCTION.


The  Book.  Isaiah  sweeps  over  all  history,  and  sheds  the  light  of  prophecy-
over  all  nations ;  but  Micah  fixes  on  his  own  people,  and  prophesies  against  Israel
(Samaria)  and  against  Judah  (Jerusalem).  God  will  temper  judgment  with
mercy.  He  will  chasten  Zion,  but  the  Eedeemer  will  come  to  Zion  as  a  man
"  from  Bethlehem  of  Judah,"  and  as  a  Mighty  Conqueror  to  subdue  his  enemies,
and  "  Jerusalem  will  be  the  Mother  Church  of  Christendom."  The  temple  will  be
destroyed,  but  a  nobler  building  shall  rise  out  of  its  ruins,  and  the  law  shall  be
fulfilled  in  the  gospel.  Its  analysis.  It  is  divided  into  three  parts,  all  beginning
with  Hear  ye.  (1st)  Chs.  i.  and  ii.  (2nd)  Chs.  iii.,  iv.,  v.  (3rd)  Chs.  vi.,  vii.  "  In
the  first  the  threatening  of  judgment  predominates  j  in  the  second  the  announce-
ment of  the  Messianic  salvation ;  in  the  third  there  follows  the  paramesis  or
admonition  to  repentance  and  humiliation  under  the  chastening  hand  of  the  Lord,
in  order  to  participate  in  the  promised  salvation.  As  this  admonition  rests  upon
the  threat  of  judgment  and  promise  of  salvation  in  the  two  previous  addresses,  so
does  the  allusion  to  the  judgment  contained  in  the  words,  "  Then  will  they  cry  to
Jehovah,"  &c.  (ch.  iii.  4),  presuppose  the  announcement  in  chap.  i.  of  the  judgment
about  to  burst  upon  the  land,  without  which  it  would  be  perfectly  unintelligible.
Consequently  there  can  be  no  doubt  whatever  that  Micah  has  simply  concentrated
the  quintessence  of  his  oral  discourses  into  the  addresses  contained  in  his  book.
This  quintessence,  moreover,  shows  clearly  enough  that  our  Prophet  was  not  at  all
behind  his  contemporary  Isaiah,  either  in  the  clearness  and  distinctness  of  his
Messianic  announcements,  or  in  the  power  and  energy  with  which  he  combated  the
sins  and  vices  of  the  nation"  [Keil].  Its  style.  "He  stands  next  to  Isaiah  in
force  and  freshness,  continuity  of  expression,  and  in  the  plastic  choice  of  words.
In  the  arrangement  of  his  thoughts,  however,  abrupt  and  fond  of  sharp  contrasts,
he  reminds  us  more  of  his  older  contemporary,  Hosea.  The  beautiful  plan  of  his
discourse  is  admirable"  [Lange].  The  diction  is  rigorous  and  clear,  varied  in  rich
figures,  and  derived  from  pastoral  and  rural  life.  The  changes  are  sudden,
frequently  hidden  by  our  version,  for  the  simple  connective  (vav)  is  often  rendered
by  some  logical  term  as  "therefore"  (i.  6),  "then"  (iii.  7),  "but"  (iv.  1),  &c.
Intercourse  with  northern  nations  had  not  debased  his  language.  "  An  undertone
of  deep  earnestness  pervades  the  book  ;  everywhere  are  discerned  the  workings  of
an  intensely  honourable  and  patriotic  soul.  Micah  is  successful  in  the  use  of  the
dialogue,  and  his  prophecies  are  penetrated  by  the  purest  spirit  of  morality  and
piety."  "  His  prophecy  sank  so  deep,  that  above  a  century  afterwards,  just  when
it  was  about  to  have  its  fulfilment,  it  was  the  prophecy  which  was  remembered.
But  the  sufferings  of  time  disappeared  in  the  light  of  eternal  truth.  Above  seven
centuries  rolled  by,  and  Micah  reappears  as  the  herald,  not  of  sorrow,  but  of
salvation.  Wise  men  from  afar,  in  the  nobility  of  their  simple  belief,  asked,
1  Where  is  he  that  is  born  King  of  the  Jews  ? '  The  answer  was  given  unhesitatingly,
as  a  well-known  truth  of  God,  in  the  words  of  Micah.  When  he  was  born,  he
was  pointed  out  as  the  object  of  worship  to  the  first  converts  from  the  heathen  on
the  authority  of  God,  through  Micah M  [Pusey],


chap.  I.J  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  MICAH.  397


CHAPTEK  I.

Critical  Notes.  2.  Hear]  Lit.  Hear,  ye  peoples  all  of  them.  "Some  140  or  150  years  had
flowed  by  since  Micaiah,  son  of  Imlah,  had  closed  his  prophecy  in  these  words.  Now  they  burst
out  anew.  From  age  to  age  the  Word  of  God  holds  its  course,  ever  receiving  new  fulfilments,  never
dying  out,  until  ttie  end  shall  come"  [Pusey\  All  therein]  Heb.  the  fulness  thereof  (Ps.  xxiv.  1).
Similar  appeals  in  Isa.  i.  2,  and  Deut.  xxxii.  1.  Witness]  in  a  hostile  sense,  in  judgment,  as  1  Sam.
xii.  5:  Mai.  iii.  5.  Temple]  i.e.  from  heaven  where  he  is  enthroned  (Ps.  xi.  4),  and  from  whence
wrath  is  revealed  (Rom.  i.  18).  3.  Tread  upon  the  proud  and  idolatrous  (high  places)  people,  as
Ruler  over  all  the  earth.  4.]  Imagery  from  storms  and  earthquakes,  to  describe  the  terrors  of  God's
judgments  (Ps.  xviii.  8).  The  similes,  "like  wax"  (as  in  Ps.  lxviii.  3),  and  "like  water,"  are
intended  to  express  the  complete  dissolution  of  mountains  and  valleys.  "  The  actual  facts  answering
to  this  description  are  the  destructive  influences  exerted  upon  nature  by  great  national  judgments"
[Keil].  5.  Trans.]  as  the  cause  of  this  judgment.  Samaria  and  Jerusalem,  the  capitals  of  Israel
and  Judah,  are  the  centres  and  source  of  corruption  which  has  filled  the  kingdoms.  6.  Heap]
Samaria,  judged  first,  will  be  destroyed — not  a  trace  of  the  city  will  be  left — and  become  like  a
heap  of  stones  gathered  from  the  field.  Pour]  Dash  down  the  stones  of  the  city  into  the  valley
beneath.  "  The  stones  of  the  temples  and  palaces  of  Samaria  have  been  carefully  removed  from  the
rich  soil,  thrown  together  in  heaps,  built  up  in  the  rude  walls  of  terraces,  and  rolled  down  into  the
valley  below  "  [Porter's  Handbook].  7.]  Her  treasures  were  gathered  from  the  hire  of  a  harlot,
and  to  the  hire  of  a  harlot  must  they  return.  Literal  prostitution  was  practised  in  Babylon  and
Syria,  and  the  hire  was  dedicated  to  the  support  of  the  priesthood,  and  idolatrous  worship.  8.]  The
Prophet  first  laments  himself,  that  he  may  touch  others.  Stripped]  i.  e.  of  shoes  or  sandals.
Naked]  i.e.  without  upper  garment  (I  Sam.  xix.  24).  This  representation  accords  with  Isa.  xx.  2,
and  symbolizes  what  would  befall  the  people.  Dragons]  Jackals  or  wolves  (Job  xxx.  29),  whose
howlings  are  at  night  most  lamentable.  Ostrich]  Remarkable  for  its  peculiar  shrieks  in  pain.
9.  Wounds]  Lit.  the  strokes  inflicted  upon  her.  Public  calamities  are  often  compared  to  diseases
(Isa.  i.  5).  Gate]  "Because  in  it,  par  excellence,  the  people  went  out  and  in."  Even  the  capital
would  not  be  spared.  10.]  The  Prophet  thinks  now  of  the  malicious  joy  of  heathen  neighbours.
Ten  places  are  mentioned  in  verses  10  —  15  to  depict  what  would  happen  in  them.  In  most  cases
the  things  said  of  each  city  are  a  play  upon  the  name  of  that  city,  a  method  of  writing  well  adapted
to  impress  the  memory  [Coioles].  11.  Forth]  To  console  others  (Jer.  vi.  25).  Standing]  i.  e.  the
sustenance  of  the  foe.  12.  Waited  J  for  better  fortune,  but  in  vain  [Calvin].  13.  Bind]  Flee  as
fast  as  possible  from  the  advancing  enemy.  Begin]  The  first  to  introduce  false  gods.  14.  Thou]
Israel  would  renounce  all  claim  to  Mor.  and  give  it  up  to  the  foe ;  and  Ach.  would  answer  to  its
name,  and  disappoint  Israel's  hopes.  15.  Heir]  A  new  possessor,  viz.,  the  Assyrian  shall  occupy
the  place,  as  they  expelled  former  inhabitants,  and  Israel's  glory  (Adullam)  shall  decay.  16.  Bald]
A  token  of  deep  mourning  (Job  i.  20  :  Isa.  xv.  2  :  Jer.  xvi.  6).  Children]  wept  for,  as  the  loss  of
a  mother.  Eagle]  Not  the  common  eagle,  but  the  bearded  or  carrion  vulture.  Judgments  in
general  are  described,  not  particular  definite  punishments,  without  precise  methods  of  accomplish-
ment, so  that  the  predictions  embrace  all  the  judgments  against  Judah  which  took  place  from  the
Assyrian  invasion  until  the  Roman  catastrophe  [Keif].

HOMILETICS.
The  Prophetic  Message. —  Verses  1,  2.

■  The  Prophet's  first  address  is  throughout  of  a  threatening  and  punitive
character  ;  it  is  not  till  quite  the  close,  that  the  sun  of  Divine  grace  breaks  brightly
through  the  thunder-clouds  of  judgment"  [Keil].  In  these  words  we  have  an  appeal
to  all  nations  to  observe  the  message  of  the  Prophet.

I.  A  message  from  God.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord."  All  prophets  have  the
same  truth  to  assert.  Their  message  is  Divine  and  not  from  "  the  will  of  man."
It  declares  the  purpose,  reveals  the  mercy  and  the  judgment  of  God.  It  is  seen  in
prophetic  vision,  felt  and  known  to  be  certain  and  true.  It  bears  witness  to  God
in  the  hearts  of  men  and  in  the  nations  of  the  earth.  II.  A  message  from  God
through  man.  "  That  came  to  Micah."  The  Prophet  and  no  other  man  of  his
day  was  specially  chosen  to  declare  the  word  of  the  Lord.  He  was  qualified  by
vision  and  spiritual  intercourse  with  God.     There  is  a  human  as  well  as  a  Divine


398  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  MIC  AH.  [chap.  *•


element  in  the  spoken  or  written  word.  God  acts  not  on,  but  in  and  through,  man.
Vital  energy  was  not  lost  in  a  passive  state,  and  growth  reduced  to  mere  existence.
The  prophets  spoke  not  by  mechanical  impulse  or  dictation.  Their  natural  and
spiritual  gifts  were  not  set  aside.  They  had  sympathy  with  truth  and  men.  Their
intellect  and  heart  were  fixed  on  the  same  pursuit,  and  God's  word  found  them  in
a  waiting  position.  III.  A  message  from  God  through  man  for  all  people.  For
the  people  of  the  present  and  the  future  generations.  1.  The  present.  Samaria
and  Jerusalem  were  immediately  concerned,  the  chief  cities  of  the  two  kingdoms.
Judgment  first  begins  at  the  house  of  God.  Jerusalem,  God's  people,  must  not  be
spared.  But  other  people  are  often  prominent  in  sin  and  punishment.  Samaria
is  put  first  as  chief  in  provocation.  God  deals  in  equity  with  men  and  chastises
according  to  desert.  Some  are  threatened  and  comforted  ;  others  judged  without
mercy.  We  expect  equity  in  our  intercourse  with  each  other.  Shall  not  the  Judge
of  the  earth  do  right,  mete  justice  to  each  individually  and  to  all  men  in  every-
thing %  At  last  all  ranks  will  be  adjusted,  and  to  every  one  will  be  given  his  due.
2.  The  future.  u  Hear,  all  ye  people."  God  warns  the  future  through  the  present
generations.  Angels  and  men,  heaven  and  earth,  are  cited  to  witness  the  solemn
scene.  The  whole  creation  stands  in  court,  to  reprove  the  sins  of  men,  and  testify
to  the  justice  of  Divine  pleading.  The  guilty  cannot  escape.  The  "  holy  temple"
will  not  protect  the  hypocrite,  as  tutelar  deities  were  thought  to  protect  the  heathen.
The  majesty  of  God  from  heaven  will  overawe  and  silence  the  sinner.  God  will
purge  his  floor,  and  discern  between  his  nominal  and  real  people.  "  He  shall  call
to  the  heavens  from  above,  and  to  the  earth,  that  he  may  judge  his  people."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  2.     The  Word.     Micaiah  son  of  of  his  conduct.     He  warns  before  the

lmlah  closed  his  prophecy  with  these  stroke.     Seek  to  be  saved,  and  rest  not

words  (1  Kings  xxii.  28).     The  minis-  in  holy  places  and  carnal  security,

trations  of  one  prophet  are  a  continua-  Hearken,   O  earth.      1.  The  trial  of

tion  of  his  predecessors.     They  are  not  the  Great  Judge.      2.  The  parties   ac-

parts   or   parcels,   but   connected    with  cused.      3.    The   witnesses    called.      4.

Divine  revelation  in  every  age,  and  fill  The  seat  of  the  Judge — The  Judgment

up  one  grand  design.     Hence  learn,  1.  of   the  visible    Church.     It  is  Divine,

The  benevolence  of  the  Word.    2.  The  public,  searching,  solemn,  and  righteous.

adaptation  of  the   Word.     3.  ThQ  per-  Holy  temple.     The  elevation,  suprem-

petuity  of  the  Word.  acy,    and  invisibility   of  God's   throne

Hear,  all  people.     The  judgment  of  [Spurgeon].     "  The  Lord  is  in  his  holy

Israel        1.  A   warning   to   all  people,  temple,  the  Lord's  throne  is  in  heaven :

2.   A  type  of  final  judgment.     God  by  his   eyes   behold,  his   eyelids   try,  the

the  fulfilment  of  this  word  is  a  "  wit-  children  of  men."
ness  "  to  the  guilt  of  sin  and  the  equity

HOMILETICS.
The  Awful  Judgment. —  Verses  3 — 7.

To  quicken  attention  to  his  message,  the  Prophet  declares  God's  purpose  to
humble  the  most  eminent  and  manifest  his  justice  to  all.

I.  The  seat  of  judgment.  "The  Lord  cometh  forth  out  of  his  place."  If  the
place  means  either  the  temple  or  heaven  itself,  the  procedure  is  not  ordinary.  God
quits  the  temple,  and  turns  the  mercy-seat  into  a  throne  of  judgment.  He  has  not
retired  from  the  government  of  the  world,  but  rends  the  heavens  and  comes  down
in  awful  justice  to  sinful  nations.  His  daily  providence  affords  no  rule  to  guide
us  when  he  "comes  out  of  his  place."  He  manifests  himself  in  surprising
wrath  (Isa.  xxvi.  21),  and  performs  "terrible  things  which  we  looked  not  for."
II.  The  circumstances  of  judgment.     "  The  mountains  shall  be  molten  under


chap.  I.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MICAH.  399


him,"  &c.     This  may  he  figurative  language,  hut  it  conveys  a  real  truth.     Nature
tremhles,  and  its  stability  dissolves  at  God's  presence.     The  hills  melt  like  wax
before  the  fire,  the  mountains  pour  down  like  floods  into  the  valley.    The  earth  in
its  lowest  depths  feels  the  indignation  of  a  righteous  God.     Nature  often  realizes
the  destructive  power  of  Divine  judgments.     History  proves  that  all  her  forces  are
yoked  to  accomplish  God's  purposes.     The  hardest  will  melt,  the  strongest  cannot
resist ;  u  for,  behold,  the  Lord  will  come  with  fire,  to  render  his  anger  with  fury,
and  his  rebuke  with  names  of  fire."     III.  The  cause  of  judgment.     "  For  the
transgressions  of  Jacob,  is  all  this."     Jerusalem,  the  centre  of  holiness,  and  the
residence  of  Jehovah,  was  the  seat  of  idols,  and  the  fountain  of  uncleanness  (2  Chron.
xxviii.  24).    The  unity,  the  claims,  and  the  being  of  God  were  denied  in  the  worship
of  Baal  (Ezek.  xvi.  31  :  2  Chron.  xxviii.  24,  25).    Samaria,  the  rival  capital,  was  the
seat  of  injustice,  and  the  corrupter  of  the  country.     The  sins  of  these  places  were
obstinate  and  aggravating.     Sin  is  the  cause  of  all  ruin,  material   and   moral.
Multiplied  sins  (transgressions)  will  bring  severe  strokes.     External  rites  and  out-
ward profession  will  not  secure  "  the  house  of  Israel."     Wealth  and  population
cannot  defend   Samaria.       All  have  provoked  God  to  anger,   and  must  feel  his
severity.     Those  who  take  no  warning  and  feel  no  shame,  ought  to  learn  that
shame  and  warning  are  a  desert  and  a  presage  to  ruin.     "  They  are  all  of  them
unto  me  as  Sodom,  and  the  inhabitants  thereof  as  Gomorrah."    IV.  The  effects  of
judgment.     "  The  order  of  the  sin  was  the  order  of  the  punishment,"  says  one.
1.  High  places  would  be  overturned.     God  will  "  tread  upon  the  high  places  of  the
earth."     Men  of  eminence,  scenes  of  idolatry,  and  military  fortifications  ;  every-
thing set  in  opposition  to  him  would  be  trampled  down  and  levelled  in  the  dust.
The  lofty  and  the  proud,  the  mighty  and  the  secure,  will  be  cast  down.     Those
who  trust  in  the  height  of  the  mountain  or  in  the  fertility  of  the  valley,  the  muni-
tions of  rocks  or  the  abundance  of  wealth,  will  be  disappointed.     There  is  no
security  against  Divine  judgment  but  in   Christ  Jesus.     2.    Idolatry  would  be
demolished.    The  idols  themselves  would  be  stripped  by  the  foe  and  destroyed.    All
graven  images  would  be  beaten  to  pieces.      Gross  superstitions  and  refined  idolatry
are  spiritual  adultery,  and  provoke  God  to  jealousy.     The  hire  and  support  of
idolatry  would  be  taken  away.   Micah  adopts  the  language  of  Hosea  (Hosea  ii.  5 —
S ;  ix.  1 ;  x.  6).     The  wealth  or  rewards  received  for  worshipping  idols,  the  gifts
and  votive  offerings  laid  upon  the  altars,  would  enrich  another  nation.     They  had
been  gathered  as  the  hire  of  a  harlot,  "and  they  shall  return  to  the  hire  of  a
harlot."     Eiches  gained  without  God  will  be  scattered  away.     Cursed  in  theii
origin,  cursed  in  their  end.    "  111  got,  ill  spent."    "  Whatever  material  prosperity  is
gained  by  ignoring  or  dethroning  God  is  the  hire,  the  price  of  the  soul,  and  shall
be  burned  out  with  fire."     Men  shall  be  put  to  shame  that  abuse  their  gifts,  and
their  sinful  gain  shall  turn  to  everlasting  loss.      3.   The  city  would  be  destroyed.
Samaria,  the  crown  of  pride  (Isa.  xxviii.  1),  was  to  be  reduced  to  its  original  mean-
ness, the  site  of  vine-plantings.      Its  gorgeous  palaces  and  noble  temples  would  be
destroyed.     The  stones  would  be  rolled  down  the  hills,  and  gathered  into  heaps  as
monuments  of  ruin.     The  foundations  would  be  laid  bare,  and  not  one  stone  left
upon  another.     The  destruction  would  be  complete  ;  fragments  of  human  habita-
tions, emblems  of  man's  labour  and  luxury,  should  lie  amid  the  beauty  and  fertility
of  nature.     Traces  of  sin  and  punishment  are  written  in  commercial  ruin,  national
disgrace,  and  natural  scenery.     Whatever  we  build  without  God,  church  systems
or  family  fortunes,  and  cement  by  strongest  sins,  will  be  hurled  down  with  the
storm  ;  great  will  be  their  fall  and  eternal  their  ruins.     "  See  ye  not  all  these
things  1  verily  I  say  unto  you,  there  shall  not  be  left  here  one  stone  upon  another
that  shall  not  be  thrown  down."

The  Incurable  Wound. —  Verses  8,  9.
The  strokes  inflicted  by  God  are  most  severe.    The  wound  is  incurable.    Morally


400  HOMILUTIC  COMMENTARY:  MIC  AH.  [chap,  i,


and  politically,  individually  and  generally,  the  case   is   desperate.     Hence  tne
Prophet  is  moved  to  bitter  sorrow.

I.  The  moral  disease  of  men  is  incurable.  Obstinacy  in  sin  will  bring  Divine
judgments,  and  no  hand  can  cure  the  wounds  that  God  inflicts  but  his  own.  1.  It
is  a  deadly  disease.  "  Her  wound  is  incurable,"  lit.  she  is  grievously  sick  of  her
wounds.  The  centre,  the  vital  parts  of  the  kingdom,  are  tainted,  the  capital  is  cor-
rupted. 2.  It  is  a  universal  disease.  The  calamity  begins  with  Samaria  and
comes  to  Jerusalem,  the  seat  of  justice  and  of  religion.  3.  It  is  a  hopeless  disease.
The  Prophet  saw  no  remedy  in  the  present  state  of  things.  This  is  a  sad  picture
of  the  condition  of  the  sinner.  He  is  not  simply  in  distress,  but  morally  diseased
and  morally  incurable.  "There  are  anodynes  that  may  deaden  their  pains,  and
death  will  relieve  them  of  their  torture,"  says  a  writer ;  "  but  a  morally  incurable
soul  is  destined  to  pass  into  anguish,  intense  and  more  intense  as  existence  runs  on,
and  peradventure  without  end."  "  Woe  is  me  for  my  hurt!  my  wound  is  grievous/'
II.  This  morally  incurable  wound  should  create  intense  sorrow.  The
Prophet  vents  his  grief  in  all  ways  of  expressing  grief.  He  goes  stripped,  "  half-
naked,"  as  we  say,  without  garments  of  beauty,  despoiled,  plundered  by  an  enemy.
He  wails  like  the  pitiable  cry  of  a  jackal  in  the  night,  or  an  ostrich  bereaved  of  her
young.  He  mourns  with  increasing  feeling  for  the  chastisement,  and  as  an  example
to  his  people.  We  should  lament  not  only  the  sufferings  of  saints  but  the  punish-
ments of  sinners.  Ministers  themselves  must  be  affected  with  the  message  they
deliver  to  others.  To  win  souls  they  must  be  men  of  sympathy.  The  impending
ruin  of  the  ungodly  must  move  them  to  tears  before  God.  "  I  will  grieve  from
the  heart  over  those  who  perish,"  said  one.  "  Who  is  weak,  and  I  am  not  weak  ?
Who  is  offended,  and  I  burn  not  1 "  "  Why  is  my  pain  perpetual  and  my  wound
incurable,  which  refuseth  to  be  healed  1 "

The  Prophet's  Lamentation. —  Verse  10.

The  calamity  of  God's  people  and  the  sorrow  of  the  Prophet  were  such  that
should  be  unknown  to  the  enemy,  lest  he  should  indulge  in  malignant  joy,  and  add
to  affliction.  Hence,  in  language  borrowed  from  2  Sam.  i.  20,  they  are  urged  to
conceal  distress,  suppress  weeping,  lest  the  Philistines  in  Gath  should  hear.

Learn,  I.  That  some  rejoice  in  the  affliction  of  God's  people.  "  Declare  it  not,"
&c.  Many  would  be  glad  to  see  the  Church  in  deepest  misery.  Strange  to  say
that  nearest  neighbours  are  often  bitterest  enemies.  Gath  was  next  to  the  borders,
but  did  not  partake  of  the  spirit  of  Judah.  But  God's  servants  have  great
sympathy  with  his  people,  and  constant  jealousy  for  his  honour.  "  Let  none  that
wait  on  thee  be  ashamed."  II.  That  God's  people  cannot  always  hide  their
affliction.  "  Weep  not,"  it  will  be  of  no  avail.  Sometimes  grief  may  be  smothered
by  concealing  it.  At  other  times  it  is  impossible  to  hide  it.  God  will  publish  it
as  a  discipline  to  his  people  and  a  warning  to  the  world.  Our  afflictions  must  be
noted  by  men,  and  under  them  they  may  be  permitted  to  insult  and  reproach  us.
But  God  will  defend  his  honour  and  his  church.  "  Eemember,  Lord,  the  reproach
of  thy  servants  "  (Cf.  Ps.  lxxxix.  50  :  1  Pet.  ii.  20).  III.  That  God's  people
should  humble  themselves  under  their  affliction.  "  Roll  thyself  in  the  dust."
It  not  to  mourn  in  Gath,  they  may  in  Aphrah.  Silent  before  the  wicked,  they
may  grieve  in  private.  Noisy  lamentation  may  be  imprudent,  but  silent  tears  are
becoming.  When  weeping  would  be  the  joy  and  laughter  of  God's  enemies  it  is
often  acceptable  to  God.  From  the  dust  we  sprang,  to  the  dust  we  must  return,
and  affliction  is  designed  to  remind  us  of  this.  "  O  daughter  of  my  people,  gird
thee  with  sackcloth,  and  wallow  thyself  in  ashes  :  make  thee  mourning,  as  for  an
only  son,  most  bitter  lamentation."

Great  Cities  and  Great  Ruin. — Verses  11 — 16.

Whether  the  following  places  be  figurative  or  real,  they  set  forth  the  greatness
of  the  calamity  which  falls  upon  them  by  their  names,  qualities,  and  condition.


OHAP.  I.]  IWMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  MICAH.  401


I.  Great  cities  are  often  guilty  of  great  sins.  Proximity  and  commercial
intercourse  corrupt.  Popular  sins  spring  from  certain  ranks  and  certain  places.
Each  has  its  special  sin,  and  all  are  involved  in  idolatry  and  its  miseries.  II.  In
the  punishment  of  great  cities  God  deals  to  each  its  due.  Each  city  of  Judah
received  its  due.  Baphir  with  its  beauty  would  be  clothed  with  shame  ;  Zaanan
with  its  flocks  and  population  would  be  the  encampment  of  the  enemy,  and  unable
to  sympathize  with  Beth-ezel,  its  nearest  neighbour.  The  inhabitants  of  Maroth
would  expect  good  and  receive  evil ;  Lachish  would  be  strong  only  to  flee,  "  like
a  brook  that  fails  and  deceives;  her  inheritance  (Mareshah)  inherited;  herself
taking  refuge  in  dens  and  caves  of  the  earth,  yet  even  there  found  and  bereft  of
her  glory."  God  weighs  truly  the  responsibilities  of  each,  and  foremost  in  privi-
leges will  be  foremost  in  punishment  for  the  neglect  of  those  privileges.  III.  No
earthly  power  can  ward  off  the  punishment  of  great  cities.  It  may  be  lawful
to  defend  ourselves  in  danger ;  but  against  God's  fierce  anger  none  can  prevail.
1.  Human  helps  will  be  in  vain.  Maroth  waited  anxiously  for  good,  but  were  dis-
appointed (ver.  12).  Beauty  and  strength,  splendid  positions  and  large  populations,
will  not  succour  those  who  trust  to  them.  Men  who  hope  in  sin  will  find  bitter-
ness in  the  end;  and  this  bitterness  may  only  be  the  beginning  of  a  greater
calamity.  "  Unto  the  gate  of  Jerusalem."  2.  Flight  cannot  save  (ver.  13).
Lachish  had  chariots  and  swift  beasts,  but  where  are  they  now  1  Shut  up  in  the
hand  of  the  enemy,  and  unable  to  escape.  "  The  horse  is  prepared  against  the  day
of  battle,  but  safety  is  of  the  Lord."  3.  Presents  cannot  bribe.  Lachish  would
send  gifts  to  some  town  or  country  in  Gath  to  purchase  aid  against  the  invader,
but  would  be  disappointed.  Wicked  men  employ  any  means  rather  than  seek
God  in  trouble.  They  might  learn  from  those  whose  sins  are  written  on  their
foreheads,  and  whose  name  and  nature  are  a  lie.  "  The  houses  of  Achzib  shall  be
a  lie  to  the  king  of  Israel."  4.  Great  distance  will  not  secure.  Adullam  was  the
remotest  border  to  Assyria  (ver.  15).  Distance,  if  such  there  be,  can  never  exempt
from  God's  judgments.  He  will  find  out  and  chastise  the  guilty  wherever  they  be.
Christ  is  the  only  security,  and  heaven  the  only  abiding  inheritance.  Secure  those
blessings  from  which  no  enemy  can  drive  you.  IV.  Universal  mourning  results
from  the  ruin  of  great  cities.  The  body  of  the  people,  the  mother  cities,  are
called  upon  to  mourn.  The  people  will  be  taken  captive  and  diminished,  or  if  left
behind  will  be  weakened  and  despised.  Sin  in  the  end  will  turn  mirth  into
bitterness,  deprive  of  liberty,  plunge  into  misery  and  everlasting  lamentation.
"  And  in  that  day  did  the  Lord  God  of  Hosts  call  to  weeping,  and  to  mourning,
and  to  baldness,  and  to  girding  with  sackcloth."

The  Inhabitant  of  Maroth. —  Verse  12.

This  refers  to  the  invasion  of  the  Assyrian,  the  rod  of  God's  anger.  He  had
subdued  and  ravaged  Israel,  and  now  entered  Judah.  The  Prophet  laments  the
horrors  of  the  scene,  and  describes  the  effects  of  them  upon  the  places  in  the  line
of  march.  Maroth  was  verv  interior,  and  situated  nigh  Jerusalem ;  and  probably
the  inhabitants  thought  on  that  account  they  were  safer  than  those  who  lived  on  the
borders.  This  may  remind  us  of  the  disappointments  of  life,  the  source  of  calamity,
and  the  season  of  deliverance.  They  "  waited  carefully  for  good ; "  but  in  vain  :
"  evil  came."  Is  such  a  disappointment  a  strange  or  unusual  thing  1  What  is  there
in  life  that  is  not  uncertain,  and  does  not  expose  the  hope  resting  upon  it  1  Is  it  Sub-
stance 1  Health  1  Children  %  Friends  ]  Does  the  Scripture  only  cry,  "  All  is  vanity ;  "
and,  "  Cease  from  man  whose  breath  is  in  his  nostrils  "  1  Does  not  all  history,
observation,  and  experience  tell  us  the  same?  Let  the  young,  and  all,  be  sober  in
expectation  of  earthly  things.  It  is  the  way  to  escape  the  surprise  and  anguish  of
disappointment.  Make  the  Lord  your  hope.  He  will  not  deceive  us  :  he  cannot
fail  us.     "  Blessed  are  all  they  that  put  their  trust  in  him."    See  also  the  source  of

26


402  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MIC  AH.  [chap.  i.


calamity.  "  Evil  came  down  from  the  Lord."  This  seems  strange  when  we  are
assured  that  "  every  good  and  every  perfect  gift  "  comes  down  from  him.  Micah
speaks  of  natural  evil,  or  the  evil  of  suffering.  And  what  calamity  is  there  that
Scripture  has  not  ascribed  to  God  1  A  storm  at  sea  ?  "  He  breaketh  the  ships  of
Tarshish."  Barrenness  of  soil?  "He  turneth  a  fruitful  land  into  barrenness."
The  loss  of  connections  1  "  Lover  and  friend  hast  thou  put  far  from  me."  We
oftener  connect  war  with  the  follies  and  passions  of  men  than  other  evils ;  but  he
has  "  created  the  waster  to  destroy."  Never  view  sufferings,  public  or  private,
personal  or  relative,  abstractedly  from  God.  Let  not  the  instruments  lead  us  to
overlook  his  agency.  They  could  have  no  power  at  all  against  us  except  it  was
given  them  from  above.  But  how  does  this  evil  come  from  him  1  Some  view
mercy  as  separate  from  justice;  and  others  justice  as  separate  from  mercy  :  one  of
these  partial  views  genders  presumption,  the  other  despair.  Extremes  should  be
avoided  in  considering  God  as  the  righteous  governor  and  the  tender  father.
Everything  in  his  present  administration  is  adapted  to  show  the  union  of  holiness
and  goodness,  to  awaken  fear  and  hope.  The  evils  he  sends  are  the  effects  of  sin  ;
the  fruits  to  take  away  sin.  We  deserve  them  and  need  them;  the  one  shows  that
we  have  no  right  to  murmur,  the  other  that  we  have  no  reason  to  complain.  Cheer-
ful submission  is  required ;  but  this  can  only  be  given  when  we  see  the  relation
that  affliction  has  to  our  desert  and  improvement.  Mark  also  the  time  of  deliver-
ance. Though  God  saves  his  people  he  may  permit  destruction  to  draw  very  nigh.
In  this  case  he  could  have  hindered  the  calamity  at  the  frontier,  but  evil  came
"  unto  the  gate  of  Jerusalem."  So  far,  but  no  farther,  did  the  insulting  foe  come.
Here  were  his  proud  waves  stayed.  Here  his  power  and  triumph  ended.  Heze-
kiah  conquered  him  on  his  knees,  and  the  Lord  put  his  bridle  into  his  jaws  and  drew
him  back.  The  angel  made  a  great  slaughter  in  the  camp  that  night,  showing  that
God  can  not  only  deliver  in  the  greatest  straits,  but  that  he  frequently  does  not
interfere  till  the  evil  has  reached  its  extremity.  The  delay  is  not  abandonment.
He  waits  to  be  gracious,  and  the  season  in  which  he  will  appear  will  display  his
glory  and  draw  forth  our  praise.  It  is  often  darkest  just  before  the  break  of  day.
"  In  the  mount  it  shall  be  seen  "  [/ay]*

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.   10.     To  be  indifferent   to   the  against   trusting   to   human   help.       1.

honour  of  God,  and  to  have  no  sorrow  By   their   own  experience.     2.  By  the

at  reproach  being  brought  on  the  cause  experience  of  others.     "  The  houses  of

of  religion  through  the  fall  of  its  pro-  Achzib "    might   have   taught   wisdom,

fessors,  is  the  mark  of  the  carnal,  unre-  for  they  are  "  a  lie."     III.  The  failure

generate  mind  [Fausset].  of    all    human   helps    is    conspicuous.

Ver.   11.     Selfish   men  are  often  so  They  are  known  by  their  names,  natures,

taken  up  with  their  own  sorrows  that  and  results.    They  deceive,  they  are  "a

they  have  no  sympathy  for  others.  "  The  lie."

inhabitant  of  Zaanan  came  not  forth  in  Ver.    15.      All    possessions,    houses,

the  mourning  of  Beth-ezel."  lands,  and  families  are  insecure  when

Ver.  13.     Beginning  of  sin.    What  a  God  is  provoked — may  be  taken  from

world  of  evil  lies  in  the  three  words  !  us,  and  another  may  be  the  heir  to  them.

[Pusey'].     To  be  the  first  occasion  and  "  /  will  bring  an  heir  unto  thee."

chief  stumbling-block  in  a  land's  defec-  The  glory  of  Israel.    1.  Religious  privi-

tion    brings    on    exemplary  judgment  leges  are  the  glory  of  a  nation.     2.  This

\Hutcheson\.  gl°ry  mav  depart  through  a  nation's  sin.

Ver.  14.     Learn — I.  That  in  trouble  When  religious  ordinances  are  neglected

men  often  flee  to  human  help.    Treaties,  or  abused,  and  God  is  provoked,  they

presents,  and  bribes  are  all  tried  rather  cannot  ward  off  judgment.     A  nation's

than  God.     II.  That  God  warns  men  glory  may  then  be  laid  in  the  dust.


CHAP.  Lj


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MWATT.


403


Ver.  16.  1.  The  signs  of  sorrow.
BaldnesSy  enlarged  baldness.  In  other
cases  baldness  forbidden  Israel,  but  in
sorrow  for  sin  they  were  called  to  it
(Isa.  xxii.  12).  As  the  eagle,  which  not
only  loses  its  feathers,  but  its  beauty,
swiftness,  and  courage  with  them.  2.
Th8  causes  of  sorrow.     The  captivity  of


children.  Indulgent  fathers  may  be
come  parricides,  not  parents.  "  Those
who  give  themselves  up  to  luxury  are
at  least  given  up  to  miserable  slavery.
When  a  man  makes  his  children  effemin-
ate he  makes  for  himself  grief  and
heart-pangs"  [Lange].


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  L


Ver.  1.  Word.  The  Word  of  God
is  the  bodying  forth  of  his  mind,  the
incarnation  of  his  thought,  the  vehicle
of  his  will;  by  which  he  would  bring
himself  near  to  us,  to  woo  us  and  awe
us,  to  attract  us  by  his  love  or  terrify  us
by  his  judgments.  It  is  the  sum  of  all
that  the  world  knows  of  him.  It  is  the
expression  of  his  character,  the  history
of  his  procedure  [Legge].

Ver.  3,  4.  Earth.  Inanimate  nature
knows  its  Creator,  and  worships  him  in
its  own  fashion.  "  States  and  kingdoms
which  stand  out  upon  the  world  like
mountains  are  utterly  dissolved  when
he  decrees  their  end.  Systems  as  ancient
and  firmly-rooted  as  the  hills  pass  away
when  he  does  but  look  upon  them"
[Spurgeon].

"  Macbeth  is  ripe  for  shaking,  and  the  powers
above
Put  on  their  instruments  "  [Shakespeare],

Ver.  5.  Transgression.  God's  justice  on
offenders  goes  not  always  in  the  same  path,
nor  the  same  pace ;  and  he  is  not  par-
doned for  the  fault  who  is  for  a  while
reprieved  from  the  punishment  [Fuller].

Ver.  6 — 8.  Heap.  Travellers  speak
of  the  site  of  Samaria  as  strewed  with
masses  of  ruins ;  of  its  rich  soil  now
cultivated  in  terraces  ;  and  of  the  stones
that  are  collected  together  into  heaps.
The  whole  face  of  this  part  of  the  hill
suggests  the  idea  that  the  buildings  of
the  ancient  city  had  been  thrown  down
from  the  brow  of  the  hill.  Ascending
to  the  top,  we  went  round  the  whole
summit,  and  found  marks  of  the  same
process  everywhere  [Narrative  of
Scottish  Mission],

Ver.  7.  Broken.  Its  idols  in  whom
she  trusts,  so  far  from  protecting  her,
shall  themselves  go  into  captivity,
broken   up   for    the    gold    and    silver


whereof  they  were  made.  The  wars  of
the  Assyrians  being  religious  wars,  the
idolatry  of  Assyria  destroyed  the  idol-
atry and  idols  of  Israel  [Pusey],

Ver.  9.  Incurable.  Moral  disorgan-
ization can  never  be  remedied  by  intel-
lectual culture.  Social  reforms  may
alter  circumstances,  but  the  gospel  only
can  remove  the  evils  of  society.

"  Pause  not ;  for  the  present  time's  so  sick
That  present  medicine  must  be  ministered,
Or  overthrow  incurable  ensues"  [Shakespeare].

Ver.  10 — 16.  God's  providences
illustrate  his  word.  Nations  are  punished
for  their  sins.  "  History  is  a  practical
comment  upon  revelation,  and  revelation
is  a  sure  key  to  many  parts  of  history."

This  passage  of  Micah  (ver.  10 — 16)
is  to  be  compared  with  that  noble  one
in  Isaiah  (x.  28 — 32),  where  the  Prophet
describes  the  panic  which  spreads  from
one  town  to  another  near  Jerusalem,
when  the  Assyrian  army  under  Sen-
nacherib invaded  Judah,  and  took  all
its  fenced  cities  (xxxvi.  1).  Micah
continues  the  prophetic  description  of
Isaiah.  Isaiah  represents  the  panic,
alarm,  and  havoc  produced  in  the  days
of  Hezekiah  by  the  Assyrian  army
under  Sennacherib  invading  Jerusalem
from  the  north-east.  Micah  represents
his  career  to  the  south-west,  even  to
Lachish,  mentioned  by  both  the  pro-
phets (See  ver.  1 3).

We  know  from  Jeremiah  (xxvi.  18)
that  the  prophetic  warnings  and  reproofs
of  Micah  wrought  powerfully  on  the
mind  of  the  good  king  Hezekiah ;  and
that  for  a  time  the  judgments  impend-
ing over  Jerusalem  were  averted  by  his
repentance.  Similar  results  appear  to
have  been  produced  on  him  by  the  cheer-
ing voice  of  Isaiah,  who  completed  the
work  of  Micah,  by  inspiring  the  king


404  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MIC  AH.  [chap.  n.


with  faith  and  hope  j  and  God  blessed  people,  and  by  destroying  the  army  of

the   work    of  the    two   prophets,    and  Sennacherib,    when    it    returned    from

the  prayers  of  the  penitent  king,  who  at  Egypt  in  triumph,  beneath  the  walls  of

first  had   faltered  (See   2  Kings  xviii.  Jerusalem.    (See  above,  on  Isa.  xxxvii

14 — 16),   by  delivering  him  and    his  36.)  [Wordsworth.]


CHAPTEE  II.

Critical  Notes.]    Judgment  has  been  pronounced  in  general,  now  special  sins  are  described.
The  conduct  of  the  nobility  is  denounced.     Devise]  Heb.  to  form  plans  (Ps.  xxxvi.  5).     Work]
Fabricate,  mature  the  plan  (Ps.  lviii.  2).     Practise]  To  execute  (Is.  xli.  4).     Beds]  i.  e.  by  night
(Cf.   Ps.  iv.  5  :  Job  iv.  13).     Morning]  i.  e.  at  break  of  day.     Hand]  Their  band  is  their  God;
right  is  overruled  by  might.     2.  Covet]  Cf.  Ex.  xx.  14  :  Deut.  v.   18.     Oppress]  Defraud.     3.
Family]  Nation.     Devise]  Cf.  ver.  1,  "to  set  clearly  before  our  eyes  the^M*  talionis  prevalent  in
God's  providence"  (Ex.  xxi.  23  :  Is.  xxxiii.  1)  \Lange\     Necks]  You  cannot  shake  off  punishment
as  ye  have  done  law.     Haughtily]  Stiff  necks  will  have  to  bend;  they  will  not  carry  themselves
loftily  (Ps.  lviii.  9),  for  their  iniquity  causes  an  evil  time.     4.  Par-]  Wickedness  and  punishment
will  be  subjects  of  common  conversation.     Doleful]  Lit.  laments  with  a  lamentation  of  lamentations,
i.  e.  a  mournfully  mournful  song.     Say]  "Actum  est  !  it  is  all  over!  an  exclamation  of  despair."
Turning]  i.  e.  causes  the  inheritance  to  pass  to  the  heathen  ;  some,  "  to  a  rebel,  our  fields  he  divideth."
5.  Cast]  No  possession  left  for  the  usual  mode  of  division.     6.  Prophesy]  Lit.  to  drip,  to  cause
words  to  flow,  prophesying  (Am.  vii.  16).     "  The  people,  the  false  prophets,  the  politicians,  forbade
God  and  Micah  to  prophesy.    Prophesy  not]  God,  by  Micah,  recites  their  prohibition  to  themselves,
and  forewarns  them  of  the  consequences"  [Pusey].     Shame]  Lit.  shames,  manifold  shame  (cf.  Am.
vii.    16).     7.  Straitened]  i.  e.  shortened,  impatient.     These]  •".  e.  the  punishments  threatened;    a
speech  which  claims  for  itself  the  promises  regardless  of  moral  condition.     God  not  less  merciful
than  formerly  (Ex.  xxxiv.  6) ;  but  their  sins  have  changed  his  proceedings  towards  them.    8.  Late]
Lit.  yesterday  -.=  not  long  since ;  or  again,  recently,  the  people  stood  up,  took  an  hostile  attitude.
Pull  off]  Not  content  with  the  outer  garment,  they  rob  passers-by  of  the  ornamental  robe,  strip
them  of  their  habiliments  as  spoils  of  war.    9.  Women]  Widows,  unprotected  (Is.  x.  2),  were  driven
from  houses  to  which  they  were  attached,  and  which  they  inherited  from  their  husbands.    Children]
Orphans  of  widows  not  spared.     Glory]  My  ornament,  i.  e.  garment  or  upper-coat.     For  ever]  No
repentance,  no  return  of  the  coat  according  to  law  (Ex.  xxii.  25 — 27).    10.  Arise]  As  you  have  cast
out  others,  so  must  you  be  cast  out.     Canaan  was  no  longer  a  rest  to  them.     11.    Spirit]  Lit.  walk
in  the  wind,  sig.  what  is  vain  or  worthless  (Is.  xxvi.  18 ;  xli.  29) ;  some,  "the  man  of  spirit,  i.  e.
claiming  inspiration."     Prophesy]  Soothe  you  in  gluttony  and  drunkenness  ;  he  would  be  listened
to  because  he  flattered  you.    12.]  A  sudden  transition  from  judgment  to  joy.    The  remnant  of  Israel
after  sifting  shall  be  gathered  together,  multiplied,  and  governed  by  Jehovah  as  their  king.     Bozrah]
Rich  in  pastures  and  flocks.    13.  Breaker]  "  A  traditional  Messianic  expression,"  will  break  a  way
for  them  in  every  hindrance  and  enemy.     Cyrus  delivering  from  Babylon  is  an  eminent  type  of
Christ  redeeming  from  sin.     Gate]  of  the  city  of  captivity.     Before]  them,  as  in  going  up  out  of
Egypt  (Ex.  xiii.  21  :   Deut.  i.  30,  33),  to  lead  the  way.      "  The  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy  com-
menced with  the  gathering  together  of  Israel  to  its  God  and  King  by  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,
and  will  be  completed  at  some  future  time  when  the  Lord  shall  redeem  Israel,  which  is  now  pining
in  dispersion,  out  of  the  fetters  of  its  unbelief  and  life  of  sin  "  [Kml\.

HOMILETICS.
The  Conception  and  Practice  of  Injustice. —  Verses  1,  2.

Special  sins  are  now  condemned.  The  injustice  and  oppression  of  the  rich  are
denounced  and  threatened  with  punishment.

I.  Injustice  in  its  purpose.  "That  devise  iniquity."  Iniquity  is  first  con-
ceived, purposed,  or  planned.  They  plot  and  forecast  before  they  act  it.  Actions
are  traced  to  principles.  Devising  is  the  incipient  working  of  the  principle.
The  thought  is  the  fountain  of  the  deed.  God  calls  it  the  work  of  evil,  and  holds
us  responsible  for  it  (Prov.  xiv.  22  :  Matt.  ix.  3,  4).     It  u  bad  enough  to  be


OHAP.  II.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MIC  AH.  405


led  into  wickedness  by  others,  but  to  devise,  to  scheme  it  is  the  depravity
of  "inventors  of  evil  things"  (Eom.  i.  30).  II.  Injustice  in  its  maturity.
They  "work  evil,"  mature  it  in  thoughts  and  desires.  1.  It  is  matured  in  the
night,  "  upon  their  beds."  In  the  rest  and  stillness  of  night  when  they  should
commune  with  their  own  hearts  and  their  God.  They  turn  the  chamber  of
sleep  into  a  place  for  plotting,  and  abuse  retirement  by  wicked  designs.  "  He
deviseth  mischief  upon  his  bed ;  he  setteth  himself  in  a  way  that  is  not  good."
2.  It  is  matured  in  the  day.  "  When  the  morning  is  light."  Early,  very  soon
after  conception  it  is  perfected.  On  their  bed,  and  in  their  waking  hours ;  no
leisure  between  deliberation  and  practice.  It  is  done  (1)  Openly,  in  the  light.  (2)
Deliberately,  in  full  light.  (3)  Shamefully,  against  knowledge  and  conscience.  3.
It  is  matured  by  might.  "  Because  it  is  in  the  power  of  their  hand."  Might,  not
right,  regulated  their  conduct.  The  lust  for  power  increases  in  strength  and  law-
lessness, until  it  becomes  a  law  to  itself,  the  master  passion  of  the  soul.  Then  no
sacrifices  are  too  costly,  no  measures  too  atrocious,  for  the  attainment  of  its  object.
"  This  they  begin  to  do,  and  now  nothing  will  be  restrained  from  them  which  they
have  imagined  to  do."  III.  Injustice  in  its  practice.  "  They  practise  it."  There
is  a  gradation  in  evil.  First  they  sin  in  thought,  then  desire,  and  afterwards  in  act.
To  covet  and  to  rob,  to  desire  and  to  take,  were  the  same  thing  with  them.  1.  It
is  a  forbidden  practice.  They  covet,  disregard  law,  and  seek  to  add  field  to  field.
2.  It  is  a  violent  practice.  "  Take  them  by  violence."  Grossly  and  openly,  by
force  and  fraud,  did  they  seize  the  property  of  others.  3.  It  is  an  inhuman  practice.
"They  oppress  a  man  and  his  house."  They  took  away  houses  and  heritages,  and
ruined  whole  families  and  their  offspring.  Human  life  was  not  held  sacred.  Like
Ahab,  they  first  coveted,  then  sought  to  destroy  their  fellow-men  by  violence  and
false  accusation.  "Come,  let  us  kill  him,  and  the  inheritance  shall  be  ours."  4.  It
is  a  cursed  practice.  "  Woe  to  them  !"  Woe  in  Hebrew  means  all  kind  of  pain,
sorrow,  and  misery.  Covetousness  is  the  root  of  all  evil  to  ourselves  and  others
(1  Tim.  vi.  9,  10).  A  covetous  man  is  cursed  in  this  life  and  in  that  to  come.
"  Beware  of  covetousness."

"You  take  my  house  when  you  do  take  the  prop
That  doth  sustain  my  house ;  you  take  my  life
When  you  do  take  the  means  whereby  I  live  "  [Shakespeare].

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

The  reign   of  selfishness.       1 .    Each  what  a  man  has  been  occupied  with  even

one  strives  and  plans  for  himself  alone.  on    his    bed    [Ibid.].      1.    Notice    the

2.  Each  one  trusts  in  his  own  strength,  gradation    of    the    evil.       Conception,

3.  Each  one  disregards  the  law  [Lange  earnest  preparation,  and  execution  by
(adapted)].  What  a  temptation  it  is  to  force.  "They  say,  they  coveted,  they
have  the  power  to  do  what  evil  spite  took,"  like  Achan.  2.  The  relation
suggests  !  What  would  many  a  one  do  between  .wicked  thoughts  and  wicked
if  the  power  of  the  hand  were  as  great  deeds.  The  oppressor  in  his  bed,  in  his
as  the  boldness  of  the  heart !  As  it  is,  heart,  and  in  his  life.  Eesist  the  first
however,  God  judges  according  to  the  attacks  of  sin  lest  ye  be  eventually
counsel  of  the  heart,  and  brings  to  light  overcome.

HOMILETIOS
Ketributive  Punishment. —  Verses  3 — 5.

Sentence  is  now  pronounced  against  the  sins  specified,  and  the  woe  threatened
(ver.  1)  is  explained.  God  will  inflict  such  judgments,  and  bring  such  times,  that
will  effectually  humble  their  pride  and  recompense  their  wickedness.

I.  Punishment  in  kind.     God  is  not  an  idle  spectator  of  oppression,  and  delay


406  BOMILET1C  COMMENTARY:  MICAH.  [chap,  it


in  punishment  is  not  disregard.  1.  They  devised  evil  against  others,  and  evil  is
devised  against  them.  "  Against  this  family  do  I  devise  an  evil."  Eetribution  is
measured  and  planned  against  wicked  men.  Infinite  wisdom  will  frustrate  and
punish  human  designs.  2.  They  took  the  lands  of  others,  and  their  own  land  shall
be  taken  from  them.  The  inheritance  was  given  to  the  foe  and  would  never  be
divided  by  lot  again.  Mercies  given  by  special  providence  may  be  removed  in
righteous  judgment  for  our  sin.  If  we  forsake  God  he  will  forsake  us.  Riches,
honour,  and  pleasure  he  can  turn  into  captivity,  and  unjust  gain  will  pass  into  the
hands  of  others.  Words  are  not  sown  in  the  wind,  and  actions  written  in  the
dust ;  but  like  imperishable  seed  they  spring  up  and  fructify  in  human  life.
"  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth  that  shall  he  also  reap."  II.  Punishment  most
humiliating1.  1.  They  would  be  humbled  in  their  pride.  "  Neither  shall  ye
go  haughtily."  Men  dream  that  if  they  cannot  avoid  judgments  they  will  be
undaunted  and  courageous  under  them.  God  can  humble  the  proud,  subdue  the
self-willed,  and  throw  the  mightiest  into  captivity  and  sorrow.  2.  They  would
become  a  by-word  in  their  sufferings.  "  In  that  day  shall  one  take  up  a  parable
against  you."  The  calamity  was  not  an  ordinary  one,  but  a  common  proverb  in  the
mouth  of  others.  Sinners  are  often  an  example  of  God's  justice  and  a  warning  to
others.  When  others  insult  and  jest  at  our  grief  it  is  most  bitter  to  endure.  The
most  haughty  and  prosperous  will  then  be  dejected  and  sad.  3.  Their  condition
would  be  most  lamentable.  "  Lament  with  a  doleful  lamentation."  (a)  Because
the  change  was  so  great.  God  had  taken  their  possessions  and  fixed  others  in
them.  "  He  hath  changed  the  portion  of  my  people."  (b)  Because  their  case
was  so  hopeless.  "We  be  utterly  spoiled."  What  reverses  in  life  to  prove  the
folly  of  men  and  the  providence  of  God.  "  Son,  remember  that  thou  in  thy  life-
time receivedst  thy  good  things,  and  likewise  Lazarus  evil  things;  but  now  he  is
comforted  and  thou  art  tormented."  III.  Punishment  most  irretrievable.  "  An
evil  from  which  ye  shall  not  remove  your  necks."  It  was  a  yoke  they  could
neither  avoid  nor  shake  off.  From  the  two  tribes  the  yoke  was  removed,  but  the
ten  were  never  able  to  withdraw  their  necks.  The  punishment  was  most  severe
and  proportioned  in  justice  to  the  sins.  Those  that  will  not  be  ruled  by  grace  will
be  overcome  by  judgment.  Prefer  the  easy  to  the  iron  yoke.  Flee  now  from  sin
that  you  may  be  saved  from  judgment  at  last.     "  For  this  time  is  evil."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND   SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  4.  The  dirge  which  follows  is  impenitence  they  think  it  a  change  of

purposely    in   abrupt   brief    words,   as  purpose  or  will.     But  what  lies  in  that

those  in  trouble  speak,  with  scarce  a  we  be  utterly  despoiled  ?    Despoiled  of

breath   for   utterance.      First,   in   two  everything ;    of   what   they   felt,  tem-

words,  with  perhaps  a  softened  inflec-  poral  things ;  and  of  what  they  did  not

tion,  they  express  the  utterness  of  their  feel,  spiritual  things.     Despoiled  of  the

desolation.     Th en,  in  a  threefold  sen-  land  of  promise,  the  good  things  of  this

tence,   each  close   consisting   of    three  life,  but  also  of  the  presence  of  God  in  his

short  words,  they  say  what    God   has  temple,  the  grace  of  the  Lord,  the  image

done,  but  name  him  not  because  they  of  God  and  everlasting  glory  [Pusey],
are  angry  with  him.      God's   chastise-  Blessings  abused  are  at  last  removed

ments  irritate  those  whom  they  do  not  by  the  Almighty  Giver,
subdue  (Amos  vi.  10)  [Pusey].  None   by   lot.      Wickedness   casting

Spoiled.  Joel  spoke  of  the  parting  of  out  a  people,   1.  From   the  protection

their  land,  under  this  same  term,  as  a  and  blessings  of  God;  2.  Will  cast  out

sin  of  the  heathen  (iii.  2).     Now  they  from    the   presence   of   God   hereafter,

say  God  divideth  our  fields,  not  to  us,  Neither   part    nor  lot   in   this   matter

but   to   the   heathen,   whose   lands  he  (Acts  viii.  21).
gave  us.     It  was  a  change  of  act;  in


chap.  1I.J  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  MICAH.  407

HOMILETICS.
Opposition  to  God's  Word  and  its  Consequences. — Verses  6,  7.

A  second  accusation  is  brought  against  them,  for  contempt  of  God's  Word  and
opposition  to  his  servants.  The  wicked  could  not  endure  the  threatening  of  judg-
ment, sought  to  silence  the  Prophet  (Amos  vii.  10 — 12),  or  make  him  preach  to
please  only,  as  their  false  prophets  did.  This  conduct  adds  to  their  sins,  leaves
them  without  true  teachers,  and  throws  them  into  deeper  shame.

I.  Man's  opposition  to  God's  Word.  "  Prophesy  ye  not,  say  they  to  them  that
prophesy."  Opposition  to  God's  Word  is  an  insult  to  his  character,  and  a  denial  of
his  authority.  1.  Men  are  offended  with  the  faithful  preaching  of  the  Word.
The  truth  is  unwelcome  to  those  who  live  in  sin.  Judgment  terrifies  thera  and
conscience  accuses  them  in  guilt.  The  cross  is  an  offence,  and  the  gospel  a
stumbling-block  to  many.  They  want  the  preacher  to  please  them,  withhold  the
truth,  and  speak  peace  when  there  is  no  peace.  "  Prophesy  not  unto  us  right
things,  speak  unto  us  smooth  things,  prophesy  deceits."  2.  Men  are  offended
with  the  constant  preaching  of  the  Word.  "  Drop  not,"  distil  not ;  indicating
habitual  and  unceasing  warning  and  lamentation.  Occasional  appeals  may  be
overlooked  ;  but  to  be  constantly  threatened  is  disagreeable  and  offensive.  It  is
vinegar  and  nitre  dropped  in  the  conscience  instead  of  dew  and  refreshment  to  the
heart.  It  argues  an  ungodly  life  and  a  degenerate  age  to  resist  the  warnings  of  the
gospel.  "Did  we  not  straitly  command  you,  that  ye  should  not  teach  in  this
name  1 "  II.  God's  purpose  to  fulfil  His  Word.  When  the  wicked  said  prophesy
not,  the  Lord  answered,  they  shall  prophesy .  The  Word  must  be  published.  Men
must  be  warned  whether  they  hear  or  forbear.  1.  GooVs  servants  must  obey  their
commission.  Persecuted  and  opposed,  they  must  be  faithful  to  their  trust  and  to  their
God.  "  Of  a  truth  the  Lord  hath  sent  me  unto  you  to  speak  all  these  words  in
your  ears  "  (Jer.  xxvi.  10 — 15).  2.  GooVs  Spirit  cannot  be  restrained.  "  Is  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord  straitened  % "  Can  you  overcome  God  by  opposing  his  servants  1
Can  you  restrain  the  Spirit  from  uttering  the  truth,  or  resolve  its  purpose  to  what
you  please  1  Can  you  quench  the  sun  or  imprison  the  light  1  Then  you  may
limit  the  Holy  Spirit  in  its  operations.  If  God  thunders  in  judgment,  it  is  not
because  he  cannot  give  mercy.  His  power  is  not  diminished,  and  his  mercy  is
from  everlasting  to  everlasting  (Cf.  Isa.  1.  2  :  Ps.  ciii.  17).  But  sins  and  iniquities
hide  his  face  from  you,  hinder  his  word,  and  procure  your  punishment.  III.  The
awful  consequences  of  opposing  God's  Word.  God  takes  them  at  their  word.
They  shall  not  prophesy,  and  their  shame  shall  not  be  removed.  1.  This  will  deprive
them  of  the  faithful  ministry.  If  men  silence  God's  ministers  and  hinder  God's
word,  God  will  leave  them  without  light  and  reproof.  They  will  have  their  wish
and  be  righteously  punished  for  their  choice.  Ephraim  is  joined  to  his  idols,  let
him  alone.  2.  This  will  offend  the  Spirit  of  God.  In  silencing  the  prophets
they  did  what  they  could  to  silence  and  limit  the  Spirit.  "  Is  the  Lord's  Spirit
straitened  1 "  But  impenitence  cannot  shut  out  conviction  from  the  heart.  Human
sinfulness  cannot  frustrate  Divine  purposes.  3.  This  will  rob  them  of  religious
privileges.  "  Thou  art  named  the  house  of  Jacob,"  but  this  conduct  is  most  un-
reasonable for  such  dignity.  Men  study  to  keep  up  a  name,  but  it  is  only  a  name,
without  anything  to  answer  to  it  in  life.  God  discerns  between  show  and  sub-
stance, fair  titles  and  truth.  Men  may  boast  of  descent,  rely  on  false  security,
and  flatter  themselves  that  they  are  Abraham's  children ;  but  God  will  reject  them,
call  them  a  sinful  nation,  a  people  laden  with  iniquity.  Their  privileges  will  be
taken  away,  and  their  profession  will  bring  a  curse  and  not  a  blessing.  "  Thou
hast  a  name  that  thou  livest,  and  art  dead."

The  Advantages  op  Eevelation. — Verse  7.
The  Word  of  God  must  operate  according  to  the  principles  and  dispositions


408  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MICAH.  [chap.  n.


within  us.  If  it  be  food,  it  is  nothing  to  the  dead,  but  to  the  living  only.  The
benefit  is  only  to  them  that  walk  by  it.  We  are  not  to  expect  that  his  wo  ids  will
do  us  good  mechanically,  that  is,  without  our  consciousness  or  activity ;  or  that
they  will  act  in  us  as  physical  causes  operate  in  the  body,  where  the  concoction  of
the  food  and  the  circulation  of  the  fluids  go  on  when  we  are  asleep  as  well  as  when
we  are  awake,  being  independent  of  our  volitions  and  thoughts.  The  Scriptures  can
only  affect  us  morally,  in  a  way  of  motive,  in  the  exercises  of  the  mind,  and  in  the
use  of  the  means  which  God  has  appointed.  This  is  the  only  way  in  which  we  are
authorized  to  look  for  it  to  work.  We  must  read,  hear,  and  understand  them ;  we
must  pray  over  them,  speak  of  them,  and  reflect  upon  them.  It  is  endless  to  describe
the  benefit  they  will  then  do  for  us.  They  will  do  us  good  in  a  way  of  information.
For  the  soul  to  be  without  knowledge  it  is  not  good.  There  is  no  knowledge  like
that  of  the  Scriptures.  It  is  clear,  full,  and  blessed.  It  gives  life  to  them  that  have
it.  It  is  an  advantage  in  duty  and  perplexity  to  hear  the  voice  :  This  is  the  way,
walk  ye  in  it.  They  will  do  us  good  in  a  way  of  excitement.  We  get  dull  and  formal,
have  a  name  to  live,  but  are  dead.  God  quickens  us  according  to  his  Word,
endears  it  to  us,  and  enables  us  to  remember  it.  "I  will  never  forget  thy  pre-
cepts ;  for  with  them  thou  hast  quickened  me."  They  will  do  us  good  in  a  icay  of
rebuke.  They  never  flatter,  but  deal  truly  with  us,  and  frequently  reprove  us.  If
we  are  concerned  for  our  welfare  we  shall  not  esteem  them  our  enemy  because
they  tell  us  the  truth.  It  is  improper  to  limit  the  benefit  of  the  Word  to  encourage-
ment, to  suppose  that  we  have  never  a  good  opportunity,  unless  it  comforts  us.  It
is  a  blessing  to  be  humbled  and  emptied  of  self,  to  see  our  vileness,  and  cry  "  God
be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  We  talk  of  benefactors  !  What  good  has  the  Bible
done  !  What  millions  has  it  blessed  !  How  much  do  we  owe  it !  Thanks  be
unto  God  for  his  unspeakable  gift  [Jay].

God's   Appeal   to   Experience. —  Verse  7.

God's  Word  does  good  and  not  harm.  It  is  folly,  therefore,  to  oppose  it.  You
are  then  acting  not  merely  in  opposition  to  God,  but  against  your  own  benefit  and
the  best  interests  of  your  country.

I.  The  words  of  God  design  to  do  good.  Words  express  mind.  God's  Word
reveals  God's  will  and  design,  and  this  design  is  merciful.  There  are  mysteries,  but
no  proofs  of  malevolent  feelings,  in  the  world.  Benevolence  predominates  in  nature,
notwithstanding  sin.  Providence  wears  a  benign  aspect.  The  sun  shines  and  the
rain  falls  on  the  just  and  the  unjust.  But  in  the  gospel  we  have  the  purpose  of
God  to  save,  the  words  of  God  to  bless.  "  God  having  raised  up  his  Son  Jesus,
sent  him  to  bless  you,  in  turning  away  every  one  of  you  from  his  iniquities."  II.
The  words  of  God  have  done  good  in  human  experience.  Their  truth  has  been
confirmed  within  us.  The  greatest  sinners  have  received  good.  Saul  of  Tarsus,
Bunyan,  and  Newton  have  been  forgiven  and  saved.  We  can  point  to  trophies  of
its  power  in  characters  most  sinful  and  profligate.  "  Such  were  some  of  you  ;  but
ye  are  washed,  but  ye  are  sanctified,  but  ye  are  justified,"  &c.  III.  But  the
good  which  the  words  of  God  effect  depends  upon  our  moral  condition.  To
him  that  walketh  uprightly.  They  operate  not  on  outward  but  moral  nature,
and  influence  us  according  to  our  relation  to  them.  The  sun  that  melts  the  wax
will  harden  the  clay.  Good  must  be  within  us  before  good  can  come  to  us.  An
evil  disposition  will  bring  a  curse  and  not  a  blessing.  "  To  the  one  we  are  the
savour  of  death  unto  death ;  and  to  the  other  the  savour  of  life  unto  life."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  6.  The  words  are  very  emphatic  shall  not  depart  [Puseij].    I.  Opposition

in  Hebrew,  from  their  briefness  :  Pro-  to  God.     1.  In  his  servants.     2.  In  his

phesy  not ;  they  shall  indeed  prophesy  ;  Word.     II.  Consequences  of  opposition.

they  shall  not  prophesy  to  these  ;  shame  1.  Shame  shall  rest  upon  them.   2.  The


ohap.  II.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MIC  AH.  409


Word   shall   be   proclaimed  to   others,  and  unfettered,  gracious  and  abundant

"  God   would    have   turned    away   the  in  its  operations  (Cf.  Mai.  ii.  15  :  2  Tim.

shame  from  them  ;  but  they,  despising  ii.   9  :    2  Thess.  ii.   9).     "  Turn  you  at

his  warnings,  drew  it  to  themselves.    It  my  reproof  :  behold,  I  will  pour  out  my

was  the  natural  fruit  of  their  doings  ;  it  Spirit  unto  you,  I  will  make  known  my

was  in  its   natural   home    with   them,  words  unto  you."

The  sinner  hath  but  to  remain  as  he  is ;  My  words.    1.  The  benevolent  nature

the  shame  encompasseth   him  already,  of    God's   words,    "do  good"     2.    The

and  only  departeth  not.     The  wrath  of  power  of  God's  words,  "  do  good."     3.

God  is  already  upon  him  and  abideth  The   persons   who    enjoy   the    benefits,

on  him  \Pusey\.  "the  upright."     Those   who  return  to

Yer.  7.  Named.  The  name  is  belied,  the  way  of  righteousness  and  do  not  for-
1.  By  conduct  which  contradicts  pro-  sake  it  (Prov.  iv.  26,  27).
fession.  2.  By  claiming  the  promises  That  is  the  old  and  still  practised
of  God  regardless  of  moral  condition  way  of  avoiding  God's  threatenings,
before  God.  Jacob  was  not  copied  in  namely,  that  men  so  readily  form  con-
spirit  and  example  by  those  who  ceptions  of  God,  and  imagine  that  he
boasted  of  his  name,  a  name  which  re-  cannot  be  angry  because  he  is  merciful,
minded  of  favours,  which  they  abused,  Let  one  learn,  first  of  all,  to  understand
and  of  which  they  were  deprived.  God  from  his  own  sayings.     He  who

Is  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  straitened  ?  hates  the  light  may  for  a  while  resort  to

No,  for  that  would — 1.  Contradict  his  imaginary  comfort,  but  it  cannot  help

Word.      2.    Be   at   variance   with    the  him  [Lange],
facts  of  human  experience.     It  is  free

HOMILETICS.
Grievous  Sins  and  Eighteous  Eetribution. — Verses  8 — 10.

The  Prophet  describes  the  sad  change  that  had  come  over  the  people.  Their
fathers  were  famous  in  war,  heroic  in  the  defence  of  their  country  against  the
enemy,  and  humane  towards  others.  But  they  had  barbarously  treated  peaceful
subjects  and  innocent  women  and  children.  God  threatens  to  do  to  them  as  they
had  done  to  others.

I.  What  are  the  sins  denounced?  1.  Rebellion  against  God.  "My  people
is  risen  up  as  an  enemy."  (a)  This  rebellion  was  recent.  "  Even  of  late ;  "
only  yesterday  you  have  added  to  former  sins.  When  men  cast  off  the  restraints
of  God's  Word  and  God's  Spirit  they  will  commit  greater  folly.  No  bonds  will
check  the  ungodly  and  rebellious.  (b)  This  rebellion  was  unprovoked.  God
was  not  their  enemy,  but  designed  their  good.  They  had  risen  up  vehemently
(Cf.  Micah  v.  4;  vii.  14  :  1  Kings  xi.  14)  against  God  and  man,  and  become
Ishmaelites  rather  than  Israelites,  (c)  This  rebellion  was  universal.  They  rose
up  as  one  man.  Whatever  their  profession,  they  were  one  in  their  sympathies
and  conduct.  Sin  is  determined  opposition  to  God.  Those  who  assume  this
attitude  are  enemies  to  God  and  their  country,  put  themselves  away  from  the
benefits  of  God's  Word,  and  prefer  darkness  to  light  because  their  deeds  are
evil.  2.  Hostility  to  man.  Casting  off  the  fear  of  God,  they  had  no  regard  for
man.  (a)  They  robbed  peaceful  travellers.  Men  averse  from  war  and  strife  were
hindered  in  their  journey,  stripped  of  their  comely  dress,  and  violently  treated  as
prisoners  of  war.  What  injustice  to  permit  this  !  What  inhumanity  to  man  I
"  Deliver  me,  0  my  God,  out  of  the  hand  of  the  wicked  ;  out  of  the  hand  of  the
unrighteous  and  cruel  man."  (b)  They  abused  defenceless  women.  "  The  women
of  my  people  have  ye  cast  out  from  their  pleasant  houses."  God,  the  preserver  of
men,  has  tender  regard  for  the  weaker  sex,  and  will  punish  aggravations  against
them.    "They  devoured  widows' houses."    (c)  They  maltreated  innocent  children.


410  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MICAH.  [chap.  n.


They  robbed  them  of  the  fitting  apparel  which  God  had  given  them,  kept  the
garments  for  ever  which  they  had  taken,  and  never  made  restitution.  They  sold
into  captivity,  and  never  ceased  their  oppression.  Sex  did  not  save  the  women,
nor  age  the  children.  Human  rights  and  human  happiness  were  disregarded.
Thus  they  provoked  God,  who  is  a  husband  to  the  widow  and  a  father  to  the
fatherless.  II.  What  is  the  punishment  threatened  ?  1.  They  were  treated  as
enemies.  They  had  set  upon  quiet  citizens  as  if  they  were  suspicious  characters ;
ill  used  friends  as  if  they  had  been  enemies.  God  now  considers  them  as
enemies.  "  My  people  is  risen  up  as  an  enemy."  2.  They  were  deprived  of  their
possessions.  As  they  had  driven  helpless  widows  from  their  homes,  so  God
gives  them  corresponding  punishment.  The  land  shall  not  be  their  rest ;  they
must  quit  it  by  force,  for  it  is  polluted  by  their  sin.  "  Arise  ye  and  depart."
There  can  be  no  resting-place  in  sin.  A  place  polluted  by  guilt  will  soon
become  "  the  sore  destruction  "  of  its  inhabitants.  "  He  that  leadeth  into  cap
tivity  shall  go  into  captivity ;  he  that  killeth  with  the  sword  must  be  killed
with  the  sword."

The  Christian's  Call  from  Earth. — Verse  10.

We  may  take  these  words  as  a  call  to  Christians  to  arise  from  the  world  with  all
its  attractions — an  admonition  not  to  live  too  much  for  earth.  For  everything
proclaims  the  transitory  nature  of  things  below,  and  reminds  us  that  "  here  we
have  no  continuing  city."     Every  condition  justifies  the  sentiment  of  the  poet —

11  Too  low  they  build  who  build  beneath  the  skies.''

I.  Earth  is  not  the  scene  of  repose.  "  This  is  not  your  rest."  We  get  no
repose  physically.  Outward  circumstances,  however  smooth,  get  upset  and
changed.  Intellectually  we  get  no  satisfaction.  The  more  we  know,  the  more  we
desire  to  know.  The  eye  is  not  satisfied  with  seeing,  nor  the  intellect  with  know-
ing. But  spiritually  rest  is  impossible  on  earth.  Earth  is  an  inn,  not  a  home ;
our  passage,  not  our  portion.  Only  at  the  end  of  our  journey  will  be  "  quietness
and  assurance  for  ever."  II.  Earth  is  not  the  place  of  destination.  Many
idolize  the  world,  and  live  as  if  they  had  not  to  depart  hence ;  but  the  Christian
is  a  stranger  and  a  pilgrim  on  the  earth.  "  I  am  a  citizen  of  the  whole  world,"
said  Diogenes,  when  asked  what  countryman  he  was.  Our  citizenship  is  in
heaven,  and,  like  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  we  look  "  for  a  city  which  hath
foundations,  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God,"  "a  better  country,  even  a  heavenly."
III.  Earth  is  not  suitable  for  our  residence.  "  It  is  good  for  pilgrimage,  but
miserable  for  residence,"  says  one.  With  all  its  beauties  and  pleasures  it  is
polluted.  Sin  and  death  abound  and  blacken  its  fair  skies.  Sin  defiles  the  land
in  which  it  is  committed.  "  Corruption  in  the  world  through  lust."  If  you  do
not  keep  yourselves  unspotted  from  the  world,  but  settle  down  in  it  and  make  it
your  rest,  you  will  be  overturned  "  with  a  sore  destruction."

"  It  is  not  for  me  to  be  seeking  my  bliss,
Or  building  my  hopes  in  a  region  like  this ;
I  look  for  a  city  that  hands  have  not  piled,
I  pant  for  a  country  by  sin  undefined."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

I.  Tlie  description  of  the  tvorld.    1.  It  Avoid  its  company.     "The  friendship

is  polluted.     2.  It  is  dangerous.     "It  of   the   world    is   enmity   with    God."

shall  destroy  you."     3.  Hence  it  is  not  Renounce  its  maxims  and  conversations,

a    rest.      II.    The  command  to  depart  "  Those   who   are   bound    for    Canaan

from  it.    "  Arise,"  &c.     1.  It  is  compre-  must  not  speak  the  language  of  Ash-

hensive.     Separate  yourselves  from  the  dod,"  says  Philip  Henry.     Live  above

world,   and    touch    not    the    unclean,  the    allurements     and     pleasures,    the


chap.  11.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MICJH.  411


anxieties  and  cares  of  the  world.     Set  Keuben  and  Gad,  prefer  an  inheritance

your  affections  on  things  above.    2.  It  is  on  this  side  Jordan.     The  godly  them-

urgent.  "  Arise  and  depart"   Like  Israel  selves   have  need   to  have   their    pure

from  Egypt,  and  the  pilgrim  from  the  minds   stirred   up  by  way   of   remem-

city  of  destruction,  we  must  hasten  and  brance.     G<>d  sends  them  therefore  the

delay  not.     3.    It  is  needed.     We  are  message,  "  Arise  ye,"  &c.      There   are

apt  to  grow  careless,  settle  down  and  five  ways  by  which  he  sends  it.     The

say,  "  In  my  prosperity  I  shall  never  first  is  his  Word.     The  second  is  afflic-

be  moved,"  but  God  wakens  us  by  his  Hon.      The    third    is    worldly  success.

providence  and  Word,  "  Arise,  and  de-  •  The  fourth  is  the  earnests  and  foretastes

part."  of  a  better  world.     The  last  is   death.

The  present  is  not  our  rest.     It  was  This  orders  us  to  depart  really  as  well

not  designed  to  be  our  rest.     It  is  not  as  morally.     Every   apprehension    and

jit  to  be  our  rest.     If   we   are   Chris-  approach  of  it  cries,  "It  is  high  time

tians    we    have    relinquished    it     and  to  awake  out  of  sleep,"  &c.  [From  Jay]
chosen   another  rest.     But  many,  like

HOMILETIGS.
The  Ministry  of  False  Teachers. —  Verse  11.

Predictions  of  judgment  were  unwelcome  to  corrupt  men.  They  opposed  the
true,  but  would  listen  to  false  prophets  who  flattered  them  in  sin  and  declared
lies.     The  ministry  of  such  is  here  described.

I.  It  is  lying  in  its  nature.  Falsehood  and  lies.  It  misrepresents  God  and
his  Word,  the  gospel  and  its  claims.  It  is  not  purity,  light,  and  power,  but  false
and  misleading.  It  ignores  or  sacrifices  truth,  and  springs  not  from  the  Spirit  of
God,  but  the  spirit  of  man.  They  pretend  inspiration,  but  walk  in  delusion  and
believe  a  lie.  "  Woe  unto  the  foolish  prophets  that  follow  their  own  spirit  and  have
seen  nothing."  II.  It  is  sensual  in  its  purpose.  Its  great  design  is  to  minister
to  the  sensual  enjoyments  of  the  people.  "  I  will  prophesy  unto  thee  of  wine  and
of  strong  drink."  The  false  prophets  pleased  the  rich  and  emboldened  the  self-
indulgence  of  all  by  promising  abundant  harvests  and  rich  vintage.  The  promises
of  God  are  often  emphasized,  but  the  conditions  of  those  promises  are  forgotten.
Congregations  are  assured  that  without  exception  and  without  penitence  they
will  be  free  from  judgment  and  sure  of  salvation.  False  teachers  pander  to
vitiated  tastes,  sanction  sinful  customs,  and  disturb  not  the  consciences  of  the
people.  But  true  ministers  strike  the  prejudices,  condemn  the  carnal  gratifications,
and  seek  to  save  the  souls  of  men.  They  handle  not  the  Word  of  God  deceitfully,
but  by  manifestation  of  the  truth  commend  themselves  to  every  man's  conscience
in  the  sight  of  God.  III.  It  is  pleasing  to  the  people  in  its  method.  Unwel-
come truths  would  not  be  heard,  but  a  prophet  of  lies  would  be  popular.  "  He
shall  even  be  the  prophet  of  this  people."  Spiritual  appetites  crave  for  food,
conscience  is  dissatisfied,  and  the  heart  restless.  Men  want  rest  and  God.  If  any
come  in  God's  name  to  set  them  at  ease  in  sensual  pleasures,  him  will  they  receive
with  joy  (Jer.  v.  43).  All  they  desire  is  freedom  from  reproof  and  licence  to  sin.
11  They  teach  their  teachers  how  they  wish  to  be  mistaught,"  says  a  writer,  "  and
receive  the  echo  of  their  wishes  as  the  voice  of  God."  "  The  prophets  prophesy
falsely,  and  the  priests  bear  rule  by  their  means ;  and  my  people  love  to  have  it
so ;  and  what  will  ye  do  in  the  end  thereof?  "  IV.  It  is  disappointing  in  its
results.  It  is  "  walking  in  the  spirit,"  or  "  walking  with  the  ivind,"  as  the  margin
gives.  1.  There  is  no  nutriment  for  the  soul.  It  is  a  ministry  empty  and  un-
substantial as  the  wind,  mixed  with  error  and  falsehood,  not  "  sound  speech  that
cannot  be  condemned."  2.  There  is  no  efficacy  in  the  word.  It  is  not  truth
spoken  in  tenderness,  love,  and  concern  for  the  hearers.     None  are  enlightened  in


412  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MIC  JR.  Lchap.  n.


mind,  quickened  in  conscience,  and  converted  from  sin.  The  words  are  mere
echoes  of  the  wind,  devoid  of  results  in  heart  and  life,  barren  to  God  and  man.
"  Ephraim  feedeth  on  wind,  and  folio  we  th  after  the  east  wind ;  he  daily  increaseth
lies  and  desolation."

The  Glorious  Future  of  Israel. — Verses  12,  13.

There  is  now  a  sudden  transition  from  threatening  to  promise.  Mercy  is  the  end
of  all  punishment  to  the  penitent.  A  remnant  shall  be  delivered  and  gathered
together,  increased  and  governed  by  Jehovah  their  Shepherd  and  King.

I.  Israel  shall  be  delivered.  The  captivity  threatened  will  come ;  but,  as  of
old,  they  shall  be  delivered  from  it.  Babylon,  no  more  than  Egypt,  can  detain
them  in  slavery.  Iron  gates  and  massive  walls  will  give  way  before  the  Breaker's
power.  An  entrance  will  be  made  into  the  city.  The  Conqueror  will  go  in,  and
the  captives  go  out  through  it  into  liberty  and  joy.  The  prison  shall  open
and  set  them  free.  This  deliverance  from  earthly  Babylon  is  a  type  and
pledge  of  redemption  from  spiritual  bondage,  by  Christ  Jesus.  Men  are  bound
in  ignorance,  prejudice,  and  sin.  Christ  gives  light  and  redemption  to  the
soul,  and  opens  the  prison  to  them  that  are  bound.  "  He  redeemed  them
from  the  hand  of  the  enemy."  II.  Israel  shall  be  united  again.  "I  will
surely  assemble  Jacob."  They  shall  be  gathered  together  in  tenderness  and
care,  in  families  and  social  privileges.  God  will  bring  his  people  from  the
greatest  distance,  and  gather  them  into  his  fold.  Public  calamities  and  vicissitudes
of  fortunes  hide  not  his  face  nor  obliterate  his  covenant.  Under  the  law  believers
could  foresee,  and  under  the  gospel  we  may  enjoy,  this  promise.  1.  This  gather-
ing is  certain.  I  will  surely  gather.  2.  It  is  constant.  The  repetition  indicates
the  progressive  and  persistent  nature  of  the  work.  3.  It  is  extensive.  Though
God's  people  are  a  remnant,  yet  all  shall  be  gathered,  and  not  one  forgotten.  "  All
of  thee."  III.  Israel  shall  be  increased.  Not  a  small  number,  but  "the  multi-
tude of  men."  God  can  turn  remnants  into  multitudes,  and  multiply  his  people
as  a  flock.  In  the  Church  it  shall  be  said,  "  The  place  is  too  strait  for  me  :  give
place  to  me  that  I  may  dwell,"  &c.  (Isa.  xlix.  20).  At  last  angels  will  gather  the
elect  from  the  four  winds  into  that  "  great  multitude  which  no  man  could
number,  of  all  nations,  and  people,  and  tongues."  IV.  Israel  shall  be  defended.
They  will  not  be  united  and  left  to  themselves  or  to  others.  God  will  possess
them  and  rule  them  by  his  love.  1.  They  will  be  secured  as  a  flock.  "  As  the
flock  in  the  midst  of  the  fold,"  in  perfect  peace  and  safety.  2.  They  will  be
guided  as  a  people.  "  Their  king  shall  pass  before  them."  As  in  olden  time,  his
presence  shall  go  with  them  and  make  an  easy  passage  through  death  and  the
grave  to  eternal  life.  3.  They  will  be  governed  as  a  nation.  "  The  Lord  on  (at)
the  head  of  them."  As  a  captain  and  conqueror  to  lead  and  rule  them  ;  to  over-
come all  opposition,  to  "  break  in  pieces  the  gates  of  brass,  and  cut  in  sunder  the
bars  of  iron."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

The  Breaker.    Notice — 1.  The  object  in   Isa.    xl.   1  —  5.     The  Prophet  sees

in  view.     To  set  free.     2.  The  oppos-  the    conqueror     Cyrus    breaking    into

ition  to  God's  work.     3.  The  destruc-  Babylon,    smiting     asunder     the    bars

Hon  of  this  opposition.     Complete  and  which   kept    Israel    captive,    as    in    a

utter  ruin — Breaker.  prison ;  and  how  they  went  forth,  after

The  words  present  Christ  as — 1.  The  the  issuing  of   his  decree,  in  joy  and

Redeemer.       2.    The    Guide.      3.    The  triumph  to  their  own  Und«      And  fiom

Defender  of  his  people.     "  A  magnifi-  this  prophetical  view  of  Cyrus  and  his

cent  transition  from  Cyrus  to  Christ,  as  victory,  and  its  blessed  consequences,


CHAP.    H.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MICAH.


413


he  passes  on  by  a  rapid  prophetic  flight
to  speak  of  the  Divine  Cyrus,  Jesus
Christ,  and  of  his  triumph  over  death
and  the  grave  [Wordsworth].  There  is
no  passing  on,  nor  going  forth,  without
Christ  our  King,  who  is  both  King
and  Lord  [Jerome],

ILLUSTRATIONS

Ver.  1,  2.  Covet  fields.  No  passion
so  deeply  agitates  and  degrades,  so
effectually  enslaves  and  destroys,  the
soul  as  covetousness.  The  man  who
sets  his  heart  upon  riches  must  be  a
stranger  to  peace  and  enjoyment.  Fear,
care,  anxiety,  suspicion,  and  jealousy
place  him  on  a  constant  rack.  To  the
toil  of  getting  is  added  tbe  trouble  of
keeping  his  pelf.  Avarice  is  insatiable
as  the  grave,  or  rather  as  a  gulf  without
bottom.  The  more  this  passion  is  sup-
plied with  fresh  fuel  the  more  vehe-
ment is  the  flame  [Rusticus] .  No  houses,
no  fields  content  those  who  cannot  rest
in  the  lust  of  concupiscence.  Yet  only
seven  feet  of  earth  will  suffice  them  at
last.

Yer.  4.  He  hath  divided  our  fields.
The  land  was  but  the  outward  symbol
of  the  inward  heritage.  Unjust  gain
kept  back  is  restored  with  usury ;  it
taketh  away  the  life  of  the  owners
thereof  (Prov.  i.  19).  The  vineyard
whereof  the  Jews  said,  the  inheritance
shall  be  ours,  was  taken  from  them  and
given  to  others.  So  now  is  that  awful
change  begun  when  Christians,  leaving
God,  their  only  unchanging  good,  turn
to  earthly  vanities,  and  for  the  grace  of
God  which  he  withdraws  have  these
only  for  their  fleeting  portion,  until  it
shall  be  finally  exchanged  in  the  day  of
judgment  [Pusey].

Ver.  7.  My  words.  They  do  evil
and  injury  to  many.  Thousands  will
curse  for  ever  the  hour  they  became
acquainted  with  the  Scriptures,  for
they  derive  from  them  only  an  increase
of  guilt  and  condemnation.  But  this
is  not  the  effect  of  design  or  of  natural
tendency   in   them,    for    the    Bible   is


Broken  up.  "  The  three  verbs — they
break  through,  they  march  through,
they  go  out  —  describe  in  a  pictorial
manner  progress  which  cannot  be  stop-
ped by  any  human  power  [Hengst en-
berg].

TO  CHAPTER  II.

intended  and  adapted  to  do  us  good
only,  but  is  the  accidental  result  of
depravity ;  and  therefore  it  is  confined
to  those  who  pervert  it,  abuse  it,  neglect
it,  and  thus  turn  the  blessing  into  a
curse  [Jay].

Ver.  8,  9.     Women  and  children.

"  The  cries  of  orphans,  and  the  oppressor's  rage
Doth  reach  the  stars  "  \Dryden\

Ver.  10.  Not  your  rest.

"  This  is  the  scene  of  combat,  not  of  rest ;
Man's  is  laborious  happiness  at  best ;
On  this  side  death  his  dangers  never  cease,
His  joys  are  joys  of  conquest,  not  of  peace."

Ver.  11.  The  horrible  subtlety  of
false  teaching  in  each  age  or  country  is
to  meet  its  own  favourite  requirements,
without  calling  for  self-sacrifice  or  self-
oblation,  to  give  it  a  god,  such  as  it
would  have,  such  as  might  content  it,
"  The  people  willeth  to  be  deceived,  be
it  deceived,"  is  a  true  proverb  [Pusey].

Ver.  12,  13.  As  the  flock.  Now
the  sheep  are  scattered  in  all  lands;  but
the  shepherd  shall  search  them  out  and
bring  them  into  the  fold,  where  they
shall  be  (a)  constantly  supplied,  and
(b)  eternally  safe  from  beasts  of  prey.
Breaker.  The  image  is  not  of  conquest,
but  deliverance.  They  break  through,
not  to  enter  in,  but  to  pass  through  the
gate,  and  go  forth.  The  wall  of  the
city  is  ordinarily  broken  through  in
order  to  make  an  entrance,  or  to  secure
to  a  conqueror  the  power  of  entering  in
at  any  time,  or  by  age  and  decay.  But
here  the  object  is  expressed  to  go  forth.
Plainly  they  were  confined  before,  as  in
a  prison ;  and  the  gate  of  the  prison
was  burst  open  to  set  them  free  (Cf.
Isa.  xliii.  6;  xlviii.  20;  lii  11,  12
[Pusey].


*ll  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MICAE.  [chap.  m.


CHAPTER  IIL

Critical  NoTEi.]  Punishment  is  threatened  against  the  heads  and  leaders  of  Israel.  1.
Princes]  Administrators  of  justice.  You]  Above  every  one.  To  know]  To  regard  justice  (Is.
xlii.  25).  2.  Pluck]  Proverbial  for  the  greatest  injustice  and  inhumanity  (Ezek.  xxii.  27:  Zeph.
iii.  3).  3.  Flay]  Sets  forth  still  more  their  barbarity  and  cruelty.  4.  Then]  Time  of  punish-
ment certain,  seen  and  expressed.  Ill]  Lit.  have  made  their  deeds  evil,  reversing  the  call  of  the
prophets  (Jer.  xxxv.  15).  5.  Prophets]  False  prophets  flatter  and  promise  security  from  judg-
ment. Bite]  Like  serpents  ;  cry,  Peace]  When  they  are  doing  mischief.  Prepare]  Lit.  "  sanc-
tify war  against  him  (cf.  Joel  iii.  9) ;  as  if  the  cause  of  their  own  appetite  were  the  cause  of
Heaven!"  [Words].  6.  Night]  Calamities  like  a  dark  night  would  come  upon  them  (Is.  viii.
22;  Amos  v.  18;  viii.  9).  7.  Ashamed]  Because  their  predictions  proved  lies.  Confounded]
False  prophets  had  no  visions  from  God.  "  Their  lying  being  punished  in  its  results,  they  become,
since  God  by  no  word  of  revelation  helps  them  out  of  their  necessity,  entirely  disgraced  "  [Hitzig],
Cover]  e".  e.  to  cover  the  face  up  to  the  nose,  a  sign  of  sorrow  (Lev.  xiii.  45) ;  here  of  shame  (Ezek.
xxiv.  17).  With  their  lips  they  had  lied,  now  they  are  dumb  and  covered  with  shame.  "  They
shall  be  so  ashamed  of  themselves  as  not  to  dare  to  open  their  mouths,  or  boast  of  the  name  of
prophet"  [Calvin].  8.  I]  In  contrast  to  false  prophets,  am  filled  with  power.  Judgment]  A
sense  of  justice  (Acts  i.  8).  Might]  "Moral  intrepidity  in  speaking  the  truth  at  all  costs  "  (2  Tim.
i.  7).  Sin]  Not  to  flatter  with  false  promises  of  peace.  9.  Hear]  Resumed  from  ver.  1.  Heads]
Whose  ungodly  conduct  is  briefly  summed  up  again.  Abhor]  Asa  thing  loathsome  and  abominable
(Heb.)  10.  Build]  Lit.  building  with  wealth  and  money  obtained  by  bribes  and  murder  of  the
innocent  (Jer.  xxii.  13  :  Ezek.  xxii.  27  :  Hab.  ii.  12).  "  Or  by  blood  he  may  mean  that  they  in-
directly took  away  life,  in  that,  through  wrong  judgments,  extortion,  usury,  fraud,  oppression,
reducing  wages,  or  detaining  them,  they  took  away  what  was  necessary  to  support  life  "  [Pusey],
11.  Reward]  Take  bribes,  when  they  should  teach  gratuitously  (Lev.  x.  11  :  Deut.  xvii.  11).
Prophets]  False  prophets.  Money]  "Giving  the  answer  which  their  employers,  the  rich  men,
wanted,  as  if  it  were  an  answer  from  God  "  [Pusey.]  Among  us]  Enthroned  in  the  temple  to
protect  us  from  calamity.  12.  Therefore]  Culminating  the  threats  of  ver.  8,  a  great  contrast  to
the  conclusion  of  chapter  II.  They  thought  to  build,  when  by  their  conduct  they  destroy  Zion ;
"for  your  sake  be  plowed."  "The  predicates  are  divided  rhetorically,  and  the  thought  is  this:
the  royal  palace,  the  city,  and  the  temple  shall  be  so  utterly  destroyed,  that  of  all  the  houses  and
palaces  only  heaps  of  rubbish  will  remain,  and  the  ground  upon  which  the  city  stood  will  be  partly
used  as  a  ploughed  field,  and  partly  overgrown  with  bushes  "  (cf.  Is.  xxxii.  13, 14)  [Keil\  Heze-
kiah's  repentance  delayed  the  execution  of  the  judgment  for  more  than  a  hundred  years;  but
Jerusalem  was  destroyed  by  Nebuchadnezzar  and  by  Titus.

HOMILETIGS.
The  Punishment  op  Ungodly  Magistrates. — Verses  1 — 4.

The  prophet  had  denounced  the  sins  of  the  people,  now  he  threatens  the  civil
rulers  and  religious  teachers  of  the  nation.  The  Judges  of  the  law  should  have
been  exemplary  in  knowledge  and  virtue,  but  they  were  corrupt  in  thought,  and
ungodly  in  conduct.

I.  The  sins  of  which  they  were  guilty.  They  are  specially  challenged  by
the  prophet,  and  accused  of  no  ordinary  guilt.  "Hear,  I  pray  you."  1.  Sins
against  superior  light.  They  were  expected  to  know  and  love  the  right.  From
the  law  of  God,  and  the  customs  of  the  country,  they  knew  the  rules  of  equity.
They  had  means  of  ascertaining  the  right,  to  administer  impartial  justice,  and  could
not  plead  excuses  for  ignorance  (Jer.  v.  4).  Affected  ignorance  and  wilful  neglect
only  aggravate  God.  Civil  rulers  sin  against  superior  privileges,  public  sentiment,
and  moral  law,  when  they  pervert  justice.  "  Is  it  not  for  you  to  know  judgment  1 n
2.  Sins  against  responsible  office.  They  were  the  heads,  the  rulers  of  the
people,  but  abused  their  authority  and  dishonoured  their  position.  Instead  of
doing  good,  they  loved  evil.  When  teachers  corrupt  doctrine,  and  preachers  with-
hold the  gospel ;  when  rulers  and  princes  pervert  equity,  and  neglect  special  duties
for  the  defence  of  which  they  are  put  in  office;  they  poison  the  stream  of  life  and


chap.  in.  J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MICAH.  41*


turn  it  into  deadly  fountains.  3.  Sins  against  the  claims  of  humanity.  They
robbed  the  innocent,  and  devoured  the  helpless.  Their  furious  rapacity  sur-
mounted every  tie  of  humanity.  Instead  of  feeding  they  fleeced  the  sheep,  and
sucked  out  the  very  blood  of  the  people.  The  words  indicate  (a)  Their  intense
greed ;  and  (b)  Their  inhuman  cruelty  in  satisfying  it.  But  great  men  who
oppress  the  poor,  and  hold  themselves  above  law,  will  be  accountable  for  their
deeds  and  condemned  for  their  cruelty.  "  Woe  to  the  shepherds  of  Israel  that  do
feed  themselves ;  should  not  the  shepherd  feed  the  flock,"  &c.  (Ezek.  xxxiv.
2 — 4).  II.  The  punishment  with  which  they  are  threatened.  Men  cannot
fare  well  if  they  do  ill.  A  just  God  rules  over  all  things,  whom  they  wickedly
forget.  1.  Punishment  is  certain.  "  Then"  predicts  the  prophet,  with  solemn
certainty.  A  day  of  retribution  was  before  his  mind.  He  warns  them  of  it.
Though  unseen,  it  is  fixed  in  the  purpose  of  God,  and  will  surely  come  upon  them.
2.  Punishment  is  proportioned  to  their  guilt.  "  As  they  behaved  themselves  ill
in  their  doings."  God's  law  is  unchangeable  ;  those  who  show  no  mercy  shall  have
judgment  without  mercy,  (a)  They  will  cry  and  not  be  heard  in  their  distress.
If  the  cries  of  the  poor  are  disregarded  by  us,  they  will  be  heard  against  us  (Ex.
xxii.  23).  Men  should  have  a  feeling  heart  and  a  helping  hand  ;  should  count  it
not  charity,  but  a  duty  and  a  privilege,  to  defend  the  poor.  But  covetousness
hardens  the  heart  and  makes  the  ear  deaf.  A  time  is  coming  when  the  scorner  and
the  oppressor  will  cry  to  God  in- vain.  "  Whoso  stoppeth  his  ears  at  the  cry  of  the
poor,  he  also  shall  cry  himself,  but  shall  not  be  heard"  (Prov.  xxi.  13,  18,  41).
(b)  They  will  be  forsaken  of  God  in  their  distress.  "He  will  even  hide  his  face
from  them  at  that  time."  They  cared  not  for  others  ;  God  will,  therefore,  withhold
his  kindness  and  presence  from  them.  Forsaken  in  heart  and  office,  bereft  of
power  and  protection,  they  will  be  undone  for  ever.  Before  God,  kings  and
paupers,  priests  and  people,  are  treated  according  to  their  character  and  deserts.
He  is  above  all  principalities  and  powers,  and  impartial  in  his  rule.  Usurped
power  shall  be  dethroned,  and  with  the  froward  God  will  show  himself  froward.
"  Lo,  this  is  the  portion  of  a  wicked  man  with  God,  and  the  heritage  of  oppressors
which  they  shall  receive  of  the  Almighty."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  2.  Hate  God  and  love  evil.  This  depends,  to  get  at  the  very  marrow  of

is   an   awful   transformation   of   moral  their  life,  and  so  feed  themselves  upon

character.     Man   at   first    loves    good,  them  [Pusey].     Alas    that   kings   and

though  he  pursues  evil.     There  is  con-  ecclesiastics  should  do  the  same  things

stant  strife  in  the  soul,  to  end  which  now  !     Men  are  robbed  of  the  means  of

many   quieten    conscience    and    blind  subsistence,  cut  to   pieces,  and  treated

judgment.     "  Then  they  hate  the  truth  like  cattle —

or  good  with  a  bitter  hatred,  because  it

disturbs  the  darkness  of  the  false  peace         "£n.d  he  !hat  stands  upon  a  slippery  place,
:iv  _u  t  it  i  j  i       5\  Makes  nice  ot  no  vile  hold  to  stay  him  up.

with  which  they  would  envelop  them-  .  [ShakespeareA

selves. '     °  Love  of  evil  is  always  con-
nected with  hatred  toward   the   good,  Ver.  4.    As  they  behaved.    "  Measure

although  men  commonly  in  practising  for  measure  "  will  ever  be  meted  out  to

evil  keep  up  a  semblance  of  love  for  the  the  evil-doer.     "  As  I  have   done,  so

good"  [Lange].  God  hath  requited  me"  (Judg.  i.  7).

Ver.  3.  He  heaps  up  their  guilt  act  Vers.   1 — 4.     A  warning  to  judges,

by  act.     First  they  flay,  i.  e.  take  away  1.  Their  responsibility  as  possessors  of

their  outer  ^oods ;  then  they  break  their  knowledge.     2.  Their  sin  :  violation  of

bones  in  pi  3ces,  the  most  solid  parts,  on  duty  and  self-seeking.  3.  Their  punish-

which  the  whole  frame  of  their  body  ment  \Lange\


416  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MICAH.  [chap.  in.


HOMILETIGS.

The  Description  of  False  Teachers. —  Verses  5 — 7.

From  unjust  judges  Micah  turns  to  false  prophets,  who  are  accused  of  flattering
in  sin  and  seducing  by  error.  Corruption  and  crime  in  the  nation  will  always
endanger  the  Church.  It  is  bad  enough  to  be  under  ungodly  rulers,  but  worse  to
be  guided  by  false  teachers.

I.  They  are  mercenary  in  their  purpose.  Their  chief  end  and  only  desire
is  gain.  Rents  and  tithes,  preferment  and  honour,  govern  their  lives.  Their  god
is  their  belly,  filthy  lucre  their  aim,  and  their  "  gospel  is  their  maw  " — supplied
with  food,  they  are  satisfied  and  promise  peace ;  but  when  no  one  puts  anything
into  their  mouths  they  are  offended  and  intolerant.  "  They  are  greedy  dogs  which
can  never  have  enough,  and  they  are  shepherds  that  cannot  understand ;  they  all
look  to  their  own  way,  every  one  for  his  gain."  II.  They  are  deceptive  in  their
teaching.  They  flatter  and  mislead  the  people.  "  They  make  my  people  err."
An  unfaithful  ministry  carries  the  people  from  God  and  leaves  them  to  perish  in
sin.  "  For  the  leaders  of  this  people  cause  them  to  err,  and  they  that  are  led  of
them  are  destroyed."  1.  They  deceive  by  predicting  prosperity  when  there  is
danger.  They  cry  peace  when  God  threatens  judgment.  They  bite  with  treachery
and  deadly  poison  in  their  mouths.  2.  They  deceive  by  flattering  rebellion  when
they  should  urge  to  repentance.  They  rebuked  no  extortion  and  excess.  They
soothed  and  smoothed  the  people,  and  fawned  like  greedy  dogs  to  those  who
fed  them.  "  Will  ye  pollute  me  among  my  people  for  handfuls  of  barley  and  for
pieces  of  bread,  to  slay  the  souls  that  should  not  die,  and  to  save  the  souls  alive
that  should  not  live,  by  your  lying  to  my  people  that  hear  your  lies  1 "  III.  They
are  hypocritical  in  their  spirit.  "  They  even  sanctify  war  against  him  "  that
withholds  their  due.  Acting  professedly  on  the  authority  of  God,  they  abuse  the
word  of  God.  Men  now  are  denounced  as  "atheists  "  and  "infidels,"  condemned
as  "  disloyal  "  and  "  traitors,"  if  they  obey  not  the  behests  of  the  priest.  Eccle-
siastics threaten  and  discountenance,  bless  or  curse,  to  get  what  they  require.  They
rebuke  only  when  their  gains  are  disturbed,  and  comfort  others  to  promote  their
own  ends.  IT.  They  are  judged  in  their  ministry.  They  promise  what  never
comes  to  pass.  Instead  of  peace  they  have  calamity.  1.  They  are  darkened  in
their  minds,  "  Therefore,  night  shall  be  unto  you."  Moral  obliquity  shuts  out
the  light,  darkens  the  understanding,  and  brings  judicial  blindness.  When
teachers  are  dark,  how  can  light  be  expected  1     "  If  the  blind  lead  the  blind,"  &c.

2.  They  are  silenced  in  their  pretensiom.  They  pretended  to  do  good,  but  sinned
against  light  and  were  condemned  by  their  own  consciences.  Deprived  of  power
to  divine,  and  robbed  of  an  answer  of  God  ;  they  had  neither  vision  nor  courage
to  speak.     They  were  seen  in  their  true  colours,  and  deciphered  before  the  world.

3.  They  were  confounded  in  their  ways.  Events  put  them  to  shame,  reputation
waned,  and  confidence  failed  them.  They  kept  others  in  the  dark  ;  God  kept  them
in  the  dark,  and  perplexed  them  with  their  own  devices.  When  God's  providence
contradicts  the  religious  teacher,  he  is  seen  to  be  opposed  to  God's  will,  and  proved
not  to  be  sent  of  God.  4.  They  were  overwhelmed  in  their  circumstances.  They
preached  falsehood,  walked  in  darkness,  and  stumbled  in  distress.  There  was
darkness  without  and  darkness  within,  a  night  of  sorrow  and  calamity.  Their  sun
went  down,  and  dark  cold  night  settled  upon  them.  They  had  to  cover  their  lips
and  hold  their  tongue.

The  True  Minister. — Verse  8.

Micah  now  contrasts  himself  with  the  false  prophets,  sets  forth  the  nature  of  the
true  ministry,  which  is  one  of  Divine  power,  earnest  appeal,  and  pure  aim.

I.  It  is  a  ministry  of  power.  "  I  am  filled  with  power."  1.  Personal  power.
Power  lodged  in  him,  controlling  heart  and  life.     2.  Power  exerted  upon  others.


chap,  n.]  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  M1CAH.  417


Power  must  be  in  the  soul,  before  it  can  be  expressed  in  the  doctrine.  This  will
prove  the  Divine  calling  and  vindicate  the  real  character  of  a  minister.  3.  Power
of  the  highest  nature.  "  By  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord."  Not  the  power  of  intellect
and  gifts,  but  "  power  from  on  high."  "  The  power  of  God  unto  salvation."  4.
Power  in  the  greatest  degree.  "  Filled  with  power."  Here  is  no  stint  nor  mea-
sure, except  moral  capacity.  This  is  most  needful,  and  the  best  furniture  to  the
minister.  Mr.  Gladstone  recently  said  that  we  had  nothing  to  depend  upon  but
moral  power.  "  Tarry  ye,  until  ye  be  endued  with  power  from  on  high."  Power
in  yourselves,  power  in  your  words,  and  power  in  the  hearts  of  men.  "  Ye  shall
receive  power  after  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come  upon  you."  II.  It  is  a  ministry
of  light.  "And  of  judgment."  1.  The  minister  himself  is  enlightened.  He  is
endowed  with  "  a  spirit  of  wisdom  and  knowledge."  He  has  judgment  to  discern
things  that  differ,  to  speak  a  word  in  season,  from  a  sense  of  justice,  a  regard  to
truth,  and  not  to  please  men.  2.  The  doctrine  which  he  preaches  enlightens  others.
It  is  judgment;  an  impartial  view  of  God's  word,  righteous  indignation  against
sin,  and  mercy  to  the  penitent.  He  has  an  ardent  love  for  souls,  and  great  zeal  for
the  glory  of  God.  Under  such  a  ministry,  sinners  are  convinced,  inquirers  en-
lightened, and  saints  edified.  III.  It  is  a  ministry  of  courage.  "  And  of  might."
He  feared  not  the  wrath,  nor  flattered  the  sins  of  man.  He  had  courage  to  brave
danger,  adhere  to  truth,  and  reprove  the  mighty.  He  was  manly  in  his  utter-
ances, endued  with  spiritual  boldness,  and  steeled  against  all  opposition  in  declar-
ing "  unto  Jacob  his  transgression,  and  to  Israel  his  sin."

"Virtue  is  bold,  and  goodness  never  fearful"  [Shakespeare].

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Yer.  8.      Here   we   have   a   pattern  All  the  fruits  of  one  Spirit,  all  to  qualify

ministry  by  which  to  test  all  others,  for  the  discharge  of  one  duty,  u  to  declare

Israel's  prophets  were  demoralized,  and  unto  Jacob,"  &c.     "  So,  then,  of  these

had  sadly  declined  from  the  dignity  of  three  gifts  power  expresses  the  Divine

the  days  of  Samuel      The  entrance  of  might  lodged  in   him  ;  judgment,  the

the  earthly-minded  and  unspiritual  into  substance  of  what  he  had  to  deliver ;

the  sacred  calling  will  be  a  curse  to  the  might  or  courage,  the  strength  to  deliver

nation.     Here  we  perceive  the  distinc-  it  in  face  of  human  power,  persecution,

tion  between  a  false  and  a  true  prophet,  ridicule,  death"  [Pusey].

between   a   converted   and   an   uncon-  Yers.  5 — 8.  Warning  to  the  Heralds

verted  teacher,  and  the  different  ground,  of  God's  Word.    1 .  Their  ideal  character

nature,  and  object  of  their  office.  There  (ver.  8).     2.  Their  danger  of  darkening

is  with  the  true  man,  spirit,  power,  light,  God's  Word  through  self-seeking,  in  that

self-denial,  wise  temperance,  pure,  un-  either  they  for  personal  advantage  preach

corrupted   delivery   of    God's  plan    of  what  the  ears   of  people  lust  after,  or

salvation ;  and    with    the   false,    envy,  brand  their  personal  enemies  as  God's

imagination,   self-love,  which  puffs  up,  enemies.     3.  The  aggravation  of  their

personal  gain,  respect  of  persons,  decep-  sin  ;  desecration  of  the  Word  ;  confusion

tfon,  &c.  [Lange].  of  God's  congregation.     4.  Their  pun-

The  Three  Gifts  of  a  true  ministry,  ishment  j  they  lose  the  capacity  to  dis-

1.  Their  Divine  source.   2.  Their  human  cern  God's  Word,  and  speak  to  the  dis-

necessity.      3.  Their   practical   design,  gust  of  others  and  of  themselves  \Lange\

HOMILETICS.
Guilty  Leaders. —  Verses  9 — 11.

^  The  prophet  gives  a  proof  of  his  fidelity  in  reproving  the  rulers  of  the  nation,
civil  and  religious ;  briefly  sums  up  the  sins  of  which  they  were  guilty,  and  which
brought  their  ruin  ;  and  shows  that  all  who  are  confident  of  God's  favour  will  not
escape  his  judgments.

17


418  H0MILBT1C  COMMENTARY:  MICAH.  [chap.  m#


I.  Civil  rulers  perverted  law  for  selfish  aggrandisement.  Rulers  of  the
State  should  have  been  patterns  of  justice,  but  they  despised  it.  1.  They  abhorred
judgment.  Loathed  it  as  abominable.  Plato  taught  that  if  virtue  could  be  seen
by  men,  it  would  be  attractive ;  but  these  judges  knew  and  hated  it.  2.  They
perverted  judgment.  They  twisted  and  distorted  it.  Not  only  crushed  individuals,
but  destroyed  the  foundation  of  justice.  3.  They  perverted  all  judgment,  "  all
equity."  Whatever  was  right  and  straight  they  made  crooked.  Natural  conscience
and  God's  law  were  both  defied.  They  neither  governed  themselves  by  right,  nor
gave  right  to  others.  They  encouraged  others  by  their  practice,  and,  as  in  the  age
of  Nero,  made  nothing  unlawful.  4.  Their  aim  was  to  build  up  Zion.  The  rich
built  their  palaces  with  wealth  gained  by  fraud  and  oppression.  The  city  was
adorned  with  streets  built  by  rapine  and  blood.  The  Lord  looked  "  for  judgment,
but  behold  oppression;  for  righteousness,  but  behold  a  cry."  II.  Religious  teachers
expounded  law  for  gain.  All  are  accused  of  bribery  and  mercenary  conduct.
Princes,  priests,  and  prophets  loved  the  wages  of  unrighteousness.  1.  Priests
taught  for  hire.  They  had  maintenance  assigned  to  them  by  God,  had  much  by
gratuity  (1  Sam.  ix.  7,  8),  and  should  have  made  a  difference  between  holy  and
unholy  (Lev.  x.  10,  11  :  Deut.  xvii.  10,  11).  But  they  sold  what  they  should
have  given,  and  combined  with  the  heads  of  the  nation,  with  injustice.  One
class  abused  their  power,  another  their  knowledge ;  the  judge  perverted  law,  the
priest  misinterpreted  it.  2.  Prophets  divined  for  money.  False  prophets  gave
answers  to  please  those  who  paid  them.  As  the  oracles  of  Apollo  were  corrupted
by  the  gold  of  Philip,  so  the  law  of  God  was  sold  for  money.  All  sought  their
own,  not  the  things  of  Christ,  nor  the  interests  of  the  people.  "  Thou  shalt
take  no  gift :  for  the  gift  blindeth  the  wise,  and  perverteth  the  words  of  the
righteous."

Vain  Confidence  Destroyed. — Verses  11,  12.

Notwithstanding  their  abominable  conduct,  yet  the  judges,  priests,  and  prophets
presume  upon  God's  favour,  and  think  that  no  evil  will  befall  them.  The  prophet
seeks  to  rouse  them  from  their  vain  confidence.

I.  They  were  confident  of  God's  favour.  "  Is  not  the  Lord  among  us1?"  Pre-
sumption feeds  men  with  delusion.  External  privileges,  outward  reformation,
ritual  worship,  will  save  no  man.  Those  who  lean  upon  these  will  dishonour  God
and  destroy  themselves.  Perversion  of  truth  and  abuse  of  ordinances  will  drive
God  from  us.  "  Trust  ye  not  in  lying  words,  saying,  The  temple  of  the  Lord,
The  temple  of  the  Lord  are  we."  II.  They  were  confident  of  security  from  evil.
"  No  evil  can  come  upon  us."  We  are  perfectly  safe  whatever  others  say.  Thus
men  are  deluded  in  sin,  and  rocked  to  sleep  in  fatal  security.  If  men  are  not
restrained  from  evil  by  religious  privileges,  they  can  never  be  protected  by  them.
Shake  off  carnal  security,  fear  the  Lord,  and  depart  from  evil.  III.  They  were
doomed  to  destruction  in  their  confidence.  "  There  shall  Zion,"  &c.  1.  The
city  would  be  destroyed.  Its  stately  buildings  were  demolished,  and  its  proud
palaces  reduced  to  heaps.  The  ground  on  which  it  stood  was  ploughed  as  a
common  field,  and  the  site  of  the  temple  became  wild  as  a  forest.  2.  Their  own
sins  had  jyrocured  this  ruin.  "  For  your  sake."  Sin  will  ever  draw  calamity  in
Church  and  State.  Corrupt  rulers  and  teachers  involve  the  people  in  defection,
and  hasten  on  the  judgment.  They  may  think  that  they  build,  when  they  only
destroy ;  that  they  secure  prosperity,  when  they  ruin  it.  Every  sanctuary  desecrated
by  hypocrisy  will  be  demolished  by  the  wrath  of  God.  Instead  of  protecting,  it
will  fall  upon  its  worshippers,  and  great  will  be  the  fall  of  it.  "  Woe  to  him  that
buildeth  a  town  with  blood  1 "


CHAP.  III.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   MIC  AH.


419


HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Ver.  9.  1.  Persons  in  eminency,  ac-
customed to  sin,  are  generally  deaf  to
what  the  Lord  saith.  2.  The  mes-
sengers of  the  Lord  must  not  give  up
when  their  message  is  not  received,  but
cry  till  either  they  get  audience  or  have
delivered  their  souls.  Hear,  I  pray
you.  3.  It  is  the  duty  of  faithful  min-
isters, in  reproving  the  faults  of  rulers,
to  be  courteous,  and  not  contemn  au-
thority. Hear,  ye  heads,  &c.  [Adapted
from  Hutcheson\.

Ver.  10.  Building  Zion  by  wrong
means  is  the  way  to  pull  it  down.  It
can  never  stand  erected  by  sinful  ma-
terials, and  for  a  selfish  end.  "Truly
we  build  up  Zion  with  blood  when  we
cheapen  luxuries  and  comforts  at  the
price  of  souls,  use  Christian  toil  like
brute  strength,  tempt  men  to  dishonesty
and  women  to  other  sin,  to  eke  out  the
scanty  wages  which  alone  our  selfish
thirst  for  cheapness  allows,  heedless  of
everything  save  of  our  individual  grati-
fication, or  of  the  commercial  prosperity
which  we  have  made  our  god  "  [Pusey].
Righteousness    builds    up    because    it


brings  God's  protection  and  blessing
unrighteousness  tears  down  because  it
brings  God's  curse  [Hengsteriberg],

Ver.  11.  Leaning.  1.  Holy  men
sometimes  rest  on  official  relationship
with  God,  pollute  the  holiest  things,
and  become  a  warning  to  others.  2.
Guilty  men  will  often  lean  upon  the
Lord,  claim*  his  protection,  and  flatter
themselves  into  false  security.  "The
sacred  office  is  a  grievous  snare  to  un-
sanctified  hearts,"  says  one.  •  "No  un-
godliness, pride,  secularity,  and  hypocrisy
are  so  great  as  those  which  stand  before
God  in  association  with  the  teaching  of
his  Word."

Vers.  11,  12.  False  confidence  in
God.  1.  Its  ground,  an  outward  temple —
sacraments.  2.  Its  danger,  disregard  of
the  distant  future,  indifference,  indulg-
ence given  to  the  natural  man.  3.  Its
end.  Fate  of  the  Jewish  state ;  the
holy  city  becomes  as  the  world,  and
shares  the  fate  of  the  world.  So  like-
wise we.  If  we  forsake  God  he  will
forsake  us  [Lange].


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  III.


Vers.  1 — 4.  Judgment.  It  is  neither
the  great  man's  power,  nor  the  poor
man's  meanness,  that  a  judge  is  to  mind
in  judgment.  A  judge,  a  justice,  must
never  cry  out,  "  Oh,  he  is  a  poor  man  ! "
nor  yet  out  of  base  fear  cry  out,  "  Oh,  he
is  a  great  man ! "  The  judges  in  Egypt
were  portrayed  without  hands  and  with-
out eyes,  to  signify  that  they  were  not
to  take  bribes,  nor  to  accept  men's
persons  [Brooks'].

Ver.  3.  Eat  flesh.

"  Diseased  nature  oftentimes  breaks  forth
In  strange  eruptions  "  [Shakespeare].

Vers.  5 — 7.  It  shall  be  dark.  Misery
assails  riches  as  lightning  does  the
highest  towers;  or  as  a  tree  that  is
heavy  laden  with  fruit  breaks  its  own
boughs,  so  do  riches  destroy  the  virtue
of  their  possessor  [Burton].

Ver.  8.   Power.   The  crowning  power


of  the  messenger  of  God  is  power  over
the  moral  man ;  power  which,  whether
it  approaches  the  soul  through  the
avenue  of  the  intellect  or  of  the  affec-
tions, does  reach  into  the  soul.  The
sphere  of  the  Christian  power  is  the
heart, — the  moral  man ;  and  the  result
of  its  action  is  not  to  be  surely  distin-
guished from  that  of  mere  eloquence  by
instantaneous  emotion,  but  by  subse-
quent moral  fruit.  Power  which  cleanses
the  heart  and  produces  holy  living  is
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  [Wm.
Arthur],

Vers.  9,  10.  Build.  The  crimes  of
the  people  of  England  are  not  denounced
by  the  pulpit  as  they  should  be ;  the
abominations  of  royalty,  the  injustices
perpetrated  in  the  courts  of  justice,  the
cupidity  of  traders,  the  swindlings  of
joint-stock  company  men,  by  which  they
become  millionnaires,  and  win  a  seat  in


420  ROMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  MIC  AH.  [chap.  iv.


the  parliament  of  the  nation.  These  part  of  it  supported  a  crop  of  barley,
things  are  not  held  up,  as  they  should  another  was  undergoing  the  labour  of
be,  for  public  execration,  in  the  broad  the  plough,  and  the  soil  turned  up  con-
sunlight  of  eternal  truth  [Dr.  Thomas],  sisted   of   stone  and   lime,   filled  with

Yer.    11.      Money.      The   priests    of  earth,  such  as  is  usually  met  with  in  the

Rome  aim   but  at  two  things — to  get  foundations    of    ruined    cities.       It   is

power  from  the  king  and  money  from  nearly  a  mile  in  circumference  [Rich-

the  subject  [Selden].     Gold  is  the  fool's  ardsorts  Travels].      On  the  S.E.  Zion

curtain,  which  hides  all  his  defects  from  slopes  down,  in  a  series  of  cultivated

the  world  [Feltham].  terraces,  sharply,  though  not  abruptly,

"  They  all  the  sacred  mysteries  of  heav'n  to  the  sites  of  the  king's  gardens.     Here

To  their  own  vile  advantages  shall  turn  and  round  to  the   S.  the  whole  declivi-

Of  lucre  and  ambition"  [Milton].  ties  are  sprinkled  with  olive  trees,  which

Yer.   12.      Zion  ploughed.      At   the  grow  luxuriantly   among    the    narrow

time  I  visited  this  sacred  ground,  one  slips  of  corn  [Porter],


CHAPTER  IV.

Critical  Notes.]  The  salvation  of  Zion  is  closely  connected  with  its  destruction,  and  a  future
glory  awaits  the  mountain,  which  is  a  wild  forest.  Last]  The  days  of  Messiah,  the  completion  of
all  things.  Mountain]  i.  e.  the  whole  city ;  its  elevation,  moral  dignity,  not  local  situation.
Estab.]  A  permanent  foundation.  Heb.  abidingly  established.  "An  expression  denoting  con-
tinuance and  perpetuity,  that  it  shall  continually  remain  on  its  settlement."  2.  Many]  All  nations
(Isa.  ii.  2 :  Matt.  xxiv.  14) ;  a  powerful  movement  in  the  heathen  world.  For]  The  reason  for
such  intense  zeal  in  going  up.  Law]  i.  e.  instruction  in  the  ways  of  God ;  the  law  as  a  rule  of  holy
life;  the  Word  as  the  source  of  salvation.  3.  Judge]  Instead  of  nations  going  to  war  (Isa.  ii.  4).
Rebuke]  Convict  (Jer.  xvi.  8,  9) ;  lit.  to  set  right,  settle  disputes.  Many]  In  contrast  to  one
nation,  which  formerly  acknowledged  Jehovah  ;  "  who  were  hitherto  for  the  most  part  inclined  of
their  own  will  to  grasp  the  sword"  [Rengst.].  Beat]  implements  of  war  into  implements  of  peace.  4.
Sit]  An  image  of  safety  even  in  open  fields  (cf.  1  Kings  iv.  25  :  Lev.  xxvi.  6).  5.  Name]  i.  e.  profession,
and  in  the  strength  of  Jehovah  (cf.  1  Sam.  xvii.  45  :  Zech.  x.  12  :  Prov.  xviii.  10).  Heathen  gods  can
do  nothing  for  them.  6.  Halteth]  Like  sheep  wearied  in  a  journey.  "Limping  denotes  the
miserable  condition  into  which  the  dispersed  have  been  brought  "  (cf.  Psal.  xxxv.  15  ;  xxxviii.  18).
[Kcil],  This  salvation  will  not  fail,  for  all  the  miserable  and  scattered  shall  be  assembled.  7.
Reign]  Expresses  a  perfect  monarchy,  as  "it  never  existed  in  present  or  past.  "  Micah  does  not
mention  the  descendants  of  David  here,  but  Jehovah  himself,  not  to  exclude  the  kingdom  of  David,
but  to  show  that  God  will  prove  that  he  was  the  author  of  that  kingdom,  and  that  all  power  is  his.
The  prophet  therefore  indicates  a  certain  difference  here  between  that  shadowy  kingdom  and  the
new  kingdom  which  God  will  openly  manifest  at  the  advent  of  the  Messiah"  [Calvin].'*  8.  Tower]
Keeping  up  the  metaphor  from  sheep,  Jerusalem  is  the  tower  from  which  the  king  guards  the  flock.
Messiah  the  Shepherd  (chap.  v.  3)  ;  Israel  the  sheep  (chap.  vii.  14).  Unto  thee]  Affirms  more  than
to  thee;  expressing  the  conquest  of  every  obstacle  that  blocks  up  the  way  to  the  goal  [Keil].  9.]
Zion  will  lose  her  king,  wander  into  captivity,  but  will  be  redeemed  from  her  enemies.  King]  Loss
of  royal  government,  the  cause  of  lamentation,  more  painful  to  Israel  than  other  people  ;  the  king
a  sign  of  God's  presence,  &c.  10.  Pain]  Fig.  of  a  woman  with  child  (cf.  Jer.  iv.  31).  Out  of  the
city,  &c]  Set  forth  the  greatness  and  certainty  of  the  calamity.  There  .  .  thee]  Emphatic
declaration;  the  scene  of  distress,  the  place  of  deliverance.  11.]  Distant  sunlight  overclouded  by
present  cloud.  Now]  Nations  gathered  not  to  hear  the  law  (ver.  2),  but  for  war.  Defiled]  Like  a
virgin.  12.  Gather  them]  To  be  punished  in  turn  when  they  have  answered  his  purpose,  when
fullv  ripe,  like  sheaves,  lit.  sheaf.  However  great  the  numbers  of  the  foe,  all  are  but  as  one  sheaf
ready  to  be  threshed  [Calvin].  13.  Arise]  Deut.  xxv.  4.  Horn]  To  push  the  enemies  (1  Kings  xxii.
11).  Gain]  Goods  collected  by  robbery  (Judges  v.  19).  Lord]  Not  for  Zion's  selfish  ends  (Isa.  lx.
6,  9).  Whole  earth]  Who  through  subjugating  the  heathen  has  proved  to  be  such  (Ps.  xciii.,  xcvi.).


chap.  iv. J  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  M1GAH.  421

HOMILETIGS.
The  Church  of  the  Future. — Verses  1 — 4.

Mount  Zion  is  not  doomed  to  be  a  perpetual  waste.  A  glory  is  here  predicted
which  it  has  not  yet  realized ;  but  its  chastisement  shall  end  in  mercy  and  moral
dignity.     It  will  become  the  residence  of  God  and  the  oentre  of  nations.

I.  The  moral  elevation  of  the  Church.  The  elevation  here  is  not  physical,
but  moral ;  a  spiritual  exaltation.  1.  Its  eminent  site.  "  The  tops  of  the  moun-
tains," &c,  "  exalted  above  the  hills."  It  is  pre-eminently  above  all  worldly
heights.  Above  earthly  potentates  and  above  idols.  Other  eminences  are  insig-
nificant compared  to  this  mountain.  Its  doctrine  and  design,  its  author  and  its
life,  are  above  the  wisdom  of  men.  Small  in  its  beginning,  it  shall  grow  and  shine
with  greater  lustre  than  kingdoms  of  this  world.  Lower  than  they,  it  will  rise
above  and  overtop  them  all.  "  A  city  that  is  set  on  an  hill  cannot  be  hid."  2.
Its  impregnable  nature.  It  shall  "  be  established."  Exalted,  it  shall  be  estab-
lished above  human  institutions.  Human  elevation  is  unstable.  This  is  built
upon  a  rock,  and  the  gates  of  hell  cannot  prevail  against  it.  Its  foundations
are  in  the  holy  mountains  (Psal.  lxxxvii.  1) ;  its  head  stands  securely  aloft,
between  heaven  and  earth,  and  it  rests,  unassailable  and  serene,  upon  the
purpose  of    God.      "Mount   Zion  cannot   be   removed,  but  abideth    for   ever."

II.  The  attractive  power  of  the  Church.  As  a  dominant,  supreme  power,  it
will  be  attractive  to  all  nations.  1.  As  the  centre  of  numbers.  "Many  nations
shall  come."  It  shall  not  be  confined  to  one  people  nor  locality.  "  I  will  make
of  thee  a  great  nation."  "People  shall  flow  into  it;"  indicating  multitude  and  eager-
ness. Like  a  river,  distant  peoples  shall  come  and  throng  in  one  continuous  stream.
A  flood  once  covered  the  highest  mountains  and  destroyed  everything  on  the  face
of  the  earth.  But  this  river  shall  bring  spiritual  life  and  fertilize  the  universe
11  They  shall  come  and  sing  in  the  height  of  Zion,  and  shall  flow  together  to  the
goodness  of  the  Lord."  2.  As  the  place  of  instruction.  They  go  to  know  God  and
to  learn  his  ways ;  not  to  be  amused  with  idle  speculations  and  novel  theories.
They  go  for  grace,  to  practise  what  they  know,  to  "  hear  of  heaven  and  learn  the
way."  Religious  instruction  has  ever  been  connected  with  Divine  worship.  The
more  we  know  of  God,  the  more  anxious  shall  we  be  to  praise  and  please  him.  "  He
will  teach  us  of  his  ways,  and  we  will  walk  in  his  paths."  3.  As  the  residence  of
God.  4<  The  house  of  the  God  of  Jacob."  More  glorious  than  the  tabernacle  and
the  temple  of  old.  This  is  the  pavilion  of  God's  splendour,  the  place  where  his
honour  dwelleth.  Here  he  dwells  and  displays  special  signs  of  grace.  "  The
glory  of  this  latter  house  shall  be  greater  than  of  the  former,  saith  the  Lord  of
hosts."  4.  As  the  seat  of  empire.  "  And  he  shall  judge  among  many  people."
God  will  here  fix  his  throne  and  exercise  spiritual  rule  over  the  world.  He  will
rebuke  the  proud,  convict  the  sinner,  and  subdue  all  things  to  himself.  Tyrants
and  thrones,  idolatries  and  superstitions,  shall  fall  before  the  power  of  the  Gospel.
"For  the  law  shall  go  forth  of  Zion,  and  the  Word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem."

III.  The  abiding  prosperity  of  the  Church.  The  Gospel  is  a  rule  of  order  and
peace  ;  brings  tranquillity  and  prosperity  to  all  people.  1.  Wars  shall  cease.  In
the  best  governed  states  we  see  restlessness,  suspicion,  and  insecurity.  Kingdoms
have  been  torn  by  civil  and  subdued  by  foreign  wars.  But  here  Jew  shall  not
hate  Gentile ;  implements  of  strife  shall  be  instruments  of  peace  ;  and  nations  shall
learn  war  no  more.  2.  Social  quietness  shall  be  enjoyed.  Vineyards  shall  be
possessed  by  the  poor  ;  the  fig,  the  characteristic  fruitfulness  of  Palestine,  shall  not
decay;  and  every  one  shall  sit  in  domestic  harmony.  Each  will  be  content  and
undisturbed  in  his  lot.  Abundance  of  peace  shall  mark  the  future  Church.  In
secrecy  men  will  sit  securely,  and  openly  walk  in  perfect  safety.  "None  shall
make  them  afraid."     This  glorious  future  seems  almost  impossible,  judging  from


422


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  MIC  AH.


[CHAP.    IV.


the  present.     But  God  has  purposed,  and  will  bring  it  to  pass.
of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


u  For  the  mouth


Ver.  1.  Flow.  The  metaphor  of
flowing  importeth  the  coming  of  people
to  Christ  by  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel.
1.  Freely  (Psal.  ex.  3).  2.  Swiftly,  as
the  waters  of  the  river  Tigris  ;  swift  as
an  arrow  out  of  a  bow  (see  Isa.  lx.  8).  3.
Plentifully,  by  whole  nations  turned  to
the  faith,  and  giving  up  their  names  to
Christ.  4.  Jointly,  as  ver.  2  (Zech.
viii.  21).  5.  Zealously,  bearing  down
all  obstacles  that  would  dam  up  their
way.  6.  Constantly  and  continually,
as  rivers  run  perpetually,  by  reason  of
the  perennity  of  their  fountains ;  and
are  never  dried  up,  though  sometimes
fuller  than  others;  as  rivers  swell  oft
with  sudden  showers  and  overflow  the
banks,  so,  beyond  all  expectation,  many
times  doth  God  propagate  his  truth,
enlarging  the  bounds  of  his  Church
with  new  confluxes  of  converts  \Trapp\.

Yer.  2.  Let  us  go  up.  1.  The  object
of  their  journey.  "  The  mountain  of
the  Lord."  2.  The  spirit  in  which  they
undertake  it.  "  And  say,  Come,  let  us,"
&c.  (1)  A  spirit  of  fervour.  (2)  A
spirit  of  mutual  love.  "  Exhorting  one
another,  as  Andrew  exhorted  his  brother
Simon,  and  Philip  Nathaniel,  and  the
woman  of  Samaria  those  of  her  city,  to
come  to  Christ;  and  so  all  since,  who
have  been  won  by  him,  by  word  or
example,  by  preaching  or  by  deed,  in
public  or  in  private,  bring  along  with
them  others  to  seek  him  /vhom  they
themselves  have  found"  \Pusey\.  3.
The  worthy  end  they  have  in  view.
"  He  will  teach  us  of  his  ways."  "  They
come  in  holy  simplicity  to  learn  what-


ever he  will  condescend  to  teach  them ;
in  holy  confidence,  that  he,  the  Infalli-
ble Truth,  will  teach  them  infallibly."
4.  The  practical  result.  "  We  will  walk
in  his  paths."

Law  out  of  Zion.  1.  The  blessing
issued.  " Law"  Not  mere  doctrine  or
religion ;  not  the  Jewish  law  :  but  law
(without  the  article)  as  the  rule  of  life
(Prov.  vi.  23 ;  xxviii.  4),  which  should
be  revealed  to  heathen  nations  (Lam.
ii.  9  :  Isa.  ii.  3).  2.  The  method  of  its
issuing.  "  Go  forth."  A  personal,  direct
act  of  God ;  a  continual  influence  of  the
Gospel  and  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the
Church  and  Christian  experience.  3.
The  centre  from  which  it  issues.  Out
of  Zion  and  Jerusalem.

Vers.  3,  4.  The  universal  spread
of  the  Gospel.  Modern  theories  of
the  future  exposed  and  refuted.  The
guarantees  for  the  fulfilment  of  this
prediction  and  its  benefits  described.
This  prophecy  is  fulfilled — (1)  In
the  character  of  the  Gospel.  (2)  The
prophecy  has  been  fulfilled,  within  and
without,  among  individuals  or  bodies
of  men,  in  body  or  mind,  in  temper  or
in  deed,  as  far  as  the  Gospel  has  pre-
vailed [Pusey].

The  cessation  of  war  an  effect  of  the
prevalence  of  Christianity  [Foster's
Lectures,  vol.  ii.].

"  No  more  shall  nation  against  nation  rise,
Nor  ardent  warriors  meet  with  hateful  eyes,
Nor  fields  with  gleaming  steel  be  covered  o'er,
Nor  brazen  trumpets  kindle  rage  no  more :
But  useless  lances  into  scythes  shall  bend,
And  the  broad  falchion  in  a  ploughshare  end  "
[Pope — The  Messiah].


HOMILETICS.
Christianity  the  only  Guarantee  for  Better  Days. — Verse  5.

The  prophet  has  just  predicted  a  bright  future  for  the  Church.  But  Jehovah
alone  can  bring  it  to  pass.  "  For "  idols  are  impotent,  and  those  who  worship
them  can  do  nothing.  Christianity  is  the  only  hope  of  mankind.  Human  systems
can  never  accomplish  the  work  of  God.

I.  Ancient  systems  did  not  bring  better  days.  What  have  the  myths  of
Egypt,  Persia,  and  India  done  1  What  did  the  religions  of  Greece  and  Borne
accomplish'?     Many  nations  excelled  in  wealth,  intelligence,  and  refinement,  but


chap.  it. J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MICAH.  423


were  degraded  in  morals.  Religion  is  always  more  potent  than  philosophy  and
culture.  The  latter  can  never  affect  the  former.  An  inferior  never  changes  the
character  of  a  superior  power.  Hence  false  religions  hecome  worse,  gravitate  to
the  centre  of  evil,  and  lose  all  influence  to  elevate  and  bless  the  world.  II.  Modern
systems  cannot  bring  better  days.  If  history  and  experience  determine  the  fate
of  nations  in  the  past ;  if  Christianity  has  been  the  only  power  to  cope  with
heathenism  and  eradicate  evil,  will  the  verdict  for  the  future  differ  from  the  past]
We  may  advance  in  commercial  prosperity,  education,  and  civilization,  without
improvement  and  elevation  in  morals.  The  religions  of  intellect  and  of  emotion,
of  imagination  and  sentiment,  the  theories  of  philosophy  and  utility — which  are
the  boast  of  the  present  day — will  never  abolish  war  and  bring  the  anticipated
millennium.  In  man  we  cannot  trust.  In  systems  half-human  and  half-divine
we  have  no  guarantee  for  the  future.  Our  faith  must  stand  not  in  the  wisdom  of
man,  but  in  the  power  of  God.  With  this  we  shall  be  safe,  happy,  and  triumph-
ant.    God  has  promised,  and  will  accomplish  better  days.

"  'Tis  coming  on  the  hills  of  time,

And  this  old  world  is  growing  brighter ;
We  may  not  see  its  dawn  sublime,

But  nigh  hopes  make  the  heart  throb  lighter."

The  Zeal  op  Idolaters  an  Incentive  to  Christian  Life.

We  may  take  ver.  5  as  a  resolution  of  Jewish  and  Gentile  converts  to  cling  to
God  and  walk  in  his  ways,  exciting  themselves  by  the  example  and  spirit  of
idolaters,  who  were  zealous  and  pertinacious  in  their  ungodly  course.

I.  Every  one  has  a  god.  It  is  a  trite  but  true  saying  that  man  will  worship.
If  he  does  not  love  the  true,  he  will  a  false  god — an  idol.  Under  the  Gospel,
and  in  heathen  nations,  idolatry  is  prevalent.  II.  Every  one  makes  a  pro-
fession of  his  god.  "Every  one  in  the  name  of  his  god" — that  is,  under
the  law  and  in  conformity  to  the  will  of  his  god.  1.  It  is  an  open  profession.
They  are  not  afraid  nor  ashamed  of  their  profession.  2.  It  is  a  consistent
profession.  They  "walk"  in  the  fear,  and  not  against  the  authority,  of  their
god.  Their  moral  conduct  does  not  contradict  their  religious  faith.  3.  It
is  a  stedfastprofession.  They  "will  walk."  They  were  constant  and  persevering
in  their  practice.  They  were  determined  not  to  forsake  their  worship ;  for  a
nation  will  seldom  change  its  gods  (Jer.  ii.  11).  4.  It  is  a  universal  profession.
For  all  will  walk,  " every  one"  &c.  Hence  if  these  idolaters  were  so  earnest  and
resolute,  what  should  we  do  1  says  the  prophet.  Their  ardour  should  kindle  our
indifference ;  their  exactness  shame  our  inconsistency ;  and  their  numbers  provoke
our  efforts.  Our  confession  and  resolution  should  be,  "  We  ivill  walk  in  the  name
of  the  Lord  our  God."  This  not  occasionally,  for  since  there  is  nothing  unreason-
able or  wearying  in  this  service,  it  should  be  "for  ever  and  ever."

The  Kingdom  of  Christ. —  Verses  6 — 8.

From  the  salvation  promised  even  those  that  are  scattered  abroad  and  dwelling
in  misery  will  not  be  excluded.  God  will  finally  remove  all  impediments  and
bring  his  people  together  into  one  glorious  and  perpetual  kingdom  in  Christ  Jesus.

I.  The  seat  of  the  kingdom.  "The  Lord  shall  reign  over  them  in  Mount
Zion."  Zion  is  the  place  from  which  the  law  went  out  (ver.  2),  and  a  type  of  the
Christian  Church  (Isa.  xl.  9;  lii.  7).  Jerusalem  was  the  special  abode  of  Jehovah,
the  seat  of  theocratic  government,  and  the  centre  of  prescribed  worship.  The
Church  now  is  the  Mount  of  God,  for  elevation  and  dignity.  Here  he  deigns  to
dwell,  to  bless  his  people,  and  rule  the  world.  "  The  city  of  the  Great  King."
II.  The  subjects  of  the  kingdom.  Jew  and  Gentile,  the  distant  and  most
degraded,  will  be  gathered  together.     Persons  that  are  despised  and  forgotten  by


424  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MIC  AH,  [chap,  it


human  governments,  the  indigent,  and  the  poor,  will  become  citizens  of  the  Great
King.  1.  The  morally  weak.  "  Her  that  halteth."  Men  are  spiritually  tired,
maimed,  and  disjointed.  Moral  halting  had  been  the  chief  sin  of  Israel,  serving
God  and  Baal  (1  Kings  xviii.  21).  Men  halt,  hesitate,  and  counterfeit  in  God's
service  now.  2.  The  hopelessly  scattered.  "Her  that  is  driven  out."  Jews
carried  away  by  force,  and  Gentiles  led  by  dumb  idols  (1  Cor.  xii.  2).  All  that
are  dispersed  like  a  flock  from  the  fold  of  God.  "  I  will  save  her  that  halteth,
and  gather  her  that  was  driven  out"  (Zeph.  iii.  16).  3.  Tlie  grievously  distressed.
"  Her  that  T  have  afflicted."  Men  are  not  merely  driven  out  from  God,  but  are
sick  and  afflicted  in  body  and  mind.  When  God  afflicts  them  they  are  specially
dear  to  him.  All  grievances  shall  be  redressed,  and  all  distempers  healed.  "  I
will  seek  that  which  was  lost,  and  bring  again  that  which  was  driven  away,  and
will  bind  up  that  which  was  broken,  and  will  strengthen  that  which  was  sick  "
(Ezek.  xxxiv.  13 — 16).  III.  The  glory  of  the  kingdom.  The  glory  of  the
theocracy  was  obscured  by  the  sins  of  kings  and  priests.  Earthly  monarchies
decay  and  undergo  eclipse;  but  the  glory  of  this  kingdom  excelleth.  1.  It  will  be
dignified.  The  kingdom  will  come  to  the  Church  with  a  glory  exceeding  "  even
the  first  dominion."  It  will  shine  with  a  greater  lustre  than  the  reigns  of  David
and  Solomon.  2.  It  will  be  strong.  "  A  strong  nation."  (a)  Strong  in  numbers.
The  remnant  scattered  and  depressed  shall  be  restored  and  multiplied,  like  the
stars  of  heaven  or  the  sands  on  the  sea-shore,  (b)  Strong  in  victory.  It  will  no
more  be  subdued  by  petty  monarchs  or  neighbouring  confederacies.  But  its
strength  is  not  human  might,  temporal  greatness ;  but  strong  in  spiritual  warfare,
in  faith,  and  achievements.  "  A  little  one  shall  become  a  thousand,  and  a  small
one  a  strong  nation."  3.  It  will  be  perpetual.  The  Lord  shall  reign  over  them,
"  even  for  ever."  The  valour  and  strength  of  David,  the  honour  and  wisdom  of
Solomon,  were  but  shadows  of  this  kingdom.  The  King  eternal  is  not  subject  to
mortality,  nor  exposed  to  danger.  The  glory  of  the  Church  and  the  height  of  its
felicity  are  the  constant  presence  and  prerogatives  of  Christ  Jesus.  "  The  Lord
God  shall  give  unto  him  the  throne  of  his  father  David ;  and  he  shall  reign  over
the  house  of  Jacob  for  ever ;  and  of  his  kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.   5.      Contrasts  in  worship.     1.  strength.     "At  that  time  they  shall  call

Men  of  the  world  reject  God.     2.  Men  Jerusalem  the  throne  of  the  Lord  ;  and

of    the  world  worship  their  own  god.  all  the  nations  shall  be  gathered  together

3.  But  Christians  are  determined  to  love  unto  it,  to  the  name  of  the  Lord,  to

and  serve  Jehovah.     That  which  is  the  Jerusalem."

scandal  to  the  world,  to  them  is  a  motive  Ver.  7.  The  Lord  shall  reign.  As
to  firmness  and  to  union.  There  are  King,  he— 1.  Of  rebels  makes  them  sub-
different  persuasions  in  the  world,  let  jects,  willing  to  be  ruled  by  him.  2.
us  be  true  and  cleave  together  in  the  He  preserves  them  in  that  privilege  by
right  way.  "  We  will  walk  in  the  name  iris  Spirit.  3.  He  gives  them  laws  far
of  the  Lord."  better  than  those  of  the  twelve  tables  in

Vers.  6 — 8.  The  flock  of  Christ.  1.  Borne,  which  yet  far  exceeded  (saith
The  flock  in  a  state  of  helplessness.  Halt,  Cicero)  all  the  learned  libraries  of  the
scattered,  and  afflicted.  2.  The  flock  philosophers  in  worth  and  weight.  4.
gathered  together  by  the  Good  Shep-  He  sweetly  inclineth  their  wills  to  yield
herd.  Gathered  by  providence  and  universal  obedience  thereunto,  and  to
found  by  grace.  3.  The  flock  defended,  cross  themselves  so  they  may  please
From  the  "  tower  of  the  flock,"  they  him.  5.  He  rewards  them  with  corn-
are — (1)  inspected  ;  (2)  environed  ;  (3)  fort  and  peace  here,  and  with  life  eternal
shielded.  The  Church  is  designed  to  hereafter.  6.  He  destroys  all  the  ene-
be   a  defence   and   tower  of    spiritual  mies  of  his  Church,  and  then,  at  last*


CWA1.  IV.]  HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:  MIC  AH.  425


delivers  up  the  kingdom  to  his  Father  tidings  the  s  gladder  by  repeating  and

(1  Cor.  xv.  24)  ;  not  his  essential  king-  enforcing  them"  [Pusey].
dom  as  God,  hut  his  economical  kingdom         Vers.  1 — 8.    The  kingdom  of  God.    1.

as  mediator  \Trapp\.  Its  central  point :  the  glorified  and  ex-

Yer.  8.  The  world  is  a  field,  the  alted  Zion,  the  source  of  the  statutes
Church  a  fold  in  that  field ;  and  a  and  revelations ;  and  through  grace,  the
strong  fold  (strong  as  a  tower),  yea,  a  ancient,  chosen  seat  of  God's  dominion,
stronghold;  Ophel,  as  it  is  styled  in  the  2.  Its  citizens  :  those  who  flow  towards
next  words  ;  and  that  of  the  daughter  it  thirsting  for  righteousness,  longing
of  Zion,  that  is,  of  the  Christian  Church,  for  salvation.  3.  Its  order :  God's  law
the  inviolable  security  whereof  is  here  and  God's  peace  (ver.  3).  4.  Its  blessed-
noted  [Ibid.].  ness  :  rest,  security,  prosperity  (ver.  4).

Come  and  arrive.     He  twice  repeats  5.  Its  duration :  eternal,  like  God  him-

the  assurance,  in  equivalent  words,  for  self  (ver.  5)  [Lange].
their  fuller  assurance,  "to  make  the  good

HOMILETICS.

The  Suffering  and  Triumph  of  God's  People. —  Verses  9 — 13.

Israel's  history,  like  human  life,  has  its  dark  and  its  bright  side.  Before  the
glory  promised  is  ever  gained,  sorrow  and  trial  must  be  endured.  This  is — 1.  A
constant  rule ;  and — 2.  A  necessary  order  in  God's  discipline.  But  the  scene  of
trial  was  to  be  the  place  of  deliverance.  The  sufferings  shall  be  over-ruled  for  the
salvation  of  his  people  and  the  destruction  of  their  enemies.     Notice  : —

I.  The  bitterness  of  the  affliction.    "  Pangs  have  taken  thee,"  &c.    Pangs  with-
out remedy,  and  painful  as  a  woman  in  travail.     1.  The  loss  of  kings.    "  Is  there  no
king  in  thee  I "     A  visible  king  was  a  protection,  and  a  symbol  of  God's  presence
to  them.     The  loss  was  most  serious  and  irreparable.      It  was  a  condition  of
helplessness    and    shame.      2.     The   loss  of   counsellors.      "  Is   thy   counsellor
perished*?"     Kings  and  judges  were  their  counsellors  and  guides;  but  they  were
bereft  of  wisdom  to  direct,  left  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  and  governed  by
captive  nations.     3.   The  loss  of  liberties.     "  Now  shalt  thou  go  forth  out  of  the
city"  which  shall  be  captured ;  u  dwell  in  the  field  "  exposed  to  danger ;  and  be
carried  "even  to  Babylon"  into  long  captivity.     This  was  a  sad  exchange  of
liberty  and  luxury  for  bondage  and  misery.     But  it  is  the  picture  of  many  a  soul
reduced  to  slavery,  bereft  of  God  and  writhing  in  agony.     II.  The  comforts  under
the  affliction.     All  is  not  lost,  though  they  have  neither  king  nor  counsellor.
God  will  make  up  for  everything.     1.  Affliction  will  end  in  good.     "Jerusalem's
pangs  are  not  as  dying  agonies,  but  as  travailing  throes,  which  after  a  while  will  be
forgotten  for  joy  that  a  child  is  born  into  the  world."     Weeping  may  endure  for  a
night,  but  joy  cometh  in  the  morning  (Ps.  xxx.  6 ;  lxxiii.  24  :  Jer.  x.  24).     2.
Deliverance  will  be  granted.     "There  shalt  thou  be  delivered."     There,  where
sorrow  is  greatest  and  hope  is  faintest — even  m  Babylon,  the  most  unlikely  place,
"  the  Lord  shall  redeem  thee."     The  utmost  degree  of  affliction  is  often  the  nearest
to  the  end,  and  help  is  not  in  the  holy  city,  but  in  the  stronghold  of  the  foe.
"Man's  extremity  is  God's  opportunity."     The  Red  Sea  must  be  the  scene  of
triumph  to  Israel,  and  the  prison  the  place  of  deliverance  to  Joseph  and  Peter.
This   magnifies   God's  grace  and  power.      "  When  the    Lord  turned  again  the
captivity  of  Zion,  we  'were  like  them  that  dream."     3.  Enemies  will  be  subdued.
"  Thou  shalt  beat  in  pieces  many  people."     In  their  weakness,  God  will  be  their
strength,  and  make  them  victorious  over  confederate  nations.    Their  horns  shall  be
iron,  to  push  their  enemies ;  and  their  hoofs  brass,  to  tread  them  down.     The
destruction  is  universal  and  complete.     All  enemies  shall  be  put  under  their  feet,
as  conquered  foes,  or  willing  subjects.     "  Pear  not,  thou  worm  Jacob.     Behold,  I
will  make  thee  a  new  sharp  threshing  instrument,  having  teeth :  thou  shalt  thresh


426  H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:  MICAS.  [chip.  it.


the  mountains  and  beat  them  small,  and  shalt  make  the  hills  as  chaff"  (Is.  xli.
13—15).  III.  The  spirit  in  which  they  should  bear  the  affliction.  If  such  be
their  prospects  in  the  trial,  how  should  they  demean  themselves?  1.  They  should
cherish  a  patient  spirit  "  Why  dost  thou  cry  out  aloud  1 "  Calm  fear  and  hush
grief ;  though  affliction  be  grievous  at  present,  it  shall  afterward  yield  the  fruits  of
joy  and  peace.     Patience  defeats  the  menace  of  the  foe,  but  passion  takes  his  part

"Patience  doth  conquer  by  out-suffering  all"  [Peel],

2.  They  should  cherish  a  submissive  spirit  "Be  in  pain,"  &c.  Grieve,  but
remember  excessive  grief,  fretfulness,  and  rebellion,  are  unreasonable.  Resistance
is  folly,  submission  is  triumph.

"  By  not  opposing,  thou  dost  ills  destroy,
And  wear  thy  conquered  sorrows  into  joy  "  [ Young],

3.  They  should  cherish  a  spirit  of  hope.  What  a  bright  prospect  opens  up  before
them  !  Why  doubt  or  despair  ?  God  will  accomplish  his  word.  Hope  will  sweeten
trial,  and,  like  the  sun,  paint  the  rainbow  on  the  clouds.  "  Black  though  our  side
of  the  canvas  be,"  said  Sir  Harry  Vane,  in  going  to  be  executed,  "  the  Divine
hand  paints  a  beautiful  picture  on  the  unseen  side."

The  Destruction  of  Zion's  Foes. —  Verses  11 — 13.

Those  who  exult  in  Israel's  fall,  and  seek  to  defile  and  outrage  her,  will  be  dis-
appointed. Inscrutable  wisdom  will  correct  the  children  with  the  foe,  and  then
destroy  the  foe  with  the  children.

I.  They  are  frustrated  in  their  design.  "Let  her  be  defiled,"  &c.  1.
They  sought  her  injury.  They  desired  to  defile  her  with  blood,  and  condemn
her  in  guilt.  The  wicked  delight  in  the  fall  and  inconsistencies  of  God's
people.  They  often  become  tempters,  then  accusers ;  "  first  desecrators,  then
sanctimonious  justiciaries,"  says  one.  2.  They  feasted  their  eyes  on  her
misery.  "Let  our  eye  look  upon  Zion."  The  world  always  hates  the  Church
and  rejoices  in  its  sorrow.  Edom  delighted  in  the  chastisement  of  Israel
(Obad.  12.)  ;  and  the  sufferings  of  the  martyrs  were  a  spectacle  to  the  heathen.
Malice  is  blind  to  all  virtue,  and  eyes  can  always  see  what  hearts  can  wish.  "  Yea,
they  opened  their  mouth  wide  against  me,  and  said,  Aha,  aha,  our  eye  hath  seen
it."  II.  They  are  crushed  in  their  efforts.  "  Many  nations  are  gathered  against
thee."  The  powers  of  earth  and  hell  are  sometimes  arrayed  against  the  Church,
but  all  in  vain.  They  are  against  God  when  against  his  people.  They  may  have
wickedness  to  imagine,  craft  to  devise,  but  are  not  able  to  perform  (Ps.  xxi.).  God
knows  their  thoughts,  but  they  cannot  defeat  his  purpose.  Pharaoh's  counsel  to
extinguish  issued  in  the  increase  of  the  chosen  people.  The  wisdom,  power,  and
counsel  of  man  signify  nothing,  if  they  oppose  the  decrees  of  God.  "  He  taketh
the  wise  in  their  craftiness."  Learn — 1.  The  folly  of  designing  against  God.  2.
The  security  of  obedience  to  God.  III.  They  are  ruined  in  their  numbers.
"  Many  nations "  combined  against  Zion.  The  armies  of  Babylon,  with  their
subject  nations,  the  forces  of  Edom,  Ammon,  Moab,  and  others,  who  exulted  in
Judah's  fall,  were  types  of  the  anti-Christian  powers  of  the  latter  days.  Neither
numbers  nor  craft  avail  before  God.  They  only  ripen  themselves  for  God  to
"gather  them  as  the  sheaves  into  the  floor."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Vers.  9,  10.  I.  The  moral  condition  of  the  privileges  of  that  city,  whose  builder

men.    Kingless  and  restless,  in  captivity  and  maker  is  God  ;  exposed  to  danger,

and  misery.     Unable  to  cope  with  sin,  tumult,  and  the  distractions  of  life.    II.

evil  habits,  and  the  world.     Without  The  purpose  of  God  concerning  men.   To


0H1P.  XT.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MICAH.


427


redeem,  to  govern,  to  guide,  and  to
exalt  above  all  misery  and  opposition.
He  will  shortly  bruise  Satan  under  their
feet,  and  every  power  of  body  and  mind
shall  be  consecrated  to  him.

Vers.  11,  12.  The  enemies  of  Zion.
1.  Their  number.  2.  Their  purpose, —
to  defile  and  rejoice.  3.  Their  spirit —
proud  and  determined.  4.  Their  help-
lessness. "They  know  not  the  thoughts
of  God."  5.  Their  ruin.  "He  shall  gather
them,"  &c.  God's  people  begin,  and  he
will  finish,  the  work.

Gather  them  as  sheaves.  Persecutors.
1.  Ripened  by  their  own  conduct.  2.
Gathered  by  the  providence  of  God.  3.
Threshed  by  the  judgments  of  God.
"  This  prophecy  received  a  primary  and
partial  fulfilment  in  the  victories  of  the
Maccabees  (1  Mace.  v.  1).  But  its
adequate  accomplishment  is  in  Christ.
It  is  to  be  applied  to  the  work  of  the
apostles,  and  apostolic  men,  missionaries
of  Christ,  who  are  compared  by  St.
Paul  to  oxen  treading  out  the  corn  (1
Cor.  ix.  9  :  1  Tim.  v.  18  :  cf.  Is.  xxxii.
20).  Their  work  is  indeed  one  of
bringing  the  nations  into  subjection  (2
Cor.  ii.  14;  x.  5  :  Eph.  vi.  12) ;  but  it
is  in  subjection  to  the  law  of  love,  in
order  that  the  good  grain  winnowed
from  the  sheaves  on  the  floor  may  be
gathered  into  the  garner  of  heaven  "  (cf .
Ps.  cxlix.  8)  [  Wordsworth] .

Yer.  13.  The  very  image  of  the
threshing  implies  that  this  is  no  mere
destruction.  While  the  stubble  is  beaten
or  bruised  to  small  pieces,  and  the  chaff
is  far  more  than   the  wheat,   and  is


carried  out  of  the  floor,  there  yet  re-
mains the  seed-corn.  So  in  the  great
judgments  of  God,  while  most  is  refuse,
there  yet  remains  over  what  is  severed
from  the  lost  heap,  and  wholly  conse-
crated to  him  [Pusey].

The  Lord  of  the  whole  earth.  1.  God
the  supreme  ruler  of  the  world.  Not
merely  the  God  of  Israel,  but  ruler
"  of  the  whole  earth."  2.  All  things
governed  in  the  interests  of  the  Church.
The  nations  subject  to  Zion,  not  for
selfish  aggrandisement,  but  for  her  good
and  his  glory  (Isa.  Ix.  6,  9  ;  xxiii.  18).
3.  The  glory  of  victory  should  be  given
to  God.  All  gains  of  merchandise,  all
achievements  of  intellect,  all  success  of
spiritual  efforts,  spring  from  him,  and
should  be  consecrated  to  him.  Holiness
to  the  Lord  should  be  written  on  all
things  we  do.

Vers.  9 — 13.  Of  the  struggles  of
God's  congregation.  They  must  be
maintained  :  1.  Under  heavy  sorrow,
in  secure  expectation  of  their  final  re-
demption (vers.  9,  10).  2.  Under  the
mighty  assaults  of  the  foe,  in  sure  con-
fidence that  the  Lord  sits  upon  the
throne  (vers.  11,  12).  3.  In  constant
self-examination.  For  although  the
victory  must  certainly  be  given  to  God's
cause  (ver.  13),  nevertheless,  until  Christ
is  born  in  the  congregation  (and  in  each
individual,  ver.  1),  the  result  of  every
contest  is  deserved  disaster  and  disgrace
(ver.  13)  [Lange].

The  whole  chapter  sets  forth — 1.  The
glory  ;  2.  The  peace  ;  3.  The  dominion  ;
and,  4.  The  victory  of  the  Church.


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  IV.


Vers.  1,  2.  Last  days.  God's  pro-
mises are  dated,  but  with  a  mysteri-
ous character ;  and  for  want  of  skill  in
God's  chronology,  we  are  prone  to  think
God  forgets  us,  when,  indeed,  we  forget
ourselves  in  being  so  bold  to  set  God  a
time  of  our  own,  and  in  being  angry
that  he  comes  not  just  then  to  us
[Gurnall].

Ver.  3.  War.  There  must  be  peace
when  the  art  of  war  is  laid  by  as  useless,
and  shall  be  learned  no  more.  That
will  be  a  blessed  time,  indeed,  when  the


art  military  shall  be  out  of  date,  and
(being  itself  the  greatest  interrupter  of
learning)  shall  be  learned  no  more.
When  soldiers  shall  turn  husbandmen
and  vine-dressers.  When  a  man  casts
away  his  sword  we  may  well  conclude
he  intends  to  be  quiet.  Thus  the  Lord
gives  quiet  to  nations  which  have  been
engaged  in  war,  by  causing  wars  to
cease  [Caryl].

Ver.  4.  Peace  of  country  life.

M  In  all  things  grew  his  wisdom  and  his  wealth,
And  folk  beholding  the  fair  state  and  health


128


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY ':  MIC  JR.


[chap,  rv


Wherein  his  land  was,  said  that  now  at  last
A  fragment  of  the  Golden  Age  was  cast
Over  the  place,  for  there  was  no  debate,
And  men  forgot  the  very  name  of  hate."

[  Wm.  Morris.]

Vers.  6 — 8.  As  the  pleasures  of  the
future  will  be  spiritual  and  pure,  the
object  of  a  good  and  wise  man  in  this
transitory  state  of  existence  should  be
to  fit  himself  for  a  better,  by  controlling
the  unworthy  propensities  of  his  nature
and  improving  all  his  better  aspirations ;
to  do  his  duty,  first  to  God,  then  to  his
neighbour;  to  promote  the  happiness
and  welfare  of  those  who  are  in  any
degree  dependent  upon  him,  or  whom
he  has  the  means  of  assisting;  never
wantonly  to  injure  the  meanest  thing
that  lives;  to  encourage,  as  far  as  he
can,  whatever  is  useful  and  tends  to
refine  and  exalt  humanity ;  to  store  his
mind  with  such  knowledge  as  it  is  fitted
to  receive,  and  he  is  able  to  attain ;  and
so  to  employ  the  talents  committed  to
his  care  that,  when  the  account  is  re-
quired, he  may  hope  to  have  his  stew-
ardship approved  [Southey],

Ver.  9.  King.

"  Kings  are  like  stars — they  rise  and  set — they
have
The  worship  of  the  world,  but  no  repose."

[Shelley.']

Vers.  8 — 10.  The  kingdom  shall  come.
Observe,  it  is  a  kingdom  that  is  to  come
to  us ;  we  are  not  to  go  to  it.  Also,  it
is  not  to  be  a  kingdom  of  the  dead,  but
of  the  living.    Also,  it  is  not  to  come  all


at  once,  but  quietly;  nobody  knows
how.  "The  kingdom  cometh  not  with
observation  "  [RusMn\.

Vers.  10,  11.  It  belongs,  in  truth,  to
the  Church  of  God  to  suffer  blows,  not
to  strike  them.  But  at  the  same  time
let  it  be  remembered  that  the  Church  is
an  anvil  which  has  worn  out  many  a
hammer  [J5^a].

Ver.  12.  Thoughts  of  the  Lord.  To
those,  the  eyes  of  whose  understandings
are  enlightened,  and  the  avenues  of  their
hearts  opened  to  discern  and  adore  the
perfections  of  God,  how  manifold  are
the  instances  which  occur  of  the  provi-
dence of  God  interfering  to  direct  the
course  of  human  events  towards  a  salu-
tary end ;  to  make  afflictions  of  men  the
by-path  to  enjoyment;  out  of  evils,
temporal  and  transitory,  to  produce
substantial  and  permanent  good  \Bp.
Mant].

Ver.  13.  Hope  doth  three  things  :  it
assures  good  things  to  come  ;  it  disposes
us  for  them  ;  it  waits  for  them  unto  the
end,  each  of  which  will  be  of  singular
use  to  fit  us  for  pious  sufferings  [Polhill] .

Arise.  When  God  has  conquering
work  for  his  people  to  do,  he  will  furn-
ish them  with  strength  and  ability  for
it;  will  make  the  horn  iron  and  the
hoofs  brass  :  and,  when  he  does  so,  they
must  exert  the  power  he  gives  them,
and  execute  the  commission ;  even  the
daughter  of  Zion  must  arise  and  thresh
[Matt.  Henry],


CHAPTER  V.


Critical  Notes.  Thou]  invading  army  (not  Judah).  TJs]  The  prophet  identifies  himself  with
the  nation.  Smite]  The  greatest  msult  (Lam.  iii.  30:  Matt.  v.  39:  xxvii.  30).  Judge]  or  king
(Amos  ii.  3).  2.  Beth.]  The  ensuing  prophecy  (vers.  1 — 5)  combined  with  what  goes  before  and
what  follows,  consummates  the  witness  of  the  0.  T.  concerning  Christ,  and  is  the  groundwork  of
his  history  in  the  New  [  Words.].  Eph.]  To  distinguish  it  from  another  Beth,  in  Zebulon  (Josh.  xix.
10,  15).  Little]  So  insignificant  in  size  and  population  that  it  was  not  enumerated  among  the
cities  of  Judah  (Josh.  xv.  21)  ;  nor  in  the  list  (Neh.  xi.  25)  ;  it  became  a  city  under  Rehoboara
(2  Chron.  xi.  6).  Thous.]  Tribes  divided  into  thousands,  over  which  a  leader  presided,  and  com-
manded them  in  war  (Ex.  xviii.  21,  25  :  Num.  i.  16  :  Deut.  i.  15).  •  Family '  is  given,  Judg.  vi.  15.
Out]  Lit.  shall  one  come  forth  to  me  to  be  ruler.  Out  of]  Beth.,  as  his  native  place,  antithetic  to
From  of  old]  Lit.  from  the  days  of  eternity ;  expressing  the  eternity  of  Christ's  Divine  nature  and


chip.  T.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MICAH.  429


person  [Gill]  ;  and  the  displays  of  his  power  of  old  from  everlasting,  which  may  be  referred  to  his
covenant  engagements,  and  to  the  work  of  creation  [Boothr.].  3.  Therefore]  On  account  of  this
fixed  plan  of  God,  his  people  will  be  given  up  to  suffer,  until  she]  "  the  virgin  "  mother  of
Jesus  (Isa.  vii.  14) ;  or  the  people  of  Judah,  from  whom  a  ruler  was  to  come  forth  (Gen.  xlix.  10).
Suffering  is  the  necessary  travail-pain  which  precedes  the  joy  of  birth.  Then]  Blessings  described
which  result  from  the  Messiah's  birth.  Rem.]  The  remainder,  not  only  inhabitants  of  Judah  left
from  the  judgment,  but  members  of  the  revolted  ten  tribes  ;  all  Israelites  dispersed  in  foreign  lands.
Only  brethren,  sons  of  Israel,  his  race,  have  the  right  to  return.  4.  Feed)  Lit.  rule  (Matt.  ii.  6)
[margin];  (Isa.  xl.  11).  Stand]  Persevering  and  diligent,  in  the  attributes  and  name  of  his  God,
i.e.  one  in  relation  and  purpose  with  Jehovah  (Isa.  ix.  5).  They]  Returned  remnant.  Abide]
Dwell  in  perfect  peace  and  security  (cf.  chap.  iv.  4  :  Isa.  xiv.  30).  Now]  in  the  fulfilment.  He]
Alone  (cf.  Joel  ii.  _0,  21  :  Luke  i.  32).  5.  Man]  Heb.  this,  emphatic  (Gen.  v.  29)  ;  the  cause  or
author  of  peace  between  God  and  man  (Zech.  ix.  10  :  Eph.  ii.  14,  17  :  Col.  i.  20).  Seven  and
eight]  Numbers  complete,  victorious,  and  contrasted  with  the  enemy  (Job  v.  19:  Prov.  vi.  16).
Prin.]  Shepherds  equivalent  to  princes  or  rulers  (Jer.  vi.  3  :  Nahum  iii.  18).  6.  Entrances]  The
borders  where  garrisons  and  its  chief  strength  lie  (2  Kings  iii.  21).  Waste]  Lit.  eat  up ;  the
metaphor  of  shepherds  (Num.  xxii.  4).  Sword]  With  her  own  naked  swords  (Ps.  Iv.  21).  He]
Messiah.  7.  Rem.]  Shall  quicken  and  have  the  same  influence  as  imperceptible  dew]  (Oeut.
xxxii.  2  :  Ps.  lxxii.  6).  An  earnest  of  greater  blessings  hereafter  (Isa.  lxvi.  19  :  Zech.  viii.  13).
Showers]  From  dabdr,  to  multiply,  multitudes  of  drops ;  from  God,  and  independent  of  human
agency,  as  dew  and  rain.  8.  Lion]  To  take  vengeance  on  her  enemies  (Isa.  lxvi.  15,  16  :  Zech.
xii.  3 — 6  ;  xiv.  17,  18)  ;  and  strike  terror  into  all  opponents.  A  prediction  of  victory  under  the
Maccabees  and  after-times.  9.]  Exultant  feeling;  High  be  thy  hand  (Isa.  xxvi.  11)  to  destroy  the
foe  (Exod.  xiii.  9).  10.  Horses]  All  human  resources  on  which  to  depend  (Isa.  ii.  6 — 8:  Ps.  xx.  7).
"  The  Church  will  never  be  safe  till  she  is  stripped  of  all  creature-trusts,  ^nd  rests  on  Jehovah
alone  "  [Calvin].  11.  Cities]  Salvation  so  complete  that  neither  forces  nor  strongholds  would  be
wanted.  12.  Witch.]  Such  offences  would  be  no  more  found  amongst  them  (cf.  Isa.  ii.  6 — 8).
Sooth.]  Signmongers  by  hand  and  observations  of  the  sky.  13.  Images]  Graven  idols  made  of
wood  or  metal.  Stand.]  Statues,  stone  images,  or  stones  dedicated  to  idols  (1  Kings  xiv.  23).  "  Thou
shalt  no  more  be  an  idolatrous  people"  [A.  Clarke].  14-  Groves]  Lit.  "  Stems  of  trees,  or  posts
standing  upright,  or  set  up  as  idols,  which  were  dedicated  to  the  Canaanitish  goddess  of  nature"
(cf.  Ex.  xxxiv.  13)  [Keil].  Cities]  In  or  near  which  idolatrous  groves  were  planted  (2  Kings  x.  25).
"  These  two  rather  subordinate  objects  are  mentioned  instar  omnium,  to  express  the  entire  abolition
of  war  and  idolatry"  [Eeil].  15.]  The  Lord  will  take  vengeance  upon  nations  that  have  not  heard,
i.  e.  not  hearkened  or  obeyed  his  voice.  "  In  other  words,  he  will  exterminate  every  ungodly  power
by  a  fierce  judgment,  so  that  nothing  will  ever  be  able  to  disturb  the  peace  of  his  people  and
kingdom  again"  [Keil],

HOMILETICS.

The  Church  Militant — Verse  1.

Calamities  are  to  precede  prosperity.  Lest  Israel  should  fall  into  carnal  security,
she  is  warned  of  her  danger,  and  roused  to  defend  herself.  Zion,  in  her  warlike
attitude,  is  a  type  of  the  Church  militant.

I.  She  is  endangered  by  the  foe.  "He  hath  laid  siege  against  us."  In
this  world  the  Christian  Church  is  engaged  in  conflict  and  exposed  to  suffering.
The  powers  of  evil  have  arrayed  themselves  against  her.  Infidelity,  popery,
and  persecution  have  besieged  her  gates.  Sin  threatens  her  character,  liberty,
and  existence.  The  foes  are  numerous,  strong,  disciplined  to  arms,  and
possessing  manifold  advantages.  "  We  wrestle  not  against  flesh  and  blood,"
&c.  II.  She  is  often  deprived  of  earthly  leaders.  "They  shall  smite
the  judge  of  Israel."  Hengstenberg  thinks  this  expression  indicates  a  time
when  no  king  of  the  house  of  David  reigned.  Deplorable  is  the  city  with  an
enemy  at  the  walls,  and  without  a  commander  within  to  help.  In  early  days
the  Church  has  been  without  leaders  to  teach  and  guide.  Apostles  were  im-
prisoned and  martyrs  put  to  death.  Men  were  determined  to  destroy  the  very
existence  of  Christianity.  Hence  the  great  persecutions  through  which  it  has
passed.  But  when  the  godly  men  cease  and  the  faithful  fail,  then  God  will  help
(Ps.  xii.  1).  "For  the  Lord  is  our  judge,  the  Lord  is  our  law-giver,  the  Lord  is
oui  king ;  he  will  save  us."  III.  She  is  roused  to  action.  "  Now  gather  thyself
in  troops."  1.  Immediate  action.  "Now."  Every  Christian,  weak  oi  strong,  is
commanded  to  arise  and  be  ready.     The  present  is  the  day  for  exertion,  and  those


430  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MICAH.  [chap.  v.


who  work  should  do  it  with  vigour.  2.  United  action,  "  Gather  thyself  in
troops."  Dangers  are  great.  United  and  personal  action  are  required.  Stragglers
may  be  taken  prisoners.  Never  let  the  enemies'  watchword  prevail — "  Divide
and  conquer."  Close  thy  ranks,  and  let  each  soldier  keep  his  place.  Supported
by  the  promise  and  presence  of  God  we  should  fear  no  evil  and  shun  no  duty.
"  The  people  that  do  know  their  God  shall  be  strong,  and  do  exploits."

The  Euler  of  Israel. — Verses  2,^3.

In  the  greatest  danger  and  the  deepest  degradation  of  Zion  a  ruler  shall  arise  to
deliver  her,  and  raise  her  to  be  a  dreaded  power  in  the  world.

I.   The  place  from  which  the   ruler   came.     Bethlehem,  the  most  insig-
nificant,  not   Jerusalem,   the   royal,   city,   gave   birth   to   Jesus.      Little,   in   a
worldly  sense,  it  was  not  the   least  among  the  cities  of  Judah ;   but  eclipsed
them  all  in  spiritual  dignity.     God  perfects  strength  out  of  seeming  weakness,
and    immortalizes    obscure    places   by   the   events   of    his    providence.      Some
men    derive    honours   from,   and    others   confer   celebrity   upon,  the    place   in
which  they  were  born.     Many  cities  have  striven  for  the  honour  of  Homer's
birth.      In  Bethlehem  we  see  the  Divine  purpose  to  choose  "the   base  things
of  the  world,  and  to  bring  to  nought  things  that  are,"     II.  The  method  in
which  the  ruler  came.      1.  He  was  promised.      "Out  of  thee  shall  he  come
forth."     Chief  priests  and   scribes  gave  the  right  answer  to  Herod's  questions
(Matt.  ii.  4 — 6).     When  it  was  rumoured  that  he  would  come  out  of  Galilee,  his
enemies  could  say,  "  Christ  cometh  of  the  seed  of  David,  and  out  of  the  town  of
Bethlehem,  where  David  was."     When  we  think  that  the  promise  has  failed,  God
is  arranging  events,  choosing  agents,  and  fulfilling  his  word.    2.  He  was  appointed.
In  the  purpose  of  God  he  was  set  apart,  and  according  to  the  command  of  God  he
came.     He  came  not  of  himself,  but  the  Father  sent  and  sealed  him  (John  vi.  27).
"  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  come  :  in  the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  written  of  me  "  (Ps.
xl.  7,  8).     3.  He  was  born  of  a  woman.     "  She  which  travaileth  hath  brought
forth."     He  was  born  of  a  woman ;  the  virgin  conceived  and  bore  a  son  (Isa.  vii.
14).     His  goings  forth  were  of  old,  but  his  birth  was  in  time.     He  was  real  God
and  true  man.     God  was  manifest  in  the  flesh ;  and  in  the  coming  of  the  Messiah
we  may  read  the  truth  of  God,  and  discern  the  purpose  and  presence  of  God.
"Let  us  now  go  even  unto  Bethlehem,  and  see  this  thing  which  has  come  to  pass."
III.  The  purpose  for  which  the  ruler  came.     "  Who  shall  be  ruler  in  Israel  1 "
The  circumstances  of  his  birth  and  life  seemed  to  bespeak  anything  rather  than
royal  dominion.     Pilate  put  the  question,  "  Art  thou  a  king,  then  1 "    The  answer
was,  "  I  am  a  king.     But  my  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world."    He  had  no  temporal
dominions,  but  he  governs  the  hearts  and  lives  of  his  people.    He  rules  the  nations
of  the  earth,  and  will  rule  to  the  end  of  time.     The  judge  of  Israel  was  smitten,
the  empire  of  Caesar  came  to  nought,  but  the  reign  of  Christ  shall  endure  for  ever.
Napoleon  rose  with  rapidity  to  boundless  inheritance,  but  finished  his  course  in
disgraceful  exile ;  contrasted  empires  founded  on  force  with  that  of  Jesus  founded
upon  love,  and  exclaimed,  "What  an  abyss  between  my  deep  misery  and  the
eternal  kingdom  of  Christ,  which  is  proclaimed,  loved,  and  adored,  and  is  extend-
ing over  the  whole  earth  ! "     IV.  The  results  which  spring  from  the  ruler's
coming.     "  Then  the  remnant  of  his  brethren  shall  return  unto  the  children  of
Israel."     1.    Deliverance  from  captivity.      They  shall   return   from  bondage  to
Canaan  and  to  Jehovah.     The  remnant  shall  become  genuine  sons  of  Israel,  people
again  in  covenant  with  God.     2.  Restoration  to  unity.     Exiled  Jews,  Gentiles  of
heathen  nations,  shall  be  united  as  brethren  under  his  reign,  and  incorporated  into
a  spiritual  commonwealth.    Then  men  become  Israelites  not  in  name,  but  in  spirit
and  truth.     Grace  makes  all  sons  of  God.     The  promise  is  not  only  to  Israel  after
the  flesh,  but  to  all  that  are  afar  off,  even  as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call
(Acts  ii.  39).


chap,  v.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  M1CAH.  431


The  Incarnation  and  Birth  of  Christ.

I.  Who  it  was  that  sent  Christ  forth.  "  Out  of  thee  shall  he  come  forth  to
me"  Jesus  Christ  did  not  come  forth  without  his  Father's  permission,  authority,
and  assistance.  We  are  too  apt  to  forget  that  while  there  are  distinctions  as  to  the
persons  in  the  Trinity,  there  are  no  distinctions  of  honour;  and  we  frequently
ascribe  the  honour  of  our  salvation,  or  at  least  the  depths  of  its  mercy  and  the
extremity  of  its  benevolence,  more  to  Jesus  Christ  than  we  do  to  the  Father.
Contemplate  that  the  Father  sent  him,  and  in  every  period  of  his  life  think  that
he  suffered  what  the  Father  willed ;  that  every  step  of  his  life  was  marked  with
the  approval  of  the  great  /  Am.  II.  Where  did  he  come  to  at  the  time  of  his
incarnation  ?  First,  it  seemed  necessary  that  Christ  should  be  born  in  Bethlehem,
because  of  Bethlehem's  history.  Again,  there  is  something  in  the  name  of  the  place.
The  word  Bethlehem  has  a  double  meaning.  It  signifies  "  the  house  of  bread/'
and  "  the  house  of  war."  Jesus  is  the  bread  of  his  people  on  which  they  feed.
Here  the  bread  of  life  was  first  given  to  man  to  eat.  It  is  also  called  "  the  house
of  war,"  because  Christ  is  to  every  man  "  the  house  of  bread  "  or  "  the  house  of
war."  Ephratah  signifies  "  fruitfulness  "  or  "  abundance."  All  our  fruitfulness
is  from  Christ.  His  incarnation  fattens  the  soil  of  our  hearts.  Next,  notice  the
position  of  Bethlehem.  "  Little  among  the  thousands  of  Judah."  There  are  many
little  ones,  unknown  and  dwelling  in  obscurity.  Christ  is  always  born  among  the
little  ones  ;  lieth  not  in  great  hearts,  but  in  little  ones.  A  broken  heart  aud  a  low
spirit  shall  have  the  Saviour,  and  none  else.  Another  thought,  how  wonderfully
mysterious  was  that  providence  which  brought  Jesus  Chrisfs  mother  to  Bethlehem
at  the  very  time  when  she  was  to  be  delivered.  III.  What  did  Jesus  come  for  ?
u  To  be  ruler  in  Israel."  He  was  "  born  the  King  of  the  Jews."  Men  are  born
princes,  but  seldom  born  kings.  But  he  is  not  ruler  of  Israel  after  the  flesh,  but
after  the  spirit.  Hast  thou  submitted  to  the  sway  of  Christ1?  IV.  Did  Jesus
ever  come  before  ?  "  Whose  goings  forth  have  been  ever  of  old."  First,  Christ
has  had  his  goings  forth  in  his  Godhead.  "From  everlasting."  He  has  not  been
a  secret  and  a  silent  person  up  to  this  moment.  That  new-born  child  is  the  infant
of  to-day,  but  the  ancient  of  eternity.  1.  Of  old  he  went  forth  as  our  covenant-
head  in  election.  2.  He  had  goings  forth  for  his  people,  as  their  representative
before  the  throne,  even  before  they  were  begotten  in  the  world.  Secondly,  we
believe  that  Christ  has  come  forth  of  old,  even  to  men,  so  that  men  have  beheld
him.  He  appeared  to  Abraham,  to  Jacob,  to  Joshua,  and  to  the  three  youths  in
the  fiery  furnace.  Observe  that  each  of  these  four  great  occurrences  happened  to
the  saints,  when  they  were  engaged  in  very  eminent  duty,  or  when  they  were  about  to
be  engaged  in  it.  When  Abraham  interceded  for  Sodom,  Jacob  engaged  in
wrestling^  Joshua  exercising  bravery,  and  Shadrach,  Meshach,  and  Abednego  were
in  high  places  of  persecution.  Christ  hath  not  left  going  forth  yet.  Recollect  he
goes  to  Bethlehem.  Are  you  little  %  He  will  go  forth  to  meet  you.  He  will
come  to  your  poor  house, — wretched  heart.  Trust  him,  and  he  will  go  forth  to
abide  with  you  for  ever  [Spurgeon].

The  Shepherd  King. —  Verse  4.

The  government  of  this  ruler  is  further  described  under  the  similitude  of  a
shepherd  feeding  and  defending  his  flock,  establishing  and  extending  his  kingdom
in  all  the  earth.

I.  The  work  of  the  shepherd  king.  He  shall  "feed" — a  word  which
indicates  to  feed  by  ruling,  as  in  the  Greek  in  Matt.  ii.  6,  "  Out  of  thee
shall  come  a  governor  that  shall  rule  (feed  marg.)  my  people  Israel."  1.  He  will
feed  his  flock.  The  soul  is  hungry,  and  men  crave  for  food.  The  word  of  Christ
can  feed  the  soul,  and  satisfy  the  wants  of  humanity.  Those  who  believe  in  him
"shall  not  hunger  nor  thirst"  anymore.     2.  He  will  rule  his  flock.     He  will


432  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MIC  AH.  [chap.  v.


teach  and  guide,  rule  and  provide.  We  require  control  as  well  as  nourishment.
All  his  sheep  "  follow  him,  for  they  know  his  voice.  And  a  stranger  will  they
not  follow,  hut  will  flee  from  him  :  for  they  know  not  the  voice  of  strangers."
II.  The  qualifications  of  the  shepherd  king.  Israel's  princes  had  no  power,  but
he  shall  stand,  clad  in  the  strength  and  displaying  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  1.  He
has  Divine  power.  "Bule  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord."  He  is  invested  with
power  to  defend  his  flock  against  wolves  and  robbers  (Johnx.  11,  12).  Care  would
he  in  vain  if  the  sheep  could  not  be  secured  from  danger.  "  No  man  is  able  to
pluck  them  out  of  my  Father's  hand."  2.  He  has  Divine  tenderness.  His  power  is
not  tyrannical.  He  loves  where  he  feeds.  His  might  is  used  to  protect,  not  to
destroy  the  flock.  He  does  not  flee  away  like  an  hireling,  but  lays  down  his  own
life  for  the  sheep.  "  He  shall  feed  his  flock  like  a  shepherd;  he  shall  gather  the
lambs  with  his  arm,  and  carry  them  in  his  bosom,  and  shall  gently  lead  those  that
are  with  young."  3.  He  has  Divine  majesty.  "  In  the  majesty  of  the  name  of
the  Lord  his  God."  All  power  in  earth  and  heaven  is  given  to  him.  Majesty  is
displayed  in  his  love  and  teaching,  in  his  nature  and  work.  He  is  invested  with
more  dignity  than  ordinary  kings.  He  bears  the  name  of  God  (Isa.  ix.  5;  x.  21) ;
the  spirit  of  might  rests  upon  him  (xi.  1) ;  and  in  the  greatness  of  his  majesty  he
overthrows  every  enemy  (Ex.  xiv.  7).  III.  The  attitude  of  the  shepherd  king".
"  He  shall  stand  and  feed."  1.  He  is  actively  engaged.  To  sit  is  the  attitude  of
a  judge,  to  stand  is  the  position  of  one  ready  to  succour  and  defend.  He  defended
Israel  from  the  attack  of  heathen  nations.  He  will  watch  and  feed  his  Church  to
the  end  of  time.  He  is  always  present  and  vigilant.  "  Behold,  he  that  keepeth
Israel  shall  neither  sleep  nor  slumber."  2.  He  is  constantly  engaged.  He  never
sits  down  in  ease  and  neglect.  He  stands  fixed  in  purpose,  and  none  can  hinder
or  remove  him.  He  endures,  surveys,  and  guards  his  flock  on  every  side.  "  He
shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged  until  he  hath  set  judgment  in  the  earth."  IV.  The
blessings  which  flow  from  the  work  of  the  shepherd  king.  Through  the  care
and  providence  of  Christ  his  people  shall  be  increased,  established,  and  acquire
greatness  and  dominion.  1.  The  perpetual  existence  of  the  Church.  "  And  they
shall  abide."  His  people  shall  not  wander  to  and  fro,  as  hitherto.  They  shall
rest  and  abide  in  permanent  security  and  peace.  None  can  hurt  or  destroy  them.
Because  he  lives  they  shall  live.  The  original  promise,  often  forfeited  through
disobedience,  shall  be  fulfilled  :  "  Ye  shall  dwell  in  your  land  safely.  And  I  will
give  peace  in  the  land,  and  ye  shall  lie  down,  and  none  shall  make  you  afraid  "
(Lev.  xxvi.  6  :  Isa.  xiv.  30).  2.  The  increasing  greatness  of  the  Church.  {t  For
now  shall  he  be  great."  A  "  little  flock  "  only  follow  him  now,  but  this  flock
shall  be  great  in  numbers  and  influence.  Its  king  shall  become  famous,  precious,
and  attractive  to  others.  "  I  have  made  thee  a  great  name,  like  the  name  of  the
great  that  are  in  the  earth."  3.  The  universal  dominion  of  the  Church.  "  He
shall  be  great  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth."  There  shall  be  no  end  to  the  increase,
no  limit  to  the  power  of  his  empire.  Souls  shall  be  converted,  nations  brought
under  the  yoke  of  Christ,  thus  the  greatness  of  his  love  and  grace  shall  be  set
forth  to  the  very  ends  of  the  world.  "  I  shall  give  thee  the  heathen  for  thine
inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  thy  possession."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.    1.     1.    Christ's   ordinary   har-  whom  a  people  may  be  kept  from  con-

bingers  and  forerunners,  when  he  is  to  fusion  and  the  Church  protected,  is  a

come  with  mercies  to  his  Church,  are  special   ingredient   in   the  affliction  of

afflictions  to  fit   them  for  such  mani-  the   visible   Church.      See   Hutcheson.

testations.    2.  These  afflictions  are  often  To    be   smitten  on    the    face    betokens

very  grievous.   The  contempt  and  injury  shame;  to  smite  with  a  rod  betokens

done  to  authority  and  magistrates,  under  destruction.      Now  both  shall  meet  in


CHAP.  V.]


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  M1CAH.


433


one ;  as  in  the  Great  Day,  the  wicked
shall  awake  to  shame  and  everlasting
contempt,  and  shall  perish  for  ever
[Pusey].

Ver.  2.  Bethlehem.  God  orders  all
in  the  continuous  course  of  his  wisdom.
All  lies  in  perfect  harmony  in  the  Divine
mind.  Each  event  is  the  sequel  of
what  went  before.  So  here  the  prophet
joins  on,  what  to  us  stands  in  such  con-
trast with  that  simple  and.  Yet  he
describes  the  two  conditions  as  bearing
one  another.  He  had  said  that  the
judge  was  smitten,  and  that  Israel  had
no  counsellor  nor  king ;  now  he  speaks
of  the  Euler  in  Israel.  He  had  said  that
the  rule  was  to  come  to  the  tower  of  the
flock;  now,  retaining  the  word,  he
speaks  of  the  ruler  in  whom  it  was  to
be  established.  But  he  has  greater
things  to  say,  so  he  pauses — And  thou!
People  have  admired  the  brief  appeal
of  the  murdered  Caesar,  "  Thou  too,
Brutus."  The  like  energetic  conciseness
lies  in  the  words,  And  thou  /  Bethlehem
Ephratah  [Pusey].

Goings  forth.  1.  In  the  purposes  of
eternity.  2.  In  the  creation  of  the
world.  3.  In  the  manifestations  of  Old
Testament.  4.  In  human  birth.  5.  In
the  events  of  providence.

Yer.  4.  The  shepherd  character  of
Jesus  indicates  : — 1.  The  helpless  and
lost  condition  of  man.  2.  The  love  of
God  in  assuming  the  character  and  office


of  a  shepherd.     3.  The  benevolent  de-
sign in  redeeming  mankind.

Feed.  This  expression  shows  how
Christ  stands  towards  his  own,  the  sheep
that  have  been  intrusted  to  him.  He
does  not  rule  over  them  like  a  dreadful
tyrant,  who  oppresses  his  subjects  with
fear,  but  he  is  a  shepherd,  and  cares  for
his  sheep  with  all  the  gentleness  that
can  be  desired.  But  since  we  are  sur-
rounded with  enemies,  the  prophet
adds :  He  works  with  power ;  that  is,
with  all  the  power  there  is  in  God,  all
the  protection  there  is  in  Christ,  as  soon
as  there  is  need  to  protect  the  Church.
We  should  learn,  therefore,  to  expect
from  Christ  just  as  much  salvation  as
there  is  power  in  God  [Calviii\.  But
neither  feed  nor  rule  conveys  the  full
idea  of  the  original  expression  (Matt.  ii.
6).  The  full  idea  is,  who  shall  act  the
part  of  a  shepherd  to  my  people  Israel, —
who  shall  at  once  protect,  and  guide,
and  feed,  and  govern  or  rule  them
[Morrison].

"  As  the  good  shepherd  tends  his  fleecy  care,
Seeks  freshest  pasture  and  the  purest  air,
Explores  the  lost,  the  wandering  sheep  directs,
By  day  o'ersees  them,  and  by  night  protects ;
The  tender  lambs  he  raises  in  his  arms,
Feeds  from  his  hand,  and  in  his  bosom  warms ;
Thus  shall  mankind  his  guardian  care  engage,
The  promised  Father  of  the  future  age."

[Fope.~\

The  world  hates  the  Church,  and  feasts
its  eyes  upon  its  misery.


HOMILETICS.
The  Peaceful  Rule  op  Christ. —  Verses  5,  6.

This  one  just  mentioned  will  bring  peace  within  his  kingdom,  and  bestow  means
sufficient  to  secure  it  when  given.  Literally  and  spiritually  this  promise  belongs
to  the  whole  Church,  and  indicates  tne  peaceful  reign  of  Christ  over  men,  I.  He
will  give  peace  to  His  people.  Peace  to  the  individual  and  to  the  Church  is
the  gift  of  God.  1.  Peace  in  his  own  person.  "This  man  shall  be  the  peace."
The  soul  is  dissatisfied  and  restless ;  filled  with  fear,  anxiety,  and  a  sense  of  guilt.
The  inner  life  of  men  is  a  prayer  for  peace.  Everything  points  to  God  as  the  only
sufficient  satisfaction.  Christ  reconciles  to  God,  gives  peace  with  God,  and  peace
with  conscience.  He  is  "  the  Prince  of  peace,  and  sends  peace  on  earth  "  where
all  is  strife.  He  "  came  and  preached  peace  to  you  who  were  far  off,  and  to  them
that  were  nigh."  2.  Peace  by  his  own  agencies.  "Then  shall  he  raise  up  seven
shepherds,"  &c.  Whatever  number  this  may  signify,  the  soldiers  of  Christ  in
themselves  are  weaker  than  the  armies  of  the  world.  But  the  feeblest  become
heroes  in  Christ  to  conquer  the  enemy  and  secure  the  Church.  Valiant  achieve-
ments have  been  made  by  the  shepherds  and  princes  of  the  Church.     God  requires

28


434  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MICAH.  [chap.  v.


not  numbers  nor  prowess.  His  instrumentalities  are  feeble  and  more  than  enough.
Grace  is  stronger  than  sin.  God  is  mightier  than  man.  The  weapons  of  our
warfare  are  "  not  carnal,  but  mighty  through  God  to  the  pulling  down  of  strong-
holds." II.  He  will  defend  the  peace  which  He  has  given  to  His  people.
The  Church  is  in  danger,  the  peace  of  the  Christian  is  often  disturbed,  and  "  in
the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation."  But  this  man  gives  and  secures  peace  to  the
individual,  the  Church,  and  the  country.  1 .  He  delivers  from  the  enemy.  "  Asshur
is  a  type  of  the  nations  of  the  world  by  which  the  people  of  the  Lord  are  attacked,
because  in  the  time  of  the  prophet  this  power  was  the  imperial  power  by  which
Israel  was  endangered."  Nimrod  was  the  founder  of  the  empire,  Gen.  x.  9,  and
indicates  the  hostility  of  this  power.  Notice — (1)  The  imminent  danger.  The
enemy  treads  within  the  borders — prevails  in  the  land,  and  enters  their  palaces.
Sennacherib's  army  entered  Judah,  took  defenced  cities,  and  besieged  Jerusalem
itself,  Is.  xxxvi.  1 ;  xxxvii.  3.  (2)  The  complete  deliverance.  Asshur  was  driven
back,  confined,  and  wasted  in  his  own  territory  with  the  sword.  He  was  defeated
and  crushed  at  his  own  gates.  2.  He  defends  from  the  enemy.  "When  defeated
once  the  attack  is  often  renewed.  But  the  Church  will  carry  the  battle  into  the
dominions  of  sin  and  Satan.  Those  who  try  to  waste  her  shall  be  foiled  and  wasted
themselves.  "  Nowihall  this  company  lick  up  all  that  are  round  about  us,  as  the
ox  licketh  up  the  grass  of  the  field."

Our  Peace  in  Trouble. — Verse  5.

The  Messiah  is  here  intended.     The  word  man,  in  Italics,  is  not  in  the  original.
The  translators  should  rather  have  put  in  the  word  Euler  or  Shepherd.     But  if
he  ^himself  be  understood,  it  is  all  the  same,  whatever  be  the  supplement.     The
Assyrian  is  used  metaphorically,  for  some  enemy.     It  is  common  for  sacred  writers
to  express  any  significant  adversary  by  the  name  of  Egypt,  Assyria,  or  Babylon ;
for  these  powers  distinguished  themselves  by  their  hatred,  oppression,  and  enslaving
of  the  Jews.     We  may  include  everything  that  annoys  and  alarms,  that  would
injure  and  destroy.     Be  the  case  what  it  may,  he  is  our  relief.     He  does  not  ex-
empt us  from  conflict,  but  affords  help,  comfort,  and  deliverance.     Enemies  assail,
but  he  keeps  our  minds  stayed  upon  him  in  perfect  peace.     Let  us  think  of
several  Assyrians,  and  see  how  he  is  our  peace,  when  they  invade  and  would
swallow  us  up.     Does  the  broken  law  of  God  threaten  us  1     A  man  has  nothing  to
fear  from  the  law  when  perfectly  kept.     The  curse  enters  through  every  breach  of
transgression.     Who  is  not  therefore  exposed  1     The  commandment  coming — sin
reviving — hope  dying — and  nothing  expected  but  a  certain  fearful  looking  for  of
judgment !     But  he  is  our  peace,  who  died  for  our  sins  and  rose  again  for  our
justification.     Does  our  adversary  the  Devil  terrify  1     When  you  think  of  his  wiles
and  strength,  and  consider  yourself,  you  are  filled  with  despair.     You  are  no  more
than  a  worm  to  a  mountain.     The  promise  is,  •'  Eear  not,  thou  worm  Jacob  ;  for  thou
shalt  thresh  the  mountains,  and  beat  them  small  as  dust."     In  the  Lord  you  have
righteousness  and  strength.     In  all  these  things  you  are  more  than  conquerors,
through  him  that  loved  you.     Do  we  complain  of  the  sin  that  dwelleth  in  us?
A  Christian  must  feel  and  ought  to  feel  it,  and  be  deeply  humbled.     "  O  wretched
man  that  I  am!"  &c.     But  where  does  he  find  relief?     "I  thank  God,  through
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."     He  has  begun  and  will  finish  the  good  work  in  me.     My
sanctification  will  be  as  complete  as  my  justification  now  is.     He  is  not  only  able
to  keep  me  from  falling,  but  to  present  me  faultless.     Do  we  consider  the  troubles
of  life  ?     In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation,  but  in  me  ye  shall  have  peace.
"As  the  sufferings  of  Christ  abound  in  us,  so  our  consolation  also  aboundeth  by
Christ."     Modern  Christians  may  not  be  called  to  suffer  persecution  as  the  dis-
ciples did ;  but  they  may  be  subjects  of  the  same  personal  and  relative  trials,  which
require  the  same  support  and  solace :  they  equally  belong  to  him,  and  are  never


chap.  V.]  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MICJH.  435


dearer  to  his  heart  than  in  the  hour  of  affliction.  He  will  not  leave  them  comfort-
less. But  death/  Death  is  called  the  king  of  terrors.  Where  would  be  the
triumph  of  faith  if  we  did  not  feel  its  approach  1  But  it  is  possible  to  rise  above
this  enemy.  We  know  it  from  Scripture  and  observation.  Whence  comes  the
victory  1  There  is  only  one  relief  when  this  Assyrian  comes — to  see  Him  that  has
"  abolished  death."  The  enemy  is  not  only  disarmed  by  him  but  turned  into  a
friend — the  curse  converted  into  a  blessing.  To  die  is  gain.  "  Yea,  though  I  walk
through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,"  &c.     From  Jay.

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND   SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  5.     This  Man.     Christ  is  our  joined  with  the  crook.     Cf.  Ps.  cxlix.

peace,   because  through   him  we   have  6 — 9  [Wordsworth\     The  more  widely

peace  above  us  with  God,  within  us  in  the   Gospel   spreads   itself    among   the

our  conscience,  around  us  with  other  nations  of  the  world,  the  more  bitter

men,  and  under  us  with  Satan  [Lange].  will  be  the  spirit  of  unbelief  and  un-

Ver.    6.     Seven  shepherds.      Feeble  godliness  [iTe«7].

instrumentality.      Contrasted  with  the  .  Princes  of  men.     Victorious  army  of

powers  of  evil.    Its  work.    Its  strength,  believers  and  preachers  [  Wordsworth] .
Its  exploits.     In  the  Church  of   God         Shall  waste.     Note,  says  one,  those

the  work  of  pastoral  teaching  is  always  that  threaten  ruin  to  the  Church  of  God

a  work  of  warfare  against  error.     In  the  hasten   ruin  to  themselves ;    and  their

escutcheon  of  the  Church  the  sword  is  destruction  is  the  Church's  salvation.

HOMILETICS.

Israel  as  the  Dew. — Vers*  7.

The  remnant  of  Jacob  through  participation  in  the  Messiah's  work  shall  have  a
beneficent  power,  and  spiritually  influence  surrounding  nations,  as  rain  and  dew
revive  withering  grass.

I.  The  Divine  origin  of  dew.  "As  a  dew  from  the  Lord."  Israel's  re-
storation and  increase  here  entirely  from  the  Lord.  This  "  orient  pearl "  glistens
with  Divine  light.  It  is  one  of  "  the  precious  things  of  heaven"  (Deut.  xxxiii.  13).
Everything  that  quickens  and  invigorates  spiritual  life,  every  influence  that  pre-
serves it  from  corruption  and  decay,  comes  from  God.  "  I  will  be  as  the  dew  unto
Israel."  II.  The  sovereign  laws  of  dew.  "  That  tarrieth  not  for  man,"  &c.  It
is  independent  of  the  contrivance  of  man.  It  does  not  originate  by  human
caprice  and  calculation.  Man  with  all  his  science  and  skill  can  neither  make
nor  hinder  it.  God  supplies  it  according  to  his  own  purpose  and  law.  "Hath
the  rain  a  father  ?  or  who  hath  begotten  the  drops  of  dew  1 "  III.  The  blessed
influence  of  dew.  Distilled  in  the  silent  night  by  the  influences  of  heaven
and  earth,  it  bathes  and  refreshes  each  blade  and  flower  with  stainless  moisture,
and  becomes  an  image  of  choicest  blessing.  1.  It  is  quickening  in  its  influence.
Without  rain  a  Christian  or  an  ungodly  community  is  like  grass  dry  and  withered
in  appearance.  "  All  flesh  is  grass,  and  all  the  goodliness  thereof  is  as  the
flower  of  the  field."  2.  It  is  gentle  in  its  influence.  The  word  showers  implies
multitude  of  drops.  "  Drops  as  the  gentle  dew  from  heaven."  Imagine  sheets
of  water  falling  at  once.  What  destruction  to  life  and  vegetation  !  God  breaks
the  force  by  its  distribution  in  the  needed  showers,  and  each  shower  into
countless  drops.  Not  even  the  tenderest  plant  is  injured.  It  descends  noiselessly
and  penetrates  deeply.  Herbs  grow  and  flourish  under  the  soft  influence  which
waiteth  not  for  the  sons  of  men.  "  My  doctrine  shall  drop  as  the  rain,  my  speech
shall  distil  as  the  dew  ;  as  the  small  rain  upon  the  tender  herb,  and  as  the  showers
upon  the  grass."  3.  It  is  copious  in  its  influence.  "  As  the  showers."  Multitude
of  drops  in  falling  rain  we  call  a  shower.     Showers  are  dispersed  in  drops  over  the


436  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY s  MICAH.  [chap.  t.


face  of  the  earth.  "  God  hath  divided  a  watercourse  for  the  overflowings  of  water  "
(Job  xxxviii.  35).  Pentecost  and  times  of  revivals  illustrate  this.  Thus  the  in-
fluence of  the  Church  upon  the  world  should  be  like  the  effects  of  rain  upon  dry-
fields  and  withering  plants.  It  should  quicken  and  strengthen,  make  fruitful  and
fragrant.  The  godly  should  mitigate  God's  anger  which  burns  up  the  ungodly;  draw
blessings  from  heaven  in  personal  and  social  life  j  and  be  as  the  dew  "  in  the  midst
of  many  people."

u  Now  sliding  streams  their  thirsty  plants  renew,
And  feed  their  fibres  with  reviving  dew  "  [Pope],

Israel  as  a  Lion. —  Verses  8,  9.

God  and  his  people  have  not  only  a  benignant  but  a  terrible  aspect  towards  men,
— as  dew  to  the  well-disposed,  and  as  a  lion  to  the  assailants.  In  many  respects
the  Church  may  be  like  the  lion.

I.  In  that  religious  awe  which  they  exercise  over  the  minds  of  ungodly
men.  The  lion  among  beasts  of  the  forest  and  the  young  lion  among  flocks
of  sheep  are  feared  beyond  description.  The  good  examples  and  consistent
lives  of  pious  men  often  strike  terror  into  the  conscience,  and  check  the  evil
practices  of  the  wicked.  They  are  awed  by  them  and  dare  not  harm  them.
Herod  feared  John  because  he  was  a  holy  man  (Mark  vi.  20).  II.  In  the
courage  with  which  they  attack  antagonists.  "If  he  go  through,  both
treadeth  down  and  teareth  in  pieces."  It  boldly  faces  and  braves  the  force  of
arms.  Wounds  rather  provoke  than  repress  its  fierceness.  It  is  not  daunted  by
numbers ;  will  often  attack  an  entire  caravan,  and  if  overpowered  in  the  combat,
instead  of  flying,  will  gradually  retreat  with  its  face  to  the  enemy  until  it  dies.
Luther  and  Latimer  were  the  lions  of  the  Church.  Christians  now  through  God
are  Cceur-de-lions,  and  endued  with  invincible  power.  "  Terrible  as  an  army  with
banners."  III.  In  the  victory  which  they  gain  over  the  enemy.  "  Lifted  up
upon  thine  adversaries."  1.  The  victory  is  resistless.  "None  can  deliver,"  how-
ever strong  and  determined.  2.  The  victory  is  complete.  "All  thine  enemies
shall  be  cut  off."  Ceasing  to  be  enemies  or  destroyed  in  their  opposition.  The
victories  of  the  Maccabees  were  earnests  of  future  glories.  The  hand  of  the  Church
shall  be  strengthened  by  the  might  of  Jehovah.  All  adversaries  will  shortly  be
bruised  under  her  feet.     "  And  he  went  forth  conquering  and  to  conquer."

Extermination  of  War  and  Idolatry. —  Verses  10 — 15.

Jehovah  will  secure  the  peace  of  his  people  by  the  destruction  of  war  instruments,
the  extermination  of  idolatry,  and  the  infliction  of  judgment  upon  resisting  nations.
Appliances  of  war  will  not  be  required  in  universal  peace  and  security.

I.  War  abolished.  God  will  deprive  them  of  everything  to  make  war,  that  they
may  depend  upon  him  alone.  1 .  Human  aids  will  be  taken  away.  Men  multiply
horses  and  chariots,  and  trust  in  them  (Ps.  xx.  7).  Israel  was  accustomed  to  rely
on  Egypt  and  Assyria  (cf.  Is.  xxxi.  1 — 3;  Hos.  xiv.  3),  but  the  time  will  come
when  the  Church  of  God  will  not  lean  on  an  arm  of  flesh.  2.  Outward  defences
will  be  destroyed.  Strongholds  and  fortified  cities  will  be  demolished.  "And
throw  down  all  thy  strongholds."  God  will  teach  his  people  not  to  look  to  war-
chariots  and  secular  allies,  not  to  seek  refuge  in  temporal  support.  He  will  be
their  garrison  and  deliverer.  Cities  have  been  provisioned  and  besieged  for  years
and  yet  have  fallen  :  but  God  defends  his  people,  "  all  of  them  dwelling  without
walls,  and  having  neither  bars  nor  gates."  II.  Idolatry  destroyed.  In  the
Church  of  God  there  may  be  illicit  intercourse  with  idols.  When  men  are  im-
patient in  affliction,  restless  in  their  mind,  and  curious  to  know  the  future,  they
set  up  gods  and  groves  of  their  own.  1.  Systems  of  divination  loill  be  destroyed.
Witchcraft,  conjuring,  and  fortune-telling  will  be  cut  off.  The  work  of  men's  hands
shall  not  be  worshipped.     Necromancy,  pyromancy,  and  astrology  are  diabolical


chap.  v.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY i  MICAH.  437


arts.  Such  tricks  are  abomination  to  God,  who  will  judge  them  in  his  wrath.
2.  Idolatrous  worship  destroyed.  Graven  images  will  be  demolished.  Groves
and  plantations  will  be  plucked  up,  and  not  a  remnant  of  idolatry  left  behind.
God  will  cut  off  whatever  hinders  his  purpose  and  corrupts  his  people.  Confidence
in  creatures  is  idolatry.  Holiness  before  God  is  essential  to  victory  over  the  foe.
Every  curious  art  and  devilish  practice  is  destined  to  fall  before  the  preaching  of
the  cross  (Acts  xix.  19).

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Vers.  10 — 14.     The  purification   of  For  as  eye   hath   not   seen,  nor    heart

the  Church.     Everything  of  an  ungodly  conceived,  the  good  things  laid  up  in

an.d   idolatrous   nature   must   be  taken  store  for  those  who  love  God,  so  neither

away  before  it  can  conquer  the  world  the  evil  things  prepared  for  those  who

and  be  fit  for  God's  residence.     This  is,  in    act    show    that    they    hate    him "

1.    A   necessary   work.     2.    A   painful  [Pusey].

work.       3.    A    Divine    work.       "The  The  Prince  of  peace.     1.  His  corning.

greater   the   glory   and   purity    of    the  (a)  In  lowly  guise,  ver.  1;  humble,     (b)

Church,  the  less  it  needs  or  hangs  upon  And  yet  to  the  throne,  ver.  1 ;  glorious,

human  aid.  The  more  it  is  reft  of  human  (c)  Because   he  was  appointed  to  this

aid,  the  more  it  hangs  upon  God.     So  form  of  old;   eternal,      (d)  At  the  ap-

God  promises,  as  a   blessing,   that   he  pointed   fulness  of  time,  ver.   2 ;    tem-

will  remove  from  her  all  mere  human  poral.

resources,  both  what  was  in  itself  evil  2.  His  work,     (a)  To  seek  and  save

and   what,    although   good,   had    been  that  which  was  lost,  ver.  2.     (b)  To  be

abused"  [Pusey].  a   shepherd   in   truth,    ver.  3.     (c)  To

Ver.     15.      The    doom    of    heathen  prepare  God's  kingdom  even  to  the  ends

nations    and    ungodly    opponents.       1.  of  the  world,  ver.  3.     (d)  To  give  peace

Vengeance  without   mercy.     2.  Venge-  to  his  followers  through  the  protection

ance    unprecedented.     "  Such    as   they  which  he  will  afford  and  the  bestow-

have  not  heard."     "In  like  way,  the  ment  of  power,  ver.   4.     (e)  To  judge

woe  on  those  who  obey  not  the  truth,  the  world,  vers.  5,  14.

also   looks   on   to  the  end.     It  too  is  3.  His  congregation,     (a)  A  spiritual

final.     There   is   nothing  to  soften   it.  congregation,   ver.  6.     (b)  A  powerful

Punishments  in  the  course  of  life  are  congregation,    vers.    7,  8.     (c)  A   holy

medicinal.     Here  no  mention  is  made  congregation:  (1)  trusts  in  God  alone,

of  mercy,  but  only  of  executing  venge-  vers.   9,   10 ;    (2)    inquires  after  God's

ance ;  and  that  with  wrath  and  fury ;  will  alone,  ver.  11 ;  (3)  fears  God  alone,

and  that  such  as  they  have  not  heard,  vers.  12,  13   [Lange].

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  V.

Ver.  2.  Bethlehem.  By  a  remark-  Bread"  and  "f mi tfulness;  "  and  despite
able  interposition  of  providence,  inter-  of  centuries  of  Mohammedan  oppression,
woven,  however,  with  the  course  of  it  is  fertile  still.  It  had  been  rich
events  in  the  world,  was  it  brought  in  the  fruitfulness  of  this  world ;  rich,
about  that  the  promised  King  should  be  thrice  nich,  should  it  be  in  spiritual  fruit-
born  in  Bethlehem  (as  Micah  the  pro-  fulness  [Pusey].

phet  had  foretold),  the  very  place  where  Ver.  3.  Give  them  up.  (1)  Into  the
the  house  of  David  had  its  origin ;  hands  of  their  enemies.  Indeed  the  far
while,  at  the  same  time,  the  lowly  cir-  greater  part  never  returned  from  the
cumstances  of  his  birth  were  in  striking  captivity,  but  remained,  although  will-
contrast  with  the  inherent  dignity  and  ingly,  in  the  enemy's  land,  outwardly
glory  that  were  veiled  in  the  new-born  shut  out  from  the  land  of  the  promise
child  [Neander].  Both  names  were  and  the  hope  of  their  fathers.  But  (2)
derived  from  "  fruitfulness,"  "  House  of  all  were,  more  than  before,  given  up  to


438


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY ':  MICAH.


[CHAP.  v.


follow  their  own  ways.  God  was  less
visibly  present  among  them.  Prophecy
ceased  soon  after  the  return  from  cap-
tivity, and  many  tokens  of  the  nearness
of  God  and  means  of  his  communica-
tions with  them, — the  Ark  and  the  Urim
and  Thummim, — were  gone.  It  was  a
time  of  pause  and  waiting,  wherein  the
fulness  of  God's  gifts  was  withdrawn,
that  they  might  look  on  to  Him  who
was  to  come.  Until  the  time  that  she
which  travaileth  hath  brought  forth,  i.  e.
until  the  Virgin  should  conceive  and
bear  a  Son  \Pusey\.

Vers.  5,  6.  Peace.  How  like  a
paradise  the  world  would  be,  flourishing
in  joy  and  rest,  if  men  would  cheerfully
conspire  in  affection,  and  hopefully  con-
tribute to  each  other's  content.  Holy
Scripture  itself  in  that  one  term  of
"  peace  "  most  usually  comprehends  all
joy  and.  contents,  all  felicity  and  pro-
sperity ;  so  that  the  heavenly  consort  of
angels,  when  they  agree  most  highly  to
bless  and  to  wish  the  greatest  happiness
to  mankind,  could  not  better  express
their  sense  than  by  saying,  "  Be  on
earth  peace,  and  good-will  among  men  "
[/.  Barrow].

"  Peace  hath  her  Tictories
Not  less  renowned  than  war." — [Milton.]

Ver.  7.  Dew  comes  down  from
heaven,  is  of  heavenly,  not  earthly,
origin,  transparent,  glistening  with
light,  reflecting  the  hues  of  heaven;
gentle,  slight,  weak  in  itself,  refreshing,
cooling  the  strong  heats  of  the  day;  con-
sumed itself,  yet  thereby  preserving
life;  falling  on  the  dry  and  withered
grass,  wherein  all  nature  droops,  and
recalling  it  to  freshness  of  life.  And
still  more  in  those  lands,  where  from
the  beginning  of  April  to  the  end  of
October,  the  close  of  the  latter  and  the
beginning  of  the  early  rain,  during  all
the  hot  months  of  summer,  the  life  of
all  herbage  depends  upon  the  dew  alone
[Pusey].

Vers.  8,  9.  The  lion  was  the  emblem
of  strength  and  sovereignty  (The  Lion  of


England).  Illustrative  of  Israel  (Num.
xxiv.  9),  and  Judah  (Gen.  xlix.  9);
die  courage  of  brave  men  (2  Sam.  i.  23  ;
xxiii.  20),  and  the  boldness  of  saints
(Prov.  xxviii.  1).  The  lion  is  fearless
of  men  (Is.  xxxi.  4;  Nah.  ii.  11).
What  can  a  javelin  do  against  his
strength !  But  even  the  king  of  the
forest  can  read  the  eye  and  the  language
of  man.  Moral  force  i3  greater  than
physical  force.  What  then  must  be  the
strength  of  the  Christian  Church  under
the  leadership  of  "The  Lion  of  the
tribe  of  Judah"!

Vers.  10 — 15.  Christianity  is  by  its
nature  adapted  to  effect  these  and  similar
changes  in  the  physical,  intellectual,
and  social  state  of  our  world,  and  by
the  decree  of  the  Eternal  it  is  hastening
their  accomplishment.  It  came  into
the  world  not  only  to  reinstate  man  in
his  proper  relationship  to  God,  but  to
restore  to  him  the  forfeited  inheritance
of  earth.  It  has  already  done  much.
Europe  has  been  indebted  to  it  for
most  of  its  civilization.  England  owes  to
it  most  of  its  elements  of  happiness  and
security.  Within  our  own  time  it  has
achieved  much  good  in  the  enfranchise-
ment of  the  slave,  in  the  partial  civiliza-
tion of  Polynesia,  in  a  thousand  in-
strumentalities of  blessing  that  are  now
at  work  in  almost  every  quarter  of  the
globe.  It  shall  go  on  until  it  has  at-
tained all  its  happy  and  benign  results.
It  shall  yet  enter,  penetrate,  and  suffuse
the  entire  frame  of  mind  and  existence.
The  Church  shall  become  an  eternal  ex-
cellence, and  a  joy  of  many  generations.
The  field  of  the  world  shall  present  the
aspect  as  of  a  paradise  regained.  The
race  of  man  shall  appear  as  the  ransomed
of  the  Lord,  joy  and  gladness  on  their
heads,  sorrow  and  sighing  for  ever  fled
away  [Legge].

"  0  scenes  surpassing  fable  and  yet  true,
Scenes  of  accomplished  bliss,  which  who  can  see,
Though  but  in  distant  prospect,  and  not  feel
The  soul  refreshed  with  foretaste  of  the  joy, —
The  joy  of  an  assembly  such  as  earth
Saw  never ;  such  as  heaven  stoops  down  to  see ! "

[Cowper.]


chap.  vi.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MICAH.  439


CHAPTER  VI.

Critical  Notes.]  The  third  division  now  begins,  after  declaration  of  judgment  and  salvation
which  awaits  the  future  remnant.  Hear]  Plead  with  God  in  controversy.  Mts.]  Witness  and
murmur  with  the  echo  (Deut.  xxxii.  1 :  Is.  i.  2).  Contend]  in  strife  or  quarrel  (Judg.  viii.  1  :  Is.
1.  8.  2.  His]  Emphatic  intentionally  to  indicate  Jehovah's  right  to  contend,  and  to  sharpen  their  con-
science by  pointing  to  their  calling  [Keil\.  3.  What]  opens  the  suit.  Israel,  tired  with  the  dealings
of  God,  bad  backslided  from  him.  Wearied]  By  demanding  what  is  irksome  (Is.  xliii.  23  :  1  John  v.
3) ;  or  failing  to  perform  what  is  promised  (Jer.  ii.  31).  4.  For]  God  had  done  good  only,  deliver-
ance from  Egypt  and  guidance  by  Moses  the  chief  proofs  of  it.  5.  Now]  A  very  tender  word,  like
our  "do  now  remember,"  or  "do  remember,"  beseeching  instead  of  commanding  [Pusey],  The
special  period  mentioned  and  the  wonderful  acts  performed  in  it  display  the  justice,  mercy,  and
righteousness  of  God  (Judg.  v.  11:  Ps.  xxiv.  5).  6.]  Remembrance  calls  ingratitude  to  mind,  and  leads
to  inquiries.  Come]  (Deut.  xxiii.  5.)  God  enthroned  on  high  (Is.  lvii.  15  :  Ps.  cxv.  3.  Burnt]
Prescribed  Lev.  i.  Calves]  Thought  to  be  most  important  (Lev.  ix.  2,  3).  7.]  u  In  case  of  calves
value  is  heightened  by  quality,  in  rams  by  quantity"  [Keil]'.  Climax  culminates  in  first-born.  But
this  only,  of  external,  heathen  origin,  atones  for  sin  by  sin.  8.]  God  has  showed  them  in  the  moral
law  that  he  requires  ;  not  outward  sacrifices  of  any  kind ;  but  the  fulfilment  of  moral  obligations  in
three  ways — do  justly,  love  mercy  (which  are  the  sum  of  the  second  table),  and  walk  humbly,  i.  e.  as  a
holy  nation  should,  in  fellowship  with  God  (cf.  Deut.  viii.  14;  x.  12 :  1  Sam.  xv.  22).  9.]  Israel
lacks  these  virtues.  Crieth]  Earnestly  and  loudly  in  Jerusalem.  Wisdom]  Wise  men  will  hear
and  discover  God's  authority  in  the  message.  "  Thy  name  sees  wisdom,  i.  e.,  has  the  true  wisdom  of
life  in  sight "  [Keif],  Thy  name  looks  out,  the  holy  manifestation  of  thyself  in  judgment  {Is.  xxx.
27 :  cf.  Ps.  xiv.  2)  \Lange\  Rod]  Judgment  threatened  (Is.  ix.  13).  10.  Yet]  notwithstanding
warnings,  treasures  acquired  by  fraud  and  oppression.  Scant]  Lit.  lean  ephah,  the  measure
forbidden  (too  small),  not  the  right  measure  (Deut.  xxv.  15,  16:  Lev.  xix.  36).  Abom.]  Smitten
by  God  (Prov.  xxii.  14)  ;  cursed  (Num.  xxiii.  7  :  Prov.  xxiv.  24).  11.  Pure]  Men  dream  that
they  can  be  clean  by  sacrifices  to  God,  in  spite  of  daily  sins.  The  prophet  destroys  this  hope,
reproves  the  rich  for  violence  and  the  people  for  deceit.  Bag]  In  which  money  and  weights  were
carried  (Deut.  xxv.  13:  Prov.  xvi.  11).  13.  Sick]  i.  e.  1  smite  thee  mortally  (cf.  for  expression,
Nah.  iii.  19  ;  for  matter,  Mic.  i.  9).  14.  Satis.]  Fulfilment  of  Lev.  xxvi.  26.  Food  would  not  be
enough,  nor  sustain.  Midst]  Cast  down  in  borders  and  in  the  metropolis,  people  will  flee  into  the
fortress,  but  only  to  die,  not  to  be  delivered.  What  goods  and  families  are  carried  away  will  be
given  to  the  sword  (cf.  Jer.  1.  37  ;  xlii.  16).  15.  Reap]  The  enemy  will  reap  the  harvests  and
plunder  the  stores  (Lev.  xxvi.  16  :  Deut.  xxviii.  38 — 40).  16.]  This  punishment  brought  upon  them-
selves. Omri]  The  conspirator  and  regicide  (1  Kings  xvi.  16 — 28).  Statutes]  By  which  this
abandoned  dynasty  had  disgraced  the  throne  of  Israel  ;  human  ordinances,  not  God's  commands
(Lev.  xx.  23).  Bear]  "  The  present  generation  is  ripe  for  the  curse,  which  the  Lord  had  cast  forth
in  the  law  for  the  future  of  his  people  "  (Is.  lxv.  7)  \Lange\

HOMILETIGS.
A  Listless  People  Rebuked. —  Verses  1,  2.

These  words  are  an  introduction  to  what  follows,  an  expostulation  to  an  un-
grateful people.  God  wishes  them  to  see  their  guilt,  and  hear  his  voice  in  the
controversy.  A  sinful  people  are  obstinate  and  listless.  But  they  must  be  roused
and  reproved :

I.  By  the  voice  of  God.  "  Hear  ye  now  what  the  Lord  saith."  God  speaks
to  us  and  reasons  with  us  in  his  word.  He  pleads  with  his  people  in  con-
descension and  grace,  requires  them  to  justify,  if  possible,  their  cause,  and  seeks
to  prove  the  equity  of  his  dealings.  "  Put  me  in  remembrance  :  let  us  plead  to-
gether :  declare  thou,  that  thou  mayest  be  justified."  II.  By  the  earnestness  of
the  Prophet.  The  Prophet  was  reluctant  to  herald  woe  to  his  people,  but  the
command  was  urgent.  Arise.  1.  He  was  earnest  in  his  tone.  "  0  my  people,"
ver.  3.  Bedewed  with  the  spirit  of  his  message.  2.  He  was  earnest  in  his  atti-
tude. Arise,  stand  up  as  one  having  authority  to  rebuke,  ready  and  undaunted
before  men.  He  must  rouse  himself  that  he  may  rouse  his  hearers.  A  cold  frosty
heart  can  never  touch  and  kindle  others  into  a  flame.  3.  He  was  earnest  in  his
method.     u  Let  the  hills  hear  thy  voice  " — any  way  to  stir  up  a  careless  people.


440  HOMILET1C  COMMENTARY:  MICAH.  [chap,  vi.


III.  By  the  stability  of  creation.  "  Hear,  0  ye  mountains."  Mountains  remain
steadfast  and  hills  are  not  carried  from  their  place.  The  earth  changes  in  its
surface  and  its  inhabitants  pass  away,  but  rocks  endure  for  ever.  Yet  Nature  is
subject  to  its  Creator  and  trembles  at  his  voice,  but  men  are  stupefied  and  hardened
by  sin.  "Hear,  0  heavens,  and  give  ear,  0  earth;  for  the  Lord  hath  spoken,  I
have  nourished  and  brought  up  children,  and  they  have  rebelled  against  me."

The  Controversy  between  God  and  Man. — Verse  2.

I.  Man's  complaints  against  God.  He  complains,  1.  Of  a  corrupt  nature;
2.  Of  the  power  of  temptation ;  3.  Of  the  dealings  of  Providence.  II.  God's  com-
plaints against  man.  1.  Mercies  despised.  2.  Grace  refused.  3.  Calls  neglected.
4.  Judgments  sent  in  vain  [F.  Wagstaff].

Weariness  in  God's  Service  Unjustifiable. —  Verses  3 — 5.

Many,  like  Israel,  are  weary  in  the  service  of  God,  complain  of  their  lot,  and  seek
to  return  to  the  world.  God  pleads  with  such,  proves  that  their  conduct  is  un-
justifiable. No  wrong  has  been  done  to  them  ;  on  the  other  hand,  they  have  sinned
against  God.     "  Wherein  have  I  wearied  thee  % "

I.  God's  claims  upon  men  are  just.  *  0  my  people."  Israel  were  God's
people  by  covenant  relationship.  God  chose  them  and  they  promised  to  serve
him.  All  men  are  God's  by  creation  and  providence.  They  are  raised  to  this
rank  and  gifted  in  their  mind  by  him.  Hence  God  has  a  just  claim  upon  their
homage  and  life.  To  refuse  is  ingratitude  and  insult.  II.  God's  commands  are
reasonable.  God  does  not  demand  what  is  impossible  or  unreasonable.  He  does
not,  like  an  Eastern  tyrant,  compel  men  to  serve  him  with  rigour  and  hardships.
God  might  weary  them  by  unlawful  requirements  (Is.  xliii.  23) ;  or  unfulfilled
promises  (Jer.  ii.  31);  but  they  weary  him  with  their  iniquities  (Is.  xliii.  24).
"  His  commands  are  not  grievous,"  why  then  complain  or  get  wearied  1  "  What
iniquity  have  your  fathers  found  in  me?"  III.  God's  kindness  is  remarkable.
"  I  brought  thee  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,"  &c.  Israel  were  specially  blessed.
1.  They  were  redeemed  from  bondage.  "And  redeemed  thee  out  of  the  house  of
servants."  Instead  of  a  nation  of  slaves  they  were  priests  to  God.  2.  They  were
guided  in  the  wilderness.  "  I  sent  before  thee  Moses,  Aaron,  and  Miriam."  They
had  instruction,  intercession,  and  praise.  3.  They  were  defended  in  their  progress.
The  power  of  Balak  and  the  device  of  Balaam  were  frustrated,  and  the  curse  was
turned  into  a  blessing.  From  Shittim  to  Gilgal  their  progress  was  safe  and  tri-
umphant. God  could  have  done  no  more  for  them,  yet  they  "  forgot  God  their
Saviour,  who  had  done  great  things  in  Egypt ;  wondrous  things  in  the  land  of
Ham."  In  the  review  of  our  life  we  see  goodness  and  mercy,  and  abundant  reason
for  gratitude.  In  deliverance  from  trouble  and  the  destruction  of  the  enemy,  we
may  read  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  and  the  display  of  the  righteousness  of
God.  "  Oh  that  men  would  praise  the  Lord  for  his  goodness,  and  for  his  wonder-
ful works  to  the  children  of  men  1 "

Man's  Questions  and  God's  Answers. — Verses  6 — 8.

Come  before  God  not  merely  with  respect,  like  bowing  to  a  superior — but  come
with  acceptance,  in  honour  and  duty  (Deur.  xxiii.  5  :  Ps.  cv.  2).  In  whatever
spirit  these  words  were  uttered,  they  indicate  the  importance  and  necessity  of
comma-  to  God.  They  are  the  recurring  question,  pressing  upon  all  ages  and  all
individuals — "  How  shall  man  be  just  with  God]  "  They  set  forth  God's  answer
to  the  question  and  specify  the  way  of  acceptance  before  him.

I.  Man's  questions.  il  Wherewith  shall  I  come,"  &c.  Convicted  by  the  previous
appeal  the  people  inquire  how  Jehovah  may  be  appeased.  1.  By  external  forms?
"With  burnt  offerings — with  calves  of  a  year  old]"     Men  naturally  cling  first  to


chap,  vi.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MICAH.  441


outward  forms,  trust  to  customary  rites  to  heal  the  schism  of  the  soul.  They  are
liberal  in  their  offerings,  zealous  in  their  profession,  and  ready  to  sacrifice  anything  for
peace  of  conscience.  But  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  cannot  take  away  sin.
2.  By  human  sacrifices  ?  "  Shall  I  give  my  firstborn  1 "  Nations  have  ;'  burnt  their
children  in  the  fire"  (2  Kings  xvii.  31).  They  have  been  driven  to  desperation
in  their  sin  and  sup  Tstitions,  and  sought  to  please  God  by  inventions  of  their
own.  Jewish  rites  and  heathen  sacrifices  were  alike  in  vain.  No  spotless  beast
nor  human  blood  could  quench  the  fire  of  the  soul.  "  There  was  wanting,"  says
Porphyry,  "some  universal  method  of  delivering  men's  souls,  which  no  sect  of
philosophy  had  ever  yet  found  out."  II.  God's  answer  to  man's  questions.  God
has  revealed  his  will  to  man  and  showed  what  is  required  from  him.  1.  It  is
revealed  in  the  written  word  of  God.  "  He  hath  showed  thee,  0  man."  In  the
Scriptures  we  have  an  answer  to  the  questions  of  the  soul  and  the  problems  of  life.
Without  the  Bible  man  is  in  the  dark.  The  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God.
The  light  of  nature  is  insufficient,  and  the  doings  of  providence  say,  It  is  not  in
me.  We  have  no  need  to  guess  nor  grope  the  way,  "  the  word  is  nigh  unto  thee."
2.  It  is  declared  by  the  servants  of  God.  The  prophet  plainly  declares  what  God
requires.  Nothing  ceremonial,  nothing  impracticable.  Three  things  are  specially
mentioned.  (1)  To  do  justly.  Not  mere  profession,  but  practice.  Justice  to
God  and  integrity  to  man  in  all  our  dealings.  God's  religion  destroys  injustice
and  oppression.  We  must  do  injury  to  none,  but  right  to  all.  Render  to  all  their
due.  (2)  To  love  mercy.  We  must  not  only  be  just,  but  kind  to  all.  Our  mercy,
like  God's,  must  be  allied  with  equity.  We  must  not  merely  show  mercy  but
love  and  delight  in  mercy.  Mercy  gives  more  than  justice  demands.  The  hard
exacting  man  is  not  a  child  of  God.  "Be  ye  therefore  merciful,  as  your  Father
also  is  merciful."  (3)  To  walk  humbly  with  God.  To  walk  with  God  implies
reconciliation,  faith,  and  constant  intercourse  (Gen.  xvii.  1  :  Heb.  xi.  5).  This  is
the  essence  of  religion  and  the  whole  duty  of  man  (Eccl.  xii.  13).  This  is  what
God  requires  from  us.  The  heart,  not  outward  forms;  sincerity  and  truth,  not
fair  profession.  "  And  now,  Israel,  what  doth  the  Lord  thy  God  require  of  thee,
but  to  fear  the  Lord  thy  God,  to  walk  in  all  his  ways,  and  to  love  him,  and  to
serve  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart  and  with  all  thy  soul  % "

Is  it  not  True. —  Verses  6 — 8.

Our  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  comes  from  God.  Conscience  uninstructed  by
him  is  useless.  Some  things  which  only  seem  to  be  good  are  sought  after  most
diligently  by  men  who  are  strictly  conscientious.  Other  things  good  in  them-
selves, which  seem  undesirable,  are  eschewed  by  the  same  persons.  Human  con-
science is  a  depraved  conscience.  In  the  text  we  read  the  doctrine  that  God  has
showed  to  man  that  which  is  both  acceptable  to  himself  and  profitable  to  us.

I.  The  revelation.  He  hath  showed,  1.  "  What  he  has  revealed.  Himself  as
the  chief  good.  His  attributes  a  subject  for  praise.  His  service  delightful  em-
ployment. His  favour  of  infinite  value.  2.  How  he  has  revealed  these  things.
(1)  By  nature.  Here  he  faintly  exhibits  somewhat  of  himself.  (2)  By  history,
especially  inspired  history.  (3)  By  Jesus  Christ.  Whatever  nature  or  history
has  taught,  by  Jesus  is  amplified  and  confirmed.  By  him  we  behold  the  Father's
loving-kindness,  tender  mercy,  forbearing  grace.  (4)  By  our  own  experience.
We  are  convinced  of  the  blessedness  of  holiness,  of  justice,  of  a  humble  walk
with  God ;  indeed  of  everything  the  Lord  has  declared  is  good.  II.  The  re-
quisition. God  does  not  show  us  what  is  good  merely  to  enlarge  our  knowledge,
but  to  insure  our  service.  Every  good  thing  if  rightly  used  redounds  to  his  glory.
1.  He  requires  us  to  demonstrate  our  knowledge.  The  light  must  not  be  put  under
a  bushel.  The  man  who  hid  his  Lord's  money  was  condemned.  2.  He  regimes
us  to  display  this  in  a  particular  way.  (1)  To  do  justly.  It  is  not  enough  to
speak  fairly.     Unpractical  religion  is  unscriptural  religion.     L±±  To  love  mercy.


442


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARr:  MICAH.


[CHAP.    VI.


It  is  not  enough  to  do  merely  from  a  sense  of  duty.  We  must  delight  in  the
things  of  God.  (3)  To  walk  humbly  with  thy  God.  ISTor  does  God  require  deeds
of  justice  and  love  of  mercy,  without  dispensing  that  grace  without  which  these
things  can  exist.  In  order  to  do  justly  we  are  invited  to  walk  with  God,  deserving
his  justice,  receiving  his  mercy.  As  a  little  child,  observe  the  Father's  practice,
and  as  far  as  you  can  do  like  him  [Stems  and  Tivigs].

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Vers.  4,  5.  Remember,  &c.  I.  God's
dealings  with  his  people  attest — 1.  His
love ;  2.  His  faithfulness ;  and  3.  His
power.  II.  These  dealings  are  often
forgotten.  This  displays,  1.  Thought-
lessness, and  2.  Ingratitude.  "  Micah
speaks  by  a  rare  idiom  of  the  righteous-
nesses of  the  Lord,  each  act  of  mercy  being
a  separate  effluence  of  his  righteousness.
The  very  names  of  the  places  suggest  the
righteous  acts  of  God,  the  unrighteous
of  Israel"  [Pusey].

Ver.  8.  Showed  good.  1.  The  thing
desired.  Good.  "Who  will  show  us
any  good  ] "  Kighteousness,  love,  justice,
and  humility.  II.  The  method  of  get-
ting it.  God  reveals  it,  hath  shoioed
thee.  It  is  not  a  discovery  of  man,  &c.
"  Do  justly.  To  do  judgment  are,  chiefly,
all  acts  of  equity;  to  love  mercy,
all  deeds  of  love.  Judgment  is  what
right  requires;  mercy,  what  love.  Yet,
secondarily,  to  do  judgment  is  to  pass
righteous  judgment  in  all  cases ;  and  so,
as  to  others,  judge  not  according  to  the
appearance,  but  judge  righteous  judg-
ment ;  and  as  to  one's  self  also.  Judge
equitably  and  kindly  of  others,  humbly
of  thyself.  He  addeth,  love  mercy;
being  merciful  out  of  love,  not  of  ne-
cessity, for  God  loveth  a  cheerful  giver
(2  Cor.  ix.  7).  These  acts  contain  the
whole  duty  of  man,  corresponding  with
and  formed  upon  the  mercy  and  justice
of  God  (Ps.  ci.  1 ;  lxi.  7).  All  which
is  due,  any  how,  or  iu  any  way,  is  of
judgment;  all  which  is  free  toward
man,  although  not  free  toward  God,  is
of  mercy.  There  remains,  walk  humbly
with  thy  God;  not  bow  thyself  only
before  him,  as  they  had  offered  (ver.  6) ;
nor,  again,  walk  with  him  only,  as  did
Enoch,  Noah,  Abraham,  Job ;  but  walk
humbly  (lit.  bow  doivn  the  going).  Yet
still  with  thy  God;  never  lifting  up
thyself,  never  sleeping,  never  standing


still,  but  ever  walking  on,  yet  ever
casting  thyself  down  ;  and  the  more  thou
goest  on  in  grace,  the  more  cast  thyself
down,  as  our  Lord  saith,  Luke  xvii.  10  "
[Pusey].

A  good  man,  like  a  good  angel,  is
ever  in  God's  presence,  and  must  there-
fore walk  worthy  of  the  vocation
wherewith  he  is  called  (Eph.  iv.  1,  2),
with  all  modesty  of  demeanour,  especi-
ally when  he  draweth  nigh  to  God
in  holy  exercises.  Then  it  must  be
his  care  to  exercise  three-fold  humility.
First  precedent :  before  he  sets  upon
God's  service,  he  must  in  heart  devote
and  dedicate  all  that  he  is  and  hath  as
a  due  debt  to  the  Almighty,  saying  with
David,  It  is  of  thine  own,  Lord  (1
Chron.  xxix.  14).  The  second  is  con-
comitant;  when  in  the  performance
of  good  duties  he  hath  grace  (this  lovely
grace  of  humility  especially),  "  whereby
he  may  serve  God  acceptably  "  (Heb.  xii.
28) ;  which  is  an  awful  respect  to  the
Divine  Majesty  with  whom  we  have  to
do  (Heb.  iv.  13).  The  third  is  subse-
quent ;  when  having  done  his  best  he  is
dejected  with  a  sense  of  his  failings,  and
looking  on  his  plumes  he  is  abashed
before  God.  As  many  as  walk  accord-
ing to  this  rule,  peace  be  on  them,  and
mercy,  and  upon  the  Israel  of  God
(Trapp).

Walk  humbly.  1.  In  prosperity  ;  for
God  is  our  benefactor.  Everything
comes  from  him.  2.  In  adversity  ;  for
he  corrects  in  wisdom  and  truth.  3.  In
all  circumstances  of  life ;  for  he  disposes
our  lot.  We  are  dependent  creatures.
Our  times  are  in  his  hands.  Wait  upon
God.  He  will  renew  your  strength  and
guide  your  life.

To  doubt  thy  goodness  would  be  base

Ingratitude  in  me :
Past  favours  shall  renew  my  hopes,

And  fix  my  faith  in  thee.


chap.  VL]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MIC  AH.  443


HOMILETIGS.
The  Voice  op  God  in  the  Dispensations  op  His  Providence. —  Verse  9.

These  words  refer  to  the  solemn  warnings  given  to  Israel  by  the  ministry  of  the
prophets,  and  to  the  judgments  about  to  fall  upon  Samaria  and  Jerusalem,  because
of  their  sins.

First.  In  what  way  may  it  be  said  that  "the  Lord's  voice  crieth"  unto
cities  and  nations.  God  has  spoken  by  the  prophets  (Heb.  i.  1) ;  by  his  Son  and
by  his  Spirit  in  Apostles  and  teachers.  In  an  indirect  way  the  voice  of  God  is
heard  in  his  works  (Rom.  i.  20;  Ps.  xix.  12 ;  Acts  xiv.  17).  But  especially  in
providential  dispensations,  of  mercy  or  judgment,  in  events  of  an  afflictive
nature.  He  speaks  to  cities  and  nations  when  he  exposes  them  to  war  and  their
young  men  fall  by  the  sword — when  the  fruits  of  the  earth  are  blasted  or  rot  in
the  ground — when  famine  succeeds  and  thousands  pine  away  with  hunger.  In
pestilence y  in  dreaded  cholera,  the  voice  of  God  is  distinctly  heard.  Secondly.
Mark  the  impression  which  the  voice  of  God  produces  upon  different  classes  of
individuals.  Some  boldly  deny  that  he  has  ever  spoken  to  men,  except  perhaps
by  the  voice  of  natural  conscience,  and  treat  the  doctrine  of  providence  as  super-
stitious (2  Pet.  iii.  3,  4).  Others  are  insensible  to  what  is  passing  around  them
(Is.  xxvi.  11).  Others  brave  the  threatenings  of  the  Almighty,  as  if  secure
against  all  attacks  (Is.  v.  19 ;  xxviii.  15).  On  some  only  a  temporary  impres-
sion is  made:  it  alarms  but  fails  to  convert  (Is.  xxvi.  16).  Others  lay  claim  to
superior  wisdom,  think  in  the  discovery  of  the  proximate  or  second  causes  of
calamity  that  they  have  solved  the  mystery,  and  exclude  the  great  First  Cause  that
moves  and  regulates  the  whole.  "  The  man  of  wisdom,"  the  enlightened  and  con-
sistent believer,  "  hears  a  voice  they  cannot  hear,  and  sees  a  hand  they  cannot  see."
Thirdly.  Notice  the  proper  improvement  to  be  made  of  such  afflictive  dispensations.
"  Hear  ye  the  rod  and  who  hath  appointed  it."  View  it  not  merely  as  a  national
calamity,  but  as  a  chastisement  from  the  hand  of  God.  While  others  treat  it  with
mute  surprise  or  affected  indifference,  and  refuse  to  acknowledge  a  Divine  hand
in  it,  beware  of  such  a  pernicious  course.  Let  us  search  and  try  our  ways  and
turn  to  the  Lord.  Deep  humiliation  and  sincere  repentance  should  be  accom-
panied with  proofs  of  active  and  self-denying  works  (Id.  lviii.  6 — 8),  in  nations
and  individuals  [Scottish  Cong.  Mag.  1847].

"The  Men  op  Wisdom." — Verse  9.

Wise  men  are  here  contrasted  with  ignorant,  careless,  and  wicked  men.  Wis-
dom here  signifies  essence,  and  the  men  of  wisdom  are  the.  men  of  essence,  not  men
of  emptiness  and  folly.  They  hear  the  voice  of  the  rod  and  understand  the  pur-
pose for  which  it  is  sent.

I.  Wise  men  discern  the  providence  of  God  in  the  calamities  of  life.  "  The
Lord's  voice  crieth  unto  the  city."  1.  The  rod  of  God  speaks  to  men.  It  has  a
voice  and  cries  aloud.  Scourges  and  calamities  speak  of  the  neglect  and  sins  of
men.  They  are  the  voice  of  God  speaking  in  power  and  authority.  Awful  judg-
ments and  visitations  are  a  rod  to  check  and  chastise  for  sin,  to  prevent  folly  and
further  misery.  Yet  many  see  but  hear  them  not.  God  speaks  once,  yea  twice,  yet
men  perceive  it  not  (Job  xxxiii.  14).  2.  The  rod  of  God  is  appointed  for  men.
"  Who  hath  appointed  it."  Hume  in  his  English  History  ascribes  famines  and
desolating  events,  to  the  ignorance  of  the  people,  the  rude  methods  of  agriculture
practised  by  our  forefathers,  and  affirms  that  the  progress  of  science  and  art  will
prevent  calamities  eventually.  Men  ascribe  them  to  chance  or  to  second  causes,  and
ridicule  the  idea  of  Divine  appointment.  But  these  men  recognize  Divine  purpose
and  direct  interposition — believe  in  a  fixed  time  and  place;  hear  the  rod  and  know
it  for  their  good  (Job  v.  6).  "  For  he  performeth  the  thing  that  is  appointed  for  me;
and  many  such  things  are  with  him  "  (xxiii.  14).    II.  Wise  men  learn  the  lessons


444  ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MIC  AH.  [chap.  vi.


of  God  in  the  calamities  of  life.  "  The  man  of  wisdom  shall  see  thy  name."
They  hear  the  voice  and  discern  the  majesty  of  God.  They  see  the  name  of  God,
the  power  and  presence  of  God  in  his  dealings  with  men.  The  glory  of  the  Divine
attributes  is  displayed  in  the  administrations  of  providence.  1.  They  understand
afflictive  dispensations.  They  hear  and  read  what  is  spoken.  They  see  the  mind,
the  word  of  the  Lord  (Jer.  ii.  31).  Few  are  wise  and  understand  these  things!
But  wise  men  discern  the  truth  of  the  rod  in  its  reports  of  evil  deeds  and  God's
displeasure.  "  The  knowledge  of  the  Holy  (One)  is  understanding."  2.  They  sub-
mit to  afflictive  dispensations.  God's  voice  cries  to  all  men,  but  the  wise  only  hear
and  obey.  They  bow  to  the  rod  as  under  the  command  of  God.  They  mourn  for
sin,  learn  righteousness  (Is.  xxviii.  21),  and  find  that  "the  school  of  the  cross  is  the
school  of  light."  By  humiliation  they  seek  to  avoid  or  mitigate  the  stroke.  When
the  blow  has  fallen  they  look  to  God  "  who  hath  appointed  it,"  and  learn  the
lessons  of  spiritual  profit  for  which  it  was  sent.  "  Lord,  when  thy  hand  is  lifted
up,  they  will  not  see  :  but  they  shall  see."  "Doth  not  wisdom  cry?  and  under-
standing put  forth  her  voice  1 "

Commercial  Immorality. —  Verses  10 — 12.

Here  we  have  a  special  accusation  of  sins  which  procure  the  rod.  Sins  which
are  common  in  all  ranks  and  committed  after  many  admonitions.  In  social  inter-
course and  business  transactions  covetousness,  violence,  and  deceit  prevailed.
Riches  were  sought  and  acquired  by  cruel  and  unlawful  means.

I.  Fraud  in  the  shops.  Trickery  has  never  lacked  its  representatives  in  all
departments  of  trade.  1.  Dishonest  deatings.  "Wicked  balances,  and  with  the
bag  of  deceitful  weights."  Rich  sellers  gave  scant  measure  and  short  weight.  They
cheated  and  deceived  the  poor  in  the  necessities  of  life.  The  law  is  violated  in
the  present  day.  Are  grocers,  drapers,  aud  corn-merchants  always  honest  in  busi-
ness transactions  %  Why  so  many  fines  for  "colouring,"  "adulteration,"  and
fraud  ]  "  Ye  shall  do  no  unrighteousness  in  judgment,  in  mete-yard,  in  weight,  or  in
measure.  Just  balances,  just  weights,  a  just  ephah,  and  a  just  hin  shall  ye  have."
2.  Ill-gotten  gains.  "  The  treasures  of  wickedness  in  the  house  of  the  wicked."
Wealth  was  sought  by  wickedness.  The  house  was  a  store-room  of  vanity,  a
monument  of  inj  ustice,  and  an  abomination  to  God.  To  heap  up  wickedness  is  to
treasure  up  wrath  (Rom.  ii.  5).  "  Treasures  of  wickedness  profit  nothing  "  (Prov.
x.  2).  II.  Oppression  in  the  market-place.  "For  the  rich  men  thereof  are
full  of  violence  : "  not  the  poor  out  of  distress,  but  the  rich  in  covetousness  and
luxury,  lived  by  violence.  Dishonest  bargains,  hard  dealings,  and  rapacity  were
daily  events.  Equity  was  ignored.  Justice,  the  foundation  of  the  state  and  the
right  of  the  citizen,  was  openly  defied.  Commerce  was  a  means  of  gain,  not  of
mutual  help.  National  injustice  was  the  fundamental  sin  of  commercial  life.
Rank  and  power  used  in  violence  will  crush  the  possessor.  Robbery  with  authority
will  bring  a  curse.  "  Envy  thou  not  the  oppressor  (a  man  of  violence,  marg.),  and
choose  none  of  his  ways."  III.  Falsehood  in  the  mouth  of  the  poor.  "The  in-
habitants thereof  have  spoken  lies."  1.  This  was  a  common  practice.  As  often  as
they  speak,  in  daily  intercourse  and  conversation,  "their  tongue  is  deceitful  (lit.
deceit)  in  their  mouth."  Nothing  but  deceit,  and  deceit  to  ruin  others  and  enrich
themselves.  2.  This  was  a  universal  practice.  No  exception  is  made.  "  A  popul-
ation of  liars,"  says  one.  "  It  cannot  be  wrong  for  it  is  always  done,"  "  It  would
be  impossible  to  carry  on  business  in  any  other  way,"  are  pleas  to  justify  the  con-
duct of  some  in  trade.  Christianity  requires  no  concealment,  no  misrepresentation,
but  strict  adherence  to  truth.  No  earthly  tribunal,  no  ancient  custom,  can  exempt
from  eternal  justice.  An  honest  man  will  be  guilty  of  no  fraud.  "  The  obliga-
tion of  an  honest  man  can  never  die,"  said  De  Eoe.  "  Bread  of  deceit  is  sweet  to
a  man ;  but  afterwards  his  mouth  shall  be  filled  with  gravel."


chap.  VI.  J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MIC  AH.  445


HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  10.  Treasures  of  wickedness.    I.  alike  by  law  (Lev.   xix.   35,  36),  and

Illegal  in  their  acquisition.     Gained,  1.  gospel  (Matt.  vii.  12  :  Phil.  iv.  8).    Men

By  dishonest  means;  2.   In  opposition  may  "commend  its  wisdom"  (Luke  xvi.

to  Divine  warning.     II.  Kisky  in  their  1 — 8)  ;  God   not   only  forbids,  but  he

position.   "  In  the  house  of  the  wicked,"  abominates  it  (Prov.  xi.  1)  [Bridge].

which  is  exposed  to  danger  and  decay.  Ver.  10 — 12.  I.  Men  are  apt  to  sin

III.  Unsatisfactory  in  thc'r  nature.  IV.  even  after  many  admonitions.      "  Are

Doomed  in  their  existence.     JSTo  power  there  yet  treasures,"  &c.     II.  Men  are

or   combination  of    circumstances    can  apt  to  dream  of  God's  approbation  in

keep  them  from  the  judgment  of  God.  their  sinful  ways.     Hence  the  challenge,

Ver.  11.  He  also  has  a  false  weight  "  Shall  I  count  them  pure  ? "  III.  Aiter
who  judges  not  his  neighbour  with  the  they  have  enriched  themselves  by  sinful
same  measure  as  himself  [Lange].  God  ways  they  grow  worse  and  openly  op-
requires  exact  justice  in  all  our  dealings,  press.  "  Pull  of  violence."  But  God  is
and  therefore  it  is  our  duty  to  take  care  a  righteous  judge,  and  will  not  acquit
that  the  weights  and  the  balance  be  the  guilty  (Ex.  xxxiv.  7).  As  men  deal
just  [JFeZfo].  Impositions;  doable  towards  their  fellow-men,  so  God  deals
dealings  ;  the  hard  bargain  struck  with  with  them.  "  Neither  will  he  help  the
self-complacent  shrewdness  (Prov.  xx.  evil-doers "  (Job  viii.  20).
14) — this  is  the  false  balance  forbidden

HOMILETICS.
Moral  Consumption. — Verses  13,  14.

God  threatens  to  smite  Israel  with  mortal  sickness  ;  not  so  much  bodily  sick-
ness, as  desolation  of  land.  By  oppression  they  had  made  others  weak,  so  Divine
judgments  will  crush  them  by  famine  and  invasion.  Their  calamity  is  a  wasting
sickness.  The  origin,  seat,  and  consequences  of  this  moral  consumption  are  plainly
described.

I.  Sickness  in  the  centre.  "  In  the  midst  of  thee."  The  sinking  down,  the
wasting  away,  was  in  the  very  centre  of  the  country.  The  capital,  the  seat  of
their  wickedness  and  treasures,  was  smitten,  and  the  plague  spread  among  the
people.  Inward  decay  always  begins  at  the  heart.  And  when  the  vital  parts  are
affected  what  can  arrest  its  progress]  II.  Sickness  with  sufficiency.  "Thou
shalt  eat,  but  not  be  satisfied."  They  had  abundance  of  wealth,  an  insatiable
appetite,  but  their  food  did  not  nourish  them.  Their  desires  were  a  disease,  not  a
moral  strength.  Like  the  deadly  wasting  that  assails  the  human  frame,  there  may
be  a  spiritual  atrophy  to  derange  and  emaciate  the  soul.  The  victim  cries  out
with  Job,  "  Thou  hast  filled  me  with  wrinkles,  which  is  a  witness  againet  me,  and
my  leanness,  rising  up  in  me,  beareth  witness  to  my  face."  III.  Sickness  aided
by  outward  circumstances.  God's  judgments  only  hastened  on  the  end.  The
moral  atmosphere  was  foetid,  and  all  their  surroundings  unfavourable  to  health.
In  God's  favour  is  life ;  but  he  withdrew  the  fruit  of  the  fields,  and  the  blessings
of  the  skies.  "When  God  departs  from  a  people  nothing  will  be  left  but  inherent
emptiness  and  pining  consumption.  "Their  flesh  shall  consume  away  while  they
stand  upon  their  feet,  and  their  eyes  shall  consume  away  in  their  holes,  and  their
tongue  shall  consume  away  in  their  mouth."  IV.  Sickness  morally  incurable.
1 1  will  make  thee  sick  in  smiting  thee."  The  sickness  was  the  result  of  the
smiting.  "  Thy  wound  is  grievous,"  lit.  makes  sick.  It  was  an  incurable  wound :
"  There  is  no  healing  of  thy  bruise "  (N"ah.  iii.  4).  Robbed  of  their  families,
smitten  in  their  vineyards,  and  helpless  in  their  condition,  what  hope  of  recovery
was  left !  Spiritual  leanness  is  the  greatest  calamity  that  can  befall  the  Church.
If  God  withdraws  his  help  everything  will  decay.     Life,  light,  and  power,  hope,


416  H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:  MIC  AH.  [chap.  vi.


joy,  and  peace,  will  die  away.  Creeds  and  ceremonies  will  only  hasten  the  ruin.
Nothing  can  survive  the  death,  the  moral  consumption,  of  true  religion.  "My
leanness  !  my  leanness  !  Woe  unto  me  ! "

Labour  without  Profit. — Verses  14,  15.

The  judgments  are  further  enumerated  by  which  God  would  make  them  sick
and  desolate.  They  would  sow  and  plant  for  others  to  reap.  They  would  not  bo
able  to  rescue  what  they  had  lost,  nor  preserve  what  they  possessed  from  the  foe.
One  stroke  would  follow  another  until  the  land  was  desolated,  and  its  inhabitants
put  to  shame.

I.  Fields  would  be  sown,  but  no  harvest  reaped.  "  Thou  shalt  sow,  but  thou
shalt  not  reap."  The  crops  would  be  blasted  and  withered,  or  the  enemy  would
reap  them  for  himself.  They  reaped  where  they  sowed  not;  so  they  must  sow  for
others  to  reap.  Sin  provokes  God  to  frustrate  man's  efforts  to  subsist.  He  takes
from  the  covetous  and  unjust  the  fruit  of  their  efforts  just  when  it  is  within  their
grasp.  If  we  wish  to  enjoy  the  results  of  our  physical  and  intellectual  labours,  we
must  fear  God  and  love  justice.  1.  The  necessities,  and  2.  The  luxuries  of  life,  the
fruit  of  the  field,  the  oil,  and  the  wine,  depend  upon  the  providence  of  God,  and
may  be  taken  away  in  his  anger.  "  Thou  shalt  plant  vineyards,  and  dress  them,
but  shalt  neither  drink  of  the  wine  nor  gather  the  grapes."  II.  Goods  would  be
rescued,  but  delivered  up  to  the  enemy.  "  That  which  thou  deliverest  will  I
give  up  to  the  sword."  Children  on  whose  account  they  got  their  wealth,  goods
and  substance  for  which  they  had  toiled,  would  be  suddenly  taken  from  them.  If
anything  at  all  was  rescued,  it  was  only  for  a  time,  and  could  not  be  held.  No
effort  can  deliver  from  the  power  of  God's  executioners.  What  we  hold  to  be
most  precious  is  often  most  unsafe,  and  what  we  are  determined  not  to  lose  that
we  lose  suddenly.  III.  Men  would  take  flight,  but  could  not  escape.  "  Thou
shalt  take  hold,"  to  rescue  or  remove  to  a  safe  place,  but  in  vain,  "  but  shalt  not
deliver."  How  can  men  flee  from  God's  vengeance  1  No  human  hand  can  rescue
from  God's  power.  No  harbour  can  hide  from  his  presence.  Heaven  is  the  seat
of  his  glory,  earth  the  scene  of  his  power,  and  hell  the  place  of  his  wrath.

M  What  can  'scape  the  eye  of  God  all  seeing,
Or  deceive  his  heart  omniscient!  "  [Milton.]

Sins  and  Punishment:  an  Unbroken  Link. — Verse  16.

This  judgment  the  people  brought  upon  themselves  by  their  ungodly  conduct.
Their  calamities  were  the  results  of  their  sins.

I.  What  were  the  sins  of  which  they  were  guilty.  First.  They  had  broken
the  covenant  of  God  and  observed  the  statutes  of  men.  "  For  the  statutes  of  Omri
are  kept."  By  every  motive  of  hope  and  fear  they  were  commanded  to  obey  God.
This  was  the  purpose  of  their  existence,  and  the  ground  on  which  they  held  theii
privileges  and  country.  But  the  Baal- worship  of  Omri  was  patronized  and  raised
into  the  popular  religion  (1  Kings  xvi.  31,  32).  Secondly.  They  observed  the
doings  of  Ahab.  Ahab's  idolatry  and  persecuting  spirit  were  commended.  The
luxury,  wickedness,  and  oppression  of  the  court  were  sanctioned.  Yea,  men  more
wicked  than  others,  men  who  sold  themselves  "  to  work  wickedness  in  the  sight  of
the  Lord,"  were  their  examples  (1  Kings  xxi.  25).  1.  These  customs  were  dili-
gently observed.  The  margin  gives,  He  doth  keep  diligently.  One  and  all  were
kept  as  religious  acts,  in  earnestness  and  diligence.  2.  These  customs  were  univers-
ally observed.  Judah  was  at  variance  with  Israel  in  many  things,  but  they  were
one  in  apostasy.  3.  These  customs  were  continually  observed.  They  had  been
introduced  ages  before  Micah's  time,  yet  he  found  them  prevalent  and  all-power-
ful. Custom  is  the  deposit  of  the  past  in  the  life  of  the  present ;  the  link  which
binds  the  present  to   the  future.     Thus  evils  are  preserved  and  perpetuated  from


CHAP.  VI.]


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  MICAH.


447


one  generation  to  another.  II.  What  was  the  punishment  which  followed  these
sins  ?  The  actual  results  were  very  different  from  the  expected  fruits.  Their  con-
duct was  so  framed  as  if  they  had  purposely  desired  the  punishment.  "  That  I
should  make  thee  a  desolation."  1.  A  privileged  nation  was  made  desolate.  They
were  deprived  of  their  privileges  and  honour.  Sin  will  desolate  the  richest  nation
and  the  most  flourishing  Church ;  make  people  an  astonishment  to  some,  and  a
hissing  to  others.  2.  An  exalted  nation  was  made  a  reproach.  "  You  shall  bear
the  reproach  of  my  people."  They  would  have  been  God's  people  if  they  had  kept
bis  covenant,  but  their  sins  brought  shame  and  reproach.  The  God  whom  they  had
forsaken  and  offended  left  them  in  the  hands  of  the  heathen.  The  conduct  which
they  deemed  wise  and  expedient  proved  fatal  to  its  originators  and  imitators.
True  honour  is  only  found  in  God's  service.  Sin  and  disgrace  are  bound  together
by  an  unbroken  link.  "  We  are  become  a  reproach  to  our  neighbours,  a  scorn  and
derision  to  them  that  are  round  about  us."


HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.


Vers.  14,  15.  1.  The  law  of  God  is
the  standard  of  right  in  all  ages.  The
threatenings  of  the  law  of  Moses  were  in
force  in  the  days  of  Micah  (Lev.  xxvi.
16  :  Deut.  xxviii.  30).  2.  The  execu-
tion of  the  law  in  the  history  of  a
nation  is  not  always  a  warning  to  a
people.  3.  The  punishment  of  the  law
to  such  as  continually  violate  it  is  most
bitter.  Disappointment  in  labour,  de-
privation of  the  necessities  of  life,
troubles  in  the  family  and  the  nation.
"  When  our  services  of  God  are  soured
with  sin,"  says  a  quaint  author,  "his
providences  will  justly  be  embittered  to
us."

Ver.  16.  Statutes  of  Omri.  Idol-
atrous customs.  1.  Originated  by  great
men.  2.  Sanctioned  by  a  wicked  court.
3.  Observed  by  a  religious  people.  Anti-


quity and  priestly  or  princely  authority
are  of  no  force  against  the  command
of  God.  Fashion  rules  with  an  iron
sceptre,  and  those  who  ought  to  stand
up  for  God,  often  bow  to  the  law  of  man.

"  Custom's  the  world's  great  idol  we  adore,
And  knowing  this,  we  seek  to  know  no  more."

[Pomfret.]

Reproach.  Sin  in  God's  people  is
especially  great.  And  as  they  have
peculiar  privileges,  so  their  reproach  or
punishment  is  proportionable  to  their
profaning  of  their  privileges  (Ezek.
xxxvi.  20,  23)  [Hutcheson].  "If  pro-
fessors of  religion  ruin  themselves,  their
ruin  will  be  the  most  reproachful  of
any ;  and  they  in  a  special  manner  will
rise  at  the  last  day  to  everlasting  shame
and  contempt."


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER   VI.


Vers.  1,  2.  Hear.  If  Adam  needed
to  hear  his  Father's  voice,  sounding
amid  the  fair  bowers  and  the  unshaded
glory  of  Paradise,  surely  much  more
does  this  prodigal  world,  that  has  gone
astray  from  him,  need  to  hear  a  Father's
voice  asking  after  us,  and  the  first  inti-
mations of  a  Father's  desire  that  the
lost  may  be  found,  and  the  dead  at
length  become  alive  [Dr  Cumming\.

Vers.  3 — 5.  Well  fare  their  hearts
who  will  not  only  wear  out  their  shoes,
but  also  their  feet,  in  God's  service,  and
yet  gain  not  a  shoe-latchet  thereby
[Thos.  Fuller].


Remember.  Wherever  thou  be,  let  the
voice  of  God  be  still  in  thine  ear.  My
son,  return  inwardly  to  thy  heart,  ab-
stract thyself  from  all  things,  and  mind
me  only  [Leighton\.

Vers.  6 — 8.  God  desires  not  merely
outward  virtue,  but  inward  purity,  and
the  penitent's  sense  of  sin  is  greatly
deepened  as  with  astonishment  he  dis-
covers this  truth,  and  how  far  he  is  from
satisfying  the  Divine  command.  Always
has  the  Holy  One  estimated  men  by
their  inner  nature,  and  not  by  their  out-
ward professions ;  to  him  the  inward  is
as  visible  as  the  outward,  and  he  rightly


448  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  MICAH.  (.chap,  vi


judges  that  the  essential  character  of  an  by  another ;    so  it  is  easier  to  be   an

action  lies  in  the  motive  of  him  who  honest  man  than  a  knave  [Skelton].
works  it  [Spurgeoii].  Yers.    12 — 15.     Crafty  counsels  are

Ver.  9.  Rod.  The  rod  hath  a  voice  joyful  in  the  expectation,  difficult  in  the
that  is  in  the  hands  of  earthly  fathers,  management,  and  sad  in  the  event
but  children  hear  it  not,  they  under-  [Tacitus].  "There  is  no  law  more
stand  it  not  till  they  are  hushed  and  just  than  that  the  contrivers  of  de-
quiet,  and  brought  to  kiss  it,  and  sit  struction  should  perish  by  their  own
silently  under  it ;  no  more  shall  we  hear  acts."  "  The  deceiver  is  often  ruined
or  understand  the  voice  of  the  rod  that  by  deceit."

is  in  our  heavenly  Father's  hand,  till  we  Ver.  16.  "  The  essence  of  wickedness

come  to  kiss  it,  and  sit  silently  under  it  is  forsaking  God."     "  Those  are  marked

[Brooks].  for  ruin  that  are  deaf  to  reproof  and

Vers.  10,  11.     Upright  simplicity  is  good  counsel."     Those  that  prefer  the

the  deepest  wisdom,  and  perverse  craft  rules  of  carnal  policy  before  Divine  pre-

the  merest  shallowness  [Barrow].  "  No  cepts,  and  the  allurements  of  the  world

man   is   wise   or  safe    but  he  that  is  and  the  flesh  before  God's  promises  and

honest."     An  upright  posture  is  easier  comforts,  despise  His  word,  giving  the

than  a  stooping  one,  because  it  is  more  preference  to  those  things  which  stand

natural,  and  one  part  is  better  supported  in  competition  with  it  [Matt.  Henry],


CHAPTER  VII.


Critical  Notes.  The  Church  now  mourns  itself,  and  confesses  that  its  condition  is  like  a  vintage
after  gleaning.  No  cluster]  to  be  found.  Ripe  fruit]  of  excellent  flavour  chiefly  desired.  2.
Good]  Heb.  merciful  and  good  to  man  (Ps.  xii.  1)  ;  delivered  from  the  evil  to  come  (Is.  lvii.  1)  ;  or
cut  off  by  those  in  wait  for  blood — lit.  bloods,  i.  e.  blood-shedding.  Net]  used  for  hunting  (Hab.  i.
15).  Brother]  Bound  bylaw  to  love  another  as  himself  (Lev.  xix  18).  3.  Evil]  Lit.  Their  hands
are  for  evil,  that  they  may  do  it  earnestly,  i.  e.  well,  cleverly.  Great]  man.  He]  Emphatic,  expresses
desire,  lit.  the  lust  of  his  soul.  They]  Venal  judges  are  ready  to  wrap,  Heb.  to  weave  or  twist  to-
gether;  they  pervert  the  cause  of  the  poor.  4.  Best]  The  prince  asks,  the  judge  grants,  and  the  rich
co-operate  ;  all  resemble  the  brier  and  thorn-bush,  which  only  prick  and  injure.  Visit.]  Corruption
is  so  high  that  judgment  will  break  in  upon  them.  Perplex.]  They  will  be  caught  as  victims,  and
not  know  what  to  do.  5.  Trust]  All  are  treacherous  and  pervert  justice  (Jer.  ix.  2 — 6) ;  confidence
will  be  unsafe.  Guide]  And  heads  of  families  to  whom  we  naturally  look,  unworthy  of  confidence.  6.
Dishon.]  Treats  the  father  as  a  fool  (Dent,  xxxii.  15  :  Jer.  xiv.  21).  Daughter]  witnesses  against  her
mother  (Ps.  xxvii.  12).  Treachery  and  faithlessness  reach  the  nearest  friends,  and  dissolve  every
family  tie  (cf.  Matt.  xxiv.  10 — 12).  7.]  Having  no  hope  from  man,  the  prophet  looks  to  God,  and
speaks  in  the  name  of  the  Church.  Salv.]  ••  e.  from  whom  all  help  comes.  8.  Rejoice]  The  enemy
must  not  think  this  condition  to  be  perpetual ;  light  will  break  through  the  darkness.  9.]  Hence  bear
patiently  the  inflicted  punishment  (Lam.  iii.  39),  until]  the  promise  of  ver.  8  is  fulfilled.  10.
Then]  the  enemy  will  discover  her  mistake,  be  covered  with  shame,  and  be  prostrated  in  the  dust
(Is.  x.  6).  11.]  This  confidence  rises.  Day]  Fences  will  'be  built  up.  Decree]  The  law  imposed
upon  Israel  by  heathens,  some ;  others,  the  decree  of  God  for  her  captivity.  12.  That  day]  when
the  walls  are  built,  there  shall  come  to  thee.  He]  i.  e.  many  from  Assyria,  &c,  scattered  believers
and  heathen  nations.  From  sea]  i.  e.  from  the  Mediterranean  to  the  Persian  Sea.  Mtn.]  i.  e.  from
Sinai  in  the  south  to  Lebanon  in  the  north.  13.  Notwith.]  Glorious  the  prospect  of  restoration,
yet  remember  judgment.  Land]  i.  e.  the  earth  as  opposed  to  the  Church  of  God  m  Zion  alone
will  be  deliverance,  outside  will  be  desolation.  14.  Feed]  Lit.  rule ;  a  prayer  in  tne  name  of  the
people,  to  be  fed  on  the  fruitful  mountain-range  (Carmel)  of  the  western  sea-coast  (Is.  x.  18;
xxxvii.  24),  and  by  Bashan  and  Gilead,  the  rich  pasture-land  east  of  Jordan  (Num.  xxxii.  1:
Deut.  xxxii.  14:  Jer.  1.  19).  15.  Marvellous]  Wonders  of  grace,  special  manifestations  of  God's
mercy,  which  will  be  repeated  in  the  days  of  Messiah,  will  confound  and  silence  the  enemy  (Ps.  cvii.


chap,  vil]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MICAH.  449


42  :  Is.  lii.  5).  16.  Deaf.]  They  shall  be  afraid  of  hearing  them,  because  they  continually  fear  new
disasters,  when  they  see  the  God  of  Israel  to  be  so  powerful  [Calvin'].  17.  Lick]  Abject  prostra-
tion as  suppliants  (cf.  Is.  xlix.  23:  lxv.  25);  an  allusion  to  Gen.  iii.  14.  Worms]  Earth-creepers
(Deut.  xxxii.  24).  Like  snakes  driven  out  of  their  hiding-place,  or  when  charmed  out  of  their  holes,
so  nations  come  trembling  out  of  their  castles  (Ps.  xviii.  46),  and  tremble,  flee  to  Jehovah  with
trembling,  as  alone  able  to  help  [cf.  Keil\  18.]  In  allusion  to  his  own  name,  Micah  praises  God,
and  closes  the  book.  Who.]  The  rescue  from  Egypt  and  the  restoration  predicted,  exalt  Jehovah
above  other  gods,  and  reveal  his  incomparable  grace  and  compassion  (cf.  Ex.  xv.  11).  Passeth]  Not
conniving  at  it,  but  forgiving  it;  not  choosing  to  look  into  it  (Prov.  xix.  11  :  cf.  Ps.  cxxx.  3).
Heritage]  Surviving  judgment,  and  typifying  the  remnant  of  grace  (ch.  iv.  7).  19.  Subdue]  Lit
tread  underfoot  as  something  deadly ;  guilt  and  power  of  sin,  both  taken  away.  Depths]  Like  Egyp-
tians into  the  Red  Sea.  All]  not  some;  pardon,  full  and  free.  20.  Truth]  Faithful  promise.  Mercy]
from  which  promises  spring.  Fathers]  (Ps.  cv.  9,  10).  Mercy  and  truth  are  the  scarlet  threads  which
run  through  the  unity  of  God's  plan  from  beginning  to  end  \_Lange\.  The  seed  of  the  patriarchs  should
never  perish,  but  would  be  restored  as  often  as  they  turned  to  God.  The  mystery  of  this  rjurpose  is
revealed  by  the  Apostle  (Rom.  xi.  25,  sqq.).  "  There  is  no  prophetic  denunciation  of  judgment
against  Israel,  which  is  not  concluded  with  promises  of  mercy  "  \Abarbinel],


HOMILETIGS.
The  Scarcity  of  Godly  Men. — Versee  1,  2.

The  prophet  mourns  that  he  lives  in  a  degenerate  age.  Good  men  have  perished.
Instead  of  finding  the  nation  like  a  ripe  vintage,  there  is  not  "  a  cluster  to  eat."  It
is  gleaned  of  the  best  and  filled  with  the  worst  of  men.

I.  Godly  men  are  scarce  upon  the  earth.  "  The  good  man  is  perished  out  of
the  earth."  We  should  not  complain,  like  Elijah,  for  we  are  not  left  alone  in  the
present  day.  Yet  good  men  are  few.  1.  Some  are  removed  by  cruelty.  They
are  cut  off  by  those  who  "  lie  in  wait  for  blood."  In  all  ages  the  blood  of  martyrs
has  been  freely  spilt.  The  wicked  plot  and  persecute,  lie  in  ambuscade  for  the
reputation  and  life  of  the  godly  now.  All  malice  is  cruelty,  and  would  put  to
death  those  whom.it  hates.  "  Deliver  me  from  the  workers  of  iniquity,  and  save
me  from  bloody  men."  2.  Others  perish  by  moral  defection.  Iniquity  abounds,
and  the  love  of  many  grows  cold.  Difficulties  and  dangers  terrify  some,  others
are  not  sincere,  get  disappointed,  and  "  draw  back  unto  perdition."  "  They  went  out
from  us,  but  they  were  not  of  us ;  for  if  they  had  been  of  us  no  doubt  they  would
have  continued  with  us."  3.  Many  are  taken  away  by  death.  Good  men  ripen
on  earth  for  the  blessedness  of  heaven.  They  are  gathered  like  the  summer  fruits,
and  thus  escape  the  severity  of  winter.  "  Merciful  men  are  taken  away,  none
considering  that  the  righteous  is  taken  away  from  the  evil  to  come."  II.  The
scarcity  of  godly  men  upon  the  earth  is  a  cause  of  regret.  "Woe  is  me!"
Godly  men  are  precious  and  profitable  as  the  first  ripe  fruits  ;  useful  to  the
Christian  Church  and  the  world.  1.  They  are  a  loss  to  the  Christian  Church.
Their  presence  and  example  adorn  and  strengthen  the  Church.  They  are  pillars,
"  the  chariot  of  Israel  and  the  horsemen  thereof."  We  require  the  wisdom  and
zeal,  the  faith  and  power,  of  former  ages.  Every  death  seems  to  diminish  the
faithful,  and  make  them  "  as  the  grape-gleanings  of  the  vintage."  2.  They  are  a
loss  to  the  world.  As  lights  their  influence  is  diffusive  and  blessed.  "  Like  the
sun,"  says  Hume,  "  they  cheer,  invigorate,  and  sustain  the  surrounding  world."
As  salt  they  preserve  the  earth  from  corruption,  and  quicken  men  to  higher  life.
Their  prayers  draw  blessings  from  heaven,  and  ward  off  judgments  from  men.
They  refresh  and  fructify  the  place  in  which  they  dwell.  When  they  die,  justice,
benevolence,  and  beauty  depart.  "  The  world  is  upheld  by  the  veracity  of  good
men,"  says  Emerson  ;  "  they  make  the  earth  wholesome.  They  who  lived  with
them  found  life  glad  and  nutritious."  "  The  saints  that  are  in  the  earth,  and  to
the  excellent  in  whom  is  all  my  delight."

39


450  HOMILETIC  COMMENT  ART :  MICAH.  [chal\  vit


Maturity  Required  by  God. —  Verse  1.

These  words  may  be  taken  as  expressing  God's  desire  for  ripeness  or  maturity  in
grace.     Hence  they  relate  to  our  experience,  character,  and  efforts.

I.  God  requires  maturity  in  human  experience.  "  My  soul  desired  the  first
ripe  fruit"  1.  The  unconverted  must  be  renewed.  No  clusters  of  grace  and  beauty
adorn  their  conduct.  They  are  like  trees  without  foliage  and  fruit.  Barren  and
unfruitful  in  the  works  and  ways  of  God.

"Here  elements  have  lost  their  uses,
Air  ripens  not,  nor  earth  produces  n  [Swiff],

2.  The  penitent  must  ripen  in  humility.  Not  mere  blossoms  of  sorrow,  but
fruits  meet  for  repentance  must  be  produced.  Penitence  and  pardon,  faith  and
holiness,  must  be  visible.  "  First  the  blade,  then  the  ear,  after  that  the  full  corn
in  the  ear."  II.  God  requires  maturity  in  Christian  character.  Christian
character  grows.  In  this  growth  are  seed  time  and  harvest ;  progress  in  knowledge
and  holiness.  There  are  babes,  but  we  must  come  to  the  full  stature,  not  the  mere
outline,  but  the  perfect  likeness  in  Christ.  "  He  is  but  the  counterfeit  of  a
Christian  who  hath  not  the  life  of  a  Christian,"  says  one.  All  the  virtues  of
Christian  conduct  must  ripen.  God  is  glorified,  and  ministers  glad,  when  we  bring
forth  much  fruit.  "  I  desire  fruit  that  may  abound  to  your  account."  III.  God
requires  maturity  in  personal  effort.  There  must  be  thought  and  maturity  in
everything.  1.  In  efforts  we  must  put  forth  our  strength  and  work  earnestly.
Whatsoever  our  hands  find  to  do,  must  be  done  with  all  our  might.  Decision  and
energy  must  be  thrown  into  every  undertaking.  2.  In  offerings  we  must  give  the
first  ripe  fruit.  In  sacred  worship  and  daily  life  let  there  be  nothing  sour  and
unripe.  In  the  Sunday-school  and  the  sick-room,  think,  prepare,  and  do  your  best.
David  would  not  offer  to  God  of  that  which  cost  nothing.  If  we  spare  the  seed
we  shall  reap  no  harvest  (Prov.  xi.  24  :  2  Cor.  ix.  6) ;  but  thorough  consecration
will  secure  overflowing  vintage.  "  Honour  the  Lord  with  thy  substance,  and  with
the  first-fruits  of  all  thine  increase :  so  shall  thy  barns  be  rilled  with  plenty,  and
thy  presses  shall  burst  out  with  new  wine."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.   1.     The   moral   contrast    or,   1.         Brotherly  cruelty.     "  They  hunt  every

What  is  desired.     "  The  first  ripe  fruit."  man  his  brother."     1.  Wicked  men  plan

2.  What  is  really  found.     "  There  is  no  to   assail   others.     2.    These   plans   are

cluster  to  eat"  (ver.  1).  crafty.     Nets  of  various  kinds  laid  to

Ver.  2.    The  picture  of  a  good  man.  ensnare.      3.  These  crafty  plans   often

1.  Tfie  good  man  in  his  character.  Good  succeed.     Fraud  is  added  to  force,  and

here  means  merciful,  actively  good  and  craft  to  cruelty.     The  guilt  is  greater

benevolent  to  men.     2.  The  good  man  because  a  brother,  by  race  or  grace,  is

in   his  influence.     He   upholds  justice,  humbled.       Nearest    friends    are   often

checks  corruptions,  and  testifies  to  God.  entrapped  like  birds  by  the  fowler.
When   merciful   men    die,   uprightness         Every  man  is  the  brother   of  every

goes  and  cruelty  enters  the  land.     "  The  man,  because  he  is  a  man,  born  of  the

good  man  is  perished,  and  there  is  none  same  first  parent,  children  of  the  same

upright."      3.     The  good   man   in   his  Father :  3  et  they  lay  wait  for  one  another,

death.     The  Church  and  the  servants  of  as  hunters  for  wild  beasts  (cf.  Ps.  xxxv.

God  lament  the  loss.     "  Woe  is  me  !"  7 ;  lvii.  7  :  Jer.  v.  26)  [Pusey].

"  0  what  are  these  ?
«  Ai combination,  and  a  form,  indeed,  Death's  ministers,  not  men :  who  thus  deal  death

Where  every  god  did  seem  to  set  his  seal,  Inhumanly  to  men ;  and  multiply

To  give  the  world  assurance  of  a  man."  Ten  thousandfold  the  sin  of  him'who  slew

[Shakespeare.]         IIis  brother"  [Milton].


chap,  vii.]  HOMILimC  COMMENTARY:  MIC  AH.  451

HOMILETICS.

"With  Both  Hands  Earnestly. —  Verse  3.

There  is  little  of  excellence  in  mere  earnestness.  The  more  earnest  a  man  is  in
vital  error,  he  inflicts,  of  necessity,  the  deeper  injury  on  the  interests  of  truth  and
men.  The  wicked  men,  in  this  picture  of  the  prophet,  stand  in  the  very  attitude
which  every  good  man  should  assume  in  the  work  of  God.

I.  Without  hands.  Some  good  men  seem  to  be  without  hands.  "  They  have
hands,  but  they  handle  not;  feet  have  they,  but  they  walk  not."  They  work
with  hands  in  other  things;  strive  manfully  in  a  political  struggle,  or  in  a
question  of  social  right.  They  are  diligent  in  business,  but  in  Christian  work  idle,
both  hands  drop  down  and  there  they  stand — without  hands.  "  Curse  ye  Meroz,
curse  ye  bitterly  !"  Why?  What  had  Meroz  done  to  merit  the  curse1?  Nothing.
That  was  the  sin,  that  she  had  "  not  come  up  to  the  help  of  the  Lord."  II.  With
one  hand.  This  is  the  second  state  in  which  many  serve  God.  This  is  well  to
begin  with,  but  a  little  more  must  be  added,  and  so  the  service  mu4  grow  into
fulness.  The  Apostles  were  grand  workers,  learned  by  watching  and  following
him  who  went  about  doing  good.  They  were  but  one-handed  men,  made  many
mistakes,  but  got  the  use  of  both  hands  in  time.  The  Master  has  always  a  great
company  of  young  workers,  some  young  in  life,  some  young  in  toil,  but  all  learning
and  needing  the  word  of  encouragement  from  those  of  more  experience.  If  you
are  speaking  for  Christ,  anywhere,  at  any  time,  doing  but  a  little  service  in  a  quiet
way ;  God  speed  you  in  your  work.  III.  With  both  hands  we  say  to  all  one-
handed  men ;  for  there  is  no  perfection,  even  of  a  relative  kind,  with  one.  Both
hands  are  given  for  use ;  the  other  will  not  be  idle,  but  will  grasp  at  something,
raise  up  another  force  of  evil  to  balance  Christian  activity ;  so  life  in  a  little  while
will  be  in  poise,  not  in  motion ;  then  in  a  little  longer  there  will  be  motion,  but  in
a  wrong  way.  "  With  both  hands"  for  safety.  With  all  the  powers  and  with  all
the  talents  given.  None  of  them  must  rust,  all  must  go  out  in  use.  How  few  things
there  are  in  the  house,  in  labour,  in  business,  that  we  can  do  with  one  hand !
David's  men  "  were  mighty  men,  helpers  of  the  war ;  they  were  armed  with  bows,
and  could  use  both  the  right  hand  and  the  left."  These  are  the  men  whom  Christ
needs  to  fight  his  battles  and  do  his  work  ;  "  workmen  needing  not  to  be  ashamed  "
of  the  work  they  do,  or  of  the  way  in  which  they  do  it.  IV.  There  is  a  higher,
the  highest  stage  of  obedience,  expressed  by  all  the  words  of  the  text,  with  both
hands  earnestly.  It  is  not  enough  that  the  talents  be  laid  out ;  they  must  be  laid
out  to  the  best  advantage.  Every  power  and  passion  must  be  enlisted,  baptized,
inspired  and  energized  in  Christian  service.  This  is  just  the  thing  to  make  some
happy,  heroic,  and  victorious.  They  work  with  both  hands — the  mechanism  is
perfect  and  the  action  steady — but  it  is  mechanical  not  vital  action.  Christian
earnestness  is  not  mere  vehemence  and  heat :  it  is  "zeal  according  to  knowledge."
Many  reasons  might  be  urged  for  an  earnest  life :  Self-preservation  requires  it.
Our  faculties  and  senses  cannot  be  kept  bright  and  clear  without  use.  The  rust  of
moral  decay  will  be  within  us  unless  we  work  "with  our  might."  Honesty
requires  it.  We  have  undertaken  a  great  service — if  at  all — on  certain  terms,  clear
conditions  laid  down  by  the  Master.  We  must  fulfil  them  or  we  do  not  live
fairly.  Benevolence  requires  it.  If  we  love  our  fellow-men,  the  one  thing  we  can
do  for  them  above  all  other  things  in  value  is,  to  live  truly  and  intensely  before
them.  Gratitude  requires  it.  This  is  all  we  can  do  for  Christ.  He  will  take
nothing  from  us  but  this.  Time  requires  it.  Not  one  of  us  would  go  out  of  the
world  without  having  lived  for  some  time  in  it  in  this  way.  The  future  is
unknown,  and  carries  secrets  undisclosed.  We  are  not  fully  matched  with  the
day  unless  working  "  with  both  hands  earnestly  "  [Raleigh].


452  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MICAH.  [chap.  vii.


Universal  Corruption  and  Universal  Judgment. — Verses  3 — 6.

Corruption  is  prevalent  in  all  ranks  of  the  community,  rests  upon  a  compromise
of  the  ruling  classes,  and  thus  the  foundations  of  morality  are  destroyed.

I.  Universal  corruption.  Sin  was  veiled  under  the  name  of  virtue,  or  com-
mitted in  the  pretence  of  justice.  1.  In  official  ranks.  Men  in  authority  expose
justice  for  sale  and  avow  bribery.  They  play  into  the  hands  of  others  to  strengthen
themselves  in  evil.  (1 .)  The  prince  asks  for  gifts.  (2.)  The  judge  seeks  reward.  (3.)
The  nobleman  utters  his  mischievous  desires.  2.  In  religous  professions.  "  The
best  of  them  is  as  a  briar."  The  most  upright  and  moral  were  carried  away  with
the  sins  of  the  day.  They  were  crooked  in  their  dispositions,  and  sharper  than
thorns  in  their  ways.  Instead  of  being  a  protection  to  others,  they  were  positively
injurious  and  oppressive.  3.  In  social  circles.  Faith  was  not  kept  anywhere;  all
to  a  man  were  treacherous  (Jer.  ix.  2 — 6).  (1.)  A  friend  was  not  to  be  trusted.
(2.)  The  heads  of  families  would  not  help  and  advise.  The  guide  or  counsellor,  and
the  wife  of  his  bosom  (Deut.  xiii.  6),  were  alike  guilty.  (3.)  The  members  of
families  were  in  a  state  of  lawlessness  and  impiety.  Natural  relationship  was
perverted.  The  son  called  the  father  a  fool.  The  daughter  testifies  against  her
mother,  and  a  man's  foes  were  found  in  his  own  household.  Oppression  was
followed  by  inhumanity.  The  strongest  ties  of  nature  and  religion  were  dissolved.
A  moral  condition  descriptive  of  the  last  times  of  the  gospel  dispensation  (Luke
xxi.  16:  2  Tim.  iii.  1 — 3).  II.  Universal  judgment.  When  men  become
oppressive  and  dangerous,  and  moral  disease  becomes  universal,  it  is  a  sign  of
approaching  ruin.  1.  There  will  be  a  day  of  visitation.  "  Thy  visitation  cometh."
Men's  actions  and  lives  are  seen  by  God.  God  will  reckon  with  them  and  visit
them  with  punishment  for  sin.  2.  This  day  of  visitation  is  foretold.  Watchmen
and  prophets  foresee  it  and  warn  men  of  its  speedy  approach.  3.  When  it  comes
and  finds  men  unprepared  it  is  terrible.  "  Now  shall  be  their  perplexity."  Sinners
are  heedless,  and  the  day  breaks  suddenly  upon  them.  They  will  be  caught  in
their  own  snaies  and,  as  they  entangled  others,  they  will  not  be  able  to  escape
their  own  retribution.  "  For  it  is  a  day  of  trouble  and  of  treading  down,  and  of
perplexity  by  the  Lord  God  of  Hosts."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  3.      The  triple  alliance  for  evil,  each  from  the  other,  and  disjoints  the

Union  is  good,  is  necessary  and  advan-  whole  frame  of   society.     Passions  and

tageous,  but  alliance  for  evil  is  disgrace-  sin   break   every   band    of    friendship,

ful  and  injurious.    1.  The  Prince  asks  i.e.  kindred,  gratitude,  nature.     The  words

for  the  condemnation  of  the  righteous  describe  partly  the  inward  corruption,

and  innocent.     2.  The  Judge  grants  for  partly  the  outward  causes  which   shall

recompense  or  reward.      3.    The  great  call  it  forth.     There  is  no  real  trust  in

man  co-operates  with  both.     "  So  they  any,  where  all  are  corrupt.     The  words

wrap  it  up,"  turn  and  twist  their  efforts  deepen  as  they  go  on.     First,  the  friend,

into  a  threefold  cord  which  cannot  easily  or  neighbour,  the  common  band  of  man

be  broken.  and  man  \    then  the  guide   (or,  as  the

Yer.  4.    Men  as  briers.     Giving  grief  word  also  means,  one  familiar,  united

for  help,  and  fleecing  when  they  ought  by    intimacy,    to    whom   by  continual

to  protect.     Hard  and   sharp    in  their  intercourse  the  soul  was  used) ;     then

dealings ;  piercing  and  injurious  in  their  the  wife  who  lay  in  the  bosom,  nearest

conduct.     "  Folden  together  as  thorns  "  to  the  secrets  of  the  heart ;  then  those

(Nah.  i.  10).  to  whom  also  reverence  is  due,  father

Vers.  5,  6.  It  is  a  part  of  the  perplexity  and  mother  [Pusey\.
of  crooked  ways,  that  all  relationships         1.  There  is  no  sure   hold   upon  any

are  put  out  of  joint.     Selfishness  rends  man,  however  strictly  he  be  bound,  who


chap.  vh.  J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    MIC  AM.  453


is  declining  from  God,  and  hath  not  a  not  easily  take  prejudice,  and  to  walk

tender   conscience   standing   in   awe  of  warily  and  prudently ;   Trust  not,  saith

him ;  for  in  this  declining  time,  friends,  he,  put  no  confidence,  keep  the  doors  of

guides,  wives,  &c,  are  not  to  be  trusted  thy  mouth,  especially  trust  in  or  look

in.     2.  In  times  of  defection  and  back-  to   none    for   help,   but   only   in   God

sliding,  the  godly  out  of  love  should  [Hutcheson].
believe  all  things  (1  Cor.  xiii.  7),  and

HOMILETICS.
Three  Kesolutions. — Verse  7.

The  prophet  is  predicting  a  period  which  marvellously  corresponds  to  the  first
age  of  the  Christian  era.  For,  he  says,  the  day  of  thy  watchmen  and  thy  visita-
tion cometh,  the  time  our  Lord  foretold,  when  Jerusalem  was  destroyed.  Then  the
Church  was  as  sheep  among  wolves.  Princes  indeed  did  evil  with  both  hands
earnestly.  Judges  like  Pilate  could  pronounce  in  a  breath,  that  the  accused  was
innocent  and  yet  condemn.  Treachery  crept  into  every  home.  Hypocrisy  pre-
vailed the  land  over.  The  Church  was  in  the  midst  of  uncompromising  enemies.
The  nearest  of  their  relatives,  as  fathers  and  sons,  betrayed  them  to  persecution
and  death.  There  was  no  help  for  them  in  man.  So  the  eyes  of  faith  turned  to
God  alone.  He  would  not  fail  them.  Each  of  us  should  adopt  these  resolutions.
Many  reasons  indicate  the  wisd'om  of  so  doing.

I.  The  resolution  of  faith.  "  I  will  look."  1.  The  promises  encourage  me.
2.  Experience  teaches  me.  3.  The  Lord  commands  me.  4.  The  engagement  will
comfort  me.  II.  The  resolution  of  patience.  "  I  will  wait."  1.  For  his  time
is  best.  2.  For  his  blessing  is  worth  waiting  for.  3.  For  I  shall  not  be
disappointed.  III.  The  confidence  of  hope.  "  God  will  hear."  1.  Though  my
cry  be  feeble  and  my  faith  weak.  2.  Though  my  request  be  great.  3.  Though
others  disdain  me.  4.  Though  I  am  alone.  Few  pleaders  in  Israel.  5.  For
he  is  near  [Steins  and  Twigs].

He  turned  away  from  creatures,  knowing  they  were  broken  cisterns  that  could
hold  no  water;  and  turned. towards  God  "the  fountain  of  living  waters."  "There-
fore," he  says,  "I  will  look  unto  the  Lord."  Observe,  first,  that  this  is  a
designed  experience,  and  not  a  casual  one,  on  God's  side.  God  is  more  concerned
for  our  welfare  than  we  are  ourselves — does  not  wait  for  our  application,  but
excites  it.  For  this  purpose  He  has  given  the  Sabbath,  the  Scriptures,  the
sanctuary,  and  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel.  All  these  dispensations  are  arranged
in  subserviency  .to  the  purpose  of  his  grace  and  our  afflictions.  He  therefore  says,
"  I  will  go  and  return  to  my  place,  till  they  acknowledge  their  offences  and  seek
my  face."  Elihu,  reviewing  afflictive  dispensations,  says,  "  All  these  things  worketh
God  oftentimes  with  man,  to  bring  back  his  soul  from  the  pit,"  &c.  Observe,
secondly,  it  is  a  necessary  experience  on  our  part.  God  does  nothing  needlessly,
and  we  may  be  assured  that  he  doth  not  "  afflict  willingly."  We  have  a  strong-
propensity  to  turn  away,  to  make  flesh  our  arm,  and  earth  our  home ;  but  "  the
prosperity  of  fools  destroys  them,"  the  things  ordained  for  their  welfare  prove  "  a
trap."  Hence,  though  trying,  these  dispensations  improve  us  by  the  goodness  of
God.  He  "  hedges  up  our  way  with  thorns,"  that  we  may  not  be  able  to  "  find  our
paths."  He  embitters  earth,  that  heaven  may  be  endeared,  and  verifies  the  language
of  Dr.  Young  :  "  Our  hearts  are  fasten' d  to  the  world,"  &c.  Oh !  it  is  a  blessed
experience  when,  with  the  Church,  we  are  thrown  from  ourselves  and  from  creatures
upon  the  Divine  resources  [Jay].

God  maintaining  the  Interests  and  securing  the  Triumph  op  His

People. —  Verses  8 — 10.

Now  the  Prophet  holds  out  hope,  and  gives  special  grounds  of  consolation  and


454  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  MICAH.  [chap.  vii.


encouragement.     God  watches  over  his  people,  and  will  not   suffer  them  to  be
destroyed.

I.  The  sad  condition  of  God's  people.     1.  Oast  into  trouble.     u  When  I  fall."

The  strongest  saint  is   infirm   and   liable  to   fall.     Sin  within  and  temptation

without  overcome  us.     Disasters  may  strip  us  of  everything,  and  sorrow  bring  to

the  grave.     But  the  fall  shall  not  be  fatal.     "  Though  he  fall  he  shall  not  be  utterly

cast  down."     2.  Sitting  in  darkness.     "I  sit  in  darkness."      The  darkness  of

doubt,  captivity,  and  mysterious  providence.     Clouds  hang  over  us,  friends  desert

us,  and  shadows  hide  God  from  us.     "  We  walk  in  darkness  and  have  no  light "

(Isa.  1.  10).     3.  Mocked  by  the  enemy.     The  enemy  has  advantage  sometimes  over

God's  people,  and  treats  them  with  insult  and  reproach.     The  world  exults  at  the

fall  of  a  godly  man.     u  Malice  is  folly,"  says  one,  "  and  when  it  holds  a  festival  its

tones  and  gestures  far  exceed  all  the  freaks  and  mummeries  of  the  lord  of  misrule."

"  They  opened  their  mouth  wide  against  me,  and  said,  Aha,  Aha,  our  eye  hath

seen  it."     II.  The  blessed  hope  of  God's  people.     God  chastises  his  children,  but

does  not  give  them  up  to  despair.     Neither  despond  nor  mistrust  him.     "  He  shall

deliver  thee  in  six  troubles,  yea,  in  seven  shall  no  evil  touch  thee."     1.  Lifted

up  from  trouble.     "  I  shall  rise."     Trials  have  their  limits  and  design.     If  we

"  have  the  will  to  rise,  he  is  at  hand  who  will  cause  thee  to  rise,"  says  a  Father.

The  sinner  lies  when  he  falls,  and  perishes  without  recovery.     "  For  a  just  man

falleth  seven  times,  and  riseth  again  :  but  the  wicked  shall  fall  into  mischief."     2.

Enlightened  in  darkness.     "  The  Lord  a  light  unto  me."     Shadows  disperse ;  joy

and  brightness  beam  upon  our  lot.     Darkness  of  sorrow  and  ill-repute  flee  away,

and  noon-day  splendours  shine  again.     "  The  Lord  shall  be  unto  thee  an  everlasting

light."     3.  Restoration  to  lost  privileges.     God  will  declare  the  right  of  his  people,

make  their  glory  conspicuous,  and  restore  them  to  former  dignities.     They  shall  be

publicly  honoured  and  greatly  enriched  with  the  covenant  blessings.     "I  shall

behold  his  righteousness."     III.  The  sure  triumph  of  God's  people.     The  truly

godly  man  has  been  subject  to  derision  in  every  age.     Men  have  asked  in  scorn,

"  Where  is  the  Lord  thy  God? "    But  the  triumph  of  the  wicked  is  short.     1.  Joy

will  be  turned  to  shame.     The  enemy  rejoiced  in  God's  apparent  forgetfulness  of

his  people,  and  laughed  at  their   profession  of   confidence   in  him.      But  God

punished  the  blasphemy  cast  upon  his  name  and  the  calumny  heaped  upon  his

children.     The  enemy  was  disappointed,  confounded,  and  covered  with  shame.     2.

Deliverance  from  the  enemy  will  be  complete.     Judgment  will  be  executed  upon

the  enemy..     He  will  be  treated  as  straw,  and  trodden  as  mire  in  the  streets.

"  And  they  shall  be  as  mighty  men  which  tread  down  their  enemies  in  the  mire  of

the  streets  in  the  battle ;  and  they  shall  fight  because  the  Lord  is  with  them."

Light  in  Darkness. — Verse  7.

1.  In  dark  spiritual  experience  God  will  be  a  light  unto  us.  When  sin  is  strong
and  grace  is  weak — when  comforts  fail  and  sorrows  multiply — when  faith  yields
and  unbelief  prevails — when  we  search  for  God  and  find  him  not — then  he  will
succour  and  fill  our  hearts  with  light  and  gladness.  2.  In  dark  providential
dispensations  God  will  be  a  light  unto  us.  When  the  clouds  are  black  above,  and
our  way  is  dark,  and  we  know  not  where  to  go — when  every  fresh  turn  of  events
serves  to  increase  our  perplexity — when  the  scenes  through  which  we  pass  defy  all
mortal  wisdom — then  he  wrill  disperse  the  gloom  and  reveal  our  way  before  us.  3.
In  the  darkness  of  death  God  will  be  a  light  unto  us.  When  wre  enter  the  damp
thick  shades  of  the  tomb — when  all  earthly  lights,  even  those  that  have  burned
with  the  steadiest  and  purest  lustre,  will  be  extinguished — then  the  Lord  will  be
our  light.  He  will  guide  our  feet,  we  shall  pass  through  the  dark  valley  without
danger,  and  enter  the  regions  of  eternal  day.


chap.  vii.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    MTCAH.  455


"  Then  let  me  not  despairing  mourn,

Though  gloomy  darkness  spread  the  sky ;
My  glorious  Sun  will  yet  return,

And  night  with  all  its  horrors  fly  "  [Adapted],

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  8.    When  I  fall,  I  shall  rise.     A  chastisement.     If  we  murmur  and  get

strange  event  and  a  strong  hope.     Trials  impatient,    the  end  has    not   been   yet

(a)  must  be  expected,  (b)  are  temporary,  answered.      "  Wherefore  doth  a  living

(c)  have  their  results,  and  (d)  must  be  man  complain,  a  man  for  the  punishment

endured  in  hope.     These  words  contain  of  his  sins?"     3.  Such  as  bear  Divine

sweet  comfort  for  slandered  saints.  indignation  in  the  right  spirit  will  be

Ver.  9.     1.   Sin  is  the  cause  of  Divine  delivered.     Bear  it  patiently,  hopefully,

indignation.     Men  make  themselves  rods  The    time   is  short,    "  until   he  plead."

by  their  own  guilt.     "  Because  I  have  His  promise  is  good.     "  He  will  bring

sinned  against   him."      2.  This   Divine  me  forth."
indignation  must  be  received  as  fatherly

HOMILETICS.
A  Glorious  Day. — Verses  11,  12.

The  Prophet  predicts  a  glorious  time,  when  Jerusalem  shall  be  divested  of
enclosures  and  narrowness ;  when  the  Church  shall  be  enlarged  by  the  return  of
captives  and  the  conversion  of  nations.

I.  A  day  of  deliverance  from  bondage.  "  In  that  day  shall  the  decree  be
far  removed."  God's  decree  to  punish,  and  the  decree  of  Nebuchadnezzar  to
retaiti  in  captivity.  Tyrannical  rule  would  be  destroyed,  and  perfect  freedom
enjoyed.  No  power  on  earth  can  detain  God's  people  in  bondage  when  he  intends
to  deliver.  II.  A  day  of  gathering  together  the  scattered  tribes.  From
fortress  and  fortified  cities ;  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  the  utmost  bounds  of  the
earth,  shall  captive  Jews  return.  As  proselytes  from  all  nations  came  to  Jerusalem
of  old,  so  shall  converts  from  north  and  south  flow  into  the  Christian  Church.
11  In  that  day  shall  there  be  a  highway  out  of  Egypt  to  Assyria,  and  the  Assyrian
shall  come  into  Egypt,"  &c.  (Isa.  xix.  23).  III.  A  day  of  peaceful  restoration.
The  walls  of  Zion  shall  no  longer  be  in  ruins.  They  shall  be  reared  for  a  habitation
and  defence.  Sin  pulls  down  the  walls  and  creates  mischief.  God  alone  can
prosper  and  establish  the  Church.  Without  his  aid  we  build  in  vain.  Our  prayer
should  ever  be,  "  Do  good  in  thy  good  pleasure  unto  Zion  :  build  thou  the  walls
of  Jerusalem."

The  Land  Cursed  by  the  Sins  op  its  Inhabitants. —  Verse  13.

Salvation  may  come  to  the  people,  but  the  desolation  of  their  land  would  remind
them  of  their  sins.  However  glorious  the  prospect,  "the  fruit  of  their  doings"
would  curse  the  country  in  which  they  lived.  Many  are  the  sins  of  a  people
which  are  calamities  to  the  land  in  which  they  are  committed.     We  notice  a  few.

I.  National  idleness  is  a  curse  to  the  land.  The  ground  is  cursed  by  the  sin
of  man,  but  will  yield  produce  when  cultivated.  But  idleness  will  bring  ruin  in
all  departments  of  trade.  As  men  sow,  so  must  they  reap  in  this  respect.  II.
National  intemperance  is  a  curse  to  the  land.  It  squanders  financial  resources,
aggravates  the  curse  of  poverty,  and  leads  to  failure  in  the  means  of  comfort  and
subsistence.  It  devours  savings  and  capital;  and  causes  theft  and  destruction  of
property.  III.  National  war  is  a  curse  to  the  land.  Devastated  fields,  the  destruc-
tion of  towns  and  villages,  are  some  of  the  fruits  of  men's  doings.  In  many  ways
judgments  from  God,  as  real  as  the  fire  upon  the  cities  of  the  plain,  desolate  the


453  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  MICAH.  ("chap,  vii


ground  because  of  them  that  dwell  therein  (Hos.  iv.  3  :  Jer.  xxiii.  10  :  Gen.  xix.
25).  "A  fruitful  land  into  barrenness  for  the  wickedness  of  them  that  dwell
herein."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Vers.    11,    12.     These   words   are   a  be  built.     2.  God's  time  is  to  be  patiently

promise  and  consolation   to   the  Jews,  waited    for   in   the    restoration   of    his

for  their  restoration  is  here  foretold  as  Church ;  for  there  is  the  day  for  doing

Micah   had  already  foretold  it  (ch.  iv.  it  which  he  will  keep,  and  no  sooner.

10).     But  the  whole  is  not  limited  to  3.  As  it  is  one  of  the  greatest  trials  to

this.     He  says  with  remarkable  indefi-  the  Church,  to  lie  under  the  tyranny

niteness,  there  shall  come.     He  does  not  and    oppression   of  strangers,    who,  by

say  who  shall  come.     But  he  twice  sets  decrees  and  injunctions   executed  with

two   opposite   boundaries,    from    which  vigour,  labour  to  ruin  her  and  destroy

men   should    come;     and    since    these  the   work   of   God;    so,   when   he   has

boundaries,  not  being  coincident,  cannot  wrought  his  work  upon  his  Church  by

be  predicted  of  one  and  the  same  subject,  such  trial,  the  Lord  will  deliver  them

there  must  be  two  distinct  incomings,  from  the  yoke,  set  them  at   liberty  to

While  in  the  first  place  the  restoration  serve  him  and  enjoy  tranquillity  without

of  Israel  is  foretold,  there  follows  that  interruptions  ;  for,  in  that  day  the  decree

conversion   of  the   world  which  Micah  shall  be  removed  \_Hutcheson\.
had  before    promised  (iv.    1 — 3),    and         The  fate  of  the  earth  and  the  glory  of

which  was  the  object  of  the  restoration  Zion  are  here  set  forth.     Zion  is  multi-

of  Israel  [Pusey].  plied  by  the  addition  of   Gentiles,  but

1.  The  Lord  will  in  due  time  restore  judgment  falls  upon  a  sinful  world.  Sal-

and  make  up  the  ruins  of  his  destroyed  vation   and   peace  within,    danger    and

Church  and  people ;  for  thy  walls  are  to  destruction  without.

HOMILETIGS.

The  Work  of  God. — Verse  14.

When  we  consider  the  symbolic  language  of  the  sacred  writers,  and  the  typical
nature  of  the  Jewish  dispensations,  we  are  authorized  to  pass  from  the  natural  to
the  spiritual  Israel.  1.  Observe  the  persons  to  be  favoured  ;  "  His  people."  He
has  always  had  a  people  for  his  Name,  described  as  "  the  flock  of  his  heritage."
This  indicates  that  they  are  sheep,  and  collectively  all  one  in  Christ.  A  man  may
have  a  flock  in  his  possession,  and  under  his  sujDerintendence,  but  not  the  flock  of
his  heritage.  In  the  East  a  person's  whole  substance  consisted  in  flocks  and  herds.
He  would  feel  a  peculiar  concern  for  them  as  his  own.  The  Lord  takes  pleasure
in  his  people.  They  are  his  portion,  and  he  derives  the  revenue  of  his  glory  from
them.  2.  See  the  blessing  implored  on  their  behalf;  "feed  thy  people  with  thy
rod."  The  rod  is  the  symbol  and  the  instrument  of  the  shepherd,  and  the  word
feed,  by  a  common  figure  of  speech,  is  significant  of  the  discharge  of  all  his  office.
The  Lord  will  lead  them  by  his  Word  and  Spirit,  heal  them  when  wounded  or
diseased,  guard  them  in  danger,  and  restore  them  when  astray.  Especially  does  he
give  repast  and  repose.  Hence  the  inquiry,  when  hungry  and  thirsty,  weary  and
faint :  "Tell  me  where  t\ioxi  feedest,  where  thou  makcst  thy  flock  to  rest  at  noon.''
The  believer  can  often  say,  "  The  Lord  is  my  shepherd,"  &c.  3.  But  how  was  the
privilege  to  be  dispensed.  "  In  the  midst  of  Carmel  let  them  feed,  in  Bashan  and
Gilead,  as  in  days  of  old.1'  Thus  the  richest  measure  and  degree  of  provisions  are
indicated.  Suppliants  may  be  choosers.  God  giveth  liberally  and  upbraideth  not.
"  Ask  and  ye  shall  receive,  that  your  joy  may  be  full."  When  Alexander  bestowed
a  boon  the  recipient  would  say,  '  It  is  too  much  for  me  to  receive."  But  the
conqueror  of  the  world  would  reply,  "  It  is  not  too  much  for  me  to  give "
[Adapted  from  Jay\.


chap   vii.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MWAH.  457


The  People  op  God. — Verses  14,  15.

1.  God's  people  are  a  separated  people.  As  Israel  was  choosen  and  separated
from  other  nations,  so  God's  people  are  in  the  worLl  but  do  not  belong  to  it.  They
"dwell  solitarily,"  live  apart  from  worldly  men,  who  think  only  of  time  and  sense.
They  are  alone  in  their  character,  tastes,  and  pursuits  (Num.  xxiii.  9  :  Deut.
xxxiii.  28).  2.  God's  people  are  a  protected  people.  God  rules,  and  defends
them.  He  teaches,  reproves,  and  delivers  with  his  "  rod."  The  flock  may  be
scattered,  helpless,  and  alone,  but  the  kind  Shepherd  will  protect  and  bless  them
(Ps.  xxiii.  3).  3.  God's  people  are  an  enriched  people.  "  Let  them  feed  in  Bashan
and  Gilead."  The  greatest  pastures  of  Canaan  typify  the  blessings  of  God's  people.
(1.)  Enriched  in  a  wonderful  degree.  Rest  and  refreshment  without  stint.  (2.)
Enriched  in  a  wonderful  metltod.  '•  As  in  the  .lays  of  old."  As  in  Egypt,  so  now
would  God  display  "  marvellous  things."  Wonders  of  grace  will  eclipse  miracles
of  power.  God  will  do  for  his  people  more  than  he  has  ever  done.  "  So  we  thy
people  and  sheep  of  thy  pasture  will  give  thee  thanks  for  ever  :  we  will  show  forth
thy  praise  to  all  generations."

Wonderful  Answers  to  Prayer. — Verses  15 — 17.

In  answer  to  the  prophet's  prayer  God  declares  that  he  will  perform  marvellous
things,  in  bestowing  good  upon  his  people,  and  entirely  subduing  their  enemies.

I.  In  the  bestowment  of  good  upon  his  people.  In  the  deliverance  from  Egypt
and  entrance  into  the  land  of  promise,  wondrous  things  were  seen.  Redemption
from  Babylon  was  a  blessing,  a  "great  thing"  which  gladdened  the  heart  (Ps.
cxxxvi.  1 — 3).  Special  manifestations  of  mercy  are  seen  now.  From  the  beginning
to  the  end  of  Christian  life,  God  will  show  them  his  marvellous  loving-kindness
(Ps.  xvii.  7).  II.  In  the  overthrow  of  their  enemies.  "  The  nations  shall  see  "
these  marvellous  deeds  of  God  to  his  people,  and  be  astonished  and  confounded.
1.  They  shall  be  frustrated  in  their  purpose.  "Confounded  at  all  their  might."
They  failed  in  their  opposition.  All  their  might  proved  weakness.  Human  power
can  avail  nothing  against  God's  people  and  their  endurance  in  suffering.  Its
strength  is  baffled  before  the  might  of  God's  grace.  2.  They  shall  he  silenced  in
their  slander.  "  They  shall  lay  their  hand  upon  their  mouth,  ashamed  of  what
they  have  said,  and  unable  to  say  any  more."  Their  ears  shall  be  deaf  "  to  the
report  of  God's  dealings,"  before  the  thunder  of  Jehovah's  mighty  deeds  (Job
xxvi.  14).  Extreme  astonishment  will  take  away  the  power  of  speech  (Judges
xviii.  19  :  Isa.  lii.  15).  3.  They  shall  he  humbled  in  their  pride.  To  lick  the  dust
is  an  emblem  of  extreme  humility.  They  will  be  cast  down  as  low  as  possible,  to
the  very  earth.  As  they  lifted  themselves  up  against  God,  so  will  they  be  abased,
like  the  serpent  under  the  curse  of  old  (cf.  Ps.  lxxii.  9;  xxii.  29).  "They  shall
bow  down  to  thee  with  their  face  toward  the  earth,  and  lick  up  the  dust  of  thy
feet."  4.  They  shall  be  exposed  in  their  folly.  Brought  out  of  their  hiding-places,
they  will  tremble  in  fear.  Like  worms  of  the  earth,  they  shall  move  out  of  their
holes.  No  security  nor  secret  place  can  protect  them.  Discovered  in  their  designs,
ashamed  of  their  conduct,  they  will  stand  before  God  in  that  fear  which  is  a  fore-
taste of  the  judgment-day  (Luke  xxiii.  30  :  Rev.  vi.  16).

"  Wit  that  can  creep,  and  pride  that  licks  the  dust"  [Pope].

God  Delighting  in  Meroy. — Verse  18.

The  Prophet  saw  mercy  unequalled  in  God's  dealings  with  Israel.  The  heathen
gods  and  all  imaginary  gods  of  men  are  unholy,  revengeful,  and  cruel.  "  Who  is
God  like  unto  thee,"  &c.  1

I.  God's  mercy  is  founded  upon  God's  nature.  It  is  not  something  without
him,  or  something  acquired  like  human  virtues.  It  belongs  naturally  to  God.
It  is  something   without  which  he  would  not  be  God.     It  is  the  essence  and


458  UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   MICAH.  [chap,  vii


manifestation  of  God.  "  God  is  love."  All  attributes  join  together  in  his  character
and  ways,  but  mercy  is  the  brightest  ray.  Judgment  is  strange  work,  but
mercy  is  a  delight  to  God.  He  puts  his  anger  by,  and  while  he  corrects  he  ever
loves.  "  To  the  Lord  our  God  belong  mercies  and  forgiveness,  though  we  have
rebelled  against  him."  II.  God's  mercy  is  displayed  in  God's  works.  In  the
physical  and  moral  world  we  have  abundant  illustrations  of  this  truth.  1.  In  the
physical  world  we  have  proofs  of  God's  mercy.  Famine,  pestilence,  and  dearth
often  come,  but  they  pass  away.  Mercy  dawns  again  in  seed-time  and  harvest,
summer  and  winter.  The  rain  falls  and  the  sun  shines  upon  the  just  and  the
unjust.  The  world,  in  its  laws  and  constitution,  indicates  no  malevolent  Creator.
2.  In  the  moral  world  we  have  proofs  of  God's  mercy.  In  the  Divine  forbearance
with  sin,  and  the  moral  constitution  of  men ;  in  the  conversion  of  the  sinner,  and
the  life  of  the  believer,  mercy  is  displayed  beyond  expression.  In  Christ  we  have
mercy  like  a  fountain  full  and  free.  Paul  was  a  pattern  of  this  mercy  to  others.  If
the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts,  and  return  unto
God,  "  he  will  have  mercy  upon  him  and  abundantly  pardon."  This  truth,  (1)  Sets
forth  the  highest  excellence  in  every  moral  being.  To  be  like  God  is  the  crown
and  substance  of  moral  life.  (2)  Gives  a  reason  to  trust  God  at  all  times.  A  God
who  delights  in  mercy  can  never  be  indifferent  to  our  happiness.  (3)  Furnishes  an
argument  to  be  merciful  to  others.  "Blessed  are  the  merciful;  for  they  shall  obtain
mercy."

No  Pardon  like  God's  Pardon. —  Verse  18.

The  Prophet  here  makes  a  challenge  to  other  deities,  and  vindicates  the  glory  of
God.  "Who  is  a  God  like  unto  thee?"  exclaim  all  who  have  embraced  the
mercy  and  received  the  forgiveness  of  God.

I.  No  pardon  like  God's  in  the  ground  of  its  bestowment.  It  is  not  connivance,
nor  mere  clemency.  It  does  not  ignore  sin  nor  set  aside  justice.  It  is  pardon
through  substitution  and  satisfaction,  bought  with  a  price  and  conferred  in  a
method  to  honour  the  law  and  magnify  Divine  love.  God  can  be  just,  and  the
justifier  of  him  that  believeth.  Caesar,  shaking  his  sword,  said  to  the  Questor,  who
sought  to  prevent  his  entrance  into  the  treasury  at  Rome,  that  it  was  easier  for  his
power  than  for  the  goodness  of  his  nature  to  despatch  him.  God  might  justly
have  punished,  but  he  spares  and  is  ready  to  pardon.

"  Here  the  whole  Deity  is  known  ;

Nor  dares  a  creature  guess
Which  of  the  glories  brighter  shone,
The  justice  or  the  grace."

II.  No  pardon  like  God's  in  the  method  of  its  bestowment.  1.  Infreeness  it  is
unexampled.  Men  are  reluctant  to  forgive  when  earnestly  desired,  begrudge
forgiveness  and  cherish  resentment  when  it  is  bestowed.  But  God  waits  to  be
gracious,  multiplies  pardons,  and  makes  overtures,  beseeching  us  to  be  reconciled
to  him.  "  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together."  2.  In  fulness  it  is  complete.  It
is  not  for  one  but  for  all  sins.  "  Forgiving  iniquity  and  transgression  and  sin."
It  needs  no  supplement,  no  repetition.  It  is  once  and  for  ever — sins  are  forgiven
and  forgotten.  Cast  into  the  depths  of  the  sea,  blotted  out  as  a  thick  cloud,  not
to  be  gathered  again.  He  retains  no  anger,  but  looks  upon  us  as  if  we  had  never
sinned.  We  are  not  therefore  to  judge  God  by  ourselves,  and  measure  his  pardoning
love  by  a  standard  of  our  own.  "  For  as  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth,  so
are  my  ways  higher  than  your  ways,  and  my  thoughts  than  your  thoughts."

Exulting  Confidence  in  God's  Mercy. —  Verses  19,  20.

The  Jews  now  avow  full  confidence  in  God's  mercy.  He  had  often  pitied  and
delivered  them.  But  his  compassions  were  not  exhausted,  would  be  exercised  again
in  displays  of  power  and  love.     "  He  will  again,"  &c.


chap.  vn.l  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:  MIC  AH.  459


I.  Confidence  in  the  bestowment  of  God's  grace.  Grace  in  the  pardon  and
subduing  of  sin,  in  showing  compassion  and  restoring  to  Divine  favour.  1.  In  the
pardon  of  sin.  Sin  is  passed  by,  left  unpunished,  and  God  does  not  "  ?nark
iniquities  "  (Ps.  cxxx.  3).  It  is  buried  in  eternal  oblivion,  never  more  to  rise  in
view.  As  in  the  Red  Sea  not  one  enemy  of  God's  people  was  left,  so  in  the  pardon
of  sin  none  are  remembered.  "In  those  days,  and  in  that  time,  saith  the  Lord,
the  iniquity  of  Israel  shall  be  sought  for,  and  there  shall  be  none  :  and  the  sins  of
Judah,  and  they  shall  not  be  found  ;  for  I  will  pardon  them  whom  I  reserve."  2.
In  the  subduing  of  sin.  "  He  will  subdue  our  iniquities."  He  takes  away  the
guilt  and  destroys  the  power  of  sin.  Sin  is  tyrannical,  and  reduces  man  to  bondage.
It  combats  the  moral  principles  and  is  victorious  over  the  moral  nature  of  man.
Christ  gives  freedom  from  the  dominion  and  consequences  of  sin,  and  implants  a

new  rule  within  us.

"  Be  of  sin  the  double  cure,
Cleanse  me  from  its  guilt  and  power.*'

3.  In  the  restoration  to  Divine  favour.  The  Jews  were  not  subdued  in  Babylon.
They  were  turned  again  and  found  that  compassion  which  they  had  often  forfeited.
God  turns  to  the  sinner  and  prepares  him  for  his  presence.  He  is  reconciled  to
men  in  Christ  Jesus.  When  they  turn  to  him,  he  will  turn  again  to  them.  II.
Confidence  in  the  performance  of  God's  word.  "  Thou  wilt  perform  the  truth."
Return  from  captivity  was  a  striking  instance  of  the  fidelity  and  kindness  of  God
in  his  covenant  promise.  But  this  is  only  a  type  of  a  greater  display  in  the  mission
of  the  Messiah.  1.  In  all  ages.  In  the  days  of  the  patriarchs  and  of  the  prophets.
To  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  Moses  and  Micah.  2.  To  all  people.  Jews  and
Gentiles.  God's  mercy  and  truth  are  alike  pledged  to  perform  his  word.  "  For
thy  word's  sake,  and  according  to  thine  own  heart,  hast  thou  done  all  these  things."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  15.   Here  is  a  present  and  full  enemies  of  God's  people,  a  proof,  1.  of

answer  to  the  Church's  prayer  ;  so  ready  Divine   power    over   men ;    2.    Divine

is  the  Lord  to  fulfil  the  desire  of  the  goodness  to  the  Church;  3.  aground  of

righteous.     It  is  but  ask  and  have  ;  and  encouragement  to  trust  God.

they  are  worthily  miserable  that  will  not  Ver.     18.      God    delights   in    mercy,

make  themselves  happy  by  asking.     The  Illustrate     and    prove    the    text.        1.

sum  of  Christ's  answer  is  this  :  As  I  led  Scripture  proves  this  truth.     In  its  laws,

Joseph  like  a  flock  out  of  Egypt,  through  doctrines,    histories,  and   promises.      2.

the  wilderness,  and  fed  them  there,  daily  The  works  of  God  prove  this  truth.     The

and  daintily,   with  angels'   food  (never  world  made  for  the  theatre  of  mercy,

was   prince   so   served  in   his   greatest  providence  displayed  in  giving  mercy,

pomp),  so  will  I  show  thee  marvellous  3.  All  the  perfections  of  God  are  employed

things  at  Babylon,  and  bring  thee  thence  to  illustrate  this   mercy.      God's   name

with  a  mighty  hand  (Ezek.  xx.  34),  to  emblazoned  in  mercy,  his  hands  employed

make  me  a  glorious  name  (I sa.  lxiii.  14),  in  bestowing  mercy.     Power,   wisdom,

and  both  these  deliverances  shall  be  a  justice  and  truth  are  on  the  side  of  mercy,

certain  type  of  thy  spiritual  redemption  Let    us    delight    in    mercy     [Dr.     R.

by  Christ.     Lo,  this  will  I  do  for  thee  as  Vaughanj.     The  text  is  also  illustrated  :

in  the  days  of  old  (ver.    14),  and  so  tit  By  the  beauty  and  fitness  of  creation,

mine  answer  ad  cardinem  desiderii ;  give  By  the  great  regard  paid  to  mercy  and

thee  not  only  the  desire  of  thine  heart,  the  merciful  in  the  word  of  God.     By

but  the  request  of  thy  lips  (Ps.  xxi.  2),  the   teachings  of  providence.     By   the

let  it  be  to  thee  even  as  thou  wilt  (Matt,  commission  that  he  gave  his  Son.     By

xv.  28)  [Trapp\.  the  purpose  for  which  the  ungodly  are

Vers.  16    17.  The  subjugation  of  the  spared.     By  the  urgent  way  in   which


460


HOMILET1C  COMMENTARY:  MICAH.


[chap,  vn


God  asks  sinners  to  be  reconciled  to  him.
By  the  way  in  which  he  receives  and
pardons  sinners.  By  the  way  in  which
he  deals  with  the  infirmities  of  his  own
people.  By  the  reception  he  gives  them
at  the  end  of  life.  Learn :  how  had  it
been  with  us  if  God  had  revealed  all
concerning  himself  except  his  mercy?
He  might  as  well  not  have  revealed  it,  if
we  have  not  sought  and  found  it.  If  we
have  not  found  mercy,  there  is  every
encouragement  to  seek  it.  Let  us  seek
more  of  this  mercy,  and  show  it  more  to
others  every  day  [Glass  and  Desk].

Ver.  1 9.  He  will  subdue  our  iniquities.
The  term  subdue  (lit.  tread  under-foot)
is  military,  and  indicates  spiritual  warfare.
1.  The  enemies.  ''Iniquities."  Many,
powerful,  within  and  without.  2.  The
conquest.      We  are   helpless.      "  Mine


iniquities  prevail  against  me."  Hence
(1)  Divine.  "  He  "  will,  &c.  (2)  complete.
"  He  will  subdue."  3.  The  means  of  con-
quest. Faith  in  Christ.  Grace  in  the  heart.
Sanctification  by  the  Spirit.  "  By  my
Spirit,  saith  the  Lord."  "We  have
purified  our  souls  in  obeying  the  truth,
through  the  Spirit."

God's  pardon.  1.  Unequalled  in
method.  2.  Incessant  in  exercise.  3.
Unmerited  in  principle.  4.  Immeasur-
able in  degree.     5.  Blessed  in  results.

Ver.  20.  1.  The  different  aspects  of
God's  covenant.  Mercy  to  Abraham,  truth
to  Jacob,  an  oath  to  the  fathers.  2.  The
certainty  of  its  performance.  Spoken,
written,  and  sworn  to.  3.  The  confidence
which  this  should  beget  in  our  minds.
God  is  mindful  of  his  people,  and  faithful
to  his  word.     "  Thouivilt  perform,"  &c.


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  VII.


Vers.  1, 2.  Good  men  few.  They  say
that  fish  smell  first  at  the  head,  and
when  godly  men  decay,  the  whole  com-
monwealth will  soon  go  rotten.  We
must  not,  however,  be  rash  in  our  judg-
ment on  this  point,  for  Elijah  erred  in
counting  himself  the  only  servant  of
God  alive,  when  there  were  thousands
whom  the  Lord  held  in  reserve
[Spur g  eon].

Vers.  3,  4.  Man  is  nothing  but
insincerity,  falsehood,  and  hypocrisy,
both  in  regard  to  himself  and  in  regard
to  others.  He  does  not  wish  that  he
should  be  told  the  truth ;  he  shuns  saying
it  to  others  ;  and  all  these  moods,  so
inconsistent  with  justice  and  reason,
have  their  roots  in  his  heart  [Pascal].

"  Faithless  is  earth,  and  faithless  are  the  skies !
Justice  is  fled,  and  truth  is  now  no  more.''

[  Virgil,  JEneid7\

Vers.  5 — 7.

11  Lean  not  on  earth;  twill  pierce  thee  to  the  heart:
A  broken  reed  at  best,  but  oft  a  spear  :
On  its  sharp  point  peace  bleeds,  and  hope  expires."

[Young.']

Vers.  7 — 9.  A  holy  silence  unstrings
every  affliction,  it  takes  off  the  weight  of
every  burden,  it  adds  sweet  to  every
bitter,  it  changes  dark  nights  into  sun-
shiny days.     The  smallest  sufferings  will


easily  vanquish  an  unquiet  spirit,  but  a
quiet  spirit  will  as  easily  triumph  over
the  greatest  sufferings  [Brooks].  Ver.  9.
Indignation.  Though  of  all  burdens  the
indignation  of  the  Lord  be  the  greatest
burden,  yet  Divine  indignation  is  but  a
light  burden  in  comparison  of  sin.  A
gracious  soul  can  better  stand  under  the
burden  of  God's  indignation  for  sin,  than
it  can  stand  under  the  burden  of  sin
itself,  which  hath  kindled  that  indigna-
tion [Ibid.].

Ver.  12.  From  mountain  to  mountain
probably  includes  all  subdivisions  of  our
habitable  earth,  as  the  words,  from  sea  to
sea,  had  embraced  it  as  a  whole.  For,
physically  and  to  sight,  mountains  are
the  great  natural  divisions  of  our  earth.
Rivers  are  but  the  means  of  transit.  The
Euphrates  and  the  Nile  were  the  centres
of  the  kingdoms  which  lay  upon  them.
Each  range  of  mountains,  as  it  rises  on
the  horizon,  seems  to  present  an  insuper-
able barrier.  No  barrier  should  avail  to
hinder  the  onflow  to  the  Gospel.  Isaiah
foretold  that  all  obstacles  should  lie
removed,  "Every  valley  shall  be  exalted,"
&c.  (xl.  4) ;  so  Micah  prophesies  from
mountain  to  mountain  [Pusey].

Ver.  18.  Mercy  and  pardon.  Mercy
hath  but  its  name  from  misery,  and  is  no


CHAP.   VII.]


EOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  MICAH.


461


other  thing  than  to  lay  another's  misery
to  heart  [Binney].  The  forgiveness  that
there  is  with  God  is  such  as  "becomes
him,  such  as  is  suitable  to  his  greatness,
his  goodness,  and  all  other  excellencies  of
his  nature  ;  such  as  that  therefore  by
which  he  will  be  known  to  be  God.  It
is  not  like  that  narrow,  difficult,  halving,
and  manacled  forgiveness,  that  is  found
among  men  ;  but  it  is  full,  free,  bot-
tomless, boundless,  absolute  ;  such  as
becomes  his  nature  and  his  excellencies
\_Oweii\.

Yers.  19,  20.  A  merchant  that  keeps
a  book  of  debit  and  credit,  writes  both
what  is  owing  him,  and  what  he  oweth
himself,  and  then  casteth  up  the  whole  ;
but   God  does   not    so,   his    mercy    is


triumphant  over  his  justice,  and  there-
fore he  wipes  out  what  we  owe  him,
and  writes  down  what  he  owes  us  by
promise ;  much  like  the  clouds  that
receive  ill  vapours  from  us,  yet  returning
them  to  us  again  in  sweet  refreshing
showers  [Nath.  SJmte,  1626].  Truth.
The  revolutions  caused  by  the  progress
of  truth  are  always  beneficial  to  society,
and  are  only  burthensome  to  those  who
deceive  and  oppress  [Du  Mai^sais].  The
light  of  God's  truth  must  not  be  left  to
burn  secretly  within  the  recesses  of  the
sanctuary,  but  must  be  applied  to  the
kindling  of  a  thousand  torches  in  the
hands  of  those  who  are  commissioned  to
carry  it  forth  into  the  thick  darkness  of
a  sinful  world  [Blornfield],


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY


ON


NAHUM.


INTRODUCTION.

The  Writer.  Little  is  known  concerning  the  Prophet  Nahum.  He  was  a
native  of  Elkosh  (ch.  i.  1) ;  and  prophesied  soon  after  Isaiah  and  Micah,  viz.,  after
the  carrying  away  of  the  ten  tribes  by  the  Assyrians  (b.  c.  721),  and  after  the
destruction  of  the  army  of  Sennacherib  at  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  (b.  c.  712),  and
before  the  fall  of  Nineveh  [Wordsworth].

The  Book.  It  is  the  complement  and  the  counterpart  of  the  book  of  Jonah,
says  Pusey.  Nineveh  repented  alter  Jonah's  preaching,  and  God  was  represented
as  merciful.  But  in  the  time  of  Nahum  the  city  had  fallen  into  violence,  and  the
judgment  of  God  is  proclaimed.  Nineveh  had  no  more  place  for  repentance,  and
the  Prophet  pronounces  sentence.  Both  books  form  connected  parts  of  one  moral
history.

Contents.  The  phrase,  '.'  the  burden  of  Nineveh,"  intimates  that  Nineveh  is
the  object  of  the  prophecy.  There  are  three  parts.  "The  first  (1)  contains  the
introduction  (1 — 10)  and  the  theme  of  the  Prophet's  oracle  (11 — 14).  The  second
(2)  sets  forth  the  calamity  which  should  come  upon  the  Assyrian  empire.  The
third  (3)  recapitulates  the  reasons  for  the  judgments  that  should  be  thus  inflicted,
and  announces  the  certainty  of  their  coming.  The  whole  forms  one  continuous
composition."

Style.  His  poetry  puts  him  in  the  first  rank  of  Hebrew  literature.  His
sentences  are  brief,  contain  multum  in  parvo,  as  in  the  descriptions  of  God,  the
siege  of  Nineveh,  and  the  destruction  of  No-Ammon.  "  He  is  inferior  to  none  of
the  minor  prophets,  and  scarcely  to  Isaiah  himself,  in  animation,  boldness,  and
sublimity ;  or  to  the  extent  and  proportion  of  his  book,  in  the  variety,  freshness,
richuess,  elegance,  and  force  of  his  imagery.  The  rhythm  is  regular  and  singularly
beautiful;  and  with  the  exception  of  a  few  foreign  or  provincial  words,  his
language  possesses  the  highest  degree  of  classical  purity.  His  description  of  the
Divine  character  at  the  commencement  is  truly  majestic ;  that  of  the  siege  and  fall
of  Nineveh  inimitably  graphic,  vivid,  and  impressive "  [Henderson],  "  In  the
organism  of  Scripture,  Nahum  occupies  an  important  position,  not  so  much  on
account  of  the  theological  as  of  the  historical  significance  of  his  prophecy.     Its


INTRODUCTION.  463


theological  importance  culminates  in  the  representation  of  God,  Jehovah,  Sabaoth
(cf.  ii.  13),  as  the  actual  Judge — a  representation  accurately  adapted  to  the  situa-
tion of  the  world  \  and  this  description  is  not  essentially  different  from  that  in  the
earliest  public  writings  and  those  of  the  preceding  prophets  "  \Lange\.  Nahum
has  also  a  message  to  men  and  nations  in  these  latter  days.  If  having  received  the
message  of  the  Gospel  from  the  Divine  Jonah,  which  is  Christ,  they  fall  away  by
unbelief,  as  it  was  predicted  by  Christ  and  his  Apostles  (Luke  xviii.  8 ;  Matt.
xxiv.  12 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  1),  that  many  do,  then  they  may  see  their  destiny  in  the
prophecy  of  Nahum,  foretelling  the  misery  and  shame,  confusion,  overthrow,  and
desolation  of  the  great  city  of  Nineveh,  which  is  the  prophetic  type  of  the  sin  and
doom  of  the  Infidel  form  of  Anti-Christianism  [  Wordsworth].


464  aOMLLETW  COMMtiJS TAR ¥ :  JS'AUUAI.  LcHaP.  I


CHAPTER  L

Critical  Notes.]  Burden]  (Vulg.  onus),  from  a  word  to  lift  up,  a  threatening  utterance  ;  some,
heavy  and  full.  2.  Jealous],  (words  from  the  decalogue),  to  be  warm.  Burns  against  those  who  hate
him  (Dent.  vi.  15).  The  term  indicates  feeling  of  injured  right,  and  strong  inclination  for  justice.
Furious]  Lit.  a  lord  or  master  of  fury :  a  master  of  dreams,  i.  e.  a  dreamer,  &c.  Reserveth]
Applied  to  God,  sig.  to  keep  or  bear  wrath  (Lev.  xix.  18 :  Ps.  ciii.  9).  3.  Acquit]  Clear  the
guilty  (Ex.  xx.  7;  xxxiv.  7).  Dust]  Light  dust  easily  raised.  4.  Rebuketh]  (Matt.  viii.  26).  5.]
Fruitful  districts  fade  under  his  wrath.  Burned]  Lit.  lifts  itself  as  in  an  earthquake  (Ps.  lxxxix.  10),
hence  to  burn  as  a  flame.  6.  Abide]  Stand  up  before  wrath  poured  out  like  fire  from  a  volcano,
which  rends  rocks  to  pieces  (1  Kings  xix.  11:  Jer.  xxiii.  29).  7.  Strong]  A  fortress.  Knoweth]
Stands  emphatically  for  the  knowledge  with  which  God  fosters  and  provides  for  his  elect,  and  which
is  experienced  by  them  (Hos.  xiii.  5)  [Lange],  8.  Over.]  Judgment  by  invading  armies,  sweeps
through  the  land  like  overwhelming  floods  (cf.  Ps.  xlii.  7:  Isa.  viii.  7,  8:  Hab.  iii.  10).  9.]  The
city  must  be  destroyed  and  its  inhabitants  perish.  Imagine]  By  means  of  defence  to  ward  off
danger.  Second]  time  from  Assyria  (cf.  Isa.  li.  17 — 23 :  2  Sam.  xx.  10).  10.  Thorns]  twisted
together,  to  appear  inseparable,  and  present  a  bristling  front  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  6,  7).  Drunken]
Assyrian  kings  proverbial  for  intemperance  and  revelry.  11.  One]  Sennacherib.  Thee]  From
Nineveh  itself  arises  its  own  ruin.  Counsellor]  Lit.  a  counsellor  of  Belial,  worthless  and  bad ;
designs  to  overthrow  the  kingdom  of  God  (Isa.  xxxvi.  14 — 20).  12 — 14.]  Repeat  the  truths
of  9 — 11.  Good  to  Judah,  and  evil  to  Assyria,  predicted.  Quiet]  In  tranquil  security  ;  or
complete  with  unbroken  ranks  and  number,  with  everything  necessary  for  a  successful  siege.  "  The
word  may  also  be  designed  to  convey  the  idea  of  mental  completeness,  i.  e  in  this  connexion,
security,  martial  courage"  \_Hend.\  Cut]  Mown  down  like  the  harvest  (2  Kings  xix.  35:  Isa.
xxxvii.  36,  37).  Give  .historical  facts.  13.  Yoke]  The  tribute  to  Assyria  (cf.  Isa.  x.  27  :  Jer.
ii.  20).  14.]  The  name  and  power  of  Assyria  to  become  extinct.  Sown]  The  seed  or  race  to
be  for  ever  destroyed,  at  destruction  of  Nineveh  the  dynasty  would  not  be  perpetuated.  Gods]
Every  kind  of  images  (Deut.  xxvii.  15).  (See  Layard's  Nineveh  and  its  Remains,  on  Idol,  of  Assyria.)
House]  The  palace  considered  sacred.  Make]  i.  e.  the  house  of  thy  gods,  thy  grave.  Sennacherib
slain  during  worship  (2  Kings  xix.  37).  Vile]  Because  when  weighed  according  to  moral  standards
worthless  (Job  xxxi.  6),  found  light  (Dan.  v.  27).  15.]  This  verse  joined  to  ch.  ii.  in  Heb.  text,
and  nearly  like  (Isa.  Hi.  7).  Here  deliverance  from  Assyria,  not  Babylon.  Tidings]  Overthrow
of  Sennacherib.  Mountains]  No  longer  covered  with  hostile  camps  to  prevent  keeping  feasts.
Peace]  and  deliverance,  i.  e.  great  yearly  feasts  of  thanksgiving.  Wicked]  Lit.  Belial  (ver.  11),
marg.  =  Sennacherib.  This  is  a  wonderful  type  of  Gospel  events ;  salvation  through  Christ,  victory
over  sin,  death,  and  hell.

HOMILETICS.
The  Servant's  Burden. — Verse  L

In  this  verse  we  have  the  substance  and  object,  the  form  and  author,  of  the  whole

prophecy.

I.  The  nature  of  the  burden.  A  burden  is  something  heavy  and  important.
1.  The  commission  from  God  was  a  burden.  An  awful  responsibility,  a  solemn
duty  imposed  upon  the  messenger.  Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things  ?  2.  The
commission  was  a  burden  upon  the  mind  of  the  prophet.  He  was  not  reluctant  to
obey,  but  its  solemnity  weighed  heavily  upon  him.  He  had  to  threaten  judgment
upon  his  fellow-creatures,  to  be  faithful  in  his  threatening,  and  declare  the  whole
message  from  God.  His  duty  was  a  burden.  He  was  deeply  sensible  of  its
import,  of  his  own  unworthiness  and  weakness.  This  is  the  spirit  of  all  true
servants.  "  A  dispensation  of  the  gospel  is  committed  unto  me."  II.  The  form
of  the  burden.  "  The  book  of  the  vision."  1.  It  was  first  a  vision  to  the  prophet.
He  saw  what  he  uttered.  He  had  a  commission  from  God,  and  spoke  in  God's
authority.  We  should  always  testify  what  we  have  seen,  and  declare  what  we  have
been  taught.  Some  speak  a  vision  of  their  own  heart  (Jer.  xxiii.  16) ;  but  God's
•ervants  see  the  vision  of  the  Almighty.     2.  Then  the  vision  was  recorded  in  a


ohap.  i.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NAHUM.  465


hook.  Reason  teaches  us  to  write  laws  and  record  events  in  a  book.  God's
prophets  were  taught  to  pen  their  thoughts  in  a  permanent  form  for  the  benefit
of  future  ages.  "  Many  a  man  lives  a  burden  to  the  earth  ;  but  a  good  book  is  the
precious  life-blood  of  a  master-spirit,  embalmed  and  treasured  up  on  purpose  to  a
life  beyond  life."  III.  The  object  of  the  burden.  "  The  burden  of  Nineveh.
Nineveh  repented  once,  but  returned  to  its  wicked  ways  again.  The  first  was  a
message  of  mercy,  the  second  one  of  judgment.  If  men  despise  warnings  they  must
expect  rebukes.  Employed  by  God  to  chastise,  Nineveh  sought  to  destroy  the
chosen  people.  Now  God  will  punish  the  city,  and  its  last  state  will  be  worse  than
the  first.  If  men  return  to  their  former  sins  because  judgment  is  not  executed,  if
they  cease  to  do  the  good  they  once  begin,  then  God  will  withdraw  his  promised
favour.  "If  it  do  evil  in  my  sight,  that  it  obey  not  my  voice,  then  I  will  repent
of  *he  good,  wherewith  I  said  I  would  benefit  them."

Jehovah  a  Jealous  God. —  Verses  2 — 5.

God's  judgments  are  traced  to  God's  jealousy  as  the  cause  of  them.  His  honour
is  injured.  His  tender  feeling  for  his  people  is  wounded,  and  though  punishment
is  suspended  for  a  time,  eventually  it  is  certain  and  severe.

I.  God's  jealousy  is  connected  with  God's  long-suffering.  "  The  Lord  is
slow  to  anger."  Towards  enemies  even  God  is  long-suffering.  For  one  hundred
years  he  had  endured  the  wickedness  of  the  Assyrians.  Judgments  are  often
delayed.  1.  This  delay  is  not  through  weakness.  "  Great  in  power."  Men  cannot
execute  their  vengeance  because  they  lack  power.  But.  God  has  all  power,  and  can
accomplish  his  will  at  all  times.  2.  This  delay  is  not  remission  of  punishment.  He
"  will  not  at  all  acquit  the  wicked."  There  is  a  limitation  of  mercy.  He  will  not  clear
the  guilty,  nor  leave  them  unpunished.  He  is  not  insensible  to  violations  of  his
law,  nor  dilatory  to  vindicate  his  justice.  Sinners  have  a  respite  in  love,  but  not
a  reprieve  in  weakness.  All  who  abuse  his  long-suffering  will  smart  at  last.  "  For
the  Lord  thy  God  is  a  consuming  fire,  even  a  jealous  God."  II.  God's  jealousy
is  often  provoked  to  vengeance.  "  And  the  Lord  revengeth."  Vengeance  is  a
defect,  and  censured  in  man.  Here  it  is  predicated  of  God  three  times.  1.  Vengeance
is  associated  with  provocation.  Slow  to  anger,  he  can  be  provoked.  His  jealousy
has  the  warmth  of  love  and  the  fire  of  wrath.  "  The  coals  thereof  are  coals  of  fire,
which  hath  a  most  vehement  flame."  2.  Vengeance  is  associated  with  mastery.
"  And  is  furious,"  a  master  of  fury,  one  who  has  anger  under  control.  He  is  Lord
of  vengeance.  "  One  who,  if  he  pleases,"  says  Grotius,  "  can  most  readily  give
effect  to  his  fury."  3.  Vengeance  is  associated  with  execution.  He  reserves
wrath  for  his  enemies,  not  because  he  is  angry,  but  because  he  is  slow  to  anger.
He  allows  it  to  accumulate,  before  execution.  But  he  "  will  take  vengeance  on  his
adversaries."  (a)  This  execution  is  swift.  He  comes  in  the  storm  and  the  whirl-
wind (ver.  3).  He  sweeps  men  away  swift  as  the  wind.  u  As  the  whirlwind
passeth,  so  is  the  wicked  no  more."  (b)  This  execution  is  easy.  The  clouds  are
the  mere  dust  of  his  feet.  As  man  walks  upon  the  dust,  so  Jehovah  tramples  upon
the  clouds,  as  the  light  dust  of  his  feet,  (c)  This  execution  is  mysterious.  "  Clouds
and  darkness  are  round  about  Him."  His  purpose  and  his  agents  are  often  concealed,
until  they  break  upon  the  guilty  like  a  lightning  flash,  (d)  This  execution  is  often
terrible.  The  heavens  above  and  the  earth  beneath  feel  the  shock  of  his  wrath.
The  sea  is  rebuked  by  his  power,  and  the  fertility  of  the  land  is  consumed  by  his
presence.  The  mountains  quake  and  the  hills  melt ;  all  nature  trembles  beneath
his  anger.  No  one  can  stand  before  fury  like  this.  The  strongest  will  quail,  the
hardest  will  melt.  "  Let  all  the  earth  fear  the  Lord ;  let  all  the  inhabitants  of
the  world  stand  in  awe  of  him."


30


4M


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NATTVM,


[chap.  I.


HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Ver.  1.  The  Burden.  The  Bearer.  The
Destination.  "He  first  defines  the  object
of  the  prophecy,  whereto  it  looks;  then
states  who  spake  it,  and  whence  it  was  "
[Pusey~].

Ver.  2.  The  titles  of  God  rise  in  awe;
first,  intensely  jealous  and  Avenger  ;  then
an  Avenger  and  a  Lord  of  lorath ;  the
master  of  it  (not  as  man,  mastered  by-
it)  ;  having  it  to  withhold  or  discharge ;
yet  so  discharging  it,  at  last,  the  more
irrevocably  on  the  finally  impenitent
[Ibid.].

The  justice  and  severity  of  God  should
be  contemplated.  1.  As  a  warning  to
his  enemies  to  deter  them  from  evil.  2.
As  a  consolation  to  his  people  to  help
them  in  trouble.

Ver.  3.  Mercy,  omnipotence,  and  jus-
tice. 1.  The  first  attribute  of  God.
"  Slow  to  anger."  Because  he  never  smites
without  first  threatening.  He  is  very
slow  to  threaten.  When  God  threatens,
how  slow  he  is  to  sentence  the  criminal !
And  when  the  sentence  is  signed  and
sealed,  how  slow  to  carry  it  out !  Trace
the  attribute  to  its  source.  Why  is  God
slow  to  anger?  Because  he  is  infinitely
good.  Because  he  is  great.  2.  The
connecting  link.  A  great  reason  why
Iih  is  slow,  because  he  is  great  in  power.
He  that  is  great  in  power  can  restrain
himself,  and  is  greater  than  he  that  takes
a  city.  When  God's  power  restrains
himself,  then  it  is  power  indeed.  If  he
were  less  of  a  God  than  he  is,  he  would
long  ere  this  have  sent  forth  thunders
and  emptied  the  magazines  of  heaven.
Bless  God  that  the  greatness  of  his
power  is  our  protection.  3.  The  last
and  most  terrible  attribute ;  He  will  not
at  all  acquit  the  wicked.  Unfold  this
first  of  all,  then  trace  it  to  its  source.
God  will  not  acquit  the  wicked.     Never


once  has  he  blotted  out  sin  without
punishment.  Calvary  proves  the  truth
of  that.  The  wonders  of  vengeance  in
the  Old  Testament  and  hell  itself  are
proofs  of  the  text.  Trace  this  terrible
attribute  to  its  source.  Why  is  this?
God  will  not  acquit  the  wicked,  because
he  is  good.  Goodness  itself  demands
the  punishment  of  the  sinner.  The
justice  of  God  demands  it.  If  in  Christ,
never  be  afraid  of  God's  power.  If  not
fled  for  refuge,  then  God  will  not  acquit,
but  punish.  Eeprieved  but  not  par-
doned art  thou.  Reprieve  will  soon  run
out,  haste  to  the  refuge  [Spurgeon\.

Way  in  the  whirlwind.  The  venge-
ance of  God  comes  at  last  swiftly,  vehe-
mently, fearfully,  irresistibly  [Pusey].

Clouds  the  dust.  1.  God  hidden  in
his  ways.  Clouds  are  round  about  him.
Deep  and  unsearchable  in  his  counsels.
1.  God  powerful  in  his  ways.  Treading
on  the  clouds,  and  making  them  as  dust
to  his  feet.  2.  God  terrible  in  his  ways
(vers.  4  and  6).  Not  difficult  to  put  the
elements  in  motion  to  destroy  Nineveh
or  impenitent  sinners.  Great  things  to
us  are  small  with  him.  All  nature
subject  to  his  control.

Vers.  4,  5.  The  quaking  of  all  things
in  the  presence  of  an  angry  God.
Celestial  and  terrestrial  agencies  subserv-
ient to  the  purpose  of  God,  {a)  in
punishing  the  wicked,  (b)  in  protecting
his  people.  "  The  huge  roots  of  the
towering  mountains  are  torn  up  when
the  Lord  bestirs  himself  in  anger  to
smite  the  enemies  of  his  people.  How
shall  puny  man  be  able  to  face  it  out  with
God  when  the  very  mountains  quake
with  fear  ?  Let  not  the  boaster  dream
that  his  present  false  confidence  will
support  him  in  the  dread  day  of
wrath."


HOMILETICS.
God's  Goodness  and  Anger. — Verses  6,  7.

Note  two  things  in  these  words.

I.  Jehovah's  anger.  1.  It  is  real.  Human  theories  of  it  are  not  always
true.  They  are  got  up  to  persuade  the  sinner  that  he  has  no  need  to  be  alarmed
for  guilt.    But  God's  words  are  true— not  exaggerations.    2.  It  is  righteous.     Not


chap.    I.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NAHUM.  467


the  rage  of  selfishness  nor  personal  offence  ;  but  the  anger  of  a  righteous  judge
against  sin,  dishonoured  right  and  insulted  law.  There  is  nothing  in  it  unjust  or
arbitrary.  3.  It  is  terrible.  Though  calm,  it  is  awful  and  overwhelming.  No  power
or  numbers  can  withstand  it.  Expulsion  from  Paradise,  the  flood,  the  ruin  of
Sodom,  and  the  destruction  of  the  ungodly,  are  specimens.  4.  It  is  inexorable.
Nothing  can  turn  it  aside  or  quench  it  when  kindled.  II.  Jehovah's  goodness.
He  is  good,  and  doeth  good;  kind  to  the  unthankful  and  unholy.  1.  His  goodness
is  sincere.  He  does  not  utter  words  and  feelings  which  are  not  in  him.  His  words
mean  what  they  say,  his  deeds  what  they  indicate.  "  God  is  not  man  that  he
should  lie."  2.  His  goodness  is  powerful.  Almighty  goodness.  He  is  able  to
deliver  those  whom  he  loves.  Their  interests  ate  safe  in  his  hands.  3.  His
goodness  is  watchful.  His  eyes  are  upon  us  at  all  times,  expecially  in  trouble.
An  unsleeping  eye,  an  untiring  hand,  never  weary  of  blessing,  ever  delighting  to
love  and  help  us.  4.  His  goodness  is  unchanging.  Without  variableness  like
himself,  ever  flowing  and  not  ebbing.  Not  like  the  tides  and  the  seasons,  his  heart
changes  not.  But  the  great  day  of  his  wrath  will  come.  Judgment  lingers  not.
He  spares  in  pity,  not  willing  that  any  should  perish.  Turn  unto  him,  &c.
[Dr.  H.  Bonar.]

The  Triumph  of  Faith. —  Verse  7.

Here  we  have  a  beautiful  description  of  the  security  and  comfort  of  those  who
trust  in  God  in  the  day  of  distress.

I.  God  a  Protection.  Not  armies,  fleets,  and  fortresses.  AJ1  other  refuges  are
refuges  of  lies.  He  is  the  only  accessible,  impregnable,  delightful  shelter.  II.
God  a  Comfort.  "  The  Lord  is  good."  Good  in  himself  and  to  others.  His
goodness  is  spontaneous,  undeserved,  and  boundless;  consistent  with  the  perfec-
tions of  his  character,  and  adapted  to  the  wants  of  our  nature.  III.  God  a  Friend.
"  He  knoweth."  He  not  merely  perceives  and  understands ;  but  approves,
acknowledges,  and  takes  delight  in  us.  He  "  takes  pleasure  in  them  that  fear  him,
in  them  that  hope  in  his  mercy."  God  is  our  friend.  His  attitude  to  us  is  like
that  to  Abraham  :  M  I  will  bless  them  that  bless  thee,  and  curse  them  that  curse
thee."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  7.  The  Lord   is    Good.     He  is  us  all   things?"      This   involves  every

essentially — immutably  good — infinitely  other.    He  is  "  all  in  all."     By  him  and

good.      The    good    of    all    creation    is  in  him  we  are  "  blessed  with  all  spiritual

derived  from  him.     "  He  is  good  to  all,  blessings  in  heavenly  places  "  [Jay].

and  his  tender  mercies  are  over  all  his  The  Lord  a  Stronghold.   From  whence

works."     But  goodness  does  not  appear  does  this  trouble  arise]     From  danger?

in  its  highest  forms  here.     These  crea-  He  is  our  strength  for  protection.     "The

tures  never  forfeited  care  and  kindness.  Lord  is  the  strength  of  my  life,  of  whom

We  have  rebelled,  and  as  children  of  shall  I  be  afraid  1 "     "We  are  more  than

disobedience    deserve   wrath.      Yet    he  conquerors."     From  duty  ?     He  is  the

spares  us,  and  provides  for  us — fitted  up  strength  to  assist.     If  oppressed  with  a

the    world    with    sights,    sounds,    and  sense  of  our  inability,  "  our  sufficiency

relishes  to  our  appetites.     But   if   the  is  of  God."    From  affliction?     He  is  our

bounties  of  nature  and  providence  were  strength  to  support  and  deliver.     If  he

stopped,  we  could  say,  "  Herein  is  love,  does  not  release,  he  sustains  and  com-

not  that  we  loved  God,  but  that  God  forts.     "My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee."

loved  us,"  &c.    This  ensures  every  other  Whatever    the    nature    and   degree    of

blessing.     "  He  that  spared  not  his  own  affliction,  in  God  we  find  a  "  very  pre-

Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all,  sent  help  in  the  day  of  trouble  "  [Jay],

how  shall  he  not  with  him  freely  give  Vers.  7,  8.  God  a  refuge  to  his  people.


468  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NAHUM.  [chip.  i.


who  are  safe,  happy,  and  cared  for  in  his  completely  destroyed.    God's  people  only

protection.     God  a  terror  to  their  ene-  afflicted  for  a   short   time,  but   of  the

mies,  who  are  overwhelmed  with  calami-  wicked  he  will  make  "  an  utter  end."
ties  (flood),  pursued  with  darkness,  and

HOMILETIGS.
Resistance  to  God  powerless. —  Verses  9 — 11.

Nahum  now  turns  to  the  invaders,  boldly  challenges  them  for  their  opposition
to  Jehovah,  again  describes  their  ruin,  and  for  the  encouragement  of  the  Jews,  adds
that  they  should  not  be  annoyed  any  more.

I.  Resistance  to  God  in  its  nature.  "  What  do  ye  imagine  against  the  Lord  1 "
1.  Resistance  in  thought.  u  Imagine."  They  thought  that  they  had  to  do  with  a
weak  people,  and  would  gain  an  easy  victory.  But  they  had  to  encounter  God.
It  is  vain  presumption  to  plot  against  him.  "  There  is  no  wisdom,  nor  understanding,
nor  counsel  against  the  Lord."  2.  Resistance  in  word.  Many  imagined  evil,  but
one  leader  was  specially  prominent  in  counsel.  Sennacherib  in  the  mouth  of
Rabshakeh  advised  worthless  and  wicked  plans  (cf.  Isa.  xxxvi.  14 — 20).  Crafty
counsellors  are  most  mischievous,  and  often  bring  ruin  upon  themselves  and  their
country.  3.  Resistance  in  act.  Plots  ripen  into  enterprises.  Wicked  thoughts
lead  to  denial  of  God's  power  and  providence  ;  to  contempt  of  God's  people,  and
opposition  to  God's  purpose.  He  sent  "  to  reproach  the  loving  God"  (2  Kings  xix.
16),  and  blasphemed  "against  the  Holy  One  of  Israel"  (ver.  22).  II.  Resistance
in  its  method.  The  metaphors  of  ver.  10  may  be  taken  in  many  senses.  Briars
and  thorns  denote  hostile  armies  (Isa.  x.  17 ;  xxvii.  4).  1.  Resistance  combined.
"  Closely  interwoven  as  thorns."  They  strengthen  one  another,  and  are  inveterate
towards  God.  Like  the  military  phalanxes  of  antiquity,  they  were  armed  and
arranged  to  present  a  bold  front.  Thorns,  "  because  they  cannot  be  taken  with
hands  "  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  6).  2.  Resistance  audacious.  Flushed  with  success,  the
Assyrians  regarded  themselves  as  invincible,  and  gave  themselves  to  wine  and  revelry.
Benhadad  was  smitten  while  drinking  in  his  pavilions  (1  Kings  xx.  16) ;  Belshazzar
was  feasting  when  Babylon  was  taken  (Dan.  v.  1 — 30).  Yet  in  this  condition
men  have  the  audacity  to  resist  God.  Intoxicated  with  pride  they  are  prepared
for  their  fall.    III.  Resistance  in  its  end.    Men's  devices  are  idle  when  God  works.

1.  The  people  were  prepared  for  ruin.  "  They  shall  be  devoured  as  stubble  fully  dry."
Dry  stubble  easily  takes  fire,  and  thorns  folded  together  are  ready  for  the  flames.
Wicked  men  are  often  compared  to  stubble,  and  God's  judgments  to  devouring  fire.
Those  who  defy  God's  will  only  fit  themselves  for  the  fire  that  is  never  quenched.

2.  Ruin  was  certain.  "  He  makes  an  utter  end."  The  destruction  is  absolutely  fixed
and  sure.  No  second  attempt  will  be  made.  One  stroke  of  the  Angel  destroyed
the  Assyrian  armies.  One  blast  from  heaven  levelled  Nineveh  in  the  dust.  Now
Nineveh — great  Nineveh — the  pride  of  its  inhabitants,  the  terror  of  its  neighbours,
and  the  envy  of  the  world,  has  fallen.  Its  celebrity  ceased,  and  its  site  for  ages
remained  unknown —

"Behold  the  pride  of  pomp,
The  throne  of  nations  fallen,  obscured  in  dust,
Even  yet  majestical — the  silent  soene
Elates  the  soul"  [Dyer],

The  Destruction  of  the  Enemy,  and  the  Eedemption  op  God's

People. —  Verses  12 — 15.

Here  good  is  predicted  to  Judah,  and  evil  to  the  enemy.  One  shall  be  purified
and  restored,  the  other  utterly  annihilated.

I.  The  destruction  of  the  enemy.  The  Prophet  notices  their  present  condition,
and  contrasts  it  with  future  ruin.     1.  They  are  unbroken  in  strength.     "  Though


chap.  I.]  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  NAHUM.  469


they  be  quiet"  If  they  be  entire,  sound  and  unharmed,  perfect  in  warlike  prepara-
tions, that  will  not  avail  them.  2.  They  are  undiminished  in  number.  "And
likewise  many."  Their  numbers  were  unimpaired  and  great.  Hezekiah  thus
exhorted  the  people  :  "Be  strong  and  courageous,  be  not  afraid  nor  dismayed  for
the  King  of  Assyria,  nor  for  all  the  multitude  that  is  with  him  "  (2  Chron.  xxxii.
7).  3.  They  are  secure  in  tranquillity.  "  Quiet,"  that  is,  without  fear,  and  perfectly
safe.  They  were  free  from  attacks,  and  securely  fortified,  but  not  against  God.
They  pictured  an  easy  march  and  a  splendid  victory  in  the  land,  "  When  he  shall
pass  through  ; "  but  the  vast  host  was  swept  away  in  a  single  night.  Notice  their
future.  1.  Idolatry  will  be  destroyed.  "Out  of  the  house  of  thy  gods  will  I  cut-
off the  graven  image."  Their  gods  in  the  temple,  graven  and  molten,  would  not
help  them,  nor  be  spared  by  the  enemy.  God  has  a  controversy  with  all  kinds  of
idols.  The  fate  of  a  nation  is  often  bound  up  with  the  fate  of  its  God.  2.  The
dynasty  would  be  extinguished.  "  No  more  of  thy  name  be  sown."  If  not
immediately,  yet  eventually  the  Assyrian  line  would  cease.  God  commanded  this,
and  it  was  certain  to  happen.  Their  splendid  renown  would  fade  away  and  their
name  be  cut  off.  The  race  would  be  cut  down  without  chance  of  springing  again.
"  The  face  of  the  Lord  is  against  them  that  do  evil,  to  cut  off  the  remembrance  of
them  from  the  earth."  3.  The  palace  would  be  turned  into  a  grave.  "I  will  make
(the  house  of  thy  gods)  thy  grave."  The  temple  was  polluted  by  slaughter,  and
converted  into  a  sepulchre  (Isa.  xxxvii.  38 ;  2  Kings  xix.  37).  Men  perish  in  the
things  in  which  they  seek  refuge.  The  Assyrian  power  was  destroyed.  God
made  a  grave  for  its  idols  and  its  people.  All  were  vile  and  light  ;  found  wanting
when  weighed  in  the  balance  (Dan.  v.  27).  Whatever  honour  man  set  upon  them,
they  were  lightly  esteemed  by  God.  Wickedness  in  religious  and  political  life
brings  contempt  and  ruin  upon  a  nation.  "  The  seed  of  evil-doers  shall  never  be
renowned."

"  God  needs  no  indirect  nor  lawless  course
To  cut  off  those  who  have  offended  Him  "  [Shakespeare].

II.  The  redemption  of  God's  people.  Deliverance  from  the  enemy  would  be
followed  by  restoration  of  worship  and  peace.  All  sorrow  would  end,  and  every
cause  of  fear  be  overcome.  1.  Deliverance  would  be  enjoyed.  The  news  would  be
proclaimed  and  welcomed  throughout  the  kingdom.  If  to  Sophocles  the  hands
and  feet  of  any  one  who  went  on  errands  of  mercy  were  beautiful,  how  much  more
should  the  heralds  of  the  gospel  be  received  by  all  who  hear  them.  (1)  Deliverance
from  affliction.  "  Though  I  have  afflicted  thee,  I  will  afflict  thee  no  more."  The
bitter  potion  will  not  be  repeated,  unless  there  be  real  necessity.  God  doth
not  afflict  willingly,  and  former  trials  should  not  hinder  faith  in  present  good.
(2)  Deliverance  from  the  enemy.  Servitude  no  longer,  (a)  From  the  yoke  of  the
enemy.  A  victorious  army  shall  no  longer  tax  and  oppress.  "  Now  will  I  break
his  yoke  from  off  thee."  (b)  From  the  fear  of  the  enemy.  He  shall  be  completely
subdued,  and  no  trace  of  his  steps  left  behind.  He  will  be  cut  off  in  spirit,
number,  and  existence.  "  The  wicked  shall  no  more  pass  through  thee."  2.  Worship
would  be  restored.  Solemn  feasts  would  be  kept.  The  free  use  and  thorough
enjoyment  of  religious  ordinances  would  be  restored.  Vows  would  be  performed,
and  gratitude  continually  abound.  The  ransomed  of  the  Lord  would  return  to
Zion  with  songs  and  everlasting  joy  upon  their  heads.  It  is  our  privilege  to  behold
the  feet  of  those  who  publish  peace  with  God  and  salvation  through  Christ.  If
we  believe  we  may  keep  our  feasts  in  gladness,  and  anticipate  the  glory  of  that
temple  into  which  the  wicked  never  enter.

HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Yer.  12.     Cut  down  like  grass  in  a     tion,  and  the  ease  with  which  it  is  done,
field.     The  completeness  of  the  destruc-     Greatness  and  number  nothing  with  God.


470


HOVILETIC  COMMENTARY     KAJIUM.


[CHAP.  I-


Ver.  13.  The  affliction  of  the  Church.
"  Yoke."  The  method  of  deliverance.
"  Break  his  yoke."  The  agent  who
works  it.  "7  will  break."  "By  the
strength  of  my  hand  I  have  done  it"
(Isa.  x.  13).  The  time  in  which  it  is
done.  "  God,  lest  his  own  should  de-
spair, does  not  put  them  off  altogether
to  a  distant  day,  but  saith  now  "  [Pusey].

Yer.  14.  It  is  sufficient  ground  of
assurance  for  the  coming  to  pass  of
greatest  things,  that  the  Lord  hath
determined  they  should  be }  for,  this  is


given  as  a  sure  ground  of  Assyria's  ruin,
that  the  Lord  hath  given  a  command-
ment, or  purposed  their  destruction,  his
purpose  concluding  as  effectually  the
concurring  of  all  means  to  bring  it  about,
as  if  they  were  especially  commanded.
Name.  "  The  Lord  doth  justly  root  out
the  memory  of  such  persons  or  states,  as
make  it  their  only  work  to  get  a  name
on  earth,  and  to  be  eminent  and  terrible  ;
for  such  is  Assyria's  doom :  no  more  of
thy  name  shall  be  sown  "  \Hutcheson\


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  I.


Ver.  1.  Burden.  He  who  possesses
the  virtues  required  in  the  care  of  souls,
should  not  take  upon  him  the  priestly
office,  unless  constrained  to  it;  and  he
who  knows  he  has  them  not,  should  not
take  it  upon  him,  even  though  he  were
compelled  to  it  [Gh'egory].

Ver.  2.  Vengeance.  When  God  sees
it  necessary  to  vindicate  the  honour  of
his  justice  to  the  world,  he  doth  it  with
that  severity  which  may  make  us  appre-
hend his  displeasure ;  and  yet  with  that
mercy  which  may  encourage  us  to  repent
and  return  unto  the  Lord  \Stillingfleei\.

Ver.  3.  Slow.  God  delays  the  punish-
ment of  wickedness,  and  does  not  strike
presently,  for  a  glorious  manifestation  of
his  holy  attribute  of  patience.  His  two
great  attributes  of  justice  and  mercy,  the
full  season  of  their  manifestation  upon
the  vessels  of  wrath  and  mercy,  is  at  an
end  at  the  great  day  of  reckoning  [Bp.
Browning].

Vers.  3,  4.  This  passage  is  so  sublime,
says  one,  that  it  would  be  difficult  to
find  its  equal.  May  the  reader's  heart
adore  the  God  before  whom  the  uncon-
scious earth  and  sky  act  as  if  they  recog-
nized their  Maker,  and  were  moved  with
a  tremor  of  reverence.  "Vain  are  the
attempts  of  men  to  conceal  anything
from  him  whose  word  unbars  the  deep,
and  lifts  the  doors  of  earth  from  their
hinges  !  Vain  are  all  hopes  of  resistance,
for  a  whisper  of  his  voice  makes  the
whole  earth  quail  in  abject  terror"
\Spurgeon\

Ver.  7.  He  who  avails  himself  of  a
refuge  is  one  who  is  forced  to  fly.     It  is


a  quiet  retreat  from  a  pursuing  enemy.
And  there  are  trials,  and  temptations,
and  enemies,  from  which  the  Christian
does  best  to  fly.  He  cannot  resist  them.
They  are  too  strong  for  him.  His  wisdom
is  to  fly  into  the  refuge  of  the  secret
place  of  his  God,  to  rest  under  the
shadow  of  the  Almighty.  His  strength
is  to  sit  still  there  (Isa.  xxx.  7)  [B.  M.
Duncan\.

Vers.  8 — 12.  When  God  shakes  men
as  dust  from  under  the  summer  thrash-
ing-floor, the  right  hand  of  a  man's
strength  is  as  powerless  as  the  left  hand
of  a  man's  weakness,  and  his  wisdom  is
as  folly.  What  avails  the  wisdom  of
the  apple  to  make  it  cling  to  the  bough
when  it  is  ripe  in  autumn  time  ?  or  the
wisdom  of  the  leaf  to  hold  it  fast  to  the
stem  when  the  tempest  csdUl  or  the
wisdom  of  the  tree  to  make  it  stand
secure  when  a  rock  from  the  cliff  comes
crashing  down  through  its  puny  branches  ?
When  God  sends  storms  upon  men,  they
must  imitate  the  humble  grass,  which
saves  itself  by  lying  down.  Therefore  it
is  said,  "  Humble  yourselves  before  the
mighty  hand  of  God,  that  in  due  season
he  may  raise  you  up  "  [H.  W.  Beecher] .

Ver.  14.  Name.  Thou  may  est  choose
whether  thou  wilt  be  remembered  to
thy  praise  or  to  thy  shame  [Bishop
Pilkingtori],

11  He  left  a  name,  at  which  the  world  grew  pale,
To  point  a  moral,  or  adorn  a  tale."

[Samuel  Johnson.]

Ver.  15.  Peace,  newly  granted  by  the
grace  of  God,  was  to  be  celebrated  by  a


chap,  ir.j  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NAUUM.  471


new  consecration  of   the  people.     This  has  already  appeared  in  Christ,  by  which
has  special    reference    to    the   king    of  the    Belial,    from    whom   every  wicked
Nineveh  and  Assyria,  and  the  promise  spirit  proceeds,  is  for  ever  cast  out  [Lange],
must  have  been   very  precious    to  con-
temporaries oppressed  by  Assyria.      But  "Come,  and  begin  Thy  reign
to  us  the  fundamental  truth  is  far  more  ComMakethe kKi  to  Thyself,
important,  that  to  the  people  of  God  a  Great  King  of  Righteousness"  [BonaA
perfect  deliverance  is  near  at  hand,  and


CHAPTER  II.

Critical  Notes.  Dasheth]  Lit.  disperser.  Keep]  in  Judah  peace,  in  Nineveh  tumult.  Watch]
for  the  enemy.  Loins]  Prepare  for  conflict  (Job  xl.  7).  Every  means  of  defence  will  be  necessary.
2.]  The  Lord  hath  chastised  Judah  and  Israel,  and  permitted  the  enemy  to  triumph;  now  the
excellency  of  Israel,  the  former  independence,  shall  be  restored.  Emptied]  Devastations,  taken  from
vine-pruning  and  cutting  young  twigs  (Fsal.  lxxx.  9).  3.  Red]  with  blood  or  paint,  or  overlaid
with  copper.  Scarlet]  Crimson,  the  fighting  dress  of  the  nations.  Torches]  Chariot-wheels  like
flaming  torches  in  rapidity  and  motion  (Isa.  v.  28).  Day]  of  equipment;  to  prepare,  to  equip  for
battle  (Jer.  xlvi.  14:  Ezek.  vii.  14).  Fir  trees]  Shields  and  lances  made  of  fir,  brandished  and
thrown  with  destructive  power.  4.  Rage]  The  chariots,  driven  iu  fury,  jostle  one  against  another,
and  run  as  lightning  (Luke  x.  18),  in  the  market-place  of  the  city.  5.  He]  King  of  Nineveh,  shall
muster  choicest  troops.  Worthies]  Heroes  or  brave  men  (Judg.  v.  13 :  Neh.  iii.  5).  Stumble]
through  fear  and  haste.  Defence]  The  covering  used  by  besiegers.  6.]  From  the  siege  the
prophet  passes  rapidly  to  the  capture  of  the  city.  Gates]  The  rivers  round  the  city  break  their
sluices  and  overflood  it.  7.  Huzzab]  Probably  Nineveh ;  some,  the  queen  of  Nineveh.  Like  a
queen  she  shall  be  dethroned  and  dishonoured ;  her  maids  mourn  like  doves  over  her  fate  (Isa.  xxxviii .
14).  Tabering]  Beating  their  breasts,  a  mournful  attitude  (Luke  xviii.  23).  8.  Old]  From
antiquity  hath  been  like  a  pool  of  water;  the  confluence  of  people  from  all  parts,  like  countless
drops  ;  an  unbroken  empire  for  600  years.  Stand]  Stand  is  the  cry,  but  all  flee  away.  9.  Take]
God  bids  the  conquerors  to  plunder.  "  This  does  not  happen  by  chance,  but  because  God  determines
to  avenge  the  injuries  inflicted  upon  his  people"  [Calvin],  10.  Empty]  Lit.  emptiness,  and
emptiedness  and  waste.  The  city  is  left,  without  its  wealth  and  monuments,  a  complete  ruin.  The
vanquished  are  horrified  at  the  destruction,  despond,  can  hardly  keep  on  their  feet,  and  turn  pale.
11  The  completeness  of  her  judgment  is  declared  first  under  that  solemn  number,  Three,  and  the  three
words  in  Hebrew  are  nearly  the  same,  with  the  same  meaning,  only  each  word  fuller  than  the
former,  as  picturing  a  growing  desolation ;  and  then  under  four  heads  (in  all  seven) ;  also  a  growing
fear"  [Pusey].  11.  Where]  is  the  site  on  which  the  mighty  city  once  stood?  Its  warriors  crushed
the  nations  like  lions  in  their  lust  and  power.  "  To  fill  up  the  picture,  the  epithets  applied  to  the
lions  are  grouped  together  according  to  the  difference  of  sex  and  age  "  [Keii],  12.]  Description  of
tyranny  and  predatory  lust  of  Assyrian  kings.  13.]  The  destruction  is  certain  -/ against  thee;
God  has  proclaimed,  and  will  fulfil  it.  Her  war-chariots,  i.  e.  the  whole  apparatus  of  war  [Calvin],
will  be  consumed  like  smoke ;  imperial  might  shall  no  longer  prey  upon  the  nations,  and  emissaries,
vith  the  king's  commands  or  exacting  tribute,  shall  be  seen  no  more  (Ezek.  xix.  9).

HOMILETICS.
The  Cause  and  Preparations  op  War. —  Verse  1.

Whether  these  words  be  applied  to  the  Jews  defending  Jerusalem,  or  to  the
Ninevites  defending  their  city  against  the  Medo-Babylonian  army,  their  meaning
is  the  same.     They  begin  a  lively  description  of  the  siege.

I.  The  cause  of  the  war.  "  For  the  emptiers  have  emptied  them  out."  1.  The
Assyrians  had  oppressed  God's  people.  They  had  abused  their  power  in  the
chastisement  of  Israel,  plundered  the  people,  and  outrageously  destroyed  their
vines.  Now  the  emptiers  must  be  emptied,  and  those  who  chastised  others  must
be  chastised  themselves.  "  Power  abused  brings  a  curse  upon  its  possessors.  Power
gives  temptation,  which  in  turn  sets  aside  honour,  social  duty,  law,  and  right;
creates  abuse  ;  and  abuse,  strife,  confusion,  retribution,  bloodshed,  sin  "  [Bailey],


472  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NAHUM.  [chap.  ii.


2.  God's  purpose  concerning  his  people  was  accomplished.  The  enemy  falls,  but  God
will  restore  his  people.  He  will  re-establish  the  glory  of  Israel  which  Asshur  had
destroyed.  Its  eminence,  by  virtue  of  its  election,  will  no  longer  be  tarnished.
God  sees  an  excellency  in  his  people  which  the  world  does  not,  and  eventually  will
make  them  "  an  eternal  excellency,  a  joy  of  many  generations."  II.  The  approach
of  the  enemy.  "He  that  dasheth  in  pieces  is  come  up."  Notice,  I.  The  nature
of  the  enemy.  "  The  dasher  in  pieces,"  not  a  hammer  of  war,  but  one  whom  God
employed  to  scatter  other  nations.  The  feeblest  people,  in  God's  hands,  may  be  a
terror  to  others  The  mightiest  nations,  intoxicated  with  success,  and  abusive  of
their  privileges,  may  be  broken  in  pieces  like  a  potter's  vessel.  2.  The  nearness  of
the  enemy.  "  Before,  thy  face."  Direct  against  her,  face  to  face.  Men  are  not
sensible  of  their  danger,  put  the  evil  day  far  off,  when  it  is  nigh  at  hand.  "  Serious
things  to-morrow,"  said  the  ancient  prince,  who  gave  himself  to  revelry,  and  was
ruined  with  his  kingdom.  III.  The  defence  of  the  city.  Some  take  the  words
ironically,  and  equivalent  to  a  prediction.  Thou  shalt  defend  thyself,  but  all  in
vain.  The  most  powerful  and  courageous  preparations  are  matters  of  derision
before  God.  1.  Keep  the  fortress.  "Keep  the  munition."  Strong  walls,  though
unassailable  by  human  skill,  would  not  be  secure.  2.  Guard  the  avenues.
"Watch  the  way"  by  which  the  foe  may  come  and  repel  him.  Prevent  entrance
into  the  city.  3.  Encourage  one  another.  "  Make  thy  loins  strong."  Gather  up
courage,  and  let  nothing  be  unemployed.  Stand,  having  your  loins  girt  about  like
men  (Ephes.  vi.  14 :  Job  xl.  7).  4.  Resist  mightily.  "  Fortify  thy  power
mightily."  It  is  a  desperate  affair,  no  careless,  timid  defence  will  avail.  Nor  will
the  utmost  the  wicked  can  do  prevail  against  God.  Impotent  are  all  efforts  of
defence  when  God  has  departed  from  a  place.  "The  Lord  hath  opened  his
armoury,  and  hath  brought  forth  the  weapons  of  his  indignation  :  for  this  is  the
work  of  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  in  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans."

The  Great  Siege  and  the  Yain  Defence. — Verses  3 — 7.

The  assailing  army  is  now  described  in  its  might  and  compactness,  its  warlike
appearance  and  design.     Notice,

I.  The  besieging  force.  The  order  and  equipment  are  graphically  pictured.
1.  The  army  is  formidable.  Many  are  spoken  of  as  one.  The  soldiers  are  valiant
and  accustomed  to  victory,  Divinely  collected,  and  deterred  by  no  foe.  2.  The
army  is  terrific.  Blood-red  in  uniform.  Chariots  like  flames  of  fire,  and  spears
like  waving  forests.     No  quarter  given.     Like  flames  they  intend  to  set  all  on  fire.

3.  The  army  is  invincible.  Its  career  has  been  triumphant,  and  its  success  is  sure.
Against  such  generals  as  Cyrus  the  Younger  and  Alexander  the  Great,  numbers
avail  not.  They  appeared  in  the  joyous  splendour  of  Divine  warriors  (cf.  2  Kings
vi.  17),  and  in  the  colour  of  those  who  execute  Divine  judgments  (Zech.  i.  8:
Rev.  vi.  4).  The  heroes  are  God's  heroes,  and  the  bewilderment  in  the  city  is
from  the  power  of  God.  II.  The  vain  defence.  .  The  inhabitants  are  summoned
together,  and  no  means  of  defence  are  neglected.  1.  Brave  men  are  summoned  to
their  post.  "  He  shall  recount  his  worthies."  All  is  at  stake.  The  leaders
especially  must  set  an  example  of  courage.  But  they  are  struck  with  terror,  run
in  perplexity,  and  through  fear  or  lack  of  strength  fall,  "  stumble  in  their  walk."
They  rush  to  the  walls,  but  the  enemies  are  already  attacking  under  cover.  -It  is
too  late.  2.  The  river  became  an  enemy  to  the  city.  The  enemy  had  been  three
times  defeated.  The  city  was  intact,  and  the  hosts  were  encamped  before  its  gates
in  vain.  But  a  sudden  inundation,  more  violent  than  usual,  burst  the  sluices  and
the  mighty  flood  broke  down  the  walls.  3.  The  royal  citadel  was  destroyed.
"  The  palace  shall  be  dissolved."  The  king  utterly  despaired,  shut  himself  up  with
his  slaves  and  concubines  in  his  residence,  kindled  the  whole  and  perished  in  the
flames.     One  ground  of  confidence  after  another  failed.     The  mighty  men,  the


chap,  n.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NAHUM.  473


river  and  the  temple,  were  no  protection.  Neither  the  palace  of  the  princes  nor
the  temple  of  the  gods  can  shelter  those  whom  God  will  punish.  "  Of  old  the
funeral  pile  was  erected ;  yea,  for  the  king  it  was  prepared  deep  and  large  :  it  was
prepared  with  fire  and  much  wood,  and  the  breath  of  God,  like  a  stream  of  brimstone,
kindles  it."  4.  The  inhabitants  mourned.  The  people  of  the  city,  under  the
figure  of  a  captive  woman  ;  and  her  maids,  the  lesser  cities,  as  female  attendants  on
the  royal  city,  were  brought  to  shame  and  distress,  (a)  They  were  destroyed  by
the  flood,  or  (b)  They  were  led  captives,  and  (c)  They  grieved  at  their  fate.  As  a
queen  Nineveh  was  dethroned  and  dishonoured.  In  helplessness  and  grief  she
mourned  as  a  dove.  If  we  do  not  repent  in  time  no  "  worthies  "  or  "  defence  "  will
turn  away  eternal  lamentation  and  despair.

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

The  overthrow  of  the  enemy  of  God  what  had  been  the   fence  against   the

is  not  the  work  of  men,  but  his  work,  enemy   became   an   entrance  for  them  :

A  disperser  comes  up ;  men  would  be  with  the  river  there  poured  in  also  the

satisfied  with  the  capture  (cf.  Obadiah)  tide  of  the  people  of  the  enemy.     The

[Lange\.  palace,   then   the    imperial   abode,  the

Neither  equipment,  nor  the  appearance  centre  of  the  empire,  embellished  with

of  assembled  power  (ver.  2),  nor  capacity  the  history  of  its  triumphs,  sank,  was

of  hasty  movement  and   vehement  and  dissolved,  and  ceased  to  be.     It  is  not  a

varied  activity  (ver.  5)  achieves  victory  physical  loosening  of  the  sun-dried  bricks

in  the  battles  of  the  kingdom  of  God :  by  the  stream  which  would  usually  flow

where  God  stands,  there  victory  comes  harmless  by ;  but  the  dissolution  of  the

[Lange].  empire  itself  [Pusey].

Thus   ver.     3   describes   the   attack;         Nahum  predicted  the  destruction  of

ver.  4  the  defence ;  the  two  first  clauses  the  city  in  its  grandeur  and  prosperity,

of  ver.  5   the  defence,  the  two  last  the  Hence  learn:  1.  To  adore  the  providence

attack  \Pusey\.  of  God  in  giving  an  exact  and  particular

Ver.  5.  If  kings  rely  more  upon  their  account  of  the  siege.  2.  To  fear  the
heroes  and  armies  than  upon  God,  they  power  of  God  in  collecting  and  employ-
must  become  discouraged  and  flee  before  ing  such  terrible  forces  to  execute  his
their  enemies  \Lange\  will.     3.  To  forsake  sin,  lest  we  should

Ver.   6.  The  palace  dissolved.      The  be    humbled    and    destroyed    by    the

prophet  unites  the   beginning  and   the  judgments  of  God.
end.      The  river  gates  were    opened;

HOMILETICS.
The  Flight  of  the  Inhabitants  and  the  Plunder  op  the  City. — Verses  8 — 10.

Nineveh  was  a  wealthy  and  populous  city.  Like  a  pool  of  water  in  multitude
of  men,  but  nothing  could  defend  it.

I.  The  disgraceful  flight.  "Yet  they  shall  flee  away."  1.  The  people  lost
courage.  Effeminacy  and  lust  beget  weakness.  God  can  dishearten  the  strono^t
and  most  courageous.  Patriotism  and  confidence  flee  apace,  and  men  are  helpless
as  the  reed  when  he  pursues.  2.  The  people  fled  away.  Panic  seized  them.
Deaf  to  the  call  of  a  few  leaders,  none  looked  back,  took  a  stand,  or  stopped  in  the
flight.  At  Waterloo,  Napoleon,  observing  the  recoil  of  his  columns  and  the
confusion  of  all  around  him,  cried  out,  "All  is  lost,  save  who  can."  In  Nineveh
the  discomfiture  and  flight  were  complete.  In  the  day  of  judgment  none  can  save
themselves  by  flight.  "The  flight  shall  perish  from  the  swift."  II.  The  extensive
plunder.  Enormous  wealth  was  treasured  up  in  the  city.  Its  reputation  as  a
commercial  city  rivalled  Tyre  (Ezek.  xxvii.  23).  Immense  riches  were  acquired  also
by  predatory  war  and  taxes  levied  to  the  utmost  degree.     1.  Its  gold  and  silver


474  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NAHUM.  [chap.  n.


were  taken.  "Take  ye  the  spoil  of  silver,  take  the  spoil  of  gold."  Riches  cannot
deliver  in  the  day  of  wrath.  They  rather  tempt  and  entice  the  spoiler.  Small
articles  of  value  have  been  found  in  the  ruins  of  Nineveh,  but  no  gold  nor  silver.
"When  thou  shalt  cease  to  spoil,  thou  shalt  be  spoiled."  2.  Its  pleasant  furniture
was  taken.  "  Glory  out  of  all  the  pleasant  furniture."  Everything  considered
costly,  vessels  of  desire,  treasures  and  utensils  that  yielded  glory  and  reputation,
were  carried  away.  "  The  wealth  of  the  sinner  is  laid  up  for  the  just."  3.  Its
desolation  was  complete.  "  She  is  empty,  and  void,  and  waste."  (a)  The  city
itself  was  destroyed.  Worldly  wealth  is  vain,  emptiness  and  poverty  are  the  end
of  worldly  greatness.  Those  who  heap  up  silver  as  dust,  and  prepare  raiment  as
clay,  only  provide  for  another's  booty  (Job  xxvii.  17).  (b)  The  inhabitants  were
terror-struck.  Their  hearts  melted  like  wax  before  the  fire,  and  their  knees
trembled  in  weakness.  Pain  seized  their  loins,  and  paleness  covered  their  faces.
A  guilty  conscience  turns  the  most  hardy  into  cowards.  Nineveh's  strength  failed
her  in  the  day  of  need.  The  terror  she  had  caused  to  Israel  fell  in  just  retribution
upon  herself,  and  this  storehouse  of  plunder  was  utterly  laid  waste  and  destroyed.

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Yer.  8.  Wealth  may  be  treasured  up  Natural  men  despair  in  adversity,  sink

for   ages,  and    increase    in    value    and  in  courage  when  robbed  of  their  earthly

abundance,  yet  not  be  secure.     Of  old,  goods.      "It   is  certainly  a  great  loss

yet  flee  away.     Because  God  spares  a  when  one  loses  money  and  goods,  but

people,  and  permits  them  to  prosper  in  not  so  great  as  when  the  heart  falls  into

wickedness  for  a  long  time,    it    is   no  despair  \Lange\     First,  the  heart,  the

proof  of  security  from  coming  judgment,  seat  of  courage,  and  resolve,  and  high

Punishment  is  often  sure  and  decreed ;  purpose,  melteth  ;  then  the  knees  smite

she  shall  be  laid  bare;  they  shall  flee  together,    tremble,    shake    under    their

away.  frame ;   then  much  pain  is  in  all  loins,

Vers.  9,  10.  Learn  the    folly  of  de-  lit.  "strong  pains  as  of    a  woman  in

pending    upon    worldly    resources.     1.  travail,"    writhing    and    doubling    the

Wealth  may  be  taken  away.     2.  Num-  whole    body,   and    making    it    wholly

bers  may  fail  and  flee  away.      3.  The  powerless  and  unable  to  stand  upright,

greatest  defences  may  be  levelled  to  the  shall  bow  the  very  loins,  the  seat  of

dust.     "The  greatest  kingdoms  finally  strength  (Prov.  xxxi.    17);  and  lastly,

come  to  nothing  when  the  Lord  inflicts  the  faces  of  them  all  gather  blackness

upon  them  his  penal  judgments,  and  all  (cf.  Joel  ii.  6),  the  fruit  of  extreme  pain,

their  power  is  unable  to  quench  and  stop  and  the  token  of  approaching  dissolution

the  fire  of  his  wrath "  [Lange].  [Pusey].     Joy   and   sorrow    will    show

Ver.    10.    The   horrors    of    a    guilty  themselves   in   the   face  as  in  a  glass,

conscience.     1.  Desponding  minds.     2.  Now  if  for  a  temporal  mischief  there  is

Extreme   pain.      3.    Visible   tokens   of  so  great  a  consternation  in  wicked  men,

approaching  ruin.     The  state  of  mind  what  shall  we  think  there  is  in  hell?

manifested  in  the  attitudes  of  the  body,  [Trapp].

HOMILETICS.
Nineveh  Effaced. —  Verses  11 — 13.

The  Prophet,  beholding  the  destruction  in  spirit  as  having  already  taken  place,
looks  round  for  the  site  on  which  the  mighty  city  once  stood,  and  sees  it  no  more.
This  is  the  meaning  of  the  question  in  ver.  11.  He  describes  it  as  the  dwelling-
place  of  lions.  The  point  of  comparison  is  the  predatory  lust  of  its  rulers  and
their  warriors,  who  crushed  the  nations  like  lions,  plundering  their  treasures,  and
bringing  them  together  in  Nineveh  [Keil].

I.  Its  site  was  obliterated.    "  Where  is  the  dwelling  of  the  lions,"  &c.     Great


chap.   II.]  HOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY :  NAHUM.  475


must  be  the  desolation  to  call  forth  such  an  expression.  Where  indeed  is  the
proud  city1?  Its  [dace  was  unknown  for  ages,  and  is  only  just  discovered  by  the
ruins  which  have  been  dug  up.  It  was  secure,  the  dwelling  of  the  lions  ;  spacious
walked;  and  wealthy,  the  feeding-place  of  the  young  lions;  but  its  battlements
were  destroyed  and  its  glory  departed.  The  dust  of  Nineveh  is  a  witness  for  the
truth  of  God,  and  a  warning  to  the  nations  of  the  earth.  "Assyria  lies  buried
there  with  all  its  people ;  round  about  are  their  graves,  all  of  them  are  slain  and
fallen  by  the  sword ;  they  have  made  their  graves  deep  there  below."  II.  Its  rulers
were  overcome.  Over  500  years  this  great  city  of  God  (cf.  Jon.  i.  3  ;  iii.  2)  was
under  its  powerful  rulers,  the  terror  of  Western  Asia.  Dynasty  after  dynasty  had
transmitted  its  dreaded  name  to  age  after  age.  1.  Its  rulers  were  strong.  Like
lions  in  power  and  purpose,  bent  on  plunder  and  mischief.  They  were  greedy,
ravenous  beasts,  which  could  never  be  satisfied  (Isa.  lxvi.  11).  2.  Its  rulers  were  a
terror  to  others.  They  tore  others,  and  were  not  touched  themselves.  Exempt
from  fear,  they  were  a  dread  to  surrounding  peoples,  "and  none  made  them  afraid."
But  the  Lord  of  hosts  was  against  them,  and  raised  up  one  stronger  than  they.
"  The  lion  is  come  up  from  his  thicket,  and  the  destroyer  of  the  Gentiles  is  on  his
way ;  he  is  gone  forth  from  his  place  to  make  thy  land  desolate ;  and  thy  cities
shall  be  laid  waste,  without  an  inhabitant."  III.  Its  resources  were  destroyed.
Ver.  13  expresses  her  complete  destruction.  1.  Its  7nilitary  defences  were  destroyed.
"  I  will  burn  her  chariots  in  the  smoke."  Their  chariots  remarkable  for  speed  and
lightness,  their  horses  noted  for  fierceness  and  power,  were  fuel  for  the  fire.  All
their  warlike  preparations  vanished  into  smoke,  and  not  a  brand  was  plucked  from
the  burning.  2.  Their  offspring  were  cut  off.  "  The  sword  shall  devour  thy
young  lions."  The  flower  of  youth,  their  hope  for  the  future,  was  cut
down.  The  whole  race  of  oppressors  was  taken  away.  God  in  justice  may
cut  off  those  whom  we  seek  to  enrich,  and  for  whom  we  are  so  anxious  to  provide.

3.  Their  ivealth  was  taken  away.  "  I  will  cut  off  thy  prey  from  the  earth."  The
immense  booty  they  had  gathered  by  fraud  and  violence  was  robbed  by  the  enemy.

4.  Their  agents  were  no  longer  seen.  "  The  voice  of  thy  messengers  shall  no  more
be  heard."  Emissaries  exacting  tribute  or  conveying  the  edicts  of  the  king;
heralds  and  delegates  travelling  the  provinces ;  messengers,  uttering  blasphemy  and
publishing  victory,  "should  no  more  be  heard  upon  the  mountains  of  Israel."  God
had  hushed  them  to  silence,  and  the  stillness  of  death  prevailed.  IV.  Its  destiny
was  sealed.  "  Behold,  I  come,"  are  words  which  seal  and  confirm  the  threat.  God
had  endured  long,  but  came  at  last.  The  city  was  captured  and  destroyed.  Its
ruins  have  never  been  revived,  and  Moslem  tribes  rear  their  hamlets  on  its  barren
stones.  "Desolation  meets  desolation,"  saysLayard;  "a  feeling  of  awTe  succeeds  to
wonder,  for  there  is  nothing  to  relieve  the  mind;  to  lead  to  hope,  or  to  tell  of  what
has  gone  by.  These  high  mounds  of  Assyria  made  a  deeper  impression  upon  me,
gave  rise  to  more  serious  thought  and  more  earnest  reflection,  than  either  the
temples  of  Baalbec  or  the  theatres  of  Ionia."

Conquerors  proud,  to  seal  her  doom,
Swept  her  to  ruin's  all-engulfing  tomb.
Long  ages  past,  and  turf  o'ergrew  the  walls,
And  silence  reigned  in  Ninus'  buried  halls.

HOMlLETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Vers.  11,  12.  The  lions.     Oppression  "The  robbery  of  the  wicked  shall  de-
is  brutish  conduct.     It  turns  palaces  into  stroy  them."

dens,  and   princes  into    lions.     "As   a         Yer.  13.     God  against  the  sinner.     1.

roaring  lion  and  a  raging  bear ;  so  is  a  God    is    declared    to   be   against    him.

wicked    ruler   over    the    poor   people."  "Behold"  fyc.      2.    God  has  power  to

Unrighteous   gain   is   a   risky    bargain,  fulfil  his  threats.      "The  Lord  of  Hosts."


476


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NAHUM.


[chap.  II.


3.  The  results  will  be  unmistakeable  if
the  opposition  continues.  Seek  to  be
reconciled  to  God.  From  the  whole
chapter  we  may  learn — 1.  God's  hand
in  destructive  warfare.  The  wealth  and
haughty  bearing  of  Nineveh  drew  forth
the  conquering  army.  The  passions  and
efforts  of  men  were  concerned,  but  they
only   performed    the    pleasure    of    the


Most  High.  2.  TJie  vanity  of  human
greatness.  Heaps  of  gold  and  silver  are
not  real  possessions.  A  royal  palace
and  an  imperial  throne  will  crumble  into
dust.  "  Empty  and  void  and  waste,"
may  be  inscribed  on  every  earthly  glory.

"They  are  but  beggars  that  can   count  their
wealth  "  [Shakespeare],


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  II.


Vers.  1,  2.  Dasher  in  pieces.  Deme-
trius was  surnamed  Poliorcestes,  the
destroyer  of  cities ;  Attilas  called  himself
Orbis  flagellum,  the  scourge  of  the  world.
Julius  Caesar  was  Fulmen  belli,  the
thunderbolt  of  war ;  he  had  taken  in
his  time  a  thousand  towns,  conquered
three  hundred  nations,  took  prisoners
one  million  of  men,  and  slain  as  many.
These  were  dissipatores  indeed,  and
dashers  in  pieces,  rods  of  God's  wrath ;
and  this  they  took  to  be  a  main  piece  of
their  glory  [Trapp\.

Vers.  3,  4.  Chariots  were  objects  of
great  interest.  "  Their  charioteers  had
an  air  of  perfect  fearlessness ;  they
dashed  along  as  if  caring  for  nothing,
but  resolved  upon  crushing  everything.
These  declarations  are  perfectly  accurate,
and  cannot  be  more  evident  than  the
sculptures  and  bas-reliefs  of  Nineveh
have  shown  them  to  be.  Their  chariots
are  represented,  covered  with  costly
decorations  and  Sabean  symbols ;  and
their  horses  are  exhibited  in  almost
every  variety  of  attitude — rearing,  run-
ning and  rushing — exactly  as  we  should
have  supposed  them  to  be,  after  reading
that  which  is  said  of  them  in  the  pro-
phecies."


The  siege  was  no  easy  task.  History
declares  that  the  king,  at  the  approach
of  the  enemy,  collected  all  his  active
forces — that  the  besieging  army  was
three  times  severely  defeated,  and  that
the  Medes  could  only  be  held  with  great
difficulty  to  the  work.  The  Assyrians
abandoned  themselves  to  negligent  re-
joicing in  the  camps  before  the  gates  on
account  of  victory,  but  were  attacked  in
the  night  and  driven  back  to  the  walls.
Salsemenes,  brother-in-law  to  the  king,
who  had  resigned  the  command  to  him,
was  driven  into  the  Tigris  (cf.  ch.  iii.  3) ;
but  the  city  was  still  uninjured,  and  the
enemy  encamped  in  vain  before  the  gates.
In  the  spring  of  the  third  year  other
powers  interfered.  The  ri  ver  became  "  an
enemy  to  the  city  "  (cf.  ii.  7;  i.  8 — 10).
The  inundation  occurred  suddenly,  and
violently  broke  down  in  one  night  the
walls  on  the  river.  The  king  despaired
of  his  life,  and  having  sent  his  family
to  the  north,  shut  himself  up  with  all
his  treasures,  and  burned  himself  in  the
royal  citadel.  Immense  booty  was  carried
away.  The  city  was  plundered,  sacked,
and  set  on  fire  [Langef  Introduction  to
Nahum].


CHAPTER  HI.

Critical  Notes.]  The  prophet  resumes  his  description  of  the  siege.  Blood]  Drops  of  blood  shed
in  murder  [Keii].  Lies]  Vain  promises  of  help.  Depart]  Ceases  not  to  plunder.  2.  Noise]  In  the
charges  of  war-cars.  "  This  passage  is  unrivalled  by  any  other,  either  in  sacred  or  profane  literature  "
[Hend.].  Riders  dash  along,  the  flame  of  the  sword,  the  flash  of  the  lance,  and  the  multitude  of  the
slain,  depict  the  attack  and  its  consequences.  4.  Whoredoms]  The  reason  of  the  punishment ;  not
idolatry  but  selfishness,  which  under  the  guise  of  love  sought  the  gratification  of  lust  :  the  crafty
policy  to  ensnare  other  States.  Selleth]  i.  e.  rob  nations  of  liberty,  bring  them  into  bondage  or  make
them  tributary  (Deut.  xxxii.  30  :  JudL  ii.  14).  5.  Discover]  Language  suggested  by  preceding
metaphor  of  an  harlot  ;  referring  to  the  custom  of  stripping  captives,  male  and  female,  and  exposing


chap,  in.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NAHUM.  477


them  to  nakedness  and  insult.  6.  Gazing- stock]  A  warning  to  others  (Ezek.  xxviii.  17).  7. J  She  will
be  an  object  of  disgust,  none  will  pity  the  devastated  city,  for  her  doom  is  deserved.  8.]  She  will
share  the  fate  of  No-Amon,  a  royal  city  of  Egypt,  populous,  sacred,  and  strong  (Ezek.  xxx.  14,  15  :
Jer.  xlvi.  25),  like  .Nineveh  well  situatt  d,  protected  by  waters  on  every  side.  9.]  Allies  numerous
and  powerful,  yet  No  (Thebes)  could  not  preserve  herself.  10.]  Its  inhabitants  subjected  to  all  the
cruelties  and  indignities  generally  inflicted  upon  conquered  people.  11.  Drunken]  with  the  cup  of
Divine  anger.  A  refuge  from  the  enemy  sought  and  not  found  in  other  nations.  12.  Strongholds]
All  the  fortifications  will  be  easily  taken,  like  ripe  figs  they  will  fall  into  the  mouth  of  the  gatherer
(cf.  Is.  xxviii.  4:  Rev.  vi.  13).  13.  Women]  Effeminate  and  timid,  or  weak  and  unable  to  offer
resistance  (cf.  Is.  xix.  6  :  Jer.  1.  37).  14.  Draw]  for  a  long-continued  siege,  improve  fortifications,
put  the  kiln  in  order  for  burning  bricks.  15.  Make]  Multiply  thyself,  like  the  largest  and  most
formidable  locusts.  16.  j  Traders  and  merchants  increased  innumerable  as  the  stars,  but  fire  and  sword
would  devour  all.  17.  Crowned]  rulers  or  vassal  princes  which  encamp  in  the  cold  and  flee  away  in
the  sun.  "  The  wings  of  locusts  become  stiffened  in  the  cold  ;  but  as  soon  as  the  warm  rays  of  the
sun  break  through  the  clouds,  they  recover  animation  and  fly  away."  18.  Shepherds]  Princes  and  great
men,  royal  counsellors  and  deputies  upon  whom  the  government  devolved.  Sleep]  in  death.  People]
The  flock  scattered  and  perished  (cf.  Num.  xxvii.  17  :  1  Kings  xxii.  17).  19.  Healing]  Softening,  or
anointing,  no  cure.     Bruise]  Fracture  or  ruin  (Prov.  xvi.  18  :  Lam.  ii.  11).

HOMILETICS.
Great  Wickedness. —  Verse  1.

The  prophet  in  this  chapter  repeats  and  confirms  the  total  ruin  of  Nineveh,
because  of  cruel  oppression  and  blood.  The  wickedness  of  the  city  is  set  forth  in
terrible  aspects.

1.  Cruel  murder.  "  The  bloody  city."  Its  prosperity  was  tainted  with  blood.
Unrighteous  war,  oppression  of  the  poor,  and  manifold  bloodshedding  are  the
indictment.  "  Woe  to  him  that  buildeth  a  town  with  blood,  and  stablisheth  a  city
by  iniquity!"  II.  Treacherous  dealing.  "It  is  all  full  of  lies  and  robbery."
Lies  in  word  and  act.  Deceit  with  man,  and  hyprocrisy  before  God.  Robbery
linked  with  lies,  secret  treachery  and  open  violence.  Full  of  wickedness.  Integrity
and  truth  banished  from  them,  and  none  upright  for  whose  sake  God  might  sp.ire
the  city.  III.  Constant  rapine.  "  The  prey  departeth  not."  She  never  ceased,
but  continued  to  make  a  prey  upon  others.  They  neither  repented  nor  grew  weary
of  iniquity.  Avarice  grew  more  intense,  lusts  were  daily  fed,  and  like  a  beast  they
tore  in  pieces  and  greedily  fed  upon  their  prey.  God  specially  marks  and  denounces
woe  upon  those  who  persevere  in  wicked  courses.  "  Arise,  go  to  Mneveh  that
great  city,  and  cry  against  it :  for  their  wickedness  is  come  up  before  me." —

"  "Who,  stung  by  glory,  rave  and  bound  away,
The  world  their  field  and  humankind  their  prey  n  [Young],

Great  Judgments  and  Great  Sins. —  Verses  2 — 4.

The  sentence  is  enlarged,  and  the  woe  explained.  Terrible  are  the  preparations
of  the  enemy,  and  the  noise  of  chariots  and  horsemen  sounds  already  in  the  ears.
The  city  is  filled  with  the  dead,  and  the  judgments  of  God  are  severe.

I.  Great  sins.  "  Because  of  the  multitude  of  the  whoredoms,"  &c.  1.  Bewitching
other  nations.  "  The  mistress  of  witchcraft."  As  harlots  try  to  dement  and  ensnare
by  incantations,  so  Nineveh  sought  to  draw  others  to  her  by  subtle  machinations.
The  love  of  gain  acts  on  multitudes  like  "  witchcraft."  They  seduce  others  hunt
after  men  in  excessive  lust,  and  lead  them  into  idolatry  and  estrangement  from  God.

2.  Enslaving  other  nations.  "  That  selleth  nations."  They  have  no  scruples  in  the
use  of  unlawful  means  to  get  power  and  subdue  others  beneath  their  feet.  Art  and
politics,  religion  and  wealth,  were  used  to  make  the  city  great   and   universal.

3.  Selfish  aggrandizement.  All  her  skill  and  artifice  in  ill-doing  were  employed  to
gratify  the  desire  of  supremacy.  Selfishness  is  often  dressed  in  love  to  accomplish
its  own  ends.  Eeligion  is  made  subservient  to  worldly  aims ;  devilish  arts  enslave
man  and  offend  God.     Domestic  sanctities  are  violated,  the  rights  of  men  are


478  H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:  NAHUM.  [chap.  m.


trampled  down,  and  justice  is  outraged.  "  Such  ambition,"  says  Sir  Walter  Scott,
"  breaks  the  ties  of  blood,  forgets  the  obligations  of  manhood."  II.  Great  judg-
ments. Men  may  glory  in  skill,  increase  in  power,  and  pursue  wickedness,  but  God
will  have  a  reckoning  with  them.  "  Because  of  the  multitude,"  &c.  1.  Judgments
are  prepared.  "  The  noise  of  a  whip,  and  the  noise  of  the  rattling  of  the  wheels,
and  of  the  prancing  horses,"  &c.  Military  preparations  are  great :  a  formidable
army  is  advancing  against  the  city  with  irresistible  speed  and  power.  The  judgments
of  God  are  (a)  numerous,  (b)  ready  for  execution,  and  (c)  will  come  with  over-
whelming speed.  When  sins  are  small,  God  is  often  patient  and  long-suffering ;
but  when  they  become  notorious  and  we  continue  in  them,  then  God  will  punish
them.  2.  Judgments  experienced.  Before,  all  was  beautiful  and  arranged  to  allure
in  the  city,  but  now  how  different  the  scene  !  Everything  fills  the  ear  with  terror,
and  the  heart  with  sadness.  (1)  Hie  dead  innumerable.  Death  follows  death  in
rapid  succession,  "  and  there  is  a  multitude  of  slain,  and  a  great  number  of  carcases."
(2)  The  dead  in  every  form.  They  are  slain,  and  the  bodies  are  carcases,  cmpses,
an  oppressive  number,  without  end.  (3)  The  dead  causing  the  living  to  stumble.
So  great  the  multitude  of  those  who  perish,  that  they  lie,  a  hindrance  in  every  street.
"  They  stumble  upon  their  corpses  " — sad  scene  !  an  awful  warning  to  others.  "  To
fill  them  with  the  dead  bodies  of  men,  whom  I  have  slain  in  mine  anger  and  in  my
fury,  and  for  all  whose  wickedness  I  have  hid  my  face  from  this  city  "  ( Jer.  xxxiii.  5).

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.   1.     Filled  with   deceit.     Great  hear  the  noise  of  the  whip,  the  rattling

cities  often  great  centres  of  wickedness,  of  the  wheels,  &c.  (Ps.  vii.  12, 13  :  Luke

Notice,   1.   The   wickedness,  (a)    deceit,  xix.  42 — 44  :  Pro  v.  i.  24).     The  enemy

(b)  violence,  and  (c)  blood.     God  would  is  sent  to  revenge  the  quarrel  of  God's

not  have   destroyed   it   on   account   of  covenant ;  the  red  horse  is  at  the  heels

idolatry    or   he   would   not   have    sent  of  the  white "  (Eev.  vi.  4).
Jonah  :  his  justice  waited  for  the  out-         Ver.  4.     The  mistress  of  witchcrafts.

break  of  greater  violence   and  impious  The   Hebrew   not    only   indicates    the

deeds.     2.  The  degree  of  this  wickedness,  subtlety,  but  the  ease  by  which  the  great

"  It  is  all  full  of  lies."     "  She  is  wholly  metropolis   made    itself    the   centre   of

made  up  of  fraud  and  falsehood,  menda-  nations.     1.   The  dominion.  "  Mistress,"

ciorum  loquacissima ;    no  truth  in  her  meaning  power,  control,  and  dominion,

private  contracts,  no  trust  in  her  public  2.   The  method  of  gaining  the  dominion.

transactions  and  capitulations  with  other  "  Witchcraft."    Treacherous  friendships,

nations  ;    be   they   never   so    solemnly  and  allurements,  to  ensnare  and  bind  to

confirmed,  yet  had  they  no  longer  force  herself  other  nations.     She  decked  her-

with  them  than  stood  with  their  own  self  like  a  prostitute  to  entice  from  God

profit"  \Trapp\.  into  sin.     But  she  will  lose  empire  and

Ver.  2.  Here  we  have,  1.  The  attack,  inhabitants,  and  become  like  a  widow
Eager  and  furious.  Noise  of  whip,  destitute  of  children.  "  These  two  things
rattling  of  wheels,  &c.  2.  The  results  of  shall  come  to  thee  in  a  moment,  in  one
the  attack.  Tremendous  slaughter,  dead  day — the  loss  of  children  and  widow-
bodies  everywhere.  "  Let  those,"  says  hood :  they  shall  come  upon  thee  in  their
an  old  writer,  "  that  refuse  to  hear  God's  perfection  for  the  multitude  of  thy
sweet  words  fear  lest  they  be  forced  to  sorceries,"  &c.  (Is.  xlvii.  9 — 12).

HOMILETIGS.

Retributive  Punishment. —  Verses  5 — 7.

Nineveh  is  represented  in  her  virgin  splendour,  and  her  punishment  under  the
figure  of  that  which  is  disgraceful  to  a  woman  (cf.  Is.  xlvii  3,  and  Hub.  ii  10).


chap,  in.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NAHUM.  479


God  is  against  her,   and  her  shame  shall  correspond   to  her  conduct.     As  she
uncovered  others,  so  shall  she  be  uncovered.

I.  She  will  be  exposed  to  nakedness  and  shame.  "  I  will  discover  thy  skirts
upon  thy  face."  Her  long  flowing  robes,  which  were  part  of  her  pomp  and  dignity,
but  which  veiled  her  misdeeds  and  pride,  shall  be  lifted  up  as  high  as  possible
(Jer.  xiii.  22).  She  will  be  treated  as  a  harlot,  and  stripped  of  her  glory  and  defence.
Her  face  shall  blush  in  fear,  and  the  consciousness  of  guilt  will  be  read  in  her  features.
Nations  shall  see  her  nakedness,  avoid  and  despise  her.  The  same  means  will  be
taken  to  display  her  lewdness  that  she  used  to  commit  it.  "  I  will  even  gather
them  round  about  against  thee,  will  discover  thy  nakedness  unto  them,  that  they
may  see  all  thy  nakedness."  II.  She  will  be  disgraced  and  insulted.  As
infamous  harlots  will  she  be  treated.  1.  Made  a  gazing-stock  to  men.  (i  I  will  set
thee  as  a  gazing-stock."  The  city  once  feared  and  renowned  shall  become  a  warning
to  others,  and  exposed  to  public  infamy.  "  I  will  cast  thee  to  the  ground  ;  before
kings  will  I  give  thee,  for  them  to  gaze  upon  thee."  2.  Treated  with  contempt  by
God  himself.  "  I  will  cast  abominable  filth  upon  thee."  She  had  done  abominable
things  before  God  (Jer.  xiii.  27),  which  she  had  forgotten,  but  God  will  punish  her
with  abominable  things.  Filth  shall  be  cast  upon  her  and  she  will  be  made  vile.
III.  She  will  be  unpitied  and  forsaken.  "  It  shall  come  to  pass  that  all  they  that
look  upon  thee  shall  flee  from  thee."  She  would  be  set  to  be  gazed  at,  and  the
effects  on  those  who  gaze  are  described.  1.  TJivpitied.  "  Who  will  bemoan  her  % "
There  will  be  none  to  comfort  and  relieve  her.  Unwept  and  unhonoured,  she  will
fall  into  the  grave.  Human  misery  excites  pity,  but  none  pay  Nineveh  the  tribute
of  sympathy.  Those  who  show  no  pity  to  others  will  find  none  for  themselves.
2.  Forsaken.  She  had  measured  friendship  by  profit,  and  forsaken  those  who  did
not  trust  in  her.  Now  she  is  repayed,  and  becomes  a  terror  to  all  round  about  her.
Such  will  be  the  portion  of  all  who  disregard  God  and  live  for  self.  They  will  be
stripped  of  all  adornments,  bereft  of  all  comfort,  and  thro  wn  into  eternal  misery.
"  These  two  things  are  come  unto  thee ;  who  shall  be  sorry  for  thee  1 — desolation
and  destruction,  and  the  famine,  and  the  sword;  by  whom  shall  I  comfort  thee  ?  "

The  Destruction  of  Some  a  Warning  to  Others. — Verses  8 — 10.

There  is  no  hope  for  Nineveh,  for  No-Amon  was  strong  by  nature  and  art,  head
of  many  confederate  nations  ;  yet  was  captured  and  destroyed.  The  city  cannot
protect  herself.  Destruction  is  sure.  Notice  how  one  support  after  another  is
taken  away.

I.  Natural  defences  will  not  avail.  No  was  strongly  fortified  by  nature  and
art.  She  "  was  situate  among  the  rivers."  The  Nile  watered  her  fields  and  guarded
her  walls.  Her  rampart  was  the  sea.  She  was  considered  impregnable.  No  was
one  of  the  grandest  and  most  magnificent  cities  of  antiquity.  But  no  situation  can
shield  from  God's  anger.  Nations  may  be  secluded  from  others  and  encircled  by
walls  and  seas,  but  God  cati  overturn  them.  II.  Large  populations  will  not
avail.  "  Populous  No."  It  was  a  great  centre  for  corn  and  merchandise,  and
attracted  many  people.  It  supplied  the  country  round  about  with  necessaries.  But
it  was  no  better  or  safer  on  account  of  its  numerous  inhabitants.  "  There  is  no  king
saved  by  the  multitude  of  an  host."  III.  Confederate  nations  will  not  avail.
No's  allies  were  numerous  and  strong.  Her  military  resources  and  Egyptian
auxiliaries  were  immense.  Ethiopia  and  Egypt  were  her  strength.  Put  and  Lubim
were  ready  to  help.  But  vast  armies  fail  to  maintain  empires  against  the  decree  of
God.  "  The  strongest  battalions  melt  like  snow-flakes  when  God  is  against  them."
The  leagured  might  of  earth  is  no  match  for  the  power  of  heaven.  "  The  Lord  of
Hosts,  the  God  of  Israel,  saith ;  Behold,  1  will  punish  the  multitude  of  No,  and
Pharaoh,  and  Egypt,  with  their  gods  and  their  kings,"  &c.  (Jer.  xlvi.  25,  26).


480


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NJHUM.


|_chap.  in.


HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.


Ver.  8.  The  ruined  cities  of  antiquity
a  warning  to  Christendom.  Carthage,
Nineveh,  and  Jerusalem  (cf.  Matt.  xi.  24:
Luke  x.  12,  13).  Warnings  proportioned
to  sins  and  privileges.

"  It  will  help  to  keep  us  in  holy  fear
of  the  judgments  of  God,"  says  an  old
author,  "  to  consider  that  we  are  not
better  than  those  that  have  fallen  under
those  judgments  before  us."

Yer.  9.  The  weakness  of  all  human
power  before  God.  The  fallacy  of
trusting  in  numbers  contrasted  with
faith  in  God.  "Lit.  Egypt  was  strength,
and  Ethiopia,  boundless.  He  sets  forth
first  the  imperial  might  of  No  :  then
her  strength  from  foreign,  subdued
power.  The  capital  is  a  sort  of  imper-
sonation of  the  might  of  the  State ;  No,
of  Egypt,  as  Nineveh,  of  Assyria.  When
the  head  was  cut  off,  or  the  heart  ceased
to  beat,  all  was  lost.  The  might  of
Egypt  and  Ethiopia  was  the  might  of
No,  concentrated  in  her.  They  were
strength,  and  that  strength  unmeasured


by  any  human  standard.  Boundless  was
the  strength  which  Nineveh  had  sub-
dued :  boundless  the  store  (2 — 10)  which
she  had  accumulated  for  the  spoiler ;
boundless  the  carcases  of  her  slain"
[Pusey].

Yers.  8 — 10.  1.  How  firm  the  stand-
ing of  Nineveh.  Surrounded  by  water,
defended  by  inner  and  outer  walls,
endless  in  wealth,  and  powerful  in  con-
federacies. 2.  How  fatal  the  fall  of
Nineveh.  (1)  Overcome  notwithstand-
ing might.  "  Yet  was  she  carried  away."
She  became  an  exile,  and  her  people
carried  into  captivity  with  heathen  bar-
barities. (2)  All  hope  of  recovery
destroyed.  (a)  Young  children  were
dashed  in  pieces  by  a  merciless  con-
queror. (6)  Noble  men  were  distributed
by  lot.  "  They  cast  lots  for  her  honour-
able men,"  &c.  No  pity  was  shown.
(c)  Officials,  men  of  state,  were  treated
like  slaves.  "  All  her  great  men  were
bound  in  chains"  (cf.  Ezek.  xiii.  14 — 16).


HOMILETIGS.
The  Fate  op  Some  Worse  than  that  op  Others. — Verses  10 — 13.

No-Amon  suffered  greatly,  but  Nineveh  will  suffer  more.  "  Thou  also  shalt  be
druuken  "  with  the  cup  of  God's  wrath.  The  greatness  of  thy  anguish  shall  deprive
thee  of  reason  and  strength,  and  stupefy  thee  like  death.

I.  The  punishment  is  a  Divine  judgment.  God  acts  by  the  same  unchanging
law  in  all  ages  and  to  all  nations.     No  and  Nineveh  must  alike  suffer  for  sins.

I.  Punishment  in  great  degree.  Not  a  mere  taste,  but  drunken.  They  drink  till
overwhelmed.  The  most  prudent  will  lose  judgment,  and  act  like  a  drunken  man.
"  Drink  ye,  and  be  drunken,  and  spue,  and  fall,  and  rise  no  more,  because  of  the
sword  which  I  will  send  among  you."  2.  Punishment  without  refuge.  Help  shall
be  sought  in  vain  from  others.  No  stronghold  from  the  enemy.  If  God  forsake,
no  help  can  be  found  in  man.  In  time  of  justice  it  is  too  late  to  cry  for  mercy.
3.  Punishment  ending  in  ruin.  "  Thou  shalt  be  hid."  The  city  once  so  proud  and
glorious  was  buried  beneath  the  mounds,  hidden  as  in  a  tomb ;  covered  out  of  sight,
and  has  only  lately  been  discovered.  In  unearthing  Nineveh  from  its  ruins,^  we
read  a  tale  of  splendour  and  power,  of  cruelty  and  blood,  of  sin  and  retribution.

II.  The  punishment  is  easily  inflicted.  The  two  figures  are  strikingly  expressive
of  the  extreme  ease  with  which  they  are  overcome.  1.  Their  valiant  men  are  faint-
hearted. "  Behold,  the  people  in  the  midst  of  thee  are  women."  Stone-walls  should
make  cowards  brave.  But  in  the  midst,  in  the  very  centre,  there  is  weakness  and
fear.  Warriors,  whom  no  toil  wearied  and  no  danger  daunted,  one  and  all  become
helpless  as  women.  Where  sin  dwells  there  is  no  power  to  resist.  When  God
takes  the  mettle  out  of  men,  the  strongest  faint  away.  "The  mighty  men  of
Babylon  have  forborne  to  fight,  they  have  remained  in  then*  holds ;  their  might


ohap.  in.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NAHUM.  481


hath  failed  ;  they  became  as  women  "  (Jer.  li.  30 ;  1.  37  :  Is.  xix.  16).  2.  Every
avenue  opens  to  the  enemy.  "  The  gates  of  thy  land,"  the  fortified  passes  and  natural
barriers  on  the  hills,,  do  not  check  the  invader.  Passes  have  been  held  by  devoted
men  against  countless  multitudes  (Thermopylae),  but  the  whole  would  be  open  to
the  enemy,  and  frontier  garrisons  would  pass  away  as  if  consumed  by  fire.
3.  Strongholds  would  be  easily  taken.  Weak  are  fortifications  against  Divine  wrath ;
trees  which  tremble  in  the  breeze,  they  only  need  the  breath  of  God.  Wealth  and
position,  self-righteousness  and  human  wisdom,  however  great  and  relied  upon,  are
false  towers,  and  will  give  no  refuge  at  last  (Prov.  xviii.  10).  The  judgment  of
God  will  shatter  them  and  sweep  them  all  away.  4.  Everything  is  ripe  for
destruction.  "  Like  fig-trees  with  the  first  ripe  figs."  They  are  eagerly  sought
after,  ready  to  fall. by  the  slightest  effort,  and  "  will  drop  into  the  mouth  of  the  eater."
Without  cost  or  sacrifice  the  enemy  will  take  the  city.  The  first  assault  would  be
successful.  What  a  fearful  moral  condition,  to  ripen  so  easily  for  the  judgment  of
God.  "  The  wine  of  the  wrath  of  God,  which  is  poured  out  without  mixture  into
the  cup  of  his  indignation."

The  Last  Hope  Destroyed. — Verses  14 — 18.

The  city  is  laden  with  guilt,  but  relies  still  upon  its  fortifications  and  numerical
strength  of  population.  The  last  prop  is  cut  down.  There  is  no  hope  left.  Though
provisioned  within  and  strongly  defended  without,  Nineveh  must  fall,  and  great
will  be  the  fall.

I.  Inward  provisions  will  waste  away.  "  Draw  the  waters  for  the  siege,  go
into  clay,  and  tread  the  mortar,"  &c.  Watery  necessary  for  siege  and  the  support  of
life,  must  be  procured.  She  must  furnish  herself  with  all  manner  of  provisions  to
keep  her  from  surrender  or  starvation.  Clay  must  be  prepared,  and  the  kilns  made
ready  for  repairing  and  building  strongholds.  The  conquering  nation  were  to  toil
and  do  the  work  of  slaves.  But  all  would  be  in  vain.  The  fire  would  devour  her
bulwarks,  and  the  sword  her  population.  Swift  will  be  the  ruin  of  all  who  number
houses  and  fortify  walls,  "  but  have  not  looked  to  the  maker  thereof,  nor  have  not
respected  him  that  fashioned  them"  (Is.  xxii.  10,  11).  II.  Outward  defences
will  be  destroyed.  (i  There  shall  the  lire  devour  thee."  There,  in  the  very  centre
of  their  toil  and  vast  preparations,  where  the  greatest  security  was  relied  upon,  was
the  devouring  fire.  What  was  considered  strongest  was  destroyed  with  ease,  like
locusts  eating  up  the  tender  grass.  Singly,  and  as  a  whole,  the  judgments  of  God
will  find  men  out.  "  Evil  shall  hunt  the  violent  man  to  overthrow  him."  III.
Immense  numbers  will  fall  away.  "  Make  thyself  many  as  the  cankerworm."
Make  thyself  numerous  and  oppressive  as  locusts,  gather  from  all  quarters  men  to
help,  and  seek  to  become  mighty  in  multitudes,  yet  the  foe  will  consume  like
creatures  which  lick  up  all  before  them.  1.  Wealthy  merchants  will  not  defend.
Though  multiplied  above  the  stars  of  heaven,  and  trafficking  in  despotism,  they
cannot  lay  up  in  store  against  the  wrath  of  God.  Money  is  the  sinews  of  war,  but
will  not  shelter  from  the  consequences  of  sin.  Prosperity  suddenly  changes  iuto
adversity.  "  The  canker  worm  spoileth  and  fleeth  away."  2.  Warlike  soldiers  will
not  defend.  The  captains,  confederates,  and  commanders  of  the  army,  will  melt
away,  perish  like  dew  before  the  rising  sun.  They  are  but  grasshoppers,  mighty
as  they  are.  "  All  flesh  is  grass."  3.  Ruling  princes  will  not  defend.  "Thy  crowned
heads  are  as  the  locusts,"  &c.  They  subside  into  quietness  in  the  calamity  of  the
night,  and  continue  their  flight  in  the  morning.  They  are  "  torpid  in  the  cold  and  fly
in  the  heat."  Officers  of  state  and  subordinate  chiefs  will  be  completely  annihilated.
"  Their  place  is  not  known  where  they  are."  4.  Gh%eat  counsellors  will  not  defend.
The  shepherds  slumber  in  listlessness  and  excess ;  sink  into  torpor  and  stupidity.
The  nobles  and  greatest  politicians  were  benighted  and  bereft  of  wisdom.     u  At  thy

31


482


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NAHUM.


[chap.  in.


rebuke,  0  God  of  Jacob,  both  the  chariot  and  horse  are  cast  into  a  dead  sleep."
Valiant  men  would  dwell  in  the  dust,  and  be  buried  in  silence.  God  can  soon  strip
a  nation  of  its  great  ones,  and  lay  its  honour  in  the  dust.  Where  are  they  when
he  deals  with  them  1  "  Though  his  excellency  mount  up  to  the  heavens,  and  his
head  reach  unto  the  clouds,  yet  he  shall  perish  for  ever :  they  which  have  seen  him
shall  say,  Where  is  he  1  He  shall  fly  away,  as  a  dream,  and  shall  not  be  found :
neither  shall  his  place  any  more  behold  him."


HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.


Ver.  14.  Clay.  Mankind  still,  with
mire  and  clay,  build  themselves  Babels.
They  go  into  clay,  and  become  them-
selves earthly  like  the  mire  they  steep
themselves  in.  They  make  themselves
strong,  as  though  they  thought  that  their
houses  would  continue  for  ever.  God's
wrath  descends,  and  eats  up  like  a
cankerworm  [Pusey].

Yers.  14,  15.  1.  Man  by  his  en-
deavours cannot  avert  the  judgments  of
God.  Nineveh  prepared  and  provisioned
herself,  but  fell  after  all.  2.  Man  may
presume  upon  carnal  means  until  he  is
ruined.  Lawful  means  are  necessary,
but  we  must  not  rely  upon  them  for
security.  If  God  be  against  us  no  other
help  can  relieve.  "  Running  into  God
is  the  only  best  way  to  escape  him.  As
to  close  and  get  in  with  him  that  would
strike  you  doth  avoid  the  blow"
[Trapp].

Ver.  15.  The  prophet  gives  in  three
words  the  whole  history  of  Nineveh,  its
beginning  and  its  end.  He  had  before
foretold  its  destruction,  though  it  should
be  oppressive  as  the  locust :  he  had
spoken   of  its   commercial  wealth;   he


adds  to  this,  that  other  source  of  its
wealth,  its  despoiling  warfares  and  their
issue.  The  heathen  conqueror  rehearsed
his  victory,  "  I  came,  saw,  conquered."
The  prophet  goes  farther,  as  the  issue  of
all  human  conquest,  "  I  disappeared "
[Pusey],

Vers.  15,  16.  1.  The  mightiest  of
earth  are  as  locusts  before  him  (cf.  Is.
xl.  22).  2.  The  more  obstinately  they
resist,  the  more  irresistible  is  the  judg-
ment. 3.  The  larger  and  more  numerous
they  are,  the  more  utterly  will  they  be
destroyed  [Lange].

Ver.  17.  Cowardly  rulers.  1.  Shelter-
ing for  advantage.  In  the  cold  day,
camping  in  the  hedges,  but  fleeing  away
in  sunshine.  2.  Living  only  to  eat.
They  are  wasters  merely,  like  locusts
devouring  everything  before  them.
3.  Deserting  when  they  should  help,  an
emblem  this  of  the  world's  friendship.
Men  get  what  they  can  out  of  others,  and
then  bid  them  farewell  in  distress.
Treacherous  friendships  abound  every-
where.

Dust.  All  flesh  perishes,  but  the
word  of  God  endures  for  ever  [Lange],


HOMILETICS.

Slumbering  Shepherds  and  Scattered  Flocks. — Verse  18.

I.  Shepherds  unworthy  in  their  character.  They  are  destitute  of  counsel;  base
and  idle  ;  careful  only  for  their  own  profit  and  safety,  and  not  for  the  interests  of  the
flock.  Efficiency  depends  upon  character  in  the  ministry.  Good  shepherds  care
for  the  sheep,  feed  and  defend  them.  "The  hireling  fleeth  because  he  is  an  hireling,
and  careth  not  for  the  sheep."  II.  Shepherds  negligent  in  their  duty.  They
sleep  and  consult  their  own  ease,  instead  of  defending  their  city  and  country.
Indolence,  self-indulgence,  and  fickleness  doth  eat  like  a  canker  into  the  ministry  of
some.  Our  duties  demand  entire  devotedness  of  mind  and  heart.  Ministers
desecrate  their  high  calling,  when  they  enter  it  for  ease  or  commercial  advantage.
Diligence  is  required  in  study,  visitation,  and  preaching.  "  Woe  to  the  idol-
shepherd  (one  wishing  to  be  his  own  idol  and  the  idol  of  his  flock)  that  leaveth  the
flock  1  the  sword  shall  be  upon  his  arm,  and  upon  his  right  eve."     III.  Shepherds


chap,  in.]  ffOMlLETlC  COMMENTARY:   NAHUM.  483


cursed  in  their  efforts.     The  flock  is  exposed  and  scattered,  like  sheep  upon  the

mountains.     They  have  none  to  care  for  them,  consequently  get  lost.     They  are

lost  for  ever.     "  No  man  gathereth  them."     Terrible  ruin  !     Fearful  responsibility

somewhere  !

M I  am  shepherd  to  another  man,
And  do  not  sheer  the  fleece  that  I  graze  "  \_ShaJcspeare\

Irretrievable  Euin. — Verse  19.

Deliverance  is  utterly  hopeless.  The  prophet  declares  the  end  of  a  nation  which
ruled  with  a  rod  of  iron,  and  oppressed  with  unmitigated  cruelty.

I.  Nineveh  cruel  will  be  repaid  for  her  cruelty.  "  For  upon  whom  hath  not
thy  wickedness  passed  continually  1 "  Monuments  and  inscriptions  prove  the  pitiless
cruelty  of  Assyria.  In  sculptures  are  rows  of  impaled  prisoners,  whose  eyes  were
put  out,  and  whose  lips  were  fastened  by  rings.  God  had  long  borne  this  oppres-
sion, but  now  guilt  must  be  punished.  Judgment  must  fall,  and  there  is  not  the
least  hope  of  recovery.     Cruelty  and  oppression  will  be  rewarded  in  their  own  coin.

II.  Nineveh  ruined  will  be  a  joy  to  others.  "  All  that  hear  the  bruit  of  thee
shall  clap  their  hands  over  thee."  1.  This  joy  is  great  It  is  exultation,  clapping
of  hands.  2.  This  joy  is  universal.  All,  for  cruelty  was  extensive,  and  none  can
grieve  at  its  termination.     The  fall  of  the  oppressor  is  the  triumph  of  the  oppressed.

III.  Nineveh  destroyed  will  never  be  restored.  There  is  neither  comfort  in  the
affliction  nor  recovery  from  it.  The  wound  is  incurable.  "  There  is  no  healing  of
thy  bruise."  There  is  none  to  help.  She  had  made  no  frienda  in  her  policy,
displayed  no  signs  of  repentance  in  her  guilt.  Now  she  must  perish  without  pity
and  without  help.  The  ruin  is  total  and  irretrievable.  "  How  hath  the  oppressor
ceased  !  the  golden  city  ceased  !  The  Lord  hath  broken  the  staff  of  the  wicked,
and  the  sceptre  of  the  rulers,"  &c.  (Is.  xiv.  4 — 7).

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  VII.

Vers.    8 — 10.     No-Ammon.     Thebes  Ann.  xii.  13),  and  opposite  to  it,  on  the

was  renowned  for  its  numerous  gates  and  west  bank  of  the  Tigris,  has  arisen  the

vast  extent.    Its  remaining  ruins  describe  city    of    Mosul.     In    the    year    1776,

a  circuit  of  twenty-seven  miles  [Hender-  Niebuhr  visited  the  spot,  and  supposed

son].     There    is   no    definite   historical  that  what  were  the  heaps  of  ruins  of

account   of    its    capture   by   Assyrians.  Nineveh,  were  natural  undulations  in  the

But  from  brief  notices  in  Scripture,  we  soil   (See  Rawlinson,  i.  326).     In  more

have  hints  of  a  struggle  for  supremacy  modern  times  it  has  been  explored  by

between  Assyria  and  Egypt  (cf.  2  Kings  Botta,  the  French  Consul  (in  1842),  and

xvii.  4).    See  Smith's  Diet,  of  the  Bible,  more  recently  by  Layard  and  others,  who

article  Thebes ;  and  Keil  on  vers.  8 — 10.  have   brought   to   light    those  gigantic

Vers.   11 — 19.  Nahum's  prophecy  of  remains  of  palaces,   statues,  and  other

the  future  destruction  of  Nineveh  was  monuments  which  testify  to  the  ancient

fulfilled  by  the  Medes  and  Babylonians  grandeur  of  Nineveh,  and  those  annalistic

(cf.  ch.  ii.  1);  and  according  to  his  pre-  inscriptions  which  confirm  the  veracity

diction,  the  vast  power  of  Nineveh  com-  of  the  prophecies   of    Nahum   and   of

pletely  vanished,  and  its  glory  was  utterly  Isaiah,  and  of  the  historical  narrative  of

eclipsed,  so  that  in  the  year  b.o.   401,  Holy  Scripture :  and  bear  witness  to  the

Xenophon  passed   by  the  site  without  Divine  foreknowledge  of  the  Holy  Ghost

learning  its  name  (Xen.  Anab.  iii.  4 — 7).  who  speaks  in  it ;  to   whom  with  the

Four  hundred  years  afterwards  a  small  Father  and  the  Son,  Three  Persons  and

fortress  was  standing  on  the  site,  to  guard  one  God,  be  honour  and  glory  now  and

the  passsageof  the  river  Tigris  (Tacitus,  for  evermore.     Amen  [  Wordsworth\


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY


OS


HABAKKUE


INTRODUCTION.

The  Prophet.  We  have  nothing  certain,  but  much  apocryphal,  concerning
the  life  of  Habakkuk.  Delitzsch  thinks  that  he  was  connected  with  the  service  of  the
temple,  and  belonged  to  the  tribe  of  Levi.  In  his  writings  we  find  his  name  and
the  notice  that  he  was  a  prophet.

The  Date.  There  is  considerable  difference  of  opinion  on  this  point.  Some
say  in  the  first  years  of  Manasseh,  and  others  that  he  prophesied  in  the  reign  of
Jehoiachin,  about  608 — 604  b.  o.  Delitzsch  fixes  the  twelfth  or  thirteenth  year  of
Josiah's  reign,  b.  c.  630  or  629.  "  It  is  evident  from  the  constant  use  of  the  future
tense  in  speaking  of  the  Chaldean  desolations  (i.  5,  6,  12),  that  the  prophet  must
have  written  before  the  invasion  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  which  rendered  Jehoiakim
tributary  to  the  king  of  Babylon  (2  Kings  xxiv.  1),  b.  c.  606,  yet  it  is  equally
clear  from  ch.  ii.  3,  that  the  prophecy  did  not  long  precede  the  fulfilment ;  and  as
there  seem  to  be  no  references  to  the  reigns  of  Josiah  or  Jehoahaz  (b.  c.  609),  and
as  the  notices  of  the  corruption  of  the  period  agree  with  the  beginning  of  the  reign
of  Jehoiakim,  we  cannot  be  far  astray  in  assigning  b.  c.  608  as  the  appropriate  date
of  this  Book."

The  Contents.  "  The  prophecy  of  Habakkuk  is  clothed  in  a  dramatic  form,
man  questioning  and  complaining,  God  answering  with  threatening.  It  announces,
as  nearest  of  all,  the  impending  fearful  judgment  by  the  instrumentality  of  the
Chaldeans  on  the  theocracy  because  of  its  prevailing  moral  corruption  (ch.  i.) ;  and
next  to  this,  in  a  fivefold  woe,  the  downfall  of  this  arrogant,  violent,  God-forgetting
and  idolatrous  offender  (ch.  ii.)  ;  and  it  concludes  with  the  answer  of  the  believing
Church  to  this  twofold  Divine  revelation — that  is  to  say,  with  a  prophetico-lyric
echo  of  the  impressions  and  feelings  produced  in  the  prophet's  mind  "  [Keil].  "  The
prominent  vices  of  the  Chaldean  character,  as  delineated  in  i.  5 — 11,  are  made  the
subjects  of  separate  denunciations  :  their  insatiable  ambition  (ii.  6 — 8),  their  covet-
ousness  (ii.  9 — 11),  cruelty  (ii.  12 — 14),  drunkenness  (ii.  15 — 17),  and  idolatry  (ii.
18 — 20).     The  whole  concludes  with  a  magnificent  psalm  in  ch.  iii.,  '  Habakkuk's


INTRODUCTION.  485


Pindaric  Ode'  (Ewald),   a   composition   unrivalled   for  boldness  of  conception,
sublimity  of  thought,  and  majesty  of  diction."

The  Style.  In  point  of  general  style,  Habakkuk  is  universally  allowed  to  occupy
a  very  distinguished  place  among  the  Hebrew  prophets,  and  is  surpassed  by  none
of  them  in  dignity  and  sublimity.  Whatever  he  may  occasionally  have  in  common
with  previous  writers  he  works  up  in  his  own  peculiar  manner,  and  is  evidently  no
servile  copyist  or  imitator.  His  figures  are  well  chosen,  and  fully  carried  out.
His  expressions  are  bold  and  animated ;  his  descriptions  graphic  and  pointed.  The
parallelisms  are  for  the  most  part  regular  and  complete.  The  lyric  ode  contained
in  chapter  iii.  is  justly  esteemed  one  of  the  most  splendid  and  magnificent  within
the  whole  compass  of  Hebrew  poetry  [Henderson].  "  His  figures  are  great,"  says
one,  "  happily  chosen,  and  properly  drawn  out.  His  denunciations  are  terrible,
his  derision  bitter,  his  consolation  cheering.  Instances  occur  of  borrowed  ideas
(iii.  19  :  comp.  Ps.  xviii.  34;  ii.  6  :  comp.  Isa.  xiv.  7;  ii.  14 :  comp.  Isa.  xi.  9) ;
but  he  makes  them  his  own  in  drawing  them  out  in  his  peculiar  manner.  With
all  the  boldness  and  fervour  of  his  imagination,  his  language  is  pure  and  his  verse
melodious."  The  Book  completes  the  series  of  writings  threatening  judgments
upon  particular  countries  and  cities  opposed  to  God  and  his  people.  Obadiah
prophesied  against  Edom,  Jonah  and  Nahum  against  Nineveh,  and  Habakkuk
against  Babylon.  The  prophet  looks  back  to  the  victories  of  Egypt,  derives  hope
for  the  future,  and  closes  with  a  sublime  expression  of  faith  in  God.  "  Although
the  fig-tree  shall  not  blossom,"  the  believer  may  "rejoice  in  the  Lord."  The  darker
the  outward  circumstances,  the  greater  the  succour  from  God.


486  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  HABAKKUK.  [chap.  i.


CHAPTER  L

Critical  Notes.]  Burden]  (cf.  Nah.  i.  1).    2.  How]  A  complaint;  wickedness  continued  long,
and  God  did  not  interfere.     3.  Why]  dost  thou  behold  violence  without  checking  it  ?  some  ;  the
prophet  is  permitted  to  behold  iniquity,  and  this  is  the  reason  for  his  cry.     Since  God  the  Holy  One
will  not  look  upon  it  in  Israel  (Num.  xxiii.  21),  why  should  his  servant  ?     Raise]  A  litigious  spirit
prevailed;  none  were  quietly  permitted  to  enjoy  their  rights.     All  was  seized  by  force  or  perversion
of  law.     4.  Therefore]    Because  crimes  are  unpunished.     Slacked]  Lit.  chilled ;  neither  secures
obedience  nor  influence.     The  word  means  to  relax,  to  lose  strength  and  vital  energy.     Forth]  Lit.
for  a  permanence,  i.  e.  for  ever,  as  in  many  other  passages,  e.  g.  (Ps.  xiii.  2  :   Is.  xiii.  20)  [cf.  Keil\
Wrong]  Unrighteous  verdicts  given,  and  godless  men  encircle  the  good.     5 — 11].     God's  answer  to
the  complaint.     Behold]  prophet  and  people.     God  is  about  to  act,  and  they  will  be  terrified  at  its
results  (cf.  Acts  xiii.  41).     6.  Raise]  To  make  incursions  and  at  length  conquer  Judea  (cf.  2  Kings
xxiv.  and  xxv.).     Bitter]  i.  e.  cruel  (Jer.  1.  42  :  cf.  marg.  Jud.  xviii.  25 :  2  Sam.  xvii.  8).    Hasty]
Rash  and  impetuous.     7.  Their]  As  they  had  raised  themselves  to  this  dignity  so  they  would  permit
none  to  share  in  their  counsels  and  determinations,  but  would  act  in  the  most  arbitrary  manner
[Henderson].     8.   Leopards]  which  leap  seventeen  or  eighteen  feet  at  a  spring.     Evening  wolves]
fasting  all  day,  are  keen  in  hunger  and  commit  ravages  on  the  flocks  at  night    (Gen.  xlix.  27  :  Jer.
v.  6).     The  eagerness  of  cavalry  to  plunder  would  be  so  great  that  fatigue  in  the  march  would  be
nothing.     Like  the  flight  of  an  eagle]  would  they  rush   along  (cf.  Jer.  iv.  13  ;  xlviii.  40,  and
Lam.  iv.  19).   9.  Violence]  Not  to  administer  justice.     Faces]  Presence.    Sup]  Swallow  all  before
them.    They  pass  along  like  a  tempestuous  wind.    Sand]  Prisoners  gathered  like  dust  by  the  simoom
in  the  desert.    10.  Scoff]  Resistance  impossible  and  laughed  at.     Heap]  Heap  mounds  of  earth,
according  to  the  usual  method  of  taking  a  fortress.    11.  Then]  Elated  by  victory.     Change]  Lit.  the
wind  passes  by ;  the  storm  of  violence  like  the  wind  sweeps  over  the  land.    Some  refer  it  to  the  Chaldee
nation,  who  change  in  mind,  lose  reason  and  moderation,  and  get  proud.     Power]  is  their  god,  or
11  (saying  that)  his  power  is  his  own,  as  one  who  is  a  god  to  himself"  [Grotius],    Henderson  gives —
"  Then  it  gaineth  fresh  spirit  ;  it  passeth  onward  and  contracteth  guilt,  (saying,)  Is  this  his  power
through  his  God."     12.]  God  now  vindicated  in  opposition  to  the  boast  of  the  enemy.     God  eternal
and  holy.  Die]  The  Chaldeans  will  not  destroy,  only  correct  us.   Mighty]  Lit.  Rock  (Deut.  xxxii.  4).
Thou]  They  are  only  thy  instruments.      13.  Look]  inactively  upon  violence.      Deal]  Chaldeans
once  allies  of  the  Jews,  now  violent  oppressors  (Isa.  xxi.  2  :  xxiv.  16).  Right]  Bad  as  Jews  were,  they
were  much  better  than  their  enemies.     14.]  God  made  his  people  defenceless  as  the  fish,  left  them
in  disorder,  and  without  any  to  care  for  them.     15.]  The  enemy  easily  catches  them  and  exults  in
his  success.     16.  Sacrifice]  Idolize  their  military  skill  and  power  by  which  they  gained  success.
Ancient  Scythians  offered  yearly  sacrifices  to  a  sabre  set  up  as  a  symbol  of  Mars  [Keif],     17.  There-
fore] shall  he  empty]  Lit.  spread  his  net  continually  to  destroy  nations  ?     Empty  it  and  throw  it  in
again  for  a  fresh  draught  ?     It  is  implied  that  God  will  not  permit  such  conduct  to  go  un-
punished, but  the  answer  is  reserved  for  the  sequel.

HOMILETICS.
The  Importunate  Prayer. — Verse  2.

The  question  asked  is  this  :  How  long  will  God  suffer  his  people  to  pray  and  still
neglect  to  hear  1

I.  Until  they  see  the  plague  of  their  own  hearts.  We  may  be  astonished  at
the  sins  of  others,  and  wonder  at  God's  forbearance  with  them.  But  we  forget  that
seeds  of  iniquity  dwell  in  our  own  hearts  and  ripen  in  our  own  lives.  We  must
feel  our  sinfulness  and  humble  ourselves  in  the  dust.  "  Who  can  say,  I  have  made
my  heart  clean,  I  am  pure  from  my  sin  1 "  II.  Until  they  remove  the  hindrances
which  prevent  the  revival  of  his  work.  Many  stumbling-blocks  are  in  the  way.
God  can  do  nothing,  and  will  not  hear  until  they  are  removed.  Ignorance,  avarice,
and  slothfulness — all  sins  must  be  forsaken.  We  must  be  ready  for  every  duty,
be  wathchful  lest  by  apathy,  selfishness,  and  unbelief,  we  hinder  the  work  of  God.
III.  Until  they  are  willing  to  give  God  the  glory.  We  may  pray  for  selfish
ends,  and  withhold  what  is  due  to  God.  If  in  pride  and  success  we  claim  the
blessing,  this  will  silence  devotion.     In  prayer  we  often  devour  that  which  is  holy,


cha*.  I.]  HOMILJSTIC  COMMENTARY:  HABAKKUK.  487


and  consecrate  to  our  own  use  that  which  should  be  given  to  God  (Pro v.  xx.  25).
We  desire  to  pamper  our  lusts  and  feed  our  own  vanity.  Wrong  in  spirit  and
purpose,  we  cry,  "  0  Lord,  how  loDg  ?  "  Learn,  1.  Why  so  many  prayers  fail.  2.  To
search  your  own  hearts  and  purify  yourselves  before  God.  We  may  have  earnest-
ness and  grief  and  yet  fail.  "  Though  you  stretch  out  your  hands,  I  will  hide
mine  eyes  from  you ;  and  though  you  make  many  prayers,  I  will  not  hear  you  *
[Adapted].

The  Lamentable  Sight. — Verses  2 — 4.

The  prophet  is  permitted  to  see  the  great  social  and  national  evils  of  the  Jews.
Unchecked  and  encouraged  they  grow  in  magnitude  and  number.  He  laments,  in
the  name  of  all  the  godly  among  them,  that  their  labours  seem  in  vain,  and  he  is
forced  to  cry  bitterly  to  God  for  relief.

I.  The  rights  of  property  were  disregarded.  "  For  spoiling  and  violence  are
before  me."  They  robbed  one  another,  and  took  goods  and  lands  from  others.
God  himself  divided  the  land,  established  the  rights  of  property,  by  sacred  law
fixed  bounds  to  every  citizen,  and  taught  him  to  be  content  with  his  lot.  When
violence  of  any  kind  breaks  forth  in  a  land  its  prosperity  will  soon  fade  away.
1.  This  disregard  was  openly  declared.  "  Before  me."  The  sins  were  deeply
rooted,  and  those  who  committed  them  cared  not  who  saw  them.  Modest  at  first,
and  afraid  of  discovery,  sinners  get  bold  in  their  wickedness,  and  openly  and
impudently  avow  them.  2.  God  seemed  to  connive  at  this  open  disregard.  "  How
long  shall  I  cry  ?  "  When  God  appears  to  overlook  sin  and  to  countenance  it  by
permitting  sinners  to  prosper,  it  grieves  the  heart  and  shakes  the  faith  of  good  men.
They  cry  to  God  for  a  sense  of  justice  and  right  to  prevail.  "  It  is  time  for  thee,
Lord,  to  work."  II.  The  spirit  of  litigation  prevailed.  "  There  are  that  raise
up  strife  and  contention."  They  were  broken  up  into  parties  and  factions  that  bit
and  devoured  one  another  continually.  Hatred  stirs  up  strifes  of  all  kinds,
domestic,  political,  and  religious.  It  sets  man  against  his  fellow-men  and  against  his
God.  It  disturbs  society,  promotes  crime,  and  rouses  the  moral  forces  of  the  universe.

"A  Trinity  there  seems  of  principles,
Which  represent  and  rule  created  life, —
The  love  of  self,  our  fellows,  and  our  God  "  [Festus],

III.  The  law  had  lost  its  authority.  "Therefore  the  law  is  slacked,"  &c.
The  law  of  peace  and  charity  and  the  law  of  Moses  were  set  at  nought.  That  which
was  the  soul,  the  heart  of  political  and  religious  life,  ceased  to  act,  like  the  pulse
ceasing  to  beat.  The  state  of  a  country  may  be  judged  from  the  authority  and
influence  of  its  moral  laws.  1.  The  law  was  first  disregarded.  Contempt  for  the
word  and  authority  of  God  opens  the  door  for  all  wickedness.  Neither  threatening
nor  promise  will  then  check  in  evil  courses.  2.  Then  the  law  was  perverted.
"Judgment  (justice)  doth  never  go  forth."  (a)  Wrong  decisions  were  given.
"  Therefore  wrong  judgment  proceedeth."  The  law  was  weak,  the  magistrates  were
corrupted,  and  there  was  no  appeal  against  injustice,  (b)  The  ties  of  humanity
were  broken.  "  The  wicked  doth  compass  about  the  righteous."  The  godly  and
innocent  were  surrounded  and  overcome  by  men  turned  into  brutes.  There  was
no  security  for  persons  or  property.  "  Wickedness,"  says  Bp.  Taylor,  "  corrupts  a
man's  reasonings,  gives  him  false  principles,  and  evil  measuring  of  things."  Well,
therefore,  did  the  prophet  lament  and  cry  to  God.  "  My  soul  is  also  sore  vexed  ;
but  thou,  0  Lord,  how  long  % "

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  1.     1.  The  minister  of  God  in  by  it,  vision.     3.  The  matter  of  it,  the

this     prophecy.       (1)   By     his     name,  burden.      In  which  two  questions  are

Habakkuk.      (2)  By  his  function,  the  moved — (1)  Why  a  burden ;   and  (2),

prophet.     2.  The  manner  how  he  came  whose  burden  it  is  :  a  burden  in  respect


488


HOMTLETTC  COMMENTARY :  HABAKKUK.


[chap,  i


of  the  sin  punished — of  the  punishment
threatened — of  the  word  of  God  threaten-
ing [Marbury].

Ver.  2.     1.  What  the  prophet  did.

(1)  He  cried — with  intense  feeling,  with
great     boldness,    with     long    patience.

(2)  He  cried  to  God  in  perplexity  and
grief,  to  stir  him  in  apparent  forgetful-
ness,  and  remind  him  of  promised  good-
ness. 2.  The  reason  why  he  did  it.
For  violence,  strife,  and  war  in  domestic
circles,  injustice  and  oppression  in
courts  of  law,  prevailing  without  check
and  without  shame.  3.  The  success  he
had  in  doing  it.  (1)  Thou  wilt  not  hear.
(2)  Thou  wilt  not  save.  As  not  hearing
is  to  be  imputed  to  his  mercy  and
patience,  so  his  not  saving  is  to  be
imputed  either  to  his  wisdom,  putting
his  children  to  the  trial  of  their  faith  by
afflictions,  or  to  his  justice,  making  one
of  them,  who  have  corrupted  their  ways,
a  rod  to  scourge  the  other,  neither  of
them  being  as  yet  worth  the  saving  till
he  had  humbled  them  [Adapted  from
Marbury].


Yers.  2 — 4.  1.  Prevalent  evils  grieve
the  minds  of  God's  servants.  Like
David  and  Jeremiah,  they  weep  at  what
they  see.  It  makes  them  sigh.  It  is  a
burden  to  them.  2.  In  their  grief  they
fly  to  God  for  remedy.  They  have  faith
in  his  power,  providence,  and  purpose.
They  earnestly  pray  for  justice  and  truth
to  prevail,  for  sin  and  wickedness  to  end.
3.  But  in  this  course  they  do  not  always
succeed.  God  is  not  unmindful  of  his
promise  nor  regardless  of  sin,  but  his
people  are  not  always  delivered,  and
retribution  not  generally  sent  in  the  time
they  fix.  God  is  holy  and  just :  we  are
hasty  and  sinful.  "  Eighteous  art  thou,
0  Lord,  when  I  plead  with  thee  :  yet  let
me  talk  with  thee  of  thy  judgments.
Wherefore  doth  the  way  of  the  wicked
prosper  1  Wherefore  are  all  they  happy
that  deal  very  treacherously  1 "

"  Thy  God  hath  said  'tis  good  for  thee
To  walk  by  faith  and  not  by  sight.

Take  it  on  trust  a  little  while,

Soon  shalt  thou  read  the  mystery  right,

In  the  bright  sunshine  of  his  smile  "  \KebU\t


HOMILETICS.

The  Wonderful  Work. —  Verse  5.

We  have  in  these  words  an  answer  to  the  prophet's  question.  God  is  not  an
unconcerned  spectator.  He  will  vindicate  his  glory,  and  unexpected  vengeance
will  fall  upon  the  transgressors.

I.  The  Work  is  Divine.  "  I  will  work  a  work."  God  hears  the  complaints  of
his  servants  and  remembers  the  taunt  of  the  wicked,  who  cry,  "  Where  is  now  their
God  1  "  God  is  the  agent,  though  the  heathen  execute  his  judgments.  He  intends
and  he  carries  out ;  "  work  a  work  "  in  solemnity  and  power.  "  This  is  the  Lord's
doing,  and  it  is  marvellous  in  our  eyes."  II.  The  Work  is  nigh  at  hand.  "  In
your  days."  That  generation  would  not  pass  before  its  accomplishment.  Already
the  clouds  blacken  :  the  judgments  may  be  suspended,  but  will  break  forth  in
startling  thunder.  This  evil  day  cannot  be  put  off.  "  It  is  nigh  at  hand,  and  not
afar  off."  III.  The  Work  is  wonderful.  "  Wonder  marvellously."  In  its  nature
it  was  not  common,  and  in  its  effects  it  would  be  alarming.  It  would  be  strange
and  unparalleled  among  other  nations  and  in  their  own  history;  spectators  "  among
the  heathen"  would  be  surprised.  "  Even  all  nations  shall  say,  Wherefore  hath
the  Lord  done  thus  unto  this  land1?  what  meaneth  the  heat  of  this  great  anger  V
(Deut.  xxix.  24 ;  xxviii.  37).  IV.  The  Work  is  incredible.  "  You  will  not  believe,
though  it  be  told  you."  The  Jews  did  not  credit  the  prediction  of  such  alarming
events;  accustomed  to  confide  in  their  cities  (Is.  xxxi.  1  :  Jer.  vii.  4),  and  in
Egyptian  strength,  they  believed  they  were  too  powerful  to  be  overcome.  Men
now  will  not  believe  in  the  judgments  of  God,  though  they  loom  in  the  threatenings.
They  are  stupefied  by  sin,  despise  the  Word  of  God,  and  go  on  until  the  curse  falls
upon  them.  Fearful  is  the  punishment  of  those  who  presume  upon  security  in
evil.     "  Behold,  ye  despisers,  and  wonder  and  perish ;  for  P  work  a  work  in  your


chap.  I.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HABAKKUK.  489


days,  a  work  which  ye  shall  in  no  wise  believe,  though  a  man  declare  it  unto  you.*
V.  The  Work  demands  attention.  "  Behold  ye."  The  call  is  solemn  and  Divine.
Behold,  since  language,  the  ministry  of  the  prophet,  and  the  complaints  of  the
oppressed,  will  not  do.  God  will  try  something  else  which  shall  be  heard.  "  I
will  work"  be  patient  and  silent  no  longer.  Behold,  the  heathen  spectators  of  their
sins  will  be  instruments  of  their  sorrows.  This  beholding  must  be  attentive  ;  regard,
not  mere  gazing.  The  matter  demands  serious  and  earnest  consideration.  The
overthrow  of  the  Jews  is  a  warning  to  all,  a  proof  that  sin  will  be  fearfully  punished
if  persisted  in  and  the  way  of  escape  rejected.  "  Is  not  destruction  to  the  wicked  1
and  a  strange  punishment  to  workers  of  iniquity1?"

The  Wonderful  Work  Accomplished. —  Verses  5 — 10.

We  have  now  a  particular  description  of  the  calamities  to  be  inflicted.  The
Chaldeans,  in  their  preparations  and  dispositions,  in  their  victories  and  devastations,
are  exactly  set  forth,  to  confirm  the  truth  and  display  the  justice  of  God.  The
Jews  are  repaid  in  their  own  coin,  and  the  dreadful  judgments  are  inflicted.

I.  In  raising  up  a  mighty  nation.     "  For  lo,  I  raise  up  the  Chaldeans,"  &c.
God  never  lacks  instruments  to  prosecute  his  design.     He  can  fetch  them  from  afar
and  dispose  them  to  his  will,  though  already  elated  with  victory  and  power.     1.  A
nation  naturally  fierce.      "  That  bitter  and  hasty  nation."      They  are  cruel  and
impetuous,  unmerciful,  and  resolute  in  their  course.     They  spare  no  pains  and  show
no  pity.    Hopeless  is  the  condition  of  those  who  fall  into  their  hands.    "  They  hold
the  bow  and  the  lance  "  to  brandish  before  the  foe ;  "  they  are  cruel  and  will  not
show  mercy."     2.  A  nation  terribly  strong.     "They  are  terrible  and  dreadful."
They  are  great  in  numbers,  armed  with  Divine  vengeance,  and  emboldened  by  former
conquests.     By  the  force  of  terror  and  the  dread  of  death  they  gain  submission.
3.  A  nation  blindly  covetous.     They  will  not  only  overcome,  but  rob  the  land  and
"  possess  the  dwellings  that  are  not  theirs."     It  is  not  merely  to  overturn  others,
they  also  take  their  possessions.     But  the  dwellings  "  are  not  theirs"  by  right,  only
held  while  God  pleases,  and  then  lost  again.    The  rights  of  society  and  the  interests
of  others  are  nothing  to  the  covetous.     They  fatten  on  the  miseries  of  men,  and
consider  not  that  poverty  will  come  upon  themselves  (Prov.  xviii.  20 — 22).     4.  A
nation  proudly  ambitious.    They  roam  through  the  land,  violently  subdue  everything
before  them,  and  deport  themselves  in  pride  and  insolence.     They  "  pass  over  "  in
quest  of  glory  to  fresh  booty  and  new  wars.     The  mightiest  empires  have  been
crushed  by  the  weight  of  their  own  greatness.     In  their  own  ambitious  ends  they
have  gone  beyond  bounds,  and  brought  their  own  ruin.     When  our  energies  are
directed   to  personal  aggrandisement  and   despotic  rule  we   may  expect  a  fall.
"  Pride,"  says  Gurnail,  "  takes  for  its  motto  great  /  and  little  you."     "  Think  not
thy  own  shadow  longer  than  that  of  others,"  says  Sir  Thomas  Browne,  "  nor  delight
to  take  the  altitude  of  thyself."     Ambition  and  pride  are  often  the  precursors  of
ruin.     "  Pride  goeth  before  destruction,  and  a  haughty  spirit  before  a  fall."    II.  In
giving  them  an  easy  victory.     In  the  figures  mentioned,  we  notice — 1.  That  the
conquest  is  irresistible.     "  Their  horses  are  swifter  than  the  leopards"  the  lightest,
swiftest,  and  most  bloodthirsty  of  beasts  of  prey.     "  They  shall  fly  as  the  eagle"
hastening  to  devour  what  it  has  secured.     "  Our  persecutors  are  swifter  than  eagles
of  the  heavens "  (Lam.  iv.  19  :  Ezek.  xvii.  3).     2.  That  the  conquest  is  violent.
"  They  shall  come  all  for  violence."     The  enemy  would  sweep  over  them  like  the
east  wind,  blasting  and  bearing  down  everything  before  it.     Gathering  the  people
*  as  the  sand,"  and  burying  them  like  caravans  in  heaps  of  destruction.     3.   That
the  conquest  is  easy.     No  opposition  will  hinder  them  from  performing  their  work.
(a)  The  power  of  kings  was  laughed  at.    Princes  and  confederates  would  be  exposed
to  greatest  contempt  and  most  ignominious  treatment.    Kings  will  be  put  down  and
set  up  in  pleasure  and  in  sport.    "  They  shall  scoff  at  the  kings."    (b)  The  strength


490  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HABAKKUK.  [chap,  l


of  fortifications  was  derided.  Forts  and  strongholds  in  which  men  trust  will  prove
matters  of  derision  to  the  agents  of  God's  vengeance.  "  They  shall  deride  every
stronghold."  The  mightiest  fort  will  be  captured  and  levelled  in  the  dust.  "  For
they  shall  heap  dust  and  take  it."  4.  That  the  conquest  is  complete.  "Which
shall  march  through  the  breadth  of  the  land."  Far  and  wide  they  spread  terror
and  death.  Unhindered  and  irresistible  they  swept  over  the  earth.  Kings  fled  in
fear,  palaces  were  plundered  with  violence,  and  lands  were  taken  by  force.  They
did  as  they  liked.  Their  own  lust  was  their  law.  No  power  of  God  or  man  seemed
to  limit  them  in  the  infliction  of  judgment  upon  the  Jews,  or  in  getting  honour  for
themselves.  God  sometimes  puts  the  stubborn  and  rebellious  into  the  hands  of
those  who  measure  justice  by  their  own  judgment  and  honour  by  their  own  dignity.
u  Their  judgment  and  their  dignity  shall  come  of  themselves  " —

"The  good  old  rule
Sufficeth  them,  the  simple  plan,
That  they  should  take  who  have  the  power,

And  they  should  keep  who  can  "  [  Wordsworth],

Evening  Wolves. —  Verse  8.

Wolves  are  very  fierce  when  urged  to  rabidness  by  a  whole  day's  hunger.     They
prowl  forth  in  that  darkness  in  which  all  the  beasts  of  the  forests  creep  forth  (Ps.
civ.  20).      Such  is  the  disposition  of  some  men  towards  their  fellow-creatures
These  evening  wolves  typify —

I.  False  teachers.  False  prophets  are  compared  to  "ravening  wolves,"
rapacious,  mischievous,  and  injurious  to  the  flock  of  God  (Matt.  vii.  15).  We  are
warned  against  heretics,  and  false  guides,  such  as  Hymenseus,  Alexander,  and
Philetus.  "After  my  departing  shall  grievous  wolves  enter  in  among  you,  not
sparing  the  flock"  (Acts  xx.  29).  II.  Cruel  persecutors.  With  relentless  spite
some  men  pursue  others.  Christians  are  wilfully  misrepresented  in  character  and
conduct;  reviled,  insulted,  and  spitefully  used  (Matt.  v.  11).  Evil  men,  as  "lions
seeking  whom  they  may  devour,"  pursue  them  in  envy.  With  keen  scent  and
eager  feet  they  are  swift  to  shed  innocent  blood.  "  The  assemblies  of  violent  men
have  sought  after  my  soul."  III.  Anxious  cares.  The  cares  of  this  world
devour  the  good  in  the  heart.  Domestic  life  and  business  impair  the  growth  of
Christian  character.  Excessive  care  destroys  peace,  induces  loss  of  temper,  hinders
prayer,  and  hurries  into  dangerous  conduct.  "  Be  careful  for  nothing."  IV.
Distracting  doubts.  Doubts  and  fears  distress  the  mind,  hide  the  light  of  God's
countenance,  and  pursue  us  like  evening  wolves.

"  To  doubt
Is  worse  than  to  have  lost :  and  to  despair,
Is  but  to  antedate  those  miseries
That  must  fall  on  us  "  [Massinger],

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  6.  He  is  said  to  raise  up  those  Yer.  8.      1.   God's  hand  is  seen  in

whom  he  allows  to  be  stirred  up  against  furnishing   the  enemies   of  his   people

bis  people,  since  the  events  which  his  with    all    necessary    qualifications    for

providence  permits  favours  their  designs,  carrying  on  their  enterprise.     Boldness,

and  it  rests  with  him  to  withhold  them,  swiftness,  number,  &c.      2.  The  fierce-

They  lift  themselves  up  for  some  end  of  ness  of  the  Divine  anger  may  be  read

covetousness  or  pride.     But  there  is  a  in  the  celerity  and  activity  with  which

higher   order  of   things  in  which   God  they  execute   their   designs.      3.  It   is

orders   their  actions   to  fulfil  by  their  vain  for  impenitent  sinners  to  lean  upon

iniquities  his  righteousness  [Pusey].  any  apparent  ground  of  security  or  con-


CHAP.  I.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HJBJKKUK.


491


fidence  when  God  arises  to  plead  with
them.  Distance  of  places,  extent  of
country,  and  strength  of  buildings  will
not  avail  [cf.  Hutchesori].

Ver.  9.  Violence.  Learn,  1.  That
God  often  repays  violence  with  violence.
2.  Yet  those  employed  by  God  to  punish
others  may  sin  themselves  by  lust  and
self-aggrandizement.

East  Wind.  "The  East  Wind,  it
seemeth,  was  the  most  unwholesome
breath  of  heaven  upon  that  land  ;  within
short  time  withered  and  destroyed  the
fruits  of  the  earth,  and  the  hopes  of  the
spring.  The  Lord  saith  that  the  faces
of  the  Chaldeans,  the  very  sight  of  them,
shall  be  as  baneful  and  as  irresistible  as
the  East  Wind."  The  cruelties  of  men,
the  calamities  which  attend  wars  and
conquests,  ought  to  invite  sinners  not  to
provoke  God  to  give  them  up  to  such
punishment — to  terrify  such  as  fear  not
the  threatenings  of  the  Word,  and  to
point  out  to  those  suffering  such  a  lot,
the  bitterness  of  departing  from  God
[Hutcheson\.

Vers.  2 — 11.  How  utterly  incompre-
hensible are  the  Judgments  of  God  J
1.    Incomprehensible    in    their    delay,


to  the  view  of  those  who  have  no
patience,  and  think  that  God  ought  to
act  as  speedily  as  their  anger  prompts
them  (vers.  2,  3).  2.  Incomprehensible
in  their  threatening,  to  those  upon  whom
they  will  fall,  and  who  nevertheless
continue  to  sin  in  security  (ver.  4).  3.
Incomprehensible  to  every  human  mind
in  their  realization.  For — (a)  They  are
greater  than  any  human  thought  would
anticipate  (vers.  5, 6).  (b)  They  take  place
in  ways  and  by  means  of  which  no  man
would  dream  (ver.  6).  (c)  They  are
often  brought  about  by  men  and  events
that,  at  first  sight,  have  nothing  in  com-
mon with  God.  4.  Incomprehensible
in  their  grandeur  and  universality,  to
those  by  whom  they  are  accomplished
(ver.  11)  [Lange].

God's  deeds  are  always  Niphlaoth,
and  have  on  them  something  to  exci  e
wonder  and  astonishment.  Incredib'  •
as  they  seem,  we  know  that  they  will
be  performed,  from  past  history,  present
signs,  and  the  light  of  God's  Word.
How  they  are  to  happen  is  a  mystery.
It  is  ours  to  fear,  believe,  and  obey.
Regard  the  threatening,  and  escape  the
danger.


HOMILETICS.
Success  Abused. — Verses  11  and  16.

Elated  with  success,  the  Chaldeans  pass  over  all  bounds  and  restraints.  In  pride
and  arrogance  they  attribute  all  glory  to  themselves  or  their  gods,  deify  their
own  power,  and  incur  the  Divine  displeasure.  They  were  intoxicated  with  their
success  and  abused  it.     Success  is  abused —

I.  When  it  is  over-valued.  Men  cry,  "  Nothing  succeeds  like  success,"  and
aim  at  it,  for  its  own  sake.  In  anticipation  and  possession  it  is  over-estimated.
It  creates  pride,  and  sometimes  overturns  reason.  "The  human  heart,"  says
Volney,  "  is  often  the  victim  of  the  sensations  of  the  moment ;  success  intoxicates
it  to  presumption,  and  disappointment  dejects  and  terrifies  it."  II.  When  it  is
thought  to  cover  sins.  If  sinful  acts  are  crowned  with  success,  they  are  con-
sidered proofs  of  prowess,  matters  of  boasting  and  exultation.  The  end  is  thought
to  justify  the  means.  The  Chaldeans  rejoiced  in  conquests  gained  by  the  miseries
of  the  Jews,  grew  haughty  and  insolent,  and  prepared  themselves  for  ruin  by
worshipping  their  own  power.  Speed  in  the  wrong  direction  is  construed  into
providence ;  favour  to  sinful  projects  and  success  in  evil  courses  are  taken  as  signs
of  God's  approval.  Thus,  because  God  suffers  mischief  to  prosper,  men  forget  their
guilt  and  rejoice  in  iniquity.  But  they  prosper  only  to  die,  and  like  beasts  fatten
to  fit  them  for  slaughter.  Fat  may  be  their  portion  and  plenteous  their  meat
(ver.  16),  but  "  h?  slew  the  fattest  of  them  "  (Ps.  lxxxviii.  31).  III.  When  it  is
ascribed  to  wrong  sources.  Men  render  Divine  honours  to  themselves  and  their
idols  rather  than  to  God,  who  alone  gives  skill  and  success.     1.  They  attribute


492  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HABAEKUK.  [chap.  L


success  to  idols.  "Imputing  this  his  power  unto  his  god."  The  Chaldeans
ascribed  success  to  Bel  and  Nebo,  and  blasphemously  argued  that  because  they
had  conquered  his  people,  Jehovah  was  inferior  to  their  gods.  Ancient  Romans
deified  their  standards  and  arms.  Savage  nations  have  made  idols  of  their
implements  and  arrows.  There  is  no  truth  in  that  religion  which  dishonours  the
true  God,  and  no  stability  in  that  prosperity  which  is  attributed  to  idols.  "  He
shall  exalt  himself,  and  magnify  himself  above  every  god,  and  shall  speak  marvel-
lous things  against  the  God  of  gods,  and  shall  prosper  till  the  indignation  be
accomplished"  (Dan.  xi.  36).  2.  They  attribute  success  to  their  own  power.
"  They  sacrifice  unto  their  net,  and  burn  incense  unto  their  drag."  When  men
deny  God,  they  deify  themselves,  and  adore  their  own  skill.  Ajax  called  his
sword  his  god,  and  thanked  it  for  all  its  brave  achievements.  Belshazzar  said,
"I  will  be  like  the  Most  High"  (Isa.  xiv.  14) ;  the  Prince  of  Tyre  said,  "lama
god"  (Ezek.  xxviii.  22);  and  Antichrist  "exalts  himself  above  all  that  is  called
God  "  (2  Thess.  ii.  4).  Nebuchadnezzar  was  proud  of  the  might  of  his  power,  and
the  Assyrian  declared,  "  By  the  strength  of  my  hand  I  did  it ;  and  by  my  wisdom,
for  I  am  prudent"  (Isa.  x.  13 — 15).  Sad  are  those  events  in  life  which  minister
pride,  and  give  occasion  to  men  to  deprive  God  of  honour  and  exalt  themselves.
"  He  who  boasts  of  a  thing,"  says  Luther,  u  and  is  glad  and  joyous  on  account  of
it,  but  does  not  thank  the  true  God,  makes  himself  into  an  idol,  gives  himself  the
glory,  and  does  not  rejoice  in  God,  but  in  his  own  strength  and  work."

**  To  our  own  nets  ne'er  bow  we  down,
Lest  on  the  eternal  shore,
The  angels,  while  our  draughts  they  own
Reject  us  evermore  "  [Keble].

God's  Character  a  Ground  op  Consolation  in  Distress. —  Verse  13.

The  prophet  turns  again  to  God  in  sublime  contrast  to  the  deifying  of  human
power — vindicates  the  character  of  Jehovah  as  opposed  to  idols,  and  declares  entire
confidence  in  him  as  the  true  ground  of  consolation  in  distress — "  Art  thou  not
from  everlasting?"  &c.

I.  God  is  Eternal.  Go  back  as  far  as  possible  in  thought,  God  was  before
thought.  In  the  beginning  God.  "  From  everlasting  to  everlasting  thou  art  God."
Hence,  1.  God  is  unchangeable  in  his  purpose.  He  is  a  rock  firm  and  immovable.
From  the  eternity  of  his  nature  the  prophet  infers  the  eternity  of  his  purpose.
"  My  God."  He  has  delivered  in  the  past,  and  will  deliver  in  the  present  and  in
the  future  (2  Cor.  i.  10).  Whatever  changes  he  never  changes.  His  people  lay
hold  of  his  covenant,  claim  a  special  interest  and  express  a  strong  hope  in  it.
"Therefore  we  shall  not  die."  1.  Temporally  we  shall  not  die.  God  will  reseive
a  remnant  of  the  Jews  to  return  from  captivity  to  the  land  of  their  fathers,  to
build  his  temple  and  enlarge  his  Church.  2.  Spiritually  we  shall  not  die.  He
will  keep  his  promise,  and  we  shall  not  lose  an  interest  in  a  better  life.  3.
Eternally  we  shall  not  die.  God  having  loved  once  will  love  to  the  end — will
never  cast  off  his  people.  In  eternal  wisdom  God  hath  given  eternal  redemption,
and  an  eternal  inheritance.  2.  God  is  unchangeable  in  his  providence.  The
prophet  might  be  distressed  at  the  description  of  the  enemy — the  condition  of  his
people  might  perplex  and  seem  to  contradict  the  covenant,  but  present  judgment
was  only  temporary  chastisement.  Their  enemies  would  not  destroy,  but  only
correct  them.  The  rod  was  in  the  hands  of  God.  Because  God  lived,  they  would
live  (John  xiv.  19).  Men  might  be  wicked,  cruel,  and  perverse,  but  he  was
always  the  same.  Clouds  may  hide  the  light,  but  do  not  destroy  the  sun.  "  Why
art  thou  cast  down,  0  my  soul  1 "  &c.


chap.   i.l  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EABAKKUK.  493


"  Now  thou  array'st  thine  awful  face
In  angry  frowns,  without  a  smile ;
We,  through  the  cloud,  believe  thy  grace,
Secure  of  thy  compassion  still."

II.  God  is  holy.  "Mine  Holy  One."  The  prophet  implores  God  as  an
individual  and  in  the  name  of  Israel.  God  in  a  special  manner  separated  them
from  other  nations,  avowed  and  adopted  them  as  his  own.  He  therefore  takes
special  interest  in  them,  and  will  exercise  special  mercy  towards  them  (Hos.  xi.  9).
The  chastisement  of  the  enemy  confirmed  his  holiness  and  purified  his  people.
The  victorious  heathen  were  unholy,  imputed  power  to  idols,  but  he  was  the  Holy
One  of  Israel  whom  they  reproached  (Isa.  xxxvii.  23).  God's  holiness  then  is —
1.  A  guarantee  of  punishment  to  sin.  2.  Of  deliverance  to  his  people  :  and,  3.
Of  justice  and  right  to  all  men.  Among  his  people,  or  in  the  wicked,  God  will  not
leave  sin  unpunished.  "Who  is  like  unto  thee,  0  Lord,  among  the  gods]  Who
is  like  unto  thee,  glorious  in  holiness,  fearful  in  praises,  doing  wonders  1 "

God  does  not  approve  of  Sin. — Verse  13.

Men  are  tempted  to  think  it  is  vain  to  serve  God,  when  he  permits  the  wicked
to  triumph  over  them.  True  views  of  God  will  check  such  thoughts.  He  cannot
look  upon  sin  with  approbation.  His  eyes  are  too  pure  to  behold  evil  and  connive
at  it.     We  infer  from  this  that  God  is  holy,  and  will  certainly  punish  sin.

I.  The  testimony  of  Scripture  proves  this.  From  beginning  to  end  it  sets
forth  the  holiness  of  God.  In  rite  and  ceremony,  in  precept  and  doctrine,  its
constant  voice  is  heard,  "Holy,  holy,  holy  is  the  Lord  God  Almighty."  II.  The
testimony  of  Providence  proves  this.  In  the  expulsion  of  angels  from  heaven
and  our  first  parents  from  Eden — in  floods  and  fire — in  the  history  of  Israel,  and
in  the  punishment  of  the  wicked.  We  see  justice  written  in  actions,  and  God's
abhorrence  of  sin  in  the  judgments  he  has  inflicted.  Evil  may  array  itself  in  wit
and  grandeur,  or  in  villany  and  success,  but  it  is  always  the  abominable  thing
which  the  Lord  hates.  Its  perpetrators  are  hated,  and  will  be  punished  by  him.
"  Eor  thou  art  not  a  God  that  hath  pleasure  in  wickedness  :  neither  shall  evil
dwell  with  thee.  The  foolish  shall  not  stand  in  thy  sight ;  thou  hatest  all  workers
of  iniquity."

The  Enigmas  of  Life. — Verses  13 — 17.

Troubled  thoughts  are  not  easily  driven  away.  Circumstances  arise  in  which
perplexities  increase — in  which  God's  conduct  seems  at  variance  with  his  Word,
and  in  which  God's  people  find  it  difficult  or  impossible  to  solve  the  enigmas  of
life.  The  prophet  seemed  astonished,  and  expostulated  with  G  )d  at  his  proceed-
ings against  the  Jews  by  the  Chaldeans.  u  Wherefore  lookest  thou  upon  them
that  deal  treacherously,"  &c.

I.  Why  does  God  permit  his  people  whom  he  loves  to  be  persecuted?  Why
do  the  enemies  who  blaspheme  thy  name,  deal  cruelly  and  perfidiously  with  thy
people1?  1.  They  are  devoured.  "The  wicked  devoureth  the  man  that  is  more
righteous  than  he."  This  has  always  been  the  lot  of  God's  people,  from  the  days
of  Abel  to  the  present  time.  "  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation."  But  this
cruelty  was  great.  They  were  hunted  and  devoured  like  prey.  2.  They  are
destroyed.  God  permitted  the  weaker  to  be  taken  by  the  stronger.  They  were
caught  like  fish  in  the  sea,  crushed  like  reptiles  in  the  dust.  They  had  no
defender  to  protect  nor  avenge  them.  God  was  silent  and  held  his  tongue.  This
seems  strange  to  those  who  trust  in  God.  To  punish  the  wicked  may  be  the  will
of  God,  but  to  strike  at  the  righteous  is  treason.  Why  then  does  God  permit
this  %  How  can  he  love  them  %  If  God  has  fixed  the  times  for  executing  his
purposes  why  does  he  hide  them  from  his  people  (Job  xxiv.  1)  1  "  Wherefore  do
the  wicked  live,  become  old,  yea,  are  mighty  in  power]"      II.  Why  does  God,


494


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY-  HABAKKUK.


[CHAP.  I.


who  is  holy,  permit  sinners  to  prosper  in  wickedness  ?  "  Wherefore  lookest
thou,"  &c.  1.  Wickedness  exalting  over  goodness.  Rejoicing  in  its  work  of
mischief  and  destruction.  Men  glory  in  their  crimes.  2.  Wickedness  idolizing
itself.  "  They  sacrifice  unto  their  own  net."  Coarse  forms  of  idolatry  spring  from
a  corrupt  mind.  When  the  idol  is  first  set  up  in  the  heart,  men  will  not  be
long  before  they  worship  their  wealth  and  wisdom,  their  armies  and  navies.  3.
Wickedness  apparently  perpetual.  The  enemy  had  gathered  immense  booty,  and
was  rejoicing  over  it.  They  had  caught  the  Jews  like  lish  in  a  net.  Will  they
devour  what  they  have  taken?  Will  they  empty  the  net  again,  and  unceasingly
go  on  without  check  or  punishment?  asks  the  prophet.  How  perplexing  were
these  things  to  his  mind.  They  have  been  perplexing  to  the  good  in  every  age.
The  abnormal  state  of  the  world  is  a  sore  puzzle  to  most  men.  Ovid  was  tempted
to  say  there  were  no  gods.  Brutus  condemned  virtue  entirely  when  defeated,  and
Pompey  declared  that  a  mist  had  come  over  the  eyes  of  Providence,  when  over-
come by  ( 'yesar.  Thus  men  charge  God  foolishly.  The  Psalmist  solved  the
problem  in  nearn  -s-  to  God  (Ps.  lxxiii.  17) — saw  that  this  life  was  only  a  state  of
trial  and  probation.  Things  may  stagger  the  godly  now,  for  we  are  brutish  in
knowledge,  impatient  in  spirit,  and  incapable  of  comprehending  God's  plans.
Wait  patiently,  ail  will  be  cleared  up  before  the  great  tribunal.  "How  unsearch-
able are  his  judgments,  and  his  ways  past  finding  out !"


"  Fixed  to  the  hold,  so  mijjht  the  sailor  aira,
To  judge  the  pilot,  and  the  steerage  blame,
As  we  direct  to  God  what  should  belong,
Or  say  that  Sovereign  Wisdom  governs  wrong.'


UOMILETW  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


V  ei      12.       N otice,   1 .    T/ie    grievous
ijllirtiaii  of  GofVa  people.      They   were
ready     to     die,    oppressed,    and     almost
annihilated.       2.    The    Divine  appoint-
'neiif    of   this    affliction.       "Thou    hast
ordained    them    for    judgment."       The
enemy    had    no   power   over   Israel  but
what  God  gave  them.      Hence  the  afflic-
tion was  (1)  Appointed  in  measure.     (2)
Appointed  in  duration.     (3)  Appointed
in  instrumentality.    All  power  is  derived
from  God,  and  is  under  his  control  (Ps.
xvii.  14).     Men  are  in  his  hands,  cannot
destroy   his    people,    nor   frustrate    his
design.      3.   The  blessed  design  of  this
affliction.     "  Thou  hast  established  them
for  correction."     Not  for  vengeance,  not
for  their  own  ends  and  pleasure ;  but  for
correction.      This  correction  is  needed,
and  should  be  expected.      "As  thresh-
ing separates  the  corn  from  the  chaff,"
says  Burton,  "  so  does  affliction  purify
virtue."       Michael  Angelo   saw  in   the
rude  block  an  angel  form,  and  with  a
sculptor's   skill   carved   the   image  and
revealed  its   beauty ;    so  God    "  rough
hews"  his  people,  forms  and  fashions
them    by   affliction   into   his    likeness.


11  Blessed  is  he  whom  thou  chastenest."
4.  The  vigorous  hope  under  this  affliction.
"  We  shall  not  die."  On  the  unchang-
ing character  and  the  eternal  covenant
of  God,  we  ground  our  hope  of  deliver-
ance, and  our  belief  in  the  perpetuity  of
his  Church.  "  Virtue,"  says  Dr.  Moore,
"  can  stand  its  ground  as  long  as  life ;
so  that  a  soul  well  principled  will  be
sooner  separated  than  subdued."  "  The
Lord  hath  chastened  me  sore ;  but  he
hath  not  given  me  over  unto  death."
"  I  am  the  Lord,  I  change  not ;  therefore
ye  sons  of  Jacob  are  not  consumed."
Let  us  thank  God  for  discipline,  and
kiss  the  rod  which  smites  us.  It  is  not
the  stroke  of  a  tyrant,  but  the  chastening
of  a  Father.

"  Such  sharpness  shows  the  sweetest  Friend,
Such  cuttings  rather  heal  than  rend."

The  three  titles  of  God  in  this  verse
are  significant.  "  The  God  to  whom  the
prophet  prays  is  Jehovah,  the  absolutely
constant  One,  who  is  always  the  same
in  word  and  work  (see  Gen.  ii.  4) ;  he
is  also  Elohai,  my,  i.  e.  Israel's  God,  who
from   time   immemorial  has   proved   to


CHAP.  I.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HABAKKUK.


495


the  people  whom  he  had  chosen  as  his
possession,  that  he  is  their  God;  and
the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  the  absolutely
Pure  One,  who  cannot  look  upon  evil,
and  therefore  cannot  endure  that  the
wicked  should  devour  the  righteous"
[Keil].

Vers.  14,  15.  The  tivo  figures  (fish
and  reptiles)  indicate  the  low  and  help-
less condition  of  the  Jews.  The  world
is  like  a  troubled  sea,  the  weaker  are
caught  and  devoured  by  the  stronger —
the  more  venomous  hurt  and  destroy
the  rest.  Notice  also  the  agencies  of
cruelty.  1.  The  angle;  2.  The  net;
and  3.  The  drag.  "  Nebuchadnezzar
and  the  Chaldeans  are  a  faint  image  of
Satan,  who  casts  out  his  baits  and  his
nets  in  the  stormy  sea  of  this  life,  taking
some  by  individual  craft,  sweeping  others
in  whole  masses  to  do  evil ;  and  whoso
hath  no  ruler,  and  will  not  have  Christ
to  reign  over  them,  he  allures,  hurries,
drags  away  as  his  prey"  [Pusey],

Vers.  15,  16.  Notice,  1.  The  instru-
ments of  wickedness.  2.  The  success
of  wickedness.  3.  The  insolence  of
wickedness.  "  Here  is  the  growth  of
iniquity;  for  first  they  exercise  all
cruel  inhumanity  against  the  Jews,  then
they  rejoice  over  them,  and  then  doth


the  sin  grow  out  of  measure  sinful,  for
they  forbear  not  to  provoke  God  himself
by  their  pride  of  heart,  robbing  him  of
the  glory  of  his  own  work,  and  ascribing
it  to  themselves"  [Marbury],

The  career  of  a  great  conqueror  has
something  intoxicating.  Before  Na-
poleon men  degraded  themselves  and
became  idolaters.  The  sin  of  the  world-
power  is  two-fold  ;  first,  it  deals  with
the  property  of  God  as  if  it  were  its
own ;  secondly,  it  does  not  honour  God
for  the  success  granted  to  it,  but  its  own
power  [Lange].

Ver.  17.  1.  The  question— "  Shall
they]"  2.  From  whence  the  answer.
(a)  reason]  (b)  philosophy]  (c)  expe-
rience] (d)  it  must  be  left  where  the
Psalmist  leaves  it  (Ps.  lxxiv.  22).  3.
The  right  attitude  in  ch.  ii.

Vers.  13 — 17.  There  is  a  limit  set
to  the  power  of  the  wicked.  1.  God  is
holy.  2.  But  the  work  of  the  wicked
is  unholy.  For,  (a)  It  is  a  work  of
hatred  against  the  righteous,  (b)  It  is
an  abuse  of  the  powers  bestowed  by
God.  (c)  It  does  nothing  for  God,  but
everything  for  itself  (ver.  15).  (d)  It
does  not  give  God  honour,  but  makes
itself  an  idol  (ver.  16).  3.  Therefore  it
must  have  an  end  (ver.  17)  [Lange].


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  I.


Vers.  1 — 4.  How  long.  If  men  look
upon  some  of  God's  providential  dealings
with  a  mere  eye  of  reason,  they  will
hardly  find  any  sense  therein,  such  their
muddle  and  disorder.  But,  alas  !  the
wrong  side  is  objected  to  our  eyes,  while
the  right  side  is  presented  to  the  high
God  of  heaven,  who  knoweth  that  an
admirable  order  doth  result  out  of  this
confusion  :  and  what  is  presented  to  him
at  present  may,  hereafter,  be  so  showed
to  us  as  to  convince  our  judgments  in
the  truth  thereof  [T.  Fuller],

Ver.  5.  Wonder.  Others  only  look
and  wonder,  the  Christian  only  looks
and  loves  [Hurrion].

Vers.  6 — 11.  Bitter.  An  envious
man  waxeth  lean  with  the  fatness  of  his
neighbours.  Envy  is  the  daughter  of
pride,   the  beginner  of  secret  sedition,


and    the   perpetual   torment   of   virtue
[Socrates],

Ver.  7.  Dignity.  Self-assumed
superiority  of  the  Chaldeans.  "  Every
man  has  j  ust  as  much  vanity  as  he  wants
understanding  "  [Pope].

"  They  whose  wit
Values  itself  so  highly,  that  to  that
All  matters  else  seem  weak,  can  hardly  love,
Or  take  a  shape  or  feeling  of  affection,
Being  so  self-endeared  "  [Shakespeare],

Vers.  12 — 17.  Let  us  at  all  times
cherish  in  our  minds  an  unrelaxing
certainty,  that  we  shall  always  find  the
Almighty  perfect  in  his  justice  to  all,
and  in  everything,  and  individually  to
each  of  us,  as  soon  as  we  have  sufficient
knowledge  of  his  operations  with  respect
to  us.  Let  us  wait  with  patience
until  what  we  do  not  perceive  or  cannot


496  H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:  HABAKKUK.  [chap.il


comprehend  shall  be  satisfactorily  eluci-  Walking  in  Hyde  Park  one  day,  I  saw

dated  to  us.     We  expect  this  equity  in  a  piece  of  paper  on  the  grass.     I  picked

our  intercourse  with  each  other.     Let  us  it  up ;  it  was  a  part  of  a   letter  ;  the

also  so    conduct   ourselves,   in   all   our  beginning  was  wanting,  the  end  was  not

thoughts  and  feelings  with  reference  to  there  :    I   could    make   nothing   of    it.

Him,  whatever  may  be  his  present  or  Such  is  providence.      You  cannot    see

future  dispensations  personally  to  our-  beginning  or  end,  only  a  part.     When

selves  [Turner].  you  can  see  the  whole,  then  the  mystery

Shall  they  ?  Providence  is  often  mys-  will  be  unveiled.  [Thomas  Jones,  1871]"
terious  and  a  source  of  perplexity  to  us.


CHAPTER  II.

Critical  Notes.]  Watch]  As  those  ascending  high  places  to  look  into  the  distance  (2  Kings  ix.
17:  2  Sam.  xviii.  24).  Set]  Plant  myself  firmly.  To  see]  what  God  will  say.  Unto]  Lit.  in  me;
outwardly  to  the  ear,  inwardly  to  the  heart;  fixed  in  purpose  and  earnest  in  mind  he  waits  for  God's
revelation.  Reproved]  when  reasoned  with,  for  my  expostulation  with  God.  2.  Vision]  Outwardly
seen  and  inwardly  perceived.  Write]  The  revelation  important  and  immutable.  Plain  Clearly,  that
it  may  easily  be  read  (cf.  Deut.  xxvii.  8;  i.  5).  3.  For]  The  reason  for  writing.  Appointed]  i.  e.  future
time  fixed  by  God  (Dan.  x.  14;  xi.  27).  Speak]  Lit.  breathe  out  (then  speak),  hasten  to  the  end.
Tarry]  Linger,  delay  a  little.  Come]  It  is  certain,  though  future.  Not  tarry  j  Be  behindhand  or
go  beyond  the  appointed  time.  4.]  Judgment  announced.  Lifted]  Puffed  up,  then  haughty  or
presumptuous.  Upright]  Not  straight,  not  without  turning  or  trickery.  The  heart  of  the  enemy
was  proud  and  displeasing  to  God.  But]  Marking  the  contrast  between  the  Jew  and  the  Chaldean,
the  believer  and  the  unbeliever.  Live]  Opposed  to  death.  The  boast  of  power  in  one  destroyed,  the
constant  faith  of  the  other  secures  salvation.  Faith]  from  aman,  to  be  firmly  rooted  or  established,
as  a  building  upon  its  foundation,  or  a  tree  by  its  roots.  Constant  and  strong  faith  is  necessary  under
all  the  afflictions  of  life  (cf.  Rom.  i.  17  :  Heb.  x.  38).  5.]  The  thought  further  developed  by  a
proverbial  saying  with  special  reference  to  the  Chaldeans.  They  were  given  to  wine  and  insatiable
conquest.  "  Wine  is  treacherous  ;  the  haughty  man  stayeth  not  at  home"  [Send.]  (cf.  Prov.  xxx.  1).
Proud]  Elated,  haughty  (Prov.  xxi.  24).  Home]  For  he  longs  to  go  forth  to  destroy.  Desire]  Lit.
soul ;  passions  widen  or  enlarge  the  soul  (Ps.  xxvii.  12;  xli.  2,  3:  Isa.  v.  14).  Hellj  Which  is  insatiable
(Prov.  xxx.  15).  Death]  Which  spares  none,.but  swallows  up  every  living  thing  (Prov.  xxvii.  20).
Gather]  Lit.  hath  gathered.  "  He  describes  it,  for  the  rapidity  with  which  he  completes  what  he
longs  for,  as  though  it  were  already  done ''  [Pusey].  6.  These]  "nations"  and  "people"  (ver.  4).
Parable]  A  derisive  song  (Isa.  xiv.  4  :  Mic.  ii.  4),  some;  ode,  given  by  others,  enigmatical  in  character.
Woes]  fivefold  given,  a  song  raised  by  the  oppressed  over  the  fall  of  the  oppressor.  First  woe,  ill-
gotten  gains.  Increaseth]  i.  e.  seizes  what  does  not  belong  to  him.  How  long]  will  he  do  this  with
impunity  ?  Ladeth]  To  make  heavy  by  a  weight  or  load  upon  one.  Thick  clay]  (mass  of  dirt)  Lit,
a  cloud  of  clay,  which  will  cause  her  ruin.  Many  render  "  a  burden  of  pledges  gained  by  usury,'
taken  by  an  unmerciful  usurer,  which  he  will  be  compelled  to  give  up  (Deut.  xxiv.  10).  7.  Shall.]
Answer  to  question,  How  long  ?  Bite]  of  a  snake;  the  enemy  like  savage  vipers  (Jer.  viii.  17).  Rise]
Shake  or  rouse  up  from  possession.  8.  Because]  Keason  for  woe.  Many]  Boundless  the  spoil.
Remnant]  Only  a  remnant  left,  will  be  sufficient  to  punish.  "  Blood,  land,  and  city]  Understood
generally,  and  not  restricted  to  the  Jews  with  their  country  and  its  metropolis  "  [Mend.].  9.  Woe]
the  second,  against  establishing  a  permanent  settlement  by  godless  gain.  Evil]  Covetousness  sur-
passingly evil  and  fatal  to  itself.  House]  Not  the  palace  but  the  dynasty  (ver.  10).  High]  Ah
eagles  build  nests  on  high  to  protect  from  harm  (cf.  Job  xxxix.  27);  "so  does  the  Chaldean
seek  to  elevate  and  strengthen  his  rule  by  robbery  and  plunder,  that  it  may  never  be  wrested  from  his
family  again."  10.  Shame]  the  result  instead  of  glory.  11.]  Personification.  Cry]  For  the  in-
justice they  had  suffered  (cf.  Luke  xix.  40).  Answer]  the  stone,  i.  e.  join  in  its  crying.  12.  Woe]  the
third.  Town]  Babylon,  rebuilt  and  enlarged  by  spoils  of  blood  (Dan.  iv.  30).  13.  Fire]  Lit.  to
suffice  the  fire  ;  conflagration  and  depopulation  the  result  of  all  labour  and  fatigue.  14.  For]  God
has  determined  this  result;  usurped  glory  must  be  destroyed  that  his  glory  may  spread  (Isa.  xi.  9).
Waters]  Surpassing  abundance.  This  predictive  of  the  gospel  times.  15.  Woe]  the  fourth.  Bottle]
Skin  in  common  use.  Look]  with  delight  (Gen.  ix.  22).  Naked.]  The  prostrate  condition  of  tLe
drunken  man  a  figure  of  the  overthrow  of  a  conquered  nation  (.Nab.  iii.  11),  and  the  uncovering  of
the  shame  denotes  the  ignominy  that  has  fallen  upon  it  (Nah.  iii.  5  ;  Isa.  xlvii.  3).   16.  Thou]  shalt


chap.  n.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HABAKKUK.  497


drink  of  the  cup  of  sorrow  (Jer.  xxv.  15 — 17).  Foreskin]  As  one  uncircumcised.  Spewing]
Shameful  vomiting  will  cover  thy  glory,  i.  e.  destroy  thee.  Turned]  Lit.  shall  turn  itself  from  other
nations.  17.  Violence]  Outrage  in  spoiling  cedar  forests  to  adorn  magnificent  edifices  (cf.  Isa.
xiv.  8).  Cover]  Completeness  of  the  destruction.  Similar  violence  to  that  which  they  had  displayed
should  fall  upon  them.  18.]  Exposure  of  the  folly  of  Babylon's  idolatry.  What]  u»e?  none  what-
ever. Lies]  Lying  oracles  connected  with  idol  worship.  Dumb]  Nonentity  (1  Cor.  xii.  1).
19.  Awake]  to  help.  Teach]  Ironical,  it  teach  !  Breath]  Not  at  all  breath,  the  spirit  of  life  (Jer.
x.  14).  20.  But]  Sublime  contrast  between  Jehovah  and  utter  vanity  of  idols.  Temple]  Enthroned
in  heaven  ready  to  protect  his  people  and  destroy  their  enemies  (Ps.  xi.  4).  He  is  not  encased  in
gold  and  silver.  All]  i.  e.  the  people  must  submit  in  reverence  before  him,  and  wait  for  his  judgment
(cf.  Zeph.  i.  7  :  Zech.  ii.  17).  It  becomes  all  to  adore  such  a  God  who  will  speak  to  the  soul  hushed
in  silence.

HOMILETICS.

The  Waiting  Servant. —  Verses  1,  2.

Habakkuk  had  two  great  difficulties  in  justifying  the  Divine  government.  First 9
the  wickedness  of  the  Jews  and  their  oppression  of  the  righteous  few  among  them.
God  removed  this  difficulty  by  predicting  that  he  would  visit  the  corruption  with
captivity,  and  that  the  Chaldeans  would  punish  them.  But  a  second  objection
presented  itself  that  the  Chaldeans  were  worse  than  the  Jews,  the  avengers  more
demoralized  than  the  people.  Hence  the  aspect  appeared  dark  indeed  to  the  prophet.
The  destruction  of  the  temple,  cessation  of  national  worship,  and  universal  depravity.
Anxious  for  further  light,  he  determines  to  take  a  stand  and  discern  in  the  light  of
God's  presence  the  solution  of  his  difficulties.

I.  The  fixed  purpose  of  the  prophet.  "  I  will  stand  and  set  me  (firmly)  upon  the
tower."  The  prophet  made  use  of  the  means  which  God  put  within  his  reach  to
solve  his  doubts.  All  temptations  and  perplexities  should  lead  us  to  the  sanctuary
of  God.  We  should  direct  our  prayer  to  him  and  look  up  beyond  human  vision.
Habakkuk  desired — 1.  To  be  Divinely  enlightened.  "To  see  what  he  will  say  to
me."  More  truth  and  more  light  could  be  had.  God  could  give  these,  and  he
would  wait  upon  him  in  singleness  of  aim.  The  voice,  the  vision  from  God  would
clear  away  the  mists  and  satisfy  the  heart.  Men  are  ignorant,  and  reason  is  dumb  in
such  circumstances.  "  I  will  hear  what  God  the  Lord  will  speak."  2.  To  be  Divinely
corrected.  "  What  I  shall  answer  when  I  am  reproved."  He  had  been  pleading
with  others  and  they  had  beset  him  with  objections.  He  desires  to  be  instructed
and  guided  in  his  reply.  Or  he  might  have  cherished  wrong  thoughts  and  uttered
wrong  words  concerning  God  in  his  darkness.  The  psalmist  stumbled  and  was
hasty  in  his  words,  when  he  saw  good  men  suffer  and  bad  men  prosper.  "  Let  us
be  silent,  that  we  may  hear  the  whisper  of  the  gods,"  says  Emerson.  II.  The
appropriate  attitude  of  the  prophet.  "  I  will  stand  upon  my  watch."  This
position  was  most  appropriate  and  safe.  It  includes — 1.  Outward  retirement.  He
ascended  the  tower,  excluded  himself  from  the  noise  of  the  city  and  the  excitement
of  society.  Alone  like  Moses  in  the  rock,  he  sought  intercourse  with  God.  "  Apart
from  the  world,  and  under  the  tuition  of  heaven,  he  was  instructed  in  the  principles
of  Divine  wisdom."  "All  weighty  things,"  says  Biehter,  "are  done  in  solitude,
that  is,  without  society."  "  Arise,  go  forth  into  the  plain,  and  I  will  there  talk  with
thee."  2.  Inward  meditation.  The  prophet  was  a  man  of  reflection  and  prayer.
He  searched  his  own  heart  and  examined  his  own  ways.  He  gave  his  whole
attention  to  his  work.  "  Little  can  be  done  well  to  which  the  whole  mind  is  not
applied,"  says  Johnson.  In  our  great  work  there  must  be  withdrawal  from  the
world  and  concentration  in  self.  "  Commune  with  thine  own  heart."  3.  Earliest
expectation.  The  prophet  waited  in  patience  and  perseverance.  He' did  not  think
that  his  prayer  was  done  with  when  offered.  He  did  not  find  relief  in  his  attitude
but  in  God's  answer.  "  I  will  watch  to  see."  Ministers  must  acquit  themselves
like  watchmen  in  an  army  or  in  a  city,  be  awake  when  others  sleep,  and  patiently
Beek  to  be  filled  with  light  and  truth  to  give  to  others  in  times  of  darkness  and  danger,

32


498  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HABAKKUK.  [chap.  n.


III.  The  gracious  answer  to  the  prophet.  "And  the  Lord  answered  me."
Expectation  was  not  disappointed.  God  is  sometimes  found  of  them  that  seek  him
not.  But  he  pledges  himself  to  hear  those  who  sincerely  call  upon  him.  "  He
said  not,  Seek  ye  me  in  vain."  The  answer  was  an  assurance  of  ruin  to  the  Chal-
deans when  the  chastisement  of  Israel  was  accomplished.  It  was  far  distant,  would
try  the  faith  of  God's  people,  but  the  event  was  certain  and  would  come  to  pass.
The  answer  was  to  be  written  in  a  conspicuous  place,  recorded  for  the  help  of  the
people  in  the  suspension  of  the  fulfilment,  and  known  as  a  proof  of  Divine  power
and  faithfulness  when  accomplished.  Both  Israel  and  Chaldea  must  own.  "  And
the  thing  was  true,  but  the  appointed  time  was  long."

The  Appointed  Vision. —  Verses  2,  3.

The  prophet  must  not  only  hear  but  record  the  Word  of  God.  What  the  seer
beholds  he  must  write.     "  Write  the  vision."

I.  To  be  permanently  recorded.  The  preacher  must  die,  for  all  flesh  is  grass.
Tradition  is  uncertain  and  may  be  corrupted.  Philosophy  is  insufficient,  and  human
reason  is  delusive.  The  testimony  of  men  would  continually  perplex  and  mislead.
But  the  Word  of  God  stands  for  ever,  an  assurance  and  guide  to  all  generations.
"  To  the  law  and  to  the  testimony."  II.  To  be  universally  understood.  "  And
make  it  plain  upon  tables."  It  must  be  legibly  and  correctly  written  upon  accus-
tomed material.  Not  the  impressions,  the  recollections  and  surmisings  of  the  mind,
not  something  like  the  thing,  but  the  thing  itself.  It  must  be  delivered  in  sim-
plicity, not  hidden  in  flowers  of  rhetoric  ;  adapted  to  the  lowest  capacity,  not  merely
to  the  thoughtful  few.  "It  takes  all  our  learning  to  make  things  plain,"  says
Usher.  "  Write  upon  the  stones  all  the  words  of  this  law  very  plainly  "  (Deut.
xxvii.  8).  III.  To  be  prominently  fixed.  "  That  he  may  run  that  readeth  it."
It  must  be  so  conspicuous  that  it  may  catch  the  eye  of  the  traveller,  hinder  no
duty,  but  read  at  once  without  difficulty.  Some  think  that  the  reference  is  to  the
ancient  posts  which  directed  the  man-slayer  to  the  city  of  refuge,  and  that  the  reading
should  be  "  he  that  runneth  may  read."  "  Refuge  "  was  a  word  so  legible  that  one
running  for  life  was  neither  delayed  nor  puzzled  to  read.  The  writing  (a)  Excites
attention.  No  one  passes  without  noticing  it.  (b)  Directs  the  steps.  "  This  is  the
way,  walk  ye  in  it."  (c)  Encourages  speed  by  well-grounded  conviction  of  its
truthfulness.  "  The  words  of  the  Lord  are  pure  and  forcible."  IV.  To  be  a  little
delayed.  "The  vision  is  yet  for  an  appointed  time."  God's  promises  reach  a
long  distance  and  comprehend  vast  agencies.  Delay  is  discipline  to  us,  and  God
has  reasons  for  it.  It  tests  our  faith,  cultivates  our  patience,  and  excites  our  hope.
We  cannot  hasten  the  end  and  must  therefore  wait.  We  must  not  measure  God's
thoughts  by  our  ways,  and  the  purposes  of  eternity  by  the  hours  of  time.  We
must  not  attribute  delay  to  impotency  or  forgetfulness.  "  The  Lord  is  not  slack
concerning  his  promise."  "  And  the  thing  was  true,  but  the  time  appointed  was
long  :  and  he  understood  the  thing,  and  had  understanding  of  the  vision,"  &c.
(Dan.  x.  1,  14).

HOMILET1C  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  3.     1.  As  the  mercies  promised  trying,  and  delivering.      2.  The  Lord's

to  the  Church  are  in  the  hands  of  God,  delaying  to  appear  diminisheth  nothing

so  is  the  timing  of  them ;  we  are  not  of  the  certainty  of  performance  that  he

therefore  to  expect  that  the  performance  hath  promised  to  the  Church.     3.  But

of  comfortable  promises  or  of  threatened  such    is    our    weakness,  that   when    he

vengeance  will  be  always  ready  at  our  delayeth  the  performance  we  are  ready

bid,  but  we  must  wait  the  Lord's  time,  to  think  that  he  denies  it  to  all,  which

who  hath  his  own  seasons  for  afflicting,  is  to  contradict  the  verdict  of  Scripture


chap,  ii.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HABAKKUK.  499

here   published   [Hutchesori].      "  God's  Israelites  waiting  for  Moses  (Ex.  xxxiiL

time,"  says  one,  u  to  visit  his  people  with  2).    Impatience  leads  to  self-destruction,

his  comforts    is  when    they  are    most  as  in  the  case  of  Saul  waiting  for  Samuel

destitute  of  other  comforts,  and  other  (1   Sam.  xiii.).      2.  It  speaks  and  lies

comforters."  not.     All   failure   is  a   kind    of   lying.

Divine  slowness.     1.  The   history  of  (1)  Failure  in  truth  is  a  lie  in  word.

the    earth     illustrates     this    principle.  (2)  Failure  in  performance  is  a  lie  in

(1)  Creation.     (2)  The  movement  of  the  act.     "Every  man  is  a  liar,  either  by

seasons.       2.  The    history    of    all    life  imposture,  and  so  in  purpose,  or  by  im-

illustrates  this  principle.    (1)  Individual  potency,  and  so  in  the  event,  deceiving

life  in  man.   (2)  Life  in  national  history,  those  that  rely  upon  him  (Ps.  lxii.  9).

3.    Revealed    religion   harmonizes  with  But  God  is  faithful  and  cannot  lie,  "  a

this   principle.     (1)  The   long   interval  God  of  truth  and  without  iniquity,  just

between   promise   and    the   coming   of  and  right  is  he'"   [Trapp].     3.  Hence

Christ.     (2)  The  manner  of  his  coming,  wait  for  the  fulfilment.    It  will  not  tarr}r,

not  as  the  thoughts  of  men  anticipated,  it  will  not  lie.     "  Waiting  comprises  in

(3)  The  history  of  revealed  religion  since  it  (1)  faith  ;  (2)  hope;  (3)  patience,  or

the    appearance    of    Christ.      (4)    The  waiting  to  the  end  for  the  time  which

spiritual  history  of  individual  believers,  the  Lord  has  appointed,  but  which  he

(5)  So  with  the  events  which  make  up  intends  us  to  wait  for"  [Lange\
the  story  of  life  [Dr.  R.  Vaughan].  Surely  come.     1.   Here  is  the  truth  of

Gorfs  word  speaks  and  lies  not.     1.  It  the  decree.    "The  vision  is  yet   for  an

speaks  at  the  end,   therefore  wait.     It  appointed  time."     2.  Here  is  the  truth

will  not  tarry   beyond,   though  it  may  of  the  word.     "It  shall  speak  and  not

tarry  tilJ  thev«ry  hour.     (1)  Impatience  lie."     3.  Here  is  the  truth  of  the  deed

leads  to  idolatry,  as  in  the  case  of  the  "  It  will  surely  come"  [Marbury\

HOMILETICS.
The  Great  Contrast,  or  the  Believer  and  the  Unbeliever. —  Verse  4.

These  words  are  generally  applied  to  the  Chaldeans,  but  we  apply  them  to  the
Jews.  Some  believed  the  words  of  the  prophet  and  others  did  net.  "While  those
Jews  who,  elated  by  false  views  of  security,  refused  to  listen  to  the  Divine  message
should  have  their  security  disturbed  and  their  minds  agitated  by  the  calamities  with
which  they  would  be  visited,  such  as  lived  righteously  before  God  and  men  should
experience  true  happiness  in  the  exercise  of  faith  in  that  message  and  others  which
God  might  communicate  to  them  by  his  prophets  "  [Henderson].

I.  The  unbeliever's  character  and  conduct.  God  takes  notice  of  man's  be-
haviour in  times  of  trial,  for  it  tends  to  promote  peace  or  disturbance,  to  honour  or
dishonour  God.  "  Behold."  The  unbeliever  is  first  described.  1.  He  is  proud  in
heart.  "  His  soul  which  is  lifted  up."  The  source  of  all  sin  is  pride.  In  the
oppression  of  the  Chaldeans,  the  exaltation  of  anti-christ,  and  the  rejection  of  the
gospel,  pride  is  manifest.  "  From  heaven  the  sinning  angels  fell."  "  Pride,"  says
one,  "  had  her  beginning  among  the  angels  that  fell,  her  continuance  on  earth,  her
end  in  hell."  2.  He  is  perverted  in  mind.  His  soul  "  is  not  upright  in  him."
He  is  not  straight,  but  crooked  in  his  thoughts  and  purpose.  He  does  not  please
God,  but  denies  his  providence  and  ridicules  his  word.  He  is  conceited  in  his  own
wisdom,  and  will  not  wait  upon  God.  Uprightness  of  character  results  from  peace
with  God  and  reliance  upon  his  grace.  We  see  the  stature,  the  complexion,  and
the  deeds  of  men  :  God  here  reads  the  heart  and  censures  the  wicked.  "  The  in-
tegrity of  the  upright  shall  guide  them  :  but  the  perverseness  of  transgressors  shall
destroy  them."  3.  He  is  restless  in  his  soul.  Luther  gives,  "  He  who  is  stiff-necked
will  have  no  rest  in  his  soul."  Pride  inflates  and  unsettles.  Those  who  trust  to
themselves  are  disquieted  within  them,  excited  by  fear,  stirred  to  fresh  adventures
by  hope,  but  disappointed  in  their  pursuits.     Unbelief  can  never  give  rest  of  mind.


600  HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  HABAKKUK.  [chap.  n.


He  who  toils,  contrives,  and  wearies  himself  in  pursuit  of  sin  will  find  his  labour
in  vain.  Like  the  treasure  in  the  miser's  dream,  all  will  vanish  in  a  world  of  reality.
"  If  ye  will  not  believe,  surely  ye  shall  not  be  established."  II.  The  believer's
character  and  conduct.  Opposed  to  those  who  proudly  reject  the  prophetic  vision,
others  give  it  a  cordial  reception.  1.  The  believer  confides  in  the  word.  He  has
firm  attachment  to  God,  unwavering  confidence  in  his  promise,  and  waits  patiently
for  its  fulfilment.  This  faith  is  opposed  to  the  pride  of  the  enemy  on  the  one  hand
and  self-assertion  on  the  other.  "  Believe  in  the  Lord  your  God,  so  shall  ye  be
established ;  believe  his  prophets,  so  shall  ye  prosper."  2.  The  believer  lives  by
his  faith  in  the  word.  "  The  just  shall  live  by  his  faith."  It  supports  in  deepest
sorrows,  and  brings  comfort  in  darkest  times.  It  gives  real  life.  Whatever  outward
or  inward  sorrows  assail,  faith  sustains  in  life  and  enjoyment.  We  begin  to  live
by  faith  in  Christ.  Through  union  with  him  we  gain  spiritual,  holy,  and  progressive
life  here  and  eternal  life  hereafter.  Steadfast  faith  is  the  source  and  element  of  the
highest  life.  "  But  without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God."  3.  The  believer
is  delivered  from  death  by  his  faith  in  the  word.  Delivered  from  temporal  calamity,
spiritual  death,  and  eternal  wrath.  Out  of  faith  springs  life.  Abiding  faith  is
continuous  life ;  but  life  never  dwells  in  the  unbelieving  heart.  If  faith  in  God
only  is  the  source  of  life,  then  pride  which  estranges  from  God  results  in  death.
Faith  raises  a  man  from  danger  and  sets  him  on  high  (Ps.  xci.  14).  There  he  is
"  kept  by  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation."  "  Whoso  putteth  his  trust  in  the
Lord  shall  be  safe."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  4.     1.   Unsanctified  affliction  be-  sentence,  the  just  shall  live  by  faith,  is

gets  a  wrong  spirit.     The  soul  is  lifted  universal,  belonging  at  once  to  Jews  and

up.     Instead  of  humbling  and  correcting,  Christians,  to  sinners  who  are  first  being

trial  often  discovers  pride,  murmuring  justified,  as  also  to  those  who  are  already

against    Divine   sovereignty,    and   vain  justified.     For  the  spiritual  life  of  each

thoughts  of  self.     2.   The  wrong  spirit  of  these  begins,  is  maintained,  and  grows

when   cherished   under   affliction    begets  through  faith.    When  then  it  is  said,  the

ajwstasy.      Those  who    are  proud   and  just  shall  live  by  his  faith,  this  word  his

complain  will  not  long  wait  upon  God.  marks  the  cause,  which  both  begins  and

They  become  self-sufficient,  unrighteous,  preserves  life.     The  just,  believing  and

and   withdraw  from  God.      "  The  just  hoping  in  God,  begins  to  live  spiritually,

shall  live  by  faith  :  but  if  any  man  draw  to  have  a  soul  right  within  him,  whereby

back  my  soul  shall  have  no  pleasure  in  he  pleases  God ;   and  again,  advancing

him."     This   verse  containeth   an  anti-  and  making  progress  in  this  his  faith  and

thesis,  wherein  two  contraries  are  set  in  hope  in  God,  therewith  advances  and

opposition  one  against  the  other.   (1)  The  makes  progress  in  the  spiritual  life,  in

man  that  is  lifted  up.     In  which  note  rightness  and  righteousness  of  soul,  in

two  things,     (a)  His  notation,  "  lifted  the  grace  and  friendship  of  God,  so  as

up."     (b)  His  censure,  "  his  soul  is  not  more  and  more  to  please  God  "  [Pnsey].

right."    (2)  The  just  man.    (a)  By  just  This  is  an  answer  to  those  that  ask,  What

we  understand  not   legal  righteousness  shall  we  do  till  the  vision  speak  %  how

but  evangelical  righteousness,  rectitude  shall  we  hold  out  till  it  come  1  till  the

of    obedience   and   holy  life,      (b)   He  70  years  of  captivity  be  expired  1    "The

shall  live,  naturally,  against  oppression ;  just  shall  live  by  faith,"  saith  he,  and

spiritually,  in  Jesus  Christ;  eternally,  in  shall  make  a  good  living  of  it  too;  he

glory  \Marbury].  shall  live  and  be  safe  by  the  same  faith

Notice  the  relation  between  righteous-  whereby  he  is  just.     He  shall  feed  upon

ness,  faith,  and  life.     Three  words  con-  his  faith,  as  some  read  that  (Ps.  xxxvii.

taining  the  essence  of  creeds  and  the  3)  [Trappj.
requirements    of    the    gospel.       "  This


chap,  ii.]  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:    HABAKKUK.  501


HOMILETICS.

Wine  a  Deceiver. — Verse  5.

This  verse  not  only  developes  the  thought  of  the  preceding,  but  adds  another
feature.  Yea  also,  i.  e.  add  to  this  that  wine  is  treacherous  [cf.  Keil\  The  genera]
rule  is  applied  to  all  oppressors,  and  especially  to  the  Chaldeans,  who  were  addicted
to  the  sins  here  described.

I.  Wine  deceives  in  its  nature.  Its  victims  are  mocked  and  grievously
deceived.  Wine  promises  pleasures  which  it  cannot  give.  Strong  drink  is  raging,
not  that  "  good  creature  "  which  some  think  it  is.  Intoxicating  drinks  abuse  men,
deceive,  and  lead  them  astray.  They  are  overcome,  beguiled,  and  befooled  before
they  are  aware.  "  Wine  is  a  mocker,  strong  drink  is  raging :  and  whosoever  is
deceived  thereby  is  not  wise."  II.  Wine  deceives  in  its  effects.  "That  it
strengthens  the  system  is  a  deception ;  chemistry  has  shown  that  it  contains  no
nourishment  for  the  body.  That  it  enriches  the  national  revenue  is  a  deception.
It  is  true  that  the  taxes  on  alcoholic  drinks  bring  millions  annually  into  the  national
exchequer,  but  how  much  of  the  wealth  of  the  nation  does  it  exhaust  by  the  pauper-
ism and  crime  which  it  creates  !  Alcoholic  drink  is  the  great  false  prophet  in
England "  [Dr.  Thomas].  Prince  and  people,  priest  and  prophet,  have  "  erred
through  wine,  and  through  strong  drink  are  out  of  the  way."

"Ah  !  sly  deceiver  !  branded  o'er  and  o'er,
Yet  still  believed  !  exulting  o'er  the  wrecks
Of  sober  vows"  [Armstrong,  I.,  M.D.,  1744].

Wine  and  its  Associates. —  Verse  5.

Drunkenness  itself  is  sin,  and  is  the  cause  of  other  sins.  Those  who  are  given
to  wine  are  sensual  and  voluptuous.  Wine  never  stands  alone.  We  have  here  its
associated  evils.

I.  Pride.  "  He  is  a  proud  man."  The  proud  man  thinks  too  much  of  himself,
despises  others,  and  is  arrogant  in  his  conduct,  "  dealeth  in  proud  wrath."  Pharaoh,
Sennacherib,  and  Nebuchadnezzar  are  fearful  examples  of  pride.  Flushed  with  wine,
Belshazzar  and  his  princes  desecrated  the  sacred  vessels  and  insulted  God.  The
drunkenness  of  the  inhabitants  enabled  Cyrus  to  take  Babylon,  well  provisioned  and
strongly  fortified.  Pride  "  is  a  vice,"  says  Hooker,  "  which  cleaveth  so  fast  unto  the
hearts  of  men,  that  if  we  were  to  strip  ourselves  of  all  faults  one  by  one  we  should
undoubtedly  find  it  the  very  last  and  hardest  to  put  off."  "A  man's  pride  shall
bring  him  low."  II.  Ambition.  "  Neither  keepeth  at  home."  Bestless  in  spirit
and  in  condition.  Though  home  be  a  palace,  to  a  discontented  mind  it  is  a  prison.
Drunk  with  ambition,  as  well  as  wine,  the  Chaldeans  were  not  satisfied  with  their
splendid  kingdom,  but  sought  to  enlarge  it.  The  world  cannot  fill  the  abyss  of  the
soul  without  God.  The  man  who  treads  others  under  his  feet  exalts  his  gate
(Prov.  xvii.  19)  above  his  neighbour,  affects  a  style  beyond  his  rank,  and  seeks
destruction.  Think  of  Alexander,  Caesar,  and  Napoleon.  When  Philip  was  thrown
down  in  the  games  he  saw  the  marks  of  his  body,  and  said,  "  How  little  a  parcel  of
earth  will  hold  us  when  we  are  dead,  who  are  ambitiously  seeking  after  the  whole
world  while  living."  III.  Covetousness.  "  Who  enlargeth  his  desire  as  hell,"  &c.
Covetousness  and  greed  of  wealth  result  from  pride.  Covetous  men  invade  the
rights  and  seize  the  property  of  others.  One  nation  will  not  ^ati»fy  without  another.
The  ambitious  "  gathereth  unto  him  all  nations  and  heapeth  unto  him  all  people."
This  passion  is  never  satisfied.  1.  It  is  like  Hades,  which  devours  in  its  desire  and
act,  and  ever  cries  Give,  give.  "  Hell  and  destruction  are  never  full."  2.  It  is  Mice
death,  which  has  slain  its  millions  and  ready  to  take  as  many  more.  Death  spares
none  but  is  terrible  to  all.  "  Hell  hath  enlarged  herself  and  opened  her  mouth
without  measure."


602  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  HABAKKUK.  [chap,  it


The  Sin  of  the  Avaricious. — Verses  6 — 8.

The  first  woe  is  pronounced,  and  the  sentence  passed,  upon  avaricious  men  in  these
words.  The  fundamental  thought  is  like  that  expressed  concerning  the  Chaldaean,
in  Isa.  xiv.  12 — 14.  Ambition  manifests  itself  in  cruelty,  and  proud  edifices  built
upon  the  ruins  of  others.

I.  Avaricious  men  increase  their  guilt.  The  covetous  and  those  who  thrive
unlawfully  in  the  world  are  under  woe.  They  multiply  their  sins  and  their  judg-
ments. They  break  God's  commands,  and  add  injustice  to  their  apostasy  (1  Tim.
vi.  10).  "  Great  abundance  of  riches  cannot  of  any  man,"  says  Erasmus,  "  be  both
gathered  and  kept  without  sin."  "  A  faithful  man  shall  abound  with  blessings ;
but  he  that  maketh  haste  to  be  rich  shall  not  be  innocent."  II.  Avaricious  men
increase  their  enemies.  "  Shall  they  not  rise  up  suddenly  that  shall  bite  thee?"
&c.  God  will  not  long  permit  their  conduct  to  prosper.  Enemies  will  suddenly
rise  up  to  disturb  their  rest.  When  they  are  most  secure  and  least  prepared  nations
will  retaliate ;  "  the  remnant  of  the  people,"  whom  they  have  despised,  or  whom
God  has  hid  from  their  fury,  will  rise  against  them.  Those  whom  they  have  op-
pressed shall  taunt  them.  Nations  and  "  many  nations  "  will  destroy  them.  Covetous
and  ambitious  men  turn  God  and  their  fellow-creatures  into  their  enemies.  "For
many  nations  and  great  kings  shall  serve  themselves  of  them  also,  and  I  will
recompense  them  according  to  their  deeds,  and  according  to  the  works  of  their  own
hands."  III.  Avaricious  men  increase  their  dangers.  Men  haste  to  be  rich
and  rush  into  danger.  1.  They  heap  up  booty  for  others.  "  Thou  shalt  be  for
booties  unto  them."  Notwithstanding  their  labour  and  strength,  the  enemy  vviJ]
easily  overcome  them.  Their  wealth  gotten  by  vanity  will  be  diminished.  Men
collect  and  foster  what  they  cannot  keep.  They  brood  over  ill-gotten  gains  which
forsake  and  disappoint  them.  "As  the  partridge  sitteth  on  eggs,  and  hatch-th
them  not;  so  he  that  getteth  riches,  and  not  by  right,  shall  leave  them  in  the  midst
of  his  days,  and  at  his  end  shall  be  a  fool."  2.  They  insure  fearful  retribution.  As
they  had  spoiled  others,  they  would  be  spoiled  themselves.  "  Refrain  from  covet-
ousness,"  says  Plato,  "  and  thy  estate  shall  prosper."  Innocent  blood  which  they
had  shed  would  be  avenged  upon  the  land,  the  city,  and  ihe  people  (ver.  8).
"  When  thou  shalt  cease  to  spoil,  thou  shalt  be  spoiled  ,  and  when  thou  shall  make
an  end  to  deal  treacherously,  they  shall  deal  treacherously  with  thee."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.    6.      1.    Ambitious  men   become  pression,    robbery,    cruelty.       3.     With

contemptible  to  others.     They  are  igno-  folly.     What  is  that  heaped  up? — only

minious,  a  taunting   proverb,   a   public  "  clay."     What  results  from  all  toil  and

derision.     "  Shall  not  these  take  up  a  vexation  1 — a   burden   for    themselves ;

parable   against   him1?"     2.    Ambitious  "  ladeth  himself."    "  A  bag  of  gold  from

men  have  no  right  to  the  possession  of  a  Western  steamer  was  found  bound  to

that  which  they  illegally  acquire.    Unjust  the    neck    of   the   robber,    his   treasure

conquest  brings  a  curse.     "  Woe  to  him  having  sunk  him  "[  Van  Doren].     "A

that  increaseth  that  which  is  not  his."  great  fortune  is  a  great  slavery  "  [Seneca].

3.  Ambitious  men  will  be  stripped  of  all  Ver.    8.       People    shall    spoil    thee,

their  unjust  acquisitions.     To  what  end  Avaiicious  men  are  spoiled  :  1.  In  their

does   the  conqueror  sweep   all   nations  friends ;  who  fall  away,  taunt,  and  help

together.      Not    for    him-elf,    but    for  to  strip  them.     2.  In  their  dignities;

others.     "  Riches  do  not  exhilarate  us  which  are  tainted  by  sin  and  fall  into

so  much  with  their  possession  as  they  dust.      3.    In  their   reputations;    their

torment  us  with  their  loss"  [Gregory].  names  are  a   proverb  in  the  land,  and

Riches  are  often — 1.  Connected  with  hated  by  all  men.    4.  In  their  posterity  ;

covetousness.      2.    With   violence, — op-  who   are   cursed   by  the  sins  of  their


chap.  II. J  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY;  HABAKKUK.  503


fathers,   and   cut   off   from    the   earth,  and  his  Macedonians.     So  the  Roman

"  God   loves   to   retaliate,  to   spoil  the  empire  was  miserably  rent  and  torn  by

spoilers  by  a  remnant  of  the  people,  by  the  Goths,  Vandals,   Huns,  Lombards,

such   as   were   of  no   note,  and    much  people   not   before   heard   of,   and   the

unlikely  to  do  such  exploits.     Thus  he  Greek  empire  by  Turks,  Tartars,  Saracens,

spoiled  these  Babylonians,  by  Cyrus  and  Scythians  "  \Trapp\
his  Medes ;  the  Persians,  by  Alexander

HOMILETICS.
The  Evil  Covetousness. —  Verses  9 — 11.

The  second  woe  is  now  pronounced  against  coveting  still  more,  and  aiming  still
higher.  The  desire  to  build  stately  palaces,  to  be  exempt  from  common  misfortunes,
and  to  perpetuate  human  greatness,  is  condemned.  It  is  an  evil  covetousness  or
gain.

I.  The  design  of  this  covetousness.     "  That  he  may  set  his  nest  on  high,"  &c.

1.  To  enjoy  the  comforts  of  life.  The  covetous  seek  ease  and  comfort,  make  their
nest  in  their  acquisitions,  and  feather  it  for  their  offspring,  as  the  eagle  builds  on
high  to  save  its  young  from  destruction.  They  think  their  prosperity  can  never
change,  and  believe  they  have  enough  to  secure  perpetual  comfort.  "  Soul,  thou
hast  much  goods  laid  up  for  many  years  ;  take  thine  ease,"  &c.  2.  To  escape  the
calamities  of  life.  "  That  he  may  be  delivered  from  the  power  of  evil."  He  fears
evil  from  those  whom  he  has  injured,  and  builds  on  high,  and  fortifies  himself
against  dangers.  But  what  avails  the  height,  when  sin  is  in  the  foundation?
Babylon  was  built  on  high,  encircled  by  walls  which  no  invader  could  scale  or
shatter.  But  it  was  levelled  to  the  dust,  and  its  proud  king  ranked  with  the
brutes.  God  can  overthrow  the  strongest  tower,  and  terror  invade  the  proudest
conscience.  "  Though  thou  exalt  thyself  as  the  eagle,  and  though  thou  set  thy  nest
among  the  stars,  thence  will  I  bring  thee  down"  (Ob.  4  :  Jer.  xlix.  16).  II.  The
proofs  of  this  covetousness.  The  very  buildings  which  they  rear  cry  out  against
their  conduct.  God's  works  speak  of  his  wisdom,  power,  and  glory.  So  man's
works  declare  his  skill  and  his  guilt.  Works  of  mercy  are  memorials  before  God,
and  plead  there ;  works  of  cruelty  and  wrong  cry  out  for  vengeance  upon  the
oppressor.  1.  The  stones  in  the  wall  cry  out.  2.  The  beam  out  of  the  timber
responds  to  the  cry.  Here  are  strange  witnesses,  woeful  antiphonies  in  sin.  If
everything  else  is  silent,  their  houses  built  by  oppression  and  blood  shall  testify
against  them.  The  whole  creation  groans  beneath  the  bondage  of  their  corruption.
"  Woe  unto  him  that  buildeth  his  house  by  unrighteousness,  and  his  chambers  by
wrong ;  that  useth  his  neighbour's  service  without  wages,  and  giveth  him  not  for
his  work."  III.  The  results  of  this  covetousness.  The  covetous  man  takes  a
wrong  course  for  his  wealth,  his  family,  and  his  posterity.  With  all  his  pains  and
schemes  he  cannot  preserve  himself  from  utter  ignominy  and  ruin.  1.  He  inflicts
personal  injury.  "  And  hast  sinned  against  thy  soul."  Men  neglect  their  souls
in  pursuit  of  the  world,  and  find  their  gain  in  the  end  to  be  a  poor  bargain.  "  The
covet«>us  man  heaps  up  riches  not  to  enjoy  them,  but  to  have  them;  and  starves
himself  in  the  midst  of  plenty,  and  most  unnaturally  cheats  and  robs  himself  of
that  which  is  his  own  ;  and  makes  a  hard  shift  to  be  as  poor  and  miserable  with  a
great  estate  as  any  man  can  be  without  it "  [Tillotson\  In  the  present  world  he
disquiets  himself,  pierces  himself  through  with  many  sorrows ;  and  in  the  world
to  come  he  will  lose  what  the  whole  world  cannot  redeem —

"  Some,  o'er-enamour'd  of  their  bags,  run  mad,
Groan  under  gold,  yet  weep  for  want  of  bread"  [Young"].

2.  He  brings  social  disgrace.  "  Thou  hast  consulted  shame  to  thy  house."  By
cutting  off  many  people,  he  gained  disgrace  not  safety.     Mighty  conquerors  who


504  I10MILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HABAKKUK.  [chap.  ii.


destroy  others  do  not  secure  their  own  throne.  Those  who  scandalise,  undermine,
or  impoverish  their  neighbours  to  make  room  for  themselves,  turn  their  own  glory
and  that  of  their  posterity  into  shame  (Prov.  xv.  25 — 27;  xiv.  11).  "He  that
trusteth  in  his  riches  shall  fall ;  but  the  righteous  shall  nourish  as  a  branch."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  9.   Evil  covetousness  not  a  good  fence  against  danger.    Nests  are  builded

covetousness.   "  Covet  earnestly  the  best  close,  and  so  they  are  warm,  and  they

gifts,"  &c.     The  desire  itself  was  evil  in  are  built  either  on  high,  or  out  of  the

its  nature.     Its  results  were  evil,  from  way  in  some  secret  place,  and  so  they

which    he   sought   to   deliver    himself,  are  safe  [Caryl].

Covetousness  is  always  evil  when  joined  Ver.  10.  TJiou  hast  consulted.  Holy
with  ambition,  infidelity,  and  confidence  Scripture  overlooks  the  means,  and
in  earthly  wealth.  On  high.  1.  The  places  us  at  the  end  of  all.  Whatever
foundation  of  the  building:  pride,  ambi-  the  wicked  had  in  view,  to  satisfy  ambi-
tion, and  earthly  power.  2.  The  fate  of  tion,  avarice,  passion,  love  of  pleasure,
the  building.  Overthrown  by  Divine  or  the  rest  of  man's  immediate  ends,  all
power.  u  He  who  builds  his  house  with  he  was  doing  was  leading  on  to  a  further
other  people's  property,  collects  stones  end — shame  and  death.  He  was  bring-
for  his  grave"  [Cramer].  What  the  ing  about  not  only  these  short-lived
world  calls  protection,  cannot  protect  ends,  but  the  lasting  ends  beyond,  and
against  God's  judgments ;  death  mounts  these  far  more  than  the  others,  since
over  all  rocks  \Diedrich\  A  nest  im-  that  is  the  real  end  of  a  thing  which
ports  two  things  :  first,  warmth,  or  a  abides,  in  which  it  at  last  ends  [Pusey].
fence  against  cold  :  secondly,  safety,  or  a

HOMILETIOS.
The  City  op  Blood. —  Verses  12 — 14.

The  third  stanza,  naturally  suggested  by  the  preceding  verse,  describes  the
method  by  which  they  carried  out  their  ambitious  ends.  They  might  pretend
public  good,  and  seek  to  establish  popular  government;  but  the  wealth  of  the
kingdom  was  gained  by  bloody  wars,  and  the  city  enlarged  by  captive  tribes  from
other  nations.     "  They  build  up  Zion  with  blood,  and  Jerusalem  with  iniquity."

I.  The  city  was  built  with  wrong  materials.  It  was  built  with  blood.  God's
people  and  heathen  nations  were  oppressed,  compelled  to  serve  the  king,  and  labour
on  the  fortifications.  All  private  fortunes  gained  by  cruelty,  all  empires  and
greatness  built  and  defended  in  contempt  for  God,  and  by  the  blood  of  men,  are
established  by  iniquity.  They  may  impose  upon  the  outward  eye,  seem  strong
and  majestic,  but  they  are  inwardly  rotten ;  will  decay  and  fall  to  ruins.  "  Woe
to  the  bloody  city  !  it  is  all  full  of  lies  and  robbery ;  the  prey  departeth  not."
II.  The  builders  of  the  city  laboured  in  vain.  1.  God  frustrated  their  aims.
Human  skill  cannot  succeed  when  God  is  opposed.  In  the  Church  and  in  the
world,  nothing  can  hinder  his  purposes.  He  is  Lord  of  Hosts,  whom  the  armies
of  heaven  and  the  agencies  of  earth  obey.  As  in  building  Babel  of  old  so  now
can  he  confound  the  design,  and  frustrate  the  efforts,  of  men.  "  Behold,  is  it  not
of  the  Lord  of  Hosts  1 "  2.  God  consumed  their  materials.  They  toiled  and  were
disappointed.  They  built  the  city,  and  reared  splendid  palaces,  only  for  the  fire.
They  laboured,  with  intense  energy  and  pride,  to  accomplish  their  own  ends,  but
they  "wearied  themselves  for  very  vanity."  Men  fatigue  themselves  in  pursuit  of
wealth  and  honour,  weary  themselves  in  sin,  and  the  result  is  consumed  in  the  fire.
"The  people  shall  labour  in  vain  (for  vanity)  and  the  folk  in  (for)  the  fire,  and
they  shall  be  weary."     III.  The  city  shall  eventually  be  destroyed.     "Tor  the


CHAP.  II. J  EOMILUTIC  COMMENTARY:  HABAKKUK.  505


earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord."  God  will  be
known  by  the  judgments  which  he  executes  upon  wrong-doers.  All  violence  and
injustice,  like  that  of  Babylon  and  Antichrist,  will  be  overturned.  The  name  of
God  will  be  read  in  the  punishment  of  the  wicked,  and  the  deliverance  of  his
people.  The  glory  of  God,  obscured  by  oppression  and  cruelty,  in  due  time  will
shine  forth  from  the  clouds,  and  fill  the  earth  with  its  splendour.  "  As  truly  as  I
live,  all  the  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  glory  of  the  Lord."

A  Glorious  Day. —  Verse  14.

"For"  indicates  the  reason  for  the  sentence  pronounced.  God  had  determined
to  manifest  his  glory  in  the  judgment  and  overthrow  of  all  ungodly  powers  (cf.
Isa.  ii.  12—21  ;  vi.  3  :  Num.  xiv.  21).

I.  The  blessing  predicted.  "  The  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord."  God
is  glorious  in  character  and  procedure.  And  of  this  glory  he  is  so  jealous  that  he
will  not  give  it  to  another  (Isa.  xlii.  8).  The  glory  here  is  the  revelation  of
impartial  justice  and  irresistible  power ;  a  manifestation  condemning  sin  and
honouring  truth.  Not  only  the  glory,  but  the  knowledge  of  it,  shall  fill  the  earth.
Men  shall  recognize  it,  see  mercy  and  judgment,  and  learn  that,  *  verily,  there  is  a
reward  for  the  righteous  :  verily,  he  is  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth."  II.  The
method  of  revealing"  this  blessing.  In  the  connection  of  the  words,  we  learn
that  God  reveals  and  magnifies  his  glory,  when  sin  is  prevalent,  and  human  glory
is  decayed.  In  the  destruction  of  Babylon  and  all  the  powers  that  resemble  it,  and
in  the  deliverance  and  restoration  of  the  Jews,  we  see  the  glory  of  God.  But  this
is  only  a  type  of  the  destruction  of  error  and  the  spread  of  Gospel  truth.  Both
judgment  and  mercy  are  requisite  to  fill  the  earth  with  the  glory  of  the  Lord.
Everything  hostile  to  him,  and  the  interests  of  his  people,  must  be  destroyed.  The
kingdom  of  Christ  set  up,  and  the  earth  illuminated  with  his  glory  (Rev.  xviii.  1).
III.  The  measure  in  which  this  blessing  is  bestowed.  "  As  the  waters  cover
the  sea."  This  indicates — 1.  Depth.  God's  judgments  are  a  mighty  deep,  and  the
knowledge  of  them  shall  not  be  superficial.  The  nations  shall  feel  them,  and  be
convicted  by  the  revelation  of  the  Divine  glory.  2.  Abundance.  The  waters  cover
the  sea,  and  spread  far  and  wide.  This  knowledge  will^ZZ  the  earth.  3.  Permanence.
The  waters  of  the  sea  abide,  can  never  be  exhausted  nor  diminished.  Knowledge
is  increasing,  the  Gospel  is  spreading,  and  the  bright  day  is  predicted  when  "the
earth  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea  "  (Ps.
lxxii.  19  :  Isa.  xi.  9).

HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  13.  Labour  in  the  very  fire,  that  gave  to  them  taketh  away.  They
Labour  which  fatigues ;  labour  in  vain  ;  had  need  to  be  made  to  see  this ;  there-
labour  opposed  to  God.  Sin  is  labour —  fore  he  saith,  Is  it  not  of  the  Lord  1 "
the   gain   is   vanity.      Then    why   not  [Marbury].

observe   who   causes  this1?     "It  is  the  Ver.  14.     The  words  of  God  in  this

Lord  that  bringeth  all  the  labours  of  the  text  are  full  of  marrow  and  fatness,  for

ungodly  to  loss  and  vanity,  that  when  God  is  rich  in  mercy,  so  he  dilateth  his

they  come  to  thrash  their  crop  of  travail,  favours.    1.  In  the  latitude,  all  the  earth

they  find  nothing  but  straw  and  chaff,  over.     2.    In   the  plenitude,   the   earth

To  express  his  power  to  do  this  he  is  shall  be  filled.     3.  In  the  magnitude,  the

here   called  the  God  of   Hosts,  for  all  knowledge  of   God's  glory.     4.   In  the

things  serve  him,  and  he  resisteth  the  profundity,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea.

proud.     He  layeth  their  honours  in  the  I.   The  thing  to  be  done.     The  earth  to

dust ;    he   disperseth   their   riches  ;    he  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  glory

spoileth  them  of  all  their  treasures:  he  of  God.  His  moral  excellences — holiness,

that  exalted  them   made  them  low ;  he  righteousness,    and    grace :    his  natural


506  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HABAKKUK.  [chap.  n.


perfections — power,  wisdom,  omniscience,  dark   the  days  of  the  prophet !     How

and  omnipotence  to  be  made  known.  II.  improbable  the  present  signs  !    Yet  how

The  necessity  of  doing  it.     God  is  seen  much  has  been  done  already  !   Sufficient

in   the   physical   universe,   and   in   the  to  guarantee  future  success.  God  himself

powers   of   the   human  mind;  but  sin,  has  pledged  his  word.     "The  glory  of

like  a  mist,  hides  the  glory.     No  intel-  the  Lord  shall  be  revealed,  and  all  flesh

lectual  effort,  no  human  light  whatever,  shall  see  it  together,  for  the  mouth  of

can  do  the  work.     God  must  shine  in  the  L<»rd  hath  spoken  it."
Christ,  shine  into  the  world,  and  into

the    soul,    "to    give    the    light    of     the  "  So   Jesus,  let  thy  langdom  come  ;

i_         i   j         j?  .li        i           »  n    i  ii  /«  n  Then  sin  and  hell  &  terrific  gloom

knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God     (2  Cor.  Shall  at  its  brightness  flee  away,—

iv.  6).    III.  Will  it  ever  be  done  ?    How  The  dawn  of  an  eternal  day."

HOMILETICS.
The  Three  Cups. —  Verses  15 — 17.

Woe  the  fourth  is  pronounced  upon  beastly  luxury,  sensuality,  and  base  treat-
ment of  subjugated  nations.  The  bottle  of  wine  turns  out  a  cup  of  wrath,  and  the
disposition  in  which  it  is  given  is  that  of  voluptuousness  and  lust  of  power.

I.  The  cup  of  wine.  "  Woe  to  him  that  giveth  his  neighbour  drink."  The
Chaldaeans,  with  insatiable  desire,  allured  neighbouring  States,  intoxicated  them
with  lust  of  war,  to  obtain  booty,  and  expose  them  to  shame.  1.  Drink  given  to  a
neighbour.  Drinking  oneself  is  bad  enough,  but  to  give  to  others  is  worse.  To
put  the  bottle  to  others  is  a  practice  too  common  in  the  palace  and  the  public-
house.  By  the  laws  of  the  club  or  the  fashion  of  the  Court,  men  are  constrained
to  drink.  2.  Drink  given  to  make  a  neighbour  intoxicated.  To  give  drink  to  a
weary  traveller,  a  cup  of  cold  water  in  the  name  of  a  disciple,  is  commendable  ;  but
to  offer  the  bottle  with  a  design  to  intoxicate,  to  "  make  him  drunken  also,"  is
abominable  wickedness.  3.  Drink  given  to  expose  an  intoxicated  neighbour  to
shame  and  contempt.  "That  thou  mayest  lo<>k  on  their  nakedness."  To  look  on
such  things  with  delight  is  most  unnatural ;  to  abuse  men  in  such  a  condition  is
awful.  Woe  to  them  who  entice  others  to  drunkenness  that  they  may  take
advantage  of  them,  and  mock  their  infirmities.  II.  The  cup  of  riot.  The  shame
with  which  the  enemy  was  satisfied,  was  equivalent  to  riot,  or  revelling  in  shame.
Belshazzar  drank  with  his  lords  and  ran  to  excess.  In  drink  is  a  breach  of
propriety  and  good  temper ;  "  envyiugs,  and  murders,  revellings,  and  such-like."
Day  by  day  we  learn  the  corruption  of  morals  engendered  and  the  crimes  com-
mitted in  sensuality  and  drink.  Every  lust  of  the  flesh  finds  in  drunkenness  and
riot  its  appropriate  fuel  and  fire,  and  its  influence  in  seduction  and  ruin  baffles  all
calculation  and  conception.  "  Let  us  walk  honestly,  as  in  the  day ;  not  in  rioting
and  drunkenness,  not  in  chambering  and  wantonness,  not  in  strife  and  envying."

11  Pass  where  we  may,  through  city  or  through  town,
Village,  or  hamlet,  of  this  merry  land,
Though  lean  and  beggared,  every  twentieth  pace
Conducts  the  unguarded  nose  to  such  a  whiff
Of  state  debauch,  as  makes  temperance  real."

III.  The  cup  of  retribution.  "  The  cup  of  the  Lord's  right  hand  shall  be  turned
unto  thee."  To  deal  out,  in  barrel  or  bottle,  inflaming  and  polluting  drinks  is  not
innocent  and  blameless  conduct.  Woe,  heavy  woe,  is  pronounced  upon  such  acta
But  when  the  motives  are  mercenary,  and  the  intentions  unkind,  the  punishment
is  heavy.  1.  They  are  filled  with  shame  instead,  of  glory.  They  sought  glory,
thought  to  be  rich  by  oppressing  others,  but  they  lost  their  reputation  and  were
filled  with  shame.  Drunkards  and  ambitious  men  proclaim  their  own  shame.
Shameful  spewing  is  on  their  glory.     God  rejects  their  services,  and  nature  abhors


chap.  II.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HABAKKUK.  507


th^ir  customs.  "Their  glory  is  their  shame."  2.  They  were  treated  as  they  treated
others.  'k  Drink  thai  also,  and  let  thy  foreskin  be  uncovered."  God's  judgments
are  equitable.  As  they  had  drawn  others  to  sensuality  and  cruelty,  so  they  had  to
drink  the  very  dregs,  and  become  contemptible  as  a  drunken  man  lying  naked,  or
an  uncircumcised  heathen,  polluting  himself  with  filthy  vomit.  Sensuality  entails
shame.  Those  who  aid  in  the  degradation  of  others  adopt  the  most  effectual  means
to  expose  themselves.  "  The  cup  also  shall  pass  through  unto  thee  :  thou  shalt  be
drunken  and  shalt  make  thyself  naked."  3.  They  were  overcome  with  the  violence
which  they  displayed  to  others.  "  For  the  violence  of  Lebanon  shall  cover  thee."
Violence  to  nature,  in  the  destruction  of  the  forests  j  to  beasts,  in  hunting  them  for
prey,  or  chasing  them  in  fright ;  to  man,  in  shedding  innocent  blood.  The  city,  the
country,  and  the  people  all  suffered.  The  end  of  this  plunder  was  not  to  adorn,
but  overwhelm  them.  The  destruction  was  complete ;  "  cover  thee  "  (Isa.  xiv.  6 — 8).
Violence  done  to  others  will  be  sure  to  recoil  upon  the  transgressors ;  "  to  make
them  a  desolation,  an  astonishment,  an  hissing,  and  a  curse;  as  it  is  this  day"
(Jer.  xxv.  15—18).

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  16.     Shame.     The  shame  of  the  should  be  lightly  accounted  of,  and  lie

ungodly  cometh  forth  from  himself ;  the  buried  in  the  sheet  of  shame,  as  in  a

shame  he  put  others  to  is  doubled  upon  dunghill  of  filthy  vomit  [Trapp].

himself;  and  the  very  means  which  he  Vers.  15,  16.  That  is  an  extraordinary

had  used  to  fill  himself  with  glory  and  kind  of  argument  which  infers,  from  the

greatness,    cover    the   glory    which    by  mention   or   prohibition  of  an  extreme

nature  he  had  with  the  deeper  disgrace,  sin,  the  rightfulness  of  the  intervening

so  that  he  should  be  a  loathsome  and  and   causative   steps.      Here,    however,

revolting  sight  to  all.     Man  veils  foul  all  the  stages  and  agencies  are  denounced

deeds   under   fair   words ;    God   in   his  and    condemned — the  poisoned    potion,

word  unveils  the  foulness  [Pusey].  the   giving   of  it,   and  the  final  result

The  Lord's  right  hand  shall  be  turned.  [Temp.  Commentary].

1.  Retribution  among  men:  turned,  Lit.  Ver.  17.  Beasts.  God  avenges  cruelty

turn  itself  from  others  to  you.     Every  done  to  brutes.   Learn — 1.  The  providence

one's   turn   will   come.     2.  Retribution  of  God  over  cattle.     2.    The  treatment

measured   among   men.     "  The   cup   of  they  should  receive  at  the  hands  of  man.

the   Lord's  right   hand."     Measure   for  "Hath   God    care   for   oxen?"      "  We

measure   all   sin   brings   its   own   retri-  learn  here  that  when   God   cometh   to

bution ;    but    the    violent    will     suffer  execute   vengeance,    he    surveyeth    the

"  violence,"  and  deeds  of  shame  will  be  whole  catalogue  of  offences ;  and  as  he

put   to   everlasting   contempt.       Glory,  saith  in  David,  '  I  wdl  reprove  thee,  and

The   Hebrew  word   for  glory  properly  set  them   in    order    before    thee,'    the

signifies  weigh tiness ;  as  the  word  twice  wrong  to  the  cities,  to  the  men,  to  the

here  used  for  shame  signifies  lightness ;  beasts,  to  persons,  to  places,  all  comes

an    elegant    opposition,    showing    that  into   account,   and    the    offenders  shall

whatsoever  the  Babylonians  gloried  in,  smart  for  all "  [Marbury].
and    held    themselves   honourable   for,

HOMILETICS.

The  Unprofitableness  op  Idolatry. —  Verses  18,  19.

This  fifth  strophe  does  not  utter  woe  at  first,  but  makes  prominent  the  cause
that  leads  to  it.  Like  the  rest  of  heathen  nations,  the  Chaldajans  trusted  to  their
gods,  but  all  hope  from  this  quarter  is  cut  off.  Idols  profit  nothing ;  it  is  folly
therefore  to  carve  and  honour  them.


508  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY  >  HABAKKUK.  [chap,  il


I.  Idolatry  is  a  system  of  lies.  "  A  teacher  of  lies."  1.  The  idol  itself  is  a
lie.  It  represents  God  as  visible,  finite,  and  dependent,  whereas  he  is  Infinite  and
Invisible.  It  contradicts  the  word  of  God  and  the  nature  of  man  ;  and  represents
carnal  conceptions  of  truth  and  worship.  2.  The  teaching  of  the  idol  is  a  lie.  In
itself  and  by  its  priests  it  sustains  delusions.  Its  oracle  is  the  doctrine  of  vanities ;
it  is  a  falsehood  and  a  work  of  errors  (Jer.  x.  8),  leading  men  to  trust  in  dumb
idols,  the  work  of  their  own  hands  (1  Cor.  xii.  2).  "  We  have  made  lies  our  refuge,
and  under  falsehood  have  we  hid  ourselves."

"  God's  omnipresence  seems  not  sensuous ;
Unless  he  be  in  us,  we  are  not  in  him  "  \Bailey\

II.  Idolatry  is  a  system  of  impotence.  Idols  may  be  adorned  and  beautified,
commended  and  honoured,  but  they  are  only  dumb  nothings.  1.  T7iey  are
fashioned  by  man.  Carved  and  encased  with  gold  and  silver,  and  yet  neither
breath,  feeling,  nor  understanding.  They  are  inferior  to  their  maker,  how  then
can  they  impart  life  and  help  to  those  who  trust  them  ]  "  They  that  make  a
graven  image  are  all  of  them  vanity  "  (Isa.  xliv.  9,  10).  2.  They  respond  not  to  the
requests  of  man.  Men  cry  "  to  the  wood,"  Awake,  for  our  relief  ;  "  to  the  dumb
stone,"  Arise,  deliver  me,  for  thou  art  my  God  (Isa.  xliv.  17)  :  but  there  is  no
answer.  A  god  that  cannot  speak  is  nothing.  The  cries  of  man  must  be  heard,
the  wants  of  man  must  be  satisfied.  Without  a  true  response  to  the  entreaties  of
man  there  is  no  religion.  We  cannot  animate  stocks  and  stones.  Art  and  science
may  create  and  beautify  gods  ;  but  this  is  labour  in  vain — will  deceive,  and  nourish
superstition.  "  They  have  mouths,  but  they  speak  not ;  eyes  have  they,  but  they
see  not ;  they  have  ears,  but  they  hear  not ;  neither  is  there  any  breath  in  their
mouths."  III.  Idolatry  is  a  system  of  vanity.  When  men  have  done  all  they
can,  displayed  their  skill  and  carved  their  image,  God  ridicules  the  result.  Only
wood  and  stone,  base  and  inferior  matter.  That  teach  !  Yes,  though  dumb  it
speaks  of  impotence,  vanity,  and  folly.  1.  What  vanity  to  trust  in  a  god  of  your
own  creation  /  If  images  are  made  by  man,  how  can  they  have  the  being  and
authority  of  God  1  Why  spend  your  energy  in  the  service  of  that  which  will  not
profit1?  "'Tis  mad  idolatry,"  says  Shakspeare,  "  to  make  the  service  greater  than
the  God."  "What  profiteth  the  graven  image1?"  2.  What  folly  to  rely  upon
that  which  brings  a  curse/  "Woe  unto  him  that  said  to  the  wood,  Awake."
Whatever  is  accounted  a  god,  which  is  only  a  creature  or  a  feigned  thing,  is  a  curse
to  man.  It  curses  human  nature  by  degrading  it,  and  making  men  like  brutes.  It
curses  the  world  by  bringing  down  the  judgments  of  God.  When  men  are
determined  not  to  retain  God  in  their  thoughts,  but  to  exalt  that  which  is  below
themselves  to  be  in  the  place  of  God,  they  become  brutish  in  their  knowledge,
vain  in  their  imaginations,  and  alienated  in  their  hearts.  "  For  this  cause  God
gave  them  up  unto  vile  affections."

The  Divine  Court. —  Verse  20.

In  sublime  contrast  to  idols,  Jehovah  is  set  forth  in  his  dwelling-place  and
authority.  None  should  dispute  with  him,  but  stand  in  awe  before  him.  In  the
court-house  of  God  "  let  all  the  earth  keep  silence."

I.  God  resides  in  this  court.  "  The  Lord  is  in  his  holy  temple."  The  world
is  not  empty  space.  A  true  and  personal  God  exists  ;  not  like  idols  dwelling  in
temples  made  with  hands,  but  revealing  himself  in  the  visible  universe.  In  heaven
by  glory  and  honour,  in  earth  by  grace  and  goodness.  "  The  Being  whose  centre
is  everywhere,  but  whose  circumference  is  nowhere."  In  every  state  and  condition
God  is  ever  near.  "  The  Lord  is  in  his  holy  temple."  II.  God  governs  in  this
court.  He  dwells  in  his  temple,  and  has  not  left  the  world  to  chance,  innexii'le
law,  or  abstract  powers.  His  throne  is  on  high,  and  has  neither  been  overturned
nor  vacated.     He  judges  the  world  in  righteousness,  delivers  his  people  in  distress.


CHAP,  n.]  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  HABAKKUK.  509


and  punishes  the  insolence  of  the  wicked.  He  is  not  enshrined  in  gold  and  silver ;
"  but  our  God  is  in  the  heavens,"  reigning  supreme  over  all  the  nations  of  the
earth.  He  is  the  world's  great  King,  discerning  and  rewarding  the  works  and
ways  of  men.  "  The  Lord's  throne  is  in  heaven  ;  his  eyes  behold,  his  eyelids  try
the  children  of  men."  III.  God  demands  silence  in  his  court.  "  Let  all  the
earth  keep  silence."  If  we  are  silent  in  courts  of  law,  if  all  are  reverent  and
solemn  before  an  earthly  judge,  how  should  we  stand  before  Almighty  God  !
1.  Let  sinners  tremble  at  his  judgments.  He  will  strike  idolaters  dumb,  convince
the  wicked  of  folly,  and  cover  them  with  shame.  2.  Let  saints  trust  in  his  word.
If  perplexed,  "  hold  thy  peace  at  the  presence  of  the  Lord  God  ;  for  the  day  of  the
Lord  is  at  hand  "  (Zeph.  i.  7).  If  afflicted,  "  be  still,  and  know  that  i  am  God  "
(Ps.  xlvi.  10).  If  weakened  in  faith,  and  disappointed  in  prayer,  "  Keep  silence
before  me,  0  islands ;  and  let  the  people  renew  their  strength  :  let  them  come
near :  let  them  speak "  (Isa.  xli.  1).  "In  speaking  of  God  our  best  eloquence  is
silence,"  says  Hooker.  "  Be  silent,  0  all  flesh,  before  the  Lord  :  for  he  is  raised
up  out  of  his  holy  habitation."

HOMILETW  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Vers.  18, 19.   The  destruction  of  idols,  to  all  perplexed,  fearful,  and  sceptical

Created    by    man  —  deaf    and    dumb,  souls,  as  stars  in  a  dark  sky.     1.   The

impotent  and  false.      Dumb  idols :  Lit.  just   shall  live   by  faith.     A   truth  so

dumb  nothings.     "  And  what  else  are  important  that  it  is  quoted  thrice  in  the

man's  idols   of   wealth,   honour,    fame,  New  Testament  (Rom.  i.  17  :    Gal.  iii.

which  he  makes  to  himself,  the  creatures  1 1  :  Heb.  x.  38).      2.   The  earth  shall

of  his  own  hands  or  mind — their  great-  be  filled,"  &c.    3.  The  Lord  is  in  his  holy

ness  existing  chiefly  in  his  own  imagina-  temple.     The  first  of  these  three  lights

tion — before  which  he  bows  down  himself,  reveals  the  secret  of  our  religion.     It  is

who  is  the  image  of  God?"  [Pusey].    The  faith.     Faith  in  God's  word,  and  faith

folly  of  idol  worshippers.    Trusting  their  in  God's  work.    The  second  opens  up  to

own  creation — calling  upon  it  as  God,  the  faith  supposed  to  exist ;  a  glorious

and  exposing  their  own  souls.     "Here  promise  that  all  sin,  misery,  and  confusion

is  a  double  woe  :  1.  Loss  of  labour;  2.  which   now    disgrace   and   oppress    the

Want  of  help.    In  the  first  they  bewray  earth,  shall  disappear,  and  make  room  for

their  folly  ;  the  god  of  this  world  hath  the  glory  of  the  Lord  to  take  their  place,

made  fools  of  them  for  turning  the  glory  The  third  sets  forth — the  stay,  the  con-

of  the  invisible  God  into  the  image  of  fidence,    the   breathless   silence    of  the

creatures ;  but  in  the  second  we  find  the  children  of  God,  while  the  promise  is

misery,  for  we  cannot  subsist  without  fulfilling,  and  especially  when  the  ways

help,  and  they  trust  to  idols  where  there  of  God  are  dark  and  mysterious.    Think

is  no  help  "  [Marbury].  of  the  circumstances  and  prospects  of  the

Behold.     Though  the  vanity  of  wor-  prophet,  and   learn   that   God,   in  dis-

shipping  idols  be  palpably  gross,  so  that  pensing  his  blessings,   takes  seasons  of

seriously  to  consider  it  is  sufficient  to  despondency  and  thick  gloom — that  in

refute   it,   yet  such   is  man's  stupidity  selecting    such     times    for     predicting

that  he  needs  stirring  up  to  notice  the  splendid    futures    he   draws   from    the

error  of  his  way — to  caution  him  of  his  opposition  of  men  and  the  infidelity  of

danger,  and  to  wean  him  from  his  sins  the  Church  an  illustration  of  his  irre-

[cf.  Hutchesori].  sistible  majesty  and  unchangeable  truth

Vers.  4,  14,  20.     Three  bright  stars.  [Anon,].
As  the  prophet  stood  on  his  eminence         Vers.  5 — 20.  Of  shameful  and  hurtful

and   saw   nothing   but    darkness,    God  avarice.     1.  Avarice  is  contrary  to  the

revealed   three   great   principles   which  order  prescribed  by  God  ;  therefore  God

infusrd  light  and  life  into  the  gloom —  must  bring  it  back  to  order  by  chastise-

princlples  which  stand  out  to  this  day  ment  (vers.  1,  65,  7).     2.  It  is  contrary


510


HOMTLETIG  COMMENTARY ".-  HABAKKVK.


[CHAP.  II.


to  love,  therefore  it  produces  a  harvest
of  hatred  (ver.  6a).  3.  It  confounds
the  ideas  of  right,  therefore  wrong  must
befall  it  (ver.  8a).  4.  It  makes  the
mind  timid ;  but  where  fear  is  there  is
no  stability  (ver.  9).  5.  It  accumulates
(riches)  with  sin,  therefore  for  nothing
(vers.  12,  11,  13,  17).  6.  It  seeks  false
honour,  therefore  it  acquires  shame  (vers.
15,  16).  7.  It  sets  its  heart  upon  gold
and  silver  and  lifeless  things,  therefore
it  must  perish  with  its  lifeless  gods
(vers.  18,  19).  8.  On  the  whole  it
provokes  the  judgment  of  God  (vers.
86,  14,  20)  [Lange].


Yer.  20.  Notice — 1.  The  privilege  of
the  godly.  "The  Lord  is  in  his  holy
temple,"  to  guide  them  by  his  wisdom,
defend  them  by  his  power,  and  save
them  by  his  grace.  2.  TJie  duty  of  the
godly.  "  Let  all  the  earth  be  silent ;  "
but  they  should  acquiesce  in  his  word
and  work.  "Even  so,  Lord  God
Almighty,  true  and  righteous  are  thy
judgments."

"  Wait,  0  ray  soul,  thy  Maker's  will ;
Tumultuous  passions,  all  be  still !
Nor  let  a  murmuring  thought  arise ;
His  ways  are  just,  his  counsels  wise."


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  II.


Ver.  1.  Watch.  We  should  follow
providence,  and  not  attempt  to  force  it,
for  that  often  proves  best  for  us  which
was  least  our  own  doing  [Henry].

Vers.  2,  3.  Tarry.  For  our  actions
let  his  word  be  our  guide,  and  for  the
events  of  things  and  all  that  concern  us,
let  his  good  pleasure  and  wise  disposing
be  our  will.  Let  us  give  up  the  rudder
of  our  life  into  his  band  to  be  steered
by  him  [Abp.  Leighton].  Prayer  is  the
rest  of  our  care,  and  the  calm  of  our
temper  [/.  Taylor].

Ver.  4.  Faith.  The  life  of  faith  can
only  spring  from  faith;  as  trees  and
plants  do  from  their  proper  seeds.  Faith
begins  here  with  a  weak  apprehension
of  things  not  seen,  and  ends  with  the
immediate  vision  of  God  in  the  world  to
come.

Vers.  5,  6.  Desire.  Could  you  change
the  solid  earth  into  a  single  lump  of
gold,  and  drop  it  into  the  gaping  mouth
of  avarice,  it  would  only  be  a  crumb  of
transient  comfort,  a  cordial  drop,  en-
abling it  to  cry  a  little  louder,  "  Give,
give  "  [Royal  Preacher].

Vers.  9,  10.  House.  How  few  houses
have  you  that  those  that  are  now  in
them  can  say,  "  My  ancestor  dwelt  here,
and  these  were  his  lands]"  Go  over
the  whole  country,  few  can  say  so.  Men
when  they  build  have  conceits.  Now  I
build  for  my  child,  and  for  my  child's
child.  God  crosses  them.  Either  they
have  no  posterity,  or  by  a  thousand
things  that  fall  out  in  the  world,  it  falls


out  otherwise  [Rd.  Sibbes].
shame —


Consulted


"  Sin  and  shame  are  ever  tied  together
With  Gordian  knots,  of  such  a  strong  thread

spun,
They  cannot  without  violence  he  undone."

[Webster.]

Vers.  12,  13.  Vanity.  To  so  small
a  purpose  is  it  to  have  an  erected  face
towards  heaven,  and  a  perpetual  grovel-
ling spirit  upon  earth,  eating  dust,  as
doth  the  serpent  [Bacon],  The  empire
of  the  world  is  but  a  crust  to  be  thrown
to  a  dog  [Luther],

Ver.  14.  Glory.  It  is  one  of  the
greatest  praises  of  God's  wisdom,  that
he  can  turn  the  evil  of  men  to  his  own
glory  [Bp.  Hall].

Ver.  15.  Drink,  Seldom  does  any
sensual  indulgence  come  alone.  One
lust  prepares  the  way  for  others;  the
first  step  is  sure  to  lead  onwards.  The
poor  deluded  victim  cannot  stop  when
he  pleases  [G.  Bridges],

Vers.  16  — 18.  Shame.  There  is
none  of  you  that  ever  entered  this  house
of  pleasure  but  he  left  the  skirts  of  his
garment  in  the  hands  of  shame,  and
had  his  name  rolled  in  the  chambers  of
death.  What  fruit  had  ye  then  1  This
is  the  question  [Bp,  Taylor],  The  man
wakes  from  his  dream,  and  finds  that
he  possesses  not  an  atom  of  the  rich
possessions  he  had  dreamed  of  [Lorin],

Vers.  18,  19.  Idolatry.  Any  opinion
which  tends  to  keep  out  of  sight  the
living  and  loving  God,  whether  it  be  to


ohap.  n.J  HOMLLMIC  COMMENTARY:    HABAKKUK.  611


substitute  for  him  an  idol,  or  any  occult  asked  a  Christian,  "  Where  is  God  % n
agency,  or  a  formal  creed,  can  be  nothing  The  Christian  answered,  "  Let  me  first
better  than  the  portentous  shadow  pro-  ask  you,  *  Where  is  he  not"?"  [Aitow-
jected  from  the  slavish  darkness  of  an  smith.].  The  Will  of  God  is  our  pole-
ignorant  heart  [Hallam].  While  earthly  star,  and,  with  our  eye  constantly  on  it,
objects  are  exhausted  by  familiarity,  the  we  shall  be  carried  safely  through  every
thought  of  God  becomes  to  the  devout  storm  and  tempest  of  this  mortal  life
man  continually  brighter,  richer,  vaster ,  [ylraw.].  What  I  do,  thou  knowest  not
derives  fresh  lustre  from  all  that  he  now;  but  thou  shalt  know  hereafter,
observes  of  nature  and  providence ;  and  is  the  unvaried  language  of  God  in  his
attracts  to  itself  all  the  glories  of  the  providence.  He  will  have  credit  every
universe  [Ghanning].  step.  He  will  not  assign  reasons,  because
Ver.  20.    A  heathen  philosopher  once  he  will  exercise  faith  [Wilson],


CHAPTER  IIL

Critical  Notes.]   Prayer]  joined  with  praise.     Shigionoth]  (cf.  Ps.  vii.) ;  this  verse  posterior
to  the  prophecy.    2.  Speech]  Report  concerning  God's  judgments.     Revive]  Preserve,  revivify  (Ps.
ixxx.  19)  :  within  years  of  calamity  in  which  we  live.    Known]  Make  thy  work  known.    3.]  These
descriptions  rest  upon  earlier  revelations  of  God.     Teman,  Edom ;  Paran]  (Deut.  xxxiii.  2).     God
appeared  from  Sinai  in  splendour,  which  like  the  morning  covered  the  heavens  with  light,  and  filled
the  earth  with  glory.     4.  Horns]  i.  e.  rays  (Ex.  xxxiv.  29) ;  side  (hand).     There]  In  the  light  was
power  veiled  (Ps.  civ.  2).     The  splendour  was  the  covering  of  Divine  Majesty.     5.]  He  comes  to
judge.     Feet]   Behind  him.     Burning]   Lit.   burning  heat   of  the  pestilence  (Deut.  xxxii.  24).
6.  Stood]  as  a  warrior.    Measured]  As  a  judge  (parcel  out  land,  Mic.  ii.  4),  some ;  he  sets  the  earth
reeling,  springing  up  as  one  in  fear.    Scattered]  Broken  asunder.    Perpetual]  Which  never  moved,
now  trembled,  bowed,  and  resolved  into  dust.     Ways]  As  formerly,  so  now:  t,  e.  He  follows  them
(Job  xxii.  15).     7.]  Neighbouring  nations  tremble  at  his  judgments.     Saw]  in  vision.     8.]  Now
judgment  is  executed.     The  description  rests  upon  two  facts :  dividing  of  Red  Sea  and  of  Jordan
(Ex.  xv.  18  :  Ps.  civ.  3,  5) ;  and  sets  forth  God  the  Judge  who  can  smite  in  wrath  the  sea  of  the
world  and  the  rivers  of  the  earth.    Salvation]  The  object  of  riding;  a  warlike  figure  (Ps.  xviii.  11  :
Ixviii.  17).    9.]  Picture  of  a  warrior  continued.    Naked]  Ready  to  shoot.    Oaths]  Promises  to  their
forefathers  (Deut.  xxxii.  40 — 42).     Cleave]  Split  into  rivers  by  judicial  interposition.     10.]  The
form  of  earth's  surface  is  changed.     Mountains]  writhe  ;   the  abyss  roars  and  raises  its  hands
(waves) ;  most  powerful  agitations  accompany  the  theophany.     11.  Arrows]  Executing  justice,  turn
light  into  darkness,  or  devouring  fire  (Isa.  x.  17).     12.]  Acts  of  judgment  connected  with  the
salvation  of  Israel.     March]  Solemn  and  majestic  proceeding  (Jud.  v.  4 :  Ps.  Ixviii.  8).     Thresh]
Tread  down  the  enemy  (Mic.  iv.  13).     13.]  The  end  of  Divine  manifestation.     Salvation]  Rescue.
Anointed]  Not  any  particular  king,  M  but  the  Davidic  King  absolutely,  including  the  Messiah,  in
whom  the  sovereignty  of  David  is  raised  to  an  eternal  duration  "  \Keil\     Head]  wounded.     Neck]
bared;  the  injury  from  above  and  from  below;  the    very  foundation   destroyed.     The  necks   of
minces  were  trodden  under  the  foot  of  Israel's  leaders,  and  the  first-born  of  Egypt  cut  off.     14.]
Warlike  nations  meet  the  same  fate  as  royal  houses.     Staves]  The  sword  of  the  foe  himself,  the
instrument  of  destruction  to  his  armies  and  villages.     Some,  "  that  the  hostile  troops  will  slay  one
another  in  confusion "  (cf.  1  Sam.  xiv.  20 :  2  Chron.  xx.  23,  24).     Came]  with   swiftness   and
violence,  like  a  storm  to  destroy  me.    Scatter]  The  figure  of  dispersing  chaff  (Isa.  xli.  16  :  Jer.  xiii.
24).     Eejoicing]  i.  e.  directed  to  swallow  the  poor  in  secret  (Ps.  x.  9).     15.  Sea]  To  destroy  these
enemies  like  Pharaoh's  hosts.     No  obstacle  prevented  God's  progress.     16.  Trembled]  The  prophet
describes  his  own  feelings  at  the  coming  of  Jehovah  :  6rst,  fear  and  tremblinsr  ;  then,  exulting  joy
(vers.  18,  19).     "  The  alarm  pervades  his  whole  body,  belly,  and  bones,  i.  e.  the  softer  and  firmer
component  parts  of  the  body,  lips,  and  feet;  i,  e.  the  upper  and  lower  organs  of  the  body."  17.]  The
trouble  of  the  day  described.     The  fig  and  vine,  the  noblest  fruits  of  earth,  plantations  and  fields
yield  not;  folds  and  stalls  empty  through  the  devastation.  18.  Yet]  God  is  my  inexhaustible  source,
and  infinite  sphere  of  joy.     Strength]  to  gird  me  to  overcome  tribulation.     Feet]  Swift  as  hinds'
to  escape  the  enemy,  and  reach  high  places  of  eminence  and  safety.  Hence  the  formulae  at  the  eud
harmonises  with  that  at  the  beginning.     It  is  an  ode  of  melody  and  joy  (Isa,  xxxviii.  20).


512  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:  HABAKKUK.  [chap.  hi.

HOMILETICS.
God's  Voice  and  Human  Fear, — Verse  2.

The  prophet  had  received  an  answer  to  his  prayer  (ch.  ii.  1).  Knew  the  mind
of  God  towards  Jews  and  Chald&ans  :  he  now  submits  to  God's  will,  but  fears  the
threatened  judgments,  and  prays  for  his  afflicted  people.

I.  God  speaks  to  men.  "  I  have  heard  thy  speech."  If  we  are  willing  to  hear
the  word  and  know  the  mind  of  God,  we  shall  not  have  long  to  wait.  1.  The
Scriptures  are  the  voice  of  God.  They  are  given  by  inspiration  of  God — make
known  the  doings,  and  set  forth  the  requirements  of  God.  The  oracles  of  God
speak  to  men  in  wisdom  and  truth.  "  Upon  whatsoever  this  title  and  inscription  is
— '  The  Word  of  Jehovah  ' — there  must  we  stoop,"  says  Owen,  "  and  bow  down  our
souls  before  it,  and  captivate  our  understandings  unto  the  obedience  of  faith."
2.  The  Christian  ministry  is  the  voice  of  God.  God  calls  to  men  by  his  servants,
but  they  refuse  to  hear.  "  Thus  we  learn  the  necessity  of  preaching,  and  what
inconvenience  follows  when  it  is  not  used.  Where  preaching  fails,  saith  Solomon,
'  the  people  perish.'  Therefore  let  every  one  keep  himself  in  God's  school-house,
and  learn  his  lesson  diligently "  [Bp.  Pilkington].  "  We  are  ambassadors  for
Christ,  as  though  God  did  beseech  you  by  us."  3.  Providence  is  the  voice  of  God.
In  times  of  judgment  and  revival,  in  national  and  personal  providences,  God  speaks
to  us.  Ponder  the  dealings  of  God,  rest  upon  his  will,  and  learn  the  instruction  of
his  discipline.  "  Shall  there  be  evil  in  a  city,  and  the  Lord  hath  not  done  it  1 "
II.  Men  should  hear  the  voice  of  God  and  fear  him.  "  I  have  heard  thy  speech
and  was  afraid."  In  ver.  16  we  have  the  effect  of  this  fear.  The  prophet  stood  in
awe  at  the  matter  and  the  majesty  of  the  speaker.  It  was  not  a  slavish,  but  a  filial
fear,  urging  him  to  pray.  The  best  men — Moses,  Isaiah,  and  Daniel — have  been
afraid  at  the  voice  of  God.     When  the  prophet  heard  the  judgments  of  God —

1.  He  feared  for  himself.  Ministers  should  examine  their  own  hearts.  Have  they
been  faithful  in  their  work,  pure  in  their  motives,  and  holy  in  their  lives'?
"  Unfaithfulness,"  says  Bridges,  "  is  to  undo  our  own  souls,  as  well  as  our  peoples'."

2.  He  feared  for  the  Church.  Israel  were  the  people,  the  special  work  of  God
(Isa.  xlv.  11).  He  desired  their  preservation  and  prosperity.  Ministers  should  be
anxious  for  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  conversion  of  sinners  among  their  people.

3.  He  feared  for  the  world.  When  he  thought  of  the  threatenings  upon  the
enemy,  he  was  astonished  at  their  guilt,  and  desired  their  wickedness  to  end.
"  The  whole  world  lieth  in  wickedness ; "  good  men  fear  and  warn  others  of  the
consequence.  "  My  flesh  trembleth  for  fear  of  thee ;  and  I  am  afraid  of  thy
judgments."

The  Revival  of  God's  Work. —  Verse  2.

The  prophet  saw  the  impending  ruin,  wept  for  his  infatuated  countrymen,  and
wrestled  with  God  to  remove  or  mitigate  the  punishment  of  their  sins.

I.  The  blessings  desired.  The  revival  of  God's  work,  and  the  manifestation  of
God's  mercy.  1.  The  revival  of  God's  work.  "  0  Lord,  revive  thy  work."  God's
people  were  afflicted,  and  God's  cause  was  low  ;  new  life  was  desired  in  the  nation,
and  fresh  favour  to  the  Church.  A  revival  implies  deadness.  Life  may  not  be
quite  extinct,  but  feeble  and  decaying.  What  deadness,  formality,  and  few  con-
versions in  the  Church  1  The  stones  and  the  dust  give  evidence  of  decay  in  Zion.
What  worldliness  and  infidelity  in  the  nation  I  Everywhere  means  of  grace
neglected,  and  masses  living  without  God.  As  Edwards  lamented  before  the
New  England  revival,  so  we  may  confess  :  "  we  have  been  long  in  a  strange  stupor.
The  influences  of  the  spirit  of  God  upon  the  heart  have  been  little  felt,  and  the
nature  of  them  but  little  taught."  A  great  necessity  exists  now  for  God  to  "  give
us  a  little  reviving  in  our  bondage  "  (Ezra  ix.  8).  2.  The  manifestation  of  God's
mercy.      "  In   wrath   remember  mercy."      (a)    Generally  manifest  the  favour.


chap.  ill.  J  HOMILETIC  COMMENT  ARK:  MABAKKUK.  513

"  Make  known."     Make  known  thy  power  and  providence  in  the  world  ;  thy  pity

and  grace  in  the  Church.     Let  us  not  guess  at  thy  purposes.     Do  not  remain

hidden   and  unknown.      Glorify  thyself    in   the  accomplishment   of    thy  work.

(b)  Specially  show  favour  to  thy  people.     Mercy  regards  our  misery.     Sin  will

bring  wrath  and  prevent  mercy  to  us.     But  with  God  there  is  mercy.     The  sinner

may  be  forgiven  that  he  may  be  feared.      God  will  remember  or  show  mercy  to  the

penitent.     "The  depths  of  our  misery  can  never  fall  below  the  depths  of  mercy,"

says  Sibbes.     "  It  must  be  great  mercy,  or  no  mercy ;  for  little  mercy  will  never

serve  my  turn,"  said  Bunyan.     "  Mercy  rejoiceth  against  judgment."     II.  The

time  in  which  the  blessings  are  desired.     "  In  the  midst  of  the  years  "  are

emphatic  words,  and  twice  given.     He  does  not  say  at  the  end  of  the  years.     He

thinks  it  long  till  then.     He  prays  for  something  to  be  done  now.     Whatever  may

be  the  remote  future,  God  suspends  the  punishment,  and  gives  room  for  penitence

and  prayer  now      In  darkness  stars  may  shine  ;  in  distress,  deliverance  be  wrought ;

and  in  wickedness  the  enemy  overthrown.     God  has  a  set  time  to  favour  Zion,  but

this  is  when  his  servants  take  pleasure  in  her  welfare,  and  favour  the  dust  thereof

(Ps.  cii.  13,  14).     Trial  days  of  the  Church  will  not  be  prolonged  one  moment

beyond  the  time  appointed ;  but,  meantime,  comfort  may  be  given,  and  we  should

renew  our  prayers  for  years  which  have  to  intervene  and  pass  away.     "  Look  then

upon  us,  and  be  merciful   unto  us,   as  thou  usest  to  do  unto   those  that  love

thy  name."     III.  The  means  by  which  the  blessings  are  to  be  secured.     Man

has  many  plans,  trusts  to  various  institutions  and  societies ;  but  God  has  one  way

to  improve   the  world.      We   hit   upon  a  scheme ;    God  implants  a  principle.

"  Eevival  preachers"  and  "revival  meetings"  may  be  necessary,  but  the  work  is

of  God.     "  Tliy  work."     Instead  of  looking  for  new  and  unusual  methods,  let  the

Church  earnestly  use  what  she  has.     "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  I  will  yet  for

this  be  enquired  of  by  the  house  of  Israel  to  do  it  for  them."     1.  Private  prayer.

We  are  guilty  of  what  has  been  termed  "  the  selfishness  of  the  closet."     It  is  not

my  family  and  ray  work,  but  God's  work,  that  we  must  remember.      Personal

interests  must  not  overlook  public  good.     2.    United  prayer.      The  first  revival

began  in  the  upper  room  when  the  apostles  were  met  together.     In  America  a

united  prayer-meeting  brought  the  wonderful  change.     "  By  prayer,"  says   one,

"  we   lay  our  hand   upon  the  springs  of  an  agency  which  can  diffuse  blessings

through  the  world."     3.  Earnest  preaching  must  not  be  overlooked.     Preaching,

like  Peter's  address  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  adapted  to  awaken  men  from  slumber,

and  convince  them  of  sin.     It  was  bold  and  earnest,  direct  in  its  aim,  and  full  of

compassion.      "  It  must  be  serious    preaching    that   makes   men    serious,"    said

Baxter.     Ministers  and  people  must  be  revived  first,  that  they  may  revive  others.

"  Wilt  thou  not  revive  us  again,  that  thy  people  may  rejoice  in  thee."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Yer.  1.     If  the  words  be  taken  in  con-  Genuine  religion  is  not   theology,    not

nection  with  the  prophecy,  we  learn  that  ceremony,    but    supreme   love   to  God.

prayer   and   praise   may   be  intimately  This   is    produced   only  by  God.       II.

united  together  ;   that  the  petitions  of  This  worlt  of  God  in  the  soul  is  liable  to

one  generation  may  become  the  music  of  decay.     Many  things  tend  to  impair  and

another;  and  that  Christian  experience  destroy  supreme  love  to  God.     Carnal

varies  as  the  dealings  of  God  may  vary,  influences,    impure    associations,    social

Ver.   2.     There  are  three   things  in  influences,  and  engrossing  worldly  cares,

this  text — 1.  an  alarming  voice;  2.  an  Hence  the  prayer,   "revive"  it.      III.

appropriate   prayer ;    and    3.    a   potent  This   decay   should   be   overcome   by  a

argument  [Spurgeon].  revival.      Revive,  quicken,  energize  this

We  offer  three  thoughts.     I.  Genuine  love,  and  give  it  more  force  and  influence

religion  K*  the  work  of  God  in  the  soul,  in  the  soul.     This  is  true  revival.     Not


614  HOMTLETIG  COMMENTARY:  HABAKKUK.  [chap.  in.


the  revival  of  crude  theological  dogmas,  continue    presumptuous ;    in    case    he

pie tistic  cant,  and  superstitious  fears  [Dr.  brought  it  too  late  we  should  not  learn

Thomas].  to  believe.     To  revive  and  to  make  known

In  the  midst  of  the  years  means  just  are  nearly  the  same  thing,  only  that  to

at  the  right  time.     He  knows  well  how  revive  is  to  perform   the   miracle   and

to  find  the  means  to  render  help,  neither  bring  relief;  but  to  make  known  means

too  so  >n  nor  too  late.     For  in  case  he  that  we  should  be  sensible  of  and  delight

brought  help  too  soon  we  should   not  in  it  [Lange\
learn  to  despair  of  ourselves,  and  should

HOMILETICS.
God's  Glory  in  Days  op  Old. — Verses  3 — 6.

God's  former  interpositions  are  remembered  and  celebrated  to  encourage  hope.
Past  favours  are  the  ground  and  prediction  of  future  deliverance.  There  is  no
reason  for  despondency  in  our  own  case  or  that  of  the  Church,  if  we  think  of  the
displays  of  God  in  days  of  old  (Ps.  lxxvii.  5).  Mercy  to  Israel  and  severity  to
enemies  have  been  resplendent  as  light.    In  the  manifestations  described  we  have —

I.  Glory  in  the  wilderness.  "God  came  from  Teman,"  &c.  Paran  is  the
desert  region  extending  from  the  south  of  Judah  to  Sinai.  Seir,  Sinai,  and  Paran
are  near  each  other,  associated  together  in  the  giving  of  the  law  (Deut.  xxxiii.  2).
The  glory  of  Sinai  is  a  type  of  the  law  which  shall  go  forth  from  Zion  to  distant
nations  of  the  earth  (Isa.  ii.  3  :  Mic.  iv.  2).  The  moral  desert  shall  shine  with
the  majesty  of  another  Lawgiver.  Nations  shall  be  enlightened  and  blessed.
The  glories  of  the  Eed  Sea  and  the  river  Jordan,  in  Canaan  and  the  wilderness,
shall  be  eclipsed  by  the  triumph  of  the  cross.  Songs  of  victory  shall  be  resounded
from  future  triumphs.  "  The  blessings  of  thy  father  have  prevailed  above  the
blessings  of  my  progenitors,  unto  the  utmost  bound  of  the  everlasting  hills."
II.  Glory  in  holiness.  He  who  came  was  "  the  Holy  One."  God  and  the  Holy
One  are  parallel  phrases  indicating  the  absolute  purity  of  the  Divine  Being  (Job
vi.  10  :  Isa.  xl.  25).  In  the  giving  of  the  law,  and  the  injunctions  to  the  people
of  old,  we  discover  the  purity  of  God.  The  outward  splendours  set  forth  the
unsullied  perfections  of  God.  Holiness  in  God  is  not  a  quality,  but  his  essence.
The  most  glorious  creatures  in  heaven  and  earth  are  only  holy  by  participation.
11  There  is  none  holy  as  the  Lord."  He  is  eminently,  essentially,  and  constantly
holy.  "  Holiness,"  says  Hodge,  "  is  God's  infinite  moral  perfection  crowning  his
infinite  intelligence  and  power.  There  is  a  glory  of  each  attribute  viewed
abstractedly,  and  a  glory  of  the  whole  together.  The  intellectual  nature  is  the
essential  basis  of  the  moral :  infinite  moral  perfection  is  the  crown  of  the  Godhead.
Holiness  is  the  total  glory  thus  crowned."  "  Who  is  like  unto  thee,  glorious  in
holiness  1 "  III.  Glory  in  light.  "  And  his  brightness  was  as  the  light."  God
dwells  in  light  inaccessible,  yet  shone  forth  in  rays  more  brilliant  than  the  sun.
1.  Light  which  illuminated  heaven.  "  His  glory  covered  the  heavens."  Not  only
the  top  of  Sinai,  but  the  broad  expanse  above.  2.  Light  which  filled  the  earth.
"The  earth  was  full  of  his  praise."  The  wonders  of  his  power  and  glory  called
forth  universal  praise.  "  0  Lord,  our  Lord,  how  excellent  is  thy  name  in  all  the
earth,  who  hast  set  thy  glory  above  the  heavens."  3.  Light  linked  with  power.
"  He  had  horns  coming  out  of  his  hand."  Horns  are  emblems  of  strength.  The
rays  of  light  were  rays  of  might,  radiant  as  the  face  of  Moses.  The  fiery  law
went  from  his  right  hand  (Deut.  xxxiii.  2) ;  by  its  majesty  and  mission  administered,
death  (2  Cor.  iii.  7) ;  and  yet  was  a  type  of  the  glory  which  remains  in  the  gospel
(2  Cor.  iii.  11).  The  horn  of  salvation  has  been  raised  up  in  Christ  to  destroy  the
wicked  and  save  the  righteous  (Luke  ii.  69).  IV.  Glory  in  judgment.  "Before
frim  went  the  pestilence,  and  burning  coals  went  forth  at  his  feet."     Death  and


chap,  in.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HABJKKUK.  515

destruction  of  all  kinds  are  a  great  array,  marshalled  and  directed  by  him  in  their
mission.  Pestilence  and  plague  often  go  before  him  as  heralds  of  his  approach.
Judgments  attend  him  ready  to  obey  his  bid.  Burning  coals  lie  beneath  his  feet,
to  fling  upon  the  foe.  "If  the  law  were  thus  given,  how  shall  it  be  required V
says  one.  "  If  such  were  the  proclamation  of  God's  statutes,  what  shall  the
sessions  be  1 "  If  outward  manifestations  are  so  awful,  what  horrible  tempests
will  be  rained  upon  the  wicked  (Ps.  xi.  6).

"  Sinai's  gray  top  shall  tremble  "  [Milton],

The  Hidings  of  Divine  Power. —  Ver.  4.

Great  as  this  "  splendour  and  retinue"  was,  it  was  only  the  veil  or  hiding  of  his
power.  The  excessive  brightness  concealed  the  Divine  glory.  "  And  there  was
the  hiding  of  his  power."

I.  Divine  power  is  hidden  in  the  splendour  of  Divine  revelation.  As  the  rays  of
light  hide  the  sun  in  their  brilliance,  so  Divine  manifestations  veil  the  power  of  God.
The  garment  of  light  covers  his  real  essence  and  attributes.  The  works  of  God  display
his  power, — the  heavens  his  glory,  and  the  earth  his  goodness ;  but  one  half  is  not
seen.  The  secrets  of  his  wisdom  and  power  are  double  to  that  which  is  (Job  xi.  6).
He  is  omnipresent,  yet  incomprehensible.  In  his  person  and  procedure  there  are
unfathomable  "  depths  "  of  wisdom  and  knowledge.  His  ways  are  past  finding
out.  Notwithstanding  nature  and  Scripture,  reason  and  religion,  he  will  still
remain  an  "  unknown  God."  "  Canst  thou  by  searching  find  out  God  1  Canst  thou
find  out  the  Almighty  unto  perfection'?"  II.  Divine  power  is  hidden  as  a
discipline  to  human  souls.  Darkness  and  light  always  meet  in  God.  This
invisibility  of  God — 1.  Is  essential  to  our  free  agency.  If  God  were  visible  to  the
human  eye,  and  constrained  us  by  his  Almighty  power,  we  could  not  be  free.  Like
a  parent  God  sees  our  ways,  but  leaves  us  to  act  as  responsible  agents.  Too  much
light  might  overpower  us,  and  throw  us,  like  Paul,  prostrate  on  the  ground.  2.  Is
essential  to  our  moral  discipline.  God's  light  will  be  darkness  to  those  who  wish
to  gaze  into  it.  It  will  veil  his  love  and  mercy.  His  darkness  will  be  light  to
those  who  wish  to  trust  and  obey.  The  hiding  of  his  power  may  be  for  shelter  or
for  judgment.  We  know  enough  of  God  in  his  goodness,  and  can  never  comprehend
him  in  his  glory.  "  The  phenomena  of  matter  and  force  lie  within  our  intellectual
range.  But  behind,  and  above,  and  around  all,  the  real  mystery  of  the  universe
remains  unsolved  "  \Tyndall\.  Angels  veil  their  faces.  Let  us  adore  and  submit  to
his  will.  "  Lo,  these  are  parts  of  his  ways  :  but  how  little  a  portion  is  heard  of
him  ?  but  the  thunder  of  his  power  who  can  understand  1 "

HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  3.    God  came.    Ancient  wonders  the    music   probably  continuing   alone,

pledges   of  future  deliverance.     Prayer  while  the  mind  rested  on  the  thought

will  gather  arguments  for  hope  and  duty  which  had  just  been  presented  to  it ;  our

from  the  storehouse  of  experience  con-  '  interlude '  "  [Pusey].
cerning  the  past.

Selah  indicates  —  1.     The  weight  of        *l  sinS  the  warrior  aud  his  miShtY  deeds "
the  matter,  not  a  mere  transient  glory.  f-  au  er  a  *

2.  The  solemnity  with  which  we  should  Notice — 1.  Who  comes.  God,  Jehovah,

consider  it.     We  must  pause  and  dwell  The  Holy  One.     2.  How  he  comes.     3.

upon  it  until  our  hearts  are  duly  affected.  What  he  comes  for.     (a)  To  deliver  his

"  There  is  no   doubt  as  to  the  general  people,     (b)  To  punish  their  enemies,
purport  of  the  word — that  it  is  a  musical         Ver.  4.     1.  There  is  much  more  to  be

direction,  that  there  should  be  a  pause,  known  of  God  in  his  works  and  way3


516  BOMILETIO  COMMENTARY    HABAKKUK.  [chap.  hi.


that  we  can  possibly  know  in  our  present  knowledge  far  beyond  what  has   been

state.      2.   His   perfections    and   opera-  witnessed   in   the   past.     "  0    God,  we

tions  are  veiled,  (a)  to  train  the  Church  have    heard    with    our    ears,   and  our

in  faith,  prayer,  and  humble  dependence  ;  fathers  have  declared  unto  us,  the  noble

(b)  to  permit  the  wicked  to  display  their  works  that  thou  didst  in  their  days,  and

malice,    and   finish    their   iniquity.     3.  in  the  old  time  before  them.     0  Lord,

Yet  there  will  be   greater  displays   of  arise  :  help  us,  and  deliver  us,  for  thine

Divine  power,  and  a  glorious  increase  of  honour  "  [Litany  of  Church  of  England].

HOMILETICS.
The  Measured  Inheritance. —  Verses  6,  7.

These  words  describe  the  effects  of  God's  approach.  He  stood  like  a  mighty
warrior  in  his  conquering  career.  The  earth  trembled,  and  primeval  mountains
dissolved  into  dust.  We  take  it  in  reference  to  Canaan.  As  Joshua  conquered
and  divided  the  land,  so  God  measured  and  portioned  it  out  to  his  people.

I.  The  inheritance  measured.  He  "  measured  the  earth."  He  measured  the
whole,  and  the  portion  for  each  tribe.  It  was  no  scramble,  but  appointment  by  lot
and  rule.  He  " divided  them  an  inheritance  by  line"  (Ps.  lxxviii.  55).  God
measures  the  earth  by  bounds  and  borders  to  the  various  nations  that  dwell  upon
it.  "Thou  hast  set  all  the  borders  of  the  earth"  (Ps.  lxxiv.  17).  Lands  and
seas,  continents  and  islands,  are  mapped  out  by  him.  He  defined  the  shape  and
weighed  the  elements  of  the  world.  In  righteous  judgment  he  observes  the  ways,
and  fixes  the  bounds  of  man's  habitations  (Acts  xvii.  26).  He  ordains  our  present
lot,  and  will  fix  our  final  destiny.  II.  The  inheritance  gained.  "  He  beheld,  and
drove  asunder  the  nations."  Notice — 1.  The  ease  by  which  it  was  gained.  He
stood  in  the  midst  of  his  glory,  without  going  forth,  and  simply  looked.  What
was  the  consequence?  (1)  All  nations  were  scattered.  Though  strong  and
numerous,  and  their  possession  ancient  and  stable  as  the  everlasting  hills.  (2)  All
opposition  xoas  subdued.  At  his  presence,  kings  and  princes,  firm  and  immovable
on  their  thrones,  were  overcome.  The  mountains  were  thrashed,  and  the  hills
made  small  before  him  (Isa.  xli.  15).  (3)  All  enemies  were  terrified.  "  I  saw  the
tents  of  Cushan  in  affliction."  The  tidings  of  his  wondrous  acts  threw  neighbouring
nations  into  despair  (Ex.  xv.  14 — 16).  So  now  at  the  approach  of  God  the  sinner
trembles  in  fear.  Before  his  rebuke  nations  wither  away.  JSTo  shelters,  no  tents
nor  curtains  can  hide  from  him.  "  The  mountains  quake  at  him,  and  the  hills
melt,  and  the  earth  is  burned  at  his  presence,  yea,  the  world,  and  all  that  dwell
therein."  2.  TJie  deliberation  by  which  it  was  gained.  "  His  ways  are  everlasting."
This  was  no  sudden,  precipitate  work.  It  was  by  the  eternal  purpose  and  strict
justice  of  God.  The  works  and  ways  of  God  are  coherent,  unchangeable,  and  true.
They  have  steps  and  progress,  but  no  change.  His  creative  and  providential  acts
are  the  same  in  all  ages.  "  If  God  could  change  his  purpose,"  says  Charnock,  "  he
would  change  his  nature."  "  Known  unto  God  are  all  his  works  from  the  beginning
of  the  world."

The  Chariots  or  Salvation. — Verses  8 — 11.

"  The  ode,  taking  a  new  turn,  now  passes  from  the  description  of  the  coming  of
God,  to  an  address  to  God  himself.  To  the  mental  eye  of  the  prophet,  God  presents
himself  as  judge  of  the  world,  in  the  threatening  attitude  of  a  warlike  hero
equipped  for  conflict,  so  that  he  asks  him  what  is  the  object  of  his  wrath  "  [JSTc*/].

I.  The  design  of  the  chariots.  God  was  not  angry  with  the  rivers  and  seas.
They  were  troubled  on  account  of  his  appearance  to  deliver.  He  comes  not  to
destroy,  but  to  save.     The  chariots  of  Pharaoh  and  of  antichrist  are  chariots  of


chap.  m.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HABAKKUK.  517

destruction.  From  these  God  will  ever  preserve  his  people.  When  he  comes
anything  will  bring  them  salvation.  God  has  many  chariots.  Clouds  and  darkness
are  his  pavilion,  winds  and  waves  are  chariots  of  victory.  "  The  war-chariots  of
Elohim  are  myriads,  a  thousand  thousands"  (Ps.  lxviii.  17).  II.  The  Driver  of
the  chariots.  "  Was  the  Lord  displeased  1 "  "  Thou  didst  cleave  the  earth,"  &c.
God  himself  is  set  forth  in  majesty  and  grace,  clad  like  a  warritfr,  and  terrible  as  a
judge.  1.  The  Driver  is  angry.  "Anger"  existed,  though  not  against  the  rivers.
God  was  "  displeased  "  with  the  wicked,  and  his  works  revealed  his  mind.  In-
sensible creatures  reprove  the  impenitence  of  men,  and  tremble  at  the  power  of
God.  "  What  ailed  thee,  0  thou  sea,  that  thou  fleddest  1  thou  Jordan,  that  thou
wast  driven  back?"  2.  The  Driver  is  mighty.  "Thy  bow  was  made  quite  naked."
The  sheath  was  laid  aside  and  cast  away.  The  arms  were  stretched,  and  judgments
were  about  to  be  shot  swift  as  an  arrow  (Isa.  xxii.  6  :  Ps.  lxiv.  7).  Quite  naked
was  the  bow,  and  not  drawn  back.  Power  was  really  displayed,  and  the  enemy
destroyed.  God  is  a  man  of  war,  shoots  arrows  with  certainty,  and  never  misses
the  mark  (Job  xvi.  12).  "The  Lord  is  a  man  of  war;  the  Lord  is  his  name."
3.  The  Driver  is  resolved  in  purpose.  "  According  to  the  oaths  of  the  tribes,  even
thy  word."  The  promise  was  given  to  his  servants,  and  confirmed  with  oaths.
Judgments  upon  the  wicked,  and  salvation  for  his  people,  are  sworn  matters;
oaths,  and  interpositions  for  all  ages  (cf.  Deut.  xxxii.  40 — 42  :  Ps.  lxxvii.  8).
"  The  oath  which  he  sware  to  our  father  Abraham,  that  he  would  grant  us,  that  we,
being  delivered  out  of  the  hands  of  our  enemies,  might  serve  him  without  fear."
III.  The  effects  of  the  chariots.  The  world  of  nature  suffers  under  the  judicial
hand  of  God.  1.  The  earth  was  convulsed  by  his  power.  Mountains  trembled  at
his  presence,  and  "skipped  like  rams."  Rivers  broke  out  of  the  deep,  and  rolled
their  floods  into  the  splits  of  solid  earth.  The  sea  roared,  the  abyss  lifted  its
waves,  and  uttered  its  voice  to  its  Maker.  What  happened  to  the  sea  happened  to
the  river.  God  repeats  his  miracles.  When  great  dangers  are  passed  little  ones
should  not  terrify  us.  "  Thou  didst  cleave  the  fountain  and  the  flood :  thou  driedst
up  mighty  rivers"  (Ps.  lxxiv.  15;  lxxviii.  15,  16).  2.  The  heavens  loere  eclipsed
with  his  splendour.  "  The  sun  and  moon  stood  still  (retired)  in  their  habitation  "
at  the  prayer  of  Joshua,  and  in  the  tempest  of  "great  stones  from  heaven"  (Josh.
x.  11 — 13).  At  the  light,  the  directions  of  God's  arrows,  and  the  shining  of  his
spear,  Israel  went  forward.  The  darts  of  God  smote  their  enemies.  Their  brilliant
splendour  brought  salvation  to  one  and  destruction  to  the  other.  "The  stars  in
their  courses  fought  against  Sisera."  But  all  these  displays  were  eclipsed  by  the
Divine  perfections  on  the  cross — when  Christ  suffered  for  sin  amid  the  darkness  and
shaking  of  creation.  How  glorious  the  displays  when  the  earth  quaked  and  angels
attended  the  resurrection — when  the  Holy  Ghost  came  down  on  Pentecost  to
enlighten  his  people,  erect  his  kingdom,  and  to  avenge  himself  of  his  adversaries.

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  9.  Tliy  bow.  The  Divine  archer,  abundance,  rivers  to  quench  thirst,  &c.
"  The  bow  represents  the  threat  of  the  "  He  smote  the  rock,  that  the  waters
vengeance  of  Almighty  God,  from  which  gushed  out,  and  the  streams  overflowed"
it  is  at  length  discharged,  if  not  turned  (Ps.  lxxviii.  20 ;  cxiv.  8).
aside;  the  longer  the  string  is  drawn,  Vers.  10,  11.  He  who  fixed  the
the  sharper  issueth  the  arrow.  So  then  world's  pillars  can  make  them  rock  in
the  more  the  coming  of  the  day  of  their  sockets,  and  upheave  the  corner-
judgment  is  delayed,  the  stricter  is  the  stones  of  creation.  The  huge  mountains
severity  of  the  judgment  then  issuing  "  are  torn  up  by  the  roots  when  the  Lord
[Pusey].  bestirs   himself  in  anger  to   smite  the

Cleave  the  earth.     1.  Divine  power,  enemies  of  his  people.     How  shall  puny

2.   Divine  goodness,  in  its   design  and  man  be  able  to  face  it  out  with   God


518  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  HABAKKUK.  \cukv.  in,

when  the  mountains  quake  with    fear  ?  the  powers  of  earth  and  heaven,  sun  and

Let    not    the   boaster   dream   that    his  storms,  earthquakes  and  floods,  subser-

present    false    confidence    will    support  vient  to  God's  purpose,  and  typical  of

him  in  the  dread  day  of  wrath  [Spurgeorij.  his  judgments.     Notice — The  ease  with

Ver.  11.     The  judgments  of  God  are  whioh  they  are  collected,  the    order  in

a  light  to  his  people,  while  they  are  the  which  they  are  linked,  and  the  destruc-

destruction   of    his   enemies ;    in   them  tion  they  create.     This,  a  hope  to  the

they  learn  righteousness  [Pusey].     All  righteous,  and  a  warning  to  the  wicked.

HOMILETICS.
The  Royal  March. —  Verses  12 — 15.

To  march,  is  used  of  the  solemn  and  majestic  proceeding  of  Jehovah  before  the
Hebrews  (Judg.  v.  4  :  Ps.  lxviii.  8  :  cf.  Henderson).  The  defeat  and  extermination
of  the  Canaanites  and  the  planting  of  Israel  were  the  doings  of  Jehovah.

I.  A  benevolent  march.  "  Thou  wentest  forth  for  the  salvation  of  thy  people."
We  speak  of  "the  wanderings  of  Israel,"  but  they  were  an  appointed,  well-ordered
march,  designed  for  victory.  God,  as  Commander-in-chief,  went  with  them.  With
his  anointed  instruments — Moses,  Joshua,  and  David,  types  of  the  Messiah — he
delivered  them  from  their  enemies.  Salvation  is  the  design,  and  will  be  the  result,
of  all  the  doings  of  God  for  his  people.  The  Church  will  never  lack  leaders,  but
in  each  we  have  a  pledge  of  eternal  deliverance  by  Jesus  Christ.  "  He  that  is  our
God  is  the  God  of  salvation ;  and  unto  God  the  Lord  belong  the  issues  from  death."
II.  A  terrible  march.  The  march  was  not  only  in  royal  dignity,  but  in  judicial
power.  1.  Terrible  in  its  aspects.  "  Thou  didst  walk  through  the  sea  with  thine
horses."  In  majesty,  power,  and  splendour,  the  Exodus  was  the  type  of  all
victories  present  and  future.  Waters  stand  on  heap,  and  the  deep  becomes  a  path
for  his  people.  "  Dividing  the  water  before  them,  to  make  himself  an  everlasting
name"  (Isa.  lxiii.  12,  13).  2.  Terrible  in  its  consequences.  The  foes,  princes,  and
peoples,  were  overthrown,  exterminated,  and  supplanted.  He  slew  great  kings  and
famous  (Ps  cxxxvi.  17,  18).  Much  more  will  God  display  his  power  to  exalt
Christ  and  overthrow  his  enemies.  "The  Lord  is  the  saving  strength  of  his
anointed."  III.  A  triumphant  march.  No  obstacles  impeded  the  march.
Mountains  shook,  waters  fled,  and  the  lofty  bowed  before  God's  presence  in  his
Church.  1.  Royal  houses  were  destroyed.  "Thou  woundedst  the  head  out  of  the
house  of  the  wicked."  Each  head  and  prince  which  sprung  from  the  family  was
cut  off,  in  cities  and  villages.  The  neck,  an  emblem  of  dignity  and  power  (Cant,
iv.  4) ;  stubbornness  and  pride  (Deut.  xxxi.  27  :  Ps.  lxxv.  5)  was  laid  bare.  The
head  and  foundation,  high  and  low,  were  completely  destroyed.  "  I  will  cut  off
from  Babylon  the  name  and  remnant,  and  son,  and  nephew  (grandson),  saith  the
Lord."  2.  Warlike  nations  were  defeated.  "  They  came  out  (were  tempestuous)
as  a  whirlwind  to  scatter  me."  Violent,  powerful,  and  insatiable  were  the  enemies.
Pharaoh  and  Sennacherib  came  out  as  a  storm,  to  sweep  everything  before  them,
like  chaff  in  the  wilderness  (Jer.  xiii.  24  ;  xviii.  17  :  Isa.  xli.  16).  "  I  will  pursue,
I  will  overtake,  I  will  divide  the  spoil ;  my  lust  shall  be  satisfied  upon  them ;  I
will  draw  my  sword,  my  hand  shall  destroy  them."  (a)  Defeated  in  their  secret
purpose.  "  Their  rejoicing  was  as  to  devour  the  poor  secretly."  The  poor  are  not
a  match  for  the  powerful.  Hence  their  pride  and  confidence  of  success.  But  God
frustrated  their  intentions.  Their  boasting  made  their  fall  more  disgraceful,  and
God's  care  for  his  people  more  glorious,  (b)  Defeated  with  their  own  weapons.
He  struck  through  "  with  his  staves."  The  destruction  was  not  only  upon  himself,
but  upon  the  multitude  of  his  subjects,  and  through  an  act  of  Divine  might  by  his
own  weapons.  The  mischief  which  he  had  prepared  for  others  fell  upon  himself.
This  has  always  been  the  case.     With  the  Midianites  and  Amalekites  (Judg.  viL


CHAP.    III.  J


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   HABAKKUK.


619


22) ;  with  the  Philistines  (1  Sam.  xiv.  16 — 20)  ;  and  the  inhabitants  of  Seir
(2  Chion.  xx.  22,  23) ;  in  the  case  of  Haman  and  Daniel  those  who  made  the  pit
fell  into  it.  Heathens  declared  that  there  was  "  no  juster  law  than  that  artificers
of  death  by  their  own  art  should  perish."  Fearful  will  be  the  future  illustrations
of  this  principle  (cf.  Ezek.  xxxviii.  21  :  Isa.  ix.  20  :  Zech.  xiv.  13).


HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.


Ver.  12.  1.  God's  anger.  2.  The  report
of  God's  anger.  "Through  the  land."
Not  the  mere  land  of  Canaan,  but  the
whole  earth.  3.  The  fearful  consequences
of  God's  anger.  "Thou  didst  thresh,"
a  word  indicating  the  ease  and  power
with  which  this  was  done,  and  the  com-
plete subjugation  of  the  enemy  (Mic.
iv.  13).

Ver.  1 3.  Head.  "  He  shall  destroy
at  once,  from  above  and  below;  over-
throwing his  kingdom  from  the  found-
ation. From  above,  his  head  was  crushed
in  pieces ;  from  below,  the  house  was
razed  from  its  very  foundations  "  \_Pusey\
The  power,  pride,  and  wisdom,  the  very
life  of  evil  to  be  conquered  by  God.
"  He  smites  his  foes  on  the  crown  of
their  pride,"  says  une.  "  The  seed  of  the
woman  crushes  the  serpent's  head.  There
is  no  defence  against  the  Lord,  he  can
in  a  moment  smite  with  utter  destruction
the  lofty  crests  of  his  haughty  foes  "  (cf.
Ps.  lxviii.  21  ;  ex.  6).

Yer.  14.  1.  The  end  in  view  —
"devour  the  poor."  2.  The  method
of  accomplishing  the  end — "  secretly."
3.  The  feeling  with  which  the  end  is
pursued.  "  Their  rejoicing."  The  rich
boast  in  wealth,  the  mighty  in  power  ;
but  the  cruel  exult  in  mischief.  The
ferocity,  craft,  and  activity  of  the  op-
pressor, and  the  danger,  snares,  and
helplessness  of  the  oppressed,  are  de-
scribed.

"  Do  not  insult  calamity  ;
It  is  a  barbarous  grossness  to  lay  on


The  weight  of  scorn,  where  heavy  misery
Too  much  already  weighs  men's  fortunes  down  "

[Daniel].

Yer.  15.  A  second  glance.  1.  In
time  of  ease  we  are  satisfied  with  a
cursory  glance,  a  time  of  trouble  promotes
a  deeper  view  of  God's  works.  We  seek
relief,  and  find  that  we  never  dwell
enough  on  them.  Particularly,  extraor-
dinary works  would  be  oftener  remem-
bered, so  much  doth  the  prophet's
practice  of  looking  over  again  on  this
act  teach  us.  2.  It  is  worthy  of  our
second  and  serious  thought  —  both  to
honour  God  and  confirm  our  faith — to
consider  that  God's  people  are  so  dear
unto  him  that  he  will  change  the  course
of  nature  to  save  them ;  that  he  can
make  them  go  safely,  like  conquerors,
through  affliction  and  danger  [Hutche-
son\.  Take  the  verse  as  emblematic  of
God's  ways.  1.  Deep  as  the  sea.  2.
Swift  and  orderly,  as  horses  yoked  in  a
chariot.  3.  Safe,  though  threatened  by
the  "  heap  of  great  waters  "  boiliug  up  as
in  a  storm.  "  The  immediate  connection,
however,  shows  that  what  the  prophet
has  in  view  is  not  the  Eed  Sea,  but  the
hostile  army  of  the  Canaanites,  which
presented  a  furious  and  impenetrable
aspect  to  the  Hebrews.  Through  this
army  Jehovah  is  represented  as  walking
with  his  warriors,  as  if  a  general  were
coolly  to  march  his  cavalry  through  the
thickest  of  a  proud  and  vaunting  foe,
which  he  knew  would  prove  utterly
powerless  in  the  attack  "  [Henderson].


HOMILETICS.

A  Song  op  Triumph. —  Verses  16 — 18.

These  verses  form  the  second  part  of  the  ode,  describe  the  feelings  of  the  prophet
under  threatened  judgments,  and  his  exulting  joy  and  confidence  in  God.  Beginning
with  a  sorrowful  note,  he  closes  with  a  burst  of  jubilant  melody.  The  birds  which
thrill  out  the  sweetest  music,  love  retirement ;  so  this  psalmist — one  of  the  most
wonderful  of  human  singers — sings  out  of  obscurity.     We  learn  that—


520  HOM1LETIC  COMMENTARY :  HABAKKUK.  [chap.  hi.

I.  God  usually  meets  the  varied  wants  of  men  by  lavish  provision.  Fig-tree,
vine,  and  olive  ;  fields,  flocks,  and  herds  indicate  variety  and  plenty.  We  do  not
enter  a  world  unprepared  for  us.  Ample  provisions  were  ready  beforehand.
Marvellous  vegetation,  fierce  fires,  volcanic  agencies,  and  toiling  waters  were
pioneers  for  human  settlers.  We  have  an  attractive  view  of  God's  goodness  and
character  when  we  think  of  him  as  the  Provider.  We  evade  the  idea  of  a  Father's
bounty  by  speaking  vaguely  of  providence.  What  is  providence  but  the  wise
action,  the  benevolent  operation,  of  gigantic  forces  1  Good  comes  to  us  through
laws  :  but  who  controls  the  laws  1  Providence  is  the  chosen  way  of  a  loving
Father's  dealing.  The  Bible  takes  us  directly  to  God,  who  gives  lavishly  out  of
"the  riches  of  his  goodness"  (cf.  Ps.  civ.  :  Jas.  i.  16,  17).  Ample  provision  is
made  for  our  needs  and  pleasure — 1.  sensational;  2.  intellectual;  3.  social;
4.  moral ;  5.  spiritual.  II.  God  must  be  recognized  as  the  Absolute  Proprietor  in
this  provision.  The  prophet  contemplates  famine,  failure,  and  desolating  death.
Though  God  usually  provides  abundance  and  variety,  he  can  reverse  this  action
and  suspend  the  course  of  nature  (Ps.  cvii.  31 — 43).  Health  may  fail,  friends  be
removed,  plans  be  frustrated,  and  privation  be  felt.  Dependent  are  we  from  first
to  last.  Resumption  of  his  gifts  establishes  God's  claim  to  ownership.  (Illus.
Abraham's  offering  of  Isaac.)  The  fig-tree  without  blossom,  the  vine  without  fruit,
the  olive  destitute  of  oil ;  the  barren  fields,  the  smitten  flocks,  and  the  empty  stalls  ;
impressively  tell  us  that  the  Lord  God  Almighty  is  the  Absolute  Propiietor.
III.  In  direct  calamity  it  is  our  privilege  to  rejoice  in  God  our  Provider.
Ver.  18.  1.  A  victorious  faith.  "Yet."  Note  the  yets.  "  Yea,  they  may  forget,  yet
will  I  not"  (Isa.  xlix.  15).  "  Yet  will  I  look  again"  (Jon.  ii.  4).  "  I  am  poor
and  needy,  yet"  (Ps.  xl.  17).  "Truth  Lord,  yet"  (Matt.  xv.  27).  "Though  he
slay  me,  yet "  (Job  xiii.  15).  Change  may  take  place  in  the  manner  of  God's  treatment,
but  never  in  his  character.  "  I  am  that  I  am."  If  business  prosper  not,  what
then]  How  shall  I  find  bread  1  "  Man  doth  not  live  by  bread  alone."  God  asks
for  entire  trust.  "  Rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for  him."  "  This  is  the
victory — even  our  faith."  This  sublime  confidence  was  nourished  by — 2.  A  precious
experience.  "The  God  of  my  salvation,"  are  words  that  reveal  manifold  past  deliver-
ances. "  Because  thou  hast  been  my  help,  therefore  in  the  shadow  of  thy  wings
will  I  rejoice."  Then,  in  troubles,  bodily,  mental,  and  circumstantial ;  in  family
trials,  business  losses,  and  painful  bereavements;  expect  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise.
"  I  will  never  leave  thee."  3.  A  noble  resolve.  "  I  will  rejoice  in  the  Lord."
"  Those  who  have  the  Jehovah  for  their  strength,  should  make  him  their  song.  Let
the  fig-tree  be  barked,  privation  be  felt,  and  the  worst  come ;  the  trustful  spirit
may  rejoice  in  God,  and  triumph  over  all.  in  suffering  we  may  say,  '  In  the  night
his  song  shall  be  with  me  '  "  [Matthew  Braithwaite].

God  the  Fountain  of  Perpetual  Joy.

I.  Joy  in  anticipated  trials.  The  prophet  heard  of  a  gloomy  future,  saw  one
support  after  another  fail,  yet  his  hope  brightens,  and  joy  increases  as  sorrows
multiply.  We  cannot  expect  freedom  from  trouble.  Nor  is  it  often  that  we  are
permitted  to  see  the  future.  No  approach  of  foreign  foes,  no  threatening  of  famine
and  failure  of  fruit-trees,  loom  before  us.  Yet  how  disquieted  when  business  fails,
and  family  prospects  darken !  We  fear  as  we  enter  the  cloud,  faint  unless  we  see
the  goodness  of  God,  and  never  rejoice  in  anticipation  of  trials.  Not  at  "  the
bright,"  but  at  "  the  dark,  side"  of  things  do  we  look.  "All  these  things  are
against  me."  But  through  the  darkness  faith  discerns  the  light,  pictures  unfailing
joy,  and  exults  in  the  friendship  of  God,  when  all  things  fail  beside.  II.  Joy  in
present  afflictions.  The  prophet  not  merely  anticipates  distress,  but  stands  in  the
midst  of  it.  Barrenness  and  failure,  disappointment  and  grief,  are  actually  seen
and  felt.     But  the  sufferings  do  not  freeze  him  into  a  misanthrope,  nor  sour  him


chap.  ni.j  HOMILETIC  COMMEfiTARX ;  HABAKKUK.  581


into  wretchedness.  He  is  hopeful,  and  resolved  to  rejoice.  It  is  said  that  Dr.
Priestly  was  one  of  the  happiest  of  men.  The  greater  his  trouhle,  the  greater
was  his  conviction  that  some  special  good  was  in  store  for  him  j  the  darker  the
sorrow,  the  stronger  grew  the  sentiment  that  joy  was  to  succeed.  "  Such  a  way  of
looking  at  things,"  says  one,  "  literally  converted  every  cloud  that  darkened  his
horizon  into  a  shadow  of  good  things  to  come."  In  all  our  clouds  we  may  find
sunshine  and  passing  scenes  coloured  with  future  glory.  "  Now  men  see  not  the
bright  light  which  is  in  the  clouds  :  but  the  wind  passeth,  and  cleanseth  them."
III.  Joy  in  eternal  duration.  If  the  soul  be  immortal  its  happiness  must  be
durable  as  its  nature.  The  world  and  all  in  it  will  perish.  The  man  of  the  world
deeply  regrets  loss  in  trial,  but  the  Christian  rejoices  in  God.  Those  who  enjoy
God  in  all  things,  can  eojoy  all  things  in  God.  Amid  the  ruins  of  nature,  they
are  rich  in  him.  When  all  created  streams  are  dried,  God  is  an  everlasting  fountain
of  bliss.  When  the  granary  is  empty,  an  assurance  of  joy  will  be  better  than  a
"  harvest  home "  (Ps.  iv.  7).  Christ  in  the  heart  is  better  than  grapes  in  the
vintage.  "  I  will  greatly  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  my  soul  shall  be  joyful  in  my  God  ;
for  he  hath  clothed  me  with  the  garments  of  salvation,"  &c.  (Isa.  lxi.  10;  xli.  16).

"  Though  vine  nor  fig-tree  neither

Their  wonted  fruit  should  bear ;
Though  all  the  field  should  wither,

Nor  flock  nor  herd  be  there;
Yet  God  the  same  abiding,

His  praise  shall  tune  ray  voice:
For  while  in  him  confiding,

I  cannot  but  rejoice  "  [Cowper],

God  all-sufficient  in  Trouble. —  Verse  19.

The  prophet  now  openly  declares  the  source  of  his  joy  and  strength,  and  predicts
the  safety  and  moral  elevation  of  his  people.  In  language  borrowed  from  Scripture
he  expresses  the  all-sufficiency  of  God,  the  hope  of  support  in  trouble,  complete
deliverance  from  the  enemy,  and  undisturbed  possession  of  the  land.

I.  God  is  strength  in  weakness.  "  The  Lord  God  is  my  strength."  Strength
to  bear  trial,  and  to  triumph  in  conflict.  Neither  spiritual  nor  military  soldiers
can  do  exploits  in  weakness.  The  Christian  is  only  a  hero,  and  the  secret  springs
of  his  courage  only  in  God.  If  he  strengthens,  nothing  can  weaken.  "  The  Lord
is  the  strength  of  my  life."  II.  God  is  safety  in  danger.  In  this  language  we
have — 1.  Deliverance  from  the  enemy.  He  is  the  God  of  salvation,  rises  up  to  judge
the  nations,  and  deliver  his  people.  Assailed  on  every  side,  yet  delivered  from  the
strong  enemy  (Ps.  xviii.  17).  When  rescued  we  must  remember  our  weakness,  and
ascribe  all  to  God.  "  Behold,  God  is  my  salvation  ;  I  will  trust,  and  not  be  afraid  :
for  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  my  strength  and  my  song."  2.  Pursuit  of  the  enemy.
"  He  will  make  my  feet  like  hinds'  feet."  Celerity  of  motion  was  deemed  a
necessity  in  the  hero  of  antiquity.  He  must  suddenly  attack  and  vigorously
pursue  the  enemy.  Achilles  was  swift -footed.  The  men  who  came  to  David  had
not  only  faces  like  lions,  but  were  "  swift  as  the  roes  upon  the  mountains,"  to
pursue  or  escape  the  foes  (1  Chron.  xii.  8  :  cf.  2  Sam.  i.  19  ;  ii.  18).  3.  Security
from  the  enemy.  "  He  will  make  me  to  walk  upon  mine  high  places."  As  David
climbed  rocks  and  steep  cliffs  to  be  safe  from  pursuit,  so  God's  people  are  sheltered
in  mountain  fastnesses  in  spiritual  war.  They  are  swift  to  pursue  and  agile  to
climb.  Ascending  into  impregnable  heights  we  are  preserved  from  falling,  and
made  to  stand  where  the  wild  goat  can  find  no  footing.  "  He  maketh  my  feet  like
hinds'  feet,  and  setteth  me  upon  my  high  places."


522


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:  HABAKKUK.


[chap.  ni.


HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Ver.  16.  Tit  at  I  may  rest.  1.  Eest
in  trouble.  Peace  of  conscience,  calm-
ness of  mind,  because  the  mind  is  stayed
upon  God  in  distress.  "  Thou  wilt  keep
him  in  perfect  peace,  whose  mind  is
stayed  on  thee,  because  he  trusteth  in
thee.  2.  Eest  through  fear.  "The  true
and  only  path  to  rest,"  says  Calvin,  "  is
through  such  fear.  Whoever  is  securely
torpid  and  hardened  towards  God  will
be  tumultuously  agitated  in  the  day  of
affliction,  and  so  will  bring  on  himself
a  worse  destruction  ;  but  he  who  in  time
meets  God's  wrath,  and  trembles  at  his
threats,  prepares  the  best  rest  for  him-
self in  the  day  of  tribulation."

"  Nor  peace  nor  ease  the  heart  can  know,
Which,  like  the  needle  true,
Turns  at  the  touch  of  joy  or  woe,

But  taming,  trembles  too"  [Mrs.  Greville],

Vers.  17,  18.  Fortitude  in  affliction.
"  The  power  of  habit  and  character,"
says  Sir  J.  Macintosh,  "to  struggle
against  outward  evils,  has  been  proved
by  experience  to  be  in  some  instances
so  prodigious,  that  no  man  can  presume
to  fix  the  utmost  limit  of  possible  in-
crease."

Vers.  18,  19.     1.  God  the  source  of
joy.     2.  God   the   source   of  strength.
3.  God  the  source  of  salvation.    In  both


verses  we  have  dangerous  positions,
wonderful  achievements,  and  secure
dwelling-places.

Ver.  19.  "Mine  high  places."  The
"  high  places  "  are  called  "  mine,"  to
imply  that  Israel  shall  be  restored  to  his
own  land,  a  land  of  hills,  which  are
places  of  safety  and  of  eminence  (cf.
Gen.  xix.  17,  "escape  to  the  mountain  ;"
and  Matt.  xxiv.  16)  [Faasset].  Morally,
high  places  of  knowledge,  holiness,  use-
fulness, and  progress  heavenwards —
"heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus."

Chief  singer.  Servants  of  God  do
not  despise  music,  but  only  give  direc-
tions how  it  should  be  properly  used  in
the  praise  of  God  [Lange].

We  too  have  our  high  places,  of
honour,  service,  temptation,  and  danger,
but  hitherto  we  have  been  kept  from
falling.  Bring  hither  the  harp,  and  let
us  emulate  the  psalmist's  joyful  thanks-
giving; had  we  fallen,  our  wailings
must  have  been  terrible ;  since  we  have
stood,  let  our  gratitude  be  fervent
[Spurgeon].  "The  Lord  was  ready  to
save  me;  therefore  we  will  sing  my
songs  to  the  stringed  instruments  all  the
days  of  our  life  in  the  house  of  the
Lord"  (Is.  xxxviii.  20).

"If  music  be  the  food  of  love,  play  on,
Give  me  excess  of  it  "  [Shakspere],


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  III.


Ver.  2.  Mercy  is  wanted  for  England.
The  wickedness  of  this  country  belongs
not  to  one  class  only,  but  to  all  classes.
Sin  runs  down  the  streets.  We  have  a
fringe  of  elegant  morality,  but  behind  it
a  mass  of  rottenness.  There  is  immor-
ality in  the  streets  at  night,  and  dis-
honesty of  business  men  in  high  places.
Cheating  and  thieving  upon  the  grandest
scale  are  winked  at.  This  city  is  wicked,
and  the  land  full  of  fornication  and
idolatry.  I  may  not  utter  a  wailing;
but  having  heard  the  Lord's  speech,  I
may  be  afraid,  exhort  you  to  pray  for
this  land,  and  ask  God  to  revive  his
work,  that  drunkenness  and  dishonesty
may  cease  [Spurgeori\.

yera#  4 — 7.     Hiding.     Man's  know-


ledge is  confined  to  parts  only  of  God's
ways.  The  extremities  or  forthgoings  of
his  administration  are  visible  on  earth
only.  The  springs,  principles,  and
anterior  steps  are  above  and  out  of
man's  sight  [Dr.  Chalmers].
Ver.  6.  Measured  the  earth.

"  Then  stay'd  the  fervid  wheels,  and  in  his  hand
He  took  the  golden  compasses,  prepared
In  God's  eternal  store,  to  circumscribe
This  universe,  and  all  created  things.
One  foot  he  centred,  and  the  other  turn'd
Round  through  the  vast  profundity  obscure ;
And  said,  Thus  far  extend,  thus  far  thy  bounds,
This  be  thy  just  circumference,  0  world  ! "

[Milton],

Ver.  9.     Bow  naked.     The  drawing

of  the  bow  was  a  mark  of  great  skill  and

slaughter.


CHAP.  in.J


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  I1ABAKKUK.


523


M  So  the  great  master  drew  the  mighty  bow,
And  drew  with  ease.     One  hand  aloft  display'd
The  bending  horns,  and  one  the  string  essay'd."

[Pope's  Homer.]

Vers.  10 — 15.  The  whole  passage
depicts  God's  descent  to  help  his  people,
attended  by  earthquake,  splendour,  and
power.  So  tremendous  was  the  shock
of  God's  assault  in  arms  that  the  order
of  nature  was  changed,  and  the  bottoms
of  rivers  and  seas  were  laid  bare.  What
will  not  Jehovah's  rebuke  do  1  Yain  are
the  attempts  of  men  to  conceal  anything
from  him  whose  word  unbars  the  deep,
and  lifts  the  doors  of  earth  from  their
hinges !  Vain  are  all  hopes  of  resist-
ance, for  a  whisper  of  his  voice  makes


the  whole  earth  quail  in  abject  terror
[Spvirgeon].

The  volcanic  phenomena  of  Palestine
open  a  question  of  which  the  data  aie,
in  a  scientific  point  of  view,  too  imper-
fect to  be  discussed  ;  but  there  is  enough
in  the  history  and  literature  of  the  people
to  show  that  there  was  an  agency  of  this
kind  at  work.  Their  traces  on  the  per-
manent feeling  of  the  nation  must  be
noticed.  The  writings  of  the  psalmists
aud  prophets  abound  with  indications
which  escape  the  eye  of  a  superficial
reader.  Like  the  soil  of  their  country,
they  actually  heave  and  labour  with
the  fiery  convulsions  which  glow  beneath
their  surface  [A.  P.  Stanley],


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY


OK


ZEPHANIAE


INTRODUCTION.

The  "Writer.  In  all  probability  Zephaniah  was  a  prince  as  well  as  a  prophet,
in  virtue  of  bis  descent  from  Hezekiah,  the  pious  king  of  Judab ;  who,  aided  and
taught  by  another  royal  prophet,  Isaiah,  wrought  a  notable  reformation  in  the
faith  and  morals  of  the  chosen  people.  In  the  title  prefixed  to  this  prophecy  his
pedigree  is  traced,  through  four  descents,  to  a  Hezekiah,  and  there  abruptly  termi-
nates, as  though,  the  name  being  well-known  to  fame,  there  was  no  need  to  carry
it  further.  Ordinarily,  only  the  name  of  a  prophet's  father  is  given.  The  fact  that,
contrary  to  custom,  Zephaniah's  pedigree  is  traced  up  to  his  great-great-grandfather,
is  an  indication  that  this  ancestor,  Hezekiah,  was  a  man  whose  name  was  held  in
memory  and  honour.  We  find  no  Hezekiah  known  to  fame  in  the  Hebrew  annals,
save  Hezekiah  the  king  ;  and  therefore  it  is  probable  that  the  Hezekiah  from  whom
Zephaniah  was  proud  to  descend,  was  that  devout  king  who  for  a  time  arrested  the
downward  current  of  the  Hebrew  story  [Samuel  Cox].

The  Date.  In  the  reign  of  King  Josiah  (641 — 610  b.  a),  who,  aided  by
Jeremiah  and  others,  reformed  public  morals.  This  date  is  corroborated  by  state-
ments in  the  Book  itself.  The  fall  of  Nineveh  and  the  overthrow  of  Assyria  are
predicted;  he  must  therefore  have  prophesied  before  these  events  (625  b.  c.)  i.e.
in  the  former  half  of  the  reign  of  Josiah.  Idolatry  was  extensively  abolished,  but
a  remnant  was  left  (ch.  i.  4).  "  This  exactly  tallies  with  the  state  of  things  in
Judah  from  the  twelfth  to  the  eighteenth  year  of  Josiah ;  for  though  this  monarch
began,  in  the  former  of  these  years,  to  effect  a  reformation,  it  was  not  till  the  latter
that  it  was  prosecuted  with  more  successful  results  "  [Henderson].  At  this  time  the
state  was  corrupt  as  the  religion.  Princes  and  judges,  priests  and  prophets,  were
alike  in  sin.  Law  was  disregarded  between  man  and  man,  and  worship  was  profaned
by  Baal  and  Moloch.  Prophets  uttered  not  the  word  of  God,  but  fine-spun  deceits
(iii.  4  :  cf.  Jer.  v.  13).  "With  the  mass  of  the  people  religious  feeling  was  extinct.
Thousands  lived  in  scepticism  and  perfect  indifference,  indulged  in  lust  and  love  of
money,  and  declared  that  God  would  neither  reward  men  for  virtue  nor  punish


INTRODUCTION.  525


them  for  vice.  "  In  short,  the  interior  of  the  temple,  which  had  been  suffered  to
fall  into  a  ruinous  disrepair,  was  an  apt  symbol  of  the  spiritual  decay  that  was
eating  out  the  very  heart  of  the  national  life,  and  unity,  and  strength."

The  Book.  Scope.  Zephaniah  does  for  the  two,  what  had  been  done  by  Hosea
for  the  ten,  tribes  of  Israel.  Hosea  is  the  first,  Zephaniah  is  the  last,  of  the  minor
prophets  before  the  captivity.  The  contents  of  the  Book  correspond  to  the  position
of  the  author.  They  have  a  retrospective  and  a  prospective  character  [cf.  Words-
worth].  In  its  general  scope,  it  closely  resembles  the  prophecy  of  Joel.  It  traverses
the  same  large  circle  of  thought.  In  both  there  is,  first,  a  threatening  of  judgment ;
then,  a  call  to  repentance ;  and  last,  the  promise  of  a  golden  age  of  concord  and
peace.  In  both  the  history  of  the  chosen  race  swells  and  grows  into  the  history
of  the  world  at  large.  In  both  the  prophet  starts  from  the  history  of  the  past,  and
presses  on  into  the  future,  until  he  is  met  by  apocalyptic  visions  of  a  regenerated
race  dwelling  amid  the  sweet  bounty  and  peace  of  a  restored  universe  [8.  Cox\

Contents.  I.  The  exordium  (i.  1 — 6).  Announcement  of  judgment  upon  the
world  and  upon  Israel,  arising  from  the  evil  condition  of  the  present.  II.  The
description  of  the  judgment  (i.  7 — 18).     (a)  In  reference  to  its  objects  (7 — 13)  ;

(b)  In  reference  to  its  dreadfulness  (14 — 18).  III.  An  exhortation  to  seek  God
(ii.  1 — 3).  IV.  An  announcement  of  the  judgment  upon  the  heathen  nations
(ii.  4 — 15).  V.  A  repeated  description  of  the  remediless  misery  in  Jerusalem
(iii.  1 — 7).  VI.  The  promise  of  salvation  (iii.  8 — 20).  (a)  The  salvation  of  the
heathen  following  the  judgment  (1 — 10).     (b)  The  purification  of  Israel  (11 — 13).

(c)  The  salvation  of  Israel  (14 — 20)  \Lange\

Style.  The  prophet  borrows  from  the  language  and  words  of  predecessors.
This  "  arises,"  says  Pusey,  "  not  as  people  have  been  pleased  to  say — from  any
declension  in  the  originality  of  the  prophets  at  his  date,  but  from  his  subject."  It
has  been  said,  "  If  any  one  desire  to  see  the  utterances  of  the  prophets  in  brief
space,  let  him  read  through  this  brief  Zephaniah."  At  times  he  is  concise  and
poetic,  yet  full  and  vivid  in  his  pictures.  "  Joel,"  says  one,  "  is  the  most  abstract
of  prophets,  and  touches  the  history  of  his  time  at  points  comparatively  few  ;  while
Zephaniah  abounds  in  minute  and  elaborate  allusions  to  the  poetical  facts  and
events  of  his  age.  And  hence,  while  Joel  may  be  read  with  edification  by  the
simple  and  unlettered,  Zephaniah  is  well-nigh  a  sealed  Book  to  them  until  a  scholar
unlooses  the  seals  and  opens  the  Book."  "  The  impressive,  deeply  impassioned
severity  of  his  style,  well  deserves  that  his  Book  should  be  designated  as  the  dies
irat  of  the  Old  Testament "  [LangeJ.


526  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZEPHANIAH.  |_chap.  *■


CHAPTER  I.

Critical  Notes.]  2.  Consume]  From  root;  to  destroy,  utterly  to  sweep  away  (cf.  Jer.  viii.  13)
everything  (ver.  3).      "  The  enumeration  of  particulars  is  designed  to  augment  the  fearful  and
universal  character  of  the  punishment "  [Henderson].     Causes,  idols,  which  made  them  offend  oi
stumble  (Ezek.  xiv.  3,  4,  7).     4.]  Judgment,  especially  upon  Judah.     Stretch]  Not  only  threaten,
but  exert  power  to  injury.    Remnant]  Statues,  images  dedicated  to  Baal,  domestic  and  tutelary  god  of
the  Phoenicians.     5.]  The  people  now  denounced  for  star-worship  and  incense-burning  upon  the  flat
roofs  of  houses  (cf.  Jer.  xix.  13:  2  Kings  xxiii.   12);   for  combining  the   worship  of  God  with
idolatry.     Swear]  Acknowledge  in  public,  solemn  manner;  openly  to  pledge  one's  service  (2  Chron.
xv.  14).  6.]  Two  further  classes  mentioned — those  who  entirely  apostate,  and  those  who  are  indifferent.
7.]  Judgment  speedily  comes.    Hold]  A  summons  to  silent  submission  (Hab.  ii.  20) ;  the  reason  given,
the  day  near.     Sacrifice]  of  victims  of  justice  (Isa.  xxxiv.  6  :  Jer.  xlvi.  10) ;  "nations  consecrated
to  war,  that  they  may  consume  Jacob"  (Jer.  x.   25)  \_Keit].     Guests]  Lit.  sanctified  those  invited
(cf.  Isa.  xiii.  3  :  1  Sam.  ix.  13 — 22  :  xvi.  5).     8.  Princes]  should  have  set  an  example  of  virtue,  but
imitated  foreign  oppi'essors.     Strange]  Peculiar  vestments  belonging  to  the  worship  of  each  idol
(2  Kings  x.  22) ;  a  violation  of  law  (Deut.  xxii.  5).     9.  Leap]  An  idol  rite  practised  in  the  temple  of
JDagon  (1  Sam.  v.  5).     Fill]   With  goods  obtained  by  violence.     The  servants  of  the  princes  were
eager  to  rush  out  of  the  palace,  seize  the  property  of  others  to  increase  their  master's  wealth.
10.]  Siege  of  Jerusalem.     Gate]  which  stood  near  fish-market  (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  14  :  Neh.  iii.  3).
Second]  A  part  of  the  city  given  (2  Kings  xxii.  14:2  Chron.  xxxiv.  22).    Hilk]  within  the  walls,
Zion  and  Moriah.     Crashing]  Breaking  to  pieces  of  what  now  exists,  not  merely  fall  of  buildings,
as  Isa.  xv.  5.     A  cry  at  the  threat  of  utter  destruction  [Keil].     11.  Maktesh]  A  rock  in  form  of  a
mortar,  where  they  hulled  rice  and  corn.     u  The  name  probably  chosen  to  express  how  their  false
hopes,  grounded  on  the  presence  of  God's  temple  among  them,  while  by  their  sins  they  profaned  it
should  be  turned  into  true  fears  "  [Pusey\     12.  Candles]  Diligently  and  thoroughly  (Luke  xv.  8) ;
the   enemy  would  leb  no  corner  escape  them.      Lees]    Quiet,  retaining  harshness,  and  growing
turbid  and  thick.     It  denotes  perseverance,  confirmation  in  xoral  indifference  (Jer.  xlviii.  1 1).    Say]
Denied  God's  providence,  put  him  level  with  idols,  who  did  neither  good  nor  ill  (Isa.  xli.  23:  Jer.
x.  5).     13.]  God  proved  to  be  ruler  and  judge,  by  giving  up  their  wealth  to  plunder,  and  punishing
them  as  despisers  of  his  name  (Deut.  xxviii.  30:  Amos  v.  11).     14].  The  hint  of  ver.   7  carried
out  further  ;  the  nearness  and  terrible  character  of  judgmaut  described     Great]  in  effects  (Joel  ii.  11).
Bitterly]  For  he  cannot  save  himself  from  the  foe  ;  the  might  of  the  heroes  and  the  city  utterly
fails.     15.]  All  the  words  supplied  by  the  language  crowded  together  to  describe  the  terrors  of  judg-
ment [cf.  Keil],     He  first,  as  the  day  of  wrath  (Isa.  six.  18).     The  effect  of  wrath,  distress  and
pressure  (Job  xv.  24)  :  then  a  reduplication  (cf.  Nah,  ii.  11) ;  desolation,  &c.  (Job  xxx.  3  ;  xxxviii.
27).     Lastly,  16.]  "  Indicating  still  more  closely  the  nature  of  the  judgment,  as  a  day  of  the  trumpet
and  the  trumpet-blast,  i.  e.  on  which  the  clangour  of  the  war  trumpets  will  be  heard  over  all  the
fortifications  and  castles,  and  the  enemy  will  attack,  take,  and  destroy  fortified  places  amidst  the
blast  of  trumpets  [Keil].     17.]  No  help  nor  counsel  in  this  distress.     Blind]  Groping  insecurely,  or
rushing  headlong  to  destruction  (Deut.  xxviii.  29  :    tfah.  ii.  5).     Dust]  Of  as  little  value  and  in
as  great  quantity  (Gen.  xiii.  16:  cf.  2   Kings  xiii.  7).    Flesh]  From  arooWo  eat ;  equivalent  to  food
(Job  xx.  23)  [cf.  Lange].     "  Their  flesh  here  called  bread,  because  doomed  to  be  the/oo^of  worms"
[Drusius].      18.]  With  silver  and  gold  they  cannob  save  themselves.     No  heed  given  to  riches
by  the  enemy  (cf.  Isa.  xiii.  17  :  Jer.  iv.  30  :  Ezek.  vii.  19).   Fire]  will  devastate  ;  cause  speedy  and
complete  destruction.     "  A  consumption,  and  that  a  sudden  one  "  [Calvin].

HOMILETICS.

The  Destructive  Judgments. —  Verses  2,  3.

The  people  had  been  formerly  warned,  but  heeded  not ;  now  threatenings  are
executed.     Destruction,  like  another  deluge,  is  to  sweep  the  whole  earth.

I.  The  universality  of  the  judgments.  The  judgment  of  Judah  is  preceded
by  one  upon  all  nations.  The  prophet  was  not  of  a  selfish  and  bigoted  spirit.  He
concerned  himself  with  the  fate  of  heathen  countries,  and  proved  that  the  destiny
of  the  world  was  linked  with  that  of  the  chosen  people.  As  the  result  of  judg-
ment, nations  will  be  converted  to  God  (ch.  iii.  9),  and  the  world  renewed  and
glorified.     II.  The   severity  of  the  judgments.     Everything  is   specified  and


chap.  I. J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZEPHANIAH.  627

paired,  like  the  threat  of  old  (Gen.  vi.  7).  The  calamity  will  be  as  terrible  as  the
flood.  1.  Inferior  creatures  destroyed.  "  The  fowls  of  the  heaven,  and  the  fishes  of
the  sea."  2.  Human  beings  destroyed.  "  I  will  consume  men."  Man  is  the  lord,
not  the  helpless  victim,  of  nature.  All  things  are  put  under  his  feet,  suffer  for  his
guilt,  and  share  his  fate.  "  All  sheep  and  oxen,  yea,  and  the  beasts  of  the  field,
the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  the  fish  of  the  sea."  Dumb  brutes  cry  out  against  human
~uilt.  We  should  learn  God's  displeasure  against  sin  when  we  see  innocent  crea-
tures suffer  for  it.  III.  The  design  of  the  judgments.  Joel  (ii.  12 — 14)  and
Zephaniah  were  deeply  convinced  that  all  sorrows  and  calamities  were  disciplin-
ary— that  judgments  were  mixed  with  mercy,  and  designed  to  purify  human  life.
God  afflicts  men  to  restore  their  souls.  The  wicked  are  swept  away,  and  their
offences  with  them.  Sad  when  life  itself  must  be  taken  away  to  cleanse  it  from
corruption  and  guilt.  .  But  nations  have  thus  been  purified  from  idolatry  and
oppression,  and  thus  will  it  be  at  the  last  day,  when  the  Son  of  Man  "  shall
gather  out  of  his  kingdom  all  things  that  offend,  and  them  that  do  iniquity."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.   1.     TJie   prophet's   employment,  ruption  and   destruction,  or  the   indis-

To  declare  God's  word,  reprove  sin,  and  soluble  link.

reform  society.  2.  The  prophet's  au-  Yer.  3.  Wicked  with  their  offences,
thority.  The  word  came  directly  from  Wickedness,  corrupting  the  earth — en-
God.  His  doctrine  not  devised  by  men,  tailing  suffering  on  the  brute  creation —
but  received  by  inspiration.  3.  The  necessitating  Divine  interference,  and  dis-
prophet's  age.  "  In  the  days  of  Josiah,  playing  Divine  love.  "  I  beheld,  and  lo,
king  of  Judah."  In  times  of  general  there  was  no  man,  and  all  the  birds  of
defection,  God's  mercy  is  so  great,  that  the  heavens  were  fled"  (Jer.  iv.  25  :  cf.
means  are  multiplied  to  reclaim  men  xii.  4).  "As  God's  acts  of  deliverance
from  sin.  "  Not  many  noble,"  but  are  connected  in  time  with  his  acts  of
some  are  called  to  this  work.  Here  judgment  (since  his  judgments  are  ever
we  have  a  king,  and  the  son  of  a  king,  separations  of  the  godly  from  the  un-
engaged in  the  service  of  God.  godly,  and  in  this  sense,  salvations  and

Ver.   2.     /  will  utterly  consume.     A  deliverances),  so  also  are  the  revelations

tragical  beginning  of  a  terrible  sermon,  of  judgment  at  the  same  time  revelations

Hard   knots  must   have   hard   wedges  ;  of  deliverance,  and  the  faith  of  the  elect,

hard  hearts,  heavy  menaces.     The  doub-  which  corresponds  to   them,  is,  at  the

ling   of    the    denunciation,    collingendo  same  time,  both  a  faith  in  judgment  and

colligam,  importeth  the  certainty,  verity,  a  faith  in  salvation  "  [Lange].
and  vehemency  thereof  \Trapp\  ,  ~„   ,,    ,

.  V?,r\2'  3-  .  "  ™6  beST  ?f  deStrT  And  „ot^oGuf  bu^oTyr^Se

tion      (Isa.    xiv.    23)    and   the  terrible  Ascribe  we  all"  [Shakspeare],

sweep  it  makes;  man  and  beast.     Cor-

HOMILETICS.
Judgment  at  the  House  op  God. — Verses  4 — 6.

The  prophet  now  declares  upon  whom  the  sore  desolation  must  come.  Even
Judah,  where  God  is  known,  and  Jerusalem,  the  holy  city,  must  suffer.  Those
most  exalted  are  most  responsible,  and  those  who  sin  against  greater  privileges  will
be  most  signally  punished.  Judgment  must  begin  at  the  house  of  God.  Six
classes  are  singled  out  for  judgment.

I.  Idolatrous  priests  destroyed.  Two  kinds  are  specified.  1.  Inferior  priests.
"  The  Chemarims,"  priests  ordained  by  the  kings  of  Judah.  to  minister  at  high
places,  or  at  the  altar  of  Jehovah,  with  alien  and  impure  rites  (c£  2  Kings  xxiii.


52b  H0M1LETW  COMMENT  ART:    ZEPEANIAH,  [chap.  i.

5  :  Hos.  x.  5).     "In  either  case,"  says  one,  "they  were  renegades  from  the  national
faith ;  miscreants,  who,  to  earn  a  loaf  of  bread  or  to  win  the  favour  of  the  court,
we*e  prepared  to  stand  at  any  altar  and  administer  any  ritual."     2.  Superior  priests.
"  The  Chemarims  with  the  priests."     Those  of  the  family  of  Aaron,   Levitical
priests,  who  have  apostatized  to  idolatry.     Such  ministers  are  not  worthy  of  the
name  and  office  of  priest.     Corrupt  in  doctrine,  flagrant  in  practice,  their  very
name  shall  be  blotted  out  of  existence.     Ministers  who  pervert  the  national  faith,
and  sell  their  birthright  to  gain  the  favour  of  the  world,  will  suffer  awful  punish-
ment.    "A  wonderful  and  horrible  thing  is  committed  in  the  land,  the  prophets
prophesy  falsety,  and  the  priests  bear  rule  at  their  hands."     II.  Idolatrous  people
destroyed.     Corrupt  priests  influence  the  people.     From  the  ministers  the  judg-
ments pass  to  the  people.     Three  classes  are  pointed  out.     1.   Open  idolaters.
These  blended  the  worship  of  Baal  (sun)  and  Astarte  (moon)  with  Sabseism  or
pure  star-worship.     The  stars  were  thought  to  be  originators  of  all  growth  and
decay  in  nature,  and  rulers  of  all  sublunary  events  (2  Kings  xxi.  3).     The  house-
top was  chosen  for  secrecy,  or  to  obtain  fuller  views  of  the  heavenly  bodies.     This
custom  was  (a)  prevalent,  and  (b)  popular.     Public  idolatry  was  individualized  and
adopted,  family  by  family.     From  house  to  house,  from  street  to  street,  incensa
burned  and  homage  rendered  to  the  queen  of  heaven.     "  The  children  gather  wood,
and  the  fathers  kindle  the  fire,  and  the  women  knead  the  dough  to  make  cakes  to
the  queen  of  heaven,  and  to  pour  out  drink-offerings  unto  other  gods."     2.   Time-
servers.     "  Them  that  swear  by  the  Lord,  and  by  Malcham."     They  swore  allegi-
ance to  God,  but  lived  to  Moloch  or  Baal  as  their  king.     To  the  service  of  Jehovah
they  joined  that  of  idols,  and  sought  to  be  on  good  terms  with  both.     One  of  our
own  poets  stigmatizes  them,  "  as  willing  to  serve  God,  so  that  they  did  not  offend
the  devil."     They  thought  Jehovah  the  true  God,  but  yielded  to  the  fashion  and
adopted  the  religion  of  the  day.     Principle  had  no  hold  upon  them,  and  reproach
was  endured  for  present  advantage.     "  Will  ye  steal,  swear  falsely,  and  burn  in-
cense to  Baal,  and  walk  after  other  gods,  and  come  and  stand  before  me  in  this
house,  which  is  called  by  my  name"  (Jer.  vii.  8 — 10  ;  v.  7).     3.  Religiously  in-
different.     "  Returning  behind  Jehovah,  drawing  back  from  him,  turning  the  back
upon  God,  is  just  the  same  as  not  seeking  Jehovah,  or  not  inquiring  after  him.
The  persons  referred  to  are  the  religiously  indifferent,  those  who  do  not  trouble
themselves  about  God,   the  despisers  of  God  "  [Keil].     Notice  the  steps  of  this
iepartuie.     They  do  not  want  God,  and  therefore  do   not  seek  him.     They  fear
his  presence  might  embarrass  them,  and  therefore  forget  him  as  much  as  they
can.     Then  they  cast  him  behind  them,  abstain  from  all  worship,  and  renounce
every  custom  that  would  bring  him  to  their  minds.     "  Thou  hast  forsaken  me,
saith  the  Lord,  thou  art  gone  backward :  therefore  will  I  stretch  out  my  hand
against  thee,  and  destroy  thee."

Four  Classes  of  Ungodly  Men. — Verses  5,  6.

I.  The  worshippers  of  nature.  When  men  see  beauty  in  creatures,  and  derive
advantage  from  them,  their  hearts  dote  upon  them,  and  are  drawn  from  God.  Men
adore  nature,  and  forget  nature's  God.  A  specious  and  plausible  idolatry  abounds
in  our  day.  To  honour  a  star  is  quite  as  offensive  to  God  as  to  honour  a  stone.
To  worship  the  splendours  of  heaven  or  the  wealth  of  earth ;  to  love  self,  family,
or  business  more  than  God  is  "to  change  the  truth  of  God  into  a  lie,  and  worship
and  serve  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator,  who  is  blessed  for  ever."

"They  trifle  with  the  truth,  until,  at  last,
Delusions  strong  as  hell  shall  bind  them  fast "  [Cowper].

II.  The  half-hearted  in  religion.     By  acts  of  solemn  profession  they  worship
God,  and  then  try  to  serve  the  world.     They  pledge  themselves  first  to  one  and


chap.  I. J  HOMILETIG  COMMON T ART :  ZEPHANIAH.  629


then  the  other,  and  try  to  serve  two  masters.  This  is  morally  impossible.  The
affections  cannot  be  divided.  One  only  can  be  our  master,  call  him  Baal,  Moloch,
or  Christ.  All  men  are  made  to  serve  something.  The  choice  lies  between  Christ
and  the  world.  Compromise  and  neutrality  are  impossible.  "  How  long  halt  ye
between  two  opinions  V*  III.  The  backsliders  from  God.  This  class  is  too
common.  Many  once  started  well,  were  firm  in  purpose,  and  kept  their  face
Zionwards,  but  have  ceased  to  follow  after,  and  utterly  forsaken  the  Lord.  To  go
back  from  God  is  virtually  to  join  the  enemy.  "  He  that  is  not  with  me  is  against
me."  Wandering  is  the  natural  tendency  of  man ;  bat  to  wander  out  of  the  way
of  understanding,  amid  light,  conviction,  and  privileges,  awfully  aggravates  the  sin.
Watch  the  first  step  in  feeling  and  practice,  lest  it  fix  you  in  a  state  of  apostasy
among  "  the  mighty  dead."  Backsliding  is  the  fountain  of  its  own  misery,  and  the
most  fearful  of  Divine  judgments.  "  The  backslider  in  heart  shall  be  filled  with
his  own  ways."  IV.  The  practical  atheists.  Those  guilty  of  defection  will  soon
live  in  total  neglect  of  God  and  his  ways.  It  is  said  that  a  sheep,  having  once
wandered  from  the  fold,  never  tries  to  return,  but  "  wanders  on  still  more  and  more
astray;"  so  in  many  cases  backslidings  are  multiplied  until  men  are  reduced  to
extremity  and  ruin.  "Ah,  sinful  nation,  a  people  laden  with  iniquity,  a  seed  of
evildoers,  children  that  are  corrupters  :  they  have  forsaken  the  Lord,  they  have
provoked  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  unto  anger,  they  are  gone  away  backward."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  4.  The  remnant  of  Baal.  1.  Ver.  6.  Positive  and  negative  apos-
Good  men  may  be  hindered  in  their  tasy.  Positive,  in  forsaking  the  Lord
work,  or  leave  it  partially  done.  Heze-  for  idols;  negative,  in  ceasing  to  "seek"
kiah's  and  Josiah's  reformation  did  not  after  him  in  real  prayer.  The  latter  is
clear  away  the  idolatry  of  Baal.  Moses  the  forerunner  of  the  former :  many
and  Luther  did  not  entirely  finish  their  who  do  not  go  so  far  as  open  apostasy,
work.  "  Good  and  evil  have  each  a  are  virtually  guilty  of  it,  for  they  do
root,  which  remains  in  the  ground  when  not  "inquire  for"  the  Lord.  This  verse
the  trunk  has  been  hewn  down.  There  describes  more  comprehensively  those
is  a  remnant  of  grace  when  the  rest  guilty  of  defection  from  Jehovah  in  any
have  been  blinded  (Rom.  xi.  5 — 7) ;  and  way.  "  My  people  have  committed  two
this  is  a  holy  seed  to  carry  on  the  line  evils ;  they  have  forsaken  me,  the  foun-
of  God  (Isa.  vi.  13).  Evil  too  has  its  tain  of  living  waters,  and  hewed  them
remnant,  which,  unless  diligently  kept  out  cisterns,  broken  cisterns,  that  can
down,  shoots  up  again,  after  the  con-  hold  no  water "  [Fausset\.
version  of  peoples  or  individuals"  Seeking  God.  1.  God  must  be  sought
[Pusey].  2.  The  presence  and  efforts  of  diligently  to  be  found.  2.  Men  do  not
good  men  increase  the  guilt  and  the  seek  God  diligently.  3.  The  natural
responsibility  of  any  nations.  3.  If  these  consequences  are,  turning  back,  forget-
nations  heed  not  their  warnings  or  binder  fulness,  and  carelessness.  "  Not  sought.
their  work,  God  may  justly  punish  them  Diligently  sought  him  (Heb.  xi.  6),
for  their  sin.  God  will  consume  Judah  zealously  inquired  after  him,  as  after
for  the  remnant  that  remains.  The  a  lost  jewel  (Jer.  xxix.  13)  God
reign  of  the  pious  Josiah  preceded  the  will  visit  for  unzealousness ;  and  curse
doom  of  Judah,  to  deprive  the  people  of  those  that  do  his  work  carelessly,  cur-
all  excuse.  "I  will  also  stretch  out  sorily,  in  a  perfunctory,  formal  way*
mine  hand  upon  Judah,  and  upon  all  [Trapp],
the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem."


\


530  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZEPHANIAH.  [chap,  i


HOMILETICS.

Prudent  Silence. —  Verse  7.

God's  anger  is  not  easily  seen,  nor  his  words  laid  to  heart,  by  those  who  are  mo«t
concerned.  Hence  warnings  are  given  time  after  time.  Judgments  are  at  hand,
and  though  men  will  pursue  their  own  folly,  yet  God  has  fixed  a  day  of  vengeance.
Sinners  therefore  should  tremble  before  the  majesty  of  God,  who  can  destroy  the
rebellious.

I.  Hold  thy  peace,  and  do  not  murmur.  Sinners  murmur  at  their  lot  in  life ;
at  the  threatening  and  punishment  of  God  for  their  sins.  They  deny  his  right
and  his  providence  over  men.  The  righteous  feel  condemned  in  God's  presence
(Job  xi.  4  :  Ps.  cxliii.  2),  how  much  more  should  the  wicked  !  They  are  warned,
devoid  of  every  plea  and  excuse.  The  voice  of  Divine  judgment  finds  an  echo  in
every  heart,  "we  indeed  justly  "  (Luke  xxiii.  41).  II.  Hold  thy  peace,  for  God
is  present.  He  sees  our  ways,  and  hears  our  ingratitude.  "  Wherefore  think  ye
evil  in  your  hearts  ? "  Hush  !  for  if  you  would  not  like  a  friend  or  a  prince  to  hear
your  words,  why  should  God  be  offended  with  them'?  If  at  any  time  speech  is
silvern  and  silence  golden,  it  is  in  the  presence  of  the  Great  Judge.  III.  Hold  thy
peace,  for  the  day  of  decision  is  at  hand.  Things  which  perplex  and  astonish
will  soon  be  cleared  up.  "  The  day  of  the  Lord  is  at  hand,"  and  will  speedily  come
(cf.  Hab.  ii.  20:  Zech.  ii.  13).

"  Thought  has  not  colours  half  so  fair,
That  she  to  paint  that  hour  may  dare,
In  silence  best  adored"  [Keble],

IV.  Hold  thy  peace,  and  submit.  Submission  is  the  most  becoming  attitude.
The  praise  of  silence  has  its  pre-eminent  advocate  in  Carlyle,  who  writes :  "  Nay,  in
thy  own  mean  perplexities,  do  thou  thyself  but  hold  thy  tongue  for  one  day  :  on
the  morrow,  how  much  clearer  are  thy  purposes  and  duties  ;  what  wreck  and  rubbish
have  those  mute  workmen  within  thee  swept  away,  when  intrusive  noises  were  shut
out."  "Thou,  whosoever  hast  been  wont  to  speak  against  God,  as  if  he  had  no  care
about  earthly  affairs,  cease  thy  murmurs  and  self -justifications :  submit  thyself  to
God,  and  repent  in  time  "  [Calvin].

The  Day  of  Jehovah's  Sacrifice. —  Verses  7 — 9.

Judgment  is  described  as  a  sacrifice.  The  Jewish  people  are  prepared,  and  the
nations  whom  God  has  called  to  war  are  invited  to  punish  them.  It  is  not  a
sacrifice  of  joy  but  of  sorrow.

I.  The  feast  is  prepared.  "The  Lord  hath  prepared  a  sacrifice."  Such  as  set
aside  the  means  of  grace  and  despise  the  regular  offerings,  only  prepare  themselves
for  sacrifice.  When  men  do  not  repent  of  sin  and  offer  themselves  "  a  living
sacrifice,"  they  will  become  victims  of  their  own  folly.  Blessings  are  withdrawn,
and  judgments  prepared  for  them.  "  The  Lord  hath  a-  sacrifice  in  Bozrah,  and  a
great  slaughter  in  the  land  of  Idumea."  II.  The  guests  are  invited.  "  He  hath
bid  his  guests."  The  nations  whom  God  has  sanctified  or  set  apart  are  the  guests.
Nations  and  individuals,  whatever  their  aims  and  passions,  are  called  to  execute
God's  displeasure.  There  is  a  kind  of  awe  about  "  the  scourges  of  God."  They
are  sanctified  sometimes  in  spite  of  themselves.  The  Chaldeans  and  the  Eomans,
Caiaphas,  Herod,  and  Pilate,  are  constrained  to  bear  testimony  to  God.  "  I  have
commanded  my  sanctified  ones,  I  have  also  called  my  mighty  ones  for  mine  anger."
III.  The  sacrifices  to  be  offered.  The  judgments  will  fall  with  equal  severity
upon  all  rank,  .  The  royal  families.  "  The  princes  and  the  king's  children."
Great  men  often  abuse  their  power,  influence  the  people  by  their  examples,  and


chap.  I.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZEPHANIAH.  631


become  chief  in  provocation.  Koyalty  is  not  exempt  from  responsibility,  and  will
be  reckoned  with  for  its  pride  and  wickedness.

M  A  flatter'd  prince  soon  turns  the  prince  of  fools  "  [Ben  Jonsori].

2.  The  noble  servants.  "  All  snch  as  are  clothed  with  strange  apparel."  Apostate
nobles  and  princes  imitated  royal  families  ;  mimicked  the  manners  of  the  heathen,
and  adopted  their  costumes.  "  Their  apparel  indicated  their  treasonable  leanings,
their  servility  to  alien  monarchs,  their  addiction  to  heathen  vices  and  superstitions."

3.  The  servile  retainers.  These  were  more  licentious  and  cruel  than  the  masters
they  served,  lived  by  plunder  and  extortion,  and  leaped  out  of  their  own  stronghold
to  invade  that  of  others.  Great  men  often  think  that  their  will  should  be  law,  and
employ  servants  to  support  their  prodigality  by  fraud  and  violence.  But  the
obligations  to  God  are  greater  than  the  claims  of  any  master.

The  Lord's  Sacrifice. — Verse  7.

I.  The  sacrifice  which  the  Lord  hath  prepared.  The  sacrifice  of  Christ  a
subject  at  all  times  interesting.  It  is  the  believer's  feast  and  the  sinner's  hope.
It  demonstrates  the  love  of  God.  Man  has'  sinned,  the  curse  was  upon  him.  A
victim  demanded,  and  must  suffer  to  expiate  sin.  This  sacrifice  could  not  be
provided  by  the  wealth  of  kingdoms  and  the  wisdom  of  schools.  Angels  could  not
prepare  it.  Must  then  man  suffer  1  Silence  all  around,  but  the  Eternal  cries,
"  Deliver  him  from  going  down  "  (Job  xxxiii.  24).  Christ  is  the  sacrifice  offered
to  the  world  (Heb.  ix.  26).  II.  The  guests  whom  God  has  invited  to  partake  of
his  sacrifice.  We  are  not  left  to  conjecture  who  these  are.  Our  Lord's  parable
(Matt.  xxii.  1 — 10)  and  Peter's  vision  inform  us  (Acts  x.  11 — 15,  34).  1.  The
Jews.  God's  chosen  people,  favoured  with  his  will.  They  had  a  variety  of
sacrifices,  which  set  forth  and  typified  Christ,  pointed  out  their  guilt  and  expiation
of  it  by  blood.  They  had  messengers  in  succession  to  call  them  to  repentance ;
but  when  Christ  came  they  rejected,  persecuted,  and  crucified  him.  Yet  after  all
this  enmity  they  were  invited  to  the  sacrifice  (Luke  xxiv.  47).  2.  The  Gentiles.
This  sacrifice  prepared  for  Jews  and  Gentiles,  nations  afar  off,  perishing  for  lack  of
knowledge.  All  mankind  invited  to  the  gospel  feast  (Isa.  xxv.  6,  7  :  Luke  xiv.
21 — 23).  Christ  gave  himself  for  all  people  (Luke  ii.  10) ;  was  a  propitiation  for
the  sins  of  the  whole  world  (1  John  ii.  2).  The  gospel  must  be  preached  to  the
world,  that  all  may  be  saved  (Mark  xv.  15).  Application.  1.  All  have  sinned,
need  a  sacrifice,  mediator,  and  Saviour.  2.  Such  a  Saviour  is  provided.  3.  Pardon,
holiness,  and  happiness  may  be  obtained  by  all  who  rightly  seek.  Are  you  partakers
of  this  great  sacrifice?  Come,  sit  with  the  guests,  and  take  your  place  at  the
sacramental  table.  Do  not  waver  nor  doubt.  If  strangers,  you  are  perishing.
Feel  your  need,  and  apply  now.  Woe  be  unto  you  if  you  make  light  of  it  I  "If  he
that  despised  Moses'  law,"  &c.  [Rev.  Thos.  Jacksorij.

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  8.  The  strange  apparel  contrasted  Seneca   complained   that   many  in  his

with  the  true  garment,  "  the  fine  linen,  time  were  more  careful  about  attire  than

clean   and    white,"    granted    unto    the  the  welfare  of  the  state.     It  is  extreme

Church,  which  is  "  the  righteousness  of  folly  to  be    too   anxious    about   either

the  saints"  in  Christ  (Kev.  xix.  8).  material  or  fashion  of  dress,  to  sacrifice

The  dress  may  be  taken  as  a  witness  comfort  for  appearance,  and  necessities

to — 1.  The  care  for  externals.     2.  The  for  luxuries.
power  of  fashion.     3.  The  state  of  the

mind.       4.     The    danger    of     luxury.  "  Caw  no  mow  to  olothe  and  eat »' fMafc^wawJ.


t>32  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZEPHANIAB.  [chap.  i.


Ver.  9.  Those  that  leap.  Those  who  schemed,  plotted,  robbed ;  they  suc-
serve  their  earthly  masters  with — 1.  ceeded  to  their  heart's  wish  ;  but  '  ill-
eagerness  ;  2.  insolence ;  and  3.  violence,  gotten,  ill-spent.'  They  filled  their
Wealth  thus  gained  is — 1.  unlawful;  masters'  houses  quite  full;  but  where-
2.  uncertain  ;  and  3.  Divinely  cursed.  with  ] — with  violence  and  deceit,  which
"Here  again  all  which  remains  is  the  witnessed  against  them,  and  brought
Bin.  They  enriched,  as  they  thought,  down  the  judgments  of  God  upon  them  "
their  masters,  by  art  or  by  force :  they  [Pusey],

HOMILETICS.
The  Doomed  City. — Verses  10 — 12.

The  vision  of  Divine  judgment  which  swept  the  earth,  and  settled  in  dark  clouds
over  the  land  of  Judah,  is  now  depicted  as  falling  on  the  city.  Jerusalem,  the
metropolis,  the  centre  of  national  vice  and  luxury,  is  besieged  by  Nebuchadnezzar.
The  advance  of  the  enemy,  the  ruin  of  the  buildings,  and  the  miseries  of  the
inhabitants,  are  set  forth  in  impressive  figures.

I.  The  anguish  at  the  gate.  "  A  sound  of  crying  from  the  fish  gate."  Massive
walls  and  iron  gates  cannot  keep  out  Divine  visitations  in  the  city ;  wealth  and
grandeur  are  no  barrier  to  retribution  in  the  family.  God  can  disturb  our  towns
and  markets,  our  business  and  societies,  and  create  want  and  anguish  on  every
hand.  II.  The  desolation  at  the  centre.  From  the  entrance  the  enemy  ^oes  on
to  the  centre,  or  second  part  of  the  city.  The  second  wall  hinders  not ;  the  sacred
temple  and  the  school  of  the  prophets  are  battered  by  rams  and  fall  crash  to  the
ground.  When  God  assails,  what  can  withstand  !  Neglect  of  duty  and  indulgence
in  sin  will  bring  a  fearful  M  cry  of  destruction  "  (Isa.  xv.  5).  III.  The  conquest
of  the  city.  When  God  begins,  he  will  make  an  end.  Judgments  penetrate  most
secret  places,  and  destroy  the  highest  citadel.  The  horrors  of  the  siege  increase.
The  storm  sweeps  everything  before  it.  The  inhabitants  gather  on  the  surrounding
hills,  and  howl  at  the  devastation  before  them.  "  A  voice  of  noise  from  the  city,  a
voice  from  the  temple,  a  voice  of  the  Lord  that  rendereth  recompense  to  his  enemies  "
(Isa.  lxvi.  6).  IV.  The  destruction  of  the  inhabitants.  "  Howl,  ye  inhabitants
of  Maktesh,"  &c.  Not  only  the  city  in  its  grandeur,  but  the  people  in  their
wickedness  are  all  destroyed.  1.  Wealthy  merchants  were  overtaken.  "  All  the
merchant  people  are  cut  down."  The  Maktesh  (lit.  mortar),  in  which  they  dwell,
is  a  type  of  the  method  in  which  they  suffer.  They  will  be  pounded  and  crushed.
The  silver  with  which  they  lade  themselves  will  weigh  them  down  to  death.
Abused  prosperity  makes  judgments  severe.  It  is  folly  to  dream  of  safety  in  any
place  from  which  God  is  banished.  Mercantile  gains  and  heaps  of  silver  cannot
deliver  men  "  in  the  day  of  the  Lord's  wrath."  *  They  shall  cast  their  silver  in  the
streets,  and  their  gold  shall  be  removed  :  their  silver  and  their  gold  shall  not  be
able  to  deliver  them  in  the  day  of  the  wrath  of  the  Lord,"  &c.  (Ezek.  vii.  1 9  :  Jas.
v.  1).  2.  Men  of  business  were  carried  off.  "  All  they  that  bear  silver  are  cut  off."
The  traders  of  the  city  had  become  very  Canaanites  in  greed  and  gain  (cf.  Hos.  xii.
7  :  Ezek.  xvi.  3).  The  invaders  seized  the  wealthy  first,  and  carried  away  their
booty  (cf.  ver.  13).  Traffic  and  trade  are  good  things,  but  are  not  the  real  basis  on
which  a  kingdom  stands.  When  carried  on  by  injustice  and  violence  they  will
cause  depression  in  business,  failure  in  banks,  and  ruin  in  the  country.  God  nevei
allows  any  dishonesty  to  go  unpunished.  "  By  the  blessing  of  the  upright  the  city
is  exalted ;  but  it  is  overthrown  by  the  mouth  of  the  wicked."


chap.  L]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZEPHANIAH.  533


Divine  Scrutiny  and  Retribution. —  Verses  12 — 18.

God  is  not  indifferent  to  human  affairs.     We  may  forget  that  God  sees  us,  but
the  fact  is  not  altered  by  our  forgetfulness.

I.  Human  conduct  is  under  Divine  inspection.  This  indicates — 1.  A  thorough
scrutiny.  "  I  will  search  Jerusalem  with  candles."  When  God  comes  forth — to
make  evil  glare  out  by  his  fierce  light — the  secret  sins  and  the  secret  sinners  cannot
be  hidden.  No  hiding-place  can  keep  out  the  light  that  makes  manifest.  2.  The
detection  of  the  guilty.  "  Men  that  are  settled  (curded  or  thickened).  The  imagery
is  taken  from  the  process  of  preparing  wine,  and  emphatically  sets  forth — (a)  The
evil  of  carnal  self-satisfaction  (Jer.  xlviii.  11).  Prosperity  fostered  pride;  ease
generated  presumption ;  absence  of  dislodging  changes  resulted  in  aggravated  spirit
of  impunity.  This  self-security  should  be  detected ;  and  (b)  Practical  atheism
should  be  exposed.  "  That  say  in  their  heart,  the  Lord  will  not  do  good,"  &c.
Practical  atheism  was  the  outcome  of  debasing  indulgence.  God's  watchfulness,
justice,  and  government  were  flagrantly  ignored.  His  patience  was  thought  to  be
unconcern.  They  talked  in  their  hearts,  held  mental  monologues,  and  charged  God
with  being  alike  indifferent  to  do  good  or  evil,  to  bestow  blessing  or  visit  with
calamity.  "  Because  sentence  against  an  evil  work  is  not  executed  speedily,  there-
fore the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  fully  set  in  them  to  do  evil."  Note  the
manifestation  of  a  similar  spirit  in  the  days  of  the  Apostle  Peter  (2  Pet.  iii.).
II.  Punishment  is  threatened  for  wrong-doing.  "  I  will  punish,  because  they
have  sinned  against  the  Lord"  (cf.  vers.  12 — 17).  God's  anger  is  not  awakened
by  trifles,  neither  is  it  disproportionate  to  the  offence.  The  same  faithfulness  and
power  are  concerned  in  the  fulfilment  of  great  and  terrible  threatenings  as  of
"  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises."  The  space  mercifully  allotted  for
repentance  was  nearly  over.  The  day  of  grace  was  ending,  and  stern  justice  was
drawing  near.  1.  The  punishment  would  not  be  delayed.  "  The  great  day  of  the
Lord  is  near,  it  is  near  and  hasteth  greatly."  2.  The  punishment  woidd  be  most
exacting.  "The  curse  causeless  shall  not  come."  The  penalty  for  sin  may  (1)
make  the  sinner's  labour  profitless.  "They  shall  build  houses,  but  not  inhabit
them,  and  they  shall  plant  vineyards,  but  not  drink  the  wine  thereof."  The
advent  of  justice  may  (2)  render  the  offenders  homeless.  "  Therefore  their  goods
shall  become  a  booty,  and  their  houses  a  desolation."  Judgment  may  (3)  terrify
with  manifold  alarms  (vers.  15 — 17).  Eetributions  (4)  make  the  whole  land
desolate.  "  The  whole  land  shall  be  devoured  by  the  fire  of  his  jealousy."  3.  The
punishment  would  not  he  evaded.  (1)  There  would  be  no  exemption  by  purchase.
"  Neither  their  silver  nor  their  gold  shall  be  able  to  deliver  them."  (2)  The  doom
would  be  inclusive  and  complete.  "  For  he  shall  make  even  a  speedy  riddance  of
all  them  that  dwell  in  the  land  "  [Matt.  Braithwaite].

The  Diligent  Search  and  the  Certain  Discovert. — Verses  12 — 14.

God  will  now  come  in  terrible  judgment,  go  through  the  city,  trying  house  by
house,  and  man  by  man.  "  As  the  vintner  goes  through  his  cellars,  torch  in  hand ;
or  as  the  head  of  the  household,  taper  in  hand,  searches  every  nook  and  corner  of
his  house  before  the  Passover,  lest  any  morsel  of  leaven  should  be  hidden  in  it,
so  Jehovah  will  *  search  Jerusalem  with  candles}  hunting  the  evil  out  of  every
dark  nook  in  which  they  have  concealed  themselves,  suffering  none  to  escape."

I.  The  nature  of  the  search.  "I  will  search  with  candles."  I.  It  is  a
determined  search.  An  earnest  and  diligent  search  of  persons  and  places ;  a  sifting
one  by  one  in  every  corner  until  the  thing  searched  be  discovered.  The  woman
"  lit  a  candle,  and  swept  the  house,  and  sought  diligently  till  she  found "  the  lost
coin  (Luke  xv.  8 :  Ps.  xliv.  21).  2.  It  is  a  universal  search  None  can  escape.
Josephus  tells  in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  how  princes  and  priests  were  dragged


&S4  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZEPHAN1AH.  [ohap.  *


out  of  tombs,  pits,  and  caves,  in  which  they  had  hidden  themselves  in  fear  of
death.  Ungodly  men  hate  the  light,  would  extinguish  the  candle,  and  hide  them-
selves from  punishment.  But  this  is  impossible.  "  Though  they  hide  themselves
in  the  top  of  Carmel,  I  will  search  and  take  them  out  thence."  (a)  No  bribe  can
avert  it.  (b)  No  strength  can  resist  it.  The  might  of  the  city  and  the  courage  of
the  warrior  would  fail.  So  irresistible  would  be  the  attack  that  "  the  mighty  man  "
would  abandon  himself  to  shrieks  of  hopeless  grief  (ver.  14).  There  is  onlj  one
way  of  escape  for  the  guilty  :  to  examine  his  own  ways,  to  condemn  his  own
offences,  and  abandon  all  pleas,  to  trust  in  Christ.  II.  The  design  of  the  search.
God  searches  the  city,  and  penetrates  the  inward  parts  of  the  soul  to  expel  dark-
ness, discover  guilt,  and  bring  men  to  himself.  1.  To  rouse  the  spiritually
hardened.  Idleness  and  ease  beget  moral  indifference.  Men  sit  down  upon  their
lees,  draw  themselves  together,  and  get  hardened  in  sin.  They  rest  on  the  vilest,
the  sediment  and  refuse  of  their  nature ;  become  defiled  by  lusts,  and  confirmed
in  habitual  wickedness.  2.  To  reprove  the  practically  indifferent.  Men  who  deny
not  God's  existence  may  reason  themselves  into  atheism,  may  wish  and  believe  in
their  hearts,  and  by  acts  inure  themselves  into  the  belief  that  God  is  far  away  from
them;  that  he  does  not  govern  the  world ;  and  "  will  not  punish  men  with  eternal
destruction  for  the  sins  of  this  short  life."  God  sits  in  heaven  heedless  of  what
men  do  or  suffer,  and  will  neither  interfere  in  this  world  nor  in  the  next.  Why
then  fear  him  1  Why  not  give  themselves  to  lusts  and  pleasures  1  This  spirit  is
rebuked  by  the  prophet.  If  men  do  not  see  God  in  the  merciful  visitations,  he
will  terrify  them  by  judgments  in  life.  3.  To  punish  the  worldly-minded.  Men
pursue  their  ordinary  course  of  labour  and  of  sin,  eat  and  drink,  build  houses  and  plant
vineyards,  until  the  day  overtakes  them,  and  deprives  them  of  all  they  have  (Matt.
xxiv.  38,  39).  (1)  They  hoard  up  and  cannot  keep.  iC  Therefore  their  goods  shall
become  a  booty."  God  refutes  men's  notions  by  his  providence,  and  makes  them
feel  that  he  cares  for  what  they  do  by  taking  what  they  possess,  and  leaving  them
homeless  and  penniless.  "  And  their  houses  a  desolation."  (2)  They  labour  and
do  not  reap  the  benefit.  They  "build  houses,  but  do  not  inhabit  them;  plant
vineyards,  but  do  not  drink  the  wine  thereof."  God  proves  the  verity  of  the
threatening  by  his  execution,  disappoints  men  of  happiness  and  enjoyment  by  his
justice.  If  we  forget  God  in  prosperity,  get  intoxicated  with  pleasure,  and  revolt
in  threatened  punishment,  we  shall  be  convinced  of  our  folly.  God  will  visit  our
cities  and  marts,  and  search  our  shops  and  families.  We  shall  be  frustrated  in  our
pursuits,  and  robbed  of  all  our  possessions.  "  Thou  shalt  build  an  house,  and  thou
shalt  not  dwell  therein;  thou  shalt  plant  a  vineyard,  and  shalt  not  gather  the
grapes  thereof"  (cf.  Deut.  xxviii.  30  :  Amos  i.  2).

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

The  three  acts  of  punishment.  The  and  abuse  of  them  have  been  a  snare  to
first  falls  upon  the  princes  who  indulge  them.  Therefore  (i.  e.  because  these
in  the  customs  of  the  heathen  (vers.  8,  things  have  had  such  an  effect)  "  their
9).  The  second  falls  upon  the  rich  goods  shall  become  a  booty."  "Religion
(vers.  10,  11).  The  third  falls  upon  the  and  morality  are  two  spheres  which  can-
careless  despisers  (vers.  12,  13)  [Lange].  not  be  separated.     An  upright  heart  can

Yers.  12,  13.    1.  Ease,  prosperity,  and  only  have  one  God,  and  in  cherishing

lack  of  change,  beget  false  security,  dis-  other  gods  besides  God  lies  a  falseness

regard  of  God's  providence,  and  spiritual  which   bears   its    fruit   in    the  field   of

indifference.     2.    God   refutes   the   Ian-  morals.     Whilst   the  heart,  in   its  pro-

guage,    and    makes    practical     atheists  foundest    depths,   is   actuated    by   two

alarmed   at  his  judgments.     3.    When  diametrically    opposite    opinions,   it    is

God  strips  any  people  of  their  posses-  necessary  that   those  influences   should

siona  they  will  find  that  their  enjoyment  finally  neutralise  one  another.     In  this


CHAP.  I.J  HCMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ZEPHANIAH.  535


way  arises  indifference  towards  motives  avarice,  take  the  place  of   eternal.     In

drawn  from  eternal  things.     The  indif-  the  second  place,  the  other  result  of  this

ference   has   a   twofold    result.      First,  fearless,  practical  atheism  is  :  God  does

temporal    motives,    among    which    the  no  good  and  no  evil "  [Lange].
most  powerful    are  pride  (fashion)  and

IIOMILETICS.
The  Great  Day  op  the  Lord. —  Verses  14 — 18.

To  rouse  the  self-secure  in  their  ease,  Zephaniah  carries  out  the  hint  of  ver.  7,
of  the  near  approach  and  awful  character  of  the  judgment.  The  warning  to  Judah
and  Jerusalem  should  make  sinners  in  Zion  tremble.  It  is  the  day,  the  great  day
of  the  Lord,  "a  specimen  of  the  day  of  judgment,  a  kind  of  doomsday,  as  the
last  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Romans  is  represented  to  be  in  our  Saviour's
prediction  in  Matt.  xxiv.  27."

I.  A  day  of  profound  darkness.  Darkness  and  gloominess,  clouds  and  thick
darkness.  Everything  looks  threatening,  and  nothing  encourages.  No  hope,  no
light.  "  The  day  of  a  darkness  so  profound,  that  day  itself  is  changed  into  its
very  opposite  and  becomes  a  night,  and  a  night  wrapped  in  clouds  through  which
no  star  can  shoot  a  ray  of  hope."  II.  A  day  of  Divine  wrath.  u  That  day  is
a  day  of  wrath ; "  wrath  treasured  up  for  awhile,  but  now  overflowing  and  irresist-
ible— manifest,  and  felt  in  distress  of  every  kind  and  degree,  in  calamity  without
relief.  If  the  wrath  of  a  king  is  like  a  messenger  of  death,  how  much  more  the  wrath
of  an  offended  Grodl  (Prov.  xvi.  14:  Mai.  iii.  2).  III.  A  day  of  material
destruction.  1.  The  cities  will  be  destroyed.  "Against  the  fenced  cities,  and
against  the  high  towers  "  (ver.  16).  Whatever  the  strength  and  structure  of  fortifi-
cations, they  would  afford  no  protection.  2.  The  land  will  be  wasted.  The  blast
of  God  will  turn  all  fertilhVy  into  waste.  The  dreary  monotony  of  desolation
appears  everywhere.  The  earth  is  wasted  with  havoc,  and  broken  into  ruin.  "  A
day  of  wasteness  and  desolation."  IV.  A  day  of  human  misery.  "A  day  of
trouble  and  distress"  (vers.  15  and  17).  1.  Great  helplessness,  (a)  No  escape
by  ransom ;  (b)  no  escape  by  flight.  Men  sink  into  anguish  beyond  expression ;
into  misery  beyond  relief.  2.  Great  blindness.  Hemmed  in,  they  turn  first  to
one  place  and  then  another ;  stagger  like  drunken  men  (Job  xii.  25)  ;  and  walk
like  blind  men.  Bereft  of  counsel,  strength,  and  hope,  "  they  meet  with  the  dark-
ness in  the  day-time,  and  grope  in  the  noon-day  as  in  the  night."  3.  Great
slaughter.  "  Their  blood  shall  be  poured  out  as  dust."  Life  was  of  no  value,
blood  would  be  utterly  disregarded,  treated  as  contemptible,  and  spilt  in  abundance
(Ps.  lxxix.  3).  Their  flesh  would  decay,  putrefy,  and  become  offensive,  and  lie  like
dung  upon  the  land.  All  this  "  because  they  have  sinned."  "  The  most  offensive
disgusting  physical  corruption,"  says  Pusey,  "is  but  a  faint  image  of  the  defile-
ment of  sin."  4.  Great  despair.  Amid  darkness,  distress,  and  murder,  the  war
trumpet  sounds  louder  and  louder,  strikes  terror  into  every  heart,  and  despair  is
read  in  every  eye.  The  fire,  of  jealousy  devours  the  land,  and  "a  speedy  riddance  is
made  of  all  them  that  dwell "  in  it.  "  He  shall  make  an  utter,  yea,  altogether
(nothing  but)  a  terrific  destruction  of  all  the  dwellers  of  the  earth"  (cf.  Ps.  civ.
29  :  Isa.  lxv.  23).  V.  A  day  of  speedy  approach.  "It  is  near,  it  is  near,  and
hasteth  greatly."  Ench  hour  tells  the  knell  of  approaching  doom.  Conscience,
Scripture,  and  providence,  like  the  voice  of  God,  proclaim  that  it  is  near.  Near,
adds  the  prophet,  to  impress  us  the  more.  It  is  at  hand  to  each.  It  hasteth
greatly,  and  may  come  before  we  are  aware.  Nothing  will  hasten  it  more  than  care-
lessness in  sin  and  security  in  judgment.  Prepare  now,  before  its  voice  is  heard ;
arise,  ye  dead,  and  come  to  judgment.  "  For  the  great  day  of  his  wrath  is  come  \
and  who  shall  be  able  to  stand  \ "


536


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY    ZEPHANLAH.


\QUJL


"  I  see  the  Judge  enthroned  !  the  flaming  guard !
The  volume  opened  !  opened  every  heart !
A  sunbeam  pointing  out  each  secret  thought !
No  patron  !  intercessor  none !  now  past
The  sweet,  the  clement  mediatorial  hour  !
For  guilt  no  plea !  to  pain,  no  pause  !  no  bound !
Inexorable  all!  and  all,  extreme"  [Young"].


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  I.


Vers.  1 — 3.  Consume.  The  wrath  of
God  is  truly  the  terriblest  thing  in  this
world — the  sting  of  sin,  which  is  the
sting  of  death.  Alas !  to  us,  God's
wrath  doth  not  appear  in  its  full  horror ;
for  if  it  did,  we  should  sooner  die  than
offend  him.  Some  do  but  think  of  it ;
few  think  of  it  as  they  should;  and
they  that  are  most  apprehensive  look
upon  it  as  at  a  distance,  as  that  which
may  be  turned  away ;  and  so,  not  fear-
ing God's  wrath,  "  treasure  up  wrath
against  the  day  of  wrath"  [Farindon].

Vers.  4 — 6.  Remnant.  Baal  was
the  Phoenician  tutelary  god.  His  name
means  lord ;  and  the  feminine  deity
corresponding,  and  generally  associated,
with  him,  was  Ashtoreth.  As  he  was
represented  by  the  sun,  so  she  was  the
goddess  answering  to  the  moon  and  the
rest  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  In  fact,  it
was  the  worship  of  nature;  a  worship
to  which  correspond  the  pantheism  and
scientific  exaltation  of  nature  and  her  laws
in  our  days  [Fausset].  They  offered
the  sacrifices  upon  the  roofs,  that  they
might  be  the  better  able  to  see  the  stars
in  heaven  [Theodoret].  Swear.  A  neuter
is  a  monster ;  he  hath  two  tongues,  two
minds,  two  souls  :  he  hath  a  tongue  for
God,  and  a  tongue  for  the  world  too :
he  looks  up  to  God,  and  saith,  certainly
thou  art  mine  :  he  looks  down  upon  the
world,  and  saith,  surely  I  am  thine ;  he
hath  a  mind  to  be  religious,  and  a  mind
to  save  his  own  stake  in  the  world  too
[Brooks].

Vers.  7 — 9.  Sacrifice.  The  image  was
probably  suggested  by  Isaiah's  words
(ch.  xxxiv.  6).  Jeremiah  subsequently
uso3  it  of  the  overthrow  of  Pharaoh  at
the  Euphrates  (ch.  xlvi.  10).  Sanctified
ones.  By  giving  this  title  to  God's  instru-
ments against  Judah,  declares  that  them-
selves, having  become  in  deeds  like  the
heathen,  were  as  heathen  to  him.    Jere-


miah reports  the  saying  (ch.  xxii.  6,  7),
That  is,  so  far,  a  holy  war  in  the  pur-
pose  of  God,  who  fulfils  his  will ;  hence
Nebuchadnezzar  was  Ms  servant  (Jer.
xxv.  9),  avenging  his  wrongs  (cf.  Joel
iii.  9:  Mic.  iii.  5)  [Pusey].

Vers.  10,  11.  These  verses  describe
the  state  of  Jerusalem,  when  besieged
by  Nebuchadnezzar.  Through  the  fish
gate  he  entered  the  city.  It  received  its
name  from  the  fish  market,  which  was
near  it.  Through  it  passed  those  who
used  to  bring  fish  from  the  lake  of
Tiberias  and  Jordan.  It  answers  to
what  is  now  called  the  Damascus  gate
[Henderson].

Ver.  11.  MaJdesh,  the  mortar,  a
name  applied  to  the  valley  of  Siloam
from  its  hollow  shape  [Jerome].  It
is  called  by  Josephus,  "the  cheese-
maker's  valley,"  and  by  the  present
inhabitants,  et-  Wold,  i.  e.  the  valley,  and
also  the  mill-valley.  The  name  "  mor-
tar "  was  probably  coined  by  Zephaniah,
to  point  to  the  fate  of  the  merchants
and  men  of  money  who  lived  there
[Keil].

Vers.  12,  13.  Neither  the  majesty  of
God,  nor  his  government  or  glory,  con-
sists in  imaginary  splendour,  but  in
those  attributes  which  so  meet  together
in  him  that  they  cannot  be  severed
from  his  essence.  It  is  the  property  of
God  to  govern  the  world,  to  take  care  of
the  human  race,  to  distinguish  between
good  and  evil,  to  relieve  the  wretched,
to  punish  all  crimes,  to  restrain  unjust
violence ;  and  if  any  one  would  de-
prive God  of  these,  he  would  leave
nothing  but  an  idol  [Calvin].

"  Even  God's  providence
Seeming  estranged  "  [Thos.  Hood],

Vers.  14 — 18.  Day.  When  iniquity
hath  played  her  part,  vengeance  leaps
upon  the  stage;  the  comedy  is  short,


chap.  I.]  HOMILET.C  COMMENTARY:  ZEPHANIAH.  637

but   the  tragedy  is    long.      The  black  God  abhors,  and  which  every  honest  man

gnard  shall  attend  you ;  you  shall  eat  at  ought   to  abhor,  and   you  can,  in   the

the  table  of  sorrow  ;  and  the  crown  of  mean  time,  have  comparative  peace  ;  but

death  shall  be  apon  your  heads,  many  there  is  a  great  difference  between  stav-

glistering  faces  looking  upon  you  [Hy.  ing  off  judgment  now,  and  staving  off

Smith].     You  can  muzzle  your  fear,  and  revelation  and  judgment  then  [//.    W.

you  can  silence  your  conscience,  and  you  Beecher\
can  go  on  making  money  by  ways  which


CHAPTEK  II.


Critical  Notes.]  Summons  to  repent.  Gather]  As  stubble  (Ex.  v.  7 — 12) ;  then  generally,  to
collect ;  in  this  sense,  to  gather  one's  self,  to  examine  one's  self.  Desired]  A  word  which  signifies
primarily,  to  turn  pale,  become  white  with  shame  (cf.  Isa.  xxix.  22)  ;  unworthy  persons,  not  desired
by  God.  2.]  Eeason  for  exhortation.  Decree]  (ch.  i.).  Forth]  As  the  embryo,  hid  in  the  womb,  is
brought  forth  in  due  time.  Day]  Lit.  as  chaff  the  day  passes  ;  u  the  day  comes  like  chaff"  [Reil].
3.]  Because  judgment  will  suddenly  come,  the  pious  exhorted  especially,  the  quiet  and  humble  before
God  (cf.  Mic.  vi.  8).  Right.]  Not  loved  strange  apparel  and  practised  idolatry.  May  be]  Not
doubtful,  but  difficult.  4.  For]  The  punishment  of  neighbouring  states  a  warning.  Five  nations,
from  all  quarters  of  the  earth,  to  indicate  universality  of  judgment.  Gaza]  and  cities  of  Philistines
(cf.  Amos  i.  6—8  :  Isa.  xx.  1).  Noon-day]  Not  by  thieves  at  night ;  but  in  the  hottest  part  of  day,
generally  spent  in  rest  (2  Sam.  iv.  5),  and  less  likely  for  attack ;  hence  sudden  invasion  (Jer.  xv.  8).

5.  Cherethites]  Cretans.  The  connection  of  Philistines  with  Crete  early  noticed  (1  Sam.  xxx.  14  :
2  Sam.  nil.  18  :  1  Chron.  xviii.  17  :  Ezek.  xxv.  16).  Cherethites  (from  a  verb,  to  cut  off)  were
used  as  executioners  in  the  royal  army  of  Judah,  and  would  be  cut  off  by  Jehovah  [cf.  Wordsworth].

6.  Sea  coast]  Lit.  line  of  the  sea,  i.  e.  the  region  or  coast  along  the  sea-shore,  and  so  called  from
the  custom  of  using  a  cord  or  line  in  measuring  off  or  dividing  a  territory  (cf.  with  the  same  appli-
cation, the  coast  of  the  sea,  Jer.  xlvii.  7  :  Ezek.  xxv.  16)  [Henderson].  Cottages]  A  proverbial
description  for  utter  desolation  (cf.  vers.  14,  15)  ;  shepherds  excavated  or  dug  huts  underground  to
protect  from  the  sun.  7.  Feed]  The  Jews  restored  to  their  land,  not  any  longer  annoyed  by
Philistines,  would  dwell  safely.  Visit]  in  mercy  (Ex.  iv.  31).  8.  Moab]  and  Ammon  rejoiced  in
the  calamity  of  the  Jews.  Compare  parallel  prophecies  against  Moab  (Isa.  xv.,  xvi. :  Jer.  xlviii. :  Amos
ii.  1—3),  and  Amnion  (Jer.  xlix.  1 — 6:  Amos  i.  13 — 15).  Magnified]  Acted  insolently  against
their  boundary  (Jer.  xlviii.  29  :  2  Kings  xiii.  20) .  9.]  The  threat  will  certainly  be  executed.  Divine
existence  itself  pledged.  The  land  shall  be  overrun  with  stinging  nettles,  and  become  a  place  for
Bait-pits,  like  the  southern  coast  of  the  Dead  Sea.  A  remnant  of  Jews  shall  possess  the  people  them-
selves. 10.]  The  judgment  is  talio.  The  universality  of  it  stands  out  with  greater  precision,
according  to  its  two-fold  fundamental  characteristic  [Lange],  11.  Famish]  Deprive  them  of
worship  and  sacrifices,  which  were  considered  food  (Deut.  xxxii.  38).  His  place]  Not  in  Jerusalem
alone,  but  everywhere  worship  Jehovah  (Ps.  lxviii.  29  :  Mai.  i.  11).  12.]  Fulfilled  when  Nebuchad-
nezzar conquered  Egypt,  with  which  Ethiopia  was  closely  allied  (Jer.  xlvi.  2,  9  :  Ezek.  xxx.  5 — 9).
13.]  The  prophet  dwells  longer  on  the  heathen  power  of  the  north,  the  Assyrian  kingdom  with  its
capital,  Nineveh,  because  Assyria  was  then  the  imperial  power,  seeking  to  destroy  the  kingdom  of
Judah.  This  explains  the  announcement,  in  the  form  of  a  wish,  as  the  use  of  the  contracted  forms,
yet  and  ydnem,  clearly  shows.  Assyria  was  north-east,  but  invaded  Palestine  from  the  north,  hence
regarded  as  situated  thus  \_Keil].  14.  Cormorant  and  bittern]  or  pelican  and  porcupine  (cf.  Isa.
xxxiv.  11),  from  whence  the  words  are  adopted  [  J To rds worth].  Lintels]  or  knops  of  pillars  (Amos
ix.  1).  "The  capitals  of  the  pillars  do  not  lie  on  the  ground,  but  now  stand  unattached,  after  the
roofs  and  doors,  which  rested  upon  them,  are  thrown  down"  [Hitzig].  15.]  This  city,  proud  and
haughty,  sheltered  behind  defences  of  water,  would  become  a  lair  of  beasts,  a  desolate  waste,  a  hissing
to  men.    All  would  exult  in  its  ruins,  wave  the  hand,  and  declare  that  "she  richly  deserved  her  fate.


«3«  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZEPHANIAH.  [chap.  n.


HOMILETIGS.
The  Call  to  Kepentance. —  Verses  1 — 3.

God  had  threatened  his  people,  now  withholds  judgment,  and  urges  them  to
repent,  earnestly  to  seek  and  serve  him,  before  the  day  of  punishment  comes.

I.  The  necessity  of  repentance.    "  Gather  yourselves  together."    Men  are  distant
from    God   and   alienated   from    one   another;  dissipated   by   lusts,  and   live   in
forgetfulness  of  their  highest  interests.     Hence  they  have  no  desire  to  turn  to  God,
and  are  unworthy  of  his  blessing  j  "  not  desired. "     They  must  be  gathered  into  one
feeling  of  penitence,  one  assembly  of  solemn  worship,  and  one  fold  of  God.     1.
Hie  impenitent  must  seek  the  Lord.     Judgment  is  threatened  against  "  sinners  and
their  offences."     The  proud  must  be  humbled,  the  unrighteous  be  holy,  and  the
backslider  return.     2.   TJie  meek  must  seek  the  Lord.     The  submissive  and  quiet
must  be  more  humble ;  those  who  do  right  must  know  more  perfectly,  and  act  more
constantly.    Meekness,  righteousness,  and  holiness  must  adorn  their  conduct.     "  He
that  is  righteous,  let  him  be  righteous  still ;  and  he  that  is  holy,  let  him  be  holy
stilL"     3.  The  whole  nation  must  seek  the  Lord.     National  repentance  is  the  only
safeguard   against   national   overthrow.     An   elect  nation    may    become    proud,
undaunted  in  sin,  and  unappalled  in  danger.     "  A  nation  not  desired,"  which  does
not  blush  in  shame  ;  yet  a  nation  whom  God  urges  to  turn  to  him  and  live.    "  Seek
the  Lord,  and  ye  shall  live,  lest  he  break  out  like  fire  in  the  house  of  Joseph  and
devour   it."     II.    The  method  of  repentance.      "  Gather  yourselves   together."
1.  By  self -examination.     A  man  must  know  himself  thoroughly,  examine  himself
closely,  and  ascertain  how  he  stands  in  the  sight  of  God.     "  Prove  your  own  selves."
As  we  collect  stubble  from  the  fields,  so  must  we  search  with  diligence,  and  pick  up
"  the  withered  leaves  of  past  life."     The  chaff  must  be  burned  up,  all  the  dead  and
worthless  must  be  destroyed  in  heart  and  conduct.     It  is  better  to  judge  ourselves
than  be  judged  of  God.     "  Let  us  search  and  try  our  way,  and  turn  again  to  the
Lord."     2.   By  earnest  reformation.     We  must  begin  with  self-examination,  and
end  with  amendment  of  life.     The  first  earnest  search  must  be  continued,  until  all
sin  is  discovered,  abandoned,  and  pardoned.     "  Bring  forth  fruits  meet  for  repent-
ance." "  That  vice  may  be  uneasy,  and  even  monstrous  unto  thee,"  says  Sir  Thomas
Browne,    "  let  iterated  good  acts  and  long-confirmed  habits  make  virtue  almost
natural,  or  a  second  nature  in  thee.     Since  virtuous  superstructions  have  commonly
generous  foundations,  dive  into  thy  inclinations,  and  early  discover  what  nature  bids
thee  to  be,  or  tells  thee  thou  mayest  be.     They  who  timely  descend  into  themselves,
and  cultivate  the  good  seeds  which  nature  hath  set  in  them,  prove  not  shrubs  but
cedars  in  their  generation."     (1)  Sin  must   be   forsaken  in  act  and  deed.     (2)
Humility  must  be  cherished.    (3)  Righteousness  must  be  followed.     In  this  radical
change  of  disposition,  attitude,  and  conduct,  lies  the  sole  chance  of  escape.     "  Seek
the  Lord  and  his  strength  ;  seek  his  face  evermore."     3.  By  public  confession.
"  Gather  yourselves  "  to  a  religious  assembly,  and  avert  the  judgment  by  united
prayer  and  confession.     The  Jews  forsook  the  worship  of  God  for  idolatry.     Many
neglect  to  assemble  themselves  together  now.     If  we  sin  together  we  should  confess
together.     Beligion  renders  social  intercourse  sacred,  and  binds  men  in  public  acts
of  praise  and  prayer.     "  Call  a  solemn  assembly,  gather  the  elders  and  all  the
inhabitants  of  the  land  into  the  house  of  the  Lord  your  God,  and  cry  unto  the
Lord."     III.    The  motives  to  repentance.     1.   Danger  threatens.     "  Before  the
decree  bring  forth."     Men  suppose  that  there  is  no  approaching  peril,  no  need  for
instant  amendment.     But  the  decree  is  uttered,  and  God  cannot  change.     "  The
error  of  one  moment  may  become  the  sorrow  of  a  whole  life."     2.  Time  is  given  for
repentance.     Space  is  afforded  before  the  day  of  grace  pass  away.     Time,  on  which
eternity  hangs,  is  a  light,  uncertain  thing.     Like  chaff  before  the  wind  it  is  driver.


chap.  II.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ZEPHANIAH.  539


onward,  and  when  it  is  passed  the  wicked  will  be  overthrown.  "  They  are  as
stubble  before  the  wind,  and  as  chaff  that  the  storm  carrieth  away."  3.  There  is
now  a  possibility  of  escape.  "  It  may  be  ye  shall  be  hid."  Not  much  chance
appeared  to  the  Jews,  but  God  discovered  one.  Judgment  looms  over  the  impeni-
tent. The  slightest  advantage,  the  least  hope  of  safety,  stimulate  to  diligence  in
temporal  matters.  You  may  secure  a  hiding-place  in  that  day.  In  Christ  we  have
shelter.  "  A  man  shall  be  as  an  hiding-place  from  the  wind  and  a  covert  from  the
tempest."  4.  If  the  season  pass,  helpless  will  be  the  situation  of  those  who  meet  the
day.  (1)  Destruction  will  be  total.  "  Before  the  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord  come
upon  you."  (2)  Destruction  will  be  without  remedy.  The  warning  is  twice  given,
to  impress  the  certainty  and  speed  of  its  coming.  "  Take  heed  lest  that  day  come
upon  you  unawares."

M  God  stays  long,  bat  strikes  at  last."

"  The  higher  the  fool,  the  greater  the  fall."

"  In  every  fault  there  is  folly."

"What  is  not  wisdom  is  danger  "  [Old  English  Proverbs],

Seek  the  Lord. —  Verse  3.

Observe  four  purposes  for  which  we  are  to  seek  God,  and  which  enter  essentially
into  genuine  religion.  First,  we  are  to  seek  to  knoiv  him.  Here  religion  begins.
"  This  is  life  eternal,  to  know  thee,  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  thou
hast  sent."  "  I  will  give  them  a  heart  that  they  may  know  me."  Secondly,  we
must  seek  to  enjoy  him.  In  order  to  this  we  must  be  reconciled.  He  cannot
comfort  us  till  we  are  reconciled  to  him.  We  cannot  rejoice  in  Christ  till  we  have
received  the  atonement.  Then  we  can  draw  to  him  as  our  exceeding  joy  ;  our  souls
can  be  satisfied  as  with  marrow  and  fatness.  In  his  favour  we  live,  and  his  loving-
kindness  is  better  than  life.  Thirdly,  we  must  seek  to  serve  him.  He  is  not  only
our  portion  to  enjoy,  but  our  master  to  obey  and  wait  upon.  "  On  thee  do  I  wait
all  the  day,"  not  only  as  an  expectant  to  receive  supplies,  but  as  a  servant  to  receive
and  execute  orders,  and  to  inquire,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  %  "  His
service  is  perfect  freedom,  his  work  honourable  and  glorious,  his  yoke  easy,  and  bis
burden  light ;  and  in  keeping  his  commandments  there  is  great  reward.  Fourthly,
we  must  seek  to  resemble  him.  It  is  the  essence  of  religion  to  be  like  him  whom
we  worship.  We  are  to  "  show  forth  his  praises  (margin,  virtues)."  God's  virtues
are  God;s  perfections,  and  the  best  way  to  show  them  forth  is  to  follow  and
exemplify  them.  We  cannot  resemble  his  natural  perfections,  eternity,  omnipotence,
and  omniscience  ;  but  we  may  resemble  his  moral  attributes — in  our  measure  and
degree  be  holy,  do  good,  and  forgive  like  him.  "Be  ye  merciful,  as  your  Father
also  is  merciful."  As  we  advance  in  this  grace,  we  are  "  renewed  after  the  image
of  him  who  created  us  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness."  "  We  are  changed
from  glory  to  glory  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord"  [W.  Jay],

The  Threefold  Call. —  Verse  3.

Divine  judgments  should  rouse  all  to  reflection,  and  lead  them  to  test  their
thoughts   and   actions.     The  wicked   do  not  seek   God,  but  fall  under  his  just
displeasure.     But  the  meek  are  exhorted  to  bend  under  his  chastening  rod,  to  seek
him  in  outward  ordinances  and  in  active  exercises      There  is  a  threefold  call  here
or  three  special  blessings  to  be  sought.

I.  Seek  the  Lord.  This  is  most  needful  and  important.  We  naturally  seek
God  in  his  works  and  word,  in  history,  and  in  ourselves  even.  When  we  find
him  our  hearts  and  intellects  are  satisfied.  "  Lord,"  says  Augustine,  "  I  have
viewed  the  world  over,  in  which  thou  hast  set  me ;  I  have  tried  how  this  and  that
thing  will  fit  my  spirit  and  the  design  of  my  creation ;  and  can  find  nothing  in
which  to  rest,  for  nothing  here  doth  itself  rest.  Lo,  I  come  to  thee,  the  eternal
Being,  the  Spring  of  life,  the  Centre  of  rest,  the  Fulness  of  all  things  1 "     "  Lord


540


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZEPHANIAH.


[chap.  n.


show  us  the  Father,  and  it  sufficeth  us."  II.  Seek  righteousness.  The  knowledge
of  God  must  be  evinced  in  holy  life.  "  He  lived  his  religion,"  was  said  of  one.
I.  Righteousness  with  men.  If  wrong  with  our  fellow-creatures,  we  cannot  be
right  with  God.  We  must  do  justice  and  love  mercy — fulfil  the  royal  law  of
loving  our  neighbour  as  ourselves.  "  Charity  is  the  scope  of  all  God's  command-
ments," says  Chrysostom.  2.  Righteous  with  God.  This  is  more  than  a  good
moral  life  ;  paying  your  way,  and  being  kind  to  all  men.  We  must  seek  and
possess  the  righteousness  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  "Except  your  righteousness
exceed  the  righteousness  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  ye  shall  in  no  case  enter  into
the  kingdom  of  heaven."

"  Their  religion  titled  them  the  sons  of  God  "  [Milton].

III.  Seek  meekness.  The  virtue  of  lowliness  (humilitas),  known  to  heathens,
was  dignified  into  humility  by  Christianity.  It  is  the  first  of  Christian  graces  in
order  and  rank — the  very  root  of  religion.  Men  teach  us  to  cherish  "  spirit  and
pluck"  in  opposition  and  insult.  Meekness  is  weakness  in  their  estimation.  But,
Christ  demands  it  from  his  disciples.  To  be  meek  is  to  be  like  him.  "I  am
meek  and  lowly  in  heart."  "  By  pride  have  we  fallen  from  the  kingdom  of  God,
and  by  humility  must  we  again  enter  it "  [Starke].

"  From  purity  of  thought  all  pleasure  springs;
And  from  a  humble  spirit  all  our  peace  "  [Young].

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.


Ver.  1.  1.  We  may  read  an  invit-
ation to  repentance  in  the  darkest  times.
"  A  fruitful  rainfalls  on  the  soil  through
which  the  ploughshare  has  been  driven.
The  gracious  intention  of  the  Divine
'  doom '  is  disclosed."  2.  All  repentance
begins  and  continues  in  self-examination.
"  Gather  yourselves,  so  as  to  rid  your-
selves of  all  chaff-like  vanities  and  sins.
Self-confidence  and  corrupt  desires  are
the  dissipations  from  which  they  are
exhorted  to  gather  themselves  "  [Calvin],
Collect  yourselves,  and  be  ye  collected  —
i.  e.  collect  your  thoughts,  and  look  into
your  state  of  mind  [Gesenius].  The
gathering  is  opposed  to  scattering,  dis-
sipation, and  distance.

"  Mankind  is  broken  loose  from  moral  bands  "

[Dry  den].

The  precept  is  doubled,  as  it  is  likewise
Num.  iii.  40 :  2  Cor.  xiii.  5,  to  show
the  necessity  of  our  doing  it,  as  also  the
utility  if  well  done ;  and  lastly,  our
crossness  and  averseness  thereunto,  to-
gether with  God's  exceeding  great  desire
that  it  should  be  done  thoroughly  for
our  greatest  good  [Trapp].

Ver.  2.  Be/ore.  God's  word  is  full
(as  it  were)  of  the  event  which  it  fore-
telleth ;  it  contains  its  own  fulfilment  in


itself,  and  travaileth  until  it  come  to
pass,  giving  signs  of  its  coming,  yet
delaying  until  the  full  time.  Time  is.
said  to  bring  forth  what  is  wrought  in
it  [Pusey].  Here  are  three  cautionary
"be/ores"  as  there  are  four  comfortable
"yets"  to  be  read  (Zech.  i.  17).  God
yet  offers  them  mercy,  as  Alexander
did  those  he  warred  against,  whiles  the
lamp  burned ;  and  as  Tamerlane,  whiles
the  white  flag  was  hung  out  (cf.  Jer.
xviii.  7,  8)  [Trapp].

Ver.  3.  Seek.  1.  The  objects  of
search.  God  and  holiness  of  life.  2.
The  method  of  search,  (a)  To  work
judgment,  not  merely  zealous  about  out-
ward forms,  (b)  To  seek  diligently,  for
the  Hebrew  form  is  intensive.  3.  The
result  of  search ;  mitigation,  if  not  pre-
vention, of  calamity;  pardon  of  sin,
and  hid  when  others  are  exposed  to
punishment.

Seek  righteousness,  seek  meekness,  i.  e.
further  measures  of  holiness  and  degrees
of  grace.  Let  him  that  is  holy  be  holy
still;  let  him  persevere,  grow,  and
advance  forward  towards  the  prize  pro-
posed unto  him,  taking  for  his  motto
that  of  Charles  V.,  "  Plus  ultra,"  further
yet;  perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear  of
God  (2  Cor.  vii  1)  [Trapp].     Ye  meek.


chap,  nj  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZEPHANIAH.  541


1.  In  times  of  decline  God  hath  a  pecu-  word,  fear  of  judgments,  and  tenderness

liar  eye  towards  the  godly,  and  expects  towards  others.    3.  Then  God  puts  their

much  from  them.    He  leaves  the  wicked  safety  beyond  all  doubt.     4.  Hence,  in

nations,  and  turns  to  them  in  exhortation  dangers,  uncertainties,  and  troubles,  they

and  promise.     2.  The  truth  and  reality  must  seek  him,  trust  his  goodness  and

of    their   graces    must   be    manifest   in  grace  \Hutcheson\
humility   of   spirit,   subjection   to    the

HOMILETICS.
The  Judgment  upon  the  Philistines. —  Verses  4 — 7.

Punishment  to  neighbouring  states  is  now  threatened.  Under  five  nations  all
mankind  are  included.  The  Philistines,  as  a  near  malicious  enemy,  are  mentioned
first.  "  Out  of  the  five  cities,  woe  is  pronounced  upon  the  same  four  as  Amos
(i.  6 — 8)  before,  Jeremiah  soon  after  (xxv.  20),  and  Zechariah  (ix.  5,  6)  later.
Gath,  the  fifth,  had  probably  remained  with  Judah  since  Uzziah  and  Hezekiah
(2  Chron.  xxvi.  6  :  2  Kings  xviii.  8).  The  name  of  the  place  itself  is  regarded  in
the  sentence,  that  it  may  suggest  the  thought  of  the  doom  pronounced  upon  it.  The
names  expressed  boastfulness,  and  so,  in  the  Divine  judgment,  carried  their  own
sentence  with  them,  and  this  sentence  is  pronounced  by  a  -slight  change  in  the
word  "  [Puseyj.     The  four  capitals  include  the  whole  territory  and  people.

I.  The  splendid  cities  will  be  destroyed.  The  chief  cities  are  threatened  with
open  and  violent  attack,  with  entire  desolation  and  depopulation.  1.  Gaza  shall
be  forsaken  (Azzah,  strong,  shall  be,  Azoobah,  desolated).  Though  strong,  and  able
to  resist  the  conqueror  for  four  or  five  months,  its  defenders  perished  in  the  battle.
Alexander  sold  its  inhabitants,  and  repeopled  it  from  the  neighbourhood.  2.  Ekron
shall  be  uprooted  {Ekron,  deep  rooting,  shall  be  Te-aker}  rooted  out).  Not  a
vestige  of  the  place  is  now  left.  It  is  only  known  by  name,  say  travellers.  Man
builds,  and  God  pulls  down.  Man  plants,  and  God  uproots.  The  most  flourishing
trade,  the  most  deeply-rooted  society,  may  be  torn  out  of  the  soil  and  carried  away.

3.  Ashkelon  shall  become  a  desolation.  The  present  city  is  a  ghastly  skeleton.
The  soil  is  good,  but  peasants  who  cultivate  it  live  outside  in  mud-huts,  under  the
impression  that  God  has  left  the  place  and  permitted  evil  spirits  to  dwell  there.

4.  Ashdod  shall  be  suddenly  overtaken.  "They  (the  enemies)  shall  drive  out
Ashdod  at  the  noon-day."  The  power  of  Dagon  (1  Sam.  v.)  could  not  defend  it.
When  its  inhabitants  were  taking  repose  and  sleep,  and  thought  themselves  most
secure — when  evil  was  least  expected,  it  would  prove  most  fatal.  The  judgments
of  God  would  suddenly  overtake  them.  Neither  antiquity  nor  valour,  neither
natural  strength  nor  the  power  of  their  gods,  would  protect  these  cities.  The  word
of  God  was  against  them,  and  their  doom  was  inevitable.  "  I  will  send  a  fire  on  the
wall  of  Gaza,  which  shall  devour  the  palaces  thereof;  and  I  will  cut  off  the  inhabit-
ant from  Ashdod,  and  him  that  holdeth  the  sceptre  from  Ashkelon,  and  I  will
turn  mine  hand  against  Ekron :  and  the  remnant  of  the  Philistines  shall  perish,
saith  the  Lord  God."  II.  The  whole  population  will  be  taken  away.  "  Woe
unto  the  inhabitants  of  the  sea-coast."  Every  epithet  in  ver.  5  is  selected  with  a
view  of  deepening  the  gloom  of  terrible  denunciation.  "  The  terrors  are  encompassed
by  hints  drawn  from  the  latent  omen  of  the  Kerethite  name,  and  from  the  ancient
Canaanite  traditions."  1.  The  fertility  of  the  land  would  be  cursed.  Shepherds
will  dig  it  up  to  build  their  huts,  and  shelter  their  flocks.  2.  Seats  of  industry
will  be  abandoned.  3.  The  country  would  be  repeopled.  "  This  once  fertile  tract
by  the  sea,  thickly  dotted  with  the  crowded  hives  of  human  industry,  with  fair
cities  inhabited  by  free  brave  men,  afterwards  a  desert,  accursed  by  God,  and
abandoned  by  man,  '  shall  become  pastures,  with  huts  for  shepherds,  and  folds
for  sheep.'     Through  the  mountain  gorges  the  flocks  of  the  restored  Hebrews  will


642  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZEPHANIAH.  [chap,  n


descend  on  the  green  flowery  plains,  knowing  no  want,  fearing  no  evil,  because  the
shepherds  go  "before  them  with  staff  and  rod  "  [S.  Cox].  "I  will  even  destroy  thee
that  there  shall  be  no  inhabitant."  "In  that  day  there  shall  be  no  more  the
Canaanite  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  of  hosts."

EOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  4.     The  judgments   threatened  are  not  like  the  winter  sun,  that  light-

upon  others  an  argument   for   the   un-  eth  but  heateth  not"  [2Va#p].     2.  The

godly  to  repent,  and   for  the  godly  to  source  of  the  blessings.     The   covenant

persevere  in  well-doing,  that  they  may  of    "the  Lord    their   God."     Covenant

escape  the  general  calamity.  rights  will  not  fail,  after  long  delay  and

Vers.  5,  6.      Woe.     1.  The  source  of  many  disappointments.     3.   The  method

the  woe.     "  The   word   of   the   Lord."  of  securing  the  blessings.    After  captivity

2.  The  cause  of  the  woe.     They  were  and  calamity.     Through  much   tribula-

of  the  posterity,  possessed  the  land,  and  tion  we  enter  heaven.     But  the  word  is

inherited  the  sins  of  Canaan.     3.  The  sure.     "  Be  thou  faithful."
consequences  of  the  woe.     (1)  Destruc-         In    chap.     i.    vers.    8,    9,    God    had

tion.    (2)  Universal  destruction.  "  Woe  threatened  to  "  visit "  the  men  of  Judah

to   the  people  who  have  the  word   of  and   Jerusalem ;     now   he  promises   to

God  against  them.     To  them  he  speak-  "  visit "  them :  the  same  Heb.  verb  used

eth  not    in  good,   but  in  evil ;  not  in  in   both   places ;  but   now  by  a   slight

grace,  but  in  anger ;  not  in  mercy,  but  in  change  of  construction  (pdquad,  construed

vengeance"  \Pusey\.  with  an  accusative  of  the  person  instead

Ver.   7.     The  fall  of  the  enemy,  the  of  with  al),  the  verb  itself  shows  that

restoration  of  the  elect  of  Israel.     The  God   is  about  to   visit  them  in  grace,

remnant  of   Baal  driven  out,  to  make  And  the  grammatical  hint  is  expanded

room  for  the  remnant  of  God.     Notice  in  the  words  which  follow  :  God  is  about

— 1.   The  blessings  bestowed.  (1)  Visited  to  visit  them,  that  he  may  "  turn  thei?

by  God.     "The  Lord  their  God  shall  captivity"   as   he  turned  that  of  Job,

visit   them/'      In   mercy   and     loving-  by  giving  them   freedom   for  bondage,

kindness  (Ex.  iv.   31).     (2)   Delivered,  peace  for  war,  wealth  for  want.     The

"And  turn  away  the^T  captivity. "     (3)  peace  and   abundance  of   this   happier

Restored  to  possession.     "  His  visits  are  time  are  charmingly  expressed  in  the

not  empty  visits  (Fs.  viii.  5);  his  favours  opening  clauses  of  ver.  7  [S.  Cox],

HOMILETICS.
The  Judgment  upon  the  Moabites. —  Verses  8 — 10.

Moab  and  Ammon  were  of  blood  relation  to  Israel.  Their  country  adjoined
Canaan,  and  from  the  time  of  Balak  they  were  always  reviling  Israel,  and
invading  their  territory,  and  plundering  their  cities.  The  pride  and  insolence  of
Ammon  were  proverbial.     They  were  now  to  be  punished  for  their  conduct.

I.  The  nature  of  their  doom.  Their  land  was  to  be  spoiled,  and  their  cities
exterminated.  1.  The  tribes  would  be  destroyed.  They  would  incur  a  fate  like
Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  whici?  are  ingulfed  in  the  Dead  Sea.  2.  The  land  would
be  cursed.  Nettles  would  infrst  it,  salt-pits  would  tear  it  up,  and  desolation
would  be  perpetual.  Destruction,  barrenness,  and  extinction  beyond  recovery
(Jer.  xlix.  18).  "  The  whole  Ian  *  ^hereof  is  brimstone,  and  salt,  and  burning  :  it  is
not  sown,  nor  beareth,  nor  any  gr*j»  groweth  therein ;  like  the  overthrow  of  Sodom
and  Gomorrah,  Admah  and  Zeboim,  which  the  Lord  overthrew  in  his  anger  and  in
his  wrath."  II.  The  certainty  of  their  doom.  "  Therefore  as  I  live,  saith  the  Lord
of  hosts."  Jehovah  pledges  himself  by  solemn  oath  to  inflict  the  destruction.
When  God  threatens  men  seem  slow  to  believe  that  he  is  in  earn?*4      Wbwj  be


chap.  II. J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ZEP1IANIAH.  M3


appeals  to  his  own  existence  in  support  of  his  truth  they  should  fear.  "  Because
he  could  swear  by  no  greater  he  swears  by  himself."  III.  The  cause  of  their
doom.  1.  Their  pride.  "This  shall  they  have  for  their  pride."  Pride  and
arrogance  are  specially  offensive  to  God.  When  men  magnify  themselves  against
the  people  of  God  and  their  possessions,  they  magnify  themselves  against  God.
God  will  bring  them  low,  and  give  them  shame  and  contempt.  2.  Their  cruelty.
They  reviled  and  reproached  the  people  of  God  (ver.  8)  ;  took  pleasure  in  their
misfortunes  ;  cherished  constant  hatred  towards  them ;  and  violated  their  land  age
after  age.  Pride  begets  insolence  and  cruelty,  and  these  expose  to  the  judgment
of  God.  "  It  is  a  dangerous  indiscretion  for  a  man  not  to  know  the  bounds  of  his
own  calling  "  [Bp.  Hall].     "A  man's  pride  shall  bring  him  him  low.  "

u  My  pride  fell  with  my  fortunes  "  [As  you  like  it}.

The  Living  God. —  Verses  8 — 11.

*  I  live."  God  here  declares  his  eternal  self -existence.  "  In  the  beginning  God."
The  living  God  is  not  indifferent  to  human  affairs  ;  neither  does  he  keep  silence.
He  has  entered  into  relationships  and  covenants  indicated  by  the  name,  "  the  God
of  Israel,"  revealed  his  majestic  power,  and  triumphed  gloriously  over  the  rebellious,
"  The  Lord,  strong  and  mighty."  This  God  has  spoken,  linked  his  sayings  with  hii
character,  and  made  them  emphatic  by  an  oath.

I.  The  living  God  is  cognisant  of  all  that  transpires  on  earth.  "  I  have  heard."
Nothing  escapes  the  eyes  of  God.  "All  things  are  naked  and  opened  to  the  eyes
of  him  with  whom  we  have  to  do."  God  is  an  ever-present  listener  (whispering
gallery  :  telephone).  1.  God  hears  the  mockery  of  evil  tongues.  "  I  have  heard
the  reproach  of  Moab,"  &c.  How  painful  for  us  to  hear  all  the  slanders,  curses,  and
blasphemies  of  one  day  !  Yet  God  hears  all  the  evil-speaking  of  men  through  all
time.  The  God  of  patience  may  bear  long  with  personal  and  national  provocations,
but  he  feels,  and  expresses  feeling  in  words.  "  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."
This  brings  out  the  idea — 2.  That  God  is  affected  by  the  injury  done  to  his  people.
This  truth  was  unfolded  to  Moses  when  commanded  to  go  to  Egypt  (Ex.  iii.  7 — 10).
Note  how  the  exalted,  living  Christ  identifies  himself  with  his  persecuted  people.
(Acts  ix.  1 — 4).  This  truth  should  comfort  and  sustain,  "  when  men  shall  revile
you,  and  persecute  you/'  &c.  II.  The  living  God  administers  timely  justice.
Nations  only  exist  in  time,  and  so  in  time  punishment  takes  place.  We  are  dealt
with  as  individuals  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ.  Moab  and  Ammon,  for
repeated  and  persistent  offences,  are  threatened  with  Divine  judgments.  God's
words  soon  become  God's  works,  notwithstanding  seeming  hindrances  and  impossi-
bilities. The  guilt  was  great  and  grievous.  Observe — 1.  The  severity  of  the
Divine  judgment.  "Moab  shall  be  as  Sodom,  and  the  children  of  Ammon  as
Gomorrah."  We  have  no  encouragement  from  the  history  of  nations  to  regard  God's
mercy  as  amiable  weakness,  or  his  judgments  as  harsh  and  vindictive.  "  The  Lord
is  righteous  in  all  his  ways,  and  holy  in  all  his  works."  Under  his  righteous
administration,  and  in  the  execution  of  judgment  for  the  oppressed,  light  words  may
bring  heavy  blows,  and  defiant  tones  desolating  retributions.  Cause  and  effect,  sin
and  suffering,  are  here  connected.  2.  The  Divine  judgment  was  the  penalty  of  pride
and  arrogance.  "  This  shall  they  have  for  their  pride,"  &c.  "  Pride  goeth  before
destruction,  and  a  haughty  spirit  before  a  fall."  Illustrations  : — Goliath  (1  Sam.
xvii.) ;  Benhadad(l  Kings  xx.)  ;  Nebuchadnezzar  (Dan.  iv.);  Babylon  (Isa.  xlvii.).
III.  The  living  God  is  jealous  of  his  name  and  worship.  "  The  Lord  will  be
terrible  unto  them  ;  for  he  will  famish  all  the  gods  of  the  earth/'  &c.  An  eidolon
is  a  thing  that  can  be  seen  and  put  for  a  being  who  cannot  be  seen.  God  is  a
spirit,  and  no  image  can  represent  a  spirit.  He  prohibits  the  attempt  to  make  a
"likeness"  of  himself  (Ex.  xx.).     The  maledictions  upon  this  sin  are  numerous


&44


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZEPHAKIAH.


[chap.  n.


and  startling.  It  is  specially  offensive  and  insulting  to  the  one  living  and  true
God.  With  the  most  horrible,  inhuman,  and  debasing  rites,  Moab  and  Ammon
worshipped  gods,  and  left  the  infamous  names  of  Chemosh,  Molech,  Milcom,  and
Peor.  1.  Idolatry  is  a  flagrant  insult  to  the  living  God.  2.  God  declares  his
intention  to  exterminate  it.  "  For  he  will  famish  all  the  gods  of  the  earth."  The
triumphs  of  Divine  truth  over  idolatry  have  been  signal  and  complete.  Islands  and
countries  have  abolished  their  idols.  The  process  goes  on  and  must  continue,  for
he  hath  said,  "  I  am  God,  and  there  is  none  like  me."  "  The  idols  he  shall  utterly
abolish."  3.  God  predicts  the  universality  of  true  and  acceptable  worship.  Jealous
for  his  character,  God  will  tolerate  no  rival.  The  heathen  gods  shall  be  without
offerings  and  devotees.  The  destructive  work  is  to  prepare  for  the  constructive,  or
rather  the  true  worship  is  to  displace  the  false.  "  Men  shall  worship  Him,  every
one  from  his  place,"  &c.  However  prevalent,  mighty,  and  venerable  idol  worship
may  be  in  some  places,  it  is  doomed.  Whether  slowly  or  rapidly  men  "  turn  from
idols  to  serve  the  living  God,"  the  promise  must  be  accomplished.  "  All  the  ends
of  the  earth  shall  remember  and  turn  unto  the  Lord  :  and  all  the  kindreds  of  the
nations  shall  worship  before  him."  The  predicted  universality  of  acceptable
worship  should  (a)  Incite  the  Church  of  God  to  pray  earnestly,  "  thy  kingdom
come  ; "  and  (b)  Inspire  unceasing  aggressive  efforts,  until  "  the  kingdoms  of  this
world  are  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord,  and  of  his  Christ  "  [Mt.  Braithwaite].


HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.


Ver.  8.  1.  No  relation  will  bind  the
wicked  to  the  Church,  and  in  sympathy
with  the  godly.  However  near,  they
break  loose,  persecute,  and  revile  them.
2.  But  God  takes  notice  of  this  conduct
towards  his  people,  declares  his  love,  and
determines  to  punish  their  enemies.
Chastisement  does  not  hinder  affection
for  them.  7"  have  heard  the  reproach.
"  The  memory  of  God  is  one  of  the  most
fearful  things  of  which  a  man  can  think.
He  notices  particularly  the  dishonour
done  to  his  people,  because  they  only
take  no  heed  of  dishonour,  and  are  not
allowed  to  defend  themselves.  But  take
heed  that  you  are  not  reviled  on  account
of  your  own  sins.  Such  reviling  God
does  not  punish,  but  it  is  itself  punish-
ment" \Lange\.

Ver.  11.  The  extermination  of
vdolatry,  and  the  establishment  of  God's
worship.  1.  Idolatry  to  be  exterminated.
"  For  he  will  famish  all  the  gods  of  the


earth."  They  will  die  from  want  and
starvation.  There  will  be  a  gradual  and
universal  destruction  of  idols.  This
happened  in  the  days  of  Sennacherib
and  Nebuchadnezzar,  who  chastised  the
Jews  and  weaned  them  from  heathen
deities  ;  in  the  early  age  of  Christianity,
and  in  modern  missions.  2.  Divine
worship  to  be  established.  Not  only  at
Jerusalem  but  universally.  "  Men  shall
worship  him,  every  one  from  his  own
place."  His  own  Gentile  home  taught  by
Jews  in  the  true  religion.  "  All  the
isles  of  the  heathen," — the  maritime
regions  of  the  West.  This  prediction  is
being  fulfilled  at  present;  and  ere  long,
"  From  the  rising  of  the  sun  even  unto
the  going  down  of  the  same,  my  name
shall  be  great  among  the  Gentiles ;  and
in  every  place  incense  shall  be  offered
unto  my  name,  and  a  pure  offering "
(Mai.  i.  11 :  Ps.  ii.  8  :  Num.  xiv.  2H


HOMILETIGS.

The  Judgments  of  God  a  Scheme  op  Redemption. —  Verse  11.

*  The  immense  value  of  this  verse  consists  in  the  fact  that  it  reveals  a  law,  a
oonstant  invariable  law,  of  the  Divine  government.  It  stands  alone  and  is  com
plete.  It  is  a  place  of  vantage,  a  point  of  rest,  to  which  the  prophet  has  risen,
and  from  which  he  contemplates  not  simply  the  doom  of  which  he  has  spoken,  ox


chap,  ii.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  Zt    HANI  AH.  545


the  dooms  of  which  he  is  about  to  speak,  but  the  whole  course  of  the  Divine
providence.  And  as  he  looks  before  and  after,  as  he  recalls  the  past  and  projects
himself  into  the  future,  he  finds  this  to  be  a  law  of  human  history,  that  the
judgments  of  God  are  a  necessary  part  of  the  scheme  of  redemption :  that  God
intends  them  to  recover  men  from  error  to  truth,  from  sin  to  holiness  "  [S.  Cox\.
Let  us  trace  this  thought —

I.  In  human  experience.  God  often  visits  in  terror,  smites  our  gods,  and
takes  away  what  is  dearest  and  most  valuable.  This  terror  brings  torment  and
despair.  The  darkness  hides  the  light,  and  the  judgment  the  mercy.  God  is
terrible  indeed  to  us.  But  how  else  could  we  be  weaned  from  sin,  delivered  from
idolatry,  and  restored  to  God  2  Threatenings  have  been  unheeded,  mercies  have
been  abused,  and  promises  are  of  no  avail.  Severe  measures  must  be  adopted.
"  Fill  their  faces  with  shame ;  that  they  may  seek  thy  name,  0  Lord."  II.  In  the
history  of  the  Christian  Church.  In  the  Jewish  nation,  in  apostolic  times  and
in  modern  history,  this  truth  is  abundantly  confirmed.  The  Church  has  been
purified  by  persecution,  and  nations  have  been  saved  by  the  famishing  of  their
gods.  "  These  judgments/'  says  one,  "  answer  to  the  convulsions  and  storms  of
the  natural  world,  and  serve  to  disperse  the  foul  infections  which  brood  over  the
homes  of  men,  to  raise  them  to  happier  conditions,  and  to  pour  round  them  a  more
vital  air."  God  thus  starves  idols  to  make  known  himself,  clothes  himself  in
terrors  to  redeem  from  error,  and  reveals  mercy  to  win  "  the  isles  of  the  heathen."
"  For  when  thy  judgments  are  in  the  earth,  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  will  learn
righteousness."

The  Doom  of  Ethiopia. —  Verse  12.

"  Zephaniah  has  to  complete  his  circuit.  He  has  travelled  East  and  "West,  and
now  completes  his  round  by  denouncing  judgment  on  the  nations  of  the  North  and
South.  At  the  South  he  merely  aims  a  blow  in  passing ;  but  it  is  curious  to  note
how  far  it  reaches.  He  travels  to  the  utmost  limit  of  his  knowledge,  and  hurls
his  curt  ringing  anathema  at  Cush  or  Ethiopia,  the  southernmost  kingdom  known
to  the  Hebrews."     Notice —

I.  That  the  enemies  of  the  Church,  though  numerous  and  far  distant,  wi  I
be  found  out  and  punished.  Philistia,  Moab,  and  Ammon  escape  not.  Th*
sword  passes  Edom,  a  constant  enemy,  immediately  south  to  Judah.  Egypt
insolent  and  more  southern  still,  is  not  mentioned.  But  far  away  the  judgment
sweeps  to  remote  Ethiopia.  "  Ye  Ethiopians  also."  II.  That  in  the  punishment
of  these  enemies  the  hand  of  God  must  be  recognized.  "  Slain  by  my  sword."
All  nations  and  individuals  are  God's  instruments,  and  under  his  control.  The
most  powerful  and  profane  are  under  the  rule  and  wielded  by  the  hand  of  God.
None  can  annoy  and  act  without  his  permission.  All  things  are  as  easily  managed
as  a  sword  in  the  hand.  Hence  learn  (a)  to  submit  to  God  in  the  persecution
by  wicked  men ;  and  (b)  to  discern  his  power  and  use  of  them.  "  Deliver  my
soul  from  the  wicked,  which  is  thy  sword."

The  Judgment  upon  Assyria. —  Verses  13 — 15.

The  prophet  dwells  upon  the  kingdom  of  Assyria  with  its  splendid  capital,
Nineveh.  It  was  the  imperial  power  then  seeking  to  destroy  Judah.  But  the
sentence  of  Jonah  and  Nahum  was  to  be  executed.  No  opportunity  of  repentance
now.  The  most  populous  and  ambitious  kingdom  of  Eastern  rac?3  has  to  be
entirely  laid  waste.

I.  Its  capital  would  become  a  heap  of  ruins.  God  wih  stretch  out  his
hand  "and  destroy  Assyria,  and  will  make  Nineveh  a  desolation."  Nineveh,
strongly  built  and  splendidly  adorned,  secure  in  its  streams  and  impregnable  in
its  defences,  would  become  an  arid  wTaste.  "  Dry  like  a  wilderness."  II.  It*
ruins  wcild  be   complete.     They  would  become — 1.  A  lair  of  wild   beasts.

35


646


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  ZEPHANIAH.


[chap,  n


"  Herds  crouch  were  once  ran  broad  streets,  loud  with  the  wheels  of  traffic  or  the
tramp  of  armies.  Wild  beasts  wander  and  climb  about  the  fallen  stones,  seeking
a  prey  or  finding  a  covert  within  its  dismantled  walls.  Pelicans  from  the  neigh-
bouring marshes,  and  hedgehogs  from  the  adjacent  fields,  make  their  homes  in  the
sculptured  capitals  of  her  fallen  columns."  2.  A  home  of  unclean  birds.  Birds
perch  and  sing  ou  the  lintels  of  broken  windows,  joyous  in  existence  amid  exten-
sive ruins.  The  music  of  the  palace,  men-singers  and  women-singers,  have  ceased
to  be ;  but  the  song  of  the  bird  startles  the  spectator  in  the  lonely  scene.  3.  A
heap  of  desolation.  "  Desolation  shall  be  in  the  thresholds."  On  spots  where
porters  watched  and  multitudes  thronged,  heaps  of  rubbish  stand.  The  thresholds
of  house  and  temple,  mart  and  palace,  are  covered  with  dust.  "  The  sands  carried
by  winds  from  the  desert,  have  buried  the  wreck  of  former  grandeur,  and  hid  every
trace  of  its  magnificence."  III.  Its  ruins  would  become  a  derision  to  travellers.
"  Every  one  that  passeth  by  her  shall  hiss  and  wag  his  hand."  He  shall  hiss  with
scorn,  and  motion  with  the  hand  in  detestation,  not  in  joy  (Nah.  iii.  19).  The
desolation  would  astonish,  and  the  ruin  of  the  immense  and  stately  city  would  be
a  source  of  joy.  "  The  merchants  among  the  people  shall  hiss  at  thee  ;  thou  shalt
be  a  terror,  and  never  shalt  be  any  more."


HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Ver.  13.  Desolation.  No  desolation
is  like  that  of  decayed  luxury.  It
preaches  the  nothingness  of  man,  the
fruitlessness  of  his  toils,  the  fleetingness
of  his  hopes  and  enjoyments.  Grass  in
a  court  or  on  a  beaten  road,  much  more
in  a  town,  speaks  of  the  passing  away
of  what  has  been  ;  that  man,  wont  to  be
there,  is  not  there  now.  It  leaves  the
feeling  of  void  and  forsakenness  [Pusey].

Ver.  15.  "J  am,"  &c.  Pride  will
fall.  The  more  selfish  and  secure  in
sin,  the  greater  the  human  shame  and


the  Divine  indignation.  This  was  the
language  of — 1.  Pride.  Deification  ot
its  own  might.  2.  Selfishness.  I  alone,
and  no  other  that  I  care  for.  3.  Defi-
ance. I  am,  who  dare  touch  me  1  No
security  in  worldly  strength  and  pros-
perity. 4.  Self-deception.  Judgments
from  God  humble  the  most  haughty,
and  turn  the  most  mirthful  into  mourn-
ing.    Thus  Divine  retribution

"  Falls  most  sure
On  wicked  men,  when  they  are  most  secure."


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  II.


Vers.  1 — 3.  Meekness.  Is  it  not  as
the  steps  of  degree  in  the  Temple,
whereby  we  descend  to  the  knowledge
of  ourselves,  and  ascend  to  the  know-
ledge of  God  %  Would  we  attain  mercy  %
humility  will  help  [C.  Sutton].

Vers.  10,  11.  Pride.  That  which
first  overcame  man,  is  the  last  thing  he
overcomes  [Augustine],

Vers.  13 — 15.  This  doom  on  Nineveh
was  carried  out  to  the  very  letter.  It
was  not  simply  the  largest  city  of  the
ancient  world.  In  the  mouth  of  the
Hebrew  prophets  it  was  the  name  of  a
district,  25  miles  long,  by  15  broad,
which  included  four  large  cities,  besides
villages  and  forts,  within  its  protecting
walls.     About  six  centuries  b.  a,  this


vast  populous  district  was  conquered
and  destroyed  by  the  Medes  (under
Cyaxares),  and  the  Chaldeans  (under
Nabopolassar,  father  of  Nebuchadnez-
zar). So  complete  was  the  destruction,
that  with  startling  abruptness  the  great
city  vanished  from  the  face  of  the  earth,
and  its  very  ruins  were  hidden  from  the
eyes  of  men.  In  a.  d.  1766,  Niebuhr,
the  great  historian,  stood  on  the  eastern
bank,  which  he  took  to  be  acclivities
wrought  by  the  hand  of  nature.  It  was
not  till  a.  d.  1842  that  Layard,  Eawlin-
son,  and  Botta  dug  into  these  mounds,
exhumed  and  interpreted  the  remains
which  tell  the  story  of  the  city's  great-
ness, luxury,  and  culture  with  a  power
beyond  that  of  words  [S.  Gox\


chap,  in.]  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:   ZEPHANIAH.  547


"I  am  "     Indulged   sin  thrives   and  "  When  we  in  our  viciousness

.i  •       »    J~   .  n^^-^r,  ~C  «tti*1  Grow  hard,  the  wise  gods  seal  our  eyes,

strengthens  in  character.    Germs  of  evil  Jn  our  owr;  sUme  dr(S  our  clear  judJgment8>

gather  round  the  accursed  ^  root,  until  Mate  U8  a(jore  our  errorg,  and  thus

judgments  from  heaven  cut  it  down.  We  strut  to  our  destruction."


CHAPTER  IIL

Critical  Notes.]  "Woe]  to  Jerusalem  ;  others,  Nineveh.  Filthy]  From  a  word,  to  straighten  one.
6elf ;  hence,  to  rebel,  to  be  refractory.  2.  Voice]  In  law  and  prophets.  Correction]  Instruction  with
manifold  chastisements.  3.  Princes]  aggravated  the  evil  (cf.  Mic.  iii.).  Lions]  tearing  the  poor
(Prov.  xxviii.  15  :  Ezek.  xix.  2  :  Nah.  ii.  12).  Wolves]  (cf.  Hub.  i.  8) :  voracious  and  insatiable,
who  devour  all  in  the  night.  4.  Prophets]  Light  and  vainglorious ;  from  a  word,  to  boil  over ;
frivolous  in  words  ;  brag  (Jer.  xxiii.  32).  Priests]  desecrate  the  temple  find  distort  the  law ;  make
everything  common  (Ezek.  xxii.  26).  5.]  The  cause  not  with  God.  He  is  very  near,  declares  his
displeasure  with  sin,  and  daily  brings  all  things  to  light.  Morning]  Lit.  in  the  morning,  in  the
morning.  Shame]  of  penitence  and  conversion.  6.  Cut  off]  Judgments  appealed  to  as  warnings
(ch.  ii.) ;  to  consider  severity  and  goodness.  7.]  Threatened  danger  would  be  averted  if  the  people
would  turn  from  evil.  But]  Instead  of  repenting,  they  rose  early,  became  more  zealous  in  wicked-
ness, prepared  themselves  for  it,  like  parties  starting  early  for  a  journey.  Hence  punishment.
8.  Wait]  The  prophecy  returns  to  its  starting-point  in  vers.  2  and  3,  to  bring  it  to  a  close  [Keil],
Prey]  (cf.  Gen.  xlix.  27  :  Isa.  xxxiii.  23).  Determination]  is  fixed,  or  my  right  or  justice  to  do
this  (ver.  5).  "  My  justice,  I.  e.  the  justice  which  I  shall  bring  to  the  light,  consists  in  the  fact  that
I  pour  my  fury  upon  all  nations,  to  exterminate  the  wicked  by  judgments,  and  to  convert  the  penitent
to  myself,  and  prepare  myself  worshippers  out  of  all  nations  "  [Keif],  Gather]  To  sift  and  convert
them  by  judgments.  9.  For]  The  reason  for  judgment,  lip  purity  of  language,  "  effusions  of  devo-
tion," springing  from  renewed  hearts.  Consent]  Shoulder ;  a  metaphor  from  burden-bearers  with  even
shoulders  (Jer.  xxxii.  39) ;  one  accord,  i.  e.  unanimity.  10.  From]  most  distant  countries  Jews  will
be  presented  to  God  by  converted  Gentiles  as  a  meat-offering  (cf.  Isa.  lxvi.  20).  Rejected  Israelites
will  be  benefited  by  Gentiles  entering  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  11.  Ashamed]  All  cause  for  shame
removed.  They  will  be  sanctified  and  restored  to  favour.  Pride]  Haughty  princes  and  priests,  who
exult  in  sin,  taken  away.  Mountain]  The  city  or  temple  of  which  they  boasted.  12.]  Those
spared  in  judgment  and  gathered  together.  Afflicted]  Bowed  down,  oppressed  with  feeling  of
impotence  for  good,  opposite  of  pride,  and  trusting  in  self — "a  humble  and  lowly  people"  [Newc.].
13.  This  remnant]  will  be  a  holy  nation  (Ex.  xix.  6) ;  without  injustice  in  life  and  deceit  in  word.
Feed]  in  peace,  undisturbed  by  foreign  foes  or  unjust  rulers.  "  This  blessing  is  still  further
developed  in  what  follows ;  first  of  all,  by  reference  to  the  removal  of  the  judgments  of  God  (vers.
14  —  17),  and  secondly,  by  the  promise  of  God  that  all  the  obstacles  which  prevent  the  enjoyment  of
the  blessing  are  to  be  cleared  away  "  [Keil].  14.]  Fulness  of  joy  indicated  by  repetition  of  words.
15.]  The  reasons  given  for  exultation.  Evil  removed,  enemies  destroyed,  full  enjoyment  of  God's
presence.  16.]  Therefore  no  cause  for  fear,  but  reason  for  diligence.  Slack]  Faint  not  (Heb.  xii.  12)
through  alarm  and  anxiety  (Isa.  xiii.  7).  17.]  Jehovah  within  is  mighty  to  help  and  save,  and  rejoices
over  his  rescued  people  (Isa.  lxii.  5 ;  lxv.  19).  Rest]  Be  silent  in  his  love ;  love  deeply  felt  and
absorbed  in  its  objects.  "  As  a  man  caresses  his  dearest  wife,  so  will  God  then  quietly  repose  in  thy
love  "  [Calvin].  To  be  silent,  not  to  speak,  is  here  very  appropriately  employed  to  express  the  non-
remembrance  of  iniquity  [/lend.].  18.]  Those  who  pined  in  distance  at  the  time  of  festivities,  shall
be  gathered  together.  Of  thee]  The  people  are  of  thy  origin  and  descent  (Isa.  lviii.  12  :  Ezra  ii.  59  :
Ps.  lxviii.  27).  Reproach]  Presses  upon  them  as  a  burden  [cf.  Lange].  19.  Undo]  Lit.  I  will  deal
with  all  oppressors  ;  heal  the  limping.  Her  that  halteth]  Weakness  no  barrier  to  restoration;  gather
together  the  dispersed,  and  will  get]  Lit.  make  them  a  praise  and  fame  im  lands  where  they  have
been  reproached.  20.  Captivity]  Lit.  captivities  of  every  age  and  kind  shall  end.  God  will  lead
them,  finish  the  work  begun,  and,  incredible  as  it  may  appear,  their  glorification  shall  be  seen  with
their  own  eyes  (Luke  xxiv.  41).


548  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ZEPHANIAH.  Tchap.  iil


HOMILETICS.
The  Guilty  City. — Verses  1 — 4.

After  threatenings  denounced  against  other  nations,  God  speaks  to  the  Church,
denounces  Jerusalem  for  the  iniquities  done  by  her.  Former  means  were  used  in
vain.     Now  the  last  sentence  is  uttered.     A  sinful  state  will  bring  a  woeful  doom.

I.  Its  inhabitants  were  ungodly.     Its  citizens  were  chosen  of  God  to  be  "a
holy  people,  zealous  of  good  works ; "  but  they  were  stained  with  corruption  and
vice.     1.   They  were  deaf  to  warning.     "  She  obeyed  not  the  voice"  of  God  in  his
law  and  prophets.     Remonstrance  and  appeal  were  in  vain;  wise  counsel  and
wholesome  reproof  were  set  at  nought.     "They  would  none  of  my  counsel  :  they
despised  all  my  reproof.     Therefore  they  shall  eat  of  the  fruit  of  their  own  way,
and  be  filled  with  their  own  devices."     2.   They  refused  correction.    "  She  received
not  correction."     She  was  neither  disciplined  by  her  own,  nor  the  sufferings  of
others.     Humbled  by  force  and  not  in  spirit,  men  kick  and  rebel ;  like  an  untract-
able  child  under  the  rod,  they  increase  their  own  chastisement.     "  Correction  is
grievous  unto    him  that   forsaketh   the  way."     3.   They  hardened  themselves  in
wickedness.     Obstinate  in  sin,  they  were  given  up  to  filthiness  and  infamy.      (1)
They  were  rebellious.     "  Woe  to  her  that  is  refractory  (filthy)."      (2)   They  were
defiled.      "  Polluted  "  within,   notwithstanding  ceremonial  purity  without.      (3)
They  were  oppressive.    "  The  oppressing  city."    Rebellion  begets  inward  defilement
before  God,  and  cruelty  to  man.    Hence — (4)  They  provoked  God  to  anger.    "Woe
to  her!"     The  infinite  patience  of  God  may  be  exhausted,  and  he  may  become
weary  in  correcting  for  sin.     "  Why  should  ye  be  stricken  any  more1?"  (Isa.  i.  5).
II.  Its  rulers  were  unjust.     The  leaders,  civil  and  religious,  who  should  have
been  a  protection  and  a  praise,  were  cruel  and  ferocious.    1.   The  princes  were  cruel.
"  Her  princes  within  her  are  roaring  lions."    Terrifying  inferiors  and  devouring  the
poor  who  had  no  helper.     2.   The  judges  were  corrupt.     "  Her  judges  are  evening
wolves."     Instead  of  defending  the  innocent  and  redressing  the  wrong,  they  were
most  greedy  and  rapacious.     They  were  no  check  to  the  insolence  and  rapacity  of
the  nobles ;  but  like  wild  beasts  driven  by  famine,  they  left  not  a  bone  of  their
evening  prey  for  the  hunger  of  the  morning.     "  They  gnaw  not  the  bones  till  the
morrow."     3.   The  prophets  were  unfaithful.    "  Her  prophets  were  light  and  treach-
erous persons."      (1)  In  their  words  they  were  light  and  frivolous,  without  truth
and  stability  in  their  teaching.     Insolent  speech  and  empty  boasting  characterized
their  ministry.      (2)  In  their  life  they  were  treacherous  and  inconsistent.     They
evinced  not  that  gravity  and   humility  which   become  the  messengers  of  God ;
trifled  with  most  serious  subjects  ;  declared  their  own  thoughts  to  be  the  truth  of
God,  and  apostatized  from  him  to  whom  they  should  have  witnessed.     3.  The
priests  were  polluted.     "Her  priests  have  polluted  the  sanctuary."      (1)  They
committed  sacrilege;    polluted   the  temple   and  its  services.      They  encouraged
others,  in  a  bold  and  carnal  spirit,  to  profane  that  which  was  holy,  and  turn  to
their  own  use  that  which  should  be  consecrated  to  God.      (2)  They  violated  law.
11  They  have  done  violence  to  the  law."     They  openly  strained  or  secretly  wrested
it  in  forms  of  violence.    By  craft  and  gloss  they  perverted  its  function,  and  became
a  type  of  all  who  transgress  the  commandment  of  God  and  make  it  of  none  effect
by  their  traditions  (Matt.  xv.  6 ;  xxiii.  23).    Thus  were  all  classes  of  society,  high
and  low,  accused  of  guilt  and  exposed  to  judgment.     Mere  power  and  outward
sanctity  will  never  save  a  people.    They  must  be  under  the  fear  of  God,  accept  b^
correction,  or  they  will  be  denounced  with  woe


chap,  in.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ZEPHANIAH.


549


Keeping  from  God. —  Verse  3.

God  is  the  source  of  our  happiness,  the  satisfaction  of  our  hearts,  and  the  end  of
our  being.  What,  then,  the  condition  of  those  who  draw  not  near  to  God  1  These
words  may  be  said  concerning —

I.  The  wicked  generally.  Sin  separates  from  God,  creates  enmity  against  him.
The  wicked,  through  the  pride  of  their  countenance,  will  not  seek  God.  God  is  not
in  their  thoughts  nor  supreme  in  their  life.  They  stand  at  a  distance,  will  not
approach  God ;  but  say,  Depart  from  us,  we  desire  not  the  knowledge  of  thy  ways.
II.  Some  afflicted  people.  Jerusalem  was  heavily  afflicted,  but  stubborn.  The
end  of  affliction  is  not  answered  in  the  case  of  many.  Like  Asa,  they  ask  counsel
of  physicians  a^d  not  God.  They  murmur,  repine,  and  rebel  against  him.  They
draw  not  near  to  God  in  his  providential  dealings  with  them.  "  It  lightens
the  stroke,"  said  one,  "  to  draw  near  to  him  who  handles  the  rod."  "  I  would  run
into  the  arms  of  Christ,  if  he  stood  with  a  drawn  sword  in  his  hand,"  said  Luther.
"  It  is  good  for  me  to  draw  near  to  God."  III.  Some  professing  Christians.
Instead  of  walking  with  God,  they  live  afar  off.  The  sanctuary  and  the  prayer-
meeting  are  forsaken,  the  Bible  neglected,  and  the  back  is  turned  from  God.  In  a
letter  to  Matthew  Henry,  his  mother  says,  "  I  write  a  line  or  two  to  remind  you
to  keep  in  with  God  by  solemn,  secret  daily  prayer."

u  The  soul  in  audience  with  its  God  is  heaven."


HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.


Vers.  1,2.  Corruption.  1.  Its  nature.
"  Towards  God,  in  herself,  towards  man,
she  is  wholly  turned  to  evil,  not  in
passing  acts  but  in  her  abiding  state.
She  is  known  only  by  what  she  has
become,  and  what  has  been  done  for  her
in  vain.  She  is  rebellious,  and  so  had
had  the  law ;  defiled,  and  so  had  been
cleansed ;  and  therefore  her  state  is  the
more  hopeless  "  [Pusey].  2.  Its  source.
Contempt  of  the  word.  Law  and  pun-
ishment, invitation  and  promise,  failed.
"  She  obeyed  not  the  voice."  3.  Its
manifestation.  Unbelief  in  threatenings
and  promises  leads  to  settled  hatred.
"  If  a  man  despise  the  word  of  God,
then  the  next  thing  is  that  he  refuses  all
amendment,  because  he  is  well  pleased
with  himself,  and^  imagines  everything
which  is  in  him  good.  And  this  is  the
climax  of  perversion  of  the  life  from
God "  [Lange].  4.  Its  consequence.
"  She  drew  not  near  to  her  God."  No
change  effected  in  life  and  heart.  Dis-
tance from  God  not  merely  as  a  natural
fact,  but  as  a  penal  consequence.  Drew
not  nigh  in  repentance,  faith,  and  love ;
stood  away  until  too  late  to  come.
"  The  way  of  destruction  begins  with


obstinacy  against  God,"  says  one;
"  then  comes  pollution  by  vice ;  finally,
the  destruction  of  conscience,  which  be-
comes manifest  in  open  acts  of  violence
and  crime."  The  fourfold  sin.  Dis-
obedience, obstinacy,  atheism,  and
final  impenitence.  Take  heed  lest  any
of  you  "  be  hardened  through  the  deceit-
fulness  of  sin."

Ver.  4.  Pollution.  1.  in  the  persons  ;
2.  in  the  things.  The  priests  were  pol-
luted themselves,  and  "  made  the  sacri-
fices of  the  Lord  to  be  abhorred."
il  Polluted  her  sanctuary,  lit.  holiness,  and
so  holy  rites,  persons  (Ezra  viii.  28),
things,  places  (as  the  sanctuary),  sacri-
fices. All  these  they  polluted,  being
themselves  polluted — first  themselves,
then  the  holy  things  which  they  handled,
handling  them  as  they  ought  not ;  care-
lessly and  irreverently,  not  as  ordained
by  God  ;  turning  them  to  their  own  use
and  self-indulgence "  [Pusey].  "  Her
priests  have  violated  my  law,  and  have
profaned  mine  holy  things  :  they  have
put  no  difference  between  the  holy  and
profane,  neither  have  they  showed
difference  between  the  unclean  and  the
clean  "  (Ezek.  xxii.  26 :  MaL  ii.  8).


600  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZEPHANIAH.  [CBJ&.  IIL

HOMILETIGS.
God's  Justice  proved  to  a  Guilty  People. —  Verses  5,  6.

No  argument  against  the  righteousness  of  God  can  be  presented  by  those  who
have  been  warned,  spared,  and  at  last  condemued.  If  iniquity  be  determined,  and
the  sinner  becomes  incorrigible,  the  course  of  justice  is  clear.  God  could  not  rightly
be  taxed  with  injustice  in  punishing  Jerusalem  with  greater  suffering  than  the
offence  deserved.     This  is  proved —

I.  By  God's  holy  character.  "  The  just  Lord  is  in  the  midst  thereof."  He  is
essentially  holy,  eternally  just ;  the  primal  law  of  right  to  all.  He  is — 1.  Just  in
himself;  and  2.  Just  to  others.  "  He  will  not  do  iniquity."  He  is  in  the  midst  of
men  who  are  polluted  and  oppressive ;  reproving  wrong,  and  giving  an  example  of
right.  Hence,  if  sinners  heed  not,  God  cannot  connive  at  their  wickedness,  and
become  as  one  of  themselves  (Ps.  1.  21).  "  The  Lord  is  upright,  and  there  is  no
unrighteousness  in  him."  II.  By  God's  righteous  administration.  God  not
only  dwelt  in  the  temple,  but  gave  clear  intimations  of  duty,  bright  manifestations
of  equity,  which  they  heeded  not.  God's  condemnations  of  evil  practices  were — 1.
Open.  In  the  day,  not  in  secret.  2.  Clear.  He  brought  "  his  judgment  to  light."
All  secret  things,  all  works  of  darkness,  were  exposed  and  reproved  (2  Sam.  xii.
12).  3.  Continual.  "  Every  morning  ;  "  morning  by  morning,  day  by  day,  his
voice  was  heard  and  his  judgments  conspicuous.  "He  faileth  not"  in  judgment
and  mercy  ;  but  they  knew  no  shame,  were  conscious  of  no  sin.  "They  were  not  at  all
ashamed,  neither  could  they  blush."  III.  By  God's  terrible  judgments  upon
others.  "  I  have  cut  off  the  nations,"  &c.  (ver.  6).  Judgments  upon  others  had
always  been  set  before  them  as  a  warning.  When  about  to  enter  the  inheritance
(Lev.  xviii.  24 — 26;  xx.  23),  they  were  oautioned.  When  they  got  possession  the
ruins  of  cities  were  silent  preachers  of  the  results  of  sin  (Isa.  xvii.  9).  They  had
been  the  instruments  of  inflicting  judgments,  and  lived  in  the  memories  of  God's
visitations  upon  others.  Fortified  cities  had  been  destroyed,  mighty  towers  levelled
to  the  dust,  and  nations  completely  ruined,  to  admonish  them,  but  all  in  vain.
How  earnest  is  God  in  seeking  the  sinner,  but  how  terrible  the  punishment  at  last !
"  I  said,  Surely  thou  wilt  fear  me,  thou  wilt  receive  instruction  ;  so  their  dwelling
should  not  be  cut  off,  howsoever  I  punished  them."

Aggravations  of  Human  Guilt. —  Verses  5 —  7.

What  aggravated  their  guilt  till  it  became  intolerable,  and  put  them  beyond  all
mercy  save  the  "  mercy  of  judgment,"  was — 1 .  That  God  had  given  them  a  pure  law
of  life j  and  himself  administered  it  among  them.  In  other  cities,  such  as  Gaza  or
Nineveh,  the  presence  and  the  law  of  God  were  but  obscurely  revealed.  Men  were
left  to  grope  after  the  Unknown,  if  haply  they  might  find  him  ;  to  infer  a  spiritual
presence  from  the  operation  of  physical  laws  ;  to  deduce  a  Divine  rule  from  the  im-
perfect and  confused  utterances  of  reason  and  conscience.  In  Jerusalem,  God  and
his  will  were  "  set  in  the  light ; "  the  history  of  the  chosen  race,  the  services  of  the
temple,  the  voices  and  scriptures  of  the  prophets,  the  national  habits  of  thought,
and  manner  of  life,  loudly  proclaimed  God  to  be  their  God.  Who  should  know
him  if  they  did  not  1  and  who  do  his  will  if  they  disobeyed  it  ?  But  with  so  pure
light  of  goodness  in  their  midst,  they  wrapped  themselves  in  darkness,  and  hated
the  light  which  reproved  their  deeds.  "  But  the  unjust  know  no  shame."  2.
That  in  the  destruction  inflicted  upon  neighbouring  kingdoms,  he  had  constantly
warned  them  of  the  inevitable  results  of  violating  that  law  (ver.  6).  They  had  seen
race  after  race  cut  off,  their  battlements  laid  waste,  their  cities  battered  down,  and
their  streets  reduced  to  such  ruinous  desolation  that  no  man  dwelt  in  them,  nor  so
much  as  passed  through  them.     What  were  these  judgments  but  the  law  of  God


•jhap.  in.j  ffOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ZEPHANIAH.  651


"writ  large,"  and  illustrated  so  impressively  as  to  arrest  the  attention  of  the  most
heedless,  and  to  rouse  a  saving  fear  in  the  stubborn  and  impenitent  1  But  even
these  glaring  and  portentous  illustrations  of  God's  wrath  against  sin  and  all  who
cleave  to  it,  had  been  wasted.  They  were  unmoved,  or  moved  only  for  a  moment,
under  shocks  and  alarms.  Only  a  judgment  more  severe  than  any  they  had  seen
or  known  could  constrain  them  to  penitence,  through  penitence  to  righteousness,
and  through  righteousness  to  peace.  "  The  nation  that  did  not  turn  pale  "  (ch.  ii.  1).
3.  That  much  as  they  suffered,  they  had  not  accepted  correction,  nor  learned  that
the  beginning  of  wisdom  is  the  fear  of  the  Lord  (ver.  7).  Not  only  had  they  seen  "  a
day  of  the  Lord  "  darken  other  lands,  and  judgments  desolate  heathen  cities.  They
themselves  had  been  visited  with  judgment,  smitten  again  and  again  till  the  whole
head  was  sick,  and  the  whole  heart  faint.  The  whole  body  politic  was  bruised,  and
wounded,  and  sore.  Their  whole  past  history  was  full  of  Divine  chastenings.
What  was  their  meaning  1  what  were  they  sent  to  say  1  "  Only  fear  God,  accept
correction,"  let  it  produce  its  natural  effect  upon  you,  and  all  will  be  right.  Cor-
rections were  sent  to  them  that  their  land  and  city  might  be  spared.  But  if  they
be  rejected,  they  harden  and  deprave.  Jerusalem  had  been  content  to  give  the  day
to  disobedience  and  mutiny.  Now  as  if  it  were  not  long  enough  for  the  sins  they
were  eager  to  commit,  "  they  rose  up  early  n  in  the  morning  "  to  corrupt  all  their
doings,"  so  shameless  were  they,  so  incorrigible  [Preache?,ys  Lantern.  Vol.  II.
Adapted].

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Yer.     5.       In     the    midst.       God's  unheeded  we  shall  ourselves  be  punished,

presence  with  an  apostate  people  will  "  No  words  could  be  more  simple  and

not  save  from  wrath,  but  will  bring  it  direct  than  these  ;  none  could  state  more

nearer   to   them.     "  Is   not    the    Lord  plainly  the  merciful  and  Divine  purpose

among  us  1 "  was  their  boast  (Mic.  iii.  of  judgment ;  the  true  function  of  the

11).     True,  he  is,  but  it  is  for  another  miseries    men   are    called    to    endure,

end  from  what  ye  think  \Calvin\.  These  judgments  and  miseries  come  to

He  faileth   not.     1.  In  presence;  2.  teach  us  the  fear  of  the  Lord;  that  is,  to

In  promise  ;  3.  In  help.    He  continually  save  us  from  all  fear.     So  soon  as  we

sets  before  us  examples  of  judgment  and  accept  them  as  corrections  of  our  sins,

mercy.      "  He    wakeneth    morning   by  their  end  is  answered  ;  henceforth  there

morning"  (Isa.  v.  4;  1.  4).    He  does  not  is  no  anger  in  them,  no  injurious  pain,

fail   to   visit   at  the  time   looked   for,  but  only  a  Divine  love  and  goodwill,

though  he  may  seem  to  forbear  or  linger  And  if  no  statement  of  the  meaning  and

behind  (Hab.  ii.  3).  function  of  suffering  can  be  more  plain

Shame.     1.  Many  in  the  Church  and  than  this,  surely  none  can  be  more  con-

in  the  nation  acknowledge  God,  yet  sin  solatory.     For,  according  to  Zephaniah,

against  the  clear  light  of  the  Word.     2.  it  comes  only  for   our   good,    for   our

When  such  are  mad  in  their  sin  and  highest  good ;  to  teach  us  the  true  wis-

rush  to  ruin,  it  is  a  presage  of  their  de-  dom,  and  to  make  us  perfect.     When

structionwhen  the  Word  has  no  influence  once  we     *  accept'    it,    its    end   being

upon  them  ;  a  token  that  judgment  must  reached,  there  is  no  reason  why  it  should

come,  notwithstanding  warnings,  when  not  either  pass  away  or  be  changed  into

"  the     unjust     knoweth     no     shame "  the  stay  and  stimulus  of  our  life."

\_Hutchesonj.  Long  unaffected,  undismayed,

Vers.    6,  7.      1.   The  chastisement  of  In  pleasure's  path  secure  I  stray'd

others  is  designed  to  improve  us.     The  Thou  mad'st  rae  feel  thy  chast'ning  rod,

design  is  benevolent ;  «  so  their  dwelling  And  strai^ht  1  turn'd  unto  my  Go1

should  not  be  cut  off."     The  method  is  Instruction.  —  Other     men's      woes

suitable  ;  "  howsoever  I  punished  them."  should  be  our  warnings  ;  others'  suffer-

The    results    are   reasonable ;    "  surely  ings  our  sermons ;    others'  lashes   our

thou  wilt  fear."     2.  If  the  warning  is  lessons ;    God's  house  of  correction,  a


552  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZEPHANIAH.  [chap.  hi.


school  of  instruction  where  we  should  not  in  hearing,  shall  be  crushed  to
hear  and  fear,  and  do  no  more  so  pieces  in  feeling,  said  that  martyr
(Deut.   xvii.   13).     He  that  trembleth      [Trapp].

HOMILETICS.
The  Waiting  Attitude  op  God's  People  in  times  op  trouble. — Verse  8.

The  prophecy  now  returns  to  its  starting-point.  The  faithful  are  called  upon  to
wait  upon  God,  as  formerly  they  were  exhorted  to  repentance  (ch.  ii.  3).  Judgments
had  thundered  forth  in  terror,  the  impenitent  were  to  be  swept  away,  and  the  fire
of  Divine  wrath  to  consume  the  whole  earth.  But  after  the  storm  comes  a  calm.
Consolation  is  given  in  calamity.  The  judgments  upon  the  enemies  will  issue  in
the  salvation  of  the  sons  of  Israel,  the  purification  of  the  earth,  and  the  glory  of  the
Lord.  Good,  not  evil,  will  spring  out  of  present  trials.  "  Therefore  wait"  a  little
longer,  the  day  will  surely  come.     God's  people  must  hope  in  him.

I.  The  basis  of  hope.  H  Wait  ye  upon  me,  saith  the  Lord."  Salvation  could
not  come  from  the  people,  even  of  favoured  Israel,  who  had  corrupted  themselves.
Princes  plundered,  and  judges  bribed,  to  get  wealth  ;  prophets  deceived,  and  priests
consecrated  themselves  to  idols.  There  was  no  hope  in  the  government  nor  in  the
priesthood.  All  were  silent  and  all  were  guilty.  Law  makes  nothing  perfect,
Christ  alone  brings  in  a  better  hope.  II.  The  discouragements  of  hope.  Sad
must  have  been  the  heart  of  God's  people  under  their  oppression.  Many  things
would  tend  to  weaken  their  faith  in  God.  1.  Inward  decay.  Leaders  became
unfaithful.  When  those  upon  whom  we  depend  for  help,  and  who  should  be
examples  of  virtue,  become  faithless,  we  doubt  all  men  and  call  them  liars
(Ps.  cxvi.  11).  2.  Foreign  invasion.  The  enemies  came,  like  wave  after  wave,
and  swept  the  land.  The  innocent  suffered  with  the  guilty,  and  none  escaped.
3.  Long  delay  of  help.  How  can  God  be  holy,  when  vice  unfolds  itself  and
pollutes  the  whole  nation  1  How  can  God  be  kind,  when  the  righteous  are  over-
whelmed with  the  wicked  1  Where  is  God's  providence  in  punishing  the  evil  and
rewarding  the  good?  Disappointment  and  dejection  seize  the  mind,  and  we  forget
to  wait  upon  God.  It  is  not  the  intenseness,  but  the  length  of  trials,  which  test
our  patience.     "  The  patience  of  hope,"  says  one,  "  will  end  "  in  the  full  assurance

of  hope —

"  Our  lives,  discolour'd  with  our  present  woes,
May  still  grow  white,  and  smile  with  happier  hours"  [Addison].

III.  The  rewards  of  hope.  Wait  for  me,  the  day  is  at  hand ;  I  will  seize  my
prey,  and  accomplish  my  purpose  (vers.  9 — 20).  1.  The  enemy  would  be  subdued.
Gathered  together  for  cruel  ends,  God  would  snatch  the  prey  out  of  their  mouth,
and  crush  their  opposition.  2.  They  would  be  sheltered  in  the  day  of  wrath.  God
not  only  overthrows  hostility  to  his  people  in  its  powerful  juncture  of  circumstances,
but  makes  a  complete  destruction  of  heathenism  and  a  full  salvation  to  his  chosen.
3.  A  purified  earth  would  be  created.  The  earth  would  be  consumed  with  the  fire
of  insulted  love,  and  out  of  it  would  spring  a  new  order  of  things.  Christendom
will  yet  become  pure  in  life,  united  in  effort,  and  all  "  with  one  mind  and  one
mouth  shall  glorify  God"  (Rom.  xv.  6).

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  8.     Prey.     Divine  justice,  like  picture  of  the  warrior  leading  to  vic-

eagles,  ready  to  fall  upon  the  prey,  the  tory.     Hence — 1.  Danger  from  sin  and

carcase  of  corruption  (Matt.  xxiv.  28).  enemies.     2.  Divine  power  in  deliver-

Taking   prey   as    booty,   we   have   the  ance.    "Through  the  judgment  Jehovah


chap,  m.]


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:   ZEPHANIAH.


553


obtains  from  among  the  nations  those
who  will  confess  his  name,  so  that  the
souls  from  among  the  nations  which
desire  salvation  fall  to  Him  as  prey
(cf.  Isa.  liii.  12,  with  lii.  15,  and
xlix.  7)"  [Keil].

Fierre  anger,  or  God's  judgments,  a
fire.  1.  To  consume;  or — 2.  To  cleanse.
The  wicked  are  exterminated,  the  peni-
tent are  converted,  and  worshippers  are
prepared  out  of  all  nations.  *  In  the
first  place,  there  is  a  work  of  judgment,


as  purifying,  struggling,  and  demolishing
to  the  last.  In  the  second  place,  there
is  a  work  of  salvation,  a  new-creating
work,  so  that  the  same  history  is  pre-
sented as  a  progressive  communication
of  the  Divine  life-germ,  advancing  to  the
complete  re-creation  of  that  which  has
become  corrupt  by  sin.  These  views
cannot  be  separated ;  each  receives  its
internal  form  by  the  irradiating  lines  of
the  other  "  [Lange\ .


HOMILETICS.
The  Gathering  op  the  Christian  Church. —  Verses  9,  10.

In  judgment  God  dispersed  his  ancient  people,  but  they  shall  be  restored  with
the  Gentiles  to  God  again.  The  heathens  shall  be  converted,  and  be  the  means  of
turning  the  scattered  nation  to  Jehovah.  God  will  gather  from  all  parts  a  people
pure  in  life  aud  united  in  service.

I.  The  Gentiles  shall  be  gathered  together.  "  From  beyond  the  rivers  of
Ethiopia;"  Abyssinia  and  neighbouring  nations  shall  be  converted.  From  the
utmost  bound  of  the  known  world  shall  people  come.  The  dispersed,  the  outcasts
of  spiritual  Israel,  shall  be  gathered  from  every  region.  With  the  restoration  of
the  Jews  shall  "  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  "  come.  "  That  also  he  should  gather
together  in  one  the  children  of  God  that  were  scattered  abroad."  II.  The  Gentiles
shall  be  holy  in  their  life.  1.  Pure  in  their  language.  "Then  will  I  turn  to
the  people  a  pure  language."  The  confusion  of  tongues  was  the  punishment  of  sin  ;
but  lips  once  polluted  with  idolatry  and  blasphemy,  shall  be  purified  by  the  Spirit
of  God.  A  pure  language  indicates  a  pure  life.  The  mouth  speaks  from  the
abundance  of  the  heart.  The  lip  was  created  by  God,  and  should  be  used  for  his
service  and  glory.  A  pure  heart  refines  character  and  conversation,  pours  grace
into  the  lips,  and  cleanses  them  from  falsehood  and  profanity.  "  He  that  loveth
pureness  of  heart,  for  the  grace  of  his  lips  the  king  shall  be  his  friend."  2.  Sin-
cere in  their  worship.  "  My  suppliants  shall  bring  mine  offering."  Converted
Gentiles  will  not  only  bring  devout  Jews  as  an  offering  to  God  (cf.  Isa.  lxvi.  20) ;
but  they  will  present  themselves  in  humility  and  acceptance  (Rom.  xv.  16).  No
longer  defiled  by  invocations  and  foul  strains  to  idols,  they  will  "  all  call  upon  the
name  of  the  Lord."  "  For,  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  to  the  going  down  of  the
same,  my  name  shall  be  great  among  the  Gentiles,  and  in  every  place  incense  shall
be  offered  unto  my  name,  and  a  pure  offering."  3.  United  in  their  sere  ice.  "  Serve
him  with  one  consent."  Saved  by  judgments,  the  nations  shall  be  sanctified  in
speech,  and  one  in  effort.  They  shall  bear  the  burden  without  strain  or  distress,
walk  step  by  step  and  work  shoulder  to  shoulder  in  the  cause  of  God.  Christen-
dom shall  yet  be  purged  from  bigotry  and  sectarianism.  There  shall  be  a  return
to  the  simplicity  and  union  in  Christ.  The  Gospel  shall  dislodge  idolatry  and
anti-Christian  systems.  Nations  shall  walk  together — the  Jew  and  the  Greek,  the
Barbarian  and  the  Scythian — side  by  side,  shoulder  to  shoulder,  bearing  the  con-
quests of  the  cross.  Thus,  on  earth  we  may  anticipate  the  joys,  and  hear  the  songs,
of  heaven  (Eev.  vii.  10  and  12;  xi.  15).  "  I  will  give  them  one  heart  and  one
way,  that  they  may  fear  me  for  ever,  for  the  good  of  them  and  of  their  children
after  them."


<W4  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZEPHAMAH.  [ohap.  in.


Bearing  the  Burden  with  one  consent. —  Verse  9.

The  law  of  God  is  a  burden.  Man  can  only  bear  it  without  strain  and  distress
as  each  freely  assumes  it,  and  as  all  help  to  bear  it,  by  walking  in  willing  and
happy  consent  of  obedience.  To  induce  a  free  and  universal  obedience,  men  are
judged  and  corrected  of  the  Lord.  The  metaphor,  therefore,  suggests  three  main
thoughts —

1.  That  the  law  of  God  is  a  burden  which  men  are  reluctant  to  assume.  To
our  selfwill  it  is  always  hard  to  submit  to  the  purest  and  tenderest  will,  even  to
the  Divine  Will,  which  moves  in  the  light  of  eternal  wisdom,  and  at  the  impulse  of
perfect  love.  Christ  admits  obedience  to  be  a  yoke  to  our  unruly  passions,  a  burden
to  our  stubborn  necks  (Matt.  xi.  28 — 30).  When  we  delight  in  bis  law  after  the
inward  man,  we  find  another  law  in  our  members  warring  against  the  law  of  our
mind,  and  bringing  us  into  the  captivity  of  sin  (Eom.  vii.  21 — 23).  We  can  only
enter  into  rest  as  we  get  unity  and  freedom  in  our  life,  and  we  willingly  submit  to
a  higher  will  than  our  own.  2.  That  we  can  only  attain  tlds  freedom  as,  with
cheerful  and  enforced  accord,  we  assume  the  burden  of  the  Divine  law,  and  do  the
will  of  God.  Self-will  makes  us  hateful  to  ourselves  and  to  others  ;  incapacitates
for  social  and  spiritual  life.  Follow  your  own  will,  you  become  a  burden  to  your-
self and  all  about  you.  Voluntarily  curtail  your  own  liberty,  then  you  have  true
liberty.  Set  yourself  against  the  world,  you  will  find  that  the  world  has  a  stronger
will  than  you  have.  We  must  take  up  some  burden,  and  submit  to  some  law.  JSTo
law  is  so  good,  no  burden  so  light,  as  the  good  will  of  God.  This  will  rules  in
human  affairs.  It  is  wise  to  make  it  our  law — not  merely  yield  to  it,  but  cheer-
fully adopt  and  love  it,  and  walk  in  liberty.  Love  makes  all  burdens  light.  When
we  love  God,  his  will  grows  beautiful  to  us,  and  preferable  to  our  own.  Because
we  bear  the  yoke  we  find  rest ;  because  we  keep  the  commandment  we  walk  at
large  (Ps.  cxix.  45).  We  are  free  because  we  obey.  But  are  we  happy  because
we  are  free.  3.  That  the  happiness  of  obedience  depends  on  the  unanimity  and  the
universality  of  obedience.  Only  when  all  men  serve  God  with  one  shoulder  the
sense  of  strain  and  distress  will  pass  from  us.  To  love  God  is  to  love  man.  Till
they  share  our  freedom,  it  cannot  be  a  happy  freedom.  Till  they  love  him  and  do
his  will,  they  will  put  many  hindrances  and  temptations  in  our  way  which  make
obedience  hard  and  painful.  If  they  do  not  take  their  full  share  in  bearing  the
burden,  it  will  press  unduly  upon  our  shoulders.  If  some  are  morally  taller  and
others  morally  shorter,  men  do  not  keep  step.  Only  when  the  whole  world  stands
under  the  Divine  burden  with  one  shoulder,  and  moves  with  one  step,  will  our
freedom  be  a  happy  freedom,  and  God's  statutes  become  our  songs.  Seeing  how
men  suffer  from  the  sins  of  men,  and  nations  from  the  sins  of  nations,  we  may  well
long  and  pray  for  the  time  when  all  men  shall  speak  with  a  pure  lip  and  serve  with
a  single  shoulder  [Preacher's  Lantern,  vol.  II.].

The  Eestored  Remnant. — Verses  11 — 13.

In  these  verses  the  prophet  pictures  the  happy  characteristics  and  condition  of
restored  Israel.  These  qualities  are  common  to  God's  people  in  all  ages  and
countries.     Notice —

I.  Their  spiritual  character.  1.  They  are  few  in  number.  "  The  remnant  of
Israel."  Small  compared  with  the  whole,  yet  precious  in  the  sight  of  God — in-
creasing, and  will  increase.  2.  They  are  humble  in  spirit.  "  An  afflicted  and  poor
people."  Poor  in  spirit,  and  conscious  of  no  desert.  Realizing  life,  growth,  and
strength  only  from  God.  3.  They  are  dependent  upon  God.  Feeling  themselves
unworthy,  they  naturally  "  trust  in  the  name  of  the  Lord."  4.  They  are  upright
in  conduct.  (1)  They  do  no  iniquity.  (2)  They  speak  no  lies.  They  worship
God  in  truth,  and  love  man  in  sincerity.     They  are  Israelites  indeed,  in  whom


CHAP,  m.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZEPHANIAH.  555


is  no  guile.  Born  of  God,  they  sin  not  (1  John  iii.  9)  in  word  or  deed.  Where
true  faith  exists,  holy  life  will  follow.  II.  Their  blessed  condition.  They  are
completely  restored  to  holiness,  sit  in  the  centre  of  a  regenerated  world,  in  the
special  presence  and  under  the  constant  care  of  Jehovah.  1.  They  are  cleansed
from  shame  for  sin.  "  In  that  day  shalt  thou  not  be  ashamed  for  thy  doings."
The  disgrace  of  rebellion  shall  bo  wiped  away.  Eemembrance  of  sin  and  failure
may  cause  penitence — long  after  sin  is  renounced  and  forgiven  we  feel  humble — ■
but  the  guilt  and  reproach  of  sin  shall  not  remain.  2.  They  are  delivered  from
spiritual  pride.  The  spirit  of  the  Pharisee,  the  vain  confidence  which  they  had
in  the  temple,  and  the  pride  of  descent  from  Abraham,  shall  be  taken  away.
3..  They  are  redeemed  from  proud  oppressors.  "  I  will  take  away  out  of  the
midst  of  thee,  them  that  rejoice  in  thy  pride."  The  meek  and  lowly  will  be  left.
The  haughty  judge  and  the  proud  sinners  will  be  exterminated.  Priests  or
prophets  who  exult  in  sinful  ways  will  be  cut  off.  4.  They  are  specially  pro-
tected by  God.  (a)  Delivered  from  fear.  "  None  shall  make  them  afraid."  JSTo
foreign  foe  nor  native  prince — no  "treacherous"  prophet,  nor  " violent"  and
"  polluting  "  priest,  can  touch  them  (ver.  4).  They  are  beyond  all  harm  and  fear.
(b)  Blessed  with  peace.  As  God's  sheep  they  "  shall  feed  "  in  green  pastures —
"lie  down"  to  rest  in  perpetual  enjoyment  (Mic.  vii.  14),  and  dwell  in  God's
presence  without  fear  (Lev.  xxvi.  6).  "  I  will  feed  my  flock,  and  I  will  cause
them  to  lie  down,  saith  the  Lord  God."

The  True  Israelite. —  Verse  13.

Of  the  subjects  of  Divine  grace  here  mentioned,  notice :  Their  number;  "a
remnant."  Strait  is  the  gate,  and  narrow  the  way,  that  leadeth  to  life,  and  few
there  be  that  find  it.  Yet  God  has  always  had  a  people  for  his  Name — never  left
himself  without  a  witness,  and  this  has  been  our  case  as  a  nation ;  for,  "  except  the
Lord  of  hosts  had  left  unto  us  a  very  small  remnant,  we  should  have  been  as
Sodom,"  &c.  Though  "  a  little  flock  "  in  a  large  field,  "  a  garden  "  in  a  vast  wil-
derness, yet  "  he  shall  cause  them  that  come  of  Jacob  to  take  root  :  Israel  shall
blossom  and  bud,  and  fill  the  face  of  the  world  with  fruit."  Their  sanctity.
"  They  shall  not  do  iniquity."  Take  this  with  some  restriction.  "  There  is  not
on  earth  a  just  man  that  doeth  good  and  sinneth  not."  But  they  are  not  "  workers
of  iniquity,"  and  "  evil-doers."  Sin  does  not  reign  in  them.  They  hate  every
false  way,  and  esteem  all  his  commandments  concerning  all  things  to  be  right.  He
that  has  "true  holiness"  cannot  be  satisfied  without  perfect  holiness.  He  there-
fore prays  to  be  sanctified  in  body,  soul,  and  spirit.  Their  sincerity.  "  They
shall  not  speak  lies,"  &c.  A  part  is  put  for  the  whole,  and  the  quality  of  speech
expresses  the  inward  temper  of  their  minds.  Everything  is  a  lie  religiously  that
does  not  accord  with  the  state  of  the  heart.  Only  an  upright  spirit  can  maintain
a  deceitless  tongue  before  God.  Christians  are  not  mere  pretenders;  a  painted
sepulchre,  fair  without,  and  rottenness  within.  Not  mere  actors  on  a  stage,  but
are  really  what  they  appear  to  be.  Their  integrity  is  specially  known  by  their  fear
of  self-deception.  They  come  to  the  light,  examine  themselves  by  the  Word,  and
implore  the  inspection  of  God  himself :  "  Search  me,  0  God."  Their  privileges.
Their  blessedness  is  expressed  pastorally,  and  includes  three  things.  First,  pasture :
they  shall  "  feed."  As  new  creatures  their  food  is  intellectual  and  spiritual;  found
in  the  ordinances  of  religion,  and  with  the  Saviour  himself.  Secondly,  repose :
and  shall  "  lie  down."  In  an  eastern  climate,  in  a  warm  sun,  how  desirable  would
rest  be  !  Hence  the  Church  says,  Tell  me,  not  only  where  thou  feedest,  but  "  where
thou  makest  thy  flock  to  rest  at  noon."  Thirdly,  security  :  "  and  none  shall  make
them  afraid."  Sheep  are  the  most  timid  of  all  animals,  every  appearance  and
movement  alarms  them.     Bat  the  righteous  should  be  bold  as  a  Hon ;  their  duty


556  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZEPHANIAH.  JJHAP.  m.


requires  it,  and  their  principles  justify  it.  God  has  amply  provided  for  their  con-
fidence. When  they  believe  it,  they  can  be  in  quiet  from  the  fear  of  evil,  "  dwell
safely  in  the  wilderness,  and  sleep  in  the  woods  "  [  W.  Jay].

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.   11.      Haughty  because  of  holy  are  common  to  all;  when  this  catholic

mountain.     Pride  in  outward  privileges.  charity  is  the  animating,  all-pervading

1.  A  sin  against  God  who  gave  them,  spirit  of  the  Church  of  God,  will  the

2.  A  danger,  because  robbing  of  enjoy-  millennium  be  far  off]  or  Heaven
ment,  and  exposing  to  judgment.   "That  itself  V  [S.  Cox].

haughtiness  is  most  offensive  to  God,  Ver.  12.  It  is  painful  to  the  human
which  is  supported  and  fed  by  the  heart,  that  it  must  first  become  corn-
pretensions  of  holiness."  If  pride  pletely  poor  and  humble  before  it  learns
be  "  the  last  infirmity  of  noble  minds,"  to  trust  entirely  in  the  living  God.  This
"  is  not  spiritual  pride  the  last  infirmity  is  the  reason  that  the  hearts  rich  in  the
of  religious  minds  1  When  the  Jew  opinion  of  the  world  are  richest  in  dead
shall  no  longer  boast  himself  in  Jerusa-  idols  [Lange].

lem  and  the  temple;  when  there  shall  Vers.    12,    13.      The    glory   of    the

not  be  a  single  sectarian  left  to  pride  Christian    Church.       Not   in   outward

himself  in  his   exclusive  possession  of  splendour  ;  for  they  are  often  few,  poor,

some  spiritual  gift,  or  on  his  singular  and  afflicted,  but  in  holy  life,  exalted

fidelity  to  some  neglected  truth  ;  when  worship,  and  Divine  protection.    Feed  :

every  man  shall  hold  all  he  has  in  trust  Shall  have  all  that  heart  can  wish  or

for  his  brethren,  call  nothing  his  own,  need  require  ■    plenty,  safety,   security

and  value  all  gifts  in  proportion  as  they  [Trapp].

HOMILETICS.
The  Joy  of  the  Redeemed. — Verses  14 — 17.

These  words  are  a  call  to  the  converted  Israelites,  and  the  inhabitants  of
Jerusalem,  to  exult  in  their  distinguished  blessings.  The  prophet  seems  to  be  in  a
transport  of  joy  himself,  as  he  adds  word  to  word,  and  epithet  to  epithet,  in  tender
feelings.  Three  designations  are  given  :  "  Daughter  of  Zion,"  "  Israel,"  and
"  daughter  of  Jerusalem."  The  wonders  of  "  that  day  "  are  great,  and  the  source  of
exultant  joy  to  all  who  see  them.  The  causes  of  this  joy  are  distinctly  pointed
out.

I.  Judgments  are  removed.  "  The  Lord  hath  taken  away  thy  judgments."
Israel  was  chastised  in  mercy,  but  God  forgave  her  sins,  and  took  away  her  judg-
ments. Christians  are  freed  from  condemnation  by  the  law,  and  rejoice  in  hope  of
salvation.  When  sin  is  pardoned,  the  consequences  of  sin  are  removed.  When
the  cause  is  destroyed  the  effects  will  cease ;  happiness  follows  the  way  of  holiness.
II.  Enemies  are  subdued.  "  He  hath  cast  out  (lit.  cleared  quite  away)  thine
enemy."  This  is  a  type  of  the  destruction  of  antichrist,  the  casting  out  of  the
prince  of  this  world  (Matt.  xii.  31),  and  the  overthrow  of  all  opposition.  Delivered
from  all  enemies,  God's  people  will  serve  him  without  fear,  in  holiness  and  right-
eousness all  their  days  (Luke  i.  74,  75).  III.  God  is  enthroned  in  their  midst.
"  Even  the  Lord  is  in  the  midst  of  thee."  God  seemed  to  desert  them  for  a  time,
but  now  returns  to  a  purified  temple.  As  King  of  Israel  he  sits  enthroned  in  mercy
to  receive  the  homage  of  a  grateful  nation.  He  dwells  in  the  Church,  and  will  be
with  his  people  to  the  end  of  time.  1.  To  deliver  them  from  evil.  "Thou  shalt
not  see  evil  any  more."  2.  To  strengthen  their  hearts.  They  will  neither  be  weary
nor  faint  in  God's  service.  Saving  health  will  be  imparted,  timidity  shall  be  over-
come, and  men  will  admire  their  courage.    3.  To  rejoice  over  them  with  sacred  joy.


CHAP.    III.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZEPHANIAH.


557


"  He  will  rejoice  over  thee  with  joy."  With  a  bridegroom's  joy  will  God  "  rejoice
in  Jerusalem,  and  joy  in  his  people  "  (Isa.  lxv.  19  ;  lxii.  5).  But  man's  love  is  only
a  faint  shadow  of  God's  love.  Love  in  twofold  aspects — in  its  silence  and  exult-
ation— represents  God's  satisfaction  and  joy  in  his  people.  He  exults  over  and
takes  pleasure  in  those  that  fear  him.  Rejoicing  now  is  only  the  first-fruits.
Those  who  weep  by  the  rivers  of  Babylon  will  sing  in  the  new  Jerusalem  :  "  Sing,
(O  daughter  of  Zion),  shout,  (0  Israel),  be  glad,  and  rejoice  with  all  thy  heart,  O
daughter  of  Jerusalem."


HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Ver.  14.  Whether  the  Church  or  the
faithful  soul — she  is  summoned  by  all
her  names — called  to  the  fullest  joy  in
God,  with  every  expression,  and  every
feeling.  Sing ;  it  is  the  inarticulate,
thrilling,  trembling  burst  of  joy  :  shout;
again  the  inarticulate,  yet  louder,  swell
of  joy  ;  a  trumpet-blast  :  and  then,  too,
deep  within ;  be  glad,  the  calm  inward
joy  of  the  soul ;  exult,  the  triumph  of
the  soul  which  cannot  contain  itself  for
joy ;  and  this,  ivith  the  whole  heart,  no
corner  of  it  not  pervaded  with  joy.  The
ground  of  this  is  the  complete  removal
of  every  evil,  and  the  full  presence  of
God  [Pusey].

Vers.  15 — 17.  Very  remarkable  is
the  use  of  the  sacred  number  three  in
these  verses.  Threefold  is  the  descrip-
tion of  their  being  freed  from  sins  :  (1)
They  shall  not  do  iniquity  ;  (2)  nor  speak
lies  ;  (3)  neither  shall  a  deceitful  tongue
be  in  their  mouth.  Threefold  their
blessedness  :  They  shall  (I)  feed  ;  (2)  lie
down ;  (3)  none  make  them  afraid.
Threefold  the  exhortation  to  joy  :  sing,
to  God  the  Father ;  shout,  to  God  the
Son  ;  be  glad  and  rejoice,  in  God  the
Holy  Ghost.    The  promise  is  threefold  :

(1)  Thou  shall  not  see  evil  any  more;

(2)  fear  thou  not ;  (3)  let  not  thine  hands


be  slack.    The  love  of  God  is  threefold  :

(1)  He  will  rejoice  over  thee  with  joy;

(2)  He  will  rest  in  his  love;  (3)  He
will  joy  over  thee  with  singing  [Pusey].

Ver.  17.  God  in  the  midst.  1.  God
near.  In  his  works,  but  specially  pre-
sent with  his  saints.  2.  God  mighty.
Mighty  to  comfort,  sustain,  and  defend.
3.  God  will  save.  He  is  willing,  bound
by  promise,  oath,  and  blood.  4.  But  is
he  thy  God  ?  Thine  by  promise,  cove-
nant, and  actual  possession.

"  How  happy,  then,  are  they  to  whom
The  Lord  our  God  is  known  ;
Whom  he,  from  all  the  world  besides,
Has  chosen  for  his  own  ! "

He  will  rejoice  over  thee.  The  satisfac-
tion here  implied  is  the  Saviour's  own
joy  arising  out  of  the  salvation  of  his
people.  First,  we  may  view  this  joy  as
the  result  of  success.  Secondly,  as  a
manifestation  of  benevolence.  Thirdly,
as  indicative  of  the  delight  and  compla-
cency with  which  he  regards  his  people.
The  Saviour's  joy  over,  and  in,  his  people
is  the  sinner's  hope.  Lastly,  the  Saviour's
joy  is  the  saint's  example.  He  was
infinitely  more  than  an  example,  and
nothing  less.  If  we  depend  upon  him,
we  must  resemble  him  \Jay\.


HOMILETIGS.

Mourning  for  the  Solemn  Assembly. — Ver.  18.

The  prophet  concludes  with  the  promise  that  all  the  dispersed — all  who  mourn
because  they  do  not  share  the  joy  of  festal  meetings  in  the  temple — shall  be
restored  to  ancient  privileges,  and  gathered  into  one  fold.  We  have  not  to  sorrow
because  deprived  of  Christian  ordinances.  Our  temples  stand,  our  Sabbaths  are  not
taken  away,  yet  there  is  reason  to  mourn  for  the  condition  of  Zion.

I.  Mourn  when  deprived  of  personal  attendance.  Domestic  affliction,  acci-
dents, and  trials  may  detain  from  its  solemnities.  Then  the  soul  is  cast  down
within  us.     God  thus  teaches  us  to  value  the  means  more  highly,  quickens  our


558  R0M1LET1G  COMMENTARY:  ZEPHANIAH.  [chap.  hi.


relish  for  the  provisions  of  his  house,  and  draws  us  nearer  to  himself.  "  When
shall  I  come  and  appear  hefore  God  1 "  (Ps.  xlii.  2).  II.  Mourn  when  neglected
by  others.  Many  entirely  forsake  the  assembling  of  themselves  together  (Heb.  x.
25).  They  do  not  see  the  utility  and  necessity  of  public  worship.  Others  are
kept  away  by  most  trifling  excuses.  In  vain  are  all  pretences  to  religion  if  the
means  of  grace  have  no  attraction.  Resolve  with  ISTehemiah  and  his  friends,  "  We
will  not  forsake  the  house  of  our  God."  III.  Mourn  when  dishonoured  by  its
attendants.  It  is  dishonoured  by  a  worldly  spirit.  Many  have  no  serious  heart
in  worship.  "  If  familiarity  does  not  breed  contempt,"  says  one,  "  it  must  always
tend  to  reduce  veneration."  "In  thy  fear  will  I  worship  towards  thy  holy  temple."
2.  It  is  dishonoured  by  inconsistent  conduct.  The  apostasies,  backslidings,  and
disgraceful  conduct  of  professors  bring  reproach  upon  the  house  and  the  people  of
God.  The  enemies  blaspheme,  the  way  of  truth  is  evil  spoken  of,  and  the
Redeemer  is  wounded  in  the  house  of  his  friends.  God's  people  bear  the  reproach,
and  grieve  at  the  dishonour  cast  upon  solemn  assemblies.  To  them,  this  "  is  a
lamentation,  and  shall  be  for  a  lamentation."  IV.  Mourn  for  its  lack  of  spiritual
prosperity.  Its  members  lack  fervour  and  power.  They  are  faithless,  unhappily
divided,  and  do  not  heartily  work  together.  Its  agencies  are  few,  and  fail  in  their
design.  Sinners  are  not  converted  to  God,  and  the  world  is  prejudiced  against
Christianity.  When  the  ways  of  Zion  mourn,  the  sons  of  Zion  are  sorrowful  also.
God  will  not  forget  their  distress,  but  gather  them  (1)  to  feasts  on  earth,  and  (2)  to
the  assembly  in  heaven.  "  Pray  for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem ;  they  shall  prosper
that  love  thee."

The  Wonderful  Restoration. — Verses  19,  20.

God  confirms  his  promise  of  restoration  by  removing  all  impediments.  The
prophecy  closes  with  the  final  reversal  of  all  which  in  this  imperfect  state  of  things
seems  turned  upside  down,  when  those  who  now  mourn  shall  be  comforted,  they
who  now  bear  reproach  and  shame  shall  have  glory,  and  those  who  now  afflict  the
people  of  God  shall  be  undone  [Pusey~\.

I.  A  restoration  glorious  in  its  character.  It  will  be  a  most  signal  day  for
Israel.  What  they  could  not  do  for  themselves  God  will  do  for  them.  1.  It  will
be  Divinely  performed.  (C  At  that  time  will  I  bring — I  gather  you — I  turn  back  "
&c.  God  manifests  his  interest  in  his  people,  and  the  greatest  difficulties  should
not  lead  us  to  doubt  the  certainty  of  the  promise.  2.  It  will  be  completely  performed
God  will  bring  home  all  banished  ones,  and  recover  all  captives,  (a)  All  infirmities
within  shall  be  healed.  Their  weakness  and  unworthiness  only  sets  forth  the  free-
ness  and  fulness  of  Divine  love.  "  Not  for  your  sakes  do  I  this,  saith  the  Lord  "
(Ezek.  xxxvi.  22).  (b)  All  dangers  without  shall  be  removed.  The  enemies  will
be  repressed  and  rooted  up,  judged  by  God,  to  prepare  for  the  restoration  of  Israel
(Isa.  lxvi.  15,  16).  Dignity  for  disgrace,  mercy  for  misery,  and  honour  for  insult.
In  every  land  where  they  have  been  reproached  shall  they  be  praised  by  the  foe.
They  will  then  be  "  high  above  all  nations  which  he  hath  made  in  praise,  and  in
name,  and  in  honour,"  &c.  (Deut.  xxvi.  19;  xxx.  3).  3.  It  will  be  visibly  per-
formed. "  Before  your  eyes,  saith  the  Lord."  However  incredible,  it  shall  be  quite
obvious  to  the  sense.  The  testimony  of  the  senses  shall  convince  you.  Believers
will  see  the  end  of  all  their  sufferings,  realize  all  their  hopes,  and  soon  partake  of
the  fulness  of  their  redemption.  II.  A  restoration  certain  in  its  accomplishment.
The  promise  is  repeated  to  make  the  assurance  greater.  One  act  of  God  makes  way
for  another.  When  he  begins  he  will  finish  his  work.  1.  Unimpeded  by  oidward
enemies.  "  I  will  undo  all  that  afflict  thee."  God  may  be  silent,  but  will  not
always  sit  still.  He  will  deal  with  all  according  to  their  deserts.  2.  Unimpeded
by  internal  weakness.  None  can  detain  them  in  bondage.  All  difficulties  will  be
easily  surmounted,     (a)  The  weak  shall  be  strengthened.     "  I  will  save  her  that


chap.  m.J


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZEPHANIAH.


559


halteth.  (b)  Tlie  outcast  shall  be  restored.  "  And  gather  her  that  was  driven  out."
(c)  The  captives  shall  be  recovered.  "  When  I  turn  back  your  captivity."  What
a  sublime  prospect  to  God's  people  !  They  shall  be  redeemed  from  oppression,
called  together  from  the  utmost  ends  of  the  earth — the  maimed  and  the  halt,  the
peasant  and  the  priest — to  be  owned,  guided,  and  fixed  in  their  kingdom.  Jew  and
Gentile,  Barbarian  and  Scythian,  shall  become  one  fold,  become  the  praise  of  the
earth,  and  the  glory  of  the  universe.  "  At  that  time"  the  Christian  Church  will  be
a  type  of  the  Church  of  the  first-born,  which  in  the  great  day  will  be  admired  and
glorified  in  Christ,  and  he  in  them.  Then  his  kingdom  will  be  established  and
perfected  in  the  new  Jerusalem.  And  the  "  redeemed  out  of  every  tribe  and  tongue
and  people  and  nation  "  shall  become  kings  and  priests  to  God.


HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.


Ver.  20.  The  period  of  restoration
distinctly  prominent  by  pointed  refer-
ence. The  manner  also  remarkable.
"  /  will  bring  you  in."  I  will  lead  you
like  a  shepherd  going  before  his  flock,
and  gather  you  in  due  season,  like  the
shepherd  putting  his  flock  into  the  fold.
"  For  even  these  weak  and  helpless  ones,
who  limp,  and  are  burdened,  and  have
been  dispersed^  are  of  the  flock  of  the
Lord,  and  will  experience  the  faithful
tender  care  of  the  Great  Shepherd  and
Bishop  of  souls."  "  That  time  is  the
whole  time  of  the  gospel;  the  one  day
of  salvation,  in  which  all  who  shall  ever
be  gathered,  shall  be  brought  into  the
New  Jerusalem.  The  words  were  ful-
filled, when  at  our  Lord's  first  coming
the  remnant  of  the  true  Israel,  those
ordained  to  eternal  life,  were  brought  in.


It  shall  be  fulfilled  again,  when  the  ful-
ness of  the  Gentiles  shall  be  come  int
and  so  all  Israel  shall  be  saved  (Rom.
xi.  25,  26).  It  shall  most  perfectly  be
fulfilled  at  the  end,  when  there  shall  be
no  going  out  of  those  once  brought  in,
and  those  who  have  gathered  others  into
the  Church  shall  be  a  name  and  a  praise
among  all  people  of  the  earth  "  [Pusey],
Your  captivity,  lit.  captivities  of  dif-
ferent ages  and  countries  in  Jewish  and
gospel  history.  "  All  personal  and  social
captivities  will  be  turned  back  like  a
stream.  '  Turn  our  captivity,  0  Lord,  as
the  rivers  of  the  south '  (Ps.  exxvi.  5)  ;
they  will  all  flow  into  the  Church  of
Christ.  (See  Isa.  ii.  2 :  Mic.  iv.  1).
*  All  nations  shall  flow  into  it ' n
[Wordsworth].


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  III.


Ver.  1.  Polluted.  Sinful  corruption
is  a  poison  so  subtle,  that  it  pierces  into
all  the  powers  of  the  soul ;  so  con-
tagious, that  it  infects  all  the  actions  ;  so
obstinate,  that  only  omnipotent  grace
can  heal  it  [Dr.  Bates],

Ver.  2.  Instruction.  The  end  of
learning  is  to  know  God,  and  out  of  that
knowledge  to  love  and  imitate  him.
"  That  it  may  please  thee  to  give  to  all
thy  people  increase  of  grace  to  hear
meekly  thy  word,  to  receive  it  with  pure
affection,  and  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  the
Spirit"  [Litany],  Near  to  her  God.
The  essence  of  all  wickedness  is  for-
saking God  [Nichols],

Ver.  3.  Avarice  is  insatiable,  and  is
always  pushing  on  for  more  [L} Estrange].


"  Fancy,  and  pride,  seek  things  at  vast  expense,
"Which  relish  not  to  reason,  nor  to  sense."

[Pope.]

Ver.  4.  Treacherous.  "  There  is  no
love  among  Christians,"  cries  the  man
destitute  of  true  charity.  "  Zeal  has
vanished,"  exclaims  the  idle  talker.
"  0  for  more  consistency  !  "  groans  out
the  hypocrite.  "We  want  more  vital
godliness,"  protests  the  false  pretender.
As  in  the  old  legend,  the  wolf  preached
against  sheep-stealing,  so  very  many
hunt  down  those  sins  in  others  which
they  gladly  shelter  in  themselves
[Spurgeon].

Ver.  5.  Just.  If  there  be  one  truth
that  speaks  throughout  the  Bible  like  the
voice  of  God,  and  resounds  with  all  the


560


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  gWHANIAH,


[chap.  in.


grandeur  of  the  Divine  intonation,  it  is
the  truth  that  God  does  not  look  with
an  equal  eye  upon  the  evil  and  the  good,
that  He  is  a  discriminator  of  character,
a  lover  of  that  which  is  right,  and  a
hater  of  that  which  is  wrong  [H.  W.
Beecher].

Vers.  6,  7.  The  desolation  is  com-
plete, within  as  well  as  without ;  ruin
itself  is  hardly  so  desolate  as  the  empty
habitations  and  forsaken  streets,  once
full  of  life,  where

"  The  echoes  and  the  empty  tread
Would  sound  like  voices  from  the  dead."

[Pusey.]

Ver.  8.  The  terrors  of  the  Lord  are
great,  but  they  do  not  exercise  supreme
sway  in  a  human  heart,  and  lead  all  its
affections  whithersoever  they  will.  His
anger  is  not  a  ruling,  leading,  drawing
power.  It  is  mighty,  but  not  to  save
[W.  Amot}.

Yers.  9  and  13.  Language.  Speech  is
the  perfect  expression  of  the  senses.
Words  are  but  the  representations  of
the  disintegrated  body  of  man  [O&en].


Christ  became  the  one  language  of  the
whole  world  [Jerome].  Deceitful  tongue
(ver.  13).  They  employ  words  but  to
disguise  their  thoughts  [  Voltaire].

Vers.  14,  15.  Sing.  Thy  words  have
darted  hope  into  my  soul,  and  comfort
dawns  upon  me  [Southern].

**  Joy  is  our  duty,  glory,  health,
The  sunshine  of  the  soul ;
Our  best  encomium  on  the  Power
Who  sweetly  plans  the  whole  "  [  Young],

Vers.  18 — 20.  So  with  this  scene  of
quiet  pastoral  felicity  the  poem  closes  ;
and  Zephaniah,  whose  earlier  words
seemed  to  bespeak  a  veritable  "  son  of
thunder,"  proves  himself  to  be  a  true
"  son  of  consolation,"  even  as  the  judg-
ment he  was  sent  to  denounce  proves  to
be  an  act  of  sovereign  and  Divine  mercy.
Harsh  and  severe  in  husk,  in  outward
seeming,  its  heart  is  "  made  of  tenderness."
It  is  like  one  of  those  fairy  nuts  in
which,  when  they  could  be  broken,
there  were  found  lustrous  gems  of  price
[8.  Cox],


BOMILETIO  COMMENTARY


01


H  A  G  G  A  I.


INTRODUCTION.

The  Prophet.  The  name  Haggai  means  my  feast;  given,  according  to  Cocceius,
in  anticipation  of  the  joyous  return  from  exile.  He  was  probably  one  of  the  Jewish
exiles  who  returned  under  Zerubbabel,  the  civil  head  of  the  people,  and  Joshua  the
high  priest,  536  B.C.,  when  Cyrus  (actuated  by  the  striking  prophecies  as  to  him-
self (Isa.  xliv.  28  ;  xlv.  1),  granted  them  their  liberty,  and  furnished  them  with
the  necessaries  for  restoring  the  bempln  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  23  :  Ezra  i.  1  ;  ii  2)
[Fausset].  All  we  know  of  his  personal  history  is  gathered  from  his  book  (ch.  i.
1  ;  ii.  1,  10,  '20  :  cf.  Ezra  v.  1  ;  vi.  14).  The  traditions  of  Jewish  writers  seem  to
have  no  evidence  to  support  them.

The  Time.  He  is  the  tenth  in  order  of  the  twelve  minor  prophets,  and  the  first
of  the  three  who  prophesied  after  the  Captivity.  He  was  preceded  by  Zechariah
by  about  two  months,  and  by  Zephaniah  100  years.  "  His  book  itself  vouches  for
the  fact  that  he  prophesied  in  the  reign  of  Darius  Hystaspis,  who  ascended  the
Persian  throne  B.C.  521.  Having  been  interrupted  in  building  the  temple  by  an
interdict,  which  the  Samaritans  obtained  from  Smerdis  the  usurper,  the  Jews
became  in  some  measure  indifferent  to  the  work ;  and  when  Darius  came  to  the
throne,  an  event  which  must  have  deprived  the  prohibition  of  all  authority,
iustead  of  vigorously  recommencing  their  labours,  the  more  influential  persons
among  them  pretended  that,  as  the  prophecy  of  the  70  years  applied  to  the  temple
as  well  as  to  the  captivity  in  Babvlon,  and  they  were  only  yet  in  the  68th  year,
the  proper  time  for  rebuilding  it  had  not  arrived,  and  gave  their  whole  attention  to
the  erection  of  splendid  mansions  for  themselves  "  [Henderson].

The  Book.    Consists  of  five  addresses,  which  were  delivered  at  successive  periods

within  the  short  space  of  three  months.     They  are  very  brief,  and  supposed  to  be

only  a  summary  or  epitome  of  the  original  discourses.     "  The  Jiist  discourse  (chap.

i.  1 — 11),  is  one  of  reproof,  expostulation,  and  warning,  being  designed  to  arouse

the  people  from  their  religious  apathy,  and,  in  especial,  from  their  indifference  to

the  condition  of  the  temple,  which  was  then  lying  desolate.     The  second  discourse

(i.  12 — 15),  after  a  relation  of  the  beneficial  results  of  the  first,  holds  out  to  them,

in  their  returning  obedience,  the  promise  of  God's  returning  favour  and  aid  in  their

9fi


562  INTRODUCTION.


work.  The  third  discourse  (ch.  ii.  1 — 9),  evoked  by  the  despondency  that  had
begun  to  affect  some  of  the  people  on  account  of  the  outward  inferiority  of  the
present  temple,  predicts  for  it  a  glory  far  transcending  that  of  its  predecessor,  since
the  treasures  of  all  nations  were  yet  to  adorn  the  Church  of  the  Messiah,  of  which
it  was  the  representative.  The  fourth  discourse  (ch.  ii.  10 — 19),  teaches  them,  from
the  principles  of  the  Ceremonial  Law,  that  no  amount  of  outward  religious  observ-
ance can  communicate  holiness,  or  secure  acceptance  with  God,  and  the  restoration
of  his  favour,  the  withdrawal  of  which  had  been  so  manifest  in  their  late  public
and  private  distress.  The  fifth  discourse  assures  the  struggling  community  of  their
preservation  in  the  midst  of  commotions  which  should  destroy  other  nations,
promising  to  its  faithful  rulers,  represented  by  Zerubbabel,  the  special  protection  of
their  Covenant  God  "  [Lange].

The  Style.  Lacks  the  poetical  qualities  of  the  earlier  prophecies,  but  is  marked
with  passages  of  great  vivacity  and  power,  "to  which,  among  other  characteristics,
the  frequent  use  of  the  interrogation  largely  contributes  (e.  g.  in  chaps,  i.  4,  9  j
ii.  3,  12,  13,  19).  In  addition  to  these  more  obvious  characteristics,  we  can  discern
both  rhetorical  and  grammatical  peculiarities  natural  to  the  declining  period  of  the
Hebrew  language  and  literature."  The  style  of  Haggai  is  consonant  with  his  mes-
sages :  pathetic  in  exhortation,  vehement  in  reproofs,  elevated  in  contemplating  the
glorious  future.  The  repetition  of  the  same  phrases  (e.  g.  saith  the  Lord,  or,  the
Lord  of  hosts  (ch.  i.  2,  5,  7),  and  thrice  in  one  verse  (ch.  ii.  4) ;  so  "  the  spirit 8
thrice  in  ch.  i.  14)  gives  a  simple  earnestness  to  his  style,  calculated  to  awaken  the
solemn  attention  of  the  people,  and  to  arouse  them  from  apathy.  Chaldaisms
occur  (ch.  ii.  3,  6,  16),  as  might  have  been  expected  in  a  writer  who  was  so  long  in
Chaldea.  Parts  are  purely  prose  history ;  the  rest  is  somewhat  rhythmical  and
observant  of  poetic  parallelism  [Fausset].  There  are  references  to  Haggai  in  Old
and  New  Testament  (Ezra  v.  1  ;  vi.  14  :  and  Heb.  xii.  20  :  cf.  Hag.  ii.  7,  8,  22).

The  Purpose  of  the  book  is  to  exhort  to  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple,  but  the
predictions  relate  to  the  Church  of  God  in  all  ages,  and  should  evoke  and  perpetuate
the  spirit  of  obedience  and  love  to  Divine  ordinances.  To  revive  the  drooping  spirits
of  all  engaged  in  the  work  of  God,  a  future  transcendent  glory  is  revealed  which
shall  crown  their  labours  and  embrace  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth.


OHAP.  I.]  HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY :  HAGGAL  563


CHAPTER  L

Critical  Notes.]  By]  Lit.  in  the  hand  of  Haggai,  the  prophet,  merely  a  conscious  medium ;
God  the  real  speaker  (cf.  Acts  vii.  35  :  Gal.  iii.  19).  Governor]  Pechah,  akin  to  the  Turkish  Pasha,
one  who  rules  a  less  country  than  a  Satrap.  2.  This]  Not  my  people,  but  reproachfully,  this  people,
as  in  acts  disowning  him,  and  so  deserving  to  be  disowned  by  him  [Pusey].  Come]  i.  e.  to  build.
Two  out  of  seventy  predicted  years  of  captivity  unexpired :  this  a  plea  for  delay  (cf.  Henderson).  3.]
A  repetition,  to  give  greater  prominence  to  the  antithesis.  4.]  God  meets  them  with  a  question,  and
appeals  to  the  conscience.  You]  Yourselves ;  the  shameful  contrast  between  them  and  Jehovah.
Cieled]  Heb.  to  cover,  wainscot,  or  overlay  with  boards,  "  so  that  what  is  predicated  of  the  houses  is
not  to  be  confined  to  the  ceiling,  but  must  be  extended  to  the  walls  which  were  thus  covered,  at
once  for  comfort  and  ornament "  [Henderson].  5.  Consider]  Lit.  set  your  heart  upon  ;  i.  e.  consider
your  conduct  and  lay  it  to  heart  ;  a  frequent  formula  with  Haggai  (cf.  ver.  7 ;  ch.  ii.  15,  18).  6.]
The  meaning  of  these  clauses  is,  not  that  the  small  harvest  was  not  sufficient  to  feed  and  clothe  the
people,  but  that  even  in  their  use  of  the  little  that  had  been  reaped,  the  blessing  of  God  was  wanting,
as  evident  not  only  from  the  words  themselves,  but  placed  beyond  doubt  by  ver.  9  [Keil].  Holes]
A  torn  bag  was  proverbial  for  money  spent  without  profit  (cf.  Isa.  lv.  2  :  Jer.  ii.  13  :  Zech.  viii.  10).
Necessities  were  dear,  and  a  day's  wage  to  purchase  them,  as  if  put  into  a  bag  with  holes.  8.]  The
summons  repeated.  They  were  not  required  to  buy,  but  simply  to  give  their  labour,  and  bring
timber  from  the  mountainous  country  where  trees  grew.  Cyrus  granted  cedars  from  Lebanon  for  the
building  of  the  temple  (Ezra  iii.  7 ;  vi.  3,  4).  Pleasure]  God  displeased  when  it  was  in  ruins.
Glorified]  Be  propitious  to  suppliants,  and  so  receive  the  honour  due  to  me  (1  Kings  viii.  30).  9.
Looked]  Lit.  Ye  turned  towards  much,  inspecting  frequently  the  growing  crops  (Exod.  xvi.  10).
Blow]  I  dissipated,  blighted  with  my  breath,  the  little  gathered  into  barns.  Because]  Most
emphatic.  Run]  Indicating  the  eagerness  with  which  they  pursued  their  own  affairs  and  sought  for
self-indulgence.  10.]  The  curse  further  depicted,  with  an  evident  play  upon  the  punishment  with
which  transgressors  are  threatened  in  the  law  (Lev.  xxvi.  19,  20  :  Deut.  xi.  17  ;  xxviii.  23,  24)
[Keil],  11.  I]  The  first  cause  :  heaven  and  earth  (ver.  10),  the  visiole  and  second  causes.
Drought]  Affecting  man  and  beast,  through  vegetation.  •'  The  word  is  carefully  chosen,  to  express
the  idea  of  the  lex  talionis.  Because  the  Jews  left  the  house  of  God  chdrebh,  they  were  punished
with  cJtbrebh  "  [Kiel].  All]  Comprehending  the  cultivation  of  the  soil  and  labour  for  the  necessi-
ties of  life.  12 — 15]  The  result  of  reproof.  Obey]  i.  e.  To  lay  to  heart,  so  as  to  obey  what  was
heard.  Fear]  The  first-fruit  of  hearing  ;  the  second  given  ver.  14.  13]  The  penitence  of  the
people  with  their  rulers,  met  with  the  promise  of  Divine  aid.  Messenger]  (cf.  Mai.  ii.  7  :  Gal  iv.
14).  Message]  *,  e.  invested  with  his  authority  and  commission.  14.  Stirred]  To  awaken  the  spirit
of  a  man  is  to  make  him  willing  and  glad  to  carry  out  his  resolutions  (cf.  1  Chron.  v.  26  :  2  Chron.
xxi.  16  :  Ezra  i.  1 — 5).  God  gave  them  energy  and  perseverance  in  the  work.  Did]  Thus,  filled
with  joyfulness,  courage,  and  strength,  they  began  the  work  on  the  twenty-fourth  day  of  the  sixth
month,  in  the  second  year  of  King  Darius  (ver.  15) ;  that  is  to  say,  twenty-three  days  after  Haggai
had  first  addressed  his  challenge  to  them.  The  interval  had  been  spent  in  deliberation  and  counsel,
and  in  preparations  for  carrying  out  the  work  [Keil].

HOMILETICS.
The  Call  to  Duty. — Verses  1,  2.

The  prophet  addresses  the  people  through  their  rulers,  and  seeks  to  rouse  them  to
their  work.  The  first  day,  the  day  of  the  new  moon  and  a  time  of  festal  sacrifice,
was  an  appropriate  time.  On  such  a  day  they  must  have  been  conscious  of  the
ruins  of  the  temple,  and  the  work  they  had  to  do.  In  season  and  out  of  season
God  calls  to  duty.

I.  A  call  through  an  inspired  messenger.  The  prophet  was  invested  with  a
Divine  commission,  and  spoke  with  Divine  authority.  The  voice  was  human,  but
the  "  word  "  was  from  Jehovah.  He  entrusts  ministers  with  His  words  and  works,
and  they  should  dispense  them,  as  faithful  stewards,  to  his  people.  This  is  a
motive,  an  encouragement,  and  a  help  to  perform  his  will.  II.  A  call  to  all
people.     The  people  were  only  few,  a  remnant,  but  none  must  excuse  (vers.  12  and


664  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  HAOGAL  [chap,  l


14).  1.  To  the  prince.  "  Unto  Zerubbabel  the  son  of  Shealtiel."  The  prince  of
royal  blood,  the  governor  of  the  land,  was  not  to  be  exempt.  2.  To  the  priest.
"  And  to  Joshua  the  son  of  Josedech,  the  high  priest."  The  heads  in  civil  and
religious  authority,  rulers  in  Church  and  State,  were  jointly  responsible  for  the
negligence  of  the  people.  Great  and  good  men  must  be  stirred  up  when  they  grow
remiss.  Men  in  high  position  have  greater  opportunities  of  knowing,  and  should
set  a  better  example  in  doing,  God's  will.  No  institution  must  be  set  aside,  and  no
social  elevation  must  excuse  from  duty.  3.  To  the  people.  The  few  are  addressed
through  their  officials.  All  have  equal  share  and  equal  responsibility.  Duty  is
the  cry  to  all.  Duty  only  is  truth,  and  there  is  no  true  religion  but  in  its  accom-
plishment. This  alone  is  the  end  of  the  highest  life,  and  the  truest  happiness  is
derived  from  the  consciousness  of  its  fulfilment.  Duty  performed,  says  George
Herbert,  "gives  us  music  at  midnight."  "  The  word  duty  seems  to  me,"  says  one,
"the  biggest  word  in  the  world,  and  is  the  uppermost  in  all  my  serious  doings."
This  call  to  duty  is  loud,  continual,  and  urgent.  "  Whatsoever  he  saith  to  you,
do  it."

The  Guilty  Excuses  for  Delay  in  Duty. —  Verses  2 — 4.

The  people  are  charged  with  neglect  in  their  work,  bereft  of  every  excuse  to
justify  their  negligence,  and  refuted  in  their  pretences  by  their  own  sinful  conduct.
They  did  not  question  the  call,  nor  deny  the  obligation  to  duty,  but  were  criminal
in  delaying  it.

I.    They  were   actuated    by   selfishness.      They   dwelt    in    ceiled    houses,
adorned  them  with  comforts  and  luxuries,  while  the  temple  was  in  ruins.     They
were  more  concerned  for  themselves   than   for  the  cause  of    God.     They  were
not  poor  in  means,  but  in  spirit.     Self-love  will  hinder  all  effort  to  repair  and
build  the  house  of  God.     It  is  fatal  to  spiritual  interests.     "  Woe  to  you  who  join
house  to  house,  and  field  to  field,  and  regard  not  the  work  of  the  Lord."     II.  They
were  hindered  through  fear.     They  might  urge  that  their  relation  with  Persia
was  not  favourable,  and  that  the  edict  to  cease  labour,  were  reasons  for  inaction.
But  this  was  a  more  pretext.     They  had  made  no  effort  to  discover  the  mind  of  the
legitimate  king,  Darius  Hystaspis.     Their  neglect  was  not  the  opposition  to  zealous
patriots  and  ardent  worshippers,  but  the  selfish  indifference  of  an  unfaithful  people.
The  intrigues  of  the  enemies,  and  cowardice,  determined  them  from  serious  effort.
They  grew  fainthearted  through  difficulty  (Ezra  iii.  11 — 13;  iv.  4).     "Woe  unto
him  that  is  faint-hearted,"  says  the  son  of  Sirach.     No  blessings  equal  a  stout  heart
in  the  service  of  God.     Cherish  the  spirit  of  Nehemiah,  "  The  God  of  heaven,  he
will  prosper  us;  therefore  we,   his  servants,  will  arise  and  build."     III.  They
delayed  in  presumption.     "  This  people  say,  The  time  is  not  come."     Ingenious
in  excuses,  they  declared  that  interruptions  proved  that  the  proper  time  to  build
had  not  arrived.     "  God  hath  interposed  many  difficulties  to  punish  our  rash  haste  "
[Calvin],  why  then  work  till  the  full  period  is  expired?     Many,  like  the  Jews,  do
not  say,  Never,  but  not  yet.     Conscience  will  not  let  them  say,  We  will  never  be
religious  and  work  for  God ;  but  they  procrastinate — put  off  till  to-morrow  what
should  be  done  to  day  (2  Cor.  vi.  1,  2),  and  thus  leave  the  great  work  of  life  un-
done.    The  time  is  always  come  to  him  who  wishes  to  do  right.     In  his  providence
and  by  his  prophets,  God  calls  now.     The  present  is  the  opportunity  to  respond,
undertake,  and  finish  the  work  which  God  has  given  us  to  do.     Should  worldlings
exert  themselves  for  pleasure  and  self-indulgence,  and  the  servants  of  God  stand
back  amid  the  ruins  of  the  temple,  and  the  loss  of  immortal  souls  1     "  Surely  I  will
not  come  into  the  tabernacle  of  my  house,  nor  go  up  into  my  bed ;  I  will  not  give
sleep  to  mine  eyes,  or  slumber  to  mine  eyelids,  until  I  find  out  a  place  for  the  Lord,
a  habitation  for  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob  "  (Ps.  cxxxii  3 — 5  :  2  Sam.  vii.  2.)


chap.  I.]  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HAQQAI.  665


A  Missionary  Sermon. — Verse  4.

The  captivity  of  Babylon  had  passed  away.  The  Jews  were  now  called  to  re-
build the  second  temple,  and  restore  the  worship  of  God.  Adversaries  watched
them,  and  tried  to  cause  their  work  to  cease  for  a  time.  The  prophets  Haggai  and
Zechariah  were  raised  up  to  urge  them  to  begin  afresh.  This  state  of  things  existed
in  other  periods  of  the  world.  To  excite  you  to  zeal  and  greater  diligence  in  the
cause  of  God,  look  at  the  words  in  the  following  aspects —

I.  As  representing  a  depression  in  the  cause  of  God.  "  The  house  of  God  lieth
waste."  There  is  a  painful  imperfection  in  the  work  of  God  in  the  present  day.  What
are  the  scenes  in  lands  where  Christianity  isprofessed?  In  our  own  land  the  cause  of
God  is  depressed.  Much  that  is  opposed  to  purity  and  happiness  abounds.  In  other
countries  which  bear  the  name  of  Christendom,  in  the  continent  of  Europe,  we
behold  the  strong-holds  of  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air — mystic  Babylon,
having  in  her  hand  the  cup  full  of  abominations.  Over  the  vast  portions  of  the
East  reigns  the  vile  impostor  in  barbarism  and  sensuality.  Beyond  these  are  the
regions  of  heathenism.  The  light  is  only  just  gathering  which  is  to  dissipate  the
darkness,  and  change  the  world  into  brightness  and  beauty.  Are  we  not  compelled
to  say,  "  the  temple  of  God  lieth  waste  "  %  II.  As  describing  a  pursuit  of  temporal
gratification  on  the  part  of  those  confessedly  attached  to  the  cause  of  God.
All  neglect  exertions  which  God  justly  demands.  Some  think  the  cause  is
impolitic,  others  that  it  is  unjust.  Generally,  it  is  often  a  lamentation  that  large
portions  of  wealth,  talent,  and  influence  in  the  world  are  not  devoted  to  God.
More  particularly,  is  there  sufficient  exercise  of  talent  and  opportunity  %  Do  not
the  principles  of  selfishness  prevent  us  from  making  sacrifices  which  ought  to  be
made?  Erom  the  period  of  the  Eeformation,  little  has  been  done  to  purify  the
Church  and  advance  its  interests.  The  spirit  of  missions  has  to  Christianize  the
Church,  before  the  Church  can  Christianize  the  world.  The  time  must  come  when
wealth,  splendour,  talents,  and  influence  must  dedicate  their  most  hallowed  powers
to  God.  Individual  exertion  is  still  very  imperfect  in  the  great  cause.  Let  each
consider  how  much  of  his  time,  natural  gifts,  and  property  have  been  given  to  pro-
mote the  interests  of  his  fellow-men.  It  will  be  little  indeed,  while  an  immense
portion  of  each  has  been  given  to  the  world.  Contrast  our  state  with  the  votaries
of  false  religion,  Mahommedanism,  and  heathenism.  Think  of  almost  incredible
sums  devoted  to  degrading  superstitions.  Think  of  Whitfield  and  others,  whose
memory  we  cherish ;  emulate  their  zeal  and  catch  their'spirit.  III.  As  challenging
the  employment  of  our  various  talents,  and  urging  the  claims  of  God.  1.  Con-
sider the  nature  of  those  obligations  under  which  God  has  placed  you,  and  regard
the  services  which  you  are  called  to  render.  2.  Consider  the  peculiar  nature  of
the  gospel  which  you  have  embraced.  3.  Consider  that  while  there  is  not  energy
in  the  cause  of  God,  there  is  an  awful  amount  of  misery  resting  upon  your  fellow-
men.  4.  Consider  the  prospect  of  success.  God  has  promised  that  every  enemy
shall  be  overcome — that  the  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  shall  be  established  upon
the  tops  of  the  mountains — that  he  will  cause  peace  and  righteousness  to  prevail  in
all  the  earth,  and  that  the  world  shall  be  given  to  Christ,  and  filled  with  the  glory
and  power  of  his  grace  [James  Parsons].

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  1.     Joshua,  the  high  priest,  was  Together  they  are  types  of  him,  the  true

a  type  of  Christ.     1.  In  his  name,  which  King  and  true  Priest,  Christ  Jesus,  who

signifieth  a  Saviour.      2.    In  his  office  by  the   Eesurrection   raised    again   the

of  high  priesthood.     3.  In  his  partner-  true  Temple,  his  body,  after  it  had  been

agency  with  Zerubbabel,  in  bringing  the  destroyed  [Pusey].

people  home  to  their  country  [Trapp].  Ver.    2.     "This  people,"  instead  of


566  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HAGOAL  [CHAP.  L


"My  people."     The  loss  of  God's  con  you  have  positive  command, in  anticipa-

fidence.     1.  Its  occasions.     2.  Its  con-  tion   of    plainer   providence   or   better

sequences.      3.    Its    retrieval    [Lange],  days —

"  This  people  say."  Words  then  have  "  The  primal  duties  shine  aloft,  like  stars."
their  weight ;  neither  are  men's  tongues  [  Wordsworth.']
their  own ;  but  there  is  a  Lord  over  Vers.  2 — 4.  There  is  a  time  for
them  (Ps.  xii.  4),  that  will  call  them  to  everything  with  men  ;  but  they  should
a  strict  account  of  all  waste  words  consider —  1.  "Who  it  is  that  claims
(Matt.  xii.  36),  and  hard  speeches  their  first  and  most  devoted  service.
(Jude  15).  He  that  weighs  his  words  2.  The  means  and  methods  of  serving
before  he  utters  them,  shall  prevent  an  him  best  [Lange].  Men  are  very  in-
after-reckoning  for  them  [Trapp].  genious  when  they  wish  to  hide  their
The  time  is  not  come.  1.  An  indica-  delinquencies  [Calvin].  Many  have
tion  of  the  wrong  spirit.  2.  A  misin-  plenty  of  money  when  they  build
terpretation  of  Divine  providence.  3.  A  houses  for  themselves,  but  great  scarcity
manifestation  of  disobedience.  4.  An  of  it  when  it  is  wanted  for  churches,
expectation  of  times  without  difficulty,  schools,  or  anything  to  promote  God's
Never  lay  by  present  duty,  for  which  glory  [Cramer],

HOMILETICS.
Human  Thoughtlessness. — Verse  5.

Having  reproved  their  sinful  negligence,  the  prophet  urges  them  to  a  serious  con-
sideration of  their  ways.  Why  should  the  earth  be  deprived  of  produce  and  their
labour  of  profit  through  their  ingratitude  and  folly  t  From  the  results  of  their
conduct  they  may  discern  the  principles  of  moral  government,  and  the  proofs  of  their
guilt.

I.  Men  should  seriously  consider  their  ways.  Solemnly  and  prayerfully  lay
them  to  heart.  Are  they  reasonable  ?  Nature  is  governed  by  force,  and  brutes
driven  with  the  lash,  but  men  should  act  under  the  influence  of  thought  and  reason,
in  gratitude  to  God, — and  a  feeling  of  responsibility.  To  be  the  slave  of  habit,  or  to
be  under  the  dominion  of  lust,  is  most  unreasonable.  Are  they  safe  ?  If  opposed
to  God's  word  they  are  sinful  and  dangerous.  "  There  is  a  way  that  seemeth  right
unto  a  man  :  but  the  end  thereof  are  the  ways  of  death."  Will  they  end  well  1
Every  action  tends  to  good  or  evil.  Thoughts,  words,  and  deeds  are  the  germs  of
future  harvest.  "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  II.  Men
do  not  seriously  consider  their  ways.  Thoughtlessness  is  common  in  spiritual
affairs, —  some  occasionally,  and  others  never,  consider.  Indifference,  prejudice,  and
habit  operate  upon  the  mind.  The  greatest  difficulty  is  to  make  men  think.
Thoughtlessness  in  spiritual  affairs  is  inconsistent.  Men  think  intensely  and  act
eagerly  in  business.  When  self-interests  are  at  stake  they  are  considerate  enough  ;
but  in  most  important  concerns  careless  and  guilty.  "  My  people  doth  not  consider."
III.  God  urges  men  to  consider  their  ways.  God's  servants  call  continually  upon
them  to  reflect  upon  their  character,  condition,  and  doom.  God's  providence  warns
them  of  their  danger.  They  have  been  chastised  time  after  time,  to  rouse  them  to
consideration  and  repentance.  Sorrows  and  griefs,  disappointments  and  embittered
cups,  have  brought  no  change.  Once  more  God  calls.  Consider  now  before  it  be
too  late  to  consider.  Neglect,  want  of  thought,  will  be  attended  with  consequences
as  fearful  as  open  rebellion.  "  Son,  do  nothing  without  counsel,  and  when  thou
hast  done  it  thou  wilt  not  repent  "  (Ecclus.  xxxii.  1 9).

"  Evil  is  wrought  by  want  of  thought
As  well  as  want  of  heart"  [.Hoof].


ohap.  L]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  BJGOJ1.  567


Dub  Consideration  op  our  Wats  should  Teach  us  the  "Will,  and  urge  us

to  the  WorKj  op  God. —  Verses  6 — 8.

The  admonition  of  ver.  5  is  repeated  (ver.  7),  both  as  betokening  greater  urgency,
and  also  for  the  purpose  of  reinforcing  the  •argument  of  vers.  5,  6,  by  showing  to
what  course  a  conscientious  review  of  their  conduct  should  determine  them.  They
should  be  impelled,  as  is  next  shown,  to  make  immediate  preparations  for  the
complete  restoration  of  the  temple  [Lange].

I.  Consideration  of  our  ways  should  teach  us  the  will  of  God.  Lack  of  con-
sideration led  to  disobedience.  When  the  Jews  therefore  did  not  hearken  to  the
word  of  God,  they  lost  his  favour  and  providential  care,  which  secure  fruitful
seasons  and  social  enjoyment.  They  were  under  the  visible  curse  of  the  law
(Deut.  xxviii.).  God's  will  was  read — 1.  In  fields  ivithout  produce.  "  Ye  have
sown  much,  and  bring  in  little."  God  disappoints  our  expectations  from  the
creature  that  we  may  fix  them  on  him.  2.  In  dally  necessities  without  enjoyment.
"  Ye  eat,  but  have  not  enough,"  &c.  If  men  would  seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God,
they  would  secure  the  secondary  things  of  life  (Matt.  vi.  33).  3.  In  labour  without
remuneration.  Wages  earned  were  spent  without  profit.  They  laid  up  treasures
for  themselves  and  lost  them.  Nothing  will  prosper  if  we  neglect  known  duty.
"The  events  of  life  are  the  hieroglyphics  in  which  God  records  his  feelings  towards
us,"  says  Moore.  He  speaks  in  the  failure  of  the  crops,  and  the  loss  of  the  mer-
chandise. He  diminishes  the  customers  of  the  tradesman,  and  scatters  the  wealth
of  the  rich,  to  correct  in  sin  and  restore  to  duty.  II.  Consideration  of  our  ways
should  urge  us  to  the  work  of  God.  "  Go  up  to  the  mountain,"  &c.  (ver.  8).
They  were  to  rouse  themselves,  collect  materials,  and  begin  to  build.  When  we
seriously  consider  our  life  and  are  convinced  of  our  sins,  we  shall  amend  our  ways,
engage  with  diligence  in  needful  and  neglected  duty.  "  Amendment  of  life  is  the
best  repentance ;  neither  is  there  any  wiser  way  to  break  olf  our  sins  than  to  prac-
tise the  contrary  duties  "  [Luther].  In  neglecting  God's  commands  we  dishonour
him  ;  but  earnest  obedience  will  secure  his  blessing.  "  I  will  take  pleasure  in  it,
and  I  will  be  glorified,  saith  the  Lord."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  5.   Consider.    The  religion  of  the  sin   lasted,    so    long    the    punishment.

Bible  is  a  reasonable  service.     We  are  The  visitation  itself  was  twofold ;   im-

not  forced  like  a  machine  into  insensible  poverished  harvests,  so  as  to  supply  less

workings    and    results.     We    are   here  sustenance ;    and  various   indisposition

taught  that  while  God  is  the  author  of  of  the  frame,  so  that  what  would,  by

all  good,  and  our  progress  in  goodness  is  God's   appointment   in  nature,    satisfy,

from    him,  yet  he    does  not  carry   us  gladden,    warm,    failed   of   its   effect "

along  in  the  way  everlasting,  but  enables  [Pusey].

us  to  walk.     He  works  in  us,  but  it  is  The  bag  with  holes,  contrasted  with

that  he  may  mil  and  do.      We  are  not  "  bags  that  wax  not  old  "  (Luke  xii.  33).

only   impressed,   but  employed.     Thus  We  provide  for  a  large  store  in  future,

all  true  religion  arises  from  consideration  by  a  wise  and  generous  use  of  what  we

[Jay].  have   in    the    present.       "  Lord,    thou

Ver.  6.    Withholding  from  God's  cause  knowest    where    I    have    laid    up   my

tends  to  poverty.     Willingly  devote   a  treasure,"  cried  Paulinus,  when  he  heard

portion  of  your  possessions  to  his  glory,  that  the  Goths  had   sacked  Nola  and

there  will  be  sweetness  in  the  remainder  taken  all  he  had.

which   the  worldling  can  never  enjoy  Ver.  8.     1.   The  work  to  do.     Go  up,

(Prov.  xiii.  25).     He  will  "  bless  us  in  bring  wood,  and  build  the  house.     A

basket  and  in  store."     "  As  long  as  the  division  of  labour  useful  and  successful.


S68  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HAOOAI.  [chap.  X.


God  a  spiritual  temple  to  build.     All  service  to  him.    (2)  In  the  manifestations

may  help.     2.   The  motive  to  perform  it.  of  his  grace  to  man.     "  God  will   not

"  I  will  take  pleasure  in  it."     God  would  come  to  bless  us  as  an  uninvited  guest,

accept  them  and  their  labours.     3.   The  His  favour  will  be  displayed  towards  us

result.     "I  will  be  glorified,  saith  the  only  when   we  have   prepared   him    a

Lord."     (1)  God  is  glorified  in  man's  temple  in  our  hearts "  [Lange].

HOMILETICS.
Haggai  i.  8.

Important  events  in  the  spiritual  world  have  been  symbolized  by  things  in  the
natural.     In  this  event —

I.  Observe  an  important  operation  directed.  The  nature  of  the
operation  is,  "  the  building  of  a  house,"  i.  e.  the  house  or  temple  of  God  upon
Mount  Zion.  The  spiritual  import  of  it,  with  which  we  have  to  do,  is  the  form-
ation and  gradual  perfecting,  through  successive  ages,  of  the  Church  of  God,  which  is
compared  to  a  temple.  Observe  its  attendant  difficulties.  Numerous  adversaries
around  them.  Obstacles  from  the  Jews  themselves,  scanty  in  number,  and  feeble
in  resource.  Some  depressed  and  fearful,  others  indifferent  and  apathetic.  These
facts  set  forth  the  circumstances  attendant  on  the  erection  of  the  temple  of  Divine
grace  under  the  gospel  of  Christ.  That  work  progresses,  amid  difficulties  and
opposition,  in  numerous  forms ;  heathen  imposture,  infidel  impiety,  antichristian
superstition,  worldly  contempt,  neglect  and  indolence  of  the  Church.  II.  Observe
the  agency  with  which  this  operation  is  conducted.  1:  An  instrumental  and
secondary  agency.  The  devoted  labours  of  converted  men,  under  the  impulse
of  renovated  nature,  influencing  others  ;  their  success  being  as  the  bringing  of
materials  by  which  the  temple  is  built.  2.  Distinct  mention  is  made  of  Divine
agency.  This  agency  is  connected  with  the  instrumentality  of  men  ;  directs  them
in  their  counsels,  gives  efficiency  and  success  to  their  movements.  III.  Observe
the  result,  in  which  this  operation,  so  conducted,  shall  terminate.  1.  The
operation  shall  be  triumphantly  completed.  The  second  temple  was  finished  in  a
brief  space  of  time.  2.  Being  triumphantly  completed,  it  will  eminently  redound  to
the  glory  of  God.  "  I  will  be  glorified  in  it,  saith  the  Lord."  This  completion
will  be  haileoVwith  rapture  by  holy  created  beings.  When  the  second  temple  was
finished,  they  brought  out  the  headstone  "  with  shoutings,  crying,  grace,"  &c.  Ezra
says  that  they  kept  the  dedication  with  songs,  and  that  they  were  delighted  in  the
achievement  of  their  work.  We  may  anticipate  the  same  delight  in  the  victories
of  truth  and  the  subjugation  of  the  universe  to  Christ.  Redeemed  men  will  rejoice,
and  angels  in  heaven  will  partake  in  their  pleasure.  Application  from  the  whole.
1.  What  encouragement  here  for  those  already  labouring  for  God.  2.  What  rebuke
here  to  those  who  profess  the  religion  of  Jesus,  yet  are  indolent  and  inactive.  3.
What  warning  here  to  those  avowedly  hostile  to  God  and  his  truth  [Preacher's
Treasury].

Duty  Vindicated  by  Divine  Government. —  Verses  5 — 11.

I.  The  Divine  government  recognizes  the  selfish  motives  which  actuate  men.
First,  the  necessity  of  moral  reform  in  the  world.  Secondly,  the  necessity  of
attending  more  to  the  spiritual  than  the  formal  in  the  Church.  Thirdly,  the  pos-
sibility of  solemn  disclosure  at  the  last  day.  II.  The  Divine  government  avenges
selfish  motives  which  actuate  men.  "  Ye  looked  for  much,  and,  lo,  it  came  to  little."
1.  God  neutralizes  the  fruits  of  their  labour.  "I  will  blow  upon  it."  2.  God
renders  inefficient  the  materials  of  their  labour.  Learn — (1)  That  God  directs  the
universe.     "  I  called."     (2)  That  God  directs  the  universe  to  mind.     «'  Why  1 "


ohap.  i.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY     HAGGA1.  669


(3)  That  God  directs  the  universe  to  meet  the  state  of  every  heart.     "  Because  n
(ver.  9).     "  Therefore"  (ver.  10).     [Adapted  from  The  Homilist.]

The  Double  Curse. — Verses  9 — 11.

To  stir  them  up,  the  evidences  of  God's  anger  are  again  put  before  them.  All
sought  their  own  things,  and  neglected  the  things  of  God.  He  therefore  disap-
pointed their  hopes  of  harvest,  and  withheld  his  blessing  from  that  which  they
gathered  into  the  barn.  "  God  punishes  men  in  both  ways,  both  by  withdrawing
his  blessing,  so  that  the  earth  is  parched,  and  the  heaven  gives  no  rain  ;  and  also,
even  when  there  is  a  good  supply  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  by  preventing  their
satisfying,  so  that  there  is  no  real  enjoyment  of  them  "  [Calvin].  I.  Little  was
reaped  when  much  was  expected.  "  Ye  looked  for  much,"  &c.  Their  toil  had
been  great.  They  sowed  much  (ver.  6),  and  kept  much  ground  under  tillage.
They  expected  much,  enough  and  plenty  to  spare.  But  the  greater  their  hopes,  the
more  bitter  their  disappointment.  II.  Little  was  reaped,  and  that  little  withered
away.  "  When  ye  brought  it  home,"  &c.  Stroke  follows  stroke,  and  men  are
punished  in  their  homes  and  possessions.  Portions,  little  or  great,  are  easily  scattered
by  the  blast  of  the  Almighty.  III.  The  cause  of  this  double  curse.  1.  The
cause  should  be  sought.  "The  curse  causeless  does  not  come."  Afflictions  do  not
spring  from  the  ground,  nor  trouble  rise  from  the  dust.  God  appeals  to  the
awakened  conscience.  "  Why  ? "  2.  The  cause  may  be  found.  "  Because  of
mine  house  that  is  waste,"  &c.  (a)  In  duty  neglected.  Absorbed  in  material
interests,  they  had  no  time  for  God's  work.  Men  seek  their  own,  more  than  the
things  of  Jesus  Christ  (Phil.  ii.  21).  (b)  In  Divine  retribution  for  duty  neglected.
"  Therefore  the  heaven  over  you  is  stayed,"  &c.  God  rules  the  world  in  the
interests  of  humanity.  Heaven  and  earth  are  at  his  command,  to  bless  or  curse.
Spiritual  indifference  results  in  temporal  distress,  and  ruin  falls  upon  an  unfaithful
people.  "  If  ye  will  not  hear,  and  if  ye  will  not  lay  it  to  heart,  to  give  glory  unto
my  name,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  I  will  even  send  a  curse  upon  you,  and  I  will
curse  your  blessings  :  yea,  I  have  cursed  them  already,  because  ye  do  not  lay  it  to
heart."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.   9.     Mine  house  waste,  ye   run         Ver.  10.  He  "calls  for"  famine,  &c,

every   man,    &c.     Apathy   in   spiritual  as  instruments  of  his  wrath  (2  Kings  viii.

matters,  zeal  in  selfish  (Pro v.  i.  16:  cf.  1  :  Ps.  cv.  16).     The  contrast  is  striking

Ps.cxix.  132).     Concern  for  the  spiritual  between  the  prompt  obedience  of  these

wants  of  men.     1.  The  situation  of  man-  material  agencies  and  the  slothful  dis-

kind,  in  a  moral  and  religious  view,  is  obedience   of    living    man,    his    people

such  as  ought  to  awaken  the  unaffected  \_Fausset\.

concern   of  good   men.      2.    Men  who         House  wasted,    and   drought.      Heb.

properly  care   for  the  spiritual  state  of  chdreb  and   chorebh.      Wasted   temple

their  fellow-beings  are  rarely  to  be  found,  and  wasted  substance.     Divine  retribu-

This    was    the    case    in    the    time    of  tion  in  human  conduct,  the  correspond-

Haggai ;  Paul  (Phil.  ii.  21);  and  is  so  ence  between  the  sin  and  its  punishment.

now.     3.   Some  of  the  principal  causes  "  The  very  evils  which   men  think   to

of  this  unconcern.     1.    An  in®rdinate  escape  by  neglecting  God's  ordinances,

and  criminal  self-love.     2.  The  preval-  they  actually   bring  on  themselves    by

ence    of    unbelief.      3.     Despondency  such  unbelieving  conduct "  [Fausset],
[Dr.  Pay8ori\.


570  HOM1LETIG  COMMENTARr.-  HAGGAI,  ichap.  i.

HOMILETICS.
The  Performance  of  Neglected  Duty. — Verses  12 — 15.

The  effect  of  the  prophet's  words  upon  the  people  was  powerful  and  abiding,  and
upon  the  very  first  indication  of  a  change  in  their  disposition,  he  is  commissioned
to  tell  them  that  God's  favour  had  already  returned,  and  that  he  would  assist  them
in  their  labours.  The  work  is  then  speedily  recommenced  under  the  influence  of
that  new  zeal  with  which  Jehovah  inspires  both  leaders  and  people  [Lange\.

I.  Duty  performed  in  the  right  spirit.  It  is  a  critical  time  when  individuals
and  societies  are  warned  by  the  voice  of  God  in  his  word  and  works.  Weal  or  woe
depends  upon  submission  or  rejection.  The  Jews  returned  to  duty.  1.  In  a  spirit
of  obedience.  "  They  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord  their  God."  (a)  Universally.
"  Zerubbabel  and  Joshua,  with  all  the  remnant  of  the  people."  (b)  Sincerely.
"  According  to  the  words  of  Haggai  the  prophet."  2.  In  a  spirit  of  humility.
"  The  people  did  fear  before  the  Lord."  They  dreaded  Divine  wrath,  regarded
Divine  authority,  and  trembled  at  the  word  of  God.  When  the  word  expounds  the
providence  of  God,  men  often  discern  their  sins,  and  serve  the  Lord  with  fear.  II.
Duty  performed  by  Divine  help.  When  God  saw  the  penitence  of  the  people,  even
before  they  began  to  work,  he  passes  from  reproof  to  tenderness  and  encouragement.
1.  By  the  teaching  of  the  prophet.  "  Then  spake  Haggai,  the  Lord's  messenger,  in
the  Lord's  message."  The  direction  of  the  prophet  was  cleai,  constant,  and
authoritative.  2.  By  the  stirring  up  of  the  people.  "The  Lord  stirred  up"  the
spirit  of  prince,  priest,  and  the  remnant  of  the  people.  Though  slothful  in  them-.
selves,  God  gave  them  strength,  alacrity,  and  joy  in  their  work.  He  strengthens  the
f  eblest  hand,  warms  the  coldest  heart,  and  imparts  every  necessary  influence  to
revive  his  work.  3.  By  the  manifestation  of  his  presence.  "I  am  with  you,  saith
the  Lord."  This  includes  all  other  blessings,  and  is  the  sure  guarantee  of  success.
Nothing  more  inspirits  men,  and  rouses  them  from  torpor,  than  promise  of  Divine
aid  and  successful  issue  of  work.  But  God's  presence  is  conditioned  to  the  Church
by  obedience  only  (Matt,  xxviii.  20).  "  What  shall  we  then  say  to  these  things  1
If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  usl"  (Rom.  viii.  31  :  2  Cor.  xii.  9).

HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Vers.  12,  13.     1.  For  the  word  to  be  decay  before  the  captivity,  they  refused

effectual,  God's  authority  must  be  seen  to  do — obey  God's  word  [Pusey].     Suc-

and  acknowledged  in  the  message  and  cessful   preachers   need   not   ascribe    to

messenger.    "  Haggai,  the  Lord's  messen-  themselves  the  merit  of  the  results  of

ger,  in  the  Lord's  message."     2.  When  their  labours.     It  is  the  voice  of  God

God  is  thus  seen  in  his  Divine  authority  which  makes  their  hearers  listen.    Whom

and  covenant  relation,  men  will  submit  God  makes  strong  for  his  service,  he  first

themselves,  and  encourage  others  to  do  subdues  to  his  fear  [Lanye\,
the  same.     Zerubbabel  and  Joshua  first,         Yer.  13.    "/  am  with  you."    Here  all

and  then  all  the  remnant  of  the  people,  former  threatening  is  recalled,  and  all

obeyed.    3.  When  we  consider  that  God  former   disobedience   forgiven    [Burck].

can  bless  beyond  all  probability  —  for  All  the  needs  and  longings  of  the  crea-

here,  by  one  sermon,  all  the  people  set  ture  are  summed  up  in  those  two  words,

about    a    long-neglected    duty,    in   the  I  with  you  [Pusey],     1.   Consider  who

midst   of  many    difficulties — it   should  speaks — a  Divine  Being.    No  other  could

encourage  God's  servants  to  go  on  with  promise  and  fulfil.    This  specially  needed

their  work   [cf.  Hutchesonj.     This  was  to  give  assurance,  joy,  and  success.     2.

the  beginning  of  a  conversion.     In  this  Consider  to  whom   God  speaks,     Jews,

one  thing  they  began  to  do  what,  all  weak,  harassed,  and  dispirited.     Then  to

along  in  their  history,  and  most  in  their  all  represented   by   them.      Preachers,


CHAP.   I.J


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY.    HAGGAL


571


teachers,  and  all  Christian  workers.
How  should  this  promise  enspirit  and
strengthen !  "  God's  promises  are  a
defence  against  man's  threatenings "
[Masori].

Vers.  13,  14.  The  presence  of  God
in  oui  labours  :  1.  The  conditions  on
which  it  maybe  secured;  2.  Its  influence
upon  our  souls ;  3.  Its  consequences  in
our  achievements  [Lange].

Ver.  15.  The  time  is  diligently  noted,
to  teach  us  to  take  good  note  of  the
moments,  wherein  matters  of  moment
have  been,  by  God's  help,  begun,  con-
tinued, and   perfected   in   the    Church.


This  will  be  of  singular  use  to  increase
our  faith  and  affect  our  hearts  [Trapp].
Let  those  who  have  fallen  into  spiritual
torpor,  but  are  now  awakened,  endeavour
as  far  as  possible  to  make  up  for  time
past,  by  redoubled  diligence  for  what-
ever time  may  be  left.  The  longer  we
have  loitered,  the  more  let  us  henceforth
redeem  the  time  in  self-devoting  labours
for  the  Lord  [Fausset],

"  'Tis  greatly  wise  to  talk  with  our  past  hours,
And  ask  them  what  report  they  bore  to  heaven,
And  how  they  might  have  borne  more  welcome
news"  [Young].


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  I.


Ver.  1.  In  its  very  first  day,  when
the  grief  for  the  barren  years  was  yet
fresh,  Haggai  was  stirred  to  exhort  them
to  consider  their  ways ;  a  pattern  for
Christian  preachers  to  bring  home  to
people's  souls  the  meaning  of  God's
judgments.  God  directs  the  very  day  to
be  noted  in  which  he  called  the  people
anew  to  build  his  temple,  both  to  show
the  readiness  of  their  obedience,  and  a
precedent  to  us  to  keep  in  memory  days
and  seasons  in  which  he  stirs  our  souls
to  build  more  diligently  his  spiritual
temple  in  our  souls  [Pusey.]

Vers.  2 — 4.  The  disingenuousness  of
their  plea  is  self-evident,  and  is  assumed
in  the  following  discourse,  which  is  in-
tended to  awaken  in  them  a  sense  of
their  ingratitude  to  God.  It  is  repre-
sented to  them  most  impressively,  with
an  allusion  to  the  very  language  of  their
pretext,  that  while  they  held  their  own
wants,  and  even  their  luxuries,  to  be
matters  of  pressing  moment,  they  thought
any  time  suitable  to  attend  to  the  claims
of  their  God  ;  that  while  their  own
houses  had  been  regained,  there  was  yet
no  habitation  for  the  God  of  Israel ;  that
while  their  wealthy  members  were  using
their  superfluous  means  to  adorn  and
beautify  their  dwellings,  God's  dwelling-
place  still  lay  desolate,  appealing  in  vain
to  their  piety  and  patriotism,  which  had
been  overborne  by  selfishness  and  supine-
ness.  The  allusion,  moreover,  could  not
fail  to  expose  the  insincerity  of  their
exouses.     If  some  of  them  had  now  the


command  of  such  resources  as  enabled
them  to  live  in  princely  splendour,  they
might  surely  have  reserved  a  portion  for
the  requirements  of  the  temple,  when
the  work  of  building  it  should  be  re-
sumed, if  that  work  had  been  giving
them  the  least  concern  [Lange],

Ver.  6.  Holes.  Money  is  seen  in  the
pierced  bag  when  it  is  cast  in,  but  when  it
is  lost  it  is  not  seen.  They  then  who  look
how  much  they  give,  but  do  not  weigh
how  much  they  gain  wrongly,  cast  their
rewards  into  a  pierced  bag  [St.  Gregory].

Vers.  5  and  7.      Consider.

11  Come,  then,  sad  thought,  and  let  us  meditate,
While  meditate  we  may.     We  have  now
But  a  small  portion  of  what  men  call  time,
To  hold  communion  "  [H.  K.  White].

Vers.  9 — 11.  Looked.  We  are  too
apt  to  misjudge  the  dispensations  of
Providence  when  we  wish  them  with
our  own  wishes  [Skelton].  The  good
things  of  Providence  may  be  considered
as  having  this  inscription,  li  Accipe,
redde,  cave,"  that  is,  "  accept  us  as  from
God,  return  us  in  gratitude  to  him,  and
take  care  not  to  abuse  us  "  [  Wilson].

Vers.  8,  12  —  15.  Obeyed.  The
longer  the  soul  hath  neglected  duty,  the
more  ado  there  is  to  get  it  taken  up ;
partly  through  shame,  the  soul  having
played  the  truant,  knows  not  how  to
look  God  in  the  face,  and  partly  from
the  difficulty  of  the  work,  being  double
to  what  another  finds  that  walks  in  the
exercise  of  his  grace.  It  requires  more
time  for  him  to  tune  his  instrument  than


572  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ':  HAGGAL  [ciiap.  ii


for  another  to  play  the  lesson  \ An  old         «.T  .,.

r»«   •     l       mu       -   i       •  ^,Li        i  "  Never  anything  can  be  amiss,

AmmJ-     Those  who  give  to  God  only  When  simplenSss  and  duty  tender  it'.'

the  shadow  of  duty,  can  never  expect  [Shakespear*.]

from  him  a  real  reward  [Flavel].


CHAPTEK  n.

Critical  Notes.]  This  oracle,  delivered  nearly  a  month  after  building  had  begun,  designed  to
remove  despondency,  and  to  meet  a  new  difficulty.  3.]  The  glory  of  the  second  did  not  answer  to
that  of  the  former  temple.  Some  of  the  oldest  who  had  returned,  had  seen  the  first  building,  and
wept  at  the  contrast  (Ezra  iii.  12).  The  Jews  note  five  points  of  inferiority.  The  absence  (1)  ol
the  sacred  fire  ;  (2)  the  shekinah  ;  (3)  the  ark  and  cherubim  ;  (4)  the  Urim  and  Thummim  ;  (5)  the
spirit  of  prophecy.  Nothing]  God  makes  the  contrast  as  great  as  possible,  seems  to  share  their  feel-
ing, and  give  evidence  of  his  strong  sympathy.  4.  Yet]  whatever  your  estimate,  I  give  another.
Strong]  Fear  not,  I  am  with  you.  Work]  David's  words  to  Solomon  (1  Chr.  xxviii.  10  :  2  Chr.
xix.  11).  5.  Covenanted]  God  the  same  in  promise  to  all  generations  and  ages  (Ex.  xix.  5,  6  ;  xxiv.
10,  11).  Spirit]  to  strengthen  (cf.  i.  14  :  Zech.  xiv.  6),  hence  continual  enjoyment  of  God's  presence
and  aid.  6.  Once]  Yet  only  a  little  while  ;  lit.  one  little,  i.  e.  brief  space  ;  till  a  series  of  movements  is
to  begin.  Shake]  by  great  moral  and  physical  revolutions,  preparatory  to  the  establishment  of
Christ's  kingdom  (Matt.  xxiv.  29  :  Heb.  xii.  26 — 28).  7.]  Having  figuratively  set  forth  great
political  changes,  the  prediction  is  repeated,  and  the  arrival  of  the  blessings  desired,  announced.
Desire]  Some  apply  these  words  to  the  Church,  but  the  majority  to  Christ.  This  is  not  the  place
for  a  discussion  [of.  Henderson  and  Wordsworth],  Glory]  Not  outward  furniture,  but  the  presence
of  God  himself  (cf.  Zech.  ii.  5  :  Ezek.  xliii.  4,  5:  Ex.  xl.  34,  35  :  1  Kings  viii.  11).  8.  Mine]
Hence  they  should  be  free  from  anxiety  in  poverty,  and  cease  to  mourn  the  absence  from  the  temple
of  these  things.  9.  Greater]  Not  in  architectural  splendour,  but  in  the  presence  of  Jehovah  the
Messiah,  and  in  peace  between  man  and  man,  and  God  and  man — temporal  peace  under  Persian
rule,  and  spiritual  in  Jesus  Christ.  10.]  This  prophecy  two  months  later  than  those  preceding  in
this  chapter.  11 — 13.]  To  convince  them  of  their  unworthiness,  they  must  learn  from  their  legal
advisers  two  things — no  holy  objects  could  communicate  holiness  to  things  or  persons  who  touched
them  (Lev.  vi.  20) ;  but  whatever  an  unclean  person  touched  was  unclean  (Num.  xix.  22).  14.  So]
'  The  nation  in  its  attitude  toward  the  Lord  resembles,  on  the  one  hand,  a  man  who  carries  holy
flesh  in  the  lappet  of  his  garment ;  and,  on  the  other,  a  man  who  has  become  unclean  through  touch-
ing a  corpse  "  [Keil],  Unclean]  By  their  habits  of  sin,  all  their  worship,  character,  and  lives  were
impure.  15.  Consider]  Review  of  their  condition  from  the  present  specific  time  to  the  period  before
resumption  of  work — "  to  connect  their  distress,  then  suffered,  with  their  unfaithfulness."  They  had
ten  measures  when  they  expected  twenty  ;  twenty  vessels  instead  of  fifty  from  the  press-vat  ;  they
were  smitten  with  two  blights  of  corn  which  were  predicted  as  chastisements  for  disobedience  (Deut
xxviii.  27  :  Amos  iv.  9) ;  yet  none  turned  to  God.  18.]  Resumed  from  ver.  15,  after  vers.  16,  17,
that  the  blessing  in  ver.  19  may  stand  in  the  more  marked  contrast  with  the  curse  in  vers.  16,  17
[Fausset].  19.]  After  an  appeal  to  lay  to  heart  past  times,  in  which  blessings  had  been  withheld,
they  must  now  fix  their  eyes  upon  the  time  now  beginning.  "  it  is  winter  (ver.  10) ;  the  seed,  only
just  committed  to  the  earth,  was  not  yet  in  the  barn.  No  fresh  leaves  on  the  fruit-trees— vine,  fig
tree,  pomegranate,  and  olive — but  ye  have  begun  again  to  build ;  from  this  day  forward  I  will  hasten
to  bless  you  "  [Wordsworth],  20—23.]  Renewal  of  promise  to  «ave  in  convulsions.  21.  Shake]
Points  back  to  vers.  6  and  7.  22.  Throne]  Government  which  binda  nations  together  (Dan.  vii.  27)!
War-chariots,  horses,  and  riders,  military  power,  and  support  of  Kingdoms,  to  be  overthrown  by  one
another's  sword.  "  One  hostile  kingdom  will  destroy  another,  and  in  the  last  conflict  the  heathen
hosts  will  annihilate  one  another"  (cf.  Ezek.  xxxviii.  21  :  Zech.  xiv.  13)  [Keil].  23.]  At  that  time
Jehovah  would  take  Zerubbabel,  invest  him  wlcn.  power  and  authority  as  head  over  all,  as  kings
depute  viceroys  by  giving  them  their  signet  (Esth.  iii.  10  ;  viii.  2).  Some  think,  as  seals  and  rings
were  objects  of  great  value  and  regard,  ?o  Zerubbabel  would  be  dear,  and  held  close,  to  God — an
object  of  incessant  care  and  delight  (Jer.  xxii.  24  :  Cant.  viii.  6).  In  a  theocratic  sense  he  restored
the  reign  of  David.  What  was  promised  to  hi  in  was  equally  promised  to  all  faithful  rulers  of  Judau.
Tuey  would  be  guardians  of  the  people,  and  should  stand  secure  amid  the  fall  of  earthly  kingdoms.
This  prosperity  and  triumph  of  old  prefigured  the  Redeemer's  reign,  whom  God  would  exalt  on  the
throne  of  David  (Matt.  i.  12  :  Luke  iii.  2),  crown  as  king  of  the  earth  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  27),  and  endow
with  a  kingdom  which  will  never  be  destroyed  (Dan.  iL  44  :  Heb.  xil  28  :  1  Cor.  xv.  24).


chap.  11.J  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  HAGGAL  573

HOMILETICS.
Methods  in  Divine  Teaching.  —  Verses  1,  2.

Rebukes,  warnings,  and  encouragements  had  due  influence  upon  the  people.  But
new  difficulties  now  threaten  and  a  fresh  message  is  required.  Hence  "  came  the
word  of  the  Lord  "  again,  in  matter  and  method  adapted  to  guide  and  comfort.

I.  God  speaks  to  his  people  in  different  periods  of  time.  "  In  the  seventh
month,  in  the  one  and  twentieth  day  of  the  month."  In  vers.  1,  10,  18,  and  chap.
i.  1,  15,  how  specific  the  mention  of  time  !  no  age  is  left  without  its  prophet  and
Divine  utterance.  II.  God  speaks  to  his  people  in  different  circumstances  of
life.  The  Jews  had  passed  through  circumstances  of  indolence  and  zeal.  Now
they  begin  to  despond  on  account  of  an  inferior  temple  and  failing  harvests  (vers.
9 — 11).  But  when  God  stirs  up  a  people  he  will  help  and  comfort  them  in  their
work.  "  Set  the  wheels  a  going  and  God  will  oil  them,"  says  an  old  writer.
III.  God  speaks  to  his  people  in  words  adapted  to  their  needs.  We  have
warnings  and  comfort,  "consider"  and  "  fear  not,"  "  go  up  and  build  "  (chap.  i.  8).
Revelations  are  given  "in  sundry  times  and  in  divers  manners,"  in  parts  and  methods
according  to  our  requirements.  Germs  lor  present  use  and  future  growth.  "  What-
soever is  Divine  revelation  ought  to  overrule  all  our  opinion-*,  prejudices,  and
interests,  and  hath  a  right  to  be  received  with  full  assent,"  says  Locke.  "  What  I
do  thou  knowest  not  now  ;  but  thou  shalt  know  hereafter."

Causes  of  Despondency  in  the  Work  op  God.— F^'se  3.

The  inferiority  of  the  second  temple  to  that  of  Solomon  was  a  ground  of  dis-
couragement in  work.  The  old  people  affected  the  young,  and  though  disappoint-
ment was  not  openly  expressed,  yet  it  suspended  their  labours.

I.  Many  disaffected  discouraged  others  in  the  work.  Some  old  men  were
still  alive,  who  thought  more  of  former  performances  and  attainments  than  present
duty  and  hopeful  signs.  They  discouraged  others,  exaggerated  the  evils  and
reflected  upon  the  work  of  God.  Murmurers  and  complainers  belong  to  every  age.
"  If  the  times  are  bad  what  are  we  doing  to  mend  them  'I "  asks  one.  "  Say  not  thou,
What  is  the  cause  that  the  former  days  were  better  than  these]  for  thou  dost  not
inquire  wisely  concerning  this."  II.  All  esteemed  the  work  too  lightly.  "  Is  it
not  in  your  eyes,  in  comparison  of  it,  as  nothing."  They  thought  more  of  outward
glory  than  spiritual  blessings.  We  are  too  apt  to  judge  by  outward  appearance,
and  forget  God's  estimate  of  labour.  Though  we  are  not  building  a  material  we
are  a  spiritual  temple.  If  not  honoured  with  the  position  of  some,  we  have
responsibilities  and  duties.  Never  say  that  you  do  nothing,  if  not  surrounded  with
outward  pomp,  and  patronized  by  the  rich  and  the  noble.  Let  us  "  serve  our  own
generation  by  the  will  of  God."

Kemedies  for  Despondency  in  the  Work  op  God. — Verses  4,  5.

Notwithstanding  alleged  grounds  of  fainting,  God  exhorts  them  all  to  be
courageous,  to  go  on  with  their  work,  and  gives  reasons  for  the  exhortation.

I.  God's  covenant  with  them  is  unchangeable.  "  According  to  the  word  that  I
covenanted  with  you,  when  ye  came  out  of  E^ypt."  Mercies  to  God's  people  are
ensured  by  a  pledge  which  is  eternal  and  immutable.  Dark  may  be  the  days  and
difficult  the  work  of  his  people  ;  but  they  are  as  much  the  object  of  his  care  as  when
the  covenant  was  first  ratified.  They  may  sin  and  be  punished  for  their  sin  ;  but  his
attitude  towards  them  is  not  the  result  of  caprice  nor  change.  Unfaithfulness  will
banish  God  from  us,  but  return  to  obedience  will  restore  his  favour  and  help.  "  My
covenant  will  I  not  break,   nor  alter  the  thing  that  is  gone  out  of  my  lips."


574


EOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  HAQGJI.


[ohap.  n.


II.  God's  presence  with  them  is  guaranteed.  "  For  I  am  with  you,  saith  the
Lord  of  hosts."  God  continually  declares  that  we  have  no  ground  for  fear.  We
need  to  have  these  assurances  repeated.  If  hosts  are  against  us,  and  the  Lord  of
hosts  is  with  us,  this  should  strengthen  us.  His  presence  will  compensate  for
past  distress,  aid  in  present  duty,  and  be  all-sufficient  for  the  untried  future.  "  The
promises  of  the  gospel  are  sealed  to  us  by  the  word  of  the  Father,  the  blood  of  the
Son,  and  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  "  [Mason].  III.  God's  Spirit  with  them  abides
for  ever.  "So  my  Spirit  remaineth  among  you  :  fear  ye  not."  God's  Spirit  was
with  the  leaders,  inspiring  the  prophets  and  sanctifying  the  priests  ;  with  the  people
for  the  work  of  the  sanctuary  (Ex.  xxxi.  1),  and  the  confirmation  of  the  weak.
The  Spirit  to  stir  up  ail  to  duty  (Ezra  v.  1  :  Zech.  iv.  6),  and  remove  every
hindrance  to  its  performance.  The  Spirit  still  abides  in  the  Church,  helping  to
realize  the  Divine  purpose  in  Christ.  "  Thou  gavest  also  thy  good  Spirit  to  instruct
them."  This  should  furnish,  1.  an  antidote  to  fear,  2.  a  ground  of  confidence,  and
3.  a  motive  to  renewed  consecration.  "  Be  strong  and  work  :  for  I  am  with  you"
(ver.  4).

HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.


Ver.  2.  The  better  to  hearten  them,
the  prophet  is  sent  again,  with  a  like
message  as  before.  Learn — 1.  That  there
are  none  so  forward  for  God  and  his
work  but  may  stand  in  need  of  continual
quickening.  2.  That  continual  preach-
ing makes  men  continue  in  well-doing
\Trapp].  3.  That  all  those  who  work
for  the  Lord  will  be  strengthened  and
encouraged  in  their  difficulties.  Speak
now,  &c.  "  The  encouragements  here  are
sent  to  the  same  persons  to  whom  the
reproofs  in  the  foregoing  chapter  are
directed;  for  those  that  are  wounded  by
the  convictions  of  the  word  shall  be
healed  and  bound  up  by  its  consolations."

Ver.  3.  Important  questions.  What
answers  to  be  given  %  Some  were  left
who  had  seen  the  first  house  in  its  glory,
about  sixty-eight  years  since.  The  con-
trast in  the  times  and  in  the  buildings
no  ground  for  despair.  "  Long  life  is  a
blessing  to  the  servant  of  God,  if  at  its
close  he  is  permitted  to  see  the  revival
of  God's  kingdom  and  increasing  signs
of  its  coming  glory  "  [Lange].  In  your
eyes,  that  is,  in  your,  thoughts  :  for  God
taketh  notice  of  the  inward  workings  of
the  heart  [Trapp].  Whatever  they
thought  of  the  work,  God's  estimate  was
very  different.  Judge  not  by  appear-
ances.

Vers.  4,  5.  Lessons  of  life.  Dwell
much  upon  past  history,  and  learn —
I.  That  what  checks  and  distress  may
be  experienced  are  due  to  unfaithfulness.


2.  That  God  never  failed  to  fulfil  his
covenant,  whether  he  chastened  or
blessed.  3.  That  in  the  adversities  of
the  present  true  hope  lies  in  the  presence
and  power  of  the  Spirit  [cf.  Lange],

Ver.  4.  Be  strong.  Here  he  exhorteth
all  ranks,  first  to  good  affection,  Be
strong,  or  of  a  good  courage  ;  secondly,
to  good  action,  Work,  or  be  doing ;  for
affection  without  action  is  like  Eachel,
beautiful  but  barren.  Here  then,  that
we  falter  not,  betray  not  the  cause  of
God,  nor  come  under  his  heavy  dis-
pleasure, who  equally  hateth  the  timorous
and  the  treacherous,  1.  Be  armed  with
true  faith.  Faith  quelleth  and  killeth
distrustful  fear.  2.  Get  the  heart
fraught  with  the  true  fear  of  God ;  for
as  one  fire,  so  one  fear,  drives  out
another  (Matt.  x.  28  :  1  Pet.  iii.  13,  14).

3.  Get  and  keep  a  clearing,  cheering
conscience ;  for  that  feareth  no  colours,
as  we  see  in  St.  Paul,  Athanasius,
Luther,  Latimer,  and  other  holy  martyrs
and  confessors.  4.  Think  on  God's
presence  as  here,  Be  strong  and  be  doing,
for  I  am  with  you.  Lastly,  look  up,  as
St.  Stephen  did,  to  the  recompense  of
reward ;  steal  a  look  from  glory,  as  Moses
(Heb.  xi.  26) ;  help  yourselves  over  the
difficulty  of  suffering  with  Christ  by
considering  the  happiness  of  reigning
together  [Trapp].

Ver.  5.  The  word  that  I  covenanted.
Deliverance  in  Egypt  should  remind  of
God's    power   and    presence   with    hia


OHAP.  II.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  UAGGAI.  575

Church.  Encouragement  is  strengthened     petition  and  renewed  emphasis  of  the
by  reference  to  the  covenant.     Former     word.

appearances    are   types    of  future.       1.         n     n  , ,     ,„        .  ,       ,   „  _.     „

r>       -^~~~~„    ™    ,    „„«,«     t~     „nn4-T.nA;nt-  "Our  God  is  still  as  kind,  and  all  His  sifts
Providences    may   seem    to    contradict        Like  wondrous,  like  unlimited,  like  flir,
promises.     2.  Promises  never  contradict        As  when  the  wind  first  blew.    Man  is  to  God

providences.      Hence   the   continual  re-  That  he  hath  ever  been"  [Bailey],

HOMILETICS.

The  Establishment  op  God's  Kingdom. —  Verses  6 — 8.

The  Jews  are  encouraged  to  proceed  with  the  work  by  the  assurance  that  Jehovah
would,  as  the  governor  among  the  nations,  in  a  brief  space,  exert  his  almighty
power  in  effecting  a  great  revolution  in  the  state  of  the  kingdoms  of  this  world,
preparatory  to  the  establishment  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah.  This  mighty
change  is  first  described  in  the  usual  figurative  language  of  prophecy,  as  a  convulsion
of  the  physical  universe,  and  then  literally  as  a  convulsion  of  all  nations.  The
passage  has  long  been  regarded  as  one  of  the  principal  prophecies  of  the  Redeemer's
advent  [Henderson].

I.  Revolutions  prepare  for  its  establishment.  "  I  will  shake  the  heavens  and
the  earth,"  &c.  1.  Physical  preparations.  The  kingdoms  of  the  world  are  but
the  scaffolding  for  the  spiritual  kingdom,  and  will  be  overturned  when  they  have
accomplished  their  end.  All  earthly  mansions  are  moveable  and  transitory,  sub-
servient to  "  the  kingdom  that  cannot  be  moved  "  (Heb.  xii.  26 — 28).  Recognize —
(1)  Divine  agency  in  the  world — "/will."  (2)  Divine  order — "  will  shake.'"  Dis-
turbance before  repose,  war  before  peace,  is  a  law  in  the  operations  of  nature,  the
government  of  nations  and  the  history  of  the  Christian  Church.  In  the  wars  of
Alexander  the  Great  and  his  four  successors,  in  the  conquests  of  Rome,  the  world
was  shaken  and  reduced  to  order.  2.  Moral  preparations.  "  I  will  shake  all
nations,  and  the  Desire  of  all  nations  shall  come."  It  was  an  ancient  notion  that
the  gods  forsook  the  cities  that  were  taken  by  the  enemy.  Hence  the  power  of
the  gods  decayed  and  national  deities  were  destroyed  by  the  conquests  of  Roman
armies.  The  na&ions  were  thus  prepared  for  the  gospel  (cf.  Keil  and  Hengs.  in  loco).
If  men  did  not  definitely  desire  Christ,  they  were  not  satisfied  with  painful  rites
and  bloody  sacrifices.  They  were  unsettled,  and  longed  for  some  one  to  satisfy
their  desires.  Bewildered  by  superstitions,  they  craved  for  Divine  light.  And  as
the  time  of  the  Redeemer's  advent  drew  near,  there  was  a  general  expectation  of  a
deliverer  in  Jewish  and  Gentile  world.  II.  All  nations  contribute  to  its  estab-
lishment. "  The  silver  is  mine,  and  the  gold  is  mine."  According  to  Josephus,
gifts  adorned  the  temple,  and  dedicatory  offerings  were  presented  in  it.  King
Artaxerxes  and  his  counsellors  bestowed  presents  upon  Ezra  (vii.  15),  and  the
help  of  Darius  Hystaspes  (Ezra  vi.  6 — 10)  maybe  regarded  as  a  pledge  of  the  fulfil-
ment of  the  promise.  The  riches  of  kingdoms  flowed  into  the  temple.  Material
wealth  will  yet  be  given  for  the  extension  and  inward  growth  of  God's  kingdom.
All  that  is  valuable  in  labour,  all  that  is  achieved  by  intellect,  all  that  is  pure  and
lofty  in  science,  art,  and  religion,  are  offerings  which  the  world  has  brought  or  will
bring  into  the  Church.  "  The  glory  and  honour  of  the  Gentiles  "  shall  be  presented
in  the  courts  of  Zion  (Rev.  xxi.  26).

The  Desire  of  all  Nations. — Verse  7.

This  refers  unquestionably  to  the  Messiah,  yet  the  title  seems  to  disagree  with
other  parts  of  Scripture  and  with  fact.  He  was  in  the  world,  and  the  world  knew
him  not — despised  and  rejected  of  men.  How  then  can  he  be  called  the  Desire  of
all  nations  %    This  character  is  justified  five  ways.    First,  by  the  general  expectation


576  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HAGGAL  LCHAP.  n.


that  prevailed  in  the  world  previously  to  his  advent.  It  is  well  known  that  there
was  a  looking  out  for  some  great  deliverer  and  benefactor  nigh  at  hand.  Testimonies
from  heathen  authors  have  been  collected,  especially  a  little  poem  of  Virgil's,  written
a  few  years  only  before  the  birth  of  Christ,  which  contains  a  prophecy  and  fore-
shadows a  personage  who  would  restore  the  peace  and  plenty  of  the  golden  reign.
The  sentiment  was  handed  down  by  tradition,  but  originally  derived  from  a  Divine
source,  the  early  and  repeated  promise  of  "him  that  should  come."  Secondly,  by
the  need  all  mankind  had  of  such  a  Saviour  as  he  would  be.  Darkness  covered
the  earth.  Men  knew  not  the  supreme  good — found  only  vanity  and  vexation  of
spirit  in  their  pursuits  and  attainments — had  no  support  in  trouble,  and  their  un-
easiness arising  from  guilt,  death,  and  futurity,  led  them  to  offer  thousands  of  rams,
rivers  of  oil,  and  to  give  their  first-born  for  their  transgressions.  No  remedy  could
be  found  to  remove  doubts  and  fears.  Though  they  had  no  revelation  of  Jesus,
who  meets  their  condition,  yet  they  ignorantly  groped  after  what  he  alone  can
impart.  He  therefore  deserves  to  be  called  the  Desire  of  all  nations,  just  as  a
physician,  able  and  willing  to  cure  all  diseases,  is  the  desire  of  all  patients.  Thirdly,
by  being  so  attractive  in  himself,  that  all  would  actually  long  after  him  if  they
knew  him.  He  has  every  excellency  in  person,  every  perfection  in  character.
Nothing  in  creation  will  afford  a  proper  image.  All  the  loveliness  of  man  and
angels  cannot  be  compared  to  his  charms.  "  He  is  altogether  lovely."  Do  we
esteem  riches  1  His  are  unsearchable.  Admire  friendship  1  He  sticketh  closer  than  a
brother.     Applaud  benevolence'?  His  love  passeth  knowledge.

"  His  worth  if  all  the  nations  knew,
Sure  the  whole  earth  would  love  him  too."

Fourthly,  by  his  having  had  admirers  in  every  country.  Wherever  believers  have
been  found,  they  have  been  distinguished  by  the  same  convictions  and  dispositions
with  regard  to  him.  Abraham  in  Canaan  rejoiced  to  see  his  day.  Job  in  the  land
of  Uz  knew  that  his  Redeemer  lived.  Wise  men  from  Persia  paid  him  homage,
and  devout  men  from  every  nation  under  heaven  joined  in  the  sacrifices  and  cere-
monies of  the  temple.  John  heard  his  praise  from  an  innumerable  multitude  out
of  all  nations  and  tongues.  Lastly,  he  is  so  named  because  in  due  time  he  will  be
prized  and  gloried  in  by  all  the  ends  of  the  earth.  To  him  shall  the  gathering  of
the  people  be.  He  is  the  salvation  prepared  for  all  people,  a  light  to  lighten  the
Gentiles.  All  kings  shall  fall  down  before  him ;  all  nations  shall  serve  him  and
call  him  blessed.  How  does  he  appear  to  me  1  Is  he  all  my  salvation,  all  my
desire  1    Will  it  complete  my  happiness  to  be  like  him  and  see  him  as  he  is  1  [Jay],

God's  Claims  and  Man's  Stewardship. — Verse  8.

In  commanding  the  erection  of  a  glorious  house  for  the  Lord  to  replace  the  one
that  had  been  destroyed,  and  which  then  lay  waste,  a  principle  is  asserted  which  is
unaffected  by  time  or  circumstances.  God's  rights  in  man  and  man's  possessions
may  be  put  among  the  things  which  change  not.

I.  God's  claim.  God  himself  makes  the  announcement.  He  is  jealous  for  his
honour  and  rights.  What  he  orders  to  be  done,  he  expects  to  be  done,  even  if  it
be  dime  alt  to  accomplish  and  involve  many  sacrifices.  1.  The  claim  is  just.  When
God  demands  the  silver  and  the  gold  to  be  devoted  to  his  service,  he  is  not  usurp-
ing authority  that  belongs  to  another.  2.  The  claim  is  absolute.  "  Mine  "  may  be
written  by  the  finger  of  God  upon  all  the  wealth  of  the  globe  (cf.  Ps.  1.  10,  11,  and
Isa  xl.,  on  God's  absolute  proprietorship).  3.  I1  he  claim  is  universal.  It  was  true
concerning  the  exiles  returned  from  long  captivity,  and  it  is  "  the  present  truth  "
concerning  the  possessions  of  all  who  are  now  in  the  land  of  the  living.  II.  Man's
stewardship.  Possessions  entrusted  to  our  keeping  or  use  involve  us  in  responsi-
bility.    Sil^r  and  gold  are  a  trust  from  God.     They  may  mean  so  much  intelligence,


ohap.  n.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HAGGAI.  577


industry,  and  self-sacrifice  on  the  part  of  their  temporary  owner — but  even  those
mental  and  moral  qualities,  which  win  silver  and  gold,  are  enjoyed  by  God's  bounty,
and  employed  by  God's  providence.  "  Thou  shalt  remember  the  Lord  thy  God  ;
for  it  is  he  that  giveth  thee  power  to  get  wealth."  1.  Our  stewardship  ought  to  b$
recognized.  We  may  ignore  accountability,  but  putting  it  out  of  mind  will  not  put
it  out  of  existence.  By  considering,  laying  to  heart,  we  shall  escape  the  wrong  and
mischief  of  forgetfulness.  2.  Our  stewardship  shoidd  be  thankfully  acknowledged.
The  inward  realization  ought  to  have  a  glad  expression.  If  the  blessing  of  the  Lord
makes  us  rich,  he  ought  to  be  blessed  for  his  munificent  gifts.  "  What  shall  I
render  unto  the  Lord  for  all  his  benefits  towards  me."  3.  Our  stewardship  should
be  faithfully  discharged.  "  It  is  required  in  stewards  that  a  man  should  be  found
faithful."  Diligent  employment  of  possessions,  of  which  silver  and  gold  may  stand
for  symbols,  is  the  condition  of  their  continuance  and  increase.  "  For  unto  every
one  that  hath  (or  uses  what  he  hath)  shall  be  given,  and  he  shall  have  abundance ;
but  from  him  that  hath  not  (or  uses  not  what  he  hath)  shall  be  taken  away  that
which  he  hath."  Because  much  silver  and  gold  may  not  be  ours  we  do  not  escape
the  levy  of  divine  law  for  God's  service.  "  For  if  there  be  first  a  willing  mind,  it
is  accepted  according  to  that  a  man  hath,"  &c.  Remember  that  the  eternal  rewards
are  given,  not  to  the  conspicuous,  famous,  or  successful  servant.  The  divine  com-
mendation of  "  well  done,"  and  the  divine  dignity  and  blessedness  are  bestowed
upon  "good  and  faithful  servants  "  [Mt.  Braithwaite].

The  Glory  of  the  Latter  House.  —  Verse  9.

The  glory  of  the  second  temple  was  not  in  its  outward  structure,  but  its  inward
furniture.  Splendid  buildings,  painted  windows,  and  stately  forms  are  surpassed
by  spiritual  blessings.     There  is  a  "  glory  that  excelleth."

I.  In  the  purity  of  its  worship.  In  the  first  house  was  worldly  splendour  ;  in
the  second,  heavenly  treasures.  In  one,  dark  shadows ;  in  the  other,  the  real  sub-
stance. There  was  the  ministration  of  the  letter,  here  of  the  Spirit.  One  temple
was  often  polluted  with  idolatry  (2  Kings  xxiii.  11,  12),  the  other  is  holy  in  its
elements  and  institutions.  Rites  and  ceremonies  gradually  retired  into  the  back-
ground ;  prayer  and  praise  took  their  place.  Thus  was  kept  alive  a  higher  and
purer  type  of  religion  than  outward  forms  and  gorgeous  ritual.  "  That  which  was
made  glorious,  had  no  glory  in  this  respect,  by  reason  of  the  glory  that  excelleth."
II.  In  the  residence  of  its  owner.  God  who  owned  the  temple  promised  to  dwell
in  it.  The  first  glory  was  covered  in  the  cloud,  the  second  veiled  in  humanity.
The  Messiah  was  "the  glory  of  his  people  Israel."  His  presence  would  be  more
than  a  substitute  for  the  distinguished  articles  wanting.  Many  eminent  persons
entered  the  temple,  but  he  was  "greater  than  the  temple."  It  exists  for  him,  and
we  must  assemble  to  meet  with  him.  Without  him,  however  splendid,  there  is  no
glory;  with  him,  however  humble,  it  becomes  "the  palace  of  the  great  King."
"The  Spirit  took  me  up,  and  brought  me  into  the  inner  court ;  and,  behold,  the
glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  house."  III.  In  the  blessedness  of  its  attendants.
"  In  this  place  will  I  give  peace."  The  Jews  had  great  trouble,  but  God's  presence
secured  peace  and  protection.  Peace  in  Christ  to  the  penitent  sinner  and  the
doubting  Christian  is  "the  glory"  of  God's  house.  Peace  with  men  first,  and
eventually  peace  on  earth.  Convulsions  in  the  natural  and  revolutions  in  the
political  world  increase  "  the  distress  of  nations  with  perplexity"  (Lu.  xxi.  25 — 27),
and  create  a  longing  desire  for  the  Prince  of  Peace.  When  he  reigns  there  shall  be
perpetual  peace.  Peace  from  God  and  based  upon  his  right  can  never  be  destroyed.
It  abounds  in  depth  and  duration.  "  In  his  days  shall  the  righteous  flourish;  and
abundance  of  peace  so  long  as  the  moon  endure th."

37


«78  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HAOOAL  [Ohap.  il


"Peace  is  the  end  of  all  things — tearless  peace;
Who  by  the  immovable  basis  of  God's  throne
Takes  her  perpetual  stand ;  and  of  herself
Prophetic,  lengthens  aye  by  aye  her  sceptre  "    [Bailey].

HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.    6.      The    Messiah's    kingdom,  with  its  possession  [Lange].

1.  Introduced  by  general  shaking.     2.  Ver.    9.      Peace.      1.    The    blessing

Ending  in  general  satisfaction.     As  the  bestowed.     2.  The  source  from  whence

first  dispensation  was  introduced  by  the  it  comes — 7,  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts,

shaking  of  the  mount,  so  the  second  by  3.  The  certainty  of  its  possession — "I

the  revolutions  of  nations.     These  com-  will  give.1'     4.  The  place  in  which  it  is

motions — the  presage  of  God's  help  and  given — In  this  house.     Every  house  of

the    fulfilment  of   his   promise.     "  The  God  is  a  place  where  God  gives  peace,

Desire  of  all  nations  shall  come."  and  every  place  of  peace  is  also  a  house

Vers.  7,8.    Notice — 1.  The  absolute  of  God  [Lange'].

dominion  over  the  world's  wealth.     2.  On  the  whole  discourse  :  The  glory  of

The  subserviency  of  this  wealth  to  the  God's  kingdom.     (1)  Its  conditions — the

promotion  of  Christ's  kingdom.     3.  The  faithfulness  of   his  people   to  all  their

confidence   this   should    beget    in    the  covenant  obligations  and   duties,   their

minds  of  God's  people.     "  Every  penny  obedience,  their  faith  and  their  courage

bears    God's   superscription   as  well   as  securing  his   favour  and  help.     (2)  Its

Caesar's"   [Henry].       The    comparative  nature — the   constant   reception   of   in-

poverty  of   the  Church  is  not  because  creasing  multitudes  of  "  Gentiles "  with

God   cannot   bestow   riches    upon   her,  their  "  treasures "  of  devotion  and  ser-

but  because  there  are  better  blessings  vice ;  and  the  abiding  presence  of  God's

than  wealth  that  are  often  incompatible  Spirit  diffusing  peace  and  joy  [Lange].

HOMILETIOS.
Duty  neglected  contaminates  Character  and  Conduct. — Verses  10 — 14.

The  people  suffering  from  scarcity  of  food  consequent  upon  the  failure  of  their
crops  had,  it  seems,  been  continuing  in  some  measure  their  regular  sacrificial  offer-
ings, though  they  had  been  neglecting  the  building  of  the  temple.  These  oblations
had  not  been  accepted,  as  they  might  have  inferred  from  the  withdrawal  of  the
divine  blessing,  the  true  cause  of  which  is  now  impressively  illustrated.  As  he
who  was  ceremonially  unclean  tainted  everything  with  which  he  came  in  contact,
so  had  they  suffering  from  God's  displeasure,  on  account  of  their  disregard  of  his
claims,  communicated  the  effects  of  that  displeasure  to  all  the  labour  of  their
hands,  which  profited  them  nothing  [Lange].  Attendance  upon  outward  ordinances
will  not  sanctify  the  character  and  render  those  acceptable  to  God  who  neglect
their  duty.

I.  This  truth  is  illustrated  by  divine  teaching.  "  Ask  now  the  priests  con-
cerning the  law,"  and  it  will  prove  two  things.  1.  That  sacred  things  cannot
communicate  holiness  to  what  they  touch.  The  flesh  of  the  sacrifice  might  hallow
"the  skirt"  in  which  it  was  carried  (Lev.  vi.  27),  but  did  not  transmit  virtue  to
meat  and  drink.  The  altar  does  not  sanctify  the  gift,  nor  the  temple  the  land.
Corn,  wine,  and  oil  are  merely  common  produce.  No  special  blessing  rests  upon
the  fruits  of  the  land,  on  account  of  its  sacredness.  2.  That  an  unclean  person
contaminates  whatever  he  touches  (Num.  xix.  22).  "  Legal  sanctity  is  not  so  readily
communicated  as  legal  impurity.  So  the  paths  to  sin  are  manifold ;  the  path  to
holiness  one,  and  that  one  of  difficult  access  "  [Grotius],  Thus  prophet  and  priest
act  in  accordance  with  their  proper  functions,  and  teach  the  same  lessons.     One


ohap.  ii.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HAGGAI.  579


expounds  the  law,  and  the  other  applies  it  (Lev.  x.  10,  11  :  cf.  Isa.  viii.  20).
II.  This  truth  is  proved  in  human  life.  "  So  is  this  people,  and  so  is  this  nation
before  me."  Here  the  two  cases  are  applied.  By  the  first  the  nation  is  not  made
holy  by  its  offerings ;  by  the  second,  by  their  disobedience,  they  pollute  what  they
offer.  1.  It  is  proved  in  Divine  worship.  "And  that  which  they  offer  there  is  un-
clean." Like  character,  like  worship.  However  splendid  the  gifts  or  beautiful
the  actions  in  themselves,  they  will  not  remove  impurity  of  life  through  neglect  of
duty.  The  possession  of  sacred  privileges  will  not  counterbalance  disobedience.
2.  It  is  proved  in  daily  life.  "  So  is  every  work  of  their  hands."  Not  only  in
their  offering,  but  also  in  their  works  are  they  unclean.  Impurity  in  heart  will  not
sanctify  in  works.  "Those  whose  devotions  are  plausible,  but  whose  conversation
is  wicked,  will  find  their  devotions  unable  to  sanctify  their  enjoyments,  and  their
wickedness  prevailing  to  pollute  them."  "  Unto  the  pure  all  things  are  pure,  but
unto  them  that  are  defiled  and  unbelieving  is  nothing  pure ;  but  even  their  mind
and  conscience  is  defiled."

God's  Relation  to  Men  determined  by  their  Conduct. — Verses  15 — 19.

The  people  are  bidden  to  review  their  condition  from  the  present  time  to  the
period  preceding  the  resumption  of  the  temple.  The  time  when  the  work  was
resumed  is  specified  here,  because  it  was  the  turning-point  of  their  fortunes.
Their  condition  before  that  event  is  recalled  for  their  contemplation,  that  it  might
connect  their  distress  then  suffered  with  their  unfaithfulness  ;  and  the  brief  period
succeeding  their  return  to  obedience  is  included,  because  they  could  not  so  soon
recover  from  their  embarrassments,  no  harvest  having  yet  intervened  [Lange].

I.  If  duty  be  neglected  men  are  punished.  If  we  repudiate  what  is  due  to
God,  we  expose  ourselves  to  danger.  Without  the  controlling  influence  of  duty
the  wisest  and  strongest  go  astray.  1.  They  are  fruitless  in  their  labour  (ver.  17).
"  I  smote  you  ...  in  all  the  labours  of  your  hands."  To  the  disease  of  the  corn
we  have  the  hail,  which  smote  the  vines.  The  grape  for  the  rich,  and  the  fig  for
the  poor,  were  smitten  by  the  judgment  of  God  (Ps.  lxxviii.  47).  2.  They  are
disappointed  in  their  hopes  (ver.  16).  The  heap  of  sheaves  when  threshed  only
yielded  half  of  what  they  expected.  The  juice  of  the  grapes  gave  not  the  usual
measure.  God's  curses  are  upon  men's  labours,  if  they  care  not  for  his  work  and
honour.  "The  Lord  shall  smite  th^e  with  .  .  .  blasting  and  with  mildew;  and
they  shall  pursue  thee  until  thou  perish."  II.  If  duty  be  performed  men  are
blessed.  As  the  consequence  of  repentance  and  obedience  the  Jews  had  a  prospec
of  rich  and  speedy  blessings.  1.  Blessed  from  the  day  of  amendment.  "  From  thi  i
day  will  I  bless  you"  (ver.  19).  God  blesses  more  readily  than  we  think.  Thj
day  of  return  to  him  is  the  day  of  rejoicing  for  us.  Temporal  blessings  shall  be
followed  by  spiritual,  and  we  shall  prove  that  "  Godliness  is  profitable  unto  all
things,  having  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come."
2.  Blessed  beyond  former  abundance.  The  vine  and  olive,  which  had  borne  little
or  nothing,  would  produce  from  that  day  more  abundantly.  The  earth  would  yield
its  increase,  and  God  would  bless  them  beyond  a!l  probability  and  degree.  Thus  do
we  learn  that  rewards  or  chastisements  come  to  man  according  to  his  conduct
towards  God.  That  natural  laws  serve  for  moral  discipline,  and  that  whoso  is  wise
will  observe  these  things.  "  If  ye  be  willing  aud  obedient,  ye  shall  eat  the  good
of  the  land"  (Isa.  i.  19  •  Zech.  viii.  9—12).

Consideration  op  Divine  Chastisements.

God's  dealings  may  be  seen  and  felt  by  all,  without  being  understood.  Hence  men
need  constantly  to  be  stirred  up  to  consider  them.  "  Now,  I  pray  you  to  consider
from  this  day."


580  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HAGGAL  [chap.  ir.


I.  Consider  the  cause  of  chastisement.  God's  anger  rested  upon  them  when  they
neglect  d  their  spiritual  interests.  We  assign  any  cause  for  sufferings  rather  than
our  sins.  "  Thine  own  wickedness  shall  correct  thee,  and  thy  backslidings  shall
reprove  thee."  II.  Consider  the  time  of  chastisement.  1.  The  past.  "From
before  a  stone  was  laid  upon  a  stone  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord"  (ver.  15).  2.  The
present.  "  From  this  day."  Think  of  the  evils  which  befell  you  before  you  set
to  work,  and  remember  the  blessings  promised  from  the  day  of  its  commencement.
A  true  understanding  of  the  past  is  often  the  best  preparation  of  the  future.
III.  Consider  the  source  of  chastisement.  "I  smote  you  with  blasting"  (ver.  17).
Men  do  not  recognize  Divine  agency  in  the  government  of  the  world.  The  Jews
were  sensible  of  their  calamities,  but  did  not  inquire  seriously  into  the  cause  of
them.  Tully  thought  that  God  had  nothing  to  do  with  rain  and  dew,  and  ordinary
occurrences  in  life.  Science  dethrones  God,  and  assigns  nature  to  inflexible  laws  or
infinite  power.  But  all  things  are  upheld  by  God's  power  (Heb.  i.  3),  and  made
subservient  to  his  purpose.  "  Fire  and  hail,  snow  and  vapour,  stormy  wind  fulfil-
ling His  word.  IV.  Consider  the  aggravations  of  chastisement.  "  Yet  ye  turned
not  to  me,  saith  the  Lord"  (ver.  17).  Affliction  will  harden  the  heart  if  God's
purpose  be  not  discovered  in  it.  Impenitence  will  be  a  ground  of  further  contro-
versy. The  more  men  revolt,  the  more  will  they  be  smitten  (Isa.  i.  5).  "The  people
turneth  not  unto  him  that  smiteth  them,  neither  do  they  seek  the  Lord  of  Hosts."

"  Though  woo'd  and  awed,
Bless'd  and  chastised,  a  flagrant  rebel  still ! "     [Br  Wardlaw],

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  15.     The  retrospect.     1.  Its  be-  the  barn  and  no  signs  of  a  crop,  much

ginning.   With  the  resumption  of  work,  less  of  safe  ingathering.     "Yet  from  this

2.  Its  direction.     "From  this  day  and  day  will  I  bless."     1.   God's  blessing  im-

upward"     (i.e.     backward).      Literally,  mediate.     "From  this  day " — as  soon  as

"from  the  not  yet  of  the  laying  .  .  .  you  return  to  me  and  my  work.     2.  God's

onwards,"  i.e.    onwards  from  the  time  blessing  certain.  JSTo  visible  sign  in  nature

when  stone  was  laid  upon  stone  at  the  — every  appearance  against  it.     But  the

temple ;    in    other     words,    when    the  promise  is  sure — "  infinitely  to  be  pre-

building   of    the   temple    was    resumed,  ferred  even  in  prospect,  to  the  world's  best

backwards  into  the  past  \Keil\.     3.   Its  things  in  possession"  [Fa-usset].    God  is

design.  To  learn  the  evils  of  disobedience,  so  sovereign  and  absolute  a  Lord  of  all

and  the  blessings  of  obedience.  things,  and  liatii  times  and  seasons,  bless-

Ver.  17.    Divine  chastisements.     1.  In  ings  and  cursings,  so  in  his  hands,  that  he

their  intention  to  bring  back    to   God.  may  undertake  to  do  things  whereof  there

2.   In  their  results,  "yet  ye  turned  not."  is  no  visible  probability  or  certainty  in

This  result  grievous  to  God,  and  sorrow  the   second   causes,   and    can    certainly

to  men.    "  Not  being  untutored  in  suffer-  perform  them  ;  therefore  doth  he  under-

ing,  I  learn  to  pity  those  in  affliction  "  take  to  bless  them,  when  second  causes

[  Virgil].  and  the  season  could  speak  no  such  thing

Yer.  19.     It  was  winter.     No  seed  in  [Hutcheson].

HOMILETICS.

The  Preservation   op   God's   People  amid   the   Overthrow   op    Empires. —

Verses  20—23.

The  same  day  in  which  God  promised  the  bounties  of  nature,  the  prophet  received
a  second  message  for  Zerubbabel,  who  was  concerned  for  the  interests  of  Zion  in
predicted  revolutions.  God  would  overturn  the  nations,  but  preserve  his  people
and  their  rulers  as  elect  and  precious  in  his  sight.


chap,  ir.]  ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  HAGGAI.  581


I.  Earthly  kingdoms  will  be  overthrown.  '  I  will  shake  the  heavens  and  the
earth  "  (cf.  vers.  6,  7).  1.  Overthrown  by  Divine  agency.  "  /  will  shake  " — "J  will
overthrow,"  and  "  I  will  destroy."  God  is  enthroned  over  all  kingdoms,  pnts  down
one,  and  exalts  another  in  his  pleasure  (Dan.  ii.  21  :  Luke  i.  52).  2.  Overthrown
by  mutual  strife.  "  Every  one  by  the  sword  of  his  brother."  Men  opposed  to  God
are  often  opposed  to  one  another.  If  national  truth  and  righteousness  do  not  con-
trol national  life,  then  we  may  expect  self-destruction,  if  not  fratricidal  war.  Mutual
destruction  is  a  feature  of  Divine  judgment  upon  wicked  nations  at  the  end  of  the
world.  "Every  man's  sword  shall  be  against  his  brother"  (Ezek.  xxxviii.  8,  9,
21:  Isa.  ix.  19).  3.  Overthrown  in  military  strength.  "  The  strength  of  the  king-
doms," that  which  supports  them  —  their  chariots  and  horsemen,  and  all  their
military  preparations.  The  kingdoms  shall  be  shaken,  thrones  upset,  and  dynasties
destroyed.  Every  people  will  be  shorn  of  its  strength,  fall,  and  cease  to  be  ;  but  the
Church  of  God  will  be  preserved,  when  unfaithful  nations  are  blotted  out  of  exist-
ence. II.  God's  people  will  be  protected.  "  In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts,
will  I  take  thee,"  to  protect  and  promote  thee  and  thy  people  to  honour.  1.  Certain
protection.  The  words,  "  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts,"  are  given  three  times,  for  greater
assurance  and  confirmation  of  faith.  2.  A  delightful  protection.  "  I  have  chosen
thee."  God  loves  his  people,  and  chooser  them  for  himself.  He  will  never  cast  them
off,  but  make  them  subjects  of  his  special  care.  They  are  a  seal  upon  his  heart,  a
seal  upon  his  arm  (Dan.  vii.  13) ;  and  hidden  in  the  shadow  of  his  hand  (Isa.  xlix.
2).  3.  An  everlasting  protection.  As  the  ring  is  inseparable  from  its  possessor,  so
God's  people  will  be  permanently  connected  with  him,  and  become  his  special
inheritance.  As  royal  signets  on  the  eternal  hand  shall  they  be  safely  guarded.
They  are  sealed  in  Christ,  and  safe  for  ever — heirs  of  that  kingdom  before  which
all  earthly  dominions  shall  fall.  "  These  shall  make  war  with  the  Lamb,  and  the
Lamb  shall  overcome  them :  for  he  is  Lord  of  lords,  and  King  of  kings :  and  they
that  are  with  him  are  called,  and  chosen,  and  faithful"  (Rev.  xvii.  14).

HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Yer.  22.    The   overthrow   prophesied  babel  was  a  devoted  servant  of  God.  God

is  universal.     It  is  not  one  throne  only,  acknowledges  his  faithfulness.   Only  the

as  of  Persia,  but  the  throne,   i.  e.,  the  beginning  of  all  was  with  God.     God

sovereigns  of  kingdoms  ;  not  a  change  of  speaks  of  the  nearness  to  himself  which

dynasty,    but    a    destruction    of    their  he  had  given  him.     But  in  two  words

strength  ;  not  of  a  few  powers  only,  but  he  cuts  off  all  possible  boastfulness  of

the  kingdoms  of  the  heathen;  and  that  his  creature.     Zerubbabel  was  all  this,

in   detail ;   that   in   which    their   chief  not   of  himself,  but    because    God   had

strength  lay,  the  chariots  and  horsemen  chosen  him"    [Pusey].    In  his  theocratic

and  their  riders,  and  this  man  by  man,  relation  he  represented  and  preserved  the

every  one  by  the  sword  of  his  brother  kingdom  of  David.   Hence  he  is  regarded

[Pusey].  by  many  as  a  type  of  Christ,  the  son  of

Ver.   23.     As  a  signet.     1.  A  token  David,   and    descendant  of  Zerubbabel

of  value.    2.  A  token  of  love  (Cant.  viii.  (cf.  1  Chr.  iii.  19  :  Matt.  i.  12  :  Luke  hi.

6).     3.  A  token  of  remembrance.     This  27),  in   whom   the    kingdom    shall    be

promise   is    the    reverse    of    Jeconiah's  perpetuated.     It   will    be  assailed,    but

sentence  :  "  though  he  were  the  signet  never  destroyed.     All  nations  that  resist

upon  my  right  hand,  yet  would  I  pluck  shall  be  broken  to  pieces,  and  scattered

thee  thence  "  (Jer.  xxii.   24).     "  Zerub-  like  chaff  before  the  wind.

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO   CHAPTER  II.

Vers.  1,  2.  Word.  What  a  beautiful  bigger  than  a  man's  hand  in  Genesis,  till
sermon  or  essay  might  be  written  on  the  the  column  of  cloud  gathers  size  and
growth  of  prophecy  !  — from  the  germ  no     strength,  and  height  and  substance,  and


582


HOMTLETIG  COMMENTARY:  HAOOAL


[chap.  II.


assumes  the  shape  of  a  perfect  man  :  just
like  the  smoke  in  the  Arabian  Night's
tale,  which  comes  up  and  at  last  takes  a
genie's  shape  [Coleridge],

Vers.  3 — 5.  Despondency.  Too  often
a  mischievous  gloom  enters  the  mind  of
God's  people.  Their  hands  slacken,  their
energies  are  paralyzed  for  the  work  of
God,  and  they  sink  into  desponding
apathy  and  indolence.  Did  we  realize
our  present  privileges  and.  future  pro-
spects, the  gleam  of  sunshine  would  be
to  us  the  earnest  of  what  it  will  be,  when
— as  Rutherford  beautifully  observes —
"  we  shall  be  on  the  sunny  side  of  the
Brae "     [Bridge].

"  There's  not  a  scene  on  earth  so  full  of  lightness,
That  withering  care
Sleeps  not  beneath  the  flowers,  and  turns  their
brightness

To  dark  despair  "  [Hon.  Mrs  Norton].

Vers.  6 — 9.  Shake.  The  prophet
lays  stress  upon  the  brevity  of  the  time,
for  the  purpose  of  comforting.  And  only
what  is  short  in  the  eyes  of  men  is  fitted
for  this.  Even  there  were  forebodings
that  the  time  of  this  empire  (Persian)
would  soon  be  accomplished,  and  the
rapid  conquests  of  Alexander  gave  ful-
filment to  this  foreboding.  And  even  his
power,  which  seemed  destined  to  last  for
ever,  very  speedily  succumbed  to  the  lot
of  all  temporal  things.  The  two  most
powerful  kingdoms  that  grew  out  of  the
monarchy  of  Alexander,  viz.  the  Syrian
and  Egyptian,  destroyed  one  another.
The  Romans  now  attained  to  the  govern-
ment of  the  world;  but  at  the  very  time
when  they  appeared  to  be  at  the  summit
of  their  greatness,  their  shaking  had  very
considerably  advanced  [Hengstenberg].

Ver.  8.  Gold  is  mine.  Trust  Pro-
vidence for  the  supply  of  your  wants  in
the  ways  of  duty  and  righteousness
[Nicholls].

Vers.  12 — 14.  Priests.  The  cere-
monial institutes  of  the  ancient  law  were
designed  to  illustrate  man's  relation  to
God,  as  being  under  his  favour  or  under
his  displeasure.  The  conditions  and
treatment  of  uncleanness,  while  setting
forth  most  vividly  the  loathsomeness  and
defilement  of  sin,  exhibited  as  clearly  the
effects  of  God's  anger  against  it,  which
was  shown  to  extend  to  all  the  sinner's


experience,  removing  him  beyond  the
reach  of  covenant  mercies  and  blessings.
While  the  Divine  displeasure  was  mani-
fested towards  an  individual  or  a  nation,
no  amount  of  outward  religious  observ-
ances could  appease  it,  just  as  no  fre-
quency of  contact  with  legally  consecrated
offerings  could  impart  sacredness  to  any
other  object  [Lange].

Vers.  15 — 19.  From  this  day.  Live
much  in  a  short  time.  "  Redeem  the
time,"  and  repair  thy  omissions  in  some
manner,  by  redoubling  thy  diligence.
Let  the  book  of  thy  life,  the  book  that
must  be  opened  at  the  last  day,  be  full
of  sense  and  worthy  matter  :  let  there  be
no  void  spaces  and  empty  gaps  (idle
words  and  idle  hours  are  such)  in  it ;  let
every  page  of  it,  every  day,  be  filled
with  what  is  significant,  intelligible,
rational,  and  worthy  to  be  transcribed
and  copied  out  by  others  [Dr  Worth-
ington] .

Consider.  Things  are  not  to  be  done
by  the  effort  of  the  moment,  but  by  the
preparation  of  past  moments  [Cecil].

Vers.  17 — 19.  Mildew.  Thorns  and
thistles  were  brought  forth  from  the
earth  as  a  judgment  for  disobedience ;
serpents  and  savage  beasts  became  evil
to  man  or  to  each  other  for  the  same
cause.  Every  hour  reminds  us  of  our
fallen  condition ;  but  God  has  so  tem-
pered mercy  with  judgment,  that  even
the  natural  world  calls  the  sinner  to
repentance,  but  not  to  despair  [Brewer]^

"  These  worlds  had  never  been,  hadst  thou  in
strength
Been  less,  or  less  benevolent  than  strong.
They  are  thy  witnesses,  who  speak  thy  power
And  goodness  infinite  "  \Cowper~\.

Vers.  21 — 23.  Overthrow.  In  spite  of
man's  short-sighted  endeavours  to  dispose
of  events  according  to  his  own  wishes
and  his  own  purposes,  there  is  an  Intelli-
gence beyond  his  reason,  which  holds
the  scales  of  justice,  and  promotes  his
well-being  in  spite  of  his  puny  efforts
[Morier].  Take  thee.  The  weakest
believer  is  safe,  because,  by  believing,  he
is  within  the  strongest  of  all  defences.
None  can  pluck  him  out  of  the  hands  of
Christ  (Prov.  xiv.  26).  "Let  God  be
thy  love  and  thy  fear,  and  he  will  be  also
thy  refuge  "  [Nicholls].


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY


OH


ZECHARIAH.


INTRODUCTION.

The  Writer.  Our  prophet,  like  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel,  was  of  priestly  descent,—
a  son  of  Berechiah,  and  grandson  of  Iddo  (ch.  i.  1 — 7),  the  chief  of  one  of  the
priestly  families  that  returned  from  exile  along  with  Zerubbabel  and  Jeshua  (N"eh.
xii.  4).  He  followed  his  grandfather  in  that  office  under  the  high  priest  Joiakim
(Nell.  xii.  16),  from  which  it  has  been  justly  concluded  that  he  returned  from
Babylon  while  still  a  youth,  and  that  his  father-  died  young.  This  also  probably
serves  to  explain  the  fact  that  Zechariah  is  called  the  son  (grandson)  of  Iddo,  in
Ezra  v.  1,  and  vi.  14,  and  that  his  father  is  passed  over  [Keil\

The  Time.  We  learn  from  ch.  ii.  4,  that  the  prophet  was  quite  a  young  man
when  he  commenced  his  labours.  In  the  second  year  of  Darius  Hystaspes  (b.  o.
520),  together  with  Haggai,  he  sought  to  stimulate  the  Jews  in  rebuilding  the
temple,  which  had  been  suspended  from  the  first  year  of  Cyrus  (b.  •.  536)
Haggai  is  thought  to  have  commenced  two  or  three  months  before  Zechariah,  but
Zechariah  prophesied  for  a  longer  period  than  that  of  Haggai.  His  predictions  are
a  sequel  to  those  of  his  contemporary,  and  stretch  out  in  a  series  of  visions  from  his
own  days  to  the  first  and  even  the  second  advent  of  Christ.

The  Book  opens  with  a  very  simple,  touching  call  to  those  returned  from  the
captivity,  linking  himself  on  to  the  former  prophets,  but  contrasting  the  transitori-
ness  of  all  human  things,  those  who  prophesied  and  those  to  whom  they  prophesied'
with  the  abidingness  of  the  word  of  God  [Pitsey].

1.  Its  Contents.  There  are  four  parts,  differing  in  outward  character,  yet  with  a
remarkable  unity  of  purpose.  All  begin  with  a  foreground  subsequent  to  the
captivity ;  all  reach  on  to  a  further  end ;  the  two  first  to  the  coming  of  our  Lord ;
the  third,  from  the  deliverance  of  the  house  then  built,  during  the  invasion  of
Alexander,  and  from  the  victories  of  the  Maccabees,  to  the  rejection  of  the  true
shepherd  and  the  curse  upon  the  false.  The  last,  which  is  connected  with  the  third
by  its  title,  reaches  from  a  future  repentance  for  the  death  of  Christ  to  the  final
conversion  of  the  Jews  and  Gentiles  [Pusey].  Besides  the  introduction  (ch.  i.
1 — 6),  we  have  four  longer  prophetic  announcements :  viz.  (1)  A  series  of  seven


584  INTRODUCTION.


visions  which  Zechariah  saw  during  the  night  on  the  twenty-fourth  day  of  the
eleventh  month  in  the  second  year  of  Darius  (ch.  i.  7  j  vi.  8),  together  with  a
symbolic  transaction,  which  brought  the  visions  to  a  close  (vi.  9—15);  (2)  the
communication  to  the  people  of  the  answer  of  the  Lord  to  a  question  addressed  to
the  priests  and  prophets  by  certain  Judseans  as  to  their  continuing  any  longer  to
keep  the  day  appointed  for  commemorating  the  burning  of  the  temple  and  Jerusalem
by  the  Chaldseans  as  a  fast-day,  which  took  place  in  the  fourth  year  of  Darius  (ch.
vii.  and  viii.) ;  (3)  a  burden,  i.  e.,  a  prophecy  of  threatening  import,  concerning  the
land  of  Hadrach,  the  seat  of  the  ungodly  world-power  (ch.  ix. — xi.)  ;  and  (4)  a  bur-
den concerning  Israel  (ch.  xii. — xiv.)  \_Keil\.  The  Messianic  predictions  abound.
It  has  been  remarked  that  Zechariah  is  distinguished  for  his  insight  into  the  moral
and  spiritual  meaning  of  the  Mosaic  economy,  and  his  illustration  of  the  Apostle's
statement  that  the  law  is  a  schoolmaster  unto  Christ,  (cf.  iii.  8  with  vi.  12,  13  ;  xii.
10  ;  xiii.  7.

2.  Its  Style.  In  point  of  style,  our  prophet  varies  according  to  the  nature  of
his  subjects  and  the  manner  in  which  they  were  presented  to  his  mind.  He  now
expresses  himself  in  simple  conversational  prose,  now  in  poetry.  At  one  time  he
abounds  in  the  language  of  symbols  ;  at  another,  in  that  of  direct  prophetical
announcement.  His  symbols  are,  for  the  most  park,  enigmatical,  and  require  the
explanations  which  accompany  them.  His  prose  resembles  most  that  of  Ezekiel ;  it  is
diffuse,  uniform,  and  repetitious.  His  prophetic  poetry  possesses  much  of  the  eleva-
tion and  dignity  to  be  found  in  the  earlier  prophets,  with  whose  writings  he  appears
to  have  been  familiar ;  only  his  rhythm  is  sometimes  harsh  and  unequal,  while  his
parallelisms  are  destitute  of  that  symmetry  and  finish  which  form  some  of  the
principal  beauties  of  Hebrew  poetry  [Henderson"]*

The  Hebrew  is  considered  pure  and  free  from  Chaldseisnis.  Some  forms  are
peculiar,  but  on  the  whole  the  language  corresponds  to  the  earlier  forms,  and  exhibits
few  traces  of  decay.  "  The  prophet,  who  returned  as  a  child  to  Judaea,  formed  his
language  upon  that  of  the  older  prophets  n  \Pusey\  Hengstenberg  suggests  two
considerations  which  aid  the  interpreter.  One,  that  Zechariah  leans  much  upon  his
predecessors  prior  to  the  Captivity;  hence  much  light  is  gained  from  parallel  passages.
The  other,  that  being  a  prophet  of  the  Eestoration,  one  element  of  uncertainty  which
is  found  in  the  earlier  prophets  here  ceases.  "  The  beautiful  harmonies  of
Zechariah's  prophecies  are  awakened  by  the  breath  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  Gospel,
as  by  a  heavenly  breeze  stirring  and  attuning  the  golden  strings  of  a  Divine  harp.
The  one  is  adjusted  to  the  other.  The  one  proves  the  Divine  origin  of  the  other"
[  WordtwortK^


CHAP.  I.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  585


CHAPTER  I.

Critical  Notes.]  2.  Sore]  Lit.  displeased  with  displeasure,  wrath  not  common,  whose  greatness
is  given  as  a  ground  for  their  return.  3.  Therefore]  Lit.  and  thou  sayest,  or  must  say.  Return]
(cf.  Mai.  iii.  7  :  Jas.  iv.  8)  Amendment  of  life  and  return  to  work  not  enough  ;  conversion  must  be
thorough.  The  threefold  "thus  saith  the  Lord,"  shows  the  importance  of  the  admonition,  and
indicates  the  boundless  power  of  God.  4.  Fathers]  Warning  to  shun  the  example  of  their  predecessors,
who  were  disobedient.  Former  prophets]  before  captivity.  5.  Fathers]  have  perished ;  their  fate
should  warn  you.  But  you  may  object,  the  prophets  also  are  dead,  and  apparently  their  words  died
with  them.  6.]  No;  the  threatenings  take  hold  ;  overtake  them  as  one  flying  from  the  foe.  The  words
and  statutes  (decrees)  of  God  uttered  by  the  prophets  reached  them  like  arrows  shot  forth,  and
fulfilled  threatened  punishment  (cf.  Deut.  xxviii.  15 — 45).  Thought]  Decreed  to  do  (Lam.  ii.  17).  7.]
The  general  plan  of  the  nine  following  visions  (ch.  i.  8  to  end  of  ch.  vi.)  is  first  to  present  the  symbol ;
then,  on  a  question  being  put,  to  subjoin  the  interpretation.  Though  the  visions  are  distinct,  they
form  one  grand  whole,  presented  in  one  night  to  the  prophet's  mind,  two  or  three  months  after  the
prophet's  first  commission  [Fausset].  8—17.]  Vision  first.  A  man]  i.  e.  an  angel  in  the  shape  of
a  man  (vers.  11,  12).  Riding]  Swift  in  execution  and  help  ;  leader  of  those  who  follow,  and  to  whom
they  report.  Red]  Colour  of  blood;  vengeance  to  be  inflicted  upon  the  foes  of  Israel  (cf.  1  Kings  iii.
22  :  Isa.  lxiii.  1,2:  Rev.  vi.  4).  Myrtle  trees]  Symbol  of  Israel  ;  not  a  stately  forest,  but  a  low  shrub,
fragrant  in  smell  and  beautiful  in  leaf.  8.  Behind]  horses.  Red,  speckled  (bay),  and  white]  the
symbol  of  victory.  These  are  agencies  employed  by  God,  and  the  colour  may  indicate  the  nature  of
their  mission  [cf.  Lange],  9.  My  lord]  The  one  who  answers  the  prophet,  the  angelus  interpres,
whose  sole  function  was  to  enlighten  the  prophet,  and  cause  him  to  understand  the  vision.  10.]  The
angel  of  Jehovah  replies,  and  not  the  interpreting  angel.  11.]  The  riders  themselves  then  state  the
result  of  their  mission.  Walked]  with  unceasing  activity  (cf.  Job  i.  7)  in  God's  errands.  Still]
Hindrances  to  restoration  removed.  Persian  wars  had  ceased,  and  at  that  time  (ver.  1)  universal
peace  reigned  over  the  earth  ;  tranquil  (Jud.  v.  26)  This  statement  of  peace  contrasts  with  the  prostrate
condition  of  Israel,  and  gives  occasion  for  intercession.  12.  How  X]  Intercession.  70  years]  does
not  imply  that  the  period  predicted  (Jer.  xxv.  12)  was  just  closing,  for  it  had  already  expired  in  the
first  year  of  Cyrus  (Ezra  i.  1).  But  the  people  were  in  a  sal  state ;  though  restored,  the  capital  in
ruins  (Neh.  i.  3)  and  the  woi'k  hindered.  13.]  Jehovah,  the  angel  of  ver.  12.  Words]  which  promise
good,  i.e.  salvation  (cf.  Josh,  xxiii.  14:  Jer.  xxix.  10).  "  In  vers.  14 — 17,  the  first  two  of  which
assert  Jehovah's  active  affection  for  his  people,  and  the  latter  two  his  purpose  to  manifest  that  love
in  the  restoration  and  enlargement  of  Jerusalem"  \JLange\  Jealous]  for  Jerusalem,  which  is  wantonly
injured.  Displeased]  with  natious  careless  and  secure,  confident  in  their  own  strength  and  prosperity.
To  Israel  anger  was  only  a  tittle  ;  to  the  heathen  it  was  fatal.  16.  Returned]  to  Jerusalem,  from  whom
God  had  withdrawn.  Line]  All  obstacles  removed,  the  temple  completed,  and  the  whole  city  shall  be
regular  in  shape,  and  exact  in  its  survey.  17.  Cities]  Other  cities  of  Judah  belong  to  God,  will
prosper  and  spread]  Lit.  scattered  not  by  an  invading  foe,  but  by  growth  and  abundance  (cf.  ii.  4 ;
viii.  4).  18 — 21.]  Four  horns]  The  second  vision.  The  foes  of  the  Jews  will  be  destroyed.  Scattered]
The  people  of  God  surrounded  by  enemies  on  all  sides.  The  number  four  referred  to  the  four
quarters  of  the  earth  in  relation  to  Palestine  [cf.  Send] ;  by  others,  to  four  chief  nations.  20.
Carpenters]  Artificers  for  each  horn,  indicating  the  agencies  God  employs  for  the  destruction  of  those
hostile  to  his  people  ;  "  skilful  to  destroy"  (Ezek.  xxi.  36).  Lifted  up]  Depressed  with  sufferiug  and
fear  (Jobx.  15).  Fray]  Terrify  and  scatter  them  in  their  pride  and  tyranny  (Ezek.  xxx.  9  :  Ps.  lxxv.
4,  5.

HOMILETIGS.
The  Prophet's  Commission.  —  Verses  1 — 3.

Zechariah  was  sent  to  console  and  encourage  God's  people  in  distress.  But  tne
ground  must  be  prepared  Law  before  gospel,  repentance  before  blessing.  Hence
in  the  first  words  we  have  the  key-note  to  his  message,  and  the  introduction  to  his
labours.     In  the  prophet's  commission  we  have —

I.  Its  Divine  origin.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  him  " — his  call  was  Divine
not  human,  real  not  fanciful ;  a  token  of  God's  great  work  among  his  people,  and
a  guarantee  that  it  would  be  successfully  carried  on.     II,  1:3  Sol)nn  nature.


586  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [chap.  i.


"  Therefore,  say  unto  them,"  that  God  was  angry  with  their  fathers,  and  will  he  with
them  if  they  repent  not.  The  first  message  is  one  of  warniug  and  judgment.  He
has  to  set  forth  the  justice  and  assert  the  prerogative  of  God  in  the  government  of
the  world.  Men  consider  Divine  displeasure  to  be  an  unreasonable  disturbance  of
their  ease,  and  an  impeachment  upon  the  Divine  character.  But  God's  anger  is
real  and  terrible.  It  is  visible  in  providence  and  in  nature.  "  Wrath  and  threatening
are  invariably  mingled  with  love ;  and  in  the  utmost  solitudes  of  nature,  the  exist-
ence of  hell  seems  to  me  as  legibly  declared  by  a  thousand  spiritual  utterances  as  of
heaven  "  [Buskin].  Persistent  attempts  are  made  to  deny  and  evade  this  fact.  Sin
blinds  men,  and  makes  them  transfer  their  own  views  to  God.  "  Thou  thoughtest
that  I  was  altogether  such  an  one  as  thyself :  but  I  will  reprove  thee"  (Ps.  1.  21).
III.  Its  inward  pressure.  The  words  in  ver.  2  were  delivered  to  the  prophet,  and
contain  the  reason  for  the  summons  to  the  people  in  ver.  3.  "  They  disclose  to  us
the  internal  pressure  under  which  he  entered  upon  his  office.  A  due  sense  of  the
power  of  God's  wrath  lies  at  the  basis  of  all  true  earnestness  on  the  part  of  his
prophets.  It  is  the  '  burning  fire  shut  up  in  the  bones  '  (Jer.  xx.  9),  which  imparts
its  own  vehemence  to  the  message,  and  produces  corresponding  conviction  in  them
that  hear.  We  observe  it  in  the  Prophet  of  all  prophets,  the  Saviour  himself.  His
groaning  in  spirit  at  the  grave  of  Lazarus,  his  tears  over  Jerusalem,  show  how  deeply
he  felt  the  terribleness  of  God's  anger"  [Lange].  There  is  a  great  demand  now
for  honest,  enlightened,  and  seasonable  speech  in  the  Christian  ministry.  "  We
cannot  but  speak:  the  things  which  we  have  seen  and  heard  "  (Acts  iv.  20  :  Job
xxxii.  18 — 20  :  Acts  xviii.  5).

The  Call  to  Repentance. —  Verses  3,  4.

Like  John  the  Baptist,  Zechariah  begins  his  preaching  with  a  call  to  repentance,
and  warns  the  people,  by  the  history  of  their  fathers,  that  no  spiritual  privileges
will  profit  them  without  holiness,  but  rather  will  aggravate  their  guilt  and  increase
their  condemnation  if  they  disobey  God.  He  declares  to  them  that  no  outward
profession  of  religion  wilL  avail;  that  all  notions  of  self -righteousness  are  offensive
to  God;  and  that  what  he  looks  for  is  personal  holiness,  and  a  practical  discharge
of  the  duties  of  piety  and  mercy  [Wordswortli],

I.  They  had  need  to  repent.  "  Therefore,  say  unf.o  them,  Turn  ye."  1.  Their
return  toas  defective.  God  had  delivered  them  from  captivity,  and  stirred  them  to
work  ;  but  zeal  without  real  conversion  will  soon  die  out.  We  must  give  our  whole
heart  to  God,  leave  self-interest  behind,  and  seek  nearer  access.  **  Draw  nigh  to  God,
and  he  will  draw  nigh  to  you."  2.  Their  delay  would  be  dangerous.  (1)  Dis-
obedience would  be  imitation  of  their  fathers.  "  Be  ye  not  as  your  fathers."
Precedents  have  great  influence.  Men  decry  good,  but  follow  evil  customs.  The
sin  of  Jeroboam  was  held  sacred  by  his  successors.  But  we  should  be  warned  by
the  sins,  and  deterred  by  the  punishment,  of  our  fathers.  "  They  did  not  hear  nor
hearken  unto  me."  (2)  Disobedience  would  bring  GooVs  displeasure  upon  them.
God  was  sore  displeased  with  their  fathers,  and  would  be  with  them  if  they  refused
to  turn.  Heavier  scourges  were  ready,  and  symptoms  of  displeasure  already  appeared
in  i(  sowing  m  :ch  "  to  "  bring  in  little  "  (Hag.  i.  6).  God's  dealings  with  the  past
are  designed  to  instruct  the  present  generation.  "  Now  all  these  things  happened
unto  them  for  ensamples  (types) :  and  they  are  written  for  our  admonition  (instruc-
tion) "  (1  Cor.  x.  11).  II.  They  had  encouragement  to  repent.  "  And  I  will  turn
unto  you,  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts."  This  promise  was  a  motive  and  a  help  to  them.
The  duty  would  be  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  but  for  this  encouragement.  God  is
always  found  of  those  who  seek  him.  If  we  desire  God  to  turn  to  us,  we  must
return  to  him.  The  flower  turned  from  the  sun  can  never  catch  its  genial  rays.
1.  Tlie  promise  is  necessary.  We  require  something  positive.  "  We  are  saved  by
hope."    The  beginning  of  religious  life  and  duty  is  often  a  kind  of  venture.    Hence


ohap.  i.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  587

failure  and  turning  back.  2.  The  promise  is  certain.  We  have  not  mere  possibility
or  probability,  but  certainty ;  assurance  which  cannot  deceive.  "  I  will."  3.  The
promise  is  confirmed.  Israel  returned  to  God,  and  he  returned  to  them.  Manasseh
sought  the  Lord  and  found  him.  The  prodigal  went  home  and  was  received.
"  Eeturn,  thou  backsliding  Israel,  saith  the  Lord ;  and  I  will  not  cause  mine  anger
to  fall  upon  you  ;  for  I  am  merciful,  saith  the  Lord  "  (Jer.  iii.  12  :  Mai.  iii.  7  :
E/ek.  xviii.  30).

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.    4,     1.   The  advantages  of  their  day  of  grace  is  short,  and  even  the  mes-

fathers.      "  The    former    prophets  "  en-  sengers  of  grace  are  passing  away.    2.  If

forced  the  law,  and  proclaimed  the  word  once  you  are  overtaken,  your  eyes  will

of  God  ;  exhorted  to  repentance ;  and  pre-  open  too  late,  and  only  with  trembling

dieted  Divine  judgments.     2.  The  guilt  lips  can  you  give  honour   to  the  Lord

of  their  fathers.    "  But  they  did  not  hear,  \Lange],     Evil  ways.      The    ways   and

nor  hearken  unto  me,  saith  the  Lord."  works  of  the  earlier  generations  are  called

Their  guilt  aggravated  by  their  privileges,  evil;  in  the  first  instance,  because  they

"  Unto  me."     God  was  in  the  voice  of  were  morally  corrupt,  and  also  because

prophets,  but  was  despised.     "  He  that  they  were  followed  by  sore  consequences

receiveth   you,   receiveth    me."      "  We  [Lange].

learn  here  that  the  examples  set  up  as  a  Vers.    3,  4.     1.    Sin  creates  distance

a  shield  for  wrong-doing  are  so  far  from  from  God.     The  sinner  is  alienated  in

becoming  of  any  weight  before  God  that  heart,  and  turned  back  from  God  in  his

they  enhance  our  guilt.     Yet  this  folly  works  and  pursuits.     2.  Repentance  is  a

infatuates  many,  for  the  Papists  claim  full  return  to  God.     Not  partial  amend-

their  religion  to  be  holy  and  irreprehen-  ment,  but  entire  renunciation  of  sin,  and

sible  because  it  has  been  handed  down  coming  close  up  to  God  in  reconciliation

by    their    fathers "    \Galviii\.     Ancient  and  fellowship.     3.    God  calls  men   to

example  and  long  usage  will  not  justify  this    repentance.      "  Say   unto     them."

disobedience    (2    Chr.    xxvi.    15,     16)  His   voice    is   heard    in    the   ministry.

[Fausset].  His  judgments  rightly  studied  declare

No  mercy  without  return,  and  no  re-  his  will,  and  are  often  suspended  till  we

turn  without  mercy.    Haste  that  you  may  return.     But  some  return,  and  others  do

not  be  overtaken.     1.    Haste,  for  your  not.

HOMILETIGS.
Lessons  prom  the  Lives  op  the  Fathers. —  Verses  5,  6.

The  two  questions  in  ver.  5  are  meant  as  denials,  and  are  intended  to  anticipate
the  objection  which  the  people  might  have  raised  to  the  admonitions  in  ver.  4,  to
the  effect,  that  not  only  the  fathers,  but  also  the  earlier  prophets,  had  died  long
ago ;  and  therefore  an  allusion  to  things  that  had  long  since  passed  by  could  have
no  force  at  all  for  the  present  generation.  Zechariah  neutralizes  this  objection  by
saying :  Your  fathers  have  indeed  been  long  dead,  and  even  the  prophets  do  not,
or  cannot,  live  for  ever ;  but  notwithstanding  this,  the  words  of  the  earlier  prophets
were  fulfilled  in  the  case  of  the  fathers.  The  words  and  decrees  of  God  uttered  by
the  prophets  reached  them,  and  they  were  obliged  to  confess  that  God  had  really
done  to  them  what  he  threatened  [J5TeiZ].     We  have —

I.  A  motive  to  activity.  Your  fathers  and  the  prophets  who  taught  them  are
dead.  No  man  lives  for  ever.  Others  have  worked  and  lived  where  we  dwell ;  but
ministers,  teachers,  and  parents  are  gone,  and  their  hearers  after  them.  Our  course
will  be  finished  soon.  Hence  this  is  our  day  of  service.  It  becomes  us  to  redeem
the  time,  to  be  active  and  diligent  in  serving  God  ourselves,  and  urging  others  to


683  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [chap.  i.


serve  him.  II.  A  testimony  to  the  truth  of  God's  word.  Your  fathers  are  not
here,  but  we  have  their  testimony.  My  words  took  hold  upon  them,  and  they  con-
fessed their  power  in  twofold  experience.  "  According  to  our  ways  and  according  to
our  doings."  If  they  rebelled  they  felt  the  threatening,  and  if  they  returned  the
promise  was  fulfilled.  God's  providence  ensures  the  accomplishment  of  his  word,  and
compels  the  acknowledgment  of  that  accomplishment  from  those  who  feel  it.  God
is  faithful  and  unchangeable  in  his  purpose.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for
ever."  III.  A.  warning  against  apostasy.  The  fate  which  overtook  the  fathers  is
pointed  out  as  a  warning  to  them."  u  Where  are  they  1 "  They  are  dead  ;  but  did
they  escape  the  punishment  due  to  their  sins  1  No ;  in  mournful  confessions  we  have
acknowledgments  of  the  fact.  There  may  be  delay,  and  the  sinner  may  think  that
he  will  escape ;  but  sooner  or  later  the  word  will  catch  him,  stick  in  his  heart  like
an  arrow  from  the  Almighty.  The  transgressor  will  be  made  to  confess,  "  Mine
iniquities  have  overtaken  me."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Yer.   6.     I.   The  message  of  God  pro-  The  desert  of  sin  ;  and  3.  The  certainty

claimed  by  his  servants.     Unchangeable  of  retribution.     Sin  sweet  in  taste,  but

in  its  nature.     "  My  words  and  statutes,"  bitter  in  fruits.    Lessons  :  — 1.    Consider

i.  e.  decrees,  given  with  Divine  authority  ;  the  warnings  of  God.     2.  Recognize  the

"  which  I  commanded."  II.  Men  trying  hand  of  God  in  the  punishment  of  men.

to  escape  from  this  message.     The  words  "  '  Like  as  the  Lord  of  hosts,'  whose  power

took  hold,  i.  e.  overtook  them,  when  flee-  is  irresistible,  'thought'  (devised,  deter-

ing  from  them  in  hatred  and  rebellion,  mined  with  himself,  and  accordingly  de-

III.   The  humble  confession  of  men  when  nonuced  by  the  prophets)  '  to  do  unto

caught  by  the  word.  "  Like  as  the  Lord  of  us,'   who  did  not  the  words  which  he

hosts  thought  to  do  unto  us,"  &c.    They  commanded  us  ( Jer.  xi.  8),  '  according  to

have  to  confess  the  truth  of  God,  and  our  ways,'  which  were  always  grievous

expose  their  folly  when  it  is  too  late.  Men  (Ps.  x.  5),  •  and  according  to  our  doings/

should  be  wise  in  time.     "  The  Lord  is  that  were  not  good  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  31),

righteous,  for  we  have  rebelled  against  *  so  hath  he  dealt  with  us  ; '  for  he  loves

his  commandments."  to  retaliate,  and  to  render  to  every  trans-

According  to  our  ways.     An  acknow-  gression  and  disobedience  a  just  recom-

ledgment — 1.  Of  the  truth  of  God.   2.  pence  of  reward  (Heb.  ii.  2)."   [Trapp].

HOMILETIGS.

The  Man  among  the  Myrtles,  or  the  Divine  Protection  op  the  Church.

Verses  8 — 13.

The  prophet  received  his  visions  not  in  a  dream,  but  when  spiritually  conscious ;
at  night,  when  most  still  and  free  from  worldly  cares,  and  most  susceptible  for
Divine  communications.  In  this  first  vision  we  have  the  protection  of  the
Church  of  God  in  its  weak  and  dangerous  condition.

I.  Jesns  Christ  is  in  her  midst.  "  Behold,  a  man  riding  upon  a  red  horse,  and
he  stood  among  the  myrtle  trees  that  were  in  the  bottom."  The  presence  of  a  great
personage  should  give  confidence.  i(  Fear  not,  thou  earnest  Caesar."  But  "  God  is  in
the  midst  of  "  the  Church  ;  "  she  shall  not  be  moved  :  God  shall  help  her,  and  that
right  early."  1.  Standing  to  defend  her.  "He  stood"  as  in  his  own  residence
(Ps.  exxxii.  14).  2.  Riding  to  help  her.  Eiding  in  speed,  upon  a  red  horse,  to
inflict  vengeance  upon  her  foes  (cf.  2  Kings  iii.  22  :  Isa.  lxiii.  1,  2  :  Kev.  vi.  4).
3.  Intel-ceding  on  her  behalf.  "0  Lord  of  hosts,"  &c.  (ver.  12).  He  was  deeply
touched  with  the  report  given,  and  with  the  contrast  between  the  condition  of  the
heathen  at  ease  and  that  of  the  Church  in  desolation.     Hence  he  prays  (a.)  for


chap.  L]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  589


mercy.  "  Wilt  thou  not  have  mercy  upon  Jerusalem  ? "  (b.)  For  a  full  display  of
mercy.  The  work,  long  delaved,  had  only  just  begun.  Much  more  remained  to  be
done  for  the  city,  the  country,  and  the  people.  As  God  had  executed  the  threaten-
ing, so  a  fulfilment  of  the  promise  is  desired.  II.  Angels  are  employed  on  her
behalf.  "  What  are  these1?  .  .  .  These  are  they  whom  the  Lord  hath  sent  to  and
fro  through  the  earth.  We  have  a  craving  for  the  knowledge  of  creatures  above
ourselves.  No  system  of  religion  separates  the  seen  from  the  unseen  world.  Hence
all  the  various  doctrines  and  theories  of  angels.  In  Scripture  alone  is  our  natural
longing  satisfied.  We  learn  that  God  is  pleased  to  use  the  agency  of  supernatural
beings  ;  that  these  heavenly  watchmen  continually  walk  about  Zion,  or  visit  distant
parts  of  the  universe,  to  counteract  the  work  of  Satan  (cf.  ii.  11:  Job  i.  7),  to  guard
his  people,  and  minister  to  the  heirs  of  salvation  (Beb.  i.  14).  Consider — 1.  Their
number;  2.  Their  work;  and  3.  Their  obedience.  Why  despair,  like  the  servant  of
Elisha?  Angels  are  sent  to  help  when  God  is  pleased  with  us.  "Behold,  the
mountain  was  full  of  horses,  and  chariots  of  fire  round  about."


"  They  fight  for  us,  they  watch  and  duly  ward,

And  their  bright  squadrons  round  about  us  plant ;
And  all  for  love,  and  nothing  for  reward,

Oh  !  why  should  heavenly  God  to  man  have  such  regard  "  [Spenser].

III.  God's  providence  defends  her.  Most  commentators  take  the  troop  and
the  colour  of  these  horses  as  symbolic  of  the  dispensations  of  Divine  providence.
Observe — 1.  The  nature  of  Providence.  "  The  peculiar  nature  of  the  dispensations
is  indicated  by  the  colour  of  the  horses,  and  the  armour  and  appearance  of  the  riders  "
[Hend.\  The  red  horse  to-day  in  conflict  and  suffering;  soon  will  the  Divine
Leader  ride  in  triumph  on  the  white  horse.  2.  The  order  of  Providence.  Red
horses  "  first,"  speckled  and  white  follow.  Without  pressing  the  point  too  far,
we  see  wars,  famines,  and  pestilence  end  in  victory.  Most  wonderfully  did  God
prepare  political  events,  in  the  restoration  from  Babylon  and  in  the  coming  of  Christ,
for  the  special  condition  of  his  Church.  Quietness  may  reign  in  all  quarters  except
in  the  Church.  Divine  justice  may  seem  to  sleep  ;  but  it  is  only  the  calm  before
the  storm.  Amid  sufferings  and  perplexing  providences,  believers  may  cry,  "  How
long  % "  But  the  uncreated  angel  intercedes  ;  "  comfortable  words  "  shall  be  heard,
and  the  darkness  of  the  night  shall  be  forgotten  in  the  glory  of  the  day.  "  Speak
ye  comfortably  to  Jerusalem,  and  cry  unto  her,  that  her  warfare  is  accomplished,
that  her  iniquity  is  pardoned ;  for  she  hath  received  of  the  Lord's  hand  double
for  all  her  sins."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Yer.    8.       The    myrtle    trees  in    the  still,  while  the  storm  sweeps  over  the

bottom,  from  their   fragrance  and  low-  mountain   summits.     In   the  metaphor

ness,  probably  symbolize  the  Church,  as  we  have  perpetual  growth.     The  myrtle

at  once  yielding  a  sweet  odour,  and  in  a  is  always  green,  sheds  not  her  leaves,

low  estate  or  lowly.     The  natural  habits  The  Church  has  ever  a  verdure  of  grace,

of  the  myrtle  make  it  the  fitter  emblem  sometimes  most  verdure  when  winter  is

[Pusey].  The  Church  of  God  is  hidden,  sharpest.     Here  we  have  the  emblem  of

secreted  as  unobserved  in  a  valley.  There  peace,  and  a  significant  token  of  victory

is   the  idea   of   tranquil   security;   the  (Spurgeon).
myrtle  grove  in  the  valley  is  calm  and

HOMILETICS.

Comfortable  Words. —  Verses  13 — 17.

Jehovah  replied  to  the  intercession  of  the  angel  that  he  loved  Jerusalem,  and  that
this  love  would  be  displayed  in  securing  its  good.     If  we  wait  patiently,  and  commit


590  HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [chap.  i.

our  trouble  to  our  Intercessor,  we  shall  have  "  good  words "  for  ourselves,  and
"  comfortable  "  words  for  others.

I.  God's  love  in  its  objects.  He  was  jealous  for  his  people,  and  angry  with
their  enemies.  1.  He  loved  Jerusalem.  The  city  had  been  wronged  by  others.
His  honour  was  involved  in  its  insults.  He  was  zealous  for  her  interests,  zealous,
"  with  a  great  jealousy,"  for  her  good.  He  had  been  ill-requited  for  kindness —
had  chastised  them  for  deserts — but  his  love  changed  not.  In  the  past  and  in
the  present  he  was  "a  jealous  God"  (Ex.  xxxiv.  14).  2.  He  teas  displeased
with  their  enemies.  "I  am  very  sore  displeased  with  the  heathen  that  are  at
ease."  He  was  "  but  a  little  displeased,"  when  he  gave  them  permission  to  chastise
his  people.  But  they  afflicted  them  more  than  he  desired,  and  sought  their  extinc-
tion to  gratify  lust  and  revenge.  "  They  helped  forward  the  affliction."  God's
displeasure  is  temporary  and  for  good ;  men's  displeasure  is  lasting  and  cruel.
II.  God's  love  in  its  consequences.  "  Therefore,  thus  saith  the  Lord,"  &c.  (ver.  16).
Judgments  were  designed  to  restore  them  to  God — that  he  might  return  in  mercy
to  them.  God  hides  his  face  and  we  are  troubled  (Ps.  xxx.  7)  ;  he  returns  and
we  rejoice.  We  have  mercy  instead  of  wrath — mercies  repeated  and  manifold.
"  I  am  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  mercies."  1.  The  capital  shall  be  built.  All
hindrances  shall  be  removed,  and  instead  of  scattered  houses,  the  whole  city  shall
be  measured  in  order  and  regularity.  "  A  line  shall  be  stretched  forth  over
Jerusalem."  2.  The  temple  shall  be  restored.  "  My  house  shall  be  built  in  it."
The  worship  of  God  should  be  the  concern  of  men.  Cities  without  churches  are
cities  without  ornaments.  The  palace  of  the  prince  must  never  tike  the  place  of
the  temple  of  God.  3.  The  country  shall  flourish.  "  Cry  yet,"  in  addition  to
foregoing  promises,  "  my  cities  shall  overflow  with  prosperity."  Hot  only  Jerusalem,
but  subordinate  cities  of  Judah,  shall  have  abundance  of  outward  and  spiritual
increase.  The  produce  of  the  vintage  and  the  fruits  of  the  earth ;  an  extension
of  trade  and  an  increase  of  population,  shall  be  given.  Whatever  be  the  immediate
prospects  of  the  Church,  God  has  great  consolation  for  her.  He  will  yet  prosper
and  comfort  Zion.  The  completion  of  the  temple,  the  restoration  of  the  city,  and
the  increase  of  the  people,  are  a  declaration  of  his  love,  a  manifestation  of  his
purpose,  and  a  pledge  of  his  fidelity.  "  The  Lord  shall  comfort  Zion ;  he  will
comfort  all  her  waste  places ;  and  he  will  make  her  wilderness  like  Eden,  and  her
desert  like  the  garden  of  the  Lord."

The  Four  Horns  and  the  Four  Smiths,  or  the  Danger  and  the  Defence

of  the  Church. —  Verses  18 — 21.

This  second  vision  is  a  fultilment  of  the  foregoing  promise.  The  horn  is  an
emblem  of  power.  The  four  mentioned  indicate  hostile  powers  on  every  side,  which
seek  to  oppress  and  crush  the  people  of  God.  The  four  smiths  signify  antagonistic
forces  which  God  has  raised  up  and  commisioned  to  destroy.     Learn —

I.  The  Church,  of  Christ  exists  in  trie  midst  of  conflict.  "  These  are  the  horns
which  have  scattered  Judah,  Israel,  and  Jerusalem."  The  Jews,  in  every  age,  were
opposed  by  enemies.  In  Apostolic  and  succeeding  times,  the  Christian  Church  had
to  contend  with  powers  and  principalities — persecutions  strong  and  violent.  In
every  quarter  of  the  earth  the  people  of  God  have  been  in  danger,  have  had  to  endure
wrath,  conflict,  and  death.  Fiery  trials  await  them  everywhere.  They  are  left  to
be  tossed  by  the  horns  of  the  enemies,  apparently  defenceless,  though  loyal  subjects
of  him  who  has  all  power  in  heaven  and  eaith.  It  is  God's  will  that  they  should
struggle  and  conquer  in  conflict  with  evil.  II.  In  this  conflict  God  raises  up
men.  Enemies  and  difficulties  may  surround  the  Church,  but  God  provides  help,
and  opens  our  eyes  to  discern  it.  "  The  Lord  showed  me  four  (carpenters)  smiths."
1.  Men  qualified  in  strength.  Workmen  are  needed.  Men  of  iron  hand  and
resolute  will.     Smiths  who  can  wield  the  hammer  and  smash  the  horns  in  pieces.


CHAP.   I.j


HUMlnETlC  COMMENTARY :  ZECHABIAH.


591


Right  kind  of  men  are  often  wanting.  Jeremiah  searched  in  vain  (ch.  iv.  22 — 25  ;
v.  1),  and  another  cries  with  a  similar  result :  "  I  sought  for  a  man  among  them,
that  should  make  up  the  hedge  and  stand  in  the  gap  hefore  me,  for  the  land,  that
I  should  not  destroy  it ;  but  I  found  none  "  (Ezek.  xxii.  30).  2.  Men  sufficient  in
number.  For  every  horn  there  was  a  smith  to  fray  or  destroy  it.  Strange  that  a
kind  of  equilibrium  between  assault  and  defence  should  be  maintained.  But  this  is
no  ground  for  despair.  The  agencies  to  foil  are  as  numerous  as  the  enemies  them-
selves. For  every  evil  there  is  a  remedy,  and  for  every  danger  a  deliverer.  The
horn  may  do  its  work,  but  the  smitli  will  follow  to  take  vengeance.  III.  Men  of
the  right  kind  are  raised  up  at  the  right  time.  The  prophet  saw  the  horns  first,
but  had  not  long  to  wait  for  the  carpenters.  Just  when  they  were  required  they
came  ready  for  work.  Men  will  be  called  and  qualified  when  God  has  a  work  for
them  to  do.  They  may  be  in  the  hut  of  the  peasant  or  in  the  school  of  the  pro-
phet, preparing  for  the  contest.  Moses  and  Joshua,  Paul  and  Luther,  Knox  and
Whitfield,  were  raised  up  at  the  right  time.  Have  confidence  then.  A  providence
silent  and  unseen  works  on  and  prepares  the  way.  Where  God  has  a  people,  there
he  is  to  defend  and  prosper  them.  Rutherford  wrote  to  a  little  church  in  Scotland,
harassed  and  ready  to  despair  on  account  of  persecution  :  *'  So  long  as  there  is  any
of  the  Lord's  lost  money  in  your  town,  he  won't  put  out  the  candle."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.


Ver.  15.  God's  displeasure.  1.  To-
wards his  people  only  short.  "  A  little
displeased."  "  Little,"  says  Pusey,  "in
comparison  with  our  deserts  ;  little,  in
comparison  with  the  anger  of  the  human
instruments  of  his  displeasure ;  little,
in  comparison  with  their's  who,  in  their
anger,  sought  their  own  ends."  2.  To-
wards his  enemies  very  great.  "  I  am
very  sore  displeased  with  the  heathen."
At  ease  themselves  they  persecute  others.
Though  permitted  to  correct  God's  people,
they  often  with  revengeful  malice  exceed
their  commission,  and  thus  bring  mischief
upon  themselves  (Prov.  xxiv.  17,  18).
The  chastisement  of  believers  is  tempo-
rary, and  in  love  ;  the  punishment  of  the
wicked  will  be  in  anger,  and  for  ever.
"  God  uses  not  the  rod  where  he  means
to  use  the  sword,"  says  Bishop  Hall.

Vers.  16,  17.  1.  The  nature  of  the
mercies.  The  rebuilding  of  the  temple
— restoration  of  public  worship — rebuild-
ing of  the  metropolis,  and  increase  of
the  cities.  2.  The  source  of  the  mercies.
"  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  /  am  returned."
"Thou  hast  punished  us  less  than  our
iniquities  deserve"  (Ezra  ix.  13  :  Lam.
iii.  22).  3.  The  measure  of  the  mercies.
In  ver.  17  there  are  four  yets,  and  all
very  gracious  ones ;  to  break  their  hard
hearts  and  to  raise  their  faith  on  his
promised  mercies.    You  shall  have  plen-


tiful increase  of  men,  cattle,  and  all
manner  of  fruits  of  the  earth,  so  that  it
shall  no  more  be  said,  This  is  Zion  whom
no  man  careth  for  (Jer.  xxx.  17);  yea,
you  shall  have  a  fulness  of  all  things,
not  only  repletive,  but  diffusive,  not  only
of  abundance  but  of  redundance  too;
your  cup  shall  overflow  into  the  lesser
vessels  of  others  [cf.  Trapp\

"  Surer  to  prosper  than  prosperity
Could  have  assured  us  "     [Milton],

Vers.  18 — 21.  We  learn  from  these
verses  that  the  friends  of  Zion  are  nu-
merous as  her  foes  ;  that  her  defence  is
equal  to  her  danger  ;  that  as  the  state  of
his  people  requires  it,  the  Lord  will
seasonably  raise  up  means  and  instru-
ments for  their  succour  and  deliverance.
The  assurance  may  be  derived  from  four
principles :  the  love  of  God — the  power
of  God — the  faithfulness  of  God — the
conduct  of  God.  In  the  first,  we  see  that
he  may  be  inclined  to  appear  for  them,
as  they  are  infinitely  dear  to  him.  In
the  second,  we  see  that  he  is  able  to  save
them.  In  the  third,  that  he  is  engaged
to  do  it.  In  the  fourth,  that  he  always
has  done  it.  Scripture,  history,  and
experience,  being  witness- -

"Then  let  the  woild  forbear  their  rage,
The  Church  renounce  her  fear ;
Israel  must  live  through  every  age,
And  be  the  Almighty's  care  "     [Jay].


592


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY;  ZECHARIAH.


[OHAP.  I


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  L


Vers.  2,  3.  Turn.  Let  every  man
that  would  avoid  a  return  to  his  former
iniquity,  be  infinitely  careful  to  avoid
every  new  sin,  for  it  is  like  a  blow  to  a
broken  leg,  or  a  burden  to  a  crushed
arm.  Every  little  thing  disorders  the
new  health  and  unfinished  recovery.
[/.  Taylor.]

Yer.  5.  Your  fathers.  While  we
shrink  with  self -diffident  dread  from  the
thought  of  apostasy  from  Christ  and
from  God,  let  us  see  to  it  that  in  our
different  conditions  and  relations  in  life
— in  the  family,  in  the  church,  in  general
society  —  we  be  found  filling  up  our
fleeting  day  of  life  with  increasingly
active  devotedness,  "  not  slothful  in  busi-
ness, fervent  in  spirit,  serving  the  Lord,"
that  so,  when  it  shall,  in  our  turn,  come
to  be  said  of  us,  "  Where  are  they  ? "
the  recollection  of  our  lives  by  those  who
survive  us  may  not  be  an  entire  blank
[Wardlaw],

Ver.  6.  Overtake.  Heathen  reminis-
cence of  God's  justice  acknowledged.
"  Earely  hath  punishment  with  limping
tread  part  with  the  forerunning  mis-
creant "  (cf.  Hor.  Od.  iii.  9)  [Pusey].

Vers.  8 — 11.  Angels.  Angels  are
men  of  a  superior  kind  [Young].  They
bear  his  will  about  to  every  part  of  the
universe.  This  is  their  delight.  They
bless  God,  who  vouchsafes  thus  to  em-
ploy them.  But  when  they  have  fulfilled
God's  message,  then  they  return  back  to
him  by  whom  they  were  sent  forth,  and
stand  before  him,  drinking  in  fresh
streams  of  life  and  strength  and  purity
and  joy  from  his  presence  \_Hare].

Ver.  11.  Their  office  was  not  a  specific
or  passing  duty,  as  when  God  sent  his
angels   with  some  special   commission,


such  as  those  recorded  in  Holy  Scripture.
It  was  a  continuous  conversation  with
the  affairs  of  men,  a  minute  course  of
visiting,  inspecting  our  human  deeds  and
ways,  and  a  part  of  the  "wonderful  order  "
in  which  God  has  "  ordained  and  consti-
tuted the  service  of  angels  and  men"
[Pusey].

Vers.  12,  13.  That  same  Christ,  who
is  on  earth  in  spirit  on  the  red  horse,  is
in  heaven  in  person,  pleading  before  the
throne.  He  pleads — he  pleads  for  mercy.
Mercy  that  sent  him  to  earth ;  mercy  is
his  petition  now.  He  pleads  for  present
mercy.  His  cry  is,  "  How  long  1 "
Eighteen  hundred  years  is  it  since  my
blood  was  offered,  and  yet  my  kingdom
has  not  come.  Observe  the  objects  of
his  intercession  ;  he  pleads  for  Jerusalem
and  Judah.  "  I  pray  for  them  ;  I  pray
not  for  the  world,  but  for  them  which
thou  hast  given  me."  And  must  he  not
prevail  1  Church  of  God,  if  thou  canst
be  rejected,  yet  he  cannot  be.  No  !  in
the  name  of  him  who  loves,  and  lives,
and  pleads  before  the  eternal  throne,  let
us  set  up  our  banner  ;  for  God  has  given
the  victory  into  our  hands  in  answer  to
the  pleadings  of  his  Son  [Spurgeon],

Vers.  18—20.  Fray.  The  Church
may  rest  calmly  in  the  assurance  that
every  hostile  power  shall  be  judged  and
destroyed.  The  primary  reference  was
to  the  Jews  in  restoring  the  city  and
completing  the  temple.  But  it  has  a
wider  significance.  In  the  long  history
of  the  Church,  it  is  proved  that  "  no
weapon  formed  against  her  shall  prosper  "
[cf.  Lange].  God  directs  and  overrules
all  counsels  and  events  for  the  progress
and  ultimate  triumph  of  his  kingdom.


CHAP.  II.]  H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:   ZECHARIAE.  693


CHAPTER  H.

Critical  Notbs.]  The  third  vision.  Man]  Messiah,  who  measures  and  will  restore  the  city.
2.  Measure]  To  sketch  a  plan  for  its  arrangement  and  rebuilding,  denoting  exactness  of  proportions
and  completeness  of  number  (Rev.  ii.  1 ;  xxi.  15,  16).  4.  Run]  Necessity  of  despatch.  Young
man]  Zechariah  young  in  service  or  in  age,  probably  between  20  and  30  years  old.  Jerusalem]
to  have  vast  influx  of  men  and  cattle,  no  longer  to  be  confined  in  narrow  walls  and  fixed  limits,  but
spread  out  like  the  open  country  (Isa.  xlix.  19,  20  :  Ezek.  xxxviii.  11).  5.  Wall]  Protection,  in
allusion  to  nightly  encampments,  when  fires  were  kindled  to  keep  off  wild  beasts.  Glory]  Illustrious
displays  of  God's  presence;  an  allusion  to  the  Divine  presence  in  the  Holiest  (Rom.  ix.  4).
6.  North]  Babylon,  north  of  Jerusalem ;  an  address  to  such  Jews  as  still  remained  there,  through
infirmity,  ties  of  property,  &c.  The  urgency  of  the  call  denoted  by  repetition,  Ho,  ho!  Spread]
Scattered  in  violence.  7.  Zion]  t.  e.  inhabitants  of  Zion  ;  God's  people  dwelling  with  the  daughter,
i.  e.  the  people,  of  Babylon,  personified  as  a  woman  (Ps.  ix.  14  ;  cxxxviii).  8,  9,  After]  obtaining
glory  (ver.  5),  the  speaker  is  sent  to  inflict  vengeance  upon  the  enemies.  "  To  get  glory  upon  the
heathen,  i.e.  to  display  the  glory  of  God  upon  the  heathen  through  the  judgment  by  which  their
power  is  broken,  and  the  heathen  world  is  made  to  serve  the  people  of  God  "  [Keif\.  9.  For]  An
additional  explanation.  The  angel  of  the  Lord  would  swing  (shake)  his  hand,  as  a  gesture  of  menace
or  symbol  of  miraculous  power  (cf.  Isa.  xi.  15  ;  xix.  16)  over  the  nations.  As  a  consequence  they
would  be  a  spoil  to  the  Jews  who  had  been  obliged  to  serve  them.  Know]  here,  and  in  ver.  11,
signifies  as  frequently,  to  know  by  experience  [Henderson'].  10.]  Summons  to  rejoice  over  God's
indwelling,  and  its  happy  results.  Come]  at  Messiah's  first  advent,  and  more  especially  in  his  return
in  glory  (Jer.  i.  14,  and  Rev.  xxi.  3).  11.]  Then  many  nations  will  be  joined  ;  attach  themselves  to
Jehovah,  and  become  his  people  (cf.  chap.  viii.  20,  21  :  Isa.  xiv.  1).  The  restricted  kingdom  of
Israel  will  be  enlarged  and  glorified.  10,  11.]  (Heb.  xiv.  15).  The  Divine  residence  here  predicted
must  be  interpreted  of  that  which  took  place  during  the  sojourn  of  the  Son  of  God  in  the  land  of
Judea.  The  almost  entire  identity  of  the  language  here  employed  with  that  used  in  chap.  ix.  9,
where,  in  like  manner,  the  daughter  of  Zion  is  called  to  hail  the  advent  of  her  king,  compels  to  this
conclusion  (cf.  Ps.  xl.  7  :  Isa.  xl.  9,  10).  "With  this  appearance  and  residence  of  the  Messiah  are
connected,  as  their  consequents,  the  extensive  conversion  of  the  heathen  nations,  and  their  being
constituted  a  people  devoted  to  his  service  and  glory.  The  repetition  of  the  prediction  relative  to
his  residence  in  Zion  is  designed  to  express  the  certainty  of  the  event  [Henderson].  12.  Inherit]
Will  take  possession  of  Judah,  according  to  Deut.  xxxii.  9  ;  they  would  become  the  objects  of  God's
favour  and  delight.  13.  Silent]  All  flesh  summoned  to  wait  in  reverence  and  submission  to  Jehovah
coming  to  work.  Already  he  has  risen  up]  out  of  heaven  his  holy  habitation  (Deut.  xxvi.  15 :
2  Chron.  xxx.  27),  to  avenge  his  people.  "  The  Divine  majesty  has  seemed  to  be  asleep,  but  now
it  is  roused  up  ;  let  men  therefore  beware  "  [Lange],

HOMILETICS.
The  Measured  City. —  Verses  1 — 5.

The  third  vision  continues  the  subject  of  the  second — the  rebuilding  of  the  city
and  temple  of  Jerusalem.  The  one  represents  the  destruction  of  Israel's  foes,  the
other  the  increase  and  security  of  the  covenant  nation.  The  prophet  sees  a  man
with  a  measuring-line  advancing  on  the  scene,  and  asks  the  meaning.  The  answer
is  given,  that  Jerusalem  is  about  to  be  measured,  with  a  view  to  future  glory  and
extension.

I.  The  city  accurately  measured.  "  To  measure  Jerusalem,  to  see  what  is  the
breadth  thereof,  and  what  is  the  length  thereof."  When  a  house  or  city  is  built  or
enlarged  a  survey  is  made.  When  Constantine  resolved  to  erect  a  metropolis  for  his
mighty  empire,  he  set  out  on  foot,  at  the  head  of  a  procession,  to  trace  its  boundary.
His  attendants  expressed  astonishment  at  the  breadth  of  the  circuit  he  was  taking.
"  I  shall  still  advance,  till  he,  my  Invisible  Guide,  thinks  proper  to  stop/'  was  the
reply.  He  halted  not  till  wide  over  seven  hills  the  limits  were  fixed.  Then
millions  from  all  parts  of  his  dominions  set  to  work  with  wonderful  success.     The

38


594  HOMTLETIG  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [chap,  n.


Church  has  an  architect, — "  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God."  Before  a  stone  was
laid,  the  dimensions  were  taken,  and  the  plan  formed.  If  men  form  plans  before
they  build,  shall  not  God  1  In  creation  we  have  order  and  measurement,  in  pro-
vidence purpose  and  gradual  fulfilment.  God  knows  the  number  and  condition  of
the  Christian  Church — the  true  and  the  false  professors.  On  earth  and  in  heaven
this  city  is  defined  in  its  proportions,  and  exact  in  its  size  (Rev.  ii.  1  j  xxi.  15,  16).
II.  The  city  greatly  enlarged.  "Jerusalem  was  to  be  inhabited  as  towns
without  walls."  The  former  limits  of  the  city  would  be  too  narrow.  The
inhabitants  shall  become  so  many  that  they  shall  spread  out  and  dwell  securelv  in
the  open  country.  Earthly  walls  may  defend,  but  they  limit  and  straiten  a  city.
Barriers  will  be  removed,  and  the  boundaries  of  the  Church  shall  extend  far  and
wide.  Literally,  this  was  verified.  Josephus  and  others  tell  us  that  the  citizens
"  gradually  crept  out  beyond  its  walls,"  and  grew  "  to  a  number  which  the  city  in
its  ancient  dimensions  could  not  supply  with  dwellings."  Spiritually,  the  Mo-aic
walls  were  thrown  down,  and  the  limits  of  the  Church  extended  to  others  far
beyond  the  Jewish  nation.  Now  the  "line"  of  the  gospel  "is  gone  out  through
all  the  earth."  There  is  yet  room  for  "  every  kindred  and  people  and  nation  and
tongue."  Of  the  increase  of  this  city  there  will  be  no  end.  Its  inhabitants  at
length  will  be  "  a  multitude  which  no  man  can  number."  III.  The  city  Divinely
protected.  "  The  Lord  will  be  unto  her  a  wall  of  fire  round  about,"  &c.  No
danger  will  happen  to  the  unwalled  city.  God  would  encamp  round  it,  a  wall  of
fire,  to  consume  every  foe  that  invades  it.  Moats  may  be  crossed,  massive  walls  may
be  assailed,  and  mighty  ramparts  be  overturned;  but  a  circle  of  flame  is  an  impassable
barrier.  The  walls  of  Babylon  were  levelled  to  the  ground,  the  hills  round  Jeru-
salem were  scaled,  and  proud  cities  have  been  destroyed ;  but  God  is  the  defence
without  and  the  glory  within  the  Church.  It  is  a  strong  city,  and  God  has  appointed
salvation  for  walls  and  bulwarks  (Isa.  xxvi.  1).  "  As  the  mountains  are  round  about
Jerusalem,  so  the  Lord  is  round  about  his  people,  from  henceforth  even  for  ever."

In  vers.  4  and  5,  three  things  are  promised  respecting  the  literal  Jerusalem.

I.  Extension.  Notice  the  correspondence  between  ver.  4  and  the  represent-
ation in  the  first  vision  (chap.  i.  16,  17).  The  expression,  "  shall  be  inhabited
without  walls "  (or  as  a  modern  translator  gives,  "  as  unwalled  villages "),  has  a
meaning  sufficiently  obvious  ;  viz.  that  the  former  limits  of  the  city  which  u  the
man  with  the  measuring-line  "  was  about  to  take,  would  be  too  straitened  for  the
number  of  its  inhabitants  ;  so  that  they  would  spread  themselves  out  into  surround-
ing localities.  This  was  literally  fulfilled.  For  a  time  immediately  after  the  return
from  Babylon,  under  Nehemiah,  the  building  and  extension  were  rapid.  The  pro-
gress suffered  interruption  — adverse  and  prosperous  seasons, — opposition  and
favour ;  till,  in  the  period  of  the  heroic  Maccabees,  "  Jerusalem,  blessed  with  free-
dom and  prosperity,  filled  the  extent  of  her  walls  with  citizens,  resumed  her  royal
insignia  under  native  princes,  overpassed  her  former  boundaries, — and,  as  the  head
of  a  populous  and  extensive  territory,  rose  to  a  state  of  opulence,  power,  dignity,  and
splendour  which  she  had  not  known  since  the  division  of  Israel  and  Judah"
\_Stonard\.  II.  Security.  This  is  implied,  to  a  certain  extent,  in  the  former
particular.  The  very  idea  of  dwelling  "  without  walls "  implies  confidence  or  felt
safety.  But  mark  the  striking  promise  (ver.  5).  The  figure  is  most  vivid  and
expressive.  As  a  literal  "  wall  of  fire,"  environing  a  city,  would  effectually  prevent
intrusion  by  consuming  all  who  should  venture  to  attempt  it ;  so  would  Jehovah's
avenging  jealousy  destroy  every  assailant  of  the  holy  city.  He  himself  would  be
its  unseen  but  sure  protection.  Had  the  inhabitants — Israel  and  Judah  generally—
in  former  days  exercised  faith  in  God,  walked  in  his  fear,  maintained  the  purity
of  his  worship,  and  the  practice  of  his  laws,  its  walls  had  never  been  overthrown,
nor  its  temple  demolished  ;  it  would  have  been  as  safe  without  walls  as  with  them ;
it  would  never  have  experienced  its  seventy  years'  desolation,  nor  its  people  the  same


CHAP.  IL]


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ZECHAR1AH.


595


period  of  captivity  and  oppression.  Now  he  had  begun  their  promised  restoration.-
and  engages  to  invest  their  city  anew  with  his  all-protecting  presence  and  power.
The  figure  resembles  the  vision  in  2  Kings  vi.  15 — 17.  III.  Glory.  "The
glory  in  the  midst  of  her."  Jehovah's  presence,  "  dwelling  between  the  cherubim,"
was  from  the  beginning  and  all  along  the  true  glory  of  ancient  Jerusalem.  Its
Shekinah  was  glorious;  but  this  was  only  the  visible  symbol  of  an  infinitely  more
glorious  presence.  The  Jews  counted  the  fire,  and  the  temple,  the  ark,  the  altar,
and  the  pomp  of  ritual  their  glory.  But  these  external  glories  did  nothing  for  them.
When  by  their  sins  they  drove  Jehovah  from  them  their  true  glory  departed.
When  he  took  up  anew  his  abode  with  them — that  would  be  their  glory.  He
would  also  be  glorified  in  delivering  them  from  thraldom,  protecting  them  in
danger,  receiving  their  homage,  vindicating  their  rights,  and  avenging  their  wrongs
\Wardlaw  condensed].


HO  MI  LET IG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Vers.  1 — 5. 1  believe  this  passage  refers
to  a  happyand  glorious  future,  yet  to  come,
when  the  city  of  Jerusalem  shall  have  no
walls,  except  the  protection  of  the  Lord,
but  shall  be  extended  far  and  wide.  The
Jewish  people  and  their  royal  city  shall
remain  the  centre  of  the  manifestations
of  the  Divine  glory,  just  as  the  city  of
London  still  remains  the  centre  of  the
metropolis ;  but  the  nations  of  the  earth
shall  be  joined  unto  the  Lord ;  so  that
while  Jerusalem  remains  the  city  of  the
Great  King,  the  faithful  among  the  people
of  all  nations  shall  be,  as  it  were,  a
suburban  population  to  the  chosen  city,
and  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah  shall
extend  far  and  wide.  The  city  will  be
rebuilt  in  more  than  former  splendour —
the  Jews  restored  to  their  own  land,  and
Messiah  reign  as  a  prince  of  the  house  of
David.  The  text  will  bear  an  application
to  the  Church  and  congregation.  1 .  First,
let  us  see  the  man  with  the  measuring-line
in  his  hand.  It  is  possible  that  the  man
in  the  text  was  nothing  but  a  man.  I
have  intense  reverence  to  the  angel,  but
entire  dislike  to  the  man,  with  the
measuring-line.  Men  err  in  measuring
the  length  and  breadth  of  God's  true
Church.  2.  Hear  the  prophecy  of  a
great  extension  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ.
Look  for  it  now.  Learn  that  the  supply
for  all  the  number  shall  be  as  great  as  is
required.  The  cattle  are  the  provisions
for  the  population.  God  will  give  what-
ever provision  the  Church  wants.  Divine
love  shall  be  very  sweetly  enjoyed  among
all  the  members.  The  joy  of  the  Divine
presence  will  be  common.     3.  Observe


where  this  great  increase  is  to  come  from.
From  two  sources,  indicated  in  vers.  6
and  7.  Midtitudes  are  to  come  out  of
the  xoorld.  People  of  God  are  scattered
everywhere,  but  God  knows  them  and
will  bring  them  together.  A  large  num-
ber do  not  believe  in  Christ,  but  dwell
with  the  daughter  of  Babylon.  From
unconverted  men  and  women  we  expect
the  greatest  increase  through  the  Spirit's
power.  We  are  looking  for  it,  and  pray-
ing for  it ;  may  God  grant  it  [Spurgeon].
Vers.  1 — 4.  1.  It  is  our  duty  to  inquire
into  God's  dealings  with  his  Church,
search  out  his  mind,  and  read  his  word.

2.  Such  as  would  see  the  true  condition
of  the  Church  have  need  of  elevated  and
spiritual  minds,  enlightened  by  God.  "I
lifted  up  mine  eyes,"  &c.  [cf .  Hutcheson\

3.  Those  who  inquire  in  the  right  spirit
shall  be  lightened  to  discern  the  safety
and  glory  of  the  Church.  (1)  Enlightened
wonderfully.  Angels  and  prophets  were
commanded  to  teach.  (2)  Enlightened
earnestly.  "  Eun,  speak,"  &c.  "  Hot  go,
but  run  ;  yea,  fly  swiftly,  with  weari-
ness of  flight,  as  Dan.  ix.  21.  Christ
tli  inks  it  long  ere  his  praying  people  hear
from  him  "  [Trapp\

Ver.  4.  Run,  speak.  A  sermon  to
young  men.  Speak  to  him  of  his  mental,
moral,  and  spiritual  interests.  Speak  in
earnestness,  and  without  delay.  "Eun."
Eemember  the  honour  God  has  conferred
upon  you  in  giving  you  the  command  to
speak.  u  The  angel  tells  the  prophet,
but  the  prophet  must  tell  the  people  ;
God  using  not  the  ministry  of  angels,
but  men,  earthen  vessels,  to  bear  his  name


696  E0MTLEI7G  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [ohap.  il


to  his  people  (Acts  viii.  27 ;  ix.  6 ;  xvi.  glory  is  not  in  architecture  and  ritual,  in

9  "  [Trapp].  eloquence  and  music,  hut  in  the  presence

Yer.  5.    God  the  beauty  and  the  bul-  of  God's  Spirit,  converting  the  sinner  and

wark  of  the  Church.     His  presence   a  quickening  the  saint.    "  When  the  Lord

pledge  of  his  protection,  a  provision  for  shall  build  up  Zion,  he  will  appear  in

outward  and  inward  wants.     Zion's  true  glory."

HOMILETICS.
The  Call  to  Quit  the  World. —  Verses  6 — 9.

When  God  had  promised  to  rebuild  and  enlarge  Jerusalem,  dwell  in  it  and  glorify
it,  his  people  should  have  been  glad  to  return  to  it.  But  all  did  not  obey  the
proclamation  of  Cyrus  and  come  back  to  their  own  land.  Many  Jews  still  remained  in
Babylon.  They  are  urgently  called  to  leave  the  devoted  city,  and  avail  themselves
without  delay  to  return  to  their  own  country.     Apply  this  generally,  and  learn —

I.  That  God  calls  men  out  of  the  world.  "Come  forth."  Careless  and
indifferent  to  their  origin  and  their  destiny,  they  live  in  ease  and  forgetfulness  of
God.  Hardened  by  sin  and  overcome  by  the  world,  they  are  deaf  to  entreaty  and
disobedient  to  warning.  But  at  length  God  rouses  and  restores  them  to  himself.
This  call  to  men  is — 1.  Earnest.  2.  Repeated.  3.  Effectual.  II.  That  men  are
reluctant  to  obey  the  call.  Through  love  of  the  world  they  are  prejudiced  against
the  work  and  the  ways  of  God.  Unwilling  to  embark  in  difficulty,  they  linger  in
danger.  This  reluctance  springs  from  many  causes.  1.  Continuance  in  sin
obliterates  remembrance  of  spiritual  good.  The  Jews  forgot  their  own  land,  and
preferred  the  wealth  of  Babylon  to  Jerusalem  their  chief  joy.  Worldly  men  are
concerned  for  nothing  beyond  present  enjoyments.  2.  Present  possessions  are
thought  more  certain  than  future  good.  The  present  world  to  them  is  real.  Power,
position,  and  riches  are  seen  and  felt.  But  they  disbelieve  in  future  blessings.
"  Demas  hath  forsaken  me,  having  loved  this  present  world."  3.  U7ibelief  leads
men  to  disregard  all  calls  to  God.  The  Jews  might  doubt  the  power  of  God,  the
sincerity  of  the  proclamation,  and  the  benefits  of  returning  to  Jerusalem.  The
commands  of  God  seem  unreasonable,  the  calls  to  duty  prejudicial  to  selfish
interests,  to  indolent  and  wicked  men.  Others  may  go  to  the  celestial  city,  but
they  remain  in  the  city  of  destruction.  III.  That  sufficient  motives  to  comply
wit  a  the  call  are  presented  to  men.  God  deals  with  them  as  reasonable  and
intelligent  creatures.  He  does  not  constrain  or  force  men  out  of  the  world.  Many
reasons  are  given  in  the  text.  1.  Though  God  has  punished  yet  he  loves  men.
"  For  I  have  spread  you  abroad  as  the  four  winds  of  heaven."  Far  and  wide  had
they  been  dispersed  ;  with  violence  had  they  been  punished  ;  yet  God  recalled  them,
and  would  have  mercy  upon  them.  2.  Though  men  have  disobeyed  the  call  yet
they  are  not  forsaken.  Call  after  call  is  given  to  the  Jews.  They  had  been
ungrateful  and  disobedient,  but  God  invites  them  again  with  love  and  urgency.
3.  Though  invitations  are  given  to  man  yet  disobedience  will  endanger  their  soids.
God  was  about  to  destroy  Babylon  and  punish  the  oppressors,  to  spoil  the  nations
who  had  persecuted  his  people.  The  alarm  is  given.  "  Ho,  ho,  come  forth."  1.  In
the  world  is  danger.  "  Flee  "  like  Lot  from  Sodom.  Speed  your  way  and  lose
no  time.  "  Escape  for  thy  life  ;  look  not  behind  thee."  2.  In  the  world  is  captivity.
"Deliver  thyself."  From  sin  and  sloth,  from  danger  and  eternal  death.  "My
people,  go  ye  out  of  the  midst  of  her,  and  deliver  ye  every  man  his  soul  from  the
tierce  anger  of  the  Lord  "  (Jer.  li.  45  j  1.  8  ;  li.  6).

The  Blessedness  op  Israel,  and  the  Perils  op  her  Persecutors. —  Verse  8.

That  God  will  avenge  his  people  is  a  doctrine  of  the   New  as  of  the   Old
Testament  (2  Thess.  i.  6).    For  our  comfort  we  shall  describe  those  whom  God


chap.  n.j  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  597


avenges ;  in  order  to  excite  to  adoration,  show  the  intensity  of  Divine  sympathy ;
for  the  purpose  of  warning,  refer  to  the  perils  of  persecutors ;  and  for  the  fortifying
of  patience,  point  out  the  season  of  vengeance.

I.  The  subjects  of  the  Lord's  concern.  "  He  that  toucheth  you."  1.  A  sinful
and  perverse  people.  Not  a  nation  of  Enochs,  Abrahams,  nor  Johns,  but  an  erring,
provoking  nation.  2.  An  afflicted  and  chastened  people.  Here  is  the  secret  of
concern.  A  father  pities  his  petulant  and  wayward  child  if  he  be  wounded  and
troubled.  3.  A  chosen  people.  God  could  choose  no  other  but  a  sinful  people,  for
the  whole  earth  was  corrupt.  He  chose  them,  knowing  their  future  sins — ordained
that  from  them  should  come  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  4.  A  'penitent  people.  God
comforts  none  of  his  servants  until  they  mourn  their  sinfulness  and  perversity.
He  always  loves  them,  but  the  beam  of  his  consolation  cannot  reach  them  when
they  wilfully  immure  themselves  in  the  strongholds  of  sin.  II.  Tiie  intensity  of
Divine  sympathy.  "  He  that  toucheth  you  toucheth  the  apple  of  his  eye."  Tears
flow  at  once  if  the  eye  be  touched.  In  this  figure  we  see  the  truth  illustrated — 1.
That  the  sufferings  of  the  saints  personally  affect  the  Lord.  He  is  far  more  affected
by  the  malice  of  our  enemies  than  we  are.  Our  sufferings  compared  with  his  are
as  the  striking  of  the  body  to  the  wounding  of  the  eye.  When  Jesus  hung  upon
the  cross  they  touched  the  apple  of  his  eye.  2.  We  learn  also  that  the  Lord  feels
our  woes  instantly.  The  idea  seems  to  be  that  the  moment  the  saints  are  touched
the  Lord  is.  However  sudden  the  attack,  he  knows  and  feels.  III.  The  peril  of
persecutors.  The  pronoun  Ms,  is  understood  by  some  as  referring  to  the  subjects
of  Divine  vengeance.  Whether  it  be  so  or  not,  this  is  certain— they  stand  under
condemnation.  To  touch  a  king  or  a  king's  son  is  treason.  God  accounts  indignities
offered  to  Israel  as  indignities  offered  to  himself.  Pharaoh  touched  them  and  was
destroyed  ;  the  i\malekites  and  Canaanites  fought  against  them  and  were  defeated  ;
Assyrians  strove  to  enslave  them  and  were  discomfited.  Babylon  was  laid  in  the
dust;  Rome  was  spoiled,  and  ultimately  ruined.  IV.  Tne  season  cf  vengeance
"  After  the  glory."  After  the  return  to  their  own  land  ;  after  their  penitence  and
purification.  It  was  in  God's  own  time.  When  the  saints  have  entered  the  New
Jerusalem,  their  robes  being  made  white,  then  the  Lord  will  avenge  his  own  elect
in  a  special  and  final  sense.  — Stems  and  Twigs.

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Vers.    7,  8.     Two    classes   addressed.         We  have  here  the  twofold  object  of

1.  The  careless  and  indifferent.  Those  Christ's  mission.  1.  To  glorify  the
in   the  world,  living   in   ease  and  sin.     Church.     "  After  the  glory  " — in  restor-

2.  Those  in  Babylon  who  should  be  in  ing  and  edifying  the  Church.  Manifest-
Zion.  Christians  are  out  of  their  place  ing  his  glory  to  his  people  (John  xvii.
in  the  pleasures  and  pursuits  of  the  6).  2.  To  destroy  the  enemies.  He  hath
world.  "  Come  out  from  among  them,  "  sent  me  to  the  nations  which  spoiled
and  be  ye  separate,  and  touch  not  the  un-  you."  Mark — (1)  The  ease  with  which
clean  thing,  and  I  will  receive  you,"  &c.  this  is  done.  "  I  will  shake  mine  hand
(2  Cor.  vi.  17,  18  :  Rev.  xviii.  4).  upon  them."     A  mere  wave  of  the  hand

Vers.  8,  9.  The  Messiah,  not  the  pro-  is   sufficient    to    crush    all    opposition,

phet  nor  the  angel  mentioned  (ver.  4),  is  What  must  be  the  stroke  of  the  hand,  if

here  intended.      "  Observe  the  evidence  the  mere  shaking  will  prostrate  the  foe  !

of  the  Divinity  of  the  speaker  here,  in  the  (2)  The  power  with  which  this  is  done.

terms  used  by  him  :  '/  will  shake  my  The  nations  are  spoiled  of  their  strength

hand  at  them.*  This  can  be  the  language  and  honour — made  slaves  to  those  over

of  no  other  than  Jehovah ;  and  yet  it  whom   they   tyrannized.     3.    To  reveal

is  the  language  of  one  who  speaks  of  God  to  men.     "  And  ye  shall  know  that

'Jehovah'    as   having    tsent    him'" —  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent  me."

[Wardlaw],  Ver.  8.    How  admirably  adapted   to


598  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [ohap.  n.


popular  instruction  and  impression  is  the  saries  of  his  people  learn  their  danger,

imagery  of  Scripture.     Who   does   not  Let  this  encourage  us  to  do  anything  for

in  a  moment  understand  and  feel  the  the  people  of  God.     Let  his  people  also

allusion  before  us  %     "  He  that  toucheth  learn  to  do  their  duty.     If   God  is  so

you,"  &c.     It  reminds  us  of  union:  it  concerned    for  them,  how   should  they

shows  valuation :  it  bespeaks  attention :  regard  and   be  concerned  for  his  glory

it  expresses  sympathy.     Let  the  adver-  [Jay].

HOMILETIOS.
The  Glory  of  the  Messiah's  Kingdom. —  Verses  10 — 13.

These  words  look  beyond  the  Jewish  restoration,  to  the  earlier  and  remoter  times
of  the  Messiah.  With  his  appearance  and  residence  are  connected  the  return  of  his
people  to  his  service  and  glory,  and  the  extension  of  his  kingdom  among  the  heathen.
In  prospect  of  this  glory,  the  people  are  called  to  exult  with  joy.  The  glorification
of  this  kingdom  consists  in  the  following  privileges  : —

I.  In  the  residence  of  its  King.  "  Lo,  I  come,  and  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of
thee,  saith  the  Lord."  The  greater  the  resident  the  more  dignified  the  house.  God
dwelt  with  his  people  in  type  and  shadow,  in  the  glory  of  the  temple  and  the
blessings  of  his  Spirit.  Literally,  in  Christ's  first  and  future  coming;  spiritually,  in
the  power  of  his  grace  over  heart  and  life.  We  have  not  a  mere  poet,  statesman,  or
prophet,  but  the  great  God  himself,  dwelling  with  individuals  and  sections  of  the
Christian  community.  "  God  hath  said,  I  will  dwell  in  them  and  walk  in  them  ;
and  I  will  be  their  God,  and  they  shall  be  my  people  "  (2  Cor.  vi.  16  :  Ezek.  xxxvii.
27  :  Zech.  viii.  3).  II.  In  the  extension  of  its  dominion.  "  Many  nations  shall
be  joined  to  the  Lord  in  that  day."  Proud  exclusiveness  shall  cease  ;  the  walls  of
partition  shall  be  broken  down ;  and  Jew  and  Gentile  shall  become  subjects  of  one
King.  Hence  extension.  1.  By  the  restoration  of  the  Jews.  "The  Lord  shall
inherit  Judah."  "  It  was  to  be  on  the  principle,  to  the  Jew  first, v  says  Wardlaw.
"  Among  that  people  was  he  to  appear  and  dwell  while  on  earth.  The  chosen
people  were  not  to  be  utterly  and  finally  cast  off.  He  would  again  restore  them  in
mercy ;  gather  from  their  so  much  wider  and  longer-continued  dispersions  ;  restore
them  anew  to  the  land  of  their  fathers  and  the  city  of  their  God  (ver  12)."  2.  By
the  adoption  of  other  nations.  "  Many  nations  shall  be  joined  to  the  Lord  in  that
day."  New  converts  shall  inherit  the  blessings  of  the  chosen  people.  An  abundant
increase  is  promised  to  the  mere  handful  of  Jews.  This  is  the  purpose  for  which
Israel  existed  and  was  restored  (Jer.  xxiv.  7;  xxx.  22:  Ezek.  xi.  20;  xiv.  11).
Gentiles  shall  be  grafted  in  with  Jews  (Eom.  xi.  23)  ;  Jerusalem  shall  become
the  centre  of  glory,  the  throne  of  God,  and  one  law  shall  rule  the  stranger  and  the
homeborn  (Kx.  xii.  49).  "At  that  time  they  shall  call  Jerusalem  the  throne  of  the
Lord ;  and  all  nations  shall  be  gathered  unto  it."  III.  In  the  grandeur  of  its
achievements.  Earthly  kingdoms  achieve  greatness  and  create  happiness  by
wealth,  power,  and  war.  True  glory  springs  from  spiritual  birth  and  God's  presence.
1.  Great  joy  will  result  to  this  kingdom.  "  Sing  and  rejoice,  0  daughter  of  Zion."
Those  only  cm  rejoice  who  have  been  restored  to  God  and  recovered  their  purity —
those  with  whom  God  dwells,  and  whom  he  bids  rejoice  and  sing.  (1)  This  joy  is
abundant.  "  it  is  a  great  jubilee  of  joy,  to  which  Zion  is  invited.  Thrice  besides
is  she  invited  with  the  same  word  (Isa.  liv.  1  :  Zeph.  iii.  14,  15  :  Isa.  xii.  6),  and
all  for  the  restored  and  renewed  presence  of  God  "  [Pusey].  (2)  This  joy  is
bestowed  in  circumstances  unlikely.  Rejoice  in  trouble  and  opposition  !  Yes,  it  is
not  unseasonable  then.  Do  we  not  seek  medicine  in  sickness,  music  in  mourning  1
"  Cry  out  and  shout,  thou  inhabitant  of  Zion  :  for  great  is  the  Holy  One  of  Israel
in  the  midst  of  thee."  2.  Universal  submission  will  result  to  this  kingdom.  "  Be
silent  (hush),  0  all  flesh,  before  the  Lord."    Unbelievers  among  the  Jews  are  not  to


ohap.  n.]  ttOMILWPIG  COMMENTARY;  ZECKARIAH.  599


doubt  God's  promise,  and  enemies  in  all  nations  are  to  fear  his  power.  All  opposi-
tion will  be  subdued.  Willingly  or  unwillingly  men  must  submit  in  the  day  of
God's  power.     How  foolish  to  measure  wisdom  and  compare  strength  with  God,  to

"  contend  with  him  that  is  mightier  than  they  ! "  Learn  to  reverence  God's
authority,  to  hear  providential  warnings,  before  he  is  roused  for  the  last  act  of
justice,  to  pronounce  the  doom,  and  fix  the  eternal  condition  of  millions.  "Thou,
even  thou,  art  to  be  feared ;  and  who  may  stand  in  thy  sight,  when  once  thou  art
angry?"

HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Vers.  10 — 12.  The  joy  of  the  Church  (Ex.  iii.  5).  "It  is  not  one  technical
springs  from  three  sources.  1.  The  expression,  as  people  now  by  a  sort  of
presence  of  Christ.  2.  The  increase  of  effort  speak  of  '  the  holy  land.'  E very-
numbers.  3.  The  gathering  together  thing  which  has  reference  to  God  is  holy,
and  possession  of  God's  people  [cf.  The  land  is  holy,  not  for  any  merits  of
Hutchesonj.  theirs,  but  because  God  was  worshipped

Ver.  11.  (First  clause.)  The  formation  there,  was  specially  present  there.    It  was

of  national  brotherhood  by  Christianity,  an  anticipation  and  type  of  "  thy  holy

1.    Christianity   alone   affords    a    basis  Church  throughout  all  the  world  doth

for  it.     Socialism,  communism,  &c,  do  acknowledge  thee  "  [Pusey].

not.    Society  built  upon  any  other  found-  Ver.    13.     Three   reasons    for   silence

ation   will  fall,   and  great  will   be   the  implied.       1.   They     are    but     "flesh,"

fall.    2.  Christianity  alone  can  cement  it  weak  and  ignorant.     2.  He  is  Jehovah,

together.    Education,  science,  and  philo-  all-wise    and    all-powerful.       3.    He    is

sophy    useful,    but    not    sufficient.      3.  already  "  raised  up  out  of  his  place,"  and

Christianity  alone  guarantees  it.      '*  Na-  who   can   stand   before   him  ]     [A.    R.

tions  shall  be  joined."     "  I  will  mention  Fausset.~\

Rahab  and  Babylon  as  knowing  me.  Lo,  If    God  do  but  awake  for  us,  all  is

Philistia,  and  Tyre,  with  Ethiopia.     (To  presently  well  with  us.    Therefore,  when

each  of  which    it  shall  be  said),  This  the    Church   was  in    her    return   from

nation    was    born    there "      (in    Zion)  Babylon  the  prophet  concludes  with  an

(Ps.  Ixxxvii.  4.)  exultation  of  spirit.   Be  silent,  &c.    "AD

"  Mark  ye  well  Philistia's  legions,  flesh>  ye  tnat  are.  wicked  of  the  world,

Lo,  to  seek  the  Lord  they  come ;  ye  that  are  enemies,  be  ye  silent ;  leave

And  within  the  sacred  regions  your    boasting,    your    reproaching,    and

Tyre  and  Cush  have  found  a  home."  blaspheming,   for   the  Lord  is  awaked;

Thou  shalt  know,  &c.     The  manifest-  now  he  begins  to  stir  for  his  people,  he

ation  of  the  unity  of  the  Church  a  proof  will  stop  your  mouths  shortly.    All  flesh

of    the    Messiah's   commission.     When  takes  in  the  Church  and  people  of  God

nations  know  God,  the  world  will  know  too.    0  be  ye  silent,  in  regard  of  your  fears

saving  truth  (John  xvii  21 — 23).  and   doubtings,   murmurings    and    dis-

Ver.  12.   1.  The  inheritance.  "Judah."  tracted  complainings:  silence  all  these,

The  joining  of  nations  did  not  destroy  why?    The  Lord  is  awaked,  he  is  raised

God's  covenant  with  his  ancient  people,  up  out  of  his  holy  habitation  ;  that  is,  he

Hence    this    assurance   that   he   would  that  seemed  before  to  confine  himself  to

"  again  "  be  the  portion  of  Israel  ( Jer.  x.  those  higher  regions,  as  atheists  speak  in

16  ;  li.  19  :  Deut.  xxxii.  9  ).     "Pardon  Job,  to  walk  in  the  circle  of  the  heavens,

our  iniquity  and  our  sin,  and  take  us  for  not  intermeddling  with  the  earth  :  this

thine  inheritance."     2.  The  place.     "In  God  is  now  awaked,  raised  out  of   his

the  holy  land."    The  land  is  again  made  holy  habitation,  and  now  ye  shall  know

holy  by  God,  and  sanctified  by  his  pre-  that   he  orders  all   things  here  below;

sence.     So  he  calls  the  place  where  he  therefore  be  silent,  all  flesh"  [Caryl].
revealed  himself  to  Moses  holy  ground


600


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.


[OHAP.  II.


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  II


Vers.  1 — 4.  Behold,  a  man.  All
Zechari  all's  visions  are  remarkably  simple.
They  are  not  like  Isaiah's,  when  he  saw
the  Lord  sitting  upon  a  throne,  high  and
lifted  up ;  nor  like  Ezekiel's,  when  he
beheld  living  creatures  with  four  faces,
and  wheels  full  of  eyes.  Zechariah  had
not  imagination  enough  to  be  capable
of  beholding  with  due  appreciation  visions
so  complicated  and  mysterious.  He  was
not  the  proper  instrument  of  God  for  the
revelation  of  those  more  mysterious  mat-
ters :  but  the  Lord  had  a  place  for  him,
and  a  vision  for  him  too.  How  sweet  to
be  a  servant  of  God  in  any  position
[Spurgeon].

Ver.  5.  Wall.  China  is  said  to  be
protected  by  a  wall  of  stone ;  old  Eng-
land is  shielded  by  her  wooden  walls  ;
but  the  Church  of  God  has  a  better  wall
still,  for  she  has  the  Divine  wall  of  fire  ;
her  enemies  cannot  break  through  this  to
destroy  the  meanest  of  her  citizens,  and
her  false  friends  shall  say  to  themselves,
"  Who  among  us  can  dwell  with  eternal
burnings  1 "  and  so  shall  start  back  from
a  Church  which  is  visibly  sheltered  and
protected  by  the  presence  of  the  Most
High  [Spurgeon].

Ver.  7.    Deliver  thyself.

"  How  vain  and  poor,  and  little  worth,
Are  all  these  glittering  toys  of  earth

That  lure  us  here !
Dreams  of  sleep,  that  death  must  break,
Alas  !  before  it  bids  us  wake,
Ye  disappear"  [Manrique].

Ver.  8.  Apple.  It  is  a  charming
image.  The  eye  is  one  of  the  most
intricate  and  delicate  structures  in  the
human  frame ;  and  the  pupil  of  the  eye
— the  opening  by  which  the  light  of
heaven  enters  for  the  purpose  of  vision,
— the  most  delicate  and  easily  injured,  as
well  as  important,  part  of  that  structure.
Nothing  can  more  finely  convey  the  idea


of  the  sensitively  tender  care  of  Jehovah
for  the  objects  of  his  love.  There  are
many  figures  in  the  Bible  expressive  of
the  same  sentiment :  there  is  no  one
more  exquisitely  beautiful  than  this
[Wardlaw].

Ver.  9.  Shake.  God  is  known  b y  his
power;  that  power  is  known  by  his
works ;  and  how  shall  we  approach  to
estimate  him,  unless  we  examine  those
works?  [Macculloch].

Vers.  10 — 12.  Rejoice.  To  be  happy
we  must  be  blessed  with  the  presence  of
the  Holy  Spirit.  In  adversity,  in  pro-
sperity, in  sickness  and  in  health,  our
joys  will  be  pure,  our  sorrows  will  be
lightened,  with  this  holy  emanation  of
the  Deity  in  our  bosoms.  Natural  evil
we  must  feel ;  moral  evil  and  its  effects
we  shall  often  experience  ;  but  there  will
still  remain  in  our  hearts,  if  regenerated,
a  cordial  drop,  a  source  of  sweet  enjoy-
ment, of  which  no  external  circumstances
can  utterly  deprive  us  [V.  Knox].

Ver.  11.  Nations.  The  Jews'  un-
belief was  a  step  whereby  the  Gentiles
arose  to  the  knowledge  of  the  gospel ;  as
the  setting  of  the  sun  in  one  place  is
the  rising  of  it  in  another  [Charnock].

Ver.  13.  Silent  The  prophet,  like  a
crier  in  a  court,  commands  or  proclaims
silence.  The  Hebrew  word  means  hush,
inhibiting  speech.  Yield  all  reverence,
respect  and  fear,  stand  in  awe.  Let  the
wicked  silence  their  vain  boasts  and  the
godly  their  vain  fears.  Let  neither  the
one  nor  the  other  utter  a  word  before  the
Lord  [Caryl].  How  readily  can  Jehovah
command  an  audience  !  It  may  be  that
in  the  latter  days  he  will,  by  some  such
miracles  of  power  in  the  realms  of  grace,
constrain  all  earth's  inhabitants  to  attend
to  the  gospel,  and  submit  to  the  reign  of
his  all-glorious  Son  [Spurgeon].


jhap.  in.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  601


CHAPTEE  III

Critical  Notes.]  He]  The  interpreting  angel.  Standing]  As  before  a  judge  (Num.  xxxv.  12  :
Deut.  xix.  17  :  1  Kings  iii.  16).  A  judicial  transaction  represented,  say  some.  But  the  high  priest
is  described  as  having  entered  the  new  temple,  taken  his  position  before  the  altar,  and  was  about  to
offer  sacrifice  for  the  people,  when  he  was  opposed  by  Satan  [Henderson].  Satan]  No  human
adversary;  lit.  the  adversary.  Right]  The  side  of  the  accuser  (Ps.  cix.  6  :  Job  xxx.  12).  Resist]
Impede  or  oppose,  by  dwelling  upon  the  sins  of  high  priest  and  people  (cf.  ver.  3).  2.  Jehovah]  t,  e.
the  angel  of,  said.  Rebuke]  Twice  repeated,  "for  the  sake  of  emphasis,  and  with  the  repetition
the  motive  which  led  Jehovah  to  reject  the  accuser  is  added  "  [Keil],  God  will  not  only  nonsuit,
but  reprove  by  act,  and  overcome  the  accuser  (Ps.  ix.  5;  cxix.  21).  Plucked]  Delivered  from
Babylon.  God  will  not  desert  them;  though  denied  by  sin,  he  will  cleanse  them.  3.  Filthy]  garments
worn  generally  by  those  on  trial  among  the  Romans,  but  here  represent  the  guilt  and  punishment
of  the  Jews,  as  removal,  and  investment  of  splendid  attire,  indicate  restoration  to  enjoyment  and
privileges.  4.  Stood]  Ministering  angels,  honoured  with  standing  continually  before  the  great  King
(cf.  1  Kings  x.  8  :  Dan.  i.  5).  To  pass]  i.  e.  removed  its  guilt;  remit,  forgive,  and  justify  (2  Sam.
xii.  13  ;  xxiv.  10).  5.]  The  nation  not  only  to  be  forgiven  but  glorified.  Let]  The  prophet  asks
help.  Mitre]  The  priesthood  restored  ;  and  its  fair  colour  symbolizes  its  official  purity  and  order —
so  the  wish  complied  with.  6 — 10.]  Here  the  symbolic  act  of  reclothing  is  made  the  occasion  of  a
prophetic  address  through  the  high  priest  to  the  nation.  Protested]  Testified,  made  a  solemn
declaration  as  one  on  oath  (Gen.  xliii.  3  :  Deut.  viii.  19).  Walk]  God's  promise  was  connected  with
their  observance  of  his  ordinances.  Then]  Certain  privileges.  Judge]  Administer  right,  viz.  "  in
relation  to  the  duties  devolving  upon  the  high  priest  in  the  sanctuary  as  such  :  hence,  right  adminis-
tration of  the  service  in  the  holy  place  and  Holy  of  Holies  "  [Keil].  The  priestly  family  of  Joshua
would  take  a  part  in  the  future  government  of  the  nation.  Places]  Guides.  Stand  by]  Angels.
"  The  import  of  the  promise  is,  that  he  and  his  successors  in  office  should  enjoy  the  care,  direction,
and  aid  of  celestial  spirits  in  the  management  of  the  national  affairs  "  [Henderson].  8.  Fellows]
Thy  associates  in  the  priesthood.  Wondered]  Men  of  wonder,  of  sign  or  portent ;  typical  men,
foreshadowing  future  persons  or  events  (cf.  Isa.  viii.  18  :  Ezek.  xii.  6).  Branch]  All  expositors
admit  this  to  be  the  Messiah,  the  servant  (Isa.  xlii.  1)  :  the  sprout  from  the  stem  of  Jesse  (Jer.
xxiii.  5  :  Isa.  ii.  1,  2;  liii.  1).  9.  Stone]  Foundation  by  God,  the  chief  builder,  which  should  be
the  object  of  his  special  care.  Eyes]  upon  a  thing  denote  vigilance  and  care  (cf.  Ps.  xxxii.  8).  Seven]
denotes  perfection  ;  these  not  carved  upon  the  stone  [Calvin],  but  directed  towards  ;  fixed  upon
the  covenant  people  (cf.  Piev.  v.  6).  Engrave]  Lit.  "  I  will  open  the  opening  of  it."  What  kind
of  ornaments  it  does  not  say,  "  but  that  they  were  cut  out  or  engraven  in  the  foundation-stone,  the
exigency  of  the  place  requires,  except  we  regard  the  stone  as  here  used  by  synecdoche  for  the  whole
temple,  in  which  case  reference  will  be  had  to  the  finishing  off  of  the  structure,  the  foundation
of  which  had  been  laid  in  the  presence  of  Joshua  "  [Henderson].  Land]  of  Israel  with  its  inhabitants
representative  of  the  Christian  Church.  Remove]  the  punishment  to  which  Jews  had  been  exposed.
Day]  The  day  of  national  atonement  celebrated  after  completion  of  the  temple  (Lev.  xxiii.  27);
typical  of  day  of  atonement  by  Christ  (Heb.  x.  10 — 12;  vii.  27).  10  Under]  A  proverbial
description  of  a  happy  period  (1  Kings  iv.  25)  ;  an  emblem  of  tranquil  prosperity  (Mic.  iv.  4)  ;
of  personal  and  social  peace  in  the  gospel ;  and  of  the  blessed  condition  flowing  from  a  purified
Church.

HOMILETICS.
Joshua  Resisted  and  Established  in  his  Work. —  Verses  1 — 5.

This  fourth  vision  is  an  encouragement  to  the  people  in  their  work.  In  the  person
of  the  high  priest  they  stand  before  Jehovah  opposed  by  Satan,  assisted  by  Christ,
and  restored  to  covenant  blessings.

I.  Joshua  resisted  in  his  work.  The  condition  was  critical,  but  God  made  it
known  to  the  prophet.  "He  showed  me  Joshua."  1.  Joshua  resisted  in  his
service.  "  The  high  priest  standing,"  not  as  a  criminal,  but  officiating  as  priest,  and
ministering  to  Jehovah  (Deut.  x.  8).  He  is  engaged  in  prayer,  anxious  for  the
people  ;  but  opposed  in  his  work.  Honourable  duty  and  nearness  to  God  will  not
exempt  from  opposition  and  temptation.    Satan  presented  himself  with  the  sons  of


602  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [ohap.  m.


God  (Job  i.  6).  2.  Joshua  resisted  in  his  filthy  garments.  Filth  is  caused  by
sin.  The  soiled  robes  were  emblematic  of  his  own  and  the  sins  of  the  people — of
their  unworthy  and  abject  state  before  God.  The  nation  had  b^en  chastised,  but
its  guilt  was  not  cleansed.  Gross  wickedness  may  be  forsaken,  but  the  power  of  sin,
self-righteousness,  and  refined  idolatry  remain.  The  garments  of  all  Christians
should  be  clean,  "  for  glory  and  for  beauty"  (Ex.  xxviii.  2).  If  stained  with  filth
they  taint  the  dignity  of  office,  and  bring  accusation  against  it.  How  God  bears
with  our  manifold  infirmities  !  "  We  are  all  as  an  unclean  thing,  and  all  our  right-
eousnesses are  as  filthy  rags."  3.  Joshua  resisted  by  Satan.  "  And  Satan  stand
ing  at  his  (Joshua's)  right  hand."  Satan,  one  of  the  highest  created  spirits,  has
become  the  tempter  and  accuser  of  men — the  most  finished  example  of  perverted
will  and  unsanctified  power  in  the  universe.  He  would  probably  be  mortified  at
the  return  of  Divine  favour  to  the  Jews — plead  their  sinfulness  and  unfitness  for
the  work,  and  desire  that  God  would  cast  them  off  and  recall  his  grace.  This  was
a  vital  issue  for  that  day,  and  for  the  history  of  redemption  in  all  ages.  It  touched
the  existence  of  God's  kingdom  and  the  coming  of  the  Messiah  on  earth.  (1)  He
resisted  with  energy.  He  is  strong  and  experienced  in  his  work,  diligent  in  mischief,
and  ever  seeking  opportunities  to  do  it  (1  Pet.  v.  8).  (2)  He  resisted  in  the  fittest
■place.  The  right  hand  is  advantageous  ground  for  one  who  impedes  or  opposes
another.  When  the  enemy  can  choose  his  position  in  fight,  it  is  of  great  service  to
him.  The  subtlety  and  power  of  the  adversary,  the  guilt  and  weakness  of  men,  give
every  opportunity  for  success.  Satan  often  gets  the  advantage,  and  seems  likely  to
triumph  over  us.  "Let  Satan  stand  at  his  right  hand"  (Ps.  cix.  6).  (3)  He
resisted  at  the  fittest  time.  The  Jews  had  only  just  returned  from  captivity,  were
few  and  weak,  and  not  very  earnest  in  their  work.  God's  people  are  attacked,  like
Christ,  when  weakened  by  nature  (Matt.  iv.  2),  when  resistance  seems  impossible.
When  a  man  is  down,  little  will  crush  or  overcome  him.  Occasions  of  trial  are
chosen  that  the  fall  may  be  more  disgraceful  (Isa.  xxi.  4).  "  In  the  greatest  calm
provide  for  a  storm,"  said  Elizabeth.  "A  day  may  have  a  fair  beginning  and  a
foul  ending."  II.  Joshua  established  in  his  work.  He  had  a  defender  who
confounded  and  rebuked  the  adversary  in  his  evil  design.  "  The  Lord  said  unto
Satan,"  &c.  1.  His  adversary  is  defeated,  (a)  Defeated  by  the  Lord.  "The  Lord
rebuke  thee."  Satan  was  checked  by  one  who  silenced  him  without  arguments.
Christ  himself  gave  him  into  the  hand  of  God,  and  effectually  wiihered  him  with
rebuke  (Mark  i.  25,  26:  Luke  iv.  35).  "We  have  an  Advocate  with  the  Father."
(b)  Defeated  by  the  Lord  in  love  to  his  people.  They  had  no  merit  in  themselves.
It  was  enough  that  he  had  chosen  them.  "  The  Lord  hath  chosen  Jerusalem,"  and
maintained  his  choice  in  all  its  integrity.  The  nation  is  acquitted,  not  because  the
charges  of  Satan  were  false,  but  out  of  God's  free  love  to  them.  "  Who  shall  lay
anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  1  It  is  God  that  justifieth.  Who  is  he  that
condemneth  1 "  2.  His  sins  are  forgiven.  "I  have  caused  thine  iniquity  to  pass
from  thee."  The  filthy  garments  were  taken  away,  and  sin  completely  and  freely
forgiven.  In  Christ  Divine  wrath  is  appeased,  polluted  nature  cleansed,  and  guilty
man  justified  before  a  holy  God.  "  Who  is  a  God  like  unto  thee,  that  pardoneth
iniquity,  and  passeth  by  the  transgression  of  the  remnant  of  his  heritage?  He
retaineth  not  his  anger  for  ever,  because  he  delighteth  in  mercy."  3.  His  privileges
arc  restored.  God  not  only  acquits  but  restores  to  all  the  honours  and  duties  of
office,  justifies  and  sanctifies.  (1)  The  priesthood  was  restored.  He  was  clothed
with  change  of  raiment.  The  robes  of  the  high  priest  were  put  upon  him,  and  hts
ministered  for  the  people.  (2)  Its  official  qualification  was  given.  Priestly  vest-
ments did  not  complete  the  attire.  The  "  mitre"  the  turban  of  pure  white  linen,
with  its  holy  crown,  was  wanting.  "  Set  a  fair  mitre  upon  his  head."  Men  are
washed  and  decorated  to  be  qualified  for  work.  Ministers  and  teachers  must  be
holy  and  adorned  with  the  crown.   Engraven  on  their  breast-plate  must  be  the  title


(irvp.  in.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  603


of  their  office,  and  the  aim  of  their  life,  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord"  (Ex.  xxviii.  36).
"  Thou  shalt  put  the  mitre  upon  his  head,  and  put  the  holy  crown  upon  the  mitre."

We  may  take  Joshua  as  a  type  of  all  the  people  of  God,  as  they  stand  in  their
sense  of  sin  and  natural  faultiness,  subject  to  the  accusation  of  Satan,  but  delivered
by  their  gracious  Lord ;  and  the  change  of  raiment  as  setting  forth  the  forgiveness
of  sin  and  the  imputation  of  the  Saviour's  righteousness,  which  is  the  joy  of  all
believers.     Let  us  take  each  particular  separately.     I.  To  begin  where  the  vision
begins — with  the  believer  himself,  represented  by  Joshua.     He  is  described  as  a
priest,  standing  before  the  angel  of  the  Lord.     Mark  this.     He  is  a  priest.     Certain
sons  of  Korah  claim  to  be  legitimate  descendants  of  apostles,  and  pretend  to  be
priests  in  a  special  sense.     But  the  apostles  claimed  no  priority  beyond  others
(1  Pet.  ii.  5).     Every  humble  man  and  woman  that  knows  Christ's  power  in  the
soul — that  has  been  cleansed  from  dead  works — is  appointed  to  serve  as  a  priest  unto
God.     But  observe,  the  high  priest  is  "  standing  before  the  angel  of  the  Lord — "
standing  to  minister.    This  should  be  the  perpetual  position  of  the  believer  ;  not  in
a  bed  of  sloth,  or  wandering  about  for  private  business.     He  is  appointed  priest  for
ever;  should  always  be  offering  sacrifice,  and  attending  to  the  duties  of  his  high
calling.    He  ministers  before  the  angel  of  Jehovah.     He  can  never  stand  to  minister
before  Moses,  the  mediator  under  the  law ;  much  less  before  Jehovah  himself,  for
our  God  is  a  consuming  fire.     It  is  only  through  a  Mediator  that  we  poor  defiled
ones  can  ever  become  priests  unto  God.     Bead  the  next  word  in  the  light  of  your
own  experience.    "  Clothed  with  filthy  garments."    Did  you  ever  feel  this  in  coming
to  God  1   Perhaps  at  evening  prayer,  unable  as  the  head  of  the  household  to  pray —
in  your  business  kept  up  late,  and  distracted  in  the  house  of  God.     How  can  we
hope  for  a  blessing  on  anything  we  do,  with  a  heart  of  unbelief  !     But  do  not  let
a  sense  of  unfitness  keep  you  from  service — lead  you  to  renounce  your  priesthood.
Stand  where  you  are,  and  remember  it  is  the  only  place  where  sin  can  be  washed  and
prayer  accepted.     II.  Let  us  turn  to  another  individual.     An  adversary.     Satan
stood  before  the  angel  to  resist  Joshua.     Observe  the  name,  Satan,  which  signifies
an  adversary.     An  adversary  by  nature,  who  is  so  vile  that  he  cannot  help  being
the  adversary  of  everything  good.     This  adversary  selected  a  most  fitting  place.    He
accused  him  before  the  angel — before  God's  own  Son.     He  does  not  attack  Joshua
first,  but  seeks  to  prevent  his  acceptance.     If  once  persuaded  that  you  are  not  God's
children  and  not  accepted  before  him,  he  knows  that  serious  injury  is  done  us.    He
selected  a  fit  opportunity — when  Joshua  had  his  filthy  garments  on.    Expect,  when
you  have  lost  your  sense  of  justification,  when  conscious  of  sin,  and  you  feel  unfit  to
minister  before  God,  that  he  will  come  to  accuse  you.     III.  Here  is  a  very  gloomy
picture — the  believer  willing,  but  quite  unable,  to  minister  unto  the  Lord  ;  but  the
Angel  speaks.    He  has  been  silent  till  now.    This  rebuke  comes  at  the  right  season.
When  Satan  accuses,  Christ  pleads.    He  does  not  wait  until  the  case  has  gone  against
us — then  express  regret;  but  is  always  a  present  help.  He  knows  the  heart  of  Satan,
being  omniscient ;  and  long  before  he  can  accuse,  puts  in  the  plea  on  our  behalf,  and
stays  the  action  till  he  gives  the  answer  to  silence  every  accusation.     This  rsbuke
came  from  the  very  highest  authority.     "Jehovah  rebuke  thee,  0  Satan."     If  God
hath  chosen  his  people,  it  is  no  use  for  Satan  to  attempt  their  overthrow.     The
rebuke  is  forcibly  applicable  to  the  case  in  hand.     Satan  says,  "The  man's  garments
are  filthy."  "  Well,"  says  Jesus,  " how  do  you  expect  them  to  be  otherwise?  When
you  pull  a  brand  out  of  the  fire,  do  you  expect  it  milk-white  or  polished'?"     This
plea  did  not  require  a  single  word  to  be  added  to  it  from  Joshua.     This  so  silenced
the  devil  that  he  was  speechless.     He  has  often  made  out  a  case  against  u^,  but
been  nonplussed  !     "I  will  sift  him  like  wheat  in  my  sieve."     His  plans  would
succeed,  but  there  is  a  "but"  in  the  way  (unfortunate  for  him,  fortunate  for  us).
i'  But  I  have  prayed  for  thee,  that  thy  faith  fail  not."     IV.  A  matchless  deed  of


604


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ZECEARIAH.


[chap.  in.


grace,  is  the  soul  of  the  text.  Sin  is  removed.  "  Take  away  the  filthy  garments
from  him."  The  order  is  given  to  clothe  him.  "  I  will  clothe  thee  with  change  of
raiment."  The  righteousness  of  Christ  is  given  to  the  believer.  One  thing  more.
The  prophet  was  so  astonished  to  see  the  change  that  he  broke  out  and  spake
himself.  "  And  I  said,  Let  them  set  a  fair  mitre  upon  his  head."  Some  of  God's
people  get  as  far  as  imputed  righteousness,  believe  themselves  to  be  accepted  in
the  Beloved,  but  tarry  there.  Put  on  your  mitre,  and  praise  the  covenant  angel,
who  in  Jehovah's  name  has  taken  away  your  filthy  garments.  Notice  the  closing
sentence.  "The  angel  of  the  Lord  stood  by."  We  want  him  always  to  stand  by,
though  clothed  with  new  garments,  and  crowned  with  the  mitre.  We  want  his
strength,  comfort,  and  the  light  of  his  countenance.  "  Abide  with  us,"  must  be  our
daily  prayer  [From  Spurgeon].

HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.


Ver.  2.     There  are  two  grounds    on
which   the  rebuke   of    Satan  proceeds.

1.  Jehovah's  choice  of,  or  delight  in,
Jerusalem.  "  The  Lord  that  hath  chosen
(or  that  delighteth  in  Jerusalem)  rebuke
thee."  Satan  knew  full  well  that  in
his  opposition  to  Joshua,  to  prevent  his
officiating  as  priest,  he  was  opposing
Jehovah,  who  had  returned  in  loving-
kindness  to  Jerusalem.  He  would  have
that  loving-kindness  kept  back  and
turned  away,  and  the  punishment  of
their  sins  continued ;  and  would  thus
have  interdicted  the  blessing  of  Jehovah.
Since  it  was  the  pleasure  of  Jehovah  he
was  seeking  to  hinder,  it  was  appropriate
that  the  rebuke  should  come  from  him.

2.  The  malice — the  envious  and  deadly
spite  of  the  devil,  stands  here  in  contrast
with  the  benevolence — the  relenting  for-
bearance and  love  of  Jehovah.  "  Is  not
this  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire  ] "
The  question  must  be  understood,  not
of  Joshua  considered  only  personally,  but
representatively — as  relating  to  the  rescue
of  the  people  as  well  as  himself  from
oppression  and  wrong,  and,  if  their  ene-
mies had  had  their  will,  extinction;  and
the  deliverance  and  restoration  of  the  very
office  of  Joshua — the  priestly  office —
which,  without  such  Divine  interposition,
might  have  been  lost.  Satan  would  have
had  the  brand  kept  in  the  fire  till  it  was
consumed.  But  Jehovah's  power,  and
goodness,  and  faithfulness,  had  plucked  it
out  of  the  flames — rescued  it  from  such
consumption.  The  rebuke  is  evidently
that  of  indignant  supremacy  and  offended
benevolence,   directed   at   once    against


malignity  and  presumption  [Wardlaw].

Is  not  this  a  brand  ?  &c.  1.  If  delivered
once,  is  it  reasonable  to  cast  them  into
the  furnace  again]  Persecutors  in  the
days  of  Queen  Mary  were  cruel  enough
for  this ;  but  we  must  have  compassion
upon  men,  "  pulling  them  out  of  the
fire  "  (Jude  22).  How  much  more  will
God  have  pity !  2.  If  God  loves  his
people,  shall  he  change?  Never  !  Though
stained  with  dirt  and  scorched  with  fire,
he  will  never  cast  them  off.  Like  the
three  worthies  (Dan.  iii.  20),  they  will  be
delivered  from  fire  and  promoted  to
honour  The  gifts  and  calling  of  God
are  without  repentance.  Rebuke  thee.  1.
This  a  warning  against  the  sarcastic,
bitter,  and  virulent  spirit  which  so  often
shows  itself  in  speaking  and  writing
against  others  [Wordsworth'].  2.  A
lesson  not  to  argue  with  the  tempter,  but
refer  him  to  the  Saviour,  whose  rebuke
is  powerful  and  successful  (Ps.  lxxx.  6  :
Matt.  iv.  10).

Vers.  3 — 5.  Two  things  are  here  said
to  belong  to  free  acceptance  with  God.
(1)  The  taking  away  of  the  guilt  of  our
sin,  our  filthy  robes ;  this  is  done  by
the  death  of  Christ,  the  proper  fruit
of  which  is  the  remission  of  sin.  (2)
But  more  is  required  ;  even  a  collation
of  righteousness,  and  thereby  a  right
to  eternal  life.  This  is  called  a  change
of  raiment,  or,  as  in  Isaiah  lxi.  10,  the
garments  of  salvation,  the  robe  of
righteousness.  This  is  made  ours  on]y
by  the  obedience  of  Christ,  as  the  other
is  by  his  death  [Oiven~\.

We   may  learn  from   the   whole — 1.


chap,  in.]  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAE.  605


That  those  whom  God  redeems  he  will  ness,  cleansing   and   love,  should  be  a

eause  to  serve  him.    2.  That  though  sin  reason  for  confidence  in  prayer,  a  support

may  pollute,  God  freely  forgives  them,  in  temptation,  and  a  motive  to  activity  in

3.  That  God's  deliverance  and  forgive-  service.

HOMILETIQS.
Great  Promises  on  Specified  Conditions. — Verses  6,  7.

We  have  here  three  things  promised,  or  engaged  for — and  the  promise  made  to
depend  on  certain  conditions.  It  matters  not  which  of  the  two  we  notice  first ;  we
may  take  them  as  they  stand.

I.  The  specified  conditions.  The  stipulations  are  these  :  "  If  thou  wilt  walk  in
my  ways,  and  keep  my  charge  "  (marg.,  ordinance).  These  two  conditions  are  closely
connected.  1.  Personal  holiness.  The  former  relates  to  personal  character  and
conduct.  He  was  to  he  found  obedient  to  God's  precepts ;  exemplifying  in  his  own
character  the  sanctity  and  moral  rectitude  which  it  was  part  of  the  duty  of  the  priest
to  inculcate  on  the  people  :  "  for  the  priest's  lips  should  keep  knowledge,  and  they
should  seek  the  law  at  his  mouth  :  for  he  is  the  messenger  of  the  Lord  of  hosts."
2.  Official  faithfulness.  He  was  to  keep  the  charge  of  Jehovah,  i.  e.  faithfully  to
perform  all  official  duties,  punctually  to  attend  to  every  enjoined  function  of  his
commission  ;  keeping  all  the  ordinances,  as  God  had  delivered  them  to  Moses  (Lev.
viii.  35).  II.  The  great  promises.  Three  things  depended  upon  these  conditions.
1.  Thou  shalt  "judge  my  house."  The  word  house  does  not  mean  temple,  but
household.  "  The  house  of  Jacob  "  is  a  designation  of  Israel,  who  were  regarded
and  repeatedly  spoken  of  as  the  family  of  Jehovah.  u  I  am  a  father  to  Israel."
To  judge  his  house,  then,  is  the  same  thing  as  to  rule  his  people.  This,  you  think,
did  not  pertain  to  the  priesthood ;  but  it  is  remarkable  how  it  thus  turned  out,  in
regard  to  the  priestly  lineage  in  the  family  of  Joshua.  Not  in  the  person  of  Joshua
himself;  but  after  Nehemiah's  death,  a  large  portion  of  the  management  of  the
civil  affairs  of  Judea  was  committed  by  the  Syrian  prefects  into  the  hands  of  the
high  priest;  and  it  was  more  fully  realized  in  the  time  of  the  Maccabean  high
priests,  in  whom  the  civil  and  the  sacred  were  eminently  united.  When  these
princely  priests  failed  in  the  conditions  here  specified  in  the  arrangements  of
providence,  the  glory  departed.  2.  Thou  shalt  " also  keep  my  courts"  He  was  to
continue  to  have  the  charge  of  God's  house,  to  minister  in  the  holy  place,  and
superintend  the  entire  system  of  the  sacerdotal  and  Levitical  services.  His
continuance  in  this  high  and  honourable  office, — that  is,  in  the  way  of  succession
in  his  lineage,  depended  on  the  conditions  mentioned,  of  personal  obedience  and
official  fidelity.  It  is  the  same  style  of  conditionality  with  that  on  which  Jehovah
promised  to  Israel  generally,  and  took  them  into  covenant :  M  Now,  therefore,  if  ye
will  obey  my  voice  indeed,  and  keep  my  covenant,  then  ye  shall  be  a  peculiar
treasure  unto  me  above  all  people  :  for  all  the  earth  is  mine  :  and  ye  shall  be  unto
me  a  kingdom  of  priests,  and  an  holy  nation."  3.  I  will  give  thee  "places  to  walk
among  these  that  stand  by."  By  "  these  that  stand  by  "  are  meant,  the  attendant
angels.  The  difficulty  here  is  with  the  word  rendered  "places  to  walk"  (marg.,
walks).  The  original  in  some  degree  is  ambiguous.  But  from  the  conjugation  of
the  verb  to  which  as  a  participle  it  belongs,  we  are  disposed  to  acquiesce  in  the
judgment  of  Henderson,  who  makes  it  to  signify,  neither  walks  nor  walkers,  but
those  who  guide  or  conduct  in  walking  : — "  I  will  give  thee  ministering  guides
among  these  that  stand  by."  No  sense  can  correspond  better  than  this  with  all
that  we  learn  from  the  previous  history  of  the  Jewish  people  from  the  call  of  Abraham
onwards,  respecting  the  ministration  of  angels.  It  is  a  promise,  then,  of  the  aid  and
direction  of  those  who  surround  the  Divine  throne,  "the  ministerings  spirits  sent


606  HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY :  ZECE ARIAS.  [chap,  m.


forth  to  minister  to  the  heirs  of  salvation."  If  the  rendering  "  walks"  or  "places
to  walk"  be  retained  (though  we  feel  doubtful),  then  the  promise  will  be  a  higher
one  still — namely,  that  of  an  association  with  angelic  spirits  from  heaven  [Adapted
from  Wardlaw].

Men  op  Wonder. — Verse  8.

The  Jewish  economy  was  typical  in  its  aim.  Its  sacerdotal  institutions  were
"  shadows  of  good  things  to  come."  Hence,  "  Joshua  and  his  fellows  that  sat  before
him  " — inferior  priests,  who  officially  ministered  to  the  high  priest — are  termed  men
of  signs.  They  typified  the  Messiah  here  promised,  and  those  whom  the  Messiah
admits  to  share  his  priesthood  (1  Pet.  ii.  5  :  Eev.  v.  10).  These  words  might  be
taken — First,  as  a  pledge  to  the  desponding  Jews  that  the  priesthood  would  be
preserved  until  Christ  came.  Secondly,  as  a  reproof  to  the  unbelieving  multitude,
who  wonder  at  God's  people  with  incredulity  (Ps.  lxxi.  7  :  Isa.  viii.  18).  Apply
the  words  to  Christians.

I.  They  are  a  wonder  to  themselves.  They  are  astonished  at  God's  love  to
them — amazed  to  think  of  his  grace  and  goodness.  Why  are  they  called,  while
others  refuse  to  come  1  They  were  chosen  not  because  better  than  others,  not  on
account  of  their  foreseen  repentance  and  faith.  "I  am  a  wonder  to  myself,"  said
one.  "  I  am  a  miracle  of  grace,"  said  another.  "  By  the  grace  of  God,  I  am  what
[  am."  II.  They  are  a  wonder  to  their  fellow-men.  Believers  are  "  to  thousand
eyes  a  mark  and  gaze."  They  are  not  understood  in  their  spirit,  habits,  and
employments.  To  the  wicked,  they  are  a  puzzle.  They  are  often  feared,  despised,
and  persecuted.  Their  spiritual  birth  is  a  mystery  of  mercy,  their  life  a  constant
reproof  to  the  ungodly,  and  their  death  a  triumph  of  grace.  "  I  am  as  a  wonder
unto  many."  "  Behold  I,  and  the  children  whom  the  Lord  hath  given  me,  are  for
signs  and  wonders  in  Israel,  from  the  Lord  of  hosts."  III.  They  are  a  wonder  to
angels.  Angels  take  deep  interest  in  redeemed  men,  and  wonder  at  their  characters
and  pursuits.  As  Jesus  was  "  seen  of  angels,"  so  are  his  people.  "  Last  "  in  the
judgment  of  the  world,  they  are  deemed  by  heavenly  hosts  worthy  of  intense
regard.  "  For  we  are  made  a  spectacle  (theatrical  exhibition)  unto  the  world,  and
to  angels  (good  and  bad),  and  to  men  "  (1  Cor.  iv.  9).

My  Servant,  the  Branch. —  Verse  9.

Only  one  person  is  here  typified  by  the  Jewish  high  priests,  and  most  comment-
ators admit  this  person  to  be  the  Messiah,  under  the  titles  of  the  text.

I.  My  Servant.  1.  Under  this  title  was  Clirist  predicted.  This  was  the
characteristic  name  of  the  Messiah.  "  Behold  my  servant,  whom  I  uphold ;  mine
elect,  in  whom  my  soul  delighteth  "  (Isa.  xlii.  1  ;  xlix.  3  ;  liii.  11  :  Ezek.  xxxiv.  23).
2.  Under  this  capacity  he  appeared  on  earth.  "  I  am  among  you  as  one  that
serveth."  Thus  honouring  service,  and  dignifying  the  humblest  calling.  "  Who  made
nimself  of  no  reputation,  and  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made
in  the  likeness  of  men."  3.  In  this  capacity  he  rendered  most  eminent  service.
No  one  ever  merited  this  title  like  him.  He  rendered  a  service  most  signal  and
gracious,  which  no  one  in  the  universe  could  perform  beside.  "  Being  formed  in
fashion  as  a  man,  he  humbled  himself,  and  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the
death  of  the  cross."  II.  The  Branch.  He  is  "  the  branch  of  the  Lord"  (Isa.  iv.  2) ;
"  a  righteous  branch  "  (Jer.  xxiii.  5) ;  "  the  branch  of  righteousness  "  (Jer.  xxiii.
15).  He  is  the  tender  branch  from  the  almost  extinct  royal  line  of  David.  Not
"  a  limb,  in  the  sense  of  one  among  many  on  the  same  tree,  but  a  shoot  which  springs
up  from  the  root ;  and  which,  though  small  at  first,  becomes  a  tree  of  wonderful
qualities"  [Cowles],  This  marks— (1)  His  humble  origin;  (2)  gradual  growth;
and  (3)  ultimate  prosperity.     In  course  of  time  the  tender  shoot  would  become  the


chap,  m.1  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ZECHARIAH.  607


monarch  of  the  forest,  and  under  its  mighty  branches  and  beautiful  foliage  the
nations  of  the  earth  would  take  shelter.

The  Mission  op  the  Messiah  and  its  Results. —  Verses  8 — 10

These  words  point  to  the  author  of  the  blessings  promised — to  him  by  whom  sin
was  to  be  expiated,  and  the  kingdom  of  God  flourish.  They  set  forth  the  mission
of  the  "  servant,  the  Branch,"  and  the  results  of  that  mission  in  the  building  of  a
more  glorious  temple  than  that  of  Solomon  or  Zerubabbel.

I.  The  method  of  his  coming1.  He  comes  as  a  servant,  and  as  the  sprout.
I.  As  a  branch.  "  According  to  which  the  Messiah  is  to  spring  up  as  a  rod  out  of
the  stem  of  Jesse  that  has  been  hewn  down,  or  as  a  root-shoot  out  of  a  dry  ground.
Tsemach,  therefore,  denotes  the  Messiah  in  his  origin  from  the  family  of  David,
that  has  fallen  into  humiliation,  as  a  sprout  which  will  grow  up  from  its  original
state  of  humiliation  to  exaltation  and  glory,  and  answers  therefore  to  the  train  of
thought  in  this  passage,  in  which  the  deeply  humiliated  priesthood  is  exalted  by
the  grace  of  the  Lord  into  a  type  of  the  Messiah  "  [Keii].  2.  A  branch  Divinely
caused  to  grow.  "  I  will  bring  forth  my  servant,  the  Branch."  God  himself  under-
takes to  bring  him  forth.  He  is  God's  servant,  and  will  have  to  do  God's  work.
He  came  from  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  and  was  upheld  until  he  had  done  the
will  of  the  Eather.  "  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  saying,  Behold  the  man
whose  name  is  the  Branch  ;  and  he  shall  grow  up  out  of  his  place,  and  he  shall
build  the  temple  of  the  Lord."  II.  The  nature  of  his  work.  1.  To  prepare  the
kingdom  of  God.  "  I  will  engrave  the  graving  thereof  "  (ver.  9),  **.  e,  engrave  it  so
as  to  prepare  it  for  a  beautiful  and  costly  stone.  "  The  preparation  of  this  stone,  i.  e.
the  preparation  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  established  in  Israel  by  the  powers  of  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord,  is  one  feature  in  which  the  bringing  in  of  the  tsemach  will  show
itself"  [Keil^].  2.  To  remove  iniquity.  li  And  I  will  remove  the  iniquity  of  that  land."
The  removal  of  punishment  from  the  Jews  was  typical  of  the  remission  of  sins  by
the  atonement  of  Jesus  Christ.  (1)  From  the  Jews.  From  "that  land" —
multiform  and  aggravated  as  that  was  (Jer.  1.  20).  (2)  From  all  nations.  To  the
Jew  first,  then  the  Gentile  (Acts  iii.  26).  (3)  "  In  one  day."  The  wiping  away  will
not  be  imperfect  and  continually  repeated ;  but  once  and  for  ever  taken  away.
"  By  one  offering  he  hath  perfected  forever  them  that  are  sanctified  "  (Heb.  x.  12  ;
ix.  26 ;  vii.  27).  III.  The  results  which  flow  from  the  completion  of  his  work.
When  guilt  is  taken  away,  discontent  and  misery  will  be  swept  away ;  peace  and
prosperity  will  be  enjoyed  by  a  purified  Church.  We  have  a  figure  (ver.  10)  for
a  state  of  repose — peace,  security,  personal  and  social.  The  peaceful  influence  of  the
gospel  was  felt  from  the  first — individually,  in  the  soul  of  each  subject  of  it ;
socially,  in  the  intercourse  of  all.  Jew  dwelt  in  peace  with  fellow-Jew  ;  and  even
Gentiles  were  numbered  among  neighbours  and  brethren,  who  before  were  aliens
and  outcasts,  "  hated  with  perfect  hatred."  The  proclamation  was  to  be,  "  Peace,
peace  to  him  that  is  far  off,  and  to  him  that  is  nigh  " — and  the  corresponding  effect
of  it  was,  "  He  is  our  peace,  who  hath  made  both  one,  and  hath  broken  down  the
middle  wall  of  partition"  [Wardlaw.~\  "They  shall  sit  every  man  under  his  vine
and  under  his  fig-tree ;  and  none  shall  make  them  afraid :  for  the  mouth  of  the
Lord  of  hosts  hath  spoken  it."

"  No  sound  of  war  is  heard — no  thought  of  sin,
But  one  sole  word,  *  Peace— Peace.'  "

HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  8.  Sign  men.  1.  Wonderful  in  and  restored  to  God  and  duty.  2.
their  experience.     Delivered,  pardoned,     Wonderful  in  their  manners.    Despising


908


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.


[chap.  in.


pleasures  which  others  esteem ;  pursuing
paths  which  others  term  folly.  "  They
think  it  strange  that  ye  run  not  with
them  into  the  same  excess  of  riot  ;
speaking  evil  of  you."  3.  Wonderful  in
their  character.  Redeemed  and  made
holy — types  of  future  converts,  and  of
all  priests  unto  God.

Ver.  9.  The  stone.  Taking  it  as  the
foundation-stone  of  the  temple.  1.  Its
laying.  By  God,  before  Joshua.  2.  Its
protection.  "  Upon  one  stone,  seven
eyes."  "  The  eye,"  says  Wardlaw,  "  is
the  natural  hieroglyphic  for  knowledge  ;
and  seven,  as  every  reader  of  the  Bible
is  aware,  is  the  number  used  to  denote
completeness,  perfection.  '  Seven  eyes '
denote  the  perfection  of  observant  know-
ledge :  and  as  '  the  eyes  of  Jehovah '
mean  Jehovah's  observation  and  know-
ledge, his  'seven  eyes'  express  the  per-
fection of  both — omniscient  observation"
— (cf.  chap.  iv.  10).  Hence  this  is  a
proof  of — (1)  Providential  care  ;  and  (2)
an  encouragement  to  the  Jews  in  work.
Taking  the  stone  with  many  as  repre-
senting Christ,  notice — 1.  God  declares
that  he  lays  (Heb.),  that  he  gives  a  stone
before  Joshua,  lit.  before  his  face,  to  de-
fend him,  and  in  order  that  he  may  place
it  as  the  foundation  and  corner-stone
of  his  building,  which  symbolized  the
Church,  of  which  the  corner-stone  is
Christ  (Isa.  xxviii.  16:  Ephes.  ii.  20:
1  Pet.  ii.  6).  2.  The  stone  is  graven,
like  the  precious  stones  in  the  breast-
plate of  the  high  priest,  with  the  names
of  the  tribes  upon   them    (Ex.    xxviii.

21  :  cf.  original  in  2  Tim.  ii.  19  ;  and
Rev.  xxi.  14).  3.  The  figure  here  is
of  eyes,  emblems  of  light  (cf.  Matt.  vi.

22  :  Ezek.  i.  18  :  Rev.  iv.  4—6).  The
stone  is  not  a  dark,  lifeless  stone,  like
other  stones,  but  a  living,  seeing  stone.
4.  Those  eyes  are  seven,  signifying  com-
pleteness, representing  the  sevenfold  gifts
of  the  Spirit  with  which  the  Messiah  was
anointed,  animated,  strengthened,  and
enlightened  (Isa.  xi.  2) ;  indicating  the
perfection  of  the  spiritual  illumination
and  perpetual  watchfulness  of  Christ
[IForcZs.].  The  language  is  future  :  *  I
will  engrave  the  graving  (or  the  sculp-
ture) thereof."     As  the  stone  is  a  figure,


so  is  the  engraving  that  of  hieroglyphic
eyes,  which  may  convey  a  twofold  mean-
ing. The  first,  certainly,  that  the  eyes
of  Jehovah  should  be  continually  upon
it,  with  intense  and  delighted  interest ;
and  upon  the  glorious  spiritual  structure
that  was  to  rest  upon  it,  marking  its
progressive  advancement  to  its  final
completion.  The  idea  is  the  same  as
that  expressed  respecting  the  land  of
Canaan :  "  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  thy
God  are  always  upon  it,  from  the  be-
ginning of  the  year  to  the  end."  The
second,  one  which  I  express  with  hesita
tion,  because  not  sure  about  the  propriety
of  assigning  two  meanings  to  one  hiero-
glyphic. I  cannot  forget  that  the  stone
represents  a  person,  and  that  person
Divine.  Jesus  Christ  himself  is  the
u  chief  corner-stone."  May  not  the  en-
graving of  the  seven  eyes,  then,  convey
the  additional  idea  of  the  Deity  of  him
whom  the  stone  represented — as  himself
the  possessor  of  Divine  omniscience ;
which  could  say — "  All  the  churches
shall  know,  that  I  am  he  that  searcheth
the  reins  and  the  hearts  "  [  Wardlaw].

Seven  eyes  upon  one  stone.  Observe  the
notice  that  Christ  was  to  excite  and
engage.  The  eye  of  God  was  upon  him.
He  had  complacency  in  contemplating
him  in  the  redemption  of  his  people.
The  eyes  of  angels  were  upon  him.
They  announced  and  sang  his  birth,  and
ministered  to  him  in  the  wilderness.
The  eye  of  Satan  was  upon  him.  He
watched  him  through  life,  hoping  to
make  a  prey  of  him,  as  he  had  done  of
the  first  Adam.  But  he  was  the  Lord  of
heaven,  and  found  nothing  in  him.  The
eyes  of  men  were  upon  him.  Simeon
saw  him,  blind  Bartimaeus  followed  him.
Judas  followed  him  closely  for  three
years,  and  Pilate  saw  him  judicially.
The  centurion  watched  his  death,  and  all
the  people  gathered  at  the  sight.  The
disciples  saw  the  Lord  after  his  resur-
rection and  were  glad.  Paul  saw  him
at  mid-day.  How  many  millions  and
millions  have  seen  him  since,  not  with
the  eye  of  sense,  but  of  faith  1  In  an-
other world  he  is  all  in  all — he  draws
every  eye  and  employs  every  tongue.
We  shall  see  him  as  he  is  \Jay\


OHAP.  III.]


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY '.  ZECHARIAH.


609


Ver.  10.  The  reign  of  the  Messiah  is
distinguished  by  three  things.  (1)  En-
joyment. The  very  image  of  the  vine
and  the  fig-tree  is  delightful.  (2)  Liberty.
Slaves  and  captives  did  not  sit  under
their  vine3  ana   fig-trees,  nor   did  pro-


prietors in  time  of  war.  (3)  Benevolence.
"  Ye  shall  call  every  man,"  &c.  There  is
no  selfishness,  no  envy.  All  are  anxious
that  others  should  partake  of  their
privileges  [/ay].


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  III.

Vers.   1 — 5.     Satan,  "  the  accuser  of  Christians,  your  state   occasion   should

our  brethren,"  (Rev.  xii.  10).   Accusation  be    always:    you    are    always    dear  to

is  the  element  of  his  being.     He  accuses  Christ,    and   always  near   the    Father's

God  to  men  (cf.  Gen.  iii.  4,  5),  and  he  heart  [Spurgeon].
accuses  men  to  God  (as  in  Job  and  in         Ver.  7.    Keep.    Godliness  is  the  high-


this  passage).  Hence  his  name  in  the
!N".  T.,  DLaboliiSy  from  diaballein  -  to  set
at  variance,  namely,  by  slander, — a  de-
scriptive title  quite  as  strong  as  the
Hebrew  term,  Satan  =  opposer,  the  in-
herent and  everlasting  adversary  of  God  interferes  with  duty  [H.  More]
and  man,  and  of  all  that  is  good.  In  the
end,  the  kingdom  of  our  God  and  the
power  of  his  Christ  will  be  too  much  for
the  craft  and  malice  of  Satan.  Still  that
malignant  being  opposes  the  truth,  and
leaves  no  stone  unturned  to  turn  away
God's  favour  from  his  people,  and  thus
overthrow  the  entire  redemptive  economy
[Lange].      Resist.     Against  whom   does


way  to  happiness;    the  good  old  way

that  hath  ever  been  beaten  by  all  those

saints  that  now  find  rest  to  their  souls

Trapp\.       Consult    duty,    not    events

Annesley].     Perish   discretion  when  it


"  Devotion  when  lukewarm  is  undevout  "

\Young\.

Ver.  8.  Men  of  signs.  So  were  the
primitive  Christians.  They  were  like  so
many  pieces  of  immortalitv,  dropped
down  from  heaven,  and  tending  thither-
ward— all  full  of  God,  and  full  of  Christ,


Satan  multiply  his  malicious   assaults  1     and  full  of  heaven,  and  full  of  glory  :


Against  those  in  whom  God  has  multi-
plied his  graces.  He  is  too  crafty  a
pirate  to  attack  an  empty  vessel ;  he
seeks  to  rob  those  vessels  which  are
richly  laden  [Wilson].

Ver.  2.  Brand.  A  poor  Hindoo  con-
vert was  once  taunted  by  a  European
infidel,  who  asked  him  what  Jesus  had
done  for  him.  The  Hindoo  took  a  worm,
put  it  inside  a  circle  of  dried  leaves  and
grass,  and  set  fire  to  them.     When  the


and  this  world  was  nothing  to  them  ;
trampled  upon  as  a  despicable,  con-
temptible thing  [Howe].

Ver.  9.  Stone.  The  excellence  of  the
foundation  is  for  the  building  that
rests  on  it.  And  so,  whatever  gives
Christ  value,  so  to  speak,  in  the  sight  of
God  and  angels — as  the  union  in  him  of
the  glories  and  virtues  of  the  two  natures,
Divine  and  human ;  his  filial  zeal,  and
perfect  obedience,  and  efficacious  atone-


fire  approached  the  worm,  he  snatched     ment,  and  priestly  intercession,  and  royal


it  up  and  put  it  into  his  bosom,  exclaim-
ing, "  That  is  what  Jesus  has  done  for
me."  I  was  once  exposed  to  eternal  fire.
The  flames  had  even  touched  me,  and  I
was  a  scorched  and  blackened  brand  ;
when  God  in  his  matchless  grace  plucked
me  forth  !    [Sacred  Garland].

Ver.  5.     Mitre.     Some  act  with  their


might  and  majesty — all,  all  redounds  to
the  honour  and  blessing  of  "them  that  are
Christ's"  (1  Cor.  xv.  23),  through  faith
in  his  name  [Dr.  Lillie].

Iniquity.  Christ,  with  his  holy  suf-
fering, love,  and  perfect  obedience,  is  the
only  one  thing  wherein  God  can  have
infinite   pleasure,  and   for   the   sake   of


mitres  as  our  kings  and  queens  do  with  which  he  can  look  graciously  on  the  race

their  crowns  ;  they  only  put  them  on  of  men  [Dr.  Heubner].

upon  state  occasions — do  not  wear  them  Ver.  10.     Sit.    Mankind  have  always

always,   because   they   are    too    heavy,  clung   to  the  hope  of  better  times  of

3d


510  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHaRUH.  (chap.  iv.


the  text.      We  give  a  passage  from  the  The  base,  degenerate,  iron  offspring  ends,

famous  Eclogue  (iv.)  of  Virgil.  £  Solden  Pr°geny  from  heaven  descends.  .  .  .

°       x      '  See, labouring  nature  calls  thee  to  sustain

,,  m,     ,  ,      .  , ,  .  ,   ,  The  nodding  frame  of  heaven  and  earth  and

"  The  last  great  age,  foretold  by  sacred  rhyme,  main!

Renews  its  finished  course  ;  Saturnian  times  See>  to  tneir  base  restored  earth,  seas,  and  air,

Boll  round  again  ;  and  mighty  years,  begun  And  joyful  ages  from  behind  in  cvo^g  ranks
From  their  first  orb,  m  radiant  circles  run.  v^eas.  {Dryden'*  Virgil.]


CHAPTER  IV.

Critical  Notes.]  The  golden  candlestick  a  symbol  of  the  pure  and  prosperous  state  of  the
Jewish  Church.  Waked]  Overpowered  by  what  he  had  seen  and  heard,  the  prophet  needed  quick-
ening into  spiritual  consciousness.  2.  Candlestick]  or  chandelier.  Like  the  seven-branched  golden
candlestick  in  the  tabernacle  (Ex.  xxv.  37:  Ezek.  xxv.  31);  but  this  visionary  candlestick  is  a
designed  enlargement.  Bowl]  i.  e.  can  or  round  vessel  for  the  oil.  Seven  lamps]  united  in  one  stem
(Ex.  xxv.  32).  Seven  pipes]  Lit.  seven  and  seven.  Some  say,  seven  and  seven,  i.  e.  fourteen ;  others,
seven  each  for  each  lamp,  i.  e.  forty-nine  for  the  seven  ;  this  not  impossible.  The  greater  the
number  of  oil  pipes,  the  more  brilliant  the  light.  3.  Trees]  Supplying  oil  to  the  bowl.  Explanation
(vers.  12 — 14).  5.  Knowest  not]  No  reproof  of  ignorance,  though  the  vision  might  easily  be
mistaken,  but  a  stimulus  to  inquiry.  No]  How  candid  the  confession  !  6.  Might]  Lit.  army,  power.
The  work  undertaken  will  be  finished,  not  by  human  strength  of  any  kind,  but  by  the  Spirit  of  God
(cf.  Hag.  ii.  5).  7]  The  resources  of  the  Jewish  leader  were  few,  and  the  hindrances  formidable,
but  the  great  mountain]  will  be  depressed  into  a  level  plain,  every  obstacle  removed,  and  the  work
completed.  Headstone]  Refers  to  the  finishing  of  the  structure.  Shoutings]  of  acclamation.  "  The
repetition  of  favour  or  grace  is  for  the  sake  of  intensity  ;  and  the  ascriptions  of  this  favour  to  the
stone,  implies  that  it  was  possessed  of  this  quality,  and  was  to  be  the  medium  of  its  conveyance  to
others.  The  prediction  was  clearly  fulfilled  in  our  Redeemer.  '  Grace  or  favour  was  poured  through
his  lips'  "  [Henderson].  9.]  Additional  information.  Finish]  So  he  did,  in  the  sixth  year  of  Darius
(Ezra  vi.  15).  10.  Day  of  small  things]  "  The  short  period  which  had  elapsed  since  the  Jews  had
begun  to  rebuild  the  temple,  and  the  commencement  which  had  been  inconsiderable  and  inauspicious."
Who  ?]  with  its  negative  answer,  contains  an  admonition  to  the  people  and  their  rulers  not  to  despise
the  small  beginnings  [Keil].  Plummet]  With  the  human  is  strikingly  contrasted  Jehovah's  estimate
of  the  work.  His  eyes,  which  run  to  and  fro,  rejoiced  when  they  saw  Zerubbabel  with  the  plummet
in  hand ;  a  sign  of  work  commenced,  and  superintending  care.  Zerubbabel  is  the  type  of  a  future
Zerubbabel,  the  Messiah,  who  will  build  the  temple  of  God.  11.  What]  A  question  put  three  times,
ver.  4),  this;  and  ver.  12 ;  varied  at  each  time  and  at  last  minute.  Two  olive  trees]  Supposed  to
be  the  anointed  priesthood  and  royalty  by  some  (by  others,  the  two  Churches,  the  Jewish  and
Gentile),  or  "  Christ's  priesthood  and  monarchy — confirmed  by  vi.  13.  Olives  produce  oil  ;  oil  supplies
light  to  the  candlestick,  and  all  the  oil  of  the  Holy  Spirit  flows,  by  the  medium  of  his  Messiahship
in  its  twofold  functions  of  King  and  Priest,  into  the  Candlestick  of  the  Universal  Church  "  [  Words.].
12.  Branches]  Lit.  ears,  from  resemblance  to  ears  of  grain.  "  As  ears  are  full  of  grain,  so  olive-
branches  are  full  of  olives."  Golden  oil]  Gold-like  liquor  in  brightness  and  purity.  13.  Answered]
The  angel  is  anxious  to  awaken  attention.  14.  Two  anointed]  Lit.  sons  of  oil,  a  symbol  of  Joshua
and  Zerubbabel,  anointed  and  installed  into  office  by  oil  ;  and  of  the  royal  and  priestly  office  of
Christ.  Stand]  The  posture  of  servants  waiting  to  receive  orders  from  their  masters.  "  if,  then,  the
candlestick  had  two  olive-trees  by  its  side,  yielding  oil  in  such  copious  abundance,  that  every  one  of
the  seven  lamps  received  its  supply  through  seven  pipes,  it  could  never  fail  to  have  sufficient  oil  for
a  full  and  brilliant  light.  This  was  what  was  new  in  the  visionary  candlestick  ;  and  the  meaning  was
this  hat  the  Lord  in  future  would  bestow  upon  his  congregation  the  organs  of  his  Spirit,  and
maintain  them  in  such  direct  connection  with  it,  that  it  would  be  able  to  let  its  light  shine  with
levenfold  brilliancy  "  [Keil].

HOMILET1CS.

The  Christian  Church  the  Golden  Light-bearer. —  Verses  1 — 6.

In  the  former  vision  there  was  a  display  of  the  means  and  grounds  of  the
forgiveness  of  sin.     In  this  we  have  communications  of  grace,  to  conquer  obstacles


chap,  rv.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  61]


and  establish  the  work  of  God.  The  Church  is  symbolized  by  the  candlestick.
Streams  of  golden  liquid  flow  into  it  from  one  centre,  to  feed  and  preserve  the
light.  Without  the  aid  of  man,  the  oil  is  supplied  freely  and  copiously  to  bless  a
sinful  world.     Notice —

I.  The  design  of  the  Christian  Church.  To  give  light.  It  is  created  and
constituted  to  be  the  light  of  the  world.  The  world  is  spiritually  dark :  for
"  darkness  covers  the  earth,  and  gross  darkness  the  people."  But  truth,  light,  and
life  are  found  in  the  Church  of  God.  1.  Its  light  is  diffusive.  All  light  is
diffusive.  The  light  in  the  Church  must  not  be  quenched  nor  u  hid  under  a
bushel."  Individually  and  collectively,  we  must  diffuse  knowledge,  holiness,  and
joy — shine  forth  for  the  benefit  of  men  and  the  glory  of  God.  2.  Its  light  is
borrowed.  It  is  only  a  light-bearer,  not  a  creator  of  light.  Like  the  moon,  the
Church  shines  with  a  borrowed  light.  She  has  no  resources  of  her  own,  but
depends  upon  Christ  the  Sun  of  Kighteousness  for  every  kind  and  degree  of
influence.  If  she  forgets  her  end,  neglects  her  mission,  and  disowns  her  dependence,
her  light  may  be  extinguished.  "  In  him  was  life  ;  and  the  life  was  the,  light  of
men."  II.  The  unity  of  the  Christian  Church.  The  seven  lamps  may  indicate
its  unity — one  candlestick,  but  many  branches  ;  one  body,  but  many  members.  All
sections  of  Christians  are  united  together  in  Christ  the  Head.  All  have  their  light
and  place,  and  iu  proportion  as  they  are  supplied  with  oil  and  diffuse  the  sanctifying
influence  of  truth  to  others,  do  they  answer  the  end  of  their  own  illumination
(cf.  Job  xxv.  3  :  Phil.  ii.  15).  III.  The  vitality  of  the  Christian  Church.  It  was
fed  and  sustained  by  virtues  not  its  own.  1.  It  was  Divinely  fed.  The  lamps
were  not  furnished  with  oil,  nor  kept  by  human  agency.  The  two  living  olive-
trees  poured  their  oil  into  the  central  reservoir  without  the  skill  and  labour  of  man.
The  Church  thrives,  and  the  cause  of  God  triumphs,  "  not  by  might,  nor  by
power,  but  by  my  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord."  2.  It  was  freely  fed.  The  oil
spontaneously  flowed  from  the  olive-trees.  Christ  has  received  gifts  for  men,  and
from  his  priestly  and  regal  offices  they  are  freely  bestowed  upon  the  Church.  u  And
of  his  fulness  have  all  we  received."  IV.  The  value  of  the  Christian  Church.
The  candlestick  was  gold.  Though  few  in  number,  obscure  and  imperfect  in
character,  God's  people  are  precious  in  his  sight.  They  are  his  jewTels,  pure  and
indestructible.  If  they  lose  purity  of  life  and  doctrine  they  will  tarnish  their
character  and  dim  their  lustre.  "  How  is  the  gold  become  dim  !  how  is  the  fine
gold  changed  ! "  The  preciousness  depends  upon  the  purity,  and  the  responsibility
upon  the  honour,  of  the  Christian  Church.  "The  king's  daughter  is  all-glorious
within ;  her  clothing  is  of  wrought  gold."

"  The  purest  treasure  mortal  times  afford,
Is — spotless  reputation  :  That  away,
Men  are  but  gilded  loam,  or  painted  clay  "     [ShakspeareJ,

Not  by  Might  nor  by  Power — Verse  6.

'*  The  vision  was  an  embodied  prophecy,  intended  in  the  first  instance  for  the
guidance  and  comfort  of  Zerubbabel."  The  prophet,  and  through  him  the  people,
are  informed  in  their  despondency  of  God's  purpose  and  method  concerning  his
work.  They  must  not  faint,  but  rely  upon  him,  who  is  all-sufficient,  and  would
preserve  and  furnish  them  with  needful  means  to  finish  the  work.  "  Not  by
might,"  &c.     Take  the  words  generally —

I.  Not  by  might  nor  power  in  Christian  life.  Spiritual  life  is  the  direct  act
of  God;  "  born  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  mai.,  but
of  God."  From  beginning  to  end  it  is  promoted  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  Carlyle
speaks  of  "  the  almost  omnipotent  power  of  education,"  and  others  commend  the
refinements  of  life ;  but  these  do  not  satisfy  conscience  nor  touch  the  heart.     Men


612


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  Z  ECU  All  I  AH.


[CHAP.    IV.


are  "  saved  by  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  This  is  the  doctrine  of  Scripture,
and  the  characteristic  of  spiritual  life.  II.  Not  by  might  nor  by  power  in
Christian  work.  The  temple  was  rebuilt  not  by  the  might  of  this  world.  God
procured  the  edict  of  Cyrus,  and  touched  the  hearts  of  Darius  and  Artaxerxes.  In
the  day  of  Pentecost,  and  at  the  Reformation,  in  the  revivals  and  movements  of  the
Church,  we  recognize  the  same  truth.  In  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  the  redeeming
energy  of  Christ  and  the  agency  of  God  are  preserved  through  all  generations.
By  the  Holy  Spirit  the  power  of  God  is  brought  into  the  world.  God  has  all
hearts  in  his  hand,  and  all  agencies  under  his  control.  He  inflames  the  zeal,  inspires
the  prayers,  and  bestows  the  qualifications  for  the  spread  of  his  kingdom.  We  rely
too  much  upon  numbers,  eloquence,  and  human  agencies.  The  great  want  of  the
day  is  the  Holy  Spirit.  If  we  depend  upon  him,  then  however  few  and  feeble  in
effort,  the  progress  of  the  work  will  never  be  impeded.  Systems  founded  by  power
and  spread  by  force  will  come  to  nought.  "  All  they  that  take  the  sword,  shall
perish  with  the  sword."  God's  presence  must  be  sought,  and  his  power  trusted.
Then,  when  human  means  are  hidden,  and  the  might  of  the  Spirit  enjoyed,  all  the
glory  will  be  given  to  him.


HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Yers.  1,  2.  The  weary  and  sleepy
prophet.  1.  Indicative  of  Christian
weakness.  Believers  are  mortal,  cannot
long  bear  up  in  spiritual  duties,  and
often  astonished  by  wonderful  revelations
in  hard  times  (cf.  Daniel's  sleep,  ch.  x,  9  ;
and  Peter's  at  the  Transfiguration,  Luke
ix.  32).  2.  A  type  of  all  who  stand  un-
consciously,  and  live  carelessly,  in  the
presence  of  God  and  great  events.  There
is  a  lethargy  of  soul  in  the  whole
sphere  of  Divine  realities  ;  and  men  try
to  live  indifferent  to,  or  entirely  without,
the  light  and  friendly  visitations  of  God.
3.  A  proof  of  God's  goodness  in  rousing
men  to  duty.  We  require  stirring  up  in
natural  indolence  and  spiritual  weakness,
to  reap  the  benefit  of  Divine  instruction ;
and  when  the  revelations  are  given,  we
do  not  understand  them.  u  The  angel
that  talked  with  me  came  again."  "  He
wakeneth  morning  by  morning ;  he  wak-
en eth  mine  ear  to  hear,  as  the  learned."

Vers.  2,  3.  Obsasve  the  candlestick
is  golden,  and  the  oil  is  called  golden.
The  Church  must  be  pure  and  holy;
what  she  teaches  must  be  pure  and  holy
also  ;  not  adulterated  with  the  admixture
of  any  novel  doctrines,  such  as  those
which  have  been  added  by  some  to  the
faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints,  and
imposed  as  necessary  to  salvation  [  Words-
worth].

Yers.  4,  5.  An  apt  pupil  and  a  won-


derful teacher.  I.  The  pupil.  The  pro-
phet—  1.  Not  ashamed  to  confess  his
ignorance.  Ignorance  may  be  wilful,
but  criminal  when  it  can  be  removed.
•'  Know  est  thou  not,"  &c,  as  much  as
to  say  that  he  ought  to  know  (cf.  John
iii.  10).  Its  removal  difficult.  We  may
search  and  attend,  yet  not  properly
understand.  The  prophet  was  warned,
and  took  heed  to  the  angel,  but  required
further  teaching.  2.  Sought  to  be  in-
structed by  asking  questions.  "  The
prophet  pretends  to  no  knowledge  which
he  does  not  possess.  Let  us  imitate  the
twofold  example ;  both  that  of  inquisi-
tiveness  and  that  of  ingenuousness.  Let
us  be  on  the  alert  in  our  inquiries  after
knowledge ;  and  in  order  to  our  acquiring
it,  never  foolishly,  and  to  save  our  pride
or  vanity,  affect  to  have  what  we  have
not"  \Wardlaw~].  II.  The  Teacher,  the
angel.  Notice — 1.  His  method,  by  asking
counter-questions;  to  excite,  quicken,
and  suggest.  This  is  Socratic  and  Christ-
like. The  wisdom  of  ancient  philoso-
phers, and  the  teaching  of  Jesus,  have
come  to  us  in  dialogue  forms.  2.  His
willingness.  The  pupil  was  eager  and
earnest,  the  teacher  was  able  and
willing.  u  There  are  many,"  savs  one,
"  whose  ignorance  clings  to  them  because
they  are  unwilling  to  confess  it,  and  so
to  forsake  it ;  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,
there  are  others  who  are  as  reluctant  to


chap,  iv.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHAMAB.  613


drop  a  word  of  wisdom  from  their  lips,  given    to   him    for  present    duty,  and

as  a  miser  is  to  surrender  a  guinea  from  this    must    be    communicated    to   the

his  purse."     If  not  taught  by  angels,  be  people.     One    revelation   only  prepares

thankful  for  the  Bible  and   the  Holy  for   another,  and    by   giving   what    we

Spirit.      3.  But  the  degree  of   inform-  know,  we    increase   our   own   stock  of

ation  was  not  great.     Explanations  were  learning.      "  He    that   watereth   others

reserved,  and  the  pupil  had  to  ask  again  shall  himself  be  watered."
(cf.    vers.    12    and    13).     Enough    was

HOMILETICS.
Divine  Grace  the  Source  of  all  Strength. —  Verses  7 — 10.

The  resources  of  the  Jewish  leader  were  few,  and  dangers  formidable,  hence  the
promise  of  help.  The  beginning  may  be  small  and  discouraging,  but  the  co-operation
of  the  Holy  Spirit  will  ensure  success.  Joshua  and  Zerubbabel  shall  finish  the
work,  and  bring  forth  the  copes  tone  amid  the  loud  shouts  of  the  people — "  Grace,
grace  unto  it/'

I.  The  work  was  carried  on  under  the  Divine  auspices.  The  leaders  do  their
part,  but  it  is  "  with  thooe  seven  "  eyes  (ch.  iii.  9),  "  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  which
run  to  and  fro  through  the  whole  earth."  God  watched  the  foundation,  and  was
ever  present  to  superintend.  Nothing  took  him  by  surprise  or  happened  unknown.
In  all  parts  of  the  earth  his  people  are  defended  and  guided  by  his  providence.
"  The  Divine  eye  is  ever  in  union  with  the  Divine  arm,"  says  a  writer ;  "  the
knowledge  of  God  with  his  power."  Under  his  inspection  the  work  must  prosper.
He  takes  cognizance  of  all  creatures,  inspires  and  directs  all  efforts.  Those  that
have  the  plummet  in  hand  can  do  nothing  without  him,  should  seek  his  presence,
and  depend  upon  his  help.  "  Except  the  Lord  build  the  house,  they  labour  in  vain
that  build  it."  II.  The  difficulties  were  overcome  by  Divine  help.  Difficulties
there  were,  manifold  and  great,  in  the  people  themselves  and  outside  them.  1.  Some
despised  the  work.  Circumstances  were  disheartening,  made  them  sigh  and  desist.
They  were  few  in  number,  and  the  work  in  proportion  to  their  means  very  great.
"Who  hath  despised  the  day  of  small  things  1 "  2.  Powerful  enemies  opposed  the
work.  They  were  artful,  malignant,  and  often  successful.  Like  great  mountains,
impassable  and  immovable,  they  stood  in  the  way.  But  the  mountains  were  levelled
down,  difficulties  vanished  away,  and  all  became  a  plain.  "  Thou  shalt  thresh  the
mountains,"  when  engaged  for  God  (Isa.  xli.  15).  To  despond  is  faithless  and  guilty.
Nothing  can  resist  God.  The  victories  of  his  word  are  sure.  "Every  mountain
and  hill  shall  be  made  low ;  and  the  crooked  be  made  straight,  and  the  rough  places
plain."  III.  The  work  was  finished  amid  joyful  acclamations  of  Divine  praise.
"  He  shall  bring  forth  the  head-stone  thereof  with  shoutings,  crying,  Grace,  grace
unto  it."  The  people  wished  well  to  the  building,  and  prayed  that  it  might  stand
for  ever.  The  finishing  of  the  temple  was  a  type  of  the  work  of  God  in  all  ages.
The  Jewish  builder  represented  Christ,  the  Divine  architect  of  the  spiritual  temple.
His  work  begun  by  grace  should  end  by  grace.  Amid  opposition  it  is  carried  on
and  will  be  finished.  Soon  the  plaudits  of  men  and  angels  shall  shout  in
acclamation  and  acknowledgment  of  the  multiplied  favour  of  God.  Grace,  free
grace,  shall  be  the  theme  of  their  song  !     "  Grace,  grace  unto  it."

Despising  the  Day  op  Small  Things — Verse  10.

The  Jews  are  reproved  for  their  heartlessness  and  unbelief.  They  should  not
estimate  God's  work  by  present  appearances.  Their  progress  though  small  is  an
earnest  of  great  and  glorious  success.  To  despair  when  God  has  promised  help,  is  to
doubt  his  faithfulness,  power,  and  omniscience.     These  words  declare —

I.  A  fact  in  history.     1.  "  The  day  of  small  things."    This,  notwithstanding


614  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :  ZECHARIJH.  [chap.  iv.


great  toil  and  much  time  spent  in  the  work  of  God.  In  Jewish  history  and  in  the
present  time — in  the  Sunday  School  and  in  the  Christian  Church — in  philanthropic
and  missionary  enterprise,  it  is  the  day  of  small  things.  Though  success  may  be
realized,  yet  it  is  small  in  itself;  small  in  comparison  with  what  might  be,  and  with
what  will  be.  2.  Let  us  learn  a  lesson.  To  be  humble,  because  we  have  done  so
little  and  been  so  idle.  To  be  more  prayerful;  "0  Lord,  revive  thy  work."  To
depend  more  upon  God.  "Not  by  might,  nor  by  power."  II.  A  tendency  in  onr
nature.  Contempt  for  small  beginnings  in  religious  matters  has  been  a  common
feeling.  Sanballat  despised  the  work  of  Neheraiah  (ch.  iv.  2).  Christianity  "was
despised  and  rejected  of  men,"  in  the  person  of  its  founder  and  his  apostles.
Missionaries,  religious  institutions  and  societies,  have  been  ridiculed  in  their  feeble
beginnings.  Why  does  this  happen  %  "Because,"  says  Foster,  "we  do  not  apprehend
the  preciousness  of  what  is  good,  in  any,  even  the  smallest  thing — we  know  not
what  is  requisite  to  be  previously  done,  to  bring  the  small  beginning  into  existence
We  are  apt  to  set  far  too  high  a  price  on  our  own  efforts,  as  estimated  against  their
results;  and  then  there  is  the  impiety  of  not  duly  recognizing  the  supremacy  of  God."
III.  A  reproof  from  God.  '"Who  hath  despised V  How  unreasonable  and
foolish  in  the  present  circumstances.  "  Our  duty/'  said  Spinosa,  "  is  neither  to
ridicule  the  affairs  of  men,  nor  to  deplore,  but  simply  to  understand  them."  It
becomes  no  one,  least  of  all  a  believer,  to  deride  a  small  beginning,  and  think
despondingly  of  the  work  of  God.  This  conduct  is  foolish.  1.  Because  there  are
no  little  things  really.  Appearances  deceive.  We  see  not  the  connection,  the
beginning  and  the  end  of  things.  u  All  are  links  of  one  vast  chain."  2.  Because
great  things  spring  from  what  appear  little  things.  In  nature,  we  have  mighty
forests  from  smallest  seeds,  and  broad  rivers  from  tiny  streamlets.  It  is  "  first  the
blade,  then  the  ear,  then  the  full  corn  in  the  ear."  In  history,  we  have  great
results  from  small  beginnings.  The  Bible  and  missionary  societies  are  illustrations.
The  law  of  providence  and  the  gospel  of  Christ  teach  the  same  truth.  A  little
leaven  hid  in  the  meal  affects  the  mass  ;  the  grain  of  mustard  becomes  a  mighty
tree ;  and  the  handful  of  corn  on  the  bleak  mountain-top  yields  a  waving  harvest
like  the  fruitful  Lebanon.  Despise  not,  despair  not.  The  work  will  and  must  be
finished.  What,  then,  will  be  the  end  of  those  who  help  not,  but  deride  and
hinder  its  accomplishment?     "Behold,  ye  despisers,  and  wonder  and  perish."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  7.  Great  mountain.  Mighty  power  to  build  a  habitation  for  his  name,
enemies  despised,  subdued,  and  rendered  and  to  finish  their  work.  3.  When  this
subservient  to  the  cause  of  God.  "  A  work  is  finished,  it  is  a  proof  of  Christ's
mountain  is  spoken  of  in  Scripture  unchangeable  love  and  care,  and  should
emblematically,  to  denote  the  greatest  be  rightly  studied  as  revealing  the  char-
difficulties  and  oppositions  of  men  to  acter  of  God.  Thou  shalt  know  that
cross  any  design ;  and  the  overturning  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent  me  [cf.
or   levelling   of    these    mountains    ex-  Hutcheson.]

presseth  the  highest  actings  of  the  power  The  whole  drift  of  this  chapter  might

of  God,  in  subduing  all  difficulties  and  be  summed  up  in  the  words  of  Jesus  to

oppositions  for  the  good  of  his  people  "  his    disciples,  "  Have  faith    in   God  I "

[Caryl].  and  the  encouragement  that  was  held

Vers.  8,  9.    1.  The  promises  of   the  out  to  the  Jewish  builders,  is  held  out

Word  are  faithful  and  worthy  of  con-  to  us.    We  have,  first  of  all,  what  should

fidence  —  their  repetition  indicates  our  ever  be  enough   to  inspire   confidence-,

distrust,  but  God's  readiness  to  perform,  though  it  stood  alone — independent  of

2.    It   is  a  special   favour  to  a   people  all  information  as  to  the  way  in  which

when   God    grants    them    reformation,  the  work  was  to  be  effected  by  him — we


Chap,  iv.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHJRIAH.  615


have  the  express  and  explicit  promise  of  to   the   great   results    promised    to    us

Jehovah,    that    the    building   shall    be  [Wardlaw].

finished;  and  that  before  the  obedient  Ver.  10.  When  good  men  despise  the
and  prayerful  efforts  of  his  people  the  day  of  small  things,  the  grand  essential
greatest  —  the  most  apparently  insur-  of  religion,  faith,  is  wanting.  They
mountable  —  obstacles  give  way.  We  lack  faith  in  the  unerring  wisdom  of  the
have  more  than  the  bare  word  of  promise :  Divine  scheme  and  determinations  ;  faith
the  assurance  of  the  incessantly  attentive  in  the  goodness  of  God,  the  absolute
superintendence  and  watchful  care  of  his  certainty  that  infinite  wisdom  and  power
ever-present  providence.  The  "  seven  cannot  be  otherwise  than  good ;  faith
eyes  of  the  Lord  run  to  and  fro  *  to  help,  in  the  promises  of  God,  that  his  servants
Still  further,  we  have  the  promise  of  the  shall,  in  the  succession  of  their  gener-
constant  and  copious  effusion  of  the  Holy  ations,  see  his  cause  advance  from  the
Spirit.  The  might  and  power  of  man  small  to  the  great,  though  this  be  not
are  pronounced  altogether  incompetent,  granted  to  any  one  separately  ;  that  their
and  this  Divine  influence  is  promised,  labours  shall,  each  in  their  turn,  be  ap-
This  was  true  in  the  existing  case.  Faith,  proved  and  recorded ;  and  that  they  shall
fortitude,  energy,  and  perseverance  were  at  last  exult  in  the  glorious  consummation
needful,  and  supplied  by  the  Spirit  in  [John  Foster].  We  ought  not  to  de-
leaders  and  people.  It  is  true  in  a  spise  the  day  of  small  things,  because —
peculiar  sense  of  the  spiritual  temple.  1.  such  conduct  tends  to  prevent  its
The  stones  must  be  prepared,  and  no  becoming  a  day  of  great  things ;  2.  angels
energy  but  God's  can  make  them  living  do  not  despise  it,  but  rejoice  over  every
stones.  Even  all  legitimate  and  zealous  one  repenting  sinner  j  3.  our  Saviour
effort  must  prove  fruitless,  unless  God  does  not  break  the  bruised  reed,  nor
give  his  influence  with  them.  But  quench  the  smoking  flax ;  4.  God  does
having  the  promise,  we  need  never  de-  not  despise  it,  but  noticed  even  some
spond.  As  the  ancient  Church  was  good  thing  found  in  the  son  of  Jero-
animated  to  look  with  confidence  for  the  boam  ;  5.  the  day  of  small  things  is  the
accomplishment  of  the  glorious  things  commencement  of  great  things  [Paysori\.
awaiting   her;    so  let  us  look   forward

HOMILETICS.
The  Golden  Candlestick.^-  Verses  11 — 14.

The  candlestick  of  pure  gold  represented  the  Church  of  God.  There  is  always
some  distinctive  peculiarity  between  the  material  emblem  and  the  spiritual  reality ;
a  seeming  incongruity  which  is  in  reality  a  distinguishing  glory,  e.  g.  "  a  lamb  in
the  midst  of  the  throne ; "  so  here,  such  a  candlestick  was  never  seen  except  in
vision.  The  lamps  in  the  temple  were  supplied  by  the  priests  in  the  ordinary  way,
but  this  in  a  supernatural  way.  The  mystery  was  explained  to  the  prophet  as
representing  Joshua  the  high  priest  and  Zerubbabel  the  prince,  who  were  endued
with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  raised  up  to  rule,  intercede,  and  build  up  the  temple.
All  authority  and  success  depended  upon  God ;  they  were  acknowledged  as  a
combined  and  eminent  type  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  priest  upon  the  throne,  builds
the  spiritual  temple,  and  who  alone  shall  bear  the  glory.

I.  The  seat  of  spiritual  light.  The  Church  contains  the  knowledge,  holiness,
and  consolation  to  be  found  in  this  sinful  world.  Worldly  men  are  strangers  to
this  light ;  wander  carelessly  into  error  and  destruction ;  and  even  the  wisest  and
most  diligent  never  discovered  a  light  sufficient  to  guide  them  aright.  This  light
is  not  inherent,  or  all  would  have  it  alike,  as  the  light  of  conscience  and  reason.
Not  merely  the  light  of  the  old  dispensation,  but  the  light  of  the  glorious  gospel,
which   is  fixed  in  this  Church,  which  there  diffuses  satisfaction,  direction,  and


616  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAIL  [chap.  iv.


holiness.  Its  rays  thrown  around,  invite  and  attract  the  world  ;  but  they  must  come
into  the  Church  to  enjoy  it.  Out  of  Zion,  the  perfection  of  beauty,  God  hath
shined.  II.  The  source  of  spiritual  light.  It  conies  from  the  Lord  Jesus,  its
glorious  source,  in  whom  all  fulness  dwells.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  oil  of  gladness,
resting  on  Christ,  and  freely  given  by  him  to  his  Church.  It  is  supplied  not  by
any  natural  or  artificial  means,  as  the  oil  in  the  vision  was  not  pressed  from  the
olive,  nor  poured  into  the  lamps  by  the  help  of  man ;  but  flowed  spontaneously,
abundantly,  constantly,  from  a  living  source — so  the  communication  of  Divine  grace
from  Christ,  the  living  spring.  III.  The  communication  of  light.  It  is  by
means  of  a  golden  candlestick.  1.  This  may  apply  : — First,  to  the  glorious  doctrines
of  the  gospel,  by  which  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  God  is  displayed  in  Jesus
Christ.  Second,  to  the  ordinances  of  the  gospel,  by  which  light  and  consolation
are  dispensed  in  the  Church,  and  which  attract  the  notice  of  the  world.  Seven
branches  turning  every  way,  all  lit.  Christ  so  places  his  word,  ordinances,  and
ministers,  that  no  part  of  the  Church  is  destitute  of  life,  and  that  the  whole  will
shine  as  the  light  of  the  world.  Third,  to  the  character  of  the  saints,  shining  in
the  effulgence    of    holiness;    "ye  are  the  light  of  the  world"  (cf.  Isa.  lx.   1).

2.  Whether  allusion  be  to  either  or  all  of  these,  the  emblem  will  apply — a  golden
candlestick.  First,  formed  of  valuable  material.  The  doctrines  and  ordinances  of
the  gospel  are  more  precious  than  gold  :  the  law  of  thy  mouth  is  better  than
thousands  of  gold  and  silver.  The  saints,  precious  sons  of  Zion,  are  comparable  to
fine  gold.  The  candlestick  is  formed  by  infinite  skill,  and  wrought  with  most
exquisite  workmanship.  Second,  gold  denotes  brightness,  purity,  splendour,  and
glory.  What  refulgent  purity  in  the  doctrines,  in  the  ordinances  of  the  gospel,  and
in  the  lives  of  consistent  Christians  !  Third,  gold  denotes  durability.  It  is  an
indestructible  metal.  Lead  can  be  melted  until  wasted  away ;  but  gold,  expose  it
to  what  heat  you  may,  retains  its  weight,  loses  nothing  by  alloy,  and  escapes
uninjured.  The  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  the  Church,  and  the  characters  of  holiness
in  saints,  are  incorruptible  ;  shall  endure  to  the  end  of  the  world,  and  never  be
consumed,  by  persecution  or  hell  itself.  In  closing — 1.  We  are  led  to  admire  the
wonderful  provision  of  Divine  grace.  Worldly  men  despise  our  secret  communica-
tions and  deride  our  expectations,  ana  we  ourselves  wonde-  how  supplies  come.
But  the  mysterious  olive  pours  in  its  rich  abundance.  2.  We  see  the  reason  why
the  gospel  and  the  Church  live  in  spite  of  opposition.  They  depend  upon  a  living
source.     Earth  and  hell  cannot  cut  the  golden  pipes,  or  turn  aside  the  stream.

3.  We  are  reminded  that  no  human  power  or  effort  can  do  good  to  men,  except  the
Holy  Spirit  works  by  them.  But  the  Spirit  works  by  the  meanest  instrument,  and
needs  not  the  countenance  of  mighty  monarchs,  or  the  aid  of  learning  and  oratory.
The  excellency  of  the  power  is  his  own.  4.  We  are  taught  to  distinguish  between
grace  and  the  gospel.  The  oil  is  distinct  from  the  pipes,  though  conveyed  through
them.  Ordinances  are  but  pipes  and  means,  not  to  be  rested  in ;  yet  golden  pipes,
very  valuable,  and  employed  to  convey  the  blessing  Pray  for  a  rich  supply  of  the
Holy  Spirit  [ The  New  Evangelist].

HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Vers.  12 — 14. ;  1.  The  question  (ver.  in  themselves,  and  the  means  of  bless-

12);  2.  the  confession  (ver.  13);  3.  the  ing  others — empty  themselves  (ver.  12).

answer  (ver.   14).     The  angel  returned  The  unction  of  the  Holy  One  must  abide

no  answer  (only  asked  a   question)  to  in  us  before  we   can  furnish   grace  to

the  question  of  the  prophet,  to  invite  others  (cf.  Johniii.  20 — 27).  ''Joshuaand

closer   attention,    and   prompt   a   more  Zerubbabel   shadowed   forth  what   was

definite  question  [cf.  Pusey].  united  in  Christ,  and  so  in  their  several

Ver.  14.  Two  anointed  ones.     Blessed  offices  they  might  be  included  in  the


CHAP.   IV.]


HOiMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.


617


symbol  of  the  olive-tree.  They  could  not
exhaust  it ;  for  men  who,  having  served
God  in  their  generation,  were  to  pass  away,
could  not  be  alone  intended  in  a  vision,
which  describes  the  abiding  existence  of
the  Church.  Christ  is  both  High  Priest
and  Eternal  King.  In  both  ways  he
supplies  to  us  the  light  which  he  brought.
From  him  flow  unceasingly  piety  and
righteousness  to  the  Church,  and  it  never
lacks  the  heavenly  light.  The  oil  is
expressed  into  tubes ;  thence  passed
through  tubes,  into  the  vessel  which
contains  the  lamps :  to  designate  the
various  suppliers  of  light,  which,  the
nearer  they  are  to  the  effluence  of  the


oil,  the  more  they  resemble  him  by
whom  they  are  appointed  to  so  Divine
an  office.  The  seven  lamps  are  the
manifest  Churches,  distinct  in  place,  but
most  closely  bound  together  by  the
consent  of  one  faith,  and  by  the  bond
of  charity.  For  although  the  Church  is
one,  yet  it  is  distinct  according  to  the
manifold  variety  of  nations.  But  the
lamps  are  set  in  a  circle,  that  the  oil  of
one  may  flow  more  readily  into  others
and  it,  in  turn,  may  receive  from  others
their  superabundance,  to  set  forth  the
communion  of  love  and  the  indissoluble
community  of  faith  "  [Pusey].


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  IV.


Vers.  1 — 4.  Candlestick.  All  human
souls,  never  so  bedarkened,  love  light ;
light  once  kindled  spreads  till  all  is
luminous  [Carlyle].  We  are  all  naturally
ambitious  to  shine  in  the  world.  It  is  the
foible  of  our  race ;  but  the  fault  lies  not
in  the  passion  itself,  but  in  mistaking  the
sphere  and  choosing  improper  objects.
Many  are  proud  to  shine  in  the  lustre
of  pomp,  the  elegance  of  dress,  or  the
splendour  of  equipage  ;  others  again  are
ambitious  of  the  voice  of  fame,  or  the
acquisition  of  power.  To  such  as  act  by
the  opinion  of  the  world  alone,  fashion
is  above  all  other  laws.  They  study
nothing  but  appearance.  This  object
absorbs  other  appetites,  passions,  princi-
ples, and  duties.  But  religion  alone  will
teach  from  what  principle,  in  what
manner,  and  by  what  means  to  shine
[Baseley].

Vers.  4,  5.  What?  Conviction  of
ignorance  is  the  door-step  to  the  temple
of  wisdom  [Spur g  eon].  Compare  thy-
self with  those  that  are  more  learned  or
wise  than  thyself,  and  then  thou  wilt
see  matter  to  keep  thee  humble  [Sir
Mt.  Hale].  Ask  the  reason  "Why?"
[Arkwright],

'*  Ignorance  is  the  curse  of  God  ;
Knowledge    the   wing   wherewith   we    fly   to
heaven  "  [Shakespeare].

Vers.  6,  7.  Power.  Dependence  gives
God  his  proper  glory.  It  is  the  peculiar
honour  and  prerogative  of  Deity  to  have


a  world  of  creatures  hanging  upon  it —
staying  themselves  upon  it ;  to  be  the
fulcrum,  the  centre  of  a  lapsing  creation
[Howe].

Ver.  10.  Despised.  To  a  decidedly
irreligious  contemner,  we  might  say,
"Beware  what  you  do;"  for  "if  the
thing  be  of  God,"  you  are  daring  him  by
your  contempt.  If  there  be  something
of  his  spirit  and  power  contained  and
acting  in  things,  it  is  not  safe  to  make
free  with  them  in  the  way  of  scorn,
however  inconsiderable  in  magnitude
they  may  seem.  It  may  one  day  (not
"  a  day  of  small  things "  that)  be  a
question,  not  of  rebuke,  but  of  judgment.
On  that  day  will  not  be  forgotten  a
contempt  of  the  introductory  littleness
(say,  rather,  undisclosed  dignity)  of  what
God  had  determined  to  advance  to
greatness  and  glory  [John  Foster].

Ver.  11.  Olive.  No  tree  is  more  fre-
quently mentioned  by  ancient  authors,
nor  more  highly  honoured  by  ancient
nations.  By  the  Greeks  it  was  dedicated
to  Minerva,  and  even  employed  in
crowning  Jove,  Apollo,  and  Hercules,
as  well  as  emperors,  philosophers,  and
orators,  and  all  whom  tho  people  de-
lighted to  honour.  By  the  Romans  also
it  was  highly  honoured.  Columella  de-
scribes it  as  ''  the  chief  of  trees."  It  is
not  wonderful  that  almost  all  the  ancient
authors,  from  the  time  of  Homer,  so
frequently    mention    it,   and    that,    at


618  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHaRIJH.  [chap.  v.


Horace  says,  to  win  it  seemed  the  sole  appeared  in  pairs;  as  Moses  and  Aaron,

aim  men  had  in  life  [Garm.  i.  7].     See  the  inspired  civil  and  religious  authori-

Tristam,  Nat.  Hist,  of  the  Bible ;  Thorn-  ties;    Caleb  and  Joshua;   Ezekiel   the

son,  Ld.  and  Bk.  priest  and  Daniel  the  prophet ;  Zerubba-

Ver.   14.   Two.  Christ's  witnesses,  in  bel  and  Joshua  (cf.  Rev.  xi.  3,  4)  \D.

remarkable  times  of  the  Church,  have  Brown,  D.D.].


CHAPTER  V.

Critical  Notes.]  Flying  roll]  Vision  sixth.  2.]  Ten  yards  long  and  five  yards  broad.  The
size  intended  to  indicate  the  number  of  curses  contained  ;  and  Flying]  The  velocity  nf  judgments  upon
the  wicked.  3.  Earth]  Land  of  Judah  first ;  ultimately,  to  all  the  earth.  Stealeth]  Sinners  against
the  second  commandment,  false  swearers  against  the  first.  Cut  off]  Lit.  cleared,  swept  away  as
offensive  (1  Kings  xiv.  10  :  Ezek.  xxiv.  11).  Two  sins  put  for  the  whole.  This  side — that  side]
The  scroll  was  written  on  both  sides,  as  in  Ex.  xxxii.  15.  Henderson  gives:  "  From  that  place,
whether  on  the  right  hand  or  on  the  left,  he  should  be  swept  away  by  the  Divine  judgment.
Nowhere  should  he  find  protection."  4.  Forth]  Out  of  the  treasure-house  (Jer.  x.  13).  Enter  and
remain]  Lit.  lodge  or  stay ;  not  idle,  but  consuming  inmates,  beams,  and  stones  (cf.  1  Kings  xviii.  38
Lev.  xiv.  45).  5.]  Seventh  vision.  Wickedness  driven  from  Judah  to  mingle  with  its  kindred
elements  in  Babylon.  6.  Ephah]  A  familiar  dry  measure,  denoting  unjust  dealings  in  buying  and
selling  (cf.  Amos  viii.  5).  Resemblance]  Lit.  eye  (i.  e.  that  to  which  the  eye  was  directed,  their  aim,
viz.  evil,  some).  The  ephah  was  an  image  of  the  wickedness  of  the  Jews  in  the  land.  7.  Lifted]
The  ephah  was  covered.  Talent]  Lit.  a  round  piece  of  metal,  125  lbs.  weight.  A  woman]  In
miniature,  perhaps ;  Lit.  one  woman  personified  wickedness  (cf.  Prov.  ii.  16;  v.  3,  4).  Lit.  the
wickedness  in  its  peculiar  form.  8.  Cast]  it  within ;  caused  her  to  contract  herself  within  the
compass  of  the  vessel  [Newc.~\.  Wickedness  had  risen  up,  but  was  cast  down  again,  and  sealed  up  in
the  ephah.  The  weight]  Lit.  the  stone,  round  mass  of  lead,  to  secure  her.  No  escape  from  judg-
ments. 9.  Tvpo  women]  removed  the  ephah  with  its  contents.  One  not  enough  to  carry  the  load
[Maurer].  The  Assyrians  and  Babylonians,  by  whom  God  removed  idolatry  in  the  persons  of
apostate  jews  out  of  the  land  [Henderson].  Wings]  like  storks'  wings,  strong  and  ample.  Wind]  To
represent  the  swiftness  of  movement,  flying  before  instead  of  struggling  against  wind  [Wardlaw].
Lifted]  up  above  hindrance  and  earthly  power.  11.  Build]  a  permanent  habitation.  Shinar]  An
old  historic  name  for  Babylon  (Gen.  x.  10  :  Isa.  xi.  11  :  Dan.  i.  2).  "Wickedness  is  to  be  punished
by  another  exile,  longer  than  the  former  one.  Established]  Wickedness  cast  out  of  Judah,  will
dwell  long  and  firmly,  but  not  permanently,  in  Babylon ;  a  type  of  the  final  separation  of  the  ungodly
from  the  godly  in  time  and  eternity.

HOMILETICS.

The  Unchanging  Law  and  its  Universal  Curse. —  Verses  1 — 4.

The  series  of  visions  now  take  another  turn.  In  the  two  preceding  chapters  we
have  the  elements  of  the  gospel,  in  the  destruction  of  Zion's  foes,  the  forgiveness  of
the  people,  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  the  finishing  of  the  temple.  Now
we  learn  that  God  is  holy,  and  cannot  tolerate  sinners  in  their  wickedness — that
all  who  remain  impenitent  or  reject  God's  mercy  will  he  punished  with  a  long
and  dreary  exile,  or  visited  with  exterminating  judgment.  "  The  white  robes  of
innocence  and  the  golden  oil  of  the  Holy  Spirit  disappear,  and  in  their  place  comes
a  fearful  curse,  overshadowing  the  land  and  threatening  an  irrecoverable  overthrow  "
[Lange\     We  learn  from  the  connection  of  these  words —

I.  That  God's  law  is  not  abrogated  by  change  of  circumstances.  The  Jews
were  restored  to  their  land,  forgiven  in  their  sins,  and  aided  in  their  work ;  but


chap.  v.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAff.  619


the  law  of  God  still  observed,  and  would  punish,  their  guilt.  No  place,  time,  nor
circumstances  can  alter  this  law.  It  is  "  from  eternity  to  eternity."  It  is  the
revelation  of  God,  and  the  standard  of  rectitude  in  all  nations  and  ages.  Unchange-
able in  its  nature,  demands,  and  design,  it  is  designed  to  educate  conscience,  to  keep
alive  a  sense  of  sin,  and  to  lead  to  repentance  and  faith.  "  The  law  entered  (came
in  by  the  way,  i.  e.  provisionally,  with  the  foreseen  effect)  that  the  offence  might
abound."  II.  That  the  curse  of  God's  law  will  come  upon  all  transgressors.
"  This  is  the  curse  that  goeth  forth."  There  is  a  constant  tendency  in  men  to  abuse
Divine  goodness,  and  encourage  sin.  But  to  all  who  see,  the  "  flying  roll "  unfolds
the  knowledge  of  God.  It  is  still  a  "  fiery  law,"  pronouncing  curses  on  those  who
disobey.  Sinai  still  thunders  forth  its  terrors  to  all  who  in  spirit,  word,  or  deed
break  its  principles.  They  lay  hold  upon  all,  and  where  is  the  man  that  can  escape  *\
"  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the
book  of  the  law,  to  do  th^m. "  III.  That  Divine  grace  alone  will  secure  a  man
from  the  curse  of  God's  law.  The  Jews  were  reminded  that  sin  would  hinder
their  work — that  they  were  to  forsake  it,  if  God  must  continue  to  help  them,  and
fix  them  in  their  own  land.  In  other  words,  God's  favour  alone  would  be  the
ground  of  their  security.  They  are  only  safe  who  trust  his  mercy  and  obey  his
will.  "  The  lesson  under  a  different  form,"  says  Wardlaw,  "  was  also,  that  the  land
to  which  they  had  been  restored,  must  be  held  by  the  same  tenure  as  before.  God
had  given  it  originally  by  promise.  By  faith  of  the  promise  it  was  obtained.  By
'  the  obedience  of  faith'  it  was  held.  The  inheritance  was  never  *  of  the  law ; '
was  never  held  by  any  legal  tenure — by  any  kind  of  desert — any  right  arising  out
of  the  doings  of  those  who  occupied  it."  Only  in  Christ  are  we  free  from
condemnation.  We  are  saved  by  grace,  not  by  works.  M  Not  of  works,  lest  any
man  should  boast."


The  Flying  Eoll,  or  Sin  and  its  Punishment. — Verses  1 — 4.

Taking  this  roll  as  representing  the  curse  of  God,  ready  to  be  executed  upon
transgressors,  let  us  "  lift  up  our  eyes  and  behold  "  the  sins  which  bring  the  curse,
and  provoke  God  to  ruin  men  in  personal  and  domestic  affairs.

I.  The  sins.  Some  infer  the  Divine  authority  of  the  roll,  from  its  size,  just  the
dimensions  of  the  temple  porch,  a  place  where  the  law  was  usually  read ;  others
infer,  the  great  number  of  the  sins  and  curses  written  upon  it.  Like  Ezekiel's  roll
"  it  was  written  within  and  without,"  and  full  of  "  lamentations,  and  mourning,  and
woe."  1.  The  sins  were  grievous.  Two  kinds  are  specified  as  indicating  the  whole.
(a)  Sins  against  man.  "  Every  one  that  stealeth."  This  means  every  kind  of
injustice  and  violence,  (b)  Sins  against  God.  "  Every  one  that  sweareth."  False
or  profane  swearing  was  common  among  the  Jews.  Stealing  and  perjury  often
together  ;  for  the  covetous  and  fraudulent  have  no  scruple  in  the  use  of  God's  name
(cf.  Prov.  xxx.  9).  Innumerable  methods  of  fraud  and  deceit  are  constantly  practised,
and  scarcely  considered  criminal,  because  customary.  But  all  who  are  guilty  of
injustice  and  dishonesty  with  their  neighbours  in  whatever  form,  and  all  who
withhold  from  God,  in  principle  and  action,  the  reverence  due  to  his  name,  are  under
the  curse  of  the  law.  2.  The  sins  were  open.  They  were  not  only  written  on  the
roll,  but  the  roll  was  open,  and?  of  extraordinary  size.  "  It  was  not  rolled  up  and
sealed,  but  fully  expanded  to  view,  that  nothing  it  contained  might  be  concealed,"
says  one.  Sins  are  written  legibly  on  our  moral  constitution,  in  the  sight  of  God
and  man,  and  are  "  known  and  read  of  all  men."  Sin  is  self-revealing.  It  is
impossible  to  hide  wrong  doing.  Jupiter  was  supposed  to  write  down  the  sins  of
men  in  a  book.  God  keeps  a  record  of  human  guilt,  which  will  be  unfolded  on
earth  and  in  eternity.  "  Some  men's  sins  are  open  (manifest,  clear,)  beforehand,
going  (like  heralds)  before  to  judgment ;  and  some  men  they  follow  after."     II.  The


620


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.


[chap.  v.


punishment.  "  This  is  the  curse  that  goeth  forth."  The  curse  of  the  Divine  law
must  be  denounced  against  all  transgressors.  Its  sanction  must  be  set  forth  and
not  erased.  The  theology  which  denies  Divine  justice,  and  deludes  the  conscience,
finds  no  place  in  the  teaching  of  the  prophet.  "  The  anathemas  of  Scripture  are
not  a  mere  brutum  fulmen,  but  a  solid  and  terrible  reality."  1.  The  curse  was
universal.  "  Every  one  shall  be  cut  off."  It  hangs  over  "  the  face  of  the  whole
earth,"  ready  to  fall  upon  its  objects.  2.  The  curse  was  inevitable.  "  I  will  bring
it  forth,  saith  the  Lord."  Who  can  turn  aside  that  which  Almighty  power  sends
forth?  On  "  this  side,  and  on  that,"  the  ungodly  are  "  cut  off."  3.  The  curse  was
swift.  Its  speed  was  not  slow:  "I  see  a  flying  roll."  Judgments  sleep  not,  but
suddenly  break  forth,  and  overtake  the  disobedi.-nt.  The  lightning  from  heaven
is  not  more  swift  and  irresistible.  "  He  sendeth  forth  his  commandment  upon
earth :  his  word  runneth  very  swiftly."  4.  The  curse  was  destructive.  It  penetrated
the  house,  and  consumed  everything  inside,  like  the  plague  of  old.  "  It  shall  enter
into  the  house."  (a)  It  destroys  families.  The  homes  of  the  thief  and  the  false-
swearer  were  attacked.  The  curse  of  God  comes  to  the  sinner  where  he  thinks
himself  most  protected  and  most  secure,  (b)  It  destroys  possessions.  Vengeance
enters  and  remains  in  the  house  until  it  answers  the  end  for  which  it  is  sent.  It
"  remains  in  the  midst  of  it;"  abides  like  leprosy,  infecting,  wasting,  and  consuming
all.  Ahab  multiplied  his  house,  and  defied  the  curse  pronounced  against  it ;  but
the  stroke  swept  all  away  (1  Kings  xxi.  20 — 22).  "  The  curse  of  the  Lord  is  in  the
house  of  the  wicked ;  but  he  blesseth  the  habitation  of  the  just."


HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.


Ver.  1.  Prophecies  partly  appertain
to  those  in  whose  times  the  sacred
writers  prophesied,  partly  to  the  mys-
teries of  Christ.  And  therefore  it  is
wont  of  the  prophets,  at  one  time  to  chas-
tise vices  and  set  forth  punishments ;
at  another,  to  predict  the  mysteries  of
Christ  and  the  Church  [Aug.  de  Oiv.  Dei\
It  was  a  wide,  unfolded  roll,  as  is  in-
volved in  its  flying ;  but  its  flight  sig-
nified the  very  swift  coming  of  punish-
ment; its  flying  from  heaven,  that  the
sentence  came  from  the  judgment-seat
above  \Piisey~\.

Ver.  2.  Its  large  size  might  denote
two  things  :  —  the  large  number  and
amount  of  the  Divine  denunciations  it
contained ;  and  at  the  same  time,  there
being  room  for  writing  them  large,  that
they  might  be  seen.  It  was  at  the  same
time  "flying."  By  which,  also,  two
things  might  be  denoted — that  it  was  not
meant  for  any  particular  city  or  locality,
but  to  make  a  progress  through  the
length  and  breadth  of  the  land ;  and
also,  that  the  denunciations  of  Jehovah
written  iu  it  would  come  speedily  and
surely  on  those  against  whom  they  were
pointed  [Wardlaw].


Ver.  3.  Out  off:  lit.  cleansed  away.
The  moral  meaning  of  the  Hebrew
word  suggests,  the  defiling  and  offensive
nature  of  sin,  and  the  several  measures
necessary  to  take  it  away.  "  None  who
enter  the  porch  of  the  visible  Church
may  flatter  themselves  that  they  can
escape  God's  wrath  and  malediction,  if
they  commit  any  of  the  sins  condemned
by  the  comprehensive  commination  of
this  flying  roll,  which  may  be  compared
to  a  net,  co-extensive  with  the  world,  and
drawn  throughout  the  whole  from  side
to  side  "  [  Wordsworth].

Ver.  4.  A  man's  house  is  termed  his
castle,  but  is  unable  to  hold  out  against
Divine  judgments,  which  may  be  noticed
— 1.  f or  terribleness ;  2.  suddenness ;  and
3.  retributive  end.  Property  and  estates
often  cut  off,  families  dried  up  root  and
branch,  and  doomed  to  perpetual  curse
(cf.  Job  xviii.  14,  15).  "It  is  a  curse
that  embitters  every  sweet,  and  gives  more
than  twofold  intensity  to  every  bitter.
From  this  world  it  must  accompany
and  follow  a  man  to  another,  and  settle
with  him  there  for  ever.  The  special
reference  made  to  their  houses,  with  the
stones  thereof   and  the  timber  thereof


chap,  v.j  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAIL  621


forcibly  points  to  the  care  which  they     Jehovah's  home  was  neglected"  \_Ward-
had  been  taking  of  their  own  accommo-     law].
dation,  in  comfort  and  elegance,  while

HOMILETICS.

The  "Woman  in  the  Ephah,  or  the  Wickedness  and  Punishment  of  the

Nation. —  Verses  5 — 11.

The  scope  of  this  vision  is  not  much  indicated  by  the  angel,  and  is  differently
interpreted  by  commentators.  In  the  former  vision,  God  pursues  personal  sins
with  private  calamities ;  in  this,  the  nation  fills  up  the  measure  of  its  iniquity,  and
is  cast  out  of  its  land.  Taking  the  woman  as  representing  the  Jewish  nation — the
Church  of  God,  and  the  ephah — the  wickedness,  the  corruption  in  which  the  nation
had  fallen  ;  we  have  a  prophetic  warning  or  denunciation  for  the  future.  The  two
visions,  distinct  in  form,  are  allied  in  meaning  and  purpose.

I.    The  wickedness  of  the  nation.      "  This  is  an  ephah  that  goeth  forth."
Dr.  Henderson  regards  the  wickedness  as  meaning  "  idolatry  with  all  its  accom-
panying atrocities."     Wardlaw  and  others  take  the  ephah  as  an  emblem  of  worldly
traffic  or  merchandise.     This  traffic  was  mixed  up  with  fraud  and  treachery,  and
the  ground  of  complaint  and  expostulation.     1.   The  wickedness  was  universal.
"  This  is  their  resemblance  through  all  the  land."     °  Ye  are  cursed  with  a  curse ;
for  ye  have  robbed  me,  even  this  whole  nation"  (cf.  Mai.  iii.  9).    2.  This  wickedness
was  deeply  rooted.     The  woman  is  represented  as  sitting  in  the  ephah.     World-
liness  dwells  in  the  Church.     "  The  love  of  this  present  world  "  leads  many  astray.
3.   This  wickedness  was  measured.     The  ephah  was  gradually  filled,  and  every  one
contributed  to  the  full  measure.      All  helped  to  make  the  heap,  and  ripen  the
nation  for  judgment.     Sin  was  a  common  store,  Divinely  permitted  and  exactly
measured  (cf.  Gen.  xv.  16).    "  Fill  ye  up  the  measure  of  your  fathers"  (Matt,  xxiii.
32).   II.  The  punishment  of  the  nation.     The  nation  was  shut  up  with  its  sins  in
the  measure  ;  enclosed  so  that  they  could  not  escape ;  and  carried  where  the  retri-
bution begins,  but  does  not  seem  to  end.     1.   The  nation  was  carried  away.     They
might  be  permitted  to  build  and  work  for  God,  but  if  they  heeded  not  the  warning,
they  would  be  lifted  up  out  of  their  land,  and  dispersed  to  other  countries.     2.  The
nation  was  openly  carried  away.     "  They  lifted  up  the  ephah  between  the  earth  and
the  heaven."    The  punishment  was  before  the  eyes  of  all,  a  public  example  of  God's
vengeance  to  the  world.     3.  The  nation  was  carried  away  by  suitable  agencies.
Whatever  the  two  women  represent,  they  are  set  forth  as  agents,  swift  and  sufficient,
to  execute  the  Divine  purpose,  without  let  or  hindrance.     "  Rapidly,  inexorably,
irresistibly,  they  flew  and  bore  the  ephah  between  heaven  and  earth.     No  earthly
power  could  reach  or  rescue  it "  [Pusey].     4.  The  nation  was  carried  aioay  to  an
appointed  place.     "  In  the  land  of  Shinar."     Babylon  was  an  emblem  of  restored
and  repeated  captivity.     A  place  which  symbolizes  the  anti-christian  or  ungodly
powers,  who  by  violence,  art,  and  falsehood  war  against  the  truth.     5.   The  punish-
ment  of  the  nation  in  this  appointed  place  would  be  of  long  duration.      "  The
building  of  a  house  "  for  the  ephah,  and  "  the  setting  of  it  on  its  own  base,"  repre-
sent the  long  duration  of  the  second  dispersion.     For  two  thousand  years  the  Jews
have  remained  a  distinct  people  in  a  scattered  state,  a  proof  of  God's  faithfulness,
and  a  warning  to  all  nations.     Unjust  measures,  whatever  they  be,  will  bring
righteous  retribution  upon  their  possessors.     The  instrument  of  defrauding  God
and  man  will  become  the  agent  of  punishment.     Si  oners  will  be  driven  away  in
their  own  wickedness,  and  sent  to  their  "  own  place."     Let  us  seek  our  portion
with  the  true  Israel,  and  avoid  the  curse  of  Babylon's  doom.     "  Mystery,  Babylon
the  great,  the  mother  of  harlots  and  abominations  of  the  earth  "  (cf.  Rev.  xvii.  3 — 5)l


>s


622


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.


[chap,  v,


"  Tribes  of  the  wandering  foot  and  weary  breast,
How  shall  ye  flee  away  and  be  at  rest  ?
The  wild  dove  hath  her  nest,  the  fox  his  cave,
Mankind  their  country — Israel  but  the  grave  "  \Lang$\


HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.


Ver.  6.  TJiis  is  equivalent  to  see,
there  is  a  woman,  &c.  The  strokes  of
punitive  wrath  do  not  fall  at  random
or  capriciously.  There  is  ample  reason
in  every  case,  so  that  one  may  always
say,  this  (the  ephah)  is  their  object  in
all  the  land.  Men  go  ceaselessly  adding
sin  to  sin,  and,  because  judgment  is  not
suddenly  executed,  think  that  there  is
impunity  ;  whereas  they  are  only  filling
the  measure.  God  waits.  There  is  an
appointed  time  with  him,  and  he  will
not  anticipate  [Lange\  We  too  are
taught  by  this,  that  the  Lord  of  all
administers  all  things  in  weight  and
measure.  So  foretelling  to  Abraham
that  his  seed  should  be  a  sojourner,  and
the  cause  thereof — "  for  the  iniquity  of
the  Amorites  is  not  yet  full,"  i.  e.  they
have  not  yet  committed  sins  enough
(Gen.  xv.  1 6)  to  merit  entire  destruction,
wherefore  I  cannot  yet  endure  to  give
them  over  to  the  slaughter,  but  will
wait  for  the  measure  of  their  iniquity
[Pusey],

The  ephah  may  therefore  represent —
1.  The  sins  of  the  people.  Every  one
contributing  to  fill  up  the  measure.  2.
Their  ripeness  for  Divine  judgment.  The
measure  filled  up.  3.  The  just  retribu-
tion of  their  punishment.  "The  unjust
measure  was  one  of  Judah's  leading
sins,  and  thus,  in  just  retribution,  their
punishment."

Yer.  6.  They  who  had  dealt  treacher-
ously with  others,  were  dealt  treacher-
ously with  themselves.  What  measure
men  mete  to  others,  God  metes  to  them-
selves (Isa.  xxi.  2;  xxxiii.  1)  [Fausset].

Ver.  8.  Lead  on  the  mouth  of  it.  The
ephah  was  covered,  and  the  heavy  lid  of
lead  carefully  put  down  upon  the  mouth
of  it.  This  is  a  significant  emblem  of
the  impossibility  of  escape  from  the
merited  judgments  of  God.  So  the
Jewish  people,  considered  conditionally,
as  retaining   their  character,  would   be


carried  away  in  their  ivorldliness,  as  the
woman  was  borne  in  the  ephah.  The
very  ephah,  the  instrument  of  their
merchandise  and  wealth,  is  represented
as  the  means  of  confinement;  so  does
the  worldly-mindedness,  the  ambition,
and  covetousness  of  the  Jewish  people
shut  them  up  to  retributive  vengeance
[Wardlaw].

Vers.  9—11.  1.  A  people  abusing
afflictions  and  marvellous  deliverances
from  it,  by  sinning  yet  more,  may  ex-
pect their  afflictions  to  be  returned  upon
them  with  harder  measure ;  for  a  new
and  sorer  captivity,  and  longer  dwelling
under  it,  is  here  threatened  upon  renewed
provocations.  2.  The  Lord  hath  suffi-
cient instruments  at  command  to  execute
his  judgments,  who,  being  employed
against  his  sinful  people,  shall  find  all
things  concurring  with  them  in  their
work;  two  women  enough  to  carry  the
ephah  ;  wings,  enabling  them  to  flee  and
do  their  work  violently  and  swiftly;
high  in  heaven  and  earth,  above  the
opposition  of  men;  and  wind  in  their
wings,  to  indicate  providence  helping
them  forward.  3.  Captivity  and  exile
in  profane  nations,  from  the  face  of
God,  and  the  society  of  one  another  in
his  ordinances,  is  one  of  the  sorest
judgments  by  which  the  Lord  plagues
his  Church ;  wickedness  is  carried  to  the
land  of  Shinar.  4.  As  the  Church  is
no  place  for  sin  to  reign  and  get  a  biding
habitation ;  so  enemies  to  the  Church
are  accounted  by  God  as  the  common  sink
of  wickedness,  whom  he  will  punish;
for  wickedness  is  carried  from  the  holy
land  to  Shinar,  its  own  place,  where  all
wickedness  dwelt,  from  which  the  Jews
might  gather  that,  as  he  punished  them
so  he  would  not  spare  their  enemies
[Hutcheson].  The  prophet  intimates  to
the  Jews  of  his  own  age,  that  if  they
sin  against  God  by  the  sins  here  men-
tioned, their  restoration  to  Jerusalem  is


CHAP.  V.]


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ZECBARIAH.


623


frustrate  and  abortive ;  they  are  not,  in  city  and  temple  at  Jerusalem,  yet  their

heart,  in  Zion,  the  city  of  peace,  but  in  own    proper    place,    where    their    own

Babel,  the  city  of  confusion ;  and  though  house  is  built,  is  the  land  of  Shinar

they  may  pride  themselves  in  building  a  [Wordsworth].


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  F.


Ver.  3.  Curse.  The  good  make  a
better  bargain,  and  the  bad  a  worse,
than  is  usually  supposed,  for  the  rewards
of  the  one,  and  the  punishments  of  the
other,  not  unfrequently  begin  on  this
side  of  the  grave  [Colton's  Laconics].
The  wages  that  sin  bargains  with  the
sinner  are — life,  pleasure,  and  profit ;  but
the  wages  it  pays  them  with  are — death,
torment,  and  destruction.  He  that  would
understand  the  falsehood  and  death  of
sin,  must  compare  its  promises  and
payments  together  [Soutli],

"  Our  pleasant  vices  make  instruments  to  scourge
us"  [Shakespeare].

Ver.  7.  Behold.  The  angel  bids  him
behold  the  sins  of  the  people  Israel;
heaped  together  in  a  perfect  measure,
and  the  transgression  of  all  fulfilled —
that  the  sins  which  escaped  notice,  one
by  one,  might,  when  collected  together,
be  laid  open  to  the  eyes  of  all,  and  Israel
might  go  forth  from  its  place,  and  it
might  be  shown  to  all  what  she  was  in
her  own  land  [Pusey].

Ver.  8.   Lead.      Iniquity,  as  with  a


talent  of  lead,  weighs  down  the  con-
science [St.  Ambrose].  Escape  is  con-
trary to  the  laws  of  God  and  God's
universe.  It  is  as  impossible  as  that
fire  should  not  burn,  or  water  run  up-
hill. Your  sins  are  killing  you  by
inches ;  all  day  long  they  are  sowing  in
you  the  seeds  of  disease  and  death
[Canon  Kingsley].

Vers.  9 — 11.  This  vision,  like  the
other  visions  of  Zechariah,  extends  to
Christian  times.  In  the  Christian  Church
universal  corruptions  have  arisen  which
may  find  a  solemn  warning  here.  The
Church  of  Rome  boasts  herself  to  be
Sion :  but  she  is  the  mystical  Babylon
of  the  Apocalypse.  Her  sovereign  pon-
tiff is  "  the  lawless  one "  of  St.  Paul
(2  Thess.  ii.  3 — 12).  This  prophecy
may  be  applied,  and  ought  to  be  applied,
as  a  warning  to  those  who  are  tempted
to  communicate  with  her  in  her  errors
and  corruptions.  Her  doom  will  be,  to
be  removed  from  her  place,  and  to  be
swept  away  by  the  whirlwind  of  God's
wrath,  because  she  rebels  against  his  will
and  word  [Wordsworth],


CHAPTER  VL


Critical  Notes.]  Chariots]  Symbolic  of  four  great  empires  described  (Dan.  ii.  31 — 43 ;  rii.
3 — 7) :  or  of  the  four  winds  of  heaven  (ver.  5).  Two  mountains]  Between  Moriah  and  Zion,  some;
others,  emblems  of  Medes  and  Persians,  corresponding  to  the  two  horns  (Dan.  viii.  34).  Brass]
Strength  and  solidity  (cf.  Jer.  i.  18).  2.  Red]  The  colours  indicate  the  character  of  the  dispensations.
Red,  a  symbol  of  cruelty,  war,  and  bloodshed.  Black]  of  calamity  and  sorrow.  White]  of
prosperity  and  gladness.  Grisled  and  bay]  or  piebald,  of  a  mixed  dispensation,  light  and  darkness,
prosperity  and  adversity.  5.  Angel]  explains.  Spirits]  {winds,  marg.),  emblem  of  the  destructive
powers  and  agencies  of  Divine  judgments  (cf.  Ps.  cxlviii.  8  :  Jer.  xlix.  36  :  Rev.  vii.  2,  3).
J  lender  son  gives,  "angels  or  celestial  spirits,  represented  as  employed  by  God  to  carry  into  effect
his  high  behests,  which  they  receive  in  his  immediate  presence  (Job  i.  6 ;  ii.  1),  and  then  proceed  to
the  different. quarters  of  the  globe  in  which  the  special  operations  of  Divine  Providence  are  to  be
carried  forward."     6.  North]  To  conquer  Babylonians.    After  them]  Alexander  and  his  successors


624  HOMTLETIG  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [chap.  vt.


go  forth  to  conquer  the  Persians.  South]  Egypt  and  Arabia.  7.  Bay]  Lit.  strong  or  fleet.
Sought  J  Eagerly  seeking  for  permission  to  do  what  had  to  be  done.  Walk]  in  the  land,  unmolested
by  invasion,  yet  not  free  from  annoyance  ;  a  mixed  state  of  affairs  in  Israel  for  a  considerable  period.
Get]  Permission  given  by  him  who  commands  the  chariots.  8.  Quieted  my  spirit]  i.  e.  have  appeased
mine  anger,  or  caused  it  to  rest  (Judges  viii.  3  :  Eccl.  x.  4  :  Ezek.  v.  13).  Babylon  alone  in  the  days
of  the  prophet  was  punished  ;  God's  anger  was  satisfied  in  that  direction  ;  other  monarchies  had  to
expiate  their  sins.  9.]  The  ninth  vision.  Crowns  on  Joshua.  10,  11.]  The  persons  named  appear  to
have  formed  a  deputation  from  the  captives  still  remaining  in  Babylon,  who  had  sent  them  with
contributions  in  gold  and  silver,  to  help  forward  the  building  of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem.  These
deputies  had  deposited  their  gifts  in  the  house  of  Josiah,  to  which  the  prophet  is  commanded  to
repair,  and  take  what  was  necessary  for  making  the  two  crowns,  which  were  to  be  placed  on  the  head
of  the  high  priest  [Henderson].  Crowns]  A  symbol  of  the  priesthood  and  kingdom  of  Messiah  (Rev.
xix.  12).  12.  The  man]  shadowed  forth  in  Joshua,  viz.  the  Messiah.  Branch]  As  if  it  were  a
proper  name,  as  appears  not  only  by  the  lack  of  the  article,  but  by  the  established  usage  of  the  earlier
prophets  [Lange].  (Cf.  iii.  8  :  Isa.  ivy  2  :  Jer.  xxiii.  5).  Grow]  Shall  sprout  out  from  his  place,  i.e.
from  his  land  or  nation  ;  not  an  exotic,  but  a  root-shoot  of  the  real  stock.  "  Not  merely  from
Bethlehem  or  Nazareth,  but  by  his  own  power,  without  man's  aid,  in  miraculous  conception"
[Henderson].  Build]  the  future  spiritual  temple ;  an  encouragement  to  Jews  that  the  material  temple
will  be  finished  in  spite  of  opposition.  13.  Glory]  A  reference  to  the  insignia  of  majesty  put  on  the
head  of  Joshua;  the  honour  and  authority  of  sovereign.  Sit  and  rule]  The  former  denotes  the
possession  of  the  honour  and  dignity  of  a  king ;  the  latter,  the  actual  exercise  of  royal  authority
[Hengs.].  Priest]  Priestly  and  kingly  offices  united  in  him  on  one  throne.  Peace]  Civil  and
religious  authorities  working  together,  typify  the  harmony  of  his  kingdom  and  priesthood  ;  no  clashing
of  jurisdiction  between  the  two  offices.  '*  By  the  counsel  or  purpose  of  peace,  is  understood  the
glorious  scheme  of  reconciliation  between  God  and  man,  effected  by  the  joint  exercise  of  the
sacerdotal  and  regal  offices  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (cf.  Isa.  ix.  6  :  Mic.  v.  5  :  Ephes.  ii.  14 — 17  :
Col.  i.  20,  21  :  Heb.  xiii.  20"  [Henderson].  14.  Helem]  The  same  as  Heldai  and  Hen]  Another
name  of  Josiah  (ver.  10).  Not  unusual  among  Jews  for  one  man  to  be  known  by  two  names.
Memorial]  The  crowns  not  for  these  persons  to  wear,  but  a  symbol  of  the  act  just  taken  place  ;  hence
to  be  desposited  in  the  temple  as  pledges  of  the  Messiah,  to  animate  their  anticipations  of  his
appearance.  15.  Far  off]  Gentiles  shall  be  called,  and  shall  actively  participate  in  setting  up  the
kingdom  of  God.  Know]  When  events  correspond  to  predictions.  Come]  Unbelief  would  not
hinder  the  accomplishment  of  the  promise  ;  but  if  they  obeyed,  the  temple  would  be  finished,  and  in
the  latter  days  this  would  be  realized.  The  benefits  of  the  Messiah's  coming  and  work  were
conditional  to  them.  The  large  portion  of  the  Jews  were  disobedient,  and  perverted  the  prophets.
Henderson  and  others  consider  the  words  an  aposiopesis;  a  figure  of  speech  by  which  emphatic  silence
conveys  an  intimation  more  impressively  than  words.  If  ye  will  hearken,  then — "  The  words  simply
declare  that  Israel  will  not  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Messiah,  or  to  his  salvation,  unless  it
hearkens  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord.  Whoever  intentionally  closes  his  eyes,  will  be  unable  to  see  the
salvation  of  God"  [Keil],

HOMILETIGS.

God's  Providence  guards  the  Interests  op  the  Christian  Church. —

Verses  1 — 8.

Under  the  type  of  four  chariots  the  providence  of  God  is  represented  in  this
vision  as  gliding  the  agencies  of  the  world,  in  reference  to  the  destinies  of  God's
people.

I.  The  powers  of  the  world  are  subservient  to  the  interests  of  the  Christian
Church.  The  history  of  the  world  is  arranged  with  a  view  to  promote  the  welfare
of  God's  people  and  to  establish  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah.  Hence  all  things  are
designed  and  adjusted  to  werk  in  mutual  action  and  united  tendency  for  the  good
of  the  Christian  (Rom.  viii.  28).  1.  In  their  origin.  "  There  came  four  chariots  out
from  between  two  mountains."  Calvin  explains  the  mountains  as  the  hiding-place
of  the  Divine  purpose,  which  is  kept  back  until  the  time  for  its  revelation  and
execution.  All  events  and  agencies  emanate  from  the  decrees  of  God,  which  are  firm
and  immovable  as  mountains  of  brass.  2.  In  their  nature.  The  messengers  of  God
are  sent  to  accomplish  various  designs.  Some  go  on  errands  of  bloodshed  and
mourning  •  some  as  heralds  of  joy  and  triumph ;  and  others  have  missions  mixed
with  joy  and  grief,  prosperity  and  adversity  3.  In  their  direction.  Some  go  to
the  north,  and  others  to  the  south  (ver.  6).     They  all  start  from  a  common  centre,


CHAP,  vi.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  623


the  purpose  of  the  Eternal,  but  are  sent  in  different  directions.  In  all  quarters  of
the  globe  God  is  supreme,  and  sees  the  end  from  the  beginning  of  events.  Nothing
is  contingent  or  happens  unknown  to  him.  "  Political  changes,"  says  Moore,  "are
only  the  moving  of  the  shadow  on  the  earthly  dial-plate  that  marks  the  mightiest
revolutions  going  forward  in  the  heavens."  II.  The  powers  of  the  world  are
employed  according  to  the  design  of  God  concerning  the  Christian  Church.
God's  swift  messengers  are  sent  forth  to  accomplish  the  counsels  of  his  will.  1.  To
punish  some.  War,  pestilence,  famine,  and  destructive  agencies  bring  mourning
and  distress.  God  can  turn  nations  one  against  another,  and  white  horses  may  follow
black.  2.  To  caution  others.  To  many,  providences  are  a  cup  mixed  with  bitter
and  sweet  ;  life  to  them  is  now  prosperous  and  then  adverse.  3.  To  help  God's
'people.  Whatever  be  the  dispensations  of  God  to  others,  they  portend  good  only
to  his  people.  Swiftly  and  triumphantly  are  the  chariots  driven  along,  agitating
the  earth  like  rushing  winds  ;  but  the  Church  of  God  is  secure.  "  God  is  in  the
midst  of  her ;  she  shall  not  be  moved  :  God  shall  help  her,  and  that  right  early."

The  Administration  of  Divine  Providence. — Verses  2 — 8.

In  this  vision  we  have  an  insight  of  the  providence  of  God  in  its  relation  to  men.

I.  It  is  various  in  its  aspects.  There  were  red  and  white  horses,  grisled  and
bay.  Events  have  different  aspects,  and  the  times  change  like  the  face  of  the  sky.
One  thing  is  set  over  against  the  other,  and  the  cup  of  God's  hand  is  full  of  mixture
(Ps.  lxxv.  8).  II.  It  is  supreme  in  its  operations.  All  events  "go  forth"  from
God.  He  commands  and  he  restrains.  He  is  supreme,  1.  Over  all  agencies.  The
chariots  are  driven  by  his  skill,  and  the  winds  gathered  in  his  fists  (Prov.  xxx.  4).
2.  Over  all  times.  In  all  ages  of  the  world,  and  in  every  period  of  national  and
petsonal  history,  God  rules.  All  the  laws  and  forces  of  the  universe  were  created  and
are  preserved  and  directed  by  him.  There  is  no  chance  nor  caprice  ;  there  are  no
inferior  deities,  like  the  store-keepers  of  Jupiter,  in  the  providence  of  God.  III.  It
is  wonderful  in  its  method.  In  John's  vision  angels  are  represented  as  holding
the  winds  (Rev.  vii.  1).  "Why  not  the  angels,"  asks  Wardlaw,  "  in  the  vision  of
Zechariah,  be  considered  as  directing  the  winds'?"  Angels  stand  before  God,
"  excel  in  strength,"  and  are  "  ministers  of  his  that  do  his  pleasure."  How  strange
that  God  should  employ  the  mightiest  and  most  intelligent  creatures  in  the  universe
on  our  behalf.  Well  may  Shakespeare  exclaim,  "  Angels  and  ministers  of  grace,
defend  us !  "  IV.  It  is  rapid  in  its  movements.  Swift  as  chariots  and  sudden  as
the  winds  are  changes  often  wrought.  Now  sunshine  beams  upon  nations  and  they
bask  in  prosperity ;  then  clouds  and  storms  gather  over  them  and  joy  is  driven
away.  "  The  chariot  of  God's  providence  runneth  not  upon  broken  wheels,"  says
Rutherford.  V.  It  is  satisfactory  to  God  in  its  results.  "  They  have  quieted
my  spirit."  This  may  refer  to  the  satisfaction  of  Divine  justice  in  executing
vengeance  upon  the  enemies  of  his  people  (cf.  ch.  i.  15,  and  Isa.  i.  24).  Wrath
and  mercy  may  be  deferred,  but  will  eventually  be  revealed  God's  people  should
hope  on  and  work  earnestly.  God's  enemies  should  beware  lest  they  be  overtaken
in  their  sins.  "  The  work  of  righteousness  shall  be  peace,  and  the  effect  of
righteousness  quietness  and  assurance  for  ever."

The  Ministry  op  Angels. —  Verse  7.

In  these  words  the  charioteers  are  represented  as  asking  permission  to  do  what
they  could  for  the  holy  land.  They  have  to  wait,  but  the  command  is  given  and
they  are  swift  in  obedience.     Take  them  as  describing  the  ministry  of  angels.

I.  It  is  extensive  in  range.  "  To  and  fro  through  the  earth."  North  or  south,
as  God  commissions  them  (ver.  6).  II.  It  is  antagonistic  in  its  character.
Satan  and  his  angels  walk  to  and  fro  in  the  earth  to  do  mischief.     They  roam  in

40


826  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [chap,  vl


restless  activity,  and  no  place  is  secure  from  their  attacks  (Job  i.  7).  But
the  messengers  of  Jehovah  are  more  numerous  and  powerful  than  all  against  us.
The  ultimate  triumph  is  certain,  we  may  therefore  have  confidence.  III.  It  is
retributive  in  its  design.  To  punish  the  enemies  of  God's  people  and  satisfy  the
demands  of  his  justice.  They  not  only  minister  mercy  but  execute  vengeance.
IV.  It  is  eager  in  its  spirit.  They  "sought  to  go  that  they  might  walk,"  they
were  eager  and  ready  to  be  employed.

"  They  stand  with  wings  outspread
Listening  to  catch  the  Master's  least  command,
And  fly  through  Nature  ere  the  moment  ends"  \Carringtm\

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  1.     Brass.     Mountains  of  brass  it.     But  first,  that  they  can  do  nothing

denote  the  immovable  decrees  of  God,  without  commission  from  him.  Secondly,

his   steady   execution  of    his   counsels,  that  they  are  ever  ready  to  offer  their

and  the  insuperable  restraints  that  are  service    and  yield    obedience  upon  the

upon  all  empires   and  counsels,  which  least  intimation  of  the  Divine  pleasure

God  keeps  within  the  barriers  of  such  [Trapp],     From  the  whole  section  we

impregnable  mountains  that  not  one  can  learn — that  the  earth  may  seem  to  be

start  till  he  opens   the   way  [Cruden's  quiet  and  at  peace  while  the  people  of

Concordance].  God  are  in  a  weak  and  suffering  con-

Ver.  4.      What  ?     Difficulty  doth  but  dition  ;   that  the  outward  peace  of  the

whet  d«  sire  in  heroic  spirits ;  the  harder  earth  will  be  disturbed  in  due  time,  and

the  vision,  the  more    earnest   was   the  God's  people  wonderfully  delivered ;  that

prophet's  inquisition;  he  was  restless  till  whatever  sad  dispensations  God   sends

better    resolved,  and  therefore  applieth  upon  the  nations,  the  Church  will  be. his

himself  again  to  his  angel  tutor,  rather  special  care ;    that  his  purpose  will  be

than  tutelar,  whom  for  honour's  sake  he  fully  accomplished  and  all  things  done

called  my  lord  [Trapp],  according   to   his    mind,    therefore   his

Ver.  7.    Sought.    This  doth  not  teach  people  may  trust  his  wisdom,  power,  and

that  the  angels  are  more  careful  of  this  love,
world  than  God  is,  of  whom  they  desired

HOMILETICS.

The  Messiah's  Person  and  Work. —  Verses  9 — 13.

In  predictions  concerning  the  Messiah  we  find  word  combined  with  action,
prophecy  coalescing  with  history.  An  example  of  symbolic  prediction  based  upon
present  history  is  found  in  the  text.  In  presence  of  a  deputation  of  Jews  from
Babylon,  the  prophet  was  charged  to  place  a  crown  on  the  head  of  Joshua,  the
high  priest,  and  then  deliver  the  prophecy.  Its  form  and  spirit,  the  union  of  the
priestly  and  regal  office,  forbid  us  to  confine  it  to  Jewish  restoration.  It  is  founded
upon  visible  representations,  yet  in  mystic  vision  soars  into  the  future.

I.  The  person  of  the  Messiah  is  described.  Behold  the  man,  the  man  marked
and  well  known,  the  true  man  and  most  eminent  of  all  men  (Hosea  ii.  16).  Not
man  wretched  and  miserable,  mortal  and  dying  (Job  xxv.  6  :  cf.  Ps.  viii.  4)  ;  but
man  with  the  characteristics  of  a  man — strength,  courage,  and  pre-eminence.  Joshua
and  his  companions  were  men  of  signs  (ch.  iii.  8),  but  in  none  of  them  were  the
priestly  and  regal  splendours  united.  Then  the  word  branch  designates  a  future
person,  a  sprout  of  Jehovah  (Isa.  iv.  2),  a  descendant  of  David.  The  Messiah  is
the  priest  and  king.    Zechariah  revives  the  prophecy  of  Jeremiah  (xxxiii.  15).    One


CHAP.  VL]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ZECHARIAH.  627


belongs  to  the  last  predictions  at  the  beginning  of  the  captivity,  and  the  other  is
one  of  the  first  after  it  is  past.     God  does  not  forget  his  promise,  and  will  never
forsake  his  people.     In  every  age  it  may  be  said,  "  Unto  you  that  fear  my  name
shall  the  Sun  of  Kighteousness  arise  with  healing  in  his  wings."    II.  The  work  of
the  Messiah  is  specified.     1.  He  shall  grow  up  out  of  his  place.     He  shall  sprout
up  from  his  place,  i.  e.  from  the  place  peculiar  to  him ;  not  merely  from  Bethlehem
or  Nazareth,  but  by  his  own  power,  without  man's  help,  in  his  miraculous  concep-
tion.    Some  refer  this  to  his  springing  up  from  a  low  family ;  others,  to  the  growth
of  the  Church  under  him.     It  is  better  to  apply  it  as  above.     He  shall  grow  by
virtue  of  his  own  power,  with  rapid  and  vigorous  increase.     He  springs  from  God
in  his  human  and  Divine  nature,  shot  forth  through  man,  blossoming  in  the  royal
line  of  David,  yet  neither  sown,  nor  planted,  nor  propagated  by  human  hands.    He
shall  continue  to  grow,  extend  his  power  and  dominion,  and  his  kingdom  shall  be
an  everlasting  kingdom.     2.  He  shall  build  the  temple,  the  Church  of  God,  which
is  the  house  and  temple  of  God  (1  Cor.  iii.  16:1  Tim.  iii.  15  :  1  Pet.  ii.  5).     Of
this  temple  he  is  the  author  and  foundation  (Ephes.  ii.  20 — 22).     It  is  growing
in  beauty  and  numbers,  filled  with  his  light  and  glory,  and  is  the  school  of  instruc-
tion, the  monument  of  wisdom  to  the  universe  (Ephes.  iii.  10).     The  repetition
may  indicate  the  certainty  of  the  work  being  commenced  and  finished,  or  give
emphasis  to  the  truth,  to  encourage  faith  in  his  person  and  confidence  in  his  work.
III.  The  honour  of  the  Messiah  is  set  forth.     1.  He  (himself)  shall  bear  the
glory.     The  crowns  of  royalty,  the  robes  and  insignia  of  office,  shall  hang  upon
him  and  adorn  his  person.     He  shall  lift  up  the  glory  (as  the  word  means)  which
had  been  depressed  and  despised.     It  shall  be  exalted  in  him,  not  divided  any
longer  between  kings  and  priests,  but  the  government  shall  be  upon  his  shoulders
alone,  and  he  shall  have  the  glory  (Isa.  ix.  6  :  Phil.  ii.  9 — 11).     2.  He  shall  sit
and  rule.     For  a  king  to  sit  was  nothing  strange,  but  contrary  to  the  custom  of
priests,  who  stood  daily  (Heb.  x.  11).     But  Christ  has  offered  one  sacrifice  and
obtained  eternal  redemption ;  he  has  finished  his  work,  will  never  rise  to  perform
it  a  second  time,  but  now  sits  for  ever  at  the  right  hand  of    God  :  a  priest  upon
his  throne,  whom  the  people  cannot  approach  without  priestly  intercession.     Here
the  majesty  of  a  prince  is  blended  with  the  sympathy  of  a  priest  (Heb.  ii.  18  ;  iv.
15;   v.  2).    IV.  The  special  arrangement  with  the  Messiah  is  mentioned.
11  The  counsel  of  peace  shall  be  between  them  both."   The  words  allude,  first  of  all,
to    Joshua   and   Zerubbabel,   then  to  the  priestly   and    kingly  office  of  Christ.
Formerly  kings  and  priests  had  counselled  together  for  the  peace  and  prosperity  of
the  Church  and  the  State.    Now  these  offices  may  be  centred  in  one  person,  and  no
longer  kept  distinct ;  yet  each  must  have  its  dignity.     The  majesty  of  the  king  is
not  to  be  displayed  without  the  intercession  of  the  priest.     There  is  no  depression
of  one  to  exalt  the  other,  no  confounding  together,  but  harmony  and  co-operation.
The  priest  is  a  king,  and  the  king  is  a  priest.     There  may  be  reference  also  to  the
plan  of  redemption,  a  plan  of  infinite  wisdom,  and  Christ  is  called  "  Counsellor  "
(Isa.  ix.  6).    As  in  the  creation  of  man,  so  was  there  consultation  in  his  redemption.
Peace  is  the  grand  result ;   harmony  in  the  moral  government  of  God,  peace
between  God  and  man,  and  man  and  man.     "  On  earth  peace,  goodwill  toward
men  "  [By  the  Author,  from  The  Study,  1873].

Christ  the  Builder  of  the  Temple. —  Verse  13.

The  temple  is  not  that  of  which  Zerubbabel  was  the  builder ;  but  the  spiritual
temple,  the  house,  the  Church  of  God.

I.  He  drew  the  plan.  The  Divine  Architect  who  made  and  beautified  the  world
planned  the  structure  of  his  house.  Everything  is  specified  and  pre-ordained.
Sects  may  scheme  and  build,  but  Christ  alone  can  rear  "  the  Church  of  the  living


b*i8  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [chap,  yi


God,  the  pillar  and  ground  of  truth."     II.  He  collect    the  materials.     For  a

material  temple  the  stones  are  not  naturally  prepared.  Solomon  had  to  fell  the
timber  and  cut  out  the  stones.  Christ  collects  the  living  stones  of  this  wonderful
building.  1.  He  bought  them.  He  shed  his  precious  blood  and  "  gave  his  life  a
ransom  for  many."  2.  He  prepares  them.  He  renews  by  his  grace,  forms  aud
polishes  them  for  their  place  in  the  building.  "  In  whom  all  the  building,  fitly
framed  together,  groweth  into  an  holy  temple  in  the  Lord."  III.  He  unites  the
materials  when  collected.  He  assigns  them  their  suitable  position,  and  puts
them  together  more  firmly  than  any  human  being  or  human  theory  could  "  In
whom  ye  also  are  builded  together  for  an  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit."
IV.  He  employs  others  to  help  in  this  work.  Christ  is  the  sole  builder,  others
are  under-builders.  Paul  was  "  as  a  wise  master-builder,"  and  "  laid  the  founda-
tion," but  he  declared  "  another  buildeth  thereon."  Ministers  are  only  assistant
instruments,  and  cannot  add  a  single  stone  without  his  aid.  "  He  shall  build,"  and
under  his  superintending  care  and  by  his  Divine  agency  "  the  temple  "  shall  be
finished.  In  due  time  the  head-stone  shall  be  brought  forth  with  shoutings  of
"  Grace,  grace  unto  it."

Christ  Glorified  as  the  Builder  op  His  Church. — Verse  13.

1.  The  first  point  is  the  temple.  The  temple  is  the  Church  of  God,  not  in  any
narrow,  sectarianism  sense.  Any  company  of  Christian  men  gathered  together  in
holy  bonds  of  communion,  for  the  purpose  of  receiving  God's  ordinances  and
preaching  God's  word,  is  a  Church.  All  believers  scattered  throughout  the  world,
all  Churches  gathered  together  from  the  one  Universal  Apostolic  Church.  Why  is
the  Church  called  the  temple  of  God]  The  temple  was  the  special  residence  of
God,  the  place  of  the  clearest  manifestation,  and  a  place  of  worship.  For  these
reasons  the  Church  is  said  to  be  the  temple  of  God.  2.  The  next  is  the  builder
of  the  temple.  Make  a  parallel  between  Solomon,  the  builder  of  the  first  temple,
and  Christ,  the  builder  of  the  Church.  Solomon  was  wise,  but  needed  instructions
and  a  pattern.  Christ  is  no  Solomon  in  this  respect.  A  mountain,  Moriah,  was
ready  made  for  the  first  temple  ;  for  the  second,  the  foundation  was  laid  in  oaths,
promises,  and  blood.  Again,  Christ  excels  Solomon  in  providing  all  the  materials.
He  hews  them  himself,  rough-casts  them  first,  then  during  life  polishes  them  till
ready  for  the  hill  of  God  whereon  the  temple  is  built.  In  Solomon's  temple  the
stones  were  made  ready  in  the  quarries,  and  no  sound  of  the  hammer  was  heard  ;
so  we  must  be  made  meet  for  heaven.  There  will  be  no  sanctifying  there  if  not
ready  beforehand.  3.  Pause  and  admire  the  glory  of  the  builder.  "  He  shall  bear
the  glory."  Half  his  glory  can  never  be  told.  Note  first  that  the  glory  shall  be  a
weighty  glory.  "  They  shall  hang  upon^him  all  the  glory  of  his  Father's  house."
He  shall  have  all  the  glory,  all  that  can  be  conceived,  desired,  and  imagined.  This
glory  is  continual  glory.  When  shall  his  dominion  become  effete  1  He  shall  bear
all  the  glory.  4.  Now  for  the  practical  application.  Are  we  built  upon  Christ  1
Can  we  say  that  we  are  a  part  of  his  temple,  that  his  handiwork  has  been  exhibited
in  us,  and  that  we  are  built  together  with  Christ  %  If  so,  honour  God,  for  he  has
highly  honoured  you.  Think  that  you  might  have  been  disgraced,  abandoned,  and
cast  away,  but  now  made  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost !  If  no  portion  in  Israel,  if
not  stones  in  the  spiritual  temple,  how  sad  never  to  be  used  in  the  building  up  of
God's  Jerusalem  !  It  may  seem  a  slight  thing  to  be  left  out  of  the  muster-roll  of
the  Church  to-day,  but  will  it  seem  a  slight  thing  to  be  left  out  when  Christ  shall
call  for  his  people  1  When  the  list  is  read  before  the  great  white  throne,  and  your
name  left  out,  then  there  will  be  no  change,  no  deliverance.  Submit  now,  and
believe  in  Jesus  Christ  to-day  [From  Spurgeon],


CHAP.  VI.]


Homnmc  commentary  .•  zechariah.


629


HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Vers.  9 — 12.  First,  the  offerings  of
these  people.  We  know  little  or  nothing
concerning  the  persons  who  brought  the
gold  and  silver,  but  God  can  touch  the
hearts  of  strangers  and  dispose  all  to
contribute  to  his  work.  Second,  the  use
of  these  offerings.  They  were  accepted,
though  sent  by  some  who  perhaps  pre-
ferred to  remain  severed  from  the  temple
and  the  people  of  God.  They  were
used  as  a  memorial  in  the  crowns  placed
on  the  head  of  Joshua.  "  Every  con-
tribution toward  the  building  up  of  the
Church  coming  from  a  true  heart  was
its  memorial  before  God,  and  is  a  testi-
mony before  the  world  of  the  Divinity
of  the  gospel"  [Lange].  They  were
gladly  received.  "  Come  thou,  the  same
day."  The  people  required  speedy  and
great  comfort,  and  no  sooner  were  they
prepared  than  the  favours  were  ready
(2  Chron.  xxix.  36).  God  delays  no
blessing  when  we  are  earnest  in  his
work.

Yers.  12,  13.  The  temple  of  the  Lord.
"  Even  he,"  &c,  constantly  and  confi-
dently affirm  and  aver  it,  that  notwith-
standing all  unlikelihood  and  unbelief
on  the  people's  part,  Almighty  God  will
surely  bring  it  to  pass.  This  heap  of
words  importeth  so  much,  for  "do  ye
think  the  Scripture  speaketh  in  vain  1 "
saith  St.  James,  not  without  some  holy
indignation  (iv.  5)  [Trapp].  The  Church
of  God  is  often  set  forth  under  the
image  of  a  temple.  The  allusion  was
peculiarly  natural  in  a  Jewish  writer,
considering  the  importance  attached  to


the  house  of  God  in  Jerusalem.  The
name  is  founded  on  three  reasons.
First,  consecration.  A  temple  is  appro-
priated to  sacred  uses.  The  people  of
God  are  separated  from  the  world  and
dedicated  to  his  service.  "  The  Lord
hath  set  apart  him  that  is  godly  for
himself."  Beware  of  profane  mixtures,
maintain  your  sacredness,  and  keep  your-
selves pure  from  all  filthiness  of  flesh
and  spirit.  Secondly,  residence.  A
mansion  is  a  dwelling  for  a  nobleman,  a
palace  for  a  king,  a  temple  for  God.
"  Ye  are  the  temple  of  the  living  God  ; "
"  I  dwell  in  them,  and  walk  in  them."
He  is  everywhere,  but  in  the  Church
by  a  special  presence,  in  a  way  of  grace,
influence,  and  operation.  This  secures
and  dignifies  it.  "  This  is  my  rest  for
ever;  here  will  I  dwell;  for  I  have
desired  it."  What  are  numbers,  fine
buildings,  or  imposing  ceremonies  to
communion  with  the  living  God  1  Third-
ly, devotion.  He  is  served  and  wor-
shipped in  them  as  a  temple ;  he  receives
homage  and  adoration  nowhere  else  ac-
cording to  his  own  requisition.  "  God
is  a  Spirit,  and  they  that  worship  him,"
&c.  His  worship,  therefore,  is  a  reason-
able service ;  not  gross,  but  spiritual
sacrifices.  Though  prayers,  praise,  and
alms  are  imperfect  and  defiled ;  yet  they
result  from  principle,  aim  at  the  glory
of  God,  and  being  offered  through  the
Mediator,  and  with  his  incense,  they  are
accepted,  and  the  worshipper  has  this
testimony,  that  he  pleases  God  [/ay].


HOMILETIQS.
Jesus  upon  His  Throne. —  Verse  13.

A  throne  is,  literally,  the  seat  of  a  king,  and  therefore  the  emblem  of  royalty.
Solomon's  throne  was  made  of  ivory  and  gold,  so  that  "  there  was  none  like  it  in
any  kingdom."  But  a  greater  than  Solomon  is  here.  A  greater  than  angels,  for
unto  "  the  Son  he  saith,  Thy  throne,    0  God,  is  for  ever  and  ever,"  &c.

Yet  how  sublime  and  unrivalled  !  it  is  his  throne ;  he  has  dearly  earned  it,  and
sees  in  it  the  travail  of  his  soul.  God  hath  highly  exalted  him,  and  given  him  a
name  above  every  name.  It  is  his  by  Divine  ordination,  and  by  the  suffrage  of  his
people.     They  are  made  willing  in  the  day  of  his  power,  and  avow  his  name  only.

But  many  who  ascend  a  throne  can  hardly  be  said  to  sit  and  rule  there.   They  are


630


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.


[CHAP.  fX.


hurled  by  violence,  or  drop  by  weakness,  from  it.  If  they  continue  on  it  for  awhile
they  have  little  pleasure  or  repose  ;  they  are  filled  with  fear  and  cares,  and  cannot
do  what  they  wish.  In  spite  of  the  sovereign  of  a  hundred  and  twenty-seven
provinces,  Daniel  was  thrown  into  the  lions'  den.  What  a  wretch  is  Ahab,  king  of
Israel,  who  is  sick,  and  can  neither  eat  nor  drink,  because  he  cannot  get  a  few  feet
of  garden  ground  from  a  faithful  subject.  But  Jesus  "  shall  sit  and  rule  upon  his
throne."  He  will  never  be  deposed,  never  die.  Nothing  can  impede,  nothing
perplex  him.  He  rules  in  the  midst  of  enemies  who  shall  be  made  his  footstool.
He  will  display  wisdom  and  power  in  correcting  their  designs  and  making  their
efforts  subserve  his  own  purpose.  Though  his  spiritual  empire  at  present  be  limited,
yet  remember  two  things.  First,  his  real  dominion  is  universal.  He  is  not  only
King  of  saints,  but  King  of  kings,  and  the  King  of  nations;  all  creatures  serve  him.
The  treasures  of  grace,  the  elements  of  nature,  and  the  dispensations  of  providence
are  his.  He  is  the  head  over  all  things  to  the  Church.  Secondly,  though  his
kingdom  be  limited,  md  subjects  who  obey  him  from  the  heart  be  few  at  present,
it  will  not  always  be  so,  nor  be  so  long.  "  He  shall  have  the  heathen  for  his
inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  his  possession."  Yea,  all
kings  shall  fall  down  before  him,  all  nations  shall  serve  him  [Jay],

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.


Ver.  15.  Afar  off.  Distant  nations,
symbolized  by  those  from  captivity  (ver.
9),  shall  be  called.  This  was  partially
fulfilled  in  Cyrus,  Darius,  Artaxerxes,
and  Herod,  who  greatly  assisted  in  the
temple  work.  But  the  conversion  of  the
Gentiles  is  here  set  forth.  They  shall
be  united  to  Israel  in  faith  and  privilege,
and  the  truth  of  prophecy  shall  be
realized.  1.  This  event  is  certain.  "This
shall  come  to  pass."  2.  The  truth  of  the
word  will  be  proved  when  it  does  come  to
pass.  "  You  shall  know  that  the  Lord
of  Hosts  has  sent  me  unto  you."  3.  But
it  shall  be  fulfilled  only  to  those  who
obey  the  word  preached  unto  them.  For
"  this  shall  come  to  pass  if  ye  will  dili-
gently obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord  your
God."  To  secure  the  favour^f  God  we
must  obey,  and  diligently  obey,  him.
This  knowledge  and  experience  depend
upon  individual  faithfulness  and  effort.
4.  Hence,  though  the  performance  of  the
promise  be  not  suspended  upon  men's
conduct,  yet  neglect  of  duty  may  hinder


its  fulfilment.  If  men  despise  know-
ledge, stifle  convictions,  and  reject  the
truth,  Christ's  work  will  not  profit  them.
By  this  means  they  bring  "  swift  de-
struction "  upon  themselves,  and  not  the
blessings  of  the  Messiah's  reign.

From    the    whole    chapter,    learn —

1.  God's  cause  shall  be  avenged  even  by
his  enemies.  The  messengers  of  earth
and  heaven  shall  alike  fulfil  his  pleasure.

2.  God's  cause  shall  be  supported  by  his
friends.  "  The  silver  and  the  gold  are
the  Lord's,"  and  these  they  will  not  fail
to  bestow  where  it  is  in  their  power
to  give;  while  God  will  graciously
remember  their  works  of  faith  and
labours  of  love.  3.  God's  cause  shall
be  honoured  by  the  Mediator.  All  the
purposes  of  eternal  love  are  accomplished
in  him.  To  him  belong  dominion  and
glory,  and  on  his  head  are  many  crowns.
When  the  great  events  of  his  kingdom
are  consummated,  then  shall  he  become
all  in  all"  [Oobbin].


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER   VI.

or  what  mark  it  is  aimed  at


Yers.  1 — 8.  Providence.  Everything
that  acts  for  an  end  must  know  that
end  or  be  directed  by  another  to  attain
that   end.     The  arrow  doth   not  know


but  the

archer  that  puts  it  in  and  darts  it  out  of
the  bow  knows  [CharnocJc].  Providence
certainly  does  not  attend  merely  to  the


who  shoots  it,  or  to  what  end  it  is  shot,     interests  of  individuals,  but  the  profound


chap,  vn.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAE.


631


wisdom  of  its  counsels  extends  to  the
right  ordering  and  betterment  of  all
[Humbolt].

Ver.  5.  Angels  stand.  A  king  is
there  where  his  court  is,  where  his  train
and  retinue  are;  so  God,  the  Lord  of
Hosts,  is  there  specially  present  where
the  heavenly  guard,  the  blessed  angels,
keep  their  sacred  station  and  rendezvous
[Mede\

Ver.  8.  Justice  satisfied.  Justice  is
the  key-note  of  the  world,  and  all  else
is  ever  out  of  tune  [Theodore  Parker].
Justice  always  whirls  in  equal  measure
[Shakespeare].

Vers.  10 — 15.  Prophets  introduce
gospel  subjects.  Zechariah,  especially,
in  mystic  vision  and  by  typical  repre-
sentation, which  yet  are  sufficiently  clear,
as  expressive  of  the  kingdom  and  priest-
hood of  Christ,  the  establishment  of  the
Christian  Church,  and  the  concourse  of
nations  resorting  to  that  future  Temple.
For  here  we  have  a  second  application
of  the  same  systematic  form  of  prophecy
which  was  employed  in  the  establish-
ment of  the  temporal  kingdom.  The
nearer  subject  in  each  instance  supplies
the  prophetic  ground  and  the  prophetic
images  for  the  future  Christian  subject.
In  the  first  instance,  the  kingdom  of


Christ  is  delineated  in  connection  with,
and  by  analogy  to,  the  actual  kingdom
which  was  seen  before  men's  eyes  rising
to  view ;  in  the  second  instance,  his
personal  priesthood  and  his  Church  are
delineated  in  connection  with,  and  by
an  equal  analogy  to,  the  priesthood  and
temple  of  the  Hebrew  Church,  at  the
time  when  that  priesthood  was  reinstated
in  its  functions  and  that  temple  was
rebuilt.  This  is  an  example  of  symbolic
prediction  founded  upon  the  present
scene  of  things  [Davison  on  Prophecy].

Vers.  12,  13.  The  man.  A  man's  a
man ,  but  when  you  see  a  king  you  see
the  work  of  many  thousand  men  [G.
Eliot].  Throne.  He  was  a  king  blessed
of  the  King  of  kings  [Shakespeare].
Kings  ought  to  be  kings  in  all  things
[Adrian].

Ver.  15.  Diligently.  The  expecta-
tions of  life  depend  upon  diligence,  and
the  mechanic  that  would  perfect  his
work  must  first  sharpen  his  tools
[Confucius].  What  we  hope  ever  to  do
with  ease  we  may  learn  first  to  do  with
diligence  [Johnson],  Toil,  feel,  think,
hope.  A  man  is  sure  to  dream  enough
before  he  dies  without  making  arrange-
ments for  the  purpose  [Sterling],


CHAPTER  VII.


Critical  Notes.]  The  Didactic  part.  Replies  to  questions  relative  to  fasts  observed  by  the
Jews,  but  which  they  supposed  no  longer  binding  after  restoration  to  prosperity.  Fourth]  Two
years,  nearly,  after  the  foundation  of  the  temple  was  laid  (Hag.  ii.  10 — 18),  and  nearly  two  years
before  it  was  finished.  Chisleu]  Corresponding  with  part  of  November  and  part  of  December.
"  The  end  of  b.  c.  518  "  \Ihiscy }.  2.  House  of  God]  here  a  rendering  for  Bethel.  Unto]  A  word
for  which  there  is  no  corresponding  Hebrew.  Bethel  is  construed  by  most  as  nominative  to  the  verb,
and  the  translation  given,  "When  Bethel  (t.  e.  the  inhabitants  of  that  city)  sent  Sherezer  and  Regem-
melech,  and  their  men"  as  an  embassy  to  Jerusalem.  Pray]  Lit.  to  entreat  the  face  of  i.  e.  to  seek
and  conciliate  the  favour  of  Jehovah,  to  obtain  a  Divine  answer  to  their  inquiry.  3.  Weep]  They
fasted  and  mourned  in  captivity,  on  account  of  the  ruins  of  the  temple.  Why  fast  now  when  the
city  and  temple  are  being  restored  ?  Separating]  by  vow  of  consecration,  sanctifying  oneself  by
separating  from  defilement  and  food,  as  in  solemn  fast  (cf.  Joel  ii.  16).  4.  Word]  of  reproof  for
the  method  and  spirit  in  which  they  fasted.  5.  All]  The  answer  given  not  only  to  those  who  put
the  question,  but  to  the  people  at  large.  Fasted]  in  fifth  month  in  remembrance  of  the  burning
of  the  temple ;  in  seventh  to  commemorate  the  murder  of  Gedaliah  the  son  of  Ahikam.  To  me]
Fasting  alien  from  God  and  for  selfish  ends.     6.  Did]  ye  not  eat  and  drink  in  self-indulgence  ?


632  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [chap,  vtl


Neither  in  feasting  nor  fasting  had  they  any  regard  for  Jehovah  ;  all  was  done  for  self-interest.
7.  Words]  of  former  prophets  threatened  a  curse  upon  hypocrisy  and  disobedience,  when  Jerusalem
was  inhabited  and  prosperous.  The  lessons  of  former  teachers  had  been  verified  in  the  nation's  history  ;
they  should  heed  the  warning.  8 — 14.]  God  requires  obedience,  not  formal  fastings.  The  disobedi-
ence of  the  fathers  brought  judgment  upon  the  nation.  9.  Execute]  Admonitions  which  have  special
reference  to  evils  of  which  they  were  guilty.  Judgment]  Righteous  impartiality  in  public  and
private  matters.  "Judgment  of  truth  (cf.  Ezek.  xviii.  8)  is  such  an  administration  of  justice  as
simply  fixes  the  eye  upon  the  real  circumstances  of  any  dispute,  without  any  personal  considerations
whatever,  and  decides  them  in  accordance  with  truth  "  \KeW\.  Mercy]  Tender  love  to  all.
Compassion]  to  the  unhappy,  sympathy  for  human  suffering.  10.]  This  verse  specifies  some  of  the
chief  ways  of  violating  the  preceding  requisition,  and  shows  that  it  covers  the  thoughts  of  the  heart
as  well  as  the  acts  of  the  members  \Lange\  Imagine]  *".  e.  devise  evil  (Ps.  xxxvi.  4  :  Mic.  ii.  1).
Meditate  no  revenge,  but  act  up  to  the  royal  law  of  love.  11.]  The  attitude  of  the  people  towards
these  precepts  described.  Their  fathers  and  some  of  them  refused],  paid  no  serious  attention  ;  then
pulled  away^,  like  a  refractory  beast  refusing  the  yoke  (Neh.  ix.  29  :  Hosea  iv.  16).  "It  seems
rather  to  refer  to  one  on  whose  shoulder  we  lay  our  hand,  when  he  is  reluctant  to  listen  to  us,  in
order  to  arrest,  and  beseech  him  to  hear,  but  he  fretfully  and  violently  '  draws  the  shoulder  '  from
our  kind  and  earnest  grasp"  [ Wardlaw"\.  Stopped]  Made  heavy  (Isa.  vi.  10  :  Jer.  vii.  26  :  Acts
vii.  57).  12.  Adamant]  Hard  and  impenetrable  as  stone  (Ezek.  iii.  9  ;  xi.  19).  Wrath]  The
consequence  of  disobedience  and  obduracy  (2  Chr.  xxxvi.  16).  13.  He]  by  his  prophets.  They]  cried
in  calamities,  retribution  in  kind.  They  would  not  hear  God,  and  he  would  not  hear  them  (Prov.
i.  24 — 26  :  Isa.  i.  15).  14.]  The  great  wrath  described  in  its  execution.  Scattered]  for  70  years
among  foreign  and  barbarous  nations ;  like  a  tempest  driven  amon»  those  who  pitied  them  not.
After]  their  exile  and  expulsion  no  occupants  possessed  the  land.  Passed  through]  Lit.  goes  away
and  returns  again  (Ex.  xxxii.  27),  pass  to  and  fro.  They]  The  Jews  themselves  to  blame ;  they
desolated  the  pleasant  land]  lit.  the  land  of  desire ;  made  the  choice  land  a  desert  by  their  sins
(Jer.  iii.  19  :  Ps.  cvi.  24).

HOMILETICS.
Past  Warnings  and  Present  Judgments. — Verse  7.

The  former  prophets  taught  the  worthlessness  of  fasting,  when  God  was  forgotten
and  the  weightier  matters  of  the  law  disregarded.  If  the  Jews  had  listened  to  the
messages,  the  evils  which  they  were  suffering  would  not  have  come  upon  them.
Belief  that  fasting  could  obtain  the  favour  of  God  overthrew  the  nation.  Hence
take  warning —

I.  Israel  had  been  warned  in  the  past.  "  The  Lord  hath  cried  by  the  former
prophets."  God  declares  his  will  loudly  and  sufficiently  in  his  word,  but  men
disregard  the  trumpet-call.  1.  Warned  by  various  messengers.  Zechariah  was
not  the  first  prophet ;  they  had  been  warned  by  every  prophet  whom  Jehovah
had  sent  2.  Warned  in  different  periods.  Warnings  were  not  only  addressed
to  them  in  adversity,  when  men  should  "  consider,"  but  in  prosperity,  when  they
should  humble  themselves  before  God  to  save  themselves  from  the  punishment  of
pride  and  rebellion ;  when  Jerusalem  was  inhabited  in  prosperity.  God  tells  us
beforehand,  arranges  "  one  over  against  another,"  that  we  may  rightly  chose  and
have  no  excuse  for  our  sin  (Ecc.  vii.  14).  II.  If  past  warnings  had  been  regarded
present  punishment  might  have  been  avoided.  "  Should  ye  not  hear  the
words  ] "  Should  men  disregard  the  Scriptures  and  have  no  concern  for  their  own
salvation  and  the  interests  of  the  nation?  Too  often  the  admonitions  of  ministers
are  disregarded  by  those  flushed  with  prosperity.  The  Jews  before  and  after  the
captivity  failed  to  learn  from  their  fathers,  and  had  to  mourn  for  their  country.
"  Study  the  past,  if  you  would  divine  the  future  "  [Gonfucius\.

Divine  Kequirements  and  Human  Disregard. —  Verses  8 — 14.

The  prophet  exposes  the  hollowness  of  mere  outward  forms,  and  reminds  the
people  that  their  ruin  was  not  caused  by  neglect  of  ritual,  but  by  disregard  of  the
plainest  duties  of  justice  and  humanity.  They  had  refused  to  hear  the  reiterated
and  explicit  injunctions  of  the  prophets,  and  they  are  reproved  for  their  folly.
Notice —


chap.  VII.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZE  CHART  AH.  633


I.  The  Divine  requirements  specified.  They  had  practised  injunctions  of  their
own  imposing  and  neglected  the  commands  of  God.  The  prophet  repeats  the
substance  of  former  teaching  and  urges  the  claims  of  Jehovah.  1.  Sincerity  in  life.
Obedience  is  better  than  sacrifice.  (1)  Execute  judgment.  Practise  justice  officially
and  privately,  before  God  and  man.  Judgment  must  be  true,  without  personal
considerations  or  partiality.  "  He  that  hath  not  given  forth  upon  usury,  neither
hath  taken  any  increase,  that  hath  withdrawn  his  hand  from  iniquity,  hath
executed  trne  judgment  between  man  and  man."  (2)  Compassionate  the  miserable.
"  Show  mercy"  to  the  unfortunate,  be  kind  and  have  "compassions  every  man  to
his  brother."  "  Kindness  is  the  golden  chain  by  which  society  is  bound  together,"
says  Goethe.  (3)  Oppress  not  the  helpless.  Special  regard  must  be  paid  to  the
widow  and  the  fatherless,  the  stranger  and  the  poor.  "  Ye  shall  not  afflict  any
widow  or  fatherless  child  "  (Ex.  xxii.  21).  "  Thou  shalt  neither  vex  a  stranger  nor
oppress  him :  for  ye  were  strangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt."  2.  Purity  in  heart.
We  must  not  only  do  no  wrong,  but  not  even  wish  it.  No  evil  must  be  devised
in  the  heart.  "  Let  none  of  you  imagine  evil  against  his  brother  in  your  heart."
Cherish  no  ill-feeling,  no  wish  to  retaliate.  All  evil  inclinations  and  spiteful
intentions  must  be  subdued.  We  can  never  act  rightly  if  we  do  not  feel  and  think
rightly.  Hence  the  law  of  God  restrains  the  heart.  "  Beware  that  there  be  not
a  thought  (word)  in  thy  wicked  (Belial)  heart"  (Dent.  xv.  9).  II.  The  Divine
requirements  disregarded.  Except  men  execute  judgment,  whatever  be  their
fastings  and  pretensions,  they  reject  the  word  of  God.  Ceremonial  observances
without  love  to  God  and  man  are  a  solemn  mockery.  1.  They  refused  to  hearken  to
God's  word.  They  hated  the  claims  and  rebelled  against  the  authority  of  God's
commands  (1)  They  were  wilfully  deaf '.  "  Stopped  their  ears."  (2)  They  were
wilfully  prejudiced.  "That  they  should  not  hear."  They  had  no  desire  to  know,
much  less  to  practise.  God  pursued  them  in  earnest,  constant  warning,  but  they
shook  their  shoulders,  refused  to  submit  or  bear  the  yoke,  and  were  determined  in
their  obstinate  purpose  (cf.  Acts  vii.  51).  "  They  hearkened  not,  nor  inclined  their
ear,  but  walked  in  the  counsels  and  in  the  imagination  of  their  evil  heart,  and  went
backward,  and  not  forward."  2.  They  hardened  their  hearts  in  sin.  "  They  made
their  hearts  as  an  adamant  stone."  They  were  resolved  that  nothing  should  make
an  impression  upon  them :  they  became  proud,  presumptuous,  and  inflexible.
Divine  power  even  could  neither  soften  their  hearts  nor  shape  their  lives.  "  They
dealt  proudly,  and  hearkened  not  unto  thy  commandments,  but  sinned  against  thy
judgments  (which,  if  a  man  do,  he  shall  live  in  them),  and  withdrew  the  shoulder,
and  hardened  their  neck  and  would  not  hear."  III.  The  fatal  consequences  of  disre-
garding the  Divine  requirements.  Most  terrible  are  the  penalties  here  set  forth.
"  Therefore,"  since  they  have  rejected  God,  punishment  will  be  in  proportion  to  the
violation  of  his  law.  "  Terrible  penalties,  withal,  if  thou  still  need  penalties,"  says
Carlyle,  "  are  there  for  disobeying."  1.  God  was  angry.  "  Therefore  came  "  wrath,  a
great  wrath,  from  the  Lord  of  hosts.  This  anger  is  evinced — (1)  By  disregarding
their  prayers.  "  They  cried,  and  I  would  not  hear."  There  is  "great  reason,"  says
Bp.  Keynolds,  "  that  God  shall  refuse  to  hear  him  who  refuseth  to  hear  God."  "  He
that  turneth  away  his  ear  from  hearing  the  law,  even  his  prayer  shall  be  abomination."
(2)  By  scattering  them  among  other  nations.  "I  scattered  them  with  a  whirlwind
among  all  the  nations."  The  common  bond  of  humanity  and  social  intercourse  was
broken  (Deut.  xxviii.  49,  50) ;  thev  were  cast  out  of  their  own  into  a  land  of  perfect
strangers,  from  whom  they  received  no  kindness  nor  mitigation  of  sorrows.  2.  The
laud  was  desolated.  "  For  they  laid  the  pleasant  land  desolate."  It  was  not  the
enemy,  but  their  own  sins  that  had  cursed  their  country.  God's  presence  is  the
beauty  of  a  nation,  but  sin  will  turn  it  into  a  barren  waste.  Human  guilt  desolates
everything  that  is  "  pleasant."  Let  us  take  warning.  If  we  despise  God's  word
he  will  not  hear  our  cry  in  the  day  of  wrath.     The  harder  men  grow  in  heart,  the


634  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAII.  [CHAP.  vn.


heavier  the  stroke  at  the  judgment  day.  Those  who  are  lost  will  have  to  blame
their  own  folly.  No  delusion  will  rob  them  of  this  conviction,  and  no  remedy  can
be  devised  for  the  misery  which  they  despised  and  cannot  endure.  "  They  would
none  of  my  counsel ;  they  despised  all  my  reproof :  therefore  shall  they  eat  of  the
fruit  of  their  own  way,  and  be  filled  with  their  own  devices."

Eighteous  Retribution. — Verse  13.

This  is  the  first  part  of  punishment,  retribution  in  kind.  They  would  not  hea*
God  when  he  called  to  them ;  now  he  will  not  hear  them  when  they  cry  to  him.
This  is  God's  method  of  dealing  with  nations  and  individuals.

I.  It  is  often  physically  true.  The  drunkard  pays  when  at  last  he  feels  him-
self the  slave  of  habits  which  he  knows  will  ruin  soul  and  body,  and  yet  unable
to  throw  them  off.  The  licentious  who  survive  the  power  of  gratification  may  be
tortured  by  appetites  for  which  exhausted  nature  has  no  provision  [cf.  Lange].
II.  It  is  always  spiritually  true.  He  that  digs  a  pit  for  another  shall  fall  into  it
himself.  The  backslider  in  heart  shall  be  filled  with  his  own  devices  (Prov.  xiv,
14).  Those  who  contemn  the  word  of  God  shall  be  unheard  in  the  day  of  distress
Alarmed  at  their  situation,  they  will  call,  but  God  will  not  answer  them.  Thus
men  become  the  cause  of  their  own  misery,  and  constantly  remind  us  of  the  wise
man's  words  :  ft  Therefore  shall  they  eat  of  the  fruit  of  their  own  way  "  (Prov.  i.
30,  31  ;  xxviii.  9  :  Gal.  vi.  7,  8).

"  I  do  as  truly  suffer

As  e'er  I  did  commit  "  [Shakespeare],

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  9.     Love,  the  royal  law  of  life,  tion,  is  found  in  the  provision  made  and

the  essence  of  religion.     Not  religious  maintained  for  those  who  so  often  are

profession,   but    the    practice    of   social  the  victims   either  of   cruel  neglect  or,

duty.     Keep  from  evd  in  thought  and  alas,   of    wilful    oppression "     [Lange],

act.     Meditate  no  revenge,  brood  over  Compare  the  teaching  of  Scripture  with

no  wrongs,  but  in  all  things  act  up  to  the  customs  of  heathenism.

the  requirements  of  God's  law.     "  Love         Yer.    11.  Pulled   away  the  shoulder.

worketh  no  ill."     "  Love  will  not  permit  What  is  implied  in  these  words  1     1.  A

us   to    injure,   oppress,   or    offend    our  benevolent    purpose.       2.    Eemarkable

brother  ;    it   will  not  give  us  leave  to  human  power  to  resist  it.     3.  Mysterious

neglect    our     betters,    or     despise    our  providence  to  permit  resistance.     4.  As-

inferiors.     It  will  restrain  every  inor-  tounding     effrontery    in    the    conduct

dinate    passion,   and    not    suffer  us  to  indicated.     "  Pride  not  only  withdraws

gratify  our  envy  at  the  expense  of  our  the   heart   from  God,   but    lifts    it  up

neighbour's  credit  and  reputation;  but  against  God  "  [Manton],

it  will  preserve  us  harmless  and  inno-         ..  A11     .,    .      .„.         .,  „ro,  ,  -.

»r£.      „,      ,     ,-,  All  pride  is  willing  pride     [Shakespeare  | .

cent "  [Bp.  Sherlock].  F  ° F  L  w      J

Moral    duties.      Kequired    in    every  Ver.    12.  Hearts   as  adamant.     The

age.     Superior  to  external  ordinances.  stone,  whatever  it  be,  was  hard  enough  to

Ver.    10.      Widow     and    fatherless,  cut  ineffaceable  characters  (Jer.  xvii.  1);

1.  A  sad  condition  in  life.     Weak  and  it  was  harder  than  flint  (Ezek.  iii.  9).     It

helpless.     2.   A  proof    of    God's   care,  would  cut  rocks ;  it  could  not  be  engraven

11  Widows  and  orphans  are  God's  clients  itself,  or  receive  the  characters  of  God.

taken     into    his    special     protection "  This  is  the  last  sin,  obduracy,  persever-

[Trapp].  3.  An  evidence  of  true  religion,  ing  impenitence,  which  resisted  the  Holy

u  One  of  the  surest  tests  of  an  intelligent  Ghoat,  and  did  despite  to  the  Spirit  of

Christianity,  as  well  as  of  a  high  civiliza-  grace.     Not  through  infirmity,  but  of  set


chap,  vn.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.


635


purpose,  they  hardened  themselves,  lest
they  should  be  converted  and  be  healed
(Isa.  vi.  10).  Observe  the  gradations.  1.
The  words  of  God  are  not  heard.  2.
The  restive  shoulder  is  shown.  Men
turn  away,  when  God  by  the  inner
motions  of  his  Spirit,  or  by  lesser  chas-
tisements, would  bring  them  to  the
yoke  of  obedience.  They  would  not
bear  the  burden  of  the  law,  whereas
they  willingly  bore  that  most  heavy
weight  of  their  sins.  3.  Obduracy.
Their  adamantine  heart  could  be  softened
neither  by  promises  nor  threats ;  there-
fore nothing  remained  but  the  great
wrath  which  they  had  treasured  to
themselves  against  the  day  of  wrath
[Pusey].

Hardness  is  the  state  of  a  person
insensible  alike  to  entreaties,  expostu-
lations, warnings,  admonitions,  and  chas-
tisements (Jer.  v.  3).  Men  become
obdurate  —  1.  By  separating  themselves
from  God,  the  source  of  all  life,  just  as
a  branch  dries  up  when  detached  from


the  tree,  or  as  a  limb  withers  when
the  connection  between  it  and  the  heart
ceases.  2.  By  a  life  of  pleasure  and
sin,  the  effects  of  which  may  be  compared
to  those  of  the  river  north  of  Quito,
petrifying,  according  to  Kirwin's  account,
the  wood  and  leaves  cast  into  its  waters  ;
or  to  those  of  the  busy  feet  of  passers-
by,  causing  the  crowded  thoroughfare  to
grow  hard  [Rev.  O.  Neil].

Vers.  11,12.  Causes  of  spiritual,  ruin.
1.  Heedless  indifference.  2.  Stubborn
rebellion— (1)  in  refusing  the  yoke,  and
(2)  in  stopping  the  ears.  3.  ^Resistance
to  the  Holy  Spirit.

Vers.  13,  14.  Self-inflicted  calamities.
1.  Eejection  of  God  in  trouble.  2.  Dis-
persion in  strange  lands.  3.  Devastation
of  country.  Mark  the  contrast :  the  land
of  desire  and  the  land  of  desolation.
Obey  the  word  of  God  and  seek  to  reach
that  heavenly  "land  of  desire,"  where
desolation  is  unknown,  and  whither  the
spoiler  can  never  come  [cf.  Fausset],


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  VII.


Vers.  1—6.  God  or  self— Which]
A  certain  king  had  a  minstrel,  and  he
bade  him  play  before  him.  It  was  a
day  of  high  feasting;  the  cups  were
flowing,  and  many  great  guests  were  as-
sembled. The  minstrel  laid  his  fingers
among  the  strings  of  his  harp,  and  woke
them  all  to  the  sweetest  melody,  but  the
hymn  was  to  the  glory  of  himself.  It
was  a  celebration  of  the  exploits  of  song
which  the  bard  had  himself  performed.
He  had  excelled  high  Howell's  harp,
and  emulated  great  Llewellyn's  lay.  In
high-sounding  strains  he  sang  of  himself
and  all  his  glories.  When  the  feast  was
over,  the  harper  said  to  the  monarch,  "  Oh
king,  give  me  my  guerdon ;  let  the
minstrel's  mede  be  paid."  And  the  king
said,  "  Thou  hast  sung  unto  thyself ;
pay  thyself :  thine  own  praises  were  thy
theme  ;  be  thyself  the  paymaster."  He
cried,  "  Did  I  not  sing  sweetly  1  0  king,
give  me  the  gold  ! "  But  the  king  re-
plied, "  So  much  the  worse  for  thy  pride
that  thou  shouldst  lavish  such  sweetness
upon  thyself."     If  a  man  should  grow


grey-headed  in  the  performance  of  good
works,  yet  when  at  last  it  is  known  that
he  has  done  it  all  to  himself,  his  Lord
will  say,  "  Thou  hast  done  well  enough
in  the  eyes  of  man,  but  so  much  the
worse,  because  thou  didst  it  only  to  thy-
self, that  thine  own  praises  might  be
sung,  and  that  thine  own  name  might
be  extolled  [Spurgeon].

Ver.  7.  Not  hear.  There  is  a  story
which  tells  of  a  bell  which  was  sus-
pended upon  a  rock  of  the  ocean  dan-
gerous to  navigation.  The  waves  of  the
ocean  beating  upon  it  caused  it  to  give
a  noise  of  warning  to  keep  off  the  ap-
proaching mariner.  It  is  said  that  at
one  time  some  pirates  destroyed  the  bell
to  prevent  the  warning.  Not  long  after
these  very  pirates  struck  upon  this  rock
and  were  lost.  How  many  hush  or
remove  the  voice  of  warning  from  the
point  of  danger,  who  as  soon  as  the
warning  ceases  founder  upon  the  rock
of  temptation  and  are  lost  for  ever
[McCoshJ

Vera.   8 — 10.    Duties.      Your   daily


636  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ZECHARIAH.  [chap.  viii.


duties  are  a  part  of  your  religious  life  most  ignorant  by  necessity ;  and  beasts

just  as  much  as  your  devotions  are  [H.  by  nature  [Cicero],
W.  Beecher].     Formality  in  religion  is

the  name  of  being  alive  [Jenkyn].  "The  ear  is  fche  road  to  tae  heart "  [  Voltaire],

"The  path  of  duty  is  the  way  to  glory"  Vers.  13,  14.   Come  to  pass.

[Tennyson],

Vers.   11,  12.    Stopped   ears.      Wise  T    .L        "  The  past  lives  o'er  again

i.       j.  j    -u                                   n  In  its  effects,  and  to  the  sruiltv  spirit

men  are  instructed  by  reason ;  men  of  The  CTer.fro'wning       Jt  is  J,  ?™   ..

less  understanding   by  experience;   the  r&  j>.  Coleridge.]


CHAPTEE  VIII.

Critical  Notes.]  The  fate  of  their  fathers  urged  them  to  obedience,  now  the  promise  of  future
prosperity.  2.  Jealous]  Implying  warmth  of  love  and  zeal.  Fury]  Indignation  to  enemies.  3.]
Proofs  of  love.  Returned]  Jerusalem  forsaken  when  given  up  to  foes  ;  now  God  resumes  abode.
Truth]  or  fidelity,  i.e.  in  which  truth  and  fidelity  towards  Jehovah  have  their  abode  (Isa.  i.  21:
Jer.  xvii.  17),  fully  realized  under  the  Messiah.  4,  5.]  No  sweeping  disease  among  them;  long
life  one  of  the  greatest  blessings  of  the  theocracy ;  plenty  of  children  playing  securely  in  the  streets
(contrast  Jer.  vi.  11  ;  ix.  21).  6.  Marvellous]  These  promised  blessings  seem  incredible  to  the
people ;  but  nothing  impossible  to  God.  7.  East]  Lit.  rising  of  the  sun.  West]  Lit.  the  going
down  of  the  sun  (cf.  Isa.  1.  1).  They  will  be  gathered  from  every  region  to  which  they  were
scattered.  8.]  The  covenant  renewed.  In  truth]  On  both  sides  the  relation  real  and  sincere  (Hosea
ii.  21,  22  :  Isa.  xlviii.  1 :  1  Kings  iii.  6).  9.]  Adversity  followed  neglect  of  duty,  now  blessings
promised  to  create  courage.  Hands]  With  such  bright  prospects  be  energetic  and  active  (2  Sam
xvi.  21).  These  words]  of  consolation  and  encouragement  from  Haggai  and  Zechariah.  10.]  A
reason  for  courage  in  work.  No  hire]  The  labour  of  man  and  beast  little  or  nothing;  agricultural
results  meagre  (cf.  Hag.  i.  6,9 — 11 ;  ii.  16 — 19).  Neither  peace]  None  free  from  the  enemy  in  the
ordinary  pursuits  of  life;  intestine  broils  and  contentions  prevailed  everywhere.  11.  Now]  a  vivid
contrast,  blessings  for  obedience  in  building  the  temple.  12.  Seed]  will  be  healthy  and  not  fail  to
yield  abundance  (Hosea  ii.  21,  22).  Dew]  beneficial,  especially  in  hot  climates,  where  rain  is  scarce.
"  Future  abundance  will  compensate  for  the  drought  and  scarcity  of  the  past "  [Jerome].  13.]  All
the  blessings  summed  up  in  this  verse.  "  The  formula,  to  be  a  curse  among  the  nations,  is  to  be
interpreted  according  to  Jer.  xxiv.  9 ;  xxv.  9  ;  xlii.  18  :  2  Kings  xxii.  19,  as  equivalent  to  being
the  object  of  a  curse,  i.  e.  so  smitten  by  God  as  to  serve  as  the  object  of  curses.  In  harmony  with
this,  the  phrase  to  "become  a  blessing"  is  equivalent  to  being  so  blessed  as  to  be  used  as  a
benedictory  formula  (cf.  Gen.  xlviii.  22  :  Jer.  xxix.  22).  H  This  promise  is  made  to  the  remnant  of
Judah  and  Israel,  and  therefore  of  all  the  twelve  tribes,  who  are  to  become  partakers  of  the  future
salvationin  undivided  unity  (cf.  cb.  ix.  10,  13  ;  x.  6  ;  xi.  14)  "  [Keil].  "  The  ground  upon  which  this
promise  rests  is  given  in  verses  14  and  15,  and  it  is  closed  in  verses  16  and  17  by  the  addition  of  the
condition  upon  which  it  is  fulfilled."  14.  Repented  not]  Just  as  the  threatening  did  not  fail,
neither  shall  the  promise.  1j.]  Just  as  in  ch.  vii.  9,  10,  first  positive  (ver.  16),  then  negative
(ver.  17).  Judge]  truly  and  promote  peace.  Gates]  Places  of  administering  justice.  17.  Hate]
Lit.  emphatic.  "  They  are  all  these  things  which  I  hate  ;  "  i.  e.  the  sum  of  what  I  hate  ;  for  they
comprise  the  breaches  of  the  two  tables  [cf.  Pusey].  18,  19.]  An  answer  to  question  (ch.  vii.  3).
Fasts]  shall  be  turned  into  Feasts]  of  joy  and  gladness.  Love]  Live  in  harmony  among  yourselves
as  the  result  ;  others  as  the  only  condition  of  blessing.  20.  Yet]  Emphatic.  People]  shall  be  attracted
to  God's  house.  21.  Saying]  Mutually  appealing  to  one  another.  Speedily]  Lit,  go,  going,
implying  intense  earnestness  and  determination.  I  also]  Prompt  response.  22.  Many]  in  contrast
to  a  few  and  weak  Jews  now  engaged  in  God's  work.  23.  Ten]  A  definite  for  an  indefinite  number;
denoting  a  great  and  complete  multitude  (Gen.  xxxi.  7  :  Lev.  xxvi.  26:  Num.  xiv,  22).  For  the
figure  cf.  Isa.  iv.  1.  Converts  from  among  the  Gentiles  shall  be  as  ten  to  one  Jew.  All
languages]  •.  e,  of  nations  of  all  languages.  Take  hold]  A  gesture  of  entreaty  for  help  and
protection  (Isa.  iii.  6  :  1  Sara.  xv.  32).  With  you]  An  effect  often  produced  upon  unbelievers
when  entering  the  assemblies  of  Christians  (1  Cor.  xiv.  25).  Primarily  produced  on  the  nations
who  witnessed  the  deliverance  by  Cyrus ;  finally,  that  to  be  produced  by  the  future  grand  interpositioo
of  Messiah  on  behalf  of  his  people  [cf.  Fausset],


chap.  vhi. J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  637


HOMILETICSL
The  Kbstoration  op  Lost  Purity. — Verses  1 — 3.

The  prophet  had  rebuked  the  people  for  their  formalism  and  set  forth  the  results
of  disobedience.  Now  he  assures  them  of  God's  love,  and  describes  the  consequences
of  obedience  in  restored  privileges  and  restored  purity.     Their  purity  is  restored  —

I.  By  the  manifestation  of  God.  This  is  the  first  requirement.  Man  has
wandered  from  God,  sinned  so  much  that  he  has  no  disposition  to  return.  The
sun  must  first  shine  to  draw  the  plant.  Grace  must  first  work  to  dispose  the
heart.  Men  can  never  convert  themselves ;  they  have  fallen,  but  God  alone  can
raise  them  again.  "  Turn  thou  us  unto  thee,  0  Lord,  and  we  shall  be  turned."
II.  By  reconciliation  to  God.  God  can  never  dwell  with  wickedness.  When
Jerusalem  was  in  the  hands  of  enemies  God  forsook  the  temple.  Only  when  we
forsake  sin  and  return  to  God — when  reconciled  to  him — do  we  secure  the  aid  of  his
grace  and  Spirit  to  purify  us.  Conversion  leads  to  renovation  and  holiness  of
character.  "Do  thou  give  us  the  grace  of  conversion  and  amendment/'  says  W.
Lowth,  "  and  then  thou  wilt  remove  thy  heavy  judgments,  and  restore  us  to  that
happiness  and  prosperity  which  we  formerly  enjoyed."  III.  By  consecration  to
God.  When  God  returned  to  Zion  it  became  "  a  city  of  truth."  It  became  what
it  had  been  before,  the  city  which  God  had  "  chosen  to  put  his  name  there."
Hence — 1.  The  city  teas  holy.  "The  holy  mountain."  Holy  as  the  residence  of
Jehovah  and  the  object  of  devout  veneration.  True  worship  and  spiritual  blessings
were  restored.  "  The  name  of  the  city  from  that  day  shall  be,  The  Lord  is  there."
2.  The  people  were  truthful.  Their  attachment  to  God  sincere  and  not  hypocrit-
ical ;  their  love  to  man  not  in  word,  but  in  deed  and  of  a  truth.  The  proof  of  real
conversion  is  not  in  partial,  outward  reform,  but  in  devotion  to  God  and  growth
in  holiness  founded  upon  truth.  As  God  is  righteous  and  holy,  those  who  enjoy
his  favour  must  partake  of  these  qualities.  "  The  new  man,  which  after  God  is
created  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness."

God's  Love  and  its  Wonderful  Displays. —  Verses  1 — 8.

The  Jews  are  encouraged  in  distrust  by  the  affection  of  God  for  them.  He  was
jealous  as  a  husband  or  loving  father;  he  loved  most  earnestly,  most  constantly,
and  out  of  free  love  bestowed  upon  them  the  blessings  here  mentioned.

I.  It  is  revealed  by  the  authority  of  his  word.  "  Again  the  word  of  the
Lord  of  hosts  came."  In  the  former  chapter  we  have  reproof,  in  this  encouragement,
lest  his  people  should  despair.  Times  of  adversity  and  reproof  dishearten,  hide  the
love  of  God,  like  clouds  before  the  sun.  But  God  repeats  former  messages,  gives
Scripture  comforts,  and  reminds  us  of  past  deliverances.  "  I  was  jealous  for  her
with  great  fury."  II.  It  is  displayed  in  the  manifestation  of  his  presence.  "  I
am  returned  unto  Zion,  and  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem."  Ezekiel  saw
the  glory  of  God  depart  from  the  sanctuary,  and  pictured  the  consequences  in  the
conquest,  bondage,  and  exile  of  Israel.  But  return  is  the  pledge  of  his  love  and
the  path  to  pre-eminence.  God's  presence  is  heaven  and  its  bliss  j  "  the  river,  the
streams  whereof  shall  make  glad  the  city  of  God."  "As  a  countenance  is  made
beautiful  by  the  soul's  shining  through  it,  so  the  world  is  beautiful  by  the  shining
through  it  of  God  "  [Jacobi].  III.  It  is  proved  in  abundant  blessings.  Manifold
are  the  blessings  here  promised.  1.  The  Jews  should  be  restored  to  their  own  city
(ver.  7).  From  east  and  west,  from  every  nation,  would  they  be  redeemed.  Their
distance  and  weakness  would  be  no  barrier  to  Divine  power.  2.  Spiritual  privileges
would  be  regained,  (a)  The  covenant  would  be  renewed.  God  would  be  their  God,
and  they  would  be  his  people,  (b)  God's  presence  would  be  given.  He  would  dwell
in  their  midst,     (c)  Divine  worship  would  be  restored.     Jerusalem  would  be  holy,


638  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZEGHARIAH.  [OHAP.  vin.


and  idolatry  and  falsehood  would  eventually  cease.  The  mount,  the  temple,  the
mercy-seat,  and  all  the  memorials  of  God's  mercy  would  enhance  their  joy  and
privilege.  3.  Temporal  prosperity  would  be  given.  When  God  in  covenant
grace  takes  away  sin,  he  takes  away  sorrow,  (a)  Long  life  and  freedom  from  disease.
Men  and  women  would  live  to  an  advanced  age.  (b)  Outward  peace  and  security.
The  streets  would  be  full  of  children  playing  in  fearlessness  and  joy.  Age  sat
resting  the  weight  of  years  on  its  supporting  staff,  yet  looking  fresh  and  happy.
Youth  enjoyed  its  cheerful  sports  without  the  stern  reproof  or  the  angry  growl.
The  sports  of  childhood  and  the  benefits  of  old  age  are  contrasted  with  the  days  of
sin  (Jer.  ix.  21  ;  vi.  11)  and  the  purpose  of  God.  "As  the  days  of  a  tree  are  the
days  of  my  people,  and  mine  elect  shall  long  enjoy  the  work  of  their  hands."

God's  Works  greater  than  Man's  Conception  op  them. — Verse  6.

The  promises  just  made  seemed  improbable,  morally  impossible  to  the  Jews  in
their  present  condition.  Bat  God  encourages  faith  by  reminding  them  that  what
seemed  incredible  to  them  was  possible  to  him.     Learn —

I.  Men  stagger  at  the  greatness  of  God's  promises.  "  If  it  be  marvellous  "  to
you,  something  distinct  and  prominent  from  common  events.  The  doings  of  God,
by  reason  of  his  infinite  greatness  and  goodness,  are  beyond  anticipation,  past  belief.
1.  His  people  are  few.  "A  remnant"  of  what  was  once  a  great  nation.  Will  he
interfere  on  their  behalf  %  2.  The  times  seem  unlikely.  "  In  these  days "  of
infidelity,  oppression,  and  sorrow.  3.  We  doubt  Ms  word.  "  These  things  are  too
good  to  be  true."  They  can  never  be  realized  in  our  experience.  4.  We  measure
God  by  ourselves.  We  cannot  act,  therefore  God  cannot  perform  his  promises.
They  appear  against  the  course  of  nature  and  the  laws  of  worldly  policy.  Thus  do
we  sin  against  God  and  wrong  ourselves  by  measuring  his  power  and  purpose  by
human  standards.  Be  "  fully  persuaded  that  what  God  had  promised  he  was  able
also  to  perform."  II.  God's  promises  are  not  too  great  for  him  to  perform.
"  Should  it  also  be  marvellous  in  mine  eyes,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  1 "  1.  His  love
indicates  this.  It  is  unchangeable  and  never  offers  what  he  will  not  give.  He
forgives,  and  forgives  abundantly.  In  daily  life  and  Christian  experience  he  works
far  more  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  we  can  ask  or  think.  2.  His  power  proves
it.  "  Is  anything  too  hard  for  the  Lord  1 "  Many  things  with  man  are  impossible,
but  "  with  God  all  things  are  possible."  Beware  of  profanity  and  unbelief  (2  Kings
vii.  2).  Look  to  God  in  all  things  to  increase  faith  and  secure  comfort.  "  I
know  that  thou  canst  do  everything  "  (Job  xlii.  2).

HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  1.  TJie  word  came.  The  first  "Jealous  for  Zion."  Though  he  pun-
ters. 1 — 17)  declaring  the  reversal  of  ishes  yet  he  loves.  "The  Lord  will  be
the  former  judgments,  and  the  complete  jealous  for  his  land,  and  pity  his  people."
though  conditional  restoration  of  God's  Ver.  3.  Returned.  The  departure  of
favour;  the  second  (vers.  18 — 23)  con-  God  a  curse,  and  the  return  of  God  a
taining  the  answer  to  the  original  question  blessing  to  a  people.  God's  presence  in
as  to  those  facts  in  the  declaration  of  the  ordinances  and  God's  favour  in  provi-
joy  and  the  spread  of  the  gospel.     The  dences.

first  has,  again,  a  sevenfold,  the  second  a  Vers.  4,  5.  A  delightful  scene.    1.  Boys

threefold,  subordinate    division,  marked  and  girls  playing  in  the  streets.     2.  Aged

by  the  beginning,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  men  and  women  watching  them.     "  The

hosts  [Pusey].  sports  of  childhood — innocent  sports  in

Ver.  2.  Divine  jealousy.     1.    Its  na-  their  own  nature,  of  course — are  the  very

ture.     "  Great  jealousy  "   to   love   men  instincts  of  that  period  of  life ;  and  they

and    hate   their  sins.      2.    Its   object,  have  here  the  sanction  of  a  benevolent


chap,  viil.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  C89


God,  being  a  part  of  his  promised  blessing  community  in  what  regarded  the  public

to  his  favoured  city.     Who  would  like  interests,   met  with  a   similar  rebuke"

to  be  the  man  or  the  woman  the  sight  [Wardlaw].

of   whom   frightened    such    a   group?"         Vers.   7,  8.    Israel's  restoration.      1.

[Wardlaw].      Great    blessings.     1.  Lon-  They  shall  be  gathered. together  into  the

gevity.     2.  Peace  and  security.    3.  Eeal  kingdom  of  God.     "  Not  to  the  earthly

enjoyments.     "  Thou  shalt  see  thy  chil-  Jerusalem,    that   not   large   enough  for

dren's  children,  and  peace  upon  Israel."  Jews  scattered  throughout  all  the  world,

Yer.   6.  Marvellous.     1.  A  great  sal-  but  to  the  open  and  enlarged  Jerusalem

vation.     2.  Accomplished  with  (a)  ease  in  ch.  ii.  8,  i.  e.  the  Messianic  kingdom

and  (b)  certainty,  yet — 3.  Doubted  by  an  of  God  "  [KeiT\.     2.  They  shall  become

incredulous     people.       "  Strange     that,  God's  people,  and  God  will  again  become

among  a  people  who  had  amongst  them  their  God.      3.  This  new  relation  shall

the  records  of  all  the   'mighty  deeds'  not  be  as  the  past;   a  new  feature  is

done  for  them  by  the  finger  of  Jehovah  given  by  which  the  future  will  be  dis-

in  the  days  of  their  fathers,  there  should  tinguished  "  in  truth  and  righteousness."

have   existed   the   slightest   surmise   of  A  father  may  chastise  a  son  for  disobedi-

impossibility,  or   even   of   difficulty,  in  ence,  put  him  into  temporary  seclusion

regard  to  any  assurance  of  good  coming  and  disgrace,  and  then  restore  him.    God

from    him.      On    many    occasions    was  will  never  disown  his  relation  to  Israel,

the  incredulity,  both  of   individuals  in  but   eventually    bless  them  more   than

what  regarded  themselves,   and   of   the  ever  in  Christ.

HOMILETICS.
Courage  in  Duty. — Verses  9 — 15.

The  prophet  now  urges  the  people  to  be  courageous  in  their  work.  Adversity
formerly  attended  them  for  neglect  of  duty,  but  God  will  henceforth  bestow
blessings,  which  are  but  the  earnest  of  greater  ones  which  await  those  who  return
to  God.     The  grounds  for  courage  are  distinctly  given.

I.  The  words  of  the  prophets.     "  Ye  that  hear  in  these  days  these  words  by
the  mouth  of  the  prophets."     Ever  since  they  had  commenced  to  build  God  had
exhorted  them  in  their  work  and  assured  them  that  it  would  be  finished.     Special
messengers  sent  to  stir  us  up  and  predict  success  ought  to  encourage.     It  is  a
privilege  to  hear  the  prophets,  and  a  sure  way  to  prosperity  to  believe  them  (2
Chron.  xx.  20).     II.  The  prospect  of  better  days.     Before,  they  were  hindered
in  their  work  ;  man  and  beast  laboured  in  vain.     But  bright  is  the  future  if  they
will  be  strong.     1.  Great  rewards  for  labour.     "There  was  no  hire  for  man,  nor
hire  for  beast."     Produce  was  expected,  waited  for,  but  came  not  (Hag.  i.  10).
"  Man  must  be  disappointed  with  the  lesser  things  of  life  before  he  can  comprehend
the  full  value  of  the  greater  "  [Bulwer  Lytton].     2.  Abundant  temporal  prosperity.
The  seed  will  be  healthy  and  the  harvests  fruitful.     The  earth  will  give  its  increase
and  the  heaven  its  dew.     No  failure  nor  famine,  no  poverty  nor  distress.     There
will  be  seed  to  the  sower  and  bread  to  the  eater.    3.  Entire  security  from  foes.
Neither  discord  within  nor  invasion  without  will  disturb  their  peace  and  security.
They  will  dwell  together  in  unity  and  labour  without  fear.     Their  disposition  will
be  peaceful  and  their  country  secure.     "  Peace  is  rarely  denied  to  the  peaceful  "
[Schiller],    4.  Complete  reversal  of  fortunes.    u  I  will  not  be  unto  the  residue  of  this
people  as  in  the  former  days."     If  we  return  to  duty  God  will  visit  us  in  favour.
The  curse  shall  be  turned  into  a  blessing,  and  we  shall  be  saved  from  dispersion
and  dishonour.    God  will  dwell  with  us  without  fear  and  reproach.     u  I  know  the
thoughts  that  I  think  towards  you,  saith  the  Lord;  thoughts  of  peace,  and  not  of
evil."     III.  The  pledge  of  God's  help.     "  Again  have  I  thought  in  these  days  to
do  well  unto  Jerusalem."     God  had  determined,  purposed  to  help.     1.   God's  wori


640  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [ohap.  vin.


is  explicit.  u  Fear  not,"  u  let  your  hands  be  strong."  Fear  makes  the  heart  faint,  and
when  the  heart  is  feeble  the  hands  can  never  be  strong.  When  the  spirit  is  timid
and  irresolute  we  have  neither  energy  in  body  nor  mind  to  work.  Confidence  will
brace  up  the  energies,  and  the  joy  of  the  Lord  will  be  our  strength.  2.  God's  faith-
fulness is  unchangeable.  His  word  was  true  to  the  fathers.  He  "  repented  not."
If  faithful  to  his  threatenings,  will  he  not  be  to  his  promises  1  Punishment  loner
suspended  came  at  length.  Those  who  would  not  hear  were  made  to  feel  that
God's  denunciations  were  not  empty  words.  So  "  all  that  God  is,  and  all  that
God  has,  are  alike  pledged  in  the  promises  of  his  covenant,"  says  Wardlaw,  "  to  do
good  to  his  confiding  and  obedient  people."  "  Hath  he  said,  and  shall  he  not  do
it  1  or  hath  he  spoken,  and  shall  he  not  make  it  good  ?  "

Past  and  Present,  or  Once  a  Curse  and  Now  a  Blessing. —  Verse  13.

These  words  apply  to  all  the  tribes  of  Israel — have  been  partially  fulfilled.  For
generations  Jews  have  been  cursed  by  all  people,  but  a  more  glorious  accomplish-
ment will  be  in  the  future.  They  might  be  taken  literally,  but  apply  them  in
another  sense.

I.  God's  people  have  once  been  a  curse.  1.  When  unconverted,  many  were  a
curse  in  their  influence  and  example.  Their  lives,  if  not  openly  wicked,  were  a
hindrance  to  everything  good.  "  One  sinner  destroyeth  much  good."  2.  When
chastised  by  God  they  were  in  a  sense  cursed.  From  the  first  a  curse  and  a
blessing  were  set  before  Israel,  and  the  result  was  according  to  their  choice  (Deut.  xi.
26  ;  xxx.  1).  But  God's  people  disobey,  and  are  corrected  by  sufferings.  3.  When
persecuted  they  are  cursed.  They  are  ridiculed  for  their  profession,  and  often
become  a  by-word  and  a  proverb  (Jer.  xxiv.  9).  They  are  thought  to  be  "  stricken,
smitten  of  God,  and  afflicted."  "  Thou  makest  us  a  reproach  to  our  neighbours,  a
scorn  and  a  derision  to  them  that  are  round  about  us  "  (Ps.  xliv.  13,  14).  II.  God's
people  are  now  a  blessing.  "  Ye  shall  be  a  blessing."  1.  They  are  blessed  in
their  own  experience.  They  are  renewed  and  forgiven.  They  enjoy  the  presence
and  the  favour  of  God.  "  And  such  were  some  of  you  ;  but  ye  are  washed,  but
ye  are  sanctified,  but  ye  are  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the
Spirit  of  our  God."  2.  They  are  the  means  of  blessing  others.  In  their  influence
and  example,  prayers  and  efforts,  good  men  are  a  blessing.  As  the  Jew  was  a
source  of  blessing  to  the  Gentile,  so  is  the  Christian  to  the  world.  "  I  will  bless
thee  and  make  thy  name  great,  and  thou  shalt  be  a  blessing."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  9.     1.    The  privilege.     Hearing  should  be  specially  recognized.     "  /  set

the  words  of  the  prophets.     2.  The  duty,  all  men,"  &c.     God's  holy  hand  hath  a

"  Let  your  hands  be  strong."     "  Those  special  stroke  in  the  Church's  afflictions,

only  who  are  employed  for  God  may  whosoever  be  the  instrument.     Herein  is

expect  to  be  encouraged  by  him ;  those  all-disposing    Providence  not  only  per-

who  lay  their  hands  to  the  plough  of  missive,    but    active.     "I    make   peace

duty  shall  have  them  strengthened  with  and  create  evil,"  that  is,  war  and  conten-

the  promises  of  mercy."  tion  (Isa.  xlv.  7),  which   is  called  evil

Ver.  10.  1.  Those  who  neglect  God's  by  a  speciality,  as  including  all  evils,
work  will  not  always  succeed  in  their  This  God  doth — 1.  By  letting  loose  Satan
own.  "  There  was  no  hire  for  man."  upon  them  (that  great  kindle-coal  and
Neither  can  they  always  expect  peace  make-bate  of  the  world)  to  raise  jeal-
and  prosperity.  "There  was  no  peace  ousies,  heart-burnings,  and  discontents  be-
to  him  that  went  out."  2.  Outward  tween  them.  2.  By  giving  them  up  to
troubles  and  civil  discord  may  be  judg-  the  lusts  and  corruptions  of  their  own
ments   from   God,  in  which  his   hand  wicked  hearts.     3.  By  giving  occasions


CHAP,  vni.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ZECHARIAH.  641


of   enraging  them  more  and   more   one  and  not  for  these  transitory  trappings

against  another  [Trapp].  [Trapp].

Yer.  11.  7"  will  cause.  Whereas  Vers.  14,  15.  Past  sorrows  pledges  of
people  are  apt  to  attribute  too  much  to  future  good.  How]  1.  Because  past
means  and  second  causes  of  plenty  and  sorrows  inflicted  to  prevent  future  evil.
prosperity,  God  assumes  the  honour  of  2.  Because  past  sorrows  prove  God's
all  to  himself.  Rain  and  fruitful  seasons  unchangeable  purpose  and  love.  "  So
are  his  gift  (Acts  xiv.  17).  He  resolveth  have  I  turned  and  purposed,"  &c.  "The
the  genealogy  of  corn  and  wine  unto  illustrations  of  God's  severity  will  be
himself  (Hos.  ii.  22) ;  and  both  here  surpassed  by  those  of  his  goodness "
and  elsewhere  he  giveth  us  to  know  [Lange].  His  chastisements  were  the
that  the  reward  of  religion  is  abundance  earnest  of  his  mercies,  for  they  too  were
of  outward  blessings,  which  yet  are  an  austere  form  of  his  love  [Pusey].
not  always  entailed  to  godliness,  to  the  Fear  not.  1.  Grounds  of  appreh en-
end  that  it  may  be  admired  for  itself,  sion.     2.  Grounds  of  confidence.

HOMILETIOS.
Moral  Conditions  op  Prosperity. —  Verses  16,  17.

These  verses  contain  a  virtual  and  instructive  reply  to  the  question  relative  to
the  celebration  of  the  fast  (chap.  vii.  3).  It  was  not  in  such  merely  external,
ritual,  or  ceremonial  observances,  that  Jehovah  delighted  ;  but  in  the  love  and
practice  of  moral  rectitude  [Hend.~\.  In  verses  14  and  15  we  have  the  grounds
upon  which  God's  promise  rests ;  here,  the  conditions  upon  which  it  will  be
fulfilled.     There  are  two  aspects  of  duty  as  essential  to  prosperity.

I.  Sympathy  with  our  fellow- creatures.  We  are  forbidden — 1.  To  act  evil
"  Execute  the  judgment  of  truth  and  peace  in  your  gates."  Nothing  must  be  done
in  partiality,  violence,  and  passion.  In  public  administration  and  private  inter-
course we  must  allay  feuds  and  seek  peace.  2.  To  speak  evil.  "  Speak  ye  every
man  the  truth."  (a)  In  social  intercourse.  "To  his  neighbour."  (b)  In  public
courts.  "  Love  no  false  oath."  "  Truth  is  the  band  of  union,  and  the  basis  of
human  happiness.  Without  this  virtue  there  is  no  reliance  upon  language,  no
confidence  in  friendship,  no  security  in  promises  and  oaths"  [Jeremy  Collier].
3.  To  think  evil.  "  Let  none  of  you  imagine  evil  in  your  hearts."  All  evil  springs
from  the  thoughts.  The  most  secret  sins  and  the  most  grievous  acts  begin  there.
"To  think  well,"  says  Paley,  "is  the  way  to  act  well."  "The  thoughts  of  the
righteous  are  right"  (Prov.  xii.  5).  II.  Moral  conformity  to  God.  "All  these
things"  forbidden,  are  evils  which  God  hates,  and  will  punish.  Therefore  we
should  hate  and  avoid  them  also;  shun  them,  not  for  the  sake  of  policy,  nor
propriety,  but  as  offensive  to  God.  Men  are  seeking  to  substitute  philanthropy  for
piety;  "the  claims  of  humanity"  for  the  worship  of  God.  But  Scripture  and
experience  prove  that  there  can  be  no  true  and  permanent  love  to  man,  which  is
not  the  offspring  of  love  to  God.  The  test  of  our  character  and  the  degree  of  our
prosperity  will  be  according  to  our  conformity  to  God.  If  we  love  what  he  loves,
and  hate  what  he  hates,  we  shall  bear  his  image  and  become  his  children.  "  For
love  is  of  God;  and  every  one  that  loveth  is  born  of  God  and  knoweth  God."

Fasts  Turned  into  Festive  Joy. —  Verses  18,  19.

These  words  are  fresh  grounds  for  encouragement.

I.  Their  mourning  will  be  turned  into  gladness.  Their  seasons  of  sorrow  and
penitential  confession  should  end  in  feasting  and  praise.  They  would  be  delivered
from  foreign  yoke,  and  brought  back  to  their  own  land;  restored  from  spiritual

41


642  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [ohap.  viii,


desolation  to  the  privileges  of  the  temple.  Personally  and  socially,  joy  and
gladness  would  be  great.  Troublous  times  often  end  in  joyous  songs  to  the  Church.
After  the  night  of  weeping,  the  morning  dawns  in  light  and  cheerfulness.  "  They
shall  obtain  joy  and  gladness,  and  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee  away."  II.  This
gladness  will  lead  to  sincerity  of  life.  "  Therefore,  love  the  truth  and  peace."
God  blesses  his  people,  that  they  may  love  him.  The  greater  his  promises,  the
greater  should  be  our  obedience.  Fasts  and  feasts  are  empty  forms.  God  requires
truth  in  our  life,  and  peace  in  our  hearts.  "  What  doth  the  Lord  require  of  thee,
but  to  do  justly,  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  thy  God  % "

"Truth  is  always  straightforward"  [Sophocles],

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  19.  Mark  the  practical  improve-  possession  of  your  now  restored  land
ment.  "  Therefore,  love  the  truth  and  and  liberty,  and  temporal  and  spiritual
peace."  The  words  may  be  taken  in  blessings — 'love  the  truth  and  peace.'
two  senses :  First,  as  an  appeal  to  grati-  Love  them  in  heart :  show  love  to  them
tude,  as  if  Jehovah  had  said,  "  You  owe  in  practice.  It  is  thus  only  that  you
your  deliverance  to  me."  You  deserved  can  retain  my  favour  and  blessing;  thus
it  not.  You  never  could  have  wrought  only  that  your  days  can  be  prolonged
it  for  yourselves.  It  is  all  my  doing,  upon  the  land  which  the  Lord  your
If,  therefore,  you  feel  as  you  ought;  God  has  again  given  you"  [Wardlaw].
thankful  to  your  covenant  God  for  my  Truth  and  peace,  twin  virtues.  Ob-
interposing  on  your  behalf,  think  of  my  serve  —  1.  Their  connection.  Truth
will,  and  henceforward  attend  to  what  should  be  sought,  maintained,  and
you  know  will  be  pleasing  in  my  sight :  diffused  in  a  peaceful  spirit.  2.  Their
"  love  the  truth  and  peace."  Secondly,  order.  Truth  first,  and  then  peace.
as  an  appeal  to  self-love — an  appeal  Trust  must  not  be  compromised  for  the
grounded  on  a  regard  to  their  own  in-  sake  of  peace.  It  is  not  peace  on  any
terests:  as  if  he  had  said,  "You  have  terms.  "If  it  be  possible  (it  may  not
been  suffering  for  your  own  and  your  be  so  always),  as  much  as  lieth  in  you,
fathers'  sins.  You  have  been  delivered,  live  peaceably  with  all  men."
If  you  would  shun  a  repetition  of  the
sufferings— if   you   would   continue    in        "Truth  hath  a  quiet  breast"  [^A^^^].

HOMILETIOS.
The  Future  Prosperity  op  the  Christian  Church. — Verses  20 — 23.

The  ordinary  reference  of  these  words  is  to  Gospel  times,  and,  in  part,  to  the
Gospel  dispensation  of  the  future.  They  express  the  obligations  to  be  felt  and
owned  by  the  whole  world — by  "  men  of  every  kindred,  and  people,  and  nation,
and  tongue " — to  the  Jews,  for  the  knowledge,  the  worship,  and  the  practice  of
true  religion  [cf.  Wardlaw].  The  text  contains  a  wonderful  description  of  future
prosperity  to  the  Church  of  God.

I.  Multitudes  will  be  converted  to  God.  "  Many  people  and  strong  nations
shall  come."  The  few  and  feeble  Jews  shall  increase  into  a  mighty  nation.  "  Many
shall  come  from  the  east  and  the  west,  from  the  north  and  the  south."  Bigotry
says/ew.  Modern  Scribes  and  Pharisees  say  few;  but  God  says  many.  Every
fresh  conversion  shall  win  others,  until  "all  nations  flow"  into  God's  kingdom.
II.  Multitudes  will  be  converted  to  God  by  the  instrumentality  of  the  Jews.
"  Ten  men  shall  take  hold  out  of  all  languages  of  the  nations  of  the  skirt  of  him
that  is  a  Jew."  1.  Nations  shall  feel  indebted  to  the  Jews.  Their  outward  polity
has  decayed,  and  they  have  been  scattered  and  despised  for  centuries;  but  the


CHAP,  m]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  643


world  will  yet  own  its  obligation  to  them.  Other  nations  have  given  science  and
art,  government  and  laws;  but  to  the  Jews  are  we  indebted  for  a  knowledge  of
God,  and  the  preservation  of  his  Word.  "  What  advantage  then  hath  the  Jew  1
Much  every  way;  chiefly,  because  that  unto  them  were  committed  the  oracles  of
God"  (cf.  Eom.  iii.  2;  ix.  4,  5).  2.  Nations  shall  discern  that  God  is  with  the
Jews.  "For  we  have  heard  that  God  is  with  you."  God  has  not  cast  off  his
ancient  people,  but  still  watches  over  them.  The  report  of  his  deeds  among  them
shall  spread.  They  shall  be  gathered  and  honoured,  and  other  nations  will  be
anxious  to  participate  in  their  blessings.  All  people  shall  yet  testify  in  their
favour.  "Their  seed  shall  be  known  among  the  Gentiles,  and  their  offspring
among  the  people;  all  they  that  see  them  shall  acknowledge  them  that  they  are
the  seed  which  the  Lord  hath  blessed."

A  Call  to  God's  House. — Verses  21,  22.

Take  Jerusalem  here  literally  or  spiritually,  the  words  may  be  regarded  as  a  caD
to  Christian  worship.  God  has  put  his  name  in  his  house.  It  shall  be  attractive
to  all  sincere  believers,  and  in  whatever  place  they  reside  they  shall  come  to  the
great  festivals  of  the  future.

I.  The  purpose  for  which  they  come.  Not  to  play  nor  pass  away  the  time ;
not  for  any  secular,  but  a  spiritual  end.  1.  They  go  to  pray  before  the  Lord.
Prayer  is  the  language  of  dependence  and  entreaty.  Men  feel  that  nothing  can
satisfy  but  God — are  led  to  give  up  every  kind  of  idolatry  and  come  to  him,
believing  that  he  will  hear  prayer.  Prayer  is  most  important,  and  most  necessary,
yet  meetings  for  united  prayer  are  neglected.  If  the  spirit  of  prayer  be  not  with  a
people,  there  can  be  no  life  and  unity.  2.  They  go  to  seek  the  Lord.  God  pre-
eminently displays  grace  and  glory  in  his  house.  True  worshippers  covet  his
favour,  and  long  for  his  fellowship.  They  regard  God  in  everything.  They
earnestly  seek  to  behold  his  power  and  glory  in  his  sanctuary  (Ps.  lxiii.  2).  Through
the  veil  of  ceremonies  they  look  to  the  Invisible  One.  "  This  is  the  generation  of
those  that  seek  him."  II.  The  method  in  which  they  come.  "Many  people
and  strong  nations,"  &c.  1.  In  great  numbers.  At  present  the  ways  of  Zion
mourn.  Few  attend  the  house  of  God,  and  like  sparrows  are  alone  upon  the
house-top.  As  in  ancient  times,  Jews  went  from  village  to  village,  gathering
numbers  and  singing  hymns  as  they  journeyed  on,  until  all  appeared  in  Zion
before  God:  so  shall  multitudes  say,  "  Come  ye,  and  let  us  go  up  to  the  mountain
of  the  Lord,  to  the  house  of  the  God  of  Jacob"  (Isa.  ii.  3).  2.  In  great  variety.
"The  inhabitants  of  many  cities."  Country  and  townspeople,  merchants  and
mechanics,  masters  and  servants,  shall  come.  "  Men  out  of  all  languages  of  the
nations " — the  Mahomedan  and  the  Turk,  the  Hindoo  and  the  Hottentot,  Greek
and  Jew,  shall  yet  meet  together  in  the  house  of  God.  III.  The  spirit  in  which
they  come.  1 .  A  spirit  of  mutual  excitement.  The  inhabitants  of  one  city  go  to
another.  They  do  not  invite  those  whom  they  accidentally  meet  on  the  way,  nor
do  they  wait  for  the  minister  and  the  missionary  to  do  their  work.  They  go  to
the  negligent — perhaps  at  some  sacrifice  and  inconvenience — and  stir  one  another
up.  This  is  needful  now.  Frivolous  are  the  excuses,  and  unjustifiable  the  causes,
which  keep  men  from  the  house  of  God.  2.  A  spirit  of  personal  resolve.  "  I  will
go  also,"  was  the  response  of  each  when  invited.  Many  excuse ;  they  have  no
time,  no  clothes,  and  you  must  call  again.  But  others  are  only  waiting  for  an
invitation.  Let  us  all  resolve  with  Neheiniah  and  his  friends:  "We  will  not
forsake  the  house  of  our  God."  3.  A  spirit  of  earnestness.  "  Let  us  go  speedily."
(a)  Go  with  heartiness.  Put  heart  and  feeling  into  your  work.  Angels  are  like
naming  fire  in  their  service.  We  are  dull  and  half-asleep,  (b)  Go  without  delay.
Many  delay  and  never  go.     They  never  begin  to  pray,  till  God  has  ceased  to  hear.


644


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.


[CHAP.  VIII.


Let  all  attend  and  take  others  to  the  house  of  God — pray  that  God  would  revive
his  work,  and  bless  our  souls.  "  I  was  glad  when  they  said  unto  rue,  Let  us  go
into  the  house  of  the  Lord.     Our  feet  shall  stand  within  thy  gates,  0  Jerusalem."


HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Vers.  20,  21.  Characteristics  of  a
genuine  revival.  1.  A  general  interest
in  the  house  of  God.  2.  A  mutual
concern  for  each  other's  welfare.  3.  An
earnest  resolve  for  individual  duty;  and
4.  A  great  accession  to  the  Christian
Church.

The  inhabitants,  fyc.  They  shall  not
he  satisfied  with  their  own  salvation,
careless  about  the  salvation  of  others;
they  shall  employ  all  labour  and  in-
dustry, with  wondrous  love,  to  provide
for  the  salvation  of  others  as  if  it  were
their  own,  It  is  a  marvellous  stirring
of  minds  [Pusey].  Learn  also — 1.  That
those  who  know  God  will  seek  to  bring
others  to  know  him.  2.  That  mutual
stirring  up  to  duty  is  a  means  of  increase
to  the  Church.     3.  That  in  this  work


we  should  not  be  discouraged.  (1)  Sad
times  should  not  blot  out  remembrance
of  the  Church's  charter  and  future
privileges.  (2)  Personal  sacrifices  should
not  tire  nor  dishearten  us.  Indifference
and  lukewarmness  are  out  of  place.  We
must  be  active  and  constant  in  the
work.     "  Let  us  go  speedily."

/  mil  go  also.  I.  The  object  of  the
awakened  sinner.  To  seek  God.  II.
The  means  of  accomplishing  this  object.
(1)  Attendance  in  sanctuary.  (2)  Prayer.
III.  The  influence  of  example  in  pursu-
ing this  object.  Inciting  others.  Indi-
vidual example  connected  with  general
exhortation.

Yer.  23.  A  revived  people.  1.  Blessed
with  God's  presence.  2.  Instrumental
in  the  conversion  of  others.


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER   VIII.


Vers.  1,  2.  Jealous.  Love  often
re-illumines  his  extinguished  flame  at
the  torch  of  jealousy  [Lady  Blessing-
ton].  Jealousy  is  always  born  with  love,
but  does  not  always  die  with  it
[Rochefoucauld].

Ver.  3.  Oity  of  truth.  Justice  is
the  idea  of  God,  the  ideal  of  man,  the
rule  of  conduct  writ  in  the  nature  of
mankind  [Theodore  Parker].  Great  is
truth  and  mighty  above  all  things  (Esd.
iv.  51).

Yers.  4,  5.  Here  is  a  fine  picture.
The  scene  is  the  streets  of  Jerusalem.
For  it  is  clear  that  in  this  connexion,  the
word  rendered  "  dwell "  is  decidedly  to
be  understood  as  meaning  "sit"  Lon-
gevity, when  in  any  country  it  is  found
on  a  more  than  ordinary  average,  is  a
proof  of  a  healthful  and  prosperous
condition  of  society;  and  although  I  am
satisfied  that  some  passages  of  Scripture
which  have  been  interpreted  of  personal
longevity  have  reference  rather  to  the
long-continued  national  possession  of
the  land  of  promise;  yet  that  longevity


is  included  amongst  the  promises  of
temporal  blessing  and  well-being,  there
can  be  little  doubt.  "  Thou  shalt  see
thy  children's  children,  and  peace  upon
Israel,"  is  one  of  not  a  few  similar
assurances.  The  state  described  is  one
of  peace  and  tranquil  securit}^  [  Wardlaw].
Yer.  6.  Marvellous.  The  man  who
cannot  wonder,  who  does  not  habitually
wonder  and  worship,  were  he  president
of  innumerable  royal  societies,  is  but  a
pair  of  spectacles  behind  which  there  is
no  eye  [Carlyle].

"Wonder  is  involuntary  praise  "  [Young],

Yer.  8.  In  truth.  God's  relation
sustained  from  the  time  of  having  chosen
them  had  been  always  thus  characterized.
Not  so  theirs.  They  called  God  their
God,  and  themselves  his  people ;  while
too  often  it  was  neither  "  in  truth  "  nor
"  in  righteousness  ; "  but  when  their
hearts  and  lives  gave  the  lie  to  their
lips;  when  they  flagrantly  played  the
hypocrite,  and  defrauded  him  of  his
due,  both  in  inward  devotion  and  in


CHAP.   VIII.J


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARTAH.


645


outward  service.     Let  us  see  that   our
professions  are  sincere — that  our  hearts
are  steadfast  [Wardlaio].
Ver.  9.     Strong.

"Fear  is   the  virtue  of  slaves:   but  the  heart
that  loveth  is  willing  n  [Longfellow],

Vers.  10  — 12.  Fruit.  Interesting
and  lovely  as  the  green  fields  in  their
luxuriant  riches  must  ever  be,  to  the  eye
of  faith  and  devotion  they  are  even
more  so.  Did  we  accustom  ourselves  to
associate  with  their  beauty  the  super-
intending providence  of  God,  as  well  as
the  subordinate  art  and  labour  of  man,
they  would  possess  an  interest  and  a
loveliness  which  the  mere  lover  of  nature
never  knew.  The  sweetest  landscape  is
improved  by  the  presence  of  animated
objects,  which  impart  a  liveliness,  an
interest,  as  it  were,  an  existence,  to  the
whole.  What  increased  force  and  inter-
est are  added  to  it  by  the  presence,  so
to  speak,  of  the  living  God  [Palin],

Ver.  13.     Curse.

u  A  curse  is  like  a  cloud, — it  passes  n  [Bailey].

Vers.  14,  15.  Do  well.  God  is
goodness  itself;  and  whatsoever  is  good
is  of  him  [Sir  P.  Sidney].  God  has
been  pleased  to  prescribe  limits  to  his
own  power,  and  to  work  his  ends  within
these  limits  [Paley].

Vers.  16,  17.  I  hate.  Men  resemble
the  gods  in  nothing  so  much  as  in  doing
good  to  their  fellow-creatures  [Cicero].
Every  day  should  be  distinguished  by  at
least  one  particular  act  of  love  [Lavater].

Ver.    19.     Joy.     What   is  joy  1     A


sunbeam  between  two  clouds  [Madame
Deluzy],  Joy  never  feasts  so  high,  as
when  the  first  course  is  of  misery
[Suckling].

Vers.  20 — 22.  Pray,  The  gracious
God  is  pleased  to  esteem  it  his  glory  to
have  many  beggars  thronging  at  the
beautiful  gate  of  his  temple,  for  spiritual
and  corporal  alms.  What  an  honour  it
is  to  our  Great  Landlord  that  multitudes
of  tenants  flock  together  to  his  house  to
pay  their  rent  of  thanks  and  worship  for
all  which  they  hold  of  him  !  How  loud
and  lovely  is  the  noise  of  many  golden
trumpets !  Good  Lord,  what  an  echo
do  they  make  in  heaven's  ears  !  When
many  skilful  musicians  play  in  concert
with  well- tuned  and  prepared  instru-
ments, the  music  cannot  but  be  ravish-
ing to  God  himself  [George  Swinnock].

Ver.  23.  Skirt.  This  is  a  simple
and  striking  expression.  We  have  seen
a  dear  little  infant,  when  he  wished  to
engage  the  attention  of  his  mother,
pulling  her  by  the  clothes.  When  a
child  has  been  walking  along  with  his
father,  and  afraid  that  he  would  leave
him,  he  not  only  cries  but  lays  hold  of
his  coat.  When  the  cripple  had  been
healed  at  the  beautiful  gate  of  the
temple,  he  held  Peter  and  John,  and
was  afraid  to  let  them  go  (probably
dreading  a  return  of  his  former  misery),
as  much  as  to  say,  "  You  shall  not  go,
and  if  you  do  I  will  go  with  you,  and
you  shall  draw  me  after  you."  Just  so
is  it  here.  It  shows  conviction,  attach-
ment, eager  attention,  a  wishing  to  be
among  them  and  of  them  [Jay].


CHAPTER  IX.


Critical  Notes.]  Hadrach]  Part  of  Syria,  near  Damascus.  Rest]  On  which  God's  wrath  shall
rest,  and  permanently  abide.  Eyes]  of  Israel,  and  of  other  people,  would  mark  the  providence  of
God;  or,  "Jehovah  has  an  eye  upon  men,  and  upon  all  the  tribes  of  Israel"  (cf.  Jer.  xxxii.  20).
2.  Hamath]  as  adjoining  Damascus  partook  in  "the  burden."  Tyre  and  Sidon  lay  directly  in
Alexander's  march  along  the  Syrian  coast  towards  Egypt  (see  Isa.  xxiii.).  Wise]  in  building
strong  holds,  and  heaping  up  silver  (Ezek.  xxviii.  3 — 17).  3.]  A  description  of  new  Tyre,  an  island
700  paces  from  the  shore.  4.  Castj  Ileb.  dispossess,  drive  out  her  inhabitants.  Alexander  captured
Tyre  after  seven  months'  siege;  some  few  escaped;  others  put  to  death,  or  enslaved,  and  the  city  was


646  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [CHAP.  IX.


burned.     5.]  Principal  cities  of  the  Philistines  given.     Gath  only  left  out,  probably  owing  to  its
situation  inland,  lying  out  of  the  route  of  the  army.     The  fall  of  Tyre  terrified  these  capitals  of
different  districts.     If  Tyre  could  not  stand  how  could  they?    Expect.]  Ekron,  furthest  north,
expected  Alexander  would  be  checked  at  Tyre.     Gaza]  captured  after  a  siege  of  two  months.    Betis,
its  governor,  was  bound  to  a  chariot,  and  dragged  round  the  city.     6.  Ashdod]  A  bastard  (foreigner
or  stranger)  of  the  conqueror's  nominated  ruler.     7.  Blood]  of  sacrifices,  which  heathens  often
drank.     Abominations]  Idolatrous  offerings.     "  A  prediction  of  future  conversion  of  the  Philistines
to  the  knowledge  and  service  of  the  true  God.     Their  abandonment  of  idolatry,  and  their  embracing
the  true  religion,  is  represented  by  no  longer  drinking  blood,  and  eating  things  sacrificed  to  idols,
both  of  which  were  common  among  pagans,  but  prohibited  by  the  Mosaic  law,  and  by  the  apostles  "
(Numb.  xxv.  2:  Lev.  vii.   6:  Acts  xv.  29)  [Henderson].     He]  The  Philistines  regarded  as  one.
Left]  Many  Philistines  became  proselytes  to  Judaism,  says  Josephus.     Governor]  Philistine  princes
shall  be  like  tribe-princes  (chiliarchs)  in  Judah.     There  will  be  no  distinction  between  proselytes
and  native  Jews — all  will  enjoy  equal  honours  and  privileges.     Jebusites]  Original  inhabitants  of
Jerusalem,  subjugated  by  David,  incorporated  among  Jews,  and  enjoyed  their  privileges  (2  Sam.  xxiv.
16).     8.  House]  Jews,  not  to  be  injured  by  the  army  of  Alexander  on  its  march  to  or  from  Egypt.
Fulfilled  to  the  letter.     Samaritans  punished,  but  Jews  escaped  [cf.  Henderson],     Seen]  Lit.  Now
do  I  look  with  mine  eyes.     They  were  indebted  to  God's  providence  only.     9.]  A  royal  personage
to  appear  without  armies,  and  to  reign  withont  destructive  judgments.  Daughter]  Theocratic  nation
to  rejoice  at  the  appearance  of  her  king  (Ps.  ii.  11).      Thine]  i.e.  the  one  promised  and  long
expected.     Just]  in  his  official  and  personal  character.     An  attribute  of  the  Messiah  in  connection
with  salvation  (Isa.  xlv.  21 ;  liii.   11 :  Jer.  xxiii.  5,  6).     Lowly]  Expressing  his  general  character,
not  merely  his  humiliation  in  first  advent.     Colt]  A  rough  unbroken  colt.     An  ass  was  not  a  mean
and   despised   animal,  but  in  triumphant  processions  horses  were  chosen,  and   arrayed  in  costly
caparisons.      10.]  The  nature  and  extent  of  Messiah's  reign.     Cut  off]  Remove  instruments  of  war,
and  reign  by  peaceful  means.     Ends  of  the  earth]  Not  a  mere  Jewish,  but  a  universal,  kingdom.
11.  Blood]  The  covenant  sealed  with   sprinkled  blood,   the  pledge.     Prisoners]  Jewish   exiles  in
Egypt  and   Greece.     Pit]  An  allusion  to  Gen.  xxxvii.  24.     Their  distress  great,  like   dungeons
without  water  (Jer.  xxxviii.  6).     12.  Strong1  hold]  Fortress,  forcibly  contrasting  with  pit  (Ps.  xl.
2).     To-day]  No  need  to  despair;  their  condition  miserable,  yet  not  hopeless.     Double]  Not  strictly
of  twice  the  quantity,  but  simply  of  great  abundance.     A  large  amount  of  blessing  far  outweighing
the  misery  of  bondage  [cf„  Wardlaw].    13.]  The  method  of  victory  represented  figuratively.    Judah,
the  extended  bow;  Ephraim,  the  arrow  by  which  Jehovah  would  overcome  the  Grecians.     14 — 16.]
God's  presence  with  his  people.     Seen]  Conspicuously  displaying  power,  like  the  pillar  of  old:  seen
like  lightning,  the  arrows  of  God  in  a  thunderstorm.   South]  (cf.  Isa.  xxi.  1:  Hos.  xiii.  5).  Southern
storms  always  most   violent.     15.  Eat]  the  flesh  and   drink  the  blood  of  the  enemy,  like  a  lion
devouring  its  victim  (Numb,  xxiii.  24).     Subdue]  Lit.  "tread  underfoot  the  sling-stones,"  hurled
by  the  foe.     Missiles  will  not  hinder  their  progress,  but  fall  at  their  feet,  and  be  trampled  to  the
dust.     Bowls]  of  sacrifices.     Corners]  Horns  of  the  altar,  sprinkled  with  blood  from  the  bowls  (Ex.
xxix.  12  :  Lev.  iv.  18) ;  priestly  figures  intimating  holy  war  and  victory.     16.  Stones]  Gems  in  the
crown  of  the  conqueror;  not  the  sling-stones  trodden  by  the  foot.     17.    How  great]    (exulting
exclamation)  in  bestowing  victory  and  fruitful  seasons.     Corn  and  wine]  indicate  peace  and  plenty
to  those  pressed  by  the  foe  and  pinched  in  circumstances  (Deut.  xxxiii.  28:  Ps.  iv.  8).

HOMILETIGS.
Judgments  upon  Syria  and  Phoenicia. —  Verses  1 — 4.

Judgments  are  now  threatened  upon  the  lands  of  Syria,  Phoenicia,  and  Philistia.
Nations  from  which  Israel  greatly  suffered,  typical  of  worldly  powers  exulting  in
their  strength,  and  broken  to  pieces  by  the  might  of  Jehovah.

I.  Judgments  upon  the  land  of  Syria.  "  In  the  land  of  Hadrach."  1.  Their
nature.  "The  burden  of  the  word."  The  punishment  of  the  land  is  burdensome;
no  light  trifling  matter.  It  is  bitter  and  crushing.  2.  Their  centre.  "  Damascus,"
the  capital,  "  shall  be  the  rest  thereof."  On  this  city  the  burden  was  permanently
to  settle.  Eminent  places  generally  share  in  the  guilt,  and  procure  the  punishment,
of  the  land.  After  Alexander's  victory  over  Darius  in  the  battle  of  Issus,  one  of
his  generals  was  sent  to  the  city,  who  took  its  immense  wealth,  treasured  up  by
the  Persian  monarch,  and  carried  away  its  satraps  and  princely  families  (cf.  Jer.
xlix.  23 :  Amos  i.  3 — 5).  3.  Their  extent.  "  Hamath  also,  which  borders
thereon,"  did  not  escape.  Near  in  situation,  it  shared  in  the  burden  of  wrath
resting  upon  Damascus.  Contiguous  in  territory,  they  were  alike  in  doom.  The
proverb  of   the  Jews  was  realized,  "Woe  to  the  wicked  man,  and  woe  to  his


ohap.  ix.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAB.  647


neighbour."  II.  Judgments  upon  the  land  of  Phoenicia.  Tyre  and  Sidon,  the
two  capitals  of  Phoenicia,  are  next  mentioned.  Tyre  was  originally  a  colony  of
SidoD,  but  soon  outgrew  the  mother  city,  and  became  the  capital  of  all  Phoenicia.
Hence  Tyre  is  only  spoken  of  here.  But  the  fate  of  both  places  is  interwoven  (cf.
Isa.  xxiii.  4 — 12  :  Ezek.  xxviii.  21).  1.  Tyre  could  not  be  saved  by  its  worldly
wisdom.  "  Though  it  be  very  wise."  Yolney  says,  that  it  was  "  a  nursery  of  arts
and  science."  Its  wisdom  consisted  in  building  fortifications,  multiplying  riches,
and  trusting  to  them.  It  was  worldly  wisdom,  the  source  of  her  pride  and  the
means  of  her  destruction.  2.  Tyre  could  not  be  saved  by  its  worldly  wealth.
"  Though  silver  was  heaped  up  as  the  dust,  and  fine  gold  as  the  mire  of  the
streets,"  yet  this  availed  not.  3.  Tyre  could  not  be  saved  by  its  mighty  strongholds.
"Tyrus  did  build  herself  a  stronghold."  She  had  "the  greatest  confidence"  in
herself,  says  a  historian,  "  owing  to  her  insular  position  and  fortifications,  and  the
abundant  stores  she  had  prepared."  She  was  "the  crowning  city,"  rivalling  the
world  in  strength,  beauty,  and  riches.  Her  fleet  was  sunk  in  the  sea,  her
fortifications  overturned,  and  she  was  "  devoured  with  the  fire."  The  waves  girt
her  round,  buried  her  ruins,  and  now  roll  over  her  site.  "  I  will  make  her  like  the
top  of  a  rock ;  it  shall  be  a  place  for  the  spreading  of  nets  in  the  midst  of  the  sea ;
for  I  have  spoken  it."

Three  Aspects  of  Divine  Providence. —  Verse  1.

When  the  eyes  of  man.  Taking  these  words  as  they  stand,  they  may  mean  that
the  events  of  God's  providence  would  be  such  as  to  constrain  men  to  acknowledge
God's  hand  in  them,  or  that  the  dangers  would  be  so  great  to  Israel  that  other
nations  would  watch  whether  Jehovah,  in  whom  they  trusted,  would  be  their
protector.  They  are  generally  taken  as  indicating  God's  providence  over  all  man-
kind, to  punish  the  ungodly,  and  defend  his  people.     In  this  sense —

I.  Divine  providence  is  universal.  "  The  Lord  hath  an  eye  to  man,"  i.  e.  to
all  mankind,  as  well  as  to  the  tribes  of  Israel.  He  controls  and  disposes  the
conquests  of  armies,  and  the  destinies  of  nations,  for  the  advancement  of  his  glory.
The  providence  is  the  eye  of  God.  His  look  is  not  careless  and  transient ;  but
scrutinizing  and  constant.  "  His  eyes  behold,"  without  slumber  or  fatigue,  the
actions,  words,  and  thoughts ;  "  his  eyelids  try  the  children  of  men,"  as  one
intently  examining  some  objects  to  the  exclusion  of  all  others  (Ps.  xi.  4).  "  All
things  are  naked,"  stripped  of  all  covering  and  concealment,  "  and  opened  before
him" — laid  prostrate,  and  exposed  before  his  eye  (Heb.  iv.  13).  II.  Divine
providence  is  protective.  "  As  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel."  He  may  chastise,  but
he  will  ever  protect,  his  own.  The  victorious  progress  of  Alexander  terrified  Israel,
but  Jerusalem  escaped  unhurt  amid  the  storm.  "This  *  captain  of  the  Lord's
host'  (Jos.  v.  15)  kept  at  bay  the  otherwise  irresistible  foe"  [Lange].  III.  Divine
providence  is  retributive.  It  is  a  defence  to  Israel,  and  a  punishment  to  others.
Damascus  was  the  rest;  the  region  on  which  God's  anger  settled.  He  who  chastises
his  people  will  not  fail  to  visit  other  men's  sins.  Love  seems  hidden  at  times,  and
it  may  be  difficult  to  see  on  which  side  favour  lies;  but  the  disproportion  will  not
continue  long.  A  distinction,  an  eternal  separation,  will  be  made  at  length.
"  Every  eye  shall  see  him  "  then,  and  all  reap  their  reward.  A  difference  will  be
made  "  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked,  between  him  that  serveth  God  and
him  that  serveth  him  not."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  1.  The  eyes  of  man,  tyc.  1.  Times  versal,  those  only  can  escape  who  trust
of  trouble  sent  to  direct  men's  eyes  to  him.  3.  The  punishment  upon  those
God.     2.  As  God's  providence  is  uni-     who  do  not  trust  him  will  be  heavy.


648  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARUH.  [chap.  ix.


Divine  wrath  is  sure  to  hit  its  mark,  and  midst   of  the  seas "  (Ezek.  xxviii.   2)  j

sink  those  on  whom  it  rests.  but  she  was  devoured  with  fire.     "  How

Vers.  2 — 4.  Yain  confidences.    1.  Re-  art  thou  destroyed,  which  wast  strong  in

pitted  wisdom,  which   is  not  "couDsel  the  sea "  (Ezek.  xxvi.  17).
against    the    Lord"    (Prov.   xxi.     30).         Yer.   4.     Mark  the  language.      Who

2.  Immense  wealth,  which  "profits  not  was  to   "smite  her  power  in   the  sea,

in   the  day  of   wrath "   (Prov.   xi.    4).  burn  her  with  fire,  and  cast  her  out  1 "

"  Misery  assails  riches,  as  lightning  does  Alexander     the    Great,    says    history  ;

the  highest  towers "  [Burton].     3.   Out-  Jehovah,  says  Divine  revelation.     Both

loard   fortifications.     High  walls    and  are  true.     Only  revelation  keeps  us  in

deep  seas,  instruments  of   power,  may  mind   that  "men   are  God's  band" — a

be  elements   of  destruction.     God   can  truth  which  profane  history  is  too  prone

destroy  the  wisest,  the  wealthiest,  and  to  overlook  and  forget;  as  indeed  we

the  strongest  nation.     Tyre  said  in  her  ourselves  —  all    of    us  —  naturally  are

pride,  "  I  sit  in  the  seat  of  God,  in  the  [  Wardlaw\

HOMILETIGS.
Judgments  upon  Philistia. — Verses  5 — 7.

The  prophet  now  turns  to  the  inveterate  enemies  of  Israel,  and  mentions  four
capitals  of  the  Philistines.  Their  country  lay  between  Tyre  (or  Phoenicia)  and
Egypt,  the  south-east  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea.  What  is  said  of  one  may  be  said
of  all,  and  the  fate  of  the  different  cities  corresponds  with  the  prediction.

I.  The  cities  lost  their  rulers.  "The  king  shall  perish  from  Gaza."  The
Persians  set  up  petty  kings  as  vassals  to  their  superior  control.  Notwithstanding
two  months'  siege,  Gaza  was  taken,  its  inhabitants  sold,  and  put  to  death.  Betis,
its  brave  king,  was  most  cruelly  fastened  to  the  chariot  of  the  conqueror,  and
dragged  through  the  streets.  II.  The  cities  were  depopulated.  "A  foreigner
shall  sit  as  ruler  in  Ashdod."  They  lost  their  native  people,  and  were  filled  with
a  mongrel  breed.  At  first  a  stranger  was  nominated  to  govern  in  Ashdod;  but
eventually  "  the  inhabitant  shall  be  cut  off  from  Ashdod."  Ashkelon,  once  noted
for  its  figs  and  fertility,  though  dismantled  and  re-fortified  several  times,  is  now
surrounded  with  desolate  ruins  of  former  grandeur.  III.  The  cities  were  bereft
of  their  religion.  They  shall  no  longer  glut  themselves  with  bloodsheddings.
The  prey  of  their  gods  was  taken  from  their  mouths.  "  I  will  take  away  his  blood
out  of  his  mouth,  and  his  abominations  from  between  his  teeth."  There  was  not
mere  suspension  but  total  abolition  of  their  idolatry.  They  lost  their  religion  and
their  nationality,  and  were  incorporated  with  the  Jews.  IV.  The  cities  were
desolated.  "  I  will  cut  off  the  pride  of  the  Philistines."  Their  hopes  were  "  cut
off;"  for  Tyre  did  not  check  Alexander's  triumphant  march.  Their  fortifications
were  "cut  off,"  and  levelled  to  the  ground.  Everything  in  which  they  prided
themselves,  strength,  situation,  wealth,  and  nationality,  were  "  cut  off."  The  day
of  wrath  came,  and  all  was  swept  like  chaff  before  the  whirlwind.  The  desolate
ruins  now  declare  that  God  is  a  consuming  fire.  "  For  Gaza  shall  be  forsaken,  and
Ashkelon  a  desolation;  they  shall  drive  out  Ashdod  at  the  noon-day,  and  Ekron
shall  be  rooted  up  "  (Zeph.  ii.  4).

A  Converted  Eemnant  op  Philistia. — Verse  7.

Just  as  God  left  a  remnant  for  himself  in  Israel  when  judgment  fell  upon  them,
so  a  remnant  shall  be  left  for  God  in  Philistia.  "  But  he  that  remaineth,  even  he,
shall  be  for  our  God."

I.  The  remnant  was  preserved  from  destruction.     Some  remained  after  judg-


ohap.  E£.]  EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  ZECHAEIAH.  649


ments  had  swept  the  land,  and  were  converted  to  God.  Monuments  of  grace  and
mercy  set  apart  for  him.  From  all  nations  God  will  gather  his  people.  Nothing
shall  be  a  barrier  to  acceptance  with  him.  "  The  son  of  the  stranger  that  hath
joined  himself  to  the  Lord "  (Isa.  lvi.  3).  II.  The  remnant  was  incorporated
with.  Israel.  There  would  be  no  distinction  between  the  Israelite  and  the
Philistine.  1.  Dignity  would  be  conferred  upon  them.  Their  honour  and  eleva-
tion before  God  and  the  people  "shall  be  as  a  governor  in  Judah."  2.  Equal
privileges  would  be  conferred  upon  them.  "  And  Ekron  as  a  Jebusite."  Jebusites
were  incorporated  with  Jews,  and  enjoyed  equal  honours  and  rights  (2  Sam.  xxiv.
16).  In  Christ  Jesus  there  is  no  distinction  of  race  nor  sect.  All  are  one  in  him,
and  alike  welcome  to  him.  The  proselytes  under  the  Maccabean  dynasty,  were
only  a  partial  fulfilment  of  the  text.  Heathens  shall  yet  be  converted,  and  be
joined  to  God's  people.  "  The  strangers  shall  be  joined  with  them,  and  they  shall
cleave  to  the  house  of  Jacob  "  (cf.  Isa.  xiv.  1 ;  lvi.  8).

The  Divine  Encampment. —  Verses  8,  9.

While  neighbouring  nations  are  destroyed,  a  promise  of  Divine  protection  is
made  to  the  Jews.  Their  nationality  would  be  preserved,  and  all  their  sufferings
would  turn  out  for  good.  For  this  they  were  indebted  to  God,  who  encamped
about  them,  and  watched  over  them.

I.  The  Christian  Church  is  surrounded  by  enemies.  She  is  in  the  battle-
field, and  at  war  with  all  ungodliness.  Enemies  seek  to  oppress  and  subdue  her —
pass  by  and  return.  There  is  marching  and  counter-marching,  with  a  design  to
attack.  Powers  of  darkness  invade  our  spheres  of  action,  and  encamp  within  us.
In  this  moral  campaign  the  fight  is  indispensable,  holy,  and  severe.  "  The  good
fight  of  faith."  II.  The  Christian  Church  is  defended  by  Grod.  "  I  will  encamp
about  mine  house."  It  is  not  a  mere  visit,  but  an  encampment,  a  dwelling  or
settlement.  1.  God  watches  over  her.  "Now  have  I  seen  with  mine  eyes."  Some
think  that  he  does  not  see  at  all,  or  only  looks  when  he  interferes.  But  he  ever
beholds  the  insolence  of  the  enemy,  and  the  sufferings  of  his  people — will  judge
the  one  and  avenge  the  other.  "  Awake  to  help  me,  and  behold."  2.  God  delivers
her.  "  No  oppressor  shall  pass  through  them  any  more."  Alexander  punished  the
Samaritans,  but  favoured  the  Jews.  No  foreigners  invaded  the  land  before  the
advent  of  Messiah,  as  Assyrians  and  Chaldeans  had  done  of  old.  God  guarded
them,  like  "the  chariots  of  fire  and  horses  of  fire  round  about  Elisha."  The
power  and  goodness  of  God  are  pledged  for  the  triumph  and  salvation  of  his
Church.  On  every  side  the  watch  is  kept  with  sleepless  eyes.  None  can  resist
the  Captain  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts.  "  The  Angel  of  the  Lord  encampeth  round
about  them  that  fear  him,  and  delivereth  them."  III.  The  Christian  Church
should  rejoice  in  this  defence.  To  show  the  magnitude  and  the  consequences  of
this  salvation,  Zionis  called  upon  to  "rejoice"  and  "shout"  for  joy  in  the  prospect
before  her  (ver.  9).  If  the  presence  of  Alexander,  Caesar,  or  Wellington,  created
joy  in  the  camp;  what  confidence  should  the  presence  of  God  inspire !  Napoleon's
oversight  was  remarkable,  Cromwell's  interest  in  his  men  was  great ;  but  God  says,
"Rejoice  greatly."  Cowardice  in  God's  presence  is  doubly  criminal.  "Cowards
falter,"  said  Queen  Elizabeth,  "  but  danger  is  often  overcome  by  those  who  nobly
dare."     "Fear  not,  daughter  of  Sion"  (John  xii.  15).

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Yer.    7.     lie  that  remaineth.      The  longer   an   enemy,   or    a   stranger   and

elect  remnant.     1.  From  whom  chosen,  foreigner,  but  a  fellow-citizen  with  the

2.    To   what   promoted.      Ekron   as  a  saints,  and  of  the  household  of  God.

Jebusite,  as  a  denizen  of  Jerusalem;  no  Two  things  in  this  promise.     1.  It  is  a


WO  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [chap,  rx.


great  thing  to  be  a  Jebusite.  One  of  desperate  his  own  case — nor  despond
the  highest  of  all  privileges  to  "  come  to  with  regard  to  any  of  our  fellow-
Mount  Zion,  the  city  of  the  living  God."  creatures.  God  is  able  of  these  stones  to
What  a  governor  have  these  citizens !  raise  up  children  unto  Abraham  [Jay].
What  a  charter  have  they  !  What  can  Yer.  8.  The  house  of  Jehovah.  The
equal  their  safety,  liberty,  and  defence  ]  workmanship,  the  residence,  and  the
— their  commerce,  wealth,  happiness,  property  of  God.  The  camp  of  God,
and  peace1?  Their  joy  is  unspeakable,  the  deliverance  of  the  good.  "Seen
and  full  of  glory.  2.  Jebusites  may  be  with  mine  eyes."  With  God,  compassion
derived  from  Ekronites.  The  thing  has  is  so  intrinsic  an  attribute,  that  he  is
been  done ;  and  most  unlikely  charac-  pictured  as  looking  away  when  he  does
ters  have  furnished  pious  converts  —  not  put  it  forth.  With  God,  to  behold
Manasseh,  the  dying  thief,  and  the  is  to  help  [Pusey],  Hence  God  sees
murderers  of  Jesus,  prove  this.  What  with  approval  and  tender  consideration
surpassed  the  guilt  and  depravity  of  the  — with  a  design  to  help  his  people,  and
Corinthians'?  What  says  Paul  of  his  punish  their  foes.  He  is  an  observant
own  conversion  1  What  triumphs  of  God — eyes  and  ears  are  set  upon  men —
the  riches,  freeness,  and  power  of  Divine  "  in  every  place  beholding  the  evil  and
grace !      Let     none    despair,    however  the  good."

HOMILETICS.
The  Peaceful  King  and  his  Glorious  Reign. —  Verses  9,  10.

From  the  Grecian  conqueror,  and  the  temporal  protection  which  Jehovah  would
accord  to  his  people,  the  prophet  abruptly  (by  the  prophetic  law  of  suggestion,
Fausset),  and  in  the  most  sublime  and  animated  strain,  calls  the  attention  of  the
Jews  to  a  Royal  Personage  of  a  very  different  character,  the  Messiah,  meek  and
righteous,  the  Prince  and  pattern  of  peace,  and  the  author  of  spiritual  salvation  to
all  his  subjects.  His  advent  was  to  be  accompanied  by  such  glorious  results  that
it  was  to  be  hailed  with  the  most  joyful  anticipation  \Hend\

I.  The  character  of  the  King1.  The  features  refer  to  his  personal  and  official
character.  1.  He  is  a  righteous  ruler.  "  He  is  just."  Just  himself,  and  the
means  of  justifying  others  before  God.  In  character,  principle,  and  practice,  he  is
a  righteous  King.  His  administrations  in  providence  and  grace  are  conducted  by
laws  of  pure  and  unbending  righteousness.  Truth  and  uprightness  are  fixed  on
his  throne.  aJust  and  true  are  thy  ways,  thou  King  of  Saints."  2.  He  is  a
benevolent  ruler.  "  Having  salvation."  Take  these  words  actively  or  passively,  he
had  power  over  death  and  the  grave.  He  finished  his  work,  rose  to  the  right  hand
of  God,  and  bestows  gifts  upon  men.  The  design  of  his  death  was  to  honour  God,
and  render  salvation  consistent  with  the  claims  of  righteousness,  that  he  might  be
"a  just  God  and  a  Saviour"  (cf.  Rom.  iii.  26).  He  bestows  salvation  in  its
beginning  here,  and  in  its  results  hereafter.  "  The  Son  of  Man  is  not  come  to
destroy  men's  lives,  but  to  save  them."  3.  He  is  a  lowly  ruler.  "  Lowly,  and
riding  upon  an  ass."  He  had  no  war-horse  richly  caparisoned,  and  tossing  his
arched  neck — no  imperial  chariot,  like  Alexander.  He  was  not  cruel  like  Nero,
nor  proud  like  Herod,  in  disposition.  He  was  lowly  in  his  intercourse  and
triumphs.  He  linked  greatness  with  humility,  performed  menial  service  to  his
disciples,  and  set  himself  as  an  example  to  all  men.  "Learn  of  me;  for  I  am  meek,
and  lowly  in  heart."

"  Gentleness  !  more  powerful  than  Hercules"  [Catherine  JJT.].

II.  The  nature  of  his  kingdom.  It  is  not  that  of  a  worldly  conqueror,  nor  is  it
confined  to  Jewish  lands.  It  is  peaceful,  universal,  and  perpetual.  I.  It  is  a
peaceful  kingdom.     The  symbol  would  remind  the  Jews  of  the  prediction  concern-


OHAP.  IX.J  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  661


ing  "  The  Prince  of  Peace  "  (Isa.  ix.  6).  No  wars  nor  bloodshed  were  to  disturb
his  reign.  "  Peace  hath  its  victories  no  less  renowned  than  war."  Notice — That
he  was  not  to  teach  peace,  nor  command  it ;  but  to  accomplish  by  a  word,  what
earthly  kings  cannot  do  by  force.  "He  shall  speak  peace."  He  announces
reconciliation  to  Jew  and  Gentile,  and  in  his  Word  proclaims,  '■  Peace,  peace  to  him
that  is  far  off,  and  to  him  that  is  near."  2.  It  is  a  universal  kingdom.  It  is  more
extensive  than  the  kingdom  of  Macedon,  greater  than  that  of  "  the  Emperor  of  All
the  Eussias."  As  Solomon  ruled  the  land  of  promise,  and  left  no  unconqu^red
spot;  so  shall  the  Son  of  David  reign  "from  sea  to  sea — from  the  Atlantic  to  the
Pacific" — from  the  river  "unto  the  ends  of  the  earth."  His  subjects  gathered
from  "all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and  people,"  no  man  can  number.  "Yea,  all
kings  shall  fall  down  before  him;  all  nations  shall  serve  him."  3.  It  is  a  perpetual
kingdom.  Solomon's  reign  came  to  an  end,  and  Alexander's  empire  was  divided
by  his  successors  ;  but  the  throne  of  Christ  shall  endure  for  ever.  "  Son  culte  se
rajeunira  sans  cesse,"  wrote  Renan.  Suns  may  set,  and  moons  may  fade,  but
"  His  name  shall  endure  for  ever  :  his  name  shall  be  continued  as  long  as  the  sun:
and  men  shall  be  blessed  in  him :  all  nations  shall  call  him  blessed."  III.  The
blessings  of  his  reign.  "Rejoice  greatly."  1.  Great  joy.  The  prophet,  under
the  impulse  of  inspiration,  invites  the  people  to  hail  the  coming  of  Messiah,  in
terms  of  exulting  joy.  "  Shout,  0  daughter  of  Jerusalem  ! "  It  is  not  "  a  reign  of
terror,"  but  of  happiness  and  joy.  "  I  will  rejoice  in  Jerusalem,  and  joy  in  my
people  :  and  the  voice  of  weeping  shall  be  no  more  heard  in  her,  nor  the  voice  of
crying."  2.  Perfect  security.  Freedom  from  the  power  and  corruption  of  sin  to
the  believer,  protection  and  prosperity  to  all  nations,  are  offered  by  his  Word.  He
is  King  both  of  righteousness  and  peace.  Many  usurp  the  throne,  league  with
craft,  and  rule  in  tyranny  and  oppression.  Hence  kings  are  dethroned,  kingdoms
short-lived,  and  subjects  insecure.  Happy  and  safe  are  his  people.  "  He  shall
judge  the  poor  of  the  people,  he  shall  save  the  children  of  the  needy,  and  shall
break  in  pieces  the  oppressor."

Deliverance  from  the  Pit. — Verse  11.

These  words  may  be  an  invitation  to  Jewish  exiles  to  return  from  the  bondage
of  Egypt  and  Greece.  But  they  relate  to  the  spiritual  conquests  of  the  Messiah,
and  are  the  pledge  of  Jehovah  to  him,  that  his  people  (thy  prisoners)  shall  be
delivered  from  distress,  exult  in  freedom,  and  through  the  blood  of  tfhe  covenant
anticipate  the  blessings  of  the  future.

I.  The  moral  condition.  Prisoners  were  confined  in  dungeons  or  pits  dug  for
the  purpose.  Jeremiah  was  left  to  sink  in  the  mire,  and  perish  from  thirst  in  the
pit  (xxxviii.  6).  The  pit  indicates — 1.  Deep  distress.  "Wherein  is  no  water."
Men  are  restless  and  dissatisfied — distressed  by  sin  and  the  world,  a  broken  law,
and  an  accusing  conscience.  Estrangement  from  God  brings  anguish  of  soul.
"What  exile  from  himself  can  flee]"  asks  Byron.  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am  !
who  shall  deliver  me  ? "  2.  Great  darkness.  Prisoners  sit  in  darkness  as  well  as  in
distress.  The  spiritual  light  of  this  world  is  darkness.  The  wisest  only  grope  in
uncertainty.  Sinners  walk  in  darkness,  and  live  under  the  powers  of  darkness.
Heaven  above  is  shrouded  in  gloom,  round  about  and  within  them  dwells  no  light,
and  before  them  hangs  the  shadow  of  death  (cf.  Ps.  cvii.  10).  The  Sun  of
Righteousness  never  penetrates  their  hearts.  Their  condition  is  like  an  Eastern
sepulchre — "a  land  of  darkness,  as  darkness  itself,  without  any  order"  (Job  x.  22).
3.  Utter  helplessness.  Neither  Joseph  nor  Jeremiah  could  get  out  of  the  pit.
Captives  in  a  dungeon  cannot  escape.  Cursed  by  the  law,  and  condemned  before
God,  immured  in  darkness  and  degradation,  men  are  ready  to  perish.  "  God  hath
concluded  (shut  up  as  in  a  prison)  them  all  (all  mankind)  in  unbelief,  the  consequence


652  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [chap.  ix.


of  disobedience,  that  he  might  have  mercy  upon  all "  (Eom.  ii.  32).  II.  The  price
of  deliverance  from  the  pit.  "  By  the  blood  of  the  covenant."  1.  A  covenant  of
blood.  The  Jews  were  delivered  through  the  covenant  made  at  Sinai,  and  sealed
with  blood.  In  redemption  there  is  no  remission  of  sins  without  shedding  of
blood.  But  "  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  "  could  not  take  away  sin.  Ancient
sacrifices  were  mere  shadows,  had  to  be  repeated,  and  were  inefficient.  The  blood
of  man  is  not  required,  and  will  not  avail.  "  None  of  them  by  any  means  can
redeem  his  brother,  nor  give  to  God  a  ransom  for  him."  Christ  alone  can  deliver
us.  "  In  whom  we  have  redemption  through  his  blood."  2.  A  covenant  without
change.  The  price  paid  will  not  be  required  again.  It  avails  for  this  and  every
age.  Father  and  Son  have  taken  solemn  oaths,  and  sealed  it  by  sacrifice.  Nature's
covenant  abides  firm  as  heaven  and  earth.  The  Jewish  covenant  was  not  disan-
nulled by  the  sins  of  the  people.  God's  purpose  in  Christ  shall  be  realized.  "  For
thee  also"  thy  prisoners  shall  be  delivered.  The  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are
without  repentance.  They  are  incapable  of  being  regretted,  revoked,  or  changed
(cf.  Vaughan,  Acts  xi.  29).  "  Behold  the  blood  of  the  covenant  which  the  Lord
hath  made  with  you,  concerning  all  these  words."  III.  The  method  of  deliverance
from  the  pit.  "  I  have  sent  forth."  A  beautiful  expression,  indicating — 1.  Mighty
power.  Nothing  but  God's  power  can  lift  us  up  out  of  the  horrible  pit  and  miry
clay,  set  our  feet  upon  a  rock,  and  establish  our  goings.  2.  Wonderful  grace.  "  I
have  sent  forth."  God  might  have  left  us  in  the  pit;  but  he  is  gracious,  and  "  saith,
Deliver  him  from  going  down  to  the  pit,  I  have  found  a  ransom."  3.  Perfect
liberty.  Not  only  lifted  out,  but  "  sent  forth  "  without  fear  or  foe,  like  Peter  from
prison.  "  That  we  being  delivered  out  of  the  hand  of  our  enemies,  might  serve
him  without  fear."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.    9.     Here    we    have  —  1.     The    need,  and  a  renewed  supply  answerable
Divine    in   the  form   of    the    human,     to  all  their  wants,  cares,   services,  and

2.  The  majestic  in  the  form  of  the  mean,     conflicts  [John  Newton].

The     dignity    is    royal.       ''Thy    king         Notice— 1.  The  Great  King.    2.   The

cometh."    Eoyalty  surpassing  all  others,  wonderful    kingdom.      3.    The    strange

3.  The  victorious  by  means  of  the  moral,  way  in  which  he  comes  to  possess  it.
A  king,  but  not  the  kind  the  Jews  "Riding  upon  an  ass,"  &c.  Majesty
expected.  His  sceptre  from  heaven,  veiled  in  meekness,  j  ustice  blended  with
and  his  glory  gained  through  suffering,  mercy,  drawing  the  attention,  and  re-
He  had  to  borrow  the  colt,  and  who  ceiving  the  homage,  of  multitudes.  4.
were  his  guards  and  attendants  in  his  The  method  by  which  he  spreads  it.  "  I
entrance  in  Jerusalem  1  (cf.  Matt.   xxi.  will  cut  off  the  chariot,"  &c.

5  :  John  xii.  15).     In  the  whole  history  Ver.  11.     The  sinner's  condition  by

of  Jesus  we  have  a  wonderful  combina-  nature,  and  his  rescue  by  grace.     The

tion  of  humiliation  and  grandeur.  pit  dark,  dismal,  and  deep.     "  The  pit

Vers.    9,    10.     Messiah    is   King   of  of  corruption,"  or  putrefaction  and  filth

Zion.     Happy  the  subjects  who  dwell  (Isa.  xxxviii.  17).     The  release,  conde-

under  his  shadow.     He  rules  them,  not  scending,  reaching   to    the   depth ;   and

with  a  rod  of  iron  by  which  he  bruises  free,  "  sent  forth."     "  They  have  cut  off

and  breaks  the  power  of  his  enemies,  my   life   in    the   dungeon,   and    cast   a

but  with  his  golden  sceptre  of  love.    He  stone   upon   me.       I    called   upon    thy

reigns  by  his  own  right,  and  by  their  name,  0  Lord;  out  of  the  low  dungeon

full   and   free  consent  in  their  hearts,  thou  hast  heard  my  voice."     Covenant.

He  reigns  upon  a  throne  of  grace,  to  The   covenant   love    of    God,    and   his

which  they  at  all  times  have  access,  and  faithful  promise,  sealed  with  blood,  are

from  whence  they  receive  the  pardon  of  the   hope   of   the   Church    in   time   of

all  their  sins,  grace  to  help  in  time  of  trouble   [Lange].      The   word    suggests


chap,  ix.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECEARIJH.  653


thoughts  of  grace,  privilege,  and  security,  present  in  the  form  of  a  compact,  with

not   attained   in   any  other  way.     Our  stipulations   (and  sometimes  when  the

trust  for  this  world  and  the  next,  not  stipulations  were  all  on  one  side,  Gen.

upon  the  voices  of  nature  or  conclusions  ix.  9),  and  not  only  so,  but  to  confirm

of  reason,  but  upon  the  promise  of  God  it  by  sacrifice  \Lange\
— a  promise  which  he  hath   chosen  to

HOMILETICS.
Prisoners  op  Hope.  —  Verses  11,  12.

"With  the  promise  of  release  is  connected  the  duty  of  the  captives  to  embrace  the
opportunity  of  returning  to  their  own  land,  where  they  would  enjoy  the  protection
and  favour  of  Jehovah.

I.  There  is  no  imprisonment  without  hope.  "Prisoners  of  hope."  1.  To
saints  in  trouble.  In  trials  and  straits  they  must  maintain  hope.  2.  To  sinners
in  wickedness.  A  stronghold  is  provided  for  all;  secure  from  the  stroke  of  offended
justice,  and  from  the  attack  of  the  foe.  "  No  case  is  desperate.  None  should
despair  or  say,  "  Our  hope  is  lost."  "I  would  not  despair  unless  I  knew  the
irrevocable  decree  was  passed,  saw  my  misfortune  in  the  book  of  fate,  and  signed
and  sealed  by  necessity "  [J.  Collier]  II.  There  are  grounds  for  hope  in  the
provisions  of  Divine  mercy.  1.  In  the  atonement  of  Christ.  In  the  covenant
blood  we  have  every  hindrance  removed,  and  every  means  provided  for  the  salva-
tion of  man.  2.  In  the  promise  of  Scripture.  "  I  will  render  double  unto  thee."
Grace  to  convert  and  strengthen,  the  Holy  Spirit  to  teach  and  direct,  are  offered.
Blessings  double  in  themselves,  and  as  pledges  of  others.  3.  In  the  stronghold
provided.  The  height  (Ps.  xviii.  30)  is  prepared,  the  rock  contrasting  with  the
pit.  The  Rock  of  our  Salvation  immovable  and  inaccessible.  Low  defences  are
soon  scaled,  and  weak  ones  soon  destroyed.  But  this  refuge  is  eternally  secure.  Its
sanctity  none  can  invade,  its  power  none  destroy.  III.  Men  are  urged  to  avail
themselves  of  these  provisions.  Hope  should  inspire  our  hearts  in  danger,  and
prompt  us  to  get  out  of  it.  1.  They  are  commanded  to  escape.  "  Turn  ye  to  the
stronghold."  Divine  authority  and  affection  are  set  forth  in  the  prediction.
2.  Escape  shoidd  be  made  immediately.  "  Even  to-day."  The  Jews  were  not  to
wait  for  future  opportunity,  when  all  might  return  together.  While  there  was
hope,  individually  they  must  hasten,  and  make  no  delay.  To-morrow  may  be  too
late.  To  see  the  light  of  day  fade  away  is  sad,  but  much  worse  to  lose  hope  for
eternity.     Flee  "  for  refuge  to  lay  hold  upon  the  hope  set  before  you."

Ye  prisoners  of  hope.  This  title  is  not  a  fanciful  one.  To  the  Jew  it  had  a
triple  significance.  1.  He  was  under  the  yoke  of  a  foreign  despot,  and  longed  to
regain  his  freedom.  2.  He  was  under  the  yoke  of  an  unfulfilled  promise,  and
yearned  for  the  "  day  star  to  arise."  3.  He  was  under  the  the  yoke  of  the  unrealized
prophecies  concerning  the  glory  of  the  Messiah's  kingdom,  and  the  eternal  felicity
of  his  followers.   The  words  of  the  text  are  the  true  designation  of  every  Christian.

I.  We  are  prisoners  to  an  unredeemed  body  (cf.  Rom.  viii.  23).  Observe —
1.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  the  body  is  already  redeemed.  2.  There  is  another
sense  in  ivhich  our  bodies  are  not  redeemed,  (a)  They  are  not  yet  free  from
manifold  infirmities.  (6)  Not  yet  redeemed  from  sensuous  appetites,  (c)  Not  yet
redeemed  from  the  dominion  of  death.  3.  Hope  anticipates  the  possession  of  an
immortal  body,  (a)  From  which  every  element  of  weakness  and  infirmity  is
excluded,  (b)  In  which  carnal  appetites  shall  have  no  place,  (c)  Which  shall  be
no  more  subject  to  death.  II.  We  are  prisoners  to  a  limited  and  superficial
knowledge.  "  Now  I  know  in  part " — there  is  bondage.  "  Then  shall  I  know
even  as  I  am  known  " — there  is  freedom.  1.  Our  knowledge  touches  not  the  essence,
but  only  the  phenomena.     2.  Reaches  men  not  as  they  are,  only  as  they  appear


654  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [chap.  ix.

3.  Is  limited  by  the  brevity  of  life,  and  the  conditions  of  its  existence.  4.  Hope
anticipates  the  solution  of  the  dark  enigma  of  human  life.  III.  We  are  prisoners
to  a  circumscribed  Christian  fellowship.  The  great  family  of  God  is  sadly-
dismembered.  1.  Doctrinal  divergence.  2.  Suspicion,  the  offspring  of  imperfect
knowledge.  3.  Social  status  is  a  barrier  to  fellowship.  4.  Distance  and  death
contribute  to  limit  the  measure  of  fellowship.  5.  Hope  anticipates  the  universal
and  perfect  fellowship  of  saints,  (a)  This  will  include  all  ages  ;  (b)  all  climes  ;  (c)
all  classes  and  creeds.  IV.  We  are  prisoners  to  an  imperfect  vision  of  Christ.
"  We  see  through  a  glass  darkly,"  and  through  "a  mirror  in  an  enigma"  [Lange].
Yet  note — 1.  Christ  is  really  apprehended  by  faith  even  here.  2.  This  vision  is
a  test,  a  dim  one.  3.  Human  nature  in  its  present  state  is  not  capable  of  a  more
open  vision.  4.  Hope  anticipates  not  only  an  immediate  vision  of  Christ,  but  a
nature  capable  of  beholding  it.  Lessons.  1.  This  hope  inspires  the  heavenward
pilgrim — (a)  with  patience  "  to  endure  as  seeing  him,"  &c.  (b)  With  courage  "  to
war  a  good  warfare."  2.  This  hope  was  a  sanctifying  virtue.  3.  This  hope
amounts  to  an  assurance  [The  Homiletic  Quarterly].

The  Double  Eecompense  to  God's  People. — Verses  13 — 15.

The  abundance  of  the  blessings  promised  after  release  is  expressed  by  the  word
double,  which  conveys  the  idea  of  compensation,  a  measure  of  glory  outweighing
all  former  sufferings.     "  For  your  shame  ye  shall  have  double."

I.  Victory  over  the  world  will  be  granted.  "The  sons  of  Javan  are  the
Greeks,  as  the  world-power,  the  Grseco-Macedonian  monarchy  (cf.  Dan.  viii.  28),
against  which  the  Lord  will  make  his  people  into  a  hero's  sword  "  [Keil].  This
was  fulfilled  in  some  measure  in  the  wars  of  the  Maccabees  and  Seleucidas,  but
must  not  be  confined  to  that  period.  The  Gospel  is  destined  to  overthrow  the
wisdom  of  the  Greeks,  and  subdue  the  world  to  Christ.  1.  Victory  by  human
agency.  Ephraim  and  Judah  have  to  tight.  Apostles  and  ministers  have  to
preach.  "Heaven  made  us  agents,  free  to  good  or  ill"  [Dryden].  2.  Victory  by
God's  blessing  upon  human  agency.  "  I  have  been  raised  up,"  &c.  These  words
found  an  echo  in  Judas  Maccabseus,  when  the  company  with  him  asked,  "  How
shall  we  be  able,  being  so  few,  to  fight  against  so  great  a  multitude  and  so  strong,
seeing  that  we  are  ready  to  faint  with  fasting  1 "  "  It  is  no  hard  matter,"  answered
Judas,  "  for  many  to  be  shut  up  in  the  hands  of  a  few ;  and  with  the  God  of
heaven  it  is  all  one,  to  deliver  with  a  great  multitude,  or  a  small  company  "
(1  Mace.  iii.  16 — 19  :  cf.  2  Chron.  xiv.  8 — 11).  II.  The  special  presence  of  God
will  be  displayed.  "The  Lord  shall  be  seen  over  them,"  conspicuously  displaying
his  power  for  them.  1.  As  a  shield  to  defend  them.  "The  Lord  of  Hosts  shall
defend  them,"  in  the  midst  of  enemies  numerous,  powerful,  and  bitter.  He
delivered  "  by  providential  arrangements,  by  earthquakes,  by  angelic  messengers,
by  direct  punitive  and  deadly  judgments.  He  released  them,  to  the  amazement
and  confusion  of  their  enemies,  from  the  closest  and  most  vigilant  confinement"
[Wardlaw].  2.  As  a  conqueror  to  help  them.  Taking  the  sling-stones  as  a  figure
of  the  enemy  [Keil],  they  were  trampled  beneath  the  feet  of  the  Jews.  "The  souls
of  thine  enemies,  them  shall  he  sling  out,  as  out  of  the  middle  of  a  sling"  (1  Sam.
xxv.  29).  A  phrase  denoting  security  from  the  assaults  of  the  enemy  under  the
special  protection  of  God.  3.  As  a  shepherd  to  provide  for  them.  "  The  Lord
their  God  shall  save  them  in  that  day  as  the  flock  of  his  people"  (ver."  16).  Not
only  victory,  but  lasting  peace.  Constant  care  and  tenderness  will  be  exercised
over  his  people  (Ps.  xxiii.).  III.  Great  honours  will  be  conferred  upon  them.
Job's  latter  end  was  better  than  the  beginning.  The  dignity  of  God's  people  shall
be  double  their  shame.  1.  Moral  beauty.  "  How  great  his  beauty  !"  The  beauty
Christ  bestows  upon  his  people  in  character  and  conduct  is  more  than  human;  it
is  Christ's  own  beauty.     "  Thou  art  fairer  than  the  children  of  men."


chap,  ix.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  655


"  Old  friends  shall  lovelier  be,
As  more  of  heaven  in  each  we  see  "  [Christian  Year].

2.  Unwonted  prosperity.  Young  men  shall  be  made  cheerful,  and  no  longer  suffer
scarcity.  Maidens,  ready  to  faint  from  hunger  and  thirst;  shall  have  plenty  of  new
wine.  This  abundance  of  the  fruits  of  earth  typifies  the  recompense  to  God's
people.  They  will  be  strengthened,  and  made  glad ;  be  led  to  admire  God's  free
love  and  favours,  and  to  commend  all  past  dealings  as  excellent  and  good.  "  For
how  great  is  his  goodness,  and  how  great  is  his  beauty  !  "

"  Beauty  armed  with  virtue  bows  the  soul,
With  a  commanding,  but  a  sweet,  control"  [Percival].

The  Mighty  Struggle  and  The  Glorious  Victory. — Verses  13 — 17.

I.  The  army  is  collected.  "The  Lord  God  shall  blow  the  trumpet."  The
terms  are  martial.  The  trumpet  blowing  naturally  represents  the  proclamation  of
the  Gospel  by  Divine  authority,  and  with  accompanying  Divine  power;  the  design
being  thus  the  gathering  of  outcast  sinners  to  Christ's  standard ;  and  thus  the
enlargement  of  his  spiritual  host,  and  the  increased  rapidity  of  his  conquests
[Wardlaw].  1.  The  foes.  " Against  thy  sons,  0  Greece."  2.  The  friends.
Judah  the  bow,  and  Ephraim  the  arrow.  3.  The  commander.  Jehovah  "seen
over  them,"  like  the  pillar  of  cloud  and  fire.  II.  The  conflict  is  described.  The
description  is  poetical.  1.  Terrible  as  a  storm.  "His  arrow  shall  go  forth  as  the
lightning''' — suddenly  and  irresistibly  (cf.  Ps.  xviii.  14).  "The  whirlwind  of  the
south  "  sweeps  everything  before  it.  No  power  in  earth  or  in  hell  can  resist  the
might  of  Divine  grace.  Thousands  will  yet  be  subdued.  2.  Furious  as  wild
beasts.  u  They  shall  devour,"  a  metaphor  from  beasts.  Like  devouring  lions,  they
would  eat  the  flesh  and  drink  the  blood  of  the  enemy.  "  Behold  a  people  like  the
lioness ;  it  rises  up,  and  like  the  lion  does  it  lift  itself  up  :  it  lies  not  down  till  it
devour  the  prey,  and  drink  the  blood  of  the  slain  "  (Num.  xxiii.  24).  III.  The
victory  is  gained.  The  result  is  not  uncertain.  "  Conquering  and  to  conquer."
1.  Victory  given  as  a  shepherd  to  his  flock.  "  God  shall  save  them  in  that  day  as
the  flock  of  his  sheep."  2.  Victory  recorded  in  the  crown  of  the  conqueror.
Precious  stones  or  gems  were  set  in  crowns,  and  the  elevation  of  the  crown
indicated  victory.  "  A  victory  is  twice  itself,  when  the  achiever  brings  home  full
numbers"  [Shahs.].  3.  Victory  celebrated  in  the  joy  of  the  conqueror.  The
general  idea  is  that  of  sacred  joy,  the  songs  and  shouts  of  victory,  inward  delight
and  exultation  of  spirit.     "  They  shall  drink,  and  make  a  noise  as  through  wine."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Vers.  11,  12.     Duty,  and  encourage-  was  fitted,  carried  conviction  to  the  con-

ments  to  perform  it ;  or,  the  stronghold  science,  and    quickening  power   to   the

— how  to  get  it,  and  the  blessings  of  its  heart.     By  killing  it  made  alive.     We

security  ;  or,  salvation  may  be  had.  This  are  reminded    of   the  language    of   Ps.

salvation  only  gained  by  effort.     "  Turn  xlv.  3 — 5  [  Wardlaw"].

ye,"  &c.  Yer.  16.   GodJs  people  glorified,   xfere

Ver.  12.     1.  Available  refuge.     "The  we  see  the  dignity  of  the  Lord's  people,

stronghold,"    impregnable,    secure,    and  They  are  "stones,"  precious  stones,  set

lasting.     2.  Access  to  it  free,  and  should  in  the  "crown"  of  the  King  of  kings,

be  immediate.  Here  is  also  their  exhibition :  these  stones

Ver.  14.     Arrows.     Strongly  express  of  a  crown  are  "lifted  up."     They  are

the  speed  and  the  resistless  power  of  his  not  to  be  concealed.     Here  is  also  their

converting  grace.     The  arrow  of  Divine  utility :  these  stones  are  to  be  lifted  up

truth,  with   which   the   Apostolic  bow  "  as   an   ensign    upon    the   land " — an


656


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.


[CHAP.  IX.


oriflamme  suspended  over  the  royal  tent;
designed  to  attract  followers  to  the  cause
in  which  he  is  engaged  [Jay].

Yer.  17.  How  great  his  goodness!
God's  free  love  (benevolence)  the  foun-
tain of  all  mercies.  1.  Great  in  the  gift
of  Christ.  2.  Great  in  the  conversion
of  sinners.  3.  Great  in  the  support  of
his  people.  How  great  were  the  sacrifices
which  Christ's  goodness  made !  How
great  are  the  gifts  which  his  goodness
bestows  !  How  great  the  extent  to  which
his  goodness  spreads  !  How  great  is  the
duration  of  his  goodness !  [Sacred
Garland].  But  it  is  not  the  goodness
of  God  alone  that  is  to  be  seen  in  the
Gospel.  "  How  great  is  his  beauty  /  "
The  loveliness  of  his  entire  character —


its  light ,  as  well  as  its  love — the  united
harmony  of  all  its  attributes  in  the
work  of  Christ!  We  are  not  truly
under  the  renewing  influence  of  the
Holy  Spirit,  if  it  is  only  his  goodness
that  we  admire.  The  faith  of  the  Gospel
imparts  a  spiritual  taste  for  "  the  beauty
of  holiness,"  as  well  as  of  love.  It
teaches  and  disposes  us  to  delight  in  all
that  God  is  [Wardlaw].  Hence,  great
his  beauty — 1.  In  himself.  "The
brightness  of  the  Father's  glory,"  &c.
"The  glory  of  the  only  begotten,"  &c.
He  is  beautiful  in  his  Divine  and  human
nature.  2.  In  his  people.  "The  king's
daughter  all  glorious."

"  All  human  beauties,  all  Divine,
In  my  Beloved  meet  and  shine."


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  IX.


Vers.  1 — 6.  The  foreground  of  this
prophecy  is  the  course  of  the  victories
of  Alexander,  which  circled  round  the
Holy  Land  without  hurting  it,  and
ended  in  the  overthrow  of  the  Persian
Empire.  The  surrender  of  Damascus
followed  first,  immediately  on  his  great
victory  at  the  Issus ;  then  Sidon  yielded
itself  and  received  its  ruler  from  the
conqueror.  Tyre  he  utterly  destroyed ;
Gaza,  we  know,  perished ;  he  passed
harmless  by  Jerusalem.  Samaria,  on  his
return  from  Egypt,  he  chastised.  History
gives  no  other  explanation  of  Zechariah's
prophecy  than  this  conquest  by  Alex-
ander :  that  conquest  agrees  minutely
with  the  prophecy.  No  other  event  in
history  does  [cf.  Pusey's  Lectures  on
Daniel].

Yer.  7.  The  happy  effect  of  this
humiliation  of  the  great  worldly  powers
of  Persia,  Syria,  and  Philistia,  was  this
— that  they  lost  their  confidence  in  their
own  false  deities,  and  were  prepared  to
receive  a  purer  faith.  The  prophet
foretells  this,  and  predicts  also,  that
there  will  be  a  faithful  remnant  among
those  nations,  which  will  turn  to  the
true  God ;  and  many  among  the  heathens
will  become  governors  in  Judah ;  many
who  were  once  Gentiles  will  become
preachers  and  missionaries  in  Christ's
Church.      Even  Ekron  itself   will  be-


come a  Jebusite,  a  dweller  in  Jerusalem,
the  Church  of  God  [Wordsworth].

Yer.  8.  Encamp.  On  every  side
the  watch  is  kept  by  warriors  of  sleep-
less eyes,  and  the  Captain  of  the  Host  is
one  whose  prowess  none  can  resist.  We
little  know  how  many  providential
deliverances  we  owe  to  those  unseen
hands  which  are  charged  to  bear  us  up,
lest  we  dash  our  foot  against  a  stone
[Spurgeon].

Yers.  9,  10.  Thy  king.  Christ  as  a
mere  man  was  great — great  in  intellect,
heart,  purpose,  action ;  as  a  Mediator,
supremely  great.  But  how  does  this
great  Being,  Prince  of  the  powers  of  the
earth,  enter  Jerusalem  1  In  a  triumphal
chariot? — on  a  stately,  prancing  steed,
accompanied  by  a  magnificent  cavalcade  1
No  !  On  an  ass.  The  more  truly  kingly
a  man  is,  the  less  he  cares  for  conven-
tional pageantry.  Your  great  men  have
never  cared  for  jewellery.  The  more
ornaments  are  coveted,  and  dress  is
studied,  the  more  mean  and  impoverished
the  soul.  Heart  of  oak  requires  neither
veneer  nor  varnish.  A  great  age  has
never  been  an  age  of  millinery  and  gold
rings.  The  kingly  soul  does  not  care
for  the  rose  or  the  crown  [Dr.  Thomas].

Yers.  11,  12.  Pit.  Some  of  the  pits
referred  to  in  the  Bible  were  prisons,
one  such  I  saw  at  Athens,  and  another


CHAP.  X.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.


657


at  Kome.  To  these  there  were  no
openings,  except  a  hole  at  the  top,
which  served  for  the  window  and  door.
The  "bottoms  of  these  pits  were  neces-
sarily in  a  filthy  and.  revolting  state,
and  sometimes  deep  in  mud.  "He
brought  me  up  also  out  of  an  horrible
pit,  out  of  the  miry  clay : "  one  of  these
filthy  prisons  being  in  the  Psalmist's
view;  in  Isa.  xxxviii.  17  called  "  the
pit  of  corruption,"  or  putrefaction  and
filth  [John  Gadsby],

Yers.  13 — 15.  Mighty  man.  It  is
held  that  valour  is  the  cheapest  virtue,
and  most  dignifies  the  haver  [Shaks. ].
When  a  man  goes  in  the  fulness  of  his
strength  upon  any  enterprise,  how  do
his  blood  and  spirits  triumph  before-
hand !  No  motion  of  hand  or  foot  is
without  a  sensible  delight.  The  strength
of  a  man's  spirit  is  unspeakably  more
than  that  of  the  outward  man ;  its
faculties  and  powers  more  refined  and
raised ;  and  hence  are  rational  or  intel-
lectual  exercises  and   operations   much


more  delightful  than  corporal  ones  can

be  [Howe].

Ver.  16.  Flock.  What  condescension,
for  the  Infinite  Lord  to  assume  the  office
and  character  of  a  Shepherd  towards  his
people!  It  should  be  the  subject  of
grateful  admiration  that  the  great  God
allows  himself  to  be  compared  to  any-
thing which  sets  forth  his  great  love
and  care  for  his  people.  No  man  has  a
right  to  consider  himself  the  Lord's
sheep,  unless  his  nature  has  been  re-
newed, for  the  Scriptural  description  of
unconverted  men  does  not  picture  them
as  sheep,  but  as  wolves  or  goats.  A
sheep  is  an  object  of  property,  not  a
wild  animal ;  its  owner  sets  great  store
by  it,  and  frequently  it  is  bought  with  a
great  price  [Spurgeon].

Ver.  17.     Goodness  and  beauty.

"  Oh,  he  is  good, — he  is  immensely  good,
Who  all  things  formed,  and  formed  them  all

for  man :
Who  marked  the  climates,  varied  every  zone,
Dispensing  all  his  blessings  for  the  best,
In  order  and  in  beauty  1 "  [Smart}.


CHAPTER  X.


Critical  Notes.]  Idol  worshippers  brought  their  judgments  now  ;  they  must  call  upon  Jehovah.
Ask]  He  will  give  rain :  i.  e.  all  temporal  and  spiritual  blessings.  Clouds]  Lightnings,  precursors
of  rain.  Showers]  Lit.  rain  of  heavy  rain  :  »'.  e.  plentiful  (Job  xxxvii.  6).  Grass]  for  cattle,  and
corn  for  man.  2.  Idols]  Lit.  the  teraphim,  household  and  oracular  gods,  thought  to  give  prosperity
(cf.  Gen.  xxxi.  19).  Diviners]  Soothsayers  brought  misery  tbrough  vain  and  deceitful  prophecy.
Therefore]  Because  they  trusted  idols  and  soothsayers.  They  went]  Lit.  to  break  up,  pull  up  the
pegs,  and  take  down  the  tent ;  hence  wander  into  exile.  Troubled]  Oppressed,  because  no
shepherd]  no  king,  to  defend  them.  3.  Punished]  Lit.  visited  the  goats]  in  evil,  but  his  flock]  for
good,  and  made  them  courageous  as  a  war-horse ;  a  horse  chosen  by  the  commander-in-chief  to  ride
at  the  head  of  his  army.  4.  Out]  Thrice  repeated,  for  emphasis.  Judah  no  more  subject  to
foreigners  ;  from  them  were  to  come  rulers  described  as  corner] -stones,  upon  which  the  building
firmly  rests  (Ps.  cviii.  22).  Nail]  The  large  ornamental  pin,  fixed  in  the  wall,  to  suspend  valuable
furniture  (Judg.  iv.  21  :  Isa.  xxii.  23).  The  battle-bow]  Military  force,  and  weapons  in  general.
5.]  For  such  heroic  conflict,  will  they  be  fitted  by  the  help  of  Jehovah,  that  the  enemy  will  be  put  to
shame  before  them.  The  riders  of  the  horses  are  mentioned  for  the  purpose  of  individualizing  the
enemy,  because  the  principal  strength  of  the  Asiatic  rulers  consisted  in  cavalry  (cf.  Dan.  ii.  40)
[Keil].  6.  Judah]  will  share  as  well  as  Ephraim.  Bring]  and  replace  them  happily  and  securely,
as  of  old.  7.  Ephraim]  addressed  in  remainder  of  chapter,  had  not  participated  much  in  restoration.
They,  like  Judah,  would  become  heroes.  Rejoice]  ».  e.  fight  like  a  mighty  man  exulting  in  joy  (cf.
Ps.  lxxviii.  65,  66).  Children]  should  see  the  joy,  which  would  be  lasting  and  complete.  8.  Hiss]
Whistle  as  bee-keepers  call  back  swarms  to  the  hive.  The  extraordinary  increase  of  Jews  after  this
is  a  familiar  fact  of  history  (cf.  Josephus'  Wars,  Bk.  iii.  ch.  iii.  §  2).  9.  Sow]  broadcast,  with  a
design  to  multiply  (llos.  ii.  25  :  Jer.  xxxi.  27).  Remember]  Return  to  right  mind  (cf.  Luke  xv.
17  :  Ps.  xxii.  27).  Live]  in  political  and  spiritual  life.  10.  Egypt]  the  house  of  bondage,  and
Assyria]  the  scene  of  captivity,  represent  all  lands  in  which  they  are  now  scattered.    Gilead  and

42


658  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ZECHARIAH.  [chap,  x,

Lebanon]  Their  old  dwellings  east  and  west  of  Jordan.  This  territory,  though  fertile  and  large,
should  not  be  able  to  support  them.  11.  The  sea]  personified,  shall  not  hinder  their  return.  God
will  march  at  their  head,  trample  down  all  its  proud  waves,  and  the  depths  shall  become  dry.
Assyria's  pride]  and  Egypt's  sceptre]  (rod  of  task-master),  shall  be  smitten.  12.  I]  God  will
strengthen  Ephraim.  They  will  walk]  in  his  name,  and  enjoy  his  protection ;  find  the  past  a  pledge
of  the  future,  and  see  the  Divine  perfections  more  illustrious  than  ever.

HOMILETICS.
God  the  Author  of  Spiritual  Blessings. —  Verses  1,  2.

At  the  close  of  the  preceding  chapter  God  had  promised  abundance  of  temporal
and  spiritual  good.  Here  directions  are  given  to  obtain  that  good.  Idolatry  had
brought  judgments,  but  Jehovah  will  pour  out  blessings  upon  them.

I.  All   spiritual  blessings   come  from  God.     Eain  is  the  symbol  of  God's
spiritual  gifts.     1.   The  idols  of  the  heathen  cannot  bestow  them.     The  gods  in  the
temple  and  the  deities  in  the  house  are  vanity  and  lies.     2.  The  laws  of  nature
cannot  bestow  them.  There  are  "diviners"  in  the  present  day  who  "have  told  false
dreams  " — who  have  forgotten  that  God  sits  in  the  heavens,  and  rules  the  clouds  ;
that  he  visits  the  earth  to  water  and  fructify  it.     There  is  neither  showers  nor
sunshine  in  the  natural  world  without  him — no  personal  prosperity,  progress,  and
fruit,  in  the  Divine  life  without  the  influence  of  his  Spirit.     Nor  can  any  portion
of  the  soil  of  the  world — "  the  desolate  heritages "  of  heathenism,  with  all  the
tillage  that  missionary  labour  can  bestow  upon  them,  be  rendered  productive  of  the
"fruits  of  righteousness,"  except  as  God  is  pleased  to  shed  down  the  same  gracious
influence — "  pouring  water  on  the  thirsty,  and  floods  on  the  dry  ground  "  [  Ward-
law].     "  Is  there  any  among  the  vanities  of  the  Gentiles  that  can  cause  rain's     Or
can  the  heavens  give  showers'?"     "  Thou  visitest  the  earth,"  &c.  (Ps.  lxv.  9 — 11).
II.  Prayer  is  the  appointed  means  for  securing  these  spiritual  blessings.
"Ask  ye  of  the  Lord."     Men  of   science  exalt  the  laws  of  nature,  and  despise
prayer.     Natural  philosophers  may  combine  and  direct  the  forces  of  nature,  but
God  does  not.     "  Without  a  disturbance  of  natural  law  quite  as  serious  as  the
stoppage  of  an  eclipse,  or  the  rolling  the  St.  Lawrence  up  the  Falls  of  Niagara,  no
act  of  humiliation,  individual  or  national,  could  call  one  shower  from  heaven "
[Tyndall].   But  the  prophet  directs  the  people  to  God,  when  the  heavens  withhold
their  dew,  and  assures  them  that  if  they  ask  they  shall  obtain.     "  The  Lord  shall
make  bright  clouds,"   &c.     1.  Blessings  in  rich   abundance.     "  And   give  them
showers  of  rain."  Enough  for  man  and  beast,  "  to  every  one  grass  in  the  field  " — to
every  one  that  asks  will  he  give,  "  as  the  showers  upon  the  grass."     2.  Blessings  in
due  season.     The  early  rain  in  spring,  to  water  the  seed  sown;  "  the  latter  rain"  in
autumn,  to  ripen  the  corn.     We  must  pray  in  due  seasons,  and  look  for  spiritual
prosperity  with  the  same  intense  anxiety  as  the  Jews  did  for  rain  twice  a  year.    "  I
will  give  you  the  rain  of  your  land  in  his  due  season,  the  first  rain  and  the  latter
rain,  and    I  will   send   grass  in  thy  field  for  thy  cattle"  (Deut.    xi.    13 — 15).
3.  Blessings  indicated  by  visible  signs.  Eain,  with  its  harbingers  or  accompaniments,
will  be  given.     "  The  Lord  shall  make  bright  clouds."     Clouds,  as  precursors  of  the
showers,  to  encourage ;  or  clouds  which  terrify,  shall  be  turned  into  rain  to  bless
them.     "He  maketh  lightnings  into  rain"  (cf.  Ps.  cxxxv.  7  :  Jer.  li.  16).     Clouds
shall  be  filled  with  showers,  and  distilled  as  the  dew  upon  the  land.     "As  one
shower  is  unburdened  another  shall  be  brewed'    [Trapp].     Forerunners  and  proofs
of  Divine  goodness  shall  abound  on  every  hand.     "  He  made  a  decree  for  the  rain
(regulating  its  time,  place,  and  quantity),  and  a  way  (through  the  clouds)  for  the
lightning  of  the  thunder"  (Job  xxviii.  26).

"  "Who  sets  the  bright  procession  on  its  way,
And  marshals  all  the  order  of  the  year  "  \Lange\.


chap.  X.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  659


The  Misery  op  Forsaking  G-od  and  Consulting  False  Oracles. —  Verse  2.

The  Jews  are  here  warned  not  to  imitate  the  conduct  of  their  forefathers  in
consulting  idols,  and  forsaking  Jehovah,  who  hindered  Divine  blessings,  and
brought  human  miseries.  The  warning  is  needed  now.  If  man  rejects  the  true,
he  will  choose  the  false.  His  moral  convictions,  dependent  condition,  and  exposure
to  danger,  make  him  dissatisfied,  and  impel  him  to  trust  in  superior  power.  Learn
the  folly  of  trusting  to  idols.

I.  This  course  will  disappoint.  Men  who  renounce  trust  in  God,  and
embrace  false  ways  in  hope  of  prosperity,  will  be  disappointed.  1.  Idols  reveal
nothing  to  be  relied  upon.  "The  idols  have  spoken  vanity."  The  idols  which
men  consult  in  distress,  promise  what  they  never  perform.  All  the  vanities  of  the
heathen  put  together  cannot  give  rain  (Jer.  xiv.  22).  2.  Diviners  lead  astray.
They  put  their  own  lies  into  their  lips,  and  clothed  them  with  God's  authority.
They  pretended  to  see  what  they  saw  not.  "  The  diviners  have  seen  a  lie."  They
uttered  false  prophecies,  "told  false  dreams."  False  in  matter,  because  opposed  to
God's  word,  false  in  event,  because  they  were  not  fulfilled.  "  Let  not  your  prophets
and  your  diviners,  that  be  in  the  midst  of  you,  deceive  you,"  &c.  (Jer.  xxix.  8,  9).

II.  This  course  will  lead  to  bitterness  of  mind.  "  They  comfort  in  vain."  If
the  voice  of  God,  uttered  with  every  degree  of  evidence  and  affection,  be  disre-
garded, and  men  have  recourse  to  necromancy,  the  result  will  be  vanity  and
vexation  of  spirit.  All  who,  like  Saul,  seek  an  answer  from  diviners,  will  find
them  deceptive.  "  Ye  are  forgers  of  lies  (stitchers  up  of  falsehood),  ye  are  all
physicians  of  no  value"  (of  nothingness,  idol  physicians,  Zech.  xi.  17),  Job  xiii.  4.

III.  This  course  will  expose  to  great  danger.  "  They  went  their  way."  They
were  not  only  disappointed  and  vexed,  but  they  lost  God's  protection,  and  were  left
a  prey  to  every  injury.  As  sheep  without  a  shepherd,  they  were  troubled,
scattered,  and  led  into  captivity.  They  had  no  king  to  rule  over  them,  no  priest
to  intercede  for  them,  and  no  shepherd  to  care  for  them.  This  is  the  condition  of
all  who  forsake  God,  and  refuse  the  salvation  and  tender  care  of  the  Good  Shepherd.
*  My  flock  was  scattered  upon  all  the  face  of  the  earth ;  and  none  did  search  or
seek  after  them."

Divine  Visitations. —  Verse  3.

Against  the  shepherds,  the  leaders  or  chiefs  of  the  nation,  God's  anger  was
kindled.  He  "  punished  (lit.  visited)  the  goats,"  but  Judah  was  "  his  flock,"  whom
he  visited  in  mercy.     Hence —

I.  The  rulers  are  punished.  As  shepherds  they  should  have  been  concerned
for  the  flock.  But  they  neglected,  starved,  and  scattered  the  sheep.  As  goats  they
were  guilty  of  mischief,  the  emblem  of  wantonness  and  offensive  lust.  God  will
ever  make  a  distinction  between  the  goats  and  the  sheep,  and  those  who  are  first  in
crime  will  be  first  in  punishment.  II.  The  people  are  blessed.  Judah  is  the
flock  of  God,  and  must  be  tenderly  w  tched  and  fed.  God  would  employ,  govern,
and  defend  them  against  their  enemies,  as  a  rider  doth  u  his  goodly  horse  in  the
battle."  Learn  the  advantages  of  serving  God,  and  the  necessity  of  turning  from
idols.  He  will  visit  the  ungodly  in  anger,  but  his  people  in  love.  The  goats  will
be  rejected,  and  the  sheep  saved  (Matt.  xxv.  32).  "  I  will  judge  between  cattle
and  cattle,  between  rams  and  he-goats."

HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.     1.       1.     The    blessing    needed,  morality,   and   bless   the    Church    with

"  Rain,"     all     natural,     temporal,    and  fertility.     2.  The  way  to  get  it.     "  Ask

spiritual  influences,  to  ripen  the  fruits  ye   of    the   Lord   rain."     Idols   cannol

of    the  earth,   advance  the  nation  in  send    it,   and    man    cannot    create   it


660  ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [chap.  x.


Hence,  it  is  fitting  to  feel  dependence,  Unbelief  has   recourse   to   a   crowd   of

and  give  it  expression  in  prayer.     This  superstitious  devices,  and  by  their  folly

is   good    for   ourselves,    and    the   only  and  impotence  is  put  to  shame.     Faith,

efficient  method  to  secure  Divine  opera-  on  the  contrary,  turns    to  prayer,  and

tions  in  our  favour.     Elias,  a  notable  through  it  works  wonders  "  [Lange].
example  (Jas.  v.  17,  18).     3.   The  time         Yer.  3.     Against  the  shepherds.     The

in  which  we  should  seek  it.     We  should  sins  of  the  civil  and  ecclesiastical  rulers

ask  in  seasons  when  it  is  required  for  affecting  the  nation  (cf.  Prov.  xxviii.  2).

the  refreshment  and  beautifying  of  the  "  Thus,  saith  the  Lord  God ;  Behold,  J

earth.     Prayer   may  be  out   of   season  am  against   the  shepherds  :  and  I  will

as  well  as  in  season.     "  Ask  of  the  Lord  require   my   flock   at   their   hand,    and

rain.     We  should   ask   it   in  a  higher  cause  them   to  cease    from  feeding  the

sense  —  ask   the   outpouring   of    God's  flock."     Goodly  horse.     Judah's   might

Spirit — for  the  revival   and  growth  of  was  not  in  himself;  but  in  God's  hands,

religion  and  its  appropriate  fruits  in  our  he  had  might  like,  and  above,  the  might

own  souls;  for  its  revival  in  our  Churches,  of  this   world    [Pusey].     This   may  in

and    for   its    progressive   influence   and  part  be   understood    of  the  Maccabees'

productiveness   throughout   the  world"  victories;  but  principally  of  the  Apostles,

[Wardlaw].  those   white  horses,    upon  which   they

Ver.  2.    Idol  confidences.     1.  Vanity;  rode  through  the  world,  conquering  and

2.  False ;  3.  Comfortless ;  and  4.  Mis-  to  conquer  (Rev.  vi  2)  [Trapp],
leading.       "Diviners  have  seen  a   lie.

HOMILETICS.
The  Deliverance  and  Establishment  of  God's  People. — Verses  3 — 7.

God  confirms  his  mercies  to  Judah  and  Israel,  enlarges  the  former  predictions,
and  assures  the  triumph,  restitution,  and  defence  of  his  people.

I.  God  will  deliver  them  from  their  enemies.  Foreign  or  native  oppressors —
the  sinful  leaders  of  the  flock,  or  the  inveterate  foe  of  the  nation,  would  be  visited
with  punishment.  Often  at  the  worst,  things  turn  for  the  better.  Whatever
troubles,  his  people — they  are  his  flock — will  not  be  cast  off;  but  delivered,  "For
the  Lord  of  Hosts  hath  visited  his  flock."  II.  God  will  equip  them  for  self-
defence.  Though  exposed  to  danger,  yet  God  will  furnish  them  with  everything
necessary  to  defend  themselves,  and  prevail  over  their  enemies.  Governors  of  their
own  shall  be  raised  up  to  unite  and  help  them.  No  foreign  aid  will  be  required.
The  corner-stone,  the  nail,  and  the  battle-bow,  all  strength  would  be  inherent,
though  given  by  God.  "  Their  nobles  shall  be  from  themselves,  and  their  governor
shall  go  forth  from  the  midst  of  them."  III.  God  will  give  tnem  victory  over
their  enemies.  The  timid  sheep  became  strong  as  the  battle-horse.  From  a
peaceful  people  sprung  heroes,  mighty  men,  to  deliver  from  oppressors.  The
victory  of  the  Maccabees  typifies  the  triumph  of  Christ  over  anti-Christian  powers.

1.  This  victory  will  be  complete.  "  Their  enemies  "  will  be  trampled  down  as  mire
in  the  streets,  foul  and  worthless.  As  Jehovah's  war-horse  they  will  overcome  and
confound  the  cavalry  of  the  foe.     "  The  riders  on  horses  shall  be  confounded."

2.  This  victory  will  be  through  Divine  aid.  "  They  shall  fight  because  the  Lord  is
with  them."  Courage  is  not  our  own.  All  might  comes  from  God,  and  against  his
power  nothing  can  prevail.  Mere  human  strength  is  perfect  weakness,  but  God
strengthens  in  Christ  (Phil.  iv.  13).  Feeble  humanity  rises  into  prowess  and
majesty  when  made  mighty  in  all  (kinds  of)  might  (Col.  i.  11).  IV.  God  will
restore  them  to  ancient  privileges.  Most  commentators  take  vers.  6  and  7  as
alluding  to  the  ten  tribes.  Judah  and  Israel  are  distinctly  mentioned.  A  more
complete  restoration  than  a  few  from  Babylon.  A  greater  deliverance  than  the
Maccabean  is  promised.     1.  The  tribes  of  Israel  will  be  united  together.     The


ohap.  x.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  661


house  of  Joseph  will  share  the  salvation,  and  all  Judah  together  will  be  strength-
ened. The  children  of  GodV  scattered  abroad,  shall  be  incorporated;  Jew  and
Gentile  shall  become  one  fold.  2.  Tlie  land  will  be  restored  to  them.  "  I  will
bring  them  again  to  place  them."  Privileges  lost  through  sin  will  be  restored
when  God  turns  to  his  people.  3.  Security  will  be  given  them.  God  will  place
them ;  make  them  dwell  securely  as  in  olden  time.  They  shall  be  treated  as  if
they  had  never  been  cast  off.  "  I  will  settle  you  after  your  old  estates,  and  will  do
better  unto  you  than  at  your  beginnings"  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  11  :  cf.  Job  xlii.  12).
V.  God  will  cause  others  to  participate  in  their  privileges.  Ephraim  and  their
sons  would  not  be  forgotten,  though  hitherto  not  partaking  largely  of  the  blessings
of  restoration.  1.  In  the  strength  of  conflict.  "They  of  Ephraim  shall  be  like  a
mighty  man."  2.  In  the  joy  of  victory.  "And  their  heart  shall  rejoice."  God's
presence  will  be  their  strength  and  song.  From  generation  to  generation,  mercy
will  be  enjoyed  in  renewed  performance  of  the  promise.  "  Yea,  their  children
shall  see  it,  and  be  glad."

God  the  Author  of  Political  Blessings. —  Verse  4.

God  is  the  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords.  He  only  can  give  magistrates
and  legislators  who  are  "  for  the  punishment  of  evil-doers,  and  for  the  praise  of
them  that  do  well."  They  are  not  created  by  the  institutions  nor  the  politics  of
the  state.     "  The  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  God."

I.  Men  who  are  the  corner-stones,  the  ground  of  support  to  the  state.
Princes  are  often  called  "the  chief  (corners,  marg.)  of  the  people"  (1  Sam.  xiv.
38  :  cf.  Isa.  xix.  13  ;  xxviii.  16).  II.  Men  who  are  the  nails,  the  strength  of  the
state.  They  unite  discordant  parties,  as  nails  fasten  different  timbers.  On  them
rest  the  responsibilities  of  government,  and  the  security  of  the  whole  fabric.  Eulers
and  officers  in  the  Church  should  strengthen  and  hold  it  together.  On  them  hang
all  the  implements  of  evangelical  warfare,  which  should  be  ready  for  use,  st  I  will
fasten  him  as  a  nail  in  a  sure  place  ;  and  he  shall  be  for  a  glorious  throne  to  his
father's  house"  (Isa.  xxii.  23,  24).  III.  Men  who  are  the  battle-bow,  the
defence  of  the  state.  Armour  in  general,  for  personal  and  national  conflict — men
to  wield  it  with  skill  and  success  come  from  him.  IV.  Men  who  govern,  the
rulers  of  the  state.  "  And  from  him  every  oppressor  together,"  *.  e.  in  a  good
sense,  every  ruler  who  exacts  tribute  from  nations  subject  to  Judah.  Thus  the  state
is  built  up  and  defended  by  God.  Legislation  without  him  is  insecure.  He  must
be  trusted  for  every  politician  that  founds  and  fastens  the  empire  together —
thanked  for  every  ruler  that  crushes  oppression.  All  valour  and  success,  all
ornaments  and  defence,  are  from  him.  "  The  Lord  is  Governor  among  the  nations.''

The  Religion  op  Joy. —  Verse  7.

Through  communicated  and  accompanying  might  of  Jehovah,  Ephraim  would
be  a  man  of  valour  and  strength  against  every  foe.  The  exulting /oy  with  which
they  would  be  filled  would  impart  energy  of  heart  and  hand.  In  proportion  to  the
amount,  the  variety,  and  long-continuance  of  their  outcast  condition,  of  depression
and  humiliation,  of  scorn  and  reproach,  of  personal  and  social  oppression ;  and  of
all,  as  the  effect  and  indication  of  what  was  worse  than  them  all — Divine  desertion
— the  hidings  of  God's  countenance,  his  frown,  his  wrath — should  be  the  joy  of
Jehovah's  return  and  blessing  [Wardlaw].

I.  Joyful  religion  in  its  source.  Its  source  is  secret  and  hidden  from  the
world.  1.  It  is  in  God.  They  shall  "rejoice  in  the  Lord" — not  in  his  gifts,
health,  abundance,  and  honour — but  in  God  himself.  In  his  favour  and  friendship,
in  his  Word   and  service.     2.  It  springs  from   the  heart,     "  Their  heart  shall


662  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [chap.  x.


rejoice."  Not  from  outward  circumstances,  but  from  pardoned  sin  and  peace  with
God.  This  fountain  of  living  waters  is  within  a  man.  "  A  good  man  shall  be
satisfied  from  himself."  II.  Joyful  religion  in  its  degree.  "  Their  heart  shall
rejoice  as  through  wine."  Wine  is  called  by  Plato,  "the  mitigator  of  human
sorrows."  The  figure  denotes  exuberant  joy,  joy  beyond  a  natural  degree  (cf.  Ps.
lxxviii.  65;  civ.  15).  By  a  bold  figure  wine  is  said  to  "cheer  God"  himself
(Judg.  ix.  13  .  Hence  as  cordials  are  seasonable  in  the  hour  of  need;  so  joy
buries  sorrow,  and  makes  us  forget  past  evils.  "  Let  him  drink,  and  forget  his
poverty,  and  remember  his  misery  no  more."  III.  Joyful  religion  in  its  influ-
ence. This  fountain  is  never  sealed.  1.  It  conduces  to  health.  Diseases  of  the
mind  produce  diseases  of  the  body ;  a  fretful  repining  spirit  will  waste  away  the
vigour  and  beauty  of  the  constitution.  "Let  thy  mind's  sweetness,"  says  Geo.
Herbert,  "have  its  operation  upon  thy  body,  clothes,  and  habitation."  "A  merry
heart  maketh  a  cheerful  countenance ;  but  by  sorrow  of  heart  the  spirit  is  broken."

2.  It  promotes  activity.  Happy  Christians  are  strong  and  active  Christians.
Ancient  nations  drank  wine  before  battle.  Those  who  drink  of  this  joy  will  be
heroes  in  life.     "  Neither  be  ye  sorry ;  for  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength."

3.  It  influences  others.  Children  see  and  neighbours  feel  it.  "I  am  sure  my
father's  religion  is  true,"  said  one,  "because  it  makes  him  happy."  "The  beams
of  joy,"  says  Fuller,  "  are  made  better  by  reflection."  Yet  some  are  strangers  to
this  joy.  Their  religion  is  morbid  and  melancholy — "  the  religion  of  the  sorrowful,"
misrepresenting  the  bright  religion  of  Jesus.  Seek  to  rejoice  in  God,  and  to
rejoice  always.     "Delight  thyself  in  the  Lord."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Yer.  5.     Mighty  men  or  warriors  of  Lord  God,  he  it  is  that  fighteth  for  you."

the    Gospel.       1.    Their    valour.     The  Ver.    6.     7"  have   mercy   upon  them.

figure  is  general,  indicating  triumphant  Here  is  a  double  cause  alleged,  of  these

progress  against  all  enemies,  and  thorough  great  and  gracious  promises;  and  both

and  shameful  discomfiture.     It   was  in  excluding   works.  .    First,    God's   mere

looking  forward   to  the  success  of   his  mercy ;  secondly,  his  election  of  grace ;

Apostles — so  rapid,  so  signal — that  our  "  for  I  am  the  Lord,  their  God."     This

Lord    said,    "  I    beheld    Satan   fall,    as  latter  is  the   cause  of  the  former ;   for

lightning  from  heaven."  The  comparison  God    chose    his    people    for   love,   and

is  simple.     "As   mighty  men."     They  then  loveth  them  for  his  choice.     The

shall  triumph  over  the  enemies  of  their  effects  of  which  love  are  here  set  down

cause  as  completely  as  the  most  victori-  — 1.  That  he  heareth  their  prayers,  "  I

ous    general    over   his   enemies.      The  will  hear  them."   2.  That  he  re-accepteth

causes   and    the    weapons    are    widely  and  restoreth  them  in  Christ,  as  if  they

different ;  .co  is  the  spirit  in  which  the  had  never  offended  against  him.    "  They

war  is  conducted,  and  the  results  to  those  shall  be  as  though  I  had  not  cast  them

taken  captive  by  the  conquerors  [Ward-  off."     That   was  a   cutting  speech,  and

law].     2.    The  source   of  their   valour,  far   worse   than    their   captivity,  when

"They  shall  fight  because  the  Lord  is  God  not  only  threatened  to  cast  them

with   them."     He  is  the  source  of   all  out  of  their  country  into  a  strange  land,

success.  Through  him  they  do  valiantly ;  but  that  there,  "he  would  show  them

for   he   it    is  that    treads   down   their  no   favour"    (Jer.    xvi.    13).     Here   he

enemies.     Not  a  victory,  not  a  trophy,  promiseth  to  pity  them,  and  then  they

not  a  song,  without  him  (Jos.  xxiii.  10  :  must  think  deliverance  was  at  next  door

Neh.    iv.    20).      If    Mithridates   never  \Trapp\.

wanted  courage  nor  counsel,  how  much  1.  The  blessings.     Strength,  "  I  will

more  shall  the  Messiah  and  his  mighty  strengthen  them ; "    salvation,    "  I   will

men  succeed  in   their  warfare!     "The  save;"  and   restoration,  "I  will   bring


ohap.  x.]  HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHJRIAH.  663

them  again."     2.   The  cause  of  the  bless-  to    be   gracious.'      His  ear   is   open  to

trig.      God's    mercy.      "  I    have   mercy  their   very   first    penitential   cry ;    and

upon  them."  God's  unchanging  purpose ;  while  his  ear  will  be  open  {that  alone

"  they  shall  be  as  though  I  had  not  cast  were  little)  his  poioer  will  be  ready  to

them   off."     3.   The  consequence  of  the  aid "  [Wardlaui].

blessings.       "I    will   hear   them."      He  True  conversion.    1.  Men  turn  to  God

heard  the  voice  of  their  distress,  as  he  only  through  Divine  mercy.     2.  When

did   in    Egypt.     But  understand   their  men  repent,  and  turn  to  God,  they  are

calling   upon    Jehovah    in   a   state    of  treated  as  if  they  had  not  been  cast  off.

penitential   abasement,  confession,    and  3.  Humble  penitent  prayer  to  God  is  an

return   of    heart    (cf.    Wardlaw).      "I  evidence  of   converted    men.     "Prayer

luill  hear"  is  the  fulfilment  of  a  promise  is  to  religion  what  thinking  is  to  philo-

repeatedly  made  to  them  in  former  days,  sophy.     To  pray  is  to  make  religion "

and  an  encouragement  in  their  present  [Novalis].
dispersed   state.     "Jehovah   yet  'waits

HOMILETICS.

The  Restoration,  Settlement,  and  Increase  of  God's  People. — Verses  8 — 12.

To  remove  all  doubt  concerning  the  promises  just  given  the  restoration  is  more
minutely  described.

I.  The  restoration  of  God's  people.  "  I  will  gather  them."  1.  From  different
places.  From  "  the  land  of  Egypt"  a  type  of  all  lands  of  bondage.  "  Out  of
Assyria"  a  type  of  all  lands  of  exile.  They  shall  be  sought  and  found  in  all
quarters  of  the  world.  2.  By  Divine  call.  "  I  will  hiss  for  them  and  gather
them."  As  bee-keepers  whistle  back  the  bees  to  the  hive,  or  as  sheep  flock
together  at  the  well-known  call  of  the  shepherd,  so  God  will  bring  them  back  to
himself  and  their  inheritance.  "  He  will  lift  up  an  ensign  to  the  nations  from  far,
and  will  hiss  unto  them  from  the  end  of  the  earth ;  and,  behold,  they  shall  come
with  speed  swiftly "  (Isa.  v.  26).  3.  Without  hindrance,  (a)  Distance  shall
not  keep  them  back.  Out  of  lands  far  and  near,  (b)  Distress  shall  not  hinder
them.  At  the  Red  Sea  Israel  thought  they  were  lost.  The  sea  of  affliction  shall
be  opened  up.  Its  smitten  waves  shall  overwhelm  the  foe,  "  for  the  Lord  fighteth
for  them  against  the  Egyptians"  (Ex.  xiv.  24,  25);  or  sink  into  silence  at  the
command  of  its  Maker  and  Ruler.  "  All  the  deeps  of  the  river  shall  dry  up."
(c)  Enemies  shall  not  impede  them.  "The  pride  of  Assyria  shall  be  brought
down."  The  rod  of  Egypt  shall  be  broken.  The  wonders  of  old  shall  be  repeated,
and  the  first  deliverance  shall  be  eclipsed  by  the  last.  II.  The  settlement  of
God's  people.  "  I  will  bring  them  into  the  land  of  Gilead  "  beyond  Jordan,  the
eastern,  "and  Lebanon,"  the  northern,  boundary.  1.  Settled  them  in  Divine
strength.  "I  will  strengthen  them  in  the  Lord."  Strengthen  them  to  resist
temptation,  discharge  duty,  and  endure  trial.  "  Be  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the
power  of  his  might."  2.  Settled  them  in  delightful  freedom.  "  I  have  redeemed
them  "  (ver.  8)  :  spiritually  and  temporally,  the  type  of  the  true  Israel.  "  I  gave
Egypt  for  their  ransom,  Ethiopia  and  Seba  for  thee."  III.  The  increase  of  God's
people.  "  And  they  shall  increase  as  they  have  increased."  1.  Increase  by  sowing
them  in  other  nations.  As  seed  sown  in  the  ground  they  were  scattered,  not  merely
to  spread  the  knowledge  of  God,  but  to  be  quickened  in  themselves,  and  to
quicken  others.  " The  word  is  used  of  sowing  to  multiply,"  says  Pusey,  "never
of  mere  scattering.  A  rich  harvest  was  to  spring  from  them."  "  I  will  sow  the
house  of  Israel  and  the  house  of  Judah  with  the  seed  of  man,  and  with  the  seed
of  beast."  2.  Increase  with  unparalleled  degree.  "  Place  shall  not  be  found  for
them."     "  A  promise  of  such  increase  is  a  promise  that  includes  much  more  than  it


664


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.


[CHAP.  X.


expresses.  It  implies  in  it  all  that  contributes  to  such  rapid  multiplication."  "  The
children  of  thy  bereaved  estate  shall  yet  say  in  thine  ears,  The  place  is  too  strait  for
me :  give  place,  that  I  may  dwell."  3.  Increase  in  permanent  duration.  "  They
shall  live  with  their  children  and  turn  again."  The  gift  would  be  a  continual  gift.
"  They  and  their  children,  and  their  children's  children  for  ever "  (Ezek.  xxxvii.
14).  The  blessing  would  not  be  transient,  but  abiding;  the  chartered  privileges
would  be  as  before  the  dispersion.  "The  promise  is  unto  you  and  to  your
children."


HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.


Ver.  9.  Here  we  seem  to  have  their
dispersions,  their  penitent  recognition
of  God,  and  their  consequent  pre-
servation and  return  [Wardlaw].
Sow  them,  partly  to  keep  them  as
winter  seed  in  the  ground  till  the
spring-time  of  their  conversion  and
restitution;  and  partly  making  them
seed  to  bring  in  an  increase  of  the
fulness  of  the  Gentiles  at  their  con-
version. Further,  the  Lord  promiseth
that  scattering  should  not  hinder  their
conversion,  for  the  veil  shall  be  taken
away,  and  they  shall  remember  the
Lord,  and  they  and  their  children
being  preserved  shall  return  to  God
\Hutcheson\

They  shall  remember  me — 1.  May  be
applied  to  the  Jews ;  and  2.  to  the
conversion   of   sinners.     It   indicates —

1.  That  men  have  forgotten  God,
wandered     into     distance     from     him.

2.  That  true  conversion  is  a  "  turning
again "  to  God  in  humility  and  duty.
A  state  of  unregeneration  is  one  of
forgetfulness.  Sinners  have  lost  all
sense  of  God's  glory,  authority,  and
mercy.  The  first  religious  exercise  of
the  mind  is  reflection,  fitly  represented
in  the  prodigal  when  he  came  to  himself.
Then  a  return  to  God  the  Father.  "  All
the  ends  of  the  world  shall  remember
and  turn  unto  the  Lord."

Ver.  12.  Security  and  happiness
under  Divine  protection.  1.  Christian
knowledge ;  a  knowledge  of  God's  name
revealed  to  direct  and  encourage  in  duty.
"  The  name  of  Jehovah  is  a  compre-
hensive expression  denoting  his  glory
as  manifested  in  history"  (Hengs.).
2.  Christian  profession.  To  walk  in  his
name,  or  maintain  a  course  of  life  in
harmony  with  God's   will  and    word.


3.  Cliristian  freedom.  "  They  shall  walk
up  and  down."  "  The  expression  seems
further  to  imply  a  state  of  felt  peace,
and  freedom,  and  confidence  of  safety,
and  happy  social  intercommunion,  aris-
ing from  faith  in  God — from  unshaken
reliance  on  his  power  and  wisdom,
faithfulness  and  love  "  [  Wardlaw].  I
will  strengthen  them  in  the  Lord.  The
very  assurance  we  want  in  the  duties  and
trials  of  life.  Confidently  rely  upon  it,
for  it  comes  from  the  lips  of  Faithfulness
and  Truth.  But  we  may  err  as  to
manner  of  fulfilment;  our  expectation
therefore  to  be  regulated  accordingly.
Observe,  that  the  fulfilment  of  the
promise  'will  not  exempt  us  from  all
ground  of  complaint  It  will  keep  us
in  work,  but  not  cause  us  to  cease —
secures  help  in  conflict,  but  war  lasts  for
ever.  It  will  also  be  seasonable.  "As
thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be."
Look  for  grace,  not  for  imaginary  but
real  purposes,  not  for  future  but  present
difficulties,  to  "help  in  time  of  need."
These  supplies  of  strength  to  be  sought
in  God's  own  way.  In  the  use  of
appointed  means.  Foolish  to  avoid
religious  exercises,  even  when  not  in  a
proper,  spiritual,  and  lively  frame.  Then
the  means  most  necessary,  as.  fire  when
we  are  cold,  and  excitement  when  dull
[Jay].

Vers.  10  —  12.  Messianic  mercies.
Survey  the  whole  promise  from  ch.  ix.
11  onwards;  there  are  two  leading
thoughts  developed  in  it.  (a)  That
those  members  of  the  covenant  nation
who  were  still  scattered  among  the
heathen  should  be  redeemed  out  of  their
misery,  and  gathered  together  in  the
kingdom  of  Messiah.  (6)  That  the
Lord  would  endow  all  his  people  with


chap,  x.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHAMAH.  665


power  for  the  conquest  of  the  heathen,  contests   between    the    powers    of    the

They  were  both  fulfilled  in  weak  com-  world  for  supremacy  in  Palestine.     The

mencements  only  in  the  times  immcdi-  principal    fulfilment   is    of    a   spiritual

ately  following,  and  down  to  the  coming  kind,    and    was    effected    through    the

of  Christ,  by  the  return  of  many  Jews  gathering  of  Jews  into  the  kingdom  of

out   of  captivity  and   into  the  land   of  Christ,  which  commenced  in  the  times

their  fathers,  particularly  when  Galilee  of   the  apostles,  and  will  continue  till

was  strongly  peopled  by  Israelites ;  and  the   remnant   of  Israel   is  converted  to

also  by  the  protection  and  care  which  Christ  its  Saviour  [\5M].
God  bestowed  upon  the  people  in   the

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  X.

Vers.   1,    2.     Ask  rain.     Men   seem  already  "  saved,"  and  "  brought  again,"

practically  to  have  but  little  remembrance  and  "placed."     And    the   language    is

that  the  mainspring  of  all  mechanism  much   too   strong  to   have  reference  to

of  second  causes  is  in  the  hands  of  ati  any  such  remaining  partial  deliverances

invisible  Creator;   that  it  is  not   from  and  returnings — additions  only  to  that

what  goes  on  in  the  hidden  laboratories  from  Babylon — which  might  take  place

of   what  they  call   nature   that   season  under  the  Maccabean  princes,  or  at  any

succeeds  season,  and   shower  and   sun-  period    of    their   history   between    the

shine  alternate  with  so  much  of  beautiful  prophet's  days  and  the  coming  of  Christ,

and  beneficent  order,  but  that  the  whole  And  if  it  refers  to  a  period  subsequent

arrangement  is   momentarily  dependent  to  the  coming  of  Christ,  to  what   else

upon  the  will  and  energy  of  that  Supreme  can  the  reference  be  but  to  their  recovery

Being  who  "  sitteth  upon  the  circle  of  from  their  present  long-continued  outcast

the  earth,   and   the  inhabitants  thereof  and  scattered  condition  %  [  Wardlaw\
are  as  grasshoppers  "  [Melville].  Vers.  9 — 12.     The  victory  described

Ver.  3.  Shepherds.    As  hired  servants  is  followed  by  a  large  increase  of  popu-

will  tend  men's  sheep  no  longer  than  it  lation,  not  confined  to  Judah,  but  also

is   profitable    to   them,    so   is    it    with  including  Israel.     Nor   is   there  reason

promotion-seeking  ministers  \Gawdry],  to  doubt  that  the  independence  achieved

Ver.  4.    The  administration  of  govern-  by  the  Maccabees  attracted  very  many

ment,  like  a  guardianship,  ought  to  be  of  the  exiles  from  the  northern  kingdom,

directed  to  the  good  of  those  who  confer,  who  forgot  the  old  causes  of  dissension,

and  not  of  those  who  receive,  the  trust  and  united  earnestly  in  maintaining  the

[Cicero].  re-established  national  centre  in  Jerusa-

Vers.  5,  6.     Mighty  men.     Power  is  lem.     This   fusion   at    home   led   to   a

according  to  quality  and  not  quantity,  similar    fusion    abroad,    and    wherever

How  much  more  are  men  than  nations  !  Jews  were  found,  who  preserved  their

[Emerson].     Where  power  is  absent  we  hereditary  faith  at  all,  they  still  remem-

may  find  the   robe   of  genius,  but   we  bered  Jehovah  as  one  who  had  chosen

miss  the  throne  [Landor].  Zion,  and  considered  themselves  as  con-

Vers.   7,  8.     "The  house  of  Judah,  stituent    parts   of  one  covenant  people,

and  the  house  of  Joseph"  spoken  of  in  So   far  the  predictions  of  the  chapter

the  first  of  these  verses,  signify  respect-  were  fulfilled  historically  in  the  period

ively,  the  two  tribes  and  the  ten  tribes —  extending   from    the   establishment    of

unitedly,  the  whole  house  of  Israel — the  Jewish  independence  to  the  time  of  the

posterity  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  advent.     In   the   last    three  verses  the

The  declaration,  "  i"  will  save  them,  and  prophet  describes  a  far  greater,  because

bring   them    again    and  place   them"  spiritual,    blessing   in    terms    borrowed

cannot  refer  to  the  return  from  Babylon ;  from  the  old  experience  of  the  people,

seeing,  in  that  respect,  they  had  been  The  drying  up  of  the  sea,  the  humiliation


666  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [chap.  xi.


of    Assyria,   the    overthrow  of   Egypt,  reclaim  and  bless  them  by  procedures  as

simply   set    forth    the   removal    of    all  marvellous  as  any  that  ever  occurred  in

possible    obstacles    iu   the    way    of    a  their  former  history  \Lange\.
spiritual  return  to  God.     The  Lord  will


CHAPTER  XI.

Critical  Notes.]  In  this  chapter  we  have  a  contrast  to  the  former.  It  was  necessary  to  promise
blessings,  to  encourage,  and  to  warn,  lest  many  should  presume  by  vain  confidence  in  the  promises.
"We  have  the  destruction  of  the  second  temple  and  of  the  Jewish  polity  for  the  rejection  of  Christ.
Lebanon]  t.  e.  the  temple,  lofty  and  magnificent  as  the  mountain.  "The  picture  is  a  dramatic  one.
Instead  of  the  devastation  of  Lebanon  being  announced,  it  is  summoned  to  open  its  gates  that  the
fire  may  be  able  to  enter  in  and  devour  its  cedars.  The  cypresses,  which  hold  the  second  place
among  the  celebrated  woods  of  Lebanon,  are  then  called  upon  to  howl  over  the  fall  of  the  cedars,
not  so  much  from  sympathy  as  because  the  same  fate  awaits  them  "  [Keil].  2.  Forest]  Lit.  the
fortified  or  inaccessible  forest,  Jerusalem,  with  houses  numerous,  and  built  close  together,  and  round
which  was  a  wall  (cf.  Mia  iii.  12).  3.  Shepherds]  In  reference  to  office,  and  young  lions]  in
disposition.  Jordan]  with  its  thickets  and  decorated  banks,  which  furnished  lairs  for  lions.  Jewish
leaders  are  represented  as  despairing  at  the  destruction  of  their  polity.  4.]  The  cause  of  the  ruin.
Feed]  The  prophet  to  act  the  part  of  a  good  shepherd.  Flock]  Jewish  nation.  5.  Possessors]  Lit
buyers,  who  think  they  can  sell  or  slay  for  their  own  advantage.  6.  I]  Divine  pity  would  not  be
shown  to  them;  they  would  be  left  to  civil  discord  and  foreign  rule.  King]  Roman  emperor  (John
xix.  15).  7.  I]  The  prophet  executed  the  task  committed  to  him  by  shepherding  a  sad  (poor)  flock.
Two  staves]  "  to  set  forth  the  kind  of  double  salvation  bestowed  upon  the  nation  through  the  care  of
the  Good  Shepherd"  [Keil].  Beauty]  Loveliness  or  favour  (Ps.  xxvii.  4;  xc.  17) ;  which  Jehovah
will  give  them  in  protecting  them  from  foes.  Bands]  Internal  union  and  friendship.  Easterns  tied
a  cord  or  band  as  a  symbol  of  confederacy  (cf.  Ps.  cxix.  61,  marg.).  8.]  First  act  of  shepherd.  Cut
off]  Lit.  cause  to  disappear,  destroy,  or  annihilate  (Ex.  xxiii.  23).  Three]  orders  -civil  authorities,
priests,  and  prophets  (cf.  Jer.  ii.  8,  18) ;  others,  three  rulers  of  Asmonean  line — who  died  by  violent
death  in  a  short  space  of  time — Hircanus,  Alexander,  and  Antigonus.  Loathed]  Was  straitened  for
them:  "the  Divine  grief  at  the  misery  of  his  people"  [Pusey].  Abhorred]  "Nauseated  me."
9.  Let  it]  Perish  those  who  are  doomed  to  perish.  All  kindly  control  is  withdrawn,  and  the  flock  is
left  to  the  consequences  of  its  fatal  rejection  of  deliverance.  The  fulfilment  in  the  history  of
Jerusalem.  10.  Break]  Symbolic  action  of  taking  away  the  good  received  by  the  flock  in  form  of
covenant.  "  That  is  to  say,  the  covenant  which  God  has  made  with  all  nations  is  to  be  repealed  or
destroyed"  [Keil].  11.  Broken]  The  covenant  annulled  as  the  staff  was  broken.  This  not  observed
by  the  flock  at  large  only  by  the  poor]  who  recognized  the  fulfilment  of  a  Divine  word  (Jer.  xxxii.
8).  12.  Good]  "He  served  them,  not  for  wages,  but  in  obedience  to  the  Divine  will."  Wages,
however  were  due;  the  price  of  a  slave  offered.  13.]  It  was  contemptuously  rejected.  Jehovah
regards  the  wages  offered  to  himself.  Goodly]  Noble  price,  ironical.  Potter]  As  worthless.  14.]
Worse  evil  threatened  than  the  former.  Second,  utter  breaking  up  of  the  nation,  and  loss  of  fraternal
unity.  15.]  Since  the  Good  Shepherd  was  rejected  a  very  different  class  would  shepherd  them.  Take]
again.  Instruments]  A  crook,  bag,  pipe,  and  knife,  &c.  Foolish]  Bad  shepherd  (Ps.  xiv.  1).  16.]
Conduct  of  this  ruler  described;  not  mere  neglect,  but  destroys  (cf.  Ezek.  xxxiv.  3,  4).  Enumera-
tion of  particulars  complete.  Claws  j  Tearing  off  hoofs,  disabling  them  from  seeking  pasture,
expressive  of  ferocious  greed.  Even  extremities  rent  rather  than  lose  a  shred  of  flesh.  17.  Woe]
These  merciless  rulers  meet  with  retribution.  Leaveth]  Instead  of  guarding  the  flock.  Arm]
Instrument  of  tyranny.  Right  eye]  The  organ  of  vigilance  (John  x.  12,  13).  The  former
withered,  and  the  latter  blinded.  "  The  doom  imprecated  is  truly  awful- an  utter  deprivation  of
power  and  intelligence  "  [Henderson].

HOMILETIGS.

National  Fuel  for  Divine  Fire. — Verses  1 — 3.

Applied  to  the  temple,  the  city,  or  the  people,  these  words  indicate  the  destruction
of  everything  great  in  the  Jewish  nation.     Formerly  they  had  been  visited  and


chap.  XI.]  UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  667


recovered;  now  there  is  a  final  judgment.  All  is  ripe  for  destruction.  God's
anger  is  kindled ;  the  conflagration  sweeps  through  the  land,  devours  mountain,
forests,  and  lowland  pastures,  and  creates  lamentation  iu  man  and  beast.

I.  The  nation's  glory  is  spoiled.  "  Their  glory  is  spoiled."  The  temple  and
the  city,  the  boast  and  excellency  of  the  nation,  were  besieged  and  sacked.  Their
honour  and  power  were  brought  low ;  the  wealth  and  luxury  acquired  by  the  abuse
of  power  became  a  prey  to  the  enemy.  God  can  take  away  the  results  of  our
labour,  and  the  monuments  of  our  skill.  We  may  think  our  resources  to  be  secure,
and  our  fortifications  impregnable,  but  the  doors  will  open  to  the  Divinely-appointed
agency.  II.  The  nation's  nobility  are  cut  down.  "The  mighty  are  spoiled."
The  leaders  of  the  people — men  of  superior  and  inferior  ranks — are  taken  away.
"  The  cedars"  the  pre-eminent  in  rank  and  office ;  th.efir-t?'ees,  rulers  of  lower  grade;
the  "  oaks  of  Bashan,"  men  of  strength  and  sturdy  power — the  highest  and  the
lowest  are  involved  in  fearful  destruction,  and  howl  in  agony  together.  Whatever
be  the  estimation  in  which  nobility  are  held,  Divine  wrath  may  consume  them  like
fire.  "  Worship  your  heroes  from  afar  ;  contact  withers  them  "  [Madame  Necker\
III.  The  nation  is  filled  with  despair.  "  Howl,  fir-tree."  If  doors  open  of  their
own  accord,  what  use  are  defences  %  If  the  highest  fall,  what  can  the  lowest  do  %
When  chief  men,  in  civil  or  religious  position,  are  fallen  from  their  station,  horror
and  anguish  may  well  fill  the  community.  1.  Despair  most  sad.  "Howl."  The
cedar,  the  fir-tree,  the  oak,  alike  suffer,  "for  the  forest  of  vintage  is  come  down."
2.  Despair  universal.  All  have  cause  for  alarm  and  lamentation.  The  fire  sweeps
through  Lebanon  and  Bashan,  the  entire  land  is  seized,  mountain  and  plain,  forests
and  fields,  are  laid  waste ;  men  and  beasts  cry  out  in  terror,  and  universal  despair
indicates  the  awful  ruin.  If  God's  favoured  nation  were  thus  punished,  let  the
wicked  beware  and  the  godly  be  warned.  "  Behold,  the  righteous  shall  be
recompensed  (rewarded  or  chastened)  in  the  earth  :  much  more  the  wicked  and  the
sinner  (shall  not  go  unpunished) "  (Prov.  xi.  31).

Christian  Sorrow  for  Fallen  Greatness. — Verse  2.

The  Bible  abounds  with  comparison,  is  an  ancient  book,  and  in  proportion  as
you  go  back  in  history,  you  will  find  the  language  poetic.  The  warm  imagination
of  the  Easterns  never  suffered  them  to  speak  without  figures.  Men  are  called
trees.     Three  things  in  the  text —

I.  The  differences  there  are  among  men.  Where  are  sameness  and  equality  to
be  found1?  God  is  always  producing  variety.  All  flesh  is  not  the  same  flesh
(1  Cor.  xv.  39).  What  wonder,  then,  that  differences  should  exist  among  men'?
Some  are  superior  to  others  in  family,  rank,  and  station ;  in  corporeal  qualities,  in
stature,  in  beauty,  in  strength,  gracefulness,  and  speed ;  in  mental  qualities,  in
acquired  knowledge,  in  usefulness.  Think  of  the  Luthers,  the  Whitfields,  and  the
Hills.  Seme  cedars  and  others  fir-trees.  II.  Their  fall,  however,  distinguished.
1.  There  is  a  moral  fall  to  which  we  are  exposed  while  in  flesh  and  blood;  indeed
a  man  is  never  secure  as  long  as  he  is  in  the  world.  2.  There  is  a  mortal  fall  by
death,  accident,  disease,  intirmity,  or  age.  Great  men  die  often — not  always —
before  others.  Here  the  cedar  falls,  while  the  fir-tree  survives.  III.  The  sorrow
caused  by  their  removal.  1.  Sympathetic  sorrow.  Sympathy,  a  word  the  more
we  consider  the  less  we  can  explain.  We  only  know  the  fact  that  God  has  put
something  within  us  which  reciprocates  the  feeling  which  we  find  in  another.  A
mother  hears  her  child  cry,  and  darts  to  its  relief.  You  see  a  man  drowning  in
water ;  you  sink  as  he  sinks,  rise  as  he  rises,  and  are  equally  glad  when  he  comes
to  shore.  2.  Rational  sorrow.  All  men  die.  Princes  and  soldiers  that  defend
us,  merchants  that  supply  us,  and  husbandmen  that  till  our  ground  and  fill  our
barns.     Can  we  see  the  nation  stript  of  these,  like  a  tree  dropping  its  leaves  in


668  EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ZECBARIAH.  [chap,  xl

autumn,  and  not  feel?  Can  we  see  the  country  robbed  of  its  members,  its
ornaments,  and  not  sorrow?  3.  Pious  sorrow.  We  are  told  of  St.  Ambrose  that
when  he  heard  of  the  death  of  a  minister  of  Christ  he  burst  into  tears,  (a)  The
death  of  a  good  man  is  a  public  loss.  We  lose  their  examples,  which  are  important
and  beneficial,  (h)  As  benefactors,  they  are  the  salt  of  the  earth,  the  light  of  the
world,  (c)  As  intercessors,  they  pray  for  others  as  well  as  themselves,  (d)  As  the
defence  of  the  earth,  they  are  better  than  navies  and  armies.  Ten  righteous  men
would  have  saved  Sodom.  4.  Unlawful  sorrow.  We  sorrow,  not  as  those  without
hope,  (a)  Your  mourning  would  not  be  proper  if  accompanied  with  murmuring;
(b)  if  ungrateful ;  (c)  if  it  called  you  away  from  present  things.  Every  day  has
its  duties  [TJie  Preacher's  Treasury],

The  Flock  of  Slaughter. — Verses  4 — 6.

The  prophet  here  performs  in  vision  the  acts  enjoined,  and  becomes  a  represent-
ative of  the  Messiah,  who  feeds  those  willing  to  be  fed,  and  punishes  those  who
reject  him.  But  by  obstinate  wickedness,  instead  of  becoming  "  the  sheep  of  his
pasture,"  they  become  "  the  flock  of  slaughter,"  doomed  to  destruction.

I.  The  shepherds  of  the  flock  were  worthless.  Not  merely  negligent,  but
very  wicked.  1.  They  had  no  compassion.  "Their  own  shepherds  pity  them
not."  Sad  when  ministers  have  no  benevolent  feeling  for  their  flocks — when  rulers
in  every  department  under  their  control  are  devoid  of  conscience.  2.  They  were
avaricious.  They  bought  and  sold,  to  make  gain  of  the  flock.  They  sought  only
to  gratify  self  and  covetous  desires.  "All  other  love  is  extinguished  by  self  love;
beneficence,  humanity,  justice,  philosophy  sink  under  it"  [Epicurus].  3.  They
were  cruel.  "  Whose  possessors  slay  them."  In  ruthless  cruelty  "  they  ate  the  fat,
and  clothed  themselves  with  the  wool,  and  killed  them  that  were  fed."  "  Yea,
they  are  greedy  dogs,  which  can  never  have  enough,  and  they  are  shepherds  that
cannot  understand :  they  all  look  to  their  own  way,  everyone  for  his  gain,  from  his
quarter."  4.  Tliey  are  hypocritical.  They  say,  "  Blessed  be  the  Lord."  They  are
cruel  and  oppressive,  yet  profess  to  be  religious  !  They  succeed  in  ways  which
G-od  abhors  and  reprobates,  and  then  thank  God  for  their  riches!  Sin  is  most
daring  when  committed  and  defended  under  the  pretence  of  piety,  and  claiming
the  approval  of  God  in  success.  Sanctimonious  hypocrisy  is  often  displayed  in
covetousness  and  self-aggrandizement.  "  Hypocrites  do  the  devil's  drudgery  in
Christ's  livery,"  says  one.  II.  The  flock  itself  is  given  up  to  destruction.
1.  Divine  pity  was  withdrawn.  God  had  often  displayed  compassionate  forbearance
towards  them,  but  now  he  "  will  no  more  pity  the  inhabitants  of  the  land."  2.  Evil
discord  rent  them  asunder.  The  zealots  and  factious  Jews  expelled  and  slew  one
another  in  the  siege  of  Jerusalem.  "  I  will  deliver  the  men,  every  one  into  his
neighbour's  hand."  3.  The  land,  was  smitten  by  the  foe.  "They  shall  smite  the
land."  The  people  generally  and  individually  were  delivered  into  the  hands  of  the
Boman  emperor.  With  indignant  voice  they  rejected  their  own  lawful  ruler,  and
cried,  "  We  have  no  king  but  Ccesar  /"  They  were  dispossessed  of  their  trust,  and
their  precious  inheritance  was  given  to  others.  Those  who  should  have  been
protectors  became  oppressors.  Without  friends  or  helpers,  they  were  destroyed  as
a  nation,  "and  live  only  to  perpetuate  the  memory  of  their  past  history,  and  teach
more  vividly  its  great  lessons  of  sin  and  retribution."  "  Out  of  their  hand  I  will
not  deliver  them."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  4.  1.  The  wretched  flock.  For-  2.  The  tender  compassion  of  Jehovah.
saken  and  flayed  by  the  shepherds,  "Feed  them,"  foster  and  preserve  them
counted     all    day    for    the    slaughter,     with  affectionate  care.    "  0  the  goodness


chap,  xi.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  669


of  God  to  a  nation  so  shamelessly,  so  God  has  blessed  me,  I  may  thank  him !
lawlessly  wicked.  He  himself,  the  "  Success  consecrates  the  foulest  crimes "
Shepherd  of  Israel,  neglected  no  good  [Seneca].  Thus  while  "through  covet-
office  in  seeking  and  feeding  them ;  was  ousness  they  with  feigned  words  made
careful  to  raise  up  shepherds  for  them  merchandise  of  men,"  they  at  the  same
(Mic.  v.  5),  till  at  length  he  sent  the  time  sought  to  impose  upon  the  omnis-
Man,  Christ  Jesus,  the  Chief  Shepherd,  cient  God,  and  to  put  Mm  off  with  words
who  came  to  look  up  the  lost  sheep  of  and  forms,  in  which  there  was  no  heart
the  house  of  Israel,  whom  (to  move  and  no  moral  or  spiritual  obedience,
compassion  and  affection)  he  here  There  could  not  be  a  juster  description
calleth  the  sheep  of  slaughter,  until  the  of  the  leading  features  in  the  character
time  prefixed  for  their  total  dispersion,  of  the  Pharisees.  These  were  avarice
by  reason  of  ingratitude"  [Trapp].  and  hypocrisy :  their  hypocrisy  being,  as
Yer.  5.  1.  Wickedness  declared  to  is  the  wont  of  religious  dissemblers,
he  innocent.  "They  slay  them,  and  accompanied  with  a  large  amount  of
hold  themselves  not  guilty."  They  ostentation  and  parade.  Mark  the
thought  there  was  no  wrong  in  it,  and  manner  in  which  our  Lord  speaks  of
would  not  be  called  to  account  for  it.  them  (Matt,  xxiii.  14,  23 — 25).
"All  that  found  them  have  devoured  Yer.  6.  No  more  pity.  1.  God's
them  :  and  their  adversaries  said,  We  pity  is  very  great.  Had  been  displayed
offend  not,  because  they  have  sinned  in  wonderful  ways  to  his  people,  and  is
against  the  Lord  "  (Jer.  1.  6,  7).  2.  Wick-  to  us.  2.  But  this  pity  is  limited.  "No
edness  claiming  God  as  its  associate,  more."  Forbearance  will  reach  its  limit,
"  Blessed  be  the  Lord."  Can  anything  and  heavy  woes  will  fall  upon  those  who
be  more  offensive  to  God  than  to  thank  despise  it.  Observe  the  evils  threatened
him  for  the  gains  of  oppression  and  — (a)  Deadly  feuds ;  (b)  Foreign  yoke ;
fraud  !  "  To  what  point  does  not  art  (c)  Dispossession  of  land  ;  and  (d)  Help-
reach  1  Some  learn  even  to  weep  with  less  misery.  "  They  shall  smite  the  land,
grace  "  [Ovid].  3.  Wickedness  justified  and  out  of  their  hand  I  will  not  deliver
by    success.      "I    am    rich."      I    have  them."

succeeded  in  business,  prospered  in  family  «  Mercy  to  him  that  shows  it  is  the  rule  "

and  estate,  therefore   I   must  be  right.  {Oowper].

HOMILETICS.
Thb  Two  Staves;  or  Beauty  and  Bands.—  Verse  7.

The  two  staves  are  differently  explained,  indicating,  according  to  some,  the  double
care  of  Christ  for  his  flock.  Henderson  takes  them  as  symbols  of  "  the  two  modes
of  treatment  "  which  the  Jews  had  experienced  "  under  the  guidance  and  protection
of  God."  Beauty  has  been  rendered  grace  or  favour.  Taken  in  its  connection
(ver.  10),  it  means  the  covenant  of  God,  with  all  its  blessings  and  special  favours.
Bands  signify  unity  or  brotherhood,  which  binds  men  together  (ver.  14).

I.  The  staff  Beauty.  "  The  one  I  called  Beauty."  This  symbolizes — 1.  God's
gifts  to  men.  The  gifts  of  pastors,  the  wisdom  of  senators,  and  the  power  of
princes  come  from  God,  2.  God's  presence  with  men.  Purity  of  worship  and
principle  in  the  nation — holiness  in  character  and  usefulness  in  the  Church — are
beauties  which  attract  and  adorn.  The  image  of  God,  the  beauties  of  holiness,  are
most  desirable.  "  Let  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  our  God  be  upon  us."  3.  God's
defence  of  men.  God's  covenant  was  a  pledge  of  defence  to  them  as  long  as  they
kept  it.  Thus  God's  favour  is  better  than  armies  and  fleets,  wealth  and  valour,  in
the  protection  of  a  people.  This  alone  beautifies  and  strengthens.  "  For  God  is
my  defence,  and  the  God  of  my  mercy."  II.  The  staff  Bands.  "  The  other  I
called  Bands."     Binders  symbolize  the  unity  or  brotherhood  among  men.     1.  This


670  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHaRIJH.  [chap.  xi.


alone  is  the  gift  of  God.  In  the  gospel  we  have  a  hasis  of  brotheihood,  ami
motives  to  cement  it.  The  bands  of  friendship  and  marriage,  the  contracts  of
business,  and  the  treaties  of  nations  may  be  broken.  But  in  Christ  we  have  a
living,  universal,  and  everlasting  brotherhood  of  humanity.  2.  How  strong  an
men  token  thus  bound  together.  Foes  without  cannot  destroy  unity  within.  "  Union
gives  strength  and  firmness  to  the  humblest  aids."  3.  How  weak  are  men  when
not  thus  bound  together.  Factions  and  civil  discords  in  the  nation,  divisions  in
the  Church,  and  discords  in  the  family,  will  bring  ruin.  Nothing  can  beautify  or
defend  a  broken  people.  "  Men's  hearts,"  says  Carlyle,  "  ought  not  to  be  set
against  one  another,  but  set  with  one  another,  and  all  against  the  evil  thing  only."
If  you  wish  to  retain  strength  and  beauty,  co-operate  together,  in  obedience  to  the
Great  Shepherd,  and  under  the  rule  of  Beauty  and  Bands.  "Every  kingdom
divided  against  itself  is  brought  to  desolation  ;  and  every  city  or  house  divided
against  itself  shall  not  stand."

The  Shepherd  Prophet. — Verses  7,  8.

I.  The  charge.  The  command  was  given,  "Feed  the  sheep"  (ver.  4).  Eagerly
does  the  prophet  undertake  the  duty,  and  become  a  type  of  Christ.  "  Lo,  I  come
to  do  thy  will,  0  my  God."  But  notice  the  condition  of  the  flock.  1.  A  helpless
flock.  In  the  hands  of  cruel  shepherds ;  bought  and  sold  by  strangers,  oppressed
by  native  rulers.  2.  A  miserable  flock.  "  Poor  of  the  flock,"  lit.  truly  miserable
sheep.  Men  may  be  poor  without  being  miserable.  But  the  Jewish  people  were
reduced  to  a  most  unhappy  condition.  As  in  the  days  of  Christ,  they  were
harassed  and  worried  (Matt,  ix  36) ;  lost  sheep  (x.  36).  The  poor  are  not
despised,  the  lost  are  sought  out,  and  the  wounded  are  healed  by  the  gospel.  "  I
will  seek  that  Avhich  was  lost,  and  bring  again  that  which  was  driven  away,  and
will  bind  up  that  which  was  broken,  and  will  strengthen  that  which  was  sick."
II.  The  method  of  executing  the  charge.  "  And  I  fed  the  flock  "  (ver.  7).  He
performed,  like  Christ,  the  work  of  a  good  shepherd  to  the  Jewish  nation.  1.  He
furnished  himself  with  staves.  "  I  took  unto  me  two  staves."  He  did  all  he  could
to  bind  them  together  in  unity  and  obedience,  and  direct  them  to  the  grace  and
favour  of  God.  2.  He  destroyed  the  oppressors  of  the  flock.  "  I  cut  off  three
shepherds."  "  These,"  says  a  critic,  "  were  the  persons  of  influence  by  whom  the
affairs  of  the  nation  were  conducted,  and  to  whose  wickedness,  which  reached  its
culminating  point  when  they  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory ;  the  destruction  of  the
state  is  to  be  ascribed."  3.  He  was  grieved  in  soul  at  the  condition  of  the  flock.
"My  soul  loathed  them."  He  witnessed  the  fearful  wickedness  of  rulers  and
teachers.  He  was  deeply  pained,  "  vexed  from  day  to  day  with  their  unlawful
deeds."  This  was  the  feeling  of  Christ,  and  will  be  the  feeling  of  all  true  shepherds.
Sad  the  wickedness  which  creates  tears  of  the  Saviour  !  If  "  every  human  feeling
is  greater  and  larger  than  the  exciting  cause,"  as  Coleridge  says,  what  must  be  the
loathing  of  him  who  sees  the  hearts  of  all  men  !     "  He  knew  what  was  in  man."

HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  7.     I  fed  the  flock.     Christ  the  xiv.  6:  Heb.  xiii.  20:   1  Pet.  ii.  25)"

King  of  men.     The  poor  in  spirit   are  [  Wordsworth].

chosen  to  be  rich  in  faith,  and  heirs  of  Ver.    8.       My    soul    loathed    them,

his  kingdom.     "Jehovah  in  Christ  did  1.  Divine  compassion.     "Loathed,"  lit.

the   work  of  a  Good  Shepherd  to  the  was  straitened ,   the  opposite  of  enlarged

Jewish  nation  during  the  whole  of  his  towards  them,  in  love  and  tender  com-

earthly  ministry  (cf.  John  x.  11 — 14 \  passion  (2  Cor.  vi.   11,  12).     "His  soul


ohap.  XLl  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ZECHARIAH.  671


was  grieved  (shortened)  for  the  misery  men.     "  I  will  not  feed  them  "  (ver.  9).
of  Israel"  (Judges  x.   16).     2.  Human         3.  The  impenitent  flock  and  the  grieved

abhorrence.     "Their  soul  also  abhorred  Shepherd.     God  is  infinitely  happy  and

me."     "  My  soul   did   not  loathe  them  incapable  of  grief,  yet  acts  as  if  he  felt

first,  but  their  soul  first   despised  me,  the  sins  and    miseries  of  men.     "The

therefore  my  soul  abhorred  them."    The  Good  Shepherd  lost  patience  with  their

soul    which    drives    away   God's    good  perverse  impenitence,  and  they,  on  the

Spirit  comes  at  last  to  loathe  him  and  other  hand,  loathed  him  for  his  spiritu-

the  thought  and  mention  of  him  [Pusey].  ality   and   holiness"    [Lange].       Christ

No  room  was  left  by  them  for  the  grace  cannot  be  rejected  with  impunity.  Even

of   God,  and  his  favours  were  rejected  the  Jews,  who    "  did   it   ignorantly  in

[Calvin].     Learn  that   unbelief   creates  unbelief,"  paid    a   terrible   penalty   for

a  mutual  distaste  between  God  and  the  their   crime ;    how  much   more  terrible

sinner.     "Their  soul  nauseated  me"  is  will  be  the  punishment  of  those  who

the  real  meaning — that  alienation  from  have  all  their  unbelief  without  any  of

God  will  lead  to  God's  withdrawal  from  their  ignorance  [Id.].

HOMILETICS.
God  withdrawn,  and  Man  given  up  to  his  own  Destruction. — Verses  9 — 11.

The  treatment  which  the  Shepherd  received  leads  him  to  give  up  feeding  the
flock,  and  leave  it  to  its  fate.  Tsrael  rejected  Jehovah,  and  was  in  turn  rejected.
The  staves  were  broken,  and  the  miserable  flock  have  experienced  the  weight  of  the
words,  "  Woe  unto  them  when  I  depart  from  them  !  "     Learn —

I.  That  God  may  withdraw  himself  from  men  on  account  of  their  sins.
"  Then  said  I,  I  will  not  feed  you."  God  woos  and  awes  men ;  instructs  and
chastises  them ;  loads  them  with  benefits  and  corrects  them  in  evil ;  uses  all
possible  means  to  keep  them  in  his  ways :  but  they  despise  his  long-suffering,  and
provoke  his  wrath.  The  greatest  favours  of  God  often  draw  forth  the  worst  mani-
festation of  conduct.  Men  persist  in  rebellion,  refuse  when  God  calls,  and  are
ultimately  left  to  their  folly.  "My  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  man."
II.  That  when  God  withdraws  himself  from  men  fearful  punishment  falls  upon
them  for  their  sins.  How  awful  the  picture  given  here.  1.  Destruction  most
effectual.  "  It  was  broken  in  that  day."  If  not  suddenly,  the  Jewish  nation
suffered  eventually.  God  has  power  to  execute  judgments,  and  nothing  escapes
his  notice.  2.  Destruction  in  manifold  ways.  (1)  By  pestilence.  "That  that
dieth,  let  it  die."  (2)  By  the  sword.  "And  that  that  is  to  be  cut  off,  let  it  be
cut  off."  (3)  By  famine.  "  Let  the  rest  eat  every  one  the  flesh  of  another."  (4)  By
intestine  feuds.  God  withdrew,  and  ceased  to  be  "a  wall  of  fire  round  about  them."
The  staff  Beauty,  the  covenant,  was  broken,  and  fearful  was  the  fulfilment.  When
the  Romans  forced  admission  into  their  city,  famine  and  pestilence,  feuds  and
mutual  hatred,  had  done  their  work.  Josephus  tells  us  that  every  law  of  nature
and  humanity  was  broken  ;  that  even  the  very  letter  was  fulfilled  :  "  The  left  over
shall  eat  every  one  of  the  flesh  of  his  neighbour."

The  Observant  Few. — Verse  11.

When  the  staff  was  broken,  and  calamities  were  threatened,  this  was  not
observed  by  all.  Only  a  small  number  gave  heed  to  Jehovah,  and  recognized  the
fulfilment  of  the  Divine  word.  Their  character,  attitude,  and  experience  are
described.

I.  Their  character  is  described.  "  The  poor  of  the  flock."  Poor  in  condition
and  poor  in  spirit.     The  nation  was  gone  astray,  but  God  had  "  a  seed  to  serve


672  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [chap,  xl


him."    The  people  were  doomed,  but  Jesus  had  a  "little  flock."    However  low  the
condition  of  the  world,  God  has  always  a  "  remnant  according  to  the  election  of
grace."    II.  Their  attitude  is  described.    They  "  waited  upon  me."    They  prayed
to  God  for  mercy ;  observed  God   in  the  warnings  and   actions  of  the  prophet.
They  discerned  the  hand  of  God  in  the  signs  of  the  times,  just  as  the  disciples  saw
coming  judgments  in  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  and  fled  to  Pella.      "  Whoso  readeth,
let  him  understand  (mark,  consider,  2  Tim.  ii.  7)  it"  (Matt.  xxiv.  15).    III.  Their
experience  is  described.     They  knew  that  it  was  "the  word  of  the  Lord."     They
understood  the  word  of  God,  however  perplexing  it  was  to  others ;  were  sensible  of
God's   displeasure,  and   cherished  a  humble  spirit.     Events  which   are  common
occurrences,  chances  of  war  to  some,  are  warnings  of  God  to  others.     Let  faithful
pastors  be  encouraged  from  these  words.     Prophets  before  them  have  shared  their
lot — ministered  to  a  flock,  despised  by  the  world,  but  distinguished  by  the  mark
that  they  know  the  Lord.     Jesus  himself  thought  it  not  beneath  him  to  shepherd
"  a  little  flock,"  whom  he  will  own  at  the  great  day.

The  Shepherd's  Price. — Verses  12 — 14.

The  prophet,  representing  Jehovah,  demands  the  price  for  his  services.  The
Jews  were  God's  peculiar  people,  blessed  above  all  others,  and  should  have  made
grateful  return.  But  they  offered  forms  for  sincerity,  added  injury  to  insult,  and
sold  the  Messiah  for  thirty  pieces  of  silver.

I.  A  price  of  their  own  rating.  "  If  ye  think  good,  give  me  my  price ;  and  if
not,  forbear."  As  their  servant,  he  sought  their  love  and  obedience.  He  will  not
force,  but  leave  it  to  free-will.  If  men  withhold  what  is  due,  God  will  not  con-
strain them  to  give.  His  goodness  should  bind  us  to  love  him.  "  Love  sought  is
good,  but  given  unsought  is  better "  [Shakespeare],  II.  A  price  most  contempt-
ible. "  They  weighed,  for  my  price,  thirty  pieces  of  silver."  They  gave  him  the
price  of  a  bond-servant,  half  the  value  of  a  free-man — the  compensation  for  a  slave
that  had  been  killed  (Ex.  xxi.  32:  Matt.  xxvi.  15).  "A  goodly  price" — a  splendid
value  that  has  been  set  upon  me  !  Good  men  are  not  half  valued  in  the  world.
What  wonder  when  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  was  sold  so  cheaply  !  III.  A  price
rejected  by  the  Shepherd.  "  Cast  it  unto  the  potter."  The  most  suitable  person
to  whom  to  cast  the  despicable  sum,  who  plies  his  trade  in  the  valley  of  polluted
clay  (2  Kings  xxiii.  10).  An  action  significant  of  the  mind  of  God,  and  the  doom
of  the  people.  God  values  our  smallest  service  if  offered  in  sincerity,  but  contempt
of  his  Son  will  meet  with  death.  IV.  A  price  which  brought  Jehovah's  displeasure
upon  them.  "Then  I  cut  asunder  mine  other  Staff"  (ver.  14).  The  shameful
payment  by  the  people  leads  to  the  abandonment  to  their  fate.  Eraternal  unity  is
dissolved,  and  the  nation  is  broken  up  into  self-destroying  parties.  When  schisms
rend  the  Church,  and  factions  break  the  peace  of  a  people,  we  may  see  the  with-
drawal of  the  Shepherd's  care,  and  the  presage  of  the  nation's  doom.  "  When  the
staff  of  Beauty  is  broken  the  staff  of  Bands  will  not  hold  long.  An  unchurched
people  will  soon  be  an  undone  people."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.    12.     If    ye   think  good.     The  indebted  to  him.     2.  Men  should  make

demand  an  appeal  to  men,  to  give  them  some  return  to  God.     Not  because  they

opportunity    of     reasoning,    explaining  enrich    God,    but    as    proof    of    their

their   conduct,   and   appreciating   God's  affection.     3.  God  seeks  return.     "  Give

kindness.     1.  God  lays  men  under  great  me  my  price."     He  will  not  enforce  it,

obligation    by  his  love;  makes    them  but  leave  the  consequences  with  men.


chap,  xi.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ZECHARIAH.  073


1  Thus   saith    the   Lord    God,  He    that  prophet  was  a  prophetic  prefiguration  of
heareth    let    him    hear,    and    he    that  the  treatment  of  him  "  of  whom  Mo.^es
forbeareth  let  him  forbear."  in  the  law  and  the  prophets  did  write."
Yer.    13    (cf.    Matt,    xxvii.    3 — 10).  However  indirect  and  obscure  the  pre-
There   are    points  of  diversity  between  figuration  might  be,  we  are  not  to  regard
the  two  transactions — that  in  the  Pro-  the    reference  by  Matthew   as   a   mere
ohet,  and  that  in  the  Evangelist.    There  accommodation.       There    was   in    what
are   points,  too,   of   similarity  ;   and   in  befell  the  prophet  a  designed  foreshadow-
these  the  allusive  type  is  to  be  considered  ing  of  what  in  the  future  should  befall
as  lying.     The  "price" — reward  or  hire  the  prophet's  Lord  [Wardlaw].
— given  to  the  prophet,  in   the  vision,  House.      They    are    his    most    guilty
represented  the  slight  value  set  upon  his  adversaries  who,  like  the  Jews  in  Jesus'
person  and  official  services.     So  did  the  days  on  earth,  and  like  apostate  Chris-
same   price,  put   upon   the   head    of  a  tians  in  our  days,  are  so  "  in  the  house
greater   than    Zechariah   or  any  of   the  of  the  Lord "  [Fausset].
prophets,  testify  the  low  value  they  set  Ver.    14.     Cut.     God   seems   to   say
upon    him   and    his   Divinely  -  attested  that  he  will  now  no  more  govern  this
ministrations  and  work.     The  identity  people  in  mildness  and    clemency,  nor
of  "the  price;"  the  principle,  or  want  yet  exercise  his  shepherdly  severity  in
3f  principle,  shown  in  its  pitiful  diminu-  saving   corrections    and    visitations,   as
tiveness;  and  the  giving  of  each  to  "the  formerly  he  had  done;  but  utterly  reject
potter,"  are  the  chief  points  of  resem-  and  disject  them  [Trapp\
blance,  in  which  the  treatment  of  the

HOMILETIOS.

The  Charge  of  Worthless  Shepherds. —  Verses  15 — 17.

Israel  rejected  the  Good  Shepherd,  and  must  now  be  ruled  by  shepherds  of  a
different  class.  In  one  more  symbolic  act  the  prophet  represents  the  truth.  "  Take
unto  thee  yet  the  instruments  of  a  foolish  shepherd."     Notice —

I.  The  character  of  the  shepherds.  These  pretended  shepherds  are  described
— 1.  They  were  worthless.  "Woe  to  the  idol  shepherd."  An  idol  expresses
vanity,  a  thing  of  nought.  "A  shepherd  of  nothingness,  one  who  hath  no  quality
of  a  shepherd."  Destitute  of  spiritual  life,  no  care  for  themselves  or  their  flock ,
mere  forms  or  images  before  God.  2.  They  are  foolish.  Foolish  is  synonymous
with  wicked  (Ps.  xiv.  1).  Not  mere  ignorant  and  unqualified,  but  unprincipled
and  ungodly  shepherds;  vain,  passionate,  and  cruel.  II.  The  rule  of  the
shepherds.  This  is  described  in  the  figure,  not  the  exact  words  of  Jeremiah
(xxiii.  1,  2)  and  Ezekiel  (xxxiv.  3,  4).  1.  They  are  negligent.  "  Who  shall  not
visit."  The  flock  is  sick,  wounded,  or  lost ;  and  the  shepherd  is  unfaithful  and
negligent.  2.  Tliey  are  selfish.  They  think  only  of  gratification  and  self-indulgence.
"He  shall  eat  the  flesh  of  the  fat."  3.  They  are  cruel.  They  not  only  neglect,
but  seriously  injure  the  sheep.  They  have  neither  sympathy  for  the  young  nor
regard  for  the  lost.  They  seize  and  devour  the  flock,  and  tear  in  pieces  the  claws
of  the  sheep.

Attend.  "  This  holy  fox

Or  wolf,  or  both, — for  he  is  equal  ravenous

As  he  is  subtle,  and  as  prone  to  mischief

As  able  to  perform  't ' '  [Shakespeare].

III.  The  punishment  of  the  shepherds.  *  Woe  to  the  idol  shepherd"  (ver.  17).
1.  Judicial  blindness.  "His  right  eye"  which  should  have  been  vigilant,  ever
looking  out  to  guide  the  flock,  "  shall  be  utterly  darkened."  Visited  with  blindness,
"he  shall  grope  in  the  noon-day  as  in  the  night."     2.   Withered  strength,     "The


674


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.


[cm  a  p.  xi.


sword  shall  be  upon  his  arm,"  by  which  he  should  have  defended  the  flock.  His
boasted  light  shall  be  obscured,  and  his  might  dried,  shrivelled  up  to  nothing.  He
is  bereft  alike  of  wisdom  and  strength.  Awful  warning  to  faithless  ministers.
"  If  such  woe,"  says  Wardlaw,  "  hung  over  negligent,  unfaithful,  unfeeling,  selfish
shepherds,  under  the  old  economy,  how  weightily  ought  they  to  feel  their
responsibility,  to  whom,  under  the  new,  Christ  says,  "  Feed  my  sheep  :  feed  my
lambs  "  !

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.


Ver.  15.  Instruments  of  a  foolish
shepherd.  Exalted  rank  and  sacred
power ;  the  weakness  of  human  nature,
and  all  the  means  to  support  their
ambitious  designs.

Ver.  16.  1.  The  condition  of  the
flock.  Some  are  cut  off.  Having
wandered,  they  are  left  to  perish.  Others
are  "  broken,  i.  e.  injured  through  the
fracture  of  a  limb.  The  opposite  of  that
which  stands  upon  its  feet,  and  is  still
strong  "  [jBTe#].  Some  stand  still  through
faintness  or  weakness.  "Better  the
whole  (as  the  word  always  means,  '  in  its
good  estate  ; '  like  our  prayer,  '  that
thou  wouldest  strengthen  those  who  do
stand  ').  Which  was  set  firm,  or  set  him-
self firm,  as  in  Ps.  xxxix.  6,  '  Every  man
in  his  firm  estate  is  all  vanity.'    Id  quod


stat  (S.  Jer.) "  [Pusey].  All  require
special  care.  But  notice  —  2  The
wickedness  of  the  shepherd.  He  should
sustain  and  furnish  every  one  with
provisions.  "  If  taken  as  pointing  to  an
individual  king,  there  is  none  to  whom
it  will  more  aptly  apply  than  to  Herod,
who  was  totally  regardless  of  the  real
interests  of  the  Jews,  and  whose  reign
was  marked  by  the  perpetration  of  the
most  shameful  and  barbarous  cruelties"
[Hends.].

The  whole  chapter  sets  forth — 1.  The
conduct  of  the  Good  Shepherd  (vers.
4 — 14)  who  laid  down  his  life  for  the
sheep.  2.  The  conduct  of  the  bad
shepherds  (vers.  15 — 17).  The  foolish,
cruel,  and  worthless  rulers,  who  devoured
the  flock  and  destroyed  the  nation.


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XI.


Vers.  1 — 3.  Open.  Josephus  relates,
that  "at  the  passover,  the  eastern  gate
of  the  inner  temple,  being  of  brass,  and
very  firm,  and  with  difficulty  shut  at
eventide  by  twenty  men ;  moreover  with
bars  strengthened  with  iron,  and  having
very  deep  bolts,  which  went  down  into
the  threshold,  itself  of  one  stone;  was
seen  at  six  o'clock  at  night  to  open  of
its  own  accord.  The  guards  of  the
temple  running  told  it  to  the  officer,  and
he  going  up  with  difficulty  closed  it.
This  the  uninstructed  thought  a  very
favourable  sign,  that  God  opened  to  them
the  gate  of  all  goods.  But  those  taught
in  the  Divine  words,  understood  that
the  safety  of  the  temple  was  removed  of
itself,  and  that  the  gate  opened."

Ver.  2.  Fir-tree.  The  world  cannot
do  without  great  men,  but  great  men  are
very  troublesome  to  the  world  [Goethe].
The  highest  and  most  lofty  trees  have


the  most  reason  to  dread  the  thunder
[Rollin],

Ver.  5.  Rich.  It  is  success  that
colours  all  in  life ;  success  makes  fools
admired,  makes  villains  honest  [Thomson].
Let  them  call  it  mischief:  when  it  is
past  and  prospered,  it  will  be  virtue
[Ben  Jonson].

Ver.  6.  Deliver.  Such  was  the  fury
of  contending  factions,  that  all  parts
of  the  city  and  the  very  temple  itself
were  filled  with  slaughter.  In  their
mutual  frenzy,  they  burned  the  very
granaries  of  corn  which  should  have
sustained  them,  and  destroyed  the
magazines  of  arms  which  should  have
defended  them.  And  such  was  the
pressure  of  the  famine,  that  parents  and
children,  husbands  and  wives,  tore  the
food  from  each  other's  mouths,  scanty
and  bad  as  it  was,  and,  as  a  subsequent
verse  hints,  fed  on  the  very  bodies  of


CHAP.  XT.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ZECHARIAH.


675


the  dead,eu  vying  them  the  meanwhile  the
cessation  of  their  sufferings  [  Wardlaw],

Vers.  7  (10  and  14).  The  prophetic
narrative  which  follows  differs  in  its
form,  in  some  respects,  from  the  symbolic
actions  of  the  prophets,  and  from  Zecha-
riah's own  visions.  The  symbolic  actions
of  the  prophets  are  actions  of  their  own  :
this  involves  acts  which  it  would  be
impossible  to  represent,  except  as  a  sort
of  drama.  Such  are  the  central  points,
the  feeding  of  the  flock,  which  yet  are
intelligent  men  who  understand  God's
doings  :  the  cutting  off  of  the  three
shepherds ;  the  asking  for  the  price  ;  the
unworthy  price  offered ;  the  casting  it
aside.  It  differs  from  Zechariah's  own
visions,  in  that  they  are  for  the  most
part  exhibited  to  the  eye,  and  Zechariah's
own  part  is  simply  to  inquire  their
meaning  and  learn  it,  and  receive  further
information.  Here  he  himself  is  the
actor,  yet  representing  Another,  who
alone  could  cut  off  shepherds,  abandon
the  people  to  mutual  destruction,
annulling  the  covenant  which  he  had
made  [Pusey].

Yer.  9.  /  mil  not.  God's  decrees
are  not  the  result  of  deliberation,  or  the
Almighty's  debating  matters  within
himself,   reasoning  in    his   own    mind


about  the  expediency  of  things,  as
creatures  do ;  nor  are  they  merely  ideas
of  things  future,  but  settled  determina-
tions founded  on  his  sovereign  will  and
pleasure  [Buck].
Ver.  10.  Beauty.

"  In  his  favour  life  is  found,
All  bliss  beside — a  shadow  or  a  sound  "

\Cowper\

Vers.  12,  13.  Price.  The  influence
of  money  on  a  man  will  be  according  to
the  man's  state  of  mind  ;  according  to
the  condition  of  his  heart  and  affections,
his  estimate  and  plan  of  life  [Binney].

Ver.  14.  Brotherhood.  Let  us  keep
the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of
peace.  Let  this  soft  and  silken  knot  of
love  tie  our  hearts  together  :  though  our
heads  and  apprehensions  cannot  meet,
as  indeed  they  never  will,  but  always
stand  at  some  distance  off  from  one
another  [Cadworth].

Vers.  15 — 17.  Shepherd.  0  miserable
is  that  Church  wherein  are  hirelings
instead  of  the  Good  Shepherd ;  more
miserable  where  are  wolves  in  place  of
hirelings,  and  most  miserable  where
devils  in  place  of  wolves  [Bishop  Jewell].
Eat  the  flesh.  Not  keeping  but  clipping
the  flock ;  as  if  having  now  got  a  cure,
they  might  bid  adieu  to  care  [Bernard],


CHAPTER  XII.


Critical  Notes.]  This  chapter  begins  the  first  half  of  the  second  prophecy  concerning  Israel's
future  and  the  nations  of  the  world.  The  conflict  against  Jerusalem  and  Judah  will  issue  in  the
destruction  of  the  enemies  (vers.  1 — 4).  Burden]  Implying  distress  to  Israel  and  destruction  to
their  foes ;  explained  by  reference  to  God's  creative  power,  which  removes  all  doubt  concerning  the
thing  predicted.  2.  Cup]  Causing  those  who  drink  to  reel ;  a  symbol  of  Divine  judgments,  which
intoxicate  and  cause  nations  to  fall  and  perish  (Isa.  li.  17  :  Jer.  xxv.  15).  Against]  Lit.  "also
with  Judah  it  shall  be  thus  in  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,"  i.  e.  Juduh  with  Jerusalem  will  be  a  cup  of
wrath;  the  country  and  capital  will  be  involved  in  the  same  conflict.  3.  Burden.]  Another  figure,
borrowed  from  the  custom  of  young  men  lifting  up  stones  to  test  their  strength.  Nations  will  fail
and  suffer.  Cut]  They  will  wound  themselves  by  the  sharp  edges  of  the  stones.  4.  Horses]  and
riders  represent  warlike  forces,  confused  and  injuring  one  another;  but  God  exercises  great  care  over
his  people.  Madness]  (cf.  Judg.  vii.  22  :  1  Sam.  xiv.  20)  Open]  i.  e.  to  protect  (1  Kings  viii.  29  :
Neh.  i.  6  :  Ps.  xxxii.  8).  5.  Judah]  Chiefs  of  Judah  will  see  the  foe  smitten  with  madness,  and
recognize  in  the  repulse  of  the  enemy  by  the  metropolis  Divine  security  for  the  country.  6.  Sheaf]
In  oo n sequence  of  this  trust  in  God  the  leaders  consume  their  foes  on  every  hand,  as  a  basin  of  fire


576  riOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [cnxv.  xn,


devours  faggots,  or  a  torch  consumes  sheaves.  Jerusalem]  i.  e.  the  inhabitants.  Again]  After
complete  rout  of  the  enemy  shall  dwell  in  (Jerusalem)  peace.  7.  Tents],  shifting  and  insecure,  and
spread  over  the  country,  first  saved;  to  prevent  pride  and  self- exaltation  in  the  inhabitants  of  the
iortified  and  well-defended  metropolis.  8.  Defend]  God's  people  will  be  exalted  to  a  degree  of
strength  and  glory  surpassing  anything  in  their  experience.  Even  the  stnmbler,  one  who  can  scarce
hold  himself  up,  much  less  attack  a  foe,  the  feeble,  shall  be  heroes  like  David  ;  David's  house  shall
exceed  its  ancient  fame,  become  like  God  ;  yea,  like  the  angel]  that  guarded  Israel  in  the  wilder-
ness; the  highest  type  of  glory  and  strength  (Ex.  xxiii.  20:  xxxii.  34).  This  climax  proves  the
beautiful  style  of  the  prophet,  and  contains  stimulating  consolation  as  a  promise.  9.  Seek]  expresses
the  energetic  purpose  of  the  speaker,  more  humane  [cf.  Lange\  10.]  This  a  complete  contrast  to
preceding ;  nothing  warlike,  but  all  subdued  and  spiritual,  "  a  clear  and  definite  prophecy  of  the
future  conversion  of  the  Jews,  in  consequence  of  a  special  and  extraordinary  outpouring  of  the
influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit"  [Henderson].  Jerusalem]  The  whole  covenant  nation.  Spirit]
which  brings  grace,  and  which  results  in  supplication.  Look]  Applied  to  bodily  and  mental  vision
(cf.  Num.  xxi.  9:  Isa.  xxxii.  11),  with  the  idea  of  confidence  in  thing  looked  at.  Me]  Jehovah
(ver,  1).  Mourn]  The  consequence  of  looking.  Him]  Jehovah — Messiah  speaking  in  his  own
person  first,  then  the  prophet  speaking  of  him  [Faussef],  Pierced]  Thrust  through,  to  slay  by  any
kind  of  death  (cf.  Lam.  iv.  9).  Mourning  most  bitter  and  deep,  as  for  an  only  son].  11.]  An
illustration  given,  the  greatest  recorded,  mourning  for  Josiah  in  Hadadrimmon],  a  city  in  the  valley
of  Megiddon  (2  Chron.  xxxv.  22).  12.]  It  is  universal  mourning.  "  All  the  families  and  households
of  the  nation  mourn,  and  not  the  men  only,  but  also  the  women.  To  this  end  the  prophet  mentions
four  distinct  leading  and  secondary  families,  and  then  adds  in  conclusion,  'all  the  rest  of  the
families,  with  their  wives  '  "  [Keil].

HOMILETICS.
The  Omnipotent  Supremacy  of  God. — Verse  1.

To  remove  doubt  concerning  the  promises  in  this  chapter,  God  prefixes  his  name,
proves  his  omnipotence,  and  declares  his  supremacy  over  matter  and  mind.

I.  God  is  supreme  in  the  physical  world.  Power  is  displayed  in  its  creation
and  constant  government.  1.  He  formed  the  earth.  He  "layeth  the  foundation
of  the  earth,"  fixed  it  on  its  basis,  and  revolves  it  on  its  axis.  He  not  only  made,
but  rules  and  judges  in  it,  and  those  mistake  who  say,  "  The  Lord  hath  forsaken
the  earth."  2.  He  stretched  out  the  heavens.  Like  "  a  curtain "  he  can  stretch
them  out  or  draw  them  together.  God  not  only  created  at  first,  but  continually
sustains  all  things.  But  the  power  which  created  the  world  must  be  unlimited
and  ever  present  to  uphold  it.  Without  him  the  earth  would  wander  from  its
orbit,  and  the  universe  fall  into  ruin.  "  Upholding  all  things  by  the  word  of  his
power"  (Heb.  i.  3).  II.  God  is  supreme  in  the  spirit  world.  He  "  formeth  the
spirit  of  man  within  him."  God  is  the  Creator  and  sustainer  of  man's  spirit.  "  The
Father  of  spirits."  The  human  soul  is  the  breath  of  the  Almighty  (Job  xxxiii.  4) ;
and  spiritually  we  are  of  Divine  parentage  (Acts  xvii.  28).  "  Behold,  all  souls  are
mine."  He  created  them  all,  endowed  them  with  powers  and  faculties  necessary
to  constitute  them  subjects  of  moral  government  (cf.  Hend.y  Ezek.  xviii.  4).  He
controls  men's  hearts  and  purposes  "  as  rivers  of  water,"  encourages  his  people  and
dispirits  their  enemies,  and  will  save  his  chosen  by  quickening  grace  and  eternal
life.  Thus  in  creation  and  human  experience  we  have  proofs  of  God's  power,
refutations  of  doubt  to  perform  his  promise,  and  hope  in  seasons  of  trial  and  diffi-
cult enterprise.  "  I  am  the  Lord  that  maketh  all  things  ;  that  stretcheth  forth  the
heavens  alone ;  that  spreadeth  abroad  the  earth  by  myself ;  .  .  .  that  confirmeth
the  word  of  his  servant,  and  performeth  the  counsel  of  his  messengers"  (Isa.  xliv.
24,  26).

God's  People  ruinous  to  their  Enemies. — Verses  2 — 4.

Here  we  have  promise  of  security  to  the  Church  of  God.  .Nations  may  attack
Jerusalem,  but  will  fail,  whatever  be  their  forces  and  fervour.  Three  figures  are
used  to  indicate  this  failure.    They  will  be  intoxicated  by  the  "  cup  of  trembling,"


3HAP.  xii. J  H0MILET1G  COMMENTARY :  ZECUARIAH.  677


wounded  by  the  "burdensome  stone,"  and  consumed   by  the  " hearth  of  fire"
(ver.  6).
I.  The  enemies  of  God's  people  will  be  rendered  powerless  in  their  efforts.

They  will  gather  together  and  besiege  Jerusalem — thirst  for  spoil  and  blood,  and
be  doomed  to  destruction.  As  the  gods  infatuated  those  whom  they  destroyed,  so
God  will  intoxicate  them  with  the  wine-cup  of  wrath,  administer  a  potion  to  make
them  helpless  and  reel  on  the  ground.  Sennacherib's  army  were  stupefied  and
helpless  in  their  assault.  Persecutors  may  be  excited  to  rage,  but  will  be  deprived
of  their  precaution  and  power,  made  drunk  in  their  fury,  and  exhausted  in  their
efforts.  "  The  stout-hearted  (valiant)  are  spoiled,  they  have  slept  their  sleep  (of
death),  and  none  of  the  men  of  might  have  found  their  hands  /were  able  to  fight)  "
(Ps.  lxxvi.  5).

"For  the  Angel  of  Death  spread  his  wings  on  the  blast,
And  breathed  in  the  face  of  the  foe  as  he  passed ;
And  the  eyes  of  the  sleepers  waxed  deadly  and  chill,
And  their  hearts  but  once  heaved,  and  for  ever  were  still "  [Byron],

11.  The  enemies  of  God's  people  will  be  wounded  in  their  efforts.  This  stone
will  be  burdensome  to  all  who  seek  to  remove  or  carry  it  away.  God's  Church  is
founded  on  the  rock,  and  persecutors  dash  against  it  in  vain.  It  is  a  rock  of
offence  by  virtue  of  its  charter  and  power,  a  stone  of  stumbling  to  many.  In  times
of  persecution  kings  and  rulers  have  tried  to  upset  or  remove  this  stone,  but  it  has
torn,  lacerated,  or  ground  to  powder  those  upon  whom  it  has  fallen.  Israel
escaped,  but  Pharaoh  was  drowned  in  the  sea.  The  Philistines  captured  the  ark,
but  Dagon  was  broken  to  pieces.  Diocletian  built  a  monument  to  commemorate
the  extinction  of  Christianity,  but  he  perished,  and  it  survives.  In  a  conference
with  Andrew  Rivet,  the  King  of  Prance  threatened  severe  measures  against  the
cause  of  truth,  but  the  Reformer  answered,  "May  it  please  your  Majesty,  the
Church  of  God  is  an  anvil  which  hath  broken  a  great  many  hammers  "  [cf.  Lange].
III.  The  enemies  of  God's  people  will  destroy  themselves  by  their  efforts.
Zechariah  revives  the  words  concentrated  by  Moses  to  express  the  stupefaction  at
their  ills  which  God  would  accumulate  upon  the  people  if  they  perseveringly
rebelled  against  him.  Each  expresses  the  intensity  of  the  visitation  [cf.  Pusey].
1.   They  are  smitten  with  blindness.     Then  they  rush  to  their  own  ruin  (Zech.  xiv.

12,  13).  2.  They  are  smitten  with  terror.  The  horses  of  the  enemy  were
unmanageable  by  their  riders,  got  entangled  one  with  another,  and  became
injurious  only  to  themselves.  3.  They  are  smitten  with  madness.  "  I  will  smite
every  horse  with  astonishment,  and  his  rider  with  madness."  The  riders  were
deprived  of  self-possession  and  forethought.  Thus  all  attempts  will  fail,  and  bring
shame  and  discomfort  upon  those  who  are  guilty  of  them.  "  I  will  sing  unto  the
Lord  ;  for  he  hath  triumphed  gloriously ;  the  horse  and  his  rider  hath  he  cast  into
the  sea."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  1.    Learn — 1.  That  the  promises  power  of  God,  by  which  he  stretched

of  God  often  seem  incredible.     2.  That  forth  the  heavens.     The  wisdom  of  God,

doubt   concerning   these    promises   will  by  which   he  founded  the  earth.     The

hinder  our  comforts.    3.  That  the  visible  goodness  of  God,  by  which  he  formed

effects  of  God's  powpr  should   remove  the  spirit  of  man  [cf.  Trapp].
our    doubt   an*?     etr^gtnen   our  hope.         Ver.  2.  A  cup  of  trembling.  What  it

Nothing  can  fail  f^i  lack  of  power  and  is,  and  who  brings  it,  and  who  drinks  it.

love.  The  Cnu*"ih,  therefore,  is  perfectly  "  The   cup   is   all    bitter   and     full    of

safe,  the  armies  are  in  great   danger,  sorrow,"  saith   Augustine :   "  the   godly

Pledaes  *f    Divine  faithfulness: — The  do  often  taste  the  top,  and  feel  the


6T8  ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECIWRIAH.  Lctlu\  xn


bitterness,    but    then    it    is    suddenly  enemy,  and  the  perfect  security  of  the

snatched  from  them  ;   but  the  ungodly  Church ;  or  the  madness  of  men,  and  the

shall   drink   the  very  grounds  and   ex-  special  providence  of  God.     /  wUl  open

tremest  poison "  {/.  Adams].  mine  eyes,  in  contrast   to  the    blindness

Ver.  3.  A  stone.  It  is  not  a  rock,  with  which  God  smote  those  arrayed
or  anything  in  its  own  nature  immov-  against  them— in  pity,  love,  and  guid-
able,  but  a  stone — a  thing  rolled  up  and  ance,  in  contrast  to  the  cruelty  and  self-
down,  moved,  lifted,  displaced,  piled  on  injury  of  the  foes  [cf.  Pusey\  God
others,  in  every  way  at  the  service  and  seems  to  close  his  eyes  sometimes,  and
command  of  men,  to  do  with  it  what  leave  his  people  in  darkness  and  distress,
they  willed  [Pusey].  But  notice  its  The  enemy  thinks  that  God  disregards
tremendous  weight  and  injurious  effects  them ;  but  eventually  he  will  notice  the
when  abused  I  trials  of  the   Church,   and    splendidly

Ver.  4.     The  self-destruction  of  the  interfere  to  destroy  her  foes.

HOMILETICS.
The  Energy  of  Zion's  Leaders. —  Verses  5 — 7.

God  will  not  only  preserve  Israel,  but  raise  up  and  qualify  rulers  to  manage
their  affairs — holy  men,  putting  confidence  in  the  people,  and  rejoicing  in  the
welfare  of  the  country.     Notice  the  energy  of  spiritual  leaders.

I.  Its  elements  are  the  unity  and  affection  of  the  people.  "  The  princes  of
Judah  shall  say  in  their  heart,  (lit.)  *  The  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  strength  to  me.'
The  princes  recognize  in  the  unity  and  love  to  God  found  in  the  people  their
strength  to  endure  and  defend.  The  poor  and  weak  are  held  in  highest  estimation,
and  confessed  to  be  the  hope  of  the  nation,  not  as  a  matter  of  expediency  nor
policy,  but  from  deep  conviction."  In  their  heart  the  rulers  confess  this.  God's
people  may  be  ignored  by  worldly  rulers,  but  they  are  the  defence  and  glory  of  an
empire.  II.  Its  origin  is  found  in  Divine  grace.  "  In  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  their
God."  Few  or  many,  holy  or  unholy  people  have  no  inherent  worth.  Rulers
have  no  energy  without  God.  Jehovah  makes  Jerusalem  "  a  cup  and  a  stone."  "On
human  principles,  or  according  to  the  ordinary  operation  of  cause  and  effect,  the
world  would  prevail.  Often  every  advantage  is  on  its  side  —  arms,  wealth,
influence,  state-craft,  learning,  prestige,  and  numbers.  Yet  the  few,  the  weak,  the
unlettered,  the  lowly,  the  things  that  are  not,  brought  to  nought  the  things  that
are.  The  excellency  of  the  power  is  not  in  man,  but  of  God.  The  Lord  will  not
give  his  glory  to  another.  '  Were  not  the  Ethiopians  and  the  Lubians  a  huge  host,
with  very  many  chariots  and  horsemen]  yet  because  thou  didst  rely  upon  the
Lord,  He  delivered  thee'"  [Lange].  This  should — 1.  Aid  the  weak.  "The  Lord
shall  save  the  tents  of  Judah  first."  2.  Humble  the  strong.  That  "  the  glory  of
the  inhabitants  do  not  magnify  themselves  against  Judah."

The  Danger  and  the  Defence  of  Zion. —  Verses  6,  7.

The  Church  is  looked  upon  by  many  as  troublesome.  They  have  spared  no
effort  to  destroy  it.     God  has  defended  Zion,  the  city  of  our  solemnities.

I.  The  danger  of  Zion.  A  mighty  confederacy  is  formed  against  it.  "  All  the
people  of  the  earth  "  (ver.  3)  gathered  to  besiege  Zion.  "  They  shall  be  in  the
siege"  (ver.  2).  "To  cut  off  the  name  of  Israel,  that  it  should  be  no  more  in
remembrance."  Gathered  against  a  defenceless  people.  In  Zech.  ix.  13  we  have
the  bow,  the  sword,  and  the  valour  of  the  Maccabees  under  the  direction  of  God ;
but  here  we  have  tents  shifting  and  insecure.  II.  The  defence  of  Zion.  The
people  and  the  princes  make  common  cause,  become  one-minded)  and  each  exalt  the


chap,  xil]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  670


strength  which  the  other  was  to  him  in  Jehovah.  1.  God  helps  them  to  defend
themselves.  Self-help  first,  and  then  help  from  others.  "  For  they  can  conquer
who  believe  they  can,"  says  Virgil.  "  Our  remedies  oft  in  ourselves  do  lie  which
we  ascribe  to  heaven"  [Shakspeare].  2.  God  helps  them  by  his  own  power.  "The
Lord  shall  save."  The  defenceless  first.  The  country  people  were  more  exposed,
and  needed  greater  protection.  They  might  be  forgotten  or  despised  by  the
citizens  <>f  Jerusalem;  but  God  specially  protected  them.  This  was  to  teach  the
great  men — men  of  influence  and  position — "  not  to  magnify  themselves  against
Judah."  None  must  assume  anything  to  himself.  All,  the  meanest  and  mightiest
are  equal  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  saved  by  grace  Divine.  Hence  in  every  civil
and  religious  community  there  should  be  no  ill-feeling  in  the  low  towards  the  high,
and  no  disrespect  in  the  rich  towards  the  poor.  "  He  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory
in  the  Lord."

"Praise  is  only  praise  when  well  addressed"  [Qay\,

Spiritual  Heroism. —  Verses  8,  9.

As  a  consequence  of  Divine  protection,  the  weak  would  be  strengthened,  the
mighty  endowed  with  supernatural  vigour,  and  all  their  enemies  would  be  scattered.

I.  Spiritual  heroism  is  Divine  in  its  source.  The  strength  is  "  as  the  Angel
of  the  Lord  before  them."  "  The  Angel  of  Jehovah,"  known  as  the  manifestation
of  Deity  in  their  history.  The  might  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  "  I  can  do  all
things  through  Christ,  who  strengthened  me."  II.  Spiritual  heroism  is
different  in  its  degrees.  We  have  two  classes  mentioned — 1.  The  feeble  become
powerful.  "  He  that  is  feeble  among  them  at  that  day  shall  be  as  David."  He  that
stumbles  and  is  ready  to  fall  shall  become  a  hero,  a  mighty  man  of  valour.  His
feebleness  and  unskilfulness  shall  merge  into  strength,  and  God  shall  teach  his
hands  to  war  and  his  fingers  to  fight.  "  Let  the  weak  say,  I  am  strong."  2.  The
strong  shall  be  more  powerful.  David's  house  shall  eclipse  its  former  splendour,
and  be  "as  God."  He  shall  possess  a  superhuman  courage  and  decision,  perform
exploits,  and  resemble  God,  seen  marching  in  the  front  of  his  conquering  hosts.
III.  Spiritual  heroism  is  gradual  in  its  growth.  "  From  strength  to  strength,"
by  strenuous  effort  and  perseverance.  Faith  is  gained  by  experience,  and  courage
strengthened  by  trial.  "Tried  grace  is  growing  grace."  The  sapling  once  bending
before  the  blast  has  become  the  sturdy  oak  by  the  tossing  storm.  No  degree  of
strength  is  impossible,  but  the  steps  to  attain  it  are  gradual.  "  The  righteous  also
shall  hold  (take  firm  hold)  on  his  way,  and  he  that  hath  clean  hands  be  stronger
and  stronger  (add  strength) "  (Job  xvii.  9).

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.    5.      Strength   to  me.       1.  The  populace   is  weakness,  disappointment,

piety  and  unity  of  a  people  the  strength  and   discomfiture  to  the  best-conceived

of  the  leaders.      2.  The   confidence  of  plans  of  the  most  bold,   prudent,   and

the  leaders  in  the  people  a  necessity  to  experienced  leaders  "  [  Wardlaw].

success.     Without  concurrent  aid,  skill  Ver.    6.       The    pot    of    fire.      The

and  valour  of  little  avail.     In  times  of  governors  of  a  united  and  brave  people,

danger  there  should  be  full  co-operation,  when  trusting  to  God,  are — 1.  Destruc-

reliance  one  upon  another,  and  hope  in  tive.      "  Like  a  hearth  of  fire  (a  fire-pot)

God.     "  This  union  and  valour  would  among  wood,  or  like  a  torch  of  fire  in  a

be    the    '  strength  '    of    their    leaders ;  sheaf."      2.    Very    destructive.      "  They

without   which    they   must   find    them-  shall  devour  all  the  people  round  about,

selves  utterly  powerless.    A  divided,  dis-  on  the   right   hand   and   on  the  left."

pirited,  heartless,  dastardly  soldiery  or  The  idea  conveyed  is  destruction  most


680  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [chai\  xii


terrible  and  complete — most  easily  and  first"     3.  The  design  in  the  salvation

most   certainly  accomplished.     3.    Very  "  That  the  glory  of  the  house  of  David

destructive  only  through   God.     (:  I  will  ...  do  not  magnify  themselves."     No

make,"  &c.       Jehovah  speaks,  infatuates  local  or  personal  supremacy  then.     In

and  exposes  the  enemy,  and  makes  the  the    Christian    Church    all    are   equal;

chiefs  of  Judah  a  consuming  fire.    "  The  nothing  is  due  to  learning,  wealth,  or

fire  could  not  kindle  the  wood  or  the  merit,   and  none  should  domineer  over

sheaf  of  itself,  unless  applied  to  it.     All  the  rest.

is  of  the  agency  of  God  :  I  will  make"  Vers.  8,  9.  Zion's  conquest  over  her

[Pusey].  enemies  —  all    of    God,    yet    achieved

Notice — First,  the  destruction  of  the  through  human  agency.  1 .  By  defond-
enemy;  second,  the  restoration  of  the  ing  the  helpless;  2.  Aiding  the  stum-
city.  "Jerusalem  shall  be  inhabited  bier;  and  3.  Elevating  the  mighty.  The
again."  The  people  shall  yet  dwell  in  strongest  have  need  of  more  strength,
their  own  city.  "  It  shall  not  be  a  new  and  this  strength  is  only  found  in
city  in  some  new  territory  j  but  Jerusa-  Jehovah.  Hence  the  promise  of  de-
lem,  the  city  of  their  fathers,  the  city  fence  added  to  that  of  strength,
of  their  God;  on  the  same  spot,  hal-  Ver.  9.  1.  God's  people  have  many
lowed  by  all  the  ancient  associations  of  enemies.  "  All  the  nations  that  come
their  history  and  religion.  The  language  against  Jerusalem."  2.  These  enemies
pointedly  and  strongly  expresses  reoc-  will  be  discovered.  "I  will  seek."
cupancy  and  permanent  possession "  Secret  plotters  and  open  enemies  will
[Wardlaw].  Literally,  Jerusalem  shall  be  found,  however  distant  their  dwelling
dwell  still  under  herself,  i.  e.  the  Church  or  daring  their  enterprise.  3.  These
will  not  rely  on  earthly  powers,  which  enemies  will  be  destroyed.  "  I  will
will  be  opposed  to  her,  but  she  will  seek  to  destroy."  This  the  end  of  all
dwell  in  continual  stability,  dependent  persecutors,  the  issue  of  all  opposition  to
upon  herself  (cf.  vi.  12,  out  of  his  God.  "  God  will  seek  to  destroy  them,
place;  lit.  from  under  himself),  and  on  not  as  if  at  a  loss  for  ways  and  means
her  own  spiritual  strength,  derived  from  (infinite  wisdom  was  never  nonplussed),
her  Divine  Head,  Christ  [JFbrcto.].  but   his   seeking   intimates    earnestness

Ver.    7.     1.     The    certainty   of    sal-  and  intent  upon  it,  and  that  he  over-

vation.     "The   Lord   also   shall   save."  rules  means  and  instruments,  all  motions

2.  The  method  of  salvation.     "  Judah  and  second  causes,  to  accomplish  it."

HOMILETICS.
Israel's  Sin  and  Israel's  Sorrow. —  Verses  10 — 14.

As  the  former  portion  of  the  chapter  sets  forth  the  outward  protection  of
providence  shown  toward  the  New  Testament  Israel,  by  means  of  which  it
emerged  victor  from  all  trials  and  conflicts,  and  saw  its  enemies  utterly  discomfited,
this  portion  turns  to  the  other  side  of  Israel's  experience,  and  deals  with  its  out-
ward character,  showing  how  the  covenant  people  become  such,  how  the  Church
in  its  new  form  commences  the  Christian  life,  and  obtains  a  title  to  the  Divine
protection.  It  is  by  the  bitter  herbs  of  repentance,  leading  to  pardon  and  renova-
tion through  a  believing  sight  of  the  pierced  Saviour — the  whole  preceded  and
induced  by  a  copious  shower  of  spiritual  influences  of  the  same  kind  as  those
predicted  by  Joel  (ii.  28)  and  Isaiah  (xliv.  3;  xxxii.  15).  In  this  view  the  two
parts  of  the  chapter  correspond  to  each  other,  and  make  one  complete  whole
[Lange\

I.  Israel's  sin.  "  They  shall  look  upon  me  whom  they  have  pierced."  Indig-
nities and  insults  offered  to  the  Son  of  God.  "  Upon  me."  By  wicked  hands
they  crucified  and  slew  the  Messiah.     "  From  that  day  to  this  the  impenitent  and


ohap.  xii.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  681

unbelieving  Jews  have  given  their  hearts'  consent  to  the  judgment  and  deeds  of
their  fathers  ;  have  reiterated  the  cry,  '  His  blood  be  on  us  and  on  our  children  ; '
have  through  many  successive  generations  continued  to  'crucify  to  themselves  the
Son  of  God  afresh.'  On  this  account  it  is  here  said,  even  of  the  Jews  who  shall
repent  and  believe  in  a  yet  future  generation, '  They  shall  look  upon  him  whom  they
have  pierced,' — an  expression  which  signifies  not  merely  that  their  sins,  like  'the  sins
of  the  whole  world,'  contributed  to  bring  sufferings  upon  the  Saviour,  but  which
describes  the  state  of  mind  and  heart  toward  Jesus;  their  being,  though  not  in  act,
yet  in  spirit,  his  murderers,  as  their  fathers  were"  [Wardlaio\.  II.  Israel's
mourning".  The  sorrow  described  by  comparisons  "was  a  repentance  unto  salva-
tion which  needs  not  to  be  repented  of."  1.  It  was  universal.  Not  confined  to
Jerusalem,  but  "  the  land,"  the  whole  nation,  "  shall  mourn."  Four  leading  classes
are  mentioned.  The  priesthood  or  "family  of  the  house  of  Levi;"  the  royal
lineage  or  u  family  of  the  house  of  David;"  the  prophets  or  "family  of  the  house
of  Nathan;"  the  scribes  or  "  family  of  the  house  of  Shimei."  2.  It  was  intense.
Like  the  sorrow  of  loving  parents  bereft  of  the  only  object  of  their  affection,  a
sorrow  most  deep  and  bitter,  the  death-wail  of  the  Egyptians  (Ex.  xi.  1).  A
mourning  like  the  national  distress  at  the  loss  of  Josiah.  3.  It  was  personal,  each
family  apart.  Our  relations  to  God  are  personal,  and  our  grief  must  be  solitary.
There  is  a  sorrow  as  well  as  a  joy  with  which  strangers  intermeddle  not.  The
power  of  God  came  down  upon  the  Indians  when  David  Brainerd  was  preaching.
"  Their  concern  was  so  great,  each  for  himself,  that  none  seemed  to  take  any  notice
of  those  about  him.  They  were,  to  their  own  apprehension,  as  much  retired  as  if
they  had  been  alone  in  the  thickest  desert.  Every  one  was  praying  apart  and  yet
all  together  "  [cf.  Lange],  "  I  acknowledge  my  transgressions:  and  my  sin  is  eve1
before  me."

"  The  deeper  the  sorrow,  the  less  tongue  hath  it "  {Talmud],

The  Spirit  of  Supplication. —  Verse  10.

Not  in  vain  did  Moses  and  others  long  for  a  copious  outpouring  of  the  Holy
Ghost.     God  answered  their  appeals,  and  one  of   His  promises  lies  before  us.
Addressed  towards  the  close  of  the  Babylonish  captivity  to  the  inhabitants  of
Jerusalem,  it  must  not  be  limited  to  these  alone.     In  contrast  to   the  fearful
judgment  of  God  upon  their  enemies,  they  were  promised  the  rich  gifts  of  the
Spirit  "  of  grace  and  of  prayer,"  that  is,  according  to  the  most  probable  interpreta-
tion, the  influence  of  the  Spirit  which  imparts  grace  through  which  he  teaches  to
pray  in  truth ;  and  in  consequence  of  this  benefit,  says  the  Lord,   "  they  shall  look
on  me  whom  they  have  pierced."     The  complete  fulfilment  of  this  promise  must  be
looked  for  in  the  future.     Looking  at  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  special  character  here
represented,  as  the  best  instructor  of  the  prayer  which  is  well-pleasing  to  God,  in
the  first  place,  it  is  through  him  that  a  sense  of  the  necessity  of  prayer  is  awakened.
The  necessity  exists  for  all,  but  experienced  by  comparatively  few.     Who  must
not  often  confess,  "  We  can  scarcely  urge  sluggish  flesh  and  blood  to  pray  "  1  Who
then  teaches  men  to  seek  and  inquire  after  God  earnestly  1    Who  permits  the  sinner
no  rest  until  his  broken  heart  is  fashioned  to  pray  1     The  Holy  Spirit  teaches  man
to  cry  after  God,  convinces  the  sinner  of  sin,  and  constantly  fans  the  flame,  and  lo,
it  blazes  bright  and  high !     It  is  through  him  that  boldness  in  supplication  is
heightened.    We  lack  courage  to  approach,  but  he  banishes  fear,  begets  confidence,
and  enables  us  to  go  joyfully  to  the  Father  in  the  Son's  name ;  places  hallelujahs
on  the  lips  which  recently  uttered  with  trembling,  "  If  thou,  Lord,  shouldest  mark
iniquity,  O  Lord,  who  shall  stand?"     It  is  the  Holy  Ghost  through  whom  the
tendency  of  prayer  is  so  directed  that  it  glorifies  God  and  is  abundantly  blessed  to
ourselves.     If  more  disposed  to  what  is  pleasant  than  necessary,  and  we  allow


682  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [chai\  xn


ourselves  to  be  deceived  by  appearances,  lie  shows  us  our  folly,  and  induces  us
to  ask  the  best  gifts  with  the  most  pressing  urgency.  Do  there  come  moments
— what  Christian  knows  them  not? — in  which  we  scarce  can  tell  what  we  ought
to  pray  for — the  Spirit  helps  our  infirmities,  &c.  (Eom.  viii.  26)  ;  so  that  all  the
varying,  conflicting  desires  of  the  restless  heart  are  subservient  to  one  object,  that
God's  name  should  be  glorified,  and  his  will  in  and  through  us  be  perfectly
accomplished.  Even  as  regards  frustrated  wishes,  the  desires  are  not  in  vain.
"  He  that  searchcth  the  heart  knoweth  what  is  the  mind  of  the  Spirit;"  and  through
the  same  Spirit  again  is  the  hearing  of  prayer  assured  to  us.  The  amen  of  faith
so  heedlessly  taken  on  the  lips  he  places  in  the  heart,  and  instructs  God's  children
to  trust  that  the  answer,  whatever  its  form,  will  not  fail  to  be  sent.  The  infallible
promise  associated  with  prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus  he  aids  us  to  comprehend  in
all  its  depth,  and  to  adapt  to  our  wants;  but  preserves  from  the  folly  of  unreason-
ably ascribing  to  God  a  course  of  action,  as  if  we  might  extort  that  which  had  not
been  determined  in  his  counsel  for  our  happiness.  Thus  it  is  he  through  whom,
finally,  the  fellowship  of  prayer  is  perfected ;  because  where  he  lives,  there  have
all  whom  he  guides  to  the  throne  of  grace  an  actual  fellowship  with  one  another
—  with  the  Son,  with  the  Father.  Thus  he  forms  and  trains  a  constantly  in-
creasing number  of  worshippers  in  spirit  and  in  truth ;  and  those  whom  he  here
teaches  to  pray  he  teaches  on  high  to  praise.  0,  ye  who  have  felt  something  of
this,  should  ye  not  pray  for  the  Holy  Ghost?  Ye  who  know  him,  should  ye
not  pray  more  fervently  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  without  whom  our  defective  speaking
to  God  shall  never  be  true  prayer  1  [J.  J.  Van  Oosterzee],

Evangelical  Repentance. — Verse  10.

These  words  clearly  describe  the  chief  characteristics  and  the  chief  means  of
kindling  evangelical  repentance.

I.  It  is  mourning  for  sin.  Not  feeling  great  terror  nor  shedding  many
tears.  Natural  conscience  may  inflame  remorse  and  sudden  judgments  over-
come, but  sorrow  from  shame  may  work  death.  Godly  sorrow  is  a  bitter
thing,  but  not  mixed  with  despair.  It  is  a  personal  practical  mourning  for
sin;  it  pierces  (pricks)  the  heart  (Acts  ii.  37)  and  leads  to  amendment  of
life.  II.  It  springs  from  looking  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  It  is  a  common
mistake  to  think  that  we  must  first  mourn  and  then  look  to  Jesus.  The  mourning
springs  from  the  looking.  "  They  shall  look  upon  me  and  mourn."  We  may  be
convinced  of  sin  in  various  ways,  but  sorrow  for  sin  springs  from  a  look  at  the  cross.
In  a  crucified  Saviour  we  see  the  malignity,  guilt,  and  vileness  of  sin.  All  excuses
are  given  up,  and  we  are  humbled  in  the  dust.  "  A  quick  returning  pang  shoots
through  the  conscious  heart."  But  the  arrow  that  wounds  brings  the  balm  that
makes  alive.  Peter  saw  his  master,  went  out  and  wept  bitterly,  and  was  restored.
III.  It  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  heart.  There  is  neither  mourning
nor  looking  without  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit.  All  holy  affections,  desires,
principles,  and  states  of  mind  are  the  result  of  the  Spirit.  "  That  which  is  born  of
the  flesh  is  flesh ;  and  that  which  is  born  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit."  Hence  the  precis
influence  conceived  by  the  prophet  is  overcoming  evil,  imparting  grace,  and
developing  this  grace  in  supplication.  Prayer  is  the  first  result  of  a  converted
soul.  "  Behold,  he  prayeth."  "  The  gift  of  prayer  is  not  always  in  our  power,"  says
Lessing.

HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  10.  Learn — 1.  That  a  great  — in  both  princes  and  people.  On  the
change  will  take  place  in  the  house  of  first  preaching  of  the  gospel  many  of  the
David  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem    people  believed,  but  scarcely  any  of  the


CHAP.    XII.]


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.


683


rulers;  now  all  descriptions  of  men  are  to
bow  to  the  Redeemer's  sceptre.  2.  The
cause  to  which  this  change  is  ascribed
is  the  pouring  upon  them  of  a  spirit
of  grace  and  supplication.  The  spirit
of  true  religion  is  an  emanation  of  the
grace  of  God,  which  necessarily  leads
to  importunate  prayer.  The  present
state  of  the  unbelieving  Jews  would
seem  to  render  their  conversion  hope-
less ;  but  when  the  influences  of  the
Holy  Spirit  shall  descend  upon  them,
the  heart  of  stone  shall  become  a  heart
of  flesh.  3.  The  great  medium  of  effect-
ing this  change  will  be  the  remembrance
of  him  whom  their  fathers  crucified,  and
whom  they  themselves  have  pierced  by
persecuting  his  followers  and  continuing
so  long  in  enmity  and  unbelief.  A
realizing  view  of  Jesus  on  the  cross,  as
slain  for  us,  will  dissolve  the  most
obdurate  spirit  into  contrition  and  godly
sorrow  [Sutcliffe].

Ver.  10.  The  predictions.  The  re-
pentance and  mourning  of  the  Jews  is
immediately  foretold,  but  the  fact  im-
plied is  his  having  been  pierced.  There
are  in  truth  two  predictions :  the  one,
that  Messiah  should  be  pierced;  the
other,  that  the  penitent  Jews  should
look  on  him  whom  they  had  pierced.
They  relate  to  widely  distant  periods.
Since  the  first  was  fulfilled  eighteen
centuries  have  passed  away.  But  it
was  fulfilled,  and  this  gives  ground  of
assurance  that  the  other  will  be  fulfilled
in  its  time  [Wardlaw],

1.  The  gracious  blessing  given.  (1)
Look  at  the  promise  itself  The  Holy
Spirit.  First,  as  a  Spirit  of  grace.  "  The
gift  of  God's  free  favour,  testifying  to
grace  alone  in  the  sinner's  salvation ;
the  author  of  gracious  dispositions  and
affections  in  the  human  soul,  bringing
men  in  harmony  with  God's  methods  of
grace  in  the  gospel,  and  teaching  them
to  deny  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts.


Then  the  Spirit  of  supplications,  because
coming  from  God.  He  draws  imme-
diately to  God.  He  teaches  all  under
his  agency,  not  merely  convincing  them
of  the  duty,  but  inclining  them  to  avail
themselves  of  the  privilege  of  prayer.
Wherever  the  Divine  Spirit  dwells,  com
munion  with  God  will  be  the  character-
istic feature  of  the  favoured  individual
in  whom  he  abides.  When  his  influences
come  largely  upon  families,  churches,
and  communities,  the  result  will  be  a
concert  of  prayer — a  union  of  hearts,
and  a  united  outpouring  of  those  hearts
at  the  footstool  of  God"  [Wardlaw].
(2)  Look  at  the  extent  of  the  promise.  The
effusion  is  not  fitful  nor  scanty,  but
generous  and  abundant — a  pouring  rain
upon  all  classes,  highest  and  lowest,
individually  and  socially.  2.  The  won-
derful result.  First,  "  they  shall  look"
with  a  simple,  earnest,  attentive,  and
personal  look,  "  with  trustful  hope  and
longing,  on  me  "  [Pusey].  Then  "  they
shall  mourn"  most  deeply  and  univers-
ally, the  whole  land,  family  by  family.
As  males  and  females  sat  and  worshipped
separately,  so  "  every  family  apart  and
their  wives  apart"

"  I  was  a  stricken  deer  that  left  the  herd  •'

[Cowper].

Every  family  apart.  Apply  this  to
ministers.  The  priestly  tribe  had  its
own  special  in  the  day  of  national
mourning.  "The  chief  priests  moved
the  people,"  and  thus  shared  their  guilt.
Are  ministers  not  reminded  of  their
shame1?  Is  not  grief  becoming  them
when  reviewing  their  treatment  of  God's
people  1  "  Who  can  estimate  the  crimi-
nality of  the  clergy,"  asks  one,  "  during
ages  of  corrupt  and  persistent  oppression
of  the  truth]"  Let  the  guilt  of  our
neglect  and  contempt  of  God  and  hia
word  ever  abase  and  cause  us  to  mourn
apart.


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XII.


Ver.  1.  Heavens.  Creation  in  all  its
length  and  breadth,  in  all  its  depth  and
height,  is  the  manifestation  of  his  Spirit,
and  without  him  the  world  were  dead


and  dark.  The  universe  is  to  us  as  the
burning  bush  which  the  Hebrew  leader
sa w.  God  is  ever  present  in  it ;  for  it
burns  with  his  glory,  and  the  ground  on


684


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.


[OHAP.  XIII.


which  we  stand  is  always  holy  [Francis].
Spirit  of  man.  The  soul,  immortal  as
its  sire,  shall  never  die  [Montgomery].

Vers.  2 — 4.  A  cup.  There  is  no
greater  punishment  than  that  of  being
abandoned  to  one's  self  [Pasquier  Ques-
nel].  Madness.  There  is  no  future
pang  can  deal  that  justice  on  the  self-
condemned  he  deals  on  his  own  soul
[Byron].  0,  that  way  madness  lies;
let  me  shun  that  [Shakespeare].

Ver.  5.  My  strength.  The  multi-
tude which  does  not  reduce  itself  to
unity  is  confusion;  the  unity  which
does  not  depend  upon  the  multitude  is
tyranny  [Pascal].

Vers.  6,  7.  Fire  came  down  from
heaven,  therefore  restlessly  works  itself
through  all  combustibles  till  it  returns
thither  again  [W.  Seker].  The  wrath
of  man  is  the  rage  of  man,  but  the  wrath
of  God  is  the  reason  of  God  [Bishop
Reynolds].

Vers.  8,  9.  Heroism,  the  Divine
relation  which  in  all  times  unites  a
great  man  to  other  men  [Garlyle].

Feeble.

u  Tis  not  enough  to  help  the  feeble  up,
But  to  support  him  after"  [Shakespeare].


Ver.  10.  Look.  Their  eye  shall
affect  their  heart  (Rev.  i.  7 :  Lam.  iii.
51) ;  for  the  eye  is  the  instrument  both
of  sight  and  of  sorrow ;  and  what  the
eye  never  sees  the  heart  never  rues.
The  sun  looketh  upon  the  earth,  draweth
up  vapours  thence,  and  distilleth  them
down  again  ;  so  doth  the  sun  of  under-
standing; which,  till  it  be  convinced,  the
heart  cannot  be  compuncted.  Sight  of
sin  must  precede  sorrow  for  sin  [Trapp].

Vers.  11  — 14.  Mourning.  The
prophet  uses  the  strongest  metaphors
known  to  human  experience.  No  pang
which  death  can  inflict  is  so  severe  as
that  which  wrings  the  heart  of  parents
following  to  the  tomb  the  remains  of  a
first-born  or  an  only  son.  It  seems  as
all  hope  and  glory  were  interred  in  the
same  grave.  When  President  Lincoln
was  assassinated  in  1865,  a  shuddering
horror  seized  every  heart  throughout  the
land,  and  multitudes  who  had  never
seen  the  kindly  leader  were  as  deeply
moved  as  if  the  blow  had  fallen  on  their
own  kindred.  A  gloomy  pall  settled
down  over  all  hearts  and  all  households
[Lange].


CHAPTER  XIII.


Critical  Notbs.]  This  verse  completes  the  thought  of  ver.  10,  ch.  xi.  God  not  only  pours  out
the  Spirit,  but  provides  means  of  purification.  *'  The  verse  exhibits  the  two  grand  doctrines  of  the
gospel — justification  and  sanctification  "  [Henderson],  Unclean.]  Alluding  to  water  of  separation
or  purification  for  sin  (Num.  xix.  9).  2.  Idols]  (ch.  x.  2,  marg.)  Prevalent  form  of  ungodliness,
cut  off,  i.  e.  utterly  destroyed.  Prophets]  False  prophets,  perhaps  under  demoniacal  influence.
Spirit]  of  uncleanness,  opposed  to  the  Spirit  of  holiness  (cf.  Acts  xvi.  16 :  1  John  iv.  6 :  Rev.  xvi.
13).  3.]  The  evil  denounced  will  be  abolished ;  the  very  parents  of  false  prophets  would  be  the  first
to  inflict  merited  punishment  (cf.  Deut.  xiii.  6,  10;  xviii.  20).  4.  Prophets]  themselves  would  be
ashamed]  of  their  calling ;  wear]  the  badge  of  a  prophet — assumed  to  deceive]  i.  e.  to  lie  by  imposing
upon  the  people.  5.  Say]  A  dramatic  representation  of  means  by  which  he  deceives.  He  is  charged
with  wounding  himself  in  idolatrous  worship  (1  Kings  xviii.  28).  He  denies  the  charge  ;  declares
that  they  are  chastisements  which  he  formerly  received  in  the  nouse  of  his  relatives  or  friends.  6.]  By
many  the  words  are  applied  to  Christ.  7.]  A  new  turn,  rather  abruptly,  to  the  Messiah,  who  is
designated  shepherd]  and  fellow]  lit.  the  man  of  my  union,  s.  e.  not  a  neighbour,  but  conjoined,
closely  related.  Man]  Heb.  mighty  man,  "  by  way  of  eminence  "  ( Virum  cohcerentem  mihi. — Vulg.)
Sword]  Figure  of  any  means  for  taking  human  life  (cf.  Ex.  v.  21  :  2  Sam.  xii.  9  ;  xi.  24).  Wicked
Jews  intended  (cf.  Ps.  xvii.  13),  and  regarded  as  asleep,  therefore  summoned  to  perform  the  deed.


CHAr.  xiii.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  686


Turn]  Interpose  in  favour  of  the  little  ones  (Isa.  i.  25).  8.]  Bringing  back  the  hand  explained.
"  The  dispersion  of  the  flock  will  deliver  two-thirds  of  the  nation  in  the  whole  land  to  death,  so  that
only  one-third  will  remain  alive  "  [Eeil].  9.  Fire]  Severe  affliction,  to  refine  and  purify  (cf.  Isa.
xlviii.  10  :  Jer.  ix.  6  :  Mai.  iii.  3).  The  result,  mutual  intercourse  and  confidence  between  God  and
his  people.     Everything  is  included  under  these  phrases  (cf.  ch.  viii.  8  :  Hos.  ii.  25  :  Jer.  xxiv.  7) .

HOMILETICS.

The  Fountain  for  Unoleanness. —  Verse  1.

These  words  are  connected  with  the  preceding  chapter.  The  outpouring  of  the
Spirit  will  be  followed  by  universal  sorrow,  and  then  by  forgiveness  and  purification.
Learn —

I.  That  sin  is  moral  pollution.  The  evil  is  described  by  two  words :  sin,  which
is  transgression  of  the  law ;  uncleanness,  which  is  impurity.  Sin  defiles  the  heart
and  conscience,  makes  unfit  for  the  presence  and  service  of  God.  What  leprosy
was  to  the  body,  sin  is  to  the  soul ;  the  uncleanness  of  the  one  sets  forth  the
impurity  of  the  other  (Ps.  Ii.  9).  Education,  outward  profession,  and  religious
privilege  do  not  exempt  from  this  corruption.  "The  house  of  David  and  the
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem "  required  to  be  washed.  All  have  sinned  and  need
deliverance:  first  from  the  guilt,  and  then  from  the  pollution  of  sin.  "Wash  me
throughly  from  mine  iniquity,  and  cleanse  me  from  my  sin."  II.  That  God  has
made  provision  to  take  away  this  moral  pollution.  "  In  that  day  there  shall  be
a  fountain  opened."  The  fountain  comprehends  forgiveness  and  sanctification.
"  The  grace  of  Christ's  Spirit,  as  well  as  the  virtue  of  Christ's  blood  :  whatever  is
necessary  for  both  ends"  (cf.  1  John  v.  5,  6).  1.  A  fountain  denotes  fulness.  It
is  not  a  well,  cistern,  nor  reservoir ;  but  a  fountain  of  inexhaustible  fulness.  2 .  A
fountain  denotes  sufficiency.  It  is  ever  full  and  ever  flowing.  Enough  mercy  in
God,  enough  merit  in  Christ,  to  cleanse  the  vilest  of  the  vile.  The  laver  of  old  ha  I
to  be  replenished  (Ex.  xxx.  18);  but  God  in  Christ  justifies  from  the  guilt  and
cleanses  from  the  pollution  of  sin.  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleansetli
us  from  all  sin."  III.  That  this  provision  is  always  accessible  to  men.  It  is  a
fountain  opened,  not  closed  nor  sealed  up,  as  in  Cant.  iv.  12.  The  atonement  is  not
a  fountain  hid  and  inaccessible.  Men  are  not  excluded  ou  account  of  nationality
and  the  greatness  of  their  sin — the  injustice  of  God's  demands  or  inability  to  comply
with  them.  1.  Opened  in  eternity  by  the  purpose  of  God.  Before  the  disease
came  the  remedy  was  provided.  "The  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the
world."  2.  Opened  in  every  age  for  all  nations  of  the  earth.  It  was  open  from
the  time  when  it  was  first  needed — from  the  time  that  sin  came  into  the  world.
Ever  since  it  has  been  opened  to  Jew  and  Gentile  in  every  age.  From  the  begin-
ning to  the  end  of  the  world  it  will  ever  be  open,  if  our  eyes  are  only  opened  to
see  it.

The  Opened  Fountain.

"That  day"  opens  up  a  bright  vision  to  the  prophet  in  the  darkness  of  his
time.  Looking  500  years  into  the  future,  he  predicts  an  event  at  Jerusalem  which
displays  the  love  of  God  and  makes  provision  for  the  necessities  of  man.  "  There
shall  be  a  fountain,"  &c.  This  is  a  figure  of  the  source  and  method  of  salvation
through  Christ.

I.  The  purpose  of  Divine  provision.  "For  sin  and  uncleanness."  1.  To
expiate  sin  a  necessity.  This  is  the  great  problem  of  humanity — what  all
pilgrimages  and  penances  have  had  in  view.  Christ's  death  atoned  for  sin  and
accomplished  what  Jewish  sacrifices  typified.  2.  Then  pardon  for  sin  is  required.
Grace  destroys  the  power  of  sin  and  delivers  from  its  dominion.  "  For  this  purpose
was  the  Son  of  God  manifested,  that  he  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil/


6S6  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ZECHAR1AH.  [chap,  xm,

II.  The  freeness  of  Divine  provision.  "A  fountain  opened."  1.  Opened  freely
by  Jehovah.  It  is  not  dug  by  man.  The  Divine  mind  originates  the  scheme.
Man  wanders  in  the  wilderness  ready  to  perish,  seeking  water  where  there  is  none  ;
but  God  opens  a  fountain  to  quench  his  burning  thirst.  2.  Opened  freely  to  all.
It  is  not  sealed  up,  nor  forbidden,  but  accessible  to  all,  without  money  and  without
price.  "Whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely."  III.  The
plenitude  of  Divine  provision.  In  Christ  is  unlimited  fulness  of  grace  and
truth.  Millions  have  been  refreshed,  and  still  the  waters  flow  on  with  undiminished
volume.  "  Enough  for  all,  and  enough  for  evermore."  "  The  waters  that  I  shall
give  him  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of  water,"  &c.  IV.  The  perpetuity  of  Divine
provision.  "  A  fountain  opened,"  and  always  open.  It  never  closes.  Its  store
is  never  wasted  nor  exhausted.  It  is  an  ever-flowing,  never-failing  fountain  to
supply  every  demand.  Not  the  deceitful  brook  nor  summer  stream  which  vanishes
away ;  nor  the  broken  cistern  which  holds  no  water.  It  is  a  perpetual  spring,
which  makes  the  valley  of  Baca  a  well,  the  wilderness  glad,  and  the  desert  to
rejoice  and  blossom  as  a  rose.  This  fountain  is  open  now — open  for  you.  Drink,
and  thirst  no  more  [Adapted].

"  There  is  a  fountain  filled  with  blood  "  [Cowper],

The  Purification  and  Eeformation  of  Israel. — Verses  1 — 6.

That  grace  which  pardons  sin  will  also  sanctify  the  soul.  The  promise  which
says,  "  From  all  your  filthiness,"  declares  also,  "  From  all  your  idols  will  I  cleanse
you."     Sanctification  and  reformation  go  together.

I.  The  purification  of  Israel.  Many  seek  to  get  rid  of  the  guilt  and  conse-
quences wthout  desiring  freedom  from  the  stain  of  sin.  Repentance  however
bitter,  tears  however  numerous,  do  not  repair  the  evils  of  a  wicked  life.  We  must
be  renewed  by  grace,  and  washed  in  this  "  fountain  for  sin  and  uncleanness."
Some  of  the  vilest  characters  at  Corinth  were  washed  in  a  double  sense.  "  Ye  are
sanctified,  but  ye  are  justified  (two  aspects  of  the  same  work)  in  the  name  of  the
Lord  Jesus."  II.  The  reformation  of  Israel.  Idolatry  and  divination  shall  be
utterly  abolished.  The  very  names  shall  be  "  cut  off,"  and  unmentioned.  False
prophets  and  the  spirit  of  uncleanness  shall  be  completely  destroyed.  This  is
done — 1 .  By  a  spirit  of  judgment.  They  will  discern  between  the  true  and  the
false,  commend  the  one  and  avoid  the  other.  2.  By  a  spirit  of  zeal.  The  nearest
relations  were  to  denounce  those  who  seduced  from  God,  and  cast  the  first  stone.
Loyalty  to  God  is  needful  now  as  ever.  Love  to  God  must  be  supreme,  and
nothing  must  compete  with  holiness  and  truth.  "He  that  loveth  father  or
mother  more  than  me  is  not  worthy  of  me.''  3.  By  a  spirit  of  shame.  Pretenders
will  be  ashamed,  and  strip  off  the  outward  dress  of  their  calling.  They  will  rid
themselves  of  every  suspicion  by  disowning  the  profession  of  a  prophet,  and  when
pressed  by  questions  evade  true  answers.  All  to  ensure  safety.  Self-inflicted
torture,  fastings,  and  wounds  in  the  body  will  not  avail  to  save  the  soul.
Humiliation  and  hypocrisy  in  the  devotees  of  religion  are  hateful  to  God,  who
demands  "  simplicity  and  godly  sincerity."     Never  do  evil  that  good  may  come.

Christ  Wounded  in  the  House  of  His  Friends. — Verse  6.

Many  apply  the  words  to  the  Messiah.  It  seems  rather  difficult,  but  very
natural,  so  to  apply  them.

I.  He  was  rejected  by  his  countrymen.  Christ  was  born  a  Jew,  attended  the
Jewish  synagogue,  and  lived  and  laboured  among  them.  Yet  "  he  came  unto  his
own,  and  his  own  received  him  not."  He  was  rejected  by  the  whole  nation,  who
shouted,  "  Crucify  him,  crucify  him  I "    II.  He  was  forsaken  by  his  disciples.


ohap.  xiii.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  G87

He  longed  for  human  sympathy,  and  required  human  aid  in  his  work.  But  the
best  friends  are  weak,  fall  short  of  duty,  and  desert  their  duty.  His  disciples  fell
asleep.  One  denied,  and  another  sold  him.  All  forsook  him  and  fled  away.
"My  friends  have  forsaken  me,"  cried  a  great  statesman.  "  My  friends,  there  are
no  friends,"  uttered  Socrates.  Christ  looked  for  pity  in  his  chosen  few,  and  there
was  none.  III.  He  is  wounded  now  by  his  people.  In  the  domestic  and  social
circles  friendship  decays  and  creates  grief.  What  hurts  more  than  lack  of  confid-
ence, especially  after  long  acquaintance?  Christ  is  wounded — 1.  By  the  incon-
sistent conduct  of  his  people.  When  their  life  does  not  accord  with  their  profession
they  crucify  him  afresh,  and  put  him  to  an  open  shame.  They  act  the  deed  afresh,
and  inwardly  approve  of  the  treatment  which  he  received  (Heb.  vi.  6).  2.  By
coldness  and  indifference.  Treating  things  for  which  he  died  as  of  no  moment.
Disregarding  his  authority,  and  neglecting  the  means  of  grace  which  he  established.
Christ  is  pierced  yet,  and  his  sorest  wounds  are  often  in  the  house  of  his  friends.

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  1.     1.  The  great  spring.     I  will  of   their   former  deeds,   and   repudiate

pour  out.     2.    The   great  agent.     The  their  calling.

Spirit  of  grace  and  supplication.    3.  The         Ver.  3.     Zeal  for  God  against  error

effect.     They  look;  they  mourn;   they  and  profanity.     Zeal  requiring  parental

see  the  fountain  opened  \McCheyne~\.  sacrifice  and  punishment  of  those  whom

Yers.  2 — 4.    False  prophets.    1.   Put-  we  love.    Dearest  friendships  should  not

ting  on  garments  to  deceive,  to  impose  prevent  the  exposure  of  false  teaching,
upon  the  people,  and  impress  them  with         Ver.  6.     Wounded.     There   are  four

an  idea  of  superior  sanctity.  2.  Uttering  kinds  of  such  wounds.     1.  Those  arising

words  which  are  false.     The  false  was  from  their  just  reprehensions.     2.  Those

always  prevalent    among  the  Jews ;   is  that  result  from  their  sufferings.   3.  Those

with  us ;  and  seeks  to  meet  a  craving  of  produced  by  our  being  bereaved  of  them,

our  nature.     The  Word  of  God  is  com-  4.    Those   inflicted    by   their   improper

plete.     Nothing  more  can  be  given  by  conduct.      Again;    if   the   Lord    Jesus

pretenders  to  Divine  inspiration.     "  Be-  be  the  sufferer,  he  is  wounded  in  the

ware  of   false  prophets,"  &c.     3.    Zeal  house  of  his  friends  by  their  negligent

against  false  prophets  may  be  great,  but  conduct,  by  their  selfishness,  by  their

should  always  be  in  a  legitimate  method,  gloomy   conduct,    by   their   unholiness.

and   with    prudence.      4.    When   false  His  question  is — Is  this  thy  kindness  to

prophets  are  converted  they  are  ashamed  thy  friend  %  [Jay],

HOMILETIGS.
The  Smitten  Shepherd  and  the  Scattered  Flook. — Verse  7.

These  words  are  a  direct  prophecy  concerning  the  sufferings  of  the  Saviour,  and
are  appropriated  by  him  to  himself  (cf.  Matt,  xxvi.  31).  We  condense  and  arrange
Wardlaw's  thoughts  on  the  subject.

I.  The  victim  smitten.  First,  the  official  character.  "My  shepherd.^  The
designation  presupposes  a  flock,  and  Jehovah's  flock.  A  shepherd  and  a  flock  are
essential  to  each  other.  The  shepherd  here  is  one  who  fulfils  a  shepherd's  functions
by  the  appointment  of  another.  He  had  himself  a  proprietary  right  in  the  flock
as  well  as  he  for  whom  he  acted ;  but  here  he  appears,  as  elsewhere,  in  the  capacity
of  a  servant.  Jehovah  many  times  represents  his  people — both  the  typical  and  the
spiritual  Israel — under  the  image  of  a  flock.  Here  they  are  his  flock,  cared  for  by
a  deputed  guardian  and  guide.  Under  the  character  of  a  shepherd  Messiah  is
repeatedy  predicted   (Ezek.  xzxiv.  23  :   Isa.    zL   10,   11).     Then  we  have  the


688  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  ZECHARIAH.  [chap.  xiii.

personal  aspect.  "  The  man  who  is  my  fellow."  Various  renderings  have  been
given  to  the  words  :  the  man,  my  companion ;  my  friend ;  my  associate ;  my  con-
fidant ;  my  equal ;  the  man  whom  I  have  associated  with  myself ;  the  man  who  is
united  to  me.  They  convey  the  idea  of  communion,  fellowship  on  equal  terms,
union,  equality  (cf.  John  x.  27 — 30;  xiv.  9).  Since  Jehovah  himself  declares  this
"  man  "  to  be  his  fellow,  we  shall  not  rob  him  of  his  own  appropriate  and  exclusive
glory  by  rendering  homage  to  Christ  according  to  his  own  representation.  II.  The
deadly  stroke.  The  "sword"  here  invoked,  under  a  bold  figure,  is  the  sword  of
Divine  justice — of  punitive,  retributive  righteousness  (cf.  Deut.  xxxii.  40,  41  :  Jer.
xlvii.  6,  7  :  Ezek.  xxi.  1 — 5).  It  is  addressed  as  slumbering,  and  summoned  to
"  awake"  The  language  is  prophetic,  and  looks  forward  " to  the  fulness  of  time "
when  the  "man" — Jehovah's  fellow — was  to  appear.  Manifestations  of  God's
justice  had  been  seen,  but  from  the  entrance  of  sin  into  the  world  this  sword
might  be  said  to  have  slept  in  its  scabbard.  Now  the  law  must  be  vindicated,  a
nobler  victim  smitten ;  not  sinners  themselves,  but  their  willing  and  Divine
substitute.  The  smiting,  then,  includes  all  the  sufferings — the  substitutionary  and
atoning  death  of  Jesus.  Jehovah  himself  summoned  the  sword.  "  He  bruised
him."  "  He  put  him  to  grief,"  &c.  Yet  were  all  in  the  strictest  sense  voluntary.
Jesus  undertook  the  task  with  the  full  view  of  all  it  would  cost.  "  Lo,  I  come,"
&c.  III.  The  twofold  result.  First,  "the  sheep  shall  be  scattered."  We  are
naturally  led  to  see  by  the  language  of  our  Lord  that  the  "  scattering  "  from  him  of
his  adherents  and  frie?ids — which  formed  a  part,  and  to  a  spirit  of  sensibility  like
his  not  a  trifling  one,  of  his  sufferings — was  included  in  this  prediction  (cf.  Matt.
xxvi.  31 — 56).  The  verse  which  follows  relates  to  the  dispersion  of  the  mass  of
unbelieving  Jews — an  act  of  judicial  vengeance  for  their  unbelief  and  rebellion.
The  second  result  is,  "•/  will  turn  (or  turn  back)  my  hand  upon  the  little  ones."
"The  little  ones"  here  describes  tender  affection  (cf.  Matt,  xviii.  6,  10,  14).  Jesus
appeared  to  his  disciples,  and  accosted  them  as  "children"  and  "little  children."
The  language  is  that  of  love  and  kindness,  not,  as  some  think,  that  of  threatening
and  judicial  severity.  The  hand  is  that  of  God;  the  "little  ones,"  children  of
God  in  Jesus  Christ;  and  it  is  "  turned,"  or  turned  back,  "  upon  them  "  for  gracious
care  and  protection.  The  hand  of  avenging  justice  had  smitten  the  victim  and  was
fully  satisfied,  but  these  "  little  ones  "  were  set  free.  They  may  be  scattered  for  a
time,  but  not  lost.  He  will  "  turn  his  hand "  to  gather,  bless,  shield,  and  save
them.     The  fulness  of  blessing  rests  in  Jehovah's  favour.

In  the  Furnace;  or,  Twofold  Effects  of  Trial. — Verses  8,  9.

These  words  predict  the  destruction  of  two-thirds  of  the  inhabitants  of  Judea,
by  famine,  pestilence,  and  wars ;  but  the  remaining  third  part,  after  severe  testing
and  affliction,  will  come  out  of  the  furnace  a  spiritual  and  purified  people,  enter
into  a  new  relationship  with  God,  and  enjoy  all  the  blessings  of  his  covenant.  The
former  part  has  been  fulfilled ;  the  latter  part  is  carried  on  now,  and  will  terminate
in  the  conversion  of  the  Jews  to  God.

I.  Some  are  destroyed.  There  will  be  a  frightful  sweep  of  judgments,  and
"two  parts  therein  shall  be  cut  off,  and  die."  In  the  visible  Church  there  is  a
mixture  of  good  and  bad,  sound  and  unsound.  When  God  tests  the  Church  by
affliction,  many  are  proved  unworthy;  receive  not  the  correction,  but  harden
themselves,  and  perish  in  their  sin.  II.  Others  are  preserved.  "  The  third  part
shall  be  left  therein."  They  will  pass  through  the  fire,  and  be  refined  as  silver  and
gold  by  the  process.  The  process  is  slow,  but  the  issue  certain,  even  with  the
Jews.  How  is  it  in  our  afflictions  1  All  will  have  to  pass  through  the  fire.  The
reprobate  metal  will  be  cast  away,  the  genuine  gold  will  be  refined  and  ennobled.
"  Afflictions  sent  by  Providence  melt  the  constancy  of  the  noble-minded,  but  con-


ohap.  xiii.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  689


firm  the  obduracy  of  the  vile.  The  same  furnace  that  hardens  the  clay  liquefies
gold ;  and  in  the  strong  manifestations  of  Divine  power  Pharaoh  found  his
punishment,  but  David  his  pardon  "  [CoUori\.

4<  'Tis  a  physic  that  is  bitter  to  sweet  end  "  [Shakapeare],

After  the  Furnace  ;  or,  Purified  Intercourse. —  Verse  9.

The  purifying  effect  of  trial  will  be  earnest  calling  upon  God,  and  reciprocal
intercourse  with  him.  "  The  door  of  the  furnace  leads  to  the  closet,"  says  one.
Christians  pray  best  when  they  have  endured  trials.     We  adapt  this  Outline —

I.  The  exercise.  "  They  shall  call."  1.  How  simple  is  true  prayer  !  A  "  call,"
not  in  pompous  tones  nor  lengthy  words.  "  The  simplest  form  of  speech  that
infant  lips  can  try."  2.  How  earnest  is  true  prayer  !  A  call,  an  intense  feeling  for
God,  a  crying  out  for  his  help.  3.  How  constant  is  true  prayer !  "  They  shall
call."  A  constant  practice  with  them.  4.  How  sure  the  ground  of  true  prayer !
"  On  my  name."  Sot  a  venture,  not  an  uncertain  cry  for  pity,  but  a  personal,
believing  application  to  God  who  answers.  II.  The  mutual  joy.  First,  God
says,  "  It  is  my  people," — chosen  to  stand  in  special  and  loving  relation  to  him.  He
spares  them  in  trial,  and  fits  them  for  their  high  destiny.  He  turns  to  them  in
covenant  grace,  and  with  renewed  and  complacent  delight  "  lifts  upon  them  anew
the  light  of  his  countenance."  Second,  they  renounce  their  unbelief,  and  cling  to
him.  Weaned  from  idolatry  by  affliction,  they  declare  in  gratitude  and  humility,
"  Jehovah  is  my  God."  They  not  only  worship  him  above  other  gods,  but  own
him  as  their  portion.  His  favour  to  them  is  life,  and  his  loving-kindness  is  better
than  life.  His  gifts  are  precious,  but  he  himself  exceeds  them  all.  "  Whom  have
I  in  heaven  but  thee?  and  there  is  none  upon  earth  that  I  desire  beside  thee."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  7.  The  little  ones.  How  amaz-  hand  brings  balm  to  the  most  painful
\ng  is  this  promise  of  God,  when  we  wound  wrought  by  men's  hands,  and  our
contemplate  this  hand  in  its  omnipotence,  littleness  or  weakness,  if  possible,  brings
and  think  at  the  same  time  on  our  own  us  yet  more  within  his  beneficent  reach,
utter  insignificance,  our  deep  unworthi-  May  this,  so  rich  a  fountain  of  consola-
ness,  our  woeful  weakness  !  We  count  tion,  ever  be  to  us  a  sanctifying  thought !
it  much  to  stoop  one  day  in  the  year  to  We  must  stoop  low  ere  we  can  taste  the
be  little  with  little  ones.  God  stoops  consoling  truth.  Humility  is  the  found-
anew  from  time  to  time  to  bless  the  ation  of  all  spiritual  blessings ;  nay,
most  humble  with  special  favour.  Christ  God  himself  can  build  upon  no  other,
preached  the  gospel  to  the  poor ;  chose  Direct  yourselves  constantly  to  this
his  first  subjects  from  fishermen  and  promise.  Though  he  may  turn  his
publicans.  Animating  truth !  Almost  hand  upon  the  little  ones,  it  is  not,  as
before  we  are  aware  of  our  lost  and  low  some  think,  that  they  may  always  remain
condition  the  outstretched  hand  presents  weak  and  little,  but  grow  in  the  know-
itself,  a  token  and  pledge  of  communion,  ledge  and  grace  of  Christ.  Show,  then,
strength,  and  guidance.  What  evidence  that  his  hand  is  not  stretched  out  to  you
more  clear  that  he  has  no  thoughts  of  in  vain,  and  in  turn  be  followers  of  God
anger  towards  us]  In  the  aid  which  by  your  care  over  the  little  ones  that
our  fellow-men  render  there  is  alternately  surround  you  [/.  Van  Oosterzee].
much  hardness  and  much  weakness,  so  Vers.  8,  9.  Learn — 1.  In  the  times
much  unwillingness  and  distrust,  that  it  of  severest  judgments  upon  the  visible
is  often  better  to  be  forsaken  than  sur-  Church,  God  may  have  a  few  preserved,
rounded   by   men.      But  God's   tender  "The  third  part  shall  be  left."     2.  Al-

44


690  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ZECHARIAH.  [chap,  xin


though  these  few  may  be  preserved,  they  they  shall  be  satisfied  j  I  will  be  all
will  not  be  entirely  free  from  trial,  things  that  men  righteously  desire :  life
They  must  be  tested  and  exercised  in  and  health,  and  food  and  abundance,
the  fire.  "I  will  bring  the -third  part  glory  and  honour  and  peace  and  all
through  the  fire."  3.  The  design  of  this  things  [Augustine],  The  promise  is  often-
trial  is  to  purify  them  from  dross,  and  times  renewed  through  the  prophets,
make  them  shine  the  brighter  in  God's  oftentimes  fulfilled  in  Christ,  whenever
service.  "I  will  refine  them  as  silver,"  the  Church  is  recalled  from  listlessness
&c.  "  Fiery  trials  make  golden  Chris-  by  fiery  trials,  and  through  them  her
tians."  children  are  restored  to  deeper  devoted-
To  them  a  God.  I  will  be  that  wherein  ness  and  closer  union  with  God  [Pusey].

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XIIL

Ver.  1.     Unclean.    If  we  did  not  first  [South].     It  is   too   much  proved  that

take  great  pains  to  corrupt  our  nature,  with  devotion's  visage  and  pious  action

our    nature    would     never    corrupt    us  we   do    sugar    over   the   devil    himself

[Clarendon].  That  must  needs  be  deadly  [Shakspeare].

which  could  be  healed  by  no  other  way         Ver.  7.    Little  ones.     Louis  IX.,  king

but  the  death  of  Christ.  Who,  therefore,  of  France,  was  found  instructing  a  poor

seriously  considering  that  his  sins  could  kitchen-boy ;  and  being  asked    why  he

in  no  other  way  be  expiated  than  by  the  did   so,  replied,    "  The  meanest  person

death  of  the  Son  of  God  himself,  would  hath  a  soul  as  precious  as  my  own,  and

not  tremble  to  tread  as  it  were  this  most  bought  with  the  same  blood  of  Christ "

precious  blood  underfoot  by  daily  sinning1?  [Arvine].
[Bishop  Davenport].  Vers.  8,  9.     Fire.     I  remember  some

Vers.  2 — 4.     Idols.     Idolatry  has  its  years  ago  I  went  into  a  glass-house;  and,

origin  in  the  human  heart.     Men  love  standing   very  attentive,  I    saw  several

sin,  and  do  not  want  to  be  reproved  for  masses    of    burning    glass,    of    various

it;  therefore  they  form  for  themselves  forms.     The  workman  took   a  piece  of

a  god  that  will  not  reprove  them  [J.  H.  glass,  and  put  it  into  one  furnace,  then

Evans].  he  put  it  into  a  second,  and  then  into  a

,  „r.  ,     ,  Al     ,,   ,      ...A  third.     I  said    to  him,  "Why  do  you

"With  what  unutterable  humility  /    ,i.     ,i  ■,  n       « »      rr

We  should  bow  down,  thou  blessed  God,  to  thee,  Put  thls  through  so  many  fires  1        lie

Seeing  our  vanity  and  foolishness,  answered,    "  0,    sir,    the    first    was   not

When  to  our  own  devices  left,  we  frame  hot  enough,  nor  the  second,  and  there-

A  shameful  creed  of  craft  and  cruelty  "  fore  we  put  ifc  infco  a  third,  and  that  will

[Landon].  make  it   transparent>»     xhus   we   must

Vers.   4,  5.     Lies.     All  deception  in  be  tried  and  exercised  with  many  fires,

the  course  of  life  is  indeed  nothing  else  until  our  dross  be  purged  away,  and  we

but  a  lie  reduced  to  practice,  and  false-  are    made    fit     for    the    Master's    use

hood   passing   from   words  into   things  [Whitfield].


CHAPTER  XIV.


Critical  Notbs.  ]  Day]  specially  appointed  to  inflict  judgments  and  manifest  his  glory.  SpoilJ
accumulated  by  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  and  fit  for  the  enemy.  2.  Nations]  to  take  and  plunder
the  holy  city,  to  rob  houses  and  ravish  women  (cf.  Isa.  xiii.  16).  Half]  The  able-bodied  sold
into  slavery  "or  condemned  to  work  in  mines.     Res.]  Poorer  not  eat  off]  t.  e.  not  transported,  bat


chap.  xiv.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  691


permitted  to  perish  in  ruins.  3.  Against]  The  enemy  doomed  in  turn  to  destruction  by  Jehovah,
as  when  he  fought  for  Israel  at  Red  Sea.  4.  Mount]  Which  for  situation  and  height  is  most  con-
venient to  help  his  people.  His  feetj  touch,  and  the  result  is  an  earthquake  (Ps.  lxviii.  8  :  Nah.
i.  5).  The  mount  is  split  through  the  middle  latitudinally ;  one  half  falls  to  the  north,  and  the
other  to  the  south.  A  great  valley]  is  formed  for  the  escape  of  God's  people.  5.  The]  Lit.  my
mountains — Zion  and  Moriah  specially  sacred  to  Jehovah  [Moore] — or  mountains  formed  by  my  power.
He  had  given  them  separate  existence.  The  level  opening  would  extend  to  Azal]  a  place  near  Jerusalem,
of  which  no  trace  exists  at  present.  Like  as]  the  flight  from  the  earthquake— swift,  universal,  and  in
fear,  as  in  the  days  of  Uzziah  (Amos  i.  1).  The  Lord]  The  second  person  indicates  the  joy  of  the
prophet  in  hailing  the  shining  retinue  of  Jehovah's  appearance.  Saints]  Holy  angels  (Deut.  xxxiii.
2,  3  :  Dan.  vii.  9,  10  :  Matt,  xxv,  31 :  Rev.  xix.  14).  Some  say  redeemed  men  as  well  as  holy
angels.  6.]  A  period  of  unmitigated  calamity,  which  comprehends  the  long  centuries  of  oppression,
cruelty,  and  scorn  to  which  Jews  have  been  subjected  since  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  [Henderson].
Clear]  Lit.  precious,  splendid  (cf.  Job  xxxi.  26).  There  the  moon  is  described  as  walking  preciously,
or  splendidly,  i.  e.  in  brightness  ;  but  dark]  lit.  condensed,  from  a  word  to  contract,  to  draw  together.
u  The  words  describe  the  passing  or  vanishing  of  the  brightness  of  the  stars,  answering  to  the  pro-
phetic announcement  that  on  the  day  of  judgment  sun,  moon,  and  stars  will  lose  their  brightness
or  be  turned  into  darkness"  (Joeliv.  15  :  Matt.  xxiv.  29)  [Keil].  7.  One  day]  Solitary  in  its  kind,
and  unparalleled  by  any  other  ;  neither  perfect  day  nor  perfect  night.  "  One  continuous  day  without
night  (Rev.  xxii.  5,  25).  The  millennium  described  "  (Rev.  xx.  3,  7)  [Henderson].  Known]  only
to  Jehovah,  and  should  restrain  the  curiosity  of  men.  8.  Living]  i .  e.  running,  perennial,  refreshing ;
opposed  to  stagnant,  noxious  waters ;  an  image  of  copious  streams  of  gifts  and  grace  from  the  Church,
the  source  of  all  blessings.  Eastern,  i  e.  Dead  sea ;  Western,  i.  e.  Mediterranean.  9.]  In  conse-
quence of  the  universal  spread  of  the  gospel,  Jehovah  will  be  king]  i.  e.  supreme,  and  his  name  one].
Idolatry  will  cease,  and  the  unity  of  the  Godhead  unanimously  recognized.  10.]  The  whole  land
turned]  levelled  to  a  plain  to  elevate  Jerusalem,  which  will  be  restored  to  its  former  grandeur  (Mic.
iv.  1).  This  figurative  of  spiritual  elevation.  The  boundaries  cannot  be  determined  with  certainty.
11.  Dwell]  securely,  without  fear  of  attack  or  captivity  (Isa.  lxv.  19).  Utter  destruction]  Exemp-
tion from  curse  the  ground  of  this  security.  No  more  civil  or  national  punishments  on  account  of
sin,  implying  that  the  nation  is  holy.  12—15.]  The  hostile  nations  forming  the  final  confederacy
will  be  punished  (cf.  Isa.  lix.  18  :  Ezek.  xxxvii :  Rev.  xix).  Plague]  always  an  infliction  from  God.
This  stroke  most  terrible.  "A  living  death  ;  the  corruption  (Gal.  vi.  8)  of  death  combined  in  ghastly
union  with  the  conscious  sensibility  of  life  "  [Fausset].  13.  Tumult]  CivJ  discord  another  way  of
destruction,  created  by  panic  (cf.  Jud.  vii.  22  :  1  Sam.  xiv.  20).  Lay  hold]  Seeking  help,  but  finding
arms  turned  against  one  another.  "  The  grasp  of  the  other's  hand  is  a  hostile  one  in  this  case,  the
object  being  to  seize  him,  and,  having  lifted  his  hand,  to  strike  him  dead  "  [Keil],  14.  Judah]  The
whole  covenant  people  will  carry  on  the  conflict  at  Jerusalem,  seize  as  booty  the  costly  possession  of
the  heathen,  and  visit  them  with  retribution  for  the  plunder  of  Jerusalem  (ver.  2).  15.]  So  complete
will  be  the  destruction,  that  beasts  of  burden,  used  in  warfare,  and  all  cattle  will  be  destroyed  by  the
same  plague  as  men  [Keil].  16.]  Some  heathen  will  be  preserved,  converted  to  God  ;  go  up]  i.  e.  join
in  solemn  acts  of  worship.  17.  Not]  come  up;  penalty  will  be  inflicted  upon  absentees.  Upon  them
no  rain]  i.  e.  the  blessings  of  Divine  grace  will  be  withdrawn  from  them.  18.  If]  The  menace  repeated
with  special  application  to  Israel's  hereditary  foe.  "  Egypt  will  join  the  procession  Zionwards,  or
feel  the  retributive  curse."  19.]  Sin  including  its  effects  (cf.  Num.  xxxii.  23).  20.  Bells]  sus-
pended from  the  neck,  as  tinkling  ornaments.  Holiness,  &c.]  The  sacred  symbol  engraved  upon  the
diadem  of  the  high  priest  (Ex.  xxviii.  36).  The  distinction  between  sacred  and  profane  would  cease.
The  commonest  things  would  be  holy,  because  devoted  to  God.  Pots]  Vessels  used  for  cooking  would
be  as  holy,  be  upon  a  par  with  those  considered  most  sacred,  viz.  "the  bowls  before  the  altar."
21.]  The  same  idea  carried  out  fully.  Not  only  temple-pots  would  be  equal  to  sacrificial  bowls,  but
every  common  pot  in  the  city  and  in  the  land  would  be  deemed  as  holy  as  the  utensils  of  the  temple,
and  would  be  freely  used  for  sacrifice.  Canaanite]  No  more  godless  members  of  the  covenant
nation ;  all  worshippers  would  be  righteous  and  sincere,  and  "  the  whole  kingdom  of  God  will  be
transformed  by  the  Lord  into  a  holy  of  holies  (see  Rev.  xxi.  22,  27)  "  [Keit],

HOMILETIGS.
The  Grand  Assault  and  the  Wonderful  Deliverance. —  Verses  1 — 6.

Interpreters  take  this  chapter,  some  literally  and  others  symbolically,  believe  it
to  have  been  partially  or  to  be  fulfilled  wholly  in  future  ages.  In  whatever  sense
explained,  it  sets  forth  the  great  contests  of  the  Christian  Church  and  the  great
principles  of  God's  moral  government.

I.  The  grand  assault.  All  nations  are  gathered  together  for  battle  against
Jerusalem.  1.  An  assault  at  the  appointed  time.  "  The  day  of  the  Lord  cometh."
God  suffers  his  people  to  be  reduced  and  to  pass  through  fiery  trials ;  but  as  "  day  "


692  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  [chap,  xiv.


dawns  after  night,  so  a  period  is  chosen  to  vindicate  his  judgment  and  punish  his
foes.  2.  An  assault  in  accordance  with  the  Divine  purpose.  "  For  I  will  gather  all
nations."  God  is  supreme  over  "  all  nations,"  and  will  accomplish  his  purpose  in
spite  of  the  opposition  and  often  by  the  wrath  of  man.  Historians  record  events
and  look  no  higher.  But  prophecy  exhibits  "  God  in  history."  He  predicts,  and
he  fulfils.  3.  An  assault  with  partial  success.  We  have  assault,  capture,  and
plunder,  and  sad  is  the  picture  of  rifled  houses  and  dishonoured  women.  This
should  remind  us  of  future  conflict  with  the  powers  of  darkness — teach  us  not  to
expect  peace  and  calm.  A  fearful  encounter  may  be  at  hand,  the  outlook  may  soon
darken,  and  the  onslaught  may  convulse  the  Church.  But  when  the  enemies  seem
to  triumph  victory  will  be  snatched  from  them.  "  Then  the  Lord  shall  go  forth
and  fight  against  those  nations."  II.  The  wonderful  deliverance.  God  is  not
hidden  in  obscurity.  He  comes  forth  in  wondrous  deeds.  "  Thou  wentest  forth
for  the  salvation  of  thy  people."  1.  Deliverance  by  supernatural  means.  The
mount  was  cleft  asunder,  "  a  very  great  valley  "  was  made,  and  a  place  of  escape  was
provided  by  the  special  power  of  God.  Nothing  can  prevent  the  escape  of  God's
people.  Mountains  are  removed  and  valleys  are  filled  for  the  way  of  God's
redeemed.  "  Behold,  the  Lord  cometh  forth  out  of  his  place,  and  will  come  down,
and  will  tread  upon  the  high  places  of  the  earth.  And  the  mountains  shall  be  molten
under  him,  and  the  valleys  shall  be  cleft."  2.  Deliverance  under  God's  leadership.
God  himself  goes  forth  against  the  foe,  and  fights  for  his  people.  (1)  God  was
clad  in  awful  majesty.  Again,  "  the  glory  of  the  Lord  stood  "  upon  the  mount ;
the  earth  quaked  beneath  his  feet,  and  the  stars  above  grew  dim.  The  physical
world  marked  the  events  in  the  spiritual.  (2)  God  was  attended  by  splendid
retinue.  "  My  God  shall  come,  and  all  the  saints  with  thee."  Angels  stand  before
his  throne,  wait  orders,  and  fly  on  missions  of  mercy  and  judgment.  They  are
represented  as  going  with  God  for  the  execution  of  his  purpose.  They  attended
the  first,  and  will  come  with  the  second  appearance  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  "  Behold,
the  Lord  cometh  with  ten  thousand  of  his  saints,  to  execute  judgment."

The  Eemarkablb  Day. —  Verses  6,  7

Many  refer  these  words  to  different  periods,  but  we  take  them  as  connected  with
one  event.  The  coming  of  the  Lord  will  produce  great  changes  in  nature.  The
day  will  bring  night,  and  the  evening  light.  Its  order  will  be  reversed.  When  the
natural  course  of  events  would  bring  darkness,  a  bright  light  shall  dawn.

I.  A  day  of  mingled  light  and  darkness.  "  Not  the  clearness  of  unclouded
day,"  says  Wardlaw,  from  whom  we  borrow,  "  nor  the  darkness  of  a  starless  night.
Something  between  both,  or  a  combination  of  both — darkness  here  and  light
there."  A  representation  of  the  dispensation  before  and  since  the  days  of  Christ.
Mercy  and  judgments,  comforts  and  afflictions  in  the  Christian  Church.  In  the
world  truth  and  error,  Christ  and  antichrist  in  mighty  conflict.  Now  night,  and
then  day.  "  The  light  is  neither  clear  nor  yet  dark,"  "  not  day  nor  night ; "  but  the
darkness  will  pass  away  and  the  true  light  soon  shine.  II.  A  day  only.  *  It  is
one  day."  Some  say  one  long,  continuous  day  of  grief,  which  makes  the  saints  cry,
"  How  long  % "  But  take  it  in  another  sense.  Whatever  be  the  length,  it  is  only  a
day.  In  the  darkness  light  is  not  wanting  in  which  we  may  work  and  walk.  The
sun  does  nor  entirely  set.  The  clouds  will  soon  be  scattered.  Brief,  comparatively,
is  the  period,  though  the  joy  of  day  and  the  repose  of  night  be  absent.  This
should  uphold  and  console  in  our  "  fight  of  afflictions."  III.  A  day  of  remarkable
close.  When  evening  is  naturally  expected,  lo,  the  splendours  of  day  break  forth.
"  At  evening  time  it  shall  be  light."  To  God's  people  life  may  be  clouded,  and  to
God's  cause  night  may  be  dark.  But  ere  long  "the  Lord  shall  be"  their
"  everlasting  light,  and  the  days  of "  their  "  mourning  shall  be  ended."     IV.  A


chap,  xnr.l  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ZECHARIAH.  693


day  only  known  to  God.  "Which  shall  be  known  to  the  Lord."  Its  changes
and  consequences,  its  precise  duration,  are  not  revealed  to  men.  We  should  not
be  curious  in  asking,  "  0,  my  Lord,  what  shall  be  the  end  of  these  things  1 "
Let  us  obey  the  injunction,  "  Go  thou  thy  way  till  the  end  be," — wait  in  patience
and  earnest  preparation, — "  for  thou  shalt  rest,  and  stand  in  thy  lot  at  the  end  of
the  days."     (Dan.  xii.  13).

Light  at  Evening. —  Verse  7.

The  promise  or  prophecy,  says  one  on  this  verse,  is  that  M  light  shall  come  at  a
time  when  it  is  not  natural,  when  in  the  common  course  of  things  it  is  not  looked
for.  It  would  be  no  surprise  that  light  should  come  at  noonday  ;  we  expect  it
then  ;  it  is  just  what  we  are  accustomed  to  see.  But  if,  when  the  twilight  shadows
were  falling  deeper  and  deeper,  with  a  sudden  burst  the  noonday  light  were  to
spread  around,  that  would  be  a  surprise.  Lux  e  tenebris  has  received  and
continually  receives  manifold  fulfilments  "  [Jacox],

I.  In  human  experience.  Few  lives  are  spent  from  early  day  to  evening  time
in  the  light  of  God.     Sometimes  at  midday,  and  often  in  the  night,  light  shines.

1.  In  the  conversion  of  the  tinner.  Sin  is  darkness.  The  penitent  struggling  with
sin  and  temptation,  forsaking  the  world  and  turning  to  God,  sees  no  light  and
often  feels  forsaken.     At  length  hope  dawns,  a  voice  is  heard,  and  mercy  shines.

2.  In  the  life  of  the  Christian.  Abraham  learned  that  God  could  provide  in
extremity,  "Jehovah  Jireh."  Jacob  found  that  things  which  appeared  against
him  at  one  time  were  only  passing  clouds  for  a  brighter  light.  Israel  in  Egypt  and
David  in  trial  discerned  "the  silver  lining."  God  turns  the  shadows  of  life  into
morning,  and  to  those  who  trust  him  the  night  shineth  as  the  day.  "Light  is
sown  " — like  seed  cast  into  the  ground — "  for  the  righteous,"  and  will  in  due  time,
and  after  needful  process,  be  reaped  in  golden  harvest  (Ps.  xcvii.  11).  II.  In  the
history  of  the  Christian  Church.  In  Jewish  and  apostolic,  in  the  dark  and
middle  ages,  in  the  Eeformation  and  times  of  revival,  this  truth  has  been  illustrated.
The  Church  has  passed  through  days  of  gloom  and  starless  nights ;  dreary  years
of  tempest,  frost  and  snow,  in  wintry  blasts  and  wearisome  times,  but  light  has
come.  God's  ways  may  seem  dark  and  mysterious,  impenetrable  and  hostile,  but
in  him  no  darkness  dwells.  Light  and  truth  will  break  forth  from  his  word
and  providence  to  chase  away  superstitions  and  error,  to  make  the  world  happy,
intelligent,  and  pure.  "  At  evening  time,"  improbable  or  impossible  as  this  may
appear,  "  it  shall  be  light."  "  The  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  shall
cover  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  seas."  III.  In  the  end  of  life.  In  "  life's
evening  "  light  is  desired.  "  Nothing  is  more  common  than  the  craving  and  demand
for  light  a  little  before  death,"  says  an  author.  "  Open  the  windows,"  cried  M.  de
Lescure,  on  his  dying  bed.  Rousseau  wished  to  have  "  a  parting  look  at  the  glorious
orb  of  day."  Goethe's  request  was  for  "  more  light,  more  light."  Dark  indeed  has
been  the  evening  time  to  many.  But  as  the  sun  often  struggles  through  the  clouds
of  day  and  sinks  in  brilliant  light,  so  the  chamber  of  death  has  been  filled  with  light
and  glory  from  the  Sun  of  righteousness.  To  Bunyan's  Mr.  Eearing  "  all  was  well
at  last."  The  gloom  of  the  poet  Cowper  endured  long,  but  passed  away  at  length.
Dr.  Johnson  dreaded  death  through  life,  but  met  it  with  hope  and  unusual  patience
(Secular  Annotations).  Happy  those  to  whom  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death
is  lit  up  with  God's  presence  !  Unhappy  those  whose  darkness  is  eternal  night  1
"  Unto  the  upright  there  ariseth  light  in  the  darkness."

**  Through  night  to  light.     And  though  to  mortal  eyes
Creation's  face  a  pall  of  horror  wear,
Good  cheer,  good  cheer  1    The  gloom  of  midnight  flies,
There  shall  a  sunrise  follow,  mild  and  fair  "  [Ro*egart$n\


694  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  Z ECU  AM  AH.  [chap.  xiv.


HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Vers.  1 — 5.   1.  God  is  supreme  in  the  u  My  God."    Hence  some  may  deny  and

calamities  of  the  Church  and  the  events  others  scoff,  but  I  will  patiently  wait

of  nations.     2.  His  supremacy  may  be  and  constantly  trust  iu  him.

questioned  through  the  triumph  of  the  Vers.    1 — 7.     God's  providence.     1.

enemy  and  the  inactivity  of  his  people.  Strangely    checkered.     2.   Wonderfully

3.    But   a    day   will    come  when    this  perplexing.     3.    Benevolently  working,

supremacy  will  be  finally  settled,  to  the  Or,   "  1.    The  mixed  condition  of  the

comfort  of  one  and  the  destruction  of  righteous  in  this  world :  in  knowledge,

the   other.       Christ   must   be   acknow-  outward  circumstances,  inward  comforts,

ledged  to  be  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth.  and  wavering  holiness.  2.  God's  wisdom

Ver.    3.    As  in    the   day  of   battle,  in  allowing  it:  to  subdue  their  corruption,

Former  experience  a  comfort   in  after  to  exercise  their  graces,  to  bring  them

ages.     What  a  fund  of  consolation  in  to  dependence  upon  himself.     3.    Our

God's  past  dealings  for  present  use  !  consolation  under  it :  God  notices  it,  the

Ver.    5.     The   Lord   my    God    shall  mixed  events  work  together  for  good,

come.      Bright    visions   in    dark    days,  the  scene  is  short.     4.  The  happy  ter-

The  prophet  lifts  up  his  head,  sees  the  mination  of  all :  in  a  state  of  unmingled

coming  help,  and  joyfully  exults  in  the  good,  in  an  unexpected  hour.     Finally,

vision.     1.   The   Lord  shall  come.     2.  Are   we   the   people   concerned   in   it?

When  he  does  come   he  is  my  help.  [Bradley].

HOMILETICS.
Thb  Living  Stream. — Verses  8 — 11.

The  blessings  which  should  diffuse  themselves  in  their  abundance  and  value  are
eet  forth  under  the  image  of  a  stream ;  a  parallel  to  which  is  found  in  Ezekiel's
waters  which  swept  through  the  desert,  healing  stagnant  pools  and  fertilizing
scenes  of  death  (xlvii.  1 — 12).     Notice —

I.  The  source  of  the  living  stream.  "  Li  ving  waters  shall  go  out  from  Jerusalem."
Connected  with  the  Christian  Church  are  all  the  means  of  grace  and  the  blessings
which  result  from  the  diffusion  of  Divine  truth.  "  There  is  a  river,  the  streams
whereof  shall  make  glad  the  city  of  God."  II.  The  direction  of  the  living  stream.
"Half  of  them  toward  the  former,  i.  e.  the  eastern  or  Dead  Sea,  into  which  they
might  naturally  flow,  and  toward  the  hinder,  i.  e.  the  western  or  Mediterranean  Sea,
which  natural  waters  could  not  reach."  It  flows  in  all  directions,  without  hindrance,
"from  sea  to  sea."  III.  The  perpetuity  of  the  living  stream.  The  heat  of
summer  shall  not  dry  them,  like  the  deceitful  brook  of  Job ;  the  frosts  of  winter  will
not  bind  them.  These  streams  are  not  transient,  like  Cherith,  nor  muddy,  like  the
Nile ;  but  an  unfailing  supply  in  all  seasons,  turning  the  desolate  heritages  into  the
garden  of  the  Lord.  "  In  summer  and  winter  shall  it  be."  IV.  The  fertility  of
the  living  stream.  The  effect  of  this  stream  will  be  to  subjugate  the  world  to
God.  Idolatry  will  be  renounced,  and  he  will  be  acknowledged  universal  King.
Kingdom  after  kingdom  shall  be  won,  until  all  willingly  bow  to  him  and  crown
him  Lord  of  all.     "  All  nations  shall  serve  him."

Thb  Future  Exaltation  op  Zion. — Verses  9 — 11.

Nothing  will  prevent  the  perpetual  flow  of  the  living  waters.  The  land  will  be
levelled  to  a  plain,  the  city  elevated  and  restored  to  former  grandeur.  "  Jerusalem,
as  the  residence  of  the  God-King,  is  the  centre  of  the  kingdom  of  God ;  and  in  the
future  this  is  to  tower  high  above  all  the  earth.    The  figurative  description  is


chap.  xiv. J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ZECHAR1AH.  695


attached  to  the  natural  situation  of  Jerusalem,  which  stood  upon  a  broad  mountain
ridge,  and  was  surrounded  by  mountains  which  were  loftier  than  the  city.  The
exaltation  is  a  figurative  representation  of  the  spiritual  elevation  and  glory  which
it  is  to  receive  "  [Keif\.

I.  Zion  will  be  completely  restored.  It  will  recover  from  the  ruin  of  verse  1.
The  rubbish  of  cities  and  countries  in  which  God  delights  shall  be  taken  away,
and  calamities  end  in  the  complete  restoration  of  the  Church.  There  will  be  a
great  moral  awakening,  from  which  streams  of  life  shall  issue  to  reconstruct  society
and  change  the  world.  II.  Zion  will  be  securely  inhabited.  None  shall  go  out
by  flight,  nor  be  taken  as  captives  (vers.  2  and  5).  1.  The  city  will  no  more  be
exposed  to  danger.  Neither  captured  nor  plundered  again.  "No  more  utter
destruction."  2.  The  city  will  be  no  longer  under  a  curse.  Sin  brought  a  curse,
and  a  curse  extermination  (cf.  Josh.  vi.  18).  It  will  be  holy,  no  more  tainted  with
an  accursed  thing  (Mai.  iv.  6),  and  a  type  of  that  city  where  "  there  shall  be  no
more  curse "  (Eev.  xxii.  3).  3.  The  city  will  be  perpetually  secure.  No  danger
without  from  hostile  assaults,  no  danger  from  desolation  within ;  not  only  safely
inhabited,  but  permanently  secure  from  that  time.  "There  shall  be  no  more  utter
destruction."  III.  Zion  will  be  gloriously  exalted.  "  And  it  shall  be  lifted  up."
Lifted  up  above  danger  and  ruin  into  perfect  security  and  glory.  1.  Honoured  above
other  societies  and  cities.  2.  Honoured  by  the  supremacy  of  Jehovah  (ver.  9).
Gross  polytheism  and  refined  idolatry  will  cease.  No  other  object  of  worship,  no
other  God  but  Jehovah  will  be  acknowledged.  Fading  crowns  encircle  the  brows
of  earthly  monarchs,  but  an  eternal  diadem  belongs  to  him  "  on  whose  vesture  and
thigh  is  written  the  name  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords"

The  Chastisement  of  the  Enemy. —  Verses  12 — 15.

These  words  might  be  taken  in  connection  with  verses  1 — 7,  but  the  prophetic
pause  in  description  of  the  purified  Church  directs  special  attention  to  the  chastise-
ment of  the  hostile  nations.

I.  The  enemy  are  smitten  with  the  plague  from  God.  The  Lord  smites  "  all
the  people  that  have  fought  against  Jerusalem."  The  picture  is  most  horrible  and
appalling.  While  standing  their  flesh  shall  consume  away,  their  eyes  decay  in
their  sockets,  and  their  tongue  petrify  in  their  mouth.  II.  The  enemy  are  con-
fused with  panic  among  themselves.  "  A  great  tumult  from  the  Lord  shall  be
among  them."  Fear  will  disturb  their  ranks.  Each  will  find  a  foe  in  his  com-
rade, and  while  grasping  another's  hand  for  help  will  find  "  every  man's  sword
against  his  fellow."  "  When  there  is  no  unity  in  God  each  seeks  his  own,  suspects
another,  and  is  ready  to  be  fanned  into  a  flame."  III.  The  enemy  are  completely
frustrated  in  their  designs.  1.  They  failed  in  their  means  of  defence.  The
cavalry,  mules  and  camels,  the  entire  encampment  shared  in  the  consternation  and
destruction  (ver.  15).  2.  They  ivere  overcome  by  God's  people.  "  Judah  also  shall
fight  at  Jerusalem."  The  whole  covenant  people  took  part  in  the  conflict,  and  were
victorious  through  God.  3.  They  were  robbed  of  all  their  spoil.  The  wealth  and
apparel  which  they  had  taken  from  others  were  taken  from  them.  Whatever  the
world  takes  from  the  Church  shall  be  regained,  and  converted  nations  shall  bring
their  treasures  for  the  adornment  and  defence  of  Zion  (cf.  Isa.  lx.  16,  17).

The  Converted  Remnant. —  Verses  16 — 19.

The  nations  that  have  taken  part  against  Jerusalem  shall  bo  humbled ;  a  remnant
will  acknowledge  Jehovah,  and  as  friends  and  allies  worship  with  the  people  whom
they  sought  to  destroy.  Their  conversion  is  described  as  going  up  yearly  to  the
feast  of  tabernacles  at  Jerusalem.


696  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ZECHARUH.  [chap.  xiv.


I.  They  observe  the  feast  in  the  spirit  of  unity.  Homage  will  be  paid  to
Jehovah  by  voluntary  worshippers  and  "  commissioned  representatives "  in  com-
munion with  the  chosen  race.  Religious  ordinances  will  become  as  a  bond  of
union  among  the  nations  of  the  earth,  make  them  feel  and  act  as  one  people.  From
all  quarters  will  they  come;  not  in  the  spirit  of  enmity  as  before,  not  as  in  the  days
of  monkish  superstition,  but  in  the  spirit  of  love  and  fealty.  II.  They  observe
the  feast  in  a  spirit  of  gratitude.  The  great  feast  reminds  them  of  past  deliver-
ances and  mercies.  "  In  like  manner  the  nations  will  celebrate  the  go  »dness  which
has  brought  them  through  their  tedious  and  perilous  wanderings  in  this  life  to  the
true  and  everlasting  kingdom  of  peace  and  rest"  \Lange\  In  every  heart  Zion  will
be  enthroned  as  the  city  of  the  great  King.  Then  shall  prayer  and  praise  wait  for
God,  and  the  vow  be  performed.  To  all  the  members  of  God's  family  on  earth  will
"  her  walls  become  salvation,  and  her  gates  praise."  III.  Nations  who  refuse  to
observe  the  feast  will  be  punished.  A  punishment  which  God  alone  is  said  to
inflict.  1.  Absence  of  rain  to  some.  "  Upon  them  shall  be  no  rain."  God  only
"gives  rain  from  heaven  and  fruitful  seasons,  filling  our  hearts  with  food  and
gladness."  2.  Plague  is  threatened  to  others.  "  If  the  family  of  Egypt  go  not  up
there  shall  be  plague."  This  is  accounted  for  by  some  in  the  natural  peculiarities
of  the  country,  which  was  refreshed  by  channels  cut  in  the  ground  (Deut.  xi.  10).
But  Egypt  was  an  old  and  special  enemy  of  Israel,  depended  upon  rain  for  the
overflowing  of  the  Nile,  and  must  either  join  in  procession  to  Zion  or  feel  the  curse
of  God.  What  a  lesson  for  us  !  The  worst  are  not  excluded  from  hope,  may  join
the  Church  of  God  and  receive  his  mercy.  But  God  will  suspend  his  favours  from
those  who  despise  his  ordinances.  No  rain  will  fall  upon  those  that  refuse  his
grace.  "  The  nation  and  kingdom  that  will  not  serve  thee  shall  perish ;  yea,  those
nations  shall  be  utterly  wasted."

The  Holy  City.— Verses  19,  20.

The  meaning  of  these  words  seems  to  be,  that  the  day  will  come  when  holiness
will  be  the  prevalent  feature,  and  the  actions  of  common  life  will  be  as  much  the
worship  of  God  as  the  sacrifices  on  the  altar ;  when  common  things  will  be  conse-
crated to  God,  and  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord  "  inscribed  everywhere.

I.  The  inhabitants  of  the  city  will  be  holy.  "  No  more  the  Canaanite  in  the
house."  No  Canaanite  in  the  Church,  self-righteous  in  spirit  and  unholy  in  life  ;
no  Canaanite  among  the  people.  No  godless  member  in  the  covenant  nation  ;  no
people  laden  with  sin  and  under  the  curse.  "  Upon  Mount  Zion  shall  be  deliver-
ance, and  there  shall  be  holiness."  II.  The  transactions  of  the  city  will  be  holy.
Business  in  the  market  will  be  as  sacred  as  worship  in  the  temple ;  the  furniture  of
the  house  as  holy  as  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary.  Wars  and  contentions  will  cease,
trades  and  handicrafts  will  be  hallowed,  cooking-pots  and  drinking-cups  consecrated
to  God.  Restrictive  ceremonies  will  be  abolished,  and  everything  in  ordinary  use
will  be  employed  in  the  spirit  of  devotion.  "  There  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  it
anything  that  defileth."

Keligion  in  Common  Life. — Verses  20,  21.

The  holiness  of  that  day  penetrates  things  secular  as  well  as  sacred,  and  is  set
forth  in  three  symbols.  Bells  upon  the  horses  as  holy  as  the  mitre  of  the  priest ;
the  meanest  vessels  of  the  temple  as  sacred  as  the  holiest ;  and  the  utensils  of
domestic  life  consecrated  as  sacramental  cups.     We  adapt  from  Wardlaw.

I.  The  religious  spirit  will  predominate  in  the  ranks  of  common  life.  No
Canaanite  to  make  gain  or  take  advantage ;  no  enmity  between  priests  and  people,
but  all  ranks  of  life  bound  together  by  loyalty  to  Jehovah.     II.  The  religious


ohap.  xiv.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ZECHARIAH.  697


spirit  will  predominate  in  the  actions  of  common  life.  "  Men  are  not  to  become
monks  or  anchorites ;  the  ordinary  conditions  of  human  life  are  not  to  be  reversed ;
but.  on  the  contrary,  the  infusion  of  grace  will  be  so  large  and  general  that  every
rank  and  class  will  feel  it,  and  its  effects  will  be  seen  in  all  the  relations  of  life,
purifying  and  elevating  without  upturning  or  destroying"  \Lange\.  1.  There  will
be  no  divorce  between  secular  and  sacred  things.  No  divorce  between  morality  and
religion,  between  domestic  life  and  the  service  of  God.  2.  There  will  be  a  recogni-
tion of  God's  claims  in  secular  and  sacred  things.  Nothing  withheld  from  God.
The  most  solemn  acts  of  the  temple  and  the  common  duties  of  life — the  offering  of
sacrifices  and  the  yoking  of  horses — will  be  done  for  God.  Persons  and  property
devoted  to  him,  and  every  department  of  life  under  the  domain  of  conscience.
"  Her  merchandise  and  her  hire  shall  be  for  holiness  to  the  Lord :  it  shall  not  be
treasured  nor  laid  up  "  (Isa.  xxiii.  18).

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Vers.  9 — 15.     1.  The  mercy  of  God  ness  is  the  sweet  result  of  all  dispens-

(vers.  9 — 11).     2.  The  severity  of  God  ations  toward  the  Church.     2.  Nothing

(vers.   12 — 15).  is  so  profane  but  it  may  be  sanctified

Vers.  12  —  15.  The  precedent  pro-  and  made  holy.  3.  Holiness  doth  then
mises  that  were  so  great  and  glorious  the  bear  full  sway  when  that  which  was
prophet  doth  now  further  enlarge  and  against  God  shall  be  consecrated  to  him,
illustrate.  First  the  conquest  of  the  for  the  bells  of  the  horses  had  been  em-
enemies  (12 — 15) ;  next  the  profession  of  ployed  against  the  Church  [Hutcheson].
Christ  among  all  nations  of  the  world  Vers.  20,  21.  Three  things  specialty
(16 — 19);  and  lastly  the  sanctity  of  the  characteristic  of  (ithat  day"  —  the
Church  (20,  21).  The  conquest  of  the  period  of  the  restoration  of  Israel,  and
enemies  is  set  forth,  first,  by  God's  of  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles.  1.  The
strange  judgments  upon  them  (12);  cessation  of  all  the  distinctions  of  cere-
secondly,  by  the  means — both  they  shall  monial  holiness.  The  sanctity  of  mere
despatch  one  another,  and  Judah  shall  things  shall  no  longer  exist.  No  places
fight  bravely  against  them  (13,  14);  give  holiness  or  acceptance  to  sacrifices.
thirdly ,  their  wealth  and  substance  shall  Men  " everywhere  lift  up  holy  hands"
become  a  prey  (1 4  );  fourthly,  their  horses  and  find  the  same  acceptance.  1.  The
of  service  and  all  the  beasts  they  bring  universal  prevalence  of  personal  and
with  them  shall  be  as  strangely  plagued  domestic  consecration  to  God.  3.  Purity
as  the  men  themselves  (15)  [Trapp].  of   ministry    and    membership    in    the

Vers.   16  —  21.     1.  The  worship  of  Church  of  God.  Learn — 1.  The  necessity

God's  house.     2.  The  holy  character  of  of  seeking  true  holiness  —  holiness  of

its  attendants.     3.  The  punishment  of  heart.     2.  Study  practically  the  duty  of

those  who  neglect.     "  Those  who  desire  carrying   religion   into   everything.      3.

to  partake  of  the  grace  and  salvation  Let  the  Churches  of  Christ  aim  more  and

provided    by    Christ    must   '  come    to  more  at  scriptural  purity  of  communion

Mount  Zion,  the  city  of  the  living  God.'  [Wardlaw].

They  must  partake  faithfully,  joyfully,         Holiness  to  the  Lord.     1.  The  aim  of

and  reverently  of  the  word  and  sacra-  worship.     2.    The   beauty   of   common

ments  and  other  means  of  grace,  and  the  things.     3.  The  rule  of  daily  life.     "  In

refreshing  rain  and  dews  of  the  Holy  days  of  yore  nothing  was  holy  but  the

Spirit  will  fall  upon  them.     But  if  they  beautiful "  [Schiller].    Happy  day  when

will  not  comply  with  these  conditions  holiness  shall  mark  the  Church  of  God,

their   souls   will   be   parched   and   will  when  seen  in  every  purpose  and  in  every

wither  away   with   spiritual    drought "  action  1    "  Then  shall  Jerusalem  be  holy,

[  Wordsworth].  and  there  shall  no  strangers  pass  through

Ver.  20.    Prevalent  holiness.  1.  Holl-  her  any  more."


698


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:  ZECHaRIJH.


[chap.  xiy.


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XIV.


Vers.  1  —  3.  The  Lord  goes  forth.
How  sweetly  doth  God  dispose  of  all
second  causes,  that  while  they  do  their
own  will  they  do  his  [Bp.  Hall].  Didst
thou  never  hear  that  things  ill  got  had
ever  bad  success  ?  [Shakespeare].

Vers.  4,  5.  Mountain  removes.
Nature  is  but  a  name  for  an  effect  whose
cause  is  God  [Oowper].  In  nature
things  move  violently  to  their  place,  and
calmly  in  their  place  [Bacon].

Vers.  6,  7.  Light.  As  surely  as  a
good  man's  sun  goes  down  it  shall  rise
again.  If  the  darkness  be  caused  by
depression  of  spirit  the  Holy  Ghost
will  comfort  him ;  if  by  pecuniary  loss
or  personal  bereavement  the  presence
of  Christ  shall  be  his  solace ;  and  if  by
the  cruelty  and  malignity  of  men  the
sympathy  of  the  Lord  shall  be  his
support.  It  is  as  ordinary  for  the
righteous  to  be  comforted  as  for  the
day  to  dawn.  Wait  for  the  light,  and
it  will  surely  come;  for  even  if  our
heavenly  Father  should  in  our  last
hours  put  us  to  bed  in  the  dark,  we
shall  find  it  morning  when  we  awake
[Spurgeon].

Ver.  8.  Living  waters.  The  grand
feature  of  the  latter  day  is  copious  and
continuous  effusions  of  grace  ;  no  longer
intermittent  and  scanty,  or  of  small
extent,  but  radiating  in  all  directions  at
once,  permanently  filling  every  channel,
and  limited  only  by  the  wants  of  the
race.  Quickly  but  surely,  with  the
same  noiseless  energy  with  which  the
great  providential  forces  work,  do  these
spiritual  agencies  perform  their  work
[Lange],

Ver.   11.     Safely,     The  weakest  be-


liever is  safe,  because,  believing,  he
is  within  the  strongest  of  all  defences
[Anon.].

Vers.  12 — 15.  Plague.  It  is  one  of
the  greatest  praises  of  God's  wisdom
that  he  can  turn  the  evil  of  men  to  his
own  glory  [Bp.  Hall].

Vers.  16 — 18.  Worship.  It  is  for  the
sake  of  man,  not  of  God,  that  worship
and  prayers  are  required  ;  not  that  God
may  be  rendered  more  glorious,  but  that
man  may  be  made  better,  that  he  may
be  confirmed  in  a  proper  sense  of  his
dependent  state,  and  acquire  those  pious
and  virtuous  dispositions  in  which  his
highest  improvement  consist  [Blair].

"  Look  to  thy  actions  well ;
For  churches  either  are  our  heaven  or  hell"

[G.  Herbert].

Vers.  20,  21.  Holiness  to  the  Lord.
Zechariah  is  one  of  the  most  sublime
and  impassioned  among  "the  goodly
fellowship  of  the  prophets."  It  seems
as  if  the  Spirit  designed  to  teach  the
world  by  him,  the  last  but  one  in  the
prophetic  line,  that  if  prophecy  was  to
become  mute  (as  it  became  for  about
four  centuries  after  Zechariah)  its  silence
was  not  due  to  any  failure  or  exhaustion
of  power  in  the  Divine  author  of
prophecy.  No  ;  the  light  of  the  sunset
of  prophecy  in  Zechariah  is  brilliant
and  glorious  as  its  noonday  splendours.
He  passes  on  to  the  evangelization  of
the  heathen,  the  conversion  of  the  Jews,
to  the  last  struggle  and  overthrow  of  all
antichristian  powers,  and  to  the  full
and  final  victory  of  Christ  and  the
everlasting  glory  and  felicity  of  his
Church  [Wordsworth].


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY


ON


MALACHI.


INTRODUCTION.

The  Writer.  It  has  been  a  subject  of  doubt  whether  Malachi  was  a  real  01
official  name.  Little  is  known  of  his  personal  history.  The  Book  of  Nehemiah
does  not  mention  him,  "although  he  was  a  zealous  fellow-labourer  with  that
patriotic  governor,  and  greatly  aided  him  in  his  endeavours  to  secure  a  willing  and
grateful  obedience  to  the  Divine  law.  In  this,  however,  he  does  but  share  the  fate
of  those  psalmists  who,  on  the  return  from  captivity,  composed  many  songs  for  the
temple  service.  They  too  are  unknown  to  fame.  Their  songs  found  a  place  in  the
Hebrew  Psalter,  but  no  chronicle  carried  down  their  names  to  after  ages."  Dead
to  name  and  fame,  "  they  are  not  dead  to  '  use.'  Even  to  this  day  their  works  do
follow  them"  [Cox].

The  Age.  According  to  the  tradition  of  the  synagogue,  he  lived  after  the
prophets  Haggai  and  Zechariah,  and  was  contemporary  with  Nehemiah.  This
statement  is  fully  borne  out  by  the  affinity  of  the  book  written  by  the  prophet
with  that  written  by  the  patriot.  Both  presuppose  the  temple  to  have  been
already  built.  The  same  condition  of  the  Jews  is  described.  They  both  condemn
foreign  marriages,  and  enforce  the  due  payment  of  tithes,  which  had  been  neglected.
They  likewise  correct  abuses  which  had  crept  in  with  respect  to  sacrifices,  and
reprove  their  countrymen  for  their  want  of  sympathy  with  the  poor.  In  all
probability,  Malachi  occupied  the  same  place  with  respect  to  Nehemiah  which
Haggai  and  Zechariah  did  with  respect  to  Zerubbabel.  That  the  former  was
assisted  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties  by  prophets  may  be  inferred  from  the  charge
brought  against  him  by  Sanballat  (Neh.  vi.  7).  He  may  therefore  be  conceived
of  as  having  flourished  somewhere  about  the  year  B.C.  420  [Henderson].

The  Book.  Malachi  is  composed  of  four  short  chapters  in  English,  and  three  in
Hebrew.  It  is  the  last  of  the  Minor  Prophets,  and  is  called  "  The  Seal  of  the
Prophets."  He  completes  the  Old  Testament,  and  prepares  the  way  for  the  New,  and
is  therefore  fitly  called  a  messenger  [cf.  Words.].  "  Malachi  is  like  a  late  evening
which  closes  a  long  day,  but  he  is  at  the  same  time  the  morning  twilight  which
bears  in  its  bosom  a  glorious  day  "  [Pusey],


700  INTRODUCTION.


The  Contents  are  chiefly  of  a  threatening  character.  "  The  most  enforced  and
orderly  division  is  that  which  is  now  generally  adopted.  The  book  opens  with  a
brief  introduction  or  preface  (chap.  i.  1 — 4.),  the  theme  of  which  is,  God's  love  to
Israel  a  reason  for  a  response  of  love  to  him.  After  the  introduction  come  the  three
main  sections  of  the  book  :  1.  (from  chap.  i.  6  to  ii.  9)  on  the  impiety  and  profanity
of  the  priests;  2.  (from  ver.  10  to  ver.  16,  chap,  ii.)  on  the  heathen  marriages  of
the  priests  and  people ;  and  3.   (from  ii.  17  to  iv.  4)  on  the  day  of  the  Lord"  [Coo;].

The  Style  differs  from  the  earlier  prophets,  and  the  book  has  been  classed  in  the
silver  age  of  the  Hebrew  language.  He  lacks  the  grandeur  of  Joel  and  the  passion
of  Habakkuk,  and  indicates  the  influence  of  the  Great  Synagogue  "  in  his  formal
and  scholastic  tone."  "  Though  his  language  is  pure  and  beautiful,  and  has  a
certain  poetic  rhythm,  he  is  not  so  much  a  poet  '  singing  in  full-throated  ease '  as  a
scholar  elaborating  an  edifying  discourse.  It  is  curious  to  note  how  faithful  he  is
to  a  single  form  of  composition,  and  that  a  very  simple  one,  whatever  the  theme
he  takes  in  hand.  Invariably,  without  a  single  exception,  he  develops  his  subject
in  the  following  order : — first,  he  brief!}'"  states  his  thesis ;  then  he  states  the
sceptical  objection  with  which  he  supposes  it  may  be  met;  and  lastly,  he  triumph-
antly refutes  the  objection"  [Coa;].  This  method  is  simple,  but  the  meaning
deep.  He  speaks  of  moral  and  religious  duties  to  God,  and  of  justice  and  mercy
to  man.  We  are  reminded  of  the  thunders  of  Sinai  and  the  claims  of  the  law.
Our  thoughts  are  carried  forward  to  the  terrors  of  the  Great  Day,  and  the  curse  that
will  fall  upon  the  impenitent.  But  the  Sun  of  righteousness  will  shine  with
unclouded  splendour,  and  the  morning  star  is  already  seen  to  announce  its  advent.
Thus  at  the  close  of  the  Old  Testament  "  we  get  a  glimpse  of  Christ,  whom  we  are
to  meet  and  with  whom  we  are  to  walk  in  the  New  Testament;  and  of  the  Baptist,
who  came  before  him  in  the  power  and  spirit  of  Elijah,  to  prepare  his  way,  and  to
attest  that  this  was  he  of  whom  Moses  and  the  prophets  did  write."


chap,  i.j  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  MALACHJ.  701


CHAPTER  L

Critical  Notes.  ]  Burden]  (Massa)  A  heavy  vision  full  of  toil  and  weight.  "  What  is  the  burden
of  the  Lord?"  was  asked scoffingly  from  the  prophets.  As  a  punishment  for  the  blasphemy  of  the
people,  God  declares,  "I  will  burden  you"  [cf.  Lange :  Jer.  xxiii.  33 — 40].  2.  Loved]  A  facti  n
their  history  and  the  foundation  for  reproof.  Hated]  Not  a  proper  and  formed  hatred  (for  God
could  not  hate  Esau  before  he  sinned),  but  only  a  lesser  love,  which,  in  comparison  of  the  great  lave
for  Jacob,  seemed  as  if  it  were  not  love  [Puse?/].  Jacob  and  Esau  are  illustrations  of  God's  purpose
in  the  election  of  grace.  Their  history  typified  and  conditioned  that  of  their  posterity  (cf.  Rom.  ix.
11).  3.]  The  condition  of  the  country,  desolate  and  inhabited  by  (dragons)  jackals  of  the  wilderness,
a  proof  of  this  hatred.  4.  Edom]  cannot  recover  herself.  Her  perpetual  ruins  illustrate  love  to
Israel  rather  than  to  her.  Border]  still  the  resort  of  marauding  tribes  of  the  desert.  Indignation]
Curse  (cf.  Isa.  xxxiv.  5).  5.  See]  the  ineffectual  attempts  of  Edom,  and  then  acknowledge  the  greatness
of  Jehovah  in  and  beyond  the  land  of  Israel.  6.]  Expostulation  to  priests,  who  should  love  Jehovah
as  sons,  and  fear]  him  as  servants  (Ex.  xx.  12).  Say]  Instead  of  confessing  guilt,  deny  the  charge
and  demand  proofs.  7.  Polluted]  i.  e.  any  sacrifices  the  bread  or  food  of  God  (Lev.  xxi.  6,  8 ;  xxii.
25:  Num.  xxviii.  2).  Blind  and  lame  were  polluted  bread.  8.  Governor]  If  customary  to  offer
heathen  rulers  presents  proportionate  to  the  dignity  of  the  receiver,  the  circumstances  of  the  giver,
and  the  value  of  the  favour  sought,  should  God  be  insulted  by  offering  things  which  they  would
reject  ?  9.  Pray]  An  earnest  call  to  repentance  say  some  ;  others,  that  it  is  ironical.  Think  you  that
God  will  be  persuaded  by  polluted  gifts  ?  No  ;  amend  your  ways.  This]  Contemptible  offerings  your
doing.  Means]  Lit.  from  your  hand.  Will  God  regard]  you?  10.  Nought]  So  avaricious  were  they
that  the  meanest  things  were  not  done  without  payment.  Some  say  this  frees  the  priests  from  excuse
for  carelessness,  for  the  least  service,  such  as  shutting  the  door,  was  paid  for.  Others  regard  the  words
as  a  wish  :  '*  Oh  that  some  among  you  would  not  open  my  sanctuary  to  such  profane  intruders  (close
the  doors  against  such  worshippers  and  sacrifices),  and  would  not  kindle  the  fire  on  mine  altar  to  no
purpose  /"  Better  without  worship  than  such  as  this  [cf.  Keil  and  Words.].  11.]  The  name  of  God,
treated  with  contempt  by  priests,  will  receive  universal  homage.  Jewish  worship  will  be  rejected,
and  Gentiles  offer  spiritual  worship  in  the  Church  of  Christ  (Matt.  xxi.  43).  Place]  (John  iv.
21 — 23  :  I  Tim.  ii.  8).  Incense  and  pure  offerings]  Prayers  (Rev.  v.  8),  thanksgiving,  and  praise
(Heb.  xiii.  15,  16).  12.  But]  a  renewal  of  charge  against  priests  in  verse  7.  Profaned]  habitually.
Say]  by  acts  and  life.  Table]  i.  e.  the  altar,  polluted  by  worst  offerings.  Fruit]  and  food,  i.  e.  the  pro-
vision of  the  altar.  13.  Weariness]  An  oppressive  drudgery,  not  an  honourable  privilege.  Snuff]  Do
not  hide  your  contempt.  Torn]  Taken  by  violence ;  not  fit  to  eat,  and  unlawful  to  offer  (Ex.  xxii.  30 :
Lev.  vii.  24  :  Ezek.  iv.  14).  14.  Deceiver]  The  hypocrite,  professing  one  thing  and  intending  another.
The  people  now  reproved.  Male]  required  by  law  (Lev.  i.  3,  10).  King]  An  argument  for  service
from  the  majesty  of  God.  Dreadful]  Jews  had  no  fear  nor  reverence  for  Jehovah.  The  heathen]
will  reproach  all  who  offer  to  God  corrupt  and  offensive  sacrifices.

HOMILETICS.
Special  Favours  demand  Special  Returns. — Verses  2 — 5

The  sovereign  benevolence  of  Jehovah  and  the  ingratitude  of  the  Hebrews  in
the  time  of  the  prophet  are  strikingly  contrasted.  To  the  petulant  question,
"  Wherein  hast  thou  loved  us  1 "  which  is  only  the  first  of  a  series  which  are  put
in  the  course  of  the  book,  the  answer  is  direct  and  conclusive — in  showing  greater
kindness  to  their  progenitor  Jacob  than  he  had  done  to  his  brother  Esau  [Hend.].

I.  Distinction  above  others  an  act  of  Divine  love.  From  the  first  Israel  were
chosen  and  set  apart,  and  to  the  last  were  they  loved  in  chastisement  and  rebuke.
Nothing  was  due  to  their  own  industry  and  virtues.  1.  Their  temporal  blessings
were  greater  than  those  of  others.  We  have  only  to  look  around  to  see  Divine
goodness.  Protected  homes,  restored  health,  and  fruitful  lands.  The  land  of  Israel
was  specially  favoured,  while  Idumea  was  sterile,  desolate,  and  the  haunt  of  jackals.
Israel  had  been  restored,  but  Edomites  were  under  the  ban.  2.  Their  religion*
privileges  were  greater  than  those  of  others.  Edom  and  heathen  nations  had  not
the  temple  and  the  oracles  of  God.     "  He  hath  not  dealt  so  with  any  nation  "  as


702  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  MALACHL  |_chap.  I.


with  the  Jews  (Ps.  cxlvii.  10).     God's  love  is  the  source  of  every  blessing.     He
makes  one  differ  from  another.     The  distinctions  of  men  and  the  advantages  of
nations  result  from  his  sovereign  goodness.     Thus  the  love  of  God  is — (1)  proved
from  his  word  :  "  I  have  loved  thee; "and  (2)  confirmed  by  our  life.       In  our  past
and  present  condition  we  are  reminded  of  gratuitous  love.     "  The  Lord  had  a
delight  in  thy  fathers  to  love  them,  and  he  chose  their  seed  after  them,  even  you
above  all  people,  as  it  is  this  day."     II.  Distinction  above  others  a  reason  for
implicit  submission.     The  people  ask  for  proofs  of  love.     God  appeals  to  facts  to
silence  scepticism.     1.   God's  love  may  be  questioned.     "Wherein  hast  thou  loved
us  1 "     If  God  afflicts  we  think  him  unkind  ;  if  he  withholds  what  we  desire  we
question  his  mercy.     Pride  and  petulance  have  dimmed  our  vision.     We  have
formed  the  habit  of  doubting  until  it  has  grown  strong,  and  we  constantly  cry
"  Wherein  1 "     2.  God's  love  may  be  denied.     Men  cry,  "  Give  me  the  ocular  proof  ;
make  me  see't."     If  evidence  of  God's  providence  is  not  seen  they  deny  it.     The
Jews  could  only  say,  We  are  few  and  feeble,  unable  to  defend  our  houses  and  gather
our  harvests,  the  frequent  prey  of  some  and  the  perpetual  scorn  of  others.     This
insolent  challenge  is  a  common,  a  prolific  root  of  sin,  a  fountain  of  ingratitude  and
rebellion.     The  doctrine  of  election  may  be  mysterious,  but  greater  difficulties  arise
from  its  rejection.     God  says  that  he  loves  us,  and  gives  abundant  proof  of  it.
What  more  do  we  wish  ]   All  misery  is  due  to  ourselves.    We  must  be  silent,  for  God
is  just.     "  Why  dost  thou  strive  against  him  1  (quarrel  with  and  dispute  his  dealings,
Isa.  xlv.  9)  for  he  giveth  not  account  of  (he  answereth  not)  any  of  his  matters  "  (Job
xxxiii.  13).     III.  Distinction  above  others  an  inducement  to  grateful  service.
The  election  of  Israel  was  "  not  of  works,  but  of  him  that  calleth."     Descent  from
one  and  the  same  patriarch  was  not  the  reason  of  their  choice.     The  prophet  and
the  apostle  declare  it  to  be  of  free  grace.     This  a  reason — 1.  For  grateful  service.
God's  love  lays  us  under  obligation  to  love  him  in  return.     But  amid  striking  proofs
of  it  we  are  blind,  ungrateful,  and  dissatisfied.     "  Wherein  hast  thou  loved  us  ] "
2.  For  constant  service.     "  God's  everlasting  love  was  uniform  in  itself,  manifold
in  its  manifestations  "  [Pusey].     If  God  never  ceases  to  bless  we  should  never  cease
to  serve.     "  I  am  constant  as  the  northern  star,  of  whose  true,  fixed,  and  resting
quality  there  is  no  fellow  in  the  firmament "  [Shakespeare].

"  Love  me  little,  love  me  long  "  [Marlowe].

Lessons  from  the  Euin  of  Edom. — Verses  3 — 5.

Jacob  and  Esau  were  brothers,  but  God  did  not  deal  with  them  both  alike.
Their  personal  history  was  repeated  in  their  posterity.  The  doom  of  one  was  pointed
to  as  a  lesson  of  providence  and  love  to  the  other.

I.  The  ruin  of  Edom  a  monument  of  God's  anger.  "  I  hated  Esau."  In
whatever  sense  we  take  the  word  "hated,"  greater  love  was  shown  to  Jews  than  to
Edom.  But  God  has  reasons  for  his  acts.  The  Edomites  were  "  the  children  of
the  sword,"  and  "he  that  taketh  the  sword  shall  perish  by  the  sword."  Hence
they  brought  the  anger  of  God  upon  themselves  in  "a  form  of  that  Divine
and  wholesome  law  of  retribution  which  we  find  in  our  own  lives  no  less  than
in  the  written  word,"  says  one.  II.  The  ruin  of  Edom  a  warning  to  other  people.
What  happened  to  them  may  happen  to  us.  "  Your  eyes  shall  see."  God's
people  may  be  assured  of  his  love  towards  them  and  his  providence  over  them  when
tliey  see  the  enemy  punished  and  frustrated  in  their  designs.  The  world  should
learn  that  God  "will  be  magnified  from  the  border  of  Israel."  III.  The  ruin  of
Edom  a  proof  of  Jehovah's  supremacy  over  all  nations.  The  judgments  that
fell  upon  Edom  taught  the  Jews,  and  the  world  through  the  Jews,  that  God  was
not  only  the  God  of  Israel,  but  the  God  of  the  whole  earth.  By  contrasting  the
condition  of  Israel  with  that  of  Edom  we  learn  that  Jehovah  is  supreme  over  all


ohap.  i.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  MALACHL  703


nations,  saying  to  one,  Thou  shalt  live,  and  to  another,  Thou  shalt  perish  ;  that  his
government  is  merciful  to  his  people  and  retributive  to  his  enemies.

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.   1.    Malachi's  message.     1.  The  gratitude,  replied,  "  I  have  left  It  to  the

nature  of  the  message.     "  The  burden?'  gods  to  punish."

2.  The  authority  of  the  message.  "  The  Vers.  2,  3.  Jacob  viewed  chiefly  in
word  of  the  Lord. "  3.  The  design  his  national  capacity  as  Israel,  and  taken
of  the  message.  "  To  Israel."  4.  The  by  the  apostle  as  a  type  of  the  elect
medium  of  the  message.    "  By  Malachi."  (Rom.   ix.   13).     Esau  viewed    as   the

Yer.  2.  Learn — 1.  That  God's  love  is  Edomite  nation  show  that  the  accept-
not  dispensed  according  to  any  merit  in  tance  or  rejection  is  not  spiritual,  that
us.  "  I  have  loved  thee."  2.  That  God's  a  principle  of  election  runs  through  all
love  cannot  always  be  seen  in  our  out-  history,  and  that  God,  as  absolute  sove-
ward  condition.  "  Wherein  hast  thou  reign,  bestows  religious  privileges  and
loved  us  1 "     3.  That  love  may  often  be  Divine  blessings.

seen  when  we    compare   our  condition  Yer.  4.    The  world's  defiance  of  God's

with  that  of  others.     "  I  loved  Jacob,  decree.     It  breaks  down,  he  builds  up  ;

and  I  hated  Esau."     4.  That  God's  love  it  builds,  he  breaks  down  [Lange].

should  always  beget  gratitude  to  God  in  Yers.  5,  6.     Observe  the  repetition  of

return.    "  '  I  have  loved  you,'  God  would  the  word  border  in  the  contrast  between

say,  '  with  a  special  love,  a  more  than  them.     Edom  is  the   border  (gebul)   of

ordinary  love,   with  greater    tokens  of  wickedness  ;  but  the  Lord  will  show  his

love  than  to  others.'     So  God  brings  to  power  and  love  over  the  border  (gebul)

the  penitent   soul   the    thought   of   its  of  Israel  [TKowfe.].      The  Lord  magni-

ingratitude"   [Pusey].      5.    That  when  fied,   &c.      1.    By  his  gracious  acts  to

there  is  no  gratitude  in  return  for  his  Israel.     2.  By  sending  his  word  to  the

love  God  will  punish.    The  sequel  proves  Gentiles.     3.   By  his  judgments  over  all

this.    Lycurgus,  when  asked  why  he  set  the  earth  (Rev.  xv.  4).
down  no  punishment  in  his  laws  for  in-

HOMILETICS.
Building  up  without  God. — Verse  4.

Edom's  temporal  desolation  and  her  resolve  to  repair  it  may  be  taken  as  a  figure
of  our  moral  condition  and  the  efforts  of  men  to  improve  it.

I.  Man's  moral  condition  is  a  ruin.  "We  are  impoverished;  lit.  ruined."
Sin  creates  distance  from  God,  and  brings  poverty  and  ruin.  There  is  no  misery
like  that  which  sin  brings,  and  no  misfortune  so  disastrous  as  that  in  which  it  ends.
Sin  "  brought  death  and  all  our  woe  into  the  world ; "  and  death  is  passed  upon  all
men,  for  all  have  sinned.  II.  Men  try  to  repair  their  moral  condition  by  wrong
means.  They  are  sensible  of  their  misery, — "  we  are  impoverished" — feel  their
distance, — "  we  will  return" — and  resolve  to  build  up  their  broken  fortunes, — we
will  "  build  the  desolate  places."  1.  Men's  efforts  are  directed  to  a  wrong  end.
"  We  will  return."  Return  to  what  1  Return  to  our  kingdom  and  associations.
Thus  men  cling  to  creeds,  societies,  and  institutions,  and  not  to  God.  "If  thou
wilt  return,  0  Israel,  saith  the  Lord,  return  unto  me."  2.  Men's  efforts  are  put
forth  in  a  wrong  spirit.  "  But  we  will  return  and  build."  Here  we  have  pride,
presumption,  and  opposition  to  God.  Men  resolve,  but  God  will  hinder.  At  Babel
men  were  frustrated  in  purpose,  confused  in  tongues,  and  scattered  over  the  earth.

3.  Men's  efforts  are  built  on  a  wrong  foundation.    "  They  shall  call  them  the  border
of  wickedness."     If  the  foundation  be  bad,  the  higher  it  is  run  up  the  more  labour


704  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MALACHI.  [chai    I.

is  lost,  and  the  more  tremendous  the  fall.  Empires,  houses,  and  fortunes  built  on
selfish  principles  will  never  stand.  "Woe  unto  him  that  buildeth  his  house  by
unrighteousness,  and  his  chambers  by  wrong"  (Jer.  xxii.  13).  III.  When  men
try  to  repair  their  moral  condition  by  wrong  means  God  will  overthrow  their
efforts.  "  They  shall  build,  but  I  will  throw  down."  Providence  pulls  down  as
well  as  builds  up  (Ecc.  iii.  3).  God  can  crush  every  effort  and  break  down  every
edifice  of  man.  "  I  will  work,  and  who  shall  let  1 "  (hinder,  turn  it  back,  Isa.
xiv.  27)  (xliii.  13).  He  overturns  our  bodies  by  disease  and  death  ;  our  families  by
discord  and  bereavement;  business  by  failure  and  loss  ;  nations  by  famine  and  sword.
1.  This  overthrow  is  terrible.  Places  were  desolate,  buildings  thrown  down,  broken
into  fragments.  The  firmest  foundation,  the  most  fortified  walls  of  sin,  will  not
avail  before  God.  "  The  Lord  hath  stretched  out  a  line  (not  to  build,  but  destroy,
2  Kings  xxi.  13  :  Isa.  xxxiv.  11),  he  hath  not  withdrawn  his  hand  from  destroying  :
therefore  he  made  the  wall  and  the  rampart  to  lament"  (Lam.  ii.  8).  2.  This
overthrow  is  irrevocable.  The  "indignation"  is  "for  ever."  The  destruction  can
never  be  repaired.  This  seen  in  the  tower  of  Babel  and  the  cities  of  the  plain.
Joshua's  curse  fell  upon  the  rebuilding  of  Jericho  (cf.  Josh.  vi.  26  :  1  Kings  xvi.
34).  The  apostate  Julian  could  not  contravene  the  word  of  God  concerning
Jerusalem.  When  he  had  gathered  materials  and  commenced  the  work  the  tempest
from  heaven  filled  him  with  dismay,  and  forced  him  to  confess  the  hand  of  God.
"  He  breaketh  down,  and  (so  that)  it  cannot  be  built  again  "  (Job  xii.  14).  But  is
there  no  way  of  building  that  we  may  be  secure  and  happy  1  Must  our  efforts  to
recover  ourselves  perpetually  fail,  and  our  hopes  be  for  ever  disappointed?  Build
on  Christ,  the  true  foundation,  for  no  other  foundation  can  any  man  lay ;  build  by
the  aid  of  the  Spirit,  and  in  humble  confidence  in  the  promise  of  God,  then  your
work  shall  abide.  "  Building  up  yourselves  on  your  most  holy  faith."  "  I  commend
you  to  God,  and  to  the  word  of  his  grace,  which  is  able  to  build  you  up,  and  to  give
you  an  inheritance  among  all  them  which  are  sanctified."

Titles  without  Honours. — Verse  6.

Upon  the  fact  that  respect  is  shown  by  inferiors  to  superiors  Jehovah  founds  his
right  to  honour  and  reverence  due  to  him  as  Creator  and  Kuler.  But  God  condemns
the  contempt  priests  and  people  displayed  in  offering  blemished  sacrifices.

I.  God  is  our  Father,  and  should  be  honoured.  The  prophet  does  not  appeal
to  the  law,  but  lays  down  the  truth,  which  none  will  dispute,  that  Jehovah  is  the
Father  of  Israel.  If  God,  therefore,  is  a  father,  the  honour  of  sons  is  due  to  him.
Heathen  philosophers  taught  that  parents  were  household  gods,  and  were  to  have
all  possible  respect.  "  To  God  and  our  parents,"  said  Aristotle,  "  we  can  never  make
recompense."  1.  God  claims  honour  from  us.  "Honour  thy  father  and  thy
mother"  (Ex.  xx.  12).  "Doubtless  thou  art  our  father"  (Isa.  lxiii.  16:  Mai.  ii.
10).  2.  Men  withhold  the  honour  due  to  him.  "  Where  is  mine  honour?  "  They
do  not  honour  him  with  their  substance,  but  despise  him  in  heart  and  act.  "  Do
ye  thus  requite  the  Lord  1 "  II.  God  is  our  Master,  and  should  be  served.  "  If
I  be  a  master,  where  is  my  fear  ] "  God  is  acknowledged  to  be  our  Lord.  He
should  be  served  in  filial  not  in  slavish  fear.  We  are  not  to  find  fault  with  his
employment,  or  engage  in  it  by  force  and  constraint.  "  They  say  and  do  not."  Our
service  must  be  earnest  and  constant.  In  all  fear  should  we  obey  and  submit  to
him  (1  Pet.  ii.  18).  Fidelity  to  our  conscience  will  ever  be  rewarded.  "  He  that
waiteth  on  his  master  shall  be  honoured  ; "  here  by  the  promise  and  presence  of
God,  at  length  by  the  approval  of  God.  "  Well  done,"  &c.  "  If  any  man  serve  me
him  will  my  Father  honour."

M  Bad  servants  wound  their  master's  fame  "  [Q*y\

m


ohap.  1.1  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MALACHL  705


The  Sins  op  the  Priests. — Verses  6 — 10.

Turning  from  the  people,  the  prophet  addresses  the  priests,  who  should  be  leaders
in  holiness,  but  are  foremost  in  bringing  the  service  of  God  into  contempt.  They
were  under  special  obligations  to  sanctify  him,  but  they  profaned  his  name  and
caused  Israel  to  sin.

I.  Their  services  were  a  violation  of  all  law.  A  son  should  honour  his  father,
and  a  servant  obey  his  master  (ver.  6) ;  but  they  withheld  from  God  what  they
demanded  from  the  people,  and  slighted  him  more  than  any  creature.  1.  TJie  law
of  nature  was  dishonoured.  Fair  words  and  grand  titles  require  consistent  life.
Nature  teaches  honour  to  parents  and  respect  to  masters,  reproves  want  of  reverence
to  God,  and  testifies  against  those  who  honour  in  word  and  dishonour  in  life.
"  Why  call  ye  me  Lord,  Lord,  and  do  not  the  things  which  I  say  V1  2.  The  law
of  God  was  violated.  God  expressly  forbade  the  offering  of  the  blind,  the  lame,  or
any  evil-favoured  sacrifice.  "  Whatsoever  hath  a  blemish,  that  shall  ye  not  offer  :
for  it  shall  not  be  acceptable  for  you.  Ye  shall  not  offer  unto  the  Lord  that  which
is  bruised,  or  crushed,  or  broken,  or  cut "  (Lev.  xxii.  20,  24).  If  it  be  lame,  or
blind,  or  have  "any  ill  blemish,  thou  shalt  not  sacrifice  it  unto  the  Lord  thy  God  "
(Deut.  xv.  21  :  Neh.  v.  14,  15).  3.  The  law  of  common  civility  was  disregarded.
u  Offer  it  now  unto  thy  governor  ;  will  he  be  pleased  with  thee?"  (ver.  8).  What
insult  to  oner  God  what  a  mortal  would  disdain  !  Yet  what  a  contrast  between
God's  table  and  that  of  our  princes  !  If  an  earthly  monarch  would  neither  accept
our  gift  nor  espouse  our  cause  with  such  approach,  can  we  expect  God  to  bless  1
"  Will  he  be  pleased  with  thee  or  accept  thy  person?"  II.  Their  services  were
offensive  to  God.  They  despised  his  name  and  offered  polluted  bread  upon  his
altar.  1 .  Their  offerings  were  mean  in  substance.  "  Ye  offer  the  blind  for  sacrifice  ;
is  it  not  evil  1 "  They  put  God  off  with  what  was  worth  nothing.  Darius  probably
supplied  them  plentifully  with  victims  for  sacrifice,  but  they  offered  the  worst.
'•God  despises  not  the  widow's  mite,  but  he  does  despise  the  miser's  mite,"  says
Moore.  2.  Their  offerings  were  mercenary  in  spirit.  They  would  neither  kindle
a  fire  nor  shut  the  door  without  pay  (ver.  10).  "What  will  ye  give  me,  and  I
will  deliver  him  unto  you  ?  "  How  niggardly  we  are  in  God's  service  !  Ever  crying,
"  What  profit  shall  we  have? "  Thinking  more  of  gain  than  duty.  The  meanest
service  for  God  will  not  be  unrewarded.  The  servants  of  the  temple  had  their
tithes,  cups  of  cold  water  have  their  benediction,  and  God  is  not  unjust  to  forget
labours  of  love.  But  if  we  become  covetous  and  unfaithful,  every  one  for  his
gain,  from  his  quarter  (Isa.  lvi.  11),  then  we  pollute  the  altar  and  bring  the  service
of  God  into  contempt.

True  Spiritual  Service. —  Verses  7,  8.

In  the  condemnation  of  what  was  evil  in  the  spirit  and  substance  of  ancient
sacrifice  we  learn  the  right  method  of  approaching  God,  the  true  nature  of  spiritual
service.

I.  It  should  be  intelligent.  We  should  never  offer  the  blind  or  ignorant  service,
and  worship  we  know  not  what.  "  For  he  hath  no  pleasure  in  fools."  II.  It
should  be  earnest  and  hearty.  Not  lame  and  half-hearted,  but  upright  and  sincere ;
not  sick  and  feeble,  but  vigorous  and  cheerful.  The  homage  and  communion  of  the
highest  part  of  man ;  for  God  is  a  spirit,  and  can  only  hold  communion  with  spirit.
11  If  my  soul  is  not  engaged  in  my  worship,  it  is  even  as  though  I  worshipped  not "
[Confucius].  III.  It  should  be  reverential.  If  heathens  were  careful  to  offer
sacrifices  without  blemish,  how  reverential  should  we  be  in  the  sanctuary  of  God.
Never  enter  without  due  preparation  ;  never  utter  hasty  and  ill-arranged  thoughts,
nor  offer  slovenly  prayers  and  praise.     Be  as  anxious  to  worship  God  as  to  discharge

45


706


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MALACHI.


[chap.  I.


secular  functions.  God  deserves  our  best,  let  us  not  dishonour  him  with  unsound
and  grudged  gifts.  "  Neither  will  I  offer  burnt  offerings  unto  the  Lord  my  God
of  that  which  doth  jost  me  nothing."


HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Ver.  6.  It  becomes  us  to  do  what
God  enjoins.  First,  because  he  has  a
right  to  command  us.  He  is  Sovereign,
we  are  subjects ;  Master,  we  are  servants  ;
Father,  we  are  children.  Secondly,  be-
cause all  his  commandments  are  reason-
able. None  arbitrary  or  tyrannical.
Thirdly,  because  his  commands  are  be-
neficial. All  enjoined  has  special  regard
to  our  welfare.  "  In  keeping  his  com-
mandments there  is  great  reward."
Fourthly,  because  God's  commands  are
practicable.  All  imply  power  to  obey.
If  not  possessed,  yet  attainable  ;  if  not  in
nature,  yet  in  grace  ;  if  not  in  ourselves,
yet  in  him  whose  authority  we  recog-
nize, and  who  is  always  accessible  [Jay].
God  is  the  Father  of  the  faithful — (1)  By
creation:  (2)  by  preservation  and  govern-
ance ;  (3)  b}'-  alimony ;  (4)  by  fatherly
care  and  providence ;  (5)  by  faith  and
grace,  whereby  he  justifies  and  adopts
us  sons  and  heirs  of  his  kingdom
[Pusey].

Ver.  7.  Is  it  not  evil  ?  If  we  worship
God  ignorantly  and  without  understand-
ing we  bring  the  blind  for  sacrifice ;  if
we  do  it  carelessly  and  without  considera-
tion, if  we  are  cold,  and  dull,  and  dead
in  it,  we  bring  the  sick;  if  we  rest  in
the  bodily  exercise,  and  do  not  make
heart  work  of  it,  we  bring  the  lame;
and  if  we  suffer  vain  thoughts  and  dis-
tractions to  lodge  within  us,  we  bring
the  torn  [Matt.  Henry].

Polluted  bread.  Because — 1.  It  does
not  correspond  with  the  requirements  of
God's  law.  2.  It  is  offered  with  impure
mind  and  life.  If  temple  purifications
were  necessary  of  old,  how  much  holiness
is  needful  now  !  Contemptible  table.
In  what  way  can  we  now  pollute  the
table  of  the  Lord  1  (1)  In  the  Sacra-
ment, when  we  ourselves  partake  of  it
unworthily,  or  do  not  enough  arouse  the
consciences  of  others.  (2)  In  life,  when
we  allow  in  ourselves,  or  in  others  com-


mitted to  us,  a  half-way  devotedness  to
the  Lord  [Lange].

Vers.  9,  10.  These  words  are  difficult,
but  may  contain — 1.  A  charge  against
the  priests.     You  begun,  and  continued
to  insult  God,  by  worthless  sacrifices,  and
brought  all  the  consequences  upon  the
people.     Not  from  aliens,  not  from  the
custom  of  your  fathers,  but  from  your
hand  hath  this  been.     2.   "  An  ironical
appeal,   covering   an   implied  menace"
Bring  your  maimed  sacrifices,  press  God
with  your  prayers,  will  he  regard  your
persons,  in  the  spirit  in  which  you  serve
him?     Some  say — 3.   A  call  to  repent-
ance and  prayer  for  the  mercy  of  God.
11 1  pray  you,  beseech  God,  that  he  will
be  gracious  unto  you."   4.  A  rejection  of
priestly     intercession.       An     indignant
appeal  is  made  to  their  own  consciences.
If  you  have  brought  this  evil  upon  the
worship    of    God,    if    your   hands   are
tainted  with  sinful  offerings ;  are  you  fit
to  pray  for  the  rest  1     Try  it  on,  you
will  not  succeed.     God  will  reject  you  !
"  He  sums  up  with  an  entire  rejection
of  them,  present  and  future  :  I  have  no
pleasure  in  you  ;  it  is  a  term  of  repudi-
ation (cf.  1  Sam.  xviii.  25),  sometimes
of  disgust  (Jer.    xxii.  28  ;    xlviii.  38  :
Hos.  viii.   8),  neither  will  I  accept  an
offering  at  your  hands  "  [Pusey].    5.  To
silence  excuse.     You  have  nothing  to  say
for  such  careless  offerings.     You  know
what  is  right,  and  you  are  paid  for  the
smallest  service  you  perform.    6.  A  wish
to  close  the  doors  against  such  proceed-
ings.    Who   among   you  will  shut  the
doors,  and  keep  such  worshippers  out  of
the  temple1?     Better  close  the  sanctuary
than    open   it   to  subserve   selfish  and
hypocritical   purposes — better   have   no
offerings  at  all  than  vain  offerings  which
God    will   not  accept  (Isa.   i.   11 — 15).
"  Away    with     your     vain    oblations  !
What  purpose  is  the  multitude  of  your
sacrifices  to  me  1 M


chap,  l]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MALACHI.  707

HOMILETICS.

The  Great  Name  Honoured. — Verse  11.

The  priesthood  is  to  be  transferred,  and  the  Gentiles  will  become  worshippers  of
Jehovah  in  sincerity  and  truth.  A  prediction  is  given  of  the  future  glory  of  God's
name.

I.  Great  by  the  universality  of  its  revelation.  "  Great  among  the  Gentiles,"
"great  among  the  heathen,"  great  "  from  the  rising  of  the  sun,  even  unto  the  going
down  of  the  same."  The  name,  the  perfections  of  God,  shall  be  known  from  east
to  west  —  the  greatness  of  God  shall  be  clear  and  prevalent  as  the  orb  of  day.
"  Gentiles  shall  come  to  the  light,  and  kings  to  the  brightness  of  thy  rising  (lit.  sun-
rising,  Isa.  lx.  3).  II.  Great  by  the  purity  and  prevalence  of  its  worship.
When  Jehovah's  greatness  is  known,  then  incense  and  sacrifice  will  be  offered  to
him,  which  are  not  defiled.  1.  Pure  worship.  "A  pure  offering" — "not  the
blind,  the  lame,  and  the  sick," — pure  from  carnal  ordinances  and  the  corruptions
of  human  life.  Offerings  which  spring  from  hearts  sanctified  by  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  fragrant  as  incense  from  the  altar.  Prayer,  praise,  and  thanksgiving  will  be
holy  and  acceptable  to  God.  2.  Universal  worship.  "  In  every  place,"  not
confined  to  Jerusalem,  Canaan,  or  any  locality.  This  implies  the  abrogation  of  the
old  dispensation,  and  the  universal  spread  of  the  Gospel.  "  From  the  rising  of  the
sun  unto  the  going  down  of  the  same,  the  Lord's  name  is  to  be  praised  "  (Ps.
cxiii.  3).

Man's  Estimate  of  God's  Worship. —  Verses  12,  13.

The  people  were  poor,  and  offered  the  worst  sacrifices.  The  priests  connived  at
this  to  secure  their  gains,  and  thus  profaned  the  name  and  despised  the  service  of
God.

I.  God's  service  was  burdensome.  "  Behold,  what  a  weariness  is  it !  "  God
requires  willing  service.  Nothing  is  a  greater  drudgery  than  service  without  love.
Many  are  weary  in  God's  cause.  What  should  be  a  pleasure  is  a  toil.  The  Sabbath
is  a  loss  of  time.  Money  and  gifts  presented  to  God  are  wasted.  Everything  done
for  God  is  useless.  "  Wherefore  this  waste  1 "  II.  God's  service  was  despised.
"  Ye  have  snuffed  at  it,"  treated  it  contemptuously,  think  it  a  trifle  to  blow  away
with  your  breath.  If  we  wrongly  estimate  God's  service,  we  shall  be  vexed  with
his  demands.  Who  likes  to  give  to  any  person  whom  they  disregard  1  To  despise
anything  God-like  is  a  symptom  of  a  base  heart.  "  He  that  despiseth  his  ways
shall  die."

"  Such  acts
Of  contumacy  will  provoke  the  Highest
To  make  death  in  us  live  *  [Afilton],

God's  Estimate  op  Man's  Worship.

These  words  may  be  taken  in  another  sense  (orig.)  "  You  have  said,  behold  what
a  weariness  it  is,  a  matter  of  weight,  whereas  you  might  have  blown  it  away,  it
was  so  trifling."

I.  What  we  think  to  be  great  is  very  little.  Little  in  its  substance  and  spirit —
little  in  comparison  to  our  ability,  and  God's  claims  upon  us.  What  paltry  gifts  we
offer  to  him  who  gave  himself  for  us  !  "  Stiff  in  opinion,  always  in  the  wrong  "
[Dry den].  II.  What  we  think  will  be  acceptable  may  be  rejected.  Sacrifices
unsuitable  and  wicked  will  be  cursed  (ver.  13).  1.  Because  offered  in  a  spirit  of
indifference.  We  put  God  off  with  anything.  2.  Because  offered  in  a  spirit  of
deception.  Jews  offered  a  female  under  pretence  they  had  no  male  in  their  flocks.
3.  Because  offered  in  a  spirit  of  falsehood.  "The  liar,  under  stress  of  danger  or
desire,  vows  a  pure,  and  then  when  the  peril  is  past  or  the  desire  gratified,  offers  an
impure  or  blemished  beast."     God  cannot  be  deceived,  and  will  not  be  mocked  I


708  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MALACHI.  [chap.  i.


God's  Majesty  a  Motive  for  True  Service.  —  Verses  12 — 14.
Because  God's  greatness  is  known  and  God's  majesty  dreaded  among  the  heathen,
they  should  offer  the  best  sacrifice.  David  prepared  the  materials,  and  Solomon
built  the  temple,  under  a  deep  sense  of  God's  greatness.  "  Thine,  0  Lord,  is  the
greatness"  (1  Chr.  xxix.  11 ;  2  Chr.  ii.  5).  I.  God's  great  majesty  calls  for
due  reverence.  "  Honour  to  whom  honour  is  due,"  is  a  maxim  of  social
intercourse.  What  honour,  then,  must  there  be  due  to  the  Omnipotent,  the  Infinite,
and  only  wise  God  !  How  unreasonable  for  man  to  reflect  upon  his  majesty  by  offering
inferior  when  we  can  offer  superior  service  !  "Our  hearts  should  adore  a  spiritual
majesty,  which  it  cannot  comprehend,  and,  as  it  were,  lose  itself  in  his  infinitude.
We  must  believe  him  great  without  quantity,  omnipresent  without  place,  everlasting
without  time,  and  containing  all  things  without  extent ;  and  when  our  thoughts  are
come  to  the  highest,  let  us  stop,  wonder,  and  adore"  \Bp.  Hall].  "  Who  so  great  a
God  as  our  God?"  II.  God's  spiritual  nature  calls  for  spiritual  worship.
Formal  worship  and  bodily  exercise  in  waiting  upon  God,  do  not  honour  him.  "  If
this  hypocrisy,  this  resting  in  outward  performances,  so  odious  lo  God  under  the
law,  a  religion  full  of  shadows  and  ceremonies,  certainly  it  will  be  much  more  odious
to  do  so  under  the  Gospel,  a  religion  of  much  more  simplicity,  and  exacting  so  much
the  greater  sincerity  of  heart,  even  because  it  disburdens  the  outward  man  of  the
performance  of  legal  rites  and  observances"  [Ghillingworth].  Christian  sacrifice  of
prayer  and  praise  must  be  intelligent  and  sincere,  not  outward,  slight,  and  superficial ;
internal,  for  only  with  the  spirit  can  we  be  earnest  and  sincere  ;  spiritual  as  opposed
to  ritual,  to  anything  outward.  God  is  a  Spirit  (not  matter  or  form),  and  they
that  worship  him  must  worship  him  in  spirit  (spiritually  and  sincerely)  and  in
truth  (truthfully  in  desire  and  life)  (John  iv.  24).  III.  God's  universal  dominion
demands  loyal  obedience.  "My  Name  is  dreadful  among  the  heathen."  Men
have  no  fear  of  God  before  them,  treat  him  as  they  do  a  fellow-creature  whom
they  regard,  and  by  whom  they  are  overawed.  This  is  the  root  of  ignorant,  heartless
service,  of  irreverent  systems  and  theologies  of  the  present  time,  says  a  writer.  To
correct  this  error,  God  reveals  his  name,  insists  upon  his  demands,  and  sets  forth
his  supremacy  and  universal  dominion.  He  is  a  God  to  whom  we  have  to  render
account,  whose  presence  and  power  we  cannot  shun — a  Father  who  loves  and
redeems  us ;  we  should  therefore  constantly  and  cheerfully  submit  to  his  authority,
and  obey  his  will.  God  is  not  dethroned,  nor  does  he  reign  over  a  decaying
empire.  He  must  and  will  be  obeyed  in  freedom  or  force.  "  The  Lord  most  high
is  terrible ;  he  is  a  Great  King  over  all  the  earth."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  11.  The   Jewish   sacrifices   had  unto  his  great  name  ?  Those  by  whom  he

defects,  partly  incidental,  partly  inherent,  would  replace  them  would  be  more  worthy

incidental  were  these,*  with  which  the  of  God  in  two  ways — (1)  in  themselves ;

prophet  had  upbraided  them;  inherent  (2)  in  their  universality  [Pusey].
(apart  from  their  mere  typical  character),         Everyplace.  1.   Canonical  hours  abol-

that  they  never  could  be  the  religion  of  ished.     2.  Holy  places  abolished — since

the  world,  since  they  were  locally  fixed  we  cannot  be  always  in  them.     3.  Every

at  Jerusalem.     Malachi  tells  them  of  a  time  and  place  consecrated  (cf.  Treas.  of

new  sacrifice  which  should   be  offered  David,  Ps.  cxiii.  3),  or  the  daily  univer-

throughout    the    then    heathen    world,  sality  and  purity  of  Divine  worship,
grounded  on  his  new  revelation  of  him-         Yer.  14.     King.     God  is  a  King — a

self  to  them.   For  great  shall  be  my  name  great  King — a  great  King  who  is  feared,

among  the  heathen.     The  prophet  antici-  "As  God  is  alone   Lord,    through   his

pates  an  objection  which  the  Jews  might  universal  providence  and   his  intrinsic

make  to  him.      What  then  will  God  do  authority,  so  he  alone  is  King  so  great,


CHAP.  I.]


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY :  MALACHI.


709


that  of   his  greatness,   or   dignity  and         Cursed.  The  description  and  doom  of
perfection,  there  is  no  end"    [Pusey\.         the  false  worshipper.


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  I.


Vers.  2 — 5.  Loved  you.  Ingratitude
is  too  base  to  return  a  kindness,  and  too
proud  to  regard  it ;  much  like  the  tops
of  mountains,  barren  indeed  but  yet
lofty ;  they  produce  nothing,  they  feed
nobody,  they  clothe  nobody,  yet  are
high  and  stately,  and  look  down  upon
all  the  world  about  them  [Dr.  South].

Ver.  3.  Waste.  Divine  curses  are
not  merely  imprecations,  impotent  and
fruitless  desires ;  they  carry  their  effects
with  them,  and  are  attended  with
all  the  miseries  denounced  by  God
[Cruden],

Ver.  6.  Honour 'eth.  One  of  the  best
elements  of  character  as  well  in  a  child
as  in  a  man,  is  reverence.  This  is  the
feeling  due  to  parents  and  to  God,  our
Father  in  heaven.  It  is  more  than
respect ;  it  is  respect  blended  with  awe.


One  void  of  reverence  unconsecrates  all
the  mysteries  and  sanctities  of  life
[Dulce  Domum].

Vers.  7,  8,  and  12,  13.  Accept  person.

li  When  once  thy  foot  enters  the  Church,  be  bare :
God  is  more  there  than  thou,  for  thou  art  there
Only  by  his  permission.     Then  beware  ;
And  make  thyself  all  reverence  and  fear."

[G.  Herbert.]

Ver.  10.  Nought.  "  His  money  perish
with  him,"  said  the  pious  marquis  of
Vico,  "who  prefers  not  one  hour's
communion  with  Christ  before  all  the
riches  and  pleasures  of  the  world."
"  Covetousness  debaseth  a  man's  spirit  "
[Tillotson\

Ver.  14.  Deceiver.  We  never  deceive
for  a  good  purpose  ;  knavery  adds  malice
to  falsehood  \Bruybre\.


CHAPTER  II.


Critical  Notes.]  The  charge  is  still  urged  against  the  priests,  who  are  warned  if  they  do  not
reform  they  will  be  deprived  of  enjoyments,  and  made  objects  of  shame.  2.  A]  Lit.  the  curse
denounced  (Deut.  xxvii.  15 — 26).  Have  cursed]  Lit.  have  cursed  them  severally.  The  curse  has
already  begun  in  each  one  of  their  blessings.  Blessings  pronounced  by  the  priests  upon  the  people
are  intended,  say  Keil  and  others,  and  not  tithes,  revenues,  and  portions  of  sacrifices.  The  word  may
be  taken  generally.  3.  Corrupt]  Lit.  rebuke  the  seed]  I.  e.  forbid  its  growth,  and  bring  failure  in
crops  (cf.  Joel  i.  17:  Hag.  i.  11).  Though  priests  did  not  cultivate  land,  yet  they  would  suffer
from  dearth.  Some  give,  rebuke  the  arm,  i.  e.  dry  up  the  strength,  neutralize  the  duties  performed
by  priests  at  the  altar.  Dung]  of  victims,  which  should  be  burned  outside  the  camp  (Ex.  xxix.  14  :
Lev.  xvi.  27),  would  be  spread  upon  their  faces ;  a  sign  of  ignominy  and  contempt.  One]  Lit.  they
(indefinite)  will  carry  you  away  to  it  (where  it  is  deposited)  ;  and  treat  you  as  dung  (1  Kings  xiv.
10).  4.  Know]  by  experience,  that  tltis  commandment]  ».  e.  the  decree  to  punish,  shall  henceforth  be
substituted  for  my  covenant  with  Levi,  or  the  priesthood.  They  forfeited  the  blessing,  and  turned  the
covenant  of  peace  into  woe.  Better  understand,  that  they  were  warned  to  take  heed  that  the  covenant]
might  continue  with  the  priestly  tribe  as  in  the  beginning,  and  not  become  null  or  void.  5.]  Nature
of  the  covenant  described.  Life  and  peace]  Nouns  not  in  the  genitive  case.  "  Peace"  is  the  sum  of  all
the  blessings  requisite  for  well-being.  Jehovah  granted  life  and  salvation  to  Levi,  i.  e.  to  the  priest-
hood, for  fear,  viz.  as  the  lever  of  the  fear  of  God;  and  Levi,  i.  e.  the  priesthood  of  the  olden  time,
responded  to  this  Divine  intention.  *  He  feared  me  "  [Keil].  Afraid]  Often  united  to  fear,  expressing
terror,  which  men  are  forbidden  not  to  feel  before  men  (Isa.  viii.  12 — 13)  [Pusey].  6.]  Levi  pre-
served this  fear  in  office  and  life.  Truth]  Instruction  in  the  law  was  in  truth.  Iniquity]  No
injustice  was  practised  in  his  life,  nor  was  truth  perverted  by  selfishness  and  self-interest  Walked]
Intercourse  with  God  was  progressive  and  confidential.     In  peace]  "  Equipped  with  the  salvation


710  ffOMTLETTC  COMMENTARY:  MJLACHl  [chap.  ii.


bestowed  upon  him  by  God  "  (ver.  5)  [Keil\.  And  equity]  Lit  plainness  and  straightforwardness,
opposed  to  deceit,  or  crooked  dealing.  The  consequence  of  faithful  discharge  in  duty  was  the  bringing
back,  I.  e.  the  turning  of  many  from  sin  to  God's  fear.  7.]  This  was  the  duty,  the  vocation  of  Levi,
t.  e.  of  the  priesthood.  Beautiful  description  of  priestly  functions.  Keep]  Preserve,  store  up,  to
distribute.  Knowledge]  The  negative  and  positive  precepts  of  the  law  ;  for  people  seek  the  law]
i.  e.  instruction  in  God's  will,  from  his  lips.  Messenger]  Interpreter  (cf.  Hag.  i.  13).  8.  But]  A
remarkable  contrast  to  their  pious  fathers.  They  taught  for  hire,  and  had  respect  to  persons ;
departed  from  God  themselves,  and  caused  others  to  fall  by  their  scandalous  example.  Corrupted]
by  false  teaching,  made  the  law  not  a  light  for  duty,  but  a  license  for  sin.  9.  Therefore]  Jehovah,
no  longer  bound  by  a  covenant  which  they  have  broken,  withdraws  blessings,  and  makes  them  con-
temptible. 10.]  A  fresh  section,  "  the  condemnation  of  marriages  with  heathen  women  (vers.  10 — 12),
and  of  the  frivolous  dissolution  of  marriages  with  Israel itish  women,  which  was  the  natural  conse-
quence of  the  former"  (vers.  13 — 16)  [Keil].  The  same  course  as  in  previous  rebukes  adopted
(cf.  Neh.  xii.  23 — 31  with  this  section).  One]  Common  origin,  which  gave  them  a  new  relation  to
each  other.  Treacherous]  A  violation  of  duty  to  God  was  an  offence  against  each  other,  on  account  of
this  common  relationship.  Covenant]  (Ex.  xix.  5,  6;  xxiv.  8:  Deut.  xiv.  2.)  11.  Holiness]  Pro-
faned or  desecrated  by  marriages  expressly  forbidden.  Judah]  i.  e.  the  whole  nation,  commits  this
abomination  in  Israel]  a  holy  nation  !— and  in  Jerusalem]  the  capital  of  the  nation.  12.  Cut]  Punish.
Master  and  scholar]  Lit.  him  that  watcheth,  and  him  that  answereth.  The  watcher  goes  his  rounds
by  night  to  keep  guard,  the  other  answers,  i.  e.  responds  to  his  cry  (cf.  Illus.  end  of  ch.).  13.  This]
A  second  sin  performed.  Tears]  By  ill  treatment  their  wives  were  driven  to  weep  at  the  altar.  Hence
God  will  not  accept  the  offering]  nor  bless  the  offerer.  14.  Say]  Why  does  he  not  accept  ?  Witness]
The  people  are  not  ashamed,  and  wickedly  ask  why  ?  Jehovah  declares  himself  (an  avenging  witness,
some)  of  the  marriage  which  took  place  (cf.  Prov.  ii.  17),  which  should  have  been  sacred.  The
divorced  wife  tenderly  called  a  wife  and  companion  of  joys  and  sorrows  of  youth,  and  a  wife  of  the
covenant  for  life  made  between  them.  15.]  Most  difficult  verse  of  all  prophecy.  Taken  by  many
as  recalling  the  institution  of  marriage,  of  Divine  sanction  from  the  beginning.  Did  Jehovah  not
make  one  flesh  (Gen.  i.  27),  why  only  one  pair  ?  Had  he  not  the  residue  of  the  Spirit  ?  His
creative  power  was  not  exhausted ;  he  might  have  created  many  women  for  one  man.  That  he  might
seek  to  perpetuate  a  godly  seed],  a  design  counteracted  by  frequent  divorce  \_Lange].  Others  say,
that  the  Jews  defended  their  conduct  by  the  precedent  of  Abraham,  who  took  Hagar  to  the  injury
of  Sarah,  his  lawful  wife.  To  this  the  prophet  replies  :  "  No  one  (ever)  did  so  in  whom  there  was
a  residue  of  intelligence  (discriminating  between  good  and  evil)  :  and  what  did  the  one]  (Abraham,  to
whom  you  appeal  for  support)  do,  seeking  a  goodly  seed  ?  His  object  (viz.  not  to  gratify  passion,
but  to  obtain  the  seed  promised  by  God)  makes  the  case  inapplicable  to  defend  your  position  "  [Hengs.].
Many  explain  it  according  to  ver.  10.  He  made  (us  Israelites)  one.  Our  isolation  from  other
nations  was  not  because  there  was  no  residue  of  the  Spirit  left  for  the  world.  Why,  then,  did  he  thus
isolp.te  us  ?  One]  (Heb.  the  one)  people  ?  That  he  might  have  a  goodly  seed,  i.  e.  have  a  nation,  the
repository  of  his  will,  and  a  witness  for  him  among  idolatrous  peoples.  16.  Putting  away]  Divorce.
Covereth]  They  wrap  up  or  cover  their  sins  as  with  a  garment.  17.]  This  verse  really  belongs  to
the  following  chapter.  A  class  of  murmurers  addressed  (Jewish  sceptics,  or  wicked  heathens),  who
enjoyed  prosperity,  excused  themselves  (wherein?)  declared,  that  God  delighted  in  evil  doers,  and
sneer,  Where  is  the  God  of  judgment?

HOMILETICS.
Priestly  Blessings  turned  into  a  Curse. — Verses  1 — 5.

The  rebuke  to  the  priests  is  followed  by  an  admonition  to  hear  the  Word  and
reverence  the  name  of  God,  lest  he  curse  their  blessings  and  dishonour  their  persons.

I.  The  nature  of  the  curse  upon  the  blessings.  In  whatever  sense  the  curse
may  be  taken,  it  is  an  awful  judgment,  a  solemn  warning  to  all.  1.  Their  own
persons  were  cursed.  "  I  will  even  send  a  curse  upon  you."  This  was  a  reversal
of  the  original  promise  for  obedience,  "  I  will  command  my  blessing  upon  you."
2.  Their  blessings  were  cursed.  "  He  does  not  say,  I  will  send  you  curses  instead
of  blessings,  but  I  will  make  the  blessings  themselves  a  curse"  [Pusey].  (a)  Spirit-
ual blessings  may  be  cursed ;  the  ministry  of  the  Word,  and  the  means  of  grace ;
Sundays  and  sermons  may  be  despised,  increase  the  guilt  and  aggravate  the
condemnation  of  men.  (b)  Temporal  blessings  may  be  cursed.  "  Corrupt  your  seed."
Riches,  children,  and  the  very  food  we  eat  may  do  us  no  good.  The  curse  from
heaven  may  fall  upon  them.  "  Let  their  table  be  made  a  snare  before  them,  and
that  which  should  have  been  for  their  welfare,  let  it  become  a  trap."  II.  The
reason  for  the  curse  upon  the  blessings.     1.    They  neglected  the  Word  of  God,


cHAf.  tt.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MALACHI.  711


"If  ye  will  not  hear,  and  if  ye  will  not  lay  it  to  heart."  The  Word  was  personal
in  appeal;  "this  commandment  is  for  you;"  and  solemn  in  authority,  yet  they
heeded  not.  The  Word  must  not  simply  be  heard,  but  pondered  in  the  mind.
God's  authority  must  be  seen  and  felt  in  it.  It  is  a  matter  of  life  or  death,  and
must  not  be  trifled  with.     "  Ye  do  not  lay  it  to  heart."

2.  They  despised  the  Name  of  God.  "  Give  glory  unto  my  Name."  Glory  is  due
to  God,  and  should  be  the  aim  of  priestly  and  Christian  conduct — the  rule  of  life
for  the  house  of  Aaron  and  the  house  of  Israel.  But  God  is  dishonoured  by
despising  the  ordinances  of  his  house  and  living  heedless  of  his  Word.  "  To  the
greater  glory  of  God,"  was  the  motto  of  Ignatius  Loyola.  III.  The  design  of  the
curse  upon  the  blessings.  "Ye  shall  know  that  I  have  sent  this  command  in  out
unto  you  "  (ver.  4.).  1.  They  were  admonished  to  return  to  God.  God  desired  to
keep  his  covenant  with  them,  and  punishment  was  intended  to  reform  them.  This
would  they  feel,  and  bitterly  confess.  God  ever  designs  to  make  men  happy,  and
keep  them  from  misery.  2.  They  were  admonished  for  the  sake  of  others.  "  God
willed  to  punish  those  who  at  that  time  rebelled  against  him,  that  he  might  spare
those  who  should  come  after  them.  He  chastised  the  fathers,  who  showed  their
contempt  towards  him,  that  their  sons,  taking  warning  thereby,  might  not  be  cut  off.
He  continues  to  say  what  the  covenant  was,  which  he  willed  to  be  if  they  would
repent"  [Pusey].  Every  warning  given  to  men  concerning  their  sins,  is  a  proof  of
God's  mercy,  and  will  convince  them  that  their  destruction  results  from  their  own
ways.     "  I  have  sent  this  commandment  unto  you."

Failure  in  Official  Duties. — Verses  2,  3.

By  cursing  blessings,  God  means  that  he  will  render  the  instructions  and  efforts
of  the  priests  ineffective.  When  they  raised  the  hand  to  bless,  he  would  manifest
displeasure.     He  would  neutralize  their  duties  performed  at  the  altar  [cf.  Keil].

I.  By  rendering  them  incapable  of  official  duties.  "  He  will  rebuke  their
arm"  i.  e.  dry  up  their  powers,  like  the  waters  of  the  sea.  The  arm  is  the  symbol  of
strength  and  active  labour.  From  him  that  hath  maybe  taken  away  what  he  hath,
if  abused.  God  can  wither  the  force  and  fervour  of  ungodly  ministers.  Power  is
lost  by  continuance  in  office  for  which  men  are  not  qualified.  Their  prayers  are
sin,  their  knowledge  hardens,  and  their  "  arm  shall  be  clean  dried  up."  II.  By
righteous  punishment  in  discharging  official  duties.      God  threatens  sore  evils.

1.  They  would  be  treated  with  contempt.  As  they  had  despised  him,  so  they  would
be   repaid   in  ignominy   and  shame  —  be  made  as  the  refuse  of  their  sacrifices.

2.  They  would  be  swept  out  of  office.  As  mere  cumber,  and  unworthy  of  the  temple,
"  One  shall  take  "  them  away  with  the  dung.  "  I  will  take  away  the  remnant  of
the  house  of  Jeroboam,  as  a  man  taketh  away  dung,  till  all  are  gone  "  (1  Kings
xiv.  10).

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  2.   Curse.     Things  which  should  ness  of  the  curse.     2.  The  gradual  oper-

bless,  become  an  occasion  of  falling  ;  to  ation  of  the  curse.     "  Cursed  already  ;  "

the   proud,  the  things  which  lift  them  and   will    continue    until  you    repent.

up ;  to  the  gluttonous,  their  abundance ;  3.    The    insensibility   under   the    curse.

to  the  avaricious,  their  wealth;  which,  "Ye  do  not  lay  to  heart."    4.  The  severity

if   used   to   the   glory  of  God,  become  of  the  curse.     "Curse  blessings."

blessings,    do,    when  self,   not    Go<l,  is     ..  Tiru        ..        ,  .  .         . ...      .   ,     ,

„    .      °  j     ,        ~    ,,      ,.  ,.         '     ,      "Whom  oils  and  balsams  kill,  what  salve  can

their   end,    by  God  s  dispensation  and  cure  :,  »

providence,    become    a   curse    to    them

[Pusey].   I  have  cursed  them,  Lit.  it,  i.e.         Ver.  5.  The  covenant.    1.  Its  blessings.

each  blessing.     Hence — 1.   The  minute-     "  Life  and  peace ; "  i.  e.  of  being  and  well-


712  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  MALACHL  [chap.  ii.


being  ;   for  all  the  blessings  that  make  God  in  his  whole  heart  and  soul.     For

up  human  welfare,  were  summed  up  for  these  reduplications  and  emphases  sug-

the  Hebrew  in  one  word — peace  [Cox],  gest  to  the  hearer  how  rooted  in  virtue

2.    Its     conditions.     "Forbear."     Jews  are  those  thus  praised "  [Pusey].      It  is

claimed  its  privileges,  while  neglecting  its  better  to  fear  too  much  than  to  presume

conditions  —  thought  God  would  bless  but  a  little  [Abp.  Abbot].  "  Sanctify  the

them,  while  they  were  free  from  oblig-  Lord   of   Hosts    himself    (venerate    his

ations  to  obey  him.  3.  Its  influence.   "He  glorious  majesty),  and  let  him  be  your

feared"  me,  had  great  reverence,  and  was  fear  (be  not  dismayed  at  man),  and  your

a/raid;  had  profound  and  holy  terror  dread  (lest  ye  provoke  him  by  distrust)  "

before  me.     "  He  received  the   fear   of  (Isa.  viii.  1 3).

HOMILETICS.
The  True.  Minister. —  Verses  6,  7.

The  prophet  looks  backward  to  the  fidelity  and  zeal  of  Phinehas,  which  should
have  been  copied  by  his  successors.  But  "  the  lines  of  character  are  too  large  and
fair  to  be  those  of  mortal  man.  It  is  the  ideal  priest  whom  the  prophet  has  in  his
mind,  the  archetype  to  which  every  true  priest  will  seek  to  be  conformed ;  not
any  single  member  of  the  priesthood — as  indeed  he  himself  intimates  by  using  the
tribal  name  'Levi'  in  ver.  4,  instead  of  the  personal  name,  'Phinehas,'  and  by
employing  the  abstract  term,  '  the  priest,'  in  ver.  7  "  [Coo;].

I.  The  true  minister  is  holy  in  character.  He  stands  in  awe  of  God  who
has  chosen  him,  and  made  a  covenant  of  life  and  peace  with  him  (ver.  5).  As  "  the
messenger  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts,"  he  feels  his  responsibility,  and  walks  worthy  of  his
high  vocation.  Spiritual  work  requires  spiritual  character  as  a  prime  qualification.
"  None  but  he  who  made  the  world  can  make  a  minister  of  the  Gospel,"  says  Newton.
II.  The  true  minister  is  devout  in  life.  "  He  walked  with  God."  Consistency
harmonizes  conduct  and  creed.  Holiness,  like  the  law  of  gravitation,  should  regulate
every  motion  of  life.  Men  judge  of  the  minister's  practice  more  than  the  minister's
sermon.  The  missionary  Eliot  resolved  to  leave  something  of  God,  heaven,  and
religion  with  all  that  came  near  him.  In  character  and  conduct  we  must  be  blame-
less, "  unrebukable ;"  for,  says  Bp.  Home — "  He  who  undertakes  to  reprove  the  world,
must  be  one  whom  the  world  cannot  reprove."  III.  The  true  minister  is  incor-
ruptible in  doctrine.  "The  law  of  truth  was  in  his  mouth."  He  believes  the
truth  of  God,  and  it  is  the  law,  the  staple  of  his  instructions.  No  fear,  no  sinister,
selfish  principles  lead  him  to  keep  back  or  pervert  the  truth.  He  conceals  nothing,
however  unpleasant — shuns  not  to  declare  the  whole  counsel  of  God.  "  In  doctrine
showing  incorruptness  (untainted  sincerity),  gravity  (dignified  delivery),  sincerity,
sound  speech  (healthy  discourse  in  public  and  private),  that  cannot  be  condemned  "
(Tit.  ii.  7,  8).  IV.  The  true  minister  is  successful  in  labours.  "  And  did  turn
many  away  from  iniquity."  Success  in  one  respect  may  not  be  realized.  God  can
bless  or  withhold.  One  sows,  and  another  reaps.  But  if  we  fail  to  convert,  we  may
reprove,  enlighten,  and  edify.  But  God  promises  success  to  faithful  labour.  We
must  not  therefore  set  the  sovereignty  in  opposition  to  the  faithfulness  of  God.  Aim
to  "  convert  the  sinner  from  the  error  of  his  way,"  and  your  work  will  not  be  in
vain.  Remember,  as  a  motto  and  encouragement,  "  They  that  turn  many  to  right-
eousness (shall  shine)  as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever."

The  False  Minister. — Verses  8,  9.

In  the  former  words  we  have  a  pattern  priest  described,  to  contrast  the  baseneos
and  falsehood  of  those  now  reproved.

I.  The  false  minister  is  negligent  in  duty.     "Ye  have  not  kept  my  ways."


OHAP.  n.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MALACHL  713


1.  He  'perverts  the  truth  in  teaching.  "  Ye  have  corrupted  the  covenant  of  Levi."
They  violated  and  defeated  the  intentions  of  it,  and  made  it  contemptible  by  false
expositions  and  partiality.  H  But  have  been  partial  in  the  law."  2.  He  departs
from  the  truth  in  life.  Not  merely  falls  short  of  it,  the  best  do  that,  but  openly,
insolently  renounced  and  reversed  it.  "  Ye  are  departed  out  of  the  way,"  of  know-
ledge, fear,  and  truth.  "  Her  priests  have  polluted  the  sanctuary,  they  have  done
violence  to  the  law."  II.  The  false  minister  is  pernicious  in  example.  "  Ye
have  caused  many  to  stumble  at  the  law."  Instead  of  keeping  integrity  of  character,
and  shedding  light  on  the  path  of  peace,  by  doctrine  and  example,  he  misleads,
casts  a  stumbling-block  in  the  ways  of  others,  and  causes  them  to  fall.  Fenelon
says,  "  that  moral  instructions  have  no  weight  nor  influence,  when  they  are  neither
supported  by  clear  principles  nor  good  examples."  "The  sin  of  the  young  men
was  very  great  before  the  Lord ;  for  men  abhorred  the  offering  of  the  Lord."
III.  The  false  minister  is  cursed  in  his  work.  "  I  also  made  you  contemptible
and  base  before  all  people."  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons — if  men  are — and  the  lot
of  the  unfaithful  minister  will  be  as  his  service.  "  According  as  ye  have"  acted,  so
will  be  your  punishment.  In  spite  of  office,  unholy  men  will  be  held  in  contempt
by  the  mass  of  the  people.  Careless  and  unprincipled  clergy  will  ever  sink  in  public
estimation.     1.   They  break  the  covenant  of  peace.    Therefore  forfeit  all  its  blessings.

2.  They  deeply  disgrace  themselves.  These  are  made  base,  and  made  base  before  all
the  people.  3.  They  exclude  themselves  from  office.  "I  said  indeed  that  thy  house,
and  the  house  of  thy  father,  should  walk  before  me  for  ever ;  but  now  the  Lord
saith,  Be  it  far  from  me ;  for  them  that  honour  me  I  will  honour,  and  they  that
despise  me  shall  be  lightly  esteemed."

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Vers.  6,7.  I.  Tlie  priest's  character,  trine"  (Tit.  ii.  1)  ;  "to  hold  fast  the
(a)  Intelligent :  If  he  must  keep,  he  must  faithful  word,  so  that  he  may  be  able
get,  knowledge,  (b)  Consistent ;  he  must  by  sound  doctrine  to  convince  the  gain-
walk  with  God.  (c)  Truthful ;  and  (d)  sayers "  (Tit.  i.  9).  And  how  much
holy.  "  The  lips  of  the  righteous  feed  sorer  will  be  his  punishment  if  he  fails
many."  II.  The  priest's  dignity  not  a  to  discharge  it !  (cf.  Tit.  i.  7,  9  :  2  Tim.
common  calling,  but  an  ambassador  of  ii.  2).  It  is  to  be  feared  that  this
Christ  (2  Cor.  v.  20).  "  For  he  is  warning  is  greatly  needed  in  the  present
the  messenger  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts."  day!  [IForcfe.].

III.    The  priest's  vocation.     1.  To  give         Ver.   6.     He  "  walks "  with  God  in  a

instruction.       "They   should   seek   the  happy  consent  and  progress ;  for  "how

law  at  his  mouth."     2.  To  be  impartial,  can  two  walk  together  except  they  be

"  Doing  nothing  by  partiality."     3.  To  agreed  r{ "    To  walk  is  not  only  to  move,

restore  men  to  God.    "  Turn  many  away  but   to   move   onward.      He   not   only

from  iniquity."  walks    with    God,  but    he   walks   with

Here   is   a   solemn    warning    to    the  him    "  in   integrity    and    peace : "    two

Christian  clergy.     If  such  was  the  duty  lines  of   advance  are  specially  marked

<>f   the   Levitical  priesthood,   and  such  out  for  him — the  generous  uprightness

the  penalty  for  not  performing  it  aright,  which  saves  his  teaching  from  sinister

how  much  more  imperative  is  the  obli-  perversions,  rules  his  personal  conduct,

gation  of  the  Christian  priest  to  "  keep  so  that  he  is  drawn  aside  by  no  selfish

knowledge,"  and  to  instruct  the  people  or  impure  motive;    and,  moreover,  he

in  sound  doctrine ;  or,  as  St.  Paul  ex-  possesses  himself  ever  more  fully  of  all

presses  it,  "  to  give  attendance  to  reading,  the  blessings  which  conduce  to  peace  or

to  exhortation,  to  doctrine,  to  meditate  on  well-heing.     Thus,  by  his  own  pure  and

these  things,  and  give  himself  wholly  to  happy  life,  no  less  than  by  his  whole-

them"  (1   Tim.  iv.   13,  15)  j  "to  speak  some    and     unperverted    doctrine,    he

the   things   which   become   sound   doc-  "  brings   back  many  from  guilt,"  con-


714  HOfflLETIC  COMMENTARY :  MALACHI.  [chap.  ii.

vincing  the  sinful  of  the  mistake  they  ministers.      1.  It   is    in   proportion   to

have  made,  and  leading  them,  through  their    exaltation    in    office.       2.  It    is

repentance,    to    that   way    of    life    and  impartial.      3.  It   is   public   before  all.

peace  in  which  he  himself  is  advancing  In    partiality   and    pleasing   men,  they

[S.  Cox],  bring   upon    themselves   contempt :    in

Ver.  8.  (cf.  Neh.  xiii.  29).  Prophecy  faithfulness  and  pleasing  God,  they  gain

a  comment  on  history.  the  testimony  of  a  good  conscience  and

Ver.    9.     Punishment   to   unfaithful  the  approval  of  God.

Unlawful  Marriages. —  Verses  10 — 12.

Reproof  is  now  administered  to  the  people,  especially  the  priests,  for  flagrant
violation  of  law  in  marrying  foreigners,  and  divorcing  their  wives  when  married
This  was —

I.  A  violation  of  God's  law.  Marriage  with  the  Canaanites  and  with  all
idolaters  was  forbidden  (Ex.  xxxiv.  16  :  Deut.  vii.  3  :  1  Kings  xi.  1,  2).  The  high
priest  was  to  take  a  virgin  of  his  own  people  (Lev.  xxi.  14,  15);  and  the  priests
who  married  strange  wives  denied  "  the  covenant  of  the  priesthood "  (Nek.  xiii.
29).  "  Be  not  unequally  yoked  together  with  unbelievers."  II.  A  desecration  of
the  community.  Israel  was  a  holy  people,  but  this  was  an  "  abomination  com-
mitted in  Israel."  If  they  allied  themselves  with  those  from  whom  God  had  set
them  apart,  they  broke  the  national  league,  and  profaned  the  covenant  of  their
fathers.  Hence — 1.  They  polluted  the  temple.  The  very  seat  and  centre  of  God's
presence.  "In  Jerusalem."  2.  They  polluted  the  people.  They  fell  from  their
lofty  dignity,  and  tainted  others  by  their  influence.  "  Why  do  we  treacherously
every  man  against  his  brother  1 "  III.  A  condition  of  hopeless  calamity.  The
imprecation  or  menace  is  severe.  1.  Posterity  will  not  escape  the  punishment.  In
whatever  sense  these  words  be  taken,  the  master  and  the  scholar,  or  (as  marg.)  him
that  waketh  and  him  that  answereth — the  camp  would  be  silent.  The  posterity  of
hirn  that  violated  the  marriage  law  would  be  cut  off,  and  not  one  left  in  "  the  taber-
nacles of  Jacob."  2.  Sacrifice  will  not  atone  for  the  sins.  There  will  be  none  to
offer  a  sacrifice  for  the  sinner,  or  if  there  were,  they  could  not  shield  from  the  penalty.
"  Insomuch  that  he  regardeth  not  the  offering  any  more."

A  Common  Fatherhood. — Verse  10.

God  was  the  Father,  the  Creator  of  Israel  in  a  special  sense  (Isa.  lxiii.  1 6).  But  all
men  have  a  common  relation  to  God,  who  is  our  common  Father  and  Creator.  God
is  looked  upon  as  Judge  and  Buler  of  men,  but  the  Fatherhood  of  God  is  forgotten.
Hence  the  evils  which  afflict  society.

I.  In  the  Fatherhood  of  God  we  have  an  argument  for  personal  piety.
As  dependent  creatures,  we  should  acknowledge  him.  "  Hath  not  one  God  created
us  % "  We  are  not  simply  God's  creatures,  but  his  offspring,  children  in  paternal
likeness  (Acts  xvii.  28).  Hence — 1.  A  motive  to  obedience.  As  children,  we  should
seek  to  know  and  practise  God's  will.  2.  A  protest  against  idolatry.  Material,
intellectual,  and  spiritual  idolatry  should  be  forsaken.  Our  filial  relation  should
teach  us  the  spirituality  of  the  Godhead,  and  the  folly  of  atheism.  "  Be  ye,  therefore,
followers  (imitators)  of  God,  as  dear  children"  (Eph.  v.  1).  II.  In  the  Fatherhood
of  God  we  have  a  bond  of  human  brotherhood.  He  "  hath  made  of  one  blood
all  nations  of  men."  In  the  common  origin  we  have  the  unity  of  the  human  race
— a  natural  tie  to  cement  them  together  in  their  migrations  and  settlements.  But
nations  have  broken  asunder,  set  up  divinities,  and  forgotten  God's  purpose  in
organizing  them.  Science  and  philosophy,  treaties  and  commerce,  nave  failed  to
unite  them  again.  Wars,  selfishness,  and  lusts  still  prevail.  Only  when  men
are  taught  that  a  Father  in  heaven  rules  their  interests,  and  settles  their  rights  and


chap,  n.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MALACHI.  715


wrongs,  will  they  cease  to  hate.  "  0  foolish  people  and  unwise,  is  he  not  thy
Father  that  hath  bought  thee  1 — hath  he  not  made  thee  and  established  thee  1 "
III.  In  the  Fatherhood  of  God  we  have  a  motive  to  philanthropy.     In  our

creation  we  have  a  natural,  in  Christ  a  spiritual,  relation  to  God ;  every  offence  is  a
violation  of  these  relationships  to  God,  and  an  injury  to  our  fellow-men.  Sin
against  the  brethren  is  sin  against  Christ  (1  Cor.  viii.  12).  "  Why  deal  treacher-
ously every  man  against  his  brother  ?  "  Social  sins  are  treachery  against  the
community,  violations  of  faith  and  confidence.  "Did  not  he  that  made  me  in  the
womb  make  him1? — and  did  not  one  fashion  us  in  the  womb?"  "Love  one
another."

Unholy  Marriages. —  Verse  11.

The  Jews  commanded  to  keep  themselves  separated  from  nations  around  them — to
niaintain  their  position  as  custodians  of  revelations,  and  abiding  witnesses  of  God's
existence.  But  they  often  disobeyed;  and  formed  idolatrous  connections.  Thus,
the  holiness  of  Jehovah  was  profaned,  and  Judah  became  an  abomination.
Nehemiah  and  Ezra  sought  to  remove  the  evil  which  Malachi  condemns.

I.  This  evil  may  now  be  committed  literally.  Strange  gods  are  worshipped
in  every  community.  Names  and  shapes  of  idols  have  changed,  but  in  essential
characters  remain  the  same.  Every  woman  not  truly  devoted  to  Jehovah  is  "a
daughter  of  a  strange  god,"  under  the  influence  of  the  god  of  this  world.
Christian  men,  for  the  sake  of  sensual  and  worldly  considerations,  sometimes  marry
such.  1.  They  marry  Avomen  who  sacrifice  their  noblest  feelings  for  wealth.
2.  Women  who  have  bound  themselves  upon  the  altar  of  fashion.  3.  Women  who
sacrifice  their  holiest  impulses  for  pleasure.  4.  Women  who  are  devoted  to  the
triumphs  of  ambition.  Christians  should  never  violate  their  union  with  Jehovah
to  unite  themselves  with  idolaters.  This,  under  even  the  most  plausible  circum-
stances, is — (1)  to  disobey  a  Divine  command;  (2)  to  lose  the  Divine  blesssing;
(3)  to  incur  the  Divine  displeasure.  II.  This  evil  may  be  committed  spiritually.
Union  to  God  often  represented  in  Scripture  as  marriage — the  closest  of  bonds.
God  has  right  to  our  devotion,  service,  and  love.  From  this  celestial  marriage
spring  all  virtues  and  graces.  But  the  worship  of  strange  gods  has  been  most
prolific  in  pernicious  customs,  degrading  vices,  and  dangerous  errors.  These  evils
abound,  captivate,  and  allure,  as  heathen  women  did  the  Jews.  Men  marry  the
daughters  of  a  strange  god  spiritually:  1.  When  they  join  themselves  with
popular  customs  which  have  emanated  from  the  spirit  of  idolatry.  2.  When  they
embrace  false  and  erroneous  systems  of  religion.  3.  When  they  associate  them-
selves freely  with  unholy  religionists.  God  requires  his  people  to  separate  them-
selves from  all  fascinating  forms  of  evil,  and  to  be  wholly  his.  He  has  no  agree-
ment with  idols,  nor  must  his  people  with  evils  arising  out  of  idolatry.  All
unholy  unions  are  breaches  of  a  marriage  covenant — a  voluntary  preference  of  evil
to  God.  III.  This  evil,  whether  committed  literally  or  spiritually,  will
produce  disastrous  results.  1.  Literally.  It  results  in — (1)  domestic  unhappiness ;
(2)  a  divided  household  ;  (3)  ill-trained  children — probably  generations  of  evil-
doers ;  (4)  neglect  of  true  religion  on  the  part  of  both.  "  If  David  marry  Maacah,"
says  Adams,  "  their  issue  proves  an  Absalom.  If  Solomon  love  idolatrous  women,
here  is  enough  to  overthrow  him,  with  all  his  wisdom ;  by  joining  his  heart  to
theirs,  he  shall  disjoin  it  from  God.  One  religion  matching  with  another  not
seldom  breeds  an  atheist — one  of  no  religion  at  ally  2.  Spiritually.  It  results  in
— (1)  blindness  in  spiritual  things ;  (2)  loss  of  Divine  favour  \  (3)  wandering  in
deceptive  errors  \  (4)  loss  of  religious  influence  ;  (5)  being  given  up  by  God.
"  Ephraim  is  joined  to  idols  ;  let  him  alone."  Learn  to  guard  against  uniting  with
anything  which  separates  us  from  God.  An  evil  association  has  often  been  a
devil's  chain,  binding  the  soul  to  everlasting  wretchedness  (The  Study  and  The
Pulpit),


716  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MALACHI.  [chap,  ii.


Unlawful  Divorce. —  Verses  13 — 16.

"  This  have  ye  done  again ;  "  a  second  accusation  is  brought  against  them.  To
marry  strange  women,  they  divorced  their  lawful  wives,  drove  them  in  tears  to  the
sanctuary,  and  brought  contempt  upon  their  worship.  Men  add  one  sin  to  another,
until  the  wrath  of  God  is  poured  out  upon  them.

I.  Divorce  shamefully  cruel.  They  afflicted  their  own  wives  so  cruelly  that  they
fled  to  the  altar,  and  covered  it  "  with  weeping  and  loud  cries."  Those  who  are
wronged  and  insulted  may  obtain  redress  before  God's  throne.  He  hears  the  cries
of  the  helpless.  The  tears  of  the  innocent  rise  above  the  incense  and  worship  of
their  persecutors.  II.  Divorce  strangely  aggravating.  The  offence  was  committed
against  constant  warning,  was  most  aggravating  in  its  nature  and  results.  1.  They
broke  the  tenderest  ties  of  humanity.  "  The  wife  of  thy  youth"  who  plighted  her
troth  to  thee  in  the  freshness  of  life.  "  Thy  companion"  sharing  thy  joys  and
sorrows,  hopes  and  interests,  thy  associate  and  help-meet  in  all  the  circumstances
of  life.  Above  all,  "  the  wife  of  thy  covenant"  given  and  taken  with  most  solemn
pledges,  yet  now  cast  away  in  scorn  and  lust !  Even  the  heathen  believed  marriage
to  be  a  sacred  act,  and  guarded  it  by  solemn  sanctions :  what,  then,  must  be  the
guilt  of  divorce  under  such  circumstances  !  2.  They  defied  the  witness  of  God.
"  The  Lord  hath  been  witness  "  to  the  solemn  engagement  between  them.  To  him
the  appeal  was  made.  To  violate  this  covenant  is  to  deal  treacherously,  and  God
will  avenge  the  transgressors.  "  Which  forsaketh  the  guide  of  her  youth,  and  for-
ge tteth  the  covenant  of  her  God."  III.  Divorce  boldly  defended.  Some  take
ver.  15  as  alluding  to  the  example  of  Abraham,  who  sinned  against  Sarah  the  wife
of  his  youth,  by  taking  Hagar.  This  seemed  to  sanction  their  sin,  and  the  prophet
meets  the  objection  or  defence,  "  What  did  that  one  1 "  God  promised  Abraham
seed,  a  child  who  should  be  the  hope  of  the  chosen  people,  and  the  blessing  of  the
world.  He  mistakenly  followed  the  counsel  of  his  wife,  instead  of  the  counsel  of
God,  and  sought  that  seed  by  marrying  the  Egyptian.  But  you  have  not  the
promise  of  Abraham,  nor  are  you  actuated  by  the  same  motives.  If  you  were  pure
in  motive,  you  are  sinful  in  act ;  for  God  hates  divorce,  and  acts  of  cruelty  which
you  commit.  "Therefore,  take  heed  to  your  spirit;  "  have  no  light  thought  of  this
offence;  for  you  cannot  excuse  yourselves  by  the  errors  of  great  men.  IV.  Divorce
which  frustrated  the  design  of  lawful  marriage.  Others  take  ver.  15  as  referring
to  the  first  pair,  between  whom  and  between  all  others  born  after  them,  God  willed
that  there  should  be  one  indivisible  union.  This  law  should  not  therefore  be  broken.
But  "  wherefore  one  ?  "  That  he  might  see  a  godly  seed.  From  lawful  marriage,
religious  offspring  may  be  secured  by  God's  blessing.  Divorce  and  polygamy  counter-
act the  interests  of  piety,  and  have  even  been  unfavourable  to  the  education  and  godly
training  of  children.  V.  Divorce  which  ended  in  serious  consequences.  The  unity
of  marriage  faithfully  kept  is  in  harmony  with  God's  will,  but  violated  is  pernicious
to  society.  1.  It  is  treachery  to  society.  "  Deal  not  treacherously"  (ver.  16).  2.  //  is
insulting  to  God.  "  The  Lord  God  of  Israel  saith,  that  he  hateth  putting  away."
God  permitted  Israel,  on  account  of  hardness  of  heart,  to  divorce  (Matt.  xix.  8  :
Mark  x.  5).  But  the  legislation  of  Moses  was  in  advance  of  the  common  morality
of  the  time,  and  taught  that  marriage  was  not  "  a  mere  natural  tie  and  temporary
alliance,"  but  a  solemn  covenant  to  be  dissolved  only  in  cases  of  adultery  (1  Cor.
vii.  15)  and  flagrant  infidelity,  and  by  a  legal  bill  given  into  the  hands  of  the
offender  (Deut.  xxiv.  1).  3.  It  is  detrimental  to  Christian  worship.  "  Insomuch  that
he  regardeth  not  the  offering  any  more"  (ver.  13).  God  rejects  the  gift  when  the
heart  of  the  giver  is  wrong.  He  does  not  "  receive  it  with  good  will  "  at  his  hand.
Family  discords  and  family  quarrels  hinder  worship,  and  prevent  access  to  God.
Let  parents  and  children  take  heed,  and  dwell  in  peace,  "  that  your  prayers  be  not
hindered."


chap,  ii.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  MALACHL  717


Practical  Infidelity. — Verse  17.

The  prophet's  words  are  directed  against  the  spirit  of  discontent  an
which  prevailed  among  the  people,  who  lost  faith  in  all  the  promises  of  God,  because
the  expected  manifestation  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  for  the  good  of  his  people  did
not  take  place  at  once,  and  in  their  despair  called  even  the  holiness  and  justice  of
God  in  question,  and  began  to  deny  the  coming  of  the  Lord  to  judge  the  world
[Keil\.

I.  They  had  perverted  views  of  God's  character.  Men,  impatient  under
affliction,  murmur.  Because  God  prospers  the  wicked,  and  does  not  help  them,
they  think  that  he  approves  of  sin,  and  delights  in  the  sinner.  "  Every  one  that
doeth  evil  is  good  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and  he  delighteth  in  them."  II.  They
had  perverted  views  of  God's  providence.  God  had  no  concern  for  men  at  all,
or,  if  he  had,  he  was  not  just  and  impartial.  "  Where  is  the  God  of  judgment  1 "
Men  carve  out  a  providence  of  their  own  reason,  as  they  would  like  things  to  be.
They  do  not  see  Divine  justice;  sentence  is  not  executed  upon  wicked  men,  therefore
they  say  God  will  not  punish.  They  see  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked,  and  conclude
that  God  delights  in  them.  First,  men  quarrel  with  God's  dispensations,  and  then
deny  his  providence.  Thus  are  they  proud  under  the  rod,  and  tempted  to  atheism.
When  they  cherish  this  evil  disposition,  and  break  out  into  blasphemous  expressions,
God  is  offended,  and  will  make  them  feel  that  he  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold
sin,  and  cannot  endure  to  look  upon  it  with  pleasure  (cf.  Hab.  i.  13  :  Ps.  v.  4).
"  Ye  have  wearied  the  Lord  with  your  words."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  11.  Scandalous  sin  in  the  Church,  outer  garment,  as  in  Ps.  Ixxiii.  6.  A  gar-

1.  Belies  Christian  profession.     2.  Yio-  ment  hiding  sin,  and  exposing  to  shame

lates  sacred  obligation.     3.  Profanes  dis-  and   punishment.     The  livery     of    the

tinguished  privileges.  devil — opposed  (1)  to  the  garment  of  the

Ver.  12.     Master  and  scholar.    Unfit  meek,  by  which  the  godly  cover  them-

for  their  place,  sent  out  of  the  school,  and  selves  (Eph.  iv.  24  :  Col.  iii.  10) ;  (2)  to

Divinely  punished.  "  The  Lord  cuts  off,"  the  white  robes  of  the  redeemed  saints

and  sends  them  "  out  of  the  tabernacles  in  heaven  (Eev.  vii.  14).  "  The  figurative

of  Jacob,"  where  he  deals  impartially  expression  may  be  explained  from  the

with  sin,  and  without  respect  of  persons  idea  that  the  dress  reflects  the  inward

with  men.  part  of  a  man,  and  therefore  a  soiled

Vers.  14,  15.     The  sanctity   of  mar-  garment  is  a  symbol  of  uncleanness  of

riage.     1.  Undertaken  in  solemn  cove-  heart"  (cf.  Zech.  iii.  4:  Isa.  lxiv.  5:  Eev.

nant.     Both  parties  mutually  bound  to  iii.  4)   \KeiT\.

love  and  help  each  other.     So  sacred  the  «  The  soul  of  this  man  is  in  his  clothes"  [Shaks.  ].

obligation,  that  it  is  termed    "the   cove-  "The  apparel  oft  proclaims  the  man"  [Shaks.].

nant  of  God"  (Prov.  i.  7).  2.  Witnessed  yer.    17.     Wearying   God.       Spoken

by  a  Holy  God.     If  undertaken  in  his  afterthe  manner  of  men.     God  is  said  to

fear,    the   knot   is   tied   by   his    hand,  be  tired,  fatigued— 1.  With  their  formal

"  What,  therefore,   God  hath  joined  to-  worship.      2.  With    their   blasphemous

gether,  let  not  man  put  asunder."  words  ;  and  3.  with  the  justification  of

4IQ      ,  .,      .,...   ....  .            .  themselves   in   sin.     God    is   infinitely

"  Speak  it  not  lightly !  Oh !   beware,  beware  ;  ,  •      ,       .,-,            .    ~       -,  •            -.                J

Tis  no  vain  promise,  no  unmeaning  word  \  patient  with  our  infirmities  and  prayers,

Lo  !  men  and  angels  list  the  faith  ye  swear,  hut  wearied  with  our  sins  and  impenitent

And  by  the  High  and  Holy  One 'tis  heard.  hearts.      "Thou  hast  made  me  to  serve

0  then,  kneel  humbly  at  his  altar  now,  (burdened,    overcome    by   labour)    with

And  pray  tor  strength  to  keep  the   manuige  >i        •         Iu        i,     *.             •  j   /j'         l    i\

vow#'»                             r          \Anon  1  y SIns>                      loearied  (disgusted)

me  with  thine  iniquities  "  (Is.  xliii.  23,
Ver.  1 6.  Garment.     Violence,  like  an     24).


718  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MALACHL  [chap.  h.


ILUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  II.

Vers.    1 — 4.    Curse  blessings.     Those  we  are  thinking  only  to  hear  that  the

who  despise  the  upper  springs  of  grace,  sons  of  Levi  are  to  offer  clean  and  per-

shall  find  the  nether  springs  of  worldly  feet,  instead  of  blemished  and  polluted,

comfort   prove   their  poison.       To   the  sacrifices,  to  delight  in  the  ministrations

rejecters  of   Christ   even    those   things  of   the  sanctuary  instead  of   despising

which    are    calculated    to    work    their  them,  as  much  to  our  surprise  as  pleasure,

spiritual  and  eternal  good  become  occa-  he  places  before  us  a  lofty  spiritual  ideal

sions  for  yet  greater  sin.     Wretched  are  of    character   and  service,   well-nigh,  if

those  men  who  not  only  have  a  curse  not    altogether,    beyond    the   reach    of

upon  their  common  blessings,  but  also  on  mortal  powers :  he  pronounces  a  eulogium

their  spiritual  opportunities  [Spurgeon].  on  Levi  which  we  should  hardly  dare  to

Ver.   5.  Fear.    "  All  fear  but  fear  of  inscribe,  as  an  epitaph,  on  the  tomb  of  the

heaven  betrays  guilt,  and  guilt  is  villany"  holiest  saint,   or   even   on   that   of   an

[Dr.  Lee].  inspired  apostle  [S.  Cox],

Vers.  6 — 9.  It  really  is  fine  to  observe         Ver.  10.  Father.    Man  is  thy  brother,
with  what  native  ease  Malachi  rises  into  and   thy   father   is   God    [Lamartine].
the  higher   region  of  thought.     While  The  universe  is  but  one  great  city,  full  of
dwelling  on  the  sins  of   the  priests  he  beloved   ones,  Divine   and   human,  by
moves   in    the    lower,    the    ceremonial  nature  endeared  to  each  other  [Seneca].
elements  ;  he  insists  on  the  maimed  rites         Ver.  12.  Master.    To  a  single  teacher,
and    blemished    sacrifices,    on  the   per-  the  hope  of  an  entire  city  is  often  en-
fun  ctory   and   the   contemptuous  spirit  trusted  [Scriver].    Scholar.    The  greatest
with  which   they  lounged  through  the  scholars  are  not  the  wisest  men  [Regnier].
service  of  the  Temple.     But  no  sooner  Men   must   be  taught,   as  though  you
does  he  attempt  to  frame  a  conception  taught  them  not  [Pope].
of  what  the  true  priest  should  be,  than         Vers.    13 — 16.    Marriages  are  styled
all  that  is  forgotten  ;  we  hear  no  more  of  matches,  yet  amongst  those  many  that
altar    and  sacrifice  :    his   thoughts   are  are  married,  how  few  there  are  that  are
riveted    on   the   moral   aspects    of    the  matched !       Husbands  and   wives    are
priestly  vocation — how  holy  a  man,  how  like  locks  and  keys,  that  rather  break
wise  a  teacher,  how  careful  and  friendly  than  open,  except  the  wards  be  answer-
a   guide,  the  priest  should  be.     When  able  [W.  Seeker],


CHAPTER  III.

Critical  Notes.]  Messenger]  The  prophet,  in  first  instance;  applied  to  the  Baptist  (Matt.  xi.
10  :  Luke  vii.  27).  Prepare]  Clear  away,  like  a  pioneer  before  an  Eastern  prince.  Suddenly]
Unexpectedly.  2.]  Judgment  will  begin  at  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  Who]  i.  e.  no  one  can  endure
it  (cf.  Joel  ii.  11).  Abide  and  stand]  As  opposed  to  falling  under  judgments.  The  double  figure
has  one  meaning.  The  smelter's  fire  burns  corrupt  ingredients  of  metals  (cf.  Zech.  xiii.  9) ;  the  lye
or  alkaline  salt  cleanses  the  dirt  out  of  clothes  (cf.  Isa.  iv.  4).  3.]  As  smelter  the  Lord  sits],  temper-
ing the  fire  and  keenly  watching  the  process.  Levi's]  sons,  the  objects  of  the  trial,  to  be  purified.
When  priests  morally  cleansed,  offer  sacrifices  in  righteousness.  4.]  The  whole  nation  will  be
pleasant  to  God  as  in  old  time.  5.  I]  whom  ye  challenged  (ch.  ii.  17)  will  be  a  judge  and  eye-
witness against  sins  named.  6.  I  Jehovah]  am  unchangeable  in  gifts  and  calling,  therefore  sons  of
Jacob]  (contrasted  with  Jehovah)  will  not  be  destroyed.  "  The  Divine  immutability  secured  the
preservation  of  the  Jewish  people  from  destruction,  notwithstanding  their  flagrant  wickedness,  till
lie  had  accomplished  all  his  purposes  of  mercy  "  [Uendersori\.  7.]  Reproof  for  non-payment  of
tithes,  which  was  the  cause  of  national  calamities.     Wherein]  In  what  respect  return  ?  indicates  a


chap,  in.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  MALACHL  719


self-righteous  spirit.  8.]  They  did  what  none  should  dare  to  do.  Bob]  Defraud  God.  Tithes  had
been  withheld,  though  they  were  severely  punished.  9.]  Ch.  ii.  2.  10 — 12.]  Nature  of  curse.
10.  All]  Not  a  portion,  and  thus  defraud  God.  Storehouse]  Treasuries  (Neh.  xiii.  12).  Prove]  if
I  am  not  holy  and  righteous,  an  attitude  which  they  had  questioned.  Then  shall  promised  blessings
flow  like  pouring  rain.  Pour]  Lit.  empty  out  (2  Kings  vii.  2).  Enough]  Lit.  till  there  is  no
more  need;  i.  e.  superabundance  [Keil].  Where  sufficiency  can  have  no  more  place;  more  than
sufficient ;  superabundantly  [Henderson],  11].  The  thought  individualized.  Devourer]  Locusts  and
other  noxious  creatures.  Rebuke]  Practically  ;  i.  e.  to  frustrate  the  intention.  Nothing  shall  then
miscarry.  12.  Blessed]  In  consequence  of  God's  blessing.  Delight]  An  object  of  pleasure  to
every  one  (Zech.  viii.  13  :  Deut.  xxxiii.  29).  13 — 18.]  Impatient  murmuring  is  most  unreasonable  ;
the  day  is  coming  which  will  bring  to  light  the  distinction  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked.
13.  Stout]  (bold)  sig.  to  bind  fast,  make  firm,  and  in  a  bad  sense  to  he  hard  or  obstinate,  such  as
that  in  Jude  15.  [Henderson].  Keil  gives,  to  do  violence  to  one,  to  overpower  him  (cf.  Ex.  xii.
33  :  2  Sam.  xxiv.  4).  Specimen  words  are  given.  14.]  God  has  no  regard  to  well  doing,  therefore
there  is  no  advantage  in  serving  him  (cf.  ch.  ii.  17).  His  ordinance]  Lit.  what  he  requires  to  be
observed,  prescribed  rites.  Mourn.]  In  black  or  mournful  garb,  as  a  sign  of  penitence.  Voluntary
fasting  is  brought  into  prominence.  15.]  Because  God  does  not  reward  their  works  with  prosperity,
they  call  proud]  sinners  happy  men,  favourites  of  God  when  blessed  (cf.  Ps.  lxxiii.  12).  The
wicked  are  set]  Lit.  built  up,  i.  e.  flourish  (cf.  Jer.  xii.  16,  17  :  Ex.  i.  21),  and  though  they  have
tempted  God,  are  delivered.  16.  Then]  When  the  wicked  were  openly  talking  one  with  another;  so
the  godly  held  mutual  intercourse,  and  defended  the  providence  of  God.  Jehovah  noticed  their  con-
versations, and  wrote  them  in  a  book].  A  custom  borrowed  from  a  Persian  king,  recording  the
names  and  merits  of  any  who  deserved  well,  that  they  might  be  rewarded  (cf.  Esther  vi.  1,  2).  God
keeps  a  book  also  (cf.  Ps.  lvi.  9  :  Dan.  vii.  10).  Before]  To  lie  open  before  him,  and  remind  him
of  righteous  deeds.  17.  Jewels]  Lit.  private,  peculiar  property,  u  expressing  the  highest  estimation
of  God's  people  and  their  perfect  security  in  the  day  of  judgment."  Spare]  (Ps.  ciii.  17,  18)  Con-
trasted with  punishment.  18.  Return]  to  a  better  mind.  Discern]  the  falseness  of  your  calumny
against  God's  dealings  (cf.  Ex.  xi.  7).  The  day  of  judgment  will  change  many  opinions  concerning
God's  ways  and  God's  people.

HOMILETICS.

The  Coming  op  the  Lord. —  Verses  1 — 5.

These  words  are  an  answer  to  the  sceptical  question  of  the  people — "  Where  is
the  God  of  judgment?  If  there  he  a  God,  why  does  he  permit  good  to  he  over-
come of  evil  1  Why  does  he  delay  his  coming  to  rectify  things  which  seem  wrong,
to  make  life  plainer,  and  his  people  easier  1 "  The  prophet  replies,  He  will  come ;
I  am  his  messenger ;  be  warned  by  me,  lest  you  be  caught  unprepared.

I.  The  coming  of  the  Lord  is  a  certain  event.  "  He  shall  come,  saith  the
Lord  of  Hosts."  Do  not  judge  of  this  event  by  what  you  see.  Remember  the
prediction,  which  can  never  be  falsified  by  the  unbelief  and  contempt  of  man,  or
by  the  events  of  nature.  II.  The  coming  of  the  Lord  will  be  an  unexpected
event.  "  The  Lord  shall  come  suddenly."  He  may  come  when  men  are  not  pre-
pared for  him,  when  they  do  not  anticipate  the  appearance  of  the  Judge  of  all  the
earth.  "  This  suddenness  is  repeated  in  all  the  acts  and  judgments  of  the  Lord.
The  Lord  of  glory  always  comes  as  a  thief  in  the  night  to  those  who  sleep  in  their
sins"  [Sch?nieder].  Therefore  "  be  ye  also  ready."  III.  The  coming  of  the  Lord
will  be  a  solemn  event.  "  Who  may  abide  the  day  of  his  coming  V  It  will  be
very  different  from  that  which  carnal  Jews  expected.  He  comes  not  to  flatter
national  pride,  nor  gratify  personal  wishes,  but  to  subject  their  principles  and
actions  to  a  severe  trial.  He  was  to  test  them  by  fire.  1 .  A  day  of  magnificence
to  the  temple.  He  will  come  "  to  his  temple,"  to  beautify  and  adorn  it  by  his
glory,  to  purify  it  for  his  worship  by  judicial  expulsion  of  all  who  profane  it  (Matt,
xxi.  12,  13).  2.  A  day  of  solemnity  to  the  world.  "Who  shall  stand  when  he
appeareth?"  (a)  He  will  judge  the  loicked  (ver.  5).  (b)  He  ivill  purify  the  godly
(ver.  4).  To  some  the  day  will  be  a  revelation  of  wrath,  to  others  a  manifestation
of  grace,  to  all  a  solemn  trial.  Hence  question  not  God's  justice,  murmur  not  at
his  delay,  but  prepare  for  the  decisive  day.  "  The  day  of  the  Lord  is  great  and  very
terrible,  and  who  can  abide  it  1 "    IV.  The  coming  of  the  Lord  is  an  event  of


720  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MALACHI.  [chap.  in.


which  men  are  warned.  "Behold,  I  will  send  my  messenger."  Lest  men  should
be  unprepared,  warning  is  given,  messenger  after  messenger  is  sent  to  prepare  the
way.  The  moral  condition  of  men  is  not  what  God  desires.  In  the  ministers  of
the  gospel  God  urges  to  repentance,  helps  to  remove  hindrances  and  to  prepare  for
the  presence  of  Christ.  "  To  make  ready  a  prepared  people  (supplied  like  an  army
with  all  necessaries)  for  the  Lord"  (Luke  i.  17).

The  Messenger  op  the  Covenant. —  Verse  1.

Observe  the  character  under  which  the  Messiah  is  here  presented  to  our  notice.
He  is  described  in  three  ways.  First,  by  his  person :  "  The  Lord."  The  word
signifies  authority  and  dominion.  He  is  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords,  "  Ruler  in
Israel,"  and  u  Governor  among  the  nations."  Though  all  power  is  given  to  him  as
Mediator,  yet  he  had  a  previous  claim  to  dominion  before  his  obedience  and  death.
Secondly,  he  is  described  by  his  office :  "  The  Messenger  of  the  covenant."  The
covenant  of  grace,  "  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure,"  to  which  David  fled  for  refuge
and  solace,  and  in  which  he  found  all  his  salvation  and  desire.  He  is  the  "  Medi-
ator," the  "  Surety,"  and  the  " Messenger"  of  the  covenant,  because  he  not  only
procures  and  possesses  its  blessings,  but  bestows  them.  He  announces  and  makes
them  known,  prefaces  all  invitations  and  disclosures  with  a  declaration  of  his  com-
mission from  the  Father.  This  iuferior  title  does  not  detract  from  his  glory  as
"  the  Lord,"  but  displays  it,  magnifies  it,  because  it  shows  infinite  condescension
and  grace.  Thirdly,  he  is  described  by  the  estimation  in  which  he  was  holden:
"Whom  ye  delight  in."  Carnal  Jews,  mistaken,  viewed  him  as  a  temporal  prince,
did  "seek"  him,  and  "delighted"  in  him.  It  applies,  in  a  nobler  sense,  to
spiritual  Jews.  He  was  desired  and  delighted  in  by  all  the  people  of  God  from
the  beginning.  To  seek  and  delight  in  him  will  always  characterize  the  redeemed
— those  who  believe  in  him ;  for  "  to  them  that  believe  he  is  precious."  All  that
is  desirable,  all  that  is  delightful  to  us  we  find  in  him.  He  is  our  "sun"  in  dark-
ness, our  "  shield  "  in  danger,  our  "  physician  "  in  sickness,  our  "  righteousness,"
our  "  bread,"  the  "  water  of  life,"  and  "  all  in  all."  Let  the  hearts  of  them  rejoice,
therefore,  that  seek  the  Lord  [W.  Jay].

The  Eefiner  and  the  Crucible. —  Verses  2,  3.

I.  The  severity  of  the  trial.  II.  The  agency  by  which  the  trial  is  wrought.
"  He,"  that  is,  the  Lord,  is  "  like  a  refiner's  fire."  He  alone  appoints  it;  he  alone
effects  it.  He  is  present  all  through  the  operation.  III.  The  utility  of  the
trial.  1.  It  is  a  sign  of  preciousness.  We  never  prune  the  bramble,  nor  try  the
worthless.  2.  It  is  a  test  of  genuineness.  3.  It  is  a  medium  of  purification.  4.  It
is  &  preparation  for  service  [C.  Stanford].

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.    1.     This  word  "  Behold "  signi-  troubled,    and   all   Judaea   with    him."

fieth  that  this  coming  of  Christ  in  the  With  a  whip  only  he  rushed  into  the

flesh   should   be — 1.    New,  admirable,  temple    and     drove    out    the    money-

and  stupendous.     2.  Sure  and  certain,  changers.     On  the  mount  of  transfigura-

3.    Desirable  and  joyful.      4.    Famous  tion,  in  the  garden,  at  death,  and  in  his

and  renowned  [Trapp].  resurrection  were  displays    of  majesty.

Ver.   2.    Who   may   abide   the   day  ?  Secondly,  it  may  be  exemplified  in  his

There  is  something  awful  even  in  refer-  detection  of  character.     All  through  his

ence   to   Christ's  coming   in  the   flesh,  ministry  his  eyes  were  a  flame  of  fire.

First,  in  the  occasional  emanations  and  He  silenced   those  who  ensnared  him,

display 8  of  his  majesty.     Herod  "  was  knew  all  men,  and  needed  not  that  any


ciiap.  in.]  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  MAIACHL  721


should  testify  of  man.     Thirdly,  it  may  just  the  right  heat,  neither  too  hot  nor

be  exemplified  in  the  calamities  which  too  cold,  keeping  the  metal  in  the  fire

were  to  follow  the  rejection  of  him.    They  the  exact  time,  for  none  of  heaven's  pure

said,  "  His  blood  be  upon  us,"  and  it  fell  ore  will  be  destroyed.      What  tender-

upon  them,  and  rests  upon  them  now.  ness,  care,  and  anxiety.     3.  The  design

But  their  unspeakable    sufferings  were  of  it.     To  "  purify,"  that  they  may  offer

only    emblems  of    those   moie  dreadful  an    offering    in    righteousness.       Right

punishments  to  which  they  are  exposed  service  springs  from  purified  men.    There

"  who  have  trodden  under  foot  the  Son  may  be  gilt,  but  not  gold.     Hence  "  the

of    God,"    &c.      For   there    is    another  fining-pot  is  for  silver,  and  the  furnace

coming  and  appearance  of  Christ.     Only  for    gold;     but    the   Loid    trieth    the

those   who  have  a  better  righteousness  hearts."

than  their  own  can  stand  \W.  Jay\.  Ver.  5.  1.  Monstrous  evils  in  their
Vers.  3,  4.  The  refining  process,  source.  They  "  fear  not  me. "  2.  Mon-
1.  The  objects  of  it.  "The  sons  of  strous  evils  in  their  detection.  "I  will
Levi."  The  purest  Church  and  the  be  a  swift  witness  against  "  them  in  pro-
holiest  saints  need  refining.  Gold,  the  vidence  and  the  ministry  of  the  gospel,
thing  valued  most,  is  tried  or  proved  by  3.  Monstrous  evils  in  their  results.  "  I
fire ;  but  God's  people  are  more  precious  will  come  near  to  you,"  though  you  cry,
than  gold.  2.  The  method  of  it.  "  He  Where  is  the  God  of  justice  %  &c.
sits"  tempering  the  fire,  and  making  it

HOMILETICS.
The  Unchanging  God. — Verse  6.

God  judges  the  wicked  and  purifies  the  righteous  to  carry  out  his  immutable
purpose  of  love.     He  changes  not,  therefore  the  sons  of  Israel  do  not  perish.

I.  God  is  unchangeable,  therefore  his  character  should  not  be  maligned.  "  I
Jehovah,  I  change  not."  Sin  may  triumph,  judgments  appear  long,  but  we  must
never  infer  from  this  that  God  has  changed.  God  is  the  same  in  essence  and  act
as  ever.  He  is  not  less  wise  and  mighty,  just  and  true,  than  at  the  beginning.
Whatever  be  the  character  of  his  dispensation,  he  is  the  eternal  and  immutable
One,  "  with  whom  is  no  variableness  (vicissitudes,  eclipses,  and  decreases,  like
planets),  nor  shadow  (adumbrations,  like  stars  in  different  sites  and  positions)  of
turning"  (James i.  17).  II.  God  is  unchangeable,  therefore  his  covenant  abides.
Man's  word  is  recalled,  altered,  or  forgotten.  Man's  conduct  is  fickle,  self-willed,
and  sinful.  But  "  God  is  not  a  man,  that  he  should  lie  ;  neither  the  son  of  man,
that  he  should  repent :  hath  he  said,  and  shall  he  not  do  it  1  or  hath  he  spoken,
and  shall  he  not  make  it  good  ? "  God's  covenant  with  Israel  is  "  equipped  and
sure  "  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  5).  The  ingratitude  and  unfaithfulness  of  man  can  never
annul  it.  Nothing  can  be  reversed.  "  The  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without
repentance "  (i.  e.  immutable  and  unalterable)  (Rom.  ii.  29).  III.  God  is
unchangeable,  therefore  his  people  are  not  consumed.  "  Ye  sons  of  Jacob  are
not  consumed."  We  are  fretful  and  impatient  with  one  another,  despair  of
amendment  and  love  \  but  God  waits  patiently,  never  casts  off  entirely,  and  abides
by  his  word  of  promise.  We  provoke  him  to  anger,  but  he  remembers  his  covenant.
"  It  is  of  the  Lord's  mercies  that  we  are  not  consumed,  because  his  compassions
fail  not."

Divine  Blessings  Suspended. —  Verses  7 — 12.

In  these  words  God  explains  why  his  blessings  have  been  withheld,  reproves  the
people  for  keeping  back  tithes  and  offerings,  and  promises  abundant  blessings  on
condition  of  repentance.

I.  Why  are  Divine  blessings  withheld  ?     The  reason  is  not  found  in  God,  but

46


r22  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MALACHL  [chap.  hi.


in  the  people.  God  is  not  unwilling  to  bless,  nor  slack  concerning  his  promise,  but
they  do  not  fulfil  the  conditions.  1.  They  have  rebelled  against  God.  "  Ye  are
gone  away  from  mine  ordinances,  and  have  not  kept  them "  (ver.  7).  Their  sins
were  of  long  continuance,  imitated  by  posterity,  and  defended  with  pertinacity.
2.  They  have  robbed  God.  They  defrauded  God  in  a  twofold  sense.  The  priests
did  not  discharge  their  sacrificial  duties  rightly,  and  the  Levites  could  not  officiate
f«*r  God,  because  driven  away  in  destitution.  How,  therefore,  can  God  bless  them
in  their  apostasy1?  The  reward  of  obedience  cannot  be  given  to  the  disobedient.
II.  On  what  conditions  will  Divine  blessings  be  given  ?  They  are  called  upon
to  prove  God,  to  test  him,  by  complying  with  his  wish  (ver.  10).  1.  Return  to
God.  "  Return  unto  me,  and  I  will  return  unto  you  "  (ver.  7).  If  they  return  in
penitence,  he  will  return  in  blessings.  Distance  from  God  will  hinder  the  fulfil-
ment of  every  promise.  2.  Pay  God  his  dues.  "  Bring  all  the  tithes  into  the
storehouse"  (ver.  10).  No  wonder  men  do  not  morally  conform  to  the  Divine  will
when  they  neglect  the  smaller  duty  of  sacrifice.  All,  not  a  part  of  the  tithes  must
be  given.  Nothing  must  be  kept  back,  for  God  has  a  right  to  the  firstfruits  and
the  best  of  everything.  Then,  if  these  conditions  are  complied  with,  the  curse  will
be  removed,  blessings  like  fruitful  showers  will  fall  upon  them.  1.  TJie  temple
will  be  blessed.  The  treasury  will  be  filled.  There  will  be  meaty  not  superfluity,
for  those  who  minister  in  my  house.  2.  The  land  will  be  blessed.  The  devouring
locusts  will  be  rebuked,  the  fruits  of  earth  shall  not  be  destroyed,  and  the  grapes  of
the  vintage  shall  not  miscarry.  "  Ye  shall  be  a  delightsome  land."  3.  The  people
will  be  blessed.  "All  nations  shall  call  you  blessed"  (ver.  12).  If  we  honour
God  with  our  substance  and  free-will  offerings,  we  shall  not  lose  in  this  world.
The  windows  of  heaven  will  open,  and  no  real  good  will  be  withheld.  So  happy
will  be  our  condition,  so  fertile  our  farms  and  lands,  that  all  men  will  call  us
blessed.  "  Honour  the  Lord  with  thy  substance,  and  with  the  firstfruits  of  all
thine  increase ;  so  shall  thy  barns  be  filled  with  plenty,  and  thy  presses  shall  burst
out  with  new  wine."

Robbing  God.  —  Verse  8.

When  exhorted  to  return,  they  reply  in  a  spirit  of  pride  and  self-righteousness.
Return  to  God  !  In  what  1  Have  we,  the  chosen  race,  the  holy  people,  departed
from  God  1  Yes,  replies  the  prophet,  in  those  very  things  in  which  you  profess  to
be  exact.  You  do  not  duly  pay  tithes  and  offerings,  though  rebuked  by  the  famine
for  neglect.  You  defraud  God,  therefore,  of  his  dues.  This  is  a  common  sin  in
Christian  worship  and  daily  life.

I.  Men  rob  God  of  worship.  Man  is  made  to  worship.  God  alone  is  the
proper  object  of  worship.  To  him  we  owe  reverence,  homage,  and  praise.  But  to
withhold  these  or  transfer  them  to  the  creature  is  to  rob  God.  II.  Men  rob  God
of  time.  Our  times  are  in  his  hands.  But  time  is  not  valued  nor  turned  to  good
account.  The  Sabbath,  expressly  claimed  for  God,  is  neglected.  Youth,  "  the
morning  of  life,  and  maturity  of  age  are  given  to  pleasure."  "Redeem  the  time."
"  Time  wasted  is  existence,  used  is  life"  [Young].  III.  Men  rob  God  of  talents.
All  gifts  are  bestowed  by  God,  should  be  improved  and  consecrated  to  him.  But
to  devote  them  to  sinful  conversation  and  unlawful  pursuits  is  to  rob  God.  "  What
hast  thou  that  thou  didst  not  receive  1  now  if  thou  didst  receive  it,  why  dost  thou
glory,  as  if  thou  hadst  not  received  it  1 "

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.

Ver.  7.  1.  The  charge  of  defection.  "  From  the  days  of  your  fathers."  Pos-
Gone  away  and  not  kept  the  ordinances  terity  walking  in  the  steps  of  their
of  God.    (1)  Defection  of  long  standing,     fathers,  and  thus  entailing  a  curse  upon


chap,  in.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  MALACHI.  723


generation  after  generation.     (2)  Defec-  good  to  his  Church.     In  these  and  in

tion  of  stubborn  spirit.     "  Wherein  shall  other  ways  God  shows  marvellous  love

we  return  1 "     In  wilful  ignorance  and  and  condescension,  and  pledges  himself

prejudice,  in  frivolous  excuses  and  self-  in  a   way  in   which   he  can  verify  his

righteousness,  they  challenge  the  charge  word.     "Azariah  the  chief  priest  of  the

and  demand  particulars.     2.   The  invito-  house   of    Zadok    answered     him,    and

tion  to  return.      "  Return  unto  me,"  &c.  said,  Since  the  peeple  began  to  bring  the

(1)    This   invitation  displays   the  great  offerings  into  the  house  of  the  Lord,  we

mercy   of  God.     After   such  long  and  have  had  enough  to  eat,  and  have  left

grievous  apostasy  he  offers  to  be  recon-  plenty  :  for  the  Lord  hath  blessed  his

ciled.    (2)  This  invitation  aggravates  the  people  ;  and  that  which  is   Left  is  this

impenitent  conduct  of  men.     No  excuse  great  store  (2  Chron.  xxxi.  10).
can  be  made.     ri  I  will  return  unto  you."         Vers.   10 — 12.     How  much  depends

Ver.  8.   Rob  God  !     How  base;  what  upon  giving  ourselves  an  offering  wholly

presumption,    and    what   folly !      "  In  unto   the   Lord !      The    offerings   now

what  ?     God  specifies  two  things  only,  required   are  our  hearts,  and   all   that

obvious,  patent,  which,  as  being  material  comes  from  them.    But  if  the  Lord  was

things,  they  could  not  deny.     In  tithes  so  strict  in  tithes,  how  much  more  with

and  offerings  "  \Pusey\.     A  striking  in-  our  hearts  !     Dost  thou  wish   the  full

stance  found  in  Neb.  xiii.  10.  blessing  of  God?  then  be  exact  in  what-

Ver.  10.    Prove  me.     1.    Prove  God  ever  is  thy  duty.     What  is  our  duty1?

concerning  his  promise  of  mercy  to  the  Whatever  God  requires  of  us,  in  great

penitent  sinner  and  the  troubled  Chris-  or  little,  in  his  service  or  in  every-day

tian.       2.    Prove   God   concerning   the  life.     How  can  he  who  is  not  strict  in

blessings   promised    to    his   house.     3.  duty  hope  or  pray  for  the  full  blessing

Prove  God  concerning  his  predictions  of  of  God  ?  \Lange\.

HOMILETIOS.
Hard  Sayings  against  God. —  Verses  13 — 15.

The  people  still  murmur  against  God,  and  openly  declare  that  there  is  no  profit
in  serving  him,  because  the  righteous  have  no  advantage  over  the  wicked.  But
this  murmuring  is  unjust,  and  the  coming  judgment  will  make  a  distinction
between  those  who  fear  God  and  those  who  fear  him  not.  Some  of  their  hard
words  are  given.  The  common  sentiment  of  the  time  was  that  piety  brings  no
reward,  and  the  religious  error  of  the  time  that  observance  of  outward  forms  was
the  service  which  God  should  bless.

I.  God's  service  is  falsified.  "It  is  vain  to  serve  God."  1.  This  sentiment
springs  from  a  wrong  estimation  of  God's  service.  It  is  not  a  mercenary  service.
The  Jews  waited  not  upon  God  in  love,  but  in  hope  of  being  well  paid.  Religion
is  not  a  bargain,  but  affection,  obedience,  and  gratitude  to  God.  It  is  not  a
mournful  but  a  delightful  service.  "  What  profit  that  we  have  walked  mourn-
fully," in  black  and  in  grief?  Pasting,  prescribed  or  voluntary,  was  considered
meritorious,  had  claims  upon  God,  and  when  left  unrewarded,  they  complained
against  God.  "  Wherefore  have  we  fasted,  and  thou  seest  not  1  Wherefore  have
we  afflicted  our  soul,  and  thou  takest  no  knowledge  1 "  2.  This  sentiment  is
denied  by  Scripture.  Paul  seems  to  give  some  truth  to  it  when  he  says,  "  If  in  this
life  only  we  have  hope  in  Christ,  we  are  of  all  men  most  miserable."  But  from
the  same  person  we  learn  that  "  Godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things,  having
promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come."  God  himself  told
the  Jews  that  the  meanest  act  for  him  would  not  be  left  without  reward  (ch.  i.  10).
In  every  sense,  "  wisdom's  ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness,  and  all  her  paths  are
paths  of  peace."  "  Riches  and  honour  are  with  me ;  my  fruit  is  better  than  gold,
yea,  than  fine  gold;  and  my  revenue  than  choice  silver."     3.  This  sentiment  is


724  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MALACHI.  [chap.  in.


contradicted  by  Christian  experience.  God's  people  have  found  God's  service  their
highest  happiness  and  joy.  They  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  good,  and  that  the
man  who  trusts  in  him  is  "blessed.  Whatever  be  their  outward  condition,  their
spiritual  experience  gives  the  lie  to  such  an  impudent  statement  concerning  God's
service.-  "  Blessed  are  they  that  do  his  commandments."  II.  God's  justice  is
impugned.  Because  they  met  with  no  reward  for  their  services ;  because  the
wicked  seemed  to  prosper  rather  than  the  righteous  ;  they  openly  declared  that
God's  favourites  were  proud  and  ungodly  men.  The  wicked  have  put  God  to  the
test,  they  reply,  calling  down  vengeance  from  heaven ;  but  they  are  built  up,  and
flourish,  and  though  they  have  tempted  God  by  breaking  his  laws,  yet  they  are
delivered  from  misfortune.  Hence  they  gave  wrong  verdicts,  and  set  at  nought  the
decrees  of  God.  "We  call  the  proud  happy."  We  should  not  cavil  against  God's
dealings  for  many  reasons.  1.  We  cannot  read  the  heart.  How  do  we  know  who
are  happy,  and  who  are  not  happy.  Men  most  prosperous  outwardly  may  be  most
miserable  inwardly.  Beneath  the  splendid  show  may  be  "  the  worm,  the  canker,
and  the  grief."  And  men  most  afflicted  may  be  most  happy.  The  glare  of
prosperity  should  not  blind  our  judgment.  "  Be  not  rash  with  thy  mouth,  and  let
not  thine  heart  be  hasty  to  utter  anything  before  God ;  for  God  is  in  heaven,  and
thou  upon  earth."  2.  We  forget  the  future.  For  a  time  the  proud  may  be  happy,
but  their  happiness  is  shortlived,  "  only  for  a  season,"  and  does  not  satisfy.  The
wicked  may  be  set  up,  but  they  build  on  a  wrong  foundation,  and  great  may  be
their  fall.  Those  who  tempt  and  defy  God,  may  be  delivered  for  the  present ;  but  God
is  often  most  angry  with  men  when  he  seems  best  pleased ;  sweeps  them  away
when  their  inward  thought  is  to  continue  for  ever.  On  earth  what  a  curse,  and
how  uncertain  their  prosperity  !  But  at  the  great  day,  how  sudden,  complete,  and
terrible  their  overthrow  !  Headlong  their  fall,  without  escape,  and  without  hope.
"  How  are  they  brought  into  desolation,  as  in  a  moment  1  They  are  utterly
consumed  with  terrors."

Divine  Ebcognition  op  Christian  Fellowship. —  Verses  16 — 18.

The  prophet  now  contrasts  the  faithful  few  with  the  sceptical  many.  While
the  ungodly  were  uttering  hard  sayings,  those  who  feared  God  held  mutual  inter-
course, defended  God's  dealings,  and  encouraged  one  another  to  love  and  trust
him.  A  remnant  has  always  been  found  in  the  darkest  days,  whom  God  has
noticed  and  blessed.

I.  The  practice  they  adopted.  In  character  and  conduct  they  stand  out  in
remarkable  contrast.  1.  They  were  secretly  pious.  They  "  thought  upon  his  name."
The  wicked  do  not  think  upon  God ;  or  if  they  do,  their  thoughts  concerning  him
are  sinful  and  vain.  The  righteous,  in  contrast,  esteem  and  ever  seek  to  honour
the  name  of  God.  They  meditate  upon  his  perfections,  works,  and  words,  and  their
meditation  is  sweet.  2.  They  were  personally  sincere.  They  " feared  the  Lord,"
not  in  slavish  terror,  but  with  awe  and  filial  reverence.  They  were  loyal  and  true
in  their  profession.  The  root  of  the  matter  was  in  them.  Fear  was  the  secret
spring,  the  hidden  power  of  holy  life.  3.  They  openly  encouraged  one  another.
So  powerful  was  their  piety,  that  it  was  revealed  in  their  speech,  (a)  They  spoke
openly  iC  one  to  another,"  without  fear  or  shame,  (b)  They  spoke  often,  to  encourage
and  strengthen  one  another.  Amid  the  atheism  and  ungodliness  of  the  times,  they
mutually  talked  not  about  the  politics  of  the  nation,  but  of  personal  religion  and
the  God  they  feared.  II.  The  distinction  they  gained.  Those  who  disregarded
God  would  ridicule  his  people.  But  here  is  a  caution  to  the  wicked,  and  an
encouragement  to  the  godly.  1.  God  heard  their  conversation.  "The  Lord
hearkened  and  heard  it."  God  was  thought  to  be  forgetful,  or  an  idle  spectator  of
events.  But  not  a  sigh  nor  a  prayer,  not  a  loyal  word  nor  a  feeble  meeting,  escape
his  notice.     2.   God  remembered  their  works.     As  earthly  monarchs  record  the


CHAP.  III.]


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MALACIU.


725


deeds  and  remember  the  names  of  their  servants,  so  the  King  of  Heaven  keeps  a
record  of  his  people.  The  meanest  service  will  not  be  forgotten.  "Write  this  a
memorial  in  a  book."  3.  God  spared  them  on  earth.  "  I  will  spare  them,"  in  con-
trast with  the  doom  of  the  wicked:  "as  a  man  spareth  his  own  son"  in  tender
compassion  (Ps.  ciii.  17,  18).  All  of  mercy,  nothing  from  merit.  4.  God  will
reward  them  at  judgment.  In  the  coming  day  men  will  "  return"  to  a  right  mind,
and  confess  the  justice  of  God.  (a)  They  shall  be  separated  from  the  wicked.
"Discern  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked."  This  not  always  possible  on
earth,  will  be  easy  at  the  great  day.  (b)  They  will  be  claimed  as  peculiar  treasure.
"  They  shall  be  mine,  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  in  that  day  when  I  make  up  my
jewels."  They  are  precious  to  God,  and  will  be  owned  and  honoured  by  him.
There  is  a  solemn,  an  eternal  distinction  between  those  who  serve  God  and  those
who  serve  him  not.  The  reward  of  God's  servants  is  the  greatest,  the  highest  dis-
tinction we  can  attain.  What  are  all  the  distinctions  of  the  world  to  refuge  on
earth  and  blessedness  in  heaven?  Follow  the  example  that  you  may  share  the
honour  and  happiness  of  the  saints.  "  Verily,  there  is  a  reward  for  the  righteous  :
verily,  he  is  a  God  that  judge th  in  the  earth."


HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Ver.  14.  Vain.  They  themselves  are
vain  and  most  vain,  for  two  reasons,  and
in  two  respects.  First,  they  take  them-
selves to  be  servers  of  God.  Secondly,
they  stick  in  the  bark,  serve  him  with
the  outside  only,  honour  him  with  the
lips,  and  not  with  their  hearts;  they
bring  vain  oblations,  empty  perform-
ances, serve  him  with  formalities  which
he  rejects  with  scorn  as  he  did  the
Pharisees'  devotions  (Luke  xvi.  15)
[Trappj.

Yer.  15.  Proud,  happy,  A  sentiment
— 1.  At  variance  with  the  truth  of  God.
"  Thou  hast  rebuked  the  proud,  who  are
cursed"  (Ps.  cxix.  21).  2.  Displaying
ignorance.  How  do  we  know  that  the
proud  are  happy?  Can  we  read  their
hearts?  (Prov.  xxi.  24).  3.  Indicative
of  pride.  They  boast  of  their  superior
intelligence.  "  We  call."  "  Pride  is
increased  by  ignorance;  those  assume
the  most  who  know  the  least"  [Gay].

Yer.  16.  The  Divine  jeivels.  My
jewels.  It  is  a  strong  expression  of
value.  Much  in  this  world  even  on
which  God  sets  high  value,  though  much
that  he  condemns.  Something  which
he  distinguishes  from  all  that  sparkles
and  glitters  with  material  lustre — from
things  which  earthly  and  carnal  men
have  most  coveted  and  idolized.  These
jewels  are  scattered  here  and  there,
among  earthly  things ;  not  in  a  collected
state,  except   in   God's   view.     By  him


they  are  seen  as  one  sacred  company  and
fraternity.  Unequal  in  degrees  of  purity
and  lustre,  accounted  the  dross  and  off-
scouring  of  society ;  but  He  to  whom
they  belong  sees  them  in  a  different
light ;  a  beam  of  his  radiant  light  falls
on  each,  and  all  will  see  them  at  last.
There  will  be  a  collecting,  an  assembling
of  them  together.  The  grand  act  of
righteous  separation  must  bring  the
saints  together,  that  the  effect  of  re-
demption may  be  conspicuously  dis-
played. Think  of  that  stupendous  know-
ledge and  power  which  will  secure  that
none  of  them  shall  be  missing,  or  will  be
lost !  Not  one  lost  in  the  vastness  of
the  scene ;  not  one  that  was  even  in  the
utmost  obscurity  in  mortal  life ;  not  one
in  the  remotest  corner  of  the  earth,  or
island  of  the  sea.  When  each  sees  all,
each  may  wonder  at  the  vigilance,  the
affectionate  care,  and  the  mighty  power
that  will  have  brought  them  all  together,
after  preserving  them  all  separately,  in
infinite  variety  of  circumstances  and  so
many  ages.  Then,  when  the  jewels  are
"  made  up"  he  will  pronounce,  "  they  are
mine."  What  triumph  to  hear  it !  What
congratulation  with  one  another  1  And
what  a  situation  that  must  be — in  place
and  circumstances,  felicity  and  glory —
in  which  he  will  assign  their  abode
within  the  immediate  manifestation  of
his  presence !  Looking  at  this  pro-
spect, which  of  us  can  be  content  that


726


HOMIlfiTW  COMMENTARY:  MALACHI.


[ohap.  in.


his  soul  should  be  wanting  when  "  the
Lord  of  Hosts "  shall  "  make  up  his
jewels  ! "  Who  can  bear  the  thought  of
being  cast  among  the  baser  rejected
things  of  creation,  and  for  him  to  say,
"That  is  not  mine;  take  it  away!"
[J.  Foster].

Yer.  17.  Spare  them.  If  a  man
spares  any  one,  it  will  surely  be  his  own
son.  The  very  relation  pleads  for  him.
He  spares  them  as  to  exemption.  He
spares  them  as  to  correction.     They  are


afflicted,  but  have  alleviations.  He
spares  them  as  to  exertion.  He  con-
siders their  strength,  and  will  not  require
of  some  what  he  ordains  for  others.  He
spares  them  as  to  acceptance.  Their
best  actions  are  imperfect.  Their  obedi-
ence needs  pardon.  He  views  all  through
Christ.  He  spared  not  him,  that  he
might  spare  you.  Never  forget  the
kindness  of  God,  and  spare  not  your
selves  in  his  cause  [Jay],


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO   CHAPTER  III.


Vers.  1  —  5.  Come.  The  last  day
will  assign  to  every  one  a  station  suitable
to  his  character;  ranks  will  then  be
adjusted,  and  precedency  set  right ;  then
virtue  will  be  rewarded  and  vice
punished  [JFiTsora].  A  due  considera-
tion of  this  important  subject  is  calcu-
lated to  rouse  our  minds,  and  to  set  on
work  those  two  grand  engines  and
mighty  springs  of  activity — viz.,  hope
and  fear  [lb.].

Yer.  3.     Refiner.     A  few  ladies  once
met  in  Dublin  to  read   the  Scriptures
and   converse  together.     One  lady  said
that  the  fuller's  soap  and  the  refiner  of
silver  were  only  the  same  image  intended
to  convey  the  same  view  of  the  sanctify-
ing influences   of  the   grace  of  Christ.
"No,"  said  another,  "they  are  not  just
the   same   image ;    there   is    something
remarkable   in   the    expression   in   this
verse  :  '  he  shall  sit,*  "  &c.     All  thought
it  possibly  might  be  so.     This  lady  was
to  call  upon  a  silversmith,  and  report  to
them  what  he  said  on  the  subject.     She
went,  without  telling  the  object  of  her
visit,  and  begged  to  know  the  process  of
refining,   which    he   fully   described   to
her.     "  But  do  you  sit   wThile  you  are
refining1?"  asked  she.     "  0  yes,  madam  ;
I  must  sit  with  my  eyes  steadily  fixed
on  the  furnace,  since  if  the  silver  remain
too  long  it  is  sure  to  be  injured,"  said
he.     "And  how  do  you  know  when  it
is  sufficiently  refined  1"     "  Whenever  I
see  my  own  image  reflected  in  it,  I  know
the  process  is  completed."     She  at  once
saw   the    beauty   and    comfort   of    the
expression  [Whitecross].

Yer.  6.     Change  not.     In  commercial


crises  manhood  is  at  a  greater  discount
than  funds  are.  Suppose  a  man  had
said  to  me  last  spring,  "  If  there  comes
a  pinch  in  your  affairs,  draw  upon  me
for  ten  thousand  dollars."  The  man
said  so  last  spring,  but  I  should  not
dare  to  draw  on  him  this  fall.  I  should
say,  "  Times  have  changed  ;  he  would
not  abide  by  it."  But  God's  promises
are  "  from  everlasting  to  everlasting,"
and  he  always  stands  up  to  them.  There
never  was  a  run  on  heaven  that  was  not
promptly  met  [Beecher].

Yer.  8.  Rob.  Special  favours  call
for  special  gratitude  and  service,  as  those
who  rent  the  largest  farms  generally  pay
the  most  for  them  [PFifeoral  In  tithes.
Well  may  we  think  our  substance  due
where  we  owe  ourselves  [Bp.  Hall].

Yers.  9 — 12.  Prove.  The  conde-
scending goodness  of  God  gives  not  only
to  the  godly,  but  sometimes  to  the  un-
godly, opportunity  and  challenge  to
prove  his  truth  and  power ;  and  it  is  the
duty  of  a  minister  of  God,  as  it  was  of
the  prophet,  not  only  to  point  both
classes  to  it,  but  even  to  offer  them  this
proving  of  God,  confident  as  Elijah
against  Ahab,  as  Isaiah  against  Ahaz,
that  God  will  not  forsake  his  servants,
but  will  by  the  event  put  to  shame  all
unbelief  \Lange\.

Yers.  13 — 15.  Stout  words.  Eash,
undigested,  ill-considered  speech,  is
responsible  for  much  of  the  heart-burn-
ing and  trouble  in  the  Churches.  Ex-
pressions which  convey  the  impression
that  the  Lord  acts  unjustly  or  unkindly,
especially  if  they  fall  from  the  lips  of
men  of  known  character  and  experience,


cbap.  TV  1  HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:  MALACE1.  727


are   as  dangerous  as  fire-brands  among  repress  it.     When  a  fire  burns  low,  the

stubble ;  they  are  used  for  blasphemous  coals  that  are  alive  should  be  brought

purposes  by   the   ill-disposed,  and   the  near  together,  that  they  may  be  blown

timid  and  trembling  are  sure  to  be  cast  into  a  flame.     So  when  all  is  cold  and

down  thereby,  and  to  find  reason  for  yet  dead,  living  Christians  should  draw  near

deeper  distress  of  soul  [Spurgeon].  and  seek  the  breathings  of   the  Spirit,

and  kindle  each  other  by  mutual  utter-

"  Language  is  the  dress  of  thought"  [Johnson].  ance>      Tne  wor(Js  thus  and  then  spoken

., .     -  n       ~     T       -,         ^r,  shall  be  heard  and  recorded  in  heaven

Vers.  16 — 18.     Spake  often.     When  \jjanQG]

the  wicked  are  talking  against  God,  the  L        ^  ■*'

righteous  should  talk  for  him.  Religious         "  TtaO^ -ta~jM  ta*

conversation  is  necessary,  all  the  more,  in  the  Redeemer's  book  of  life

for    the   very   reasons    that    chill    and  Their  names  recorded  are "  [Doddridge].


CHAPTER  IV.

Critical  Notes.]  The  ungodly  admonished  for  the  day]  of  judgment.  Results  to  the  wicked
awful.  Burn]  as  an  oven]  or  furnace  (cf.  Matt.  vi.  30).  "A  fire  burns  more  fiercely  in  a  furnace
than  in  the  open  air"  [Hengs.].  The  proud]  called  happy  (ch.  iii.  15),  and  all  the  wicked]  like
stubble]  fit  for  fire  :  destroyed  "root  and  branch,"  i.  e.  utterly.  2.]  To  the  righteous,  the  day  an
advent  of  justice  and  salvation.  Sun]  The  Messiah  set  forth  as  most  glorious  and  beneficent.  What
the  sun  is  to  the  natural,  he  is  to  the  moral  world ;  the  source  of  light,  life,  and  beauty.  Wings]
i.e.  beams,  "on  account  of  the  velocity  and  expansion  with  which  they  spread  over  the  earth  "  (cf.
Ps.  cxxxix.  9)  [Henderson,].  Go  forth]  as  from  the  prison  of  darkness  and  misery.  Grow  up]  Lit.
leap  in  joy  and  freedom,  like  calves  let  loose  from  the  stall.  '*  The  simile  is  designed  to  convey  the
ideas  of  freedom  from  outward  restraint  and  the  enjoyment  of  self-conscious  liberty"  [Henderson].
3.  Tread]  The  wicked,  who  were  said  to  prosper,  will  be  overcome;  destroyed  by  the  fire  of  judg-
ment, they  will  lie  like  ashes  on  the  ground.  The  condition  of  the  godly  reversed  then.  4 — 6.]
Exhortation  to  avert  coming  judgment.  Since  no  further  communications  were  to  be  given,  they
were  to  remember  those  they  already  possessed.  The  law]  A  solemn  admonition  to  Israel  and  to
us,  not  to  disregard  God's  word  with  its  statutes]  and  judgments],  its  morals  and  religion.  5.]
To  avert  the  curse  from  Israel  the  prophet]  would  be  sent  to  reform  the  nation — a  prophet  in  the
power  and  spirit  of  Elijah.  This  applied  to  the  Baptist  (Matt.  xi.  14  ;  xvii.  12,  13.  Dreadful  day]
(cf.  Joel  ii.  31),  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  but  applicable  to  the  last  day ;  for  "  all  God's  judg-
ments are  hours,  marked  on  the  dial-plate,  and  struck  by  the  alarm  of  that  great  day"  [Words.].
6.  Turn]  Family  harmony  restored,  say  some  ;  better,  a  reconciliation  of  ungodly,  estranged  from
the  piety  of  their  ancestors  and  pious  forefathers,  by  repentance.  John's  ministry  removed  family
feuds,  prepared  multitudes  for  the  Messiah,  and  thus  laid  the  foundation  for  the  recovery  of
thousands  to  the  faith  of  the  Gospel  (cf.  Luke  i.  16,  17  :  -Acts  xxi.  20).  A  curse]  Lit.  a  ban,  one  of
the  most  awful  words  the  Jews  could  use;  fell  upon  Judea,  by  which  it  is  devoted  to  destruction  and
excluded  from  common  use — a  desolation  remaining  to  this  day.  This  word,  which  closes  the
prophecy,  and  with  it  the  Old  Testament,  should  ever  ring  in  our  ears,  and  remind  us  of  the  more
awful  curse  of  the  ungodly  (1  Cor.  xi*.  22  :  Rev.  xx.  15).

HOMILETICS.
The  Approach  op  the  Judgment  Day. — Verses  1 — 5.

The  prophet  confirms  the  preceding  truth,  awakens  sinners  in  their  slumber,  and
encourages  saints  in  their  faith  by  the  prospect  of  a  day  of  judgment :  to  punish
some,  reward  others,  and  vindicate  the  ways  of  God.

I.  A  day  of  retribution  to  the  wicked.     To  the  ungodly  "the  day  cometh


728  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MdLACHT.  [chap.  rv.


that  shall  burn  as  an  oven."  Those  who  are  called  blessed  will  then  be  cursed,  and
like  stubble  consumed  by  the  fire.  1.  Utter  destruction.  "  It  shall  leave  them
neither  root  nor  branch."  "  There  is  hope  of  a  tree,  if  it  be  cut  down,  that  it  will
sprout  again  ; "  but  if  torn  up  by  the  roots  there  is  no  hope,  no  chance  of  life.  So
there  will  be  no  escape  nor  mitigation  of  punishment.  2.  Universal  destruction.
"  All  the  proud"  and  "  all  that  do  wickedly"  will  be  unable  to  resist  when  God
reveals  his  justice.  That  day  will  test  every  man's  character  and  condition.  Wood
and  hay  will  be  consumed,  gold  and  silver  will  abide  and  be  purified.  "  Every
man's  work  shall  be  made  manifest ;  for  the  day  shall  declare  it  (lay  it  open),
because  it  shall  be  revealed  by  fire  (judgment) ;  and  the  fire  shall  try  (prove)  every
man's  work  of  what  sort  it  is"  (1  Cor.  iii.  13).  II.  A  day  of  salvation  to  the
godly.  The  day  will  be  as  an  oven  to  the  wicked,  but  a  source  of  joy,  a  sun  to  the
righteous.  "  Unto  you  that  fear  my  name  shall  the  Sun  of  righteousness  arise."
The  sceptical  complained  that  judgment  did  not  fall  upon  the  ungodly,  and  that
.justice  was  not  given  to  the  godly.  But  health,  light,  and  everlasting  salvation  are
promised.  1.  The  light  of  life.  Darkness  and  disease  shali  be  scattered  away;
warmth  and  gladness  shall  shine  in  Divine  effulgence  "  Thy  sun  shall  no  more  go
down,  for  the  Lord  shall  be  thine  everlasting  light."  2.  The  joy  of  freedom.  "  Ye
shall  go  forth  "  from  darkness  and  captivity ;  become  free  and  active,  frisky  and
playful  "as  calves  of  the  stall."  This  freshness  of  first  love  is  only  a  foretaste  of
"the  joy  unspeakable,  and  full  of  glory."  3.  The  conquest  of  foes.  Not  mere
freedom  from  oppression,  but  complete  triumph  over  enemies.  The  wicked  often
prosper  and  trample  upon  the  godly ;  but  a  reversal  shall  come  to  both  classes.
"  He  that  exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased,  and  he  that  humble th  himself  shall  be
exalted."  III.  A  day  of  warning  to  all.  "  For,  behold,  the  day  cometh,"  and  lest
any,  even  sinners,  should  be  surprised,  the  trumpet-blast  warns  every  one.  1.  By
teachers  commissioned  from  God.  "  Behold,  I  will  send  you  Elijah  the  prophet."
Ministers  and  messengers  announce  the  coming  King,  are  sent  to  prepare  the  way,
and  call  upon  proud  scoffers  and  wicked  priests  to  heed  the  word.  2.  By  the
written  ivord  of  God.  Prophecy  and  preaching  may  be  temporary  and  uncertain,
but  the  law  of  God  is  never  suspended.  The  Scriptures  warn  and  invite,  encourage
and  threaten.  If  men  forget  the  living  voice,  they  must  remember  the  written  law.
3.  By  the  corrective  providences  of  God.  Compassionate  judgments  come  before  the
final  judgment — providences  which  correct  and  do  not  destroy.  God  seeks  to
separate  and  purify  men  now,  before  the  final  separation  and  settlement,  u  to  bring
the  disobedient  to  the  wisdom  of  the  just."  Heed  the  warning  now,  lest  you  be
smitten  "  with  a  curse  "  hereafter.

The  Sun  of  Eighteousness. —  Verse  2.

There  can  be  no  doubt  with  respect  to  the  application.  Our  Lord  is  elsewhere
called  Light,  which  in  Hebrew  poetry  is  used  of  the  sun,  as  the  source  of  light.
What  the  sun  is  to  the  natural  world,  that  the  Messiah  is  to  the  moral.  The
invaluable  spiritual  blessings  which  he  dispenses  are  all  comprehended  under  the
two  heads  here  specified — righteousness  and  moral  health  (cf.  Isa.  lvii.  19).  Both
of  these  are  indispensably  requisite  to  the  happiness  of  our  guilty  and  depraved
race,  and  from  no  other  quarter  can  they  be  obtained  than  from  him  "  who  of  God
is  made  unto  us  wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption"
[Henderson].     In  this  image  we  have  many  truths  suggested.

I.  Christ  is  the  source  of  light.  Whatever  be  the  radiance  of  other  lights,
they  borrow  from  him.  The  moon  in  her  beauty  and  the  stars  in  their  brilliance
only  shed  reflected  lustre  upon  the  world.  Amid  ignorance,  error,  and  sin,  he  is
the  light  of  truth,  holiness,  and  God,  in  person,  doctrine,  and  work.  "  I  am  the
light  of  the  world."  II.  Christ  is  the  source  of  life.  u  With  healing  in  his
wings."  Sin  brought  death  into  the  world.  Christ  quickens  the  dead  in  trespasses
and  sins.     As  the  sun  in  spring  rouses  dormant  energies  of  nature,  and  clothes  trees


CHAP.  IV.]


110MILETIC  COMMENTARY :  MALACHL


729


and  fields  with  beauty,  so  Christ  is  the  essential  principle  and  primal  source  of
spiritual  life.  "  In  him  was  life  ;  and  the  life  was  the  light  of  men."  III.  Christ
is  the  source  of  beauty.  To  the  sun  we  owe  the  bright  colours  which  delight  our
eyes,  and  the  golden  beams  which  gladden  our  hearts.  He  tints  the  sky,  paints
the  flowers,  and  adorns  all  nature.  Beauty  "  is  the  fringe  of  the  garment  of  God."
Christ  blesses  the  soul  and  beautifies  the  life  with  purity  and  praise.  His  grace
removes  moral  deformity,  and  prepares  for  eternal  perfection.  IV.  Christ  is  the
source  of  joy.  When  the  sun  burets  through  the  clouds,  and  pours  floods  of  light
over  the  earth,  the  birds  begin  to  sing,  and  children  shout  for  joy.  It  smiles  upon
the  cottage  of  the  poor,  cheers  and  brings  new  life  to  the  fainting  heart.  Joy  in
Christ  may  be  overcast,  but  will  break  out  again  with  greater  sweetness  and
splendour.     "  And  as  the  morning  light  he  shall  arise — a  sun  "  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  4).

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  OUTLINES.


Ver.  1.  The  oven,  the  fuel,  the  in-
tensity of  the  heat.  The  throne  (of  the
Ancient  of  days)  was  a  fiery  flame,  and
his  wheels  as  burning  fire.  A  fiery
stream  issued  and  came  forth  from
before  him.

Ver.  2.  Sun  of  righteousness.  1.  As
asserting  and  vindicating  the  righteous-
ness of  God,  called  in  question  by  blas-
phemers. 2.  As  bestowing  upon  his
people  a  double  righteousness  (imputed
and  imparted),  as  the  sun  doth  light
(John  i.  16).  It  is  further  said  that  he
shall  arise,  that  is,  he  shall  appear  and
show  himself  on  earth,  who  now  lieth
hid,  as  it  were,  in  heaven,  as  the  material
sun  doth  under  the  horizon.  1 .  He  was
manifest  in  the  flesh,  out  of  the  bosom
of  the  Father,  out  of  the  types  of  the
law.  2.  In  the  whole  course  of  his  life
he  enlightened  and  warmed  the  dark
and  dry  hearts  of  men,  and  filled  them
with  fruits  of  righteousness  (John  xv.  5).
3.  He  is  still  in  continual  motion  for  the
good  of  the  Church,  as  the  sun  in
heaven  for  the  good  of  the  world.
Under  a  cloud  in  his  passion,  he  broke
forth  again  in  his  resurrection.  From
heaven  he  daily  darts  forth  his  beams  of
righteousness,  and  showers  down  all
spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  privileges
(Ephes.  i.  3).  Lastly,  at  the  great  day
he  will  show  himself  in  a  special  manner
a  "  Sun  of  righteousness  ;  "  clearing  all


obscurities,  bringing  to  light  the  hidden
things  of  darkness,  causing  his  people's
most  holy  faith,  that  now  lies  hid  in
great  part,  to  be  found  to  praise,  honour,
and  glory,  cheering  up  their  spirits  after
manifold  tribulations,  and  healing  all
their  spiritual  maladies  [Trapp].

Healing  in  his  w ings.  1.  Moral  sick-
ness of  men.  2 ,  Christ  the  great  Physi-
cian. 3.  Faith  the  method  of  cure.
Trust,  rest  under  his  wings,  for  shelter
and  salvation.

Go  forth  and  groio  up  as  calves.  The
figure  sets  forth — 1.  Slavery.  2.  Free-
dom. 3.  Activity.  4.  Growth.  5.  Joy.
"  Grow  up ;  more  probably  bound,  as
the  animal  which  has  been  confined
exults  in  its  regained  freedom,  itself  full
of  life  and  exuberance  of  delight "
[Pusey\  They  were  before  in  darkness
and  disease,  both  of  which  confine.  But
the  Sun  of  righteousness  arises,  health  is
restored,  they  become  free  and  active.
They  go  forth  and  grow  up  as  calves  of
the  stall.  No  creatures,  perhaps,  in-
crease so  rapidly  and  observedly  as  these,
when,  as  here,  they  are  well  attended
and  fed,  for  the  very  purpose  of  fatten-
ing [Jay].

Ver.  3.  The  great  reversal.  The
wicked  overcome,  trampled  upon  as
ashes.  Victory  visible  and  complete  to
the  saints  (Micah  iv.  12,  13  :  Joel  iii.
14  :  Eom.  xvi.  20).


HOMILETIGS.

Kemembering  the  Law. —  Verse  4.

The  prophet  closes  with  special   directions   to   the   people.     Since   no   other
messenger  was  to  follow  him,  till  Jesus  and  his  forerunner  should  come,  they  must


730  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MALACHI.  [ohap.  rv.


consult  and  remember  the  written  word.  Malachi  thus  closes  by  showing  what
must  be  done  to  escape  the  curse  and  secure  the  salvation  of  God  at  the  judgment
day.     A  needed  lesson  for  us.

I.  Remember  the  end  of  the  law.  To  be  the  standard  of  faith  and  practice ;  to
guide  our  feet  in  paths  of  righteousness  ;  to  help  in  times  of  darkness  and  perplexity  ;
and  never  to  supersede,  but  ever  confirm,  the  teaching  of  the  ministry.  The  law
,  foreshadows  the  gospel.  Malachi,  the  last  of  the  prophets,  exhorts  us  to  remember
Moses,  and  preaches  Christ,  in  whom  the  law  and  the  prophets  are  fulfilled.  Thus
in  every  age  we  learn  the  importance  and  the  necessity  of  a  careful  study  of  the
written  word.  II.  Remember  the  auth  rity  of  the  law.  "  Which  I  commanded
him."  The  law  of  Moses  is  the  word  of  God,  given  in  thunder  and  smoke,  by
the  ministry  of  angels  and  the  finger  of  God.  Nature  teaches  that  if  we  believe  in
the  existence  we  should  submit  to  the  authority  of  God.  Hence  Numa,  Lycurgus,
and  Mahomet  derived  their  laws  from  heaven  to  secure  obedience  on  earth.  The
Bible  takes  the  place  of  "open  vision,' '  and  is  the  representative  of  God  in  the
world.  To  neglect  it  is  to  despise  and  to  disobey  it,  to  reject  the  authority  of  God.
"  Obey  my  voice,  and  do  all  which  I  command  you."  III.  Remember  the
reward  of  obedience  to  the  law.  Duty  is  performed  not  by  respect  to  some
enactment,  nor  by  general  consent,  but  sincere  obedience  to  the  whole  law,  li  with
the  statutes  and  judgments."  Forgetfulness  is  the  source  of  every  evil.  Faithful
remembrance  will  lead  to  Christ,  and  prepare  for  judgment.  "  I  have  set  before
you  life  and  death,  blessing  and  cursing ;  therefore  choose  life,  that  both  thou  and
thy  seed  may  live."

Elijah's  Ministry  a  Type  op  the  Christian  Ministry. —  Verses  5,  6.

Christ  is  not  easily  recognized  in  his  coming  among  men.  Hence,  lest  they
should  mistake,  warnings  are  given,  and  messengers  are  sent  to  prepare  the  way.
Elijah's  ministry  is  again  realized  in  the  person  of  the  Baptist.  Like  the  prophet,
John  was  to  be  endowed  with  extraordinary  gifts  to  fit  him  for  his  work.  His
ministry  is  commended  for  the  aim  and  the  efficacy  of  it,  and  may  be  taken  as  a
type  of  the  Christian  ministry.

I.  A  ministry  Divinely  commissioned.  "  I  will  send  you  Elijah."  It  was  pre-
sumption to  intrude  into  the  priestly  office  of  old,  and  to  take  unwarranted  commis-
sion is  to  usurp  authority  in  the  Church.  Christ  himself  was  not  self-commissioned.
How  then  shall  his  servants  "  preach  except  they  be  sent "  1  An  ambassador  must
have  express  authority  and  instructions  from  his  sovereign.  "  He  who  is  called  to
instruct  souls  is  called  of  God,  and  not  by  his  own  ambition,"  says  Bernard.  John
appeared  by  command,  in  the  name  of  a  royal  personage,  and  made  a  royal  proclam-
ation. What  John's  preaching  was  all  preaching  should  be — the  voice,  the  voca-
tion of  God  to  men.  To  the  uncalled  awful  failure  may  result.  "  I  sent  them  not,
nor  commanded  them  :  therefore  they  shall  not  profit  this  people  at  all,  saith  the
Lord"  (Jer.  xxiii.  32).  II.  A  ministry  moral  in  its  design.  John  was  a
reformer.  Political  theories  and  metaphysical  disputes  were  not  for  him  to  settle.
"  Repent,"  was  the  cry  which  resounded  in  the  wilderness,  "  for  the  kingdom  of
heaven  is  at  hand."  1.  It  prepared  for  Christ.  "  I  send  my  messenger  before  thy
face,  which  shall  prepare  thy  way  before  thee."  The  true  minister  by  his  life  and
preaching  will  "  make  ready  a  prepared  people  for  the  Lord."  2.  It  saved  from
curse.  Elijah  was  to  come  to  prepare  God's  people,  lest  at  his  coming  he  "  smite
the  earth  with  a  curse."  The  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  the  curse  of  Judaea,  and  the
sufferings  of  the  Jews  remind  us  of  the  Canaanites  in  the  past,  and  of  the  impeni-
tent in  the  future.  But  the  minister  of  God  will  warn  every  man,  and  urge  every
man  to  flee  for  refuge  to  the  hope  set  before  him  in  the  gospel.  III.  A  ministry
blessed  in  its  results.  "  He  shall  turn  the  heart  of  the  fathers  to  the  children,"
&c.     Alienated  from  God,  men  are  alienated  from  one  another.     The  Jews  had


chap,  iv.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  MALACHI.  731


fallen  away  from  the  faith  of  their  ancestors,  and  were  at  strife  with  the  Gentiles.
But  John,  in  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elias,  brought  back  the  faithless  generations  of
his  day  to  the  God  of  their  fathers,  and  "  restored  (regulated,  reformed)  all  things  "
(Matt.  xvii.  11).  Families  are  now  disturbed  by  worldliness,  hatred,  and  apostasy.
Ungodly  sons  are  at  variance  with  godly  parents.  Society  is  estranged  from  God.
Love,  the  bond  of  union,  is  broken.  Ministers  have  to  fill  up  the  chasm,  unite  all
classes,  and  bring  men  back  to  God.  Their  work  is  a  reformation,  a  restitution  to
original  peace  and  purity,  "  to  turn  the  hearts  of  the  fathers  to  the  children,  and
the  disobedient  to  (by)  the  wisdom  of  the  just  "  (or  righteous)  (Luke  i.  17).  Thus
men  will  be  restored  to  mutual  affection,  benevolence  will  accompany  true  religion,
and  morally  a  new  heaven  and  earth  will  be  created  by  the  gospel.  Hearts  and
lives  will  be  prepared  for  the  coming,  and  people  will  enroll  themselves  as  willing
subjects  of  the  heavenly  kingdom.  "  The  number  of  the  children  of  Israel  shall  be
as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  which  cannot  be  measured  nor  numbered."

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.

Ver.  4.     1.  Men  never  left  without  a  Both  fell  on  evil  times  ;  both  witnessed

rule  of  life.     If  not  the  living  voice,  fearlessly   for    God ;  neither  Was  much

they  have  the  written  law,  a  law  "  for  seen  save  in  the  direct  exercise  of  their

all  Israel."     2.   Men  apt  to  forget  this  ministry;    both    were   at   the  head    of

rule  of   life.      "  Remember  the  law  of  schools  of  disciples ;  the  result  of  the

Moses."     "  Even  when  we  have  made  ministry  of  both  might  be  expressed  in

considerable  advances  in  knowledge,  we  the  same  terms :    "  many  (not  all,   nor

must  still  retain  the  first  principles  of  even  the   majority;  but  still  many)   of

practical  religion,  and  resolve  to  abide  the  children  of  Israel  did  they  turn  to

by  them.      Those  that  study  the  writ-  the  Lord  their  God  [D.  Brown].

ings  of  the  prophets  and  the  Apocalypse         Ver.  6.    The  words  indicate  the  work

must  still  remember  the  law  of  Moses  of  the  Christian  minister.     A  reconciler

and  the  four  Gospels."  turning  men's  hearts  towards  God  and

one  another.     A  herald  to  announce  the

-  Men  are  men  ;  the  best  sometimes  forget "         approach   of  Christ      A  piomer  to  pre.

[Shakespeare].  .i  TT     i        <  i  • ■   i  ,

pare  the  way.     He  has  to  awaken  right

Ver.  5.     John's  resemblance  to  Elijah,  feeling,  warn  of  coming  judgment,  and

1.  In  the  endowments  of  his  mind.     2.  point   to    Christ   as   the   only  hope  of

In   the   habits  of   his  life.     3.  In  the  escape.    "  Flee  from  the  wrath  to  come."

exercise  of   his  ministry.     There   were         The  closing  of  the  Old  Testament  in

many  points  between  Elijah  and  John.  Malachi  is  unspeakably  solemn.     On  its

Both  prophesied  in  a  time  of  great  un-  last  leaf  we  find  the  blessing  and  the

belief  and  apostasy  from  the  law ;  both  curse,  life  and  death,  set  before  us.     As

sought  to  bring  back  the  people  to  the  its  first  page  tells  us  of  the  sin  and  curse

piety  of  their  fathers  ;  both  prophesied  of  our  first  parents,  so  its  last  speaks  of

before    great   and    terrible    judgments,  the  law  given  by  Moses,  of  sin,  and  the

The  historical  circumstances   in  which  curse  following,  mingled  with  promises

they    lived    were    remarkably   parallel,  of  the  grace  which  was  to  come  by  Jesus

Ahab    appears    in   Herod,    Jezebel    in  Christ.     So  on  the  last  page  of  the  New

Herodias.     The  words  of  Mark  vi.  20,  Testament  we  read  of  "  plagues  written

where  he  speaks  of  Herod  fearing  John,  in  this  book,"  but  its  last   words    are

and  did  many  things,  may  apply  without  gracious  words:  "Surely  I  come  quickly.

any  alteration  to  Ahab.     Their  very  ap-  Amen.      Even   so,  come,  Lord   Jesus  1

pearance,  the  fashion  of  their  dress,  and  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be

their  mode  of  life  were  identical  [Langej.  with  you  all.  Amen  "  [Lange\


732


HOMILETIC  COMMENT  A.


MALA  CHI.


[chap.  IV.


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  IV.


Ver.  1.  Proud.  Heaven  often  regu-
lates effects  by  their  causes,  and  pays
the  wicked  what  they  have  deserved
[Corneille].

Ver.  2.  Sun.  The  self-same  sun  that
shines  upon  his  court  hides  not  his
visage  from  our  cottage,  but  looks  on
both  alike  [Shakespeare].

* '  0  sun  !  of  this  great  world  both  eye  and  soul "

[Milton].

Ver.  4.  Law.  Prize  the  word  of
God  by  the  worth  of  it,  that  you  may
not  come  to  prize  it  by  the  want  of  it
[Dyer].  There  never  was  found,  in  any
age  of  the  world,  either  religion  or
law  that  did  so  highly  exalt  the  public
good  as  the  Bible  [Bacon].  Remember.
Memory,  like  books  which  remain  a
long  time  shut  up  in  the  dust,  needs  to
be  opened  from  time  to  time ;  it  is
necessary,  so  to  speak,  to  open  its  leaves,
that  it  may  be  ready  in  time  of  need
[Smeca].

Ver.  5.  Elijah.  Since  the  days  that
John  began  to  preach,  since  he  began  to
call  the  world  to  repentance,  there  has
been  a  rush  into  the  kingdom  of  God.


Men,  roused  from  their  spiritual  slum-
bers, startled  by  a  sense  of  their  own  sin
and  ruin,  have  earnestly  applied  for
pardon  and  salvation.  The  echo  of  the
words  he  proclaimed  on  the  Jordan  still
lingers  and  rings  in  the  souls  of  men,
and  the  result  is  a  pressing  every  day
into  the  empire  of  redemptive  truth
[Dr.  Thomas].

Ver.  6.  Curse.  Parting  words  are
always  solemn,  as  closing  the  past,  and
opening  out  a  future  of  expectation
before  us.  The  position  of  Malachi,  as
the  last  of  the  prophets,  bids  us  more
solemnly  prepare  for  that  dread  day —
our  Lord's  second  coming  —  which  he
foretold,  in  one  with  the  first,  warning
us  that  we  deceive  not  ourselves,  in  un-
consciousness of  our  own  evil  and  re-
membrance of  our  seeming  good,  until
he  profess  unto  us,  "I  never  knew  you;
depart  from  me,  ye  that  work  iniquity  "
[Pusey],

And  of  the  twelve  prophets  let  the
memorial  be  blessed,  and  let  their  bones
flourish  again  out  of  their  place  (Eccles.
xlix.  10).


INDEX.


/.     GENERAL   SUBJECTS.


Achob,  valley  of,  a  door  of  hope,  31

Actions,  spring  from  thoughts,  73,  641;
man's  highest  social,  87

Affliction,  needful,  42 ;  sanctifies,  108  ;
two-fold  effects  of,  688  ;  results  of,  689

Age,  importance  of,  14 ;  requirements  of,
87

Ammon,  judgment  on,  250

Angels,  ministry  of,  625

Apostasy,  steps  in,  19  ;  the  threefold,  62  ;
warning  against,  538

Assyria,  judgment  on,  545

Atheism,  practical,  98,  717,  723

Athens,  corruption  of,  135

Avariciousness;the  sin  of,  502  ;  hurtful,  509

Backsliding,  the  way  hedged  up,  21 ;
tendency  to,  156  ;  aggravated  guilt  of,
355

Beauty  of  Christian  life,  190,  193,  654 ;
Bands  and,  669  ;  Smart  on,  657

Bethel,  65,  165.

Bethlehem,  433,  437

Blessings,  restoration  of  lost,  219,  221  ;
spiritual,  symbolised  by  rain,  223  ;  God
the  author  of,  658  ;  political,  from  God,
661 ;  priestly,  cursed  710 ;  Divine,  sus-
pended, 721 ;  and  curse,  640

Brotherhood,  national,  formed  by  Christi-
anity, 599,  675 ;  in  the  fatherhood  of
God,  714  ;  Seneca  on,  718

Burden,  the  servant's,  464

Calamity,  the  final,  322

Character,  discrimination  of  public  and
private,  130  ;  God's,  a  ground  of  con-
solation in  distress,  492

Chastisement,  Divine,  23,  195  ;  of  a  cove-
nant people,  260;  without  reformation,
273 ;  consideration  of,  579 ;  of  the
enemy,  695,  cf.  affliction

Children,  training  of,  135, 138  ;  God's  care
for,  392,  689  ;  Frobel  on,  136  ;  gathering
of,  219

Christ,  headship  of,  14;  a  glorious  con-
queror, 183  ;  his  reign  described,  239  ;
resurrection,  362  ;  titles,  412  ;  kingdom,
423,  598;  the  Shepherd  King,  431  ;  the
peaceful  rule  of,  433,  434,  437;  the
Desire  of  all  nations,  575 ;  the  Branch,


606 ;  twofold  of  his  mission,  597 ;  his

congregation  and  work,  437  ;  the  Builder
of  the  temple,  627,  628  ;  upon  his  throne,
629  ;  the  price  of,  672  ;  wounded  in  the
house  of  his  friends,  686  ;  messenger  of
the  covenant,  720 ;  a  refiner,  720 ;  the
Sun  of  righteousness,  728,  729

Church,  great  days  of,  14  ;  a  revived,  32  ;
idolatry  in,  39  ;  endangered  by  the
world,  101  ;  a  corrupt,  112  ;  the  future,
421 ;  militant,  429  ;  gathering  of,  553  ;
Divinely  protected,  588,  590 ;  joy  of,
599 ;  the  golden  light-bearer,  610 ;
future  prosperity  of,  642,  329

Cities,  great,  and  great  ruin,  400

City,  the  unprofaned,  237  ;  bloody,  504  ;
guilty,  548  ;  doomed,  532 ;  measured,
593

Community,  a  reckless,  299

Conduct,  unbrotherly,  338

Confidence,  vain,  destroyed,  418  ;  exulting
in  God's  mercy,  458

Conquest  of  death  and  the  grave,  182

Conscience,  sting  of,  66  ;  testimony  of,
75 ;  a  book  of  record,  84 ;  a  witness,
291

Conversion  described,  95 ;  a  return  to
God,  166,  186

Court,  the  Divine,  508

Covenant,  blessings  of  renewed,  34 ;  with
beasts,  39  ;  breakers  of,  93  ;  in  life,  96  ;
brotherly,  251  ;  God's  undervalued,  326  ;
unchangeable,  183;  blessings  of,  711

Covetousness,  the  deeds  of,  314  ;  the  curse
of,  315,  380  ;  sin  of,  502  ;  evils  of,  503,
504

Creation,  the  mirror  and  mind  of  God,  325;
affected  by  sin,  49

Cups,  the  three,  506

Damascus,  judgments  on,  247

Day,  a  glorious,  505 ;  a  lost,  149 ;  the
terrible,  206  ;  of  judgment,  207  ;  of  the
Lord,  289  ;  of  small  Ihings  despised,
613;  the  remarkable,  692  ;  of  judgment
approaching,  727

Days,  dark,  4 ;  of  rebuke,  79 ;  solemn,  of
life,  128  ;  of  Gibeah,  132  ;  better  guaran-
teed by  Christianity,  422;  last,  427


734


INDEX.


Death,  sometimes  preferable  to  life,  145  ;
a  ruling  power,  182  ;  typical  of  moral
disease,  97  ;  the  shadow  of,  turned  into
morning,  284 ;  not  always  desirable,
290 ;  Horace  on,  303 ;  an  imaginary
remedy,  387

Defence,  the  vain  nnd  great  siege,  472

Deliverance,  the  wonderful  and  great
assault,  691

Deprivation,  a  terrible,  51

Destruction,  slow  and  sure,  80 ;  open  and
violent,  82  ;  terrible,  235

Dew,  God  as,  to  Israel,  190  ;  laws  of,  191 ;
nature  of,  438  ;  Israel  as,  435.

Dirge,  the  funeral,  280

Discovery,  a  sad,  97

Distress,  the  howling  of,  107

Divorce,  unlawful,  716

Drunkards,  solemnly  warned,  202,  211,
100,  506,  510

Duty,  Flavel  on,  152  ;  social,  violated,  339  ;
flight  from,  disgraceful,  349  ;  the  call  to,
563,  375 ;  excuse  for  delay  in,  564 ;
vindicated  by  Divine  government,  568 ;
performance  of,  neglected,  579 ;  neg-
lected, contaminates  character  and  con-
duct, 578 ;  courage  in,  639 ;  failure  in
official,  711

Eaenestness,  nature  of  77 ;  with  both
hands,  451

Earth,  a  wilderness,  31 ;  beautified,  38  ;
fruitful  seasons  of,  222 ;  Christians
called  from,  410 ;  cursed  by  sin,  455 ;
double  curse  of,  569

Edom,  judgment  on,  250  ;  lessons  from  its
ruin,  702,  337

Empires,  changes  of,  5  ;  overthrown,  580

Encampment,  the  Divine,  649

Ephraim,  left  alone,  65

Ethiopia,  doom  of,  545

Evil,  threatened,  escaped  by  return  to
God,  275

Example,  influence  of,  61,  87,  99;  pro-
genitors imitated,  163  ;  for  noble,  Israel
indebted  to  God,  255

Execution,  Divine,  and  intentions,  261

Experience,  God's  appeal  to  human,  408 ;
revived,  367

Expostulation,  the  filial,  17

Faith,  Jonah's  confession  of,  355;  the
triumph  of,  467  ;  life  of,  510

Fatherhood,  a  common,  714

Fathers,  lessons  from  the  lives  of,  587,
592

Fellowship,  Divine  recognition  of  Chris-
tian, 724 ;  needful,  727

Fire,  Divine,  and  national  fuel,  666  ;  sin  a
furnace  of,  99,  274  ;  Divine  justice  a
consuming,  282  ;  God  contending  with,
305  ;  God's  people  a  flame  of,  343  ;  the
pot  of,  679


Flock,  of  slaughter,  668  ;  of  Christ,  424  ;
a  wretched,  668;  the  scattered,  and
smitten  shepherd,  687

Folly,  exposure  of,  26

Fountain  of  earthly  enjoyment  fails,  183  ;
opened  for  sin,  685 ;  a  glorious,  239

Fretfulness,  the  folly  of,  388  ;  Divine  cor-
rection of,  389

Friendship,  duties  of,  51  ;  worldly,  re-
nounced, 410

Fruit,  summer,  312 ;  from  a  heavenly
orchard,  313

Gaement,  typical,  717

Gaza,  judgments  on,  248,  541

Gifts,  God  dishonoured  in,  24 ;  of  grace,
223

Glory,  vanity  of  earthly,  143  ;  transitory,
151 ;  God's,  in  days  of  old,  514  ;  of
Messiah's  kingdom,  598

God,  the  end  of  life,  6  ;  the  living,  14 ;
fear  of,  45  ;  gifts  of,  38  ;  forgetting,  55,
98;  restoration  to,  29,  158,  166;  true
seekers  after,  83  ;  retirement  from,  83,
135;  cast  off,  115;  seeking,  83,  149;
perfections  of,  161  ;  paternal  care  of,
153  ;  the  penitent's  return  to,  158  ;  con-
version to,  166,  186  ;  the  only  Saviour,
175  ;  the  only  king,  180 ;  army  of,  214  ;
the  great  things  of,  221 ;  camp  of,  216  ;
walking  with,  262,  264;  preparing  to
meet,  276  ;  a  gracious,  386  ;  a  jealous,
465  ;  keeping  from,  549  ;  robbing,  722  ;
building  up  without,  703

Good,  God  the  chief,  105 ;  seeking,  and
God  enjoyed,  287  ;  forsaken,  and  evil
pursued,  113  ;  cast  off,  115,  124.

Goodness,  the  Lord's,  and  fear,  45;  me-
morial of  God's,  171 ;  to  the  ungrateful,
177;  of  God,  and  anger,  466;  the
Lord's,  467  ;  and  beauty,  657

Grace  honours  a  worthless  people,  132 ;
abounding,  189  ;  reviving,  190;  Divine,
the  source  of  all  strength,  613

Gratitude,  return  for,  67,  701

Guilt  aggravated,  121

Habits,  power  of  evil,  73,  99,  100

Health  and  Divine  favour,  189

Heart,  a  divided,  141,  151  ;  hardness  of,
302,  634,  635 ;  pride  of,  334

Heathen,  the  converted,  360  ;  the  doom  of,
437

Help,  Divine,  and  moral  suicide,  179

Heroism,  spiritual,  679

History,  warnings  of,  82,  100,  119,  130,
144

Holiness  attained,  118;  beauty  of,  190;
lost,  restored,  637 ;  in  life,  697  ;  to  the
Lord,  698

Honoured,  and  dishonoured,  132

Hope,  the  last,  destroyed,  481  ;  discour-
aged, 552  ;  prisoners  of,  653


INDEX.


735


House  of  God,  experience  in,  367 ;  judg-
ments in,  527  ;  mourning  for,  557  ;  a
call  to,  643,  644 ;  worship  in,  697

Humility,  exalts,  173  ;  Christian,  540 ;
Reynolds  on,  184

Husbandmen,  disappointed,  204

Husbandry,  moral,  149

Hypocrisy  and  perjury,  142

Idolatry,  its  nature,  5,  144 ;  origin  and
effects,  116,  174;  abolished,  32,  117;
dishonourable,  133  ;  unprofitable,  507 ;
evils  of,  715

Ignorance,  of  God,  26  ;  covering  sin,  71 ;
inexcusable,  63;  of  God,  a  warning  to
the  people,  53 ;  and  to  priests,  54 ;  evils
of,  73

Indulgence,  sinful,  57 ;  selfish,  178 ;  reck-
less, 299

Influence,  extensive,  152 ;  religious,  mea-
sured by  self-estimation,  173 ;  refreshing,
190

Ingratitude,  its  source  and  fruit,  26  ;  to
God,  178

Inheritance,  the  measured,  516

Injustice  conceived  and  practised,  404

Insensibility,  religious,  102;  under  national
calamities,  209 ;  sinful,299  ;  rebuked,  439

Israel,  restoration  of,  13 ;  pride  of,  76  ;
judgment  on,  254  ;  ruler  of,  430  ;  return
of,  predicted,  159 ;  glory  of,  402 ;  glo-
rious future  of,  412  ;  a  lion,  436,  438  ;
the  true,  555 ;  sin  and  sorrow  of,  680  ;
purified  and  reformed,  686

Jehoshaphat,  valley  of,  231

Jehu,  his  character  and  service,  8 ;  pun-
ished, 9

Jonah,  his  great  commission,  347  ;  disobe-
dience, 349 ;  roused  from  sleep,  352 ;
a  sign  to  the  Ninevites,  373 ;  second
call,  374 ;  obedience,  375  ;  strange  dis-
pleasure, 385  ;  prayer,  387

Joy,  nature  of,  138;  withered,  390;  God
the  perpetual  fountain  of,  520 ;  of  the
redeemed,  556  ;  national,  revived,  222 ;
the  religion  of,  661 ;  fasts  turned  into
festive,  641

Judah,  judgment  on,  253

Judgments,  the  three,  7,  12 ;  impartial,
75  ;  severe,  82  ;  as  light,  91 ;  like  wind,
184 ;  like  a  flood,293 ;  administration  of,
233 ;  timed,  304 ;  great,  and  great  sins,
477-

Justice  in  apparent  conflict  with  mercy,
157  ;  turned  to  wormwood,  283  ;  God's,
proved  to  a  guilty  people,  550

Kings,  times  of,  5 ;  duties  of,  70 ;  errors
of,  83;  feastings  of,  100;  fall,  101,
144 ;  ambition,  152

Kingdom,  God's,  established,  575,  an
asylum,  in  danger,  342 ;  regained  and
enlarged,  342


Knowledge,  its  nature,  54  ;  of  God,  33,
49  ;  its  rejection,  55 ;  practical,  87  ;  its
pride,  103

Labour,  vain,  357  ;  profitless,  446

Law,  God's,  corrupted,  69;  perverted,  418  ;
natural,  99;  unchanging,  618;  of  Moses
remembered,  729

Leaders,  guilty,  417

Lies,  spoken,  99,  107 ;  fruit  of,  149 ;
injurious,  162  ;  defended,  253

Life,  family,  12 ;  quickened,  87  ;  a  great
want,  177 ;  a  seed-time,  119,  148 ;  a
sinner's  joyless,  126 ;  an  artist  on,  66  ;
solemn  days  of,  128 ;  a  call  to  reforma-
tion of,  148  ;  help  in  exigencies  of,  176  ;
a  Christian's,  a  pilgrimage,  257  ;  sad
pictures  of  human,  269 ;  value  of,  270,
282 ;  contrasts  in  the  voyage  of,  351  ;
moral  contrasts  in,  369 ;  impatient  of,
385  ;  enigmas  of,  493  ;  lessons  of,  574  ;
without  God,  703

Light  in  darkness,  454 ;  despised,  122  ;
at  evening,  693 ;  God  as,  89,  91 ;  in
experience,  698

Locusts,  the  scourging,  304 ;  God's  army,
311

Loss,  the  irreparable,  336

Lots,  casting,  354

Love  to  the  undeserving,  6 ;  wonders  of,
41 ;  power  of,  46 ;  of  God  and  its
wonderful  display,  637

Magistrates,  ungodly  punished,  414 ;  op-
pression of,  285  ;  warned,  415

Man,  ingratitude  of,  108,  154 ;  weal  or
woe  of,  104 ;  distressed,  107  ;  sinful,
93  ;  self -corrupted,  133 ;  morally  sick,
81 ;  incurable,  399 ;  God  testifying
against,  74  ;  God's  method  of  teaching,
168 ;  the  mighty,  657 ;  given  up  and
God  withdrawn,  671

March,  the  royal,  518

Marriage,  a  typical,  40 ;  symbolic,  5  ;  un-
lawful, 714;  unholy,  715;  sanctity  of
717

Masters,  the  two,  39

Maturity  required  by  God,  450

Men,  God's  ways  and  destinies  of,  194;
covetous,  317  ;  moral  condition  of,  426  ;
wise,  443 ;  as  briers,  452  ;  godly,  scarce,
449 ;  four  classes  of  ungodly,  528 ;
insensibility  of,  209 ;  should  consider
their  ways,  566 ;  of  wonder,  606 ;  of
signs,  607,  609  ;  observant,  671 ;  con-
duct of,  determines  God's  relation  to
them,  579

Mercy  and  judgment,  9  ;  or  justice,  90 ;
not  sacrifice,  92  ;  God's  delight  in,  457

Message,  God's,  demands  constant  atten-
tion, 199 ;  the  man  and  his,  244  ;  the
solemn,  333 ;  the  prophetic,  397

Messiah,  person  and  work  of,  626 ;  glory


736


INDEX.


of  his  kingdom,  598 ;  results  of  his
mission,  607 ;  the  peaceful  king,  650 ;
(cf.  Christ)

Mind,  a  fretful,  388  ;  deserts  of,  18

Ministers,  lives  of,  57  ;  sad  transformations
of,  94;  Luther  on,  91 ;  charges  against,
131  ;  examples  of  piety  in  days  of
calamity,  205  ;  shepherds,  266  ;  true,
416,  712  ;  slumbering,  482  ;  worthless,
673 ;  qualifications  of,  602 ;  sins  of,
705  ;  punishment  of,  714

Ministry,  an  earnest,  the  want  of  the  times,
77 ;  of  alarm,  213 ;  Christian  typified
by  Elijah's,  730 ;  work  of  the,  731

Miracle,  the  great,  361

Mirth  turned  into  mourning,  27, 39 ;  Bridge
on,  320

Moab,  judgment  on,  252,  542

Morality,  corrupt,  49,  315;  and  ritual,  292  ;
and  consumption,  445 ;  commercial,
444

Mothers  and  children,  15,  38

Music  without  melody,  292  ;  abused,  300

Name,  the  memorial,  165;  God's  great,
honoured,  707  ;  despised,  711

Nations,  destruction  of,  9  ,  punished,  50,
621  ;  sins  of,  detected,  69 ;  spurious
remedies  for  sickness  of,  81  ;  amend-
ment, 86  ;  strength,  123,  134  ;  decay,
135,  138 ;  lamentations,  203 ;  great
calamities,  201,  208;  disgrace,  265;
fuel  for  Divine  fire,  666

Nature,  laws  of,  99,  130  ;  government,
36 ;  worshippers,  528  ;  order  of,  violated,
147;  similitudes,  169;  joy  of,  205;
indifference  to,  326

Nineveh,  Jonah  in,  374  ;  repenting,  379  ;
reformed,  380,  382  ;  beseiged  and  plun-
dered, 473  ;  effaced,  474,  483

Obedience  better  than  sacrifice,  92,  633  ;
in  duty,  570 ;  due  to  God's  universal
dominion,  708

Obligation  of  man  to  God  for  temporal
mercies,  153,  178,  569,  576,  579 ;  for
religious  favours,  701

Observant,  the  few,  671

Omri,  statutes  of,  447

Oracles,  misery  of  consulting  false,  659

Order  in  conversion  19  ;  creation,  37, 165;
needful,  215

Overthrow,  the  terrible,  235

Oxen,  God's  care  for,  392

Pardon,  none  like  God's,  458,  460

Past  and  present,  or  once  a  curse,  now  a
blessing,  640

Peace,  its  nature,  709  ;  notes,  712

People,  like  priests  like,  57  ;  controversy
with  a  guilty,  47,  52  ;  a  cast  off,  11,  12  ;
worthless,  honoured,  132 ;  glory  and
grief  of,  134  ;  God's  method  of  teaching,
1 68 ;  suffering  and  triumph  of  God's,


425  ;  a  hopeless,  302  ;  God's  redeemed,
468 ;  ruinous  to  their  enemies  676 ;
defended,  453  ;  established,  660  ;  restor-
ed and  settled,  663;  a  listless,  rebuked,
439  ;  waiting  attitude  of  God's  552

Persecutors  punished,  229  ;  perils  of,  590

Picture,  a  sad,  129

Pit,  in  the  deep,  365  ;  the  horrible,  368  ;
delivered  from,  371,  651  ;  an  Eastern,
656

Polic}',  state  without  principle,  71,  82;
put  to  shame,  143 ;  short-sighted,  of
sinners,  155;  honesty  the  best,  168;
failure  of  worldy,  337

Posterity  affected  by  sinful  indulgence,
61,  296

Power,  hidings  of  Divine,  515  ;  Gods,  a
guarantee  of  truth,  324 ;  all-sufficient
in  trouble,  521  ;  supreme  in  the  world,
702,  284  ;  nor  by  might,  611

Prayer,  nature  of,  164  ;  words  in;  187, 188  ;
Young  on,  171,  366  ;  and  natural  law,
220, 351 ;  pagan  359 ;  and  distress,  366  ;
wonderful  answers  to,  457 ;  importunate,
486  ;  spirit  of,  681

Preaching,  Jonah's,  376 ;  earnest,  513  ;
Baxter  on,  79

Pride,  destructive,  9,  103 ;  exalted,  178  ;
defeated,  110;  of  heart  and  conse-
quences, 335 ;  Starke  on,  540

Process,  the  sifting,  327

Promises,  great,  on  special  conditions,  605

Prophet,  encounter  of,  with  priest,  307  ;  a
true  and  political  priest,  309 ;  lamenta-
tion of,  400

Prosperity,  temporal,  5  ;  turned  to  adver-
sity, 28  ;  danger  of  worldly,  55  ;  abused,
139  ;  unlawfully  gained  and  taken  away,
167  ;  not  the  glory  of  a  people,  134 ;  of
the  wicked  short,  175  ;  moral  conditions
of,  641

Philistia,  judgment  on,  648;  converted
remnant  of ,  648,  649

Places,  sacred,  polluted,  94  ;  dishonoured
by  immorality,  65

Plumb-line,  the  measuring,  305,  306

Privileges,  external,  327 ;  glory  of  reli-
gious, 402  ;  restoration  to  lost,  222

Providence,  its  nature,  40,  106,  196  ;  pun-
ishing sin,  170  ;  corrective  measur  s  of
272;  Spurgeon  on,  15  ;  dispensations  of
God's  voice,  443  ;  carrying  out  the
designs  of  grace,  277  ;  omniscient,  323  ;
sifting,  327,  533  ;  mysterious,  373  ;  slow
499;  guards  the  interests  of  the  Church,
624 ;  three  aspects  of,  647

Punishment,  nature  of,  136  ;  delayed,  68,
470  ;  sure,  80  ;  future,  of  iniquity,  181 ;
grievous,  and  hereditary  sins,  294 ,
retributive,  478  ;  of  sin,  or  the  flying
roll,  619


INDEX.


737


Purposes,  execution  of  Divine,  261
Pursuits,  unsuccessful,  20  ;  evil,  114
Questions,  urgent,  291,335,354, 357 ;  God's

answers  to  man's,  440
Rain,  God  as,  89  ;  needful,  95  ;  Christ  as,

89  ;  withheld,  272,  279  ;  asked  of  God,

659,  655
Recompense,  the  double,  of  God's  people,

654
Redemption  of  God's  people,  468 ;  judg-
ments of  God  a  scheme  of,  544
Reeds,  reliance  on  broken,  336
Refiner  and  crucible,  720
Religion,   decline  of  national,  48 ;  vain,

112 ;  enjoying  the  comforts  and  refusing

the  duties  of,  147  ;  honest,  168  ;  growth

in,  191 ;  in  common  life,  696,  441
Remnant,  the  miserable,  266 ;  a  converted,

695  ;    a  saved,  226  ;  the  restored,  554  ,

of  Baal,  529  ;  of  Philistia,  648
Repentance,  late,  75  ;  calls  to,  217,  538,

586;  described,   161;    space   for,  216;

benefits  of,  217 ;  Brooks  on,  84 ;  necessity

of,  538  ;  evangelical,  682
Reproof,  Divine,  388
Resistance  to  God  powerless,  468
Resolutions,  three,  453
Restraints,  Divine,  23
Restoration,  the  wonderful,  558
Retribution,  Jezreel,  or  Divine,  7 ;  taught

by  nature,  15;  slow,  80;  natural,  114;

the  fowler  of,  104  ;  righteous,  231,  634;

national,  upon  sinful  indulgence,  300  ;

and  Divine  scrutiny,  533
Return,  the  ungrateful,  108
Revelation,  advantages  of,  407
Revival,  preparation   for,  263 ;    of  God's

work,  512  ;  in  America,  513  ;  character-
istics of  genuine,  644
Ruin,  irretrievable,  483
Rulers,  cowardly,  482
Sabbath,  Bp.  Henshawe  on,  320  ;  benefits

of,  11
Sacrifice,  the   required,    356 ;    calm   and,

360 ;  day  of  Jehovah's,  530  ;  the  Lord's,

531  ;  Jewish,  ineffectual,  714
Salvation,  Divine  attributes  harmonized  in,

36  ;  source  of,  226 ;   the  Lord's,  370  ;

the  great,  37 1 ;  of  God,  372 ;  the  chariots

of,  516  ;  certainty  of,  680
Satan  resisting  Joshua,  601 ;  an  adversary,

603,  609
Saying,  hard  against  God,  723
Scriptures,  slighted,  122 ;  invitations  of,

180;  excellency  of,  196;  right  use  of,

367  ;  influence  of,  413  (cf.  the  Word).
Security,  castles  of  false,  123
Self,  exaltation   of,   174 ;    indulgence  of,

178  ;  dependence  upon,  187
Selfishness,  Harris  on,  151  ;  reign  of,  405
Service,  lip,  187 ;  waiting  in  God's,  497  ;


best,  required,  450  ;  true  spiritual,  705  ;
methods  of  training  men  for,  147 ;  weari-
ness in,  440  ;  God's  majesty  a  motive
for  true,  708

Shame,  separated  unto,  133  ;  of  sin,  67  ;
Bp.  Taylor  on,  510  ;  effect  upon  nations,
143

Sight,  the  lamentable,  487

Silence,  times  of,  286 ;  prudent,  530 ;
before  God,  509,  600

Sin,  hereditary,  6,  61  ;  bitter,  66  ;  entailed,
18 ;  a  curse,  49,  128,  152 ;  Divine  re-
membrance of,  97 ;  encircled  in,  99  ;
slavery,  84 ;  silly,  103 ;  mischief  of,
109  ;  corruption  of,  132  ;  the  beginning
of  sorrows,  121  ;  its  pursuit,  20,  24, 113,
118  ;  its  Divine  detection,  69,  71 ;  a  lie,
107  ;  imitated,  145  ;  evil  of  evils,  150  ;
and  punishment  bound  together,  446  ;
reproved  by  virtue,  and  punished  by
God's  providence,  169,  181  ;  self-de-
structive, 180;  renounced,  and  God
sought,  281  ;  manifold  and  mighty  286  ;
God's  disapproval  of,  493

Slumbering,  a  scourge  for  souls,  297  ;
words  to,  352,  363  ;  shepherds  and  scat-
tered flocks,  482

Society,  away  from  God,  88

Sorrow,  Christian,  for  fallen  greatness,
667

Spirit,  Holy,  poured  out  as  rain,  225 ;
quickens,  182 ;  dispensation  of,  224,  228 ;
resisted,  294 ;  not  straitened,  409 ;  a
spirit  of  grace,  683  ;  a  spirit  of  suppli-
cation, 681

Stewardship,  man's  and  God's  claims,  576

Stream,  a  living,  694

Stupidity  in  national  calamity,  209

Success,  not  always  given,  4 ;  abused,
491

Suicide,  moral,  and  Divine  help,  179

Syria,  judgment  on,  646

Tabernacle,  the  fallen,  reared  and  en-
larged, 328  ;  the  spiritual  glory  of,  329

Teachers,  ministry  of  false,  411

Teaching,  methods  of  Divine,  573

Thoughtlessness,  human,  566

Thoughts  and  deed,  98 ;  wicked,  109 ;
and  things,  169

Times,  good  coming,  12,  32  ;  call  from
God  in  special,  245  ;  men  for  the,  591

Titles,  without  honour,  704

Transformation,  a  sad,  94

Triumph,  a  song  of,  519 ;  worldly  uncer-
tain, 185

Truth,  its  perpetuity,  5 ;  nature,  48  ;  a
bond  of  union,  48  ;  Jerome  on,  52

Tyre,  judgment  on,  249  ;  Volney  on,  647

Unbeliever,  contrasted  with  believer,  499

Ungodly  life  and  formal  worship,  271  ;
life  of,  pictured,  118


47


738


INDEX.


Universe,  governed  in  the  interests  of  hu-
manity, 36  ;  in  sympathy  with  man,  38,
50,  210,  246

Vessels,  dishonoured,  119  ;  domestic,  de-
voted to  God,  696

Victory,  the  glorious,  and  mighty  struggle,
655 ;  the  complete,  729,  182

Vineyards  in  the  wilderness,  31

Virtue,  national,  71  ;  of  progenitors  a
reproof  of  sin,  169  ;  gives  stability,  175

Visions,  of  Amos,  307 ;  appointed,  498  ;
night,  169

Visitations,  days  of,  130  ;  Divine,  266, 267,
659

Voice,  God's,  and  human  fear,  512  ;  in
cities,  264 ;  in  providence,  443  ;  hearing,
447

Vows  made,  361 ;  debts,  370.

War  abolished,  33,  436 ;  the  holy,  233  ;
preparation  of,  471

Warning,  from  the  doom  of  men,  63  ;
Bishop  Pilkington  on,  67  ;  given  before
execution,  262 ;  to  some,  from  the  fate
of  others,  479 ;  of  past  and  present
judgments,  632  ;  indifference  to,  298

Ways,  God's  and  man's,  105

Wickedness,  great,  and  great  punishment,
136 ;  great,  477 ;  justified  by  success,
669

Wind,  feeding  upon,  162 ;  typical  of  judg-
ments, 184

Wine,  a  deceiver,  501 ;  its  associates,  501  ;
a  cup  of,  506

Wolves,  evening,  490

Word,  the,  power  of,  91,380 ;  Dr.  Thomason,
5 ;  famine  of,  318 ;  nature  of,  403,  398  ;


opposition  to,  311,  407;  does  not  invali-
date God's  covenant,  326 ;  neglected,
710  ;  cf.  Scriptures.

Words,  their  nature,  195  ;  influence,  4 ;
kind,  48  ;  blasphemous,  109  ;  idle,  129  ;
in  prayer,  188  ;  God's,  demand  attention,
199;  humane,  357:  comfortable,  589;
stout,  726

Work,  personal,  14  ;  God's,  456  ;  wonder-
ful, 488  ;  accomplished,  489  ;  call  to,
567 ;  despondency  in,  573 ;  Joshua
established  in,  601  ;  God's,  greater  than
man's  conception,  638

World,  foil}'  of  alliance  with,  120  ;  advice
of,  310;  wisdom  of  fails,  337;  described,
410  ;  the  new,  238  ;  call  to  quit,  596

Worship,  benefit  of  national,  11 ;  corrupted,
70;  external,  121  ;  perverted,  122;  true
and  false,  159  ;  formal  and  ungodly  life,
271  ;  contempt  for,  315  ;  contrasts  in,
424  ;  God's  estimate  of  man's,  707

Wound,  the  incurable,  399

Wrath,  Divine  goodness  turned  into,  177

Youth,  vigour  of,  32 ;  influenced  by
example,  662,  61

Zeal  of  idolators  an  incentive  to  Christian
life,  423  ;  for  God  against  error,  687.

Zion,  at  ease  in,  296  ;  the  unprofaned  city,
237  ;  enlarged,  328,  329 ;  law  out  of,
422  ;  foes  destroyed,  426,  427  ;  built  by
wrong  means,  419  ;  mourning  for,  557  ;
wonderful  restoration  of,  558 ;  latter
glory  of,  577  ;  leaders  of.  678 ;  metro-
polis of  a  converted  world,  238  ;  defence
of,  678,  341 ;  future  exaltation  of,  694 ;
conquests  over  enemies,  680


II.     QUOTATIONS  AND   CHOICE  EXTRACTS  FROM  AUTHORS.


Addison  quoted,  552

Ambrose  quoted,  623

Aristotle,  on  ignorance,  73

Arnot,  W.,  quoted,  84,  560

Arthur,  W.,  on  power,  419

Augustine,   on   rest,  21,  539  ;    habit,  73 ;

God's  mercy,   158 ;  prayer,    187,   366 ;

pride,   546 ;    sayings  of,  66,  132,  133,

155,  620,  690
Bacon,  on  mind,   18 ;  vice,  138 ;    riches,

172 ;  knowledge,  195 ;  law,  283  ;  vanity,

510 ;  nature,  698 ;  the  Bible,  732
Bailey  quoted,  508,  575,  578,  645
Barrow,  on  holy  men,  172  ;  peace,  438  ;

integrity,  448
Baseley  quoted,  617
Bates  quoted,  559
Baxter,  spirit  of,  77  ;  on  earnestness,  79  ;

on  preaching,  513


Beecher,  on  penalties,  68, 160 ;  hope,  124 ;

humility,  470 ;  children,  138, 537 ;  justice

of  God,  560 ;   duties,  636 ;   God's  un-

changeableness,  726
Bentham,  on  words,  142
Bernard,  St.,  quoted,  180,  730
Beza  quoted,  428
Binney  quoted,  461
Blair  quoted,  250
Bonar,  Dr.,  quoted,  467,  471
Brewer,  on  the  earth's  condition,  582  ;  evil

example,  259
Bridge  quoted,  320,  445,  510,  512,  582
Brooks,  quotations  from,  66,  84,  259,  419,

448,  536
Browne,  Sir  T.,  on  ambition,  489  ;    good

habits,  538
Browning,  Bishop,  quoted,  470
Burroughs  quoted,  14


INDEX.


739


Burton,  on  love,  154  ;  misery,  419  ;  riches,

648
Butler  quoted,  278

Byron,  quotations  from,  324,  677,  684
Calvil  quoted,  9,  272,  302,  323,  370,  433,

522,  530,  536,  540,  551,  564,  569,  587
Carlyle,  on  life,  140 ;  silence,  530 ;  edu-
cation, 611;  light,  617;  penalty,  633;

wonder,  644  ;    the  human  heart,  670  ;

heroism,  684
Caryl  quoted,  39,  84,  93,  291,  330,  427,

504,  599,  600,  614
Cecil,  on  preaching,  377  ;    consideration,

582
Chalmers,  Dr.,  on  ignorance,  54 ;  fruit  of

sin,  51  ;  the  world's  vanity,  185  ;  God's

ways,  522
Channing  quoted,  511
Charnock  quoted,  516,  600,  630
Chatham,  Lord,  on  music,  300
Cheever,  on  retribution,  15
Chillingworth,  on  worship,  708
Cicero,   on   Koman  laws,   424 ;    methods

of  instruction,  636 ;  doing  good,  645  ;

design  of  government,  665
Clement,  on  man,  59
Coleridge,  on  religion,  96  ;  prophecy,  581 ;

the  past,  636  ;  Divine  loathing,  670
Collier,  Jeremy,  on  truth,  48,  641  ;  God's

power,  295  ;  hope,  653
Chrysostom,   on  the   prayer   of  Nineveh,

382 ;  charity,  540
Confucius  quoted,  631,  632
Cowles,  on  nations,  9 ;  pride,  272 ;  Christ

the  Branch,  606
Cowper  quoted,  303,  438,  521,  528,  669,

675;  683,  698
Cox,  S.,  quotations  from,  281,  542,  546,

556,560,  718
Curaming,  Dr.,  quoted,  447
De  Foe  quoted,  444
Devenporl,  Bp.,  quoted,  690
Dickens  on  cruelty,  241
Dryden  quoted,  266,  413,  540,  654,  707
Duncan  quoted,  279,  470
Dyer,  quotations  from,  271,  330,  468
Edwards,  on  kindness,  154
Eliot,  George,  on  children,  39  ;  kings,  631
Elizabeth,  Queen,  on  cowardice,  649 ;  trial,

602
Elzaz,  quoted,  264,  268,  272
Emerson,  on  beauty,  190;  selfishness,  337  ;

good  men,  449 ;  silence,  497 ;    power,

665
Epicurus  on  self-love,  668
Erasmus  quoted,  502
Exell  quoted,  350,  353,  368,  375,  382
Feltham  quoted,  295,  420
Fenelon,  on  good  example,  713 ;  temper,

394
Ferguson  quoted,  344


Festus  quoted,  487

Fichte,  on  life,  58

Foster,  J.,  on  conquest,  185;  deliverance,

362  ;    lots,   363  ;    war,  422 ;    despising

small  things,   615,  617  ;  Divine  jewels,

726
French  quoted,  273

Fuller,  quotations  from,  76,  447,  495,  662
Gay  quoted,  679,  704,  725
Goethe,  confession  of,  143  ;  on  great  men,

674
Goldsmith  quoted,  283
Gregory,  St.,  quoted,  470.  502,  571
Grindon  quoted,  330
Grotius,  on  holiness,  578
Gurnal,  on  ingratitude,  39  ;  morality,  92  ;

promises,  427  ;  pride,  489
Guthrie,  Dr.,  on  gray  hairs,  102
Hale,  Sir  Mt.,  quoted,  617
Hall,  Bp.,  on  mirth,  39 ,  correction,  63,

591 ;  prayer,  171 ;  discretion,  286 ;  pride,

344,543;  scorners,  271 ;  God's  majesty,

698,  708  <
Hallam,  on  idolatry,  511
Hare,  on  ministry  of    angels,   592 ;    the

future,  330
Henry,  Mt.,  quoted,  24,  26,  55,  428,  448
Henry,  Philip,  on  self-conceit,  103 ;  heaven,

410
Herbert,  G.,  on  example,  87  ;  truth,   142  ;

duty,   564 ;    joy,    662  ;    worship,   698,

709
Hodge,  on  holiness,  514
Hood,  T.,  quoted,  536,  566
Hooker,  on  prayer,  188 ;  pride,  501
Howe,  on  hardness  of  heart,  64 ;  creation,

330 ;  men  of  signs,  609 ;    power,  617,

657
Hume,  on  principle  and  morality,  90 ;  good

men,  449
Jerome  quoted,  52,  158,  275,  413,  536,

560
Johnson  quoted,  470,  497,  631,  727
Jones,  Sir  W.,  on  Scripture,  124
Keble,  quotations  from,  488,  492, 530,  655
Kingsley  quoted,  623
Knox,  V.,  on  Christian  joy,  600
Lamartine  quoted,  718
Lavater  quoted,  645
Layard  quoted,  475
Legge,  on  God's  Word,  403 ;   spread  of

Christianity,  438
Leighton  quoted,  447,  510
L' Estrange,  quotation  from,  559
Liddon,  on  the  Word,  348
Lincoln,  A.,  on  slavery,  231
Locke,  on  Divine  revelation,  573
Longfellow  quoted,  387,  645
Louth,  W.,  on  conversion,  637
Luther  quoted,  23,  44,  62,  374,  376,  382,

492,  499,  510,  567


HO


INDEX.


Lytton,  Lord,  on  life,  373 ;  disappointment,

639
MacCulloch  quoted,  600
McCosh  quoted,  635
Machiavelli,  rule  of,  309,  337
Mackintosh,  Sir  J.,  on  fortitude  in  afflic-
tion, 522
Mant,  Bp.,  on  honesty,  168 ;  providence,

428
Manton,  on  station  in  life,  251 ;    pride,

634
Martin,  Hugh,  quoted,  350,  354,  357,  362,

363,  375.
Mason  quoted,  571,  574
Massinger  quoted,  490
Maurice  quoted,  310
Mede,  on  the  house  of  God,  171
Medhurst,  on  Buddha,  116
Melville  quoted,  665
Mill,  J.  S.,  on  worth  of  a  state,  134
Milton    quoted,  160,  251,  438,  341,  344,

377,  420,  446,  522,  540,  591,  732
Moore,    Dr.,    on    virtue,    494;     political

changes,  625  ;  the  events  of  life,  567
Moore,  H.,  quoted,  394,  609
Napoleon,  exiled,  119;    afflicted,  18;  la-
menting, 21,  127  ;  on  war,  72
Neander  quoted,  437
Newton,  J.,  on  the  Bible,  124 ;  a  minister,

712
Nichols  quoted,  559,  582
Owen,  quotations  from,  92,  287,  461,  512,

604
Paley,  on  enthusiasm,  77 ;  actions,  641  ;

perjury,  142  ;  Divine  limits,  645
Parker,  Theodore,  on  justice,  631,  644
Pascal,  on  unity,  684
Payson,  on  concern  for  men,  569 ;  small

things,  615
Penn,  advice  to  children,  142
Pilkington,  Bp.,  quoted,  67,  470,  512
Pitt,  on  gratitude,  177
Plato,  on  wine,  662  ;  covetousness,  502
Pliny  quoted,  226
Polhill,  on  hope,  428
Pollock,  on  hypocrisy,  161
Pope  quoted,  344,  381,  422,  433,  436,  457,

495,  523,  559,  718
Quarles,  on  repentance,  161 ;  merit,  187  ;

prosperity,  321
Raleigh,  Dr.,  quoted,  359,  363,  366,  384
Renan,  on  Christ's  reign,  651
Reynolds,  Bp.,  quoted,  178,  184,  246,  633,

684
Richter,  on  nature,  353  ;  solitude,  497
Rollin  quoted,  674
Ruskin,  on  evil,  61 ;  justice,  172  ;  Gods

kingdom,  428  ;  Divine  wrath,  586
Russell,  Lady,  on  life,  394
Ryan,  quoted,  265,  268,  274,  277,  285,  287,
291,  295,  303,  314


Sanderson,  Bishop,  quoted,  384
Schiller,  on  peace,  639  ;  beauty,  697
Scott  (commentator),  quoted,  264,  274
Scott,  D.,  experience  of,  184
Scott,  Sir  W.,  on  ambition,  478
Seeker,  on  marriage,  718
Selden,  on  Romish  priests,  420
Seneca  quoted,  211,  502,  718,  732,  669
Shakespeare    quoted,    48,   113,  138,   169,
229,  259,  287,  295,  320,  334,  384,  403,
415,  417,  469,  476,  483,  508,  527,  531,
611,  623,  673;  731
Shelley  quoted,  428
Sherlock,  Bishop,  on  love,  634
Shute,  N.,  on  God's  mercy,  461
Sibbes  quoted,  510,  513
Sibthorp  quoted,  351,  354,  348,  362,  372
Socrates,  on  envy,  495 ;  friendship,  687
Sophocles,  on  truth,  642
South,  on  covetousness,  56  ;  wages  of  sin,

623 ;  lies,  690
Southey  quoted,  428
Speke,  Captain,  on  ingratitude,  177
Spencer,  Herbert,  on  rank,  50  ;  right,  295
Spinoza,  on  men's  affairs,  614
Spurgeon   quoted,    15,   22,  36,  263,  297,

320,  358,  370,  600,  604,  628
Stanley,  on  Palestine,  523
Stillingfleet,  on  vengeance,  470
Stoughton  quoted,  95,  211,279
Swift  quoted,  173,  450
Swinnock,  on  worship,  645
Taylor,  Bishop,  on  love  to  the  world,  55  ;
God's  service,   77  ;    justice,   166,  201 ;
sin,  295,  487  ;  prayer,  359  ;  shame,  510 ;
amendment,  592
Tennyson,  on  prayer,  311  ;  sorrow,  372  ;

duty,  636
Thomas,  Dr.,   14,   27,  33,  80,  241,  268,

344,  656,  732
Tillotson,  on  habit,  99;   guilt,  75;   God,

86 ;  covetousness,  503
Tyndal,  Professor,  on  matter,  515  ;  prayer,

658
Vaughan,  Dr.,  quoted,  459,  499
Virgil  quoted,   359,  361,  364,  460,  580,

610
Volney  quoted,  201,  227,  491,  647
Voltaire  quoted,  560,  636
Warburton,  Bishop,  on  prosperity,  68
Wardlaw,  quotations  from,  592,  598,  604,

608,  612,  621,  642,  655,  660,  662,  681
White,  Kirke,  quoted,  571
Whitfield,  on  earnestness,  78
Whittier  quoted,  272
Wilberforce,  on  mirth,  39
Wordsworth  quoted,  261,  330,  490,  566
Young  quoted,  39,  226,  258.  266,  298, 303,
313,  426,  460,  477,  503,  536,  540,  660,
592,  609,  722


INDEX.


.41


III.    ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIVE  INCIDENTS.


Adrian,  College  of,  137
iEsop,  on  pride,  335

Alexander,  great  army  of,  67 ;  kindness
to  enemies,  154,  540;  besieging  Tyre,
232,  249  ;  bestowing  a  boon,  456  ;  con-
quests, 656
Alma,  wounded  soldier  in  battle  of,  111
Alphonsus,  on  clemency,  166
Apollo,  oracles  of,  corrupted,  418
Arnold,  Dr.,  affliction  of,  42  ;  pleasures  of,

126
Augustine  on  sea-side,  171
Aurelius,  Emperor,  on  the  soul,  279
Baldwin  II.  and  Turks,  234
Beecher,  Dr.,  on  saving  souls,  77
Bees  in  Barbadoes,  185
Bolingbroke's,  Lord,  aversion  to  the  Bible,

154
Bradford,  in  prison,  366  ;  saying  of,  256
Brainerd,  earnest  and  compassionate,  84
Browne,  Sir  T.,  a  remarkable  answer  of,
•     142

Bunyan,  saying  of,  513
Burke,  bereavement,  135  ;  loss,  137
Burns,  death  of,  130
Byron,  confession  of,  130
C^sar,  on  earthly  glory,  151  ;  sword  of,

458
Caliphs,  the,  and  palace  of  Zehra,  143
Cambyses  invading  Ethiopia,  67
Campbell,  the  poet,  on  fame,  58
Cecil,  on  cruelty,  278
Charles  V.  resigning  his  crown,  58  ;  battle

of  Tunis,  129  ;  motto,  540
Chesterfield,  Lord,  on  life,  66
Chili,  disaster  in,  1868,  325
Cincinnatus,  call  of,  245
Constantine  building  Constantinople,  593
Cornelia,  children  of,  134
Courtier,  Persian,  reclaimed,  129
Demosthenes  reproves  Athenians,  47
Diocletian,  monument  of,  677
Diogenes,  on  citizenship,  410
Drink,  a  girl  sold  for,  241  ;  fall  of  a  sober

man  by,  259
Edward  the  Black  Prince  and  King  John,

185
Edward  VI.,  prayer  of,  157
Edwards,  on  New  England  revival,  512
Elizabeth,  Queen,  on  time,  149 ;  Spanish

invasion,  218
Euler  and  Queen  of  Prussia,  295
Eyam,  plague  in  the  village  of,  303
Fenelon,  home  of,  191
God,  the  French  philosopher  on,  98


Goethe,  dying  request  of,  693

Goodwin,  Dr.,  death  of,  183

Hall,  Bp.,  on  his  affliction,  63

Hall,  Robert,  on  affliction,  96

Henry  IV.  (France),  death  of,  84

Henry,  M.,  mother  of,  549

Henry,  Philip,  on  prayer,  78

Herbert,  G. ,  resolve  on  entering  life,  87

Hervey,  and  dying  man,  76

Hill,  R.,  earnestness  of,  77

Huntingdon,  Lady,  and  Whitfield,  42

Infidel  in  a  storm,  363

Influence,  a  dying  man's,  152

Johnson,  Dr.,  death  of,  693

Jones,  Thomas,  on  providence,  496

King,  the,  and  minstrels,  635

Latimer  preaching  before   Henry  VIII.,

311
Lincoln,  President,  assassinated,  684
Livingstone,  death  of,  170
London,  wreck  of,  270
Louis   IX.   (France),   on  truth,   136;    in-
structing a  kitchen  boy,  690
Loyola,  Ignatius,  motto  of,  711
Luther,  in  the  closet,  164  ;  afflicted,  261
Maccabeus,  Judas,  answer  of,  654
Malta,  plague  in,  1813,  303
Mothers  and  children,  39
Napoleon,  and  little  girl,  15  ;  bitter  expe-
rience, 130  ;  at  Jaffa,  251  ;  at  Waterloo,
259,  473
Newton,  John,  preaching  in  Newgate,  41
Nicephorus,  Phocas,  and  night  cry,  125
Nobleman,  dying,  regret  of,  152
Payson,  self-will  of,  389 ;  death,  183
Paulinus,  on  sacking  of  Nola,  567
Pericles  and  the  gods,  78
Perkins  preaching  at  Cambridge,  213
Persian  emperor  and  scorpions,  259
Philip  of   Macedon,  drunk,   100;    at  the

games,  501
Philosopher,  heathen,  on  God,  511
Pirates,  story  of,  635
Pitt  deserted,  24
Plato  reproved,  137
Priestley,  Dr.,  521
Pythagoras,  on  truth,  142
Rivet,  Andrew,  before  the  king  of  France,

677
Rob  'rtson,  Fred.,  on  life,  151
Rousseau,  dying  request,  693
Rufus,  William,  saying  of,  129
Rutherford,  letter,  591  ;  saying,  582
Sailors,  remarkable  story  of,  67
Scott,  Thomas,  death  of,  138
48


742


INDEX.


Severus,  Emperor,  death  of,  78
Shelley's  liberality  to  Leigh  Hunt,  42
Simeon,  Bp.,  martyrdom,  129
Soldiers,  two,  in  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,

241
Tamerlane,  eyes  of,  324  ;  mercy  of,  540
Tarrington,  Earl  of,  140
Vane,  Sir  Harry,  execution  of,  426
Vico,   Marquis   of,   on    communion   with

Christ,  509


Webster,  Daniel,  responsibility,  71
Wesley,  John,  mimicked,  279
Whitecross,  on  refining,  726
Whitfield,  on  trial,  690  ;  at  Glasgow,  213 ;

home,  196
William  of  Normandy,  140
Williams,     missionary    enterprises,    and

chief,  186
Wycliffe,  bones  of,  259
Xerxes,  madness  of,  33


IV.     TEXTS  ILLUSTRATED   OR  EXPLAINED.


Gen.  ix.  9,  p.  653;  xliii.  30,  153  {notes).

Lev.  xxvi.  23,  263

Num.  xiv.  24,  376

Deur.  xv.  9,  633 ;  xxxii.  10,  132

Judges  x.  16,  671

1  Sam.  xiv.  38,  661

2  Sam.  xxiii.  5,  721

Job  xiii.  4,  659  ;  xvii.  9,  679  ;  xx.  12,  44  ;
xxviii.  26,  658;  xxxiii.  13,  702;   xxxiii.

17,  23
Psa.  xi.  4,  647 ;  xxxix.  6,  674 ;  lxin.  8,  6  ;

lxxvi.  5,  677  ;  lxxviii.  55,  516;   lxxviii.

57,  no;  lxxxvii.  4,  599;   cxix.  18,  11 1
Prov.  xi.  18,  148;  xi.  31,  667
Eccl.  v.  16,  118  ;  vii.  14,  632  ;  xii.  13,  105
Isa.  viii.  13,712;  xliii.  23,  717;  xxxvni.

17,  657.
Jer.  xi.  8,  588
Hos.  ii.  23,  17  {notes);  v.  2,  68  {notes).


Joel  ii.  29,  225

Amos  iii.  13,  14,  267  ;  v.  9,  286

Mic.  vi.  8,  442

Zech.  i.  6,  588;  iii.  7,  605

Mai.  ii.  15,  709  {notes) ;  716

Matt.  ii.  6,  431,  433;    xii.  40,  362;  xvii.

11,  731  ;  xxiv.  15,  672
Luke  i.  17,  720,  731
John  iv.  24,  708
Acts  xi.  29,  652  ;  xvii.  28,  714
Rom.  ch.  i.,  184;  ii.  29,  721  ;  ii.  32,  652  ;

iii.  12,  13  ;   v.  20,  619
1  Cor.  iii.  13,  728  ;  iv.  9,  606 ;  x.  11,  586
Ephes.  v.  1,  714
Col.  i.  11,  660
1  Tim.  v.  24,  619
Titus  ii.  7,712
Heb.  iv.  13,  647
Jas.  i.  17,  721


_       DATE  DUE

■ "
