>J<J 


<u4*h 


5^cj<i<:o 


\ 


HAROLD  B.  LEE  LIBRARY 

BRIGHAM  YOUNG  U^  iVERSITY 

PROVO, UTAH 


i 


THE 


preacher's   Complete  ^omiletiml 

COMMENTARY 


ON  THE 


OLD    TESTAMENT 


(ON  AN  ORIGINAL  PLAN), 


aith  (iTriticiil  anb  €xpIanatarB  ^gUb,  inbictB,  &c.,  H 


BY 


VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 


SS 


FUNK   &   WAGNALLS   COMPANY 

London  and  Toronto 

1893 


L  C-P-   ^ 


3  THE 


PREACHER'S  COMMENTARY 


QN    THE    BOOK   OF 


Leviticus: 


CONTAINING 


SUGGESTIVE   READINGS:       Being    comments    on    each    chapter, 
Didactic  and  Experimental. 

HOMILETICS  '    Consisting   of   three  hundred  and  fifty  Breviates  and 
Outlines  on  Sections,  Topics,  or  Verses  of  each  chapter. 

ILLUSTRATIONS :    Furnishing    apt    incident    or    quotation    on    the 
Homiletic  Themes. 


BY    THE 

REV.  W.  HARVEY  JELLIE, 

Author  of   "  The  Preacher's   Commentary  on  Jeremiah"   etc. 

Assisted  in  the  Homiletics  by 

Rev.  Frederick  W.  Brown. 


FUNK    &   WAGNALLS    COMPANY 

London  &  Toronto 

1892 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2011  with  funding  from 
Brigham  Young  University 


THE    L 

3RIGH/        YOUNG  Ur  IVZRSITY 
PROVO    HTAp 

http://www.archive.org/details/preacherscomplet03newy 


PREFACE, 


•  »• 


Having  regard  to  the  Commentaries  on  Leviticus  already  in  existence,  ponderous 
with  erudition  and  criticism,  claiming  also  to  be  literary  and  exegetical,  this 
**  Homiletical  Commentary"  has  deliberately  shunned  the  profundities  of 
scholarship,  and  works  along  practical  and  experimental  lines.  From  first  to  last, 
distinctive  in  this  intent,  it  has  quietly  kept  to  its  homiletical  aim.  Perhaps  it 
may  be  found,  on  that  very  account,  none  the  less  serviceable  as  a  help  towards 
pulpit  preparations.  In  its  Readings,  Homilies,  and  Outlines  it  seeks  throughout 
to  be  suggestive  and  didactic,  searching  amid  Hebrew  ordinances  for  universal 
obligations,  and  gospel  teachings  in  the  sacrifices  and  rites  of  the  Wilderness. 

To  read  the  book  of  Leviticus  in  its  rich  significance,  the  Tabernacle  Revela- 
tions must  be  pondered  in  connexion  with  the  '*  Word  made  flesh  who  tabernacled 
amon^  us"  ;  its  Altar  Sacrifices  be  read  in  the  light  which  radiates  from  the 
sacred  Cross  ;  its  Priestly  offices  and  sanctions  be  viewed  as  foreshadowing  the 
Christian's  privileges  and  ministries  ;  and  its  Moral  Enactments  be  regarded  as 
affirming  those  virtues  essential  through  every  age  in  man*s  relation  to  man. 
The  Levitical  ceremonies  and  ritual  are  picturesque  delineations  of  the  doctrines 
and  duties  of  Christianity. 

A  cursory  survey  of  this  book  of  the  Decalogue  might  dispose  preachers  to 
conclude  that  it  contains  few  themes  suited  to  present  day  needs  ;  this  error  may 
explain  why  sermons  on  texts  in  Leviticus  are  so  strangely  rare.  Closer  acquaint- 
ance with  its  contents,  and  the  appliance  of  a  steady  interpretative  faculty  to  its 
symbols,  will  reveal  that  scarcely  a  Doctrine  of  Grace  is  lacking  in  those  sanc- 
tuary ceremonies,  whilst  a  wealth  of  Ethical  Instruction  dwells  in  the  regulations 
of  the  Israelitish  Camp. 

The  endeavour  to  force  a  homily  from  any  and  every  text  has  been  honourably 
*ibandoned.  Whatever  verses  or  themes  presented  a  natural  basis  for  homiletio 
effort,  there  an  outline  or  breviate  has  been  furnished.  If  this  Commentary 
were  compacted  of  homiletics  which  no  preacher  could  use  and  no  congregation 
would  hear,  it  would  merit  the  rebuke — "  To  what  purpose  is  this  waste  !  **  The 
age  is  greatly  too  earnest  to  greet  or  value  mere  dexterous  products  which  can 
serve  no  practical  end. 

Each  chapter  opens  with  Suggestive  Readings,  which  It  is  hoped  will  afford 


IV.  PREFACE. 


guidance  to  suitable  expository  comments  in  the  services  of  the  Sanctuary. 
Thfty  are,  therefore,  not  oritioal  and  analytical,  but  didactic  and  experimental. 

The  Commentary  contains  three  hundred  and  forty-nine  Homilies  and  Out- 
lines  :  of  these,  35  have  been  couv.enaed  from  printed  sermons,  a  further  35  are 
homilies  constructed  from  books  on  Leviticus  which  are  not  homiletical ;  the 
remaining  247  are  original  contributions  for  this  book.  Those  prepared  by  our 
oo-labourer,  the  Rev.  Frederick  W.  Brown,  are  subscribed  with  his  initials.  Where 
no  name  or  initials  appear,  the  reader  may  justly  ascribe  the  homily  to  our  own 
pen  :  this  applies  also  to  all  the  Suggestive  Readings,  as  well  as  to  the  Illustrative 
Addenda.  And  in  those  instances,  where  a  name  is  undersigned  to  a  homily  or 
outline,  one  of  two  processes  must  be  credited  to  our  account.  Either  the  homily 
is  a  creation  based  upon  some  note  book  on  Leviticus,  in  which  the  author's 
ideas  and  words  are  given  as  nearly  as  practicable,  with  addition  of  our  own  to 
complete  the  homily ;  or  it  is  a  condensation  of  some  published  sermon  on  a 
text  in  Leviticus,  which  it  has  been  our  personal  task  to  prepare  for  the  pages  of 
this  Commentary. 

Among  the  books  specially  suggestive  of  these  homilies  may  be  mentioned, 
**  Jukes  on  the  Offerings  '*;  "  Thoughts  on  Leviticus,"  by  B.  W.  Newton ;  "  Notes 
on  Leviticus,"  by  C.  H.  M.j  "Christ  is  All,"  by  Dean  Law;  "The  Doctrine  of 
Sacrifice/*  by  Maurice ;  **  The  Leviticai  rriests,"  hy  Curiiss ;  and  Atwater's 
"  The  sacred  Tabernacle  of  the  Hebrews." 

By  summarizing  or  reconstrmoting  sermons  it  has  been  possible  to  enrich  this 
Commentary  with  the  quickening  thoughts  of  such  preachers  as  Edward  T. 
At  wood,  A.  Coquerel,  Albert  H.  Currier,  A.  K  Dunning,  James  Fleming,  D.D., 
H.  M.  Grant,  D.D.,  D.  C.  Hughes,  M.A.,  G.  R.  Leavitt,  David  0.  Hears,  C.  H. 
Spurgeon,  W.  Stephenson,  Samuel  Thodey,  Lewis  O.  Thompson,  W.  Wayland, 
Jno.  Wesley,  and  otUers. 

The  Illustrative  Addenda  to  each  chapter  will  afford  choice  quotation  or  apt 
incident  with  which  to  enforce  a  truth. 

Three  Indices,  with  exact  and  detailed  classifications  of  topics,  analysis,  and 
illustrations  are  supplied,  by  which  access  to  the  contents  of  this  volume  for 
every  purpose  is  rendered  simple  and  direct. 

To  the  generous  appreciation  with  which  the  larger  and  more  laborious 
Homiletical  Commentary  on  Jeremiah  was  received,  we  venture  to  commend  this 
companion  volume,  with  this  testimony — that  no  joy  so  deep  and  true  comes  to 
any  worker  for  Christ  as  that  of  knowing  his  labours  are  found  helpful  to 
others  amid  the  stress  of  their  public  toils,  and  that  the  Word  of  God  is  opening 
its  stores  of  truth  more  freely  to  students  in  consequence  of  his  honest,  though 
humble,  endeavours  to  serve  them  in  the  Divine  Master's  name. 


W.  Harvey-Jbllh, 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY 


ON  THE  BOOK  OP 


LEVITICUS. 


-•#•• 


INTRODUCTORY  NOTES. 

I  Concerning  the  book  itself.  Because  it  is  occupied  mainly  with  directions 
resnectin-  the  offerings  and  services  of  the  sons  of  Levi,  it  is  called  the  Book 
of  LevUicuB.  Under  the  very  shadow  of  Mount  Sinai  Jehovah  gave  these 
ecclesiastical  enactments  for  Israel.  The  entire  contents  of  the  book  are  mcl^^^^^^ 
within  the  brief  term  of  about  one  month,  viz.,  from  the  erection  of  the  Tabernacle 
to  the  numbering  of  the  people.  The  historical  occurrences  which  it  narrates 
are  fLT'he  co'nicrati^  (chaps,  viii.,  ix.),  God's  destruction 

of  Nadab  and  Abihu  for  profanation  (chap,  ix.),  and  the  magistrate  s  punish- 
ment of  Shelomith's  son  for  blasphemy  (chap,  xkiv  ).  Evidence  he  most  valid 
connects  Moses  with  the  authorship  of  Leviticus,  who  most  probably  wrote  these 
divinely  given  regulations  during  the  fifty  days  preceding  the  starting  of  the 
Israelites  from  their  encampment  near  Sinai  upon  their  wilderness  journey ings. 

ii  Its  natural  position  in  the  Pentateuch.  Exodus  closes  with  the  record 
of  the  Tabernacle  being  completed  ;  the  shrine  was  ready  for  the  worship  of 
God.  Leviticus  follows  with  directions  for  that  worship  ;  gives  Divine  regula- 
tions for  sacrifices  and  services,  whereby  man  might  acceptably  and  appropriately 
-come  before  the  Lord."  The  sacred  house  being  reared  now  ensue  the  orders 
of  that  house.  God  Himself  designed  the  holy  fabric  ;  He  also  prescribes  the 
ordinances  for  approaching  Him  therein.  ,,.     ,     .     ,.,   ,.     „  „„/i  ^^o-nU 

iii  A  general  summary  of  its  contents.  Mmute  institutions  and  regula- 
tions  are  given  concerning  the  altar  sacrifices  in  chaps,  i.  to  vii ,  the  consecration 
and  conduct  of  the  priesthood  in  chaps,  viii.  to  x.  ;  enactments  respecting  the 
purification  of  uncleanness-m  chap.  xi.  of  animals,  and  chaps,  xii.  to  ^v.  ot  men 
t\,^  Day  of  Atonement,  ordained  to  propitiate  for  all  omissions  and  faultmess  in 
sacrifice  during  the  year,  is  appointed  in  chap.  xvi.  and  Y^ied  statutes  a  e 
prescribed  relating  to  the  rectitude  of  the  people  among  themselves  (chaps,  xvu.  to 
XX  )  the  purity  of  the  priesthood  in  their  ministrations  (chaps,  xxi.,  xxuj,  tue 
hallowed  observance  of  the  sacred  festivals  (chaps,  xxiii.,  xxiv.),  supplemented 
with  directions  concerning  the  land,  vows,  etc.  (chaps,  xxv.  to  xxvii.). 

iv  The  spiritual  significance  of  its  sacrifices  and  ceremonies.  Jehovah 
had 'erected  His  sanctuary  in  Israel's  mid«t ;  His  people  must  now  understand 
ind  observe  the  solemn  sanctities  essential  to  access  and  fellowship  with  Him  A 
place  for  worship,  and  arrangements  for  altar  sacrifices,  were  matters  ot  inferior 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  t.  1—17. 


importance  to  the  spiritual  condition  of  those  who  should  come  before  the  Lord. 
Hence  the  sacrificial  enactments  of  Leviticus  show  how  acceptance  with  God 
and  ceremonial  purification  should  be  sought  by  Israel  But  additional  to  that 
immediate  purpose  of  these  Levitical  arrangements,  the  appointed  offerings 
presented  on  that  altar  were  all  made  typical  and  suggestive  of  the  Sacrifice  of 
the  Cross,  and  the  sacred  festivals  ordained  for  the  Tabernacle  indicated  the 
gracious  ordinances  of  the  future  Gospel  age.  Thus,  in  its  altar  types  and 
symbolic  ceremonies,  Leviticus  prefigures  the  eflBcacy  of  the  Redeemer's  substi- 
tutionary death,  and  the  spiritual  privileges  which  should  be  enjoyed  in  the 
Christian  Church. 


i«#*i 


CHAPTER  I. 

^^t  f  afo  ai  i^t  ^nxni  Sacrifices 

SUGGESTIVE  READINGS. 

V.  1. — ^Lord  called  .  .  and  spake.  From  within  the  Tabernacle:  God's 
first  habitation  among  men.  Never  before  had  He  **  dwelt  with  men  on  the 
earth";  He  speaks  now  for  the  first  time  from  His  holy  tent  in  Israel's  midst.  It 
foreshadowed  the  "  Word  tabernacling  among  us"  (John  i.  14).  "The  Lord 
called  "  is  a  phrase  specially  used  when  important  communications  were  to  follow  ; 
as  from  the  burning  bush  (Ex.  iii.  4),  and  from  Sinai's  heights  (xix.  3-20).  The 
law  of  commandments  was  given  to  Moses  amid  flames  and  thunder,  as  being  con- 
demnatory of  man's  sin.  Now,  the  law  of  sacrifice  is  given  in  gracious  communi- 
cation through  Moses,  as  revealing  God's  plan  of  mercy.  For  us,  in  these  Chris- 
tian times,  the  gentler  teachings  of  the  Mount  of  Beatitudes  form  our  law  of  duty 
and  of  life. 

V.  2. — If  any  man  of  you  bring.     God  assumei — 

(1)  That  men  would  seek  Him;  would  draw  near  to  Him  in  the  sacred  tent, 
wherein  He  had  come  so  near  to  men.  If  so,  surely  more  readily  and  gratefully 
we  should  seek  Him  ip  Jesus.  "  God  was  in  Christ,"  etc.  (2  Cor.  v.  19).  (2)  That 
men  will  seek  Himy  bringing  offerings ;  some  presentation  as  a  token  of  homage 
and  gratitude  for  His  gifts  to  them  ;  or  some  propitiation  as  a  lament  over  their 
sin  and  an  appeal  to  His  mercy.  God  still  looks  for  offerings  as  we  **  come  before 
His  presence  ";  what  shall  we  render  1  what  worthiest  presentation  can  we  take  ? 

V.  3. — A  burnt  sacrifice.  This  expressed  the  offerer's  surrender  of  himself 
unto  God  as  "  a  living  sacrifice  "  (Rom.  xii.  1).  The  victim  must  have  no  blemish, 
must  be  the  choicest  product  of  his  pastures ;  for  God  asks,  and  will  only  receive, 
our  best{M.&\.  i.  14).  It  must  be  offered  "  o/  his  own  voluntary/  will"  or  rather 
"for  his  own  acceptance,"  expressing  his  great  concern  to  win  God's  gracious 
regard ;  and  indeed,  we  ought  to  concern  ourselves  supremely  for  this ;  "in  Thy 
favour  is  life."  And  he  must  offer  it^a^  the  door  of  the  tabernacle,'"  as  being 
unworthy  to  enter.  With  humility  and  reverence,  and  a  lovvly  sense  of  demerit, 
we  should  venture  near  God. 

(a)  Christ  is  herein  typified ;  our  Sacrifice  "  without  blemish,"  offered  for 

man's  "acceptance,"  ere  He  "entered  the  holy  place"  (Heb.  ix.  12-24). 

(6)  The  Christian  is  prefigured  ;  "  yielding  himself  alive  unto  God,"  "  holy 


CHAP  I.  1—17,]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 


and  acceptable,"  ere  he  is  admitted  into  covenant  privileges  within  the 
Church  now,  and  finally  into  God's  presence  in  heaven. 

V.  4. — Put  his  hand  upon  the  head.  An  act  of  transfer  :  threefold  ; 
signifying  transference  of  his  right  of  possession  in  the  victim,  his  sense 
of  sin  to  the  victiai,  and  his  substitution  for  suffering  of  the  victim.  Thus  the 
Christian  gives  up  all  rights  of  self-possession  (**Ye  are  not  your  own"):  thus 
also  the  sinner  lays  all  his  sin,  and  the  believer  all  his  hope,  on  Christ  his 
sacrifice  and  substitute.  It  must  be  the  individual's  own  act,  none  can  do  it  for 
another;  every  one  must  himself  lay  "Aw  hand  "on  Christ. 

V.  5. — He  shall  kill  the  bullock.  Thereby  he  identified  himself  with  the 
victim  designated  to  die,  and  thereby  claimed  the  "  atonement  "  effected  by  its 
sacrificial  substitution.  To  be  saved  we  must  also  be  identified  with  Clirist  in 
His  death,  and  thereby  inherit  His  atonement.  *'  The  priest  shall  bring  the 
blood,"  not  the  offerer ;  for  the  priestly  offices  of  Christ  are  essential ;  man  must 
let  Jesus  do  all  the  work  of  propitiation.  "  Sprinkle  the  blood  round  about 
upon  the  altar "  ;  attesting  thereby  that  life  had  been  given  up  in  sacrificial 
Buffering  unto  God.  Christ's  death  is  the  sinner's  death,  and  '*  the  blood  of 
sprinkling "  testifies  that  **  He  made  His  soul  an  offering  for  sin."  Diffused 
"  round  about  upon  the  altar,"  the  blood  is  the  memorial  of  an  accomplished 
atonement,  the  seal  of  an  accepted  sacrifice. 

Vv.  6-9 — Fire  upon  the  altar  ...  an  offering  made  by  fire.  Once  lighted, 
that  fire  was  never  more  to  go  out  (ch.  vi.  13).  Yet  every  part  of  the  victim 
must  be  "  i^cwA^ii "  faultlessly  clean  before  being  placed  on  the  altar  :  only  the 
absolutely  clean  can  be  acceptable  to  God.  And  then  the  entire  victim,  every 
part  thereof,  must  ascend  in  sacrificial  fire  unto  God.  Thus  (I)  Christ  our 
atonement-offering  must  Himself  be  "holy,  harmless,  undefiled ";  and  must 
also  be  completely  sacrificed  for  man's  sin.  And  (2)  Christian  life  must  like- 
wise be  both  thoroughly  sanctified  and  wholly  devoted  unto  God.  "  Therefore 
glorify  God  in  your  body,  and  in  your  spirit,  which  are  God's  "  (1  Cor.  vi.  20). 

A  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord.  The  very  virtue  and  essence  of  the  offering 
ascended  by  fire  from  the  altar  on  earth  to  God  in  heaven.  Duly  offered  by  fire, 
the  sacrifice  was  "  a  sweet  savour  "  to  the  Lord.  Christ^s  sacrifice  was  :  "  He 
gave  Himself  for  us  an  offering  and  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  a  sweet  smelling  savour  " 
(£ph.  V.  2).  Christian  self-consecration  is  :  *'  For  we  are  unto  God  a  sweet 
savour  of  Christ'^  (2  Cor.  ii.  15).  Christian  life  perpetuates  on  earth  and  yields 
continually  to  heaven  the  incense  of  a  pure  offering,  '*  an  odour  of  a  sweet  smell, 
a  sacrifice  acceptable,  well-pleasing  to  God  "  (Phil.  iv.  18). 

Vv.  10-13. — A  burnt  sacrifice  of  the  flocks.  Only  the  wealthier  offerers 
could  bring  the  costlier  sacrifice  "  of  the  herd  "  (v.  3).  God  equally  provides  for 
the  less  opulent  among  the  people ;  gives  directions  for  their  sacrifices  just  as 
specific,  denoting  that  He  valued  their  presentation  as  much  as  the  costlier 
offering.  Our  straitened  lot  does  not  release  us  from  God's  claims,  neither  is 
our  humbler  gift  depreciated  by  God.  But  He  requires  entirety  in  all  our 
sacrifices,  that  we  devote  to  Him  our  utmost,  our  all.  "  Bring  it  all  and  burn  it 
upon  the  altar." 

Vv.  14-17  — A  burnt  sacrifice  of  fowls.  Thus  God,  with  minute  care, 
arranges  for  the  poorest,  that  none  may  feel  God's  requirements  too  heavy  for 
them  to  meet,  or  deem  their  poverty  a  disqualification  for  approaching  Him 
acceptably.  In  this  instance,  however,  t\iQ  priest  was  to  bring  the  bird  to  the  altar 
and  slay  it  (v.  15),  thereby  giving  peculiar  importance  to  the  poor  man's  offering 
as  worthy  special  attention;  for  God  has  always  put  honour  on  the  sacrifices 
of  the  poor,  as  our  Lord  did  on  the  widow's  mite.  Yet  insignificant  as  was  the 
offering  of  the  poor,  it  must  as  fully  denote  entire  self-devotion  to  God.  He  prizes 
the  love  which  shows  itself  in  our  casting  in  **  all  our  living  "  (Mark  xii.  44). 

b2 


nOMILETW  COMMENTARY  OJS 


INTRODUCTORY  HOMILIEa 

(A).     The  Lbvitioal  Ritual. 

That  Moses  was  the  author  of  this  Book  is  acknowledged  by  most  competent 
scholars.  The  events  of  the  Book  cover  only  about  a  month  of  time,  i.e.,  from 
I  he  erection  of  the  tabernacle  to  the  numbering  of  the  people,  and  they  relate  to 
the  establishment  of  sacrificial  worship  among  the  Hebrews  in  the  wilderness  of 

/.  Although  the  words  of  Leviticus  were  written  hy  Moses,  they  were  dictated  hy 

the  Lord.  ,,  i     xu        i.^. 

The  first  verse  of  the  Book  decides  this  point,  Moses  records  the  utterances 
that  proceeded  from  the  tabernacle.  So  far  then  as  Leviticus  is  concerned,  we 
have  the  thoughts  of  God  in  the  words  of  God,  and,  as  such,  they  deserve  our 
reverent  attention,  as  indicating  Jehovah's  desire  for  our  acceptable  approach  to 

Note  that  (1)  the  pure  ethical  teaching  of  the  Levitical  ritual  could  not  have  hem 
invented  hy  a  people  so  perverse  and  prone  to  corruption  as  Israel;  (2)  and  they 
would  not  voluntarily  have  put  themselves  under  such  restrictions  if  they  could. 
The  revelation  of  God  to  Israel,  through  His  servant  Moses,  was  the  outcome  of 
the  Divine  disposition  to  communicate  to  and  commune  with  man,  of  His  deep 
concern  for  human  holiness  and  happiness ;  this  the  basis  and  spring  of  all 
revelation  and  blessing  to  our  race.    [See  Illustrative  Addenda,  p.  18,  Revelation.^ 

IL  Although  the  rites  of  Leviticus  have  heen  superseded,  its  moral  teaching  has 

not  heen  abrogated.  .    ,  .  ,    .     .,     ,      . 

If  read  in  connection  with  the  Epistle  to  Hebrews  (which  is  its  best  commen- 
tary) lessons  upon  Christian  work,  worship,  witnessing  may  be  gathered.  Christ 
came  not  to  destroy  the  law,  but  to  give  it  a  fuller  and  deeper  significance,  to 
exemplify  and  enforce  the  principles  therein  taught.  The  perfect  ethics  of  the 
Gospel  have  their  germs  and  roots  in  the  law,  both  enjoin  holiness  to  the  Lord. 

///.  Although  the  sacrifices  of  Leviticus  have  heen  discontinued,  the  one  offering  of 

Christ  abideth  for  ever.  -  i  •    «. 

We  need  no  material  aZ^ar  or  sacriiice  ;  and,  therefore,  no  human  priest. 
Christ  finished  His  atoning  work  upon  the  Cross— appears  now  as  '*  Lamb  in  the 
midst  of  the  throne,"  showing  that  while  He  was  once  a  victim  ('*  Lamb  )  He  is 
now  a  victor  ( '*  throne  ").  The  law  is  our  schoolmaster  to  lead  us  to  Christ. 
Except  read  in  light  of  the  New  Testament,  Leviticus  becomes  a  form  without 
power,  shadow  without  substance.  With  joy  we  may  draw  water  out  of  these 
wells  of  salvation.  In  its  typical  rites  we  may  apprehend  Him  who  hath  obtained 
eternal  redemption  for  us.— ^cv.  F,  W.  Brown. 

(B).     Communion  with  God  bt  a  Redeemed  People  through  Altar 

Offerings. 

The  Exodus  sacrifices,  those  ofi'ered  by  the  children  of  Israel  while  in  Egypt, 
i  e  the  paschal  lamb  and  unleavened  bread,  had  reference  and  signiticance  wholly 
\.o\hQiv  redemption:  deliverance  from  death  and  bondage.  The  Levitica 
sacrifices  were  those  of  a  saved  people,  and  were  appointed  for  their  acceptable 
approaches  to  Cod  their  Saviour.  Instead,  therefore,  of  seeing  Christ  as  redeem- 
ing us  we  see  Him  in  His  work  for  those  already  redeemed  ;  bringing  them 
into  fellowship  with  God  and  restoring  them  when  they  fail  or  fall.  Lo  hold 
communion  with  God  they  need  Christ  both  as  Offering  and  Mediator,  Sacriface 


THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS. 


and  Priest ;  thus  He  appears  in  the  tabernacle  services.  Gathering  all  the 
tabernacle  offerings  into  one  view,  remark  that : 

I.  Altar  offerings  and  tabernacle  ministries  all  reach  their  completion  in 
Christ. 

He  is  the  Burnt  Offering,  Meat  Offering,  Peace  Offering,  Sin  Offering,  Trespass 
Offering  for  His  people.  "When  He  said,  sacrifice  and  offering  and  burnt 
offering  and  offering  for  sin  Thou  wouldst  not,  neither  hadst  pleasure  therein, 
which  are  offered  by  the  law;  then  said  He,  Lo  I  come  to  do  Thy  will,  0  God. 
He  taketh  away  the  first,  that  He  may  establish  the  second  "  (Heb.  x.  8,  9). 
By  the  one  oblation  of  Himself  He  has  stood  in  all  those  relations  ;  relations 
precious  to  God,  needful  to  His  Church. 

1.  In  each  offering  three  distinct  objects  are  present  :  the  offering^  the  priest,  the 
offerer.  Christ  is  each  of  and  all  these.  So  manifold  are  the  relations  in  which 
Christ  has  stood  for  man  and  to  man  that  all  types  are  required  to  represent 
His  fulness.  First  He  comes  as  Offerer  ;  but  we  cannot  see  the  Offerer  without 
the  offering;  and  the  Offerer  is  Himself  the  Offering;  and  He  who  is  both 
Offerer  and  Offering  is  also  the  Priest.  (1)  As  offerer,  we  see  Him  our  Suh- 
stitute,  **  fulfilling  all  righteousness."  (2)  As  priest,  we  see  Him  our  Mediator, 
ministering  between  God  and  Israel.  (3)  As  offering,  He  is  seen  the  Innocent 
Victim,  a  sweet  savour  to  God,  yet  bearing  the  sin  and  dying  for  it.  (1) 
The  offerer  sets  forth  Christ  in  His  Person  ;  who  became  man  to  meet  God's 
requirements.  (2)  The  offering  presents  Him  in  His  character  and  v)ork,  as  the 
victim  by  which  atonement  was  ratified.  (3)  The  priest  shows  Him  in  His 
official  relation  as  the  appointed  intercessor. 

2.  The  difference  in  the  several  offerings  asks  notice  ;  the  Burnt,  the  Meat,  the 
Peace  offerings,  etc.  They  represent  different  aspects  of  Christ's  offering.  [For 
their  different  meaning  compare  Homilies  on  each.] 

3.  The  offerer  himself  also  reflects  Christ  in  His  diverse  aspects.  The  faithful 
Israelite  stands,  in  one  instance,  as  a  sinless  offerer,  presenting  a  *'  sweet 
smelling  savour"  for  acceptance  with  God,  not  propitiating  for  sin  ;  in  another 
as  a  convicted  sinner,  offering  an  expiatory  sacrifice  which  bears  the  pain  and 
penalty  of  his  transgressions. 

The  offering  of  Christ  was  but  one,  and  but  once  offered  ;  but  as  Christ's 
fulness  and  relations  are  so  manifold,  all  aspects  are  needful  to  represent  Him  in 
those  manifold  relations  and  His  various  work  for  us. 

4.  The  different  grades  in  the  various  offerings  is  equally  significant;  the 
buUockf  the  lamb,  the  dove.  And  these  denote  the  different  estimates  and  appre- 
henstons  formed  of  Christ  by  His  people.  Christ's  work  is  so  complete  rhat  each 
aspect  may  be  differently  apprehended  according  to  the  measure  of  light  in  the 
believer.  Some  never  go  beyond  the  conception  of  Christ  as  their  Paschal 
Offering,  securing  their  redemption  from  Egyptian  bondage  and  death.  Others, 
however,  see  Him  as  their  Burnt  Offering,  wholly  devoted  to  God  for  them  ;  while 
toothers  He  is  as  the  passive  Lamb  silent  and  submissive  in  affliction ;  and  to 
others  the  mourning  Dove  gentle  and  sorrowful  in  His  innocenc.y. 

II.  Altar  offerings  and  tabernacle  ministries  were  designed  for  Israel's 
acceptable  communion  with  God. 

The  types  of  Leviticus,  in  distinction  from  the  types  of  redemption  or 
deliverance  from  doom,  give  us  the  work  of  Christ  in  its  bearing  on  worship 
and  communion. 

1.  They  meet  the  needs  of  a  ransomed  people  in  providing  for  their  access 
to  God.  If  they  come  for  consecration  they  bring  the  burnt  offerings  :  if  for 
grateful  acknowledgment  of  Divine  bounty  and  graciousness,  they  bring  the 
food  offerings  ;  if  for  reconciliation  after  ignorant  misadventure  or  neglect  of 
duty  or  temporary  transgression,  they  bring  their  peace  or  trespass  offering, 
&c.     But  they  all  provide  a  basis  for  access  to  and  acceptance  with  God. 


6  HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  i.  1—9. 


How  thoroughly  all  these  qiialitie*  unite  in  the  one  offering  of  Jesus  is 
manifest ;  so  that  we,  redeemed  by  Him,  come  before  God  with  His  merits  and 
graces,  and  are  accepted  in  Him.  "  Therefore,  being  justified  by  faith,  we  have 
peace  with  God,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  also  we  have  access  by 
faith  into  this  grace  wherein  we  stand  ....  and  not  only  so,  but  we  also  joy  in 
God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  we  have  now  received  the  atone- 
ment"  (Rom.  V.  1,  2,  11). 

2.  Christ's  work  as  connected  with  the  communion  of  His  people,  must  be  viewed 
under  manifold  representations.     The  Offering  first :  for  His  one  oblation 

"Provides  for  those  who  come  to  God 
An  all-prevailing  plea." 

Yet  how  few  believers  enter  earnestly  into  the  manifold  aspects  and  aims  of 
Christ's  one  offering  represented  in  the  various  victims  and  the  arrangements 
for  their  sacrifice.  They  read  of  Him  as  the  Sin  Oftering,  the  Burnt  Ofiering, 
&c.,  but  no  corresponding  thought  is  suggested  to  them  by  this  distinction. 
It  is  enough  for  them  that  the  blood  of  the  Paschal  Lamb  has  been  sprinkled  on 
their  door  post  and  they  are  saved  :  they  inquire  not  more  concerning  Him. 
But  they  who  would  know  the  joy  of  communion  must  go  from  strength  to 
strength  in  the  knowledge  of  the  grace  and  work  of  Jesus.  Have  they  known 
Him  as  the  Paschal  Lamb?  They  will  then  seek  to  know  Him  as  the  offering 
within  the  Tabernacle.  Have  they  learnt  Him  in  His  different  relations  as 
offering?  They  will  then  seek  to  know  Him  in  His  Offices  as  Priest:  His 
ministrations  for  us  within  the  Holy  Place  :  His  grace  and  acceptableness  as  our 
Mediator  at  the  altar :  His  free  entrance  on  our  behalf  into  the  presence  of  God. 
Thus,  redemption  being  known,  the  Levitical  sacrifices  relate  to  the  access  of 
a  chosen  people  to  God :  and  show  Christ  as  He  is  discerned  by  one  who  already 
knows  the  certainty  of  redemption;  Christ  the  Priest,  the  Offerer,  the 
Offering :  Christ  as  meeting  all  that  a  sinner  saved  needs  iu  approaching  to  God  : 
Christ  for  the  believer,  and  all  that  Christ  is  to  the  believer  as  keeping  up  his 
daily  communion  with  God,  meeting  his  needs  in  his  access  to  Jehovah. — 
Homiletically  arranged  by  Editor  from  "  Jukes  on  the  Offerings*^* 


SECTIONAL   HOMILIES. 
Topic, — Worship  by  Saoripiob  (Vv.  1-9), 

A  great  change  had  now  occurred  in  the  conditions  of  worship.  God  had 
hitherto  declared  His  will  amid  terrible  manifestations.  The  people  had  stood 
afar  off  in  fear.  Only  through  Moses,  as  a  daysman  betwixt  them,  had  Gol 
spoken  to  men,  or  men  approached  Him.  Now  the  Lord  had  commanded, 
"Build  Me  a  tabernacle  that  I  may  dwell  among  them"  (Ex.  xxv.  8).  Within 
their  camp  was  a  smoking  altar,  whose  incense  was  a  voiceless  but  constant 
prayer  ;  and  a  Holy  of  Holies,  in  whose  mysterious  recesses  dwelt  the  unseen 
Jehovah.  To  Him  all  the  people  were  to  approach,  presenting  their  sacrificial 
offerings  to  Him  for  propitiation  and  consecration. 

i.  Acceptable  worship  must  be  in  accordance  with  Divine  direction. 
1.  Many  approach  God  with  the  feeling  that  He  is  glad  to  have  the  attention 
of  men,  and  will  welcome  them  under  any  circumstances.     But  He  has  made  con- 
ditions for  acceptable  worship.     It  must  be  with 

(a)  An  obedient  spirit.     "  Not  every  one  that  saith.  Lord,  Lord,  etc.,  but 

he  that  doeth  the  will  of  My  Father." 
(6)  A  reverent  spirit.     "  Put  thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet." 
(c)  Faith.     **  He  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe,"  etc. 


,  t 


-;  / 


CHAP.  I.  1—9.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  7 

The  people  who  had  been  so  awestricken  by  the  voice  from  the  Mount  that 
"  they  entreated  that  the  word  should  not  be  spoken  to  them  any  more  "  would 
not  venture  to  approach  Jehovah  unless  called,  nor  in  any  way  than  the 
appointed.  God  has  a  right  to  prescribe  the  methods  by  which  He  shall  he 
worshipped,  and  it  is  a  proof  of  His  mercy  that  He  entered  int  j  minute  details. 

2.  In  any  way  that  God  commands,  worship  is  a  priceless  privilege. 

Here  He  appoints  approach  through  sacrifices.  Origin  of  sacrifice  seems  to 
have  been  man's  feeling  of  sin  and  need,  and  conviction  of  obligation  to  God. 
First  recorded  sacrifice  is  Abel's  offering.  From  that  time  sacrifice  became  a 
common  method  of  worship.  God  took  this  method  of  expressing  religious 
feelings  and  thoughts,  and  taught  the  people  to  use  it  in  approaching  Him,  but 
in  elevated  and  refined  forms.     It  was  figurative  and  symbolic. 

3.  God's  appointed  way  for  the  approach  of  men  to  Him  has  always  been  by 
sacrifice.  The  object  of  sacrifice  was  to  awaken  and  maintain  reverence  for  God, 
and  express  men's  feelings  towards  Him.  Not  now  by  the  blood  of  bulls  and 
goats,  but  the  blood  of  Christ  is  the  sacrifice  by  which  we  come  to  God.  "  He 
taketh  away  the  first  that  He  may  establish  the  second."  But  except  through 
sacrifice  no  man  may  draw  near.  True  religion  is  a  revealed  way  of  approach 
to  God. 

II.  Sacripioial  worship  was  ordained  as  expressive  op  the  worshipper' « 

VOLUNTARY   AND    ENTIRE   DEDICATION    TO    GOD. 

The  burnt  offering  was  the  oldest  symbol  by  which  was  sought  communion 
with  God.     Its  Hebrew  name  means  '*  an  ascending."     They  declared  by  it 

(a)  Their  aspiration  after  Him;  (b)  Their  desire  to  do  His  will;  (c)  Their 
self-surrender  to  Him. 

It  was  this  devotion  of  soul  which  made  the  offering  a  **  sweet  savour  unto 
Him."  Therefore  the  worshipper  took  prominent  part  in  the  act  of  sacrifice.  Laid 
his  hand  on  the  victim  to  make  it  his  representative.  Then  slew  it.  Priest 
dashed  its  blood  against  the  altar,  then  cut  it  up  and  burned  it.  Blood  signified 
the  life,  that  by  which  life  is  supported.  The  word  used  for  **  blood"  in  earliest 
Old  Testament  times  was  "soul."  Blood  was  **holy";  never  to  be  taken  as 
food ;  was  symbol  of  the  immaterial  and  immortal.  It  meant,  when  dashed 
against  the  altar,  that  the  real  inward  life  must  be  devoted  entirely  to  God ;  that 
the  saorificer  oflfered  himself,  soul  and  body,  in  submission  to  God's  will. 

III.  Symbolic  worship  by  sacrifice  finds  its  pull  elucidation  in  christian 

WORSHIP. 

1.  The  burnt  offering  suggests  the  holiness  of  God.  All  Jewish  sacrifices  express 
the  feeling  from  which  a  religious  life  flows  as  its  source,  the  sense  of  sin  and  of 
the  divine  holiness.  That  ritual  is  pervaded  with  this  recognition  of  holiness. 
The  tabernacle,  vessels,  garments,  the  priests  who  minister  and  the  people  who 
worship,  all  must  be  holy.  But  in  the  burnt  offering  this  was  concentrated. 
Infinite  holiness  claims  the  life  of  men.  Mounting  upwards  towards  God  by  self- 
sacrifice  ;  that  is  His  will.  That  is  the  central  idea  of  Christian  living — *'  present 
your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  holy,"  etc. 

2.  The  burnt  offering  suggests  the  spirit  of  acceptable  Christian  worship.  It 
must  be  pure;  and  we  are  not  pure.  It  is  sacrilege  to  offer  a  polluted  object  in 
sacrifice  to  a  holy  God.  New  purposes,  good  resolutions,  good  acts,  do  not  fit 
one  already  stained  by  sin  to  offer  himself  as  an  acceptable  sacrifice.  The  burnt 
offering  was  always  preceded  by  a  sin  offering.  And  "Christ  has  offered  Himself 
a  sacrifice  for  sins  for  ever  ";  we  may  therefore  offer  ourselves  as  living  sacrifices, 
acceptable  to  God. 

3.  The  burnt  offering  suggests  the  character  of  the  acceptable  Christian  wor- 
shipper. He  is  indebted  to  Christ  for  access  to  the  throne  of  grace  ;  he  knows 
that  all  his  hope  is  in  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus.  His  only  return,  therefore,  is  the 
offering  of  himself  as  the  sign  and  expression  of  the  love  of  his  heart.     This 


S  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  i.  9,  18,  17. 

offering  of  ourselves  is  (a)  a  whole  self- sacrifice  ;  (b)  a  continual  sacriflce — breathing 
life  out  in  voluntary  consecratiou.  Such  a  breathing  forth  of  self  to  Christ  re- 
quires a  constant  kindling  of  spirit  in  love  and  devotion  ;  a  strong  faith,  and  a 
habit  of  regarding  one's  self,  in  all  relations,  as  created  to  live  for  His  glory. 
All  the  solemnity  of  the  temple,  all  the  significance  of  its  worship,  and  all  the 
glory  of  the  Divine  presence  in  it,  are  realised  in  every  consecrated  life, 

•*  For  man  the  living  temple  is  :^ 
The  mercy-seat  and  cherubim 
*  And  all  the  holy  mysteries, 

He  bears  with  him." — Rev,  Albert  E,  Dunning, 

Topic  I  A  Sweet  Savour  for  Acceptanob  (Vv.  9,  13,  17), 

Thrice  reiterated :  *^  It  is  a  burnt  sacrifice^  an  offering  made  by  fire,  of  a  sweet 
savour  unto  the  Lord*^ 

Notable  differences  between  the  burnt  oflPerings  and  the  sin  offerings  :  Burnt 
offerings  were  (a)  sweet  savour  offerings  (6)  for  acceptance  ;  whereas  sin  offerings 
were  (a)  not  of  a  sweet  savour,  and  (6)  were  required  as  an  expiation  for  guilt, 
(a)  The  sweet  savour  offerings,  i.e.,  the  burnt,  the  meat,  and  the  peace  offerings, 
were  offered  on  the  brazen  altar ^  which  stood  within  the  court  of  the  tabernacle. 
(6)  The  unsavoury  offerings,  i.e.,  the  sin  and  trespass  offerings,  were  not  con- 
sumed on  the  altar,  some  being  burnt  on  the  earth  without  the  camp,  others 
were  sprinkled  by  blood  and  ate  by  the  priest,  (a)  In  the  "  sweet  savour" 
offerings  sin  is  not  seen  or  thought  of;  it  is  the  faithful  Israelite  giw'mg  a.  pleasant 
offering  to  Jehovah,  (b)  In  the  sin  offerings  it  is  the  reverse,  it  is  a  sacrifice 
charged  with  the  sin  of  the  offerer.  Thus  :  in  the  "  sweet  savour"  offerings  the 
offerer  comes  for  acceptance  as  a  worshipper;  whereas  in  the  sin  and  trespass  offerings 
he  comes  as  a  sinner  to  pay  the  penalty  of  guilt.     Therein  is  suggested  and  pictured 

1.  A  HOLY  WORSHIPPER,  PRESENTING  BEFORE  GOD  A  PERFECT  AND  PLEASANT 
OFFERING. 

Not  that  the  offerer  himself  is  holy  ;  but  his  offering,  which  God  accepts  in  his 
stead,  is  a  representative  of  perfectness,  and  its  quality  of  perfection  is  transferred 
to  the  offerer.  The  act  typifies  a  perfect  man,  in  his  approach  to  God,  standing 
the  test  of  fire,  t.«.,  God's  searching  holiness,  accepted  as  a  fragrant  savour;  the 
offering  all  ascending  as  a  sweet  offering  to  Jehovah. 

1.  The  transaction  represents  man  giving  to  God  what  truly  satisfies  Him.  It 
is  not  a  transaction  symbolic  of  a  sinner  bearing  his  sin  (that  appears  in  the 
sin  offering),  but  of  man  giving  to  God  an  offering  so  pleasing  to  Him  that  the 
"  sweet  savour"  of  it  satisfies  and  delights  Him.  With  our  experience  of  what 
man  is,  it  seems  wondrous  that  he  should  ever  perfectly  perform  his  part.  But 
in  Christ  man  has  so  performed  it ;  His  offering  was  "  a  sweet  savour  unto  the 
Lord."  Hence  we  are  in  the  burnt  sacrifice  brought  to  consider,  not  Christ  as 
the  Sin  Bearer,  but 

2.  Christ,  as  man  in  perfectness,  meeting  God  in  holiness.  The  work  of  Jesus 
here  is  not  "  God  hath  made  Him  to  be  sin  for  us"  ;  but  rather,  "  He  loved  us, 
and  gave  Himself  for  us,  an  offering  and  a  sacrifice  to  God  of  a  sweet-smelling 
savour"  (Ephes.  v.  2).  He  appears  in  the  burnt  offering  for  us  as  man  offering 
to  God  something  which  is  most  precious  and  most  pleasing  to  Him, 

Here  note  : 

(a)  The  altar  is  'Uhe  table  of  the  Lord'*  (Mai.  1.  12);  whatever  was  put 

thereon   was  "the   food  of  God."     Here,   therefore,    God    finds   that 

which  suffices  His  longings ;  an  offering  which  satisfies  Him. 
(h)  The  fire  from  heaven,  emblem  of  God's  holiness,  consumes  the  offering; 

and  it  all  ascends  as  sweet  incense  before  Him ;  betokening  that  all 

was  worthy  His  acceptance,  without  fault. 


ciiAP.  I.  3-9.]  tup:  book  of  LEVITICUS.  9 

(c)  The  victim  was  ^'without  blemish  ";  and  because  of  Christ's  unblemished 
sacrifice,  His  perfect  spotlessness  and  devotedness  was  a  sweet  feast  to 
the  God  of  heaven. 

IT.  A  PERFECT  AND  PLEASANT  OFFERING  OFFERED  TO  GOD  FOR  HIS  GRACIOUS 
ACChPTANOE. 

In  itself  "a  sweet  savour,"  the  burnt  ojQfering  was  presented  ^'' for 
acceptance"  [the  words  in  v.  3  **of  his  own  voluntary  will  "should  read  "to 
be  accepted  ";  and  are  so  rendered  in  the  Sept.  Vulgate,  Targum,  etc.].  It  was 
offered  to  God  to  secure  the  acceptance  of  the  offerer.  Observe  now  Christ's 
position  as  Offerer.     He  stood  as  Man  for  man  under  the  law  ;  hence  : 

1.  Ris  acceptance  depended  upon  His perfectness.  God  made  man  upright;  he 
erred  and  fell.  God  gave  him  opportunities  and  aids,  for  age  after  age,  that  he 
might  again  render  himself  acceptable  to  God  :  but  in  vain  his  efforts.  The  law  then 
came  ;  it  taught  him  the  conditions  of  righteousness ;  but  none  could  fulfil  it, 
and  **  there  was  none  righteous,  no  not  one."  How  then  could  man  be  brought 
to  meet  God's  requirements  1  One  way  only  remained  (Rom.  viii,  3,  4) :  the  Son 
of  God  undertook  it  for  us.  As  man's  representative,  He  took  our  place  ;  and 
there  offered  a  perfect  obedience,  **  a  sacrifice  without  blemish,"  for  our 
"acceptance";  and  thus  answered  the  question  and  demand,  Could  Man  bring  an 
offering  so  acceptable  as  to  satisfy  God  ?  He  offered  Himself ;  and  His  offering 
was  accepted  (Titus  ii.  14). 

2.  His  complete  acceptance  guarantees  His  people's  also.  And  that  it  was  com- 
pletely  accepted  is  assured  by  its  being  "  all  burnt  on  the  altar^*;  nothing 
rejected,  nothing  left  remaining.  God  gathered  it  all  up  in  the  incense  of  fire, 
as  welcome  and  pleasant  to  Him ;  so  that  He  received  it  all.  All  the  virtue 
of  that  satisfactory  offering  is  transferred  from  the  offering  to  the  offerer.  And  the 
believer  is  the  offerer ;  his  faith  identifies  him  with  Christ ;  he  lays  the  hand  of 
identifying  trust  on  the  Lord  Jesus.  Hence  '*  by  one  offering  He  hath  perfected 
for  ever  them  that  are  sanctified"  (Heb.  x.  14).  ''We  are  sanctified  by  the 
offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus  once  for  all"  (Heb.  x.  10).  Christ's  **  atonement  '* 
was  the  satisfaction  God  receives  for  the  perfectness  which  the  offerer  presents 
to  Him.  Christ  only  ever  did  this  perfectly,  and  was  aocepted  for  us  ;  and  we 
are  ^^  complete  in  Him." — Developed  from  ^^  Jukes  on  the  Offerings^ 

Topic:  SiGNIFIOANOB   OP   THE   BURNT   OFFERING   (Vv.    3-9), 

Probably  we  see  the  meaning  of  the  Mosaic  ritual  more  clearly  than  Hebrews 
did,  for  we  look  at  it  in  the  light  of  New  Testament  elucidation.  Those  who 
offered  the  sacrifices  in  the  tabernacle  knew  only  in  part,  and  saw  as  through  a 
glass  darkly ;  now  that  the  Great  Sacrifice  has  been  offered,  we  look  at  those 
rites  face  to  face. 

Among  the  Jews  the  burnt  offering  was  the  oldest  and  most  significant,  and 
announced,  every  day,  truths  of  transcendent  importance.  Such  sacrifices  were 
symbolic  of  the  kind  of  worship  God  requires  of  the  human  race.     Notice  : 

I.  The  nature  of  the  burnt  offering.  Neither  valueless  nor  unclean 
creatures  were  to  be  presented,  but  living,  wholesome,  sound,  and  valuable 
gifts  ;  the  pride  and  prime  of  the  flocks  and  herds,  *'  a  male  without  blemish." 
So  God  demands,  as  well  as  deserves,  the  first  and  best  of  all  that  we  possess.  He 
will  not  accept  the  refuse  and  dregs  of  our  time  and  talents.  Youth,  strength, 
worth,  and  beauty  are  to  be  ungrudgingly,  unreservedly  given. 

II     The  CHARACTER  OF  THE  BURNT  OFFERING. 

(a)  Voluntary.  "  He  shall  offer  it  of  his  own  voluntary  will."  Though  com- 
manded, it  was  not  extorted  ;  obedience  was  to  be  willing,  not  compelled.  God 
treated   Israelites  as  men,  not  machines;  as  servants,   not  slaves.     Men  have 


10  HOiVlLETlC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  i.  10—17 


always  been  allowed  to  *' choose  whom  they  would  serve";  it  is  so  still,  we  may 
accept  or  reject  the  Great  Sacrifice  ;  we  must  present  ourselves  voluntarily  to 
the  Lord,  none  other  is  acceptable  service. 

(6)  Vicarious.  *'  And  he  shall  put  his  hand  upon  the  head  of  the  burnt 
offering,  and  it  shall  be  accepted  for  him,  to  make  atonement  for  him."  This 
act  indicated  the  identification  of  the  offerer  with  the  offering,  and  the  trans- 
ference of  his  guilt  to  it.  The  perfect  suffered  for  the  imperfect,  the  guiltless 
for  the  guilty.  So  Christ  suffered  in  our  stead,  and  bore  our  sins,  ''the  just  for 
the  unjust,  to  bring  us  to  God.'  As  we  lay  our  hand,  by  faith,  upon  the  spotless 
Lamb  of  God,  we  become  identified  with  Him,  and  our  guilt  is  transferred  to 
Him.     [See  Addenda,  p.  19,  Propitiation^ 

III.  The  manner  of  the  burnt  offering.  Not  only  strict  injunction  about 
what  to  be  offered,  and  when,  and  where,  but  how  the  offering  was  to  be  presented. 

(a)  Orderly.  "  Order  Heaven's  first  law."  Minute  directions  given  even  to 
washing  inwards  and  legs  of  victim,  the  plucking  away  of  the  crops  of  the 
pigeons  and  doves.  Thus  obedience  was  enjoined^  resignation  taught^  and  respect 
paid  to  Divine  sovereignty.  Voluntaryism  was  not  to  be  latitudinarianism  ;  God 
still  requires  order  in  our  worship ;  forms  may  exist  without  frigid  formality ; 
and  method,  without  mechanical  monotony.  Unrestrained  religious  fervour  is 
only  fanaticism  or  "  will  worship  "  and  "  strange  fire." 

(6)  Openly.  "  At  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,"  not  secretly 
in  the  tent,  not  away  from  open  gaze  in  some  hidden  place,  but  publicly.  Thus 
the  worshipper  became  a  witness  and  confessor  before  God  and  man.  Witnessing 
for  God,  confession  of  Christ  still  required  of  all  who  profess  to  believe  and 
worship.  Our  light  is  to  "  shine  before  men,"  we  are  to  be  "  living  epistles  known 
and  read  of  all  men." 

(c)  Devoutly.  "  Before  the  Lord."  This  expression  repeated  to  remind  the 
offerer  he  was  observed  and  judged  by  the  searching  Eye  that  looks  into  the 
secrets  of  the  heart.  Consciousness  of  being  "  before  the  Lord  "  would  beget 
humility,  sincerity,  solemnity.  Let  us  remember  that  all  we  think  and  say  and 
io  is  in  the  light  of  God.  **  All  things  are  naked  and  opened  unto  the  eyes 
of  Him  with  whom  we  have  to  do." 

(d)  Cheerfully.  "  A  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord."  As  the  fragrant  flame 
ascended  from  the  sacrifice,  gladness  and  gratitude  were  symbolised,  indicative 
of  a  joyful  heart,  and  willing  mind.  God  still  requires  sincerity  and  truth  in 
the  inward  parts,  and  in  the  hidden  parts  we  need  to  know  wisdom.  The  holo- 
caust thus  taught  the  need  of  ardent  love,  aspiring  desire,  entire  surrender,  as 
the  first  essentials  of  real  religion.  In  the  self-sacrificing  life  and  love  of  Christ 
those  features  meet  in  harmony  and  perfection.  Though  we  are  exempted  from 
repeating  the  burnt  offerings,  we  may  present  to  God  the  sacrifice  of  a  broken  and 
contrite  heart  with  the  assurance  it  will  not  be  despised. — F,  W»  Brown, 

Topk:  Variety  in  Saorifiobs  (Vv.  10-17). 

He  who  had,  in  Egypt,  appointed  for  every  household  the  one  sacrifice  of  the 
Passover,  now  directs  sacrifices  of  a  wider  and  various  order,  graduated  to  the 
personal  ability,  and  spiritual  condition  of  each  worshipper.  These  sacrifices 
"which  are  to  be  brought  to  the  Lord  to  propitiate  His  graciousness  to  them,  are 
themselves  the  appointment  of  His  graciousness  to  them.  So  absolute  are  His 
decrees  concerning  what  is  to  be  presented,  and  how,  when  and  by  whom  to  be 
presented,  that  to  vary  them  at  any  suggestion  of  priest  or  priests,  under  any 
impulse  of  devotion,  gratitude  or  fear,  or  through  sense  of  dread  and  distress, 
would  be  to  commit  one  of  these  transgressions  which  the  sacrifices  themselves 
were  provided  to  meet.     [See  Maurice,  Doctrine  of  Sacrifice.] 


CHAP.  I.  10-17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  11 

I.  The  consciousness  of  sin  and  need  for  propitiation  pervades  the 

VARIED  RANKS  OF  HUMAN  SOCIETY. 

Guilt  is  universal.  "  Rich  and  poor  meet  together,"  in  sense  of  personal 
transgression  and  necessity  for  a  sacrifice.  Hence  the  wealthy  who  could  offer 
"  sacrifice  of  the  herd^'  the  middle  class  who  could  only  bring  *'  offering  of  the 
flocks"  and  the  poorest  whose  impecuniosity  compelled  them  to  bring  an  "  offering 
to  the  Lord  offowls^^'  are  all  provided  for  in  God's  arrangements  for  propitiatory 
sacrifices.     [See  Addenda,  p.  19,  Sacrifices  of  the  Poor.] 

1.  The  condition  and  history  of  every  people  showed  the  desire  for  sacrifice  ; 
that  it  could  only  be  stifled  when  the  strongest  and  deepest  convictions  of 
humanity  were  stifled.  But  where  there  was  sense  of  guilt,  dependen  je,  obliga- 
tion, thankfulness,  there  sacrifices  were  offered. 

2.  The  entire  Jewish  people,  irrespective  of  social  gradation,  had  experienced 
God's  redeeming  mercy,  which  constrained  them  all  to  seek  Him  with  offerings. 
The  Lord  had  ransomed  them  all,  and  was  now  drawing  them  into  privileged 
relationship  with  Himself.  He  was  *'  no  respecter  of  persons ":  all  alike  were 
within  Divine  grace.  And  equally  "the  grace  of  God  which  bringeth  salvation 
hath  appeared  unto  all  men  "  (Tit.  ii.  11). 

3.  In  every  human  heart  there  dwells  the  condemnation  for  sin  and  the  prompt- 
ings to  seek  propitiation  with  God, 

For  though  each  man  bears  his  own  special  sin,  and  each  class  in  society  carries 
its  own  distinctive  transgression ;  yet  all  know  that  "  all  have  sinned,"  and  that 
God  requires  of  every  "  wicked  man  that  he  forsake  his  way  and  return  unto  the 
Lord "  (Isa.  Iv.  7). 

II.  Divine  provision  for  propitiation  is  varied  to  suit  all  gradations 

OF  HUMAN  SOCIETY. 

In  no  demand  He  makes  does  He  "exact  more  than  our  iniquity  deserveth." 
Nay,  He  relieves  the  weight  of  requirement  that  none  should  find  the  yoke 
other  than  easy,  and  the  burden  light. 

1.  The  resources  and  ability  of  the  offerer  are  considered.  God  is  no  "  hard 
ta!^kma8ter."     None  can  be  discouraged  by  sense  of  inability. 

2.  No  one  is  exempted  from  the  demand,  of  a  propitiatory  offering.  The  poorest 
are  included  in  God's  arrangement  equally  with  the  wealthiest. 

3.  Liberty  of  choice  is  allowed  that  each  may  prove  his  sincerity  by  bringing  his 
utmost  and  best.     God  tests  us  thus. 

4.  Humblest  offerings  were  as  acceptable  with  God  as  the  costliest :  evidenced  in 
the  minuteness  of  God's  directions  for  the  poor  man's  offering  of  the  fowls. 

5.  Supreme  importance  was  attached  to  the  spirit  in  which  the  offering  wcu 
brought  (r.  3).  Thus  "let  us  draw  near  with  a  pure  heart"  (Heb.  x.  22). 

III.  Amid  all  variety  in  sacrifices  the  one  quality  op  propitiation 
WAS  conspicuous  and  inherent. 

1.  The  quality  of  the  offering,  as  faultless,  was  specified,  indicating  that  substi- 
tution could  only  be  effective  as  giving  to  God  a  sinless  victim  in  place  of  a  sinful 
offerer. 

2.  The  identifying  act  of  the  offerer  denoted  his  sense  of  deserving  the  fate  of 
the  victim  about  to  die. 

3.  His  being  detained  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  until  the  sacrifice  was  offered 
impressed  the  truth  that  God  was  too  holy  for  sinful  man  to  approach  until 
propitiated  by  sacrifice. 

4.  By  the  process  of  cleansing,  flaying,  and  burning,  a  typical  foreshadowing 
was  enacted  of  the  atoning  sufferings  of  Christ,  as  the  world's  atonement,  the 
"propitiation  for  our  sins;  and  not  for  ours  only,  but  also  for  the  whole  world" 
(1  John  ii.  2).  And  in  that  all-i  iclusive  sacrifice  every  variety  of  the  human 
family  has  a  share;  none  too  poor  to  be  excluded,  none  too  wealthy  to  be 
exempted ;  for  "  all  have  sinned  and  oome  short  of  the  glory  of  God," 


12 


HOMlLhTlC  COMMENTARY  ON 


[chap.  I.  1—13. 


OUTLINES    ON   VERSES. 


V.  1. — Theme:  God  within  the 
Tabbrnaclb.  ^^  And  the  Lord  spake 
unto  him  out  of  the  tabernacle  of  the 
congregation^' 

The  tabernacle  was  erected  in  the 
midst  of  a  people  supernaturally  sepa- 
rated from  the  rest  of  mankind  to  be 
the  recipients  and  mediators  of  a  reve- 
lation which  Jehovah  would  make  of 
Himself  to  the  world.  In  it  a  constant 
worship  was  to  be  maintained  by  the 
priests  in  the  name  of  the  holy  nation. 

I.  Within  the  sanctuary  God  makes 
His  presence  known. 

He  may  do  it  by  '*  calling  "  men  to 
Him  there,  or  by  "  speaking  "  to  them 
in  messages  of  truth  and  life.  Many 
have  found,  who  entered  the  sanctuary, 
**  surely  God  is  in  this  place."  He  is 
there — 

1.  Invisible,  Moses  saw  not  God; 
but  "  no  man  hath  seen  God  at  any 
time."  He  is  the  *'  King  immortal, 
invisible."  Yet  there  are  solemn 
realities  which  eye  hath  not  seen. 
The  material  world  has  in  it  many 
invisible  facts :  forces  and  agencies 
hidden  from  physical  sight.  Life  also 
is  crowded  with  invisible  activities, 
energies  of  vast  influence  which  elude 
vision.  Holy  places  are  not  void  scenes, 
an  Unseen  Presence  is  there. 

2.  Recognised.  A  solemn  symbol 
dwelt  in  the  tabernacle  :  the  shekinah 
cloud.  We  have  no  visible  sign  ;  but 
none  the  less  God  makes  His  presence 
realised  in  His  tabernacles  now.  He 
has  spiritual  resources  for  attesting  that 
He  is  amidst  *'  the  congregation  "  still. 

3.  Gracious.  Not  as  on  Sinai,  too 
awful  for  men  to  bear  the  sight ;  but 
gently  dwelling  above  the  mercy -seat. 
How  graciously  the  Lord  reveals  Him- 
self in  His  holy  place  now ;  to  arouse 
the  heedless,  allure  the  sinful,  heal  the 
stricken,  reveal  His  compassion,  cleanse 
the  contrite,  save  the  trustful  soul. 

II.  Within  the  tabernacle  God  sends 
His  messages  of  redemption  to  the 
congregation. 

Here  the  Lord     ent  directions  for 


sacrifices  which  should  be  for  an  "atone- 
ment." The  messages  through  Moses 
contained  a  system  of  religious  truth 
answering  all  the  spiritual  necessities 
of  Israel,  revealing  : 

(1)  The  nature  and  character  of  God. 

(2)  The  covenant  relation  between 
Him  and  them. 

(3)  Provision  for  the  pardon  and 
restoration  of  the  penitent  transgressor, 

(4)  The  condemnation  of  the  wilfully 
and  persistently  disobedient. 

In  these  Christian  times  He  sends 
tidings  and  offers  of  redemption  unto 
His  people ;  gracious  messages  of  salva- 
tion in  Christ  to  the  congregations  who 
gather. 

1  By  His  minister  and  representa- 
tive :  as  by  Moses. 

2.  Based  upon  the  merits  of  atoning 
sacrifice. 

3.  Requiring  man^s  response  and  co- 
operation. 

III.  Within  the  sanctuary  God  is 
willing  to  meet  every  soul  who  will 
seek  Him. 

**  If  any  of  you"  etc.  No  restric- 
tion. True  we  may  meet  the  Lord 
elsewhere  than  in  His  sanctuaries 
now ;  yet  none  but  may  find  Him 
there.  Only  in  order  to  meet  Him 
acceptably,  now  as  then,  each  must 

1.  Come  with  sacrificial  offering  :  i.e.^ 
resting  on  the  atonement  of  Christ. 

2.  With  thorough  earnestness  of  de- 
sire. Not  prefuncturily,  not  in  alien 
mind,  but  *'of  his  own  voluntary  will," 
i.e.,  with  personal  effort  to  meet  Him 
acceptably,  and  in  His  own  way. 

3.  With  self  dedication.  Suggested 
in  the  burnt  offering.  Lay  yourself 
before  God,  He  will  "  receive  you  gra- 
ciously." 

V.  2. — Theme :  Revelation  op  Pro- 
pitiation. "  Speak  unto  the  children 
of  Israelf  and  say  unto  them,  Ye  shall 
bring  your  offering  of  the  herd  and  of 
the  flock" 

I.  The  Author  of  Divine  Revelation 
— God.  *'  The  Lord  called  unto  Moses." 


CHAP.  I.  1—13.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 


18 


God  could  reveal :  He  knew  what  man 
needed  :  would  not  remain  silent,  and 
let  man  perish  for  want  of  light  addi- 
tional to  that  of  Nature. 

II.  The  Medium  of  Divine  Revela- 
tion— Man.  To  a  representative  and 
brother  of  our  race  Divine  communi- 
cations came.  Most  reasonable  and 
appropriate  vehicle.  Glorifying  to 
God  :    dignifying  to  man. 

III.  The  IScene  of  Divine  Revelation 
> — Tabernacle.  Sacred  place  fitted  to 
be  audience  chamber  with  Deity. 
Revelations  given  in  sacred  spots,  as 
-well  as  to  select  persons. 

IV.  The  Means  of  Diving  Revela- 
tion— Speech.  The  Lord  "  spake  " 
unto  Moses,  used  human  speech, 
though  imperfect;  other  language 
would  have  been  unintelligible  and 
useless. 

V.  The  Purpose  of  Divine  Revela- 
tion— Redemption.  To  sanctify  from 
guilt,  to  save  from  consequences  of 
bin,  to  recover  holiness  in  man  here 
and  for  ever.  Such  redemption  (1) 
Mediatorial — through  priest;  (2)  Sacri- 
ficial— through  oblations. — F.  W.  B. 

V.  2. — Theme:  The  Way  of  Access 
TO  God.  "  If  any  man  of  you  bring  an 
offeting  unto  the  Lord^  ye  shall  bring 
your  offering  of  the  cattle,  even  of  the 
herd,  and  of  the  flock." 

Human  liberty  is  here  recognised, 
but  it  is  a  liberty  emphatically  restricted. 
Any  man  might  bring  an  offering  if  he 
deaired  ;  but  if  he  did,  he  must  bring 
it  according  to  absolute  directions.  In 
our  dealings  with  God  there  must  be 
acceptance  of  a  Will  beyond  our  own 
will ;  obedience  to  commands  ;  reverent 
and  humble  observance  of  Divine  au- 
thority. "  Who  art  thou  that  repliest 
against  God  1"  "  Hath  not  the  potter 
power  over  the  clay]"  etc.  '*  Whatso- 
ever He  saith  unto  thee,  do  it."  "  If 
ye  be  willing  and  obedienty^  etc. 

I.  In  our  approach  to  God  nothing  is 
left  to  human  invention. 

1.  There  are  conditions  to  our  accept- 
able approach.  Therefore,  he  who 
would  draw  nigh  should  pause  and  ask 
solemnly :  *'  Wherewith  shall  I  come 
before  the  Lord,  or  bow  before  the  ingh 


Godi"  Do  not  "rush  in  where  angels 
fear  to  tread."  Think  Whom  you  ap- 
proach, and  inquire  how  to  draw  near 
aright. 

2.  There  are  minutely  revealed  con- 
ditions for  our  approach.  Neither 
priest  nor  people  might  take  one  step 
except  as  directed  (chap.  viii.  36  ;  ix. 
6,  7).  We  may  be  sincere  and  even 
devout  in  spirit  when  adopting  methods 
and  ideas  of  our  own  in  spiritual  be- 
haviour ;  but  God  will  not  have  our 
way,  but  His  vfa.y.  It  must  be  accord- 
ing to  the  revelation  of  God. 

II.  For  our  rightful  approach  to  Him 
God  has  made  full  and  gracious  pro- 
vision. 

1.  A  place  for  meeting  God  (v.  1). 
Within  the  sanctuary;  at  the  mercy- 
seat  ;  in  the  "  secret  place  of  the  taber- 
nacle of  the  Most  High  "  God  asks  ua 
apart.  *'  Having  boldness  to  enter  into 
the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus."  Israel 
had  a  "  worldly  sanctuary,"  because 
then  '*  the  way  into  the  holiest  was  not 
yet  made  manifest  while  as  the  first 
tabernacle  was  yet  standing."  Now 
there  is  no  outer  court  for  the  people 
and  inner  temple  for  the  priest ;  all  may 
meet  God  in  "  heavenly  places,  in  Christ 
Jesus" — drawing  near  God  in  blessed 
privacy. 

2.  A  sacrificial  basis  of  acceptance* 
Being  guilty  man  needs  propitiatory 

sacrifice.  *'  Without  shedding  of  blood 
there  is  no  remission."  This  basis  of  a 
propitiatory  sacrirtce  constituted  Israel 
an  acceptable  people  with  God.  The 
atonement  of  Christ  is  the  guarantee 
of  our  welcome  also.  *'  Through  the 
offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  once 
for  all "  we  may  approach  "  in  full  as- 
surance of  faith." 

8.  A  mediatorial  ministry  "  The 
priests  shall  bring  the  blood"  (v.  5). 
"  We  have  such  a  High  Priest  ...  a 
minister  of  the  sanctuary,"  etc  (com p. 
Heb.  viii.  I,  2).  Jesus  represents  us 
there  continually  ;  "  in  the  presence  of 
God  for  us  ";  and  He  presents  to  God  our 
sacrifices  and  gifts ;  "  by  Himy  there- 
fore, let  us  offer  the  sacrifice,"  etc,  (Heb. 
xiii.   15) 

III.  By  such   arrangements  for   our 
acceptable   approach,  God  has  laid  us 


u 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON 


[chap.  1. 1—13. 


under  most  solemn  obligations  to  seek 
Him. 

1.  Shall  God  wait  in  vain  within  the 
holy  place,  and  none  draw  near  ?  He 
says,  "  Seek  ye  My  face."  Surely  our 
"  hearts  shall  say  to  Him,  Thy  face,  0 
Lord,  will  I  seek." 

2.  Can  sinful  man  despise  the  sacrifice 
of  Jesus  offered  for  his  propitiation? 
Nay  I  '*  My  soul  looks  backs  to  see,"  etc. 

3.  With  such  a  Priest  within  the 
Holy  Place,  have  we  no  mediation  to  ask, 
no  sins  to  confess^  no  offerings  to  bring  ? 

V.  3. — Theme:  Necessity  of  Saori- 
FiOE.  "  If  his  offering  he  a  burnt  sacri- 
fice." 

The  fall  of  man  necessitated  "the 
republication  of  the  religion  of  Nature 
(as  Butler  says)  with  additional  truths 
and  additional  proofs."  Man  required 
to  be  taught  how  depraved  he  had  be- 
come, and  how  he  might  be  delivered 
from  the  guilt  and  consequences  of  that 
fallen  state.  The  burnt  offering  was 
eminently  calculated  to  impress  upon 
worshippers  in  the  tabernacle  services 

/.   The  heinous  nature  of  sin. 

IL  The  wickedness  of  idolatry. 

III.  The  oneness  of  Israel's  nation- 
ality. 

iV.  The  duty  and  privilege  of  Di- 
vine worship. 

V.  2'he  need  of  substitutionary  sacri- 
fice in  order  to  salvation. 

VI.  The  sovereign  claim  of  Jehovah 
upon  His  peoples  life  and  love. 

The  doctrine  of  mediation  and  vicari- 
ous sacrifice  is  taught  in  Nature,  we 
get  the  principles  there ;  but  the 
eternal  and  spiritual  truths,  which 
those  principles  illustrate,  are  pre- 
sented in  the  Levitical  Ritual ;  and 
pre-eminently  in  the  Redemption 
wrought  by  Jesus  Christ.  The  direc- 
tions concerning  the  burnt  offering 
show  that  the  recognition  of  the  existence 
of  sm  and  the  need  of  its  removal  in  order 
to  acceptable  service  lies  at  the  founda- 
tion of  the  Mosaic  and  Christian  econo- 
mies.—F.  W.  B. 


V.  3. — Theme:  Volition  in  Wor- 
ship. "  He  shall  offer  it  of  his  own 
voluntary  will" 


As  expressive  of  our  Saviour* s  act  in 
devoting  Himself  to  be  man  s  sacrifice, 
it  accords  with  the  grand  statement, 
"  Lo  I  come  to  do  Thy  will,  0  God  ; 
Thy  law  is  within  My  heart."  And  as 
expressive  of  the  soul's  act  in  coming 
before  God  with  his  own  offerings  of 
love  and  service,  or  with  the  free  exer- 
cise of  trust  in  Jesus'  atonement,  it 
suggests  the  right  state  in  which  to 
seek  God.  The  offering  is  not  the 
chief  thing  in  the  transaction,  but  the 
spirit  of  the  man  occupied  in  it. 

I.  True  worship  springs  from  the 
soul.     Should  be — 

1.  Spontaneous.  As  a  joy,  not  con- 
strained, not  reluctant. 

2.  Grateful.  Recognising  the  privi- 
lege, seizing  the  gracious  opportunity. 

3.  Earnest.  With  a  whole  heart  in 
the  act. 

II.  Acceptable  worship  depends  on 
the  offerer's  will     On — 

1.  The  thoroughness  of  his  purpose. 
Christ  asks,  **  What  wilt  thouT  and 
makes  His  answer  wait  upon  our  desire. 

2.  The  ardour  of  his  approach.  Come 
with  intensity  of  aim,  a>>k  large  things, 
cry,  "I  will  not  let  Thee  go  except 
Thou  bless  me." 

3.  The  individuality  of  his  suit. 
Every  man  must  be  himself  in  worship, 
not  echo  others'  prayers,  not  repeat 
others'  acts,  but  stand  before  God  as  a 
worshipper,  having  something  which  is 
**  his  own*' — to  repent  of,  to  ask  for,  to 
offer 

III.  Sacrificial  worship  is  the  trans- 
gressor's personal  transaction. 

1.  The  victim  must  be  one  which  the 
offerer  himself  brings.  We  must  **  bring  " 
our  sacrifice  now,  come  before  God  with 
the  mention  and  merits  of  Christ. 

2.  The  offerer  must  exert  his  oum 
faith  in  the  act  of  substitution.  Claim- 
ing Christ's  merit,  identifying  himself 
with  the  atonement  of  Calvary  by  his 
appropriating  faith. 

3.  The  tra7isaction  must  be  wholly  one 
of  volition.  God  does  not  force  us  un- 
willing. We  must  act  with  a  prompt 
and  earnest  spirit,  or  miss  the  precious 
benefits  of  the  Uedeemer's  sacrifice. 

Note  :  EaUh,  w  hen  real,  acts  eagerly. 
Love  is  always  swift  in  volition.    Misery 


CHAP.  I.  1 — 18.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITirUS, 


16 


(as  over  sin)  goes  willingly  to  the  Lord 
with  its  "  sacrifice  of  a  broken  heart," 
or  A  ith  trust  in  the  redemption  of  the 
Cross. 

IV.  Self  dedicatory  worship  draws 
its  virtues  from  the  free  will  which 
prompts  it. 

1.  Only  thus  is  it  sincere.  Yet  some 
offer  themselves  to  God  moved  by  ex- 
ample, induced  by  companions,  under 
transient  excitement,  agitated  by 
alarm,  but  void  of  full,  and  earnest, 
and  determined  action  of  the  will. 

2.  Only  thus  is  it  pleasing  to  God. 
He  *'  loveth  a  cheerful  giver."  What- 
ever we  bring,  it  should  be  with  en- 
entirety,  resoluteness. 

3.  Only  thus  can  it  gain  us  spiritual 
benefit.  "  With  what  measure  we  mete 
it  shall  be  measured  to  us."  If  we 
are  heedless  and  heartless  in  going  to 
God,  He  will  return  leanness  to  our 
souls.  But  He  has  "abundant  pardon," 
"plenteous  redemption,"  ** abounding 
grace,"  for  earnest  souls. 

They  who  give  themselves  wholly 
and  voluntarily  to  the  Lord,  He  "re- 
ceives graciously  and  loves  freely." 
[See  Addenda,  p.  19,  Consecration.] 

V.  4. — Theme:  Acceptance  with 
God.  *^And  he  shall  put  his  hand  upon 
the  head  of  the  offering." 

This  book  might  be  called  the  Gospel 
according  to  Leviticus,  for  it  exhibits 
the  gospel  in  its  spirit,  though  under 
figurative  rites.  One  <  »f  the  fathers  says 
that  every  syllable  of  this  book  contains 
a  mystery,  and  Paul  tells  us  that  ^^the 
law  was  a  shadow  of  good  things"  etc. 

Jf  a  man  happen  to  find  a  monument 
of  antiquity  with  inscriptions  of  old 
letters  and  characters,  how  anxious  is 
he  to  decipher  the  meaning  and  reveal 
the  hidden  mystery!  Much  more 
should  we  be  auxious  to  examine  and 
investigate  the  figures  of  this  book. 
Every  sacrifice  was  a  kind  of  silent 
Bermon  presented  to  the  eye,  indicating 
the  nature  of  Christ's  ottice  and  the 
desion  of  His  death.  And  by  such 
visible  signs  the  gospel  was  prtniched, 
just  as  when  John  said,  **  Behold  the 
Lamb  of  God." 

I.  That  God  alone  is  competent  to 


reveal  the  nature  of  the  sacrifice  and 
the  method  of  our  acceptance. 

He  strongly  resjnts  every  neglect  of 
His  prescribed  institutions  and  every 
invasion  of  His  prerogative. 

"  The  Lord  called  to  Moses  and  spake 
unto  him,'^  etc.  In  the  setting  up  of 
the  tabernacle,  every  particular  is 
closed  with  *' As  the  Lord  commanded 
Moses."  Learn,  then,  how  sweet  com- 
manded  obedience  is.  "  In  vain  do  yt 
worship  by  tradition.^* 

If  none  of  the  outward  offices  were 
left  to  human  invention,  how  much 
less  able  is  man  to  originate  the  terms 
of  acceptance  with  God  I  None  but  God 
knew  the  evil  of  sin,  the  value  of  the 
soul,  the  conditions  of  worthy  approach, 
etc.  God  prescribes  a  method  of  ac- 
ceptance and  worship  for  all  classes. 
All  stand  in  equal  need  of  an  interest 
in  the  atonement ;  all  must  seek  it  on 
the  same  terms,  by  God's  prescribed 
rule ;  all  shall  derive  the  same  benefit. 
The  rich  were  to  present  a  bullock ; 
but  where  the  ability  differed  the 
offering  differed.  Those  next  in  degree 
were  to  present  a  sheep  or  goat,  and 
those  poorer  still  were  to  present  turtle 
doves  or  young  pigeons. 

It  should  be  remembered  that  the 
offering  of  the  Virgin  Mary  at  the 
birth  of  our  Lord  was  not  a  costly, 
but  a  simple,  one — the  humblest ;  no 
more  than  a  turtle  dove  and  two  young 
pigeons.  To  put  honour  on  humble 
poverty  Jesus  was  born  in  a  borrowed 
manger,  and  was  buried  in  a  borrowed 
grave.  ^^Fvxes  have  holes."  "God  dwells 
with  the  poor  in  spirit." 

II.  That  God  prescribes  not  only 
the  offering  itself  but  the  spirit  in 
which  it  should  be  presented. 

1.  It  was  to  be  a  bullock,  to  show  that 
the  best  of  our  possessions  are  to  be 
offered  to  the  Lord;  and  without  blemish, 
God  condemns  those  who  brought  the 
blind  and  lame.  And  it  intimates, 
too,  the  purity  of  the  appointed  sacri- 
fice. **  Such  an  High  Priest  became  us" 
etc.  The  excellency  and  perfection  of 
Christ  had  much  to  do  with  the  eflfi- 
cacy  of  IHs  sacrifice.  ^'  A  lamb  without 
blemish  or  spot."  "  Who  through  ths 
Eternal  /Spirit"  etc. 


16 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON 


[chap.  I.  1— IS. 


Some  are  desirous  of  a  cheap  religion ^ 
but  when  God  provided  a  sacrifice  it 
was  the  most  costly ;  "  not  silver  and 
gold,  but  preciovs  Uood'^  As  God 
deemed  nothing  too  precious  for  us, 
we  deem  nothing  too  precious  for 
Him. 

2.  It  was  to  be  freely  offered.  "Of 
His  own  voluntary  will."  To  show 
that  God  does  not  accept  constrained 
service.  "  The  people  offered  willingly" 
'*  Thy  people  shall  be  willing  in  the  day 
of  Thy  power."  **  With  my  whole  heart 
have  I  sought  Thee.**  ^^  I  beseech  you^* 
etc.  (Rom.  xii.  1). 

3.  It  was  to  be  openly  presented — to 
show  that  we  publicly  confess  Christ 
before  men.  "  At  the  door  of  the  con- 
gregation." **  /  am  not  ashamed  of  the 
gospel."  "  Whosoever  is  ashamed."  A 
public  avowal — for  the  good  of  others 
and  for  the  glory  of  God. 

4.  The  offerer  must  take  a  distinct 
personal  part  in  the  transaction.  "  He 
shall  put  his  hand  upon  the  head  of 
the  burnt  oflPering/'  to  show  that  he 
was  deeply  sensible  of  his  need  of 
mercy  ;  to  show  that  he  fully  concurred 
in  the  appointed  sacrifice,  that  he  was 
anxious  to  transfer  all  his  guilt  to  the 
victim,  and  derived  all  his  hope  from 
it.     "  My  faith  would  lay  her  hand.** 

Our  devout  aff'ections  must  centre 
in  Christ ;  our  only  trust  be  reposed 
in  Him.  **  We  receive  the  atonement." 
Not  merely  driven  by  the  stress  of 
necessity,  but  a  hearty  concurrence. 

5.  Not  only  was  the  victim  slain,  but 
the  blood  sprinkled. 

6.  The  whole  was  to  be  presented  by 
the  priest.  Not  only  at  the  altar,  but 
within  the  veil. 

III.  That  God  has  left  us  in  no 
doubt  of  our  acceptance  when  thus 
approaching  Him  in  faith  and  prayer. 
**  It  shall  be  accepted  for  him,  to  make 
an  atonement  for  him." 

1.  The  substitutionary  offering  is  al- 
lowed by  God  to  stand  in  the  sinner*s  stead 
— "  accepted  for  him." 

2.  The  provision  of  the  substitute 
is  even  a  more  welcome  arrangement  than 
that  the  sinner  should  bear  his  own 
punishment.  "  It  shall  be  accepted." 
God    "  desires    not    the    death    of    a 


sinner,"  is  well  pleased  that  we  find 
escape  by  laying  our  hand  on  the 
Sacrifice  of  Calvary. 

3.  It  effects  a  full  *'  atonement  "  for 
the  soul,  satisfies  the  Divine  require- 
ments, and  secures  the  justification  of 
the  believer.  "  There  is,  therefore, 
now  no  condemnation  to  them  whinh 
are  in  Christ  Jesus." 

4.  It  makes  the  offerer  himself  an 
object  of  pleasure  in  God's  regard  Not 
merely  is  our  substitutionary  offering 
*^  accepted"  by  God,  but  we  become 
ourselves  beloved  for  the  sake  of  our 
trust  in  the  Sacrifice.  **  I  will  accept 
you,  saith  the  Lord  God"  (Ezekiel 
xliii.  27). 

V.  9. — Theme:  The  Altar  Firh 
**  An  Offering  made  by  Fire." 

The  flame  devours.  The  victim  is 
consumed.  Seek  the  truth  reflected 
from  the  altar  fire.  The  Cross  flashes 
it  out  vividly.  The  fire  consumes  the 
sacrifice. 

I.  That  fire  tells  what  is  sin's  due. 
It  pourtrays  what  the  gfuilty  must 

bear.  Look  on  the  consuming  blaze, 
and  think  how  the  "  fire  shall  be  ever 
burning,  it  shall  never  go  out."  Re- 
member Christ's  picture  of  the  sinner's 
doom— '* everlasting  fire";  "where 
their  worm  dieth  not  and  the  fire  is 
not  quenched."  Ponder,  therefore, 
sins  sure  doom/ 

II.  That  fire  suggests  the  anguish  of 
Christ. 

Type  of  the  Cross  is  that  altar ;  and 
of  the  sufferings  of  Jesus,  that  burning 
fire.  "  He  made  His  soul  an  offering 
for  sin." 

"  0,  the  pangs  His  soul  sastained  I " 

His  anguish  was  as  a  "consuming 
fire,"  it  raged  within  Him  as  a  scorch- 
ing blaze.  It  was  as  though  God's 
wrath  was  hot  and  devastating  upon 
Him.  Mark,  therefore,  the  Saviour*s 
redeeming  grace  I 

III  That  -fire  pourtrays  the  fervour 
of  Christian  consecration. 

With  burning  devotion,  and  flaming 
zeal,  and  self- consuming  love,  ardent, 
glowing,  manifest.  Shall  Christ's  "  zeal 
consume  Him,"  and  ours  lack  intent' 


CHAP.  I.  1  —  13.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 


17 


ity?  The  entire  life  of  a  Christian 
should  be  one  continuous  blaze  of 
flaming  love  and  ardent  devotion. 
[See  Addenda  :  p.  19,  Consecration.'\ 

V.  9. — Theme:  The  Spirit's  Effi- 
CAOT.  *'  An  ofifering  made  by  fire,  of 
a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord." 

The  Holy  Spirit  is  symbolised  by 
fire.  All  the  grace  and  virtue  of 
sacrifices  depend  upon  the  Spirit 

I.  Altar  sacrifices  were  consecrated 
by  the  element  of  Divinely  kindled 
fire. 

The  fire  came  from  heaven  (com p. 
chap.  ix.  24):  and  any  fire  LOt  thus 
supernaturally  originated  was  offen- 
sive (comp.  chap.  x.  1).  That  fire 
coming  ^^  out  from  before  the  Lord " 
symbolises  the  Holy  Ghost,  which 
came  2^9  fire  from  Ood  on  the  Pentecost. 
Only  through  the  Spirit's  sanctifying 
could  those  off'erings  have  become  holy. 

II.  Christ's  sacrifice  was  rendered 
efl&cacious  through  the  energy  of  the 
Holy  Spirit. 

He  suffered  in  the  spirit.  "  Who 
through  the  eternal  Spirit  offered  Him- 
self without  spot  to  Qod."  That  Divine 
fire  burned  within  the  soul  of  Jesus  : 
the  Spirit  was  given  without  measure 
unto  Him ;  and  His  sacred  unction 
consecrated  the  sufferings  of  Jesus  to 
be  a  perfect  atonement  for  human  sin. 

III.  Spiritual  sacrifices  depend  for 
their  sanctity  on  the  Spirit  s  grace. 

Of  Jesus  it  was  declared  "  He  shall 
baptise  you  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and 
tuith  fire."  Is  not  that  the  "  Spirit 
of  burning "  which  rendered  "  holy  " 
everyone  '*  written  among  the  living  in 
Jerusalem"?  [See  Isa.iv.  3,  4.]  This 
"manifestation  of  the  Spirit"  (1  Cor. 
xii.  7,  11)  is  the  occasion  of  all  Chris- 
tian sanctity  and  of  all  acceptable 
sacrifice  and  service.  His  glowing 
grace  and  energy  within  the  soul 
constrains  and  seals  our  devotions ;  and 
"  the  unction  from  the  Holy  One " 
(1  Jno.  ii.  20)  makes  our  lives  and  offer- 
ings "  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord." 

IV.  All  sacrifices  sanctified  by  the 
Spirit  rise  as  a  delightful  incense 
unto  God. 

When    Noah,    saved    by    the    ark, 


burned  his  sacrifice  of  gratitude  upon 
the  altar  he  reared,  "the  Lord  smelled 
a  sweet  savour"  (Gen.  viii.  21). 

So  from  the  holocaust  in  the  taber- 
nacle there  arose  "  by  fire  a  sweet 
savour  unto  the  Lord."  The  ransomed 
Israelites,  brought  again  from  captivity 
to  God's  "  holy  mountain,"  should  once 
more  offer  their  oblations,  and  God 
would  "  accept  them  with  their  sweet  sa 
vour"  (Ezek.  xx.  41).  Supremely  the 
Lord  Jesus  Himself  wsiS  "an  offering  and 
a  sacrifice  to  God  for  a  sweet  smelling 
savour  "  (Ephes.  v.  2).  And  wcy  whom 
God  "  causeth  to  triumph  in  Christ," 
are  "  unto  God  a  sweet  savour  of  Christ  " 
(2  Cor.  ii.  15). 

Every  sacrifice  which  is  the  out- 
flowing of  our  love  and  zeal  for  the 
Lord,  becomes,  through  the  virtue  of 
the  Spirit  consecrating  our  gifts,  *'  an 
odour  of  a  sweet  smell,  a  sacrifice  accept- 
able, well  pleasing  to  God  "  (Phil.  iv.  18). 

The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  sacred  fire  in 
the  Christian  life,  by  whose  gracious 
influences  our  offerings  ascend  in 
sweetness  and  acceptableness  "unto 
the  Lord."  "  Quench  not  the  Spirit." 
[See  Addenda  p.  19,  The  Ascending 
Fire.] 

V.  11.  Theme: A  Life-offering.  "He 
shall  kill  it  on  the  side  of  the  altar. '^ 
1   Its  substitutionary  significance. 

1.  That  the  offerer  deserved  to  forfeit 
his  life. 

2.  That  he  sought  escape  from  the 
penalty  of  his  sinfulness. 

3  That  he  believed  God  would  aC' 
cept  the  victim  in  lieu  of  himself, 

4.  That  substitution  not  alone  suf- 
ficed Jehovah,  but  was  more  acceptable 
to  Him  than  the  sinner's  death. 

II.  Its  practical  interpretation. 

1 .  Life  peculiarly  belongs  to  God  :  it 
is  supremely  His  part  in  creation. 
Lower  things  He  gives  to  man  ;  but 
life  is  His. 

2.  Representing  thus  His  claim  on 
His  creatures,  it  stands  as  the  emblem 
of  what  we  owe  Him.  What  we  owe  we 
ought  to  pay.  We  should  give  our  life 
to  God.     It  is  our  duty. 

3.  It  denotes  that  what  is  most  pre- 
ci')U8  in  uSf  and  forms  the   supremely 


18 


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY  ON 


[CHAP.  1. 13. 


valuable  element  in  our  being,  should 
all  and  wholly  he  the  Lords.  Not  the 
inferior  part,  not  the  less  essential 
qualities,  not  *'  part  of  the  price,"  but 
everything  in  us  of  worth  :  our  life. 
III.  Its  Gospel  foreshadowing. 

1.  The  body  of  Jesus  is  the  offering 
pourtrayed.  **  A  body  hast  Thou  pre- 
pared Me.*' 

2.  He  yielded  to  God  man^a  duty: 
the  dutiful  life  man  had  failed  to  sur- 
render to  Him. 

3.  He  gave  life  in  its  perfectness  to 
God.  In  Himself  perfect,  He  offered 
Himself  wholly  and  absolutely  and 
perfectly  to  God  :  and  the  perfectly 
obedient  Man  then  *' seeing  that  all 
things  were  now  accomplished,  cried, 
It  is  finished,  and  gave  up  the  ghost." 

V.  13. — Theme:  Completeness  in 
Sblf  Devotion.  "The  priest  shall 
bring  it  all^  and  burn  it  on  the   altar." 

1.  In  this  particular  the  Burnt  offer- 
ing differed  from  the  Meat  offering  and 
Peace  offering  ;  for  in  these  cmly  a  part 
was  burnt  with  fire. 

2.  It  differed  also  from  the  Sin 
offering,  which  though  wholly  burnt, 
was  not  burnt  "  on  the  altar.** 

I.  Man's  duty  to  God  is  the  abso- 
lute surrender  of  all. 

Not  of  one  faculty  or  several ;  but 
the  entirety. 

1.  This  accords  with  Christ* s  summary 
of  the  first  commandment :  which  de- 
mands all  the  mindy  all  the  soul,  all 
the  affection,  all  the  strength.  "  Thou 
shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all" 
etc.  (Matt  xxii.  37). 

2.  The  minute  and  all-inclusive  devo- 
tion of  the  victim  affirms  the  same 
truth.  The  "head,"  the  "fat,"  the 
"legs,"  the  "inwards"  all  are  enu- 
merated. Symbolic:  "head"  of 
thoughts  ;  ^*  fat "  of  vigour  ;  "  legs  "  of 
walk,  conduct;  "inwards"  of  affections 
and  emotions. 

II.  Christ's  performance  of  Man's 


du*y  to  God  was  characterised  by  ab- 
solute surrender  of  all. 

1.  Jesus  reserved  nothing ;  He  gave 
up  all.  Had  there  been  but  one  thought 
in  the  mind  of  Christ  not  perfectly 
given  to  God,  one  affection  in  His  heart 
not  yielded  to  His  Father's  will,  one 
step  in  the  walk  of  Jesus  not  taken  for 
God  but  for  His  own  pleasure,  then 
He  would  not  have  offered  Himself,  or 
been  accepted,  as  "a  whole  burnt 
offering"  to  Jehovah.  But  all  was 
offeredy  and  all  was  consumed  on  the 
altar. 

2.  From  first  to  last,  in  Jesus^  self 
had  no  place.  So  entirely  was  His 
whole  life  devoted  to  His  Father  that 
it  almost  seems  He  could  have  had  no 
will  of  His  own.  Everything  He  did 
or  said  was  for  God.  His  first  recorded 
words  were,  "I  must  be  about  My 
Father's  business";  His  last^  "It  is 
finished."  Yet  as  perfect  man.  He  had 
a  human  will,  and  human  afftctions. 
But  no  one  hour  was  spent,  nor  act 
performed  for  His  own  advancement  or 
gratification;  all  was  given  in  entire 
devotedness  to  God. 

III.  Christian  self  devotion  will 
attempt  to  re  produce  Christ's  absolute 
surrender  of  alL 

1.  True,  this  is  a  conception  of  life 
repudiated  by  the  world.  "  Men  will 
praise  thee  when  thou  doest  well  to 
thyself'  (Psa.  xlix.  18). 

2.  Few  Christians  exhibit  such  self 
devotion  to  God.  Our  thoughts  are  for 
self,  our  ease,  &ur  interest,  etc.  But 
if  David  resolved  *'  Neither  will  I  offer 
burnt  offerings  unto  the  Lord  of  that 
which  doth  cost  me  nothing**;  if 
Ananias  was  punished  for  grieving  the 
Spirit  by  ^^  keeping  back  part  of  the 
price  "/  surely  we  whom  "  the  love  of 
Christ  constraineth "  should  rise  to 
highest  devotion  of  our  all  to  God  ; 
and,  like  our  Lord  who  "gave  Him- 
self" (Ephes.  V.  2)  in  all  His  perfect- 
ness, "  yield  ourselves  unto  God.** 


ILLUSTRATIVE  ADDENDA   TO   CHAPTER  I. 


Bevelation.  Varro,  a  Roman  writer 
of  the  first  century  B.C.,  states,  that 
in  his  day  he  had   been  at  pains  to 


collect  the  various  opinions  on  the 
question  "  What  is  the  true  object 
of  human  life  1 "  and  had  reckoned  up 


CHAP.  I.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 


19 


as  maDy  as  three  hundred  and  twenty 
different  answers.  How  much  we  need 
**  the  wisdom  which  is  from  above," 
teaching  from  God  !  He  reveals  what  we 
need  to  know  for  our  truest  good  on 
earth,  our  acceptance  with  Him  now, 
and  our  entrance  at  last  into  His 
presence.  We  are  to  listen  to  Him, 
and  obey  His  word. 

"  'Tis  revelation  satisfies  all  doubts, 
Explains  all  mysteries  except  her  own, 
And  so  illuminates  the  path  of  life 
That  fools  discover  it,  and  stray  no  more/' 

— Cowper. 
Dr.  Taylor  of  Norwich  once  said 
to  me  (wrote  John  Newton),  **  Sir,  I 
have  collated  every  word  in  the 
Hebrew  Scriptures  seventeen  times, 
and  it  is  very  strange  if  the  doctrine 
of  the  atonement  you  hold  should 
not  have  been  found  by  me  "  "I  am 
not  surprised  at  this"  (John  Newton 
answered)  ;  **  I  once  went  to  light  my 
candle,  and  could  not,  for  the  ex- 
tinguisher was  on  it.  Now  prejudice, 
from  education,  learning,  etc.,  often 
proves  an  extinguisher;  it  is  not  enough 
that  you  bring  the  candle,  you  must 
remove  the  extinguisher." 

The  Ascending  Fire.  **  The  symbo- 
lism of  this  combustion  (upon  the 
altar)  is  manifest.  It  was  a  sending 
of  the  gift  to  God.  After  arranging 
the  divided  or  the  selected  portions  of 
the  carcase  in  the  heaven- born  fire, 
which  had  issued  forth  from  the  Divine 
presence  at  the  consecration  of  the 
tabernacle,  they  were  burned,  that  is 
to  say,  they  were  etherialised  and  they 
rose  to  heaven  as  '  a  sweet  savour.'  To 
burn  was  to  effectually  present." — Prin- 
cipal Cave. 

Sacrifices  of  the  Poor.  The  Jews 
at  J  assy  still  bring  offerings  of  the 
fowls.  '*  In  one  house  "  records  those 
who  were  observers  of  the  incident, 
"  we  came  to  the  window  of  the  house 
and  saw  distinctly  what  was  going  on 
within.  A  little  boy  was  reading  the 
prayers,  and  his  widowed  mother 
stood  over  him  with  a  white  hen  in 
her  hands.  When  he  came  to  a 
certain  place  in  the  prayer,  the  mother 
lifted  up  the  struggling  fowl,  and 
waving  it  round  her  head,  repeated 
theae   words :    *  This  he  my   substitute, 


this  be  my  exchange :  this  fowl  shall  go 
to  death  and  I  to  a  blessed  life.'  This 
was  done  three  times  over,  and  then 
the  door  of  the  house  was  opened,  and 
out  ran  the  boy  carrying  the  fowl  to 
the  shocket,  or  slayer,  to  be  killed  by 
him  in  the  proper  manner."  This 
occurred  on  the  eve  of  the  Day  of 
Atonement. 

•*  Sacrifice  is  the  first  element  of 
religion,  and  resolves  itself  in  theo- 
logical language  into  the  love  of  God." 
—Froude,  "  Short  Stories." 

Propitiation.  Cowper,  the  poet, 
speaking  of  his  religious  experiences, 
says,  **  But  the  happy  period  which 
was  to  shake  off  my  fetters,  and  afford 
me  a  clear  opening  of  the  free  mercy 
of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  was  now 
arrived.  I  flung  myself  into  a  chair 
near  the  window,  and  seeing  a  Bible 
there,  ventured  once  more  to  apply  to 
it  for  comfort  and  instruction.  The 
first  verse  I  saw  was  the  25th  of  the 
3rd  of  Romans :  *  Whom  God  hath 
set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation  through 
faith  in  His  blood,  to  declare  His 
righteousness  for  the  remission  of  sins 
that  are  past,  through  the  forbearance 
of  God.'  Immediately  I  received 
strength  to  believe,  and  the  full  beams 
of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  shone 
upon  me.  I  saw  the  sufficiency  of  the 
Atonement  He  had  made,  my  pardon 
sealed  in  His  blood,  and  all  the  fulness 
and  completeness  of  His  justification. 
In  a  moment  I  believed  and  received 
the  Gospel." 

Consecration.  "  And  here  we  offer 
and  present  unto  Thee,  0  Lord,  our- 
selves, our  souls  and  bodies,  to  be  a 
reasonable,  holy  and  lively  sacrifice 
unto  Thee,"  etc. — Communion  Service. 

*'From  henceforth  thou  shalt  learn 
that  there  is  love  to  long  for,  pureness 
to  desire,  a  mount  of  consecration  it 
were  good  to  scale." — Jean  Ingelow. 

On  the  seal  of  the  Baptist  Missionary 
Society  is  the  figure  of  an  ox,  standing 
patiently,  with  a  plough  on  one  side, 
and  an  altar  on  the  other,  with  the 
inscription  beneath :  "  Ready  ftr 
either y"  to  serve  or  suffer. 

Calvin's  motto  was:  "/  give  Thee 
all;  I  keep  back  nothing  for  myself." 

0% 


20  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  ii.    1—18. 


CHAPTER  II. 

SUGGESTIVE    READINGS. 

V.  1.  His  oflFering  shall  be  of  fine  flour. — Sacrifices  for  the  "  meat  offering  " 
were  from  the  vegetable,  not  animal,  kingdom.  I^ood  qfetuig  more  expreases  the 
idea.  Prepared  from  wheat,  and  presented  in  various  forms  ;  fine  flour,  and 
cakes  of  four  difFei*ent  kinds,  and  wheat  in  the  grain.  These  were  products  of 
husbandry,  not  spontaneous  growths  entailing  no  anxiety  in  provision,  or  labour 
in  preparation  ;  they  represent  human  labour ;  were  the  daily  food  of  man, 
essential  to  his  life ;  suggestive,  therefore,  of  his  dependence  on  God,  to  whom  he 
offered  them,  his  gratitude  to  God,  from  whom  he  received  them,  his  dedication 
to  God,  whom  he  worshipped  in  the  act  of  sacrifice.  As  typical  of  Christ:  His 
excellency  is  indicated  in  the  quality  of  the  flour,  "fine,"  and  His  su^eri7ig$  in  the 
disposal  of  it.  God  looks  for  grateful  returns  from  those  who  share  the  gifts  of 
His  bounty  in  Providence  :  *'  What  shall  I  render  unto  the  Lord  for  all  His 
benefits  towards  me  V  How  much  more  He  should  receive  responses  of  our  thank- 
ful love  for  His  greatest  Gift  whose  worth  and  virtue  are  prefigured  in  this  "  fine 
flour  burned  upon  the  altar"  as  "  a  thing  most  holy  of  the  offerings  of  the  Lord 
made  by  fire." 

Oil  and  frankincense. — Symbolic  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  grace,  and  the  sacred  joy 
of  a  consecrated  life.  If  "  flour"  suggests  the  product  of  human  labour,  the  '*  oil  " 
points  to  the  added  sanctity  of  the  Spirit,  needful  in  order  to  our  offering  being 
worthy  a  place  on  God's  altar;  and  "frankincense"  denotes  the  devout  gkdness 
with  which  we  should  make  fragrant  every  act  of  sacrifice  and  service  to  the 
Lord.  Compass  God's  altar,  enriched  by  the  Spirit's  unction,  and  inspired  with 
holy  fervour;  thus  our  consecration  becomes  *'  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord." 

V.  2.  Burn  the  memorial  of  it. — As  a  heavenward  appeal  to  God  that  He 
would  remember  both  the  offerer  and  His  "  word  unto  His  servants  on  which  He 
had  caused  them  to  hope."  So  David  pleads — the  Lord  "remember  all  thy 
offerings,  and  accept  thy  burnt  sacrifice  "  (Psa.  xx.  3)  ;  and  thus  the  prayers  and 
alms  of  Cornelius  rose  up  "  for  a  memorial  before  God."  We  may  send  up  to 
Heaven  our  "  incense  of  a  pure  offering,"  and  keep  a  memorial  continually  before 
God  of  our  enduring  hope  in  Him  and  of  His  covenant  engagements  for  us. 

V.  3  The  remnant. — The  priests  of  the  tabernacle  lived  upon  these  consecrated 
gifts.  As  "  priests  unto  God  "  (Rev.  i.  6)  we  Christians  have  a  share  in  all  the 
provisions  of  God's  house  :  the  Bread  of  Life,  the  grace  of  the  Spirit,  the  delights 
of  Divine  fellowship.  This  is  "  the  feast  of  fat  things"  which  they  within  the 
Church  enjoy.  "  Eat  ye  that  which  is  good,  and  let  your  soul  delight  itself  in 
fatness"  (Isa.  Iv.  2). 

V.  8.  Bring  the  Meat  Offering. — Choose  which  kind  of  offering  you  prefer 
(three  kinds  are  specified  in  vv.  4-7),  then  come  with  it  '*  unto  the  Lord"  ;  through 
the  mediation  of  our  Divine  "  Priest"  ;  and  He  who  prizes  the  *'  prayers  of  the 
saints"  and  loves  the  "  sacrifices  of  joy,"  will  seal  our  offerings  with  acceptance, 
and  "  hear  from  His  holy  heaven  with  the  saving  strength  of  His  right  hand  " 
(Psa.  XX.  6). 

V.  11.  No  offering  with  leaven  nor  any  honey. — They  would  produce  fer- 
mentation. "  Leaven"  is  symbolic  of  pride  and  hypocrisy,  malice  and  wickedness; 
and  "  honey,"  though  sweet  to  the  taste,  soon  begets  sickness,  thus  suggesting  a 


CHAP.  11.  1—3.]  THE    BOOK  OF  LEVlTICOS.  21 


soul  quickly  satiated  and  nauseated.  God  desires  "  truth  in  the  inward  parts," 
worship  from  a  "  honest  heart/'  sacrifices  from  those  whose  delight  in  Him  is  not 
quickly  reversed,  whose  love  changes  not.  A  mingling  of  corruption  and  in- 
sincerity spoils  our  finest  offerings.  What  need  to  pray,  **  Create  in  me  a  cleah 
heart,"  etc.,  and  to  examine  ourselves  and  our  motives  when  employed  in  sacred 
occupations,  lest  we  offend  with  leaven  and  honey. 

V.  13.  Season  with  salt. — It  preserves  from  putrefaction ;  renders  food 
savoury ;  denotes  uncorruptedness,  durability,  constancy  ;  was  and  is  an  oriental 
symbol  of  hospitality  and  amity.  "  Every  sacrifice  shall  be  salted  with  salt,"  says 
Christ  (Mark  ix.  49):  there  must  be  no  corruptness  allowed  in  the  individual 
Christian  life  ;  and  all  our  services  should  be  savoured  with  the  precious  qualities 
of  enduring  fidelity  and  constant  love.  Salt,  too,  betokens  the  perpetuity  of  the 
Spirit's  grace  ;  and  because  of  His  abiding  presence  (glad  fact  in  the  Christian's 
experience,  "  He  dwelUth  with  you  and  shall  be  in  you")  the  consecrated  soul 
retains  its  sweetness  with  God  and  its  healthful  influence  on  men.  "  Ye  are  the 
salt  of  the  earth." 

SECTIONAL  HOMILIES. 
Topic:  Homage  graced  with  Excellencies  (Vv.  1-3), 

In  seeking  God  it  should  be  our  aim  to  press  much  into  the  act  of  adoration  : 
not  to  approach  Him  with  a  poverty  of  graces,  but  with  every  virtue  combined  in 
the  service  ;  thought  and  feeling,  desire  and  devotion  all  being  of  the  highest,  the 
finest  and  most  fragrant.  Not  with  one  excellency  alone  beautifying  our  homage, 
but  with  manifold  excellencies  combined.  "  The  preparations  (plural)  of  the 
heart"  are  desirable  ;  all  our  resources  of  devout  feeling  and  intelligence  ;  the 
soul's  fulness  of  gracious  yearnings  and  aspirations  ;  so  that  our  offerings  are  rich 
in  excellent  qualities  of  homage  :  these  make  worship  and  service  "  things  most 
holy"  unto  the  Lord. 

I,  Every  element  op  worth  and  attractiveness  should  oonobntratb  in 
OUR  WORSHIP  AND  SERVICE  OF  GOD.  "  His  offering  shall  be  oifine  flour;  and  hp 
shall  pour  oil  upon  it,  and  ^wt  frankincense  thereon."  By  all  these  combined 
ingredients  a  total  result  would  be  produced  which  constituted  the  offering  one 
"  of  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord." 

1.  Solitary  graces  are  not  despised  by  Him  we  worship.  We  may  take  Him 
gratitude^  as  did  Noah  when  he  burnt  his  sacrifice  upon  quitting  the  Ark ;  our 
appeasement  ^Q.QYi^QQ'A^  as  did  Balaam  on  Pisgah  ;  onv penitential  oblation,  as  David 
did  in  the  threshing-floor  of  Araunah  ;  we  may  take  Him  our  look  of  faith,  as  did 
the  Israelites  suffering  from  the  serpent-bite  ;  our  tears,  as  did  Peter  when  he 
''  wept  bitterly"  j  and  none  of  these  sacrificea  are  rejected.  For  he  condescends 
to  our  low  estate,  and  accepts  the  one  ruling  feeling  or  desire  which  prompts  us 
to  seek  His  face. 

2.  Yet  worship  should  be  the  outflow  of  all  noble  affections  and  aspirations  of  the 
soul.  "  Fine  flour,  oil  and  frankincense,"  all  should  mingle,  all  should  blend  into 
an  offering"  of  sweet  savour."  As  when  the  woman  *'  who  was  a  sinner"  brought 
her  '*  alabaster  box  of  ointment,^^  and  besides  this,  '*  washed  His  feet  with  tears^'^ 
yea,  and  ^^  kissed  His  feet,"  and  then  "  anointed  them  with  the  omtment"  (Luke 
vii.  37-8) — all  passions  of  penitence,  gratitude,  adoration,  trust,  love,  combining 
and  concentrated  on  Jesus  ! 

3.  Preparation  for  such  a  blending  of  graces  in  worship  is  our  evident  duty. 
We  ought  not  to  enter  God's  presence  with  a  poverty  of  homage,  with  hearts 
cold  and  heedless,  with  no  affection  astir,  with  no  sacred  graces  alert ;  but  with 
all  holy  emotions  and  desires  awake,  and  intelligent  perceptions  quickened  by 
forethought  Siud  pre-vision.    God  emphatically  directs  this  preparatory  am,ugement 


22  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  ii.  1—3. 


for  a  right  offering:  "When  any  will  offer,  etc.,  he  shall  take  thereout  the  flour 
and  the  oil  and  the  frankincense*'  (vv.  1  and  2).  [See  Addenda,  p.  29,  Sweet 
I  license  J\ 

So  David  arouses  and  prepares  himself:  "Bless  the  Lord,  0  my  soul;  and  all 
that  ii  vdthin  me,  bless  His  holy  name."  Having  no  occasion  in  this  age  of  the 
Spirit  to  seek  God  with  material  presents,  we  may  and  should  take  Him  the 
realities  they  symbolised ;  so  that  as  from  **  golden  vials  full  of  odours''  the 
prayers  of  saints  might  "ascend  up  before  God  "  (Rev.  v.  8  ;  viii.  6).  All  this 
should  enforce  upon  worshippers  a  deeply  earnest  concern  to  go  in  unto  the  King 
with  WiQiY  purest,  holiest^  devoutest  feelings  and  thoughts.  "  Let  not  thine  heart 
be  hasty  to  utter  anything  before  God"  (Eccles.  v.  1,  2).  He  asks  of  us  "  what- 
soever things  are  true,  venerable,  just,  pure,  lovely,*'  etc. 

IL  Adorable  pbesentations  to  god  secure  his  gracious  appreciation 

AND   LAVISH   PRAISE. 

What  a  richness  of  approving  words  we  have  here  I  "An  offering  ...  of  a 
sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord."  "It  is  a  thing  most  holy  of  the  offerings,*'  etc. 
(Vy.  2,  3). 

L  No  poverty  of  approval  ever  repels  a  fervent  worshipper. 

Affection  may  be  wasted  upon  the  unappreciating ;  pearls  cast  before  swine  will 
be  trodden  under  foot ;  Art's  beauties  are  insipid  to  the  unsympathetic  souL 
To  the  imbecile  and  the  eye  void  of  discernment, 

*  A  primrose  by  the  river^s  brioi 

A  yellow  primrose  is  to  him, 

And  it  is  nothing  morey 

Much  that  is  beautiful  in  the  world,  and  in  human  life,  misses  recognition  ;  eyes 
and  hearts  are  closed  to  their  preciousness.  But  "  God  knoweth  the  heart'^ ;  sees 
the  motive  of  action,  the  meaning  of  sighs  and  tears,  the  graces  of  desire  and 
design  in  our  feeblest  and  frustrated  efforts.  "  It  is  well  that  it  was  in  thine 
hearty  "  The  Lord  loveth  a  cheerful  giver."  "  It  is  accepted  according  to  that 
a  man  haJth'^  Nothing  escapes  Him.  Jesus  so  instantly  saw  the  charm  of  Mary's 
act,  though  against  it  the  "disciples  murmured"  (Mark  liv.  6,  8,  9).  God 
*^  smelted  a  sweet  savour  '  when  Noah  sacrificed. 

2.  Offering  such  excellency  of  homage  we  shall  assuredly  realise  that  Ood  u 
well  pleased.  If  "  the  Lord  had  respect  unto  Abel  and  to  his  offering,"  because 
"  by  faith  Abel  offered  a  more  excellent  sacrifice  than  Cain,  by  which  he  obtained 
witness  that  he  was  righteous,  God  testifying  of  his  gift,"  will  He  fail  to  seal  His 
favour  upon  the  soul  who  "  worships  Him  in  spirit  and  in  truth,"  seeing  "  the 
Father  seeketh  such  to  worship  Him"  %  Did  there  not  come  transfiguration  glories 
upon  Jesus  "  as  He  prayed'^  (Luke  ix.  29),  followed  by  the  inspiring  testimony, 
"  This  is  My  beloved  Son"  1  "  In  everything  by  prayer  and  supplication  with 
thanksgiving,  let  your  requests  be  made  known  unto  God  ;  and  the  peace  of  God, 
which  passeth  all  understanding,  shall  keep  your  hearts  and  minds  through  Christ 
Jesus"  (Phil.  iv.  6,  7).  God  will  make  us  glad,  assured  that  we  are  ^*  accepted 
of  Him:* 

III.    Excellences    in    typical    offeringn    foreshadowed    the    beauties    and 

W0RT.iINE3S   OF   JESUS. 

1.  The  quality  of  the  flour  bespeaks  the  intrinsic  excellence  of  Christ.  He  is  th« 
faultless  One,  "holy,  harmless,  undefiled"  ;  God's  most  gracious  Son;  "fairer 
than  the  children  of  men."  Inheriting  His  virtues  by  faith,  we  are  beauteous  in 
His  beauty,  faultless  in  His  perfection,  "  accepted  in  the  Beloved,"  "  made  the 
righteousness  of  God  in  Him,"  so  as  to  stand  at  last  "  perfect  before  Him  in 
love.^ 

2.  The  pouring  oil  thereon  denotes  the  anointing  of  the  Spirit.  For  the  Holy 
Ghost  descended  on  Him;  "  baptised  with  the  Holy  Ghost,"  Jesus  was  enriched 


CHAi.  II.  8-10.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS,  28 


with  the  Spirit's  grace.  And  as  "heirs  of  Christ"  we  also  "have  an  unction 
from  the  Holy  One"  ;  and  "the  anointing  which  je  have  received  of  Him  abideth 
in  jDu"  (1  Jno.  ii.  27). 

3.  The  added  frankincense,  creating  a  pleasing  odour  through  the  tabernacle, 
tells  of  the  delight  fulness  of  Christ  ;  His  joj-inspiring  grace.  Is  not  His  name 
*' as  ointment  poured  forth'"}  He  gladdens  all  who  share  in  His  sacrifice.  And 
He  adds  the  beauty  of  spiritual  delightfulness  to  the  believer,  so  that  God  joys 
in  us;  and  we  are  both  to  Him  and  among  men  as  "the  sweet  savour  of 
Christ." 

Our  approach  to  God  in  the  excellences  of  worship  becomes  acceptable  and  well- 
pleasing  to  Him  only  because  of  Jesus*  merits  and  virtues^  which  add  alJ  the 
worth  to  every  accepted  service  men  can  render  to  the  Lord.  [See  Addenda, 
p.  28,  The  Beautiful  in  Worshipi\ 

Topic:  Maintenance  op  Priestly  Ministration  (Vv.  8-10). 

I.  Approach  to  god's  altar  through  god's  priesthood. 

1.  Their  office  and  ministers  were  Divinely  ordained,  (a)  As  to  the  office  : 
"  No  man  taketh  this  honour  to  himself  but  he  that  is  called  of  God  "  (Heb.  v. 
4).  Christian  preachers  must  hear  God's  call  to  the  ministry.  "  Christ 
glorified  not  Himself  to  be  made  an  high  priest,  but  He  that  said  unto  Him, 
Thou  art  My  Son"  (Heb.  v.  5).  (6)  As  to  the  ministrations:  Every  act  of  the 
priests  is  here  minutely  prescribed.  So  of  Christian  ministers  (1  Cor.  ix.  16-23). 
And  our  Lord's  ministrations  equally  so.     (See  Heb.  vii.  24,  &c.) 

2.  Without  their  mediation  none  could  approach  God.  Nor  may  any  come 
nigh  His  presence  now  except  through  the  priesthood  of  Jesus  Christ  (John  xiv. 
6),  "  No  man  cometh  to  the  Father  but  by  Me  "  ;  and  (Heb.  iv  15,  16),  ''  Having 
a  High  Priest,  &c.,  let  us  therefore  come  boldly,"  (fee.  The  Christian  ministry 
does  not  reproduce  and  perpetuate  a  human  priesthood.  No  sacrifices  are  now 
offered  (Heb  x.  11,  12);  but  *' we  are  ambassadors  for  Christ,  as  though  Ood 
did  beseech  you  by  us  .  .  .  be  ye  reconciled  to  God." 

IT.  Maintenance  of  god's  priests  bt  the  peoples'  gifts. 

1 .  A  Divine  ordinance  that  they  should  be  generously  s^ipported  while  sacredly 
employed.  Not  super  naturally.  God  did  not  feed  them  with  angels'  food,  nor 
from  the  skies,  nor  from  other  than  human  resources,  but  by  the  offerings  oj 
individual  worshippers  It  left  them  free  for  their  hallowed  work.  It  called  out 
the  generous  thoughtfulness  of  those  whom  they  sacredly  served.  It  knit  priest 
and  people  together  in  mutual  dependence  and  mutual  helpfulness. 

2.  Individual  responsibility  to  support  God's  servants  and  maintain  His  sanc- 
tuary. Not  a  single  sacrifice  could  be  laid  on  the  altar,  of  smy  kind,  without 
«ome  part  being  assigned  to  the  priests.  This  affirms  our  duty  to  give  of  our 
life  and  love  to  Christ  while  we  approach  His  Sacrifice  to  draw  atonement  from 
Christ.  It  also  pronounces  against  a  selfish  spirit^  concerned  only  for  personal 
gain,  in  seeking  salvation.  The  offerer  must  consider  others'  wants  as  well  as 
care  for  his  own  soul.  And  equally  it  teaches  that  they  who  enter  God's  house 
and  benefit  by  the  ministration  of  the  Christian  pastor  should  contribute  to  his 
comfort  and  support  (1  Cor.  ix.  11,  13,  14  ;  Phil.  iv.  18).  [See  Addenda,  p.  29, 
God's  Minister s.'\ 

III.  Priestly  ministrations  protected  with  utmost  sanctity. 

1.  Closed  within  the  sacred  precincts  of  God's  house,  they  lived  apart  from  the 
Vforld.  God's  witnesses  to  a  spiritual  life,  and  to  a  **  life  hid  with  Christ  in  Ghd,'* 
"  Wherefore  come  out  from  among  them,  and  be  ye  separate  " 

2.  Ceaselessly  employed  in  sacred  services,  they  summoned  men  to  a  self" 
iurrendered  career,  glorifying  God  in  their  body  and  their  spirit  which  are  His.'' 


24  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  |_chap.  ii.  8-10. 


"Ye  are  a  holy  priesthood,  a  peculiar  people"  (1  Pet.  ii.  5-9),  "  zealous  of  good 
works." 

8.  Living  in  the  very  scene  where  God  dwelt,  they  pledged  to  all  sanctified 
souls  a  home  with  God.  *'  These  are  not  of  the  worlds  "  I  will  that  they  be  with 
Me  where  I  am"  (John  xvii.  16-24).  "Therefore  are  they  before  the  throue 
of  God  and  serve  Him  day  and  night  in  His  templcy'  &o.  (Rev.  vii.  16), 

Topic:   SUGQESTIVENESS  OP  THE  MeAT  OFFERING  (Vv.  8-10) 

I.  Its  human  aspect. 

The  Burnt  Offering  indicated  consecration  to,  reconciliation  with  God  ;  trans- 
ferrence  of  guilt  to  victim  slain.  The  meat  offering  points  to  restoration  after 
reconciliation,  the  introduction  of  the  worshipper  to  favour  and  friendship  of 
the  Lord.  At  the  Lord's  Table,  we  may  remember,  the  associations  are 
Eucharistic  as  well  as  Sacrificial.  What  did  the  meat  offering  teach  the  offerer 
concerning  himself? 

1.  That  he  was  dependent  upon  God.  As  he  prepared  and  presented  the  finest 
of  the  wheat,  made  the  pure  white  flour  into  cakes  such  as  formed  his  daily 
meal,  he  would  be  reminded  of  his  dependence  upon  God  who  makes  the  corn  to 
grow,  and  crowns  the  year  with  His  goodness.  This  offering,  suggestive  of  the 
social  mealy  would  remind  the  worshipper  that  he  sat  at  the  board  of  his  heavenly 
Father  who  gave  him  daily  food,  and  loaded  him  with  life's  bounteous  blessings. 

2.  That  he  was  under  obligation  to  God»  The  offering  acknowledged  his  duty 
and  indebtedness.  Though  small,  yet  it  was  of  the  best.  Not  chaf^  husks,  or 
bran,  but  *'fine  flour."  The  obligation  was  to  be  discharged  with  (a)  Cheerful- 
ness. Oil  was  to  mingle  with  offering,  suggesting  gladness  in  the  worshipper, 
grace  and  favour  in  the  worshipped,  (b)  Devoutness.  *'  Frankincense,"  an 
emblem  of  prayer  and  praise  ascending  like  sweet  incense  to  the  sky. 

We  are  prone  to  forget  the  goodness  of  God  as  exercised  and  exhibited  in  our 
unceasing  Providential  supplies.  He  gives  us  necessaries  and  luxuries.  Yet 
some  (a)  forget  Him  amid  the  excitements  and  enjoyments  of  life.  Some  (b) 
ignore  Him  in  their  exclusive  attention  to  the  laws  and  agencies  of  nature. 
Some  (c)  insult  Him  by  denying  His  existence,  and  attributing  all  phenomena 
and  providence  to  chance.  But  some  {d)  adore  Him  by  grateful  hearts  and 
obedient  lives.  We  should  thankfully  partake  of  His  temporal  mercies,  but  with 
supreme  gratitude  accept  "  His  unspeakable  gift,"  the  true  Bread  from  heaven. 

II.  Its  SACERDOTAL  ASPECT  ;  or,  What  did  the  meat  offering  teach  concerning 
the  Priests  ] 

1.  Their  office  was  worthy  of  respect.  Selected  by  the  Lord,  they  were  His 
special  servants,  and  were  appointed  to  perform  sacred  duties  which  the  people 
could  not  do  for  themselves.  They  were  God's  priests,  and  as  such  deserved  the 
considerate  regard  of  the  people.  Though  Christian  ministers  are  not  priests, 
yet  they  are  ambassadors  for  Christ,  and  stand,  as  it  were,  in  His  stead,  beseech- 
ing men  to  be  reconciled  unto  God ;  and,  as  such,  are  to  be  held  in  high  esteem 
for  their  work's  sake. 

2.  llieir  services  commanded  recompense.  Being  withdrawn  from  secular  en- 
gagements, and  giving  their  time  and  thoughts  to  sacerdotal  duties,  they  had  a 
cogent  c'aim  (a)  to  live  in  the  affections  and  sympathies  of  the  people  ;  and  (b)  to 
be  supported  by  them  (Ezek.  xliv.  27-30;  1.  Cor.  ix.  13).  In  connection  with  the 
sacrifices  there  was  the  priest's  portion  (v.  3),  so  that  their  physical  wants  might 
be  supplied.  The  New  Testament  teaches  that  "  the  labourer  is  worthy  of  hia 
hire,"  and  "  those  who  preach  the  Gos[)el  should  live  by  the  Gospel." 

3.  Their  sacredness  claimed  for  them  no  worship.  No  sacritice  was  offered  to 
the  priests.     They  had  to  seek  forgiveness  and  offer  sacrifices   for  themselves. 


CHAP.  II.  1—8,  11-13.]       THE  BOOK   Ob   LEVITICUS,  26 


Till  the  worship  had  been  completed  they  partook  of  nothing  offered  in  sacrifice 
to  God  ;  then  it  was  their  privilege  to  share  what  remained.  Under  the  New 
Testament  dispensation  ministers  are  not  priests.  They  occupy  no  such  unique 
position,  and  have  no  priestly  functions  to  fulfil.  Yet,  the  minister  of  the  Cross 
— if  he  be  true  and  faithful — is  worthy  of  the  highest  esteem,  us  well  as  worthy 
of  his  hire,  though  unworthy  of  worship,  as  the  Levitical  priests.  Through 
relationship  to  our  Great  High  Priest  the  whole  company  of  the  faithful  become 
"  kings  and  priests  unto  God" ;  though  not  even  "  the  glorious  company  of  the 
apostles"  would  receive  homage,  but  would  exclaim  with  one  voice,  '  Worship  God" 
III.  Its  theological  aspect;  or,  What  did  the  meat  offering  teach  the 
offerer  concerning  God  *? 

1.  That  lie  greatly  valued  His  own  gifts  to  man.  *'  The  earth  is  the  Lord's, 
and  the  fulness  thereof,  the  world,  and  they  that  dwell  therein"  ;  and  yet  He 
holds  His  smallest  works  and  common  gifts  to  man  in  great  esteem.  His  directing 
the  priests  about  their  offerings  with  such  minuteness  of  detail  shows  that  the 
works  His  hands  had  made  are  worthy  being  presented  with  scrupulous  care  and 
order  in  His  service. 

2.  That  He  reclaims  a7id  accepts  His  own  gifts  from  man.  He  had  the  right  to 
do  so,  and  to  have  them  offered  and  disposed  of  as  He  saw  fit.  All  objections 
about  waste  and  uselessness  in  the  sacrifices  vanish  when  we  remember  this. 
When  the  people  offered  of  their  flocks  and  crops  they  only  gave  back  a  small 
portion  of  what  they  had  received  in  abundance ;  so  that  their  offerings  were 
{a)  provided  by  God ;  (b)  belonged  to  Him;  and  (c),  however  great,  were  below  His 
deserts.  We  cannot  offer  to  the  Lord  anything  that  is  absolutely  our  own,  for 
all  we  have  and  are  belong  to  Him.  *'  Not  your  own,  bought  with  a  price." 
God  has  a  right  to  our  service  and  sacrifice.  If  we  present  ourselves  as  living 
sacrifices  He  will  accept  and  appreciate  them  as  His  own  gifts  restored. 

3.  That  He  may  be  propitiated  by  such  offerings  of  His  gifts  by  man.  Offerings 
of  the  produce  of  the  earth  (such  as  Gain's),  unassociated  with  substitutionary 
sacrifice,  fall  below  what  God  requires  of  man.  Hence  the  Deist  leaves  out  of 
his  worship  the  essential  element  to  etfioieiicy  and  acceptability.  The  hand  of 
faith  must  first  be  laid  upon  the  head  of  the  burnt  offering,  and  an  atonement 
be  accepted  for  him,  before  other  services  and  sacrifices  can  be  well  pleasing  to 
God.  We  cannot  enrich  the  Lord  by  our  gifts,  yet  He  accepts  them  as  expressions 
of  our  fealty  and  faith.  Such  offerings  of  our  gratitude  and  trust  will  be  unto 
Him  a  "  sweet  savour." — F.  W.  B. 


Topic  I  Character  as  Qualipying  Saorifiob  (Vv.  1-3  and  11-13). 

"Fine  flour,  oil,  frankincense,  it  is  a  thing  most  holy  unto  the  Lord.  N'o 
leaven  nor  any  honey.  Every  oblation  season  with  salt."  Beyond  all  dispute 
i\iQ  frankincense  and  salt  indicate  certain  moral  features  of  ,7000? ;  and  leaven, 
honey,  &c.,  certain  moral  features  of  evil.  This  specification  of  the  excellent, 
this  prohibition  of  the  deleterious,  denotes  how  the  qualities  which  enter  into 
our  sacrifices  and  services  are  considered  by  God. 

I.  Symbolised  here  we  behold  the  graces  and  paultlessnbss  which  dis- 
tinguished JESUS. 

1.  His  life  was  sacrificial.  Bruised  corn  suggests  suffering,  a^^d  our 
Redeemer  knew  such  bruising  from  God  and  man  *'  It  pleased  the  Lord  to 
bruise  Him,"  &c.  "  Reproach  hath  broken  My  heart."  But  a  crushed  and 
suffering  Jesus  is  man's  salvation.     "  By  His  stripes  we  are  healed." 

2.  Yet  His  sacrifice  was  full  of  grace.  ^^  Fine  fl  )ur,  oil,  frankincense,  salt.** 
(a)  Highest  qualities  of  person  and  character  distioi^uished  Jesus.  No  hnsk,  no 
common  quality  in  the  flour  ;  *'  that  Holy  Thing  which  shall  be  born  of  thee  shall 


26  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  ii.  12—16. 

be  called  the  Son  of  God  "  (Luke  i.  35).  "  It  is  a  thing  most  holy."  (b)  The 
sacred  oil  of  the  Spirit  enriched  the  character  of  Christ.  *'  Pour  oil "  (v.  1). 
**  Grace  is  poured  into  thy  lips.'*  "The  Word  became  flesh,  full  of  grace  and 
truth."  "  The  Father  givoth  not  the  Spirit  by  measure  unto  Him."  **  Jesua 
being  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  &c.  [See  Acts  x.  38.]  (c)  The  delightfulness  of  a 
perfect  mllinghood,  the  fragrance  of  a  zealous  consecration  crowned  His  sacrifice  : 
**  Frankincense."  *'  Thy  law  is  within  my  heart."  "  His  zeal  it  consumed  me.** 
"  My  beloved  Sou  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased." 

3.  In  Bis  character  there  was  no  fault,  (a)  No  corruption  tainted  His  sinless 
nature  and  sacrifice.  "No  leaven."  "Holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  separate  from 
sinners."  "  1  find  no  fault  in  this  man."  (6)  No  mere  earthly  sweetness  which 
might  become  sickly ;  no  week  sentiments  of  feeling ;  no  low  or  fitful  affections 
of  the  heart ;  no  private  preferences  or  fleeting  fantasies.  His  soul  was  moved 
alone  by  loyalty  and  love  to  God  and  His  high  work  for  man. 

4.  Perpetuity  and  unchangeahleness  of  excellence  distinguished  Christ's 
character  and  sacrifice.  *' Seasoned  with  salt.'"  His  devotion  to  man  was  an 
incorruptible  and  invariable  principle.  His  saving  grace  is  an  enduring  and 
inexhaustible  quality  in  His  sacrifice. 

II.   Indicated  here  we  recognise  the  qualities  of  character  god  desires  in 

SACRIFICIAL  lives. 

This  offering  was  to  present  on  the  Lord's  altar  what  would  be  grateful  and 
savoury  to  Him.  Such  is  the  aim  of  the  Christian  life  :  to  consecrate  to  Him 
a  "  sweet  savour  of  Christ." 

1.  An  even  devotion,  genuine  and  excellent  throughout,  like  ^'  fine  flour." 

2.  An  anointed  character,  beautified  by  the  Spirit  ;  for  "  if  any  man  have  not 
the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  His." 

3.  A  sweet  fervour  of  soul.  For  as  the  fire  brought  out  the  aroma  of  frankin- 
cense, so  should  aflfliction  exhibit  Christian  sweetness  and  grace.  God  desires, 
too,  a  glad  and  grateful  spirit  in  service.  ''  Giving  thanks  to  His  name."  Also 
qualities  which  spread  pleasure  around,  as  did  the  frankincense.  *'  To  do  good 
and  communicate  forget  not,  for  with  such  sacrifices  God  is  well  pleased.'^ 

4.  Uncorruptedness  of  heart.  "  No  leaven,  nor  honey."  Void  of  selfishness 
and  guile  ;  neither  insincerity  nor  mere  natural  sweetness,  which  may  decay  : 
but  the  abiding  graces  of  the  Holy  Spirit  ;  having  an  "  unction  from  the  Holy 
One." 

5.  Enduring  integrity  of  heart  and  life.  "Salt."  Counteracting  the  putrefac- 
tions of  sin.  Maintaining  perpetuity  of  sacred  love  and  consecration.  *'  Show- 
ing forth  the  virtues  of  the  Lord." 

Holy  and  consecrated  lives  ;  the  noblest  qualities  of  heart  ;  the  incorruptible 
graces  of  the  Spirit  ;  these  make  our  services  and  sacrifices  *'  in  the  sight  of 
God  of  great  price."     [See  Addenda,  p.  29,  Character.'] 

Topic:  Resurrection  Emblems.     *'  The  oblation  of  the  first-fruits"  (Vv.  12-16). 


?> 


The  order  in  which  this  offering  came  is  given  in  chap,  xxiii.  First  the  Pass 
over,  then  the  Wave-sheaf ,  ihe^n  the  Pentecost.  The  *'  sheaf  of  ihQ  first-fruits 
might  be  burnt  as  a  sweet  savour  to  the  Lord,  but  the  "  oblation  of  \hQ  first- 
fruits"  might  not  be  burnt  on  the  altar  (chap.  ii.  12).  The  reason  for  this  being 
that  the  '^  sheaf  was  unleavened,  whereas  the  "  oblation"  was  mixed  and  made 
with  leaven  (chap,  xxiii.  17). 

I.   Our  lord's  resurrection  presented  the  "  Sheaf  oi  the  first-fruits"  unto 
the  Lord. 

"  Now  is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead,  and  become  the  first-fruits  of  them  that 
sleep"  (1  Cor.  xv.  20). 


CHAP.  II.  1—11.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVUICUS. 


27 


I.  "In  Him  was  no  sin^' — no  leaven.  2.  He  was  Himself  a  *^  siveet  savour"  to 
God.  3.  He  therefore  rose  to  God  in  His  pure  humanity  as  incense  from  the 
sacrifice. 

II.  The  church  op  Christ  was  the  ''oblation  of  the  first-fruits." 
"  We  are  a  kind  of  first-fruits  of  His  creatures"-  (Jas.  i.  18). 

1.  This  ojBTering,  having  sin  in  ity  *'  mixed  with  leaven,"  could  not  stand  the  test 
of  fire,  God's  searching  holiness. 

2.  Yet  it  was  to  be  consecrated  to  God.  "  Ye  shall  offer  it,  but  it  shall  not  be 
burnt"  (Lev.  ii.  12). 

3.  And  was  both  offered  and  accepted.  For  along  *'  with  it"^  was  presented  a 
burnt  offering,  a  meat  offering,  a  peace  offering,  and  a  sin  offering  :  symbols  of 
Q\\x\9>'^ ^ 'propitiatory  atonement.  The  Church  comes  before  God  with  the  merits  of 
Christ ;  and  is  offered  with  all  the  value  of  Uis  work  associated  with  it.  Though 
in  itself  unable  to  stand  the  fire  of  God's  holiness;  yet,  with  Christ's  virtue 
added,  it  is  accepted  even  as  the  Shenf  was  accepted. 

4.  All  the  merits  of  the  propitiatory  sacrifices  were  needful  to  secure  the  accept- 
ance of  the  leavened  oblation.  All  the  virtues  of  Christ's  sacrifice  and  offices  of  His 
priesthood  are  needful  to  ensure  our  acceptance  with  God,  in  consequence  of  the 
sin  intermixed  with  our  redeemed  humanity.  "■  The  priests  shall  wave  them  with 
the  bread  of  the  first-fruits"  (xxiii.  20).      [Compare  Juk  s  on  the  Offerings^ 

III.  All  the  offerings  of  first-fruits  appeared  before  the  lord. 

1.  Christ  Himself  entered  into  ttie  Holy  Place  before  the  Lord.  He  ascended 
to  the  heavenly  places. 

2.  Hi%  redeemed  Church  also  entered  accepted  into  the  very  presence  of  the  Lord. 
"These  were  redeemed  from  among  men,  being  the  first-fruits  unto  God  and  to 
the  Lamb"  (Rev  xiv.  4). 

3  Identified  with  Him  in  consecration 'to  God,  we  shall  be  united  with  Him  in 
the  temple  of  God.  *' Where  I  am  there  also  shall  My  servants  be.*'  "Father, 
I  will  that  they  also  whom  Thou  hast  given  Me  be  with  Me  where  I  am."  *'  By 
Man  came  also  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.'*  "  So  shall  they  be  for  ever  with  the 
Lordr     [See  Addenda,  p.  29,  Resurrection  Emblems.^ 

OUTLINES  ON  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  IL 


V.    1. —  Theme:    Thb    pebjpect    sdbdded- 

NESS     AND     MEEKNESS     OF       CHRIST.        ''^  Fine 

flour r 

The  types  supply  various  aspects  of 
Christ's  one  work.  "The  Holy  Spirit  takes 
truth  in  portions,  and  seems  sometimes  to 
turn  our  eyes  away  from  one  portion  of  truth 
to  let  us  see  better  some  other  portion,  by 
keeping  our  attention  for  a  time  fixed  on  that 
alono"  (Bonar).  The  Burnt  offering  has 
shown  us  Christ  as  the  Devoted  One.,  dedica- 
ting Himself  and  all  His  powers  always  to 
God.  Now  the  Meat  offering  will  reveal  to 
ua  Christ  in  meek  subdtiedness . 

I.  Christ  was  herb  to  develop  a  char- 
acter OP  PERFECT  SUBJECTION  TO  QoD. 

1.  Men  had  through  all  their  history  been 
marked  by  self  will  and  arrogant  insubordina- 
tion to  God.  *'  Cedars  of  Lebanon  high  and 
lifted  up."  "  Pride  compassed  them  about," 
&c. 

2.  Among  ench  Christ  came  to  manifest  im- 
plicit obedience  and  subjection.  "  Lo  I  cotne 
to  do  Thy  will,  0  God  " 

"  Not  My  will  but  Thine  be  done."  Ohoerful 


subservience  to  Another's  will,  even  through 
bitterness  of  suffering ;  meek  submission  to 
insult  and  reproach  ;  gentle  patience  and  kind- 
ness even  to  enemies— such  were  His  char- 
acteristics. 
II.  Christ's    qualities  of  meekest  sub- 

DUEDNESS  ARE  TYPIFIED  IN  THE   FOOD  OFFER- 
ING.     "-Fine  Jloia-.-^ 

1.  There  is  no  suggestion  in  the  type  of 
subduedness  conferred.  No  millstone  is  seen 
grinding  the  corn  into  its  smoothness.  The 
Hour  is  brought  perfected  in  its  fineness. 
tSucli  wiis  Christ  as  He  came  ifito  the  ivorld : 
perfect  in  meekness  and  lowliness  and  everj 
(juality  of  submission.  Affliction  and  suffer- 
ing found  these  qualities  in  Him,  as  the  lire 
on  the  altar  found  them  in  the  flour  ;  it  did 
not  produce  them. 

2.  The  invariable  eventless  of  Christ's  sub- 
viission  is  suggested.  The  meekness  He 
niuuifested  in  the  judgment  hall  and  on  the 
Cross  wari  not  more  perfect  than  that  which 
iiiaikcd  Him  as  He  grew  up  in  the  home  of 
Joseph  and  Mary,  sharing  their  low  estate. 
"  He  was  subject  unto  them."     The  excellcn- 


28 


HOMILETTC   COMMENTARY  ON 


[chap.  II. 


ciei  of  Hia  character  were  intrinsic  and 
essential.     "  Fine  floury 

{a)  How  contrasted  is  this  excellency  of 
Christ  zvith  the  variable  spirit  and  behaviour 
of  His  folloivers.  John  wished  to  call  tire 
from  heavt^Q  on  others  1  Paxil  spake  in 
anL'er,  "  God  shyll  smite  thoo  thou  whited 
walll  "  But  the  equability  of  Jesus  never  failed. 

ib)  Yet  we  may  cultivate  *^  the  meekriess 
and  gentleness  of  Christ.'"  Guard  against  the 
hindfrnnces  to  graciousness  of  character  and 
the  irritations  which  molest  the  spirit,  and 
"  learn  of  Him  who  was  meek  and  lowly  of 
heart."  [Compare  Newton's  Thoughts  on  Levi' 
tictis.'] 

V.  3  —  Theme :  Chtiist  the  food  of  privi- 
leged SOULS.  '•  1  he  refunant  of  the  Meat 
offering  shall  be  Aaron  s  and  his  sons."* 

Before  any  portion  went  to  supply  the 
necessities  of  the  ministering  priests,  note — 

I   In  the  offering  of   christ   which  is 

DESIGNED  TO  SUSTAIN  MAN's  LIFE,  GOD    HAD   A 

PORTION  "  A  handful,"  "  the  memorial  "  of 
the  offering  was  first  burned  upon  the  altar. 
Even  in  devoting  Himself  to  meet  the  hunger 
and  wants  of  humanity,  Christ  did  it  as  "  an 
oflFering  unto  the  Lord"  He  did  all  with  His 
Father  in  first  and  highest  thought. 

II.  In  THE  OFFERING  OF  CHRIST  PROVISION 
IS  MADE  FOR  THE  SPIRITUAL  WANTS  AND  NEEDS 
OF  MEN. 

1.  In  Christ  Jesus  will  be  found  man^s 
sufficiency.  The  soul's  wants  are  all  supplied 
in  Him.  Whoever  drew  upon  Him  and  went 
away  unsatisfied?  What  need,  what  trial, 
what  demand  of  our  manifold  life  does  Christ 
not  meet  ?  He  will  satisfy  us  in  every  condi- 
tion :  when  poor  to  give  us  succour,  when 
weary  to  give  us  strength,  when  sorrowful  to 
give  us  joy.     Christ  is  our  Food. 

2.  Yet  it  is  limited  to  those  who  are  in 
priestly  relation  to  Him.  Those  who  are 
"  priests  unto  God  "  ;  all  sanctified  souls,  who 
live  to  God,  they  will  find  in  Jesus  every 
true  need  met.  Others  may  wander  else- 
where crying,  "Who  will  show  us  any  good  ?  " 
but  '*  they  who  are  Chrises  have  crucified  the 
flesh  with  its  affections  and  lusts,"  and  these 
find  "  Christ  is  all  in  all." 

V.  9. — Theme :  A  memorial  on  god's  altar. 

"  The  priest  shall  take  of  the  meat  offering 
a  memorial  thereof  and  shall  burn  it  upon  the 
altar."     Consider — 

T.  Its    contrast    with    a    memorial    of 

INIQUITY. 

In  Numb.  v.  11  we  read  of  "an  offering  of 
'fiemorial^  bringing  iniquity  to  remembrance^ 


That  was  a  food  offering  of  barley  meal, 
without  oil,  and  -^'xihayMi  frankincense. 

No  intrinsic  virtue,  no  sacred  anointing,  no 
pleasing  grace. 

The  memorial  was  associated  with  sin^  and 
the  forerunner  of  a  curse  (Numb.  v.  18). 

How  appalling  if  Clirist's  offering  were  to — 

1.  Memorialise  our  guilt  before  God  ;  and 

2.  Evoke  a  curse  ut>on  our  conviction  of 
wrong: 

II.  The  GRACIOUS  significance  in  CHRIST'H 

MEMORIAL  OFFERING. 

In  this  instance  of  the  "memorial" — 

1.  It  was  rendered  sweet  to  God  by  admix- 
ture of  oil,  frankincense  and  salt.  A  pleasant 
offering  to  Him.  therefore.  And  assuredly  no 
memorial  of  iniquity  could  be  pleasant  to  God  ; 
it  was  a  remembrance  of  the  sacred  grace  cf 
Christ  for  man. 

2.  It  was  designed  to  bring  righteousness  to 
remembrance.  Christ's  precious  merits.  And 
going  up  before  the  Lord  for  us  they  repre- 
sent the  truth  that  by  imputation  those 
merits  become  ours,  on  whose  behalf  "  the 
memorial  "  is  burned  on  the  altar. 

V.  9. — Theme:  Thoroughness  in  servicb 
FOR  THE  LORD.  "  It  is  an  offering  made  by 
tire,  of  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord." 

I.  Complete  consecration.  Fire  «A- 
sorbs,  transforms  all. 

II.  Ardent  enthusiasm.  Fire  intense^ 
demonstrative,  aggressive. 

III.  Divine  approbation.     •'  The  Lord." 
(a)  Recognises  such  thorough  service. 

ib)  Rejoices  in  such  thorough  service;  '*» 
sweet  savour." — F.  AF.  B, 

V.  11. —  Theme  :  Purity  in  service  of  the 
LORD.  "Ye  shall  burn  no  leaven,  nor  any 
honey." 

Service  for  the  Lord  to  be — 

I.  Unmixed  with  itnpure  influences. 
"  Leaven "  penetrates,  and  permeates,  and 
transforms  the  meal  into  its  own  nature;  evil 
spreads  rapidly  when  entertained,  has  power 
to  vitiate  the  heart,  and  corrupt  religious 
work  and  worship. 

II.  Unf nixed  with  sensual  indulgences. 
"Honey"  suggestive  of  self -gratification,  of 
luxury  to  satiety.  Appetites  must  be  curbed, 
selfishness  crucified ;  not  the  sweet  and  safe 
sought  so  much  as  the  right  and  tru'^.  We 
need  the  thoughts  of  our  hearts  cleansed  by 
the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that 
motives  and  desires  may  be  pure  ;  for  the  out- 
ward act  of  service,  however  costly,  is  only  an 
abomination  if  not  offered  from  a  sincere  and 
sanctified  heart. — F.  W.  B. 


ILLUSTRATIVE  ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  XL 


The  beautiful  in  worship. 

No  sacred  lore,  howe'er  profound, 
Nor  all  the  long  and  varied  round 
Of  sacred  rites,  can  bliss  procure 
For  worthless  man,  in  heart  impur^ 


Altho*  a  man  with  zeal  and  skill 
Should  all  external  rites  fulfil, 
He  reaps  no  fruit  of  all  bis  toil 
If  sin  his  iwer  man  should  soil. 


ClIAP.  III.  1 — 17.] 


THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS, 


29 


E'en  he  his  all  in  almH  who  spends, 
With  heart  defiled,  secures  no  meed; 
The  disposition,  not  the  deed, 
Has  value — on  it  all  depends. 

Vayu  Purana,  viii.  190. 
See  Bonar*s 
"'Tis  fir«t  the  true  and  then  the  beautiful, 
Not  first  the  beautiful  and  then  the  true." 

"  Onward,  onward  may  we  preea 
Thro'  the  path  of  duty; 
Virtue  is  true  happiness, 
Excellence  true  beauty 
Minds  are  of  supernal  birth, 
Liet  us  make  a  heaven  of  earth." 
James  Montgomery. 
The  merely  beautiful,  external  and  (esthetic 
in   worship   is   not   enough,   and  is    perilous 
when,  as  expressed  in  Aurora  Leigh, 

"  The  beautiful  seems  right 
By  force  of  beauty." 
"In  the  spirit  of  that  significant  Oriental 
usage  which  drops  its  sandals  at  the  palace 
door,  the  decent  worshipper  will  put  off  his 
travel-tarnished  shoes,  will  try  to  divest  him- 
self of  secular  anxieties  and  worldly  profits, 
when  the  place  where  he  stands  is  converted 
into  holy  ground  by  the  words,  "  Let  us  wor- 
ship God  I  " — Br,  yas.  Hamilton. 

Sweet  incense.  Worship  is  the  compound 
of  many  gracious  ingredients — repentance, 
faith,  contrition,  desire,  love,  joy  in  God,  and 
other  graces  Offered  daily  and  inspired  by 
the  Spirit,  such  worship  is  no  intrusion,  but 
welcome  before  the  Eternal  Throne, performed 
with  all  the  precious  sweetness  of  the  meri- 
torious grace  of  Christ. 

God's  ministers 

"  The  man  who  has  adopted  the  Church  as 
a  profession,  and  goes  through  the  routine  of 
his  duties  with  the  coldness  of  a  mere  official 
— filled  by  him  the  pulpit  seems  filled  by  the 
ghastly  form  of  a  skeleton,  which,  in  its 
cold  and  bony  fingers,  holds  a  burning  lamp." 
— Dr.  Guthrie. 

*' A  minister's  credentials  as  a  pastor  will 
be  most  readily  accepted  who  shows  himself 


the  follower  of  One  who  turned  and  said  to 
His  disciples,  *  But  I  have  called  you  friends.*  ** 
— Anon. 

*'  The  Apostle  saith  that  they  are  worthy  of 
double  honour,  an  honour  of  reverence  and 
an  honour  of  maintenance  ;  and,  doubtless, 
the  very  heathen  shall  rise  up  in  judgment 
against  many  who  profess  the  truth  in  this 
respect;  for  the  heathen  themselves  did  show 
such  honour  to  their  devilish  priests  that  one 
of  the  Roman  consuls  seeing  a  priest  and 
some  vestal  virgins  going  on  foot,  and  he 
riding  in  his  chariot,  descended,  and  would 
not  go  into  it  again  till  those  votaries  were 
first  placed." — Bishop  Reynolds. 

"  The  spirit  and  manner  of  a  minister  often 
affects  more  than  the  matter." — Cecil. 

It  is  said  of  IVhitefield,  "  So  close  was  his 
communion  with  God  before  preaching,  that 
he  used  to  come  down  to  the  people  as  if 
there  were  a  rainbow  about  his  head.''''  And  of 
the  Rev.  J.  //.  Stewart.,  "He  was  a  precious 
box  of  ointment  in  a  wounding  world."  And 
of  the  Rev.  J.  H.  Forsyth,  '  He  did  what 
thousands  do,  but  he  did  it  cls  not  om  in  a 
thousand  does.^'' 

Resurrection  emblems.  "  The  very  first 
employment  of  Israel  in  Canaan  was  prepar- 
ing the  type  of  the  Saviour's  resurrection,  and 
their  first  religious  act  was  holding  up  that 
type  of  a  risen  Saviour.'* — Bonar. 

*•  The  wheat  sheaf  was  an  earnest  that  the 
whole  field  should  be  reaped,  as  well  as  a 
sample  of  the  harvest,  .  .  .  The  ideas  of 
pagans  respecting  the  dead  are  suggested  by 
the  broken  Corinthian  pillar  or  the  stringless 
harp.  .  .  .  The  word  cemetery,  which 
means  a  sleeping-place,  gives  us  the  Christian 
idea  for  He  '  giveth  His  beloved  sleep.'" — 
Filkington. 

Character.     "Character  is    higher    than 
intellect." — /*  tnerson. 
"A  soul  of  power,  a  well  of  lofty  thought, 

A    chastened    hope    that    ever    points    to 
heaven."  J.  Hunter. 

"  When  character  is  lost  all  is  lost." — 
German  Motto. 


CHAPTER  HI. 


%\t  Jcacc  Offering  nf  (ibljanksgtlyntg* 


SUGGESTIVE  READINGS. 


V.  1. — A  sacrifice  of  peace  offering.  Happy  are  the  truths  made  evident  In 
this  peace  sacntice  ;  debghttul  to  God,  blessed  for  man.  Peace  is  established 
between  God  and  the  soul,  reconciliation  is  realised  ;  and  the  offerer  comes  to 
the  altttr  with  festive  gladness  in  his  heart.     Yes,  and  God  also,  and  the  priesti, 


80  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  ill. 


and  the  offerer's  friends,  all  join  in  the  sacrificial  banquet  of  joy  over  peace  restored. 
Its  completeness  was  realised  in  Christ :  "  For  He  is  our  Peace,  who  hath  made 
both  one"  (Ephes.  ii.  14).  The  angels'  carol  has  become  translated  into  Christian 
experience — "  On  earth  peace,  goodwill  toward  men."  He  who  would  enter  into 
and  enjoy  "peace  with  God,"  must  bring  the  Redeemer's  ''sacrifice  of  peace 
offering"  (Rom.  v.  1) 

Whether  male  or  female.  Unrestricted  freedom  in  choice  of  the  victim  ;  as 
though  God  was  so  desirous  of  peace  with  man  that  every  possible  opportunity 
and  convenience  should  be  arranged  for  effecting  conciliation.  That  is  the 
lesson  :  and  in  the  atonement  of  Calvary  the  plan  of  appeasement  and  acceptance 
is  ready  of  access  to  every  one.  No  difficulty,  no  embarrassment,  is  left  by  God 
\n  the  way  of  our  obtaining  reconciliation  and  fellowship  with  Him. 

V.  2.— -Lay  his  hand  on  .  .  .  and  kill  it.  Here  is  the  crowning  act  of  the 
sinner  :  act  of  identification  with  the  very  death  of  the  victim.  Who  slew  the 
Sacrifice  1  even  he  who  lays  bis  hand  on  Him  in  order  to  be  saved  ;  yes,  saved  by 
the  death  the  sinner  himself  inflicted  I  Jesus  claims  the  victim's  place  ;  gives  His 
life  for  man.  Each  altar  sprinkled  with  blood  proclaims  the  peace  thus  bought, 
peace  bought  by  death.     "  The  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  Him." 

V.  3. — All  the  fat  that  is  upon  the  inwards.  In  the  burnt  offering  it  was  the 
fat  connected  with  the  limbs  and  external  parts  of  the  victim  which  God  required  ; 
but  in  the  peace  sacrifice  He  specifically  asks  the  inward  fat  which  covers  the 
vitals.  This  denoted  inward  health  ;  and  typified  the  inmost  excellency  of  Christ. 
And  as  this  was  to  he  for  God,  placed  and  consumed  upon  His  altar,  it  bespeaks 
tiow  all  the  virtue  and  grace  of  Jesus  in  His  own  essential  perfectness  and 
preciousness  were  necessary  to  a  satisfactory  peace  between  God  and  man.  For 
what  inferior  sacrifice  could  suffice*?  The  enmity  and  outrage  wrought  by  our 
sin  and  sinfulness  were  such  that  the  most  absolute  excellence  was  essential  in 
our  propitiatory  offering.     But  Christ  offered  "  all"  His  virtue  to  God  for  us. 

V.  5. — On  the  altar  upon  the  burnt  sacrifice.  Peace  is  not  the  first  thing  for 
man  to  seek  with  God,  but  satisfaction  :  that  having  been  made  in  the  burnt 
sacrifice,  he  may  "  burn"  his  peace  offering  "  upon  the  burnt  sacrifice."  No 
basis  for  peace  except  the  sufi*erings  of  Christ.  He  having  been  offered  in  sub- 
stitution for  guilt  we  may  lay  our  peace  offering  upon  that  Sacrifice. 

V.  11. — The  food  of  the  offering  made  by  fire  unto  the  Lord.  God  finds 
*'food" — satisfaction,  gratification — in  the  altar  ofiering,  in  the  excellencies  of 
Christ  devoted  in  sacrifice  to  win  man's  acceptance.  Grand  truth  :  the  presenta- 
tion of  atonement  by  Jesus  for  man's  peace  yields  to  God  a  satisfying  *'  food,"  a 
Bubs^a^'tial  joy,  which  both  fills  all  the  Divine  desires  and  answers  all  the  Divine 
demands.     Tiie  oaviour's  sacrifice  was  very  precious  to  the  holy  God. 

V.  17. — Eat  neither  fat  nor  blood.  As  the  "  fat"  symbolised  the  inmost  virtue, 
this  law  claimed  the  best  as  God's  portion  :  and  as  the  "  blood  "  represented  the 
life  of  the  victim,  this  law  claimed  life  as  inalienably  God's.  You  owe  Him 
your  inmost  affections,  the  most  precious  qualities  of  your  being ;  yea,  your 
whole  life.  Jesus  gave  them  all  to  His  Father :  and  we  should  also  yield  our 
noblest,  our  alL 

Explanatory  Homily. 

i.  The  spiritual  standing,  or  sacred  qualification  of  the  offerer.  Peace  offer- 
ings could  be  presented  only  by  persons  who  had  already  obtained  forgiveness  of 
sins  (by  the  sin  and  trespass  offerings,  comp.  chap.  vi.  7),  and  had  consecrated 
themselves  as  on  the  altar  to  Jzhovah  (by  the  burnt  offering,  comp.  vii.  12),  and 
were  tiius  2it  peace  with  God. 

This  sacrificial  regulation  indicates  an  enduring  spiritual  law  :  that  he  who 
would  euter  iuto  a  state  of  friendship  with  God  must  first  have  secured  expia- 


CHAP.  III.  1—5.]  THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS,  81 


tion  of  his  sins  (sin  offering),  and  have  consecrated  himself  (burnt  offering)  and 
his  substance  (meat  offering)  to  the  Lord. 

ii.  Propitiation  and  self  surrender  are  not  absent  even  in  presenting  peace 
oferings.  The  hlood  of  the  victim  was  sprinkled  on  the  altar,  and  portioris  of  the 
carcass  were  burnt  in  the  fire.  Whereas  the  imposition  of  hands  and  slaughter  of 
the  substitute  by  the  offerer  betokened  sense  of  condemnation  and  appeal  to 
sovereign  grace. 

We  cannot  acceptably  offer  even  sacrifices  of  peace  and  praise  apart  from  the 
njoritorious  death  and  substitutionary  atonement  of  Jesus. 

iii.  Peace  offerings  were  various,  both  in  the  victims  chosen  and  in  the  pur- 
pose for  which  they  were  offered.  (1)  The  victims :  from  the  herds  or  flocks,  male 
or  female.  (2)  'l^hQ  purpose :  thank  offerings,  votive  offerings,  free-will  offerings. 
The  first  expressed  gratitude  for  God's  gracious  favours  ]  the  second  fulfilled  a 
vow  made  on  condition  of  receiving  God's  goodness  ;  the  third  entreated  a 
mercy,  but  without  conditions,  as  in  a  vow,  retaining  freedom  to  make  return 
to  the  Lord'as  occasion  served. 

Great  variety  may  mark  our  thank  offerings  to  God,  but  the  liberty  leaves  us 
without  excuse  if  we  render  noMring  to  the  Lord  for  all  His  benefits  towards  us. 

iv.  In  the  distribution  of  portions  of  the  peace  offering  a  sacrificial  feast  of 
fellowship  was  enacted. 

A  part  to  Jehovah,  other  parts  to  the  priests,  and  the  remainder  to  the 
offerer,  all  meeting  in  amity  and  peace,  and  joyously  sharing  in  the  sweet  savour 
offering. 

For  the  reconciliation  (tf  man  to  G'^d,  and  Divine  fellowship  with  man,  occa- 
sioned heart  gladness  to  the  Divine  Father  (see  parable  of  Prodigal  8oi^),  to  ihe 
reinstated  worshipper,  and  to  the  Daysman  betwixt  them  who  laid  His  hand  on 
them  both — the  mediating  Priest. 

V,  The  part  of  the  divided  victims  luere  specially  apportioned,  establishing  a 
law  of  priority  in  sacred  claims.  To  God  the  choicest  parts  first.  These  were 
burned  on  the  altar,  and  became  a  ''sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord."  To  the 
community  of  priests  ("  the  breast  "),  and  to  the  officiating  priest  ('*  the  right 
hind  leg ")  next,  indicating  grateful  recognition  of  Priesthood  ministries, 
specially  Christ's,  and  fellowship  with  the  sacred  priesthood  of  believers.  The 
sacrificer  retained  the  rest,  but  only  that  he,  with  his  friends,  might  join  the  sacred 
repast,  and  thus  emphasize  the  truth  of  the  communion  of  saints  ;  they  and  God's 
household,  and  God  Himself,  all  partaking  of  the  one  offering,  as  a  feast  of 
friendship  and  communion. 

Our  first  aim  should  be  to  offer  the  worthiest  to  the  Lord ;  next  to  own 
grateful  obligations  to  the  mediatorial  service  of  Christ ;  then  to  establish 
fe.-^tal  relationship  with  the  household  of  God,  the  household  of  faith.  Self 
liist  in  fellovvtihip,  no  man  living  to  himself.  Christian  life  joyously  oommuning 
wiUi  the  Father y  the  Mediator,  and  the  Church, 


SECTIONAL    HOMILIES. 

Topic :  Pbace-Opfbring  Sacrifices  (Vv.  1-5). 

Consider — 

I.   Historic  instances  of  presenting  the  peace  offering. 

Scripture  records  of  these  occurrences  are  instructive.  Some  of  the  occasions 
when  the  offering  was  presented  were  Divinely  appointed. 

(a)  At  the  consecration  of  priests  for  their  holy  office  and  ministry  (Lev.  vii. 
30-84\  (6)  At  the  completion  of  the  term  ^f  a  Nazarite's  vow  (Numb.  vi.  14). 
(c)  At  the  dedication  of  the  completed  tabernacle  (Numb.  vii.  17).     (o?)  At  the 


32  HOMILETIC   COMMENTAUY  ON  [chap.  iii.  1—5. 

feast  of  the  first-fruits  (Lev.  xxiii.  19);  and  (c)  At  the  joyful  opening  of  Solo- 
mon's temple  (1  Kings  viii.  63). 
Others  were  spontaneous — 

1.  For  signal  experience  of  Providential  deliverance.  Thus  (a)  David  in  the 
hour  of  victory,  when  *' his  head  was  lifted  up  above  his  enemies  round  about 
him,"  resolved  to  "sacrifice  in  (jod's  tabernacle  sacrifices  of  joy*'  (Psa.  xxvii.  6). 
(6)  Amid  merciful  rescues  from  peril,  enumerated  in  Psalm  cvii.,  as  when  gin<led 
through  a  lone  wilderness  (v.  4),  or  brought  out  of  sore  oppression  (vv.  10  14), 
or  upon  recovery  from  wasting  sickness  (v.  18),  or  when  the  haven  is  reached 
after  terrible  voyage  (v.  30),  etc.  Then  "lettiiem  sacrifice  the  sacrifice  of  thanks- 
giving "  (v.  22). 

2.  As  the  fulfil tnent  of  vows  made  in  troublous  circumstances.  Thus  Jonah 
"  prayed  unto  the  Lord  his  God  out  of  the  fish's  belly  "  (Jonah  ii.  1),  and  vowed, 
when  "  salvation  came  to  him  of  the  Lord  "  (v.  9),  that  he  would  sacrifice  unto 
Him  with  the  voice  of  thanksgiving,  and  pay  that  he  had  vowed  "  (v.  9).  [See 
also  Psa.  cxri.  3,  17-19] 

3.  As  a  seal  of  fervent  and  trustful  prayer.  So  did  the  confederate  tribes 
before  going  to  battle  against  the  victorious  Benjamites.  They  "  went  up  and 
came  to  the  house  of  God  and  wept,  and  sat  there  before  the  Lord,  and  fasted 
that  day  until  even,  and  ottered  burnt  offerings  and  peace  offerings  before  the 
Lord  "  (Judges  xx.  26).  [See  Addenda,  p.  38,  Sacrifices  of  Peace.'\  Consider  again 
the— 

XL    SaORED  sentiments  prompting  to  the  offering  op  the  PBA.OB  SAORIFIOES. 

Noting  the  attitude  of  thought,  the  feelings  of  heart,  with  which  the  sacri- 
fices were  presented,  we  shall  realise  the  religious  afifections  which  found  expres- 
sion in  this  form  of  altar  ofifering. 

1.  Prominent,  as  a  motive  to  the  peace  offering,  is  thanksgiving.  It  presented 
a  sacrifice  of  praise  to  God;  it  yielded  an  offering  to  Jehovah's  glory.  Ttiis 
implies  a  heart  of  gratitude  in  man ;  a  reverent  sense  of  the  goodness  of  God  ; 
a  desire  to  perform  some  act  to  His  glory  and  praise.  In  chap.  vii.  12  it  is 
distinctly  marked  as  intended  "/or  a  thanksgiving ^  The  worshipper  should 
seek  God  not  alone  with  requests,  and  under  sense  of  danger  or  need,  but  with 
i\\Q  homage  of  joy.  "I  will  sacrifice  sacrifices  of  joy.  I  will  sing,"  etc.  (Psa. 
xxvii.  6).  "God  hath  done  great  things  for  us,  whereof  we  are  glad."  "  What 
shall  1  shall  render  unto  the  Lord  for  all  His  benefits  towards  met"  **  Bless 
the  Lord,  0  my  soul,"  etc.  "  Thanks  he  unto  God  for  His  unspeakable  gift." 
We  are  to  glorify  God  with  praises.  Hence  the  exhortation,  "  By  Him,  there- 
fore, let  us  offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise  to  God  continually,  that  is  the  fruit  of 
our  lips  giving  thanks  to  His  name"  (Heb.  xiii.  15).  [See  Addenda,  p.  38, 
Thanksgiving.  ] 

2.  Equally  manifest,  as  a  motive  to  the  peace  offering,  is  dedication.  Thus 
it  is  provided  that  *'  the  sacrifice  of  his  offering  [may]  be  a  vov)^  (Lev.  vii.  16). 
This  means  a  consecration  to  some  act  of  service  for  God.  As  the  "  sweet  savour" 
ascended  to  God  it  bore  to  Heaven  a  hostage  and  pledge  of  practical  godliness 
and  grateful  obedience  which  should  follow.  "  Praise  waiteth  for  Thee,  0  God, 
in  Zion,  and  unto  Thee  shall  the  vow  he  performed**  (Psa.  Ixv.  1).  "I  will  go  into 
Thy  house  with  hurnt  offerings,  I  will  pay  Thee  my  vows  which  my  lips  have 
uttered,  etc.  I  will  offer  unto  Thee  burnt  sacrifices  of  fatlings,  with  the  incense 
of  rams,"  etc.  (Psa.  Ixvi.  13-15).  Christian  life  should  assuredly  be  yielded  in 
devotion  to  the  Lord  in  return  for  the  grace  we  have  received. 

III.    Gospel  realisations   of  the   typical   siqnificanob    op    the    peace 

OFFERINGS. 

1.  The  varieties  in  the  victims  symbolise  the  manifold  aspects  of  Ghrisfs 
gracious  offering.     As  in  the  burnt  offering.    [See  on  Chapter  I.] 

2.  The  different  motives  prompting  the  offering  suggest  the  various  purposa 


CJlAP  111.  3,  9,  14,  16.]        77//i   tiOOK   OF  LEVIIKWS.  33 

Christ's  sacrifice  efff.cted.  1 1  is  peace  offeriuj^  both  was  for  Gods  praise,  in  sinners 
reconciled  ;  and  for  man's  deJicadon,  in  Christian  lives  being  vowed  an(i  devoted 
to  His  service.  For  when  "  made  nij^^h"  in  Christ  it  is  our  joy  to  live  unto  God 
in  loving,  willing  obedience.  Christ's  sacrificial  life  represented  both  significant 
aspects  of  the  peace  ofier  ing  :  it  was  an  offering  to  Divine  praise  and  glory,  and 
an  enactment  of  man's  yrntefal  consecration  to  God. 

3.  The  blessed  reconciliation  of  God  and  man   was  sealed  in   the   peace  oifering 
of  Jesus.      **  Having  made  peace  through  the  blood  of  His  cross,  by  Him  to  recon 
cile  all  things  unto   Himself,"  etc.  (Colos.  i.  20). 

IV.  PkESE>T-DAY  obligations  in  the  LlQtiT  OF  THE  ANOIKNT  PEAOB  OFFER- 
INGS. 

1.  He  who  wouhl  offer  praise  to  God  must  do  so  at  the  altar.  That  was  the 
place  where  the  ofiering  was  made.  Nothing,  no  grateful  affection,  no  dedicatory 
vow,  may  ^y^  from  man  to  God  irrespective  of  the  altar.  Nothing  can  be  accepted, 
DOthing  IS  permitted,  apart  from  Christ's  sacrifice.  The  peace  offering  must  be 
"  on  the  altar  upon  the  burnt  sacrifice"  (v.  5);  something  additional  to  and 
following  upon  Christ's  atoning  merits.  Gratitude  is  beautiful,  dedication  is 
right;  but  God  will  have  neither — from  sinful  man — apart  from  the  Saviour's 
grace.  These  are  lovely  flowers  which  can  only  properly  unfold  and  bloom  under 
the  radiance  of  the  Cross. 

2.  Divine  graciousness  summons  us  to  the  sacrifces  of  tha7ikful  devotion.  Not 
a  moment  but  our  hearts  and  lips  should  be  pouring  out  streams  of  praise,  the 
sweet  savour  of  love,  the  lunnage  of  joy,  the  evidence  that  we  are  the  Lord's  : 
'*  wherefore  glorify  God  in  your  body  and  in  your  spirit,  which  are  God's." 

3.  Peace  with  God  in  Christ  is  the  basis  of  a  joyful  godly  life.  Praise  can  only 
be  where  peace  is  realised  and  enjoyed.  All  our  happiness  rests  on  our  being  in 
Christ,  partakers  of  "  peace  with  God  through  Jesus."  Then  we  can  **  alsoJDy  in 
God  '  (Kom.  V.  1  and  11).  And  Christian  life  should  '^  show  forth  the  praises  of 
Him  who  hath  called  us  out  of  darkness,"  etc.  (1  Pet.  ii.  9).  Blessed  peace 
which  imparts  such  joy  and  inspires  such  praise  ! 

Topic :  The  Feast  op  Man's  Fellowship  with  God  (Vv.  3,  9,  14,  16). 

"  He  shall  offer  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  peace  offering  unto  the  Lord."  Not  the 
whole,  but  a  part  was  to  be  burnt  on  the  altar  fire,  and  *'  Aaron's  sons  shall 
burn  it — i  e  ,  the  specified  portion  which  God  required  (see  v.  4).  And  this 
part  participation  by  God  is  further  particularised  in  v.  16 — *'  The  priest  shall 
burn  them  upon  the  altar ;  it  is  the  food  of  the  offering  made  by  fire  for  a  sweet 
savour  ;  all  the  fat  is  the  Lord's." 

The  remaining  parts  (chap,  vii.)  were  distributed  to  the  priests  who  minis 
tared  and  the  offerer  himself.  Thus  the  peace  offering  was  shared  by  God  with 
man  ;  they  met  together  in  a  sacrificial  feast ^  and  partook  of  the  same  altar 
oblation.     To  eat  together  is  a  sign  of  friendship  and  fellowship. 

L  Such  privileged  communion  between  god  and  man  is  established  o> 

SPECIAL  conditions. 

Who  is  the  man  who  thus  is  admitted  to  feast  with  God]  May  anyone 
adventure  into  such  privilege  1  Are  there  no  restrictions  or  conditions  regu- 
lating so  wondrous  an  incident? 

1.  Fellowship  between  God  and  man  vci\x%t  he  qXjth^ciJj.ar  of  sacrifice.  There, 
where  sin  is  acknowledged,  atoned  and  purged;  where  substitution  is  accepted 
for  the  life  of  sinful  man;  where  "  no  condemnation "  is  attained  by  penalty 
having  been  laid  upon  the  Victim.  Only  there  can  God  meet  man  in  friend- 
ship.     ISacrifice  must  go  first. 

2.  Fellowship  proceeds  on  the  recognition  that  we  yield  our  highest  affection$ 


34  HOMILkTIC   COMMESTMlY   0\'    [chap,  hi  3,  9,  14,  16. 

and  virtues  first  to  God.  That  victim  being  offered  is  in  the  offerer's  stead,  and 
represents  man.  What  part  of  the  man  does  God  require  1  The  very  choicest 
'part ;  just  as  He  was  to  have  the  inmost  vitalities  and  fat  of  the  sacrifice.  It 
means  that  before  God  can  have  blessed  communion  with  man,  man  must  give 
God  his  inmost  atfections  and  noblest  powers  in  ready  consecration  ;  that, 
indeed,  it  is  only  in  the  act  of  such  dedication  of  our  highest  qualities  to  Him 
God  comes  into  fellowship  with  man  at  all.  God  would  have  refused  to  partake 
of  the  feast  if  any  inferior  part  had  been  presented  Him.  We  must  bring  our 
first  energies,  our  purest  love,  if  God  is  to  "  sup  with  us  and  we  with  Him  " 
(Rev.  iii.  20). 

3.  Fellowship  can  only  be  enjoyed  in  connection  with  intervening  priestly  ser- 
vices. **  Aaron's  sons,"  etc.  (vv.  2-4).  No  communion,  no  acceptance  with  God 
apart  from  the  mediation  of  Jesus. 

4.  Fellowship  with  God  requires  that  we  associate  His  priests  with  us  in  the  feast. 
[Compare  chap  vii.  14,  31-35.]  The  lessons  of  this  enactment  are  (1)  Generous 
attention  to  and  support  of  those  who  minister  to  us  in  holy  things.  We  "  reap 
their  spiritual  things,"  and  should  show  appreciation.  (2)  Gommanion  with  the 
saints  who  unite  with  us  in  temple  service.  All  fellow  Christians  are  "  priests." 
(3)  Largeness  of  heart  in  sharing  with  others  the  blessings  we  enjoy.  Give  a 
better  portion  to  them  than  that  we  retain  for  ourselves.  **  Hospitality  one  to 
another  without  grudging"  (1  Peter  iv.  9).  In  a  feast  the  host  gives  the  best 
to  his  guests.  The  idea  is  regal.  We  entertain  the  King  and  His  courtiers^  and 
place  the  choicest  part  of  the  banquet  first  before  the  King ;  then  the  best 
remaining  portions  we  serve  to  His  attendant  ministers ;  for  ourselves,  happy 
and  honoured  that  we  may  sit  down  at  such  a  banquet  and  entertain  such  guests. 
[See  Addenda,  p.  38,  Blessedness  of  Peace.] 

II   Such  privileged  communion  pourtrays  the  joyous  experience  open 

TO   MAN   IN    CHRIST. 

Felicity  is  the  prevalent  sentiment  in  such  a  feast.  Joy  with  God  ;  joy  in 
Jesus;  joy  among  fellow  saints.  But  all  this  blessedness  is  in  connection  with 
a  sacrificed  life.      As  all  our  felicity  springs  from  the  redemption  of  Jes\is. 

1.  God^s  satisfaction  and  delight  with  the  choice  virtues  of  Jesus.  Christ,  as  our 
Representative,  is  here  giving  Himself  to  God  for  us,  and  He  finds  sweet  savoury 
food  in  the  offering  (vv.  11,  16).  "This  is  My  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well 
pleased."  For  the  inmost  affections  of  Jesus  were  all  supremely  consecrated  to 
His  Father.  Yet  there  was  also  another  cause  of  God's  delight  in  Jesus— that 
He  offered  Himself  as  the  sacrifice  for  man's  salvation  :  '' therefore  dioih  My  Father 
love  Me  because  I  lay  down  My  life."  God  looked  on  the  altar,  saw  that  to  Him 
were  yielded  the  best  affections  of  His  Son,  and  saw  equally  that  His  life  was 
readily  offered  as  a  Peace  Sacrifice  for  sinners,  that  the  Father  and  the  family 
might  he  again  at  one. 

2.  Man's  blessedness  m  the  experiences  of  fellowship  in  Christ  Jesus.  Peace  is 
not  all  we  find  in  Him,  but  happiness,  ''joy  unspeakable  and  fall  of  glory'' :  "a 
feast  of  fat  things."  Christian  life  is  a  banquet.  "  Eat,  0  my  friends."  And  it 
is  a  feast,  not  upon  faulty  and  false  diet,  which  mocks  the  cravings  and  hopes  of 
men,  but  is  upon  an  offering  "  without  blemish"  the  choicest  of  the  flock.  Christ 
Himself  is  the  food  of  the  believer. 

**  Yes,  Thou  art  precious  to  my  souL" 

Happy  they  who  are  "  partakers  of  Christ  Jesus,"  and  live  upon   Him.     Hft 

"satisfies our  mouth  with  good  things,"  and  so  daintily  feasts  the  heart's  longings 
that  "  His  joy  remains  in  us,  and  our  joy  is  full.*' 

Note  :  This  feast  of  fellowship  was  botli  an  expression  of  hve  by  the  offerer  of 
the  sacrifice,  and  in  turn  nourished  that  love  in  him  by  communion  with  God  and 
His  Church. 


CHAP.  III.  1—17.]  77//';   BOOK   OF   LEVITICUS.  35 


3.  Christ's  own  happin<ss  in  the  feast  of  man^ s  fellowship  mith  God.  The  priest 
had  a  choice  part  in  the  sacrifice.  He  who  is  "  Priest  over  the  house  of  God"  shares 
in  this  glad  banquet.  Himself  the  Victim  sacrificed,  He  is  also  the  mediating  and 
partakiiiiJ^  F^riest.  How  does  this  open  to  view  the  heart  of  Christ  :  He  as  medi- 
ating Priest  joins  in  the  gladness  of  the  event  of  communion  reinstated  between 
God  and  man  :  feasts  with  us  as  the  intervening  Friend,  and  is  satisfied  with  the 
portion  which  is  His.  For  can  our  Lord  he  other  than  satisfied  with  His  part  in 
the  trans iction  %  It  is  through  His  mediation  that  God  and  men  feast  together. 
And  in  the  delighted  love  of  the  Father  and  the  grateful  happiness  of  man  Jesns 
finds  a  rich  satisfaction  :  it  is  *'  the  joy  set  before  Him"  for  which  He  "endured 
the  cross,  despising  the  shame." 

(1)  Into  such  a  feast  He  asks  to  be  admitted,  as  He  appeals  at  the  sinner's 
heart :  **  Behold  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock  ;  if  any  man  will  hear  My  voice 
and  open  the  door,  I  will  come  in  and  sup  with  him  and  he  with  Me." 

(2)  To  such  a  feast  He  comes  when  His  saints  gither  at  the  sacramental  table. 
"  With  desire  I  have  desired  to  eat  this  passover  with  you."  "  This  do  in  remem- 
brance of  Me."     "There  am  I  in  the  midst  of  you." 

(3)  For  such  a  feast  He  is  preparing  in.  the  Father  s  house.  That  "  supper  of 
the  Lamb"  was  often  in  His  thoughts  when  on  earth  (Luke  xiv.  15  ;  xxii.  16,  18). 
"^Hesaith  unto  me,  Write,  Blessed  are  they  which  are  called  unto  the  marriage 
supper  of  the  Lamb"  (Rev.  xix.  9).  Joy  will  indeed  fill  the  Saviour's  heart  then  ; 
for  "  He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul  and  shall  be  satisfied"  (Isa.  liii.  11). 

Topic :  Peace  by  Fulfilling  Divine  Conditions  (Vv.  2-5,  etc.). 

Temporal  blessings  God  showers  down  alike  upon  the  evil  and  the  good.  Un- 
solicited He  loads  mankind  daily  with  His  benefits.  But  for  spiritual  blessings 
He  will  be  inquired  of.  Specified  means  must  be  employed  that  pardon  and 
peace  may  be  enjoyed.  The  first  part  of  the  peace  offering  was  expiatory  ;  then 
came  the  Eucharistic  feast. 

I.  The  offering  was  to  be  carefully  chosen.  The  strongest,  best  and 
purest  parts  were  to  be  kept  exclusively  sacred  to  the  Lord.  Everything  was  to 
be  done  in  order,  and  according  to  minute  directions. 

II.  The  offering  was  to  be  personally  appropriated.  No  offering  by  proxy  ; 
each  offerer  to  offer  for  himself  with  his  own  hands.  Not  enough  to  purpose  in 
the  heart,  to  have  sound  views  and  clear  knowledge  of  what  required.  The 
act  must  promptly,  personally  be  performed. 

III.  The  offering  was  to  be  cheerfully  presented.  (This  fully  shown  in 
chap,  vii.)  All  not  to  be  consumed  as  in  holocaust ;  the  offered  had  anticipa- 
tion of  partaking  with  priests  of  residue  in  joyful  fellowship. 

Our  inestimable  privilege  is  to  have  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  with  His 
Son  Christ  Jesus,  who  has  left  to  the  world  through  His  Church  the  Divine 
legacy  of  Peace.  He  is  our  peace,  and  hath  broken  down  the  middle  wall  of 
partition  between  us  and  God. — F,  W,  B, 

Topic:  Peace  resulting  from  propitiation  (Vv.  1-17). 

Reconciliation  and  restoration  to  God  bring  peace  ;  hence  the  peace  offering, 
BO  peculiarly  significant  of  tranquil  joy,  follows  the  burnt  and  meat  offerings.  In 
this  festival  God,  the  priests,  and  the  people  partook  together.  It  signified  to 
complete,  to  make  whole,  and  was  therefore  a  symbol  of  fulness,  fellovjship,  and 
friendship.  In  it  God  showed  not  only  that  He  is  to  be  ministered  to  by  man, 
but  also  that  He  delights  to  minister  to  man.  The  great  truth  taught  is,  that 
reconciliation  to  God  leads  to  intimate  communion  with  Him. 

d3 


86 


nOMlLETW   COMMENTAUY  ON 


[cHAr.  111.  1 — 17. 


I.  Great  freedom  was  aUowed  in  seledion  of  the  Offerings.  Any  sacrificial 
animal  of  either  sex,  or  of  any  a^e,  might  be  offered,  so  long  as  it  was  without 
blemish.  The  worbhipper  could  suit  his  own  convenience,  the  demand  made 
was  in  no  way  exacting  or  irksome.  The  commandments  of  God  are  not  grievous  : 
we  are  only  expected  to  offer  according  to  our  abiHty,  but  what  we  offer  must  be 
the  best  we  have,  and  offered  in  a  right  spirit      "  Whether  we  eat  or  drink,"  etc. 

II.  Great  freedom  was  allowed  in  participation  of  the  Offering.  Part  was  to  be 
presented  to  the  Lord,  part  eaten  by  the  priests,  and  part  by  the  people  ;  so  that 
God  and  man,  Heaven  and  earth,  would  hold  festival  toi^ether,  in  one  solemn 
covenant.  Such  a  condition  of  peace  was  one  of  the  great  moral  wants  of  man, 
for  sin  had  estranged  man  from  God  and  thrown  discord  into  the  human  family. 
This  offering  proclaimed  peace  on  earth,  goodwill  to  men.  Christ  our  Peace 
invites  us  to  His  table  to  hold  communion  with  Him,  and  feed  by  faith  on  the 
sacrifice  He  has  provided.  This  life  of  happy  communion  with  God  in  Christ 
is  the  prelude  of,  and  preparation  for,  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb. — 
F.  W.  B. 


OUTLINES    ON    VERSES. 


V.  L — Theme:  Faultlessness  in  Sacri- 
fice. "  He  shall  offer  it  without  blemish  unto 
the  Lord." 

I.  As  REPRESENTING  THE  PURITY  OP  HIM 
TO   WHOM   THE   OFFERING    WAS    PRESENTED. 

II.  As  FRESHADOWING  THE  PURITY  OF  HIM 
WHOM   THE   OFFERING   TYPIFIED. 

III.  As  SYMBOLISING  THE  PURITY  DESIDER- 
ATED   BY   THB   OFFER   OF   THE    SACRIFICE. 

Our  offerings  to  the  Lord  must  be  complete 
and  pure — by  association  with  the  merits  of 
Christ's  perfect  sacrifice,  and  prompted  by 
motives  made  pure  by  the  indwelling  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.— F.  W.  B. 

V.   2. —  Theme:    Identification    of    the 

OFFERER     with     THB    OFFERING.        "  And     he 

shall  lay  his  hand  upon  the  head  of  the  offer- 
ing, and  kill  it  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle 
of  the  congregation"  (v.  2). 

I.  Actual  contact. 

"Lay  hand  on,"  sig.  (a)  apprehension^  (&) 
appropriation^  (c)  identification. 

II.  Actual  committal. 

"And  kill  it,"  offerer's  own  act,  acknow- 
ledging he  deserved  to  die  as  the  victim,  his 
substitute,  died.  This  would  (a)  teach  the 
heinousness  of  sin  that  it  needed  the  sacrifice 
of  life,  (6  beget  hatred  for  sin  upon  which 
Jehovah  thus  placed  Divine  displeasure. 

By  act  of  faith  we  must  lay  our  hand 
upon  the  sacred  head  of  Christ,  and  have  a 
personal  interest  in  His  life  and  death. — 
F.  W.  B. 

V.  3. — Theme :  God's  positive  commands. 
"  And  he  shall,"  &c. 

God's  commands  to  Israel  peremptory. 
How  they  were  to  wrorship,  what  they  were 
to  sacrifice,  arbitrarily  stated.  Though  com- 
mands are  imperious,  people  are  under  moral 
obligations  to  obey.  No  room  for  option  or 
exception  when  precept  associated  with  un- 
equivocal "//6a//."     buch  commands — 


I.  Exhibit  the  sovereignty  of  the  Lord* 

He  has  right  to  command  without  giving 
reasons  or  explanations.  He  has  right  to  do 
whHt  He  pleases  with  His  own. 

II.  Exercise  the  faith  and  patience  of 
THE  w<jRSHiPPERS.  To  obev  precepts  the 
reasons  for  which  were  hidden  would  show 
greater  confidence  and  resignation  than  were 
reasons  seen. 

III.  Exalt  the  obedience  of  the  life. 
The  people  not  required  to  offer  that  which 
cost  them  nothing,  or  they  would  have  had 
mean  ideas  of  worship.  God  demands  large 
things  of  us,  and  "  blessed  are  they  that  do 
His  commandments." — F.  W.  B 

V.  8. — Theme:  Peace  associated  with 
penitence  and  prayer.  "  He  shall  lay  his 
hand  upon  the  head  of  his  offering." 

Until  sin  is  pardoned  there  can  be  no  real 
peace,  no  real  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  pre- 
sence. This  truth  comes  out  in  all  the  offer- 
ings, for  every  sacrifice  was  to  be  the  symbol 
of  the  broken  and  contrite  heart  of  the  offerer. 
God  was  pleased  with  the  sufferings  of  the  vic- 
tims slain  and  the  savour  of  their  burning 
carcasses  only  as  they  represented  the  self- 
surrender  of  the  worshipper,  and  the  incense 
of  holy  prayer  ascending  from  the  penitent 
spirit. 

I.  /n  the  peace  offering  the  offerer  acknow- 
ledged his  guilt.  As  he  laid  his  hand  upon  the 
head  of  the  victim  at  the  Tabernacle  door  he 
owned  that  he  was  guilty  and  deserved  to  die. 
It  would  be  a  public  confession  of  guilt  and 
the  need  of  atonement  for  offences. 

II.  In  the  peace  offering  the  offerer  trans- 
ferred his  guilt.  God  accepted  a  substitute 
for  the  guilty  one  who  deserved  to  die.  Prob- 
able that  the  Hebrews  felt  more  was  included 
in  their  offerings  than  they  could  then  see, 
that  they  pointed  to  a  greater  sacrifice  yet  to 
be  offered  in  God's  good  time,  upon  whom 
would  be  laid  the  iniquity  of  us  all. 


CHAF'    III.   1 — 17.] 


THE  Book  of  lk  vine  us. 


87 


The  privileges  associated  with  Peace  offer- 
ings would  awaken  praise.  The  offerer  would 
stand  in  the  attitude  of  prayer^  as  with  eyes 
lifted  to  Heaven  h«  presented  his  oblation; 
he  would  be  filled  xvith  praise y  as  in  the  house 
of  the  Lord  he  enjoyed  peaceful  communion. 
When  we  commune  with  God,  let  us  blend 
'enitence,  prayer,  and  praise^  remembering 
blt'ssings  received,  anticipating  blessings  to 
•ome.  With  such  sacritices  God  is  well 
jjlcased,  and  in  association  with  them  he  im- 
prtPts  his  own  peace,  which  passeth  all  under- 
standing.-F  W.  B. 

V.  6 — Theme:  Succession  in  sacrifices. 

"  Burn  it  on  the  altar  upon  the  burnt  sacrifice^ 
which  is  upon  the  wood  that  is  on  the  fire." 
There  is  order  established  by  God  in  — 
I.  The  successive  sacrificial  offerings 

REQUIRED. 

1.  First  on  the  altar  must  be  laid  the  burnt 
offering,  which  must  ^^  alV  be  burnt,  for  God 
required  complete  consecration  of  Christ  in 
death  to  satisfy  the  fire  of  BUs  holiness,  the 
demands  of  His  righteous  law. 

2  Then  follows  the  meat  offering,  which 
signifies  the  presentation  of  the  best  and 
richest  life  in  substitution  for  man.  It  asserted 
His  requirement  of  the  first  and  finest  quali- 
ties of  humanity.  Christ  must  offer  His  per- 
fect manhood  in  living  form  as  an  obedience 
offering.  Which  means,  that  when  God's 
holiness  finds  satisfaction  in  Christ's  death, 
Jehovah  still  demands  the  full  offering  of  the 
redeemed  man's  living  obedience. 

3.  The  peace  sacrifice  then  may  be  pre- 
sented, and  the  man  who  has  satisfied  yustice 
in  the  death  of  Christ,  and  yielded  obedience 
in  the  life  of  Christ,  may  enter  \nio  fellowship 
and  peace  through  Christ.  [See  Addenda,  p.  38, 
y  ei'ms  of  I  eace.^ 

11  The  successive  spiritual  attainments 
reached. 

1.  Whole  surrender  to  God.  The  burnt 
offering  required  and  enforced  that  attain- 
ment. The  redeems  d  soul  lays  itself  wholly 
on  the  altar,  is  wholly  consumed  in  dedication 
to  God. 

2.  I'erfectness  of  character ;  the  excellencies 
of  obedience,  pure  uncorruptness  of  heart; 
the  submissiveness  of  will.  These  are  reached 
in  succession,  and  are  suggested  in  the  meat 
offering. 

3.  /fellowship  with  God.  Feasting  in  the 
blessedness  of  peace  and  acceptance  with  Him 
in  and  through  Christ  Jesus.  "0  God  I  will 
praise  Thee,  for  though  Thou  wast  angry  with 
me,  Thine  anger  is  turned  away,  and  Thou 
comfortest  meP 

lil.  The  successive  realisations  of 
christian  privilege. 

1  Acceptance.  Tnat  is  assured  as  the  fruit 
of  the  burnt  offering.  It  is  offered  "  for  ac- 
ceptance "  (see  on  i.  5),  and  God  does  accept 
the  entire  sacrifice  for  atonement. 


2.  Spiritual gi'oces  The  beauties  of  Christ 
become  ours;  the  charms  of  the  anointing 
Spirit  rest  on  us.  "  The  frankincense,  oil, 
salt,"  etc. 

3.  jfoyous  communion  with  Cod.  Raised  into 
blissful  privilege,  feasting  with  the  Lord  and 
His  priests.  "Truly  our  fellowaViip  is  with 
the  Father  and  with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ." 

IV.  The  successive  religious  obligations 
urged. 

Not  fellowship  and  privilege  first,  but  tirhi 
entire  dedication. 

Then  cultivation  of  spiritual  excellencies. 

Following  iheBQ  comeB  glad  fellowship  with 
heaven. 

V.  16. —  Theme:  God  deserves  and  de- 
mands THE  BEST.     "All  the  fat  is  the  Lord's." 

I.  Not  the  mere  bones  of  rigid  formalism. 

II.  Not  the  mere  sinews  of  strenuous  obser- 
vances. 

III.  Not  the  mere  skin  of  outward  profes- 
sion. 

lY.  Not  the  mere  blood  oi  ardent  enthasiasm, 
but  the — 

V.  "  Fat  '*— the  richest,  fullest,  best  that 
we  can  offer :  not  lean,  shrivelled  work 
or  worship,  but  "  the  fat  for  the  Lord,"  the 
most  prime  and  precious  we  can  procure.  Let 
us  give  our  youth  and  strength,  our  richest 
love  and  fullest  fervour  to  Him  who  is  worthy 
of  all.-F.  W.  B. 

V.  17. —  Theme:  Obedience  the  test  o» 
FAITH.     "  It  shall  be  a  perpetual  statute.** 

It  would  require ya/M  to  constantly  obey, 
for  the  offerings  would  seem  to  be — 

I.  An  infliction  of  needless  pain. 

II.    A  WASTE    OF   VALUABLE    LIFE. 

Ill  Unequal  to  the  end  designed: — 
that  there  should  be  any  correspondence  be- 
tween the  physical  suffering  of  brutes  and 
atonement  for  moral  guilt  of  man. 

We  cannot  formulate  a  rationale  of  the 
great  Peace  offering  presented  in  the  Gospel. 
It  is  beset  with  formidable  difficulties  Faith, 
not  reason,  must  lead  us  to  the  Cross,  the 
hand  of  simple  trust  must  appropriate  the 
blessings  of  salvation. 

Note  :  The  culpability  of  disobedi- 
ence. 

To  omit  obedience  to  the  statutes  of  Je- 
hovah was  sin,  because  of  transgression  of 
His  law. 

Omission  would  spring  from  (1)  indifference, 
(2)  independence,  (3)  disloyalty,  (4)  rebellion. 
So  now  to  invitations  and  commands  of  Gospel. 
Christ  taught  that  sins  of  omission  were  cul- 
pable and  condemnatory.  The  rich  man  in 
the  parable  omitted  to  care  for  Lazarus.  The 
man  who  did  not  use  his  talent  was  punished. 
The  wicked  in  the  day  of  judgment  are  repre- 
sented as  being  punished  for  omissions  (Mattt 
XXV,  81-46).— F.  W.  B. 


38 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY   ON 


[chap.  IV.  1—35. 


ILLUSTRATIVE   ADDENDA   TO    CHAPTER   III. 


Sacrifices  of  peace.  "  They  were  either 
intended  to  testify  thankfulness  for  blessinga 
already  received,  in  which  view  they  are  called 
'thank  offerings'  in  Coverdale's  translation  ; 
or  were  else  votive,  beinj;  offered  with  prayer 
for  future  blessings.  No  doubt  they  were 
sometimes  both  in  one.  .  .  Only  the  fat  parts 
were  consumed  on  the  altar.  A  small  portion 
was  appropriated  to  the  priest  the  rest  being 
allowed  to  the  offerer  and  his  guests  as  an 
offering  feast.  Whence  Dr.  Boothroyd,  follow- 
ing Michaelis,  prefers  to  translate  ^helamim 
by  '  feast  sacrifice '  rather  than  '  peace  offer- 
ing. 


'''—Kitto. 


Peace  op  the  gospel.  It  is  a  great  mercy 
to  have  the  Gospel  of  peace,  but  it  is  far 
greater  to  have  the  peace  of  the  Gospel. 

Blessedness  of  peace.  "  If  joy  be  love 
exulting,  peace  is  joy  reposing.  It  is  love  in 
the  green  pastures  and  beside  the  still  waters." 
— Dr.  y antes  hamilton. 

Father  of  life  and  light  I  Thou  good  Supreme  I 

#  •  •  •  # 

Save  me  from  folly,  vanity  and  vice, 
From  every  low  pursuit;  and  feed  my  soul 
With  knowledge,  conscious  peace,  and  virtue 

pure. 
Sacred,  substantial,  never-fading  bliss  I 

Thomson's  Seasons. 

On  earth  peace.  "  People  are  always  ex- 
pecting to  get  peace  in  heaven  ;  but  you  know 
whatever  peace  they  get  there  will  be  ready 
made.  Whatever,  of  making  peace  they  can 
be  blest  for,  mu.«*t  be  on  the  earth  here." — 
Rdskik,  Eagle's  Nest. 


Terms  OF  peace. 
"The  consciousness  of  faith  of  sins  forgiven, 

Of  wrath  appeased,  of  heavy  guilt  thrown  off, 

Sheds  on  my  breast  its  long-fort^otten  peat'e." 

L.  J.  Hall,  Miriam. 

Thanksgiving.  "Praise  is  the  rent  we 
owe  to  God,  and  the  larger  the. farm  the  larger 
the  rent.  The  Lord  has  many  fine  farms  from 
which  He  receives  little  rent.  Thanksgiving 
is  a  good  thing  ;  thanks-living  is  better." — P. 
Henry. 

Life  work.  "  Let  not  thy  praises  be  tran- 
sient— a  fit  of  music,  and  then  the  instrument 
hung  by  the  wall  till  another  gaudy  day  of 
some  remarkable  providence  make  thee  take 
it  down.  God  comes  not  guest  wise  to  His 
saints'  house,  but  to  dwell  with  them.  David 
took  this  np  for  a  life  work  :  '  As  long  as  I 
live  I  will  praise  thee.'  " — Gurnall. 

Constant.  "  There  was  a  beautiful  tradi- 
tion among  the  Jews  which  Lancisius  quotes 
from  Philo.  It  is  to  this  effect :  When  God 
had  created  the  world,  H'*  asked  the  angels 
what  they  thought  of  the  work  of  His  hands. 
One  of  them  replied  that  it  was  so  vast  and 
perfect  that  only  one  thing  was  wanting  to  it, 
namely  that  there  should  be  created  a  clear, 
mighty  and  harmonious  voice,  which  should 
fill  all  the  quarters  of  the  world  incessantly 
with  its  sweet  sound,  thus  day  and  night  to 
offer  thanksgiving  to  its  Maker."—  F.  W. 
Faber. 

*' And  touched  their  golden  harps,  and  hymn- 
ing praised 

God  and  His  works." 

Milton,  ^aradise  Lost. 
"  Now  God  be  praised,  that  to  believing  souls 

Gives  light  in  darkness,  comfort  in  despair." 

Henry  VI.  ii.  3,  §  L 


■•♦•- 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Satrtft^^s  for  Sins* 


SUGGESTIVE  READINGS. 


V.  2. — If  a  soul  shrill  sin.  Be  it  noted  that  the  foregoing  sacrifices  are 
specified  as  sacrifices  already/awiiViar  to  the  Hebrew  people.  In  distinction  from 
those,  the  sin  and  trespass  offering  are  for  the  first  time  mentioned.  The  law  only 
just  given  on  Sinai  created  a  new  standard  of  obedience  and  righteousness  ;  thus, 
"  by  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin."  It  is  here  defined  as  '*  against  the  com- 
mandments of  the  Lord,"  etc.  ;  and  to  meet  this  new  disclosure  of  human  frailty 
frud  guiltiness,  God  appointed  the  sin  and  trespass  offerings.  Shall  we  not  wel- 
come a  full  discovery  of  our  sinfulness,  since  it  both  disposes  the  sinner  to  despair 


CHAP.  IV.  1-35.]  THE   BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS,  30 

o/se/Ay«.«^i/7'^a/ioM  and  constrains  him  to  seek  the  redemption  divinely  provided? 
When  God  reveals  sin  it  is  to  show  its  antidote  ;  and  "  with  Iliui  is  plenteous 
redemption." 

Through  ignorance,  i.e.,  ina'dvertently,  as  distinguished  from  deliberate  and 
defiant  disoJtedience  (com p.  Numb.  xv.  30),  for  which  there  was  no  expiation. 
Are  these  of  small  import?  Shall  we  think  them  of  such  inferior  consequence 
as  compared  with  sins  done  wilfully  ?  Let  it  then  be  recalled  that  Christ  was 
crucified  by  inadvertence !  That  greatest  act  of  human  wrong  was  done 
^^  through  ignorance"  (Acts  iii.  17)  :  "  Had  they  known  it,  they  would  not  have 
crucified  the  Lord  of  glory"  (1  Cor.  ii.  8).  Hence,  though  great  the  crime  it 
may  be  forgiven  mankind  ;  as  a  wilful  sin,  done  in  the  full  light  of  knowledge, 
could  not ;  but  man's  guilt  at  the  Cross  was  a  vast  sin  of  inadvertence  :  "  Father, 
forgive  them, /or  they  know  not  what  they  do  !"  (Luke  xxiii.  31).  Alas  !  for  such 
as  *'  sin  wilfully  after  they  have  received  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  !  there 
remaineth  for  such  no  more  sacrifice  for  sins"  (Heb.  x.  26). 

Vv.  3-12. — The  priest  that  is  anointed,  etc.  Thus  it  is  aflfirmed  that  even 
the  highest  personage  in  the  priestly  ranks  is  frail  and  as  liable  to  sin  as  the 
commonest  of  the  people  ;  he  may  "  do  according  to  the  sin  of  the  people"  (v.  3). 
Shall  Christ's  ministers,  then,  dare  assume  to  possess  superior  spiritual  sanctity  ? 
[See  Heb.  vi.  27,  28.]  The  *'  anointed''  priest  was  the  high  priest  (chap.  viii.  12)  ] 
other  priests  were  only  consecrated.  Yet,  though  he  was  frail  as  ordinary 
persons,  his  sacred  oflice  and  privileges  made  his  sin,  so  much  the  greater  that  he 
had  to  bring  a  far  more  costly  sacrifice  for  his  atonement.  [See  vv.  27,  28.]  God 
distinguishes  concerning  the  criminality  of  sins  :  they  who  live  nearer  the  light 
have  less  excuse  for  '*  ignorance."  So  here,  God  requires  most  solemn  arrange- 
ments for  expiation  ;  the  blood  is  to  be  sprinkled  "seven  times  before  the  Lord, 
before  the  veil  of  the  sanctuary,"  i.e.,  in  front  of  the  holy  of  holies,  and  even  be 
smeared  upon  the  golden  altar  itself !  thus  setting  his  sin  in  the  very  light  of 
God's  countenance  1  How  would  this  fill  the  anointed  priest  with  self-reproach 
and  shame  !  God  cannot  deal  leniently  with  elevated  souls.  We  shall  be 
*' judged  according  to  that  we  have." 

V.  7. — Pour  all  the  blood  at  the  bottom  of  the  altar.  By  this  rite  the  sinner 
acknowledged  that  he  deserved  to  have  his  blood  thus  poured  out  like  water.  It 
likewise  signified  the  pouring  out  of  the  soul  before  God  in  true  repentance  ;  and 
typified  our  Saviour's  pouring  out  His  soul  unto  death, — Henry. 

V.  12. — Without  the  camp.  As  being  accursed,  for  it  symbolically  held  the 
sinner's  guilt,  he  having  laid  his  hand  (v.  4)  thereon.  So  did  our  Sin-Bearer 
ILfiiuffer  without  the  gate"  (Heb.  xi.  1 1-13).  Thus,  too,  is  sin  r-ev/wved  from  God^s 
presence  by  expiation,  carried  into  oblivion,  and  consumed  out  of  existence.  Jesus 
^^ put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself." 

Vv.  13-21. — If  the  whole  congregation,  etc.  Crime  may  spread  itself  through- 
out a  community,  a  state,  or  a  nation ;  and  equally,  a  congregation  or  a  church 
may  lapse  into  evil  conduct  and  contract  iniquity.  When  the  sin  becomes 
**  known"  to  them  (v.  1 4),  an  expiation  must  be  made  with  a  solemnity  equal 
to  the  high  priest's.  Guilt  is  not  less  guilty  because  of  its  being  prevalent  in  a 
community.  God  has  declared  against  wrong-doers  that  "  though  hand  join  in 
hand  they  shall  not  be  unpunished."  Sanctioned  wrongs,  evils  connived  at, 
customary  misdemeanours,  immoralities  and  impieties  which  find  currency, 
popular  sins,  all  are  hateful  to  Jehovah,  and  none  the  less  hateful  because  the 
moral  or  spiritual  distemper  rages  amid  the  multitudes  rather  than  confines  itself 
to  individuals.  Nations  have  suffered  God's  displeasure  for  unrepented  sins  ;  and 
churches  have  been  withered  for  cherishing  impurities  which  have  wounded 
Christ  in  the  house  of  His  friends.  True  patriotism  should  bemoan  and  seek  to  re- 
move the  evils  which  degrade  the  national  life ;  and  earnest  piety  will  show  itself 
in  endeavouring  to  arouse  a  lukewarm  Church  to  "repent  and  do  her  first  works." 


40  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY   ON  [chap.  iv.  1-12. 


Vv.  22-26. — When  a  ruler  hath  sinned.  They  who  dispense  laws  are  amenable 
to  the  Lawgiver;  they  who  call  others  to  account  are  themselves  accountable 
•0  the  Supreme  Ruler.  The  word  '*  ruler"  is  rendered  "  king"  in  1  Kings  xi.  34, 
Ezek.  xxxiv.  24,  etc.  ;  but  God  is  "  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords"  ;  and  before 
His  bar  they  must  stand  in  judgment  if  before  the  Cross  they  do  not  bow  in 
penitence  and  faith.  "  Be  wise  now,  therefore,  0  ye  kings  ;  be  instructed  ye 
judges  of  the  earth.  Serve  the  Lord  with  fear,  and  rejoice  with  trembling.  Kiss 
the  Son,  lest  He  be  angry,"  etc  (Psa.  ii.  10-12). 

Vv.  27-35. — One  of  the  common  people  sin.  The  lowest  are  not  overlooked 
by  the  searching  eye  of  God.  Though  in  his  humble  station  he  may  be  less 
instructed,  less  responsible  for  error,  less  blameworthy  for  sin,  yet  God  demands 
expiation.  If  none  are  exempted  from  the  sinfulness  of  his  deeds,  surely  each 
should  watch  against  sin,  never  excusing  himself  that  he  "did  it  ignorantly,"  but 
seek  to  inform  himself  of  God's  requirements,  and  thus  come  to  "  understand 
his  errors."  Yes  ;  and  leaving  his  evil  state,  every  one  should  seek  the  altar 
with  his  sin  offering ;  go  to  Calvary  with  meek  contrition  and  an  upturned  look 
of  prayerful  trust.  **  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away  the  sin  of 
the  world." 

SECTIONAL  HOMILIES. 

Topic:  Sins  Committed  in  Ignorance  (Vv.  1-12). 

Our  evil  nature  does  not  slumber ;  it  acts.  "  Dead"  as  regards  all  power  of 
living  to  God,  it  is  full  of  untiring  energy  in  living  "  according  to  the  prince  of 
this  world,  the  spirit  which  worketh  in  the  children  of  disobedience  "  Cain  and 
his  children  were  "  dead"  towards  God,  yet  full  of  activity  in  wrong,  they  builded 
cities  and  invented  arts,  living  to  Satan  and  themselves.  So  we  are  committers  of 
sin,  doers  of  iniquity.  No  remedy,  therefore,  would  be  commensurate  with  our 
need  which  failed  to  meet  the  consequences  of  committed  sin.  Accordingly  the 
sin  ofifering  and  the  trespass  offering  were  appointed. 

Committed  sin  may  be  distributed  into  those  committed  in  ignorance  (and  of 
these  this  chapter  treats),  and  those  committed  consciously/  (which  are  dealt  with 
in  chapter  v.). 

I.  Man's  own  disposition  is  to  condone  inadvertent  sins. 

In  the  heart  of  many  there  is  readiness  to  think  of  sins  of  ignorance  as  if  they 
were  no  sins  ;  or  if  admitted  to  be  sins  and  need  mercy,  such  mercy  is  regarded 
rather  as  a  right  than  as  the  unmerited  gift  of  grace. 

1.  Ignorance  is  treated  as  if  synonymous  with  guiltlessness.  To  act  conscien- 
tiously, however  dark  or  dead  the  conscience,  is,  in  the  esteem  of  many,  to  act 
blamelessly.     Hence 

2.  The  responsibilities  which  attach  to  knowledge  become  secretly  a  reason  why 
knowledge  is  eschewed.  "  Darkness  is  loved  rather  than  light,"  because  darkness 
brings  quiet ;  whereas  light  has  an  awakening  and  convicting  power. 

To  these  errors  of  thought  the  appointment  of  the  sin  offering  is  an  answer :  it 
is  designed  to  meet  sins  committed  in  ignorance.  No  one  who  reverences  the 
Word  of  God  will  speak  lightly  of  sins  of  ignorance  after  reading,  "  If  a  soul 
shall  sin  through  ignorance,  etc.  ...  let  him  bring  for  the  sin  that  he  hath 
sinned,"  etc.  (vv.  4,  5). 

II.  Wherrin  the  guiltiness  of  inadvertent  sins  consists. 

The  heinousness  of  such  sins  depends  not  so  much  on  the  character  of  the 
deed  done  as  on  that  condition  of  heart  which  is  capable  of  committing  sin  without 
knowing  that  it  is  sin  ;  and  commits  it,  perhaps,  exultingly^  triumphing  in  it  as 
good  I     What  must  angels  think  of  the  state  of  that  soul  which  is  so  thoroughly 


CHAP.  IV.  1—12.]  THE   BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  41 

blinded^  so  utterly  astray  from  God,  as  to  violate  His  commandments  and  resist 
His  will  in  total  unconsciousness  that  it  is  doing  wrong  ! 

1.  What  such  sinfulness  has  wrought.  It  was  thus  that  multitudes  in  Israel 
hated  and  persecuted  the  Lord  Jesus,  that  Paul  shed  the  blood  of  Stephen,  resist- 
ing the  testimony  of  the  Holy  Ghost  from  one  whose  face  shone  with  heavenly 
brightness  while  he  spake  ;  that  Paul  again  "  verily  thought  he  was  doing  God 
service"  when  persecuting  the  saints.  All  this  argued  thorough  blindness  of 
soul,  thorough  alienation  of  heart  from  God. 

2.  Sin  in  ignorance  is  the  embodiment  in  action  of  those  dark  principles  oj 
enmity  against  God  which  lie  embosomed  in  the  human  heart. 

III.  God's  emphatic  witness  against  inadvertent  sins. 

1.  Sources  of  Divine  remonstrance  against  such  sins. 

(1)  In  Nature.  Throughout  the  heathen  world  the  eternal  power  and  God- 
head are  declared  by  the  works  of  God's  hands.  "  The  heavens  declare  the  glory 
of  God,"  etc.  (Psa.  xix.)  "  He  left  not  Himself  without  witness  in  that  He 
gave  them  rain,"  etc.  (Acts  xiv.  17).  *' The  invisible  things  of  Him,"  etc. 
(Rom.  i.  20). 

(2)  In  Scripture.  The  Jews,  in  addition  to  the  testimony  of  creation,  had 
the  written  Word.  "  To  them  were  committed  the  oracles  of  God"  (Rom. 
iii.  2). 

(3)  By  living  preachers.  From  them  came  many  a  warning,  "  line  upon  line, 
precept  upon  precept." 

(4)  In  conscience.  The  consciences  both  of  Jews  and  Gentiles  were  often 
made  to  feel  the  appeals  of  God  ;  as  Paul  made  Felix  tremble. 

2.  MavbS  resistance  of  the  Divine  remonstrance.  S  itau  and  man's  own  evil 
disposition  quenched  or  obscured  the  light.     As  they  turned  from  the  light — 

(1)  Their  conscience  became  more  hardenea.  And  as  it  hardened,  sins  o^ 
ignorance  were  multiplied,  and 

(2)  Committed  with  a  higher  and  more  reckless  hand. 

3.  Such  daring  ignorance,  how  is  it  fostered  7 

(1)  By  the  perversion  of  revealed  truth.  Truth  had  been  revealed  to,  receivea 
by,  Israel;  but  received  to  be  betrayed.  Their  imposing  systems  of  worship 
and  sacrifice  were  constantly  distorted,  were  false  renderings  of  Divinely  given 
truth. 

(2)  Erroneous  teaching  was  welcomed.  In  vain,  therefore,  the  Scriptures 
spake  of  Jesus  ;  in  vain  John,  His  ftrerunner,  testified  ;  in  vain  the  Lord  Himself 
proved  by  His  words,  His  character,  His  miracles,  that  tie  was  indeed  the  Son 
of  the  living  God.  The  light  of  holiness  and  grace  shone  fruitlessly  upon  their 
hearts,  whose  natural  darkness  was  deepened  by  the  systematic  influence  of  a 
religious  corruption  which  had  sanctified  error  by  holy  titles,  and  had  blesses 
wickedness  in  the  name  of  God. 

Nor  has  it  been  otherwise  in  Christendom.  The  history  of  the  Church  of  God 
supplies  countless  instances  of  soulsso  Tioz^ris/tecZ/ro/n  childkood  in  error  as  to  be 
deadened  in  every  power  of  right  discernment  and  apprehension.  What  wonder, 
seeing  that  our  hearts  naturally  love  darkness,  that  sins  of  ignorance  should 
abound  1 

IV.  Godly  souls  are  betrayed  into  thr  commission  of  inadvertent  sins. 
It  would  be  happy  could  we  assert  even  of  real  Christians  that  they  were  freti 

from  these  fearful  sins  of  ignorance. 

1.  How  are  Christians  betrayed  thereinto  ?  Whenever  they  give  themselves  up 
to  the  guidance  of  any  individual,  or  of  any  system  not  strictly  accordant  with  God's 
revealed  truth,  they  will  surely  act  against  Christ  and  His  commaudmeata 
ignorantly.  Hence  nothing  operates  more  terribly  against  the  pn)gress  of  truth 
than  the  misdirected  energies  of  real  Gkrisiians  ignorantly  sustaining  error y  igno- 
rantly resisting  light. 


42  UOMILETIC   COMMEATARY   ON  [chap,  i v.  1—12. 


2.  Christians  may  therefore  he  beguiled.     Paul  was  keenly  alive  to  their  peril. 
He  knew  how  easily  the  souls  of  believers  can  be  bewitched.     *'0  foolish  Gala 
tians,  who  hath    bewitched  you  ?"     He  knew  how  easily  Satan  can  transform 
himself  into  an  angel  of  light  to  deceive. 

3.  If  where  there  is  most  diligence  and  watchfulness  there  may  be  sins  of  igno- 
rance, how  much  more  where  there  is  negligence  or  slumber,  or  acquiesoence  in 
the  prevailing  evil  of  the  age  ! 

V.  Sins  in  the  godly  are  most  heinous  in  god's  esteem. 

Addressed  as  is  this  chapter  to  those  who  were  ostennbly  the  separated  people  of 
God,  it  teaches  us  especially  respecting  sins  of  ignorance  committed  by  believers. 

1.  Sins  are  greater  in  proportion  to  the  spiritual  status  of  those  who  commit  them. 
The  loftier  our  privileges,  the  nearer  we  are  brought  to  God,  the  more  intimately 
we  are  connected  with  His  service,  the  more  terrible  must  be  the  consequences 
of  transgression. 

2.  God's  name  was  more  dishonoured.  The  sins  of  an  instructed  Israelite 
threw  discredit  on  the  God  he  acknowledged. 

3.  Sacred  life  was  defamed.  With  the  priest  or  Israelite  there  should  have 
been  found  understanding  and  the  fear  of  the  Lord. 

Notes  :  (a)  God  had  a  right  to  expect  such  sins  to  be  avoided.  The  priests  were 
anointed  that  they  might  minister  in  the  near  presence  of  God  :  their  employ- 
ment was  in  holy  things  ;  their  place  the  sanctuary.  As  instructed  in  the  Word 
\  of  the  Lord,  acquainted  with  the  ways  of  His  house,  their  lips  were  to  keep 
knowledge;  and  others  through  them  were  to  learn  the  ways  of  the  Lord.  Sins 
of  ignorance  were  therefore  the  very  sins  that  should  have  been  absent  from  the 
priest. 

(b)  Sin  is  to  be  estimated  by  a  man's  spiritual  elevation.  As  here ;  by  the 
holiness  of  the  things  and  places  in  whicii  the  priest  ministered,  and  by  the 
disastrous  consequences  to  others,  as  well  as  to  himself,  that  flowed  from  its 
commission.       -~-,.,.^^^^ 

VI.  Expiation  prDtided  for  sins  op  inadvertence. 

Sin,  as  in  the  priest,  had  invaded  the  holy  place,  had  entered  before  the  veil, 
had  tainted  the  place  of  his  ministration,  had  defiled  the  altar,  had  involved 
others  in  its  consequences  :  the  stain  must  be  effaced.,  either  by  vengeance  con- 
Bun^ng  the  sinner,  or  be  expiated  by  the  blood  of  a  substituted  victim. 

God,  in  the  unsearchable  riches  of  His  grace,  appointed  the  sin  offering;  on 
whose  head  the  transgressor  laid  his  hand,  and  whose  blood  was  sprinkled  before 
the  Lord.     Thus  was  denoted — 

1.  Against  Whom  the  sins  were  committed.  Seven  times  the  blood  was  sprinkled 
**  before  the  Lord."     "  Against  Thee,  Thee  only,  have  I  sinned,"  etc.  (Psa.  li.  4). 

2.  The  process  of  purging.  The  ground  on  which  the  priest  was  accustomed  to 
stand,  the  altar  at  which  he  ministered,  were  covered  with  blood :  thus  the  taint 
was  covered  over,  himself  purchased  back  from  destruction,  the  privileged  place 
he  had  occupied  preserved  unforfeited. 

3  Its  suggestion  of  death.  The  remainder  of  the  blood  was  poured  out  at  the 
bottom  of  the  altar,  betokening  that  the  just  requisition  of  God's  holiness  had 
been  met — met  by  death.  It  was  the  token  of  accomplished  and  accepted 
atoning  death.     It  was  blood  shed* 

4.  Its  suggestion  of  wrath.  On  fire,  kindled  not  on  the  altar,  not  even  within 
the  camp,  but  '*  without  the  gate,**  the  place  of  dishonour  and  reproach,  like  the 
fire  of  Gehenna,  it  was  devoured  as  an  accursed  thing. 

VII.  Typical  intimations  of  Christ's  death  for  man's  sins. 

1.  God's  condemnation  of  our  Substitute.  Faith,  as  it  stands  by  the  fire 
without  the  camp,  and  gazes  on  the  devoted  parts  of  the  sin  offering  being  con- 
sumed, beholds — 

(1)  The  memorial  of  what  Christ  became  on  account  of  His  people. 


CHAP.  IV  2,  13,  &c..]  THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS,  43 


(2)  Sees  not  only  their  sius,  but  their  nns  judicially  ended. 

(3)  That  their  guilt  is  remembered  no  more  as  the  subject  of  wrath — evidenced 
by  the  ashes  ;  for  ashes  are  the  token  of  tire  having  burned  itself  out. 

2.  God's  acceptance  of  our  Substitute.  The  internal  parts  of  the  victim  were 
burned  on  the  altar  ;  representing  the  inherent  excellencies  of  Christ,  and  accepted 
as  *'  a  sweet  savour"  by  Gjd.  Jehovah  provided  for  us  One  whose  excellencies 
are  here  presented  fur  our  vileness.  In  atonement  Divine  holiness  retjuires  in 
the  Surety  nut  only  that  He  should  bear  every  penalty,  but  that  He  should  also 
present  a  substitutional  perfectness  fur  us.  Thus,  while  sins  committed  in  igno- 
ratice  showed  the  inherent  corruption  of  our  inmost  nature  ;  the  acceptance  of 
tlie  inmost  p^rts  of  the  sin  offering  by  God  upon  His  holy  altar  declares  the  satis- 
faction made  by  Christ  on  our  account. — Homiletically  developed  from  Thoughts 
on  Leviticus,  by  B,  W.  Newton. 

Topic  :  Sinai's  Law  Necessitated  the  Oriqin  of  the  Sin  Offering  (Vv.  2,  13, 

14,  22,  27,  etc.). 

Revelation  from  God  and  religious  feeling  in  man  are  not  synonymous,  are  not 
synchronous.  The  religious  feeling  is  instinctive.  Kevelation  comes  to  inform 
and  guine  that  instinct.  Prior  to  any  revektiou,  man  was  religious.  Within 
himself,  in  the  thoughts  and  fears  and  aspirations  of  his  own  soul,  man  possesses 
the  incitements  to  religion,  i.e.,  to  recognise  and  seek  and  propitiate  God. 

I.  Earliest  axnals  op  human  history  show  man  to  have  been  religious. 

1.  Touched  by  conscious  dependence,  man  acknowledged  it  by  tributary  gifts  to 
Deity. 

2.  Grateful  for  enjoyed  blessings  or  providential  deliverances,  he  brings  to  hia 
altar  a  thank  offering. 

3.  Troubled  by  sense  of  error,  wrong,  guilt,  he  rears  an  altar  and  offers  some 
propitiatory  presentation.  Well  nigh  every  ancient  people  thus  expressed  reli- 
gious feeling,  even  where  no  revelation  was  given.  Either  these  votive  and 
appeasement  offerings  originated  in — 

(a)  The  outcry  and  outlook  of  the  human  soul  for  its  unseen  and  unknown  God  j 
or — 

(6)  An  intimation,  in  some  form,  from  Heaven  that  men  "  should  seek  the  Lord 
if  haply  they  might  feel  after  Him  and  find  Him  "  (Acts  xvii.  27). 

But,  whether  by  supernatural  intimation  or  by  spiritual  intuition,  man  ha£ 
always  been  religious. 

Turning  to  the  Hebrew  scriptures  we  find  offerings  on  some  rude  form  of  altar 
presented  to  God  by  the  children  of  the  first  human  family ,  Cain  and  Abel.  And 
noteworthy  :  they  bring  their  offerings  not  as  if  they  were  adventuring  upon  and 
orii^inating  a  new  mode  of  worship,  but  as  if  in  conformity  with  a  custom  alreadif 
existing. 

Through  the  antedeluvian  period,  and  following  the  dispersion  of  Noah's 
descendants,  worship  by  altar  offerings  was  preserved  in  all  branches  of  the  Semitic 
family.     [Compare  Atwater  on  Tabernacle  of  the  Hebrews.^ 

II.  Prior  to  THE  sinaitio  law  neither  sin  or  trespass  saobificbs  were 
instituted. 

The  early  patriarchs  were  familiar  with  burnt  offerings  and  meat  offerings ; 
but,  until  the  Exodus,  sacrifices  for  expiation  seem  to  have  had  no  speoifio  exist- 
ence. 

1 .  Subordinately  every  ancient  sacrifice  of  victims  on  the  altar  intimated  con- 
icious  sin  and  desire  for  expiation.  But  it  was  only  subsidiary.  The  sacrifice 
was  not  offered  with  the  single  and  supreme  thought  of  atonement  for  sin.  Those 
vemoter  sacrifices  expressed  self-surrender  and  allegiance  rather  than  expiation. 


44  HUMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON        [chap.  iv.  2,  VS,  Ac. 

No  sacrifice  is  recorded  as  a  distiuct  effort  to  expiate  for  sin  prior  to  the  Sinaitic 
law. 

2.  Until  the  law  was  given  sin  was  not  clearly  realised  and  felt.  There  was 
doubtless  a  vague  and  indefinite  sense  of  wrong  in  men,  but  '*  where  there  is  no 
law  there  is  no  transgression  "  (Kom.  iv.  15).  So  also  "by  the  law  is  the  know- 
ledge of  sin  "  (Rom.  iii.  20)  ;  but  "sin  is  not  imputed  where  there  is  no  law*' 
(Rom.  V.  13) 

3.  The  conviction  of  man  of  sin  rendered  the  Siti  offering  •  a  necessity.  The  law 
convicted  man  of  sin  ;  his  inherent  guiltiness  had  not  been  apprehended  till  it 
stood  revealed  in  the  light  of  God's  holy  commandments.  Hence  this  provision 
of  the  sin  offering  has  relation  to  a  man  '*  sinning  against  any  of  the  command- 
ments "  (Lev.  iv.  2,  13,  14,  22,  27,  etc.).  "  The  law  entered  that  the  offence  might 
abound"  (Rom.  v.  20). 

III.  In  the  Sin  offering  assurance  of  salvation  meets  the  awakened  con- 
sciousness OF  GUILT. 

It  seems  evident  that  the  sacrificial  offerings  of  the  Hebrews  became  modified 
and  developed  in  order  to  meet  the  advancing  consciousness  of  sin.  With  a  nearer 
acquaintance  with  God  came  a  keener  sense  of  unworthiness  and  wroLg.  Hence 
their  sacrifices  became  increasingly  expiatory. 

1.  Sin,  essential  and  inherent  sin,  was  so  pressed  upon  man's  conscience  by  the 
standard  of  perfect  and  unattainable  righteousness  given  in  the  law,  as  to  render 
the  sin  offering  an  absolutely  necessary  provision  of  God's  mercy. 

2.  Hence  the  expiatory  element  in  sacrifice,  which  had  been  subordinate  until 
the  law,  was  raised  into  eminence  a7id  vividness  in  the  newly  and  specially  insti- 
tuted offering  of  the  sin  sacrifice. 

3.  And  in  the  sin  sacrifice  a  prophecy  of  God's  purpose  was  given  to  provide 
the  great  expiatory  sacrifice  of  Calvary,  in  which  all  anticipatory  sacrifices  were  to 
be  completed  and  annulled. 

Topic:  Ignorance  in  Sinning  (Vv.  2,  13,  22,  27.) 

"  If  a  soul  sin  through  ignorance^*  ;  but  a  soul  should  not  be  so  ignorant  as  to 
inadvertently  sin.  Has  not  God  plainly  declared  what  "ought  not  to  be  done"  1 
(v.  2).  If  therefore  "they  have  done  somewhat  against  any  of  the  command- 
ments of  the  Lord  concerning  things  which  should  not  be  done,"  they  "  are 
guilty'  (v.  13).  Such  ignorance  must  be  either  from  carelessness,  which  shows 
culpable  neglect;  or  through  blindness,  which  argues  wilful  repudiation  of  light. 
A  perverse  will,  an  "  evil  heart  of  unbelief  in  departing  from  the  living  God,"  a 
refusal  to  "  come  to  the  light  lest  their  deeds  should  be  made  manifest" ;  these 
are  criminal,  and  are  sternly  condemned 

I.  Man's  perception  of  right  and  wrong  cannot  bb  an  allowed  standard. 
-He  may  "  sm  through  ignorance." 

1.  Neither  hm  judgment  nor  his  conscience  is  an  adequate  guide  in  detecting 
«in.  There  are  many  wrong  things  whicli  escape  mans  cognizance,  many  which 
Ins  conscience  fails  to  condemn,  many  which  indeed  "  seem  right  unto  a  man"  and 
his  heart  approves,  which  God  cannot  tolerate.  [See  Addenda,  p.  57,  Ignorance 
V    Knowledge.] 

2.  Hence  the  inquiry,  What  is  sin?  must  be  determined  from  without  a  man, 
and  not  from  within  him.  God  must  be  heard.  *' God  is  light,  and  in  Him  is 
no  darkness  at  all."  He  knows  what  is  sin  ;  and  He  has  revealed  it  in  "  the  com' 
mandments  of  the  Lord  " 

3.  The  presence  of  sin  in  man,  sin  even  ignorantly  contracted,  imperils  marCi 
relationship  to  God.  He  cannot,  look  upon  jsin.  It  must  be  cast  out  from  His 
presence.     "  Garry  it  forth  without  the  camp"  (v.  12).     Sin,  therefore,  interrupts 


CHAP.  IV.  6,  7.]  THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS.  45 

man's  approach  to  God,  prevents  his   acceptable   worship  of  God,  and  alieuates 
his  relationship  with  God. 

II.  God's  estimatpj  and  measurement  of  sim  regulated  the  atonement, 
"  Bring  for  the  sin  which  he  hath  sinned,"  etc.  (v.  3).  All  the  depths  and  sub- 
tilties  oi  sin  were  in  God's  thoughts  when  He  arranged  for  its  expiati(jn. 

1.  Man's  faulty  apprehension  of  sin  would  have  narrowed  the  atonement.  We 
should  then  have  found  our  guilt  exceeding  the  provisions  ;  an  unexpiated  sin- 
fulness would  have  remained  beyond  the  appeasement  we  had  made. 

2.  Sin  has  been  expiated  according  to  God's  measurement  of  sin.  Hence  difull 
atonement  for  the  believer's  sins  of  ignorance  as  well  as  for  his  recognised  sins 
has  been  made  in  Christ. 

(a)  This,  if  apprehended,  lays  the  ground  of  a  settled  peace.  All  may  be  left 
with  Christ. 

(b)  This  will  exalt  our  conception  of  the  fulness  and  efficacy  of  the  Saviour''^ 
taa^ijice, 

(c)  This  will  assure  us  oi  acceptable  and  satisfactory  fellowship  with  God,  since 
all  sin  is  propitiated. 

III.  Ignorance   concerning  sin  argues    man's  real  helplessness  in  dealing 

WITH    IT. 

Even  if  he  could,  by  any  process,  rid  himself  of  sin,  what  can  he  do  with  the 
sin  of  which  he  is  not  cognizant  ?  There  is  guiltiness  in  man  which  never  comes 
(until  he  is  Divinely  enlightened)  within  the  range  of  his  own  consciousness  or 
conscience. 

1.  Man's  ignorance  of  sin  proves  his  total  inability  to  put  it  away.  He  is  like 
a  physician,  when  himself  so  sick  as  to  become  delirious,  attempting  to  prescribe 
and  apply  remedies  for  his  recovery.     [See  Addenda,  p.  57,  Perils  of  Ignorance.^ 

2.  Even  the  most  elevated  human  conscience  is  inadequate  to  determine  and 
depose  sin.     ^'  Who  can  understand  his  errors  1" 

3.  If  there  may  be  sin  eluding  our  detection,  how  would  the  dread  of  unde-- 
tected  and  unexpiated  guilt  destroy  all  peace  were  we  left  to  deal  with  our  sin  1 

4.  No  happy  communion  with  God  would  be  possible  were  a  misgiving  over 
lurkmg  sin  troubling  our  hearts.  An  uneasy  mind,  anxious  on  the  question  of 
sin,  would  mar  all  worship  and  blessedness. 

(a)  A  happy  spiritual  life  rests  upon  an  assured  peace. 

(b)  Assured  peace  must  rest  on  a  perfectly  purged  conscience. 

(c)  A  purged  conscience  must  rest  on  the  foundation  of  a  perfect  remission  of 
all  our  sins,  whether  sins  of  knowledge  or  of  ignorance. 

" And  He  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins" 

Topic  :  Defiled  Sanctities  (Vv.  6,  7.) 

"  The  priest  shall  dip  his  finger  in  the  blood,  and  sprinkle  of  the  blood  seven 
times  before  the  Lord,  before  the  veil  of  the  sanctuary.  And  the  priest  shall  put 
some  of  the  blood  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  of  sweet  incense  before  the  Lord,** 
etc. 

The  sin  of  a  ^^  priest^'  marks  the  wrong-doing  oi  exalted  and  privileged  souls,  ?indi 
the  defamation  wrought  by  one  so  eminent  in  sacred  relationship  and  service 
In  his  misdemeanour  a  defiled  foot  would   taint  the  holy  ground  on  which  he 
stood  ;   a  defiled  hand  would  taint  the  altar  at  which  he  miniiitered. 

1.  Christians  occupying  exalted  positions,  enjoying  elevated  privileges,  render- 
ing distinguished  service  for  God,  iwiy  fall  into  sin. 

2.  They  know  that  the  dishonour  done  to  God  is  commensurate  with  the  dignity 
of  their  position  and  the  holiness  of  their  jr'fession. 

3.  So  acutely  is  their  guilt  felt  by  them  when  thus  brought  under  conscious- 


46  HOMIl  ETIC  COMMEiN VARY  ON  [chap.  iv.  2,  3,  13. 

ness  of  sin,  that  its  burden  and  bitterness  would  overwhelm  them  were  there 
not  adequate  grace  in  the  sin  offering  for  even  such  sin  as  theirs. 

Here,  therefore,  it  is  clearly  shown  by  the  Holy  Spirit — 

I.  That  HOWEVER  FAR  SIN  MAY  HAVE  PENETRATED,  even  though  to  the  very 
*' veil  of  the  sanctuary,"  and  whatever  solemn  and  sacred  things  sin  may  have 
DEFILED,  even  though  it  be  the  holy  "altar"  itself,  thither  the  atoning  blood 
FOLLOWS,  carrying  full  expiation  where  sin  has  carried  defilement. 

1.  VVhen  sin  enters  the  inmost  recesses  of  a  Christian  soulj  high  in  sacred  rela- 
tionship and  godly  service,  into  the  motives,  thoughts,  affections  of  a  holy  man,  it 
intrudes  to  the  very**  veil  of  the  sanctuary"  wherein  God  dwells.  Sin  thus 
invades  scenes  so  hallowed,  the  very  vestibule  of  the  Divine  indwelling. 

2.  When  sin  mars  the  life  and  conduct  and  ministries  of  a  consecrated  servant  of 
the  Lord,  who  had  occupied  high  station  in  the  church,  and  fulfilled  prominent 
functions  in  the  sanctuary,  it  profanes  the  very  "  altar  "  of  Jehovah,  for  it  casts 
a  stain  and  defamation  on  the  holiest  solemnities  of  the  Christian  profession. 
In  touching  one  who  dwells  so  near  God,  and  whose  life  is  so  devoted  to  Him, 
sin  lays  its  defiling  hand  on  that  which  on  earth  is  most  godly,  which  most  re- 
presents God,  and  which  is  nearest  God. 

Can  there  be  atonement  and  purifying  for  such  desecration  of  most  holy 
things  ? 

Yes,  the  virtue  of  the  Redeemer's  blood  penetrates  to  any  shrine,  to  every 
object  sin  has  reached. 

And  '*  where  sin  abounded  grace  doth  much  more  abound."  [See  Addenda, 
p.  57,  Pardon.^ 

II.  That  the  DiSHONorrR  done  to  god,  to  the  sanctities  op  a  godly  life,  and 
to  the  solemnities  op  sanctuary  iIinistries  was  compensated  for  in  offering 
upon  that  *' altar  of  sweet  incense  "  the  symbols  of  the  inherent  and  intrinsic 

excellency  of   CHRIST. 

1.  The  inward  excellency  of  the  victim  (represented  in  "  the  fat  that  covereth 
the  inwards,"  etc.)  is  laid  on  the  sacred  altar  in  lieu  of,  and  as  an  appeasement 
for,  the  inward  impurity  of  the  sinner,  whose  soul  had  contracted  defilement 
through  ignorance  And  in  that  precious  excellency  of  Jesu?  as  our  Substitute 
God  receives  a  perfectly  satisfactory  compensation.  The  ill  savour  of  our  sin 
dishonoured  God  and  defiled  His  holy  altar;  but  on  the  "sweet  incense  altar  " 
Christ  offered  so  fragrant  a  presentation  as  to  answer  for  all  the  fallibilities  and 
faults  of  man. 

2.  Especially  is  this  perfectly  acceptable  offering  of  Christ's  excellence  a  conso- 
latory fact  in  contrast  with  the  imperfection  which  discredits  the  most  conse- 
crated and  sacred  human  life.  Even  2i  priest  *'  anointed  "  with  the  holy  oil  (v.  3), 
called  to  minister  at  the  altar  and  before  the  veil  of  the  sanctuary,  may  *'  sin 
according  to  the  sin  of  the  people."  Alas  !  "  there  is  none  righteous,  no,  not 
one."  Men  may  be  now  '*  anointed  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  raised  to  a  "  holy  priest- 
hood "  in  Christ,  elevated  to  loftiest  spiritual  privileges,  made  partakers  of  the 
heavenly  gift,  and  yet  may  defile  all  this  sacred  excellence  through  sin.  "  The 
best  of  men  are  but  men  at  the  best."  But  Christ  was  "  holy,  harmless,  unde- 
filed."  "  In  Him  was  no  sin."  And  in  Him  God's  "  soul  delighted."  Ami  in 
Him  God  was  honoured  by  a  perfection  so  unsullied  as  to  obliterate  the  dishonour 
done  to  Him  by  man's  faultiness  and  sin. 

Topic: — Sin's  Fearful  Aspects.     "  If  a  soul  shall  sin"  (vv.  2) ;  if  a  priest  shall 
sin"  (v.  3)  ;  if  the  whole  congregation  of  Israel  shall  sin"  (v.  13),  etc. 

Sin  !     The  sound  is  brief.      But  it  presents  a  dark  abyss  of  thought. 

I.  Think  much  of  sin  :    it  is  earths  death-blow 

It  marred  the  beauty  of  a  beauteous   world ,  stripped  it  of  its  lovely  robe ; 


CHAP.  IV.  27,  35.]  THE  BOOK   OF   LEVITICUS,  47 

caused  life  to  wither  and  decay,  etc.    It  placed  its  foot  upon  a  perfect  workman- 
ship and  left  it  a  disordered  wreck. 

II.  Thii)k  much  of  sin  :  it  is  man's  ruin. 

Its  most  tremendous  blight  fell  on  our  inner  life.  It  drove  the  soul  from 
peaceful  fellowship  with  God  ;  changed  the  loving  child  into  a  hardened  rebel ; 
robbed  the  mind  of  light ;  made  the  heart  a  whirlpool  of  tumultuous  passions,  a 
spring  of  impure  streams.  It  is  the  malady,  the  misery,  the  shame  of  our  whole 
race.  It  is  the  mother  of — death  ;  it  digs  each  grave  ;  every  widow  and  orphan 
tastes  its  gall.  It  fills  each  hospital  with  sick;  strews  the  battle-field  with  slain. 
It  is  the  core  in  every  grief,  the  worm  that  gnaws  the  root  of  peace. 

III.  Think  much  of  sin :  its  terrible  destruction  dies  not  in  the  grave 
There  is   a  region  where  its  full  efi^ects   run   revel.     It  kindled  quenchless 

flames  ;  sharpened  the  undying  sting  of  an  upbraiding  conscience  ;  bars  the  hope- 
less in  that  outer  darkness,  where  weeping  ever  weeps,  and  wailing  ever  wails. 

IV.  Think  much  of  sin  :  it  works  this  bitter  and  eternal  anguish  because  god's 

OURSE    attends    it. 

It  raised  a  rebel  hand  against  His  will ;  dared  to  violate  His  holy  law  ;  strove 
to  lay  His  honour  in  the  dust  \  trampled  on  the  statute  book  of  Heaven.  There- 
fore God's  anger  fiercely  burns  against  it ;  hence  every  misery  follows  in  its  rear. 
He  must  be  wretched  who  has  God  against  him. 

V.  Think  much  of  sin:  regard  it  with  an  earnest  dread. 

No  power  can  over-paint  the  terrible  reality  of  what  dn  is,  what  sin  has  done, 
what  penalties  it  evokes.  Those  terrors  of  a  human  heart  are  the  best  prelude  to 
the  tidings  of  the  sin  offering.  Tears  magnify  the  Cross.  Hell  seen  betimes  i& 
hell  escaped  for  ever.  Though  sin  is  death,  the  sinner  need  not  die.  There  is  a 
way  by  which  the  vilest  may  stand  pure.  God's  love  decreed  a  plan.  He  willed 
a  ransom,  and  His  Son  achieved  it.  Flee  to  the  Sin  Offering.  Blessed  are  they 
whose  curse  descends  on  the  Saviour's  Cross. — From  "  Christ  is  All,"  by  Dean 
of  Gloucester. 


Topic:  How  the  Sin  Offering  meets  Man's  inmost  Need  (Vv.  27,  35). 

The  trespass  offering  provides  expiation  for  specific  acts  of  transgression,  for 
what  man  does ;  the  sin  offering  provides  expiation  for  the  evil  inherent  in  man, 
for  what  he  is.  Our  error  is  to  see  sinfulness  only  as  it  breaks  into  expression 
in  deeds;  God  sees  that  there  is  in  us  a  sinfulness  which  is  essential,  and  which 
IS  the  source  whence  the  evil  acts  proceed  ;  that  so  tainted  is  man's  moral  nature 
as  that  he  may  sin  without  even  recognising  his  conduct  to  be  sinful.  It  is  a 
mere  peradventure  whether,  having  sinned,  his  sin  will  even  "  co7ne  to  his  know- 
ledge' (v.  28). 

I.  Mournful  recognition  of  the  sinner's  inherent  corruption. 

Sin  is  in  our  very  nature.  The  institution  of  the  law  of  *'  commandments" 
does  not  create  us  sinners,  it  only  reveals  us  to  be  sinners.  It  holds  the  standard 
up  which  discloses  how  void  man  is  of  righteousness,  of  rightness.  This  inherent 
corruption  is — 

1.  Not  realised  hy  the  unenlightened.  Unconverted  persons  only  apprehend 
sin  as  it  appears  in  actions;  they  repudiate,  or  fail  to  recot^nise,  the  fact  that 
they  are  essentially,  and  in  all  the  springs  of  thought  and  life,  sinful. 

2.  Faintly  discerned  at  first  by  the  awakened.  The  young  convert  perceives 
and  bewails  his  trespasses  more  tiian  his  sin.  He  deplores  that  he  has  done  evil, 
but  scarcely  sees  how  really  he  is  evil. 

3.  Supremely  apprehended  hy  the  most  godly.  Those  highest  in  grace,  with 
conscience  most  illumined  and  heart  most  instructed  through  fellowship  with 
God,  and   realisation  of  the  beauty  of  Christ,  and  enlightenment  of  the  Holy 


i8  HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY  ON    [chap.  iv.  3  13,  22,  27 


Ghost,  "  abhor  themselves"  and  not  their  acts  only.  "  In  me,  that  is,  in  my  flesh, 
dwelleth  no  good  thing y  Most  keenly  is  this  realised  by  holiest  men.  "The 
flesh  lasteth  against  the  spirit,''  so  that  "when  we  would  do  good  evil  is  present." 
[See  Rom.  vii.  and  Gal  v.   17.] 

II.  Joyous  satisfaction  over  the  inclusive  atonement  op  jesus,  "  A 
Bweet  savour  unto  the  LordC^ ;  "an  atonement /or  A^W  (v.  31). 

When  the  painful  fact  is  realised  that  sin  in  us,  as  well  as  trespasses  hy  us, 
constitutes  our  condemnation,  what  consolation  comes  in  the  fact  that  an  off  faring 
for  sin,  as  well  as  offerings  for  trespasses,  was  appointed  by  God.  Thus  Ciir  st 
was  **  made  sin  for  us"  ;  He  "  bore  our  sin" ;  as  well  as  "  was  delivered  for  our 
offences." 

1.  Because  of  our  indwelling  sinfulness  Christ  was  offered  as  our  Sin  Sacrifice 
(t.  29). 

2.  Because  Christ  was  offered  as  our  Sin  Sacrifice  we  who  trust  in  Him  are 
saved  from  an  indwelling  sin  (v.  35). 

Note,  therefore  : 

(1)  When  the  Spirit  reveals  to  believers  their  deeper  sinfulness  ("He  shall  con- 
vince of  sin"  John  xvi.  8),  it  is  not  to  destroy  their  peace  in  Christ,  or  rob  them 
of  joyful  realisation  of  His  full  atonement ;  but  to  reveal  how  much  Christ's 
salvation  is  needed,  and  to  provoke  to  fuller  gratitude  and  faith. 

(2)  To  doubt  our  justification  and  acceptance  because  we  see  our  "  sin,"  betrays 
a  low  estimate  of  Christ's  work  for  us,  and  reflects  on  the  all-abounding  gracious- 
ness  of  God  in  providing  the  sin  offering.  He  "  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of 
Himself."     "  He  by  Himself  purged  our  sins"  (Heb.  i.  3). 

Topic:  Three  Aspects  of  Sin  Offering  (Vv.  3,  13,  22,  27). 

I.  Three  distinct  classes  op  transgression  are  specified. 

1.  "  The  priest  that  is  anointed  "  and  "  the  whole  congregation  of  Israel "  are 
classed  together  as  if  identified.  For  the  priest  represented  all  Israel,  and  all 
Israel  suffered  in  the  error  of  the  priest,  so  that  the  individual  and  collective 
sin  are  to  be  atoned  for  on  precisely  the  same  conditions  and  by  precisely  the 
same  methods.  This  points  to  those  transgressors  who  had  enjoyed  sacred  privi- 
leges, and  were  in  covenant  relation  to  Jehovah,  representing  godly  souls  who 
yet  had  erred  from  their  integrity. 

2.  The  *^  ruler"  represents  the  civil  and  secular  life  of  a  people,  men  of  state 
dignity,  social  eminence,  and  foremost  in  patriotic  affairs  rather  than  in  the 
church  ;  statesmen,  legislators,  magistrates,  civil  functionaries.  These  may  err 
from  their  uprightness. 

3.  *"' The  common  people^*  ^2ii\iQY  m  the  multitudes,  who  are  distinguished  by 
no  eminence,  burdened  by  no  public  respjnsibility,  holding  no  office  iu  Church 
or  State,  simple  ordinary  persona  exposed  to  none  of  the  temptations  and  perils 
of  an  exalted  station.     Yet  these  may  err  and  lapse  into  wrong. 

II.  Threk  alienations  wrought  by  sin  are  intimated. 

1.  God^s  dwelling-place  in  the  tabernacle  was  rendered  unsanctified.  "  Holi- 
ness becometh  Thine  house,  0  Lord,  for  ever."  But  instead  of  stainless  sanctity 
sin  had  been  carried  by  the  priest  "  before  the  veil  of  the  sanctuary.'  The  holj 
place  was  sullied  in  God's  sight. 

2.  God's  worship  was  marred.  The  whole  "  congregation  "  had  to  pause  in 
consecration  and  peace  offerings,  in  the  joy  of  adoration,  and  to  assume  the  sad 
attitude  of  criminals  suing  escape  from  vengeance  by  bringing  a  victim  which 
must  be  treated  as  '*  accursed  "  in  order  that  sinful  men  might  be  spared.  It 
turned  aside  the  homage  of  a  happy  people  from  Jehovah,  while  they  bowed  in 
mournful  prostration  as  a  multitude  of  condemned  transgressors. 


CHAP.  IV.  1—12.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  4ft 

3.  The  individual  conscience  was  molested.  Sin  raised  a  barrier  between  the 
soui  aod  God,  separated  the  sinner  from  the  Divine  acceptance,  and  destroyed — 
BO  long  as  it  lay  on  the  conscience — all  fellowship,  all  bliss. 

III.  Threefold  appeasr:ments  wrougfit  by  thk  blood  are  sngi^ested. 

1.  The  blood  being  "sprinkled  before  the  Lord,  before  the  veil  of  the  sanc- 
tuary," secured  Jehovah's  relationship  with  His  people  (which,  but  for  this  atone- 
ment, must  have  been  severed)  and  His  continued  dwelling  in  their  midst. 

2.  The  blood  being  put  upon  "  the  golden  altar  "  preserved,  the  basis  of  accept- 
able tvorship,  so  that  the  flame  of  "the  sweet  incense"  might  acceptably  ascend 
to  God,  He  being  propitiated  by  the  atonement. 

3.  By  pouring  "all  the  blood"  at  "the  bottom  of  the  altar"  the  claims  o/ 
God  on  the  individual  soul  were  met,  for  thereby  substitutionary  death  was 
attested.     [Compare  Notes  on  Leviticus^  by  C.  H.  M.] 

Topic:  The  Eminent  Sinfulness  op  Error  in  the  Priest  (Vv.  1-12). 

Contrition  for  sin  must  always  have  some  proportion  to  its  malignity  and 
magnitude.  In  the  gradations  of  the  sin  offering — as  in  all  the  other  sacrifices 
— this  truth  is  clearly  taught.  Not  that  any  amount  of  contrition  could  really 
atone  for  any  sin  ;  but  the  contrition  symbolised  in  the  sacrifice  was  to  bear 
some  proportion  to  the  character  of  the  sin  to  be  condoned.  The  same  sin  in  the 
priest  would  be  considered  greater  than  in  the  people,  from  many  considerations. 

I.  From  the  superior  position  he  occupied.  Placed  in  front  of  the  people,  and 
anointed  to  a  conspicuous  as  well  as  dignified  office,  being  mediator  between  God 
and  man. 

II.  From  the  superior  privileges  he  enjoyed.  He  had  exemption  from  many 
secular  anxieties  that  would  irritate  and  embarrass  others ;  was  not  exposed  to 
many  temptations  that  encompassed  others ;  had  more  familiar  and  frequent 
fellowship  with  Jehovah  than  the  common  people  ;  and  was  constantly  coming  in 
contact  with  influences  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties  that  would  tend  to  render 
his  falling  into  error  inexcusable  and  very  culpable. 

III.  From  the  superior  knowledge  he  possessed.  He  would  be  intimately  ac- 
quainted with  the  requirements  of  the  law,  having  to  expound  and  enforce  it ; 
and  he  would  have  ample  means  and  opportunities  for  ascertaining  the  purpose 
of  the  precepts  enjoined,  and  of  avoiding  omissions  and  mistakes. 

IV.  From  the  superior  influence  he  exerted.  The  priest  would  be  looked  up  to 
by  the  people  as  an  example,  and  his  influence  would  be  very  powerful  upon 
Israel  for  good  or  for  evil.  The  old  saying,  "  Like  priest,  like  people,"  has  much 
truth  in  it;  and  if  sin  had  been  allowed  in  the  priest  to  be  passed  over  and  healed 
up  slightly,  it  would  have  been  like  offering  a  premium  to  sin  and  proclaiming  an 
indulgence  to  transgression.  The  sin  of  the  priests  would  not  only  taint  all  the 
holy  places  that  they  frequented  in  the  prosecution  of  their  sacerdotal  work  and 
worship,  but  it  would  contaminate  the  magnetic  circle  of  moral  influence  by 
which  they  were  enveloped,  and  which  necessarily  affected  the  minds  and  morals 
of  the  people  among  whom  they  daily  ministered.  Sin  grows  heinous  according 
to  the  rank  and  ivfiuence  of  the  transgressors ;  and  God  acknowledged  the  exalted 
position  of  the  priests  by  exacting  larger  sacrifice  from  them  in  the  sin  offering 
than  from  the  common  people.  Sins  in  the  priests — who  were  regarded  as  the 
theocratic  earthly  head  of  Israel — would  tend  to  debase  the  moral  sense  of  the 
whole  community.  The  sins  of  the  priest  were  conspicuous  and  the  sacrifice, 
therefore,  was  conspicuous  too ;  and,  as  the  unintentional  offender  brought  the 
young  bullock  for  an  offering,  we  read  in  his  obedience — anxiety  and  willingness 
to  be  forgiven,  as  well  as  confession  of  his  sin.  The  fact  that  the  offermg  was 
equal  to  that  required  for  the  sin  of  the  whole  congregation,  and  more  than  vas 

> 


50  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  iv.  18—22. 

to  be  made  for  the  sin  of  a  ruler,  showed  how  great  the  contrition  and  self- 
abasement  were.  There  was  no  oil  mixed  with  the  sin  offering  to  suggest  glad- 
ness;  no  fragrance  of  frankincense  ;  no  festive  joj'  or  communion,  as  at  the  meat 
offering.  Everything  about  it  denoted  sorrow  and  suffering  on  account  of 
wrong-doing. — F,   W,  Brown, 

Topic :  The  Sin  Offering  of  Ignorance  for  the  Congregation  (Vv.  13-22). 

The  people  were  as  liable  to  sin  through  ignorance  as  the  priest,  so  provision 
Vas  made  for  their  forgiveness  as  had  been  mercifully  made  for  his.  The  laws 
recently  promulgated  were  so  many^  minute,  and  complicated  that  the  people 
would  be  liable  to  misinterpret  and  misunderstand  them.  The  Divine  Lawgiver 
knew  that;  made  provision  to  meet  such  liability  by  appointing  an  offering  easily 
available  and  that  would  effectually  atone.  The  people  had  mixed  before  their 
exodus  with  an  idolatrous  nation  ;  their  old  propensities  and  practices  would 
pursue  them  in  the  wilderness,  as  their  old  foes  had  pursued  them  even  though 
they  had  been  delivered  from  their  final  bondage.  The  offering  for  the  sins  of 
ignorance  of  the  people  teaches  us — 

I.  That  error  is  so  indigenous  iOy  and  insidious  in  man,  that  a  whole  community 
may  become  the  victim  of  it, 

(a)  A  whole  community  may  sin  ignorantly  when— 

1.  It  unwittingly  obeys  unrighteous  human  laws, 

2.  When  it  misinterprets  a  righteous  Divine  law. 

3.  When  it  is  misled  by  the  incorrect  interpretations  of  its  leaders, 

4.  When  it  is  unaware  of  the  existence  of  the  law. 

In  any  of  the  above  instances  the  persons  committing  sin  do  so  ignorantly, 
and  such  wrong-doing,  though  unintentional,  may  incur  guilt,  i.e.,  may  entail  evil 
consequences.     Let  us  pray  and  strive  to  be  saved  from  such  delinquencies. 

(6)  A  whole  community  may  sin  ignorantly — 

1.  Uven  when  it  has  anointed  and  authoritative  leaders, 

2.  Uven  when  it  has  ample  means  of  ascertaining  the  truth, 

3.  £ven  when  it  u  surrounded  by  helpful  and  hallowed  associations. 

We  see  these  facts  exemplified  in  the  history  of  Israel.  How  constantly  they 
went  wrong  wilfully,  and  frequently  ignorantly,  although  blessed  with  peculiar 
and  pre-eminent  advantages.  Notwithstanding  our  light  and  knowledge  we  are 
in  danger  of  falling  into  error ;  our  high  privileges  may  even  prove  a  snare  to 
us,  put  us  off  our  guard,  and  render  us  an  easy  prey  to  sin. 

No  nation  is  exempt  from  this  danger.  If  God's  ancient  people  were  not  exempt, 
where  He  specially  manifested  His  presence  and  power,  where  His  will  was  openly 
made  known,  no  people  at  any  subsequent  period  of  the  world's  history  can  be 
exempt. 

No  church  is  exempt,  for  although  the  Spirit  takes  of  the  things  of  Christ  and 
shows  them  unto  His  people,  and  leads  them  into  all  truth,  yet  we  only  see  as 
through  a  glass  darkly,  and  "  know  in  part."  The  Church  has  committed  great 
errors  in  all  ages,  and  no  man,  and  no  body  of  men,  however  saintly,  are  infal- 
lible.    The  larger  the  disc  of  light  the  greater  the  circumference  of  darkness. 

No  family  is  exempt.  Where  the  best  interests  and  welfare  of  each  is  sought 
there  may  be  sins  committed  ignorantly,  yet  fraught  with  disastrous  conse- 
quences. We  may  mislead  by  the  advice  we  give,  misjudge  in  the  opinions  we 
form  ;  may  omit  to  discharge  our  duty  by  neglecting  judicious  and  necessary 
dincipline  and  counsel. 

II.  That  when  a  whole  community  becomes  the  victim  of  inadvertent  error  wothing 
hut  a  general  expiation  will  atone  for  it. 

The  elders  of  the  congregation  laid  their  hands  upon  the  heads  of  the  offering 


CHAP.  IV.  22—26.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  51 


to  be  presented  to  the  Lord  to  denote  that  the  whole  people  confessed  their  sin 
and  desired  its  removal,  and  the  priest  did  with  the  bullock  as  with  his  own  sin 
offering.  Thus  he  made  an  atonement  for  the  people,  and  their  sin  was  for- 
given. Such  a  service  and  sacrifice  would  be  equivalent  to  a  season  of  national 
confession  and  humiliation,  and  would  be  accepted  as  such  in  the  sight  of  God. 
We  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace,  yet  the  principle  that  was  under- 
lying these  old  rites  exists  still,  and  though  we  are  called  upon  tooflPer  no  bullock 
for  our  individual  or  national  sins,  yet  we  are  expected  to  present  the  sacrifice 
of  broken  and  contrite  hearts  to  the  God  against  whom  we  have  wittingly  or 
unwittingly  sinned,  and  to  expect  that  our  sacrifice  will  be  accepted  through  the 
atonement  of  our  great  Redeemer,  who  is  at  once  our  Sacrifice  and  Priest.  When 
sin  is  participated  in  by  a  nation^  or  churchy  or  family,  the  whole  community  and 
circle  should  participate  in  the  contrition,  acknowledging  complicity  in  the  com- 
mission of  the  sin,  and  deprecating  the  consequences  which,  but  for  forgiveness, 
would  inevitably  ensue. 

In  our  united  and  public  worship  we  should  unitedly  and  publicly  confess  sin, 
for  if  we  are  not  conscious  of  any  flagrant  and  high-handed  sins,  we  are  sure  to 
have  upon  us  the  stain  of  some  inadvertent  olBfence  against  the  Divine  laws.  In 
many  things — yea,  in  all  things — we  all  offend.  There  is  full  and  free  forgive- 
ness for  all  secret  and  unknown  faults  as  well  as  for  open,  unmistakable  sins. 
— F.  W.  B. 


Topic:  The  Sin  Opferino  for  the  Ruler  (Vv.  22-26). 

By  the  sin  offering  of  the  ruler  being  inferior  in  quality  to  that  of  the  priest, 
I  he  Lord  taught  the  people  that  no  secular  position  was  so  high  as  that  of  the 
priest's,  and  that  no  influence  was  so  potent  and  extensive  as  that  which  he,  by 
virtue  of  his  person  and  position,  exerted.  The  humblest  sacred  ofl&ce  is  higher 
than  the  highest  secular  position,  and  the  sincere  believer  and  true  disciple  in 
the  Kingdom  of  Heaven,  though  poor  and  obscure  in  the  world,  is  a  king  and  a 
priest  unto  God.     We  learn  from  this  rite — 

I.  That  persons  in  the  highest  positions  of  secular  authority  among  men  are  held 
responsible  to  God. 

It  has  often  been  said  that  "a  king  can  do  no  wrong";  but  the  teaching  of 
the  old  economy  shows  us  that  kings  could  do  wrong,  and  that  rulers  could  do 
wrong  through  ignorance,  and  that  their  ignorant  acts  of  wrong-doing  were  not 
connived  at  or  condoned  by  the  King  of  Heaven.  When  they  committed  error, 
even  by  mistake  or  in  ignorance,  the  law  could  not  be  broken  without  the  Law- 
giver being  slighted  and  insulted.  The  inculcation  of  this  truth,  and  the  institu- 
tion of  this  rite,  would  arouse  rulers  to  be  circumspect  in  their  conduct,  and 
check  them  in  the  exercise  of  their  regal  authority,  when  tending  to  grow  exact- 
ing and  despotic. 

II.  That  persons  in  the  highest  positions  of  secular  authority  among  men  mast 
humble  themselves  before  God  and  men  when  they  discover  their  public  errors. 

The  example  of  the  ruler  would  influence  the  people  injuriously  The  atone- 
ment of  his  sin  was  therefore  to  be  made  in  a  public  manner  before  the  Lord,  and 
in  the  presence  of  the  people  he  must  acknowledge  his  offences.  Just  as  mercy 
adds  lustre  to  crowned  heads,  so  the  acknowledgment  of  inadvertent  errors  or 
wilful  sins  will  purify  and  dignify  the  conscience,  and  add  to  the  glory  of  earth's 
miu;htiest  potentates. 

III.  That  persons  in  the  highest  positions  of  secular  authority  among  men — thu9 
humbling  themselves — obtain  forgiveness  of  their  sins  and  arrest  the  consequences  of 
their  guilt. 

God  was  just,  and  yet  the  justifier  of  the  penitent  sinner ;  He  demanded  atoce* 

b2 


52 


nOMTLETJC  COMMENTARY  ON  [CHAP.  IV.  27-85. 


n.ent  that  His  broken  law  might  be  vindicated,  and  H.s  slighted  authority 
Sed  The  people  would  see  the  exceeding  heinousness  of  sin,  how  exacting 
and  inevitable  ifs  penalty.that  a  priest  or  a  ruler  could  not  sm  ignoranlly  without 
having  to  humble'^  himself  and  seek  forgiveness  from  Him  whose  laws  he  had 
broken  The  guilt  of  such  sins  would  be  arrested,  their  moral  consequences 
would  be  removed.  Sucl,  sins  would  not  likely  be  repeated  they  could  not  be 
rnorantly  by  the  same  persons,  and  they  probably  would  not  be  wilfully,  when 
hey  tad  V^een  shown  to  be  so  offensive  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  when  for  them 
uch  sacrifices  had  to  be  made.  When  a  course  of  sin  is  arrested  a  multitude 
of  sins  are  hidden-not  only  blotted  out,  but  prevented-sins  of  the  past  re- 
ived and  sins  of  the  future  restrained.  Guilt  removed  here,  and  consequences 
hereafter.— F.  W.  B. 

Topic :  The  Sin  Opferiks  ot  Onb  of  thj  Common  Pboplb  (Vv.  27-35). 

The  law  of  the  sin  oflfering  of  ignorance  included  all  persons  and  positions 
TkeLnciUv  of  ih,  priea  did  not  shield  him  from  its  demands  and  scrutiny  rAe 
2,Z7thi ruler  <i\d  not  hedge  him  in  from  its  surveillance  ^emM. 
o7h  coire<,aUon  did  not  hinder  the  action  of  its  claims;  and  the  obscur  ty  of 
«{;  one  of  ?he  congregation  did  not  excu.e  or  exempt  an  offender  from  its  re- 
ouirement  So  soon  as  the  sin  was  discovered  to,  or  6y  the  offender,  expiation 
aZrd!n"  to  Divine  direction  must  be  promptly  and  penitently  made  for  them. 
Tlie  sin  oftenntr  for  one  of  the  common  people  teaches  us—  _ 

I  That  ohcuritv  of  social  position  does  not  shut  men  out  from  the  cognizance  «/ 
thea/eaM  The  requirement  of  an  offering  from  a  common  person  who  might 
nadvertenti;  sin,  showed  that  none  were  too  obscure  to  be  observed  by  the  eye 
of  the  Lo  d  Each  member  of  the  congregation  of  Israel  was  a  creature  of 
God  each  had  a  soul  capable  of  sinning,  and  needing  forgiveness,  and  each  one 
was  recognised  by  and  known  unto  Him.  The  actions  of  all  men  are  not  only 
afifin   V)nt  their  moral  auSiVity  judged.  .  ,  ^   j 

Ti.   ThTobscurii!/  of  sociil  position  does  not  shut  men  out  from  the  government  of 

'\Cwt-t  imposed  upon  and  obedience  expected  from   each  and  all.     The 
poorest  might  look  at  the  manifestation  of  God  in  the  shekinah  cloud,  and  recog- 

°' TlfrA"  oLt^i"o/  ^ial  mi^i<y-  does  not  shui  men  out  from  th.  clenuruy  of 

'^Xlff^^ng  required  from  a  common  person  was  not  so  great  and  costly  as 
thJt  required  from  a  priest  or  rul^ ;  it  was  adapted  to  the  humbler  circum- 
lucesTf  the  offerer.  This  showed  that  the  great  God  was  not  willing  hat  even 
fhenoorest  among  the  people  should  perish,  not  willing  that  they  should  sin  on 
without  an  offerhfg,  and  so  become  reprobates.  He  restored-though  they  might 
hfve  sinued-to  ffis  fellowship  and  fnendship.  "  The  Lord  is  good  to  all  and 
mltender  mercies  are  over  all  His  works."  In  the  nature  and  extent  of  he 
sin  offering  we  see  foreshadowed  the  fact  that  in  the  great  sin  offering  ol  the 
llLb  of  Golprovision  is  made  for  the  forgiveness  of  all  "We  hav.  redemption 
through  His  blood,  even  the  forgiveness  of  sins.  — *.  W.  i». 


CHAP.  IV.  2—27.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 


53 


OUTLINES   ON   VERSES   OF   CHAPTER  IV. 


V.  2. — Theme:  Sin  turough  ionoranok. 

1.  The  seat  of  sin.  "If  a  sou/"  etc. — body 
with  organs  only  instruments  of  soul. 

2.  'I  he  source  of  sin  "Ignorance" — of  God 
— His  love,  mercy,  grace,  etc. 

3.  The  strength  of  sin.  Law,  "  command- 
menta." 

4.  The  stain  of  sin.  Deep — requires  blood 
to  wash  it  away. 

Temptation  in  itself  not  sin  ;  yielding  is  sin. 
Ignorance  of  Israel  inexcusable.  They  had 
sacred  memories,  public  directions,  repeated 
remindings.  The  Judge  of  all  the  earth  will 
do  right  with  those  who  have  never  heard  His 
name ;  but  those  who  know  His  will  and  do 
it  not  shall  be  beaten  with  many  stripes, — F. 
W.B. 

V.  3. —  Theme:  Sin  in  the  priesthood. 
*'  If  the  priest  that  is  anointed  do  sin." 

I.  A  HOLY  OFFICE  DOES  NOT  ENSURE  INFAL- 
LIBILITY. 

II.  Occupants  of  a  holy  office  are  specially 
CALLED  TO  SANCTITY.  "  Be  ye  cleau  that  bear 
the  vessels  of  the  Lord." 

III.  Eminently  privileged  and  enlightened^ 
they  who  minister  before  God  should  be  most 
noiLANT  lest  they  SIN.  To  "  sin  through 
ignorance  "  should  be  impossible. 

IV.  Sin  in  God's  priests  had  to  be  purged 
BY  A  gkeat  SACRIFICIAL  EXPIATION.  Express- 
ing— 

1.  The  peculiar  magnitude  of  sin  in  them. 

2.  The  boundless  suflficiency  of  redemption, 
even  for  them. 

V.  6.  Note:  Sevenfold pukgino.  "Sprinkle 
of  the  blood  seven  times  before  the  Lord." 

The  different  treatment  of  the  blood  is  here 
to  be  noticed.  Whilst  in  the  case  of  the  other 
sacrifices  the  priest  threw  the  blood  upon  the 
walls  of  the  altar  of  burnt  offering  (see  chap.  i. 
i),  in  the  sin  offering  the  high  priest  is— 

1.  First,  to  dip  his  finger  seven  times  in  the 
blood,  and  sprinkle  it  before  the  Lord. 

The  finger,  according  to  the  rules  which 
obtained  ciuring  the  second  temple,  was  that 
of  the  right  hand,  as  the  blood  was  always 
taken  and  sprinkled  with  the  right  hand.  [The 
right  hand  is  the  symbol  of  strength,,  as  if 
denoting  that  the  act  was  done  with  a  resolute 
purpose  to  find  purifying. — Ed.] 

2.  Seven,  being  a  complete  number,  is  used 
for  the  perfect  finishing  of  a  work. 

Hence,  the  seven  days  of  creation  (Gen  ii. 
2,  8);  seven  branches  in  the  golden  candle- 
stick (Exod.  XXV.  37 ;  xxxvii.  23)  ;  seven  times 
the  blood  was  sprinkled  on  the  day  of  atone- 
ment (Lev.  xvi.  14);  seven  times  was  the  oil 
sprinkled  upon  the  altar  when  it  was  conse- 
crated (Lev.  viii.  11);  seven  days  were  re- 
quired for  consecrating  the  priests  (Lev.  viii. 
86) ;  seven  days  were  necessary  for  purifying 


the  defiled  (Lev.  xii.  2;  Numb.  xix.  19); 
seven  times  Naaman  washed  in  the  Jordan 
(2  Kings  V.  10-14);  seven  days  Jericho  was 
besieged,  and  seven  priests  with  seven  tt urn- 
pets  blew  when  the  walls  fell  down  (Josh.  vi. ) ; 
the  Lamb  had  seven  horns  and  seven  eyes, 
which  are  the  seven  spirits  of  God  (Rev.  v. 
6);  seven  seals  are  on  God's  book  (Rev.  v.  6), 
etc. — Ellicoti's  Commentary. 

V.  6 — Note:  Expiation  wrought  tr  the 
GAZE  OF  heaven.  "  Before  the  Lord,  before 
the  veil  of  the  sanctuary." 

1.  The  phrase  "  before  the  Lord  "  indi- 
cates that  the  act  of  expiation  was  to  be  per- 
formed in  the  immediate  presence  of  (I)  Him 
whom  the  sin  had  dishonoured  ;  ( 2)  Him  whom 
the  sprinkled  blood  was  to  propitiate  ;  and  on 
the  very  spot  where  the  priest  had  ministered, 
and  which  — 

(1)  By  priestly  sin  had  been  desecrated^  and 

(2)  By  expiatory  blood  was  to  be  again  sane- 
tified. 

This  twofold  effort  of  expiation,  reconcilia- 
tion to  God,  and  sanctification  of  sacred  scenes, 
suggests  what  the  sinner  has  to  secure  through 
the  blood  of  Christy  viz. : — 

(a)  Jehovah  propitiated,  so  that  man  may 
stand  unrebuked  in  His  presence. 

(/^)  Defiled  scenes  reconsecrated,  so  that 
God  may  still  dwell  in  the  temple,  in  the 
human  heart.  That  must  be  sanctified,  for 
^'- ye  are  the  temple  of  God." 

2.  The  phrase  "before  the  veil  of  thb 
SANCTUARY  "  indicates  that  the  act  of  expiation 
was  to  be  performed  in  the  gaze  of  the  angel 
hosts.  That  blue  "  veil"  was  all  overwrought 
with  cherubic  and  angel  forms,  typical  of  the 
firmament,  the  heavenly  world,  crowded  with 
the  angelic  hosts. 

1.  For  angelic  beholders  watch  and  bewail 
man's  sin. 

2.  They  foy  in  the  presence  of  God  over  the 
sinner  s  repentance. 

3.  They  **  desire  to  look  into  "  the  wonders  of 
redemption. 

4.  They  "  minister  unto  those  who  are  heirs 
of  salvation^^ 

Hence — 

(a)  Having  beheld  God's  holy  place  defiled, 
they  watch  its  re-hallowing,  and  thus  ponder 
how  are  justified  the  ways  of  God  with  men. 

{b)  Having  witnessed  the  withdrawal  of 
God  from  the  defiled  scenes  (for  "your iniqui- 
ties have  separated  between  you  and  God,  and 
your  sins  have  hid  His  face  from  you."  Isa. 
lix.  2),  they  are  eager  observers  of  the  renexval 
of  favour  and  fellowship  between  God  and  the 
expiated  soul.  "  The  father  ran  and  fell  on 
his  neck  and  kissed  him  " ;  and  '♦  the  father 
said  to  his  servants  (comp.  Psa.  ciii.  20,  21 ; 
Zech.  iii.  4, 5),  Bring  forth  the  best  robe/'  •to. 


54 


fJOMlLETlC   COynfENTAHY  ON 


[chap.  IV.  6—12 


V.  6. —  Theme:  Sevenfold  sprinkling. 

To  denote  completeness,  perfection,  to  indi- 
cate how  deeply  dyed  sin  was,  and  impress 
the  mind  that  it  fully  was  forgiven:  sprinkled 
"  before  the  Lord:'     To  teach— 

(1)  That  all  sin  is  committed  agaiu'^t  Him. 

(2)  That  all  sin  must  be  forgiven  by  Him. 
Atonement  and   mediation    the    basis    and 

means  of  pardon. — F.  i-V.  B. 

V.  12. —  Theme:    Sin    loathed    by    god, 

"  Fven  the  whole  bullock  shall  he  carry  forth 
without  the  caffip^^  etc. 

If  the  law  reveals  sin  in  man,  it  is  to  drive 
the  convicted  and  condemned  sinner  to  the 
sacrifice  for  sin.  The  law  was  not  given  to 
make  men  holy,  but  to  prove  us  sinners. 
Deluded  souls,  "  bUnded "  bj  the  deceiver, 
try  to  keep  the  law  and  thus  become  righteous : 
in  vainl  For  "  the  law  makes  nothing  per- 
fect" ;  it  unveils  man's  deformity  that  he  may 
hide  himself  in  the  redeeming  merits  of  Christ. 

I  Sin's  hatkfulness.  "  Carry  forth  with- 
out the  camp." 

Look  at  the  sin  offering,  and  see  there  how- 
hateful  sin  is  I  See  how  the  perfect  Substi- 
tute, God's  own  beloved  One,  is  cast  out. 

1.  Our  sin  is  repulsive,  odious,  an  offence  to 
Cod.     He  cannot  bear  it  in  His  presence. 

2.  He  in  whom  sin  centres  is  repelled  as 
loathsome,  yes :  be  it  Jesus,  our  Surety,  on 
■whom  our  sin  is  laid ;  or  be  it  man  himself, 
carrying  his  own  unpardoned  sins — the  sin- 
bearer  is  banished  ! 

II.  Sin's  annihilation.  '*  Shall  he  be 
burnt:^    Nothing  remaining. 

1.  S^in  consumed.  "Behold  the  Lamb  of 
God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world." 
Those  dead  "  ashes  "  tell  of  sin's  annihilation. 

2.  Sins  cancelled.  All  our  bewailing  over 
our  sins  could  never  cancel  one ;  if,  therefore, 
they  were  not  all  cancelled  when  Christ  "  died 
for  our  sins  "  they  cannot  now  be  cancelled. 
«  There  remaineth  no  more  offering  for  sin," 

(a)  If  the  sin  offering  has  been  sacrificed 
and  accepted,  we  may  joy  in  the  fact  of  sin 
for  ever  expiated, 

{b')  We  may  rejoice,  even  when  most  con- 
vinced of  sin,  that  God  asks  no  penalty  beyond 
the  death  already  borne  [iSee  Addenda,  p.  67. 
Pardon:\ 

Y.  12. —  Theme:  Discipleship  following 
CHRIST  TO  REPROACH.  "  The  whole  bullock 
shall  he  carry  forth  without  the  camp'"* 

This  act  is  to  be  viewed  as  expressing — 

a.  The  place  which  the  Lord  Jesus  took  for 
us,  as  bearing  sin. 

b.  The  place  into  which  Lie  was  cast,  by  a 
world  which  had  rejected  Him. 

The  use  which  the  Apostle,  in  Heb.  xiii,, 
makes  of  Christ's  having  "suffered  without 
the  gate  "is  deeply  practical :  "  Let  us  go  forth, 
therefore,  unto  Him,  without  the  camp,  bear- 
ing Bis  reproach.^' 

1,  The  place  where  He  suffered  expresses 
our  rejection  from  earth.  Though  His  death 
has  secured  us  a  city  on  high,  it  has  forfeited 
for  US  a  city  below. 


2  In  suffering  "  without  the  gate "  He  set 
aside  Jerusalem  as  the  present  centre  of 
Divine  operations.  There  is  no  such  thing 
now  a.s  a  consecrated  spot  on  earth. 

3,  Christ  has  taken  His  place  as  a  suffering 
One,  outside  the  range  of  this  world's  religion 
— its  politics,  and  all  that  pertains  to'it.  The 
world  hated  Him,  and  cast  Him  out. 

Wherefore,  the  word  is,  "  Go  fort  h^ 

I   Outside  every  religious  camp. 

You  must  "go  forth"  out  of  every  "holy 
city,"  every  religious  system  which  men  set 
up,  to  find  the  rejected  Christ. 

1.  From  the  gross  absurdities  of  ignorant 
superstitions. 

Christ  is  not  to  be  found  amid  the  ruins  of 
Jerusalem,  amid  the  so-called  sacred  scenes 
and  the  relics  of  antiquity.  A  single  ray  of 
revelation  shows  that  we  must  "  go  forth  " 
from  all  such  trifles  to  find  communion  with 
a  rejected  Christ. 

2.  So,  when  men  setup  **  a  camp,^^  and 
rally  round  a  standard  on  which  is  embla- 
zoned some  do^ma  of  truth,  or  some  imposing 
institution,  when  they  appeal  to  some  ortho- 
dox creed  or  splendid  ritual— it  then  requires 
much  spiritual  discernment  for  the  proper 
application  of  the  words  "  let  us  go  forth,"  and 
much  spiritual  energy  and  decision  to  act 
upon  them.  Still,  they  should  be  discerned 
and  acted  upon,  for  the  atmosphere  of  a  camp 
is  destructive  of  personal  communion  with  a 
rejected  Christ. 

3.  It  is  the  tendency  of  our  hearts  to  drop 
into  cold  stereotyped  forms.  These  ^  forms  may 
have  originated  from  real  visitations  of  the 
Spirit.  The  temptation  is  to  stereotype  the 
form  when  the  spirit  and  power  have 
departed.  This  is,  in  principle,  to  set  up  a 
camp  The  Jewish  system  could  boast  a 
Divine  origin— its  temple,  splendid  worship, 
priesthood,  sacrifices,  etc.  Where  is  the 
system  which  could  put  forth  such  powerful 
and  lofty  pretentions  to-day?  And  yet  the 
command  was  to  '  go  forth."  It  is  our  prone- 
nessto  slip  away  from  communion  with  Christ, 
and  sink  into  a  dead  routine. 

II.  Outside  the  Camp  to  the  lord  jesu8 
"  Unto  Him.'" 

Not  glide  from  one  system  to  another,  from 
one  set  of  opinions  to  another,  from  one  com- 
pany of  people  to  another,  but  from  all  which 
merits  the  appellation  of  "  a  camp  "  to  Him 
who  "  suffered  without  the  gate." 

1.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  as  thoroughly  outside 

the  gate  now. 

The  religious  world  put  Him  outside  eighteen 
centuries  ago  ;  and  the  religious  world  of  that 
day  is,  in  spirit  and  principle,  the  religious 
world  of  the  present  moment.  The  world  has 
covered  itself  with  the  cloak  of  Christianity. 

2.  If  we  would  walk  with  a  rejected  Christ 
we  must  be  a  rejected  people. 

Our  Master  "  suffered  without  the  gate,"  vre 
cannot  reign  within  the  gate.  If  we  walk  in 
His  footsteps  whither  will  He  lead  us  ?  Surely 
not  to  the  high  places  of  this  Godless,  OhriiV- 
less  world. 


CUAP.  IV.  13—27.] 


THE  BOOR    OF  LEVITICUS. 


55 


"His  path,  uncheered  by  earthly  smiles, 
Led  ouly  to  the  Cross." 

He  was  a  despised  Christ,  a  rejected  Christ, 
a  Christ  outside  the  camp. 

3.  Bearing  His  reproach^  let  us  go  forth 
unto  Him. 

Not  bask  in  the  sunshine  of  the  world's 
favour  Let  us  be  faithful  to  a  rejected 
Lord.  While  our  consciences  repose  in  His 
blood,  let  our  hearts'  affections  entwine  them- 
selves around  His  sacred  Person.  We  ask  a 
bold  separateness  from  the  world,  a  joyous, 
living  attachment  to  Christ.— Arranged  from 
JSJotes  on  Leviticus^  by  C.  H.M. 

V.  \Z.— Theme :  Hidden  sin. 

Sin  may  be  hidden,  undetected  by  the  doer; 
may  be  concealed  from  others ;  but  cannot 
from  God.  The  genesis  of  sin — (a)  begins  in 
secret  chambers  of  heart,  {b)  proceeds  to, 
exhibits  itself  in,  words  and  deeds.  No  sin  so 
secret  and  subtle  but  known  fully  to  God. 
Thought,  feeling,  intention,  are  known  to 
Him.  Sins  of  heart  need  pardon — unfulfilled 
eyil  purposes  need  forgiveness. — F,  W»  B, 

V.  20. — Theme:  Good  news. 

I.  Of  appointment  of  mediator. — **  Priest." 

n.  Of  acceptance  of  sacrifice — "Atone- 
ment." 

IIL  Of  proclamation  of  pardon.  "Shall  be 
forgiven  them." 

In  the  Gospel  we  have  these  glad  tidings 
fully  and  freely  proclaimed,  and  all  centred 
in  Christ.—/:  W.  B, 

V.  27. — Theme:  Common  Peoplb. 

I.  No  one  so  common  as  to  be  overlooked  by 
God. 

n.  No  sin  so  trivial  as  to  be  connived  at  by 
God. 

Life,  then,  is  real,  solemn  earnest,  even  in 
humblest.  Venial  as  well  as  mortal  sins  to  be 
deprecated  and  avoided. — F.  W,  B, 

"V.  20.— Theme:  Fokgivbn.  «*It  shall  be 
forgiven  them-^ 

Based  on  the  '*  atonement."  No  forgiveness 
otherwise.  "  The  priest  shall  make  an  atone- 
ment for  them  and  it  shall  be  forgiven  them." 
The  terms  of  forgiveness  are  fixed  :  and  the 
order  in  which  forgiveness  is  gained  is  deter- 
mined.    Atonement  first :  then  forgiveness. 

I.    ThB    consciousness    of     FOfiGIVENESS  : 

kov)  is  it  gained  ? 

The  mind  of  the  Jewish  offerer  was  set  at 
rest  by  the  presentation  of  his  sin  offering. 
How  did  he  know  that  the  sin  for  which  he 
brought  his  sacrifice  was  forgiven  ? 

Because  God  had  said  * '  It  shall  be  forgiven 
him." 

1.  His  peace  of  heart  rested  on  the  testimony 
•fGod. 

2.  His  peace  of  heart  rested  on  the  offered 
and  accepted  sacrifice. 

It  was  a  transaction  with  a  covetiant  pro- 
mise. The  transaction  effected  ("  atonement 
made  for  him  "  ,  the  promise  was  believed  (^"  it 
shall  be  forgiven  him  ").     Thus— 


(a)  Faith  in  God'^s  fVordemd.  in  the  Saviour's 
atonement  imparts  the  peace  and  satisfaction 
of  forgiveness  to  the  sinner. 

For  an  offerer  of  the  sin  offering  not  to  be- 
lieve that  his  sin  was  forgiven  would  have 
reflected  on  the  truthfulness  of  God  who  had 
pledged  forgiveness  as  the  issue  of  atonement. 
To  doubt  is  to  "  make  God  a  liar."  We  must 
believe ! 

(J))  Chris fs  crucifixion  is  a  fact ;  as  really 
so  as  the  death  of  the  victim  for  the  sin 
offering.  The  blood  of  Christ  is  our  satisfac- 
tion to  justice :  as  the  blood  of  the  victim 
was.  What  then?  ^tn  is  expiated.  That  fact 
stands.  The  believer  sees  in  Christ  One  who 
has  been  judged  for  his  sin  ;  One  who  made 
himself  responsible  for  his  sin.  And,  as  God 
sealed  His  acceptance  of  that  sacrifice  by 
Christ's  resurrection,  the  sinner's  pardon  and 
justification  are  truths  to  be  held  with  the  joy 
of  faith. 

II.    ThB     BEALISATION     of      FOBOITBNB88: 

What  it  ensures  ? 

1.  All  fear  of  judgment  and  wrath  is 
eternally  set  aside.  God  "made  Him  to  be 
sin  for  us  that  we  might  be  made  the 
righteousness  of  God  in  Him  "  (2  Cor.  v.  21). 
Our  judgment,  the  wrath  due  to  sin,  these 
were  settled,  effected,  on  the  accursed  tree, 
between  Divine  holiness  and  the  Spotless 
Victim.  Justice  has  no  charge  to  bring  against 
the  believer,  because  it  has  no  charge  to 
bring  against  Christ.  If  a  charge  could  be 
brought  against  a  soul  identified  with  Christ 
by  faith,  it  would  deny  the  perfectness  of 
Christ's  work  on  his  behalf. 

2.  Eternal  life  is  inherited :  for  the  death 
which  sin  brings  is  escaped  by  its  falling  on 
the  Substitute.  The  sin  is  gone,  because 
the  life  to  which  it  was  transferred  is  gone. 
There  is  no  other  death  required.  The  sinner 
does  not  die :  for  Christ  has  died  his  death. 
It  remains  to  the  forgiven  and  justified  soul 
that  he  lives:  "  he  that  believeth  in  Me  shall 
never  die  "  (John  xi.  26).  The  judgment  and 
death  of  Christ  on  the  Cross  were  realities  ; 
then  the  righteousness  and  life  of  the  believer 
are  also  realities.  Imputed  sin — ours  laid  on 
Christ — was  a  reality  ;  imputed  righteousness 
— Christ's  transferred  to  us — is  a  reality. 
The  death  of  Jesus  satisfies  all  the  demands 
made  as  to  human  sin,  satisfies  them  for  ever. 
[Comp.  Notes  on  Leviticus^  by  C.  H.  M.]  [See 
Addenda,  p.  67,  Pardon.'] 

V.  27.  Theme:  Culpability  of  igno- 
KANCB.     "  If  any  one  jm,"  etc. 

The  majesty  of  the  law  of  God  was  ex- 
hibited, and  declared,  by  the  fact  that  il 
could  not  be  broken  inadvertently  with 
impunity ;  and  the  mercy  of  God  was  dis- 
played in  that,  for  any  transgression,  an 
offering  would  not  only  be  accepted,  but  was 
commanded.  It  is  an  eternal  law  that  the 
moral  quality  of  an  action  lies  in  the  inten- 
tion Sins,  committed  through  ignorance, 
may  be  fraught  with  disastrous  consequences, 
as  in  the  case  of  those  who  rejected  and 
crucified    Christ    "through    ignorance,"   for 


66 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON 


[chap.  IV.  27. 


whom  He  prayed  on  the  Cross  saying  "  they 
know  not  what  they  do."  Their  ignorance 
was  not  wholly  excusable ;  they  shut  their 
eyes  to  evidences  of  the  Messiahship;  through 
pride  and  prejudice  they  regarded  Him  as  an 
impostor  and  usurpei,  and  had,  as  Jesus  said, 
"no  cloak  for  their  sins." 

Saul  of  Tarsus,  though  "  blameless,  as 
touching  the  righteousness  which  is  in  the 
law,"  yet  his  legal  blamelessness  did  not 
exempt  him  from  errors  of  ignorance,  nor  did 
his  scrupulous  conscientiousness  prevent  him 
from  doing  wrong  ;  for  he  persecuted  the  Chris- 
tians, and  thought  he  was  doing  God  service. 
The  Pharisee  in  the  Temple  thought  himself 
better  than  other  men,  and  seemed  unaware  of 
the  heinous  pride  and  wicked  self  righteousness 
that  prevented  him  going  down  to  his  house 
justified  as  did  the  poor  publican.  Even  con- 
science needs  educating  and  enlightening ;  it 
has  shared  the  fate  of  all  the  other  faculties, 
and  is  liable  to  sericuslj  mislead  us. 

We  may  commit  sins  of  ignorance. — 

I.  Through  mere  want  of  thought ;  through 
absolute  neglect. 

II.  Through  lack  of  knowledge  that  might 
have  been  acquired. 

III.  Through  misapprehension  of  informa- 
tion, or  direction  given. 

IV.  Through  defectiveness  of  memory^  not 
retentive  or  ready  at  the  needed  juncture  to 
prevent  error. 

V.  Through  not  heeding  protests  and  ob- 
stacles which  God  may  have /-aced  in  the  way, 
and  presented  against  wrong-doing. 

The  sacrifice  provided  for  sins  of  igno- 
rance shows  that  God  does  not  connive  at  the 
errors  and  mistakes  of  any  one ;  and,  that  for 
inadvertent  wrong  doing,  as  well  as  for  high- 
handed sins,  pardon  must  be  sought.  We 
need  to  pray  to  be  forgiven  for  unknown,  as 
well  as  for  known  sins ;  and  to  be  cleansed 
from  secret  faults,  as  well  as  to  be  kept  back 
from  presumptuous  sins. — F,  W.  B. 

V.  27 — Theme:  Scbiptubb  thb  antidote 

rOR  IGNORANCE 

"  Sin  through  ignorance^  while  he  doeth 
■omewhat  against  any  of  the  commandments  of 
the  Lord." 

Honest-hearted  reception  of  the  Word  of  God 
can  alone  preserve  us  from  ignorance. 

I.  Acquaintance  with  scripture  :  This 
alone  is  the  effectual  remedy  for  the  darkness 
of  ignorance. 

I.  Is  not  the  light  of  Scripture  hidden  to- 
day, other  Mghts  being  substituted  instead  ? 

1)  Think  of  the  manner  in  which  ceremo- 
nial rites  (many  of  them  mere  inventions  of 
man),  ministered,  too,  by  unholy  hands,  have 
supplanted  the  true  and  saving  ministrations 
of  the  Gospel  of  the  grace  of  God. 

(2)  Think  of  multitudes  while  yet  in  their 
•ins,  because  nnsanctified  by  faith  in  Jesus, 
being  taught  falsely  to  say  to  the  great  Shep- 
herd of  Israel,  "  We  are  Thy  people,  and  the 
sheep  of  Thy  pasture." 

(3;  Think  how  many,  uncommissioned  by 
Ood,  unacquainted  with  His  truth,  untaught 


by  His  Spirit,  have  usurped  the  place  of 
ministers  of  Christ,  and  are  so  owned  and 
honoured. 

(4)  Think  how  professed  discipleship  of 
Christ  has  degenerated  into  seeking  unholy 
place  and  gain,  coveting  the  splendour  of 
Solomon  rather  than  the  reproach  of  Jesus. 

2.  Is  there  not  a  natural  tendency  in  the 
heart  of  man  to  bow  to  perverted  and  falsely 
assumed  authority  ? 

"  The  prophets  prophesy  falsely,  and  the 
priests  bear  rule  by  their  means,  and  Thy 
people  love  to  have  it  so." 

(1)  All  such  authority,  neither  based  upon 
nor  guided  by  truth,  can  only  lead  into  the 
darkness  to  which  itself  belongs.  What  won- 
der, then,  that  ignorance  should  settle  upon 
that  soul  which  has  made  itself  the  slave  of 
such  authority  I  What  wonder  if  it  should 
welcome  falsehood,  and  fight  against  truth, 
and  congratulate  itself  most  when  furthest 
from  the  principles  of  Christ  1 

(2)  Individuals,  too.  as  well  as  collective 
bodies,  may  claim  an  authority  which  Cod  has 
never  given.  And  not  unfrequently  fear,  or 
affection,  or  self  interest,  or  a  disposition  to 
lean  upon  others,  causes  it  to  be  gladly  recog- 
nised. But  such  authority,  seeing  that  it  is 
not  grounded  upon  truth,  that  it  directs  not  to 
the  Scriptures  alone,  can  only  lead  towards, 
if  not  into,  darkness. 

II.  Close  adherence  to  scripture  :  This 
alone  will  save  us  from  the  false  leadings  and 
lights  of  our  age. 

1.  Is  that  which  we  hear  true  or  false  ?  Is  it 
or  is  not  the  Word  of  God  ?  Such  are  the  great 
questions  we  have  to  ask  ourselves  now. 

2.  The  faithful  use  of  the  Scripture  will 
expose  many  an  error,  detect  many  a  sin  of 
ignorance^  and  show  us  much  that  we  have  not 
sufficient  grace  to  attain. 

3.  Instruction  and  exhortation  of  tho 
Scriptures  is  employed  by  the  Lord  to  free  His 
people  from  the  sins  of  ignorance  and  their 
disastrous  consequences. 

III.  The  steady  light  of  god's  word: 
This  is  appointed  to  shine  on  in  the  darkness, 
until  the  day  dawn. 

The  energies  of  Satan,  and  the  impelling  of 
evil  in  us,  are  active  to  resist  the  Scriptures 
and  quench  the  sacred  light  of  truth. 

1.  The  delusions  of  Satan  and  of  the  human 
heart  struggle  to  increase  darkness  and  confirm 
error.  And  we  cannot  wonder  that  they 
prosper  in  their  plans  during  a  period  marked 
by  our  Lord  Himself  as  one  wherein  "  iniquity 
shall  abound." 

2.  Yet  the  greater  the  darkness  the  more 
precious  is  any  light  that  is  available  in  our 
midst.  Amid  all  the  dark  and  stifling  scenes 
through  which  the  fierce  passions  of  men, 
under  Satan,  are  hurrying  alike  the  Church 
and  the  world,  the  Word  of  God  remains  un- 
changed and  unchangeable  ;  the  only  one  steady 
light. 

3.  Happy  they  who  stand  most  apart  from 
the  tumults,  and  cleave  most  closely  to  thi 
Scriptures,  and  most  meditate  therein. 

4.  If,  «s  the  history  of  Christianity  peca- 


CHAP.   IV. J 


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 


67 


liarly  shows,  iho  perpeftf  a!  effort  of  Satan  he  to 
hi (k,  veil  or  distort  \\\Q  liu'lit  of  Scripture, /<•/ 
our  effort  be  to  unveil  //,  and  to  give  steady 
direction  to  its  boams.  Ho  will  not  have  lived 
in  vain  who  shall  have  caused  one  ray  of  light 
from  the  Word  of  God  to  rest  steadily  on  a 
heart  that  was  dark  to  it  before. 

IV.  Scripture  light  will  surely  mani- 
FKST  SINS  OF  IGNORANCE:  how,  then,  can  we 
have  courage  to  use,  or  to  approach  a  light,  so 
certain  to  reveal  such  sins  both  in  ourselves 
and  others,  if  there  were  no  Sin  Offering? 

What  hope  could  we  have  unless  we  were 
able  to  say  that  the  whole  family  of  faith  are 
protected  for   ever  under  its   efficacy  ?  We 


have  not  again  to  offer  it :  it  has  been  ofTered, 
once  and  for  ever  offered,  every  ceremony 
fulfilled,  every  ordinance  obeyed. 

Let  us  use  it,  not  to  nurture  ignorance,  list- 
lessness  and  slumber,  but  to  encourage  our- 
selves to  cleave  to  and  maintain  the  light  of 
revealed  truth,  which,  however  beset  by  evil, 
however  much  it  may  be  for  the  time 
shrouded,  shall  never  have  its  essential  bright- 
ness marred  by  one  element  of  darkness,  on  to 
the  hour  when  it  mingles  with  the  light  of  the 
eternal  day. — Developed  from  Thoii'^hts  on 
Leviticus^  by  B.  W.  Newton,  Vol.  L — [See 
Addenda,  p.  58,  Scripture  Light.'\ 


ILLUSTRATIVE  ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  IV. 


Ignorance.     Classical  quotations : — 

I^noratione  rerum  bonarum  et  malarum 
maxime  hominuiti  vita  vexatur. — Cicero. 

[Through  ignorance  of  what  is  good  and 
bad  the  life  of  man  is  greatly  perplexed.] 

O  miser  as  hoyninum  ynentesl  Oh  pec  tor  a 
coeca  ! — Lucretius. 

[How  wretched  are  the  minds  of  men,  how 
blind  their  understandings,] 

Quantum  animis  er^'ois  inestl — Ovid. 

[What  error  there  is  in  human  minds  I] 

Ignorance  versus  knowledge. 
"  When  you  know  a  thing,  to  hold  that  you 
know  it ;  and  when  you  do  not  know  a  thing, 
to    allow    that  you   do  not  know  it — this   is 
knowledge." — Confucius  :  Analects. 
"  Wisdom  is  humble  that  he  knows  no  more." 

— Cowper:  The  Task. 
"The  first  step  to  self-knowledge  is  self- 
distrust.  Nor  can  we  attain  to  any  kind  of 
knowledge  except  by  a  like  process." — J.  C. 
and  A.  W.  Hare  :  Guesses  at  Truth. 
"  All  things  I  thought  I  knew ;  but  now  confess 
The  more  I  know  I  know,  I  know  the  less." 

— Owen. 
**  Ignorance  is  the  curse  of  God  ; 
Knowledge  the   wing  wherewith  we  fly  to 
heaven." — Henry  VI. 

"By  knowledge   we   do   learn   ourselves    to 
know. 
And  what  to  man,  and   what   to   God   we 

owe." — Spencer:     Tears  of  the  Muses. 
"  Conviction  of  ignorance  is  the  door-step 
to  the  temple  of  wisdom." — Spurgeon. 

Perils  <  p  ignorance. 

Modern  scieace  has  shown  that  the  seeds 
of  epidemic  and  miasmatic  diseases  are 
generated  and  exert  their  activity  during 
the  nights,  and  in  places  unvisited  by  the 
sun's  beams — a  true  image  of  the  evils  de- 
veloped from  unillumined  ignorance. 

"  So  long  as  thou  art  ignorant  be  not 
ashamed  to  learn.  Iguvorance  is  the  greatest 
of  all  infirmities,  and  when  justified  the 
greatest  of  all  follies." — Isaak  Walton. 

"Ignorance  is  the  night  of  the  mind,  but 
a  night  without  moon  or  star."—  Confucius. 


"  Ignorance,  when  voluntary,  is  criminal, 
and  that  man  may  be  properly  charged  with 
that  evil  which  he  neglected  or  refused  to 
learn  how  to  prevent." — Johnson. 

Explanation  of  man's  ignorance. 

"  Ignorance  of  things  very  near  to  us,  and 
in  which  we  are  nearly  concerned,  may  be 
from  two  causes: 

i.  From  want  of  Light.  Nothing  can  be 
perceived  in  the  dark.  If  you  are  in  a  dark 
room,  though  it  be  richly  adorned  and  fur- 
nished, all  is  lost  to  you.  If  you  stand  in  a 
dark  night  on  the  top  of  a  hill  that  commands 
a  fine  prospect,  still  you  are  able  to  see  no 
more  than  if  you  were  in  a  valley.  Though 
you  were  in  a  dangerous  place,  with  pitfalls, 
precipices,  thieves  and  murderers  all  around 
you,  still  you  might  imagine  yourself  in 
safety,  if  you  had  no  light  with  you. 

ii.  It  may  hefrotn  some  ignorance  or  obstruc- 
tion between  you  and  the  object.  Thus,  your 
dearest  friend  or  greatest  enemy  might  be 
within  a  few  yards  of  you,  and  you  know 
nothing  of  it,  if  there  were  a  wall  between 
you. 

These  comparisons  may  in  some  measure 
represent  our  state  by  nature.  God  is  near: 
"in  Him  we  live  and  move  and  have  oxxr 
being  I  f<  ternity  is  near;  we  stand  upon  the 
brink  of  it.  Dea'h  is  near ;  advancing  to- 
wards us  with  hasty  strides.  The  truths  of 
God's  Word  are  most  certain  in  themselves, 
and  of  the  utmost  consequence  to  us,  but  we 
perceive  none  of  these  things,  we  are  not 
affected  by  them,  because  our  understandings 
are  dark,  and  because  thick  walls  of  ignorancty 
prejudice  and  unbeliej  stand  before  the  eyes  of 
our  minds,  and  keep  them  from  our  view." 

Pardon. 

"  /  be'ieve  in  the  forgiveness  of  sins  " — The 
article  of  the  creed  which  brought  peace  to 
Luther's  troubled  mind  when  seeking  the  way 
of  salvation.  *'  Oh  my  sins  1  my  sms  !  "  was 
his  cry,  almost  of  despair;  from  which,  how- 
ever, he  was  greatly  relieved  by  the  good 
counsel  and  comforting  advice  of  Staupita. 
But  the  work  was  not  yet  finished.     One  day 


58 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON 


[CHAP,  y. 


all  hia  fears  and  terrors  had  returned,  when 
an  old  monk  entered  his  cell,  and  Luther 
opened  his  heart  to  him.  The  venerable  old 
man  was  unable  to  follow  his  soul  in  all  its 
doubts  as  Staupitz  had  done,  but  he  knew  his 
crged,  and  found  much  consolation  in  it  for  his 
own  heart ;  so  he  repeated  to  Luther  the 
cheering  article,  *'/ ^^//Vz/^  in  the  forgiveness 
of  sins. '^ 

These  simple  words,  pronounced  with 
much  sincerity  in  the  decisive  moment, 
diffused  great  consolation  in  Luther's  mind. 
From  that  instant  light  sprang  up  in  his 
rejoicing  heart. 

"  I  feel  more  sure  than  ever  that  the 
right  thing  is  to  take  each  sin  the  moment 
the  conscience  feels  it,  to  the  blood  of  yestcs, 
and  there,  having  once  purged  it,  to  re- 
member it  no  more.  I  don't  think  of  one 
scriptural  example  of  a  sin  once  forgiven  ever 
being  charged  upon  the  conscience  again ; 
and  I  suppose  the  yearly  sins  were  never 
expected  to  be  again  brought  to  mind,  after 
the  scapegoat  had  borne  them  into  the  land  of 
f orgetfulness.  Oh  for  grace  to  plunge  into  the 
ocean  of  Divine  forgiveness." — A.  L.  Newton. 

Scripture  light. 

At  a  missionary  meeting  in  Mangnia,  after 
the  whole  Bible  had  been  received  in  their  own 
language,  an  aged  disciple  rose  up  to  exhort 
the  people  to  read  the  whole  Bible  through. 
Lifting  his  own  new  Bible  before  the  congre- 
gation, he  exclaimed,  "  My  brothers  and 
sisters,  this  is  my  resolve :  the  dust  shall 
never  cover  my  new  Bible,  the  moths  shall 
never  eat  it,  the  mildew  shall  never  rot  it  I  my 
light,  my  joy  I  ** 


What  ignorance  of  the  Bible  existed  in 
Europe  before  printing  was  introduced  1 
Stcphanus  relates  of  a  certain  doctor  of 
Sorbonne,  who,  speaking  of  the  Reformers, 
expressed  his  surprise  at  their  mode  of 
reasoning  by  exclaiming, "  I  wonder  why  these 
youths  are  constantly  quoting  the  New  Testa- 
ment. I  was  more  than  50  years  old  before 
I  knew  anything  of  a  New  Testament^  And 
Albert,  Archbishop  and  Elector  of  Mentz,  in 
the  year  I5.i0,  accidentally  meeting  with  a 
Bible,  opened  it,  and  having  read  some 
pages  of  it,  observed,  "I  do  not  indeed  know 
what  this  book  is,  but  this  I  see,  that  every- 
thing in  it  is  against  us.''''  Even  Carolastadius, 
who  was  afterwards  one  of  the  Reformers, 
acknowledged  that  he  had  never  begun  to 
read  the  Bible  till  eight  years  after  he  had 
taken  his  highest  degree  in  divinity. 

Dr.  Samuel  yohnson,  distinguished  as  a 
writer  on  morals,  and  whose  writings  have  sel- 
dom been  excelled  in  energy  of  thought  and 
beauty  of  expression,  said  to  a  young  gentle- 
man who  visited  him  on  his  dying  bed  "young 
man,  attend  to  the  voice  of  one  who  has  pos- 
sessed a  certain  degree  of  fame  in  the  world, 
and  will  shortly  appear  before  his  Makes:: 
read  the  Bible  every  day  of  your  life^"* 

Salmasius,  one  of  the  most  consummate 
scholars  of  his  time,  saw  cause  to  exclailD 
bitterly  against  himself :  "  0,  I  have  lost  d 
world  of  time — time,  the  most  precious  thing 
in  the  world  1  Had  I  but  one  year  more,  it 
should  be  spent  in  perusing  David's  Psalm? 
and  Paul's  Epistles.  0  sirs "— addressing 
those  about  him — 'mind  the  world  less  and 
God  more  I  " 


■•♦•- 


CHAPTER  V. 


^xtB^muB  S^eJ)kssljj  Committctr. 

SUGGESTIVE   READINGS. 

V.  1.— If  the  soul  .  .  .  hear  the  voice  of  sweariiig.     Sins  may  be  acted  out 

consciously  and  defiantly;  for  such  there  was  no  expiation  provided.  But  sins 
may  be  committed  without  realising  their  sinfulness;  of  these  the  preceding 
ctjapter  deals,  and  for  such  there  was  expiatory  sacrifice  and  assured  forgiveness. 
Yet,  also,  sins  may  be  contracted  where  no  volition  or  action  occurs,  by  passive 
non-resistance,  by  tacit  connivance,  by  incautious  heedlessness :  and  such  arc 
the  sins  this  chapter  interdicts  while  it  also  prescribes  expiation.  Sin  may  come 
in  through  the  ear :  ^'hear  the  voice  of  swearing  "  ;  albeit  it  is  no  sin  in  itself  to 
hear,  unless  we  shut  it  in  wilfully  and  become  accessory  thereto.  It  should  be 
let  out  through  the  lips  :  ^' utter  it"  :  give  it  no  harbour,  but  prompt  escape;  foi 
it  defiles  the  soul  which  retains  it  as  a  secret.     Let  no  evil  thing  find  a  quiet 


CHAP.  V.  1—17.]  Tim  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  59 


chamber  in  our  thoughts ;  expose  it,  and  thereby  exorcise  and  condemn  it. 
Impurity  must  ensue  fVi)m  entertaining  secretly  what  God  bids  us  renounce  and 
denounce. 

V.  2. — Touch  any  unclean  thing.  God  would  have  His  people  untainted  by 
uncleanness.  With  minute  care  He  had  defined  what  were  unclean  things. 
From  every  contagion  they  must  keep  free,  if  they  were  to  remain  ceremonially 
holy.  Shall  not  we  also  shun  contact  with  forbidden  things  1  "For  God  hath 
not  called  us  unto  uncleanness,  but  unto  holiness."  There  are  institutions  in 
society,  companionships  and  friendships,  indulgences  and  pastimes,  recreations 
and  books,  wtiich  would  defile  a  Christian  life  and  lower  the  sanctities  of  exist- 
ence. "  Wherefore,  come  out  from  among  them,  and  be  ye  separate,  saith  the 
Lord,  and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing"  (2  Cor.  vi.  17). 

It  be  hidden  from  him.  How  often  do  we  touch  defilement  unconsciously  1 
And  having  by  contact  derived  the  contagion  (in  pure  thoughts  sullied,  our 
sensitive  recoil  from  evil  blunted,  elevated  aims  lowered,  and  Christward  affec- 
tions decoyed)  how  do  we  forget  that  we  have  touched  !  How  constantly  we 
argue  with  our  own  consciences  that  the  tainted  pleasures  and  pastimes  we  foster 
are  outside  the  interdicted  list.  Yet  this  self-excusing  is  vain ;  "  he  also  shall  be 
unclean  and  guilt f/." 

V.  4. — Whatsoever  a  man  shall  pronounce  with  an  oath.  Vows  which  bind 
us  to  lines  of  conduct  should  never  be  made  in  ignorance.  It  is  perilous  to 
society  as  well  as  to  individual  honour  for  a  man  to  make  himself  subject  to  a 
vow  whose  issues  are  ^^  hid  from  him."  This  reprehensible  plan  prevails  in  those 
**  secret  societies"  and  '*  brotherhoods"  whose  programme  is  the  destruction  of 
civil  institutions  and  State  stability.  If  a  man  blindly  swears  away  his  liberty, 
and  binds  himself  by  oath  to  any  confederation,  he  is  '•^  guilty'^  of  any  and  all 
the  deeds  done  by  the  associates  of  such  organisations.  Oaths  should  only  be 
taken  when  their  issues  are  fully  discerned  ;  certainly  no  right-minded  man  will 
allow  himself  to  become  the  dupe  of  bad  associates,  or  the  accomplice  of  evil 
designs,  under  the  specious  plea  that  the  effects  of  his  oath  were  "  hid  from 
him"  when  he  bound  himself  thereby.  Prudence  and  piety  will  warn  us  against 
being  thus  "  rash  with  our  mouth."  [Compare  Eccles.  v.  2  and  6 ;  Acts  xxiii. 
12-14] 

V.  5. — He  shall  bring  his  trespass  offering.  Rash  oaths  incurred  guiltiness, 
and  must  be  atoned  for;  the  folly  of  taking  an  oath  to  '*  do  evil"  was  an  otfeuce 
to  be  expiated  ;  whereas  the  neglect  of  an  oath  to  "  do  good"  was  equally  a 
trespass.  God's  requirement  of  an  expiatory  offering  for  both  misdemeanours 
acted  beneficially  on  the  community,  by  restraining  persons  from  taking  hasty 
and  inconsiderate  oaths.  "  This  served  very  effectually  (says  Michaelis)  to 
maintain  the  honour  of  oaths,  inasmuch  as  every  oath,  however  inconsiderate,  or 
unUwful,  or  impossible,  was  regarded  so  far  obligatory  that  it  was  necessary  to 
expiate  its  non-fulfilment  by  an  offering ;  and  it  was,  at  the  same  time,  the  best 
possible  means  of  weaning  the  people  from  rash  oaths,  because  a  man  who  had 
grown  addicted  to  the  unbecoming  practice  would  find  hiiuself  too  frequently 
obliged  either  to  keep  his  oaths,  how  great  soever  the  inconvenience,  or  else  to 
make  an  offering  for  their  atonement." 

V.  15. — Ignorance  in  the  holy  things  of  the  Lord.  There  were  dues  or  debts 
to  the  sanctuary  of  God,  and  he  who  failed  to  bring  his  tithes  and  first-fruits, 
even  though  unintentionally  and  "  through  ignorance,"  was  a  transgressor.  A 
costly  **  amends"  (v.  16)  was  to  be  made  for  this  oversight,  if  his  trespass  was  to 
be  forgiven  him.  Thus  jealous  is  God  that  we  withhold  no  duty  from  Him,  that 
we  "  enter  into  His  presence  with  thanksgiving,"  i.e.,  with  gifts  as  thank  ofierings. 
Every  soul,  spared  in  the  laud  of  the  living,  succoured  by  Divine  goodness  and 
grace,  overshadowed  by  the  b'atherhood  of  God,  shepherded  by  the  patient  care 
of  Christ,  upheld  by  the  energy  of  the  Spirit,  owes  offerings  to  Heaven,  and 


60  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  v.  1—5. 


should  enter  the  sanctuary  with  the  acknowledgments  of  all  the  mercy  received. 
Our  grateful  souls  should  seek  to  fulfil  *'  something  of  the  debt  we  owe."  "  What 
shall  I  render  unto  the  Lord  for  all  His  benefits  towards  me  V  God  aska 
sanctuary  presents  from  every  one  of  His  people. 

V.  17. — Forbidden  to  be  done.  For  the  Lord  had  prohibited  the  profane  use, 
or  the  appropriation  to  personal  ends,  of  "  holy  things"  dedicated  to  the  sanctuary 
and  its  services.  If  a  soul  had  reason  only  to  suspect  his  misuse  thereof,  he  must 
seek  forgiveness  by  trespass  offering.  All  such  stern  requirements  tended  to 
enforce  a  recognition  of  the  supreme  claims  of  Jehovah  and  the  sanctity  of 
religion.  No  trifling,  no  forgetfulness,  no  error  was  excusable.  Shall  not  we 
"stand  in  awe  and  sin  not,"  guarding  ourselves  from  "presumptuous  sins"  and 
inadvertent  negligence  by  **  watching  unto  prayer "  and  by  swift  fulfilment  of 
our  obligations  to  Heaven  ) 


SECTIONAL  HOMILIES. 

Topic:  Complacent  Ignorance  (Vv.  1-5). 

Sins  of  ignorance  dififer  greatly  in  kind  and  in  degree.  Transgression  may 
ensue  from  Lack  oj  knowledge  that  such  conduct  is  forbidden  ;  or  it  may  be  that, 
knowing  the  prohibition,  disobedience  is  speciously  excused  on  some  vague  plea 
that  circumstances  warrant  it  or  expediency  condones  it.  In  such  cases  igno- 
rance, if  it  be  really  ignorance  at  all,  is  selt-induced,  and  is  therefore  the  more 
culpable.     Amid  such  reprehensible  forms  of  ignorance  may  be  placed — 

I.  Carelessness  ;  the  mind  too  placid  to  rouse  itself  to  inquiry. 

II.  Indiscrimination  j  the  habit  of  ignoring  vital  principles  and  conniving  at 
inconsistencies. 

III.  {Self-excusing;  finding  exceptional  circumstances  which  extenuate  faults 
and  condone  misconduct. 

IV.  Neglect  of  scripture;  not  "coming  to  the  light  lest  their  deeds  should 
be  reproved"  (John  iii.  20). 

V.  Satisfaction  with  a  state  op  conscious  darkness  ;  indifference  to 
precise  regulations  of  religion,  indisposition  of  heart  towards  "  perfect  holiness" ; 
a  loose  and  easy  content  over  failings  and  negligence.  Ignorance  is  by  some 
persons  consciously  cherished :  it  allows  them  a  covert  from  the  exactions  of  a 
lofty  and  honest  piety. 

VI  Plausible  sophistry  ;  entertaining  the  delusion  that  because  there  is 
not  determined  wiltulness  in  sinning,  or  not  fullest  knowledge  of  God's  prohibitions 
of  sin,  they  are  less  responsible,  less  to  be  condemned. 

Note  :  Many  persons,  trained  from  youth  in  a  school  of  error,  grow  up  with 
false  pri7iciples  dominating  their  judgments  and  consciences^  or  with  ignorance  of 
the  application  of  right  principUs  to  particular  incidents  and  actions.  The  per- 
ception of  righteousness  is  vague  and  dim,  the  moral  sense  is  feeble  and  faltering, 
"  darkness  in  part"  has  happened  to  them.  Thus  Luther,  trained  amid  the 
blinding  theories  of  Romanism,  groped  on  till  manhood  in  delusions  and  dimness. 
Thus  Paul,  brought  up  amid  the  traditions  of  Judaism,  found  his  soul  clouded 
with  wholly  wrong  thoughts  concerning  what  was  "  doing  God  service." 

It  is  our  duty  to  undeceive  ourselves,  to  inquire  after  knowledge,  to  seek  full 
light,  that  our  dimness  may  yield  to  discernment. 

A  complacent  ignorance  is  as  the  softly  gliding  stream  which  flows  onwards  to 
the  rapids.  To  be  able  to  rest  in  such  self  satisfied  ignorance  indicates  that  self- 
delusion  has  begun,  portending  doom.  *'  Whom  the  gods  would  destroy  they 
first  dement/'     And  such  contentment,  wliile  in  error  of  the  very  way  of  godly 


CHAP.  V.  1.]  Tni':  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  61 


obedience  and  acceptance,  betokens  a  demented  state  ominous  of  worst  issues. 

Therefore  : — 

1.  Search  the  Scriptures.  2.  Seek  the  Spirit's  illumination.  3.  Culture  a  pure 
and  enlightened  conscience.  4.  Exercise  the  judgment  and  will  in  efforts  to  *'  cease 
from  evil  and  learn  to  do  well." 

Topic :  The  Sin  op  Conniting  at  Wrong-doings  (V.  1). 

The  trespass  offering  atoned  for  voluntary  offences,  thus  fitly  supplementing 
the  offerings  f  jr  sins  of  ignorance.  All  crime — i.e.,  wrong  done  to  men — is  sin 
in  the  si^ht  of  God,  and  needs  to  be  followed  bj  repentance  as  well  as  repara- 
tion. Here  we  are  taught  that  a  person  committed  sin  in  withholding  know- 
ledyfe  when  able  and  judicially  commanded  to  divulge  it. 

The  camp  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness  was  not  only  a  Church,  but  a  Common- 
wealth;  the  interests  of  the  people  were  mutual,  and  their  duties  reciprocal.  It 
was  the  duty  of  the  rulers  to  defend  and  promote  the  right,  and  to  expose  and 
denounce  the  wrong.  When  an  evil  doer  was  arrested,  a  proclamation  was  made 
calling  upon  any  who  could  furnish  evidence  (that  the  ends  of  justice  might  not 
be  defeated)  to  present  themselves  as  witnesses  in  the  court.  If  any  such  per- 
son, throv'gh  fear  or  neglect,  failed  to  furnish  the  information  in  his  possession 
he  was  a  partaker  in  the  sin.  The  safety  and  sanctity  of  society  demanded  that 
evidence  should  not  wilfully  be  withheld.  Jehovah  here  required  His  people  to 
co-operate  with   Him  in  protesting  against  and  exposing  sin.     Observe — 

I.  That  tbe  sins  of  men  cannot  evade  witnesses. 

In  old  writer  has  forcibly  said  *'  that  to  every  sin  there  must  be  at  least  two 
witnesses,"  viz  ,  "a  man's  own  conscience  and  the  great  God."  Wrong-doiny; so 
confuses  and  condemns  a  man,  except  he  be  very  degraded  and  hardened,  that 
even  though  he  was  nob  really  observed  in  the  act,  he  will  so  betray  himself  to 
others  that  evidence  of  a  presumptive  or  positive  kind,  circumstantial  or  self- 
evideut  can  be  presented. 

Living  together  as  the  Israelites  did  in  the  wilderness,  they  would  be  con- 
stantly under  each  other's  eye,  wrong-doing  would  be  easily  detected,  its  guilt 
easily  proved. 

We  are  all  daily  revealing  ourselves  more  or  less  to  each  other,  and  persona 
who  observe  our  conduct  are  tacitly  gathering  evidence  to  accuse  or  excuse,  to 
commend  or  condemn  our  conduct  and  character.  This  worM  is  a  place  of  trial, 
a  place  of  judgment.  We  are  not  only  arraigned  before  the  tribuual  of  our  own 
consciences,  but  also  before  the  bar  of  public  observation  and  opinion. 

II.  That  it  is  the  duty  op  witnesses  to  give  evidence  when  justice 

DEMANDS    IT. 

When  a  witness  heard  the  words  of  adjuration  he  was  required  at  the  proper 
place  to  give  the  needed  information.  It  was  his  duty  because  (1)  the  law  of 
the  Lord  commanded  it,  and  (2)  the  purity  of  society  demanded  it.  It  would 
also  be  an  injustice  to  a  wrong-doer,  for  the  sake  of  shielding  him  from  present 
punishment,  by  conniving  at  his  sin  to  encourage  him  in  evil  ways.  Moreover, 
a  witness  owes  the  duty  to  himself  to  testify  against  sin,  for  if  he  does  not  ex- 
pose it  and  bring  it  to  condemnation,  he  may  foster  even  in  himself  a  careless 
unconcern  about  wrong.  By  bearing  witness  against  evil  doing  we  utter  our 
protest  against  the  wrong,  and  if  we  do  it  in  the  right  spirit  and  "  speak  the  whole 
truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth,"  we  are  serving  righteously  and  faithfully  our 
day  and  generation,  and  we  therein  discharge  a  duty  we  owe  to  God  against 
whom  all  sin  is  a  transgression,  and  who  has  appointed  rulurs  to  administer  jus- 
tice for  the  praise  of  those  who  do  well,  and  to  be  a  terror  to  evil  doers 

III.  That  in  concealing  evidence  against  sin  we  involve   ourselves 

IN    SERIOUS   guilt. 


62  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  v.  2,  3. 


By  withholding  evidence  we  may  think  to  cover  over  sins,  and  so  we  may ; 
but  we  do  not  remove  them.  We  may  prevent  them  coming  to  li^ht  and  meet- 
ing their  merited  punishment,  but  the  sins  remain,  and  will  take  deeper  root 
and  throw  out  wider  branches.  It  is  a  trespass,  a  breach  of  the  Divine  law 
when  we  allow  sin  to  go  unaccused  and  unexposed  ;  we  thereby  offer  an  induce- 
ment to  sin,  and  tacitly  encourage  indulgence  in  transgression.  The  guilt  of 
concealing  evidence  is  seen,  in  that  by  so  doing  we — 

1.  Dishonour  GocTs  voice,  which  speaks  within  us, 

2.  Disobey  God^s  published  laws. 

3.  Decrease  our  own  antipathy  to  sin, 

4.  Encourage  the  trespasser  in  his  wrong- doing. 

All  sin  ought  to  be  acknowledged  and  expiated  for  the  sake  of  the  sinner  and 
the  wronged.  A  person  refusing  to  give  evidence  makes  himself  an  accessory 
to  a  wicked  deed  after  its  accomplishment,  and  becomes  an  accomplice  in  its 
guilt.  Divine  revelation  teaches  us  that  we  have  duties  we  owe  to  ourselves, 
to  society,  and  to  God. — F.  W.  B. 

Topic :  The  Contagiousness  op  Sin  (V.  2,  3). 

The  sin  of  touching  an  unclean  person  or  thing  is  here  described.  The  whole 
of  the  directions  given  respecting  ceremonial  defilement  were  to  teach  most 
emphatii;  .lly  the  holiness  of  God,  and  His  deep  concern  for  the  holiness  of  His 
creatures.  The  children  of  Israel  were  not  only  to  obey  Him,  but  also  to  worship 
Him,  and  as  their  service  was  to  be  a  sacrament  and  their  work  worship,  it 
was  necessary  that  they  should  be  taught  the  utmost  scrupulousness  in  cere- 
monial, as  well  as  inward,  purity.  These  regulations  and  requirements  would 
not  only  teach  the  people  who  were  immediately  affected  by  them  the  most 
salutary  lessons,  but  would  also  teach  (through  them)  the  world  valuable  truths. 
We  learn — 

I.  The  importance  of  crRcuMSPECTiON  in  our  outward  behaviour. 

The  Israelites  would  feel  that  the  greatest  possible  vigilance  would  he  needed 
as  they  went  in  and  out  the  camp  and  mixed  with  the  congregation,  lest  they 
should  become  defiled  by  contact  with  some  unclean  thing.  As  we  mingle  with 
our  fellow-men,  and  discharge  our  duties  in  the  world,  although  we  are  not  under 
the  restrictions  and  regulations  of  the  Levitical  law,  yet  we  are  in  a  world  where 
the  moral  atmosphere  is  tainted,  and  where  we  are  in  constant  danger  of  being 
morally  defiled.  We  are  not  only  ourselves  surrounded  by  a  sympatli-  tic  moral 
influence,  which  affects  all  with  whom  we  have  contact,  but  we  also  in  turn  re- 
ceive influence,  good  or  ill,  from  others  with  whom  we  associate.  We  learn  that 
the  greatest  possible  circumspection  is  essential  as  we  move  amid  the  busy  throngs. 

II.  The  possibility  of  contamination,  even  though  we  practise  circum- 
spection  IN   OUR  OUTWARD  CONDUCT. 

The  text  shows  that  it  was  possible  for  people  to  become  defiled  and  be  un- 
conscious of  it.  A  man  might  find  even  that  his  extreme  caution  had  ensnared 
him.  He  might  not  always  be  able  to  discriminate  between  the  clean  and  the 
unclean,  especially  at  first  sight.  So,  as  we  pass  through  the  world,  we  are  so 
closely  surrounded  by  morally  contaminating  influences  that  sometimes  we  may 
acquire  infection  before  we  are  aware  of  it.  Even  the  most  innocent  pleasures 
and  pursuits  may  be  perverted  by  us,  becoming  suggestive  and  ministrant  of 
sin ;  in  our  ignorance  or  simplicity  we  may  get  a  wrong  bias,  wicked  thoughts 
may  be  awakened.  For  such  defilement  we  shall  need  to  make  expiation;  also 
seek  forgiveness  and  cleansing,  that  the  impurity  of  our  heart  and  conscience 
may  be  removed,  and  the  progress  of  moral  depravity  and  deterioration  be 
arrested.— F.  W.  B. 


CHAP.  V.  4-13.]  TlIK  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  68 


Topic:  The  Responsibility  of  Words  (V.  4,  5), 

Here  is  taught  the  sin  of  a  person  making  a  rash  oath.  Tn  their  conversation 
with  each  father  the  people  were  to  beware  of  uttering  idle  words,  especially 
when  calling  upon  God  to  witness  what  they  said  ;  also,  they  were  to  be  careful 
how  they  committed  themselves  by  solemn  engagements  to  do  evil  or  to  do  good. 
The  people  were  at  present  rude  and  unpolished,  and  one  of  the  objects  of  the 
ritual  was  to  elevate  and  refine  them.  Words  are  often  spoken  as  if  they  were 
of  no  importance,  vows  made  and  oaths  uttered  as  if  they  were  unnoticed  by 
God ;  but  this  law  shows  us  that  He  does  take  strict  notice  of  them,  and  that 
though  forgotten  by  us,  they  are  not  forgotten  hy  Him.  Though  spoken  heed- 
lessly and  easily  forgotten,  yet  God  would  hold  them  responsible.  The  gospel 
has  not  repealed  the  law's  condemnation  of  rash  speaking,  for  Christ  taught  that 
**for  every  idle  word  that  men  speak  they  shall  give  an  account  at  the  day  of  judg- 
ment." And  we  are  taught,  moreover,  to  "swear  not  at  nil,  neither  by  heaven, 
for  it  is  God's  throne,  nor  by  earth,  for  it  is  His  footstool,  neither  by  our  heads, 
for  we  cannot  make  one  hair  black  or  white."  The  influence  of  this  Levitical 
injunction  would  be  to  lead  the  people  to  make  an  oath — 

I.  Rarely.  There  would  be  no  need  for  oaths  if  they  cultivated  veracity,  if 
their  simple  word  was  known  to  be  their  bond.  To  employ  oaths  frequently 
would  be  taking  God's  name  in  vain,  and  incurring  danger  of  frequently  trans- 
gressing one  of  the  great  commandments.  God  was  in  their  midst  as  their  Law- 
giver and  King  ;  they  must  not  use  too  frequently  and  familiarly  His  holy  name 
in  connection  with  their  common,  ordinary  conversation  and  conduct. 

II.  DiLiBERATELY.  Evcu  whcu  circumstauces  seemed  to  require  that  they 
should  call  God  to  witness  and  confirm  what  they  affirmed,  the  act  was  so  solemn 
that  they  would  need  to  do  so  with  great  caution  and  deliberateness,  pondering 
what  they  were  about  to  affirm  or  deny,  and  estimating  the  probability  that  they 
could  promptly  perform  their  purpose.  An  oath  deliberately  made  would  be 
impressed  upon  the  memory ;  if  not  fulfilled,  no  excuse  could  be  offered.  The 
nature  of  an  oath,  of  the  pledge  with  which  it  is  accompanied,  should  be 
thoroughly  weighed  before  God  is  called  upon  to  help  and  witness. 

III.  Conditionally.  There  may  be  some  cases  and  instances  where  an  un- 
conditional oath  may  be  safely  pronounced ;  but  it  is  more  prudent  to  associate 
with  it  qualifying  conditions.  Such  a  course  would  not  make  the  oath  less 
binding  for  all  reasonable  intents,  and  ought  to  meet  the  requirements  of  any 
ordinary  case.  Our  proneness  to  err,  the  impossibility  of  our  meeting  exorbitant 
demands,  the  probability  of  after-thought  showing  us  that  what  we  had  engaged 
to  do  was  impracticable  or  undesirable,  ought  to  be  taken  into  account.  Con- 
ditions and  circumstances  may  so  change  as  to  relieve  us  from  promises  which, 
at  the  time,  we  made  in  good  faith.  When  wise  men  make  oaths,  they  will  make 
them  cautiously. 

1.  Cultivate  transparency  and  veracity  of  speech^  so  that  our  communications 
may  require  to  be  simply  yea,  and  nay  ;  for  when  more  is  required  it  indicates 
that  we  have  become  unreliable,  so  that  our  word  cannot  be  trusted. 

2.  If  pledges  made  between  man  and  man  are  tlius  solemn  and  binding,  and 
the  breach  of  them  so  blameworthy,  pledges  to  God  in  solemn  sacrament  must 
be  more  solemn  and  binding,  and  their  non-fulfilment  more  culpable. — F.  W.  B. 

Topic:  Tbb  Way  op  Pardon  (Vv.  6-13). 

In  the  fifth  verse  it  is  enjoined  that  when  any  person  shall  be  guilty  of  any  of 
the  trespasses  specified,  he  shall  confess  that  he  had  thus  sinned  ;  from  which  we  at 


64 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON 


[chap.  v.  1—13. 


once  see  that  confession  w^lb  to  immediately  follow  conviction,  and  the  next  step — 
as  we  learn  from  the  succeeding  verse — would  be  contrition.  The  offender  was 
to  bring  his  trespass  offering  unto  the  Lord  for  his  sin,  and  the  priest  would 
present  it  to  the  Lord  as  an  atonement  for  the  sin.  The  ofifering  was  to  be  one 
of  the  flock,  or  a  fowl,  or  of  flour.     From  this  arrangement  we  learn  that — 

L  The  way  op  pardon  was  made  easy.  The  circumstances  of  the  trans- 
gressor were  mercifuily  considered.  The  gradation  of  the  offerings  from  a  bullock 
down  to  the  tenth  part  of  an  ephah  of  fine  flour  showed  that  God  would  allow 
no  difiBculty  to  stand  in  the  way  of  transgressors  seeking  expiation.  For  the 
various  gradations  of  wrong-doing  there  was  pardon  on  confession  and  contrition. 
The  offerings  could  be  easily  obtained,  and  the  priest  and  altar  were  close  at  hand, 
so  that  at  any  moment  the  needed  confession  and  atonement  could  be  made.  In 
the  Mosaic,  as  well  as  the  Christian  dispensation,  the  way  of  forgiveness  is  made 
easy. 

IL  The  way  op  pardon  was  made  explicit.  Full  and  clear  directions  are 
given,  even  to  minute  details,  in  the  way  the  victim  was  to  be  slain,  and  its 
various  parts  disposed  of,  and  each  direction  (meaningless  and  useless  as  some 
at  first  sight  appeared)  had  some  symbolical  or  typical  import.  In  every  instance 
assurance  was  given  of  forgiveness,  if  only  the  required  conditions  were  complied 
with.  The  unsavouriness  of  the  offering — from  the  absence  of  sweet  oil  and 
frankincense — suggests  the  loathsomeness  of  sin  :  that  it  is  displeasing  to  God, 
ought  to  be  offensive  to  man,  and  is  to  those  truly  humble  and  contrite. 

(a)  The  mercy  of  God  displayed  in  (1)  providiicj  remedy  to  arrest  the  course  of 
sin;  (^)  providing  remedy  to  arrest  the  consequtncts  of  sin.  Man's  ignorance  of 
sin  proves  his  utter  inability  to  put  it  away  of  liiiudelf. 

(h)  The  misery  of  sin  discovered  in  that  it  (1)  produces  separation  from  God  and 
all  real  good  ;  (2)  necessitates  suffering  and  atonement  before  it  can  be  forgiven.  In 
the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  Levitical  economy  we  get  God's  provision  for 
man's  need — a  sacrifice  appointed  for  man's  sin  ;  a  priest  to  present  the  sacrifice 
for  man's  sin ;  and  a  place  of  worship  where  the  sacrifice  may  be  offered  and 
accepted. — F.  W.  B. 

OUTLINES  ON  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  V.  1—13. 


V.  2. — Theme:  Contraction  of  dbfilb- 
IfENT.  **  Jf  a  soul  touch  an  unclean  thing . .  . 
he  also  shall  be  unclean^  and  guilty." 

Human  depravity,  inherent  — universal — 
"  Out  of  the  heart  proceed  evil  thoughts,"  etc. 
Depravity  may  be  deepened  and  developed  by 
outward  influences  and  circumstances.  The 
body  and  mind  may  generate  or  acquire 
disease;  so,  with  the  soul.  We  are  surrounded 
by  a  magnetic  circle  of  influence  which  affects 
us,  and  through  it  we  affect  others  for  good 
or  evil.  Hence  importance  of  guarding  our 
sympathies,  susceptibilities,  senses,  and  every 
avenue  and  vehicle  of  our  being.  "  Touch 
not  the  unclean  thing." 

We  learn  the  importance — 

I.  Of  absence  feom  evil  associations. 
"Enter  not  into  the  path  of  the  wicked,  and 
walk  not  in  the  way  of  evil  men."  [See  Ps.  i.] 

II.  Of  abstinence  from  appearance  of 
J5VIL.  Beware  of  every  infectious  interdicted 
thing.     "Taste  not,  touch  not,  handle  not." 

Christ  could  mix  with  sinners,  could  touch 
lepers  and  the  dead  without  defilement,  be- 
cause there  "was  nothing  in  Him  to  respond 


to,  or  to  be  laid  hold  on,  by  temptation  or 
corruption.  As  the  needle  leaps  to  the  load- 
stone, so  our  hearts  leap  to  meet  temptation 
by  the  law  of  attractive  affinities.  For  every 
stain  of  defilement  we  contract,  even  though 
as  deep  as  crimson  or  scarlet,  there  is  a 
remedy  :  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanses 
from  all  sin,"  and  can  make  our  souls  as  white 
as  snow. — F.  W.  B. 

V.  7. — Theme :  What  god  expects  of  us. 
"If  he  be  not  able  to  bring  a  lamb,  then  ha 
shall  bring  for  his  trespass  two  turtle  doves, 
or  two  young  pigeons,  unto  the  Lord." 

There  is  nothing  exacting  or  exorbitant  in 
the  claims  of  God  upon  His  creatures.  He 
expects  of  us  only  what  we  can  render  accord- 
ing to  talents,  circumstances,  opportunity, 
claims.  He  regards  our  purposes,  and  ac- 
cepts them  as  acts  performed  when  perform- 
ance is  impossible,  e.g.,  He  said  of  David's 
purpose  to  erect  the  Temple,  "  It  was  well 
that  it  was  in  thine  heart."  Christ  commended 
the  act  of  the  woman  in  the  gospels  b<*cau8e 
"  she  had  done  what  she  could." 


CHAP.  V.  14—19.] 


THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS. 


65 


If  God  expects  of  ua  only  what  we  can 
render — 

I.  Then  none  are  exempt  from  his  ser- 
vice. Doves  and  pigeons  were  accepted 
where  lambs  could  not  bo  furnished.  The 
widow's  two  mites  were  as  acceptable  as  the 
box  of  precious  ointment  and  Solomon's 
Temple. 

II.  Then  hts  service  is  perfect  free- 
dom. The  offerer  had  to  judge  and  choose 
what  he  would  offer.  Grod  expects  ^  oluntary 
cheerful  gifts,  not  simply  from  a  sense  of 
duty  but  from  impulses  of  a  generous  love. 
If  we  give  ourselves  to  the  Lord,  all  we  have 
will  be  laid  upon  the  altar  that  sanctities 
both  the  giver  and  the  gift. — F.  W.  B. 

V.  8. —  Theme :  Mediation.  "  He  shall 
bring  them  unto  ^Ae  priest^  who  shall  offer ^^ 
etc. 

The  sin  offering  taught  that  guilt  separated 
between  the  sinner  and  his  Sovereign  Lord  :  — 
Priest  came  between  to  connect,  and  be 
medium  of  communication.  Such  an  arrange- 
ment would  {a)  inspire  courage^  and  {b) 
impart  comfort  to  the  offerer. 

The  offerer  brought  his  offering  to  the 
priest,  yet — 

I.  TUE  VALUE  OF  THE  OBLATION  WAS  NOT 
ENHANCED    BY    ANT     MERIT    OP     THE    PRIEST. 

But  the  infinite  dignity   of  our  High  Priest 
gave  infinite  dignity  to  His  sacrifice. 

II.  The  PRIEST  OFFERED  SACRIFICE  PRO- 
VIDED BY  ANOTHER :  our  High  Priest  offered 
Himself,  once  for  all. 

In  the  hands  of  the  priest  the  sinner's 
sacrifice  was  acceptable:  through  Christ  our 
offerings  are  well-pleasing  to  God.     The  only 


thing  that  God  hates,  and  that  can  separate 
between  Jehovah  and  His  creatures  is  sin. 
Its  removal  restores  harmony,  holiness, 
happiness  in  man,  and  the  universe  — 
F.  W.  B. 

V.  10. —  Theme:  Divinb  forgiveness. 
"  The  priest  shall  make  atonement  for  him 
for  his  sin  which  he  hath  sinned,  and  it  shall 
be  forgiven  hifn^ 

Nature  is  unable  to  show  how  sin  may  be 
forgiven.  By  an  inevitable  and  almost  uni- 
versal law  reaping  follows  sowing,  both  in 
quality  and  quantity.  Retribution  follows 
wrong-doin^^  Nature  is  stern,  unrelenting  ; 
only  in  revealed  religion  can  we  learn  how 
God  can  be  just  and  yet  forgive  the  sinner. 
The  Bible  alone  teaches  that  there  is  forgive- 
ness with  God  that  He  may  be  feared  The 
offerer  was  assured  that  if  he  presented  the 
prescribed  oblation,  his  sin  A'ould"  be  forgiven 
him^     This  arrangement  teaches 

I.  That  satisfaction  must  be  offered  by 

THE    sinner    himself,    OR  BY  HIS  ACCREDITED 

substitute.     Pardon  costs  something  both  to 
God  and  man. 

II.  That  the  sinner  must  be  sincerely 
sorry  for  his  sins.  The  offerings  were  to 
be  presented  in  a  manner  which  would  denote 
reverence  and  repentance.  Only  forsaken  sin 
is  forgiven. 

III.  That  in  the  forgiveness  of  sin  thb 
righteousness  of  god  is  vindicated  The 
demands  of  His  justice  were  met — His 
broken  law  honoured — atonement  sufficient 
and  satisfactory  made. 

In  the  Gospels  all  these  points  are  exempli- 
fitd  and  enforced. — F.  i//.  B, 


SECTIONAL  HOMILIES. 


Topic:  Trespasses,  done  ignorantly,  against  tee  Lord  (Vv.  14-19). 

Scarcely  is  it  possible  to  accredit  absolute  ignorance  to  trespassers  in  these 
**  holy  things  of  the  Lord":  for  God's  declarations  respect  ino:  His  rights  were 
neither  unintelligible  nor  obscure.  They  ought  to  have  been  known  thoroughly, 
they  must  have  been  known  to  some  degree.  The  ignorance  was,  therefore,  in 
some  sense  wilful;  certainly  it  was  conscious,  and  was  even  preferred  to 
knowledge. 

Still,  it  is  noteworthy  that  ignorance  is  predicated  of  these  trespassers  against 
the  Lord,  whereas  there  is  no  allowance  of  ignorance  in  the  trespasses  done 
against  men.  [Compare  chap,  vi.]  This  marks  a  melancholy  fact  in  the  conduct 
of  wrong-doers.  We  defraud  God  of  His  due  carelessly  and  without  giving  it  a 
thought;  whereas  we  are  too  cautious  to  trespass  afj:ain8t  a  neighbour  without 
knowing  it.  For  the  fear  of  man  is  more  operative  over  us  than  the  fear 
of  God. 

I.  Fraudulent  conduct  against  the  lord. 

1.  Israel's  history  for  ages  illustrates  the  ready  ease  with  which  men  could 
**  rob  God"  (Mai.  iii.  8-10).  Commanded  to  appear  repeatedly  every  year 
before  the  Lord  and  celebrate  His  feasts,  yet  era  upon  era  passed  without,  their 
keeping  those  sacred  feasts  at  all — until,  in  the   times  of  Ezra  and  Nehtiuiah, 


66  HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY  ^iV  [chap.  v.  15.  16- 

<bey  read  the  Scriptures  (long  closed  and  neglected)  and  discovered  their  omis- 
sions to  have  been  so  numerous,  so  grievous,  so  long  continued,  that  the  people 
all  lifted  up  their  voices  and  wept. 

Fifty  years  later,  ngain  Israel  is  described  as  habitually  defrauding  God  of  JTis 
due,  and  even  justifying  themselves  in  their  *' robbery,"  asking  with  effrontery, 
"  Wherein  have  we  robbed  Thee?"  (Mai.  iii.  8). 

Such  warning  incidents  should  have  aroused  the  Church  of  Christ  to  greater 
watchfulness  in  later  days.     Yet — 

2.  The  present  conduct  of  Christians  repeats  the  trespass  of  the  ancient  Church. 
Ts  there  not  a  defrauding  "of  the  holy  things  of  the  Lord"  still  rampant  1 
Consider — 

(a)  Doctrines  suppressed  and  truths  silenced  which  ought  to  be  "  sounded  out" 
clearly. 

(6)  Worship  rendered  perfunctorily ^  and  void  of  "  spirit  and  truth" ;  "  the  form 
of  godliness  without  the  power  thereof." 

{c)  Open  allegiance  to  Christ  withheld  ;  a  careless  and  compromising  profession 
supplanting  whole  consecration. 

(d)  The  selfish  rete?ition  of  our  gains  and  possessions,  spending  so  freely  upon 
ourselves  that  we  have  little  or  nothing  to  give  God. 

IT.  Restitution  demanded  as  the  condition  of  pardon. 

Unlike  the  sin  offering,  the  "  trespass  ofifering"  must  not  be  presented  until 
reparation  had  been  made. 

1.  Satisfaction  was  to  precede  sacrifice,  Man  is  a  debtor,  having  withheld  dues 
from  the  Lord.  Those  dues  were  not  to  be  set  aside  by  substituting  contrition 
or  expiatory  offerings.  It  were  easy  to  trespass  if  all  could  be  righted  by  peni- 
tential confessions.  But  God  says,  "Behold,  to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice." 
"  He  shall  make  amends  ".•  such  is  Jehovah's  fiat  (v.  16). 

2.  In  Christ's  obedient  life  satisfaction  did  precede  sacrifice.  Man  *'  had  nothing 
to  pay  ";  but  Jesus  paid  the  debt.  In  His  own  career  He  "  fulfilled  all  righteous- 
ness" on  man's  behalf  Then,  having  perfectly  satisfied  the  Divine  requirements 
in  His  life,  He  bore  man's  merited  punishment  for  long  disobedience. 

3.  Divine  forgiveness  differs  essentially  from  connivance  at  man's  sin.  God  can 
pardon  all  manner  of  trespasses,  but  can  gloss  over  not  one  jot  or  tittle  of  iniquity. 
"  His  grace  is  perfect,  and  therefore  He  can  forgive  all :  His  holiness  is  perfect, 
8 nd  therefore  he  cannot  pass  over  anything.  He  cannot  sanction  iniquity,  but 
He  can  blot  it  out."— C.  H.  M. 

4.  Restiivtion  by  obedience  is  a  law  which  still  incites  believers  to  a  diligent 
piety.  Not  by  the  merit  of  their  acts  to  justify  themselves  with  God,  but  to 
make  such  *'  amends"  as  a  soul  reclaimed  from  disloyalty  naturally  desires  to 
make  to  its  gracious  Lord  and  King.  "The  love  of  Christ  constrains  us  ";  and 
V)y  every  act  of  sacrifice  and  service  we  aim  to  set  right  all  wrong  we  have  done, 
to  counteract  the  follies  of  past  j^ears,  to  benefit  those  whom  we  may  have 
harmed,  to  redeem  the  time  by  diligent  use  of  opportunities  remaining,  and 
"  henceforth  to  live  not  unto  ourselves,  but  unto  Him  who  loved  us  and  gave 
Himself  for  us."  By  such  earnest  efforts  to*' do  good  as  he  has  opportunity" 
does  the  Christian  seal  his  salvation,  and  enjoy  the  "  Well  done"  of  his  Lord. 
[See  Addenda,  p.  71,  Reparation.^ 

Topic:  "Amends"  made  by  Christ  for  Man's  Faults  (Vv.  15,  16). 

Think  of  all  the  wrong  and  all  the  trespass  which  have  been  done  against  th« 
Lord. 
I.  God  has  been  wronged  of  his  rights  in  this  wicked  world. 
1.  "What  are  the^w*^  rights  of  Jthovah  iu  His  creature,  man  1 


CHAP.  V.  15,  16.]  THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS.  67 

2.  What  are  man's  returns  to  Jehovah  in  actual  obedience  and  rir/hteonsjiess  ? 

3.  Wiuit  amazing  outrage  and  transgression  have  defrauded  God  of  His  due  ! 

4.  What  shortcomings  and  blemishes  have  marred  even  the  best  Lives  of  His 
redeemed  people  I 

II.  God  has  gained  more  by  Christ's  redemption  than  he  lost  by  man's 

FALL. 

Tiie  trespass  offerer  adds  a  surplus  I  But  who  can  weigh  the  surplus  Christ 
brings  % 

1.  Jehovah  reaps  a  richer  harvest  of  glory,  honour  and  praise  in  the  fields  of 
redemption  than  ever  He  could  have  reaped  in  those  of  creation. 

2.  The  "  sons  of  God"  would  raise  a  loftier  song  of  praise  around  the  empty 
tomb  of  Jesus  than  ever  they  raised  in  view  of  the  Creator's  accomplished 
work. 

3.  The  wrong  has  not  only  been  perfectly  atoned  for,  but  an  eternal  advantage 
has  been  gained  by  the  work  of  the  Cross.  God  is  gainer  by  the  work  of 
Calvary. 

III.  All   honour   to   jesus,  in  whose    cross    such  vast  "  amends  "  were 

MADE. 

1.  No  wonder  that  around  the  Crucified  One  the  affections  of  patriarchs, 
prophets,  apostles,  martyrs,  and  saints  have  ever  entwined  themselves. 

2.  No  marvel  tliat  the  Holy  Ghost  should  have  given  forth  that  solemn  but 
just  decree,  "  If  any  man  love  not  our  Lord  Jesus  Christy  let  him  be  anathema, 
maranatha"  (1  Cor.  xvi.  22).  Heaven  and  earth  shall  echo  forth  a  loud  and 
eternal  amen  to  this  anathema. 

3.  No  marvel  that  it  should  be  the  fixed  and  immutable  purpose  of  the  Divine 
mind  that  "  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow  of  things  in  heaven 
and  things  on  earth,  and  things  under  the  earth,  and  that  every  t  )ngue  should 
confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father"  (Phil.  ii.  10,  11). 
[Compare  Notes  on  Leviticus^  by  C.  H.  M.] 

Topic :  Trespassers  and  the  Trespass  Penalty  (Vv.  15,  16). 

(a)  Sin  has  many  forms  :  breaks  out  into  trespasses. 

(b)  The  trespass  offerings  are  manifold  :  meet  with  penalty  and  satisfaction  all 
wrongs  done. 

I.  The  dues  op  heaven  are  withheld  :  God's  will  is  transgressed,  His  law 
infringed. 

1.  Creation's  law  makes  man  God^s  sole  possession.  No  faculty  of  mind  or 
frame,  no  power  of  intellect  or  thought,  no  talent  of  influence  or  time,  no  oppor- 
tunity, no  gift,  no  grace,  is  property  of  our  own.  All,  then,  should  serve  the 
cause  of  one  Sovereign  Lord.  Reason  should  plan,  and  eyes  should  see,  and 
hands  should  work,  and  feet  should  run,  to  do  Him  honour  and  augment  His 
praise.  Our  every  energy  should  fly  abroad  with  morning  light  to  gather  fruits 
of  glory  fur  His  name.  Each  night  should  prove  that  faith  and  love  have 
laboured  to  advance  His  Kingdom  upon  earth. 

2.  Instead  of  this,  self  inounts  the  great  Creator  s  throne.  We  rise,  enter  on 
the  day,  journey  on,  as  if  self-seeking  were  legitimate  employ.  Whether  we 
rest  or  toil  it  is  "  unto  ourselves."  Is  not  this  trespass  1  It  robs  our  God ; 
wastes  His  dues.  It  brands  us  as  purloining  from  a  Father's  and  a  Benefactor's 
store. 

3.  Judgment  must  follow  upon  such  trespasses.  The  fire  must  consume.  Life 
must  be  laid  on  the  altar.  Blood  must  flow.  Trespass  brings  death.  No  soul 
can  sm  and  escape  wraih. 

II.  Man  can  make  no  true  amends. 

r2 


66  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  v.  14-19 


1.  Devotedness  cannot  repay  the  debt.  That  is  a  vast  conceit.  Tf  not  one 
thought  of  any  moment  ever  swerved  from  a  pure  etFort  for  the  Lord,  it  would 
but  be  that  moments  due. 

2.  Surplus  of  merit  there  is  none.  That  is  a  papist's  dream.  Our  best  acts 
are  only  increase  of  our  debt.  Hence  all  our  works  make  bankruptcy  more  deep. 
When  Justice  calls  to  the  white  throne,  the  fairest  reckoning  is  one  huge  debt. 
Who,  then,  can  stay  arrest  ? 

III.  The  trespass  offering  presents  relief. 

1.  Jesus  is  satisfaction  to  the  full.  Hence  death  for  sin  is  not  the  whole  of 
His  grand  work.  That  decks  us  with  no  merit  ;  it  fills  no  hand  with  fruits  of 
righteousness.  He  pays  then  a  whole  life's  homage  to  the  law.  He  gives  com- 
pliance to  its  largest  rule.  It  asked  for  one  undeviating  course  of  love.  Jesus 
was  love  without  one  straying  step. 

2.  This  pure  fulfilment  is /or  those  who  are  Christ's.  For  such  Christ  wrought 
it ;  to  their  account  he  puts  it.  Unsullied  righteousness  by  Him  avails  for 
believers. 

Such  is  the  Gospel  which  pervades  this  rite.  It  declares  in  emphatic  terms 
that — 

(1)  Trespass  stains  your  life,  your  heart,  soul,  and  mind,  every  day,  every 
hour. 

(2)  It  warns  that  trespass  strengthens  Satan's  claims,  places  a  vast  barrier 
between  you  and  God. 

(3)  Shows  a  full  recovery.  Christ's  cioss  and  life  are  both  pictured.  You  see 
Him  dying  to  pay  the  trespass  penalty  :  you  see  His  righteousness  supplying 
trespass  wrongs. — Homiletically  arranged  from  the  Dean  of  Gloucester's  Christ 
%$  all. 

Topic:  Sacrilege  (Vv.  14-19). 

The  former  offerings  may  be  regarded  as  both  sin  and  trespass  offerings ;  these 
in  the  closing  verses  of  this  fifth  chapter,  and  in  the  opening  seven  verses  of  the 
sixth,  are  particularly  and  exclusively  trespass  offerings.  Wrong  has  been  done 
to  God  and  man ;  and  for  that  trespass  contrition  must  be  shown,  an  offering 
made,  and  restitution  given.  The  trespass  here  indicated  is  sacrilege — mistake 
and  misappropriation  in  the  use  of  sacred  things :  a  culpable  trespass,  whether 
done  wittingly  or  unwittingly.     From  this  rite  we  are  taught — 

I.  The  jealousy  of  jehovah  for  the  honour  of  his  worship  in  thb 

TABERNACLE. 

By  the  Levitical  ritual  the  people  were  taught  that  worship  was  only  rendered 
acceptable  when  associated  with  Divinely  prescribed  sacrifices.  There  would  be 
danger  of  the  people  becoming  formal  in  their  worship  ;  that  they  would  fall 
short  of  the  full  requirements  of  the  ritual.  The  holy  things  here  spoken  of 
were  the  tithes,  first-fruits,  gifts,  etc.,  demanded  of  the  Lord.  Such  things 
were  His  before  they  were  devoted  as  sacrifices,  but  they  were  doubly  His  when 
He  claimed  them  as  offerings  unto  Himself  in  connection  with  the  worship  of 
the  tabernacle.  To  withhold  would  be  to  rob  and  wrong  God  ;  the  honour  of 
His  worship  would  be  insulted.  His  law  outraged.  Whether  (he  sacrilege  was 
committed  knowingly  or  unknowingly  it  mattered  not :  the  worship  was  marred, 
and  for  the  trespass  an  offering  must  be  presented.  The  trespasser  was  to 
brmg  a  ram  without  blemish  out  of  his  flocks,  and  the  priest  was  to  make  an 
atonement  for  him.  Restitution  was  to  accompany  his  contrition.  He  must 
make  amends  for  the  wrong  he  had  done  in  the  holy  thing ;  and  then  his  tres- 
pass was  to  be  forgiven  him. 

Worship  is  a  privilege  we  are  permitted  to  enjoy,  a  duty  we  are  bound  to 


CHAT.  V.   14—19.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 


69 


discharge.  When  we  draw  near  to  God  to  pay  onr  vows  and  commune  with 
Hun  in  prayer  and  praise,  we  draw  near  to  give  to  tfira  the  glory  tliat  is  due  to 
His  name.  Under  the  gospel  dispensation  we  have  not  to  erect  a  m  iterial  altar 
and  present  ofierings  such  as  the  Israelites  did  under  the  law.  No  definitely 
prescribed  portion  of  our  substance  is  required  of  us,  as  was  requireil  under  the 
old  economy,  but  we  are  expected  to  give  unto  the  Lord  of  our  metins  in  pro- 
portion as  He  hath  prospered  us.  Yet,  however  liberal  we  may  be,  and  con- 
scieiitioas  in  discharging  our  trust  as  stewards  of  the  Kingdom,  we  constantly 
fall  short  of  our  duty  as  indicated  in  the  gospel ;  we  trespass,  wittingly  and 
unwittingly,  and  need  coustantly  to  seek,  in  confession  and  contrition,  the  {>,.rdon 
of  our  religious  defalcations,  and  to  make,  in  so  far  as  we  are  able,  some  restitu- 
tion to  God,  some  humble  amends,  by  bringing  "  forth  fruits  meet  for  repent- 
ance." 

II.  The  INFLUENCFl  THIS  JEALOUSY  WAS  CALCULATED  TO  EXERT  UPON  THE 
WORSHIPPERS  IN  THK  TABKRNaCLE. 

Suiih  scrupulous  concern  on  the  part  of  Jehovah  about  the  sanctity  of  His 
service  would  teach  the  people  to  cultivate — 

(1)  Sensitivtiiess  of  feeling.  It  would  be  evident  that  indiflference  or  careless- 
ness would  render  the  worshipper  liable  to  a  breach  of  trust,  to  make  mistake  or 
misapply  the  things  devoted  to  the  Lord. 

(2;  Tenderness  of  conscience.  It  would  be  easy  for  conscience  to  become  per- 
verted and  hardened  in  the  midst  of  so  many  privileges  and  in  the  abundance  of 
blessings. 

(3)  Scrupulousness  of  conduct.  The  worshipper  would  find  that  merely  good 
intentions  would  not  suthce;  contrition  and  confession  would  not  be  enough: 
there  was  to  be  implicit  and  complete  obedience — nothing  wanting  of  all  that 
the  Lord  commanded.  None  of  the  sacrifice  kept  back,  none  of  the  holy  things  be 
employed  or  used  for  their  own  gain.  If  they  did,  even  though  they  wist  it  not, 
they  were  guilty,  and  should  bear  their  iniquity. 

Watch  that  we  trespass  not  against  God  as  Achan  did,  and  as  Ananias  and 
Sapphira  did  in  the  early  Christian  Church.  Beware  of  trespassing  through 
contempt,  carelessness,  or  presumption.  Aim  to  be  suspiciously,  as  well  as 
scrupulously,  sensitive  of  doing  wrong.  Pray  for  pardon  of  inadvertent  and 
unknown  sins.  God  does  not  pass  over,  but  forgives  trespasses  for  the  sake  of 
our  great  Trespass  Offering.  This  is  the  gospel  order  of  blessing  to  the  penitent  : 
repentance^  reforination,  restitution^  then  reconciliation  to  God's  favour,  and 
restoration  to  His  family,  here  and  hereafter. — F.  W.  B. 


OUTLINES  ON  VERSES,  CHAPTER  V.   14-19. 


V.  16. — Theme:  Reparation.      "  And  he 

shall  niake  amends  for  the  harm  that  he  hath 
done\\\  the  holy  thing,"  etc. 

In  forgiving  sins  God  does  not  teach  that 
transgression  of  His  law  is  a  trivial  matter; 
for,  atonement  not  only  expiates  but  makes 
amends.     Amends  must  be  made,  for — 

I.  Sin  is  a  wrong  done  to  god. 

II.  Sin  is  a  wrong  done  to  max. 
Amends  must  be  made  by — 

(1 )  Appropriate  contrition. 

(2)  Fersonal  sacrifice. 

(3;  Unreserved  consecration'. — evincing  it- 
self in  a  holy,  useful,  Christ ly  \\le.—F.  W.  B. 
[See  Addenda,  p.  71,  Reparation^ 

V.  17. —  Theme :  Error,  though  inadvert- 


ent, IS  GUILTY.  "If  a  soul  sin,  and  commit 
things  forbidden,  though  he  wist  it  not,  yet 
is  he  guilty,  and  shall  bear  his  iniquity.'' 

God  required  a  trespass  offering  for  the 
smallest  error  in  relation  to  any  of  His  ordin- 
ances, however  unwittingly  that  error  was 
committed. 

Yet  so  multitudinous  were  the  rights  of  the 
ceremonial  law,  that  its  re  iuireuicats  wore 
heavily  and  anxiously  upon  the  lives  and 
consciences  of  God's  people.  Righteousness 
by  the  law,  therefore,  became  a  weary  a  fruit- 
less hope. 

By  tnis  very  weariness  and  failure,  Israel 
was  led  to  crave  and  look  for  releuse  from 
this  "yoke,"  which  was  promised  when 
Messiah  brought  in  the  "  betta^  ^^oveuant." 


70 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY  ON 


[chap.  v. 


The  gospel  age  promised  release  from  the 
oppression  of  a  ritual  righteousness,  and  free- 
dom for  a  more  spiritual  service. 

I.    A  SOPHISTRY  NEEDING  CORRECTION. 

This:  that  in. cndon  constitutes  the  quality 
of  an  action  ;  whether  conduct  is  criminal  or 
not.  But  this  declaration  of  "  guilt,"  though 
in  the  action  he  *' wist  it  not,"  testifies  against 
a  sweeping  and  all-inclusive  application  of 
that  principle,  viz.,  that  intention  qualifies 
action. 

1.  Ignorance  may  and  does  extenuate  the 
guilt  of  an  action.  Knowledge  deepens  guilt 
(John  ix.  41 ;  xv.  22).  Ignorance  alleviates  it 
(Luke  xxiii  34;  Acts  iii.  17;  1  Tim.  i.  13). 

2.  Yet  ignorance  cannot  excuse  guilt. 

A  man  is  not  excused  for  breaking  the  laws 
of  the  land  because  he  was  ignorant  of  them. 
Nor  is  a  servant's  ignorance  of  his  master's 
will,  when  he  might  and  ought  to  have  known 
it,  a  sufficient  plea. 

Nor  is  be  innocent  who  trespasses,  through 
error,  against  any  ordinance  of  the  Lord. 
And,  if  80  in  respect  of  ceremonial  observ- 
ances, much  more  so  in  relation  to  tnoral 
duties.  Hence  the  curse  stands  against  "  every 
one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  written  in 
the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them  "  (Gal.  iii.  10). 

3.  God  Himself  refuses  to  condone  such  igno- 
rance. His  Word  declares  that  men  '•''perish 
for  lack  of  knowledge  "  (Hos.  iv.  6)  ;  and  that 
though  "  a  people  be  of  no  understandings  He 
will  not  have  mercy  on  thorn,  and  will  show 
them  no  favour"  (Isa.  xxvii.  11).  [Oomp. 
Simeon's  Sermons]. 

II.  Man's  uncompdted  guilt. 

1.  Reckon  up  our  remembered ^\u%.  "  They 
are  more  in  number  than  the  hairs  of  our  head." 

2  Add  the  sins  realised  at  the  time  but  now 
forgotten.  Memory  lets  slip  multitudinous 
trespasses. 


3.  Yet  what  can  represent  the  number  of 
our  unrecognised  s\n&,  done  iti  ignorance,  done 
in  error  ? 

4.  Deviations  and  defects  also,  which  Go'l's 
eye  alone  detected,  and  which  we  too  self- 
indulgently  condoned. 

Eiiphaz  charges  the  inquiry  on  Job,  and  on 
us,  '*  Is  not  thy  wickedness  great.,  and  thine 
iniquities  infinite  ?  "  (Job  xxii.  5}. 

God's  Word  declares,  "  There  is  not  a  just 
man  upon  earth  that  doeth  good  and  sinneth 
not "  (Eccles.  vii.  20),  tbat  "in  many  things 
we  all  offend  "  (Jas.  iii.  2 ;  Prov.  xxiv.  16). 

/n  estimating  oi(r  guiltiness  we  fail:  "Who 
ca7i  understand  his  errors  ?^\Psa.  xix.  12). 

To  extenuate  guilt  by  saying  "  //  is  an 
error''"'  (Eccles.  v.  6),  is  to  add  to  sin:  rather 
let  us  humble  ourselves  in  shame  before  God. 

Ill,  Vast  virtue  needed  in   atonement. 

1.  Under  the  ceremonial  arrangements  for 
expiation,  how  manifold  and  minute  and  nu- 
merous were  the  regulations  and  provisions 
necessary  to  make  atonement  for  sin  I 
"  Without  shedding  of  blood  there  was  no 
remission."  And  to  that  were  added  costly 
offerings  and  exacting  observances. 

2.  When  all  sin  had  to  be  expiated  by 
Christ's  one  offering.,  what  value  it  must  needs 
possess  I  Yet  "  by  one  offering"  the  Saviour 
"purged  our  sins," 

{a)  It  summons  us  to  faith.  "  Look  unto 
Me  and  be  ye  saved."  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of 
God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world." 

{b)  It  incites  us  to  grateful  adoration. 
"  Unto  Him  that  loved  us  and  washed  us  from 
our  sin  in  His  own  blood,"  etc.  (Revr.  i.  5,  6). 

(f)  It  assures  us  of  perfect  redemption. 
"  There  remaineth  no  more  offering  for  sin," 
for  "  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  God's  Son, 
cleanseth  us  from  all  sin  "  ( I  John  i.  7).  [See 
Addenda,  p.  71,  Rede?nption). 


ILLUSTRATIVE  ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  V. 


Taking  oaths. 

The  judicial  oaths  taken  in  courts  of  justice 
are  administered  variously:  "The  usaal 
practice  in  England  and  Ireland  is,  for  the 
witness,  after  hearing  the  oath  repeated  by 
the  officer  of  the  court,  to  kiss  the  four  gos- 
pels by  way  of  assent:  and  in  Scotland,  the 
witness  repeats  similar  words  after  the  judge, 
standing  and  holding  up  his  right  hand, 
'  swearing  by  Almighty  God,  as  he  shall  answer 
to  God  at  the  great  day  of  judgment,'  but 
•without  kissing  the  book.  Jews  are  sworn  on 
the  Pentateuch,  keeping  on  their  hats,  and 
the  oath  ends  with  the  words,  '  So  help  you, 
Jehovah.'  A  Mohammedan  is  sworn  on  the 
Koran.  A  Chinese  witness  has  been  sworn  by 
kneeling  and  breaking  a  china  saucer  against 
the  witness-box.  Thus,  the  mere  form  of 
taking  the  oath  is  immaterial;  the  witness  is 
allowed  to  take  it  in  whatever  form  he  con- 
siders most  binding  upon  his  own  conscience 
— the  essential  thing  being,  however,  that  the 


witness  acknowledge  some  binding  eflfect 
derived  from  his  belief  in  a  God  and  a  future 
state  ....  The  objections  of  Quakers,  Mora- 
vians, and  Separatists  to  taking  an  oath  have 
long:  been  respected  as  not  being  funda- 
mentally at  variance  with  a  due  sense  of 
religious  feeling,  and  hence  they  have  been 
allowed  to  make  an  affirmation  instead  of 
taking  the  oath.  In  1854  another  concession 
was  made  to  those  who,  not  being  Quakers, 
yet  refuse  to  take  the  oath  for  sincere  con- 
scientious motives  ;  and  these  are  now  also 
allowed  to  affirm  instead  of  to  swear.  But 
the  law  remains  as  before,  that  atheists  and 
persons  who  admit  that  they  have  no  religious 
belief  whatever,  are  excluded  from  giving 
evidence  in  courts  of  justice." — Chamber's 
Ency. 

"Unlawful  oaths  generally  mean  oaths 
taken  by  members  of  secret  and  illegal  so- 
cieties   of    a    treasonable    description:    and 


CHAP,  v.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 


71 


statutes  lon^  ago  were  passed  to  inflict  pen- 
alties ou  all  who  took  or  administered  such 
oaths." — Jbid. 

Profane  Oaths. — Louis  the  French  king 
was  taken  prisoner  by  Meletisaka  the  Sultan 
and  conditions  of  peace  being  concluded  be- 
tween them,  for  more  assurance  thereof  the 
Sultan  offered  to  swear,  "  if  he  failed  in  per- 
formance of  anything,  to  renounce  his  Mo- 
h  wuned^''  requiring  likewise  of  the  king  to 
swear,  if  he  failed  in  anything  he  had  pro- 
mised, to  deny  his  Christ  to  be  Cod :  which 
profane  oath  the  king  detesting,  and  wishing 
rather  to  die  than  to  give  the  same,  the  Sul- 
tan, wondering  at  his  constancy,  took  his  word 
without  an  oath  at  all,  and  so  published  the 
league. 

As,  on  the  other  side.  King  John  of  England, 
being  overlaid  in  his  barons'  wars,  when  he 
sent  ambassadors  to  the  monarch  of  Morocco 
for  aid,  offered  to  swear  fealty  to  him  and  to 
receive  the  law  of  Mohammed ;  and  thereby 
the  monarch  grew  into  such  dislike  of  the 
king  that  ever  after  he  abhorred  the  mention 
of  him. — Trapp. 

"It  is  a  great  sin  to  swear  unto  a  sin  ; 
But  greater  sin  to  keep  a  sinful  oath." 

Henry  VI.,  II.  v.  1. 

Sincere  oaths. 

"  His  words  are  bonds,  his  oaths  are  oracles  ; 

His  love  sincere,  his  thoughts  immaculate  ; 

His  heart  as  far  from  fraud  as  heaven  from 

earth." — I  wo  Gentlemen  of  Verona, 11.  7. 

"  An  oath,  an  oath,  I  have  an  oath  in  heaven: 
Shall  I  lay  perjury  upon  my  soul  ? 
No,  not  for  Venice." 

Merchant  of  Venice,  IV.  1. 
**  Tis  not  the  many  oaths  that  make  the  truth  : 
But  the    plain    single  vow,  that  is  vow'd 
true." 

All's  well  that  ends  well,  IV.  2. 

"Unheedful  vows  may  heedfully  be  broken.'' 

Shakespeare. 

Indiftbrrncb. — Idle  swimmers  who  go 
floating  carelessly  down  the  stream,  reckless 
of  the  nearing  peril  until  they  get  beyond 
reach  of  the  bank. 

"  I  asked  a  young  man,  '  Are  you  in  anxiety 
about  yourself  and  your  salvation?'  He  re- 
plied, '  I  have  little  concern  or  feeling  on  th« 
■ubject/ 


'"Are  you  not  trying  to  do  what  God  com- 
mands you  as  well  as  you  are  able,  and  with 
such  light  as  you  have  ?  ' 

"  '  Oh  no ;  it  would  seem  absurd  for  one  who 
feels  so  httle  as  I  do  to  attempt  any  religious 
duty  I  ' 

"  '  Yet,  you  admit  that  God  does  require  of 
you  repentance,  and  faith,  and  worship,  and 
a  holy  life  ;  do  you  not?  ' 

"  'Yes,  I  admit  all  this,  but  do  not  feel  in- 
terested, or  troubled,  or  concerned,  respecting 
it. 

"  '  What  would  you  advise  a  customer  to  do 
who  had  contracted  a  debt  with  you,  who  ad- 
mits his  debt,  and  that  he  ought  to  pay  it, 
but  says  he  knows  it  all,  yet  is  so  void  of 
interest  or  feeling  about  it?  ' 

"  In  an  instant  he  replied,  '  I  would  advise 
him  to  pay  it,  not  waiting  for  feeling. '  " 

Redemption. 
"  Heavenly  powers  where  shall  we  find  such 

love? 
Which  of  ye  will  be  mortal  to  redeem 
Man's  mortal  crime ;  and  just  th'  unjust  to 

save  ?  "  Paradise  Lost,  III.  213. 

"  The  Cross, 
There,  and  there  only  (tho'  the  deist  rave, 
And  atheist,  if  earth  bears  so  base  a  slave), 
There,  and  there  only,  is  the  power  to  save." 
Cowper,  Progress  of  Error,  'il3. 

"  Why,  all  the  souls  that  were,  were  forfeit 
once; 

And  he  that  might  the  vantage  best  have 

took 
Found  out  the  remedy." 

Measure  for  Measure^  II,  2. 

Reparation. 

"  Restore  to  God  His  due,  in  tithe  and  time; 
A  tithe  purloined  cankers  the  whole  estate.'' 

G.  Heebfrt,  The  Temple 

• 
"  God  is  much  displeased 
That  you  take  with  unthankfulness  His  doing  : 
In  common  worldly  things  'tis  called  ungrate- 
ful, 
With  dull  unwillingness  to  repay  a  debt 
Which   with   a   bounteous    hand  was  kindly 

lent  ; 
Much  more  to  be  thus  opposite  with  heaven : 
For  it  requires  the  royal  debt  it  lent  you." 

Richard  Ill.y  \L  2. 


72  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  vi.  2-13. 


CHAPTER  VI. 


SUGGESTIVE   READINGS. 

V.  2. — Trespass  against  the  Lord  and  lie  unto  his  neighbour.  Wrong  done 
to  man  is  done  to  God.  To  deceive  and  defraud  our  neighbour  is  an  insult  to 
Jehovah.  To  harm  man  is  to  inflict  injury  on  God  ;  as  to  touch  His  people  is  to 
"  touch  the  apple  of  His  eye  "  ;  and  as  Saul's  persecution  of  the  saints  was  per- 
secution of  Christ  Himself  (Acts  ix.  5).  Take  heed,  lest  acts  of  injustice  to 
others  so  aff«  of  heaven  as  to  evoke  remonstrance  and  rebuke. 

Vv.  2,  3. — Vie  ence,  or  hath  deceived,  or  sweareth  falsely.  Evil  is  fruitful  in 
forms  of  development.  Two  distinct  classes  of  wrong  are  here  indicated  : 
embezzlement  of  thiogs  placed  contidingly  by  a  neighbour  in  his  hand,  "  that 
which  was  deHvered  him  to  keep^  or  in  fellowship  "  [Lit.  *'  something  placed  in  his 
hand,"  a  deposit]  ;  and  now,  plunder  and  fraud,  a  neighbour's  property  being 
possessed  with  violence  and  seizure.  When  Adam  revolted  from  obedience  to 
(xod  it  introduced  a  fraudulent  principle  into  human  life  which  soon  wrought 
wrong  between  man  and  man.  He  who  can  sin  against  the  Lord  will  be  found 
equally  capable  of  sinning  against  man.  Dishonesty  heavenward  is  likely  to  be 
confirmed  hy  dishonesty  in  transaction  with  neighbours.  There  is  no  guarantee 
of  integrity  where  there  is  impiety.  Righteousness  before  God  means  Tightness 
towards  man. 

V.  5. — Restore  it  in  the  principal.  Reparation  should  follow  repentance, 
and  precede  propitiation.  First,  set  right  the  evil  done  to  your  neighbour,  then 
come  to  the  Lord  for  acceptance.  It  is  an  easy  and  delusive  repentance  of  sin — 
sin  done  to  men  on  every  hand,  sin  continued  for  years,  sin  working  sorrow  in 
homes  and  in  social  circles — if  the  penitent  may  leave  unremedied  uU  this  woful 
wrong  among  men,  and  free  himself  from  further  concern  by  simply  on  his 
knees  lamoming  all  before  God.  No!  if  convinced  of  guilt,  go  and  do  right  where 
your  selfishness,  and  greed,  and  fraudulence  have  wrought  havoc  and  misery  ; 
wipe  out  the  blots  of  crime  on  human  pathways,  then  come  for  appeasement  and 
acceptance  to  the  Lord.  "Bring  forth  fruit  meet  for  repentance"  (Matt.  iii. 
7-10). 

Add  a  fifth  part  more.  Let  there  be  an  overflow  of  generosity  to  compensate 
for  former  selfishness.  And  let  Christian  life  be  distinguished  by  a  liberal 
diff'usion  of  your  possessions,  in  order  both  to  lessen  the  cares  of  neighbours  and 
attest  the  reality  of  your  conversion.     "  Freely  ye  have  received,  freely  give." 

V.  6. — Bring  his  trespass  offering.  Zacchseus  might  pledge  himself '-if  he 
had  taken  anything  from  any  man  by  false  accusation  to  restore  him  fourfold  "  / 
but  to  lavish  reparation  on  man  could  not  obliterate  the  guile  of  his  actions  as 
concerns  the  law  and  holiness  of  God.  There  must  be  atonement.  Good  deeds 
and  generous  benefactions  cannot  expunge  guiltiness  of  soul.  And  besides  the 
actual  trespasses,  which  reparation  may  in  part  requite,  there  remains  the 
criminality  of  conscience,  the  impurity  of  soul,  the  impiety  towards  God.  And 
*'  it  is  blood  that  maket.h  atonement  for  the  souV 

Vv.  8-13. — The  burnt  offering,  because  of  the  burning  upon  the  altar,  etc. 
Every  evening  a  lamb  was  sacrificed  (Exod.  xxix.  38),  aud  these  directions  refer 


CHAP.  VI.  1—12.]  THE  BOOR   OF  LEVITICUS.  73 

to  the  ritual;  the  burning  was  to  be  ^^  all  night  until  the  morning.''  An  i  the 
altar  fire  was  ceaselessly  to  be  maintained  ;  symbolic  of  (I)  the  perpetual  atone 
ment  needed  by  men  ;  (2)  the  continuons  acceptawe  of  worship  bti  God  :  (3)  the 
uninferrapted  relatiomhip  of  Jehovah  with  Israel.  In  this  Christian  epoch  we 
maintain  no  ceaseless  fire,  but  we  enjoy  a  ceaseless  atonement,  which  assures  us 
of  undoubted  acceptance  and  unbroken  fellowship  with  God.  Instead  of  the 
daily  feeding  of  the  altar  fire  with  wood,  we  may  devote  afresh  daily  our  love 
and  obedience,  for  these  should  '^ never  go  out"  in  Christian  lives. 

Vv.  14-18.— The  meat  offering  This  section  adds  directions  for  the  priests, 
supplementing  the  regulation  given  in  chap.  ii.  1-3. 

V.  18.— Every  one  that  toucheth  them  shall  be  holy.  Either  this  contact 
with  holy  things  claimed  that  the  person  so  "  touched"  should  be  set  apart  for  God, 
or  the  contact  communicated  a  sanctity  which  henceforth  secured  his  consecration. 
Derived  sanctity  :  it  is  a  law  in  continuous  operation  :  many  souls  having  been 
drawn  to  Christ  through  the  influence  of  such  contact  with  "  holy  things "  as 
e.g.  the  Bible,  the  Sanctuary,  etc.;  or  with  ho\y  persons,  as  godly  parents.  Christian 
friends,  ministers  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Grace  goes  forth  from  them,  as  virtue 
went  out  from  Jesus  to  heal.  Seek  such  contact,  if  yet  in  your  sins.  Send  out 
such  sanctifying  energy,  if  the  sacred  grace  is  in  you. 

Vv.  19-23. — Consecration  offerings  for  the  priest  *' in  the  day  when  he  is 
anointed."  With  glad  thank  offerings  the  priest  was  to  seal  his  dedication  to 
the  sacerdotal  office.  No  tone  or  aspect  of  despondency  would  be  proper  to  such 
an  incident.  It  was  to  high  privilege  and  honour  the  youn^  priest  was  set 
apart :  entire  separation  for  the  Divine  service.  And  to  what  joyous  life  can  we 
aspire  comparable  to  this  %  "Yield  yourselves  unto  God  as  those  that  are  alive 
from  the  dead."  The  entrance  upon  a  sacred  life  is  a  blissful  incident,  and  should 
be  marked  with  festive  dedications. 

Vv.  2 1  30.— The  sin  offering  killed  before  the  Lord.  Supplementary  direct- 
ions are  supplied  to  chap.  iv.  1-5.  So  specially  sacred  was  the  blood  of  the  sin 
offering  that,  if  perchance  a  spray  of  the  blood  of  the  victim  spurted  out  upon 
the  priest's  garments,  the  stain  must  b^  dealt  with  as  of  solemn  consequence,  and 
even  the  vessel  in  which  the  stained  garment  was  washed  (vv.  27,  28).  Thus 
sptcific  were  Jehovah's  regulations  that  the  atoning  blood  might  not  be  profaned. 
How  much  more  should  '•'  the  precious  blood  of  Christ"  be  cherished  as  "  a  holy 
thing,"  and  guarded  from  profanation  !  (Heb.  x.  29).  From  within  that  ancient 
temple  a  voice  of  appeal  comes  to  us  to  this  day  that  we  solemnly  regard  the 
blood  of  atonement,  and  so  value  it  that  we  prize  its  sanctifying  virtue  and 
honour  its  efficacy  by  a  blameless  life. 

SECTIONAL  HOMILIES,  CHAPTER  VL  M2. 

Topic:  Distinctions   between   Trespasses   against   God  and  against  Men. 

(Connect  Chap.  v.  15-19  with  vi.  1-7.) 

The  trespasses  in  oh.  v.  relate  to  misconduct  "in  the  holy  things  of  the"^ 
Lord";  the  trespasses  in  ch.  vi.  refer  to  misdeeds  in  the  common  transactions 
and  relations  of  life. 

Distinction  A  :  Note  that  the  expression,  "  if  a  soul  sin  through  ignorance," 
which  occurs  in  the  former,  is  omitted  in  the  latter.  The  reason  for  this  is 
obvious — 

I.  The  claims  which  stand  connected  with  **  the  holy  things  of  the  Lord  " 
must  pass  infinitely  betond  the  reach  op  the  most  elevated  human  sensi- 
BiLiTY.  Those  claims  may  be  continuilly  interfered  with,  continually  trespassed 
upon,  and  the  trespassers  be  not  aware  of  the  fact. 


74  HOMILETLC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  vi.  2— 4. 


1  Man's  conscience  can  never  be  the  regulator  in  the  sancturtry  of  God.  How 
often  may  we  have  wronged  God  "in  Bis  holy  things"  without  ever  taking  a 
note  of  it  in  the  tablet  of  conscience^  yea,  without  having  the  competency  to 

detect  it  !    pee  Mai.  iii.  8.]  ,     ,     ,        ^    „      .  7  •  .• 

.  2.  God's  holiness  alone  must  fix  the  standara  when  God  s  rights  are  m  question. 
That  higher  light  must  shine  on  man's  conscience,  therefore,  to  correct  his 
"  ignorance  "  of  the  laws  which  governed  the  sanctuary. 

II.  On  the  other  hand,  the  human  conscience  can  readily  grasp  the  full 
AMOUNT  OF  THE  HUMAN  CLAIM,  and  Can  readily  take  cognizance  of  any  inter- 
ference with  such  claim.  ^    jk  •    * 

1.  When  mans  rights  are  in  question,  conscience  acts  as  a  prompt  and  efficient 
standard  The  wrong  which  the  human  eye  can  see  and  the  human  heart  feel, 
the  human  conscience  can  judge.  A  man  could  not,  "  through  ignorance,"  tell 
a  lie,  swear  falsely,  act  violently,  deceive  his  neighbour,  or  find  a  lost  thing  and 
deny  it.     These  were  all  plain  and  palpable  acts,  lying  withm  the  range  ot  the 

most  sluggish  sensibility.  ^  ,  7     •  » 

2.  "Ignorance"  is,  therefore,  ?iO^  allowed  as  qualifying  and  condoning  mens 

conduct  in  the  common  affairs  of  life.  , ,     ,     c  r^r.  -  ^  u  ,n  a  ^^\ 

How  blessed  it  is  to  know  that  the  precious  blood  of  Christ  has  settled  ail 

questions  with  respect  to  God  or  man,  our  sins  of  ignorance  or  our  known  sms! 

Here  lies  the  deep  and  settled  foundation  of  the  believer's  peace.     Ihe  l.ross 

has  divinely  met  all.  .  u  •      tu     v.^i„ 

Distinction  B :  Note  that  when  it  was  a  question  of  trespass  m  the  holy 
things  of  the  Lord,"  the  unblemished  sacrifice  wa^B  first  introduced,  and  afterward 
"the  principal  "  and  "the  fifth."  This  order  was  reversed  when  it  was  a  ques- 
tion of  the  common  affairs  of  life.  [Compare  ch.  v.  15,  16,  with  ch.  vi.  4-7.J 
The  reason  of  this  is  equally  obvious— 

I.  When  the  Divine  rights  were  infringed  the  blood  of  atonement  was  tlie 

prominent  requirement.  ^i    t  i.       i 

If  an  Israelite  had,  by  an  act  of  trespass,  deranged  his  relation  with  Jehovah, 

the  order  was  sacrifice  and  restitution. 

IT.  When  human  rights  were  infringed,  restitution  woidd  naturally  assume 

the  leading  place  m  i\iQ  mmd..  ,     ,    ,  ,   ,.         i   .-  •,;    7.-„ 

If  an  Israelite,  by  an  act  of  trespass,  had  deranged  his  relation  with  his 
neighbour,  the  order  was  restitution  and  then  sacrifice.     ;  a    ^  ^u  ^ 

i  To  wrong  a  fellow-man  interferes  with  commiimon  with  (xod.  And  that  com- 
munion can  only  be  restored  on  the  ground  of  atonement  Mere  restitution 
would  not  avail.  It  might  satisfy  the  injured  man,  but  could  form  no  basis  of 
restored  communion  with  God.  To  restore  "the  principal  and  add  -the 
fifth  "  would  still  leave  the  sin  remaining ;  and  "  without  shedding  of  blood  is 

no  remission."  .      .       .      /»      •  «T<?fi.^i, 

2  To  set  right  the  wrong  to  the  injured  man,  restitution  is  efficacious.  it  tnou 
bring  thy  gift  to  the  altar,  and  there  remember  that  thy  brother  hast  aught 
against  thee,  leave  there  thy  gift  before  the  altar  ^^!l  8^.,^^^^  ^^^1,^^!^.^" 
reconciled  to  thy  brother,  and  then  come  and  offer  thy  gift     (Matt.  v.  26,  Z^). 

The  claims  which  arise  out  of  our  human  relations  must  not  be  disregarded. 
They  must  ever  get  their  proper  place  in  the  heart.     [Compare  6.  M.  M.^ 

Topic:  Harm  done  by  Trespass  (Vv.  2-4). 

In  the  trespass  against  "the  Lord,"  considered  in  ch  v.,  f ««  .'T^^^Pf '^° 
declaration  as  to  "  the  harm  done  "  by  that  trespass ;  and  for  that  hann  the 
tS  '  r  htd  to  "make  amends"  (ch.  v.  15,  16).  In  this  chapter  trespasses 
Silfa  "neighbour"  are  under  consideration,  and  these  trespasses  are  «- 


CiiAi'.  VI.  2—4.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 


76 


plnined  as  bein-  deeds  of  actual  wrong.  Not  imaginary  or  sentimental  tres- 
passes, but  acts.  Which  statement  shows  how  truly  the  greatest  enemy  of 
mankind  is  man.     Or,  as  Jiobert  Burns  declares  it : 


"  Man's  inhumanity  to  man 
Makes  countless  thousands  mourn." 


In  the  same  vein  writes  Younx/,  in  his  ''  Night  Thoughts": 

"  Inhumanity  is  caught  from  man, 
From  smiling  man." 

T    m  P®®  Addenda,  p.  86,  Injuru.] 

1.     IriE    INJURY    WROUGHT    BY   TRESPASS. 

Ample  terms  are  employed  here  to  describe  the  forms  of  wron<>--doin<r  We 
read  of  "  violently  taking,"  "  deceitfully/  getting,"  and  «  sweari?w  fahdy  about  that 
w/ach  IS  found.'' 

1.  Trespass  defined.  In  every  act  of  ire^^^^^  practical  and  positive  wrong  was 
done;  there  was  an  act  of  evil  by  which  another  was  injured.  "  Trespass  "  dif 
fered  from  '-sin"  in  this:  sin  marked  what  man  was  in  himself  trespass  described 
what  man  had  done.  Deeds  of  wrong,  therefore,  are  here  under  consideration  • 
actual  wrong  and  robbery.  ' 

2.  Trespass  conditioned.  It  might  be  wrought  '' in  ignorance  "  (ah  v  15  17 
19)  when  done  against  "the  Lord";  and  it  is  implied  even  in  these  acts  of 
wrong  agamst  man  that  the  trespasser  did  not  deliberately,  and  "of  malice 
aforethought"  do  these  acts,  but  under  impulse  or  through  connivance  or  simply 
from  inatteutiou.  For  it  comes  to  be  recognised  as  trespass  afterwards,  not  at 
the  time  of  the  act.  God  has  harsher  names  and  heavier  judgments  for  wroua. 
domg  wrought  m  full  consciousness  and  full  light.  Still,  recognised  or  un- 
recognised, it  is  "trespass." 

3.  Trespass  weighed.  Neither  our  conscience,  nor  our  knowled^^e  nor  our 
ability  are  allowed  to  be  the  standard  by  which  our  acti  )ns  are  measured 
weighed,  judged;  but  God's  truth.  "Though  he  wist  it  not,  yet  is  he  quiltu'- 
he  hath  certainly  trespassed  against  the  Lord"  (ch  v.  17-19).  Man's  jud^meVt 
of  his  own  acts  is  not  to  be  trusted.  If  a  man's  conscience  or  his  li-ht*  were 
the  standard,  every  man  would  weigh  his  conduct  by  a  different  rule  •  there 
would  be  no  absolute  standard  of  right  and  wrong.  Evil  then  would  consist 
not  111  the  act  itself,  but  in  man's  estimate  or  perception  thereof.  Sin  ha^ 
blinded  our  perceptions  to  the  "  sinfulness  of  sin  ";  but  that  does  not  alter  the 
tact.     God  measures  and  weighs  our  trespasses  by  His  Word. 

4.  Trespass  recognised.  Light  comes  in  at  last,  and  the  wrong-doer  discovers 
that  he  has  committed  a  trespass.  "  When  he  hiowelh  of  it "  (chap,  v  4)  •  and 
in  due  course  transgression  makes  itself  known  to  the  transgressor  Li^ht 
shines  iQ  the  darkness,  and   its   beams  fall  about  every  l.fe,  and'will  ultimat'ely 

bring  to  light  the  hidden  things  of  darkness."     Conscience  in  man  will  awake 
and  memory  will  convict  the  sinner  of  his  long-forgotten  sin.  ' 

"Conscience     .     .     mutinies  in  a  man's  bosom; 
It  fills  one  full  of  obstacles."— iSAa/(:e.sy>€a?-«. 

"  There  is  no  future  pang 
Can  deal  that  justice  on  the  self-condemned 
He  deals  on  his  own  soul." — Byron. 

*♦  Conscience  is  harder  than  our  enemies, 
linows  tiwri',  accuses  with  more  nicety."— 6rVor<7<?  Eliol, 

**  Yet  still  there  whispers  the  small  voice  within, 
Heard  thro*  gain's  silence,  and  o'er  glory's  din; 
Whatever  creed  be  taught  or  land  be  trod, 
Mans  confidence  is  the  oracle  of  Go  i.''— Byron. 


76  HOMILETIC  COMMEISTAUY  ON  [chap.  vi.  4,  5. 

IT.  The  reparation  madr  for  trespass. 

When  the  tiespass  was  realised,  it  had  to  be  expiated  hy  sacrifice,  and  amends 
had  to  he  made  to  the  injure<l  neighbour. 

1  Trespass  atoned.  Blessed  be  Ood  (whose  voice  within  us,  whose  inspired 
Word,  whose  convincing  Spirit  brings  home  to  us  our  trespass),  that  His  grace  has 
'  iound  a  Ransom."  *'  He  shall  bring  his  trespass  offering  unto  the  Lord,"  etc. 
(v.  6).  He  that  sees  Jesus  in  the  trespass  offering,  sees  trespass  expiated, 
annihilated;  for  Christ  has  assumed  its  guiltiness,  borne  its  judgment,  paid  its 
penalty.  Not  alone  was  "  His  soul  made  an  offering  for  sin"  but  '*  He  was 
wounded  for  our  transgressions  "  (Isa.  liii.  5-10). 

2.  Trespass  compensated.  For  the  wrongs  the  trespasser  has  done  to  his 
neighbour  restitution  must  be  made  :  "He  shall  even  restore  it  in  the  principal " 
(v.  5).  Our  Lord  has  made  full  reparation  for  the  wrong  we  had  done— to  God 
and  man  ;  satisfying  God  by  His  own  merits  given  for  our  demerits,  and  blessing 
man  by  ensurmg  to  him  richer  advantages  than  those  which  sin  forfeited. 

Wherefore  this  reparation  after  expiation  ?  Thus  :  for  a  victim  merely  to  die 
would  leave  the  injured  neighbour  a  loser  still.  Though  the  trespasser  were 
punished,  the  injury  would  remain.  The  death  of  the  wrong-doer  would  not 
restore  defrauded  rights.  Yet  until  this  was  done  satisfaction  could  not  be 
regarded  as  perfect  ;  nor  could  justice  be  said  to  have  righted  the  wrong. 
Therefore,  punishment  fell  upon  the  victim,  and  the  wrong  was  also  repaired. 
So  that  in  the  atonement  for  trespass  we  find — 

1.  Judgment  inflicted.  The  victim's  life  is  forfeited,  as  was  the  sinner's  for  his 
sin.     And  Christ  gave  His  life  as  man's  substituted  victim. 

2.  Injury  compensated.  The  evil  had  to  be  remedied.  Having  wrought  evil 
in  time  past  of  our  lives  (comp.  Ephes.  ii.  2,  3),  we,  saved  by  Christ  Jesus,  now 
give  ourselves  to  earnest  effort  to  repair  the  wrong  done  ;  to  glorify  God,  whom 
we  had  wronged  by  disobedience  and  dishonour ;  to  benefit  men,  whom  we  had 
harmed  by  sinful  influence  and  example.     To  these  are  to  be  added  : 

3.  Dues  exceeded.  More  than  the  original  loss  had  to  be  repaid  ;  the  wrong 
more  than  remedied.  A  ^^  fifth  part  more"  hdi^io  be  "  added  thereto."  For 
there  was  in  Christ's  obedience  and  virtue  a  surplus,  an  excess  of  merit  presented  to 
God,  passing  beyond  man's  demerit.  And  in  Christian  devotedness  and  ministry 
there  are  blessings  brought  to  men  by  man  far  more  sacred,  and  tender,  and  con- 
solatory, and  helpful,  which  more  than  outweigh  all  the  injury  done  to  men  by 
man.  "  Let  him  know  that  be  which  converteth  the  sinner  from  the  error  of  his 
way,  shall  save  a  soul  from  death,  and  shall  hide  a  multitude  of  sins"  (Jas.  v.  20). 
[See  Addenda  p.  87,  Faithlessness."] 

Topic :  Restitution  made  for  Wrong  (Vv.  4,  5). 

Besides  the  original  due  was  added  a  "fifth."     Consider — 

i.  How  this  was  fulfilled  for  us  in  Christ.  At  His  hands  God  received  more 
than  all  whereof  man  had  robbed  Him. 

ii.  The  consequence  of  this  to  those  "  in  Christ."  They  are  "  complete  in  Him  " 
through  whom  we  have  received  the  atonement. 

But  the  practical  bearing  of  that  transaction  commands  attention.  Enquire 
In  what  way,  and  how  far,  this  view  of  Christ's  act  of  reparation  should  prove  an 
incentive  and  an  example  to  us. 

I.  Rf.stitution  made  hy  those  who  are  in  fellowship  with  Christ. 

By  standing  in  behalf  of  man  Christ  makes  full  restitution  for  man's  wrong 
and  trespass  ;  "not  with  corruptible  things,  as  siWer  and  gold '"  (1  Pet  i  18,  19), 
but  by  the  value  of  His  own  offering  and  obedience  He  repays  our  trespasses. 

1.  In  this  sense,  of  satisfying  God  for  our  trespasses,  we  can  m-nke.  nn.  restitution. 


CHAP.  VI.  1--7.J  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  77 


If  Christ  has  not  raade  it  we  are  lost.  The  rest  of  our  lives,  if  wholly  spent  for 
God,  could  never  atone  for  our  acts  of  trespass.  Each  day  would  bring  its  own 
proper  claim.     Works  of  superero<yation,  therefore,  we  could  have  none. 

2.  Yet  there  is  a  sense  in  which  the  soul  in  fellowship  with  Christ  will  make 
restitution.  Not,  indeed,  to  win  acceptance,  but  as  showing  how,  according  to  his 
measure,  through  the  Spirit,  he  sympathises  with  Christ.  As  he  has,  in  days 
past,  ''  as  the  servant  of  sin,"  robbed  God  and  man  of  their  rights,  so  now,  as 
'*  having  been  made  free  from  sin,"  he  will  "  become  the  servant  of  righteousness  " 
(Rom.  vi.  22). 

II.  Amends  superadded  to  the  resdtzition  offered. 

In  consequence  of  trespass,  against  God  or  man,  more  than  their  original  claim 
was  due  to  them. 

1.  Under  the  law,  the  claim  on  man  was  righteousness.  If  man  dealt  justly 
toward  God  and  man  nothing  further  could  be  claimed  of  him.  But  it  became 
different  when  he  had  trespassed.     Then,  by  God's  appointment — 

2.  Right  was  no  longer  the  measure  of  man's  debt.  The  trespasser  now  is  in  no 
condition  to  attempt  to  deal  out  righteousness,  either  to  God  or  man.  The  fact 
of  our  having  become  trespassers — 

(1)  Gives  God  a  claim  upon  us  which  is  not  the  hare  claim  of  right.  Above  and 
beyond  this,  the  trespasser  is  a  debtor.  He  requires  more  than  the  righteous- 
ness which  sinless  souls  could  have  rendered;  additional  "amends"  have  to  be 
made  ;  something  more  than  an  equivalent  for  man's  sin  ;  this — Christ's  bounteous 
virtues  ;  yea,  and  also— that  we  love  Him  for  His  grace  to  us. 

The  law  did  not  ask  love ;  li  asked  of  man  rectitude!  But  God  now  asks 
more  than  rectitude ;  He  desires  and  expects  gratitude^  affection^  consecration, 

"  For  souls  redeemed,  for  sins  forgiven, 
For  means  of  grace,  for  hopes  of  heaven, 
Father,  what  can  to  Thee  be  given, 
Who  givest  all  ?" 

(2)  Calls  US  to  unselfish  devotion  to  others.  As  the  recipients  of  grace  we  are 
called  to  exhibit  grace  in  all  our  transactions  with  others.  Not  dealing  out 
justice  to  men,  but  generosity,  and  kindness,  and  unselfishness.  "  Ye  have  heard 
that  it  hath  been  said,  an  eye  for  an  eye  ;  but  I  say  unto  you,  resist  not  evil :  do 
good  to  them  that  hate  you ;  pray  for  them  that  despitefully  use  you  "  (Matt. 
V.  38-44). 

"And  when  ye  stand  praying, /or^^^;e  if  ye  have  ought  against  any;  that  your 
Father  also  in  heaven  may  forgive  you  your  trespasses.     But  if  you  do  not  for- 
give, neither  will  your  heavenly  Father  forgive  you  your  trespasses  "  (Mark  xi 
25,  26).     [Comp.  also  Luke  vi.  32-35.] 

Yet  how  far  is  this  principle  of  grace  exceeding  justice  the  rule  of  Christian 
lives  1  If  we  are  y^s^,  how  little  concern  have  we  as  to  being  gracious  in  our 
dealings  with  fellow-men!  We  go  to  law  (1  Cor.  vi  1-7)  ;  we  claim  our  rights, 
little  thinking  of  the  added  "  fifth  "  of  the  trespass  offering. 

Grace,  not  right,  must  be  the  law,  as  it  is  the  hopCy  of  the  trespasser.  [Comp. 
Jukes  on  the  Offerings.^ 

OUTLINES  ON  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  VL  1-7. 

V.  2.  Theme:  The  ddtt  of  honesty.  as   religious   life.      Society   could   not  exist 

History  and  civilisation  be^an  with  promul-  without  respect   to   rights   of  property,  and 

gation  of  law  from  Sinai,  which  would  regu-  restraint    of     liberty.       Israel    in    wilderness 

late   man's    conduct    towards    God   and    his  without  laws    would    have  been  a  horde  of 

neighbour.     Israel  in  wilderness,  not  only  a  savages,    where    only   the    strongest    would 

chur:h,  but   cojtimonweaith ;   hence,  laws  to  have   survived.       The  Lord's  freemen  were 

govern  civil  and  social  relationships,  as  well  not  to    be    out-laws   and    freebooters,    but 


78 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON 


[chap.  VI.  1 — 5. 


obedient  servants  of  the  most  High.  /7e 
would  dwell  with  them,  they  were  to  dwell  in 
peace  with  each  other,  and  hold  each  other 
in  mutual  esteem.  Every  breach  of  trust, 
every  species  of  dishonesty,  strictly  prohibited; 
when  committed,  amends  to  be  made,  and  for- 
giveness sought.  From  the  trespass  otfering 
we  learn — 

I.  That  property — though  not  inte- 
grally A  HUMAN  RIGHT — MAY  BE  LAWFULLY 

POSSESSED  BY   MAN. 

Though  the  earth  is  the  Lord's  and 
the  fulness  thereof,  yet  He  hath  given 
it  to  the  children  of  men.  Though  a 
man  absolutely  possesses  nothing  but  w/iai 
he  IS,  he  may  acquire  the  right  to  call  worldly 
possessions  lawfully  his  own.  No  commu- 
nity of  goods  among  Israelites.  Communism  is 
Utopian  ;  infringement  upon  the  due  interests 
of  others,  and  therefore  robbery.  As  trustees 
and  stewards,  in  holding  and  using  posses- 
sions, we  must  have  respect  (a)  to  the  good 
of  others,  and  {b^  the  claims  of  God. 

II.  That  PROPtRXY  unlawfully  pos- 
sessed, IS  NOT  ONLY  A  CRIME  AGAINST  MAN, 

BUT  ALSO  A  SIN  AGAINST  GoD. 

Every  breach  of  trust,  dishonest  act,  or 
fraudulent  transaction,  displeased  Jehovah, 
and  required  atonement  at  the  hands  of  the 
ofifender.  Guilt  was  contracted  when  the 
law  was  dishonoured,  and  no  circumstances 
were  to  be  pleaded  in  exfemmtion  of  the 
guilt  or  in  mitigation  of  the  sacrifice  demanded. 
The  principle  of  this  law  has  never  been  re- 
pealed ;  it  is  morally,  as  well  as  legally, 
criminal,  to  obtain  property  of  any  sort  by 
any  wrong  means,  either  from  individuals  or 
societies.  Revealed  religion  lies  at  the  basis 
of  aW  politicaly  commercial  amd  social  morality. 
— F.W.B. 

V.  2.  Theme :  Breach  of  confidence.  "  Lie 

unto  his  neighbour,  or  hath  deceived  his  neigh- 
bour.'''' 

L  Note  some  examples  of  this  sin. 

1  Injury  to,  or  loss  of,  borrowed  goods. 
[See  Kings  vi.  6.] 

'I.  iceiaiiiing  a  found  article,  knowing,  not 
setking,  the  owner. 

3    Obi  aining  property  under  false  pretences. 

II.  Effects  of  this  sin. 

1.  Diminishes  the  trust  men  should  have  in 
each  other. 

2  Tj'^'Rfaens  the  stock  of  general  kindness. 
[See  Matt.  v.  42.] 

;-i.   iu.sters  a  spirit  of  dishonesty. 
Ill    The  divine  view  of  this  sin. 

1.  Reparation  to  be  made  to  man. 

2.  Confession  and  atonement  to  be  made  to 
God. — Rev.  J,  Comper  Gray,  Biblical  Museum. 

Thetne  :  Depositing  property. 

I.  A  neighbourly  convenience.  To  de- 
posit valuable  property  with  a  neighbour  was, 
and  still  is,  a  common  practice  in  the  East, 
where  no  establishments  exist  for  the  storing 
of  private  treasure. 

1.  How  helpful  a  neighbour  may  become. 

2    How  ^rand  is  this  confidence  in  another. 


3.  How  mutually  dependent  we  are  one  upon 
another. 

4.  How  honourable  we  should be'm  all  trans- 
actions. 

5.  B.OW Jealously  we  should  strive  to  merit 
implicit  trust.     [See  Addenda,  p.  %Q),  Injury.'] 

II.    A  HAZARDOUS  transaction. 

1.  Alans  reliableness  is  sorely  diso'editedhy 
continuous  breaches  of  faith. 

2  Treasure  becomes  often  a  serious  anxiety 
to  its  possessor. 

3.  No  security  can  be  guaranteed  in  any 
earthly  confidence.  [See  Addenda,  p.  87,  Faith- 
lessness.] 

III.  A  doubtful  alternative. 

There  was  another  method  adopted,  when 
a  man  was  about  to  journey,  if  he  could  not 
trust  his  neighbour  :  he  would  conceal  his 
treasures  under  ground. 

1.  What  light  this  throws  on  Scripture 
phraseology . 

The  Hebrew  word  for  treasure  denotes  hid- 
den :  and  explains  such  phrases  as  "  hidden 
riches  of  secret  places  "  (Isa..  xlv .  8 )  and  "  search 
for  her  hid  ti'easure  "  (Prov.  ii.  4  ;  Job  iii.  24). 

2.  What  light  this  throws  on  Christ^ sparables. 
There  was  danger  of  a  man  forgetting  the 

spotyfhere  he  had  long  ago  buried  his  treasure. 
Hence  our  Lord's  language  concerning  "  trea- 
sure hid  in  the  field  "  and  "  searching  "  '*  dig- 
ging '  to  find  it. 

IV.  A  SPIRITUAL  ANALOGY. 

This  committing  treasure  to  a  neighbour 
suggests  Paul's  imagery  of 

7'he  soulcommitteato  Christ :  *'  I  Know  whom 
I  have  trusted  and  am  persuaded  that  He  is 
able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  unto 
him  against  that  day"  (2  Tim.  i.  12).  [See 
also  v.  14  and  Tim,  vi.  20] . 

1.  Christ  is  faithful  to  our  trust. 

2.  We  cannot  safely  risk  our  souls  in  other 
keeping. 

V.  5.  Theme:  The  beneficence  of  a 
redeemed  life, 

The  same  law  in  reference  to  "  the  fifth 
part "  obtained  in  the  case  of  a  trespass 
against  a  man,  as  in  a  trespass  against  the 
Lord.  The  application  of  this  regulation  to 
the  work  of  Christ  indicates  that  man,  as 
well  as  God,  is  a  positive  gainer  by  the  Cross. 
The  believer  can  say,  as  he  gazes  upon  that 
Cross,  "However  I  have  been  wronged,  tres- 
passed against,  deceived,  whatever  ills  have 
been  done  to  me,  /  am  a  gainer  by  the  Cross. 
I  have  not  merely  received  back  ail  that  was 
lost,  but  much  more  beside.'' 

Thus,  whether  we  think  of  the  injured  or 
the  injurer,  we  are  equally  struck  with  the 
glorious  triumphs  of  redemption,  and  the 
mighty  practical  results  which  How  from 
that  gospel,  which  fills  the  soul  with  the 
happy  assurance  that  "  all  trepasses  "  are 
"forgiven,"  and  that  the  root  from  whence 
those  trespasses  have  sprung  has  been  judged. 

I.    A     TRESPASSER     IS     TRANSFORMED     INTO 

A  BENEFACTOR  by  the  law  of  Divine  grace. 
He  carries  blessings — 
1.  Jnto  the  scenes    which  have  been  the 


CHAP.  VI.  5—7.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS, 


79 


■wHti«s3  of  a  man's  sins,  hia  tieapasses,  and 
hiv,  injarioas  ways. 

I}.  Among  persons  ivho  have  suffered  in 
consequence  of  his  evil  doings,  his  deceits, 
and  his  transgressions. 

3.  The  re)ie%ving  grace  of  God  having 
worked  in  hi?n,  he  is  sent  back  to  those  scenes 
and  among  those  sufferers  furnished  with 
grace,  in  order  that  he  should — 

4.  Not  only  repair  the  wrongs^  but  to  allow 
the  full  tide  of  practical  benevolenre  to  flow 
forth  in  all  his  ways,  yea,  to  "love  his 
enemies,  and  do  good  to  them  that  hate 
him,  and  to  pray  for  them  that  despitefuUy 
use  and  persecute  him."  Such  are  the 
rich,  rare,  and  refreshing  fruits  of  the  grace 
of  God  thMt  act  in  connection  with  our  great 
Trespass  Offering. 

II.  A  GRACIOUS  LIFE  WILL  ATTEST  ITSELF 
IN  GENEROUS  CONDUCT. 

Sinfulness  and  selfishness  can  have  no 
licence  in  a  redeemed  life.  Instead  of  the 
caviller  against  godliness  being  able  to  show 
that  God's  people  allow  sin  "that  grace  may 
abound,"  sin  is  cut  up  by  the  roots ;  the 
sinner  is  turned  from  a  curse  into  a  blessing, 
from  a  moral  plague  into  a  channel  of  Divine 
mercy,  from  an  emissary  of  Satan  into  a 
messenger  of  God,  from  a  child  of  darkness 
into  a  son  of  the  light,  from  a  self-indulgent 
pleasure-seeker  into  a  self-denying  lover  of 
God,  from  a  slave  of  vile  lusts  into  a  willing- 
hearted  servant  of  Christ,  from  a  narrow- 
hearted  miser  into  a  benevolent  minister  to 
the  needs  of  his  fellow-men.  The  thief,  the 
defrauder,  is  transformed  into  a  generous 
donor  ;   giving  the  "  fifth  "  of  his  possessions. 

2.  Practical  righteousness  is  the  crowning 
witness  of  that  life  whose  sin  is  expiated  and 
forgiven.  Away,  then,  with  the  oft  repeated 
taunts,  "  Are  we  to  do  nothing  ?  "  "  According 
to  this  gospel  we  may  live  as  we  list  I  "  They 
who  utter  such  language  know  not  what  grace 
means :  have  never  felt  its  sanctifying  and 
elevating  influences.  They  forget  that,  while 
the  blood  of  the  trespass  offering  cleanses  the 
conscience,  the  law  of  the  offering  sends  the 
trespasser  back  to  him  whom  he  has  wronged 
with  "the  principal "  and  "the  fifth  "in  his 
hand.  Noble  testimony,  this,  both  to  the  grace 
and  righteousness  of  the  God  of  Israel  I 

If  the  conscience  has  been  set  to  rights,  by 
the  blood  of  the  Cross,  in  reference  to  the 
claims  of  God,  the  conduct  also  must  be  set 
to  rights  by  the  holiness  of  the  Cross  jn  refer- 
ence to  the  claims  of  practical  righteousness. 
This  hallowed  union  will  never  be  dissolved 
by  any  mind  which  is  j:overned  by  pure  gos- 
pel morality.  "  He  that  doth  not  righteous- 
ness is  not  of  God  ''  (I  John  iii  10). 

III.  Divine  grace  is  dishonoured  in  those 
whose  conduct  and  character  exhibit  not  the 
fair  traces  tiF  practical  holiness. 

1.  God  has  given  us  in  His  Word  those  evi- 
dences by  which  we  can  discern  those  that  belong 
to  Him.  "The  Lord  knoweth  thorn  that  are 
His;  and  let  every  one  that  nameth  the  name 
of  Christ  depart  from  iniquity"  (2  Tim.  iii. 

19; 


Ca)  We  have  no  right  to  suppose  that  an  evil- 
doer belongs  to  Cod.  The  holy  instincts  of  tbo 
Divine  nature  are  shocked  by  such  a  thought. 
Dilliculty  is  felt  in  accounting  for  evil  prac- 
tices in  those  who  are  regarded  as  Christians. 
But  the  Word  of  God  settles  the  matter  clearly 
and  authoritatively  :— "  In  this  the  children  of 
God  are  manifest,  and  the  children  of  the 
devil:  whoever  doeth  not  righteousness  is  not 
of  God,"  etc.  (1  John  iii.  9,  10). 

{b)  Laxity  and  self-indulgence,  specially  the 
peri  Is  o!  our  times,  must  be  severely  and  sternly 
shunned. 

2.  An  accommodating,  easy  profession  of 
Christianity  is  rebuked  by  this  law  of  the 
trespass  offering.  Every  genuine  Christian  is 
called  upon  to  give  a  clear  testimony,  a  tes- 
timony resulting  from  the  steady  exhibition 
of  '•  the  fruits  of  righteousness  which  are  by 
Jesus  Christ  unto  the  glory  and  praise  of  God." 
Most  deplorable  is  it  to  see  such  faulty  mani- 
festation abroad  of  the  love  and  holiness  which 
should  distinguish  Christian  conduct. 

Let  us  rebuke,  by  a  life  of  self-denial  and 
genuine  benevolence,  the  culpable  inactivity  of 
professors.  Christian  life  should  abound  in 
large  and  generous  ministries.  [Comp.  0.  H.  M. 
on  Leviticus^ 

V.  6,  7.  Therne :  The  sin  of  dishonesty. 

In  the  natural  government  of  the  world 
God  has  made  the  laws  of  nature  on  the  side 
of  goodness  and  virtue  ;  and  in  the  moral 
government  of  the  universe  the  Divine  favour 
is  on  the  side  of  honesty,  integrity  and  right- 
eousness. The  enactments  of  Sinai,  and  those 
from  the  door  of  the  tabernacle,  were  a  tran- 
script of  the  holiness  of  the  Divine  character, 
fixing  approval  upon  the  right,  and  stigma 
upon  the  wrong.  Men  were  to  do  to  others 
as  they  would  others  should  do  to  them, 
remembering  that  the  eye  of  the  Lord  was 
upon  them.     Thus  Israel  was  taught  — 

I.  That  the  sin  of  dlbhonesty  incors 
the  JUST  indignation  of  heaven. 

Moses  and  others,  who  administered  the 
laws  among  the  people,  would  feel  the  sacred- 
ness  and  responsibility  of  their  office,  in  that 
they  were  Jehovah's  deputies,  and  punished 
offenders  in  His  name.  Earthly  rulers  and 
governments  should — 

(a)  Base  their  statutes  upon  Divine  enact- 
ments;  and 

{Jb)  Seek  the  reformation,  as  well  as  punish- 
ment, of  the  offender. 

The  appointed  offering,  and  the  appearance 
of  the  trespas-sers  before  the  Lord,  denoted 
that  sin  had  been  committed,  that  guilt  had 
been  incurred.  All  sin  is  hateful  in  the  eyes 
of  Him  with  whom  we  have  to  do. 

II.  That  the    sin    of   dishonhstv   may 

NEVERTHELESS  BE  FORGIVEN. 

Specific  directions   were   given   respecting 
the  offering  required,  that  the  offerer  might 
have  no  doubt  as  to  the  way  of  forgiveness. 
Obedience  would  show  that  the  trespasser- 
la)  /^  cknowledged  his  offence  ; 
(J>)  IVas  sorry  for  it  ; 


80 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON 


[CHAP.  VI.  8 — 13 


(<•)   JVas  ready  to  make  amends  ; 

(d)  Desired  absolution. 

The  root  and  essence  of  sin  is  that  it  is 
committed  against  God ;  hence,  only  God  can 
forgive  it.    In  the  gospel  the  law   is   not 


destroyed,  bnt  fulfilled;  For  Christ,  our  Sin, 
or  Trespass  Offering,  procures  complete  aufi 
free  pardon  for  all  sin.  Fools  make  a  mock 
at  the  sin  offering,  but  with  the  righteous  it 
is  in  esteem.— F.  W.  B. 


SECTIONAL  HOMILIES  CHAP.  VL  8-13. 

TEE  LAW  OF  THE  BURNT  OFFERING  (resumed). 

Topic, — Dignity  linked  to  Duty  (Vv.  8-12). 

With  the  eighth  verse  of  this  chapter  v^e  traverse  ground  ah-eady  gone  over. 
Directions  having  been  given  for  the  institution  of  the  burnt  ofFering,  Aaron  and 
his  sous  now  receive  particulars  as  to  their  parts  in  the  service.  The  burnt 
offering  was  the  first  and  most  important  of  all  the  ordinary  oblations,  pointing 
as  it  did  to  unreserved  personal  consecration,  and  universal  Divine  redemption. 
In  the  directions  given  to  Aaron  and  his  sons,  we  learn — 

I.  How  APPARENTLY  UNDIGNIFIED  DUTIES  MAY  BE  ASSOCIATED  WITH  THE  MOST 
EXALTED  SERVICE. 

The  Divine  work  to  which  the  priests  were  appointed  would  distinguish  them 
from  the  common  people ;  ensure  them  reverent  recognition ;  be  their  pass- 
ports to  social,  as  well  as  sacred  eminence.  Their  spotless  vestments  were  a 
symbol  of  their  ofi&cial  purity.  How  undignified  it  would  seem  for  the  priest  to 
be  busy  removing  the  ashes  of  the  consumed  sacrifice  with  his  own  hands  to  a 
clean  place  without  the  camp.  But  no  work,  however  lowly,  if  done  for  God  and 
at  His  command,  can  bring  real  degradation.  Men  always  go  up  when  they  go 
to  duty.  David  felt  he  would  "rather  b^  a  door-keeper  in  the  house  of  the 
Lord  than,"  etc.  The  priests  were  as  great  and  dignified  when  removing  the 
ashes  of  the  offering  as  when  they  ascended  to  their  loftiest  sacerdotal  duties. 
Let  us  think  nothing  mean  or  low  that  we  can  do  in  the  service  of  our  risen 
and  loving  Lord. 

II.  How  THE  ASSOCIATION  OF  LOWLY  DUTIES  WITH  EXALTED  SERVICE  MAY  BE  A 
SALUTARY  DISCIPLINE  TO  THE  WORSHIPPER. 

That  the  reasons  for  the  sacrifices,  and  the  laws  relating  to  them  were  only 
partially  given  ;  and  that  in  matters  of  precision  and  detail  so  much  seemed 
mysterious  and  even  unnecessary,  would — 

(a)  Test  the  faith,  (6)  quicken  vigilance,  (c)  stimulate  energy,  and  (d)  prepare  for 
higher  and  more  spiritual  service.  He  that  is  faithful  in  the  least  will  be  in  that 
utiich  is  greatest.  Fidelity  in  what  the  world  may  deem  small  and  meaning- 
less will  receive  the  recognition  of  heaven,  and  promotion  to  higher  and  holier 
service. — F,  W.  Broiun. 


OUTLINES  ON  VERSES,  CHAPTER  VL  8-13. 


V.  9.  Theme:  Sacbed  attire. 

These  directions  concerning  offering  the 
burnt  sacrifice  relate  to  the  priests  ;  and 
denote  the  divinely  acceptable  method  of 
their  ministrations.  In  all  these  specific 
ceremonial  regulations  there  lay  couched  im- 
portant spiritual  suggestions. 

I.  In  holy  attire  they  serve  at  the  altar. 

1.  Suggestive  of  the  essential  holiness  of 
Christ.  By  His  grace  all  offerings  were 
rendered  a  sweet  savour  to  God. 


2.  Symbolic  of  their  derived  purity  and 
righ'eoiisness.  [Oomp.  Exod.  xxviii.  40-48  witb 
Psa.  cxxxii.  9  ;  Rev  iii.  4;  vii.  IS,  14;  xix.  8. J 

3.  Indicative  of  the  spirit  of  sei-vice.  Bring 
to  God  services  and  sacrifices  with  clean 
hands,  and  pure  hearts,  and  holy  lives.  The 
state  of  the  offerer  affects  the  character  of  the 
offering.     [See  Heb.  x.  22.] 

II.  In  ALThRiiD  GARMENTS  they  bear  the 
ashesfrom  the  sanctuary. 

1.  '1\l^  changed  tone  cf  feeling  in  the  mini»- 


CHAP.  VI.  8 — 13.] 


THE   BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 


81 


trant.  He  no  longer  serves  in  clolight  at 
God's  altar,  but  takes  part  in  tho  act  of  out- 
casting  the  sin  sacrifice.  A  saddened  mood 
is  upon  bim  as  be  becomes  for  the  moment 
associated  with  the  repulsiveness  of  sin  in 
carrying  the  ashes  '*  without  the  camp."  There 
are  two  aspects  of  Christian  m\n\sivj— joyous 
privilege,  when  clothed  in  the  garments  of 
salvation,  and  saddened  reflection  when  reahs- 
ing  tho  offensiveness  of  sin. 

2.  The  altered  scenes  which  a  Christian 
frequents.  He  is  not  always  within  "the 
holy  place  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  Most 
High,"  be  has  to  go  forth  to  outside  scenes: 
the  rougher,  less  hallowed  scenes  of  life  and 
humau  Society.  Yet,  though  laying  aside  the 
holiest  priestly  garb  when  he  left  the  most 
sacred  scenes,  as  a  Christian  soul  necessarily 
I  aves  behind  him  the  sublimer  thoughts  and 
1.elihgs\^Q  wore  when  in  the  very  secret  of 
God's  presence  :  still  his  changed  garments 
-were  consecrated  garments.  The  Christian 
must  never  lay  aside  his  sanctity,  nor  his 
priestly  profession.  Everywhere,  whether 
apart  with  God  or  busy  amongst  men,  he 
must  wear  the  consecrated  attire. 

V.  12.  Theme :  Divine  fire  humanly  main- 
tained. 

"The  fire  upon  the  altar  shall  be  burning 
in  it;  it  shall  not  be  put  out ;  and  the  priest 
shall  burn  wood  on  it  every  morninq,'\  etc.     ^^ 

It  might  have  been  supposed  that  this  "fire, 
having  been  Divine  in  its  origin,  would  have 
been  Divinely  maintained.    That  fire,  so  given, 

suggests — 

1.  Divine  endowments  committed  to  the 

control  of  men. 

As  in  the  instances  of  that  "  fire,  super- 
naturally  originated  on  that  altar,  and  then 
left  in  mans  hands,  so  with  — 

1.  Pure  sympathies  implanted  within  man. 

2.  Revelation  in  the  Scriptures. 

3.  Quickened  life  in  the  regenerated  soul. 

4.  spiritual  endowments  to  the  believer. 

6.  Sacred  affections  in  the  Christian  heart. 
6.  Holy  enthusiasm  firing  an  earnest  nature. 
From  God  they  come :  but  man  has  them 
in  his  hands. 

II.  Divi  >  E  endowments  entrusted  to  the 

PRES !•  SVATION  of  MKN. 

The  priests  had  to  keep  that  "  fire"  alive,  or 
it  would  expire. 

1.  Jfaving  received  the  gifts  of  God  we  are 
responsible  for  their  maintenance.  God  holds 
us  as  in  trust  with  them. 

2.  How  solemn  the  priestly  office,  which  all 
are  called  to  perform:  feeding  the  Divine 
**  fire  "  in  our  souls  continually  1 

III.  Divine   endowments   requiring  the 

CO-OPJ  RATIVk   WATCUFLLNtSS  OF  MKN. 

The  priest's  eye  would  need  to  be  often  turned 
to  the  altar  tire:  ''every  morning''  it  needed  care. 

1.  A  watchful  life  is  imperative  if  we  would 
maintain  godi.in«;88  within. 

2.  Neo-lect  will  allow  the  extinction  of  the 
divinest'^gift.  It  needs  scarcely  that  positive 
effort  be  made  to  ''put  out "  the  fire :  it  will 
go  out  of  itself  if  not  attended  to. 


Only  neg'ect 
(a)   Daily  prayer  ; 
\b)  Daily  reading  of  the  Scriptures  ; 
(J)  Daily  fellowship  with  Christ ; 
{d)  Daily  ivatching  against  temptation. 
Fail  in  these  duties,  and  the  "  tire  "  will  expire. 
'•'■  Every  morning''  bring   wood  to  the  fire! 

IV.  Divine  endowments  enduring  only 
where  actively  maintained. 

That  fire  did  expire  I  At  the  destruction  o 
the  temple  by  Nobucbadnezzar. 

1.  May  the  Divine  life  in  a  soul  go  out? 

2.  May  the  Christian's  '^ first  love  "  become 

extinct? 

3.  May  the  h^ly  aspirations  of   a  child  of 

God  droop  ? 

4.  May  all  sacred  ardour,  in  prayer,  in  con- 
secration, die  away  ? 

"  Work  out  your  salvation  with  fear  and 

trembling." 

"  See  that  ye  make  your  calling  and   election 

sure,'^ 

V.  13.   Theme:  Fire  not  to  go  out. 

I.  Its  typical  import,  as  relating  to  the  gos- 
pel. 

1.  That  we  all  constantly  need  the  atonement. 
This  fire  was  given  for  the  use  of  all  Israel  with- 
out exception  :  all  needed  to  offer  atonement ; 
Aaron  as  well  as  the  people.  We  must  all  bring 
our  offering  to  the  altar.  The  fire,  too,  was  for 
daily  use  And  daily  we  need  to  come  to  God 
through  the  atonement.  _ 

2.  That  the  Levitical  sacrifices  are  insuffi- 
cient for  us.  Thousands  of  victims  were  con- 
sumed on  God's  altar,  yet  the  fire  continued 
to  burn ;  indicating  that  full  atonement  had 
not  been  offered  (Heb  x.  1-4,  11,  and  ix.  9). 

3.  That  God  intended  to  supply  a  satisfactory 
saaifice.  The  continuous  fire,  and  the  daily 
supply  of  wood,  seemed  to  repeat  Isaac's  in- 
quiry, "  Behold  the  fire  and  the  wood,  but  where 
is  the  lamb  for  a  burnt  offering  ?  "  (Gen.  xxii. 
7,  b).  God  kept  up  the  expectation  of  the 
Great  Sacrifice. 

4.  That  all  who  repudiated  that  Great  Sacri- 
fice must  expect  severest  judgments.  The  victims 
consumed  by  that  fire  betokened  the  smner  a 
deserts  (Mark  ix.  43,  44,  45,  etc.).  "  Who  can 
dwell  with  the  devouring  fire?  who  can  dwell 
y^iih.  everlasting  burnings ?"  [Isa..  xxxiu.  14> 

II.  Its  mystical  import,  as   relaiin-j  to  the 

church. 

That  altar  represents  the  heart  of  man^ 
from  whence  offerings  of  every  kind  go  up  to 
God  (^Heb.  xiii  15,  l6).  ,     ,  ^  j 

I.  That  no  offering  can  be  accepted  of  God 
Wiless  it  be  inflamed  with  heavenly  fire. 

Compare  Nadab  and  Abihu's  doom  (Lev.  X. 
1  2);  and  tho  remonstrance  of  Isaiah  ^^1.  11). 
'  2.  That  if  God  have  kindled  in  our  hearts  a 
fire  we  must  keep  it  alive  by  our  own  vigilance  : 
"Stir  up  the  gift  of  God  that  is  in  thee  "  (2 
Tim  i.  6  I ;  "Be  watchful,  and  strengthen  the 
tbings  which  remain,  that  are  ready  to  die  " 

(Rov.iii.  2).  J  .     o,   j» 

\\  That  every  sacrifice,  offered  in  God  s  ap- 
pointed way,  uill  be  accepted.  Though  unable 
to  bring  a  kid  or  lamb  or  young  pigeons,  yet 


S2 


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY  ON 


[chap,  vl  13. 


bring  a  small  measure  of  flour  (Lev.  v.  5-l3). 
The  sigh,  tear,  groan,  will  be  accepted  equally 
with  the  most  iiuent  prayer  ;  the  widow's  mite 
equally  with  the  offerings  of  the  wealthy, 

III.  /is  personal  suggestion,  indicating  oua 
DUTT. 

i.  Look  to  the  Great  Atonement  9A  your  only 
hope, 

2.  ^7crreyider  up  yourselves  as  living  sacri- 
fices unto  God.— C.  Simeon.  [See  Addenda, 
p.  86,  h7ichi7'ing  Fire."] 

V.  13,    Theme  :  The  altab  fire. 
"The  fire  shall  ever  be  burning  upon  the 
altar;  it  shall  nevar  go  out." 

A.  This  fire  is  typical  of  holy  desires,  and 
of  DIVINE  love;  to  which  it  bears  an  exact 
parallel  in  a  variety  of  instances,  in  its  various 
operations : — 

i.  Fire  is  an  illuminating  quality. 

ii.  It  is  a  wanning  and  heating  quality. 

iii.  It  will  burn  any  combustible  matter ; 
separating  metal  from  dross  and  rust. 

iv.  It  is  an  ascending  quality ;  greedily 
mounting  to  its  proper  seat,  and  will  not  rest 
till  it  incorporates  with  its  own  element. 

V.  It  is  a  melting  and  softening  quality. 
Iron  and  other  metals  are  m&de  pliable  by  it. 

vi.  It  is  a  comforting  and  consoling  quality. 

vii.  It  is  of  an  assimilating  qua^lity.  It 
changes  materials  into  its  own  nature,  and 
sets  them  on  fire. 

vhi.  Without  fire  business  would  be  ar- 
rested ;  nor  could  we  exist.  Parallel:  "  Man 
lives  not  by  bread  alone,"  etc.  '•  His  Word 
was  in  mine  heart  as  a  burning  fire." 

B.  how  may  we  quench  the  firb  of  holy 
desires  and  Divine  love  ? 

i.  By  inco7isi(/e/ ation  OT  vinwsitchfMlneaa. 

ii.  By  a  trifling  spirit^  or  permitting  levity 
to  prevail. 

iii.  Not  keeping  our  eye  single,  our  heart 
sincere. 

iv.  fond  conceits  of  ourselves ;  heing  yvise 
above  ^^uat  is  written. 

V.  Not  harmonising  our  lives  by  the  rule  of 
God's  \Y ord.— Methodist  Flans,  by  Rev.  Wm. 
Stephens,  a.d.  I7b6. 

V.  13.  Theme :  The  altak  fiee  a  symbol 
OP  regenerating  grace. 

The  ANALOGY  bet'^•een  this  fire  and  regener- 
ating grace  appears — 

I.  In  its  source  and  oj'igin, 

II.  In  its  tendency. 

III.  In  its  nature  and  properties* 

IV.  In  iia  per ??ianency. 

V.  In  ita  perpetuity. 

The  practical  lesson  gathered  from  the 
Bubject,  is  diligence  in  the  use  of  means  : — 

1.  Frayer :  secret,  family,  social. 

2.  Study  of  God's  Word. 

3.  Meditation  (Ps.  cxix.;  Mai  iii.  16;  Heb. 
X.  25). 

4.  Attendance  on  the  tfieans  of  gi-ace. 

6.  Faithful  labour  for  the  glory  of  God 
and  the  salvation  of  souls. — From  Homiletic 
Monthly,  by  Rev  G.  F.  Love.  [See  Addenda, 
page  b6,  Enduring  d'ire.'\ 


V.    18.   The?ne:    The    unextinquishableb 

FIRE. 

The  Divine  injunction  to  keep  the  fire 
upon  the  altar  ever  burning  has  been  thought 
by  some  Biblical  scholars  to  imply,  that  the 
wrath  of  God  against  sin  will  never  expire , 
that  the  Divine  punishment  for  sin  is  inter- 
minable. But  we  must  remember  that  the 
fire  on  the  altar  consumed  not  the  sinner  but 
the  sacrifice  offered  in  the  sinner's  stead 
And  the  fire  did  ultimately  go  out. 

It  seems  more  consistent  with  the  moral 
teaching  of  the  rite  (and  certainly  beset 
with  fewer  difficulties)  to  take  the  fire  {a) 
as  symbolic  of  the  fact  that  the  constantly 
offered  sacrifices  met  with  abiding  approval 
of  the  Lord;  and  (3)  as  an  emble?n  of  the 
deep  devotion  and  constant  love  of'  the  hear, 
necessary  to  secure  unbroken  commuuiou 
with  heaven. 

Our  bodies  are  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost ; 
and,  as  priests  unto  God,  "  we  are  to  offer  up 
ourselves  living  sacrifices,  holy  and  acceptable 
unto  Him."  Fire  is  a  Divine  emblem  by 
which  God  is  represented  to  us ;  and  by 
which  God  is  manifested  in  us.  Enthusiasm 
means  God  in  us.  The  fire  of  consecration 
must  be  — 

I.  Divinely  kindled.  It  must  come 
from  the  presence  of  Jehovah,  or  we  shall 
offer  strange  fire  on  the  altar.  The  baptism  of 
fire,  Uke  that  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  from  above. 

II.  Constantly  replenished.  The  altar 
fire  was  every  day  fed  by  the  repeated  sacri- 
fices. Enthusiastic  consecration  can  be 
sustained  only  by  repeated  supplies  of  appro- 
priate fuel.  We  must/z7^  up  grateful  memories^ 
holy  resolutions,  selfdetiying  services,  etc. 
The  flash  of  rehgious  excitement  will  not 
suffice,  God  will  not  accept  the  white  ashes 
of  a  former  fire. 

III.  Frequently  revived.  The  fire  mus . 
not  be  choked,  or  damped,  it  would  need 
fresh  air,  and  stirring  :  the  fire  in  our  hearts 
needs  the  fresh  air  from  heaven — to  be  stirred 
by  renewed  efforts — we  need  to  beware  of 
extinguishing  influences,  such  as  unholy  lusts, 
undue  anxieties,  unbelief  in  God,  inattentiou 
to  public  and  private  devotions,  etc. 

IV.  Judiciously  controlled.  The  fire 
upon  the  altar  was  kept  within  reasonable 
bounds,  or  it  might  have  spread  disaster 
through  the  whole  camp.  Zeal  and  conse- 
cration must  be  governed  by  intelligence,  or 
they  will  degenerate  into  fanaticism  and  lead 
to  bigotry  and  persecution.  Let  us  seek  to 
be  clad  with  zeal  as  with  a  garment,  and  to 
possess  holy  fire  in  our  souls. 

The  fire  of  consecration  may  be  known  by— 

(a)  hi  tense  heat  of  love. 

{b)  1  wof old  flame  of  devotion — prayer  and 
praise. 

(tr)  Clear  light  of  knoivledge. 

Such  a  fire  within  will  be  comforting,  puri' 
fying.,  aggressive,  ascending.  Take  fire,  hold 
tire,  spread  fire  ;  then  when  death  comes  we 
shall  be  translated  to  the  land  where  we 
shall  be  as  seraphs  before  the  sapphire 
throne.— F.  W.  B, 


CHAP.  VI    14-lS.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  83 


SECTIONAL  HOMILIES,  CHAPTER  VL   14-30. 

THE  PRIESTS'  ME  A  T  OFFER  hYQ. 

Topic:  Priestly  Services  and  Privileges  (Vv.  14-16). 

"  The  sons  of  Aaron  shall  offer  it  before  the  Lord  .     .  the  remainder  shall 
Aaron  and  his  sons  eat.*' 

1.  FUIFILMK^^T   OF    SACRED    FDNCTIONS. 

Christ  was  typified  in  "Aaron, '  Christians  in  *' his  sons/' 

\^\ArT^'^^**  ^*'^  7^riW^/y  ministrations  of  Jesus  Christ  within  the  sanctnart/ 
{a)  Withm  His  Church  on  earth,  in  maintaining  the  love,  and  devotion  and 
piety  winch  there  are  offered  to  God.  (6)  Within  the  heavenli/  sanctuary,  in 
gathermg  up  the  prayers  of  His  saints,  adding  His  own  virtues  to  human  offer- 
ings, and  mterceding  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us. 

2.  The  subsidiary/  ministries  of  the  Christian  priesthood,  (a)  In  consecrated 
lives^     (6)  Inlovmg  gifts,      {c)  In  prayerful  fellowship,     (d)  In  useful  agencies. 

Jl.   Knjoyment  of  spfcial  privileges. 

1.  Christ  feasts  with  His  followers.  "  Aaron  and  his  sons  shall  eat."  For  our 
Lord  appeals  to  us,  *'Eat,  My  friends  ;  yea,  eat  and  drink,  0  My  beloved  "  We 
have  '  fellowship  with  Jesus  Christ  "  (1  John  i.  4).  Thus  our  Lord  ate  "  the 
passover  with  His  disciples.''  Thus  He  ''  sups  with  us''  (Rev.  iii.  20)  Thus  He 
will  eat  with  His  Church  at  the  heavenly  feast. 

%  A  repast  reserved  for  the  priesthood.     None  but  "Aaron    and   his  sons" 

"^w  I  ®^i'  u  .?  '^  ^  j""^  *^'®  "^^^""^'^  ^'""'^s  "^*  ^f'  a  bi^^en  life  in  Christ  to 
which  all  but  Christians  are  strangers,  there  are  lofty  fellowships  with  God 
which  none  but  priestly  souls  can  approach.  Note,  this  feast  was  to  be  -  in  the 
holy  place  -not  the  innermost  court,  type  of  "heaven  itself,"  but  in  "the  court 
of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  "-symbolic  of  the  Church  on  earth.  It 
thus  points  to  the  sacred  favours  enjoyed  noiv  in  the  spiritual  life  and  in  Christian 
communion. 

Topic:  Divine  Friendship  (Vv.  14-18). 

Jhe  leading  idea  of  this  offering  is  communion  with  Jehovah.  In  the  sacrifice 
presented  the  Divine  and  the  human  meet  in  hallowed  fellowship  and  banquet 
together  with  great  rejoicing.     We  learn  ; 

I.  That  the  almighty  deigns  to  commune  familiarly  with  man  At 
Sinai  the  people  were  commanded  to  keep  distant  ;  in  the  burnt  offerincr  the 
whuleof  the  sacrifice  was  consumed,  indicating  that  the  offerer  deserved  to  be 
consumed  for  his  iniquity;  here  a  small  portion  only  was  consumed,  the  greater 
part  was  taken  by  the  priests,  and  the  meal  was  peculiarly  sacred.  "  I  have 
given  It  them  for  their  portion  of  My  offerings  made  by  tire."  Thus  Jehovah 
partook  with  the  priests,  and  entered  into  intimate  fellowship.  Under  the  new 
dispensation  we  are  all  made  priests  unto  God,  through  faith  in  His  dear  Son-  we 
become  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature;  we  enter  His  banqueting  house,  and  His 
banner  over  us  is  love.  He  calls  us  not  servants,  but  friends  ;  sups  with  us  in 
our  hearts,  at  His  table  in  the  Church,  and  will,  with  us,  hereafter  at  the 
marria^^e  feast  in  heaven. 

n.  That  man  must  not  take  undue  advantage  of  such  divine  famili.aritt. 

q2 


84  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  vi.  19-23 

The  meat  offering  was  to  be  solemnly  and  carefall}''  presented  :  strict  attention 
to  be  paid  to  dress  and  deportment  :  no  ceremonial  or  personal  impurity  to 
be  allowed  :  no  leaven  of  any  kind  used.  A  sacred  circle  was  drawn  around 
the  altar,  the  service  invested  with  great  importance,  even  the  priests  placed 
under  restrictions.  We  may  come  with  holy  boldness  and  childlike  confidence 
to  God  ;  but  we  must  do  so  with  becoming  reverence.  "  God  is  a  spirit,*'  etc. 
Where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  there  is  liberty,  but  not  levity  and  irreverence. 
Sincerity,  thankfulness ^  and  a  sense  of  deep  responsibility  will  give  the  right  tone 
to  our  religious  exercises. 

III.  That  such  hallowed  fellowship  is  acceptable  to  god  and  profitable 
TO  MAN.  The  people  offered  their  flour,  oil,  and  frankincense ;  the  priests  took 
their  portion  and  ate  it  in  the  court  of  the  tabernacle  ;  the  fragrant  incense 
perfumed  the  air ;  Jehovah  accepted  all  as  a  sweet  savour,  having  respect  to 
the  obedience  and  reverence  represented  in  the  offering.  The  worshipper  was 
taught  his  relation  to  the  Lord,  acceptance  of  Him,  friendship  with  Him.  Christ 
has  not  only  become  our  Sin  Offering,  but  our  Meat  Offering,  in  that  He  invites 
us  to  partake  of  His  love  :  "  My  flesh  is  meat  indeed,  and  My  blood  is  drink 
indeed."  Only  hy  personal,  spiritual  participation  of  Christ,  can  we  have  fellow- 
ship with  Him  here,  and  companionship  with  Him  in  eternity.  "  If  any  man 
have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ  he  is  none  of  His." — F.  W.  B. 


Topic  :  Ministerial  Dedication  :  The  Priest's  Consecration  Offering 

(Vv.  19-23). 

Here  can  be  found  suggestions  concerning  dedication  and  devotion  to  the 
ministerial  office. 

L   Consecration  to  the  ministry :  an  event  to  he  marked  by  impressive  solemnities. 

"  The  day  when  he  is  anointed.'^  What  a  day  that  is  to  a  young  minister  !  His 
entrance  upon  so  solemn  and  responsible  a  work  as  that  of  becoming  "  a  minister 
of  the  sanctuary  "  should  be  specially  signalised. 

''  This  is  the  offering  unto  the  Lord  in  the  day  when  he  is  anointed."  God  asks 
that  the  consecration  solemnities  should  be  "unto"  Him.  For  it  signifies  the 
setting  apart  of  a  life  "  unto  the  Lord,"  and  the  placing  upon  His  altar  of  every 
energy f  faculty^  affection^  and  aspiration. 

"0  Lord.  Thy  heavenly  grace  impart, 
And  fill  my  frail,  inconstant  heart : 
Henceforth  my  chief  desire  shall  be 
To  dedicate  myself  to  Thee — 
To  Thee,  my  God,  to  Thee." 

II.  Consecration  to  the  ministry :  an  act  to  he  characterised  bt  complete  self- 
devotion. 

1.  Perpetuity  is  to  mark  the  offering.  "  For  a  meat  offering  perpetual"  It  is 
to  be  no  temporary  dedication,  but  a  whole  life-long  devotion. 

2.  Continuity  is  to  mark  the  offering.  "  Half  of  it  in  the  morning,  and  half 
thereof  a^  night"  ;  i.e.,  it  was  to  be  a  day-by-day  dedication  ;  the  offering  was  to 
go  on  every  morning  and  night.  God  asks  not  one  demonstrative  act  of  consecra- 
tion at  the  outset  of  our  official  life,  or  our  Christian  life,  but  a  ceaseless  repeti- 
tion, a  daily  reproduction  of  that  act  of  devotion  ;  **  the  lore  of  our  espousals  "  is 
to  be  daily  enacted. 

3.  Entirety  is  to  mark  the  offering.  **  It  is  a  statute  for  ever ;  it  shall  be  wholly 
burnt "  (v.  22).  ''  Every  meat  offering  for  the  priest  shall  be  wholly  hurnt  "  (v.  23). 
In  the  offering  for  the  people  God  required  only  a  '*  handful  of  flour"  as  a 
"memorial  of  it  unto  the  Lord"  (v.  15);  but  He  required  the  complete  offering 


CHAP.  VI.  24—30.]  THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS.  86 

from  a  priest.    No  part  of  the  price  might  be  withheld  :  time,  taleuts,  all  the  man 
is  and  has — *'  wholly.'^ 

*'  How  can  I,  Lord,  withhold 

Life's  brightest  hour 
From  Thee  ;  or  gathered  gold, 

Or  any  power? 
"Why  should  I  keep  one  precious  thing  from  Thee 
When  Thou  hast  given  Thine  own  dear  Self  for  mef 

III.  Consecration  to  the  ministry:  a  service  to  be  associated  with  gratitude  and 

JOT. 

1.  Emblems  of  thanhfulness  were  to  be  laid  on  the  altar.  "  Fine  flour,  and  oil." 
For  it  should  be  that  the  young  minister,  laying  himself  out  for  his  high  calling, 
should  realise  hov)  much  he  owes  his  Lord,  and  ask  :  "  What  shall  I  render  unto  the 
Lord  for  all  His  benefits  towards  me?^'  To  His  grace  we  must  ascribe  all  we  have 
received  of  endowments,  gifts,  holy  affections,  enjoyment  of  His  redemption, 
enlightenment  by  His  Spirit,  the  call  to  ministerial  work. 

«  To  Thee,  Thou  bleeding  Lamb, 
I  all  things  owe  ; 
All  that  I  have  and  am, 
And  all  I  know  ; 
All  that  I  have  is  now  no  longer  mine, 
And  I  am  not  my  own  ;  Lord  I  am  Thine." 

2.  Such  joyous  self-devotion  is  pecidiarly  fragrant  to  the  Lord.  "  For  &,  sweet 
savour  unto  the  Lord^'  (v.  21).  There  is  so  much  that  charms  even  the  glorious 
Jehovah  in  a  young  life  fully  consecrated :  the  ardour  and  bloom  of  opening 
manhood  laid  wholly  on  His  altar  ;  the  aspirations  and  affections  of  the  heart 
withdrawn  entirely  from  secular  attractions  and  pursuits,  and  fixed  on  Christ 
and  His  service;  the  fervour  of  being  dedicated  to  the  sublime  mission  of 
winning  souls  for  the  Saviour  and  ministering  in  His  courts. 

•*  Accept  these  hands  to  labour, 
These  hearts  to  trust  and  love, 
And  deign  with  them  to  hasten 
Thy  kingdom  from  above." 


Topic:  Thb  Sin  Opferinq  a  Shadow  of  Good  Things  to  Comb 

(Vv.  24-30). 

The  sin  offering  was  presented  on  the  north  side  of  the  altar  :  in  the  fulness  of 
time  the  world's  Great  Sacrifice  was  offered  on  the  north  side  of  Jerusalem.  How, 
as  well  as  what  to  be  presented  clearly  indicated  in  this,  as  in  previous  offerings. 
In  directions  given  we  learn  : 

I.  How  complete  the  sin  offering  was.  Though  parts  of  the  sacrifice 
were  to  be  eaten  by  the  priests  when  the  oblation  was  made  for  the  people,  the 
whole  was  to  be  consumed  by  fire  when  presented  for  the  priests.  The  sin 
offering  atoned  for  every  kind  of  sin,  thus  showing  great  completeness,  and 
adaptation  for  priests  and  people,  who  in  the  sight  of  God  need  forgiveness  and 
restoration  to  His  favour.  When  a  part  of  the  offering  was  eaten  by  the  priests 
it  was  shown  how  God  and  man  were  reconciled ;  when  the  offering  was  wholly 
burned  it  was  shown  how  complete  the  atonement  was,  how  fully  pardon  was 
secured. 

IT.  How  transitory  the  sin  offering  was.  Frequently  repeated,  it  was 
only  of  temporary  virtue.  It  borrowed  all  its  efficacy  from  the  great  Sin  Offering 
which  it  typified.  **  It  was  not  possible  for  the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats  to  take 
away  sin  " ;  without  the  sacrifice   of  Christ  they  would  have   been  of  no  avail 


86 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON 


[CHAP.  VI. 


Altars  and  ofteiings  have  passed  away,  but  Jesus  hath  procured  "  eternal 
redemption  for  us." 

III.  How  SACRED  THE  SIN  OFFERING  WAS.  It^  was  Called  "  most  holy/* 
great  precaution  was  taken  that  it  should  not  be  desecrated,  even  the  imple- 
ments and  vessels  used  in  its  observance  were  scrupulously  guarded  from  cere- 
monial impurity.  Priests  were  not  allowed  to  partake  if  ceremonially  defiled  : 
showing  that  sin  and  holiness  are  alike  contagious — may  be  communicated, 
intentionally  or  unintentionally,  to  persons,  places,  offices,  things.  How  complete 
and  sacred  the  sin  offering  of  the  Redeemer  !  If  contempt  for,  and  neglect  of, 
Levitical  rites  was  heinous  in  the  sight  of  God,  how  much  more  so  similar  con- 
duct when  shown  to  what  they  foreshadowed  ! 

Conclmion.  The  sin  offering  showed  (a)  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin  ;  (b)  the 
absolute  necessity  of  atonement  being  made  for  it;  (c)  the  transcendant  importance 
of  deliverance  from  every  taint  of  tt.  These  truths  fully  taught  and  actually 
embodied  in  the  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God. — F.  W.  B. 


ILLUSTRATIVE  ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  VL 


Injury. 

"  Of  all  the  things  that  have  had  record  in 
the  world,  of  the  many  sources  of  violence, 
injustice  and  cruelty,  I  do  not  know  of  any- 
thing else  that  is  so  cruel  as  man.  It  is  only 
man  that  studies  cruelty,  and  makes  it  ex- 
quisite, and  prolongs  it,  and  carries  it  out 
with  appliances  and  art.  From  the  despot 
on  the  throne  to  the  despot  of  the  household, 
all  men  alike  carry  vengeance,  bitterness, 
wrath,  hurtfulness,  as  characteristics  of  the 
race." — //.  IV.  Beecher. 

"  How  should  you  feel  if  you  were  to  enter 
the  room  where  your  child  is  sleeping,  and 
find  upon  it  a  stealthy  cat,  stationed  at  the 
portal  of  life,  and  stopping  its  very  breath  ? 
How  should  you  feel  were  you  to  find  upon 
your  child  a  vampire  that  had  fastened  into 
its  flesh  its  blood-sucking  bill,  and  was  fast 
consuming  its  vitality  ?  How  do  you  feel 
when  one  of  your  children  tramples  upon 
another  ?  or  when  your  neighbour's  children 
crush  yours  ?  or  when  ruffian  violence  strikes 
against  those  whose  hearts  for  ever  carry  the 
core  of  your  heart?  Judge  from  your  own 
feelings  ho%v  God,  with  Bis  infinite  sensibility, 
must  feel  when  He  sees  men  rising  up  against 
their  fellow-men:  performing  gross  deeds  of 
cruelty  on  every  hand  .  .  .  devastating 
society  by  every  infernal  mischief  that  their 
ingenuity  can  invent."' — H.  W.  Heecher. 

"Justice  consists  in  doing  no  injury  to 
men  ;  decency,  in  giving  them  no  offence." — 
Cicero. 

"  Recompense  injury  with  justice,  and  kind- 
ness with  kindness." — Confucius. 

"He  threatens  many  that  hath  injured  one." 

— Ben.  Jonson. 

"Brutus  hath  riv'd  my  heart : 
A  friend  should  bear  his  friend's  infirmities, 
Bat  Brutus  makes  mine  greater  than  they 
are." — Shakespeare. 

"  Virtue  is   not   left   to   stand   alone.     He 


who   practises   it    will    have    neighbours.— 
Confucius. 

"  Be  as  just  and  gracious  unto  me 
As  I  am  confident  and  kind  to  thee. 

—  Titus  Andronicus. 

Enduring  fire. 

The  perpetual  fire  of  the  Persian  Magi 
and  modern  Parsees ;  the  eternal  fire,  as  it 
was  called  at  Rome,  kept  perpetually  burn- 
ing by  the  Vestal  virgins ;  and  the  Pur 
Asbeston  "  unextinguishable  fire,"  of  the 
Greeks  at  Delphi,  were  evident  imitations  of 
this  sacred  fire. 

"It  was  one  of  the  distinguishing  marks 
of  the  chieftainship  of  one  of  the  Samoan 
nobility  that  his  fire  never  went  out.  His 
attendants  had  a  peculiar  name  for  their 
special  business  of  keeping  his  fire  blazing 
all  night  long  while  he  was  asleep." — Turner's 
Polynesia. 

"  During  the  second  temple  this  perpetual 
fire  consisted  of  three  parts  or  separate 
piles  of  wood  on  the  same  altar ;  on  the 
largest  one  the  daily  sacrifice  was  burnt;  the 
second,  called  the  pile  of  incense,  supplied  the 
fire  for  the  censers  to  burn  the  morning  and 
evening  incense;  and  the  third  was  the  per- 
petual fire  from  which  the  other  two  portions 
were  fed.  It  never  was  quenched  till  th^ 
destruction  of  the  temple  by  Nebuchadnezzar. 
Indeed  we  are  positively  assured  that  the 
pious  priests  who  were  carried  captives  into 
Persia,  concealed  it  in  a  pit,  where  it  remained 
till  the  time  of  Nehemiah,  when  it  was  re- 
stored to  the  altar  (2  Mace,  i  19-22).  The 
authorities  in  the  time  of  Christ,  however, 
assure  us  that  the  perpetual  fir©  was  one  of 
the  five  things  wanting  in  the  sacred  temple.' 
— Elliott'' s  Co??i7nentary. 

"  Wake  in  our  breasts  the  living  fires. 
The  holy  faith  that  warmed  our  sires." 
— Holmes.     Army  Hymn. 


CHAP.  VII.  1 — 10.] 


THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS. 


87 


Faithlessness. 
"  Treason  is  therein  its  most  horrid  shape 
Where  trust  is  greatest!   and  the  soul  re- 

sign'd 
Is  stabbed  by  her  own  guards  !  " — Dry  den. 

"  He  who  does  not  respect  confidence  will 
never  find  happiness  in  his  path.  The  belief 
in  virtue  vanishes  from  his  heart,  the  source 
of  nobler  actions  becomes  extinct  in  him." — 
Anjfenberg. 

*'  Faith  and  unfaith  can  ne'er  be  equal  powers  ; 
Unfaith  in  aught    is   want  of  faith  in  all." 

—  I'ennyson. 

"  0  what  a  goodly  outside  falsehood  hath  !" 

— Merchant  of  Venice. 

"  Trust  that  man  in  nothing  who  hath  not 
a  conscience  in  everything," — Sterne. 


"  A  slender  acquaintance  with  the  world 
must  convince  every  man  that  actions,  not 
Words,  are  the  trn'j  ciiterion  of  the  attach- 
ment of  friends  ;  and  that  the  most  liberal 
professions  of  goodwill  are  very  far  from  be- 
ing the  surest  marks  of  it." — Geo.  iVashin^ton. 

"  A  foe  to  God  was  ne'er  true  friend  to  man, 
Some  sinister  intent  taints  all  ho  does." 
— Young's  Night  7  houghts. 

•'  The  highest  compact  we  can  make  with 
our  fellow  is  :  Let  there  be  truth  between  us 
two  for  evermore.  It  is  sublime  to  feel  and 
say  of  another  :  I  never  need  meet,  or  speak, 
or  write  to  him ;  we  need  not  reinforce  our- 
selves, or  send  tokens  of  remembrance  ;  I  rely 
on  him  as  on  myself  ;  if  he  did  this  or  thus  I 
know  it  was  right." — Emerson. 


CHAPTER  VII. 


|lttual  0f  i\z  Sacrifice.s;  tlje  J^eitce  ©fferiiig. 


SUGGESTIVE   READINGS. 


V.  1. — Likewise  this  is  the  law  of  the  trespass  oflfering.  More  precise  in- 
structions are  now  added  to  those  givea  in  chap  v.  1-13,  expressly  for  the 
guidance  of  the  priest.  Every  minute  detail  is  of  Divine  regulation;  God  rules 
within  the  sanctuary,  directs  every  particular  of  worship  and  service  therein  ; 
for  altar  sacrifice  is  '*  most  koly^''  and  man  must  scrupulously  refrain  from  add- 
ing, omitting,  or  altering  augtit  when  he  approa^jhes  Jehovah  with  expiation. 
Neither,  in  the  Christian  dispensation  is  licence,  or  caprice,  or  self-assertion 
allowed  to  sinful  man  who  would  propitiate  God  ;  he  must  implicitly  follow 
instructions.     "He  hath  showed  thee,  O  man,  what  is  good." 

V.  7. — As  the  sin  offering,  so  is  the  trespass  offering.  If  any  item  of 
regulation  was  given  for  one  offering  which  was  not  given  in  the  other,  then  it 
was  to  be  applied  as  equally  binding  in  bjth  cases.  The  priest  was  entrusted 
with  the  duty  of  searching  out  each  particular  and  fulfilling  it  sedulously.  It 
should  be  our  study  to  "  it;io?^>  the  Holy  Scriptures,"  and  therefore  we  should 
"  compare  spiritual  things  with  spiritual,"  *'  searching  the  Scriptures  daily,"  as 
did  the  Bereans,  in  order  that  nothing  be  left  undiscovered,  nothing  unfulfilled. 
How  careful  should  be  our  endeavuur  to  make  the  written  will  of  God  our  law 
in  every  particular  of  worship  and  of  habit,  of  life  and  conduct. 

V.  10. — One  as  much  as  another  [literally,  a  man  as  his  bro'her^.  In  the 
**  meat  offering"  *' all  the  sons  of  Aaron  "  were  to  share,  and  the  dividing  was  to 
be  equal.  And  this  law  assures  us,  who  in  Christ  are  of  the  ''  priesthood,"  that 
there  is  an  equal  participation  in  the  merits  of  the  sacrifice  and  the  privileges  of 
tfie  Christian  life  for  all  who  are  sacredly  related.  The  gracious  rule  of  brother- 
hood is  to  be  illustrated  in  our  enjoyment  of  the  sicrameutal  feast  at  the  Lord's 
table,  *'  All  ye  are  brethren."  No  assumption  of  superiority  is  permissible,  no 
exclusive  appropriation  of  the  sacred  provisions;  in  the  Gospjl  feast,  and  at  the 


88  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON         [chap.  vii.  12—37 

Lord's  Supper,  "  a  man  is  as  his  brother.^'  How,  then,  dare  the  Romish  cele- 
brant assume  the  sole  right  of  participating  ?  or  where  is  the  warrant  for 
"priestly  "  superiority  in  the  *'  household  of  faith"  ? 

V.  12" — Offer  it  for  a  thanksgiving.  These  ''peace  offerings  "  are  of  three 
kinds — thank  offerings  (vv.  12-15),  votive  offerings  (v.  16),  and  voluntary  offer- 
ings (vv.  16-18).      [Conip.  on  chap,  iii.] 

V.  18. — Neither  shall  it  be  imputed  unto  him  that  offereth  it.  The  offerer 
was  expected  to  see  that  the  entire  votive  or  voluntary  offering  was  **  eaten 
the  same  day "  as  it  was  offered;  a  regulation  this  which  compelled  him  to 
hospitality,  to  invite  together  a  sufficient  number  of  neighbours  or  poor 
persons  to  the  festal  board.  And  if  through  inattention  to  this  duty  of  con- 
siderate and  generous  hospitality  any  part  remained  uneaten  that  "same  day," 
it  must  be  completely  consumed  "  on  the  morrow,"  or  the  offerer  was  liable  to 
a  serious  risk — the  part  not  consumed  might  fall  into  some  person's  hands  after 
the  limited  time  ;  and  then  the  effi^cacy  of  the  sacrifioe  would  be  entirely  dis- 
annulled and  the  offerer  must  bring  another  votive  offering  and  go  through  the 
regulations  of  lavish  hospitality  again,  but  with  more  promptitude  and  pre 
cision.  A  Christian  must  "  not  live  to  himself";  his  care  for  others  must  be 
generous  ;  he  must  be  hospitable  to  the  needy ;  and  in  his  enjoyment  of  sacred 
privileges  he  must  bring  in  others  to  share  with  himself  the  "feast  of  fat 
things,"  or  his  own  selfish  religious  life  becomes  "  an  abomination." 

V.  20. — Having  his  uncleanness  upon  him.  The  penalty  of  legal  defilement 
was  excision  from  the  Lord's  people.  ''  Ye  are  a  holy  nation."  Such  was 
Jehovah's  reiterated  declaration ;  and  every  infringement  of  ceremonial 
sanctity  was  immediately  stamped  with  disapprobation  and  disfranchisement. 
Shall  not  the  Church  of  Christ  bd  equally  guarded  from  the  presence  of  the 
unclean  1  Wherefore  "let  a  man  examine  himself,"  and  let  those  charged  with 
the  care  of  the  Church  preserve  her  fellowship  from  contamination  by  "  trying 
the  spirits  "  As  for  ourselves,  this  is  the  injunction  for  us  to  lieed  :  "  Wherefore 
come  out  from  among  them,  be  ye  separate,  and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing." 

Vv.  22-:i7. — Ye  shall  eat  no  manner  of  fat.  .  .  no  manner  of  blood. 
[Comp.  on  chap.  iii.  17  j.  That  which  was  the  Xort/'*  man  must  not  appropriate. 
"What  shall  I  render  unto  the  Lord?"  Our  aim  should  be  rather  to  exceed 
His  specified  requirements  by  offering  something  beyoni,  "  some  very  precious  " 
alabastron,  some  free-will  sacrifice  of  love  "for  the  great  love  wherewith 
He  has  loved  us." 

V.  30. — His  own  hand  shall  bring  the  offerings  of  the  Lord.  Divine  service 
could  not  be  done  by  proxy.  Just  as  at  tfie  jud^^^meut  "  every  one  shall  give 
account  of  himself  to  God,"  so  in  now  seeking  appeasement  and  acceptance  every 
soul  must  come  to  the  Lord  on  his  own  behalf.     "  The  Master  calleth  for  thee^ 

V.  34. — The  wave  breast  and  the  heave  shoulder.  The  spectacular  move- 
ments of  parts  of  the  sacrificial  victim  before  the  altar  intimated  their  con- 
secration to  Jehovah,  and  their  performance  was  justified  by  the  necessity  of 
impressing  on  the  people  the  supreme  claims  of  God  upon  them  when  they 
brought  their  offerings.  It  was  an  uplifting  of  the  sacrifice  to  Him  who  dwelt 
between  the  cherubim ;  a  recognition  of  His  unseen  presence,  a  response  to 
His  solemn  demands.  A  vivid  realization  of  God  within  the  sanctuary  would 
constrain  to  more  reverence  in  our  offerings  and  actions.  "  Who  hath  required 
this  at  your  hands  to  tread  My  courts  T  (Isa  i.  12). 

V.  37. — This  is  the  law  of  the  burnt  offering,  etc.  An  enumeration  of  the 
various  kinds  of  sacrifices,  which  carries  the  suggestion  that  Jehovah  could 
omit  no  one  from  the  list,  that  all  were  essential  to  His  continued  favour 
towards  and  fellowship  with  man,  that  the  religious  life  could  not  be  thorough 
if  one  were  withheld — self- consecration,  fellovvship,  atonement,  rec  juciliation, 
peace. 


cuAi"  vu.  A— 10.]  Tilt:  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS,  89 


SECTIONAL  HOMILIES. 
Topic:  Invariable  Laws  REGULATING  Sacrtfioial  Wousiiip  (Vv.  1-10). 

With  minute  precision  God  reiterates  His  requirements  in  sacrificial  worship 
Thus  emphasizing  the  conditions  of  man's  propitiation,  and  his  acceptance  with 
Him.  *'  There  is  one  law  for  them  "  (v.  7).  Though  some  diversity  existed  in 
the  details,  e.g.,  as  to  the  disposal  of  the  blood  of  the  victim  by  the  priest  [comp. 
eh.  iv.  6,  7,  with  v.  2],  and  the  sharing  of  the  different  parts  of  the  animal;  yet 
amid  all  diversity  in  details,  an  invariable  law  ruled  in  the  arrangements,  and 
this  God  again  emphasizes.  What  was  that  invariable  law?  Tn  chap  vi.  27,  etc, 
the  stress  of  Divine  injunctions  is  laid  on  the  qualiti/  of  the  sanctiti/  d'lat  in  j^vnshing 
the  sin  offering  :  and  here  it  is  reaffirmed  (vii.  1)  "it  is  7nost  holy''  and  ^v.  6)  "  it 
shall  be  eaten  in  the  holy  place  y  it  is  mo.s^  holy''  Ponder  that  itifl'xible  require- 
ment and  consider  that  there  are  still  inevitable  laws  and  fixed  oauditions  of  ac- 
ceptable approach  to  God. 

I.  Methods  of  worship  may  vary,  but  holiness  is  inevitable  in  all. 

1.  Moral  qualities  are  essentially  more  valuable  than  outward  rituals. 

2.  Modes  of  approaching  God,  though  important, /ai/ ^o  win  Divine  favour,  if 
the  inmost  state  is  alien  to  His  will. 

3.  Sanctity  is  the  most  precious  quality  in  man.  Not  grandeur,  not  punctilious- 
ness, but  holiness. 

4.  This  holiness  indicates  not  so  much  moral  faultlessness  and  absolute  perfect- 
ness  in  the  offerer,  as  sincerity,  humility,  "a  right  spirit,"  a  reverence  of  God,  and 
a  trustfulness  in  His  grace.     [See  Addenda,  p.  100,  True  IVorthip.^ 

IL  All  propitiatory  acts  are  secondary  to  the  supreme  fact — death  for  sin. 

1.  First  in  order  of  time  :  the  offering  was  to  be  slain  (v.  2).  After  that  was 
done,  then  began  the  ritual.  Any  attempt  to  draw  near  God  until  the  atonement 
death  is  a  realised  fact  is  an  intrusion,  an  anachronism. 

2.  First  in  order  of  conseqzience :  the  worshipper  inyist  siibstitute  a  victim's  life. 
Or  he  himself  must  die  !  Shielded  from  death  by  substitution,  he  may  then  seek 
God  by  propitiatory  ritual  or  reconciliatory  worship. 

3.  Calvary  was  thus  the  consummation  of  all  types  :  Death  for  sin  making 
possible  man's  approach  to  God. 

III.  Offerings  to  God  must  always  be  ths  CHorcEST  in  our  power  to  present. 

\.  Vast  variety  was  allowed  and  ordained  in  the  sacrificial  offerings.  God  per- 
mits and  approves  our  various  gifts;  every  one  bringing  his  distmctive  offering; 
every  life  presenting  its  special  and  peculiar  quality.  Considerable  freedom  in 
choice  is  granted. 

2.  Yet  the  invariable  law  rules—  God  must  have  the  finest,  the  very  best.  The 
vital  parts,  the  choicest  of  the  inwards  of  the  victim  were  claimed  for  Him 
(vv.  3-5). 

3.  Each  worshipper  has  to  bring  something  of  pecidiar  preciousness  to  God, 
something  additional  to  atonement.  Yes ;  beyond  Christ's  death,  God  asks  the 
very  choicest  qualities  of  the  life  of  all  who  seek  Him.  [See  Addenda,  p.  100,  Offerings 
for  God.] 

IV.  Absolute  consecration  marked  whatever  was  presented  to  the 
lord.     '*  It  is  most  holy." 

1.  There  might  be  no  taking  back  that  which  had  been  offered.  Think  on 
Ananias  and  Sapphira. 

2.  A^o  ojie  might  share  that  which  *'  pertained  unto  the  Lord."     [Comp.  v.  20.] 
Hence :  once  dedicated  to  the  Lord  we  are   Ilis  absolutely  and  always.     And 

whatever  is  dedicated  to  the  Lord  noL^«  may  partake  with  Him — it  is    lis  only. 


90  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  vii.  11— 18. 


Topic:  The  Sacrifice  of  Peace  Offering  (Vv.  11-18). 

*'  And  this  is  the  law  of  the  sacrifice  of  peace  offerings,  which  he  shall  offer 

unto  the  Lord,"  etc. 

In  the  ritual  of  the  Hebrews  there  were  three  great  classes  of  offerings:  the 
burnt  offering,  the  sin  offering,  and  the  peace  offering.  The  meat  and  drink 
offerintrs   were  secondary,  and  usually   were   offered   in  connection   with   other 

sacrifices. 

The  burnt  offering  and  the  peace  offering  were  known  before  the  giving  of  tlie 
law.    The  sin  offering  was  instituted  in  connection  with  the  law,  as  made  necessary 

The  law  of  the  peace  offering  is  given  Last  in  publication  of  the  sacrificial 
arrangements,  as  if  to  declare  that  it  naturally  follows  the  others  as  a  sacrifice 
oi  completeness  (as  expressive  of  restored  fellowship  between  God  and  man);  and 
also  that  every  view  of  Christ  is  gathered  into  it. 

I.   The  peace  offering  is  a  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving. 

Three  forms  (>f  it  are  specified  : 

(1)  The  offering  of  thanksgiving,  i.e.,  for  some  special  blessing. 

(2)  The  vow,  tiae  fulfilment  of  a  promise  to  God. 

(3)  The  voluntary  offering  made  from  a  principle  of  gratitude,  when,  with  no 
special  occasion,  the  worshipper  called  upon  his  soul  and  all  within  him  to  bless 
and  praise  God's  holy  name. 

It  was  a  peace  offering,  a  national  thanksgiving^  which  Solomon  made  at  the 
dedication  of  the  temple.     It  is  this  sacrifice  so  frequently  referred  to  in  the 

Psalms. 

In  connection  with  i\iQ  Passover  celebration  there  were  two  peace  offerings  :  the 
former  of  these  is  continued  in  the  Pascal  supper,  which  is  a  sacrifice  of  peace 
offering,  a  feast  of  thanksgiving  for  God's  greatest  gift  to  men,  a  service  by  the 
Church  to  be  joyously  observed.  At  the  sacramental  table  we  should  (1)  thank 
God  for  all  special  exhibition  of  Divine  goodness;  (2)  ahoxiid  Jo  (/fully  fulfil  our 
promises  to  Him,  those  sacred  covenants  into  which,  in  trial  or  ditiicuity,  we  have 
entered  with  Him  ;  (3)  should  make  our  voluntary  offerings^  m  view  of  the 
constant  mercies  of  God,  the  daily  and  hourly  grace  ;  not  the  freshet  water  in 
the  stream  of  Divine  providence,  but  the  constant  flow  from  the  inexhaustible 
**  upper  springs."  How  well  do  these  befit  all  our  approaches  to  Gud,  how  well, 
of  all  places,  do  they  befit  the  sacrifice  of  the  Communion  1 

II.  The  peace  offering  is  a  sacrifice  of  fellowship. 

This  idea  lies  at  its  centre.  The  peculiar  feature  of  it  was  the  sacrificial  meal ; 
t\iQ  priests  shared  in  what  was  offered  ;  the  offerer  also  partook  ;  the  offering  was 
presented  to  God^  and  part  thereof  consumed,  as  if  by  tJim,  upon  His  altar. 

1.  It  was  an  act  of  communion  with  God.  He  gives  us  back  a  portion  from  the 
altar.  Christ  is  our  sacrifice.  At  the  Communion  we  partake  of  the  Paschal  Lamb. 
God  gives  us  His  flesh  to  eat.  His  blood  to  drink.  When  we  came  home  as 
returning  prodigals  the  Father  set  the  table /or  us,  and  sat  down  with  us  :  "  Let 
us  eat  and  be  merry,"  He  said.  At  the  Communion  Christ  says,  "  Let  ^6'  eat : 
let  us  drink."     He  sits  at  the  table  with  us. 

2.  So  also  the  sacred  meal  was  an  act  of  mutual  communion.  It  was  a  social 
meal  :  the  priest,  the  worshipper,  his  family,  and  other  friends  shared  with  him. 
So  was  it  in  the  peace  offering  of  the  Passover ;  so  in  Solomon's  great  feast  of 
dedication  ;  so  it  is  at  the  Communion  table.  We  partake  of  Christ  together. 
Holy  fellowship,  of  loftiest,  tenderest  experience. 

What  a  beautiful  relation  of  Christian  to  fellow  Christian  is  here  exhibited. 
How  the  fact  of  our  having  sat  at  Christ's  table  together,  partaken  of  the  Lamb 


CHAP.  VII.  11—18.]  THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS.  91 


of  Ood,  commits  lis  to  purest  brofherly  love,  most  free  from  all  self-seekinof, 
alienation,  suspicion,  bitterness  ;  charges  us,  '*  Ye  are  members  one  of  another." 
How  much  is  meant  when  we  are  exhorted  to  "  be  at  peace  among  yourf^dves." 
It  is  to  be  in  fellowship  in  the  sacrament,  in  offering  together  our  offering  of 
peace,  partaking  together  our  joyous  supper  at  which  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Ghost  unite  with  us.     Is  true  communion  anything  less  than  thisi 

III.  The  basis  of  communion  in  the  peace  offering  is  sachifice  :  and^  in  the 
sacrifice^  the  shedding  of  blood, 

The  shedding  of  blood  in  this  particular  sacrifice  does  not  represent,  as  in  the 
sin  offering,  the  act  of  atoning  for  sin.  1,  The  bleeding  Christ,  as  our  Peace 
Offering,  is  not  our  Sin  Bearer.  But  His  blood  in  this  offering  also  declares  that 
an  atonement  has  been  made,  and  that  the  sole  ground  of  fellowship  with  Ood  ia 
in  the  reconciling  blood  of  the  Lamb.  "  But  now  in  Christ  Jesus,"  etc  (Eph.  ii. 
13,  14). 

2.  Y^e  follow  our  sin  offering  with  the  peace  offering  of  the  saa^ament,  and  we 
constantly  renew  our  sacrament  to  express  our  joy  in  redemption,  and  our 
recognition  of  the  sole  ground  of  it,  the  blood  of  the  Redeemer.  The  sacrament 
is  only  an  act  of  communion  with  him  whose  sins  have  been  washed  away  in 
the  "  fountain  filled  with  blood."  We  must  make  our  peace  offering  on  the  basis 
of  a  previous  sin  offering  of  atonement  for  our  soul. 

3.  Communion  with  God  is  impossible,  on  any  natural  basis,  without  the  blood 
of  Christ.  You  speak  of  enjoying  communion  with  God  and  wi'h  good  people; 
is  it  in  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God  1  Certain  tribes  in  Africa  have  a  cu.stom 
which  they  call  blood- brotherhood,  the  most  sacred  of  all  relationslilps  By  the 
mutual  transference  from  the  veins  of  each  to  the  other  of  their  bl  od.  t^'O  become 
in  the  most  binding  and  inevitable  manner  brothers.  Ours  is  a  blood-brother- 
hood, fellow  Christians ;  only  with  us  the  seal  of  the  covenant  is  the  blood  of 
Christ. 

IV.  The  peace  offering  eequtrfs  holiness  in  the  woRsnippFR. 

This  fact  is  expressed  in  the  provision  ihd^^t '•^  unlea veiled  bread  "  should  be 
offered  as  a  part  of  the  sacrifice.  Yeast  or  leaven  was  a  symbol  of  corruption. 
The  absence  of  leaven  suggested  the  absence,  therefore  the  removal,  of  sin. 

If  in  your  heart  there  is  a  preference  for  sin  let  it  concern  you.  Ask  yourself, 
how  can  this  be,  if  jou  are  a  new  man.     [See  Addenda,  p.  ICO,  True  Worship.'\ 

V.  In  the  peace  oferivg  the  sinfulnpss  of  a  nature  partially  sanctified 
is  confessed. 

With  the  offering  of  unleavened  bread  one  of  leavened  bread  was  also  to  be 
made.  This  was  not  a  part  of  the  sacrifice,  but  a  meat  offering  accompanying 
the  sacrifice.  It  is  particularly  stated  that  the  bread  was  leavened;  i.e.,  the 
principle  of  corruption  was  within,  and  working  in  it. 

Since  our  conversion  we  are  not  sinners  as  before  ;  but  sin  is  in  us.  We 
cannot  make  God  an  absolutely  holy  offering. 

Some  claim  that  they  have  no  sin.  They  are  deceived.  "  If  we  say  we  have 
no  sin  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us."  We  need  cry  to  God 
with  pangs  of  conscience  ever  keener  : 

•*  Break  ofiF  the  yoke  of  inbred  Bin 
And  fully  set  my  spirit  free." 

VI.  Tn  the  peace  offering  the  wohshipper  was  to  keep  near  the  sacrifice. 
1.   This   is   suggested  in   the   regulation   that   the   offering  was  to  be  "  eaten 

the  same  day."  If  the  offerer  had  been  allowed  to  keep  the  offering  over  day 
after  day  he  would  be  tempted  to  make  his  communion  meal  off  unwholesome 
meat,  less  than  the  freshest  and  best.  Do  not  let  the  sacrifice  be  abandoned, 
allowed  to  suffer  neglect.  Keep  near  God.  Renew  your  sacrifice  daily.  Think 
not  you  can  live  on  past  devotions — of  yesterday,  of  last  Sabbath. 


92 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON         [chap.  vii.  29— 31. 


2.  We  tend  to  mRke  religion  consist  of  other  elements  to  the  exclusion  of  sacri- 
fices We  conceal  from  ourselves,  in  attention  to  externals,  that  the  life  of  reli- 
eion  is  devotion,  and  that  the  life  of  devotion  is  the  element  of  sacrifice.  The 
early  Church  kept  near  the  Sacrifice.  They  communed  daily.  The  freshest 
offering  is  best.     The  near  place  is  the  place  of  fellowship ;  keep  near  Christ. 

3.  The  suggestions  of  the  peace  offering  are  most  practical  for  any  one  who 
seeks  to  live  close  to  God. 

(a)  It  is  the  complete  offering  :  expressmg  the  idea  of  the  burnt  ottering, 
entire  consecration;  of  the  sin  and  trespass  offerings,  atonement  for  sin  ;  and  it 
expresses  its  own  characteristic  idea,  the  joyous  communion  of  the  soul   with  God 

and  all  saints.  ,     ,..  i  -a 

(b)  It  suggests  all  the  possible  relations  of  Christ  to  the  soul  which  sacrihce  can 
embody      Keep  we  Christ  ever  before  us  in  all  His  offices.  .      .      •       . 

(c)  Daily  we  should  remember  that  the  condition  of  daily  communion  is  a  daily 

oferivg.  ^^  . 

Whosoever  so  approaches  God,  Christ  is  his  peace.  However  far  away  some- 
time daily  he  is  now  brought  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  daily  he  finds  the 
middle  wall  of  partition  broken  down,  and  the  way  into  the  holiest  place  opened. 
—Rev.  Geo.  B.  Leavitt.  [Compare  Homilies  on  the  Peace  Offering,  pp.  30  37 
infra^ 

Topic:  The  Believer's  Peace  and  Portion  (Vv.   29-31). 

(1)  There  is  nothing  that  men  more  require  in  their  natural  and  restless  con- 
dition than  peace,  a  composed  and  assured  state  of  mind  The  need  is,  however, 
to  be  met ;  the  amplest  provision  has  been  made  for  its  being  met ;  and  we  have 
only  to  appropriate  to  enjoy  it.  (2)  Yet  there  are  but  few  who  avail  themselves 
of  the  provision.  Instead  of  being  restful,  men  are  disquieted  ;  dissatisfied  mstead 
of  contented  ;  apprehensive  instead  of  assured.  A  broad  gulf  separates  them 
from  the  Centre  of  their  being,  and  from  all  that  is  serene  and  satisfying. 

I  To  HAVE  GOD  IS  TO  HAVE  PEACE  :  for  He  is  the  God  of  peace ;  especially  as 
revealed  and  given  us  in  Chrii^t.  But  what  is  given  may  be  enjoyed,  as  what 
is  offered  may  be  received.  Then  let  the  gift  be  accepted,  and  the  peace  you  desire 
will  "keep  your  heart  and  mind,"  and  this  in  all  circumstances.  The  winds  of 
adversity  may  smite  you,  and  the  waters  of  affliction  overwhelm  you;  but  as 
God  is  greater  than  these,  He  keeps  in  the  perfectness  of  peace  the  minds  that 

are  stayed  upon  Him.  ,       i.    tt- 

II  Such  peace  is  found  in  Christ  alone  ;  not  in  anything  done  by  Him,  or 
given  by  Him,  but  in  His  personal  indwelling.  The  apostle's  declaration  is,  that 
*^  He  is  our  peace"  (Ephes.  ii.  U)      [See  Addenda,  p  100,  Sacred  Peace.] 

The  knowledge  of  Him  will  illuminate,  and  the  faith  of  Him  will  impart 
security  ;  but  you  must  have  Himself  to  have  the  portion  that  will  satisfy,  and 

the  peace  you  need. 

III  But  not  only  is  Christ  our  peace,  but  from  being  the  atoner.  our  peace 
offering,  He  gives  Himself  to  God  an  offering  and  a  sweet  smelling  savour, 
and  then  to  us  who  trust  in  Him  for  deliverance  and  satisfaction. 

The  ancient  Jewish  sacrifice  of  the  peace  offering  illustrates  this.  (1)  The 
material  of  which  it  consisted  was  either  a  bullock,  heifer,  lamb,  or  goat ;  but  in 
all  cases  it  was  to  be  "  without  blemish."  God  is  entitled  to  the  best,  and  wil 
receive  nothing  less.  Yet  how  often  is  less  than  what  He  asks  offered  Him  ! 
That  they  who  so  act  by  Him  should  have  few  answers  to  their  prayers,  and 
little  satisfaction  in  their  reli,i2;ion,  can  be  wondered  at  by  no  one. 

(2)  Peace  offerings  were  offered  by  persons  who,  havmg  obtained  forgiveness  of 
sins,  and  given  themselves  to  God,  were  at  peace  with  Him.  Friendship  with 
God  was  the  principal  idea  reprefceuted  therein. 


CHAP.  VII.  11— 35.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  93 


(3)  Only  a  part  of  the  peace  offerinj^  was  given  to  God  ;  but  that  was  the  hest^ 
the  part  to  which  He  was  entitled,  and  which  He  claimed  And  it  was  accepted, 
as  was  shown  by  its  consumption  by  fire.  Offer  Him  your  best,  and  though  in 
itself  small  and  poor,  He  will  receive  it,  and  make  liberal  acknowledgement  of 
His  approval  of  it. 

(4)  The  Israelite  was  not  at  liberty  to  lay  the  fat  of  his  offering  at  random, 
any  way,  or  any  where,  on  the  altar.  He  had  to  lay  it  ^*  upon  the  sacrifice  that 
was  upon  the  wood  on  the  altar  fire."  But  that  sacrifice  was  the  Iamb  of  the 
daily  offering,  which  typified  atonement  in  its  fuhiess.  There,  God's  portion 
of  the  peace  offering;  was  laid,  and  accepted  according  to  the  value  of  that  on 
which  it  was  offered. 

(5)  Apart  from  Christ  nothing  is  acceptable  to  Him,  What  you  bring  to  Him 
m2iy  he  your  best,  that  which  He  a^ks  for,  and  what  is  in  itself  valuable;  but 
unless  offered  on  the  ground  of  atonement  it  is  not  received  by  Him. 

(6)  But  that  is  the  ground  within  everyone^s  reach,  and  on  which  everything 
that  is  offered  to  God  may  be  presented.  There  is  no  one  by  whom  the  name  of 
Jesus  may  not  be  used  as  a  plea,  and  His  sacrifice  urged  as  a  reason  for  acceptance. 

IV.  The  peace  offering  expressed  the  thought  of  communion  and  satisfaction. 
It  supplied  God  with  a  portion,  and  man  also.  It  furnished  a  table  at  which 
both  met,  and  where  they  had  fellowship  with  one  another.  God  fed  on  the 
fat,  and  man  on  the  shoulder  and  breast  (v.  31)  ;  and  both  were  satisfied. 

(1)  But  we  have  Christ  here;  and  we  know  what  the  Father  ever  fonnd  in  Him; 
with  what  pleasure  He  ever  regarded  Him,  in  His  righteousness  of  walk,  perfec- 
tion of  obedience,  and  beauty  of  character.  God  was  supremely  pleased  with  all 
that  Jesus  was  and  did,  as  the  representative  of  Himself  to  men,  and  the  ideal  Man 
to  the  ivorld,  the  indicator  of  holiness  and  the  honourer  of  the  law.  Christ  was, 
and  is  still,  His  well-beloved  and  His  joy. 

(2)  But  not  God  alone  fed  on  the  peace  offering,  man  did  that  also;  he  ate  of 
the  breast  and  the  shoulder.  In  the  anti  type  these  typified  love  and  sttmr/fh. 
These,  believer,  are  your  portion  in  Christ.  You  have  His  heart  of  love  and  His 
shoulder  of  might — His  unchanging  affection  and  His  all-sustaining  power. 
Enfolded  in  His  embrace  and  enthroned  on  His  shoulder  of  strength,  you  occupy 
A  position  where  evil  cannot  harm  you,  nor  want  remain  unmet 

V.  No  Israelite  who  was  ceremonially  unclean  was  permitted  to  partake  of  the 
peace  offering,  or  share  with  God  in  the  provision  it  supplied.  And  without 
holiness  no  man  is  now  allowed  to  see  God.  But  provision  is  made  both  for 
man's  expiation  and  for  his  sanctifying  from  all  impurity.  The  cross  that 
separates  from  the  guilt  of  sin  also  separates  from  its  defilement.  Christ  is  thus 
Sanctifier  as  well  as  Justifier.  He  "  gave  Himself  for  us,  that  He  might  redeem 
us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto  Himself  a  peculiar  people"  (Tit   ii.  14). 

Thus  beautified  with  His  salvation,  you  will  find  a  place  in  His  banquetinor 
house  of  love,  a  guest  at  the  Lord's  table,  and  satisfied  with  the  food  of  which 
you  partake  (John  vi.  57,  55,  35). 

Are  you  satisfied  with  Christ  ?  Does  He  appease  all  your  yearnings,  fulfil 
your  every  desire,  give  you  rest,  and  prove  your  peace  ?  "  My  beloved  is  mine,  and 
I  am  His  "  (Song  of  Sol  ii.  16).  His  resources  are  inexhaustible,  His  communi- 
cations are  continuous,  and  His  glory  is  divine. — Arranged  from  *'  The  Gospel  in 
Leviticus j"  by  James  Fleming,  D.B, 

Topic:  The  Law  of  the  Peace  Offering  (Vv.  11-35). 

A  halo  of  gladness  surrounds  this  sacrifice.  Persons  grateful  for  deliverances 
wrought  and  mercies  received,  desirous  of  paying  vows  previoasly  made,  or 
pledging  themselves  voluntarily  to  some  new  obligation,  were  to  offer  before  the 
Lord  their  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving  and  praise.     In  this  law  we  see  : 


94  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  vii.  35—38, 


I.  That  pface  follows  forgiveness. 

The  expiatory  sacrifices  removed  guilt,  which  is  the  only  barrier  that  can  exist 
between  God  and  man.  The  peace  offering  admitted  man  into  the  reconciled 
presence  of  God.  The  offerer  came  not  as  a  culprit  seeking  pardon,  but  as  a 
forgiven  child  drawing  near  to  a  loving  Father.  Pardon  is  the  door  into  the 
chamber  of  Peace.  So,  in  the  Gospel,  *'  Being  justified  by  faith  we  have  peace 
with  God,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Peace  is  the  Divine  legacy  Christ 
has  left  to  all  who  come  to  Him  for  rest  from  the  burden  of  the  ceremonial 
]aw,  and  guilt  of  sin. 

IT.  That  pestoration  follows  peace. 

In  presenting  the  peace  offerings,  and  feasting  on  the  same,  the  worshippers 
would  feel  they  were  admitted  into  the  family  of  God.  They  sat  in  His  banquet- 
ing house,  and  His  banner  over  them  was  love.  The  priests  and  people  joined 
with  the  Lord  in  the  divinely  appointed  eucharistic  feast.  This  privilege  is 
taught  in  the  parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son.  It  would  not  have  been  enough  for 
him  to  be  pardoned  for  his  rebellion  and  sin,  he  needed  restoration  to  his  father's 
house  and  favour.  Christ  is  our  peace.  He  has  broken  down  the  middle  wall  of 
partition,  and  made  us  one  with  God. 

III.  That  gratitude  follows  restoration. 

The  pardoned  and  restored  worshipper  would  be  constrained  to  render  to  the 
Lord  the  glory  due  to  His  name.  Brought  into  a  right  relatic^nship  with  God, 
there  would  be  the  expression  of  right  feelings  towards  Him.  The  offering  waved 
to  and  fro,  and  heaved  toward  heaven,  would  denote  the  offerer's  gratitude  to 
Jehovah  ;  recognising  Him  as  the  Proprietor  of  all  things,  and  as  worthy  of  the 
warmest  and  strongest  love.     The  gratitude  was — 

(a)  Prompt.  The  offering  was  to  be  made  at  once,  none  of  the  things  pro- 
vided were  to  be  kept  until  the  third  day,  all  to  be  partaken  of  while  memory  of 
the  blessings  acknowledged  was  fresh, 

(6)  Large-hearted.  The  priests  and  people  were  to  invite  their  families  to  join 
them  in  the  feast,  and  to  eat  unsparingly. 

(c)  Perpetual.  The  statute  was  never  to  be  repealed  while  the  economy  con- 
tinued. The  people  were  under  obligation  to  be  thankful,  and  they  knew  how 
their  thankfulness  might  be  acceptably  expressed.  The  injunction  of  the  Gospel 
is  "  In  everything  give  thanks  :  for  this  is  the  will  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  con- 
cerning you." 

IV.  That  devotion  follows  gratitude. 

The  waving  of  the  breast,  the  heaving  of  the  shoulder,  symbolised  consecration 
of  strength,  and  affection  to  the  Lord.  Everything  offered  was  to  be  clean,  and 
even  the  inward  parts,  obviously  teaching  the  necessity  of  moral  purity  in 
character  of  those  who  presented  the  offerings.  Those  who  dared  to  trans- 
gress by  omitting  the  directions,  or  were  in  any  way  hypocritical,  exposed  them- 
selves to  the  penalty  of  excommunication,  as  well  as  to  severe  reproof. 

(a)  The  peace  offering  was  partaken  of  in  tents  of  the  people.  Religion  is  for 
the  tent  as  well  as  the  altar,  for  the  home  as  well  as  the  sanctuary  Christ 
expects  our  service  to  spring  from  love,  not  from  fear  ;  from  gratitude  to  Him 
for  what  He  has  done  for  us.  "  We  love  Him,  because  He  first  loved  us." — F.  W, 
Brovm. 

Topic:  Recapitulation  op  Sacrificial  Ritual  (Vv.  35-38). 

Here  the  directions  respecting  sacrifices  are  solenmly  emphasised  :  ''  This  \% 
the  portion,"  etc.  Offerings  and  the  priesthood  were  inseparably  connected  ; 
when,  and  in  the  fulness  of  time,  the  offerings  ceased,  the  priesthood  ended.  All 
priestly  assumption  under  the  Christian  dispensation  is  out  of  place  ckronologi- 
call^f  and  presumptuous   religiously.      Israel,  by  the  Mosaic  economy,  was  to 


CHAP.  VI.  37,  8.J  THE   BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS.  95 


become  the  repository  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  the  reflector  of  Kis  irlory,     Th' 
otterings  taught  that  man  is  a  guilty  sinner  in  the  sight  of  God,  that  his  sin 
fulness  separates  him  from  (xod,  that  removal  of  sin  restores  man  to  God.     The 
Jewish  economy  was  perfectly  unique;   the  Hebrew  nation  stood  out  in  distinct 
relief  among   surrounding    idolatrous  nations.      In    this    recapitulation    of   the 
Levitical  ritual  we  are  taught — 

I.  That  god  does  not  enjoin  obkdiexce  upon  man  without  at  the  same 

TIME  FURNISHING  DIRECTIONS  FOR  RENDERING  IT. 

Had  directions  been  given  that  certain  otferiugs  were  to  be  presented,  and  no 
specifications  added  as  to  how  they  were  to  be  offered,  the  people  would  have 
been  in  constant  uncertainty  whether  or  not  they  were  doing  the  thing  that 
was  required.  As  it  was,  the  priests  and  people  entered  upon  their  religious 
observances  with  a  full  knowledge  of  their  duties  and  how  to  discharge  them 
In  the  Gospel  we  are  told  what  God  requires  of  us  under  the  Christian  dispensa- 
tion. Christ  has  taught  us  in  His  royal  law  what  all  the  law  and  the  prophets 
taught.  In  our  worship  we  may  observe  and  present  all  that  the  offerings  of 
the  Levitical  economy  signified.  We  may  receive,  in  answer  to  believing  prayer, 
the  influences  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  whose  office  it  is  to  guide  us  into  all  truth 
and  to  take  of  the  things  of  Cbrist  and  show  them  unto  us. 

II.  That  god  does  not  present  alternatives  to  man  when  he  furnishes 

DIRECTIONS  for  OBEDIENCE. 

The  laws  of  the  offerings  were  as  emphatic  as  they  were  clear ;  there  was  no 
margin  left  for  human  invention,  no  zone  of  uncertainty  about  the  things  to  be 
presented.  In  some  offerings  there  were  gradations,  but  it  was  in  specified  things  ; 
the  offerer  was  to  bring  no  substitute  for  what  was  divinely  ordained.  This 
exclusiveness  would  give  assurance  to  the  offerer  that  what  he  presented  God 
Would  accept,  and  would  prevent  oscillation  between  rival  claims.  Tne  straight 
line  of  the  law  was  laid  down,  and  clearly  indicating  fitiger-posts  set  ud  ;  the 
commands  were  unmistakable,  "This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it."  So  under  the 
Gospel  we  have  no  alternatives  in  the  way  of  salvation.  '*  No  other  name  given," 
etc.     The  Christian  religion  excludes  all  others. 

III.  That   god   does   not   withhold   from    man  inducements   to  render 

OBEDIENCE    TO    DIVINE    COMMANDS. 

The  promulgation  of  the  law  from  Sinai,  and  the  enunciation  of  the  ritual 
from  the  tabernacle,  were  associated  with  the  most  solemn  sanctions.  The 
Hebrews  could  have  no  reasonable  doubt  about  the  Divine  origin  and  hindi)i<j 
obligation  of  those  enactments.  With  equal  solemnity  our  duties  toward  rhe 
Gospel  have  been  inculcated.  Not  from  Sinai,  but  from  the  Mount  of  Beati- 
tudes ;  not  from  Moses,  but  from  Christ.  Evidences  of  the  Messiah>.hip  of 
Christ,  of  the  supremacy  of  His  claims,  of  the  truth  of  His  religion,  are  many 
and  conclusive.  His  life  was  public,  His  miracles  were  not  done  in  a  corner. 
*'  He  that  despised  Moses'  law  died,"  etc.  (Heb.  x  28,  29).  In  the  Gospel,  as 
on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration,  Moses  and  Elias  meet  to  bear  witness  to  His 
character  and  mission  ;  all  the  rays  of  spread  light  that  gave  guidance  to  the 
Hebrews  centre  in  the  cross,  focus  on  Calvary.  '*  Before  Messiah's  coming  the 
ceremonies  of  the  Jewish  economy  were  as  the  swaddling  bands  in  which  He  was 
wrapped,  but  after  it  they  resembled  the  linen  clothes  which  He  left  in  the 
grave.     Christ  was  in  the  one,  but  not  in  the  other." — F,   W,  B. 

Topic:     SURYBT     OF    THE     ENTIRE     AlTAR     SACRIFICES;     WITH    THEIR     PRACTICAL 

Significances  (Vv.  37,  8). 

"  This  is  the  law  of  the  burnt  offering,  of  the  meat  offering,  and  of  the  sin 
offering,  and  of  the  trespass  offering,  and  of  the  consecrations f  and  of  the 
sacrifice  of  the  peace  offerings,"  etc. 


96  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap,  vii  37,  h 

The  ofFerino^s  set  forth  Christ.  We  see  in  them  how  man  in  Christ  has  made 
atonement.  We  look  at  the  sin  and  trespass  otFerino^s  and  see  that  the  sin  of 
man  has  been  fully  borne  :  at  the  burnt  and  meat  otferings,  and  see  all  God's 
requirements  satisfied.  And  this  is  our  confidence,  that  as  Christ  "  for  us"  has 
been  "  without  the  camp,"  as  "  for  us  "  He  has  been  laid  on  the  altar,  so  truly 
do  we  stand  in  Him,  even  as  He  is;  "for  by  one  offering  He  hath  perfected  for 
ever  them  that  are  sanctified." 

We  are  one  with  Christ.  In  this  view  His  offering,  as  our  Example,  sets 
before  us  the  model  and  standard  of  our  self-sacrifice.  And,  just  as  Christ's 
sacrifice  for  us  had  varied  aspects,  as  satisfying  God,  and  as  satisfying  man, 
and  as  bearing  sin  ;  so  will  our  sacrifice,  in  a  lower  sense,  have  these  same  aspects. 
In  this  way  the  typical  offerings  have  an  application  to  Christians.  Thus  we  also 
are  offerers  ;  "present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice"  (Rom,  xii.  1).  Between 
Christ's  sacrifice  and  ours  there  will,  of  course,  be  dissimilarities  neither  few  nor 
small,,  arising  from  the  fact  that  He  was  sinless  and  we  are  sinners.  Yet  the  saint 
will  "  be  made  conformable  unto  His  death  "  (Phil.  iii.  10),  and  his  rule  in 
sacrifice  will  be  "the  offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ." 

Trace,  therefore,  how  far  the  various  aspects  of  the  offering  of  the  body  of 
Christ  niay  be  applicable  to  those,  who,  being  members  of  His  mystical  body, 
are  called  to  "  walk  even  as  He  walked." 

I.  The  burnt  opfeking.  This  was  man  satisfying  God  ;  man  in  Christ 
giving  himself  to  God  as  His  portion.  We  have  seen  how  far /or  us  [comp.  pp. 
8,  9  ^??/ra.]  this  was  fulfilled  in  Christ :  we  now  inquire  how  far  in  us  it  may 
be  fulfilled  by  the  Spirit. 

The  burnt  offering  stands  as  a  witness  how  we  should  **  yield  ourselves" 
(Rom.  vi.  13). 

1.  As  to  its  measure.  It  was  "  wholly  burnt."  No  part  was  withheld  from 
God.  Entire  self-surrender.  It  must  "  cost  us  something  "  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  24).  The 
burnt  offering  was  God^s  claim :  the  fulfilment  of  this  required  the  life  of 
Christ.  It  will  demand  our  lives — "Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  with  a// thine 
heart,  all  thy  soul,  all  thy  mind  and  all  thy  strength." 

Our  path  after  Christ  must  be  still  a  sacrifice.  Can  we  "present  our  bodies  a 
living  sacrifice  "  without  cost,  without  feeling  that  sacrifice  is  still  sacrifice  ?  Christ 
felt  His  sacrifice. 

2.  As  to  its  character.  In  the  varieties  of  the  burnt  sacrifice,  of  bullock, 
lamb,  and  turtle  dove,  each  brought  out  some  distinct  particular  in  the  char- 
acter of  our  blessed  Lord.  Would  to  God  that  in  active,  yet  patient  service 
(as  the  bullock),  in  silent,  unmurmuring  submission  (as  the  lamb),  in  gentleness 
and  innocency  of  life  (as  the  dove),  we  might  be  conformed  to  Him  who  went 
before  us. 

Service,  submission,  meekness,  will  gain  no  crown  for  us  here ;  nor  did  they 
for  Christ.  We  cannot  seize  greatness,  or  secure  honour  in  this  world,  by  offei- 
ing  ourselves  to  God  in  the  character  these  emblems  signify.  Christ  was  despised 
and  rejected  of  man,  as  a  lamb  slain  and  none  to  pity.  May  He  give  us  grace 
gladly  to  acquiesce  in  the  likeness. 

II.  The  meat  offering.  This  was  Christ  sa^/s/ym^r  man  ;  o^erin^  Himself  a$ 
marCs  meat.  In  doing  this  He  met  man's  claim  on  Him  as  man.  Man  had  a 
claim  on  man ;  God  had  ratified  that  claim,  saying,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy 
neighbour  as  thyself,"  In  the  meat  offering,  Christ  met  and  satisfied  this 
claim,  by  giving   Himself  to  God  as  man'  s  portion. 

1.  For  the  measure  of  it  it  is  enough  to  say,  the  type  shows  us  the  whole  con- 
sumed.    Such  is  our  standard. 

2.  For  its cAa7'ac^er,  the  "bruised  corn,"  the  "oil,"  the  "salt,"  and  the  "frank- 
incense," are  sufficently  explicit. 

How  far   may  we  be  conformed  to  it  %     To  answer  this  question  let  us  look  to 


CHAP  .VII.  37,  8.]  TtlE   BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS.  97 


other  days,  and  see  how  men  have  conrormed  to  it.  Time  was  when  the  Church, 
though  but  "  a  leav(.Mied  cake  "(Lev.  xxiii.  17),  was  so  far  filled  with  the  anointing 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  tiiit  **  the  multitude  of  them  which  believed  were  of  one  heart 
and  of  one  soul,  neither  said  any  of  them  that  aught  of  the  things  which  he  possessed 
ivas  his  own.  But  they  had  all  things  common  ;  neither  was  there  any  that  lacked  ; 
for  as  many  as  were  possessors  of  Innds  or  houses,  sold  them,  etc.,  and  dis- 
trihution  was  made  to  every  man  as  he  had  need  "  (Act  viii.  3 1  -35).  Here  was  a  meat 
offering  ;  and  costly  ;  yet  not  a  rare  one. 

In  that  day  there  were  living  men,  who  for  the  Gospel  had  "lost  all  things" 
(Phil.  iii.  8),  yet  were  willing  to  suffer  more  :  "Yea,  if  I  he  poured  out  (alluding 
to  the  drinlc  offering  which  was  an  adjunct  to  the  meat  offering),  on  the  sacrifice 
and  service  of  your  faith,  I  joy  and  rejoice  with  you"(Piiil  iii.  17).  See  also 
concerning  Ouesiphorus,  Epaphroditus,  Philemon,  Phebe 

There  is  yet  a  Church.  There  must  yet  be  offerings  ;  and  we  hear  of  sacrifices, 
but  what  is  their  measure,  their  character?  Let  each  judge  himself.  But  this 
stands,  that  just  in  measure  as  we  are  like  our  Master,  just  as  we  accept  His 
words  as  the  rule  of  our  devotion,  just  so  far  shall  we  find  our  path  a  sacrifice. 

IIL  The  peace  offering.  This  view  of  the  offering  shows  us  the  offerer  fed ; 
for  he,  with  the  priest  and  (xod,  partook  of,  *.«,  found  satisfaction  in,  the  cffernig. 
The  peace  oflPering  has  a  fulfilment,  not  only  in  Christ,  but  in  His  members. 

1.  Does  God  find  satisfaction  in  our  offerings  1  The  answer  is  clear  :  "  To 
do  good  and  to  communicate  forget  not, /or  with  such  sacrifices  God  is  well  'pleased''* 
(Heb.  xiii.  16).  So  the  offering  sent  by  the  Philippians  to  Paul  was  "an  odour 
of  a  sweet  smell,  a  sacrifice  accej^tahle,  well  pleasing  to  God  "  (Phil.  iv.  18).  God 
puts  value  on,  finds  satisfaction  in,  the  offerings  of  His  Church.  He  "  loveth  a 
cheerful  giver"  (2  Cor.  ix  7);  and  as  our  greatest  gift  is  *'to  give  ourselves" 
(2  Cor.  viii.  5),  so  the  presentation  of  our  bodies  as  living  sacrifices  is  "accept- 
able unto  the  Lord"  (Rom.  xii.  1). 

2.  The  priest  also  fed  in  the  peace  offering.  Oar  Priest  finds  joy  in  our  offer- 
ings, poor  though  they  be  ;  so  that  even  in  a  cup  of  cold  water  and  in  bread  to 
the  hungry  He  is  refreshed  and  fed.  "  I  was  an  hungered,  ap,d  ye  gave  Me  meat  ; 
I  was  thirsty  and  ye  gave  Medrinh''  (Matt.  xxv.  35).  Did  we  but  know  His  joy 
in  seeing  us  yield  ourselves  an  offering  to  Him  ;  did  we  realise  His  gladness  of 
soul  in  each  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love  in  ministering  to  His  saints,  we 
could  not  give  with  narrow,  grudging,  selfish  hearts.     "  Ye  did  it  unto  Me/'' 

3.  The  peace  offering  fed  the  offerer.  And  surely  we  have  been  strangers  to 
self-sacrifice  if  we  need  to  be  told  the  joy  it  imparts  to  him  w'ho  sacrifices.  Paul 
says,  '*  Yea  if  I  be  sacrificed  I  joy  and  rejoice  with  you  "  (Phil.  ii.  17) ;  "  /  rejoice  in 
niy  sufferings  for  you,"  etc.  (Col.  i  24)  ;  **  I  count  not  my  life  dear  unto  me, 
BO  that  I  might  Bnish  my  course  with  joy  "  (Actsxx.  24). 

The  very  costliness  of  our  sacrifice  iacreases  our  joy  when  we  know  that  He, 
to  whom  we  offer,  rejoices  with  us. 

IV.  The  sin  and  trespass  offerings.     And  first  as  to  the  sin  offering. 

1.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  the  Christian  may  hear  sin  and  suffer  its  judgment 
in  his  mortal  flesh.  For  lack  of  knowing  this,  many  are  sparing  that  flesh  which 
the  cross  of  Christ  was  given  to  crucify.  Is  there,  then,  anything  to  be  wrought 
in  us  by  the  Spirit  answering  to  the  dying  for  sin  of  the  sin  offering  ?  Yes ; 
Christ's  death  in  the  flesh  for  sin  is  made  our  example:  "Forasmuch,  then,  as 
Christ  hath  suffered  fur  us  in  the  flesh,  arm  yourselves  with  the  same  mind ;  for 
he  that  hath  suffered  in  the  flesh  hath  ceased  from  sin"  (1  Pet.  iv.  1).  The 
Christian,  as  having  been  judged  in  the  person  of  Christ,  and  knowing  that  for 
him  Christ  has  borne  the  cross,  follows  on  by  that  cross  to  judge  and  mortify  all 
that  he  finds  in  himself  still  contrary  to  his  Lord.  The  flesh  in  him  is  contrary  ; 
the  flesh,  therefore,  must  die  (Gal.  vi.  14  ;  v.  24  ;  Rom.  vi   6). 

Q.  In  the  trespass  offering  restitution  was  made  for  wrong.     And  the  sai:it  in 

H 


98 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY  ON 


[chap.  VII.  1 — 12. 


fellowship  with  Christ  will  make  restitution  ;  in  acts  of  generosity  and  kindncjsa 
to  men  ;  and  will  "  add  the  fifth,"  going  beyond  bare  justice,  in  dealing  graciously 
and  mercifully  with  others. 

Such  is  '*  THE  LAW  OF  THE  OFFERINGS.''  It  givcs  but  0116  view  of  Christ  ;  yet 
how  much  is  involved  in  it  both  as  to  our  standing  and  walk  in  Him.  His 
offering  witnesses  of  sacrifice  even  to  the  cross.     [Comp.  Jukes  on  the  Offerings.! 


OUTLINES   ON   VERSES   OF   CHAPTER   VII. 


Vv.  l-lO.—TAgmg :  The  trespass  offering. 

This  law  similar  to  that  of  sin  offering, 
with  additional  directions  respecting  the  blood 
of  the  sacrifice,  which  was  to  be  sprinkled 
round  about  the  altar.  The  shedding  and 
sprinkling  of  so  much  blood  in  the  worship 
of  God  was  doubtless  intended  to  impress 
the  worshipper  with  t/ie  repulsiveness  of  sin; 
the  enormity  of  guilt,  the  absolute  necessity  of 
pardon^  in  order  to  acceptance  and  peace. 
In  this  law  we  see — 

I.  God's  jealous  regard  for  the  strictest  order 
in  His  service.  The  directions  given  in  the 
ritual  were  emphatically  Divine  ;  He,  to 
whom  belong  the  silver  and  the  gold,  and  the 
cattle  upon  a  thousand  hills,  condescended 
to  give  minute  directions  about  slaying  a 
"bullock,"  "ram,"  and  "pigeon,"  to  teach 
that  no  part  of  His  service  is  beneath  His  no- 
tice, or  may  be  performed  carelessly.  Every- 
thing we  do  for  God  is  worthy  of  being  done 
well,  or  it  should  not  be  done  at  all.  Mankind 
should  aim  at  perfectly  doing  God's  will,  as  it 
i«i  done  in  heaven. 

II.  Gods  generous  concern  for  the  temporal 
wants  of  His  sei'vants.  All  the  parts  of  the 
sacrifice  not  burnt  upon  the  altar  were  the 
perquisite  of  the  priests.  The  offering  not 
only  provided  for  the  spiritual  needs  of  the 
people,  but  for  the  physical  requirements  of 
those  who  had  surrendered  themselves  to  the 
service  of  the  tabernacle.  The  provision  was 
suitable,  liberal,  and  constant.  As  the  priests 
with  their  sons  partook  of  their  ample  pro- 
visions, gratitude  to  Jehovah  and  mutual  good 
feeling  would  be  cultivated.  No  one  can  serve 
God  for  nought.  He  cares  for  all  His  crea- 
tures, especially  for  those  who  trust  Him ; 
"  no  good  thing  will  He  withhold  from  them 
that  walk  uprightly." 

We  are  not  under  the  law  but  under  grace 
yet,  we  are  not  to  conduct  our  religious  ser- 
vices lawlessly.  We  do  not  obey  because 
commanded,  and  from  fear,  but  from  con- 
straint and  love.  One  of  the  first  questions  a 
true  believer  will  ask,  is :  "  Lord  what  wilt 
Thou  have  me  to  do  ?"  Duties  to  ourselves, 
«ur  fellow -men,  and  God,  run  parallel  with 
every  privilege  we  enjoy  and  every  blessing 
we  receive.  We  are  saved  by  faith  in  Christ 
and  not  by  works  of  the  law  ;  but  **  faith  with- 
out works  is  dead." — F.  W.  B. 

Vv.  1,   n,  37. — Theme:  Rigidity  oP  thb 
LAW.     "  This  is  the  law,"  etc. 

Reiteration  employed  to  indelibly  impress 


the  statutes  upon  the  minds  of  priests  arr' 
people;  to  show  their  pressing  and  transcend- 
ant  importance.  The  worshipper  would  thus 
be  impressed  with — 

I.  The  majesty  of  jehovah.    He,  God  over 
,11,  exercised  in  all  royal  supremacy.      From 

His  word  there  was  no  appeal. 

II.  The  privilege,  as  well  as  duty,  op 

WORSHIPPING  HIM. 

They  were  not  to  draw  near  as  slaves,  but 
as  servants  and  friends,  and  obtain  the  favour 
of  the  King  of  kings. 

HI.  The  necessity  op  preparation  fob 

WORSHIPPING  HIM 

It  would  UQeA personal,  as  well  as  ceremonial 
purity  to  approach  acceptably  one  so  august 
and  holy. 

IV.  The  blessedness  of  obedience  to  mi 

COMMANDS. 

(«)  By  obedience  they  would  bless  the  Lord. 

{b)  By  obedience  they  would  be  blessed  them- 
selzes. 

Carelessness  in  preparation  for  service 
might  not  only  lead  to  useless,  but  offensive 
worship.  The  heart  needed  to  be  in  full  ac- 
cord with  the  purposes  for  which  the  ofTer- 
ings  were  instituted.  Surely  obedience  to  the 
commands  of  Christ  are  as  binding  as  was 
obedience  to  the  laws  of  Moses  The  ordi- 
ances  of  the  Christian  religion  are  the  in- 
variable accompaniinents,  as  well  as  the  eX' 
ternal  badges,  of  membership  in  the  Christian 
Church.—/:  W.  B. 

V.  12 — Theme:   Thanksgiving.     "If    he 

offer  it  for  a  thanksgiving." 

Even  brutes  are  capable  of  gratitude.  Israel 
was  often  rebuked  by  the  prophets  for  thank- 
lessness,  and  reminded  that  the  dumb  creation 
put  them  to  shame.  Gratitude  rises  naturally 
in  our  hearts  towards  human  benefactors ; 
shall  we  not  be  thankful  to  Him,  in  whom  we 
live  and  move  and  have  our  being  ?  Concern- 
ing thanksgiving,  we  observe  — 

I.  It  is  universally  obligatory,  for— 

(a)   We  are  dependent  creatures^ 

(^)  Recipient, 

(c)   Unworthy, 

{d)  Responsible. 

III.  It  may  be  occasionally  voluntary. 
"When  no  particular  command  calls  for  it; 
when  no  special  mercy  suggests  or  prompts  it. 
It  may  rise  out  of  a  full  and  gladsome  heart. 
It  may  be  adoration  for  what  God  is  in  Him- 
self and  has  promised  to  bestow ;  as  woll  as 
for  gifts  received.     The  Giver  is  above  and 


CHAP.  VII.  20-38.] 


THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS, 


99 


better  than  His  gifts.  Lot  us  bless  Him,  and 
forget  not  all  His  benetits,  especially  "  JJii 
unspeakable  gtft^ 

111.  It  should  be  presented  becomingly. 

(a)  Without  delay ^  for  life  is  short ;  duty 
demands  ;  God  deserves  ;  opportunity  favours  ; 
delay  is  a  slight;  we  are  liable  to  forget  alto- 
gether what  we  postpone. 

{b)  With  freshness :  nothing  deteriorated,  or 
exhausted.  Beauty,  vigour,  sweetness,  fra- 
grance, virtue,  soundness,  all  should  be  laid  at 
His  feet,  offered  at  His  thrune. 

{c)  With  generosity :  Let  us  not  withhold ; 
and  having  given,  let  us  not  withdrazv  ;  The 
Lord  loves  a  cheerful,  an  ungrudging  giver. 

"  Whoso  offeroth  such  praise  glorilieth  God." 
—F.  W.  B. 

Vv.  20,  21. —  Theme:  Excommunication 
"That  soul  shall  be  cut  off   from  his  people." 

Precaution  against  laxity  in  service,  care- 
lessness in  offering.  Failure  to  comply  mi- 
nutely with  directions,  would  incur  Jehovah's 
righteous  displeasure. 

I.  The  offering  would  be  rejected. 

IL  The  offerer  would  be  excommuni- 
cated. 

The  strength  of  the  strongest  chain  is  the 
weakest  link,  if  that  breaks,  all  fails.  So,  if 
the  offerer  omitted  one  requirement,  broke  one 
link  in  the  chain  of  law,  he  was  guilty  of  vio- 
lating the  whole.  We  have  analogies  of  similar 
exactness  in  nature.  There  perversions,  ax- 
cesses,  shortcomings,  violations,  miscarriages, 
etc.,  entail  forfeiture  of  blessing  ;  indeed,  they 
convert  the  blessing  into  a  bane.  Men  are 
constantly  cutting  themselves  off  from  good 
by  placing  themselves  voluntarily  under  the 
ban  of  heaven.  Higid  discipline  is  especially 
needed  in  the  infancy  of  the  affairs  connected 
with  State,  Church,  Society,  Family.  Law  is 
intended  to  be  a  terror  to  evil  doers,  and  an 
encouragement  to  those  who  do  well.  Under 
the  Gospel  Christ  is  able  to  save  to  the  utter- 
most.—/^  W.  B. 

Vv.  23,  26. — Theme:  Reserved  things. 

"  Ye  shall  eat  no  manner  of  fat." 
"  Ye  shall  eat  no  manner  of  blood." 

I.  To  beget  reverence  for  God's  altar. 

II.  To  preserve  a  sense  of  the  sacredness  of 
life. 

III.  To  show  that  the  best  and  ri:hest  things 
can  he  claimed  righteously  by  God. 

IV.  To  cultivate  delicacy  of  feeling  ;  check 
gross  and  savage  passions. 

Thus  the  hearts  and  minds  of  men  were  cul- 
tured in  the  elementary  education  of  the  wil- 
derness ;  preparatory  to  the  higher  culture  ; 
which  after  ages  would  demand  and  develop. 
—F.  W.  B. 

V.  36. —  Theme :  The  wh"LE  duty  of  man 
"Which  the  Lord  communded  to  be  given 

unto  the  children  of  Israel." 

In  heathen  sacrifices,  man  is  seeking  after 
God  ;  in  the  Hebrew  sacrifi --es,  God  was  seek- 
ing after  man.       The  fixing  of  times,  places 
offerings  for  sacriiico,  showed  that  Uie  Lord 


was  anxious  and   ready  to  bless.     The  things 
which  the  law  enjoined  showed — 

I.  TUK  TRANSCENDENT  IMPORTANCE  OF  TRUB 
RELIGION. 

Nature,  conscience,  convenience,  choice 
were  not  sufficient.  True  religion  must  be 
revealed.  Offerings  did  not  explain  the  origin 
of  evil,  but  what  was  more  important,  hoiv  it 
?night  be  removed.  That  which  God  has  spe- 
cially revealed,  in  addition  to  His  revelation 
in  nature,  must  be  specially  important  for  us 
to  know  and  obey. 

II.  The  PARAMOUNT  CLAIMS  OF  TRUE  RE- 
LIGION. The  Jewish  religion,  promulgated 
from  Sinai,  put  in  the  forefront  of  all  othei 
claim  Christ  commands  us  to  "  seek  tirst 
the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness." 
Religion  is  '  the  one  thing  needful." — F,  W.  B. 

Vv.   37,  38. — Theme:    Summary    of    thb 

OFF  I.KINGS. 

The  laws  given  from  the  tabernacle  are 
an  expansion  and  enforcement  of  those  given 
fro'Zi  Sinai.  They  symbolised  essential  spiri- 
tual truths  for  th.;  Uubrew,  a.ndi  typified  the 
same  for  the  Christian  Church  viz  ,  the  ne- 
cessity of  mental,  moral,  and  spiritual  purity 
in  drawing  near  to  God.  Thus  the  founda- 
tion of  true  religion  was  laid  for  all  ages. 
These  laws  were  a  piotest  against  idolatry ; 
a  witness  to  the  sovereignty  of  yehovah ;  a 
bad^e  of  distifictionfor  Israel ;  a  training  for 
further  and  higher  sei'vice,  and  fuller  revela- 
tion. Looking  at  the  offerings  as  a  whole 
they  taught — 

I.  That  man  is  a  sinner,  and  needs  to 

ACKNOWLEDGE     HIMSELF      AS     SUCH     IN      THB 
SIGHT  OF  God. 

A  sinner  by  nature ;  by  transgression  of 
Divine  law;  deserving  punishment---death; 
a  sinner  absolutely  at  the  mercy  of  Him 
against  whom  the  sin  had  been  committed. 

II.  That    man    kequi'ED    to    make    an 

ATONhMENT    FOR    HIS     SIN     IN    ORDER   TO    AP- 
PROACH GOD  ACCEPTABLY. 

He  must  not  come  to  God  empty-handed, 
there  must  be  the  divinely  appointed  gift,  the 
substitute,  for  whose  sake,  in  some  way,  sin 
should  be  forgiven.  Vicarious  sacrifice  in 
harmony  with  the  law  of  nature. 

III.  That  man  required  personal  faith 

IN    THE  atonement    MADE   ON    HIS  BEHALF,  TO 
RENDER  IT  EFFICACJOUS  FOR  HIM. 

Neither  offering  or  act  of  any  avail  except 
representing  faith  and  obedience  of  offerer. 
The  fire  that  consumed  the  sacrifice  repre- 
sented the  ascending  consecration  of  the  wor^ 
shipper  s  spirit. 

iV.  That  man  required  complete  con- 
formity TO  god's   will,  and  restoration 

TO  HIS  FAVO¥R. 

The  perpetual  offering  of  sacrifices  would 
necessitate  constant  remembrance  of  the  Di- 
vine precepts  ;  the  frequent  coming  to  God 
would  keep  alive  a  sense  of  His  presence  and 
sovereignty.  Thus  the  chief  end  of  man  would 
be  secured — "  To  glorify  God,  and  enjoy  Him 
for  ever."— ^.  W.  B. 

h2 


100 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY  ON 


[CPIAP.  VIII.  2. 


ILLUSTRATIVE  ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  VII. 


Thue  worship. 

*'  Deos  placatos  pietas  efficiet  et  sanctitas.^^— 
Cicero. 
[Piety  and   sanctity  will  propitiate  the  gods.] 

**  Kes  sacros  non  modo  manibus  attingi^  se  ne 
cogitatione  quideni   violari  fas  fuUy — Gicer  ). 

[Things  sacred  should  not  only  not  be 
touched  with  hands,  they  should  not  be  vio- 
lated even  in  thought]. 

"  When  once  thy  foot  enters  the  Church,  be 
bare : 
God  is  more  there  than  thou ;  for  thou  art 

there 
Only  by  His  permission.     Then  beware, 
And  make  thyself   all  reverence  and  fear." 

— Geo.  Herbert 

**  In  the  temple  every  little  ornament,  even 
of  the  mighty  structure  that  crowned  the  cliffs 
of  Zion,  was  "  holy  "  to  the  Lord.  Not  the  great 
courts  and  inner  shrines  and  pillared  halls 
merely,  but  all.  Not  a  carven  pomegranate, 
not  a  bell,  silver  or  gold,  but  was  "  holy." 
The  table  and  its  lamps,  with  flowers  of  silver 
light,  tent  and  staves,  fluttering  curtains  and 
ascending  incense,  altar  and  sacrifice,  breast- 
plate and  ephod,  mitre  and  gem-clasped  girdle, 
wreathen  chain  and  jewelled  hangings — over 
all  was  inscribed  Holy,  while  within,  in  the  in- 
nermost shrine,  where  God  manifested  Him- 
self above  the  mercy  seat,  was  the  holiest. 
Thus  the  utter  holiness  of  that  God  with  whom 
they  had  to  do  was  by  every  detail  impressed 
upon  the  heart  and  conscience  of  ancient  Israel." 
'—Grosart. 

Offerings  to  god. 

"Just  as  a  thing  looks  green  which  is  looked 
at  through  green  glass,  or  red  through  a  red 
glass,  so  is  everything  most  pleasing  and 
acceptable    to     God    the     Father    which    is 


offered  through  His  Only    Begotten   Son."— 
F.  I'V.  Faber. 

Sacred  peace. 

"  Peace  is  greater  than  all  other  treasures, 
but  no  philosophy  can  bestow  it :  for  how  i-an 
it  cleanse  from  sin?  Nor  can  any  works:  for 
how  are  they  able  to  justify  ?  Descend  into 
whatever  mine,  shake  whatever  tree,  knock  at 
whatever  door  in  the  world  thou  wilt,  the  poor 
world  cannot  offer  it  thee.  Peace  is  but  one  ; 
One  only  has  peace ;  One  only  can  give  it : 
know  ye  Him  who  says  :  "  These  things  have  I 
spoken  unto  you  that  in  Me  ye  might  have 
peace"  ?  His  name  is  "  the  Prince  of  Peace." 
— Krummacher. 

<' As  on  the  Sea  of  Galilee, 
The  Christ  is  whispering '  Peace.'"--  Whittien 

"  Happy  the  heart  that  keeps  its  twilight  hour, 
And,  in  the  depths  of  heavenly  peace  reclined, 
Loves  to  commune  with  thoughts  of   tender 

power, 
Thoughts  that  ascend,  like  angels  beautiful, 
A  shining  Jacob's  ladder  of  the  mind  1  " 

—  Haul  H  Hayne. 

"Years  ago  a  Christian  friend  had  expe- 
rienced a  heavy  and  most  unexpected  loss,  a  loss 
which  to  most  men  in  his  circumstances  would 
have  been  crushing.  The  moment  the  an- 
nouncement of  what  had  happened  was  made 
to  him  his  mind  turned  to  the  believer's  all- 
sufficient  and  never  failing  portion  in  God,  and 
the  certainty  of  the  unsearchable  riches  of 
Christ ;  and  the  calm  of  his  spirit  continued. 
The  next  day  was  the  Sabbath :  and  he  was 
seen  in  his  place  in  the  sanctuary,  joining  in 
worship  with  the  people  of  God  as  if  nothing 
of  misfoi'tune  had  overtaken  him.  It  was  a  re- 
gret to  him  that  his  meany  of  doing  good  were 
diminished,  but  his  own  peace  of  heart  remained 
unbroken." — Dr.  ^dt.  Fleming. 


-•♦*" 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


SUGGESTIVE  READINGS. 


V.  2. — Take  Aaron  and  his  sons  and  the  garments,  etc.  All  that  was  to  be 
now  done  by  Moses  had  previously  been  specifically  enjoined  (Exod.  xxviii., 
xxix.,  XXX.).  The  office  of  the  priesthood  was  now  to  be  formally  instituted, 
that  office  being  necessary  to  the  maintenance  and  performance  of  the  sacrificial 
system  ordained  in  the  preceding  chapters.     Hitherto,  Moses  had  fulfilled  the 


CHAP.  VIII.  6-13.]  THE   BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS, 


101 


priestly  functious  ;  from  this  time  he  ceases  such  ministries.  It  is  for  him  a 
valediction,  for  Aaron  an  inauguration.  Thus  do  sacred  ministries  become 
transferred,  famihar  human  forms  pass  away  from  the  services  by  which  God's 
people  have  been  aided  and  blessed  ;  but  the  work  ceases  not,  for  God  never 
fails  His  Church  nor  overlooks  her  needs;  while  for  us  in  Christ,  who  has  "an 
unchangeable  priesthood,"  and  is  Himself  ''  the  same  yesterday,  and  to  day  and 
for  ever,"  an  abiding  provision  is  assured.  **He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession 
for  us. 

Vv.  6-9.— Washed  them  with  water,  etc.  Washing  is  the  first  stage  in  the 
process  of  priestly  consecration.  As  cleansing  from  all  unrighteousnes  is  inevit- 
able ere  we  can  enter  spiritual  privilege.  *'  Who  shall  ascend  the  hill  of  the 
Lord  or  who  shall  stand  in  His  holy  place?  He  that  hath  clean  hands  and  a 
pure  heart  "  (Psa.  xxiv.  3,  4).  The  priestly  washing  was  by  bathing,  the  whole 
body  being  thus  cleansed  ;  for  entire  purifying  was  required  and  was  symbolised 
An<i  "he  that  is  bathed  ...  is  clean  every  whit"  (John  xiii.  10)  Only 
they  who  have  experienced  thia  "cleansing  from  all  sin"  can  stand  within 
Gwd  s  sanctuary  ;  but  we  have  "  boldness  to  enter  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood 
of  Jesus  .     having  our  hearts  sprinkled  from  an  evil  conscience,  and  our 

bodies  washed  with  pure  water"  (Heb.  x.  19  22). 

Vv  7,  8.-Put  upon  him  the  coat,  and  girded  him,  etc.  The  "coa^"  was  a 
cluse-hcring  garment  of  white  linen,  covering  the  entire  body  :  this  was  bound 
about  the  body  with  a  linen  "^m/^<' or  sash,   embroidered  with   figures    and 

T^\.  f'}^  ^^?  ^""^^^  ^''^'"  ^^^^  '^^^  P^^^^®^  t^e  *Vo6e,"  called  "the  robe  of  the 
eph.,d  (Exod.  xxviii.  31-35),  which  was  all  blue,  and  was  woven  without  seam  • 
above  the  robe  was  the  ''  ephod;'  which  fell  one  part  over  the  front,  and  another 
part  over  the  back  of  the  shoulders  ;  this  compound  and  ornate  upper  garment 
was  wrought  of  blue,  purple,  scarlet,  and  fine  twined  linen,  interwoven  with 
threads  ot  gold.  The  -curious  girdle  of  the  ephod^'  was  of  the  same  costly 
material  as  the  ephod  itself,  and  fastened  the  ephod  below.  The  "  breastplate  '' 
was  a  square  pocket,  suspended  by  gold  chains  from  the  onyx  and  gold  epaulettes 
on  the  shoulders ;  around  its  four  sides  were  set  twelve  precious  stones,  each 
stone  beawng  the  name  of  a  tribe  of  Israel.  Within  this  breast-pocket-open 
on  the  upper  side  to  receive  them— were  placed  "  the  Urim  and  the  Thummim  " 
the  oracular  stones  by  which  the  priest  learned  the  mind  of  God  on  questions 
ot  J^dgtnent.  Then  the  head-dress  or  turban  of  linen,  the  "  viUre:'  was  placed 
on  his  head,  across  which  was  tied  -  the  golden  plate,  the  holy  crownJ'  bearing  the 
awful  inscription,  "  HOLINESS  TO  THE  LORD." 

This  solemn  robing  suggested — 

1.  The  installation  of  the  high  priest  in  his  pontifical  oflSce,  as  the  supreme 
minister  in  the  sanctuary,  and  as  God's  representative  amid  Israel 

2.  His  personal  adornment  with  righteousness  and  sanctity,  the  qualities 
which  alone  fitted  man  to  dwell  in  near  communion  with  the  Lord 

3.  The  mediatorial  glory  and  beauty  of  the  coming  Messiah,  whose  graces  all 
these  symbolic  adornments  typified  and  prefigured. 

^  Surely  if  Jehovah  attached  to  such  minute°symbols  so  great  significance  and 
importance,  He  must  value  the  realities  of  which  they  were  but  signs  •  the 
mediatorial  graces  of  Jesus,  with  which  God  was  "well  pleased";  the  sanctities  of 
a  priestly  character  in  us  who,  in  the  Gospel,  have  become  "priests  unto  God"  • 
adorned  ^''^'''*^*  ""^        ^'''^^'^  righteousness  with  which  all  believers  in  Christ  are 

.J\^^'\^:-^''^^^^  the  tabernacle,  etc.,  including  the  ark  of  the  covenant, 
the  al  ar  of  incense,  the  candlestick,  the  table  of  shewbread,  the  veil,  aod  sacred 
utensils  Ihen  the  anointing  oil  was  "seven  times"  sprinkled  upon  "the 
altar  and  its  vessels, '  and  "  the  laver  and  its  footr  By  their  anointing  they  were 
sanctified    for  sanctuary  uses,  and  as  symbols  of  gracious  truths  to  worshippers. 


102  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  UN       [chap.  vm.  U    3d. 


He  poured  the  anointing  oil  upon  Aaron's  head  :  not  sprinkled  it,  but  in  such 
quantity  as  that  it  "  ran  down  unto  the  beard,  and  went  down  to  the  skirts  of 
his  garments "  (Psa.  cxxxiii.  2),  suggesting  the  plenteous  grace  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  which  covered  over  the  entire  manhood  of  God's  consecrated  priest, 
"baptised  with  the  Holy  Ghost,"  "endued  with  power  from  on  high,"  "receiv- 
ing an  unction  from  the  Holy  One."  The  Spirit  was  "  given  without  measure  " 
to  Christ,  and  we  may  also  be  richly  anointed  with  His  energy  and  grace.  But 
they  who  are  so  *^  anointed"  are  consecrated  to  a  holy  ministry,  sealed  for  a 
sacred  life  on  earth. 

Vv.  14  17. — The  bullock  for  the  sin  offering.  For  the  first  time  in  all  history, 
as  a  new  incident  on  earth,  full  of  interest  to  all  the  hosts  of  heaven,  instinct 
with  significance  for  all  humanity,  suggesting  new  conceptions  of  man's  guilt 
and  Christ's  atonement — the  sin  offering  was  now  offered.  Jehovah  Himself 
must  have  viewed  with  peculiar  regard  the  j^r^^  sin  offering  ever  presented.  Calvary 
witnessed  the  last  ever  to  be  offered  !  "  There  remaineth  no  more  offering  for 
sin."     The  order  of  the  sacrifices  is  noticeable  : 

1.  The  sin  offering  first  :  for  substitution  is  the  basis  of  the  sinner's  justfica- 
tion  with  God. 

2.  Next  the  burnt  offering  (v.  18) :  as  declaring  complete  self-surrender  of  life, 
in  its  highest  qualities  and  complete  devotion,  unto  God. 

3.  Then  the  ram  of  consecration  (v.  22),  which  was  the  thank  offering  and  the 
peace  offering  :  representing  the  grateful  joy  of  those  whom  God  honoured  with 
the  privileges  of  priesthood,  and  as  initiating  a  career  of  festal  fellowship  with 
the  Lord. 

V.  23. — The  tip  of  Aaron's  right  ear,  etc.  The  "right"  member  conveys 
the  meaning  of  entirety,  thoroughness,  fulness,  and  strength.  Every  sense  and 
every  member,  all  avenues  of  feeling,  and  all  life's  active  powers,  were  to  be 
used  for  God.  See  here  the  standard  of  life's  dedication  for  all  Christians,  who 
owe  to  their  Lord  so  great  a  debt  of  love  as  should  constrain  them  to  most 
fervent  and  absolute  devotion 

V.  30. — Anointing  oil,  and  of  the  blood.  The  Spirit's  grace  mingles  with 
the  Redeemer's  virtue  :  both  are  imperative.  Salvation  must  be  sealed  with 
sanctification,  and  the  good  work  of  renewing  is  in  no  case  complete  where  there 
is  not  the  blended  application  of  both  the  "  blood  "  and  the  "anointing  oil." 

Vv.  33-36. — Seven  days  shall  he  consecrate  you.  Within  the  sacred  enclo- 
sure they  were  to  tarry  during  that  period.  Consecration  must  not  be  hurried. 
Zeal  to  be  engaged  in  Christian  work  may  lead  to  rash  and  reckless  haste;  let 
the  young  convert  pause  amid  the  Divine  sanctities,  and  get  his  soul  filled  with 
reverence,  nourished  into  strength,  enriched  with  grace,  such  as  can  only  be 
secured  by  ^^  waiting  on  the  Lord."  Ardour  is  good,  alacrity  is  often  needed, 
for  opportunities  summon  us  to  activity ;  but  the  young  life  needs  first  the 
sacred  fostering,  and  a  "quiet  resting  place," or  ever  it  is  equipped  for  the  duties 
of  the  Christian  priesthood.  Moreover,  God  asks  for  Himself  this  consecration 
interlude.  Each  day  of  the  seven  these  priests  were  to  ''^fill  the  hand^"  i.e.y 
were  to  repeat  the  same  sacrifices.  God  must  be  served  first,  then  man.  Dwell 
much  and  restfully  "  in  the  secret  places  of  the  Most  High,"  give  Him  leisurely 
your  homage,  wait  on  Him  in  meditation  and  prayer  ;  you  will  be  more  endowed 
tor  gracious  ministries  to  men  by  such  solemn  seclusion  with  the  Lord.  "  Wait 
on  the  Lord  and  He  shall  strengthen  jour  heart ;  wait,  I  say,  on  the  Lord." 


CHAP  vni.  1-5.]  rilE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS.  103 


SECTIONAL     HOMIUES. 

Topic:  Priests  versus  Priestism  (Vv.  1-5). 

So  great  have  been  the  abuses  of  the  priestly  office,  so  enormous  its  pretensions, 
ao  offensive  its  intrusions,  that  it  requires  an  effort  of  thought  in  order  to  enter- 
tain, in  these  times,  pleasant  and  grateful  ideas  respecting  "priests"  and  the 
functions  of  priesthood.  The  modern  assumptions  of  priestism  are  so  painful  an 
outray:e  on  Christianity  as  to  start  the  intelligent  mind  into  revulsion  and  move 
the  devout  heart  to  grief.     Yet — 

I.    PkIF.STS  ministered  in  ISRAEL  WITH  THE  HIGH  SANCTION  OF  GOD.       He  — 

I .  Created  the  office,  and  defined  its  solemn  functions,  which  were  of  the  loftiest 
character. 

2  Invested  the  person  of  the  priest  with  splendour,  majesty,  and  beauty,  to 
command  admiration  and  awe. 

3.  Determined  the  meJiitorial  intervention  of  the  priest  between  man  and  God  ; 
set  one  man  in  this  august  and  solemn  supremacy  among  his  fellows. 

4.  Refused  any  other  than  the  priest  to  come  direct  to  His  altar  and  stand  in 
His  most  holy  presence. 

II.  The     PRIESTHOOD     WAS    A     PROVISIONAL     ARRANGEMENT     ANTICIPATORY     OP 

Christ's  glorious  offices. 

1.  In  the  personal  excellence  and  piety  of  individual  priests,  the  faultless  being 
always  chosen,  Christ's  perfect  humanity  was  foreshadowed. 

2.  In  the  splendid  attire  with  which  the  priests  were  adorned,  Christ's  majestic 
attributes  and  Divine  qualities  were  represented. 

3.  In  the  imposing  ministries  before  and  within  the  veil,  Christ*s  offices  as 
atoning  and  mediating  Priest  were  pourtrayed. 

4.  In  the  sacred  and  exclusive  privileges  the  priests  enjoyed,  Chrisfs  entire 
acceptahleness  and  God^s  great  delight  in  Him  were  impressively  and  constantly 
intimated. 

Ill  Christian  ministers  inherit  many  of  the  most  august  and  respon- 
sible spiritual  functions  of  the  priesthood. 

1.  They  have  no  priestly  calling,  yet  are  as  distinctly  commissioned  and 
divinely  consecrated  to  their  work. 

2.  Their  solemn  trust  places  them  in  highest  ministries  and  responsibilites  as 
mediators  between  God  and  human  souls. 

3.  The  Christian  Church  is  commanded  to  maintain  them  in  their  ministry  and 
esteem  them  very  highly  in  the  discharge  of  their  sacred  commission. 

4.  As  bishops  and  shepherds  of  Christ's  flock,  they  are  put  in  trust  with  the 
souls  (f  their  people ;  ''they  watch  for  souls." 

IV.  Modern  priestliness  perverts  and  prostitutes  the  sacred  office  of  the 
ministry  in  the  christian  church. 

1.  Irs  offensive  assumption  of  spiritual  supremacy  is  in  defiance  of  Christ's  law 
of  equ^tlity  and  brotherhood  among  believers. 

2.  Its  officious  intrusion  between  God  and  men  is  an  affront  to  the  unfettered 
liberty  and  right  of  every  one  to  seek  God  for  himself,  and  is  an  infringement 
upon  the  mediatorship  of  Jesus  which  always  avails  for  all. 

3.  Its  daring  pretensions  of  altar  ministries  is  a  perversion  of  New  Covenant 
doctrines  ;  neither  altar  nor  sacrificial  rites  remaining  now  within  the  Church. 

4.  Its  appalling  misleading  of  seduced  souls^  who  rest  on  such  beguiling  priest- 
liness for  spiritual  safety,  instead  of  wholly  trusting  Christ,  is  sufficient  to  fill 
Christian  hearts  with  indignation  and  to  cover  the  very  name  of  ^'  priest  "  with 
auachemas.     [See  Addenda,  p.  114,  Fricstism.\ 

(a)  There  is  now  no  priest  but  Jesus  Christ, 


104  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  viii.  1—13. 


(6)  His  ministers  falsify  their  trust  if  they  thrust  (he  shadow  of  a  human 
presence  between  the  soul  and  Jesus. 

(c)  The  Christian  Church  will  rightly  value  the  ministry  as  it  elevates  Christ's 
offices  before  men. 

(d)  Every  believer,  though  not  called  to  the  ministry  of  the  Word,  is  entrusted 
with  priestly  functions,  as  a  pleader  with  men  for  God,  a  pleader  with  God  for  men. 

Topic:    The  Calling  op  the  Priests  (Vv.  1-13). 

Notable  in  this  record  is  the  exclusive  agency  of  God  in  placing  on  His  people 
the  blessings  of  redemption.  It  recounts  the  consecration  of  His  priests,  those 
whom  He  was  pleased  to  call  into  His  sanctuary  to  know  and  serve  Him  :  a 
calling  now  granted  to  all  the  family  of  faith.  Former  chapters  of  Leviticus 
have  revealed  the  arrangements  of  God's  mercy  in  providing  the  satisfaction  due 
to  His  own  holy  government,  and  in  securing  the  pardon  and  accepiiuce  of  His 
people.  But  pardon  and  acceptance  are  not  the  only  blessings  God  has  provided 
through  redemption. 

I.  The  priestly  calling. 

To  what  does  God  summon  and  set  them  apart? 

1.  Intimate  access  with  Him  ;  coming  into  special  nearness  to  His  presence, 
His  altar,  and  His  holy  place. 

2.  Fullest  knowledge  of  Him  ;  learning  His  secret  will,  enjoying  freest  com- 
munion with  Him. 

3.  Holy  service  for  Him.     "  His  servants  shall  serve  Him." 
11.  A  calling  of  highest  happiness  and  privilege. 

1.  The  fact  of  His  being  what  He  is  as  God,  perfect  in  all  goodness  and  in  all 
blessing,  must  necessarily  make  admission  into  His  service^  joy  ;  and  exclusion  from 
it,  woe.     [See  Addenda,  p.  114,  Sanctity.'] 

2.  What  higher  honour  than  to  be  employed  in  carrying  out  the  designs  of  One 
who  is  perfect  in  wisdom  and  love,  and  all  powerful  likewise,  so  as  surely  to 
accomplish  the  contemplated  end. 

II.   A  calling  harmonious  with  a  christian's  sacred  instincts  and  energies. 

1.  God's  saints  have  energies,  imperishable  energies  which,  if  unoccupied ,  must 
cause  them  unceasing  sorrow  ;  and  how  could  they  hQ  fitly  occupied  except  in  His 
sei'vice  % 

2.  But  they  are  not  to  be  unoccupied.  He  who  gave  those  energies  intends  that 
they  should  be  fully  occupied,  and  that  not  in  distance  from  Himself,  but  in  His  own 
near  presence. 

IV.  A  calling  into  a  wondrous  life. 

Israel  was  now  in  the  midst  of  a  waste  and  howling  wilderness  ;  and  God  might 
have  assigned  to  their  priests  that  they  should  serve  and  commune  with  Him 
amid  those  wild  and  ungenial  scenes. 

1.  But  they  were  called  to  enter  beneath  the  shelter  of  the  tabernacle  of  God.  Its 
golden  boards  enclosed  them,  its  mystic  curtains  covered  them.  They  were  shut 
in  with  God,  encompassed  within  the  sacred  and  hallowing  seclusion. 

2.  Amid  what  solemn  experiences  they  daily  dwelt  I  There  they  found  incenss 
ascending  for  them,  and  shrouding  them  with  its  fragrance ;  ligH  shining  for 
them  and  encompassing  them  with  its  brightness ;  and  bread  prepared  for  them 
as  food,  even  on  the  table  of  God.  There,  in  the  presence  of  God's  own  goodness, 
they  learned  His  lessons,  and  when  they  went  back  into  the  wilderness,  they 
never  again  entered  it  as  their  home,  but  as  tliose  whose  dwelling  place  was  with 
God  in  the  peace  of  redemption.  They  might  go  in  or  they  migtit  go  out;  but 
still  they  were  His  priests  always.  [Uomp.  B.  W.  Newton's  Thoughts  on 
Leviticus.] 


CinP.  VIII.  1,  2.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  105 


Topic:  The  Mi.vistry  of  the  Pkiksthood  (Vv.  1,  2). 

I.  Definition  of  the  priesthood.  A  priest  is  one  who  mediates  between  God 
and  man  He  presents  the  gifts  and  sacrifices  which  the  worshipper  may  not, 
or  does  not,  or  dare  not  offer  in  person  ;  and  brings  back  from  God  the  assurance 
of  acceptance  and  favour. 

II.  Development  op  the  priestly  office.  Among  the  Hebrews,  as  among 
kindred  nations,  priestly  functions  were  discharged  by  the  head  of  each  family 
till  the  institution  of  the  covenant  at  Sinai.  This,  by  consecrating  one  family 
as  priests  for  the  nation,  and  requiring  all  sacrifices  to  be  presented  in  front  of 
the  tabernacle  of  meeting,  put  an  end  to  the  ancient  practice. 

The  transition  from  the //m/^  priesthood  to  the  Leviticil— the  national  priest- 
hood was  indicated  when  Moses  was  entrusted  to  conluct  the  sacrifices  of  Israel, 
as  the  mediator  of  the  covenant ;  and  the  closing  of  the  old  regime  was  marked 
by  his  choosing  young  men  as  his  assistants  in  the  offering  of  national  sacrifices. 
As  the  mediator  of  the  covenant,  divinely  authorised  to  communicate  God's 
messages  to  the  people,  and  the  people's  messages  to  God,  Moses  would  be  the 
first  person  thought  of  for  the  priesthood.  But  his  hands  being  already  suffi- 
ciently occupied,  the  office  was  conferred  on  his  brother,  as  the  person  nearest 
to  him  in  consanguinity  and  harmony  of  feeling. 

III.  The  unifying  value  of  a  national  priesthood.  It  would  help  to 
consolidate  the  families  which  had  before  worshipped  at  different  altars.  The 
union  of  all  Hebrews,  of  whatever  parentage,  in  the  worship  of  the  tabernacle, 
was  an  important  element  of  national  life.  The  families  were  henceforth,  at 
least  so  far  as  concerns  the  rites  of  religion,  united  together  as  a  nation  ;  and  the 
family  of  Aaron  were,  by  the  appointment  of  Jehovah,  mediators  between  the 
nation  and  Himself. 

IV.  Selection  of  the  aaronic  family.  The  nation  being  constituted  espe- 
cially Jehovah's,  by  virtue  of  their  election  as  His  covenant  people,  the  family  of 
Aaron  were  elected  to  a  corresponding  eminence  above  their  kindred  ;  not  only 
belonging  to  Jehovah  as  all  Hebrews  did,  but  being  in  a  peculiar  sense  His  for 
the  service  of  mediation.  As  the  entire  nation  was  holy,  or  separate  from  other 
nations,  so  this  family  was  called  to  be  holy,  for  the  office  and  ministrations  of 
the  priesthood.  As  this  separation  of  the  Hebrews  from  the  rest  of  mankind 
did  not  begin  with  any  act  of  their  own,  but  they  were  chosen  by  the  Lord  to 
be  His ;  so  Aaron  and  his  sons  did  not  take  the  prerogatives  of  the  priesthood 
spontaneously,  but  were  called  to  the  office  by  the  election  of  Jeh)vah  Himself. 

V.  Beneficence  op  the  priestly  office.  The  people  were  not  qualified  to 
draw  near  to  God  in  person  ;  and  though,  by  virtue  of  their  election,  they  were 
entitled  to  dwell  in  His  habitation,  their  consciousness  of  sin  made  them  afraid 
of  Him ;  therefore,  in  condescension  to  their  inability  to  understand  the  great- 
ness of  His  love.  He  provided  a  class  of  persons  who,  as  representatives  of  His 
elect,  might  in  their  stead  enter  the  tabernacle.  To  draw  near  to  God,  to  be  a 
priest,  are  equivalent  expressions.  Aaron  drew  near  in  behalf  of  those  who  were 
elected  to  have  spiritual  communion  with  God,  but  were  not  yet  delivered  from 
the  bondage  of  fear  ;  and  his  admission  within  the  habitation  signified  that  they 
were  entitled  to  a  corresponding  access  in  spirit,  that  they  were  called  "  a  king- 
dom of  priests  "  for  the  reason  that  they  might  thus  draw  near  God  in  spiritual 
fellowship.  By  his  office  he  was  qualified  to  do  outwardly -and  symbolically  what 
all  might  do  in  spirit  and  in  truth. 

VI.  Expiatory  ministry  of  the  priesthood.  Before  Aaron  could  enter  the 
holy  habitation  in  behalf  of  the  people,  he  must  officiate  at  the  altar  of  sacrifice, 
and  expiate  sin ;  for  his  constituents  were  sinful,  and  the  representation  of  then 


106  nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY  oy         [chap.  viu.  6 -30. 


approach  to  God  as  members  of  His  household  must  be  preceded  by  signs  that 
their  sin  was  taken  away  ;  otherwise  it  might  be  inferred  that  Jehovah  was 
indifferent  whether  His  people  were  holy  or  unholy.  The  Hebrew  priesthood 
therefore  symbolised  in  general  the  expiation  of  sin,  and  the  admission  to  filial 
intercourse  with  God  effected  thereby.     [Comp.  Atwater,  Sacred  Tabernacle^. 

Topic :  QuALiPiOATiONS  and  Ministries  of  God's  Priests  (Vv.  6-30). 

All  now  done  to  the  tabernacle  priests  symbolises  the  experiences  of  the  sanc- 
tified soul 

I.  Consecration  wholly  the  work  op  another. 

Moses,  acting  for  and  representing  God  did  everything  needful  to  complete 
their  consecration  ;  whilst  they,  the  subjects  of  consecration,  stood  as  passive 
recipients  of  blessings  which  were  placed  upon  them  by  another's  hand.  Moses 
washed  them,  clothed  them,  anointed  them,  slew  the  appointed  sacrifices, 
sprinkled  the  blood,  etc.  He  ceased  not  from  his  ministrations  until  he  left 
them  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  fully  consecrated  as  the  priests  of  God. 

A  lesson  this  to  those  who  desire  to  he  established  in  grace.  We  have  not 
properly  learned  the  typical  lesson  if  we  trust  to  either  our  power  of  appreciation, 
or  the  applicatory  power  of  faith.  The  garments  brought  to  us  and  placed  upon 
us  by  God  become  the  spring  of  joy,  steadfast  and  abiding,  only  as  we  realise 
that  our  possession  of  them  rests  not  in  powers  connected  with  the  creature,  but 
in  God  alone. 

II.  Perfect  cleanness  the  initial  requirement. 

Their  cleansing  was  received  as  a  gift  from  God.  They  washed  not  themselves, 
the  hand  of  another  did  it.  Even  as  Jesus  says  to  His  disciples,  "  If  I  wash  thee 
not,  thou  hast  no  part  with  Me"  (Jno.  xiii.  8). 

HI,  Investiture  in  holy  attirb. 

To  Moses  it  had  before  been  said,  "Thou  shalt  make  holy  garments  for  Aaron 
thy  brother,  for  glory  and  beauty."     Those  garments  had  been  made. 

1.  All  the  adornments  of  grace  have  been  prepared  for  us  ;  wait  in  readiness 
for  us. 

2.  A  moment  of  intensest  joy  to  Moses  when  he  brought  forth  those  prepared 
garments  for  adornment.  Nor  less  to  Christ  when  He  clothes  the  soul  "  with 
the  garments  of  salvation." 

3.  Attire  symhoiic  of  sacred  qualities.  They  were  of  blue,  purple,  scarlet,  fine- 
twined  linen,  with  connecting  chains  and  ouches  or  settings  of  gold,   indicating: 

{a)   Heavenliness  of  character  (typified  by  the  blue). 
(6)  Purity  (typified  by  the  white  linen). 

(c)  Official  dignity  (typified  by  the  scarlet  and  purple), 

(d)  Divine  power  of  sustaining  others  (typified  by  the  chains  and  ouches  of 

gold)  ;  gold  beiug  us  d  in  the  tabernacle  as  a  symbol  of  Deity. 
IV.  Adorned  with  the  crown  op  holiness. 
On  his  head  was  placed  "  the  holy  crown,  the  golden  plate." 

(a)  A  *' crown"  is  the  symbol  of  kingship -y  it  declares  the  royaVy  of  conse- 

crated souls f  **  kings  unto  God." 

(b)  Holiness  inscribed   on  the  crown  :  it  declares  that  the  highest  dignity  of 

man  is  moral  rectitude,  spiritual  samtity 
That  pi     e  bore  the  inscription  "  H^^liness  to  the  Lord."     It  implied  that— 

1.  The  vindication  of  that  '*  holiness'^  was  the  avowed  object  of  his  priestly 
service. 

2.  Bearing  that  inscription  on  his  brow  among  the  people,  during  his  priestly 
ministries,  asserted  that  God'^  holine^^  had  been  and  was  being  adequately  main,' 
tainedL 


CHAP.  viii.  6— 30.]  THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS.  107 


3.  Eiiterin^]^  into  God's  presence  with  that  inscription  was  evidence  that  God 
acknowledged  the  fact  of  Ills  holinei^a  heinq  maintained.  It  was  so  with  the  temple 
priests;  so  with  our  glorious  High  Priest;  is  so  with  every  soul  who  fulfils  on  earth 
the  niijiistry  of  Christian  devotion. 

V.  The  badge  of  mediatoushtp. 

1.  From  the  high  priest's  shoulders  (the  place  of  endurance  and  strength),  sus- 
pended by  chains  of  gold  (symbol  of  Divine  sustaining  power),  hung  the  "  breast- 
plate."    And  that  badge  of  his  office,  to  intercede  for  others,  lay  upon  his  heart. 

2.  It  bore  upon  it  the  names  of  those  for  whom  he  was  appointed  to  minister,  and 
whose  high  priest  he  was.  Every  one  who  had  a  place  within  that  cluster  of 
names  had  a  claim  on  his  ministry  and  mediatorship. 

3.  Besides  being  suspended  from  the  shoulders,  the  place  of  strength,  it  was 
firmly  hound  to  the  pontifical  ephod,  the  distinguishing  garment  of  the  media- 
torial office  of  high  priest. 

The  most  glorious  function  of  the  high  priest  was  the  bearing  others^  names, 
not  his  own  ;  and  mediating  for  others,  not  for  himself,  before  the  Lord.  It  is 
certainly  the  crowning  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  And  the  Christian  soul  has  a 
priestly  mission,  supreme  above  all  others,  to  "look  not  every  man  on  his  own 
things  but  the  things  of  others";  to  bring  others  before  the  Lord  in  prayer,  and 
to  win  souls  into  blessed  reconciliation  with  God  by  his  gracious  interventions  and 
Christl\  ministries. 

VI.  Spiritual  anointing. 

That  "  holy  oil  "  is  the  "  unction  from  the  Holy  One."  (1)  The  plenitude  of 
the  Spirit;  and  (2)  the  graces  of  the  Spirit;  and  (3)  the  efficient  power  of  the 
Spirit,  -Ave  essential  to  a  priestly  life  of  sanctity  and  service. 

VII.  Qualification  based  on  sacrifice. 

1.  The  scene  suddenly  changes  ;  and  the  gloriously  attired  and  anointed  priest 
stands  as  a  sinner  by  the  sin  offering.  For  sin  must  be  expiated  even  for  the 
most  privileged  souls. 

(1)  Its  blood  sprinkled  upon  the  altar  indicated  that  appeasement  was  demanded 
or  ever  they  could  approach  that  altar  in  ministry. 

(2)  Its  body  being  consumed  without  the  camp  declared  what  their  doom  would 
he  did  justice  exact  its  due. 

(3)  But  the  blood  on  the  altar  and  accepted,  announced  complete  propitiation 
and  acceptance. 

(4)  While  the  choice  inward  parts  consumed  on  the  altar  fire,  testified  that 
God's  claim  o^  inward  perfectness  was  satisfied. 

2.  The  burnt  sacrifice  summoned  them  to  absolute  self-devotion;  for  God  will 
receive  no  less  in  any  who  avowedly  become  His.     "  His  zeal  must  consume  us" 

3.  But  in  the  consecration  offering  they  yielded  themselves  up  to  God  with  grati- 
tude and  gladness:  as  those  who  reach  towards  the  self-devotion  of  Jesus — "  I  de- 
light to  do  Thy  will  ;  yea,  Thy  law  is  within  my  heart." 

In  every  sacrifice  the  merits  of  Christ  and  His  atonement  are  primarily  set 
foi  th  :  but  there  is  a  subsidiary  relevancy  to  the  self-denials  of  a  Christian  career. 

VIII.  Applied  sacrificial  grace. 

**  Moses  took  the  blood  of  it,  and  put  it  upon  the  tip  of  Aaron's  ear,"  etc. 

1.  The  vcdue  of  sacrifice,  which  had  before  been  accepted  for  them,  was  now 
applied  to  them. 

2.  The  meaning  of  sacrifice,  also,  was  now  urged  upon  them  :  all  life  laid  out 
for  God,  and  in  His  service. 

IX.  Symbolic  offerings  presented  to  god. 

This   was   their  first  act  of  personal  presentation  within  God's  sanctuary  of 
consecrated  sacrifices.      Moses  took  offerings  and   **  put  all   upon   Aaron's  hands, 
and  upon  his  sons'  hands,  and  waved  them  for  a  wave  offering  before  the  Lord/ 
eta 


108  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  viii.  1-5. 


The  sacrifices  which  thus  filled  their  hands  were  those  which  signified  : 

1.  Inward  perfectness :  perfectness  in  the  reins,  and  in  the  heart;  indicating 
the  bringing,  on  their  part,  into  God's  employ  of  their  purest  afifections,  and 
highest  virtues,  and  noblest  intelligence. 

2.  Outward  developed  perfectness  of  character ;  represented  in  the  unleavened 
anointed  bread  that  constituted  the  meat  offering. 

It  is  only  in  Christ's  perfectness,  a  perfectness  to  be  appropriated  by  us,  that 
we  can  present  such  offerings  before  God, 
X.  Sign  of  divine  acceptance. 

1.  Being  sjirinkled  hy  the  blood  which  first  had  been  sprinkled  and  accepted 
upon  the  altar,  conveyed  the  fact  that  God  received  their  consecration  :  that  them- 
selves, their  office,  and  all  its  various  functions  were  placed  under  the  sanction 
and  the  acceptableness  of  the  blood. 

2.  The  sprinkling  of  the  holy  anointing  oil  symbolically  connected  the  Holy 
spirit's  grace  with  those  oflices  into  which  God  was,  and  is  pleased  to  call  His 
people.  Without  this,  by  whatever  dignity  or  beauty  they  might  be  clothed, 
they  would  remain  inefficient  and  powerless  to  minister  aright  before  the  Lord. 
But  He  who  calls  into  holy  office  bestows  the  needed  grace  and  power. 

3.  Their /(^6(^Z^?^(^  wjoo/i  the  sacrifice  signified  the  com??^w?^^caf^ow  of  strength,  for 
we  are  nourished  by  food ;  and  suggested  the  fellowship  now  established  between 
them  and  God.  They  fed  on  part  of  that  on  which  the  holy  fire  of  the  altar  had 
fed.     There  was  communion,  therefore,  with  God  in  the  sacrifice. 

Thus  consecrated,  they  were  to  abide  within  the  tabernacle,  and  "  keep  the 
charge  "  of  Jehovah.  And  *'  blessed  is  the  man  whom  Thou  choosest,  and  causeth 
to  approach  unto  Thee."     [See  Addenda,  p.  114,  Sanctity i\ 

Topic:  Consecration  of  the   Priests. — A.:  The  Publicity  op  the 

Cerfmony  (Vv.  1-5). 

Among  the  Hebrews,  previous  to  the  promulgation  of  the  law  from  Sinai,  the 
priesthood  was  not  confined  to  particular  individuals;  though,  as  a  rule,  the 
head  of  the  family  discharged  duties  at  the  altar  of  the  household  associated 
with  divine  worship.  The  Levitical  priesthood  corresponds,  in  many  of  its  features, 
w^ith  most  of  the  religions  of  antiquity,  in  their  sacerdotal  institutions.  In  them, 
we  read  of  priests,  altars,  and  sacrifices  ;  supposed  to  be  mediums  of  communi- 
cation between  the  worshippers  and  worshipped,  and  the  means  of  propitiation. 

The  institution  of  the  priesthood  followed  the  request  of  the  people  that 
Jehovah  would  not  speak  to  them  except  through  some  mediator.  The  priests 
became  servants  of  the  Lord,  and  of  the  people  for  His  sake.  The  consecration 
services,  by  which  Aaron  and  his  sons  were  inducted  to  their  offices,  were  calcu- 
lated to  humble  as  well  as  exalt  them.  They  were  to  be  free  from  personal 
blemish,  sanctified  from  all  ceremonial  defilement,  and  were  to  exercise  self-denial 
by  abstaining  from  wine  during  the  peiformance  of  their  duties.  In  this  chapter 
we  have  the  peiformance  of  ceremonies  directed  in  Exodus  xxix.,  and  they  were 
not  repeated  subsequently,  except  in  the  succession  of  the  high  priest.  The 
ceremony  was  public — 

I.  To  confirm  its  great  importance.  Among  a  people  so  prone  to  be  re- 
bellious and  jealous,  it  was  necessary  that  conclusive  evidence  should  be  fur- 
nished to  leave  no  room  for  the  shadow  of  a  reasonable  doubt  respecting  the 
persons  selected  for  so  distinguished  a  position.  The  purposes  for  which  the 
priesthood  was  instituted  were  the  most  solemn  and  important  ;  upon  the  right- 
ful discharge  of  the  duties  the  most  momentous  issues  hung.  Aaron  and  liis 
sons  were  to  stand  in  the  breach  which  sin  had  made  between  man  and  God,  and 
be  dispensers  of  life  and  death. 


ciur.  viii.  6— 17.]  TUB  BOOK  OF  I.EVllWUfi. 


109 


II  To  CONFIRM  ITS  wviNB  APPOiNTMn:NT.  Had  they  been  consecrated  in  a 
private  ^ay,  «"spic.ons  that  the  offices  had  been  assumed  from  personal  ambi- 
tion or  for  selfish  ends,  m.ght  have  been  suggested  ;  but  the  ceremony  being 
performed  m  the  presence  of  the  whole  congregation,  "at  the  door  of  thf 
tabernacle,    the   open   approval  of  Jehovah  was  procMnmed.     The  congregation 

III.    To  CONFIRM    ITS    GENEBAL    ACCEPTANCE.      The    people    had   asked    for  tha 

.ntervent,on  Of  a  priest,  their  request  had  been  gra.^ted,  and  1  hey  were  no^ 
required  to  show  at  a  public  ceremony  that  they  approved  a.d  .ceepld  what  wJI 
done  At  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  they  would  recognise  the  d  vine  appobt! 
ment,  and  unitedly  engage  to  accord  with  the  arrangements  made.  The/were 
the  subjects  of,  and  witnesses  to,  the  covenant  made  with  Moses  and  Aaron  and 
pledged  themselves  ready  to  render  implicit  obedience  ' 

Read  in  the  light  of  the  New  Testament,  these  considerations  may  be  applied 
to  the  pubhc  consecration  of  our  blessed  Lord,  when  baptised  in  the  Jordan  by 
John.  Heaven  opened,  the  divme  voice,  the  descent  of  the  Spirit  in  the  present 
of  many  witnesses,  indicated  the  great  importance  of  the  mission  He  was 
beg.nning;  showed  that  He  was  beloved  of  God,  and  possessed  HrnnnualiLd 
approval.     Such  fact^s  place  upon  all  to  whom  the  tidings  come  bindin.rob  ,„»- 

B. :  The  Solemnity  op  the  Ceremony  (Vv.  6-17), 

Commanded  to  draw  near' to  Jehovah  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  and  to 
observe  the  ceremony  under  direct  Divine  superintendence,  the  Israel   e's  won  d 

feel    he""'  ""^Tf  "'*''  ?  r''  "^  ^''P  ''>'^"'°'«y  ■■°  tl'e  service -they  wou  d 
feel  they  were  standing  on  holy  ground.     The  solemnity  seen-  ^ 

I.  Ky  the  prkparatory  ablutions  enjoined.  Appointed  to  rom^  r,i<,h  t«  - 
God  spotlessly  pure  and  holy,  Aaron  and  his  sons  mT  adopt  meanrfitl^  to 
suggest  the  need  of  inward  holiness  and  official  blamelessness  ^ 

II.  By   the   sacerdotal   vestments    required        fJarmonta    ««    V>o„,  *f  l  j 

elab  .ate,  rendering  the  priests  (especially  thrHig'h  S    ," pX fn 'the"' 
appearance,  would  not  only  adorn  the  person  but  convev  tho  iH7»Hr„7  t  u       f 
worship  required  the  presentation  of^ thiZlr77J  ^^^^^^^^ 
att,re  was  chosen  by  the  Lord,  and  each  parfs^g^^steHle  solimn  Cn 
the  sens"es"  ""*"■""'  ''™"^'  *'"  '''•  ''''  ^P'"'  ^'^  >>«  -ade  drvouTthrough 

.afo^-np=.rrri,x^^^^^^ 

IV.   Br  the    general    anointing   ORWRvvn      Ti.r    .1,    ""■""" '-"«™- 
the  priests,  was  anointed  with  od      IsTae    Z'  J.\  tf  e^'acle,    as    well    as 

saored.  '^wibuip  was  to   be   regarded   as   peculiarly 

Lamb':f'Go:..^^:n:tunhf  sr:::  sir;.'  ""t.  t'-'  r'  -  "„*'^« 

the  exemplar;  characj  oi    His  Hfe      it'tuui  '  "'  "'"." 

holiest  of  all  by  a  new  and  living  way.-^.;^^B';''"'  '*  *"*'*  ^'"'''^  '"*"  '^^ 


no  HOMILETIC   CUMMENl'ARY  ON        [chap.  viu.  17— ;  6 


C. :  The  Completeness  of  the  Ceremony  (Vv.  17-36). 

In  the  consecration  observances  every  place  where  the  priests  would  officiate, 
and  every  faculty  of  the  priest,  was  impressively  dedicated.  The  heady  the  seaif 
of  intelligeuce  ;  the  shoulders,  the  repository  of  strength  ;  the  breast,  the  home  of 
love;  all  were  clothed  appropriately  to  indicate  purity,  energy,  excellence.  Beauty 
in  appearance,  efficiency  in  service,  comfort  for  the  worshippers,  benedictions  for 
the  whole  congregation,  all  were  arranged  for,  and  guaranteed.  As  the  hands  of 
the  priests  were  lifted  towards  heaven,  and  waved  to  and  fro,  they  were  reminded 
that  their  ministry  would  reach  to  heaven  ;  and  at  the  same  time  bless  the 
children  of  men.     The  completeness  of  the  ceremony  is  seen  in  that — 

I.  There  was  no  margin  left  for  human  invention. 

Every  thing  was  done  fidly  and  exactly  as  Jehovah  commanded  ;  the  pattern 
of  the  tabernacle  was  given  to  Moses  on  the  mount,  and  every  minute  arrange- 
ment in  the  series  of  sacrifices,  and  consecration  of  the  priests,  finally  fixed. 
Had  the  people  been  left  to  add,  or  subtract,  there  would  have  been  room  for 
manifold  innovations  and  absurdities. 

II.  There  would  be  no  after  need  for  divine  revision. 

Jehovah  never  makes  mistakes  ;  what  He  does  stands  fast,  His  plans  are  per- 
fect, His  purposes  immutable.  The  pifbsthood  met  the  moral  needs  of  the 
Hebrews  ;  was  perfectly  adapted  to  requirements  of  the  age.  When  the  pro- 
phetical age  dawned,  and  clearer  light  shone  upon  divine  revelation,  the  things 
instituted  in  connection  with  the  tabernacle  service  developed  into  more  spirit- 
ual significance ;  what  they  taught  remained  unimpaired.  These  things  con- 
tinued till  they  were  lost  in  the  substance  of  which  they  were  only  shadows. 
Christ  embraced  all  the  divine  teaching,  and  embodied  all  the  excellencies  to 
be  found  in  Moses  and  the  law.  Christianity  is  not  so  much  a  new,  as  a  per- 
fected religion,  as  the  first  verse  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  teaches.  The 
whole  of  revelation,  from  first  to  last,  is  a  development;  every  stage  complete 
in  itself,  each  growing  out  of  its  predecessor,  and  merging  into  something  better. 
The  completion  of  redemption  will  be  when  we  are  made  kings  and  priests  unto 
God,  and  reign  with  Chiibt  for  ever  and  ever. — F,   W»  B, 


D. :  The  Significance  of  the  Ceremony  (Vv.  17-36). 

The  institution  of  sacrificial  worship,  through  an  ordained  priesthood,  would 
deepen  in  the  hearts  of  the  Hebretvs  impressions  of  Divine  truth  already  there 
as  the  outcome  of  the  patriarchal  teaching.    They  were  now  very  clearly  taught — 

I.  77iat  there  can  he  no  acceptable  service  rendered  to  God  without  purity  in  the 
worshipper. 

II.  ^Jliat  the  imperfection  of  purity  in  the  worshipper  demands  an  atonement  in 
the  sight  of  God  to  make  up  for  that  defect. 

III.  That  the  distance  between  God  and  man,  produced  by  dn,  can  be  removed 
only  by  a  divinely -appointed  mediator. 

The  priests  were  the  channels.,  not,  the  sources,  of  blessina^  to  the  people  ;  they 
had  no  power  of  their  own  to  dispense  pardon,  nor  could  they  exempt  from 
blame,  or  furnish  indulgences.  They  existed  for  the  people,  not  the  people  for 
them.  They  wielded  deputed  and  responsible  power.  Medieval  priestly  assump- 
tion, papal  arrogance,  find  no  sanction  in  these  Levitical  rites. 

The  Kpistle  to  the  Hebrews  teaches  that  in  the  Gospel  dispensation  we,  as 
priests  to  God,  are,  (a)  cleansed  by  the  washing  of  regeneration  ;  (6)  clothed  with 


OiiAP.  VIII.  2,  3.J 


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 


Ill 


the  qaiments  of  Christ's  ricjhJp  ^nsripss  ;  (c)  offr  si^riHy^s  of  prais?  anl  praijer  ;  (d) 
surrender  ourselves  wholly  to  the  Lord;  {e)  receive  the  unction  of  ike  Holy  One. 

To  seek  positi<)ii  aii<l  successjiou  in  sucti  a  spiritual  priesthood  is  tiie  duty  aad 
Drivilege  of  all— i^:  W.  B. 


OUTLINES   ON   VERSES  OF    CHAPTER  VIII. 


V.  2. —  Theme:  God's  elected  priests. 
i.  "  It  is  not  only  historically  trae  that 
Aaron  and  his  descendants  weri?  priests  by 
THE  ELECTION  OF  JEHOVAH  declared  through 
Moses,  the  mediator  of  the  covenant,  and  con- 
firmed by  the  sign  of  the  almond  rod,  but 
such  a  calling  of  God  is  essential  to  the  idea  of 
the  office ;  for  a  priest  is  one  who  comes  near 
to  God,  dwells  with  Him  in  His  home  as  a 
companion  in  behalf  of  others,  because  more 
acceptable  than  they.  The  priest  is  preferred 
before  those  he  represents  ;  therefore  no  man 
may  take  this  honour  to  himself,  or  be  ex- 
alted to  it  by  his  fellows.  'Blessed  is  the  man 
whom  Thou  chooseih,  and  causest  to  approach 
unto  Thee,  that  he  may  dwell  in  Thy  courts  ; 
we  shall  be  satisfied  with  the  goodness  of 
Thy  house,  even  of  Thy  holy  temple'  (Psa. 
Ixv.  4).  Only  those  thus  chosen  by  God  were 
priests. 

ii.  "  This  divine  election  of  the  family  of 
Aaron  out  of  Israel  signifies  that  those  who 
had  been  admitted  to  lilial  fellowship  with 
the  Holy  One  of  Israel  were  called  thereto  by 
the  SOVEREIGN  CHOICE  OP  GOD.  As  Jehovah 
chose  the  family  of  Aaron  out  of  the  tribe  of 
Levi,  the  Levites  out  of  the  twelve  tribes  of 
Israel,  and  the  Hebrews  out  of  all  the  nations, 
80  has  He  chosen  His  spiritual  seed  out  of 
every  kindred,  and  tongae,  and  people,  and 
nation.  Without  such  election  they  would 
have  remained,  like  the  rest  of  mankind, 
strangers  to  the  covenant,  instead  of  be- 
coming '  a  holy  priesthood  to  oflfer  up  spirit- 
ual sacrifices.'  The  New  Testament  writers 
make  this  Divine  election  very  prominent, 
declaring  that  those  who,  by  receiving  Christ 
became  sons  of  God,  were  '  born  not  of 
the  will  of  man,  but  of  God'  (Jno.  i.  13), 
were  *  called  to  be  saints '  (Rom.  i.  17), 
were  '  chosen  before  the  foundation  of  the 
world  that  they  should  be  holy '  i^Eph.  i. 
4  ,  were  'predestinated  to  the  adoption 
of  children'  (Eph.  i.  6;,  were  *  elect  unto 
obedience  and  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus 
Curist'Cl  Pet.  i.  2). 

iii.  "  The  priesthood  were  elected  to  holi- 
ness. The  whole  people,  as  a  kingdom  of 
priests,  were  to  be  a  holy  nation ;  but  the  family 
of  Aaron  were  chosen  to  a  still  higher  cere- 
monial purity  than  was  required  of  their 
brethren.  When  Korah  and  his  companions 
claimed  the  right  to  officiate  as  priests,  they 
did  so  on  the  ground  that  all  the  congregation 
were  holy ;  and  the  reply  of  the  mutineers 
was,  '  To-morrow  Jehovah  will  show  who  are 
His,  and  who  is  holy  ;  and  will  cause  him  to 
come  near  unto  Him  ;  even  him  whom  He  hath 
chosen  will  He  cause  to  come  near  unto  him ' 


(Numb.  xvi.  5).  The  budding  of  Aaron's  rod 
decided  the  question  between  him  and  those 
who  claimed  the  office  on  the  ground  that  all 
were  holy.  It  was  a  sign  that  Aaron  was 
elected  to  a  superiority  of  holiness  among 
the  Hebrews,  as  the  nation  was  to  a  similar 
eminence  among  the  nations  of  the  earth. 

"  The  election  of  the  Hebrews  to  be  a  holy 
nation  set  forth  before  the  eyes  of  men  the 
truth  that  Jehovah  is  holy,  and  that  the  true 
Israel  who  in  spirit  and  in  truth  have  access 
to  Him  must  be  holy ;  the  calling  of  the  priests 
to  a  greater  strictness  of  life  than  was  required 
of  the  common  people,  and  the  requirements 
of  a  still  higher  degree  of  holiness  in  the  head 
of  the  sacerdotal  order,  were  concurrent  and 
cumulative  testimonies  to  the  same  truth, 
— At  water,  Sacred  Tabernacle. 

V.  3. —  Thei7ie :  An  elect  people.    "And 
gather  them,"  etc. 

The  circumstances  amid  which  Divine  di- 
rections were  given  to  the  people,  as  well  as 
the  directions  themselves,  were  calculated  to 
impress  the  fact  upon  all  Israel  that  they 
were  an  elect  nation,  brought  out  from  Egypt 
to  inaugurate  a  new  era  for  the  world.  Every 
other  nation  was  sunken  in  idolatry,  and  Israel 
had  proneness  to  it,  as  evinced  in  the  worship 
of  the  calf  at  the  foot  of  the  Mount.  All 
idolatry  debases  and  degrades ;  has  never 
been  known  to  develop  into  civilisation,  much 
less  into  pure  and  unde filed  religion.  Man 
could  not  develop  from  his  innate  wisdom  or 
inner  consciousness  such  ideas  of  God,  holi- 
ness, duty  and  worship,  as  those  which  were 
promulgated  and  established  around  Sinai. 
The  institution  and  consecration  of  the  priest- 
hood taught  that  God  is  holy,  and  that  "  holi- 
ness becometh  His  house  for  ever."  Man, 
without  supernatural  aid,  has  always  trans- 
ferred and  affixed  his  own  sinful  passions  to 
priests  and  gods  ;  and,  has  sought  to  become 
like  them,  to  avoid  their  anger,  and  secure 
their  benediction.  In  Israel,  Jehovah  showed 
who  He  was  ;  and  how  His  favour  might  be 
secured.     Consider : 

I  The  congregation  ASSEMBLED  All  the 
people  were  to  meet,  they  had  been  prepared 
for  united  service.  In  Egypt  they  had  be- 
come bound  together  by  strong  and  tender 
ties — they  had  no  prejudices  or  predilections 
in  respect  to  government,  were  ready  to  take 
directions  from  their  Divine  king.  Had  Je- 
hovah revealed  Himself  equally,  and  at  once, 
to  all  men,  revelation  would  have  seemed  the 
spontaneous  and  simultaneous  growth  of  hu- 
man inquiry ;  and  the  plan  by  which  God 
governs  our  race  would  have  been  thwarted. 


112 


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY   ON 


[chap.  VIII.  8,  9. 


Israel  was  chosen  to  high  honour,  but  onerous 
duties  were  associated  with  their  privileges; 
they  wore  called  to  self-denying  service,  and 
to  the  attainment  of  holiness,  requiring  con- 
stant self-mortification.  The  priesth  ./ould 
convey  knowledge  of  God  through  the  medium 
of  the  senses  ;  thus  the  revelation  in  the  wil- 
derness was  adapted  to  the  infancy  of  the 
Jewish  Church, 

II.  The  place  of  assembly.  "  The  door  of 
the  tabernacle."  Everything  done  in  order 
to  beget  devoutness  and  solemnity.  There 
was  no  image  of  Jehovah  before  which  the 
people  would  bow ;  but  they  were  to  remem- 
ber that  God  had  taken  up  His  abode  among 
them,  and  revealed  His  will  from  the  taber- 
nacle. What  a  contrast  the  place  would  be 
to  the  heathen  temples  in  Egypt,  with  which 
Israel  had  been  familiar.  'J hey  were  places 
where  revolting  abominations  were  practised  ; 
here,  all  would  impress  the  mind  with  purity. 
The  priests  who  were  to  ofHciate  in  the  holy 
place  must  be  sanctified,  to  denote  tiow  spot- 
lessly pure  the  God  of  Israel  was.  The 
gathering  of  the  congregation  at  the  door  of 
the  tabernacle,  and  the  consecration  of  the 
priesthood  would  meet  the  great  wants  of 
man's  moral  nature.  He  has  something  in 
him  that  compels  him  to  recognise  and  wor- 
ship a  superior  Being;  he  becomes  like  the 
Being  he  worships  ;  he  seeks  to  commune 
with  and  receive  communications  from,  the 
Being  he  worships ;  he  desires  a  mediator  be- 
tween him  and  his  God. 

All  the  light  and  purity  that  gathered 
around  the  Levitical  priesthood  was  symbolic 
of  the  purity  of  character  required  in  those  who 
draw  near  to  God  ;  and  typical  of  the  perfect 
purity  of  Him  who  was  "holy,  harmless,  un- 
defiled,  and  separate  from  sinners." — F.  iV.B. 

V.  8. —  Theme:  Israel's  glory. 

*'  And  he  put  the  breastplate,"  etc. 

To  outward  seeming  at  this  time  the  people, 
in  themselves  and  their  circumstances,  did  not 
present  a  very  dignified  appearance.  With 
no  visible  means  of  subsistence,  a  horde  of 
eEi-ncipated  slaves,  and  before  them  as  their 
new  arena  for  enterprise  a  waste,  howling 
wilderness.  Yet  they  were  the  Lord's  free- 
men; He  was  their  Deliverer  and  King. 
Through  and  with  their  priests,  consecrated 
in  their  presence,  they  would  draw  very  near 
to  God.  They  had  not  been  permitted  to  en- 
grave their  names  upon  tablets  of  fame  in  the 
land  of  bondage,  but  now  their  names  are  en- 
graved upon  the  breastplate  of  the  high 
priest,  and  presented  before  the  Lord.  This 
denoted— 

I.  That  they  would  be  ever  remembkred 
IN  the  divine  presence. 

Their  names  uncovered ;  plainly  imme- 
diately seen. 

II.  That  they  had  a  pla.cb  near  the 
heart  of  their  reprliskn tative. 

Not  behind  his   back,  or  beneath  his   feet, 
but  on  his  bi'east. 
HI.  That  they  were  regardkd  as  VERr 

PRBOIOUS  BY  THE  LORD 


Their  names  not  written  in  the  sands  of 
the  desert,  which  would  be  soon  obliterated, 
nor  on  raw  and  rough  material,  but  on  precious 
stones.  The  Lord  esteems  those  as  His 
"Jewels'*^  who  become  His  people. 

IV.  That  they  might  receive  light  and 

DIRECTION  IN  ALL  THEIR  JOURNEYINGS. 

The  Urim  and  Thummim  in  the  breastplate 
would,  in  some  way  unknown  to  ns,  indicate 
the  Divine  will  to  priests  and  people.  The 
precious  stones  of  the  breastplate  may  sug- 
gest the  paradise  lost  by  the  fall,  where  there 
were  gold  and  precious  stones  ;  and  paradise 
regained  by  the  redemption  of  Christ,  where 
precious  stones  abound.  Oar  great  High 
Priest  carries  us,  not  only  on  His  breast,  but 
in  His  heart.  He  remembers,  represents  us, 
pleads  for  us.  Through  His  righteousness 
we  may  hereafter  be  admitted  into  the  holiest 
of  all.  -F,  IV.  B. 

V.  9. —  Theme :  The  holy  crown. 

**  Upon  his  forefront  did  he  put  the  golden 
plate,  the  holy  crown  ;  as  the  Lord  commanded 
Moses." 

Man  is  the  only  creature  whose  forehead 
fronts  the  temple  of  the  sky,  Fittmg  that 
the  head  of  High  Priest,  "the  human  face 
divine,"  should  be  crowned  with  gold  when 
approaching  the  King  of  kings,  and  repre- 
senting Him  among  the  people.  The  gold  band 
upon  the  mitre  shone  like  a  diadem,  caught 
and  reflected  the  glory  of  heaven.  On  it  in 
letters  patent  to  all:  ''  Holiness  to  the  Lord." 
Gold  denotes  preciousness  and  incorruptibility. 
Such  ever  are  the  nature  and  character  of 
Jehovah.  The  holy  crown  upon  the  head  of 
the  High  Priest  implied  — 

I.  That  HE  had  regal  duti  es  to  discharge. 

He  was  in  the  service  of  the  King,  immortal, 
invisible,  the  only  wise  God.  Nothing  he  com- 
manded to  be  performed  could  therefore  bo 
mean  or  unimportant. 

II.  That  he  had  regal  power  to  exer- 
cise. Weak,  like  other  men,  in  himself,  he 
was  a  plenipotentiary,  full  of  power,  because 
of  the  authority  by  which  He  was  commis- 
sioned and  sustained.  Amba8.«tadorsin  councils 
and  courts  are  powerful  on  account  of  the 
Sovereign  and  Realm  they  represent :  so  here. 

III.  That  he  had  regal  dignity  to  sus- 
tain. He,  a  kingly  priest,  would  need  to 
magnify  his  office.  He  was  under  necessity 
to  keep  the  glory  of  the  crown  unsullied.  The 
people  would  look  up  to  Aaron  as  their  ex- 
emplar, as  well  as  mediator.  Every  thought, 
word,  deed  to  be  "Holiness to  the  Lord." 

Here  we  have  a  significant  lype  of  Christ 
our  High  Priest.  He  was  anointed  with  the 
oil  of  gladness  above  His  fellows.  He  is  King 
and  Priest.  Our  great  Intercessor  was  seen 
by  John  (Rev.  xiv.  14,)  '•  having  on  His  head 
a  golden  crown."  Holiness  is  the  crown  and 
glory  of  the  universe  ;  constitutes  the  nature 
and  blessedness  of  God ;  is  the  ultimatum  of 
human  redemptioa  Hohness  and  blessednesi 
are  wedded  together  by  indissoluble  bonds.-^ 
F,  W.  B, 


CHAP.  VIII.  22—36.] 


rilE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 


113 


V.    \2.— Theme:    Sanctification.      "To 

fianctify  him." 

Aaron  was  set  apart  to  his  prand  work,  not 
only  by  lavationa  and  lustrations,  but  by  an- 
nointinija.     This  wouUl  show — 

I.  That  he  was  entirely  dedicated  to 
GODS  SEuviCE.  As  the  oil  was  poured  pro- 
fusely upon  his  head,  it  syunbolised  the  fact 
that  80  readily  and  cheerfully  woul.l  he  pour 
out  bis  life's  best  and  brightest  energies  in 
Jehovah's  service. 

II.  That  he  was  completely  sanctified 
IN  god's  presence. 

As  the  oil  made  the  face  of  Aaron  shine, 
and  he  submitted  to  every  preliminary  in 
conntction  with  his  entry  upon  his  ofl5ce,  he 
would  have  the  inward  witness,  and  give  ocu- 
lar proof,  that  the  needed  preparation  was 
complete. 

Christ,  as  our  great  High  Priest,  "  sanctified 
HimseljT  not  for  His  office  simply,  but  for  the 
Bake  of  His  disciples  ;  and  His  will  is  that 
we  sbould  be  "  sanctified  through  the  truth." 
We  all  need  the  "  unction  of  the  Holy  One," 
sanctitication  by  the  grace  of  Christ,  and  the 
influences  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  fit  us  for  sacred 
service  and  communion  with  the  Lord. — 
F.  W,  B, 

V.  21. — 7"-^^^^ ;  Perfect  SERTICE.  "And 
he  washed  the  inwards,"  etc. 

The  minute  and  strict  directions  given 
respecting  the  offerings  presented  at  the  con- 
Becration  of  the  priests  showed — 

I.  The  need  of  inward  purity.  Man  looks 
only  on  the  outward  appearance;  the  Lord 
looks  upon  the  inward  parts,  and  in  the  hidden 
parts  He  would  have  us  to  know  wisdom. 
The  inv.  ards,  as  well  as  the  legs  of  offering 
were  to  be  cleansed  before  being  presented, 

II.  The  NEiiD  OF  unreserved  surrender. 
The  whole  ram  was  to  be  offered.  This  same 
truth  fully  taught  in  the  holocaust.  The  new 
dispensation  demands  that  we  present  our 
bodies  hving  sacrifices  holy  and  acceptable 
unto  God.  Let  us  seek,  then,  to  please  the 
Lord  and  to  be  accepted  of  Him. — F.  W.  B. 

V.  23. —  Theme:  Living  sacrifices. 

"  And  he  slew  it ;  and  Moses  took,"  etc. 

Aaron  and  his  sons  laying  their  hands 
upon  the  ram  of  consecration,  identified  them 
with  it ;  denoted  their  unqualified  surrender 
to  Jehovah.  The  blood  of  the  victim  being 
put  upon  the  priests'  ears,  hands,  and  feet, 
must  have  been  intended  to  teach  important 
lessons.  The  blood  sprinkled  upon  the  right 
ear,  suggests — 

I.  That  the    priests    werk    to    atten- 

TIVFLY     listen    to    THE    COMMANDS     OF     THE 

LORD.  They  were  not  to  exercise  their  own 
ingenuity  in  forming  precepts,  they  were  not 
to  listen  to  anything  that  would  border  on 
collusion,  or  conspiracy.  Ear-gate  was  ever 
to  be  open  and  ready  to  receive  the  commu- 
nications from  heaven;  was  to  be  kept  sacred 
to  the  Lord.  The  sprinkling  of  blood  upon 
the  thumb  of  the  ri^ht  hand  suggests — 
XL  That  the  priests  were  to  readily 


RECEIVE    THE    COMMANDS    OF   THE  LORD.       The 

hand  is  an  emblem  of  receptivity^  as  well  as 
energy ;  represents  capacity  and  will.  By  it, 
we  distribute  and  receive-  The  hands  of  priests 
would  be  busy  in  offering  sacriKfea,  in  waving 
incense,  in  presenting  prayer.  They  must  be 
therefore  clean  and  consecrated,  ever  ready 
to  present  gifts  to  God  from  the  people,  and 
to  convey  blessings  to  them  from  God  The 
sprinkling  of  blood  upon  the  great  toe  of  the 
right  foot  suggests — 

III.  That  the  priests  werk  to  immedi- 
ately OBEY  THIO  COMMANDS  OF  THE  LORD, 
By  our  feet  we  move  in  the  direction  our 
hearts  prompt  and  lean.  The  feet  of  the 
priests  would  stand  in  the  holy  place,  it  was 
fitting  they  should  be  sanctified. 

Our  great  High  Priest  gave  the  words  to 
His  disciples  that  He  received  from  His 
Father  ;  His  holy  hands  were  ever  busy  doing 
good;  His  "holy  feet,  trod  the  sacred  fields 
of  Palestine  for  our  advantage,"  Let  us  seek 
that  all  our  powers  may  be  sanctified  by  and 
consecrated  to  the  Lord.—  F.  IV,  B. 

V.  27. —  Theme:    Heabty  service. 

"And  he  put  all  upon  Aaron's  hands,"  etc. 

Moses  had  the  honour  of  inducting  Aaron 
to  his  office,  as  well  as  robing  him  for  it. 
Placing  the  offering  upon  the  hands  of  Aaron 
and  his  sons — 

I.  Clearly  indicated  their  work.  Gave 
them  practical  knowledge  of  the  duties  to  be 
prepared. 

II.  Fully  dedicated  thkm  to  their  work. 
Not  only  were  they  sanctified  and  attired  in 
sacerdotal  vestments,  but  really  began  their 
work. 

Waving  the  offering  in  their  hands,  showed — 

I.  The  subordinacy  of  the  priesthood. 
They  were  only  servanta,  with  hands  full  of 
obligations;  they  held  gifts  which  already 
belonged  to  Jehovah  :  of  His  own  they  would 
offer  at  the  altar. 

II.  The  supremacy  of  the  lord.  Them- 
selves, as  well  as  the  offering,  belonged  to 
God  ;  they  stood  before  the  Lord  acknow- 
ledging His  sovereign  claims. 

Let  us  do  the  work  of  the  Lord  with  both 
hands  earnestly.  Our  work  is  {^a^  important 
— requires  both  hands;  (Jb)  great — fills  both 
hands  \{c)  urgent — prompts  both  hands.  Thus 
our  Redeemer  toiled  for  us,  so  let  us  labour 
for  Him.— 7^  W,  B. 

y.  33. —  Theme:  Spven  days'  consfcratioh. 
"  Seven  days  shall  he  consecrate  you." 
The  protracted  period  of  consecration  with- 
in the  tabernacle  would  suggest — 

I.  The  deep  dyed  character  of  sin. 

II.  The  immaculate  purity  of  God. 

III.  Ihe  need  of  patient  preparation  for 
sacred  work. 

IV.  'Ihe  conditions  of  success  in  sacred 
work.—F.  W.  B. 

V.  36. —  'heme:  Exkmplary  obrdifnoh. 
"  So  Aaron  and  his  sons  did  all,"  etc 
Though   many   things    commandad   to   bf 


V4 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON 


[chap.  VIII. 


doDG  seemed  strange  and  unimportant,  yet 
"a//  things*^  -were  done  by  Aaron  and  hfs 
sons  that  the  Lord  directed.     Indicating — 

I.  Willingness  for  the  sfrvic^s  /^  which 
they  were  called.     Thus  they  enjoyed  — 

IT.  Guarantee  of  success  in  the  work 
to  which  they  uere  called. 


FulfiHinor  their  part  of  the  covenant,  the 
Loid  would  fulfil  Hia  part.  Those  who  honour 
the  Lord  He  will  honour.  Through  the  priest- 
hood priceless  blessings  would  be  vouchsafed 
to  Israel;  through  our  Great  Prophet,  Priest, 
and  King,  innumerable  and  inestimable  bless- 
ings came  to  the  world, — F.  fV.  £. 


ILLUSTRATIVE  ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  VIIL 


Priestism. 

'•  Go  forth  and  preach  impostures  to  the 
world, 
But  give  them  truth  to  build  upon." 

— Dante. 

"  The  power  to  bind  and  loose  to  Truth  is 

given, 
The  mouth  that  speaks  it  is  the  mouth  of 

Heaven ; 
The  power  which  in  a  sense  belongs  to  none, 
Thus  understood,  belongs  to  every  one. 

.•••••  •  • 

It  owes  its  high  prerogatives  to  none, 
It  shines yi?^  all,  as  shines  the  blessed  sun; 
It  shines  in  all  who  do  not  shut  it  out 
By  dungeon  doors  of  unbelief  and  doubt. 
To  shine,  it  does  not  ask — 0,  far  from  it — 
For  hierarchal  privilege  and  permit ! 
Rabbi  and  priest  may  be  chained  down  to 

lies 
And  babes  and  sucklings  winged  to  mount 

the  skies." 

— Abraham  Coles  :   The  Evangel. 

"Led  so  grossly  by  this  meddling  priest^ 
Dreading  the  curse  that  money  may  buy  out." 

— King  Johny  III.,  1. 

"  Hateful  to  me,  as  are  the  gates  of  hell, 
Is  he  who,  hiding  one  thing  in  his  heart. 
Utters  another." — Bryant's  Homer's  Iliad. 

•*  O  what  a  godly  outside  falsehood  hath  I" 
Merchant  of  Venice.,  I.,  3. 

*'  Priest,  beware  your  beard ; 
I  mean  to  tug  it,  and  to  cuff  you  soundly ; 
Under  my  feet  I  stamp  thy  cardinal's  hat ; 
In  spite  of  pomp,  or  dignities  of  Church, 
Here  by   thy  cheek   I  drag  thee  up  and 
down." — Henry  F/,  i.,  3. 

Sanctity. 

"  Holiness— as  I  then  wrote  down  soma  of 
my  contemplations  on  it — appeared  to  me  to 
be  of  a  sweet,  calm,  pleasant,  charming,  se- 
rene nature,  which  brought  an  inexpressible 
purity,  brightness,  peacefulness,  ravishment 
to  the  soul ;  in  other  words,  that  it  made  the 
soul  like  a  field  or  garden  of  God,  with  all 


manner  of  pleasant  fruits  and  flowers,  all  de- 
lightful and  undisturbed,  enjoying  a  sweet 
calm  and  the  gentle  vivifying  beams  of  the  sua. 
The  soul  of  a  true  Christian — as  I  then  wrote 
my  meditations  -  appeared  like  such  a  little 
white  flower  as  we  see  in  the  spring  of  the 
year,  low  and  humble  on  the  ground,  opening 
its  bosom  to  receive  the  pleasant  beams  of  the 
sun's  glory  ;  rejoicing,  as  it  were,  in  a  calm 
rapture,  diffusing  around  a  sweet  fragrance, 
standing  peacefully  and  lovingly  in  the  midst 
of  other  flowers  round  about,  all  in  like  man- 
ner opening  their  bosoms  to  drink  in  the  light 
of  the  sun." — Jonathan  Edwards. 

"  A  Christian  should  let  us  see  his  graces 
walking  abroad  in  his  daily  conversation ; 
and,  if  such  guests  are  in  the  house,  they  will 
often  look  out  of  the  window,  and  be  publicly 
peen  abroad  in  all  duties  and  holy  actions.' 
— Gurner. 

"  When  courtiers  come  down  into  the 
country,  the  common  home-bred  people  pos- 
sibly think  their  habits  strange;  but  they  care 
not  for  that.  '  It  is  the  fashion  at  Court.' 
What  need,  then,  have  the  godly  to  be  so 
tender-foreheaded,  to  be  out  of  countenance 
because  the  world  looks  on  holiness  as  a 
singularity  ?  It  is  the  only  fashion  in  the 
highest  Court,  yea,  of  the  King  of  kings  Him- 
self."—6'a//^r. 

"  Inward  holiness  and  eternal  glory  are  the 
crown  with  which  God  dignifies  His  elect. 
But  they  are  not  the  cause  of  the  election.  A 
king  is  not  made  a  king  by  the  royal  robe  he 
wears  and  the  crown  that  encircles  his  brow; 
but  he  therefore  wears  his  robes  and  puts  on 
his  crown  because  he  is  a  king." — Salter, 

"  True  ornaments  to  know  a  holy  man." 

— Richard  dl/.,  iii.,  7. 

"Our  holy  lives  must  win  a  new  world's 
crown." — Richard  II.,  v.,  1. 

"  Holiness  and  happiness  are  always  an  in- 
dissoluble connection  ;  yea,  holiness  is  felicity 
itself." — Alex.  Macworter. 

"  He's  honourable ; 
And,  doubling  that,  most  holy." 

—  Cymbeline^  III.,  4. 


CiiAi-  IX.  1-4.]  TUli   BOOK    OF  LEVITICUS.  115 


CHAPTER  IX. 

|iiau0iii\tl  lUuistri^s  ai  %nxaxu 

SUGGESTIVE    READINGS. 

V.  1.— On  the  eighth  day.  It  was  the  dawn  of  their  Sabbath,  and  followed  a 
week  of  seclusion  within  the  tabernicle,  where  they  had  daily  presented  their 
consecration  offerings.  With  what  solemn  eagerness  they  must  have  anticipated 
this  day  :  the  day  of  their  inauguration  into  their  public  ministry  as  God's  priests 
for  Israel.  Moreover,  the  day  was  to  be  distinguished  by  a  sublime  mduifesta- 
tion  of  '*  the  glory  of  Jehovah  "  unto  them  and  before  the  people.  Such  privileged 
days  enter  into  all  saintly  careers,  fervently  desired,  surpassingly  blessed  :  when 
the  soul  is  led  into  hallowed  spiritual  experiences  and  when  **the  Lord  suddenly 
comes  to  His  temple."     It  intimates  the  truths  that  — 

1.  Preparation  for  sacred  service  ought  to  be  made  in  seclusion  with  thorough- 
ness and  utmost  solemnity. 

2.  Devout  waiting  for  the  Lord  will  in  due  season  be  sealed  with  glad  realisa- 
tions of  Him. 

3.  Entrance  upon  any  sacred  project  or  pursuit  should  be  stayed  until  God  has 
been  sought  in  patient  communion. 

4.  A  ministry  for  God  will  only  be  acceptable  and  effective  as  the  minister 
is  himself  fully  and  spiritually  in  readiness  for  his  "  high  calling." 

That  **  Ufe  hid  with  God  "  is  symbolic  of  the  sacred  separateaess  to  which  the 
Christian  is  called,  and  summons  us  to  like  retirement  from  the  world,  that  we 
may  become  meet  to  render  true  service  as  "  priests  unto  God." 

V.  2.— Take  thee  a  young  calf.  Was  there  in  this  a  calling  Aaron's  sin  to  re- 
membrance ?  Jesus,  as  He  commissioned  Peter  to  his  apostolic  ministry,  called 
his  sin  (of  denying  Him  thrice)  back  to  memory  by  His  thrice  repeated  inquiry, 
"Loyest  thou  MeT'  And  here  Jehovah  recalls  the  calf  idolatry  at  the  base  of 
Sinai;  for  on  no  other  occasion  was  "a  calf"  appointed  for  a  sin  offering.  But 
surely,  in  now  entering  upon  his  high-priesthood,  that  great  occasion  of  sin  should 
be  in  his  mind  to  humble  his  soul  in  the  hour  of  his  exaltation,  and  teach  him 
how  wholly  unmerited  was  the  sacred  honour  into  which  Jehovah  now  admitted 
him.  It  is  well  that  we,  in  hours  of  exalted  privilege,  "look  to  the  hole  from 
which  we  were  digged/'  and  have  our  sins  in  miad,  **  lest  we  be  exalted  above 
measure."  Paul  needed  a  like  restraint.  Human  nature  is  apt  to  become  self- 
satisfied  and  arrogant ;  the  remedy  is  to  see  our  frailty  in  the  light  of  past  follies. 

V.  4. — To  day  the  Lord  will  appear  unto  you.  When  an  appointment  is  made 
to  an  exalted  office  in  the  State,  it  is  accompanied  by  presentation  in  person  to 
the  Sovereign  of  the  realm.  This  was  Aaron's  introduction,  in  his  high  official 
status,  to  the  very  presence  of  Jehovah,  whose  priest  he  was  henceforth  to  be, 
and  in  whose  Regal  presence  he  was  henceforth  to  minister.  The  Shekinah, 
which  had  dwelt  in  the  secresy  of  the  holy  place,  would  that  day  "  shine  forth  " 
in  brightness.  God's  elect  servants  should  behold  His  glory.  It  would  teach 
them  to  serve  with  awe,  and  impress  on  them  the  grandeur  of  their  office  ;  thus 
fostering  reverence  and  circumspection  in  their  ministry.  When  the  like  inci- 
dent occurred  to  Isaiah,  his  spirit  was  utterly  overwhelmed  (Isa.  vi.  5)  ;  and  even 
John  the  beloved  fell  as  one  dead  at  the  feet  of  the  glorified  Jesus  (Rev.  i.  17). 
Blessed  are  they  who  have  had  Paul's  glad  yet  gentler  experience:  *' It  pleased 
God  to  reveal  His  Son  in  mc  "  (Gal.  i.  16).  It  was  then  he  was  designated  tc 
his  apostolic  work ;  and  such  a  vision  calls  us  also  to  a  sacred  life  and  service. 

i2 


n'>  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [oiiap.  ix,  7-24. 


V.  7. — Go  unto  the  altar  .  .  .  make  atonement  tor  thyself.  Installed 
though  Aaron  was  as  hiijh  priest,  he  yet  waitei  the  ?  );mnarid  to  act ;  and  Moses 
stood  to  him  as  God.  Hence  the  words,  "  No  nciao  taketh  this  honour  unto  him- 
self, but  he  that  is  called  of  God,  as  was  Aaron  "  (Heb.  v.  4,  5).  Yet  it  is  well 
that  we  heed  God's  will  in  the  call  addressed  to  us  from  the  demands  and  oppor- 
tunities around  us.  "  Go  unto  the  altar '\'  for  there  is  frequent  occasion  that 
we  approach  the  altar  in  service  for  man  and  sacrifice  to  God. 

Atonement  for  thyself,  and  for  the  people.  The  "people"  were  con- 
cerned in  Aaron's  sin  of  idolatry  ;  "  They  made  the  calf  which  Aaron  made  " 
(Exod.  xxxii.  25) ;  hence  there  was  to  be  an  inclusive  sacrificial  ofFeriuj^  for  both 
Aaron  and  the  people.  But  "  such  an  High  Priest  became  us  who  is  holy,  harm- 
less, undefiled,  separate  from  sinners  .  .  .  who  needeth  not  to  offer  up  sacrifice 
first  for  His  own  sins"  (Heb.  vii.  26,  27). 

V.  15.— The  people's  offering.  This  consisted  of  the  sin  offering,  burnt 
offering,  meat  offering,  and  peace  offering.  It  was  Aaron's  first  mediatorial  ser- 
vice, standing  between  God  and  the  people,  and  propitiating  on  their  behalf. 
From  that  hour  there  never  has  ceased  to  be  an  intercessory  priest ;  nor  shall  the 
priesthood  fail  henceforth  ;  for  "the  word  of  the  oath  has  consecrated  Christ /or 
evermore  "  (Heb  vii.  28).  How  consolatory  and  assuring  the  truth,  that  within 
"the  holy  place  made  without  hands"  our  Lord  unceasingly  presents  the  merits 
of  His  mighty  sacrifice,  and  intercedes  for  all  who  come  to  God  by  Him.  None 
need  fear  neglect,  since  Jesus  assumes  the  gracious  ministry  of  mediation ;  it  is 
the  office  to  which  He  devotes  Himself  now  in  heaven  :  '*  He  ever  liveth  to  make 
intercession  for  us."  And  as  His  sacrificial  death  on  the  cross  was  not  for  Him- 
self, but  for  mankind,  He  still  presents  •'  the  people's  offering."  But  He 
"  needeth  not  daily  "  to  renew  the  sacrifice  Aaron's  duty  was  to  maintain  with 
undeviating  regularity  and  recurrence  the  burnt  sacrifice  of  the  morning  (verse 
17);  type  of  the  enduring  virtue  of  Jesus'  atouement  day  unto  day,  till  time 
shall  be  no  more. 

V.  22.— Aaron  lifted  up  his  hand  toward  the  people.  Sacrifices  completed, 
Aaron  now,  with  hands  upraised,  pronounced  his  first  priestly  blessing  upon 
Israel.  The  very  words  of  the  blessing  were  ordered  by  Jehovah  :  "Speak  unto 
Aaron,  and  unto  his  sons,  saying,  On  this  wise  ye  shall  bless  the  children  of  Israel, 
saying  unto  them  :  The  Lord  bless  thee  and  keep  thee :  the  Lord  make  His  face 
shine  upon  thee,  and  be  gracious  unto  thee  :  the  Lord  lift  up  His  countenance 
upon  thee,  and  give  thee  peace  "  (Numb.  vi.  23-26). 

So  Jesus,  His  sacrifice  finished,  "  lifted  up  His  hands  and  blessed  "  His 
Church  ;  and  "  it  came  to  pass,  while  He  blessed  them.  He  was  parted  from  them, 
and  carried  up  into  heaven  "  (Luke  xxiv.  50,  51) ;  whence  still  and  unceasingly  that 
unBnished  act  of  blessing  goes  on,  and  its  sacred  gladness  and  peace  come  down 
perpetually  upon  an  adoring  Church. 

V.  23. — Moses  and  Aaron  went  into  the  tabernacle.  The  last  entrance  for 
Moses,  the ^r5^  for  Aaron;  and  it  marked  the  moment  for  transmitting  the 
priestly  duties  from  the  younger  to  the  elder  brother.  Surely  they  bowed  the 
knee  together  when  within  that  "  secret  place  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  Most  High," 
and  sought  on  each  other's  behalf  the  succour  and  grace  of  God  for  the  onerous 
responsibilities  of  their  Divine  service.  Beautiful  the  thought  of  such  hidden 
prayer  by  two  brothers,  ere  they  "  came  out "  to  their  high  and  holy  ministries. 

V.  24. — There  came  a  fire  out  from  before  the  Lord.  Forth  from  the 
effulgent  "glory"  cloud  (verse  23)  sprang  living  flames  on  to  the  altar,  and  the 
smouldering  sacrifice  was  quickly  consumed  by  miraculous  fire.  This  fire  was 
jealously  maintained  ;  it  went  not  out  by  day  or  night :  it  burned  always  as  the 
symbol  of  Jehovah's  sanction  upon  the  altar  presentations,  and  His  acceptance  of 
those  who  offered  them. 

When  the  people  saw,  they  fell  on  their  faces.     "  Blessed  are  they  who  have 


CHaP.  IX.  1-4.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  117 


not  seen,  and  yet  have  believpd  " ;  for  sfill  "  the  Lord  iR  in  His  holy  temple," 
though  the  shekin;ih  is  nof  visible.  "0  come,  let  us  worship  and  bovv  down  ; 
let  us  kneel  before  the  Lord  our  Maker  :  for  He  is  our  God  "  (Paa.  xcv.  6,  7). 


SEOriONAL     HOMILIES. 
Topic:  Entering  upon  Priestly  Wohk  (Vv.    1,  2). 

**0n  the  eighth  day  Moses  called  x\aron  and  his  sons,  and  said  unto  Aaron, 
Take  thee  a  ^oung  calf  for  a  sin  offering,  and  a  ram  for  a  burnt  offering^,  and 
offer  them  before  the  Lord." 

A  train  of  solemn  rites  preceded  the  priests'  admission  to  their  functions.  The 
entrance-path  was  long  and  holy.  None  might  draw  near  uncalled,  uncleansed — 
without  atonement  made  through  blood,  without  the  sprinklings  of  anointing 
oil  (chap.  viii.   6,  24,  30). 

Through  a  whole  week  the  victims  died,  and  consecrating  services  went  on.  Dur- 
ing those  days  the  sacred  tent  enclosed  the  devoted  baud.  They  might  not  pass  its 
separating  gate.  The  world  was  left.  A  barrier  parted  them  from  commou  life. 
They  dwelt,  shut  out  from  man,  shut  in  with  God. 

I.  There  is  a  rightful  path  by  which  god's  ministers  reach  their 
Bached  office. 

Called  ;  cleansed  ;  consecrated. 

II.  Preparation  completed  :  the  holy  office  is  assumed. 

"  On  the  eighth  day  "  service  commenced  in  fulness.  Life  is  now  one  cloud  of 
incense  to  the  Lord.  From  morn  till  night  the  willing  pnosta  discharge  fore- 
shadowing forms. 

III.  In  the  christian  ministry  the  priestly  symbols  are  realised. 
Altars  no  more  are  raised  :  victims  no  longer  die  :   all   vanished  in  the  Cross. 

No  lights  now  are  lighted,  no  incense  burns  :  twilight  ordinances  fled  when  the 
Sun  of  Righteousness  arose.  Yet  still  wide  fields  of  labour  open  :  and  grand 
facts  are  to  be  set  forth  by  your  ministry.  Your  life  is  to  proclaim  the  Lamb  of 
God,  the  blood  once  and  for  ever  shed.  Your  voice  must  never  cease  the  cry — 
Behold  this  truth  ;  bathe  in  this  stream  ;  trust  in  this  death  ;  plead  this  atoning 
Cross. 

Shame  would  it  be  if  legal  priests  relaxed  not  typifying  work,  and  your  hands 
wearied  in  uplifting  the  grand  substance— Christ.  [Compare  *'  Christ  is  all"  By 
Dean  of  Gloucester.] 

[See  Addenda,  p.  127,  Ministerial  Dedication.^ 

Topic:  Sacrificial  Preparation  for  Jehovah's  Appearing  (Vv.  2-4) 

"  Take  thee  a  sin  offering,  a  burnt  offering,  peace  offerings,  to  sacrifice  before 
the  Lord  ;  and  a  meat  offering  ;  for  to  day  the  Lord  wilt  appp.ar  unto  you." 

Who  would  see  God  1  Lot  the  soul  make  ready.  To  wUom  will  God  show 
Himself?     They  who  make  ready  by  sacrifices. 

I.  To  see  the  lord  demands  spiritual  preparkdness  in  man. 

1.  For  man  \,omeet  God  luitkout  readiness  would  entail  on  him  terror  and  death. 

2.  But  man  may  meet  God  with  readiness^  prep  i red  even  to  behold  His  glory. 

3.  When  man  meets  God  thus  prepared,  the  meeting  is  propitious  and  privileged. 
II.  Sacrificial  MERITS  prepare  man  for  searching  manifestations  of  god. 
I.  By  effecting  the  coiaplete  removal  of  kin  sin  (by  Sin  offering)  and  therefore 

cancelling  his  condemnation. 


US  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  ix.  7 


)■> 


2  By  presenting  an  offering  ^f  self  deindiori  (Burnt  offering),  and  th'^reby  nppeas- 
'nj'  the  Divine  favour. 

3.  By  conciliatory  acts  of  pr(^piriation  (Pence  offering),  thus  removing  all 
estrangement. 

4.  By  covenanted  communion  with  God  (Meat  offering)  ;  fellowship  with  God  in 
the  sacrificial  feast. 

When  Jehovah  meets  a  soul  thus  "made  nigh"  by  sacrificial  merit,  not  only 
is  there  "no  condemnation,"  but  "access  unto  grace"  is-assured,  and  even  *'joy 
in  God."     [Compare  Rom.  v.  1,  2,  11.] 

III.  Amid  most    glorious    divine    manifestation    the  soul   prepared   by 

SACRIFICE    stands    FEARLKSS  AND    BLEST. 

1.  Revelations  of  God  come  now  to  privileged  souls  :  and  are  ^^  times  of  ref resil- 
ing" 

2.  The  unveilings  of  death,  which  will  bring  the  soul  to  God's  clear  presence, 
will  not  terrify  the  believer:  it  will  be  '"  far  better  ^ 

3.  The  Lord's  appearance  '*  in  great  glory  "  at  the  judgment  will  be  welcomed 
with  joyous  acclaim,  by  those  who  "look  for  His  appearing." 

4.  And  in  the  splendour  of  heaven,  the  ransomed  hosts  will  stand  without 
rebuke;  realising  in  God's  presence  "  fulness  of  joy."  [See  Addenda,  p.  128, 
Nearness  to  God.^ 

Topic:  Consecration  a  Qualification  for  Action  (Vv.  7-22). 

Between  the  records  of  this  and  the  preceding  chapter  there  is  a  striking 
contrast. 

(a)  The  cleansing  and  adornment  of  the  priests — in  which  the  priests  them- 
selves took  no  active  part — represent  the  truth  that  the  soul,  in  being  made 
ready  for  sacred  office  and  sanctuary  privilege,  is  a  passive  recipient  of  grace 
which  flows  from  God  through  Christ  our  mediator. 

As  with  Aaron  and  his  sons,  so  with  Joshua  (Zach.  iii.  3-5)  ;  all  investiture 
with  purity  and  dignity  was  wrought /or  them  not  by  them.  We  do  not  make 
ourselves  clean,  do  not  consecrate  ourselves  priests.  All  is  of  grace,  derived 
from  Christ. 

{h)  Our  complete  consecration  and  equipment  for  privileged  relationship  and  a 
life  of  near  access  with  God,  are  preparatory  for  a  career  of  service.  [See 
Addenda  p.  128,  Spiritual  Benefactors,'] 

I.  Consecrated  soids  are  called  to   serve  in  the  power  of  the  grace  they 

HAVE    RbCEIVED. 

1.  New  energies  are  imparted  to  the  soul  on  which  the  grace  of  Christ  rests. 
**  We  are  His  workmanship,  created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works  "  (Eph.  ii.  10). 

2.  New  qualifications  are  bestown  upon  the  soul  for  a  life  of  sacred  service. 
*' When  thou  art  converted,  strengthen  thy  brethren  "  (Luke  xxii.  32),  "Go 
stand  and  speak  in  the  temple  to  the  people  all  the  words  of  this  life  "  (Act  v.  20). 
"  Let  him  that  heareth  say  come"  (Rev.  xxii.  17).  '*  Maketh  manifest  the  savour 
of  His  knowledge  by  us  in  every  place"  (2  Cor.  ii.  14). 

3.  New  inspirations  animate  the  life  thus  divinely  enriched.  "  The  love  of 
Christ  constraineth  us"  (2  Cor.  v.  14).  "They  which  live  should  not  henceforth 
live  unto  themselves, but  unto  Him  who  died  for  them  and  rose  again"  (2 Cor. v.  15). 

II.  They  who  have  received  gra^e  are  required  to  expend  their  redeemed 

LIVES  IN    SACRED  MINISTRIES   FOR  OTHERS. 

1.  The  virtue  of  sacrifice  is  not  exhausted  in  consecrating  us  who  are  made 
priests  in  Christ. 

2.  Sacrificial  merits  avail  for  the  people  among  whom  we  are  to  serve  as  priests 
In  ofifices  helpful  to  their  salvation. 


CHAP.  IX.  22]  THE   BOOK  OF    LEVITiruS.  119 


3.   The  peculiar  sphere  of  Christian    thon<^ht   and    action  is  defined  — carrying 
to  others  the  blessings  of  altar  sacrifice.    For  priestly  service  now,  as  with  Aaron 
is  all  associated  with  tha  sacrifice. 

III.  Consecration  and  service  are  thb  two  sacred  seals  and  guarantees 

OF  A  PUIVILEGKD  CHRISTIAN  LIFE. 

1.  Merely  to  dwell  apart  from  mpn  as  being  ourselves  consecrated  souls,  of  a 
higher  sanctity  and  more  heavenly  calling  than  the  people,  is  to  miss  the  end  for 
which  we  were  "called  of  God  as  was  Aaron." 

2.  Equally  so,  to  toil  in  service  thereby  to  gain  assurance  of  our  acceptance  with 
God,  is  to  fulfil  the  duties  and  carry  the  burdens  of  the  priesthood  forgetful  of 
the  derived  and  sufficient  grace  of  Christ  for  ourselves. 

3.  Sanctity  and  service  :  sanctity  derived,  and  service  rendered  ;  these  form  the 
blended  credentials  of  our  hallowed  priestly  life,  our  blessed  relationship  to  God, 
and  they  afford  us  the  full  guarantee  of  sufficiency  for  and  success  in  our  minis- 
tries for  man. 

Topic:  A  Solemn  Benediction  (V.  22). 

"And  Aaron  lifted  up  his  hand  towards  the  people  and  blessed  them." 

It  would  be  an  act  of  presumption  in  a  man  to  assume  the  part  of  blessing 
others  if  he  were  not  himself  occupying  a  superior  spiritual  altitude  to  those  he 
blessed. 

I.  In  the  relations  of  men  to  Jehovah  tJiere  are  those  who  attain  a  higher  life 
OF  privilege  and  of  power. 

The  high  priest  alone  was  empowered  to  bless.  His  was  a  spiritual  elevation 
above  the  priests. 

1.  Conscious  nearness  to  God  is  not  equally  attained  by  all, 

2.  Sacred  power  from  God  is  not  equally  derived  by  all. 

II.  Hidden  fellowship  with  jehovah  is  the  source  of  exalted  qualifica- 
tion, the  spring  o/ beneficent  spiritual  power. 

Aaron  had  spent  solemn  seasons  during  the  seven  days  enclosed  within  the 
tabernacle.  It  nerved  his  heart  for  his  high  task,  it  gave  him  assurance  as  he 
assumed  the  high  function  of  blessing  the  people  in  Jehovah's  name.  But  after 
that  official  act,  he  went  into  more  intimate  fellowship  and  prayer  with  God 
(v.  23);  and  when  he  came  forth,  he  again  "blessed  the  people."  It  was  the 
act  of  one  whose  soul  was  full  of  conscious  power,  to  whom  it  was  no  Uni^er  an 
official  trust  and  duty  to  bless,  but  a  delight  and  privilege ;  it  was  the  outflowing 
of  a  soul  all  ardent  and  adoring. 

1.  Blessings  can  only  flow  from  a  soul  itself  rich  in  the  affluence  of  blessedness. 

2.  Affluence  of  blessedness  can  only  be  won  by  the  most  intimate  commuaion 
with  the  L9rd. 

III.  They  who  live  an  elevated  spiritual  life  are  rich  benefactors  to 
A  sinful  world. 

1.  They  draw  power  from  God  which  does  not  rest  unused,  but  goes  forth  in 
blessing  others. 

2.  They  exert  salutary  and  saving  energy  among  men,  by  which  earthly  life  is 
sweetened,  and  spiritual  health  is  imparted,  and  Christian  peace  is  bestown. 

3.  Their  very  prayers,  unheedel  as  factors  of  good,  win  daily  benediction  from 
heaven  on  many  hearts  and  homes. 

4.  As  a  daily  influence  in  society  such  elevated  souls  shed  a  benign  grace, 
making  social  circles  purer,  kinder,  less  selfish  and  sinful,  more  gentle,  peaceful, 
and  Christian. 

5.  In  all  their  active  ministries  for  Christ  they  are  potent  for  good.  The^ 
cannot  *'lift  up  their  hands  towards  the  people"  but  gracious  results  ensue. 

Thus  should  every  Christian  seek  to  be  a  "  light  of  the  world,"  "  icdt  in  the 


120  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  ix.  23,  24 

3arth."  Therefore  let  each  (a)  live  a  life  of  nearest  intercourse  with  the  Lord; 
a'*  life  hid  with  Christ  in  God";  (b)  fulfil  the  solemn  o&Lce  of  gracious  inter- 
cessors for  men;  winning  blessings  by  secret  prajers. 

"  But  that  from  us  aught  should  ascend  to  heaven 
So  prevalent  as  to  concern  the  mind 
Of  God  high  blest,  or  to  incline  His  will, 
Hard  to  belief  may  seem  :  Yet  //?is  will  prayer^ — Miltotu 

"  More  things  are  wrought  by  prayer 
Than  this  world  dreams  ©f.     Wherefore,  let  thy  voice 
Rise  like  a  fountain  for  me  night  and  day." — Tennyson. 

"  Prayer  ardent  opens  heaven,  lets  down  a  stream 
Of  glory  on  the  consecrated  hour 
Of  man,  in  audience  with  the  Deity." — Young. 
[See  Addenda,  p.  128,  Spiritual  Benefactors,'] 

Topic :  Within  the  Secret  of  God's  Tabernacle  (Vv.  23,  24.). 

"  And  Moses  and  Aaron  went  into  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,"  etc. 

In  this  first  day  of  priestly  work  a  fact  of  significance  occurs.  When  all  the 
offerings  had  been  duly  made,  Moses  and  Aaron  seek  t  ie  holy  tent.  For  a 
short  season  they  retire.  They  leave  the  busy  scene.  It  is  their  wish  in  still- 
ness to  seek  God's  clearer  face.  He  was  before  them  in  the  public  rite ;  but 
calm  retreat  would  give  them  more  calm  approach. 

I.  The  Christian  servant  labours  in  open  scenes. 

In  busy  haunts  of  busy  men  he  strains  the  toiling  nerve.  The  world  is  the 
wide  field.  There  are  the  precious  souls  which  need  the  wholesome  warning 
and  the  faithful  word.  There  sin  abounds,  and  misery  dwells,  and  ignorance 
spreads  its  blinding  veil.  There  Satan  rules  with  dreadful  sway.  In  this  wild 
waste  the  good  seed  must  be  sown.  Amid  graceless  crowds  grace  must  be  man- 
fully displayed.     But — 

II    Private  hours  gain  strength  for  public  zeal. 

When  all  is  still  the  opening  heavens  pour  down  their  dew.  In  quietude  the 
soul  draws  nearer  to  Christ's  arms.  Then  tender  whispers  testify  of  love ;  then 
truth  unfolds  the  wondrous  page  ;  then  promises  assume  substantial  form  ;  then 
distant  prospects  brighten  to  the  view.  It  is  when  apart  from  men  that  grace 
takes  deeper  root,  temptations  wither,  the  world's  false  glitter  fades,  the  inner 
man  is  strengthened  to  resist,  and  loins  ^re  girded  for  the  battle  field.  The 
soldier  of  the  cross  goes  forth  from  solitude  to  fight  his  fight.  He  who  seeks 
God  alone  has  God  in  public  by  his  side. 

III.  Communion  with  god  enriches  the  soul  with  precious  grace.' 

Grace  for  others.  Moses  and  Aaron  soon  return  ;  but  they  come  not  with 
empty  hands  ;  they  are  enriched  with  the  best  gifts.  Here  is  beautiful  evidence 
of  gainful  commerce  with  the  Lord.  Laden  with  good,  they  haste  to  scatter 
good  around.     Their  souls  are  redolent  of  heaveu  ;  "  they  blessed  the  people." 

The  blessed  of  the  Lord  bless  earth.  And  they  are  the  most  blessed  who  seek 
the  mercy-seat.  The  wise,  the  rich,  the  learned,  and  the  strong,  are  tools 
employed  by  God  to  move  the  world's  machine,  but  it  is  piety  which  strews  real 
weal  on  men.  They  who  descend  from  Ziou's  heights  are  as  the  clouds  which 
drop  refreshing  rain. — '^Christ  is  aU.^'    [See  Addenda,  p.  128,  Nearer  to  God.] 

Topic :  The  Priests'  Entrance  upon  their  Office  (Vv.  1-7). 

At  the  close  of  the  seven  days'  consecraMon  service  in  the  court  of  the  taber- 
nncle,  the  priests  entered  publicly  upon  their  office,  began  their  holy  and  solemn 


CHAP.  IX.  1—7.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  121 

work.  On  the  eighth  day,  Moses  called  Aarou  and  his  sons,  and  the  elders  of 
Israel,  and  gave  directions  how  the  sacrifioal  services  of  the  tabernacle  were  to 
be  inaugurated.  The  rites  of  consecration  were  to  culminate  in  a  public  declara- 
tion and  recognition,  in  the  presence  of  Israel  and  the  Lord.  On  this  occasion 
Aaron  and  his  four  sons  were  to  slay  the  victims  to  be  ottered  ;  and  the  ceremony 
was  of  the  most  imposing  character.  As  Aaron  and  his  sons  came  forth  from 
their  seclusion  at  the  call  of  Moses,  they  appeared  in  vestments  which  were  a 
visible  expression  of  the  offices  they  held,  and  an  outward  sign  of  the  poA'er  and 
authority  with  which  they  had  been  invested.  Moses  here  transfers  the  office  he 
had  held  to  Aaron,  and  declares  that  he  does  so  at  the  command  of  the  Lord. 
Aaron  was  now  to  speak  to  the  people  as  the  oracle  of  God  to  man,  and  the 
mouthpiece  of  man  to  God.  As  the  people  saw  the  high  priest  ascend  the  altar 
steps  for  the  first  time,  they  would  recognise  the  person  through  whom  hence- 
forth they  would  draw  near  to  heaven.      We  notice  : 

I.  That  the  installation  of  Aaron  and  his  sons  to  the  office  of  the  priesthood^  was 

SOLEMNIZED  BY  THK  PRKSENTATION  OF  SYMBOLIC  SACKIFICES  TO  THB  LOKD. 

Although  the  consecration  service  had  extended  over  seven  days,  and  had  been 
most  searching  and  complete,  though  the  high  priest  had  been  washed,  anointed 
and  clothed  with  gorgeous  and  spotless  apparel,  crowned  with  the  mitre  which 
displayed  in  pure  gold  the  words,  "  Holiness  unto  the  Lord  ";  although  appointed 
sacrifices  had  been  presented  during  those  seven  secluded  days ;  yet,  when 
the  consecrated  priest  and  his  sons  came  forth  to  begin  their  duties,  it  is  neces- 
sary that  additional  sacrifices  be  offered  before  they  can  perform  any  acceptable 
service  for  the  people. 

This  showed  that  the  priests,  after  all  consecrating  ceremenies,  were  (I )  not  perfect 
men,  that  they  were  compassed  about  with  infirmity,  and  that  for  them  as  with 
the  rest  of  the  people  forgiveness  and  cleansing  from  sin  must  be  sought  of  God. 
False  religions  lift  the  priesthood  above  human  faultiness  and  infirmity,  and 
invest  those  who  officiate  at  the  altar  with  superhuman  privilege  and  power.  In 
the  Levitical  economy  this  error  was  not  committed,  and  it  is  one  of  the  dis- 
tinguishing works  of  the  divinity  of  the  old  dispensation  that  the  imperfections 
of  the  best  of  men  are  acknowledged  as  demanding  repentance  and  forgiveness. 

(2)  The  priests  of  the  Levitical  economy  were  not  perfect  types  of  Christ;  for 
He  was  "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from  sinners." 

The  order  of  the  sacrifices  ofi'ered  on  the  first  day  of  the  official  service  of  the 
priests,  shows  the  progressive  steps  by  which  we  approach  unto,  and  find  accept- 
ance with  God.  (a)  The  sin  offering  suggests  that  first  there  must  be  forgiveness  of 
sin,  the  barrier  must  be  removed  which  separates  between  the  soul  and  its 
Maker.  (6)  7%e  burnt  offering  suggests  that  pardon  having  been  procured, 
there  must  be  complete  consecration  to  Him  who  has  mercifully  forgiven,  (c)  The 
peace  offering  suggests  devotion  of  the  life  to  the  Lord,  the  enjoyment  of  union 
and  communion  with  Kim,  and  constant  communications  from  Him.  These 
sacritices  were  to  be  presented  in  the  presence  of  the  people,  at  the  command  of, 
and  unto  the  Lord.  Though  set  apart  to  the  holiest  service,  no  man  is  perfectly 
pure.  No  acceptable  service  can  be  rendered  to  God  except  by  persons  who 
have  been  pardoned  and  prepared.  The  clear  statements  in  the  New  Testament  of 
the  perfect  purity  of  Christ,  and  the  evidence  we  have  that  those  statements  are 
correct,  furnish  conclusive  proofs  that  He  was  infinitely  superior  to  the  Aaronic 
priesthood ;  that — unlike  them — He  was  not  even  "  tLe  best  of  men,"  but  was 
God-man  "  God  manifest  in  the  flesh." 

II.  That  the  installation  of  Aaron  and  his  sons  to  the  ojjice  of  the  priesthood  wets 

SIGNALISED  BY  THE  MANIFESTATION    OF  THE    PRESBNCri    OF    TUB    LOKD. 

What  Moses  had  done  and  commanded  with  respect  to  the  tabernacle  and  its 
services,  had  been  by  the  authority  of  the  Lord.  He  had  received  authority 
not  only  respecting  the  sacrifices  to  be  offered,  but  also  to  announce  that  follow- 


r22  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  ix.  7—21 


ing  the  presentation,  the  Lord  Himself  would  make  Himself  known,  and  reveal 
His  ^lory.  The  offerings  were  to  be  presented  "before  the  Lord,"  and  He 
would  give  open  demonstration  that  He  both  saw  and  approved.  He  would 
show  His  regard  for  their  oV)edient  worship,  by  manifesting  His  glorious  presence. 
In  all  our  ai;ts  of  worship,  in  every  service  we  present  to  the  Lord,  we  shall 
derive  inspiration  and  stimuhis  by  remembering  {a)  His  commandments  ;  {b)  His 
presence;  (c)  His  promises.  He  crowns  the  well  doing  of  earth  with  His  own 
eternal''  well  done!"  But  those  who  are  faithless  and  despise  His  Word  shall  be 
covered  with  shame  and  everlasting  contempt. — F.  W.  B. 

Topic :  Aaron's  first  Offering  for  Himself  (Vv.  7-14). 

What  unquestioning  obedience  Aaron  yielded  to  the  will  of  the  Lord,  as  made 
known  through  Moses !  for  we  read,  "  Aaron  went  therefore  unto  the  altar,  and 
slew  the  calf  of  the  sin  offering,  which  was  for  himself."  The  ritual  is  the  same 
as  that  in  chap,  iv.,  except  that  the  blood  is  not  brought  inno  the  sanctuary. 
Holiness  without  which  no  man  can  see  the  Lord,  could  only  be  typically 
attained  by  the  Levitical  priesthood. 

1.  The  offerings  presented  by  Aaron  for  himself  show  that  his  priesthood 
WOULD  BE  ACCEPTED  He  could  uot  have  drawu  near  to  God  acceptably  for  others, 
had  there  I  een  any  unforgiveu  guilt  resting  upon  him.  The  three  offerings  he 
prebented  fully  satisfied  the  Divine  claims,  and  placed  him  in  a  position  of  ac- 
ceptance and  communion ;  so  that  he  could  represent  the  interests  of  the  people 
in  The  presence  of  Jehovah.  God  would  be  well  pleased  with  arrangements  He 
had  Himself  made. 

IL  7V/e  offerings  presented  by  Aaron  for  himself  showed  that  he  was  compassed 
BY  iNFiRMiTiiiS.  This  lessou  respecting  the  servants  of  the  Lord,  chosen  and  ap- 
pointed to  wait  upon  Him  for  His  o^vn  glory  and  the  best  interests  of  men,  is 
continually  presenting  itself  through  the  s acred  scriptures.  Aaron  had  sin  that 
needed  to  be  forgiven,  there  was  natural  enmity  in  his  mind  that  needed  to  be 
slain.  It  was  a  humbling  thing  for  Aarou  to  proceed,  arrayed  in  his  splendid 
sacerdotal  garments,  upon  which  the  people  looked  with  awe  and  wonder,  to  slay 
the  calf  that  was  appointed  for  sacrifice,  and  to  offer  it  for  his  own  sins.  The 
calf  would  probably  remind  him  of  his  great  sin  in  making  a  golden  calf  for  the 
people  to  worship  while  Moses  was  up  in  the  mount.  Any  pride  of  heart,  or 
presumption  of  mind,  would  now  be  checked  by  a  public  acknowledgment  of  his 
sins  and  need  of  pardon,  though  chosen  and  lifted  to  so  high  and  holy  an  office. 

III.  IVte  offerings  presented  by  Aaron  for  himself  show  that  a  greater  offering 

MUST  HAVE    BEEN  TYPIFIED,  BY  VIRTUE    OF    WHICH  THESE  WERE   ACCEPTED.       All  the 

washings,  anointings,  offerings,  and  attirings  of  the  seven  consecration  days  h  id 
not  sufficed  to  make  the  priests  pure  and  holy  ;  and  one  offering  now  is  not 
enough  to  make  the  ceremony  complete;  nor  are  the  three  that  are  now  offered 
final.  None  of  these  could  make  the  comers  thereunto  perfect,  they  had  only 
temporary  and  typical  value.  Our  High  Priest's  offering  of  Himself  was  accepted. 
He  is  therefore  able  to  save  all  who  come  unto  God  by  Him.  He  made  no  offer- 
ing for  Himself,  for  He  had  no  sins  to  own,  no  guilt  to  atone  for.  His  sacrifice 
is  final,  for  by  one  offering  He  hath  perfected  for  ever  them  that  are  sanctified. 
Tasting  death  for  every  man,  no  other  offering  is  needed  by  noLan,  and  no  other 
can  be  accepted  by  God. — F.  W.  B, 

Topic:  Aaron's  Offbrinqs  for  the  People  (Vv.    15-21). 

In  these  offerings  for  the  people,  the  people  were  led  to  express  their  desire 
for  forgiveness  and  their  complete  consecration  to  the  service  of  Jehovah.    They 


cn\p.  IX.  22,  23.]  Tf^E  IIOOK   OF  LEVITICUS.  123 

bad  asked  for  some  one  to  go  propitiously  between  tbem  and  God  ;  tbeir  request 
bad  been  granted,  their  offerings  are  taken  by  Aaron  and  presented  to  tbe  Lord 
for  tbem.     By  such  an  arrangement,  botb  priests  and  people  were  taught — 

I.  That  thky  stood  on  a  common  moral  equality  before  god.  The  elec- 
tion of  persons  to  eminent  positions  and  distinguished  service  did  not  imply 
that  they  were  the  favourites  of  heaven,  exempted  from  responsibility,  or  from 
moral  blame.  The  priests  were  under  the  same  moral  obligations  with  those 
for  whom  they  officiated  at  the  altar ;  and  had  to  seek  acceptance  in  the  same 
wai/^  of  the  God  who  alone  can  forgive  sins. 

II.  That  they  both  needed  pardon  from,  before  they  could  have  peace 
WITH,  god.  a  condition  of  sinfulness  unrepented  and  unforgiven  is  a  condition 
of  rebellion  and  hostility.  And,  as  two  cannot  walk  together  except  they  agree, 
so  God  and  man  cannot  commune  together  except  strife  and  variance  cease. 
Both  people  and  priests,  after  acknowledgment  of,  and  atonement  for  sin,  could 
draw  near  to  God,  and  enjoy  friendship  and  fellowship  with  Him. 

III.  That  they  were  both  expected  to  render  implicit  and  complete 
obedience  to  god.  Priests  and  people  had  to  do  what  Moses  commanded,  and 
he  only  commanded  what  God  enjoined.  Jehovah  alone  was  the  source  of 
authority  and  power  in  the  commonwealth  and  theocracy  of  Israel.  The  way 
by  which  God  comes  to  man  is  by  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  and  the  blood  must 
be  applied  according  to  His  own  will  and  pleasure.  The  most  minute  details 
had  to  be  carried  out,  which  would  test  the  faith,  as  well  as  the  obedience  of  the 
worshippers.     The  Word  of  the  Lord  was,  ^^  Do  and  live.^' 

Under  the  Gospel  dispensation,  and  around  the  cross  of  Christ,  all  men  meet 
on  a  level  morally;  and  none  are  saved  except  through  faith  in  His  Name. 
Being  pardoned  and  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God  through  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  But,  "no  cross  no  crown."  Faith  and  works  must  go 
together,  we  are  saved  by  faith,  but  faith  without  works  is  dead.  What  God 
hath  joined  together  let  no  man  put  asunder.  Christ  enjoins  obedience  to  His 
commandments,  as  well  as  faith  in  His  Name. — F.  W.  B. 

Topic:  Blessing  the  People  (Vv.  22,  23). 

How  earnestly  Aaron  entered  upon  his  solemn  and  responsible  work  !  Having 
presented  the  required  sacrifices,  prompted  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  he  pro- 
nounced his  benediction  upon  the  people.  Descending  the  sloping  side  of  the 
altar  Moses  conducted  him  into  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  to  finally  in- 
struct him  in  his  duties.  On  returning,  Aaron  blessed  the  people,  for  this  was 
to  be  the  outcome  of  all  the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  Levitical  economy  : 
blessing  from  the  Lord. 

The  people  were  not  only  prepared  for  a  holy  and  lofty  mission  by  the  strict 
•lud  searching  discipline  of  the  Levitical  ritual,  but  they  were  initiated  unto 
■slementary  knowledge  of  spiritual  truths,  and  introduced  into  the  possession  of 
priceless  spiritual  blessings.  The  sacrifices  themselves  had  no  virtue  or  power 
to  bless,  but  they  were  the  tests  of  the  people's  faith  and  obedience  ;  appointed 
and  approved  means  by  which  the  demands  of  God's  law  were,  for  that  age  of  the 
world,  satisfactorily  met.  God  favourably  regarded  the  relation  into  which  Israel 
had  been  brought,  and  His  blessing  descended  upon  the  people  when  Aaron 
outspread  his  hands  Aaron's  act  foreshadowed  the  work  of  Him  who  was  to 
come,  and  in  whom  all  nations  would  be  blessed.  When  the  sacrifices  had  been 
offered  the  l)lessing  fell  on  the  people,  denoting  that  God  was  satisfied  with 
obedience  to  His  commandments ;  and  typifying  the  greater  benediction  of  our 
High  Priest,  as  from  the  most  holy  place  lie  dispenses  His  blessings  upon  tha 
hearts  of  men. 


124  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  ix.  22,  23 


In  the  act  of  Aaron  blessing  the  people  we  observe — 

I.  The  recognition  o/ man's  greatest  need,  t;i2'.,  god's  blessing.     By  sin  man 
had  incurred  the  Divine  displeasure  ;  had  fled  from  the  Divine  presence  ;  his 
mind  had  become  carnal  and  alienated  from  God.     The  mercy  of  God  could  not 
let  man  perish  ;  His  justice  demanded  an  atonement,  in  order  that  reconciliation 
and  resloration'might  be  effected.     Divinely  appointed  substitutionary  sacrifices 
satisfied  the  claims  of  Divine  justice  for  the  time  being  ;  and,  through  them, 
friendship  and   communion  with  God   were  enjoyed.     Man,  as  the  offspring  of 
God    could  not   be    happy  without  God,  without  his  reconciled  presence,  and 
paternal  benediction.     The  needed  blessing  was  promised,  if  only  the  needed  con- 
ditions for  its  bestowment  were  observed.     In  these  incidents,  the  preliminaries 
were  completed ;  and  Aaron,  with  the  sanction  and  smile  of  Heaven,  came  forth 
and  blessed  the  people.     Probably,  the  formulary  employed  was  that  recorded  in 
Num   vi.,  23  27,  or  Ps.  xc,  17  ;  words  which  the  Lord  commanded  Aaron  and  his 
sons    to 'use,    ''The  Lord   bless     thee,  and    keep  thee;   the  Lord  make  His 
face  to  shine    upon  thee  and    be   gracious  unto  thee ;   the  Lord  lift    up    His 
countenance  upon  thee,  and  give  thee  peace."     "  And  let  the  beauty  of  the  Lord 
our  God  be    upon  us;  and  establish   the    work    of  our   hands    upon  us:  yea, 
the    work    of    our   hands    establi!>h    Thou    it."     What   a   complete  and   com- 
prehensive blessing  !     Some  have  thought  that  the   mention  of  the  name  of 
Jehovah   three  times  in  the  words  to  be  used  by   Aaron  have  reference  to  the 
triune  nature  of  God,  according  with  the  threefold  apostolic  blessing  of  the  new 
Testament    and   the  formulary  pronounced  at  the  ordinance  of  baptism.     Man 
needed  the  blessing,  good  will,  and  aid  of  the  Lord,  His  friendship  and  smile. 
Needed  to  be  kept  from  all  evil  within,  and  from  the  Evil  One.     Man  needed  the 
face  of  God  to  shine  upon  him,  God's  reconciled,  cheering,  transformmg  face,  the 
face  of  his  Father  and  King.     The  peace  of  God  alone  could  remove  remorse  for 
the   past  and  dread  apprehensions  for  the  future.     Here,  then,  was  the  bestow- 
ment  of  all  needed  grace,  the  earnest  as  well  as  preparation  for  final  glory.  Ihese 
blessings  centre  in,  and  flow  from  Christ  with  (a)  infinite  fulness  ;  (b}  tnestimabU 
graciousness  ;  for  all  men  and  all  time.     Observe — 

II    The  declaration  of  god's  greatest  jor,  viz.,  blessing  men. 

How  quickly  the  mercy  of  God  whispered  blessing  in  the  ears  of  the  first 
ofl'ending  pair  ere  they  were  expelled  from  the  blissful  bowers  of  Eden  !  How 
He  sanctioned  the  erection  of  altars  and  accepted  their  off"erings  wherever  the 
patriarchs  pitched  their  tents  !  How  faithfully  He  now  fulfilled  the  promises 
made  to  Moses,  to  meet  with  and  bless  His  people  if  they  erected  an  altar  to 
His  name  and  off^ered  sacrifices  thereon.  His  greatest  joy  is  in  blessing  mam 
He  is  slow  to  anger,  and  delights  in  mercy.  Aaron,  standing  with  outspread 
hands,  was  the  representative  of  God  as  well  as  of  the  people  ;  and  in  the  words 
of  the  Lord,  as  well  as  in  His  name,  he  pronounced  the  bles.mg.  God  blessed 
man  ;  (a)  in  equity  :  He  had  not  connived  at  iniquity,  had  not  accepted  man 
into  His  confidence  and  communion  without  obedience  and  satisfaction.  He 
was  iust,  and  yet  the  justifier  of  those  who  came  to  Him  in  s.critices,  which 
tvpified  the  one  sacrifice  of  Jesus.  (6)  Out  of  the  sanctuary  The  high  priest 
came  out  of  the  tabernacle  and  blessed  the  people  ;  and  God  still  pronounces 
His  best  and  brightest  blessing  out  of  Zion,  where  His  name  is  recorded.  His 
worship  observed,  (q)  In  connection  with  human  means.  It  was  the  blessing  ot 
God,  but  it  passed  through  the  lips  of  Aaron.  God  employed  and  honoured 
human  agency.  Man  could  not  bless  himself;  Aaron,  of  himself,  could  not 
bless  the  people.  He  could  be,  and  was,  the  channel  to  convey  the  Divine 
benediction.  Moses  inducted  Aaron  to  his  office,  and  then  Aaron  conveyed 
blessings  to  men.  We  cannot  be  sources,  but  we  can  be  means  of  blessing  to 
others  ;  we  may  glorify  God  by  co-working  with  Him  in  His  plans  and  purposes 
lor  blessing  men.^    The  Go.^pel,  vhich  blesses  men,  is  the  Go.^pel  of  God  s  glory. 


CHAP.  IX.  23,  21]  THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS.  125 


Aaron  blessing  men  fron>  the  holy  place  where  the  sacrifices  were  completed 
may  be  regarded  as  a  type  of  Him  who,  when  on  earth,  opened  His  lips  and 
pronounced  His  benedictio.ns  upon  men,  not  only  in  the  beatitudes  but  all 
through  His  life  as  He  went  about  doinj;  good,  when  He  descended  from  Olivet 
with  hands  outspread,  blessing  His  disciples.  He  has  His  hands  full  of  blessing 
now,  since  He  has  led  captivity  captive  and  received  gifts  for  men. — F.  W.  B. 

Topic:  The  Miraculous  Fire  (Vv.  23,  24). 

According  to  the  word  of  Moses,  when  all  was  completed  that  the  Lord  babr 
commanded,  the  Divine  glory  was  displayed  in  the  presence  of  the  con;j:?egatioM. 
There  was  no  delay  on  the  part  of  Israel  to  comply  with  the  Divine  requirements, 
and  there  was  no  delay  on  the  part  of  the  Lord  to  signify  He  had  accepted  their 
sacrifices.  There  was  a  sudden  flash  of  mysterious  flame  from  the  resplendent 
light  that  filled  the  holy  place.  It  lighted  upon  the  brazen  altar,  and  consume'! 
the  sacrifice  which  was  already  on  fire  ;  thus,  the  altar  fire  was  consecrated.    Look 

L  At  some  of  the  pacts  which  the  flashing  fire  cokfirmkd. 

(a)  That  the  sacrifices  were  divinely  accepted.  The  priests  had  kindled  a  fire, 
had  done  all  needed  to  render  their  offering  complete  and  acceptable  ;  Aaron 
had  been  into  the  tabernacle,  returned,  and  blessed  the  people  ;  it  needed  only 
now  the  baptism  of  fire,  the  smile  of  the  Lord  to  be  seen  beaming  forth  from  the 
holy  place.  That  radiant  and  eff*ulgent  smile  came,  took  possession  of  the 
sacrifice  upon  the  altar,  compassed  and  consumed  it.  The  ascending  flame  sym- 
bolizes that  heaven  received  it. 

(6)  That  the  priests  were  divinely  accredited.  What  Aaron  and  his  sons  had 
done  pleased  the  Lord  ;  He  inspected  their  work,  saw  that  it  was  good  ;  and^ 
to  show  to  priests  and  people  that  the  order  of  the  priesthood  was  confirmed, 
the  fire  came  leaping  forth  to  crown  the  fire  the  priests  had  lighted.  Thus  the 
Lord  owned  the  priests  as  co-workers  with  Himself,  as  mediators  between  the 
human  and  Divine.      Henceforth,  they  would  be  His  accredited  servants. 

(c)  That  the  tabernacle  was  divinely  appropriated.  God  had  already  taken 
possession  of  it  and  had  filled  it  with  His  glory  ;  but  the  eyes  of  the  common 
people  were  not  permitted  to  see  the  glory  that  dwelt  within  It  was  well,  there- 
fore, for  them  to  witness  the  glory  manifested  fr».m  within;  to  see  the  fire  of  the 
Lord  leap  forth,  giving  them  ocular  demonstration  that  Jehovah  had  really 
appropriated  the  tabernacle  as  His  earthlv,  local,  temporary  dwelling  place. 
Jehovah  has  never  ceased  to  answer  by  fire.  The  Scriptures  record  many 
instances  where,  by  cloud  and  flame,  the  Divine  Presence  has  been  manifested 
to  men,  e.g.,  the  dedication  of  the  temple;  the  nativity  of  Christ ;  the  descent 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  at  Pentecost.  At  the  end  of  the  world,  by  clouds  and  fire 
the  great  assizes  will  be  inaugurated.  Let  us  seek  c.i  present  acceptable 
sacrifices  to  Him  in  the  sanctuaries  of  our  hearts,  let  us  seek  for  the  descent 
of  the  fire  of  His  love  to  consume  all  selfishness  and  sin,  and  make  our  bodies 
temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     Consider  also  :    • 

II.   JSOME    OF   the    EFFj^CIS    WHICH   THE    FLASHING    FIRE    PRODUCED. 

The  people,  having  been  told  beforehand  by  Moses  that  at  the  completion  of 
their  offerings  the  glory  of  the  Lord  would  appear,  were  anticipating  the  mani- 
festation which  took  place.  There  had  heQu  atonement,  2iin\mediatio7i,  sm  had  been 
forgiven  and  removed  ;  all  had  been  declared  "  holiness  unto  the  Lord,"  there  was 
nothing  now  to  dread.  The  people  were  filled  with  holy  rapture.  A  loud  simul- 
taneous shout  of  joy  arovse.  They  could  not  restrain  their  gladness  ;  adoration 
blended  with  praise  ;  they  were  grateful  as  well  as  glad.  They  felt  that  God  was 
j)ropitiated  by  what  had  been  done.  They  were  filled  with  sacred  awe.  Tliey 
fell  upon  their  faces  ;  the  glory  was   so  resplendent,  or  they  may  have  felt  how 


l^G 


HOMILRTIC   COMMENTARY  ON 


[CHAP.  IX  G-24 


threat  the  disparity  existing  between  them  and  God,  how  unworthy  they  were  of 
His  favour.  They  were  not  prostrate  with  dread  and  terror,  but  from  feelings  of 
reverence  and  worship.  Tlie  people  had  no  doubt  about  the  reality  of  the  fire — 
about  its  miraculous  character— they  were  satisfied  as  to  its  origin  and  meaning. 
All  the  manifestations  of  God's  glory  to  men,  in  nature,  and  in  revelation,  are 
cahmlated  and  designed  to  awaken  rap'ure  and  heget  reverence.  The  Gospel  brings 
glad  tidings  of  great  joy,  even  a  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory  ;  it  begets 
reverence  for  it  shows  us  how  great  our  sins  and  how  holy  our  God.  We  see 
God  as  a  consuming  fire  to  consume  sin,  and  to  purify  from  all  defilement.  Let 
us  so  live  that  hereafter  we  may  enter  into  the  glory  unchanging  and  eternal. 
Rapture  and  reverence  will  characterise  the  delight  and  worship  of  heaven. 
—F.  W.  B. 

OUTLINES  ON  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  IX. 


V.  6. —  Theme:  Conditions  op  blessing. 

Inanimate  nature  governed  by  fixed  laws  ; 
brute  creation  by  instinct  ;  man  by  reason. 
These  facts  asserted  in  scripture,  obvious  to 
experience  and  analogy.  Man  can  exercise 
intelligent  and  deliberate  choice.  God  com- 
pels where  law  and  instinct  rule,  but  com- 
mands where  reason  reigns  Animals  sub- 
mitted unconsciously  to  their  fate,  but  the 
worshippers  voluntarily  slayed  and  intelli- 
gently presented  them  in  sacrifice.  The 
people  were  told  to  obey  the  Lord,  and  then 
His  glory  would  appear  unto  them.  Thus, 
a  promise  was  given  to  inspire,  reward  held 
out  to  stimulate  and  sustain.  Thus  the 
people  were  taught — 

I.  The    duty   op   obedience    to   divine 

COMMANDMENTS. 

Implying — 

{a)   7  hat  God  has  (he  right  to  command. 

(^b)  That  man  has  ability  to  obey. 

(c)  That  man  is  under  obligation  to  obey. 

II.  The  blessing  of  obedience  to  divine 
commandments. 

{a)  It  pleases  God.  He  is  satisfied— glori- 
fied. 

(  b)  It  blesses  man.  Exercises  and  honours 
his  noblest  faculties,  awakens  keenest  delight, 
secures  manifestation  of  Divine  glory.  Those 
who  obey  increase  in  knowledge  of  the  Divine 
will,  and  become  transformed  into  tho  Divine 
likeness.  God's  highest  delight  to  exercise 
mercy,  to  purify,  and  save. — F.   W,  B. 

V.  12. —  Theme:  The  blood  of  sprink- 
ling. 

In  tabernacle  service  and  furniture  almost 
everything  sprinkled  with  blood.  There  must 
have  been  something  peculiarly  significant 
in  the  fact.     Among  other  things  it — 

I  Indicated  that  life  had  been  really 

gACRIFICED. 

II  Awaked  peelings  of  awe  in  the  wor- 
shippers. 

III  Invested  things  with  peculiar 
sacredness. 

IV  Proclaimed  that  propitiation  had 
been  effected. 

The  precious  blood  of  Christ  tenches  these 
things,  and  more;    for  the    blood   sprinkled 


round  about  the  altar  had  no  virtue  in  itself 
to  wash  away  sin,  whereas  Christ's  blood 
cleanses  from  all  sin.  (See  Heb.  xii.  24 ; 
1  Peter  i.  2.)  The  robes  of  the  glorified  are 
made  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  The 
new  song  of  heaven  extols  the  eflBcacy  of  the 
blood  that  was  shed  on  Calvary. — F.  W.  B. 

V.  24. —  Theme:  The  answer  by  fire. 

The  flame  that  leaped  out  of  the  taber- 
nacle and  consumed  the  burnt  offering,  and 
the  fat  upon  the  altar — 

I.  Dkmonstrated  the  fact  of  the  divine 

PRESKNCR. 

II.  Exhibited  thb  awfulness  of  the  di- 
VI NK  power. 

III.  Proved  the  fidelity  op  the  ditinb 
word. 

IV.  Taught  the  tenderness  op  the  di- 
vine M'BCY. 

The  fire  might  have  consumed  the  sinners 
instead  of  the  sacrifice,  but  God  is  a  consum- 
ing fire  against  sin,  He  loves  the  sinner,  is  not 
willing  that  any  should  perish.  -  F.  IV.  B. 

Vv.  23,  2i.— Theme:  God's  acceptance  of 
the  sacrifices. 

When  we  see  the  variety  of  ordinances  and 
multitude  of  sacrifices,  we  are  ready  to  ask. 
What  compensation  could  be  made  to  the 
people  for  all  the  expense  and  trouble  to 
which  they  were  put  ?  Here  we  have  a 
sufficient  answer:  God  would  not  withhold 
from  them  communication  such  as  would 
abundantly  recompense  all  they  did  for  His 
sake.  He  gave  them  such  testimonies  of 
His  acceptance  as  made  their  hearts  overflow. 
Consider — 

I.  The  testimonies  of  god's  acceptance. 

Thesa  were  of  different  kinds: 

1.  Ministerial.  Moses  and  Aaron  having 
finished  all  they  had  to  do  within  the  taber- 
nacle, came  forth  and  "  blessed  the  people." 
In  this  they  were — 

(1)  Types  of  Christ:  Showing  what  He 
would  do  as  soon  as  He  had  finished  His 
sacriticf^:  He  blessed  His  disciples  ("Luke 
xsiv  50,  .51)  as  He  was  taken  up  to  heaven; 
and  Ho  pent  the  promisod  blessing  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  quickly  thence  (Acts  ii.  38 ;  iii.  2G). 


CHAP.  IX.] 


THE  BOOK   OF   LEVITICUS, 


127 


(2)  Examples  to  ministers:  Showinjj  what 
all  ministers  aro  authorised  and  euipowerod 
to  declare  to  those  who  rely  or.  the  Groat 
Sacrifice.  They  are  to  stand  forth  in  the 
very  name  of  God.  and  proclaim  pardon  and 
peace  to  all  (Acts  xiii.  oiS,  39  . 

2.  Personal.     In  two  ways  did  God  Himself 
by  direct  testimo)iies^  apart    from  all  indirect 
human  aj^oucy,  manifest  His  acc»^ptance. 

(1)  he  displayed  His  glory  before  all  the 
people.  Now  we  have  no  such  visible  mani- 
festation, but  we  have  instead,  as  direct 
testimonies  from  God,"  the  Spirit  of  God  wit- 
nessing with  our  spirit";  and "  the  love  of 
God  shod  abroad  in  our  hearts." 

(2)  He  sent  fire  upon  the  sao-ifice :  Showinj^ 
what  fiery  indignation  they  deserved,  but 
that  he  bad  turned  it  aside  from  theoa,  and 
caused  it  to  fall  on  the  altar. 

ir.  Effkcts  produchd  bv  these  testi- 
monies OF  G'  D*S  ACCEPTANCE. 

Visible  objects  affect  us  strongly;  the 
people  now  were  deeply  impressed  with  what 
they  saw.     They  were  tilled — 

1.  With  exalted  joy.  Had  they  not  been 
taught  to  expect  this  manifestation  they 
would  have  been  terrified  thereby,  as  Gideon 
and  Manoah  (Judges  vi.  21,  22;  xiii.  19-22)  ; 
but  being  prepared,  they  rent  the  air  with 
their  shouts 

The  inward  triumph  of  Paul  seems  more 
suited  to  our  dispensation  (Komans  viii.  31- 
39  j,  and  that  is  both  the  privilege  and  duty  of 
avery  one  of  us  to  enjoy. 

2.  With  profound  reverence.  Humility  united 
with  joy.  Even  the  seraphim  cover  their 
faces  and  feet  before  the  throne ;  glorified 
saints  cast  their  crowns  at  the  feet  of  Him 
who  sitteth  thereon.  Exalted  joys  should  be 
tempered  with  adoration.  Illustrations  will 
be  found  in  Gen.  xvii.  3 ;  Exod.  iii.  6. 

Learn : — 

(a)  To  lay  no  stress  on  transient  affections. 
Such  a  state  of  feeling  in  the  people  ought  to 
have  issued  well,  but  soon  passed  away  when 
temptation  arose. 

(J))  To  be  thankful  for  the  advantages  we 
enjoy.  We  are  apt  to  envy  the  Jews  their 
privileges :  they  walked  by  sight,  we  walk  by 
faith.  But  our  High  Priest  "  blesses  us  with 
all  spiritual  blessings."     Chas.  Simeon^  M.A. 

V.  24. — Theme:  Gracious  fire. 

A  sudden  marvel  fills  all  minds  with  awe. 


While  blessings  fall  from  blessing  saints 
(Moses  and  Aaron)  heaven  brightens  with 
resplendent  sigtis.  Glory  shines  around.  Fire 
is  sent  furtli. 

1.  FlUK  SEALS  WITH  HEAVliN'S  OWN  SHAL 
THK  ATONING  RITKS. 

Wherefore  comes  the  fire  forth  ?  Is  it  to 
seize  the  guilty  sons  of  men  ?  Is  it  to  hurl  on 
them  deserved  wrath?  Far  otherwise.  It 
comes  with  olive  branch  of  peace.  It  settles 
on  the  altar.  It  feeds  on  the  victim  as  its 
feast.  Then  it  brings  evidence  of  God's 
delight.  Then  it  fills  hearts  with  tranquil 
peace.  The  flame  with  blazing  tongue  pro- 
claims :  Hero  is  the  sacrifice  which  God  se- 
lects, approves,  calls  men  to  bring,  and  never 
will  refuse. 

IL  TlIK  ATTESTING  FIRE  SPBAKS  GOD'S  AC- 
OHPTANCh   OF  SUBSTITUnON. 

The  altar  victims  were  the  foreshadowing 
of  Christ.  Faith  therefore  loves  this  scene. 
It  is  one  of  the  wells  from  which  it  gladly 
draws  new  joy.  It  is  one  of  the  meadows  of 
its  richest  food 

Bat  what  is  the  antitype  of  the  descending 
fiame?  The  clear  GosdoI  page.     There,  dis- 
tinct testimonies  answer  to  this   approving 


sign  :  — 


(1 )  The  angelic  host,  a  shining  train,  which 
swept  down  from  heaven  at  Jesus'  birth. 

(2)  The  baptismal  seal  (Luke  iii.  21,  22). 

(3)  Transfiguration  glories  rest  on  Him: 
and  a  voice  from  the  cloud  proclaims,  "  This 
is  My  beloved  Son." 

(4)  The  opened  grave,  guarded  by  the 
angels,  for  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ  we 
have  the  fiery  seal  of  an  accepted  sacrifice 

When  Israel's  host  beheld  the  fire  of  God, 
what  were  their  feelings  ?  "  They  shouted 
and  fell  on  their  faces."  Sweet  joy  was  theirs. 
Deep  adoration  warmed  each  heart  Exult- 
ing praise  burst  forth.  Profoundest  wonhip 
was  their  instant  act. 

Shall  we  not  do  the  like  ?  God  sent  His 
Son  to  seek,  to  save.  He  lays  on  Him  our 
every  sin;  gives  us  every  pledge  that  He 
approves,  attests,  receives,  delights  in  the 
accepted  offering.  Witness  after  witness  from 
His  courts  assures  that  pardon,  acquittal, 
release  from  every  woe,  admission  to  the 
home  of  heaven,  may  be  ours.  Oh,  then,  let 
every  breath  praise  God  I  Let  every  hour 
of  every  day  be  inward  worship. — Dean 
Law. 


ILLUSTRA.TIVE  ADDENDA   TO   CHAPTER   IX. 


Ministerial  dedication. 

**If  so  poor  a  worm  as  I  may  to  Thy  great 

glory  live, 
All  my  actions  sanctify,  all  my  words  and 

thoughts  receive; 
Claim  me   for  Thy  service,  claim  all  I  have 

and  all  1  am. 

**TaKe  my  soul  and  body's  powers  ;  take  my 
memory,  mind,  and  will ; 


All  my  goods  and  all  my  hours  ;  all  I  know 
and  all  I  feel ; 

All  I  think,  or  speak,  or  do — take  my  heart, 
but  make  it  new. 
"Now,  0  God,  Thine  own  I  am;  now  I  give 
Thee  back  Thine  own; 

Freedom,  friends,  and  health  and  fame,  con- 
secrate to  Thee  alone  ; 

Thine  I  live,  thrice  happy  1 1  Happier  still 
if  Thine  to  da^:'— Charles  Wesley. 


128 


HOMILE.TIC  COMMENTARY   UA 


[chap.  IX. 


'1  thank  Thee,  Lord,  for  using  me  for  Thee 
to  work  and  speak  ; 
However  trembhng  is  the  hand,  the  voice 
however  weak. 

"For  those  to  whom,  through  me,  Thou  hast 
some  heavenly  guidan  '.e  given  ; 
For   some,  it  may  be,   saved    from   death, 
and  some  brought  nearer  heaven. 

"  Oh,  honour  higher,  truer  far^  than  earthly 
fame  could  bring, 
Thus  to  be  used  in  work  like  this,  so  long, 
by  such  a  King  ! 

*'  A  blunted  sword,  a  rusted  spear,  which  only 
He  could  wield ; 
A  broken  sickle  in  His  hand  to  reap  His 
harvest  field." — Bonar. 

Nearness  to  god. 

Favoured    places  .'—-Eden,     Peniel,     Sinai, 
Temple,  Transfiguration  Mount,  Olivet,  etc. 

Favoured  persons:  Enoch,  Abraham, 
Jacob,  Moses,  Aaron,  David,  Elijah,  Daniel 
Stephen,  Paul,  John. 

Spiritual    Bbnefactors.    Our    power  to 


benefit  others  will  just  be  in  proportion  to 
our  personal  holiness.  "  Speak  for  eternity," 
says  Mr.  Cheyne,  "but  above  all,  cultivate 
your  own  spirit.  A  -word  spoken  by  you 
when  your  conscience  is  clear,  when  youi 
heart  is  full  of  God's  Spirit,  is  worth  two 
thousand  words  spoken  m  unbelief  and  sin. 
Tois  was  my  great  fault  in  the  ministry. 
Remember  it  is  not  man  but  God  that  must 
have  the  glory.  It  is  not  so  much  speaking 
as  faith  that  is  heard." 

"  The  vertical  power  of  religion  in  the  heart 
is  the  ti'uest  measure  of  its  horizontal  power 
in  the  world." — Bowes. 

"  When  one  that  holds  communion  with  the 

skies, 
Has  filled  his  urn  where  those  pure  waters 

rise. 
And    once   more   mingles   with   us  meaner 

things — 
'Tis  e'en  as  if  an  angel  shook  his  wings; 
Immortal  fragrance  tills  the  circuit  wide, 
That  tells   us     whence    his    treasures    ar« 

supplied." —  Cowper. 


CHAPTER  X. 

^ethless  ^iiiistrg  St^rixlg^  fveIntkeJ>* 

SUGGESTIVE  HEADINGS. 

V.  1. — Nahab  abd  Alnhu  offered  strange  fire.  Whether  they  were  prompted 
by  impetuous  religious  feeling,  or  were  confused  with  wine,  the  act  was  reckless; 
they  offered  before  the  Lord  incense  on  fire  which  was  unsauctified.  Probably, 
instead  of  holy  fire  taken  from  the  altar,  they  lit  their  censers  from  the  fire 
burning  "  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle,"  used  for  "  boiling  the  flesh."  [See 
chap.  viii.  31.]  To  act  in  God's  service  from  heated  impulse  is  as  blameworthy 
as  to  act  under  intoxication.  Strong  feeling  makes  a  man  as  confused  in 
thought  and  rash  in  conduct  as  does  strong  driijk.  When  God  commands  what 
should  be  done,  that  and  that  only  should  be  done  :  and  done  in  the  manner  He 
prescribes,  Self  will,  heedlessness,  impetuosity,  must  be  absolutely  arrested  on 
the  very  threshold  of  sacred  service.  God  asks  obedience :  literal  and  absolute  : 
and  '  behold  to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice;  and  to  hearken  than  the  fat  of 
rams." 


V.  2  — Went  out  fire  from  the  Lord.  That  fire  had  only  just  before  fallen 
upon  the  altar  victim  instead  of  falling  on  the  sinner :  God  thus  expressed  His 
pleasure  in  sparing  man  and  accepting  the  substituted  atonement  offering.  And 
**  He  is  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,"  But  if  man  will  act  disobediently, 
notwithstanding  God's  desire  to  spare  him,  man  must  bear  his  penalty.  And 
now  the  fire  falls  direct  on  the  sinner  and  devours  him.  "  For  our  God  is  a 
consuming  fire."  The  cross  of  Jesus  shelters  all  who  will  hide  beneith  its  grace, 
but  on  the  presumptuous  the  wrath  of  God  must  surely  fall.  "  Tkey  died  before 
the  Lord." 


CHAP.  X.  3— 7.]  T[IE  BOOK   OP  LEVITICUS.  120 

V.  3. — This  is  it  that  the  Lord  spake.  Moses  appeals  to  a  well-known  divine 
utterance,  which,  however,  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  written  Scriptures.  Jubt 
80,  the  apostle  Paul  quotes  a  saving  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  which  nowhere  appears 
in  the  Gospels  (Acts  xx.  35).  There  were  sayings  of  Jehovah  living  in  the 
people's  memory  which  the  pen  had  not  transcribed  to  the  sacred  page.  There 
is  an  unwritten  Bible  :  for  God's  messages,  in  which  He  "spake  in  times  past 
unto  the  fathers  by  the  prophets,"  were  so  numerous  that  all  could  not  be 
gathered  into  the  written  Bible. 

In  this  sense  must  be  understood  John's  statement  that  much  of  our  Lord's 
life  — His  words  and  deeds — is  left  unrecorded  in  the  pages  of  the  evangelists 
(John  XX.  30  ;  xxi.  35).  Yet,  lest  any  should  use  this  tact  as  a  warrant  for 
adding  aught  "to  the  words  of  the  book  of  this  prophecy  "  (Rev.  xxii.  18)  John 
declares  that  the  written  Gospels  are  sufficient  for  our  faith,  *'  that  ye  might 
believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God  :  and  that  believing  ye  might 
have  life  through  His  name  "  (John  xx.  31) 

I  will  be  sanctified  in  them  that  come  m'gh  Me.  Aaron  and  His  sons  had 
been  most  solemnly  consecrated  for  their  ministries :  and,  because  of  their 
perfected  sanctification  (ceremonially),  were  to  be  allowed  near  access  to 
Jehovah's  awful  presence.  Should  they  presume  upon  their  privilege  and  act 
heedlessly,  violating  their  sanctity  by  thoughtless  and  irreveient  conduct  1 
God  would  not  have  it  so.  The  presumptuous  soul  is  offensive  to  Jehovah.  [See 
Num.  XX.  30.]  If  we  do  not  honour  Him  by  our  reverence,  He  will  get  honour 
to  Himself  in  our  punishment. 

Aaron  held  his  peace — bowing  to  the  appalling  judgment  of  God  with 
acquiesence  :  recognising  that  his  sons  had  summoned  upon  themselves  the 
doom  which  befel  them.  It  was  the  silence  of  a  soul  overwhelmed  with  grief, 
but  grief  regulated  by  the  sense  that  "  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  doeth  right." 

V.  5— Carried  them  in  their  coats  out  of  the  camp.  Their  priestly  tunics 
were  not  burned  by  the  fire  which  had  struck  the  wearers  with  death.  The 
garments  were  symbols  of  the  sanctity  God  approved  :  they  remained  unharmed. 
What  a  hush  of  awe  must  have  gone  through  "the  camp,"  as  the  crowds  of 
Israel  watched  the  carrying  of  the  blanched  corpses  through  their  midst.  It 
told  the  warning  truth  that  God  was  so  jealous  tor  His  holiness  that  He  would 
not  spare  even  the  young  priests  so  newly  consecrated  if  tbey  failed  to  sanctify 
Him.  "Let  us  have  grace,  whereby  we  may  serve  God  acceptably,  with 
reverence  and  godly  fear  :  for  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire." 

V.  6. — Uncover  not  your  heads.  To  let  the  hair  fall  dishevelled  was  the 
custom  of  mourners,  the  sign  of  bereavement.  For  them  to  express  open  and 
violent  grief  would  appear  like  casting  blame  upon  God,  like  strife  against  His 
providence.  They  must  submit.  "  I  was  dumb,  I  opened  not  my  mouth, 
because  Thou  didst  it."  Hard  indeed  it  is  not  to  complain  and  rebel  when  the 
hand  of  God  lays  bitter  strokes  upon  us  :  but  piety  will  manifest  itself  best  in 
meek  submission  and  quiet  endurance. 

Much  grace  will  be  needed,  however,  in  mourners  if  they  are  to  yield  up  their 
treasures  of  affection  thus  uncomplainingly  to  the  Lord.  Yet  let  it  be  remem- 
bered that  Jesus  had  no  rebuke  for  the  tears  shed  over  Lazarus*  death  ;  yea, 
more,  that  as  He  stood  by  the  grave  and  beheld  the  scene  of  weepers,  *'  Je&us 
e^fjo^ "  ( John  xi.  35).  The  case  was  exceptional  with  these  young  priests,  and 
God's  prohibition  of  mourning  for  them  must  not  be  regarded  as  a  divine  inter- 
dict of  the  tears  of  love. 

V.  7. — For  the  anointing  oil  of  the  Lord  is  upon  you.  They  who  are  dedi- 
cated to  God's  service  must  let  that  be  supreme  ;  its  claims  subordmate  all  private 
duties  ;  even  the  burial  of  their  dead  was  insufficient  as  a  warrant  for  them  however 
briefly  to  desert  their  sacred  offices.  *'  Let  the  dead  bury  their  dead,"  said  Jesus  j 
*  •Old  come,  follow  me"  (Matt.  viii.  21,  22).    For  religious  claims  are  superlative^ 

K 


130  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  x.  1, 2 

and  our  human  affections  (in  themselves  becoming)  may  prove  a  snare  if  permitted 
to  assert  themselves  against  divine  claims. 

Vv.  8-11. — Do  not  drink  wine,  etc.  Certainly  such  a  possible  cause  for  excited 
action,  confused  thought,  or  uugoverned  feeling  must  be  scrupulously  shunned 
by  all  when  occupied  in  sanctuary  ministrations  and  sacred  employ.  Jesus  "  would 
not  drink  "  (Matt,  xxvii.  34)  when  the  narcotic  drug  was  offered  Him  at  Calvary  ; 
for  He  was  at  that  moment  engaged  in  divinest  employ — offering  Himself  unto 
God  as  man's  atonement.  Paul's  admonitions  to  bishops  and  deacons  (1  Tim.  iii. 
2,  3)  not  to  be  *'  given  to  wine,"  is  in  the  same  direction  ;  any  cause  of  false  ex- 
citement or  possible  rashness  must  be  sedulously  avoided  by  those  occupied  in 
God's  service  The  prohibition  is,  however,  not  all-inclusive ;  it  only  applies  to 
specified  persons,  and  to  specified  occasions — "when  ye  go  into  the  tabernacle  of 
the  congregation." 

Vv.  12-15. — Take  the  meat  offering,  etc.  Moses  pressed  upon  the  priests  to 
turn  to  their  spiritual  functions  and  ministries  without  delay.  For  the  best  solace 
in  grief  is  activity.  Sit  not  in  repining  because  of  God's  stroke,  turn  to  Him  in 
holy  service.  Possibly  the  dread  of  God,  "lest  He  be  angry,"  urged  all  to  quick 
attention  to  duty.  Sad  it  is  that  we  need  often  the  startling  visitation  of  God  to 
awaken  us  to  vigilance  in  religion,  "  When  thy  judgments  are  in  the  earth,  the 
inhabitants  of  the  world  will  learn  righteousness"  (Isa.  xxvi.  9). 

Vv.  16-20.— Moses  diligently  sought  the  goat  of  the  sin  offering.  The  flesh 
of  this  sacrificial  offering  should  have  been  eaten  by  the  priests ;  and  Moses  grew 
"  angry  "  with  the  surviving  sons  of  Aaron  that  they  had  neglected  this  part  of 
the  prescribed  ritual.  But  Aaron  produced  an  explanation  of  the  omission : 
that  all  the  sacred  regulations  for  the  sin  offering  had  been  observed  by  them, 
except  the  festive  part  which  was  an  obligation  upon  the  priest  and  his  family ; 
aud  that  the  calamity  which  had  befallen  them  unfitted  them  for  this  social  re- 
past or  rendered  the  festivity  inappropriate.  This  was  an  error ;  express  com- 
mands should  not  be  evaded  even  by  plea  of  untimeliness  or  impropriety ;  duty 
must  be  first :  but  Moses  was  touched  by  his  brother's  great  grief,  and  "  was 
content."  For  is  it  not  written,  "  I  desired  mercy  and  not  sacrifice,  and  the 
knowledge  of  God  more  than  burnt  offerings"  (Hosea  vi.  6)1  Where  the  "  spirit* 
is  right  the  "  letter  "  is  less  important. 


SECTIONAL    HOMILIES. 
Topic :  Repulsive  Incense  (Vv.  1,  2). 

**  Nadab  and  Ahihu  offered  strange  fire  before  the  Lord^ 

Nadab  and  Abihu  were  priests,  ministers  of  the  tabernacle  ;  therefore  lessons 
from  their  example  possess  a  special  fitness  to  ministers  of  Christ.  To  preach 
to  others,  forgetting  admonitions  to  ourselves,  were  deplorable,  fulfilling  the 
lament,  "  They  made  me  the  keeper  of  the  vineyards,  but  mine  own  vineyard 
have  I  not  kept"  (Cant.  i.  6).  Yet,  though  the  lesson  of  this  incident  is  special 
to  ministers  of  the  sanctuary,  it  is  not  exclusive  ;  for  "ye are  a  holy  priesthood,  to 
otter  spiritual  sacrifices"  (1  Pet.  ii  5).  Every  redeemed  soul  is  consecrated  by 
grace  to  be  God's  priest  in  His  great  universe.  Christ  "  hath  made  us  kings  and 
priests  unto  God  " 

From  every  priest  God  tooks  for  incense;  of  affection,  influence,  service,  posses- 
sicns,  praises,  prayers.  Gol  called  us  into  the  temple  of  His  grace  that  we  might 
"  nffer  livmgsaciifices  ;  holy  aud  acceptable,  our  reasonable  service."  This  is 
our  mission  on  earth,  the  design  of  our  conversion ;  for  this  the  Spirit  works  io 
u&  •  we  must  be  priests. 


CHAP.  X   1,2.]  THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS,  131 

A.nd  each  of  us,  as  a  priest,  does  tnke  his  censer,  and  the  fire  ascends  to  the 
Lord.  Each  is  doing  something  in  work,  or  worship,  or  ministry,  to  fill  the 
temple  of  earth  with  offerings  to  the  Lord.  But  it  is  for  us  solemnly  to  ask  in 
presence  of  this  incident  — 

What  incense  are  we  offering  ]  Even  priests  may  err  here:  bura  "strange 
fire,"  offer  what  God  will  abhor,  and  imperil  their  souls  in  the  action.  Consider 
therefore — 

I.  Their  offensive;  offering.     *^  O^ered  strange  fire." 

1.  What  rendered  their  incense  odious  to  God?  *' The  fire  w3iS  strange.^*  It 
lacked  two  essential  and  acceptable  qualities — 

(a)  It  had  not  been  kindled  by  God,  The  fire  on  the  altar  was  kindled  from 
heaven.  The  divine  origin  of  that  fire  changed  human  offerings  laid  on  that  altar 
into  atoning  sacrifices.  They  became  thereby  sanctified.  Without  this  divine 
element  the  human  offerings  were  not  acceptable  (chap.  ix.  24).  But  these 
priests  "  took  their  censers  and  put  fire  therein  " ;  and  thus  the  fire  had  nothing 
of  divinity  in  it;  the  offering  was  altogether  earthly  and  human;  "strange 
fire." 

(6)  It  had  not  been  mingled  with  blood.  Sacrificial  victims  were  being  con- 
tinuously offered  on  that  altar  ;  that  fire  never  went  out ;  the  fire  was  never  free, 
therefore,  from  the  blood.  This  rendered  the  fire  sacred.  Consecrated  by  blood. 
Nothing  came  to  God  pleasing  Him  except  mingled  with  blood.  But  their  fire 
bad  nothing  of  the  savour  of  blood  in  it :  it  was,  therefore,  "  strange,"  offensive 
to  God. 

2.  What  corresponding  offensiveness  may  mar  our  offerings  ? 

In  the  Christian  church  to-day,  not  a  little  *'  strange  fire"  is  burned  before 
the  Lord.  The  motive  that  prompts  what  we  do  \%not divine ;  the  fire  is  earthly, 
human.  The  incense  is  not  sanctified  by  blood;  for  much  we  do  is  done  without 
associating  it  with  the  atonement  of  Christy  and  resting  on  the  merits  of  His  blood 
for  acceptableness  and  worth.  Thus,  the  fire  is  "  strange  "  when  our  religion  or 
work  is  the  outcome  of — 

(a)  Mere  emotional  fervour.  The  "  wild  fire  "  of  hot  sensationalism,  the  re- 
ligion of  boisterous  emotion  and  animal  tumult,  the  raging  vulgarity  of  noise, 
these  are  no  acceptable  substitute  to  offer  before  the  Lord,  in  place  of  calm 
devoutness  and  holy  earnestness.  There  may  be  the  noisiness  of  the  *' crackling 
of  thorns,"  without  fervid  glow  or  quiet  heat.  Emotional  people  are  not  the 
most  devotional.     Sensation  is  no  test  or  measure  of  sincerity. 

(6)  Mere  intellectual  excitement.  Public  prayers  which  are  voluble  and  bois- 
terous, lacking  thoughtful  reverence,  how  are  they  rebuked  by  the  homage  of 
the  veiled  cherubim,  repudiated  by  the  emphatic  command  :  "  Be  not  rash  with 
thy  mouth,  for  God  is  in  heaven  and  thou  upon  earth ;  therefore  let  thy  words 
be  few  "  (Eccles.  v.  2).  Preaching  which  abandons  itself  to  the  mere  "  fire  of 
oratory,"  though  rousing  an  audience,  may  be  more  human  than  divine ;  souls 
are  never  converted  by  "excellency  of  speech"  (I  Cor.  ii.  1,  4,  5). 

(c)  Mere  feverish  activity.  There  is  an  evil  under  the  sun  into  which  very 
young  converts  are  betrayed.  Before  becoming  themselves  enriched  in  the 
Christian  life,  before  they  have  nourished  and  fortified  their  minds  in  divine 
truth,  without  giving  any  one  opportunity  of  "  instructing  them  in  the  way  of 
the  Lord  more  perfectly,"  as  Paul  did  Aquila  and  Priscilla  (Acts  xviii.  26),  they 
seize  their  censer,  and  with  restless  eagerness  rush  out  to  wave  their  incense 
forth.  "Not  a  novice,"  says  Paul,  "lest,  being  lifted  up  with  pride,  he  fall 
into  the  condemnation  of  the  devil"  (1  Tim.  iii.  6). 

\d)  Mere  self  glorify  imj  religious  effort.  He  who  rejects  Christ's  righteousness, 
but  labonrs,  by  diligent  efforts,  "  to  establish  his  own  righteousness,"  offers 
strange  fire.  The  Christian  who  is  active  for  love  of  eminence  or  observation, 
sealous  or  liberal  for  the  sake  of  praise  or  distinction,  offers  "strange  fire." 

k2 


132 


HOMILETIC  COMUHNTARY  ON  [ciiAf.  x.  1,  2 


(e)  if  ere  spiritual  rhapso,iy.  Spiritual  moods  .«°«i"  frames  of  feehg  wh.ch 
are  elevated  ardent,  rapturous,  are  not  the  divmest  m  which  a  child  of  God 
may  be  found  God V.oes  not  intend  that  we  Jive  in  the  cloud-land  of  ecstasy, 
"o'e'ation  of  feeling  n,a,  be  l-"'  self-elevation  God  i.ug^^^^^^^ 
e  ^  u  fV.o  iW^T(\  hpaven"  bv  a  "  thorn  in  his  flesh,  that  he  might  ratriei  giory 
[:r  his  h'USs'  •  for  mu'ch  of  that  lofty  sentiment  of  piety  is  "strange  hre." 
rSee  Addenda,  p.  151,  SCTsaitona^tsm.]  ,i,  t-^W" 

II    Their  rash  impiitv.     "  Oftered  strange  fire  before  the  Lord. 

To  ordinary  observers  that  fire  looked  like  altar  fire,  as  prayers  which  are 

sensationallnd   services  which  are  self-seeking,  look    like  ardent  piety ;  but 

.  God  se'th  not  as  man  seeth,  he  looketh  at  the  heart."  The.r  act  was  one  of- 

l  MsTpresumption.  Even  an.id  the  solemnities  of  the  sanctuary  they 
were  reck  ess,  frivolous.  They  "  took  fire  "  and  swung  their  censers,  as  if  it 
mattered  not  how  they  ministered  ;  as  if  God  deserved  no  special  reverence. 
To  enter  God's  awful  presence  without  awe,  to  engage  in  H,s  worship  without 
adorrt'u.  seems  a  repetition  of  this  careless  swinging  of  censers.  It  is  as 
though  God  stm  addressed  the  trifler  :  "  When  ye  come  to  appear  before  me 
who   hath   required   this   at  your   hands   that   ye   should   tread   my   courts 

(Isa.  i.  12). 


"  Lo  God  is  here  ;  let  us  adore, 
And  own  how  dreadful  is  this  place. 


Their  conduct  seems  to  have  resulted  from  festive  ^ndnlgen.ce.  The  command 
nf  V  q^ndicates  that  in  a  state  of  intoxicated  excitement  they  rushed  into  the 
holv^laceBat  indulgence  of  any  sort,  if  it  unfits  us  for  God^s  presence  or 
service  should  be  shunned.  Human  nature  is  likely  to  be  overbalanced  when 
service,  snouiu  uc  ,,,„_„f,,re   Paul  "kept  his   body  in   subjection,"  and 

ZZZ  Z  S  "^'wlX  comXfore^the  Lord  "'"  drunk,  but  not  with 
wine '•  (Isa.  xxiz  9) ;  intoxicated  with  worldly  thoughts,  with  foolish  vanity ; 
rhrmind  exci  ed  with  delirious  readings ;  and  whatever  takes  solemnity  from 
us  must  be  shunned  a.  we  come  before  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.     [See  Addenda, 

'■  1"#=S;..  By  lighting  their  own  fire  and  by  assuming  an  office 
strictly  assigned  to  the  hirih  priest,  they  violated  Gods  commands. 

Analoqv  of  their  condmt  :-Refusing  divme  provisions  made  for  us  in  the 
sacr  ice'o'f  Christ,  and  maUnc,  a  religion  of  our  ^n.  When  «od  ^-  "f  ^^^ 
name  under  heaven  whereby  we  must  be  saved,"  and  said  "  Neither  is  there 
saUation  in  any  other"  (Acts  iv.  12),  what  is  it  but  wilful  disobedience  to 
seun  other  trusts  %  Pi  iful  the  wrongly  directed  efforts  of  mistaken  souls, 
whe  her  of  those  who,  not  animated  with  the  love  of  Christ  are  yet  doing 
ChrL'tan  work  in  their'  own  strength ;  or  those  who,  -^king  salvation,  are  re- 
lying on  other  merits  than  those  of  the  blood  poured  out  on  the  aUar. 

111.    Their  ALARMING  DESTRUCTION.  „  T>   f  „„  fV,o  T  ^r^  " 

They  ofiered  ofiensive  fire  ;  God  sent  out  devouring  fire.     "  ^f  ^«  *^«.P^f,, 
they  burned  their  fire  ;  "  before  the  Lord  "they  were  burned  -'l^  fi«-     ^^^  ^ 
what  measure  ye  mete  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again.       Let  this  admonish 

"'l.°  "TZo'^^'^th  whom  we  have  to  do.     Hitherto,  in  the  tabernacle  service 
God  had  not  asserted  indignation  against  the  sinful,  so  much  ^^P^J'^f  J«^  Pf-" 
don  and  redemption.     But  He  who  is  gracious  can  also  show  Himself .;«»•«,  as  he 
who  presumes  upon  His  mercy  will  prove.     [See  Addenda,  p.  loO,  Presumption.] 
%  The  rebuke  which  presumption  will  receive.  ,     c  n^A  »i,„ll 

la)  The  compleJe  overthrow  of  their  rash  efforts.  For  what  is  not  of  God  shall 
not  stand  He  will  put  every  human  thing  to  confusion.  The  fire  shal  try 
every  Ws  work."     Much  "work  "  which  is  thought  the  outcome  of  zeal  for 


CHAP.  X.  1,  2]  rilE  BOOK   OF  LKVITTCUS.  \ft:l 

God,  will  prove  hut  "  wood,   Lay,  stubble,"  merely  human  ;  aud,  therefore,  '*  if 
the  work  be  burned  he  bhtill  suffer  loss." 

(6)  More  terrible  rebuke  may  be  given  than  the  frustration  of  our  work  :  the 
fire  may  fall  upon  ourselves.  '*  Kor  the  Lord  Jesus  sliall  be  revealed  from  heaven 
in  fluniiiig  fire,  taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  God  and  obey  not  the 
gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ"  (2  Thess.  i.  7).  And  *' if  judgment  begin 
at  the  house  of  God,  what  shall  the  end  be  of  them  that  obey  not  the  gospel  oj 
God?''  (1  Pet.  iv.  17).     [See  Addenda,  p.  151,  Punishment.] 

Topic:  Youthful  Profanation  op  a  Sacred  Office  (Vv.  1,  2). 

Special  grace  is  indeed  needed  by  those  occupying  highest  offices  in  the  Church 
of  God. 

Nadab  and  Abihu  were  the  first  young  men  called  into  the  ancient  priesthood  ; 
and  in  their  career  a  warning  is  offered  to  the  young  who  think  it  easy  to  bear, 
and  covet  precipitately  to  secure,  the  dignity  and  gravity  of  a  sacred  office. 

Paul  gives  warning  aganist  calling  out  the  young  to  prominent  positions  in  the 
Church  ;  and  commanded  "  not  a  novice,  lest,"  etc.  (1  Tim.  iii.  6). 

If  only  the  foe  of  the  Church  can  secure  that  a  young  and  incautious  spirit 
he  placed  in  the  forefront  of  God's  people  then  he  will  bring  all  his  artifices  for  his 
overthrow ;  and  in  the  fall  of  a  leader  there  will  be  great  cause  for  *'  the  enemy 
to  blaspheme." 

God  grant  that  many  young  men  may  be  led  out  into  usefulness  in  the  Church, 
and,  if  He  will,  into  high  stations  in  the  Church  of  Christ ;  into  the  ministry  of 
the  gospel,  into  influential  scenes  of  witness  for  truth  ;  but  God  also  grant  to 
such  the  measure  of  special  grace  they  will  need,  lest  they  stumble  on  the  high 
places,  and  enable  them  to  bear  the  standard  of  the  Lord  with  steady  hand  to 
victory ! 

I.  Solemn  preparation  for  a  sacred  career. 

Nadab  and  Abihu  ^^ saw  the  God  of  Israel"  (Exod.  xxiv.  1,  9,  10).  This  was 
Jehovah's  method  of  prepaying  a  man  for  a  sacred  career,  e.g  ,  Moses  at  the 
burning  bush  (Exod.  iii.  3,  6);  Isaiah  and  Ezekiel  for  prophetic  work  (Isa.  vi. 
1,  6,  8 ;  Ezek.  i.  1) ;  Saul  of  Tarsus  for  apostleship  (Acts  ix.  27). 

That  sight  gave  them  qualification.  It  taught  them  who  God  was  ;  how 
glorious  and  holy  (Exod.  xxiv.  10).  As  also  saith  Isaiah,  *'  I  have  seen  the 
King  the  Lord  of  Hosts."  They  would  surely  be  reverent  and  solemn  here- 
after in  all  their  service  within  the  tabernacle  in  presence  of  resplendent  Deity. 

Have  you  seen  God  for  yourselves  1  It  is  your  qualification  for  serving  Him. 
You  cannot  minister  before  the  Lord  unless.  Hold  back  from  all  sacred  work 
until  you  have  "  seen  the  King."  But  if  God  has  revealed  Himself  to  you  it  is 
both  a  qualification  and  call  to  His  service.  For  He  wants  those  who  have  seen 
Him  to  '*  tell  the  vision,"  to  go  from  that  secresy  of  blessed  experience, 
saying,  *'  That  which  our  eyes  have  seen,  which  we  have  looked  upon,  declare  we 
unto  you,  that  ye  may  have  fellowship  with  us  "  (1  John  i.  1-3). 

II.  Entire  separation  to  sanctuary  ministry  (Exod.  xxviii.  1). 

1,  Their  designation  to  this  office  was  to  be  accompanied  by  most  solemn  rites 
of  consecration  (Exod.  xxix  ).  Washing  (v.  4)  ;  clothing  with  priestly  robes  (vv. 
6,  8,  9);  reconciliation  offerings  (vv.  10-18);    sanctifying    unction  (vv.  20,  21). 

Note  :  that  a  year  intervened  between  the  directions  given  for  their  dedicatioa 
and  the  event.  An  interval  of  serious  thought,  meditation  on  their  high  calling, 
forming  of  resolves  and  prayerful  preparation  for  their  future. 

2.  Obeying  these  minute  directions,  Moses  did  then  consecrate  them  (Levit. 
viii.  4.  30)  in  the  sight  of  all  Israel.  They  were  thus  publicly  set  apart  to  the 
holy  office. 


134  HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY  ON  [chap,  x  1,2. 


From  all  this  it  appears  how  careful  God  is  that  they  who  are  to  engage  in  His 
service  should  be  spiritually  prepared.  It  was  God  s  idea,  God's  work,  wrought 
through  Moses.  And  ye  are  "  God's  workmanship,  created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto 
good  works,  which  God  hath  before  ordained  that  ye  should  walk  in  them." 

God  wants  you,  who  are  called  to  sacred  service  and  high  trust  in  His  Church, 
not  less  hallowed  and  consecrated  than  Nadab  and  Abihu.  ''  Be  ye  clean  that 
bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord."      God  must  have  holiness   in  those  who  serve 

Him. 

III.  Startling  misdemeanour  and  profanity. 
O  how  great  a  fall  is  here  !  (Lev.  x    I,  2). 

1.  For  awhile  they  maintained  a  reverent  demeanour.  They  gave  good  promise 
(chap.  viii.  36)  ;  were  observant  and  obedient  to  God's  word ;  and  attended  to 
the  duties  of  their  office  (ix.  8,  9,  1 2,  13).  Not  instantaneously  did  they  fall  from 
their  eminence.     The  castle  must  first  be  undermined  before  it  crumbles  into 

ruins. 

"  Ye  did  run  well."  Young  Christians  began  their  spiritual  life  with  every 
promise  of  **  adorning  the  doctrine  of  God  their  Saviour  in  all  things,"  conversion 
seemed  thorough;  and  Christian  iservice  was  entered  on  with  seriousness  and 
earnestness,  consecration  seemed  real.  But  a  vast  difference  exists  between  a 
hopeful  beginning  and  "  continuing  therein  with  all  perseverance":  **  holding  fast 
the  beginning  of  our  confiience  steadfast  unto  the  end." 

Many  a  ship  made  a  good  start— wrecked  1  Many  a  well  formed  bud — 
blighted  !     Many  a  promising  youth— destroyed  ! 

2.  What   explains  and  accounts  for  their  fall  ? 

Was  it  a  mere  mistake,  an  act  of  ignorance  1  No ;  "  the  Lord  commanded 
them  not."  Emphatic  prohibition  :  "  Ye  shall  burn  no  strange  incense  thereon," 
etc.  (Exod.  XXX.  9).  It  arose  from  recklessness.  They  may  have  thought  their 
own  fire  as  good  as  that  on  the  altar ;  but  they  had  no  right  to  think  on  such 
a  matter  ;  God  had  commanded. 

When  God  has  made  the  way  of  obedience,  the  way  of  salvation,  the  way  of 
holiness  plain,  to  substitute  anything  is  an  act  of  daring  presumption  and  a 
horrible  offence  to  God. 

What  could  have  led  them  to  this  act  of  presumption  'i  With  God's  express  com- 
mand, how  dared  they  disobey  1  In  a  festive  moment  they  seemed  to  have  lost 
sobriety  ;  and  their  act  was  done  under  the  confusion  of  drink.  How  fearful  the 
act!  What  bitter  woes  and  wrongs  has  not  the  baneful  indulgence  wrought  I 
O  what  homes  desolated,  what  characters  destroyed,  what  souls  ruined  I  True, 
indeed  of  intemperance — 

When  once  the  demon  enters. 

Stands  -within  the  door, 
Peace  and  hope  and  gladness 

Dwell  there  nevermore. 

Alas  for  the  young  who  have  fallen  thereby  ! 

Put  away  from  you  all  indulgence  which  imperils  your  character  and  piety. 
Have  a  just  fear  of  yourselves.  Do  not  think  you  stand,  lest  you  fall.  [See 
Addenda  p.  151,  Intemperance.^ 

IV.  Punishment  of  youthful  profanity.     "  They  died  before  the  Lord." 

1.  Though  exalted  in  religious  privileges:  how  terrible  their  doom.  "Thou 
Capernaum,  exalted  unto  heaven,  shalt  be  cast  down  to  hell." 

Yes  :  the  divine  ^race  with  which  men  trifle  will  invoke  most  fearful  retribu- 
tion. "  Of  how  much  sorer  punishinent,  suppose  ye,  shall  he  be  thought  worthy 
who  hath  trampled  under  foot  the  Son  of  God."  "  Therefore,  kiss  the  Son 
Jest  he  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way  when  his  wrath  is  kindled  but 
ft  little." 


CHAP.  X.  1,  2]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  135 

That  hij?h  All-Seer  which  I  dallied  with 
Hath  turned  my  ftiyned  prayer  upon  my  head, 
And  j^iven  in  earnest  what  I  begjjfod  in  jost. 
Thus  doth  He  force  the  swonla  of   wicked  men 
To  turn  their  own  points  on  their  master's  bosom. 

2.  In  the  beauty  and  fulness  of  youth,  how  instant  their  destruction/  Dread 
the  possibility  of  being  thus  arretted  :  life  arrested  in  an  act  of  sin  !  Leave  the 
way  of  godliness  but  for  a  moment  ;  you  may  never  return  !  Adventure  upon 
one  rash  step  of  impiety  :  it  may  be  your  last.  There  is  but  one  step  between 
you  and  death  ! 

"God  is  angry  with  the  wicked  evert/ diij":  but  He  holds  back  judgment; 
yet  it  may  leap  foith  anySny.  *'  Wherefore,  let  us  have  grace,  whereby  we  may 
serve  God  acceptably  with  reverence  and  godly  fear  :  for  our  God  is  a  consuming 
fire."     [See  Addenda  p.  151,  Rashness.'\ 

Topic :  The   Sin  op   Aaron's   Sons  (Vv,  1,  2). 

Not  many  hours  had  elapsed  since  Nadab  and  Abihu  were  consecrated  to  the 
sacred  office  of  the  priesthood.  They  knew  that  only  the  high  priest  was  to 
officiate  with  the  holy  incense,  and  that  the  fire  to  be  employed  must  be  taken  from 
the  brazen,  and  put  upon  the  golden  altar.  Yet  they  usurped  the  functions  of 
the  high  priest,  kindled  common  fire,  and  offered  it  on  the  golden  altar,  "which 
the  Lord  had  not  commanded."  Such  an  act  was  a  flagrant  exhibition  of  insub 
ordination,  and  a  direct  insult  to  Jehovah.      In  their  heinous  sin  we  see — 

I.  How  ELKVATION  TO  HIGH  AND  HOLY  POSITIONS  DOES  NOT  PLACE  MEN  BEYOND 
THE  TEMPTATION  AND  LIABILITY  TO  COMMIT  SIN. 

Consecrated  to  the  priestly  office,  they  were  henceforth  expected  to  be 
examples  to  the  people  of  purity,  and  piety.  They  would  be  amid  scenes,  and 
engage  in  services,  calculated  to  restrain  them  from  wrot)g-doing,  and  to  stimu- 
late them  to  good  works.  It  was  reasonable  to  expect  that,  while  the  solemn 
ceremony  of  consecration  and  inauguration  was  fresh  in  their  memories,  they 
would  be  conscientious,  circumspect,  and  magnify  their  office  ;  but  a  day  did  not 
elapse  without  a  strong  temptation  to  desecrate  their  office  ;  a  day  did  not 
elapse  before  they  yielded  to  the  temptation.  They  were  proud  and  presump- 
tuous ;  intoxicated  with  the  elevation  they  had  received  to  the  priestly  office  (if 
not  with  drink),  and  snatching  up  common  fire,  went  unbidden  into  the  holy 
place  before  the  Lord,  and  insulted  Him  to  His  face.  The  temptation  was  pecu- 
liar to  their  position;  flatterered  their  vanity;  promised  them  equality  with 
Moses  and  Aaron  in  authority  and  power  ;  they  yielded  to  it  and  fell.  By  un- 
holy ambition  fell  the  angels  and  our  first  parents — no  position,  however 
exalted,  seems  to  be  exempt  from  temptation  to  pride  and  presumption.  We 
learn  that  (i. )  having  pious  parents ;  (ii.)  being  in  holy  places  ;  (lii.)  holding  sacred 
offices;  (iv.)  seeing  divine  manifestations,  will  not  place  us  beyond  the  reach  of 
temptation  to  commit  sin,  or  screen  us  from  punishment  if  we  coumiit  it.  Even 
Jesus  Christ  was  assailed  by  the  shafts  and  insinuations  of  the  wickt^d  one. 
Being  a  servant,  and  even  a  son  of  God,  does  not  exempt  from  temptation,  but 
temptation  is  not  in  itself  sin,  yielding  is  sin. 

II.  How  THE  COMMITTAL  OF  SIX  MERTS,  AND  MAY  MEET  WITH  SUDDEN  CORRE- 
SPONDING RETRIBUTION. 

Their  punishment  may  seem  severe,  but  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  sin 
was  committed  (a)  by  persons  in  high  position,  {b)  enjoying  great  privVege,  (c)  pos- 
sessing great  light  and  knowledge,  (d)  deliberately,  and  (e)  daringly,  on  the  floor  of 
the  holy  place,  and  before  the  face  of  the  holy  God.  It  was  a  sin,  which,  if  not 
signally  and  immediately  punished,  would  have  been  a  precedent  for  presumption 
of  the  highest  kind.     Had  they  sinned  ignorantly,  they  would  have  been  allowed 


136  UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  x.  1-S. 


the  privilege  of  the  sia  offering.  We  may  not  always  be  able  to  trace  resemblance 
between  sin  and  its  punishment,  in  kind  or  degree,  but  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth 
is  equitable,  and  allots  His  punishments  according  to  the  deeds  done,  and  in  the 
end  will  render  unto  every  man  according  to  his  works.  Position,  circumstances^ 
knowledge,  intention^  ability — all  will  be  taken  into  account  in  adjusting  penalty 
and  awarding  bliss. 

III.  How  SUCH  RETRIBUTION,  WHILE  IT  CONDEMNS  THE  SINNER,  VINDICATES  THE 
BROKEN  LAW  AND  GLORIFIES  THE  LAWGIVER. 

We  may  note  that  the  punishment  they  received  (1)  condemned  them  here  in  the 
eyes  of  all  Israel ;  (2)  showed  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin  ;  and  (3)  the  exacting 
demands  and  exalted  dignity  of  the  law.  The  Lord  had  said  to  Moses  that  He 
would  be  sanctified  in  them  who  drew  near  Him,  and  glorified  by  all  the  people ; 
and  He  would  make  even  the  wrath,  or  wickedness  of  man,  to  praise  Him.  Nadab 
and  Abihu  treated  the  law  and  the  Lawgiver  with  contempt,  and  the  Lord  showed, 
by  visiting  them  with  immediate  retribution,  that  such  sins  deserve  death,  and 
that  He  is  able  to  vindicate  His  own  glory.  God  thus  manifesting  Himself  as  a 
consuming  fire,  showed  (1)  His  Jealousy,  that  He  could  not  be  openly  and  grossly 
insulted  ;  (2)  His  power,  that  the  fire  which  glowed  in  the  cloud,  which  had  kindly 
led  them  out  of  Egypt,  protected  them  from  their  foes,  and  which  consumed  the 
burnt  offering  on  the  day  of  consecration,  had  power  to  destroy,  and,  unless  held 
in  check,  would  consume  all  sinners  ;  (3)  His  mercy,  that  while  sin  deserved 
punishment,  and  God  had  the  right  and  power  to  destroy,  He  made  judgment 
His  strange  work,  and  such  retribution — as  that  which  visited  Aaron's  sons — an 
exceptional  thing.  Let  us  learn  that,  though  worship  must  be  voluntary,  yet  it 
must  be  according  to  God  s  own  appointed  way.  Liberty  is  not  to  be  perverted 
into  lawlessness.  Knowledge  of  God  will  be  good  or  ill  to  us  according  as  we  use 
or  abuse  it.  The  law  set  before  men  life  and  death,  and  left  them  to  choose. 
The  gospel  is  a  savour  of  life  unto  life,  or  of  death  unto  death,  according  as  men 
accept  or  reject  it.  Sacred  fire  renders  divine  worship  acceptable,  strange  fire 
renders  divine  worship  abominable  ;  the  former  God  longs  for,  the  latter  God 
loathes.  Strange  fire  is  offered  upon  God's  altar  when  worship  is  presented  with 
(1)  unsolicited  materials,  or  from  (2)  unsandified  motives.  Enthusiasm  is  holy 
ardour — literally,  God  in  ws— His  own  fire  ascending  to  Himself. — F.  W,  B, 


Topic :  Man's  Degradation  op  What  is  Holt  (Vv.  1-3). 

The  page  of  human  history  has  ever  been  a  sadly  blotted  one.  It  is  a  record 
of  failure  from  first  to  last.  Amid  all  the  delights  of  Eden  man  hearkened  to 
the  tempter's  lie  (Gen.  iii.).  When  preserved  from  judgment  by  the  hand  of 
electing  Love  and  introduced  into  a  restored  earth,  he  was  guilty  of  the  sin  of 
intemperance  (Gen.  ix.).  When  conducted  by  Jehovah's  outstretched  arm  into 
the  land  of  Canaan,  he  "forsook  the  Lord,  and  served  Baal  and  Ashtaroth" 
(Judges  ii.  13).  When  placed  at  the  very  summit  of  earthly  power  and  glory, 
with  untold  wealth  at  his  feet,  and  all  the  resources  of  ihe  world  at  his  command, 
he  gave  his  heart  to  the  uncircunicisei  stranger  (I  Kings  xi.).  No  sooner  had  the 
blessings  of  the  gospel  been  promulgated,  than  it  became  needful  for  the  Holy 
(Jhost  to  prophecy  concerning  *' grievous  wolves,"  "  apostasy,"  and  all  manner  of 
failure  (Acts  xx  29  ;  1  T\m.  iv.  1-3;  2  Tim.  iii.  1-5  ;  2  Peter,  ii.  ;  Jude).  And, 
to  crown  all,  we  have  the  prophetic  rec^)rd  of  human  apostasy  from  amid  all  the 
splendours  of  millenial  glory  (Rev.  xx.  7-10).     Thus  : 

L  Man  spoils  everything.  Place  him  in  position  of  highest  dignity,  and  he 
will  degrade  himself.  Endow  him  with  most  ample  privileges,  and  he  will  abuse 
tbttm.     Scatter  blessings  around  him  in  richest  profusion,  and  he  will  corrupt 


CHAP.  X.  1—11.]  THE  BOOK    or   LEVITICUS.  137 


them.     Such  is  man  !     Such  is  nature   in  its  fairest   forms   and  under   the  most 
favourable  circumstances.      Here,  with  Nadab  and  Abihu — 

1.  Hardly  had  the  divine  position  been  assumed  ere  it  was  deliberately  aban- 
doned, through  neglect  of  the  divine  commandment.  Hardly  had  the  echo  of 
the  shout  of  victory  died  away  ere  the  elements  of  a  spurious  worship  are 
prepared. 

2.  Man  has  always  proved  himself  ill-disposed  to  walk  in  the  narrow  path  of 
strict  adherence  to  the  plain  word  of  God.  The  by-path  has  ever  seemed  to 
present  resistless  charms  to  the  poor  human  heart.  "Stolen  waters  are  sweet" 
(Prov.  ix.  17)  ;  such  is  the  enemy's  language. 

3.  Nadab  and  Abihu  took  their  own  way  :  they  should  have  acted  according  to 
the  word  of  the  Lord. 

II.  Divine  holinfss  rejects  that  which  is  the  fruit  of  man's  corrupt  will. 
**  There  went  out  fire   from  the   Lord   and   devoured    them."     How    deeply 

solemn. 

1.  By  the  outgoing  of  fire  Jehovah  had  signified  His  acceptance  of  a  true  sacri- 
fice (chap.  ix.). 

2.  By  the  outgoing  of  fire  He  sends  His  judgment  upon  erring  priests  (chap.  x.). 
The  '*  strange  fire  "  was  rejected  as  an  abomination.  The  Lord  was  glorified  in 
the  former ;  but  it  would  have  been  a  dishonour  to  accept  the  latter. 

Men's  corrupt  will  is  never  more  hideous  and  abominable  than  when  active  in 
the  things  of  God.     But — 

III.  Man  cannot  be  permitted  to  desecrate  the  sanctuary  op  the  divine 
PRESENCE.     "  I  will  be  sanctified  in  them  that  come  nigh  me,"  etc. 

1.  The  dignity  and  glory  of  the  entire  economy  depended  on  Jehovah's  mainten- 
ance of  His  righteous  claims.  If  these  were  to  be  trifled  with  all  was  forfeited. 
If  men  were  allowed  to  defile  the  sanctuary  by  *'  strange  fire  "  there  was  an  end 
to  everything. 

2.  Nothing  could  be  permitted  to  ascend  from  the  priestly  censer  but  the  pure 
fire,  kindled  from  ofi"  the  altar  of  God,  and  fed  by  the  "pure  incense  beaten 
small." 

3.  Man  must  not  be  allowed  to  introduce  his  devices  into  the  worship  of  God.  All 
his  efforts  can  only  issue  in  the  presentation  of  "strange  fire,"  unhallowed  in- 
cense, false  worship.  His  very  best  attempts  are  an  absolute  abomination  in  the 
sight  of  God.-^C.  H.  M. 

Topic:  The  Law  of  Worship  (Vv.  1-11), 

Religious  history  is  a  continuous  series  of  revelations  of  God  :  every  incident 
freighted  with  significance  and  suggestiveness.  The  gleam  of  the  seraph's  sword 
at  the  gates  of  Eden  declares  the  sinner^s  banishment  from  God:  the  roar  of  the 
deluge  is  the  voice  of  many  waters  attesting  the  terrible  might  of  Divine  judg- 
ments: the  lightnings  of  Sinai  write  out  in  letters  of  fire  the  sovereignty  of  the 
decalogue.  And  so  in  the  doom  of  Nadab  and  Abihu  we  have  announced  in  tongues 
of  flame  the  law  of  worship.  What  answer  does  the  incident  give  us  to  the  vital 
question.  How  can  men  worship  God  acceptably? 

I.  The  CHARACTER  OP  THE  W0K8H1PPEK  is  a  factor  of  importance. 

While  the  people  were  yet  trembling  at  the  ju'lgments  seur,  upon  the  offending 
priests,  God  ordained  certain  restrictions  to  be  observed  by  those  who  ministered 
at  His  altars,  as  a  "  statute  for  ever  throughout  your  generations,  that  ye  may  put 
differences  between  holy  and  unholy,  and  between  unclean  and  clean." 

1.  The  numerous  directi(»iis  in  the  Jewish  ritual  relating  to  personal  purity, 
were  all  significant  of  the  value  of  character  in  the  office  of  worship. 

2.  Yet  the  soundness  of  the  inward  life  as  pre-requisite  to  a  real  approach  to  God 


138  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  x.  1—11. 


is  seldom  considered.     This  material  age  exalts  the  form  above  the  spirit.     If  a 
man  observe  the  formalities  of  public  worship  his  spiritual  condition  is  assumed 

to  be  correct. 

3.  But  character^  the  style  and  stamp  of  the  man,  is  the  one  thing  needful. 
"  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for  tkej/  shall  see  God.'' 

II.  The  purpose  op  the  worshipper  is    the    element  of   which    God  maket 

Nadab  and  Abihu  oflFered  **  strange  fire  "  in  obedience  to  some  selfish  end. 
Their  proper  offices  in  the  ministry  were  subordinate ;  the  adoption  of  a  new 
method  would  secure  them  reputation.     Egotism,  vanity,  prompted  them. 

1.  When  a  minister  at  God's  altar  now  cultivates  eccentricities  and  extravagances 
of  manner  to  attract  a  crowd  and  become  famous,  he  is  offering  *'  strange  fire." 
A  singleness  of  purpose  to  honour  God  should  be  the  sovereign  motive  in  every 

minister's  heart. 

2.  Attendance  in  God's  house  is  not  proof  of  true  worship.  Why  are  they  there  ? 
Coming  to  be  charmed  with  eloquence  is  not  worship.  Atteud<iiice  from  force  of 
habit  is  not  worship.  Ceremony  is  easier  than  consecration;  so  men  satisfy 
themselves  with  the  outward  observance,  while  the  essential  need  of  the  inward 
aspiration  is  overlooked. 

It  is  averred  that  the  offices  of  public  worship  are  waning  in  interest  and 
influence.  The  reason  is  not  far.  It  is  not  from  lack  of  facilities  and  appliances. 
There  are  wheels  enonoh,  but  not  enough  of  *'the  living  spirit  within  the 
wheels."  Abolish  the  intellectual  and  aesthetic  theory  of  worship,  and  restore 
the  spiritual,  and  the  evil  is  corrected.  Let  every  man  feel  that  only  the  outgo 
of  His  heart  to  God  is  worship,  and  our  places  of  prayer  will  become  true  temples 
where  the  glory  of  the  Shekinah  burns,  and  where  hushed  assemblies  gather  to 
Bun  themselves  in  the  light  of  the  Divine  Presence. 

III.  The  preparation  for  worship  is  a  matter  to  which  God  attaches  great 

importance. 

1.  Men  should  be  at  their  best  when  they  approach  the  place  and  hour  of 
worship.  In  the  house  of  God  things  suffered  elsewhere  were  forbidden  (vv.  8,  9). 
Every  faculty  should  be  in  highest  exercise ;  every  barrier  to  God's  freest 
access  to  the  soul  should  be  broken  down. 

2.  Now,  as  then,  true  worship  requires  preparation.  It  cannot  be  extempo- 
rised. We  cannot  turn  to  it  at  a  moment's  notice,  and  realise  it  while  our  ears 
are  full  of  the  babble  of  the  market  and  our  hands  are  clenched  in  the  grip  of 
gain.  As  Moses  in  sight  of  the  flaming  bush  must  put  off  his  shoes  because  he 
was  standing  on  holy  ground,  so  those  who  would  meet  God  in  their  worship 
must  prepare  themselves.  A  hushed  season  of  reverence  is  a  pre-requisite  ;  a 
ready  soul,  and  no  utlier,  finds  a  waiting  God. 

IV.  The  mode  of  worship  has  its  limits  of  importance. 

Nadab  and  Abihu  were  punished  for  departing  from  the  divinely  established 
order  of  service.  Under  the  Christian  dispensation  larger  liberty  is  allowed. 
Men  are  free  to  adopt  such  methods  of  worship  as  are  most  affluent  in  ministries 
to  their  spiritual  life.     But  the  old  underlying  princi(»le  is  still  in  force. 

1.  Forms  of  worship  are  only  to  help  men  to  get  to  God.  All  claims  to  antiquity, 
or  beauty  of  diction,  or  ajipeal  to  the  sensuous  in  men,  are  barred  out ;  the  one 
question  is.  Do  they  help  us  to  push  open  the  doors  of  the  invisible  world,  and 
make  our  way  to  the  presence  of  our  Lord  % 

2.  In  the  nature  of  the  case  there  is  no  one  set  method  for  reaching  this  end. 
The  ritual  which  gives  wings  to  the  soul  in  Christian  lands  may  prove  a  drag 
weight  to  the  Zulu. 

3.  The  soul  owes  no  loyalty  to  ceremonials  of  human  contriving.  Along  which 
way  it  can  quickest  find  God  it  is  bound  to  travel.  There  is  no  best  way  foi 
the  whole  world. 


CHAP.  X.  2— 5.]  TIIR   BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  130 

Right  character,  earnest  purpose,  due  preparation,  helpful  method,  these  are  the 
essentials  to  acceptable  worship.  These  will  open  a  door  through  which  the 
divine  S[)irit  shall  come  in,  until  the  soul  of  the  worshipper  is  "filled  with  all 
the  fulness  of  God." — Rev.  Edward  S.  At  wood,  in  Sermons  on  the  International 
S.  S.  Lessons. 


Topic:  Spurious  Worshippers:  their  Darino  and  Doom  (Vv.  2-5). 

I.  God  discriminates  between  true  and  spurious  worship. 

1.  Earnest  spirits,  honest  in  their  struggles  in  searching  after  peace  with  God, 
map  make  mistakes  in  coming  nigh  Him.  They  may  bring  what  He  cannot  receive  ; 
self-reliant  eforts.  "  If  I  wash  myself  in  snow-water,  and  make  my  hands  never 
so  clean"  (Job.  ix.  30);  repentant  tears;  ho^mg  to  2^^^Qdi^Q  by  contrition  ;  generous 
acts,  endeavouring  to  win  by  deeds  of  mercy.  Such  efforts,  though  erronious, 
may  be  sincere  endeavours  of  upright,  but  unenlightened  consciences  to  attain  a 
knowledge  of  sins  forgiven.  Hence  eager  souls  are  seeking  God  by  works  of  the 
law,  or  the  ordinances  of  systematic  religion. 

2.  All  such  will  doubtless  issue  through  the  exceeding  goodness  of  God,  in  the 
clear  light  of  a  known  and  enjoyed  salvation.  There  never  yet  was  one  who 
followed  the  faintest  glimmerings  of  light  which  fell  upon  his  understanding,  who 
did  not,  in  due  time,  receive  more.  '*  To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given."  **  The 
path  of  the  just  is  as  the  shining  light,  which  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the 
perfect  day."     All  this  is  as  plain  as  it  is  encouraging. 

3.  Yet  they  who  bring  their  own  impious  wills  into  the  worship  and  service  of 
God  can  expect  no  graciousness  from  God  ]  on  them,  sooner  or  later,  the  solemn 
judgments  of  a  righteous  God,  who  cannot  allow  His  claims  to  be  trifled  with, 
must  fall.     "  I  will  be  sanctified  in  them  that  come  nigh  me." 

II.  God  deals  with  worshippers  on  the  terms  of  their  own  profession. 

1.  If  men  come  near  Him,  honestly  seeking  Him^  He  will  meet  them  as  seekers, 
and  they  shall  surely  find  Him. 

2.  But  when  men  approach  as  priests^  He  will  demand  from  them  such  worship 
and  incense  as  priests  should  offer. 

3.  They  who  come  before  God  as  worshippers  are  regarded  by  Him  as  no 
longer  seekers,  enquirers,  asking  the  right  way  to  Him,  but  as  those  who  believe 
they  know  ?iVi^  prof  ess  to  have  found.  From  such  He  requires  the  true  worship, 
the  acceptable  offering.  If  their  censer  smokes  with  unhallowed  fire,  if  they 
offer  unto  God  the  elements  of  a  spurious  worship,  if  they  essay  to  tread  His 
courts  unwashed,  unsanctified,  unsubdued,  if  they  place  on  His  altar  the  work- 
ings of  their  own  corrupt  m\\,  judgment  must  be  the  result.  There  will  be  (a)  the 
immediate  rejection  of  all  worship  which  has  not  the  Father  for  its  goal,  Christ 
for  its  substance  and  hope,  the  Holy  Spirit  for  its  sanctity  and  acceptableness  ; 
and  there  will  be  (6)  the  fearful  judgment  at  the  last,  when  all  folly  and  wrong 
will  be  accursed. 

4.  God's  holiness  is  as  quick  to  reject  all  "  strange  fire,"  as  His  grace  is  quick 
to  accept  the  faintest,  feeblest  breathings  of  a  true  heart.  He  must  pour  out 
His  righteous  judgment  upon  all  false  worship,  though  He  will  never  "quench 
the  smoking  flax,  or  break  the  bruised  reed." 

in.  Yet  what  an  enormity  of  spurious  worship  goes  up  before  god. 

1.  Very  much  of  that  which  parses  among  men  for  worship  of  God  is  but 
**  strange  fire  "  after  all.  There  is  neither  the  pure  fire  nor  the  pure  incense, 
and  therefore  heaven  accepts  it  not. 

2  Attainment  to  the  true  qualities  of  hallowed  worship  is  a  result  of  divine  grace 
in  the  soul.     He  who  knows  through  grace  the  pardon  which  the  blood  of  Christ 


140  HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  x.  1,2. 


brings,  he  who  has  recei\^ed  the  illumination  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  can  worship 
the  Father  in  spirit  and  in  truth. 

3.  It  is  consolatory  to  turn  our  thoughts  from  the  vain  worship  which 
within  so  many  shrines  is  burned  before  the  Lord,  to  consider  the  true  worship 
which  from  so  many  honest  and  Christian  hearts  is  ascendrng  to  God's  sanctuary. 

IV.  The  just  judgment,  whlch  falsity  of  worship  evokes,  cannot  fail  to 

COME. 

1.  It  tarries  now,  because  of  the  interposing  grace  of  Christ,  staying  the  plague, 
arresting  the  doom.  During  this  age  of  grace,  '*  God  is  in  Christ  reconciling  the 
world  unto  Himself,  not  imputing  their  trespasses  unto  them^  Therefore  the 
judgment  falls  not  direct,  as  on  Nadab  and  Abihu  it  did,  on  spurious  wor- 
shippers. 

2.  Yet  the  throne  of  God  cannot  ever  continue  to  he  insulted  by  clouds  of  im- 
pure incense  ascending  from  unpurged  worshippers.  "Strange  fire"  will  ultimately 
be  quenched  for  ever,  and  all  that  is  spurious  be  abolished,  and  the  whole 
universe  become  as  one  hallowed  temple  wherein  the  true  God,  Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Ghost,  shall  be  adored  in  acceptable  and  reverent  worship  throughout  tho 
everlasting  ages. 

Topic:  A  Warning  to  Worshippers  (V.  1,  2). 

There  are  three  circumstances  in  which  the  Old  Testament  dispensation  deserves 
our  notice.  (1)  As  it  prefigured  the  times  of  the  gospel  and  the  sacrifice  of  Christ — • 
"  the  law  a  shadow."  (2)  As  it  showed  the  true  requisites  of  acceptable  worship. 
(3)  As  it  plainly  marks  the  solemnity  which  God  attaches  to  all  the  institutions  of  His 
own  appointment.  Everything  was  marked  by  severity.  The  Sabbath  breaker  was 
punished  with  death,  disobedience  to  parents  with  death,  the  slightest  infraction 
of  a  solemn  ordinance  was  punished  with  death.  Instance  before  us,  Nadab  and 
Abihu.  Say  not  we  have  no  concern.  The  dispensation  differs,  but  the  Lawgiver 
is  still  the  same  (Heb.  xii.  28,  29).     Tabernacle  typified  Christ  (Heb.  ix.  8). 

Consider  the  circumstances,  warnings,  inferences.    Necessary  to  mark  these. 

I.  The  cHi;  p  circumstances  which  the  history  records. 

1.  The  setting  up  of  the  tabernacle.  This  had  been  erected  at  a  great  expense, 
and  was  truly  a  national  work,  and  the  completion  of  it  was  a  subject  of  universal 
congratulation.  No  labour  was  withheld,  no  cost  spared,  no  ditficulty  considered  j 
all  ages,  all  classes,  all  ranks,  almost  all  hands  were  employed  in  forwarding  it 
(Ex.  XXXV.  20).  It  had  been  framed  after  the  pattern  in  the  mount,  by  God's  ex- 
press appointment,  "  as  the  Lord  commanded."  The  most  consummate  skill  had 
been  employed  in  its  erection  ;  and  as  they  saw  its  hallowed  curtains  finished, 
they  rejoiced  with  an  elevated  and  a  reasonable  joy.  They  felt  that  they  were 
no  longer  aliens  ;  they  had  the  visible  symbol  of  God's  presence  ;  they  were  raised 
to  the  dignity  of  mornl  life ;  they  had  a  sanctuary  to  which  they  might  repair, 
and,  amidst  the  toils  of  the  wilderness,  there  was  one  object  on  which  the  eye 
might  rest,  one  sacred  enclosure  which  formed  the  link  between  earth  and  heaven. 
It  was  their  refuge  in  danger,  their  guide  in  perplexity,  their  solace  in  weariness, 
and  their  hope  when  every  other  hope  failed  them. 

2.  The  acceptance  of  their  sacrifices.  At  length  the  expected  day  arrived  when 
the  tabernacle  should  be  publicly  consecrated  and  the  first  services  performed. 
Ten  thousand  hearts  beat  with  warm  devotion  when  the  solemnities  l)egau. 
Moses  and  Aaron,  the  elders  of  Israel,  the  Levitical  priesthood,  the  great  congre- 
gation— all  were  assembled.  And  now  the  sin  offering  for  Aaron  was  to  be  pre- 
sented. The  beasts  were  slain,  the  ceremonies  performed,  the  blood  was  spriukled, 
the  wave  offering  was  offered  ;  Aaron,  in  the  ardour  of  devotion  and  with  a  heart 
overflowing  with  love,  blessed  the  people  (23,  24).     The  sacrifice  was  accepted. 


rnvp.  X.  1,2.]  THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS.  Ul 

3.  The  death  of  Nadah  and  Ahihu.  "  And  Nadab  and  Ahihu  took  each  a  censer 
and  put  fire."  This  had  been  distinctly  prohibited — went  beyond  God  a  ordinance. 
It  was  a  virtual  contempt  of  the  authority  of  God,  a  dishonour  to  the  spiritual 
nature  of  that  institution.  They  were,  probably,  over-elated  with  the  honour  of 
their  new  function,  and  perhaps,  with  the  headstrong  vanity  of  irreligious  youth, 
anxious  to  overstep  the  ordinary  forms  and  show  the?**  independence  of  the  ex- 
ample and  authority  of  Aaron.  The  Jewish  doctors  suppose  that  these  young  men 
wei  e  intoxicated  with  wine,  and  had  also  neglected  to  make  the  proper  distinctions 
in  the  sacrifices  (from  8  and  9). 

Their  sin  was  compounded  of  impiety,  presumption,  and  sacrilege.  ^^And  there 
went  out  fire  from  the  Lord.^*  Fire  was  their  sin,  fire  their  punishment.  God  saw 
that  fire  was  the  fittest  vengeance  for  a  sin  of  fire — his  own  fire  for  their  strange 
fire  ;  the  same  fire  which  consumed  the  sacrifice  now  consumed  the  sacrificers. 
**/<  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  GodJ*  'J-'hey  had  to  do 
with  one  who  was  wise  to  prescribe  His  own  worship,  ^ws^  to  require  what  lie 
hath  prescribed,  and  powerful  to  avenge  what  was  in  opposition  to  His  command. 

There  is  som.ething  inexpressibly  awful  in  the  thought  that  the  service  of  the 
sanctuary  began  with  death  and  judgment  ^^  before  the  mercy-seat"  (4-6). 

II.  The  warnings  which  the  text  perpetuates. 

Lay  it  to  heart,  and  remember  that  it  is  as  eff'ectual  to  all  the  purposes  of 
solemn  caution  as  though  it  had  occurred  but  yesterday  and  had  taken  place 
within  the  precincts  of  a  Christian  temple.  Is  is  recorded  for  your  instruction. 
God  is  the  same,  religion  is  the  same,  worship  is  the  same,  and  the  sanctions  of 
Gospel  ordinances  are  the  same  ;  the  only  ditference  is  that  the  punishment  is 
deferred  till  death,  and  that  instead  of  earthly  and  material  fire,  those  who  mock 
God  in  His  ordinances  will  be  exposed  to  a  fire  never  quenched^  ^^  suffering  the 
vengeance  of  eternal  fire." 

1.  The  avful  solemnity  which  God  attaches  to  the  ordinances  of  religion.  "  /  will 
be  sanctified  in  them  that  come  nigh  me."  This  law  has  never  been  repealed,  but 
it  has  been  renewed  and  perpetuated  by  Christ  Himself  '*  God  is  a  spirit."  Ex. 
X.  22.  Sanctified  God  will  be,  either  in  the  spirituality  of  men's  worship,  or  the 
severity  of  their  condemnation.  Let  us  beware  of  falling  into  their  sin.  When 
we  come  with  prayerless  and  unsanctified  hearts,  with  worldly  aff'ections,  with 
profane  imaginations,  when  we  worship  without  spirituality  of  mind,  without 
imploring  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  without  a  lively  faith  in  the  sacrifice 
and  intercession  of  Christ,  we  bring  common  fire,  "  strange  fire,"  to  the  altar. 
These  flames  were  never  of  His  kindling  He  hates  both  altar  and  fire,  priest  and 
sacrifice.     Who  can  calculate  our  guilt  ] 

Remember  this,  ye  who  only  come  to  trifle,  who  never  pray  before  you  come, 
who  make  no  conscience  of  spiritual  worship — remember,  you  never  leave  His 
house  as  you  enter  it.  You  leave  it  witu  a  heavier  weight  of  guilt.  "  Keep  thy 
foot,"  etc.  (Ecclf^s.  V.  1). 

2.  No  outward  profensiony  no  forms  of  religion^  however  specious,  will  avail  with- 
out  internal  piety.  Nadab  and  Abihu  had  been  anointed  with  holy  oil,  set  apart 
by  God  Himself,  clad  with  beautiful  garments,  had  taken  part  in  a  sacrifice  which 
had  been  accepted  (ix.  9).  But  all  this  was  as  nothing.  What  a  lesson  to  ministers  / 
Well  may  we  tremble,  answerable  for  the  spirit  we  diiTase  in  prayer,  etc. 

3.  The  piety  of  parents  will  form  no  shield  fur  the  iniquity  of  children  Aaron's 
sacrifice  had  been  accepted,  his  sons  were  smitten  instantly.  We  might  have 
pleaded  their  youth  and  inexperience,  a  first  off'ence,  their  relation  to  Aaron. 
Even  Aaron  had  not  a  word. 

III.  The  inperknces  which  this  event  supplies 

1.  Bless  God  for  the  more  gracious  age  in  ivhich  you  live^  that  "mercy  now  re^ 
joices  against  judgment  " 

2.  Mo2irn  the  iniquity  of  your  holy  things.     Even  our  very  approaches  to  God, 


142  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  x.  3. 


our  prayers,  hymns,  services,  are  all  marred  by  our  sad  defects,  in  spirit,  manner, 
and  aim. 

3.  Implore  the  divine  Spirit  to  *'  help  your  iufirmities,  for  we  know  not  what 
to  pray  for  as  we  ought ;  but  the  Spirit  himself  maketh  intercession  for  us  with 
groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered,  and  maketh  intercession  for  the  saints  accord- 
ing to  the  will  of  God  "  (Rom.  viii.  26,  21),— Rev,  Samuel  Thodey,  A.D.  1822. 


Topic:  The  Silenob  op  Aaron*s  Sorrow  (V,  3), 

The  sudden  and  awful  destruction  of  Nadab  and  Abihu  filled  the  heart  of 
their  father  with  unutterable  grief.  It  mast  have  been  a  most  appalling  sight 
to  see  two  young  men  clad  in  priestly  vestments  smitten  dead  before  the  Lord 
in  the  midst  of  an  iniquitous  act  of  innovation.  But  "Aaron  held  his  peace." 
Let  us  notice — 

I.  The  poignant  character  of  aaron's  sorrow.  The  blow  came  and 
smote  (i.)  his  patriotis7n — he  would  feel  that  Israel  as  a  nation  was  disgraced ; 
(ii.)  his  piety — religion  was  dishonoured  and  God  insulted  ;  (iii.)  his  puternitp. 
As  a  man,  he  would  have  felt  deeply  had  any  two  men  of  Israel  met  with  such 
a  doom  ;  but  for  the  victims  to  be  his  sons,  the  flower  and  promise  of  his 
family,  this  would  make  his  grief  exceedingly  great.  He  may  have  looked  upon 
them  with  pardonable  pride  the  day  before,  when  they  stood  by  his  side  and 
received  the  commendation  of  the  Lord  ;  now  he  stands  beside  them  with  un- 
utterable shame,  as  well  as  sorrow,  as  he  sees  them  lying  lifeless  under  the 
condemnation  of  the  Lord.  (1)  It  is  a  great  grief  for  pareuts  to  watch  their 
children  die  when  they  have  seen  the  end  approaching,  and  have  prepared  their 
hearts  to  meet  the  bereavement  by  its  slow  approach ;  but  in  Aaron's  case  the 
bereavement  was  sudden,  there  were  no  premonitions  to  prepare  the  father  s 
heart  to  meet  it.  (2)  It  is  a  great  grief  for  parents  to  surrender  their  children 
even  when  they  feel  sure  they  die  in  the  Lord,  and  that  God  gently  takes  their 
life  away  ;  but,  in  Aaron's  case,  his  sons  died  under  the  frown  of  the  Lord,  and 
concerning  their  future  he  could  have  no  sure  and  certain  hope.  To  lose  two 
sons  under  such  circumstances  was  sorrow  of  the  most  poignant  kind. 

II.  The  patient  conduct  op  aaron  under  such  sorrow. 

The  catastrophe  struck  him  dumb.  He  restrained  himself,  and  refrained  from 
uttering  any  comment  on  the  event,  any  complaint  against  God.  It  was  not  the 
silence  oi  stoicism,  or  sullenness,  or  obstinacy,  hxxto^ devout  and  reticent  submission. 
He  heard  what  Moses  had  to  say  upon  the  event ;  he  felt  his  sons  had  grossly 
insulted  the  Lord  ;  that  God's  glory  must  be  vindicated  ;  that  the  punishment 
was  merited  ;  so,  he  ^^held  his  peace"  He  offered  no  objection,  asked  for  no 
explanation ;  knew  he  could  not  reverse  the  verdict,  could  not  restore  the 
victims  ;  it  was  an  irreparable  loss  I  He  "  held  his  peace  "  ;  no  language  of  his 
could  have  described  his  grief,  or  conveyed  a  fair  idea  of  his  sorrow.  He  *'  held 
his  peace"  with  men,  but  by  thought,  which  is  inarticulate  speech,  he  could  tell 
his  grief  to  God.  Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  sometimes  can- 
not speak ;  at  such  a  time  as  this,  in  the  hidden  depths  of  the  spirit,  the  heart 
only  knows  its  own  bitterness.  This  incident  of  Aaron  silently  and  meekly  bear- 
ing his  great  grief  teaches  us  that  one  of  the  most  consistent  and  expressive  ways 
to  show  our  sincere  sorrow  in  the  hour  of  any  great  calamity,  is  by  holding  our 
peace.  Silence  at  such  a  time  is  (a)  safe^  (b)  devout,  (c)  consistent.  The  silence 
must  be  holy  and  resigned;  for  there  may  be  rebellion  and  anger  in  the  heart 
when  the  lips  are  dumb.— i^.    W,  B, 


CUAT.  X.  6,  7.1  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITWUS.  143 


Topic:  Priestly  Elevation  above  Private  Sorrow  (Vv.  6,  7)^ 


Aaron,  Eleazar  and  Ithamar  were  to  remain  unmoved  in  their  elevated 
place,  their  holj?  dignity,  their  position  of  priestly  sanctity.  Neither  the  failure, 
nor  the  judgment  consequent  thtTeon,  was  to  be  allowed  to  interfere  with  those 
who  wore  the  priestly  robes  and  were  anointed  with  ''  the  oil  of  the  Lord." 
Those  outside  might  "bewail  the  burning,"  but  as  for  Aaron  and  his  sons,  they 
were  to  go  on  in  the  discharge  of  their  hallowed  ministries. 

1.  Worship,  not  lamentation,  is  the  solemn  function  op  priests. 

Priests  in  the  sanctuary  were  not  to  bewail  but  to  adore;  not  to  weep  as  in 
the  presence  of  deatli,  but  to  bow  their  anointed  heads  as  in  the  presence  of  the 
divine  visitation.  The  fire  of  the  Lord  might  act  and  do  its  solemn  work  of 
judgment,  but  to  a  true  priest  it  mattered  not  what  that  "  fire"  came  to  do — to 
express  divine  approval  by  consuming  the  sacrifice,  or  divine  displeasure  by 
iuiiiing  sin  ;  that  "fire"  was  the  known  manifestation  of  God,  «,nd  whether  it 
acted  in  mercy  or  judgment  the  business  of  all  true  priests  was  to  worship.  "I 
will  sing  of  mercy  and  of  judgment ;  unto  thee,  0  Lord,  will  I  sing." 

n.  2/iey  who  have  the  anointing  of  the  Holy  Ghost  must  maintain  an  elevation 
OF  soul  above  nature's  weaknesses. 

1.  Priestly  nearness  to  God  gives  the  soul  an  insight  into  all  God's  waysj  and  such 
a  sense  of  the  Tightness  of  all  His  dispensations  that  one  is  enabled  to  worship  in 
His  presence,  even  though  the  stroke  of  His  hand  has  removed  from  us  the  object 
of  tender  affection. 

2  Though  godly  souls  feel  as  men,  they  worship  as  priests.  They  are  not 
stoics  ;  but  an  elevated  spiritual  life  opens  up  a  region  to  the  soul  brought  *'  nigh 
to  God  "  of  thought,  feeling,  experience,  in  which  nature  can  never  move  ;  a 
region  in  which,  with  all  its  boasted  refinement  and  self-sufficiency,  nature 
(unhallowed  by  God's  grace  and  unsustained  by  the  Lord's  sufficiency)  knows 
nothing.  We  must  tread  the  sanctuary  of  God  with  truepriestly  energy,  in  order 
to  enter  into  the  depth,  the  meaning,  and  power  of  such  holy  mysteries. 

The  prophet  Ezokiel  was  called,  in  his  day,  to  sit  down  to  this  difficult  lesson 
(Ezek.  xxiv.  16-18) ;  and  it  proves  that  in  prophetic  testimony,  as  well  as  in 
priestly  worship,  we  must  rise  superior  to  all  the  claims  and  influences  of  n^-ture 
and  of  earth. 

in.  Our  high  priestly  privileges  may  be  forfeited  by  the  assertion 
OP  nature's  frailties. 

Too  often  sanctified  and  hallowed  souls  fall,  below  their  divine  elevation. 

1.  Nothing  save  realised  priestly  nearness  to  6^oi  can  preserve  the  heart  from 
the  power  of  evil  or  maintain  its  spiritual  tone. 

2.  All  believers  are  priests  unto  God,  and  nothing  can  deprive  them  of  their 
position  as  such.  But  though  they  cannot  lose  their  position  they  may  grievously 
fail  in  the  discharge  of  their  functions.  While  looking  at  the  precious  truth  of 
the  believer's  security  we  may  forget  the  possibility  of  our  failing  to  discharge 
our  sacred  duties. 

3.  There  is  continual  need  of  watchfulness  and  prayer,  that  the  hallowed  eleva- 
tion of  priests  unto  God  he  presei^ed.  His  heavenly  grace  alone  will  preserve  us 
from  every  species  of  failure,  whether  it  be  personal  defilement,  or  the 
presentation  of  any  of  the  varied  forms  of  "  strange  fire,"  which  abound  so  in 
the  professing  Church,  or  in  the  yielding  to  persoual  weakness  of  grief  and  com- 
plaint of  our  frail  human  nature. — Developed  from  Notes  on  Leviticus^  by  C.  H.  Mi 


]44  noMlLETiC  COMMENTAliY  ON  ICriAi.  x.  8  -  11 


Topic:  Excitations  Perilous  to  Communion  (Vv.  8-11). 

The  eA'ect  of  wine  is  to  excite  nature ;  and  all  natural  excitement  hinders 
that  calm,  well-balanced  condition  of  soul  which  is  essential  to  the  proper  dis- 
charge of  the  priebtly  othce. 

I.  Each  should  discover  for  himself  what  acts  upon  him  as  a  deletiiRIOUS 
excitement. 

1.  The  causes  which  excite  are  manifold  indeed  ;  wealth,  ambition,  politics,  the 
varied  objects  of  emulation  around  us  in  the  world,  as  well  as  "  wine  and  strong 

drink." 

2.  Acting  upon  us  with  exciting  power,  they  entirely  unfit  us  from  every 
department  of  priestly  service.  If  the  heart  be  swollen  with  (a)  feelings  of  pride, 
covetousness  or  emulation^  it  is  utterly  imopssible  that  the  pure  air  of  the  sanctuary 
can  be  enjoyed,  or  the  sacred  functions  of  priestly  ministry  discharged.  Men 
speak  of  the  versatility  of  genius,  or  a  capacity  of  turning  quickly  from  one 
thing  to  another  ;  but  the  most  versatile  genius  ever  possessed  could  not  enable 
a  man  to  pass  from  (b)  an  unhallowed  arena  of  literary,  commercial  or  political 
competition,  into  the  holy  retirement  of  the  sanctuary  of  the  divine  presence  ; 
nor  could  it  so  adjust  the  eye  that  has  become  dimmed  by  the  influence  of  such 
scenes  as  to  enable  it  to  discern,  with  priestly  accuracy,  the  difference  **  between 
holy  and  unholy,  and  between  unclean  and  clean." 

II.  God's  priests  must  keep  themselves  apart  from  unhallowed  ex- 
citations. 

1.  Theirs  is  a  path  of  holy  separation  and  abstraction.  They  are  called  aside 
from  and  raised  far  above  the  influence  of  merely  earthly  joy  as  well  as  earthly 
sorrow.  In  other  words,  the  joy  of  God's  priests  is  not  the  joy  of  earth,  but  the 
joy  of  heaven,  the  joy  of  the  sanctuary.  "  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  their 
strength." 

2.  Hence,  everything  that  incapacitates  us  for  our  priestly  function,  that  tends 
to  derange  our  priestly  relation  or  dim  our  priestly  vision,  must  unfit  us  for  the 
service  we  are  called  to  render.  The  heart  must  be  kept  right,  the  conscience 
pure,  the  eye  single,  the  spiritual  vision  undimmed. 

3.  The  sovVs  business  in  the  holy  place  must  be  faithfully  and  diligently  attended 
to,  else  all  will  go  wrong.  Private  communion  with  God  must  be  kept  up,  else 
we  shall  be  fruitless  as  servants,  and  defeated  as  men  of  war.  It  is  vain  for  us 
to  bustle  about,  and  run  hither  and  thither  in  what  we  call  service,  or  indulge 
in  vppid  words  about  Christian  valour  and  warfare.  If  we  are  not  keeping  our 
priestly  garments  unspotted,  if  we  are  not  keeping  ourselves  free  from  all  that 
would  excite  nature,  we  shall  assuredly  fail  and  be  defeated.  Our  success 
in  every  department  depends  on  our  cultivating  a  spirit  of  worship. 

(a)  Let  us  then  exercise  a  spirit  of  self-judgment  over  our  habits,  onr  ways,  our 
associations.  It  is  the  business  of  each  one  to  be  fully  aware  of  what  is  to  him 
as  "  wine  and  strong  drink,"  what  blunts  his  spiritual  perceptions.  It  may  be 
the  auction  mart,  a  cattle  show,  a  newspaper — the  merest  trifle.  But  if  it  tends 
to  excite,  it  will  disqualify  us  for  future  ministry. 

(6)  When  by  grace  we  discern  aught  that  in  the  slightest  degree  unfits  us  for 
the  elevated  exercises  of  the  sanctuary,  let  us  put  it  away^  cost  what  it  may. 
Let  us  not  suff'er  ourselves  to  become  slaves  of  a  habit. 

{c)  Communion  with  God  should  be  dearer  to  our  hearts  than  all  besides ;  and 
just  in  proportion  as  we  prize  that  communion  shall  we  watch  and  pray  against 
everything  that  would  rob  us  of  it,  against  everything  that  would  excite,  ruffle  or 
unhinge. 

{d)  The  more  we  live  in  the  presence  of  God,  the  less  we  can  hear  to  he  oui  of 


Chap.  x.  12—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITtCUS.  145 


it ;  and  no  one  who  knows  the  deep  joy  of  being  there  could  lightly  indulge  in 
aught  that  would  take  or  keep  him  theuce.  There  is  not  that  object  within  the 
compass  of  earth  which  would,  in  the  judgment  of  a  spiritual  mind,  be  an 
equivalent  for  one  hour's  fellowship  with  God. 

Qy  abiding  in  the  secret  retirement  of  His  holy  presence,  and  keeping  im- 
plicitly to  His  truth,  we  shall  be  kept  from  false  worship  of  every  kind,  and 
fleshly  excitement  in  all  its  forms;  so  shall  we  be  enabled  to  carry  ourselves 
aright  in  every  department  of  priestly  ministration,  and  to  enjoy  all  the  privi- 
leges of  our  priestly  position.  The  communion  of  a  Christian  is  easily  hurt  by 
the  rude  influences  of  an  evil  world  ;  within  the  sacred  precincts  of  the  divine 
presence  all  is  pure,  safe,  and  happy. 

Far  from  a  world  of  grief  and  sin, 
With  God  eternally  shut  in. 

[See  Addenda,  p.  151,  Sensationalism.'\ — Videy  C.  H.  M. 

Topic:  The  Unrelaxinq  Strictness  of  the  Ritual  (Vv.  12-20). 

The  Lord  having  spoken  unto  Aaron  (v.  8),  showing  that  he  was  not  dis- 
missed from  service  on  account  of  the  sins  of  his  sons — Moses  now  addresses 
him  and  his  two  surviving  sons  upon  the  law  of  eating  the  holy  things ;  showing 
they  were  still  as  priests  to  draw  near  to  the  Lord,  and  mediate  for  the   people. 

Workers  may  sin  and  die,  but  (^od's  work  must  go  on.  The  reiteration  of  the 
law  of  the  meat  offering  was  useful  and  timely,  as  Aaron  and  his  sons  may  have 
forgotten  it  in  alarm  and  confusion  at  the  calamity  just  occurred.  They  were  to 
partake  of  their  portion  according  to  the  law  of  the  Lord,  as  their  due,  according 
to  the  commandment  of  the  Lord. 

Then  having  given  these  directions  concerning  the  offerings,  Moses  betrays 
some  misgivings  respecting  the  full  observance  of  the  sin-offeriug  ritual  :  and 
"  Moses  diligently  sought  the  goat  of  the  sin  offering,  and,  behold  it  was  burnt  "  ; 
this  made  him  angry,  he  questioned  the  sons  of  Aaron  upon  their  delinquency, 
and  assured  them  that  they  might  and  ought  to  have  eaten  what  was  appointed 
them  as  their  share  of  the  sacrifice  in  the  holy  place  [See  chap.  vi.  26-29] 
Aaron  offered  an  apology  for  the  omission,  and  Moses  accepted  it.   Let  us  look — 

I.  At  the  failure  of  the  priests  to  fulfil  the  RhQuiRHju  ritual. 

Moses  reminded  them  that  he  had  enjoined  it  upon  them  ;  that  what  he  en- 
joined he  received  from  the  Lord ;  the  portion  allotted  them  was  the  gift  of  God, 
and  given  in  connection  with  the  privilege  of  acting  as  typical  siu  bearers  of  thw 
congregation.  How  jealous  Moses  was  for  the  honour  and  strict  observance  d 
the  ritual :  he  would  not  have  any  part  of  it  neglected  under  any  circumstances 
or  pretext.  They  were  to  be  performed  in  the  right  ti/ne,  place,  and  manner,  as 
well  as  in  the  right  spirit.  Neither  priests  nor  people  were  at  liberty  to  inno- 
vate upon  the  details  of  the  offerings. 

II.  At  the  causes  of  the  failure,  (a)  An  overwhelming  feeling  of  sorrow. 
Aaron  said:  "Such  things  have  befallen  me,  ^' and  they  were  "swc/i  things"  o^ 
Sorrow  as  no  language  could  describe  ;  he  had  held  his  peace  under  the  stroke 
of  a  double  simultaneous  bereavement,  but  ^^  such  things"  had  not  been  known 
by  him  before,  nor  had  he  heard  of  any  ^^  such  things"  occiin'mg  in  connection 
with  any  other  family.  He  had  been  overwhelmed,  and  that  had  contributed  to 
the  failure  to  comply  with  what  was  required  of  him  and  his  sons,  {b)  An  overaw- 
ing fear  of  sin  He  feared  that  if  he  had  eaten  of  the  sin-offering  it  might  not 
have  l)een  accepted  of  the  Lord,  that  too  much  sin  clung  to  him  and  his  sous, 
and  he  would  rather  leave  the  rite  uncompleted  than  perforjn  it  in  a  wrong 
Bpuit.     Aaron  apprehended  the  gieat  truth   that  "God   is  a  Spirit,  and  that 

1 


145  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  x.  18,  19. 


those  who  worship  Him  must  worship  Him  in  spirit  and  in  truth."  Aaron  felt 
tliat  with  such  feelings  as  pervaded  his  breast,  to  have  eaten  his  portion  of  the 
sin-offering  would  have  been  a  mere  empty  and  meaningless  form.  Suoh  a  full 
and  frank  acknowledgment  of  deviation  and  unworthiness  satisfied  Moses,  and 

he  said  no  more. 

III.  At  the  forgiveness  of  the  failure.  It  is  not  directly  stated  that 
Aaron  and  his  sons  were  forgiven,  but  doubtless  they  were.  The  Lord  allowed 
the  omission  to  pass  unnoticed  ;  and  evidently,  Moses — although  he  was  angry 
at  first — saw  that,  in  the  exceptional  circumstances  under  which  the  failure 
occurred,  no  dishonour  was  intended,  and  no  offence  was  offered  to  the  Lord. 
The  sin  of  Aaron's  sons  in  offering  strange  fire  was  a  positive  outrage.  The 
sin  of  Aaron  and  his  two  surviving  sons  was  a  simple  failure.  Forgiveness  was 
granted  on  the  ground  (a)  of  human  infirmity.  Aaron  and  his  sons  must  have 
been  physically,  as  well  as  mentally  and  morally,  exhausted  by  the  sorrow  into 
which  they  were  so  suddenly  plunged  ;  they  felt  constrained  to  fast  as  well  as 
to  weep.  The  flesh  was  weak,  though  the  spirit  may  have  been  willing.  (6) 
Of  spiritual  sincerity.  Aaron  declared  he  was  afraid  that  if  he  ate  he  might  do 
so  unworthily  and  unacceptably  ;  that  he  shrank  from  a  forced  and  false  com- 
pliance with  the  letter  of  the  law.  (c)  Of  Divine  clemency.  Moses  knew  that 
God  was  a  jealous  God,  that  the  ritual  was  very  rigid  and  exacting  ;  and  yet 
he  knew  that  the  Lord  was  merciful  and  ready  to  forgive.  He  pointed  out  the 
error  and  failing  to  his  brother,  then  held  his  peace,  content  with  what  Aarou 
had  to  say  in  his  defence.  In  all  our  service  and  worship  we  have  to  do  with  a 
God  who  pities  those  who  fear  Him,  even  as  a  father  pities  his  children  ;  who 
knows  our  frame,  and  remembers  that  we  are  dust.  All  errors  and  failings, 
yea,  all  sin,  may  now  be  forgiven  through  Christ's  one  great  atonement,  if  only 
the  penitent  ask  in  faith  and  sincerity. — F.    W.  B. 

Topic:  No  Joy  Before  God's  Altar  (Vv.  18,  19). 

Origen  (a.  d  185-254)  in  his  Commentary  on  Leviticus  {In  Levity  Horn,  viii.) 
supplies  suggestions  based  on  Aaron's  grief  amid  his  priestly  ministrations 
which  may  be  headed — 

Christ's  grief  at  god's  heavenly  altar  : 

And  reflects  thus  :  "  My  Saviour  even  now  is  mourning  for  my  sin.  How  can  He, 
who  is  the  Advocate  for  my  sins,  drink  the  wine  of  gladness  when  I  am  grieving 
Him  with  my  transgressions  1  He  is  therefore  in  sorrow  as  long  as  we  remain  in 
error.  .  .  For  we  cannot  think  that  while  Paul  mourned  for  sinners  and  wept 
for  the  guilty,  my  Lord  Jesus  abstains  from  weeping  when  He  approaches  the 
Father,  when  He  stands  near  the  Altar  and  offers  the  propitiation  for  us.  And 
this  is  the  meaning  o^  the  prohibition  against  drinking  the  wine  of  gladness  when 
coming  near  the  altar,  fur  Christ  suffers  still  the  bitterness  for  our  sins." 

In  the  Benediciine  Breviary  this  passage  from  Origen  formed  one  of  the 
"lectures  "  or  readings,  and  its  teaching  became  thus  diffused  over  the  whole 
Catholic  Church. 

St.  Bernard  (a.d.  1091-1153)  recognising  the  erroneousness  of  doctrinal 
teaching  in  this  comment  of  Origen,  wrote  a  special  discourse  [S.  Bernardi 
Serm.  xxxiv.  de  verbis  Origenis^  see  Canon  Jenkiu's  Devotion  to  the  Sacred 
Heart']  pointing  out  the  error  and  danger  of  extending  the  suff< rings  of  Christ, 
either  in  body  or  mind^  into  the  reign  of  His  glory.  "  On  earth  '  he  exclaims, 
"Jesus  truly  wept,  was  truly  sorrowful,  truly  sutfered,  truly  died,  was  truly 
buried.  But  now  that  He  is  risen  again,  old  things  are  passed  away.  Seek  not 
theu  thy  Beloved  on   His  bed  ;  He  is  riaen,   He  is  not  here.  .   .    Now  He  is  uo 


CHAP  X.  1,  2.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 


147 


longer  among  the  dead,  but  is  taken  from  the  midst  of  them,  changed  in  body, 
changed  in  heart,  He  hath  entered  into  the  majesty  of  the  Lord.  .  .  Though  our 
Lord  wept  over  Jerusalem,  now  He  weeps  no  more  for  ever  (even  as  raised  from 
the  dead  He  dieth  no  more);  and  as  rising  from  His  bed  He  is  no  more  found 
therein.  Yet  He  hath  now  an  unspeakably  larger  and  more  effectual  feeling 
than  they  have  who  mourn  for  sinners,  or  lay  down  their  lives  for  their 
brethren  ;  although  He  who  hath  finished  Hia  work  can  no  longer  do  either  of 
these  acta  of  mercy." 

OUTLINES  ON  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  X, 


v.  1. —  Theme:  Self-exalting  zeal. 

Sounds  of  high  joy  had  first  been  swelling 
through  the  holy  court :  sure  tokens  of  ap- 
proving love  had  rested  on  the  altar. 

But  a  vile  foe  is  always  near.  Satan  sees 
the  sacred  hour,  and  flies  to  mar.  He  sees 
the  gospel  of  tbat  heaven-sent  fire,  and  will 
strive  to  quench. 

I.  No  STATION  IS  TOO  HIGH  FOR  TEMPTA- 
TION   TO    ASSAIL. 

The  foe  has  keys  for  every  gate.  Though 
the  place  is  sacred  and  the  office  holy,  no 
consecrated  functions  scare  him  back.  He 
seeks  the  side  of  Aaron's  first-born  sons. 
Their  calling  to  be  priests  is  no  protecting 
shield.  He  can  ascend  the  altar  steps.  He 
knows  the  tit  temptation  for  the  holiest  place. 
So  now  he  fosters  self-exalting  zeal.  He 
leads  to  worship,  but  the  worship  must  be 
"  strange."  Such  was  his  bait :  mark  its 
success. 

II.  Self-will  offerings  have  no  place 

IN  GODS  worship. 

1.  Their  Jirst  slep  strays.  Each  takes  his 
censer.  God  did  not  require  this  act :  it  was 
not  His  will. 

2.  The  next  act  errs  more.     They  add  fire. 
Whence  was  it  brought?    God  has   provided 
what  alone  He  would  receive.  An  outstretched 
hand  might  instantly  obtain  the  divinely  sanc- 
tioned tire. 

3.  Was  there  defiant  reasoning  on  their 
part  ?  What,  will  no  other  flame  avail  ? 
Will  His  altar  fire  alone  cause  incense  to  as- 
cend ?  Impious  self-will  thus  reasons  unto 
ruin. 

4.  A  "  strange "  service  is  acted  Their 
hands  feign  holy  work,  but  rebel  feet  tread 
doivn  Uod''s  ordinance. 

III.    To    DESPISli  GOD    IS    RAPID   DOWNFALL. 

1.  his  frown  is  withering  blight:  it  arms 
each  creature  with  destructive  siing.  Behold 
a  proof.  The  pledge  of  favour^  "  fire,"  in- 
flicts sudden  death  I  The  symbol  of  accepted 
service  now  hurls  the  disobedient  into  ruin's 
gulf. 

2.  The  fire  thus  scorned^  puts  forth  its 
mighty  strength  ;  acts  out  God's  indignation. 
It  vindicates  its  sacred  import.  They  who 
rejected  the  fire  of  God  cannot  now  cast  it  off. 
It  wraps  tHem  in  its  burning  arms,  and  lays 
their  blackened  corpses  in  the  dust.  Thus 
Nadab  and  Abihu  perish  from  the  earth. 


IV.  The  judgment  of  god  still  lives  fob 

TRANSGRESSORS. 

This  story  stands  as  a  dark  beacon  on  a 
rocky  coast.  It  cries,  beware  1  to  all  despisers 
of  the  gospel  scheme.     It  shows  that — 

1.  They  who    stray  from    God's  appointed 
path,    fall  into    quicksands    of    tremendous 
v^rath.     It  declares  that — 

2.  If  men  despise,  reject^  neglect  the  atone- 
ment God  has  provided,  death  without  a 
remedy  is  near. —  The  Very  Rev.  Henry  Law, 
D.D. 

V.  2 — Theme  :  DtSPisiNG  god's  altar. 

I.  On  that  altar  burned  the  symbol  of 
god's  grace  for  men. 

♦' Fire  "  given  by  Him,  as — 

1.  A  seal  of  His  acceptance  of  human 
o^e  rings. 

2.  A  sanctifying  element  rendering  sacrifice 
ejlcacious. 

II.  From  that  altar  scorn  ers  turn  in 

WILFUL    PRESUMPTION. 

They  despise  the  grace,  they  reject  the  pro- 
visions of  God.  There  are  Nadabs  and  Abihua 
still.     Who  are  they? 

1.  They  hear  of  Christ  and  refuse  His 
sufferings  and  merits  for  their  own  salvation. 

2.  They  see  the  cross  and  reject  it  as  the  sym- 
bol of  faith.  They  rather  choose  a  self-created 
fire:  merits  of  their  own.  They  develop  an 
obedience  of  their  own  contriving. 

III.  All  substitutkd  mkkits  are  hateful 

TO  A  GRACIOUS  GOD. 

The  sin  of  Nadab  and  Abihu,  therefore, 
re-appears  to-day  in  the  — 

1.  Self-righteous.  A  round  of  duties  towards 
God,  of  charity  towards  men  :  and  they  ask, 
what  lack  we  more  ?  But  what  is  man's  best  ? 
Rags  and  pollution.  Yet  for  these,  God's  well- 
beloved  Son  is  scorned,  His  righteousness  put 
aside. 

2.  Self-reformation.  Flagrant  faults  are 
shunned.  Foul  transgressions  have  soiled 
their  lives.  These  they  own  and  flee.  But 
they  bring  self- reformation  fruits,  Cain-like, 
and  lay  them  on  fire  for  offerings.  Self- 
amendments  are  their  incense.  But  outward 
changes  are  not  inward  grace;  a  painted  sur- 
face will  not  purify  a  tomb. 

8.  Contrition  is  offered.  B'eelings  ar« 
stirred,  tears  flow.  The  tempter  whispers — 
there  is  merit  in  tears.     The  mourning  spirit 

l2 


148 


tiOMlLETtC  COMMESTARY  ON 


[chap.  X.  8' 


fondly  hopes  that  mourning  can  bring  peace. 
Sorrow  when  brought  as  the  price  of  pardon 
is  "  strange." 

4.  Formalists  crowd  God's  courts  in  studied 
reverence.  Their  lips  drop  holiest  words, 
their  hands  touch  holiest  symbols.  If  rites 
and  outward  decorum  were  devotion,  they 
worship  indeed  But  such  worshippers  reject 
the  substance  and  rest  on  signs.  They 
stay  no  wrath,  purge  no  sins. 

{a)  What  does  your  censer  contain  ? 

{b)  Christ's  merits  alone  are  delightful 
incense  to  God. 

V.  Z.— 7 heme :  Violation  of  sanctity.  "  I 
will  be  sanclifuii^''  etc. 

I.  The  essence  of  their  sin  in  their  con- 
duct before  the  Lord. 

I.  The  emphasis  is  to  be  placed  on  the 
word  <'L"  "  /  will  be  sanctified."  God  must 
be  served  with  sanctity:  and  he  must  be 
alone  considered  in  our  worship,  and  not  our- 
selves or  others. 

2    This  implies  that  when  deviations  from 
divine  and  clearly  defined  instructions  occur, 
the  Lord  charges  that  such  deviations  do  not 
enhance  His  glory :  neither  is  He  sanctified 
in  those  who  are  guilty  of  such  deviations. 

II.  The  BEQUisiTES  in  worship  which  are 
hereby  enforced. 

1.  The  only  acceptable  manner  of  administer- 
ing the  ordinances  of  God's  house— s^riai  ob- 
servance of  the  prescribed  order.  Not  with 
the  "  strange  fire"  of  will  worship. 

2.  The  unfitness  of  those  who  minister  in 
holy  things  who  w^^/^<:/the  proper  observance 
of  the  ordinances,  and  teach  men  so  to  do.  ^ 

Y'.  Avoid  everything  which  would  disqualify 
us  for  acceptable  worship. — D.  C.  Hughes^ 
A.M. 

V.  3. —  Theme:  The  silvnce  of  aaron. 

Of  the  silence  of  grief  there  is  no  example 
more  renowned  than  that  of  Aaron.  This 
was  truly  the  silence  of  grief  and  no  reproach 
of  insensibility  can  be  attached  to  him. 

I.  The  conduct  of  aaron  must  br  ex- 
plained IN  the  light  of  the  Wm>LE  EVKNTS. 

1.  The  slaying  of  his  sons  was  a  7iecessity, 
\\\  order  to  arresc  further  presumption  and 
pi«  fanity  spreading  throughout  all  Israel. 

2.  God's  holy  ordinances  had  beeti  outraged, 
whose  penaltj  was  death. 

II.  It  is  the  case  of  godly  humility  to  be 
tlius  silent  in  the  bosom  of  an  irreparable  loss, 
cf  a  profound  allliction. 

HI.  In  this  mute  sorrow,  there  is  also  more 
than  wispi  humility ;  as  we  must  see  there  also 
ACQUIESCBNCB. 

Aaron  cannot  hide  from  himself  that  his 
Pons  merited  their  fate. 

iV.  It  is   just  to  recognise  in  this  conduct 

l.oWLY  AND  FIRM  RLSIGNATION. 

I.   Rebellion  speaks. 

'-'.  A'esignation holds  its  peace.     A.  Coquerel. 

V.  3 — Theme :  Mute  suffering. 

1.  UoW  GREAT  THE  GRACE  NEEDED  FOE 
IHlb. 


II.  How  exemplary  the  use  of  needed 
GRACE  in  such  a  trial  as  this. 

Let  us  learn  to  submit  to  God's  judgments 
however  severe. — D.  C.  Hughes^  A.M.  [See 
Addenda  p.  151,  Submission'] 

V.  3. —  Theme:  Submission  to  god  in  af- 
fliction.    "  And  Aaron  held  his  peace  " 

The  becoming  behaviour  of  a  servant  of 
God  under  very  great  and  sore  affliction: 
who,  through  divine  assistance,  stilled  the 
murmurings  of  nature  and  replied  nothing 
against  God.     Observe  — 

L  That  the  children  of  god  are  some- 
times liable  to  severe  affliction,  both 
personal  and  relative.  David  complains  ( Psa. 
xxxviii.  2).  Job  also  (Job  ix.  27).  Paul's 
testimony  (2  Cor.  v.  4).  And  it  is  in  heaven 
only  where  all  tears  shall  be  wiped  from  their 
eyes  (Rev.  vii.  17).  The  blessed  God  intends 
by  their  afflictions  their  advantage  in  time 
and  eternity. 

1.  He  never  afflicts  till  there  is  a  real  ne- 
cessity (1  Peter  iv.  16). 

2.  He  afflicts  in  wisdom  (Heb.  xii.  9,  10\ 

3.  /n  measure  <  1  Cor.  x.  18). 

4.  /n  love  and  tenderness  i^Prov.  iii.  12 ; 
Heb.  xii.  5,  6  ;  Rev.  iii.  19). 

5.  To  sanctify  our  hearts  and  affections 
(Heb.  xii.  10). 

6.  To  save  us  from  condemnation  (2  Cor 
iv.  17). 

7.  They  are  but  light  and  momentary  (Psa. 
XXX  5;  Isa.  liv.  7,8;  2  Cor.  iv.  17). 

II.  What  is  implied  in  being  siLtNT  IN 
trials  and  afflictions? 

Not  a  careless  indifference  (Heb.  xii.  5). 

Not  a  sullen,  daring  obstinacy  (Jer.  v.  3). 

Not  a  restraint  of  prayer  before  God,  nor 
a  restraint  of  communication  before  a  real 
friend  (Job  yix.  22).     But— 

1.  A  deep  sense  of  God's  hand  in  what  we 
sufer  (Psa.  xxxix.  9  ;  Isa.  xxxviii.  1.5;  1  Sam. 
ii.H) 

2.  An  hfinihle  acquiesence  in  the  justice  of 
His  proceedings. 

3.  A  lesigmng  ourselves  to  His  pleasure 
(Matt  xxvi'.  39). 

4.  Acknowledging   His  right  in  us,  to  do  as 
He  thinks  best    Job  i.  21). 

III.  Considerations  by  which  to  induce 
such  a  gracious  temper  of  mind. 

1 .  God  has  an  unquestionable  right  to  dispose 
of  us  and  ours  as  He  pleases  (Rom.  ix.  21,  22). 

2.  He  grants  many  daily  mercies  which  we 

do  not  deserve. 

3.  We  have  j/«;/^^/ against  Him  I  Mic  vii.  9). 

4.  The  sufferings  of  Christ  for  us  were  in- 
finitely greater  than  are  ours  (Isa.  liii.  4,  5  ; 
Heb.  ii.  10). 

5  We  shall  be  adjudged  unworthy  to  rei^n 
with  Him  if  we  do  not  suffer  with  Him  (Malt. 
X.  3S,  39) 

6  In  afflicting  His  people  God  has  a  view 
to  His  own  glory  (Lev.  x.  3> 

Improvement — 

1    To   be  impatient  under  affliction  is  un 
becoming  in  a  child  of  God,  con.sidered  as  A 
new  creature. 


CHat.  X  6—9.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  LBVITICHS. 


149 


2  To  oppose  our  wills  to  the  will  of  God 
is  hii^h  presumption  (Isa.  vi.   9). 

3.  It  is  inconsistent  with  our  prayers. 

4.  It  would  subject  us  to  the  charge  of  in- 
grat'tude  to  our  best  Friend  and  Benefactor, 
who  has  drawn  us  to  Christ,  pardoned  our 
sins,  given  us  ibe  spirit  of  adoption,  and  made 
us  heirs  of  a  glorious  immortality,  and  who  is, 
by  these  very  afTlictions,  preparing  us  for  our 
heavenly  state  {2  Cor  iv.  17) — Hamiiim. 

V.  ^.— Theme:  Public  lamentation. 

Aaron  and  his  sons,  Eleazar  and  Ithamar, 
were  to  refrain  from  exhibiting  outward  signs 
of  grief  ;  were  not  to  uncover  their  heads  so 
that  their  hair  might  not  become  dishevelled  ; 
nor  rend  their  clothes,  as  was  the  custom  at 
such  times  of  sorrow.  They  were  to  sup- 
press their  grief,  lest  they  seemed  to  rebel 
against  the  retributive  providence  of  God  and 
untit  themselves  for  their  duties ;  lest  they 
die.  and  wrath  come  upon  all  the  people. 
They  wm^e  to  show  in  the  presence  of  the 
people  supreme  love  to  the  Lord,  and  un- 
moved, exalted  devotion  to  His  service. 
Although  Aaron  and  his  two  sons  were  not 
to  disengage  themselves  from  their  duties  nor 
exhibit  outward  signs  of  grief  there  was  to 
be  a  general  lamentation,  evincing: 

I.  Public  recognition  of  a  signal  judq- 
MKNT.  The  sin  was  too  great  to  be  passed 
unnoticed  by  the  people,  and  the  judgment 
was  too  solemn  to  be  hushed  up  and  treated 
as  of  transient  moment;  the  whole  house  of 
Israel  was  to  bewail  the  burning  which  the 
Lord  had  kindled.  They  were  to  lament  the 
sin  that  had  caused  the  judgment,  and  the 
sudden  transformation  of  a  joyful  ceremony 
into  a  scene  of  lamentation  and  woe.  Such  a 
public  and  sorrowful  recognition  of  the  divine 
judgment  would  impress  the  people  with  the 
exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin,  and  be  calculated 
to  deter  them  from  repeating  a  similar 
offence  ;  would  teach  them  the  dignity  of  the 
Law,  and  jealousy  of  the  Lawgiver  for  His 
own  glory.  The  people  were  to  show,  by  an 
act  of  national  humiliation  and  sorrow,  that 
they  deplored  the  sin,  and  deprecate  d  the 
divine  anger.  The  general  lamentation  also 
evinced  — 

II.  Public  sympathy  with  a  signal 
BORUOW  "  Slight  sorrows  are  loquacious, 
deep  anguish  has  no  voice."  The  sight  of 
the  whole  congregation  mourning,  weeping, 
and  wailing,  would  help  Aaron  and  his  sons 
to  bear  their  griefs ;  especially  when  they 
knew  that  the  Lore!  had  commanded  the 
public  lamentation.  The  expressed  grief  cf 
the  sympathising  people  vvould  be  the  counter- 
part of  tho  suppressed  grief  of  the  sorrowing 
priests.  Simi.ar  judginenis  tuilowing  flagrant 
sins  are  recorded  in  2  Sam  vi.  7  ;  1  Chron. 
xiii.  10;   Num.  xv.  32-oG.   We  luriher  learn  — 

(fi)  That  when  the  leaders  of  a  people  sin, 
the  whole  community  shares  in  the  blame. 

{b)  That  when  the  leaders  of  a  people  are 
sifcfnally  punished,  the  whole  communiiy 
shares  in  the  sorrow. 

(<:)  That    bereavement,  even   of   the    most 


painful  kind,  must  not  prevent  us  discharging 
sacred  duties. 

(d)  That  sympathy  with  the  bereaved  is 
in  keeping  with  the  instincts  of  our  nature, 
and  in  harmony  with  tho  will  of  God. 

(e)  That  when  God's  righteous  wrath  is 
made  manifest  against  sin,  penitential  grief 
should  be  prompt  and  general. — F.  W.  B. 

V  9  —  Theme:  Help  to  temperance. 
Combine   with  this    verse,   Jer.    xxxv.    6 ; 

Ephes.  V   18;  1.  Thess.  v.  7. 

Intemperance,  one  of  the  giant  evils  of  the 
land,  is  self  imposed  This  is  its  saddest  fea- 
ture All  the  evils  connected  with  it  might 
be  swept  away  if  men  so  willed. 

I.  The  natural.  Use  no  intoxicants  :  and 
thus  never  acquire  a  passion  for  them. 

II  The  medical.  Some  treat  drunkenness 
as  a  disease  :  and  by  medicine  seek  to  destroy 
the  appetite  for  alcohol 

III.  The  sanitary.  Asylums  for  inebriates 
have  been  opened,  which  combine  physical 
and  moral  means  to  effect  a  cure  :  and  with 
success. 

IV  The  legal.  Its  object  is  to  control  or 
arrest  the  evil ;  and  by  prohibition  of  its 
manufacture  and  sale,  to  remove  it  from  the 
land. 

V.  The  voluntary.  This  involves  the 
pledge  and  membership  in  societies  banded 
together  for  mutual  help  and  safety.  Earnest 
work  for  others  is  a  good  preventative,  so 
long  as  it  is  actively  continued. 

VI.  The  spiritual.  Grace,  wherever  re- 
ceived, casts  out  the  demon  of  drink. 

VII.  The  philanthropic.  Here  is  a  reform 
in  which  to  engage.  Intemperance  is  the 
fruitful  source  of  crime,  misery  and  ruin. 
The  resources  it  wastes  are  enormous.  Its 
results  on  the  individual,  the  family,  friends, 
and  country,  are  appalling. 

Dark  as  is  the  picture  of  its  ravages,  yet 
the  progress  made  towards  sobriety  within 
this  century  has  been  considerable.  Sidney 
Smith  said  that  at  the  beginning  of  his  life, 
"even  in  the  best  society,  one  third  of  the 
gentlemen,  at  least,  were  always  drunk."  To- 
day the  use  of  liquors  at  public  tables  is  the 
exception,  not  the  rule. 

This  beneticent  change  in  public  se  timent 
demands  devout  thankfulness,  and  is  prophetic 
of  what  shall  be  achieved. — Nev.  Lewis  O. 
Thompson.  [See  Addenda  p  151,  Intemper- 
ance ] 

V  9. —  Theme:  A  divine  prohibition. 

The  prohibition,  occurring  here,  seems  to 
indicate  the  secret  of  the  rashness  and  rebel- 
lion of  Nadab  and  Abihu  ;  that  they  offered 
the  strange  tire  before  the  Lord  when  under 
the  unhallowed  excitement  of  intoxicating 
drink.     Let  us  regard  the  prohibition — 

I  As  A  precaution  against  impious  pre- 
sumption. The  position  the  priests  occupied 
and  the  duties  they  performed  would  be  cal- 
culated to  excite  them.  They  would  require 
no  artiticial  stimulants  to  inflame  their  pas- 
sions.    Participation  of  wine  and  .strong  drink 


150 


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY  ON 


[chap.  X. 


may  lead  to  indulgence  and  excess,  which  are 
the  sources  of  manj'  evils  ;  such  as  (a)  i'jjen- 
sive  carelessness ;  persons  become  careless 
about  the  promisee  they  have  made  and  the 
duties  they  have  to  discharge,  heedless  of  the 
smiles  or  frowns  of  those  they  profess  to 
please  and  obey,  {b)  Off'ensive  independence ; 
persons  get  puffed  up  vvitb  a  vain  notion  of 
their  dignity  and  importance,  assume  absurd 
airs,  and  forget  their  position  in,  and  relation 
to  society  around  them,  (f )  Off'ensive  arro- 
gance;  persons  become  overbearing  and  dis- 
respectful, employ  words  and  perform  actions 
most  insulting,  and  of  which  they  would  feel 
ashamed  in  their  sober  hours.  (</)  Offensive 
indolence;  persons  become  paralyzed  for  use- 
ful and  holy  employment;  although,  fre- 
quently they  become  infuriated  and  enthu- 
siastic in  useless  and  unholy  engagements. 
None  of  these  thir  gs  could  be  tolerated  in  the 
service  of  Jehovah  in  the  tabernacle,  for  the 
priests  were  to  be  devout,  carejuh  vigilant, 
were  to  exercise  self-restraint  and  control ; 
with  concentration  of  strength,  and  consecra- 
tion of  spirit  give  themselves  up  wholly  to 
the  Lord.  Such  a  prohibition  was  therefore 
necessary  and  merciful.  We  may  also  regard 
it — 

II     As    A    SAFEGUARD   AGAINST    SINFUL    IN- 

nuLGENCE.  Tarrying  in  wine  and  strong 
drink  is  directly  opposed  to  reasonable  and 
acceptable  religious  service;  it  perverts  the 
powers  of  body,  mind,  and  soul.  It  leads  to 
ibe  perversion  (a)  of  personal  endowments. 
Bodily  strength  becomes  abused,  health  de- 
teriorated and  undermined  ;  mental  faculties 
weakened  and  frequently  deranged ;  natural 


geniality  and  amiability  soured.  (J))  Of  Pro* 
vidential  bestowments.  Princes  have  been 
brought  to  pauperism,  fortunes  have  been 
wasted  at  the  shrine  of  Bacchus  ;  homes  and 
friends  have  been  brought  to  a  common  ruin 
by  its  degraded  devotees,  {c)  Of  reasonable 
enjoyment.  The  priests  were  not  commanded 
to  abstain  from  wine  and  strong  drink,  except 
when  they  were  in  the  tabernacle  officiating 
at  the  services.  They  might  partake  at  other 
seasons,  but  were  to  use  and  not  abuse  what 
they  were  allowed,  (d')  Of  religious  ordi- 
nances. The  various  directions  of  the  ritual 
were  so  minute  and  numerous,  that  except  the 
head  was  kept  clear,  the  nerves  calm,  there 
was  a  great  risk  of  mistakes  being  made,  of 
some  parts  of  the  ceremonies  being  omitted. 
The  memories  of  the  priests  were  to  be  kept 
unclouded,  their  imaginations  unexcited,  their 
animal  passions  uniti  flamed.  Ancient  his- 
torians speak  with  great  ardour  and  decision 
upon  the  fact,  that  in  connection  with  heathen 
worship,  the  priests  were  prohibited  taking 
wine  during  their  attendance  upon  the  gods 
and  the  performance  of  their  worship.  The 
reasons  given  are,  that  indulgence  in  wine 
and  strong  drink  induces  hesitation,  for  get  ful- 
ness, sleep,  folly,  and  insanity.  The  prohibi- 
ten under  consideration  subserved  divine 
purposes  during  the  Levitical  economy,  con- 
duced to  the  safety  and  well-being  of  the 
priests  and  the  glory  of  Jehovah.  "  Where 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  there  is  liberty;" 
we  may  under  the  gospel  abstain  from  meat 
as  well  as  wine,  if  thereby  we  can  be  the 
means  of  saving  a  soul  from  death,  and  hid- 
ing a  multitude  of  sins. — /^  W.  B. 


ILLUSTRATIVE   ADDEND  I   TO  GfI\PTER  X. 


Pride. 

"  In  general  pride  is  at  the  bottom  of  all 
great  mistakes." — Kuskin,  True  and  Beauti- 
ful. 

"  But  man,  proud  man  1 
Drest  in  a  little  brief  authority, 
Most  ignorant  of  what  he's  most  assur'd, 
His  glassy  essence — like  an  angry  ape. 
Plays  such  fantastic  tricks  before  high  heaven 
As  makes  the  angels  weep." 

— Measure  for  Measure.,  II.  2. 

'Pride  in  their  port,  defiance  in  their  eye." 
— Goldsmith,  The  Traveller. 

"  It  thrust  proud  Nebuchadnezzar  out  of 
men's  society;  proud  Saul  out  of  his  kingdom  ; 
proud  Adam  out  of  paradise;  proud  Haman 
cut  of  court ;  proud  Lucifer  out  of  heaven." — 
Henry  Smith. 

"  What  is  pride  ?     A  whizzing  rocket 
That  would  emulate  a  star." 

—  Wordsworth. 


Presumption. 

*'  Presumption  is  a  firework  made  up  of 
pride  and  foolhardiness.  It  is  indeed  like  a 
heavy  house  built  upon  slender  crutches. 
Like  dust,  which  men  throw  against  the  wind, 
it  flies  back  in  their  faces  and  makes  them 
blind.  Wise  men  presume  nothing  but  hope 
the  best ;  pi'esutnption  is  hope  out  of  her 
wits." — T.  Adams, 

"  Sequitur  suferbos  ultor  a  tergo  Deus.^^ 

— Seneca. 
[An    avenging    God    closely   follows    the 
haughty.] 

"  Omne  animi  vitium  tanto  conspectius  in  se 
Crimen    habet,    quarto    major,    qui  peccat 

habetur.'" — Juvenal 
[Every  vice  makes  its  guilt  the  more  con- 
spicuous in  proportion   to   the   rank  of   the 
offender.] 

"It  is  a  dangerous  thing  m  the  service  of 
God  to  decline  from  His  own  institutions.  We 
have  to  do  with  a  Being  who  is  wise  to  pre- 
scribe His  own  worship,  just  to  require  what 


CHAP.  X.  1,  2.] 


THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS. 


151 


He  hath  prescribed,  and  powerful  to  revenge 
that  which  He  hath  not  required." — Bishop 
hall. 

Rasunkss. 

**  Audax  omnia  perpeti 
Ge\  s  humaua  ruit per  vetiiiim  nefas  " 

— Horace. 
[The  human  race,  afraid  of  nothing,  rushes 
OD  through  every  crime.] 

"  Faucis  tetneritas  est  bono^  multis  ?nalo.' 

— Phakdkus. 
[Rashness  brings   advantage  to  few,  mis- 
fortune to  many.] 

**  juvenile  vitium  regere  non  posse  inipetumr 

Seneca. 
[It  is  the  fault  of  youth  that  it  cannot  con- 
trol its  own  impetuosity.] 

Submission. 
•'  Calamity  is  man's  true  touch-stone." 

— Fletcher. 
**  All  are  not  taken  1  there  are  left  behind 
Livini^  beloveds,  tender  looks  to  bring 
And  make  the  daylight  still  a  happy  thing, 
(^nd  tender  voices  to  make  soft  the  wind. 
But  if  it  were  not  so — if  I  could  find 

No  love  in  all  the  world  for  comforting, 
Nor  any  path  but  hollowly  did  ring  : 
Where  '  Dust  to  dust '  the  love  from  life  dis- 
joined— 
And  if  before  these  sepulchres  unmoving 
I  stood  alone  (as  some  forsaken  lamb 
Goes    bleating   up   the  moors   in    weary 
dearth) 
Crying,  '  Where  are  ye,  0,   my  loved  and 
loving  ?' 
I  know  a  voice  would  sound,  '  Daughter,  I 

AM: 
Can    I   suffice    for  heaven  and  not   for 
earth  ?  ' " — Mrs.  Browning. 


During  the  siege  of  Barcelona  by  the 
Spaniards  and  English,  in  170'),  an  affecting 
incident  occurred,  which  is  thus  related  by 
Captain  Carleton  in  his  Memoirs  :  '  '  1  remem- 
ber I  saw  an  old  officer,  having  his  only  son 
with  him,  a  fine  young  man,  about  twenty 
years  of  age,  going  into  the  tent  to  dine. 
While  they  were  at  dinner  a  shot  from  the 
bastion  of  St.  Antonio  took  off  the  head  of 
his  son.  The  father  immediately  rose  up, 
first  looking  down  upon  his  headless  child, 
and  then  lifting  up  his  eyes  to  heaven,  while 
the  tears  ran  down  his  cheeks,  only  said, 
'  Thy  will  be  done  1' " 

Sensationalism. 
"  Violent  fires  soon  burn  out  themselves  : 
Small  showers  last  long,  but  sadden  storms 

are  short : 
He  tires  betimes  that  spurs  too  fast  betimes : 
With  eager  feeding,  food  doth  choke  the 

feeder ; 
Light  vanity,  insatiate  cormorant, 
Consuming  means,  soon  preys  upon  itself." 

— Shakespeare. 
Intkmperancb. 

"  Bonarum  rerum  consuetudo  pessinta  est.** 
[rhe  too  constant  use  even  of  good  things 
is  hurtful.] 

"Tou'h  the  goblet  no  more! 
It  will  make  thy  heart  sore 
To  its  very  corel" — Longfellow,  Cristus. 

"Drunkenness  is  an  immoderate  affection 
and  use  of  drink  That  I  call  immoderate 
that  is  besides  or  beyond  that  order  of  good 
things  for  which  God  hath  given  us  the  use 
of  drink. — jEREMr  Tatlob,  Holy  Living 
II.  2. 

Punishment. 

"  Punishment  is  the  recoil  of  crime,  and 
the  strength  of  the  back-stroke  is  in  propro- 
tion  to  the  original  blow." — Trench* 


-•o»- 


CHAPTER  XL 


Jfoob:   Jcrmittcb  m\b  JroIjiMtcb'^ 


SUGGESTIVE   READINGS. 


V.  2. — These  are  the  beasts  which  ye  shall  eat.  [For  scientific  aud  sanitary 
inforuiatiou  re8pcctiiig  il;e  HniaiiU,  repiiles,  birds,  aud  fisbes  specified,  vakiable 
iuforaiation  will  l)e  louud  in  ^Vldtlaw's  Code  of  Haalth  ;  also  in  Calmet ;  aud  a 
useful  summary  in  the  CrUical  and  Explanatory  Gouimenfary  o\\  this  chapter] 

How  noteworthy  the  fact  that  the  glorious  Jehovah  should  extend  lii;*  oversight 
of  Israel  to  such  minute  dietic  and  sanitary  regulations  But  the  minute  is  not 
less  within  God's  tUoiight  than  the  uiajestic ;  the  "  hairs  of  your  head  "  are 
guarded  (Matt.  x.  30)  with  a  providence  which  equally  controls  dynasties  aud 
kmgs  (Matt.  x.  18).     There  is  nothing  unimportant  with  Him  "  whose  we  are  " 


152  IhJMILETlC   COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xi.  4— 7. 


He  careth  for  you  with  a  care  which  gathers  all  into  consideration— each  single 
Btep,  *'  lest  we  dash  our  foot  against  a  stone  ";  each  moment  of  life,  lest  "  sudden 
destruction"  come  upon  us  ;  each  item  which  makes  for  health,  for  happiness, 
for  holiness ;  for  God  thinks  of  us  in  every  particular. 

The   special   purposes  effected  by   these  die  tic  regulations  for  the   Hebrew 

people  were : — 

1.  Sanitary :  to  effect  health  and  cleanliness  in  the  individual  and  the  family. 
And  beyond  question  the  classification  of  meats  is  founded  upon  the  wholesome- 
ness  of  the  creatures  as  man's  food,  while  the  stringent  laws  respecring  the 
*'  dead'*  were  of  emphatic  importance  in  an  Oriental  country  and  climite.  It  is 
Bacon's  testimony  that  ''cleanliness  of  body  was  ever  esteemed  to  proceed  from  a 
due  reverence  of  God";  and  Thomson  affirms  that  ^'health  is  the  vital  principle 

of  bliss." 

2.  Political:  to  enforce  a  distinction  between  the  Hebrew  and  surroundmg 
nations,  restricting  them,  by  minute  prohibitions  in  diet,  frorfi  mingling  with  other 
people  in  the  usages  and  indulgences  of  social  life ;  enforcing  on  them  a  constant 
necessity  of  avoiding  all  close  familiarity  with  ''  strangers."  Ttiis  distinction,  in 
habits  at  the  table,  and  in  all  festivities,  rendered  them  "  a  peculiar  people,"  and 
restrained  them  from  a  perilous  intermingling  with  idolatrous  neighbours  ;  thus 
conserving  the  Theocracy,  and  marking  out  Israel  as  a  nation  selected  and 
governed  by  Jehovah. 

3.  Religious:  The  distinction  of  meats  rested  on  a  moral,  a  religious,  a 
theological  basis.  The  creatures  here  classified  were  images  of  virtues  and  vices, 
suggestive  to  the  Oriental  mind  of  moral  and  sacred  truths ;  were  a  piotorial 
delineation,  therefore,  of  theological  instructions.  Certainly  those  creatures 
pronounced  "  clean"  have  been  acknowledged  most  wholesome  as  man's  meat  in 
all  after  times ;  and  this  enforced  limitation  on  Israel  that  only  "  clean  "  food 
should  pass  their  lips  carried  the  important  lesson  to  every  man,  woman,  and 
child,  that   '*  God  had  called    them   not   to   uucleanness    but    unto   holiness " 

(1  Thess.  iv.  7). 

Every  enactment  of  the  old  dispensation  aimed  at  cultivating  virtue,  purity, 
sanctity  in  God's  people;  and  equally,  even  more  solemnly,  every  requirement  of 
the  gospel  and  all  the  provisions  of  our  Lord's  atonement  summon  us  to  be 
*'  clean  every  whit."     "  Be  ye  holy,"  saith  God,  "  for  I  am  holy." 


SECTIONAL  HOMILIES. 

Topic:  Distinguishing  the  Precious  from  the  Vile  (Vv.  4,  5,  6,  7). 

" He  is  unclean  unto  you" 

God's  charge,  through  Ezekiel,  against  the  faithless  priests  was  that  ''  they 
put  no  difference  between  the  holy  and  profane,  neither  showed  difference 
between  the  unclean  and  the  clean"  (Kzek.  xKii.  26).  It  was  also  His  require- 
ment from  Jeremiah  in  order  to  his  being  dignified  as  God's  acknowledged 
messenger :  "  If  thou  take  forth  the  precious  from  the  vile,  thou  shalt  be  as  My 

mouth"  (Jer.  xv.  19).  i       •  j- 

The  emphasis  with  which  Jehovah  insists  upon  this  habitual  and  minute  dis- 
tinguishing the  unclean  from  the  clean  proclaims  therefore  a  foremost  law  %n 
godly  conduct.     Consider — 

1.  That  God's  people,  the  spiritual  Israel,  move  in  a  scene  of  mingled  good 

AND    evil.  .        u     1 

Man  coveted  in  Eden  to  "know  good  and  evil."  From  that  hour  the  clean 
and  unclean  "  have  been  around  him  in  every  path  of  life. 


CHAP  XI   1-7.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  153 


1.  In  the  sphere  of  daily  life  we  have  contact  with  both.  The  world  around  us  — 
eirth,  air,  and  sea— all  elements,  all  scenes,  are  occupied  with  these  physical  and 
m  ral  opposites,  '*  clean  and  unclean."  A  character,  a  quality,  is  upon  all  that 
lives.  And  this  fact  in  the  lower  orders  of  creatures  forcibly  indicates  the  like 
re  ilities  of  moral  and  spiritual  contrasts  in  the  human  lives  which  throng  our 
-phere. 

2.  Our  contact  with  them  entails  the  danger  of  contamination.  Taste  the 
unclean  and  we  thereby  become  defiled.  God  has  marked  specifically  and 
minutely  the  things  which  are  to  be  accounted  "an  abomination"  (vv.  12,  20, 
ere.).  So  in  the  human  sphere,  there  are  interdicted  pleasures,  companionships, 
alliances.  The  ban  of  heaven  is  upon  much  which  the  world  sanctions.  We 
cmnot  "have  fellowship  with  the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness"  without 
being  made  "unclean"  (v.  26).  "Every  one  that  toucheth  them  shall  be 
unclean." 

3  In  such  a  defiling  sphere  our  d%ity  is  to  separate  the  precious  from  the  vile. 
God  has  separated  them  for  us  by  His  prohibitions  and  permissions  ;  by  His 
"  thou  shalt "  and  "  thou  shalt  not."  We  are  to  act  out  His  commands,  work 
along  the  line  of  His  directions.  Iguorauce  is  inexcusable  when  God  hath 
"shown  us  what  is  good,  and  what  the  Lord  rei^nires  of  us"  (Micah  vi.  8). 

II.  That  171  life's  mingled  scene  the  godly  must  exercise  continuous  vigilance. 
People  who  knew  not  the  Lord  put  no  difference  between  things  clean  and 

unclean.  But  the  "  Israel  of  God  "  would  need  to  hourly  walk  as  amid  treachery 
and  hazard  ;  they  could  not  eat  of  the  dish  of  an  alien  without  possibility  of 
tasting  the  condemned  food.  This  enforced  a  divided  life  upon  the  Israelite,  as 
Christianity  still  does,  leading  us  to  "  abhor  that  which  is  evil  and  cleave  to  that 
which  is  good,"  and  maintain  a  "  separation  from  sinners." 

1.  We  enter,  by  relationship  with  Christ,  into  a  separated  life.  As  Israel  was 
by  these  dietic  ordinances  severed  from  intimacy  and  festivity  with  the  heathen, 
so  are  Christians  called  aside,  led  out  from  near  intercourse  with  unsanctified 
society,  to  "  put  a  diff'erence  between  the  unclean  and  the  clean"  (vv.  43-47). 
We  are  separated  unto  God  in  Christ :  "  They  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am 
not  of  the  world"  (John  xvii.  16). 

2.  Such  a  separated  life  must  assert  itself  in  habitual  avoidance  of  prohibited 
things.  The  "  unclean"  is  to  be  marked,  repudiated,  shunned,  as  "  an  abomina- 
tion." It  entails  an  hourly  watchfulness,  a  quick  habit  of  penetrating  into  the 
moral  diff'erences  which  underlie  society,  men,  and  manners,  pastimes  and 
pursuits.  Things  must  be  looked  at,  not  from  their  popularity,  their  advan- 
tages, their  attractions,  but  faced  with  a  challenge  as  to  their  moral  quality  and 
tendency.  Will  this  defile?  Is  it  "clean  or  unclean  "1  We  must  "take  the 
precious  from  the  vile." 

3.  Minute  distinctions  are  forced  upon  us  by  this  principle  of  conduct.  The 
"  unclean  ''  things  are  not  glaringly  so  ;  the  "  clean  "  are  not  manifestly  diff*erent 
from  the  "abominable."  These  creatures — beasts,  reptiles,  fishes,  etc. — are  so 
similar  that  the  lines  seem  almost  to  converge  and  intersect.  We  may  easdy 
avoid  sinful  men,  shiin  their  society,  hide  from  their  power;  and  yet  men  thr»)W 
out  their  influence  where  they  themselves  are  invisible  and  unsuspected.  We 
might  loathe  the  company  of  a  vile  man,  and  yet  think  it  no  risk  to  read  his 
thoughts  as  they  appear  on  the  printed  page.  "  Thereby  many  are  defiled." 
Thoughts  read  enter  our  minds,  are  within  us  to  soil  and  fret  us.  The  senti- 
ments, maxims,  and  ideas  of  worldly-wise  men  gain  currency  as  motives  to 
common  conduct,  as  rules  of  life.  They  may  act  as  decoys.  Let  us  challenge 
their  "cleanness"  in  God's  sight,  and  estimate  them  by  His  truth.  Our  age  is 
charmed  with  the  specious  plea  of  "expediency,"  "  tolerance,"  "  utilitarianism." 
Let  us  separate  tho  "precious  from  the  vile." 

III.  That  by  strictest  adherence  to  divine  directions  sanctity  of  life  should  bb 


154  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [cHAr.  xt.  44. 

MAINTAINED.     **  Ye  shall  not  make  yourselves  abominable,  etc. ;  ye  shall  sanctify 
yourselves"  (vv.  43,  44). 

1.  Every  godly  soul  is,  to  a  degree,  p^tt  in  trust  with  the  imparted  sanctity. 
All  Israel's  peculiar  and  distinguishing  holiness  was  the  bestowment  of  Jehovah's 
grace  ;  as  all  our  Christian  purity  and  piety  are  derived  from  Christ.  Yet  sanctity 
is  not  a  passive  condition  of  the  soul,  but  a  cultivated  quality  of  temperament 
and  behaviour.  *•  Ye  shall  therefore  sanctify  yourselves,  and  ye  shall  be  holy ; 
for  I  am  holy  ;  neither  shall  ye  defile  yourselves  with  any  manner  of  creeping 
thing  "  (v.  44).  Godliness  is  to  be  wrought  out  into  life,  shunning  the  "cor- 
ruptions which  are  in  the  world,"  and  cultivating  the  holiness  which  assimilates 
us  to  God. 

2.  Derived  sanctity  is  no  assurance  against  defilement  if  we  forsake  God's  com- 
mands. The  Israelite  only  maintained  his  spiritual  status  as  he  held  by  his 
sacred  separateness  frona  the  heathen ;  repudiating  their  festivities,  broad- 
ening rather  than  obliterating  the  line  of  demarcation  which  distinguished  him 
from  the  godless  world.  The  admonitory  word  to  us  is  this  :  "  As  obedient 
children,  not  fashioning  yourselves  according  to  your  former  lusts  in  your 
ignorance  ;  but  as  he  which  hath  called  you  is  holy,  so  be  ye  holy  in  all  manner 
of  conversation  "  (1  Pet.  i.  14,  15).  It  is  our  covenant  privilege  to  be  as  God's 
sanctified  household  amid  alienated  peoples ;  with  His  sanctuary  amongst  us, 
admitted  through  a  High  Priesthood  into  the  holiest  of  all ;  accepted  by  sacrifice, 
sanctified  by  the  Spirit  It  therefore  behoves  us  to  shun  the  vile,  touch  not  and 
eat  not  "  the  unclean,"  but  live  in  delightful  observance  of  His  commands,  and 
thus  '*  perfect  holiness  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord"  (2  Cor.  vii.  1).  [See  Addenda 
to  chap,  xi.,  Separate  from  iSinners.'] 

Topic :  Forbidden  Foods. 

"  Neither  shall  ye  defile  yourselves  "  (V.  44). 

The  details  of  these  ceremonial  restrictions  are  unimportant  to  us.  They  had 
their  meaning  and  purpose  for  the  Jew.  But  the  suggestiveness  of  these  pro- 
hibitions comes  powerfully  upon  us  who  are  not  under  Jewish  ceremonialism. 

"  Govern  well  thy  appetite,  lest  Sin 
Surprise  thee,  and  her  black-attendant  Death." 

Paradise  Lost,  Bk.  vii  line  546. 

I.  Man's  duty   is — That  his  physical  health  and  purity  be  sbdolously 

MAINTAINED. 

The  lust  of  the  eye,  the  caprices  of  appetite,  are  not  to  rule  him.  He  may 
give  no  license  to  cravings  whose  indulgence  would  violate  the  health  and 
sanctity  of  his  physical  frame.  Every  fitful  fancy,  every  low  desire,  can  fiud 
gratification  in  the  varieties  of  meats  and  drinks  which  are  within  man's  reach. 
Yet  that  is  no  justification  for  his  indiscriminate  and  unrestricted  indulgence. 
His  self-respect,  his  intelligence,  his  sense  of  propriety,  his  regard  for  purity,  his 
recoil  from  vicious  and  vitiating  habits,  and  his  recognition  of  responsioility  to 
God,  should  restrain  him  from  any  gratification  which  is  low  and  degrading, 
which  will  inflame  the  blood,  intoxicate  the  brain,  disease  the  body,  defile  the 
conscience. 

''' Keep  thyself  pure''  {\  Tim.  v.  22).  Such  is  man's  duty.  If  he  trifle  with 
his  health,  and  defile  his  flesh,  he  mars  the  work  of  God's  hands.  [Addenda 
to  chapter  xi.,  F easting 7\ 

"All  philosophy,''  says  Epictetus,  "lies  in  two  words — 'Sustain'  and 
Abstain  ' " 

11    Man's  dignity  is — That  his  entire  nature  be  hallowed  and  sanctified. 


CHAP.  XI.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  155 


''For  I  am  the  Lord  your  God  :  ye  shall  therefore  sanctify  yourselves,  and  ye 
shall  be  holy,  for  I  am  holy  ;  neither  shall  ye  defile  yourselves  "  (v.  44). 

All  God's  solicitous  care  for  Israel's  physical  health  and  purity  was  but  the  index 
to  His  supreme  desire  fv)r  their  moral  rectitude  and  spiritual  holiness  He  does 
not  interdict  delights,  but  He  requires  that  no  defilement  be  admitted  into  the 
temple  of  the  human  life,  sensuous,  intellectual,  or  spiritual. 

"  Relitjion  does  not  censure  or  exclude 
Unnumbered  pleasures,  harmlessly  pursued  "  (Cowper's  Retirement)^ 

but  it  lays  prohibition  on  all  that  would  demoralise  us  and  offend  God.  "  Unless 
the  vessel  be  pure,"  says  Horace,  '*  whatever  is  put  in  will  turn  sour."  \_Sincerum 
est  nisi  vas,  quodcunque  infundis  acescit.^  The  first  requirement,  therefore,  to  a 
hallowed  life  is  a  purified  body ;  its  passions  subdued,  its  vile  aff'ections  ex- 
tinguished, its  immoral  tendencies  arrested  Conversion  proves  itself  by  the  renun- 
ciation of  all  sins  of  the  flesh.  From  the  mental  nature  must  then  be  excluded  all 
"evil  thoughts";  the  intellectual  citadel  of  man  must  be  purged  of  impure 
imaginations,  decoying  fallacies,  fitful  reasonings,  and  "every  thought  be  brought 
into  the  obedience  of  Christ  "  (2  Cor.  x.  5).  The  spiritual  life  can  only  be  per- 
fected in  holiness,  dignified  with  sanctity,  as  the  tabernacle  in  which  it  dwells  is 
preserved  inviolate.  Hence  the  appeal,  "Come  out  from  among  them,  and  be  ye 
separate,  and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing  ;  and  I  will  receive  you,  and  will  be  a 
Father  unto  you,  and  ye  shall  be  my  sons  and  daughters,  saith  the  Lord 
Almighty  "  (2  Cor.  vl  17,  18). 

Note  :  The  word  "Ao^y"  has  its  root  in  the  ancieot  Saxon  word  halig,  hale, 
sound,  whole  ;  and  health  is  therefore  the  primal  idea  of  holiness — an  unblemished, 
unimpaired,  perfect  physique.  It  glides  into  the  higher  application — perfect  in 
a  moral  sense ;  pure  in  heart,  pious  in  thought  and  life. 

Inferentially  :  All  Jehovah's  regulations  for  Israel's  physical  cleanness  and 
health  carried  with  them  the  higher  demand — *' a  clean  heart  and  a  right  spirit." 
For  only  he  that  is  '  clean  every  whit "  has  attained  to  the  divine  ideal  of  man's 
true  dignity — "  Holiness  unto  the  Lord" 


Topic:  A  Restraint  upon  Festivities. 

The  design  of  God's  directions  concerning  food  was  not  guidance  to 
nutritious  diet.  The  palate  suffices  man  to  discern  between  the  luscious  and  the 
harmful.  And  the  classification  is  not  into  salubrious  and  insalubrious,  tasteful 
and  tasteless,  but  clean  and  unclean.  The  results  of  these  distinctions  and 
directions  are  : 

I.  Removal  from  all  social  contact  and  fellowship  with  the  heathen. 

God's  chosen  tribes  could  hold  no  intimacy,  share  no  festivity  with  idol 
worshippers.  The  tables  of  the  nations  were  unclean.  The  Jew  could  have  no 
seat  at  impure  boards. 

The  principle  is  divine.  The  need  of  separateness  remains,  for  the  world  is 
still  the  world.  Its  baits,  its  indulgences,  its  corruptions  are  unchanged.  It 
extends  its  nets  for  unwary  souls.  Hence  Scripture's  voice  still  cries.  Beware. 
Beacons  still  shovv  a  coast  bestrewed  with  wrecks,  and  wisdom  calls  the  holy 
pilgrim  from  the  treacherous  path. 

A  clear  precept  interdicts  the  world.  Believers  must  not  cross  the  line. 
They  must  dwell  apart,  avoid  intimacies,  share  no  vile  festivities. 

1.  Mark  the  divine  goodness  in  this  separating  law.  The  climate  of  the 
world  checks  growth  in  grace.  A  coiling  serpent  sucks  the  life  blood.  Rough 
contact  blunts  the  edge.  Solomon's  lustre  becomes  clouded  with  shame  because 
his   heart  declined  to  pleasure's  charms.     All  indulgent  intimacies  with   the 


166  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  x.  44-47. 


world  cause  holiness  to  sicken  and  wane.  Therefore  Mercy  warns,  "  Be  not 
conformed  to  this  world  "  (Rom.  xii.  2).  [See  Addenda  to  chap.  xi.  Separate 
from  Sinners.^ 

2.  Consider  that  the  world  wars  incessantly  against  Christ  and  His  honour.  It 
declares  itself  Christ's  open  foe  :  it  proclaims  hostility  against  sacred  truth.  Is 
it  not,  then,  a  traitor's  part  to  feast  with  the  enemy  ]  The  true  believer  shows 
himself  on  the  Lord's  side,  in  company,  act  and  step.  We  are  the  "  salt  of  the 
earth  "  :  but,  mixed  with  corruption,  the  salt  loses  its  savour. 

3.  Usefulness  is  neutralised  where  godliness  is  accommodating.  Suspicion 
fastens  on  the  faltering  steps,  on  the  compromising  profession.  Society  will 
heed  no  warning  words  from  one  who  courts  to  share  its  vanities.  Therefore 
Jesus  says,  "  They  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world"  (Jno. 
xvii.  14).  Tread  down  the  barrier  line,  stray  out  beyond  the  limits  of  Israel's 
fellowship,  and  you  wrong  your  own  soul,  shadow  the  glory  of  Christianity,  and 
enfeeble  the  witness  of  gospel  truth.     The  second  result  is — 

II.   Unceasing  vigilance  was  enforced  upon  god's  people. 
God's   dividing  line   was  drawn  everywhere,  on  all  scenes,  on  every  hour, 
between  clean  and  unclean.     Its  lesson  is  to  us — 

1.  That  at  every  step  we  inquire  Is  this  a  lawful  path?  The  quality  of 
cleanness  or  uncleanness  stamps  every  movement  of  every  mind,  every  act 
throughout  each  day.  Each  minutest  thing  is  the  seed  of  some  result.  We  may 
contract  defilement  from  veriest  trifles.  This  law  enforces  us  to  apply  a 
constant  test. 

2.  A^o  act  is  neutral — void  of  quality,  good  or  ill.  We  always  stand  in  a  path 
which  is  right  or  wrong.  Ask  continuously,  Am  I  in  a  *•  clean  "  path  1  and  it 
will  be  found  often  impossible  to  tarry.  Examine  thoughts  by  this  test ;  dispel 
those  found  to  be  "  unclean."  Put  words  before  this  criterion,  and  "  set  a 
watch  upon  the  door  of  thy  lips."  Place  books  at  this  bar  of  judgment;  and 
how  many  trifling  offsprings  of  a  worldly  pen  will  be  consigned  to  oblivion  ! 
Bring  employ  to  this  light  j  and  flee  from  what  stands  rebuked  in  the  light  of 
gospel  truth. 

Is  your  soul  clean  or  unclean  ?  By  nature  it  is  vile.  But  there  is  a  Saviour's 
blood  and  a  purifying  Spirit.  Jesus  can  cleanse,  the  Spirit  can  sanctify. — Com- 
pare Dean  Law's  "  Christ  is  AIL** 

Topic:  Legal  Prohibitions  Abrogated  by  Christianity  (Vv.  44-47). 

The  ceremonial  dispensation  made  righteousness  and  sanctity  dependant  on 
external  observances  and  habits.  Judaism  "  stood  only  in  meats  and  drinks,  and 
divers  washings,  and  carnal  ordinances,  imposed  until  the  time  of  reformation." 

The  spiritual  dispensation  institutes  an  inward  life  of  holiness,  the  Christian 
being  "  sanctified  in  Christ  Jesus."  Hence  for  us  the  Levitical  restrictions  and 
regulations  are  set  aside.  "  Every  creature  of  God  is  good  and  nothing  to  be 
refused,  if  it  be  received  with  thanksgiving"  (1  Tim.  iv.  4). 

Peter  received  a  special  revelation  upon  this  matter  (Acts  x.),  which  at  once 
and  for  ever  swept  hw&y  the  distinctions  between  clean  and  unclean  creatures ; 
and  with  it  abrogated  that  righteousness  of  moral  life  and  religious  feeling,  which 
consisted  in  attendance  to  mere  details  of  ceremonialism.  The  vision  to  Peter 
was  especially  intended  to  abolish  the  distinction  between  the  Jewish  and  Gentile 
nations  :  since  the  gospel  offered  cleansing  to  all  people,  and  Christ,  by  His 
atonement  as  the  Lamb  of  God,  took  away  the  sin  of  the  whole  world  (John  i. 
29  ;  1  John  ii.  2). 

Paul  likewise  received  instruction  direct  from  Christ  on  this  same  truth  :  "  I 
know,  and  am  persuaded  by  the  Lord  JesuSj  that  there  is  nothing  unclean  of  itself,** 


CRAP.  XI.  41.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS,  167 


So  that  we  are  under  an  economy  based   upon  grand  principles  rather  than 
punctilious  rites. 

I.  Christianity  regards  nothing  as  irremediably  uncli^an. 

Its  message  is  that  the  ULclean  may  be  made  clean  :  that  what  was  before 
forbidden  and  "  cast  away"  may  now  find  acceptance,  and  be  pLiced  among  the 
sanctified.  Nothing  is  so  impure  but  it  may  be  purified  :  the  human  hearty  the 
godless  will^  the  evil  imaginations,  the  defiled  habits,  the  guilty  conscience^  the 
degraded  soul.  "  Lord,  if  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  make  me  clean."  Christianity 
declares  that  none,  nothing,  is  unchangeably  impure  :  defilement  may  be  re 
moved ;  God's  prohibition  is  withdrawn :  the  "  handwriting  against  us"  is 
abolished  ;  the  sinner  may  be  "  washed,  sanctified,  justified  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God"  (1  Cor.  vi.  2). 

IL  Christianity  denouncrs  nothing  because  op  its  being  unclean. 

The  law  had  denounced  much.  Not  foods  only,  but  people.  The  Gentiles 
were  excluded  from  spiritual  fellowship  with  IsraeL  But  the  doom  has  been 
revoked:  the  "middle  wall  of  partition"  has  been  broken  down  (Ephes.  ii.  14)  ] 
all  may  enter  the  sacred  enclosure  and  become  accepted  in  Christ. 

Every  sin-defiled  soul  is  in  its  sinfuluf^ss  a  separated  and  forbidden  thing ;  in 
its  uucleanness  it  is  put  aside,  it  has  no  place  among  the  pure,  no  part  in  the 
heritage  of  them  who  are  sanctified  through  faith  in  Jesus.  But  not  denounced  ! 
Guilt  renders  it  necessary  that  the  sinner  should  be  thus  excluded  so  long  as 
guilt  remains ;  "  without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord ;"  for  "  the  unclean 
can  not  stand  in  His  sight."  Yet  Christianity  offers,  opens  "  salvation  even  to  the 
uttermost ; '  declares  that  *'  where  sin  abounded  grace  doth  much  more  abound.'' 

Men  who  missed  the  large  and  loving  truth  denounced  the  "publican  and  the 
harlot";  Jesus  Christ  set  the  door  open  wide  to  them  and  became  their  Friend. 
*'  Behold  a  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners." 

Ill,  Christianity  abandons  nothing  however  unclean. 

No  !  it  goes  down  to  the  depths.  The  leper  was  abandoned — socially  and 
ceremonially — left  to  perish  ;  his  plaintive  cry  "  Unclean  !  unclean  !"  winning 
no  help  till  Christ  *'  touched  the  leper  "  and  healed  his  leprosy  and  restored 
him  to  society  again.  Until  the  possibility  and  potency  of  Christ's  redemption 
and  sanctity  came  to  our  souls,  we  were  thus  outcasts.  The  kingdom  of  God  on 
earth  was  closed  upon  the  unclean  ;  and  heaven  too  :  "  Nothing  entereth  that 
defileth." 

No  more  now  ;  a  "  new  and  living  way  "  aff'ords  us  entrance   even  *'  into   the 

holiest  of  all."     The  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  avails  for  each  ;  and   *'  him  that 

Cometh  unto  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."     Not  a  soul  need  remain  unclean. 

Christ  can  cleanse.     There  is  hope  for  the  vilest. 

"  The  Cross  I  it  takes  our  guilt  away 
It  holds  the  fainting  spirit  up." 

Topic :  Symbols  of  Cleanness  in  the  Lower    Forms  op  Life. 
"  To  make  a  difference  between  the  unclean  and  the  clean  "  (V.  41). 

i.  With  regard  to  "  blasts,"  two  distinctive  marks  point  out  those  which  are 
clean  and  may  be  eaten  ;  they  should  chew  the  cud  and  divide  the  hoof.  Either 
of  itself  would  be  insufticient  to  constitute  ceremonial  cleanness.  What  spiritual 
truth  may  we  learn  from  such  marks  being  given  1  The  chewing  of  the  cud 
expresses  the  natural  process  of  "  inwardly  digesting"  that  which  one  eats; 
while  the  divided  hoof  sets  forth  the  character  of  one's  outward  walk.  He  who 
feeds  upon  the  green  pastures  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  inwardly  digests  what  he 
takes  m,  combines  calm  meditation  with  pr^tyerfid  study,  will  manifest  the 
tharacter  of  outward  walk  which  should  distinguish  him  who  obeys  the  Word. 

The  one  without  the  other  was  insufficient  (vv.  4-8).     A  man  may  profess  to 


158  llOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xi.  41. 


love  and  feed  upon  the  Word  of  God  as  the  pasture  of  his  soul ;  but,  if  his  foot- 
prints along  the  pathway  of  life  are  not  such  as  the  Word  requires,  he  is  not 
clean.  And  also,  though  a  man  walk  blamelessly,  if  his  walk  be  not  the  result 
of  the  hidden  life  it  is  worthless.  The  impression  of  the  foot  is  of  no  avail 
without  the  divine  principle  within  which  feeds  upon  and  digests  the  rich  pasture 
of  God's  Word. 

ii.  With  respect  to  "  all  that  are  in  the  waters/'  the  double  mark  of  clean- 
ness again  is  given.  Two  distinctions  were  necessary,  "fins  and  scales"  (vv.  9, 
10).  A  fish  needs  the  "  fin  "  to  enable  it  to  move  th7'ough  the  water^  and  "scales" 
to  resist  their  penetrating  action.  And  so  does  the  believer  require  that  spiritual 
capacity  which  enables  him  to  move  onward  through  the  elements  surrounding 
him,  and  at  the  same  time  to  resist  their  penetrating  influence.  Both  are  essen- 
tial. Encased  against  the  action  upan  us  of  the  evil  world,  yet  endowed  with 
the  energy  to  pass  onward  through  it. 

iii.  The  law  with  respect  to  birds  was  that  the  carnivorous,  the  omnivorous, 
the  grovelling,  were  unclean  (vv.  13-24).  A  striking  exhibition  is  therein  given 
of  what  must  be  strenuously  shunned  by  every  Christian.  He  must  refuse 
everything  of  a  "  carnal "  nature.  Nor  may  he  feed  promiscuously  upon  every- 
thing which  comes  before  him  ;  he  must  "  make  a  difference  between  unclean 
and  clean";  must  exercise  a  discerning  mind,  a  spiritual  judgment,  a  heavenly 
taste.  Finally,  he  must  use  his  wings :  rise  on  the  pinions  of  faith,  and  find  his 
place  in  the  celestial  sphere  to  which  he  belongs.  Nothing  grovelling,  nothing 
promiscuous,  nothing  unclean  for  the  Christian. 

iv.  As  to  *' CREEpma  things"  there  was  entire  prohibition  (vv.  41-43). 
Jehovah  would  have  his  people  free  from  the  defilement  consequent  upon  contact 
with,  touching  or  tasting  anything  unclean.  They  were  not  their  own  ;  they 
belonged  to  Jehovah  :  His  name  was  called  upon  them.  Other  nations  might 
eat  what  they  pleased  :  but  Israel  enjoyed  the  high  distinction  of  being  regulated 
by  the  Lord  in  every  detail  of  life. 

(a)  Their  entire  separation  from  all  manner  of  uncleanness  flows  out  of  their 
relationship  to  Him,  (t  is  not  the  principle  of  "stand  by  thvself,  I  am  holier 
than  thou"  ;  but  simply  this,  '*  God  is  holy,"  and  therefore  all  who  are  brought 
into  association  with  Him  must  be  holy  likewise.  If  a  Christian  be  now  asked 
why  he  walks  apart  from  the  ten  thousand  things  in  which  men  of  the  world 
participate,  his  ans^ver  is  simply  "My  Father  is  holy."  This  is  the  true  founda- 
tion ot  personal  holiness. 

(6)  They  are  hound  to  aim  at  the  maintenance  of  the  character  which  He  pre- 
scribes. If  God,  in  His  exceeding  grace,  stoops  down  to  our  low  estate,  aud  lifts 
us  in  association  with  Christ,  has  He  not  a  right  to  prescribe  what  our  character 
should  be*?  And  a  true  Israelite  will  maintain  that  "difference  between  the 
unclean  and  the  clean." 

(c)  How  strange  to  one  who  had  scrupulously  observed  these  ceremonial 
distinctions  all  his  days,  must  have  been  that  vision  of  the  vessel  containing  ^^  all 
manner  of  four-footed  beasts,  and  wild  beasts,  and  creeping  things,  and  fowls  of  the 
air"  (Acts  x.  11-16)  let  down  from  heaven,  and  to  have  heard  the  voice  say, 
*'  Rise,  Peter,  kill  and  eat."  No  examination  of  hoofs  and  habits  ;  no  need 
now  of  this.  The  soul  was  now  to  rise  above  all  ceremonial  barriers  into  the 
magnificence  of  heaven's  grace.  True  cleanness,  the  cleanness  God  required,  was 
no  longer  outward  and  ceremonial,  but  should  consist  in  being  washed  in  the  blood 
of  the  Lamb,  which  cleanseth  from  all  sin,  and  renders  the  believer  clean  enough 
to  tread  the  sapphire  pavement  of  the  heavenly  courts. 

The  door  of  the  kingdom  is  thrown  open  by  the  hand  of  Sovereign  ajrace  ;  but 
not  to  admit  alight  that  is  unclean.  Nothing  unclean  could  enter  heaven.  But 
a  "  cloven  hoof"  was  no  longer  to  be  the  criterion  :  but  this — "  what  God  hath 
cleansed,''* 


cnAP.  XI.  1—43]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  159 

^■-  ■       ■■  1  ■■■   ^M^^i^—  I        »■  ^— ^^M— ^i^i^^— —        ■  .1.  I  ^■■        — .  mil—.  — -■■■■■■  ■  I  ■  i»^^M^— ^» 

The  standard  by  which  true  cleanses  must  be  regulated  is  no  longer  carnal, 
ceremonial,  earthly;  but  spirituil,  moral,  and  heavenly.  We  are  no  longer 
heiiirned  round  about  by  "  touch  not,  taste  not,  handle  not  ";  but  the  divine 
Word  assures  us  that  "  every  creature  of  God  is  good  and  nothinj^  to  be  refused, 
if  it  be  received  with  thanksgiving;  for  it  is  sanctitied  by  the  Word  of  God  and 
prayer''  (1  Tim  iv.  4,  5).— C.  //.  M. 

Topic:  Jehovah's  Concern  for  Israel's  Well-being  (Yv.  1-43). 

Doubtless  the  laws  concerning  clean  and  unclean  animals  were  symbolic, 
conveying  lessons  specially  adapted  to  Israel  at  the  time;  they  were  also  typical 
of  moral  truths  to  be  observed  by  worshippers  of  Jehovah  through  a,ll  time.  So 
far  as  regards  the  animals  themselves  they  were  all  on  the  same  moral  level  in 
the  sight  of  God ;  each  followed  the  instincts  implanted  by  the  great  Creator, 
acquired  the  habits,  and  exercised  the  passions  peculiar  to  its  nature.  Some 
were  more  repulsive  to  man  than  others,  of  less  service  when  alive,  less  utility 
when  dead. 

Animals  had  been  classified  by  the  patriarchs  and  among  heathen  nations  ; 
some  animals  had  been  considered  more  sacred  than  others.  But  these  laws 
definitely  fixed  the  line  of  demarcation  to  be  drawn,  the  main  distinction  being 
twofold  :  All  animals  were  unclean  except  those  which  divided  the  hoof  and 
chewed  the  cud.  The  directions  for  determining  the  difference  were  numerous 
and  minute,  entailing  careful  and  constant  discrimination.  Origen  and  other 
allegorical  writers  have  found  symbol  and  type  in  every  permitted  or  prohibited 
thing ;  but  the  course  is  dangerous,  and  likely  to  lead  to  most  erroneous  conclu- 
sions.    General  truths  are  suggested,  such  as  — 

I.  Divine  concern  for  the  temporal  welfare  op  Israel. 

Laws  of  purity  enjoined  would  obviously  conduce  to  their  physical  comfort. 
Cleanliness  is  a  safeguard  against  many  bodily  ills.  Nothing  was  interdicted  in 
these  restrictions  that  would  tend  to  health  and  longevity.  Caring  for  Israel 
as  a  father  for  his  children,  Jehovah  would  have  them  partake  only  of  food  that 
was  nutritious.  Nothing  is  beneath  His  notice  that  affects  the  welfare  of  the 
children  of  men. 

II.  Divine  concern  for  the  national  unity  of  israel. 

Elected  to  special  privileges  and  responsibilities,  the  Hebrew  nation  was  to  be 
clearly  distinguished  from  all  other  nations  on  the  earth.  The  laws  would  keep 
the  people  from  joining  with  the  heathen  in  their  ordinary  meals  and  sacred 
feasts  ;  would  be  a  barrier  against  every  intruder ;  for  the  Cauaanites  ate  some 
of  the  animals  these  laws  prohibited,  and  offered  others  in  sacrifice  to  heathen 
gods.  Nothing  tends  to  obliterate  national  difiFereuces  and  to  throw  social 
distinctions  into  oblivion  more  than  sitting  together  at  the  same  table  and 
pai taking  of  common  food.  Israel's  observance  of  the  directions  given  in  this 
chapter  would  set  a  hedge  around  the  family  life,  and  indicate  a  peculiar  people. 

III.  Divine  concern  for  the  exclusive  worship  of  israel. 

Rites  and  ceremonies  had  already  been  instituted  that  would  exclude  other 
nations  from  mingling  with  the  Hebrew  in  the  worship  of  the  tabernacle  ;  now 
a  guard  is  put  around  the  social  as  well  as  sacred  table.  Tent^  as  well  as  taber- 
nacle, to  be  consecrated  to  the  Lord.  Here  we  see  Jehovah's  sovereignty  exercised, 
His  jealousy  for  the  exclusive  worship  of  His  people.  Whether  the  people  ate 
or  drank,  they  were  to  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God.  Tliey  were  to  come  out  from 
the  ungodly  and  be  separate,  and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing,  and  thus  become 
the  sous  and  daughters  of  the  Lord  God  Almighty.  Nothing  less  than  cheerful 
obedience  to  divine  regulations  for  private  and  public  life  would  satisfy  the 
claims  Jehovah  made  upon  the  loyalty  and  worship  of  His  people. 


IGO  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xi.  44-49. 

IV.  Divine  concern  for  the  complete  purity  of  Israel. 

While  purity  of  heart  and  mind  were  of  the  first  importance,  the  body  also 
was  to  be  kept  pure.  Nothing  to  be  eaten  that  would  make  it  gross,  or  vitiate 
the  blood.  Even  the  dwellings  of  the  people,  their  garments,  and  every  article 
f(»r  use  or  ornament,  to  be  ceremonially  clean.  These  minute  and  exact  re- 
quirements would  impress  Israel  with  the  holiness  of  the  Lord  with  whom  they 
had  to  do.  In  avoiding  the  proscribed  animals — the  habits  and  appearance  of 
which  in  many  cases  would  beget  natural  disgust — the  people  would  be  reminded 
(a)  of  the  vileness  and  loathsomeness  of  sin;  (b)  of  the  need  of  constant  circumspection 
to  avoid  contamination  with  evil ;  (c)  of  the  necessity  of  complete  purity  in  the  sight 
of  Jehovah.  Attention  thus  called  to  the  body  and  physical  things  would  show 
that  the  human  frame  is  not  the  vile  product  (as  the  Gnostics  contended)  of  a 
malevolent  deity,  but  created  and  cared  for  by  Him  who  breathed  into  it  at 
first  the  breath  of  life,  and  made  man  a  living  soul. 

V.  Divine  concern  for  thhi  exalted  piety  op  Israel. 

Selfishness  is  the  root  of  all  sin,  pride  of  all  impiety.  These  laws  would  tend 
to  humble  the  people,  teach  them  self-denial.  Having  to  abstain  from  eating 
animals  savage  and  voracious  intfieir  nature,  unattractive  in  their  form,  repulsive 
in  their  habits,  would  remind  Israel  that  the  most  scrupulous  sanctity  of  heart 
was  required  by  Him  who  demanded  such  purity  in  meaner  things.  These  un- 
clean animals  may  be  regarded  as  types  of  persons  it  is  always  well  to  avoid. 
Thus  the  brute  creation  is  a  book  full  of  useful  lessons  upon  what  we  may  with 
advantage  adopt,  and  what  we  ought  to  shun.  In  all  these  things  we  see  the 
wisdom  and  goodness  of  the  Lord,  conducing  to  well-being  here,  and  furnishing 
stepping-stones  to  blessedness  hereafter. — F.  W.  B, 

Topic:  Jehovah's  Concern  for  His  own  Glory  (Vv.  44-49). 

The  regulations  taught  Israel  that  Jehovah  was  their — 

I.  Supreme  ruler.  "  For  I  am  the  Lord  your  God."  All  authority  resided 
in  Him.  He  had  sovereign  right  to  command  and  restrain.  The  people  were  not 
to  study  tbeir  own  preferences,  or  conveniences,  but  obey  the  mandates  that 
issued  from  the  King  of  kings. 

II.  Spotless  king.  *'  For  I  am  holy."  The  constant  reiteration  of  this  truth 
must  have  engraved  it  deeply  in  the  consciences  of  the  congregation,  and  im- 
pressed them  most  solemnly  with  the  purity  of  the  divine  nature.  Israel  couJd 
never  have  conceived  of  so  holy  a  Being,  surrounded  as  they  had  been,  and  were 
still,  by  hideous  and  degrading  idolatry. 

III.  Great  deliverer.  "  For  I  am  the  Lord  that  bringeth  you  up  out  of  the 
land  of  Egypt."  The  people  were  under  vast  obligatiou  to  the  Almighty.  He 
had  wrought  signal  deliverances  for  them  They  were  His  by  redemption.  He 
had  a  right  to  expect  obedience  from  them.  He  had  brought  them  out  of  E^ypt 
for  the  specific  purpose  of  making  them  a  people  for  Himself.  These  laws  would 
test  their  faith,  gratitude,  and  obedience ;  teach  them  self-denial,  and  restraint. 
Their  spiritual  nature  was  to  be  in  ascendancy  over  everything  carnal  and  tem- 
poral. 

In  the  New  Testament  a  new  interpretation  is  given  to  these  Levitical  laws  j 
we  are  shown  that,  not  what  we  eat  or  drink  defiles  the  soul,  but  what  comes  out 
of  it.  The  root  and  seat  of  evil  are  within ;  yet,  care  needs  to  be  exercised 
against  temptation  and  contamination.  Touching  the  unclean  thing,  such  aa 
pernicious  literature,  places  of  ill-fame,  sinful  companionship ^  may  lead  to  moral 
defilement,  to  spiritual  degeneracy.     In  the  gospel — 

(1)  Special  emphasis  is  laid  upon  spiritual  purity  ; 

(2)  With  spiritual  purity  is  associated  our  highest  joy. 


CHAP.  XI.  2,  3.]  THE  BOOR  OF  LEVITICUS,  161 

Our  bodies  are  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ;  they  ought,  therefore,  to  be  kept 
pure.  The  Church  is  the  Body  of  Christ  :  from  it,  therefore,  everj^thing  should 
be  excluded  that  is  unclean.  Into  the  celestial  city  "  there  shall  in  no  wise  enter 
anything  that  defileth,  neither  whatsoever  worketh  abomination "  j  all  there 
shall  be  for  ever,  ** Holiness  unto  the  Lord." — F,W.B. 


Topic :  The  Clean  and  the  Unclean. 

**  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel^  saying,  These  are  the  beasts  which  ye  shall  eat 
among  all  the  beasts  that  are  on  the  earth.  Whatsoever  parteth  the  hoofy  and  is 
clovenfootedf  and  chtweth  the  cudy among  the  beasts,  that  shall  ye  eat"  (Lev.  xi. 
2,3). 

As  the  Mosaic  was  peculiarly  a  typical  dispensation,  we  shall  not  exaggerate 
the  uses  of  the  text  if  we  show  that  there  was  something  instructive  to  us  and 
something  typical  of  the  better  covenant  in  the  command  given  that  the  people 
were  to  eat  no  creatures  bat  those  which  divided  the  hoof  and  those  which  chewed 
the  cud. 

I.  These  distinctions  of  meat  were  laid  down  to  keep  the  jews  as  a  distinct 
PEOPLE,  and  that  herein  they  might  be  a  type  of  the  people  of  God,  who  are  also, 
throughout  all  ages,  to  be  a  distinct  and  separate  people — not  of  the  world,  even 
as  Christ  was  not  of  the  world. 

With  this  Levitical  rule  it  was  quite  impossible  for  the  Hebrews  to  mix  with 
any  other  nation  without  violating  the  statutes  they  were  commanded  to  keep. 
Their  food  was  so  restricted  that  they  could  not  possibly  enter  into  social  inter- 
course with  any  of  the  neighbouring  peoples.  The  Canaanites,  for  instance,  ate 
everything,  even  the  flesh  that  had  been  torn  by  dogs,  and  the  dogs  themselves. 
Now,  a  Jew  could  never  sit  at  a  Canaanite's  table,  because  he  could  never  be 
sure  that  there  would  not  be  the  flesh  of  some  unclean  and  accursed  thing  upon 
it.  The  Jews  could  not  even  eat  with  the  Arabs,  who  were  near  akin  to  them, 
for  they  frequently  partook  of  the  flesh  forbidden  to  the  Jew.  This  command 
made  them  a  distinct  and  isolated  republic  so  long  as  they  were  obedient  to  the 
law.  Just  so  the  Mohammedan  regulations,  less  strict  than  those  of  the  Jew, 
prevent  their  becoming  socially  intermingled  either  with  the  idolators  or  with 
Christians.  Now,  what  is  the  use  of  this  to  us  %  It  is  the  earthly  type  of  a  heavenly 
mystery.  Thus  all  who  name  the  name  of  Christ  are  solemnly  bound  to  be  for 
ever  separated  from  the  world.  Our  Saviour  "  was  holy,  harmless,  undefiled, 
and  separate  from  sinners."  He  was  with  them,  but  He  was  never  of  them ; 
among  them,  but  always  distinct  and  separate  from  them.  He  hath  set  us  an 
example.  Be  among  men  as  a  light  in  the  midst  of  darkness,  as  salt  scattered 
over  putridity,  as  heavenly  angels  in  the  midst  of  fallen  men ;  a  distinct  people, 
a  chosen  generation. 

But  in  what  respects  are  we  to  be  distinguished  9 

1.  In  a  pure  consistency  always,  in  vain  eccentricity  never.  Not  in  our  gar- 
ments ;  not  by  any  peculiar  jargon  in  speech  ;  such  artificial  separations  we  leave 
to  the  people  whose  vanity  feeds  on  its  own  conceit.  Not  trying  to  make  our- 
selves look  like  Christians.  Heavenly  realities  within  do  not  always  need  to  be 
labelled  outside,  so  that  ever^/body  may  say,  *'  There  goes  a  saint."  There  are 
other  modes  of  being  distinguished  from  the  world  than  any  of  these. 

2.  We  ought  ever  to  be  distinguished  from  the  world  in  the  great  object  of  our 
life.  Our  main  and  principal  motive  as  Christians  should  always  be  to  live  for 
Christ.  You  can  make  the  commonest  calling  become  really  sacred.  You  may 
take  the  highest  orders  by  dedicating  your  daily  life  wholly  to  the  service  of 
Jesus.     There  is  such  a  thing—  and  let  those  that  deny   the  possibility  stand 

M 


162  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xi.  2,  3. 

self-convicted  that  they  obey  not  the  precept — "  Whether  ye  eat  or  drink,  or 
whatsoever  ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God." 

3.  By  our  spirit  2iS  well  Si,s  our  aim  we  should  likewise  be  distinguished;  a 
spirit  which  watcheth  humbly  before  God,  and  seeketh  to  know  His  will  and  to 
do  it  through  the  grace  of  God  given. 

4.  Our  maxims  and  rules  which  regulate  us  should  be  very  different  from  those 
of  others.  A  Christian  never  considers  what  is  usual,  but  what  is  right.  The 
believer  reads  things,  not  in  man's  light,  in  the  obscurity  of  which  so  many  blind 
bats  are  willing  to  fly,  but  he  reads  things  in  the  sunlight  of  heaven.  If  a  thing 
be  right,  though  he  lose  by  it,  it  is  done  ;  if  it  be  wrong,  though  he  should  be- 
come as  rich  as  Croesus  by  allowing  it,  he  scorns  the  sin  for  his  Master's 
sake. 

3.  Our  actions  should  be  distinctive.  Let  your  conduct  talk  out  your  soul. 
Let  the  main  sermon  of  your  life  be  illustrated  by  all  your  conduct,  and  it  shall 
not  fail  to  be  illustrious.  This  will  furnish  the  best  proof  that  you  have  been 
with  Jesus. 

4.  A  Christian  is  distinguished  bp  his  conversation.  If  he  would  have  a  jest, 
he  picks  the  mirth  but  leaves  the  sin  ;  his  conversation  is  not  used  to  levity  ; 
it  is  not  mere  froth,  but  it  ministereth  grace  unto  the  hearers.  Oh  !  commend 
me  to  the  man  who  talks  like  Jesus ;  who  will  not  for  the  world  suffer  corrupt 
communications  to  come  out  of  his  mouth.  You  know  the  value  of  the  gold  of 
heaven  too  well  to  pawn  it  away  for  the  counterfeits  of  earth.  *'Come  ye  out 
from  among  them  ;  be  ye  separate,  and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing. ^'  By  a 
holiness  which  merely  moral  men  cannot  equal,  stand  as  on  a  pedestal  aloft  above 
the  world.  Thus  men  may  know  you  to  be  of  the  seed  of  Jesus,  even  as  they 
knew  the  Jew  to  be  the  seed  of  Israel. 

II.  The  distinction  drawn  between  clean  and  unclean  animals  was  in- 
tended by  God  TO  keep  his   people  always   oonsoious  that  they  were  in 

THE    NEIGHBOURHOOD  OP    SIN. 

An  oriental  Jew,  sensible  and  intelligent,  walks  out  in  the  fields.  He  walks 
along  close  by  the  side  of  the  high-road,  and  what  should  he  see  but  a  string  of 
camels  going  along?  "  Ah  !"  he  says  to  himself  "  those  are  unclean  animals." 
Sin,  you  see,  is  brought  at  once  before  his  mind's  eye.  He  turns  away  from  the 
road  and  walks  down  one  of  his  own  fields,  and  as  he  goes  along  a  hare  starts 
across  his  path.  "Ah!"  says  he,  *'an  unclean  animal  again;  there  is  sin  in 
my  path."  He  gets  into  a  more  retired  place ;  he  walks  on  the  mountains ; 
surely  he  shall  be  alone  there.  But  he  sees  a  coney  burrowing  among  the  rocks; 
"  Ah  !"  says  he,  *' unclean  ;  there  is  sin  there  !"  He  lifts  his  eye  up  to  heaven ; 
he  sees  the  osprey,  the  bald  eagle,  flying  along  through  the  air,  and  he  says, 
**  Ah  !  there  is  an  emblem  of  sin  there  1"  A  dragon-fly  has  just  flitted  by  him — 
there  is  sin  there.  There  are  insects  among  the  flowers  ;  now  every  creeping 
thing,  and  every  insect,  except  the  locust,  was  unclean  to  the  Jew.  Everywhere 
he  would  be  reminded  that  this  world,  however  beautiful,  still  has  sin  in  it. 
Even  the  fish,  in  sea,  or  river,  or  inland  lake,  had  their  divisions;  those  that 
had  no  scales  or  fins  were  unclean  to  the  Jew,  so  the  little  Hebrew  boys  could 
not  even  fish  for  minnows  in  the  brook  but  they  would  know  that  the  minnow 
was  unclean,  and  so  their  young  hearts  were  made  to  dread  little  wrongs  and 
little  sins,  for  there  were  little  sins  in  the  little  pools,  even  as  there  were 
leviathan  sins  floating  in  the  deep  and  nude  sea.  We  want  to  have  this  more 
before  our  minds.  Not  a  spot  is  there  in  the  universe  where  the  curse  of  sia 
has  never  inflicted  a  blight,  or  where  the  hope  of  redemption  should  not  inspire 
a  prayer.  See  that  you  put  on  the  whole  panoply  of  God,  and  watch  and  pray 
lest  ye  enter  into  temptation.  Every  morning  we  ought  to  ask  the  Lord  to  keep 
us  from  unknown  sins,  to  preserve  us  from  temptation  that  we  cannot  foresee,  to 
check  us  in  every  path  of  life  if  we  are  about  to  go  wrong,  and  hold  us  up  every 


CHAP,  xr.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 


168 


hour  that  we  sin  not.     May  the  Lord  sot  sin  straight  before  your  eyes,  and  then 
set  the  cross  of  Christ  there  too,  and  so  you  will  be  saved. 

III.  This  injunction  was  also  intended  to  be  A  rule  of  discrimination  by 

WHICH  WE  MAY   JUDGE  WHO  ARE  CLEAN    AND  "WHO    ARE  UNCLEAN,  that   is,  WHO    ARE 
SAINTS  AND  WHO  ARE  NOT. 

There  are  two  tests,  but  they  must  both  be  united.  The  beast  that  was  clean 
was  to  chew  the  cud,  here  is  the  inner  life  ;  every  true-hearted  man  must  know 
how  to  read,  raark,  learn,  and  inwardly  digest  the  sacred  Word.  The  man  who 
does  not  feed  upon  gospel  truth,  and  so  feed  upon  it,  too,  that  he  knows  the 
sweetness  and  relish  of  it,  and  seeks  ovA,  its  marrow  and  fatness,  that  man  is  no 
heir  of  heaven.  You  must  know  a  Christian  by  that  which  supports  his  life  and 
sustains  his  frame.  But  then  the  clean  creatures  were  also  known  by  their  walk. 
The  Jew  at  once  discovered  the  unclean  animal  by  its  having  an  undivided  hoof; 
but  if  the  hoof  was  thoroughly  divided,  then  it  was  clean,  provided  that  it  also 
chewed  the  cud.  So  there  must  be  in  the  true  Christian  a  peculiar  walk  such  as 
God  requires.  You  cannot  tell  a  man  by  either  of  these  tests  alone,  you  must 
have  them  both.  But  while  you  use  them  upon  others  apply  them  to  yourselves. 
You  may  profess  the  faith  within,  but  if  you  do  not  walk  aright  without,  you 
belong  to  the  unclean.  On  the  other  hand,  you  may  walk  aright  without,  but 
unless  there  is  a  real  feeding  upon  precious  truth  in  the  heart,  all  the  right 
walking  in  the  world  will  not  prove  you  to  be  a  Christian.  That  holiness  which 
is  only  outward  is  moral  not  spiritual ;  it  does  not  save  the  soul.  That  religion 
which  is  only  inward  is  but  fancy  ;  it  cannot  save  the  soul  either.  But  the  two 
together,  the  inwards  parts  made  capable  of  knowing  the  lusciousness,  the  sweet- 
ness, the  fatness  of  Christ's  truth ;  and  the  outward  parts  conformed  to  Christ's 
image  and  character;  these  conjoined  point  out  the  true  and  clean  Christian 
with  whom  it  is  blessed  to  associate  here,  and  for  whom  a  better  portion  is  pre- 
pared hereafter. — (7.  H.  Spurgeon,  in  "  Metro.  Tab.  Pulpit.^' 


ILLUSTRATIVE  ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  XI. 


Separi-TB  from  sinners  : — 
This   was  Christ's  distinction : 
distinguish  all  who  are  Christ's. 


it  should 


*'  The  friendships  of  the  world  are  oft 
Confederacies  in  vice,  or  leagues  of  pleasure. 
Ours  has  severest  virtue  for  its  basis, 
And  such  a  friendship  ends  not  but  with 
life." — Addison  :  Ca^o  iii.  1. 

"  There  are  three  friendships  which  are  ad- 
vantageous, and  three  which  are  injurious. 
Friendship  with  the  upright,  friendship  with 
the  sincere,  and  friendship  with  the  man  of 
obfcervation  ;  these  are  advantageous.  Friend- 
ship with  the  men  of  specious  airs,  friendship 
with  the  insinuatingly  soft,  and  friendship 
with  the  glib-tongued  ;  these  are  injurious." 
— CJo>FUCius:  AnalecU  iii. 

"  Nature  and  religion  are  the  baiids  of 
friendship;  excellency  and  usefulness  are  its 
great  endearments.  But  as  all  cannot  actually 
be  of  our  society,  so  neither  can  all  be  ad- 
mitted to  a  special,  actual  friendship." 

—Jeremy  Taylor. 


*'  Not  with  the  light  and  vain, 

The  man  of  idle  feet  and  wanton  eyes  ; 
Not   with  the   world's   gay,    ever   smiling 
train ; 
My  lot  be  with  the  grave  and  wise. 

"  Not  with  the  trifler  gay. 

To  whom  life  seems  but  sunshine  on  the 
wave  ; 
Not  with  the  empty  idler  of  the  day  ; 
My  lot  be  with  the  wise  and  grave. 

"Not  with  the  jesting  fool. 

Who  knows  not  what  to  sober  truth  is 

due  ; 
Whose  words  fly  out  without  an  aim 

rule ; 
My  lot  be  with  the  wise  and  true. 

"  With  them  I'd  walk  each  day, 

From  them  time's  solemn  lessons  would 
learn. 
That  false  from  true  and  true  from  false  I 
may 
Each  hour  more  patiently  discern." 

— BONAB. 

m2 


164  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xii. 


Ffasttno'—  With  such  a  temperance 

««  Simple   diet    is  best;    for   many    dishes  There  would  be  no  slaves,  no  syncophant. 

bring  many  diseases."— Pliny.  At  great  men  s  tables.— Mat. 

"  They  eat,  they  drink,  and  in  communion  «  Fatal  effects  of  luxury  and  ease  1 

secret  "Vye  drink  our  poison,  and  we  eat  disease, 

Qaaff  immortality  and  joy." — Milton.  Indulge  our  senses  at  our  reason's  cost, 

"  Health  and  liberty  Till  sense  is  pain,  and  reason  hurt  or  lost. 
Attend  on  those  bare  meals :   if  all  wer«  -Chandler. 

blest 


-•o*- 


CHAPTER    XII, 

SUGGESTIVE    READINGS. 

V.  2.— If  a  woman  hath  conceived  .  .  she  shall  be  imclean.    Thus  at  the 

very  entrance  into  life  uncleanness  clings  to  us.  Not  a  child  is  born  without  de- 
filement surrounding  its  birth.  **  Behold,  I  was  shapen  in  iniquity,  and  in  sin 
did  my  mother  conceive  me  "  (Psa.  h.  5).  *'  How  can  he  be  clean  that  is  bora 
of  a  woman  1 "  (Job  xxv.  4).  How  humbling  is  this  Scripture  presentation  of  our 
case.  From  the  cradle  to  the  grave  man's  life  is  pronounced  unclean.  Surely  it 
should  arrest  all  self-elation  and  boasting.  Pitiable  indeed  sounds  the  vain 
panegyric  upon  the  dignity  of  human  nature  ;  melancholy  is  the  haughty  assump- 
tion of  excellence  and  worthiness,  in  the  light  of  this  vision  of  man's  defilement 
from  birth  till  death.  He  should  rather  "  abhor  himself,  and  repent  in  dust  and 
ashes  "  (Job  xlii.  6).  Instead  of  the  too  common  flattery  of  human  nature,  be 
this  mirror  of  his  humiliating  impurity  held  up  to  the  face  of  the  self-satistied 
sinner,  that  he  may  see  the  "  hole  of  the  pit  whence  he  was  digged  ^'(Isa.  h.  1), 
and  cry  in  penitential  lowliness,  **  We  are  all  as  an  unclean  thing,  and  all  our 
righteousnesses  are  as  filthy  raa:8  "  (Tsa.  Ixiv.  6). 

V.  6.— She  shall  bring  a  lamb.  Always,  in  God's  graciousness,  the  remedy 
rises  for  the  malady.  Defilement  has  its  antidote  in  atonement.  The  two 
grand  aspects  of  the  sacrificial  death  of  Christ  stood  out  here  in  the  "  lamb  for  a 
burnt  offering,"  in  which  He  offered  Himself  without  spot  to  God  ;  and  in  the 
''sin  offering,"  in  which  He  substituted  Himself  as  the  victim /or  men.  From 
the  humbling  spectacle  of  human  helplessness  and  defilement  here  given  what, 
can  be  more  assuring  and  consolatory  than  to  gain  a  view,  in  type,  of  the  perfect 
merits  of  Jesus  —who  in  Himself  concentrated  the  unsullied  grace  and  dignity  of 
humanity,  and  in  His  sacrifice  effectually  atoned  for  the  guiltiness  and  degreda- 
tion  of  our  fallen  race.      "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin 

of  the  world."  ^jy    .     -u  -a 

Vv.  2,  5.— If  the  woman  have  born  a  man  child.  .  .  If  she  bear  a  maia 
child.'  The  mother's  defilement  was  ceremoniously  less  for  the  male  child  than 
for  the  female.  Is  not  this  a  perpetuated  memorial  of  the  fact  that  sin  entered 
the  world  throngh  the  woman,  she  being  the  first  transgressor  'i  Certainly  this  is 
the  basis  of  Paul's  argument  for  her  inferior  position  in  the  Christian  Church  (1 
Tim  ii.  11-14).  Or,  in  this  shorter  banishment  from  sanctuary  privileges  when 
her  child  was  a  male,  there  may  be  found  an  intimation  of  the  blessed  privilege 
coveted  by  all  Hebrew  mothers,  of  giving  birth  to  the  **  man  child,"  who  was 
to  be  "  born  of  a  woman,"  to  redress  the  woes  of  the  fall.    Every  suggestion  of  the 


CHAi'  xii.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS,  165 

coming  Emmanuel  was  cherished  as  the  soft  radiance  of  that  promised  *'  Morning 
Star."  And  so  the  heavier  penalty  fell  on  the  birth  of  the  female  child,  since 
woman  was  a  remembrance  of  sin,  whereas  the  ameliorated  penalty  was  attached 
to  the  birth  of  a  male,  since  the  Man  Child  was  the  herald  of  the  promised 
Saviour 

V.  8. — If  she  be  not  able  to  bring  a  lamb.  However  poor  the  woman  might 
be,  there  could  be  no  exemption  from  the  presentation  of  an  atonement  offering. 
Poverty  must  come,  though  with  meek  aspect,  trusting  in  reconciling  blood. 
And  the  *'  poor  in  spirit,"  whose  faith  is  tremulous,  whose  apprehension  is  feeble, 
must,  nevertheless,  lay  ho[)e  on  the  merits  of  sacrifice  None  can  be  allowed, 
through  lowliness  of  station  or  poverty  of  soul,  to  evade  the  propitiatory  atone- 
ment. AH  must  place  trust  in  Christ  whatever  our  lot  in  life,  whatever  our 
spiritual  mood.  Yet  how  tender  is  God's  consideration  !  He  will  allow  the 
turtle  dove  to  suffice  for  the  poor,  and  regard  it  as  equally  efficacious  as  the 
richer  ofiFerer's  lamb,  so  that  the  humblest  Israelite  should  be  harassed  by  no 
fear  lest  she  forfeit  privilege  by  her  lowlier  gift.  God's  perfect  grace  comes  to 
the  very  condition  in  whicti  the  "  poor  and  needy  "  are  to  be  found.  And  so,  in 
this  Christian  dispensation,  the  lowest  and  the  feeblest  have  the  atoning  blood 
brought  within  their  reach,  and  through  its  merits  may  recover  all  the  privileges 
from  which  "  uncleanness "  excludes  them.  "  To  the  poor  the  gospel  is 
preached." 

HOMILIES. 
Topic:  Motherhood. 

Scripture  shows  that  God  thinks  much  of  mothers.  Allusions  to  a  mother's 
sufferings,  perils,  relationship,  affection,  are  very  numerous.  She  passes  through 
no  experience  which  has  not  been  noticed,  described,  and  used  by  the  Lord  as  a 
simile  of  spiritual  truth.  Motherhood,  in  all  its  aspects,  is  the  reiterated  theme 
of  God's  VVord.  This  must  afford  a  wealth  of  consolation  and  support  to  a  be- 
lieving mother  in  her  trials  and  solicitudes ;  her  watchful  Father  has  shown  that 
He  minutely  considers  all  her  various  cares,  her  mysterious  pangs,  her  heart 
struggles  between  dread  and  delight,  her  yearnings  and  her  love. 

The  hirth  of  a  child  is  also  an  event  which  constantly  engages  inspiration. 
The  Word  makes  frequent  reference  to  the  incident.  A  new  life  ushered  into  the 
world,  is  a  fact  which  touches  the  heart  of  God.  Another  being  launched  upon 
the  floods  of  possibility  ;  another  factor  in  the  intricate  sum  of  human  existence, 
whose  results  must  affect  the  ultimate  reckoning  ;  another  soul  added  to  the 
millions  whose  destiny  is  bliss  or  woe.  There  is  no  room  for  doubting  that  the 
divine  Father  is  concerned  for  each  human  offspring.  He  notes  the  child's 
entrance,  gives  directions  concerning  it,  sends  counsels  for  its  career  desires  its 
salvation  and  sanctification,  calls  it  to  the  immortal  Home  made  ready  by  Christ. 
"  It  is  not  the  will  of  your  Father  in  heaven  that  one  of  these  little  ones  should 
perish  "  (Matt,  xviii.  1 4). 

L  How  observant  is  Scripture  of  the  humiliations  incident  to  motherhood. 

This  chapter  is  a  witness. 

1.  Scripture  has  sanctioned  and  sanctified  wifely  relationship  (Psa.  cxiii  9). 

2.  Scripture  recognises  everj/  stage  of  physical  suffering  which  motherhood  en- 
tails (Jer.  iv.  31). 

3.  Scripture  forewarns  of  the  tender  sorrows  and  distresses  incident  to  maternity 
(Jno.  xvi.  21  ;  Isa.  xxvi.  17). 

4.  Scripture  contains  special  messages  of  compassion  and  hope  for  mothers  in 
their  period  of  solicitude  (isa.  xl.  11). 


166 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap  xii. 


II    JIoiv  emphatically  does  Scripture  pap  tribute  to  the  honours  of  motherhood. 
In  making  a  mother  the  sijmhcd  of  the  Church  of  God  (Gal.  iv.  6  ;  Ephes.  v.  82). 
In  comparing  Jehovah's  consolatory/  ministries  to  those  of  a  mother  (Isa.  Ixvi.  13). 
In  using  motherhood  as  the  channel  of  Christ's  advent  (Luke  i.  35). 
In  the  tender  consideration  for  Bis  mother  manifested  by  Jesus  (Luke  ii.  52  ; 

Jno.  xix.  26,  27).  /at  ^.i. 

In  the  command  given  to  children  to  pay  then-  mothers  reverence  (Matt.  xv. 

4   etc)      [See  Addenda  to  chap,  xii.,  J/a^erw%] 
'  III.  How  watchfully  does  Scripture  guard  the  happiness  which  should  be  the 

crOW;7l  O/ MOTHbRHOOU.  ,    ,    X1**-   1       ••       -IK       Mi        17    U 

1.  Conjugal  loyalty  is  scrupulously  demanded  (Mai.   n.    15,    lb  j  Hipbes.   v. 

2.  A  mother's  place  in  the  family  is  carefidly  indicated  (Ephes.  vi.  1,  2). 

3*.  The  grace  which  flows  through  mothers  to  their  children  is  recognised  with 

emphatic  approval  (2  Tim.  i.  5).  ,  .     ^,    •  .,        i  *  *i. 

4.  The  blessedness  of  a  mother' s  privilege  is  mdicated  in  Christ  s  welcome  ot  the 
mothers  who  brought  their  children  to  Him  (Luke  xviii.  15-17). 

«  And  say  to  mothers,  What  a  holy  charge 
Is  theirs  ;  \fith  what  a  kingly  power  their  love 
Might  rule  the  fountains  of  the  new-born  mind ; 
Warn  them  to  wake  at  early  dawn,  and  sow 
Good  seed  before  the  world  has  sown  its  tares." — Mrs.  Sigoumey, 

Though  her  child  is  "born  in  sin,"  and  she  is  humiliated  by  her  own  "un- 
cleanness  "  yet  can  a  mother  retrieve  her  humiliation  by  uplifting  her  child  in 
ijraver  to' God  by  training  her  oflPspring  in  the  faith  of  Christ,  and  at  last,  wirh 
her  children  saved  in  the  Lord,  appearmg  in  the  glory  of  the  Eternal  Presence 
with  the  glad  cry,  *'  Behold  me,  and  the  children  which  thou  hast  given  me  1 
[See  Addenda,  Childhood,] 

Topic:  Birth. 

I    In  its  paw^s  there  survives  the  MEMORIES  OF  THE  WOEFUL  FALL. 

Our  ancestress  Eve  sinned,  therefore,    "unto  the   woman  God  said,  I   will 

greatly  multiply  thy  sorrow  and  thy  conception  ;  in  sorrow  thou  shalt  bring  forth 

children"  (Gen.  iii.  16). 

II.  In  its  ''  uncleanness"  there  arise  suggestions  op  our  transmitted  defile- 

PhVical  impurity,  amid  which  a  babe  is  ushered  into  the  world,  is  but  a  sign 
of  that  corruption,  moral  and  spiritual,  which  parents  pass  on  to  their  ofifspring  : 
''  Altogether  born  in  sin  "  (Jno.  ix.  34).  ^ 

IIL  In  its  transports  there  reappears  the  joyousness  op  the  Messiahs  in- 
carnation. ^      .  ,  .   1      .     r>.i    •  i.   iU      T       J  » 

Sang  the  angels,  "Unto  you  is  born  a  Saviour,  which    is  Christ  the  Lord 
(Luke  ii   11)     A  woman   '*  as  soon  as  she  is  delivered  of  the  child,  remembereth 
no  more  the  anguish  for  joy  that  a  man-child  is  born  into  the  world  "  (Jno. 
xvi.  21). 

Topic:  Pollution  and  Purifying. 

The  birth  of  a  child  should  be  an  event  of  gratitude  and  delight.  It  is  never 
wholly  so  ;  for  a  shadow  falls  on  every  new-born  life. 

(a)  It  is  "  born  in  sin,"  and,  therefore  may  perish  in  sin  ! 

(6)  It  is  born  amid  travail,  and  may— dread  possibility  that  \— occasion  death 
through  the  anguish  of  birth. 


CHAP.  xii.J  THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS.  167 

(r)  Tt  is  an  event  marked  by  God  as  qualified  with  "  imcleannoss."  For  He 
sees  in  every  birth,  since  Eve's  fall,  t\\Q  perpetaation  oi  B\n^  t\iQ  propajation  of  a 
sinning  race, 

I.  Unclean  :  such  is  the  verdict  of  heaten  upon  human  life. 

God  lias  here  written  the  word  polUuion  upon  the  very  entrance  of  a  babe 
into  existence. 

1.  It  bnnds  the  mother  as  "  unclean"  and  excludes  her  from  social  fellowship 
and  sanctuary  privileges.  We  are  not  now  judged  by  this  ceremonial  standard  ; 
but  a  [)rit)ciple  underlies  this  banishment  of  the  mother.  It  declares  that  there 
is  taint  in  the  blood.  There  has  never  been  a  sinless  mother  on  this  earth. 
Certainly  not  Eve;  nor  even  the  Virgin  Mary — for  she  had  equally  to  observe 
"the  days  of  her  purification"  (Luke  ii.  22).  Womanhood  is  defiled;  therefore 
maternity  is  not  pure. 

2.  It  brands  the  child  as  defiled.  The  tender  babe  holds  in  its  physical  form 
the  gertns  of  foul  disease,  of  corrupt  affections  and  passions.  ''Who  can  bring  a 
cltan  thing  out  of  an  unclean  V  From  a  poisoned  fountain  there  can  flow  only 
vitiated  streams.  Leave  that  babe  to  follow  its  iabred  desires  and  it  will  degen- 
erate into  evil.  Goodness  is  never  self  evolved,  but  only  badness.  "  They  go 
astray  as  soon  as  they  be  born"  (Psalm  Iviii.  2). 

II.  Clraxsing  :  such  is  the  demand  of  god  upon  every  one  defiled. 

Here  upon  the  mother  only,  because  the  ceremonial  directions  deal  with  the 
mother.  But  the  demand  is  equally  enforced  upon  all;  each  sex,  every  life.  The 
male  child  was  unclean  till  "  circamcised"  (v.  3). 

1.  Until  cleansing  is  effected  there  is  banishment  :  the  door  is  closed  upon 
social  life,  for  she  must  be  separate  :  and  closed  upon  sacred  scenes,  for  she  must 
*'  not  come  into  the  sanctuary."  Defilement  excludes  us  from  all  that  is  happiest, 
purest,  best. 

2.  Until  cleansing  is  effected  there  is  degradation, :  the  woman  forfeited  her 
pi  ice  of  dignity  in  her  own  home  and  in  God's  temple.  Impurity  is  a  degrada- 
ti  »n.  We  sink  thereby  from  our  honoured  place  in  creation  ;  we  grovel  instead 
of  triumph  ;  we  are  bowed  into  shame  before  God  instead  of  joying  in  His  favour ; 
and  we  are  refused  the  blessedness  which  is  the  right  of  sinless  man,  of  tread- 
ing God's  courts  with  acceptance,  and  abiding  in  the  delights  of  holy  privilege. 

ill.  Purified:  such  is  the  possibilitt  opened   by  god  to  all  who  are 

UNCLEAN. 

1.  Womanhood  sanctified  (v.  7).  In  the  Christian  dispensation  there  is  a 
richer  purifying  than  the  ceremonial ;  it  "  cleanses  from  all  sin."  Look  in  upon 
the  Bethany  home — "  Mary  sat  at  Jesus'  feet."  See  the  apostles'  list  of  con- 
secrated women  in  the  Christian  church  at  Rome  (Romans xvi.).  Lift  your  eyes 
to  the  pure  souls,  "an  hundred  and  forty  and  four  thousand"  with  the  Lamb 
on  Mount  Sion  :  virgin  saints,  all  undefiled  (Rev.  xiv.  1,  4). 

2.  Childhood  consecrated  (v.  3),  thereby  enrolled  as  a  member  of  the  Israel  of 
God  :  and  now  placed  in  the  hands  of  Jesus  who,  blessing  the  children,  declares, 
*'  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven." 

There  is  merit  in  Christ's  "  atonement"  which  purges  all  sin's  stains.  There 
is  grace  in  His  heart  by  which  all  may  be  rejoiced.  There  is  beauty  ia  His 
righteousness  with  which  all  may  be  clothed  in  sacred  comeliness. 

Topic:  The  Statute  relating  to  Matbrnitt, 

This  chapter  records  the  rites  to  bo  observed  by  Hebrew  women  in  oonneo- 
tion  with  their  new  experiences  of  maternity.  The  period  of  ceremonial 
restrictions  would  differ  according  to  the  sex  of  the  child  ;  but,  in  both  cases, 
the  mother  would  be  permitted  to  present  her  offering  before  the   Lord,  and, 


168  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xn. 

eventually,  be  restored  to  her  former  status  among  the  people.     The  statute 
suggests  the  following  reflections  : 

I.  That  anguish  is  associated  with  maternity. 

Through  the  i^'all  the  sorrows  of  conception  were  greatly  multiplied,  and 
the  pangs  of  childbirth  became  intensified.  The  whole  period  of  conception, 
with  many,  is  a  burden ;  and  the  time  of  travail  one  of  most  excruciating  pain. 
Though  the  mother  experiences  one  of  nature's  keenest  joys  when  she  knows 
that  to  her  a  child  is  born,  yet  there  are  accompanying  sorrows  which  only  the 
feelings  of  maternity  can  know,  as  no  stranger  can  intermendle  with  the  joy. 

II.  'J'hat  privacy  is  associated  with  maternity. 

Although  the  procreation  of  children  is  normal  and  of  divine  ordination, 
yet,  where  there  is  virtuous  womanly  modesty,  there  is  always  a  sense  of  shyness 
and  reserve  during  period  of  preparation  for  advent  of  the  little  stranger, 
especially  at  the  season  of  delivery.  The  instincts  of  nature  suggest  withdrawal 
from  public  observation  and  general  familiar  intercourse  even  with  friends. 
Hence,  even  among  heathen  nations,  special  rites  and  customs  have  always 
been  associated  with  the  experiences  under  consideration.  Such  restraints  and 
reserve  do  not  degrade  the  gentler  sex  in  the  sight  of  God  or  the  eyes  of  right- 
minded  men  ;  woman  rather  rises  thereby  in  honour  and  esteem. 

III.  That  depravity  is  associated  with  maternity. 

Maternity,  under  honourable  conditions,  is  no  sin  :  yet,  by  it,  depravity  is 
communicated ;  as  the  Psalmist  expresses  the  fact,  "  Behold  I  was  shapen  in 
iniquity,  and  in  sin  did  my  mother  conceive  me.*'  There  is  a  hereditary  tendency 
in  human  nature  to  sin  ;  so  that  giving  birth  to  a  child  is  the  propagation  of 
sinfulness,  and  an  extension  of  the  consequences  of  transgression,  entailing  moraZ, 
as  well  as  ceremonial  defilement.  The  rite  of  purification,  under  these  circum- 
stances, is  both  symbol  and  type  of  purification  of  the  children  of  men  by  atonement 
of  our  great  High  Priest  on  Calvary.  Responsibilities,  commensurate  with  the 
honour  of  maternity,  suggested  by  the  statute.  Imperative,  that  children  born 
in  sin,  with  inherent  depraved  propensities,  should  be  taught  the  law  of  the  Lord, 
and  trained  in  holiness  and  righteousness  all  their  days. 

JV.  That  salvation  is  associated  with  maternity. 

Though  for  a  while  the  mother  was  kept  secluded  from  society,  the  restrictions 
were  only  of  a  temporary  character.  She  was  soon  seen  presenting  her  appointed 
offerings  before  the  Lord  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation.  The 
burnt  offering  was  the  basis  of  all  other  offerings ;  and  signified,  not  only 
the  sovereign  claim  of  Jehovah  upon  all  we  have  and  are ;  but,  also  the  disposi- 
tion of  the  worshipper  to  become  a  living  sacrifice,  holy  and  acceptable 
unto  God.  Behold  the  goodness  of  God  in  promising  to  accept  ''two  turtles, 
or  two  young  pigeons  "  if  the  offerer  were  not  able  to  present  a  lamb ;  one 
for  the  burnt  offering ^  the  other  for  the  sin  offering.  The  intention  and  frame 
of  mind  were  of  more  importance  than  the  offering  itself,  as  the  Scriptures 
elsewhere  declare,  "  Behold  !  to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice,  and  to  hearken 
than  the  fat  of  rams."  This  rite — being  for  the  Jews,  and  associated  with 
the  Levitical  economy — is  abrogated  now;  a  more  minute  examination^  therefore^ 
would  not  minister  to  edification — is  not  necessary.  Some  moral  teachings  have 
been  indicated,  and  they  may,  when  convenient,  be  reiterated  in  public  as  part 
of  the  didactic  function  of  preaching  ;  for  principles,  gathered  from  divine  laws, 
have  undying  roots,  and  inexhaustible  meanings.  This,  as  well  as  other  rights, 
was  observed  down  to  the  advent  of  our  blessed  Lord  ;  for  Mary,  the  mother  of 
Jesus,  offered  in  the  Temple  the  least  offering  allowed  at  thanksgiving  and  sacri- 
fice after  child-birth  ;  an  irrefutable  proof  of  the  abject  poverty  of  her  worldly 
circumstances.  On  national,  as  well  as  on  religious  grounds,  no  objection  can 
be  offered  under  the  gospel  to  women,  having  been  delivered  in  the  time  of 
maternal  solicitude  and  sorrow,  publicly  paying  their  vows  in  the  courts  of  the 


CHAP.  XIII.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 


169 


Lord,  and  with  grateful  hearts  re-dedicating  themselves  to  the  service  of  the  Most 
High.  If  womankind  reflect  with  sorrow  upon  the  fact  that  it  was  through 
Eve's  seduction  that  Adam  fell  and  sin  entered  our  world,  they  may  reflect  with 
joy  upon  the  fact  that  it  was  through  their  own  sex  that  the  second  Adam  came, 
who  has  reversed  the  curse  of  sin  and  redeemed  the  human  race.  If  in  connec- 
tion with  the  first  man  shame  seems  to  cover  womanhood,  the  second  man,  the 
Lord  from  heaven,  placed  a  wreath  of  undying  glory  on  her  brow,  as  we  see 
lymg  in  the  arms  of  Mary  at  Bethlehem,  *'  the  holy  child  Jesus."  Paul  asserts 
in  his  first  Epistle  to  Timothy  (v.  15),  that  women  shall  be  saved  through  the 
child-bearing;  salvation  has  come  through  its  ordinance,  and  if  women  abide  in 
faith,  love,  sanct^fication,  and  holy  self-control,  they  shall  be  cleansed  from  all 
DQoral  impurity,  shall  be  not  only  sanctified,  but  saved,  through  the  Child  born 
the  Son  given.— i^.  W.  B.  ^  , 


ILLUSTRATIVE  ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER    XIL 


Motherhood  : 

*'  There  is  no  mother  like  the  mother  that 
bore  us."—  Spanish  Proverb. 

"  A  mother  is  a  mother  still, 
The  holiest  thing  alive." — Ooleridob. 

If  . 

• A  mother's  love 

Is  an  undying  feeling.     Earth  may  chill 

And  sever  other  sympathies,  and  prove 
How  weak  all  human  bonds  are :  it  mav 
kill  ^ 

Friendship,  and  crush  hearts  with  them ; 

but  the  thrill 
Of  the  maternal  breast  must  ever  move 
In  blest  communion  with  her  child,  and 

fill 

Even  heaven  itself  with  prayers  and  hymns 
of  love. — Patterson. 

Monica,  Augustine's  mother.  Never  did 
mother  struggle  more  earnestly  than  she. 
From  her  son's  nineteenth  to  his  twenty- 
eighth  year,  while  he  was  revelling  in  all  sin's 
foulness,  she  persisted  in  resolute  hope  and  fer- 
vent prayer.  In  his  twenty-ninth  year  she  was 


still  **  instant  in  prayer,"  when  he  left  her  and 
journeyed  to  Rome.  From  Rome  he  went  to 
Milan,  and  thither  the  praying  mother  followed 
him.  And  there  the  answer  to  her  prayer 
and  reward  of  her  Christian  influeuce  came. 
In  Ambrose's  preaching  contrition  came  to 
Augustine,  and  that  event  made  Monica's 
happiness  complete. 

OmLDHOOD : 
"  Children  are  what  their  mothers  are. 
No  fondest  father's  fondest  care 
Can  fashion  so  the  infant's  heart 
As  those  creative  beams  that  dart, 
With  all  their  hopes  and  fears,  upon 
The  cradle  of  a  sleeping  son." — Landeb. 

*'  The  mother's  heart  is  the  child's  school- 
room."— Beecueb. 

Cecil,  who  had  adopted  infidel  sentiment  in 
his  youth,  and  prided  himself  upon  his  strong 
arguments  against  religion,  said,  long  after- 
wards :  "  There  was  one  argument  I  could 
never  get  over,  the  influence  and  life  of  a 
holy  mother." 


-•o^ 


CHAPTER    XIII. 

f^pr0sg:  its  Jistolrcrg  ait^  Cuatm^iti 

SUGGESTIVE  READINGS. 

Gathering  into  view  the  circumstantial  and  concise  description  of  the  malady 
here  given  ;  the  directions  concerning  leprosy  may  be  thus  analysed  and  arranged  • 

Symptoms  of  leprosy  : 

1.  Their  minuteness:  small  in  their  beginnings,  trifling  skin  blemishes  or  hair 
defects,  scarcely  distinguishable  at  the  outset,  evasive  therefore,  and  subtle. 


^70  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xiiL 


2  Their  intricacy:  so  resembling  other  ailments,  in  some  cases  rismg  out  of 
other  blemishes  and  wounds;  complicate  and  interblendmg. 

3  Their  repuhiveness  :  all  the  descriptions  are  loathsome. 
Discrimination  of  the  symptoms.     The  investigation  had  to  be— 

1.  Cautious:  lest  that  should  be  pronounced  leprosy  which  was  not  ;  or  that 

"tV:?L'!-Thrs'uffe;ermustbe  repeatedly  examined  where  the  signs  were 

uncertain  :  no  haste,  no  summary  decision.  .    -t^  j„ 

3.  Thorough  :  searching  to  the  very  root :  watching  a  wound  to  note  its  de- 

vel.>pment8,  shaving  the  hair  that  no  symptom  escape  notice 

Treatment  of  the  leper.    When  the  malady  was  beyond  doubt,  the  doom  was- 
1.  Absolute  :  he  was  banished,  there  might  be  no  concessions ;  he  was  excluded 

^\':''Mlurnful :  garments  to  be  torn,  the  hair  dishevelled,  the  lips  covered,  as 

^"V^MW.-  from  the  outlawed  leper  must  rise  the  cry  of  warning  to  others, 
which  was  also  the  death  knell  of  his  own  fate—"  Unclean  ! 

Six  various  aspects  under  which  leprosy  may  develop  itself  in  man  are  here 
^^t^firsl  appearance  <>t  the  plague:  the  victim  manifesting  symptoms  which 
"TZr:^^-^!^^  (vv.  9-11).     But  two  features  of  the  malady  are 

\2)    The  vlaaue  spots  have  lost  their  virulence  (vv.  16,  17).  .  .        ., 

tLevrokdevetopi«ff  from  other  sores  or  accidental  wounds :  seizing  these 
blemishes  in  which  to  root  itself  (vv.  18-28).  i,.. /„„  oq  ■jtn 

4  The  pla..ue  burping  itself  amid  the  hair:  called  the  "dry  scall    (vv.  29-37) 

5  Ham  m  leprosy  (vv.   38,   39).     It  is  still   accounted   harmless   by  the 
Arabsfruses  no'TnTonvenience,  and  lasts  variously  from  two  months  to  two 

^'e^'Tbe  baldness  distemper  :  leading  to  the  falling  off  of  the  hair  from  the 
back  of  the  head  (vv.  40- 14). 

Vv  45  46 -The  leper  in  whom  the  plague  is,  etc.  As  the  victim  of  a  grievous 
.^llmitv  the  poor  leper  must  assume  the  melancholy  aspects  of  mourning, 
he  mu  t  tdl  ourhis  w'^.e  in  the  doleful  cry  "Unclean,"  and  his  doom  must  be 
t!  wander  as  an  outcast  from  the  society  of  Israel  and  from  the  sanctuary  of  God 
Thrs  foul  dTstemper  has  always  been  a  parable  of  the  loathsomeness  of  sm  and 
its  dilmil  punXeu?  vividfy  pourtra^s  the  grievous  penalties  of  moral  and 

^'^'^'riVt^-Mrr^nCihat  the  plague  of  leprosy  is  in,  etc.    Equal 
miluteness  of  inspection,  discrimination  of  taint  were  to  be   exercised  upon 

gZ  rafflcted'wi.h  the  plague,  and  if  i-^^^^'lXtfV^SiltZ 
|p.P  tn  be  burned.  Clothes  were  scarce,  and  not  easily  to  be  replacea  ^'^  yae 
deer  hence  cTre  hat  nothing  be  needlessly  destroyed.  But  no  unclean  thing, 
nor  "anything  that  defileth"  could  be  allowed  to  abide  "'thin  the  camp 
EvUmus^t  be  rooted  from  our  own  persons,  or  we  become  outcasts  a^d  evil 
must  be  shunned,  contact  therewith  be  scrupulously  avoided  or  t^e  malady 
Zy  return.  Therefore,  like  leprous  garments  we  mus  "  Uy  J^th  v"^, 
weight  and  the  sin  that  doth  so  easily  beset  us  Within  t'\«/«''°J°",P  ", 
The  redeemed  Church  on  earth,  and  amid  the  blessedness  of  the  ransomed 
society  of  heaven,  God  will  allow  m  place  for  any  unclean  thing,      neither 


CHAP.  XIII.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  171 


whatsoever  worketh  abomination  or  maketh  a  lie,  but  they  which  are  written  in 
the  Lamb's  book  of  life  "  (Uev.  xxi.  27). 

SECTIONAL  HOMILIES. 

Topic:  Man  Physically  a  Victim  of  Cruel  Maladies. 

How  appalling  this  picture  of  physical  misery  !  To  what  sickening  and  weary- 
ing distempers  has  the  human  frame  become  a  prey  I  How  humiliating  to  con- 
template 

"  the  thousand  nataral  shocks 

That  flesh  is  heir  to  1" 

I.  Fashioned  after  the  divine   image^  how  graceful  and  dignified  is  the 

HUMAN  FORM  ! 

Moving  among  all  products  of  God's  creating  skill,  man  is  His  *'  noblest  work." 

1.  As  a  tenement  of  the  mind  and  spirit^  the  body  is  endowed  with  a  natural 
comeliness. 

It  is  no  unfit  abode  for  the  higher  nature  within.  Physically  we  are  *'  fearfully 
ard  wonderfully  made."  Mark  its  symmetry,  its  erectness,  its  agility.  Well  says 
Hamlet^  *'  What  a  piece  of  work  is  a  man  !  How  noble  in  reason  !  how  infinite 
in  faculty!  in  form  and  moving  how  express  and  admirable!  iu  action  how  like 
an  angel !  in  apprehension  how  like  a  god  1  the  beauty  of  the  world  I  the  paragon 
of  animals !" 

2.  As  an  intrustment  of  the  mind  and  spirit^  the  body  possesses  finest  aptitudes. 
Its  motions,  its  senses,  its  abilities,  afford  admirable  outlets  for  the  impulses 

and  aims  of  the  inner  being.  The  eyes  for  vision,  the  lips  for  speech,  the  hands 
for  ministry  and  work,  the  limbs  for  movement — the  physical  form  is  a  thing  of 
marvellous  suitableness  to  the  necessities  of  intellectual  life  and  spiritual  sym- 
pathies. It  is  in  itself  no  grim  prison,  no  harsh  machine,  but  a  supple  instru- 
ment, ready  to  all  the  requirements  of  the  indwelling  soul. 

II.  Assailed  bp  foul  diseases ^  how  desecrated  and  pitiable  is  the  hum\n  form  ! 

Look  upon  the  mighty  fallen  !  writhing  in  anguish,  wasted  by  disease,  distorted 
by  maladies  ! 

1.  In  bodily  diseases  we  mark  the  traces  of  calamitous  experiences  having  be- 
fallen man. 

As  in  the  geological  strata  the  torn  and  disordered  upheavals  declare  that 
violence  has  wrought  harm,  so  in  the  sufferings  and  maladies  of  the  human 
frame.  Some  dire  disaster  has  come  upon  the  serene  world  of  human  life. 
Diseases  are  evidences  of  ruinous  activities  having  invaded  man's  history.  God 
made  his  noble  creature  for  something  better  than  to  be  the  victim  of  sufferings 
and  maladies.  A  foul  hand  has  been  laid  upon  his  beauteous  form.  *'  An  enemy 
hath  done  this."  Sin  has  done  dire  work.  Every  pang,  disorder,  disease,  is 
therefore  a  warning  cry  against  sin  which  brought  death  into  the  world  and  all 
our  woes. 

2.  In  our  physical  maladies  we  may  note  the  inducements  to  watchfulness  and 
virtue. 

If  diseases  point  to  a  historic  disaster  in  man's  career — his  fall  through  sin, 
they  also  quicken  man  to  carefulness  against  repeating  the  follies  and  vices  which 
engender  physical  maladies.  They  are  a  call — Beware  !  It  is  not  altogether  a 
melancholy  fact  that  illnesses  and  sufferings  assail  us,  if  they  warn  us  from  in- 
dulgences ?nd  defilements  which  develop  physical  misery.  The  evil  heart  of 
man  would  urge  him  to  unlimited  vices  if  this  penalty  did  not  confront  and  tOr 

strain  him. 

"Just  disease  to  luxury  succeeds, 
And  every  death  its  own  avenger  breeds  "  (Pope), 


172  mnilLETIC   COMMENTARY  ON  [CHAP.  XIIL 


3  Amid  all  distresses  of  the  body  there  are  ameliorations  and  consolations 
offered  in  religion. 

(1)    A  patient  and  devout  spirit  may  "  draw  honey  out  of  the  rock,"  and  find 

solace  in  anguish  ;  for  those  who  love  God  have  had  to  testify,  "  It  was  good  for 

me  to  be  afflicted.'* 

*'  Affliction  is  not  sent  in  vain 
From  that  good  God  who  chastens  whom  He  loves  "  {Southey), 

(2).  In  suffering  also  there  comes  the  consolation  of  Christ  to  those  who  are 
His.  He  knew  affliction  in  bitterest  degree,  and  is  a  "  brother  born  for  adver- 
sity." 

(3).  And  there  opens  in  prospect  to  the  child  of  God  the  blissful  life  of  heaven, 
where  "  the  inhabitants  never  say  they  are  sick,"  etc.  (Rev.  xxi.  4). 

Topic :  Disease — Development — Doom. 

Trace  the  career  of  the  malady  :  it  does  not  complete  itself  at  a  stride  :  it  has 
its  outset  and  its  goal.  A  pestilence  in  the  land  does  not  expand  into  its  fatal 
proportions  without  antecedent  inciteriients  and  advancing  developments.  In 
its  germiiial  stage  the  peril  may  have  been  unsuspected  or  ignored,  but  its 
frjjctification  proves  that  active  energies  have  long  and  effectively  operated. 
Harvest  fields  swept  by  the  scythe  once  lay  bare  in  ploughed  furrows ;  the  seed 
was  sown,  it  grew,  ripened,  till  the  reapers  entered,  and  the  garners  were  filled. 
Good  and  bad  products  alike  have  their  history  of  outset,  advance  and  fruition. 
In  man's  physical  and  moral  life  there  are  equally  traceable  the  beginnings  and 
progressions  of  evil,  till  the  fatal  end  is  reached.  No  fact  for  contemplation  in 
the  moral  realm  is  more  melancholy  than  this — the  progress  of  coiTuption.  Con- 
sider the — 

1.  Subtle  history  op  its  origin. 

Transmitted  ;  mysteriously  passed  on  from  parent  to  child:  or  acquired  hj  con- 
tact with  the  leper,  or  things  infected  with  leprosy  1.  For  awhile  the  distem- 
per lies  concealed  in  the  blood,  assumes  no  visible  symptoms ;  is  latent,  passive. 
Thus  sin  long  secretes  itself  in  the  nature  as  a  subtle  tendency,  slumbers  in  the 
heart  as  a  hidden  taint.  Whence  the  beginnings  of  evil  in  a  human  life^  Came 
it  from  parentage,  a  moral  tendency  in  the  affections,  the  will,  the  habits  %  Was 
it  imparted  by  early  whisperings,  faulty  examples,  harmful  influences  ? 

2.  Its  first  appearance  was  in  a  form  of  uncertainty,  not  manifestly  leprous, 
a  swelling,  a  spot.  Wrong  when  beginning  in  a  child  is  not  glaringly  wrong, 
there  is  a  something  suggestive  of  possible  deviation  from  right,  but  it  is  not  cer- 
tainly so,  not  manifestly  and  determinately  so.  It  startles  suspicion  in  the 
observer :  the  word,  though  not  false,  was  hardly  true  ;  the  secret  act  was 
scarcely  deceitful,  yet  lacking  in  thorough  honesty ;  it  is  scarcely  a  "  rift  in  the 
lute"  ;  not  yet  a  rot  on  the  fruit,  only  a  *'  little  pitted  speck." 

3.  Thus  starting,  as  evil  does,  in  a  kind  of  incertitude,  as  a  slight  dereliction, 
a  wavering  which  creates  suspicion,  but  is  not  yet  sufficiently  pronounced  to  be 
condemned,  it  only  needs  time  in  order  to  unfold  2i.ndi  declare  itself.  Leave  it  to 
work  its  way  out,  and  it  quickly  assumes  more  positive  f(n'ms,  and  it  becomes 
too  manifest  that  the  leprosy  has  a  firm  hold  on  the  blood,  the  life.  [Addenda  to 
chap,  xiii    Developments^ 

II.  Appalling  rapidity  op  its  progress. 

Having  gained  hold  on  its  victim,  and  diffused  itself  through  the  blood,  the 
infection  hastens  to  spread  over  the  system.  Thought  of  sin,  suggested  from 
without,  or  awaking  from  within,  grows  into  desire;  desire  into  intention:  in- 
tention into  act. 

Vital  energy  decays,  good  resolves  droop,  moral  force  and  rectitude  of  pur- 


niAP.  xni.  12,  13,]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  173 


pose  decline;  then  succeed  estranged  affections,  a  defi>iiit  will,  an  "evil  heart  of 
unbehef,  clmracter  corrupted,  till  "  sin  reigns  in  our  mortal  body  tUat  we  obey 
It  in  the  lusts  thereof"  (Rom.  vi.  12).  ^        !■  wo  ooey 

lit.    [yOATMSOME  ASPECI9  OP  ITS  DEVELOPMENT. 

Whether  looked  at  in  its  incipient  stage  (vv.  2.  3),  or  in  further  advance  (v 
Skive  ^^    ^^'  "'  ""  *"  "'^"'"'•^  *'**«  (^-  24).  etc.,  it  is  always  re"- 

wh?/h'l'  U^y^  ^'°''''  °^  ''""  ^°^  P''"''''  "^  ''•*  ""'  ^^^  abominable  thing 

IV.  Contagious  properties  of  the  malady 

One  leper  could  spread   infeotion  through  a  community ;  all  who  came  near 
him,  all  he  touched,  became  contaminated! 

upmf  an  men''"''  "'onT'""^  '^/  world   and  death  by  sin  :  and  so  death  passed 
upon  ail  men.  One  smner  destroj  eth  much  good." 

evil  example  !     The  destructive  influence  of  imourity.     ''  Evil  communications 
coiTupt  good  manners."     [Addenda  to  chap,  xiii./  TrJismitted  Effects  T ^^'^^^"^^ 

V.    l^ATAL  TERMINATION  OF  THE  PLAGUE. 

^.o^i!'^'!'  f^T  arrested,  soon  completes  its  ravages  ;  and  the  victim  sinks  to 
deatL     And  what  are  the  issues  of  sin  %     -  Wages  of  sin  is  death." 

brinSSdLt^         ''  '^^^^'^^'  '^^'^^^^^^  ^^^^-'  -^-^^  -fi-bed, 
1.  ^/tcast  for  his  uncleanness,  all  his  days  (v.  46). 

Topic:  The  Leper  Before  the  Priest  (Vv.  12,  13). 
/£      A      f    ?r         Pla.-jue  from  his  head  even  to  hi,  foot,  wheresoever  the  nriest 

This  IS  a  singular  paradox,  but  not   to   him  who  uuderstando  th«   <,.«„.! 

anTi"t'orall''rit'r'^  "Z  ^%. --'7.  "^^t  leprosyTthe  tjpe  Ts  ' ^ 
ana,  h,st  of  all,  see  the  leper,  and  in  the  leper  the  sinner.  Then  britJhin  hefV. 
the  priest  and  watm  while  the  priest  examines  Mm.  ^  '"^"'^' 

1.   lurn  your  eyes  to  the  ..OATasCME  and  ghastly  spectacle  of  a  leper 

aimospneie ,  His  breath  was  as  dangerous  as  the  pestilence.     He 


174  HOMILETJC  COMMENTARY  ON        [chap.  xiii.  12,  13. 

shot  baneful  glances  from  his  eyes.  All  that  he  did  was  full  of  the  same  loath- 
someness as  was  himself.  The  actions  of  the  "  natural  man"  are  tainted  with 
sin.  Whether  he  eats  or  drinks,  or  whatsoever  he  does,  he  continues  to  sin 
against  his  God.  Nay,  if  he  should  come  up  to  God's  house  and  sing  and  pray, 
there  is  sin  in  his  songs,  for  they  are  but  hypocrisy ;  there  is  guilt  in  his  prayers, 
for  the  prayers  of  the  wicked  are  an  abomination  unto  the  Lord.  Let  him 
attempt  to  perform  holy  actions,  he  is  like  Uzziah  who  laid  hold  upon  the 
censer  of  the  priest  while  the  leprosy  was  on  his  brow,  till  he  was  glad  to  retire 
from  the  sacred  place  lest  he  should  be  struck  dead.  If  thou  dost  not  confess 
that  all  thy  actions  before  thou  wast  regenerate  were  full  of  sin  and  abominable 
in  the  sight  of  God,  thou  hast  not  yet  learned  what  thou  art,  and  it  is  not  likely 
that  thou  wilt  wish  to  know  what  a  Saviour  is. 

3.  Being  thus  the  medium  of  contagion  and  defilement  wherever  he  went,  the 
Lord  demanded  that  he  should  be  shut  out  from  the  society  of  Israel.  There  was 
a  spot  outside  the  camp,  barren,  solitary,  where  lepers  are  confined.  They 
were  commanded  to  wear  a  covering  over  the  mouth  and  upon  the  upper  lip, 
and  if  any  passed  by  they  were  compelled  to  cry  "  Unclean  !  unclean !  unclean  I" 
Some  of  the  Rabbi  translate  the  cry  "  Avoid  I  avoid  !  avoid  ! "  One  of  the 
American  poets  has  put  it,  **  Room  for  the  leper  !  room  ! "  They  were  required 
never  to  drink  of  a  running  stream  of  water  of  which  others  might  drink  ;  nor 
might  they  sit  down  on  any  stone  by  the  roadside  upon  which  it  was  probable 
any  other  person  might  rest.  They  were  dead  to  all  the  enjoyments  of  life, 
dead  to  all  the  endearments  and  society  of  their  friends.  Such  is  the  case  with 
the  sinner  with  regard  to  the  people  of  God.  He  can  go  and  find  such  mirth  as 
the  company  of  his  fellow-lepers  can  afford,  but  where  God's  people  are  he  is 
out  of  place,  shut  out  from  the  communion  of  saints,  cannot  pray  their  prayer 
nor  sing  their  hymns,  know  not  their  joys,  never  taste  their  perfect  peace,  never 
enter  into  the  rest  which  remaineth  for  them. 

4.  The  leper  was  wholly  unable  to  come  up  to  the  house  of  God.  Other  men 
might  offer  sacrifices  but  not  the  leper ;  others  had  a  share  in  the  great  high 
priest's  sacrifice,  and  when  he  went  within  the  vail  he  appeared  for  all  others, 
but  the  leper  had  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter.  He  was  shut  out  from 
God  as  well  as  shut  out  from  man.  He  was  no  partaker  of  the  sacred  things 
of  Israel,  and  all  the  ordinances  of  the  tabernacle  were  as  nothing  to  him. 
Think  of  that,  sinner  !  As  a  sinner  full  of  guilt,  thou  art  shut  out  from  all 
communion  with  God.  Thou  canst  not  stand  in  His  presence,  for  He  is  a 
devouring  fire  and  would  consume  thee.  Thy  prayers  are  shut  out  from  Him, 
thy  words  are  unheard  ;  shut  out  utterly  and  entirely  by  sin  from  the  presence 
and  acceptance  of  God. 

II.    Now  BRING  THE  LEPER  UP  TO  THE  HIGH  PRIEST. 

Whenever  a  leper  was  cleansed  under  the  Jewish  law  the  leper  did  nothing^  the 
priest  did  all.  Previous  to  his  being  pronounced  clean,  the  leper  was  passive — 
the  priest  did  everything.  The  priest  comes  out  from  the  sanctuary,  comes  to 
the  place  of  the  lepers,  where  no  other  man  might  go  but  he  in  his  priestly 
office.  He  calls  up  one  leper  before  him  ;  he  looks  at  him  and  there  is  a  spot 
on  that  leper  which  is  not  leprous — quick,  raw,  healthy  flesh.  The  priest  puts 
him  aside  ;  he  is  an  unclean  leper.  Here  is  another,  and  he  has  but  one  or  two 
red  spots  appearing  beneath  the  skin,  all  the  rest  of  his  body  is  perfectly  sound ; 
the  priest  puts  him  aside,  he  is  an  unclean  leper.  Here  is  another ;  he  is  from 
head  to  foot  covered  with  a  scaly  whiteness  of  the  filthy  disease,  the  hair  is  all 
turned  white,  owing  to  the  decay  of  the  powers  of  nature  which  are  unable  now 
to  nourish  the  roots  of  the  hair.  There  is  not  a  single  speck  of  health  in  him 
from  the  crown  of  his  head  to  the  soul  of  his  foot,  but  all  is  pollution  and  filth. 
But  hark  !  the  high  priest  says  to  him,  "  Thou  art  clean."  And  after  certain 
necessary  ceremonies  he  is  admitted  into  the  camp,  and  afterwards  into  the  very 


CHAF.  XIII.  45.1  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  175 


sanctuary  of  God.  **  If  there  was  found  any  sound  place  in  him,  he  was  unclean.** 
But  when  the  leprosy  had  covered  him,  wheresoever  the  priest  looked,  then  the 
man  became  by  Bacrificial  rights  a  clean  leper. 

Bring  up  the  sinner  before  the  Great  High  Priest.  How  many  there  are 
ready  to  confess  that  they  have  done  many  things  which  are  wrong,  but  they  say, 
"  Tliough  we  have  done  much  which  we  cannot  justify,  yet  there  have  been  many 
good  actions  which  might  almost  counterbalance  the  sin  ;  been  charitable  to  the 
poor,  sought  to  instruct  the  ignorant,  to  help  those  that  are  out  of  the  way.  We 
have  some  sins  we  do  confess ;  but  there  is  much  which  is  still  right  and  good, 
and  we  therefore  hope  that  we  shall  be  delivered."  I  put  you  aside,  in  God's 
name,  by  His  authority,  as  unclean  lepers.  For  you  there  is  no  hope  and  no 
promise  of  salvation  whatever.  A  second  comes.  He  admits  a  very  great 
measure  of  guilt ;  not  open  immorality,  but  hia  thoughts  and  the  imaginations 
of  hia  heart  have  been  evil,  and  evil  frequently.  "  But  still,"  saith  he,  **  though 
"I  have  not  one  good  work  of  which  to  boast,  nor  any  righteousness  in  which  to 
glory,  yet  I  do  hope  that  by  repentance  I  may  amend ;  I  trust  th  it  by  a  resolute 
persistence  in  good  works  I  may  yet  blot  out  my  past  life,  and  so  may  enter 
heaven."  I  set  him  aside  again,  aa  being  an  unclean  leper,  for  whom  cleansing 
rites  are  not  provided.  He  is  one  who  must  still  be  kept  without  the  camp ;  he 
has  not  arrived  at  that  stage  in  which  it  is  possible  for  him  to  be  made  clean. 
But  another  comes.  Probably  he  is  a  really  better  man  than  either  of  the  other 
two,  but  not  in  his  own  opinion.  With  many  a  sigh  and  tear  he  confesses  that 
he  is  utterly  ruined  and  undone.  "  A  month  or  two  ago  I  would  have  claimed 
a  righteousness  with  the  very  best,  could  have  boasted  of  what  1  have  done;  but 
now  I  see  my  righteousness  to  be  as  filthy  rags,  and  all  my  goodness  is  as  an 
unclean  thing.  I  count  all  these  things  but  dross  and  dung.  I  tread  upon 
them  and  despise  them.  I  have  done  no  good  thing.  I  have  sinned  and  come 
short  of  the  glory  of  God.  Lord,  at  Thy  feet  I  fall,  full  of  leprosy  from  head  to 
foot;  nothing  have  1  to  boast  of,  nothing  to  trust  to  except  Thy  mercy."  He  is 
a  clean  leper ;  sins  forgiven,  iniquitiea  put  away.  Through  the  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ,  who  died  upon  the  tree,  saved  !  Aa  soon  as  ever  the  leprosy  had  come 
right  out  the  man  was  clean,  and  as  soon  as  ever  your  sin  is  fully  manifest,  so 
that  in  your  conscience  you  feel  yourself  to  be  really  a  sinner,  there  is  a  way 
of  salvation  for  you.  As  long  as  a  man  has  anything  to  boast  of,  there  is  no 
Christ  for  him ;  but  the  moment  he  has  nothing  of  his  own,  Christ  is  his. — C 
H,  Spurgeorif  a.d.  1860. 

Topic  :  "  Unclean,  Unclean  "  (V.  45). 

God's  mercp  paints  malady  in  hideoua  tints,  that  the  sufferer  may  see  his 
plague  and  hasten  to  the  healer. 

Leprosy  showed,  by  a  long  train  of  emblem,  the  complex  loathsomeness  of 
Bin,  that  evil  might  be  the  more  abhorred. 

I.  This  malady  crept  in  with  stealthy  steps. 

Not  easily  discerned.  Human  skill  was  blind.  Wiadom  from  on  high  was 
needed.     The  anointed  prieat  muat  search. 

Sin  lurka  within  the  veina.  The  world  haa  no  detecting  eye.  The  self- 
pleased  fancy  boasts  of  health.  Death  is  begun  when  all  seems  life.  The 
plague  devours,  but  ignorance  sees  not. 

Only  the  Spirit  can  **  convince  of  sin  "  :  He  only  can  reveal  the  inborn  defile- 
ment. He  sets  the  soul  before  the  mirror  of  God's  Word  ;  opens  sightless  eyea; 
and  the  sinner  beholds  a  hideous  mass  of  polluted  self  The  light  from  heavea 
shows  leprosy  throughout.  [See  Job  xlil  6 ;  and  Isa.  vl  6.  Compare  also 
Paul's  testimony.  Rom.  vii.  24.] 


176  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY   ON         [chap.  xiii.  1-45. 


Sinners,  bring  heart,  and  thought,  and  ways,  and  life  to  the  revealing  Word. 
Consult  not  the  world's  counsel.  Call  in  the  Faithful  Witness.  Shrink  not 
Seif-knowledge  is  a  step  towards  Christ.  The  malady  perceived  leads  to  the 
malady  relieved. 

II.  The  sufferer  hears  the  priest's  codemning  voice. 
He  is  pronounced  '*  Unclean." 

He  goes  forth  ;  tastes  no  more  the  joys  of  social  scenes  ;  shunning  and  shunned 
he  hides  himself  in  solitude.  His  whole  mien  proclaims  the  misery  of  his 
dejected  soul.  Clothes  rent,  head  bare,  mouth  covered  ;  and  when  the  hollow 
voice  must  speak  it  sounds  the  plaintive  knell,  "  Unclean,  unclean  !" 

1.  The  wretchedness  of  sin  :  The  '*  clothes  are  rent  " — symbol  of  bitterest  grief 
(2  Sam.  iii.  31 ;  Job  i.  20).     There  is  no  woe  like  that  of  sin. 

2  Lowly  shame  also  :  *'  Head  uncovered."  [See  Job  xix.  9  ]  In  the  leper  thus 
despoiled   we  see  how  sin  inflicts  an  ignominious  brand.     [Compare  Ezra  ix.  6.] 

3.  Utterance  stifled :  "  upper  lip  covered."  The  sorrowful  and  shameful  sinner 
finds  speech  muffled  and  choked.  When  God  withdrew,  *'  Then  were  the  seers 
ashamed,"  etc.  (Micah  iii.  7).  Sin  should  be  mute.  While  faithful  lips  abound 
in  prayer,  and  send  forth  songs  of  praise,  and  tell  of  redeeming  grace ;  a  sinner's 
"  throat  is  an  open  sepulchre." 

4.  Pollution  is  bemoaned.  If  a  passing  step  draws  near,  a  piteous  warning  must 
be  raised — "  Unclean,  unclean  !"  (Zech.  iii.  3 ;  Isa.  Ixiv.  6). 

5.  Outcast  from  social  life.  No  home  may  welcome  him.  In  loneliness  he 
pines.  No  station  gains  exemption.  Miriam  (Numb,  xii,  14);  King  Uzziah 
(2  Kings  XV.  5). 

What  has  sin  done  1  Driven  angels  from  heaven's  light.  Excluded  multitudes 
of  men  from  communion  with  God,  holy  fellowship,  the  consecrated  board  : 
makes  sinners  exiles  from  the  heaven  bound  host,  lone  "  oflF-scourings  "  amid  the 
miseries  of  desert  life. 

6.  JShut  without  the  gates.  God  and  His  people  within,  he  "  without."  The 
saved  within  heaven's  gates — barred  ;  the  lost  "  without "  for  ever.  Thus  the 
leper  stands  an  emblem  of  sin's  dreadful  plague. 

Why  this  picture  of  horror  ?  That  [you  may  sink  in  despair  1  Far  other- 
wise. 

III.  The  great  high  priest  is  near. 

1.  He  comes  to  the  leper.  With  healing  grace,  He  draws  nigh  the  foulest,  the 
hopeless. 

2.  Bis  remedy  is  ready  and  sure.  "  Lord,  if  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  make  me 
clean  !"  was  a  leper's  cry.     Hear  His  reply,  '*  I  will,  be  thou  clean." 

3.  None  need  be  an  outcast  from  His  fold.  He  opens  grace  and  glory  to  the 
penitent  and  trustful  soul.     [Comp.  "  Christ  is  a^^."J 

Topic:    Leprosy,   a  Parable  op   Human   Depravity. 

A.     As   it   affects  the  Moral    Constitution   of    Man   (Vv.    1-45). 

Leprosy  has  always  been  regarded  as  a  mysterious  as  well  as  a  malignant 
disease.  Unlike  other  diseases,  it  was  to  be  detected  and  treated  by  the  priests. 
Probably  the  disease  was  acquired  by  the  Hebrews  while  badly  fed  and  hardly 
worked  in  Egypt.  Their  skin  would  become  liable  to  cutaneous  diseases  on 
account  of  exposure  to  the  dust  of  brickfields  and  heat  of  the  burning  sun.  In 
the  whole  range  of  Scripture  is  no  other  malady  so  fully  described.  Invested 
with  such  prominence  and  importance,  the  Hebrews  would  be  {a)  put  on  their 
guard  against  cerem.onial  defilement :  (b)  filled  with  the  spirit  of  religious  fear  .•  {cj 
eiimulated  to  desire  spiritual  purity.     The  patient,  as  be  repaired  to  the  priest, 


CHAF.  XIII.  1—45.]  THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS.  m 


convicted  of  pollution,  would  be  humbled,  and   have  thoughts  suggested  to  his 
mind  of  unvvorthuiess  and  sin. 

I.  Lepiiosy  was  mysterious  in  its  origin.  Neither  the  patient  nor  the  priest 
could  tell  exactly  how  or  when  the  disease  originated  ;  they  had  to  attend  to  the 
symptoms,  and  concern  themselves  about  the  reality  and  removal.  The  priest 
could  not  look  into  the  spriiigs  of  life  and  analyse  the  seeds  of  the  evil.  So, 
moral  evil,  that  affects  our  race,  is  mysterious  in  its  origin  ;  we  can  detect  and 
trace  its  symptoms,  prove  its  presence  ;  it  corrupts  the  springs  of  our  moral 
nature,  vitiates  all  the  faculties  of  the  soul.  We  know  by  history^  observation, 
especially  by  experience,  that  we  are  children  of  a  sin- smitten  race,  the  tamt  is 
m  our  blood,  and  only  requires  favourable  circumstauces  to  assert  its  malignity 
and  power, 

II.  Leprosy  was  insidious  in  its  progress.  For  a  while  the  person  affected 
might  he  unconscious  of  its  presence  ;  and  even  the  priest  might  find  difhculty 
in  passing  judgment  after  careful  examination.  It  was  liable  to  break  out  at 
any  time,  and  assume  various  aspects.  So,  with  depravity  having  its  seat  within, 
at  any  time,  and  under  any  circumstances,  it  may  reveal  its  pre^-ence  and  power 
— develop  the  most  alarming  symptoms.  Little  spots,  so-called  sins  of  inadver- 
tency, slight  infirmities,  may  secretly  develop  into  morally  corrupt  habits,  and 
disfigure  the  whole  life. 

III.  Lepr6sy  was  detestable  in  its  symptoms.  Every  phase  of  it  was  as- 
sociated with  uncleanness.  The  patient  not  only  became  loathsome  to  himself, 
but  oflensive  to  society.  Mental  and  moral  anguish  would  accompany  physical 
pain.  The  disease  would  disfigure  and  deform  the  frame,  rendering  life  almost 
intolerable.  So,  sin  produces  moral  disfi^jjurement,  induces  all  kinds  of  sorrow. 
Holiness  is  beautiful,  but  wickedness  is  hideous.  Our  moral  sense  puts  its  stigma 
upon  vice.  Moral  impurity  God  loathes,  and  will  ultimately  destroy.  Society 
has  its  lazar  houses,  where  depravity  may  not  only  be  checked,  but  where  its 
hideous  symptoms  may  be  hidden  from  beholders.  Such  sins  as  those  spoken  of 
in  Rom.  i.  21-32  justify  the  statement  of  Isaiah  i.  5,  6,  concerning  the  offensive 
features  of  moral  corruption, 

IV.  Leprosy  was  inveterate  in  its  tenacity.  When  once  it  asserted  itself, 
the  sufferer  would  have  to  be  prompt  and  persevering  io  his  efforts  to  get  it 
eradicated.  The  priest  had  to  make  very  close  scrutiny,  to  re-examine,  and  put 
the  leper  under  repeated  probation.  Any  contact  with  contagion  would  suffice 
to  revive  the  old  evil  in  all  its  virulence.  There  was  the  pre-disposition  in  the 
blood,  the  secret  of  the  trouble  was  there.  So,  with  moral  depravity,  it  has  been 
transmitted  in  our  blood,  the  springs  of  life  are  vitiated.  Sin  is  indigenous,  and 
defies  complete  eradiction  in  this  life.  Only  one  sinless  Being  has  lived  oq  our 
earth.  He  was  immaculately  conceived  ;  we,  are  *'  born  in  sin,  and  shapen  in 
iniquity."  leprosy  defied  all  human  means  to  remove  it  ;  through  the  instru- 
mentality of  the  divinely  appointed  priest  alone  it  succumbed.  Education., 
reform,  etc.,  cannot  cure  the  depravity  of  the  heart,  nothing  short  of  "  the  foun- 
tain opened  in  the  house  of  David  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness."  Through  the 
mercy  of  God  we  can  be  "  abundantly  pardoned  "  here,  and  become  *'  without 
spot  "  hereafter.—/^.  W,  B. 

Topic.  B.  As  IT   Affects  the  Earthly  Circumstances  of  Man  (Yv.    45-59). 

One  of  the  first  penalties  the  leper  suffered  was  excommunication.  No  sooner 
did  the  priest  detect  disease,  than  he  commanded  withdrawal  on  the  part  of  the 
Bufferer  from  healthy  society,  in  order  that  the  infection  might  not  spread. 

I.  He  would  bb  shut  out  from  the  domestic  circle.  So  sin  unso- 
cializes,  unfits  men  for  the  joys  and  purity  of  hearth  and  home ;  frequently  the 
morally  impure  have  to  be  excluded  from  the  company  of  the  virtuous. 


178  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xiii.  47—57. 


II.  He  would  be  shut  out  prom  the  secular  circle.  Not  permitted  to 
return  to  his  tent,  he  would  be  unfit  to  take  his  place  in  society,  and  fulfil  his 
duties  in  the  world.  So  wrong-doing  and  moral  turpitude  will  render  men  unfit 
for  society,  and  necessitate  their  incarceration  for  reformation  and  restraint. 

III.  He  would  be  shut  out  prom  the  sacred  circle.  Although  allowed 
to  repair  to  the  priest,  he  would  not  be  allowed  to  mingle  and  take  part  in  the 
services  of  the  house  of  God,  the  priest  shut  him  up  in  seclusion.  So  evil  shuts 
men  out  from  communion  with  God  and  His  people.  Those  composing  the 
Church  are  persons  who  become  separate,  and  who  touch  not  the  unclean  thing. 
The  saddest  aspect  of  sin  is  that  it  separates  the  soul  from  God;  and,  but  for  the 
intervention  of  our  great  High  Priest,  would  shut  us  out  from  His  presence  for 
ever. 

Hoio  circumspect,  therefore,  we  ought  to  he  I  How  anxious  that  the  lejorosy  of  our 
souls  may  he  cleansed  / — F,   W,  B, 

Topic:  Sinful  Surroundings  (Vv.   47-57). 

Notice  was  to  be  taken  of  leprous  garments  and  houses ;  and,  no  matter  what 
their  texture  or  value,  if  found  to  be  incurably  diseased,  were  to  be  unscrupu- 
lously destroyed.     By  these  things  we  are  taught — 

I.  That  great  care  should  be  exercised  in  the  selection  op  our  sur- 
roundings. 

We  are  not  absolutely  creatures  of  circumstances,  but  are  marvellously  affected 
by  them.  We  are  not  responsible  for  our  parentage,  nor  the  early  environments 
which  give  bias  and  tone  to  after  life.  These  are  circumstances  unforeseen  and 
uncontrollable,  to  which  we  are  compelled  resignedly  to  submit.  But  we  have 
to  make  many  of  the  influences  that  enwrap  us  like  garments,  as  we  go  through 
life. 

(a)  The  clothes  we  wear, 

(b)  The  books  we  read, 

(c)  The  company  we  keep, 

(d)  The  places  we  frequent. 

(e)  The  scenes  we  visit. 

All  these  may  have  a  pernicious  and  demoralising  tendency ;  they  may  be 
leprous,  and  introduce  sin  through  the  gateways  of  the  town  of  man's  soul.  How 
suitable,  then,  the  advice  in  Psa.  i.  and  in  Proverbs  of  Solomon. 

II.  That  prompt  and  decisive  action  should  be  taken  when  our  surround- 
ings AWAKEN  suspicion. 

(a)  Avail  ourselves  of  judicious  advice.  The  leper  took  anything  he  suspected 
to  priest  for  scrutiny.  Let  us  test  our  surroundings  by  the  teaching  of  our  Great 
High  Priest;  for  there  can  be  no  high  morality  without  His  religion. 

(6)  Suspend  the  suspected  thing  till  scrutiny  has  been  made. 

Suspected  garments  were  shut  up  seven  days;  and  repeated  if  needed.  Let 
us  be  shy  of  suspicious  books,  places,  etc.     Have  them  fairly  investigated. 

(c)  //  the  suspected  thing  he  righteously  condemned^  let  unconditional  destruction 
of  it  immediately  ensue. 

The  leprous  garment  was  to  be  consumed  with  fire.  So  let  us  break  oflf  at  once 
from  bad  company  or  vicious  books.  The  converts  at  Ephesus  burnt  their  wicked 
books  ;  that  ensured — 

(1)  That  they  should  do  the  owners  no  more  harm^ 

(2)  That  they  should  not  corrupt  ethers,  and-" 

(3)  Showed  the  reality  of  conversion. 

Things  that  will  not  wash,  that  will  not  improve  by  washing,  are  not  to  be  re- 
lied on.     Sin  is  not  an  external  deformity,  a  trifling  irregularity,  infirmity,  or 


CHAr.  xiir.  12,  13,  45,  4C.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  179 


failirtg;  but  in  the  soul,  degrading  all  its  powers,  which,  if  not  cleansed  will 
ultimately  get  its  desert,  ia  everlasting  destruction  from  the  presence  of  the 
Lord. — F.  W.  B.  ^ 

Topic:  The  Wondrous  Working  op  God's  Grace  (Vv.  12,  13,  45,  46). 

The  God  of  Israel  could  bear  with  infirmity,  blemish,  failure,  but  the  moment 
It  became  a  case  of  defilement— in  head,  beard,  forehead,  or  any  part— it  could 
not  be  to  erated  in  the  holy  assembly  (vv.  45,  46).  Here  was  the  leper's  condi. 
twn  the  leper  s  occupation,  the  leper's  place.  What  more  humiliating  than  this  J 
Excluded  from  the  only  spot  in  all  the  world  in  which  Jehovah's  presence  was 
known  or  enjoj'ed.     In  that  poor,  solitary  leper  behold— 

I.    A  VIVID  TYPE  of  one  IN  WHOM  SIN  IS  WORKING. 

It  is  not  a  helpless,  convicted  sinner  who  is  here  pourtrayed,  whose  guilt  and 
misery  have  thoroughly  come  out-a  fit  subject,  therefore,  for  God's  lovt  and  the 
baviours  blood-but  one  in  whom  sin  is  actually  working,  one  in  whom  there  is 
the  positive  energy  of  evil. 

1.  *S'o  long  as  sin  is  working  there  can  be  no  fellowship  with  God  or  with  His 
people.  "He  shall  dwell  alone  ;  without  the  camp  shall  his  habitation  be."  How 
long  i  All  the  days  wherein  the  plague  shall  be  in  him."  This  is  a  great  prac- 
tical truth  :  the  energy  of  evil  is  the  death  blow  to  communion.  It  matters  not 
what  the  amount  of  the  evil  be,  if  it  were  but  a  foolish  thought,  so  lon^  as  it 
continues  to  wo7'k  it  must  cause  suspension  of  fellowship. 

2.  A   suggestive  paradox  in    God's  dealing   with   sinners.     When  the    plague 
break  out  abroad  in  the  skin,  and  the  leprosy  cover  all  the  skin  of  him  "  etc 
he  IS  clean"  (vv.  12   13).     The  moment  a  sinner  is  in  his  true  place 'before 

God,  the  matter  is  settled.  Directly  his  real  character  is  fully  out,  no  difficultv 
remains.  When  the  soul  is  before  Him  with  the  cry,  -Just  as  I  am  T  the 
free  grace  of  God  flows  down  to  him.  "When  I  kept  silence,"  etc.  (Psa.  xxxii. 
6,  4) ;  but  when  I  acknowledged  my  sin,"  etc.  (v.  5),  "  thou  forgavestr  The 
moment  a  sinner  takes  his  true  place  as  one  thoroughly  lost,  guilty,  and  undone 
as  one  in  whom  there  is  not  a  single  spot  on  which  the  eye  of  Infinite  Holiness 
can  rest  with  complacency,  so  bad  that  he  cannot  possibly  be  worse,  that  mo- 
ment there  is  a  perfect  settlement  of  the  entire  matter. 

II.  The  grace  of  god  deals  with  acknowledged  sinners 
1.  The  more  evidently  a  man  is  a  sinner  the  m.ore  clearly  is  established  his  title 
to  the  grace  of  God,  and  to  the  work  of  Christ,  "for  Christ  also  hath  suffered 
for  sins,  the  just  for  the  unjust,"  etc.  (1  Pet.  iii   8).     The  gospel  applies  itself 
to  all  who  are  on  the  ground  of  being  lost.     It  is  there,  and  thereXne,    ha 

2    To  have  a  hopeless  view  of  one's  self  is  the  beginning  of  salvation.     So  lone, 
as  a  sinner  thinks  there  is  a  single  spot  which  is  not  covered  with  the  direful 

fs  full V  dill    '7/  ''"'  '\'^u    '""^'^  ^^'""^•^-     I^  '^  ^^'^  ^'^  true  condition 
abl^i'^tht  .r  ^''!'  f  "^  ^l  ''''  ^'"^''^^  "  wretched,  and  poor,  and  miser- 

•iJt'iLS^^^^  m  """'^^  ''  "'""'"  ^'  ^^^o..-Evolvedfror. 

OUTLINES  ON  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  XIII. 

n2 


180 


HOMILETtC   COMMENTARY  ON 


[CHAP.  XIII.  4—9. 


acquiesce  nncomplainingly  to  the  decison.  We 
have  suggested  ~ 
I.  By  what  sig>s  indwelling  depravity 

MAY  BE  DETECTED 

(a)  Uprising  of  evil  desire.  *'  When  a  man 
shall  have  in  the  skin  of  his  fiesh  a  rising." 
Inordinate  cravings,  sensual  promptings,  etc. 

(Ji)  Uprising  of  inflamed  passions.  *'  A  scab 
or  bright  spot."  Evil,  like  leaven,  soon  spreads, 
and  demonstrates  its  existence  ;  though  secret 
at  first,  it  reveals  its  vitality  and  virulence 
in  a  palpable  manner.  Sin  has  its  roots  in 
lust,  evil  desire  ;  and,  when  hidden  lust  hath 
conceived  it  bringeth  forth  sin;  and  sin,  when 
it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death.  In  first 
transgression, the  lustful  looking  preceded  the 
tasting  and  fatal  eating  of  the  forbidden  fruit. 
Lat  us  check  the  looking  and  inward  longing, 
and  seek  to  arr^  st  the  uprisings  of  inward 
depravity,  thus  nip  sin  in  the  bud. 

Indwelling  depravity  cannot  always  be  de- 
tected by  {a)  personal  feelings  ;  or  (J))  personal 
inconvenience.  Many  diseases,  at  their  begin- 
ning, are  insidious  and  flattering  :  do  not  occa- 
sion pain,  or  seem  to  impair  the  strength 

II.  By  WHAT  TESTS  THE  EXISTENCE  OP  IN- 
DWELLING DEPRAVITY  MAY  BE  PROVED, 

(a)  By  comparing  ourselves  with  divine 
descriptions  of  sin.  Probably  the  Hebrews 
were  furnished  with  directions  to  guide  them 
in  self-examination,  to  indicate  when  they  had 
need  to  have  recourse  to  the  priest.  God,  in 
His  great  mercy,  has  given  a  description  of 
sin  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  ;  and,  by  compar- 
ing ourselves  with  the  mirror  of  the  Word, 
we  may  detect  the  uprisings  of  depravity,  and 
see  what  ravages  sin  commits  in  our  moral 
nature. 

(^)  By  repairing  to  persons  competent  to 
guide  us  in  our  investigation 

The  leper  was  to  be  brought  to  the  priest ; 
who,  under  divine  guidance  and  authority, 
would  give  needed  counsel.  So  now — al- 
though there  are  no  priests  after  the  Aaronic 
patterns — persons  anxious  about  their  souls 
And  the  removal  of  sin  do  w  ell  to  confer  with 
ihe  ambassadors  of  Christ,  who  have  obtained 
dealing  of  the  plague  of  their  own  hearts, 
and  seek  help  from  heaven  to  direct  anxious 
inquirers  who  ask,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be 
saved?"— i^.  W.  B. 

V.  5. —  Theme :  Scrupulous  care  in  deal- 
ing WITH  depravity. 

The  priest  exercised  great  patience  in  ex- 
amining every  case  brought  before  him ;  he 
did  not  cloak  or  cover,  or  seek  only  to  slightly 
heal ;  the  course  adopted  was  searching  and 
thorough;  Sin  is  not  to  be  treated  as  a  slight 
moral  indisposition,  but  as  a  serious  radical 
disease. 

I.  Depravity,  like  leprosy,  may  some- 
times appear  ''  at  a  stay."  This  might  be 
the  outcome  of  — 

(a)  Heredity.  Life  healthy  transmitted  by 
parentage — ability  to  resist  inroads  of  infec- 
tion, development  of  disease.  So,  though 
piety   does  not  ran   in  the    blood,  yet  pro- 


pensities and  dispositions  are  inherited,  and 
check  or  quicken  depravity. 

( b)  Organisation.  The  fires  of  lu8t  will 
kindle  quicker  in  some  natures  than  in  others. 
Some  persons  have  animality  so  preponderat- 
ing that  Satan  seems  able  easily  to  get  the 
advantage  over  them. 

(c)  Environment.  Pure  surroundings  help 
to  repress  tendencies  to  go  wrong,  to  develop 
dispositions  to  virtue.  The  restraints  of  a 
godly  home.^  refining  influences  of  a  good  educa- 
tion may  stay  the  tide  of  depravity  that 
otherwise  would  break  forth  with  great 
volume  and  power. 

II.  Though  apparently  "  at  a  stay," 
depravity,  like  lkprosYjMay  be  unabated 
in  its  vihulbncb. 

Though  the  priest  did  not  at  first  detect 
signs  of  disease,  yet  it  may  have  been  lurking 
dormant  in  the  system,  and  waiting  only  for 
a  favourable  occasion  to  awaken  into  activity. 
This  might  occur  from 

(a)  Jnward  irritation.,  or 

(b)  Outward  influences. 

We  do  not  know  what  depths  of  depravity 
are  within  us,  till  some  unexpected  tempta- 
tion stirs  them,  till  the  enemy  comes  in  upon 
ns  as  a  flood. 

III.  The  arrest  of  symptoms  of  depravity 

MAY  issue    in    the    REMOVAL  OF  THEIR  CAUSE. 

(a)  When  sinful  habits  are  stayed,  their 
fires  may  burn  out. 

( b)  When  sinful  habits  are  stayed  a  new 
life  is  to  be  exhibited. 

The  healed  leper  was  to  "  wash  his  clothes 
and  be  clean."  He  was  to  appear  among 
society  as  a  new  creature,  both  in  conduct 
and  character.  The  life  of  recovered 
lepers  would  be  (1)  beautiful,  (2)  holy.,  (3) 
useful,  (4)  happy  So  of  every  saved  and 
sanctified  soul. — F.  W.  B, 

V.  9. —  Theme:  Sin  not  to  be  connived 

AT. 

It  was  the  duty  of  the  leper  to  go  to  the 
priest;  of  society,  to  see  that  he  went  :  "he 
shall  be  brought  unto  the  priest." 

I.  A  MAN  WITH  LEPROSY  NOT  TO  BE  LEFT 
TO  HIS  MORBID  FEELINGS. 

He  not  at  liberty  to  neglect  means  of  re- 
covery. No  excuse,  no  willingness  to  commit 
his  case  to  fate  or  chance  to  exonerate  him 
from  obligation  to  own  his  malady.  Liberty 
in  society  is  only  lawful  as  it  is  compatible 
with  the  general  good.  The  leper  must  go  to 
priest,  for — 

(a)  Bis  own  sake. 

(b)  Sake  of  others. 

So  sinners  ought  to  repair  to  great  High 
Priest  for  similar  reasons. 

II.  A  MAN  WITH  LEPROSY  TO  BE  DIRECTED 
TO  MEANS  OF  CURE. 

Friends  would  take  and  introduce  him  to 
priest,  especially  those  who  had  obtained 
healing  themselves.  We  have  a  right  to  in- 
terfere with  the  liberty  of  our  fellows  when 
it  is  for  their  real  and  unmistakable  good. 
Let  us  take  sinners  to  Christ,  the  Great  Phy- 


CHAP.  XTIT.  45-47.] 


THE  BOOR   OF  LEVITICUS, 


181 


sician.  Ho  is  able  and  7vilHn^  to  heal,  as  He 
heal  I'll  tho  Inpers  in  tho  days  of  His  flesh. 
He  removes  leprosy  of  sin. 

The  leper  was  not  to  puzzle  his  brains 
about  such  questions  as  — 

(a)  Why  was  leM'osy  permitted? 

( b)  How  is  it  generated  ? 

(c)  How  is  it  cured? 

Enough  for  him  to  own  it;  avail  himself  of 
mtans  of  recovery.  Useless,  absurd,  dangerous 
to  hide  or  disown  it.  So  with  leprosy  of  sin, 
it  is  a  good  sign  when  it  is  acknowledged, 
sorrowed  over,  taken  to  Him  who  alone  can 
remove  depravity,  and  make  our  souls  as 
clean  as  spotless  wool,  as  white  as  virgin 
snow.— i^.  iV.  B. 

Vv.  2,  1018,  24,  29,  \^:.—The7ne :  Degrees 

OP   DEPRAVITY. 

Obviously,  in  leprosy  there  were  varieties 
in  kind,  as  well  as  symptoms.  So  in  deprav- 
ity it  assumes  various  forms,  manifests  itself 
in  different  ways,  though  all  may  be  grouped 
under  the  denomination,  sin.  We  have 
suggested  - 

I  Inherent  depravity.  "  In  the  skin  of 
the  flesh  a  rising  "  (v. 2). 

II.  Quick  Ey  ED  depravity.  *' Quick  raw 
flesh  in  the  rising  "  (v.  lOj 

III.  Aggravated  depravity.  "  In  sight, 
lower  than  the  skin  "  (v.  20). 

IV.  Virulent  depravity.  "  The  quick 
flesh  that  burneth  '  (v   24). 

V.  Hideous  depravity.  "  Plague  upon 
the  head,  or  the  beard  "  (v.  29). 

VI  Total  depravity.  "  The  priest  shall 
pronounce  him  utterly  unclean  ;  his  plague 
is  in  bis  head  "(v.  44). 

Thus  depravity  culminates  in  disfigure- 
ment of  "the  human  face  divine," suggesting 
the  fact  that  sin  has  marred  the  image  of 
God  in  man,  and  deranged  the  whole  of  his 
intellectual  and  moral  powers. 

What  an  evidence  of  spiritual  blindness, 
that  men  do  not  see  the  hideoas  nature  of 
•in.    No  wonder  that  God — who  sees  every 


secret  sin— should  linte  it,  and  provide  for  its 
removal.  Those  who  voiuut.irily  close  their 
eyes  to  their  sinful  state,  and  die  impenitent 
will  be  moral  suicides. — F.  W.  B. 

Vv.    45-47 — Theme:    Results   of    unrk- 

MOVED  DEPRAVITY. 

When  the  leper  was  pronounced  "  utterly 
unclean  "  by  the  priest,  the  case  was  regarded 
as  desperate  and  hopeless.  So,  when  sinners 
become  exceedingly  vile,  and  defy  every  effort 
made  for  their  amendment,  the  following 
things  ensue : 

I.  Character  destroyed.  The  leper's 
clothes  were  rent ;  so,  sin  ruins  the  character 
of  its  victims. 

If.  Intellect  dethroned.  The  leper's 
head  was  bare;  so,  tbe  mind  of  the  aban- 
doned sinner  becomes  neglected,  deformed,  and 
unprotected. 

HI.  Influence  pernicious.  The  leper's 
upper  lip  covered,  to  indicate  that  the  breath 
had  become  exceedingly  corrupt.  So,  sin 
changes  the  tongue  from  being  a  wholesome 
tree,  to  a  pestilential  stream  of  polluting  in- 
fluences. 

IV.  Life    corrupted.     <«  He  is    unclean."^'* 
All  the  springs  of   life  become   impure,  the 
whole   man  is   corrupt.     So,  sin  defiles  the 
body,  soul,  and  spirit ;  pollutes  thought,  word, 
and  deed. 

V.  Condition  solitary.  "  He  shall  dwell 
alone."  Sin  cuts  men  off  from  society  with 
each  other,  from  holy  angels,  from  God.  Re- 
ligion unites  men  with  the  divine  Father ;  and 
with  each  other,  in  the  bonds  of  holy  brother- 
hood. 

VI.  Self-condemned.  The  poor  leper  cried 
"Unclean,  unclean  I"  Wherever  he  went  he 
proclaimed  his  complaint.  So  sinners— whe- 
ther they  know  it  or  not-  proclaim,  wher- 
ever they  go  (by  their  character),  the  de- 
pravity that  debases  them ;  and,  if  at  last  ex- 
cluded from  the  place  of  the  holy,  they  will 
own  the  justice  of  the  sentence  that  excludes 
them.— i^.  W,B, 


ILLUSTRATIVE   ADDENDA  TO    CHAPTER  XIII. 


Developments. 

"  The  Present  is  the  living  sum-total  of 
the  whole  Past  " — Carlyle,  Characteristics. 

"  Consequences  are  unpitying.  Our  deeds 
carry  their  terrible  consequences,  quite  apart 
from  any  fluctuations  that  went  before,  con- 
sequences that  are  hardly  ever  confined  to 
ourselvei."— Gborge  Eliot,  Adam  Bede. 

"  Large  streams  from  little  fountains  flow 
Tall  oaks  from  little  acorns  grow." 

— David  Everett. 

"From  little  sparks  may  burst  a  mighty 
flame."— Dante. 


**  Things  bad  begun  make  strong  themselves 
by  iW— Macbeth,  III,  2. 

Transmitted  Effects  : 
"And  out  of  darkness  came  the  hands 
That  reach  through  nature,  moulding  men." 
—  Tennyson,  In,  Memoriam. 

'*  The  seed  we  sow  another  reaps; 
The  wealth  we  find  another  keeps  ; 
The  robes  we  weave  another  wears  ; 
The  arms  we  forge  another  bears." 

— Shelley. 

•*The  evil  that  men  do  lives  after  them." 
— Julius  Casar,  III  2 


182 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON 


[CHAP.  XIV.  2—4. 


"No  act  of  man,  nothing  'how  rotich  less 
the  man  himself  1  is  extinguished  when  it 
disappears  ;  through  considerable  time  it  still 
works,  though  done  and  vanished." — Carlylb. 

"  No  action,  whether  foul  or  fair, 
Is  ever  done,  but  it  leaves  somewhere 
A  record,  written  by  fingers  ghostly, 
Ai  a  bleising  or  curse,  and  mostly 


In  the  greater  weakness  or  greater  strength 

Of  the  acts  which  follow  it." 

— Longfellow,  Christus, 

Unclean. 

**  The  seeds  of  all  my  sins  are  in  my  heart, 
and  perhaps  the  more  dangerous  that  I  do 
not  see  them." — M'Cheynb. 

**  Great  sins  make  great  sufferers.*' — Anka 
E.  Gbeen. 


•«♦•- 


CHAPTER  XIV 

SUGGESTIVE  READINGS. 

V.  2. In  the  day  of  his  cleansing.     Remedy  and  respite  came  to  the  pitiable 

leper.  Although  his  case  seemed  forlorn  and  dismal — uncleai),  and  an  outcast-— 
yet  the  hope  was  left  to  him  that  the  plague  might  be  healed,  and  he  be  again 
restored  to  society  and  the  sanctuary.  The  darkest  lot  of  human  life  is  illummed 
by  hope  ;  faint  may  be  its  ray,  yet  it  breaks  the  dreariest  gloom.  Weary  indeed 
were  ''all  the  days  wherein  the  plague  was  in  him"  (chap.  xiii.  46),  but  after 
long  waiting  there  might  come  in  due  season  *' the  day  of  his  cleansing."  Yes, 
the  possibilities  of  better  things  cheer  us  in  every  adverse  case  ;  the  promises  of 
God  alleviate  the  desolation  of  all  who  wait  for  Him,  even  as  the  outlook  for 
"  the  accepted  time  and  the  day  of  salvation  "  cheers  the  languishing  soul  in  its 
conscious  misery  and  sin.  To  every  plague-bound  soul  this  solace  remains— 
**  the  day  of  his  cleansing  "  may  perchance  come. 

V.  3.— The  priest  shall  go  forth  out  of  the  camp.  No  restoration  from  banish- 
ment to  God,  no  removal  of  the  bane  of  uncleanness,  except  through  priestly 
mediation.  Between  the  soul  and  salvation  comes  the  priest.  And  the  whole 
work  of  reinstating  the  outcast  in  his  lost  privileges  begins  in  this  act  of  the 
priest  going  forth  to  the  place  of  the  leper's  banishment.  The  coming  forth  of 
Christ  Jesus  to  us,  to  where  we  were  in  our  banishment,  that  was  the  initial 
incident  in  our  restoration  to  God.  No  one  but  the  priest  could  come  nigh  a 
leper  without  contracting  defilement ;  no  one  but  the  sacred  person  of  our  divine 
Priest  could  approach  us  "  in  our  sins  "  and  both  Himself  remain  "  holy,  harm- 
less, undfcfiled,"  and  also  bring  the  unclean  life  back  to  purity  and  privilege.  ^  _ 
V.  4.— Two  birds,  cedar  wood,  scarlet  and  hyssop.  Symbols  of  ceremonial 
and  sacrificial  cleansing.  The  one  bird  was  killed,  the  other  set  at  liberty.  The 
one  bird  dead,  symbolising  that  the  leprous  life  of  the  victim  was  now  also  dead  ; 
the  other  bird/rce,  symbolising  that  henceforth  a  new  life  of  liberty  was  set  before 
the  restored  leper.  Or  the  evangelical  symbolism  may  suggest  to  us  in  the  slain 
bird  the  death,  and  in  the  soaring  bird  the  resurrection  of  Christ— two  aspects  of 
His  perfected  redemption  for  the  sinner. 

The  ''cedar''  in  Scripture  is  the  symbol  of  loftiness  and  pride,  and  leprosy 
was  regarded  as  God's  rebuke  for  arrogance  and  haughtiness.    "  Hyssop  "  symbo- 
lised lowliness.     Tradition  affirms,  "  Pride  was  the  cause  of  the  distemper,  which 
cannot  be  cured  till  man  becomes  humble,  and  keeps  himself  as  low  as  hyssop." 
" /Scarlet"  a  binding  of  crimson  wool,  by  which  the  cedar  and  hyssop  were 


CHAF.  XIV.  7-63.J  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  183 


connected;  suggestive  of  "sins  as  scarlet,"  and  equally  of  the  blood  of  atone- 
ment ;  or  it  may  symbolise  the  now  purified  and  healthy  blood  flowing  in  the 
cleansed  leper's  veins. 

V.  7.— Sprinkle  upon  him  seven  times.  Welcome  to  the  leper  those 
sprinklings  of  the  blood;  each  one  being  a  testimony  of  his  deliverance.  And 
to  a  sin-burdened  life  how  welcome  "  the  blood  of  sprinkling."  There  is  no  im- 
patience while  the  sign  of  cleansing  is  "  seven  times  "  repeated.  Naaman  might 
resent  the  requirement  of  the  seven  washings  in  Jordan ;  but  it  was  in  ignorance 
of  the  fact  that  **  seven  "  is  the  sign  of  perfectness.  The  life  which  craves 
emancipation  from  uncleanness  and  banishment,  frets  not  under  the  repeated 
application  of  the  purifying  blood  ;  it  is  to  him  "  precious  blood,"  and  his  outcry 
is  '*  Wash  me  throughly  from  mine  iniquity."  They  who  have  experienced  the 
bitterness  of  sin,  weary  not  under  the  process  of  cleansing. 

Vv.  8,  9. — He  that  is  to  be  cleansed.  The  first  process  of  personal  purifying 
restored  the  leper  to  the  camp,  the  place  of  acknowledged  relationship  to  Jehovah ; 
he  entered  the  society  of  Israel.  Even  so  does  the  repentant  sinner,  who  has 
been  recalled  from  his  outcast  life,  seeks  to  cleanse  himself  from  evil  ways  and 
outward  defilements,  and  then  takes  his  place  amid  the  congregations  of  God's 
people.  It  is  the  beginning  of  his  new  and  better  life.  He  ventures  not  yet 
into  "  his  tent," nor  treads  the  floors  of  the  sanctuary;  for  these  nearer  and  more 
sacred  felicities  require  a  fuller  sanctifying.  He  must  be  "  clean  "  who  would 
dwell  in  **  the  camp  ";  doubly  cleansed  who  could  enter  the  family  of  God's 
people  in  happy  '*  tent "  fellowship ;  supremely  sanctified  if  he  would  tread  the 
sanctuary  of  holy  privilege,  accepted  within  the  very  presence  of  the  Lord. 

Vv.  10-20.— He  shall  take  two  lambs,  etc.  For  now,  at  the  end  of  seven 
days  the  soul  is  to  come  "before  the  Lord  "  (v.  11);  and  who  will  venture  near 
Him  without  sacrifice  1  The  priest  leads  him  to  the  very  "  door  of  the  taber- 
nacle," waves  the  "trespass  offering"  in  God's  presence,  slays  the  "sin  off'ering 
and  burnt  offering  in  the  holy  placp,"  then  applies  the  trespass-off'ering  blood,  to 
the  person  of  the  suppliant  together  with  the  oil  of  consecration,  making  atone- 
ment for  him,  that  he  may  be  clean.  The  priestly  ministries,  and  the  sacrificial 
offerings  reveal  to  us  the  works  of  Jesus ;  the  applied  blood  and  oil  suggest  the 
gracious  offices  of  the  Holy  Spirit  All  the  most  effective  methods  of  purifying  are 
called  into  requisition  if  a  leper  is  to  be  made  acceptable  to  God.  True  types  of 
the  needs  of  guilty  men.  It  is  not  by  easy  and  superficial  processes  they  can  be 
reinstated  in  grace.  The  priestly  offices  and  sacrificnal  merits  of  Christ,  the 
direct  ministries  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  applying  the  healing  virtues  of  redemp- 
tion, are  imperative  for  their  acceptance  with  the  Lord.  The  sinner  needs  all 
that  Christ  and  the  Spirit  can  do  for  him  if  he  is  to  stand  without  spot  or  rebuke 
before  God. 

Vv.  21-32. — If  he  be  poor.  Poverty  is  left  without  plea  of  inability  by  such 
concessions ;  and  equally  is  saved  from  fear  of  rejection  by  such  evidence  that 
God  thinks  specially  of  the  poor. 

Vv.  33-53. — Leprosy  in  a  house.  A  law  given  in  the  desert  which  was  applicable 
to  their  future  lot  in  the  Land  of  Promise.  It  is  thus  a  hostage  that  they  would 
"  come  into  the  land  of  Canaan."  God  sees  the  end  from  the  beginning.  He 
knows  the  way  we  take,  and  He  arranges  the  goal  we  shall  reach.  It  is  so  in 
our  earthly  movements  ;  it  is  certainly  so  in  our  spiritual  pilgrimage. 

God  would  have  our  homes  pure.  No  care  could  be  too  minute,  no  toil  too 
heavy,  no  sacrifice  too  serious,  in  order  to  keep  the  house  clean  from  plague. 
The  habitations  of  the  righteous  should  be  free  from  all  impurities ;  the  walls 
bared  of  all  suggestions  of  wrong  thoughts  and  passions;  the  house  free  from 
every  enticement  to  indulgence  and  sin.  Modern  Art  is  responsible  for  many  a 
plague  spot  on  the  walls  of  our  houses  ;  and  Luxury  is  to-day  laying  decoys  on 
our  tables  which  allure  to  habits  whose  issue  is  sin.     Christian  houses  should  be 


184  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xiv.  1-3. 


free  from  all  occasions  to  such  defilement.  At  all  costs,  though  it  mean  the 
partmg  with  ideal  pictures  and  vahied  sculpture  in  the  adornuient  of  our  rooms,  or 
the  removing  of  indulgences  from  our  board,  which  may  encourage  in  our  children 
impure  thoughts  or  perilous  habits,  let  us  show  ourselves  to  be  God's  people  by 
keeping  our  homes  clean.  For  a  Christian  home  is  earth's  best  type  of  the 
beauteous  and  blissful  heaven. 


SECTIONAL    HOMILIES. 
Topic:  The  Law  op  Cleansing  (Vv.  1-3). 

The  ^*lctw  of  cleansing"  is  clearly  and  emphatically  shown  at  the  outset  ;  man's 
part  in  his  own  purifying  is  to  "stand  still,  and  see  the  salvation  of  God."  All 
is  to  be  done  for  him,  nothing  done  by  him.  The  leper  must  make  no  advances, 
could  effect  no  purifj'ing  ;  he  must  for  ever  remain  unclean  and  an  outcast  if 
help  and  deliverance  are  not  brought  him.  And  in  the  redemption,  in  the  re- 
creation of  the  sinner,  all  must  be  of  God,  all  of  grace ;  "  not  of  works,  lest  any 
man  should  boast.'*     [Addenda  to  chap,  xiv.,  Helplessness.] 

1.  Guilty  man's  absolute  helplessness. 

1.  His  position.  The  leper's  place  was  outside  the  camp,  in  the  place  of 
(symbolical)  banishment  from  God.  He  was  consigned  to  solitude,  dreary  isola- 
tion, beyond  the  reach  of  human  aid.  Doubly  outlawed,  from  God  and  man  ;  all 
help  divorced  from  him  ;  far  off  from  the  agencies  of  healing  and  amelioration  ; 
shut  out  from  divine  and  human  regard.  In  the  ranks  of  sinful  men  and  women 
to-day,  there  are  thousands  equally  outlawed  from  help ;  living  far  off  from  God, 
apparently  untouched  by  gracious  influences  of  heaven,  never  hearing  of  Christ, 
unarrested  and  unawakened,  living  as  outcasts.  Nor  do  their  fellow  men  come 
to  their  aid  ;  **  no  man  careth  for  their  soul ;"  they  are  shunned  as  criminals, 
abandoned  as  hopeless.  Let  not  this  be  supposed  true  only  of  the  lower  classes 
of  society ;  in  the  highest  stations  there  are  those  of  whom,  so  far  as  sacred 
agencies  reaching  them,  God  seems  to  say,  "  Let  them  alone  !"  and  to  whom  no 
delivering  help  or  saving  word  ever  appears  to  come  from  those  who  know  the  way 
of  salvation. 

2.  His  condition.  Beyond  human  aid,  certainly  the  leper  was  beyond  self- 
aid.  How  could  he  act  to  secure  his  own  cleansing  1  He  could  only  communi- 
cate defilement  to  everj^ thing  and  every  one  he  touched.  He  was  a  defiled  and 
a  defiling  leper  ;  could  make  nothing  clean,  only  unclean.  Without  any  helper, 
he  was  absolutely  helpless.  Are  sinners  thus  1  Can  we  minimise  or  escape  our 
guilt?  If  it  were  possible  for  us  to  do  *' works  of  righteousness,"  they  would 
not  diminish  the  guilt  to  our  past  account  or  obliterate  present  sinfulness.  All 
our  righteousnesses  are  as  filthy  rags  ;  "  there  is  none  that  doeth  good  and  sinneth 
not."  It  is  mournfully  true  that  the  unclean  cannot  act  any  single  part  for  the 
removal  of  their  uncleanness. 

Add  to  this  the  fact  that  one  leper  could  not  cleanse  another,  and  the  sum  of 
his  helplessness  is  complete.  Neither  in  himself  nor  in  his  fellow-men,  clean  or 
unclean,  could  deliverance  or  healing  be  found. 

When  shut  out  from  men  we  are  shut  up  to  God.  Grace  meets  us  in  our 
extremity.  Jesus  finds  him  whom  men  "  oast  out "  (John  ix.  35),  and  receives 
sinners  whom  society  rejects  (Matt.  ix.  11,  12). 

"When  penitence  has  wept  in  vain 

Over  some  foul  dark  spot. 
One  only  stream,  a  stream  of  bloody 

Can  wash  away  the  blot. 

IL  God's  abounding  helpfulness. 


CUM'.  XIV.  1-3.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS,  185 

Since  his  only  resource  was  in  God,  He  alone  devised  and  accomplished  the 
plan  of  his  cleaiisinor. 

1.  The  outqoing  of  divine  help.  "  The  priest  shall  go  forth  out  of  the  camp." 
He  was  in  this  the  "minister  of  Ood,"  acting  out  God's  purpose.  Tn  the  priest 
God  approached  the  leper.  Later  in  time,  to  guilty  men  there  came  the 
Supreme  Priest ;  man  could  not,  in  his  sin,  come  to  God,  hut  God  came  to  man 
in  Christ.  And  still  He  comes,  hy  mediatorial  agencies,  to  the  lone  spirit  in 
the  misery  of  sin.  The  first  step  in  a  sinner's  salvation  is  taken  by  God.  He 
does  not  shrink  from  leprous  scenes.  Where  sinners  are  the  Saviour  comes. 
"  In  this  was  manifested  the  love  of  God  toward  us  "  (I  John  iv.  9,  10). 

2.  The  process  of  divine  cleansing.  Having  "  bei^an  a  good  work,"  God  carries 
it  on  to  completion  (vv.  5,  7).  Sacrificial  bloodshedding  follows  (v.  6),  then  the 
blood  of  sprinkling  is  applied  (v.  7)  in  token  of  redeeming  merits  communicated  ; 
followed  by  the  soaring  bird  (v.  7),  symbolic  of  the  risen  life  into  which  God's 
grace  calls  the  soul  whose  death  is  both  symbolised  and  substituted  in  the 
offering  slain. 

3.  Cleanness  joroclaimed.     The   priest  "  shall   pronounce  him  clean,"  that  it 

may  convey  glad  assurance  to  the  sufferer,   that  he  may  fearlessly  claim  the 

privileges  now  his.     A  wondrous  hour  to  the  stricken  spirit  is  that  when  God 

pronounces  him  clean  ;  it  brings  with  it  the  "  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all 

understanding,"  it  imparts  strong  confidence  and  acceptance  to  the  long  outcast 

life.     For  as  truly  as  the  leper  heard,  and  heard  with  eagerness,  the  priest's 

voice  of  acquittal,  so  to  the  sinner  entering  into  the  Saviour's  grace  comes  the 

*'  witness  in  himself,''  the  voice  of  blessed  testimony  for  the  Lord,  "Thy  sins  are 

forgiven  thee,  go  in  peace." 

One  only  hand,  a  pierced  hand, 
Can  salve  the  sinner's  wound. 

" /aw  the  Lord  that  healeth  thee^     [Addenda  to  chap,  xiv.,  Cleansed.'\ 

Topic:  Anxiety  for    Recovery  (Vv.  1-3). 

Medicinal  remedies  were  not  prescribed  for  leprosy ;  it  was  treated  more  as  an 
uncleanness  than  as  a  disease,  and  the  sufferer  repaired  not  to  the  physician,  but 
the  priest  From  the  decision  of  the  priest  there  was  no  appeal.  In  the  leper 
was  expected — 

L  Willingness  to  be  healed.  There  was  anxiety  in  the  congregation  that 
the  diseased  should  submit  to  the  required  regulations,  and  become  quickly 
healed.  The  leper  must  not,  through  feelings  of  shame,  hide  his  complaint,  or 
keep  from  the  necessary  scrutiny.  He  must  be  willing  to  submit  frequently,  if 
needed,  and  follow  closely  the  directions  given.  The  first  step  towards  moral 
recovery  is  to  know,  and  acknowledge  the  plague  of  sin  in  the  heart ;  to  liave 
anxiety  to  be  searched  by  the  caudle  of  the  Lord,  and  have  every  evil  way  rooted 
out.  It  is  good  when  an  anxious  inquirer  exclaims  from  solemn  conviction  :  '*  I 
am  altogether  as  an  unclean  thing,  and  my  righteousness  is  as  filthy  rags." 

II.  Confidence  in  his  healer.  Faith  in  the  priest  would  lie  at  the  basis  of 
the  leper's  obedience  to  the  requirements  of  the  Ceremonial  Law  ;  abandoning  all 
dependence  in  any  other  means.  The  priest  was  to  confirm  the  cure  God  bad 
wrought,  by  directing  a  process  of  cleansing,  which  would  exercise  and  prove  the 
offerer's  faith.  The  priest  was  the  representative  of  Jehovah  ;  the  directions  he 
gave  were  to  be  regarded  as  the  commands  of  the  Lord  ;  confidence  in  him,  and 
implicit  obedience  to  his  directions,  were  accepted  as  compliance  with  the  ex- 
pressed purposes  of  God. 

To  be  completely  recovered  from  the  leprosy  of  sin,  unshaken  confidence  must 
be  reposed  in  Him   who  alone  has  power  to  heal,  who  alone  can  give  us  the  in- 


186  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xiv.  4— 20. 

ward  witness  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life.  Meeting  the  priest  out- 
side the  camp,  as  mediator  between  God  and  His  people,  would  give  comfort  and 
composure  to  the  suppliant  for  mercy  ;  so,  God  coming  to  meet  us  in  the  likeness 
of  man,  and  unattended  by  overawing  manifestations,  awakens  confidence  in  the 
earnest  seeker  after  salvation.  Willingness  to  be  saved,  belief  in  the  Saviour, 
personal  appropriation  of  the  blessings  of  redemption,  are  the  sole  and  indispensible 
requisites  for  deliverance  from  sin  and  death, — F,  W.  B. 

Topic :  Remedial  Measures  (Vv.  4-9). 

Leprosy,  next  to  death,  was  regarded  as  a  symbol  of  the  pollution  and  loath- 
someness of  sin.  The  care  taken  in  the  purification  of  the  leper  may  be  re- 
garded as  peculiarly  referring  to  the  fact  that  sin  separates  man  from  all  pure 
and  holy  beings,  or  the  whole  family  of  God,  and  as  setting  forth  the  restora- 
tion of  the  penitent  to  the  company  of  all  faithful  people,  by  means  of  the 
great  appointed  sacrifice.  The  ceremony  to  be  observed  would  impress  the 
mind  of  the  restored,  not  only  with  the  fact  that  he  had  become  whole,  but 
that  a  fresh  tide  of  life  had  started  in  his  veins  ;  and,  as  he  saw  the  live  bird 
escape  and  soar  towards  heaven,  he  would  probably  have  suggested  to  his  mind 
that,  henceforth,  he  was  to  rise  superior  to  earthly  things,  and  seek  those  that 
are  above. 

I.  Restoration  to  the  divine   favour  is  through   divinely  appointed 

SACRIFICES. 

The  leper  may  have  wondered  what  connection  there  was  between  the  sacri- 
fices and  the  cleansing  he  desired  ;  yet  it  was  not  for  him  to  question  but  to 
obey,  and  accept  gratefully  the  blessing  conferred.  So,  in  what  we  are  com- 
manded to  do  for  our  cleansing  and  sanctifying  the  reason  may  not  be  apparent, 
but,  since  God  has  enjoined  obligations  upon  us,  exceptions  and  questionings 
are  excluded.  These  offerings  certainly  suggest  that  only  by  the  sacrifice  of  the 
life  of  a  substitute  can  we  be  cleansed  from  defilements,  only  by  compliance 
with  divine  directions  can  we  obtain  restoration  to  divine  favour. 

II.  When  restored  to  divine  favour,  the  fact  should  have  public  de- 
claration. 

The  leper  was  to  be  cleansed  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle,  "  before  the 
Lord,"  and  there  he  was  to  be  pronounced  whole  when  the  rites  of  purification 
were  completed.  Thus  the  whole  camp  would  know  that  the  man  who  had  been 
unclean  and  excommunicated  was  now  recovered,  and  re-admitted  into  the 
society  of  his  friends.  His  ear,  hand,  and  foot  having  been  consecrated  by  the 
priest,  a  pledge  was  given  that  henceforth  a  new  life  would  be  lived  before 
Israel.  So,  when  persons  are  restored  from  the  plague  of  sin,  and  cleansed  by 
the  influences  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  public  confession  is  expected  and  becoming  to 
the  honour  of  God,  and  for  the  encouragement  of  goodness.  Christ  has  enjoined 
the  duty  of  confessing  Him  publicl}'  upon  all  His  disciples,  and  declared  that 
He  will  be  ashamed  of  those  in  the  last  day  who  are  now  ashamed  of  Him. — 
F.  W,  B. 

Topic:  Progressive  Cleansing  (Vv,  8-20). 

Until  a  change  came  upon  the  leper's  state  which  was  both  (a)  a  conscious 
change  to  himself,  and  (6)  an  evident  change  to  the  priest,  nothing  could  be  done 
towards  his  admission  to  God's  fold.  So  long  as  a  sinner  remains  dead  in  his 
sin,  without  feeling  or  desire  towards  salvation,  destitute  of  penitence  and  faith, 
the  way  of  his  reception  to  the  community  of  Christ's  redeemed  is  barred :  he 
must,  in  contact  with  the  priest,  prove  his  awakened  state. 


CTIAP.  XIV.  8     20.]  THE   BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS.  187 


This  initia  movement  accomplished,  there  follows  the  application  of  the  merits 
of  sacrificialblood,  and  the  liheratioa  of  the  soul  for  a  freed  and  a  resurrection 
life  as  one '-alive  from  the  dead,"  alive  unto  God  throu-h  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord.  These  are  all  the  basis  incidents  of  the  Christian  life,  upon  which  are 
superadded  the  fuller  cleansitigs,  the  advancing  experiences,  the  hi-her  priviWes 
I.  Fuller  cleansings.-  ^         ^ 

The  8even.fold  sprinklings  (v.  7)  declare  the  reiterated  application  and  the 
a^>ounding  virtues  of  the  atonement  of  Christ.     But  there  is  yet  more  to  come. 

1.  Human.  CO  operation  with  God's  worhing.  The  priest's  acts  stand  for  the 
div.ne  operations  in  the  sinner's  cleansing;  but  the  man  himself  hasto^co- 
work  together  with  God  ";  he  must  shave  himself  and  wash  himself  The  sinner 
must  "put  off,  concennnrrthe  former  conversation,  the  old  man  which  is  corrupt 
accordn.g  to  the  deceitful  lust  "  (Ephes.  iv.  22  ;  comp.  Colos.  iii.  8-10)  ;  rid  himself 
of  a  1  sinful  excresences,  and  taints,  and  indulgences,  and  habits.  He  must  also 
apply  the  pure^ater  of  the  Word,  the  truths  and  precepts  of  religion,  enforcing 
upon  himself  the  sacred  teachings  and  requirements  of  the  gospel  «'  Ye  are  mv 
fr.er.dsifyedo  whatsoever  I  command  you"  (Jno.  xv.  14).  '^  Sanctify  them 
through  thy  truth  (Jno.  xvii.  17).  -  Now  ye  are  clean  through  the  t.or/ which 
1  have  spoken  unto  you  "  (Jno.  xv.  3). 

'^- Repeated  efforts  after  perfect  cleaning.     What  was   done  at  first  before  he 
could  be  admitted  to  the  camp,  the  conaregation  of  Israel  (v.    8),  must  be  re- 
peated seven  days  after,  even  more  scrupulously  and  minutely  (v.  9)   as  a  nre 
paration  for  his  entering  his  own  "tent"    (v.   8)  and    the  *' tabernacle  "  of  the 
Lord  (v.  11)      It  18  needful  that  he  who  has  been   living  in   sin  reform  his  life 
and  cleanse  his  ways  before    he    becomes   even    an   attendant  on  sacred  scenes 
entering  into  the  camp  and  society  of  Christians;  but  if  he    is  to  come  into  the 
more  intimate  felloivship  of  the  saints  {^^  tent  -  nearness,  and    family    intimacv) 
and   mto    personal   communion   with  the  Lord   ("tabernacle"    access   to     God) 
Z  Tw    '^Z^\}'''^f^  f    ^'^^y   ^'^Hc   of  his    former   life    of  impurity,    get 
rid  of  his  old  self,  and  seek  a  more  thorough  cleanness  by  most  sedulous  use  of 
sanctifying  gospel  aids.     The  sources  of  spiritual  cleansing  are  Scripture,  prayer. 
self-mor  ification,  cross-bearing  after  Jesus,  the  Holy  Spirit's  energies,  the  culture 
of  a  godly  mind  and  a  pure  heart.     [Addenda  to  chap,  xiv.,  ^ancti/ication  1 

11.   Advancing  expkrirnces.  -• 

That  soaring  bird  was  emblematic  of  the  freed  and  aspiring  career  now  set 
before  him.     The  whole  of  the  new  life  came  not  to  him  at  a  bound  :  he  had  to 

go  from  strength  to  strergth,"  to  move  forward  by  intervals  and  stages. 

1.  Time  intervals  separated  his  experiences,  though  allowed  to  come  into 
the  camp  at  once  he  had  to  put  "  seven  days,"  a  slow  space  of  time,  between  that 
event  and  the  next,-entrance  into  his  tent ;  and  "  on  the  eighth  day  "  followed 
his  presentation  before  the  Lord  in  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  The 
soul  being  "made  nigh,"  translated  "from  the  power  of  darkness  into  '*  the 
kingdom  of  God  s  dear  Son,"  moves  onward  by  time  stages  ;  and  sometimes  the 
intervals  are  wide,  years  coming  between  the  successive  incidents  of  his  progress 
Human  nature  is  s/vr/g,sh,  cannot  move  rapidly  into  new  conditions  of  life  T  and 
80  also  It  IS  slow  to  apprehend  the  transformations  of  grace.  They  must  come  by 
deliberate  advances  upon  the  renewed  life,  or  the  soul  is  overwhelmed  and  con- 
Sr't^oVtheroi^^^^  ^^"^   -age/.o.,..,.oglory,a8bythe 

2.  Attainments  foUow  successively.  To  the  priest,  the  camp,  the  tent,  the 
tabernacle.  Is  there  any  of  us  who  can  "count  himself  to  have  attained,  or 
already  perfect  ?  Much  advance  has  through  divine  love  and  help  been 
made ;  but  there  are  further  possibilities.  '«  To  the  mark  for  the  prize  of  our 
high  calling  of  God."     [Addenda  to  chap,  xiv.,  Progress  1 


188  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON         [chap.  xiv.  21--32. 


III.  Higher  privileges. 

Blessed  the  initial  incident  to  the  lou^  outcast  soul  which  brought  him  to  the 
priest,  in  living  contact  with  one  who  could  declare  him  clean.  Glad  the 
experience  of  his  cleansing  which  give  him  qualification  again  for  the  fellowship 
with  Israel. 

1.  According  to  fitness  so  is  privilege  regulated.  Th^  first  cleansing  only  gave 
him  access  to  the  camp  (v,  8)  ;  the  seven  days'  waiting  qualified  him  to  enter 
his  tent  (v.  8)  ;  the  after  purging  fitted  him  for  the  tabeinacle.  More  grace  for 
those  who  aspire  higher.  But  the  successive  advancements  in  the  divine  life 
come  according  to  our  preparedness  to  enter  into  them. 

2.  Spiritual  favours  increase  as  we  go  forward.  The  longer  we  live  in  Christ 
and  press  forward  in  the  culture  of  Christian  virtues  and  habits,  the  more 
blessed  becomes  our  state;  more  intimate  and  assured  enjoyments,  richer 
delights  and  loftier  elevations.  Piety  gives  not  its  most  precious  fruits  at  the 
outset.  The  luxuries  are  more  entrancing,  the  triumphs  are  more  splendid,  the 
satisfaction  is  more  complete,  the  virtues  are  more  Christ-like  the  longer  we 
abide  in  grace  and  seek  the  things  that  are  above.  The  most  blissful  sanctuary 
life  has  yet  only  began  to  *'  taste  "  how  gracious  the  Lord  is.  The  most  ample 
application  of  the  "  blood  "  and  "  oil  " — graces  of  redemption  and  consecration — 
may  be  exceeded  by  the  still  richer  realizations;  for  "  He  giveth  more  grace" 
So  may  we  advance  nearer  yet,  till  we  "  appear  in  Zion  before  God,"  and  gain 
the  highest  sanctity  and  the  loftiest  bliss." 


Topic :   Grace  for  the  Poor  (Vv.  21-32). 

"  The  law  of  him  in  whom  is  the  plague  of  leprosy,  whose  hand  is  not  able  to 
get  that  which  pertaineth  to  his  cleansing." 

*'lf  he  be  poor":  thus  opens  the  gentle  message  of  Heaven  to  the  needy. 
"  And  cannot  get  so  much.^^  What  then  'i  Let  him  bring  the  lesser  offering,  and 
it  shall  be  accepted  for  his  atonement  as  readily  as  the  larger  oflferings  (v.  8)  of 
the  rich  man  who  is  able  to  get  '*  that  which  pertaineth  to  his  cleansing." 

I.  Poverty  is  no  barrier  to  god's  cleansing  grace. 

1.  Grace  meets  the  needy  one  just  where  be  is,  and  as  he  is.  The  atoning 
blood  is  brought  within  reach  of  the  very  lowest,  the  very  feeblest.  All  who 
need  it  can  have  it.     "  He  that  hath  no  money, ^^  etc.  (Isa.  Iv.  1). 

2.  The  lowly  need  fear  no  heedless  disregard.  Man  may  despise  them,  put  them 
aside  :  not  so  our  gracious  Saviour.  Within  those  whose  lot  is  hard  there  may 
be  beauteous  souls,  "rich  in  faith." 

Let  us  be  very  tender ; 

The  lowliest  soul  may  be 
A  temple  of  priceless  treasure 

That  only  God  can  see. 

II.  Poverty  has  no  influence  on  the  merits  of  atoning  saoripiob. 

1.  The  value  of  atonement  lies,  not  in  the  ofiferer's  social  status  and  resources,  but 
in  the  sacrificial  blood.  It  is  not  what  we  are,  but  what  Christ  is  and  has  done 
for  us,  that  forms  the  sure  basis  of  our  acceptance.  The  sacrifice  of  the  cross 
has  the  same  efficiency  to  every  soul  that  brings  it  before  God  as  his  offering, 
whether  lowly  or  wealthy.  And  in  the  smaller  offering,  equally  with  the  richer, 
there  was  exhibited  the  full  value  of  the  atoning  work,  *' precious  blood,"  a 
spotless  victim,  a  perfect  substitute  for  man's  uncleanness. 

2.  The  acceptance  of  the  poor  is  guaranteed  by  this  sacrifice.  There  need  be  no 
trepidation  in  the  breast  of  the  lowly,  the  feeble,  the  needy,  the  misgiving;  all 
are  welcomed  on  the  ground  of  an  offering  such  as  they  are  **  able  to  get." 
Nothing  beyond.     Jesus  said  of  the  woman,  *'  She  hath  done   what  she  could,** 


CHAP.  XIV.  :Jl-5;l]  THE  IWOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  189 

III.    POVICRTY    AFFORDS  NO    EXCUSK    FOR    FAILING    TO    SEKK    GOD*S    MEROT. 

1.  Without  the  presentation  of  sacrl/i-iat  offering  no)ie  could  he  readmitted  to 
divine  favour  and  fellowship,  (iod  would  not  (iispense  with  atonenaeut,  however 
straightened  the  individual's  case.  Every  one,  the  poorest,  must  come  with 
sacrifice.  Christ  Jesus  must  be  every  one's  trust  and  hope.  And  there  is  grace 
in  His  meritorious  cross  for  each.  God  will  allow  none  to  excuse  themselves. 
Sacrifice  or  rejection  ! 

2.  The  terms  of  admission  to  the  divine  life  are  that  we  bring  our  utmost.  "  Such 
as  he  be  able  to  get."  Not  pleading  poverty  as  a  reason  for  doing  poorly,  offer- 
ing a  meaner  presentation  than  is  justifiable.  The  poor  may  not  cover  them- 
selves from  God's  requirements  by  their  penury  :  but  must  bring  *'  such  as  they 
are  able  to  get,"  their  very  best.  None  may  *' offer  to  God  that  which  costs  him 
nothing."  God  would  reject  it  as  a  "  vain  oblation."  The  widow's  mite  was 
pleasing  to  Christ  as  being   '*  all  her  living." 

"  Little  faith"  is  but  a  po  )r  offering  to  bring  to  Christ :  but  if  the  trembling 
and  anxious  soul  can  only  bring  that,  "  it  is  accepted  according  to  what  a  man 
hath^  and  not  according  to  what  he  hath  not." 

Our  treasury  offerings  to  the  sanctuary,  our  working  energies  in  Christian  ser- 
vice, our  talents  for  speaking  to  others  for  Christ,  or  in  prayers  to  God  for  blessing 
on  sacred  work  ;  all  stand  on  this  divine  principle,  *'  such  as  he  be  able."  Then 
the  sacrifices  will  be  welcomed,  and  the  soul  admitted  into  all  the  fellowship  and 
felicities  of  grace.     [Addenda  to  chap,  xiv.,  Poverty.^ 

Topic :  Purity  in  the  House  (Vv.  34-53). 

« 

Tt  awates  wonder  that  leprosy  could  cling  to  the  walls,  could  fix  itself  upon 
the  very  stones  of  a  house,  in  some  cases  defying  purgation,  necessitating,  there- 
fore, the  demolition  of  the  structure  and  the  casting  out  of  all  its  fouled  materials 
into  an  unclean  place.  The  precautions  here  so  expressly  given  show  the  danger^ 
and  denote  that  God  abhorred  house  defilement  equally  with  uncleanness  in  the 
human  person.  It  is  not  alone  that  "  sinners  shall  not  dwell  in  His  sight  "  (Psa 
V.  4,  5),  but  unclean  things  were  revolting  to  Him — "  whatsoever  (as  well  as 
t^Aosoever)  worketh  abomination  or  maketh  a  lie"  (Rev.  xxi.  27)  is  hateful  to 
Him.  So  God  is  emj^hatic  in  condemnation  of  any  defiling  thing  in  His  people's 
abodes.     Themselves  clean,  their  homes  must  be  pure. 

I.  Household  cleanliness  should  distinguish  the  abodes  op  the  good. 

1.  Surely  Si  pure  mind  will  express  itself  in  scrupulous  cleanliness  in  its  surround 
ings.  Virtue  and  piety  are  as  sensitive  plants,  recoiling  from  every  physical  un- 
cleanness. 

Burns  speaks  of  the  devout  Cotter's  return  to 

His  clean  hearth-btane^  his  thrifty  wifie's  smile. 

Goldsmith  marks  the  Traveller's  delight  as 

His  ioved  partner,  boastful  of  her  hoard. 
Displays  her  cleanly  platter  on  the  board. 

It  would  prove  a  pleasing  study  to  note  how  character  may  he  tested  by  such  minute 
domestic  purities. 

2.  Certainly  the  cleanliness  of  a  home  reflects  its  influence  upon  those  who  dwell 
therein.  If  the  occupants'  purity  stamps  itself  on  the  house,  the  condition  of  the 
house  casts  back  impressions  of  the  occupant. 

Thomson  says  : 

Even  from  the  body's  purity,  the  mind 
Receives  a  secret  sympathetic  aid. 

And  not  less  so  from  the  purity  of  home  scenes. 

3.  The  motive  to  such  cleanliness  will  be  with  the  Christian  a  regard  for  God's 


190 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON        [chap.  xiv.  34—43. 


approval  What  care  would  not  Martha  feel  that  every  spot  and  article  in  her 
l(ethany  home  should  be  spotless  and  bright,  knowing  that  the  Lord  Jesus  might 
be  there  any  hour  as  a  Guest.     Cleanliness  is  fostered  by  a  spirit  of  reverence, 

A  servant  with  this  clause, 
Makes  drudgery  divine  ; 
Who  sv^eeps  a  room  as  for  Thy  laws, 

Makes  that  and  th'  action  &ne.—  Geo.  Herbert. 

4  Such  care  for  simple  home  satisfactions  renders  the  dwellings  delightful  to  its 
iuiiiates  It  is  tlie  sense  of  the  purity  and  the  carefulness  which  we  fiud  at  hotne 
that  leads  us  to  rest  so  confidingly  there.  Suspicion  and  detraction  may  disiurb 
thoueht  and  spoil  enjoyment  when  in  scenes  which  love  and  piety  have  not  made 
sweet  for  us  :  but  all  is  good  and  genial  at  home.  "  No  little  room  so  warm  and 
bright"  (Tennyson)  anywhere  in  the  great  world,  as  that  where  gentle  hands 

have  made  all  so  satisfactory  for  us.  ,  .   ,   .^         ^  ■    e  -    » 

And  though,  as  the  French  proverb  affirms,  "  to  every  bird  its  nest  is  fair, 

yet  it  is  not  easy  to  believe  it  fair  if  the  nest  be  fouled. 

The  sober  comfort,  all  the  peace  which  springs 

From  the  large  aggregate  of  little  things  : 

On  these  small  cares  of  daughter,  wife,  or  friend, 

The  almost  sacred  joys  of  home  depend.— Hannah  Morb. 

II    Home  SANcriiib-S  will  be  scrupulously  maintained  by  the  godly. 

1  *  Impurities  would  force  entrance  into  the  homes  of  God's  people  still.  Not 
leprous  spots  cleaving  to  the  structure,  but  moral  plague  spots  and  intellectual 
defilements  Nude  art,  and  sensuous  pictures,  and  indecent  drawings,  by  which 
incautious  parents  adorn  their  rooms  ;  books  and  mag.^zines,  containing  articles 
and  stories  in  which  there  is  a  taint  upon  virtue,  or  a  sneer  against  truth,  are 
recklessly  laid  up  >n  the  table,  because  it  is  fashionable  to  subscribe  tor  such 
literature.  Companionships  press  into  our  family  enclosure,  which  it  is  dithcult 
to  refuse  •  friendships  which  are  desirable  for  wordly  ends  are  allowed  in  Chris- 
tian  households  but  whereby  is  fulfilled  the  warning,  "  evil  communications 
corrupt  good  manners."  Verily  in  all  such  cases  ''  it  seemeth  to  me  there  is, 
as  It  were,  a  plague  in  the  house  "  (v.   25). 

2  Devout  minds  will  resolutely  cleanse  from  the  family/  all  such  defilements.  It 
would  not  be  easy  or  pleasant  work  to  '' empt^  the  hou«e  "  (v,  36),  to  "  take  away 
the  stones  in  which  the  plague  is  "  (v.  40),  to  "  have  the  house  scraped  withm 
round  about"  (v.  41)  ;  but  the  work  has  to  be  rigorously  done  in  the  name  ot 
God  I  "  Abhor  that  which  is  evil!"  giving  no  assent  or  connivance  to  what  may 
defile  Dut^,  not  agreeableness,  is  the  Christian's  law.  Parents  are  home- 
guardians.  The  husband  is  the  house  band.  There  may  be  no  looseness  in  the 
keepirjg  of  the  home.  "  If  any  provide  not  for  his  own  house,  he  hath  denied  the 
faith,  and  is  worse  than  an  infidel"  (I  Tim.  v.  8). 

Home  has  been  designated  "  Heaven's  fallen  sister'*;  and  it  is— where  pure 
and  hallowed— the  nearest  similitude  to  Heaven.  To  Adam,  paradise  was  home  ; 
to  the  Christian,  home  should  be  paradise.     Let  there  be  unsullied  purity  m  the 

house.  ,         .     ,  . 

Around  each  pure,  domestic  shrine,  ^ 

Bright  flowers  of  Kden  bloom  and  twine, 

Our  hearths  are  altars  all. — Keble. 

III.  Habitations  incurably  defiled  are  destined  to  destruction. 
There  is  no  alternative.     If  the  plague  cannot  be  arrested  and  removed,  the 
habitation  must  be  demolished  ;  "  he  shall  break  down  the  house"  (v.  45). 

1.  Destroyed  habitations ;  let  them  warn  against  the  faintest  beginnings  of  error 
and* sin,  against  the  connivance  of  the  slightest  dereliction  from  sanctity.  Wrong 
works  ruin  !  Purest  homes  have  become  devastated  by  incautious  inattention  to 
Bma,ll  impieties.     If  a  house  is  to  be  saved,  sin  must  be  out-barred. 

2,  Sanctified  homes.     Evil  may  be  purged  (v.  49).     Ask  holy  visitants  to  com© 


cnAP.  XIV.  2—4.] 


THE  BOOK    OF   LhVirWUiS. 


lifi 


in;  not  "priests"  now,  but  the  presence  of  the  good,  the  virtuous,  the  Chris- 
tian, and  let  the  atoning  blood  (v.  50)  have  application,  and  "  the  running  water" 
of  God's  word,  the  living  stream  of  sacerd  truth,  be  used.  Tiiere  is  remedy  for  home 
defects  and  defilements  ;  and  the  doom  of  a  family  may  be  averted,  the  *'  salva- 
tion of  a  house"  (Luke  xix.  9)  may  be  secured,  by  the  admission  therein  of  the 
Saviour  Himself,  and  the  graces  of  His  kingdom,  the  agencies  of  religion,  and  the 
sanctifying  influence  of  family  prayer  and  Scripture  reading;  for  so  the  plague 
sliall  be  expelled,  and  the  house  "shall  be  clean"  (v.  53).  [A.ddenda  to  chap, 
xiv.,  llome.'\ 


OUTLINES  OF  VERSES  ON  CHAPTER  XIV. 


V.   2. —  TTieine:     Cleansing    the    lepeb. 

"  This  is  the  law  of  the  leper  in  the  day  of 
his  cleansing :  he  shall  be  brought  unto  the 
priest." 

Consider — 

I.  The  disease. 

1.  Jts  peculiar  designation  Leprosy  the 
"plague  of  boils  "  (Deut.  xxviii.),  which  ap- 
plies very  forcibly  to  sin. 

2.  Its  distinguishing  characteristics.  >t?iall 
in  appearance  ;  so  in  a  vicious  course  of  life. 
1\ gradually  spread,  as  does  sin  spread  over 
all  the  powers  and  faculties  of  a  man. 

3.  Its  pernicious  consequences.  The  malady 
was  injurious  to  society,  as  being  infectious 
and  pernicious;  to  i\iQ  person  himself,  exclud- 
ing him  from  all  society,  civil  and  religious. 
So  sinners  corrupt  others,  while  their  abomin- 
able ways  shut  them  from  the  communion  of 
the  faithful. 

II.  The  cure  of  the  disease. 

1.  Ao  htanan  means  could  be  availing.  The 
leper  would  gladly  have  cured  himself.  No 
art  of  man  was  effectual  y'l  Kings  v.  7).  We 
have  no  remedy  of  man's  devising  for  sin 
(Rom.  vii.  19,  24). 

2.  If  the  leper  was  cured  it  was  by  God 
alonCf  without  the  intervention  of  human 
means.  Comp.  Luke  xvii.  14;  Isa.  li.  7. 
Nothing  was  prescribed  or  attempted  for  the 
removal  of  this  distemper  And  none  but 
God  can  remove  sin,  etc.  Rom.  vii.  10,  18 ; 
Ephes.  V.  9  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  2. 

tJ.  But  the  cure  was  associa'ed  with  blood 
and  water.  And  to  be  cleansed  from  the 
leprosy  of  sin  we  must  have  applied  the 
blood  and  spix'it  of  Christ  (1  John  i.  7  i  Ezek. 
xxxvi.  25). 

II.  The  confirmation  of  the  cure  by  the 

PRIEST. 

1.  A  person  was  not  to  be  pronounced  clean 
on  a  sudden-  The  priest  was  to  use  much 
caution  and  deliberation.  Cauion  should  be 
exercised  by  ministers  and  office  bearers  in 
the  church  towards  those  who  are  candidates 
for  fellowship. 

2.  When  it  evidently  appeared  that  soundness 
had  been  imparted  to  his  disordered  body, 
this  was  declared  with  due  solemnity.  IL-re 
we  see  the  pre-eminence  of  our  iiigU  Priest ; 
for  while  the  priest  merely  declared  the  leper 
healed  lie  most  effectually  heals. 


Let  those  infected  with  the  leprosy  apply  to 
their  souls  the  divinely  appointed  remedy  ; 
and — 

Let  those  who  have  been  cleansed  from  it 
carefully  discharge  the  duty  enjoined  on  them 
(v.  10,  etc.).— ^K.  Sleigh. 

V.  3  Theme :  Divine  compassion  exhib- 
ited. 

The  lonely  leper,  desiring  an  audience  with 
the  priest,  would  go  towards  the  camp,  and 
wait  for  the  opportunity  to  present  his  case. 
The  priest,  ascertaining  that  his  services 
were  required,  would  go  forth  out  of  the  camp, 
and  discharge  his  duty.  This  would  indicate 
that  the  condition  of  the  leper — 

I.  Though  helpless  was  not  hopeless. 
He  could  not  euro  himself — no  mortal  man 

could  cure  him,  but  the  priest,  as  medium 
of  communication  from  heaven,  could  be  the 
channel  of  cleansing.  Helpless  in  the  pres- 
ence of  men,  he  was  hopeful  in  the  presence 
of  the  Lord.  So,  sinners,  reprobated  by  their 
fellows,  are  renewed  and  restored  by  their 
Maker.     The  condition  of  the  leper — 

II.  Though  repulsive  was  not  irre- 
coverable. 

He  was  shunned  by  society,  and  branded  a8 
unclean ;  but  the  priest  came  out  of  the  camp 
and  met  him,  showing  that  Jehovah  had  not 
given  him  up,  was  not  unwilling  to  heal  him. 
God,  by  sending  His  dear  Son  into  our  world, 
has  come  forth  to  meet  us,  not  to  speak  from 
a  distance,  and  treat  us  as  reprobates,  but  He 
has  come  close  to  us,  touched  us,  worn  our  hu- 
manity, that  we  may  be  healed.  Here,  in- 
deed, is  divine  com{)assibn  ;  meeting  us,  not 
in  disdain  or  to  destroy,  but  to  sanctify  and 
save.— ^.  W  B 

V.  4. —  Theme:  A  type  of  redemption. 

Though  the  rite  prescribed  here  was  to  be 
observed  after  the  leper  was  cured,  yet  it 
may  be  regarded  as  typical  of  the  offering 
made  for  the  removal  of  sin  from  the  soul  of 
man. 

I.  The  leper's  cleansing  was  procured 

BV — 

(a)  Infliction  of  death.  Two  live,  clean 
birds  brought  to  priest ;  one  of  them  killed, 
its  blood  sprinkled  on  leper  to  be  cleansed, 
■even    times,       Through   sacrifice   of  life  '^f 


192 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap,  xi v.  8— 34. 


Cbrist,  through  His  blood,  we  have  forgive- 
ness of  sins. 

(d)  Victory  over  death.  The  living  bird 
after  being  dipped  in  the  blood  of  the  slain 
bird  was  let  loose  in  the  open  field.  Here  we 
get,  if  not  type — yet  illustration,  of  conquest 
over  the  grave  by  Him  who  bare  our  sins  in 
Hib  own  body  on  the  tree. 

II.  The  leper's  cleansing  was  communi- 
cated BY — 

(a)  Personal  application.  The  blood  was 
sprinkled  upon  the  person  to  be  cleansed. 
So,  nothing  short  of  actual  contact  with  vir- 
tue of  Christ's  death  will  cleanse  from  sm. 

(Jj)  Repeated  application.  The  blood  was 
sprinkled  seven  times,  to  denote  that  the  cure 
was  thorough  and  complete.  We  need  the 
constant  application  of  the  merits  of  Christ's 
sacrifice  to  remove  the  guilt  we  are  con- 
stantly contracting  from  contact  with  a  sin- 
ful world,  and  the  uprising  of  remaining  de- 
pravity in  our  hearts. 

Thus,  coming  to  the  priest,  and  submitting 
to  the  ordinance  of  cleansing,  the  leper  would 
be  taught — 

(1)  Humility.  He  would  be  deeply  im- 
pressed with  his  corruption  and  unworthi- 
ness. 

(2)  Gratitude.  That  God  had  devised  means 
whereby  so  helpless  a  condition  might  be  met, 
•o  miserable  a  state  be  changed. 

(3)  Responsibility.  If  cleansed  thus  he 
would  be  a  new  creature  ;  expected  to  live  a 
new  life  ;  under  lasting  obligation  to  Him  who 
had  given  the  healing.  So,  in  redemption ; 
those  who  are  saved  are  taught  humility, 
gratitude,  consecration.  "Ye  are  not  your 
own,"  etc.— i^.  W,  B, 

Vv.  8,  9. — Theme:  Sanctipication. 

Personal  efforts  of  the  leper  for  himself  to 
follow  services  performed  for  him  by  the 
priest.  He  to  co-operate  with  the  divine 
means  employed.  In  directions  given,  means 
of  sanctification  are  suggested,  such  as — 

I.  Purification  of  ASSuCIATIo^s.  Leper 
to  "  wash  his  clothes." 

II.  Mortification  op  self.  <•  Shave  off 
all  his  hair." 

HI.  Measures  op  reform.  "Wash  his 
flesh  in  water." 

IV.  Scrupulous  self-examination. 
"Tarry  out  of  his  tent  seven  days." 

V.  Congenial  society.  When  cleansed, 
the  leper  was  restored  to  the  worship  of  the 
tabernacle,  publicly  presented  at  the  door 
before  the  Lord.  He  was  then  allowed  to 
mingle  with  the  sacred  and  social  life  of  the 
nation. 

Sanctification,  a. progressive  work.  We  are 
**  being  saved''^  in  this  hfe.  Our  complete 
purification  hinges  on  perseverance  in  use  of 
divinely  appointed  means.  Constant  circum- 
spection and  introspection  essential.  Sancti- 
fication on  earth  culminates  in  presentation 
before  the  presence  of  the  Lord  in  heaven, 
without  spot  or  Nvrinkle  or  any  such  thing. — 


Vv.  21,  22. —  Theme:  No  excuse  por  ne- 
glecting MEANS  OF  cleansing. 

As  in  other  rites,  provision  is  here  made, 
so  that  even  the  poorest  were  not  shut  out 
from  ordinance  of  healing,  so  that  none  could 
make  excuse  in  justification  of  neglect.  There 
was — 

I.  Gradation  in  the  offerings.  The 
leper  was  to  offer  "such  as  he  could  get.' 
God  does  not  expect  more  than  we  can  do. 
He  demands  the  best  we  can  offer;  if  we 
offer  our  best  He  accepts  it. 

II.  Equality  in  the  offerers.  Whatever 
they  brought  they  all  stood  upon  a  moral 
level  before  Jehovah.  He  makes  no  distinc- 
tions, in  the  bestowment  of  His  mercy,  be- 
tween rich  and  poor. 

III.  Completeness  in  the  recovery. 
The  smallness  and  poverty  of  the  offering 
did  not  hinder  a  full  blessing  coming  on  the 
leper  ;  all  alike  pronounced  clean  when  con- 
ditions complied  with.  The  merits  of  Christ's 
sacrifice  more  than  make  up  for  any  defects 
and  deficiencies  in  our  services.  Though  we 
and  our  works  are  less  than  nothing,  He  is 
all  and  in  all.—/';  W,  B. 

Vv.  17,  25,  28,  29. — Theme:  Completeness 
OP  cleansing. 

The  leper  was  not  only  cleansed  from  de- 
filement, delivered  from  past  disabilities,  but 
introduced  to  a  new  hfe.  He  is  now  the  ser- 
vant of  Jehovah,  and  expected  to  enter  into 
solemn  covenant  with  Him.  There  was  to  be 
henceforth — 

I.  Devout  attention  to  divine  commands. 
The  "  right  ear  "  of  the  cleansed  leper  touched 
with  blood  and  oil. 

II  Energetic  service.  The  "right  hand" 
touched,  etc. 

III.  Ready  obedience.  The  "right  foot" 
touched,  etc. 

IV.  Intelligent  consecration.  "Oil 
poured  upon  the  head."  Thus  all  our  powers 
should  be  set  apart  for  the  service  and  glory 
of  Him  who  has  interposed  to  save  us,  and 
who  sets  us  apart  as  His  peculiar  people  by 
the  washing  or  regeneration  and  renewing  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.— i^  W.  B. 

Vv.  33,  34. —  Theme:  Leprous  houses. 

Material  things  not  evil  in  themselves,  yet, 
since  the  Fall,  they  have  often  become  ve- 
hicles of  contamination,  incentives  to  depra- 
vity. Man  has  disfigured  the  world  and  made 
it  like  a  leprous  house,  so  that  "  the  whole 
creation  groans  and  travails  "  on  account  of 
sin,  syren  songs  are  sung  to  beguile  the  un- 
wary, and  wrecking  lights  are  held  out  from 
scenes  which  appear  both  beautiful  and  safe. 
The  leprosy  of  lewdness,  licentiousness,  cling 
to  many  a  dwelling  in  the  midst  even  of  civil- 
ised Christian  society.     Thus  — 

I.  The  world — as  the  house  op  our  race 
— HAS  become  leprous.  Let  us  beware  of 
its  tempting,  tainting  influences. 

II.  The  body — as  the  house  op  the  soul 
— ^has  become  leprous.    It  contains  not  onlj 


CHAP.  XI V.J 


THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS, 


193 


•eeds  of  mortality,  but  of  depravity.  Oorrup- 
tion  elintjs  to  all  its  issues  aad  powers.  The 
world  will  be  puritied  by  the  final  wrecking 
fires  ;  the  vile  body  of  our  mortality  is  to  be 
changed  bv  our  risen  Lord,  if  we  live  and  die 
to  nim— >.  IV.  B 

Vv.  45-49. — Theme:  Depraved  surround- 
ings TO  BE  DEM  >LISUED. 

Every  efifort  wis  to  be  made  to  effect  the 
complete  cleansing  of  leprous  houses;  such 
efforts  failing,  the  houses  were  to  be  pulled 
down  and  the  materials  carried  to  an  unclean 
place  without  the  city.     So — 


I.  Strenuous    efforts   should  be   made 

TO    PUKIFV   corrupt    SURROUNDINGS.       In  the 

world ;  our  own  homes ;  in  our  bodies ;  in  our 
hearts. 

II.  Complete    destruction    must  ensub 

WHERIi  CORRUPTION  IS  INCURABLE.     At  length 

the  house  was  demolished,  to  prevent  spread 
of  infection,  to  show  hatefulness  of  corrup- 
tion. So,  in  the  end,  when  period  of  proba- 
tion is  over,  all  uncured  depravity  will  be 
removed  to  an  unclean  place  ;  the  finally  im- 
pure, even  in  surroundings,  will  be  destroyed. 
Purity  shall  ultimately  triumph  over  corrup- 
tion, and  happiness  over  misery. — F,  W.  B. 


ILLUSTRATIVE  ADDENDA.   TO  CHAPTER  XIV. 


Helplessness. 

A  physician,  attending  a  Christian  patient, 
became  concerned  to  gain  such  spiritual 
assurance  and  joy  in  Christ  as  the  sufferer 
manifested,  and  asked  how  it  might  be  se- 
cured.    He  replied  : 

"  Doctor,  I  have  felt  that  I  could  do  nothing., 
and  so  I  have  put  my  case  in  your  hands  ;  I 
am  trusting  in  yoti.'^ 

He  saw  the  simplicity  of  the  way,  absolute 
helplessness,  but  absolute  trust  in  Christ ; 
and  he  found  peace  therein. 

"  Lord,  save  mo  from  my  sin ; 
Thine  is  the  work  alone  ; 
Come  to  this  erring  soul  of  mine 
And  make  that  power  known." 

— Offord. 

Cleansed. 

**  His  garb  was  simple,  and  his  sandals  worn  •, 
His  stature  modelled  with  a  perfect  grace ; 
His  countenance  the  impress  of  a  Qoi, 

•  ••••••• 

He  looked  on  Helen  earnestly  awhile. 

As  if  His  heart  were  moved ;  and  stoopioif 

down 
He  took  a  little  water  in  His  hand 
And  laved   the  sufferer's  brow,  and  said, 

'  Be  clean  1' 
And  lo  I  the  scales  fell  from  him,  and  his 

blood 
Coursed  with  delicious  coolness  through  his 

veins, 
And  his  dry  palms  grew  moist,  and  on  his 

lips 
The  dewy  softness  of  an  infant's  stole. 
His  leprosy  was  cleansed ;  and  he  fell  down 
Prostrate  at   Jesus'  feet,  and   worshipp'd 

Him." 

— Willis  :  Room  for  the  Leper, 

Sanctification. 

"Justification  regards  something  ^on^fot 
ns  ;  sanctifiration,  something  done  in  us.  The 
one  is  a  change  in  our  state,  the  other  in 
our  nature.  The  one  is  perfect,  the  other 
gradual.  The  one  is  derived  from  obedience 
to  the  Saviour,  the  other  from  His  Spirit 
I'oe  one  gives  a  title  to  heaven,  the  other  a 


meetness  for  it.  Suppose  yon  had  a  son  ; 
you  forbade  him  to  enter  a  place  of  contagion 
on  pain  of  losing  all  you  could  leave  him. 
He  goes,  and  is  seized  with  the  infection.  He 
is  guilty,  for  he  had  transgressed  your  com- 
mand ;  but  he  is  also  diseased.  Do  you  not 
perceive  that  your  forgiving  him  does  not 
heal  him  ?  He  wants  not  only  the  father's 
pardon,  but  the  physician's  aid.  In  vain  is 
he  freed  from  the  forfeiture  of  his  estate,  if  he 
be  left  under  the  force  of  the  disorder." — 
Jay. 

**  Who  would  be  cleansed  from  every  sin 
Must  to  God's  holy  altar  bring 
The  whole  of  life — its  joys,  its  tears, 
Its  hopes,  its  loves,  its  powers,  its  years, 
The  will,  and  every  cherished  thing." 

—  Allx*. 

Progress. 

"  Flying  birds  are  never  taken  in  the  fowler's 
i.'iara, '" — Secker. 

"  He  never  was  so  good  as  he  should  be, 
who  does  not  strive  to  be  better  than  he  is." 
— Warwick. 

"  It  is  so  with  all  climbing :  Every  upward 
step  makes  another  needful;  and  so  we  must 
go  on  until  we  reach  heaven,  the  summit  of 
the  aspiration  of  time.'' — H.  W.  Beecher 

"  All    growth  that  is  not    growth   towards 
God 
Is  growing  to  decay." — Geo.  MaoDonald. 

Poverty  :  the  saintly  poor. 

*'  The  shell  may  be  coarse  which  encloses 
the  pearl.  An  iron  safe  may  hold  treasures 
of  gold.  A  broken  frame  may  contain  the 
most  beautiful  picture.  Poor  believers  may 
be  rich  Christians." — Bowes. 

••  There  was  no  part  of  creature-holiness 
that  I  had  so  great  a  sense  of  the  loveliness 
of  as  humility,  brokennoss  of  heart,  and 
poverty  of  spirit ;  and  there  was  nothing  that 
I  so  earnestly  longed  for.  My  heart  panted 
after  this— to  be  before  God  as  in  the  dust; 
that  I  might  be  as  nothing,  and  that  God  might 
be  All;  that  I  might  become  a  little  child.  — 
Edwards. 


191 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON 


[CHAP.  XV'. 


"  The  Emperor  heard  that  the  treasures  of 
the  Church  had  been  confided  to  St.  Laurence; 
he  was  brought  before  the  tribunal  and  re- 
quired to  confess  where  those  treasures  were 
concealed.  He  answered  that  in  three  days 
he  would  show  them.  On  the  third  day  St. 
Laurence  gathered  together  the  sick  and  the 
poor,  to  whom  he  had  dispensed  alms,  and 
placing  them  before  the  tribune  said,  "Be- 
hold !  here  are  the  treasures  of  Christ's 
Church^ 

"  God's  riches  to  my  soul  be  given. 
And  'tis  enough  for  earth  and  heaven  1" 

— Hans  Sachs. 

«  That  life  on  earth  may  be  the  best 
In  which  by  want  the  soul  is  tried  ; 
For  He  whose  word  is  ever  sure, 
Hath  said  that  'Blessed  are  the  poor.'" 

— Weld. 


Home. 

"  A  man's  house  should  be  on  the  hill-top 
of  cherfulness  and  serenity  ;  so  high  that  no 
shadows  rest  upon  it ;  and  where  the  morn- 
ing comes  so  early  and  the  evening  tarries 
so  late  that  the  day  has  twice  as  many  golden 
hours  as  those  of  other  scenes  Home  should 
be  the  centre  of  joy." — Behcher 

"  Oh.  happy  home  I  oh,  home  supremely  blest, 
Where   Thou,  Lord  Jesus    Christ,  art    en- 
tertained 
As  the  most  welcome  and  beloved  guest, 
With   true    devotion   and    with    love    un- 
feigned ; 
Where  all  hearts  beat  in  unison  with  Thine, 
Where  eyes  grow  brighter  as  they  look  on 
Thee, 
Where  all  are  ready  at  the  slightest  sign 
To  do  Thy  will,  and  do  it  heartily." 


.«••- 


CHAPTER    XV. 


SUGGESTIVE  READINGS. 

Sc^rret  impurities,  whether  of  men  or  women,  are  carefully  discriminated 
here  as  resulting  from  guilty  sex-irU  intercourse,  and  as  the  effect  of  natural 
infirmity.  God  has  stern  thoughts  for  the  licentious.  He  brands  him  as  pol- 
luted and  polluting,  and  interdicts  from  all  privileges  those  who  have  become 

^Yet  even  where  no  moral  vilene«b  attaches  to  the  uncleanness,  where  the 
impurity  is  the  consequence  of  physical  >Teakness  and  natural  processes,  God 
enforces  exclusion.  For  although  the  Lord  is  very  pitiful  to  our  weaknesses 
"  knows  our  frame,  and  remembers  that  we  are  dust,"  commiserates  our  secret 
maladies  and  ''  breaks  not  the  bruised  reed,"  nevertheless,  only  the  clean  can 
be  allowed  free  enjoyment  of  social  and  spiritual  favours  within  the  camp  and 
congregation  of  His  ''  holy  nation."  _ 

Considering  even  the  sanitary  value  of  these  prohibitions  and  laws  we  discern 
God's  wisdom  and  benignity,'  for  they  placed  the  ban  on  self-destroying  indul- 
gences and  arrested  contamination  of  loathsome  diseases.  But  as  a  witness  to 
The  necessity  of  moral  and  spiritual  purity  in  the  person  and  habits  of  Gods 
people  these  restrictions  are  full  of  sigQifioance.  ^'  Cleanse  thou  me  from  secret 
faults^ 

HOMILETIC  HINTS. 

I  The  distressing  vileness  of  faUen  human  nature.  An  ever-flowing  stream 
of  uncleanness.  While  uii«unctified  by  grace,  not  only  is  it  true  concerning  the 
"vile  body  "  that  "  in  us,  that  is  in  our  flesh,  dwelleth  no  good  thing,  but  all 
its  habits  and  infirmities  are  corrupt  and  corrupting.  What  occasion  is  left  for 
''glorying  in  the  flesh"?     Let  those  who  vaunt  the  di^nit^  of  human  nature 


CUAR  XV.  1-11,  ID— L'7.]    THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS.  19o 


see  its   revolting  side  in   this  cliapter.      Then  "  every  mouth  shall    be   stopped, 
and  all  become  trnilty  before  (Ind." 

II.  The  stainless  sanctity  required  in  God's  presence.  Any  soil,  stain,  or 
mark  of  impurity  must  clo«e  the  uncleau  from  comiug  near  where  Ho  dwells. 
Jehovah  had  associated  Himself  with  this  pe  >ple,  was  in  their  midst;  and  as  He 
could  not  bear  defilement  He  insi^^ts  on  the  most  rigorous  sanctity,  in  their 
persons,  their  privacy,  their  homes,  their  worship.  It  carries  irs  appeal  to  us 
that  we  *'  perfect  holiness  in  the  fear  of  (iod."  "  Wash  you,  make  you  clean, 
put  away  your  evil  from  before  mine  eyes." 

III.  The  bounteous  provisions  made  for  the  sinner's  cleaiasing.  The  re- 
deeming blood  and  purifying  water  are  again  available  atonement  through 
Christ,  and  sanciifiration  through  the  Spirit  and  the  Word ;  these  are  efficacious 
for  even  vilest  stains  and  most  loathsome  impurities. 

Thus,  while  "in  the  body,"  whose  every  habit  and  infirmity  affirms  its  natural 
corruptness,  we  can  hope  for  renewing  grace  thn)Ugh  the  redemption  and  wash- 
ing which  the  gospel  offers  to  all  who  will  "  wash  and  be  clean." 

"  We  have  the  blood  of  Christ  T  said  Schliermacher,  and  so  passed  away  to 
glory. 

Notes. 

i.  Indecencies  both  shock  a  virtuous  mind,  and  are  signally  offensive  to  Divine 
Holiness. 

ii.  The  human  frame^  formed  for  noble  uses,  may  be  most  basely  degraded  bv 
forbidden  indulgences 

iii.  Low  passions,  if  allowed  sway,  inflict  miseries  on  others,  entailing  them  in 
the  humiliation  of  communic  tted  uncleauness. 

iv.  Hidden  physical  impurities  are  as  miuutely  marked  by  the  Omniscient  Eye 
as  are  the  flagrant  leprous  taints. 

v.  A  more  emphatic  loathing  is  noticeable  in  God's  denunciation  of  these 
secret  sexual  uncleaiinesses  than  of  any  other  forms  of  human  defilement. 

vi.  Our  Lord's  healing  of  the  woman's  secret  malady  (Mark  v.  25  27)  may  be 
allowed  to  denote  the  Source  of  help  to  all  who  ask  deliverance  from  corrupting 
weaknesses  and  vicious  tendencies. 

vii.  Infinite  pity  has  provided  expiation  for,  and  cleansing  from,  even  our 
basest  sins,  equally  as  for  our  natural  infirmitieg. 


SECTIONAL  HOMILIES. 
Topic:  The  Odiousnkss  of  Peksonal  Impurity  (Vv.  1-14,  19-27). 

These  regulations,  which  at  firat  sight  may  appear  indelicate  and  unnecessary, 
were ''holy,  just  and  true."  Among  the  licentious  idolatrous  Egyptians  Israel 
was  to  become  a  model  for  purity;  no  secret  sin  of  any  kind  tolerated  amono- 
them.  Laws  necessary  to  the  physical  and  moral  well  being  of  the  whole 
nation  ought  not  to  be  considered  offensive.  A  vast  multitude  was  to  be  con 
ducted  through  the  wilderness  with  a  crowded  encampment  of  tents.  Nothing, 
in  such  a  case,  would  keep  them  pure  and  make  social  life  t(;lerable  but  such 
rigid  legislation  as  the  Mosaic  regulations  enjoined.     These  regulations  : 

I.  Asserted  the  need  of  scrupulous  personal  purity. 

Not  only  were  the  people  to  be  on  their  guard  against  diseases  such  as 
leprosy,  which  revealed  itself  by  outward  manifestations,  but  against  secret 
impurities   which   mi^ht    be    known   only   to  the    persons  sufiering   therefrom 

0% 


J96  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xv.  13-18,  28-33. 


Thus  the  encampment  of  the  wilderness  would  be  kept  from  degenerating  into 
a  hotbed  of  impurity  and  disease.  Into  whatever  flagrant  sins  the  Jews  as  a 
nation  fell,  they  never  became  notorious  for  impurity  or  immorality  ,  and,  to 
this  day,  the  ranks  of  the  licentious  are  conspicuously  free  from  members  of  the 
family  of  Abraham.  The  gospel  is  not  less  rigid  in  its  demands  for  personal 
purity  •  indeed,  it  probes  the  moral  nature  of  man  more  deeply,  and  demands 
purity  of  thought  and  desire  as  well  as  of  word  and  deed.  Unaccomplished 
vicious  purposes  are  regarded  as  performed.  The  gospel  condemns  every  species 
of  impurity  that  would  defile  the  body,  and  teaokes  higher  morality  than  the 
ceremonial  law  ever  reached. 

II.  Suggested  the  need  op  complete  moral  spotlessness. 

Having  to  repair  to  the  priest;  and,  when  cleansed,  to  appear  before  the  Lord, 
would  naturally  suggest  to  the  mind  the  necessity  of  absolute  purity  of  heart 
in  the  service  of  Jehovah.  He  who  demanded  the  complete  removal  of  all 
pollution  from  the  physical  frame,  must  require  truth  and  purity  in  the  human 
heart.  All  sin  is  a  diseased  and  wasteful  outflowing  of  the  vitality  of  the  soul. 
As  none  were  too  impure  to  apply  to  the  priest,  no  case  so  desperate  but  might 
be  cured,  so  the  vilest  of  the  vile  may  repair  to  our  Great  High  Priest,  who  is 
able  and 'willing  to  save  to  the  uttermost  of  human  need,  in  all  the  world,  through 
all  time.—F.  W.  B. 

Topic:  The  Consequenoes  op  Personal  Impurity  (Vv.  13-18,  28-33). 

The  laws  of  nature  cannot  be  set  aside,  or  perverted,  without  the  infliction  of 
penalties  upon  the  delinquent.  This  world  is  a  place,  though  not  the  place  of 
punishment  for  sin.  Impurity  of  life  entails  weakness,  suffering,  shame  ;  disgrace 
and  deprivation  were  the  penalty  borne  by  those  ceremonially  defiled,  teach- 
ing us — 

I.  That  personal  impurity  naturally  entails  disastrous  consequences. 
The  body  becomes  deteriorated,  the  stamina  reduced,  when  vices  of  a  secret 

character  work  in  the  dark  at  the  basis  of  life.  The  mind  becomes  enfeebled, 
the  soul  debased.  The  sensualist  and  impure  carry  the  brand  of  their  iniquity 
upon  their  countenance,  signs  of  their  immoral  character  in  their  gait.  Personal 
impurity  bars  the  gate  to  heaven  !  for  there  nothing  that  defileth  or  worketh 
abomination  can  enter.  Its  consequences  extend  to  others  ;  for  morally  unclean 
persons  carry  contamination  wherever  they  go,  as  the  law  declared  the  unclean 
did  in  the  cases  before  us.  The  Jews  were  taught  that  the  slightest  touch 
conveyed  defilement;  so,  sinful  influences,  however  apparently  slight,  vitiate 
and  convey  moral  infection.     Blessed  be  God  we  are  tau-ht— 

II.  That  the  consequences  op  personal  impurity  may  be  arrested  and 

removed. 

Persons  and  things  defiled  by  contact  with  the  unclean  could  be  cleansed  by 
being  bathed  in  water,  and  the  presentation  of  two  clean  live  birds  for  an  atone- 
ment. Thus,  not  onlv  the  unclean  persons  could  obtain  cleansing,  but  the  entail 
of  their  corrupt  influences  could  be  stayed.  The  stains  of  guilt,  the  course  of 
sin,  can  only  be  arrested  and  removed  by  the  intervention  of  the  Lord.  The 
consequences  of  sin  in  our  world  can  only  be  counteracted  by  the  sanctifying 
influences  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  sacrificial  life  of  the  spotless  Lamb  of  God. 

Note  1 :  The  Laws  respecting  uncleanness  could  notha,ve  been  invented  by  man; 
for  human  nature  does  not  voluntarily  inflict  penalties  upon  itself,  does  not 
bring  its  vices  into  the  light  of  day,  and  arraign  them  at  the  bar  of  public 
opinion;  for,  "men  love  darkness  rather  than  light  because  their  deeds  are 
evil." 


CHAT.  XV.  2,  i;j,] 


THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS, 


197 


Note  2  :  Instead  of  sin  flowing  secretly  from  our  words  and  deeds,  corrupting 
ourselves,  and  contaminating   others,  ''light"  is  to  shine  from  us,  pure,  cheerful, 
penetrating,  divine.     Thus   shall  our  lives  redound   to  the   glory  of  God,  and 
coutribute  towards  the  moral  regeaeratioa  of  our  race. — F.  W,  B. 


OUTLINES  ON  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  XV. 


V.  3. —  Theme:  The  secret  flo-vt  of  sin. 

"When  any  man  hath  a  I'unning  issue  out  of 
his  flesh,  because  of  his  issue  he  is  unclean." 
Jehovah  demands /«;-//;/  of  body  ^  as  well  aa 
of  mind  and  hearty  in  those  who  profess  to  be 
His  people,  and  draw  near  to  Him  in  sacred 
•worship.  Our  bodies,  not  to  be  despised  or 
neglected,  but  kept  pure,  as  the  handiwork  of 
Cody  and  as  the  divelling-place  of  the  human 
soul.  The  uncleanness  here  spoken  of,  pro- 
bably the  outcome  of  secret  wantonness,  or 
open  licentiousness,  or  self-pollution.  Secret 
sins,  witnessed  by  no  one  but  ourselves  and 
God,  vitiate  the  springs  of  life,  and  waste  the 
substance  of  which  our  bodies  are  composed. 
Thus  the  Moral  Governor  of  the  universe  haa 
set  His  inevitable  stigma  upon  all  wrong-doing. 
By  this  statute  we  have  suggested — 

I.  That  sin  is  an  immoral  issue  from  with- 
in MAN,  Not  a  complexion^  that  may  easily 
be  changed ;  not  an  excrescence^  that  clings 
to  the  surface  only ;  but  a  radical  defilement 
issuing  from  the  heart,  which  is  the  fountain 
of  life.  How  disgusting  and  injurious  sin  is  I 
How  inveterate  its  hold  upon  our  nature  I 
Flowing  from  within,  it  often  escapes  detec- 
tion, and  defies  all  merely  human  remedies 
for  its  removal.  "In  us,  that  is  in  our  flesh, 
there  dwelloth  no  good  thing  ;"  when  we  would 
do  good  evil  is  present  with  us.  Sin  is  not 
to  be  got  rid  of  by  change  of  scenery  or 
society.  Those  who  retreat  from  the  world — 
her?}iits,  monks,  nuns,  etc.— carry  their  evil 
propensities  with  them,  and  the  secret  flow  of 
sin  does  not  cease.  However  moral  the  out- 
ward  life  may  be,  out  of  the  heart  will  flow 
secret  pride,  unbelief,  lust,  evil  thoughts,  which 
defile  the  soul  and  burden  the  conscience  with 
guilt. 

II.  That  sin  Tnus  pollutes  evert  thing 
it  comes  in  contact  with.  Whatever  the 
persons  mentioned  in  this  chapter  touched 
became  unclean  ;  showing  how  exceedingly 
contagious  the  defilement  was.  So  sin  pollutes 
and  transmits  itself.  Like  a  serpent,  its  trail 
is  left  wherever  it  goes.  The  beauty  of  the 
world,  its  bounties  and  pleasures,  have  been 
distorted  and  abused  by  the  contaminating 
touch  of  sin.  Let  us  pray  to  be  kept  from 
secret  sins.  Suggestions  to  evil  come  up  the 
corridors  of  memory,  flash  from  pictures  in 
the  chambers  of  imagination.  Indulgence  in 
secret  impure  desires  will  induce  and  excite 
the  flow  of  moral  evil  from  the  heart,  wastinsr 
the  powers  of  the  soul,  corrupting  every  circle 
that  it  touches.  Sin  indisposes  and  incapaci- 
tates men  for  pure  society  and  holy  service. 


If  not  stayed,  consequence  death.  Blessed  be 
God  !  sin  has  been  atoned  for,  may  be  re- 
moved ;  death  has  been  abolished,  life  and 
immortality  brought  to  light  by  the  gospel. — 
F,  W.  B. 


V.  \Z.  — Theme :  Thb  radical  cure  o»  snr. 
"And  when  he  that  hath  an  issue  is  cleansed 
of  his  issue,"  etc 

Though  the  uncleanness  here  mentioned 
was  so  deeply  rooted  and  virulent,  yet  it  was 
curable ;  the  persons  cured  were  restored  to 
their  former  positions  in  society,  and  declared 
whole  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord.  We  learn 
here — • 

I  That  sin  can  be  removed  only  through 
atonement.  "The  priest  shall  make  an 
atonement  for  him  before  the  Lord."  The 
water  and  the  blood  that  flowed  seem  to 
typify  the  foiintain  opened  upon  the  cross  in 
the  Saviour's  side.  In  every  instance  under 
the  law  where  sin  was  to  be  forgiven  some 
pure  life  had  to  be  offered  as  an  atonement, 
the  innocent  suffered  as  a  substitute  for  the 
guilty.  Thus  the  roots  and  principles  of  the 
gospel  of  Christ  are  found  in  the  economy  of 
Moses. 

II.  That  the  removal  of  sin  can  onlt  bb 
completed  by  sanctification.  The  ablu- 
tions of  the  candidate  for  cleansing  indicated 
that  only  by  persistence  in  the  means  of  grace, 
and  thoroughness  of  dedication  to  the  condi- 
tions of  mercy,  can  we  become  sanctified.  At 
eventide  the  cleansed  person  became  clean  ; 
so,  when  life's  day  is  over,  and  the  shadows 
of  death  close  upon  the  believer,  the  work  of 
sanctification,  which  has  progressed  through 
the  whole  period  of  probation,  will  become 
complete;  the  "  vile  body''  will  be  laid  aside, 
the  emancipated  and  immaculate  spirit  be 
^''present  with  the  Lord'" 

Obviously,  contaminating  influences  maybe 
communicated  unexpectedly  and  tininten- 
tionally.  What  need  to  pray,  as  David  did 
(Ps.  li.),  "Wash  me  throughly,"  etc.  The 
writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  urged 
them  to  seek  to  have  their  "  bodies  washed 
with  pure  water,  and  their  hearts  sprinkled 
from  an  evil  conscience."  Christ  can  arrest 
the  flow  of  sinful  iofluences,  as  He  stayed  the 
issue  of  the  poor  sufferer,  recorded  Mark  v, 
29.  The  gospel  dispenses  with  the  burden- 
some ceremonials  of  the  Law  •,  but,  all  they 
pointed  to  is  preserved  and  fulfilled,  for  "  the 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ  clear  eeth  ,^oia  all  sin." 
—  F.  W.£, 


198 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON 


[chap.  XVI.  2. 


ILLUSTRA.TIVE    ADDENDA.  TO    CHAPTER  XV. 


Secresy. 

"  Go  to  your  own  bosom 
Knock  there:  and  a^k  your  heart  what  it  doth 
know." — Shakespeark. 

Self  mastkry. 

"  1  will  be  lord  over  myself.  No  one  who 
cannot  master  himself  is  worthy  to  rule." — 
Goethe. 

"  A  little  fire  is  quickly  trodden  out : 
Which,  being  suffered,  rivers  cannot  quench." 

— Henry   VI. 

Passions. 

'  The  passions  may  be  humoured  till  they 
become  our  master,  as  a  horse  may  be  pam- 
pered till  he  gets  the  better  of  his  rider;  but 
early  discipline  will  prevent  mutiny  and  keep 
the  helm  in  the  hands  of  reason." 

— Cumberland. 

"His  soul,  like  bark  with  rudder  lost. 
On  passions'  changeful  tide  was  tost ; 
Nor  vice,  nor  virtue,  had  the  power 
Beyond  the  impression  of  the  hour; 
And  0  I  when  passion  rules,  how  rare 
The  hour  that  falls  to  Virtue's  share  !  " 

— Scott. 

•'  No  man's  body  is  as  strong  as  his  ap- 
petite :  but  heaven  has  corrected  the  bound- 
iH^sness  of  his  voluptuous  desires  by  stinting 
his  strength  and  contracting  his  capacities." 

—  llLLOTSON. 


**  What  profits  us  that  we  from  Heaven  derive 
A  soul  immortal ;  and  with  looks  erect 
Survey  the  stars  ;  if,   like  the  brutal  kind. 
We  follow  where  our  passions  lead  the  way  ?" 

— Claudian. 

Vice. 

"  Vice  stings  us  even  in  our  pleasures  ;  but 
virtue  consoles  us  even  in  our  pains  " — Colton 

*'  Why  is  there  no  man  who  confesses  his 
vices  ?  It  is  because  he  has  not  yet  laid  them 
aside.  It  is  a  waking  man  only  who  can  tell 
his  dreams." — Seneca. 

'*  Men  only  feel  the  smarts  but  not  the  vice." 

— Pope. 

Virtue. 

"  Virtue  that  transgresses,   is  but    patched 
with  sin  ; 
But  sin  that  amends,  is  but  patched  with  vir- 
tue."—Shakespeare,  Twelfth  Nighty  1 , 3. 

"  Wisdom  and  virtue  require  a  tutor  ; 
though  we  can  easily  learn  to  be  vicious  with- 
out a  master."—  Seneca. 

"  God  sure  esteems  the  growth  and  com- 
pleting of  one  virtuous  person  more  than  the 
restraint  of  ten  vicious." — Milton. 

"  The  soul's  calm  sunshine,  and  the  heartfelt 

joy, 

Is  virtue's  prize." — Essay  on  Man^  Popb, 


tot 


CHAPTER  XVI 


%\t  toat  ^ag  0f  Jtanem^nt 


SUGGESTIVE   READINGS. 


V.  2. — Come  not  at  all  times  into  the  holy  place  within  the  veil.  It  was  but 
natural  that  the  solemn  judgment  which  befel  Nadab  and  Abihu  "  when  they 
offered  before  the  Lord  aud  died^^  (v  1)  should  have  rendered  Aaron  apprehen- 
sive lest  be  also  migbt  err  in  his  ministries  before  Jehovah.  Gtjd's  message  of 
direction,  therefore,  came  to  guide  him  in  his  sacred  duties  ;  for  He  will  show 
the  good  and  the  right  way  to  such  as  desire  to  do  His  will,  albeit  He  is  swift  to 
rebuke  those  who  adventure  to  act  presumptuousl}?  in  His  sacred  presence. 

For  I  will  appear  in  the  cloud  upon  the  mercy  seat.  Shall  vve  not  *'  stand  in 
awe  and  sin  not  "  where  we  know  that  God  is  present  ?  That  "  cloud  "  softened 
His  exceeding  glory,  so  as  to  allow  the  eye  of  mortal  man  to  look  and  yet  live ; 


CHAP.  XVI.  3-19.]  THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS.  199 


and  that  "  morcy-seat"  sn«rge8ted  the  divine  pitifiiliiess  towards  the  siDner  who 
desired  to  approach  Him  in  reconciliation.  Nevertheless,  there  might  be  no 
trifling,  no  profanity  in  His  holy  light  ;  for  Clod  is  severe  as  well  as  gracious. 
Man  should  fear  before  Him  And  since  there  is  no  scene  where  God  is  not 
present,  should  we  not  cultivate  reverence,  and  live  as  in  readiness  to  meet  Himl 
Within  His  house  still  there  should  be  solemnity  ;  His  worship  demands  homage; 
"the  Lord  is  in  His  holy  temple."  He  will  be  gracious  to  the  lowly  and  devout 
wherever  they  approach  Him,  shielding  His  great  glory  from  them  as  with  a 
"cloud"  while  they  seek  with  supplications  and  offerings  His  "  mercy  seat." 

V.  3. — Thus  shall  Aaron  come  into  the  holy  place.  Only  "  once  a  year  ";  on 
the  august  Day  of  Atonement.  This  restriction  carried  a  pensive  lesson  :  "that 
the  way  into  the  holiest  of  all  was  not  yet  made  manifest'*;  that  the  hindrances 
to  man's  free  approach  to  God  had  been  only  partially  removed  ;  that  no  provision 
was  in  existence  for  his  abiding  in  the  holy  presence.  Man  might,  by  special 
arrangements  of  grace,  enter  where  God  dwelt,  but  he  could  not  tarry  there. 
Because  atonement  was  not  then  complete  ;  for  types  could  not  "  take  away 
sins  "  so  satisfactorily  as  to  qualify  man  for  continuous  nearness  to  God.  Only 
in  the  perfect  work  of  Jesus  Christ  cin  sinners  gain  abiding  fitness  for  this  highest 
privilege. 

Sin  offering  and  a  burnt  offering.  These  again  meeting  the  twofold  aspects 
of  atonement  {vide  chaps,  iv.  and  vi.) ;  meeting  every  requirement  of  God's  holi- 
ness and  of  man's  guilt. 

V.  4. — He  shall  put  on  the  holy  linen  coat  Attired  "  in  fine  linen,  clean  and 
white"  (Rev.  xiv.  7,  8),  symbolic  of  a  blameless  righteousness  : — the  inherent  per- 
fection and  purity  of  Christ  our  High  Priest,  and  the  derived  sanctity  of  His  re- 
deemed and  priestly  followers.  Being  divested  of  His  glorious  robes,  and  ap- 
pearing simply  in  these  "  garments  of  righteousness,"  suggests  to  us  our  Lord's 
condition  while  He  was  engaged  in  making  "atonement";  His  majesty  and 
splendour  laid  aside,  but  adorned  with  faultless  sanctity  and  grace.  Such  meek 
purity  became  Him  most  while  engaged  in  the  sad  work  of  atoning  for  human 
transgression  and  wrong, 

Vv  5-10. — Two  kids  of  the  goats :  the  one  lot  for  the  Lord  and  the  other 
lot  for  the  scapegoat.  The  two  goats  formed  one  sin  offering  God  rakes  His 
share  and  is  well  pleased  therewith  ;  for  there  was  a  portion  in  Christ's  sacrifice 
which  was  specially  welcome  to  His  Father,  the  perfect  worthiness,  the  sweet 
subjection,  the  willing  suffering  of  His  Son — that  was  "  the  Lord's  lot,'^  The  other 
part  was  for  the  sinner's  release,  removing  from  the  transgressor  the  guilt  and 
penalty  of  sin  ;  and  in  the  virtue  of  Christ's  work  through  which  we  have 
"remission  of  sins"  we  find  the  sinners  "  lot"  "  As  far  as  the  east  is  from  the 
west  so  far  hath  he  removed  our  transgressions  from  us"  (Psa.  ciii    12). 

Vv.  11-19 — The  sin  offering  for  priest,  people,  and  sanctuary.  The  in- 
cidents were  as  follows  ;  the  young  bullock  was  slain  ;  while  its  blood  was  being 
gathered  into  a  vessel  Aaron  entered  within  the  veil  carrying  a  censer  of 
burning  coals  in  his  right  hand  and  a  platter  of  fragrant  incense  in  his  left ; 
placing  the  burning  coals  at  the  foot  of  the  Ark  he  cast  the  incense  thereon  and 
thus  filled  the  Most  Holy  shrine  with  a  soft  cloud,  thereby  veiling  the  Ark  from 
open  vision  :  he  then  returned  for  the  vessel  of  blood,  and  going  again  within 
the  veil  he  sprinkled  the  Mercy  Seat  therewith,  thus  making  atonement  for  his 
own  sin  and  for  his  priestly  associates;  for  the  "sweet  savour  of  Christ"  and 
the  "blood  of  sprinkling"  are  needed  even  for  consecrated  and  priestly  souls. 
Leaving  the  Holy  of  Holies,  where  the  incense  still  burned,  he  offered  on  the 
altar  the  goat  which  had  been  allotted  as  the  sacrifice  for  the  people's  sin,  after- 
wards re-entering  the  veil  to  sprinkle  also  its  blood  of  atonement  upon  and 
before  the  Ark  Thus  three  entrances  were  made  that  day  into  the  Most  Holy 
of  All.     No  other  priest  was  allowed  within  the  tabernacle  (v.  17)  during  theae 


200  HOMILETIC  COMMENTAIir  ON         [chap.  xvi.  20—34. 


solemn  incidents  ;  for  unworthiness  excluded  every  one,  since  *'  none  doeth  good 
and  sinneth  not."  The  faultlessly  Divine  Priest  alone— typified  in  Aaron— might 
have  access  to  where  the  Glory  dwelt.  With  the  sprinkling  of  blood  Aaron  also 
made  atonement  for  the  defilement  of  the  sanctuary  and  the  altar  ;  symbolically 
purifying  them  from  all  defilements  which  had  incidentally  accumulated  through 
neglect  or  misdemeanour  during  the  year.  For  uncleanness  clings  to  our  holiest 
things  and  our  best  deeds,  and  '*  almost  all  things  are  by  the  law  purged  with 

blood." 

Vv.  20-22. — The  live  goat.  Propitiation  by  dmtk  has  been  enacted  m  these 
first  regulations.  The  release  of  the  living  m  signified  by  the  second  t3/ pical 
arrangement.  It  pictorially  shows  us  the  taking  away  of  sin  from  the  sinner  by 
his  Substitute  ;  "  behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the 
world,"  but  it  also  expresses  the  removal  from  the  believer's  comcience  of  the 
burden  and  grief  of  his  transgressions — the  confession  of  iniquities  leading  to 
their  being  carried  into  oblivion  ;  ''  the  goat  shall  bear  upon  him  all  their 
iniquities  into  a  land  not  inhabited."  Glad  remission  indeed!  "  Thou  hast  cast 
all  my  sins  behind  thy  back  "  (Isa.  xxxviii.  17)  ;  they  are  annulled  by  God  ;  and 
as  for  ourselves,*'  the  worshippers  once  purged  have  no  more  conscience  of  sins" 
(Heb.  X.  2) ;  they  are  obUterated  for  the  believer.  And  is  every  iniquity  and 
transgression  thus  borne  into  forgetful  ness  *?  Yes.  ''All  their  iniquities" 
(vv.  21,  22).  This  is  remission  of  sins  to  the  full !  Hence  the  "  peace  which 
passeth  all  understanding  " ;  for,  "  being  justified  by  faith  we  have  peace  with  God 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ"  (Rom.  v.  1). 

Vv.  23,  24.— Aaron  shall  put  off  the  linen  garments.  The  magnificent 
attire  re-assumed  by  Aaron  when  the  sin  offerings  were  completed  may  remind 
us  of  the  glory  which  did  follow  when  our  Lord  had  finished  atonement ;  He 
re-assumed  His  majesty ;  though  still,  as  High  Priest  for  man  in  the  heavenly 
sanctuary,  He  perpetuates  sacrificial  merits  for  His  people.  "  The  fat  of  the 
sin  offering,"  etc.  (comp.  iv.  10),  the  choicest  virtues  of  our  Redeemer's 
atonement  still  go  up  from  the  altar  as  a  delightsome  offering  unto  the  Lord. 

Vv.  29-34.— A  statute  forever  unto  you.  Every  year  the  Day  of  Atonement 
should  be  solemnly  set  apart,  and  its  ordinances  devoutly  observed.  Such  seasons 
for  self-mortification,  for  severance  from  the  afi'airs  of  this  life,  for  concentrated 
attention  to  the  needs  of  our  souls  and  the  claims  of  God,  foster  humility  and 
reverence,  bring  eternal  realities  powerfully  before  our  thoughts,  and  impress  ua 
with  the  preciousness  of  the  Redeemer's  work.  Our  peril  i^  in  habitual  heedless- 
ness ;  we  are  borne  on  in  the  rush  of  secular  concerns.  The  Lord's  Day  ought  to 
bring  us  a  healthful  pause,  enough  to  correct  our  worldliness  and  awaken  to 
spiritual  attention.  But  it  is  for  our  good  that  we  check  life's  ensnaring  routine, 
and  secure  an  interlude  in  which  to  give  supreme  consideration  to  the  wonders 
of  God's  redeeming  grace  and  the  urgency  of  our  spiritual  interests  ;  "  that  ye 
may  be  clean  from  all  your  sins  before  the  Lord  "  (v.  30)  :  "  it  shall  be  a  sabbath  of 
rest  unto  you.^* 

\  EXPLANATORY  ARTICLE. 

Concerning  the  Meaning  op  "Azazel,"  or  the  "  Scapegoat  "  (V.  8). 

^*And  Aaron  shall  cast  lots  upon  the  two  goats:  me  lot  for  the   Lord  (^Eeh.  La- 
Jehovah),  and  the  other  lot  for  the  scapegoat  (He^r  La-Azazel)." 

In  the  eastern  part  of  the  Court  of  Priests  in  the  Temple,  i.e.,  close  to  the 
worshippers,  stood  an  urn,  called  Calphi,  in  which  were  two  lots  of  the  same 
shajje,  size,  and  material  ;  (in  the  second  temple  these  were  of  gold) ;  the^  one 
bore  the  inscription  " la-jEHOVAH,"  for  Jehovah,;  the  other  "la-Azazel,'    for 


CHA1>.  XVI.  8.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  201 


Azazel.  The  two  goats  were  placed  with  their  backs  to  the  people,  and  the  faces 
toward  the  sanctuary  (westward).  The  high  priest  now  faced  the  people,  shook 
the  urn,  thurst  his  two  hands  into  it,  drew  out  the  two  lots,  laying  one  on  the 
head  of  each  goat.  Popularly  it  was  considered  a  good  augury  if  the  right  hand 
lot  had  fallen  "for  Jehovah."  The  two  goats  must  be  altogether  alike  in  appear- 
ance, size,  and  value.  The  lot  having  designated  each  of  the  two  goats,  the  high 
priest  tied  a  tongue-shaped  piece  of  scarlet  cloth  to  the  horn  of  the  goat  "  for 
Azazel,"  and  around  the  throat  of  the  goat  "for  Jehovah."  The  go&c  that  was 
to  be  sent  into  the  wilderness  was  now  turned  round  face  to  the  people,  waiting, 
as  it  were,  till  their  sins  should  be  laid  on  him  to  carry  them  forth  "  to  a  land 
not  inhabited."  Afterwards  the  high  priest,  laying  both  his  hands  on  the  head  of 
this  goat,  confessed  and  pleaded  as  follows  : 

"0  Lord,  the  house  of  Israel  Thy  people  have  trespassed,  rebelled,  and  sinned 
before  Thee.  I  beseech  thee,  0  Lord,  forgive  now  their  trespasses  and  sins 
which  Thy  people  have  committed,  as  it  is  written  in  the  law  of  Moses,  Thy 
servant,  saying  that  in  that  day  there  shall  be  *an  atonement  for  you,  to  cleanse 
you,  that  you  may  be  clean  from  all  your  sins  before  the  Lord.' " 

While  the  prostrate  multitude  worshipped  at  the  name  of  Jehovah,  the  high 
priest  turned  his  face  towards  them  as  he  uttered  the  words  "  Ye  shall  be 
cleansedy^*  as  if  declaring  to  them  the  absolution  and  remission  of  their  sins. 

A  strange  scene  was  then  witnessed ;  the  priests  led  the  sin-burdened  goat 
through  "  Solomon's  porch,"  and,  as  tradition  has  it,  through  the  eastern  gate 
which  opened  upon  the  Mount  of  Olives.  Here  an  arched  bridge  spanned  the 
intervening  valley,  and  over  it  they  brought  the  goat  to  the  Mount  of  Olives, 
where  one,  specially  appointed  for  the  purpose,  took  him  in  charge.  Tradition 
enjoins  that  he  should  be  a  stranger,  a  non-Israelite.  Scripture  tells  us  no 
more  of  the  destiny  of  the  goat  that  bore  upon  him  all  the  iniquity  of  the 
children  of  Israel  than  that  they  **  shall  send  him  away  by  the  hand  of  a  fit 
man  into  the  wilderness  "  (v.  22),  but  tradition  supplements  this  information. 

The  distance  between  Jerusalem  and  the  beginning  of  "  the  wilderness  "  ia 
computed  at  nearly  90  stadia,  making  precisely  ten  intervals,  each  half  a  Sab- 
bath-day's journey  from  the  other.  At  the  end  of  each  of  these  intervals  there 
was  a  station,  occupied  by  one  or  more  persons  detailed  for  the  purpose,  who 
offered  refreshment  to  the  man  leading  the  goat,  and  then  accompanied  him  to 
the  next  station.  By  this  arrangement  two  results  were  secured  :  some  trusted 
persons  accompanied  the  goat  all  along  his  journey,  and  yet  none  of  them  walked 
more  than  a  Sabbath  day's  journey.  At  last  they  reached  the  edge  of  the  wil- 
derness ;  here  they  halted,  and  the  attendant,  viewing  afar  off,  while  the  man 
led  the  goat  forward,  tore  off  half  the  scarlet  tongue  and  stuck  it  on  a  projecting 
cliff;  then,  leading  the  animal  backwards,  he  pushed  it  over  the  projecting  ledge 
of  rock. 

If  tradition  be  correct  on  this  point  it  must  have  been  a  modern  innovation, 
for  originally  the  goat  was  set  free. 

There  was  a  moment's  pause,  and  the  man,  now  defiled  by  contact  with  the 
sin-bearer,  retraced  his  steps  to  the  last  of  the  ten  stations,  where  he  spent  the 
rest  of  the  day  and  night.  But  the  arrival  of  the  goat  in  the  wilderness  was 
immediately  telegraphed  by  the  waving  of  flags  from  station  to  station,  so  that 
in  a  few  minutes  after  its  occurence  it  was  known  in  the  temple. 

In  a  subject  so  obscure  great  difference  of  opinion  exists  as  to  the  signifi- 
cance of  the  word  "  Azazel."  Those  opinions  most  worthy  of  notice  are  :  It  is  to 
be  taken — 

1.  As  a  designation  of  the  goal  itself.  Most  old  interpreters  hold  this  view  : 
regarding  it  as  meaning  the  goat  sent  away,  or  let  loose.  In  accordance  with 
this  the  Vulgate  renders  it  Gaper  emissarius ;  Luther,  der  ledige  Bock ;  the 
Septuagint  uses  the  term  o  aTroTro/ATrats  applied  to  the  goat  itself.     Theodoreb 


202  HOMILETIC   COMMEJSTARy   ON  [ciup.  xvi.  2,  3. 


and  Cyril  of  Alexandria,  consider  the  meaniog  of  the  Hebrew  to  be  the  goat  sent 
awaj/,  and  regard  that  as  the  sense  of  the  word  used  in  the  Septuagint. 

2.  As  the  name  of  the  place  to  which  the  goat  was  sent.  Thus  Vatlabus,  Dejling, 
Kimchi,  Abenezra,  and  others  regard  it  as  the  desolate  spot  iu  the  wilderness  ; 
Bochart  and  Carpvoz  as  any  lonely  place  ;  and  the  Arabian  version,  some  Rabbins, 
LeClerc  and  others,  as  "  Mount  AziZ,"  or  the  cliff  down  which  the  goat  was 
thrown. 

3.  As  a  personal  being  to  whom  the  goat  was  sent.  They,  Gesenius,  Ewald, 
Rosenmiiller,  Dr.  Wette,  Knobel  and  many  of  the  Ribbins  think  that  "  Azazel" 
was  an  evil  demon.  Origen  considers  it  was  Satan.  Spencer  supposes  the  goat  was 
given  up  to  the  devil,  and  committed  to  his  disposal.  Hengstenberg  affirms  very 
confidently  that  "  Azazel''  cannot  possibly  be  anything  but  another  name  for 
Satan.  He  repudiates  the  notion  that  the  goat  was  in  any  sense  a  sacrifice  to 
Satan,  but  urges  that  it  was  se/it  away  laden  with  the  sins  of  God's  people^  now 
forgiven,  in  order  to  mock  their  spiritual  enemy  in  the  desert,  his  proper  abode,  and 
to  symbolize  by  its  free  gamboU  their  exalting  triumph.  He  argues  that  the  origin 
of  the  rite  was  Egyptian,  and  that  the  Jews  substituted  Satan  for  Typhou,  whose 
dwelling  was  the  desert. 

4.  The  interpretation  most  harmonious  with  the  scope  of  Scripture  and  with  the 
nature  of  the  service  is  that  "  Azazel"  denotes  ^' a  free  going  away,^^  or  *'  an  entire 
and  utter  removal."  Michaelis  and  Jahn  give  the  former  rendering  of  the  word, 
and  Tholuck,  Thompson,  Bahrand  Winer  the  latter. 

Dr.  Eodersheim  (in  his  work,  *^The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Service"),  says, 
"The  word  Azazel  is,  by  universal  consent,  derived  from  a  root  which  means 
*  wholly  to  put  aside,'  or  '  wholly  to  go  away.*  Whether,  therefore,  we  render 
the  la-Azazel  by  *  for  him  who  is  wholly  put  aside,'  that  is  the  sin  bearing  Christ, 
or  '  for  being  wholly  separated,'  or  *put  wholly  away,  or  aside,'  that  is,  the  put- 
tinjr  away  of  sin,  the  truth  is  still  the  same,  as  pointing  (1)  to  the  temporary 
and  provisional  removal  of  sin  by  the  goat  *  let  go'  into  *  the  land  not  inhabited,' 
and  (2)  to  the  final,  real,  and  complete  removal  of  sin  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
(Isa.  liii.  6)." 

And,  as  if  to  add  to  the  significance  of  the  rite,  tradition  has  it  that  when 
the  sacrifice  was  fully  accepted,  the  scarlet  mark  which  the  scapegoat  had 
borne  became  white  (Isa.  i.  18),  but  adds  that  this  miracle  did  not  take  place 
lor  forty  years  before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem, 

"  Smith's  Dictionary  "  (see  Day  of  Atonement)  suggests  that  "the  slain  goat** 
should  be  viewed  as  setting  forth  the  act  of  sacrifice .  in  giving  up  its  own  life  for 
others  "to  Jehovah,"  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  divine  law  :  and 
the  goat  which  carried  off  its  load  of  sin  for  "  complete  removal,"  as  signifying  the 
cleansing  influence  of  faith  in  the  sacrifice.  .  .  .  But  for  us  the  whole  spiritual 
truth  has  been  revealed  in  historic  fact,  in  the  life,  death,  and  resurrection  of 
Him  who  was  made  sin  for  us,  who  died  for  us,  and  rose  again  for  our  justifi- 
cation. This  Mediator  it  was  necessary  should  in  some  unspeakable  manner 
unite  death  and  life. 


SECTIONAL    HOMILIES. 
Topic:  A  Unique  Day  in  Israel  (Vv.  2,  3). 

I.  A  LAW  OP  SEPARATION  :  Hindrances  to  abiding  nearness  to  God.  "  That  he 
come  not  at  all  times  into  the  holy  place  within  the  veil." 

1.  God  was  enclosed  from  man  within  that  veil  ;  man  excluded  from  God  :  «»V« 
efecU 


C/iAi'.  XVI.  1-3.J  THE  BOOK   OF   LEVITICUS.  203 


2.  No  perni'inent  ahvling  plare  had  been  secured  for  even  the  most  privileged 
within  God's  presence  ;  atnnemfnt  loas  not  perfect  (Heb.  x    1-4). 

3.  Perfection  for  man  could  not  come  of  Lf'vidcal  priesthood  or  sicri^Ges  :  and  the 
faulty,  the  unclean,  couhi  not  abide  in  God's  si^^ht. 

II.  A  LAW  OF  reconciliation:  Atonement  removing  obstructions  from  between 
man  and  God.     Access  within  the  veil  effected,  through  — 

1.  A  spotless  priest.  "  These  are  holy  garments"  (v.  4).  "  Thus  shall  A^aron 
come  into  the  holy  place"  (v.  3). 

2.  The  ample  atonement.  "  With  sw-offering,  and  6wrw^offering"  (v.  3) ;  satis- 
fying all  Goti's  claims  against  the  sinner;  and  sufficing  for  all  man's  guilt  and  re- 
quirements. 

3.  Privileged  recipients.  '*  Make  atonement  for  himself  and  his  house"  (v.  6); 
representing  the  Church  (Heb.  iii.  6). 

III.  A  LAW  OF  PKLLOWSMIP  :  Admission  into  the  most  sacred  Presence. 

1.  By  blood  of  sprinkling :  Evidence  of  substitutionary  death.  "  Seven  times'* 
applied  (v.  14)  :  perfect  redemption. 

2.  By  merits  of  the  Saviour's  grace  ;  sweet  incense  burned  before  the  Lord 
(v.  12,  13)  :  *•  sweet  savour  of  Christ^  By  the  fragrant  merits,  by  the  precious 
blood  of  Christ,  we  may  **  eriter  into  the  holiest'^  [See  Addenda  to  chap,  xvi., 
Mercy  Seat.  ] 

Topic:  Typical  Enactment  op  Atonement  (V.  3,  seq.). 

Both  the  day  and  the  observances  were  authorised  of  God  (vv.  1,  2)  ;  both, 
therefore,  divinely  important.  (1)  In  regard  to  the  definiteness  of  the  day. 
(2)  In  regard  to  the  meaning  and  order  of  its  ceremonies. 

1.  The  typical  meaning  op  the  Jewish  atonement  day. 

1.  The  divinely  stated  reason  for  its  appointment  (v.  16). 

(1)  The  fact  of  sin  and  the  necessity  for  its  expiation  by  blood,  both  unmis- 
takeably  and  divinely  declared.  This  is  significant,  as  it  bears  upon  the  atone- 
ment of  which  this  was  only  a  type. 

(2)  Sin  necessitates  atonement  if  it  is  to  be  pirdoned  :  **  without  shedding 
of  blood  there  is  no  remission  "  (Heb.  ix.  22). 

(a)  Aaron's  personal  preparations  typical  of  the  purity  and  holiness 
of  our  Lord  (v.  4  :  Heb.  vii.  26). 

(6)  Aaron's  typical  work  (vv.  17,  18). 
i  Our  Lord  was  absolutely  alone  in  His  great  atoning  work. 
ii.  Though  Aaron  here  typifies  Christ,  he  must  not  himself  forget  that  he  is  a- 
sinner,  and  therefore  must  atone  for  his  own  sins.     In  this  he  was  not  a  type  of 
Christ  (Heb.  vii.  27). 

(3)  This  fact  bespeaks  the  antagonism  of  sin  against  the  divine  will,  and  the 
holiness  and  righteousness  of  the  divine  character. 

2.  The  divinely  appointed  measures  for  its  observance. 

(1)  In  respect  to  the  aiJ:ent  to  carry  o«it  the  measure. 

(a)  It  was  not  anyone  who  volunteered,  but  Aaron  the  priest  (vv.  2-6). 
(6)  So  is  the  case  of  our  Lord  (Heb.  v.  4,  5). 

(2)  In  respect  to  the  measures  themselves. 

iii.  The  blood  of  the  sacrifice  was  sprinkled  first  upon  the  mercy  seat  eastward, 
and  then  before  the  mercy  seat  (v.  14),  and  then  in  the  **  holy  place,"  and  lastly 
upon  "the  altar  that  is  before  the  Lord."  Thus  the  atoning  bh)0(i  was  sprinkled 
everywhere,  from  the  throne  of  God  within  the  veil  to  the  altar  which  stood  in 
the  court  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  (comp.  Heb  ix.  23  28). 

iv.   Now  follows  the  typical  act  of  releasing  the  live  goat  (vv.  20-2:5). 

The  two  goats  were  designed  to  represent  the  two  aspects  of  Christ's  atone- 


204  HOMTLETIC   COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xvi.  8-22. 


ment :  First,  that  on  which  "  the  Lord's  lot"  fell  being  doomed  to  death  showed 
that  the  death  of  Christ  alone  could  vindicate  the  majesty,  truth  and  holiness 
of  the  character  of  God.  Secondly,  the  live  goat  over  which  Aaron  confessed 
the  people's  sins,  and  thus  typically  was  ordained  to  "  bear  upon  him  all  their 
iniquities  into  a  land  not  inhabited  "  (v.  22),  signified  the  completeness  of  the 
divine  act  in  the  remission  of  the  sins  of  him  who,  by  confession  and  faith  in 
Christ,  transfers  them  to  Him. 

V.  An  instructive  and  significant  scene  follows  (vv.  27,  28).  The  burnt 
offering  represents  consecration.  Here,  first,  of  our  Lord  ;  having  atoned  for  our 
sins,  He  has  consecrated  Himself  to  His  Father  for  His  Church,  to  protect,  guide, 
sympathise  with,  intercede  for,  and  ultimately  present  her  without  spot  unto 
the  Father  (Eph.  v.  25-27  ;  Jno.  xiv.  3  ;  Rom.  viii.  34).  Secondly,  we  have 
here  represented  the  consecration  of  the  believer. 

vi.  The  perpetuity  of  this  memorial. 

Pkactioal  lessons 

1.  The  hatefuluess,  heinousness,  and  guiltiness  of  sin  are  here  shown. 

2.  God's  desire  to  provide  for  the  removal  of  its  guilt,  and  the  prevention  of 
its  consequences  demonstrated. 

3.  The  comprehensiveness  of  the  provision  in  the   atonement. — Eev.  D.  G, 

Hughes. 

Topic:  The  Slain  Goat  and  the  Scapegoat  (Vv.  8-10,  15,  16,  21,  22). 

On  this  day  many  victims  died.  Each  holy  altar,  each  holy  place  received 
the  reconciling  sign  of  blood.  Each  sacrifice  proclaims  that  substituted  suffer- 
ings avail. 

Christ,  their  full  truth,  has  once  laid  down  His  life.  That  once  is  all-sufficient 
for  all  the  sins  of  all  His  people. 

But  in  the  service  of  the  atoning  day  one  part  stands  singularly  forth.  Two 
goats  are  brought  for  a  sin  offering.  The  priest  receives  them  at  the  tabernacle 
door.  Lots  are  cast.  Man's  mind  may  not  select.  Some  unseen  hand  takes 
one  for  death  and  bids  the  other  live.  This  scene  reveals  the  council  of  eternal 
love.  Before  the  worlds,  God's  will  called  Jesus  to  the  saving  work.  Each  por- 
tion of  the  scheme  was  pre-resolved.     Each  was  consigned  to  His  receiving  hands; 

I.  The  sentenced  goat  died;  and  mark  the  uses  of  its  blood. 

With  this  the  high  priest  ventures  within  the  mystic  veil ;  the  mercy  seat 
receives  the  drops;  the  holy  tent  is  strewn  throughout;  seven  times  the  golden 
altar  s  horns  are  touched, 

1.  Blood  is  our  peace.  The  wounded  conscience  writhes;  sin  is  deepest  misery. 
But  when  the  Spirit  shows  the  blood,  all  dread  forebodings  cease.  It  proves  that 
peace  is  signed  in  heaven. 

2.  Blood  has  a  sin-expelling  power.     How  can  that  be  loved  which  pierced  the 

Lord  ? 

3    Blood  drives  Satan  back.     Nothing  can  daunt  him,  no  place  exclude  him, 

but  this  blood  of  Christ. 

4.  Blood  bars  the  entrance  to  doom.  A  Christ- washed  soul  may  not  enter 
there. 

5.  Blood  removes  the  hindrances  to  heaven.  Behold  the  countless  multitudes 
before  the  throne.  "  They  have  washed  their  robes  and  made  them  white  in  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb." 

6.  The  blood  fills  paradise  with  songs.  This  is  the  substance  of  their  mighty 
anthem  :  **  Thou  wast  slain,"  eto.  They  cannot  sing  above  who  have  not  washed 
on  earth. 


CHAP.  xvT.  12-14.]  rilE   BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  205 


II.  Tub  laden  goat  is  lku  away, 

1.  On  its  head  is  transmitted  all  Israel's  guilt.     The  substitute  receives  the  I 
whole.     The  scapegoat  takes  the  burden  on  its  head. 

2.  It  is  borne  by  him  afar ;  beyond  the  camp,  beyond  all  sight,  beyond  the 
track  of  man.  Unseen,  unknown,  forgotten,  it  departs  from  mortal  view  ;  buried 
in  oblivion's  land. 

Faith  knows  this  scapegoat  well  ;  there  is  no  brighter  picture  of  full  pardon 
of  all  sin  in  Christ.  Daily  the  soul  tells  out  all  its  sin  upon  the  head  of  Christ, 
who  waits  to  bear  it,  and  carry  it  far  away.  Christ  hastens  away  with  the 
accursed  load,  and  God's  all-searching  eye  finds  it  no  more. 

Is  the  east  distant  from  the  west  f  Can  we  move  through  the  intervening  space  1 
As  we  advance  the  horizon  still  recedes ;  infinite  separation  divides.  Thus  far 
the  scapegoat  bears  our  guilt  away  (Psa.  ciii.  12). 

Ca?t  we  recover  what  is  buried  in  ocean  depths  ?  Such  is  the  grave  of  sin  (Micah 
vii.  19). 

Are  objects  visible  upon  which  the  back  is  turned?  Thus  sins  are  hidden  from 
God  (Isa.  xxxviii.  17). 

How  does  a  mass  of  blackening  clouds  wrap  the  sky  in  a  pall  of  impenetrable 
night  I  Heed  the  voice  of  p  irdoning  grace  :  "  I  have  blotted  out,  as  a  thick 
cloud,  thy  transgression,"  etc.  (Isa.  xliv.  22). 

No  search  finds  His  people^s  sins.  A.  land  of  infinite  forgetfalness  conceals 
them  (Jer.  1.  20). 

God's  pledge  stands.  "  I  will  remember  their  sin  no  more  "  (Jer.  xxxi.  34).  The 
scapegoat  ordinance  confirms  the  truth. 

Ponder  this  ordinance.  Sins,  many,  vile  and  hateful,  pass  to  our  Scapegoat, 
and  so  pass  away.    Faith  transfers  them  ;  Christ  removes  them  ;  God  forgets  them. 

Have  your  bands  touched  the  Scapegoat's  head?  If  not,  your  loathsome 
load  remains. — JDean  Law. 


Topic:  Intercession  op  Christ  (Vv.  12-14). 

**  And  he  shall  take  a  censer  full  of  burning  coals  from  of  the  altar ^  and   his  hands 
full  of  sweet  incense  and  bring  it  within  the  veiiy 

We  derive  great  advantage  from  being  able  to  compare  the  Old  Testament  with 
the  New.    Since  we  see  religion  is  essentially  the  same  thing  in  all  times  and  ages. 

There  are  not  two  ways  of  acceptance  with  God  :  one  under  the  law  and 
another  under  the  gospel — but  one  way  for  Jew  and  Gentile :  "Jesus  Christ  the 
same  yesterday,  etc." 

The  fault  of  the  Jews  who  entered  not  into  the  proper  spirit  of  their  own 
religion  :  that  they  valued  the  shell  of  their  religion,  but  saw  not  the  Pearl  of 
great  price.  They  fully  estimated,  perhaps  over  estimated  the  adornments  of 
the  casket,  but  certainly  overlooked  the  bright  Jewel  within.  They  rejoiced  in 
the  pomp  of  their  worship,  the  splendour  of  their  ritual,  the  imposing  grandeur 
of  their  sacrifices  and  the  miraculous  attestation  that  their  religion  came  from 
God,  but  were  strangely  remiss  in  not  discovering  its  real  spirituality  of  design, 
and  its  intimate  connection  with  the  person  and  work  of  Christ.  They  cried 
"  The  Temple  of  the  Lord  are  we"  but  when  the  Lord  of  the  Temple  came,  they 
treated  Him  with  opposition  and  contempt.  Had  they  been  good  JewSj  they 
wotild  have  been  good  Christians.  Our  Lord  implies  this — ^^  If  ye  believed  his 
writing  (marg.)  ye  would  have  believed  my  words.^*  If  they  had  been  true  disciples 
of  Moses  they  would  have  been  of  Christ. 

Let  us  be  warned,  and  pray  that  we  may  see  the  spiritual  design  both  of  their 
dispensation  and  of  our  own. 


206  HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY  ON         [chap.  xvi.  12— 14. 


1.    The   DOCTllINR  of    the    intercession    of    CHRIST. 

1.  As  typically  exhibited  under  the  law. 

Here  Moses  describes  the  cerem'>ny  of  the  great  day  of  expiation  and  atone- 
ment. Aaron  went  iiito  tlie  most  holy  place  to  sprinkle  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice 
before  the  mercy  seat.  No  human  being  was  permitted  to  accompany  him.  All 
the  worshippers  remained  without  (Luke  i.  8,  9,  12).  Aaron  was  to  enter  on 
behalf  of  the  children  of  Israel — so  that  what  he  did  within  the  veil  was  not  merely 
on  his  own  account  but  on  theirs,  all  of  which  was  a  great  type  of  Christ  (Heb. 
ix.  11).  He  used  no  words,  but  what  he  did  was  significant  enough.  He 
appeared  there  that  the  virtue  of  the  blood  shed  on  the  altar  might  be  applied 
to  the  acceptance  of  the  tribes  he  represented  in  the  forgiveness  of  their  sins, 
and  the  answer  of  their  prayers.     Herein  a  type  of  Christ. 

2.  As  actually  fulfilled  in  Christ.  He  not  only  suffered  on  the  cross,  but 
ascended      Not  on  His  own  account  but  ours. 

It  mainly  consists  in  His  presenting  Himself  before  God  in  our  nature,  and  in 
the  merit  of  His  finished  atonement  as  the  ground  of  our  acceptance,  and  in  the 
intimation  of  His  will  (in  thought  if  not  in  words),  that  the  purchased  blessing 
of  His  salvation  may  be  theirs,  and  that  all  law-charges  and  accusations  against 
them  may  be  hushed  and  cancelled. 

"  To  appear  in  the  presence  of  God."  Not  for  Himself  but  for  us.  Teaching  us 
that  His  state  of  transcendixnt  happiness  has  not  removed  Him  to  an  inaccessible 
distance,  and  has  neither  dissolved  nor  impaired  His  gracious  connection  with 
us,  but  maintains,  without  any  detraction  from  His  own  perfect  bliss,  the  moat 
generous  sympathy  with  our  interests  and  wants. 

It  puts  a  glory  on  His  atonement — that  everything  is  to  pass  through  His  hands. 
A  shining  testimony  of  the  holiness  of  God,  and  the  efficacy  of  Christ's  work. 
No  wonder  if,  having  finished  His  work,  He  should  appear  above  with  large  acces- 
sions of  splendour  to  repossess  the  glory  He  had  before  all  worlds.  But  here  is 
the  point  of  admiration,  He  does  not  appear  for  His  benefit  but  for  ours. 
Illustrated  by  common  analogies: — as  an  advocate  appears  on  behalf  of  his  clients; 
a  king  on  behalf  of  his  subjects  ;  a  general  as  representative  of  his  troops;  a 
priest  at  the  altar  as  representative  of  whole  body  of  worshippers ;  so  Christ 
appears  as  the  representative  of  all  His  believing  people.  As  our  King  He 
appears  in  beauty  ;  as  Captain  of  salvation  appears  victorious  ;  as  Elder  Brother  ; 
as  Priest,  Counsellor,  Advocate. 

Grand  expression  of  His  love.  Not  content  to  offer  one  life  on  the  Cross. 
He  consecrates  His  new  existence.  Though  raised  to  the  throne  of  reverence,  does 
not  overlook  His  little  flock  (John  xvii.). 

II.  The  benefits  we  derive  from  it. 

i.  The  forgiveness  of  our  sins.  "  If  any  man  sin."  After  all  done  for  us,  we 
are  guilty  and  undeserving.  But  while  our  sins  are  crying  out  against  us  on 
earth,  Christ  is  pleading  in  heaven. 

Every  contrite  sinner  has  liberty  to  apply  by  faith  the  merits  of  the  atoning 
sacrifice.  Nay,  every  sinner  is  condemned  for  not  doing  this.  "  Whosoever  cometh." 
But  for  this,  our  state  would  be  less  safe  than  under  the  law.  Every  Jew,  to 
whatsoever  tribe  he  belonged,  might  carry  his  sacrifice  to  the  priest,  and  as  he 
saw  him  enter  the  veil  might  say,  "  He  is  gone  thither  for  me,  sprinkled  the  Holy 
Place  for  me."     So  every  Christian  now. 

ii.  Belief  of  our  sorrows.  Christ  possesses  a  capacity  of  sympathy,  especially  in 
mental  distresses,  tenderness  of  conscience,  etc.  Hannah  prayed,  but  Eli's  heart 
was  not  touched  with  feeling  of  her  infirmity. 

iii.  The  acceptance  of  our  duties.  These  are  maimed  and  imperfect.  Enough 
evil  in  them  to  render  them  offensive  and  displeasing  to  God.  Bat  Christ  pre- 
sents them  (Rev.  viii.  2). 

Your  tears  of  penitence,  labours  of  faith,  songs  of  gratitude,  vows  of  obedience, 


CHAP.  XVI.  16-30  ]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  207 


He  presents.  Amid  wonsliip  of  angels,  saints,  and  martyrs  He  disdains  not  to 
present  the  sighings  of  the  prisoner,  the  tears  of  contrite,  the  prayers  of  the 
child  whose  mind  is  opening  to  devotion,  and  ejaculation  of  dying. 

iv.  2'ke  frustration  of  spiritual  tnemies.  Satan  is  the  avenger,  but  Christ  is 
our  advocate.     **  Peter,  I  have  prayed  for  thee."— S.  Thodey,  a.d.  1840. 

Topic  :1!b.^   Worth   op   Sacrifices  (Vv.  16-30). 

Of  all  the  days  of  the  Jewish  year  this  was  The  Day,  the  meeting-time  of  God 
and  man. 

The  priestly  tribe  could  minister  on  all  other  days ;  none  but  the  High  Priest 
on  this.  No  foot  but  his  should  press  the  floor  of  the  sacred  tent.  Dressed  in 
purest  white,  repeatedly  cleansed  with  pure  water,  he  entered— o^<e  man  for  the 
nation,  into  the  holy  of  holies. 

What  did  the  elaborate  ritual  of  the  day  mean?  If  divine  forgiveness  depended 
upon  such  a  day,  then  why  did  the  world  wait  for  twenty-five  hundred  years 
before  the  Day's  appointment?  If  absolutely  necessary,  why  was  not  the  day 
and  its  ritual  enjoined  upon  Abraham,  and  even  upon  Adam  in  Paradise  ?  What 
is  the  meaning  of  sacrifice  ?     Observe — 

1.  God's  character  is  not  changed  hy  sacrifice.  He  neither  regards  sin  with  less 
hatred,  nor  loves  the  sinner  less  in  consequence.  The  burnt  offerings  and  sacri- 
fices of  the  centuries  have  not  added  jot  or  tittle  to  His  immeasurable  love.  The 
sacrifice  of  Calvary  was  the  natural  outcome  of  the  divine  nature,  rather  than 
the  means  of  changing  that  nature.  This  sacrifice,  like  all  others,  expressed  His 
change  of  attitude. 

2.    These  mere  sacrifices  possessed  no  intrinsic  value.     In  themselves  considered 
sacrifices  are  a  "  vain  oblation  "  (Isa.  i.  13  ;  comp.  Mio.  vi.  7 ;  Psa.  li.  16  ;  Heb.  x,' 
6).     So,  though  thousands  stood  by  the  altar  with  their  ofiPerings,  with'a  multi- 
tude of  sacrifices,  "  It  is  not  possible  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  should 
take  away  sins." 

Bearing  these  facts  in  mind,  that  the  divine  nature  is  unchanged  by  them, 
also  that  mere  sacrifices  are  unpleasing  to  Him  and  powerless  to  take  away  sin  • 
what  is  their  nature  and  history,  and  why  commanded  ?  ^ 

Of  the  4,000  years  ending  with  the  Sacrifice  of  Calvary,  2,500  had  passed  ere 
sacrifices  were  instituted.  God  says  by  Jeremiah,  ''  I  spake  not  unto  your 
fathers  concerning  burnt  ofiPerings  and  sacrifices"  (Jer.  vii.  22).  They  were 
instituted  after  the  sinful  worship  of  the  golden  calf  at  Sinai. 

But  the  fact  is  evident  that  they  were  instituted  because  there  was  a  necessity: 
yet  since,  as  we  have  seen,  it  was  not  a  necessity  on  God's  part,  it  must  have  been 
for  man's  sake. 

In  the  sacrifices  of  the  Day  of  Atonement  God  proclaims  eternal  truths. 
I.  The  divine  testimony  against  sin. 

These  were  the  chosen  people  whose  God  alone  was  holy.  Yet  behold  the 
people  all  in  abasement :  it  is  the  cry,   *'  We  have  sinned  I" 

1.  Not  oneof  allthe  ptople  could  offer  a  sacrifice:  not  one  was  sinless:  the 
high  priest  alone  was  allowed  to  act  for  them. 

2.  One  i"pot  alone  was  sacred,  curtained  with  richest  fabrics  :  and  this  one  spot 
thus  curtained  was  the  divine  rebuke  against  sin. 

ir.  The  basis  of  atonkment. 

Our  sinfulness  cannot  change  God's  nature,  although  it  changes  His  attitude 
towards  us. 

1.  The  whole  sacrificial  order  of  the  Day  of  Atonement  was  given  for  the 
demising  from  sin.  Just  as  Christ  afterwards  came  to  **  save  His  people  from 
their  sius,"  ^    ^ 


208  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY   ON  [chap.  xvi.  84. 

2.  Every  sacrifice  was  one  of  blood,  from  Abel's  downward.  Why  1  "  The  life  of 
the  flesh  is  in  the  blood,  and  I  have  given  it  you  upon  the  altar  to  make  an  atone- 
ment for  your  soul." 

P>.  This  affirms  that  the  God  of  love  must  respect  His  holy  law  even  at  the  ex- 
pense of  death.  These  sacrifices  were  the  elementary  lessons  declaring  that  by- 
and-by  the  law  would  be  made  honourable  by  the  costliest  of  all  sacrifices. 

III.  The  NECESsrrr  for  a  perfect  high  priest. 

In  silence,  on  that  great  silent  Day,  stood  priests  and  people  while  the  high 
priest  entered  the  holy  place  and  fultilled  his  task. 

1.  His  unworthiaess  for  such  deeds  was  impressed  upon  him  every  moment.  He 
must  offer  sacrifices  "  for  himself"  :  then  five  times  he  washed  his  whole  body, 
and  ten  times  his  hands  and  feet.  He  must  lay  aside  his  own  garments  and  wear 
the  whitest  linen. 

No  imperfect  man  could  become  a  perfect  priest,  any  more  than  an  imperfect 
sacrifice  could  give  a  perfect  conscience.  Salvation  depends  on  a  more  perfect 
High  Priest  than  Aaron. 

2.  Our  Great  High  Priest  needed  no  such  cleansing.  "  He  offered  himself  with- 
out spot  to  God." 

Verily  the  Day  of  Atonement  was  the  culminating  day  of  Jewish  history.  Its 
sunrise  was  upon  Sinai,  its  sunset  upon  Calvary.  In  the  morning  the  people 
said  to  Moses,  *'  Let  not  God  speak  to  ua  lest  we  die  !''  but  m  the  evening  the 
surging  crowd  heard  the  sacred  lips  proclaim  to  a  world  longing  for  salvation, 
"  It  is  finished  !" — Eev.  David  0,  Mears. 


Topic :  Full  Atonement. 

**  This  shall  he  an  everlasting  statute  unto  you^  to  make  an  atonement  for  the  chU 
of  Israel  for  all  their  sins  once  a  year  (Levi.  xvi.  34). 

The  day  of  atonement  was  pre-eminenently  intended  to  typify  that  great  day 
of  vengeance  of  our  God,  which  was  also  the  great  day  of  acceptance  of  our  souls, 
when  Jesus  Christ  "died,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  to  bring  us  to  God."  That  day 
of  atonement  happened  only  once  a  year^  to  teach  us  that  only  once  should  Jesus 
Christ  die  ;  and  at  a  set  and  appointed  time  ;  not  left  to  choice  of  Moses,  or  con- 
venience of  Aaron,  but  on  a  peculiar  set  day  (v.  29),  to  show  that  God's  great 
day  of  atonement  was  appointed  and  predestinated  by  Himself.  Christ's  expia- 
tion occurred  but  once,  and  then  not  by  any  chance ;  God  had  settled  it  from 
before  the  foundation  of  the  world  ;  and  at  that  hour  when  God  had  predes- 
tinated, on  the  very  day  that  God  had  decreed  Christ  should  die,  was  He  led 
like  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter,  and  as  a  sheep  before  her  shearers  He  was  dumb. 

I.  The  pekson  who  was  to  make  the  atonemwnt.  Aaron  the  high  priest 
did  it.  "  Thus  shall  Aaron  come  into  the  holy  place ;  with  a  young  bullock 
for  a  sin  offering  and  a  lamb  for  a  burnt  offering,"  Inferior  priests  slaugh- 
tered lambs  ;  other  priests  at  other  times  did  almost  all  the  work  of  the 
Sinctuary  ;  but  on  this  day  nothing  was  done  by  any  one,  as  a  part  of  'he 
business  of  the  great  day  of  atonement,  except  by  the  high  priest.  (Id 
rabbinical  traditions  tell  us  that  everything  on  that  day  was  done  by  him, 
even  the  lighting  of  the  candles,  and  the  fires,  and  the  incense,  and  all  the 
offices  that  were  required,  and  that,  for  a  fortnight  beforehand,  he  was  obliged 
to  go  into  the  tabernacle  to  slaughter  the  bullocks  and  assist  in  the  work  of  the 
priests  and  Levites,  that  he  might  be  prepared  to  do  the  work  which  was  un- 
usual to  him.  All  the  labour  was  left  to  him.  So  Jesus  Christ,  the  High  Priest, 
and  He  only,  works  the  atonement.  There  are  other  priests,  for  "  he  hath  made 
w  priests  and  kings  uuto  God."     Every  Christian  is  a  priest  to  offer  sacrifice  of 


CHAP.  XVI.  34.]  THE  BOOK   OF  LEVI HC US.  ^.^ 


prajer  and  pntise  unto  God,  but  none  save  the  hi<:h  priest  must  offer  atonement 
go  withm  the  veil,  slaughter  the  goat,  and  sprinkle  the  blood 

2.  The  high  priest  on   this  day   was  a  hunihted  pned.     "  He  shall  put,  on  the 
holy  Wi  coat   and  he  shall  have  the  linen   breeches  upon  his  fle.h,  and  shall  be 
girded  with  a  hnen  girdle,  and   with  the  linen   mitre  shall  he  be  attired  •  these 
are  holy  garments  '  (v.  4).     On   other  days   he  wore  the  golden  garments  ;  the 
mitre  with  a  plate  of  pure  gold  around   his  brow,  tied   with  briUian     blue:  the 
splendid   breastplate,  studded   with  gems,  adorned  with  pure  gold  and  set  with 
precious  stones  ;  the  glorious    ephod,  the  tinkling  bells,  and  all  the  other  orna- 
ments wherewith  he  came  before  the  people  as  the  accepted  high  priest.     But 
on   this  day  he  had  none  of  them.     On  that  day  he  humbled  himself  just  as  the 
peop  e   humbled  tJiemselves.     Jesus  Christ,  when  He   made   atonement,  was  a 
bumbled  priest.     He    did   not  make  atonement  arrayed  in  all  the  glories  of  His 
ancient  throne  in  heaven.     Upon  His  brow  there  was  no  diadem    save  the  crown 
of  thorns  ;  around  Him  was  cast  no  purple  robe,  save  that  which  He  wore  for  a 
time  in  mockery  ;  on  His  head  was  no  sceptre,  save  the  reed  which  they  thrust  in 
cruel  contempt  upon  Him.     But  oh  !  adore  Him,  for  it  was  the  simple  clean  linen 
ot  His  own  humanity,  in  which  He  made  atonement  for  your  sins 

3.  A  spoUess  high  priest ;  and  because  there  were  none  such  to  be  found 
Aaron  had  to  sanctify  himself  and  make  atonement  for  his  own  sin  before  he 
could  go  in  to  make  an  atonement  for  the  sins  of  the  people  (v.  3).  Yea  more 
before  he  went  within  the  veil  with  the  blood  of  the  goat  which  was  the  atone', 
ment  for  the  people,  he  had  to  go  within  the  veil  to  make  atonement  there  for 
himself  (vv.  11-13).  Aaron  must  not  go  within  the  veil  until  his  sins  had  been 
typically  ^^'f^d,  nor  even  then  without  the  burning  smoking  incense  before 
his  face  lest  God  should  look  on  him  and  he  should  die,  being  an  impure  mor- 
tal.    Moreover,  it  is  said,  that  he  had  to   wash  himself  many  times  that  day 

V""*  1 J  i^'  .  ^''''  ^^^  '^  ^'^^  ^^""^^^^^^  provided  for  that  Aaron  on  that  day 
should  be  a  spotless  priest ;  not  so  as  to  nature,  but,  ceremonially,  care  was  taken 
that  he  should  be  clean.  But  we  have  a  spotless  High  Priest,  who  needed  no 
washing,  needed  no  atonement  for  Himself;  needed  no  incense  to  wave  before  the 
mercy  seat  to  hide  the  angry  face  of  justice  ;  needed  nothing  to  hide  and  shelter 
Mim  ;  He  was  all  pure  and  clean.  Adore  and  love  Him,  the  spotless  Hic^h  Pries- 
who,  on  the  day  oi  atonement,  took  awav  guilt.  ' 

.,  4.  The  atonement  was  made  by  a  solitary  high  priest-Silone  and  unassisted'. 
And  there  shall  be  no  man  in  tne  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  when  he 
goeth  in  to  make  an  atonement  in  the  holy  place"  (v.  17).  Matthew  Henry 
observes,  that  no  disciple  died  with  Christ :  when  He  walput  to  death  His  dis- 
ciples fors()ok  Him  and  fled  ;  they  crucified  none  of  His  followers  with  Him,  lest 
any  should  suppose  that  the  disciple  shared  the  honour  of  atonement.  Thieves 
were  crucified  with  Him  because  none  would  suspect  that  they  could  assist  Him: 
but  if  a  disciple  had  died,  it  might  have  been  imagined  that  he  had  shared  the 
atonement.  God  kept  that  holy  circle  of  Calvary  select  to  Christ.  0  glorious 
High  Priest,  1  hou  hast  done  it  all  alone.  «  I  have  trodden  the  wine-press  alone, 
and  of  the  people  there  was  none  with  me."  Then  give  all  the  glory  unto  His 
holy  name,  for  alone  and  unassisted  He  made  atonement  for  your  guilt 

5.  Again,  It  was  a  laborious  high  priest  who  did  the  work  on  that  day.  There 
were  fifteen  beasts  which  he  slaughtered  at  different  times,  besides  the  other 
offices,  which  were  all  left  to  him.  He  who  was  ordained  priest  in  Jeshurun,  for 
tnat  day  toiled  like  a  common  Levite,  worked  as  laboriously  as  priest  could  do,  and 
tar  more  so  than  on  any  ordinary  day.  Just  so  with  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Oh, 
what  a  labour  the  atonement  was  to  Him  !  It  was  a  work  that  all  the  hands  of 
the  universe  could  not  have  accomplished  ;  yet  He  completed  it  alone.  There 
was  the  bloody  sweat  in  Gethsemane,  the  watching  all  night,  then  came  the 
shame,  the  spitting,  the  cruel  flagellations  in  Pilate's  hall ;  then  there  was  the 


F 


210  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xvi.  U. 


via  dolorosa  through  Jerusalem's  sad  streets  ;  then  came  the  hanging  oq  the 
cross,  with  the  weight  of  His  people's  sins  on  His  shoulders.  Ay,  it  was  a  divine 
labour  that  our  great  High  Priest  did  on  that  day — a  labour  mightier  than  the 
making  of  the  world:  it  was  the  new  making  of  a  world,  the  taking  of  its  sins 
upon  His  almighty  shoulders  and  casting  them  into  the  depths  of  the  sea. 
Jesus,  though  He  had  toiled  before,  yet  never  worked  as  He  did  on  that  wondrous 
day  of  atonement. 

II.  The  means  whereby  this  atonement  was  made. 

"  And  he  shall  take  of  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  Israel  two  kids  of 
the  goats  for  a  sin  offering,  and  one  ram  for  a  burnt  offering  "  (v.  5  ;  see  also 
vv.   7-10).     The  first  is  the  type  of  the  means  whereby  the  atonement   wag 

made. 

1.  It  answered  all  the  pre-requisites  of  every  other  thing  sacrificed ;  it  must 
be  a  perfect,  unblemished  goat  of  the  firU  year.  Even  so  was  our  Lord  a  perfect 
man,  in  the  prime  and  vigour  of  his  manhood.  And  further,  this  goat  was  an 
eminent  tj/pe  of  Christ  from  the  fact  that  it  was  taken  of  the  congregation  of  the 
children  of  Israel  (v.  5).  The  public  treasury  furnished  the  goat.  So  Jesus 
Christ  was,  first  of  all,  purchased  by  the  public  treasury  of  the  Jewish  people 
before  He  died.  Thirty  pieces  of  silver  they  had  valued  Him  at,  a  goodly  price  ; 
and  as  they  had  been  accustomed  to  bring  the  goat,  so  they  brought  Him  to  be 
offered ;  not  with  the  intention  that  He  should  be  their  sacrifice,  but  unwittingly 
they  fulfilled  this  when  they  cried  *'  Crucify  Him  !" 

2.  Though  this  goat,  like  the  scapegoat,  was  brought  by  the  people,  God!s 
decision  was  in  it  still.  Mark,  it  is  said,  "  Aharon  shall  cast  lots  upon  the  two 
goats  ;  one  lot  for  the  Lord,  and  the  other  lot  for  the  scapegoat."  This  mention 
of  lots' is  to  teach  that  although  the  Jews  brought  Jesus  Christ  of  their  own  will 
to  die,  yet,  Christ  had  been  appointed  to  die.  Christ's  death  was  fore-ordained, 
and  there  was  not  only  man's  hand  in  it,  but  God's.  "  The  lot  is  cast  into  the 
lap,  but  the  whole  disposing  thereof  is  of  the  Lord."  So  it  is  true  that  man 
put  Christ  to  death,  but  it  was  of  the  Lord's  disposal  that  Jesus  Christ  was 
elaughtered,  'Hhe  just  for  the  unjust,  to  bring  us  to  God." 

'6.  Behold  the  goat  marked  out  to  make  the  atonement,  and  see  it  die.  The 
priest  stabs  it.  Mark  it  in  its  agonies  ;  beliold  it  stiug-;ling  ;  observe  the  blood. 
Ye  have  here  your  Saviour.  See  His  Father's  vengeful  sword  sheathed  in  His 
heart;  behold  His  death  agonies.  Mark  the  blood  from  His  open  side.  As  the 
blood  of  the  goat  made  the  atonement  typically,  so  thy  dying  Saviour  made  the 
great  atonement  for  thy  sins. 

4.  That  blood  was  tahen  within  the  veiU  and  there  sprinkled.  So  with  Jesus's 
blood,  ''  Sprinkled  now  with  blood  the  throne."  The  Saviour's  blood  has  made 
atonement  within  the  veil  \  He  has  taken  it  there  himself.  By  this  one  off'eriug 
atonement  was  made  for  ever. 

III.  We  now  come  to  the  effects. 

1.  One  of  the  first  effects  of  the  death  of  this  goat  was  tke  sandificalion  of  the 
holy  things  which  had  been  made  unholy.  '*  He  shall  sprinkle  it  upon  the  mercy 
seat  :  and  he  shall  make  an  atonement  for  the  holy  place,"  etc.  (v.  15).  Where 
God  dwelt  should  be  holy,  but  where  man  comes  there  must  be  some  degree  of 
unholiness.  This  blood  of  the  goat  made  the  unholy  place  holy.  So  of  this 
Banctuary,  our  prairies  and  our  prayers,  there  is  blood  on  them  all ;  our  holy 
Sabbath  services  have  been  sprinkled  with  the  blood  of  the  great  Jesus,  and  as 
such  they  will  be  accepted  through  Him.  Is  it  not  sweet  to  rt  fleet  that  our  holy 
things  are  now  really  holy  ;  that  though  sin  is  mixed  with  them  all,  and  we 
think  them  defiled,  yet  the  blood  has  washed  out  every  stain  :  and  our  Sanctuary 
service  is  as  holy  in  God's  sight  as  the  service  of  the  cherubim,  and  is  accept- 
able as  the  psalms  of  the  glorified  ;  we  have  washed  our  worship  in  the  blood  of 
tne  Lamb,  and  it  is  accepted  through  Him. 


CHAP.  XVI.  34.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  211 


2    The  second  great  fact  was   that  their  sins  were  taken  away.     This  was  set 
forth   by  the  scapegoat.     The  first  goat  was  a  type   of    the  atonement;     the 
second  18  the  type  of  the  effect  of  the  atonement.     The  second  goat  went  away 
atter  the  first  was  slanghtered,  carrying  the  sins  of  the  people  on  its  head   and 
BO  It  sets  forth,  as  a  scapegoat,  how  our  sins  are  carrie-1  away  into  the  depths  of 
the    wilderness.     But   mark,  this  goat   did    not  sacrdi  ;i>xlly   make    the    atone- 
ment :  It  IS  the  fruit  of  the  atonement ;  but  the  sacrifice  is  the  means  of  making 
It      So  by  the  death  of  Christ  there  was  full,  free,  perfect  remission  for  all  those 
whose  sins  are  laid  upon  His  head.     For  on  this  day  all  sins  were  laid  on  the 
scapegoats  head— sins  of  presumption,  ignorance,  uncleanness,  sins  little  and 
sins  great,  sms  against  the  law,  morality,  ceremonies,  sins  of  all  kinds  were 
taken  away  on  that  great  day  of  atonement. 

3.  An  interesting  fact  is  here  worth  mentioning.  Turn  to  chap  xxv  9  and 
you  will  read:  -Then  shalt  thou  cause  the  trumpet  o^  the  jab Uee  to  sound  on 
the  tenth  day  of  the  seventh  month,  in  the  day  of  atonement  shall  ye  make  the 
trumpet  sound  throughout  all  your  land."  So  one  of  the  effects  of  the  atone- 
ment  was  set  forth  to  us,  the  scapegoat  is  gone  and  the  sins  are  gone  ;  and  no 
sooner  are  they  gone  than  the  siWer  trumpet  sounds. 


The  year  of  jubilee  is  come, 
Return,  ye  ransomed  sinners,  home. 


On  that  day  sinners  go  free  ;  on  that  day  our  poor  mortgaged  lands  are  liberated 
and  our  poor  estates  which  have  been  forfeited  by  oar  spiritual  bankruptcy  are 
all  returned  to  us.  So  when  Jesus  dies,  slaves  win  their  liberty,  and  lost  ones 
receive  spiritual  life  again;  when  He  dies,  heaven,  the  long  lost  inheritance  is 
ours.  Blessed  day  !  Atonement  and  jubilee  ought  to  go  together.  Have  you 
ever  had  a  jubilee  in  your  hearts  ?  If  you  have  not,  it  is  because  you  have  not 
had  a  day  of  atonement.  "^ 

4.  One  more  effect  of  this  great  day  of  atonement  :  entrance  within  the  veil 
Only  on  one  daj^  m  the  year  might  the  high  priest  enter  within  the  veil  and 
then  It  must  be  for  the  great  purposes  of  the  atonement.  Now,  the  atonement 
IS  finished,  and  you  may  enter  within  the  veil ;  "  Hwing  boldn.ss,  therefore  to 
enter  into  the  holiest,  let  us  come  with  boldness  unto  the  throne  of  the  heavenly 
grace.  u-vcuijr 

V\.  "^u^^  u  ?i^u   ^^""^^^  BEHAVIOUR  WHEN  WE  CONSIDER  THE  DAY  OP  ATONEMENT 

,x.  \  }uA  I  I  ^  ^^^^""^"^  ^''''  ®''^'*  ""^**  -y^^  •  ^^^^t  in  the  seventh  month  on* 
the  tenth  day  of  the  month,  ye  shall  afflict  your  souls"  (v.  29).  That  is  one 
thing  that  we  ought  to  do  when  we  remember  the  atonement.  Sure,  sinner  there 
18  nothing  that  should  move  thee  to  repentance  like  the  thought  of  that  ^^reat 
sacrifice  of  Christ  which  is  necessary  to  wa«h  away  thy  guilt.  -  Law  and  terrors 
do  bu  harden,  but  methinks,  the  thought  that  Jesus  died  is  enough  to  make 
us  melt.  It  IS  well,  when  we  hear  the  name  of  Calvary,  always  to  Thed  a  tear 
for  there  is  nothing  that  ought  to  make  a  sinner  weep  like  the  mention  of  tne 
death  of  Jesus.     On  that   day   « ye  shall  atfiict   your  souk"     And  even    you 

BhouidT'       ^''''  ^^''""^  ^^''*  ^'''''  ^^^'''''''  ^^'^^'  '^'^^^^  '^^'""^  y^^  '^^^^^^  y^ 

Alas  I  and  did  my  Saviour  bleed  ? 

And  did  my  So v 'reign  die  ? 
Would  He  devote  that  sacred  head 

For  such  a  worm  as  1  ? 

SavToar^^<'1ffl""^*°  ^Z'  *"  '^Z  °'"'  ^'''^  ^'^^  "h^*  "«  did  to  pierce  the 
^uXd  b/yt"'.^L"  ""'''    ""P  '"  "•"  ^'"*  '''' '  ''^^P  f"^  «'-  ""^^  -^ 

mL  ^„^'"»h"^.  T"  *f  "  '^",  T/'"''^  "'  ""  "  (^-  ^^>-  ^^'l^*"  "«  -^o'^^ider  the  atone- 
ment,  we  should  rest,  and  "  do  no  work  at  all."  ]test  from  your  works  as  God 
did  from  His  on  the  great  Sabbath  of  the  world  ;  rest  from  your  own  rig^eous 


212  HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xvi.  1-5. 

—  — ^ 

ness  ;  rest  from  your  toilsome  duties  ;  rest  ia  Him.      "  We  that  believe  do  enter 
into  rest."     No  longer  seek  to  save  thyself;  it  is  done,  it  is  done  for  aye  ! 

3.  When  the  priest  had  made  the  atonement,  after  he  had  washed  himself,  he 
came  out  again  in  his  glorious  garments.  When  the  people  saw  him  they  attended 
him  to  his  house  with  joy,  and  they  offered  burnt  offerings  of  praise  on  that  day : 
he  being  thankful  that  his  life  was  spared,  and  they  being  thankful  that  the 
atonement  was  accepted  ;  both  of  them  offering  burnt  offerings  as  a  type  that 
they  desired  now  to  be  *'a  living  sacrifice,  holy  and  acceptable  unto  God."  Let 
us  go  into  our  houses  with  joy.  The  atonement  is  finished;  the  High  Priest  h:«s 
laid  aside  the  linen  garments,  and  He  stands  before  you  with  His  breastplate, 
and  His  mitre,  and  His  embroidered  vest,  in  all  His  glory.  How  He  rejoices  over 
us,  for  He  hath  redeemed  His  people,  and  ransomed  them  out  of  the  hands  of  His 
enemies.  Come,  let  us  go  home  with  the  High  Priest ;  the  atonement  is  ac- 
cepted, and  we  are  accepted  too  ;  the  scapegoat  is  gone,  our  sins  are  gone  with 
it.  He  hath  given  unto  us  a  day  of  atonement,  and  a  day  of  acceptance,  and  a 
year  of  jubilee. — C.  H.  Spurgeon,  a.d.  1856  :  Abbreviated, 

Topic:  The   Day   op   Atonement   (Vv.   1-5). 

The  Mosaic  ritual  here  reaches  a  climacteric  point.  On  this  annual  day  of  national 
expiation  every  kind  of  sin  was  confessed  and  atoned  for,  which  might  have  escaped 
notice  before.  Propitiation  being  offered  for  the  whole  nation,  all  the  people 
received  forgiveness.  The  day  gave  all  other  days  a  deeper  meaning,  its  rites 
interpreted  and  intensified  all  other  ceremonies.     Notice — 

I.  The  TiMEi ;  when  the  day  of  atonement  was  instituted,  "  After  the  death  of 
the  two  sons  of  Aaron."  [a)  It  was  jvst  after  a  great  catastrophe.  The  fire  of  the 
Lord  had  flashed  out,  revealing  the  divine  indignation  against  the  reckless  priests. 
Thus  the  Lord  showed,  that,  though  the  workers  may  sin  and  die,  the  woik 
must  go  on  ;  that  m  the  midst  of  deserved  wrath  He  remembers  mercy,  (b}  It 
was  just  at  a  great  crisis.  The  Jewish  theocracy  was  being  consolidated,  and 
those  rites  and  ceremonies  completed  that  would  distinguish  the  Jews  for  ever 
from  all  other  nations.  The  basis  was  being  laid,  broad  and  deep,  for  the 
operations  of  God  to  bless  the  world,  All  the  light  of  nature  and  revelation,  of 
the  patriarchial  dispensation  and  the  human  conscience,  was  centred  in  the  day 
of  atonement,  (c)  It  was  just  before  a  great  career.  Israel  had  before  them  a  great 
mission,  they  had  been  miraculously  delivered  from  Egyptian  bondage,  were  to 
pass  the  wilderness  and  enter  the  promised  land.  They  were  to  be  the  custodians 
of  the  Word  of  God,  and  the  representatives  of  real  religion.  Through  them 
all  the  nations  of  the  earth  were  to  be  blessed  ;  with  them  Jehovah  would  dwell  ] 
by  them,  make  Himself  known  to  the  world ;  and  eventually  through  their 
posterity  He  would  come,  and  in  very  deed  would  dwell  with  man  on  the  earth. 

II.  The  person  by  whom  the  atonement  was  to  be  made.  ''The  Lord  said  unto 
Moses,  speak  unto  Aaron  thy  brother,"  etc.  Any  of  the  priests  could  offer  the 
daily  sacrifices;  but,  the  annual  one  could  be  offered  by  the  high  priest  alone. 
For  so  great  and  distinguished  an  office  (a)  a  human  agent  was  selected.  A  man 
— feeble,  sinful,  sorrowful,  and  dying — Moses'  brother,  and  a  brother  of  the  whole 
race.  What  dignity  God  puts  on  man  !  How  He  selects  feeble  agents  to 
accomplish  mighty  results,  and  makes  men  co-workers  with  Himself  in  the  most 
solemn  and  sublime  engagements,  {b)  A  human  agent  was  directed,  Moses — to 
convey  directions  about  the  duties  Aaron  should  perform  in  connection  with  hia 
high  oftice.  The  Lord  never  calls  men  to  work  for  Him  without  giving  them,  at  the 
same  time,  ability  to  do  it,  and  directions  how  to  do  it.  Aaron  but  faintly  fore- 
shadowed our  great  High  Priest ;  for  Christ  was  God,  as  well  as  man,  and  needed 
not  to  V)e  instructed.  He  knew  the  Father's  will  completely,  and  did  it  perfectly; 
and  knew  also  what  was  ia  man,  and  needed  for  man. 


CiiAi-  XVI.  5  14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  213 


III.  Thk  spirit  in  which  the  person  zuas  to  officiate.     Aaron  was  not  to  come  at 
all   times  unto  the  holy  place;  so,  he  was  to   possess  (a)  a  reticent  spirit.      His 
sons,  who  were  slaiu  before  the  Lord,  had  not  restrained  themselves,  but  rushed 
unbidden  into  the  holy  place  ;  Aaron  was  to  take  warning  by  their  fate,  hold  him- 
self under  restraint,  not  be  too  free  and  familiar  with  sacred  things,  even  though 
he  miiiht  be  tempted  to  go  into  the  holy  of  holies  more  than  once  a  year.     (6)  A 
devout  spirit.     The  most  holy  place  was  calculated  to  inspire  the  priests  with 
reverent  feelings.     That  it  was  to  be  entered  but  once  a  year  would  impress 
the  mind  of  Aaron  with  religious  awe,  as  well  as  the  fact  that,  on  entering,  he 
had   to  attire  himself  in  special  vestments  and  offer  specified  sacrifices.     The 
holy  of  holies  was  the  audience  chamber  of  the  theocratic  Kin^r,  the  seat  and 
throne  of  the  divine  kingdom  among  men.     The  peculiar  priviWe  of  meeting 
God  face  to  face  once  a  year  demanded  the  deepest  solemnity  and  profoundest 
reverence,   (c)  A  sanctified  spirit.   Not  only  was  Aaron  to  feel  becomingly  reverent, 
when  he  offered  the  atonement,  but  he  was  also  to  possess  a  suitable  disposition 
in  other  respects.    He  was  commanded  to  lay  aside  his  splendid  pontifical  robes, 
and  attire  himself  in  the  simple  sacerdotal  garments  of  an  ordinary  Levite      He 
did  not  appear  now  as  the  representative  of  the  people  simply,  but  as  a  sinful 
man  seeking  pardon  for  himself  and  the  whole  nation.     The  clean  white  linen 
m  which  he  officiated  would  ^jmhoW^Q  purity ;  and  the  complete  washing  before 
putting  it  on  would  represent  sanctity  of  character. 

When  Christ  came  to  our  world  to  atone  for  men.  He  laid  aside  His  glory  and 
took  upon  Him  the  clean  white  garment  of  the  virgin's  nature  ;  He  came  in  a 
spirit  that  pleased  God,  that  met  all  the  requirements  of  the  divine  law,  thereby 
securmg  a  perfect  and  everlasting  righteousness,  which  is  unto  all  and  upon  all 
who  believe. 

^  ly.  The  results  the  officiator  was  to  expect.  The  Lord,  always  present 
m  the  cloud  upon  the  mercy  seat,  had  promised  the  people  that  on  the  day  of 
atonement  He  would  "  appear  "  unto  them,  {a)  There  would  he  the  special  maai^ 
testation  of  the  divine  presence.  Not  in  the  cloud  of  incense  ascending  from  the 
swinging  censer  in  Aaron's  hand,  but  in  the  supernatural  cloud  that  did  not 
waste  away— did  not  change  like  other  clouds ;  that  was  lighted  up,  not  with 
rays  of  the  natural  sun,  but  with  beams  of  divine  brightness.  The  divine  ap- 
pearance was  supernatural,  {h)  There  would  he  the  mysterious  manifestation  of  the 
divine  presence.  The  Lord  would  appear,  but  it  would  be  in  the  cloud.  His  glory 
would  be  veiled;  for  no  man  could  literally  see  His  face  and  live.  The  Deity 
v^as  to  be  seen  ''  through  a  glass  darkly."  He  was  to  be  apprehended,  but  not 
comprehended  (c)  There  would  he  the  gracious  manifestation  of  the  divine  presence 
It  was  upon  "  the  mercy  seat "  that  the  Lord  promised  to  appear.  Had  the  Deity 
erected  a  judgment  seat,  instead,  among  the  people,  they  would  all,  not  only  have 
been  condemned,  but  speedily  consumed.  But  the  day  of  atonement  would  work 
propitiation,  and  win  both  pardon  and  peace. 

If  the  gospel  is  in  any  part  of  the  book  of  Leviticus,  we  have  it  here :  and 
read  in  the  light  of  the  ninth  chapter  of  Hebrews  we  see  the  great  atonement  of 
tne  Kedeemer  foreshadowed  in  the  ceremonies  connected  with  this  national 
day  of  expiation.  Through  Christ's  atonement  the  veil  has  been  rent  in  twain  • 
we  may  now  draw  near  to  God,  and  know  Him  as  our  Father ;  for  Christ  was  *'  the 
brightness  of  His  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  His  person."  Through  Him  we 
nave  now  received  the  atonemeiit.—F.  W.  B. 

Topic  :  Aaron's  Sin  Opferinq  for  Himself  (Vv.  5-U). 

The  holiness  communicated  and  imputed  to  the  high  priest  at  his  consecration 
did  not  free  him  from  liability  to  commit  siu  and  incur  guilt.     Hence,  previous 


214  HOMILETIC  COMMENTAUY  ON  [chap.  vi.  5-11 


to  presentiu^  an  atonement  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  nation  Aaron  was  com- 
manded to  present  a  sin  offering  for  himself  and  his  house,  tie  needed  clean 
hands  and  a  pure  heart  when  enterin^'  into  the  most  holy  place.  According  to 
the  word  of  the  Lord  so  Aaron  did.     Observe — 

I.  It  was  A-^  OBEDIENT  ACT.  The  bullock  was  to  be  taken  and  slain  by  the 
high  priest's  own  hands,  indicating  ready  and  unquestioning  acquiescence  with 
the  divine  will.     Such  obedience  is  still  indispensible  to  acceptable  worship  and 

sacrifice. 

II.  It  was  A  FRAGRANT  ACT.  A  censcr  full  of  burning  coals,  of  the  fire  from 
off  the  altar  of  the  Lord,  was  taken  within  the  veil,  and  sweet  incense,  beaten 
small,  put  upon  the  fire,  that  its  fragrance  might  fill  the  holy  place. 

III.  It  was  A  REVERENT  ACT.  The  cloud  of  the  incense  was  to  cover  the  mercy- 
seat,  that  the  offerer  die  not.  He  was  not  to  gaze  with  unclouded  eyes  upon  the 
place  where  God  made  Himself  specially  known.  He  was  to  be  reminded  of  the 
infinite  and  unapproachable  majesty,  as  well  of  the  infinite  meekness  and  mercy 
of  Jehovah;  and,  that  though  privileged  to  draw  near  the  mercy  seat,  he  must 
worship  with  prof  nind  reverence. 

IV.  It  was  A  SUPPLIANT  ACT.  The  blood  of  the  bullock  was  to  be  sprmkled 
upon  the  mercy  seat,  eastward,  and  before  it,  with  his  finger  seven  times.  The 
incense  would  not  only  denote  cheerful  but  also  expectant  worship,  for  it  suggests 
the  sweet  and  ascendmg  nature  of  prater.  The  blood  sprinkled  on  and  before 
the  mercy  seat  would  seem  to  cry  for  mercy  ;  and  indicate,  not  only  praper^ 
but  propitiation, — F,  W,  B. 

Topic  :  Aaron's  Sacrifice  Compared  and  Contrasted  with  Christ's. 

I.  Analogy.  .l  j   i.    u     *i, 

(1)  Both  were  divinely  appointed.  Aaron  was  chosen  and  anointed  to  be  the 
high  priest  of  Israel.  Christ  was  set  apart,  and  ordained  as  the  High  Priest  of 
man  and  ''  anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  his  fellows." 

(2)  Both  atoned  "  alone  "  on  the  great  day  of  atonement.  No  one  was  allowed 
to  enter  the  most  holy  place  with  Aaron;  and  Christ  "  trod  the  winepress 
alone";  neither  man,  nor  angels  shared  with   Him  the  sutfering  and  oblation  of 

the  cross.  .        ,,    ^  , .  4.    ui^ 

(3)  Both  were  divinely  accepted.  Assurances  were  given  that  the  great  obla- 
tion would  be  accepted;  and,  when  offered,  indications  were  vouchsafed  that 
Jehovah  was  well  pleased.  Aaron's  return  from  the  solemn  seclusion  of  the 
most  holy  place  was  proof  he  had  pleased  Jehovah;  for  unacceptable  sacrihce 
would  have  been  visited  with  death  to  the  offerer.  So,  when  Christ  came 
from  the  darkness  of  the  grave  after  His  atonement  it  showed  He  was  accepted, 

and  Jehovah  satisfied.  .      ,.  7      mi        i.     •       vi     ^ 

li)  The  blessings  of  both  tvere  discriminately  dispensed.  The  atoning  blood 
only  bedewed  those  who  felt  and  confessed  their  guilt  So  while  the  atone- 
ment  of  Christ  is  sufficient  for  all,  it  is  only  efficient,  and  applied  where  hearts 
ere  truly  broken  and  contrite. 

II.  Disparity.  ,1         •         c    t.      a 

(1).  Aaron  had  to  make  the  atonement  once  a  year  ;  showing  how  imperfect  ana 

temporary  the  efficacy  of  his  offermg  was  ;  but  Christ  offered  His  atonement  onct 
for  ever,  never  to  be  repealed  or  repeated.  ij     ^     ^ 

^  (2).  Aaron  atoned  for  himself  needed  to  obtain  pardon  before  he  could  atone 
for  the  people  ;  but  Christ  was  -  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from  sm- 
nersr  and  needed  not  to  atone  for  Himself;  He  "  did  no  sin,  neither  was  any  deceit 

found  in  his  mouth."  ,  .        -,   ,  r^i    -  ^    jt     ^  u\^ 

(3).  Aaron  offered  a  sacrifice  that  was  provided  for  Urn;  hut  Christ  offered  Him- 


CiiAi'.  XVI.  29-;M.]  the  book   Ol^  Lh:VtTtCtlS.  215 

sflf ;  tuas  both  priest  and  victim ;  and  it  was  the  infinite  dignity  of  His  nature 
that  gave  infinite  value  to   His  sacrifice. 

(4).  Aar-on  offered  a  material  sacrifice,  hut  Christ  '  poured  out  his  soul  unto 
death."  He  gave  His  blood,  i.e.,  His  life  and  love  to  reconcile  the  world  unto 
Go.l. 

(5).  Aaron  offered  for  himself  and  the  sins  of  Israel  only.  Christ  did  not 
oiftT  for  Hniiself  but  I/e  offered  ^\for  the  sins  of  the  ivhole  world." 

(6)  A  aron^s  offering  only  atoned  for  inadvertant  sins,  for  faults  and  failings  of 
mtn ;  for  high-lianded  sins,  and  wilful  transgressions  there  was  wo  renieHy  ; 
when  those  were  discovered,  they  were  met  with  the  penalty  of  death.  But  the 
sacrifice  of  Christ  atones  for  all  sin,  even  the  most  flagrant  and  heinous  (see  Heb. 
ji,),—F.  W.  B. 

Topic:  Ratification   of   the  Statute   op  the  Atonement  (Vv.  29-34). 

Special  significance  was  given  to  the  day  of  atonement  by  directions  concern- 
ing it  being  reiterated,  by  freedom  from  all  ceremonial  defilement  being  insisted 
upon.  The  priests  burnt  incense  every  day  on  the  golden  altar  witfiout  the  veil, 
but  the  high  priest  alone  was  permitted  to  enter  into  the  holy  of  holies  witJiin  the 
veil  once  a  year.  This  statute  would  awaken  solemn  reflection,  and  be  an  abid- 
ino;  precaution  against  undue  familiarity  with  the  visible  symbolic  presence  of 
Jehovah.     The  day  of  atonement  was  to  be  observed — 

J.  Annually,  "  And  it  shall  be  a  statute  for  ever  unto  you."  The  tenth  day 
of  the  seventh  month  (Tisri)  in  every  year  was  to  be  oV)served  down  to  the  time 
when  the  great  antitype  would  render  the  annual  repetition  of  the  rite  unneces- 
sary. The  day  gave  a  rounded  completeness  to  the  oblations  of  the  year ;  the 
ceremony  would  be  perpetually  needed,  for  each  succeeding  generation  would 
require  the  blessings  of  propitiation  and  forgiveness. 

II.  Publicly.  The  whole  nation  was  commanded  to  join  in  celebration  with  great 
unanimity.  "  Whether  it  be  one  of  your  own  country,  or  of  a  stranger  that 
sojourneth  among  you."  The  blood  of  the  sacrifice  was  to  be  taken  by  the  high  priest 
within  the  veil,  and  sprinkled  secretly  upon  the  mercy  seat,  but  he  was  to  re- 
appear among  the  people,  pronounce  publicly  his  benediction,  and  show  openly 
that  the  sacrifice  had  been  completed,  the  end  of  the  ceremony  secured.  The 
service  included,  because  it  was  intended  for,  all. 

HI.  Tranquilly.  '*It  shall  be  a  sabbath  of  rest  to  you."  No  manner  of 
work  to  be  done  by  any  who  were  in  the  camp.  Thus  disengaged  from  all 
secular  toil,  the  people  could  concentrate  their  thoughts  upon  the  solemn  engage- 
ments of  the  day,  with  undistracted  minds  and  undivided  hearts.  The  exercises 
of  the  day  were  not  sanguinary  struggles  with  the  Almighty  for  victory  over  His 
wrath  against  sin,  but  an  exhibition  of  His  mercy  in  opening  a  way  of  propitia- 
tion for  all  who  would  embrace  opportunity.  The  tranquillity  of  the  day  of  atone- 
ment was  s;ymbolio  of  the  rest  of  soul  Israel  might  enjoy  under  a  consciousness 
of  sin  forgiven  and  restoration  to  the  divine  favour ;  sugi2:estive  of  the  peace  of 
God  which  passeth  all  understanding,  and  which  those  enjoy  who  are  made  one 
with  Him  by  sacrifice. 

IV.  Contritely.  "  Ye  shall  afflict  your  souls."  According  to  many  Jewish 
"Writers,  the  children  of  Israel  submitted  to  manifold  deep  humiliations  on  that 
day,  observed  it  as  a  solemn  fast.  They  were  not  commanded  to  afflict  their 
bodies  or  rend  their  garments,  but  to  present  the  sacrifice  of  broken  and  con- 
trite hearts,  which  God  will  never  despise.  This  would  necessitate  the  suppres- 
sion of  worldliness,  the  repression  of  every  sinful  passion.  When  tlie  hands  of 
the  high  priest  were  placed  upon  the  head  of  the  scapegoat,  and  the  sins  of  the 
people  confessed,  faith  and  repentance  were  to  be  exercised  or  the  ceremony 


216 


HOMILETIC  COMMENrARY  ON    [chap.  xvi.  2,  10—12 


would  be  a  mere  farce,  and  offensive  to  Him  who  expects  worshippers  to  draw 
near  in  Bnirit  and  in  truth. 

Many  objections  have  been  alleged  against  the  doctrine  of  atonement  by 
vicarious  sacrifice,  against  propitiation  by  "  blood."  Those  difficulties  dwindle 
away  as  the  light  of  the  New  Testament  is  thrown  upon  them.  The  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  shows  that  "  blood  "  represented  life,  which  is  symbolic  of  (a)  price- 
less worth;  (b)  highest  sanctity  ;  (c)  choicest  gift.  Thus  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ 
cleanseth  from  all  sin,  because  it  represents  and  means  that  His  life  and  love 
were  poured  out  for  the  sake  of  the  world's  redemption. 

Against  the  doctrine  of  divine  mediation  reason  can  bring  no  valid  objection) 
for  nature,  by  abundant  analogies  and  illustrations,  suggests  its  probability  in 
the  realm  of  grace.  The  sacrifice  of  Christ  was  (a)  universal ;  (b)  efficacious  ; 
(c)  voluntary  ;  (d)  final.  Our  duty  and  privilege  to  accept  the  blessings  tj'pified 
by  the  day  of  atonement.  Our  only  hope  for  time  and  eternity  is  in  Christ. 
The  music  that  will  hush  all  the  discords  of  earth  swells  from  the  new  song  of 
Moses  and  the  Lamb. — F.  W.  B. 


OUTLINES  ON  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  XVL 


V.    2.-  Theme:     Undue    familiarity    in 

DIVINE  THINGS  CHFCKED. 

"  He  shall  come  not  at  all  times  into  the 
holy  place  within  the  veil  before  the  mercy  seat" 

The  day  of  atonement  the  most  solemn 
day  in  the  Jewish  Calender.  Everything 
about  it  calculated  to  awaken  interest  and 
solemnity.  Other  offerings  had  respect  to 
particular  persons  and  sins,  this  to  the  whole 
nation  and  all  sin.  Thus  was  prefigured  the 
great  sacrifice  of  Calvary,  which  atoned  for 
sins  of  whole  world.  Nadab  and  Abihu 
had  displayed  presumption  and  irreverence 
in  drawing  near  to  the  Lord,  and  for  their 
wicked  conduct  had  been  slain;  now,  Aaron 
is  commanded  not  to  go  into  the  holy  of 
holies  but  once  a  year,  lest  he  should  also  die. 
Notice — 

I,  That  access  into  jehovah's  presence 
WAS  RESTRICTED  Every  day  ordinary  offer- 
ings could  be  presented,  and  divine  favour 
secured  ;  but,  lest  the  people  should  become 
unduly  familiar,  and  therefore  irreverent, 
restraint  was  put  upon  their  communion, 
they  were  not  allowed  to  enter  the  most  holy 
place  at  all,  and  the  high  priest  only  on  the 
day  of  atonement  Access  into  God's  special 
presence  could  only  be  — 

1.  In  a  special  place.  The  holy  of  holies; 
within  the  veil,  where  was  the  mercy  seat 
crowned  with  the  shekinah  cloud.  God  is 
everywhere,  His  favour  may  be  secured  in 
every  place  ;  but,  His  full  presence  and  glory 
are  only  beheld  in  heaven,  within  the  veil. 

2.  /\t  special  times.  On  the  day  of  atone- 
ment spi  cial  levelations  were  made  of  divine 
xnercy,  special  benedictions  were  bestowed 
upon  the  people.  God's  love  was  signally 
displayed  when  Christ  effected  the  atonement 
upon  the  cross  ;  special  blessings  come  upon 
man  on  the  days  of  rest  that  remind  us  of  the 
seal  of  the  atonement,  of  the  resurrection  of 
Jesus  on  the  morning  of  the  third  day. 


3.  By  special  persons.  Only  the  high  priest 
could  enter  within  the  veil,  thus  teaching 
Israel  how  great  and  worshipful  Jehovah 
was.  There  was  only  One  in  the  whole  uni- 
verse who  could  offer  atonement  for  the  sins 
of  the  world,  and  appear  in  the  presence  of 
God  for  us,  the  Son  of  God,  the  man  Christ 
Jesus. 

4.  After  special  preparation.  Aaron  had  to 
present  offerings  for  himself,  and  become 
cleansed  from  all  ceremonial  uncleanness,  the 
preparation  very  thorough  and  complete. 
Christ,  our  Great  High  Priest,  needed  not  to 
sacrifice  for  Himself,  nor  to  seek  purification  ; 
but  He  was  made  perfect  through  sufferings, 
and  passed  through  the  baptism  of  Geth- 
semane  on  the  way  to  Calvary. 

5.  For  special  purposes.  Aaron  went  into 
atone  and  intercede,  to  fulfil  the  will  and 
purposes  of  Jehovah  in  relation  to  Israel. 
Christ  died  to  remove  sin,  to  Oj-en  gate  of 
heaven  to  all  believers  for  the  regeneration 
and  redemption  of  humanity. 

II.  That  such  restriction  was  merciful 

AND  BENEFICIAL. 

(a)  Impressed  the  people  with  the  deep  so- 
leDinity  of  the  ceremony. 

\b)  f'roduced  profound  reverence  in  their 
hearts  for  the  worship  of  Jehovah. 

(c)  Awakened  expectations  of  special  bless- 
ini(s. 

The  veil  of  the  Temple  has  been  rent  in 
twain  ;  we  may  go  with  holy  boldness  to  the 
throne  of  grace;  yet  reverence  ought  to  be 
cultivated,  worship  is  to  be  assoc-  a  ed  with 
godly  fear,  for  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire. — 
F.  W.  B. 


Vv.  \^-\^.  — Theme :  Sin  removed. 

The  two  goats,  presented  at  the  door  of  the 
tabernacle  before  the  Lord,  were  but  one  offer- 
ing, though  one  was  allowed  to  escape  into  the 
wilderness.     The  goat   slain   would   indicate 


CHAP.  XVI.  13,  2i.  30.]      THE  BOOK  OF  r.Evmrm 


217 


that  atonement  could  be  effected  only  by  the 
shedding  of  blood;  the  scapegoat  would 
teach  that  in  atonement  sin  is  not  only  for- 
given, but  completely  taken  azvay.  The  gospel 
and  the  law  agree  hero. 

I.  That  sin  to  hk  forgiven  must  be  con- 
FESSKD.     The  people  could  not  atone  for  their 
sins,    but   they    must    offer   the    sacritice    of 
broken  and  contrite  hearts.     As  Aaron   laid 
ais  hands  on  the  goat  and  confessed  the  sins 
of  the  people  he  would  b;^  showing  in  the  most 
emphatic  way  that  personal  faith  and  repent- 
ance were  needed  in  order  that  guilt  might  be 
forgiven.     So    God  requires    still   that   those 
who  seek  His  pardoning  mercy  shall  feel  sorry 
for  their  sins  and  confess  them  with  humble, 
lowly,  and  believing  hearts. 

ir.  That  sin  to  bk  forgiven  must  be  re- 
MOVKD.     Not  connived  at  or  covered  up    not 
clung  to  and  repeated  when  the  pardon  is  se- 
cured, but  taken  away  for  ever;  not  only  the 
guilt,  but  the  love  and  practice  of  sin  ^one. 
Ohrist  atoned  for,  and  removed  sin.     Redemp- 
tion  IS  to  produce  sanctificatton  and  righteous- 
ness.    Hohness  is  the  outcome  of  propitiation, 
the  end  of  the  law  and  the   gospel      Christ 
has  secured  by  His  atonement  pardon  for  the 
guilt  of  sin  and  the  annihilation  of  its  exist- 
ence when  His   kingdom  shall  be  complete, 
and  He  '  all  and  in  all."— A  W  B.        ^       ' 

V.  13 — Theme:  Intercession. 

The  incense  may  be  regarded  as  symbolic 
of  the  merits  of  the  atonement  and  interces- 
sion of  the  high  priest.  Sweet  ascending 
fragrance  from  live  coals  off  altar  of  sacridce 
suggests  concerning  intercession 

I.  Its  basis.  Sacrifice,  mercy-seat :  the 
cloud  covered  the  place  where  God  met  pro- 
pitiously with  man. 

II.  Its  sanction.  God  commanded  it ;  had 
It  before  Him  Aaron  could  swing  the  censer 
with  holy  boldness  w/^^«  and  where  divinelv 
directed.  •' 

III  Its  efficacy.     Saved  life  of  the  priest, 
"that  He  die  not";  showed  that   the  cere- 
mony   had  been  acceptably   observed ;   gave 
Aaron  warrant  to  complete  the  rite  and  bless 
the  peop  e.     Our  great  High  Priest  presents 
the  merits   of  His   own    sacrifice   within   the 
veil ;  the  fragrance  of  His  life  and  death  avail 
for  all  who  come  to  God  by  Him     Our  prayers 
and  praises  may  rise  mingled  with  the  merits 
of  ills  intercession,  and  find  acceptance  in  the 
holiest  of  all. — A  [V.  B. 


Aaron,  having  offered  the  appointed  sacri- 
fice, laid  aside  his  linen  garments,  washed  his 
person  in  pure  water,  arrayed  himself  in  his 
gorgeous  vestments,  and  stood  before  the 
people  as  their  earthly  representative  and 
^ead.  Every  act  in  the  service  pointed  to  the 
hohness  of  God,  to  His  disapproval  of  everv 
form  of  sm  Sanctifieation  from  the  stnins  of 
guilt,  and  assumption  of  the  beautiful  gar- 
ments of  holiness,  essential  to  acceptable 
fellowship  with  the  Lord  ;  for— 

I.  Defilement    canxVot    appear    in    the 
PRESENCE  of  T.iE  LORD.    Only  sin  Can  separate 
between  God  and  man,  but  sin,  producing  de- 
filement of  the  soul,  withdraws  the  sinner  far 
from  God,  renders   him  unfit  for  the   divine 
presence.     When  our  first  parents  sinned  they 
fled  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  ;  the  atone- 
ment heals  the  breach,  effects  righteousness 
withm  a  man,   and  shows    how   the  perfect 
nghteousness  of  another  may  be  set  over  to 
ills  account ;  and  this  because— 

II.  Provision  has  been  made  for  the 
REMOVAL  OP  DEFILEMENT.  Aaron's  ablutions 
of  his  flesh  were  symbolic  of  moral  cleansing, 
and  suggest  to  us  how  guilt  mav  now  be  re- 
moved. In  the  fountain  opened  for  sin  and 
uncieanness  we  may  have  every  stain  removed 
by  the  washing  of  regeneration  and  renewing 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  old  man,  with  thi 
lusts  of  the  flesh,  must  be  put  off,  and  the  new 
man  put  on,  transforming  the  worshippers  into 
new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus.— i^.  iv.  b 


^J  24— Z/^^^^;  Supreme  DEMAND  FOR  HOLi- 


y.  30.—  Theme  :  The  atoning  sacrifice 
Israel  was  taught  both  helplessness  and 
need,  m  that  atonement  had  to  be  made  for 
the  nation  by  one  who  stood  as  mediator  in  its 
6.ead.  Atonement  was  made  in  Jehovah's 
own  way,  the  people  were  to  reverently  sub- 
mit to  the  arrangements,  and  by  repentance 
and  faith  avail  themselves  of  the  blessings 
presented      Observe 

I.  Th«    ATONEMENT    WAS    OP    A    VICARKUS 

CHARACTER.     The  innocent   suffered   for   the 
guilty,  the  priest  atoned  for  the  people. 

II.  The  atonement  secured  spiritual 
PURITY.  ''  That  ye  may  be  clean  from  all 
your  sins 

/f?  V}'  f  ^^^/^'^/raz///;/  of  man  needed  it. 
{t>)   The  holy  nature  of  Jehovah   demanded 
tt» 

Once,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  atonement  has 
been  made  for  the  sins  of  the  world  ;  a  way 
has  been  opened  for  the  removal  of  guilt  here 
for  admission  unto  perfect  holiness  and  bless- 
edness hereafter. — F.  AK  B. 


ILLUSTRATIVE  ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  XVL 


The  mercy  seat. 

''Propitiation,"  or    mercy  seat   (Xhe    same 
word  as   ,n  .  Hob.  ix   5).     If  we  wWd   ha^^ 

ChrT«t  t  """""'    ^'  '^^^"^^    C^"«t;  out    oi 


First:  None  might  come  into  the  holy  of 
holies,  where  the  mercy  seat  stood,  but  the 
high  priest ;  signifying  that  we  have  nothin^r 
Priest""  """^  but  through  Christ  our  Uigh 

Secondly :  The  high  priest  might  not  com« 


218 


noMILETlC  COMMENTARY  ON 


[chap.  XVII.  4. 


near  the  mercy  seat  without  blood  (Lev.  xvi. 
14),  to  show  that  we  have  no  rij^ht  to  oaercy 
but  through  the  expiatory  saoritice  of  Christ's 
blood. 

Thirdly  :  The  high  priest  might  not,  upon 
pain  of  death,  come  near  the  mercy  seat  with- 
out incense  (Lev.  xvi.  13),  indicating  that 
there  could  be  no  mercy  from  God  without  the 
incense  of  Christ's  intercession. 

So  that,  if  we  would  have  mercy,  we  must 
get  a  part  in  Christ — IVafson. 

The  scapegoat. 

There  was  in  the  year  ISoG  exhibited  in 
the  Art  Union  a  fine  picture  of  the  scapegoat 
dying  in  the  wilderness:  it  was  represented 
■with  a  burning  sky  above  it,  its  feet  sticking 
in  the  mire,  3urrounded  by  hundreds  of  skele- 
tons, and  there  dying  a  doleful  and  miserable 
death.  Now,  that  was  just  a  piece  of  gratui- 
tous nonsense,  for  there  is  nothing  in  the 
Scripture  that  warrants  it  in  the  least  degree. 
The  rabbis  tell  us  that  this  goat  was  taken 
by  a  man  into  the  wilderness  and  there 
tumbled  down  a  high  rock  to  die  ;  but,  as  an 
excellent  commentor  says,  if  the  man  did 
push  it  down  the  rock  he  did  more  than  God 
ever  told  him  to  do.  God  told  him  to  take  a 
goat  and  let  it  go :  as  to  what  became  of  it 
neither  you  nor  I  know  anything  ;  that  is  pur- 
posely left.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  taken 
away  our  sins  upon  His  head,  just  as  the 
scapegoat,  and  He  is  gone  from  us — that  is 
all  :  the  goat  was  not  a  type  in  its  dying,  or 
in  regard  to  its  subsequent  fate.  God  has 
only  told  us  that  it  should  be  taken  by  the 


hand  of  a  fit  man  into  the  wilderness.  The 
most  correct  account  seems  to  be  that  of  one 
Rabhi  Jarchi,  who  says  that  they  generally 
took  the  goat  twelve  miles  out  of  Jerusalem, 
and  at  each  mile  there  was  a  booth  provided 
where  the  man  who  took  it  might  refresh 
himself  till  he  came  to  the  tenth  mile,  when 
there  was  no  more  rest  for  him  till  he  had 
seen  the  goat  go.  When  he  had  come  to  the 
last  mile  he  stood  and  looked  at  the  goat  till 
it  was  gone,  and  he  could  see  it  no  more. 
Then  the  people's  sins  were  all  gone  too. 
Now,  what  a  tine  type  that  is  if  you  do  not 
enquire  any  further!  Bat  if  you  will  get 
meddling  where  God  intended  you  to  be  in 
ignorance,  you  will  get  nothing  by  it.  This 
scapegoat  was  not  designed  to  show  us  the 
victim  or  the  sacrifice,  but  simply  what  be- 
came of  the  sins.  The  sins  of  the  people  are 
confessed  upon  that  head  ;  the  goat  is  going  ; 
the  people  lose  sight  of  it ;  a  fit  man  goes 
with  it ;  the  sins  are  going  from  them,  and 
no  V  the  man  has  arrived  at  his  destination; 
the  man  sees  the  goat  in  the  distance  skipping 
here  and  there  over  the  mountains,  glad  of  its 
liberty  ;  it  is  not  quite  gone  ;  a  little  farther, 
and  now  it  is  lost  to  sight.  The  man  returns, 
and  says  he  can  no  longer  see  it ;  then  the 
people  clap  their  hands,  for  their  sins  are  all 
gone  too.  Oh  1  soul ;  canst  thou  see  thy  sins 
all  gone?  We  may  have  to  take  a  long  jour- 
ney, and  carry  our  sins  with  us  ;  but  oh  I  how 
we  watch  and  watch  till  they  are  utterly  cast 
into  the  depths  of  the  wilderness  of  forgetful- 
ness,  where  they  shall  never  more  be  found 
against  us  for  ever.— C.  H,  Spurgeon. 


■«««- 


CHAPTER  XVIT. 


%\t  ^anctttg  0f  tlje  ^m"^. 


SUGGESTIVE   REA.DINGS. 


V.  4. — And  bringeth  it  not  unto  the  door  of  the  tabernacle.  A  captious 
mind  will  a&k.  Why  is  uot  sacrifice  accep<^able  to  God  wherever  offered?  Surely 
it  is  in  the  spirit  of  the  offerer,  rather  than  in  the  circumstances  of  the  offering, 
that  piety  consists.  Wherefore,  then,  this  insistance  on  mere  conditions,  and 
importance  attached  to  the  place  of  sacrifice'?  But  God  meets  such  contention 
of  thought  with  absolute  interdict ;  He  is  the  authority  in  human  life  and  sacred 
regulations  ;  and  *'  who  art  thou  that  repliest  against  God"?"  Even  when  ''your 
ways  are  not  my  ways"  (Isa  Iv.  8),  the  Lord  must  be  obeyed,  and  His  terms  of 
dealing  with  sinful  creaturts  be  observed  as  absolute  Yet  more.  There  was 
wisdom  in  those  requirements ;  for  the  Israelites  had  been  so  trained  to  super- 
stitious and  heathenish  ideas  in  I'^^ypt  as  to  need  this  feiiciog  about  in  order  to 
restrain  them  from  lapsing,  all  but  unconsciously,  into  the  snares  of  familiar 


CHAP.  xviT  1-10.]  THE   BOOK  OF  LEVFTICII.^.  219 

idolatrous  practices.  Our  God  is  gracious  in  all  His  ways  ;  His  commandments 
are  not  grievou?* ;  but,  knowing  our  tendencies  to  err,  He  arrests  us  at  the  first 
Bymptoras  of  errinor,  and  shows  us  the  path  of  safety,  the  plan  of  acceptance. 

V.  5. — The  sacrifices  which  they  offer  in  the  open  field.  [See  Addenda  to 
chap..  Sacrifices  unto  devils.'^  They  liad  learned  this  from  the  Egyptians,  who 
peopled  the  scenes  of  nature  with  deities  (v.  7),  and  Israel  continually  fell  into 
this  old  habit,  and  sacriticed  in  groves  and  on  high  places  ;  it  was  the  snare  of 
their  whole  after  history.  We  may  be  redeemed  from  our  spiritual  bondage, 
and  become  pilgrims  to  Canaan,  yet  all  the  journey  through  the  power  of  o'd 
habits  puTsues  us,  and  would  reassert  itself  up  n  us.  Therefore  the  urgency  with 
which  God's  Word  prohibits  any  and  every  concession  to  "the  former  lusts  in 
our  ignorance."     We  must  shun  lurking  perils. 

V.  8. — Whatsoever  men  there  be.  It  was  an  inflexible  regulation,  binding  upon 
"the  house  of  Israel,"  and  also  upon  ^^ strangers  that  sojourn  among  you.^'  For 
evil  may  be  introduced  by  the  society  we  entertain,  the  guests  who  visit  us. 
And  hospitality  was  to  be  restricted  by  divine  laws.  How  ensnaring  often  be- 
comes the  courtesy  which  we  think  due  to  "  strangers  "  !  There  is  a  tendency 
to  relax  from  steadfast  principles  of  righteousness  and  lofty  habits  of  piety  at 
such  times  as  jjuests  are  staying  in  our  homes.  This  is  to  lower  God's  standard 
in  accommodation  to  men.  It  must  not  be  ;  strangers  in  godly  homes  must  con- 
form to  the  godly  laws  which  are  there  supreme  ]  the  children  of  God  must  never 
yield  to  unhallowed  cnatoms  of  their  guests;  hospitality  must  be  no  excuse  for 
impiety. 

V.  10. — I  will  set  my  face  against  that  soul  that  eateth  blood.  God  claimed 
the  blood  as  being  *•  the  life  "  of  the  creature.  He  has  ownership  in  all  His 
creatures,  and  we  should  acknowledge  Him  therein.  But  this  law  has  emphasized 
the  Value  of  blood  as  the  symbol  also  of  atonement  (v.  11).  And  He  would  have 
every  act,  even  of  eating  and  drinking,  testify  of  the  atonement  required  by 
sinners.  The  table  could  not  be  spread  for  "strangers"  (v.  12),  nor  could  any 
one,  Isr^xeiite  or  stranger,  seek  recreation  and  pleasure  in  ^^  hunting  ^^  even,  but 
the  significance  and  sacredness  of  "  the  blood"  must  be  recognised.  We  have 
reason,  indeed,  to  regard  as  most  suggestive  and  precious  the  blood  of  atonement. 
It  leads  our  thoughts  to  Him  whose  death  has  gathered  into  itself  all  virtue  for 
redemption.  How  dreadful  the  consequences  of  counting  that  "  blood  of  the 
covenant  an  unholy  thing !"  (Heb.  x.  29). 


SECTIONAL  HOMILIES. 


Topic:  The  Solemnity  of  Sacrifice  Publicly  Recognised  (Yt.  1-10). 

Jehovah's  concern  for  solemnity  and  purity  in  apparently  trifling  things  re- 
vealed His  intense  hatred  for  sin,  His  supreme  love  for  holiness.  The  demand 
for  purity  extended  to  private  individual  acts  no  less  than  to  public  national 
observances.  The  blood  of  all  beasts  slain  for  food  or  sacrifice  was  to  be  pre- 
sented at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle,  to  check  the  people  from  wanton  destruction 
of  animal  life;  to  remind  them  that  all  life  is  from  the  Lord;  its  destruction 
under  His  cogniziuce.     This  injunction  would — 

I.  Previ£nt  idolatry.  The  idolatrous  practices  of  the  Egyptians,  among 
whom  Israel  had  lived,  would  have  implanted  a  tendency  in  the  people  to  relapse 
into  heathenish  superstitions  during  their  encampment  in  the  wilderness.  The 
Egyptians  sacrificed  to  the  goats,  or  field  devils — supposed  to  inhabit  the  wilderness 
—to  avert  their  wrath,  and  secure  their  favonr.     To  ensure  that  no  idolatrous 


220  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xvii. 


sacrifice  should  be  offered  in  the  camp  the  blood  of  every  slain  animal  was  to  be 
presented  before  the  Lord,  as  an  acknowledgement  that  Jehovah  was  the  sovereign 
King  in  Israel.  God  is  the  proprietor  of  all  life,  to  Him  all  ought  to  be  solemnly 
dedicated. 

II.  Stimulate  obedience.  Probably  the  Hebrews  could  not  see  the  reason 
for  so  rigid  a  command,  it  was  for  them  to  render  unquestioning  obedience  be- 
lieving in  the  wisdom  of  their  great  Lawgiver,  in  the  righteousness  of  His  precepts. 
When  enactments  seemed  meaningless,  and  ceremonies  superfluous,  the  human 
was  always  and  in  every  case  to  be  subordinated  to  the  divine  will.  Thus  the 
discipline  of  the  Jewish  economy  educated  loyal  and  implicit  surrender  of  all 
the  faculties  of  heart  and  mind.  Under  the  gospel  dispensation  we  are  saved 
by  faith,  which  is  the  gift  of  God  ;  yet,  "  faith  without  works  is  dead."  Faith 
and  love  must  prove  their  existence  and  genuineness  by  obedience  to  the  commands 
of  Christ. 

Ill  Perpetuate  allegiance.  These  arrangements  were  to  continue  in  force 
through  succeeding  generations.  In  coming  constantly  to  the  door  of  the  taber- 
nacle, and  making  its  services  the  constant  theme  of  attention,  the  Israelites 
would  be  carrying  out  the  first  great  injunction  of  the  decalogue,  ''Thou  bhalt 
have  none  other  gods  but  me."  Identifying  the  tabernacle  with  the  domestic 
acts  of  life,  with  acts  performed  to  provide  material  food,  would  tend  to  keep 
in  vivid  remembrance  the  fact  that  everything  was  to  be  done  to  the  glory  of 
God.  It  is  still  so;  every  meal  should  become  a  sacrament,  all  we  do  should 
be  done  devoutly  and  heartily  as  unto  the  Lord. 

IV.  Awaken  gratitude.  Coming  so  frequentlj^  to  the  door  of  the  tabernacle 
with  the  blood  of  animals  slain  for  food  or  sacrifice  would  remind  the  Hebrews 
how  constantly  they  were  indebted  to  Jehovah  for  all  the  temporal  and  spiritual 
blessings  they  enjoyed.  They  would  thus  trace  their  mercies  to  the  Source  from 
which  all  good  and  perfect  gifts  flow  to  man. 

V.  Promote  holiness.  Such  constant  reference  to  the  tabernacle  would  keep 
the  Lord  perpetually  before  the  people,  and  act  as  a  solemn  restraint  upon  their 
conduct.  In  common  as  well  as  sacred  meals,  in  the  tent  as  well  as  in  the 
tabernacle,  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord  '*  was  to  be  inscribed  above  all.  As  the 
Israelites  presented  the  blood  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  they  would  be 
reminded  of  the  sacredness  of  life  ;  have  suggested  to  their  minds  the  necessity 
of  complete  self-surrender  to  Jehovah  The  New  Testament  has  no  diviner 
injunction  than  this,  "  Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy." 

VI.  Beget  reverence.  As  the  people  drew  nigh  to  the  door  of  the  tabernacle 
they  would  be  reminded  of  the  august  authority  of  God  in  demanding  such 
obedience  and  annexing  such  penalties  to  disobedience  The  justice  and 
jealousy  of  God  would  fill  every  devout  worshipper  with  profound  religious  awe. 
In  all  Christian  worship  godly  fear  should  have  its  place,  "  for  our  God  is  a  con- 
suming fire." 

VIL  Indicate  reconciliation.  The  fact  that  the  people  were  permitted 
thus  frequently  to  approach  the  tabernacle  proved  that  Jehovah  was  propitious, 
and  delighted  in  mercy.  He  had  come  to  dwell  with  men  because  He  delii^hted 
in  their  company  and  fellowship.  If  those  who  drew  near  to  God  only  fultilled 
the  conditions  He  saw  fit  to  lay  down,  there  was  no  need  for  slavish  fear  or 
apprehensions  of  disapproval.  That  God  expects  us  to  live  in  His  favour  and 
fear  denotes  the  fact  that  He  is  reconciled  to  us,  and  that  the  only  thing  that 
hinders  our  bliss  here  and  hereafter  is  unwillingness  to  be  reconciled  to  Him. — 
F.  W.  B. 

Topic:  The  Place  op  Sacrifice  (Vv.  8,  9). 

1.  God  has  a  right  to  say  where  and  how  He  will  be  worshipped,  and  He  has 
exercised  the  right.     He  has  told  us  the  way  in  which  He  will  be  approached. 


CHAP.  xvir.  10— 12.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  221 


2.  The  way  to  life  may  be  narrow,  but  there  is  no  one,  with  the  Word  of  Truth 
in  his  hand,  who  may  not  discover  it  and  follow  it. 

3.  Of  old  God  gave  minute  and  ample  instruction  to  His  people  ;  they  were  to 
approach  Him  by  sacrifice,  and  that  sacrifice  was  to  be  offered  on  the  altar  of 
burnt  offering  :  "  there  shalt  thou  offer  "  (Deut.  xii.  13,  14).  It  mattered  not  in 
what  the  offering  consisted,  expiatory  or  eucharistic,  the  requirements  as  to  the 
place  of  presentation  yffo.^  ihQ  ^d^mQ— the  place  which  the  Lord  had  chosen  and 
made  His  habitation. 

♦*  Even  those  animals  which  were  slain  for  food  in  the  wilderness  were  brought 
to  the  door  of  the  tabernacle,  and  there  killed,  and  their  blood  sprinkled  on  the 
altar.  If  an  Israelite  did  not  bring  the  animal  which  he  intended  for  foc.d  to  the 
door  of  the  tabernacle,  but  killed  it  elsewhere,  God  declared  that  blood  should  be 
imputed  to  him"  (Bonar on  Leviticus,  chap  xvii.). 

A.  What  admonitory  purpose  was  thereby  servfd. 

1.  The  people  were  indellibly  impressed  with  their  need  of  atonement.  Every 
time  an  intelligent  Israelite  took  away  life  he  must  have  felt  his  own  life  was 
forfeited  to  God,  and  that  by  the  blood  of  sacrifice  only  could  it  be  redeemed. 
The  very  preparation  of  bis  food  impressed  him  with  the  truth  that  life  is  the 
gift  of  God,  But  if  this  is  Old  Testament  truth,  it  is  New  Testament  truth  also 
(see  Jno.  vi.  51  j  iii.  36). 

ii.  Idolatry  was  the  root  sin  of  the  ancient  nations  ;   and  the  head  of  every  family 
as  priest  in  his  own  house,  might  sacrifice  to  whatever  god  he  pleased.     To  cor- 
rect this  in  Israel  was  one  of  the  admonitory  purposes  of  this  enactment  that  all 
pacrifices  should  be  offered  at  the  house  of  God. 

B.  What  sacred  and  evangelical  doctrine  underlays  this  ri  gulation. 

i.  The  tabernacle  was  a  type  of  the  Lord  Jesm;  and  just  as  the  Israelite  could 
only  worship  God  by  sacrifice  at  His  own  dwelling,  so  we  can  only  present  our 
offerings  to  Him  through  Christ.  *•  By  Him,  therefore,  let  us  offer  the  sacrifice 
of  praise  continually,"  etc.  (Heb.  xiii.  15;  Col.  iii.  17). 

^  ii.  The  altar  of  brass  was  the  place  of  sacrifice  (v.  6),  on  which  burned  the 
inextinguishable  fire,  symbol  of  divine  holiness  and  endless  propitiation.  It  stood 
between  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  and  the  Skekinah  withiu  the  veil.  An  inter- 
posing sacrificial  altar,  the  Cross  of  Jesus  stands  between  the  human  offerer  and 
the  Holy  God.  Had  not  Christ,  our  Atonement,  put  Himself  between  us  and 
what  we  deserved  wrath  had  fallen  upon  us. 

C.  What  practical  obligation  this  restricted   scene    of    sacrifice  en- 
joins on  us  now. 


^^  'J.    t 


i.  The  altar  was  the  one  way  of  approach  ;  even  so,  Christ  is  the  one  way  to 
the  Father  (Jno.  xiv.  6).  ^ 

ii.  Excellencies  in  the  offerer  or  the  offering  could  not  neutralize  the  necessity  for 
coming  in  this  only  way  to  God.  The  Jew's  sacrifice  might  be,  in  itself  all  that 
was  required,  but  offered  elsewhere  than  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the 
congregation  it  was  refused.  Though  we  be  generous  in  disposition,  upright  in 
walk,  reverent  in  manner,  not  for  these,  but  for  Christ's  sake,  can  we  be  accepted. 
u",Vu  ^S'"''?!'*''^  ^^^^A^>^a^  altar  imparted  sanctity.  Whatsoever  toucheth  thealtar 
shall  be  holy  (Exod.  xxix.  37).  The  first  touch  of  Christ  by  faith  delivers  from  guilt 
iw.  At  the  cross  God  is  to  be  found  and  enjoyed.  Only  at  the  cross  will  He  be 
merciful  to  our  unrighteousness,  and  only  in  Christ  meet  us  in  grace.  fComp.. 
Ihe  hospel  m  Leviticus.—i.  Fleming,  D  D.].  l        r  i 

Topic:  Blood  Prohibited  as  Food  (Vy.  10-12). 

This  divine   enactment    forbidding    blood    as    food    wa^   much  older  than  the 
tabernacle  ordinances :  was  given  to  Noah  directly  after   the  flood    (Gen   ix    4) 
Reiterated  now  to  the  Israelites  (chap.   iii.  17;  vii.  26);  and   the  r^so;. 'for' the 


222  HOMIIETIC  COMMENTARY  ON         [chap.  xvii.  10-12. 


statute  is  now  assigned  :  **  the  blood  is  the  life  of  the  flesh,  and  is  given  to  man 
to  make  an  atonement  for  his  soul."     [See  Addenda  to  chap.,  Life  in  the  Blood] 

I.  Blood  sacredness  :  solemnly  appointed  by  God  for  a  most  gracious  purpose. 
Instances  from  the  Old  Testament  : 

Abel's  offering  of  "  the  firstlings  of  his  flock  "  (Gen.  iv,  3-5),  securing  em- 
phatic approbation  over  Cain's  fruits  of  the  ground. 

Noah's  altar  sacrifices  after  the  flood  (Gen.  viii.  20,  21). 

Job's  patriarchial  offerings  of  sacrifices  for  propitiation  and  thanksgiving 
(Job  i.  5). 

Moses'  entire  system  was  atoning  and  sacrificial  by  means  of  blood.  "No 
remission  of  sins  without  the  shedding  of  blood." 

The  blood  was  to  be  used  for  no  other  purpose. 

The  New  Testament  testimony. 

Prophecy  had  foretold  that  Messiah  would  "  redeem  Israel "  (Psa.  cxxx.  8), 
and  "make  an  end  of  sins"  (Dan.  ix.  24);  and  it  should  be  done  by  blood: 
"  wounded  for  our  transgressions"  (Isa.  liii.  5,  10). 

At  the  Eucharistic  Supper  Jesus  took  the  cup  and  said,  "  This  is  my  blood 
of  the  New  Testament  which  is  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins  " 
(Matt,  xxvi   28). 

The  apostles  testify  to  the  same  truth  :  "  We  have  redemption  through 
his  blood  "  (Col.  i.  14,  20). 

The  cry  of  the  Church  on  earth  and  in  heaven  tells  the  sacred  truth,  *'  Unto 
him  that  loved  us  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood  "  (Rev.  i.  5,  v.  9). 

God  has  "  given  to  us  the  blood  for  the  atonement  of  the  soul" 

II.  Blood  appropriation  :  emphatically  restricted  by  God  for  this  one  sacred 
purpose. 

It  is  refused  for  food,  and  its  mal-appropriation  protected  by  penalties  of  a 
very  appalling  nature. 

1.  It  would  loive*'  the  dignity  and  defile  the  sanctity  of  blood  if  allowed  for 
common  uses.  All  serious  regard  for  the  "  atonement  "  virtue  which  lay  in  the 
blood  would  have  left  their  minds  had  it  not  been  thus  exclusively  reserved. 
There  is  no  less  danger  of  irreverent  minds  '*  counting  the  blood  of  the 
covenant  an  unholy  thing  and  doing  despite  to  the  Spirit  of  grace  "  (Heb.  x.  29). 
In  this  prohibition  of  a  familiar  use  of  solemn  things  God  sought  to  fence  His 
people  from  a  sin  easily  besetting  them.  God  would  have  us  touch  sanctities 
with  awe. 

2.  It  would  perpetuate  in  their  thoughts  their  need  of  ^^  atonement"  to  have 
blood  thus  interdicted  for  all  other  purposes.  *'  Atonement  "  would  confront 
them  as  their  daily  necessity,  even  at  their  meals.  And  it  should  be  "  ever 
before  us  "  that  we  are  sinners  needing  the  atonement  of  Christ  ;  it  is  gracious 
for  God  to  make  us  daily  see  and  realise  our  case  and  the  urgency  of  our  need 
of  that  "  precious  blood  of  Christ,"' 

3.  It  would  lead  on  their  hopes  to  the  e^ectual  and  final  sacrifice  which  Messiah 
would  present.  The  very  weariness  of  this  continual  presentation  of  blood  in 
sacrifice  would  deepen  the  longing  for  Messiah's  sacrifice  ;  which  should  end  all 
provisional  offerings  A  tired  traveller  hails  sight  of  each  sign-post  as  it  tells 
him  home  is  near. 

All  the  ancient  types  pointed  men  onwards :  God  would  concentrate  human 
desire  on  the  promised  Saviour. 

Now  He  makes  all  teaching  and  experience  of  man  point  human  hope  and  faith 
hackwardsy  on  the  finished  work  of  redemption,  on  the  One  Sacrifice  of  Jesus — 
'*  Whom  God  hath  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation  for  sin  through  faith  in  his 
blood  "(Rom.  iii.  25). 

A  WARNING :  Christ  must  be  used  as  an  Atonement.  His  "  blood "  must  be 
recognised  as  of  infinite  urgency  and  value  for  sinful  men.     Whoso  dares  take 


CHAP.  XVII.  10,  11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS,  223 


Christ  as  his  food,  refusing  His  sacrificial  work,  Renkin'^  to  appropriate  and  enjoy 
Jesus  as  a  Teacher,  Example,  Friend,  but  repudiannj^  him  as  a  Sin  Offerinj^,  a 
Redeemer  of  the  ruined  soul,  he  falls  under  the  menaces  of  these  words  of  God, 
Christ's  blood  must  be  realised  as  a  supreme  necessity  for  man,  as  aa  "  atone- 
ment for  his  soul." 

Topic:  Holy  Blood  (Vv.  10,  11). 

With  stern  command  God  sets  a  fence  around  all  blood.  All  reverence 
enshrines  it.     An  awful  sanctity  exempts  it  from  the  food  of  man 

What  if  offence  occur,  if  rash  hands  bring  it  to  the  board  for  food  1  Theu 
penalty  frowns  terribly,  wrath  darkens,  excluding  judgments  follow. 

But  why  is  blood  thus  sanctified  ] 

I.     Is  NOT  BLOOD  THE  ALTAR's  FOOD  1 

Yes  :  there  is  its  constant  flow  :  it  is  the  stream  from  expiring  victims.  It 
reminds  of  death  as  the  desert  of  sin,  and  bears  witness  that  remission  of  sin  is 
prepared.     Then  it  is  linked  with  expiating  grace.    Thus  : 

II.  It  points  to  calvary's  gross 

It  shadoA's  forth  the  wrath-sustaining  death  of  God's  co-equal  S  )n.  It 
introduces  Jesus  bleeding  that  souls  m  ly  live.  It  is  the  symbol  of  redemption's 
price;  emblem  of  the  one  atoning  Lamb. 

Hence  till  Jesus  came  the  same  forbidding  voice  was  heard  :  Touch  not  the 
blood  !  It  is  devoted  to  God.  It  is  most  holy  unto  Him.  It  pictures  out 
redeeming  suffering.     It  is  "  atonement  for  the  soul." 

We  live  in  gospel  light ;  the  wondrous  death  is  no  more  veiled  in  mystic  types. 
We  gaze  with  open  vision  on  the  blood-stained  cross  ;  may  approach  the  fountain 
opened  in  the  Saviour's  side  ;  may  there  wash  our  every  sin  away. 

Shall  we,  thus  privileged,  fall  short  in  reverence  9  Think  of  the  grand  antitype, 
Christ's  blood;  ponder  its  worth,  its  use^  its  mighty  power  ^  its  unspeakable  results. 

i.  Its  glorious  worth.  Enter  the  Garden.  The  Sufferer  seems  a  lowly  man. 
Man  verily  He  is,  or  He  could  possess  no  human  blood.  But  in  that  lowly  body 
Deity  dwells.     He  is  the  Mighty  God.     It  is  the  *'  blood  of  God  "  (Acts  xx.  28). 

ii.  Its  gracious  use.  The  sinner  is  justly  sentenced  to  woe.  Nothing  but 
boundless  substitution  can  release.  Jesus  is  God,  and  He  brings  blood  divinely 
efficacious.   He  is  an  able  Saviour,  for  blood  flows  in  the  channel  of  omnipotence. 

iii.  Its  effectual  power.  It  is  the  ransom  price  of  all  the  saved  Their  number 
baffles  number.  Each  was  defiled  with  darkest  stains  of  guilt.  But  now  behold 
them.  Robes  white  ;  not  one  stain  spoils  ;  penalties  all  paid.  The  blood  has  saved. 

iv.   Its  precious  results. 

1.  It  is  the  peace  of  all  believing  souls.  The  day  of  awakened  conscience  was 
one  of  bitter  woe.  The  thundering  law  denounced,  the  wrath  of  God  menaced. 
But  the  Spirit  led  the  trembler  to  the  cross  Faith  heard  the  assurance,  "  Though 
your  sins,'  etc.  (Isaiah  i.  18) ;  faith  gazed,  and  found  full  repose. 

2.  It  is  the  source  of  sanctifying  grace.  He  must  flee  sin  whose  eye  is  fixed 
on  the  blood.  Can  he  love  that  which  gave  those  wounds  to  Christ  ]  The 
sight  of  calvary  slays  the  love  of  sin. 

(a)  Make  it  your  study.  For  every  thought  here  is  food.  Angels  gaze  and 
they  adore.  But  they  glean  no  advantage  from  it.  To  you  it  is  salvation's  price ; 
the  gate  of  heaven. 

(6)  Love  it.  It  18  proof  of  God's  love,  that  Jesus  loves  you  better  than  Him- 
self.    That  mind  is  rock  which  is  not  melted  by  such  flame. 

(c)  Praise  it.  All  lips  commend  the  charms  of  beauty  and  heroic  deeds.  But 
what  so  beauteous  as  grac3  leading  Jesus  to  the  cross  %  Where  is  noble  act  like 
H  is  surrender  of  Himself  for  you  1 


224  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  OIV         [chap.  xvii.  10— 1 6. 

(d)  Use  it.  Every  hour,  when  temptations  darts  are  flying  round  ;  it  will 
"  quench  the  fiery  darts"  When  you  seek  light  from  scripture's  pages ;  those 
lines  are  brightest  in  which  blood  is  seen.  Use  it  in  prayer ;  it  is  the  plea  of 
pleas.  \n  sanctuary  rites :  the  service  is  cast  out  which  is  not  hallowed  with 
blood.  Use  it  in  all  holy  work  for  God:  it  consecrates  the  motive,  way,  end  ; 
and  harvests  grow  from  seeds  sown  in  blood.  And  when  death  draws  near  use  it : 
it  ensures  heaven,  where  it  may  be  the  eternal  theme. — Dean  Law. 

Topic:  A  Divine  Prohibition  (Vv.  10-16). 

Of  all  the  sacrifices  offered  in  the  Tabernacle,  the  expiatory  were  the  most 
important ;  that  offered  on  the  Day  of  Atonemeut  the  climax  of  all.  The  virtue 
and  worth  of  the  offering  were  symbolised  in  the  blood  of  the  victims  ;  to  ^^, 
therefore,  peculiar  solemnity  and  sanctity  were  attached.  Noah  and  his 
descendants  were  forbidden  to  partake  of  flesh  with  the  blood  :  thus,  the  way 
was  prepared  for  the  strict  prohibition  of  this  chapter.  In  putting  a  guard 
around  the  seat  of  animal  life  Jehovah  taught  the  Hebrews — 

I.  That  blood  was  to  be  regarded  as  a  sacred  thing.  Not  because  it  was 
unwholesome,  or  unclean,  or  repulsive,  was  blood  not  to  be  partaken  of,  but 
because  by  it  atonement  was  made  for  the  sins  of  the  soul.  From  the  earliest 
history  of  our  race  God  had  taught  that  life  must  be  given  for  life  ;  and  that 
without  shedding  of  blood  there  could  be  no  remission  of  sins.  Thus  blood 
became — 

(a)  The  means  of  expiation. 

(b)  The  symbol  of  reconciliation. 

(c)  The  type  of  the  one  great  vicarious  sacrifice;  by  virtue  of  which  all  the 
Mosaic  offerings  were  efficacious  and  accepted. 

There  was  nothing  so  precious  on  earth,  in  the  estimation  of  God,  as  life  ; 
upon  it,  therefore,  He  set  His  most  solemn  seal  ;  to  it  He  attached  rigid 
regulations ;  and  around  it  He  erected  His  righteous  restraint. 

II.  That,  being  a  sacred  thing,  blood  was  not  to  be  shed  heedlessly  ; 
or  to  be,  iinder  any  circumstances,  partaken  of. 

Acting  under  such  prohibitions,  Israel  would  be  distinguished  from  the 
heathen  nations,  who  recklessly  shed  blood,  and  who  not  only  offered  it  to  their 
gods  but  partook  of  it  themselves.  Jehovah,  as  the  sovereign  Lord  of  all  life, 
reserved  the  symbol  of  it  to  Himself;  it  wis  to  be  in  no  way  degraded,  not  left 
anywhere  carelessly  exposed,  but  treated  with  profound  deference.  A  check 
was  thus  put  upon  indiscriminate  slaughter,  and  in  every  creature  slain  for 
food,  or  sacrifice,  the  operator,  by  the  divine  restriction  he  was  under,  would  be 
reminded  of  the  absolute  sovereignty  of  the  Lord. 

III.  That  disregard  to  these  prohibitions  would  incur  the  righteous  dis- 
pleasure OF  THE  proprietor  OP  ALL  LIFE. 

Disobedience  would  not  only  displease  God  but  incur  excommunication  from 
His  presence.  The  enactments  may  seem  severe,  but  they  were  needed  under 
the  circumstances  of  the  wilderness,  and  taught  lessons  of  circumspection  and 
moral  purity,  calculated  to  lift  the  people  from  depraved  and  degrading 
practices.  The  guilt  of  taking  life  could  only  be  atoned  for  by  the  sacrifice  of 
life.  Thus,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  Christ,  by  shedding  His  precious  blood,  by 
offering  His  divine  infinite  life  a  ransom  for  the  souls  of  men,  satisfied  the  claims 
of  divine  justice,  opened  the  way  to  heaven  for  every  man.  Figuratively,  and  by 
faith,  we  are  to  eat  the  flesh  and  drink  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God,  but  care 
must  be  taken  that  the  acts  are  not  performed  unworthily,  nor  must  the  blood  of 
the  covenant  be  trampled  under  foot  and  counted  an  unholy  thing.  Those 
who  persist  in  abusing  or  despising  the  precious  blood  of  Christ  will  wonder 
and  perish  in  the  day  when  the  secrets  of  all  hearts  ishall  bo  disclosed. — F,  W»  B, 


CHAP    JVIII.  2—5] 


THE  BOOK    OF  LEVITICUS. 


225 


ILLUSTRATIVE  ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  XVIL 


Sacbtftces  unto  devils    v.  7). 

The  word  Seiri/n^  here  translated  "  devils," 
literally  moaus  hairy  or  shaggy  goats,  and 
then  goat- /ike  deities,  or  demons. 

The  Egyptians,  and  other  nations  of  an- 
tiquity, worshipped  goats  as  gods.  Not  only 
was  there  a  celebrated  temple  in  Thmuis, 
the  capital  of  the  Mendesian  Nomos  in  Lower 
Egypt,  dedicated  to  the  goat  image  Pan, 
whom  they  called  Mendes,  and  worshipped  as 
an  oracle  and  as  the  fertilising  principle  in 
nature,  but  they  erected  statues  to  him 
everywhere.  Hence  the  Pan  Silenus.  satyrs, 
fawns,  and  woodland  gods  found  among  the 
Greeks  and  Romans ;  and  hence,  too^  ihe  goat- 
like forms  of  the  devil,  with  a  tail,  horns, 
and  cloven  feet,  which  obtain  in  Medieval 
Christianity,  and  which  may  still  be  seen  in 
seme  European  cities. 


The  terror  in  whioh  the  devil,  appearing  in 
this  Pan-like  form,  created  in  those  who  were 
thought  to  have  seen  him,  has  given  rise  to 
our  expression /rt«/r. — Ellicoti's  Comment ajy. 


Life  in  the  blood. 

This  st.tement  (v.  14)  that  "  the  life  of  the 

flesh  is  in  the  blood  "  had  stood  in  the  Mosaic 

Sci  iptures  for  8,600  years  before  philosophers, 

scientists     and    anatomists    had    found    their 

way  to  this  physical  truism. 

That  the  blood  holds  the  vitality  of  the 
entire  bodily  structure  is  given  here  as  a  fact 
of  7'evelation ;  and  it  lay  in  the  Bible  for 
nearly  4,000  years  before  anatomists  dis- 
covered the  fact  by  their  research.  Now  it 
is  acknowledged  as  a  principle  confirmed  by 
elaborate  and  accurate  experiments. 


-•••- 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 


%xiitsimn%  Carriages:  Jamcstit  Jtin% 


SUGGESTIVE  READINGS. 


V.  2. — Speak  unto  them  and  say,  I  am  the  Lord  your  God.  Jehovah  is  the 
sole  lawgiver,  His  word  the  one  law  to  His  people  :  ungodly  customs  and 
usages  claim  no  heed  from  them  :  what  He  wills  is  absolute.  Relationship  to, 
and  fellovv>hip  with  God  are  based  upon  impliidt  obedience.  There  must  be 
cheerful  acceptance  of  His  authority  in  all  the  details  of  life.  Ethics  are  to  be 
decided  by  the  word  divine,  for  who  but  ''the  Lord"  should  erect  the  standard 
of  rectitude  for  man  % 

V.  3.— After  the  doings  of  the  land  of  Egypt.  The  Israelites  dwelt  amid  a 
people  of  corrupt  and  debasing  habits  for  so  long  a  period  that  it  was  with 
difficulty  they  purged  themselves  from  sympathy  with  familiar  evils.  They 
who  enter  upon  the  new  life  of  grace  in  Christ  Jesus  find  that  their  "  old  sins" 
follow  close  upon  their  steps  and  exert  seductive  influence.  To  "cast  out  the 
old  leaven"  is  a  necessity  still,  if  we  would  enjoy  the  favours  of  our  redeemed 
lot  and  our  new-covenant  relationships.  What  "Egypt"  approved  or  "Canaan" 
practised  may  no  longer  regulate  the  godly  life ;  but,  What  saith  the  Lord  ? 

V.  5.— He  shall  live  in  them.  Social  health  and  spiritual  blessedness  will 
always  attend  obedience  to  God's  just  and  benign  "statutes."  Violation  of  the 
laws  of  humanity,  the  laws  of  rectitude  and  purity,  bring  physical  decrepitude 
and  social  disaster. 

Here  note  that  these  words  form  the  basis  of  the  Old  Testament  doctrine  of 
salvation  by  works  Obedience  secures  life— sacred  and  eternal  life.  These  words 
are  quoted  by  the  prophet  Ezekiel  (xx.  11,  13,  21),  and  by  the  Apostle  Paul 


2-26  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap,  xviii.  1—3. 

(Rom  X.  5  ;  Gal.  iii  12.),  as  summarizing  the  teachings  of  Moses*  dispeasation — 
the  merits  of  works,  Justification  hy  obedience.  We,  in  gospel  times,  realise  life 
through  faith  ;  salvation  in  Christ's  merits,  and  not  in  our  own  Yet  the 
beneficent  law  stands  for  ever :  that  observance  of  G-  )d's  law  is  salutory  ;  for 
**life"  is  most  trulj  realised  now  by  those  whose  conduct  is  godly,  and  blessed 
rewards  are  assured  hereafter  to  those  who  do  those  things  which  please  the 
Lord. 

Vv.  6-18. — None  of  you  shall  approach  to  any  that  is  near  of  kin.  The 
prohibited  cases  of  intercourse  or  marriage  are  :  the  son's  own  mother,  and 
consequently,  by  inference,  the  daughter's  o^vn  father  (v.  7)  ;  a  stepmother,  and, 
by  inference,  a  stepfather  (v.  8) ;  a  full  sister  or  half-sister  (v.  9) ;  a  grand- 
daughter (v.  10)  ;  a  half-sister  (v,  11) ;  an  aunt  (v.  12) ;  an  aunt  by  marriage  (vv. 
13,  14);  a  daughter-in-law  (v  15);  a  brother's  wife  (v.  16);  a  stepdaughter, 
and  a  step-granddaughter  (v.  17);  polygamy  is  interdicted  (v.  18),  the  adding 
*'a  wife  to  her  sister,"  and  this  during  the  wife's  *'  lifetime."  The  inference  in 
each  case  carries  prohibition  also  to  the  corresponding  relationship:  as  eg.^ 
half-brother  (v.  9)  ;  uncle  (v.  12);  son-in-law  (v.  15),  and  so  on  throughout. 
Every  marriage  alliance  is  to  be  ruled  by  the  initiatory  definition  (v.  6),  ^'  Near 
of  kin";  and  the  instances  specified  show  this  near  kinship  to  include  cases  of 
consanguinity  and  also  equally  of  marriage  relationship.  Let  this  interpretation 
be  applied  to  the  question  of  the  *'  deceased  wife's  sister." 

The  important  law  running  through  all  these  regulations  is  :  Fidelity  in  wed- 
lock ;  scrupulous  honour  in  the  marriage  relationship ;  the  door  is  to  be  closed 
on  all  occasion  of  jealousy  or  illicit  love.  Home  bonds  are  to  be  cherished  as  all 
too  sacred  and  precious  for  passion  or  caprice  to  trifle  with.  God  will  have  family 
obligations  loyally  and  vigorously  maintained. 

Vv.  19-23  Crimes  against  Purity.  How  shamefully  vile  humanity  may  be- 
come !  What  a  gross  being  is  he  whom  God  pities  and  would  save ;  and  how  low 
has  he  fallen  whom  Christ  would  lift  up  to  sanctity  and  bliss  ! 

Vv.  24-30.  The  land  is  defiled.  The  well-being  of  a  land  depends  on  the 
morality  of  its  inhabitants.  National  decay  sets  in  when  the  people  become 
abandoned.  The  records  of  national  life,  from  ancient  times  till  now,  emphasise 
the  precept,  "  Righteousness  exalteth  a  nation,  but  sin  is  a  reproach  to  any 
people  "  (Prov.  xiv.  34). 

SECTIONAL  AND  TOPICAL  HOMILIES. 

Topic  :  Unaccommodating  Godliness  (Vv.  1-5). 

"  After  the  doings  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  wherein  ye  dwelt,  shall  ye  not  do  ;  and  after 
the  doings  of  the  land  of  Canaan,  whither  I  bring  you,  shall  ye  not  do,'^  etc. 

Danger  lurks  in  example  ;  customs  lure  us  from  strict  integrity  ;  easy  to  fall 
in  with  prevailing  habits,  sentiments,  ideas  With  "men  of  this  world"  who 
have  no  disposition  to  "  come  out  from  among  them,  be  separate,  and  touch  not 
the  unclean  thing,"  the  current  maxims  and  methods  are  accepted  without  chal- 
lenge,  they  stream  along  with  the  flow  of  social  life  ;  they  yield  themselves  un- 
resistingly to  the  popular  course. 

Herein  lies  the  distinction,  the  distinguishing  element  of  piety  ;  it  refuses  to 
allow  custom  to  dominate  either  conscience  or  conduct. 

1.  Worldly  seductions  everywhere  environ  the  godly  life. 

"  After  the  doings  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  after  the  doings  of  the  land  of 
Canaan.** 


CHAP,  xviii.  1—5.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  227 

1.  Ensnarementa  are  not  escaped  hy  change  of  place.  He  who  thinks  to  flee 
the  world  by  exchanging  *'  Egjpt "  for  "  Canaan,"  will  find  the  world  still  at  his 
heels.  To  quit  your  gentle  home  for  the  cloister  or  the  nunnery  ;  to  forsake  one 
sphere  of  business  for  another  in  hope  of  fleeing  the  sanctioned  malpractices  of 
trade  ;  to  attempt  to  be  "not  of  the  world"  by  any  process  of  mere  exclusion 
and  avoidance  of  places  and  people,  is  a  fallacy  ;  for  evd  is  everywhere,  in  some 
guise  or  disguise ;  and  from  the  snares  of  sin  and  the  sanctions  of  impiety  there 
is  no  hiding-place  in  ''this  present  evil  world." 

2.  Ensuarements  are  not  left  behind  with  the  advance  of  years  Forty  years 
were  spent  by  the  Israelites  in  the  desert,  between  "Egypt"  and  "Canaan"; 
yet  that  distance  of  time  would  not  liberate  them  from  the  seductions  of  world- 
liness.  What  they  left  behind  them  in  "  Egypt "  they  would  meet  again,  in 
alteied  forms,  in  "Canaan,"  when  at  length  they  reached  that  land.  No 
Christian  ever  advances  beyond  the  reach  of  evil  and  the  subtleties  of  the  world. 
What  he  had  to  fight  with  during  his  Egyptian  life  he  will  have  to  fight  with 
all  his  career  through.     Time  does  not  rid  the  godly  of  this  seductive  peril. 

3.  Ensuarements  are  not  absent  from  coveted  scenes  of  privilege,  *•  Canaan  " 
was  the  hope  and  desire  of  every  Israelite.  It  was  a  "  goodly  land,"  the  in- 
heritance of  faith,  the  goal  of  pilgrimage.  "  Egypt"  was  a  scene  of  bondage 
and  grief,  type  of  a  sinner  s  lot  ere  redeemed.  But  "  Canaan  "  was  suggestive  of 
liberty,  prosperity,  privilege^  symbol  of  the  Christian,  life  of  sacred  rest^  freedoMy 
and  joy  in  the  Lord.  Yet  even  withm  "  Canaan  "  the  snares  of  sin  would  be 
encountered;  no  release  from  danger,  a  stern  necessity  to  "  watch  and  pray,  lest 
ye  enter  into  temptation  "  ;  and  this  in  most  delightful  and  hallowed  hours, 
amid  spiritual  favours  and  privileges.  Even  the  happiest  Christian  life  is  en- 
compassed about  with  *'  the  sins  that  so  easily  beset  us."  [See  Addenda  to 
chapter  xviii.,  Custom.'\ 

li.  Sanctioned  impieties  must  be  everywheree  shunned  by  the  godly  life. 

The  Egyptians  were  the  most  civilised  and  majestic  people  of  the  age  ;  and 
their  "doings"  and  '^ordinances"  may  represent  the  usages  of  society  and 
culture :  the  customs  of  refinement  and  respectability.  The  Canaanites  were  a 
rude  and  unpolished  people,  easy  and  free  ;  and  their  "  doings  "  and  "  ordinances" 
answer  to  the  popular  maxims  and  habits,  the  pleasures  and  practices  current 
among  the  less  educated,  the  customs  of  the  masses. 

1.  Wherever  our  place,  whatever  our  station,  godliness  repudiates  and  renounces  sin. 
Yes :  and  every  form  of  sin  ;  personal  or  social ;  secret  or  open;  sanctioned  or 

unpopular.  The  man  of  God  loathes  impurity,  shuns  impiety.  Not  fashioning 
himself  to  the  standard  of  morals  around  him,  he  has  "  no  fellowship  with  the 
unfaithful  works  of  darkness,  but  rather  reproves  them." 

2.  An  accommodating  conscience,  and  an  obliging  disposition,  must  be  allowed 
no  sanction  in  commerce  with  the  world.  "  After  their  doings  ye  shall  not  do  !" 
"  Neither  shall  ye  walk  in  their  ordinances." 

And  to  my  mind,  tho'  I  am  a  native  here, 

And  to  the  manner  born,  it  is  a  custom 

More  honoured  in  the  breach  than  in  the  observance. — Hamlet. 

3.  Amid  prevailing  error  it  is  the  business  of  godliness  to  show  the  right  and 
good.  What  else  is  the  significance  of  our  Lord's  words:  "Ye  are  the  light  of 
the  world  "  ;  "  ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth  "  %  It  is  neither  convenient  or  advan- 
tageous to  assume  this  attitude  of  resistance  against  the  cherished  "ordinances" 
of  social,  literary,  or  professedly  religious  life.  But  the  Christian  is  among  men 
with  a  divine  business,  to  put  wrong  to  the  blush  ;  to  pronounce  by  his  virtues 
against  all  vice,  by  his  spirituality  against  all  earthliness  of  soul,  by  his  self- 
denials  against  all  low  indulgence,  by  his  lofty  worship  against  all  dead  formality 
or  careless  irreverence.     Religion  is  the  fearless  yet  beautiful  exhibition  of  the 

Piety,  whose  soul  sincere. 

Fears  God,  and  knows  no  other  fear. 


228  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [ciur.  xviii.  3. 


TIL   An  inflexible  divine  standard  everywhere  regulates  the  godly  life. 

1.  The  standard  of  divine  relationship.  "I  am  the  Lord  your  God"  (v.  2). 
Israel's  *'  doings"  were  to  take  tone  and  character  from  this  fact — their  God  was 
the  Lord ;  He  was  theirs,  and  they  His.  Living  under  the  influence  of  that 
solemn  relationship,  their  conduct  should  harmonise  with  His  perfections — 
"  holy  as  He  is  holy."  It  is  the  hourly  obligation  of  the  Christian,  to  **  walk 
uorthy  of  the  LordJ'  to  ''  walk  so  as  also  He  walked.^^ 

2.  The  standard  of  divine  teachings.  God  has  told  us  His  will ;  in  precept  and 
commandment  we  have  our  directory  of  conduct.  His  word  is  to  be  "  a  lamp  to 
our  feet  and  a  light  to  our  path."  None  can  err  throue:h  lack  of  instruction. 
**  Wherewithal  shall  a  young  man  cleanse  his  way  ?  By  taking  heed  thereto 
according  to  thy  word."  This  is  the  law  for  Israel  everywhere  :  **  Ye  shall  do  my 
judgments,  and  keep  mine  ordinances,  to  walk  therein"  (v.  4). 

3.  The  standard  of  divine  claims.  God's  ordinances  were  not  imperious  exac- 
tions ;  He  deserved  all  He  asked  of  Israel  in  return  for  His  grace  and  love  to 
them.  Already  they  were,  by  His  almighty  arm,  redeemed  from  *'  Egypt,"  and 
they  were  journeying  to  "  Canaan,  whither  I  bring  you."  They  owed  Him  loyal 
obedience,  loving  regard,  cheerful  acquiesence.  **  What  shall  I  render  unto  the 
Lord  for  all  His  benefits  towards  me  V  "  How  much  owest  thou  unto  my  Lord  T 
What  claim  on  your  life  comes  from  His  cross  1 

4.  The  standard  of  divine  promise.  *'  Keep  my  statutes,  which  if  a  man  do  he 
shall  live  in  them!'  (v.  5).  Present  gains  and  comforts,  eternal  life  and  bliss.  For 
*'  godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things,  having  the  promise  of  the  life  which 
now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come."      [See  Addenda  to  chap,  xviii.,  Religion.^ 


Topic:  Nonconformity  to  the  World. 

^^  After  the  doings  of  the  land  of  Egypt ^  wherein  ye  dwelt y  shall  ye  not  do**  (v.  3). 

Israel  now  under  the  drill  and  discipline  of  Jehovah.  The  pilgrimage  through 
the  wilderness  to  be  a  period  of  moral  probation.  Moral  precepts  now  associated 
with  positive  commands.     The  need  of  this  injunction  seen  from — 

I.  The  inherent  propensity  of  human  nature  to  worldliness.  Indul- 
gence of  animal  appetites,  exclusive  concern  for  present  enjoyment,  inclination 
to  conform  to  prevailing  customs,  worldliness  congenial,  and  therefore  easy  to 
our  fallen  nature  ;  these  things  show  the  need  for  the  call  to  nonconformity  to 
the  world. 

II.  The  exalted  mission  to  which  israbl  was  called.  The  nation  was 
selected  to  be  the  repository  of  divine  truth,  the  community  among  which 
Jehovah  would  specially  display  His  goodness  and  glory.  Israel  was  not  to  move 
with  the  evil  stream  of  tendency  making  for  unrighteousness,  but  to  become  sin- 
gular, come  out  from  the  ungodly,  and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing.  This,  the 
true  idea  of  a  Church — drawn  out,  separated  from  the  world.  Christ  taught  that 
those  who  escape  a  worse  than  Egyptian  bondage  are  to  be  known  by  the  non- 
conformity to  the  world,  separation  from  sin,  "  light  of  the  world,"  **salt  of  the 
earth,"    "  city  set  on  a  hill." 

To  become  thus  peculiar  and  distinguished  for  holiness  would  require,  on  the 
part  of  Israel — as  it  does  of  Christians — (a)  Deep  rooted  repugnance  to  sin  ;  (b) 
resolute  resistance  of  temptation  ;  (c)  prayer  for  divine  assistance  ;  (d)  heroic 
struggles  after  self-conquest.  To  achieve  victory  over  the  world  is  life,  to  sustain 
defeat  is  death.  While  in  the  world,  let  us  seek  not  to  he  of  it.  While  not 
praying  to  be  taken  out  of  the  world,  wo  should  pray  to  be  kept  fraoa  the  evit 


CHAP.  XVIII.  6,  21.]  raE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS.  229 


Topic :   The   Blessedness   op    Obedience. 

*^  If  a   man   dOy    he  shall   live   in   them  "    (v.    5). 

The  legislation  to  which  Israel  was  expected  to  submit  was  not  an  arbitrary 
and  despotic  code  of  laws  imposed  to  humble  them  and  force  them  into  subjection  ; 
but  a  government  of  righteousness  that  would  secure  the  glory  of  God  and,  at 
the  hSLme  time,  the  salvation  of  man.  Jehovah  entered  into  covenant  with  His 
people,  and  engaged  to  fulfil  all  His  gracious  promises,  if  ouly  the  conditions 
were  secured  upon  which  their  fulfilment  was  made  to  hinge.  The  way  of  life 
and  the  way  of  death  were  set  before  the  people  ;  they  were  exhorted  to  embrace 
the  former,  warned  to  escape  the  latter.  Punishment  was  annexed  to  disobedience, 
reward  to  doing  well.  Thus  the  world  was  taught  through  the  Mosaic  legisla- 
tion— 

I,  That  life  is  not  an  idle  dream.     Time  was  not  to  be  spent  in  self- 

grjitification,  or  wasted  in  wanton  wickedness.     Life,  though  brief,  and  like  a 

vapour,  to  be  turned  to  something  real,  spent  in  doing  the  will  of  God.     Life 

not  a  period  for  lounging  or  loitering,  but  for  service^  conflict,  progress.     It  is  the 

morning,  the  seed  time  of  eternity ;  let  us  improve  each  golden  opportunity,  and 

remember  whatsoever  we  sow  that  shall  we  reap. 

We  live  in  thoughts,  not  breath  ;  in  deeds,  not  years  ; 

In  feelings,  not  in  figures  on  the  dial : 

We  must  count  time  by  heart-throbs, 

He  most  lives,  who  thinks  most,  feels  the  noblest. 

Acts  the  best. 

II.  That  man  is  not  a  creature  op  circumstances.  Israel  was  not  to  be 
the  victim  of  the  environments  of  Egypt,  from  which  they  had  just  emerged; 
nor  of  the  influences  that  would  encircle  them  in  the  land  towards  which  they 
were  journeying.  They  were  not  to  drift  but  to  live — not  to  be  moulded  by 
circumstances,  but  conquer  them,  and  leave  the  stamp  of  their  piety  and  loyalty 
wherever  they  went.  They  had  the  faculty  of  reason,  the  prerogative  of  choice, 
were  responsible  for  the  use  they  made  of  the  privileges  they  enjoyed.  Though 
Jehovah  commanded.  He  did  not  coerce,  the  people  were  left  free  to  obey  or  rebel. 
With  life  attached  to  obedience,  surely  the  people  would  be  led  to  (a)  resist  every 
seduction  to  disobedience ;  (6)  avoid  every  place^  person,  and  thing  that  would  suggest 
sin  and  incite  to  wro'ag  doing ;  (c)  covet  above  everything  else  the  favour  of  the 
great  king^  who  declared  Himself,  "I  am  the  Lord  your  God."  Concerning  the 
commandments  of  the  gospel,  in  the  language  of  its  glorious  Author,  "  If  ye 
know  these  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them." — F»  W.  B. 


Topic  :  God's   Holy   Name. 
^  Neithei'  shalt  thou  profane  the  Name  of  thy  God*'  (v.  21), 

Peculiar  solemnity  attached  to  the  divine  name;  it  conveyed  to  the  minds  of 
the  Hebrews  ideas  of  the  infinite  greatness  and  glory  of  Jehovah's  nature.  It 
was  hedged  in  by  special  sanctity,  and  gave  infinite  importance  and  power  to 
everything  to  which  it  was  attached.  The  sacredness  of  the  name  of  the  Lord, 
and  the  command  to  keep  it  holy — 

I.  Showed  how  closely  he  identified  himself  with  his  people.  He  was 
one  with  them,  called  them  into  close  fellowship,  and  His  honour  was  bound  up 
with  their  character  and  conduct  If  Israel  fell  into  sin  and  shame,  Jehovah's 
name  was  profaned. 


230  BOM/LETIC  COMMENTARY  ON         [chap,  xviii  1-30. 

IT.  Showed  how  immaoulatkly  pure  jehovah  is.  His  name  was  emphatically 
holy  and  distinguished  from  all  other  names  known  in  earth  and  heaven.  The 
nature  of  Jehovah  so  transparently  pure  that  every  kind  of  evil,  however  trivial 
in  appearance,  was  to  be  scrupulously  avoided  for  His  sake. 

III.  Showed  how  heinous  all  sin  is.  Sin  is  odious  and  repulsive  when  we 
remember  {a)  Its  brutish  and  -fiendish  influences  ;  (b)  how  it  defiles  the  perpetra- 
tor^ and  contaminates  society  ;  (c)  how  it  brings  punishment  here  ajid  torment  here- 
after.  But  sin  appears  most  abominable  in  its  nature  and  awful  in  its  conse- 
quences when  regarded  as  an  insult  to  the  Alm^ighty,  a  profanation  of  His  holy 
name.  Let  us  hate  and  forsake  sin  because  God  hates  it ;  let  us  view  it  in  the 
light  of  Gethsemane  and  Calvary.  The  love  of  Christ  will  not  only  conquer  our 
selfishness,  and  constrain  us  to  holy  consecration,  but  make  us  hate  and  forsake 
every  form  of  iniquity  in  thought,  word,  and  deed.  Life  will  not  be  the  dragging 
out  of  a  miserable  existence,  but  a  triumphant  march  to  the  heavenly  Canaan, 
if  we  seek  to  become  cleansed  from  all  unrighteousness,  and  to  "  perfect  holiness 
in  the  fear  of  the  Lord."— i^.  W.  B, 


Topic :  Conjugal  Chastity;  or.  Holiness  in  the  Home  (Vv.  1-30). 

In  this  chapter  moral  precepts  are  associated  with  ceremonial  observances. 
The  home  life  of  Israel  was  to  be  kept  pure,  sexual  intercourse  to  be  righteously 
restricted.  The  people  among  whom  Jehovah  would  dwell  must  be  clean  in 
their  domestic  habits,  pure  in  their  social  relationship.  The  natives  of  Canaan 
became  so  addicted  to  the  vices  here  interdicted  that  by  a  retributive  provi- 
dence they  became  exterminated.  These  statutes,  being  moral,  are  of  perpetual 
obligation  ;  were  not  destroyed,  but  fulfilled  in  the  ethical  teaching  of  Christ  and 
His  Apostles.  The  fire  of  divine  anger  against  impurity  burns  with  greater 
intensity  in  the  New  Testament  than  in  the  Old.     Observe — 

I.  That  the  social  affections  op  human  nature  are  prone  to  become 
wicked  and  wild. 

Man  was  made  at  first  with  social  instinct  and  affections;  therefore,  it  is  **  not 
good  for  him  to  be  alone."  In  the  one  help-meet  made  for  him  would  be  found 
congenial  society,  conjugal  bliss.  In  the  first  family  marriage  relationships 
were  entered  upon  among  its  own  members,  but  as  the  race  multiplied  it 
was  to  the  general  advantage  of  families  to  marry  out  of  their  own  circles, 
that  the  purity  and  unity  of  the  race  might  be  preserved.  Bounds  within 
which  the  affections  might  be  indulged  were  divinely  revealed,  and  the  dis- 
pleasure of  the  Almighty  unmistakably  announced  asj;ainst  every  infringement  or 
perversion.  The  natural  propensity  to  inordinate  affection  is  confirmed  (a)  By 
history.  Nations  and  individuls,  mentioned  in  sacred  and  profane  history, 
present  sad  proofs  of  the  excesses  into  which  social  love  will  run  when  the  reins 
are  thrown  upon  the  neck  of  lust.  (6)  By  observation.  In  our  own  land  and 
age,  amid  abounding  religious  advantages,  and  restraining  influences  of  civilisa- 
tion, what  vice,  immorality,  conjugal  unfaithfulness,  and  domestic  impurity, 
abound  !  Deeds  of  infamy  are  done  that  the  powers  of  darkness  may  blush  to 
look  upon,  which  the  stern  hand  of  the  law  and  the  sweet  influence  of  the 
gospel  are  aiming  to  prevent  and  remove,  (c)  By  experience,  "  When  we  would 
do  good  evil  is  present  with  us,"  and  the  most  invincible  enemy  we  have  to 
contend  with  in  our  hearts  is  the  Goliath  of  lust.  Our  animal  passions  are  our 
"  body  of  death,*'  that  often  wrings  from  us  the  doleful  exclamation,  **  0  wretched 
man  that  I  am."  Pure  Platonic  love  is  a  splendid  but  Utopian  idea.  The  best 
of  men  have  found  it  necessary  to  watch  carefully  the  issues  of  life,  to  keep  the 
body  under  subjection,  lest  passions  intended  to  play  honourably  become  prolific 
sources  of  corruption  and  misery. 


CHAP.  XVIII    1—30.] 


THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS. 


231 


II.  That  God  has  therkfore  promulgated  suitabl's  laws  to  restrict  the 

SOCIAL  AFFKCTIONS  OF  HUMAN  NATURE. 

The  springs  of  national  purity  are  ia  the  homes  of  the  people  ;  when  the  home 
life  is  corrupt  the  knell  of  a  nation's  greatness  is  tolled  by  the  hand  of  doom. 
Expediency^  conscience^  and  self-love  might,  in  some  instances,  suggest  restric- 
tions in  the  indulgence  of  sensuous  affection  ;  but  nothing  short  of  such 
regulations  as  those  here  enjoined  could  effect  the  desirable  end.  And  these 
regulations  were  enforced  with  great  authority — on  the  ground  of  Jehovah's 
sovereitrnty  and  holiness,  **  I  am  the  Lord  your  God."  From  such  an  authority 
there  could  be  no  appeal,  for  it  respect  and  obedience  would  be  demanded. 
Thus,  all  incest  and  unchastity  were  {a)  detestable  to  Jehovah  ;  (6)  an  outrage 
upon  human  nature ;  (c)  incompatible  with  mans  physical^  mental^  and  moral  well- 
being  ;  (d)  in  antagonism  to  the  laws  and  forces  of  the  universe  These  statutes 
exhibit  the  wisdom  'dud  goodness  of  our  great  Creator ;  that  as  a  holy  and  righteous 
Father  He  cures  for  the  best  interests  of  His  children  by  wedding  holiness  and 
happiness  in  indissoluble  union.  Having  made  man.  He  knew  what  was  in  him, 
what  was  best  for  him  ;  being  his  natural  and  moral  governor  He  could  justly 
impose  what  prohibitions  He  saw  fit. 

III.  That  tho«e  laws    demand  implicit  obedience   prom   all  who   know 

THEM 

Whether  positive  or  moral,  divine  precepts  ought  to  be  obeyed,  for  (a)  they 
are  all  sovereign.  Emanate  from  the  King  of  kings,  from  the  Source  of  all 
authority  and  power-  God  has  absolute  right  to  command  at  restrain.  (6) 
They  are  all  humane.  Everything  interdicted  would  be  good  for  man  to  shun, 
for  vice  is  cruel^  degrading  d^nd  filthy,  (c)  They  are  all  salutary.  The  Individual, 
the  Family^  the  Church,  the  State.,  all  made  healthy,  pure  and  strong  by 
avoidance  of  every  species  of  immorality,  by  the  practice  of  moral  virtues.  (1) 
To  keep  these  divine  commandments  was  life.  They  tended  to  prolong  his  life, 
make  it  worth  living,  secure  the  favour  of  the  Almighty,  which  is  better  than 
life.  (2)  To  break  them  was  death.  Those  who  indulged  in  corrupt  heathenish 
habits  would  be  cut  off  from  among  the  people.  Immorality  debases,  deteriorates, 
and  entails  death.  Let  but  the  divine  laws  regarding  purity  be  rigidly  observed, 
the  social  fabric  of  a  nation  will  rest  upon  a  rock  ;  neglected,  it  will  sink  into 
the  mire  of  corruption,  into  the  pit  of  oblivion.  To  go  on  in  sin  that  grace  may 
abound  is  a  foul  heresy,  injurious  to  man,  detestable  to  God.  The  gospel  gathers 
up  the  teachings  of  the  law  and  the  prophets,  and  shows  that  **to  obey  is  better 
than  sacrifice,  and  to  hearken  than  the  fat  of  rams." — F.  W.  B. 


ILLUSTRATIVE   ADDENDA   TO   CHAPTER   XVIII. 


Custom  : 
*'  Man  yields  to  custom,  as  he  bows  to  fate, 
In  all  things  ruled — mind,  body,  and  estate." 

—  Crabbe. 

"  Custom  calls  me  to't : — 
What  custom  wills,  in  all  things  should  we  do 
it?" — Coriolanus,  II.  3. 

"  New  customs 
Tho'  they  be  never  so  ridiculous, 
Nay,  let  them  be  unmanly,  yet  are  followed." 

—Henry  F///.,  I.  3. 

Religion: 

'•  The  body  of  all  true  religion  consists,  to 
be  true,  in  obedience  lo  the  will  of  the  Sovereign 


of  the  world,  in  a  confidence  in  His  declarations. 
and  in  imitation  of  His  perfections  " — Burke. 

"  Piety,  like  wisdom,  consists  in  the  dis- 
covery of  the  rules  under  which  we  are  actu- 
ally placed,  and  in  faithfully  obeying  them." 
— JFroddb. 

"  Life  and  Religion  are  one,  or  neither  is 
anything.  I  will  not  say  neither  is  going  to  be 
anything.  ReliKion  is  no  way  of  life,  no  show 
of  life,  no  observances  of  any  sort.  It  is 
neither  the  food  nor  medicine  of  being.  It  is 
life  essential."— Geo.  Macdonald. 

"A  religious  life  is  a  struggle  and  not  a 
hymn." — Madame  db  Stabl. 


232  HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY   ON  [c:iap.  xix.  2. 

CHAPTER   XIX. 

Iractttal  Jpi^tg  :  |leIt0t0iT  in:  all  |ltlalt0tts^tpi5* 

SUGGESTIVE    READINGS. 

V.  2. — Speak  unto  all  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  Israel,  and  say : 
Nowhere  else  in  the  whole  of  Leviticus  does  this  direction  to  address  ^'  all  the 
congregation  "  occur  ;  a  fact  which  indicates  the  importance  of  this  section  of  the 
decalogue.  And  in  the  precepts  of  this  chapter,  traversing  the  entire  range  of 
personal,  social,  and  religious  life,  we  have  the  law  summarized — *'  the  whole 
duty  of  man"  in  epitome. 

Reverence  for  parents  (v.  3)  ;  sabbath  observance  (v.  3) ;  repudiation  of  idolatry 
(v.  4)  ;  the  conditions  of  acceptable  sacrifice  (vv.  5  8)  ;  regard  for  the  poor  in 
harvest  gleanings  (vv,  9,  10);  honesty  in  act  and  speech  (v.  11);  fidelity  to 
oaths  (v.  12)  ;  commercial  integrity  (v.  13);  consideration  for  sufferers,  the  deaf 
and  blind  (v.  14)  ;  impartiality  in  justice  (v.  15) ;  avoidance  of  slander  (v.  16)  ; 
care  for  one's  neighbour  (v.  16);  gentleness  jei  faithfulness  to  oihQY^^fskXjM^  {w.  17)  ; 
malice  tohQ  shunned  (v.  18);  hybrid  products  forbidden  (v.  19);  the  crime  of 
seduction  (vv.  20-22)  ;  regulations  concerning  fruit  growths  (vv.  22-25) ;  blood  to 
be  put  aside  as  food  (v.  26) ;  and  sorceries  and  superstitious  practices  avoided  (v.  26 ) ; 
prohibition  of  heathenish  manners  and  rites  of  mourning  (vv.  27,  28)  ;  trafic  in 
vice  condemned  (v.  29) ;  regard  for  the  sabbath  and  sanctuary  (v.  30) ;  necromancy 
denounced  (v.  31);  respect  for  the  aged  commanded  (v.  32);  courtesy  to 
strangers  (vv.  33,  34)  ;  honesty,  in  trade  (vv.  35,  36)  :  and  all  based  on  the  grand 
reqiurement  that  the  "  statutes  and  judgments  "  of  "  the  Lord  "  were  to  be  the 
rule  of  their  conduct  in  all  relationships  and  all  transactions. 

The  righteousness  which  God  delights  in  pervades  our  whole  life,  purifies  all 
habits,  ennobles  all  actions,  stamps  character  with  rectitude  and  conduct  with 
integrity.  Religion  is  for  daily  life  ;  not  for  sacred  scenes  and  solemn  hours,  but 
for  every  place,  every  moment ;  sanctifying  the  full  manhood,  elevating  all 
action,  dignifying  all  aims.  There  is  not  a  plan  or  project,  not  a  fault  or  foible, 
not  a  vice  or  misdemeanour,  not  a  social  or  sacred  duty,  but  the  thought  of  God 
is  upon  it,  and  He  has  a  word  in  condemnation  or  sanction  respecting  it.  He 
"  with  whom  we  have  to  do "  overlooks  nothing  in  our  behaviour,  "  neither  is 
there  any  creature  that  is  not  manifest  in  His  sight,  but  all  things  are  open  and 
naked  to  the  eyes  of  Him"  (Heb.  iv.  13). 

How  scrupulously  should  we,  therefore,  speak  and  act ;  not  in  reluctant  sub- 
mission but  in  cheerful  obedience ;  His  "  laws  within  our  heart "  ;  His  *'  statutes 
our  song  "  ;  delighting  to  do  His  will.  For  He  who  requires  such  minute  dutiful- 
ness  shows  concern  that  none  should  suffer  at  our  hands,  and  therefore  that  we 
should  suffer  nought  from  others.  Divine  benevolence  regulates  these  require- 
ments, and  all  are  detailed  indications  of  His  fatherly  eagerness  for  His  children's 
comfort.  Only  in  right  doing  is  there  happiness,  whether  in  the  family,  in 
society,  or  in  the  church,  hence  God  requires  the  right  to  be  maintained  in  all 
relationships  j  and  when  His  "  will  is  done  on  earth"  earth  will  be  a  reflection  of 
heaven. 

HOMILIES   ON   CHAPTER  XIX. 

Topic:  The  Religion  op  Morality. 

I  Piety  is  not  to  be  all  ecstatic.  Tabor  heights,  Beulah  rhapsodies,  third- 
heaven  visions — these  are  not  the  whole  of  religion,  nor  indeed  the  standard  of  a 


CHAP,  xrx.]  rilE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS.  2.*^^ 

sncred  life.  There  is  the  piety  of  daily  work,  of  common  things.  Kasier  to  be 
religions  when  we  are  on  the  wing  soaring,  than  when  we  are  on  owv  feet  struggling. 

ii.  Piety  may  not  become  eclectic.  There  are  divine  precepts  and  laws  congenial 
to  us,  others  the  reverse.  Yet  we  may  not  select.  Directions  concerning  the 
*'  Sabbath  and  sanctuary "  are  easier  and  more  pleasant  to  heed  than  those 
against  tale-bearing,  fraud  in  business,  gleaning  on  the  fields,  etc.  But  "  these 
ought  ye  to  have  done,  and  not  to  have  left  the  others  undone." 

iii.  Piety  should  not  be  wd^xvoviXy  egotistic.  God's  laws  and  directions  call  us  out 
of  ourselves,  give  no  room  for  selfishness,  self-assertion,  individualism.  Think 
of  others  first^  care  for  the  "poor"  (v.  9),  your  "neighbours"  (vv  1-^,  17),  bear- 
ing no  malice  (v.  18),  etc.  Let  self  give  place;  "look  not  every  man  on  his 
own  things,  but  every  man  also  on  the  things  of  others  "  (Phil.  ii.  4). 

iv.  Piety  must  never  become  elastic.  There  is  a  peril  of  the  godly  man  relax- 
ing and  relapsing  from  strict  and  severe  rectitude  ;  stretching  his  convictions, 
and  accommodating  himself  to  prevailing  tastes  or  personal  fancies.  Here  is 
rigid  law  ;  to  that  he  must  bring  all  conduct ;  by  this  standard  all  his  behaviour 
must  be  ruled.  Avoid  an  easily  adjusting  religion,  straining  and  shaping  itself 
to  the  conveniences  of  the  hour,  and  the  inducements  of  temptation,  and  the 
impulses  of  the  carnal  heart. 

I.  Religion  requires  the  moralities  op  family  life. 

God  asks  that  there  be  "first  piety  at  home."  [See  Addenda  to  chapter, 
Morality.^ 

1.  Family  dutifidness  among  children.  "Ye  shall  fear  every  man  his  mother 
and  his  father"  (v.  3).  This  is  the  "  first  commandment  with  promise  "  (Ephes. 
vi.  2).  The  word  "fear"  enjoins  respect,  felt  and  shown;  generous  succour  and 
attention  to  their  comfort ;  obedience  to  their  rule  and  desires. 

2.  Purity  in  conjugal  relationships.  Between  husband  and  wife  there  should  be 
strictest  fidelity.  Any  departure  from  morality  is  severely  denounced  as  the 
violation  of  the  sanctities  of  family  bonds  (vv.  20  22).  "  No  man  should  go  be- 
yond or  defraud  his  brother"  in  this  matter  (1  Thess.  iv.  4-6)  And  equally, 
with  sternest  reprobation,  God  marks  the  traffic  in  vice  (v.  29).  There  have  been 
parents  sufficiently  "  earthly,  sensual,  devilish,"  to  be  capable  of  this  foul  crime 
against  a  child.     Jehovah  would  have  the  home  clean  and  loving  and  hallowed. 

3.  Homage  for  the  aged  (v.  32).  Venerating  the  "  hoary  head,"  and  caring  for 
the  "  old  man  "  gently  in  his  drooping  years,  and  paying  him  the  courtesies  and 
attentions  due  to  one  who  has  lived  a  lengthened  life  and  is  nearing  eternity. 

II.  Religion  requires  the  moralities  op  neighbourly  relationship. 

In  the  narrowest  circle  of  oiir  neighbours.^  near  residents,  there  should  be  the 
cultivation  of  rectitude  and  goodwill.  The  yet  larger  range  of  neighbourliness  is 
taught  us  in  our  Lord's  parable  of  the  Good  Samaritan — care  for  anyone  in  need. 

1.  Every  device  of  deceitfulness  is  to  be  abhorred  (vv.  11,  12).  No  advantage 
to  be  taken,  no  trickery  practised,  no  falsity  condoned. 

2.  All  oppression  and  injustice  is  to  be  shunned  (v.  13).  Straightforwardness 
in  dealings,  considerateness  in  payment  of  his  dues. 

3.  Slander  and  whispering  are  denounced  (v.  16).  How  disastrous  this  per- 
nicious habit  has  proved  !  (see  1  Sam,  xxii.  9,  18  ;  Ezk  xxii.  9,  etc.).  Yes  : 
and  as  harm  may  come  to  a  neighbour  from  doing  nothing  equally  as  from  our 
slandering  him,  God  denounces  our  "  standing,"  i.e.,  standing  still,  when 
inactivity  might  let  a  neighbour's  blood  be  shed,  either  in  accident  from  which  we 
could  rescue  him,  or  from  the  stroke  of  justice  when  we  could  prove  him  innocent. 

4.  Generous  concern  for  a  neighbour  is  inculcated.  "  Hate  "  to  be  closed  from 
thine  "  heart ";  then  venturing  to  "  rebuke  "  him  if  he  be  going  into  "  sin  '* 
(v.  17);  yet  never  allowing  malice  to  urge  thee  to  ^*  avenge  or  bear  grudge**; 
but  to  "  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself"  (v.  18).  In  %h\^  Is^at  precept  is  summed 
up  all  the  mora]  aspects,  the  human  side  of  religion., 


234  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap,  xix- 

III.  Religion  rp-qufres  the  moralities  of  oivio  benevolence. 

A  mail  of  (iod  is  not  les^^  a  member  of  society,  of  tbe  state,  or  of  the  nation 
because  he  is  religious.     He  has  duties  towards  his  fellow -citizens  as  such. 

1.  The  prosperous  are  to  care  for  the  '"'•poory  When  the  harvest  is  being 
reaped  (v.  9)  there  is  to  be  a  generous  dropping  of  ears  for  the  poor  :  and  so 
with  the  vine  gathering  (v.  10). 

2.  The  healthy  are  to  he  pitiful  to  the  afflicted.  Instead  of  despising  and 
maltreating  "the  deaf"  and  "  the  blind  "  (v.  14),  all  the  instincts  of  phiUnthropy 
— which  is  piety  humanized — prompt  *'  the  strong  to  bear  the  infirmities  of  the 
weak." 

3.  Hospitality  for  the  stranger  (vv.  33,  34).  A  willing  asylum  should  be 
offered  to  any  fugitive  or  sojourner  :  there  might  be  no  national  exclusiveness  or 
selfishness  :  the  generous  hand  should  be  outstretched  to  any  one  who  would  find  a 
home  amid  the  people  of  God. 

IV.  Religion  requires  the  moralities  op  honest  transactions. 

1.  Impartiality  in  the  administration  of  justice  (v.  15)  If  the  high  courts  of 
judgment  should  be  demoralized  by  no  cupidity,  certainly  oar  personal  conduct 
should  be  swayed  by  no  servility.  The  "  poor''  and  the  "  mighty  "  should  have 
equal  justice  at  our  hands  :  not  one  law  for  the  rich  and  another  for  the  poor. 

2.  Fairness  in  the  transactions  of  trade  (vv.  35,  36).  Honesty  in  commerce  ; 
in  forming  estimate  of  articles  of  purchase  ("in  judgment''),  not  saying  *'  It  is 
nought,  it  is  nought,"  etc.  (Prov.  xx.  14) ;  as  well  as  in  serving  and  selling  these 
articles. 

V.  Religion  requires  all  m'oralities  to  be  joined  with  the  elevated 
sanctities  of  worship. 

Just  as  that  religion  is  wrong  which  c<)nsists  in  serving  God  to  the  neglect  of 
man ;  so  is  that  as  surely  wrong  which  fulfils  duties  to  man  but  neglects  God^s 
claims.  Week-d»y  righteousness  needs  to  be  crowned  by  sacred  solemnities  on 
the  sabbath  and  in  the  sanctuary. 

1.  Family  life  should  be  hallowed  with  Sabbath  sanctities.  *'  Keep  my 
Sabbaths  "  (v.  3)  ;  for  that  is  the  day  of  da^s  in  which  to  instruct  the  house- 
hold in  sacred  duties.  When  God  is  revered  in  the  home  family  reverence  will 
not  wane. 

2.  Delusive  idolatries  will  be  escaped  by  homage  for  Jehovah  on  His  day. 
Keeping  His  Sabbaths  will  correct  the  penis  of  "  turning  unto  idols  "  (connect  v. 
3  thus  with  V.  4). 

3.  Worship  of  the  Lord  should  be  with  sacrificial  offerings  (v.  5-8) ;  for  man  is 
a  sinner,  and  must  come  with  propitiation  to  God's  altar. 

4.  God\  sanctuary  should  be  held  in  reverence  (v.  30)  ;  "  not  forsaking  the 
assembling  of  your>elves  together"  (Heb.  x.  25);  but  coming  with  solemn 
thought  and  prayer. 

5.  All  superstition  to  be  sedulously  shunned.  Heathenish  delusions  (v.  26-28), 
and  "familiar  spirits"  (v.  31).  God  should  fill  the  spiritual  life  of  man;  and 
Him  only  should  we  serve. 


Topic:  The  Genius  op  the  Mosaic  Laws. 


"  And  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moaes,  saying,"  etc.  How  repeatedly  these  words 
occur  previous  to  enunciation  of  statutes  to  Israel,  to  indicate  that  Moses  was 
only  the  amanuensis,  or  mouthpiece  of  Jehovah,  and  that  the  statutes  demanded 
devout  attention  and  implicit  obedience  The  repetition  of  sundry  laws  re- 
corded in  this  chapter  furoishes  a  fair  specimen  of  the  whole  economy,  embraces 


CHAP  XTX]  THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS.  235 


principles  aid  doctrines  exhibited  in  the  realms  oi Nature ,  Providence^  and  Grace, 
Looked  at  as  a  whole,  they  sugi^est  the  followiDg  trains  of  thought  : — 

I.  Thkir  striking  ANALoav  WITH  THE  CONSTITUTION  OP  NATURE  This  accords 
with  what  might  have  been  expected  d,  priori,  viz.,  that  God  would  govern  men 
by  similar  laws  to  those  by  which  He  governs  the  world,  that  between  physical 
and  spiritual  laws  there  would  be  close  correspondence.  The  laws  here  promul- 
gated were  : 

(a)  Unsystematic  in  their  arrangement.  Like  the  glorious  difiFuseness  in  nature, 
where  the  geologist  and  botanist  can  make  their  scientific  arrangements  from 
world-wide  materials,  scattered  here  and  there  in  great  profusion  ;  so,  in  the 
Mosaic  economy,  running  through  Leviticus — and  through  the  whole  Bible — are 
sundry  precepts  unformulated,  unscientifically  arranged,  leaving  scope  for  the 
sanctified  soul  of  man  to  arrange  in  a  course  of  systematic  theology. 

(6)  Disciplinary  in  their  character.  Nature's  laws  teach  man  that  he  is  a 
probationer ;  that  if  he  obeys,  safety  and  happiness  will  ensue  ;  if  he  disobeys, 
danger  and  death  will  await  him.  The  Mosaic  laws  taught  that  whatsoever  a  man 
sows  that  shall  he  reap,  that  retribution  follows  closely  on  the  heels  of  the 
wrong-doer.  Thus,  the  law  was  a  schoolmaster,  teaching  self-restraint,  and 
enforcing  lessons  upon  human  conduct  that  have  been  the  basis  of  all  good 
government  in  the  world,  the  germs  of  all  pure  morality  among  men. 

(c)  Merciful  in  their  tendency.  The  law  put  no  embargo  upon  anything  that 
would  minister  to  the  real  welfare  of  the  human  race,  only  pernicious  habits 
were  condemned.  The  weak^  the  poor,  the  aged,  parents  aud  strangers,  all  were 
to  be  treated  with  kindness  ;  sympathy  and  aid  were  to  be  extended  to  them. 
Even  towards  the  brute  creation  care  and  kindness  were  to  be  exercised,  nothing 
was  to  be  wantonly  or  unmercifully  treated.  Nature's  laws  exhibit  kindness 
and  mercy  in  their  operations  ;  even  in  their  sternest  moods  they  work  for  good, 
and  in  the  end  produce  happiness. 

{d)  Mysterious  in  their  operations.  Man^'  of  nature's  laws  perplex  and  puzzle 
the  greatest  minds,  seem  inconsistent  with  the  perfect  wisdom  and  goodness  of 
the  Infinite  Author  of  the  universe.  And  in  the  Levitical  code  many  of  the 
sacrificial  rites  and  ceremonial  observances  seem  strange  and  ambiguous.  These 
facts  teach  us  (i. )  how  comprehensive  God's  laws  are ;  (ii  )  how  limited,  our  know- 
ledge is;  (iii.)  how  incumbent  faith,  humility,  and  resignation  are  upon  all  who 
would  know  the  will  of  the  Lord  aiid  do  it. 

If.  Their  be3veficent  influence  upon  the  national  life  op  Israel.  The 
people  were  in  great  danger  of  becoming  corrupt,  from  their  recollections  of  their 
surroundings  in  Egypt,  from  their  inherent  tendency  to  depart  from  the  living 
God  ;  the  sj'stem  of  sacrifices  instituted  among  them,  the  ceremonial  laws  to 
which  they  were  expected  rigidly  to  submit,  would  keep  them  distinct  from  the 
surrounding  nations,  lift  them  to  a  high  standard  of  national  greatness.  The 
prohibition  o^  sM  false  swearing,  fraud,  deception,  tale-hearing,  selfishness,  revenge, 
and  every  kind  of  private  and  public  immorality,  would  conduce  to  the  safety 
and  stability  of  the  Hebrew  Commonwealth.  The  Levitical  laws,  while  they 
taught  the  people  that  they  were  one  as  a  nation,  also  enjoined  upon  each 
individual  responsibility.  The  whole  nation  was  one  great  family,  mutually 
related  to  each  other,  all  amenable  to  Jehovah,  their  Father  and  King.  The 
religion  of  the  Bible  exalts  the  life  of  any  nation  that  follows  its  precepts.  Those 
— where  the  Holy  Scriptures  are  regarded  as  the  foundation  of  national  greatness 
— will  be  found  in  the  van  of  the  civilisation  of  the  world. 

in.  Their  special  adaptation  to  elevate  the  whole  nature  op  man.  The 
laws  respecting  uncleanness,  restraining  the  animal  passions  and  appetites, 
securing  rest  one  day  in  seven,  would  conduce  to  man's  physical  well  being. 
Powers  of  the  mind  would  be  awakened  and  expanded  by  efforts  required  to 
apprehend  and  obey  the  elaborate  ritual  of  the  tabernacle.     The  moral  powers 


236 


nOMILETlC   COMMENTARY  ON 


[CHAP    XIX    2,  3 


would  be  cultivated  by  everything  having  reference  to  purity  of  heart,  and  the 
spotless  supremacy  of  Jehovah.  Thus  Israel  were  shown  that  God  took  special 
interest  in  them,  that  they  were  not  like  the  brutes  which  perish,  but  servants  of 
the  Lord,  children  of  the  great  King,  being  educated  for  higher  future  employ- 
ment. They  hai  access  to  the  house  of  the  Lord ;  listened  to  the  Word  of  the 
Lord ;  were  led  by  chosen  servants  of  the  Lord.  These  facts  would  lead  them  to 
look  onward  and  upward,  present  to  them  the  way  to  pardon  and  peace,  to 
fellowship  with  God  and  meetness  for  Heaven. 

IV.  Their  elementary  poreshadowings  op  the  teachings  of  the  gospel. 
(a)  In  the  supremacy  of  their  claims.  Everything  was  to  be  subordinated  to  the 
demands  of  Jehovah  ;  so,  Christ  said,  "  seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,"  etc. 
(6)  In  the  object  of  their  observances.  Holiness  was  the  end  of  everything  in 
the  law ;  so,  the  gospel — in  the  precepts  of  Christ  and  His  apostles — demands 
purity  of  heart,  sets  holiness  as  the  mark  of  our  high  calling,  to  which  is  attached 
the  prize  of  heaven,  (c)  In  the  substitutionary  chara/^ter  of  their  sacrifices.  The 
Hebrews  were  taught  to  consider  their  guilt  transferred  to  the  victim  offered  for 
them ;  through  it,  in  some  way,  they  were  forgiven,  accepted  of  the  Lord  ;  so, 
in  the  gospel,  through  the  one  great  sin  offering  guilt  is  removed,  the  favour  of 
God  secured,  heaven  opened.  The  services  of  the  tabernacle,  the  statutes  of 
the  Levitical  law,  were  calculated  to  suggest  the  priceless  value  of  the  human 
soul,  the  existence  for  it  of  a  life  beyond,  of  which  the  present  is  introductory 
and  preparatory.  In  the  gospel  all  these  foreshadowings  are  presented  as  substan- 
tial rc'dities,  just  as  indefinite  twilight  merges  into  revealing  distinguishing  day. 
—F.  W.  B. 


OUTLINES   ON   VERSES  OF   CHAPTER  XIX 


V.  2. —  Theme:  Personal  holiness, 

**  Ye  shall  be  holy,  for  I,  the  Lord  your  God, 
am  holy.'''' 

'I  he  glorious  end  for  which  the  law  was 
given,  every  ceremonial  precept  enforced, 
■was  that  the  people  should  become  holj^. 
The  holy  nature,  name.,  will  and  purpose  of 
Jehovah  demanded  that  those  who  would  be 
constantly  drawing  near  to  Him  in  the  taber- 
nacle services  should  come  out  from  the 
heathen  world,  forsake  their  sinful  customs, 
and  become  conformed  to  His  commandments, 
which  were — 

I.  Worthy  of  jehovah.  Not  one  can  be 
characterised  as  mean  or  unmerciful ;  some 
of  them  may  see^n  beyond,  but  not  one  against, 
reason.  The  unreaped  corners  of  the  field, 
the  gleanings  of  the  harvest,  the  grapes  left 
upon  the  vine  foi  the  poor  and  the  stranger 
in  the  land,  would  speak  of  the  considerate- 
ness  of  Jehovah  for  the  physical  wants  of  the 
people  ;  and  the  injunctions  against  fraud, 
against  hating  in  the  heart,  against  impurity 
in  social  life  ;  the  command,  "  thou  shalt  love 
thy  neighbour  as  thyself";  all  these  injunc- 
tions pointed  to  the  heart  as  the  seat  of  all 
holiness,  and  demanded  that  the  motives  by 
which  the  Hebrews  would  be  actuated  should 
be  pure  Such  a  code  of  laws,  with  such 
humane  and  holy  ends,  reflected  glory  upon 
the  supreme  Lawgiver,  proving  that  He  is 
holy,  that  His  nature  is  on  the  side  of  right- 
eousness. 


II.  Beneficial  to  Israel.  Everything 
was  to  be  avoided  that  would  work  detona- 
tion in  the  physical  constitution,  for  vice 
and  impurity  produce  feebleness  and  decay. 
Want  of  reverence  for  parents  and  the  aged  ; 
lack  of  sympathy  for  the  suffering  and  in- 
firm, bring  ruin  into  the  domestic  and  social 
circle.  Greed,  dishonesty,  unrighteousness, 
work  disintegration  and  disaster  in  the  com- 
mercial world.  The  holy  laws  of  God  were 
a  barrier  against  all  these  terrible  evils  by 
demanding  personal  holiness  in  everyone  who 
heard  these  injunctions. 

The  disposition  of  the  heart  and  mind  was 
to  be  brought  into  conformity  with  the  will  of 
Jehovah,  *' ye  shall  offer  at  your  own  will." 
The  people  were  not  slaves,  to  do  reluctantly 
the  will  of  God,  or  perform  services  and  offer 
sacrifices  in  a  mechanical  manner ;  they  were 
the  Lord's  free  men,  and  from  wills  in  har 
mony  with  Him  were  to  obey  His  statutes. 
Thus  inward,  personal  holiness  would  be 
secured,  Jehovah's  glory  displayed.  The 
great  end  of  the  gospel  is  holiness  of  heart 
and  life  The  Christian  Church  is  a  commu 
nity  of  "saints."  The  redeemed  in  heaven 
are  those  wno  are  faultless,  without  spot  in  the 
presence  of  God's  unsullied  glory. — F,  W.  B. 

V.  3. — Theme :  Family  piety. 

"  Ye  shall  fear  every  jnan  his  mother  and 
his  father,  and  keep  my  Sabbaths;  I  am  the 
l^rd  vour  God^^ 


CHAP.  XIX.  3  —  9.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITKWS, 


237 


I.    7n  home  life  the  spirit  of  fear  demands 

CULTDRB. 

1.  No  dutiful  submission  to  parents  where 
*'  fear "  has  no  place  in  children's  hearts. 
This  "  fear  "  not  slavish  but  respectful,  leading 
to  an  unresisting  spirit,  and  obedient  beha- 
viour. 

2.  No  proper  basis  of  obedience  where  duty 
is  not  made  forceful  by  the  requirements  of  reli- 
gion. "  Keep  my  sabbaths,"  naaking  piety  an 
integral  part  of  home-life;  thus  fortifying 
the  claims  of  parentage  by  the  teachings  of 
God's  Word  and  His  house. 

II.  7n  children,  both  their  human  and  di- 
vine RELATIONSHIPS  SHOULD  BE  FOSTERED 

1.  This  requires /;if^^  in  the  parents.  How 
else  can  they  show  their  children  the  ways  of 
the  Lord  ?  Parents  are  to  their  children 
God's  representatives  and  viceregents  on 
earth. 

2  This  will  cultivate  piety  in  the  children 
'*  Keep  God's  Sabbath "  in  the  home  :  bring 
upon  young  heaits  and  minds  the  graces  of 
religion,  the  delight  of  "  holy  psalm  and 
song,"  the  teachings  of  Jesus,  the  bliss  of 
adoption  through  Christ ;  and  "  bringing  them 
up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord." 

Ill  In  sabbath  B-XBITs  the  family  needs  be 
devoutly  educated. 

1.  Sabbath  leisure  gives  opportunity  for 
pMrental  attention  to  the  religious  interests  of 
the  family. 

2  The  i^abbath  solemnity  is  helpful  to  the 
effort  of  1-ading  children's  thoughts  to  godly 
instruction. 

3.  Sanctuary  services  and  ordinances  should 
form  themes  of  teaching  and  interest  in  the 
home  on  sabbath  days 

Children,  thus  trained  in  early  recognition 
of  God  by  parents  who  link  themselves  with 
God  in  holy  life  and  word,  and  who  "make 
the  S-bbnth  a  delight"  in  their  homes,  as- 
suredly will  not  depart  from  the  ways  of  re- 
ligion, but  tread  early  the  path  after  Jesus. 
[See  Addenda  to  chapter,  Family  Piety  and 
Sabbath  and  ^anc/ua>y'\ 

V  3  —  Hieme:    Filial  obligations. 

'*  Ye  shall  fear  every  man  his  mother  and  his 
father ^'^ 

Under  the  patriarchal  dispensation  the 
father  was  to  be  revered  not  only  as  the  head 
of  the  family,  but  as  the  priest  in  the  home 
circle  The  tent  and  the  altar  were  reared 
together,  children  were  expected  to  honour 
their  parents  by  becoming  attention  to  social 
and  sacred  duties.  In  the  decalogue  the 
claims  of  parental  authority  were  enforced  ; 
and,  being  here  reiterated,  the  Hebrews  would 
be  taught  those  duties  which,  disregarded, 
bring  discord  and  misery  into  the  home.  Na- 
tural instincts  prompt  filial  fear,  but  unduti- 
fulness  to  parents  will  often  spring  up  with 
other  moral  delinquencies  to  which  our  fallen 
nature  is  prone.  Want  of  reverence  for 
parenthood — 

I.  Exhibits  baseness  of  heart.  The  af- 
fections must  have  become  corrupt,  the  feel- 
ings hardened,  when  parents  are  dishonoured. 


II  Incurs  the  divink  displeasure.    It  is 

God's  will  that  children  should  reverence 
their  parents  ;  to  disobey  His  will  is  to  dis- 
honour and  displease  Him. 

III  Entails  disastrous  consequences. 
A  special  promise  was  made  to  those  who 
would  obey  in  these  particulars,  and  in 
several  parts  of  Scripture  threatenings  of 
punishment  are  annexed  to  disobedience. 
Obedience  should  be  reverent  afiectionatey 
cheerful  d.n^  constant.  "  Children  obey  >our 
parents  in  the  Lord,  for  this  is  right." — 
F.  IV.  B. 


V.  6. —  Theme:      Willing    offerings  op 

PEACE. 

See  homilies  on  Chapters  iii  and  vii. 
Compare  specially  Outline,  Chapter!.,  v.  3,  p. 
14,  Volition  in  worship. 


V.  9.  —  Theme:    Harvest  gleanings. 

How  notable  are  the  provisions  made  in  the 
Mosaic  law  for  the  poor 

The  Sabbatical  year  (Exodus  xxiii  10,  II  ; 
compare  Deut  xv.  12,  15) 

The  equalization  of  tha  atonement  money 
for  poor  and  rich,  thus  establishing  the  value 
of  the  poor  as  equal  to  the  rich  (Exodus 
XXX.  12). 

The  same  minute  directions  for  the  poor 
man's  offerings,  showing  God's  equal  interest 
in  his  sacrifice  (Levit.  ii ,  etc.). 

And  here  the  command  that  the  harvest 
and  vintage  gleanings  should  be  left  (vv. 
9,10). 

Notice — 

I.  That  the  humane  laws  of  modern 
times,  respecting  gleaning  privileges,  are  all 
based  upon  this  Mosaic  command 

Everywhere  there  is  a  popular  feeling  that 
the  farmer  should  allow,  and  was  not  entitled 
to  prevent  the  poor  from  gathering  what  the 
reaper  left  behind. 

In  England  the  custom  of  gleaning  had 
very  nearly  passed  into  a  legal  right,  for 
there  is  an  extra  judicial  dictum  of  Lord 
Hall,  in  which  he  says  that  those  who  enter  a 
field  for  this  purpose  are  not  guilty  of  tres- 
pass ;  and  Blackstone  (iii.  12)  seems  to  adopt 
his  opinion.  But  that  has  since  been  twice 
tried,  and  decided  in  the  negative  in  the  Court 
of  Common  Pleas ;  the  Court  finding  it  to  be 
a  practice  incompatible  with  the  exclusive 
enjoyment  of  property,  and  productive  of  va- 
grancy and  many  mischievous  consequences. 

"It  is  still,  however,  the  custom  all  over 
England  to  allow  the  poor  to  glean,  at  least 
after  the  harvest  is  carried  "  (Chambers). 

The  law  of  Moses  directed  a  liberal  consi- 
deration for  the  poor  at  the  seasons  of  harvest 
and  ingathering.  The  corners  of  the  field 
were  not  to  be  reaped ;  the  owner  was  not  to 
glean  his  own  fields  ;  and  a  sheaf  accidentally 
left  in  a  field  was  not  to  be  fetched  away,  but 
to  be  the  possessien  of  the  poor  gleaners. 

Although  the  permission  to  glean  was  * 
favour,  it  required    no   special  influence  to 


23S 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY  ON 


[CHAP.  XIX.  10,   12. 


secure  it ;  for  Ruth  secured  this  liberty  with- 
out any  recommendation  (Ruth  ii  2,  3) 

II.  I  hat  a  benevolent  helpfulness  in  respect 
of  the  poor  is  A  special  obligation  op  those 

WHO  ENJOY  PLENTY. 

1.  H^ith  God  in  thought,  the  rich  will  spare 
of  their  abundance  that  the  poor  may  be  fed. 
And  this  is  the  meaning  of  this  sealing  sen- 
tence, "  I  am  the  Lord  your  God  "  (v.  10), 
You  owe  ail  to  Him,  especially  in  harvest ; 
and,  therefore,  share  with  the  needy  His  gifts 
to  you. 

2.  Amid  harvef^t  rejoicings,  gratitude  should 
incite  to  generosity.  What  render  to  God  ? 
*'  As  ye  have  received,  give  I"  Seek  occasion 
to  gladden  others — those  in  need.  Gladness 
which  has  no  kindly  outlet  and  expression 
makes  men  selfish  and  hard.  God  is  lavish; 
let  your  "hands  be  open"  also  (Psa.  cxlv. 
16). 

3.  Kindness  to  the  poor  has  especial  assur- 
ances  of  divine  approval.  "  He  that  giveth  to 
the  poor  lendeth  to  the  Lord."  "The  liberal 
soul  shall  be  made  full."  But  He  will  requite 
those  who  neglect  the  poor  (Psa,  ix.  18  ;  xii. 

III.  That  this  generous  consideration  for  the 

poor  is    A  TOKEN  OF    GOD'S    REGARD     FOB  THE 
LOWLY. 

I  I  heir  maintenance  engaged  the  divine 
attention.  For  them  "the  corner"  of  the 
field  was  claimed  from  the  reapers,  and  to 
them  was  assigned  the  right  to  clear  the 
ground.  It  was  their  part  in  the  national  soil, 
the  poor  had  this  heritage  in  the  land.  And 
God  enjoins  on  His  Church  now  to  "care  for 
the  poor."  They  are  Christ's  bequeathment 
to  His  disciples.  "  The  poor  always  ye  have 
with  you." 

2.  I  heir  salvation  is  prominently  sought  in 
the  gospel.  '"  To  the  poor  the  gospel  is 
preached."  And  "God  hath  chosen  the  poor 
rich  in  faith."  He  who  showed  concern  for 
their  physical  supply  and  maintenance,  as 
emphatically  manifests  His  desire  that  they 
be  "  blessed  with  all  spiritual  blessings  "  in 
Christ.     Therefore  — 

{a)  The  poor  should  cherish  a  grateful 
and  trustful  hope  in  their  God. 

if))  They  should  value  the  high  mercies 
of  redemption  in  Christ  beyond  all  the  kind- 
nesses of  His  providence.  For  the  favours 
of  providence  only  affect  them  temporally, 
but  "  the  riches  of  His  grace  "are  of  eternal 
consequence.  Therefore,  "  seek  ye  first  the 
kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteousness,  and 
all  these  things  shall  be  added  unto  you.'* 

{c)  Let  none,  because  of  lowliness  or 
poverty,  despond  of  God's  favour.  All  His 
regulations  prove  that  "  he  careth  for  you." 
Look  unto  Him  with  assurance.  "This  poor 
man  cried  and  the  Lcrd  heard  him,  and  saved 
him  out  of  all  his  troubles "  (Psa.  xxxiv. 
6> 

•His  love  ordained  the  seasons, 
By  Him  are  all  things  fed, 
He  for  the  sparrow  careth. 
He  gives  the  poor  their  bread  t 


Every  bounteous  blessing 
His  faithful  love  bestows  : 

Then  magnify  His  glorious  Name 
From  Whom  all  goodness  flows." 

V.    10. —  7  heme  :    Jehovah's     righteous 

DEMANDS. 

"  I  atn  the  Lord  your  God.'''' 

Though  the  record  of  divine  revelation 
contains  no  argument  to  prove  the  existence 
of  God,  it  repeatedly  asserts  the  fact;  all  the 
forces  of  nature,  all  positive  and  moral 
statutes,  are  traced  to  the  sovereign  will  and 
absolute  authoritv  of  Jehovah.  The  Hebrews 
were  taught  that  their  obedience  was  not  to 
be  governed  by  the  customs  of  society,  their 
own  preferences  or  prejudices,  but  by  the 
declared  will  of  Him  Who  had  sovereign  claim 
to  them  and  theirs.  Thus  they  were  em- 
phatically taught — 

I.  1  he  absolute  supremacy  of  fehovah.  No 
imaginary  deity  was  to  be  brought  into  com- 
petition, or  comparison  with  Him.  He,  the 
Eternal,  Infinite,  Almighty,  Creator,  and 
Governor  of  all  things.  He  had  right  to 
assert  His  claim  to  universal  homage ;  to 
settle  the  question  of  the  human  mind  about 
the  divine  existence.  God  has  spoken,  de- 
clared His  existence,  and  character ;  to  doubt 
that  word,  deny  that  existence,  impeach  that 
character,  indicate  derangement  of  the  mental 
powers,  and  debasement  of  the  heart. 

II.  The  absolute  character  of  their  obligations.. 
They  belonged  to  the  Lord,  He  claimed  them 
as  His  own  peculiar  people.  All  idols  were 
to  be  forsaken  (v.  4),  the  worship  of  Israel 
was  not  to  have  its  basis  m  ignorance,  or 
origin  in  fear,  but  in  the  recognition  of  the 
obligations  under  which  Jehovah's  relation- 
ship and  dealings  had  placed  them.  He  was 
a  jealous  God,  and  would  not  share  worship 
with  another.  Having  received  such  a  reve- 
lation of  the  divine  character  and  claims,  Israel 
was  under  obligation  to  render  intelligent, 
cheerful,  devout,  constant,  implicit,  willing 
obedience.  The  divine  claims  to  obedience 
are  unrelaxing,  declarations  of  our  obligations 
unrepealed.  "  Ye  are  not  your  own,"  etc. 
"  I  beseech  you,  brethren,  by  the  mercies  of 
God,"  etc.  The  divine  supremacy  of  Christ 
places  us  under  binding  obligation  to  serve 
Him  loyally ;  His  self-sacrificing  love  con- 
strains us  to  serve  Him  lovingly. — F.  W.  B, 

V.  12 — 1  heme:  False  swearing. 

All  nations  have  severely/>w«e.rA^^  perjury. 
The  Egyptians  with  death  or  mutilation ; 
the  Creeks  with  heavy  fines  and  ultimate  loss 
of  all  civil  rights;  the  Remans  visited  it  with 
the  penalty  of  death. 

These  ancient  nations  all  held  that  the  gods 
were  especially  incensed  by  this  crime,  and 
that  a  divine  Nemesis  pursued  the  perjurer. 
[See  Addenda  to  chapter,  Perjury'\. 

I.  What  swearing  by  god's  name  en- 
tails. 

1.  Acknowledgment  of  His  Omniscience.  It 
calls  Him  to  witness,  and  imprecates  Him  at 
the  avenger  of  falsehood. 


CHAP,  ytx  13—16.1 


THE  BOOK   OF   LEVITICUS. 


2.19 


2.  Acknowledgment  of  His  Righteousness. 
He  is  to  be  the  umpire  and  arbitrator.  We 
call  in  as  a  witness  to  our  fidelity  only  such  a 
one  as  is  himself  faithful  and  true,  and  will 
act  a  right  part.  Such  is  God.  Man's  use 
of  His  name  is  an  appeal  to  the  certainty  that 
He  will  judge  aright. 

II.  What  perjury  in  god's  name  entails. 

1.  An  insolent  affront  upon  GocCs  character. 
It  is  infamy,  daring  insolence,  the  degradation 
of  His  most  holy  name  for  unholy  ends.  It 
invokes  Him  to  act  as  a  witness  that  a  lie  is 
true  Yet  He  loathes  falsity.  It  is  defiant 
triding,  an  affront  to  the  God  of  truth.  It 
^'''profanes  his  name." 

2.  A  certain  visitation  of  judgment.  He 
**  will  not  hold  him  guiltless  that  taketh  his 
name  in  vain "  (Exod.  xx.  7)  Certainly, 
therefore,  He  will  punish  lying  and  profanity. 
Having  been  called  in  as  a  witness  to  a  lie 
He  will  prove  that  He  witnessed  it.  Thus  to 
insult  His  love  of  truth  and  defy  His  power 
to  vindicate  it,  and  trail  the  purity  of  His 
character  in  the  mire — before  whom  the  very 
angels  veil  their  faces  as  they  adore  Him — 
will  ensure  a  just  requital  (Heb.  x  30).  And 
"  there  shall  in  no  wise  enter  the  heavenly 
city  any  who  loveth  and  maketh  a  lie  "  (Rev. 
xxi.  27). 


V.  13 — Ihern^:  Fairness  to  hired  la- 
bourers 

I.  Work  is  a  just  basis  for  an  equitable 

CLAIM. 

Therefore  it  should  be  paid  for,  not  patron 
{singly^  nor  grudgingly^  bat  as  a  due.  The 
labourer  has  given  you  his  time^  strength, 
ability.,  and  ingenuity ;  he  has  a  right  to  an 
equivalent  from  you,  and  should  not  be 
treated  ignominiously,  but  respectfully,  in 
asking  a  just  return 

II.  Wages  cannot  righteously  be  de- 
ferred AP  FEB  WORK  IS  DONE. 

During  a  day  of  toil  the  labourer  has  put  his 
capital  into  your  service,  spent  his  life  for 
that  period  for  your  advantage  and  gain. 
You  are  to  that  extent  his  debtor ;  to  detain 
his  wages  is  to  make  yourself  more  his 
debtor,  and  delay  in  payment  should  be  com- 
pensated with  increment.  "  Short  reckonings 
make  long  friends." 

HI.  Masters  should  study  the  position 

AND  COMFORT  OF  THOSE  THEY  EMPLOY. 

A  poor  man  has  no  capital,  wants  prompt 
settlement ;  he  lives  day  by  day  upon  his  hard 
earnings.  His  strength — expended  by  the  day's 
toil — must  be  replenished  for  the  morrow's 
work.  To  hold  back  the  means  for  his 
nourishment  is  to  rob  him  of  the  morrow's 
capital,  his  replenished  energy.  And  he  may 
have  dependents  in  his  lowly  home  waiting 
to  share  in  the  earnings  of  the  day.  Hold 
not  back  his  dues  "  all  night  until  the  morn- 
ing," lest  your  incousiderateness  inflict  priva- 
tion and  embitter  poverty.  Oomp.  Deut.  xxiv. 
14,  15  ;  Jer.  xxxii.  13 ;  Mai  iii.  5 ;  James  v. 
4.  [See  Addenda  to  chapter,  Business  and 
Work:\ 


V.  14.  —  Theme:  Deaf  and  blind. 

i.  As  witnesses  to  afflictions  possible  to 
ALL.  they  call  for  our  commiseration. 

ii.  As  sufferers  of  direful  infirmities, 
they  should  enlist  our  gentle  care  and  gener- 
ous helpfulness.     "  Eyes  to  the  blind." 

iii.  As  pensive  illustrations  of  man's 
FRAILTY  they  should  incite  our  gratitude 
that  God  made  us  to  differ. 

Consider — 

1.  How  mean  the  act  of  ridiculing  those  who 
carry  the  grief  of  such  bodily  infirmities. 
"  But  fear  thy  God,"  for  He  will  requite. 

2.  How  swift  was  the  compassion  of  Jesus  tO' 
wards  those  sad  children  of  infirmity. 

3.  How  glad  the  outlook  of  the  heavenly 
life  for  such  as  suffer  here — if  they  have  hope 
in  Christ.  For  "  there  shall  be  no  more  sor- 
row, nor  crying,  neither  any  more  pain." 

V.  15. —  Theme:  Impartial  justice. 

I.  Justice  perverted. 

In  every  nation  and  age  wealth  and  influ- 
ence have  effectively  distorted  the  adminis- 
tration of  justice. 

Poverty  and  weakness  have  borne  cruel  and 
basest  wrongs  by  reason  of  their  very  help- 
lessness. 

II.  Justice  inflexible. 

Poverty  may  not  be  pleaded  in  arrest  of 
justice.  He,  who  being  poor,  acts  wrongly, 
may  not  make  poverty  his  screen ;  he  must 
bear  his  guilt.  A  sentimental  pity  for  the 
poor  would  thwart  the  ends  of  righteousness. 
Sin  is  sin  whether  committed  in  rags  or  in 
ermine.     [Comp.  Exod.  xxiii.  3.] 

A  servile  courtesy  to  the  "  mighty  "is  equally 
subversive  ot  righteousness.  A  perfidious 
king  is  as  guilty  a  traitor  to  his  country  as  a 
perfidious  subject.  Neither  station  nor  purse 
should  sway  the  balances  of  justice. 

As   in  the  sanctuary,  so  at  the  bar,  there 
should  be  "  no  respect  of  persons."     [Comp. 
Jas.  ii.  6,  19,  with  verses  2-4.] 

III.  Justice  certain 

God  wilt  judge  those  who  now  administer  or 
pervert  judgment.  '•  Every  man  shall  give 
account  of  himself  to  God." 

The  "  supreme  Judge  of  all  the  earth  "  will 
do  right.  He  "  discerns  judgtnent  "  now,  and 
will  dispense  justice  at  the  last  day.  [See 
Addenda  to  chapter,  Justice.'\ 

V.  16. —  Theme:  Tale-bearing  and  slandeb. 
I.  Character  IS  in  the  keeping,  and  there- 
fore at  the  mercy  of  acquaintances. 

1.  Therefore  supremely  value  each  other's 
good  name. 

2.  Jealously  defend  a  worthy  reputation. 

3.  Scornfully  silence  the  unproved  rumours 
of  evils      [See  Addenda  to  chapter,  Slander^ 

II.  Character  m.\y  be  ruthlessly  shat- 
tered by  sinister  whisperings. 

1.  For  listeners  are  ready  to  entertain  and 
repeat  slander. 

"Man's  inhumanity  to  man  1" 

2.  Aspersions  feed  on  the  inventiveness  of 
malice. 


240 


nOMlLETlC  COMMEISTARY  ON  [chap.  xix.  15,  lb. 


Proof  not  asked  ;  nothing  therefore  to  check 
or  refute  the  slander.  And  "  lying  lips  "  find 
delight  in  adding  to  the  lie  as  they  pass  it  on. 

3  Reputation  is  easily  damaged.  That  which 
only  a  lifetime  can  build  an  hour  may  defame. 

III.  Character  is  so  psecious  that  its  tra- 
ducers  should  be  loathed. 

1.  Dread  a  tale  bearer  as  a  destroying  pesti- 
lence 

2.  He  who  wrongs  another's  reputation  may 
next  wrong  yours.  By  heeding  his  slanders 
you  encourage  his  vile  trade,  and  slander  must 
find  new  victims  1 

3.  Put  to  shame  all  tale-bearers  with  ruthless 
severity. 

Note  — 

i.  There  is  enough  of  woe  abroad  with- 
out increasing  it. 

ii.  As  we  need  our  many  evils  to  be 
pitied  by  man  and  pardoned  by  God,  let 
us  with  "  charity  hide  sins,"  not  expose 
them. 

iii.  There  '\%  grace  in  Christ.,  and  energy 
in  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  which  to  perfect  a 
good  life  and  win  a  good  name,  which 
even  enemies  of  religion  shall  be  unable 
to  defame  or  destroy. 

iv.  Tue  light  of  the  final  judgment  will 
refute  all  slander,  and  bring  every  secret 
thing  to  the  open  gaze  of  the  world. 


1.  In  seeking  to  turn  him  aside  from  sin 
(v.  17).  [See  Addenda  to  chapter,  Neigh- 
bour lines  s~\ 

2.  In  beajing patiently  any  wrong  received 
from  him  (v.  18  . 

3  In  praying  and  working  for  his  conversion 
to  God. 

4.  In  leading  him  to  the  Saviour  you  have 
yourself  found  ;  as  did  the  woman  of  Samaria 
her  neighbours. 

A    Cultivate  kindness  and  generosity  by  com- 
munion with  Jesus  ;  and  that  will  so  fill  your 
soul  with  pity  for  the  erring,  Q.ndi  yeartting  for 
their  deliverance  as  will  make  it  easy  to  love 
your  neighbour. 

B.  Consider  how  many  evils  you  have 
wrought^  which  men  have  had  to  condone 
and  God  to  forgive^  and  then  you  will  take 
meekly  the  wrongs  others  have  done  you. 

0.  I  ive  with  eternity  in  view,  and  act  to- 
wards others  more  as  you  will  wish  you  had 
done  in  the  Day  of  Account,  and  through  the 
everlasting  ages 

D.  And  as  opportunity  goes  by  swiftly,  do  at 
once  what  love  prompts,  and  "  do  it  with  thy 
might."  There  are  wounds  waiting  to  be 
healed,  hearts  to  be  comforted,  estrangements 
to  be  conciliated,  errors  to  be  forgiven. 

'*  Love  thy  neighbour ^''  with  like  depth  and 
thoroughness  as  thou  lovest  "  thyself." 


V   18  —  Theme :  Neighbourly  lovb. 

"  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself ^^ 

Disinterested  love  is  difficult  to  cherish,  and 
is  all  too  rare. 

The  contraries  of  love  are  everywhere  rife  : 
jealousy,  rivalry,  cruelty,  selfishness,  greed, 
hate. 

An  unloving  spirit  is  an  ungodly  one;  for  a 
malicious  man  is  as  unlike  God  as  an  immoral 
man  is  ;  the  slanderer  is  as  cruel  as  the 
murderer. 

I.  All  true  human  love  has  its  root  and 

ORIGIN  IN  GOD. 

It  is  a  ray  of  His  glory,  a  breath  of  His 
Spirit.  A  mother  s  love  is  a  divinely-implanted 
instinct.  So  the  love  oi  friendship  is  heaven- 
born.  And  neighbotcrly  love  is  an  inspiration 
from  God  The  fine  feelings  of  benevolence,  of 
philanthrophy ,  of  charity — all  aspects  of  the 
divine  spirit  of  love  are  of  Him.  And  Chris- 
tian love,  the  love  of  God,  love  for  Christ,  the 
brotherly  love  of  saints,  all  come  from  our 
drinking  in  the  spirit  of  Jesus. 

II.  Every  expression  op  true  human 
love  has  heaven's  highest  approval. 

Our  love  Godward IB  the  rising  of  the  flame 
towards  its  Source,  and  is  as  a  "  sweet  savour 
of  Christ  "  to  Him. 

Our  love  for  tnan  is  the  outbreathing  of  the 
mind  of  Christ  in  us,  the  diffusion  of  the  very 
spirit  of  Jesus. 

Love  for  God  and  for  man,  let  it  prevail,  and 
it  brings  heaven'' s  blessedness  within  the  huvian 
breast,  and  will  make  our  bleared  and  dis- 
tracted earth  again  like  heaven 

III.  Neighbourly  LOVE  has  ample  oppor- 
tunities FOB  ILLUSTBATION. 


V.  19. —  Theme:  The  responsibiutt  o» 
stewardship. 

'*  Ye  shall  keep  my  statutes.'''' 

The  Israelites  knew  that  the  land  towards 
which  they  were  moving  was  given  them  for 
their  inheritance,  they  were  to  possess  it,  and 
enjoy  its  abundant  resources.  But  they  had 
to  remember  that  it  was  Jehovah  who  had 
delivered  them  from  Egypt,  who  would  con- 
duct them  through  the  wilderness,  and  to 
whom  they  would  be  responsible  when  they 
would  get  to  the  end  of  their  wanderings,  and 
enter  upon  the  land  flowing  with  milk  and 
honey.  In  Canaan  they  would  be  the  Lord  s 
husbandmen,  and  stewards,  to  farm  the  land 
according  to  His  will.  "  Ye  shall  keep  my 
statutes."  They  would  be  reminded  of  their 
stewardship  in — 

I.  The  sacrifices  th»^t  offered  to  the 
lord  (see  preceding  Homilies  on  offerings). 
As  the  Hebrews  brought  the  best  of  their 
substance  and  offered  it  to  the  Lord,  they 
would  recognise  the  claims  of  the  Highest  and 
Holiest  to  themselves  and  all  they  possessed. 

II.  In  the  portions  they  reskrved  for 
THE  POOR.  They  were  the  almoners  of  the 
Lord,  and  at  His  command  must  see  that  the 
needy  did  not  perish  from  want.  Coveteous- 
ness  and  selfishness  were  alike  condemned ; 
they  could  not  do  as  they  pleased  with  the 
grapes  and  corn. 

Ill  In  THE  non-participation  op  UNOIR- 
cumcised  fruit.  The  young  trees  were  to 
be  left  for  four  years,  the  fifth  year  they 
might  partake  thereof.  Thus  a  curb  was  put 
upon  their  appetites,  and  the  first-fruits  were 
to  be  wholly  devoted  to  the  Lord.     Thus  th9 


CHAP.  XIX.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 


241 


earth  would  be  to  Israel  God  i  banqueting 
house,  and  the  people  were  to  partake  only 
of  those  things  which  the  divine  host  con- 
sidered good  for  them  and  the  land. 

IV.  In  THK  PRliSKRVATION  OF  PRUJL»UCB  AND 

STOCK  FROM  ADULTERATION.  There  was  to 
be  no  breeding  between  diverse  kinds  of 
cattle,  no  mingling  of  seed  in  sowing  a  field, 
no  mixing  of  materials  in  fabrics  for  garments. 
These  injunctions  would  not  only  be  in  har- 
mony with  Jehovah's  requirement  of  purity 
in  heart  and  life,  but  would  keep  before  the 
minds  of  the  people  the  fact  that  corn  and 
cattle,  food  and  clothing  were  all  under  His 
surveillance.  He  was  the  proprietor  of  all ;  to 
Him  account  must  be  rendered  for  all. 

V.  In    the    hIGHTBOLJSNESS    OF   THEIR    COM- 

Mf  RCiAL  TRANSACTIONS.  Here  we  see  (vv.  35, 
36)  how  thorough  and  searching  the  morality 
of  the  Mosaic  law  was.  The  Hebrews  were 
to  avoid  every  kind  of  wrong-doing.  Religion 
was  to  affect  their  business  transactions,  cover 
the  whole  of  their  secular  life.  In  everything 
they  did  they  were  to  remember  that  the  eye 
of  the  Lord  was  on  them,  they  were  His  ser- 
vants, under  obligation  to  do  all  to  His  glory, 
according  to  the  principles  of  righteousness. 

Under  the  new  dispensation  we  are  stewards 
in  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  We  are  responsible 
for  the  use  we  make  of  the  talents  entrusted 
to  us.  The  gospel  does  not  exempt  us  from 
responsibility  to  live  righteously  all  our  days  ; 
all  the  precepts  of  the  moral  law  are  summed 
up  in  the  golden  law,  as  enunciated  by  Christ, 
*'Thou  shalt  love,"  etc.  Christianity  de- 
mands a  holy,  righteous  life,  as  well  as  a 
sound  scriptural  belief. — F.  W .  B. 

Theme:  The  duty  of  reproving  our 
neighbour.  "Thou  shalt  not  hate  thy 
brother  in  thy  heart:  thou  shalt  in  anywise 
rebuke  thy  neighbour,  and  not  suffer  sin 
upon  him." 

The  ritual  or  ceremonial  law  was  such  "  a 
yoke  as  neither  our  fathers  nor  we  (says 
Peter)  were  able  to  bear."  Yet  many  excel- 
lent moral  precepts  are  interspersed  among 
those  laws.  Several  in  this  chapter  (vv.  lO, 
II.  13,  14,  15,  16).  In  this  injunction  con- 
sider— 

I.  What  duty  is  enjoined,  and  what 
should  be  rkbuked. 

1.  To  tell  anyone  of  his  fault,  "  Thou  shalt 
not  suffer  sin  upon  him."  ^im,  therefore,  is 
the  thing  we  are  called  to  reprove,  or  rather 
him  that  commits  sin.  Do  all  we  can  to  con- 
vince him  of  his  fault,  and  lead  him  in  the 
right  way. 

2.  Love  requires  that  we  also  warn  him  of 
error  which  would  naturally  lead  to  sin.  If 
we  d  »  "not  hate  him  in  our  heart,"  but  love 
our  neighbour,  we  shall  generously  warn  him 
of  mistakes  likely  to  end  in  evil. 

3.  Avoid  reproving  for  anything  that  is  dis- 
putable. A  thing  appears  evil  to  me,  there- 
fore if  I  do  it  I  am  a  sinner  before  God.  But 
another  is  not  to  be  judged  by  my  conscience. 
So  I  must  only  reprove  for  what  is  clearly 


and  undeniably  evil,  eg..,  profanity,  insobriety. 
Few  who  are  guilty  of  tliese  will  defend  them, 
when  appeal  is  made  to  their  conscience  in 
the  sight  of  God. 
II.  Who  they  are  we  are  called  to  re- 

PROVK. 

I  There  are  some  sinners  we  are  forbidden 
to  rebuke.  "  Cast  not  pearl  before  swine," 
i.e..,  brutish  men,  known  to  be  immersed  in 
sins,  having  no  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes. 
Do  not  expose  the  precious  pearls,  i.e.,  the 
sublime  doctrines  of  the  gosp  <1.  to  th(3ir  con- 
tempt, and  yourself  to  injurious  treatment. 
Yet  if  we  saw  such  persons  speak  or  do  what 
they  themselves  know  to  be  evil  we  ought  to 
reprove  them. 

1.  Our  ''neighbour  "  is  every  child  of  man, 
all  that  have  souls  to  be  saved.  If  we  re- 
frain because  some  are  sinners  above  other 
men  they  may  perish  in  their  iniquity,  but 
God  will  require  their  blood  at  our  hands. 

3  Else,  in  the  lower  world  there  might  be 
upraiding  of  us  for  our  neglect  of  duly., 
through  which  souls,  left  unwarned.,  failed  to 
•'  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come." 

4.  Yet,  the  reproving  is  not  to  be  done  in 
the  same  degree  to  everyone  First  it  is  p  ir- 
ticularly  due  to  our  parents.,  if  needing  it  ; 
then  to  brothers  and  sisters  ;  then  to  relatives ; 
then  to  our  servants  ;  to  our  fellow  citizens  ; 
members  of  the  same  religious  society  ;  watch 
over  each  other  that  we  may  not  suffer  sin 
upon  our  brother.  To  neglect  this  is  to 
'  hate  our  brother  in  our  heart";  and  "he 
that  hateth  his  brother  is  a  murderer."  It 
imperils  our  own  salvation  to  neglect  this 
duty. 

III.  What  spirit   and    manner    should 

MARK  our  performance  OF  THIS  DUTY. 

1  There  is  considerable  difficulty  in  doing 
it  aright.  Although  some  are  specially  quali- 
fied to  do  it  by  grace.,  and  skilful  by  practice. 
But.  though  difficult,  we  must  do  it  ;  and 
God  will  aid  us 

2.  How  most  effectual?  When  done  in  *  the 
spirit  of  love^''  of  tender  goodwill  for  our 
neighbour,  as  for  one  who  is  the  son  of  our 
common  Father,  as  for  one  for  whom  Christ 
died,  that  he  might  be  a  partaker  of  salva- 
tion. 

3.  Yet  speak  in  the  spirit  of  humility 
"  Not  think  of  yourself  more  highly  than 
you  ought  to  think."  Not  feeling  or  showing 
the  least  contempt  of  those  whom  you  re- 
prove;  disclaiming  all  self  superiority;  own- 
ing the  good  there  is  in  him 

4.  In  the  spirit  of  meekness.  "  For  the 
wrath  of  man  worketh  not  the  righteousness 
of  God."     Anger  begets  anger,  not  holiness. 

5.  Put    no    trust    in   yourself;     in    you 
wisdom  or  abilities;  speak  in  the  spirit   of 

prayer. 

H.  And  as  for  the  outward  manner,  as  well 
as  the  spirit,  in  which  it  should  be  done  ;  let 
there  be  a  frank  outspokenness,  a  plain  and 
artless  declaration  of  disinterested  love.  It 
will  pierce  like  lightning. 

7.  With  great  seriousness.,  showing  that  yon 


242 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xix.  26-32. 


are  really  in  earnest.     A  luf^icrous  reproof 
makes  little  improssion,  or  is  taken  ill. 

^.  Yet  there  are  exceptions  when  a  little  we// 
p/aced rai//ery  will  pierce  deeper  th^n  solid  ar- 
gument. *'■  Ridicu/u77i  acri fortius. ^^  "Answer 
a  fool  according  to  his  folly,  lest  he  be  wise 
in  his  own  eyes." 

9.  Adapt  the  manner  to  the  occasion.  By 
few  or  many  words  as  the  situation  deter- 
mines ;  or  by  no  words  at  all,  but  a  look,  a 
gestui  e,  a  sigh.  Such  si/ent  reproof  may  be 
attended  by  the  power  of  God. 

1 0.  Watch  for  a  fair  occasion.  *'  A  word 
spoken  in  season,  how  good  it  is."  Catch 
the  "  Mo/iia  tempora  fandiy^  the  time  when 
his  mind  is  soft  and  mild. 

1 1.  But  should  a  man  be  left  alone  when 
intoxicated ?  I  dare  not  say  bo;  for  instances 
are  forthcoming  of  its  having  had  good 
effects.  Despise  not  the  poor  drunkard. 
Many  of  them  are  self- condemned,  but  they 
despair.  He  that  tells  a  man  there  is  no  help 
for  him  is  a  liar  from  the  beginning.  "Be- 
hold the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away  the 
sins  of  the  world." 

1 2.  You  that  are  diligent  in  this  labour  of 
love  be  not  discouraged.  You  have  need  of 
patience.     That  "  you  reap,  if  you  faint  not." 

When  a  re/igious  movement  is  abroad  it  will 
be  accompanied  with  a  spirit  of  reproving. 
All  who  are  awakened  by  God's  Spirit  will  be 
reprovers  of  outward  sin. — yohn  Wes/ey^ 
M.A.,  Sermons  Ixv. 

Vv.  26,  31. — Theme:  Wicked  supersti- 
tions. 

I.  A  PROOF  OF  man's  arrant  ALIENATION 
FROM  GOD. 

He  will  create  oracles,  consult  devils,  any- 
thing rather  than  seek  unto  God. 

II.  A  RECOGNITION  OF  DARK  SPIRITUAL 
AGENCIES  OPPOSED  TO  GOD. 

Scripture  does  not  declare  these  "familiar 
spirits  "  to  be  unreal  ;  it  acknowledges  them, 
and  records  man's  dealings  with  them  :  Samuel 
and  Witch  of  Endor.    [Compare  Acts  xvi.  16.] 

III.  A  REPROBATION  OF  SUCH  PERSONS  AS 
CLAIM  TO  BE  '•  MEDIUMS  "  OF  INTERCOURSE 
WITH  SPIRITS. 

•'  Regard  not  them."  God  disowns  them. 
A  fearful  case  they  are  in  who  make  this  their 
trade.  Heaven  denounces  them,  and  will  ex- 
clude them.  Spiritualists  are  in  no  favour  or 
league  with  Deity. 

IV.  A  PROHIBITION  OF  ALL  USB  OF  THESE 
WICKED  MYSTERIES. 

Man  is  to  deal  alone  with  Deity,  with  God 
in  Christ,  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  They  who 
**  seek  after  wizards,"  and  "  use  enchant- 
ments," are  offending  God,  and  are  *'  defi/ed  by 
them.'' 

Prayer  brings  us  direct  to  Him  who  is  the 
"  Father  of  lights  "  ;  and  He  giveth  liberally  to 
*'  any  who  /ack  wisdom  and  will  ask  of  God''"' 
(James  i.  17,  and  5). 

Jesus  Christ  is  the  ofie  Mediator,  and  "  ever 
liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us."  There 
should  be  no  intercourse  with  the  spirit  world 


but  through  Jesus.,  and  through  Him  with  the 
Father  a/one.  [Soe  Addenda  to  chapter, 
Superstitions.'] 

Vv.  3   and  30. —  Theme:    Sacrednbss  of 

THE  SABBATHS. 

"  Ye  sha//  keep  my  Sabbaths.''''  ' 

All  days  belong  to  God,  and  should  therefore 
be  kept  sacred,  bat  He  has  seen  fit  to  anoint 
one  day  in  seven  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above 
its  fellows.  The  Sabbath  is  a  divine  institu- 
tion dating  from  Eden,  is  associated  with  the 
completion  of  the  great  work  of  creation  It 
was  heaven's  antidote  to  the  curse  of  labour. 
Let  us  consider : 

I.  For  what  purpose  was  the  Sabbath 

ORIGINALLY  INSTITUTED  ? 

Certainly  not  because  God  needed  it  : 
though  on  it  He  rested  from  His  labours  and 
sanctified  it.  It  was  made  for  man,  that  in 
it  he  might  enjoy;  (a)  physi^a/  repose;  {b) 
menta/  recreation  ;  (<:)  spiritua/  profit ;  (d) 
uninterrupted  opportunities  for  divine  wor- 
ship. Godles-ness  has  ignored  its  claims, 
selfishness  has  begrudged  its  weekly  advent 
and  call  from  secular  engagements.  The 
observance  of  one  day  in  seven  for  the  re- 
pose and  refreshment  of  body,  mind  and 
heart  brings  blessings  to  man  and  glory  to 
God. 

II.  For  WHAT  PURPOSES  THE  SABBATH  HA8 
BKEN  PERPETUATED  UNDER  THE  NEW  DISPEN- 
SATION. 

The  change  of  day,  the  less  rigid  demand 
for  its  ceremonial  observance,  have  not 
lessened  its  importance  and  necessity,  It  is 
still  to  be  observed  as  a  day  of  rest  from 
secular  toil,  and  specially  devoted  to  the 
work  and  worship  of  Jehovah.  The  Christian 
Sabbath  is  associated  with  the  completion  of 
the  great  work  of  redemption.  Christ  set  His 
appropriation  and  approva/  upon  it  by  making 
special  posthumous  appearances  to  His  dis- 
ciples on  the  first  day  of  the  week.  The 
conduct  of  the  apostles  gives  authoritative 
sanction  to  the  observance  of  the  first  day 
instead  of  the  seventh  ;  and  the  Holy  Spirit 
has  set  His  seal  of  approval  upon  the  change, 
not  only  by  the  descent  at  Pentecost,  but 
by  exerting  His  saving  power,  as  Chri>tian8 
have  met  for  worship  and  extending  the  Re- 
deemer's Kingdom  on  the  Lord^s  Day.-— 
F.  W.  B, 


V.  32. —  Theme:  Homage  for  age. 
That  is,  when  and- 


the    aQ-ed   represent 


haturb 


i.   Because 

WISDOM. 

ii.  Because  the  aged  record  luOTHQ  years  spent 

IN  OUR  SERVICE. 

iii.    Because    the    aged   demonstrate    god'§ 

PROVIDENTIAL  CARE. 

iv.  Because  the  aged  are  solemn  admoni- 
tions OF  life's  decay 

V.    Because  the  aged  suggest  nearness   to 

ETERNITY. 

vi    Because  the  aged    exhibit   the  richest 

FRUITS  OF  GRACB. 


CHAP.  XIX.  33,  35,  36.]        THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS, 


243 


vii.  Because  the  aged  mark  the  line  of  God's 
COVENANT  BLESSINGS /^r  descendants. 

viii.  Because  the  af,?c/ represent  on  earth 

HIM  WHO  IS  THE  "  ANCIENT  OF  DAYS." 

(a)  Youth  should  venerate  the  aged  (Job 
XXX.  i.  12  ;  Isa.  iii.  4,  5). 

{b)  Age  should  injluence  and  hallow  the 
young  (2  Tim.  i.  6). 

[See  Addenda  to  chapter,  Old  Age. "^ 

V.  33. —  Theme:  Courtesy  to  strangers. 

I.  We  ourselves  are  strangers  on  the 
earth. 

"  For  ye  were  strangers  in  the  land  "  (v. 
34). 

1.  Z><?/i?w^/<?«/ on  other  care  than  our  own; 
human  and  divine, 

2.  Transient,  soon  to  leave,  resting  but  a 
little  while  on  earth. 

Observe :  it  is  good  to  see  in  the  case  of 
others  an  analogy  with  our  own ;  it  will 
f  outer  sympathy,  and  helpfulness. 

II.  Courtesy  should  root  itself  in 
generous  love. 

"  Thou  shalt  love  him  as  thyself^'' 

1.  Acting  to  the  stranger  z,%  if  the  service 
were  being  rendered  to  us.  This  will  teach  us 
what  to  do,  and  how  to  show  kindness. 

2.  Recognising  that  we  may  perchance  be  in 
the  stranger's  position.  As  thus  needing 
kindness,  let  us  now  exhibit  it. 

3.  Opening  our  hearts  in  ungrudging  bene- 
volence. "  Love  "  gives  lavishly.  Courtesy 
should  not  be  meagre  and  superficial. 

III.  Gratitude  to  heaven  prompts  us  to 

generous  KINDNESS. 

"Ye  were  strangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt  ; 
I  am  the  Lord  your  God." 


1.  Memory  of  Cod^s  rescue  should  constrain 
ns  to  care  for  others. 

2.  God's  relationship  to  us  requires  that  we 
illustrate  His  lovingkindness. 

3.  His  commands  to  courtesy  cannot  he 
evaded  with  ijnpunity. 

"  I  was  a  stranger  and  ye  took  me  not  in  : 
Depart  I" 

Vv.  35,  36 — Theme:  Business  honesty. 

i  Social  life  is  based  upon  commercial 
contracts. 

Each  bringing  to  the  other  some  product 
of  skill  or  toil.  We  cannot  supply  a  fraction 
of  our  own  wants,  we  must  buy  ;  and  we 
have  also,  in  turn,  something  to  sell.  Business 
is  the  outcome  of  this  reciprocal  dependence 
Bach  can,  each  must  help  the  other  ;  or  social 
and  civic  life  would  be  impossible 

ii.  Dishonesty  is  subversive  of  the  very 
basis  of  social  life 

It  breaks  confidence,  alienates  intercourse ; 
closes  friendly  relationships,  substitutes 
roguery  for  righteousness,  and  wrecks  all 
goodwill. 

Pleasant  to  reflect — 

1  How  much  trade  honour  there  is  among 
men. 

2  How  surely  trickery  brings  discovery, 
and  therefore  penalty,  on  rogues. 

8.  How  honesty  is  ever  winning  respect  and 
reward. 

iii.  Justice  sits  observant  of  all  de- 
ceitful deeds. 

♦'  I  am  the  Lord  " 

He  sees  all  secresies  ;  weighs  all  balances  ; 
hates  all  dishonesties  ;  will  requite  all  de- 
ceits. 


ILLUSTRATIVE  ADDENDA    TO    CHAPTER    XIX. 


Morality. 

Morality  is  the  object  of  government.  We 
want  a  state  of  things  in  which  crime  will  not 
pay,  a  state  of  things  which  allows  every 
man  the  largest  liberty  compatible  with  the 
liberty  of  every  other  man." — Emerson,  For' 
tune  of  the  Republic. 

"0  let  us  still  the  secret  joy  partake 
To  follow  virtue  even  for  virtue's  sake." 

— Pope. 

Family  Piett. 

Where  Abraham  pitched  his  tent,  there  he 
built  an  altar. 

"  We  are  really  what  we  are  relatively." 

— P.  Henry. 

"  Children  are  what  their  mothers  are." 

— Landor. 

Sabbath  and  Sanctuary. 
"  O  day  of  rest  1     How  beautiful,  how  fair. 
How  welcome  to  the  weary  and  the  old  I 
Dav  of  the  Lord !  and  truce  to  earthy  care  I" 
— Longfellow,  Christus. 


Sin  keeps  no  Sabbaths. 

Of  a  well  spent  Sabbath  Philip  Henry  used 
to  say ;  "If  this  be  not  the  way  to  heaven,  I 
know  not  what  is." 

Poor. 

"  This   mournful  truth  is    everywhere  con- 
fessed, 
Slow  rises  worth  by  poverty  depressed." 

— Samuel  Johnson. 

*'  Poverty  is  the  only  load  which  is  the 
heavier  the  more  loved  ones  there  are  to 
assist  in  supporting  it." — Richteb. 

Charity. 

"  Thev  serve  God  well, 
Who  serve  His  creatures." 

— Mrs.  Norton. 

**  He  is  truly  great,  that  is  great  in  charity." 

— Thomas  a.  Kempis. 

**  To  pity  distress  is  but  human  ;  to  relieve 
it  is  Godlike.'' — Horace  Mann. 

b2 


214 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON 


[chap.  XX.  2. 


Pk«jury. 

*'  Sworn  on  every  slight  pretence, 
Till  perjuries  are  common  as   bad  pence, 
Wbi  e  thousands,  careless  of  the  damning 

sin, 
Kiss  the  Book  outside,  who  ne'er  looked 

within."—  OowPKR. 

Business  and  Work. 

"  Business  dispatched  is  business  well  done, 
but  business  hurried  is  business   ill  done  " — 

BULWER  LyTTON. 

"  All  true  work  is  sacred  ;  in  all  the  work, 
were  it  but  true  hand  labour,  there  is  some- 
thing of  divineness." — Caklyle. 

"  In  every  rank,  or  great  or  small, 
'Tis  industry  supports  us  all." — Gat. 

**  For  men  must  work,  and  wc  men  must  weep, 
Antl  the  sooner  it's  over,  the  sooner  to  sleep." 

— KiNGSLET. 

Jdstice 
"  Heaven  is  above  all  yet ;  there  sits  a  Judge 
That  no  king  can  corrupt  " 

—  henry   VI 2L  ill.,  1. 

"  He  who  the  sword  of  Heaven  would  bear, 

Should  be  as  holy  as  severe ; 

Pattern  in  himself,  to  know 

Grace  to  stand,  and  virtue  go ; 

More  nor  loss  to  others  paying 

Than  by  self-offences  weighing." 

— Measure  for  Measure. 

"  Four  things  belong  to  a  judge  :  to  hear 
courteously,  to  answer  wisely,  to  consider 
soberly,  and  to  decide  impartially." 

— Sjcrates. 

"  The  virtue  of  justice  consists  in  modera- 
tion, as  regulated  by  wisdom." — Aristotle. 

Slander. 

"  One  evil  tongue,"  say  the  Jews,  "  hurts 
three  persons,  the  speaker,  the  hearer,  and 
the  person  spoken  of." 

"A  lost  good  name  is  ne'er  retrieved.'* 

—Gat. 
**I  hate  the  man  who  builds  his  name 
On  ruins  of  another's  fame." — Gat. 


**'Twas    slander  filled  her  mouth  with  lying 
words: 
Slander,  the  foulest  whelp  of  sin." 

—  Pollock. 

'*  Low  breathed  talkers,  minion  lispers 
Cutting  honest  throats  by  whispers." 

—  Scott. 

**  Be  thou  as  chaste  as  ice,  as  pure  as 
Snow,  thou  shalt  not  escape  slander." 

— Hamlet. 


ti 


Convey  a  libel  in  a  frown. 
And  wink  a  reputation  down." 

— SWIPT. 


Neighboiirlin*e  s  s . 

"  We  cannot  show  ourselves  more  friendly 
to  any  man  than  by  an  early  reproof  of  his 
error,  or,  as  it  is  here  expressed,  by  not  suf- 
fering stn  upon  him  'Tis  a  mercy  to  meet 
with  reproof  (though  late;  from  others  ;  but 
to  be  soon  reproved  is  much  mercy.  Every 
good,  the  sooner  it  comes  to  us,  the  better  it 
is."-  Caryl, 


Superstitions. 

"Superstition  is  related  to  this  life,  religion 
to  the  next ;  superstition  is  allied  to  fatality, 
religion  to  virtue  :  it  is  by  the  vivacity  of 
earthly  devices  that  we  become  superstitious : 
it  is,  on  the  contrary,  by  the  sacrifice  of  these 
devices  that  we  become  religious." — Madamb 
DB  Stael. 

Old  age. 

"  Life's  shadows    are   meeting    Eternity's 
day." — Jas.  G  Clarke. 

'*  Age  is  not  all  decay  :  it  is  the  ripening, 
the  swelling,  of  the  fresh  life  within,  that 
withers  and  bursts  the  husk." — Geo.  Mac- 
Donald. 

"  Thus  fares  it  still  in  our  decay, 

And  yet  the  wiser  mind 
Mourns  less  for  what  age  takes  away, 
Than  what  it  leaves  behind." 

— Wordsworth. 


-•♦•- 


CHAPTER    XX. 


Sicrtial  anb  Pnral  (^xmtB, 


SUGGESTIVE  READINGS. 


V.  2. — Again  thou  shalt  say  to  the  children  of  Israel.  These  denunciations 
of  sin  (already  denounced  in  ch.  xviii.)  are  to  be  repeated  in  the  hearing  of  the 
nation.     The  holy   God    would   have   these   social    and   moral   commands    re> 


CHAP.  XX.  3—27.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  ^  245 


iterated  that  they  may  be  emphasised  upon  the  people's  attention.  When  sins 
are  pleasant  to  us,  when  inclination  leads  us  towards  th«in,  it  is  soircely  in 
human  nature  to  halt  at  the  first  command  to  desist.  Evil  indulgence  deadens 
sensibility  to  God's  voice.  Although  tae  law  of  heaven  denounces  iniquities, 
yet  when  the  sins  are  cherished,  we  are  very  slow  to  "  turn  at  God's  reproof." 
Therefore,  God  speaks  once  more,  "  Again  thou  shalt  say."  "  For  God  speaketh 
once,  yea,  twicCy  yet  man  perceiveth  it  not  "  (Job  xxxiii.  14)  He  knows  our  dis- 
position to  lurk  m  the  enjoyment  of  our  sins,  therefore  pursues  us  with  His 
voice,  reiterating  the  warning  words. 

Vv.  3  and  5. — I  will  set  My  face  against  that  man.  Penalty  is  now  attached 
to  prohibition.  God  emphasises  His  denunciations  by  affixing  terrible  punish- 
ments to  corrupt  deeds.  For  a  sinner  will  find  he  has  to  do  with  something 
more  than  divine  expostulations  and  commands ;  *'  God  is  angry  with  the 
wicked,"  and  to  crimes  against  righteousness  He  has  attached  doom.  They 
who  will  not  pause  at  persuasions  will  be  overtaken  with  punishments. 

V.  4. — If  the  people  hide  their  eyes.  Connivance  at  wrong  entails  joint- 
guiltiness  in  the  deed,  and  joint-penalty.  AflPection  and  friendship  often  lead  us 
to  wink  at  errors  and  misdemeanours  in  those  we  love,  but  we  thereby  become 
"partakers  of  their  sins"  (Rev.  xviii.  4),  and  shall  **  receive  of  their  plagues." 

*^*  Compare  foregoing  chapters  for  suggestive  readings  on  the  verses  fol- 
lowing. 

It  is  specially  noticeable  that  the  penalty  rather  than  the  sin  of  all  mis- 
demeanour is  distinctive  of  this  chapter.  If  men  are  not  restrained  from  evil 
practices  which  the  law  has  denounced  as  sin^  it  may  be  they  will  shun  them 
when  the  law  annexes  to  them  death  I  How  gracious  is  this  act  of  God  : 
making  it  so  clear  to  us  that  transgression  of  the  law  is  not  only  repulsive  to 
Him — as  being  sin,  but  also  destructive  to  us — as  entailing  death.  There  are 
minds  less  startled  by  the  heinousness  of  wrong  as  God  sees  it  than  with  the 
disastrous  consequences  which  wrong  brings  on  themselves.  Yet  God  appeals 
even  to  the  selfishness  of  sinners  as  a  motive  to  shun  sin. 

Vv.  22-27.— A  separated  and  sanctified  people.  God  had  separated  Israel 
from  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  to  exhibit  His  holy  character  in  their  purity 
and  to  illustrate  the  reward  of  holiness  by  possessing  "the  land  flowing  with  milk 
and  honey  ";  thus  connecting  purity  with  privilege,  as  cause  and  consequence. 
Being  thus  ''separated  "  by  God  (v.  24),  they  were  to  separate  themselves  by 
distinctive  conduct  (v.  25),  and  show  themselves  before  the  less  favoured  nations 
as  "  holy  unto  the  Lord  "  (v.  26). 

If  thus  it  behoved  the  Jewish  people  to  maintain  sanctity,  surely  we,  who  are 
chosen  in  Christ  Jesus  and  called  to  be  saints,  should  show  forth  the  virtues  of 
the  Lord,  and  thus  connect  holiness  of  life  with  our  enjoyment  of  the  in- 
heritance which  is  made  ours  by  grace. 


HOMILIES. 

Topic:  The   Axe   Laid   at  the   Root  op  Moral  Evil. 

Here,  commandments  already  given  are  repeated  and  enforced  with  renewed 
autho'ity  and  power.  Repetition  essential  to  inculcation  of  knowledge,  and 
fixing  indelibly  the  truths  taught.  The  vices  into  which  Israel  was  liable  to 
fall  are  odiously  repulsive  to  the  virtuous  human  mind ;  how  inexpressibly 
abominable  they  must  have  been  to  the  nature  of  the  immaculately  holy  God ! 
Inward  as  well  as  ceremonial  purity  demanded  of  the  Hebrews,  hence  the  con- 
stant call  to  circumspection  and  consecration.  One  great  purpose  running  through 
the  whole  economy — the  recovery  of  man  from  the  practice,  guilt,  and  penalty 


246  HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xx.  3 


of  sin.     Looking  at  this  chapter  in  the  light  of  the  circumstances  under  which 
it  was  given  we  learn — 

I.  Constant  vigilance  enjoined  against  ensnaring  sin.  The  people  of 
Israel  were  not  elected  to  divine  advantages  unconditionally,  exempted  from 
responsibility  for  the  use  they  made  of  their  privileges.  The  elaborate  and 
searching  character  of  the  laws  by  which  they  were  governed  denoted  (a)  that  the 
people  were  very  depraved  by  nature,  and  ever  prone  to  sin ;  {b)  that  they  were 
liable  to  yield  to  temptations  arising  from  remembrances  of  the  sinful  habits  of  the 
Eyptians ;  (c)  that  they  would  be  ever  coming  in  contact  with  seductions  to 
wrong-doing  (v.  22).  Every  vice — condemned  in  this  chapter — is  an  outrage 
upon  decency  and  the  moral  sense.  Nature  sets  her  face  against  all  such 
iniquity,  sets  her  burning  stigma  upon  immorality.  Filthy  practices  entail  re- 
tributive consequences.  As  a  great  family  of  which  Jehovah  was  the  head, 
Israel  was  to  guard  against  everything  indecent  and  indelicate.  Nothing  could 
destroy  them  but  inward  corruption,  every  weapon  formed  against  them  would 
be  futile  if  they  kept  pure  in  character,  faithful  in  allegiance  to  the  Lord. 
Abandonment  to  the  abominations  of  the  heathen  would  bring  down  the  indig- 
nation of  heaven,  and  the  land  whither  they  were  going  would  cast  them  out 
as  apostates  and  reprobates. 

II.  Tremendous  retributions  attached  to  wrong-doing.  Expressions  of 
divine  displeasure  against  sin  (in  this  chapter)  are  very  strong,  punishments 
threatened  very  awful.  It  mattered  not  who  the  person  might  be  upon  whom 
the  guilt  of  idolatry  and  licentiousness  might  be  brought,  the  sentence  was  to  be 
executed.  The  penalties  seemed  severe,  but  they  showed  (i.)  the  holiness  of  the 
divine  law;  (ii.)  the  detestable  nature  of  sin;  (iii.)  the  retributive  character  of 
guilt.  The  fate  of  sinful  nations  was  to  be  a  warning  to  the  Hebrews.  The  re- 
vealed indignation  of  Jehovah  against  every  kind  of  mural  evil,  was  to  lead  the 
people  to  avoid  the  approach  and  appearance  of  evil.  These  righteous  statutes 
calculated  to  awaken  devout  reflection,  rigid  self-examination. 

Under  grace  in  Jesus  Christ  we  are  elected  to  privileges,  predestinated  to  be 
conformed  to  the  image  of  God's  Son.  The  world  is  to  see  the  purity  of  the 
divine  nature  reflected  in  the  light  of  our  Christly  lives.  We  are  expected,  by 
Him  who  has  called  us  out  of  nature's  darkness,  to  represent  and  thus  recom- 
mend the  religion  which,  like  its  Author,  is  pure  and  undefiled.  Unfaithfulness 
to  our  sacred  trust,  unholiness  in  our  lives,  will  forfeit  the  favour  of  our  Master, 
destroy  peace,  produce  spiritual  ruin.  The  grand  object  of  redemption  is  not 
mere  salvation  from  sin's  consequences,  but  its  complete  removal  from  the 
human  soul  and  the  universe  of  God.  Nowhere  as  in  the  gospel  of  Christ  does 
the  Hre  of  indignation  burn  so  fiercely  against  unrighteousness  and  impurity,  its 
intensest  heat  is  centred  in  the  mysteries  and  sufferings  of  the  cross. — F.  W.  B, 


Topic  :  Capital    Offences. 

*^And  I  will  set  my  face  against  that  man,  and  will  cut  him  of  from  among  his 
people."  (v.  3). 

How  frequently  we  road  in  this  chapter  of  excommunication  and  death.  The 
words  "  he  shall  surely  be  put  to  death  "  occur  again  and  again ;  flash  after  flash 
of  the  lightning  of  divine  wrath,  peal  after  peal  of  the  thunder  of  divine  condem- 
nation startle  us,  as  the  various  crimes  are  indicated  towards  which  such  judg- 
ments are  directed.     As  we  reverently  gaze  and  listen,  we  learn — 

I.  To  WHAT  DIABOLICAL  DEPTHS  HUMAN  DEPRAVITY  CAN  SINK.  ThoSB  who  in- 
dulged in  Molech  worship,  committed  murder  of  the  most  horrible  kind,  and  in 
the  heathen  temples  immoralities  of  the  most  degrading  and  disgusting  character 


CHAP.  XX.  4.J  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  217 

were  pracMsed.  Vice  was  not  confined  to  public  places,  but  its  pollutions  cnrsed 
the  most  sacred  and  delicate  relationships  in  life.  Ha  n;iii  nature  can  sink  into  a 
condition  of  degradation,  compared  with  which  the  natural  habits  of  the  brute 
creation  are  pure  and  noble. 

IT.    To  WHAT  A  FEARFUL  EXTENT  THE  DIVINE  ANGER  CAN  TURN.      "  God  is  Love," 

and  it  is  equally  clear  from  nature  and  revelation  He  is  also  holy,  just,  and  true. 
He  is  angry  with  sin,  and  with  the  sinner  while  He  loves  and  indulges  in  sin,  and 
snch  anncuncements  of  anger  against  the  guilty  as  this  chapter  contains,  show 
God  is  a  consuming  fire  against  evil  ;  He  bets  His  f'lce  against  it,  visits  its  per- 
petrators with  death.  Only  by  infliction  of  death  upon  the  sinner's  Substitute, 
can  the  claims  of  divine  justice  be  met,  the  divine  anger  against  sin  be  averted. 

III.    To  WHAT  FATAL  ISSUES  TRANSGRESSION  OF  THE  DIVINS  LAWS  CONDUCTS.       (a) 

The  loss  of  divine  favour.  "  I  will  set  my  face  against  that  man."  Nothing  can 
be  more  awful  than  to  incur  the  antagonism  of  the  Almighty.  (6)  The.  loss  o 
congenial  society.  *' And  will  cut  him  off  from  among  his  people."  He  shall  be 
excommunicated,  an  exile  and  outcast  for  ever.  The  loss  of  the  favour  of  God, 
banishment  from  the  society  of  the  blessed,  will  constitute  the  punishment  of  the 
finally  impenitent. 

IV".  To  WHAT  sor.EMN  FACTS  THESE  DIVINE  DECLARATIONS  POINT.  Unquestion- 
ably :  (a)  To  the  heinousness  of  sin.  That  it  required  atonement,  to  be  forgiven  ; 
that  unforgiven  it  entailed  death.  (6)  To  the  righteovsness  of  God's  law.  That 
it  denounced  every  kind  of  iniquity,  could  not  be  broken  in  the  smallest  point 
with  impunity,  (c)  To  the  holinsss  of  God's  name.  Jehovah's  nature  arrayed 
against  even  secret  sins  ;  where  He  dwelt,  where  His  name  is  recorded,  nothing 
impure  must  be  allowed. 

Conclusion.  Human  nature  is  still  the  same,  prone  to  depart  from  the  living 
God,  liable  to  sink  to  the  lowest  depths  of  sensuality  and  guilt.  The  anger  of 
God  still  burns  against  evil,  His  face  set  against  evil-doers.  Sin,  if  unrepented. 
unremoved,  brings  death,  destruction  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord.  As  of  old, 
so  now,  but  with  greater  freeness  and  fulness^  a  way  is  open  for  pardon,  purity, 
peace.  In  the  Christian  Church,  proclaimed  in  the  glad  tidings  of  the  gospel, 
we  have — 

1.  Higher  examples  of  holiness .     Especially  in  our  Exemplar,  Christ  Jesus. 

2.  Loftier  precepts  to  guide  us.    Ethics  of  the  gospel  transcend  those  of  the  law. 

3.  Stronger   inducements  to  urge  us.     Not  fear  but  love,  the  gospel  motive. 

4.  Superior  prospects  to  cheer  us.  Life  and  immortality  have  been  brought  to 
light  by  the  gospel  j  we  may  look  forward  to  an  eternity  of  rest  in  the  Canaan 
above.— ^.  W.  B, 


Topic:  Connivance  at  Iniquity, 

*'  If  the  people  of  the   land  do  any   ways   hide  their   eyes  from  the  man  when  he 
giveth  his  seed  to  Molech^'  etc   (v.  4). 

(a)  Evils  are  allowed  to  pass  unrehulced.  From  indifference  :  a  total  unconcern 
about  either  right  or  wrong,  piety  or  sin.  Or  from  indolence:  habitual  inertia, 
unwillingness  to  take  any  trouble  to  set  wrong-doers  right,  or  rescue  the  debased 
from  their  degradations. 

(6)  Errors  are  permitted  to  flourish  unmolested.  From  contempt  of  truth  :  caring 
nothing  for  sacred  knowledge,  content  to  let  others  dwell  and  to  dwell  themselves 
in  ignorance  or  delusion,  serving  Molech  or  any  other  fallacy,  as  they  may 
prefer.  Or  from  false  charitableness  :  pleading  that  if  men  but  be  loyal  to  the 
light  they  had,  or  faithful  to  convictions  they  cherish,  as  their  standard  of 
duty  and  code  of  religion,  it  matters  little  what  errors  thrive.     But  consider — 


248  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xx.  4. 


I.  Appalling  inhumanities  wrought  under  sanction  of  religion. 

*'  Givet.h  his  seed  unto  Molech"  Tender  iufants  offered  up  to  devouring  6res. 
Heathenism  has  its  Inghtful  records  :  the  car  of  Juggernauth  ;  the  funereal 
fires  for  widows  :  the  abandonment  of  aged  parents;  children  cast  into  the  Ganges  ] 
etc 

Romanism  has  its  catalogue  of  enormities ;  prison  tortures ;  inquisitorial 
h(»rrors,  faggot  fires  of  martyrdom,  etc 

II.  Pathktic  onconcern  over  the  enormities  of  sin. 

Superstition  is  but  one  of  the  many  foul  products  of  sin  ;  and  the  barbarities 
wrought  through  superstition  are  but  a  fraction  of  the  cruelties  developed  by 
sin. 

1.  There  is  a  common  ca//ows?i6s.«  respecting  the  miseries  rampant.  The  victims 
of  sin  are  everywhere — in  debased  homes,  in  asylums,  in  prisons  :  poverty, 
brutality,  villainy :  yet  society  connives  at  it  all,  and  avowed  Christians  lift 
not  the  burdens  with  one  of  their  fingers. 

2.  A  willing  ignorance  of  existing  woes  prevails.  The  people  of  the  land 
hide  their  eyes.     How  difi'erent  this  from — 

The  keen  spirit,  which 
Seizes  the  prompt  occasion,  makes  the  thought 
Start  into  instant  action,  and  at  once 
Plans  and  performs,  resolves  and  executes  1 

A  true  grief  for  sin,  and  pity  for  the  sinner^  and  hatred  of  what  degrades  the 
soul  of  man  and  dishonours  God,  would  stir  us  to  generous  activity. 

III.  Delusive  self  satisfaction  amid  prevailing  wrong. 

It  is  not  enough  that  we  "  hide  our  eyes."  When  men  err  and  sin  around  us— - 
1.  Not  to  know  may  be  criminal  ignorance.  Each  man  is  set  in  charge  with 
the  other;  and  we  owe  it  to  him  that  we  inform  ourselves  of  his  condition  and 
conduct.  To  pass  by  on  the  other  side  '*  is  no  excuse  for  letting  the  sufferer  die." 
2  Nnt  to  share  in  his  deed  does  not  exonerate  us  from  his  sins.  If  we  connive 
at  his  deed  we  to  a  degree  both  sanction  and  encourage  it.  We  ought  to  **  rebuke 
the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness."  But  instead  of  that  we  give  consent  by  our 
silence,  by  our  ignoring  them. 

3.  Not  to  stay  the  inhumanities  which  are  being  inflicted  renders  us  chargeable 
with  complicity.  What  brutality  to  stand  inactive  while  children  were  being 
sacrificed  to  Molech  !  What  cruelty  to  let  the  helpless  suffer,  the  deceived 
perish,  the  sinner  be  lost ! 

IV    Connivance  at  iniquities  severely  adjudged  by  god. 
"  Then  I  will  set  my  face  against  that  man  "  (v   8) 

1.  The  watchmaris  duty  is  to  raise  the  sound  of  warning.    [Comp.  Ezekiel  xxxiii.] 

2.  Yet  every  man  who  will  keep  his  eyes  open  sees  the  occasion  and  necessity  for 
this  ministry  of  protest,  and  warnino;,  and  rescue.  He  who  sees  not  is  guilty  of 
"  hiding  his  eyes  from  the  man."  Sinners  are  everywhere  ;  sufferers  are  every- 
where. 

3.  Judgment  will  be  based  on  our  actions  to  others.  **  Inasmuch  as  ye  did  it 
unto  me  "  ;  or,  '*  inasmuch  as  ye  did  it  not  "  (Matt.  xxv.  41,  45). 

Note  :  Our  urgent  duty  in  the  world  is  to — 

(a)  Rebuke  sin  and  wrong-doing,  and  seek  to  check  its  ravages. 

(b)  Be  alert  amid  opportunities  to  rescue  the  victims  of  iniquity  from  their 
woes. 

(c)  Our  own  salvation  is  without  guarantee  unless  we  also  seek  '*  by  all  means 
to  save  some."  For  we  may  inherit  judgment  for  neglect  of  those  "ready  to 
perish." 

(d)  The  very  spirit  of  Christianity  incites  to  eager  and  loving  endeavour  to 
**  convert  the  sinner  from  the  error  of  his  ways,  save  his  soul  from  death, 
and  hide  the  multitude  of  his  sins.'' 


CHAP.  XX  7-9.]  THE  BOOK    OF  LEVITICUS.  249 


Topic:  The  Possibilities  op  Sanctity  (Vv,  7,  8). 

Certainly  "this  present  world"  (Titus  ii.  12)  is  not  very  friendly  or  favour- 
able to  active  sanctity. 

Yet  it  is  the  only  world  in  which  the  human  character  and  life  can  rise  out  of 
sin  into  active  sanctity.  Death  closes  the  door  on  opportunity.  "  As  the  tree 
falleth  so  shall  it  lie." 

Hence  the  urgency  and  repetition  of  this  call  of  God,  pleading  with  men  to 
**  sanctify  yourselves."  Is  it  possible  to  effect  this  1  How  may  we  thus  attain  to 
sanctity  ?     By 

I.  Abstinence  :  a  steadfast  negation  of  all  tendencies  and  inducements 
TO  impurity. 

There  must  be  diligent,  strenuous  and  minute  regard  to  every  "  Thou  shalt 
not"  of  God's  Word.  Assuredly,  all  sinful  propensity  in  us  must  be  repressed; 
all  habits  of  evil  denied ;  all  indulgence  of  impure  imaginations  and  desires 
refused.  "  Taste  not,  touch  not,  handle  not^  "  Put  off  the  works  of  darkness." 
"  Crucify  the  flesh  with  its  affections  and  lusts."  This  chapter  shows  us  how  in 
many  sinful  ways  and  works  of  the  flesh  we  must  "  deny  ourselves." 

In  order  to  this  negation  of  all  unholy  dispositions  and  practices  we  shall 
need  that  *'  grace  may  abound."  For  sinful  man  is  "  weak  through  the  flesh." 
But  this  grace  is  available  to  us  in  Jesas  Christ. 

I I.  Obedience  :  the  diligent  practice  of  all  the  duties  and  requirements 

OF  holiness. 

The  affirmative  side  of  sanctity  is  certainly  not  less  important  than  the  nega- 
tive. "  Do  this  and  thou  shalt  live."  *'  Ye  shall  keep  my  statutes  and  do  them" 
(y.  8). 

A  practical  piety  is  imperative.  To  secure  that  the  "house  be  empty  and 
swept"  is  something  ;  iniquities  cast  out  of  the  heart  and  life  :  but  the  good,  the  true, 
the  devout,  the  lovely  must  also  be  brought  in.  To  have  the  vine  pruned  and 
purged  of  all  dead  and  fruitless  boughs  is  necessary  ;  but  equally  it  is  desiderated 
that  what  remains  should  "  bring  forth  much  fruit." 

He  who  would  "  sanctify  himself  "  must  therefore  cultivate  pure  afiections, 
thoughts  and  desires ;  practise  the  duties  and  obligations  of  religion,  maintain 
habits  of  rectitude  and  godliness  :  "  perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord." 
He  who  is  "  watchful  unto  prayer,"  "  alive  unto  God,"  quick  to  heed  and  obey 
His  word,  will  not  fail  to  attain  to  these  affirmative  qualities  of  sanctity. 

III.  Assistance:  divine  co-operation  sustaining  and  succeeding  human 
efforts  towards  sanctity. 

"Sanctify  yourselves"  (v.  7),  for  "I  am  the  Lord  which  sanctify  you"  (v.  8). 

All  His  (1)  disciplinary  corrections  and  afflictions  ;  (2)  Scripture  teachings  and 
promises;  (3)  spiritual  communications  and  religious  privileges ;  (4)  gifts  and 
comfort  of  His  Holy  Spirit  ;  (5)  purifying  power  of  the  indwelling  love  of  Christ, 
are  resources  of  God's  sanctifying,  with  wbich  He  seals  our  earnest  endeavours 
after  holiness. 

"  Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,  for  it  is  God  which 
worketh  in  you  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure"    (Phil.  ii.  12,  13). 

Topic,  The  Grief  op  Undutiful  Children. 

"  Every  one  that  curseth  his  father  or  his  mother  shall  surely  he  put  to  death^*  etc, 
(V.  9). 
Family  life  should  be  a  source  and  centre  of  consolation,  affection  and  delight ; 


20U  IIOMILETIC   COMMENTARY   ON  [chap  xx  9 


parents  proving  a  comfort  and  benediction  to  their  children,  and  children  bring- 
ing gladness  and  honour  to  their  parents. 

Home  is  the  sphere  of  harmony  and  peace. 

Fearful  is  the  conception  of  an  accursed  family  :  abusive  children,  agonized 
parents  !  It  is  the  most  dreaiful  perversion  which  earth  contains  ;  love  changed 
into  cursing  ;  duty  into  rebellion ;  purity  into  foulness  ;  rest  into  hateful  strife 
and  war      It  is  clearly  true  of  such  children  that  they  are — 

I.  A  GRiKF  TO  THEIR  PARENTS.  Bitter  the  very  thought — "  he  hath  cursed  hia 
father  or  his  mother." 

1.  The  gri(  ^"  of  blighted  hopes.  What  tender  and  bright  expectations  were 
centred  in  the  little  one  as  parents  first  looked  upon  their  cherished  child  ! 

They  are  idols  of  hearts  and  of  households, 
They  are  angels  of  God  in  disguise. — Chas.  M.  Dickenson. 
Terrible  the  grief  when  all  glad  hopes  are  desolated,  and   what  promised  joy 
and  love  only  yields  a  "  curse." 

2.  The  grief  of  outraged  affection.  No  stint  of  fond  thought  and  care  is 
lavished  on  the  child. 

How  sharper  than  a  serpent's  tooth  it  is 
To  have  a  thankless  child. — Shakespeare. 

3.  The  grief  of  frustrated  prayer.  Over  the  children's  heads  parents  have  bowed 
in  supplication  to  God,  and  pleadings  full  of  heartfelt  fervour  have  been  poured. 
Yet  is  this  what  results — a  "curse"  in  the  home,  a  terror  to  the  parental 
heart ! 

4.  The  grief  of  ruined  happiness.  How  can  joy  ever  again  dwell  in  the 
parent's  soul  against  whom  his  own  child  has  risen  with  "cursmgs"?  It  must 
darken  all  the  light  of  earthly  gladness  ;  and  it  must  deeply  shade  even  the 
anticipations  of  heaven — for  no  place  iu  "  the  Father's  house  "  will  be  found  for 
a  child  who  brought  a  curse  into  his  earthly  home. 

II.  A  GRIEF  TO  THEMSELVES.  Dreadful  the  penalties  which  are  threatened 
— *•  he  shall  surely  be  put  to  death ;  his  blood  is  upon  him.'' 

1.  God's  anger  will  be  upon  him.  A  wicked  son  or  daughter  knows  this  awful 
fact  before  the  judgment  day  arrives;  God  loathes  the  child  who  curses  a 
parent.     It  is  a  terrible  thought  to  carry  through  life. 

2.  Human  contempt  will  be  won.  For  all  respect  and  trust  is  forfeited  by  a 
child  whose  behaviour  is  so  cruel ;  society  shuns  the  unnatural  creature  where 
his  or  her  conduct  is  known. 

3.  Conscience  can  never  have  peace.  Children  who  have  outraged  home  and 
left  the  pareufal  roof  have  been  harrowed  through  years  with  the  woes  of  an 
**  accusing  conscience,"  and  traversed  lands  and  seas  to  weep  over  a  parent's 
grave. 

4.  A  retributive  justice  ipnrsuea  them.  Their  own  crime  re-appears  against 
them  :  for  the  very  quality  in  themselves  that  rendered  them  capable  of"  cursing  " 
their  parents  will  betray  itself  in  all  relationships  in  after  years,  making  them 
hJeful  and  hated,  and  lay  them  open  to  the  consequences.  And  this  vile  quality 
will  re- appear  in  their  offspriitg,  and  win  back  from  their  own  children's  lips 
like  "curses"  which  they  once  uttered  themselves.  God  follows  such  cruelty 
to  parents  with  relentless  rigour.  Penalty  overtakes  this  crime  in  this  life 
and  doom  awaits  it  hereafter. 

III.  A  GRIEF  TO  GOD. 

1.  Undutifulness  to  parents  is  inseparable  from  impiety  towards  God.  Sucb 
sons  and  daughters  are  always  godless,  alien  from  all  sacred  duties  and  claims  : 
"  a  smoke  in  God's  nostrils,"  a  dishonour  to  His  laws. 

2.  Outrage  to  parental  relatiojiship  and  feeling  is  felt  by  God  as  an  outrage  on 
His  own  Fatherly  love  and  grace.  He  feels  a  parent's  grief;  and  wrong  done  to  80 
tender  a  relationship  is  a  wound  to  the  divine  Father's  heart. 

3.  In  His  ^^ beloved  aS'ow "  and  ^^holy  child  Jesus''  God  shows  the  fulness  of 


CHAP.  XX.  26.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  251 


aflPection  which  should  mark  a  child  :  and  it  degrades  the  very  name  of  a 
*'5o?i"  and  a  "c/ii7(i,"  the  relationship  which  Jesus  assumed,  when  it  brings  a 
curse  upon  human  parents  instead  of  love. 

4.  Home  is  God's  earthly  type  of  heaven:  and  a  home  filled  with  ** cursing'*  is 
a  peculiar  abomination  to  Him  who  designed  our  earthly  homes  to  be  a  fore- 
taste here  of  **  the  Father's  house  *'  above.  It  is  a  most  offensive  and  sorrowful 
evidence  of  the  ravages  which  sin — '*  the  abominable  thing  God  hates  " — has 
wrought  in  His  world.  How  different  this  delineation  of  a  " cursing*'  child 
"^'om  the  poetic  and  the  divine  idea  of  a  child. 

A  sweet  new  blossom  of  humanity 
Fresh  fallen  from  God's  own  home  to  flower  on  earth. 

Let  parents,  with  diligent  prayer  and  training,  bring  their  children  to  Jesus  ; 
f:  lio  alone  can  cast  out  the  evil  spirit  from  a  child.  [Compare  Matt,  xviii.  14,  21.] 

Topic  :  The  Hebrew  Church. 

*  And  ye  shall  he  holy  unto  me :  for  I  the  Lord  am  holy^  and  have  severed  you 
from  other  people  that  ye  should  he  mint "  (v.  26). 

The  Hebrews  were  not  only  a  royal  nation^  with  Jehovah  for  their  King,  but 
they  constituted  an  established  churchy  not  by  the  edict  of  any  earthly  monarch 
or  political  assembly,  but  by  a  royal  proclamation  from  the  Court  of  Heaven. 
That  the  people  might  know  and  ever  remember  the  high  dignity  thus  conferred 
upon  them,  Moses  was  directed  to  proclaim  the  fact  in  association  with  the 
promulgation  of  laws  demanding  holiness  of  heart  and  life.  The  Hebrew  Church 
was  composed  of  persons — 

I.  Separated  from  the  world,  **  have  severed  you  from  other  people."  They 
had  been  delivered  from  Egypt,  protected,  preserved,  guided,  exceeding  great 
and  precious  promises  vouchsafed  to  them,  beside  laws  for  the  regulation  of 
their  lives.  They  had  been  severed  from  other  uatious  that  they  might  become 
distinguished  for  purity,  and  be  the  means  of  blessiug  the  world. 

II.  Separated  from  sin.  *' Ye  shall  be  holy  unto  me"  All  the  rites  and 
ceremonies  imposed  upon  them  were  to  this  end.  The  divine  image,  lost  by 
the  fall,  was  to  be  restored.  Holiness,  to  which  the  people  were  called,  would 
not  only  produce  happiness  in  the  restored,  but  yield  pleasure  to  Jehovah,  whose 
name  is  holy. 

III.  Consecrated  to  the  lord.  "Holy  unto  me."  The  people  were  not  to 
live  for  self-gratification,  they  were  not  their  own  or  at  their  own  disposal,  their 
wills  were  to  fall  in  with  the  divine  will,  they  were  to  be  holy  for  Jehovah's 
sake  All  the  services  of  the  tabernacle,  every  sacrifice  offered,  would  remind 
the  worshippers  of  their  duty  to  surrender  themselves  unreservedly  to  Him 
who  had  set  them  apart  for  His  own  service  and  glory. 

IV.  Owned  of  the  lord.  *'  That  ye  should  be  mine."  Herein  we  see  the 
condescension  of  Jehovah,  to  take  into  His  possession,  as  His  intimate  friends, 
such  unworthy  creatures  as  the  Hebrews  were.  We  see  His  infinite  goodness  in 
providing  for  their  wants  and  educating  them  for  a  sublime  position  amoDg  the 
nations  of  the  earth.  He  owned  them,  they  were  therefore  to  feel  themselves 
at  His  disposal,  and  to  act  implicitly  under  His  direction. 

The  same  things  hold  good  in  the  Christian  Church.  Believers  are  to  come 
out  from  the  ungodly,  be  distinct  from  the  world.  They  are  to  be  separate 
from  sin  and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing.  They  are  to  be  consecrated  to  the 
Lord,  their  motto  ''  For  me  to  live  is  Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain."  They  are  not 
their  own,  bi|t  bought  with  a  price,  even  the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  Let  us 
warn  others  against  sin  ;  watch  over  our  own  hearts ;  pray  for  help  to  resist  every 
temptation ;  avoid  everything  likely  to  contaminate  ;  avail  ourselves  of  every 
aid  to  growth  in  grace  and  progress  in  holiness. — F,  W.  B. 


252  HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xxi.  1. 


Topic :  Godly   Distinctiveness    (Vv.  22-26). 
It  manifests  itself  in,  and  results  from  : — 

I.  A  UNIQUE  CODE  OP  MORAL  AND  SACRED  LAWS. 

"Ye  shall  keep  all  Mi/  statutes  and  all  My  judgments,  and  do  them  *'  (v.  22). 
No  other  people  had  a  standard  of  morals^  or  a  directory  of  religious  regulations 
comparable  to  these. 

II.  A   STUDIOUS  AVOIDANCE    OF   THE   CUSTOMS    OF    UNGODLINESS. 

*'  Ye  shall  not  walk  in  the  manners  of  the  nations,"  etc.   (v.  23). 
Conformity  to  the  world  was  prohibited.     However  sanctioned,  or  desirable, 
or  seemingly  harmless,  the  customs  of  the  ungodly  were  to  be  shunned. 

III.  A  CAUTIOUS  SELECTION  OP  SOCIAL  ENJOYMENTS  AND  INDULGENCES. 

"  Ye  shall  put  difference  between  clean  and  unclean,"  etc.  (v.  25). 

Palate  not  to  be  gratified,  tables  not  to  be  spread  with  promiscuous  viands. 
God's  wish  and  word  were  to  rule  them  in  every  enjoyment ;  and  self  restraint  was 
to  mark  them  in  every  gratification. 

IV.  A  HERITAGE  OF  SPECIAL  PRIVILEGES  AS  GOD's  PEOPLE. 

"  Ye  shall  inherit  their  land,  a  land  that  floweth  with  milk  and  honey,"  etc 
(v.  24). 

Sinners  lose  earthly  felicities,  as  the  penalty  of  their  impiety  :  '*  therefore  I 
abhorred  them  "  (v.  23;. 

The  godly  possess  rich  heritage  of  good  as  the  mark  of  God's  favour  :  "  I 
will  give  it  unto  you  to  possess"  (v.  24). 

V.  A  SEAL  OF  DIVINE  SANCTITY    RESTING  UPON  THEM. 

They  show  themselves  to  be — 

1,  Divinely  **  separated  "  (v.  24)  from  other  people.  Their  history  and  career 
attest  God  s  dealing:  with  them  as  with  no  other  people. 

2.  Divinely  sanctified.  ('*  Ye  shall  be  holy  unto  me  :  for  I  the  Lord  am  holy, 
and  have  severed  you  from  other  people  "  (v.  26).  For  the  very  **  beauty  of  the 
Lord  "  rests  upon  the  character  and  conduct  of  those  He  redeems. 

JSote: 

(a)  God  claims  His  people  :  they  are  not  their  own  ;  may  not  follow  their  own 
desires  and  delights,  He  is  their  law,  they  must  surrender  to  Him.  "  That  ye 
should  be  mine  "  (v.  26).  It  is  a  blessed  fact  to  belong  to  God :  but  it  carries 
its  obligations. 

{b)  Priviliges  are  conditioned  upon  fidelity  {y.  22).  The  inheritance  would  be 
forfeited  if  obedience  were  withheld.  All  God's  covenant  promises  to  us  wait 
upon  our  loyalty  to  Him.     "  Ye  are  my  friends  if  ye  do"  etc 


-•o«- 


CHAPTER    XXI. 

SUGGESTIVE    READINGS. 

V,  1. — Speak  unto  the  priests    .    .     there  shall  none  be  defiled.     If  it  was 

important  that  the  whole  community  of  Israel  should  maintain  ceremonial  and 
moral  purity,  it  was  certainly  not  less  urgent  for  *'  the  priests,  the  sons  of  Aaron." 
Through  the  past  ten  chapters  the  laws  have  had  reference  to  the  "  congregation 
of  Israel  "j  the  divine  word  now  comes  to  His  ministers  within  the  sanctuary. 


CHAP.  XXI.  1—6.]  THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS,  253 

These  priests  were  types  of  Christ,  and  also  of  the  sacred  character  and  sacer- 
dotal ministry  of  6e/^f^;ers.•  their  life  and  service  should  therefore  be  inviolate, 
consecrated,  worthy.  For  Christ  was  *'holy,  harmless,  separate  from  sinners"; 
and  His  folio vvers,  who  maintain  His  witness  in  the  world,  are  also  to  be  "  holy 
and  unblamable.*'  This  sanctity  is  now  to  be  typically  enacted  and  fore- 
shadowed in  the  conduct  and  ministry  of  these  priests. 

Vv  2-4. — Contact  with  the  dead  entailed  ceremonial  uncleanness,  and  ex- 
cluded from  the  sanctuary  for  a  week.  For  a  priest  to  be  disqualified  for  hia 
functions  was  both  derogatory  to  his  sacred  office  and  a  most  serious  interrup- 
tion of  his  duties.  In  Christians  who  are  "  priests  unto  God  "  there  may  be 
neither  disqualification  for,  nor  interruption  of,  their  ministry.  Human  claims, 
and  even  domestic  sorrows,  may  not  intercept  the  Christian  life ;  that  must  be 
maintained  unchecked  whatever  befalls  us.  Happy  we  that  the  succour  of  our 
Lord  so  supports  us  in  our  griefs  and  bereavements  that,  instead  of  checking  us 
in  our  Christian  life  and  work,  they  qualify  us  for  even  a  richer  ministry  for  Christ 
among  men. 

Vv.  5,  6. — Marks  of  mourning  prohibited.  For  they  who  live  near  God's 
presence,  in  the  joy  of  His  favour,  both  have  such  consolations  in  Him  as  to 
temper  grief  over  bereavement,  and  also  realise  the  world  beyond  the  dark  veil 
which  has  fallen  between  them  and  their  loved  ones.  Therefore,  by  moderating 
their  distress,  they  would  teach  us  how  to  "  sorrow  not  as  others  who  have  no 
hope."  Even  in  our  darkest  sorrow  let  us  never  "  profane  the  name  "  which  we 
are  to  glorifj  ;  remembering  our  high  office  and  privileged  standing  in  Christ.      j;    . 

Vv.  7-9.— They  shall  not  take  a  wife,  etc.     Called  himself  to  a  hallowed  life, '^^^ 
the  priest  must  preserve  himself  from  faulty  alliances.    Marriage  should  be  I'egu-'^'^Y 
lated  by  fitnes^!.     There  should  be  moral  harmony,  spiritual  sympathy,  between  ^*  ^ 
man  and  wife;  emphatically  so  with  all  who  profess  Christ.     *' Be  ye  not  un- 
equally yoked  together." 

Vv.  10-15.— He  that  is  the  high  priest,  etc.  The  ordinary  priests  were 
allowed,  when  death  fell  on  their  nearest  relationships,  to  relax  their  ministries 
awhile  ;  but  not  so  the  high  priest  j  for  his  absence  from  the  tabernacle  would 
arrest  all  the  services  of  the  sanctuary,  while  his  contact  with  the  dead  would 
disqualify  him  to  intercede  for  the  people  before  God. 

"  Vv.  16-24. — He  that  hath  any  blemish,  let  him  not  approach,  etc.  Physical 
malformations  necessarily  unfit  nien  for  solemn  public  offices  when  they  attract 
observation,  disturb  reverence,  and  induce  ridicule.  Yet,  although  bodily  in- 
firmities still  offer  a  natural  obstruction  to  any  one  so  afflicted  entering  the 
ministry  of  the  Christian  Church,  they  create  no  barrier  to  usefulness  in  many 
other  honourable  and  hallowed  paths  of  service.  Within  a  deformed  body  may 
dwell  a  beautiful  soul ;  and  **  our  feeble  frame "  need  not  disqualify  us  for 
gracious  and  loving  work  in  the  Church  of  our  Lord. 

Our  Divine  Priest  was  in  all  points  perfect — *' without  blemish";  in  Him  God 
was  "  well  pleased."  No  defect  mars  His  acceptance  as  He  appears  in  the  presence 
of  God  for  us,  and  no  infirmity  in  person  or  character  exposes  Him  to  the  depre- 
ciation of  men.  He  is  the  faultless  Jesus;  "fairest  among  ten  thousand,  and 
altogether  lovely." 

SECTIONAL    HOMILIES. 

Topic  :  Sacred  Rela.tionship  Demands  Sanctity  op  Life. 

"  Speak  unto  the  priests,  There  shall  none  he  defiled  ;  the  bread  of  their  God  do  they 
offer,  therefore  they  shall  he  holy  "  (vv.  1-6). 

If  there  is  one  fact  more  notably  emphasised  than  another  in  this  address  to 
priests,  it  is  this  :  their 


264  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xxi.  1—6. 

I.  Absolute  and  indestructible  relationship. 

Every  son  of  Aaron  was  a  "  priest."  Of  this  union  with  Aaron  it  is  observable 
that — 

1.  It  results  from  a  living  relationship.  By  birth  he  was  connected  with  Aaron, 
a  lineal  descendant  of  God's  High  Priest.  And  no  truth  is  more  a  truism  than 
that  every  Christian  is  by  birth- relationship  connected  with  Christ — born  a 
priest,  eDtering  the  spiritual  life  a  "  priest " ;  not  rising  later  into  the  priestly 
relationship,  but  the  moment  he  is  quickened  and  becomes  a  believing  and  a 
living  soul,  he  is  a  "  priest  unto  God." 

By  no  process  of  spiritual  development  or  self-culture  or  studied  effort  does  the 
convert  to  Christ  become  a  *'  priest ";  he  is  that  by  virtue  of  his  living  rela- 
tionship to  the  High  Priest :  for  as  all  the  sons  of  Aaron  were  priests,  so  are  all 
the  sons  of  God  through  their  connection  with  Christ.  The  spiritual  priesthood 
is  the  appendage  of  our  spiritual  birth. 

2.  The  relationship  is  inalienable  and  indestructible.  Conduct  is  not  the  basis 
of  relationship  with  Christ,  but  life.  A  son  of  Aaron  might  be  defiled  *'  for  the 
dead  "  (v.  2),  yet  he  did  not  thereby  cease  to  be  related  to  Aaron.  If  we  were 
only  priests  to  God  as  our  conduct  was  faultless,  who  could  stand  1  If  none 
remained  a  *' priest 'Monger  than  he  preserved  himself  undefiled,  who  would 
hold  the  spiritual  office  an  hour  %  We  are  all  unclean  ;  defile  ourselves  con- 
tinuously with  "the  dead,"  the  guilty  and  contaminating  things  of  earth.  But 
"  our  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God  ";  and  by  virtue  of  that  life-union  we  remain 
priests. 

3.  Imperfections  of  nature  and  character  do  not  sever  relationship.  A 
"blemish,"  deformity  of  body,  proved  a  disqualification  for  ministry,  but  did  not 
destroy  association  with  Aaron.  Yes  ;  there  is  exclusion  from  high  and  honoured 
services  in  Gonseqyience  of  irremediable  defect  and  fault ;  and  Christians  with  in- 
curable weakness  of  disposition,  worldliness  of  sympathy,  infirmities  of  character, 
vacillation  of  purpose,  are  thereby  set  aside  from  honour  in  the  Church  and 
highest  ministries  for  their  Lord  ;  yet  still  the  relationship  to  Christ  continues, 
for  it  is  a  birth-relationship,  based  upon  a  life-union  with  Jesus.  Christ  is  our 
life,  and  Christ  liveth  in  us.  We  are  therefore  in  priestly  connection  with  our 
High  Priest. 

But  though  relationship  is  absolute  and  indestructible — 
II.  Privilege  is  dependent  and  conditional. 

1.  Defilement  is  a  disqualification  for  near  fellowship  and  highest  enjoyment  of 
the  priestly  relationship.  Contact  with  ''  the  dead  "  was  forbidden  ;  it  excluded 
the  priest  from  the  service  of  God  until  cleansed  anew  and  so  reinstated.  All 
contamination  works  disqualification,  therefore  "touch  not,  taste  not,  handle 
not"  A  priestly  life  should  be  pure.  "Keep  thyself  pure."  "The  temple  ot 
God  is  holy."  "  Unspotted  from  the  world."  Spiritual  favours  are  surrendered 
by  the  Christian  the  moment  he  defies  himself  Privilege  is  connected  with 
purity.      Near  fellowship  is  for  the  uncorrupt. 

2.  Defect  is  a  disqualification  for  highest  service  for  our  Lord.    [See  v.  17,  etc.] 
Physical  deformities  even  now  form  a  natural  barrier  to  the  loftiest  offices  in 

the  Church  of  Christ.  Not  unfitting  the  sufferer  for  many  lowlier  and  less 
public  ministries ;  for  sacred  grace  is  not  dependent  upon  physical  "  form  and 
comeliness."     [See  Addenda  to  chapter.  Bodily  Infirmities.'] 

Defects  of  character,  of  mental  and  moral  constitution,  also  exclude  from  loftiest 
stations  and  services  in  the  Christian  kingdom.  They  are  a  barrier  to  such 
positions  in  the  church  as  require  noblest  qualities  of  character  :  for  eminence 
gives  influence  ;  and  he  who  moves  in  the  public  gaze  must  be  free  from  such 
weaknesses  of  will,  or  principle,  or  conduct  as  would  lay  him  open  to  inconstancy. 
For  such  infirmit'es  would  bring  reproach  and  derision  on  the  Holy  Name  we 
bear.    There  isK**  '11  for  the  weak  and  defective  a  relationship  with  Christ     "for 


CHAP.  XXI.  1-6.]  THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS.  256 


by  grace  are  they  saved  ";  but  not  eminent  position  in  the  Church.  "  He  shall 
eat  the  bread  (tf  his  God  :  only  he  shall  not  go  in  unto  the  veil,  nor  come  nigh 
\uUo  the  altar,  because  he  hath  a  blemish"  (vv.  22,  23).  [See  Addenda  to  chap- 
ter. Bodily  Appearance.^ 

A.  All  imperfections  in  Christians  work  deprivation, 

(a)  Loss  of  near  fellowship  with  God  in  most  privileged  secresy. 

{h)  Forfeiture  of  rights  to  most  sacred  services  in  connection  with  the 
sanctuary. 

(c)  Refusal  to  represent  6^oc?  before  men,  exclusion  from  the  solemnities 
of  priestly  station  and  function. 

B.  Sacred  relationship  summons  to  exalted  sanctity. 

{a)  Avoidance  of  all  forms  and  causes  of  contamination  (v,  1), 
(h)  Customs,  harmless  in  themselves  and  not  forbidden  to  others,  must 
be  shunned  by  priestly  souls  (vv.  5,  6). 

(c)  Indulgences  and  relationships  are  to  be  regulated  by  our  exalted 
standing  in  Christ  (v.  9). 

(d)  Life  must  be  lived  under  the  power  of  the  "  annointing'*  (y,  10), 
the  "  unction  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 

Only  thus  can  we  maintain  ourselves,  as  **  a  spiritual  priesthood  to  oflfer  up 
spiritual  sacrifices,  acceptable  to  God  ny  Jesus  Christ"  (1  Peti  ii,  5). 

Topic:  Dignity  of  the  pKiKfaTHOOD  to  be  kept  Inviolate. 

That  the  Levitical  priests  were  to  be  blameless  and  without  blemish,  indicated 
the  peculiar  sanctity  of  their  office,  and  the  holiness  of  Jehovah,  whom  they 
represented  among  the  people.  The  priesthood  filled  the  gap  between  the  Holy 
God  and  sinful  man,  the  offerings  they  presented  were  the  means  of  securing 
fellowship  at  the  mercy  seat,  pardon  for  national  and  individual  offences.  The 
directions  to  the  priests  respecting  their  qualifications  for  the  service  of  the 
tanernacle  were  repeated  before  all  Israel,  that  the  people  might  recognise  the 
office  and  dignity  of  those  who  were  solemnly  set  apart  for  sacerdotal  duties. 
The  directions  of  this  chapter  taught  the  priests — 

I.  That  their  patriotism  was  to  be  subordinate  to  their  superior  saintly 

OFFICE. 

When  tidings  came  to  the  priests  of  any  great  sorrow  in  the  camp  of  Israel, 
of  suffering  and  death,  human  sympathy  would  prompt  them  to  repair  to  the 
spot  and  condole  with  the  bereaved  ;  but  they  were  not  to  *'be  defiled  for  the 
dead  among  the  people,"  nor  surround  the  dead  body,  nor  join  in  the  necessary 
obsequies  Hosvever  patriotic  they  might  feel,  and  however  much  they  loved 
their  people,  the  claims  of  their  otfice  were  paramount ;  they  had  a  great  work 
to  do,  and  could  not  turn  aside  to  mourn  for  the  dead,  except  under  very  special 
circumstances.  Even  natural,  as  well  as  national  sympathy,  was  to  be  sup- 
pressed, nothing  was  to  be  done  that  would  in  any  way  produce  ceremonial 
defilement.  Thtse  restrictions  would  be  for  the  best  interests  of  the  people,  as 
in  obeying  them  the  priests  would  not  neglect  those  duties  in  the  discharge  of 
which  priceless  blessings  came  from  the  presence  of  Jehovah  to  Israel. 

II.  That  their  Pi^RSONAL  appearance  was  to    be   appropriate  to    their 

SAINTLY   OFFICE. 

Directious  had  already  been  given  respecting  vestments.   [See  former  Homilies. 
The  heathen  priests  mutilated  their  bodies,  disfigured  their  features,  corruptee 
themselves  with  vicious  habits;  the  Hebrew  hierarchy  were  not  to  practise  such 
things,  their  bodies,  as  well  as  their  hearts  and  minds,  were  to  be  kept  whole 
and  pure.     The  exquisite  beauty  of  nature— even  in  the  minutest  things — be- 
tokens the  tastefulness  of  the  great  Creator.     He  loves  the  lovely,  is  pleased 


256  nOMILETIC   COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  XXI.  4. 

with  the  beautiful ;  the  unsightly  and  discordant  are  incompatible  with  His 
glorious  purposes.  It  is  a  serious  deficiency  in  the  equipment  for  efficient  ser- 
vice, when  the  physical  powers  are  feeble,  or  bodily  appearance  repellent.  Those 
who  minister  before  the  Lord  should  be  free  as  possible  from  all  physical 
defects,  mental  obliquity,  and  moral  obtuseness,  as  well  as  from  flagrant  wrong- 
doing. 

III.  That  their  conjugal  alliances  were  to  be  helpful  to  their  SAiNTLr 

OFFICE. 

Celibacy  was  not  imposed  upon  the  Levitical  priesthood,  but  full  and  strict 
directions  given  respecting  their  matrimonial  engagements.  They  were  not  to 
marry  persons  beneath  them  in  dignity,  or  concerning  whose  chastity  and 
morality  anything  detrimental  was  known  to  exist.  For  a  priest  to  take  an 
unsuitable  wife  would  be  to  beset  his  office  with  insuperable  embarrassments. 
By  her  evil  communications  his  good  manners  would  become  corrupted.  None 
of  his  family  could  act  wrongly  without  some  unfavourable  reflection  being  cast 
on  him.  This  ancient  statute  has  a  good  lesson  for  modern  days.  Too  much 
care  cannot  be  exercised  by  Christian  ministers  in  the  selection  of  help-meets 
for  life  ;  the  Church,  as  well  as  the  home,  will  be  affected  for  good  or  evil  as 
the  wife  and  children  of  the  minister  of  Christ  conduct  themselves  before  the 
people. 

As  the  ages  progress,  less  importance  will  become  attached  to  physical 
blemishes  than  to  mental  and  moral  defeots.  The  moral  standard  of  human 
measurement  is  divine,  and  will  outlive  all  other  authority.  The  cause  of  Christ 
has  often  been  injured  by  its  members  yoking  themselves  with  unsuitable  part- 
ners ;  the  purity  and  harmony  of  home  life  will  conduce  to  the  light  and  sweet- 
ness of  church  life.  The  house  of  the  Lord  must  not  be  profaned,  nor  must 
anything  be  allowed  in  the  character  of  its  ministers  calculated  to  bring  its  hal- 
lowed services  into  ridicule  or  contempt.  Ministers  of  Christ  should  aim  to 
live  above  suspicion,  to  be  renowned  for  moral  worth,  and  to  be  highly  esteemeo 
for  their  work's  sake.  Such  favour  will  be  the  foreshadowing  of  the  approval  of 
the  Master  in  the  last  great  day. — F,   W.  B, 

Topic :  Qualifications  for  Sacred  Service  (V,  4). 

Impossible  that  the  ceremonial  rites  and  observances,  and  the  elevated  spirit- 
ual teachings  of  Leviticus  could  have  been  the  inventions  of  the  Hebrew  priest- 
hood. Uninspired  men,  under  the  sway  of  human  passions,  would  have 
exempted  themselves  from  disabilities  and  censures  and  accorded  to  themselves 
unrestrained  license.  Though  the  priests  were  peculiarly  honoured,  and 
permitted  to  draw  very  near  to  God,  yet  they  needed  to  observe  ceremonies  for 
spiritual  cleansing,  they  needed  to  resist  temptation,  and  seek  forgiveness  the 
same  as  ordinary  men.     The  priests — 

I.  Were  to  be  free  from  physical  blemishes  arising  from  heredity,  acci- 
dent, acquired  malformation,  or  self  infliction. 

II.  Were  to  avoid  all  contact  with  evil.  Everything  that  would  dis- 
qualify and  detain  them  from  regular  consecrated  service  was  to  be  sedulously 
avoided,  (a)  all  contact  with  things  ceremonially  unclean,  (6)  all  unholy 
alliances  of  a  social  and  domestic  character.  These  directions  needed  because 
the  priests — 

III.  Were  the  representatives  op  the  lord.  Bore  His  name,  reflected  His 
nature,  executed  His  laws.  He  sanctified  them,  set  them  specially  apart  to  be 
mediators  between  Himself  and  the  people. 

IV.  Were  the  exemplars  op  the  people.  Possessing  special  advantages, 
called  to  exalted  duties,  exempted  largely  from  other  cares,  the  priests  were 


CHAP.  XXI.  22,  23]  THE  BOOR   OF  LEVITICUS.  261 


expected  to  exhibit  conspicuous  holiness,  to  become  examples  to  Israel  in  all 
things  that  Jehovah  commanded. 

V.  Weke  types  of  thb  predicted  redeemer.  Especially  was  this  so  in  the 
character  and  work  of  the  high  priest.  His  sanctification  from  all  defilement, 
admission  into  the  holiest  of  all,  presentation  of  the  blood  of  the  atonement 
before  the  mercy  seat,  etc. ;  all  were,  as  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  teaches,  typical 
of  Him,  who,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  would  abrogate  the  ceremonial  law  of 

Moses. 

In  the  Christian  dispensation,  where  all  believers  are  kings  and  priests  unto 
God,  spiritual  qualifications  are  required  for  sacred  services.  Freedom  from 
physical  blemishes,  avoidance  of  contact  with  contaminating  influences,  non- 
association  with  uncongenial  companions,  will  tend  to  make  service  for  Christ 
more  efficient.  Every  physical,  mental,  and  spiritual  excellence  is  necessary  to 
adequate  equipment  for  the  work  of  the  ministry,  for  the  service  of  the  sanc- 
tuary. Persons  may  serve  God  well  who  are  encumbered  with  various 
deficiences,  but  they  can  serve  Him  better  who  have  few,  and  could  serve  Him 
best  if  they  had  none.  We  are  called  upon  to  be  imitators  of  God  ;  the  world 
is  to  see  the  divine  likeness  in  us.  The  Christliness  of  our  lives  is  to  be  so  un- 
mistakable that  men  shall  recognise  us  as  having  been  with  Jesus.  "Let  your 
light  so  shine  before  men,"  etc. — F,  W»  B, 

Topic:  Allowance  for  Human  Infirmity  (Vv.  22,  23), 

How  fitting  that  the  priests  who  were  commanded  to  offer  spotless  sacrifices 
should  themselves  be  without  blemish.  How  fitting,  also,  that  in  a  dispensation 
of  types  and  symbols,  respect  should  be  paid  to  the  purity  and  perfection  of  the 
body,  which  would  naturally  be  regarded  as  mirroring  the  faculties  of  the  soul. 
Impressions  are  produced  upon  the  spirit  through  the  corporeal  senses,  the 
physical  appearance  of  the  priests,  therefore,  as  they  officiated  at  the  altar,  would 
affect  the  tone  of  devotion  in  the  people.  It  would  be  for  the  best  interests  of 
Israel,  as  well  as  for  the  glory  of  Jehovah,  that  no  one  with  a  blemish  should 
take  a  prominent  part  in  the  services  of  the  tabernacle.     Consider — 

I.  The  influence  physical  infirmities  ought  to  exert  upon  the  human 

MIND. 

They  are  often  the  cause  of  perplexity  and  pain,  but  they  should  always 
awaken  (a)  Reflection :  Why  has  disease  invaded  the  frame  so  "  fearfully  and 
wonderfully  made"  1  Why  such  malformations  and  imperfections  in  organs 
originally  designed  for  healthy  and  harmonious  activities?  The  reply  comes — 
Sin  has  done  all  the  mischief,  caused  all  the  infirmities  and  pains.  (6)  Caution: 
If  the  body  is  so  liable  to  disease  and  injury,  to  many  disqualifications  for  ful« 
filling  the  great  purposes  of  life,  surely  we  cannot  exercise  too  much  vigilance  in 
warding  off  injury,  in  avoiding  everything  that  would  vitiate  the  springs  of  life, 
or  disorganize  and  corrupt  our  mortal  bodies,  (c)  Humility  :  A  body  so  liable  to 
disease,  weakness  and  death,  so  marred  by  sin,  is  not  a  thing  to  be  proud  of  and 
idolised ;  at  the  best  it  is  a  body  of  death,  only  the  feeble  vehicle  of  the  soul, 
a  muddy  vestment  of  decay  grossly  shutting  us  in  from  hearing  and  seeing  the 
beauties  and  harmonies  of  heaven.  The  soul  demands  our  ^rs^,  constant^  supreme 
care. 

II.  The  hindrance  physical  infirmities  may  prove  in  the  discharge  of 
sacred  duties. 

Though  the  heart  might  be  consecrated,  the  mind  willing,  priests  with  phy- 
sical defects  were  not  allowed  to  perform  sacerdotal  duties.  Though  no  such 
exclusive  regulations  are  in  force  in  the  Christian  Church,  yet  physical  defects 
are  serious  drawbacks  to  efficient  seryice ;  lam^neu*  d^afness^  blindness^  loss  of 


258 


HOMIIETIC  COMMENTARY  ON 


[CHAP    XXI. 


w>ice,  general  dehiWy.  deformity ^  deficiency ^  eio.,  not  only  make  the  appearance 
unattractive,  but  unfit  the  person  for  complete  and  thorough  service.  There 
may  be  full  and  acceptable  service  rendered  in  the  heart,  the  ftail  body  dis- 
qualified for  outward  service  may  become  a  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  "  They 
also  serve  who  wait/' 

III.  The  consideration  physical  infirmities  receive  prom  him  who  made  us. 

Those  disqualified  to  serve  at  the  altar  of  the  tabernacle  were  uot  wholly 
excommunicated,  were  not  expelled  from  the  precincts  of  the  sanctuary  or 
deprived  of  its  sacred  provisions.  They  might  eat  the  priest's  portions  of  the 
mtat^  siuy  and  trespass  ofi'erings,  of  the  shewbread,  and  other  priestly  perquisites; 
probably  also  they  aided  the  officiating  priests  by  performing  various  subordi- 
nate duties.  Thus  we  get  an  illustration  of  the  fact  mentioned  by  David,  "  He 
knoweth  our  frame,  He  remembereth  that  we  are  dust.**  Evidently  {a)  physical 
features  are  not  an  invariable  index  to  the  qualities  of  the  soul.  Some  of  the  most 
lovely  looking  creatures  are  the  most  ferocious  and  deadly — tigers,  serpents,  etc. 
Some  of  the  most  uncomely  frames  have  been  known  to  possess  exquisite  minds, 
sublime  spirits ;  and  vice  versa.  (6)  Physical  features  are  not  the  signs  by  which 
Jehovah  judges  of  real  worth.  Priests  with  blemishes  were  simply  excluded  from 
prominent  conspicuous  duties,  the  Lord  owned  them,  "  He  shall  eat  the  bread 
of  his  God."  The  Lord  looketh  not  upon  the  outward  appearauce  (as  a  rule, 
and  never  when  judging  of  real  worth)  but  upon  the  heart.  To  Him,  character, 
not  circumstances  or  appearances,  is  the  criterion  by  which  the  favour  is 
bestowed.  All  through  the  Bible,  election  and  promotion  are  based  upon 
character,  (c)  Physical  features  will  neither  distort  nor  disqualify  in  the  future 
life.  The  believer's  body  of  humiliation  is  to  be  fashioned  like  unto  the 
Saviour's  glorious  body ;  no  imperfection  of  any  kind  in  the  perfect  state  of  the 
purified.  Those  who  suffer  from  physical  infirmities  may  gather  comfort  from 
foregoing  considerations ;  those  who  are  largely  exempt  from  them  shall  bear 
the  infirmities  of  the  weak.  Our  blessed  Master  will  not  break  the  bruised 
reed  or  quench  the  smoking  flax.  He  can  make  us  strong  in  weakness,  we  may 
glory  in  infirmities  that  the  power  of  Christ  may  rest  upon  us. — F.  W.B, 


ILLUSTRATIVE  ADDENDA  10   CHAPTER  XXL 


Celibacy  : 

"  Lust  may  be  in  the  heart  though  it  be 
not  seen  by  others  ;  as  guests  may  be  in  the 
house  though  they  look  not  out  of  the 
■window." — BowES. 

Bodily  infirmities  : 

"  Our  bodily  infirmities,  blessed  be  God, 
cannot  exclude  us  from  His  heavenly  glory. 
And  they  who,  on  many  accounts,  may  be 
disqualified  for  the  work  of  the  ministry, 
may  s(  rve  God  with  comfort  in  other  stations 
in  His  Church."—  Scott, 


**  Though  snch  blemishes  do  not  disable 

men  from  the  ministry  of  the  gospel,  such 
remarkable  deformities  as  apparently  pro- 
cure contempt  should  discourage  any  from 
undertaking  that  work,  except  where  such 
persons  feel  irresistibly  called  to  it.  But  that 
which  in  the  Evangelical  ministry  is  most 
liable  to  ex^^eption  is  such  blemishes  in  the 
mind  or  manners  as   render  such   men  in- 


competent to  teach  others   and   unfit  to  b# 
public  examples." — Assetnblfs  Annotation, 

Bodily  appearance : 

Auxilium  non  leve  vultus  hahet. 
[A  pleasing  countenance  is  no  slight  advan- 
tage].— Ovid. 

"  'Tis  not  a  lip,  or  eye,  we  beauty  call, 
But  the  joint  force  and  full  result  of  all.** 

—Pope. 

*  I  pray  Thee,  O  God,  that  I  may  be  beanti* 
ful  within." — Socbatbs.    . 

"Let  none  presume 
To  wear  an  undeserved  dignity." 

— Merchant  of  Venice-^  II.  9. 

"  Though  nature  with  a  beauteous  wall 
Doth  oft  close  in  pollution,  yet  of  thee 
I  will  believe,  that  thou  hast  a  mind  to  suit 
"With  this  thy  fair  and  outward  character.* 

— >SHAK£SP£A9JiL 


CHAP.  XXII.  1-11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS,  269 

•*  Handsome  ia  that  handsome  does.*'  **  How  this  grace 

— Goldsmith,  Vicar  of  IVakeJield,  L  Speaks  his   own  standing  1     What  a  mental 

power 
This  eye  shoots  forth  I     How  big  imagination 
*  Charms  strike  the  sight,  but  merit  wins       Moves  in  this  lip  1     To  the  dumbness  of  the 
the  soul." — Popa.  gesture 

One  might  interpret." — Timon  of  Athens^  I.  L 

Gratior ac  pulchro  veniens  in  corpore  virtus,       **  What  tender  force,  what  dignity  divine ; 
[Even  virtue  is  fairer  when  it  appears  in  a  What  virtue  consecrating  every  feature  I" 

beautiful  person.]— Vieqil,  — Yoon». 


■•••- 


CHAPTER   XXII. 

SUGGESTIVE  READINGS. 

V.  1. — Profane  not  My  holy  nam©  in  those  things  which  they  hallow  unto 
Me.  Holy  things  must  not  be  touched  with  unclean  hands.  What  God  hallows 
should  be  revered.  To  treat  heedlessly  any  sacred  thing  profanes  that  Name 
with  which  it  has  become  associated.  If  this  applied  to  the  altar  offerings  of 
the  ancient  tabernacle,  surely  it  applies  to  our  holy  things — the  Scriptures,  the 
Sanctuary,  the  Lord's  Day;  for  the  Divine  Name  is  linked  to  them,  they  are 
hallowed  unto  Him,  and  must  not  be  profaned.  More  forcibly  this  requirement 
applies  to  lives  hallowed  in  consecration  to  Christ ;  they  must  not  be  profaned 
by  fellowship  with  evil,  lest  it  lead  to  "that  holy  name  by  which  they  are  called 
being  blasphemed." 

V.  2. — That  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  My  presence.  Did  not  the  devouring 
fire  consume  Nadab  and  Abihu  %  Infliction  of  such  severe  penalties  was  a  mea- 
sure necessary  in  that  age  for  the  enforcement  of  duty,  for  inculcating  correct 
ideas  of  Jehovah's  sanctity  and  authority.  Priests,  by  their  privileged  access  to 
His  **  presence,"  might  lapse  into  incaution ;  and  as  their  favours  were  special, 
so  their  warnings  were  emphatic.  If  we  dwell  "  in  the  light,"  how  appalling  the 
possibility  of  being  thrust  into  outer  darkness  !  Having  preached  to  others,  how 
fearful  to  think  of  becoming  a  castaway  !  Such  possibilities  should  arouse  privi- 
leged souls  to  "  take  heed  lest  they  fall." 

V.  10.— There  shall  no  stranger  eat  of  the  holy  thing.  Hospitality  is  every- 
where in  Scripture  commended ;  we  should  be  *'  careful  to  entertain  strangers." 
But  guests  in  our  homes  do  not,  on  that  account,  become  qualified  to  share  the 
covenant  privileges  of  religion,  which  are  reserved  to  those  who  are  Christ's. 
Relation  to  God  as  a  priest  is  a  personal  matter ;  and  as  a  spiritual  priest  each 
believer  is  entitled  to  sit  at  the  sacred  table — yes,  to  feast  in  the  very  banqueting 
house  of  sovereign  love — but  we  have  no  authority  to  extend  these  divine  favours 
to  others  who  have  no  priestly  relationship  to  God,  even  though  they  have 
domestic  or  friendly  relationship  to  us.  Courtesy  or  magnanimity  may  not 
obliterate  the  spiritual  distinctions  with  which  God  separates  men. 

V.  11. — But  if  the  priest  buy  any  soul  with  his  money,  he  shall  eat.  So 
that  when  a  soul  becomes  a  priest's  possession,  he  shares  the  priest's  privileges. 
Its  counterpart  is  in  those  we  win  to  Christ — not  by  **  money,"  but  by  the  energies 

g  2 


260 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xxi.  2l 


of  Christian  persuasion  and  influence ;  bound  to  ua  in  the  obligations  of  love. 
Uur  converts  enter  into  our  sacred  enjoyments :  "  Ye  are  all  partakers  of  my 
grace"  (Phil.  i.  7).  ^ 

\  14-— If  a  man  eat  of  the  holy  thing  unwittingly.  Intruding  where  he 
ought  not ;  taking  advantages  for  which  he  had  no  qualification  ;  enjoying  sacred 
food  for  which  he  had  done  no  sacred  service.  This  is  "trespass  "  (v.  16).  Yet 
all  assumption  of  religion  without  being  in  heart  religious,  all  church  offices  and 
emoluments  held  by  unchristian  men  for  the  sake  more  of  "gain  than  godliness" 
—this  is  profanation,  and  these  "  bear  the  iniquity  of  trespass  " 

Vv.  17-24. — Physical perfectness  requiredin  animals  sacrificed.  For  they  were 
suggestive  of  the  perfect  Christ,  and  must  therefore  have  no  defect ;  and  they  be- 
tokened the  perfect  life  which  believers  are  called  to  devote  to  God:  "Be  ye 
therefore  perfect,  even  as  your  Father  in  heaven  is  perfect." 

V.  25.— Neither  from  a  stranger's  hand,  etc.  Offerings  must  be  faultless,  and 
the  offerer  must  be  qualified.  Precious  gifts  from  unhallowed  hands  God  cannot 
accept.  Leave  the  gift  on  the  altar,  and  enter  first  into  sacred  relationship  with 
God  through  Christ.  Our  standing  *'  in  Him  "  is  of  supreme  importance ;  until 
we  are  thus  ''made  nigh."  we  cannot  acceptably  "  draw  nigh." 

V.  32. —I  will  be  hallowed  ...  I  am  the  Lord  which  hallow  you  It  is  for 
that  sublime  end  we  are  sanctified.  Men  seek  their  own  salvj»  ion,  God  seeks 
their  sanctity  ;  because  salvation  is  a  selfish  goal,  while  sanotit;  is  i  testimony 
for  God  to  men  and  angels.  The  work  of  divine  grace  in  us  ib  lioc  merely  for 
our  gain,  but  to  "adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour,"  to  ^now  the  holy 
character  of  God  to  those  who  "  take  knowledge  of  us,"  and  thus  help  to  fulfil- 
ment the  prayer,  "  Hallowed  be  thy  name." 


HOMILIES  ON   CHAPTER    XXIL 

Topic:  A  Solemn  Regard  for  Hallowed  Things. 

**  TTiat  they  profane  not  my  holy  name  in  those  things  which  they  hallow  unto  me  " 

(V.  2). 

Religion  is  a  sacred  inward  life.  It  consists  not  in  outward  things,  such  as 
symbols  and  ceremonies,  which  it  uses  and  calls  to  its  aid,  but  in  the  soul's 
acceptance  with  God,  in  its  homage  of  Him,  and  in  its  glad  resignation  to  Him 
and  service  for  Him. 

Yet  religion  has  its  outward  eocpression  in  lasiter'ml  things  which  it  **  halloivs" 
It  does  this  by  their  consecration  to  God's  service  and  honour.  What  in  itself 
may  be  common  and  worldly  becomes  sacred  when  dedicated  to  religious  pur- 
poses. And  in  this  act  of  hallowing  worldly  things,  religious  men  show  their 
difference  from  the  ungodly,  who  merely  keep  all  earthly  things  for  worldly  and 
human  ends,  devoting  none  to  God.  But  the  children  of  God  will  have  "  things 
which  they  hallow  unto  me." 

I.  Man's  ability  to  render  things  hallowed. 

1.  Places:  As  sanctuaries  devoted  to  God's  worship.  Homes  consecrated  by 
piety  and  prayer.  Select  scenes  of  retirement,  as  some  secret  glen  where  a  devout 
soul  goes  apart  for  meditation,  etc.,  like  Isaac  at  the  well  Lahai-roi.  A  lowly 
room  or  shed,  used  for  gathering  two  or  three  in  Christ's  name  for  reading  and 
exhortation. 

2.  Seasons:  As  the  "  Lord's  day";  or  appointed  days,  as  "holy  days  "  ;  or  a 
fixed  hour  for  bending  the  knee  with  some  distant  friend ;  or  times  in  which  to 
commemorate  God's  work  in  history. 

3.  Possessions :  As  wealth  set  apart  for  Christ ;  or  time  deliberately  determined 
to  be  spent  in  Christian  worJL «  or  some  particular  ol^ect  we   dedicate  to  the 


CHAP.  xxiT.  3.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS,  261 


Master's  use — as  Peter's  boat,  which  he  lent  to  Christ  from  which  to  preach  to  the 
multitudes  on  the  shore. 

4.  rersons:  Onr  own  lives  with  all  their  talents  and  affections,  **  they  ^ave 
themselves  unto  the  Lord  "  ;  or  a  child,  as  Hannah  dedicated  Samuel ;  or  a  band 
of  Christian  workers  sent  forth  on  a  specific  mission. 

II.  Man's  tendency  to  propane  things  hallowed. 

1.  As  when  regard  for  the  sanctity  of  holy  scenes  ceases  ;  the  sanctuary  fails 
to  be  in  thought  **  none  other  but  the  house  of  God  and  the  gate  of  heaven  "  ; 
or  home  piety  and  prayer  are  discouraged  by  neglect. 

2.  Regard  for  the  solemnity  of  sacred  seasons  declines  ;  the  Snhhath  is  not 
cherished  as  *'  a  delight,  the  holy  of  the  Lord,  honourable  "  ;  prayer  times  are 
let  slip  disregarded. 

3.  Regard  for  the  divine  claim  on  our  possessions  abates  ;  we  "  keep  back  some 
part  of  the  price  "  ;  we  recall  from  its  dedicated  purpose  some  consecrated  object. 

4.  Regard  for  true  spirituality  in  ourselves  and  others  wanes  ;  the  "  6rst  love  " 
waxes  cold;  the  eagerness  for  our  child  or  families  to  become  Chiistian  abates  in 
the  presence  of  their  worldly  interests  and  prospects. 

III.  Man's  responsibilitt  to  respect  things  hallowed. 

1.  They  are  no  longer  ours,  either  to  recall  from  consecration  or  to  divert 
to  ourselves.  Money  was  not  Ananias's  after  he  had  professedly  given  it  to 
Christ.  And  "  Ye  are  not  your  own."  Vowed  to  the  Lord,  our  appropriation 
of  it,  or  diversion  from  its  sacred  purpose,  is  profanation. 

2.  God's  name  becomes  identified  with  "things  hallowed  unto  Him.**  What  a 
dishonour  and  derision  to  God  and  religion  if,  e.g ,  a  church  should  be  debased 
and  turned  into  a  tavern  or  a  theatre  :  if  a  Christian  home  be  degraded  into  a 
habitation  of  libertines  and  revilers :  if  a  sanctified  life  returns  again  to  the 
vileness  of  iniquity.  Scoffers  then  will  "  blaspheme  that  holy  name  by  which 
we  are  called.*' 

3.  When  anything  is  "hallowed  "  it  is  a  witness  amid  ungodliness  for  religion 
and  the  unseen.  The  tendency  of  man  is  to  grow  absorbed  in  material  things, 
to  attend  merely  to  his  physical  and  earthly  interests.  "  Things  hallowed  "  to 
God  speak  to  men  of  what  is  divine,  spiritual,  eternal,  and  they  cannot  be 
removed  from  amongst  us  without  danger  of  men  sinking  lower  into  dark 
materialism,  and  so  forfeiting  all  the  benefits  which  Christianity  has  brought  into 
our  national,  social,  and  individual  life. 

(a)  The  Bible  deserves  to  be  cherished  as  a  hallowed  book,  yet  how  many 
neglect  it :  how  many  deride  it :  how  many  read  it  only  to  disobey  it. 

(6)  The  cross  is  a  symbol  of  a  most  pathetic,  solemn,  yet  precious  fact — the  death 
of  Jesus.  Yet  to  how  many  Protestants  has  it  become  a  mere  trinket  for  adorn- 
ment :  while  to  many  Romanists  it  has  become  an  object  of  idolatrous  superstition, 

(c)  The  bread  and  wine  are  tokens  of  a  finished  redemption  and  our  fellow- 
ship with  Christ  by  faith.  Yet  they  may  be  "eaten  and  drank  unworthily,  not 
discerning  the  Lord's  body,"  as  if  they  had  no  solemn  meaning :  or  they  may 
be  travestied  on  the  "  altar  "  of  Ritualists,  and  in  the  Papal  "  mass." 

"  Then  beware, 
And  make  thyself  all   reverence  and  fear." 

"  Speak,  that  they  profane  not  my  holy  name  in  those  things  which  they  hallow 
unto  me,** 

Topic :  Defiling  Holy  Things. 

"  Whosoever  goeth  unto  tJ-e  holy  things,  which  the  children  of  Israel  hallow  unto  the 
Lord,  having  his  uncleann^ss  upon  him,  that  soul  shall  be  cvi  off  from  my 
presence  :  I  am  the  Lord  "  (V.  3). 

Caryl  says,  *'  The  very  heathen  had  this  notion,  they  would  not  admi*.  any  to 


262  UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap,  xxiu  1—16 


their  religious  services  unless  they  were  prepared :  therefore  one  cried  out 
to  the  people  when  they  came  to  sacrifice,  *  All  you  that  are  unclean  and 
profane  go  far  away  from  these  sacrifices.*  Not  only  the  word  of  God  but  the 
very  light  of  nature  taught  them  not  to  meddle  with  holy  things  till  they  were 
themselves  sanctified." 

In  proof  of  this  stands  that  saying  of  Mneas  to  his  father  when  he  came 
from  the  war,  **  In  genitor^^  etc.     "  Father,  do  you  meddle   with  the  sacrifices: 
but  as  for  me  it  is  a  sinful  thing  to  touch  them  till  I  have  washed  myself  at 
the  fountain.** 

Cicero  teaches  a  noble  reverence  for  things  hallowed;  Res  sacros  non  modo 
manihus  attingiy  se  ne  cogitatione  quidem  violari  fas  fuit^  '*  Things  saored  should 
not  only  not  be  touched  with  the  hands,  but  not  violated  even  in  thought.*' 

Yet  there  have  been  priests  of  our  holy  religion — yes,  ministers  of  the  gospel  of 
Christ — and  men  in  sacred  eminence,  who  have  defamed  Christianity  by  their 
levity  and  sacrilege,  until  verily — 

Religion^  blushing^  veils  her  sacred  fires. — Popb. 

Admonitory  incidents  : 

Belshazzar  converted  the  consecrated  vessels  of  the  temple  into  instruments  of 
luxury  and  intemperance,  touching  holy  things  while  himself  unclean  ;  but  the 
hand  of  indignant  judgment  wrote  in  flaming  letters  upon  his  banqueting  hall 
his  sentence  of  doom. 

Herod  polluted  the  sepulchres  of  the  saints  with  a  sacreligious  search  for 
treasures  supposed  to  be  hidden  there,  when  God  made  fire  rise  from  the  earth 
to  devour  the  infamous  men  who  touched  holy  things  with  their  uncleauneas 
upon  them. 

Antiochus  ransacked  the  very  temple  of  God  ;  Heliodorus  emptied  the  treasures 
of  their  consecrated  moneys ;  Pompey  defiled  the  Sabbath  and  the  sanctuary  ; 
Vrassus  despoiled  the  house  of  God  of  ten  thousand  talents ;  but  their  careers 
all  tell  the  story  of  scathing  judgment  for  defiling  holy  things,  that  ruin  is  ever 
the  avenger  of  sacrilege. 

Judas  dared  to  touch  with  foul  hands  the  sacred  person  of  Christ,  and  sell 
Him  for  money ;  but  the  curse  fell  upon  him,  and  he  perished  in  his  iniquity. 

**  That  soul  shall  he  cut  off  from  my  presence  ;  I  am  the  Lord" 

Topic;  Irreverence  Amid  Sanctities  (Vv.    1-16), 

The  heathen  hierarchy  practised  and  exemplified  the  debasing  vices  of  the  idols 
they  represented  and  professed  to  propitiate.  Jehovah  declared  holiness  indis- 
pensable to  acceptable  service  in  His  presence.  The  Hebrews  were  taught  by 
symbol,  by  ceremonies  which  appealed  to  their  senses — truths  concerning  holiness 
which,  under  the  gospel,  are  more  fully  enforced  by  the  teachings  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.     In  order  that  undue  familiarity  with  holy  things  might  be  prevented — 

I.  A  LINE  OF  demarcation  WAS  TO  BE  DRAWN  BETWEEN  SACKED  AND  SECULAR 
THINGS. 

For  the  performance  of  sacred  duties  there  were  fixed  places  and  set  times  ; 
no  priest  was  to  officiate  when  physically,  ceremonially,  or  morally  impure. 
**  Speak  unto  Aaron  and  his  sons,  that  they  separate  themselves  from  the  holy 
things  of  the  children  of  Israel.'*  Why  such  strictness  ?  (a)  Because  sacred 
things  enshrined  the  name  of  the  Lord,  *'That  they  profane  not  my  holy  name." 
{b)  Because  sacred  things  honoured  the  nam  f  the  Lord.  **  These  things  which 
they  hallow  unto  me.'*  Still  required  that  those  who  bear  the  vessels  of  the 
Lord  shall  be  holy,  and  make  a  difference  between  sacred   and  secular  things. 

II.  A  LINE  OF  DEMARCATION  WAS    TO    BE    DRAWN  BETWEEN  PUKITY  AND  IMPURITY 
FOOHARAOTEB. 


CHAP.  XXII.  17—80.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS  263 


No  priest  was  to  officiate  at  the  altar  in  a  state  of  unfitness,  under  penalty  ol 
excommunication.  *'  i  hat  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  my  presence  :  I  am  the 
Lord."  This  declares  the  priest  to  be  fallible  and  frail ;  need  for  constant  watch- 
fulness lest  the  altar  become  polluted.  Under  the  new  dispensation  a  fountain 
full  and  free  is  open  for  sin  and  uncleanness.  As  kings  and  priests  unto  God, 
believers  are  expected  to  exhibit  in  their  lives  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  Christianity 
has  not  relaxed  the  demands  of  the  law  for  holiness  of  character,  the  standard  ia 
even  higher,  for  **  If  any  man  have  not  the  spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  his." 
^F.  W.B. 

Topic:  The  Best  for  the  Highest  (Vv.  17-30) 

The  sacrifice— not  the  officiating  priest— was  the  centre  of  the  Levltical 
economy.  He  existed  for  the  altar,  not  it  for  him.  If  absolutely  necessary  that 
priests  should  be  holy,  equally  so  that  the  offerings  should  be  perfect,  especially 
when  regarded  in  the  light  of  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  as  of  typical  import,  as 
Bbadows  of  good  things  to  come.     Every  offering  was  to  be  presented — 

I.  With  a  willing  mind.  *'  Freewill  offerings,  which  they  will  offer  unto  the 
Lord  for  a  burnt  offering.'*  The  authoritative  commands  of  Jehovah  did  not 
interfere  with  free  agency;  the  judgment  and  moral  sense  of  offerers  were  ap- 
pealed to,  they  were  to  choose  what  God  had  chosen.  Unless  voluntarily,  there 
could  have  been  no  moral  quality  in  the  services  they  rendered.  No  virtue, 
where  no  possibility  of  vice,  at  least  in  a  probationary  state.  At  the  erection  of 
the  Temple  the  same  willingness  was  required.  In  the  service  of  Christ  we  are 
to  present  ourselves  willing,  as  well  as  living  sacrifices. 

II.  With  perfect  obedience.  "Whatsoever  hath  a  blemish  shall  he  not 
offer."  No  unwholesome  or  unsightly  thing  was  to  be  laid  on  the  altar.  The 
Highest  deserved,  as  He  demanded,  the  best.  Obedience  in  the  offerer  thus 
required  to  be  complete  ;  no  withholding,  or  withdrawing,  (a)  That  the  holy 
harmony  of  the  economy  might  not  be  broken,  (b)  That  the  spotless  antitype  might 
be  clearly  foreshadowed. 

God  still  demands  the  best  we  can  offer,  the  vigour  and  vivacity  of  youth  ;  the  most 
wakeful  and  valuable  portions  of  our  time;  the  choicest  and  richest  fruits  of  our 
iubstance. 

III.  With  a  grateful  heart.  "  Neither  from  a  stranger's  hand  shall  ye  offer 
the  bread  of  your  God."  Offerings  were  to  be  presented  by  those  who 
knew  the  Lord  and  would  be  actuated  by  devoted  love.  Acquaintance  with 
God,  reconciliation  with  Him,  must  precede  offerings  on  His  altar.  The  character 
of  the  giver,  more  than  the  nature  of  the  gift,  determines  the  divine  estimate 
of  offerings. 

IV.  With  a  loyal  spirit.  The  constant  reiteration  of  the  declaration,  «  I  am 
the  Lord,"  rendered  obvious  that  all  ought  to  be  done  with  the  prufoundest 
reverence  for  the  divine  majesty.  The  Hebrews  were  to  acknowledge  Jehovah 
as  their  sovereign  king.  Time  has  not  altered  these  conditions  of  acceptable  offer 
ing.  Energy,  time,  means,  etc.,  all  to  be  cheerfully  surrendered  to  Him  who  is 
our  Prophet,  Priest  and  King.  We  owe  Him  the  best  of  everything  ;  He  sacri- 
ficed the  best— His  life—for  us  ;  how  irresistible  the  words  of  the  apostle.  **  For 
ye  are  not  your  own,"  etc. — F.  W.B, 

Topic  :  Blemishes  in  our  Saorifiobs 

*•  Whatsoever  hath  a  blemish,  that  shall  ye  not  offer;  for  it  shall  not  be  acceptable 

for  you''  (V,  20). 

Reference  is  to  sacrifices.    All  religious  service  is  of  the  nature  of  sacrifioeL 
"  Whatsoever,  etc"  (Text). 


264  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap,  xxil  20. 

L  Read  this  requiremeut  of  perfect  sacrifices,  and  bj  it  let  us  test  our  regard 
for  the  SABBATH  services. 

God  has  once,  at  least,  read  us  a  very  solemn  lesson  of  the  manner  in  which 
He  regards  lost  Sabbaths.  Seventy  Sabbatical  years  the  Jews  allowed  to  drop 
out  of  their  calendar.  Seventy  years  were  spent  by  them  in  captivity.  A  fear- 
ful presage  to  us  of  what  might  be  the  national  judgment,  if,  as  a  church  and 
people,  we  went  on  to  blot  out  from  amongst  us  our  day  of  rest.  And  yet,  is  that 
fear  groundless?  Are  we  not  already  gone  far  towards  such  a  state  of  things? 
Is  not  the  Sunday,  to  a  fearful  extent,  an  omitted  day]  The  fourth  command- 
ment an  omitted  commandment?  Such  as  the  Sunday  is,  so  is  the  week.  It  is  the 
keystone  of  the  arch  of  our  secular  life.  The  folly  and  sin  of  most  men  is,  they 
hegin  by  making  the  Sunday  a  blank  day.  And  as  a  blank  becomes  intolerable, 
therefore  the  day  proves  to  them  listless,  weary,  worldly,  profane.  A  taste  for 
spiritual  things  needs  to  be  cultivated  and  prayed  for.  A  vague  mind,  a  dull 
leeling,  the  sense  of  its  being  a  long  day  each  time  the  Sunday  comes  round — 
these  afford  proof  that  to  us  heaven  is  still  very  far  off,  that  the  bright  and 
beautiful  world  is  not  "  our  own  plac,"  To  pass  a  little  more  into  detail,  ordinarily 
everyone  will  agree  that  if  the  Sabbath  be  obligatory,  then  it  is  assuredly  obli- 
gatory thus  far — 

1 ,  That  there  be  regular  attendance  upon  public  service, 

2.  Of  the  other  hours  of  the  day,  that  a  part  be  spent  in  private  devotional 
exerciseSy  a  part  in  religious  reading  ;  that  a  higher  and  more  sacred  tone  of  conver- 
sation be  maintained;  that  some  work  of  pietj  and  love  be  performed. 

These  are  but  some  of  the  most  obvious  and  necessary  Sunday  duties  and 
Sunday  enjoyments.  How  do  many  of  us  acquit  ourselves  in  this  matter  %  Has 
the  sacrifice  of  the  seventh  portion  of  our  time,  which  we  profess  to  offer  week  by 
week,  any  "  blemish  "  ?  An  unoccupied  day  must  prove  an  unpleasant  day.  We 
omit  duty,  therefore  God  omits  blessing.  Need  we  look  further  than  our  Sun- 
days, idle,  &c.,  for  many  a  disappointment  and  discontent  and  bitterness  of  life  ? 

II.  By  this  test  let  xx^  judge  our  sanctuary  worship. 

Examine  ourselves  in  the  house  of  God.  Difliculty  of  keeping  the  mind  col- 
lected and  devout  results  from  want  of  due  preparation, 

1.  Something  may  be  said  respecting  the  posture  of  body  we  a'ssume  in  the 
sanctuary.  Position  of  body  re-acts  upon  the  mind.  Indolence  is  associated 
with,  and  leads  to,  irreverence.  Kneeling  is  required  equally  by  the  dignity  of 
God  and  the  weakness  of  our  nature. 

2.  So  with  the  voice,  DiflQcult  to  over-estimate  how  much  is  lost  [a)  To  the 
beauty  of  our  services ;  {h)  To  the  glory  of  God  ;  (c)  To  our  own  souls,  by 
the  silence  so  many  of  us  >  '^^tain,  both  in  the  responses  and  in  the  servue  of 
song.  But  there  are  mou  er  us  "  blemishes"  in  our  sanctuary  sacrifices  than 
these.     Where  is — 

(1)  The  constant  mental  effort  essential  to  true  worship,  and  proper  in  the 
presence  of  God  ? 

(2)  The  self-distrust  due  from  such  sinful  creatures  as  we? 

(4)  The  self-discipline  to  bring  ourselves  into  responsiveness  to  God's  Spirit  I 

(3)  The  inward  up-looking  for  divine  light  and  grace  ? 

(5)  The  frequent  reminding  ourselves  of  what  we  are  and  what  God  is 

(6)  The  simple  spirit  of  self-application  / 

(7)  The  faith  to  give  wings  to  prayer? 

Well  might  St.  James  say  "Ye  have  not  because  ye  ask  not,  or  ask  amiss.** 
'*  Blemish  on  sacrifice  "  drives  the  flame  down  again. 

III.  By  this  test  let  ns  examine  our  observance  of  the  sacrament  op  the  lord*s 

SUPPER. 

A  word  in  solemn  affection  to  some.  You  never  attend  the  sacrament  to 
oelebrate  the  Lord's  death  at  alL     Others,  if  at  all,  so  irregularly  as  almost  to 


CHAF.  XXII.  31—33.]         THE   BOOK    OF   LEVITICUS,  265 


turn  the  attendance  into  a  mockery.  Do  you  considv  r  that  that  with  which  you 
so  deal  is  none  other  than  the  dying  command  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour:  the 
highest  and  best  of  all  the  means  of  grace  ?  And  yet  you  habitually  pass  it  by. 
Can  there  be  any  limit  to  the  evil  which  such  an  omission  may  be  entailing  upon 
your  soul  1  Your  religion  is  barren  of  joy  if  your  soul  fails  to  realise  peace ; 
if  your  prayers  work  no  effect ;  if  your  faith  seems  to  rest  on  no  reality ;  if  you 
gain  no  sense  of  forgiveness.  Well,  there  is  a  chain  of  cause  and  consequences 
here  ;  we  must  divide  its  links.  The  soul's  losses  all  fasten  themselves  into  the 
soul's  omissions.     Note : 

1.  Happy  for  us  that  we  can  turn  from  all  our  poor  *'  blemished"  sacrifices  to 
that  pure  and  perfect  sacrifice  of  Christy  which  has  been  offered  "  without  blemish 
and  without  spot  "  for  us. 

2.  Only  let  us  never  forget  that  he  who  would  safelt/  trust  in  the  power  of  that 
**  Sacrifice  "  for  his  salvation,  must  take  the  spotlessness  of  that  Sacrifice  for  his 
daily  pattern. — Anon, 


Topic:  Unquestioning  Obedience  Peremptorily  Enforced  (Vy.  31-33). 

The  pilgrimage  of  Israel  through  the  wildernes  was  of  a  probationary  character, 
affording  a  suggestive  emblem  of  all  human  life.  The  natural  tendency  of  the 
human  will  to  rebellion  required  imperative  commands  to  subdue  and  bend  it 
to  the  obedience  of  the  just.  The  minute  and  exacting  requirements  of  the 
Mosaic  ritual  would  train  the  people  to  humble  obedience.  Such  peremptory 
statutes  were  based  upon  : 

^  I.  What  jehovah  was  in  Israel.  "  I  am  the  Lord."  The  Lord  had  perfect 
right  to  enjoin  what  obedience  He  chose  upon  His  subjects.  In  the  midst  of 
Israel  Jehovah  was  Kmg,  His  word  went  forth  with  power.  Let  all  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  earth  stand  in  awe  of  Him,  and  obey  His  voice,  for  it  is  still  univer- 
sally true,  "  The  Lord  reigneth." 

II.  What  jfhovah  was  to  Israel.  '<  Your  God."  To  carry  out  His  wise 
and  benevolent  designs  towards  the  race,  God  saw  fit  to  make  Israel  His  chosen 
people,  custodians  of  His  written  word,  channels  of  blessing  to  the  whole  world. 
Israel  was  under  the  most  solemn  obligations  to  obey  divine  statutes,  to  conform 
to  the  divine  will.  Under  the  new  dispensation  no  stronger  motive  can  prompt 
to  Christian  consecration  and  obedience  than  the  declaration  of  the  apostle  to 
the  Gentiles,  "  Whose  I  am,  and  whom  I  serve." 

III.  What  jehovah  had  done  for  Israel.  "  That  brought  you  out  of  the 
land  of  Egypt."  The  Exodus  had  exhibited  the  goodness  of  the  Lord.  Wonders 
had  been  performed,  unexpected  channels  of  deliverance  had  been  opened, 
abundant  supplies  had  been  vouchsafed  to  them.  Obligations  to  obedience 
were  inany  and  weighty.  The  goodness  of  God  calleth  us  to  repentance.  Re- 
demption from  the  slavery  of  Satan  and  sin  sboum  coustraio  to  obedience. 
Translated  into  the  kingdom  of  God's  dear  Son,  this  the  becoming  question  of 
the  soul,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?" 

^T;  "^HAT  jehovah  would  DO  WITH  ISRAEL.  "I  am  the  Lord  which  hallow 
^T  .u  ^^'^.^^^^  «  purpose  m  selecting  Israel  as  His  peculiar  people,  was  not 
only  that  His  name  might  be  hallowed  among  them,  but  that  their  hearts  might 
become  sanctified  by  His  presence.  Holiness  was  the  supreme  end  of  the  Mosaic 
ritual.     Ceremonially  and  symbolically  priests  and    people  were  made  holv  bv 

£cfo>;ifzoXt7l    ^'^"^  ""^"'  ''''  '^"^^•'  ^'^  ^  manifested'prl 


266 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xxii.  1—20. 


OUTLINES   ON  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  XXIL 


Vv.   1,  2. —  Iheme:    Thb     jealousy    of 

JEHOVAH. 

Hutoan  nature  inherently  prone  to  pre- 
snmption  and  irreverence.  Upon  the  priests 
■was  enjoined  the  most  scrupulous  care,  lest 
in  any  way  they  disgraced  themselves  and 
dishonoured  Jehovah.  Small  gifts  were  not 
excluded  from  the  altar  of  the  Lord,  but  all 
blemished  offerings  were  ,  to  teach  Israel  id) 
1  he  supremacy  of  the  divine  will.  "What  He 
required,  not  what  they  might  feel  disposed 
to  offer,  must  be  presented,  (b)  The 
necessity  of  unquestioning  obedience.  "  I  am 
the  Lord.  Enough  for  Israel  to  know  that 
the  Lord  required  it  at  their  hands.  The 
jealousy  of  Jehovah  for  His  name  and  glory 
would  inculcate  the  need  of — 

I.  Constant  circumspection.  Sacerdotal 
duties  so  intricate  and  various,  the  priests 
■would  require  to  exercise  unrelaxing  vigil- 
ance. 

II.  Careful  discrimination.  Offerings 
to  be  unmixed ;  in  strict  accordance  with 
minutely  prescribed  directions. 

III.  Complete  consecration.  Every- 
thing to  be  done  to  the  full ;  no  reserve, 
shortcoming,  or  withdrawal.  No  imperfec- 
tion in  servant  or  service  tolerated  in  the 
tabernacle  worship. 

Inherited  and  unavoidable  disabilities  for 
public  service  form  no  barrier  in  the  way  of 
divine  favour.  A  willing  heart  is  accepted 
when  the  acomplishment  of  its  sincere  pur- 
pose is  impossible.  Willingness  and  ability 
characterise  the  service  of  the  Upper  Temple. 
Scrupulous  care  still  to  be  exercised,  that 
there  be  no  profanation  of  God's  Name,  Vay, 
Book,  house.   Ordinances-. — F.  W,B. 

V.  10  —  Theme:  Holy  feasts  forbidden 
TO  strangers. 

**  I  here  shall  no  stranger  eat  of  the  holy 
thing  " 

Salvation  is  common,  open  to  all;  but  privi- 
leges are  special,  reserved  to  consecrated 
souls.  [See  "  Suggestive  Readings  "  on  the 
verse,] 

These  '*  strangers "  in  the  priest's  house 
represent  persons  near  the  Kingdom  of  Grace 
but  not  within  it. 

I.  Friendship  with  the  godly  does  not 
confer  qualification  for  religious  privileges. 
Not  though  we  be  guests  in  the  home  of  a 
minister  of  Christ's  sanctuary;  not  though 
"we  enjoy  Christian  intimacy  and  affection,  do 
■we  on  that  account  become  qualified  to  share 
the  covenant  blessings  of  religion. 

Personal  alliances  and  family  intimacies 
with  God's  people  do  not  render  us  partakers 
of  their  grace. 

n.  Enjoyment  ^bblioious  intfroourse 
does  not  create  qualification  for  sacn  i  privi- 
eges. 

Within  the  priest's  home  there  would  be 
much  religious    converse,   and    acquaintance 


with  the  meaning  of  religious  truths  and 
duties;  but  knowledge  of  divine  things,  and 
the  advantage  of  holy  conveysaiion^  do  not 
necessarily  lead  to  spiritual  life. 

"Having  all  knowledge  and  understanding 
all  mysteries  profit  nothing  "  if  there  be  not 
inward  life  and  personal  love. 

III.  Residence  in  holy  dwellings  does 
not  confer  qualifications  for  saintly  privileges. 

Though  resident  in  the  priest's  home, 
"  strangers  "  might  not  partake  of  the  priest's 
food. 

Attendance  on  the  sanctuary ;  frequenting 
holy  places ;  being  continually  near  God's 
servant  in  sacred  scenes ;  all  this  may  be 
without  personal  piety. 

Being  a  doorkeeper  in  the  house  of  God  ; 
a  persistent  attendant  at  sacred  services; 
maintaining  a  constant  connexion  with  the 
sanctuary  ;  these  do  not  ensure  and  guarantee 
a  state  of  grace,  a  qualification  for  the  privi- 
lege of  sanctified  souls. 

Apply  :— 

1.  Better  be  *'  strangers^^  near  though  not 
in  the  kingdom,  than  aliens  far  off  from  all  the 
allurements  and  opportunities  of  religion. 

2.  Though  "  strangers,''  the  way  is  possible 
in  the  gospel  for  such  to  become  partakers  of 
the  feasts  of  redemption  and  of  grace.  "  At 
that  time  ye  were  without  Christ,  being 
aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel  and 
strangers,"  etc.  (Ephes.  ii.  12). 

Nearness  to  those  who  are  sanctified  in 
Christ  Jesus,  and  spiritually  "  priests  unto 
God,"  should  help  forward  a  religious  fife 
until  those  once  "  strangers,^'  yet  guests, 
become  welcomed  to  the  feasts  of  sacred  love. 
[See  outline  on  v.  25,  Holy  Ministries  refused 
from  strangers."] 

V.  20. — Theme:  Unblemished  sacrifices. 

"  But  whatsoever  hath  a  blemish,  that  shall 
ye  not  offar  ;  for  it  shall  not  be  acceptable  for 
you." 

Everything  laid  on  the  altar  to  be  free  from 
(a)  bodily  disease,  (b)  national  deformity,  (c) 
acquired  defects.  These  defects,  emblems  of 
moral  blemishes,  which  disqualify  for  service 
under  the  gospel — depraved  passions,  crooked 
conduct,  deflection  from  duty,  indulgence  in 
any  kind  of  sin — will  render  the  most  costly 
offering  obnoxious  to  the  divine  mind. 

Men  present  blemished  sacrifices  to  the 
Lord — 

I.  When  their  gifts  are  not  propor- 
tionate to  their  means.  Many  profess  to 
give  to  the  utmost  of  their  ability,  when  they 
only  give  a  pitiable  fraction  from  the  abund- 
ance with  which  God  has  prospered  them. 
Such  blemished  sacrifices  God  rejects. 

II.  When   their    gifts    are     not    thb 

SYMBOLS  OF   SELF-SACRIFICE.      No   offering   is 

accepted  except  presented  in  a  willing  and 
devout  spirit ;  God  expects  living  sacrifices, 
the  wealth  of   human   love — all    the  heart 


Ohap.  XXIII.  2.] 


THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS, 


267 


mind,    soul,  etrengm ;    then   other  gifts  as 
evidences  of  complete  solf-consecration. 

in.  When  their  gifts  ark  presented 
TO  PROCURE  SALVATION.  Sonsuous  worshlp, 
ritualistic  observances  are  valueless  ;  only  the 
merits  of  the  one  all-atoning  sacrifice  of 
Christ  can  render  the  most  perfect  gifts  ac- 
ceptable. 

Let  but  the  heart  be  wholly  given  to  the 
Lord,  then  not  the  deceased  or  decayed,  the 
refuse  or  leavings,  the  chaff  or  dregs,  but  the 
best,  costliest,  and  brightest  will  be  conse- 
crated to  the  Lord. 

These  things  read  in  the  light  of  the  New 
Testament  teach— (a)  How  completely  the 
spotlessness  of  Christ  fulfilled  the  rigid  require- 
ments for  perfection  in  Jewish  sacrifices,  (d) 
How  the  material  offerings  of  the  tabernacle 
were  adapted  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  pro- 
clamation of  what  they  foreshadowed,  {c) 
How  the  constant  demand  for  holiness  in  ofer- 
ings  and  offerers  reiterated  the  abiding  facts, 
that  Jehovah  is  spotlessly  holy ;  and  that 
"  without  holiness  no  man  can  see  the  Lord^ 

V.  25. — Theme  :  HoLT  minisxbiss  befuseo 

mOM  STRANGSBS. 


If  "strangers"  might  nor  eat  the  feast 
reserved  for  priestly  souls  (cotnp.  on  v.  10) 
80  neither  would  God  allow  them  to  minister 
at  the  altar  of  His  sanctuary. 

This  interdict  demands — 

I.  That  MINISTERS  OP  THE  GOSPEL  be  thcm- 
eelves  true-born  sons  of  God. 

IL    That    WORKERS      IN      THE     CHURCH    be 

chosen   exclusively  from   those   in  spiritual 
fellowship  with  Gods  penfile. 

III.  That  SACRED  OFFERINGS,  gifts  laid  on 
the  altar  of  religion,  are  only  acceptable  as  the 
giver  is  a  sin'-ere  Christian. 

IV.  That  A  SPIRITUAL  STATE  is  the  su- 
premely precious  thino  in  God's  esteem;  not 
what^Q  bring,  but  what  we  ar^  ourselves  who 
bring  the  offering. 

Notes  : — 

1.  God  abhors  halloived  services  by  unhal- 
lowed souls.  "They  shall  be  not  accepted 
for  you." 

2.  A  gracious  relationship  to  God  in  Christ 
must  precede  all  attempts  to  please  Him  by 
service  or  gifts. 

3.  From  saintly  souls  every  ofering,  how- 
ever lowly,  is  a  *' sacrifice  well  pleasing  unto 
God,"  as  a  token  of  sonship  and  love. 


••••- 


CHAPTER    XXIIL 


SUGGESTIVE    READINGS. 

y.  2.~Conceming  the  feasts  of  the  Lord.  Religion  has  its  joy  seasons,  Its 
festive  aspects  Israel's  sacred  feasts  symbolised  the  festivals  of  the  Christian 
soul,  those  holy  delights  which  believers  now  realise  in  their  life  of  faith  and 
fellowship, 

(a)  Sacred  festivaU,  breaking  in  upon  the  monotony  of  the  year,  and  arresting 
society  amidst  its  common  worldly  employ,  confer  valued  benefits  on  humanitv  • 
they  are  a  temporary  reprieve  from  the  clamour  of  secular  toils,  and  set  men 
free  for  refreshment  and  rest ;  while  they  also  incite  to  some  degree  of  religious 
mterest  and  gratitude,  for  they  witness  to  gracious  events  in  God's  redeeming 
purposes  for  the  world,  and  summon  the  multitudes  to  gladness  in  commemora- 
tion. 

(6)  Spiritual  joyousness,  that  sacred  gladness  we  inher  it  in  Christ,  and  of  which 
those  festivals  were  but  suggestions  and  scintillations,  has  its  special  and  more 
emphatic  seasons  within  the  experience  of  the  Christian  ;  for  although  religion 
brings  into  the  soul  an  enduring  happiness  and  a  perennial  feast  of  love  there 
are  times  when  richer  enjoyment  of  divine  fellowship  and  privilege  delights  tlie 
god.y  man,  and  his  holy  relationship  to  Christ  and  the  Church  fills  h!m  with 
profounder  satisfaction  and  bliss.     The  sun's  light  shines  steadily  on  throughout 


268  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  UJS        lchap.  xxiii.  2—16. 


the  entire  day,  but  there  are  occasional  intervals  when  his  beams  burst  forth  ia 
more  resplfndant  glory. 

V.  2. — Holy  convocations^  even  these  are  my  feasts.  Heathenism  had  its 
wild,  licentious  orgies  ;  Christianity  claims  sanctity  for  all  its  festivities.  On 
all  pleasures  and  delights  it  inscribes  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord."  Happiness 
must  be  holy.  God  sends  gladness  into  the  soul  He  redeems,  and  its  joy  must 
be  always  kept  pure. 

Yet,  in  this  arrangement  that  the  feasts  should  be  "  convocations ^^  emphasis 
is  placed  on  the  fact  that  our  joy  should  be  sympathetic  and  communicative, 
not  isolate  and  selfish.  Redeemed  men  have  common  reasons  for  happiness 
and  praise ;  God  would  have  them  meet  together  in  grateful  celebration,  foster- 
ing a  sacred  friendship,  entering  into  each  other's  joy.  Sin  has  drawn  society 
together  in  the  sympathy  of  sorrow  and  degradation;  religion  re-unites  those  it 
blesses  in  the  fellowship  of  sacred  gladness. 

V.  3. — The  sabbath  of  rest.  As  the  oldest  of  all  sacred  festivals,  and  the 
most  frequent  in  recurrence,  God  places  the  sabbath  in  the  front ;  it  brings  to  toil- 
worn  lives  a  day  of  *'  rest,"  it  announces  to  weary  souls  that  sacred  rest  which  Jesus 
gives,  it  foreshadows  to  life's  pilgrims  Zionwards  the  *'  rest  which  remaineth " 
when  heaven  is  reached. 

The  sabbath  rest  is  to  be  enjoyed,  not  in  selfish  ease,  but  as  a  time  for  meet- 
ing with  God's  people  in  sacred  assemhly^  "  a  holy  convocation,"  and  as  a  season 
for  devout  social  fellowship  ;  "  it  is  the  sabbath  of  the  Lord  in  all  your  dwellings." 

V.  5. — The  Lords  passover.  A  commemoration  of  grand  events  :  spared 
from  the  angel's  stroke  of  death,  freed  from  the  cruelty  of  oppressive  slavery. 
Kedemption  and  emancipation — such  truths  are  proclaimed  now  to  man  through 
the  "  sacrifice  of  Christ  our  Passover."  Christians  who  have  experienced  the 
deliverance,  and  escaped  into  the  "  glorious  liberty  "  of  faith,  should  celebrate 
with  joy  this  work  of  God's  salvation  ;  for  if  Israel  kept  holy  festival  in  memory 
of  the  Egyptian  rescue,  surely  we  should  "  keep  the  feast "  (1  Cor.  v.  7,  8). 

Vv.  7,  8. — Ye  shall  do  no  servile  work ;  but  ye  shall  oiFer  an  offering  made 
by  fire.  They  who  are  gathered  under  the  merits  of  the  Paschal  Atonement  are 
set  free  from  **  servile  "  toils.  No  more  "  servile  work  "  now  for  the  sinner,  no 
weary  efforts,  no  fruitless  endeavours,  no  degrading  labours  ;  for  the  "  offering 
made  by  fire,"  the  sweet  incense  offering  of  Christ,  has  gone  up  to  God,  and  it 
is  enough.  The  soul  is  set  free  from  legal  '*  work,"  and  now  stands  an  observer 
of  the  meritorious  offering  which  rises  to  heaven  as  "  by  fire."  Not  the  labours 
of  our  hands  but  the  offering  on  Calvary  :  with  that  "  sweet  savour  of  Christ " 
God  is  well  pleased  ;  and  sinners  stand  acquitted  with  their  trust  fixed  on 
the  accepted  sacrifice. 

V.  10. — Bring  a  sheaf  of  the  first-fruits  of  your  harvest.  The  paschal  offer- 
ing foreshadowed  the  death  of  Chiist,  the  **  sheaf  of  first-fruits"  His  resurrec- 
tion. And  equally  is  symbolised  tiie  risen  and  renewed  life  into  which  all 
Christians  emerge  from  their  death  in  sin,  under  the  quickening  of  God's  Spirit. 
Further,  it  predicts  the  final  resurrection  of  those  who  "sleep  in  Christ." 
"Christ  the  first-fruits,  afterwards  they  that  are  Christ's  at  His  coming."  And 
as  our  resuvrectiou  body  at  the  last  day  will  be  "  fashioned  like  unto  his  own 
glorious  body,"  so,  meanwhile,  should  our  resurrection  life  be  graced  with  all 
the  perfections  of  His  character.  "  If  ye  theu  be  risen  with  Christ,  seek  those 
things  which  are  above."  Surely  every  soul  called  from  sin  to  grace,  raised 
from  death  unto  life,  should  seal  the  outset  (see  v.  14)  of  His  spiritual  career  by 
an  act  of  **  first-fruits  "  consecration,  which  should  be  the  pledge  of  an  after 
"harvest"  of  devoted  service  to  the  Lord. 

V.  16.— Number  fifty  days,  and  offer  a  new  meat  offering.  This  was  the 
feast  of  Pentecost,  which  opened  with  the  presentation  of  the  first-fruits  barley 
sheaf,  and  was  to  be  closed  with  the  offering  of  a  loaf  made  from  the  ingathered 


CHAP,  xxiii.  24— 84.]  THE  BOOK  01    LEVITlCUti.  269 

wheat  harvest.  It  celebrated  the  completion  of  the  harvest  season.  It  thus 
testified  that  God  had  given  an  abundant  ingathering,  and  had  blessed  His 
people  with  bread.  In  the  Christian  Church  the  "  first-fruits"  were  the  foretoken 
of  harvest  abundance  ;  for  Christ's  resurrection  guaranteed  a  great  ingathering 
of  souls  ;  and  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  the  spiritual  harvest  was  brought  in  unto 
the  Lord.  It  was  exactly  "fifty  days"  after  Christ  arose  from  the  dead  that 
the  Holy  Ghost  was  given,  and  the  bountiful  ingathering  of  converts  was  secured 
for  the  church  (Acts  ii.). 

V.  24. — A  memorial  of  blowing  of  trumpets.  It  was  the  rallying  note  amid 
the  camp  and  throughout  Israel,  raakiog  known  the  opening  of  a  new  era.  The 
*'  Feast  of  Trumpets  "  proclaimed  the  arrival  of  "  New  Year's  Day,"  for  the  civil 
year  began  on  *' the  first  day  of  the  seventh  month."  With  a  great  outburst  of 
joy-strains  the  new  epoch  opened.  Suggestive  of  the  new  era  upon  which  a 
redeemed  soul  enters,  the  Christian  convert  starts  forth  as  with  music  and  glad- 
ness upon  a  holy  career.  The  trumpet  notes  are  typical  of  the  Gospel  cally  by 
which  men  are  aroused  to  regard  and  seize  the  first  opportunity  presented  them. 
It  prefigures  also  that  mighty  trumpeting  at  the  end  of  time,  which  will  summon 
living  and  dead  to  the  day  of  God,  to  which  those  in  Christ  will  first  respond 
(1  Thess.  iv.  16),  but  which  will  awaken  all  who  sleep  to  a  new  era  for  universal 
humanity  (1  Cor.  xv.  51,  52). 

V,  27. — A  day  of  atonement.  In  chap.  xvi.  the  ritual  of  the  great  day  is 
elaborately  given ;  here  the  spirit  and  temper  of  the  people  is  described,  the 
whole  congregation  was  to  bow  before  God  abased  and  penitential.  It  is  well  if 
only  once  every  year  we  chasten  "  and  afflict  "  our  souls  with  humiliating  thought 
of  our  sin,  and  bend  before  Jehovah  with  contrite  hearts.  Alas,  there  is  need 
that  we  bemoan  our  demerit,  and  thus  contemplate  the  "  Atonement.'*  Yet 
how  precious  the  fact  that,  while  like  a  penitent  we  stand  in  shame  for  our  sin, 
the  "  Day  of  Atonement "  proclaims  redeeming  efficacy  and  grace  for  all  who 
lay  their  hand  and  hope  on  the  sacrificial  Lamb. 

V.  34. — The  Feast  ol  Tabernacles.  It  is  minutely  directed  in  v.  40  that  they 
were  to  take  "  boughs  of  goodly  trees,"  affording  shade  and  shelter  and 
suggestive  of  God's  overshadowing  care  and  covenant;  '* branches  of  palm 
trees,"  emblematic  of  victory  (Rev.  vii.  9),  for  they  were  the  triumphant  host  of 
God  marching  onward  to  possess  Canaan  ;  and  '*  willows  of  the  brook,"  symbols 
of  ple]iitude  and  prosperity  (Isa.  xliv.  4).  This  dwelling  in  booths  seven  days 
every  year  (v.  42)  would  perpetuate  the  memory  of  their  pilgrim  career,  their 
dependence  on  divine  care  and  providence,  and  God's  unfailing  sufficiency  for 
them  from  the  outset  to  the  close  of  their  journey  to  Zion.  And  shall  not  we 
also  keep  in  remembrance  the  years  in  which  we  have  been  "  strangers  and 
pilgrims  en  the  earth,"  through  which  the  Lord  has  surely  led  us,  never  failing 
in  the  watchfulness  of  His  providence  or  the  sufficiency  of  His  graced  'Thou 
shalt  remember  all  the  ways  the  Lord  thy  God  has  led  thee  these  forty 
years  in  the  wilderness,  to  humble  thee,  and  to  prove  thee,  to  know  what  is  in 
thine  heart "  (Deut.  viii.  2). 


SECTIONAL  HOMILIES. 

Topic:    The    Sabba.th   op  Rest  (V.  3), 

Levitioal  enactments,  its  rites  and  regulations,  its  festivals  and  solemnities, 
were  all  transient  and  Jewish,  The  Sabbath  is  not  to  be  classified  with  these  : 
it  is  not  one  of  many  institutes  of  Israel.  It  preceded  the  wilderness  encamp- 
ment, was  anterior  to  the  enactments  of  Sinai.  The  Sabbath  dates  with  man's 
creation,  it  began  in  £dea.     It  is  primeval  law.     Its  origin  preceded  Bin. 


270  aOMILETW  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap,  xxiii.  3. 


If  thus  remote  its  origin^  what  of  its  permanency  f 

It  was  recognised  through  Antediluvian  times.  Noah  tept  it  within  the  ark, 
sending  forth  his  dove  after  seven  days*  interval.  Moses  urges  its  observance, 
and  this,  not  after  its  promulgation  on  Sinai,  but  at  the  outset  of  the  encamp- 
ing of  the  Israelites  in  the  desert  (Exo.  xvi.  23),  as  being  an  institute  well 
understood  ;  it  had,  therefore,  been  known  to  them  through  their  Egyptian 
bondage.  It  was  no  novel  statute,  therefore,  when  incorporated  in  the  decalogue 
on  Sinai. 

In  Jewish  history  it  became  reinforced  with  all  the  solemnities  of  the  giving  of 
the  law,  the  Sabbath's  sanctity  was  inscribed  on  stone  with  the  finger  of  God. 

The  line  of  prophets  in  succession  urged  its  solemnity,  and  denounced  its 
neglect  and  violation. 

Our  Lord  re-asserted  its  authority,  "  The  Sabbath  was  made  for  man"  (Mark 
ii.  27),  for  all  men,  for  all  ages.     And  now — 

Sabbaths  are  threefold,  as  St.  Anstin  sayg  ; 
The  first  of  time,  or  Sabbath  here  of  days ; 
The  second  is  a  conscience  trespass  free; 
The  last  a  Sabbath  of  eternity. — Herrick. 

I.  The  weary  life  of  man  calls  for  this  interval  of  sabbath  rest. 

1.  Each  individual  life  requires  it.  Toil  wastes  our  physical  fabric,  the  strain 
on  nerve  and  brain  wears  away  the  energy  of  life.  The  rush  of  daily  duties 
consumes  all  leisure,  allows  no  pause  for  bodily  rest,  no  repose  for  thought,  or 
attention  to  the  soul's  great  concerns. 

2.  Family  life  demands  it.  Amid  the  eagerness  of  worldly  work  parents  and 
children  are  scattered,  each  to  a  separate  scene  and  diverse  tasks.  Yet  home  is  a 
unity  ;  family  life  is  a  blended  harmony.  There  is  need  for  a  lull  in  the  clamour ; 
a  truce  for  the  rallying  together  of  the  scattered  ones ;  that  home  might  quietly 
re-construct  itself,  and  fanjily  life  be  realised. 

3.  Moral  life  calls  for  it.  A  worn  and  spent  state  of  body,  nerve,  and  brain, 
brings  with  it  a  relaxed  will,  an  enfeebled  moral  purpose.  With  recouped 
physical  energy  comes  reaffirmed  force  of  mind  and  character.  A  pause  for  bodily 
rest  is  essential  for  this  moral  resuscitation. 

4.  Spiritual  life  cries  out  for  it.  Amid  the  arid  scenes  of  the  world  the  soul 
droops  and  thirsts.  It  pants  for  the  living  streams  And  as  Christ  called  His 
dibciples  apart  to  rest  awhile,  so  does  the  Sabbath  ;  giving  to  overtaxed  lives  the 
sacred  joy  of  going  apart  with  Jesus. 

Enquire  :  Is  this  inflexible  command  of  God  necessary  in  order  to  conserve  the 
Sabbath  i 

If  man  so  greatly  needs  it,  would  not  his  need  assert  itself,  and  lead  men  to 
perpetuate  the  beneficent  institute  without  a  divine  command  1 

Answer:  (a)  Man's  ^reec?  would  lead  him  to  deny  a  Sabbath  to  hinisdf  His 
lust  of  gain,  and  clamour  for  success,  would  drive  him  on  to  ruinous  absorption 
in  earthly  schemes  and  lucrative  pursuits.  **  The  love  of  money  "  urges  on  to 
suicidal  indifference  to  all  higher  interests.  He  would  never  let  a  day  go  each 
week  from  his  eager  life.  "  Time  is  money  "  ;  and  if  a  Sabbath  brings  no  gain  to 
his  grasping  hands  it  is  a  day  lost. 

(6)  Nor  would  selfish  men  concede  the  SabbatKs  rest  to  weary  toilers.  Already 
the  oppressed  and  overwrought  workers  find  it  difficult  to  arrest  the  encroach- 
ments of  trade  on  the  sanctities  of  the  Lord's  Day.  Heartless  employers  would 
snatcti  precious  hours  from  the  Sabba'h,  and  force  their  servants  to  labour.  Men 
would  not  give  the  holy  day  to  their  fellows  if  no  divine  law  interpjsed  to  check 
such  infringements. 

Every  interest,  therefore,  of  human  life,  is  bound  up  with  the  maintenance  of 
the  Sabbath  as  a  day  of  rest.     [See  Addenda  to  chapter  ;  Sabbath.] 


CHAP.  XXIII.  3.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  271 


II.  The  bin-worn  spirit  op  man  wghs  for  the  consolations  op  sabbatio 

SAORBD  REST. 

The  Sabbath  is  but  typical  of  the  rest  of  faith  which  the  gospel  brings  to 
burdened  souls. 

1,  All  trials  cease  when  the  spirit  enters  into  the  Sabbatic  rest  which  Jesus 
gives.  The  sinner  "  ceases  from  his  own  works  "  (Heb.  iv.  10).  Worn  with 
labour^  and  heavy  laden  with  the  burdens  of  conscious  unrighteousness,  the  toil- 
ing soul  comes  to  the  Saviour  (Matt.  xi.  28).  A  heavenly  day,  a  serene  S  ibbatio 
life,  dawns  upon  him  at  once,  and  in  the  restfuluess  of  faith,  trusting  all  to  Jesus, 
he  desists  from  fruitless  efforts  to  *'  establish  his  own  righteousness,"  and  sits  down 
at  the  feet  of  Jesus.     It  is  the  Sabbath  rest  of  his  life  begun. 

2.  Our  daily  conflicts  and  crosses  render  the  Sabbath  privilege  a  precious  con- 
solation to  the  believer.  Resting  in  Jesus  does  not  render  the  world  a  restful 
scene  to  the  Christian.  Nor  does  human  life  cease  to  know  the  common  griefs 
and  struggles  of  existence.  Whereas  also,  the  keen  longings  of  the  soul  for 
fellowship  with  Christ  finds  few  occasions  for  gratification  amid  the  busy  hours 
of  the  week.  How  welcome,  therefore,  to  the  believer  is  the  day  of  rest  !  By 
"still  waters"  and  amid  *' green  pastures"  he  roams,  in  all  the  solemn  delights 
of  leisurely  meditation :  and  his  soul  is  **  restored  "  (Psa.  xxiv.).  To  his  troubled 
heart  comes  the  solace  of  the  "  peace"  which  only  Jesus  gives  (Jno.  xiv.  1,  27). 
Within  the  sanctuary,  "soothed  with  holy  hymn  and  psalm,"  quickened  by  fellow- 
ship with  saints,  and  renewed  through  waiting  upon  God,  he  gains  **  times  of 
refreshing "  and  strengthening  of  soul.  He  drinks  of  the  brook  by  the  way 
and  lifts  the  head  with  freshened  vigour  for  life's  journey.  Full  oft  the 
rejoicing  soul,  glad  in  Christ,  and  refreshed  by  the  Sabbath  privileges,  has  to  say, 

Thou  art  a  cooling  fonntain 

In  life's  dry,  dreary  sand  ; 
From  thee,  like  Pisgah's  mountaiO; 

We  view  the  promised  land ; 
A  day  of  sweet  reflection 

Thou  art,  a  day  of  love — 
A  day  of  resurrection 

From  earth  to  things  above. 

III.  The  lipb-tired  soul  of  man  longs  fob  the  sabbath  of  heavenly  rest. 
All  sabbath  repose  and  refreshing  on  earth ;  all  realisations  of  the  rest  of  soul 

Christ  gives  to  the  believer,  all  sanctuary  consolations  enjoyed  on  the  Lord  s 
day,  are  but  foretastes  and  foreshado wings  of  heaven's  eternal  peace,  and  joy, 
and  love. 

1.  As  the  sabbath  dap  dawns  after  the  night  is  spenty  so  heaven's  sabbath  follows 
death's  dark  night. 

We  have  to  live  ouv  life's  day  of  duty  and  service  to  confront  the  responsibili- 
ties of  worldly  trusts  and  opportunities  to  "  work  while  it  is  called  day."  "  This 
is  not  our  rest."  But  the  shadows  at  length  fall ;  a  hush  spreads  over  the 
tumult  of  existence ;  the  hand  slackens  its  hold  en  the  instruments  of  labour ; 
darkness  comes  gently  down  upon  earthly  scenes.  But  a  "  lively  hope  "  fills  the 
Christian  soul ;  a  vision  of  a  glorious  dawn  sweeps  across  the  dimming  human 

gaze. 

And  a  voice,  while  earth  cares  fly, 
With  the  closing  hours  is  blending — 
**  Best  is  coming,  rest  is  nigh  I" 

Night  wraps  itself  around  the  life  :  the  day  of  eternity  breaks  npon  the  spirit : 

Heaven's   rest  is   gained.     And  "  there    shall   be    no   night  there,"   "  neither 

sorrow,  nor  crying,  neither  any  more  pain ;  for  the  former  things  are  passed  away." 

„  Blessed  are  the  dead  who  die  in  the  Lord :  yea,  from  henceforth,  saith  th« 

Spirit,  for  they  rest^* 

2.  As  the  sacred  rest  of  faiih  is  gained  hy  the  sinner  only  when  he  comes  unto  Jesu 


272  UOMILETIC   COMMENTARY  ON  [ciup.  xaiii.  X 

BO  the  heavenly  rest  is  gained  only  when  the  Christian  reaches  the  very  presence 
of  his  Lord. 

"  Come  unto  mc/*  says  Jesus,  "  and  I  will  give  you  rest !"  Blessed  the 
experience  of  reaching  Him  now  by  faith :  but  when  the  soul  bursts  through  the 
barrier  of  death  and  passes  the  gates  of  the  heavenly  city,  and  finds  itself  within 
the  "Everlasting  Arms,''  leaning  on  Jesus'  bosom,  never  more  to  leave  the 
radiant  presence  of  his  Lord,  then,  indeed,  will  the  full  rest  of  heaven  be  known- 
No  rough  billows  heave  on  the  serene  ocean  of  life  eternal.  No  shadow  falls  on 
the  bright  sky  of  heaven's  bliss.  No  distance  ever  more  divides  the  redeemed  soul 
from  the  rapture  of  Christ's  presence.  '*  For  ever  with  the  Lord  '* :  and  therefore 
there  remaineth  a  keeping  of  sabbaths  for  the  people  of  God 

Rest,  spirit  free  I 
In  the  green  pastures  of  the  heare»3ly  shore, 
Where  sin  and  sorrow  can  approach  no  mor^ 
With  all  the  flock,  by  the  Good  Shepherd  fed^ 
Beside  the  streams  of  life  eternal  led, 
For  ever  with  thy  God  and  Saviour  blest, 

Best,  sweetly  rest  1 

Topic :  The  Sabbath  (V.  3). 

Placed  first  among  the  Hebrew  festivals,  the  sabbath  becomes  Invested  with 
peculiar  honour  and  importance.  It  claimed  priority,  dating  back  to  the  com- 
pletion of  creation,  and  reaching  forward  throughout  ail  time,  to  be  consummated 
in  eternity.  The  institution  and  perpetuation  of  the  sabbath  secured  time  for 
the  full  observance  of  sacred  duties  ;  and,  by  its  weekly  advent,  called  attention 
to  them.  No  institution  of  the  Hebrew  economy  was  more  frequently  referred 
to,  or  its  observance  more  strictly  enforced.  Part  of  the  badge  that  distin- 
guished Israel  from  surrounding  nations  was  cessation  from  worldly  toil  and 
complete  consecration  to  sacred  service  one  day  in  seven.  The  Hebrew  Sabbath 
was — 

I.  A.  SACRED  MEMORIAL,  of  the  Original  institution  of  a  special  season  for  rest 
and  undisturbed  attention  to  divine  things.  It  would  be  a  perpetual  reminder 
of  the  fact  that  **  in  six  days  the  Lord  made  heaven  and  earth,"  therefore,  a  con- 
stant rebuke  to  every  form  of  heathenism,  where  the  true  God  was  ignored  or 
unknown.  Under  the  Christian  dispensation  observance  of  "the  Lord's  Day** 
is  a  perpetual  memorial  of  the  fundamental  fact  of  Christianity,  that  the  Re- 
deemer's atoning  work  was  completed  on  earth  when  He  rose  from  the  grave 
on  the  morning  of  the  third  day. 

II.    A  SACRED  FESTIVAL. 

In  it  God  took  special  delight.  He  demanded  it  as  a  sacrifice  of  time  from 
those  whose  days  really  all  belonged  to  Him.  Though  all  secular  work  was  to 
be  discontinued,  works  of  mercy,  piety,  and  necessity  were  to  be  performed. 
The  Hebrews  were  to  gather  together  for  divine  worship  and  the  cultivation  of 
personal  holiness.  Though  God  did  not  need  the  rest — for  He  never  grows 
weary  ~  yet  man  needed  it ;  and  God  rejoiced  in  it,  as  its  claims  were  recog- 
nised, its  duties  discharged.  It  was  a  festival,  not  a  fast ;  for  man  to  use,  not 
abune ;  to  be  made  a  delight,  not  a  burden ;  for,  in  sanctifying  time  and 
strength  to  the  Lord  according  to  His  gracious  will,  man  finds  his  highest  and 
truest  joy. 

The  transfer  of  the  sabbath  from  the  seventh  to  the  first  day  of  the  week  has 
not  diminished  its  Siicredness,  or  relaxed  its  claims.  It  is  still  a  feast  of  the 
Lord,  to  be  devoted  to  sacred  purposes.  It  proclaims  to  all  the  right  of  freedom 
from  exacting  toil,  and  places  all  upon  a  level  as  the  Lord's  free  men. 


CHAP,  xxiii.  5—8.]  THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS.  275 


III.    A  SACRED    TYPE. 

The  law  of  the  sabbath,  re-published  In  the  wilderness,  pointed  to  the  time 
when  Israel  would  be  able  fully  to  observe  it  in  the  land  of  ('anaan.  The 
peculiar  sanctity  and  blessedness  of  the  day  may  fitly  be  regarded  as  typical  of 
the  perfect  rest  of  heaven,  where  all  the  toils  and  trials  of  time  will — for  those 
who  keep  His  commandments — issue  in  the  rest  and  recompense  of  eternity. 
In  observing  the  sabbath,  we  not  only  obey  the  divine  command,  but  we  follow 
the  divine  example  (Gen.  ii.  2,  3).  Thus  God  is  pleased  and  man  is  blessed. 
Thus  time  becomes  hallowed,  life  worth  living,  and  heaven  won.  [See  also  pre- 
ceding Homily  on  chap.  xix.  v.  3.] — F.  W.B, 

Topic:  SiQNiFiOANOE  OP  THE  Passover  (Vv.  5-8), 

"  The  first  Passover  was  the  commencement  of  the  special  privileges  of  the 
chosen  nation,  every  subsequent  Passover  became  a  pledge  of  the  continuance 
of  those  privileges  "  (Cave). 

(a)  The  feast  was  retrospective  and  commemorative. 

Israel's  deliverance  from  the  destroying  angel,  and  from  Egyptian  bondage,  wa& 
an  event  unparalleled  in  human  history.  God  would  perpetuate  the  memory  of 
so  wondrous  an  incident  as  a  testimony  for  all  time  that  *'  salvation  is  of  the 
Lord,"  and  that  mightiest  deliverances  can  be  wrought  for  His  people  by  our 
Red  eemer. 

Thus  the  Lord's  Supper,  as  a  commemorative  feast,  also  "  shows  forth  the 
Lord's  death,"  leading  back  our  thoughts  and  faith  to  **  Christ  our  Passover, 
sacrificed  for  us,"  and  the  wondrous  redemption  wrought  for  an  enslaved  Church 
and  a  death-doomed  world. 

(6)  The  feast  was  prospective  and  typical. 

The  lamb  of  the  paschal  feast  foreshadowed  "  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh 
away  the  sins  of  the  world."  For  the  lamb  employed  at  this  commemorative 
feast  was  more  than  a  symbol  of  the  victim  whose  blood  was  sprinkled  on  the 
doorposts  in  Egypt,  it  was  a  sacrifice.  It  meant  substitution.  It  typically 
"  put  away  sin." 

At  the  Lord's  Supper,  Christ  said  to  His  followers,  "  My  body  is  broken  for 
you,  my  blood  is  shed  for  you."  And  Paul  adds  the  testimony  that  *'  our  Pass- 
over is  sacrificed  for  us." 

The  Identification  of  the  Paschal  Victim  with  Jesus  Christ  :— 

I.   With  regard  to  the  selected  victim. 

1.  Was  it  A  lamb?  Christ  is  often  so  called  on  account  of  His  innocence, 
meekness,  and  resignation  (Isa.  liii.  7;  Jno.  i.  29  ;  1  Pet.  i.  19;  Rev.  v.  6). 

2.  Was  it  taken  from  tkefiock?  Christ  was  chosen  from  among  His  brethren, 
was  one  of  us  (Acts  iii.  22,  23). 

3.  Was  it  a  male  of  the  first  year  f  (Exod,  xii.  5).  Because  the  '*  male,"  being 
the  stronger,  symbolised  energy  and  excellence;  and  in  "its  first  year"  was  at 
Its  fullest  and  most  perfect  development ;  so  was  Christ  all  "  comely,"  in  the 
fulness  and  perfection  of  His  days. 

4.  Was  it  without  blemish  ?  Christ  was  altogether  spotless  and  faultless  (1 
Pet.  i.  10;  Heb.  vii.  25). 

II.   With  regard  to  its  sacrificial  oblation. 

1.  As  the  lamb  was  set  apart  four  days  before  it  was  slain,  so  Christ  was, 
during  the  last  four  days  of  His  life,  under  examination,  preparatory  to  His 
death  (Matt.  xxi.  1). 

2.  As  the  lamb  was  eventually  slain,  so  was  Christ  (Rev.  v.  9). 

8.  As  its  death  was  witnessed  by  the  entire  assembly^  so  was  Christ  publioij 
crucified  (Luke  xxiii.  18).  f 


874  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON        [chap,  xxiii.  5 -8. 

4.  As  the  time  of  the  sacrifice  was  "  at  even  "  (v.  5),  so  was  our  Saviour's 
death  (Matt,  xxvii.  45 ;  Luke  xxiii.  44-46).     [Comp.  Sleigh's  Aids  to  Reflection.! 
III.   With  regard  to  the  paschal  feast. 

1.  The  eating  of  the  passover  typified  that  we  find  in  Christ  our  life,  out 
nourishment,  and  sufficiency  (Jno.  vi.  35,  53-56). 

2.  The  spirit  in  which  the  feast  was  to  be  partaken  is  indicated  in  the  sig- 
nificance of  the  "  bitter  herbs,'*  suggesting  a  penitential  spirit  and  bitter  mourn- 
ing, in  remembrance  of  our  sin  (Zech.  xii.  10). 

3.  The  regulations  for  partakers  of  the  feast  are  significant.  Eaten  "  with 
hastef^*  indicates  the  urgency  with  which  we  should  receive  Christ ;  with  "  loins 
girded"  denotes  our  willingness  to  quit  the  past  for  a  pilgrim  life  of  faith  ;  with 
"feet  shodf^  suggestive  of  rough  ways  to  be  resolutely  trod ;  "  staff  in  hand," 
declares  our  defence  and  support. 

4.  The  feast  being  eaten  in  companies.,  teaches  the  Christian  law  of  union  in 
Church  fellowship,  that  religion  may  not  be  isolate.  Christ  gathers  His  dis- 
ciples together  at  the  feast  of  His  Supper,  and  says,  "Eat  ye  all  of  it,  drink  ye 
all  of  it." 

0  wondrous  emblema  1  setting  forth  His  death  from  whom  our  life  doth  flow  | 
NdYor  can  finite  reason  sound  such  depths  of  love,  such  depths  of  woOb 

Topic :  The  Passover  (Vv.  6-8). 

The  Exodus  of  Israel  from  Egypt,  one  of  the  most  prominent  landmarks  in 
the  history  of  the  nation.  The  feast  of  the  Passover  was  the  sit^fuificant  memo- 
rial by  which  the  memory  of  that  event  was  perpetuated  (Exod.  xii.).  Not  only 
individual,  but  national  deliverance  ought  to  be  remembered. 

I.  The  hallowed  memories  it  embalmed. 

The  final  plague  with  which  Pharaoh  and  his  people  were  visited  led  to  the 
emancipation  of  Israel,  and  their  departure  from  Egypt.  The  miraculous  pre- 
servation of  Israel,  the  destruction  of  the  firstborn  of  Egypt,  and  the  means 
employed  to  accomplish  both  were  brought  to  mind  when  the  Passover  was 
observed  as  the  anniversary  of  the  solemn  night  of  death  that  gave  birth  to  the 
Hebrew  nation. 

II.  The  sacred  duties  it  inculcated. 

(a)  Humility.  Their  own  arm  had  not  gotten  them  the  victory,  they  had 
been  redeemed  from  abject  poverty  and  slavery.  They  had  nothing  in  them- 
selves to  boast  of  when  they  remembered  the  hole  of  the  pit  from  which  they 
had  been  digged,  (b)  Thankfulness :  seeing  Jehovah  had  interposed  in  such  a 
critical  juncture  for  their  race,  He  deserved  their  heartfelt  gratitude,  jubilant  as 
the  song  of  Moses,  bright  as  the  beautiful  sea.  (c)  Gladness  that  they  had 
escaped  exacting  toil,  cruel  oppression,  bitter  bondage  ;  before  them  was  a 
career  of  honour  and  blessedness,  well  might  their  hearts  leap  for  gladness  and 
their  feet  move  with  joyful  steps,  (d)  Consecration.  At  the  Exodus,  Israel 
started  on  a  new  life.  Henceforth  the  people  were  to  be  known  as  the  servants 
of  Jehovah,  set  apart  and  sanctified  for  His  glory.  They  were  not  their  own  ; 
to  them  His  divine  will  would  be  communicated,  and  through  them  made  known 
to  the  world. 

In  the  Gospels  the  Passover  is  identified  with  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread, 
which  began  and  closed  with  a  Sabbath,  suggesting  the  idea  of  a  complete  con- 
secrated life.  Only  unleavened  bread  was  to  be  eaten  at  the  feast ;  in  all  our 
Christian  service  the  leaven  of  evil  is  to  be  scrupulously  avoided.  Christ  Our 
passover  is  sacrificed  for  us,  let  us  keep  the  feast  with  humility,  solemnity,  thank' 
fulness,  gladness,  devoutness,  and  consecration. 

III.  The  glorious  event  it  foreshadowed. 

About  the  typical  character  of  the  feast  there  is  do  room  for  doubt  (set 


CHAP.  XXIII.  10,  11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITIGV8.  275 

1  Cor.  V.  7,  8).  {a)  In  the  deliverance  it  affected;  from  slavery,  degradation 
misery,  death,  (b)  In  the  means  employed  for  deliverance;  sacrifice  of  appointed 
lamb,  spriukli ng  of  its  blood,  etc.  (c)  In  the  co-operation  the  means  demanded;  tlie 
people  were  to  believe,  obey,  fulfil  the  conditions  laid  down,  (d)  All  who 
embraced  the  opportunity,  and  adopted  the  meansy  were  saved.  Not  one  house  was 
visited  by  death  where  the  blood  had  been  sprinkled  upon  the  doorposts  and 
lintel.  The  above  considerations  may  all  be  applied  to  whit  Christ  has  done 
and  is  for  us,  and  to  our  duty  in  relation  to  His  great  atonement. 

Conclusion,  (a)  There  was  but  one  way  of  deliverance.  (6)  It  was  not  in- 
vented or  stcggested  by  many  but  by  God.  (c)  Only  practical  faith  availed.  So  in 
relation  to  the  Gospel.  The  excellence  of  Christ  our  Passover  is  seen  in  that  while 
many  victims  were  slain  in  Egypt  and  they  were  only  efficacious  for  a  seieot 
people  and  one  period  of  time,  the  Lamb  of  God  by  one  offering  atoned  for  the 
whole  world  and  all  time.  Indiference,  as  well  as  unbelief  in,  and  rejection  of 
the  world's  Redeemer,  will  be  visited  with  sore  punishment,  for  "  how  oau  we 
•soap©  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ?" — F,  W.B, 

Topic:  The  Sheaf  op  the  First  Fruits  (Vv.  10,  11). 

The  book  of  nature  is  a  fruitful  study.  In  all  God's  works  He  strives  to  fix 
attention  on  Himself.  In  feeding  the  body  He  would  show  Himself  to  the 
soul. 

Harvest  time  nears.  The  early  promise  is  fulfilled  (Gen.  viii.  22).  The  first- 
lings of  the  grain  are  ripe.  The  fields  of  barley  wave  their  golden  heads.  But 
shall  the  gatherers  heedlessly  reap,  and  thoughtless  hands  store  the  garner  t 
No.     On  the  altar  the  first  sheaf  must  be  laid. 

I.  The  acknowledgment  of  god  must  preoede  every  work. 

The  first  act  of  harvest  adores  the  harvest's  Lord.  The  first  sickle  cuts  an 
offering  for  God. 

1.  Thought  of  God  should  precede  alL  Let  morning  dawn  with  Him.  Let 
adoration  introduce  each  task.  Nothing  is  well  done  unless  begun  with  God. 
All  is  disorder  except  the  First  be  first. 

2.  The  priest  uplifts  the  sheaf  on  high.  The  first-fruits  represent  the  entire 
produce  of  the  fields.  The  act  is  a  confession  that  all  earth  yields  is  from  God, 
and  belongs  to  God.  Man's  toil  and  care  may  be  employed,  but  all  results  are 
divine, 

3.  The  oflTering  of  the  sheaf  is  but  small.  He  who  might  justly  claim  the 
harvest,  takes  but  one  sheaf.  The  large  abundance  remains  for  man's  supply. 
Thus,  while  a  bounteous  Hand  fills  our  garneis,  while  valleys  bend  with  corn 
and  clouds  distil  their  fatness,  the  Giver  makes  His  small  demand.  But  tiie 
little  God  asks  is  an  acknowledgment  of  His  claim.  He  is  no  hard  task  master ; 
but  He  requires  that  He  be  first  in  our  thoughts  ;  He  then  gives  abundantly  mto 
our  lives  and  hearts. 

4.  But  in  this  demand  He  shows  that  all  must  not  be  consumed  on  self  We 
cannot  take  a  sheaf  to  God  now  :  but  the  poor  need  food  :  famished  souls  cry  for 
the  Word  ;  the  heathen  perish  for  the  bread  of  life.  Such  are  the  claims  on  our 
first  fruits. 

II.  In  this  harvest  shhaf  ohrist  is  set  before  the  seeking  heart. 

1.  The  name  of  **  first  fruits  "  leads  by  a  straight  path  to  Him.  The  Spirit's 
▼oice  is  very  clear :  "  Now  is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead,  and  become  the  first 
fruits  of  them  that  slept " ;  "Christ  the  first  fruits:  afterwards  they  that  are 
Christ's  at  His  coming"  (1  Cor.  xv.  20,  23). 

2.  The  day  of  offering  next  seals  this  truth.  On  the  morning  which  succeeds  tht 
Paschal  Sabbath  the  sheaf  is  waved.     Ou  this  same  dawn  Jesus  arose. 

T  3 


276  BOMlLETtC    COMMEN lARY    ON       [chap,  xxiii.  15,  16. 

Following  this  clue,  let  us  gaze  on  this  type.     That  sheaf — 

(a)  Brings  back  thought  of  the  seed  cast  into  the  ground.  Buried  in  the  earth  : 
the  frost  imprisoned  it :  storms  sealed  its  interment :  but  at  last  it  rose  into  life  : 
victory  over  death. 

Thus  Christ  descended  to  the  grave  :  life  seemed  extinct :  the  grave  made  fast 
its  bars  :  but  in  vain.     He  came  forth — the  First  fruit  from  the  dead. 

(b)  That  sheaf  relates  a  tale  of  triumph.  It  symbolises  success.  Death  fails 
to  hold  Him.  He  is  "  declared  the  Son  of  God  with  power  by  His  resurrection.'* 
Raise  high  before  God,  therefore,  your  sheaf.  It  is  the  exultation  of  the  believer. 
**  Christ  being  raised  from  the  dead  dieth  no  more  " :  and  **  because  I  live,  ye 
shall  live  also." 

Though  that  sheaf  is  alone  before  God,  yet  it  predicts  and  guarantees  the  after 
harvest, 

III.  The  harvest  ingathering  is  sure  to  follow  the  first  fruits. 

1.  Already  it  is  fulfilled  in  the  harvest  of  upraised  souls.  Believers  have  been 
"  raised  up  together,  and  made  to  sit  together  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus.*' 

2.  The  rising  dead  as  thep  quit  their  graves  shall  perfect  the  fulfilment  of  this 
sign.  How  changed  shall  they  come  forth  !  Decay  will  bloom  into  unfading 
youth  :  the  mortal  will  be  robed  in  immortality.  "  We  shall  be  like  Him  1"  The 
first  sheaf  predicts  your  resurrection. 

3.  A  world-wide  harvest,  a  glorious  prospect  is  promised  ;  when  the  whole  mass 
of  sanctified  and  ripened  souls  shall  be  reaped  from  earth's  fields  and  garnered  in 
glory. — Based  on  Dean  Law's  "  Christ  is  all."  [See  Addenda  to  Chapter 
Harvest  First  fruits]. 

Topic:  Pentecost  and  the  Spirit  (Vv.  15,  16). 

The  feast  of  Pentecost  was  celebrated  on  the  fiftieth  day  after  that  in  the 
Passover  week  on  which  the  wave  sheaf  was  presented  to  the  Lord,  and  was 
marked  by  off'ering  to  Jehovah  two  loaves.  It  was  also  known  by  the  name  of 
the  "  Feast  of  Harvest,"  from  its  coming  at  the  close  of  the  wheat  harvest. 

It  was  attended  by  vast  multitudes  (comp.  Acts  ii.),  was  "  a  holy  convocation," 
and  it  was  a  day  of  gladness  and  Joy  (Deut.  xvi.  14). 

I.  Gratitude  expressing  itself  in  joyous  dedication. 

I.  Of  themselves;  2.  Of  their  property.  For  Israel  not  only  renewed  their 
self- consecration  in  worship  and  sacrifices  laid  on  God's  altar,  but  also  their 
possessions  in  the  harvest  reaped,  as  expressed  by  the  waving  of  the  baked 
loaves  before  Him. 

(a)  Pentecost  thus  reminded  Israel  of  their  dependance  on  God  for  the  produce 
of  their  fieldSf  as  well  as  for  higher  good.  God  is  the  God  oi  providence  as  well  as 
of  grace.  He  is  supreme  alike  in  the  natural  and  spiritual  worlds.  Laws  are 
everywhere  the  action  of  His  power.  "  He  giveth  to  all  life,  and  breath,  and  all 
things  "  (Acts  xvii.  25). 

(6)  But  God  will  be  achiowledged  in  His  gifts  and  doings.  Pentecost,  there- 
fore, excited  a  spirit  of  thankfulness  ;  it  kept  alive  in  Israel  the  feeling  of  being 
God's  in  what  they  possessed  as  well  as  in  what  they  were.  Yet  what  belongs 
to  Him  He  claims.  It  is  not  only  ourselves,  therefore,  that  we  are  to  yield  to 
Him,  but  what  we  have.  The  burnt  offering  muht  not  only  be  laid  on  the  altar, 
but  the  baked  loaves  waved  before  Him  as  alike  His  property. 

II.  Sacred  associations  connected  with  the  pentecost  festival. 

1.  Historic.  It  was  commemorative  on  the  giving  of  the  law  on  Sinai.  With 
the  chronological  data  of  Exod.  xix.  before  us,  it  is  clear  that  it  was  on  the 
fiftieth  day  after  the  departure  of  Israel  from  Egypt,  i.e.,  after  the  first  Pass- 
over, that  the  taw  was  given,  and  the  national  existence  of  the  Hebrews  was  in- 


fHAP.  XXIII.  23-25.]         THE    BOOK    OF   LEVITICUS.  277 


aiigurated.  Thus  God's  manifestation  of  FUmaelf  to  Israel  on  Sinai,  and  FHs 
words  to  Moses,  effected  %y  His  wilderness  Church  what  His  Spirit's  advent  and 
the  gift  of  new  tongues  effected  for  the  Christian  Church  at  Jerusalem. 

2.  Typical.  It  looked  forward  as  well  as  backward.  As  the  Passover  fore- 
shadowed the  death  of  Christ,  so  did  the  Pentecost  the  Spirit's  descent.  At 
the  Feast  of  Pentecost  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  writes  the  law  of  God,  not  on  tables 
of  stone,  but  on  '*  the  fleshy  tables  of  the  heart,"  was  poured  out. 

III.  The  harvest  bounty  suggests  the  fulness  of  the  spirit  which  marked 

THE  CHRISTIAN  PENTECOST. 

1.  The  endowments  of  the  Christian  Pentecost  were  first  for  the  apostles^ 
giving  them  qualification  for  their  life  work,  and  ensuring  the  maintenance  of 
their  joy  of  faith.  For  "the  promise  of  the  Father"  they  were  bidden  by  Christ 
to  wait  at  Jerusalem.  Until  the  Holy  Ghost  came  upon  them  they  were  not 
"endowed  with  power,''  not  prepared  to  be  "  witnesses  for  Christ  in  Jerusalem 
and  all  Judea,"  etc. 

2.  But  this  baptism  of  power  is  what  every  child  of  grace  needs  and  may  possess, 
Discipleship  is  not  of  itself  suflBcient  for  all  that  we  are  required  to  be  in 
character  and  service.     For  these  we  want  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit's  indwelling 

What  the  Spirit  was,  in  the  fulness  of  His  indwelling  presence,  to  the  first 
disciples,  He  is,  in  a  very  real  and  blessed  sense,  to  all  so  possessed  by  Him 
now  :  "  strengthened  with  might  in  the  inner  maUf"  and  equipped  for  a  life-work  of 
witness  for  Christ  Jesus.  —- »— 

The  bountiful  harvest  shows  God's  plenitude^  and  His  Joy  in  enriching  man. 
Certainly  He  is  as  willing  to  bestow  the  abundance  of  His  Spirit.  We  receive 
Him  by  faith,  and  according  to  the  degree  of  such  faith.  The  promise  of  the 
Spirit,  and  the  bestowment,  are  both  Christ's,  and  He  will  never  allow  the 
desire  for  Him  to  remain  unmet.  He  is  too  anxious  to  see  us  what  the  Spirit's 
indwelling  alone  will  make  us,  to  delay  or  refuse  the  answer  to  prayer  for  thia 
holy  gift. 

Then  will  come  into  our  souls  grace  in  increasing  supplies,  fulness  of  assur- 
ance of  faith  and  hope,  and  strength  added  to  strength.  So  endowed  and  en- 
riched, we  shall  "  yield  ourselves  unto  God,  and  our  members  instruments  for 
righteousness."  "The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering, 
gentleness,  goodness,  and  faith "  (GaL  V.  22). — Outlined  from  "  Gospel  in 
Leviticus,"  by  Jas.  Fleming,  D.D. 

Topic :  "  A  Memorial  of  Blowing  of  Trumpets  "  (Vv.  23-25). 

With  reverberating  tones  of  joy  this  blast  of  trumpets  ushered  in  Israel's 
civil  jear.  At  earliest  dawn  of  the  "  first  day  of  the  month  "  the  exhilarating 
notes  sounded  forth  throughout  the  camp,  or  the  land,  of  Israel.  The  music 
strains  were  continued  all  day.  It  was  "  a  Sabbath,"  fur  rest  from  work,  for  "  an 
holy  convocation,"  but  it  was  a  Sabbath  of  praise,  of  music,  of  delight. 

I.  Trumpet  tones  awaken  attention. 

Sleepers  would  start  from  their  slumbers  at  that  early  blast  of  the  trumpets. 
What  need  is  there  that  sleepers  should  awake  !  Drowsiness  is  on  the  souls  of 
multitudes.  They  dream  on  heedlessly,  letting  life  glide  away,  and  salvation 
lie  in  neglect.  Thought  sleeps,  interest  sleeps,  spiritual  claims  and  gospel 
realities  are  ignored.  Eyes  are  closed  from  the  "  Day  Dawn,"  they  see  not  that 
the  Sun  of  Righteousness  has  arisen.     *'It  is  high  time  to  awake  out  of  sleep." 

Clarion  notes  startle  drowsy  souls.  Providence  sen^ls  out  trumpet  blasts. 
The  preacher's  words  may  startle  sleeping  consciences.  God's  Spirit  may  sound 
the  note  of  arousing  in  the  souL  "Awake,  O  sleeper:  arise  and  call  upou  thy 
God  I " 


278  HOMILETIC    COMMENTAUY    ON        [chap,  xxiii.  23-25. 

'■  ■ ' —   ■     —     '        ■        '  ■■         '      ■    . .  — , 

IL  This  "  blowing  of  trumpets  "  announced  the  end  of  a  year. 

1.  A  year  gone  !  A  cause  for  Joy,  for  glad  trumpet  tones.  Yes  !  if  the  year 
has  been  spent  well.  Yes !  if  God  has  been  known  by  us  as  a  Refuge  and  a 
Faithful  Friend  ;  having  kept  us  by  His  grace,  and  magnified  His  sufficiency  for 
us.  Yes!  if  we  have  escaped  perils  and  conquered  foes,  and  in  review  can  cry, 
"  0  my  soul,  thou  hast  trodden  down  strength ;  now  thanks  be  to  God  who 
always  causeth  us  to  triumph  in  Christ."  Yes!  if  our  **  salvation  is  nearer," 
heaven  nearer,  the  reward  of  faithful  service  nearer,  the  goal  at  hand. 

2.  A  year  gone  !  A  startling  fact ;  shrill  trumpet  notes  should  stir  us  to 
alarm.  If  not  saved,  if  time  has  run  to  waste,  if  we  have  let  slip  from  us  the 
opportunities  of  grace,  if  we  are  yet  in  the  bonds  of  iniquity,  if  still  the  door  of 
our  hearts  is  closed  upon  the  knocking  Christ,  if  we  are  without  hope  and  with- 
out God  in  the  world,  **  redeem  the  time.*' 

III.  The  Feast  of  Trumpets  proclaimed  A  NEW  tear  opened. 

The  past  is  past.  Opportunities  unused  are  gone  beyond  recall.  Penitential 
tears  cannot  bring  back  the  misspent  year.  Verily  God  might  "cut  us  down  as 
oumberers  of  the  ground." 

1.  But  a  respite  is  announced*  Another  year  opens.  The  Intercessor  has 
pleaded  "  Let  be  this  year  also."  It  is  an  extension  of  opportunity  to  seek  the 
Lord,  for  sinners  to  forsake  their  ways,  and  unrighteous  men  their  thoughts, 
to  **  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come,"  to  haste  to  the  "  hope  set  before  us,"  to  claim 
the  salvation  in  Christ  offered  to  the  penitent  and  believing.  0  use  the  precious 
respite  mercy  gives.  The  trumpets  sound;  they  tell  of  hope  prolonged:  seize 
the  precious  hour  "while  it  is  called  to-day." 

2.  A  new  era  is  set  before  Israel.  Gratitude  for  past  mercies,  the  memory  of 
God's  great  goodness,  the  experiences  of  redeeming  and  sustaining  grace,  incite 
to  service,  to  consecration.  **  How  much  owest  thou  unto  thy  Lord  1  Take 
thy  bill  and  torite  quickly.'*  "  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  thy 
might."  Let  love  and  thankfulness  urge  to  more  diligence,  more  self-sacrifice, 
more  eagerness  in  use  of  privileges,  more  fervent  culture  of  holiness.  "  Go  up 
higher."  "Press  to  the  mark."  "Repent,  and  do  thy  first  works."  The 
trumpet  sounds ;  it  rallies  the  hosts  of  the  Lord  to  their  ranks,  to  the  battle, 
to  brave  achievements,  to  victories  for  the  King. 

IV.  Those  trumpet  blasts  were  a  memorial  of  sinai. 

When  God  came  down  on  the  cloud- robed  peak  of  the  mount,  it  was  a  scene 
of  appalling  splendour  and  solemnity.  The  myriad  observers  below  trembled, 
"  so  terrible  was  the  sight."  When  suddenly  a  weird  trumpet  note  swelled  out 
on  the  air,  filling  all  hearts  with  amaze  :  and  "  the  voice  of  the  Trumpet  sounded 
long,  and  waxed  louder  and  louder"  (Eiod.  xix.  19).  This  "blowing  of 
trumpets"  was  "a  memorial." 

1.  It  led  them  back  to  solemn  thoughts  of  God.  Because  Jehovah  was  now 
more  graciously  dwelling  among  them  in  the  Holy  place,  He  was  still  the  God 
of  Sinai.  We  must  not  presume  on  His  grace.  How  august  and  dreadful  is 
He  with  whom  we  have  to  do.     "  Fear  before  Him,  all  ye  saints." 

2.  It  recalled  the  law,  as  the  basis  of  their  covenant  relationship.  "  Do  this  and 
live."  Such  were  the  terras  on  which  they  stood  to  Jehovah.  Transgress,  and 
you  die.  "  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  written  in  the 
book  of  the  law  to  do  them."  But  who  can  1  Is  the  trumpet  blast,  therefore, 
a  summons  to  judgment?  It  need  not  be.  It  declares  the  standard  for 
righteousness,  only  to  emphasize  the  mercy  which  has  provided  sacrifice  that 
the  sinner  might  propitiate  and  live. 

V.  Assuredly  the  trumpet  is  A  symbol  OP  the  gospel. 

"  Blessed  are  the  people  that  know  the  joyful  sound  "  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  15).  "  I 
was  in  the  Spirit  on  the  Lord's  day,  and  heard  behind  me  a  great  voice,  as  of  a 
trumpet,  saying,  I  am  Alpha  and  Omega''  (Rev.  i.  10). 


CHAP,  xxiii.  24,  :ii)i  THE   BOOK    OF   LEVITICUS  279 


1.  Christ's  voice  should  he  heard  in  that  "blowing  of  trumpets."  It  Bounds 
forth  iu  the  announcements  of  the  gospel  through  the  Scriptures,  through  all 
who  tell  the  message  of  hope  and  grace.  Jesus  speaks  to  the  heart  affrighted 
by  the  clamour  of  Sinai's  awful  peals.  The  Gospel  is  the  silvery  note  sending 
a  thrill  of  comfort  and  gladness  into  condemned  souls.     It  is  as  "  music  in  our 


ears." 


2.  Christianity  w  a  trumpet- toned  herald:  hastening  through  the  heavens  with 
the  calls  of  grace  to  all  mankind.  "I  saw  an  angel  flying  in  the  midst  of 
heaven,  having  the  everlasting  gospel  to  preach"  (Rev.  xiv.  6).  All  who  know 
the  good  news  should  take  up  the  trumpet  of  Truth  and  send  out  the  tidings 
over  all  the  earth. 

8.  The  Gospel  is  a  joy  note  to  the  world.  Not  "  a  voice  of  thunder,"  but  of 
sweet  melody.  It  brings  "  good  tidings  of  great  joy";  salvation  to  the  utter- 
most ;  cleansing  of  all  sin  ;  a  precious  Saviour ;  an  upraised  cross ;  a  "  new 
covenant "  of  redemption ;  of  an  opened  door  in  heaven  for  all  who  cleave  to 
Jesus.  Glad  indeed  are  these  trumpet  tones ;  they  calm  the  sinner's  fears ; 
allure  the  troubled  to  peace,  win  the  anxious  to  faith. 

All  around  us  are  sad  notes :  0  sorrow,  0  oppression,  0  anguished  prayer,  0 
dark  despair.     Earth  is  a  scene  of  Babel  discord.    The  air  clangs  with  confusion. 

But  let  the  Gospel  trumpet  blow.     Its  sweet  harmonies  float,  as  did  the  songs 

of  angels  over  Bethlehem  fields,  soothing  unrest,  heralding  "  peace  and  good  will/ 

thrilling  hearts  with  joy. 

And  still  its  heavenly  music  floats 
Oe'r  all  this  weary  world. 

VI.  A  prophetic  thought  is  stirred  by  those  trumpets ;  they  foretell  thb^  rb- 

8URRECTI0N  SCENE. 

The  close  of  time  will  arrive  ;  the  great  white  throne  will  be  set ;  the  mighty 
angel  will  set  his  foot  on  the  sea  and  another  on  the  land,  and  declare  that  time 
shall  be  no  more.  And  then  "the  Lord  Himself  shall  descend  from  heaven 
with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with  the  trump  of  God" 
(1  Thess.  iv.  16).     From  opened  graves  the  dead  shall  arise ;  and  you  with  them. 

Listen  expectantly  for  that  trumpet  blast.  At  such  an  hour  as  ye  think  not  it 
will  sound.  Sleepers  were  awoke  when  at  early  dawn  the  priests  blew  their 
trumpets  on  this  Hebrew  festival.  And  sleepers  will  awake  at  the  judgment 
blast.  And  **  all  that  are  in  tbeir  graves  shall  come  forth."  Be  ye  therefore 
ready,  so  that  that  day  should  not  overtake  you  unawares. 

Fill  the  interval  with  a  wise  use  of  life.  The  Gospel  trumpet  offers  you  a 
perfect  righteousness;  the  judgment  trumpet  will  demand  it.  The  Gospel 
trumpet  bids  you  robe  yourself  in  spotless  garments  :  the  judgment  trump 
will  call  to  condemnation  those  who  are  not  *'  white  and  clean,"  covered  with 
the  robe  of  salvation.  Such  will  arise  from  death's  sleep  glad  "  to  meet  the 
Lord  in  the  air,  and  so  to  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord."  [See  Addenda  to  chapter 
"  Blowing  op  Trumpets."] 

Topic :  The  Feast  of  Trumpets  (Vv.  24,  25)* 

The  feast  of  trumpets  Is  mentioned  here  for  the  first  time.  It  was  kept  on 
the  first  day  of  Tisri,  with  which  the  civil  year  began.  It  was  a  time  of  holy 
rest,  and  communion  with  the  Lord  through  an  offering  made  by  fire  unto  Him. 
The  feast  was  kept  by  Israel  when  they  took  possession  of  Canaan,  and  was 
characterised  by  great  joy  and  gladness.     The  feast  was  suggestive  of — 

I.  The  completion  op  the  work  of  creation. 

The  earth  (fitted  to  be  the  abode  of  man)  was  ciad  in  beautiful  garments ; 
presented  an  aspect  of  great  fertility  and  richness.     The  Lord  pronounced  it 


280  HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY     ON    [chap,  xxiii.  83—44. 


good  J "  the  morning  stars  sang  together,  and  all  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for 
joy.'*  The  beginning  of  the  civil  year,  when  the  harvest  was  ripe,  and  the  air 
was  ringing  with  the  shouts  of  harvest  home,  would  seem  suggestive  of  the 
beginning  of  human  history,  which  began  amid  scenes  of  plenty,  as  the  first 
human  pair  came  through  the  gate  Beautiful. 

II.  The  promulgation  of  the  law  from  sinai. 

The  sounding  of  the  trumpet  from  morning  to  evening  would  remind  Israel  of 
the  time  when  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  called  attention  to  the  promulgation  of 
those  statutes,  in  the  observance  of  which  they  would  please  Jehovah,  and  show 
to  the  world  that  they  were  His  people.  The  feast  would  call  attention  to  the 
divine  voice,  the  trumpets  would  proclaim  His  right  to  be  heard,  the  imperative 
duty  of  the  listeners  to  hearken  and  obey. 

III.  The  blessings  of  the  departed  year. 

Israel  had  been  spared  through  another  year.  God  had  been  faithful  to  His 
promises,  all  their  wants  had  been  supplied.  It  became  them  to  let  their  voices 
be  heard  in  loud  and  joyful  notes;  the  music  of  their  hearts  echoed  in  vocal 
praise. 

IV.  The  bounty  of  the  dawning  year. 

As  their  storehouses  were  filled  with  plenty,  and  their  presses  burst  forth  with 
new  wine,  anxieties  about  the  future  would  be  allayed,  provision  would  be  abun- 
dant for  man  and  beast,  Israel  would  have  wherewith  to  satisfy  their  physical 
necessities,  and  to  offer  the  various  sacrifices  in  connection  with  the  tabernacle 
services.  The  trumpets  would  call  to  thankfulness  and  cheerful  acknowledg- 
ment of  indebtedness.  However  rich  and  abundant  the  oblations  might  be, 
they  ought  to  be  presented  in  the  willing  and  gladsome  spirit  such  words  as 
these  inspire,  "  Of  thine  own  have  we  given  thee ;  thine  is  all  the  glory." 

V.  The  need  op  wakeful  alacrity  in  the  service  of  jehovah. 

Trumpet  peals  rousing  and  stimulating;  and,  when  blown  by  the  priests,  loud 
calls  to  hearty  service.  Though  no  servile  work  was  to  be  done,  yet  sacred  ser- 
vices were  to  be  performed,  solemn  sacrifices  offered.  Israel  was  to  awake 
and  put  on  strength,  enter  with  special  enthusiasm  upon  the  work  of  the  Lord. 
External  material  aid  may  be  consistently  used  to  awaken  attention  and  quicken 
devotion.     Illustrative  also  of — 

VI.  The  inauguration  of  the  gospel  age. 

At  the  day  of  Pentecost,  when  the  Holy  Ghost  was  given,  and  the  first  fruits 
of  the  Gospel  harvest  were  gathered  in,  the  apo«tles  went  forth  lifting  up  their 
voices  like  trumpets,  preaching  Jesus  and  the  resurrection.  Isaiah  in  predicting 
the  Gospel  age  said,  "  In  that  day  the  trumpet  shall  be  blown";  and  verily  the 
sound  of  the  Gospel  trumpet  went  speedily  through  all  the  earth.  John  in 
apocalyptic  vision  heard  the  divine  voice  as  the  sound  of  a  trumpet ;  and  the 
voice  of  God  as  of  a  trumpet  shall,  in  the  last  great  day,  awake  the  dead  to 
judgment.  Let  us  begin  each  year  with  a  feast  of  trumpets,  and  each  day  with  a 
loud  call  to  privilege  and  duty,  that  our  lives  may  be  one  continuous  litany  and 
psalm.  Then  when  the  morn  of  eternity  dawns,  and  the  shadows  of  earth  flee 
away,  we  shall  join  in  singing  the  song  of  Moses  and  the  Lamb. — F.W.B, 

Topic:  The  Feast  op  Tabernacles  (Vv.  33-44), 

On  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  seventh  month,  five  days  after  the  Day  of  Atone- 
ment, the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  began,  and  (according  to  additional  information 
gathered  from  Numbers  and  Nehemiah)  the  sacrifices,  which  were  many, 
gradually  decreased  in  number  to  the  eighth  day.  Israel  was  very  remiss  in 
observing  the  feast  on  entrance  upon  Canaan  ;  for,  from  the  time  of  Joshua  to 
Nehemiah,  it  was  unobserved.     Obviously,  the  object  of  the  feast  was  to  keep 


CHAP.  XXIII.  33-44.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUIS.  281 


alive  the  spiritual  life  of  the  natioa,  to  perpetually  renew  its  youth.     The  feast 
was  calculated — 

I.  To  PERPETUATE  AMONG  THE  PEOPLE  THE  MEMORY  OP  MIRACULOUS  EVENTS 
CONNECTED  WITH  THMR  NATIONAL  HISTORY. 

"  That  your  getieratious  may  know  that  I  made  the  children  of  Israel  to 
dwell  in  booths,  when  I  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt."  Emancipation, 
protection,  presfrvatioriy  all  the  miraculous  events  connected  with  the  exodus 
from  Egypt  and  the  pilgrimage  through  the  wilderness,  exhibited  the  faithful- 
ness and  goodness  of  the  Lord.  It  would  be  well  for  Israel  to  be  put  in  constant 
remembrance  of  these  things.  Such  interpositions  suggested  their  dignity  and 
duty  as  a  people,  and  their  destiny  among  the  nations  of  the  earth.  It  is  good 
for  all  peoples,  in  all  time,  to  remember  great  national  deliverers  and  deliver- 
ances. Surely,  He  shstuld  be  lovingly  remembered  who  has  redeemed  us  from 
the  bondage  of  sin  and  death  ! 

II.  To  AWAKEN  IN  THE  PEOPLE  GRATEFUL  JOY  FOR  THE  COMPLETED  FRUITFUL 
SEASONS  OP  THE  YEAR. 

This  the  crowning,  most  joyous  feast  of  the  year.  What  a  glad  picture  the 
people  would  present,  as  they  sat  under  their  booths  rejoicing  with  the  joy  of 
harvest,  the  roads  and  fields  vocal  with  the  sound  of  happy  voices,  and  the 
courts  of  the  Lord  resounding  with  sacred  praise. 

Permission  to  indulge  in  such  innocent  pleasures  taught  the  people  that 
Jehovah  delighted  in  their  happiness  as  well  as  in  their  holiness.  *'  God  (as 
Cowper  puts  it)  made  the  country,  maa  the  town."  The  verdure  of  the  grass, 
the  hues  and  fragrance  of  the  flowers,  the  abundant  foliage  of  the  trees,  the 
luscious  fruits  and  golden  corn,  remind  us  that  God  would  have  us  experience 
many  joys  in  our  earthly  pilgrimage,  while  we  look  forward  to  the  Canaan  of 
ineffable  beauty  and  undisturbed  repose.  In  the  gospel  we  have  provision  for 
all  our  spiritual  wants,  rich,  fully  free, 

III.  To  ENJOIN  UPON  THE  PEOPLE  CONSTANT  OBEDIENCE  TO  THE  REVEALED 
COMMANDMENTS  OF  THE  LORD. 

The  large  number  of  sacrifices  connected  with  the  feast,  and  the  septennial 
public  reading  of  the  whole  law,  would  train  and  exercise  the  people  in 
obedience,  revive  their  knowledge  of  the  Lord  and  acknowledgment  of  His 
sovereignty.  In  later  times  there  was  the  additional  custom  of  a  solemn 
libation  of  water  fetched  from  the  pool  of  Siloam  every  day  at  the  time  of 
raorniog  sacrifice.  The  whole  ceremony  was  characterised  by  great  enjoyment 
and  delight.  The  feast  may  be  regarded  as  illustrative,  if  not  typical,  of  {a) 
The  pilgrim  character  of  the  believer  s  life.  Here  we  dwell  in  frail  tenements, 
and  have  no  continuing  city.  (6)  The  advent  of  the  Messiah;  when  **  God  in  very 
deed  dwelt  with  man  on  the  earth."  At  one  of  the  celebrations  of  this  feast, 
Jesus  said,  "  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me  and  drink."  (c)  The 
latter  day  glory  of  the  Church  militant,  (d)  The  glorious  state  of  the  Church 
triumphant ;  where  the  redeemed  are  represented  as  waving  palm  branches,  in- 
dicative of  peace,  conquest,  and  joy.  The  Feast  of  Tabernacles  followed  closely 
on  the  Day  of  Atonement,  thus  joy  sprang  out  of  sorrow.  Blessedness  that 
flows  from  mediation  and  sacrifice  is  incomparable  joy.  Let  sin  be  atoned  for 
and  removed,  holiness  and  happiness  inevitably  ensue, — F,  W.B, 


Topic:  Festival  op  Tabernacles  and  Inoatherino  (Vv.  33-^). 

It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  Old  Testament  religion  was  only  stern  and 
repressive.  It  had  its  side  of  restraint  and  self-denial,  and  thence  sprang  much 
of  all  that  was  best  m.  the  character  and  happiness  of  the  people.     But  it  had 


282  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY   ON        [chap,  xxiii.  33— 44. 

also  its  side  of  cheer  and  hope,  indeed  of  festivity.  Its  weekly  Sabbaths  were 
intended  to  be  days  of  delight  ;  so  were  its  New  Moons.  Then  each  season  had 
its  great  festival,  save  winter  ;  the  spring  its  Passover  ;  the  summer  its  Pentecost ; 
the  autumn  its  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  Each  was  a  joyful  feast ;  but  the  last, 
falling  on  a  time  of  the  year  when  all  hearts  would  naturally  be  glad,  was  the 
most  joyful  of  all. 

Note  some  of  its  more  instructive  features. 

I.  It  was  a  protracted  religious  meeting. 

As  a  **  feast  unto  the  Lord  "  it  began  and  ended  with  a  "  holy  convooatlon,"  a 
coming  together  for  religious  ends. 

1.  These  were  held  in  the  central  sanctuary  of  the  nation.  All  male  Israelites 
were  required  to  attend. 

2.  The  highly  religious  character  of  this  feast  appears  in  the  unusual  number  of 
its  gifts  and  sacrifices. 

3.  All  the  Hebrew  festivals  were  intended  to  inspire  pairiotism^  and  promote 
the  separation  of  Israel  from  other  nations ;  to  remind  the  people  of  their  cove- 
nant relations  to  God,  and  bind  them  in  loyal  piety  to  Him. 

We  should  value  occasions  for  holy  convocation  ;  and  use  them  for  such  re- 
ligiously joyous  ends. 

II.  It  was  a  thanksgiving  for  god's  bounty  in  a  complete  harvest. 

It  came  at  the  end  of  the  year,  when  they  had  "gathered  in  the  fruit  of  the 
land  "  (v.  39),  and  was  therefore — 

1.  A  public  recognition  of  divine  faithfulness  in  giving  rain  in  due  season, 
c.'iusing  the  earth  to  yield  her  increase.  Hence  it  was  called  the  *'  Feast  of  In- 
gatherings" (Exod.  xxiii.  16). 

2.  A  feast  of  grateful  gladness.  The  sixty-first  Psalm,  supposed  to  be  sung  at 
this  feast,  well  expresses  the  thought  supreme  in  devout  minds.  This  expressed 
itself  in — 

3.  A  profusion  of  gifts  and  sacrifices.  Multiplied  and  great  mercies  demanded 
the  more  abounding  recognition.  [See  Addenda  to  chapter,  Harvest  First-  fruits.] 

III.  It   was   a  commemoration  for  mercies  attempering  hardships   and 

DANGERS. 

A  part  of  the  command  ran  thus  :  "  All  that  are  Israelites  born  shall  dwell  in 
booths,  that  your  generations  may  know  that  I  made  the  children  of  Israel  to 
dwell  in  booths,  when  I  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt "  (43,  44). 

In  such  a  sight — a  whole  people  deserting  their  homes,  and  lodging  in 
temporary  arbours,  decorated  with  foliage  and  fruit-laden  boughs — there  was 
something  picturesque  and  inspiriting      But — 

1.  It  was  also  an  impressive  memorial.  Israel  was  again  **  abiding  in  tents 
according  to  their  tribes,"  as  he  did  when  Balaam  looked  from  the  heights  of 
Moab,  and  said, "  How  goodly  are  thy  tents,  0  Jacob,  and  thy  tabernacles,  0 
Israel,"  etc. 

2.  The  celebration  commemorated  all  the  diverse  experiences  of  the  wilderness. 
Not  its  trials  alone,  but  its  triumphs  and  blessings.  Doubtless  the  materials  of 
the  booths  were  reminders  of  the  different  stages  of  their  wilderness  journey  ; 
the  *'  branches  of  palm  trees,"  of  the  valleys  and  the  plains ;  the  "  boughs  of  thick 
trees  "  of  the  bushy  mountain  heights ;  the  "  willows,"  of  the  refreshing  water 
brooks. 

3.  For  all  times  commemoration  has  its  uses.  To  fire  the  patriotism  of  a  nation, 
it  is  helpful  to  rehearse  the  memories  of  its  founders  and  defenders.  To  rekindle 
enthusiasm  in  a  noble  cause,  it  is  a  good  thing  to  recall  its  early  struggles  and 
victories.     Stimulus  is  often  found  in  keeping  great  days  in  personal  history. 

The  manner  of  modern  times  is  to  foster  pride  by  celebrating  human  exploits ; 
that  of  ancient  Israel  was  to  kindle  gratitude  and  stir  obedience  by  recalling  the 
goodness  of  God. 


CHAP.  XXIII.  2.] 


THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS. 


288 


TV.  In  every  aspect  this  festival  was  an   expression  of  the  jotpul  side  op 

RELIGION. 

A  feast.  The  people  were  to  "  rejoice  before  the  Lord  their  God  "  (v.  40). 
Comp.  also  Dent.  xvi.  14,  15.  There  was  a  grand  illumination  of  the  court  of 
the  Temple;  an  evening  procession  in  holiday  attire,  and  with  branches  of  myrtle 
and  palm  and  willow  ;  and  a  going  in  mass  for  water,  which  was  poured  out  at 
the  foot  of  the  altar,  while  there  arose  the  chant— accompanied  with  glad  music  — 
*'  Therefore  with  joy  shall  ye  draw  water  out  of  the  wells  of  salvation." 

It  was  concerning  this  ceremony  that  there  sprang  up  the  proverb  :  '*  Whoso^ 
ever  hath  not  seen  the  rejoicing  at  the  drawing  of  this  water,  hath  never  seen  rejoicing 
at  all.'* 

1.  This  joy  had  its  root  in  the  sense  of  inward  pmce  which  comes  from  the 
pardon  of  sin.     This  feast  followed  close   upon  the  Day  of  Atonement. 

2.  The  joy  ^'d.^  neither  selfish  nor  lawless.  Gifts  for  the  poor  designated  it; 
intimating  that  life  has  no  true  delight  that  can  be  separated  from  either  love  or 
duty. 

3.  Rq^  false  the  theory  that  religion^  if  e^iYnest,  is  Joyless  /  It  has  indeed  its 
restraints  and  obligitions,  its  laws  and  duties;  but  this  is  a  beneficent  arrange- 
ment, giving  zeal  to  our  gladness.  Between  religion  that  knows  how  to  be  stead- 
fast, self-denying,  and  heroic,  and  that 

Mirth  that  after  no  repenting  draws 
there  can  be  no  quarrel.     They  go  often  and  well  together. 

V.   This  feast  was  a  type  of  a  greater   pea.st  now  preparing   for   god's 

PEOPLE. 

Archbishop  Trench  has  reminded  us  that  "on  this  rests  the  possibility  of  a 
real  and  not  naerely  arbitrary  teaching  by  parables,  that  the  world  of  nature  is 
throughout  a  witness  for  a  world  of  spirit,  proceeding  from  the  same  hand,  grow- 
ing out  of  the  same  root,  and  constituted  for  that  very  end.  All  lovers  of  truth 
readily  admit  these  m3'sterions  harmonies,  to  them  the  things  of  earth  are  copies 
of  things  of  heaven."     In  this  feast  there  is — 

1.  A  prophecy  of  the  latter -day  rest  and  Joy  of  the  earthly  church  (Zeo.  xiv.  16, 
20 ;  and  also  Tsa.  xxv.  6,  8).  Under  the  abundant  outpouring  of  God's  Spirit, 
closer  fellowship  with  God  and  fuller  bliss. 

2.  The  heavenly  feast  following  *'  the  harvest  which  is  the  end  of  the  worlds 
John  beheld  the  scene  :  "  I  looked,  and  behold  a  great  multitude,  palms  in  their 
hand,"  etc.    (Rev.  vii.  9,  10). 

Evermore  tl^ey  shall  drink  of  God's  river  of  pleasure.  They  shall  be  satisfied 
with  delight. 

What  assurance  have  you  that,  when  that  bright  day  dawns,  you  will  witness 
its  rising  be^im  ;  that  when  that  great  feast  is  spread,  you  will  share  in  its  delights  1 
— Rev.  H.  M.  Grant,  D.D, 


OUTLINES     ON     VERSES     OF     CHAPTER    XXIIl. 


V.  2. — Theme:  "Feasts  of  the  lord." 

1.  Sacred  lifk  is  itsklf  a  fhstival. 

1    Divine   in  its  origin.      "  Feasts  of  the 
Lord:' 

2.  Blissful  in  its  quality.     "  Feasts  " 
3    Enriched  v!\ih  frequent  delights. 

"  Feasts  ;  "  plural,  for  God  breaks  in  upon 
he  Cliristaia  career,  itself  a  festiral.  with 
ximes  of  refreshing  and  incidents  of  gladness 
giving  "  days  of  heaven  on  the  earth." 

II.  This,  christian  year  has  its  festivi- 

tlfiS. 


1.  /  ime  is  interrupted  by  sacred  seasons. 

A  pause  in  the  rush  and  absorption  of 
earthly  aflFairs,  that  God  and  His  doings  may 
have  attention  and  commemoration. 

2.  Human  life  is  refreshed  by  the  bkssitigs 
of  religion. 

Even  the  godless  share  in  the  relief  and 
rest  which  our  holy- days,  "holidays,"  bring 
them. 

3.  A  witness  to  what  is  God's  will  for  man. 
That  all  should  have  a  joyous  life  even 

here. 


284 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY  ON 


[CHAP,  xxiii.  10—15. 


That  heaven  should  make  earth  glad ;  for 
happiness  has  its  sprinsr  in  the  Lord 

III.  Gracious    SKA.ioNS    asb    appointed 

FOR   THE    CRURCH. 

God  would  fill  His  people  with  blessedness ; 
BO  there  comes  to  them  : 

1  Days  of  rest  and  gladness.  The  Sabbath, 
the  anniversaries  of  great  gospel  incidents. 

2.  Special  times  of  revival.  For  quickened 
life;  renewed  power;  aroused  earnestness; 
rekindled  love  ;  awakened  prayerfulnesa  ; 
enlarged  prosperity. 

3.  toretaste  of  heaven^ s  joy.  He  feasts  His 
saints  with  felicities  at  gracious  seasons,  and 
the  fulness  of  His  favour  satiates  their  souls. 
In  su^h  wondrous  seasons,  *'  whether  in  the 
body  or  out  of  the  body,  God  knoweth,"  they 
rise  into  "  third  heavens,"  they  find  a  "  feast 
of  fat  things  '  provided,  and  enter  the  very 
**  banquetting  house  "  of  heaven's  bliss. 

V,  10 — Theme:  Fir'T  fruits  sheap. 
"  1  hen  shall  ye  bring  a  sheaf  of Jirstfruits,"' 

The  celebration  of  this  feast  could  not  take 
place  till  Israel  entered  Canaan  ;  for  during 
the  pilgrimage  through  the  wilderness  there 
was  neither  sowing  nor  reaping,  the  daily 
descent  of  manna  from  Heaven  being  adequate 
to  supply  daily  bread.  The  first  sheaf  pre- 
sented before  the  Lord  hallowed  and  guar- 
anteed the  complete  harvest.     It  exhibited — 

I.  The  depbndkncb  op  Israel  upon  tub 
LoiiU.  The  Holy  Land  was  the  Lord's. 
Israel  could  not  claim  it  by  right  of  inheri- 
tance, purchase,  or  conquest.  Being  a  free 
gift,  reaping  a  harvest  they  had  not  sown, 
it  was  fitting  the  first  reaped  sheaf  should 
be  presented  in  a  solemn  act  of  worship,  ac- 
knowledging that  the  harvest  was  the 
outcome  of  divine  goodness  and  power. 
Israel  would  be  as  much  dependent  upon 
divine  supply  in  Canaan  as  in  the  wilderness. 
Israel  was  to  think  of  themselves  last,  God 
was  to  be  owned  and  honoured  first.  Though 
aellishness  would  reverse  the  order,  the  com- 
mand is,  to  honour  the  Lord  with  our  sub- 
siance,  and  the  firstfruits  of  all  our  increase. 

IL  The  dklight  of  Israkl  in  Tiiii  Lord. 
A  meat  offering  accompanying  the  waving  of 
the  barley  she  if  constituted  the  service  a 
feast,  not  a  fast.  The  fine  flour,  wine,  and 
oil  indicated  that  the  feast  was  eucharistic, 
a  season  of  social  and  sacred  joy.  "  The 
Lord  loveth  a  cheerful  giver."  Offerings 
should  be  presented  ungrudgingly  to  Him 
who  loads  us  with  His  benefits.  The  accepta- 
bility of  offerings  depend  upon  what  and  hozo, 
as  well  as  upon  what  and  when  presented. 
The  cheerful  and  loyal  heart  will  devise 
liberal  things. 

III.  Thb  dedication  of  Israel  to  the 
Lord.  The  waving  sheaf  would  excite  the 
people  to  gratitude.,  and  symbolise  their  devo- 
tion to  the  glory  of  Jehovah.  The  thank- 
offering  was  accepted  through  the  burnt- 
offering,  denoting  that  all  service  must  have 
its  basis  in  complete  self-surrender.  The 
sheaf  of  first  fruits,  was  an  earnest  that  the 


whole  harvest  would  be  ^fathered  in,  and  it 
consecrated  the  whole  Christ  is  the  "  First 
fruits  of  them  that  slept."  He  rose  on  the 
day  of  the  offering  of  first  fruits  of  Jewish 
harvest,  as  an  earnest  that  all  who  are  one 
with  Him,  shall  be  safely  gathered  in  at  the 
harvest  home  of  the  world.  All  our  gifts  to 
the  Lord  must  be  preceded  by  complete  self- 
consecration,  through  the  mediation  and 
merits  of  oui-  Great  High  Priest. — F,  IV.  B, 

V.  14. — TJieme:  Self  in  abetancb.    "  Ye 

shall  eat  neither  bread,  nor  parched  corn,  nor 
green  ears^  until  the  selfsame  day  that  ye  have 
brought  an  offering  unto  your  God^'' 
I.  Man's  sinful  tendenot  is  to  intrude 

SELF  BEFORE  THB  LORD. 

1.  Through  impatient  self-will. 

2.  Through  a  weak  craving  after  visible 
enticements. 

.\  Through  a  habit  of  ignoring  God  in  his 
life. 

4.  Through  the  infatuation  which  places 
material  gains  above  spiritual  interests. 

II.  Subordination  of  self  is  tub  law  of 

RELIGION. 

1.  God  is  to  \i&  first  in  our  affections. 

2.  Our  gratitude  should  prompt  us  to  quick 
recognition  of  what  we  owe  him. 

3.  Saved  by  Him,  and  enriched  by  His 
gifts,  how  natural  that  He  be  adored  with 
alacrity  and sej-ved with  delight! 

4.  Christ  Jesus  sacrificed  self  for  us :  and 
has  left  us  an  example  to  make  Him  our  first 
thought. 

HI.  Self-repression  is  rewarded  with 

RICH  BESTOWMENTS. 

1.  We  deny  ourselves  but  for  a  brief  season. 
*'  Until  the  selfsame  day  that  ye  have  brought 
an  offering." 

2.  God  gives  us  a  present  reward  for  every 
denial  of  self  for  His  pleasure:  in  the  ap- 
proval of  conscience,  and  the  vNitness  of  His 
Spirit,  and  the  happiness  of  a  hallowed  life. 

3.  Earthly  denials  and  crosses  for  Christ's 
sake  and  God's  service,  quickly  yield  to  the 
rich  feasts  of  the  heavenly  world. 

{a)  If  it  become  true  of  any  in  this  self 
indulgence^  "  Remember  that  thou  in  thy 
lifetime  receiveth  thy  good  things,"  the  loss 
will  come  in  the  future. 

(b)  Every  subjection  of  self  for  God  now  is 
a  pledge  of  ccning  bliss.  For  "  he  that 
abaseth  himself  shall  be  exalted,'* 

V.  15. — Theme:  the  feast  op  pbntbcost  ; 
harvest  home. 

There  were  three  divinely  appointed 
harvest  festivals  among  the  Jews.  The 
Pentecost  feast  followed  the  Passover 
feast,  and  the  presentation  of  two  loaves 
before  the  Lord  was  a  token  that  the  corn 
had  been  safely  gathered  in,  and  an  expression 
of  gratitude  and  acknowledgment  of  obliga- 
tion to  Jehovah.  If  Pentecost  did  not  com- 
memorate the  giving  of  law  from  Sinai  fifty 
days  after  exodus  from  Egypt,  or  typify  the 
day  when  the  Spirit  would  be  given,  symbo- 


Vt 


:i  V  p*-»«. 


■?• 


CkiAP.  xxiii.  17—27]  r/i^   i?C>0/i:    OF    LEVITICUS. 


285 


lized  by  rushing  wind  and  forks  of  flame  ;  it 
certainly  eigniHod  to  the  Hebrews: 

I.  That  temporal  blessings  ought  to  bb 
GRATEFULLY  ACKNOWLEDGED.  Ingratitude 
is  a  besetting  sin.  Among  the  sins  for  which 
Israel  was  rebuked  by  the  prophets,  unthank- 
fulnoss  was  the  blackest.  It  led  to  forget- 
fulness  of  the  Lord,  to  sensuousness  and 
idolatry.  Rain  from  heaven,  and  fruitful 
seasons  come  from  God,  He  fills  our  heart* 
with  good  and  gladness. 

II   That  such  acknowledgments  ought 

TO  BB   MADB   WITH  BECOMING   SOLEMNITY. 

The  observance  of  the  day  as  a  holy  convo- 
cation, the  abstinence  from  all  servile  work, 
and  the  presentation  of  various  sacrifices, 
would  invest  the  feast  with  great  solemnity. 
The  burnt  oflfering  would  remind  the  people 
of  the  sovereign  c  aim  of  Jehovah  to  their 
complete  consecration  to  His  service  ;  the  sin 
offering,  of  their  entire  un  worthiness  of  the 
blessings  received.  Their  festivities  were 
not  to  be  marked  by  frivolity  and  levity  like 
Bacchanalian  orgies,  but  by  sacred  devotion 
and  becoming  reverence.  AH  seasons  of  indi- 
vidual and  national  rejoicing  should  be  free 
from  sinful  indulgences  and  in  harmony  with 
a  sanctitied  conscience  enlightened  by  the 
word  of  God. 

III.  That  bkcoming  solemnity  in  sacred 

WORSHIP    DOES    N  jT    exclude    THE    HIGHEST 
P   SSIBLE  JOY. 

Such  a  festival  would  sanctify  and  sweeten 
the  blessing  of  the  year,  induce  the  people  to 
feel,  as  they  sat  at  their  daily  board,  that 
they  were  in  God's  banquetting  house,  and 
that  His  banner  over  them  was  love.  In  re- 
membering the  poor,  Israel  would  have  the 
exquisite  joy  that  benevolence  brings,  and 
exemplify  Him  who  is  good  to  all.  The 
fountain  of  joy  springs  up  close  by  the  altar 
of  sacrifice  and  unselfishness.  Let  i/S  not 
allow  the  gifts  of  Providence  to  stagnate  in 
the  Dead  Sea  of  selfishness,  but  send  them 
forth  to  gladden  weary  hearts  and  desolate 
homes.  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  the  joy  of 
giving ;  it  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to 
receive.  Love  to  God  and  man  sums  up  the 
whole  law,  is  the  new  commandment  of  the 
Gospel.— i^.  ^V.  B, 

V.  17. —  Theme:  Beginning  the  reaping. 

"  They  are  thefirstjruits.'''' 

No  sickle  moved  in  Israel's  land  before  the 
«heaf  had  been  brought.  God's  bounteous 
hand  must  bo  revered  before  man's  taking 
hand  may  work.  Such  was  the  ordinance. 
This  was  more  than  diu  worshipy  it  was  pure 
delight. 

There  is  no  joy  like  gratitude.  They  most 
enjoy  who  most  perceive  and  bless  the  Giver, 
Earthly  comforts  should  give  wings  to  praise. 

But  this  holy  service  discharged — 

I.   Alacrity     pervades    the    field    of 

SBKYICB. 

With  cheerful  heart,  animated  look,  and 
rapid  step,  the  crowding  reapers  hasten 
forkk. 


1.  Rich  abundance  meets  them  on  all 
hands. 

2.  All  is  busy  joy.  No  hand  is  idle.  Life 
is  brisk  with  work 

II.  Toil  when  uallowkd  by  God's  smile 

IS  SWIiET. 

1.  Labour  is  delight  when  God  calls  toil 

2.  Every  willing  hand  finds  occasion.  And 
every  religious  heart  will  see  occasion  to  be 
from  God. 

Ill   Life  is  our  ingathering  day. 

1.  All  about  us  is  the  harvest. 

2.  Every  morning  calls  us  io  reap. 

3    God  a  blessing  is  on  the  diligent  life. 
4.  The  day  is  gone  too  quickly  for  loitering. 

IV.  Each   Worker    may    find   his    own 

FIELD  of  ingathering. 

1.  Ask,  "Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to 
do?'''  and  He  will  show  where  we  should  go 
work 

2.  The  fields  are  various  : 

1.  The  Scripture ^eldia  eyer  Tea,d.y.  What 
have  you  gathered  this  day  from  the  Bible 
page? 

2.  Duties  are  individual  and  always  close 
to  hand.  Not  a  day  but  some  finished  obli- 
gation should  be  gathered  in.  An  empty 
hand  proclaims  a  graceless  heart. 

3.  The  world  is  a  wide-spread  scene,  thick 
with  precious  souls.  These  call  for  ingather- 
ing     Here  every  grain  is  p  iceless. 

V.  The   reaping   methods  and  appliances 

ARE  manifold. 

1.  Fersonal  effort  in  the  hot  day  of  oppor- 
tunity. 

2.  Direction  and  inspiration  of  others  in 
Christian  work. 

3    Brayer  for  gracious  hours. 

VI.  Harvest  sehSons  quickly  go. 

1  Scenes  of  eager  toil  are  soon  cleared.  Then 
no  more  work  can  be  done.  They  die  around 
us  ;  and  are  gone  1     How  should  we  hasten 

3.  The  hours  of  work  glide  past.  Evening 
comes  on.  Life  is  rapid.  Opportunity  is 
swift  winged. 

Woe  to  the  man  whose  life  is  not  a  reaping 
day.  No  idler  enters  the  heavenly  rest. 
Dean  Law. 

V.  22. — Theme:  Harvest  glbaninqs  for 
THE  poor. 

Compare  on  Chap,  xix.,  9. 

V.  27. —  Theme:   Thb     orbat     dat     of 

atonement. 

The  day  of  Atonement  is  here  introduced 
as  a  Hebrew  fast.  It  was  a  solemn  prepara- 
tion for  seasons  of  rejoicing  before  the  Lord 
at  ensuing  feasts.  As  this  great  day  of  ex- 
piation has  been  considered  in  Homilies  on 
chap,  xvi.,  remarks  here  upon  it  may  be 
limited.     The  day  was  a  call  to  — 

I  Repentance.  "  Ye  shall  afflict  your 
souls."  Not  simply  tho  observance  of  out- 
ward rites  indicative  of  penitence,  the  mor- 
tification of  the  body  ;  but  thorough^  sincete, 
public  acknowledgment  of  guilt,  heartfelt 
sorrow  for  sin.     The  call  ^9,%  peremptory ^  for 


236 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON 


[chap.  XXIII.  42. 


khe  soul  was  to  be  cut  off  from  the  people 
that  did  not  truly  repent.  Sin  was  to  be 
felt,  acknowledged,  -  mourned  for,  and  for- 
saken, in  order  that  it  might  be  forgiven 
through  the  atonement.  The  same  call  and 
conditions  obtain  in  the  now  dispensation. 
The  day  was  also  a  call  to — 

II.  Reoonciliation  Sin  excluded  man 
from  God,  and  necessitated  restraint  and  ro- 
Btriction  being  imposed  on  the  worshippers.  On 
the  day  of  Atonement,  as  the  contrite  Hebrews 
saw  their  representative  enter  the  most  holy 
place  to  offer  incense  before  Jehovah,  they 
would  see  that  the  distance  had  been  re- 
moved, that  God  was  pleased  with,  and  recon- 
ciled to  them,  as  they  were  reconciled  to  Him. 
The  day  was  a  Sabbath  of  rest  in  all  their 
dwellings,  so  that  their  piety  and  purity  were 
to  be  known  in  their  homes  as  well  as  at  the 
holy  altar.  Blessed  be  God,  through  the  one 
offering  on  Calvary,  all  who  repent  towards 
God  and  exercise  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  may 
enter  into  the  most  holy  place  and  enjoy 
Divine  fellowship  and  peace.  Thus  God 
reconciles  the  world  unto  Himself,  and  repen- 
tance culminates  in  life  — A  IV.  B. 

V  42. —  Theme:  Sojourning  in  booths. 

"Ye  shall  dwell  in  booths  seven  davs :  all 
that  are  Israelites  born  shall  dwell  in  booths." 

It  was  commemorative:  see  v.  43. 

It  was  significant :  of 

I   Christ  tabernacling  in  the  flesh. 

Three  facts  are  suggestive  here  of  Christ's 
incarnation  being  foreshadowed  in  this  feast ; 

I  John's  use  of  the  idea,  "  The  Word  dwelt 
tabernacled)  among  us,  full  of  grace  and 
truth  "  (Jno.  i.  14). 

2.  The  people's  gathering  ol  palm  branches 
when  persuaded  of  His  Messiahship  (Matt, 
xxi   8  9) 

3.  Christ  chose  **  the  great  day  of  the  feast" 
of  this  very  feast  of  tabernacles,  to  identify 


Himself  with  one  of  its  incidents.  While  the 
waters  of  Siloam  were  being,  on  that  eighth 
day,  poured  on  the  altar  steps,  "Jesus  stood 
and  cried.  If  any  man  thirst  let  him  come 
unto  me  and  drink"  (Jno  vii   37,38). 

4.  Yet  f/is  tabernacle  life  was  not  perma- 
nent. Booths  are  for  pilgrims,  not  residents. 
And  Jesus  was  here  but  for  a  season.  "  Yet 
a  little  while  I  am  with  you," 

II.  Man's  insecure  tenure  on  the  earth. 

1.  A  booth  of  boughs  and  palms  would 
ijuickly  wither:  so  does  our  frail  tabernacle. 
What  are  these  bodies  but  tents  of  drooping 
desh? 

2.  It  was,  moreover,  occupied  but  a  few 
days  ;  and  we  are  resident  in  this  body  only 
a  brief  season.     Think  not  to  stay  long  here. 

3.  The  materials  of  the  booths  were  of  the 
earth  and  returned  to  the  earth:  mere  growths 
from  the  soil,  soon  to  decay  and  go  back  to 
the  soil.  Even  so,  "  dust  thou  art,"  etc.,  "  of 
the  earth  earthy." 

III.  A  christian's  pilgrim  career. 
Israel  dwelt  in  booths  through  their  jour- 
ney from  Egypt  to  Canaan  (see  v.  4'?). 

1.  Christ's  redeemed  are  pressing  through 
a  wilderness.     It  is  not  their  goal. 

2.  Rest  and  content  are  not  to  be  sought 
here.    A  temporary  accommodation  is  enough. 

3.  Earth's  discomfort  gives  zest  to  desire  for 
the  ^^ city  of  habitation.'"'  And  as  Israel, 
weary  with  their  booth-life,  craved  the  sure 
abodes  of  Canaan,  so  we  "  earnestly  desire  to 
be  clothed  upon  with  our  house  which  is 
from  heaven ;  for  in  this  we  groan,  being 
burdened  " 

4.  God's  ordinance  of  a  booth  life  was  a 
pledge  of  the  certainty  of  Canaan.     It  assured 
them  that  He  desired  them  to  journey  for- 
ward to  the  goodly  land    And  He  would  have 
us  "  set  our  face  Zionward." 

[See  Addenda  to  Chapter.  Frail  Habita- 
tions.] 


ILLUSTRATIVE   ADDENDA    TO   CHAPTER   XXIII 


Sabbath : 

"  As  if  a  segment  of  the  eternal  Sabbath 
had  been  inserted  in  the  days  of  earth,  and 
men  wondered  at  their  own  happiness." 

—  Hamilton. 
Called    by  the   Jews  the    '  Day  of    Light,' 
by  the  Africans « Ossa-day,'  the  day  of  silence ; 
by  tho  Cree  Indians  the  '  Prayii^g  day; 'by 
the  early  Christians  the  '  Queen  of  days.' 

— Bowts. 
*'  How  still  the  morning  of  the  hallowed  day  I 
Mute  is  the  voice  of  rural  labour,  hushed 
The  ploughboy's  whistle  and  the   milkmaid's 
song." — Gravham. 

Of  a  well-spent  Sunday,  Philip  Henry 
used  to  say:  "If  thTs^  bo  not  the  way  to 
heaven  I  know  not  what  is." 

"  O,  day  of  rest !     How  beautiful   and  fair 
How  "welcome  to  the  weary  and  the  old  1 


Day  of  the   Lord  I     And  truce  to  earthly 

carel 
Day  of  the  Lord,  ad  all  our  days  should  be." 
— Longfellow — Christus. 

**  Oh,  what  a  blessing  is  Sunday,  interposed 
between  the  waves  of  worldly  business  like 
the  Divine  path  of  the  Israelites  through 
Jordan.  Tbere  is  nothing  in  which  I  would 
advise  you  to  be  more  strictly  conscientious 
than  in  keeping  the  Sabbath  holy.  I  can 
truly  declare  that  to  me  the  Sabbath  has 
been  invaluable  "-  Wilberforck. 

"  I  feel  as  if  God  had,  in  giving  the  Sab- 
bath, given  fifty  two  Springs  in  every  year." 

— S.  T.  Coleridge. 

"  Sir,"  said  a  man  addressing  a  minister 
returning  from  church  on  Sabbath  morning, 
"  did  you  meet  a  lad  on  the  road  driving  a 
cart  with  instruments  for  harvesting  in  it  ?  ' 


CDAI.  XXIV.  1 — 4.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS, 


?87 


"  I  think  I  did,"  replied  the  tninipter,  •'  a 
boy  with  a  shoit  memory,  wasn't  ho  ?" 

•'  What  makes  you  think  he  had  a  short 
memory,  sir  ?"  was  the  surprised  answer. 

*'  I  think  he  has,"  answered  the  minister, 
"  and  belongs  to  a  family  who  have  short 
memories." 

"  What  in  the  world  makes  you  think  so  ?" 
asked  the  man,  greatly  puzzled. 

"  Because,"  replied  the  minister  in  a  serious 
tone,  "  the  Great  God  has  proclaimed  from 
Mount  Sinai,  '  Remember  the  Sabbath  day  to 
keep  it  holy  ; '  and  that  boy  has  forgotten  all 
about  it." — Christian   Treasury. 

"  Now   let   us  repose  from   our  care  and  our 
sorrow, 
Let  all  that  is  anxious  and  sad  pass  away  ; 
The  rough  cares  of  life  lay  aside  till  to-mor 
row, 
And  let  us  be  tranquil  and  happy  to-day 

"  Let  us  say  to  the  world,  should  it  tempt  us 
to  wander. 
As  Abraham  said  to  his  men  on  the  plain: 
"  There's  the  mountain  of  prayer,  I  am  going 
up  yonder, 
And  tarry  you  here  till  I  seek  you  again. 

'•  To  day,  on  the  mount  we  would  seek  for  thy 
blessing : 
0,  Spirit  of  holiness  meet  with  us  there  ; 
Our  hearts  then  will  feel  thine  influence   pos 
sessing, 
The  sweetness  of  praise,  and  the   fervour 
of  prayer,"— Edmbkton. 

Harvest  first  fruits  : 

The  Hindoos,    when    gathering    in    their 
narvest,  before  it  is  removed  for  the  thresh- 
ing floor,  always  put  aside  a  part  for  their 
H^ods. 
"  Lord  of  the  harvest  I  all  is  Thine  I 

The  rains  that  fall,  the  suns  that  shine, 


The  seed  once  hidden  in  the  giound, 
The  skill  that  makes  our  fruits  abound! 
New  every  year, 
Thy  gifts  appear. 
New  praises  from  our  lips  shall  bound  1" 

— Gurnet. 
"  Blowing  op  trumpets  " : 
"  The  trumpet  I  the   trumpet  1  the   dead   all 

have  heard, 
Lo  the  depths  of  the  stone-covered  charnels 

are  stirred  ; 
From  the  sea,  from  the  land,  from  the  south, 

from  the  north, 
The  vast  generations  of  men  are  come  forth." 

— Milman. 
Frail  habitations. 

On  a  house  near  Tretsey,  in  Cheshire, 
built  in  1636,  of  thick  oak  framework  filled 
in  with  brick,  was  this  inscription: — '■''FUres  si 
scires  unu?n  tua  teinpora  mensem  ;  ridis  cum 
non  scis  si  sit  fo^silan  una  dies^''  ["You  would 
weep  if  you  knew  that  your  life  was  limited 
to  one  month  ;  yet  you  laugh  while  you  know 
not  but  that  it  may  be  restiicted  to  a  day"]. 

"  When  J  get  settled,  Fll — " ;  so  people  are 
always  planning ;  but  how  little  they  think 
of  the  uncertainty  that  lies  in  the  first  word 
•'  W/%^» /"—Bowes. 

A  father  with  his  little  son  is  journeying 
overland  to  California,  and  when  at  night  He 
pitches  his  tent  in  some  pleasant  valley,  the 
child  is  charmed  with  the  spot,  and  begs  his 
father  to  rear  a  house  and  remain  there  ;  and 
he  begins  to  make  a  little  fence  about  the  tent, 
and  digs  up  the  wild  flowers  and  plants  them 
within  the  enclosure.  But  the  father  says, 
*'  No,  my  son,  our  home  is  far  distant,  let  these 
things  go,  for  to-morrow  we  must  depart." 
Now  God  is  taking  us,  His  children,  as 
pilgrims  and  strangers  homeward  :  but  we 
desire  to  build  here,  and  must  be  often  over- 
thrown before  we  can  learn  to  seek  "the  city 
that  hath  foundation,  whose  Builder  and 
Maker  is  God." — H.  W.  BsiscHiSR. 


■•> 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


SUGGESTIVE   READINGS. 

Vv.  1-4. — Cause  the  lamps  to  burn  continually.  There  la  a  Light  whose 
radiance  never  dims,  whose  glow  never  pales — self-luminous  and  eternally 
lustrous;  "that  is  the  True  Light  which  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into 
the  world"  (J no.  I  9).     But  our  illumined  lives,  made  by  grace  to  shine  even 


^PS 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY     ON  [chap.  Xxvi.  1 


amid  the  beauty  of  God's  sanctuary,  these  need  constant  fostering  and  care,  jr 
their  glory  would  wane.  Because  the  virgins  slept,  neglecting  to  trim  their 
lamps,  their  lights  faded  ;  and  their  sudden  cry  on  awakening  was,  "  Our  lamps 
are  going  out  /"  (Matt.  xxv.  8).  There  is  a  human  responsibility  in  this  matter 
of  keeping  our  *' lights  burning"  (Luke  xii.  35),  and  we  must  "bring  the  pure 
oil"  by  which  the  flame  is  fed.  Self-watchfulness  and  praj'er  for  grace  are  in- 
evitable if  Christian  character  is  to  shine  '*  continually." 

Vv.  5 — 9. — Bake  twelve  cakes  and  set  them  upon  the  pure  table  before  the 
Lord.  Every  tribe  was  to  be  represented  in  this  sacred  food  laid  before  the  Lord, 
none  exempted.  Jehovah  asks  from  the  Church  in  its  entirety,  from  all  within  His 
Church,  that  His  table  be  spread  with  the  sacrificial  offerings  of  their  love,  that 
He  may  feast  thereupon  with  satisfaction  and  delight.  If  He  gives  riches  of 
salvation  to  man,  we  may  return  Him  the  offerings  of  our  sanctified  lives  :  "  they 
gave  their  own  selves  unto  the  Lord  '*  (2  Cor.  viii.  5).  Nor  may  these  sacrifices 
of  righteousness  be  fitful  and  intermittent;  the  loaves  must  be  *' set  in  order 
before  the  Loid  continually"  (v.  8),  even  as  the  devotion  of  our  affections  and 
services  must  be  unceasing,  a  life-long  consecration.  Such  fulness  and  constancy 
in  our  piety  renders  it  *'  most  holy  unto  Him  of  all  the  offerings  " 

Vv.  10-16. — The  Israelitish  woman's  son  blasphemed  the  l;^ame  of  the  Lord, 
and  cursed.  An  unwise  marriage  issued  in  an  evil  result.  This  youth  of  half 
blood,  in  a  quarrel  with  "  a  man  of  Israel,"  vented  his  malignity  in  uttering  some 
vile  blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Name  which  the  Israelite  so  solemnly  revered. 
A  special  revelation  of  "  the  mind  of  the  Lord'*  was  sought,  in  order  that  this 
new  sin  in  Israel's  midst  might  be  judged  aright,  and  every  one  who  heard  the 
blasphemy  was  summoned  to  join  in  the  administration  of  punishment  (v.  14), 
Surely,  *'  if  he  that  despised  Moses*  law  died  without  mercy,"  terrible  must  be 
the  doom  of  those  who  insult  the  grace  of  God  in  Jesus,  and  slight  His  redemp- 
eion  !  (Heb.  x.  28,  29).  If  words  of  impiety  were  sufficient  to  bring  death  upon 
an  offender,  what  shall  be  the  consequence  of  a  life  of  disobedience  and  of  per- 
sistent ungodliness  I  See  Rom.  ii.  8,  9.  Let  us  guard  against  anger ;  it  impels 
to  outbursts  of  wickedness.  And  let  our  souls  guard  jealously  the  majeaty  of 
the  Divine  Name. 

Vv  17-22.— Breach  for  breach,  eye  for  eye,  tooth  fc^r  tooth.  This  was  the 
Mosaic  rule  of  equity  :  a  wrong  was  punished  by  demanding  its  equivalent.  Our 
Lord  gave  a  more  gracious  law  to  His  followers,  whose  mission  in  the  world  was 
to  expound  and  foster  the  spirit — not  of  revenge,  uor  even  of  exact  justice,  but 
of  forgiveness  and  love.  "  But  I  say  unto  you,  that  ye  resist  not  evil"  (Matt.  T, 
38,  39),     *' Dearly  beloved,  avenge  not  yourselves.'* 

SECTIONAL  HOMILIES. 

Topic:  Continuous  Lustre  op  a  Godly  Life  (Vv.  1-4), 

Darkness  might  brood  over  the  outer  world,  but  light  must  continuously  glow 
within  the  sanctuary.  Outside  of  the  Church  of  Christ  there  may  spread  the 
gloom  of  error,  the  night  dreariness  of  delusion ;  but  witldii  tiie  sanctuary  **  the 
light  (if  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  "  must  shine  undimmed.  Even  so, 
though  men  in  sin  dwell  in  darkness  and  love  darkness  rather  than  light,  within 
the  Christian  soul  there  must  always  shine  the  marvellous  light  of  the  Spirit's 
illumination  and  of  the  Gospel  truth. 

I.  A  BEAUTIFUL  LIGHT  BEARER :  what  au  ideal  picture  of  the  Christian  ! 

"He  she»ll  order  the  lamps  upon  the  pure  candlestick"  (v.  4).  A  golden 
candlestick  hung  with  burning  lamps  1  [See  Addenda  to  chapter,  Light-hearers,'] 
Here  note-~ 


CHAP.  XXIV.  1—4.1  THE  BOOR   OF  LEVITICUS.  28» 


1.  A  Christianas  intrinsic  worth.  The  candlestick  was  of  "  pure  *'  goM.  God 
thus  images  tbe  preciousness  of  a  redeemed  and  sanctified  life.  Worth  of  character, 
Individual  nobleness,  must  be  the  basis  of  a  beneficent  ministry  for  others. 

2.  A  lustrous  mission.  On  every  branch  was  hung  a  lamp.  Christians  live  not 
for  themselves,  not  even  to  exhibit  their  own  graces.  A  candlestick,  howevei 
precious  its  metal  and  exquisite  its  workmanship,  is  intended  to — not  hold  atten- 
tion to  itself,  but  to  hold  up  the  I'ght,  to  show  light. 

3.  Ceaseless  luniinosify.  There  are  lights,  set  up  for  mariners,  which  gleam 
and  wane  ;  their  stream  of  lustre  is  not  perennial.  But  the  lamps  in  the  sanctuary 
burned  on  with  ceaseless  glow,  with  unvarying  radiance.  Piety  should  maintain 
its  steadiness,  not  flicker,  not  burst  into  splendour  at  favoured  seasons  and  then 
wane.     "  Your  light  hiirningy 

4.  Every  grace  aglow.  In  some  Christians  only  one  beautiful  quality  is  con- 
spicuous, while  all  other  graces  are  obscure.  But  every  branch  of  th«  candlestick 
should  bear  a  lamp,  and  each  lamp  should  be  alight, 

11    Sanctity  riiQuisite  for  a  clear  light. 

"  They  shall  bring  pare  oil  olive,  beaten  for  the  light." 

1.  Christian  grace  is  divinely  ^^  pureJ^  It  is  the  work  of  tbe  Holy  Spirit. 
"Oil  "  is  the  Scripture  symbol  of  the  Spirit,  and  **  pure  oil'*  marks  the  essential 
sauctify  of  each  endowment  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  No  other  source  exists  whence 
man  can  derive  what  is  unalloyed.  This  is  the  only  "  pure  "  spring  of  Rood  ;  all 
others  are  unclean.  How  **  pure"  is  every  bestowment  which  God's  Spirit  im- 
parts :  knowledge^  feeling,  energy ^  enjoymenty  aspiration^  hope — all  unalloyed,  un- 
mixed with  ingredients  of  evil ! 

2.  Christian  life  emits  clear  lustre.  As  we  are,  so  we  produce.  A  clean  foun- 
tain yields  clean  waters.  Pure  oil  produces  clear  burning  lamps.  If  our  minds 
are  spiritually  illumined  there  will  be  no  emission  of  error  :  error  indicates  a 
human  admixture  with  the  Divine  enlightenment.  So  with  emotion  j  *'  the  fruit 
of  the  Spirit  is  love.^^  If  we  shed  forth  an  unlovely  and  unloving  spirit  it  intimates 
the  presence  of  deleterious  intermixtures.  We  need  to  close  the  lamps,  into  which 
the  Spirit's  "pure  oil"  is  poured^  against  all  impurities, or  our  light  will  not  be  clear. 

III.  The  steady  light  of  testimony, 

"  From  the  evening  unto  the  mornmgf  before  the  Lord  continually.^*  The  golden 
lamp  diifused  its  light  without  intermission,  clear  and  constant. 

1.  The  High  Priesfs  responsibility.  **  Aaron  shall  order  it,  etc."  No  secondary 
bands  had  charge  of  the  light.  It  was  not  left  to  inferior  priests.  Ministers  of 
the  sanctuary  may  wish  and  endeavour  to  keep  Christian  life  alive  and  Christian 
lustre  radiant  in  the  Church,  in  the  souls  of  believers  ;  but  they  fail.  Man's  work 
is  full  of  peradventures  and  frustrations.  And  there  must  be  no  risk  in  the 
maintenance  of  the  Sanctuary  light.  If  left  to  one  of  the  minor  priests,  or 
assigned  as  a  trust  to  many,  neglect  might  ensue.  Aaron  himself,  therefore,  was 
charged  with  this  office  of  keeping  the  light  continually  burning.  He  typified 
Christ ;  and  our  Lord  **  walJctth  amid  the  golden  candlesticks^*  ever  nourishing  the 
life  and  lustre  of  His  Church. 

2.  The  continuous  testimony  of  the  Church.  Every  age  has  seen  the  "  True 
Light  "  shining  amid  the  darkness  of  error  and  the  delusions  of  the  world. 
Though  virgins  slumber  who  should  watch,  though  indifference  to  Truth  mark  the 
guardians  of  the  sacred  light,  yet  on,  age  after  age,  the  light  has  shone,  increas- 
ingly clear ;  for  Christ  keeps  the  lamps  nourished,  and  will  not  let  the  lustre 
expire.  "  He  shall  order  the  Umps  upon  the  pure  candlestick  before  the  Lord 
continually  y 

(a)  Here  is  tbe  guarantee  of  the  Church  fulfilling  her  Lord^s  design.  **  Ye  are 
the  light  of  the  world  ;"  *'  holding  forth  the  word  of  life." 

(h)  In  this  lies  the  hope  of  the  constancy  of  the  Christian  life.  Christ  nourishei 
tbe  flame* 


\ 


290  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY   ON  [chap.  xxiv.  5—9 

Topic:  The  Bread  op  the  Presence  (Vv.  5 — 9). 

In  the  Tabernacle  we  have  a  type  of  the  "  more  perfect  Tabernacle,"  In  which 
Deitj  sojourned  during  the  Incarnation — "  God  manifested  in  the  flesh."  For 
the  physical  form  of  Christ  was  what  the  Mosaic  Tabernacle  was,  a  shrine  of  the 
Divine  indwelling,  in  which  He  came  in  nearness  and  grace  to  men,  holding  com- 
munion with  us. 

The  table  on  which  the  loaves  of  shewbread  were  laid  was  made  of  acacia  wood 
overlaid  with  plates  of  pure  gold,  symbolic  of  those  sacred  and  divine  qualities  of 
Chriat's  person  and  character,  which  form  the  basis  of  all  accepted  offerings.  Only 
as  ourselves  or  our  gifts  are  laid  upon  Christ  can  they  be  allowed  a  place  "  before 
the  Lord."  Here,  then,  we  have  the  key  to  the  meaning  and  suggestiveness  of 
the  shewbread :  a  consecrated  people  resting  on  the  perfections  of  Christ. 

1.  Consecration  must  depend  for  its  acchiftanob  upon  thb  perfections 
OF  Christ. 

These  loaves  represented  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  all  dedicated  to  the  Lord  ; 
laid  "  before  the  Lord ";  surrendered  entirely  to  Him.  Every  one  should  be 
devoted  to  Him,  fully  and  absolutely  His. 

Is  consecration  sufficient  of  itself  to  ensure  Jehovah's  acceptance  1     Far  from  it. 

It  is  *'  the  altar  that  sauctifieth  the  gift"  ;    and  it  was  the  golden  Table,  Christ's 

pure  and  glorious  perfections,  which — becoming  the  basis  on  which  the  consecrated 

%    offerings  rested — rendered  these  loaves  an  accepted  presentation. 

V;^  No  acceptance  apart  from  Christ.     Full  acceptance  for  all  who  place  themselves 

upcn   Christ. 

II.  Consecrated  offerings  must  be  always  our  choicfst  and  best. 
On  the  Golden  Table  no  couimon  bread  might   be  placed.     The  profanity  that 

presumes  on  Christ's  j»erfect  ions,  and  presents  before  the  Lord  faulty  things,  will 
ensure  rebuke.  Christ's  grace  adds  all  the  element  of  acceptableness  to  what  we 
bring  ;  but  God  will  not  accept  aught  that  we  bring  which  is  not  the  purest  and 
noblest  we  can  present.  *•  Thou  shalt  take  fine  flour"  These  loaves  represented, 
X .  therefore, 

)(%^  1,  The  dedication  of  what  was  choicest.     Are  any  powers  too  noble,  any  attain- 

ments too  exalted,  any  affections  too  pure  to  be  yielded  to  Him  ? 

2.  A  generous  largeness  in  the  act  of  consecration.  The  loaves  were  of  double 
size  :  "Two- tenth  deals  shall  be  in  one  cake"  (v.  5).  Annanias  and  Sapphira 
offered  ''^part  of  the  price,''  and  were  rejected  for  their  cupidity  and  grudging. 
Lay  lavishly  on  God's  altar  of  your  best. 

III.  Consecration  requires  to  be  perpetually  renewed. 
Every  Sabbath  fresh  loaves  were  to  be  substituted. 

1.  There  is  no  finality  in  our  devotion.  It  must  be  repeated,  continued  ; 
perennially  fresh, 

2.  Sabbath  obligations  are  as  imperious  as  Sabbath  privileges  are  precious.  We 
may  not  greet  the  holy  day  for  what  bliss  we  can  gain  or  enjoy,  without  greeting 
the  day  by  attempting  the  re- consecration  of  ourselves  and  our  services  to  the 
Lord.  Leave  "  the  things  which  are  behind  ";  come  with  renewed  zeal  and  love 
and  devotion  before  the  Lord. 

3.  Each  renewal  must  be  sanctified  by  02ir  prayers^  and  the  merits  of  Christ 
Jesus.  That  burning  of  incense  symbolises  prayer  rising  from  the  offerer — foi 
prayer  hallows  our  gifts  :  but  it  also  betokens  "  the  sweet  savour  of  Christ^*  without 
which  nothing  rises  as  a  fragrant  offering  to  the  Lord. 

Topic:  The  Lamps  of  the  Tabernacle  (Vv.  1-4). 

Israel  had  to  constantly  appear  in  the  Tabernacle  to  present  sacrifices  and 
observe  ceremonies ;  it  was  essential,  therefore,  that  light  should  be  supplied  \s^ 


^"^ 


CHAP.  XXIV.  6-9.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS,  291 


which  divine  service  might  be  conducted.     The  goldea  candlestioK  was  hung  with 
its  seven  lamps. 

I.  They  were  symbolical  of  thh  position  and  privileoes  of  the  Hebrew 

NATION. 

(a)  The  light  shone  in  the  midst  of  darkness.  However  dense  the  night  might  be 
around  the  Tabernacle,  light  was  within  shining  upon  the  altar,  lighting  up  the 
holy  place.  So,  where  the  darkness  of  moral  night  enwrapped  surroundiug 
naions,  Israel  had  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  God. 

(6)  The  light  was  derived  from  a  divine  source.  The  lamps  were  lighted  from 
the  sacred  fire  upon  the  altar.  Israel  did  not  obtain  knowledge  of  divine  things 
from  surrounding  nations,  but  direct  from  Jehovah.  Their  lii^ht  was  supernatural 
divine  revelation,  a  lamp  unto  the  feet,  light  unto  the  path  in  the  probation  and 
pilgrimage  of  life. 

(c)  The  light  of  the  best  and  purest  kind.  Candlestick  was  of  pure  gold,  Od 
was  the  finest,  even  good  for  food.  Tue  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of 
God  incomparable,  inestimable. 

II.  They  wwkb  typioal  op   the    OHAriACTER    and   work    op    the    christian 

CHURCH. 

(a)  In  their  Purity,  (6)  Preciousness,  (c)  ManifoldnesSf  (d)  Unity,  The  Priests 
had  to  keep  their  lamps  supplied,  for  churches  need  constantly  the  unction  of  the 
Holy  One  supplied  by  the  Great  tle^d  of  the  Church.  Churches  are  to  give 
light,  and  save  life.     Christians  are  to  be  lights  in  the  woild. 

The  lamps  were  outside  the  veil  tuat  enclosed  the  Holy  of  holies  ;  so  the  Church 
is  outside  the  veil  of  Heaven,  but  near  and  preparatory  for  it. 

No  nobler  ambition  of  position  than  this  to  live  and  walk  in  the  light  of  God. 
Those  who  refuse  the  light,  and  walk  in  darkness,  secure  for  themselves  despair 
and  death.  For  the  righteous  there  is  reserved  light  for  the  eventide,  in  eternity 
they  shall  shine  as  the  brightness  of  the  firmament,  and  as  tiie  stars  for  ever  and 
ever.—F.W.B. 

Topic:  The  Table  of  Shewbread  (Vv.  5-9). 

Directions,  for  the  construction  of  the  table  upon  which  the  shewbread  was  to 
be  placed,  are  recorded  in  the  xxv.  of  Exodus.  In  this  chapter  we  have  directions 
given  for  making  the  shewbread,  which  was  to  be  placed  before  the  Lord  con- 
tinually. The  shewbread,  being  the  ''  Bread  of  the  presence  of  the  Lord,"  was  a 
memorial — 

L  Of  the  nearness  op  isriel  to  the  lord. 

The  twelve  loaves,  made  of  fine  flour,  and  placed  In  two  rows  upon  the  pure 
tabhf  outside  the  veil  of  the  testimony  in  the  Tabernacle,  corresponded  with  the 
twelve  stones  in  the  breastplate  of  the  High  Priest,  which  contained  the  names  of 
the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel ;  and  showed,  when  he  went  into  the  most  holy  place, 
not  only  how  near  the  people  were  to  his  own  heart,  but  also  how  near  they  were 
to  the  presence  and  power  of  Jehovah.  The  bread,  brought  by  the  people,  repre- 
sented the  staflFof  their  life,  their  strength,  and  stay ;  and  the  Lord,  by  admitting^ 
and  adopting  those  representations,  showed  how  near  He  allowed  Israel  to  dravv 
to  HiuL  Bread,  representing  their  life,  was  perpetually  in  the  Divine  presencer 
and  the  weekly  renewal  of  the  loaves  denoted  that  God  permitted  the  perpetual 
enjoyment  of  His  presence. 

IL  Of  the  unity  op  ishael  before  the  lord. 

The  bread  was  of  one  kind  and  size,  and  placed  on  one  table,  though  divided 
Into  twelve  cakes.  So,  though  Israel  was  divided  into  twelve  tribes,  they  were 
one  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord  ;  and  not  one  of  them  would  ever  be  despised, 
■o  long  as  they  obeyed  His   commandments,  and  drew  near  to  Him  at  Hia 

▼  2 


292  llOMiLETlC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xxiv.  10—16. 


appointe(J  meefing  place.  The  Lord  had  set  apart  the  nation  for  Himself;  they 
^eie,  therefore,  one  great  familj,  a  special  religious  couimuuity,  of  which  He  was 
sole  and  supreme  Head. 

III.  Of  thb  dependence  op  Israel  upon  the  lord. 

Some  have  suggested  that  the  constantly  replenished  bread  upon  the  table 
was  a  memorial  of  the  manna,  to  remind  Israel  how  mercifully  and  miraculously 
they  were  fed  in  the  wilderness.  Doubtless,  the  loaves  would  tend  to  remind 
them  of  that  great  f^ct  ;  but  they  would  also  remind  them  how,  in  Canaan,  tbey 
were  constantly  dependent  upon  the  Lord,  who  crowned  the  year  with  His  good- 
ness, and  gave  them  the  finest  of  the  wheat.  The  loaves  were  a  slight  return  and 
acknowledgment  of  their  constant  obligation  to  the  Divme  bounty  The  shew- 
bread  may  be  regarded  as  an  emblem  of  the  purCy  sujicienty  and  Batisfyiiig  bread 
of  heaven,  which,  if  a  man  eat,  he  shall  live  for  ever. 

IV.  Op  the  dedication  of  Israel  to  the  lord. 

Pare  frankincense  was  put  upon  each  row  of  loaves;  two  vessels  of  wine  were 
also  placed  beside  them,  as  an  accessory  to  the  service,  to  be  poured  out  withal, 
when  the  incense  was  offered.  Under  the  old  dispensation,  bread  and  wine  are 
always  spoken  of  as  means  and  emblems  of  bodily  strength  and  cheerful  service  ; 
and  those  elements  on  the  table  before  the  Lord  denoted  the  complete  dedication 
of  the  tribes  to  His  service,  while  the  ascending  incense  would  represent  the 
prayers  of  the  people,  the  rising  of  their  grateful  and  gladsome  hearts  to  Heaven. 
The  perpetual  presence  of  the  bread  s^'mbolized  perpetual  consecration  to  the 
Theocratic  King. 

V.  Op  the  accessibility  of  israel  to  the  lord. 

The  Tabernacle  was  the  Divine  dwelling-place,  and  the  acceptance  of  twelve 
loaves  from  the  people  to  lie  before  the  Lord,  and  to  be  called  '*  the  Bread  of 
JJ  is  presence"  showed  that  He  took  the  people  into  His  friendship  and  favour. 
Sabbath  after  Sabbath,  as  the  incense  ascended,  the  people  would  rejoice,  that 
through  mediation  and  intercession  their  offerings  were  accepted.  God  is  not 
only  pleased  with  the  faith  and  love,  the  praises  and  prajers  of  His  people,  but 
also  with  their  almsdeeds.  Let  us  present  an  offering  to  the  Lord,  pure,  whole- 
somey  valuable,  and  constant,  perfumed  with  the  merits  of  the  sacrifice  of  our  Great 
High  Priest ;  thus  shall  we  enjoy  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  pass  the  days  of 
our  pilgrimage  in  His  favour  and  fear. — F,  W.  B, 

Topic:  Blasphemy  against  God's  Holy  Namk  (Vv.  10 — 16). 

This  is  the  earliest  Scripture  record  of  blasphemy ;  and,  as  a  newly-developed 
form  of  sin,  it  is  treated  with  rigour  for  its  complete  suppression.  Yet  notwith- 
standing the  swift  judgment  which  overtook  this  first  blasphemer,  this  is  not  the 
last  Scripture  instance  of  blasphemy. 

The  provocation  or  motive  to  this  act  of  "  the  Israelitish  woman's  son  "  seems 
to  have  been  mere  malignity  of  thought  against  God  and  His  people,  a  wish  to 
wound  reverent  minds  by  reviling  the  Name  they  revered. 

"Swearing  is  a  sin  that  hath  more  malignancy  in  it  against  God,  by  how  much 
the  less  is  the  temptation  to  it,"  says  Burroughs  \  and  adds,  **  I  verily  believe  that 
if  God  had  never  made  the  Third  Commandment,  there  could  never  have  been 
so  many  oaths  in  the  world  ;  but  it  springs  from  a  mere  malignancy  of  spirit  in 
man  against  God  because  He  has  forbidden,  for  no  profit  can  arise  from  the 
practice.** 

Yet,  while  "  no  profit  **  comes  to  the  blasphemer,  great  ill  and  grief  are  thereby 
caused  to  others.  Dr.  Scudder  was  returning  from  India  with  his  sou,  and  the  lad 
was  shocked  to  hear  from  an  English  passenger  on  the  steamboat  God's  name  used 
in  dreadful  blasphemy.     Accosting  him,  the  doctor  said,  ^'  This  boy  has  been  born 


CHAP.  XXIV.  10  -16.]  THE  BOOK    OF   LEViTlcV^  f^S 


and  reared  in  a  heathen  country  and  a  land  of  idolatry;  but,  in  all  his  life,  he 
never  heard  a  mun  biasp'aeoae  his  Maker  until  now."  (See  Addenda  tu  Chapter, 
Profanity  J. 

I    The  HisTORio  interest  op  this  inoidfnt. 

This  act  of  blasphemy,  and  the  jiid^raenr,  which  it  called  forth  on  the  sinner, 

I.  Brought  out  clearly  that  the  Name  of  the  Lord  was  Israels  most  solemn 
trust  The  people  evidently  felt  this,  by  the  horror  which  the  reviler's  conduct 
awakened  throughout  the  whole  camp  ;  and  by  their  anxiety  to  learn  how  Jehovah 
regarded  the  indignity.  And  this  was  emphasized  by  God's  sentence  of  doom 
upon  the  blasphemer.  A  crime  must  be  great  which  evokes  such  condign 
punishment.  That  Holy  Name  was  to  be  guarded  with  jealous  awe.  The  event 
showed,  therefore,  how  emphatically  God  will  '*  not  hold  him  guiltless  that  taketh 
His  name  in  vain/* 

2.  Introduced  the  significant  custom  of  avoiding  the  very  use  of  the  Name  of 
the  Lord*  The  Jews  interpreted  this  command  (v.  16)  as  prohibiting  the  utterance 
of  the  divine  Name  under  any  circumstances,  and  consequently  they  never  after 
pronounced  the  word  Jehovah.  When  blasphemy  was  uttered,  the  person 
hearing  it  laid  his  hand  on  the  head  of  the  transgressor,  to  indicate  his  sole 
responsibility  for  the  guilty  act;  and  then  tore  his  own  robe  as  a  symbol  of  his 
shame  and  alarm.  Certainly  this  may  admonish  us  against  an  undue  freenesa 
in  the  use  of  the  august  Name  either  in  pious  speech  or  efl'usive  prater. 

II.  The  heinous  quality  op  the  crime. 

1.  The  crime  defined.  Blasphemy  is  calumny  and  insult  against  the  holy  God, 
uttered  with  the  intention  to  defame  Him.  It  not  only  expresses  the  hatred  of 
Him  in  the  speaker's  own  heart,  but  aims  at  awakening  iu  his  hearer's  mmd  an 
equal  loathing  of  Jehovah  and  all  His  claims.  It  is  held  up  ia  Scripture  as  an 
assault  upon  the  dignity  and  sanctity  of  God's  name :  Psa.  Ixxiv.  18  ;  Isa.  liL  6  j 
Rom.  ii.  24. 

heal  blasphemy  consists  in  intended  and  direct  insult  upon  God*s  honour  and 
holiness.  But  relative  blasphemy  consists  in  the  unconscious  and  in'Hrect  effect  of 
a  man's  words  or  acts,  as,  e.g.  the  uttering  opinions  or  sentiments  which  dishonour 
God's  name  and  discredit  His  word.  To  allow  one's  lips  to  utter  with  irreverence 
and  familiarity  the  august  Name  is  near  akin  to  the  sin  of  wilfully  maligning  Hiou 

2.  The  root  of  tlie  sin.  This  must  be  traced  to  the  vileness  of  the  human 
heart,  and  its  natural  enmity  to  God  (Comp.  Matt.  xv.  19).  It  should  be  noticed 
also  as  being  the  outgrowth  of  folly  and  pride  (see  2  Kings  xix.  22 ;  Psa.  Ixxiv.  18)» 
Of  all  sins,  blasphemy  is  an  indication  of  a  mind  mad  with  impiety. 

3.  Its  great  offennveness  to  God  and  man.  How  hateful  to  God  is  evident  from 
the  penalties  inflicted — [see  v.  16  and  comp.  Isa.  Ixv.  7 ;  Ezek.  xx.  27-32.,  xxxT. 
11,  12  ;  Matt.  xii.  31,  32] — how  hurtful  to  man  is  manifest  from  Psa.  xliv.  15, 16  ; 
ixxiv.  10,  18,  22.  They  who  revere  ^^this  glorious  and  fearful  Name^  The  Lobd 
THY  God  "  (Deut.  xxviii.  68)  are  distressed  at  its  profanation. 

Louis  IX.  of  France  branded  swearers'  lips  with  a  hot  iron  for  this  offence,  and 
when  some  complained  that  the  punishment  was  too  severe,  he  replied,  **  I  could 
wish  that  by  searing  my  own  lips  I  could  banish  all  profanity  from  my  realm.* 

III.  Facts  explanatory  of  suoh  blasphemous  bpeeoh. 
The  sin  of  profanity  points  to  : — 

1.  An  ungoverned  tongue.  Speech  should  be  held  under  control.  The  tong^ie 
may  be  "  set  on  fire  of  hell."  Allow  unbridled  speech,  and  protanity  easily  grows. 
"  Set  a  watch,  0  Lord,  before  my  mouth." 

2.  Passionate  contention  and  strife.  Little  do  men  anticipate  to  what  extremes 
passion  will  carry  them  when  they  enter  upon  controversy  or  strife  (Prov.  xvil  14). 

3.  An  unsanctified  heart.  This  man  was  not  a  true  Israelite  :  not  by  birth,  not 
by  sentiment  He  did  not  share  in  the  nation's  solemn  fear  of  God.  Unless  a 
'*olean  heart  and  right  spirit"  ia  iu  us,  evil  may  easily  get  dommija  over  us. 


294  ROMILETW    COMMENTARY   ON       [chap.  xxiv.  10—15. 


a.  How  beautiful  the  assurance  of  Solomon — **  He  that  loveth  purenesa  of  heart, 
for  the  grace  of  his  lips,  the  king  shall  be  his  friend  *' !  If  such  purity  of  heart  and 
grace  of  speech  win  an  earthlj  monarch's  favour,  certainly  the  King  divine  will 
seal  with  favour  now  and  eternally  such  q'lalities  of  character  and  conduct. 

b.  How  wirtning  is  that,  Name  which  in  our  Christian  dispensation  we  are  called 
to  cherish !  It  is  the  name  of  Jesus.  And  the  Father  gave  it  His  Sou  to  be  "  a 
Name  above  every  name,  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow  ** 
(Phil.  ii.  9,  10) ;  and  it  is  ''given  under  heaven  among  men  "  (Acta  iv.  12)  to  be 
loved  as  the  **  sweetest  sound  on  mortal  tongue,'*  and  the  pledge  of  grace  and 
bliss. 

Topic:  Blasphemy  op  Shelomith's  Son  (Vv.  10-15). 

This  incident  in  the  career  of  Israel  is  similar  in  character  to  that  of  the  two 
sons  of  Aaron,  who  offered  strange  fire  upon  the  altar,  thereby  insulting  the  name 
of  the  Lord,  degrading  His  sanctuary,  and  meeting  with  sore  retribution.  When 
Israel  left  Egypt,  a  mixed  multitude  of  camp  followers  proceeded  with  them  into 
1  he  wilderness.  They  encamped  outside  the  tents  of  Israel,  and  only  occasionally 
entered  the  sacred  enclosure.  A  son  of  an  Israelitish  woman,  whose  father  was  an 
Egyptian,  had  an  altercation  with  a  man  of  Israel,  and  when  striving  with  him 
in  the  camp  blasphemed  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  cursed.  Mcjses  at  once 
sought  to  learn  the  mind  of  the  Lord  concerning  such  an  offence ;  and  the 
offender  was  stoned.  The  sentence  was  strictly  and  solemnly  carried  out,  for 
"  the  children  of  Israel  did  as  the  Lord  comuiauded  Moses.'*  From  this  incident 
we  learn — 

I.  That  thb  name  op  Jehovah  could  not  be  blasphemed   with  impunity. 

In  all  the  oldest  MSS.  *' the  Name"  stands  alone,  without  the  words  "of 
Jehovah."  The  Hebrew  name  of  God  was  peculiarly  solemn;  the  Jews,  afraid  to 
pronounce  it,  employed  the  word  "Lord"  instead.  "Jehovah"  meant  the  ua- 
derived,  infinite,  and  eternal  existence  of  deity,  and  was  the  incommunicable 
name  by  which  He  made  His  august  might  and  majesty  known.  It  was  en- 
throned above  all  the  names  of  heathen  deities,  and  enshriued  the  Divine  Glory. 
Around  it  was  set  a  sacred  fence.  To  blaspheme  it  was  a  sin  of  the  deepest  dye.  The 
Jews  have  always  been  marked,  even  in  their  most  degenerate  days,  by  reverence 
for  the  great  name  of  Jthovah.  Alas  1  how  the  name  of  the  Lord  is  profaned  and 
blasphemed  to-day.  Because  of  swearing  the  land  mourneth.  Though  blas- 
phemers are  not  now  stoned,  yet  over  their  heads  hangs  the  sword  of  His  right- 
eous retribution,  threatening  them  with  everlasting  shame  and  contempt. 

IL  That  the  sanctity  of  the  camp  could  not  remain  degraded  bt  thb 

PR&SENOE  OF  A  BLASPHEMER. 

It  is  evident  that  blaspheming  in  the  camp  was  a  very  rare  thing,  for  no  sooner 
had  the  son  of  Shelomith  uttered  his  oaths  than  the  people  arrested  him,  and 
demanded  that  he  might  be  appropriately  punished.  This  shows  their  jealousy 
for  the  honour  of  the  divine  name,  and  for  the  moral  safety  and  purity  of  society. 
Let  us  beware,  lest  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  be  profaned,  lest  He  be  crucified 
afresh  and  put  to  an  open  shame.  The  camp  of  Israel  and  the  Church  of  the 
living  God,  cannot  be  profaned  without  incurring  the  divine  displeasure. 

III.  That  the  signal  and  seveiib  punishment  could  not  be  infliotrd 

UPON  THE  BLASPHEMER  WITHOUT  AOOOMPANYINO  APPROPRIATE  SOLEMNITY. 

The  sentence  was  to  be  executed  outside  the  camp,  in  the  presence  of  witnesseft 
who  heard  the  words  spoken ;  they  were  to  lay  their  hands  upon  the  head  of  the 
doomed  man,  to  show  that  he  bore  his  own  guilt,  and  was  devoted  to  expiate  ?.t. 
As  we  see  him  publicly  and  solemnly  stoned,  we  learn  how  fearful  a  thing  sin  is* 
and  how  fearful  it  is  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God,  except  we  do  so  in 
penitence  and  prayer.  We  also  learn — (a)  Tke  danger  of  anger*  (6)  How  OM 
%in  UacU  to  another* — F.  W*  B, 


CHAP  XXIV.  2 — 8. J 


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 


295 


OUTLINES   ON   VERSES   OF    CHAPTER   XXIV. 


V.  2. —  Theme:  The  golden  candle  stick. 

That  part  of  the  temple  exclusively  claimed 
by  Jehovah  was  lighted  by  a  candlestick  with 
seven  lamps,  which  were  kept  continually 
burning.  This  candlestick  might  possibly  be 
intended  to  represent  Christ  as  "the  light  of 
the  world,"  but  certainly  shadowed  fortk  his 
church  in — 

I.  Its  privileges. 

1.  Qhrist  declared  XhaX  the  candlestick  reprC' 
sented  His  church  (Rev.  i.  20).     Consider — 

(1.)  Of  what  it  was  composed.  Pure  gold 
(Exod.  XXV.  31-38).  Symbol  of  the  ''  divine 
nature  "  of  which  saints  are  made  partakers 
(2  Pet.  i.  4). 

(2.)  How  it  was  supplied.  With  purest  oil ; 
symbol  of  the  "  unction  of  the  Holy  One  which 
we  have  received  "  (1  John  ii.  20,  27),  for  the 
enlightenment  of  our  minds  and  sanctifying 
of  our  souls. 

(3.)  For  what  purpose  ii  was  used.  To  shine 
in  darkness,  that  all  who  were  engaged  in 
God's  service  might  fulfil  their  duties  aright, 
and  that  God  might  be  glorified  in  them 
(^ll«v   i.  12,  13). 

2    J  he  priestly  attendant  prefigured  Christ, 

This  is  afifirujed  on  Christ's  own  authority 
(Heb.  iv   14,  15). 

(1.)  He  is  constantly  employed  in  inspecting 
and  trimming  the  lamps. 

(2.)  Not  a  saint  escapes  His  watchfulness; 
He  sees  all  our  declensions  and  needs. 

(3.)  He  interposes  to  correct  their  dulness, 
and  to  restore  them  to  their  wonted  splendour 
(John  XV.  2). 

n.  Its  duties. 

The  duties  of  the  saints  are— 

1.  To  shine ;  that  God's  power  and  grace 
may  be  magnified  among  men,  and  that  their 
fellow-creatures  may  be  benefitted  by  their 
instructions,  example,  and  influence  (Matt.  v. 

14-10). 

2.  To  be  receiving  more  grace  Jrom  Christy 
in  order  to  their  shining  with  yet  brighter 
lustre. 

He  has  **  the  residue  of  the  Spirit  "(Mai  ii. 
15);  and  "of  that  fulness  we  must  all  receive 
even  grace  for  grace  "  (John  i.  16).  Comp. 
Zech  iv.  2-4,  11-14. 

(a)  An  important  inquiry.  Are  you  as 
lights  shining  m  a  dark  place  ?  Judge  your- 
selves. 

(b)  A  solemn  admonition.  If  we  would  not 
have  "our  candlestick  removed"  we  must 
repent  every  known  defect  and  seek  to  be 
pure  as  He  is  pure. 

(c)  An  encouraging  reflection.  He  "will 
not  quench  the  smoking  iiax  "  (Matt.  xii.  20). 
"  Thou  wilt  light  ray  ccndle,  etc."  (Psa.  xviii 
28.  y — C.  Simeon. 

V.  4, — Theme:  The  glory  of  the  church. 

**  He  shall  orier  the   lamps    upon   the  pure 
tandUstick  be/or  t  the  Lord  continually*^ 


The  high  priest  caring  for  the  golden  candle- 
stick, a  type  cf  Christ  in  His  care  for  the 
churches  (Zech.  iv.  2-6;  Rev.  i.  12- .'0).  God 
is  Light.  Light,  the  firstborn  of  creation. 
Light,  the  beginning  of  work  of  grace  in  soul 
of  man.  Christ  the  Light  of  the  world,  a 
light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles,  glory  of  Israel. 
The  lamps  before  the  Lord  continually,  so 
churches  ever  under  His  eye  and  care.  Con- 
sider— (a)  how  the  light  of  the  lamps  was 
derive  I ;  (b)  it  was  cheering;  (c)  it  was  re 
vealing ;  (d)  it  was  beautiful ;  (e)  it  ws^ 
constant ;  (})  it  was  precious ;  (g)  ii  wan 
essential.  Trace  analogy  in  light  vouchsafed 
to  Christian  church  and  Christly  souls. — 
F.H^.B. 

V  6 — Theme:  The  shewbread. 

The  mystery  of  the  shewbread  is  applied 
by  some  to  Christ,  who  called  Himself  "  the 
true  bread."  But  the  circumstance  of  the 
flour  "  being  taken  from  all  the  children  of 
Israel,'  and  made  mto  "twelve  cakes,"  de- 
notes that  those  loaves  represented  the  twelve 
tribes  i.e.^  the  Church  of  God. 

I.  Their  solemn  dkdioation  to  god. 

"  For  a  memorial,  as  an  offering  made  by 
Are  unto  the  Lord."    As  such.  His  eyes  are 
upon  them  continually;  and  as  the  Irankin 
cense  was  to  God  an  odour  of  a  sweet  smell, 
80  they  are  accepted  by  Him. 

II    Their  periodical  renewal. 

While  one  generation  is  passing  away 
another  comes  in  to  supply  their  place. 
Never  shall  God's  people  be  removed  but 
others  shall  be  ready  to  succeed  them.  There 
are  always  souls  prepared  to  be  *'  baptised 
from  the  dead." 

in.  Their  ultimate  destination. 

The  saints  when  their  appointed  period  here 
is  fulfilled ^  pass  into  the  possession  of  Christy 
the  Great  High  Priest.  "  The  Lord's  portion 
is  his  people  "  (Ueut.  xxxiii.  9).  Christ  will 
claim  His  people  as  His  "  peculiar  treasure." 

It  is  the  duty  of  God's  people,  therefore: — 

1.  fo  consecrate  themselves  entirely  to  God, 
as  being  made  and  "  set  apart  '  absolutely 
for  Him  (Tsa.  xliii.  21). 

2  lo  occupy  themselves  in  prayer  and  in- 
tercession. 

As  the  loaves  represented  "before  the 
Lord  "  all  Israel,  so  Christians  should  regard 
themselves  as  required  to  "  make  supplica- 
tions, prayers,  iuteicession,  and  thanksgiving 
for  all  men." 

8.    /  0  wait  patiently  their  removal  hence. 

"  All  the  days  of  my  appointed  time  will  1 
wait,  till  my  charge  come." — C.  Simeon, 

V.  8 — Theme:  Special  time  for  servicb. 

**  hvery  Sabbath  he  shall  set  it  in  order  be- 
fore the  Lord.^^ 

Forms  may  exist  without  formality.  Con- 
tinuous  worship  does  not  preclude  ipecial 


296 


HOMILETW   COMMENTARY  ON 


[CHAP.  XXIV.  13—16. 


peasons  for  service.  The  Sabbath  a  peculiarly 
holy  and  cons<5crated  day.  The  house  of 
God  a  speciaDy  consecrated  place.  Special 
(jeasong  for  attention  to  divine  things,  (a) /r^- 
v^nt  forgcifuhiess,  ib)  arrest  attention,  (J)  se- 
cure freshness^  {d)  awaken  inquiry.  The 
br»ad  was  never  allowed  to  get  moaldy  or 
8tale.  The  frankincense  upon  each  row  upon 
the  golden  table  symbolic  of  prayer,  purity, 
and  praise.  In  Christian  service  and  worship 
renewal  of  strength,  refreshment  in  service, 
replenishment  of  sacrifice  essential  to  accept- 
able vrorship  and  spiritual  profit.  At  all 
times,  especially  on  the  Lord's  day,  there 
must  be  renewed  consecration  to  Him  before 
whose  presence  we  bow, — F,  ^.  B* 

Vv.  13-15. — Theme:  Evil  connexions. 

1  The  danger  of  unqodlt  connkxions. 
As   a  caution   against   intimacy   with   the 

ungodly  we  are  told  that  '*  evil  communica- 
tions corrupt  good  manners,"  and  "  the  com- 
panion of  fools  shall  be  destroyed."  Whereas 
in  the  marriage  union  such  connexion  is 
peculiarly  dangerous,  because  its  influence  is 
incessant. 

I.  Injurious  to  the  person  himself.  It  cannot 
be  productive  of  happiness,  or  piety.  Comp. 
2Cor.  vi.  U,  15. 

2  Injurious  to  their  ofspring.  It  sorrow- 
fully happens  that  when  parents  are  divided 
in  relation  to  religion  the  children  yield  most 
to  the  influence  of  the  ungodly  parent. 

II.  The  danger  op  ungodly  habits. 

1.  The  habits  of  this  young  man  were  bad, 
a  son  of  wrathful  nature  and  reviling  habits. 

2.  'J  he  consequences  proved  fatal  to  him. 
Little  did  he  anticipate  the  issues  of  his  evil 
habits.     "  Sin  bringeth  forth  death.^'' 

(a)  Check  strife  and  anger  in  ourselves* 
\b)  Arrest  blasphemy  in  others, 
— C  6imeon,  M.A. 


Vv.  10-16. — Theme:  Slatino  thb  bx«A8- 
ratMEB. 

The  narrative  shows 

I.  The  evil  resulting  prom  connexion 
with  thb  ungodly,  "  whose  father  was  an 
Egyptian "—  said  by  the  Rabbins  to  be  the 
man  whom  Mok*s  killed. 

II.  7 he  danger  k.Bis,iiiQt  PR  M  indulgencb 
IN  PASSii  iNATE  ANGI.R :  "  strovo  ";  the  blas- 
phemy was  uttered  in  a  quarrelsome  passion. 

III.  The  BLASPHEMY  which,  in  this  case, 
resultfd  prom  such  indulgence. 

♦'  Cursed "  the  Holy  Name  of  Jehovah ; 
which,  the  Israelite  claime  i,  belonged  to  none 
but  Israelites. 

IV.  The  punishment  which  all  like  sik 
MicRiTB. — IV.  H' ay  land,  B.A. 


V.  16. —  Theme:  Blasphemy. 

**  And  he  that  blasphemelh  the  name  of  the 

Lord^  he  shall  surely  be  put  to  death^'' 

A  flaming  sword  here  guards  the  sacred 
name  of  Jehovah.  Not  only  were  holy  ser- 
vices to  be  rendered  to  Him,  but  reverent 
thoughts  entertained  of  Him,  whether  uttered 
or  unexpressed.  Why  were  contemptuous  or 
irreverent  words  uttered  impiously  against 
God's  name  considered  as  heinous? 

I.  Because  God^s  Name  reveals  and  repre- 
sents him.  As  the  Eternal,  Infinite,  Self- 
existent,  Almighty,  Only  God. 

II  Because  to  blaspheme  God^s  Name,  indi- 
cates the  lowest  depths  of  human  sinfulness. 
The  blasphemer  is  capable  of  doing  every 
other  kind  of  evil  without  compunction. 

III.  Because  such  wickedness  exerts  a  most 
baneful  influence  upon  others.  When  con- 
tempt is  thrown  upon  the  divine  name,  obedi- 
ence to  divine  laws  is  discouraged,  the  seeds 

of  rebellion  to  divine  authority  are  sown. 

IV.  Because  the  Divine  Name  is  worthy  of 
all  honour  and  blessing. 

V.  Because  God  has  justly  branded  the  sin 
with  intenso.st  hatred ;  and  attached  to  it  hope- 
less doom. 

No  sin  had  denounced  upon  it  a  severer 
judgment  by  the  Son  of  God.  How  needful 
that  we  constantly  offer  the  prayer,  '*  Hal- 
lowed be  thy  name." — F.  VV.  B. 

V.  22. —  Theme:  The  insxobablenbss  of 
thk  law. 

*'  >  e  shall  have  one  manner  of  Law^ 
To  maintain  order  in  the  wilderness  among 
the  tribes  of  Israel,  it  was  essential  that  pu- 
nishment should  not  be  tardy  in  its  move- 
ments, but  summary  in  its  infliction.  The 
people  needed  to  be  held  with  a  tight  rein, 
chastised  with  a  strong  hand.  The  law  of 
retaliation  was, 

I.  Stric'ly  just.  Only  fair  that  punishment 
should  be  of  the  kind  and  extent  of  the  crime, 
for  crime  is  an  offence  against  man  and 
society,  the  sin  of  tbe  crime  is  taken  cogniz« 
ance  of  by  God,  He  only  can  forgive  it. 

II.  highly  salutary.  It  would  check  ten- 
dencies to  op  ression,  robbery,  and  cruelty. 
Self-love  and  fear,  where  principle  was  absent, 
would  deter  from  wrong  doing  for  which 
severe  /etaliating  punishment  would  ensue. 

The  law  anticipated  and  foreshadowed  the 
golden  rule,  '*  Whatsoever  ye  would  that  men 
should"  etc.,  for  the  people  would  seek  to  do 
only  such  things  as  they  would,  should  re- 
taliation be  done  to  them. 

Under  the  Gospel,  magnanimity  supplants 
retaliation.  The  beau-ideal  of  Christian  man- 
hood is,  lamblike  innocence,  and  doveiike 
gentleness,  patience,  love. — F.  W*  B* 


ILLUSTRATIVE   ADDENDA   TO  CHAPTER   XXIV. 


Light  bearers.  The  ancient  Insignia  of 
the  Walden«ian  Church  was  a  candlestick, 
with  a  light  radiating  its  rays  across  the  ear- 


rounding  darkness,  and  encircled  with  seven 
stars ;  with  the  motto,  "  Lux  lucet  in  teivt- 
bris"    Anything  more  appropriately  descrip- 


OHAF.    TLXV.]  THE   BOOK    OF  LEVITICUS,  297 


tive  of  the  pceition  and  history  of  the  Church,        "devil,  deuce,"  etc.,  and  who,  at  last,  took 
it  would  be  impossible  to  conceive.  the  name  of  God  in  vain,  "  Stop,  sir,"  said 

the  old  man,  'I  said  nothing  while  you  onlr 
jrti<'»ANnT.     A  good  old  man  was  once  in        used  freedoms  with  the  name  of  your  own 
company  with  a  gentleman,  who  oocasionally         master,  but   I   insist  upon  it  that  you  shall 
iutrodttcod    into    oottTersatiou    the   words,        use  no  fr«edom§  wiUi  Um  l!i«a«  of  mino." 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

tm  of  Inbiltt 

SUGGESTIVE  READINGS. 

Vv.  1-7. — Then  shall  the  land  keep  a  Sabbath  unto  the  Lord.  For  a  whole  year 
the  laud  ceased  to  be  the  property  of  the  owuer ;  he  might  uot  till  the  soil,  neither 
gather  its  spontaneous  produce  ;  God  asserted  His  ownership  by  this  enactment, 
and  manifested  His  providential  sufiSciency  for  His  people  by  the  guarantee  of 
plenty  in  the  harvest  preceding.  The  fallow  land  acquired  new  productive  powera 
by  this  year  of  reht,  as  man  and  beast  gather  fresh  energy  by  the  weekly  sabbath. 
The  sabbatic  law  is  a  boon  to  the  whole  word.  They  who  would  secularise  the 
holy  day  are  *' madmen,  casting  firebrands,  arrows,  and  death.**  The  Heaven- 
given  daj/'s  rest  is  a  solace  to  man's  fretting  life  :  a  quiet  interval  amid  earth's 
clamour  for  thought  of  his  sacred  interests  ;  and  a  gentle  admonition  of  his  need 
of  that  spiritual  rest  which  burdened  souls  should  seek  in  Christ  Jesus. 

Vv.  8-22. —  rhou  Shalt  number  seven  sabbaths  of  years.  On  the  great  day 
of  Atonement,  the  tenth  day  of  the  seventh  month,  the  sound  of  trumpets  pro- 
claimed the  dawn  of  a  Jubilee  year  of  universal  restitution  and  redemption. 
Prisoners  were  liberated,  slaves  were  set  free,  debtors  were  absolved,  ancestral 
heritages  were  restored,  the  land  enjoyed  rest  from  tillage,  and  its  produce  was 
the  common  lot  of  all.  Beautiful  symbolism :  of  the  joyous  proclamation  of  tlie 
gospel  liberty  and  salvation  following  upon  the  sacrifice  of  the  Uedeemer ;  and  of 
man's  emancipation  by  Christ  from  the  tyranny  of  sin  and  Satan,  and  restoration 
to  the  glad  liberty  of  a  spiritual  life.  The  restoration  of  inheritances  effected  the 
sharp  distinction  of  the  tribes,  keeping  the  families  intact.  It  also  neutralised 
over-reaching  and  land  greed.  GiodJ^  promise  of  abundance  (V^  22,  83)  to  com- 
pensate for  the  Jubilee  year's  cessation  of  agricultural  processes  carriss  with  it 
still  the  lesson  that  none  are  losers  who  serve  God  even  in  the  face  of  seeminsf 
sacrifice  ;  for  "  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  it  maketh  rich  "  ***ris  mine  to  obey,  'lis 
His  to  provide."  The  questioning  spirit  of  distrust  (v.  20)  is  arrested  by  God's 
assurance  of  prosperity  following  upon  obedience.  We  may  dismiss  fear  if  intent 
on  duty.  The  path  of  righteousness  is  always  safe  to  tread,  and  none  that  trust 
in  the  Lord  shall  be  desolate. 

Let  this  supernatural  fact  in  history  be  pondered.  A  miraculous  year  of  super- 
abundance was  guaranteed  every  fiftieth  year,  as  a  provision  for  the  Jubilee 
Sabbath.  If  it  had  iViled,  what  would  have  ensued  %  Moses  would  have  been 
proved  a  deceiver,  i^-etending  to  divine  inspiration  as  Israel's  legislator,  the 
Jewish  religion  would  have  received  utter  refutation.  The  pledge  of  verses  22  aud 
23  were  a  supernatural  attestation  every  fifty  years — easily  verified  or  refuted  — 
of  the  reality  of  the  true  religion,  and  of  Jehovah's  pergonal  superintendence  ovef 
the  order  of  nature  and  the  experienoes  of  man* 


ii98  EOMILETIC    COMMENTARY    OJ^  [chap.  xxv.  1—7. 


A  whole  nation,  aga  after  age,  acted  on  the  commj^nd  to  keep  Jubilee  because 
satisfied  by  the  preceding  sign  that  the  ordinance  was  it>deed  divine. 

Vv.  23-34.^^The  land  shall  not  be  sold  for  ever,  &c.  Xhe  twelve  tribes  held 
the  land  of  Canaan  of  Jehovah  as  His  tenants  at  will,  having  no  right  or  permis- 
sion to  barter  with  the  soil,  which  was  not  their's  but  His.  It  were  well  if  all 
dwellers  on  the  earth  would  consider  that  no  sure  or  extended  tenancy  can  be 
maintained  by  man  in  this  transient  abode.  Though  it  is  true  **that  the  earth 
hath  He  given  to  the  children  of  men,"  yet ''  the  earth  is  the  Lord's  ":  even  as 
He  gave  Canaan  by  lots  to  the  tribes,  jet  declared  "the  land  is  Mine  "  (v.  23). 
Here  we  have  no  continuing  city;  men  can  call  nothing  their  own  ;  the  day  of 
restitution  will  reverse  our  possessions;  the  hour  of  relinquishment  hastens  for  us 
all.  Death  will  end  all  occupancy  here.  But  there  is  *'  a  better  and  more  endur- 
ing: substance  "  for  us  to  inherit,  by  faith  in  Christ :  and  he  only  is  truly  rich  in 
I  er  itages  who  **  lays  up  for  himself  treasures  in  Heaven.*' 

Vv.  35-38.— If  thy  brother  be  waxen  poor.  The  poor  always  ye  have  with  you : 
and  the  near  of  kin  who  have  been  uiifortnuate,  '*  fallen  in  decay,"  claim  special 
commiseration  and  leniency.  What  have  we  that  we  have  not  received  1  Should 
we  not,  therefore,  show  generosity  and  kindness] 

Vv.  39  55. — Not  compel  him  to  serve  as  a  bondman.  An  Israelite  must  be 
treated  as  became  his  dignity,  however  penurious  and  helpless  he  might  be,  for 
iie  was  God's  ransomed  and  chosen  chil.l,  a  "son  of  Abraham."  Full  redemption 
came  with  the  Jubilee,  from  every  contract  and  claim  And  the  day  of  our  redemp 
Hon  draweth  nigh:  when  "the  creature  itself  shall  be  delivered  from  the 
bondage  of  coiiuption  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  chiidiea  of  God''  (Horn, 
viii.  21). 

SECTIONAL  HOMILIES. 

Topic:  A  Sabbath  of  Rest  unto  the  Land  (Vv.  1-7), 

Agriculturists  still  recognize  the  value  of  this  law  of  one  year's  rest  In  seven 
for  the  land.  Violation  of  this  regulation  will  exhaust  the  richest  soil,  and  bring 
bterility.     [See  Addenda  to  chapter,  Sabbath.^     This  law  proclaimed, 

I.  Divine  ownership  in  the  soil 

Just  as  the  reservation  of  the  "seventh  day"  as  a  Sabbath  asserted  God's 
claim  upon  man's  time,  so  this  law  affirmed  His  right  to  the  soil  man  occupies  and 
utilizes. 

II.  Man's  highest  interests  are  not  material  and  earthly. 

He  is  here  for  nobler  pursuit p  and  more  solemn  concerns  than  to  dig  and  toil, 
to  buy  and  sell  and  get  g^in.  For  a  mun's  life  consisteth  not  in  the  abundance 
of  the  things  which  he  possesseth. 

III.  Neighbourliness  and  benevolence  should  be  cultivated. 

A  common  interest  in  all  relationships  of  life  (Vv.  6-7),  and  a  helpful  regard  one 
for  another  would  be  promoted.  Release  from  the  stern  occupancies  of  life  would 
also  awaken  those  social  instincts  and  foster  those  healthy  friendships  which 
render  intercourse  cheering  and  elevating.  Men  were  designed  for  fellowship  and 
afliection  ;  not  for  exacting  from  each  other  what  each  can  be  forced  to  produce. 
Cultivate  brotberliness.     [See  Addenda  to  chapter,  Benevolence.^ 

IV.  Reliance  on  god,  in  implicii  obedience  to  his  will. 

To  desist  fjom  effoit  to  provide  for  their  own  maintenance  would 

1.  £  licit  their  faith  in  the  fatherly  care  of  God 

2.  Summon  them  to  a  religious  use  of  the  time  which  God  had  set  free  from 
secular  toils. 

3.  Incite  them  to  grateful  thoughts  of  God's  dealings  with  them  as  His  people^ 


CH.^i>.  XXV.  8— 18.J  THE    BOOK    Ot    LEVITICUS, 


21i.^ 


and  win  tliem  to  a  renewed  recognition  that  they  were  ''  not  their  own  "*  but  His 
who  had  redeemed  and  still  cared  for  them.  '  ' 

V    Sabijatio  rkst:  Heavkn's  gracious  l^w  for  eartfi^y  toilers 
Human  hh  becomes  a  toilsome  drudgery,  unless  God  interposes  restraints.    He 
would  save  men  from  grinding  degradation,  from  absorbing  labours  :  and  give  them 
respite  and  rest.     Man  needs  the  Sabbath  pause,  in  order  to  realise— 

1 .  Th^ih\gheT  possibilities  are  opened  to  him  by  God's  grace  than  to  be  a  servant 
of  the  soil  on  which  he  dwells.  He  may  live  for  a  **  better  country,  even  a 
heavenly.'  •" 

2.  That  God  desires  of  men  the  devotion  of  fixed  seasms,  and  leisurely  hours  for 
sacred  meditation  and  fellowship  with  the  skies. 

Topic:  The  Jubilee  Year:   Its  Fourfold  Significance  (Vv.  8-13). 

To  the  Hebrew  the  blessings  of  the  jubilee  year  were  local  and  literal ;  it  was 
a  year  of  re^t  and  of  restitution  for  the  land ;  a  year  of  release  and  rejoicing  to  every 
inhabitant.  Liberty  was  regained  by  the  slave  ;  possessions  in  the  soil  reverted 
to  their  owners;  agricultural  toils  were  suspended  that  a  whole  year  of  relaxation 
and  repose  miu^ht  be  enjoyed.  Every  home  was  in  enjoyment  of  plenty  everv 
hand  ceased  trom  weary  labours,  and  both  man  and  beast  dwelt  in  quietude  and 
peace. 

Glad,  indeed,  was  the  hour  when  the  silver  trumpet  tones  announced  the 
arrival  of  the  year  of  rest.     It  was  like  the  prelude  to  a  joyous  authem,  and  that 

anthem  was  the  angels' song  over  Bethlehem  fields- '•  Peace  on  earth,   good wiU 
among  men.  '    ®  v^^«nx 

It  was  a  richly  symbolic  institute,  that  Year  of  Jubilee,  whose  suggestiveness 
finds  fulhlment  in  three  distinct  directions.     It  points  to 

iv^i8^2r|^'''''^'^'^''   dispensation   of  gospel  liberty   and  rest.     [See  Luke 
Epli 'i'is:  1™'  ^^n^'  "^  "^^^^  ^^^^^^^  ^^^  ^^^-     \-^'^-^' 

Isa'VxVh?8i3T™xx^^^^^^^^^^  ESTABLISHED     RIGHTEOUSNESS   AND  PEACE.       [See 

IV     The  HEAVENLY    STATE  OF    ETERNAL    SECURITY   AND    SERENITY.       [See    2    Pet 

111.  1.5 ;  Kfcv.  XIV.  13  j  XXI.  4].  *• 

nf  i^.'L' t^l''^^''.K  1  n*"'  ^^^l^""  ^"'^^'^*'  *^  ^^^^  «^  *h«««  gra^d  fulfilments 
of  us  symbolism,  the  following  facts  stand  out  clearly  :— 

fi, ';  ?^''y/^'^^-  .^^^  ^^^®  f  supernatural  abundance  the 'year  preceding  the  Jubilee 
that  m  the  enjoyment  of  vast  supplies  there  should   be  no  mcessU}  for  toil,  no 
occasion  for  care- [See  v.  21].     And  assuredly  there  is 

1    Bounty  in  the  provisions  of  the  Gospel  (1  Tim.  i.  14). 

2.  Fulness  of  grcmefor  the  believer  in  Jesus  (2  Cor.  iv   15  •  Titus  iii  6) 

3.  Abundance  of  good  to  be  enjoyed  in  the  Millennial  Age  (Psa.  Ixxii  1\ 

4.  Limttless  bliss  m  the  Heavenly  land  (Psa.  xvi.  ii). 

H  Kest.  That  Sabbatic  year  was  to  be  consecrated  to  repose  :  the  land  was  to 
be  allowed  to  rest ;  the  toiler  was  to  cease  from  toil.  Every  want  wrsuppLd 
Without  the  weariness  of  labour.     Equally  true  of  the  suppliea 

1.  Gospel  rest  which  Christianity  announces  (Matt.  xi.  29), 

2.  Believer's  rest  which  faith  secures  (Heb.  iv.  3). 

3.  Millennial  rest  for  a  wearied  Church  (Kev*  xx'  2  3) 

4.  Beavcnly  rest   for   Christ's   redeemed    followers   (Rev.   xlv    13)       fSee 
Addenda  to  chapter,  Rest].  ^  '*      L^®® 

Jnded  (7^39  ^il  ^^^^^^^^^^  7^0  set  free  the  moment  the  JubUee  trumpet 
Bounded  (Yv.  39-44).     And  assuredly,  this  finds  verification  in  th© 


300  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  UN  [chap  xxv.  8-13 


1.  Liberty  which  Christ  proclaimed  to  souls  enslaved  in  sin  and  fear  (Luks 
iv.  18  ;  Heb.  ii.  15). 

2.  Spiritual  freedom  realized  hy  faith  (Rom.  viil.  15  ;  Jno.  viii.  36). 

3.  Emancipation  from  thraldom  which  shall  distinguish  the  Millennial  reign 
(Isa.  xlix.  8,  9). 

4.  Glorious  liheiiy  of  the  children  of  God  in  Heaven  (Rom.  vHi,  21 ;   Rev. 
xxi.  24,  26).     [See  Addenda  to  chapter,  Liherty\ 

iv.  Restitution.  If  the  Israelite  had  parted  with  his  inheritance,  its  pos- 
session v\as  restored  to  him  in  the  Year  of  Jubilee,  and  that  without  payment 
(Vv.  25-37).    So 

1.  The  redemption  of  Christ  recovers  for  man  all  that  sin  had  forfeited. 

2.  Believers  in  Jesos  regain  all  the  virtue,  happiness,  and  hopes  which  the 
fall  had  ruined. 

3.  The  weary  and  wronged  world  would  enjoy  paradisal  gladness  through 
Christ's  millennial  sway. 

4.  Heaven  will  realize  all  which  on  earth  had  been  desired,  and  restore  all 
which  death  had  desolated.     [See  Addenda  to  chapter,  Possession8\ 

V.  Let  it  be  marked  that  the  Jubilee,  with  all  its  blessings,  was  oonsquent 
UPON  Atonement.  Not  till  the  blood  of  Expiation  bad  been  shed,  and  the  living 
goat  had  borne  into  the  land  of  oblivion  the  sins  which  (ceremonially)  had  been 
transferred  to  it,  did  the  silver  trumpets  peal  forth  their  exultant  notes,  pro- 
claiming liberty  and  rest,  restitution  and  rectitude  for  the  people.  And  it  is 
because  of  Christ's  atonement  that 

1.  Christianity  has  come  to  sinful  man,  with  all  its  tidings  of  good  and  wealth 
of  salvation  (John  i.  29  ;  Ephes.  i.  6). 

2.  Spiritual  blessings  are  inherited  by  the  believer  in  Jesus  (Rom.  v.  11). 

3.  2^he  Church  will  eftjoy  the  Sabbatic  millennial  glory  (Rev.  xix.  11-1-1), 

4.  Heaven  will  be  the  eternal  possession  of  the  redeemed  (Rev.  viii.  14-17). 

The  cross  is  the  source  of  all  human  good.  All  things  are  ours,  because 
Christ  has  died.  As  the  blood  on  the  doorposts  freed  Israel  from  the  plague  of 
death  in  Egypt,  so  it  is  to  us  now  and  for  ever  the  Blood  of  Chriet  which  ensures 
ail  sacred  good  (Rev.  i.  6,  6 ;  v.  9,  10). 

Topic:  Glad  Facts  of  the  Jubilehl 

I.  God's  sovereign  right  tc  the  earth.    He  determines  when  and  whether 

its  fields  should  be  tilled  and  reaped.  Man,  in  his  pride,  calls  the  lauds  his  own  ; 
thinks  and  acts  as  if  he  were  Creation's  lord.  His  fancy  rears  a  throne  and 
crowns  himself  the  king.  But  this  decree  establishes  Goii's  rule.  We  are  depen- 
dant  tenants  of  His  fields.      "  The  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof." 

II.  God's  power  to  provide.  He  wills,  and  crops  abound.  Thus  through  this 
year  of  rest  no  want  is  known.  The  marvel  grows  when  it  is  considered  that  the 
Jubilee  Year  succeeds  a  Sabbath  Year,  in  which  no  seeding  or  reaping  had  gone 
on.  But  God  gave  forth  a  treble  harvest  in  each  forty-eighth  year.  And,  as  the 
poor  widow's  meal  and  oil,  it  proved  an  unexhausted  feast.  As  Joseph's  well- 
replenished  store,  it  fed  the  hungry  and  never  failed. 

None  can  succeed  without  the  Lord,  and  none  shall  want  who  truly  follow  Him. 
Faith  works  when  God  says,  Work  j  it  rests  when  God  says,  Rest ;  and  thrives  in 
obedience. 

III.  Universal  rest  enjoined  and  enjoyed.     No  hand  should  toil.     Tillage 
and  harvest  sleeps,      Kepese  is  the  one  law — for  man,  beast,  and  soil     A  Yeai 
lon^  Sabbath  reigns. 

Emblem  of  soul  rest  in  Christ. 

IV.  Atonement  ushers  in  this  oonsborated  tear.    When  the  scapegoat  hM 


CHAP.  XXV.  8—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  3C1 


borne  sins  out  of  sight,  when  the  High  Priest  has  spr'nklei  the  meroy-seat,  thin 
holy  season  begius.  A  light  here  shines  upoa  the  path  which  leads  to  rest- 
through  penitence  for  sin,  and  reliance  on  the  Victim. 

Y.  The  trumpet  sounds  throughout  the  land.  In  every  place,  by  everj' 
ear,  the  long-expected  notes  are  heard.  They  tell  no  doubtful  tale.  "  Glatt 
tidings  "  are  yours  to  proclaim,  ye  ministers  of  Christ.  0,  see  that  your  lips  pub- 
lish rest  in  Christ.      "  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye,  my  people,  saith  your  God." 

VI.  Causes  for  Israel's  delight.  The  downcast  debtor  was  now  free.  The 
boudman  cast  away  his  yoke.  All  forfeited  estates  returned.  The  oppressor 
might  no  more  oppress.  No  servant  trembled  at  his  steru  lord's  voice.  The 
former  owner  claimed  his  father's  fields.  The  ancient  landmarks  were  rebuilt, 
and  libertv  resumed  its  sway.  In  every  house  and  heart  there  was  consciousness 
of  relief.  "  Sorrow  and  mourning  fled  away.     So  thero  is  all-deliverance  in  Christ. 

1.  We  are  poor  debtors.  Our  debts  exceed  the  moments  of  our  lives;  But 
Justice  must  have  reckoning.  There  is  no  trifling  with  God.  But  hark  1  the 
Jubilee  is  coma !  Christ  avails  to  pay.  His  ransomed  ones  are  all  free.  No 
debt  remains. 

2.  The  Jubilee  relaxes  the  ties  of  bondage.  Each  soul,  apart  from  Christ,  is  a 
poor  slave.  Tyrants  are  many,  and  their  yoke  is  hard.  But  Christ  liberates 
trom  fetters  (Jno.  viii.  36). 

(a)  Satan  enchains  the  souL  But  Jesus  vanquishes  this  despot,  and  the  Jubilee 
sets  free  from  Satan's  power. 

(b)  Sin  rules  the  captive  race  of  men.  Till  expelled  by  Christ,  it  must  reign. 
But  a  new  passion  gains  the  throne  when  Christ  comes  in,  and  shews  His  dying 
love.  His  blood  to  attone. 

(c)  This  world  is  a  foul  tyrant.  Its  smiles  allure,  its  frowns  deter,  its  fashions 
force  compliance,  its  laws  exact  submission  ;  it  drives  its  millions  to  a  slavish 
toil.     But  the  grace  of  Christ  emancipates  from  the  world's  enthralling  snares. 

(d)  Death,  too,  is  a  fearful  tyrant.  Its  chilly  features  terrify.  The  stoutest 
quails.     None  can  relieve  but  Christ. 

3.  The  Jubilee  restores  inheritance.  Sin  drove  man  from  a  fair  abode ;  forced 
him  to  a  wilderness  of  desolation.  God's  smile  was  lost ;  the  blessing  of  com- 
munion ceased.  But  Christ  re-instates  with  more  than  Eden  heritage.  He  places 
us  in  a  land  of  peace,  where  God  is  our  joy  for  ever.  More  is  fouad  than  was  lost 
by  sin. 

Christ  came,  lived,  died,  reigns,  to  grant  this  Jubilee  to  souU.  Hear  His  own 
words  (Luke  iv.,  18,  19).  He  becomes  His  people's  life,  their  liberty,  their  ransom, 
their  peace,  their  joy,  their  hope,  their  glory.  The  trustful  soul  reposea  in  a 
jubilee  of  joy.     (Arranged  from  Dean  Law's  "  Christ  is  AH"), 

Topic:  Thk  Year  of  Jubilee  (Vv.  8-14.) 

This  was  the  last  and  most  remarkable  of  the  Hebrew  festivals.  It  bears  un- 
mistakeable  marks  of  Divine  origin,  of  wise  and  benevolent  design.  The  trumpet 
of  jubilee  sounded  on  the  tenth  day  of  Tisri,  immediately  after  the  great  atone- 
ment had  been  made  by  the  High  Priest,  and  the  sound  of  it  went  forth  through- 
out the  whole  land.  Every  valley  and  mountain  resounded  with  the  soul-stirring 
notes,  and  the  people  knew  that  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord  had  come.  The 
Jubilee  taught — (a)  The  dependence  of  Israel  upon  the  bounty  of  Heaven,  (b)  The 
duity  of  mutual  kindness.^  forbearance,  and  forgiveness,  (c)  The  unique  position  Israel 
occupied  among  the  nations,  (d)  The  unity  of  their  race.  Bj  its  advent  was 
proclaimed — 

L  Rest  from  manual  labour. 

The  ordinary  law  with  respect  to  physical  subsistence  was,  **  In  the  sweat  of 


303  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xxv.  8-14 

thy  brow  thou  shalt  eat  brea(^,"  but  in  the  eighth  and  fiftieth  years  the  la^  was 
Buspended,  for  no  agricultural  work  of  any  kind  was  to  be  performed,  the  land 
was  to  lie  fallow,  and  have  perfect  rest.  Labour  siispeaded  for  such  a  protraoted 
period  wovild  restore  the  wasted  energies  of  man,  and  secure  renewed  vitality  to 
the  soil.  Such  an  arrest  of  the  tide  of  busy  life  would  suij^gest  to  the  Hebrews 
the  necessity  of  seeking  the  meat  that  endureth  to  everlasting  life« 

II.  Deliveranoe  from  civil  bondaob. 

Liberty  was  to  be  proclaimed  tbroughent  the  land,  every  slave  wag  to  be  set 
^ree.  In  exceptional  cases,  where  full  freedom  was  not  given,  the  condition  of  the 
most  abject  was  ameliorated.  Thus  the  common  brotherhood  of  man  was  em- 
phatically proclaimed,  during  the  period  of  the  jubilee  all  were  on  a  level.  This 
was  an  invaluable  boon  to  men,  and  gave  the  dcpundeut  and  dowuUodden  a  fair 
and  new  start  in  secular  life. 

III.  Forgiveness  OF  DEBTS. 

Pecuniary  liabilities  that  had  been  contracted  in  the  transaction  of  business, 
and  which  debtors  were  unable  to  discharge,  were  remitted.  No  usury  or 
increase  was  to  be  taken  from  the  poor,  the  millstone  of  debt  was  to  be  removed 
from  their  necks.  Thus  the  inequalities  of  social  and  secular  life  were  readjusted, 
and  society  started  afresh  upon  a  reformed  and  revived  basis, 

IV.  Kkstitution  op  lost  propertf. 

Of  course,  there  would  necessarily  be  inequalities  in  the  social  circumstances  of 
the  people;  some  would  accumulate  property  that  others  would  lose  through 
misfortune  or  negligence,  and  wide  gaps  would  be  thus  created  between  classes  of 
the  con^imunity.  Those  gaps  would  be  filled  up  at  the  Jubilee,  where  all  wicked^ 
or  undue  accumulation  of  possessions  would  be  rectified,  and  a  period  put  to 
boundless  ambition  and  lawless  aggression.  Selfishness  and  greed  would  thus  be  cut 
up  root  and  branch,  and  all  men  taught  to  be  reasonable  in  their  aims  and  claims, 

V.  Rejoicing  for  the  people. 

The  sounding  of  the  trumpet,  immediately  upon  the  atonement  being  made, 
would  inform  the  people  that  an  acceptable  offering  had  been  presented  for  their 
sins;  and  that  all  the  blessings  promised  in  connection  with  the  Jubilee  might  be 
enjoyed.  A  full  tide  of  gladness  would  flow  through  the  land,  for  the  great 
national  holiday  had  begun,  and  innumerable  and  inestimable  blessings  were 
available  for  all.  The  trumpet  sound  would  set  the  joy  bells  in  every  devout 
Hebrew  heart  ringing  with  gladsome  melody. 

VI.  Exemption  from  care. 

During  the  previous  year  the  horn  of  plenty,  with  twofold  richness,  was  poured 
into  the  nation's  lap,  and  as  the  people  beheld  the  super- abundant  stores  provided 
in  anticipation  of  their  manifold  wants,  they  would  be  relieved  from  care  and 
anxiety  while  the  land  had  the  long  rest.  They  would  not  need  to  watch  the 
clouds,  their  well-filled  barns  and  overflowing  presses  would  calm  all  their 
anxieties  and  fears.  In  these  arrangements  would  be  seen  the  kind  thoughtful* 
ness  of  Israel's  gracious  Father,  the  sovereignty  of  their  eternal  King. 

VII.  Homecoming  of  families. 

However  scattered  through  adverse  circumstances  from  the  old  homestead,  or 
exiled  through  debt,  all  could  now  return,  domestic  devotion  and  social  love  could 
now  be  completely  restored.  All  this  would  tend  to  socialize  and  humanize  the 
people,  and  foster  home  and  national  piety. 

VIII.  Regeneration   of  the  nation. 

Every  Jubilee  year  the  people  started  afresh  with  a  renewed  consciousness  of 
the  presence  of  the  Lord  in  their  midst,  and  of  their  intimate  relationship  to  Him. 
He  brought  them  out  of  Egypt,  gave  them  the  goodly  fertile  land  ;  and  every 
Jubilee  they  were  reminded  that  the  land  was  His,  that  it  was  not  to  be  im- 
poverished and  exhausted,  that  the  nation  was  not  to  decay  or  become  dis- 
integrated.    The   divinely  appointed  couditious  upon   whioii  the  people  took 


CHAP.  XXV.  8-28.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS, 


303 


possession  of  the  land  were  restored,  and  they  looked  up  to  Jehovah  as  their 
merciful  and  bountiful  Benefactor. 

Regarding  the  year  of  Jubilee  aa  a  type  of  the  gospel  age  which  Christ  carae  to 
proclaim,  and  of  tlie  latter  day  glory  such  reflections  as  thase  are  suggested  •— 
The  gospel  brings  rest  of  heart  for  all    who   hear   and   obey   ita  joyful  sound 
Deliverance  from  bondage  of  Satan,  sin,  and  self.     Recovery  of  our  lost  inheritance 
Forgiveness  of  the  debt  we  owe  to  God.     Rejoicing  because  of  good  news  and  glad 
tidings  of  reconciliation  and  peace.     Exemption  from  care  about  guilt  of  past 
events  of  present,  revelations  of  the  future.     Complete  restoration  to  God.  ' 

It  is  man's  highest  honour  and  joy  to  proclaioi  the  acceptable  year  of  the 
Lord.  The  day  shall  come  when  a  weary  world  and  longing  Church  shall  be 
fully  blest  in  enjoyment  a  Jubilee  univertiti  and  perpetual— i^.  W,  B. 

Topic :  Important  Principles  Contained  in  the  Jubilee  Regulations  (Vv.  8-28) 

Not  till  God  uttered  His  voice  in  Christ  could  men  understand  the  Jewish 
institutions.  We  who  have  heard  the  voice  of  Christ  and  His  apostles  have  come 
plainly  to  see  that  *Hhe  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord,"  and  "the  times  for  the 
restitution  of  all  things"— by  which  terms,  and  others,  the  year  of  Jubilee  was 
described — have  their  fulfilment  in  the  Gospel, 

(1).  The  Jubilee  began  on  the  Day  of  Atonement,  announced  by  trumpet 
blasts  Following  upon  the  expiatory  services  of  the  day,  the  gladness  occasioned  by 
the  "joyful  sound  ''  was  tn  accord  with  the  truths  symbolized  in  those  expiatory  services 

(2).  The  Jubilee  was  marked  by  a  complete  suspension  of  agricultural  labour* 
Fear  was  quieted  by  God's  promise  (v.  21).  God's  hles&ing  upon  the  obedient  is 
better  than  the  sowing  of  the  disobedient.  t 

(3).  The  spontaneous  fruits  that  grew  during  the  suspension  of  agricultural   -^t> 
operations  were  open  to  all.     No  man  had  the  right  to  appropriate  them.     Thus 
the  common  dependence  of  all  classes  upon  God's  bounty,  and  His  equal  regard  for 
all  was  declared.  ''      ■<    ^- 

(4).  The  Jubilee  restored  to  men  their  lost  liberties  (v.  10).  Every  Hebrew 
whom  poverty,  or  misfortune,  or  misconduct  had  deprived  of  freedom  regained 
all  the  rights  and  privileges  of  a  free  man.  ' 

(5).  It  brought  back  to  their  original  or  hereditary  owners  the  family  estates 
which  had  been  alienated  from  them  (v.  10).     Thus  the  consolation  of  misfortune 
or  the  joy  of  old  age,  might  be  that  one  recovered  at  the  Jubilee  the  home  of  his 
childhood  from  which  he  had  been  driven  by  sore  stress  of  poverty. 

Macaulay  tells  how  Warren  Hastings,  "  when  under  a  tropical"  sun  he  ruled 
fifty  millions  of  Asiatics,"  was  haunted  with  the  wish  to  recover  the  ancestral 
manor  of  Daylesford.  "  He  would  be  Hastings  of  Daylesford."  This  purpose 
formed  in  infancy  and  poverty,  was  steadfastly  cherished.  "And  when  his  lon^ 
public  life,  so  chequered  with  good  and  evil,  with  glory  and  obloquy  had  at 
leiigth  closed  for  ever,  it  was  to  Daylesford  that  he  retired  to  die." 

The  Jubilee  recalled  to  the  remembrance  of  the  nation  the  fact  that  the  land 
was  God's,  and  they  but  "strangers  and  sojourners"  therein  (v.  23)  •  and  that 
institution  gave  back,  as  with  the  hand  of  God,  to  every  man  from  whom  it  had 
been  alienated  the  inheritance  of  his  fathers.  By  the  two  great  blessings  it  gave 
him— the  recovery  of  his  freedom  and  of  his  family  inheritance-^very  one  was 
given  a  new  start  m  life,  and  the  nation  as  a  whole  made  a  fresh  beginning  on  an 
equal  footing,  as  if  they  entered  anew  the  promised  land,  and  experienced  afresh 
In  all  their  fulness  the  privilege  of  the  original  covenant  of  grace. 

Important  principles,  in  their  germs,  were  contained  in  this  institution  :— 
I.  Man's  need  of  occasional  rest  prom  toil. 

By  the  emphasis  given  to  rest,  God  hallowed  it  as  being  a  duty  and  a  privilege 
Um  was  not  to  give  himself  to  a  ceaseless  course  of  grinding  toil,  or  to  unrelaxing 


304  UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  XXV.  23, 184 


endeavours  to  keep  np  riches.  Such  confinement  to  labour  is  deadening  to  the 
best  faculties  of  the  soul.  It  destroys  the  elasticity  of  the  heart  and  the  sweetness 
of  the  spirit. 

Christianity  repeats  the  old  lesson.  Mary  pausing  from  her  work  to  listen  to 
Jesus  is  a  better  model  than  Martha  ceaselessly  toiling.  *'  Come  ye  apart  and 
rest  awhile.** 

II.  All  men  are  entitled  to  a  share  op  God's  bounty. 

What  grew  in  the  fields  in  the  Jubilee  year  was  God's  harvest,  free  to  all.  It 
was  to  be  distributed,  like  other  pure  bounties  of  His  hand,  the  rain  and  sunshine, 
0  all  alike.  This  happened  every  Sabbatic  year  as  well  as  in  the  Jubilee.  It 
tsserted  that  man's  share  in  producing  any  harvests  is  very  small,  that  God  is  its 
ohief  agent,  and  therefore  that  it  rightly  belougs  in  great  part  to  Him,  and  ought 
to  be  largely  employed  for  the  general  weal. 

Christianity  endorses  it.  The  early  believers  "  had  all  things  common." 
Christian  charity  urges  that  we  contribute  to  the  happiness  of  the  community. 

III.  The  welfare  of  societt  is  imperilled  by  th£  aoquisition  of  landed 

ESTATES. 

The  operation  of  the  Jubilee  was  to  prevent  the  accumulation  of  land  in  the 
hands  of  a  few.  The  public  good  demanded  its  general  division  among  the 
people.  Great  Britain  may  be  said  to  be  suffering  because  of  the  absence  of 
such  a  rule.  Ireland  is  rocking  as  with  an  earthquake  because  the  laud  is  held 
in  the  grasp  of  a  few  rich  landowners,  while  the  mass  of  the  people,  stripped  of 
their  ancestral  fields,  are  sunken  in  extreme  poverty.  Because  of  a  similar  evil 
the  French  Revolution  overturned  the  government  of  France, 

The  doctrines  of  Communism  find  no  support  in  the  reasonings  of  a  wise 
statesmanship,  or  in  the  teachings  of  Christianity.  But  Christianity  suggests  a 
remedy  for  the  evil  Let  property  be  held  and  administered  on  Christian  prin- 
ciples :  "  Be  rich  in  good  works,  ready  to  distribute,  willing  to  communicate." 

IV.  The  dignity  op  man  viewed  as  a  ransomed  child  k^)F  god. 

The  Jubilee  proclaimed  the  equality  of  men  in  the  sight  of  Jehovah,  and  forbade 
their  tyrannizing  over  or  holding  another  in  slavery.  The  ground  of  the  prohibi- 
tion was  the  same  as  that  which  forbade  the  absolute  sale  of  land — GocTs  ownership 
of  them.  "They  are  My  servants,*'  etc.  (v.  42).  The  Jubilee  made  the  slave  a 
freeman,  and  the  poor  man  a  property  owner. 

How  Christianity  emphasizes  this  truth  !  It  forbids  contempt  or  oppression  of 
any  man  for  whom  Christ  died.  He  may  be  poor,  ignorant,  or  even  wicked. 
But  for  him  also  the  scheme  of  redemption  was  planned.  For  his  sake  Christ 
laid  aside  the  regalia  of  heaven  and  came  down  to  earth.  For  him  He  made 
atonement  for  sin.  For  his  regeneration  He  shed  forth  His  iJoly  Spirit,  There 
is  joy  in  heaven  when  he  repents;  and  when  he  dies,  if  he  dies  in  faith  and 
submission  to  God,  he  is  carried  bv  anorels  to  the  realm  of  the  blesf^ed. 

By  these  things  the  dignity  of  man  as  man  is  proclaimed.  He  ia  to  be  treated, 
therefore,  with  consideration  and  kindness,  with  love  and  forbearance ;  and  in 
the  judgment  Christ  will  say,  "  Inasmuch  as  ye  did  it  to  one  of  the  least  of  these 
my  brethren,  ye  did  it  unto  me.'* — Albert  H.  Currier. 

Topic:  Canaan,  the  Lord's  Land  for  Ever  (Vv.  23-24). 

"The  land  is  mine  I ^  How  decisive  this  claim  by  Jehovah  on  the  soil,  to  the 
possessions  which  He  secured  for  Israel  and  b  ttled  upon  His  people  for  ever  I  It 
is  to  be  marked  that  the  land  is  never  called  theirs  ;  always  called  His  ;  for  though 
God  gave  it  into  their  occupancy  He  claimed  it  as  His  peculiar  possession.  **  He 
will  be  merciful  unto  His  land  "  (Deut.  xxxiii.  43);  **  I  will  pluck  them  (Israel) 
up  by  the  roots  out  of  My  laud  "  (2  Chron.  vii.  20)  ;   "  Lord,  Thou  hast  beeo 


CHAP.  XXV.  14— 55.J  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVlTTCUS,  305 


favourable  nnto  {iveJ I  pleased  with;  margin)  5^A^  land  "  (Psa.  Ixxxv.  1);  **  Then 
will  the  Lora  oe  jealous  for  HU  land,  and  pity  His  people "  (JoJl  ii.  18  • 
Psa.  iil  2),  ' 

I.  In  the  land  op  canaan  Jehovah's  most  wondrous  deeds  all  centred. 
"There  He  set  up  His  thione  and   sanctuary;    there    His   priests  stood   to 

minister  continually  before  Him.  There  the  voices  of  His  prophets  were  heard 
testifymg  of  present  ruin  and  future  restoration  and  glory ;  there  the  Baptist 
began,  continued,  and  ended  his  career  as  the  forerunner  of  the  Messiah  ;  there 
the  Blessed  One  was  born  of  a  woman  ;  there  He  was  baptised;  there  He  preached 
and  taught;  there  He  laboured  and  died ;  and  thence  He  ascended  in  triumph  to 
the  right  hand  of  God  ;  thither  God  the  Holy  Ghost  descended,  in  Pentecostal 
power;  and  thence  the  overflowing  tide  of  gospel  testimony  emanated  to  the  ends 
of  the  earth ;  thither  the  Lord  of  glory  will  descend,  ere  long,  and  plant  His  feet 
"on  the  Mount  of  Olives";  there  "His  throne  will  be  re-established  and  His 
worship  restored." — G,  H,  M. 

II.  Over   the   land  op  oanaan  Jehovah's  most  jealous  watchfulness   is 

EXTENDED. 

There  is  no  spot  in  all  the  earth  like  unto  the  land  of  Canaan  in  the  divine 
estimation.  His  eyes  and  His  heart  are  there  continually  ;  it's  dust  is  precious 
in  His  sight ;  it  is  the  centre  of  all  His  thoughts  and  operations,  as  touchint^  the 
earth ;  and  it  is  His  purpose  to  make  it  an  eternal  excellency,  the  joy  of  manv 
generations.  ^ 

III.  Upon  the  land  op  oanaan  jehovah's  most  emphatic  claim  is  sealed 
"The  land  is  Mine:'     It  might  not  be  sold  for  ever.     It  dwells  in  the  keeping 

of  the  Omnipotent.  It  has  been  a  coveted  object  through  many  ages  and  b? 
niany  earthly  dynasties;  and  will  yet  be,  if  prophecy  is  rightly  read,  the  scene 
of  cruel  war  and  sanguinary  strife.  But  Jehovah  maintains,  and  will  perpetuate 
His  claim.     Inalienably,  "  the  land  is  Mine." 

For  what  purpose,  and  for  whom,  does  God  claim  and  keep  that  land  %  It  is  to 
be  the  inheritance  of  His  covenant  people ;  to  be  re  occupied  by  those  to  whom 
He  entrusted  it  by  an  everlasting  covenant;  and  when  "the  fulness  of  the 
Gentiles  "  ends,  and  its  present  era  of  downtrodden  abuse,  which  symbolises  also 
the  oppressed  and  outlawed  lot  of  "lost "  Israel  and  "  dispersed"  Judah  is  closed 
then  He  who  hath  *' not  cast  away  His  people  "  will  require  the  land  for  Israel's 
re-possession.     [See  Isa.  Ixvi.  12-23.]. 

Topic:  Exalted  Philanthropy. 

'*  Ye  shall  not  oppress  one  another/'  etc."— (Vv.  14,  35-38) 
In  the  Jubilee  year  the  ambitious  and  affluent  among  the  Israelites  were  to 
surrender  their  possessions  on  terms  that  would  lift  up  the  unfortunate,  and  better 
wLT?.//h'''  P  A^  P^J-  All  overreaching  and  oppression  were  to  be  abandoned. 
What  faith  m  God,  obedience  to  His  commands,  time  for  thoughtful  meditations 
incentives  to  human  kindness,  etc.,  the  year  of  Jubilee  would  inspire !  The  spon' 
taneous  produce  of  the  land  became  public  property,  the  poorest  Israelite,  even 
the  stranger  and  the  slave,  enjoyed  liberty  and  fared  liberally.  The  poor  have 
always  been  the  objects  of  divine  concern,  and  attention  has  been  called  to  Z 
amelioration  of  their  condition.     Let  us  consider. 

I.  Some    op    the    causes    op   poverty.      Hereditary   or   acquired  weakness, 
obscure   origin,    ignorance,    extravagance,    idleness,  incompetencey,  misfortune 
calamity,  or  sometimes  divine  chastisement,  as  in  case  of  Job  "Ayri'Une, 

II.  Some  op  the  miseries  op   poverty.      Exacting,  unremunerative   labour- 
degrading  surroundings  ;  deficiencies  in  necessaries  of  life  ;  indisposition  for  X. 

2±  "Th'  '^^  T^^  improvement.     Poverty  has  a  bitter  cry,Tunger  a  sha^ 
thorn.     Under  such  circumstances  life  scarcely  seems  worth  Uving.  ^ 


306 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON 


[ciiAP.  XXV.  8— 9 


ITI.  Some  of  the  ameltot?ation8  op  poverty.  Industry  ;  economy  ;  clean- 
liness ;  sobriety  ;  sympathy  ;  charity  ;  above  all,  the  upliftinjr,  cheering  influences 
of  the  gospel,  which  are  peculiarly  adapted  and  specially  intended  for  the  poor. 
The  gospel  will  fire  men  with  a  laudable  ambition,  which  will  lift  them  in  the 
social  scale,  or  will  make  them  happy  in  their  unavoidable,  Jowly  circumstances. 
On  the  basis  of  common  bn^therhood,  and  the  universal  Fatherhood  of  God,  the 
temporal  as  well  as  spiritual  interests  of  the  poor  should  be  cared  for  and 
ministered  unto,  not  by  patronising  indiscriminate  charity  which  fosters  idleness 
and  begets  hypocrisy,  but  undet  the  guidance  of  sanctified  intelligence  and 
Christly  charity.— i^.  W,  B, 


OUTLINES  ON  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  XXV. 


V.  ^.  — Theme:  The  sabbatical  tear. 
The  institution  of  the  sabbath  of  the  seventh 
year  taught  that  the  Lord  was  the  sovereign 
King  of  the  people,  and  the  sole  Proprietor  of 
the  land  ;  very  appropriate  that  the  law  con- 
cerning it  should  be  pronounced  amid  all  the 
solemn  scenes  and  sanctions  of  Sinai.  The 
Sabbatic  year  inculcated  the  lessons : 

I.  That  tub  lord  was  the    sole   pbo- 

PRlET<tB  OP  THE    LAND. 

In  all  the  promises  made  respecting  Canaan, 
it  was  constantly  kept  before  the  people  that 
the  land  was  the  Lord's  ;  and  that  He  would 
give  it  to  the  people — give  it  as  He  gives  all 
His  other  gifts,  to  be  used  according  to  His 
good  pleasure  and  revealed  will.  The  people 
were  tenants,  and  must  obey  the  Lord  of  the 
land ;  for,  while  "  the  earth  is  the  Lord's  and 
the  fulness  thereof,"  Canaan  was  to  Him  the 
most  holy  place.  The  land  would  be  as  His 
most  gracious  land,  which  He  would  open  or 
shut  as  He  saw  fit  ;  and  the  people  would  see 
that  they  were  in  His  land,  and  dependent 
upon  Him,  as  the  seasons  rolled  in  their 
•  nnual  round. 

II.  That  the  land  had  resting  upon  it, 
<jontinuallt,  the  favour  of  the  lord. 

The  land  was  to  be  ordinarily  fertile  every 
fear  ;  but,  the  sixth  year  was  to  be  excep- 
tionally fruitful,  yielding  enough  for  the 
seventh  ;  so  that,  in  it,  the  land,  as  well  as  the 
people  might  repose.  Each  sixth  year  would 
exhibit  in  an  extraordinary  manner  the  un- 
failing and  inexhaustible  resources  of  God, 
and  show  how  His  smile  and  blessing  rested 
on  tbe  soil.  Canaan  would  look  like  a  second 
Eden,  as  she  appeared  decked  in  her  rich  and 
beautiful  garments.  When  the  waters  of  the 
flood  subsided,  God  said  to  Noah,  "  I  will  no 
more  curse  the  ground  for  man's  sake,"  and 
the  fertile  earth  shows  that  the  Almighty 
crowns  the  year  with  His  goodness  and  that 
His  paths  drop  fatness. 

n.  That  the  divine  favour  provides  for 

THE  VTELL-BEINQ  OP  EVERY    LIVING  THING. 

This  is  a  general  and  world-wide  truth  ; 
but  it  was  especially  seen  in  the  Sabbatic 
v«ar.  During  its  months,  every  stranger  in  the 
land,  and  every  beast,  h;»d  abundant  provi- 
sion in  the  stores  laid  up,  and  the  spontaneous 
growth  of  the  soil.  The  great  God  of  Nature 
pays   respect  to  the  wants  of  the  minutest 


creatures  His  hands  have  made ;  and  the 
directions  given  about  brute  creation  would 
show  that  He  was  kind  to  them,  and  would 
suggest  to  men  to  treat  them  kindly.  He 
"is  good  to  all  and  His  tender  mercies  are 
over  all  His  works" 

IV.  That  of  every  living  thing,  man  is 

THE  NEARHST  and  DEAKEST  TO  TUB  GREAT 
CREATOR. 

During  the  seventh  year  the  poor  were  to 
be  fed,  and  the  bound  set  at  liberty;  thus 
lessons  of  kindness  and  forgiveness  were 
taught.  The  year  was  not  to  be  passed  in 
luxury  and  idleness,  but  time  was  to  be  spent 
in  reading  the  whole  Law  ;  it  was  a  Sabbath  to 
the  Lord,  when  He  could  be  pleased  and 
glorified  with  the  prayers  and  praises  of  His 
people.  To  man  alone  are  directions  given  for 
worship— He  is  the  offspring  of  God,  made 
in  His  image  and  capable  of  worshipping 
Him.  Not  only  one  day  in  seven,  but  one 
year  in  seven,  was  to  be  kept  as  a  sabbath, 
showing  how  God  looked  for  man's  devoted 
service 

V.  That  the    great    creator    teaches 

MORAL  TRUTHS  TO  MAN  BT  M^ANS  OF  WuRKS 
OP  NATURE. 

All  the  processes  and  phenomena  of  nature 
are  intended  to  illustrate  and  enforce  spiritual 
tilings.  Hence  the  Bible  is  full  of  references  to 
correspondences  and  analogies  between  the 
kingdoms  of  nature  and  grace.  The  extraordi- 
nary provision  made  for  the  Sabbatic  year 
would  inculcate  lessons  of  faith,  obedience, 
reverence,  love.  In  the  fulness  of  time  the 
great  Teacher  by  His  inimitable  parables  threw 
a  flood  of  light  upon  similitudes  between  the 
outer  and  inner  courts  of  divine  revelation.  To 
devoutly  study  and  practice  these  lessons  will 
ensure  exquisite  pleasure  and  eternal  profit. 
—F,  W.  B. 

V.  9— Theme:  Lessons  op  thb  Jubilbb. 

I.  Its  peculiar  features, 

1.  //  was  a  great  boon  to  all  sorrcfwing 
ones. 

(1.)  Every  captive  was  liberated. 

(2.)  The  exiled  wanderer  returned. 

(3.)  The  oppressed  debtor  was  released 
from  his  debts, 

(4.)  The  unfortunate  poor  were  restored  l 
their  ancestral  heritage. 


CHA?.  XXV.  9—25.2 


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 


SO^ 


{5  )  Familiea  that  had  been  separated  were 
now  re-united. 

(6.)  Every  estate  reverted  to  the  familiea 
to  whom  they  were  originally  allotted  in  the 
conquest  ot  Canaan. 

2.  Ail  this  was  intimately  connected  with 
the  DAY  OF  Atonement.  It  was  on  the  day 
of  atonement,  every  year,  that  the  trumpet 
was  sounded  in  every  corner  of  the  land,  re- 
minding the  people  of  the  year  of  Jubilee 
(V.9). 

3.  Jt  was  to  be  a  year  of  perfect  freedom  from 
toiKJv.ih  12). 

4.  Every  business  transaction  had  reference 
to  the  year  of  jubilee  (v.  16).  Prices  were 
regulated  by  its  nearness  or  distance. 

II.  Its  typical  mbanino. 

1.  //  had  special  reference  to  the  millennial 
glory  of  Israel  in  the  land  which  Jehuvah 
Keeps  for  them  through  all  generations. 

(1.)  God  claims  Canaan  as  He  does  no 
other. 

(2.)  God  has  honoured  Canaan  as  He  has 
no  other. 

2.  It  is  a  beautiful  and  correct  type  of  heaven. 
(1.)   Where  every  believer  will  enter  upon 

his  inheritance,  and  enter  into  his  rest. 

(2.)  Where  all  exile,  captivity,  separation, 
poverty  and  oppression  will  for  ever  cease, 
and  God  will  wipe  away  all  tears  from  our 
eyes. 

III.  Its  practical  lessons. 

1.  That  which  the  Jubilee  year  restores, 
and  the  rest  and  joy  and  plenty  it  brings, 
prove  the  graciousness  of  God. 

(1).  The  sorrow,  poverty,  oppression,  exile, 
etc.,  which  occurred  between  two  Jubilee 
years  show  the  workings  of  human  selfishness 
and  sin. 

(2).  That  which  the  Jubilee  restores  shows 
the  workings  of  divine  grace. 

2.  The  unspeakable  blessedness  of /^^w^r/dfj 
Jubilee  in  the  millennial  period  (Isa.  xxv, 
6-12;  xxxiii.  1>3  24 ;  xxxv.  1-10;  Iv.  13; 
Rom.  xi.  25  ;  viii  18-22,). 

3.  i  he  mofe  glorious  and  more  enduring 
bliss  of  heaven  (Rev.  xxi.   1-27;  xxii    1-16). 

—D,  C.  hughes, 

Vr.  9,  10,   11. — TTieme :    Thb  jubilss  a 

TYPE  OF   THB   GOSPEL. 

I.  Its  primary  purpose. 

1.  //  was  kind  and  benevolent:  showing 
that,  by  remedying  the  evils  the  Israelites 
entailed  on  themselves,  God  took  an  interest 
in  their  welfare. 

2.  It  was  wise  and  politic.  A  people  thus 
regulated  would  be  kept  distinct  as  to  their 
various  tribes  and  families,  while  an  affec- 
tionate and  dependant  spirit  would  be  pro- 
moted 

3.  \\>  ^2i%  good  and  beneficiaU  The  insolvent 
debtor  delivered,  &c. 

n   Its  typical  reference. 

1.  The  Jubilee  of  grace.  This  finds  us 
deeply  in  arrears  to  divine  justice,  and  fully 
remits  all  our  debt.  It  reverses  our  state  of 
spiritual  bondage,  restoring  to  us  the  rights 
jmd  blessings  of  freedom.    And  it  invests  us 


with  a  new  title  to  our  f -rfeited  inker: 'ance 
opening  to  us  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ^A-cts 
X.  43;  Rom.  vi.  14;  Jno.  viii.  86;  Ephe. 
ii.  1"^). 

2.  The  Jubilee  of  glory. 

III.  Its  joyful  commbnofmeht. 

This  was  announced  by  the  sound  of  trvmpeti 
throughout  the  land  on  the  day  of  atonement. 
Our  jubilee  also,  which  begins  in  the  great 
atonemont,  is  now  proclaimed  among  us,  and 
is  the  joyful  season  of  God's  grace,  mercy, 
and  salvation. 

*•  Blessed  are  the  people  that  know  the  joy- 
ful sound  "  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  16). —  Wm.  Sleigh 

V.   18    Thrme:  The  duty  of  obediencb 

*' Wherefore  ye  shall  do  My  statutes,  and 
keep  My  judgments,  and  do  them  ;  and  ye 
shall  dwell  on  the  land  in  safety." 

Man  not  a  machine,  but  a  responsible,  free 
agent  ;  therefore  conditioned  on  obedience. 
Berein,  seen  the  dignity  of  man,  the  righteous 
ness  and  holiness  of  God.  God  had  right  to 
command  Israel  under  obligation  to  obey, 
for 

I.  He  was  their  soverbiqn  ruler.  Lord, 
King,  Almighty,  Absolute,  Eternal. 

Ii.  TueY  WSRE  his  DEPENDENT  creatures 

They  derived  all  from  Him,  were  defendedj 
delivered,  by  Him. 

III.  The  path  of  obbdiexce  was  safe. 
Whatever  might  befal  them  when  doing  the 
will  of  God  would  be  overruled  for  their  real 
good.  No  weapon  formed  against  them  could 
prosper,  while  they  enjoyed  the  approving 
smile  of  the  Lord. 

IV.  The  only  criterion  of  characteb 
IS  obedience.  Faith,  love,  loyalty,  sincerity, 
consecration,  evinced  and  vindicated  by  un- 
questioning, cheerful,  self-forgetful,  constant 
obedience.  The  law  of  Christ  confirms  this 
test,  **If  ye  love  me,  keep  my  command- 
ments." Revelation  closes  with  declaration 
of  same  truth.  "  Blessed  are  they  that  do 
His  commandments,  that  they  may  have  right 
to  the  tree  of  life,  and  may  enter  in  through 
the  gates  into  the  city."— A  IV.  B» 

V.  25 — Theme  :  The  kinsman's  rights. 
The  tale  is  simple.     One  of  Israel  s  sons  is 

destitute  His  goods,  his  lands  are  torn  away. 
The  creditor  demands,  the  claim  is  just,  all 
must  be  yielded. 

But  is  there  some  kinsman  whose  heart 
feels  pity,  and  whose  means  abound  ?  Then 
he  has  right  to  pay  the  price  and  buy  back 
the  forfeited  estate.  He  may  not  be  denied. 
Redeeming  privilege  is  his. 

Such  is  the  statute  of  the  Jewish  realm. 
But  it  shows  far  more  than  civil  remedy  for 
helpless  debt.  It  is  a  bright  transcript  of  the 
work  of  Christ. 

L   No  ONB  BUT   A   KINSMAN   OOULD  REDBBM 

US. 

The  needy  ones  are  offsi>ring  of  earth; 
dust  is  their  origin,  the  worm  their  brother) 
the  clod  their  home. 

But  to  redeem  requires  a  kindred  birth. 

Yet  Jmus  ii  God ;  an  infinite  distance  d^ 

W  2 


308 


aOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY  ON 


[chap.  XXV.  65. 


vides  Him  from  men.  One  sits  enthroned  in 
highest  crlory,  the  other  grovels  in  earth'* 
lowest  mire.  Jesus  may  /ov£,  but,  as  God, 
He  cannot  redeem^  cannot  claim  a  kinsman's 
right.  Are  then  the  destitute  beyond  re- 
lief? 

Since  the  Redeemer  tmist  be  Man,  Jesus  con- 
nects Himself  with  human  ties.  A  human 
form  is  marvellously  framed  ;  and  the  virgin 
mother  bears  tbe  heavenly  child.  The  God' 
Man  becomes  a  kinsman  to  redeem. 

IL  The  KiNSMiLS  alsu  ni^eds  wealth  by 

WHICH  TO  PAY  THE  PRICE. 

Family  ties  are  not  enough.  Much  is  re- 
quired for  the  redemption  of  souls.  But  His 
deity  imparts  suflScit  ncy.  The  price  is  bound- 
less ;  the  payment  far  exceeds.  **  In  whom 
w^e  have  redemption  through  His  blood,  the 
forgiveness  of  sins,  according  to  the  riches  of 
His  grace''  (Ephes.  i  7). 

The  sinner,  appalled  at  his  debts,  may  ap- 
proach tbe  Saviour,  and  plead  His  near  kin- 
dred^  may  tell  Him  that  He  is  one  of  our 
family,  and  remind  Him  that  He  alone  has 
the  redeeming  right  and  redeeming  might. 

Then,  being  redeemed,  let  your  life  pro- 
claim that  you  are  no  more  your  own  but 
*'  bought  with  a  price."  The  kmsman  claims 
your  heart,  your  loye,  your  alL — Dean 
Law* 


V.  55. — Theme:  Royal  sebviob. 

"  For  unto  me  the  children  of  Israel  are 

servants." 

All  things  serve  the  T  ord,  but  there  are 
gradations  of  service.  Man  occupies  a  sphere 
only  second  to  angels.  Israel  chosen  to  co- 
operate with  Jehovah  in  communicating  His 
will  to  the  world,  in  winning  back  a  prodigal 
race  to  Himself. 

I.  The  service  he  expects.  («)  Intelli- 
genty  higher  than  that  rendered  by  inanimate 
and  irrational  things.  Thoughtful,  reason- 
able, conscientious.  (3)  Spontaneous.  The 
outcome  of  free  and  deliberate  choice,  of 
preference  for  Him  above  all  others,  (c) 
Grateful.  Remembering  deliverances  vouch- 
safed, benedictions  bestowed,  {d)  Lifelong. 
Not  spasmodic  service,  nor  a  course  marked 
by  withholdings,  backslidings,  shortcomings, 
or  apostacy.     He  demands  fidelity  unto  death. 

II.  The  beward  he  bestows,  (a)  Bis 
gracious  approval ;  {d)  improvement  in  holi- 
ness ;  {c)  promotion  to  higher  service  hete ; 
{d)  admission  to  perfect  blessed  service  here- 
after. In  heaven  His  servants  shall  see  and 
serve  Him.  Service  there  will  be  ineffable 
rapture  and  rest,  because  not  beyond  the 
strength,  nor  against  the  will,  but  in  complete 
harmony  with  the  renewed  and  immortal 
faculties.— /^  W.  £. 


ILLUSTRATIVE  ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  XXV. 


BsNiyoLEifca. 

**  Then  none  was  for  a  party  ; 
Then  all  were  for  the  state ; 
Then  the  great  man  helped  the  poor, 
And  the  poor  man  loved  the  great. 
Then  lands  were  fairly  portioned; 

Then  spoils  were  fairly  sold  ; 
The  Romans  were  Hke  brothers 
In  the  brave  days  of  old." 

— Macaulay. 

"  Beneficence  is  a  duty.  He  who  fre- 
quently practises  it,  and  sees  his  benevolent 
intentions  realised,  at  length  comes  to  love 
him  to  whom  he  has  done  good.  When, 
therefore,  it  is  said,  '  Thou  shalt  love  thy 
neighbour  as  thyself,'  it  is  not  meant.  Thou 
shalt  love  him  first  and  do  good  in  consequence 
of  that  love,  but  thou  shalt  do  good  to  thy 
neighbour,  and  this  thy  beneficence  will  en- 
gender in  thee  that  love  to  mankind  which  is 
the  fullness  and  consummation  of  the  inclina- 
tion to  do  good." — KanU 

Sabbath.      *'8in  keeps  no  Sabbaths.^— 

Bro9ka, 

**  Yes,  child  of  suffering,  thou  might  weU  be 
sure, 
He  who  ordidned  the  Sabbath  loves  the 
poor/ 

— JSoAms,  UraitUk 


*  A  world  without  a  Sabbath  would  be  like 
a  man  without  a  smile,  like  a  summer  with- 
out flowers,  and  like  a  homestead  without  a 
garden.  It  is  the  joyous  day  of  the  whole 
week." — H.  W.  Beecher. 


**We  never  knew  a  man  work  seven  days 
in  a  week  who  did  not  kill  himself  or  kill  his 
mind." — Anon. 


Rest: 

"  No  lamkin  by  its  shepherd  bome^ 

No  dove  its  mate  caressing, 
No  bondman  freed,  no  pilgrim  worn 

The  grateful  shade  possessing; 
No  child  clasped  to  its  mother's  hearfc, 
No  sick  man  when  his  pains  depart. 

No  warrior  home  returning  ; 
No  man  can  know  such  perfect  rest 
As  that  which  ends  our  weary  ques^ 

Our  gracious  Lord  discerning." 

Ltbebtt. 

*<  A  man,  till  he  be  in  Christ,  is  a  slave  { 
and  the  more  free  a  man  thinks  himself  to  be 
and  labours  to  be,  the  more  slave  he  is. 
Why  7  Because  the  more  he  sins  the  mori 
he  is  enthralled  to  sin."— /St6(M. 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  tm 


"  The  end  of  Christian  liberty  is,  that  being  Possessioks. 

delivered  from  the  hands  of  our  enemies,  we  uflow    shocking   must   thy    sninmons   be,  O 

might  servo  the  Lord  without  fear, — PVest-  Death  I 

minsUr  Catechism  To  him  that  \a  at  ease  in  his  possessions  ; 

-  He  is  the  freeman,  whom  the  truth  makei  Who,   counting   on  long  years    of  pleasure 

free,  here, 

And  all  are  slaves  besides.''  Is  quite  imf  ornished  lor  that  world  to  come. " 

— Cwej^,  -^Blair. 

101 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

|ltlt0t0n  as  ^tttrmming  a  |tatt0tt's  Jesting. 

SUGGESTIVE  READINGS. 

Vv.  1-13. — If  ye  walk  in  My  statutes,  etc.  The  Lord  engaged  to  enrich 
them  as  a  nation  with  temporal  blessings  and  religious  advantages,  if,  and  so  long 
as,  Israel  maintained  allegiance  to  God's  worship  and  statutes,  His  Sabbaths  and 
sanctuary.  Ho  crowns  the  enumeration  of  favours  relating  to  this  life  with  higher 
assurance  that  He  would  dwell  among  them  in  all  the  spiritual  nearness  ensured 
by  His  "covenant.*'  Our  fidelity  to  God  is  the  measure  of  our  prosperity  and 
happiness.  They  who  fear  the  Lord  shall  not  lack  any  good  thing.  Human  life 
IS  so  dependant,  in  nothing  sufficient  of  itself,  either  to  provide  the  necessities  of 
physical  being,  or  to  ensure  for  the  soul  fitness  for  Divine  acceptance  and  favour ; 
that  we  may  well  prize  the  *'  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises,"  which  are 
all  ours  in  Christ,  if  we  but  maintain  a  true  relationship  with  Him  by  obedience 
and  faith.  God  does  not  ask  a  hard  thing  in  what  He  requires  :  how  gratefully 
we  should  yield  Him  our  utmost  in  return  for  the  riches  ot  His  grace  1 

Vv.  14-39. — But  if  ye  willnot  hearken  unto  Me.  A  happy  people,  honoured 
and  privileged  so  long  as  they  were  religious,  could  sink  to  lowest  degradation 
and  misery  by  revolt  against  the  Lord  their  God.  The  picture  of  Israel's  pitiable 
desolation  and  anguish  delineates  the  awful  spoliation  which  now  sin  inflicts  on 
transgressors,  and  the  dark  terrors  which  will  follow  in  the  world  beyond.  These 
terrible  denunciations  show  how  aggrieved  God  is  with  human  wrong  doing,  h  -^ 
He  regards  with  abhorrence  man's  impious  rebellion  against  His  goodness  and 
grace,  and  how  heavily  lie  will  avenge  it.  Let  sinners  "fear  before  Him,"  and 
"  kiss  the  Son,  lest  He  be  angry."  A  brilliant  light  casts  the  blackest  shadows, 
God's  great  grace  for  unworthy  men  throws  on  those  who  maltreat  it  the  darkt^st 
gloom  of  His  indignation  and  wrath  (Rom.  ii.  8-9.) 

Vv.  40  46. —If  they  shall  confess  their  iniquity.  Though  having  deeply  sinned, 
yet,  if  by  their  mistries  they  return  in  contrition,  infinite  mercy  would  receive 
^hem  again.  Wondrous  pity  :  grace  aboundmg !  "Who  is  a  God  like  unto 
thee,  that  pardoneth  iniquity  1"  It  is  the  glory  of  the  gospel  to  proclaim  sal- 
vation **even  unto  the  uttermost,"  and  our  comfort  to  know  that  "  if  we  confess 
our  sins,  God  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  Uifrom  all 
unrighteousness"  (1  Jno.  i.  9.) 

PECULIARITIES  OF  CHAPTER  XXVL 

i.  Ceremonial  institutions,  social  regulations,  and  moral  lujunotions,  have 
hitherto  constituted  the  substance  of  the  book  of  Leviticus.  Now  they  yield 
place  to  PROPHKTio  fromisks  A^D  WARNINGS  Concerning  the  nation  (which  extend 
Qver  all  after  ages  of  Israel's  career,  sketchiug  the  national  apostacy  and  over^ 


«10  HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY  ON         [chap.  xxvi.  1—12 

throw,  its  disappearance  through  long  centuries,  and  its  ultimate  repentance  and 
restoration. 

it.  The  camp  of  Israel  has  hitherto  been  regarded  as  a  sacred  community  sur- 
rounding the  Shekinah  within  the  Holy  of  Holies,  with  whom  Jehovah  was  main- 
taining gracious  relationship  and  hallowed  fellowship,  through  priests  and 
sacrifices.  Now  Israel  is  viewed  as  a  nation  to  bb  ruled  by  Divine 
GOVERNMENT,  with  material  rewards  and  secular  blessings,  aflBxed  to  loyal 
obedience  to  Jehovah's  laws,  and  likewise  secular  punishment  threatened  in  the 
event  of  revolt  from  the  Divine  sway. 

iii.  Although  the  aspect  of  Israel  as  a  sacred  community  passes  into  that  of  a 
nation  under  Divine  government,  yet  the  bond  of  special  and  spiritual 
UNION  BETWEEN  Jehovah  AND  IsRAEL  is  forcefuUy  emphasized,  and  Israel's 
national  security  and  prosperity  are  bound  up  with  the  maintenance  of  the 
Theocracy:  Religion  being  the  secret  of  her  life  and  continuance. 

iv.  The  predictions  of  this  chapter  form  the  basis  of  all  after  prophecies 
concerning  the  future  of  Israel,  the  very  phraseology  of  these  promises  and 
threatenings  reappearing  almost  literally  in  the  messages  of  God's  prophets  in 
successive  ages — JE.g.^ 

V.  4. — "  Then  will  I  give  you  rain  in  due  season,  and  the  land  shall  yield  her 
increase,  and  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  yield  their  fruit  ;  "  v.  5. —  <\nd  your  thresh- 
ing  shall  reach  unto  the  vintagCj  and  the  vintage  shall  reach  unto  the  sowing  time  ; 
and  ye  shall  eat  your  bread  to  the  full,  and  dwell  in  your  land  safely  ;  "  v.  6. — 
"  And  I  will  give  peace  in  the  l%nd^  and  ye  shall  lie  down,  and  none  shall  make 
you  afraid ;  and  I  will  rid  evil  beasts  out  of  the  land,  neither  shall  the  sword  go 
through  your  land." 

Compare  Ezekiel  xxxiv.,  y.  26,  "  I  will  cause  the  shower  to  come  down  in  his 
season,  there  shall  be  showers  of  blessing  ;  "  v.  27. — "And  the  tree  of  the  field 
shall  yield  her  fruit,  and  the  earth  shall  yield  her  increase,  and  they  shall  be  safe 
in  their  land  ;  "  v.  25. — "I  will  make  with  them  a.  C07cvena7it  of  peace,  amd  will 
cause  the  evil  beasts  to  cease  out  of  the  land" 

Compare  with  v.  5,  Amos  ix  13,  '•  Behold  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that 
thft  ploughman  shall  overtake  thereaper^  and  the  treader  of  grapes  him  thatsoweth 
seed." 

.Notably,  let  Joel  ii.  19-27,  be  read  with  these  verses  under  view.  Thus  v.  23, 
'*  He  will  cause  to  come  down  for  you  the  rain,  the  former  rain,  and  the  latter 
rain  in  th<^  first  month;"  ftnd  v.  24. — **  And  the  floors  shall  be  full  of  wheat,  and 
the  vats  shall  overflow  with  wine  and  oil." 

V.  The  providential  sway  of  Jehovah  is  claimed  as  Originating,  and  ordering 
THESE  material  FAVOURS  or  distresses,  making  them  consequent  upon  the 
religion  or  irreligion  of  Israel,  although  they  may  be  naturally  accounted  for  as 
results  ensuing  from  certain  physical  conditions  in  the  land  or  in  the  nation's 
social  development.  But  behind  natural  incidents  lies  the  supernatural  hand  of 
God,  physical  laws  have  an  invisible  legislator  administering  them,  and  all  the 
occurrences  in  Israel's  career,  bright  or  dark,  are  traced  directly  to  Jehovah's 
personal  dealings  with  His  people.  **  If  ye  walk  in  my  statutes,  then  F  will  give 
you  rain  "  (V?.  3-4).  "  /  will  have  respect  unto  you,  and  make  you  fruitful,  and 
multiply  you,  and  establish  my  oonvenant  with  you  "  (v.  9),  eto. 

SECTIONAL  HOMILIES. 
Topic:  The  Advantages  of  religion  in  a  nation's  life  (Vv.  1-12), 

**  We  know/*  says  Burlce  (in  his  Reflections  on  the  Revolution  in  France),  "  and, 
what  is  better,  we  feel  inwardly,  that  religion  is  the  basis  of  civil  society,  and  the 
iource  of  all  good,  and  of  all  comfort." 


CHAP.  XXVI.  1—12]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  311 


To  this  may  be  added  the  famous  testimony  of  Josiah  Quincy  (Boston,  1830)  : 
"  Human  happ'uess  has  no  perfect  security  but  freedom;  freedom  none  but 
virtue  ;  virtue  none  but  knowledge  ;  and  neither  freedom,  nor  virtue,  nor  know- 
ledge has  any  vigour,  or  immortal  hope,  except  in  the  principles  of  the  Christian 
faith,  and  in  the  sanctities  of  the  Christian  religion  "  (see  Addenda  to  chapter, 
Natvmal  Irreligiori), 

1.   Wherein  a  nation's  RELiriious  life  consists. 

The  recognised  presence  of  God  in  the  midd  of  the  prople  (Vv.  11,  12) :  "I  will  set 
my  tabernacle  among  you  ;  and  I  will  walk  att\ong  you,  and  will  be  your  God, 
and  ye  shall  be  my  people."     This  may  be  realized — 

1.  In  saTic^wari^^s  consecrated  to  Divine  worship  throughout  the  land,  and  in 
assembled  congregations  gathering  to  adore  Him  (v.  2). 

2.  In  tacred  literature  diffusing  religious  knowledge  among  the  people. 

3.  In  benevolent  and  elevating  t«s^i^tt^»o?is  diffusing  Christianity  in  its  practical 
forms. 

4.  In  educational  agencies  for  the  training  of  children  early  in  moral  and  reli- 
gious truth. 

5.  In  homes  ei,iadfamilp  life  sweetened  by  the  influence  of  piety, 

6.  In  a  legislature  ruled  by  the  fear  of  God  and  observant  of  Scripture  precepts. 

7.  In  wealth,  gathered  righteously,  being  expended  for  evangelical  and  Christian 
ends. 

8    In  the  happy  relationship  of  all  social  classes^  based  upon  goodwill  and  respect. 

9.  In  the  stores  of  harvest  and  gains  of  commerce  being  acknowledged  as  God's 
providential  gi^ts  and  generous  beuefactions  (Vv.  4,  5).     All  such  public  recogni 
tionsof  the  authority  and  the  claims  of  religion,  emphasize  and  declare  that  within 
this  nation's  life  God  dwells — known,  revered,  and  served. 

II.  Advantages  which  result  to  a  nation  from  religion. 

1.  Religion  impels  to  iadudry^  intelligeucej  self  respect,  and  social  improvement  ; 
and  these  will  affect  every  branch  of  labour  and  enterprise,  resulting  in  material 
prosperity  (Vv.  4,  5). 

2.  Religion  leads  to  avoidance  of  agitation  and  conflict,  checks  greed,  ambition^ 
and  vainglory,  and  thus  promotes  a  wise  content  among  the  people,  and  peaceful 
relationships  with  surrounding  nations  (v.  6). 

3.  Religion  fosters  sohrUty,  energy,  and  courage,  and  these  qualities  will  assert 
themselves  on  the  fields  of  war  when  sad  occasion  arises,  and  will  ensure  the 
overthrow  of  tyranny  and  the  defeat  of  invasion  (v.  8). 

4.  Religion  nurtures  the  mse  oversight  of  homes  and  families,  the  preservation 
of  domestic  purity,  the  development  of  healthful  and  intelligent  children,  and  these 
will  work  out  in  a  strong  and  increasing  population  (v.  9). 

5.  Religion  corrects  the  intrigues  of  self  destructive  commerce,  and  teaches 
honesty,  forethought,  and  justice  in  business  arrangements  ;  thus  checking  waste, 
extravagance  and  insolence,  aad  these  issue  in  the  enjoyment  of  plenty  (v.  10). 

6.  Religion  enjoins  Sabbath  observance  and  sanctuary  services  (v.  2)  which 
nourish  holiness  in  thought  and  life,  sweeten  character,  purify  the  springs  of 
action,  incite  to  righteous  and  noble  deeds,  to  social  good  will,  to  mutual  regard, 
to  sacred  ministiies,  to  reverence  for  Scripture,  to  recognition  of  the  claims  of 
the  unseen  world,  and  thus  bring  down  upon  all  people  the  blessings  of  God,  the 
Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  (Vv.  11,  12). 

How  can  religion  fail  to  convey  benefits  of  every  valuable  order  to  society  and 
.the  whole  nation  when  it  makes  the  individual  a  nobler,  kinder,  purer,  Godlier 
man  ?    That  land  is  enriched  in  which  dwells  a  people  whose  individual  ohftjcacter 
majf  bo  sketched  thus : 

I  venerate  a  man  whose  heart  is  warm. 

Whose  hands  are  pare,  whose  doctrines  and  whoMUit 

Ck>incident,  exhibit  Incid  proof 

That  he  ii  honest  in  the  S»cred  OaoBO. — Ctv^tr. 


1'i  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  xxvi.  3—11. 


ill.     VVlTFIIN  A  RELIGIOUS  NATION  GOD  PLEDGES  HIMShjLF    TO  DWELL. 

Aud   where  He  makes  His  tabernacle  (v.  11)  there — 

1.  Happiness  will  be  realised,  the  joy  of  the  Lord  will  be  known,  "  His  loving 
kindness,  which  is  more  than  life,"  will  be  enjoyed. 

2.  Security  will  be  assured.  **  None  make  you  afraid  *'  (v.  6),  for  He  will 
be  as  a  *'  defence  to  His  people." 

3.  Sanctity  will  flourish.  Intercourse  with  God  (v.  12)  will  elevate,  refine, 
and  grace  a  people's  character  and  life.  *'  Happy  the  people  in  such,  a  case,  yea, 
happy  the  people  whose  God  is  the  Lord." 


Topic:  The  Blessing  and  the  Curse  (Vv.  3-14). 

Throughout  Leviticus  the  voice  of  mercy  sounds  ;  for  what  is  mercy  but  a 
remedy  for  woe  1  At  Sinai's  base  grace  sweetly  smiles  \  for  what  is  grace  but 
safety  for  the  lost  ^  These  final  words  from  God  have  an  awakening  import. 
There  is  a  seriousness  in  parting  words.     Last  admonitions  usually  sink  deep. 

Ere  the  tribes  advance  to  Canaan,  God  seeks  to  admonish  and  impress.  Truly 
when  sinners  rush  to  ruin  they  strive  against  a  warning  God,  they  stop  their  ears, 
they  set  their  faces  like  flmt,  they  harden  their  necks.  Here  God  adjoins 
paternal  counsels  to  a  Sovereign's  command.  He  shows  what  blessings  crown 
obedient  paths,  what  miseries  beset  the  rebel- way, 

I.  Alluring  promises. 

Unfold  the  roll  (vv.  3-13).     It  is  a  picture  in  which  plenteousness  abounds : — 

The  earth  in  season  yields  luxuriant  stores.  Peace  waves  her  gentle  sceptre. 
No  invading  hosts  scare  the  quiet  vales.  No  ravening  beasts  watch  for  prey. 
If  assailing  armies  dare  make  attack,  they  advance  to  sure  defeat.  A  little 
band  puts  multitudes  to  flight.  A  happj  progeny  rejoices  in  each  house.  These 
are  external  gifts. 

Spiritual  delights  are  scattered  with  copious  hand.  God's  presence  is  assured. 
His  near  abode  is  among  His  people.  He  claims  them  as  His  own  (v.  12).  He 
gives  Himself  to  them. 

Such  are  the  blessings  pledged  if  His  statutes  are  observed.  Could  any  hear, 
yet  choose  the  rebel  path  1 

II.  Tremendoqs  threats. 

The  scene  now  changes.  Peal  follows  peal  of  terrifying  awe  (vv.  14 — 39). 
The  disobedient  must  prepare  for  appalling  miseries  : — 

Health  shall  wither  :  pining  malady,  sore  disease,  and  racking  pain  shall  prey 
upon  the  tortured  frame. 

Famine  shall  raise  its  ghastly  form :  penury  shall  sit  at  every  hearth. 

Nature  shall  not  yield  increase :  no  crops  shall  spring  from  sown  seed,  the 
trees  shall  mock  with  fruitless  boughs. 

Savage  life  shall  ravage  :  children  and  cattle  shall  be  mangled  in  the  roads, 
and  the  homesteads  become  solitary. 

War  shall  rage :  the  hostile  banner  deride  the  fallen  city. 

The  holy  tanctitary  should  be  no  refuge  :  its  offerings  God  would  refuaa. 

Such  is  the  heritage  if  God's  covenant  be  not  kept* 

III.  Foreshadowed  doom  realised. 
God's  word  is  sure.     Performance  follows. 

1.  Israel  madly  scorned  His  sway.  They  rashly  followed  their  own  hearts 
desire. 

2.  Threatened  vengeance  fell.  Witness  the  desolation  of  their  bounteous 
land  and  the  tribes  scattered  through  the  world's  breadth.  The  sterile  plains 
at  home,  the  outcast  wanderers  abroad,  bear  witness  that  the  doom  predicted 
comes. 


CRAP.  XXVI.  14—19.]  THE  BOOK    OF   LEVITICUS.  313 


IV.    A  SPIRITUAL  ALLEGORY. 

1.  A  picture  is  given  of  the /air  land  of  grace.  The  obedience  of  faith  wins 
the  full  possession  of  that  beauteous  inheritance  which  Christ  purchased  for  His 
redeemed.  And  faith  finds  abundance  in  the  land  of  grace.  Surely  that  life  is 
blessed  which  gains  all-suflfioienoy  in  Christ's  perfect  righteousnes-s,  renewing 
power,  plenteous  redemption,  unspeakable  peace.  *'  All  things  are  yours,  for  ye 
are  Christ's."  Supplies  of  grace  are  lavishly  given  j  the  heavens  coioe  down  in 
showers  of  goodness. 

2.  But  a  fearful  contrast  appears.  Crowds  upon  crowds  refuse  to  obey;  slight 
the  Saviour's  charms.  Therefore  sins  remain.  The  world  enslaves.  Troubles 
abound.  Misery  ste'^ps  your  life.  If  you  look  upward  the  heavens  are  barred  ; 
God  frowns ;  each  attribute  condemns.  Friends  bring  no  peace ;  foes  wound, 
and  no  balm  heals.  Life  is  a  misery,  death  plunges  into  deeper  woe,  eternity  is 
hell. 

When  God's  grace  is  scorned,  when  His  precious  Son  is  crucified  afresh,  Mercy 
can  show  no  mercy,  pardon  cannot  release.  The  heritage  of  unbelief  ia  on© 
unmitigated  curse. 

Tbe  blessing  and  the  curse  are  set  side  by  side.  So  sweetly  point  tlie  hhssing 
that  eyger  souls  will  grasp  it.  So  awfully  pronounce  the  curse  that  alarmed 
sinners  may  dread  it.  Happy  souls  are  they,  who,  yielding  obedience  to  the 
persuasions  of  Almighty  goodness,  inherit  the  blessing. 

PartJy  evolved  from  Dean  Law's  "  Christ  is  AlV* 

Topic  :  National  transgression  and  disaster  (Vv.  14-19). 

For  770  years  before  they  were  literally  fulfilled  in  their  bitter  experience, 
these  appalling  warnings,  graphic  and  minute  in  their  details,  were  in  the 
hands  of  the  Hebrew  nation,  were  continuously  read  in  their  hearing  as  a  voice 
of  entreaty  that  they  would  cleave  to  the  Lord  their  God.  But  *'  because 
sentence  is  not  executed  speedily,  therefore  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  fully 
set  in  them  to  do  evil  "  (Eccles.  viii.  12). 

Yet  deferred  sentence,  both 

1.  Manifests  the  Divine  patience  and  His  unwillingness  to  smite ;  and 

2.  Prolongs  mans  opportunity  to  forsake  evil  and  find  mercy. 
Nevertheless  :    "  The  Lord  is  not  slack  concerning  His  promise " ;  He  does 

not  relax  because  He  delays.     The  storm  only  gathers  greater  violence  when 
long  pent  up      Here  is  vividly  delineated 
I.  A  nation's  progressive  apostasy. 

1.  Passive  indiference  to  divine  teachings  and  appeals  (v,  14).  Mental 
obliquity  or  wilful  inattention  to  the  known  will  of  God.  This  mere  listlessness 
is  commonly  the  first  downward  step  :  **  Ye  will  not  hearken  unto  J/e."  To  this 
non- attention  next  succeeds, 

2.  Non-compliance  with  divine  calls  and  claims  (v.  14).  "  Will  not  do  all  these 
commandments."  Practical  resistance  of  God's  authority  ;  "  We  will  not  have 
this  man  to  reign  over  us."  Not  as  yet  profane  rebellion,  but  settled  unconcern 
and  neglect.     This  leads  forward  to, 

3.  Contemptuous  rejection  of  God's  statutes.  **  Ye  shall  despise  My  statutes  " 
(v.  15).  Pride  lifts  the  heart  into  dislike  and  derision  of  sacred  regulations  and 
requirements.  "  Who  is  the  Lord  that  I  should  serve  Him  ?"  '*  It  is  vain  to 
serve  God,"  etc.  (Malachi  iii.  14,  15). 

4.  Spiritual  revolt  from  all  sacred  demands.  "  Your  soul  abhor  my  judg- 
ments" (v.  15).  **  For  every  one  that  doeth  evil  hateth  the  light,"  etc.  (Jno. 
iii.  20).  *' These  are  they  that  rebel  against  the  light"  (Job  xxiv.  13).  It  ia 
the  soul's  loathing  of  all  holy  rule  and  heavenly  alluremeat.  It  argues  a  fearful 
departure  from  God.     How  great  a  fall  was  that  1 


814  nOMlLETIC    COMMENTARY    ON       [chap.  xxvi.  14—19 


6.  Violafion  of  all  covevant  relationship.  "Ye  break  my  covenant "  (v.  15). 
It  severs  all  bonds  between  the  soul  and  God  ;  denies  His  right  to  command  \ 
rejects  Him  utterly — in  atheistic  scorn,  in  wilful  rebellion.  The  **  thing  made  " 
disowns  Him  who  made  it. 

Notes  :  (a)  Such  decline  from  God,  whether  by  communities  or  individuals, 
only  occurs  by  progressive  stages.  The  wreck  is  not  instantaneous.  The  castle 
falls  not  a  ruin  by  one  stroke  ;  it  wastes  by  the  process  of  dilapidation — stone 
from  stone  ;  crumbles  to  decay. 

(6)  This  decline  from  God  is  not  allowed  to  proceed  without  gracious  efforts 
made  to  arrest  its  course.  God  sent  His  prophets  to  plead  and  warn,  His 
judgments  to  awaken,  His  providential  mercies  to  win,  His  sanctuary  privileges 
to  allure.  A  sinner  goes  from  God  amid  pathetic  pleadings  and  arresting 
importunities  :  **  Turn  ye,  turn  ye  from  your  evil  ways ;  for  why  will  ye  die  V 

II.  An  apostate  nation's  calamitifs. 

1.  Sin  brings  disease  Siud  phi/sical  suffering  in  its  train  (v.  16)  ;  "Terror,  con- 
sumption, and  the  burning  ague,  that  shall  consume  the  eyes  and  cause  sorrow 
of  heart."  Impiety  inevitably  drifts  into  impurity.  When  God  is  rejected,  the 
'•  lusts  of  the  flehh  and  the  ejes  and  the  mind''  dominate.  And  in  physical  de- 
gradation, defilement,  and  decay  the  fruits  of  sin  are  reaped.  "  Destruction  and 
misery  are  in  their  way."  These  are  the  natural  consequences  of  sin  j  bat  God 
smote  Israel  with  supernatural  afflictions. 

2.  Failure  and  penury  follow  quickly  upon  habits  of  indulgence  and  impurity. 
**  Sow  your  seed  in  vain,  for  your  enemies  shall  eat  it"  (v.  16).  Nothing  suc- 
ceeds in  the  hands  of  a  dissipated  and  dissolute  man;  and  he  becomes  a  prey  to 
his  hated  scorners  and  rivals.  There  was  a  peculiar  fulfilment  to  Israel  of  this 
threat  ;  for  God  laid  their  land  open  to  thi  incursions  of  predatory  tribes  and 
despotic  spoilers,  by  which  the  people  "yere  continually  wasted. 

3.  A  godless  life  invites  the  ravages  of  the  enemy  (v.  17).  God  withdrew 
His  protection,  and  adversaries  swept  down  upon  Israel.  They  who  repudiate 
Divine  government  are  "  taken  captive  by  the  devil  at  his  will,"  and  serve  their 
enemies.  Sin  is  very  cruel.  It  *'  slays  "  its  victims  j  slaughters  their  virtue, 
peace,  happiness,  hopes  ;  detroys  precious  souls. 

4.  Sin  alao^//*  the  life  of  wrong  -  doers  with  terrcyrn  :  they  **flee  when  none  pur- 
Bueth."  Even  in  nations  there  is  "  strong  confidence  "  and  *'  a  sound  mind  "  only 
when  conscious  of  rectitude  and  the  enjoyment  of  God's  approval.  It  paralyses 
a  people's  heart  to  feel  that  Heaven  is  alienated  and  Divine  favour  lost.  Armies, 
too,  have  gone  with  assurance  into  battles  when  convinced  that  God  is  with 
tbem  ;  as  Cromwell's'*  Ironsides  ":  while  enemies  h'AveJied  withpanicy  as  did  the 
Spanish  Armada,  when  possessed  with  alarm  that  God  was  against  them. 

5.  There  are  the  yet  darker  calamities  of  abject  overthrow  and  Divine  desertion  : 
"  I  will  break  the  pride  of  your  power,  and  I  will  make  your  heaven  as  iron,  and 
your  earth  as  brass  "(v.  19) — a  picture  oi  prostration  and  helplessness  which  finds 
verification  In 

(a)  Baby  ion  8  fall  :now  lying  buried  amid  bleaching  sands,  emblem  of  rebuked 
pride. 

(6)  The  desolation  of  Jerusalem:  now  a  waste  scene,  and  her  children  the 
"  tribes  of  the  wandering  foot  and  weary  breast," 

(c)  llie  buried  cities  of  Pompeii  and  Uerculaneum :  interred  beneath  voloanio 
ashes,  a  monument  of  sudden  wrath  on  a  voluptuous  people. 

Such  historic  admonitions — Warn  against  National  Impiety^  and  Call  mankind 
to  seriousness  and  prayer.  For  even  in  the  solemn  threatenings  of  God,  there 
lies  an  overt  assurance  of  mercy,  that  "  if  a  nation  or  individual  will  cease 
from  apostacy  and  sin  and  hearken  unto  Him**  (v.  18),  He  will  turn  aside  the 
"seven  times  more  '*  punishment  for  sins  and  show  the  forgiveness  in  which  He 
delights,  and  the  salvation  which  the  glorious  gospel  of  His  grace  proclaims. 
(See  Addenda  to  chapter,  National  Irreligionk 


CHAP.  XXVI.  29— 89.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS,  S15 


Topic:  Desolation  UPON  Israel  (Vv.  29  39), 

Though  chosen  in  grace,  and  pledged  in  covenant,  as  God*8  people  ;  though 
being  led  miraculously  to  Canaan,  to  be  settled  in  the  goodly  land  ;  yet  an  alarm- 
ing picture  of  woe  and  ruin  is  outspread  whose  realisation  seemed  incredible. 

I.  How  nORRIFYINQ  THE  MISERIES  WHICH  MAT  BEFALL  A  PRIVILEGED  PEOPLE. 

The  miseries  of  penury  and  siege  (v.  29) ;  of  captivity  and  slaughter  (v.  33)  ;  of 
anguish  and  derision  (v.  36) ;  of  pitiless  misery  and  disaster  (v.  39). 

1.  None  are  so  secure  in  grace  and  privilege  that  they  can  disregard  the  possi- 
bility of  a  fall. 

2.  None  are  so  rich  in  sacred  favours  as  to  be  beyond  danger  of  their  total 
loss. 

3.  None  are  so  honoured  by  God's  selecting  and  distinguishing  grace  but  they 
may  lapse  into  alienation  and  desolation. 

II.  How  AMAZING  THE  DISASTERS  WHICH  MAY  DEVASTATE  A  BEAUTIFUL  COUNTRY. 

Canaan  was  a  wealthy  land,  a  scene  of  loveliness,  abundance  and  delight.  Yet 
on  it  came  the  disasters  of  depopulation  (v.  31)  :  sterility  (v.  32)  ;  desertion  (v 
35) — even  enemies  abandoning  it. 

1.  National />/ew^y  and  prosperity  are  conditional  upon  national  righteousness 
and  piety. 

2.  National  greatness  and  glory  have  been  withered  by  the  anger  of  an  insulted 
God. 

3.  National  strength  and  safety  are  only  guaranteed  as  religion  is  fostered  by 
the  laws  of  a  country,  and  in  the  habits  and  lives  of  its  people. 

III.  How  PITEOUS  THE  PROFANATION  WHICH  MAT  DESPOIL  A  NATION'S  SANCTITIES  ! 

Canaan  was  the  scene  of  Jehovah's  sanctuary  :  the  Temple  rose  on  Zion ;  and 
the  land  sent  up  her  tiibes  to  the  celebration  of  sacred  feasts  and  to  the  holy 
worship  of  God.  Yet  aU  her  "  sanctuaries  "  were  brought  *'  unto  desolation  "  (v.  31), 
all  the  fragrance  of  her  sacr'jtces  became  loathsome  to  Jehovah  (v.  31),  and  her 
desecrated  Sabbaths  were  avenged  in  the  bleak  silence  and  loneliness  which  fell  on 
hallowed  scenes  (v.  34). 

1.  Religious  favours,  if  abused,  may  be  utterly  withdrawn  from  us. 

2.  God  loathes  the  ofiferings  once  delightful  to  Him  :  when  the  offerer's  love 
is  estranged, 

3.  Holy  scenes  and  holy  days  become  a  barren  mockery  if  a  trifling  spirit 
alienate  the  sacred  Presence : — **  Ichabod  l** 

Topic:  The  Lost  Tribes  op  Israel  (Vv.  38-39). 

"  Ye  shall  perish  among  the  heathen,  and  the  land  of  your  enemies  shall  eat 
you  up.  And  they  that  are  left  of  you  shall  pine  away  in  their  iniquity  in  your 
enemies'  land  :  and  also  in  the  iniquities  of  their  fathers  shall  they  pine  away 
with  them." 

Does  this  threat  import  the  complete  exterminaHon  of  the  outcast  Israel  t  Are 
the  exiles  from  Palestine  literally  *^ eaten  up  "  in  the  land  of  their  enemies?  What 
are  the  rival  theories  1 

L  That  the  outcast  tribes  op  Israel  absolutely  perished  in  the  lands  of 
THEIR  captivity  :  that  they  have  ceased  to  be  a  distinct  people  ;  that  they  or 
their  descendants  are  not  to  be  discovered  in  any  portion  of  the  globe  ;  and  that| 
therefore,  there  is  no  possibility  or  hope  of  their  recovery. 

Against  this  theory  it  is  to  be  urged  that, 

1.  This  threat  applies  equally  to  Judah  and  Israel ;  and  that  as  cert2i\n\j  Judah 
is  not  exterminated,  so  equally  it  ia  probable  that  Israel,  though  not  discovered^ 
is  still  ea^uting. 


3^5  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [chap.  XXVL  1,2. 


2  That  as  nindeen  centuries  have  not  sufficed  to  extinguish  the  Jewish  part  of 
the  orieinal  Hebrew  nation,  so  neither  can  it  be  thought  that  the  preceding  eight 
centuries,  from  the  Assyrian  captivity  till  the  Christian  age,  would  efifect  the 
obliteration  of  the  Israelitish  tribes.  ^^^     ui   *n 

3  That  as  it  was  predicted  of  the  Israelitish  tribes  that  they  should  be  -  loi^ 
from  sight  (2  Kings  x^iii.  18),  whereas  the  Jewish  tribes  were  to  be  preserved  as 
[cvisihle  witness  among  the  nations,  the  non- discovery  of  the  lost  ten  tribes  is  as 
hteral  a  part  of  God's  plan  as  the  distinctive  pre^ervat.oa  of  the  Jew. 

4.  That  there  are  promises  of  God  which  absolutely  affirm  Israel  s  ultimate 
discovery  and  restoration  eq^i^Wy  vfith  3 \id^h'».  „    ,     ,     ,     ,    ,,  a 

Therefore  this  threat  must  be  equally  applied  to  all  the  twelve  tribes,  and  can 
only  mean  their  destruction  as  a  distinct  nation, 

ii    That  the  long  and  mournful  obliteration  of  the  Hebrew  nation,  as  a 

JUDGMENT,  WILL  ISSUE  IN  ITS  FINAL  MIRACULOUS  RE- GATHERING.        FoF 

1    The  covena7it  of  God  with  the- whole  nation  ensures  their  imperishableness. 

2*  The  threat  of  obliteration  is  qualified  by  the  promise  of  recovery  and  restora- 
tim,  if  they  should  repent  (Vv.  41,  42),     [Compare  Deut.  iv.  27,  31]. 

3.  It  is  pledged  here  absolutely  that,  though  driven  away  m  exile,  G^oc?  woM 
not  Himself '*  cast  them  away,"  ''nc^  utterly  destroy  them."  (v.  44);  because  His 
**  covenant  "  with  them  must  stand  (Rom.  xl  2). 

Topic :  Fundamentals  in  true  Religion  (Vv.  1,  2). 

Israel  was  ever  prone  to  depart  from  the  living  God,  to  forget  His  command- 
ments  Hence  the  need  of  frequent  reiteration  of  the  divine  precepts.  The 
inculcation  of  statutes  respecting  fundamentals  in  religion  comes  very  sui  ably 
here,  enforcing  Jehovah's  claim  to  sole  and  supreme  worship.     Thus  Israel  was 

solemnly  reminded  —  ,.77^1,  4  ^ 

I  Of  the  Person  to  whom  alone  religious  worhip  "houLd  be  presentea. 
The  light  of  nature  and  our  inner  consciousness  suggest  that  the  author  of  all 
things,  our  Creator  and  King,  ought  to  be  reverently  worshipped ;  but  they  do 
not  teach  us  whether  or  not  He  will  accept  our  worship,  nor  what  kind  of  worship 
He  requires.  In  Levitical  ritual  the  needed  information  was  given,  not  only  as 
to  what  He  would  accept,  but  what  He  righteously  demanded.  No  idol  of  any 
kind  was  to  be  set  up  in  Canaan.  No  material  object  could  fairly  represent  the 
invisible  and  eternal  Lord.  Idolatry  degrades  and  brutalises  men ;  men  never 
rise  above  their  ideals.  Idolatry  is  an  insult  to  the  only  true  and  living  God. 
The  only  image  of  the  invisible  God  ever  presented  to  the  world  was  the  Man 
Christ  Jesus.  "  Great  is  the  mystery  of  godliness ;  God  was  manifest  in  the 
flesh,"  etc.  Nothing  short  of  the  living  God  can  satisfy  the  longing  of  the  human 
heart.  All  his  needs  are  fully  met  in  the  person  and  work  of  Christ. 
II.  Of  the  Tjme  most  favourable  f(yr  the  presentation  of  religious  worship. 
Worship  is  the  rfw/«/,pm%e,  and  prerogative  of  man  at  all  times.  His  very 
work  should  be  done  in  such  a  fervent  and  devout  spirit  that  it  may  be  worship, 
and  all  worldly  service  so  performed  that  it  may  partake  of  the  character  of 
sacrament.  But  there  are  times  when  worship  may  be  more  full  and  devout ! 
such  are  the  divinely-appointed  and  weekly-occurring  Sabbaths.  They  arrest  the 
rush  and  roar  of  secular  life.  The  hallowed  associations  of  the  day,  the  oppor- 
tunity for  public  communion  and  fellowship  suggest  and  foster  reverence.  The 
Sabbath  reminds  man  that  he  has  a  soul  to  care  for ;  and  divine  life  in  the 
individual  and  nation  is  generally  concurrent  with  the  extent  to  which  the  day 
of  holy  convocation  is  observed.  Let  the  Sabbath  be  neglected  and  desecrated 
and  at  once  the  way  is  open  for  all  kinds  of  irreligion  and  ini(iuity.  The  people 
were  also  reminddd| 


CHAP.  XXVI  H,  1-i]  THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS.  S17 


III.  Of  tuh:  PoACE  where  religious  worship  is  the  most  acceptable  to  the  Lord. 

Vuder  the  old  dispensation  God  appointed  certain  spots  aud  localities,  where 
He  would  meet  His  people,  and  consecrated  certain  buildings  as  His  audience 
chambers  :  among  such  places  were  the  Tabernacle  and  Temple.  "  He  loved  the 
gates  of  Zion  more  than  all  the  dwellings  of  Jacob,"  and  spake  glorious  things 
of  his  own  favourite  city.  The  devout  heart,  nevertheless,  could  find  any  place 
a  "house  of  God"  and  "gate  of  heaven"  when  God  saw  fit  to  make  Himself 
known,  as  he  did  to  the  Patriarchs,  especially  to  Jacob  at  BetheL  It  aided  men 
in  worship,  and  gave  them  courage  and  confidence  in  seeking  the  Lord  to  know 
that  He  was  to  be  found  "  always  at  homej'^  as  it  were,  in  some  places,  and  ready 
to  manifest  Himself,  as  He  did,  not  to  the  world  or  out  in  the  world.  Reverence  for 
special  sacred  places  among  the  Jews  was  not  superstition ;  Christ  paid  respect  to 
the  Temple,  and  twice  showed  His  indignation  at  its  profanation  by  expelling  the 
unholy  traders.  Though  under  the  new  dispensation  we  have  no  Tabernacle  or 
Temple,  as  of  old,  yet  our  meeting-places  for  prayer  and  praise  are  sanctuaries 
of  the  Lord,  for  He  has  promised  to  meet  with  those  who  gather  together  in  His 
name,  even  though  there  be  but  two  or  three.  The  Divine  presence  consecrates 
the  house  where  believers  meet,  and  earthly  worship  may  become  preparatory  to 
the  worship  of  heaven,  where  **  the  Lord  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb  are  the 
Temple  of  it."--il  fF,  B. 

Topic:  Incentives  to  True  Religion  (Vv.  3,  42), 

The  injunctions  of  this  chapter  are  contemporaneous  with,  and  confirmatory  of, 
the  laws  contained  in  the  Book  of  Exodus,  especially  of  the  Ten  Commandments 
given  on  the  tables  of  stone.  The  people  were  evidently  not  elected  to  uncon- 
ditional favours  and  salvation;  they  are  addressed  as  free  and  accountable  agents, 
in  a  state  of  trial,  and  passing  through  a  period  of  probation.  It  was  merciful 
and  just  to  acquaint  Israel  of  the  conditions  of  service  and  stewardship,  to  warn 
them  from  evil  doing,  to  excite  them  to  holy  living.     Notice, 

I.    The  BLIBSINGS  PROMISED  TO  OBEDIENCE. 

To  those  who  would  walk  in  the  statutes  of  the  Lord  and  keep  His  command- 
ments, there  would  be  vouchsafed, 

1.  Temporal  blessings,  (a)  Seasons  of  plenty,  (b)  Times  of  tranquility ',  {c) 
Joys  of  society.  Thus  their  physical  and  social  wants  would  be  met,  their  minds 
kept  in  peace,  their  hearts  and  homes  filled  with  joy. 

2.  Spiritual  blessings-  (a)  The  Lord  would  own  them  ;  be  their  Friend  and  King  ; 
(6)  The  Lord  would  dwell  among  them.  These  were  blessings  and  honours  enjojed 
by  no  other  nations,  and  which  laid  upon  Israel  commensurate  responsibility. 
The  Lord  would  be  with  them,  and  bless  them  abundantly,  if  only  they  would 
walk  in  His  statutes.  The  Gospel  does  not  destroy  the  moral  teaching  of  the 
law  ;  Antinomianism  is  not  taught  in  the  New  Testament.  Christ  comes  to  and 
blesj^es  those  who  love  His  commandments  and  do  them,  and  will  pronounce  His 
final  approval  upon  those  who  have  in  this  life,  not  simply  believed,  but  "  well 
done** 

II.  The  punishment  threatened  to  disobedience. 

Here  we  have  held  out  the  red  danger-light,  the  warning  beacon,  that  the 
people  might  be  deterred  from  breaking  the  divine  laws.  When  the  Lord  entered 
into  judgment  with  His  people,  they  could  plead  no  excuse,  they  had  His  mind 
and  will  made  known  repeatedly.  In  this  chapter  to  the  disobedient  are 
threatened — (a)  Physical  and  mental  sufferings  ;  {h)  Useless  labour ;  (c)  Igno- 
minious defeat ;  {d)  Aggravated  sorrows ;  (e)  Degradation  ;  (f)  Desolation ;  (g) 
Destruction.  Thus  they  would  be  chastised,  and  almost  exterminated,  if  thev 
turned  from  Qod  and  gave  themselves  up  to  iniquitj. 


818  HOMILEIIC   COMMENTARy  ON        [chap.  xxvi.  42-45 


We  are  here  taught  the  doctrine  of  a  righteous  retributive  Providence.  The 
world  is  under,  not  only  the  natural,  but  the  moral  government  of  Gjd.  In  this 
world  God  visits  the  sins  of  nations,  and  sometimes  the  sins  of  individuals — 
this  is  a  place,  though  it  is  not  the  place  of  punishment.  The  covenants  of  the 
Lord  with  men  have  always  been  conditional ;  to  obey  has  been  to  live  ;  to  disobey 
has  been  to  die.  While  Israel  obeyed,  as  in  the  days  of  Solomon,  the  blessing 
of  this  chapter  came  upon  them  ;  but  when  they  forsook  the  Lord  and  gave 
themselves  up  to  every  kind  of  iniquity,  the  judgments  denounced  here  were 
literally  fulfilled.  To-day  the  land  of  Canaan  lies  waste;  and  the  Jews  are 
scattered  to  the  four  winds  of  heaven.  Blessing  and  curse  are  set  before  us  in 
the  gospel  Life  or  death  depend  on  our  choice.  "The  wa^es  of  sia  ia  death, 
but  the  gift,"  eto.—i'.  fF,  £. 

Topic:  The  Bow  in  the  Cloud  (Vv.  42-45). 

In  the  hope  held  ©ut  to  the  rebellious,  and  the  mercy  promised  to  the  penitent 
at  the  end  of  this  chapter,  we  see  how  the  Lord  delighteth  in  mercy,  how  slow 
He  is  to  anger,  and  plenteous  in  goodness  and  truth.  For  though  the  people 
should  rebel  and  bring  upon  themselves  all  the  threatened  punishments  ;  yet  if 
they  would  repent  and  confess  humbly  their  sins,  the  blessings  promised  to 
obedience  should  come  upon  them  to  replace  the  punishments,  as  they  again  took 
delight  in  the  commandments  of  the  Lord.  On  the  black  cloud  that  hung 
threateningly  over  the  land,  there  fell  rays  of  hope,  a  bow  of  promise  arched 
the  darkest  sky.  "  The  Lord  was  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but  that 
all  should  come  to  repentance."     These  verses  show, 

L  That  the  way  was  left  open  for  the  rebellious  to  return. 

1.  It  was  the  way  of  reflection.  They  were  to  lookback  upon  the  wrong  doing 
of  their  lives,  and  see  how  far  they  had  deflected  from  the  good  old  way,  how 
they  had  been  guilty  of  dereliction  of  duty. 

2.  It  was  the  way  of  confession.  They  were  to  feel  sorry  for  their  sins,  and 
con^'ess  and  acknowledge  their  iniquity, 

3.  It  was  the  way  of  humiliation.  They  were  not  to  return  proudly,  feeling 
they  had  not  been  rewarded  according  to  their  iniquities.  The  way  is  still  open 
lor  the  vilest  to  return ;  for,  the  New  Testament  teaches  that  these  are  the  steps 
in  the  ladder  of  life,  out  of  sin  to  holiness,  from  earth  to  heaven,  from  self  to 
God,  viz.  I  Repentance,  conversion,  consecration, 

IL  That  if  the  rebellious  returned  to  the  lord  in  his  own  appointed 

WAY,  HE  WOULD  GRACIOUSLY  RECEIVE  THEM. 

1.  He  would  do  so  for  the  sake  of  their  fathers.  He  would  remember  His 
covenant  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob. 

2.  He  would  do  so  for  the  sake  of  His  name,  "  For  I  am  the  Lord."  He  had 
purposed,  as  well  as  promised,  to  deal  mercifillly  with  them. 

3.  He  would  do  so  for  the  sake  of  the  land.  He  had  selected  Canaan  as  the 
arena  where  He  would  specially  display  His  glory  to  men,  and  He  would  not 
allow  it  to  lie  waste  for  ever. 

4.  He  would  do  it  for  the  sake  of  His  covenant.  "  I  will  remember  my  cove- 
nant"  The  Lord  does  not  make  a  covenant  and  then  tear  it  rashly  to  pieces ; 
if  broken  by  man  He  will  speedily  renew,  nor  allow  the  irregularities  and  irre- 
ligion  of  men  to  thwart  His  beneficent  arrangements.  Here,  indeed,  was  a 
resplendent  bow  of  many  colours,  beaming  with  the  beautiful  light  of  the  mild 
and  merciful  countenance  of  the  Most  High. 

What  encouragement  for  sinful  men  to  return  to  the  Lord,  "  for  He  will  have 
mercy  upon  them,  and  abundantly  pardon."  The  Levitical  Law  closes  with 
oflers  of  meroji  the  last  words  of  the  Law  are  words  of  entreatj  and  promise. 


CHAP,  XXVI.  1 — 14.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  LBJVITICm. 


319 


Glad  tidings  reached  the  ears  of  Israel  in  the  desert.  The  object  of  the  Law  was 
to  restrain  from  sin  and  restore  from  its  practice  and  power.  Design  of  Law 
and  Gospel  identical  ;  the  tree  of  life  has  its  roots  deep  down  in  the  soil  of  the 
old  economy.  God's  written  word  is  natural  religion  vocalised^  and  Christianity- 
is  Judaism  fulfilled,  in  the  final  declaration  of  how  sins  may  be  forgiven.  This 
truth  could  not  be  learned  from  Nature,  and  was  only  symbolically  and  typically 
taught  by  Moses.  Whosoever  will,  may  come  now  and  take  of  the  water  of  life 
freely.— i^.  fF.  B. 


OUTLINES    ON"    VERSES    OF  CHAPTER  XXVI 


▼,  1. —  TJieme :  Idolatry  interdicted. 

The  Israelites,  having  been  surrounded  by 
idolaters  during  their  sojourn  in  Egypt,  would 
be  in  danger  of  yielding  to  the  induence  such 
surroundings  would  exert  upon  them,  even 
when  in  the  presence  of  circumstances  calcu- 
lated to  keep  alive  constant  recognition  of 
the  only  true  and  living  God.  Hence  the  re- 
petition needed  of  injunctions  against  all  idol 
worship;  indeed,  the  whole  system  of  Judaism 
rests  upon  the  sublime  truth,  there  is  but  oue 
God.     Let  us  inquire — 

I.  What  thk  proneness  of  human  natobbs 

TO  IDOLATRY  SUGO;iST3. 

It  shows  both  the  dignity  and  depravity  of 
nan;  that  — 

(a)  He  is  endowed  with  religious  instincts. 
Capable  of  worship,  of  exercising  faith,  hope, 
love,  reverence,  fear,  etc. 

(b)  He  is  conscious  of  amenability  to  some 
supreme  power.  Seeks  to  propitiate,  secure 
favour,  and  aid. 

(c)  He  is  apprehensive  of  a  future  state  of 
existence.  Ideas  vague,  indednite,  absurd, 
yet  the  outcome  of  inward  presentiment,  etc. 

(d)  He  is  unable  by  light  of  nature  to  dis- 
cover God.  His  knowledge  is  so  faded,  light 
■o  dim.  How  low  the  soul  must  have  fallen 
to  substitute  *'  nothings"  for  the  Eternal  One  1 
Heathenism  has  never  of  itself  emerged  into 
the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God, 
as  seen  in  the  voice  that  has  spoken  from 
heaven,  and  has  been  recorded  by  holy  men 
moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 

II.  What  liNDOLGENca  in  idolatry  en- 
tails. • 

(a)  Degradation.  Worship  of  heathen 
deities  demoralising  In  their  temples,  at 
their  services,  tho  rites  observed  are  grovel- 
ling, and,  in  some  instances,  demoniacal. 

lb)  Superstition.  Devotees  are  duped  by 
priests,  enslaved  by  torturing  ritualism,  sub- 
ject and  victims  of  absurd  delusions. 

(c)Misery.  Fear  the  ruling  passion,  not  love. 
Nothing  ennobling,  inspiring,  quickening, 
comforting.  Idol  worship  mucks  the  longings 
of  the  human  soul,  cannot  appease  its  hunger, 
Mtisfy  its  thirst. 

III.    How  IDOLATRY   MAY   BE  ABOLISHED. 

Darkness  can  only  be  dispersed  by  tb« 
letting  in  of  light.  The  folly  of  idolatry  must 
be  shown,  its  helplessness,  misery,  sin  by  the 
■yr^ftd  of  the  writtoa  r«fblation  ol  lieav«n, 


the  preaching  of  the  glorious  Gospel.  Igrael, 
by  Its  worship  of  Jehovah,  was  a  living  pro- 
test against  all  idolatry ;  and  the  Christian 
Chu'ch  is  commissioned  to  proclaim  the 
gospel  among  all  nations,  that  the  kingdoms 
of  this  world  may  become  the  kingdoms  of 
our  God  and  of  His  Christ.  No  person^  place., 
or  thing  must  come  between  our  souls  and 
God,  or  have  the  faith,  hope,  love,  trust 
that  are  due  only  to  Him.  We  are  guilty  of 
idolatry  if  we  regard  anything  as  a  representa- 
tive of,  or  substitute  for  Him.  What  we 
supremely  love  and  live  for  is  our  GoL 
Christ  is  God,  we  ought,  therefore,  to  live  to 
U.I1X—F,  IV.  B. 

Vv.  3, 14. —  Theme:  The  equity  or  god's 

WAYS     '■''  if  ye  walk  in  my  statues 

then','  etc.  (v.  3).     "  But  if  ye  will  not 

/ will-'  etc.  Cv.  14). 

Natural  religion  teaohes  us  that  the  govern- 
ment of  the  author  of  nature  is  retributive 
Revealed  religion  teaches  analogous  truth  in 
other  realms  of  the  divine  procedure.  Penal 
consequences  of  wrong  doing  act  as  warnings 
against  sin,  and  awaken  regret  for  transgres- 
sion     Retribution  is  — 

I.  Universal.  Everywhere,  and  in  all 
time,  the  transgression  of  God's  laws  entails, 
in  some  way.  penalty. 

n.  Rh  medial. 

Intended  to  prevent  defiance  of  heaven, 
usurpation  of  divine  sovereignty.  Pain  has  a 
merciful  ministry.  The  peace  and  satisfac- 
tion virtue  and  obedience  bring  are  a  proof 
that  God  is  holy  and  on  the  side  of  goodness. 
Israel  was  shown  not  only  that  God  demanded 
worship  and  loyalty  on  account  of  what  He  is 
in  Himself,  but  because  of  what  they  would 
secure  for  all  who  lived  in  harmony  with  His 
revealed  will.  Hence  the  positivs  commands 
in  connection  with  the  Levitical  ritual  were 
supplemented  by  persuasives  to  a  holy  life. 
Inducements  were  held  out  to  win  obedience, 
threateniogs  pronounced  to  deter  from  trans- 
gression. Thus  tho  people  were  taught  Vhat 
Jehovah  was  not  arbitrary  and  despotic,  but 
merciful  as  well  as  just,  unconditionally  ex- 
cluding none  from  the  blessing  of  the  covenant 
made  to  their  fathers. 

Not  only  was  the  sovereignty  of  God  r^^^^X^^ 
to  Israel,  but  the  prej'ogative  of  choice  in  inan^ 
bj  whioh  he  i«  distingoished  from  all  iaaiu- 


320 


nOMILETIC  COiXWEN'lARY  ON 


[chap.  xxvx.  b-ll. 


mate  tbingB  and  irrational  creatures.  In  the 
gospel  these  truths  are  republished  with  ad- 
ditional clearness  and  power.  Christ  invites 
to  supreme  blessedness ;  those  who  remain 
unblest  are  those  who  will  not  come  unto  Him 
that  they  may  have  life,  who  destroy  them- 
aelves,  reap  what  they  sow.  Thus  the  ways 
of  God  are  just  and  right,  and  will  so  be  ac- 
knowledged at  last  before  an  assembled 
nniverse. — J*'.  14^»  B. 

V.  %.— Theme  :    Valoub    and    victory 

THROUGH  GODLINESS. 

"  Five  of  you  shall  chase  an  hundred,  and 
an  hundred  of  you  shall  put  ten  thousand  to 
flight ;  and  your  enemies  shall  fall  before  you 
by  the  sword." 

rsSee  addenda  to  chapter,  Valour^ 

I.  Eeligion  begets  a  dauntless  ardoub. 

A  fervent  enthusiasm  is  awakened,  which 
defies  obstacles,  perils,  foes. 

Proved  by  the  heroes  of  faith  (Heb.  xi.) ; 
by  the  sufferings  of  Huguenots  Puritans,  and 
Covenanters ;  by  the  records  of  martyrdom. 

II.  Religion  imparts  an  intrepid  confi- 
dence. 

They  who  have  God  on  their  side,  see 
armies  of  horses  and  chariots  fighting  with 
them  (2  Kings  vi.  17.);  so  as  to  realize  that 
"  they  that  be  with  us  are  more  than  they 
that  be  against  us."  And  John  Wesley's  strong 
boast  becomes  their  motto  :  "  The  best  of  all 
iB,  God  is  for  us."" 

Ill  Religion  animates  with  strong  conso- 
lation. 

Foes  may  be  many,  and  life  may  be  beset 
■with  devices  of  evil ;  yet  this  is  the  stay  of 
the  believer,  "  No  weapon  that  is  formed 
against  thee  shall  prosper"  (Is.  Hv.  17). 

IV.  Religion  ensures  a  glorious  victory. 
Adversaries,  however  numerous,  shall  flee. 

Peace  shall  be  realized,  not  by  complicity 
with  the  world,  nor  compromise  with  enemies, 
but  by  their  vanquishment  "  We  are  more 
than  conquerors  through  Him  that  loveth 
us :"  and  even  now  our  paeon  shout  is  this, 
•* Thanks  be  unto  God  who  always  causethus 
to  triumph  in  Christ" ;  while  beyond  death  this 
Bhall  be  our  record :  "  They  overcome  by  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb." 

V.  10. —  7  heme  :    Emmanuel    amid    his 

FBOPLB. 

«  /  will  set  my  tahernacU  among  you*^ 

I.  Amid  the   nation  on   zion   rested  the 

SHEKINAH. 

"  In  Salem  is  His  tabernacle,  and  His 
dwelling  place  in  Zion"  (Psa.  Ixxvi.  2). 

II.  Incarnate  on  earth   dwelt  the  Lord 

yesus. 

'*  The  Word  was  made   flesh    and  dwelt 

wnong  us"  (John  i  14). 

III.  Enshrined  in  lowly  hearts  abides 
the  Holy  Spirit. 

"  He  shall  abide  with  you  for  ever"  (John 

Xiv.  17). 

IV    EtERSAT-LT  AMTP    THIC     fILORlFIED     IS 

manifested  the  glad  presence  of  God. 

••  1  beard  a  great  voice  out  of  heaven,  say- 


fng,  Behold  the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with 
men,  and  He  will  dwell  with  them,  and  they 
shall  be  His  people,  and  God  Himself  shall  be 
with  them,  and  be  their  God"  (Kev.  xxL  3). 

V    13. —  Theme:   Emancipated  ahd  blb- 

VATED. 

**  /  have  broken  the  bands  of  your  yoke,  and 
made  you  ^o  upright ^^ 

I.  Freed  from  old  enslavements  :  such 
is  the  initial  act  of  redeeming  grace,  "  Being 
made  free  from  sin,"  "  Christ  hath  made  us 
free,"  "  The  Lord's  free  men." 

II.  Deliverance  tbk  preparation  foe 
rightkousness. 

The  "  yoke  broken"  is  not  the  end;  it  seta 
the  life  free  that  it  may  ''*•  go  uprighf;  in  rec- 
titude of  conduct,  in  elevation  of  desire  and 
aim ;  in  uplifted  longings  and  afifections ;  in 
righteousness  and  holiness  of  spirit. 

III.  Divine  source  op  man's  redemption. 
"  Old  things  have  passed  away  ;  behold  all 

things  are  become  new :  and  all  things  are  of 
(  od.^''  He  is  the  emancipator  from  old  sins, 
He  our  sufficiency  for  an  "  upright  "  walk. 

"  I  am  the  Lord  your  God,  which  brought 
you  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  that 
ye  should  not  be  their  bondmen :  and  /  have 
broken  the  bands  of  your  yoke,  and  made 
you  go  upright."  (See  1  Cor.  i.  30  )  "  But  of 
Him  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesus,"  etc. 

V.  VI, —  7 heme:  The  cowardice  of  guilt. 

"  Ye  shall  flee  when  none  pursue  you." 

I.    Goodness  DESPists  such  servility. 

A  righteous  soul  scorns  cringing,  and 
counts  fear  a  degradation  of  soul  and  a  dis- 
honour to  his  avowed  faith  in  God.  It  is 
weak  and  unmanly. 

*'  There  is,"  says  Montaigne,  "but  one  thing 
of  which  I  am  afraid,  and  that  is  fear." 

And  most  truly. 
"  To   fear  the    foe,   since     fear     oppresseth 
strength 

Gives,  in  your  weakness,  strength  unto  your 
foe." — Richard  H  y  iii  2. 

n,     GoDLINSSS  rectifies  SUCH  COWARDICE. 

By  showing  what  resources  the  soul  has  in 
God,  and  by  embracing  the  promises,  which 
assure  him  of  all  grace  and  strength  equal  to 
his  day.  "  Who  is  he  that  shall  harm  yo", 
if  ye  be  followers  of  that  which  is  good?" 

Froude  says,  "  Courage  is,  on  all  hands, 
considered  as  an  essential  of  high  character." 

"  The  righteous  are  bold  as  a  lion."  In 
God's  favour  the  soul  dwells  confident. 

III.  Guilt  renders  souls  craven. 

Fear  is  the  black  spectre  ever  before  the 
ungodly. 

*'  Cowards  die  many  times  before  their 
deaths." — Julius  Ccesar,  ii.  2. 

Sinners  ^*flee^^  from  purity,  salvation. 
Heaven ;  driven  by  their  lusts,  their  folly, 
and  their  guilt  to  sin,  to  danger  and  to  doom. 

V.  17. —  7 heme:  Pride  crushed. 

"  I  will  break  the  pride  of  your  power." 

I.  Carnal  pride  bases  itself  ov  faliB 
trusts. 

The  "  pow^r  '*  of  these  Hebrews,  what  wm 


CflAP.  XXVI.  28—34.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 


321 


it?  They  bognilftd  and  deluded  themselves 
by  imagining  themselves  strong  and  secure. 

So  sinners  rest  ehite  on  satisfaction  with 
%\xe\r  health,  Va.Q\v  possessions,  their  self  esteem, 

n.  Carnal  pride    offends    against  all 

DITINE  TKACHINGS. 

Every  dealing  of  Jehovah  with  this  people 
taught  that  they  were  nought  in  themselves  ; 
all  they  were  G  )d  had  made  them. 

Pride  is  despicable  in  those  who  owe  every- 
thing to  Divine  pity  and  grace.  It  is  specially 
o^ensive  \>o '^vax  who  has  "wrought  all  our 
works  in  us  "  ;  for '*  what  have  wo  that  w© 
have  not  received?^ 

Ill    Carnal  pride   leads  to    most    rash 

IMPIETY. 

It  led  Israel  to  disregard  Divine  warnings, 
to  indulge  their  own  wayward  inclinations,  to 
disbelieve  God  and  substitute  idols  after  their 
own  vain  conceits  ;  and  thus  to  sever  them- 
selves from  God's  covenant  of  protection  and 
peace. 

Pride  still  rejects  Christ;  grieves  the  Holy 
Spirit ;  and  "  goeth  before  desti'uction." 

rV.  Carnal  pride  assukbdly  most  be  con- 
temn kd. 

God  will  put  it  to  shame.  "  I  will  break 
the  pride  of  your  power." 

By  sickness — laying  us  even  with  the  dust. 

By  losses — desolating  us  of  all  our  boasted 
gains. 

By  terrors  —  ?iV.\r\g  the  soul  with  horror  and 
forebodings. 

By  death — stripping  us  of  earth's  frivolous 
glory,  and  brings  i  s  face  to  face  with  the 
realities  of  righteousness  and  judgment. 

[See  Addenda  to  chapter,  tridecrushed^ 

Vv.  23  'i^.— Theme:  Obstinacy  punished. 

I.  The  charactkr  described. 

One  who  persists  obstinately  in  evil  courses: 
"  will  not  be  rejormed'''  i  his  may  apply  to 
1.  A  nation  ;  2.  An  individual. 

Such  obstinacy  may  be  the  effect  of 

(1).  A  proud  confidence  in  human  wisdom 
and  resources 

(2)    A  rooted  love  of  sin. 

It  betrays 

(1).  Great  blindness  of  mind. 

(2).  Great  hardness  of  heart. 

II.  Thk  divine  pboceddkb  in  relation 
thereto. 

1.  Opposition.  "  I  will  walk  contrary,"  etc. 
Nature  and  Providence  armed  against  the 
rebellious. 

2.  Punishment:  which  will  be, 

(1)  Severe ;  (2)  Proportionate ;  (3)  In- 
creasing.— y.  Comper  Gray. 

*^  Compare  also  Outline  on  Vv.  27,  28 
below. 

Vv.  Tl-1^.— Theme:  God's  determination 
to  pdmsh  sinners. 

"  And  if  ye  will  not  for  all  this  hearken  unto 
Me,  but  walk  contrary  unto  Me,  then  will  I 
walk  contrary  unto  you  also  iu  fury." 

L  An  AflTECil^Q  SUPPOSIXION  statbix 


The  Lord  here  supposes  that  His  people 
may  commit  three  grevious  sins ; 

1.  The  sin  of  disobedience.  '*  If  yt  will  not 
hearken  unto  Me,"     Hence  observe  — 

{a)  That  the  Lord  in  His  word  speaks  f»  us 
(Heb.  viii.  12). 

(b)  That  whatever  the  Lord  says  in  His 
Word  it  is  our  bounden  duty  to  hear  (Heb. 
iii.  7 ;  1  Thess.  v.  20  ;  James  i.  19). 

(e)  That  we  are  too  apt  to  turn  a  deaf  ear 
to  Him  (Exod.  v.  2;  Psa.  xii  4). 

2.  The  sin  of  incorrigibleness.  "  If  for  all 
this  ye  will  not  hearken."    Note  here— 

(a)  That  afHictioas  sometimes  have  the 
nature  of  punishments  (Jer.  xiii  21). 

(b)  That  punishment  is  the  natural  and 
necessai'y  consequence  of  transgression. 

(c)  That  in  the  punishment  which  God  in- 
flicts He  seeks  our  reformation  (2  Chron. 
xviii.  22). 

{d)  That  our  depravity  in  too  many  cases 
frustrates  His  designs  (Zeph  iii.  2). 

3.  The  sin  of  perverseness.  "  If  ye  walk  con- 
trary to  Me."     Observe  again — 

{_a)  That  the  Lord  s  pleasure  is,  we  should 
walk  with  Him  (Mic  vi.  8). 

(^)  That  we  walk  with  the  Lord  when  we 
walk  in  His  way  (2  Kgs.  xx.  3  ;  Eccles.  xii.  13). 

(f)  That  walking  otherwise  than  He  has 
commmanded  is  to  show  a  perverse  and  un- 
toward heart. 

11.  An  awful  consequence  declared. 
**I  will  walk  contrary  also  to  you  in  fury.' 
Thus  we  see  that 

1.  Conformable  to  our  character  will  be  on  ■ 
end 

If  God  should  deal  thus  with  us 

(a)  We  shall  lose  the  blessing  which  He 
imparts  to  His  obedient  followers  (vv  4-12;. 

(^)  Our  expectations  will  issue  in  dis 
appointment  and  vexation  (Hos.  viii.  7) ;  and 

<C)  Like  chaff  before  the  wind  we  shall 
speedily  be  carried  to  destruction  (Psa.  i. 
4,  6 :. 

2.  Enforcement  of  these  considerations : 
We  see 

(a)  That  a  religion  consisting  of  mere 
notions  will  never  save  a  man. 

(b)  That  men  are  not  at  liberty,  as  some 
suppose,  to  live  as  they  please. 

\c)  That  God  takes  notice  of  the  ways  of 
all. 

(jd)  That  if  He  displays  His  anger  we  should 
be  anxious  to  find  out  the  cause;  and 

(e)  That  if  anyone  perish  he  will  have  no 
one  to  blame  for  it  but  himself  Qa^,.  iii.  11). — 
Wm.  sleigh. 

V.  34.—  Theme:  Sabbath  barrenness. 

**  Then  shall  the  land  enjoy  her  Sabbaths^ 
as  long  as  it  lieth  desolate^  and  ye  be  in  y  ur 
enemies''  land ;  even  then  shall  the  land  rest, 
and  enjoy  her  Sabbaths." 

God  had  required  that  Sabbatical  years 
should  be  observed,  during  which  the  land 
should  rest ;  no  tillage  or  harvest  work  being 
done.  Owners  of  the  soil  would  disregard 
this  enactment,  thinking  they  would  beneiift 


S22 


HOMILEnC    COMMENTARY  ON        [cuap.  xxvi  40-42. 


by  making  the  land  yield  its  produce  throngh 
these  Sabbath  years.  Por  this  sin  against 
Ood's  ordinance,  the  people  would  forfeit 
occupancy  of  the  land,  and  pine  in  exile. 
"  TA^n  shall  the  land  enjoy  her  Sabbaths." 

1.  Sabbath  abuse. 

This  abuse  consisted  in  turning  God's  sab- 
bath into  a  time  of  selfish  gain. 

1  The  interval  of  rest  is  not  only  genial 
but  essential. 

2.  To  invade  that  interval  by  exacting  toils 
is  to  violate  a  benignant  ordinance  and  to 
outrage  God^s  right  of  control. 

3.  All  infringement  of  Sabbatic  rest  is  both 
%  folly  and  a  profanation  ;  for  greed  defeats 
itself  in  this  undue  exaction  of  return, 
whether  from  man  or  soil. 

4.  The  Sabbath  repose  was  designed  to 
give  leisure  for  sacred  interests  and  the  service 
of  God.  Man's  spiritual  life  needs  the 
pause. 

6  The  intrusion  of  selfish  and  covetous 
schemes  into  the  holv  period  is  the  assertion 
of  self-will  to  the  rejection  of  God's  will ;  the 
enthronement  of  self  in  the  supremacy  claimed 
by  God ;  thus  "  serring  the  creature  more 
than  the  Creator.** 

II.    SaBRVTH  DESOLATION. 

God  vM  refute  such  impious  greed,  such 
selfish  effrontery.  In  the  experience  of  these 
Israelites  He  cast  off  from  the  soil  those  who 
robbed  it  of  the  Sabbatic  rest,  and  He  gave 
full  requital  to  the  land  in  the  years  of  de- 
population. 

1.  Desolate  Sabbaths  are  still  requited  n^on 
transgressors. 

Men  neglect  the  holy  day,  in  scorn  of 
Heaven's  blest  law ;  and  do  their  own  work 
and  think  their  own  thoughts  through  its 
sacred  hours.  As  a  fact  in  human  experience 
now,  God  requites  this  wrong  upon  sinners  in 
a  restless  life,  a  weary  heart.,  a  troubled  con- 
science., a  shadowed  happiness. 

2.  Even  God's  children  suffer  exile  from 
sacred  scenes  and  Sabbath  privileges. 

Ih  days  of  health  they  trifled  with  their 
Sabbaths  ;  spent  them  in  indulgence  rather  than 
in  earnest  zeal  and  hallowed  communion ; 
even  desecrating  in  part  the  sacred  hours  by 
selfish  enjoyments  or  worldly  concerns.  This 
sin  lies  at  the  door  of  professedly  Christian 
people  to-day  ;  God  s  day  is  misused.  There 
will  come  afilictions — the  exile  time,  when  the 
soul  will  cry  out  for  the  living  God,  to  "  ap- 
pear before  God  ;"  and  in  Sabbaths  spent  tn 
pain  and  banishment,  in  restless  discomfort  of 
soul,  God  will  requite  the  wrong. 

3.  Unblest  Sabbaths  have  their  explan^ition 
in  this  law  of  requital.  The  sanctuary  ser- 
vices bring  to  the  hearer,  when  he  went  with 
eager  longing,  no  relief  or  help.  But  it  is  the 
requital  for  those  Sabbaths  of  indifference 
and  undevoutness  in  which  the  sanctuary  ser- 
vices have  been  contemned  and  marred. 
«*  Take  heed  how  ye  hear."  "  Call  the  Sab- 
bath a  delight;  the  holy  of  the  Lord,  honour- 
able.'* 


Vv.  40-42. — Theme:  God's  promises  to 

PEMTFNTS. 

Though  God  foreknew  and  foretold  that 
His  people  would  bring  upon  themselves  His 
heavy  judgments,  He  yet  assured  them  that, 
if  even  in  their  lowest  misery  they  should  re- 
turn to  Him  with  humiliation  and  contrition, 
He  would  restore  them  to  His  favour,  and  to 
the  land  from  whence  they  had  been  expelled. 

What  consolation  Nehemiah  derived  from 
th^se  declarations  (Nehem.  i.  5-9.)  1 

I.  What  is  that  bepbntancb  which  god 
Rp;QriRKS? 

1.  That  we  acknowledge  our  guilt.  Our 
father's  sins  as  well  as  our  own  are  first 
grounds  of  national  humiliation.  Our  own 
sins  are  the  chief  burden  of /^r.r^ //a/ contrition. 
But  sin  should  be  viewed  in  its  true  light,  as 
"  walk  ng  contrary  to  God  "  (Psa.  li.  4  . 

2.  That  "^Q  Justify  God  in  His  judgments. 
If  we  have  dared  to  walk  contrary  to  Him, 
is  not  He  justified  in  "  walking  contrary  to 
us "?  Whatever  inflictions  He  imposes  we 
have  reason  to  own  it  as  less  than  our  deserts 
(Ezra.  ix.  13),  and  that  His  judgments  are 
just  (Rev.  xvi.  7). 

3  That  we  ^^  thankful  for  His  dealings  by 
which  He  has  "humbled  our  uncircumcised 
hearts." 

Only  real  contrition  can  produce  this.  It 
realises  mercy  in  judgment,  and  love  in 
affliction. 

II.  The  connexion  between  our  repent- 
ance AND  gods  mercy. 

Repentance  is  void  of  merit.  Even  obedi- 
ence is  destitute  of  merit ;  "  when  we  have 
done  all  we  could  we  are  unprofitable  ser- 
vants." The  acknowledgement  of  a  debt  is  a 
very  different  thing  from  a  discharge  of  that 
debt.  A  cond  mned  criminal  may  be  sorry 
for  his  offences,  but  that  sorrow  does  not 
obliterate  his  crime,  still  less  entitle  him 
to  rewards.  Yet  there  is  connection  betv\feen 
repentance  and  pardon,  and  meekness  in  the 
exercise  of  mercy  towards  the  penitent — 

1.  On  God^s part.  For  repentance  glorifiei 
God.     [See  Joshua  vii.  19], 

2.  On  the  part  of  the  penitents.  It  incites 
to  loathing  of  the  sin,  and  to  adoration  oj 
Divine  grace. 

So  God  insists  on  the  condition,  "  If  they 
be  humbled,  then  will  I  pardon  "  For  then 
God  can  do  it  consistently  with  His  honour, 
and  they  will  make  a  suitable  improvement 
of  the  mercy  vouchsafed  them. 

III.  The  ground  and  measure  of  that 

M'^RCY  which  penitents  MAY  EXPECT. 

God's  covenant  with  their  ancestors  was  the 
basis  and  warrant  for  His  mercy  to  Israel 
(Vv.  42,  44,  and  46). 

His  covenant  with  us  in  Christ  is  our  hope 
and  guarantee. 

1.  Be  thankful  that  you  Ktoyet  within  recuh 
of  mercy. 

2.  Have  especial  respect  unto  the  cove- 
nant of  grace.  It  is  to  that  God  looks,  and  to 
that  should  we  look  also.     It  is  the  oiily  basis 


CHAP.  XXVI.  ] 


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 


323 


in   which  mercy    and  redemption    are    now 
possible. —  C.  Simeon^  JW.A. 

V.  45. —  Theme:  Gains  of  a  good  an- 
cestry. 

"I  will  for  their  sake  remembur thd  coven- 
ant of  their  ancestors." 

I.  The  vows  and  praykrs  of  a  goodlt 
parentage  exercise  influence  upon  tub 
divine  plans. 

That  '■^  covenant^*  is  thrice  referred  to  as 
determining  God's  arrangements  (Vv.  42,  44, 
45). 

Note  jfob's  prayers  for  his  children  (Job  i, 
6);  comp.  with  v.  10,  "Made  a  hedge  about 
Job  and  about  his  housed'' 

II.  Over  long  intervals  the  influence 
OF  pakental  Cove m ants  extend. 

This  "covenant  "  with  Abraham  was  made 
19C0  years  B.C.  (Gen.  xv.  13,  14),    It  is  now 


1900  j'ears  a.d.,  yet  the  word  stands,  "  They 
are  beloved  for  the.  fathers''  sakes.  For  the 
gifts  and  caling  of  God  are  without  repent- 
ance "(Rom.  xi.  28,  29). 

God  is  at  work,  though  He  seems  to  wait. 
**In  due  season  ye  shall  reap  if  ye  faint  not.* 
Praying  soul,  anxious  heart,  clinging  to  the 
promises — 
"  Hope,  and  be  undismayed  ; 

God  hears  thy  cries,  and  counts  thy  tears, 

God  shall  Hft  up  thy  head." 

III.     How    GRAND    THE      LINK     BKTWEEN    A 

Parent's  PiKTY  AND  the  children's  destinyI 

1 .  L  ive  and  pray  for  you  r  descendants. 

2.  Value  the  sacred  benefits  even  though  as 
yet  unrealised,  of  a  godly  ancestry. 

8.  Rest  in  the  unfailing  pledge  of  God  to  re- 
ward piety  and  prayer.  ^See  Addenda  to 
Chapter,  Ancestors \ 


ILLUSTRATIVE   ADDENDA    TO    CHAPTER   XXVL 


National  irreligton. 

"  Men  come  to  think  that  the  guilt  of  sins 
committed  in  concert  is  distributed  ;  and  that, 
if  there  be  a  thousand  men  banded  and  handed 
together  in  wickedness,  each  shall  have  but 
one  thousandth  part  of  guilt.  If  a  firm  suc- 
ceeds, the  gain  is  distributed  to  each  partner  ; 
but,  if  it  fails,  each  one  may  be  held  for  the 
whole  loss.  Whoever  commits  a  sin  will  bear 
the  sins,  whether  alone  or  with  a  thousand ; 
whoever  commits  or  connives  at  public  sin 
will  bear  the  blame,  Public gn\\t  always  has 
private  endorsement  ]  and  each  man  is  liable 
for  the  whole  note.'' — //.  W.  Beecher. 

"Sail  on,  0  Ship  of  State! 
Humanity,  with  all  its  fears, 
With  all  the  hopes  of  future  years, 
Is  hanging  breathless  on  thy  fate !" 

— Longfellow. 
*'  To  make  us  love  our  country,  our  coun- 
try ought  to  be  lovely." — Burke. 

"Our  heart,  our  hopes  are  all  with  thee. 
Our   hearts,   our  hopes,  our  prayers,  our 

tears, 
Our  faith  triumphant  o'er  our  fears. 
Are  all  with  thee,  are  all  with  thee." 

— Lon^ellow, 
VALoim. 
It  wta  said  by  a  nobUman  at  th«  grav«  of 


John  Knox :  *'  Here  lies  one  who  never  feared 
the  face  of  men." 

"  The  brave  man  is  not  he  who  feels  no  fear, 

For  that  were  stupid  and  irrational ; 

But  he  whose  noble  soul  its  fear  subdues, 
And  bravely  dares  the  danger  nature  shrinks 
from." 

•—jroanna  Bailie, 

Pridr  Crush'  d. 

"  Remember  what  thou  wert  before  thy 
birth — nothing',  what  thou  wert  for  many 
years  after  —  weakness  ;  what  in  all  thy 
life — a  great  sinner;  what  in  all  thy  ex- 
cellencies—a mere  debtor  to  God,  to  thy 
parents,  to  the  earth,  and  to  all  creatures. 
Upon  these  or  the  like  meditations,  if  we 
dwell,  we  shall  see  nothing  more  reasonable 
than  to  be  humble,  and  nothing  more  foolish 
than  to  be  proud." — Jeremy  Taylor, 

"  Pride  thrust  proud  Nebuchadnezzar  ou» 
of  men  s  society,  proud  Saul  out  of  his  king- 
dom, proud  Adam  out  of  paradise,  proud 
Hamaan  out  of  court,  and  proud  Lucifer  out 
of  Jaeaven." — Henry  Smith. 

Angkstors. 

"  My  chastity's  the  jewel  of  our  house, 
Bequeathed  down  from  my  ancestors." 

— Shakespeart. 


324  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  [CHAf.  XXYtt 


CHAPTER  XXVIL 

SUGGESTIVE  READINGS. 

V.  2. — ShaTl  malce  a  singular  vow.  The  Rabbins  interpreted  the  phrase  as 
meaning  to  *'  pronounce  a  vow,"  and  the  Chaldee  version  renders  the  words, 
"  shall  distinctly  pronounce  a  vow."  From  this  followed  the  subtle  and  mis- 
leading theory  that  no  vow,  unless  pronounced  audibly,  was  binding :  ignoring 
the  solemn  truth  that  *'  Our  thoughts  are  heard  in  heaven  ";  that  "  there  is  not 
a  word  in  our  tongue  but  the  Lord  knoweth  it  altogether  "  (Psa.  cxxxix  4). 
Thus  they  made  void  the  law  by  their  traditions.  Surely,  if  iniquity,  which 
secretely  is  "regarded  in  our  hearts"  (Psi.  Ixvi.  18),  offends  God,  so  that  He 
will  not  hear  our  prayers,  the  formation  of  a  solemn  resolve  in  the  privacy  of 
thought  is  *' regarded"  by  Him  as  equal  to  an  uttered  vow.  He  values  a 
purpose  when  it  is  as  yet  only  *'in  thy  heart "  (1  Kings  viii.  18). 

Vv,  1-13. — The  persons  shall  be  for  the  Lord  by  thy  estimation.  Gratitude 
impels  to  dedication ;  and  it  led  individual  Israelites  to  dedicate  themselves  or 
their  children  to  God's  service  iu  His  house  for  life.  Hannah  thus  devoted 
Samuel.  But  while  this  was  right,  and  it  is  well  for  the  zeal  and  love  of  the  soul 
to  find  outlet  in  such  acts  of  surrender,  vows  made  rashly  are  harmful  iu  them- 
selves and  displeasing  to  God,  whereas  hesitancy  in  fulfilling  right  vows,  will 
equally  wound  our  own  conscience  and  dishonour  the  Lord  (Ecoles.  v.  2-5). 

Vv.  14-25.— Sanctify  his  house  to  be  holy  to  the  Lord.  Just  as  "  persons  " 
(v.  2)  might  be  devoted  to  Jehovah,  so  might  possessions — houses,  lanHs, 
cattle,  and  all  worldly  substance.  Yet  God,  while  valuing  the  piety  which  led 
to  such  consecration,  gently  arrested  excess  of  zeal  which  uiight  carry  persons 
be}'ond  prudence  in  their  act  of  dedication.  In  verse  16  tlie  words  *'  some  part 
of  a  field*'  hold  the  suggestion,  which  a%rwards  became  a  recognized  regulation 
in  Israel,  that  no  man  should  vow  the  whole  of  his  estates  to  sacred  purposes, 
since  that  would  reduce  him  and  his  family  to  penury.  God  values  a  zeal  ruled 
by  prudence.  In  this  Christian  age  of  spiritual  obligations  it  rises  into  a  privi- 
lege to  be  permitted  to  use  sM  we  possess  for  the  glory  of  our  Lord  and  His 
kingdom  rather  than  to  consign  it  by  vows  to  any  ecclesiastical  order  or  priestly 
control.  Each  is  a  steward,  and  must  "spend  and  be  spent"  for  his  Lord  :  the 
right  fulfilment  of  our  stewardship  may  not  be  entrusted  to  another,  [See  Rom. 
xvi.  6-8].  Everj  man  must  bear  his  own  burden,  and  give  account  of  tiiraself  to 
God,  for  all  are  now  priests  unto  God"  (Rev.  i.  6),  each  having  his  ministry  to 
fulfil  and  his  sacrifiesto  present  (1  Pet.  ii.  4). 

Vv.  26-27. — The  Lord's  firstling :  no  man  should  sanctify  it.  Those  first- 
lings belonged  to  Jehovah  already  ;  were  His  property  by  express  enactment 
(Exod.  xiii.  2),  and  therefore  were  not  free  for  the  poaseiisor  to  dedicate.  A  vow 
implies  something  beyond  defined  duty.  God  has  made  some  sacred  demands 
upon  His  people  so  emphatic  as  to  necessitate  implicit  obedience;  but  be^^oud 
these  absolute  duties  there  is  a  realm  of  liberty  in  which  each  may  obe^  the 
inciiements  of  gratitude  and  the  spontaneity  (jf  luve. 

Vv.  28-29  —Every  devoted  thing  is  most  holy  unto  the  lord.    It   was 


CHAP,  xivii.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS,  825 


allowed  to  the  Israelite  to  transfer  to  God  complete  and  irrevocable  possession  of 
his  living  treasures  as  children  or  servants,  and  also  his  material  substance, 
cattle  and  estates.  Once  so  devoted,  it  could  never  be  redeemed.  So  Hannah 
devoted  Samuel,  and  Jephtha  his  daughter.  And  we,  who  have  surrendered 
ourselves  to  Christ,  and  devoted  our  children  in  baptismal  covenantjto  the  faith, 
may  not  "  draw  back  "  under  penalty  of  death.  The  Lord's  possessions  may  not 
be  recalled  from  their  sacred  purpose  and  aim,  "  Therefore  glorify  God  in  yo^r 
body  and  spirit,  which  are  His." 

Vv.  30-34.— The  tithe  of  the  land.     [See  *•  Eistwy  of  TUhes;'  hounij  on  thia 
section  of  chapter]. 


SECTIONAL  HOMILIEa 

Topic:  Laws  Concerning  Vows» 

Reasonable  to  suppose  that  pious  Hebrews,  anxious  to  obey  the  laws  of  the 
Lord,  would  resolve  upon  devoting  themselves  and  their  substance  to  His  service. 
Some  of  them  might  make  vows  under  sudden  sxcitement  or  ecstatic  feeling, 
which,  upon  calm  reflection,  they  would  devoutly  wish  commuted  or  remitted.' 
Moses,  and  his  successors,  would  need  to  know  how  to  deal  with  such  cases 
with  equity  to  worshipp'irs,  and  the  approval  of  Jehovah.  Hence,  necessity  and 
blessing  of  such  directions  contained  in  this  appendix  to  the  book  of  Leviticus 
which  teach,  ' 

I.  That  voluntary  and  special  vows  were  permitted  by  the  lord. 

The  people  were  commanded,  but  never  compelled  to  obey.  In  the' strictest 
injunctions  respecting  ritual,  a  margin  was  left  for  voluntary  service,  free  will 
offerings.  Special  vows  were  optional.  *'  If  thou  shalt  forbear  to  vow,  it  shall 
be  no  sin  to  thee"  (Deut.  xxiii.  22).  Circumstances  would  be  frequently  occur- 
ring to  prompt  the  formation  and  utterance  of  special  dedication  of  persons  or 
property  to  the  Lord,  e,g.,  special  blessing,  signal  deliverances,  etc.  Gratitude 
would  suggest  and  duty  demand  exceptional  service.  Enthusiastic  love,  always 
inventive  and  ready  to  lavish,  is  ready  to  offer  what  unsympathetic  spectators 
rashly  denominate  ''waste"  (Mark  xiv.  4).  Jehovah  accepts  unaccomplished 
purposes,  if  unavoidable  circumstances  or  personal  inabihty  prevent  their  tul- 
filrnent.  Vows  should  be  made  cautiously,  deliberately,  and  in  most  instances, 
conditionally;  because  further  enlightenment,  or  cbanged  conditions  may  render 
their  fulfilment  undesirable,  unnecessary,  or  even  im;possible. 

II.  That  vows  were  acceptable   to   the    lord   according  to  the   spirit 

WHICH  PROMPTED  THEM,  AND  IN    WHICH  THEY  WERE   PAID. 

When  circumstances  justified  an  Israelite  repenting  of  his  vow,  it  could  be 
comniutated  or  remitted,  or  some  compensation  off'ered  in  its  stead.  Jehovah 
would  accept  nothing  that  was  recklessly  or  reluctantly  presented.  All  adjust- 
ments and  decisions  were  to  be  made  according  to  the  standards  of  the  sanctuary 
not  according  to  human  fallibility  and  caprice.  Though  a  vow  should  not 
be  literally  performed,  it  must  he  perfectly  fulfilled  in  respect  to  honourable  in- 
tention, and  sacred  fidelity.  The  state  of  heart,  in  the  presentation  of  sacrifice 
determnied  the  value  of  the  gift.  This  law  has  never  been  repealed.  Through 
the  vail  of  the  Levitical  economy  beam  the  rays  of  the  Gospel,  which  do  not 
destroy  the  law,  but  fulfil  it. 

in.  That  freedom  op  choice  given  in  the    fulfilment  op  vows  did  no7 

CONTRAVENE  THE  PURPOSES  OP  THE  LORD  CONCERNING  HIS  WORK  AND  WORSHIP, 

The  compensation  paid  in  lieu  of  the  original  vow  went  to  sustain  the  sanctuarv 
services,  and  the  Lord  reserved  to  Himself  seme  unalienable  rights.  Some  thin/s 
when  devoted  could  not  be  withheld  or  withdrawn  under  any  ciroumstanc«g 


826  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  OIS  [chap,  xxvii.  1—8. 


He  demanderl  a  tenth  of  tlie  produce  of  the  land,  and  enforced  His  claim  with 
righteous  and  nnrelaxing  rigour.  Thus  the  preservation  and  perpetuation  of 
Jehovah's  worship  were  secured,  and  not  left  contingent  upon  the  fickleness  and 
uncertainty  of  human  devotedness.  Righteousness  lies  at  the  foundation  of  the 
Levitical  economy  ;  is  the  basis  of  natural  and  revealed  religion. 

Though  in  the  gospel,  Moses  and  Elias  withdrew,  and  we  see  "  Jesus  only  "; 
though  under  the  new  dispensation  the  yoke  of  service  is  easy,  the  burden  of 
sacrifice  light  r  yet  obedience  is  the  divine  test  of  love,  and  Christly  works  are 
the  essential  proofs  of  saving  faith.  Leviticus  is  a  witness  to  Christ  and  His 
gospel.  In  Him  we  have  combined  all  that  the  law  embodied,  —  <^/tor,  iSacri/ice, 
Priest. 

Simplicity,  and  purity  of  aims,  loftiest  motives,  deepest  meanings,  and  in- 
comparable excellence,  lift  the  law  and  the  gospel  infinitely  above  all  other 
religions  of  the  world.  The  superiority  to  Jewish  narrowness  and  bigotry,  to 
human  sinfulness  and  shortsightedness,  demonstrate  their  divinity  of  origin, 
mutual  dependencef  absolute  authority,  undying  vigour,  and  inestimable  wortL-^ 
F,  W.  B. 

Topic :  Comparative  Ability  (Vv.  1-8). 

1.  It  Is  distinctly  stated  that  no  obligation  enjorces  individuals  to  malce  a  vow 
to  the  Lord  (Deut.  xxiii.  22). 

2.  But  the  stringency  oi  fulfilling  a  vow  when  once  made  is  emphatically  laid 
'^own  (Deut.  xxiii.  21  ;  Eccles.  v.  4,  5). 

3.  The  practice  of  making  vows  largely  prevailed  during  the  Mosaic  dispensa- 
'  m  (1  Chron.  xxix.  9;  Judges  xi.  30  ;  Num.  xxx.  2,  etc.). 

4.  Voluntary  votos  had  recognition  or  place  in  the  Christian  Economy  {Acts 
Kvni.  18,  etc.).  Yet  in  the  act  of  devoting  ourselves  or  our  possessions,  it 
must  be  considered  that 

I.  Ability  is  no  standard  for  our  personal  accept  a  nce  with  God. 

It  was  obviously  a  question  of  capacity  or  resources,  when  a  man  was  making 
his  vow,  what  that  vow  should  be  ;  but  ability  or  resources  had  no  place  in  God's 
acceptance  of  the  individual  binuself.  The  rule  of  personal  acceptance  appears  in 
Exod.  xxx.  15. 

1.  Atonement  and  acceptance  stand  on  the  common  basis  of  guilt.  And 
there  is  no  difference  between  rich  and  poor  in  this. 

2.  Redemption  requires  an  equal  price  for  every  human  soul.  Christ's  full 
merits  are  needed  for  and  by  each  one. 

3.  No  votive  offering  is  accepted  unless  and  until  the  atonement  price  has  been 
paid. 

Then  we  may  come  with  our  vows.  But  Chrisfs  preciousvefts  must  proceed. 
Personal  merits  or  pos^ehsions  have  no  regard  with  God  until  t  I  rist  has  atoned 
for  our  souls.  Into  the  lelationship  of  acceptance  with  God  we  gau  only  enter 
— and  *'  we  have  boldness  to  enter  " — by  "  the  blood  of  Jesus." 

IT.  Ability  will  be  estimated  as  rjgulating  our  offerings  to  God. 

When  atonement  is  made  for  our  souls,  and  which  are  accepted  on  that 
ground,  then  we  may  bring  our  offerings. 

1.  ^he  differences  which  separate  «s  are  reckoned  in  the  "  estimation  **  of  our 
gifts.     It  is  thus  :  "  According  to  that  a  man  hath." 

2.  The  righteousness  of  God  requires  that  we  offer  according  to  what  He  ha* 
bestowed  on  us.     If  riches,  then  a  large  gift,  etc. 

3.  Our  own  Judgment  is  not  .*?  fflcient  to  decide  our  obligation.  **The  shekel  of 
the  sanctuary  is  to  weigh  every  offering.  All  this  disposes  of  fitfulness  and 
oaprice  in  the  performances  of  religion;  God  looks  to  our  bringing  our  utmost; 
and  lie  weighs  whcU  we  bring. 


Ci'Ai'.  XAVii.  14-35.]  THE  BOffK  OF  LEVITICUS. 


^£t 


PRIkIt  orG  ^^'  ^^^^'^   ^^^"^^  ™''  MEASURE  OP    OBLIGATION,  IS  DBTiiRMlNED  BY  THB 

Therojvas  a  rigid  rule  by  which  the  votive  offerings  were  estimated  :  but  to 
this  standard  so  me  were  too  poor  to  attain  (v.  8).  -  If  be  be  poorer  than  thy 
estimation  then  shall  he  present  himself  to  the  priest.^'  Note :  he  turns  from 
ifo...  to  tne;;rt.6-^;  from  the  embodiment  of  rig kteo as  exaction  to  the  represen- 
tative ot  gracious  mediation.  ^ 

1.  ^  sense  of  insutHcieacy  for  righteous  requirements  is  here  provided  for    '<  Wa 
have  a  High  Priest  over  the  house  of  God." 
^^Frorn  the  righteousness  of  the  law  we   may  turn  to  the  ^raciousness  of  the 

grace.     God  does  not  burden  the  weak;  He  meets  our   peuury  with  i^entlener 
His  grace  is  magnified  by  our  inability  to  rise  to  the  stan^iard^of  righCusLss 

tton        What  then  ?        Where  sin  abounded   grace   doth   much   more  abound  » 
preaihel^'"''  ''  "^'^^  """'  ^'  ^^  ^''^^"     "  ^^  '^'  ^'^'^  the  gospel  is 

Topic:  Redemption  op  votive  opperings  (Vv.  14- 35), 

(a)  '^ows  were  sometimes  made  erroneously  and  with  faulty  motives  •  for  if  i« 
human  to  err  In  God's  pity,  arrangements  were  sanctioned  for'releasng 
devotees  from  these  solemn  obligations  and  bonds.  ^ 

(6)  By  the  imposition  of  a  ransom  price,  which  was  in  the  nature  of  a  fine 
rashness  was  punished,  and  thus  checked.  * 

(c)  This  insistance  upon  an  equivalent  for  the  withdrawal  of  votive  offerings 
enforced  the  fact  that  inconsiderate  action  or  impetuosity  could  not  be  neutralised 
by  the  mere  feeling  of  regret  for  what  had  been  done:  God  exacted  His  dues 
and  bound  them  to  a  reverence  for  His  righteous  claims. 

1.  Spontani^ity  in  religious  offerings. 

Into  every  career  come  such  manifest  mercies  or  gi-acious  deliverances  as  to 
tTardTmer^  '''■'''  "  "^^'^  '"'^^  '  ""'^'  ""^^  *^^  ^^^^  for  al^ms "Lefi^ 

giai  hirrii^Ti;^^^^^^     ^^^  ''^^  ^-^^^^  *^  -^«  ^^  ^-^--  ^he 

2.  The  outgoing  of  our  gratitude  is  arrested  by  no  strict  imposts  or  demands. 
The  offermg  may  be  a  person  or  his  possessions.  God  allows  freedom  where  He 
can. 

tinn  ^^^r^lT"^  '"'''''  for  gratitude  should  find  outlet  in  exceptional  oonsecra- 
tion.  Th>s  "singular  vow  was  something  in  excess  of  the  usual  religious  gifts 
and  services  ;  it  was  something  besides  the  continual  burnt  offerinir 

Ask  (a)  Is  there  one  of  God's  children  to  whom  God,  in  providence  or  grace 
l^^^^^t  extended  excepttonal  proofs  of  loving  kindness  or  deliverance?     "What 
hath  God  wrought  I"     What  abounding  grace  has  He  shown  i 

(6)  Is  there  o»«  of  God's  children  from  whom  God  has  received  no  return  of 
rf«rf»ca«.««  or  devotion  for  His  wondrous  goodness  and  love  »  Have  our  heart, 
been  sepulchres  in  which  to  bury  the  records  of  His  love  J 

(c)  Is  there  one  of  God's  children  in  whom  awakes  a  sense  of  "how  mucoh  he 

air?     .'I  ^m'n'""^  """   *°/'^.k'*";   ""r"'  P'^"^^^  ""   *"«  oonTcratinS 

1     1"     (XA      r^")'.^"''^  unto  the  Lord   now  in   the  presene  of  all     Hii 

people.      God  values  a  wiUmg  offering,  and  wait*  to  receive  what  we  earnesuj 


:>28  HOMILETJC  COMMENTARY  ON        [chap,  xxvii.  30—83 


II.  Enforcement  of  espoused  obligations. 

It  is  our  melancholy  tendency  to  lapse  from  vows  ma(7e  In  times  of  mercy. 

1.  God  holds  us  to  our  vows.  In  some  covenants  and  consecrations  He  allows 
no  recall  (Vv.  28,  29) ;  while  in  every  instance  some  snbstitution  or  commuta- 
tion is  required.  This  is  an  enforcement  of  the  law  of  fidelity.  Between  God 
and  man  there  must  be  the  fulfilment  of  rights.  Never  does  ffe  violate  an 
obligation  to  which  He  has  pledged  Himself.  He  fulfils  all  that  He  covenants 
to  regard — precious  promises,  supplies  of  grace,  riches,  provisions  of  mercy, 
plenteous  redemption.  There  is  no  withdrawal  from  His  word,  on  **  that  which  He 
has  caused  us  to  hope  :"  '*  faithfulness  is  the  girdle  of  His  loins." 

Neither  may  there  be  fickleness  in  our  obligations  to  Him.  Jacob  might  forget 
Bethel  amid  his  successes  in  Padan-aran ;  but  God  did  not :  "  Arise,  go  up  to 
Bethel,  and  make  there  an  altar  unto  God  that  appeared  unto  thee,"  etc.  (Gen. 

XXXV.   1). 

2.  God  concedes  to  our  weaknesses.  "He  Is  very  pitiful  and  of  tender 
mercy,"  not  a  hard  task-master.  W  hile  maintaining  the  law  of  righteousness, 
and  requiring  our  fidelity.  He  yet  provides  for  our  short-sightedness  and  varia- 
bility. Vows  made  in  an  earnest  moment  might  prove  most  burdensome  and  in- 
expedient to  fulfil.  We  see  only  the  moment ;  fuller  reflexion  may  show  us  that 
the  pledge  we  made  was  not  wise,  or  that  it  would  overtax  us.  Therefore,  God 
allows  commutation.     Vows  were  redeemable  on  terms  here  defined. 

a.  A  gracious  principle  of  considerateness  and  concession  runs  through  all  God*s 
requirements  of  us.  He  looks  for  the  spirit  of  fidelity,  the  wish  to  act  aright ;  and 
then  He  relaxes  the  literal  bond.  For  He  sees  our  frailty.  "  Know  then  that 
the  Lord  exacteth  of  thee  less  than  thine  iniquity  requireth  "  (Job  xi.  6). 

b.  The  gentle  law  of  substitution  is  here  unveiled.  God  accepts  something  else^ 
somethinof  hss,  in  the  place  of  that  we  owe  Him.  We  owe  Him  perfect  obedience. 
He  accepts  the  wish  and  effort  to  obey.  We  owe  Him  all  we  are  and  have  :  He 
accepts  a  portion  of  our  time,  substance,  and  energies.  We  owe  Him  our  com- 
plete ruin,  for  "  the  soul  that  sinneth  shall  die  ";  but  He  says,  "  Let  the  wicked 
forsake  his  way,  and  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts,  and  let  him  return"  etc., 
and  He  will  accept  this,  and  stay  the  doom. 

In  the  Person  and  Sacrifice  of  Christ,  substitution  reaches  its  climax.  But  it  was 
not  something  less  when  He  stood  for  the  human  race  :  it  was  infinitely  more  I 
A  perfect  Son  for  rebellious  children ;  a  spotless  Sacrifice  for  a  sinful  world. 
"  Thanks  be  unto  God  for  His  unspeakable  gift"     See  Addenda,  Fows^ 


Topic:  The  History  op  Tithes  (Vv.  30- 33), 

I.  The  Scripture  records  concerning  the  law  of  tithes. 

1.  Antecedent  to  the  Mosaic  legislation.  The  principle  of  dedicating  a  tenth  to 
God  was  recognised  in  the  act  of  Abraham^  who  paid  tithes  of  his  spoils  to 
Melchizedek  in  his  sacerdotal  rather  than  his  sovereign  capacity  (Gen  xiv.  20 ; 
Heb.  vii.  6).  Later,  in  Jacob's  vow  (Gen.  xxviii.  22),  the  dedication  of  a  "tenth" 
presupposes  a  sacred  enactment,  or  a  custom  in  existence  which  fixed  that  pro- 
portion rather  than  any  other  proportion,  such  as  a  seventh,  or  twelfth. 

2.  The  Mosaic  statutes.  These  given  in  this  section  lay  claim  in  God's  name 
to  the  tenth  of  produce  and  cattle.  An  after  enactment  fixed  that  these  tithes 
were  to  be  paid  to  the  Levites  for  their  services  (Numb,  xviii.  21-24),  who  were 
to  give  a  tithe  of  what  they  received  to  the  priests  (Vv.  26-28).  The  sacred 
festivals  weie  later  made  occasion  for  a  further  tithe  (Deut.  xii.  5,  6,  11,  17; 
xiv.  22,  23) ;  which  was  allowed  to  come  in  mone^ -value  rather  than  m  kind 
(Deut.  xiv.  24-26). 


CHAP.  XXVII.  84.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS,  32: 

3.  HezeMaK s  reformation.    This  was  signalized  by  the  eagerness  with  which  the 
people  came  with  their  tithes  (2  Chron.  xxxi   5,  6). 

4.  After  the  Captivity.  Nehemiah  made  marked  and  emphatic  arrangements 
concerning  the  tithing  (Nebem.  x.  37  ;  xii.  44). 

5.  Prophets'  teachings.  Both  Amos  (iv.  4)  and  Malachl  (iii.  10)  enforce  this 
as  a  duty,  by  severely  rebuking  the  nation  for  its  neglect — as  robbing  God. 

6.  In  Christ's  day.  Our  Lord  exposed  and  denounced  the  ostentatious 
punctiliousness  of  the  Pharisees  over  their  tithing  (Matt,  xxiii.  23). 

7.  Teaching  of  the  New  Testament.  The  fact  of  the  existence  of  ministers  as  a 
distinct  class,  assumes  provision  made  for  their  maintenanoe.  The  necessity  for 
such  provision,  and  the  right  on  which  it  is  founded,  are  recognized  in  such  texts 
as  Matt.  X.  10 ;  Lk.  x.  7;  Rom.  xv.  27;  1  Cor.  ix.  7-14. 

II.  The  Ecclesiastical  development  op  the  demand  for  tithes. 

1.  The  Fathers  urged  the  obligation  of  tithing  on  the  earliest  Christians. 
The  ** Apostolical  Canons,"  the  "Apostolical  Constitutions,"  St.  Cyprian  on 
*'  The  Unity  of  the  Church"  and  the  writings  of  Ambrose,  Chrysostom,  Augus 
tine,  and  other  Fathers  of  both  divisions  of  the  early  Church,  abound  with 
allusions  to  this  as  a  duty ;  and  the  response  was  made,  not  in  enforced  tithing, 
but  by  voluntary  offerings. 

2.  The  legidtition  of  the  first  Christian  Emperors  recognised  the  obligation  of 
maintaining  the  ministers  of  Christ.     But  while  they  assigned  lauds  and  other 
property  to  their  support,  they  enacted  no  general  payment  of  the  tenth  of  the 
produce  of  the  lands. 

3.  Ancient  Church  councils  favoured  titbings  of  land  and  produce,  e.g.^  the 
Councils  of  Tours,  a.d.,  567;  the  second  Council  of  Macon,  a.d.,  585;  the 
Council  of  Rouen,  a.d.,  650;  of  Nantes,  a.d.,  660;  of  Metz,  756. 

4.  Its  first  imperial  enatiment.  Charlemagne  (king  of  the  Franks,  A.D.  768- 
814;  and  Roman  Emperor,  a.d.  800-814)  originated  the  enactment  of  tithes  as 
a  public  law,  and  by  his  capitularies  formally  established  the  practice  over  the 
Roman  Iiimpire  which  his  rule  swayed.  From  this  start  it  extended  itself  over 
Western  Christiandom  ;  and  it  became  general  for  a  tenth  to  be  paid  to  the 
Church. 

5.  Introduction  of  tithes  into  England.  Offa,  king  of  Mercia,  Is  credited  with 
its  assertion  here,  at  the  close  of  the  eighth  century.  It  spread  over  other  divi- 
sions of  Saxon  England,  until  Ethel wulf  made  it  a  law  for  the  whole  English 
realm.  It  remained  optional  with  those  who  were  compelled  to  pay  tithes  to 
determine  to  what  Church  they  should  be  devoted  ;  until  Innocent  III.  addressed 
to  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  a.d.  1200,  a  decretal  requiring  tithes  to  be 
paid  to  the  clergy  of  the  parish  to  which  payees  belonged.  About  this  time  also, 
tithes,  which  had  originally  been  confined  to  those  called  praeiial,  or  the  fruits 
of  the  earth,  was  extended  to  every  species  of  profit  and  to  the  wages  of  every 
kind  of  labour. 

6.  The  great  and  small  tithe.  The  great  tithe  was  made  upon  the  main  pro- 
ducts of  the  soil,  corn,  hay,  wood,  etc. ;  the  small  on  the  less  important  growths. 
To  the  rector  the  great  tithes  of  a  parish  are  assigned,  and  to  the  vicar  the  small. 

7.  Tithes  paid  **  in  kind''  These  claim  the  tenth  portion  of  the  product 
itself  (Vv.  30-33).  This  is  varied  by  a  payment  of  an  annual  valuation ;  or  an 
average  taken  over  seven  years;  or  by  a  composition,  which,  in  a  bulk  sum, 
redeems  the  land  from  all  future  impost,  rendering  it  henceforth  "tithe  free." 

III.  The   arguments  for  rejecting  the  modern  impost  of  Tithes. 

1.  The  rule  of  Equity  is  infringed.  When  every  man  belonged  to  the  one 
Church  of  the  realm,  all  inhabitants  might,  with  some  show  of  rectitude,  be 
called  to  support  it.  In  Ireland  the  larger  part  of  the  nation  was  antagonistic 
to  the  Church,  for  which  tithes  were,  through  many  generations,  levied,  and  the 
impost   was   resented  as  an  affront  and  injustice.     In  England  a  half  of  the 


330  UOMILETIC    COMMENTARY  ON  [chap,  xxvii. 

population  dissents  from  the  Established  Church,  and  both  rears  and  maintains 
its  own  sanctuaries,  and  also  sustains  Noncomformist  worship;  on  these  adherents 
of  English  Free  Churches  the  tithe  is  an  oppression  made  in  unrighteousness.  In 
Wales,  where  the  tithe-sustained  Church  has  a  vastly  smaller  proportional 
attachment,  the  enforcement  of  the  law  is  even  a  greater  breach  of  equity.  The 
only  law  of  equity  in  such  ecclesiastical  questions  is — they  who  use  a  Church 
should  pay  for  its  support. 

2.  The  genius  and  teaching  of  Christianity  is  violated.  Christianity  enforces 
DO  demand  by  law,  it  makes  appeal  to  love.  It  asks  willinghood.  It  states 
this  principle:  *'That  as  there  was  a  readiness  to  willy  so  there  may  be  a 
performance'^  (2  Cor.  viii.  11).  And  it  limits  the  acceptahlenes  s  of  what  is 
t  ffered  by  this  law  :  "  If  there  hQ  first  a  willing  mind^  it  is  accepted  according  to 
that  a  man  hath,"  etc.  (2  Cor.  viii.  12).  If  exaction  and  impost  were  to  cease,  there 
would  be  good  hope  that  all  sections  of  Christ's  Church  in  our  land  would  con- 
bine  to  maintain  the  historic  sanctuaries  of  Episcopalianism,  and  prove  that 
charity  and  willinghood  have  yet  a  deep  root  in  the  Christian  heart  of  England. 

3    The  sacred  persuasives  to  generosity  in  Church  maintenance  are  : 

(a)  That  as  the  gospel  is  superior  to  the  law,  and  Christ  to  Moses,  so  should 
Christian  generosity  surpass  Jewish. 

(b)  That  as  to  Jews  Zion  was  dear,  and  for  her  they  lavished  vast  wealth,  so 
should  Christians  brings  with  yet  grander  houutifulnesSy  of  their  substance  to  tha 
cause  and  Church  of  their  blessed  Lord. 

(c)  That  it  is  beyond  question  a  N'ew  Testament  obligation  on  all  believers  to 
support  the  ministry  and  maintain  the  ordinances  of  the  gospel  (I  Cor.  ix. 
13,  14). 

{d)  That  while  the  Gospel  supplies  motives  to  love  and  consecration  and  sacrifice^  it 
leaves  Christians  to  apply  these  to  themselves,  and  work  out  sacred  principles  in 
beautiful  performances. 

Note. — The  Jew  devoted  nearly  one-third  of  his  income  to  religious  purposes, 
by  the  command  of  the  law ;  a  tenth  for  the  Levites,  in  property  (Numb,  xviii. 
20,  etc  ) ;  another  tenth  for  the  Sanctuary,  chiefly  in  cattle  and  grain  (Deut.  xiv. 
22,  etc.)  ;  and  every  third  year  a  tenth  to  the  poor. 

Christian:  "How  much  owest  thou  unto  my  Lord  1  Take  thy  bill  and  write 
down  quickly." 

Topic:  Epilogue. — The  Law  and  the  Gospel. 

Leviticus,  like  the  Tabernacle,  may  present  to  the  cursory  observer,  a  rough 
and  uninviting  exterior ;  but  within  are  found  priceless  blessings  for  those  who 
devoutly  draw  near,  and  reverently  worship.  The  Law  may  seem  cumbrously 
elaborate,  needlessly  exacting;  but  banctified  intelligence  and  patient  investiga- 
tion will  discover  mercy  in  its  purposes,  and  evangelical  doctrines  in  its  statutes. 
The  letter  may  sometimes  kill,  but  the  spirit  invariably  gives  life.  In  their 
sublime  ends,  the  old  and  the  new  dispensations  are  indissolubly  linked  together, 

thus  suggesting — 

I.  Thp:  points  upon  which  the  law  and  the  gospel  essentially  agree. 

1.  Both  jwocldm  the  spotless  holiness  and  inflexible  justice  of  Jehovah.  The  law 
allows  no  connivance  at,  or  compromise  with  sin  ;  so  the  gospel  shows  no  weak- 
ness or  flaw  in  the  inflexibility  of  justice,  for  Christ  fulfilled  the  law  and  satis- 
fied the  utmost  claims  of  Divine  justice.  Perfect  holiness  is  exhibited  in  His 
blameless  life,  enforced  in  His  immaculate  example. 

2.  Both  proclaim  the  extent  and  heinousness  of  sin.  For  all  sins,  even  those  of 
ignorance,  sacrifices  were  provided.  The  high  priest,  with  the  whole  nation, 
needed  forgiveness.     Many  and  costly  oblations  taught  how  universal,  inveterate 


CHAP.  XXVII.  34.]  THE  BOOK    OF   LEVITICUS.  331 


and  deep-dyed  is  sin.     The  Cross  teaches  that  the  sins  of  the  world  can  only  be 
washed  away  by  the  precious  blood  of  Christ. 

3.  Both  proclaimed  the  necessity  of  mediation  and  vicarious  sacrifice  in  order  to 
reconciliation  to  God,  Priests  introduced  men  to  God,  interceded  for  them. 
The  sacrifices  offered  were  in  the  offerer's  stead.  The  gospel  reveals  one  Me- 
diator between  God  and  man,  one  oflering  of  the  sins  of  the  whole  world. 

4.  Both  proclaimed  the  necessity  of  faith  <xn2  obedience  in  order  to  salvation.  The 
offererof  Jewish  sacrifices  identified  himself  with  the  victim,  and  appropriated 
the  promised  blessing.  Sanctificatio-i  and  consecration  were  to  accompany  the 
application  for  forgiveness.  Sacrificej  were  ouly  efficacious  when  associated  with 
holiness,  the  adoption  of  a  new  life.  So,  in  the  gospel  believers  are  saved /rom 
not  m,  their  sins.  Without  holiness  no  man  can  see  the  Lord.  All  who  bear 
the  name  of  Christ  and  believe  on  Him  must  depart  from  iniquity. 

II.  The  points  upon  which  the  law  and  the  gospfl  progressively  differ 

1.  The  Law  enforced  authoritative  commands;  the  Gospel  exhibits  gracious  con- 
straints.  The  former  appealed  to  fear,  the  latter  appeals  to  love.  Thunders 
peal  from  Sinai,  music  rings  from  Calvary. 

2.  The  Law  seened  to  limit  its  legislation  to  time;  the  Gospel  discloses  immor- 
tality, and  points  to  eternity.  The  Israelites  met  with  retribution  at  tho  hands 
of  Moses,  wrong-doers  are  now  reminded  of  the  final  account.  *'  the  iudgment 
seat  of  Christ.''  '  juugmeni 

3.^  The  Law  revealed  God  as  man's  Sovereign  King  ;  the  Gospel  reveals  Him  as 
mans  loving  Father.  Revelations  at  Sinia  were  august,  awe-inspiring  •  made 
God  known  as  Sovereign  and  Governor.  Christ  revealed  the  Fatherhood  of  God  • 
that  man,  though  fallen  and  profligate,  is  His  child ;  that  for  him  there  are 
many  mansions  and  unfading  joys. 

4.  The  Law  took  main  cognizance  of  overt  acts;  the  Gospel  has  primary  respect 
to  motives  and  intentions  of  the  heart.  Thus,  the  morality  of  the  New  Testament 
m  exceedingly  pure  and  absolutely  perfect;  a  transcript  of  the  holiness  of  the 
Divine  nature. 

5.  The  Law  was  to  he  supplanted  by  some  better  thing  ;  the  Gospel  is  final  con^ 
elusive,  and  complete.  We  look  back  to  the  law  and  see  the  foregleammg  of  the 
gospel ;  we  look  forward  thro.igh  Apocalyptic  visions  to  the  glorious  consumma- 
tion,  when  the  redeemed  universe  will  echo  with  the  song  of  Moses  and  the  Lamb 

Hallelujah  1     For  the  Lord  God  Omnipotent  reigneth." F.  W.  B.  * 

Topic:  "Commandments  which  the  Lord  commanded  Moses '*  (V.  34). 

The  Divine  regulations  and  requirements  of  Leviticus  are  to  be  classified  as^ 

1.  Ceremonial:  and  consequently  special  to  the  Jewish  nation;  not  binding 
upon  or  applicable  to  this  Christian  age.  ^ 

2.  Moral  :  for  precepts  and  teachings  intermingle  with  the  ceremonies  whose 
relevancy  and  urgency  are  not  to  be  restricted  to  any  nation  or  period  :  there  are 
Divine  directions  for  us  as  for  Israel. 

3.  Spiritual :  A  foreshadowing  of  gospel  doctrines  and  of  the  better  covenant 
of  grace,  and  of  the  privileges  of  the  Christian  life,  runs  through  the  Levitical 
institutes.  In  these  types  and  premonitions  Christ  and  His  work  are  prefic^ured  • 
and,  therefore,  we  read  our  inheritance  in  these  Jewish  si^ns  "^         ' 

I.  Sao.^ifiob  AND  incense.  Theie  have  found  their  verification  in  the  substitu- 
tionary  death  of  Jesus. 

II.  Tabernacle  sanctities  and  solemnities.  These  have  become  glorified 
in  the  incarnation  of  Christ  which  they  predicted,  and  the  indwelling  of  the 
Spirit  in  the  believer  which  they  pourtrayed. 


332         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  BOOK    OF  LEVITICUS. 


III.  Camp  duties  andpurtfyings  These  find  their  sac^red  realization  in  those 
obligations,  responsibilities,  and  services,  which  now  distinguish  believers  who 
form  the  community  of  Christ's  living  Church. 

IV.  Holy  feasts  and  convocations.  These  proclaim  the  spiritual  fulness  and 
delights  with  which  the  redeemed  in  Christ  are  now  enriched  ;  and  those  "times 
of  refreshing  "  with  which  the  Spirit  gladdens  humble  hearts  in  which  Emmanuel 

dwells. 

V.  Altar  offerings  and  vows.  These  mark  that  consecration  of  life  and 
love  which  all  who  know  the  Lord  should  yield  to  Him,  and  which  both  distin- 
guish the  Christian  character  and  dignify  the  Christian  name. 

**Unto  Him  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  His  own  blood,  and 
hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  uiito  God  and  His  Father  ;  to  Him  be  glory  and 
dominion  for  ever  and  ever,  Amen." 


ILLUSTRATIVE  ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  XXVIL 


Vows  Unpaid. 

"Praise  should  always  follow  answered 
prayer.  It  was  thus  with  one  man  ;  he  was 
very  ill ;  a  great,  strong  man  in  his  day  ;  yet 
disease  shrivelled  him  up,  laid  him  upon  a 
lowly  bed,  made  him  pray  to  the  humblest 
creature  in  his  house  for  farours  hour  by 
hour.  As  he  lay  there,  in  his  lowliness  and 
weakness,  he  said,  "  If  God  would  raise  me 
up  I  would  be  a  new  man,  I  would  be  a 
devout  worshipper  in  the  sanctuary,  I  would 
live  to  His  glory.''  And  God  gathered  him 
up  again  ;  didn't  break  the  bruised  reed  ;  did 
not  quench  the  smoking  flax,  but  permitted 
the  man  to  regain  his  faculties.  And  he  was 
not  well  one  month  till  he  became  as  worldly 
as  he  was  before  his  affliction  He  prayed  as 
if  his  heart  loved  God ;  and  when  he  got  his 
health  back  again  he  was  a  practical  atheist, 
he  was  virtually  the  basest  of  blasphemers." 

yose/>/i  Parker,  D.D. 

"  C5ftll  to  thy  God  for  grace  to  keep 

Thy  vows;  and  if  thou  break  them  weep; 
Weep  for  thy  broken  vows,  and  vow  again  ; 
Vows  made  with  tears  cannot  be  made  in  vain. 

Then  once  again 
I  vow  to  mend  my  ways ; 

Lord,  say  Amen, 
And  Thine  be  all  the  praise." 

G.  Herbert. 

"  It  is  the  purpose  that  makes  strong  the 

vow ; 
Rut  vows  to  every  purpose  must  not  hold." 

Shakespeare. 

'CTnheedfal  towa  may  heedf  ally  be  broken.*' 


Tithes 

*'  I  know  of  two  men  who  started  business 
with  this  view:  *  We  will  give  to  God  one- 
tenth  of  our  proBts.'  The  first  year  the 
profits  were  considerable ;  the  tithe  was  con- 
sequently considerable.  The  next  year  there 
was  increase  in  the  profits,  and,  of  course, 
increase  in  the  tithe.  In  a  few  years  the 
profits  became  very,  very  large  indeed,  so 
that  the  partners  said  one  to  another:  'Is 
not  a  tenth  of  this  rather  too  much  to  give 
away  ?  Suppose  we  say  now  wo  will  give  a 
twentieth?'  And  they  gave  a  twentieth; 
and  the  next  year  the  profits  had  fallen 
down;  the  year  after  they  fell  down  again, 
and  the  men  said  to  one  another  as  Chr  stians 
should  say  in  such  a  case,  '  Have  not  we 
broken  our  vow?  Have  we  not  robbed  God?' 
And  in  no  spirit  of  selfish  calculation,  but 
with  humility  of  soul,  self-reproach  and  bitter 
contrition  they  went  back  to  God  and  told 
Him  how  the  matter  stood,  prayed  His  for- 
giveness, renewed  their  vow,  and  God  opened 
the  windows  of  heaven  and  came  back  to 
them  and  all  the  old  prosperity." — Joseph 
Farktr,  D  D. 

^  Restore  to  God  His  due  in  tithe  and  time ; 
A  tiihe  purloined  cankers  the  whole  estate." 

G.  Herbert, 

*'  I  cannot  love  Thee  as  I  would, 
Yet  pardon  me,  O  Highest  God  1 
My  life,  and  all  I  call  my  own, 
I  lay  before  1  hy  mercy  throne : 
And  if  a  thousand  lives  were  mine, 
0  sweetest  Lord,  they  should  be  Thina, 
And  scanty  would  the  offering  be, 
Bo  richly  ha^t  Thou  loved  me." 

From  the  German* 


TOPICAL    INDEX. 


-•••- 


PAOB. 

Introductory  Notes...^               .^  .....  1 
Chapter   I:    Th«;   Law     of  the  Buent 

Sacrifices         „„.            2 

Suggestive  Readings  ~.~  —  3 

The  Levitical  Ritual             ....  4 

Commun'on  through  Altar  Offerings 4 

Worship  by  Sacrifice             ..~.  6 

A  Sweet  Savour  for  Acceptance  .^..  8 

Significance  of  the  Burnt  Offering  .....  9 

Variety  in  Sacrifices              ....  ««.  10 

God  within  the  Tabernacle  ...„  «,..  12 

Revelation  of  Propitiation    ..^  .....  12 

Way  of  Access  to  God           ...«  ....  >  3 

Necessity  of  Sacrifice            .»«  »».  14 

Volition  in  Worship                ..^  ...  14 

Acceptance  with  God            ««.  «^  15 

The  Altar  Fire       ....             ««  «».  16 

The  Spirit's  Efficacy             »«,  «...  17 

A  Life  Offering       .^  „...  17 

Completeness  in  Self  Devotion            18 

illustrated  Addenda             —  18,  19 


Chapter  II :  Bloodless  Sacrificfs  :  The 

F*.OD  Offerings               .....            20 

Suggestive  Readings 20,  21 

Homage  Graced  with  Excellencies     21 

Maintenance  of  Priestly  Ministrations  23 

Suggestiveness  of  the  Meat  Offering 24 

Character  as  Qualifying  Service         25 

Resurrection  Emblems         ..>  26 

Subduedness  and  Meekness  of  Christ 27 

Christ  the  Food  of  Privileged  Souls...  28 

A  Memorial  on  God's  Altar 28 

Purity  in  Service  of  the  Lord              -...  28 
Illustrative  Addenda            — ,              28,  29 


Chapter   III :  Tub  Peace  Offering  of 

Thanksgiving  .....            .^            29 

Suggestive  heailin^s  ...  •»  29,30 

Explanatory  Homily             „^             .....  30 

Peace-Offoring  Sacrifices      .....             .....  31 

Feast  of  Man's  Fellowship  with  God 33 

Peace  by  Fullilling  Divine  Conditions  35 

Peace  Resulting  from  Propitiation     35 

Faultlessness  in  Sacrifice     .....             ««,  36 

Identification  of  Offerer  with  Offering  36 

God's  Positive  Commands    «...  36 

Peace  Associated  with  Penitence       «».  36 

Succession  in  Sacrifices        .....  37 

The  Best  Deserved  by  God  .....            «...  37 

Obedience  the  Test  of  Faith..^.            «».  37 

Illustrative  Addenda            ..»            •»  88 


PAGE. 

Chapter  IV :  Sacrtficfs  for  Sins        .....  38 
Suggestive  h  eadings   ....               ....        38,39,40 

Sins  Committed  in  Ignorance               40 

Sinai's  Law  occasioned  the  Sin-Offering  43 

Ignorance  in  Sinning             ««,             «...  44 

Defiled  Sanctities   ....             ««,             ««  45 

Sin's  Fearful  Aspects            .....            «.«  46 

Sin-Offering  Meets  Man's  Need          47 

Three  Aspects  of  the  Sin-Offering      .....  48 
Eminent   Sinfulness  of  Error    in    the 

Priest  ..„               ....  49 

Sin-Offering  for  the  Congregation       «...  60 

Ruler     ...               .....  61 

Common  People ...«  62 

Sins  through  Ignorance        ..«              «...  63 

,,     in  the  Priesthood          ««.             ...  63 

Sevenfold  Purging .««  53 

Expiation  in  the  Gaze  of  Heaven         53 

Sin  Loathed  by  God                ...             54 

Discipleship   following    Christ   to  Re- 
proach                .....             .....             «...  64 

Hidden  Sin             ««,            ««,            ».«  65 

Good  New3             ««,             ««,             ««.  65 

Common  People     ««.             »«,             «.«  55 

Forgiven .....             ««,             «,„  65 

Culpability  of  Ignorance      .....             55 

Scripture  the  Antidote  for  Ignorance ....  56 
Illustrative  Addenda            «...              57, 58 

Chapter  V:    Trespasses    Heedlessly 

Committed         .....            ...„            ....  58 

Suggestive  Readings  ««.        58,  59,  60 

Complacent  Ignorance           ««,             «...  60 

Conniving  at  Wrong-doing  .»«             ««.  61 

Contagiousness  of  Sin           ..,«             ,««  62 

R'^sponsibility  of  Words       ««.             •».  63 

Way  of  Pardon       .««             ,««  63 

Contraction  of  Defilement    ...«             ««.  64 

What  God  expects  of  Us      .«.             ««.  64 

Mediation    .««             «.«  65 

Divine  Forgiveness                ««,             «...  65 

Trespasses  done  Tgnorantly 65 

"  Amends  "  by  Christ  for  Man's  Faults  66 

Trespass  P««tialty  ..«.             ««.             ««.  67 

Sacrilege                 «^            ««,             ««.  68 

Reparation              ««             ««.  69 

Error  Through  Inadvertence              69 

Illustrative  Addenda  «»  70, 71 

Chapter  VI:  Trfspass  Offerings;  and 

Priestly  Consecration 72 

Suggestive  Readings  72,  73 

Distinctions  between  Trespasses  against 

God  and  Man     «.«            .«..            73 


11. 


TOPICAL   INDEX. 


FIAB. 

Harm  done  by  Trespasi      .^  ««.  75 

Restitution  made  for  Wrong...^  ,^  76 

Duty  of  Honesty    ....  .^  77 

Breach  of  Confidence           .....  ....  78 

Depositing  Property              .....  ....  78 

Beneficence  of  a  Redeemed  Life  .„.  78 

Dishonesty              ....            .....  .....  79 

Dignity  Linked  to  Duty        .....  ....  80 

Sacred  Attire         ....  80 

Divine  Fire  Humanly  Maintained  ....  81 

Fire  not  to  Go  Out .....  81 

The  Altar  Fire       82 

„          „        A   Symbol  of  Regener- 
ating Grace  ...  82 

Inextinguishable  Fire           .....  82 

Priestly  Services  and  Privileges  .....  SH 

Divine  Friendship ....  83 

Ministerial  Dedication          .„,  84 

Sin-ofi'ering  a  Shadow  of  the  Gospel 85 

Illustrative  Addenda            .-..  86, 87 


Chapter  VH :  Ritual  op  the  Sacbificbs: 

The  Peace  Offering      87 

Suggestive  Readings  .....  87, 88 

Invariable  Laws  for  Sacrifice  ..«  89 

Peace-offering  Sacrifice        ....  «..  90 

Believers'  Peace  and  Portion  ...  92 

Law  of  the  Peace-  offerings  .....  ....  93 

Ritual  of  Sacrifice  ...             ....  ...  94 

Practical  Significance  of  Sacrifices    ..«»  95 

Trespass  Offering                  ...  98 

Rigidity  of  the  Law              ...  ....  98 

Thanksgiving        ....            ...  ««.  98 

Excommunication ....            »..  ...  99 

Reserved  Things    ...  «-.  99 

Whole  Duty  of  Man              ...  --,99 

Summary  of  the  Offerings    ..«  «..  99 

Illustrative  Addenda             —  ....  100 


Chapter   YITI:    Priesthood  Initiated 
AND  Consecrated  100 

Suggestive  Readings  .....  100,  10 1,  102 

priests  versus  f'riestism      ....  ....    103 

Calling  of  the  Priests            ....  ....  104 

Ministry  of  the  Priesthood  ....  105 

Qualifications  of  God's  Ministers  ....  -106 

Consecration  of  the  Priests 108 

Solemnity  of  the  Ceremony  of  Conse- 
cration             .....  «...  109 

Completeness,  etc.  „              „  .....  110 

Significance,  etc.     „               ^  .....  Ill 

God's  Elected  Priests           ....  ...  Ill 

An  Elect  People     .....  «...  Ill 

Israel's  Glory          ....             ...  .....  112 

The  Holy  Crown    ....            .....  «...  112 

Sanctification          ....             mm.  -...  113 

Perfect  Service      ««.            -«.  .....  113 

Living  Sacrifices    —             «..  .....  113 

Hearty  Service       .«.  «...  113 

Seven  Days'  Consecration    .....  «...  113 

Exemplary  Obedience           ....  «..  113 

Illustrative  Addenda            ««.  ...    114 


Chapter  IX :  Inaugural  Ministbies  of 
▲asom.«.,  --.  ««.  .~.<  11& 


Suggestive  Readings  ^  ....         115,116 

Entering  upon  Priestly  Work            117 

Sacrificial      Preparation      for      God's 

Appearing           117 

Consecration  Qualifying  for  Work      118 

A  Solemn  Benediction           119 

Within  the  Secret  of  God's    Tabernacle  1 20 

Priests'  Entrance  upon  Office              l20 

Aaron's  First  Offering  for  Himself     122 

„        Offering  for  the  People           122 

Blessing  the  People              ...            ....  123 

Miraculous  Fire      ...             ....  125 

Conditions  of  Blessing           ....             ....  126 

Blood  of  Sprinkling               ...              ....  126 

God's  Acceptance  of  Sacrifices            ....  126 

Gracious  Fire         ...            127 

Illustrative  Addenda  ««,  127,  128 


Chapter    X:    Reckless    Ministry  Re- 
buked              ....  128 

Suggestive  Readings  ...«  ...  1 28,  129,  130 

Repulsive  Incense ....             ....  ..  180 

Youthful  Profanity               .....  ...  133 

Sin  of  Aaron's  Sons               .....  ....  135 

Degradation  of  what  is  Holy.....  ....  136 

The  Law  of  Worship  137 

Spurious    Worshippers :    Daring  and 

Doom  ...  ....  139 

Warning  to  Worshippers      ....  ...  140 

Silence  of  Aaron's  Sorrow   142 

Priestly     Elevation      above     Private 

Sorrow ....  143 

Excitations  Perilous  to  Communion 144 

Unrelaxing  Strictness  of  the  Ritual  145 

No  Joy  before  God's  Altar   ....  ....  146 

Self-exalting  Zeal  ....  «...  147 

Despising  God's  Altar          ««.  ^.  147 

Violation  of  Sanctity            ««,  .«..  148 

Silence  of  Aaron     ...  «...  148 

Mute  Suffering      ....  148 

Submission  to  God  in  Affliction  «.„  148 

Public  Lamentation              .....  ....  149 

Help  to  Temperance             ....  ....  149 

A  Divine  Prohibition  ««  149 

Illustrative  Addenda             ««.  160,  151 


Chapter    XI:     Food     Permitted     and 

Prohibited           ...  151 

Suggestive  Readings  151,  152 

Distinguishing  the  Precious  from  the 

Vile      ....            ...            ...  152 

Forbidden  Foods    ...             .....  154 

Restraint  upon  Festivities   155 

Legal  Prohibition  Abrogated  by  Chris- 
tianity               156 

Symbols  of  Cleanness  in  Animal  Life..  157 
Jehovah's  Concern  for  Israel's   Well- 
being    159 

Jehovah's  Concern  for  His  own  Glory  160 

The  Clean  and  Unclean        161 

Illustrative  Addenda            .«.          163,  164 


Chapter  XII :  MAThRNirr 
Suggestive  Readings  .... 
Motherhood  ««. 


164 

164  165 
«...  i65 


TOPICAL.   INDEX. 


iij 


B!rth       —  -^  «. 

Pollution  and  PurifyinjBf 

Statute  Relating  to  Maternity 
Illustrative  Addenda 


PAOS. 

^  166 
M..  166 
....  167 
^  169 


Chapter  XTII :  Leprost  :  its  Discoyebt 
AND  Treatment    169 

Suggestive  Readings  169   170 

Man  Physically  a  Victim  of  Maladies     171 

Disease,  Development,  Doom  172 

The  Leper  before  the  Priest  .....  173 

''Unclean  I  Uuclean  I "         175 

Leprosy,   a    Parable    of    Human    De- 
pravity      ._  _.  176 

Sinful  Surroundings  178 

Wondrous  Workings  of  God's  Grace 179 

First  Symptoms  oif  Depravity  179 

Scrupulous     Care    in     Dealing     with 

Depravity  _  180 

Sin  not  to  be  Connived  at    .....  ^..  180 

Degrees  of  Depravity  ^...  181 

Results  of  Unremoved  Depravity       ....    1 81 
Illustrative  Addenda  ««,  181,  182 

Chapter  XIV:  Leprosy  Cleansed      182 


Suggestive  Readings 
The  Law  of  Cleansing 
Anxiety  for  Recovery  _^ 

Remedial  Measures  ..._ 

Progressive  Cleansing  „,.. 

Grace  for  the  Poor  .^  ^ 

Purity  in  the  House  .«. 

Cleansing  the  Leper  .^  ^ 

Divine  Compassion  Exhibited  ^ 

A  Type  of  Redemption 

Sanctification 

No  Excuse  for  Neglecting  Cleansing  ... 

Completeness  of  Cleansing  ..... 

Leprous  Houses     ...„ 

Depraved  Surroundings 


Illustrative  Addenda 


182,183 
.....  184 
-..  185 
M...  186 
M...  186 
^  188 
«..  189 
^.  191 
^   191 

192 
192 
192 
192 
193 


193,  194 


Chapter   XV:     Secret    Physical  Im- 
purities             .....           .....            194 

Suggestive  Readings  194 

Vileness  of  Fallen  Human  Nature     194 

Indecencies  195 

Odiousness  of  Personal  Impurity       195 

Consequences         „              „  _.  i96 

Secret  flow  of  Sin .....  .....  197 

Radical  Cure  of  Sin              ...  .....  197 

Illustrative  Addenda            ««.  ,^  198 


Chapter    XVI:     The    Great    Day  of 

Atonemknt            198 

Suggestive  Readings  198,  199,  200 

Explanatory  Article  on  "  Azazel  "     200 

A  Unique  Day  in  Israel        202 

Typical  Enactment  of  Atonement  «...  203 

Slain  Goat  and  Scapegoat    .....  204 

Intercession  of  Christ          ._  _  205 

Worth  of  Sacrifices               .....  207 

Full  Atonement     ...»             ...  "*"  208 

Day  of  Atonement •  212 

Aaron's  Sin  OflFerins:  tor  Himself  Z.  213 


PAOJK. 

Aaron's     Sacrifice     Compared      with 

Christ's  214 

Ratification  of   the  Statute  of  Atone- 
ment     ..  215 

Undue  Familiarity  in  Divine  Things 216 

Sin  Removed  216 

Intercession  .....  217 

Supreme  Demand  for  Holiness  217 

The  Atoning  Sacrifice  217 

Illustrative  Addenda  ««.  217,  218 

Chapter  XVII:    The  Sanctitt  of  thb 

Blood     _  2 18 

Suggestive  Readings ....  218,  219 

Solemnity  of  Sacrifice  .»..             219 

Place  of  Sacrifice  ...  .....  .....  220 

Blood  Prohibited  as  Food  ..«,  .....  221 

Holy  Blood             .....  ^..  223 

A  Divine  Prohibition  .«..  ~.  224 

Illustrative  Addenda  ««.  .....  225 


Chapter    XVIU :       iNCESTUOua 
BiAGBS  :  Domestic  Pority  .... 

Suggestive  headings 

Unaccommodating  Godliness 
Nonconformity  to  the  World 

Blessedness  of  Obedience    

God's  Holy  Name 

Conjugal    Chastity,    Holiness 

Home  

Illustrative  Addenda  _ 


Mab- 

225 

225,  226 
226 

.....    ZiiQ 

.....  229 

229 

in    the 

230 

-...  231 


Chapter  XIX:    Practical  Piety: 
LiGioN  in  all  Relationships 

Suggestive  Readings  ..... 

Religion  of  Morality  ..... 

Genius  of  the  Mosaic  Laws.... 

Personal  Holiness ...., 

Family  Piety  .....  "^ 

Filial  Obliga'ions"  ....  ..... 

Willing  Offerings  of  Peace  IZ 
Harvest  Gleanings 
Jehovah's  Righteous  Demands 
Fairness  to  Hired  Labourers 

Impartial  Justice  ..... 

Tale-bearing  and  Slander     ..... 
Neighbourly  Love 
Responsibility  of  Stewardship 

Reproving  our  Neighbour    

Wicked  Superstitions 

Sacredness  of  the  Sabbath  

Homage  for  Age    

Courtesy  to  Strangers  .^ 

Business  Honesty 

Illustrative  Addenda 


Re. 


—    243, 


,232 
232 
232 
2.54 
236 
236 
237 
237 
237 
238 
289 
239 
239 
240 
240 
241 
212 
242 
242 
243 
243 
244 


Chapter  XX  :  Social  and  Moral  Crimes  244 


Suggestive  Readings  

Axe  Laid  at  Root  of  Moral  Evil 
Capital  Offences 

onnivance  at  Iniquity         ..... 
Possibilities  of  Sanctity       .Z 
Grief  of  Undutiful  Children   * 
The  Hebrew  Church 
Godly  Distinctiyenesf  ..... 


245 
245 
246 
247 
249 
249 
261 
261 


IV. 


TOPICAL   INDEX. 


PAGE. 

Chapter  XXI,  Purity  in  the  Peiesthood  252 
Sugg  e  stive  Readings ....  ....  ....  253 

Sacred  Kelationships       ....  ....  253 

Dignity  of  the  Priesthood  Inviolate     255 
Qualifications  for  Sacred  Service....     256 

Allowance  for  Human  Infirmity    ....  257 

Jllustrative  Addenda  ....  258,  259 


Chapter  XXII:     Priestly   Privileges 

l^OKFEITED  BY  UnCLEANNKSS  .      259 

Suggestive  Readings  '259,  '26O 

Solemn  Regard  for  Hallowed  Things 260 

_    ...      „  .     „.  .  2g^ 

262 
263 
263 
ii65 
266 


Evil  Connections.... 
Slaying  the  Blasphemer  .. 
Blasphemy 

Inexorableness  of  the  Law. 
Illustrative  A ddenda 


PAGE. 

....  296 
....  296 

....  296 

....  296 

296,  297 


Defiling  Holy  Tbings 
Irreverence  amid  Sanctities 
The  Best  for  the  Highest     ..... 

Blemishes  in  our  Sacrifices 

Unquestioning  Obedience  Peremptory 

The  Jealousy  of  Jehovah    

Holy  Feasts  Forbidden  to  Strangers 266 

Unblemished  Sacrifices        266 

Holy  Ministries  Refused  from  Strangers  267 

Chapter   XXIII:     Israel's  Holy  Fes- 
TITAL8     ^  —  -.  267 

Sugg\:stive  Readings  .....  .....  267,  268,  269 

Sabbath  of  Rest    .....  .....  .....  269 

The  Sabbath  ^  «...  272 

Significance  of  the  Passover  «...  273 

The  Passover         .....  ...  «...  274 

Sheaf  of  the  First  Fruits    .....  «...  275 

Pentecost  and  the  Spirit      276 

Memorial  of  Blowing  of  Trumpets    277 

Feast  of  Trumpets  ...«  279 

Feast  of  Tabernacles  250 

Festival     of     Tabernacles     and     In- 
gathering .....  ««  .....  281 
Feasts  of  the  Lord               «..  «...  283 
First  Fruits  Sheaf.....            ««.  «...  284 

Self  in  Abeyance  284 

Feast  of  Pentecost :  Harvest  Home 284 

Beginning  the  Reaping         ...«  2-^5 

Harvest  Gleanings ««,  «...  285 

Great  Day  of  Atonement     ««,  «...  285 

Sojourning  in  Booths  ...«  286 

iUmirative  Addenda  -«.  286,  287 

Chapter    XXIV:     Sanctuary    Light: 

Shewbrbad:  Blasphemy   287 

Suggestive  Readings  288 

Continuous  Lustre  of  a  Godly  Life    288 

290 

2J^0 

«...  291 
«...  292 
«...  294 
.-.  295 
««.  295 
««.  296 
..295 


The  Bread  of  the  Presence 

Lamps  of  the  Tabernacle    

Table  of  Shewbread  ««. 

Blasphemy  of  God's  Holy  Name 

„  of  Shelomith's  Son 

Golden  Candlestick  ««. 

Glory  of  the  Church  ««. 

Shewbread  ..-  ««. 

Special  Time  for  Seryioo     •• 


Chapter  XXV:  The  Year  of  Jubilee      297 

SKgK'estive  A  ead27ii;s  «„.  297,  298 

Sabb;ith  of  Rest  unto  the  Lord  298 

Jubilee  Year :  its  Fourfold  Significance  2b9 
Glad  Facts  of  the  Jubilee    ««.  .....  300 

Year  of  Jubilee     301 

Principles  Contained  in  Jubilee  Bega- 

lations.....  ...»  ...„  303 

Canaan :  the  Lord's  Land  for  Ever    „...  304 
Exalted  Philanthropy  .....  ^..  305 

Sabbatical  Year     ...  .....  ^...  306 

Lessons  of  the  Jubilee         .....  ^..  306 

Jubilee  a  Type  of  the  Gospel  ««.  307 

Kinsman's  Rights  «.,  ,^  307 

Royal  Service         .....  .^  ^,  308 

Illustrative  Addenda  «-,  ...  308 

Chapter  XXVI:    REriGiON  as  Deter- 
mining A  Nation's  Dbstiny  309 

Suggestive  Readings  ««,  .....  309 

Peculiarities  of  the  (  hapter  309 

Advantages  of  Religion  in  Nation's  Life  310 

Blessirg  or  Curse.....  311 

National  Transgression  and  Disaster 3i8 

.....  315 
-«.  315 
«...  3)6 
«...  317 
««.  318 
«...  319 
319 


Desolation  upon  Israel 
Lost  Tribes  of  Israel 
Fundamentals  in  True  Religion 

Incentives  to  True  Religion 

The  Bow  in  the  Clouds        ««, 

Idolatry  Interdicted  ««, 

Equity  of  God's  Ways  ..... 

Valour  and  Victory  through  Godliness  320 

Emmanuel  amid  His  People  «.«  820 

Emancipited  and  Elevated  .««  ,^.  320 

Cowardice  of  Guilt  ,«,  .^  320 

Pride  Crushed       ««.  ^..  320 

Obstinacy  Punished  .....  321 

God's  Determination  to  Punish  Sinners  321 

Sabbath  Barrenness  .....  322 

God's  Promises  to  Penitents  «...  322 

Gains  of  a  Good  Ancestry  .««  .^  323 

Illustrative  Addenda  ««,  ««.  823 


Chapter  XXVII:  Votive  Offerings  to 
thk  L'Rd  .....  824 

Suggestive  Readings  .....            ««,  .....  324 

Laws  Concerning  Vows        ...«  «...  325 

Comparative  Ability             .....  326 

Redemption  of  Votive  Offerings  «...  327 

History  of  Tithes ..^.  328 

Law  and  Gospel     .....  .....  330 

Commandments  of  the  Lord  ,«..  331 

Illustrative  /.  Idenda           mm  «...  832 


ANALYTICAL    INDEX. 


Aaron,  Grief  for  his  Sons 
^      His  First  Offering 


PAOV. 

^.  129,  142,  145 
<'for  Himself." 

122,  213 
Inaugural  Ministries  of ....  115,  117,  121 

Makes  the  Atonement  «...  212 

Offerings  for  the  People  ....  122 

Sorrow  «...  ~-  146,  148 

Submission      142,148 

Aaron's  Sacrifice  Compared  wiih  Christ's  214 

,,        Sons,  The  Son  of         135 

Ability,  Comparative ....  ....  .....  326 

Determined  by  the  Priest  327 

No  Standard  of  our  Acceptance  .....  326 


n 

n 
n 
»> 

» 


>i 


128,  132,  135 


6,8, 


„      to  Hallow,  Man's 
Abihu  and  Nadab 
Absolute  Consecration 

Abstinence  from  Sin  ..«  «^ 

Acceptable  Worship  ..^  .^ 

Acceptance  with  God...«  «», 

Access  to  God            -^  «« 

Accommodating  Conscience  ^m, 

Acquiesence  in  Affliction  «^ 

Adoration  in  Worship  ... 

Aiied,  Homage  for    «»  «« 

Agricultural  Labonm  .^ 
Allowance  for  Human  Infirmity 

Altar,  Despising  God's  .^ 

J'    M.1  SJ      •9»m                                   —9f  MM* 

Inextinguishable  •«. 

No  Joy  before  God's 

Oiferings,  Communion   through 


t* 


»» 


260 

141 

89 

249 

126 

15,  108 

13,2^6 

«...  227 

.....  148 

.....    22 

283,  244 

298,  303 

.....  257 

--.  147 

—     16 

M...     82 

146 

221 


Symbol  of  Regenerating  Grace    82 


66 
67,77 
«-.  294 

^.  247 

107,  109,  131 

185 

19,82 
....    64 


"  Amends  "  made  by  Christ 
„  Man  Cannot  Make 

Anger,  Danger  of 
„      Divine 

Ancestry  :  Gains  of  a  Good 

Anointing     

Anxiety  for  Recovery.»« 

Ascending  Fire  .....  , 

Associations,  Evil 

Atonement,  Measured  by  Man's  Sin       45 

Great  Day  of      198,  203,  212,  285 

Basis  of 207, 210 

Typical  Enactment  of  203 

Full         ....  208,  210 

Statute  o'.  Ratification  of  the  215 
Vast  Virtue  Needed  in         70 

Attainments,  Progressive         187 

Attire,  Sacred  80,  109,  199 

Authorship  of  Leviticus  -...1 

Awakened  Con.«»c)ence  „^  •-.44 

'*  Ay.azAl  "    .....  ^  .  200 


n 


•* 


B 

Beauties  of  Jesus  Foreshadowed 
Beautiful  Country  Devastated.... 
Beautiful  in  Worship.....  „^ 

Beguilod  into  Sin  ....  .^ 

Be'ne diction,  A  Solemn  Il9, 

!;<enefactor.  The  Christian  a    

Beneficence  of  a  Redeemed  Life 

Benevolence  „^ 

Best,  The:  God  Demands        ««, 

Birth  ....  .^ 

Blasphemy „^ 

Blasphemer,  Slaying  the 
XSlasphemy  against  God's  Holy  Name 
„         Real  and  Relative  ...„ 
„         of  Shelomith's  Son..... 

Blessing  and  Curse    .•« 

Blemish,  Christ  without  ,^ 

Blemishes  in  Sacrifice  «.» 

Blind,  The ^  ^ 

Bloodless  Sacrifices   .«,  „^ 

Blood  of  Sprinkling  .^  ,^ 

„    Life  in  the         ....  ..... 

„     Not  to  be  Shed  Heedlessly 

J,     Prohibited  as  Food 

„    Sanctity  of        ....        218, 222, 
Bodily  Appearance    .^  «,« 

„       Deformities     .—  „^ 

„      Infirmities       -... 

Body,  the  House  of  the  Soul    -«, 
Bondage,  Deliverance  from      «« 
Bondmen,  Kedeeming  the         «« 
Booths.     See  Tabbjrnacles. 
Bounty,  God's  .....  ..^ 

Bow  in  the  Cloud       .....  -.. 

Bread  of  God's  Presence  .«. 

Breastplate  —  ..... 

Burnt  Offering.     See  Sackificbs. 

„    Its  Significance  -.» 

Basiness  Honesty      ....  mm 

„       See  Tr.\db. 

0. 
Cakes.     See  Subwbbbap 
OaUing,  The  Priestly  ^ 

Camp,  Without  the    

Canaan,  God  Claims  the  Soil        298, 

„       Pilgrims  to  ...., 

„       The  Land  Never  to  be  Sold 
Candlesticks,  Golden ....  .^ 

„  Christ  amid  the .... 

Capital  Offences         .....  .mm 

Celibacy     ...    ...     «« 

Ohnrcb  Glorv  oi  tb«      t^ 


FAOB. 

—,  22 
^  315 
-..  28 

1.23.  126 
78,  119 

MM.   78 

.....  308 
37,  2(J3 

166, 1G8 
.....  287 
296 

292,  296 
M...  293 
-M.  294 
-M.  312 

263,  2fi6 
MM.  289 
-M.  20 
«-.  126 
MM.  225 
MM.  224 
M.M  221 

223,  2/4 
258 

171,  172 
M...  *^58 
m...  192 
«M.  302 
«M.  298 

299,  304 

«M    '^'^0 

M...  112 
243,  244 


—  104 

304,  306 
...  286 
298 

288, 293 
MM.  289 
M...  216 
M...  258 

—  ^95 


VI. 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


» 
»» 


PAGE. 

Church:  its  Privileges  and  Duties   ....  295 

The  Hebrew  251 

Workers  must  be  Godly     ....267 
Character  as  Qualifying  Sacrifices       25,  29 

Defects  of  254 

Imperilled  by  Slander      ....  239 
Charity     ....  ....  ....  ...  243 

Chastity   ....  230 

Childhood.     See  Mateenity  ;  also    ....  169 

Children,  Dutifulness  of     ....  233,237 

Grief  of  Undutiful  ....  249 

Christ  amid  the  Golden  Candlesticks      280 

"        as  Peace  Offering      ....  ....     93 

Giver  of  Kest  271 

"       His  Meekuess  ....  ....     27 

"        His  Self-devotedness  ....     18 

"        Intercession  of  ....  ....  205 

"        our  Passover  ....  ....  268 

cur  Priest       .....    67, 103,  208 

Tabernacling  in  the  Flesh  «...  286 

the  Food  of  His  People 
the  Lamb        .....  mm 

the  Lamb  Slain  »«, 

without  Blemish  «m 

Christian  Purity        ..«.  ^^ 

Civic  Benevolence     ««,  »«. 

Clean  and  Unclean    ..... 
Cleanliness  in  the  House 
Cleansed,  Leprosy    ..... 
Cleansing,  Progressive 
„         The  Law  of 
,         The  Sinner's 
Commandments  of  the  Lord  to  Moses  .....  331 
Commerce.    See  Business 
Common  People        .^  .^  52,  .^5 

Communion  with  God  120,144 

Communion  with  God  through  Sacrifice        5 
Communities,  Sins  of.^.  .m.  «.    50 

Community,  Sin  in  %.^  mm,  ••.     50 

Companions,  Evil      ««.««.«..  296 
Compassion,  Divine  ..«.  «»  ««  19 1 

Complacent  Ignorance  ««.  —     60 

Completeness  in  Self-Devotion  ««.     18 

Confidence,  Violated ««.  —     78 

Conformity  to  the  World  .....  «...  '^28 

Congregations.     See  Convocations 
Conjugal  Chastity     .....  .....  230.  256 

Conniving  at  Wrong .....     61,227,247 

Consecration  19,  84,  89,  TOO,  108, 113. 118,  290 

Consequences  of  Personal  Impurity      196 

Contagiousness  of  bin  62,  64 

Contents  of  Leviticus  Summarized       331 

Contrition   m«.  2i5 

Convocations,  Holy  ^  282, 332 

Corruption,  Man's  Inherent     »•  »»    47 

„  See  Depbavity 

Courage.     See  Oowabdiob 
Courtesy  to  Strangers  ««.  ■».  243 

Cowardice  of  Guilt    .....  ««  «...  320 

Craven.     See  Gowardiob 

Creation,  Completed .^  ^..  279 

Creator — God,  of  Everything  «.«  306 

Crown,  The  Holy      «...  ....  106,  112 

Cure  of  Sin.....  «.  ^  ....  197 

OuBtom        —««,««,•...  231 


MM.        28 

«M.  273 
—  ^  273 

MM*  MM.  ^ 

MM*  .....  253 

MM.  234 

M...  167,161,167 

MM.  189 

MM.  182, 191,  193 

MM.  186 

MM.  184,  191 

M.M  ....  i    I/O 


PAGE. 
...  ....    loO 

....  ....      i^O  t7 

....  ....    oOZ 

....  ....    Aoo 

15,  18,  32,  127,  284 

254 

....    45,  137,  148 
217 


Day  of  Atonement 

Deaf,  The 

Debts,  Cancelling 

Deceitfnlness 

Dedication 

Defects  of  Character 

Defiled  Sanctities 

Defilement 

Defiling  Holy  Things 

Degradation  of  Holy  Things 

Delight,  God's  in  Christ 

Depraved  Surroundings 

Depravity        ....        176,  179,  180,  194,  217 

Degrees  of  ....  181,  246 

"  Results  of  Unremoved 

Developments 
Dignity  Linked  to  Duty      ....  80 

Dignity  of  Man      .... 

Di8cipleship,Following  Christ  to  Reproach 

Diseases 

Disease,  Development,  Doom 

Dishonesty.....  ...  ....  .... 

Disobedience,  Punishment  of  ....  m.. 

Distinctness,  Godly  

Domestic  Purity.  See  Household,  Family 
Dread  of  Sin 

Drunkenness.     See  Intoxication 
Duty  of  Alan  


261 

136 

34 

193 


181 
181 


255 
304 

54 
171,  172 
172 

79 
317 
252 

47 


E. 

Early  Annals  of  Man  ... 

Elect  People  .mm  ... 

Elevated     .....  .....  .... 

Emancipated  and  Elevated  .... 

Emmanuel  amid  His  People  .... 

Emotion  in  Worship....  .... 

Employers....  .... 

Endowments,  Divine,  to  Man  .«• 

Enslavement,  Freed  from  ... 

Ensnarements  „.  .... 

Equity  of  God's  Ways 
E>idence,  Giving,  against  Wrong 
EK:cellencies  in  Jesus 

Excellencies  in  Worship  ... 

Excitement  in  Worship  ... 

Excommunication     ....  .«, 

Excuse,  No....  «.,  ... 

Excusing  Sins  „..  .^ 

Experiences,  Advancing  ... 

Expiation    ....  ....  ,«, 


99 


«M  43 

...  Ill 

....  320 

M-.  320 

M...  320 

MM.    131 

•M.  239 

M..       81 

.....  320 

227,  246 

.....  319 

M...        61 

25,46 

21,25 

131,  144 

M...  192 
M..  60 
.....  187 
53,105 


Dftrin{^  and  Doom 


D, 


189 


F. 

Fairness  in  Trade     ««          234, 239 

Faith  The  Sacred  Rest  of  mm,            «...  271 

Faithlessness             ...            ....    87 

False  Swearing          .....  ....            .....  238 

FamiUarity  in  Divine  Things  Checked  .....  216 

Family  Connections  ...  „...             .....  296 

Family  Piety              ...  _.  235,  237,  243 

Family  Purity           ._  ...  IbO,  225,  233 

Fauitlessness  in  Sacrifice        .....  36 

Feast  of  Blowing  the  Trumpets  277 

First  Fruits  _.  275,  284,  287 

Harvest       ...  ...  276 

Paschal      ....  ...            .....  274 

Pentecost    ...  ...          276,284 

Feasts  of  the  Lord  ....  ...            ....  283 

Fellowshipi  A  Law  of  mm            •—  20t 


n 


ANALYTICAL    INDEX. 


ril 


PAGB. 


FellowBuips,  Christ's  Happiness  in       35 

God's  Feast  of      31,  33,  83 

in  Christ,  Man's  Blessed     34 


»» 


jj 


Fervour,  Christian     

MM. 

16,  26 

Festivities,  Restrained 

,^^ 

155,  KH 

Festivals,  Israel's  Holy 

MM 

.....  267 

Festival,  Sacred  Life  a 

MM 

283 

Filial  Obligations       ..«, 

..... 

237 

Fire,  "  Strange  "        ^ 

128,  131,  147 

„    upon  the  Altar  .^ 

8,16, 

81,82,147 

„     not  to  go  oat     .^ 

M.M 

81 

„     Miraculous         ^ 



125,  126 

„     Gracious              ..«. 

MM 

.MM  127 

First  Fruits.     See  Fkastb 

Food            ..... 

MM* 

151,  154 

„    Unclean             ..«, 

mm 

152,  154 

Forgiveness                «.« 

MM. 

55,  57,  65 

Formalists 

MM. 

....  148 

Fowls  as  Sacrificial  Offering 

'8...« 

M.M                     O 

Fragrant  Sacritice     ..^ 

M.M 

M...  214 

Frail  Habitations      .«. 

MM* 

M.M  287 

Frankincense 

•  •••• 

...     20 

„            Symbolizes  Christ's  Delight- 

fulness 

••••• 

.     23 

Freedom  in  Offerings 

•MM 

86,  263 

Friendship,  Divine    ..... 

— 

MM.       83 

G. 

Garments.     See  Attikb 

Gifts  to  Priests 

«Mi 

.....     Zo 

Gleanings,  Harvest    ..... 

•MM 

237,  285 

God,  Creator 

MM* 

306 

„      Equity  of  His  Ways 

•MM 

M...  319 

„      His  Holy  Name 

MM. 

.....  229 

„      His  wondrous  Grace 

,,„, 

....    179 

„      Place  for  Meeting  Him 

..M. 

13,  120 

„      within  the  Tabernacle 

.MM 

12,  no 

Godliness,  Unaccommodatin 

^.... 

....  226 

,,          Valour  and  Victory  thi 

rough....  320 

Godly  Distinctiveness 

MM. 

„...  2o2 

„      Life,  Lustre  of  a 

MM* 

_  288 

„      Sin  in  the 

MM. 

M.M     46 

God's  Righteous  Demand* 

..... 

238 

Good  News .... 

..... 

...     65 

Gratitude  to  God 

MM. 

94,  220,  263 

Guilty  Man's  Helplessness 

MM. 

184 

Gospel  and  Law  Compared 

■  1     , 

330 

„        Age  Inaugurated 

MM* 

MM.  280 

„        Foreshado  wings 

MM. 

M...  236 

f>     Joy — 

MM. 

M.M  279 

„        Trumpet       ..... 

1        1, 

MM.  278 

Government,  Divine 

MM. 

M...  310 

Grace  for  the  Poor 

,     ,^ 

-...  188 

„       Transformations  of 

MM. 

MM.     78 

-      Wondrous      ..... 

^ 

MM.  179 

liabits.  Ungodly 
Harm.     See  Ikjury 
Harvest  Home 


Harvest       237,  281,  282,  284. 

,,        Ingatherings 


«> 


Sheaf  of  First  Fruits 

Heavenly  Feast 

„        Rest  asked  by  the  Soul 
Hebrew  Church 
Healer,  Confidence  in  ..^ 

Helpfulness,  God's  Abounding 


—  —  296 


...  284 

285,  286 

276  281 

276,  286 

.....  283 

M...  271 

MM.  251 

— .  185 

MM.    184 


PAOB. 

Helplessness,  Guilty  Man*i 

MM* 

184,  193 

Helpless,  not  Hopeless 

•MM 

MM.  191 

Hidden  Sin ««. 

MM* 

MM.        56 

High  Priest                mm. 

**M. 

MM.  208 

Higher  .Privileges     ..... 

■■■M 

.....  188 

Holiness  Demanded  .... 

«■«* 

217,  236 

.,        to  the  Lord  .„ 

MM* 

101,  106 

Holy  Blood 

MM. 

.....  223 

„     Dwellings 

•  •••• 

-...  266 

„     Feasts  Forbidden  to  Strangers 

266 

„     Ministries  Refused  from  Strangers    267 

„     Spirit's  Energy 

•MM 

17 

Home 

MM.  194, 

230,  302 

„       Sanctities 

,, 

MM  190 

„       Type  of  Heaven 

-MS 

MM.  251 

Home.     See  Family 

Homage      .«M            MM* 

•MM 

•«•••              ^M. 

Honesty      .....            _ 

„^ 

77,79 

Honey         .^ 

MM* 

M.      20 

Hospitality ..... 

__^ 

..     234 

Household  Purity    ..«. 

M.M 

189,  230 

Houses,  Leprous       ...» 

MM* 

MM.  192 

L 

Idolatry  Interdicted  ...«            «.  ...  819 

„        Prevented  ..^            .^  mm.  219 

Ignorance   .....            .....  mm.    57 

„          Complacent              .....     60 

„  Sins  of        ....     39,  40,  44,  50,  53,  55 

,.  Trespasses  done  in    ...        68,  65,  69 

Immanuel.     See  Emmandbl 

Impiety       mm.             mm*  mm.  136 

Impure  Service         mm.            .mm  mm.    28 

Impurity     .....            «m.  195 

Inadvertent  Sins.     See  Ignorance 

Incense  Repulsive     .....  mm.  130 

Incestuous  Marriages                .....  «-.  225 

Incorrigibleness         .*•             ,*,  •*.  321 

Indecencies .mm             mm*  mm.  195 

Indifference                .....             «»  •••     71 
Indulgence,     See  Temperance 

Inextinguishable  Fire               ...»  82, 86 

Infection     .....  m...  192 

Infirmities  a  Hindrance            ...»  m«.  257 

Inherent  Corruption  of  the  Sinner  .....     47 

Inhumanities  in  the  Name  of  Religion 248 

Initiation.     See  Minibtebs,  Priests 

Injury  to  Man            ««            .«..  74, 86 

Injustice      ...„  MM.  233 

Intemperance.     See  Intoxication 

Intercession                .....             .,„.  mm.  217 

of  Christ  206 

Intoxication  134,  144,  149,  151 

Irreverence  amid  Sanctities    „^  >...  262 

Israel,  Desolation  upon            ««,  ....  316 

,,      Lost  Ten  Tribes  of      ««  m.m  3i5 

Israel's  Wellbeing     ...  ^^  169 

J. 

Jealousy,  God's,  Concerning  Worship  68,  160 

„           of  Jehovah                 ...  .....  266 

Jehovah,  Name  Disused  by  Jew*  «...  293 

„         Jealousy  of               mm.  mm.  266 

Joy  in  Worship          .-m             m-*  m—  286 

„    of  the  Gospel     ....            .«.  -m  279 

„    Heavenly             ....             „«,  ..«  284 

Joyful  side  of  Religion  «.»  282 

Joyous  Privileges  open  to  us  in  Christ ....     84 

3t 


Vlll. 


ANALYTICAL   INDEX. 


PAGE. 

Jubilee:  a  Type  of  the  Gospel  .....  307 

f,       Blessings  Consequent  on  Atone- 
ment        .^  ,^  .^  300 
Glad  Facts  of  the     «.            «-.  300 
Lessons  of  the           ««.            «.„  306 
Regulations  of  the    •.            .....  303 

Year  of        ^  .....  297,  299,  ?01 

^  ^  234,244 

Impartial     m.  «»  om.  239 


n 

$» 
n 

Justice 


M 


Kinsman  Needs  Wealth 
Kinsman's  Rights 
Knowledge  t.  Ignorance. 


««            ...  808 
307 

See lONOBANOB. 


Labourers,  Fairness  to  Hired  .«« 

Landed  Estates  .... 

Lamps  on  the  Candlestick       «« 
Law  and  Gospel  ....  ««, 

„    Inexorableness  of  the      ««• 

„   of  the  Tabernacle  •«. 

Leaven        «.»««•««. 
Leper  «»««••».• 

Leprosy       .....  ««,  «...  169, 

ff      loathsome     .....  m.. 

„      a  type  of  Redemption .«., 
Leprous  houses  .....  .«• 

Liberty,  Christian     

„      a  preparation  for  Elevation 
Life  Offering,  A         .«.  ««. 

^  in  the  Blood       .....  «». 

Lightbearers,  Christian's         »., 
Light,  Sanctity  requisite  for  ««, 

„    of  Testimony    «...  «.» 

Lips,  Grace  of  .....  .^ 

Loaves.     See  Shewbbead. 
Love  to  our  Neighbour 
Lowly.     See  Pooa. 

yal  Spirit  .«. 

Lustre  of  a  godly  life 

M. 
Maladies     «.  «»  «.  --.171 

Maternity    ....  ««        164,  165,  167,  169 

Marriages    ...„  «-.  226 

Masters,  Consideration  from  to  Servants    239 
Maintenance  of  the  Priests      .....  23,  24 

Manifestation  of  God .....         117,  121 

^an's  Ability  to  Render  Things  Hallowed  260 
I,      Earliest  History  «.»  ««.     43 

„      Frail  Body       ....  ^  ^  286 

),      Inherent  Corruption      ««•  •».    47 

ff     Insecure  Life  ««.  «-.  286 

9      Physical  Defilements     ....    171 

IP      Tendency  to  profane  things    hal- 
lowed ...  ...  260 

^     Weary  Life  asks  the  Sabbath  of 

rest.....  --.  .»..  .....  270 

Meat  Offering  ^  ««  20, 24 

Meditation  ^  ^      23,65,107 

Mediatorship  ,«.  107 

Meetings,  Religious.    See  Congregations. 


—  239 

^  304 
«-.  288 
^  330 
^  296 
«-.  290 
.....    20 

173,  191 

176,  179 
^  172 
«...  191 
...   192 

299, 308 
-.-  320 
^  17 
.....  225 

288,  296 
^  289 
«...  289 

■  ^  294 


—  —  240 

^  263 

«.         288,  289 


Memorial 

Mercy  Seat ..« 

Merits,  Hateful  to  God 
Millennial  Blessings  ..— 
MisiBter*    «•  «• 


20,28 

^  217 

....  147 

299,  300 

2Sy24,29 


» 
n 


Ministers,  Dedication  of  84,  103, 

Must  be  True-bom  Sons  of 
Not  Priests  ..« 

Purity  of   ..... 
Qualifications  of 

Reckless  

Temptations  oi 

Moral  Evil  ..«.  ««, 

Morality     .....       ^     ..... 

„      the  Religion  of  ^ 

Mosaic  Laws,  Genesis  of  ^ 

Motherhood.     See  Matbbnitt. 

Mute  Suffering 


....  10^, 
M...  128, 


195,  196, 


PAG9. 
108,  127 

God  267 

..-  103 

.....  253 

133,  266 

139,  160 

135,  144 

244,  246 

233,  243 

•.-  232 

— .  234 


9» 

M 


^  «.  .^148 


N. 
Nadab  and  Abihu.    See  Abihu. 

National  Priesthood . ...  ,^  105 

„        Trangressions  and  Disaster    313 

Name  of  God  Blasphemed        .....  292,  294 

„  Jehovah  disused       ^^  293 

Nation,  Advantages  of  Religion  to  ft     .....  810 

^      Calamities  on  ..,.  814 

Profanation  of  Nation's  Sanctities  315 

Progressive  Apostasy  of  «...  313 

Nearness  to  God        «.«-«•...  128 

Neighbour,  Duty  to  our  «.,  ««  241 

„  Trespasses  Against  .....     72 

Neighbourliness        «...  78,  233,  239,  244,  298 

New  Year   ....  ^  ^  278 

Nonconformity  to  the  World  .«,  ,».  228 

0. 

Oaths          ^            ^  63,70 

Obedience         95,  113,  220,  249,  263,  281,  307 

Blessings  Promised  to  «...  317 

Blindness  of            ««  «...  2:^9 

Duty  of     .«.            ««,  ^  307 

Test  of  Faith           ^  «-.    37 

Unquestioning          „^  «^  265 

Obstinacy  Punished  ..,..  ««  321 

Odiousness  of  Sin     ...»            ««,  195,  230 

Offensive  Offerings    «^  «.,  131 

Offerings     _            «-.  99,  100 

Offerings.     See  Sacrifices. 

Offerer  Identified  with  his  Offering  ««,    S$ 

Oil  and  Frankincense               «m.  «•    20 

Old.    See  Agbd. 

Oppression  .^ 


ft 

m 
tt 
t» 


-.  ..  -.233 


Parentage,  A  Godly                 «.  ,«..  323 

Parents       —            •«  .^  237 

„      Grief  from  Children    ...  «..  2/(7) 

Pardon        .....            —  67,  63 

Paschal  Victim.     See  Passovbk. 

Passionate  Strife       ....».«  ^.  293 

Passions,  Low           .^            ««•  195,  198 

Passover,  Feast  of     .....            «.  268,  27 i 

„         Significance  of        ««  277 

Peace,  Divine  Conditions  of    ...  35,  3S 
„      -offering          ....            «...  29,  32,  87,  9? 

^      The  Believer's               .....  92,  100 

„            Historic  Instances  of  .....    31 

Penitence    >.•  S6, 65 

Penitents,  God's  Promipes  to  ««  ,«.  832 

Pentecost  and  the  Spirit          .^  mm.  276 

Perfect  Offerer,  A      ...            «,•  m.      8 

.      Sacrifices      ^            ^  ..  f 6« 


ANALYTICAL     INDEX. 


IX. 


PAOB. 

Perjury       ^  —  -.  .....  2.^  8 

Personal  Holiness     .^  «.»  ^..  236 

Poor  ^  19 

„  Care  for  234,  238,  298 

„  Gleanings  of  Harvest  for  the  ^..  285 

„  Grace  for  .^  «^  «^  188 

Philanthropy     ^         ..~.  ~-  •«.  305 

Physical  Impurities  .....  ^.  19.") 

„         In  drmities  a  Hindrance  257 

Piety.  Family  ^  236, 243 

„     in  all  Relationships         ..^  .....  232 

Pilgrimage....  ..............  286 

Pleasant  Offering       .^  ,^  .....       8 

Pollution  and  Purifying  ,^  ,^  166 

Possessions....  „^  .^  801) 

Possibilities  of  Sanctity  „^  .^  249 

Poverty.    (See  Poor).  ««  «...  193 

„        Causes  of    .««  ««,  ....  305 

Practical  Piety  «.«.«.•««.  232 

Prayer        .....  ,^  .....  36 

Presumption  «»  134,  147, 149,  160 

Pride  .....  .....  ...„  150 

„    Crushed  ^  ..«.  ^  320, 323 

„     Leads  to  Impiety  „^  .....  321 

Priest,  High,  Necessity  of        .....  ...»  208 

Priesthood,  Approach  to  God,  through  .....     23 

„         Consecrated         100, 117,  120, 127 

„  Definition  of  .^  105 

„  Purity  of  the        ...„  ....  252 

Priestism    103,  ll4 

Priestly  Elevation  above  Private  Sorrow  143 
f,        Services       .....  ^  .....     83 

„        Privileges    .^  «.,  259 

Profanity     ^  ^  133,  147 


Priests 


Calling  of     .....  .... 

Conjugal  Relationships 
Dedication  of  .«« 

Dignity  of    «.«  ««, 

Errors  in     .....  «^ 

Initiation  of 


103,  111 

104,  111 
256 

108,  121 

255 

49,53 
.....  120 


» 

»» 


Qualifications  of       106,  118,  133,  256 

Representatives  of  the  Lord     .....  256 

Their  Failure  in  Service  ««,  145 

Maintenance      .«»  «.„     23 

Ministry  .....  105 

„       Witnesses  to  a  Spiritual  Life    .....     23 

Privilege,  Conditional  .....  254 

Privileged  Teople,  Miseries  Befalling  a 315 

Privileges,  Higher     .....  188 

Profanity     .^  ^  ^  183,  147,  297 

Progress     ....  .....  .«..  193 

Progressive  Cleansing  .....  186 

Prohibitions  Abrogated  by  Christianity  166 

Promises  and  Warnings  .....  812 

Property     .....     78 

Property,  Ancestral  .....  «...  803 

Prophetic  Promises  and  Warnings         809 

Propitiation  11,  12,  19,  31,  35,  49,  217 

Public  Lamentation  ....  ...»  149 

Punishment  «.  .....  151 

„  of  Pride «...  821 

,.  of  Sinners  321 

Purifying     63,64,167,217 

Purity  and  Impurity  Distinguished       262 

in  the  House  .....         189,  226,  230,  233 
in  Service       ....  ^  28,  137 

of  the  Priesthood         »«,  252 

Personal        ^  ^         195. 196 


ti 


ti 


FA01I. 

R 

Rashness    ««           128, 139,  150 

Reaping,  Beginning  Harvest    ««.  28.5 

Rebellious,  Way  Open  to  Return  .....  ?»18 

Reconciliation  .....  .^  JOl 

„          with  God           ^  53,220,2-6 

Recovery,  Anxioty  for              .^  «...  1R5 

„        Complete  ««.  ^.  192 

Regenerating  Grace,  Like  Fire  «...     82 
Relationship  Inseparable,  Christian       »«.  254 

Reliance  on  God        .««            ..«.  .....  298 

Religion       .....  231 

Determining  Nation's  Destiny 309 

Incentives  to  True     .««  .....  317 

Remedial  Measures   .....             ««,  .....  186 

Reparation.     See  Restitution. 

Repentance ...«             ««            .«,  285, 322 

Reproach  for  Christ                  .^  .....     64 

Reproving  our  Neighbour,  Duty  of         ««  241 

Repulsive  Incense     ...«             ««.  .««  130 

Reserved  Things        ....            .....  «...     99 

Resignation.    See  also  Submission.       ««.  148 

Rest,  Christian  Dispensation  of  299 

„    From  Toils      .....            ««.  801,  303 

„    in  Finding  Christ            ...«  «...  308 

„    Sabbatic  Year  a  Symbol  of  299 

Restitution  ...«  «.^      65,  76,  97,  300,  30'? 

Restoration .««  .^  186 

Resurrection,  Christ's              .^  26.  275 

Emblems            ««.  26,  29 

Final,  of  the  Dead  276,  279 
First  Fruits  a  Symbol  of .....  276 

Scene  ..«,            «.»  .....  2 "9 

Retribution «^  ]35 

Revelation:  Its  Author,  etc.  «.«  18,  18,  56 

Reverence  .....            «^  .....  220 

Ritual,  The  Levitical               ««,  ««.      4 

„        Sacrificial     ««,            «^  ««.     94 

Robbing  God              «^            .^  ««.     66 

Royal  Service             .^            .^  .....  308 

Ruler,  His  Sin           ««.            .^  40,  51 


99 


99 


Sabbath 


s 


M 
»> 

» 
ft 

»» 


Abuse  ««, 

Barrenness  .... 
for  the  land 
in  the  Family 
of  rest 


perfectly  consecrated 
„        sanctity  of  ..... 

Sabbatical  Year 

Sacrament  of  Lord's  Supper 

Sacred  life  a  Festival 
„      Office  .«« 

„      Seasons  ««, 

Sacrifice,  Bloodless   ««, 


286,  308 

322 

....  321 

297,  298 

237 

216,  243,  269,  299 


264 
234,  242 

306 

264,  273 
«...  283 
«...  133 
-.  283 
20 


Burnt  ..«.  ^     2, 9,  80,  96 

Meat  .....  _  96 

necessity  for  14,  89,  207 

Peace  29,  31.  35,  37,  90,  93 

Sin  and  Trespass  38,  85,  97.  98,  102 
Solemnity  of.  Publicly  Recog- 

nised      ...«  _.  _  219 

The  Atoning  ««,  •«.  2i7 

The  Place  of  «.,  .^  220 

to  Devils    ««.««,,««  225 
Sacrifices,  Living      ««..«.  .^  118 

tt         of  Peace  «..  ,^  ..83 


»» 

9) 
f* 
tt 

n 

99 

99 

>9 

»» 


ANALYTICAL    INDEX 


PAGE. 

Sacrifices,  The  Worth  of         -.-  ....   207 

Sacrilege     46,68,137,148 

Salt,  Sacrifice  Seasoned  with 21 

Sanctification  113,  154,  192,  193,  197 

Sanctity,  Possibilities  of  ...„  249 

Sanctu.iry  Ministry  133 

„  reverenced  224,  237,  243 

Satisfaction  to  God.     See  Restitution. 

Scapegoat   199,  2(  0,  204,  218 

Scripture,  The  Antidote  for  Ignorance   56,  58 

Secresy        ^.„  ^^  .....  198 

Secret  Flow  of  Sin    .....  ««,  «...  197 

„      Impurities       .^  ...    194 

Secular  and  Sacred  Things    .^  262 

Self- dedication  .....  .^  15,  18 

««  60 

«-.  131, 174 
—  ....  284 
-«  ^.  198 
«-.  ...  249 
^     31,  284 

147 

144 
202 


ff 


^    excuse  m.m  ••■•• 

„    glorying  ^  ««. 

„    in  abeyance        .....  mm. 

^    mastery  ..^  «» 

I,    satisfaction         ...^  •». 

surrender  ».«  ^^ 

will  in  Service  .^  ... 

Sensationalism  .««  ..^ 

Separation 

„  between  Good  and  Evil  153, 166, 163 

Separateness,  Godly  >«,  ^^  .....  252 

Service,  Perfect         .....  ^  113,  119 

„       Royal           _  .....  308 

„        Special  Times  for  «..  .....  295 

Seven  Days' Consecration  ««.  .....113 

Sevenfold  Purging    ,..„  ...„  53 

Sheaf  of  Firsttruits  .....  ^..    26,  275,  284 

Shewbread                  ^  .....  290,  291,  295 

Sin,  Contagious         .««  .....    62,  179,  180 

Heinous  „^  .....  230 

Removed  ...»  ...»  216 

Sinai's  Law  .„.,  ._    43, 278,  280 

Sinner's  Vileness       .....  «...  195 

Sins,  Annihilation  of .....  ... .     54 

Fearful  Aspect  of  _    47,  246,  248 

Loathed  by  God  ^  64,  207 

not  Connived  at  «...  180 

of  Ignorance      .^  .....  40 

Sacrifice  for       .....  38,  85 

Sin  worn  Spirit  of  Man  Asks  Rest        271 

Slander       ....  233,  239,  244 

Social.    See  Family,  Household. 

('rimes            „...  .....  244 

Obscnrity        ,«..     52 

Solemn  Regard  for  Holy  Things  ....   260 

SoHtary,  the  High  Priest  .....  .....  209 

,.         the  Leper  .....  .....  181 

ScTYow,  Elevation  Above  .^  «...  143 

„         in  God's  presence  ««.  «.„  145 

Sovereignty,  God's    .„«  «.«    36 

fepirit's  Efficacy         ««.  »«,  «...     17 

Fulness          ..«.  «.«  ««,  276 

VTa  ctCv                          ftm  w»t%  mmm*         ^  i 

Spiritual  Anointing  .....  ««.  «...  107 

Benefactors  .....  128 

Significance  of  the  Saerifious  1 

Union         .....            ««.  .....  310 

Spotless  High  Priest  ^  «.«  209 

Sprmkhng                  ««.            ,».  .«..    54 

Stewardship               ...             ,,,  ^..  240 

Strangers,  HospitaUty  to  ««.  234,  243,  259 

Strife          ...             ...  ^.  ...   293 

Snbisission               «»  mm  148,  151 


» 
n 
>f 

n 

»» 


»i 


» 


>5 


PAGB. 

Substitution  of  Victim  for  the  Offerer     3,  17 
Succession  in  Sacrifice  ...  ...     37 

Summary  of  Contents  of  Leviticus         1,  321 
Superstitions  ...  ...  234, 242  244 

Supper,  The  Lord's  ...  ...  ...  273 

Surroundings,  Sinful  ...  178,  226,  229 

Swearing.     See  Blasphkmt. 

„  False         ...  •••  ••.  238 

Sweet  Savour  Sacriaces  •••  3, 29 

Sympathy  ...  ...  •••  •••  149 


Tabernacle,  Man's  Frail  ...  ...  286 

Tabernacles,  Feast  of  280,  281,  282,  286 

Table,  Golden  ...  ...  ...  290 

,,      of  Shewbread  •••  ...  291 

Talebearers  ...  •..  239 

Temperance  ...  ...  149,  150,  151 

„  See  Intoxication. 

Temptations  of  Ministers         ..  ...   136 

Thanksgiving  ...  ...  29,  32,  38,  98 

Thoroughness  ...  ...  ...     28 

Tithes:  Arguments  Against  ...  ...  330 

Ecclesiastical  ...  ...  829 

Great  and  Small         ...  ...  329 

History  of    ...  ..  ...  328 

„       Introduction  into  England  of   ...  329 
„        Scripture  Records  of...  ...  328 

„        Witnholding  ,„  ...  332 

Tongue,  Ungoverned  „.  ...  293 

Trade,  Fairness  in    ...  ...  234,  243 

Transmitted  Effects  ...  ...  ...  181 

Trespasses.  See  Sins,  Ignorance. 
Trumpets,  Blowing  of  ...  277, 287 

Feast  of    ..  ...  ...  279 

Gospel     ...  ...  ...  278 

Memorial  of  Sinai  ...  ...  278 


tt 
ft 


it 
»* 
n 


u. 

Unblemished  Sacrifices           .««            .«..  266 

*' Unclean" .....             «.,            «...  175 

Unclean  Foods           ...«            «...  156 

,,            „    may  be  Cleansed            «...  157 

Uncleanness  forfeits  Priestly  Privilege  259 

Uncorruptness           .....             26 

Undignified  Duties     80 

Union,  S^  iritual,  between  God  and  Israel  310 


Valour  and  Victory  through  Godliness 320 

Varietf  h  Worship    ««.  .....     10 

Veil  of  the  Sanctuary  ««.  ««.     63 

Vicarious  bacrifice    ..».  «.»  «„.     10 

Vice  ...>  -«.  «...  198 

Victory  through  Godliness      ....  «...  320 

Vigilance.     See  Watchfulness. 

Vile  distinguished  from  the  Precious    .....  153 

Vileness,  Man's  —  «...  195 

Violation  of  Sanctity ««.  148 

Violation.     See  DiiFiLBD,  Sacrilege. 

Virtue  ...«  .....  ««.  198 

Volition  in  Worship ««.  ««.     14 

Voluntary  act  of  Offering        ««,  .««  2, 9 

„         Dedication  ««.  ««.      7 

Votive  Offerings  to  the  Lord  .««  ««.  324 

„  Redemption  of  327 

Vows,  Acceptable  according  to  the  motive  325 
God  holds  UA  to  our       ^  ^  828 


9f 


AHALTTICAL    INDEX 


Towi  Laws  Concerning  .^ 

0     the  Singular  vow  ,^ 

ta     Unpaid  ^  ^ 

Wa^es         ^_            ^ 

Warnings  and  Promises  .^ 

Watchfulness 

Way  to  God                 .'".~  .^ 

Weaknesses  forfeit  privileges  *** 

Weary  life  of  Man  asks  rest  .«. 

What  God  expects  of  as  .^ 

Whisperings               ^ 

Wilderness,  Pilgrims  through  the 

Within  the  Veil 

Witnesses  against  wrong         .^ 

Words,  Responsibility  for 

Workers  in  the  Church  most  be  eodJr 

Worldliness _  ^ 

Woraltiip  aootptaUt  ZL  m 


PAGE. 

^  326 
—  824 
^  832 


239 
812 

156 

13 

•-.  143 

.-..  270 

.....     64 

233,  239 

M..<  286 

^  120 

61 

63 

267 

228 


Worship,  affections  !n  ,^ 

as  a  privilege  „^ 

as  Dedication  „^ 

Christian       .^  ^^ 

excellencies  n  ,^ 

excitable       .....  ^  131^ 

preparation  for  , 

spurious        ..^  ^^ 

symbolic       «^  ,^ 

The  Law  of .^ 

true 

Worshippers,  true  and  False   '~**  137, 
,)        warning  to .... 

Worthiness  of  Jesus  foreshadowed 

Y. 

Year,  A  new  year  begna  «,. 

_>,    gone       ^  ^ 

Toathlnl  Ptolaniiy  «« 


>» 
n 

m 
n 
n 

n 
f* 
ft 

»> 


PA0K. 

.^ 

21 

•M. 

7 

mm. 

7 

..... 

7 

21, 

,138 

137, 

144 

21, 

138 

MM. 

139 

MM. 

7 

•  .».. 

137 

100, 

139 

188, 

139 

•MM 

140 

■•tP* 

22 

278, 

280 

MM. 

278 

,«, 

li»8 

ILLirSTRATIONS  &  QUOTATIONS. 


FAOB. 

Abraham*  Tent  and  Altar      ^,  ,.,  243 

"  Action,  I  mves  somewhere  a  record  "...  182 

n       *•  'Ceen  spirit,  sUrts  into  instant 

4,    ,,    .      taction" 248 

Afraid  of  lothing  but  F^ar      ...  ...  32O 

"  Afiaictioi  is  not  sent  in  vain  "  (Southey)  172 
«*  Angels  ot  God  in  Disguise  "  ...  ...  260 

** Appetite,  Govern  well  thy"  ...  ...   154 

,y        **  No  man's  body  is  as  strong 
as  his  "  (Tiilotson) 
Ancestors    ...  ,,, 

Ancestral  Heritages  ... 
Antioehus'  Sacrilege ... 
Ascending  Fire 
Atonement  not  found  in  Bible.    By  Dr 

Taylor. 


.•• 


198 
323 
303 
262 
19 


*•• 


19 


Beautiful  in  Worship  ...  ..,     28 

Beautiful,  « 'Tis  first  the  Pure,  and  then 

tli«**     ...  ...  ^    29 


••. 


••• 
••• 


••• 

••• 


Beautiful,  ""^Hrtue  is  Fairer  in  a  Person"  269 
Beauty — "Excellence  true  Beauty  "      ...     29 

n      "  'Tis  not  a  lip,  an  eye,  we  beauty 
^^all" 
Beecher,  H.  W.,  concerning  Injury        ||[ 
Belshazzar's  Sacrilege 
Benefactors,  Spiritual 
Beneficence  a  JDuty    ,,, 
Benevolence 
Bible,  Ignorance  of    ... 

„    Salmasius'  advice 

„     Samuel  Johnson's  daily  reading  of 
Blasphemy,  Incident  of 

„         Louis  IX.  concerning  ...  ^.,^ 

Blood,  Life  in  the  ;  A  Modern  Discovery  226 
Blood—"  We  have  the  Blood  of  Christ  "* 

„  ^.,     ,      (Schliermacher) 195 

Bodily  Appearance    ..  .„  ...  258 

„      Infirmities 268 

Bonar.     « I  thank  Thee,  Lord,  for  using 

^      ^^^     128 

lirayery ;  ♦*  Brave  man  feels  no  fear  "  ^  828 


258 

86 
2G2 
128 

308 

308 

58 

53 

58 

292 

2:t3 


XlL 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   QUOTATIONS 


PAGE. 
"Brnttia  hath  riv'd  my  Heart*  ...     86 

Business  and  Work    ...  ...  •..  244 

Byron  concerning  Conscience  .••  ••.     75 


It 


0. 

"Calamity  is  Man's  True  Touchstone  " ...  151 
Calvin  :  Crest  of,  with  Motto  ...  ...     19 

Caryly  on  Heathen  Regard  for  Solemnities  2G  i 
Cave^  Principal,  on  Altar  Firo  ...     19 

Cecil  Respecting  Ministers       .••  ...     29 

Celibacy      ...  ...  ...  ...  258 

Character   ...  ...  ...  ...     29 

"  A  Mind  to  Suit  Thine  Out- 
ward" ...  ...  ...  258 

„  German  Motto  Concerning  ...     29 

Charity        ...  .,.  ...  ...  243 

„      "He  Truly  Great  that  is  Great  in 

Charity"    ...  ...  ...   24.^ 

**  rharms  StriRe  the  Sight  "   ...  ...  25'i 

Cmla,  A  Spout  New  jt^iosHom  of         ... 

Humanity"  ...  ...  251 

„       a  Thankless  ...  ...  250 

Childhood    ...  ...  ...  ...  1H9 

"  Children  are  what  their  Mothers  are  "      169 
Christian  Graces  shown  ...  ...  114 

„         Man:  •' Whose  Doctrine  and  Life 

Coincident"  ...  ...   811 

CicerOi  concerniTig  Error  ...  ...     53 

„      Things  hallowel  ...  ...  2o2 

Cleanliness  .  ...  ...  ...   189 

"  Cleanly  platter  on  the  hoard "  (Gold- 
smith; ...  ...  ...  ...  189 

Cleansed      ...  ...  ...  ...  193 

„      "  Who  would  be  cleansed  from 

every  sin  "  ...  ...  193 

**  Comfort  in  Despair  "  ...  ...     28 

Communion.     "  With  God  eternally  shut 

in  •••  •••  •••  •••J.^o 

Companions.     **V<:t   -v'tYx   the  li^-ht   aiid 

vain "    ...  ....  ...  ...   IGS 

Confucius  concerning  Friendship  ...  163 

„  „  Ignorance  ...     57 

„  „  Justice  ...     8f> 

„  „  Virtue  ...     86 

Conscience — Mutinies  in  Bosom  ...     75 

„         "  Harder  than  our  Enemies  "         75 
„        «  The  Oracle  of  God "  ...     75 

y,        in  everything "         ...  ...     87 

Consecration  ...  ...     19 

„  Baptist  Missionary  Society's 

Motto...  ...  ...     19 

"  Consequences  are  unpitying  "  ...   181 

Country,  love  of         ...  ...  ...  323 

"  Courage,      essential      to     Character  " 

(Froude)  ...  ...  ...  320 

"  Cowards  die  many  times,"  etc.  ...  32() 

Cross,  Cowper  concerning  the  ,.,     71 

"  Cross,  It  takes  our  Guilt  away  "         ...   157 
Custom         ...  ...  ...  ...  231 

„       calls  me  to  it"  ...  ...  231 

n      "Man  yields   to,  as   he  bows  to 

Fate  "        ...  ...  ,    231 

„      more  honoured  in  the  breach  "        227 
n      New  customs,  though  ridiculous, 

are  followed  ...  ,..  231 


Decay 


D. 


PAO«. 

Dedication  :  "  I  cannot  love  Thee,"  etc.  330 
Deeds.     ^'We  live  in  deeds  not  years" 

rBailey)               ...            ..,            ...  229 

Developments             ...             .••             ...  l81 

Disease  to  luxury  succeeds  "               ,,,  171 

"Disposition,  not  the  deed"    ...             ...  29 

Distress.     "  To  pity  distress  is  human"  243 

Drink. — "We  drink  our  poison,"  etc.       ..  164 

„       "  When  once  the  demon  enters  "...  134 

M.             •••            •••  161 


it 


Drunkenness 


E. 


Elioty  GV^r^^,  Concerning  "  Conscience*'      75 

„  ,,         "  Consequences "  181 

"  Evils  that  men  do  live  after  them  "     ...  181 


87 
•..    87 


P. 

"  Faith  and  nnfaith  can  ne*er  be  eqnal 

powers "  ...             .••             .••  ... 

Faithlessness  ...  •*.« 

Falsehood  a  Goodly  Outside  ,.•  •••     87 

Family  Piety               .-             .«•  ••.  243 

,,           Abraham's  Tent ...  ••.  243 

Fear,  Afraid  of  fear,  Montaigne  ...  320 

„     "  To  fear  the  foe.  since  fear  op- 

presseth  strength  "  ...  ...  320 

Feasting      ...            •••            •••  •••   164 

Fire,  Enduring          •••            •••  ••.     86 

Fires,  Living              •••             •••  ••.     86 

"  Flesh  is  heir  to  "    ...             ...  ...171 

Forgiveness,  Luther  Concerning  ...     58 

Frail  Habitations      ...  ..-  287 

"  Freeman  whom  truth  makes  free  '*  ...  309 
Friendships,  Confucius  Concerning  ..     163 
„          of  the  world  are  oft  con- 
federacies in  vice  "  ...   163 
0             *♦  Nature    and  religion  are 

the  bands  of  "...  ...  163 

/Vw-**/*'*  View  of  Sacrifice      ...  ...     19 

„        Testimony  conotrning  Courage    320 


292 

198 

150 

114 

29 


29 


G. 

God's  Name  Blasphemed  ... 

Goethe  Concerning  "  Self -Mastery  " 
Goldsmith  Concerning  Pride    .. 
Graces  a  Christian  sh/>uld  show  his 
GuthriCf  Dr.,  on  Ministers      ••• 

H. 

Hamilton,  Dr.  James,  on  Worship 

„  „  on  Peace  ...     38 

*'  Handsome  is  that  handsome  does  "     ...  259 
Happiness,  Virtue  is  True       ...  ...     29 

Harvest  Custom  of  Hindoos     ..  ...  287 

First  Fruits  ...  ...  287 

"  Lord    of    the   harvest  all   is 

Thine" 2s7 

Hare.  A .  ^f'..  Concerning  Knowledge    ... 
Hastings^    Warren^    his    yearnings    for 
Daylesford  ...  ...  ...  3^2 

Haughty,  "An  Avenging  God  follows"...   15:) 
*' Hearths  and  altars  "  ...  ...  190 

Hearts.     "  Idols  of  Hearts  and  of  House- 
holds"... ...  ...  ...  260 

Berber  ty  George,  "Make  thyself  all  rever- 
ence and  fe&r  "       ...  100 


»» 


'  *  Restore  to  God  His  due 


r  rrv 


,.  244       Herod's  Pollution  of  Sepulchres 


...  263 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   QaOTATlONflL 


riii. 


>> 


PAOB. 

HelpIessnesB              ...            ...            .  .  193 

Medical  Incident   Illustra- 
ting the  Soul's...             ...  193 

Holiness,  Inward       ...             ...             ...  1I4 

,,          Jonathan  Edwards  on  Personal  114 

Home  and  Happiness  Connected            ...  Il4 

Cleanliness     ...             ...             ...  189 

Creature  Holiness.     Edwards    ...  193 


'  Home  should  be  the  centre  of 


♦> 


joy  "        ...             ..              ...  194 

„       *'  0   happy    home,    0    home    su- 
premely blest "      ...             ...  194 

,,       *'  The  almost  sacred  joys  of  home 

depend"  ...             ...             ...  190 

Human  Life,  its  True  Object ...            ^  18 


Ignorance,  Classfcal  quotations  concerning    57 
„        Conviction  of  ...  ...     67 

n        Explanation  of        ...  ...     67 

„        "  is  the  curse  of  God  »*  ...    67 

„        Perils  of    ...  ...  ...     67 

Imposture — Quotations  under  Priestism     114 
Incense,  Sweet,  in  Worship      ...  ...     29 

**  Industry  supports  us  all  "     „,  „.  244 

Indifference  7I 

"  Inhumanity  to  Man  "  „,  ...     75 

lDJ»iry  ...  86 

Intemperance  ...  ...  I34,  151 

Isaac  Walton  concerning  Ignorance       ,,.     67 


J. 

Johnson,  Dr.,  concerning  Ignorance       ,„     67 
»  »  the  Bible  ...     58 

Judge:  "A  Judge   whom  no   king    can 

corrupt"  ...  ...  244 

^      *«  Four  things  belong  to  a  Judge," 

etc.  (Socrates)        ...  ...  244 

9,      *'  He  who  the  Sword  of  Heaven 

would  bear"  ...  ...  244 

Justice        ...  ...  ...  ...     86 

„     The  virtue  of  Justice  is  modera- 
tion," etc 244 


K. 


Kitto,  on  Sacrifices  of  peace 


•••    So 


L. 


"Lands  were  fairly  portioned*'  ,,,  308 

Large  streams  from  little  fountains  flow    181 
Leper.     "  Room  for   the  leper,    room !" 

(Willis)  193 

Liberty,  m  Christ       ...  308 

Libel.     "  Convey  a  libel  in  a  frown  "     ...  244 
**  Life's  shadows  are  meeting  Eternity's 

^.     <^ay" 244 

Life,  insecurity  of      ...  ...  ...  287 

•  Light  in  darkness,  comfort  in  despair  "     38 
Light  bearers  ...  ...  ...  296 

•*  Little  sparks  may  burst  into  a  mighty 

flame"  ...  iqi 

Louis,  king  of  France,  concerning  orofanity  71 

.    »>  »>  blasphemy  etc.  293 

••  Lowhest  soul  may  be  a  temple  "         ,,.  188 

__  M. 

Maoaulay  concerning  Ancestral  property  303 

Meroj-seat ...  .^  ^      ''    .;.  217 


PAGE 

Milton,  on  Redemption             m*  ...  71 

Ministers,  Credentials  of          ...  ill  29 

„         Dedication  of             ...  „.  127 

„         Dr.  Guthrie  concerning  ,„  29 

„         maintenance  of         ...  „.  29 

„        used  by  God            ...  ...  128 

Morality      ...             ,„             ...  ...  243 

Motherhood                 ...             ...  ...  169 

Mother.     Monica.  Augustine's  mother  ...  169 

Cecil's  mother          ...  ...  169 


« 


Mothers:  *'A  Mother  is  a  Mother  still**...  169 
,f  "  A  Mother's  love  is  an  undying 

feeling"  ...  ...  169 

M  Say  to  Mothers,  "  What  a  holy 

charge  I"  ...  ...  166 

n  "The    Mother's    heart    is    the 

child's  school"  ...  ,„  169 

N. 

Name :  "  A  lost  good  name  is  ne'er  re- 

trieved."— C-ay 244 

„     God  s  Name  blasphemed  ...  292 

Nation,  Advantage  of  Religion  to. —^w^-^^^.  310 

♦♦  n         Testimony  of  Quincy      311 

National  Irreligion    ...  ...  ...  323 

Nearness  to  God        ...  ...  ...  128 

Neighbours,  Virtue  wins  ...  ...     86 

Neighbourliness         ...  ...  ...  244 

Newton,  A.  L.,  concerning  «  Forgiveness  "  68 

19         John,  concerning  "  Atonement "       19 

0. 

**  Oath.  I  had  an  oath  in  heaven  "  ...  71 
Oaths,  "  Not  many  that  make  the  truth*"    71 

„       Profane           71 

„       Sincere  ... 

„       Taking  ..... 

„       Unlawful         70 

Occasion,  Keen  spirit  aeizea  the  prompt  218 

Offerings  to  God         10 ) 

^^^H^ 244 

„       "  18  not  all  decay         ...             ...  244 

M       **  Mourns  less  for  what  age  takes 


... 
••• 
••• 
... 


...     71 
...     70 


away 


... 


..  244 


P. 


... 


...     67 


Pagan  Images  of  Death 
Pardon 

Passions 193 

9        **  Follow  where  our  passions  lead 

the  way,"  Claudian             ...  198 

„         "  When  passion  rules,"  Scott  ...  198 

Peace,  Blessedness  of               ...            ...  33 

„       Christ  Whispering         .'**             ***  100 
„      Incidents   of    one    finding    Peace, 

Fhning       ;  100 

»      Of  the  Gospel  ...             ...             ...  33 

«>n^aith          33 


Sacred 
terms  of 


..• 


...  100 


'*  Penitence  has  wept  in  vain  "  ...  184 

Perjury.     «  Perjuries  are  common  as  bad 

.P.^^®"^ 215 

riety,  whose  soul  sincere,  fears  God," 

,   ®f°-  •••       , 227 

I'leasures,  harmlessly  pursued,"  Cowper  )65 

Pompey's  Sacrilege 262 

i'oor  man  loved  the  great "   ^  ^,  fiog 


sir. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  QUOTATIONS. 


PAGB. 

Poor,  Sacrifices  of    •••  ,«,  ...     19 

Poor,  the  Church's  Treasures  ...  ...  19  i 

„     *' Blessed  are  the  poor '*.„  ...  Ili4 

Possessions...  ...  ,^  ,,,  309 

Poverty :  the  Saintly  Poor      ...  ...  193 

„  of  Spirit     ...  ...  ...   193 

g^  "Slow  rises  worth  by  poverty 

depressed "  ...  ...  243 

•  M  Poverty    a     loa'i    wbch     is 

heavier  the  more  ehare  it  "     243 
Prayer  :  Opens  Heaven  ...  ...   120 

„  •*  More  things  wrought  by,"  etc.  120 

„         *'  Hath  turned  my  feigned  prayer 

upon  my  head "      ...  ...  185 

"  Preach  impostures  to  the  world**        ...  1 14 
Prt^sumption  •••  •••  .,«  151 

Pride  ...  •••  •••  ••    151 

„      Ornshed  •••  •••  ...  323 

Priestism     ...  •••  •••  ,,.  114 

Priest,  Meddling        ...  ...  ,,,  114 

'•  Primrose  by  the  river's  brim**  ...     22 

Profane  Oaths  ...  ...  ...     71 

Profanity.     (See  also  Swearing,  Blas- 

FUK^X  •«#  •••  •••  •••    ^«/i 

Progress      ...  ...  ...  ...  193 

„        *'  Every    upward    step    makes 

another  needful "    ...  ...  193 

„        "  Flying  birds  not  taken  *»  ...  193 

Propitiation...  ...  ...  217 

"  Punishment  is  the  recoil  of  crime  *  •..  151 

'  Pure  domestic  shrine  '*  •••  m.  190 

R. 

Rashness,  Olassical  Quotations  ...  151 

Redemption  ...  ....  •..     71 

„  Shakespeare,  concerning    ...     71 

Relatively.     "  We  are  really  what  we  are 
relatively**  ...  ...  ...  243 

Religious    Men:     **I    Venerate   a    Man 
whose  Heart "  &c.  ...  ...  ...  311 

Religion       ...  ...  ...  ...  231 

„        "Blushing,    veils    her    sacred 

fires"  Po/>e  ...  ...  262 

^        «*  Consists  in  Obedienca  **  ...  231 

„        Faithfully  Obeying  God's  Laws  231 
„         "  is  a  Struggle,  not  a  Hymn," 

Stael        ...  ...  ...  231 

„        "is  Life  Essential,*' 3iacc?owa/c?...  231 
Reparation  ...  ...  ...  ...     71 

Resurrection  Emblems  ...  ...     29 

Rest,  Found  in  Christ  ...  ...  30S 

"  Rest  is  coming,  rest  is  nigh  **  ...  271 

*'  Rest,   Spirit,   free,  in  the   green    pas- 
tTiros         ...  ...  ...  •••   Zi^ 

Ruskin,  concerning  Peace  on  Earth        ...     38 

„  „  Pride  ...  158 

R&velation  ...  ...  .•  ...     19 

„         Satisfies  all  Doubts  •••     10 

S. 
Sabbath  to  the  Poor  ...  ...  308 

„       "  A    Segment    of    the    Eternal 


Sabbath    ... 
,,       and  Sanctuary 


...  286 
..  243 
^       Called  by  Jews  «  Day  of  Light"  286 
^       *♦  Day  of  the  Lord,  and  truce  to 

Earthly  care,"  Longfellow    ...  243 


••• 

•••         OQ 

•M 

...  225 

*•• 

...  100 

> 

...  323 

••• 

...  100 

•  •• 

...  100 

••• 

...  144 

•  •• 

•..  193 

Tay 

...  193 

•  •• 

...  218 

lAOB. 

Sabbath,  "  Fifty-two    Springe   in   every 

Year,"  Cohridqe    ...  ...  286 

„         Forgetting  the  ...  ...  287 

H        «  How  Still  the  Morning  of    the 

Hallowed  Day "       ..  ...  286 

f,        Philip  Henry's  Sabbaths  ...  243 

M        Sin  keeps  no  ...  ...  243 

„        «  Thoc  art  a  Cooling  Fountain  *'  271 
„        ''  Ti  anquil  and  Happy  To-day  "  287 
„         Wiber force's  Testimony    to    its 

Value        ...  ...  ...  286 

*'  Sabbaths  are  Threefold,  as  St.  Austin 
says"       ...  ...  ...  ...  270 

Sacrifices  of  the  Poor  .,,  ,,.     19 

Sacrifice,  Fronde's  View         •••  ...     19 

„        of  Peace     ...  ^'^ 

,,        to  Devils     .«• 

Sacred  Peace 

«  Sail  on,  thou  Ship  of  State** 
Sanctuary,  worship  in  the 
,.         All  holy  there 
Sanctity       ... 
^  anctification 

,,  V.  Justification,  Jay 

Scapegoat    ... 
Schliermacher's  Dying  Words,  *'  We  have 
the  Blood  1 "  ...  ...  ...  195 

Scripture  Light  ...  ...  ...     58 

Seasons  :  "  His  love  ordained  the  seasons  **  238 
Secresy        ...  ...  ...  ...  198 

„       **  Go  to  your  our  bosom,  knock 

tnere.  •••  ...         ...  l«7o 

«  Seeds  of  all  my  sins  are  in  my  Heart "  182 
"  Seed  we  sow  another  reaps  "  ...  181 

Self-knowledge.      Guesses  at  truth       ...     57 
Self  mastery  .,  ...  ...  198 

J,  **  I  will  be  lord  over  my- 

self," Goethe  ...  ...  198 

Sensationalism  ...  ...  ...  151 

Separate  from  sinners  •••  ,,.  163 

Sincere  Oaths  ...  •••  «..    71 

Sinners,  Separate  from  ...  ...  163 

Sins.  *•  Great  sins  make  great   sufiFerers  "  182 
"Slander    filled  her  mouth    with  lying 

words  **  ...  ...  244 

Sleep,  Death  as  a       ...  ...  ...     29 

St.iupitz  and  Luther  concerning  Forgive- 

UcSo  •••••  *«*  •••  •••        Of 

„       *'  Tho*  pure  as  snow,  not  escape  "  244 

Submission  ...             ...             ...  ...  151 

Mrs.  Browing  concerning  ...  15 1 

A  father's  submission  ...  151 

Superstitions               ...             ...  ...  244 

Swearing:  Burroughs  on           ...  ^.  292 

„        Louis,  IX.  Concerning  ...  293 


Temperance  in  Diet  ...  ...  ...  164 

Tennyson,    "  More  things  are  wrought  by 

prayer"  ...  ...  120 

„         "Hands  moulding  man**        •••  181 
Thanksgiving  ...  ...  •••     38 

„  Constant  ...  •••    88 

„  Life's  work        ...  .„     88 

*•  Tis  not  a  lip,  an  eye,  we  beauty  call  **  ..  250 
Tithe,  Incidents  of  lapsing  from  ...  832 

Tithes,  Georgo  Herbert's  words  —    71 


ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   QUOTATIONS. 


xr 


PAGE. 

Tongue,  *'  One  evil  tongue  hurts  three 

persons"  ....  ....  244 

"  Touch  the  Goblet  no  more"  ....151 

Transmitted  Effects  ....  ....  181 

"  Treason,  where  trust  is  greatest"  ....     87 

Trifler,  "  Not  with  the  trifler  gay"    ....  163 

True  friend  to  man,  ne'er  a  foe  to  God     87 
Trust,  Sterne  concerning     ....  ....     87 

"       Emerson      ....  ....  ....     87 

Trumpets,  Blowing  of  ....  ....  287 

"  The  dead  all  have  heard"  287 


U 


Unclean     ....  .... 

Unlawful  Oaths 


....  182 
....     71 


Valour  :  John  Knox  ....  ....  323 

Varro,  B.C.   100,  Collects  Opinions  on 
Human  Life         ....  ....  ....     18 

"  Vice  stings  us  even  in  our  pleasures," 

Oolion  ....  198 

•'      "  Men  only  feel  the  smart,"  Pope  198 
"     "  No  man  confesses  his  vices," 

Seneca    ....  198 

"  Violent  fires   soon    burn   out   them- 
selves" ....  ....  ....  151 

"  Virtue     that     transgresses     is     but 

patched,"  &c 198 

"       "  consecrating      every      feature," 
Young  ....  ....  259 

"       "  Follow  virtue  even  for  vir- 
tue's sake,"  Pope  ....  243 


>  > 


PAGE. 

Virtue  "is  the  soul's  calm  sunshine" 

Pope      198 

' '       "  One  virtuous  person  more  than 

ten  vicious"         ....  ....  198 

"       "  requires  a  tutor,"  Seneca     ....   198 

Vows  :  "  Unheedful  vows  may  heedfully 

be  broken"  ....  ....     71 

*'  Grace  to  keep  thy  vows"     ....  332 

"  to    every   purpose    must   not 

hold"     332 

"       Unpaid         332 

W 

Wesley's  Boast  :  "  God  is  for  us"  ....  320 
"  When  once  the  demon  enters"  ....  134 
"  When  one  that  holds  communion  with 

the  skies"  ....  ....  ....  128 

**  Whispers,  Cutting  honest  throats  by"  244 
"  Words    are     bonds,    his     oaths    are 

oracles"  ....  ....  ...."    71 

Working  Seven  Days  a  Week  ....  308 

Work  :   "  All  true  work  is  sacred,"  Car- 

lyle  244 

"         "  Men  must  work,  and  women 


must  weep" 

244 

Worship,  The  Beautiful  in  .... 

29 

"          Oriental  usage  in 

29 

"         Sweet  Incense  Worship 

29 

True       

100 

"  Yoke  of  inbred  sin" 


19 


* '  Youth  cannot  control  its  impetuosity"  151 


A 


IIOMILETICAL  COMMENTARY 


ON   THE    BOOK   OF 


NUMBERS 


(CHAPTERS  I.  TO  XV.)  ' 


H^/TH    CRITICAL    AND    EXFLANATOKY    NOTES,     IirOICES,     Etc.      EU 


BY 


REV.    WILLIAM    JONES. 


FUNK   &    WAGNALLS   COMPANY 

London  &  Toronto 

1892 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY 


OS 


THE    BOOK    OF    NUMBERS, 


■T 


WILLIAM     JONfiS. 


Title. 

The  word  Numbers  is  a  translation  of  the  title  given  to  this  book  in  the  LXX, 
'ApiOfioL,  in  the  Vulgate  Numeric  and  was  evidently  applied  to  it  because  it 
contains  the  record  of  the  two  numberings  of  the  people.  The  Jews  sometimes 
call   it    *1^1,''1,    Vayedabber,  which    is    its   first   word   in  the    Heb.;   but   more 

• 

frequently  1]il7P?>  Bemidbar^  in  the  desert^  which  is  its  fifth  word,  and  mor^ 
accurately  characterises  the  book. 

Contents. 

"  The  book  narrates  the  history  of  the  Israelites  during  their  sojourn  in  tbe 
wilderness  from  the  completion  of  the  law-giving  at  Sinai  (Lev.  xxvii.  £4)  to 
their  mustering  in  the  plains  of  Moab  for  actual  entry  into  the  Land  of  Promise" 
— or,  from  *'the  first  day  of  the  second  month,  in  the  second  year  after  they 
were  come  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt "  (chap.  i.  1)  to  the  end  of  the  tenth  month 
of  the  fortieth  year  (Deut.  i.  3),  or  a  period  of  thirty-eight  years  and  nine  months. 
The  events  of  the  history  are  generally  given  in  their  chronological  order,  except 
in  chapte_^s  xv.-xix.,  inclusive.  These  "  chapters  appear  to  deal  with  a  long 
period,  from  which  only  isolated  episodes  are  given;  and  of  these  the  dates  can 
only  be  conjectured," 

Authorship. 

From  the  earliest  tiroes  the  book  has  been  generally  regarded  as,  in  substance, 
at  least,  the  work  of  Moses.     In  support  of  this  view,  the  following  reasons  are 

1 


INTRODUCTION. 


given  in  the  "  Speaker's  Coinmeatary  : " — "(1)  The  catalogue  of  the  stations  or 
encampments  during  the  journeyings  is  assigned  to  Moses  in  xxxiii,  2.  (2)  The 
intermixture  in  this  book  of  narrative  and  legislative  matter  is  one  of  its 
characteristic  features  ....  This  feature  is  exactly  one  which  belongs  to  the 
work  of  a  contemporary  anr.alist.  (S)  That  the  author  had  an  intimate 
acquaintance  with  Egypt  may  be  strikingly  illustrated  from  Numbers.  Comnare 
viii.  7  sqq,;  v.  11-35  ;  xix.  1-10  ;  xi.  5,  6  ;  xiii.  22.  (4)  The  statements  of  this 
book  abound  in  evidences  that  the  writer  and  those  with  whom  he  lived  were  «till 
in  the  desert.  Compare  xix.  14;  ii. ;  ix.  16  sqq.;  x.  1-28,  35,  36.  (5)  There  are 
topographical  statements  in  the  book  which  could  hardly  have  been  written  after 
the  days  of  Moses.  Compare  xxi.  13  with  xxxii.  (6)  The  various  communica- 
tions purporting  to  be  from  God  to  Moses  are  so  worded  and  often  of  such  a 
nature  (cf,  e.g.  xiv.  11 -26),  that  unless  we  go  the  length  of  denying  their  historical 
character  altogether,  we  must  admit  them  to  have  been  recorded  by  the  very 
person  who  received  them.  (7)  No  other  person  than  Moses  has  been  or  can  be 
named  with  anything  like  probability,  or  even  plausibility,  as  the  author  .... 
We  conclude  then,  with  confidence,  that  nothing  has  been  as  yet  alleged  which 
disturbs  the  generally-accepted  views  respecting  the  authorship  of  this  book.  It 
is,  in  substance,  the  work  of  Moses ;  and  whilst  many  portions  of  it  were 
probably  committed  to  writing  for  years  before  the  whole  was  completed,  yet  the 
concluding  chapters  were  not  written  until  towards  the  close  of  the  fortieth  year 
after  the  exodus." 

As  to  our  work  on  this  book,  very  few  words  are  necessary.  In  accordan.'»e 
with  a  leading  principle  of  this  series  of  Commentaries,  we  have  endeavoured  to 
present  the  largest  number  of  things  in  the  smallest  number  of  words.  To  this 
principle,  literary  finish  and  grace  have  been  subordinated.  Some  of  the  records 
contained  in  this  book  are  not  well  adapted  to  homiletic  treatment  or  fruitful  in 
homiletic  suggestion.  In  dealing  with  these,  we  have  endeavoured  to  suggest 
homiletic  methods  without  any  straining  of  the  text  or  unworthy  handling  of  the 
Sacred  Word ;  and  we  venture  to  hope  that  we  have  not  been  altogether 
unsuccessful  in  this  respect.  The  illustrations  which  are  given  are  (by  Mr. 
Dickinson's  request)  numerous.  They  are  drawn  from  a  wide  range  of  literature, 
and  very  few  of  them  are  taken  from  "  Storehouses,"  ''  Treasuries,"  or 
**  Dictionaries  of  Illustration."  Each  one  will  be  found  to  be  well  suited  to 
illumine  or  impress  the  point  to  which  it  is  attached.  In  our  work  we  have 
consulted  the  best  authors  who  have  written  on  this  book ;  and  are  under 
considerable  obligations  to  '^  A  Commentarie  upon  the  Fourth  Booke  of 
Moses,  called  Numbers,  by  William  Attersoll,  Minister  of  the  Word  "  (1618); 
"Comfortable  Notes  upon  the  Booke  of  Numbers,  by  Bishop  Gervase  Babington** 
(1637);  "Keil  and  Delitzsch's  Commentary  on  the  Pentateuch; **  and  to  tLo 
*'  Speaker's  Commentary." 
2 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  BOOK  01"   NUMBERS. 


-•o*- 


CHArPTER  L 


Thb  Numbering  of  the  People, 


(  Verses  1-3.) 


*'  The  object  of  the  encampment  at 
Ci^inai,"  says  Perowne,  ''  has  been  ac- 
complished. The  Covenant  has  been 
ipade,  the  Law  given,  the  Sanctuary 
s<^t  up,  the  Priests  consecrated,  the  ser- 
vice of  God  appointed,  and  Jehovah 
dwells  in  the  midst  of  His  chosen 
people.  It  is  now  time  to  depart  in 
order  that  the  object  may  be  achieved 
for  which  Israel  has  been  sanctified. 
That  object  is  the  occupation  of  the 
Promised  Land.  But  this  is  not  to  be 
accomplished  by  peaceable  means,  but 
by  the  forcible  expulsion  of  its  present 
inhabitants  ;  for  '  the  iniquity  of  tl  e 
Amorites  is  full,'  they  are  ripe  for  judg- 
ment, and  this  judgment  Israel  is  to 
execute.  Therefore  Israel  must  be 
organised  as  Jehovah's  army ;  and  to 
this  end  a  mustering  of  all  who  are 
capable  of  bearing  arms  is  necessary. 
Hence  the  book  opens  with  the  number- 
ing of  the  people." 

Thrice  were  the  people  numbered  in 
the  wilderness.  Nine  months  previous 
they  were  numbered  for  the  purpose  of 
collecting  atonement-money  from  every 
male  of  twenty  years  old  and  upward 
(Comp.  Exod.  XXX.  11-16  with  xxxviii. 
25,  26).  On  this  occasion  they  were 
numbered  with  a  view  to  war.  And 
thirty-eight  years  afterwards,  in  the 
plains  ot  Moab,  they  were  again  num- 
bered, for  the  division  of  the  Promised 
b3 


Land  among  the  tribes,  according  to 
the  number  of  their  families  (Comp. 
xxvi.  and  xxxiii   54). 

Our  text  sets  forth  : — 

L  The  Authority  for  this  Number- 
ing. 

It  was  commanded  by  God.  "  The 
Lord  spake  unto  Mo>e:s  .  .  .  Take  ye 
the  sum  of  all  the  congregation  of  the 
children  of  Israel."  Contrast  this  with 
the  numbering  of  the  p?ople  by  David 
(1  Sam.  xxiv.,  and  1  Chron.  xxi).  This 
was  expressly  commanded  by  the  Lord  : 
that  was  utterly  devoid  of  Divine  autho- 
rity. This  was  done  for  wise  and 
worthy  reasons  (as  we  shall  see) ; 
that,  from  pride  and  vain  reliance. 
Moses  numbeied  the  people  to  see  the 
number  of  God's  subjects  able  to  fight 
in  the  Lord's  battles.  David  seems  to 
have  desired  to  know  the  number  of  the 
people  as  his  own  subjects,  and  to  dis- 
play the  extent  of  his  own  dominion 
and  power.  As  the  result  of  David's 
sin,  the  Lord,  by  pestilence,  slew  seventy 
thousand  men.  It  is  of  the  utmost  im- 
portance that  the  leaders  of  men  should 
be  well  assur*  d  of  two  things  in  the 
movements  which  they  inaugurate: — 

1.  That  they  have  the  Divine  approval 
of  their  undertakings.  The  movt-ment 
vi^hich  is  approved  by  God,  and  well 
prosecuted,  shall  advance  to  splendid 
tiiumph.     But  that  which  He  appioves 


CELal.  I. 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:  NUMBERS. 


not  must  end  in  failure  and  disaster. 
Apply  this  test  to  our  undertakings. 

2.  That  they  are  actuated  hy  worthy 
motives  in  th%ir  undertakings.  A  sinful, 
selfish,  or  mean  motive  will  vitiate  our 
enterprises  and  mar  our  works.  "  The 
Lord  looketh  at  the  heart.'*  Let  us 
scrutinize  our  motives. 

II.   The  Place  of  this  Numbering, 

'*  In  the  wilderness  of  Sinai." 
1.  In  a  desert.  The  wilderness 
suggests  (1)  the  ideas  of  a  life  of 
Privation,  Little  or  no  food  grows 
in  the  desert.  There  are  no  homes 
in  the  desert.  Pleasant  streams  and 
refreshing  shades  are  seldom  found 
there.  (2)  Peril.  This  would  arise 
from  the  scorching  heat  of  the  sun ; 
from  the  furious  violence  of  the  storm, 
and  from  the  fierce  attacks  of  savage 
beasts.  (3)  Perplexity.  The  desert 
has  no  well-defifted  roads  made  through 
it.  The  traveller  is  very  liable  to  lose 
his  track,  grow  bewildered,  and  sink 
into  utter  perplexity.  We  have  in  this 
an  illustration  of  the  life  of  the  good 
in  this  world.  The  world  cannot  supply 
the  soul's  needs.  We  have  needs  and 
yearnings  that  the  best  things  of  this 
world  are  utterly  inadequate  to  satisfy. 
We  cannot  find  a  home  for  the  soul  in 
anything  here.  This  is  not  our  rest. 
There  are  perils  many  and  great  in  this 
present  life  and  world.  We,  too,  are 
"in  the  desert." 

2.  In  a  desert  where  the  tabernacle  of 
God  was.  "  In  the  wilderness  of  Sinai, 
in  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation." 
They  were  in  the  desert ;  but  the  Lord 
also  was  there.  His  presence  was  a 
guarantee  of  (1)  Provision.  He  fed 
them  with  bread  from  heaven.  His 
presence  and  power  transformed  the 
desert  into  a  banquet  hall.  In  obe- 
dience to  His  will  the  solid  rock  became 
a  fountain,  and  the  desert  rejoiced  in 
pheasant  streams.  In  Him  the  home- 
less wanderers  fouud  a  home  and  rest. 
(2)  Protection.  He  guarded  them  from 
the  scorching  heat  of  the  sun  by  day  by 
the  pillar  of  cloud,  and  from  the  at- 
tacks of  savage  beasts  by  night  by  the 
pillar  of  fire.  In  the  day  of  battle  He 
was  their  shield  and  fortress.  (3)  Di- 
rection, He  "led  His  people  like  a 
4 


flock  by  the  hand  of  Moses  and  Aaron." 
He  "  guided  them  in  the  wilderness  like 
a  flock.'*  "  He  led  them  forth  by  the 
right  way,  that  they  might  go  to  a  city 
of  habitation."  It  matters  not  that 
this  world  is  like  a  desert  to  the  godly 
soul,  if  God  be  with  us  here.  His 
presence  will  afford  the  most  adequate 
and  delightful  supplies,  the  divinest 
satisfaction,  the  most  impregnable  de- 
fence, and  the  most  infallible  guidance. 

"  Though  in  a  bare  and  rugged  way, 
Through  devious,  lonely  wilda  I  stray. 
Thy  presence  shall  my  pains  beguile; 
The  barren  wilderness  shall  smile, 
With  sudden  green  and  herbage  crowned. 
And  streams  shall  murmur  all  around.'* 

Addison. 

III.  The  Time  of  this  Numbering. 

"On  the  first  of  the  second  month,  in 
the  second  year  after  they  were  come 
out  of  the  land  of  Egypt."  That  is, 
exactly  one  month  after  the  setting  up 
of  the  tabernacle  (Exod.  xl.  2,  17) 
and  about  eleven  months  from  the 
time  of  their  arrival  in  the  desert  of 
Sinai.  The  people  abode  in  this  desert 
nearly  a  whole  year  (Comp.  Exod. 
xix.  1,  with  Num.  i.  1,  and  x.  11). 
What  was  the  reason  of  this  protracted 
halt  ?  With  so  great  and  inspiriting  a 
destiny  before  them  as  the  taking  pos- 
session of  the  Promised  Land,  why  did 
they  not  advance  at  once  with  eager 
resolution  to  their  task  ?  The  design 
of  this  long  stay  was,  that  they  might 
be  instructed  in  their  relations  to  God 
and  to  each  other;  that  they  might 
learn  lessons  of  duty  and  worthip;  that 
they  might  be  taught  to  reverence  and 
obey  God.  The  pause  was  for  the 
purpose  of  promoting  progress.  There 
are  times  and  circumstances  in  which 
standing  still  is  the  truest  aud  speediest 
advance.  It  is  well  that  the  declaration 
of  war  should  not  be  made  until  plans 
of  operation  are  formed,  equipments 
prepared,  soldiers  drilled  and  disci- 
plined, etc.  What  a  terrible  reminder 
of  this  truth  Fraoce  received  in  her 
recent  war  with  Prussia  I  It  was  well 
that  the  Apostles,  with  the  commission 
to  the  most  glorious  task ,  and  the  world 
sorely  needing  their  message,  should, 
notwithstanding,  tarry  at  Jerusalem  Id 


ffOMlLETIC    COMMENTARY:  NUMBERS. 


CHAP.    I, 


silence,  until  they  were  baptized  with 
the  Holy  Ghost. 

Let  us  learn  the  wisdom  of  wailing 
until  circumsfauces,  events,  and  agents 
are  ripe  for  aciion  ;  and  while  we  wait, 
m^ike  diliiient  preparation,  etc.  (a) 

IV.  The  Manner  of  this  Number- 
ing. 

"  Take  ye  the  sum  of  all  the  congre- 
gation of  the  children  of  Israel,  after 
their  families,  by  the  house  of  their 
fathers,  with  the  number  of  their  names, 
every  male  by  their  polls,  from  twenty 
years  old  and  upward,  all  that  are  able 
to  go  forth  to  war  in  Israel."  They 
were  to  take  account  of — 

1.  Only  the  males.  All  females  were 
excluded  from  ihe  reckoning. 

2.  Only  the  males  above  twenty  years 
old.  Those  who  were  under  that  age 
were  not  taken  into  the  account,  being 
regarded  as  too  young  to  endure  the 
strain  of  military  service. 

3.  Only  the  males  above  twenty 
■>ears  old  who  were  in  vigorous  healthy — 
"able  to  go  foith  to  war.''  The  sick, 
the  aged,  the  infirm,  the  maimed  were 
exempted  from  this  census,  as  unfit  for 
war. 

4.  They  were  to  be  numbered  ''  after 
their  families"  that  it  might  be  known 
of  what  tiibe,  and  of  what  pirticular 
house  every  able  man  was. 

5.  The  numbering  was  to  be  indi' 
vidualf  and  by  name.  *'  With  the  num- 
ber of  their  names,  every  male  by  their 
polls.*'  The  census  was  particular  and 
minute.  From  these  directions  as  to 
the  numbering  we  learn:  — 

First :  That  the  Lord  chooses  fit  in- 
struments for  the  acco7nplishment  of  His 
purposes.  He  here  selects  for  war  not 
women,  or  boys,  or  old  men,  or  the  in- 
firm ;  but  able  men.  He  can  use  any 
instrumentality,  even  the  feeblest,  for 
the  most  arduous  tnsks.  But  such  is 
not  His  method.  He  employs  means 
adapted  to  the  ends  to  be  attained. 
Illustrations  of  this  abou  d.  Joseph, 
Moses,  Joshua,  David,  Puul. 

Second :  That  the  Lord  is  perfectly 
acquainted  with  every  one  who  is  fitted 
for  His  work.  He  kuo^vs  the  tribe,  the 
family,  the  name  of  every  one  who  is 
"  able   to   go   forth   to   war "    against 


ignorance,    sin    and    misery.       Ponder 
this  ye  able   men   who  are  at  ease  in 
Zion. 
V.  The  Design  of  this  Numbering. 

1.  The  primary  design  was,  the  or- 
ganization of  the  army.  God  had  pro- 
mised to  give  them  the  land  of  Canaan. 
He  will  certainly  bestow  it  upon  them  ; 
but  not  without  their  effort.  Innumer- 
able foes  must  be  vanquished  before  they 
enter  upon  the  land.  They  must  do 
battle  with  the  heathen  nations  that  are 
now  in  possession,  and  conquer  them. 
And  to  do  this,  they  must  organise  an 
army,  employing  the  fittest  men  for 
soldiers,  making  the  wisest  arrange- 
ments for  marching,  encamping,  etc. 
Where  ordinary  means  are  adequate  to 
accomplish  the  desired  end,  God  never 
uses  extraordinary.  Whatman  can  do 
for  himself,  God  never  does  for  him. 
God  has  promised  to  us  the  victory  over 
our  spiritual  foes,  the  possession  of 
the  inheritance  of  spiritual  perfec- 
tion and  privileges,  and  heaven  as 
the  goal  of  our  earthly  pilgrim- 
age. He  will  not  fail  to  fulfil  His 
promise.  But  we,  too,  must  use  the 
means.  If  we  would  enter  into  the 
restful  activities  of  heaven,  we  must  live 
the  life  of  faith  and  of  Divine  service 
on  earth.  If  we  would  gain  the  victory 
we  must  be  valiant  and  persistent  in  the 
fight.  If  we  would  win  the  prize  we 
must  "  run  with  patience  the  race,"  etc. 
{h).  But  this  numbering  would  serve 
other  important  purposes.  It  would 
tend — 

2.  To  manifest  the  Divine  faithfulness. 
God  bad  promised  Abraham  that  his 
seed  should  be  as  the  stars  for  multi- 
tude. This  census  shows  how  God 
was  fulfilling  that  promise.  Seventy- 
five  souls  went  down  into  Egypt.  And 
how  wonderfully  are  they  increased  in 
215  jears  !  Now  there  are  six  hundred 
thousand  men  able  to  bear  arms.  And 
the  whole  population  could  not  have 
been  less  than  two  millions,  and  this 
despite  the  oppression  and  persecu- 
tions of  the  Egyptians.  "  He  is  faith- 
ful that  promised.''  * 

*  For  a  critical  examination  of  the  numbers 
recorded  in  this  book  see  Keil  and  Delitzdch  in 
loco. 


CHAP.      I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    NUMBERS. 


3.  To  show  forth  the  Divine  power. 
We  see  this  in  His  feeding  and  sustain- 
ing FO  immense  a  number  in  the  desert, 
^^  without  harvest  or  husbandry,  without 
planting  or  tilling,  without  sowing  of 
corn,  or  without  feeding  and  breeding 
of  cattle." 

4.  To  the  promotion  of  order.  **  It  is 
a  rout  and  a  rabble,  not  an  army, 
that  is  not  mustered  and  put  in 
order." 

5.  To  exhibit^  on  the  coming  of  the 
Messiah,  the  correspondence  of  the  event 
with  the  predictions  concerning  it.  He 
was  predicted  as  to  come  of  the  seed  of 


Abraham,  of  the  tribe  of  Judab,  of  the 
house  of  Diivid.  Hence  the  importance 
of  an  accurate  register  of  tribes  and 
families. 

6.  To  illustrate  the  care  of  God  for 
His  people  generally  and  particidarly. 
They  were  numbered  individually  and 
by  name.  The  Lord's  care  over  His 
people  is  most  mioute  and  constant  and 
tender.  *'  He  calk  th  His  own  sheep  by 
name,  and  leadeth  them  out.  The  good 
Shepherd  giveth  His  life  for  the  sheep." 
"  The  Lord  knovveih  them  that  are  His." 
'*The  very  hairfl  of  your  head  are  all 
numbered," 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 


(a)  I  warn  those  who  have  only 
lately  found  their  Saviour  from  rushing 
before  their  fellow- men,  and  atterapt- 
mg  to  fill  those  posts  in  the  service  of 
Christ  which  demand  a  deeper  expe- 
rience and  a  more  tried  and  tested 
Christian  hood.  The  Lord's  retirement 
to  the  wilderness  after  He  had  been 
baptised  and  announced  as  the  Messiah, 
after  He  was  in  a  peculiar  manner 
''  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  gives  to  all 
of  us  not  less  humbling  than  profitable 
guidance  as  to  the  deliberation  with 
which  solemn  work  ought  to  be  under- 
taken  Not  up  to  Jeru- 
salem, but  away  to  the  wilderness  ; 
not  out  to  the  multitude,  but  back  to 
the  solitude ;  not  forth  to  the  world  to 
conquer,  but  away  from  it,"  impelled" 
by  the  Spirit,  "  to  be  tempted."  Nor 
does  this  stand  solitary  in  the  history 
of  the  Church.  You  remember  that 
strange,  half-involuntary  forty  years  of 
Moses  in  the  wilderness  of  Midian, 
when  he  had  fled  from  Egypt.  You  re- 
member, too,  the  almost  equally  strange 
years  of  retirement  in  Arabia  by  Paul 
when,  if  ever,  humanly  speaking,  in-taut 
action  was  needed.  And  pre-eminently 
you  remember  the  amazing  charge  of 
the  ascending  L(  rd  to  the  disciples  : 
**  Tarry  at  Jeru?aiem."  Speaking  after 
the  manner  of  men,  one  could  not  have 
wondered  if  out-spoken  Peter,  or  fervid 
James,  had  said  :  '  Tarry,  Lor  \  I  How 
long  ?  Tarry,  Lt>rd  I  Is  there  not  a 
perishing  world  groaning  for  the  '  good 
6 


news  *  ?  Tarry  I  did  we  hear  Thee 
aright.  Lord  ?  Was  not  the  word, 
haste  ?  *'  Nay  :  "  Being  assembled  to- 
gether with  them,  He  commanded  them 
that  they  should  not  depart  from  Jeru- 
salem, but  wait  for  the  promise  of  the 
Father." — Grosart, 

(b)  We  are  here  in  every  sense  on 
a  stage  of  probation;  so  that,  having 
been  once  recovered  from  apostasy,  we 
are  candidates  for  a  prize  and  wrestlers 
for  a  crown.  It  is  not  the  mere  ad- 
mission into  the  kingdom  for  which  we 
contend.  When  justified,  there  is  open 
before  us  the  widest  field  for  a  righteous 
ambition — and  portions  heightening  in 
majesty,  and  deepening  in  brilliancy, 
rise  on  our  vision  to  incite  to  unwearied 
endeavour.  For  I  count  it  one  of  the 
glories  of  Christianity  that,  in  place  of 
repressing,  it  gives  full  scope  to  ail  the 

ardours  of  the  spii  it  of  man 

Christianity  tells  her  subjects  that  the 
rewards  in  eternity,  though  all  pur- 
chased by  Christ,  and  none  merited  by 
men,  shall  be  rigidly  apportioned  to 
their  works.  She  tells  them  that  there 
are  places  of  dignity,  and  stations  of 
eminence,  and  crowns  wiih  more  jewel- 
lery, and  sceptres  with  more  sway,  in 
that  glorious  empire  which  Christ  shall 
set  up  at  His  second  appearing.  And 
she  bids  them  strive  for  a  loftier  recom- 
pense ;  she  would  not  have  them  con- 
tent with  a  lesser  portion,  though  it  in- 
finitely outgrew  human  imagination  as 
well  as  human  desert.     She  sends  them 


HOMJLETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  I. 


to  wrestle  for  the  loftiest,  though  un- 
worthy of  the  lowest.  She  does  not 
allow  the  believer  to  imagine  that  every- 
thing is  done  when  a  title  to  the  king- 
dom is  obtained.  She  shows  him  that 
the  trials  of  the  last  great  assize  shall 
proceed  most  accurately  by  measure  of 
woiks.  There  is  no  swerving  in  the 
Bible  from  this  representation.  And 
if  one  man  become  a  ruler  over  ten 
cities,  and  another  over  five,  and  another 
over  two,  each  receiving  in  exact  pro- 
portion to  his  improvement  of  talents, 
then  it  is  clear  as  demonstration  can 
make  it  that  our  strivings  will  have  a 


vast  influence  on  our  recompense — that 
there  shall  be  no  particle  in  the  portion 
of  the  righteous  which  is  not  altogether 
an  undeserved  gift;  still,  in  the  arrange- 
ments of  judgment  there  will  be  an 
accurate  balancing  of  what  is  bestowed 
and  what  is  performed.  Oh  I  it  shall 
not  be  said  that  because  he  is  secure  of 
admission  to  heaven,  the  Christian  has 
nothing  further  to  excite  him  to  toil. 
He  is  to  wrestle  for  a  place  amongst 
spirits  of  chief  renown;  he  is  to  propose 
to  himself  a  station  close  to  the  throne. 
— //.  Melvill,  B,D. 


In  the  Desert  :  An  Illustration  op  the  Life  of  the  Good  in  this  World. 

{Verse  1.) 

"And  the  Lord  spake  imto  Moses  in    the   wilderness 

congregation." 


of    Sinai,   in  the  tabernacle  of   the 


In  the  Hebrew  Bible  this  book  is 
called  "137011  =  in  the  desert.     By  this 

name  also  the  Jews  generally  speak  of 
it.  The  tiile  is  most  appropriate  for 
the  book  which  records  the  history  of 
Israel  during  the  long  wandering  in 
the  wilderness. 

Consider  : 

I.  The  natural  trials  of  the  desert. 

Deserts  are  generally  characterised 
by- 

1,  Barrenness.  "The  general  cha- 
racter of  the  wadvs,  as  well  as  of  the 
mountains  of  Sinai,"  says  Dean  Stanley, 
*'  is  entire  desolation.  If  the  mountains 
are   naked  Alps,  the    valleys  are   dry 

rivers The  Israelites  were 

brought  into  contact  with  a  desolation 
to  them  the  more  remarkable  by  its 
contrast  with  the  green  valley  of  the 
Nile."  And  in  another  place  he  speaks 
of  "  the  whole  wilderness  "  as  having 
"  a  doubly  dry  and  thirsty  aspect."  The 
world,  with  its  wealth  and  pleasures, 
its  honours  and  power,  cannot  afford 
satisfaction  to  the  longing  souls  of  men. 
It  is  clear  from  their  very  nature  that 
temporal  and  material  things  cannot 
satisfy  spiritual  beings,    (a) 

2.  Homelessness.  Men  do  not  as  a 
rule  establish  homes  in  the  desert. 
They  may  pitch  their  tent  there  for  a 
little  while,  but  they  speedily  move  on 


to  other  scenes.  The  home  of  the  soul 
is  not  here.  Its  rest  is  not  here.  If 
any  man  attempt  to  find  the  home  of 
his  soul  in  anything  here  he  will  find, 
sooner  or  later,  that  great  has  been  his 
mistake,  and  sore  will  be  his  disappoint- 
ment. Only  in  the  spiritual,  the  per- 
sonal^ the  perfect^  and  the  permanent  is 
the  true  home  of  the   soul. 

3.  Fathlessiness.  There  were  no  well- 
defined  roads  in  the  desert.  And  the 
Israelites  were  strangers  in  it.  Left 
to  themselves  they  were  liable  and 
likely  to  go  astray.  And  man  if  left 
to  himself  now,  or  to  the  world's  guid- 
ance, will  not  find  the  true  path  of 
life.  And  even  when  by  Divine  direc- 
tion he  has  found  it,  the  world  presents 
many  enticements  to  lure  him  from  it. 

4.  Perilousness.  They  were  exposed 
to  danger  from  the  scorching  sun,  from 
violent  storms,  from  savage  beasts,  and 
from  desperate  bands  of  robbers.  The 
perils  to  which  the  good  are  exposed  in 
this  world  are  many  and  great.  They 
spring  from  ••*  the  wiles  of  the  devil," 
*'  the  depths  of  Satan,"  the  seductions 
of  the  world,  and  the  lusts  of  the  flesh. 

And  in  the  case  of  Israel  in  the 
desert  there  seemed  to  be, — 

5.  Aii.ilessness.  How  aimless  and 
fruitless  must  the  thirty-eight  years  of 
wandering,  to   which   they    were   con- 


CHAP.  I. 


BGMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBFE^i, 


condemDed  for  their  unbelief  and  re- 
bellion, have  seemed  to  them  !  Inex- 
pressibly weary  and  dreary  must  those 
years  have  been  to  the  young  genera- 
tion. There  are  times  in  the  spiritual 
life  of  good  men  when  they  pass  through 
somewhat  ana'ogous  experiences.  The 
years  pass,  opportunities  come  and  go, 
life  hastens  on  towards  its  close;  and 
so  little  seems  accomplished,  so  little 
progress  made  in  our  character,  so  little 
true  work  done.  We  have  toiled  and 
struggled  long,  and  at  times  painfully, 
and  yet  we  have  not  attained,  the  goal 
of  our  ambition  seems  still  so  far  off 
that  the  heart  is  prone  to  grow  weary 
and  despondent.  Such  are  some  of  the 
trials  of  the  desert. 

II.  The  Divine  Presence  in  the 
desert. 

''  Tbe  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  in  the 
wilderness  of  Sinai,  in  the  tabernacle  of 
the  congregation."  They  were  in  the 
deert;  but  God  was  with  them  there. 
We  have  here, — 

I  Divine  communication  in  the  desert, 
*  The  Lord  spake  unto  Moses,"  etc. 
And  God  is  in  ( onstant  communica- 
tion with  His  people  now.  His  voice  is 
never  silent ;  for  in  silence  some  of  His 
most  precious  communications  are  made. 
The  thoughtful  and  reverent  spirit  hears 
His  voice  in  the  sounds  and  silences  of 
nature,  and  can  say, 

**  Oleon  hears  no  anth3ai  ringing  in  the  sea 
and  sky : 
Nature  singrs   to   me   for  ever— earnest 
listener,  I."  (A) 

God  is  also  ever  speaking  through 
the  Sacred  Scriptures,  and  by  His  Holy 
Spirit. 

2.  Divine  provision  in  the  deser't.  The 
Lord  fed  the  vast  host  of  Isratl  with 
manna  from  heaven,  and  with  water 
from  the  rock  He  supplied  them.  They 
were  in  the  desert,  but  the  resources  of 
God  never  failed  them.  So  now,  "  The 
Lord  will  give  grace  and  glory ;  no 
good  will  he  withhold  from  them  that 
walk  uprightly."  "  Your  heavenly 
Father  knoweth  that  ye  have  need  of 
all  these  things."  "My  God  shall 
supply  all  your  need  according  to  His 
riches  in  glory  by  Christ  Jesus." 

3.  Divine  shelter  and  rest  in  the  desert. 


The  people  of  Israel  for  forty  years  were 
homeless  wanderers;  but  they  found 
their  rest  and  home  in  God.  '*  Lord, 
Thou  hast  been  our  dwelling-place  in 
all  generations."  God  is  the  only  true 
home  and  rest  of  souls. 

3,  Divine  direction  in  the  desert.  The 
Lord  went  before  them  in  the  pillar  of 
cloud  by  day  and  in  the  pillar  of  fire  by 
night.  Thus  the  desert  was  not  really 
pathless,  their  tedious  wanderings  were 
not  reallv  aimless.  And  still  the  Lord 
directs  His  people  He  does  so, — (1) 
By  the  leadings  of  His  providence.  (2) 
By  the  teachings  of  the  sacred  Scrip- 
tures. (3)  By  the  influences  of  the  Holy 
Spirit. 

5.  Divine  protection  in  the  desert.  The 
Lord  protected  the  Israelites  from  the 
heat  of  the  sun  by  day  by  means  of  the 
pillar  of  cloud  ;  and  from  the  attacks 
of  savage  beasts  by  night  by  means  of 
the  pillar  of  fire.  He  also  guarded  them 
from  the  assaults  of  neighbouring  na- 
tions, except  in  those  instances  in  which 
they  disregarded  His  counsel,  and  re- 
belled against  Him.  God  is  still  the 
sure  defence  of  all  who  put  their  trust 
in  Him.  "  No  weapon  that  is  formed 
against  thee  shall  prosper."  "  If  God 
be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ? " 
"  Who  is  he  that  will  harm  you,  if  ye 
be  followers  of  that  which  is  good  ?  " 
God  is  with  us  in  our  march  through 
the  desert ;  and  His  presence  assures  us 
of  all  good. 

III.  The  Divine  uses  of  the  desert. 

Why  this  wandering  to  and  fro  for 
thirty-eight  years  ?  Wbat  is  the  mean- 
ing of  this  tedious  and  painful  delay  ? 
Of  what  use  was  it  ?  To  prepare  a 
people  for  the  inheritance  of  Canaan. 
God  has  not  only  to  give  them  the  in- 
heritance, but  to  fit  them  for  it — for 
its  privileges,  duties,  etc.  Time  was 
needed  for  two  things  : — 

1.  That  the  generation  of  slaves  might 
pass  away.  Were  the  people  that  kit 
Egypt  fit  to  enter  upon  the  privileges 
and  duties  connected  with  the  indepen- 
dent possession  of  the  Promised  Land  ? 
Slavery  had  robbed  them  of  their  man- 
hood. They  were  most  persistent  and 
provoking  unbelievers,  contemptible 
cowards,  shrinking  from  any  difficulty, 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  I. 


quailins:  in  the  presence  of  any  danger. 
They  were  the  creatures  of  carnal  apl 
petites,   preferring  the  fish,  the  cucum- 
bers,   the   onions,  and    the   melons  of 
Egypt   with  slavery,   rather  than    the 
manna  of  heaven  and  freedom.    Eman- 
cipated in  body,  they  are  yet  slaves  in 
soul.     And  by  reason  of  this,  and  of 
their  murmurings  and  rebellions  against 
God,  they   must   live  and    die   in   the 
desert    (see   xiv.  26-35).     In  this  we 
have  an  illustration  of  God's  dealings 
with  His  people  now.     There  is  much 
in    us    that  must  die   and    be  buried 
before  we  can  enter  upon  the  inherit- 
ance   of     spiritual    perfection.       Our 
craven- hearted  fears,  our  carnal  lusts, 
our  miserable  unbelief,  must  be  buried 
in  the  desert.     The  slave  nature  must 
be  put  to  death,  etc.     There  are  godly 
persons   in   this    world   who  are    past 
service,  whose  strength  and  health  have 
long   departed,    whose   life  is   one    of 
constant  weariness  and  pain,  who  long 
for  the  summons  hence,    and    wonder 
why  it  is  so  long  delayed.     May  it  not 
be  because  the  discipline  of  the  desert 
IS  not  yet  ended  ?    There  is  something 


of  the  old  nature  that  is  not  yet  dead 
and  buried. 

2.    That  a  generation  of  free  men  might 
he  educated.      In  the    desert  God  was 
trafninsf  the  children  into  true  manhood, 
—into  fitness  for  the  place,  the   duties, 
and  the  privileges  designed  for  them! 
And    the    education    was   remarkably 
successful.     The   generation   that  was 
trained  in  the  wilderness  and  entered 
the   Promised   Land,    was    honourably 
distinguished     for     faithfulness,     etc 
(comp.  Josh.   xxiv.   31  ;   Jer.   ii.   2,  3). 
So  in  this  world   God  is  educating  us 
into  calm,  far-seeing  faith,  into  high- 
souled  courage,  into  reverent  and  hearty 
obedience,  etc.     This  life,   when  truly 
hved,  is  not  fruitless,  aimless,  or  vain. 
Even  its  trials  are  designed  to  bless  us.* 
Its  storms  and  strifes  are  intended  to 
invigorate  and  nerve  us.     In  the  desert 
we  are  being  trained  by  God  into  spirit- 
ual perfection  and  power,  and  educated 
for  service  and  blessedness. 
Conclusion  : 

Let  us  ponder  well  the  Divine  design  of 
our  life  in  this  world.  By  the  help  of  God 
let  us  seek  its  realization  in  ourselves. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  We  might    ask    the  statesman, 
and   as  we  wished   him  a  happy  new 
year.  Lord  Dundas  would  answer,  "  It 
had  need  to   be  happier  than   the  last, 
for  I  never  knew  one  happy  day  in  it." 
We  might  ask  the  successful  lawyer, 
and    the    wariest,   luckiest,   most  self- 
complacent  of  them  all  would  answer, 
as  Lord  Eldon  was  privately  recording 
when  the  whole  bar  envied  the  Chan- 
cellor, *'  A  few  weeks  will  send  me  to 
dear  Encomb,  as  a  short  resting-place 
between  vexation  and  the  grave."    You 
m^ht    say   to    the  golden    millionaire, 
You    must    be    a    happy   man,    Mr 
Rothschild."      "Happy!     me    happy  j 
What  1    happy  1   when  just  as  you  are 
going  to  dine  you  have  a  letter  placed 
m   your   hand,  saying,  ^f  you  do  not 
send  me  £500,  I  will  blow  your  brains 
out  I       Happy  I  when  you  have  to  sleep 
with    pistols    at    your    pillow!"     We 
might    ask    the    clevei     artist    (David 
Scott),  and  our  gifted  countryman  would 


answer,  of  whose  latter  days  a  brother 
writes,  « In  the  studio  all  the  pictures 
seemed    to  stacd   up   like    enemies   to 
receive  me.-     This  joy  in  labour,  this 
desire  for  fame,  what  have  they  done 
for    him?     The   walls   of    this  gaunt 
sounding  place,  the  frames,  even  some 
ot  the  canvases,  are  furred  with  damp. 
In  the  httle  Ubrary  where  he  painted 
last  was  the  word  "  Nepenthe,''  written 
interrogatively  with  white  chalk  on  the 
wall.     We  might  ask  the  world-famed 
warrior,    and   get    for   an   answer   the 
'Miserere  "  of  the  Emperor  Monk,  or 
the  sigh  of  a   broken    heart  from  St 
Helena.     We   might  ask  the  brilliant 
courtier,  and  Lord  Chesterfield  would 
tell    us,     "I    have    enjoyed    all    the 
pleasures  of  the  world,  and  I  do  not 
regret  their  loss.     I  have  been  behind 
the  scenes;  I  have  seen  all  the  coarse 
pul.eys  and  dirty  ropes  which  move  the 
gaudy  machines ;  and  I  have  seen  and 
smelt  the    taUow  candles  which    illu- 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


minate  the  whole  decorations  to  the 
astonishment  of  an  ignorant  audience." 
We  might  ask  the  dazzh'ng  wit,  and 
faint  with  a  glut  of  glory,  yet  disgusted 
with  the  creatures  who  adored  him, 
Voltaire  would  condense  the  essence  of 
his  existence  into  one  word  "  EnnuV* 
And  we  might  ask  the  world's  poet,  and 
we  should  be  answered  with  an  impre- 
cation by  that  splendid  genius,  who — 

"Drank    every   cup  of    joy,   heard   every 
trump 
Of    fame;    drank    early,    deeply   drank ; 

drank  draughts 
That     common     millions     migbit     have 

quenched,  then  died 
Of  thirst,  because  there  was  no  more  to 
drink."— Po//r>^. 

— Db.  James  Hamilton. 

(J)  God  hath  a  voice  that  ever  is 

heard, 
In  the  peal  of  the  thunder,  the  chirp 

of  the  bird ; 
It  comes  in  the  torrent,  all  rapid  and 

strong, 
In    the    streamlet's   soft    gush    as    it 

ripples  along; 


It  breathes  in  the  zephyr,  just  kissing 

the  bloom; 
It  lives    in    the  rush  of  the  sweeping 

simoom ; 
Let  the  hurricane  whistle  or  warblers 

rejoice, 
What  do  they  tell  thee,  but  God  hath 

a  voice  ? 
God  hath  a  presence,  and  that  ye  may 

see 
In  the  fold  of  the  flower,  the  leaf  of 

the  tree ; 
In  the  sun  of  the  noon-day,  the  star  of 

the  night ; 
In    the  storm-cloud  of    darkness,  the 

rainbow  of  light ; 
In  the   waves  of  the  ocean,  the  fur- 
rows of  land ; 
In  the  mountains  of  granite,  the  atoms 

of  sand; 
Turn  where  ye  may,  from  the  sky  to 

the  sod, 
Where  can  ye  gaze  that  ye  see  not  a 

God? 

Eliza  Cook, 


The  Numbered  Feoplb. 
(Fme5  2,  3.) 


These  annals  are  an  historic  mirror. 
They  image  out  a  heavenly  Father's 
special  dealings  with  each  child  of  faith. 
The  parallel  is  quickly  drawn.  They 
once  groaned  bitterly  in  cruel  bondage. 
But  Mercy  set  them  free.  Believer, 
you  too  were  once  a  slave  at  Satan's 
wilL  But  now  the  chain  is  broken, 
etc.  Israel's  tribes  are  journeying,  as 
strangers,  through  a  desert  waste.  And 
is  not  yours  a  wilderness  career  ?  But 
they  are  conveyed  by  a  heavenly  guide. 
So,  too,  a  beckoning  hand  marks  out 
your  wanderings  by  day — by  night, 
etc.  They  had  heard  "the  voice  of 
words  '* — the  fiery  law.  This  law  has 
also  pierced  the  deep  recesses  of  your 
inner  man.  You  have  thus  learned  the 
glorious  righteousness  of  God,  etc.  Was 
Israel  God's  special  portion  ?  You, 
too,  are  not  your  own.  You  are  a 
purchased  property,  etc.  There  is  no 
novel  thought  in  this.  But  common 
truths — like  common  blessings — soon 
10 


lose  their  point.  Colours  soon  fade 
without  a  renewing  touch. 

And  now,  before  the  people  move, 
God  speaks  again.  He  gives  command 
to  register  the  number  of  each  tribe. 
.  .  .  .  New  instruction  meets  us 
here. 

In  common  matters,  men  count  pos- 
sessions, which  are  choice,  and  dear, 
and  prized.  They  whose  mean  joys 
are  fixed  on  this  world's  pelf — thus 
calculate  their  gold.  See,  too,  the 
watchful  shepherd's  care.  Do  we, 
then,  stray  beyond  sound  limits  when 
in  God's  numbering  we  read  God's 
love  ?  Do  not  clear  characters  here 
write,  that  His  people  are  thus  num- 
bered, because  loved — counted,  because 
prized  ?  My  God  loves  me :  my  name 
is  in  his  heart.  The  knowledge  of  this 
fact  is  reached  by  happy  steps.  They 
are  all  Scripturally  firm.  Review  them. 
Wherefore  was  Jesus  sent  to  bear  your 
sins,  and  deck  you  in  his  robe  of  right* 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  I. 


teousneps  ?  Why  was  Christ  slain  ? 
Why  are  you  spared  ?  .  .  .  .  Wherefore 
did  the  Spirit  speed  to  arouse  your 
sleeping"  conscience — to  show  self's  ruin 
and  the  remedy  of  the  Cross  ?  .  .  .  . 
How  is  it  that  your  tottering  feet  ai'e 
still  upheld  along  the  slippery  hill, 
which  leads  to  Zion's  heights  ?  The 
strength  is  not  your  own.  There  can 
be  only  one  reply,  God  loves  you. 
Would  that  the  eye  of  Faith  for  ever 
rested  on  this  glorious  truth.  God 
loves  you!  What  an  amazing  impulse 
to  bear  the  willing  servant  over  all 
mountains  of  doubt,  and  fear,  and 
hindrance !  What  a  strong  shield  to 
ward  off  Satan's  darts!  It  is  victory, 
before  one  blow  is  struck !  It  is  light 
in  the  dark  day  of  triall  It  is 
the  holy  wing  to  lift  above  the 
world  I 

Who  are  numbered  f  None  are  en- 
rolled, but  they  whose  age  and  strength 
enable  them  for  war.  Christ's  service 
is  a  mighty  work — a  determined  fight. 
Satan  disputes  each  onward  step.  The 
world  presents  its  countless  troops,  etc 
The  flesh  is  an  internal  fee,  etc.  Be- 
liever, yours  is  this  warrior's  life.  Fight, 
as  one  fighting  for  eternity.  Strive,  as 
one  striving  for  a  kingdom.  Jesus 
commands,  etc.  Follow  him  boldly. 
No  one  will  triumph  who  has  never 
fought.  No  one  who  truly  fights,  will 
fail. 

Each  numbered  soldier  paid  a  ran- 
som price  (Ex.  xxx.  12).  The  rich — 
the  poor — were  equally  assessed.     All 


in  Christ's  camp  are  ransomed  by  hia 
blood.     All  plead  one  sacrifice. 

Next  comes  the  register.  It  presents 
a  vast  array  of  numbered  warriors. 
Beyond  six  hundred  thousand  men 
(Num.  i.  46).  Whence  is  this  marvel- 
lous increase?  One  family  had  entered 
Egypt.  Hardship,  and  cruelty,  and 
toil  had  done  their  worst  to  keep  them 
low.  But  God's  early  promise  was  their 
portion  (Gen.  xii.  2).  The  numbered 
people  prove  that  our  God  is  Truth  as 
well  as  Love. 

Behold,  again,  this  multitude.  It  is 
an  emblem  of  a  far  larger  host  (Rev.  vii. 
9),    The  fight  is  a  prelude  to  the  crown. 

About  a  year  has  passed  since  the 
last  numbering.  The  Levites  then 
formed  part  of  the  collected  mass. 
They  are  not  now  included.  But  the 
number  then  and  now  amounts  exactly 
to  the  same.  Israel  has  surrendered 
Levi's  tribe,  but  Israel's  forces  are  not 
thereby  less.  Here  is  a  profitable 
lesson.  We  never  lose  by  giving  to  the 
Lord.  Selfishness  is  penury.  Christian 
benevolence  is  wealth. 

Once  more  survey  the  Numbered 
People.  You  are  inclined  to  say,  this 
band  will  safely  reach  the  promised 
land.  Alas  I  two  only  steadfastly  ad- 
here. The  multitude  distrusts  the 
Lord.  Their  corpses  strew  the  desert. 
An  awful  proof  that  outward  privileges 
alone  save  not  (Heb.  iii.  19).  Unbelief 
is  the  bar  which  shuts  out  Christ. 
Unbelief  rejects  the  Gospel,  and  so 
perishes. — Henry  Law^  D.D, 


Rank  and  Servicb. 
(Verses  4-16.) 


In  these  verses  we  have  an  illustra- 
tion of — 

I.  Co-operation  in  Divine  Service, 

One  man  of  every  tribe,  being  head 
of  the  house  of  his  fathers,  was  to  be 
associated  with  Moses  and  Aaron  in 
numbering  the  people.  By  this  arrange- 
ment— 

1.  The  toil  of  Moses  and  Aaron  would 
he  lessened.  There  is  urg  ut  need  for 
the  lessening  of  the  labours  of  many 
overwrought  Christian  ministers  to-day. 


And  there  are  many  things  in  which 
others  may  render  them  valuable  as- 
sistance. 

2.  The  accomplishment  of  the  task 
would  be  facilitated.  The  cause  of  God 
in  this  world  will  advance  with  rapid 
strides  when  co-operation  in  Christian 
work  shall  become  constant  and  uni- 
versal amongst  His  people. 

3.  The  envy  of  the  princes  would  he 
prevented.  We  know  that  on  a  subse- 
quent occasion  certain  '*  princes  of  the 

11 


ClUJP.  L 


liCMlLETIC    COMMENTARY:    SVMBERS. 


assembly "  arose  against  Moses  and 
Aaron,  saying,  '^  Ye  take  too  much  upon 
you,  seeing  all  the  congregation  ai  e  holy, 
every  one  of  them,  and  the  Lord  is 
among  them ;  wherefore  then  lift  ye  up 
yourselves  above  the  congregation  of 
the  Lord  ?  "  "  Sore  eyes,"  say  Babing- 
ton,  ^^  cannot  abide  the  clearness  of  the 
sun,  and  an  evil  stomach  turneth  the 
best  nutriment  to  hurt.  The  greener 
the  leaf  is,  the  sooner  the  worms  bite 
it."  Probably,  moved  by  envy,  they 
would  have  murmured  against  Moses 
and  Aaron  at  this  time ;  but,  being 
united  with  them  in  the  business,  all 
occasion  thereof  is  removed.  Co-oper- 
ation in  service  is  the  best  antidote  to 
envy  and  complaint  and  carping  criti- 
cism. Grumblers  are  seldom  found 
among  the  workers  of  the  Church. 

We  have  in  the  text  an  illustration 
of— 
II,  Society's  need  of  leaders. 
1.  Because  they  are  at  present  indis- 
pensable  to   social   order  and  progress. 
These  men  were  representatives  of  the 
people.       Instead   of   "  the  renowned," 
we  should  translate,  "  the  called  of  the 
congregation." — Keil   and  Del.  :    "  In 
verse  16  they  are  designated  as  'called 
men  of  the  congregation,*   because  they 
were  called  to  diets  of  the  congregation, 
as  representatives  of  the  tribes,  to  regu- 
late the  affairs  of  the  nation."      And 
society  in  this  age  must  have  its  leaders 
and  representatives  in  politics,  in  mili- 
tary affairs  and  enterprises,  in  science, 
in  religion,  etc.     Moreover,  it  is  essential 
that  some  ptrtons  should  be  entrusted 
with  the  reins  of  government.     Rulers 
are  indispensable    to   order.      Leaders 
are    necessary    also    to   secure     unity 
in  the  pursuit  of  any  great  and  com- 
prehensive     aim.        Certain      objects 
of  utmost  importance  to  society  can- 
not  possibly  be   attained   without   co- 
hesion  of    purpose    and  effort   on   the 
part    of     a    large    number     of     men, 
and  such  cohesion  is  impossible  without 
leaders.     **  Amongst  the  masses,"  says 
Guizot,    "  even  in   revolutions,  aristo- 
cracy must  ever  exist;  destroy    it    in 
nobility,  and  it  becomes  centred  in  the 
rich  and  powerful  Houses  of  the  Com- 
mons    Pull  them  down,  and  it  still 
12 


survives  in  the  master  and  foreman  of 
the  workshop." 

2.  Because   of  the  differences  in  the 
faculties    of   men.       These    men   were 
*'  princes "    from  the  nobility  of  their 
birth :   and   they   were  probably    men 
distinguished    also    for  their    abilities. 
Speaker's  Comm.  ;     *'The  selection  of 
the  Princes  of  the  Tribes  appears  from 
V.  4  to  have  been  made  under  Divine 
direction;  but  probably,  as  v.  16  seems 
to  suggest,  they  were  for  the  most  part 
the  same  persons  as  those  chosen  a  few 
months    previously    at    the   counsel   of 
Jethro  (Exod.  xviii.  21-26  )     Of  those 
here  named  Naashon,  prince  of  Judah, 
was  brother-in-law  of  Aaron  (Exod.  vi. 
23),    and   ancestor   of    King     David. 
Elishama,    prince    of    Ephraim,    was 
grandfather  of  Joshua  (1   Chron.  vii. 
26,  27).     The  peers  of  men  like  these, 
though  nothing  has  been  in  fact  pre- 
served to  us  respecting  them,  were  no 
doubt  entitled,  amongst  theii*  fellows,  to 
the  epithet  'renowned,'  v.  16."      Some 
men  are  born  rulers.      The  governing 
faculty  is  innate  in  them.      They  have 
the  extensive  mental  vision,  the  calm- 
ness of  judgment,  the  promptitude  in 
action,  the  love  of  order,  the  power  of 
arrangement,   the    acquaintance    with 
human  nature,  the  skill   in  managing 
affairs,  et  c,   which  mark  them  off  for 
leaders   of   men.       But  in    others  the 
qualifications  of  leadership  are  conspicu- 
ous by  reason  of  their  absence.      And 
amongst    those    in   whom    the    ruling 
faculty  is  innate  it  exists  in  different 
degrees  of  power.     So  they  are  fitted 
for  different  degrees  of  dominion.    "  We 
must  have  kings,"  says  Emerson,  "  we 
must  have  nobles ;    nature   is   always 
providing  such  in  every  society ;  only 
let  us  have  the  real  instead  of  the  titu- 
lar.    In  every  society,  some  are  born  to 
rule,  and  some  to  advise.     The  chief  is 
the  chief  all  the  world  over,  only  not 
his  cap  and  plume.     It  is  only  this  dis- 
like of  the  pretender  which  makes  men 
sometimes    unjust    to    the    true    and 
finished  man."  (a) 

We  have  in  the  text  an  illustration 
of— 

III.  The  grand  characteristic  of  true 
leaders. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  1. 


They  are  pre-eminent  in  service. 
These  "  princes  of  the  tribes  '*  were  to 
serve  the  tribes  in  this  numbering  of 
the  people.  **  Those  that  are  honour- 
able should  study  to  bb  serviceable." 
"  Whosoever  will  be  great  among  you,*' 
said  our  Lord,  "let  him  be  your  minister; 
and  whosoever  will  be  chief  among  you, 
^et  him  be  your  servant ;  even  as  the 
Son  of  Man  came  not  to  be  ministered 


unto,  but  to  minister,  and  to  give  His 
life  a  ransom  for  many."  "I  am 
among  you  as  He  that  serveth."  The 
great  God  who  is  supreme  over  all  is 
servant  of  all.  And  from  the  minister- 
ing of  the  archangel  to  the  labour 
of  the  insect,  the  true  rank  and 
glory  of  a  creature  consist  in  the 
service  which  it  renders  in  God's 
universe,  (b) 


ILL  US  TRA  TIONS, 


(a)  Greatness  is  not  a  teachable  nor 
j.a"Dable  thing,  but  the  expression  of  the 
mind  of  a  God-made  great  man  ;  teach 
or  preach,  or  labour  as  you  will,  ever- 
lasting   difference   is    set   between   one 
man's  capacity  and  another's,  and  this 
God-given   supremacy   is   the   priceless 
thing,  always  just  as  rare  in  the  world 
at  oue  time  as  another.      What  you  can 
manufacture  or  communicate,  you  can 
lower    the    price   of,    but    this    mental 
supremacy  is  incommunicable  :  you  will 
never  multiply  its  quantity,  nor  lower 
its  price  ;  and  nearly  the  best  thing  that 
men    can   generally  do,  is  to  set  them- 
selves not  to  the  attainment,  but  the 
discovery    of    this:  learning    to    know 
ji«  Id  when  we  see  it   from  iron-glance, 
and  diamonds  from  flint-sand,  being  for 
nioit  of  us  a  more  profitable  employ- 
n.ent  than  trying  to  make  diamonds  out 
of  our  own  charcoal. — John  Raskin, 

{b)  There  is  no  dignity  but  of  service. 
How  different  the  whole  notion  of 
training  is  now  from  what  it  was  in  the 
middle  ages.  Service  was  honourable 
then.  The  first  thing  taught  then  was 
how  to  serve.  No  man  could  rise  to 
the  honour  of  knighthood  without  ser- 
vice. A  nobleman's  son  even  had  to 
wait  on  his  father,  or  to  go  into  the 
family  of  another  nobleman,  and  wait 
upon  him  as  a  page,  standing  behind 
bis  chair    at    dinner.     Tiiis    was    ao 


honour.     No  notion  of  degradation  was 
in  it ;  it  was  a  necessary  step  to  higher 
honour.     And  what  was  the  next  higher 
honour?     To    be   free    from   service? 
No.     To   serve   in  the   harder  service 
of  the    field;  to  be  a  squire  to   some 
noble  knight,  to  tend  his  horse,  to  clean 
his  armour,  to  see  that  every  rivet  was 
sound,   every  buckle  true,  every  strap 
strong,  to  ride  behind  him  and  carry  his 
spear,  and  if  more  than  one  attacked 
him  to  rush  to  his  aid.     This  service 
was  the  more  honourable  because  it  was 
harder,  and  was  the  next  step  to  higher 
honour  yet.     And  what  was  this  higher 
honour  ?    That  of  knighthood.    Where- 
in did  this  knighthood  consist?     The 
very  word  means  simply  service.     And 
for  what  was  the  knight  thus  waited  on 
by  his  squire  ?     That  he  might  be  free 
to  do  as  he  pleased  ?     No,  but  that  he 
might  be  free  to  be  the  servant  of  all. 
By    being   a   squire  first,   the  servant 
of    one,   he    learned    to    rise    to    the 
higher   rank,   that   of   servant   of   alL 
His  horse  was  tended,  his  armour  ob- 
served, his  sword  and  spear  and  shield 
held  to  his  hand,  that  he  might  have  no 
trouble  looking  after  himself,  but  mio^ht 
be  free,  strong,  unwearied,  to  shoot  like 
an  arrow  to  the  rescue  of  any  and  every 
one  who  needed   his  ready  aid.     There 
was  a  grand  heart  of  Christianity  in 
that  old  chivalry. — George  Macdcaald, 


13 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


God's  Knowledge  of  His  People, 

(Verse  6.J 
••These  are  the  names  of  the  men  that  shall  stand  with  yon.** 


The  text  teaches  that  the  Lord  knew 
these  "  princes  of  the  tribes  of  their 
fathers" — their  names,  their  parentage, 
their  fitness  for  the  work  in  which  they 
were  to  take  part,  etc.  We  infer  that 
God  IS  perfectly  acquainted  with  His 
people. 

Consider : 

I.    The  great  truth  here  implied. 

God  knows  His  people  individually 
and  altogether. 

1.  This  is  philosophicaL  If  God  is 
infinite,  He  must  know  all  things. 
Nothing  can  be  so  great  as  to  surpass 
His  comprehension  ;  nothing  so  small 
as  to  escape  His  notice.  Great  and 
small,  generally  and  particularly,  He 
knows  all  things  and  everything.  "  The 
relation  God  holds  to  objects  of  know- 
ledge," says  Bushnell,  *'is  different  in 
all  reFpects,  from  that  which  is  held  by 
us.  Our  general  terms,  ma?  /ree, 
insect,  flower^  are  the  names  of  particu- 
lar or  single  specimens,  extended,  on 
the  ground  of  a  perceived  similarity, 
to  kinds  or  species.  They  come,  in 
this  manner,  to  stand  for  millions  of 
particular  men,  trees,  insects,  flowers, 
that  we  do  not  and  never  can  know. 
But  God  does  not  generalise  in  this 
manner,  getting  up  general  terms  under 
which  to  handle  particulars,  which,  as 
particulars.  He  does  not  know.  His 
knowledge  of  wholes  is  a  real  and  com- 
plete knowledge.  It  is  a  knowledge 
of  wholes  as  being  a  distinct  knowledge 
of  paraiU'ars.  He  knows  the  wholes 
in  the  particulars,  the  particulars  in 
the  wholes."  '^History  acquaints  us, 
that  Cyrus  bad  so  vast  a  memory,  that 
he  knew  the  name  of  every  particular 
soldier  in  his  army,  which  consitted  of 
divers  nations ;  shall  it  be  too  hard  for 
an  infinite  understanding  to  know  every 
one  of  that  host  that  march  under  His 
banners  ?  "  (a) 

2.  This  is  Scriptural,  See  1  Kings 
xix.  14-18  ;  Psalms  i.  6  ;  Ivi.  8  ;  cxlvii. 
3,  4  J  Isa.  xl.  26-31  i  Mai.  iii  16,  17  ; 


Matt.  vi.  25-34;  x.  29,  30;  John  x. 
3,  14,  27;  Phil.  iv.  3;  2  Tim.  ii.  19  j 
Rev.  iii.  5;  xxi.  27.  '*  No  doubt  but 
He  that  calls  the  stars  of  heaven  hr 
their  names,  knows  the  number  Oj^, 
those  living  stars  that  sparkle  in  the 
firmament  of  His  Church.  He  cannot 
be  ignorant  of  their  persons,  when  He 
numbers  the  hairs  of  their  heads,  and 
hath  registered  their  names  in  the  book 
of  life.  ....  He  knows  them  as  a 
general  to  employ  them,  as  a  shepherd 
to  preserve  them."  God's  knowledge 
of  His  people  involves  His  favour  to- 
wards them.  It  is  a  knowledge  not  of 
apprehension  merely,  but  of  approbation 
also.  It  implies  affection  for  them,  the 
exercise  of  care  over  them,  etc.,  as  in 
Amos  iii.  2. 

II.  The  practical  bearings  of  this 
great  truth. 

The  realization  of  this  truth  will 
tend, — 

1.  To  restrain  from  sin.  The  con- 
sideration of  God's  perfect  acquaint- 
ance with  us  is  fitted  to  check  any 
rising  inclination  to  evil.  "  The  ways 
of  man  are  before  the  eyes  of  the  Lord, 
and  He  pondereth  all  His  goings." 

2.  To  promote  sincerity  of  life.  He 
cannot  he  imposed  upon  by  any  empty 
forms  or  hollow  pretences.  Our  thoughts 
and  feelings  are  known  to  Him.  And 
simulation  and  dissimulation  are  an 
abomination  in  His  sight. 

3.  To  promote  humility.  The  con- 
sideration of  God's  knowledge  makes 
manifest  the  gre^ttuess  of  our  ignorance. 
"  We  are  but  of  yesterday,  and  know 
nothing."  God  knows  all  our  secret 
sins,— aU  uuh.  ly  desire-,  etc.  Surely 
this  should  humule  us. 

4.  To  quicken  reverence  towards  God. 
Great  intelligence  is  a  thing  to  com- 
mand respect  and  admiration.  But  He 
in  whom  infinite  intelligence  is  joined 
with  infinite  holiness  should  be  admu'ed 
and  adored. 

6.  To  comfort   the  godly  under  r0 


IIOMILELIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  I. 


proaches.  So  it  proved  to  Job  when 
misunderstood  and  falsely  accused  by  his 
friends  (Job  xvi.  19  ;  xxiii.  10). 

6.  To  sustain  the  godly  in  affliction 
and  trial.  He  who  thoroughly  knows 
each  and  every  one  of  His  people  will 
certainly  support  them  in  their  afflic- 
tions, give  them  patience  in  their  trials, 
and  in  His  own  time  deliver  them  from 
all  troubles. 

7.  To  incite  to  hearty  obedience.  If 
He  knows  us  always  and  altogether, 
shall  we  not  endeavour  to  do  those 
things  which  He  approves  ?     If  He  re- 


gards us  with  favour,  shall  we  not  seek 
to  love  and  honour  Him  ? 

8.  To  strengthen  trust  in  God.  No 
plans  that  are  formed  against  His  people 
are  unknown  to  Him.  His  own  de- 
signs are  formed  in  infinite  wisdom. 
He  knows  all  our  temptation  and  weak- 
ness, all  our  danger  and  need.  And 
His  power  to  help  is  as  great  as  His  in- 
telligence. "  My  sheep  hear  My  voice, 
and  I  know  them,  and  they  follow  Me ; 
and  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life ;  and 
they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall 
any  one  plurk  them  out  of  my  hands. 


ILLUSTRATJONS. 


(a)  A  little  child  sits  on  the  veran- 
dah and  watches  the  worm.  He  is  a 
voyager  for  his  food  on  the  leaf  of  the 
mulberry  tree,  and  he  goes  eating,  eat- 
ir)g,  eating.  Let  us  suppose  that  some 
Divine  Power  enables  that  worm  to  be 
so  far  intelligent  as  to  say,  "  It  is  said 
that  there  are  beings  who  can  understand 
this  whole  tree ;  but  it  does  not  seem  to 
me  possible.  I  can  comprehend  how 
there  might  be  beings  that  should 
understand  this  leaf,  and  the  next  three 
or  four ;  but  to  take  in  all  the  million 
leaves  on  this  tree  is  a  thing  that 
transcends  my  conception.  I  do  not 
believe  it  possible  for  any  magnified 
worm  to  understand  so  much.*'  It  is 
not  possible  for  any  worm.  But  there 
is  a  little  Sunday-school  child  sitting  on 
the  verandah,  who  looks  on  the  tree  and 
sees  the  whole  of  it ;  and  not  only  sees 
the  w  ole  of  it,  but  can  individualize 
the  leaves  at  its  pleasure.  How  easy 
it  is  for  that  little  child  to  take  in  that 
whole  tree  !  and  how  hard  it  is  for  that 
worm  to  take  in  more  than  three  leaves  I 
And  let  that  child  grow  up,  and  be 
educated,  and  trained  in  landscape- 
gardening,  and  it  will  take  in,  net  merely 
a  tree,  but  a  whole  forest.  If  one  leaf 
is  coloured,  if  one  twig  is  broken,  if 
there  is  a  dry  branch,  it  does  not  escape 
his  notice.  Differences  of  hue,  light, 
and  shadow,  tLe  infinite  diversities  that 
come  in  forest  life — he  takes  them  all 
in,  and  has  a  kind  of  omnipresence  in 
his  consciousness  of  the  facts  of  this 
whole  matter.     What  coiild  a  worm 


understand  or  imagine  of  a  being  that 
is  competent  to  take  in  the  realm  ot 
philosophy,  and  that  makes  himself  the 
measure  of  creation?  He  says,  **It 
does  not  seem  reasonable  to  me  that 
anybody  can  understand  more  than 
twenty  leaves.  I  cannot ;  and  I  do  not 
see  how  anybody  else  can."  And  yet, 
do  not  you  understand  how  a  person 
can  take  in  sections,  and  gradations, 
and  ranks,  and  degrees  infinitely  above 
what  a  worm  could  understand  ?  And 
have  you  anything  more  to  do  than  to 
carry  on  that  idea  to  imagine  a  Being 
before  whom  all  eternity  passes,  and  to 
whom  all  the  infinite  treasures  of  this 
eternity  shall  be  just  as  simple  as  to  you 
the  leaves  on  the  individual  tree  are? 
It  only  requires  magnitude  of  being, 
infinity. — //.   W.  Beecher, 

The  sun  is  a  natural  image  of  God  ; 
if  the  sun  had  an  eye,  it  would  see  ;  if 
it  had  an  under.- tanding,  it  would  know 
all  visible  things ;  it  would  see  what  it 
shines  upon,  and  understand  what  it 
influenceth,  in  the  most  obscure  bowels 
of  the  earth.  Doth  God  excel  Hia 
creature,  the  sun,  in  excellency  and 
beauty,  and  not  in  light  and  under- 
standing ?  certainly  more  than  the  sun 
excels  an  atom  or  grain  of  dust.  We 
may  yet  make  some  representation  of 
this  knowledge  of  God  by  a  lower 
thing,  a  picture,  which  seems  to  look 
upon  every  one,  though  there  be  never 
so  great  a  multitude  in  the  room  where 
it  bangs ;  no  man  can  cast  his  eye  upon 
it,    but    it   seems   to   behold    him    in 

15 


CHAP.  1. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


particular ;  and  so  exactly,  as  if 
there  were  none  but  him  upon  whom 
the  eye  of  it  were  fixed ;  and  every 
man  finds  the  same  cast  of  it :  shall 
art  frame  a  thing  of  that  nature,  and 
shall  not  the  God  of  art  and  all  know- 


ledge, be  much  more  in  reality  than 
that  is  in  imagination  ?  Shall  not  God 
have  a  far  greater  capacity  to  behold 
everything  in  the  world,  which  is  in- 
finitely less  to  Him  than  a  wide  room 
to  a  picture  ? — CharnoQke% 


The  Census  and  its  Teachings. 
(Verses  17-19J 


This  census  was  taken  as  they  were 
formed  into  a  nation.  In  Egypt  they 
were  not  a  nation,  but  hordes  of  slaves. 
Now  begins  their  national  existence. 
God  reduces  them  to  order,  consolidates 
them,  that  they  might  undertake  the 
responsibilities  and  enjoy  the  privileges 
of  nationhood. 

Why  did  God  give  us  this  record  ? 
Paul  writes  that  *'  all  Scripture  is  given 
by  inspiration  of  God,  and  is  profit- 
able,** etc.  The  Bible  is  a  practical 
book  ;  it  is  inspired  for  our  profit — oil 
of  it.  True,  some  portions  are  more 
esteemed  by  us  than  others  are.  Look 
at  the  well-used  Bible  of  an  aged 
Christian.  Some  parts  are  more  soiled 
than  others.  Is  this  right?  Yes.  It 
is  compatible  with  reverence  for  the 
whole  Bible,  just  as  Christ,  while  lov- 
ing all  the  disciples,  had  his  three  best- 
loved  among  them.  But  we  ought 
not  to  neglect  any  part  of  the  Bible. 
There  is  a  blessing  in  all  of  it.  In 
places  we  least  expect  it,  we  find  it  to 
be  inspired  for  our  profit.  This  chapter 
seems  dry  and  profitless,  but  it  is  not 
so.  Like  some  of  the  glens  in  South 
Wales, — sterile,  barren,  unattractive, 
and,  to  the  outward  look,  valueless ; 
but  underneath  are  coal  mines  and  un- 
told wealth.  So  with  this  chap'er.  Let 
us  inquire,  what  this  numbering  was 
calculated  to  teach  the  people  at  the 
time,  and  in  Lke  manner  to  teach  us  at 
the  present  day  ? 

I.  It  was  calculated  to  teach  them 
the  grand  fact  that  God  was  person- 
ally interested  in  and  well  acquainted 
with  each  one  of  them  individually. 

The  object  of  the  census  was  to  in- 

vidualize  them,  to  separate  each  from 

the  mass,  to  register  each  name  that  the 

record  might  be  kept  before  God.     He 

16 


wanted  them  all  to  feel,  that  He  knew 
them  and  was  interested  in  them.  There 
is  a  tendency  in  man  to  think  that  he  is 
lost  in  the  mass,  and  that  the  great  God 
is  not  interested  in  him.  This  tei  ency 
is  very  pernicious ;  it  leads  to  sin,  and 
then  to  despair.  The  Bible  all  through 
combats  it;  and  there  is  no  doubt  that 
it  was  one  great  design  of  this  census. 
This  chapter  is  to  us  like  the  microscope 
in  nature — revealing  to  us  God's  great- 
ness by  the  interest  He  takes  in  the 
individual.  It  is  a  grand  truth  to  feel, 
God  sees  me,  knows  all  about  me,  cares 
for  me.  He  is  not  some  cold  abstrac- 
tion, indifferent,  inaccessible,  and  un- 
mindful of  us.  Far  from  it.  The 
Bible  and  Christ  bring  Him  near  to  us, 
showing  Him  to  be  full  of  interest  in 
us.  He  feeds  the  fowls,  clothes  the 
lilies,  knows  the  varj^ing  market-price 
of  sparrows,  numbers  the  hairs  of  our 
heads,  knew  the  street,  house,  and 
person  where  Peter  lodged.  Struggling, 
anxious,  suffering  one,  single  yourself 
from  the  crowd.  God  knows,  loves, 
cares  for  thee. 

II.  It  was  a  vivid  illustration  of 
the  faitlifulness  of  God  to  His  word. 

He  had  said  to  Abraham  that  his  seed 
should  be  numerous,  that  they  should 
go  to  Egypt,  etc.  The  figures  of  this 
chapter  tstiow  how  well  He  kept  His 
word.  To  faith  a  fact  is  better  than 
a  hundred  arguments.  And  anything 
that  strengthens  our  faith  in  God's 
Word  is  a  great  blessing  to  us.  The 
worth  of  the  Bible  and  its  promises  in 
a  suffering,  sinful  world  no  one  can  tell. 
To  shake  one's  faith  in  the  promises  is 
like  going  through  a  hospital  and  rudely 
teaiing  the  pillows  from  under  the 
heads  of  the  suffei  ers.  It  is  faithful- 
ness that  makes  the  promises  precious* 


BOMILETW   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


CHIP.  X 


What  a  comfort  to  Israel  to  have  con- 
fidence in  the  Word  of  God,  to  feel 
that  they  could  trust  Him  !  Nothing 
would  impress  His  faithfulness  more 
than  this  census,  showing  how  well  He 
Had  kept  His  promise  to  Abraham.  It 
also  speaks  to  us,  etc. 

Ill,  It  afforded  them  striking  proof 
of  God's  power  to  keep  His  word. 

God  is  not  only  true,  but  His  arm  is 
almighty.  It  was  by  this  census  that 
the  people  knew  how  many  they  were, 
God  led  them  ou^  of  Egypt,  rescued 
them  at  the  Red  iSea,  protected  and  fed 
them  thus  far  in  the  wilderness.  Was 
there  anything  too  hard  for  the  Lord? 
Would  not  all  this  encourage  them  to 
lean  on  His  arm  ?  He  had  proved  His 
power  to  keep  His  word.  God  is  equal 
to  all  our  wants.  His  word  is  true  ; 
His  arm  is  strong.     With  such  a  God 


for  our  Friend  we  have  nothing  to  feai*, 
etc.  "  Among  the  gods  there  is  none 
like  unto  Thee,  O  Lord."  "  Happy  is 
he  that  hath  the  God  of  Jacob  for  his 
help." 

"  This  God  ia  the  God  we  adore, 

Our  faithful  unchangeable  Friend; 
Whoso  love  is  as  great  as  His  power, 

And  knows  neither  measure  nor  end, 
*Tis  Jesus,  the  First  and  the  Last, 

Whose  Spirit  shall  guide  us  safe  home : 
We'll  praise  Him  for  all  that  is  past, 
And  trust  Him  for  all  that's  to  come." 

Hart. 

These  figures  then  are  eloquent  Let 
them  lead  us  to  trust  more  fully  in  God. 
The  ungodly  I  what  say  they  to  you  ? 
They  certify  your  doom,  if  ye  repent 
not.  The  threatenings  as  well  as  the 
promises  of  the  Bible  rest  on  the  word 
of  the  faithful  and  almighty  God. — 
David  Lloyd. 


The  first  Army  of  Israel,  an  Illustration  of  the  Church  Militant. 

(Verses  20-46.J 


In  these  verses  we  have  the  record 
of  the  number  of  men  "  from  twenty 
years  old  and  upwards  that  were  able 
to  go  forth  to  war"  in  the  respective 
tribes,  and  in  the  whole  of  the  tribes 
united,  with  the  exception  of  that  of 
Levi,  A  consideration  of  the  numbers 
of  the  respective  tribes  will  be  found  in 
other  commentaries.  We  propose  to 
consider  this  first  army  of  Israel  as  an 
illustration  of  the  Church  Militant. 

Consider  : 

I.  The  necessity  of  this  army. 

Before  the  Children  of  Israel  can  take 
possession  of  the  Promised  Land  the 
idolatrous  Canaanitish  nations  must  be 
dispo>-seseed.  To  expel  them  from  the 
country  Israel  must  encounter  them  in 
battle  and  vanquish  them.  And  to  do 
this  a  large  and  brave  army  was  neces- 
sary. It  is  necessary  that  the  Christian 
Church  should  be  militant.  The  in- 
dividual Christian  cannot  attain  the 
inheritance  or  spiritual  perfection  with- 
ou\  conilict.  And  the  Church  cannot 
take  its  true  place  or  fulfil  its  Divinely 
appointed  mission  without  doing  vigo- 
rous battle. 

1.  Internal  foes  havs  to  be  conquered. 


In  ourselves  there  are  carnal  appetites 
which  must  be  subdued,  evil  passions 
which  must  be  quelled  by  the  power  and 
principles  of  Divine  grace,  etc.  The 
Christian  has  to  achieve  self-conquest. 
"  He  that  is  slow  to  anger  is  better 
than  the  mighty,  and  he  that  ruleth  his 
spirit  than  he  that  taketh  a  city." 
"  The  ba'  le  in  which  thoughts  are  the 
only  swordcj,  and  purposes  are  the  only 
spears,  and  tears  are  the  only  shots — 
the  inward  struggles  of  men's  souls — 
these  are,  after  all,  the  mightiest  bat- 
tles ;  and  in  the  sight  of  God  they  are 
the  most  sublime." 

2.  Exteimal  foes  have  to  he  conquered, 
God  summons  us  to  do  battle  with  ig- 
norance and  supeistition,  with  dirt  and 
disease,  with  immorality  and  irreligion, 
with  vice  and  crime.  We  need  to 
guard  against  Satanic  subtlety,  and  to 
resist  Satanic  influence.  It  is  madness 
to  make  light  of  the  adversaries 
with  which  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ 
has  to  contend.  It  is  to  invite  defeat, 
etc. 

II.  The  authority  for  organising 
this  army. 

''  The  Lord  spake  unto  Moses/'  tx« 

17 


CHAP.  L 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY.    NUMBERS. 


pressly  coramanrling  him  to  take  the 
number  of  men  able  to  do  military  duty. 
The  first  army  of  Israel  was  organised 
under  Divine  direction.  May  we  not 
mfer  from  this  that  there  are  possible 
circumstances  in  which  war  is  justifi- 
able ?  In  itself  war  is  unquestiona»  / 
a  terrible  evil.  ("J-  ^ut  it  certainly 
appears  to  us  that  circumstances  may 
arise  in  which  a  nation  would  be  justi- 
fied in  having  recourse  to  war.  *'  The 
arms  *are  fair,"  says  Shakspeare, 
"  when  the  intent  of  bearing  them  is 

jUbt." 

"  War  is  honourable 
In  those  who  do  their  native  rights  maintain; 
In  those  whose  swords  an  iron  barrier  are 
Between  the  lawless  spoiler  and  the  weak  . 
But  is,  in  tho-ie  who  draw  the  offensive  bladft 
For  added  power  or  gain,  sorded  and  despic- 
able 
As  meanest   office   of   the   worldly  churl." 

Joanna  Baillie.    (6.) 

III.  The  Composition  of  this  Army. 

1.  It  was  composed  of  Israelites 
only.  None  of  the  ''  mixed  multitude  " 
were  included.  The  warriors  were  men 
who  could  "declare  their  pedigrees 
after  their  families,  by  the  house  of 
thtir  fathers."  In  fighting  the  battles 
of  the  Lord  in  this  ao^e  ttiorough  deci- 
sion is  required.  *' Who  is  on  the 
Lord's  side?"  The  victorious  Church 
must  be  composed  of  true  Christians. 
Victories  for  truth  and  right  demand 
the  prowess  of  true  and  righteous  men. 

2.  It  was  composed  ofahh  men  onVg. 
''  Every  male  from  twenty  years  old 
and  upward,  all  that  were  able  to  go 
forth  to  war."  In  accomplishing  His 
purposes  God  uses  fit  instruments.  He 
^'mploNS  means  adapted  to  the  attain- 
ment of  His  ends.  In  the  conflicts  of 
the  spiritual  life  and  work  every 
Christian  may  through  Jesus  Christ  be 
an  able  warrior.  Weak  and  timid  in 
ourselves,  we  may  be  courageous  and 
"stiong  in  the  grace  that  is  in  Christ 
Jesus." 

3.  It  comprised  all  the  able  men, 
"  Every  male  from  twenty  years  old  and 
upward,  all  that  were  able  to  go  forth 
to  war,"     No   excuses   were    allowed. 


None  were  exempted.  Altogether  the 
army  was  very  large  :  it  consisted  of 
six  hundred  and  three  thousand  five 
hundred  and  fifty  men.  Every  Chris- 
tian is  called  to  be  a  soldier.  The 
continuance  and  growth  of  the  Christian 
life  are  impossible  apart  from  vigorous 
conflict.  We  must  either  vanquish  our 
spiritual  enemies,  or  they  will  vanquish 
us.  Neutrality  is  out  of  the  question 
here.  And  no  thought  of  truce  can  be 
entertained  without  In  s  and  injury. 
Neither  can  we  do  our  fighting  by  proxy. 
Evpry  Christian  must  be  a  personal 
combatant  in  the  great  conflict 

IV.  The  conquerhag  spirit  of  this 
Army. 

Their  leaders  constantly  endeavoured 
to  inspire  the  soldiers  with  the  spirit  of 
intelligent  trust  in  God.  When  this 
spirit  animated  them  they  achieved 
splendid  triumphs :  when  it  failed 
them  they  turned  their  backs  to  their 
enemies  and  fled  in  dismay.  Victory 
in  our  spiritual  conflicts  is  attainable 
only  through  faith.  When  our  faith  in 
God  is  strong,  we  are  invincible.  When 
it  fails,  we  are  overthrown  by  the  first 
assault  of  the  enemy.  ''  Ttiis  is  the 
victory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even 
our  faith."  "  Above  all,  taking  the  shield 
of  faith,  wherewith  ye  th^ll  be  able  to 
quench  all  the  fiery  darts  of  the 
wicked."  True  faith  gives  glorious 
visions  to  the  spirit,  inspires  us  with 
heroic  courage,  girds  us  with  all-suf- 
ficient strength,  makes  us  more  than 
conquerors  through  the  Capiam  of  our 
salvation,  (c.) 

Conclusion  : — 1.  A  call  to  decision, 

"  Who  is  on  the  Lord's  side  ?  "     2.  ul 

call  to  courage.     Our  arms  are  trit  d  and 

true  ;  our  great  Leader  is   invincible  ; 

let  us  then  *'  be  strong  and  of  a  good 

courage."      3.  A     call    to    confidence. 

Our  courage,  to  be  true,  must  spring 

from  faith.     By  trust  we  triumph. 

"  Strong  in  the  Lord  of  Hosts, 
And  in  His  mighty  power  ; 
Who  in  the  strength  of  Jesus  trusts 
Is  more  than  couqueror." 

€UWesUjf. 


u 


nOMlLbTIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  I. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  Wherever  there  is  war,  there 
must  be  injustice  on  one  side  or  the 
other,  or  on  both.  There  have  been 
wars  which  were  little  more  than  trials 
of  strength  between  friendly  nations, 
and  in  which  the  injustice  was  not  to 
each  other,  but  to  the  God  who  gave 
them  life.  But  in  a  malignant  war  of 
these  present  ages  there  is  injustice  of 
ignobler  kind,  at  once  to  God  and  man, 
which  rmist  be  stemmed  for  both  their 
eakes.  It  may,  indeed,  be  so  involved 
with  national  prejudices,  or  ignorances, 
that  neither  of  the  contending  nations 
can  conceive  it  as  attaching*  to  their 
cause ;  nay,  the  constitution  of  their 
governments,  and  the  clumsy  crooked- 
ness of  their  political  dealings  with  each 
otticr,  may  be  such  as  to  prevent  either 
of  them  from  knowing  the  actual  cause 
for  which  they  have  gone  to  war. 

John  Ruslcin, 

(h)  You  may,  perhaps,  be  surprised 
at  my  implying  that  war  itself  can  be 
right,  or  necessary,  or  noble  at  all.    Nor 
do  I  speak  of  all  war  as  necessary,  nor  of 
all  war  as  noble.     Both  peace  and  war 
are  noble  or  ignoble  according  to  their 
kind  and  occasion.     No  man  has  a  pro- 
founder  sense  of  the  horror  and  guilt  of 
ignoble  war  than  I  have.     I  have  per- 
sonally seen  its  effects  upon  nations,  of 
unmitigated  evil  on  soul  and  body,  with 
perhaps   as    much   pity  and    as    much 
bitterness  of  indignation  as  any  of  those 
whom   you   will   hear   continually   de- 
claiming in   the  cause  of   peace.     But 
peace  may  be  sought  in  two  ways.    One 
way  is  as   Gideon  sought  it,  when  he 
built  his  altar  in   Ophrah,  naming  it, 
'  God    send    peace,*    yet    sought    this 
peace  that  he  loved  as  he  was  ordered 
to  seek  it   and  the  peace  was  sent  in 
(iod's   way  : — "  The  country    was     in 
quietness  forty  years    in    the    days  of 
Gideon."     And  the  other  way  of  seek- 
ing  peace    is   as  Menahem   sought    it, 
when  he  gave  the  King  of  Assyria  a 
thousand   talents  of   silver,  **  that   his 
hand   might  be  with  him."      That  is, 
you  may  either  win  your  peace  or  buy 
it : — win  it,  by  resistance  to  evil ;   buy 
it,   by   compromise    with    evil.      You 


o 


may  buy  your  peace  with  silenced  con- 
sciences ;  you  may  buy  it  with  broken 
vows,  buy  it  with  lying  words,  buy  it 
with  base  connivances,  buy  it  with  the 
blood  of  the  slain,  and  the  cry  of  the 
captive,  and  the  silence  of  lost  souls — 
over  hemispheres  of  the  earth,  while 
you  sit  smiling  at  your  serene  hearths, 
lisping  comfortable  prayers  evening  and 
morning,  and  counting  your  pretty  Pro- 
testant beads  (which  are  flat,  and  of 
gold,  instead  ot  round,  and  of  ebony,  as 
the  monks'  ones  were),  and  so  mutter 
continually  to  yourselves,  "  Peace  I 
peace  ! "  when  there  is  no  peace,  but 
only  captivity  and  death  for  you,  as 
well  as  for  those  you  leave  unsaved — 
and  \ours  darker  than  theirs. — Ibid. 

I  believe  in  war.  I  believe  there 
are  times  when  it  must  be  taken.  I 
believe  in  it  as  a  medicine.  Medicine 
is  not  good  to  eat,  but  when  you  are 
sick  it  is  good  to  take.  War  is  not  a 
part  of  the  Gospel;  but  while  men  and 
the  world  are  travelling  on  a  plain 
where  they  are  not  capable  of  compre- 
hending the  Gospel,  a  rude  form  of 
justice  is  indispensable,  though  it  is 
very  low  down.  If  you  go  to  a  plain 
still  higher,  war  seems  to  be  a  very 
poor  instrumentality.  And  if  you  go 
yet  higher  and  higher  till  you  reach 
that  sphere  where  the  crowned  Sufferer 
stands,  how  hateful  and  hideous  war 
seems  I  In  the  earlier  periods  of  society 
it  is  recognised  as  having  a  certain 
value;  but  its  value  is  the  very  lowest, 
and  at  every  step  upward,  till  you  come 
to  this  central  Divine  exhibition,  it 
loses  in  value.  Always  it  is  a  rude 
and  uncertain  police  of  nations.  It  is 
never  good.  It  is  simply  better  than 
something  worse.  Physical  force  is  the 
alternative  of  moral  influence  ;  if  you 
have  not  one,  you  must  have  the  other. 
—'H,  W.  Be'xher, 

Few  religious  men  could  justify 
most  of  the  wars  of  history.  On  one 
side  or  other  war  must  be  the  greatest 
of  all  crimes,  and  the  instances  in  which 
either  side  is  right  are  but  few.  But 
this  doft<!  not  affect  the  principle.  If 
but  ono  can  be  instanced  in   which  a 

19 


CUAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


people  simply  resisted  aggression,  con- 
quest, violation  of  liberties,  or  wrong, 
it  would  suffice.  If  Eogland  were  in- 
vaded by  an  unprovoked  aggressor;  if 
London  were  assailed,  its  homes  in  im- 
minent peril  of  violation,  the  property 
of  its  merchants,  the  honour  of  its  women, 
the  lives  of  its  children  and  citizens 
imperilled,  what  should  I  do  ?  Go  out 
and  reason  with  the  invader  ?  appeal  to 
to  his  sense  of  righteousness  ?  Yes,  it 
would  be  right  to  do  that  if  it  were 
practicable.  Crowd  into  churches  to 
pray?  Yes,  it  would  be  eminently 
right  to  do  that.  But  suppose  the 
invader  to  be  as  ambitious,  as  false, 
and  as  conscienceless  as  Napoleon,  to 
be  sunk  below  any  possible  appeal  to 
moral  feeling,  am  I  passively  to  let 
him  work  his  devilry — to  burn  my 
house,  murder  my  children,  and  do 
worse  to  my  wife  and  daughters?  Am 
I  to  pray,  and  passively  expect  God  to 
work  a  moral  miracle?  I  think  not. 
I  am  to  employ  righteous  means  to 
resist  wrong,  and  to  ask  God  to  bless 
them.  If  only  the  magistrate's  sword 
will  deter  the  robber  and  the  murderer,  I 
am  to  use  that  sword  ;  and  an  army  in 
its  only  lawful  capacity  is  simply  a 
power  of  mj^gistracy.  Some  of  the 
greatest  deliverances  that  God  wrought 
for  His  people  were  through  armies. 
The  most  precious  liberties  of  the  world 
and  the  Church  have  been  won  by 
armed  revolution  and  defence.  From 
Marathon  to  the  Armada,  from  the 
destruction  of  Sennacherib  to  that  of 
Napoleon,  from  the  revolt  from  under 
Pharaoh  to  that  from  under  the  Stuarts, 
or  the  King  of  Naples,  the  moral  and 
religious  sense  of  the  world  has  ap- 
proved the  resistance  of  wrong  by  force. 
So  loQg  as  force  and  the  magistrate  and 
the  police  are  necessary  to  preserve 
righteousness  and  justice  and  liberty, 
they  must  be  employed.  The  ideal  of 
Christianity  is  peace  and  universal 
brotherhood,  but  it  is  not  to  be  attained 
by  permitting  the  ruffian  and  the  robber 
and  the  tyrant  to  work  their  will 
unrefcisted — that  would  be  to  leave 
society  to  lawlessness  and  brutality. — 
H.  Allan,  D,D. 

(c)  How  often,  through  the  world's 
20 


literature  and  history,  have  we  heard  some 
ambitious  commander  or  emperor  bab- 
bling, in  his  vain  waking  dreams,  of  a 
world's  conquest !  We  turn  from  these 
poor  visions  of  cruelty  and  blood  to  the 
meek  army  of  the  living  God  ;  from  the 
false  victories  of  force  to  the  true 
victories  of  faith.  Here,  on  a  lowly  bed, 
in  an  English  village  by  the  sea, — as 
I  was  lately  reading, — fades  out  the 
earthly  life  of  one  of  God's  humblest, 
but  noblest  servants.  Worn  with  the 
patient  care  of  deserted  prisoners  and 
malefactors  in  the  town  jail  for  twenty- 
four  years  of  unthanked  service,  earning 
her  bread  with  her  hands,  and  putting 
songs  of  worship  on  the  lips  of  these 
penitent  criminals — she  is  dying;  and 
as  the  night  falls  some  friend  asks, 
"  What  shall  I  read  ?  "  The  answer  of 
the  short  breath  is  one  firm  syllable, 
**  Praise  !  '*  To  the  question,  "  Are 
there  no  clouds?  "  "None;  He  never 
hides  His  face.  It  is  our  sins  which 
form  the  clouds  between  us  and  Him. 
He  is  all  love,  all  light,"  And  when 
the  hour  of  her  departure  was  fully 
come,  "Thank  God,  thank  God!'' 
And  there, — as  I  read  again — in  his 
princely  residence,  surrounded  with 
the  insignia  of  power,  but  in  equal 
weakness  before  God,  expired  a  guileless 
statesman,  nobleman  by  rank  and 
character,  calmly  resigning  back  all  his 
power  into  the  Giver's  hands,  spending 
his  last  days  of  pain,  like  many  hours  of 
all  his  days  before  it,  with  the  Bible  and 
Prayer-book  in  his  feeble  hand,  saying, 
at  the  end,  '*  I  have  been  the  happiest 
of  men,  yet  I  feel  that  death  will  be 
gain  to  me,  through  Christ  who  died  for 
me."  Blessed  be  God  for  the  manifold 
features  of  triumphant  faith  ! — that  He 
suffers  His  children  to  walk  towards 
Him  through  ways  so  various  in  their 
outward  look  ; — Sarah  Martin  from 
her  cottage  bed,  Earl  Spencer  from  his 
gorgeous  couch,  little  children  in  their 
innocence,  unpretending  women  in  the 
quiet  mmistrations  of  faithful  love, 
strong  and  useful  and  honoured  men, 
whom  suffering  households  and  insti- 
tutions and  churches  mourn.  All 
bending  their  faces  towards  the  Ever- 
lasting Light,  in  one  faith,  one  oheering 


^^ 


HOMlLETtC   COMMT^NTARY:   NUMBERS, 


CHAP.    1, 


hope,  called  by  one  Lord,  who  has  over- 
come the  world,  and  dieth  no  more  I 

••  One  army  of  the  living  God, 

To  His  command  we  bow  : 
Part  of  His  hobt  hav«  crossed  the  flood, 

And  part  are  crossing  now." 

The  sun   sets;  the  autamn  fades;  life 


hastens  with  us  all.  But  we  stand  yet 
in  our  Master's  vineyard.  All  the  day 
ot  our  appointed  time,  let  us  labour 
righteously,  and  pray  and  wait,  till  our 
change  come,  that  we  may  change  only 
from  virtue  to  virtue,  from  faith  to 
faith,  and  thus  from  glory  to  glory. — 
F,  D,  Huntington,  D.D, 


The    Levites    and   their   Service    an   Illustration  of  the    Christian 

Ministry. 

(Verses  47-54.) 


The  tribe  of  Levi  was  not  numbered 
with  the  other  tribes.  The  Levites 
were  exempted  from  military  service, 
and  set  apart  for  the  service  of  the 
tabernacle.  In  any  wise  and  proper 
arrangement  of  the  affairs  of  human 
society,  provision  will  be  made  for  the 
requirements  of  the  spiritual  nature  of 
man.  The  chief  features  of  the  service 
of  the  Levites  as  here  indicated  may 
properly  be  regarded  as  illustrative  of 
the  work  of  the  Christian  ministry. 

I.  The    true    Christian     minister 
should  manifest  some  fitness  for  the 
work  before  he  is  designated  thereto. 
The    Levites    had    manifested    their 
zeal  for  the  worship  of  God  by  slaying 
the  worshippers  of  the  golden   calf  at 
th*}    command  of  Moses  (Exod,  xxxii. 
26-29).     And,  as  a  reward,  the  honour 
of  this  sacred  calling  is  conferred  upon 
them.     They  had  already  acted  as  assis- 
tants to  the  priests  (Exod.  xxx^iii.  21), 
being  of  the  same  tribe  as  Moses  and 
Aaron.     And  now  they  are   expressly 
appointed   to  the  charge  of  the  taber- 
nacle.    ''  But  the  Levites  after  the  tribe 
of    their   fathers  were   not   numbered 
among  them.      For   the  Lord  spake" 
(not    *'  had    spoken ")    "  unto    Moses, 
saying,"  etc.    '^  Singular  services   shall 
be  recompensed  with  singular  honours." 
That  a  person    should   manifest    some 
fitness  for  the   work  of    the  Christian 
ministry  before  he  is  set  apart   to   it 
seems  so  obvious  and  indisputable  that 
it  would  be  superfluous  to  call  attention 
to  it,  were  it  not  that  in  practice  it  is 
so  often  disregarded.     There  seems  to 
be  in  some  quarters  an  impression  that 
almost    anyone  is  competent  for   the 


sacred  office  of  the  ministry.  In  de- 
termining the  trade  which  their  sons 
shall  learn,  wise  parents  will  consider 
their  respective  inclinations  and  apti- 
tudes. An  artist  would,  perhaps,  make 
a  poor  minister  ;  a  successful  merchant 
might  utterly  fail  as  a  barrister.  Is 
there  less  aptitude  required  in  the  work 
of  the  Gospel  ministry  than  in  the 
other  pursuits  of  life?  Unfitness 
should  be  tolerated  in  any  sphere  of 
life  and  activity  rather  than  in  this. 
There  should  be  adaptation  of  voice^  of 
mind^  of  character,  etc. 

II.  That  the  true  Christian  minis- 
ter is  called  of  God  to  his  v^rork. 

'^Ttie     Lord     spake     unto     Moses, 
saying,     .     .     .      Thou    shalt   appoint 
tbe  Levites  over  the  tabernacle  of  tes- 
timony," etc.     In  addition  to  fitness  for 
the  otfice,  the  true  minister  will  feel  a 
conviction  of  moral  obligation  to  enter 
upon  the  holy  work  :  the  impulsions  of 
the  Divine   Spirit  will  urge  him  in  the 
same     direction,     until    the    words    of 
St.    Paul   truly  express  his   condition, 
*•'  Necessity  is  laid  upon  me ;  yea,  woe 
is  unto  me,  if  I  preach  not  the  Gospel." 
*'True   ministers,"   says  Hugh  Miller, 
"  cannot  be  manufactured  out  of  ordi- 
nary men — men  ordinary  in  talent  and 
character — in  a  given  number  of  years, 
and  then  passed  by  the  imposition  of 
hands  into  the  sacred  ofiSce  ;  ministers, 
when  real,  are  all  special  creations  of 
the   grace    of    God."     The    Christian 
ministry  is  not  a  profession  into  which 
a  man  may  or  may  not  enter  as  he 
pleases ;  but  a  Divine  vocation,  which 
is  solemnly  binding  upon  those  to  whom 
it  is  addressed,  and  without  which  no 

21 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS- 


man  can  enter  upon  it  without  sin. — (a) 

III.  That  the  work  of  the  Christian 
minister  demands  his  entire  devotion 
thereto. 

The  Levites  were  to  be  free  from  all 
other  service,  that  they  might  give 
themselves  unreservedly  to  the  ministry 
of  the  tabernacle.  There  are  men  who 
are  rendering  (in  preaching  and  other- 
wise) most  useful  and  self-denying  ser- 
vice to  the  Church  of  Christ,  whose 
time  and  energy  are  not  entirely  de- 
voted to  it.  They  are  worthy  of  high 
honour.  But  the  work  of  the  stated 
minister  and  pastor  demands  all  his 
time  and  energy,  if  it  is  to  be  done  well. 
His  duties  are  so  many,  so  great,  and 
so  unspeakably  important,  as  to  chal- 
lenge all  his  powers.  M.  Htnry  : — 
••'  Those  that  minister  about  holy  things 
should  neither  entangle  themselves,  nor 
be  entangled,  in  secular  affairs.  The 
ministry  is  itself  work  enough  for  a 
whole  man,  and  all  little  enough  to  be 
employed  in  it."  The  Apostle  Paul, 
in  writing  to  the  Christians  at  Rome, 
specifies  their  respective  duties,  and 
urges  each  one  to  diligence  in  the  dis- 
charge of  bis  own  (R(  m.  xii.  6,  8). 
And  to  Timothy  he  writes  :  '•  No  man 
that  warreth  entangleth  himself  with 
the  affairs  of  this  life,"  etc.  (2  Tim.  ii. 
3,  4).  And  considering  the  solemn 
issues  of  his  work,  in  conscious  weak- 
ness he  cries,  '*  Who  is  sufficient  for 
these  things  ?  " 

"  'Tis  not  a  cause  of  small  import 

The  pastor's  care  demands  ; 
But  what  might  fill  an  angel's  heart, 
And  filled  a  Saviour's  hands." 

Doddnige. 

IV,  That  a  faithful  discharge  of  the 
duties  of  the  Christian  minister  is 
essential  to  the  well-being  of  society. 

The  duties  of  the  Ivevites  are  briefly 
stated  in  verses  50,  51,  and  53.  No 
one  who  was  not  of  their  tribe  was  in 
any  way  to  intermeddle  with  their 
duties  or  encroach  upon  their  position. 
If  a  stranger  drew  near  to  the  taber- 
nacle he  was  to  be  put  to  death.  If 
the  functions  of  the  Levites  were  not 
properly  discharged,  wrath  would  be 
upon  Israel.  What  was  the  intention 
of  these  strict  regulations  ? 
22 


We  suggest — 

1.  That  the  sacred  things  might  b6 
decently  kept  and  ordered.  The  Levitea 
had  charge  "over  all  the  vessels  of 
the  tabernacle,  and  over  all  things 
that  pertained  to  it."  It  is  most  im- 
portant that  everything  which  is  used 
in  connection  with  the  worship  and 
service  of  God  should  be  appropriate 
to  its  sacred  uses,  and  be  well  pre- 
served. God's  service  hallows  even 
the  meanest  things  which  are  employed 
in  it ;  but  we  should  devote  our  be^t 
things  to  it, 

2.  That  the  people  might  be  inspired 
with  reverence  for  sacred  things.  This 
to  us,  to  a  large  extent,  accounts  for 
the  stern  penalty  annexed  to  any  in- 
trusion upon  the  function  of  the  Levites, 
Reverence  is  one  of  the  highest  attri- 
butes of  mind.  The  Lord  seeks  to 
enkindle  or  increase  it  in  Israel. 

3.  That  the  people  might  he  impressed 
with  the  unworthiness  of  sinful  man  to 
approach  unto  the  Most  High.  We 
sinners  are  utterly  unfit  to  draw  near 
unto  Him  who  is  **  glorious  in  holi- 
ness." The  Levites  were  called  to  the 
charge  of  the  sacred  things.  They 
alone  could  draw  near  to  the  taber- 
nacle. Through  the  mediation  of  Jesus 
Christ  all  men  may  now  draw  near  to 
God.   (See  Heb.  x.  19-22.) 

Now,  these  things  are  needful  at  the 
present  time.  Becoming  worship,  re- 
verence for  sacred  things,  and  humility 
towards  God  are  ever  obligatory  and 
beneficial  to  us.  The  true  Christian 
minister  in  the  faithful  discharge  of 
his  duties  confers  the  greatest  benefit 
upon  society. — {h) 

V.  That  personal  holiness  of  heart 
and  life  are  essential  to  the  faithful 
discharge  of  the  duties  of  the  Christian 
Ministry. 

The  Levites  were  separated  from  the 
other  tribes  for  their  sacred  work. 
Their  outward  separation  was  intended 
to  show  forth  the  separation  from 
worldliness  and  sin  which  the  Lord 
required  of  them.  They  who  have  to 
do  with  holy  things  should  themselves 
be  holy.  "  Be  ye  clean  that  bear  the 
vessels  of  the  Lord."  (See  Rom.  ii 
2 1-24 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  16 ;  Tit,  ii.  7.)     Thus 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  I. 


Goldsmith     describes     the    Christian 

minister — 

"  In  his  duty  prompt  at  every  call, 
Ho  watched  and  wept,  he  prayed  and  felt  for 


all 


And,  as  a  bird  each  fond  endearment  tries 
To  tempt  its  new-fledged  offripring  to  the  skies, 
He  tried  each  art,  reproved  each  dull  delay, 
Allured  to  brighter  worlds,  and  led  the  way,** 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 


(a)  The  minister  without  a  vocation  is  not 
only  unhappy,  he  is  guilty, — he  occupies  a 
place,  he  exercises  a  right  which  does  not 
belong  to  him.  He  is,  as  Jesus  Christ  said, 
*'  a  ttiief  and  a  robber,"  who  has  not  entered 
in  through  the  gate,  but  climbed  up  some 
other  way.  The  word  vocation  has,  in  other 
applications  (that  is  to  say,  as  applied  to  pro- 
fessions of  a  secular  order),  only  a  figurative 
significance, — at  least  only  a  figurative  signi- 
ficance is  attributed  to  it.  It  is  equivalent  to 
aptitude,  talent,  taste.  It  is  natural  to  repre- 
sent these  qualifications  as  voices,  as  appeals. 
But  when  applied  to  the  ministry,  the  word 
returns  to  its  proper  sense.  When  conscience 
authorises  and  compels  us  to  the  discharge  of 
a  certain  duty,  we  have  that  which,  although 
out  of  the  sphere  of  miracle,  deserves  most 
fully  the  name  of  vocation.  In  order  to  exer- 
cise the  mini.-^try  legitimately,  a  man  must  be 
called  to  it, — A   Vinet. 

{b)  That  a  man  stand  and  speak  of  spiritual 
things  to  men.  It  is  beautiful, — even  in  its 
great  ob-icuration  and  decadence,  it  is  among 
the  beautifuUest,  most  touching  objects  one 
sees  on  the  earth.  This  Speaking  Man  has 
indeed,  in  these  times,  wandered  terribly  from 
the  point;  has,  alas !  as  it  were,  totally  lost 
sight  of  the  point ;  yet,  at  bottom,  whom  have 
we  to  compare  with  him  ?  Of  all  public  func- 
tionaries boarded  and  lodged  on  the  Industry 
of  Modern  Europe,  is  there  one  worthier  of 
the  board  he  has?  A  man  even  professing, 
and  never  so  languidly  miking  still  some 
endeavour,  to  save  the  souls  or  men:  contrast 
him  with  a  man  professing  to  do  little  but 
shoot  the  partridges  of  men  I  I  wish  he  could 
find  the  point  again,  this  Speaking  One,  and 
stick  to  it  with  tenacity,  with  deadly  energy; 
for  there  is  need  of  him  yet  I  The  Speaking 
Function — this  of  Truth  coming  to  us  with  a 
living  voice,  nay,  in  a  living  shape,  and  as  a 
concrete  practical  exemplar :  this,  with  all  our 
Writings  and  Printing  Functions,  has  a  peren- 
nial place.  Could  he  but  find  the  point 
again, — take  the  old  spectacles  oflF  his  nose, 
and  looking  up  discover,  almost  in  contact 
with  him,  what  the  real  Satanaa,  and  soul- 
devouring,  world-devouring  Devil,  Now  is. — 
Thomas  Carlyle. 

((■)  Beloved  in  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ,  it  is  a  very  menetrous  thing  that  any 
man  should  have  more  ioDgues  than  hands; 


for  God  bath  given  us  two  hands  and  but  one 
tongue,  that  we  might  do  much  and  say  but 
little.  Yet  many  say  so  much  and  do  so  little, 
ah  though  they  had  two  tongues  and  but  one 
hand  :  nay,  three  tongues  and  never  a  hand. 
Insomuch  as  that  may  be  aptly  applied  to 
them  which  Pandulphus  said  to  some  in  his 
time :  '•  You  say  much,  but  you  do  little  ; 
you  say  well,  but  you  do  ill.  Again,  you  do 
little,  but  you  say  much;  you  do  ill,  but  you 
say  well."  Such  as  these  (which  do  either 
worse  than  they  teach,  or  else  less  than  they 
teach ;  teaching  others  to  do  well  and  to  do 
much,  but  doing  no  whit  themselves)  may  be 
resembled  to  diverse  things.  To  a  whetstone, 
which  being  blunt  itself,  makes  a  knife  sharp ; 
to  a  painter,  which  being  deformed  himself, 
makes  a  picture  fair;  to  a  sign,  which  being 
weather-beaten,  and  hanging  without  itself, 
directs  passengers  into  the  inn  ;  to  a  bell, 
which  being  deaf  and  hearing  not  itself,  calls 
the  people  into  the  church  to  hear;  to  a  night- 
ingale, which  being  restless  and  sitting  upon 
a  thorn  herself,  brings  others  by  her  singing 
into  a  sweet  sleep  ;  to  a  goldsmith,  which 
being  beggarly  and  having  not  one  piece  of 
plate  to  use  himself,  hath  store  for  others 
which  he  shows  and  sells  in  his  shop.  Lastly, 
to  a  ridiculous  actor  in  the  city  of  Smyrna, 
which  pronouncing  '•  0  ccehim  ! — O  heaven  I " 
— pointed  with  his  finger  toward  the  ground  ; 
which  when  Polemo,  the  chiefest  man  in  the 
place,  saw,  he  could  abide  to  stay  no  longer, 
but  went  from  the  company  in  a  chafe,  saying, 
"This  fool  hath  made  a  solecism  with  his 
hand ;  he  hath  spoken  false  Latin  with  his 
hand."  Such  are  all  they  which  teach  one 
thing  and  do  another;  which  teach  well  and 
do  ill, — Thomas  Plaiifere. 

The  faithful  miniwter  is  strict  in  ordering 
his  conversation.  As  for  those  who  cleanse 
blurs  with  blotted  fingers  they  make  it  the 
worse.  It  was  said  of  one  who  preached  very 
well,  and  lived  very  ill,  that  when  he  was 
out  of  the  pulpit  it  was  a  pity  he  should  ever 
go  into  it ;  and  when  he  was  in  the  pulpit,  it 
was  a  pity  he  should  ever  come  out  of  it.  13ut 
our  minister  lives  sermons.  And  yet  I  deny 
not  but  dissolute  men,  like  unskilful  horse- 
men who  open  a  gate  on  the  wrong  side,  may, 
by  the  virtue  of  their  office,  open  heaven  for 
others,  and  shut  themselves  out.  —  Thomas 
Fuller, 


^A^.  1. 


BOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:  NUMBERS. 


Evert  Man  by  his  own  Standard, 
(  Verse  52.) 


The  various  tribes  of  Israel  had  to 
be  placed  in  order,  and  the  whole  to  be 
put  under  a  strict  regulation.  This  was 
needful  for  encampment,  for  march,  for 
worship,  for  battle :  without  this,  con- 
fusion, etc.  Israel  in  many  things 
typical  of  the  Christian  Church.  We 
see  it  in  this  also, — 

I.  The  One  IsraeL 
Observe : 

1.  Their  real  oneness  of  descent.  The 
children  of  Abraham. 

2.  Their  original  condition.  All 
bondsmen. 

3.  Their  Divine  deliverance.  Brought 
out  of  Egj'pt,  etc. 

4.  In  one  Divine  covenant.  Pro- 
mises, etc. 

5    Journeying  to  the  one  inheritance. 

6.  Under  one  command.  See  how 
this  all  applies  to  the  Church  of  the 
Saviour.  All  the  children  of  God  by 
faith,  all  heirs,  all  pilgrims,  all  of  one 
covenant,  one  Saviour,  etc. — essentially 
one  ;  one  in  Christ  Jesus. 

II.  The  various  Trib3S. 
Observe : 

1.  Their  different  names.  Necessary 
for  distinction — recognition. 

2.  Their  different  positions  in  the  camp. 
See  next  chapter.  East  side,  v.  3 ; 
south  side,  v.  10;  west,  v.  18;  north, 
V  25. 

3.  The  various  tribes  were  in  one 
general  accord  and  union.  All  one 
religious  confederacy,  absolutely  one, 
worship  one,  etc. ;  in  perils  one,  in  war- 
fare one,  in  prospects  one. 

III.  The  Special  Directions  to  the 
different  Tribes. 

1.  Each  tribe  had  their  own  standard 
or  banner  to  distinguish  it  from  the  rest. 
No  order  without. 


2.  Each  man  was  to  he  by  his  own 
standard.  Not  a  wanderer ;  not  a 
visitor  to  all;  but  his  own  fixed,  legiti- 
mate position. 

3.  Thus  the  duties  of  every  tribe  would 
he  regarded  and  fulfilled. 

4.  Thus  the  interests  of  all  would  be 
sustainf^d.  Now,  if  this  was  important 
and  necessary  in  the  camp  of  Israel, 
how  much  more  in  the  Church  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  I  The  thousands  there  : 
millions  here.     But  let  us  see,. — 

IV.  The  Spiritual  Lessons  the  sub- 
ject presents  to  us. 

1.  We  see  now  the  denominational 
tribes  in  the  Kingdom  of  Christ.  Christ- 
ians of  different  conditions,  education, 
training,  leaders,  etc. 

2 .  Christians  have  a  special  interest  in 
their  own  camp. 

3.  To  devote  themselves  to  these  is  the 
first  duty  and  privilege.     Just  as  families 

are  constituted,  so  cuurches. 

4.  All  the  various  denominational 
camps  constitute  the  one  Church  of  the 
Saviour.  Only  one  Israel,  one  body, 
one  army,  etc.  For  particular  pur- 
poses, every  man  by  his  own  camp  ; 
for  general  purposes,  all  acting  in  con- 
junction and  harmony.  How  absurd 
jealousies  andenvyingsl  How  ridicu- 
lous isolation!  How  oppressive  as- 
sumptions and  priestly  dictations  !  How 
suicidal  strifes  and  contentions  I  How 
monstrous  exclusions  and  anathemas  I 
The  great  tabernacle  of  God  is  built 
four-square,  and  includes  all  the  tribes. 
Christian  denominations  have  special 
standards,  and  serve  the  whole  best  by 
every  man  being  by  his  own  standard. 
The  glory  of  G-od  is  identified  with  the 
unity  of  the  wiiole.  Christ's  prayer  to 
Him,  etc. — Jabez  Burns,  D.D, 


24 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  U. 


CHAPTER  II. 


The  Marshalling  of   the  PEOPLBi 
{^Verses  1  and  2.) 


In  this  chapter  we  have  the  order  of 
the  twelve  tribes  in  the  camp  and  on 
the  march.  And  in  these  verses  we 
have  the  general  directions  which  the 
Lord  gave  unto  Moses  for  marshaliiog 
the  tribes.  Keil  and  Del.  :  *'  The  twelve 
tribes  were  to  encamp  each  one  by  his 
standard,  by  the  signs  of  their  fathers' 
houses,  opposite  to  the  tabernacle  (at 
some  distance)  round  about,  and,  ac- 
cording to  the  more  precise  directions 
given  afterwards,  in  such  order  that  on 
every  side  of  the  tabernacle  three  tribes 
were  encamped  side  by  side  and  united 
under  oue  banner,  so  that  the  twelve 
tribes  formed  four  large  camps  or  divi- 
sions of  an  army.  Between  these  camps 
and  the  court  surrounding  the  taber- 
nacle, the  three  leading  mishpachoth 
{i.e.,  families  or  clans)  of  the  Levites 
were  to  be  encamped  on  three  sides, 
aud  Moses  and  Aaron  with  the  sons  of 
Aaron  (i.  c,  the  priests)  upon  the  fourth, 
i.e.,  the  front  or  ea.>tern  side,  before 
the  entrance  (chap.  iii.  21-38).  7^.7,  a 
standard,  banner,  or  fla?,  denotes  pri- 
marily the  larger  Jield  sign.,  possessed 
by  every  division  composed  of  three 
tribes,  which  was  aLso  the  banner  of 
the  tribe  at  the  head  of  each  divi-ion ; 
and  secondarily,  in  a  derivative  signifi- 
cation, it  denotes  the  anm/unitvd  under 
one  standard,  like  o->;/Aeta,  or  vexillum. 
It  is  used  thus,  for  example,  in  verses 
17,  31,  34,  and  in  combination  with 
^T\p^  in  verses  3,  10,  18,  and  25,  where 
'  standard  of  the  camp  of  Judah,  Reu- 
ben, Ephraim,  and  Dan'  signifies  the 
hosts  of  the  tribes  arranged  under  these 
banners.  JHjnj^,  the  signs  (ensigns)  were 
the  smaller  tiags  or  banners  which  were 
carried  at  the  heads  of  the  different 
tribes  and  subdivisions  of  the  tribes 
(the  father^'  houses).  Neither  the 
Mosaic  law,  nor  the  Old  Testament 
generally,  gives  us  any  intimation  as  to 
the  form  or  character  of  the  standard 


(degel).  According  to  rabbinical  tra-^^ 
dition,  the  standard  of  Judah  bore  the 
figure  of  a  lion,  that  of  Reuben  the 
likeness  of  a  man,  or  of  a  man's  head, 
that  of  Ephraim  the  figure  of  an  ox, 
and  that  of  Dan  the  figure  of  an  eagle  ; 
so  that  the  four  living  creatures  united 
in  the  cherubic  forms  described  by 
Ezekiel  were  represented  upon  these 
four  standards." 

In  these  verses  we  have  four  homi- 
letic  points. 

I.  Order. 

The  Lord  here  gives  directions  to 
Moses  concerning  the  order  that  was  to 
be  observed  amongst  them.  The  great 
importance  of  a  clear  and  well  under- 
stood arrangement  amongst  so  large 
a  number  of  men  will  be  obvious 
upon  the  slightest  consideration.  But 
notice: — 

1.  God  Himself  delights  in  order. 
This  is  clearly  manifest  in  His  work-^, — 
in  the  rising  and  setting  of  the  sun  and 
moon,  in  the  sublime  march  of  the 
stars,  in  the  ebbing  and  flowing  of  the 
tides,  in  the  regular  succession  of  the 
seasons.  Even  comets,  those  apparently 
erratic  wanderers  in  space,  are  not 
erratic ;  but  move  with  perfect  pre- 
cision both  as  regards  space  and  time. 

2.  The  importance  of  order  is  recog- 
nised in  human  affairs.  h\  the  Christian 
Church,  in  national  government,  in 
military  affairs,  in  the  family  and  home, 
and  in  the  individual  life,  order  is  of 
the  utmost  importance,  and  is  fraught 
with  the  greatest  advantages.  "  Order," 
says  Soiithey,  "  is  the  sanity  of  the 
mind,  the  health  of  the  body,  the  peace 
of  the  city,  the  security  of  the  state. 
As  the  beams  to  a  house,  as  the  bones 
to  tiie  microcosm  of  man,  so  is  order  to 
all  things."  "  Let  all  things,"  says 
St.  Paul,  '*  be  done  decently,  and  in 
order." 

3.  This  order  was  probably  Divinely 
instituted  as  a  means  to  peace  and  unity. 

2d 


CHAP.  li. 


^OMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


It  is  probable  that  if  God  had  not  de- 
termioed  the  order  which  should  be 
observed  among  them,  there  would  have 
been  strife  and  contention  for  priority 
and  precedence.  Thus  the  tribe  of  Reu- 
ben might  have  claimed  the  pre-emi- 
nfnce  as  a  birth-right,  and  refused  to  fall 
in  with  the  arrangement  by  which  Judah 
held  the  post  of  honour  and  headed  the 
march.  While  Jiidah  might  have  re- 
fused to  concede  the  position  to  Reuben, 
because  of  their  own  vast  numerical 
superiority.  Again,  the  tribe  of  Simeon, 
for  the  same  reason,  might  have  refused 
to  occupy  a  position  subordinate  to  that 
of  Reuben  ;  for  the  former  tribe  num- 
bered 59,300,  while  the  latter  only 
46,500.  Other  causfS  of  dissatisfaction 
and  dispute  would  also,  probably,  have 
been  discovered.  And  the  issue  would 
have  been  strife,  divisions,  and  we  know 
not  what  evils.  But  the  Lord  prevents 
this  by  himself  detei  mining  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  tribes.  Order  is  ever  con- 
duiive  to  peace  and  unity.  Let  us 
cuhivate  order,     (a) 

IL  Variety. 

There  were  different  standards.  Each 
camp   had   its  own  characteristic  stan- 
dard.     And  each  tribe  and  each  father's 
house  had    i^s   own  distinctive  ensign. 
Their  order  was  not  monotonous.     Mo- 
notony  is    not    a    mark   of    divinity. 
Variety    cbaracterises    the    works    of 
God.     Countries  differ  in  their  climates, 
conformations,  productions,   etc.     The 
features    of    landscapes  differ.     ''  Star 
differeth    from  star."     Trees,  flowers, 
faces,  minds    differ.     Hence   it   seems 
reasonable  that  we  should  find  differ- 
ent ensigns  in   the  Church  of  Christ. 
With  one  spirit  there   may  be    many 
forms.     With  unity  of  the   inner  life 
there  may  be  great  variety  of  outward 
development.     There  are  many  denom- 
jnaiions  in   the  Christian  Church  be- 
cause  there  are  differences  of    mind, 
temperament,  degrees  of  education  ana 
culture,  etc.,  in  those  who  compose  the 
Church.     This  variety  is  promotive  of 
health,  activity,  usefulness,     (b) 

IIL  Unity. 

All  the  tribes  were  gathered  "  about 
the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,"  as 
around  a  common  centre.     They  had 
26 


different  standards  and  ensigns,  but 
constituted  one  nation.  Their  position 
in  relation  to  the  tabernacle  illus- 
trates— 

1.  The  dependence  of  all  on  God.  All 
the  tribes  looked  to  Him  for  support, 
provision,  protection,  direction,  etc. 

2.  The  access  of  all  to  God,  The 
tabernacle  was  the  sign  of  the  presence 
of  God  with  them.  It  was  in  their 
midst ;  not  very  far  from  any  of  them. 
All  of  them  in  the  appointed  way 
might  approach  Him  in  worship. 
Through  Christ  we  both  (Jews  and 
Gentiles)  "  have  access  by  one  Spirit 
unto  the  Father."  (See  Ephes.  ii.  18- 
22.) 

3.  The  reverence  of  all  towards  God. 
They  were   to   pitch  "  over  against  the 
tabernacle."     Probably  the  tribes  were 
2,000  cubits  distant  from  it.     Compare 
Joshua  iii.  4.     They  were  thus  to  en- 
camp around  the  sacred   place,  that  no 
stranger  might  draw  near  to  it ;  and 
the  Levites  were   to  encamp  near  the 
tabernacle  on  every  side,  that  the  people 
themselves  might  not  draw  too  near  to 
it,  but  might    be  taught   to  regard  it 
with  respect  and  reverence.     "  God  is 
greatly  to  be  feared  in  the  assembly  of 
the  saints,  and  to  be  had  in  reverence 
of  all  them  that  are  about  Him."  Now, 
all  Christians  are  one  in  their  relation 
to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     All  depend 
upon  God  as  revealed  in  Him  ;  all  ap- 
proach unto  God  through  Him ;  all  rever- 
ence God  in  Him.    The  various  denom- 
inations of  Christians  constitute  the  one 
Church  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     He 
is  the  centre  of  unity.     As  Christians 
draw  nearer   to  Him    they  will  draw 
nearer  to  each  other;  not  in  uniformity, 
but  in    increasing   nearness    to  Jesus 
Christ  will  the   increase  of  true  unity 
be  found.     "  Uniformity  is  the  creation 
of  man;  unity  is  the  inspiration  of  God. 
The  first  can  be  made  by  a  mask  ;  the 
latter  must  be  created  or  imparted  by  the 
Spirit  of  God.   Uniformity  is  compatible 
with  death ;  unity  is  inseparable  from 
real  and  conscious  life.     Uniformity  is 
the  churchyard  ;  unity  is  the   church 
itself  of  the  living  God.     All  may  ba 
uniform,  yet  all  may  be  dead  ;  none 
can   have   real,   inner,   spiritual,   vital 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  II. 


unity,  without  having  that  truth  which 
God  inspires,  and  that  life  of  which 
Christ  is  the  Giver." 

IV,  Security. 

The  tabernacle  of  God  in  the  midst 
of  the  carap  was  a  guarantee  of  their 
fafety.  We  may  apply  to  them  the 
words  of  one  of  their  poets  of  a  subse- 
quent age:  "God  is  in  the  midst  of 
her ;  she  shall  not  be  moved,"  etc. 

His  presence  in  their  midst  would 
tend  to — 

1.  Quell  their  fears.  He  had  wrought 
marvellous  things  on  their  behalf  in  the 
past ;  He  was  ever  doing  great  things 
for  them.  Then  why  should  they  quail 
before  any  danger  or  enemy  ? 

2.  Inspire  their  confidence  and  courage. 
It  should  have  given  to  them  the  assur- 
ance of  victory  in  conflict,  etc.  This 
seems  to  have  been  the  idea  of  Moses : 


"  When  the  ark  set  forward,  Moses  said, 
Rise  up,  Lord,  and  let  Thine  enemies 
be  scattered,  and  let  them  that  hate 
Thee  flee  before  Thee."  Distance  from 
God  is  weakness  and  peril  to  His 
Church.  Nearness  to  Him  is  safety 
and  power.  Living  in  vital  union  with 
Him  all-conquering  might  is  our& 

Conclusion — 

1.  Let  us  learn  sincerely  and  heartily 
to  recognise  as  members  of  the  Christian 
Israel  all  who  have  the  Christian  spirit, 
however  widely  they  may  differ  from 
us  in  forms  and  opinions. 

2.  Let  us  think  less  of  our  isms^  and 
more  of  Christ's  Church ;  less  of  theo- 
logical and  ecclesiastical  systems,  and 
more  of  Christ's  Gospel;  le,-s  of  human 
authority  and  patronage,  and  moiv,  of 
the  Lord  Jebus  Christ, 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 


(a)  Order  is  Heaven's  first  law — a  glorious 
law, 

Seen  in  those  pure  and  beauteous  isles 
of  light 

That  come  and  go,  as  circling  months 
fulfil 

Their  high  behest.  Nor  less  on  earth 
discern'd, 

*Mid  rocks  snow-clad,  or  wastes  of  herb- 
less  sand, 

Throughout  all  climes,  beneath  all  vary- 
ing skies, 

Fixing  for  e'en  the  smallest  flower  that 
blooms 

Its  place  of  growth.  Milton, 

(6)  Let  us  go  down  and  stand  by  the  beach 
of  the  great,  irregular  sea,  and  count  whether 
the  thunder  of  it  is  not  out  of  time.  One — 
two — here  comes  a  well-formed  wave  at  last, 
trembling  a  little  at  the  top,  but,  on  the  whole, 
orderly.  So,  crash  among  the  shingle,  and  up 
as  far  as  this  ^rey  pebble  ;  now  stand  by  and 
watch  I  Another  I  Ah,  careless  wave  I  why 
couldn't  you  have  kept  your  crest  on  ?  It  is 
all  gone  away  into  spray,  striking  up  against 
the  cliffs  there.  I  thought  as  much — missed 
the  mark  by  a  couple  of  feet  I  Another! 
How  now,  impatient  one!  couldn't  you  lave 
waited  till  your  friend's  reflux  was  done  with, 
instead  of  rolling  yourself  up  with  it  in  that 
unseemly  manner  ?  You  go  for  nothing.  A 
fourth,  and  a  goodly  one  at  last.  What  think 
T'e  of  yonder  slow  rise  and  crystalline  hollow, 
without  a  flaw  ?  Steady,  good  wave;  not  so 
fast,  not  so  fast:  Where  are  you  coming  to  f 
By  our  architectural  word,  this  is  too  bad ; 
two  yards  over  the  mark,  and  ever  so  much  of 


you  in  our  face  besides ;  and  a  wave  which 
we  had  some  hope  of,  behind  there,  broken  all 
to  pieces  out  at  sea,  and  laying  a  great  white 
table-cloth  of  foam  all  the  way  to  the  shore, 
as  if  the  marine  gods  were  to  dine  off  it  I 
Alas  1  for  these  unhappy  arrow- shots  of 
Nature ;  she  will  never  hit  her  mark  with 
those  unruly  waves  of  hers,  nor  get  one  of 
them  into  the  ideal  shape,  if  we  wait  for  her 

a  thousand  years But  the  sea  was 

meant  to  be  irregular  I  Yes,  and  were  not 
also  the  leaves  and  the  blades  of  grass  ;  and, 
in  a  sort,  as  far  as  may  be  without  mark  of 
sin,  even  the  countenance  of  man  ?  Or  would 
it  be  pleasanter  and  better  to  have  us  all 
alike,  and  numbered  on  our  foreheads,  that 
we  might  be  known  one  from  the  other  ? — 
Ruskin. 

The  sun  comes  forth.  And  first  I  perceive 
the  chick-weed  blossoming,  almost  incon- 
spicuous. It  is  born  again  of  the  sun,  and 
shows  the  sun's  power.  Just  beyond  there  is 
a  clump  of  violets.  They  are  born  again  out 
of  death  into  life  by  the  power  of  the  sun. 
Further  on  are  bulbs  of  various  kinds.  And 
each  developes  in  its  own  way.  One  has  one 
style  of  leaf  or  bloom,  and  another  another. 
And  they  multiply  as  the  sun  grows  warmer, 
till  the  woods  and  fields  swarm  with  myriads 
of  growths,  3om«  purple,  some  red,  some 
white,  some  blue,  some  green,  all  shades,  and 
combinations,  and  forms  being  represented. 
They  are  all  oorn  of  the  sun,  and  brought 
into  their  life  and  power;  and  yet  they  are 
widely  different  in  their  structure  and  appear- 
ance. Would  yo»  reduce  them  all  to  one,  and 
have  nothing  but  daisies,  nothing  but  tulips, 
or  nothing  but  violets  ?     Are  not  God's  abon- 

27 


CHAP.  II. 


nOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


dant  riches  in  this,  that  when  He  creates  life 
from  death  in  so  many  ways  there  are  pre- 
sented such  variatioDs  of  beauty  and  amiable- 
ness?  So  it  is  with  the  truths  of  the  Gospel. 
God  does  not  make  those  truths  the  game  to 
any  two  minds.  If  men  had  the  subtla  power 
of  aEalysis,  so  as  to  seize  just  what  they  feel, 
and  put  their  feelirgs  exactly  into  words,  I 
believe  it  would  be  found  that  no  two  persons 
on  the  face  of  the  earth  ever  stated,  or  could 
state,  thoir  views  of  a  fact  alike.  God,  that 
never  made  two  faces  alike ;  God,  that  never 
made  two  leaves  alike  j  God,  that  makes  unity 


with  infinite  diversity— He  does  not  mean  that 
men  shall  feel  just  alike.  The  amplitude  of 
being  is  expressed  by  variations  of  being,  that 
go  back  to  essential  unity,  and  take  hold  of  a 
common  root.  And  the  attempt  to  bring  the 
glowing  and  fervid  Orientals,  the  staid  and 
practical  Occidentals,  the  mediaeval  minds, 
the  artist  minds,  the  sombre  and  un irradiat- 
ing natures,  and  the  light  and  gay  natures, 
all  to  one  statement  of  speculative  truth,  is 
as  wild  and  preposterous  as  the  boy's  race 
after  the  rainbow.  It  cannot  be  done. — H, 
W.  Beecher. 


Man  in  Relation  to  Order,  Home,  and  God. 

(Verse  2.) 


Let  us  inquire  what  God  would  teach 
by  this. 

I.  The  importance  of  Order  in 
every  tiling. 

God  here  insists  upon  method  in  all 
their  movemrnts.  Each  was  to  be  in 
his  own  place.  He  was  thus  teaching 
His  people,  and,  through  them,  the 
world.  The  sojourn  in  the  wilderness 
was  their  school-time;  hence  we  have 
80  much  of  it.  In  the  lessons  God 
taught  them  we  find  principles  that  are 
to  fiuide  us.  God  loves  order  in  every- 
thing :  He  is  not  the  author  of  con- 
fusion. Satan  brought  discord  into  the 
world.  There  was  not  a  jarring  note 
in  the  universe  till  sin  came  into  exist- 
ence. God  loves  order.  You  can  see 
this  in  all  His  works  ;  there  is  no  con- 
fusion or  waste  in  anything  ;  nothing 
is  neglected  or  left  out;  nothing  can 
be  improved  upon.  In  all  there  is  com- 
pleteness and  harmony.  God  is  our 
pattern  in  this.  The  h  ghest  art  is  the 
best  copying  of  nature.  So  in  human 
life,  the  noblei?t,  the  highest  is  the 
one  (hut  f(»llows  most  closely  in  the 
footprints  of  God.  To  live  well  is  of 
vast  importance  to  us,  and  it  is  impos- 
sible with  disorder  and  confusion.  In 
business,  if  there  is  no  method,  failure 
must  be  the  result.  In  the  home  life, 
if  there  is  no  order,  there  must  be 
misery.  So  order  is  essential  to  success 
in  the  religious  life.  '*  Let  all  things 
be  done  decently  and  in  order,*'  said 
Paul.  The  reference  is  to  the  regularity 
and  discipline  of  an  army  :  the  order  is 
as  perfect  as  possible ;  and  it  is  this 
26 


which  makes  all  the  difference  between 
an  army  and  a  rabble.  Order  is  the 
essence  of  beauty,  strength,  comfort, 
and  usefulness. 

II.  The  sacredness  of  family  life. 
Each  was  to  be  ''  with  the  ensign  of 

his  father's  house;"  his  place  wa^  to 
be  with  his  family.  The  people  had 
been  slaves  ;  and  slavery  saps  the  foun- 
dation of  family  life.  God  has  to  teach 
them  the  sacredness  of  the  family  circle. 
There  can  be  no  real  national  life  unless 
the  family  life  be  pure  and  sacred. 
Men  only  live  in  families.  The  brutes 
dwell  in  herds.  God  has  given  man  the 
family  instinct;  and  the  Bible  and  re- 
ligion ever  tend  to  strengthen,  purify, 
and  ennoble  it.  The  higher  a  man 
rises  in  the  scale  of  being,  the  deeper  is 
his  interest  in  his  family.  The  more  we 
love  God,  the  more  we  love  one  another. 
Divine  love  sanctifies  and  elevates 
the  human.  God  taught  the  people 
here  to  respect  their  families.  Many 
parents  seem  to  be  anxious  only  to  feed, 
clothe,  and  help  their  children  for  this 
life.  Are  their  children  brutes?  Are 
they  to  perish  like  the  beasts  ?  Or, 
have  they  a  soul  ?  Parents,  strive  to 
mpke  your  homes  abodes  of  peace  and 
blessedness,  centres  of  attraction  and 
holy  influence,  so  that  your  children 
may  gather  round  the  ensign,  etc,  God's 
eye  is  on  our  family  life. 

III.  The  right  way  to  feel  and  to 
act  tovi^ards  Himself. 

They  were  to  be  '*  far  o£F  about  the 
tabernacle.'*  True  life  is  impossible 
apart  from  right  esteem  of  God.     He 


nOMILETlC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  II. 


is  the  centre,  the  pivot  of  all  true  life. 
As  amongst  this  people,  so  in  His 
Church,  God  is  the  attracting  power, 
etc.  He  is  in  the  midst  to  rule,  pro- 
tect, and  guide.  As  there  is  no  circle 
without  a  centre,  so  the  Onurch  falls  to 
pieces  unless  God  be  in  the  midst. 
Love  to  Him  brings  His  people  to- 
gether, and  binds  them  together.  The 
earth  is  made  of  particles  :  gravitation, 
as  it  attracts  each  particle  to  itself, 
binds  them  together  so  as  to  form  the 
earth.  Thus  God  attracting  each  soul 
to  Himself,  binds  them  together  as  a 
Church.  We  are  to  turn  around  Hi  in 
as  the  planets  around  the  sun,  receiving 
our  light,  our  beauty,  our  influence  from 
Him. 

''Truth  is  dual."  The  above  is  only 
half  the  truf.h  ;  the  other  half  is  in- 
volved in  the  expression,  "far  off."  In 
nature  there  are  t^vo  great  forces  at 
work — the  centripetal  and  the  centri- 
fugal. If  either  of  these  were  to  fail, 
the  earth  would  be  wrecked.    In  religion 


we  have  two  similar  forces.     God  must 

attract  us  ;  He  is  the  centre  of  our  soul. 

But  we  must  also  keep  our  distance  ;  we 

must  be  "far  off."    There  is  no  religion 

without  reverence.     God  is  great  and 

holy.     The  people  were  to  be  *'  far  off  " 

as    well    as   '*  about    the    tabernacle." 

Divine  things  are  to   be  treated  with 

respect   and    handled   with    reverence. 

There  is  no  true  religion  without  awe ; 

no   true  love  without  fear.     While  we 

lovingly  trust  God  as  our  Father,  let  us 

give   Him    the   respect    due    to    His 

name. 

Learn. 

1.  'The  deep  interest  God  takes  in  His 
people.  He  wants  them  to  be  the  very 
best  possible — to  be  perfect. 

2.  How  religion  affects  the  whole  o] 
man  and  His  life.  It  teaches  us  how 
to  act  in  all  things.  There  is  nothing 
above  or  beneath  its  notice  that  affects 
us.  It  is  then  our  best  Friend.  If  it 
is  not  yours,  seek  it  without  delay. — 
David  Lloyd, 


The  Camp, 
{Verse  2.) 


When  Balaam  looks  down  upon  the 
outstretched  camp  of  Israel,  his  very 
soul  expands.  It  must  break  forth  into 
praise.  The  beauty  c^ptiva^es.  The 
order  charms.  (See  chap.  xxiv.  5-9.) 
Let  us,  too,  view  this  favoured  camp. 

L  The  Tents. 

Not  splendid  palaces ;  poor  tents. 
They  are  the  pilgrim -dwellings  of  a 
pilgrim- troop^the  short-lived  homes  of 
short-lived  sojourners.  Reminds  of 
mortal  state.  These  frames  have  one 
original — the  dust.  Is  it  not  folly, 
then,  to  pamper  and  admire, the  flesh? 
At  best  these  bodies  are  a  tent.  How 
soon  they  crumble!  The  tents  must 
fall ;  but  when  ?  Perchance  this  very 
hour.  Is  he  not  then  the  fool  of  fools, 
who  boasts  him  of  to-morrow's  dawn  ? 
Learn  how  fleeting  is  life's  day.  When 
I  go  hence,  is  an  abiding  mansion  mine  ? 
Flesh  is  a  mean  abode.  This  thought 
commends  the  grace  of  Jesus.  He 
t corned   not   to    assume   it.     No    man 


was  ever  man  more  thoroughly  than 
Jesus.  He  thus  descended  that  He 
might  bear  the  curse.  He  sought  a 
lowly  tent  to  do  a  godlike  work.  But 
soon  the  degradation  passed.  The  cross 
was  triumph's  car.  Manhood  now 
shines  in  Him  arrayed  in  light  of  Deity. 
And  all,  whom  faith  makes  one  with 
Him,  shall  soon  behold  and  share  this 
lustre.  Weakness  and  frailty  shall  put 
on  unfading  freshness. 

II.  The  Order. 

Let  Israel's  camp  be  now  more  closely 
scanned.  What  perfect  regularity  ap- 
pears !  Arrangement  is  complete,  etc. 
Our  God  delights  in  order.  Where  He 
presides,  confusion  vanishes.  Is  it  not 
so  in  every  Christian's  heart?  When 
Jesus  takes  the  throne,  wise  rule  pre- 
vails, disturbing  lusts  lie  down,  etc.  Is 
it  not  so  in  Christian  life  ?  Bach  duty 
occupies  its  stated  post.  The  home,  the 
closet,  the  public,  the  world,  in  turn 
have  claims,  in  turn  are  served.     How 

29 


CHAP,  IL 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


different   is    the   worldling's   day!     It 
seems  an  upset  hive,  etc, 

Buf  in  Israel's  camp  each  tribe  has 
its  place.  .  .  .  God  fixes  all  the  bounds, 
and  all  the  bounds  are  gladly  kept.  The 
same  all-ruling  mind  disposes  now  each 
member  of  Christ's  body.  Each  enters 
on  the  stage  of  life,  as  God  is  pleased 
to  call.  Each  runs  a  pre-ordained 
course.  Each  disappears,  when  the 
allotted  task  is  done.  We  see  this  clear 
arrangement  throughout  the  Church's 
history.  .  ,  Bow  bumbly  before  this 
ordering  mind,  then  discontent  will  not 
arise;  no  murmutings  will  mourn  an 
obscure  lot,  a  grievous  burden,  a 
lengthened  pilgrimage,  or  an  early 
grave. 

III.  The  Position. 

"  About  the  tabernacle  of  the  con- 
gregation shall  they  pitch."  As  the 
planets  circle  the  sun,  so  these  sur- 
round the  sanctuary.  God  is  the  centre  ; 
they  form  the  wide  circumference. 

Is  there  no  meaning  here  ?  God  in 
Christ  Jesus  is  the  centre,  the  heart, 
the  life,  the  strength,  the  shield,  the  joy 
of  His  believing  flock. 

Is  there  no  warning  here?  Let 
Christians  ponder  this  Canfjp's  plan 
when  called  to  fix  their  dwellings  upon 
earth.  When  weighing  the  advantages 
of  place,  the  foremost  thought  should 
be,  Is  God  known  here  ?  Are  His  pure 
truths  here  clearly  taught  ?  Was  Lot 
a  gainer,  when  his  eye  only  coveted  the 


fertile  plains?  Can  fairer  fields,  or 
sweeter  prospects,  make  amends  for  a 
cold  blank  within  ?  Can  air-salubrity 
repay  for  inward  sickness  and  a  spiritual 
decline  ? 

IV.  The  Standard 

A  standard  floats  above  each  tribe. 
Beneath  the  well-known  sign  they 
rest,  and  by  its  side  they  march.  Be- 
lievers have  an  ensign  too.  The  banner 
over  them  is  Jesu's  love.  (Song,  ii.  4.) 
The  standard  is  a  pledge  of  safety. 
Mighty  foes  hate  and  assail,  plot  and 
rage,  etc. ;  but  they  must  fail.  Beneath 
it  there  is  sweet  repose.  The  weary 
spirit  and  the  worn-out  flesh  can  often 
watch  no  more.  But  as  is  the  vineyard 
of  the  Lord,  so  is  His  camp.  **  I  the 
Lord  do  keep  it,"  etc.  (Isa.  xxvii. 
3.) 

Beside  it  there  is  victory.  Many 
have  fought  beneath  the  Gospel-banner, 
and  all  have  triumphed.  They  who 
go  boldly  forward,  looking  unto  Jesus, 
assuredly  prevail.  (2  Cor.  ii.  14.) 
Happy  camp,  where  Jesus  is  salvation's 
Captain  ;  His  cross,  salvation's  ensign  ; 
His  heaven,  salvation's  rest  ! 

Believer,  glory  in  your  standard,  and 
be  steadfast.  Cling  constantly  to  Christ. 
Let  every  company,  moment,  place, 
witness  your  firm  resolves.  Wave  now 
and  ever  the  glorious  ensign — "  Christ 
is  all."  Thu-?  dwell  within  the  camp, 
and  you  will  reign  upon  the  throne. — 
Henri/  Law^  D.D, 


Aspects  of  Honour. 
(Verses  3-9.) 


•'It  seems  to  us,"  says  Dr.  Gumming, 
"an  uninteresting  and  unprofitable  ex- 
ercise to  read  the  list  of  the  tribes  and 
their  names,  the  camps  and  their  num- 
bers, the  captains  and  their  names,  who 
together  composed  the  mighty  host  that 
took  their  exodus  from  Egypt,  through 
the  desert,  to  the  land  of  Canaan  ;  but 
surely  it  was  important  in  the  circum- 
stances in  which  they  were  placed  that 
each  and  all  should  be  recorded — it 
was  important  with  reference  to  the 
Feparate  and  distinct  maintenance  of 
the  tribes  —  lljat  the  promise  of  the 
30 


Messiah  from  a  specific  tribe  might  be 
vindicated  and  established  in  the  fjil- 
ness  of  the  times.  In  the  next  pi  u*e, 
this  mighty  crowd,  numbering  six  hun- 
dred thousand  men,  ai)le  to  bear  arms — • 
and  that  must  have  amounted,  with 
camp  followers,  to  nearly  two  millions — 
a  vast  population  in  the  desert — mu  t 
of  necessity  be  reduced  to  some  order 
of  regiments  or  companies,  in  order  that 
authority  might  be  exercised  where  it 
was  needed ;  that  the  means  of  de- 
fence might  be  had  recourse  to  most 
speedily  and  effectually  where  they  were 


HOMlLKriC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  n. 


required  ;  and  that  each  loving  his  own 
compmy,  each  individual  loving  by  pre- 
ference his  own  tribe  best,  might  yet, 
a"^  a  tribe  mingled  with  the  rest,  have 
that  wider  feeling,  which  recoo^nised  an 
L-raelite  under  whatever  standard  he 
wns,  in  the  j^reat  army  of  which  tliey 
formed  a  part.  For  these  and  other 
reasons,  God  commanded  Moses  and 
Aaron  to  make  the  arrangements  here 
specified ;  and  what  God  saw  useful 
to  command,  it  cannot  have  been  use- 
less to  record,  and  it  may  not  be  alto- 
gether unprofitable  to  read.  We  must 
not  think  that  the  chapter  that  does  not 
personally  benefit  us  spiritually  is  there- 
fore of  no  use.  It  is  possible  for  true 
Christians  often  to  be  somewhat  selfi-h, 
and  to  think  that  that  cannot  be  useful 
which  does  not  benefit  the  individual, 
or  that  that  cannot  play  a  part  impor- 
tant in  the  whole  which  does  not  pro- 
duce a  deep,  a  spiritual,  and  profitable 
impression  upon  each.  We  must  learn 
to  look  wider,  to  extend  our  horizon, 
and  to  learn  that  there  are  parts  in  the 
Bible  which  may  not  bring  personal  in- 
struction to  us,  but  which  nevertheless 
may  have  a  force  in  relation  to  the 
whole  book  that  vindicates  it  from  the 
assaults  of  the  sceptic;  sets  out  its  great 
truths  in  bolder  Ieli^f  and  in  clearer 
light;  and  even  those  parts  which  we 
cannot  see  or  comprehend  the  use,  the 
place,  and  the  necessity  of  now,  if  we 
can  only  exercise  a  little  patience  we 
shall  know,  and  understand,  and  see 
the  usefulness  of  more  clearly  hereafter. 
There  are  many  parts  in  this  globe  that 
we  cannot  understand  the  end  of ;  we 
cannot  see  the  use  perhaps  of  so  much 
water;  we  cannot  see  the  necessity  of 
those  large  wasted  and  blasted  deserts. 
But  ;^et  I  have  no  doubt  they  have  a 
use,  and  are  subserving  a  purpose ;  and 
we  must  not  deny  that  God  made  this 
or  made  that  because  we  cannot  see  the 
purpose  that  it  subserves  in  the  great 
economy  of  the  universe.  1  believe 
that  with  the  exception  of  what  sin  has 
done,  there  is  not  a  star  in  the  sky, 
however  tiny  it  looks  to  us.  that  is  not 
necessary  to  the  balance  of  the  uni- 
verse ;  and  that  if  one  star  wt  re  to  fall 
from  its  socket,  or  one  orb  to  be  shat- 


tered in  its  march,  a  shock  might  bo 
felt  that  would  influence  injuriously  at 
least  the  whole  solar  system.  And  it 
may  be  that  in  this  bles>ed  Book,  which 
is  God's  inspired  Book,  some  of  those 
dull  and  dry  passages,  as  they  must 
appear  to  us  personally,  are  probably 
subserving  great  and  ultimate  purposes, 
which  we  may  not  see  now,  but  shall 
see  hereafter." 

Our  text  gives  us  the  acoouut  of  the 
composition  of  the  first  camp,  which 
was  situated  on  the  east  side,  toward 
the  rising  of  the  sun.  This  post  of 
honour  was  conferred  upon  Judah.  To 
him  was  ^iven  the  first  standard.  With 
him  were  Issachar  and  Zebulun.  These 
three  tribes  were  de-cended  from  the 
three  younger  sons  of  Leah  ;  and  their 
union  under  one  standard  was,  there- 
fore, an  appropriate  arrangement.  To 
each  tribe  a  captain  was  appointed ; 
these  captains  be!nj»;  the  "  princes  of 
the  tribes  of  their  fathers,"  who  assisted 
Moses  and  Aaron  in  the  numbering. 
Here,  t^en,  are  differences  of  rank 
ordered  by  God.  One  tribe  has  the 
most  dif  tinguished  position  of  all.  Three 
other  tribes  are  p'a  :ed  each  at  the  head 
of  a  camp ;  and  in  each  tribe  one  person 
was  appointed  by  God  as  captain,  or 
prince,  or  commander-in-chief.  Leaders 
and  rulers  are  essential  to  society.  "To 
have  neither  supes  iors  nor  inf«  riors 
would  be  to  breathe  a  stifling  atir.o&- 
phere  of  mediocrity.  Natural  leader- 
ship is  the  soul  of  common  action." 
Inasmuch  as  the  most  distinguished 
place  was  assigned  to  the  tiibe  of  Judah 
we  t-ike  as  our  subject  ;  Aspects  of 
lion  01  tr. 

We  se*^  here — 

1.  Honour  wisely  conferred. 

The  tribe  of  Judah  was  the  most 
numerous  and  p  )werfulof  all  the  tribes. 
This  was  a  good  reason  for  placing  it 
in  the  most  prominent  and  illustrious 
positi  >n.  Honours  of  title  and  place 
are  not  alwa)'s  wisely  conferred.  They 
are  sometimes  bestowed  upon  those  who 
are  neither  dislingui.-hed  in  their  abili- 
ties, exalted  in  their  character,  nor  ex- 
emplary in  their  conduct.  This  is  a 
sad  perversion  of  things,  (a)  But  the 
truest  and  highccst  honours  are  tho^e  of 

31 


OHaP.  II. 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   SUMBERS. 


character  and  cooduct,  and  these  are 
attainable  through  the  grace  of  Grod 
unto  all  men. 

"  Trust  me,  Clara  Vere  de  Vere, 

From  yon  blue  heavens  above  us  bent, 
The  grand  old  gardener  and  his  wife 

Smile  at  the  claims  of  long  descent. 
Howe'er  it  be,  it  seems  to  me, 
'Tis  only  noble  to  be  good. 
Kind  hearts  are  more  than  coronets, 
And  simple  faith  than  Norman  blood." 

Tennyson 

The  honour  of  being  children  of  the 
Most  High,  "heirs  of  God  and  joint 
heirs  with  Christ,"  of  being  made ''  kings 
and  priests  unto  God,"  of  sharing  in 
the  spirit  and  service  of  Christ,  we  may 
all  attain  through  Him.  But  in  these 
honours  there  are  differences  of  degree. 
There  are  some  to  whom  will  be  given 
'*  an  abundant  entrance,"  while  others 
will  "  be  saved  yet  so  as  by  fire." 

II.  Honour  in  relation  with  duty 
and  responsibility. 

The  tribe  of  Judah  in  being  appointed 
to  the  place  of  honour  in  the  Israel iti^h 
host  had  also  the  place  of  peril.  Being 
at  the  head  of  the  camp,  if  there  were 
dangers  to  be  met  or  foes  to  be  encoun- 
tered, they  must  first  enter  the  lists 
against  them.  In  their  case  rank  and 
risk,  distinction  and  duty,  were  united. 
The  places  of  distinction  should  ever  be 
for  those  who  render  the  most  and  best 
service.  And  the  highest  places  in  both 
the  Church  and  the  State  involve 
gravest  responsibilities  and  most  arduous 
duties.  He  who  treads  the  pa^h  of 
duty  faithfully  and  bravely  will  find 
in  due  time  that  it  leads  to  the  mot  un- 
fading honours.  (See  notes  and  illus- 
trations on  ch.  i.  4-16.)     (h) 

III.  Honour  as  connected  with 
parental  influence. 

Judah  was  the  first  of  the  sons  of 
Jacob  who  was  blessed  by  the  venerable 
patriarch  "  when  he  was  a-dying." 
Reuben,  Simeon,  and  Levi  were  cen- 
sured by  hiuu     The  parental  blessing 


in  the  case  of  Judah  has  not  been  in 
vain.  And  in  the  honour  now  put  upon 
the  tribe  the  influence  of  that  blessing 
is  still  further  manifest  (see  Gen.  xlix. 
8-12).  It  is  in  the  power  of  every 
parent  instrumentally  to  bless  his  chil- 
dren. By  wise  teaching,  holy  example, 
and  believing  prayer,  parents  may  confer 
the  greatest  advantages  on  their  off- 
spring, and  aid  them  to  reach  the 
highest  honours.  Let  parents  seek  thus 
to  bless  their  children,    (c) 

Let  the  children  of  godJy  parents  ap- 
preciate their  privileges  in  this  respect, 
(d) 

IV.  Honour  as  related  to  futiure 
greatness. 

The  dying  patriarch  had    predicted 
that  Judah  should  be  the  ruling  tribe  ; 
he  promised  to  Judah  a  kingdom  and 
sovereignty.      Many   years    have  since 
passed    away  ;    and    still    Judah    has 
neither  lawgiver  nor  sceptre.     But  here 
are  two  things  to  encourage  faith  in  the 
patriarchal    prediciiou — viz.,     the    nu- 
merical superiority  of  the  tribe,  and  the 
post  of  honour  assigned   to   it.     Ages 
more  were  to  pass  away  before  the  pre- 
diction   was  fulfilled  ;  but  the    honour 
now  conferred  on  the  tribe  would  en- 
courage faith  in  its  predicted  destiny. 
Its    natural    tendency    would     be    to 
stimulate  them  to — 

1.  Believe  in  their  destiny, 

2.  Work  for  their  destiny, 

3.  Wait  for  their  destiny. 

In  like  manner  let  every  blessing 
which  we  receive  from  God  be  to  us  a 
pledge  of  our  full  and  final  salvation. 
Let  every  privilege  conferred  upon  us 
increase  our  assurance  of  the  splendid 
honours  which  await  us  hereafter. 
"  Henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a 
ciown  of  righteousness,"  etc.  "  To  him 
that  overcometh  will  I  grant  to  sit  with 
Me  in  My  Throne,"  etc.  "Now  arc 
we  the  sons  of  God,  and  it  doth  not  y\i 
appear  what  we  shall  be,"  etc. 


3S 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


CHA^.  ,1. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  Let  none  presume 
To  wear  an  undeserved  dignity. 

0,  that  estates,  degrees,  and  offices, 

Were  not  derived  corruptly  I  and  that  clear 

honour 
Were  purchased  by  the  merit  of  the  wearer ! 
Eow  many  then  should  cover,  that  stai.id  bare  ! 
How  many  be  commanded,  that  command  I 
How  much  low  peasantry  would  then  begleaned 
From  the  true  seed  of  honour  I  and  how  much 

honour 
Pick'd  from  the  chaff  and  ruin  of  the  times, 
To  be  new  varnish'd  I — S'lahespeare. 

"The  Merchant  of  Venice,"  ii.  8. 

(b)  Not  once  or  twice  in  our  rough  island- 
story 

The  path  of  duty  was  the  way  to  glory  i 
He  that  walks  it,  only  thirsting 
For  the  right,  and  loams  to  deaden 
Love  of  self,  before  his  journey  closes. 
He  shall  find  the  stubborn  thistle  bursting 
Into  glossy  purp'es,  which  outredden 
All  voluptuous  garden  roses. 
Not  once  or  twice  in  our  fair  island-story 
The  path  of  duty  was  the  way  to  glory: 
He,  that  ever  following  her  commands), 
On  with  toil  of  heart  and  knees  and  bands, 
Thro'  the  long  gorge  to  the  far  light  has  won 
His  path  upward,  and  prevail'd, 
Shall  find  the      ppling  crags  of  duty  scaled 
Are  close  upon  tne  shining  table-lands 
To  which  our  God  Himself  is  moon  and  sun. 

Tennyson, 
(c)  The  voice  of  parents  is  the  voice  of  gods, 
For  to  their  children  they  are  Heaven's  lieu- 
tenants, 
Made  fathers  not  for  common  uses  merely 
Of  procreation  (beasts  and  birds  would  be 
As  noble  then  as  we  are)  ;  but  to  steer 
The  wanton  freight  of  youth  through  storms 

and  dangers, 
Which   with   full    sails   they  bear  upon,  and 

straighten 
The  mortal  line  of  life  they  bend  so  often. 
For  these  are  we  made  fathers,  and  for  these 
May  challenge  duty  on  our  children's  part. 
Obedience  is  the  sacrifice  of  angels, 
Whose  form  you  carry. 

Shakespeare. 
Mr.  Irving,  in  his  "  Life  of  Washington,'' 
brings  to  the  knowledge  of  the  public,  we 
believe  for  the  first  time,  a  beautiful  incident 
in  the  religious  training  of  the  youthful  George 
when  left  to  the  sole  care  of  his  widowed 
mother.  Of  her  general  course,  Mr.  Irving 
remarks,  with  fine  discrimiLation;  '-EDdowed 
with  plain,  direct  good  sense,  thorough  con- 


scientiousness, and  prompt  decision,  she  gov- 
erned her  family  strictly,  but  kindly,  exacting 
deference  while  she  inspired  affection.  George, 
being  her  eldest  son,  was  thought  to  be  her 
favourite,  yet  she  never  gave  him  undue  pre- 
ference, and   the   implicit   deforence  exacted 
from  him  in  childhood  continued  to  be  habit- 
ually   observed    by   him   to   the    day  of   her 
death.     He  inherited  from  her  a  high  temper 
and  a  spirit  of  command,  but  hfir  early  pre- 
cepts and  example  taught  him  to  restrain  and 
govern  that  temper,  and  to  square  his  conduct 
on  thn  exact  principles  of  equity  and  justice." 
No  Maternal  Association  has  ever  devised  a 
belter   principle   to   be  observed   in    training 
children  than  this  of  Mary  Washingtou — '  ex- 
acting deference  while  she  inspired  ajjection.^* 
How   rarely  do    we   pee   thes-e   two  essential 
elements   in  family  government   justly  com- 
bined  in  either  parent  1     From  this  general 
view  Mr.  Irving  passes  to  the  following  inci- 
dent: "Tradition  gives  an  interesting  picture 
of   the  widow  with  her  little  flock  gathered 
round  her,  as  was  her  daily  wont,  reading  to 
them  lessons  of  religion  and  morality  out  of 
some  standard  work.     Her  favourite  volume 
was    Sir    Matthew    Hale's    *  Contemplations, 
Moral  and  Divine.'      The  admirable  maxims 
therein  contained,  for  outward  action  as  well 
as  self-government,  sank  deep  into  the  mind 
of  George,  and  doubtless  had  a  great  influence 
in   forming    his   character.      They   certainly 
were  exemplified  in  his  conduct  through  life. 
This  mother's  maaual,  bearing   his  mother's 
name,   Mary   Washington,   written   with  her 
own  hand,  was  ever   preserved  by  him  with 
filial  care,  and  may  still  be  seen  in  the  archives 
of   Mount  Vernon.      A   precious   dojument ! 
Let  those  who  wish  to  know  the  moral  founda- 
tion of  his  character  consulc  its  pages."    Would 
that  the  minds  and  hearts  of  all  our  youth 
might  be  trained  after  fluch  *  model  I — New 
York  Independent. 

(d)  Hold  fast  to  home  influences  atd  re- 
membrances ;  and  recollect  that  he  who  tries 
to  sbame  you  out  of  a  father's  and  a  mother's 
fear,  and  out  of  obedience  to  them,  tries  to 
steal  the  most  precious  treasure  you  have. 
He  that  is  trying  to  destroy  the  influence  of 
your  parents  upon  you  is  trying  to  take  from 
you  the  most  faithful  love  you  ever  knew. 
You  shall  lie  down  in  the  grave  when  you 
shall  have  traversed  forty  or  eighty  years  of 
life,  without  having  found  another  friend  who 
has  borne  as  much  for  you,  or  done  as  much 
for  you,  as  your  father  or  your  mother. — H. 
W.  Beecher. 


The  Mercy  of  God  in  Relation  to  the  Consequences  of  Sin. 

(Verses  10-16.J 


We  have  here  the  account  of  the 
composition  of  the  second  can. p.  Its 
place  was  south  of  the  tabernacle.     At 


its  head  was  placed  the  tribe  of  Reuben, 
the  eldest  son  of  Jacob  and  Leah,  and 
with   it  were  associated  the   tribe    of 

33 


CiiAr.  a. 


IIOMILl'jnC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


\  Simeon,  the  second  son  of  Leah,  and 

I  that  of  Gad,  the  eldest  son  of  Leah's 

I  handmaid,  Zilpah. 

L  Reuel^  in  verse  14,  is  doubtless  an 
error  of  some  copyist,  and  should  be 
Deuel,  as  in  chap.  i.  14.  Several  MSS. 
and  Versions  read  Deuel  in  this  place. 
In  this  section  we  have — 
L  An  example  of  the  continuance 
of  the  consequences  of  sin. 

How  is  it  that  Reuben,  being  the 
first-born,  does  not  take  the  first  place  ? 
Why  was  Judah,  the  fourth  son,  pre- 
ferred before  him?  Because  Reuben 
had  been  guilty  of  the  most  shocking 
incest.  (See  Gen.  xxxv.  22 ;  xlix.  4; 
1  Chron.  v.  1.)  He  sinned  grievously, 
and  now  his  pnstei  ity  suffer  loss  thereby. 
Sin  when  it  is  done  is  not  done  with. 
It  lives  in  its  results  in  the  person  of 
the  sinner,  and  in  the  persons  of  others 
who  are  related  to  the  sinner.  Sin  may 
be  repented  of,  confessed,  forgiven ; 
and  yet  many  of  its  consequences  may 
remain,  and  that  for  many  generations. 

1.  The  Sacred  Scriptures  declare  this, 
(See  Exod.  xx.  5  ;  Lev.  xxvi.  39  ;  Lam. 
V.  7;  Luke,  xi.  49-51.) 

2.  The  connexion  between  one  genera- 
tion and  another  necessitates  this.  The 
consequences  of  the  vices  of  parents 
are  transmitted  to  their  offspring. 

3.  Our  social  relationships  necessitate 
this.  We  are  ever  exerting  an  influence 
upon  others,  and  being  influenced  by 
others.  One  corrupt  character  corrupts 
o  hers.  One  holy  character  tends  to 
purify  and  exalt  others. 

4.  The  facts  of  human  life  attest  this. 
The  drunkard  may  forsake  his  drunken- 
Ties.  may  seek  and  obtain  the  Divine 
forgiveness,  may  lead  a  new  life,  yet 
many  of  the  results  of  his  sinful  indul- 
gences will  remain  in  himself,  and  if  he 
be  a  parent  will  be  transmitted  to  his 
children.  The  spendthrift  may  abandon 
his  reckless  courses ;  but  it  requires 
many  years,  perhaps  more  than  one 
generation,  to  repair  the  shattered 
fortunes  and  restore  the  family  estate 
to  its  ancient  prosperity.  Man  may 
turn  to  God  late  in  life,  may  be  par- 
doned, accepted,  saved ;  but  he  cannot 
recover  the  years  spent  in  the  service  of 

34 


sin,  or  undo  the  evil  which  he  has 
wrought.  The  guilt  is  taken  away  ; 
but  the  loss,  and  much  more  than  tho 
loss,  remains.  God  is  just.  His  laws 
are  immutable.  They  cannot  be  get 
at  nought,  or  disregarded,  without  incur- 
ring stern  and  certain  penalties.  Let 
these  solemn  facts  restrain  us  from  sin. 
Let  parents  especially  lay  them  to  heart ; 
and  for  the  sake  of  their  offspring,  let 
them  eschew  evil,  and  cultivate  virtue. 

"Parents  bequeath  not  to  your  children's  lot 
The  shame  that  from  them  no  device  can  take, 
The  blemish  that  will  never  be  forgot." 

IL  An  example  of  the  exercise  of 
the  Divine  mercy  in  mitigating  the 
consequences  of  sin. 

Notwithstanding  the  horrible  sin  of 
Reuben,  he  was  not  altogether  cut  off 
from  his  father's  house.  Though  he 
forfeited  his  birthright  he  was  not 
exiled  from  the  family.  His  posterity 
was  not  cast  out  of  the  chosen  people. 
His  tribe  was  not  degraded  to  the  lovvest 
rank  among  the  tribes,  but  placed  in  an 
inferior  po  ition  to  that  of  Judah  only. 
"So  then,"  says  Attersoll,  "albeit  he 
was  punished  justly,  he  was  punit-hed 
gently.  Thus  God  dealeth  evermore. 
He  corrccteth  both  moderately  and 
mercii'uily  ;  and  as  the  phj^sician 
allayeth  the  bitterness  of  the  potion 
with  £ome  sweetness,  so  God  assuageth 
the  greatness  of  His  punishment  with 
some  mildness  and  favour  that  He 
mingleib  with  it.*'  We  have  illustra- 
tions of  this  in  the  case  of  Miriam 
(ch.  xii.)  and  that  of  David  (2  Sam. 
xxiv.  10-16)  (Comp.  Psa.  Ixxxix.  30- 
33  ;  Isa.  liv.  7,  8 ;  Lam.  iii.  31-33.)  In 
further  elucidation  and  confirmation  of 
our  position,  let  the  following  points  be 
noted :  — 

1.  God  delighteth  not  in  judgment.,  hut 
in  mercy.  "  The  Lord  is  mercitul  and 
gracious,  slow  to  anger,  and  plenteous 
in  mercy,*'  etc.  (Psa.  ciii.  8-11.)  Mark 
the  tendernei-s  of  His  appeal  to  His 
faithless  and  rebellious  people,  "  Why 
will  ye  be  stricken  any  more  ?  **  (Isa.  i 
5.)     "  He  delighteth  in  mercy.*'  (b) 

2.  He  is  our  Father^  and  deals  with  us 
as  a  Father,  He  is  not  simply  our 
Creator,  Sustainer,  and  Sovereign,  but 
our  Father.     When  He  punishes,  Ho 


HO^riLETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  II. 


does  so  as  a  Father.  "  Consider  in 
thine  heart,  that  as  a  man  chasteneth 
his  son,  so  the  Lord  thy  God  chasteneth 
thee"  (comp.  2  Sam.  vii.  14,  15). 

3.  In   His  dealiivis  with  21s  He  duly 
considers  our  veakness,   our  exposedness 
to  temptation,  etc.     Our   temperament, 
tendencies,  temptations,  trials,  etc.,  are 
•  all  known  to  Him.     In  His  judgments 
all  these  things  are  taken  into  considera- 
tion.   He  never  judges  har.^hly.   "Like 
as  a  father  piiieth  his  children,  so  the 
Lord  pitieth  them   that  fear  Him;  for 
He  knoweth  our  frame,"  etc.  (Psa.  ciii 
13-18) 

His  mercy  is  ever  in  exercise  miti- 
gating the  severity  of  the  consequences 
of  sin,  and  tempering  the  sternness  of 
the  woes  of  life. 
Conclusion : 


^  1.  Let  the  mercy  of  God  deter  us  from 
sin.  ^  Shall  we  be  bo  base  as  to  sin 
against  so  much  kindness? 

2.  Let  the  mercy  of  God  encourage 
our  confidence  in  Him.  In  sorrow  let  us 
seek  Him  ;  for  he  pities,  etc.  In  guilt 
let  us  seek  Him  ;  for  He  forgives,  etc. 

3.  Let  this  example  of  the  mercy  oj 
God  lead  us  to  be  patient  under  life's 
trials.  Like  those  of  Reuben,  our  trials 
are  not  so  severe  as  we  have  deserved, 
and  they  are  tempered  by  the  rich 
mercy  of  God.  He  is  ever  evolving 
good  out  of  them,  making  them  by  His 
grace  the  occasion  of  strength  and  bles- 
sing to  us. 

4.  Let  this  example  of  the  mercy  of 
God  encourage  the  wicked  to  forsake  sin 
and  seek  salvation.  "Let  the  wicked 
forsake  his  way,"  etc.  (Isa.  Iv.  6,  7.) 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  If  sin  were  mortal,   then  thirty  years 
would    swing  the  world  over  into  the  inille- 
nium  ;  we  should  bury  it  with  the  next  gene- 
ration.    But  it  is  not  mortal.    It  is  not  barren, 
but  prolific  ;  it  propagates  itself ;  it  bas  pater- 
nal tunctions,  and   sends  its  children   out  in 
swaroas  to  pos.e>s  the   earth.     I  wish  you  all 
to    understand   that    whatever    evil    you    are 
toleraiing  in   your  lives,  will    live  after  you 
are  gone ;  you  will  pass  away,  but  this  shall 
not   pass   away.     One   immortalitv   you  will 
take    with   you    at    death  ;  anotue'r   you  will 
leave  behind.     It  shall  stand  above  your  grave 
when  the  mound  is  fashioned  and  the  mourners 
depart;    and    shake    itself   as   a    strong   man 
rejoiceth  in  his  strength,  and  go  forth  as  one 
of  the  forces  of  the  world.     It  will  be  imper- 
sonal ;  It  will  have  no  name  ;  it  wiil  show  no 
face  ;  and  yet  it  will  be  you,  jour  worse  half 
unchecked,  unrestrained  by  the  good  that  was 
once  mated  with  it,  and  that   kept  it  within 
bound?.     It  is  in  the  moral  and  spiritual  as  it 
13  in  the  material  world.     It  is  said  that  one 
cannot   stir  the  air  with  a  sound  so  sott  and 
slight  that  it  will  ever  cease  to  be  a  sound 
Ihe  words  we  speak,  whether  of  love  or  hate' 
whether  pure  or  vile,  start  pulsations  in   the 
R  1  that  will  never  cease  to  throb.     You  can- 
not open  your  lips   and  start  a  motion  in  the 
atmosphere,  which  shall  not,  like  a  wave  on  a 
shorele^ss  sea,  whose  forces  are   within  itself 
and  adequate,  roll  on   and  on  for  ever      An 
oath  once  spoken  sounds   for  ever  in  the  uni- 
rerse  as  an  oath  ;  it   is  an  explosion   whose 
reverberations  can  neverdie.    They  rollaround 
\     contmonts  ;  they  crash  against  the  sides  of 
all  mountains;  they  beat  discordantly  in  and 
npon  the  atmosphere  of  aJl  worlds  ;  the  devils 
hear  tnem  and   rejoice;  the  holy,  and  fly  in 
'hsmay.     And,  at  the  Judgment,  why  may  we 
D  2 


not  suppose  that  these  sounds  shall  all  come 
back  to  us— the  good  in  soothing  music,  and 
the  evil  in  toi  taring  discord,  and  every  man 
shall  be  judged  according  to  the  word  of  his 
mouth?  Indeed,  it  seems  to  me  that  every- 
thing in  man  that  is  of  the  mind  and  soul  is 
immortal.—  W.  H.  H.  Murray. 

(6)  Man  having  destroyed  that  which  God 
delighted  in,  the  beauty  of  his  soul,  fell  into 
an  evil  portion,  and,  being  ce.zed  on  by  the 
Divine  justice,  grew  miserable,  and  condemned 
to  an  incurable  sorrow. 

In  the  midst  of  these  sadnesses  God  remem- 
bered His  own  creature,  and  pitied  it  ;  and 
by  IJis  mercy,  rescued  him  from  the  hands  of 
His  power,  and  the  sword  of  His  justice,  and 
the  guilt  of  His  punishment,  and  the  disorder 
of  his  sin,  and    placed  him  in   that  order  of 
good  things  where  he  ought  to  have  stood.    It 
was  mercy  that  preserved  the  noblest  of  God'a 
creatures   here    below;    he    who   stood   con- 
demned and  undone  under  all  the  other  attri- 
butes of  God,  was  saved  and  rescued  by  His 
mercy;  that  it   may   be    evident   that    God'a 
mercy  is  above  all  His  works,  and  above  all 
ours,  greater  than  the  creation,  and  greater 
than  our  sins.     As  is  His  majesty,  so  is  His 
mercy,  that  is,  without  measures  and  without 
rules,   sitting   in   heaven   and   filling  all  the 
world,  calling  for  a  duty  that  He  may  give  a 
blessing,  making  man  that  He  may  save  him 
punishing   him    that  He  may  preserve   him! 
And  Gods  justice  bowed  down  to  His  mercv 
and  all  His  power  passed  into  mercy,  and  Hia 
omniscience  converted  into  care  and  watchful- 
ness,  into  providence  and  observation  for  man's 
avail ;  and  heaven  gave  its  influence  for  man. 
and  rained  showers  for  our  food  and  drink  • 
and  the  attributes  and  acts  of  God  sat  at  the* 
loot  of  mercy,  and  aU  that  mercy  descended 


ciiAr.  II. 


IIOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


npon  the  head  of  man For,  ever 

eince  the  fall  of  Adam,  who,  like  an  unfortu- 
nate man,  spent  all  that  a  wretched  man  could 
need,  or  a  happy  man  could  have,  our  life  is 
repentance,  and  forgiveness  is  all  our  portion  ; 
and  tliough  any  els  were  objects  of  God*8  bounty, 
yet  man  only  is,  in  proper  speaking,  the  object 
of  His  mercy  ;  and  the  mercy  which  dwelt  in 
an  infinite  circle  became  confined  to  a  little 
ring,  and  dwelt  here  below ;  and  here  shall 
dwell  below,  till  it  hath  carried  all  God's 
portion  up  to  heaven,  where  it  shall  reign  and 
glory  upon  our  crowned  heads  for  ever  and 
ever  I  ...  I  must  tell  concerning  God's 
mercy  as  we  do  concerning  God  Himtelf,  that 
He  is  that  great  fountain  of  which  we  all 
drink,  and  the  great  rock  of  which  we  all  eat, 


and  on  which  we  all  dwell,  and  nnder  whose 
shadow  we  are  all  refreshed.  God's  mercy  is 
all  this;  and  we  can  only  dravv  the  great  lines 
of  it,  and  reckon  the  constellations  of  our 
hemisphere,  instead  of  tellinj;  the  number  of 
the  stars  ;  we  only  can  reckon  what  we  feel 
and  what  we  live  by  ;  and  though  there  be,  in 
every  one  of  these  lines  of  life,  enough  to 
engago  ua  for  ever  to  do  God  service,  and  to 
give  Him  praises,  yet  it  is  certain  there  are 
very  many  mercies  of  God  on  us,  and  toward 
us,  and  conctruing  us,  which  we  neither  feel, 
nor  see,  nor  understand  as  yet;  but  yet  we 
are  blessed  by  them,  and  are  preserved  and 
secure,  and  we  shall  then  know  ihem,  when 
we  come  to  give  God  thanks  in  the  festivities 
of  an  eternal  Sabbath.— Jere//i^  Taylor. 


The   Tabernacle    in  the  Midst  of  the  Host, 

(Verse  17  *J 


We  have  spoken  of  two  of  the  stan- 
dards, and  two  other  remain  to  be 
spoken  of.  In  this  verse,  Moses  inter- 
laceth  the  placing  and  situation  of  the 
tabernacle,  which  was  so  environed  with 
the  Levites,  and  they  flanked  and  forti- 
fied with  the  whole  host,  that  it  re- 
mained in  the  midst,  in  a  place  of  the 
greatest  safety,  fittest  for  access  in  re- 
gard of  the  people,  and  hardest  for 
access  in  regard  of  their  enemies. 

I.  The  Reasons  for  placing  the 
Tabernacle  after  this  manner. 

1.  God  doth  hereby  admonish  them, 
that  they  should  always  have  Him  be- 
fore their  eyes,  lest  they  should  forget 
His  worship  or  offend  Him  with  their 
sins  (comp.  Lev.  xxvi.  11,  12). 

2.  He  had  respect  indifferently 
unto  all  the  tribes.  If  any  others 
had  pitched  their  tents  farther  than 
from  the  Tabernacle,  they  would  have 
quarrelled  and  complained  that  they 
had  been  contemned  and  despised. 

3.  The  Levites  were  hereby  put  in 
mind  of  their  duty,  and  therefore  are 
lodo^<d  about  it. 

II.  The  Uses  of  placing  the  Taber- 
nacle after  this  manner. 

1.  It  assuieth  us  that  God  will  ever 
be  in  the  midst  of  us,  and  settle  His 
rest  and  residence  among  us  (comp. 
Lev.  xxvi.  11,  12;  Ezek.  xxvii.  27). 
We  must  know  how  God  is  said  to 
dwell  among  us.  Difference  between 
His  general  presence  and  His  special 
36 


presence.  His  general  presence  is  in 
all  places ;  His  special  presence  is  in 
His  Church.  His  general  presence  is 
of  His  power;  His  special  presence  is 
of  His  grace  and  favour.  There  Is  a 
common  manner  of  God's  being  every- 
where, and  in  all  things,  by  His  t  ssence : 
there  is  a  special  way  of  God's  being 
present,  as  that  which  is  loved  is  present 
in  him  that  loveth  (comp.  John  xiv. 
2Sj,  (1)  God  is  joined  unto  us  in  the 
person  of  His  own  only  Son  Emmanuel 
—  t.e.f  God  with  us.  We  are  made 
members  of  His  body  (see  Matt,  xxviii. 
20).  (2).  We  have  with  Him  the 
preaching  of  the  Gospel,  whereby  God 
is,  as  it  were,  brought  down  to  reside 
and  remain  among  us.  (3)  We  have 
the  promise  of  His  presence  and  the 
seals  thereof  in  His  Sacraments,  whereby 
we  are  at  one  with  Him,  and  He  with 
us  (see  Gal  iii.  27 ;  John  vi.  64-56  ; 
1  Cor.  x.  16,  17).  (4)  When  we  com<? 
together  in  the  Church  to  call  upon  His 
name,  He  is  near  unto  us,  and  most 
familiar  with  us  (see  Matt,  xviii.  20), 
(5)  He  dwelleth  among  us  whensoever 
He  preserveth  us  from  evil,  and  de- 
li vtreth  us  from  our  enemies 

Let  us  take  heed  to  walk  in  fear  before 
Him,  etc.  (see  Deut.  vi.  12-15;  2  Cor. 
vi,  16-18).  We  ought  to  walk  always 
as  in  God's  presence,  and  to  consider 
evermore  that  His  eye  is  upon  us. 

2.  It  serveth  to  teach  us  to  what  end 
God   hath   instituted  Civil   States  and 


UOMILICTIC    COMMENTAKY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAr.  II. 


Common  wealths  in  this  world — to  wit, 
to  be  stays  and  props  to  the  Church, 
that  the  people  of  God  may  assemble 
together  in  peace  and  quietness.  (1) 
Let  all  persons,  princes,  and  people, 
high  and  low,  do  good  to  the  Church 
of  God,  and  employ  their  best  endea- 
vours to  promote  the  ^lory  of  God  and 
the  safety  of  the  Church  (see  Pss. 
cxxii.  6,  7 ;  cxxxii.  1-5).  (2)  It  is 
the  duty  of  all  persons  to  assemble  to- 
gether to   hear    His   word 

If  we  would  dwell  with  God,  let  us  re- 
pair to  His  housie ;  i^"  we  wou'd  see 
Him,  we  shall  see  Hin  there;  if  we 
would  hear  Him,  we  shall  hear  Him 
there;  if  we  would  know  Him,  we  shall 
know  Him  there,  for  His  face  is  to  be 
seen  there.  His  voice  is  to  be  heard 
there.  His  presence  is  to  be  found  there 
(^ee  Pss.  xxvii.  4 ;  xlii.  1  ;  Ixxxiv.  2). 
(3)  Let  us  not  stand  in  fear  of  any 
enemies,  as  if  they  would  bear  and  beat 


down  the  Church  before  them;  neither 
let  us  forsake  our  mother,  for  fear  of 
troubles  that  may  come  upon  her.  .  .  .  . 
The  Church  is  set  in  a  safe  place ; 
they  shall  cot  be  able  to  hurt  it  :  it 
hath  a  safe  Keeper,  that  neither  f«lum- 
bereth  nor  sleepeth  ;  they  shall  not  be 
able  to  destroy  it:  the  gates  of  hell  and 
the  power  of  the  devil  are  set  against 
it,  but  they  shall  never  have  victory 
over  it  (see  Deut.  vii   21,  22). 

3.  It  serveth  to  conclude  the  full  and 
final  happiness  of  the  faithful,  which  is 
begun  in  this  life,  but  shall  be  con> urn- 
mated  in  the  end  of  this  world.  Then 
will  God  dwell  with  us,  and  we  shall 
dwell  with  Him  ;  then  we  shall  be  ad- 
mitted into  His  presence,  and  never  be 
cast  out ;  then  no  evil  shall  touch  u^, 
or  come  near  us,  and  no  good  thing  shnll 
be  wanting  unto  us  that  we  can  de&ire 
(see  Rev.  xxi.  3, 4  ;  2  Pet.  iii.  13  ;  Rev, 
vii.  15-17  ;  xxi.  2^-27).— PT.  AtUrsoll. 


The  Camp  of  Ephraim,  and  its  Suggestions. 

(Verses  18- 24  J 


In  these  verses  we  have  an  account 
of  the  third  camp,  which  was  posted  to 
the  west  of  the  Tabernacle.  It  con- 
sisted of  the  tribes  of  Ephraim,  Manas- 
seh,  and  Benjamin,  all  descendants  of 
Rachel.  Looking  at  this  camp  homi- 
letically  we  discover  in  it — 

I.  An  illustration  of  the  Divine 
Sovereignty. 

Ephraim  and  Manasseh  were  sons  of 
Joseph  by  his  wife  Asenath.  Though 
Manasseh  was  the  elder,  yet  Ephraim 
was  placed  at  the  head  of  this  camp. 
^'The  first  indication  we  have  of  the 
ascendancy  of  Ephraim  over  Manasseh 
is  in  the  blessing  of  the  childsen  by 
Jacob  (Gen.  xlviii.).  The  intention  of 
Joseph  was  evidently  that  the  right  hand 
of  Jacob  should  convey  the  ampler 
blessing  to  the  head  of  Manasseh,  his 
first-born,  and  he  had  so  arranged  the 
y(»ung  men.  But  the  result  was  other- 
wise ordained.'* 

Jacob  persisted  in  setting  Ephraim 
before  Manasseh.  "God  chose  from 
the  beginning,"  says  Bishop  Patrick, 
"in    several   instances,    to   prefer   the 


younger  before  the  eider,  as  Abel  be- 
fore Cain  ;  Shem  before  Japheth ; 
Isaac  before  Ishmael ;  Jacob  before 
Esau  ;  Judah  and  Joseph  before  Reu- 
ben ;  and  here  Ephraim  before  Manas- 
seh ;  and  Moses  before  Aaron  ;  and 
David,  the  youngest  of  all,  before  his 
elder  brethren — to  show  that  the 
Divine  benefits  were  not  limited  to  the 
order  of  nature,  but  dispensed  freely, 
according  to  God's  most  wise  goodness." 
God  bestows  all  His  gifts  freely,  accord- 
ing to  His  own  good  pleasure,  both 
when  He  will,  and  where  He  will,  and 
to  whom  He  will.  Our  salvation  from 
beginning  to  end  is  owing  to  His 
sovereign  favour.  We  have  nothing  of 
our  own.  "  For  who  maketh  thee  to 
differ?  and  what  hast  thou  that  thou 
didst  not  receive  ?  "  etc.  God  is  debtor 
to  no  man.  We  have  no  claim  upon 
His  bounty.  If  He  should  withhold 
His  blessing  from  any  of  us,  we  sh  uld 
have  no  just  ground  of  complaint 
against  Him.  We,  however,  do  well 
ever  to  bear  in  mind  that  His  is  the 
sovereignty  of  a  Being  of  infinite  wisdom^ 

37 


CFJA]'.   II. 


UOMTLETIC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


righteousness^  and  love.  It  is  the  sov- 
ereignty of  GOD,  the  Supremely 
Good,  (a)  Thoug'i  we  know  not  the 
reasons  of  many  of  His  decisions  and 
doings,  yet  we  koow  that  in  them  all 
He  is  actuated  by  motives  and  seeks  the 
accomplishment  of  ends  which  are 
worthy  of  Himself.  Let  us  then,  like 
the  Hebrew  poets,  rejoice  is  God's 
sovereignty,  and  celebrate  it  in  reverent 
and  hea' ty  songs. 

II.  An  illustration  of  the  sacredness 
of  family  ties 

These  three  tribes  which   constitute 
this    camp  were   all    descended    from 
Rachel,    and    were  the   whole  of   her 
descendants.     We  may  fairly  conclude 
that  this  was  one  reason,  and  a  chief 
one,  why  they  were  grouped  together. 
To  the  eye  of  God  family  ties  are  sacred 
things.     Jesus  our  Lord  "  was  subject 
unto"   His    parents.      On    the    cross, 
amidst  His  own  fierce  agonies  of  both 
body  and  ^oul,  He  was  mindful  of  His 
mother,  spake  to  her,  and  committed  her 
to  the  care  of  His  beloved  disciple.  The 
ties  of  kinship  are  of   the  closest,  ten- 
derest,   strongest,   holiest  nature  ;   and 
should  be  so  regarded.     In  our  families 
let  us  cultivate  mutual  forbearance,  and 
helpfulness,  and  holy  love;  "for  with- 
out hearts  there  is   no  home."     Let  us 
make  our  houses  homes ;  the  scenes  of 
confidence,    peace,  affection,  and   wor- 
ship.    '^  It  is   just  as  possible  to  keep 
a   calm    house    as    a    clean    house,    a 
cheerful    house,  an    orderly    house,  as 
a    furnished    house,    if  the    heads  set 
themselves  to   do    so.      Where    is    the 
difficulty    of    consulting    each    other's 
weakness,  as  well  as  each  other's  wants; 
each  other's   tempers,  as  well  as  each 
other's  healrh  ;  each  other's  comfort,  as 
well  as  each  other's  character  ?     Oh  !  it 
is    by  leaving  the    peace    at   home  to 
chance,  instead  of  puTSuing  it  by  system, 
that  so  many  houses  are  unhappy.''    (b) 


III.  An  illustraUon  of  the  Divine 
regard  for  the  weak. 

This  was  the  least  numerous  of  the 
four  great  divisions,  and  therefore  by 
direction  of  God  it  was  appointed  to 
that  pontion  in  which  there  was  the 
last  danger.  Tenderly  God  cares  for 
the  feeble.  "  He  shall  gather  the  lambs 
with  His  arm,  and  carry  thena  in  His 
bosom,  and  shall  gently  lead  those  that 
are  with  young."  "  A  bruised  reed 
shall  He  not  break,  and  the  smoking 
flax  shall  He  not  quench."  What  a 
rich  fund  of  comfort  and  encouragement 
there  is  htre — 

1.  For  those  who  are  physically  af- 
flicled. 

2.  For  those  whose  faith  is  feeble. 

3.  For  those  who  are  sorely  tried 

He  is  acquainted  with  us  altogether ; 
and  in  our  great  need  He  will  b(  stow 
upon  us  the  tenderest  eare  and  the 
richest  grace,  (cj 

Occlusion : 

Let  us  unfalteringly  trust  in  God. 
Let  us  rejoice  in  the  sovereignty  of  so 
wise  and  kind  a  Being. 

"  He  everywhere  hath  sway, 
And  all  things  serve  His  might, 
His  every  act  pure  blessing  is  ; 
Hi»  path  unsullied  light. 

Leave  to  His  sovereign  sway, 
To  choose  and  to  command: 
So  shalt  thou  wondering  own  His  way, 
How  wise,  how  strong  His  handt 

Thou  comprehend'st  Him  not : 
Yet  earth  and  heaven  tell 
God  sits  as  Sovereign  on  the  throne  ; 
He  ruleth  all  things  well. 

Thou  seest  our  weakness,  Lord, 
Our  hearts  are  known  to  Thee; 
0  lift  Tbou  up  the  sinking  hand, 
Confirm  the  feeble  knee. 

Let  us  in  life  and  death, 
Boldly  Thy  truth  declare; 
And  publish  with  our  latest  breath, 
Thy  love  and  guardian  care." 

P.  Gerhard, 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 


(a)  The  sovereignty  of  God  naturally 
ariseth  from  the  relation  of  all  things  to  Him- 
pelf  as  their  entire  Creator,  and  their  natural 
and  inseparable  dependence  uprn  Him  in 
re  J.  aid  ot  thtir  being  and  well-being.  The 
fcisD  cause  of  everything  bath  an  unquestion- 


able  dominion  of  propriety  in  it  upon  the  score 
of  justice.  By  the  law  of  nations,  the  first 
finder  of  a  country  is  esteemed  tie  rightful 
possessor  and  lord  of  that  country,  and  the 
first  inventor  of  an  art  hath  a  right  of  exer- 
cising it.     If  P>  ma~i   hath   a  just  claim  of 


TlOMII.F/nC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  fl. 


dominion  over  that  thing  whose  materiala 
were  not  of  his  framing,  but  form  only  the 
addition  of  a  new  figure  from  his  fikill ;  as  a 
limner  over  his  picture,  the  cloth  whereof  he 
never  made,  nor  the  colours  wherewith  he 
draws  it  were  never  endued  by  him  with  their 
distinct  qualities,  but  only  he  applies  them  by 
his  art  to  compose  such  a  figure  ;  much  more 
hath  God  a  rightful  claim  of  dominion  over 
His  creatmvs,  whose  entire  being,  both  in 
matter  and  form,  and  every  partic'e  of  their 
excellency,  was  breathed  out  by  the  word  of 
His  moutb.  He  did  not  only  give  the  matter 
a  form,  but  bestowed  upon  the  matter  itself  a 
beiijg ;  it  was  formed  by  none  to  His  hand,  as 
the  matter  is  on  which  an  artist  works.  He 
had  the  being  of  all  things  in  His  own  power, 
and  it  was  at  His  choice  whether  He  would 
impart  it  or  no  ;  there  can  be  co  juster  and 
stronger  ground  of  a  claim  than  this.  A  man 
hath  a  right  to  a  piece  of  brass  or  gold  by  his 
purchase,  but  when  by  his  engraving  he  hath 
formed  it  into  an  excellent  statue,  there  results 
an  increase  of  his  right  upon  the  account  of 
his  artifice.  God's  creation  of  the  matter  of 
man  gave  Him  a  right  over  man ;  but  Hi« 
creation  of  him  in  so  eminent  an  excellency, 
with  reason  to  guide  him,  a  clear  eye  of  under- 
standing to  discern  light  from  darkness,  and 
truth  from  falsehood,  a  freedom  of  will  to  act 
accordingly,  and  an  original  righteousness  as 
the  varnish  and  beauty  of  all;  here  is  the 
strongest  foundation  for  a  claim  of  auth  irity 
over  man,  and  the  strongest  obligation  on 
man  for  subjection  to  God. —  Charnocke. 

(6)  Famiiies  are  not  isolated  individuals, 
but  the  descendants  of  their  fathers,  and 
therefore  essentially  members  one  of  another  ; 
God  himself  being  the  Father  of  all  the 
families  of  the  universe.  What  can  be  more 
interesting  than  to  co-  template  the  intelli- 
gent universe,  as  consisting  of  endlessly  mul- 
tiplied bonds  of  fatherhood  and  childhood ; 
and  all  these  held  in  the  strong  unity  of  one 
Divine  Fatherhood  and  one  Divine  Son -"hip? 

Family  relationship  is  therefore  a  very  sacred 
thing.  Its  root  being  not  in  the  cr'^ation,  but 
in  God.  And  though  we  shall  not  find  on 
earth  any  development  worthy  of  its  holy 
root,  nevertheless,  the  flower  which  fills  the 
world  with  choicest  fragrance  is  family  affec- 
tion. It  is  capablft  of  becoming  most  heavenly, 
since  the  Eternal  Father  is  Himself  the  spiing 
of  parental,  as  His  Eternal  Son  is  of  filial 
love.  Therefore,  also,  family  affections  are 
capable  of  ceaseless  cultivation.  There  is 
nothing  to  hinder  family  love  from  becoming 
evermore  deeper,  stronger,  and  lovelier.  If  it 
be  80  strong  and  so  precious  among  fallen 
creatures,  what  must  it  be  among  the  perfect  ? 
If  family  life  on  the  earth   gives  vise,  M  it 


often  does,  to  a  very  paradise  of  courtesies  and 
tender  sanctities,  what  must  family  life  be  in 
the  immediate  Presence,  and  under  the  direct 
influence,  of  the  Infinite  Father  and  His  Only 
Begotten  Son  ?  Christian  parents  and  their 
children  should  know  therefore,  that  in  their 
families  they  have  not  a  little  world,  but  a 
little  heaven  to  cultivate. 

What  a  solace  to  our  hearts  is  the  assurance, 
that  we  shall  never  cease  to  be  members  of  a 
family  !  The  perfection  of  the  gr#  at  heavenly 
household  is  that  it  is  a  Household  of  house- 
holds. We  are  born  into  a  family,  we  grow 
up  in  a  family,  we  die  in  a  family,  and  after 
death,  we  shall  not  simply  go  into  the  great 
heaven,  but  to  our  own  family,  in  our  Father's 
House.  "  Abraham  gave  up  the  ghost,  and 
was  gathered  to  his  people.^'  "  Thou  shalt  go 
to  thy  fathers  in  peace,"  God  had  said  to  him. 
All  in  heaven  will  not  know  us,  but  our  own 
people  will  know  us.  We  shall  go  to  them. — 
J,  Pulsford. 

(c)  "  A  bruised  reed  I  will  not  break."  Is 
there  anything  that  grows  so  high,  carrying 
up  so  little  strength  of  stem,  as  the  reed  that 
rises  twenty  or  thirty  feet  in  the  air,  and  has 
a  stalk  not  larger  than  my  finger?  Now,  a 
beast  striking  through  the  thicket,  eager,  with 
his  unquenched  thirst,  for  the  cooling  draught, 
strikes  against  a  joint  of  the  slender  reed, 
shattering  it  so  that  it  has  but  just  strength 
to  bear  its  own  weight.  So  weak  is  it,  that  if 
there  be  so  much  wind  as  to  lift  one  ©f  its 
leaves,  or  to  bend  it  in  the  least  degree  in 
either  direction,  it  must  surely  break.  But 
God  says,  "  My  gentleness  is  such  that  when 
I  go  down  among  men  whose  condition  is  like 
that  of  a  bruised  reed,  I  will  do  nothing  to 
complete  their  overthrow,  but  will  deal  with 
them  in  such  a  way  that  they  shall  gather 
strength  till  I  have  sent  forth  judgment  unto 
victory." 

"And  smoking  flax  I  will  not  quench."  If 
the  flame  is  just  djing  out  in  a  lamp  it  is  not 
in  danger  of  being  suddenly  extinguished,  for 
the  old  warmth  in  the  wick  seems  for  a  time 
to  nourish  and  sustain  it ;  but  immediately 
after  the  wick  is  lighted,  and  before  any 
waimth  is  communicated  to  it,  the  least  move- 
ment is  sufificient  to  extinguish  it.  Now  God 
says,  "  Wherever  there  is  a  spark  of  grace 
lighted  in  the  soul,  if  it  flickers  so  that  the 
least  breath  of  the  person  who  carries  it,  or 
the  h  ast  motion  of  his  hand  is  in  danger  of 
putting  it  out,  I  will  deal  so  gently  with  him 
as  not  to  quench  that  spark.  I  will  treat  it 
with  such  infinite  tenderness  that  it  shall 
grow  into  a  flame  which  shall  burn  on  for 
ever."  And  these  are  the  symbols  by  which 
God  measurea  His  wonderful  gentleness,— 
H.  W.  Beecher, 


a» 


CHAP.  IL 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


The  Camp  of  Dan:  Aspects  op  Divine  Service. 

(Verses  25-31.J 


This  IS  the  fourth  great  division  which 
encamped  north  of  the  tabernacle,  and 
brought  up  the  rear  on  the  march. 
The  powerful  tribe  of  Dan  was  placed 
at  the  head  of  it,  and  with  it  the  re- 
maining tribes,  Asher  and  Naphtali. 
Dan  was  the  fifth  son  of  Jacob,  and  the 
first  of  Bilhah,  Rachel's  maid.  Asher 
was  the  eighth  son  of  Jacob,  and  the 
second  of  Zilpah,  Leah's  handmaid. 
Naphtali  was  own  brother  to  Dan,  being 
the  sixth  son  of  Jacob,  and  the  second 
of  Bilhah.  The  composition  and  sta- 
tion of  this  camp  suggest  certain 
homiletic  points  concerning  the  Divine 
service. 

I.  Persons  of  every  kind  and  degree 
of  faculty  may  find  employment  in 
the  Divine  service. 

Each  of  the  tribes  had  its  position 
and  duties  in  one  of  the  four  great  divi- 
sions, or  in  the  interior  near  to  the 
tabernacle.  Whatever  its  number  or 
its  peculiar  characteristics,  every  one 
had  its  allotted  place  and  work.  It 
would  appear  that  Judah  w<^s  strong 
and  courageous,  while  Dan  was  secret 
and  subtle  (see  Gen.  xlix.  8-12,  17); 
yet  for  Dan,  as  well  as  for  Judah,  there 
is  a  place  in  the  great  army  of  Israel. 
In  the  great  work  of  God  amongst  men 
there  is  room  for  workers  of  every  kind 
and  degree  of  ability.  And  God  lays 
claim  to  the  services  of  every  one. 
There  is  work  suited  to  every  one,  as 
St.  Paul  clearly  shows  in  1  Cor.  xii. 
Eloquence,  scholarship,  teaching  power, 
courage,  patience,  tact,  administrative 
ability,  aptitude  for  the  details  of  busi- 
ness, etc.,  may  each  find  its  appropriate 
sphere  in  the  great  work  and  warfare 
of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ.  Even 
the  patient  sufferer  has  a  place  in  His 
service. 

"  They  also  serve  who  only  stand  and  wait.** 

Let  this  serve  as — 

1.  An  encouragement  to  the  feeble. 

2.  A  rebuke  to  the  slothful,    (a) 

II.  It  is  essential  that  even  the 
lowest  position  in  the  Divine  service 
should  be  faithfully  filled. 
40 


It  may  appear  to  some  that  the  place 
allotted  to  the  camp  of  Dan  was  an  in- 
ferior and  obscure  one.  "  They  shall 
go  hindmost  with  their  standards." 
But  it  was  essential  that  some  of  the 
tribes  should  occupy  this  position,  and 
discharge  its  duties.  There  must  be  a 
rearguard  as  well  as  a  vanguard.  In 
building  the  temple  the  services  of  the 
hewers  of  wood  are  as  indispensable  as 
those  of  the  .^killed  workmen.  The 
blower  of  the  organ-bellows  is  as  neces- 
sary to  secure  its  grand  aid  in  worship 
as  the  accompli.-hed  musician. 

*' Small  service  is  true  service  while  it  lasts  ; 
Of    friends,   however   humble,   scorn   not 


ooe: 


The  daisy,  by  the  shadow  that  it  casts, 
Protects   the  lingVing  dewdrop  from  the 
sun.'*  Wordsworth. 

Moreover,  great  achievements  are  im- 
possible apart  from  faithful  attention 
to  the  details  of  the  enterprise.  The 
strength  of  the  whole  chain  is  not 
greater  than  that  of  its  weakest  link. 
The  efficiency  of  the  entire  body  is 
affected  by  the  condition  of  its  obscurist 
and  feeblest  member.  Faithfulness  in 
littles  is  imperatively  demanded  as  a 
condition  of  success  in  all  true  and 
noble  work,    (b) 

III.  Even  the  lowest  position  in 
the  Divine  service  is  one  of  privilege 
and  honour. 

If  the  position  of  Dan  and  the  two 
associated  tribes  be  reo:arded  as  the 
lowest  in  the  great  host,  yet  it  was  a 
distinguished  and  advantageous  posi- 
tion. They  were  as  truly  a  part  of  the 
people  chosen  of  God  as  those  in  the 
first  camp.  The  privileges  which  tho-e 
of  the  other  camps  enjoyed,  they  en- 
joyed also.  The  promise  s  and  prospects 
which  encouraged  the  others,  encour- 
aged them  also.  The  Lord  was  their 
God,  etc.  The  feeblest  and  obscurist 
member  of  God*s  spiritual  Israel  occu- 
pies a  place  and  sustains  relationships  of 
highest  honour  and  richest  privilege. 
*' We  are  the  children  of  God  :  and  if 
children,  then  heirs  ;  heirs  of  God,''  etc. 
In  calling  us  to  any  work,  even  the  raoGt 


nOMILblTIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  n. 


<( 


menial,  in  His  service,  God  confers  upon 
us  the  most  exalted  distinction.  It  is  a 
call  to  co-operation  with  Himself,  etc. 
We  are  workers  together  with  Christ." 

"  Our  Master  all  the  work  hath  done 
He  asks  of  us  to-day  ; 
Sharing  His  service  every  one, 
Share  too  His  sonsbip  may  : 
Lord,  I  would  serve  acd  be  a  son, 
Dismiss  me  not,  I  pray." 

T.  T.  Lynch. 

IV,  Seemingly  obscure  positions  in 
the  Divine  service  are  in  many  in- 
stances positions  of  great  importance 
and  responsibility. 

It  was  so  in  this  case.  There  was 
danger  of  attack  in  the  rear.  With  the 
exception  of  the  camp  of  Judah,  which 
led  the  way,  the  <jamp  of  Dan  was  in  a 
position  which  required  the  greatest 
strength.  And,  being  numerically  in- 
terior only  to  Judah,  ihe  wisdom  of  its 
appointment  to  that  position  is  obvious. 
Though     their    position    was     ''hind- 


most," yet  in  importance  it  was  second 
only  to  that  of  the  camp  of  Judah.  An 
illustration  of  spiritual  work.  The  ser- 
vices of  the  quiet  and  comparatively 
obscure  scholar,  thinker,  and  writer  are, 
at  the  very  least,  quite  as  important  as 
those  of  the  popular  preacher.  The 
wise  and  faithful  pastor,  who  is  almost 
unknown  beyond  his  own  sphere  of 
service,  is  doing  as  worthy  and  as 
needlul  a  work  as  the  evangelist  whose 
fame  is  world-wide.  The  quiet  members 
of  the  Church,  who  are  influential  in  the 
family  and  in  the  prayer  meetings,  are 
perhaps  more  necessary  to  the  existence 
and  prosperity  of  the  Church  than  the 
men  who  are  prominent  in  committees 
and  on  public  platforms,  (c) 
Conclusion: 

1.  Have  we  any  place  in  the  spiritual 

Israel  ? 

2.  Are  we  endeavouring  faithfully  to 

discharge  its  duties  f 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  The  feeblest  power  may  be  beneficially 
exerted.     Are    there  any    who   are   flittering 
themselves   that    if    they    possessed    gigantic 
talents  they  would  employ  ttiem  on   benalf  of 
human  freedom  and  human  progress?     I  pro- 
DOUDce  such  self-consoldtion    a   deadly  error. 
Man's  bu-ines:i   is  to  employ  the  talents  with 
which    Almighty  Wisdom   has  endowed  him, 
and  by   their  employment  to  multiply  them. 
Deposit  the  acorn  in  a  cabinet,  and  lime  will 
turn  it  to  corruption  ;  but  plant  that   a'jorn 
where  the  light  aod  the   dew  of  heaven  cjin 
exert  upon  it  their  fructifying  influence,  aud 
time  will  develope  the  majestic  oak.     So  with 
talents ;  bury   them  in  disuse,  and  they  will 
become   morally   pestilential ;  but  give    them 
free   and   beneficent  exercise,  and    they    will 
breathe  new  life  into  the  social  constitution. 
Young  man  I  employ  thy  one  talent  dilig.ntly, 
and  thou  sbalt  hi  promoted  to  the  rulership  of 
larger  empire  :   wait  not    for   time    that  may 
never  advene;  sigh  not  for  golden  opportuni- 
ties and  felicitous  coincidences  ;  the  truo  man 
makes  every  opportunity  golden  by  turning  it 
to  a  golden  use,  and  the  robust  soul  conquers 
the  infelicties  of  unpropitious  circumstances. 
That  will  be  a  glorious  day  in  human  history 
on    which    all    Christians,    the    feeblest    and 
mightie.-^t,  will    be   working   for  the  advance- 
ment of  Christ's  Kingdom; — the  orator  sway- 
ing  the  multitude,   ttie   writer  sending  forth 
his  richly  laden    page,  the   widow  giving  her 
two  mites,  and  the  child  of  poverty  bestowing 
*'a  cup  of  cold  water."    When  the  whole  Church 
is   at    work  the   kingdom  of  darkness  will   be 
shaken  to  its  centre. — J,  Parker^  U.D, 


(b)  Napoleon  was  the  moat  effective  man  in 
modern  times — some  will  say  of  all  times. 
The  secret  of  his  character  was,  that  while  his 
plans  were  more  vast,  more  various,  and,  of 
course,  more  difficult  than  those  of  other  men, 
he  had  the  talent,  at  the  same  time,  to  fill 
them  up  with  perfect  pro  nptness  and  pre- 
ci-'ioD,  in  every  particular  of  execution.  His 
vast  and  daring  plans  would  have  been  vision- 
ary in  any  other  man  ;  but  with  him  every 
vision  flew  out  of  his  braiu  a  chariot  of  iron, 
because  it  was  filled  up,  in  all  the  particulars 
of  execution,  to  be  a  solid  and  compact  frame- 
work in  every  part.  His  armies  were  together 
only  one  great  engine  of  desolation,  of  which 
he  was  the  head  or  brain.  Numbers,  spaces, 
tim  s.  were  a'l  distinct  in  his  eye.  The  wheel- 
ing of  every  legion,  however  remote,  was  men- 
tally present  to  him.  The  tramp  of  every  foot 
sounded  in  his  ear.  The  numbers  were  always 
supplied,   tlie   spaces  pissed    over,  the  times 

met,  and  so  the  work  was  done There 

must  be  detail  in  every  great  woik.     It  is  an 
element  of    etfoctiveness,   which   no   reach  of 
plau,  no  enthusiasm   of  purpose,  can   digpeuKe 
with.       Thus,    if    a  man    conceives    iho    idea 
of    becoming  eminent  in  learning,  but  caunot 
toil  through  the  million  of  little  drudgeries 
necessary    to  carry   him  on,  his  learning  will 
be  soon  told.     Or,  if  a  man  undertakes  to  be- 
come rich,  but  despises  the  small  and  gradual 
advances  by  which  wealth  is  ordinarily  accu- 
mulated, his   expecta'.ions  will,  of  course,  be 
the  sum  of  his  riches.     Accurate  and  careful 
detail,  the   mindif  g  of  common  occasions  and 
small  things, combined  with  general  scope  and 

41 


CHAP  n. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


Tigour,  is  the  secret  of  all  the  efficiency  and 
success  in  the  world. — H  Bnshnell,  D.  D. 

(c)  Slight  services  may  be  invaJuiible  services. 
What  can  be  a  more  trivial  image  than  **  a  cup 
of  cold  water  ?  "  Less  trivial,  unquestionably, 
in  the  hot  Ea-t  than  in  our  well- watered  Eng- 
land ;  but  a  trivial  image  even  there.  And 
yet  I  have  read  of  cases  in  which  a  cup  of 
■water  would  have  fetched  more  than  its  weight 
in  gold.  Look  into  the  despairing  eyes  of  that 
boat-load  of  ship-wrecked  sailors,  tossing  hour 
after  hour  on  the  ocean  in  the  heat  of  the  sun  : 
the  briny  water  glancing  and  flashing  all 
around  them  as  if  in  mockery,  and  not  a  drop 
anywhere  of  that  which  might  slake  their  wild 
human  thirst.  What  would  not  those  men 
give  for  a  draught  of  fresh  water  a-piece  ? 
Look  at  the  caravan  in  the  desert,  when  the 
last  camel,  *'  the  ship  of  the  desert,"  lies 
stranded  and  doomed  upon  the  sand  ;  wh^^n  no 
hope  remains  to  the  travellers  of  reaching  in 
time  thi  pp)t  where  the  cool  palm  trees  draw 
their  life  liom  the  hidden  spring.  How  much 
of  his  rich  mf^rchaudize  would  not  that  dying 
trader  be  content  to  part  with  in  exchange  for 
**a  cup  of  cold  water?"  Or  traverse  the 
ba,ttle-field  when  the  fight  is  ended,  and  one 
p  lor  wounded  soldier,  whose  courage  had  car- 
ried him  too  far  fans  been  overlooked.  The 
sun  goes  down,  the  stars  appear,  but  de^vy 
night  fails  to  alleviate  the  burning  thirst 
whieh  always  follows  gun-shot  wounds.     Yet 


if  some  comrade  shall  [venture  out  to  look 
for  the  wounded  man,  shall  find  him  groaning 
under  the  silent  stairs,  and  shall  bring  him, 
though  it  were  from  the  nearest  puddle,  the 
draught  he  craves,  they  two  shall  know  for 
ever  what  a  blessing  there  may  be  in  "a  cup 
of  cold  water."  And  have  we  not  all  heard  of 
the  generous  Sidney,  as  he  was  borne  dying 
from  the  field  of  Zutphen,  how  he  had  just  i»ut 
the  cup  to  his  lips,  when  a  poor  fellow  was 
carried  by,  who  looked  as  he  went  at  the 
richer  Sidney's  draught  with  the  longing  eyes 
of  despair, — and  how  the  dying  rich  man  with- 
drew his  lips  before  he  drank,  and  gave  the 
cup  to  the  dying  poor  man  with  the  words, 
"  Thy  necessity  is  yet  greater  than  mine !  " 
Beside  the  noble  Sidney's  name  is  that  simple 
story  still  inscribed  upon  the  immortal  page. 
Of  such  and  of  so  great  a  value  may  even  "  a 
cup  of  cold  water  "  be.  And  I  often  think  of 
Him  who  sat  once  by  Jacob's  well  in  the  heat 
of  the  day,  asking  for  a  drink  of  water  from 
the  Samaritan  woman.  He  accepted  all  the 
conditions  of  human  weakness  and  human 
want.  He  knew  by  experience,  even  whilst 
he  used  tais  image  to  indicate  the  slight  nature 
of  such  an  offering  as  this,  what  a  precious 
offering  it  might  really  be,  and  that  it  might 
be  employed,  and  that  without  exaggeration, 
to  denote  all  the  difference  between  life  and 
death. — J.  G.  Pigg,  B.A, 


Contentment  and  Obediencis, 
(Verses  32-34J 


These  verses  present  to  us  two  topics 
on  which  we  may  reflect  vvi  h  pnifit. 

I  Contentment  with  the  Divine 
appointment. 

We  have  teen  that  God  in  His  in- 
finite and  sovereign  wisdon  allotted  to 
each  tribe  its  place  and  duty  as  it 
pleased  Him.  And  it  appears  from 
the  text  that  each  tribe  freely  accepted 
the  Divine  appointment,  and  fell  into 
its  allotted  position.  There  is  not  even 
a  hint  that  any  one  of  the  tribes  was 
gwilty  of  any  murmuring  against  the 
arrangements.  This  is  the  more  re- 
markable when  we  take  into  account 
how  prone  the  people  were  to  complain 
tmd  fret  upon  the  very  slightest  pre- 
text. Let  us  learn  to  be  content  cheer- 
fully to  occupy  the  position,  and  dili- 
gently to  ^o  the  work  allotted  to  us  by 
God.  "My  times  are  in  Thy  hand." 
"  He  shall  chocse  our  inheritance  for 
us."  **  Thou  shalt  guide  me  with  Thy 
coun«sel."      The    most    cogent    reasons 


urge  us  to  be  content  with  the  appoint- 
ments of  God  concerning  us. 

1.  We  are  incompetent  to  determine 
our  own  place  and  duty.  This  will  at 
once  appear  if  we  consider — (1).  Our 
ignorance.  How  ignorant  we  are  (a) 
of  ourselves.  Possibilities  of  both  good 
and  fcvil  are  latent  within  us  which  only 
God  knows.  If  the  deteimioation  of 
our  lot  were  with  us,  we  might  choose 
such  an  one  as  would  tend  to  kill  any 
germs  of  truth  and  g<^odness  which 
are  within  us,  and  to  stimulate  the 
germs  of  evil  into  awfully  rapid  and 
ruinous  development.  God  alone  is 
thoroughly  acquainted  with  us.  How 
ignorant  we  are  (b)  of  ih^  future.  The 
particular  character  and  circumstances 
of  the  coming  minute  are  veiled  from 
us.  The  choice  which  now  seems  wise 
and  good,  amid  the  altered  circumstances 
and  conditions  of  the  morrow,  may 
appear  foolish  and  evil.  To  God  only 
is  the  entire  future  clearly  visible.    Qui 


nOMILETlC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  11. 


iDCompetcnce  to  determine  our  own  lot 
will  appear  further  if  we  consider — (2) 
Our  pr  oneness  to  self 'indulgence.  In 
choosing  for  ourselves,  we  shmld  select 
the  pleasant  rather  than  the  painful, 
the  sweet  rather  than  the  bitter.  And 
yet  for  us  the  bitter  may  be  the  more 
wholesome,  and  the  painful  may  be  in- 
dispensable to  our  well-being.  We  are 
incapable  of  choosing  our  own  place 
and  work. 

2.  We  have  ample  grounds  for  con- 
fidence in  the  determinations  of  God  for 
us.  We  discover  these  in — (1)  His 
knowledge.  He  knows  all  ihi  gs.  He 
knows  the  whole  future  perfectly.  He 
knows  us  individually  and  thoroughly 
(see  Ps.  cxxxix.  1-4).  (2)  His  wisdom. 
*'  Wisdom  and  might  are  His  :  He 
giveth  wisdom  unto  the  wise,"  etc. ; 
"  O  the  depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the 
wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God  !  "  etc. ; 
**  Ihe  only  wise  God."  (3)  His  kind- 
nes.'^.  He  is  as  gracious  as  He  is  wise. 
'•  God  is  love "  (see  Ps.  cxlv.  8,  9). 
Surely,  in  considerations  like  the?e  we 
have  most  powerful  reasons  forconient- 
nient  with  the  place  and  work  to  which 
we  are  appointed  by  God.  (aj  These 
consideraiiorjs  should — 

First — Silence  our  murmur ings  because 
of  our  particular  circumstances  and  con- 
dition. 

fetcoi  d  —  Deter  us  from  seeking  to 
alter  our  condition  and  circumstances 
by  any  unrighteous  or  unworthy  me- 
thods,   (bj 


II.  Obedience  to  the  Divine  com- 
mands. 

The  obedience  of  Israel  upon  this 
occasion  seems  to  have  been  most  ex- 
emplary, ^'  And  the  children  of  Israel  did 
accordinsf  to  all  that  the  Lord  com- 
manded Moses :  so  they  pitched  by  their 
standards,"  etc.  Without  murmuring  or 
disputing,  without  abatement  or  omis- 
sion, they  did  as  they  were  directed. 
Their  obedience  was  prompt  and  com- 
plete. Let  us  note  this  to  their  credit, 
and  as  an  example  to  us.  Entire 
obedience  is  required  of  us  also. 

1.  All  God's  commands  are  binding^ 
because  they  are  all  right.  He  requires 
of  us  nothing  but  what  is  just  and  true. 
We  cannot  break  the  least  of  His  com- 
mandments without  sin.  "  The  law  is 
holy,  and  the  commandment  holy,  and 
just,  and  good." 

2.  All  God's  commands  are  bene- 
volent. *"  In  keeping  of  ihem  there  is 
great  reward."  Obedience  is  blessed 
as  well  as  binding,     fcj 

Conclusion : 

Let  us  seek  Divine  aid  that  we  may 
render  full  and  hearty  obedience  to  all 
the  commands  of  God. 

«  0  let  Thy  sacred  will 
All  Thy  delight  in  me  fulfill 
Let  me  not  think  an  action  mine  own  way, 

But  as  Thy  love  erhall  sway, 
Resigning  up  the  rudder  to  Thy  skill." 

Geo.  Herbert, 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(ix)  There  are  two  forms  of  discontent ;  one 
laborious,  the  other  indolent  and  complaining. 
We  respect  the  man  of  laborious  desire,  but 
let  us  not  suppose  that  his  restlessness  is 
peace,  or  his  ambition  nj#ikness.  It  is  because 
of  the  special  connection  of  meekness  with 
contentment  that  it  is  promised  that  the  meek 
shall  "inherit  the  earth."  Neither  covetous 
men,  nor  the  grave, can  inherit  anything;  they 
can  but  consume.  Only  contentment  can 
possess.  The  most  helpful  and  sacred  work, 
therefore,  which  can  at  present  bo  done  lor 
humanity,  is  to  teach  people  (chiefly  by  ex- 
ample, as  all  best  teaching  must  be  done)  not 
how  to  ••  better  themselves,"  but  how  to 
*'  satisfy  themselvps."  It  is  the  curse  of  ev*  ry 
evil  nation  and  evil  or  nture  to  ear,  and  not  be 
t-atisfied.  The  worda  oi  blessing  are,  that  they 
shall  eat  and  be  aatisfiod.  Atjd  as  tticre  is 
only  one  kind  of    water  which  quenchea  all 


thirst,  so  there  is  only  one  kind  of  bread  which 
satisfies  all  hunger,  the  bread  of  justice  or 
rigbteousijcas;  which  hungering  after,  men 
shall  always  be  filled,  that  being  the  bread  of 
Heaven  ;  but  hungering  after  the  bread,  or 
wages,  of  unrighteousness,  shall  not  be  tilled, 
ttiat  being  the  bread  of  Sodom.  And,  in  order 
to  teach  men  how  to  be  satisfied,  it  is  neces- 
sary fully  to  understand  the  art  and  joy  of 
humb  e  life, — this,  at  present,  of  all  arts  or 
sciences  being  the  one  most  needing  study. 
Humble  life, — that  is  to  f^ay,  proposing  to  itself 
no  future  exaltation,  but  only  a  sweet  con- 
tinuance; not  excluding  the  idea  of  foresight, 
but  wholly  of  fore-sorrow,  and  taking  no  troub- 
lous thought  of  coming  days:  so,  also,  not 
excluding  the  idea  of  providence,  or  provision, 
but  wholly  of  accumulation;  the  life  of  domes- 
tic affection  and  domestic  peace,  full  of  sensi- 
tiveness to  all  elements  of  costless  and  kind 

43 


CHAP   II. 


HGMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


pleasure; — therefore,  chiefly  to  the  loveliness 
of  the  natural  world. — J.  Rustcin. 

(6)  But  that  Thon  art  my  wisdom,  Lord, 
And  both  mine  eyes  are  Thine, 
My  mind  would  be  extremely  stirr'd 
For  missing  my  design. 

Were  it  not  better  to  bestow 

Some  place  and  power  on  me  ? 

Then  should  Thy  praises  with  me  grow, 
And  share  in  my  degree. 

But  when  I  thus  dispute  and  grieve, 

I  do  resume  my  sight; 
And  pilfring  what  I  once  did  give, 

Disseize  Thee  of  Thy  right. 

How  know  I,  if  Thou  should'st  me  raise, 
That  I  should  then  raise  Thee? 

Perhaps  great  places  and  Thy  praise 
Do  not  60  well  agree. 

Wherefore  unto  my  gift  I  stand  } 

I  will  no  more  advise: 
Only  '^o  Thou  lend  me  a  hand 

riince  Thou  hast  both  mine  eyes, 

Geo.  Herbert. 

(c)  That  principle  to  which  Polity  owes  its 
stability.  Life  its  happiness,  Faith  its  accep- 
tance, and  Creation  its  continuance,  is  Obe- 
dience  How  false  is  the  conception, 

how  frantic  the  pursuit,  of  that  treacherous 
phantom  which  men  call  Liberty !  most  trea- 
cherous, indeed,  of  all  phantoms  ;  for  the 
feeblest  ray  of  reason  might  surely  show  us, 
that  not  only  its  attainment,  but  its  being, 
was  impossible.  There  is  no  such  thing  in 
the  universe.  There  can  never  be.  The  stars 
have  it  not;  the  earth  has  it  not;  the  sea  has 
it  not ;  and  we  men  have  the  mockery  and 
semblance  of  it  only  for  our  heaviest  punish- 
ment  If  there  be  any  one  prin- 
ciple more  widely  than  another  confessed  by 
every  utterance,  or  more  sternly  than  another 


imprinted  on  every  atom  of  the  visible  creation, 
that  principle  is  not  Liberty,  but  Law. 

The  enthusiast  would  reply  that  by  Liberty 
he  meant  the  Law  of  Lil)erty.  Then  why 
use  the  single  and  misunderstood  word  ?  If 
by  liberty  you  mean  chastisement  of  the 
passions,  discipline  of  the  intellect,  subjec- 
tion of  the  will;  if  you  mean  the  fear  of  in- 
flicting, the  shame  of  comnaitting,  a  wrong; 
if  you  mean  respect  for  all  who  are  in  autho- 
rity, and  consideration  for  all  who  are  in 
dependence ;  veneration  for  the  good,  mercy 
to  the  evil,  sympathy  to  the  weak;  if  you 
mean  watchfulness  over  all  thoughts,  tern- 
pprance  in  all  pleasures,  and  perseverance  in 
all  toils;  if  you  mean,  in  a  word,  that  Service 
which  is  defioed  in  the  liturgy  of  the  English 
Church  to  be  perfect  Freedom,  why  do  you 
name  that  by  the  same  word  by  which  the 
luxurious  mean  licence,  and  the  reckless 
mtan  change;  by  which  the  rogue  means 
rapine,  acd  the  fool  equality,  by  which  the 
proud  mean  a?  arcby,  and  the  malignant  mean 
violence?  Call  it  by  any  name  rather  than 
this,  but  i's  b.  st  and  truest  is  Obedience, 
Obedience  is,  indeed,  founded  on  a  kind  of  free- 
dom, else  it  wouid  become  mere  subjugation, 
but  that  freedom  is  only  granted  that  obedience 
may  be  more  perfect ;  and  thus,  while  a 
measure  of  licence  is  necessary  to  exhibit  the 
individual  energy  of  things,  the  fairness  aLd 
pleasantness  and  perfection  of  them  all  consist 
in  their  Restraint.  Compare  a  river  that  has 
burst  its  banks  with  one  that  is  bound  by 
them,  and  the  clouds  that  are  scattered  over 
the  face  of  the  whole  heaven,  with  those  that 
are  marshalled  into  ranks  and  orders  by  its 
winds.  So  that  though  restraint,  utter  and 
unrelaxing,  can  never  be  comely,  this  is  not 
because  it  is  in  itself  an  evil,  but  only  because, 
when  too  great,  it  overpowers  the  nature  of 
the  thing  restrained,  and  so  counteracts  the 
other  laws  of  which  that  nature  is  itself  com- 
posed.—*/.  Ruskin, 


CHAPTER  IIL 


Critical  Notes.  —  "Muster  of  the 
Tribe  ot  Levi.  As  Jacob  had  adopted 
the  two  sons  of  Joseph  as  his  own  sons, 
and  thus  promoted  them  to  the  rank 
of  heads  of  tribes,  tie  tribe  of  Levi 
founded,  strictly  epeaking,  the  thir- 
teenth tribe  of  the  whole  nation,  and 
was  excepted  from  the  muster  of  the 
twelve  tribes  who  were  destined  to  form 
the  army  of  Jehovah,  because  God  had 
chosen  it  for  the  service  of  the  sanc- 
tuary. Out  of  this  tribe  God  had  not 
only  called  Moses  to  be  the  deliverer, 
lawgiver,  and  leader  of  His  people,  but 
44 


Moses'  brother  Aaron,  with  the  sons  uf 
the  Ja'ter,  to  be  the  custodians  of  the 
sanctuary.  And  now,  la->t!y,  the  whole 
tribe  was  chosen,  in  the  place  of  the 
first-born  of  all  the  tribes,  to  assist  ilie 
priests  in  performing  the  duties  of  the 
sanctuary,  and  was  numbered  and  mus- 
tered for  this  its  special  calling." — Keil 
and  Del, 

Ver.  1.  Generations.  "  The  term 
'generations'  is  strictly  a  technical 
Avord  (cf.  Gen.  ii.  4  ;  v.  1,  vi.  9,  etc, ; 
Ruth  iv.  18).  It  does  not  point  to 
birth  and  origin  8o  much  as  to  dcwa- 


HOMTLETTC    COMMFyTARV:    NVMHEnS. 


CHAP.  III. 


ward  history  and  development."  The 
"  generations  "  here  are  not  merely  the 
descendants  of  Moses  and  Aaron,  but 
of  the  Levites  «renerally.  *'  Aaron  is 
placed  before  Moses  here  "  (see  at  Ex. 
vi.  26  sqq),  "not  merely  as  being 
the  elder  of  the  two,  but  because  his 
sons  received  the  priesthood,  whilst  the 
sons  of  Moses,  on  the  contrary,  were 


cla'^sed  among  the  i3sl  of  the  Lovi- 
tical   faoailies"    (cf.    1    Chron.    xsiii. 

14). 

Ver.    3.    Whom  he  consecrated:   lit. 

as  marg  ,  ''  who^ie  hand  he  filled,"  by 
setting  them  apart  to  the  office  of 
priests. 

Ver.  4.   In  the  sight  of  Aaron,  their 
father — i.e.,  during  his  lifetime. 


Aaron  and  his  Sons  :  Parents  and  Children. 

(Verses  1-4:.) 


In  these  verses  we  have — 

I.  An  incidental  illustration  of  the 
exalted  personal  character  and  the 
Divine  mission  of  Moses. 

AaroD  was  the  ancestor  of  a  regular 
succession  of  priests.  But  Moses  seeks 
nothing  for  himself  or  for  his  descen- 
dants. He  does  not  use  his  high  posi- 
tion or  his  great  power  for  the  aitain- 
ment  of  any  selfi.h  end.  He  '^  p  isses 
by  his  own  family,  or  immediate  de- 
scendants ;  he  gave  no  rank  or  privilege 
to  them  during  bis  life,  and  left  nothing 
to  them  at  his  death.  They  became 
incorporated  with  the  Levites,  from  or 
amongst  whom  they  are  never  distin- 
guished." An  illustration  of  the  nobility 
of  his  chiracter  and  the  utter  unselfish- 
ness of  his  aims.  Other  eminent  m(  n 
seek  to  advance  the  interests  of  their 
descendants ;  but  it  was  not  so  with 
him.  In  this  we  have  also  a  confirma- 
tion of  the  Divinity  of  his  vocation — that 
he  was  called  ot"  God  to  his  great  enter- 
prise. Had  it  been  otherwise,  we  should 
have  seen  him  aim  at  the  graiification 
of  avarice,  or  the  acquisition  of  power, 
or  the  attainment  of  honours  for  him- 
^^elf  and  his  successors.  The  disinte- 
restedness of  his  conduct  witnesses  to 
the  Divinity  of  his  calling. 

II.  An  intimation  that  the  duties 
of  the  ministers  of  religion  demand 
for  their  faitlif al  discharge  their  entire 
consecration  thereto. 

It  seems  to  us  that  the  strikinsr  ex- 
pression  used  in  the  third  verse  may 
fairly  be  regarded  as  suggesting  this 
truth,  *'  Whose  hands  he  filled  to 
minister  in  the  priest's  office."  The 
apobilei  soon  found  this  entire  conse- 


cration of  their  time  and  powers  to  the 
work  to  be  necessary.  *'  We  will  give 
ourselves  continually  to  prayer,  and  to 
the  ministry  of  the  word"  (see  Acts  vi. 
1-4).  And  St.  Paul,  in  writing  to 
Timothy,  says :  *^  Give  thy.-elf  wholly 
to  them  "  (see  1  Tim.  iv.  13-16,  and 
remarks  on  this  point  in  our  notes  on 
ch.  i.  47-54). 

III.  An  example  of  wicked  sons 
descending  from  a  godly  parent. 

Aaron,  though  far  from  being  so 
great  or  so  holy  a  man  as  his  brother, 
was  without  doubt  a  good  man  ;  yet 
Nadab,  his  eldest  son,  and  Abihu,  his 
second  son,  were  consumed  by  God  be- 
cause of  their  sin.  "  Nadab  and  Abihu 
died  before  iLe  Lord,  when  they  offered 
strange  fire  before  the  Lord,  in  the  wil- 
derness of  Sinai."  Their  sin  was  that 
they  kindled  the  incense  in  their  censers 
with  fire  not  taken  from  that  which 
burned  perpetually  on  the  altar,  and  pro- 
bably that  they  did  this  while  in  a  state 
of  intoxication  (Lev.  x.  1-11).  God 
will  be  served  as  He  pleases  and  directs. 
There  is  peril  even  in  the  slightest  in- 
fringement of  Divine  directions.  In 
sacred  services  the  least  deviations  from 
the  clearly  revea'ed  will  of  God  are 
dii<pleasing  unto  Him.  For  their  sin 
Nadab  and  Abihu  were  devoured  by 
"  fire  from  the  Lord."  They  were 
degenerate  and  depraved  sons  of  a  pious 
father.  Generation  is  not  regeneration. 
Personal  character  is  not  hereditary  as 
personal  possessions  often  are.  Our 
Lord  represents  one  *'  in  hell "  and  "•  in 
torments  "  as  addressing  Abraham  as 
"  Father,"  and  Abraham  in  reply  ad- 
dres:3ing  him  as  "  Son."     The  children 

45 


CHAP.  III. 


HOMTLETIC    COMMENTAHl :    NUMBER!^ 


of  godly  parents  may  at  last  find  their 
own    place   in   hell.     Salvation    is   not 
transmissible.     It  is  a  personal  concern. 
Repentance,  faith,  self- consecration,  are 
acts  which  cannot   be  done  by  proxy. 
The  general  rule  undoubtedly   is  that 
the  children  of  pious  parents,  who  have 
been  well  and  wisely  trained  by  ihem, 
will   themselves    become  pious.     It   is 
also    true   that   moral    tendencies    are 
transmissible  from  parent  to  child.    Still 
there  are  exceptions  to  this  rule.     Yet 
we  think  if  we  knew  all  the  particulars 
of     the    home-life    and    the    parental 
training  and  example,  we  should  find 
such  exceptions  to  be  very  rare  indeed. 
Many  parents  of  undoubted  piety  fail 
sadly  in  the  training  of  their  children  : 
some  through  over-severity,  others  by 
undue  indulgence,   etc.     Did    not   Eli 
fail  in  this  respect?     (1  Sam.  iii.  IS.) 
Do  not    the    troubles    which    arose   to 
Jacob  by  reason  of  the  sins  of  his  eons 
look  like  the  natural  retribution  of  his 
own  sins,  in  deceiving  his  aged  father 
and   in  wronging  his  brother?     Were 
not  the   troubles  in    the  later  life  of 
David,    because  of    the  wickedne.-s  of 
some   of  his  sons,  connected  with    his 
own  sins?     (2  Sam.  xii.  10-12.)     Let 
pious  parents  take  heed  to  them.'- elves 
and  to  their  duties,     (a) 

IV.  An  example  of  the  widest  dif- 
ference of  character  and  destiny  in 
children  of  the  same  parents. 

While  Nadab  and  Abihu  were  spdly 
depraved  and  suddenly  destroyed,  their 


younger  brethren  Eleazar  and  Ithamap 
faithfully    "ministered  in  the  priest's 
office   in     the    sight   of    Aaron    their 
father,"   and   upon  his  death,  Eleazar 
succeeded   him    as    high    priest.     The 
children  of  the  same  parents  frequently 
differ  widely  from  each  other  in  features, 
in  disposition,  and,  as  amongst  the  sons 
of  Aaron,  in  character.     The  freedom 
of    the    human   will  to   a   very   great 
extent  explains  this.    The  things  which 
to  one  man  are  the   very  bread  of  life, 
arother   man  will   pervert   into  deadly 
poison.     The   ministry  of    the   Divine 
Gof-pel  to  some  is  ^' the  savour  of  life 
unto  life,"  to  others    "the  savour  of 
denth  unto  death.'*     (b) 
Conclusion : 

Our  subj-'Ct  utters  earnest  counsels 

1.  To  ike  children  of  godly  parents. 
Trust  not  in  the  character  and  prayers 
of  your  parents  for  salvation.  These 
are  of  priceless  value,  yet  they  will  not 
avail  to  your  salvation  apart  from  }oiir 
own  faith  and  obedience.  (See  Ezek. 
xviii.)     (c) 

2.  To  parents.  Be  diligent  and  faith- 
ful in  the  discharge  of  your  duty  to 
your  children.  (1)  Let  your  own 
life  be  right,  and  so  set  them  a  good 
example,  {d)  (2)  Give  them  wise 
religious  instruction  and  training,  (e) 
(3)  Commend  them  often  and  earnestly 
to  God  in  prayer,  (f)  (4)  Afford 
them  encouragement  in  every  manifes- 
tation of   pious   feeling    and    conduct, 

{9) 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  I  do  not  overlook  the  dreadful  possibi- 
lity, thfit,  in  the  stress  of  temptation,  and  a 
depraved  inclination,  the  child,  even  wLen  all 
this  has  been  dona  for  him,  may  wander  off 
and  be  a  prodigal.  He  may  viciously  disown 
the  covenant  made  in  his  behalf.  He  may 
plunge  into  sin,  in  despite  of  all.  Then  his 
only  way  back  into  the  Church  of  Christ  must 
be  by  conversion,  as  with  the  children  of  un- 
believers. All  I  say  is,  that  such  instances 
ought  to  be  prevented  or  diminished  by  wiser 
and  more  Christian  notions  and  practices. 
Let  the  Christian  parents  continually  speak  to 
the  young  child  of  Church  privileges,  of  the 
joy  and  the  duty  of  his  Curistian  heritage  and 
home.  Let  that  child  have  the  doctrines  and 
life  of  Christ  faithfully  instilled  into  his  soul, 
by  domestic  instruction  and  family  prayer. 
Let  him  be  reminded  of  bis  baptismal  dedi- 

46 


cation,  and  taught  to  live  worthily  of  it.  No 
magical,  talit-manic  t  £ft  ct  is  thus  to  be  wrought 
upon  him,  but  a  perfectly  natural  and  simple 
one,  standing  in  harmony  with  all  other  edu- 
cational influences,  and  guaranteed  also  a 
peculiar  ble.'-sing.  This  Christian  child,  like 
others,  must  Lave  a  spiritual  nature  and  life 
formed  upon  him,  in  addition  to  his  natural 
life.  Only,  this  blessed  boon  of  a  new  and 
holy  heart  steals  in  upon  him  gradually,  by 
way  of  his  parents' eyes  and  voice  and  prayer.', 
from  the  very  dawn  of  his  consciousness, 
grows  with  his  growth,  hardens  with  his 
muscles,  expands  with  his  understanding,  and 
matures  in  him  as  gently  and  regularly  as 
any  of  th^  growths  of  the  forest  or  the 
field  ;  so  \\v^\>  there  shall  be  no  period  in  hia 
remembrance,  when  he  was  not  moving  straight 
on   towaids  a   ripe  Christian  character,  and 


HOMiLETlC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


ciiAr.  III. 


fnll  comtDnnion  in  the  Church.  All  this  I 
place  in  contrast  with  our  strange  and  savage 
habit  of  turning  off  our  little  ones  to  feed  on 
the  husks  and  cha£F  of  the  senses,  till  some 
dreadful  wrench  of  sorrow,  after  they  have 
grown  up,  possibly  wakens  a  few  of  them  to 
conviction,  and  drives  them  back,  broken- 
spirited,  from  the  far  country  where  they  had 
wandered,  to  their  Father's  house. — F.  D. 
Htintington,  D  D. 

{b)  So  from  the  heights  of  will 
Life's  parting  stream  descends. 
And,  as  a  moment  turns  i's  slender  rill, 
Each  widening  torrent  bends. 
From  the  same  cradle's  side, 
From  the  s-ame  mother's  knee, 
One  to  long  darkness  and  the  frozen  tide, 
One  to  the  peaceful  sea  ! 

0.  W.  Holmes. 

(c)  The  child  of  a  very  godly  father,  not- 
withstanding all  the  iriStructions  given  him, 
the  good  education  he  has  had,  and  the  need- 
ful rebukes  that  have  been  given  him,  and 
the  restia'nts  he  has  been  laid  under,  after 
all  the  pains  taken  with  him  and  prayers  put 
up  for  him,  may  yet  prove  wicked  and  vile, 
the  grief  of  his  father,  ttie  shame  of  his  family, 
and  the  curse  and  plague  of  his  generation. 
This  wicked  man  shall  perish  for  ever  in  his 
iniquity,  notwithstanding  his  being  the  son  of 
a  good  father.  He  is  his  own  destroyer  ;  and 
his  relation  to  a  good  father  will  be  so  far 
from  standing  Lim  in  stead  that  it  will  aggra- 
rate  his  sin  and  his  condemnation,  and  will 
make  his  tuisery  hereafter  the  more  intole- 
rable.— M.  Henry. 

{d)  Truth  must  be  lived  into  meaning  before 
it  can  be  truly  known.  Examples  are  the 
only  sufficient  commentaries  ;  iiv'ng  epistles 
tt  e  only  fit  expounders  of  written  epistles. 
When  the  truly  Chiistian  father  and  mother 
teach  as  being  taught  of  God,  when  their 
prayers  go  iuto  their  lives,  and  their  lives 
into  their  doctrine  ;  when  their  goodness 
melts  into  the  memory,  and  heaven,  too, 
breathes  iuto  the  associated  thoughts  and 
sentiments,  to  make  a  kind  of  blessed  memory 
for  h\  they  teach,  then  we  see  the  beau- 
tiful office  they  are  in  fulfilled. — H.  Bush- 
nell,  D.D 

(e)  There  must  be  regular  Biblical  teach- 
ing. Somewhere  and  somehow,  not  by  chance, 
not  at  interrupted  and  infrequent  seasons,  but 
patiently  and  humbly,  and  week  by  week, 
that  wonderful,  most  ancient  and  Eternal 
Book  must  be  opened  before  him.  Its  sublime 
jet  6;mjpl9  truths,  plain  to  the  child's  under- 


standing; its  holy  personages,  its  grand 
Prophets  and  ardent  Apostles;  its  venerable 
patriarchs  and  its  inspired  children,  must  all 
pass,  in  their  robes  of  lijibt  and  forms  of  sin- 
gular majesty  and  beauty  before  him.  Its 
psalms  must  be  sung  into  his  toul.  Its  beati- 
tudes and  commandments  must  be  fixed  in 
his  remembrance.  Its  parables  must  engage 
his  fancy.  Its  miracles  must  awe  his  wonder. 
Its  cross,  and  ark,  and  all  its  sacred  emblems, 
must  people  bis  imagination.  Without  that 
Bible,  no  child  born  among  us  can  come  to 
Him  whom  only  the  Bible  reveals. — F.  D. 
Huntington,  D.D. 

{/)  There  must  be  prayer.  Your  child 
must  know,  he  must  see,  he  must  feel,  that 
between  your  parent-heart  and  Him  who  ia 
the  Infinite  Father  of  all  alike  there  is  open 
and  conscious  communion.  Till  there  is  esta- 
blished, in  all  simplicity,  this  confiding  and 
daily  intercourse  between  the  soul  and  Heaven, 
you  have  not  received  your  child  in  the  name 
of  Christ.  What  was  testified  by  one  of  tho 
strong  statesmen  of  early  American  history 
might  be  declared,  in  spirit,  probably  by  nearly 
all  the  best  men  that  have  lived  in  Chris- 
tendom. "I  believe,"  he  said,  ''that  I  should 
have  been  swept  away  by  the  flood  of  French 
infidelity  if  it  had  not  been  for  one  thing — 
the  remembrance  of  the  time  when  my  sr.inted 
mother  used  to  make  me  kneel  by  her  bedside, 
taking  my  little  hands  folded  in  hers,  and 
causing  me  to  repeat  the  Lord's  Prayer." — 
Jlnd. 

(g)  Piety  is  very  commonly  discouraged  in 
children  by  giving  them  tests  of  character 
that  are  inappropriate  to  their  ago.  The  child, 
for  example,  loses  his  temper  in  some  matter 
in  which  he  is  crossed ;  and  the  conclusion  is 
forthwith  sprung  upon  him  that  he  has  a  bad 
heart,  and  is  certainly  no  Christian  child.  It 
is  only  necessary  to  ask  how  the  father,  how 
the  mother,  would  themselves  fare  tested  by 
the  same  rule?  ...  It  is  never  to  be 
assumed  by  us  that  they  are  without  piety 
because  they  falter  in  som(3  things.  The  child 
must  be  judged  or  tested  in  the  same  general 
way  as  the  adult.  If  he  is  wholly  perverse, 
has  no  spirit  of  duty,  turns  away  from  all  re- 
ligious things,  it  will  not  encourage  anything 
good  in  him  to  ttll  him  that  he  is  without 
piety  ;  but  if  Le  loves  religious  things,  wants 
to  be  in  tbem,  tries  alter  a  good  and  obedient 
life,  he  is  to  be  sho^vn  how  tenderly  God  re- 
gards him,  how  ready  Hs  is  to  forgive  him, 
and  when  be  stumbles  or  falls,  how  kindly  He 
will  raise  him  up,  how  graciously  help  h'M  to 
standi— JST.  Bushndl^  DM. 


« 


CHAP.  III. 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:  NUMBERS. 


Tas  Dedication  of  the  Levites — Church  Work  and  Workers. 

( Verses  6-10.) 


These  verses  suggest  the  following 
observatioDS : — 

I.  That  the  offices  of  the  Church 
are   Divinely  instituted. 

The  Lord  here  institutes  the  Levitical 
order  with  its  duties,  the  priestly  order 
with  its  duties,  and  places  both  under 
the  high  priest,  who  also  had  his  duties. 
In  the  Christian  Church  the  office  of 
the  Ministry  was  instituted  by  our 
Lord  Himself.  (See  Matt,  xxviii.  18- 
20  ;  Mark  xvi.  15,  16  ;  Luke  xxiv.  45- 
49  )  The  deacon's  office  was  instituted 
by  the  inspired  apostles  wirh  soleain 
prayer  to  God,  and  was  ratified  by  the 
signal  blessiug  of  God  which  followed. 
(Ste  Acts  vi.  1-8  )  Apostles,  prophets, 
evangelists,  pastors  and  teachers,  are 
spoken  of  by  St.  Paul  as  the  gifts  of 
Christ  to  the  Church,  "for  the  per- 
fecting of  the  saints,  for  the  work  of 
the  ministry,  for  the  edifying  of  the 
body  of  Christ.''  These  offices  are  not 
human  inventions.  They  are  Divine 
in  their  origin,  and  in  their  authority, 
(a) 

II.  There  are  different  ranks  in  the 
offices  of  the  Church  as  instituted  by 
God. 

The  Levites  were  given  to  the  priests 
for  the  performance  of  those  religious 
duties  which  i^^ere  of  an  inferior  kind. 
The  priests  ranked  higher  than  the 
Levites.  They  were  granted  a  nearer 
access  to  God  in  the  Holy  of  holies. 
The  high  priest  held  the  highest  office 
in  the  tribe,  and  ranked  as  the  head  of 
both  the  priebts  and  the  Levites.  With 
respect  to  the  Levites  this  is  clearly 
indicated  in  th'^text.  Thus,  in  verse  (5, 
'*  the  expression  ^^?7  "TDJl^  is  fre- 
quently met  with  in  connection  with 
the  position  of  a  servant,  as  standing 
before  his  master  to  receive  his  com- 
mands. " — Keil  and  Del.  And  Fuerst  : 
"  To  stand  before  one  in  a  respectful, 
submissive,  ministering  position  before 
the  great,  hence  to  serve,  to  wait  upon. 
Deut.  I.  38  ;  Dan.  i.  5."  The  ninth 
verse  also   expresses  their  "  complete 

4a 


surrender  "  to  him.  We  must  be  care- 
ful in  applying  tbis  to  the  Christian 
Church  ;  for,  as  Dr.  Stoughton  observes, 
"the  Jewish  Church  was  in  certain 
respects,  and  tho^e  the  most  charac- 
teristic and  striking,  so  utterly  different 
from  the  Churches  instituted  by  the 
Apostles,  that  a  combination  of  the 
principles  of  the  first,  with  the  prin- 
ciples of  the  second,  is  simply  impos- 
sible." But  in  the  offices  of  the 
Christian  Church  there  are  grades  or 
ranks.  Various  ranks  are  necessary  for 
the  maintenance  of  the  order,  and  the 
performance  of  the  various  duties  of 
the  Church.  Various  ranks  are  inev- 
itahle.  While  there  are  differences  of 
mental  capacity  and  spiritual  power 
amongst  the  members  of  the  Church, 
differences  of  rank  there  must  be. 
Thus  we  find  that  ministers  were  rulers 
in  the  Churches  in  the  Apostolic  age, 
St.  Paul  writes,  *•  We  beseech  you, 
brethren,  to  know  them  which  labour 
among  you,  and  are  over  you  in  the 
Lord,  and  admonish  you,"  etc.  (1  Thess. 
V,  12,  13.  And  the  writer  of  the  Epistle 
to  the  Hebrews  says,  *'  Remember  tbem 
which  have  the  rule  over  you,  who  have 
spoken  unto  you  the  Word  of  God." 
"^  They  ruled  in  the  name  of  their 
Divine  Master,  administering  Hia  laws, 
not  enacting  any  of  their  own," 

III.  The  lowliest  labour  in  the 
service  of  G-od  is  sacred  and  blessed. 

The  Levites  were  to  perform  the 
most  common  and  laborious  duties. 
They  were  the  servants  of  the  priests. 
They  had  to  keep  guard  round  the 
tabernacle,  to  keep  the  sacred  vessels 
pertaining  to  it,  to  remove  it  fiom 
place  to  place  during  their  wan- 
derings and  journeyings,  to  prepare 
supplies  for  the  sanctuary,  such  as 
incense,  wine,  oil,  etc,  and  to  keep  all 
pertaining  to  the  tabernacle  clean  and 
in  order.  Yet  they  were  dedicated  to 
this  work,  and  taught  to  regard  the 
work  itself  as  sacred.  The  most  menial 
labour  in  connection  with  the  cause  of 
God  should  still  be  regarded  as  eacred. 


nOMTLETTC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  Uh 


ItP  bigh  and  holy  a  socintious  and  ends 
exalt  and  hallow  ir.  ''•  I  had  rather  be 
a  dooikeeper  in  the  bouse  of  my  God, 
than,"  etc.  Indeed,  all  work  which  is 
faithfully  done  is  sacred.  Duty  is  ever 
divine  aLd  ennobling.  '*  One  thing  I 
will  remind  you  of,"  ssljs  Mr.  Carlyle, 
*'  that  the  essence  and  outcome  of  all 
religions,  creeds,  and  liturgies  whatso- 
ever is,  to  do  one's  work  in  a  faithful 
manner.  Unhappy  caitiff,  what  to  you 
is  the  use  of  orthodoxy,  if  with  every 
stroke  of  your  hammer  you  are  breaking 
all  the  Ten  Cominandments, — operating 
upon  Devil's  dust,  and  endeavour- 
ing to  reap  where  you  have  not 
sown?"    (b) 

IV.  God  also  appoints  the  persons 
to  fill  the  various  offices  in  His 
Church. 

Here  He  appoints  the  tribe  of  Levi 
to  the  service  of  the  tabernacle,  and 
the  sons  of  Aaron  to  the  priesthood; 
and  He  called  Aaron  to  be  the  high 
priest.  *'  And  no  man  taketh  this 
honour  unto  himself,  but  he  that  is 
Called  of  God,  as  was  Aaron."  True 
ministers  are  creations  of  God,  not  the 
manufacture  either  of  university  or 
college  professors,  or  of  consecrating 
bishops,  or  of  both  united.  He  alone 
is  able  to  qualify  men  for  the  office, 
and  He  alone  is  competent  to  utter  the 
authoritative  call  to  it.    (cj 

V.  Intrusion  into  sacred  places  and 


duties  awakened  the  stern  displeasure 
of  the  Lord. 

''  Aaron  and  bis  sons  shall  wait  on 
their  priest's  office  ;  and  the  stranger 
that  Cometh  nigh  shall  be  put  to  death." 
Any  one  who  was  not  a  son  of  Aa'on, 
even  though  he  were  a  Levite,  that 
should  draw  nigh  to  perform  any  of 
the  duties  pertaining  to  the  office  of 
the  priest  was  to  be  put  to  death.  "  Let 
this  be  thought  upon  by  our  over-bold 
intruders  into  the  work  of  the  ministry." 
God  will  have  sacred  things  reverently 
regarded,  and  sacred  duties  reverently 
performed. 

Conclusion : 

The  subject  affords. — 1.  Encourage- 
ment to  those  who  are  called  of  God  to 
Cliristian  work.  He  who  has  called 
you  to  }0ur  work  will  sustain  you  in  it, 
mnke  it  efficient  by  His  blessing,  and 
corjfer  upon  you  rich  rewards.  2.  Ad- 
monition  as  to  our  estim  ite  of  the  ministers 
of  the  Lord,  They  "'  are  amba.^sadors  for 
Christ."  God  H-mself  speaks  through 
them  to  men.  They  are  called  and 
commissioned  by  Jesus  Christ,  And 
He  says,  "  He  that  receiveth  whom- 
soever I  send  receiveth  Me,  and  he  that 
receiveth  Me  receiveth  Him  that  sent 
Me;"  "Despise  not  prophesy ings." 
''Know  them  which  labour  among  you, 
and  are  over  you  in  the  Lord,  and 
admonish  you;  and  esteem  them  very 
highly  in  love  for  their  work's  sake." 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  All  men  cannot  work  in  the  same  way : 
"Ihere  are  diversities  of  operation."  Upon 
the  face  of  a  watch  you  may  see  an  illustration 
of  my  meaning.  On  that  small  space  you 
have  three  workers :  there  is  the  second- 
pointer  performing  rapid  revolutions;  there  is 
the  vnmit e-\)omier  going  at  a  greatly  reduced 
speed  ;  aud  there  is  the  Aowr- pointer  tardier 
ttill.  Now  any  one  unacquainted  with  the 
mechanism  of  a  watch  would  conclude  that 
the  busy  little  S'  cond-poin  er  was  doing  all 
the  work — it  is  clickiiig  away  at  sixty  times 
the  ppeed  of  the  minute-pointer  ;  ai  d  as  for 
the  hour-hand  that  seems  to  be  doing  no  work 
at  all.  You  can  see  in  a  moment  that  the 
first  is  busy,  and  in  a  short  time  you'll  see 
the  second  stir,  but  you  must  wait  still  longer 
to  assure  yourself  of  the  motion  of  the  third. 
So  is  it  in  the  Church.  There  are  active, 
fussy  men  who  appear  to  be  doing  the  work 
of  the  whole  community,  and  othors  who  go 


at  less  speed,  and  others  slower  still.  But  can 
we  do  without  the  minute  and  the  hour- 
pointers?  The  noisy  second- band  might  go 
round  its  littlo  circle  for  ever,  without  telling 
the  woil  I  the  true  time.  We  5-hoiild  be  thankful 
for  all  kinds  of  workers.  The  silent,  steady 
hour-hand  need  m  t  envy  its  noisy  little  col- 
league. Eich  man  must  fill  the  measure  of 
his  capacity.  Your  business  is  to  do  your 
allotted  work,  so  as  to  meet  the  approbation 
of  the  Master. — Joa.  Parker,  D.D. 

(b)  There  is  a  perennial  nobleness,  and 
even  sacredness,  in  work.  Were  he  never  so 
benighted,  forgetful  of  his  high  calling,  there 
is  always  hope  in  a  man  that  actually  and 
earnestly  works;    in   idleness  alone  is   there 

perpetual    despair Ic    has   been 

written,  "an  endless  significance  lies  in  work  " 
—  as  man  perfects  himself  by  writing.  Fonl 
junijbs  are  cleared  away,  fair  seed-fields  rise 
iiittead,  and   stately  cities;    and  withal,    iiit 


CHAP.  Til. 


IIOATTLETIC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


man  himpelf  first  ceases  to  be  a  jungle  and 
foul,  unwholesome  desert  thereby.  Consider 
how,  even  in  the  meanest  sorts  of  Labour,  the 
whole  soul  of  a  man  is  composed  into  a  kind 
of  real  harmony,  the  instant  he  sets  himself 
to  work!  Doubt,  Desire,  Sorrow,  Remorse, 
Indignation,  Despair  itself,  all  these,  like  hell- 
dogs,  lie  beleaguering  the  soul  of  the  poor  day- 
worker,  as  of  every  man;  but  as  he  bends 
himself  with  free  valour  against  his  task,  all 
these  are  stilled,  all  these  shrink  murmuring 
far  off  into  their  caves.  The  man  is  now  a 
man.  The  blessed  glow  of  Labour  in  him,  is 
it  not  a  purifying  fire,  wherein  all  poison  is 
burnt  up  ?  and  of  sour  smoke  itself  there  is 
made  bright,  blessed  flame !  .  .  .  .  Work 
is  of  a  religious  nature ;  work  is  of  a  hi  aoe 
nature,  which  it  is  the  aim  of  all  religion  to 

be Admirable  was  that  of  the  old 

monks,  "  Laborare  est  orare :  Work  is  Wor- 
ship." ....  All  true  Work  is  sacred: 
in  all  true  Work,  were  it  but  true  hand- labour, 
there  is  something  of  divineness.  Labour, 
wide  as  the  Earth,  has  its  summit  in  Heaven. 
Sweat  of  the  brow  ;  and  up  from  that  to  sweat 
of  the  brain,  sweat  of  the  heart  :  which  in- 
cludes all  Kepler  calculations,  Newton  medi- 
tations, all  Sciences,  all  spoken  Epics,  all 
acted  Heroisms,  Martyrdoms  —  un  to  that 
"Agony  of  bloody  sweat."  which  all  men  have 
called  divine  I  O  brother  !  if  this  is  not 
*'  worship,"  then  I  say  the  more  pity  for  wor- 


ship, for  this  is  the  noblest  thing  yet  disco veied 
under  God's  sky  I  Who  art  thou  that  corn- 
plainest  of  thy  life  of  toil  ?  Complain  not. 
Look  up,  my  wearied  brother;  see  thy  fellow- 
Workmen  there,  in  God's  Eternity  ;  sur- 
viving there,  they  alone  surviving  :  sacred 
band  of  the  loamortals,  celestial  Body-guard 
of  the  Empire  of  Mankind  !  Even  in  the 
weak  Human  Memory  they  survive  so  long, 
as  saints,  as  heroes,  as  gods  ;  they  alone  sur- 
viving; peopling,  they  alone,  the  immeasured 
solitudes  of  Time  I  To  thee,  Heavf>n,  though 
severe,  is  no<  unkind;  Heaven  is  kind — as  a 
noble  Mother  ;  as  that  Spartan  Mother,  say- 
ing, while  she  gave  her  son  his  shield,  "With 
it,  my  eon,  or  upon  it  1  "  Thou  too  shalt  re- 
turn home,  in  honour  to  thy  far-distant  Home, 
in  honour;  doubt  it  not— if  in  the  battle  thou 
keep  thy  shield  I  Thou,  in  the  Eternities  and 
deepest  Death-kingdoms,  art  not  an  alien ; 
thou  everywhere  art  a  denizen  I  Complain 
not;  the  very  Spartans  did  not  complain. — 
Thos.  Carlyle. 

(c)  The  man  who  has  adopted  the  church 
as  a  profession,  as  other  men  adopt  the  law, 
or  the  army,  or  the  navy,  and  goes  through 
the  routine  of  its  duties  with  the  coldness  of 
a  mere  official  —  filled  by  him,  the  palpit 
seems  filled  by  the  ghastly  form  of  a  skeleton, 
that,  in  its  cold  and  bony  fingers,  holds  a 
burning  lamp. — Thos,  Guthrie^  D.D, 


God's  Claims  upon  Man's  Service. 


{Verses  11-13.) 


These  verses  suggest  the  following 
observations  : — 

I.  That  God's  claims  upon  man*s 
service  are  incontestable. 

Upon  what  are  they  grounded  ? 

1.  Upon  what  He  is  in  Himself. 
•'  The  Levites  shall  be  Mine  .  .  .  Mine 
«ball  they  be.  I  ana  the  Lord."  The 
concluding  words  of  veri-e  13  are  better 
thus  expressed:  "Mine  shall  they  be, 
Mine,  the  Lord's."  He  is  the  Propri- 
etor of  all  things.  All  things  and  all 
persons  were  created  by  Him,  and  are 
sustained  by  Him.  He  is  over  all.  He 
is  the  greatest,  the  best  Being.  And 
as  such  His  claim  upon  man  is  complete 
and  indisputable.  The  inventor  has  a 
right  to  his  invention ;  the  maker  to 
the  thing  made.  So  God,  etc.  The 
Supremely  Great  and  Good  has  a  right 
to  the  admiration,  the  worship,  and  the 
service  of  all  intelligent  beings. 

2.  Upon    what   He    does  for    man, 
**  All  the  fi'sboi  n  are  mine ;  for  on  the 


50 


day  that  I  smote  all  the  firstborn  in  the 
laud    of    Egypt   I    hallowed    unto   me 
all  the  firstborn    in  Israel,"  etc.     The 
preservation    of    the  firstborn    of    the 
Israelites  on  the  dread  night  when  all 
the   firstborn   of   the   Egyptians   were 
slain  is  here  put  forth  by  the  Lord  as  a 
ground   of    claim    upon    tbem.     Their 
preservation    was    an    exercise  of    the 
Divine  mercy.      He  spared  them  that 
they    might    devote    themselves    unre- 
servedly  to    His  service.     God  spares 
the  sinful  race  of  man,  and  constantly 
confers    upon    the   ill-deserving   many 
choice   gifts.     He  has  redeemed   us  at 
a  great    cost, — "not.   with    corruptible 
things,  as  silver  and  gold  ;  but  with  the 
precious  blood  of  Christ/*     His  claims 
upon      us     are     not     only     incontro- 
vertible,   but    most    heart-conttraining 
also,    (a) 

Such  being  the  character  of  His 
claims  upon  us,  we  cannot  withhold 
from  Him  our  loyal  and  hearty  service 


nOMlLETlC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  IlL 


without  iucurring  the  guilt  of  manifest 
fraud  and  basest  inoratitude. 

II.  There  is  a  correspondence  be- 
tween the  gifts  and  the  claims  of 
God. 

His  demands  are  proportioned  to  His 
bestowments.  He  had  spared  the  lives 
of  the  firstborn  of  Israel,  and  He  claims 
the  firstborn.  "  Unto  whomsoever  much 
is  given  of  him  shall  be  much  required: 
and  to  whom  men  have  committed 
much,  of  him  they  will  ask  the  more." 
**  Freely  ye  have  received,  freely  give." 
All  our  possessions  and  powers  involve 
corresponding  responsibilities,     (b) 

1.  This  is  righteous.  No  one  can 
truthfully  complain  that  the  require- 
ments of  God  are  unreasonable  or  ex- 
cessive. 

2.  This  is  beneficent.  By  the  opera- 
tion of  this  principle  the  weak  are  aided 
by  the  strong,  the  great  and  gifted 
render  much  and  noble  service,  etc.  Let 
no  one  boast  of  the  greatness  of  his 
powers  or  possessions,  as  though  they 
were  his  own,  etc.  "  For  v^rho  maketh 
thee  to  differ  ?  and  what  hast  thou  that 
thou  didbt  not  receive  ?  "  etc.  Let  us 
rather  be  humble,  and  faithful  in  the 
use  of  all  our  gifts  in  God's  service. 

III.  The  Divine  arrangements  are 
ever  marked  by  infinite  wisdom  and 
kindness. 

In  the  substitution  of  the  tribe  of 
Levi  for  the  firstborn  of  all  the  tribes, 
we  have  an  illustration  of  this.  "  And 
I,  behold,  I  have  taken  the  Levites 
from  among  the  children  of  Israel  in- 
stead of  all  the  firstborn,"  etc. 


1.  By  assigning  the  sacred  duties  of 
the  service  of  the  tabernacle  to  the  one 
tribe  the?/  would  be  likely  to  be  more  faith- 
fully and  efficiently  performed.  The  uu- 
divided  iuterebt  of  ihe  tribe  would  be 
devoted  to  this  holy  calling. 

2.  By  this  arrangement  the  conve- 
nience of  the  nation  was  undoubtedly  con- 
sulted. The  Divine  requirements  in 
this  respect  would  be  the  more  easily 
complied  with  by  this  arrangement  than 
by  that  for  which  it  was  substituted. 

3.  The  tribe  of  Levi  was  numerically 
the  most  fitted  for  these  duties.  "  This 
was  the  smallest  tribe,  and  they  were 
quite  enough  for  the  service.  To  have 
had  a  more  numerous  tribe  at  this  time 
would  have  been  very  inconvenient." 

4.  The  tribe  of  Levi  had  manifested 
its  moral  fitness  for  these  duties.  By 
their  faithful  and  courasjeous  defence  of 
the  honour  of  the  Lord,  by  slaying  the 
worshippers  of  the  golden  calf,  the  chil- 
dren of  Levi  had  shown  themselves  to 
be  the  most  suitable  of  all  the  tribes  for 
this  service.  So  we  are  able  to  trace 
the  wisdom  and  kindness  of  God  in  this 
arrangement.  And  all  His  plans  and 
doings  are  perfectly  wise  and  kind.  We 
may  not  always  be  able  to  discover  this 
wisdom  and  kindness.  But  the  limita- 
tion of  our  p  twers  should  never  be  re- 
garded as  a  reason  for  questioning  the 
Divine  perfections.  Let  every  addi- 
tional illustration  of  His  wisdom  and 
goodness  that  we  discover  lead  us  to 
cherish  increased  gratitude  to  Him, 
and  to  repose  increased  confidence  in 
Him, 


ILL  US  TRA  TIONS. 


(a)  A  gentleman,  visiting  a  slave-mart, 
was  deeply  moved  by  the  a^^ony  of  a  slave- 
girl,  who  had  been  delicately  reared,  and 
feared  that  she  should  fall  into  the  hands  of  a 
rough  master.  The  g  ntleman  inquired  her 
price,  paid  it  to  the  slave-trader,  then  placed 
the  bill  of  sale  in  htr  own  hands,  telling  her 
Bhe  was  free,  and  could  now  go  home.  The 
Blave-girl  could  not  realise  the  change  at  first, 
but,  running  after  her  redeemer,  cried,  "  He 
h38  redeemed  me  I  he  has  redeemed  me  I  Will 
you  let  me  be  your  servant?"  How  much 
more  should  we  serve  Him  who  has  redeemed 
ns  from  sin,  death,  and  heU?— Diet,  of 
lllust.  "^ 

b3 


(b)  Thysel/  and  thy  belongings 

Are  not  thine  own  so  proper,  as  to  waste 
Thyself  upon  thy  virtues,  them  on  thee. 
Heaven  doth  with  us,  as  we  with  torches  do  ; 
Not   light   them   for   themselves  :    for  if  our 

virtues 
Did  not  go  forth  of  ua,  'twere  all  alike 
As  if  we  had  them  not     Spirits  are  not  finely 

touch'd, 
But  to  fine  issues :  nor  nature  never  lends 
The  smallest  scruple  of  her  excellence. 
But,  like  a  thrifty  goddess,  she  determines 
Herself  the  glory  of  a  creditor, 
Both  thanks  and  M&Q.—Shakespeare. 

"Measure  for  M' asnre,"!  i 


CHAP,  iiu 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


The  earth  that  in  her  genial  breast 
Makes  foi  the  down  a  kindly  nest, 
Where  wafted  by  the  warm  south-west 

It  floats  at  pleasure, 
Yields,  thankful,  of  her  very  best, 

To  nurse  her  treasure  : 

True  to  her  trust,  tree,  herb,  or  reed. 
She  renders  for  each  scatter'd  seed. 
And  to  ber  Lord  with  duteous  heed 

Gives  large  increase: 
Thus  year  by  year  she  works  unfeed, 

And  will  not  cease. 


Woe  wor^h  th"se  barren  hearts  of  ours, 
Where  Thou  has  set  celestial  flowers, 
And  water'd  with  more  balmy  showers 

Than  e'er  distili'd 
In  Eden,  on  th'  ambrosial  bowers- 
Yet  nought  we  yield. 

Largely  Thou  givest,  gracious  Lord. 
Largely  Thy  gifts  should  be  restor'd. 
Freely  Thou  givest,  and  Thy  word 

Is,  "  Freely  give."" 
He  only,  who  forgets  to  hoard. 

Has  learn'd  to  livo.  KebU. 


The  Measure  op  the  Divine  Demands  upon  Man. 

(Verses  12,  13.) 


In  the  text  God  calls  attention  to  the 
reason  he  had  for  selecting  a  tribe  for 
the  service  of  the  sanctuary.  It  was  to 
be  in  lieu  of  the  firstborn,  who  were 
specially  His  because  He  smote  the 
firstborn  of  Egypt  to  effect  the  de- 
liverance of  Israel.  He  had  a  right  to 
the  firstborn  in  the  sense  that  all  are 
His  ;  but,  in  addition  to  that,  they  are 
now  His,  as  redeemed  by  Him.  It 
is  the  same  with  us  now.  While  all 
things  and  all  men  are  God's,  the 
Christian  is  especially  His — he  is  His 
child.  God  is  said  to  be  the  father  of 
us  all  ;  and  so  He  is.  But  then  we  have 
Binned,  and  have  thereby  forfeited  all 
our  rights.  We  are  the  prisoners  of 
Justice.  The  parent  of  the  criminal 
cannot  exercise  his  fatheily  functions: 
practically  his  child  has  ceased  to  be  his, 
fur  the  State  claims  him.  So  with  us 
and  God.  Although  as  Creator  He  is 
the  Father  of  us  all,  yet,  through  our 
sin,  we  are  practically  not  His  children. 
He  cannot  exercise  the  pa'^ernal  func- 
tions towards  us  till  we  are  ransomed 
from  the  curse  of  the  law  and  beome 
free,  which  we  only  do  in  and  through 
Christ.  It  is  then,  by  redemption, 
that  we  become  His  dear  children,  and 
<  njoy  all  the  privileges  of  sonship. 
Thus  Christians,  like  the  firstborn, 
Fpecially  belong  to  God  ;  for  he  has 
rot  only  given  them  being,  but  he  has 
ransomed  them. 

The  text  further  contains  a  principle 

of  deep   importance    to  us.     As    God 

emote  tlie  firstborn   of  Egypt,  He  de- 

xaandtd   the  firatborn  of   Israel.     2'he 

52 


measure  of  their  redeviption  "became  th% 
measure  of  His  demands  from  them.  He 
expected  ihem,  and  He  expects  us  to  do 
in  our  way  what  He  has  done  in  His 
way  for  u.^.  He  calls  upon  us  to  give 
to  Him  what  He  has  given  to  us.  We 
find  the  same  principle  in  the  New 
Testament.  Christ  is  more  than  the 
sacrifice  for  sin  :  He  is  our  Pattern. 
As  He  made  Himself  of  no  reputation, 
we  are  to  have  the  mind  that  was  in 
Him.  We  are  to  crucify  self,  to  die 
to  sin,  and  to  rise  again  in  newness  of 
life. 

We  shall  now  take  two  compre- 
hensive points. 

I.  God  gave  the  best  He  had  to 
effect  our  salvation. 

He  withheld  not  His  only  begotten, 
His  well-beloved  Son.  A  parent's  love 
to  his  child  is  the  deepest  and  tenderest. 
Such  was  God's  love  to  Christ.  The 
sacrifice  was  the  greatest  that  the 
Father  could  make.  We  feel  sure  that 
if  man  could  have  been  saved  in  any 
other  way  the  Son  would  have  been 
spared  the  ignominy,  the  bitterness, 
and  the  pain  He  endured  through  His 
life  and  in  His  death.  God  gave  Hiiiij 
the  best,  the  chiefest  treasure  that  He 
had,  for  our  ransom.  In  this  wo  have 
a  significant  hint  of  what  He  expects 
from  us.  We  must  give  Him  the  very 
best  of  all  we  are  and  of  all  we  have. 
As  there  was  no  salvation  witlout  God 
giving  His  best  for  us,  so  there  is  no 
religion  unless  we  are  prepared  to  give 
our  best  to  Him.  There  is  no  hardship 
in  this.     It  really  means  no  more  than 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHa,.  r/I. 


this,  that  we  are  to  love  Him  supremely. 
He  asks  nothing  of  us  ihat  He  has  not 
done  for  us  first  Himself.  In  tbe  life 
of  Christ  this  is  conspicuous.  He  lived 
all  His  sermons.  Pie  taught  much  that 
was  new,  that  was  hard  to  do,  and  was 
f^ffninst  the  practice  of  the  world ;  but 
He  did  it  all  first  Himself.  God  has 
g  ven  us  His  best  in  giving  His  Son  ; 
let  us  then  give  our  best  of  everything 
to  Him. 

II.  The  Son  gave  Himself. 

On  the  part  of  Christ  there  was  the 
sacrifice  of  His  own  life  as  the  ransom 
for  our  sin.  Redemption  is  more  thnn 
doctiine— it  is  the  Son  of  God  giving 
Himself  for  man.  Just  so,  religion  is 
more  than  creed — it  is  man  giving 
Himself  to  God.  Christ  might  have 
given  many  things;  but  nothing  would 
do  for  our  salvation  but  the  consecra- 
tion of  Himself.  This  is  the  extent  of 
God's  demand  on  us.  ''  My  son,  give 
me  thine  heart."  We  have  to  yield 
ourselves  to  Him.  Not  merely  to  die 
tor  Him,  but  to  give  up  ourselves  to 
live  for  Him — to  burn  out  in  His  work 
—to  be  faithful  unto  death — which  is 
often  harder  to  do  than  to  die  for  Him. 


Many  are  willing  to  give  time,  talents, 
money.  But  Christ  wants  us.  He 
knoA^s  that  if  we  give  Him  our  heart 
we  shall  give  Plim  all;  and  if  we  with- 
hold tliis  from  Him,  we  give  Him 
nothing  at  a''.  Consecrate  yourselves 
to  Him  as  lie  did  Il'mself  for  you. 
This  is  the  great  principle  of  the  text. 
And  it  is  the  princip'e  which  governs 
God's  demands  of  us  at  the  present  day. 
Let  us  sacrifice  ourselves  to  God  as  He 
sacrificed  His  Son  for  us.  I  urge  this 
because — 

1.  Thus  onh/ can  we  attain  to  a  high 
ideal  in  religion.  Be  the  best  possible 
Christian  :  be  not  content  with  medio- 
crity :  aim  hij^h. 

2.  This  is  the  best  way  to  be  useful. 
The  power  of  Christianity  is  in  ihe 
fact  of  Christ  giving  Himself.  Our 
influence  for  g<jod  is  in  proportion  to 
our  self-saciifice. 

3.  This  is  the  way  to  enjoy  religion, 
The  more  we  give  of  self  to  God,  the 
more  will  He  give  of   Himself  to  us. 

Let  all  think  of  what  God  has  done 
for  them,  and  consider  what  returns 
they  have  made  to  Him. 

David  Lloyd. 


TuE  Numbering  of  the   Levites  :  Command  and  Obedience. 

(Verses   14  16.) 


In  these  verses  we  have  the  command 
of  the  Lord  to  Moses  to  number    the 
Levites,  and  the  record  of  the  obedience 
of  M<  ses.     In  dealing    with   the  com- 
mand we   shall   notice   only  such  sug- 
gestions as  arise  out  of  that  part  of  it 
in  which  it  differs  most  from  the  com- 
mand to  number  the   other  tribes.     In 
the   othei     tribes     "  every    male    from 
twenty  years   old  and  upward,  all   tnat 
wfre  able  to    go    forth   to   war"  were 
mimbered.     But   concerning   the   tnbe 
of  Levi,  Moses  is  directed  to  number 
'every   male   from  a    month   old    and 
upwaid."    This  command  is  suggestive 
of — 

I.  The  interest  of  God  in  childliood. 

The  tribe  of  Levi  was  not  ap[)0:nied 
to  the  same  service  as  the  other  tribes  ; 
and,  consequeritly,  they  are  not  num- 
bered by  the  same  rule.     ''  Number  ihe 


children  of  Levi, — every  male  from  a 
month    old    and     upward    shalt    thou 
number   them."     The    Levites    *'  were 
to  be  sanctified  to  Jehovah  in  the  place 
of  the  firstborn  ;  and  it  was  at  the  ao^e 
of  a  month  that  the  latter  were  either 
to  be  given  up  or  redeemed  "  (compare 
verses  40  and  43  with  chap,  xviii.  16). 
The  children  of  the  Levites  were  to  be 
taught    that    from    their    infancy  thev 
belonged  to   the   Lord,  and   were  dedi- 
cated to    His  service.     Only  8  680  <  ut 
of  22,000  were  regarded   as   fit  to   be 
employed   in   the   service  of  the  taber- 
nacle, yet  all    were   numbered    as    be- 
longing to  the  Lord.     God  is  profoundly 
and   tenderly   interested   in    childhood. 
In  His  spiritual  Kingdom,  in  which  all 
His  loyal  subjects  are  priests,  He  claims 
for   His   service  every  child   e«en  from 
the   very   dawn   of  its  existence.     Hia 

63 


CHAP.  in. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


interest  in  little  children  is  strikingly 
illustrated  in  the  presentation  of  the 
little  child  by  the  Lord  to  His  disciples 
as  the  picture  of  the  "  greatest  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven."  (Matt,  xviii.  1-6.) 
And  perhaps  even  more  strikingly  in 
the  blessing  which  He  be  towed  upon 
the  infants  that  were  brought  to  flim 
for  that  purpose.  (Matt.  xix.  13-15.) 
It  is  the  duty  of  Christian  parents  to 
recognise  God's  claim  upon  their 
offspring,  and  to  dedicate  them  to 
Him.  That  dedication  cannot  take 
place  too  early,  since  from  their  very 
birth  they  are  His  by  the  divinest  rights. 
It  is  also  their  duty  to  train  their 
children  for  Him.  "  Ye  fathers,  pro- 
voke not  your  children  to  wrath  ;  but 
bring  them  up  in  the  nurture  and 
admonition  of  the  Lord."  Let  parents 
be  encouraged  in  the  performance  of 
their  duty  by  the  interest  of  God  in 
their  offspring.  He  will  approve  and 
bless  their  devout  efforts,     (a) 

The  command  here  given  to  Moses 
suggests, — 

IL  The  generosity  of  God's  deal- 
ings with  man. 

He  here  accepts  even  infants,  who 
must  live  many  years  before  they  can 
actively  engage  in  His  service,  in  ex- 
change for  able-bodied  men.  "  Observe 
we  again  with  comfort,"  saith  Bishop 
Babington,  "  what  exchanges  God 
maketh  with  men.  He  taketh  a  child 
of  a  month  old,  and  foregoeth  a  first- 
born of  ripe  years.  Such  is  His  manner 
and  most  gracious  goodness  ;  He  giveth 
more  than  He  wanteth,  and  gainers 
ever  are  His  children  by  Him.  Job 
had  a  bitter  trial  and  a  heavy  loss,  yet 
mark  the  end,  and  the  Lord  made  him 
greater  than  ever  he  was — the  Lord 
blessing  the  last  days  of  Job,  as  the 
text  saith,  more  than  the  first,  etc. 
David's  child  was  taken  away,  but  a  far 
better  was  given  again,  even  Solomon, 
the  wisest  son  that  ever  father  had.  A 
cake  was  taken  of  the  poor  widow  of 
Sarepta  for  His  prophet,  but  what  a 
requital  made  God  unto  her  ?  The 
meal  in  tlie  barrel  and  the  oil  in  the 
cruse  decayed   not   till   other   comfort 


grew.  Another  kindness  done  by  the 
Shunamite,  was  it  not  recompen-ed  by 
that  blessing  that  was  so  vehemently 
wished — even  a  son  ;  firtt  given,  and 
after  revived  from  death  to  life  again  ? 
Think  of  the  saying  in  the  Gospel  con- 
cerning this  point :  *  Verily  I  say  unto 
you,  there  is  no  man  that  hath  forsaken 
house,  or  brethren,  or  bisters,  or  father, 
or  mother,  or  wife,  or  children,  or 
lands  for  My  sake  and  the  Gospel's, 
but  he  shall  receive  an  hundred-fold 
now  at  this  present,  houses,  and  breth- 
ren, and  f-isters,  and  mothers,  and  chil- 
dren, and  lands  with  persecutions,  and 
in  the  world  to  come  life  everlasting.' 
See  the  change,  and  mark  the  gain 
for  your  exceeding  comfort.  Such  a 
God  is  our  God,  that  not  a  cup  of  cold 
water  can  be  given,  but  He  will  yield  a 
far  greater  gift  for  it.  We  cannot  visit 
Him,  feed  Him,  clothe  Him,  etc.,  in 
His  poor  members,  but  He  will  acknow- 
ledge it  before  the  host  of  heaven,  and 
give  that  which  passeth  ten  thousand 
worlds — eternal  joy  in  heaven." 

Let  us  notice, — 

III.  The    obedience  of  God's  ser- 
vant. 

**  And  Moses  numbered  them  accord- 
ing to  the  word  of  the  Lord,  as  he  was 
commanded."  The  point  to  which  pro- 
minence is  here  given  is  the  complete- 
ness of  the  obedience.  It  was  not  merely 
general,  but  particular.  He  conformed 
to  the  directions  which  he  had  received 
from  the  Lord  in  derail.  Herein  he  is 
an  example  to  us.  Nothing  which  God 
directs  can  be  trifling  or  unimportant. 
What  Infinite  Wisdom  commands  mi- 
nutely, it  must  be  both  our  duty  and  our 
interest  minutely  to  do.  "  General 
obedience,"  says  Dr.  Parker,  "  is  only 
80  far  gojd:  we  must  be  minute  and 
exhaustive,  or  we  shall  incur  Divine 
displeasure.  Learn  that  Divine  language 
never  exceeds  Divine  meaning.  Theje  is 
significance  in  every  word  ;  you  cannot 
amputate  a  single  syllable  without  doing 
violence  to  the  Divine  idea."  Let  us 
strive  to  render  complete  and  hearty 
obedience  to  all  the  commands  of 
God.     (h) 


ftl 


nOMlLETlC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


CHAP,  in. 


ILL  us  TRA  TIONS. 


(a)  God's  interest  in  human  life  begins  at 
the  earliest  possible  period.     This  is  an  argu- 
mect  for  infant  baptism  which  I  have  never 
kno(vn  to  be  touched,  much  less  shaken.    The 
i; arrow  critics  who  have   taken  upon   tbem- 
pelves  to  settle  that  question,  have  been  fight- 
ing each   other  with   Greek   derivatives  Ind 
grammatical  inflexions,  as  if  avy  moral  question 
could  be  settled  by  such  means !     I  make  this 
question  one  of  life,  not  one  of  grammar;  and 
1  put  this  direct  and  urgent  inquiry — namely, 
"When  does  God's  interest  in  human  life  begin? 
When  does  Christ's  heart  begin  to  yearn  in  pity 
over  all  human  creatures?      When  does  com- 
passion's tear  well  into  the  Redeemer's  eyes? 
When  does  He  feel  the  kindling  of  love  to. 
wards  human  beings?     Is  it  when  they  are 
five  years  old,  or  ten— does  He  shut  up  Bis  love 
until  they  are  twenty-one  ?    The  question  may 
appear  quaint,  but  I  press  it;  I  urge  a  distinct 
answer— When  does  Chii&t's  interest  in  human 
life  begin  ?     I  contend  that  His  interest  re- 
lates to  life,  not  to  age  ;  to  birth,  not  to  birth- 
days.     As  soon  as  a  child  is  born,  that  great 
redeeming  heart  yearns   with   pitying    love. 
Wtat  has  Christ  to  do  with  what  we  call  age  f 
What  is  age?     It  may  be  useful  for  us  to  keep 
a  record  of  anniversaries,  to  tabulate  for  sta- 
tistical purposes,  to  call  one  man  twenty  and 
another  forty,  though  forty,  in  reality,  may  be 
less  than  twenty;  but  will  you   presume  to 
reduce  Christ  to  a  commercial  agent,  who  deals 
with  men  according  to  their  age  ?     No  !     I 
hold  to  it  as  a  sweet  joy,  a  most  delicious  and 
enjapturing   thought,  that  Jesus   Christ  in- 
terests  Himself  in   me,  that  my   nama    was 
written  in  His  heart  ere  it  fell  from  my  mother's 
lips,    and    that    before    a  father   knows  the 
mystery  and  prido  of  parental  life,  Jesus  ex- 


periences the  travail  of  the  soul  which  yearns 

to  make  the  child  an   heir  of  immortality 

Jos.  Parker,  D.D. 

(b)  Nothing  is  more  certain  or  clear  than 
that  human  souls  are  made  for  law,  and  so  for 
the   abode  of  God.     Without   law    therefore 
without  God,  they  must  even  freeze  and  die. 
Hence  even  Chrisc  Uimsilf  must  needs  estab- 
lish and  sanctify  the  law  ;  for  the  deliverance 
and  liberty  Ho  comes  to   bring  are  still  to  be 
sought  only  in  obedience.     Honceforth  duty  is 
the  b  other  of  liberty,  and  both  rejoice  in  the 
common  motherhood  of  law.     And  just  here, 
my  friends,  is  the  secret  of  a  great  part  of 
your  misery  and  of  the  darkness  that  envelopes 
your  life.     Without   obligation  you  have   no 
light,  save  what  little  may  prick  through  your 
eyelids.     Only  he  that  keeps  God's  command- 
ments walks  in  the  light.     The  moment  yoa 
can  make  a  very    simple  discovery,  viz.,  that 
obligation  to  God  is  your  privilege,  and  is  not 
imposed  as  a   burden,    your  experience    will 
teach  you  many  things— that  duty  is  liberty, 
that  repentance  is  a  release  from  sorrow,  that 
sacrifice  is  gain,  that  humility  is  dignity,  that 
the  truth  from  which  you  hide  is  a  healing 
element  that  bathes  your  disordered  life,  and 
that  even  the  penalties  and  terrors  of  God  are 
the  artillery  only  of  protection  to  His  realm. 
— //.  Bushnell,  D.D. 

It  ought  to  be  the  great  care  of  every  one  of 
us  to  follow  the  Lord  fully.  We  must,  in  a 
course  of  obedience  to  God's  will,  and  service 
to  His  honour,  follow  Him  universally,  with- 
out dividing;  uprightly,  without  dissembling; 
cheerfully,  without  disputing;  and  constantly, 
without  declining:  and  this  is  following  Him 
fully.— J/.  Henry, 


Sacred  Things  and  Duties, 
{Verses  17-39.) 


Critical  Notes. 

Verse  36.  The  custody  and  charge. 
Margin:  '* Hebrew,  the  office  of  the 
charge," 

Verse  38.  Keeping  the  charge  of  the 
sanctuary  for  the  charge  of  the  children 
of  Israel^  '''  i.e.,  to  attend  to  everything 
that  was  binding  upon  the  children  of 
Israel  in  relation  lo  the  care  of  the 
sanctuary,  as  do  stranger  was  allowed 
to  approach  it  on  pain  of  death."— 7^627 
and  Del. 

Verte  3d.  The  number  of  the  Levites 
as  stated  in  this  verse  is  22,000  ;  but  as 
stated  in  verses  22,  28,  and  34,  it  is 
22,300.  Various  attempts  have  been 
made  to   reconcile  the  twa     That  of 


Dr.  Kennicott,  given  by  Dr.  A.  Clarke, 
in  loco,  seems  to  us  the  most  reasonable. 
*'  Formerly,  the  numbers  of  the  Hebrew- 
Bible  were  expressed  by  letters,  and  not 
by  words   of  full  length;    and  if  two 
nearly  similar  letters  were  mistaken  for 
each  other,  many  errors  in  the  number 
mu^t  be  the  consequence.     Now  it  is 
probable  that  an  error   has  crept  into 
the  number  of  the   Gershonites,  verse 
22,  where  instead  of  7,510  we  should 
read  7,200  as  "]  caph,  500,  might  have 
been    easiJy  mita^en  for  ^  resh,  200, 
especially  if  the  down  stroke  of  the  caph 
had  been  a  little  shorter  than  ordinary, 
which    is    often    the    case    in    MSS." 
Ktil  and   Del.   regarfl   the  discrepancy 

65 


CHAP.  If  I. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


as  aii.-ing  from  "a  copyist's  error  in  the 
inimherof  one  of  the  Leviiical  families; 
possibly  in  verse  28  we  should  read 
]Ub':}  for  UJ^D  (8,300  for  8,600)." 

In  these  verses  we  have  the  record  of 
the  numbering  of  the  Levite^,  with  the 
names  of  the  chiefs  who  had  (he  over- 
sight of  them,  the  places  assigned  to 
them  about  the  tabernacle,  and  the 
duties  as  distribu'ed  amongst  them. 
They  suogest  the  following  homiletiG 
points.     Notice — 

I.  The  Divine  dii-ections  for  in- 
suring order. 

By  Divine  direction  the  whole  tribe 
is  arranged  in  four  divisions,  the  fami- 
lies composing  each  division  are  clearly 
distinguished,  the  station  of  each  divi- 
sion is  appointed,  a  chief  is  set  over 
each  division,  and  Eleazir  the  son  of 
Aaron  is  appointed  chief  over  the  chiefs. 
In  this  we  cleaily  discover  a  Divine 
recognition  of — 

1.  The  importance  of  arrangement  and 
order.  (See  our  notes  and  illustration 
on  chap,  ii.,  verses  1  and  2,  on  this 
point.) 

2.  The  importance  of  supervision  and 
authority  for  the  maintenance  of  order, 
(On  this  point  see  our  notes  and  illus- 
trations on  Society's  need  of  leaders^  ch.  i. 
4-16.) 

II.  The  Divine  distribution  of  duty. 

1.  The  duties  were  distributed  amongst 
the  whole.  No  family  was  ext^mpted  ; 
nor  was  any  individual  of  the  prescribed 
age,  etc.  There  was  work  for  a'l,  and 
for  every  one.  So  in  our  day  there  is 
mo.^t  urgent  need  for  the  services  of 
every  true  man  and  woman.  The 
greatest  need  of  both  the  Church  and 
the  world  is  true-hearted  labourers. 

*'  There's  something  for  us  all  to  do 

In  this  great  world  of  ours ; 
There's  vrork  for  me;  there's  work  for  you, 

Heaven  8»nds  no  idle  hours: 
We  have  a  mi^sion  to  perform, 

A  post  of  trust  to  fill, 
Then  rouse  the  soul,  and  nerve  the  arm, 

Acd  lend  the  lofty  will."     (a) 

2.  The  duties  distributed  to  each  division 
were  different  from  those  distributed  to  the 
other  divisions.  Moses,  and  Aaron  and 
his  f^ons,  were  appointed  to  the  position 
of  the  highest  honour  and  the  weightiest 
responsibil  ty.     The  duties  which  rank 


56 


second  in  honour  were  allotted  to  the 
Kohathites.  To  tke  Merarites.  which, 
though  the  smalVst  of  the  families  of 
Levi,  yet  contained  the  largest  number 
of  able-bodied  men  (compare  vers.  22, 
28,  34,  and  ch.  iv.  v^rs.  36,  40,  44), 
were  allotted  the  most  heavy  and 
laborious  duties.  All  men  cannot  work 
at  ihe  same  ta.^ks  or  in  the  same  way. 
Division  of  duty  is  (l)  necessary.^  because 
of  the  differences  in  the  kind  and  degree 
of  ability  amons^st  men.  {b)  It  is  also 
(2)  advantageous.  By  means  of  it  more 
work  may  be  accomplished  and  better. 
The  advantage  will  be  found  both  in 
the  quantity  and  in  the  quality  of  the 
results.  Contrast  the  ancient  and  the 
modern  method  of  pin  manufacture  in 
illustration  of  this  point. 

3.  The  duties  of  all  were  Divine.  All 
were  engaged  in  the  service  of  God  ;  all 
were  appointed  by  God.  The  duties 
were  assigned  to  each  division  and  to 
all  as  a  "charge"  from  God  —a  sacred 
tru^t.  So  now,  all  duty,  even  the  low- 
liest and  most  menial,  when  rio;htly  re- 
garded and  faithfully  discharged,  is  holy. 
The  highest  duties  can  never  of  them- 
selves exalt  the  hireling  or  the  unfaith- 
ful worker;  but  the  spirit  of  the  faith- 
ful and  devoted  worker  will  dignify  and 
hallow  the  meanest  labours,     (c) 

III.  The  Divine  recognition  of  the 
sacredness  of  things  associated  with 
religious  worship. 

JNot  only  the  ark  and  the  altars,  but 
the  hanging-!,  the  coverings,  the  cords, 
the  boards,  the  bars,  the  sockets,  the 
pins,  etc.,  connected  with  the  tabernac'e 
were  given  in  solemn  charge  to  the 
Levites.  All  these  things!  were  to  be 
held  as  sacred.  And  it  any  stranger 
came  nigh  to  the  samjtuary  itself  he 
was  to  be  put  to  death.  And  still  there 
are  sacred  places  and  sacred  things. 
They  have  been  made  sacred  neither  by 
the  ^'  consecration  "  of  pope  or  cardinal, 
of  archbishop  or  bishop,  nor  by  the 
**  dedication  "  of  any  minl-^ter  or  minis- 
ters ;  but  by  the  memories  which  gather 
round  them,  or  by  the  uses  to  which 
they  are  set  apart.  To  reverent  spiri  s 
the  commonest  things  are  hallowed  by 
sacred  uses,  and  even  the  plainest 
places  are  consecrated  by  puro  and  pre- 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  ni. 


oious  association*!.  The  spiritual  his- 
tory of  every  godly  man  bag  its  sacred 
places.  And  have  we  not  each  things 
which  are  profoundly  sacred  to  us  per- 
sonally ?     (d) 


Conclusion : 

Let  us  endeavour  to  be  true  and 
tender  in  sentiment,  pure  and  reverent 
in  feeling,  and  hearty  and  faithful  in 
duty. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  There  is  something  for  all  to  do,  but 
by  diffr-rent  instruments — one  by  his  organ, 
another  by  his  piano,  another  by  his  paint- 
brush, another  by  his  sculptor's  chisel,  another 
by  his  plough,  another  by  his  carpenter's  tools, 
another  by  his  trowel — every  man  by  that  to 
which  he  is  called  in  the  providence  of  God, 
that  he  may  give  some  expression  to  the  in- 
wardness that  is  waked  up  in  him.  There  are 
rude  workmen  who  have,  back  of  their  hand, 
back  of  their  skill,  a  soul  that  is  trying  to 
express  itself  in  the  realities  of  life.  This  is 
the  ordination  which  makes  true  manhood  and 
true  genius.  -  R.  W.  Beecher. 

(b)  See  the  illustration  on  verses  5-10,  by 
Dr.  Parker. 

(c)  Teach  me,  my  God  and  King, 
In  all  things  Thee  to  see, 

And  what  I  do  in  any  thing, 
To  do  it  as  for  Thee  : 

Not  rudely,  as  a  beast. 
To  rur  into  an  action ; 
But  still  to  make  Thee  prepossest, 
And  give  it  his  perfection. 

A  man  that  looks  on  glass, 
On  it  may  stay  his  eye; 
Or,  if  he  pleaaeth,  through  it  pass, 
And  then  the  heav'n  espie. 

All  may  of  Thee  partake: 
Nothing  can  be  so  mean. 
Which  with  his  tincture  (for  Thy  sake) 
Will  not  grow  bright  and  clean. 

A  servant  with  this  clause 
Makes  drudgery  divine : 
Who  sweeps  a  room,  as  Cor  Thy  laws, 
Makes  that  and  th'  action  fine. 

This  is  the  famous  stone 
That  turneth  all  to  gold : 
For  that  which  God  doth  touch  and  own 
Cannot  for  less  be  told. 

George  Herbert, 

Seo  also  the  illustration  by  Carlyle  given 
nu'lHr  verses  5-10. 

id)  It  is  given  us  to  transfer  our  own  mental 


and  moral  nature  to  the  objects  of  our  eight  or 
of  our  conception      One  man,  who  has  never 
read  the   Sacred  History,  and  whose  mind  is 
wholly  uninformed  as  to   its  wonderful  facts, 
might  visit  the  Holy  Land  and  make  himself 
familiar  with  its  existing   scenery,  and  as  his 
foot  impressed  its    hallowed   soil,  and  his  eye 
rested  on  its    mountains  and   its  vales,  on  its 
rivers  and  its   lakes,  and  on    all  its   natural 
phenomena,  he  might  betray  no  more  emotion 
than  would  be  awakened  by  the  contemplation 
of  similar  phenomena  in  any  other  part  of  the 
world  ;  while  another  man,  who  had  imbibed 
the  spirit  and  the  inspiration  of  the  Bible,  and 
whose  faith  reposed  in  its  simple,  yet  sublime 
narratives,  would  everywhere  find  the  most 
extraordina-y  appearances,  and  feel  that  he 
was  in  a   land    teeming   with   miracles.     To 

him,  *'  every  name  commemora'^es  a  mystery 

every   grotto  announces  a  prediction— every 
hill  echoes  the  accent  of  a  prophet."     He  can- 
not get  away  from  the  impression  that   "  God 
Himself  has  spoken  in  those   regions— dried 
up   rivers— rent  the  rocks— and  opened  the 
graves."     To  him   "the  desert   still  appears 
mute  with  terror ;  "  and  he  imagines  that  it 
can  never  have  "presumed  to  int  rrupt  the 
silence,  since  it  heard  the  awful  voice  of  the 
Eternal  I  "  He  f  e^ls  that  he  is  on  holy  ground  • 
and  his  very  step  is  reverent.     He  approaches 
every   object  with  deepening   awe,    and  li^e 
Moses  at  the  burning-bush,  sees  everything 
glowing    with   Divine    glory.      The    natural 
scenery  of  Palestine  may  not  be  superior  to 
that  which   is  to   be  found  in  other  parts  of 
the  world ;  but  where  can  we  find  a  country 
so  rich   in  associations,  or  with  what   other 
place  can  we  connect  associations  so  hallowed 
and  so  unique  1     It  is  our  remembrances  and 
our  memories  which  give  to  the  outward  phe- 
nomena such  transcendent  interest.    We  throw 
the  whole  living  flame  of  our  holiest  feeling 
upon  everthing  without    us   and   around  us, 
and  everywhere  we  see  beauty,  and  magnifi- 
cence and   glory— everywhere    we  trace  the 
footsteps     of    Divinity,    and    everywhere    we 
hear  the  voice  of  God.— i2.  Ferguson,  LL.D. 


Alloted  Duties, 
(Tmes  21-38.) 


I.  They  dlfFered  in  importance,  yet 
there  was  no  vain  ambition. 

II.  They  differed  in  labour,  yet  there 
was  no  complaining. 


III.  They  differed  in  nature,  yet  were 
all  undertaken  with  equal  cheerfulness. 

IV.  They  differed   according  to  the 
wise  will  of  God. — The  Biblical  Museum 


CHAP.  III. 


tiUMLi.li^TlV    VOMMEISTARy:    NUMBERS, 


Tub    Responsibility   op    each    and   the    Co-operation  op   all   in   thb 

Service  of   God. 

(Verses  25,  26,  31,  36,  37.) 


Having  chosen  the  Levites  for  His 
service,  God  portions  out  their  work  to 
them.  The  priesthood  was  conferred 
upon  Aaron  and  his  family,  and  the 
rest  of  the  tribe  were  to  assist  them  in 
the  service  of  the  tabernacle.  In 
making  these  arrangements  the  charac- 
ter of  Moses  stands  out  strikingly  pro- 
minent. He  does  not  demur  because 
his  tribe  has  no  inheritance,  neither  do 
we  find  him  seeking  any  special  honour 
for  his  own  family.  Few  men  there 
are  who  are  not  injured  by  prosperity 
and  power,  and  who  take  no  advantage 
of  their  position  to  further  the  interests 
of  their  families.  Nepotism  is  common 
in  Church  and  State.  Moses  was  above 
that,  and  was  ready  to  acquiesce  in 
God's  way,  thinking  it  great  honour  to 
his  family  to  be  engaged  in  His  service, 
though  in  the  humble  position  of 
Levites. 

God  divides  the  tribe  of  Levi, 
having  selected  from  it  the  family  of 
Aaron  for  the  priesthood,  into  thiee 
distinct  families  ;  and,  in  the  text,  He 
gives  to  each  his  own  work  to  do  in 
connection  with  the  tabernacle.  Their 
duty  in  the  wilderness  was  to  carry  it 
and  its  furniture  from  place  to  place, 
etc.  Each  had  his  work  to  do,  and  all 
had  to  co-operate.  Thus  the  tabernacle 
and  its  services  were  ever  attended  to, 
and  God's  work  among  the  people  was 
constantly  carried  on.  Lookng  thus  at 
the  verses  which  constitute  our  text, 
they  suggest  to  us  the  subject  of 
personal  responsibility  and  co-operation 
in  the  service  of  God, 

I.  God  has  a  work  for  every  one  of 
His  children  to  do,  and  He  expects 
each  one  to  do  it. 

He  holds  each  responsible  for  it.  We 
are  to  be  His  servants ;  we  are  to  be 
usefuL  He  brings  up  none  of  His 
children  in  luxurious  idleness.  God 
hates  idleness.  Amongst  the  countless 
forms  and  varieties  of  life  in  the  uni- 
verse, there  is  not  one  that  has  not  some 
68 


purpose   to   answer — something    given 
it  to  do  by  its  Creator.     To  show  how  He 
hates  idleness  He  has  linked  poverty  to 
it.     It  is  so  in  religion  too.    The  spirit- 
ual idler  is  ever  a  spiritual  pauper,  and 
can  never  possess  the  riches  of  religion. 
We  must  work  before  we  can  possess 
them.     The  hand  of  the  diligent  God 
blesses.     There  is  much  need  of  calling 
attention  to  this  truth  at  the  present 
day.     The  age  is  a  luxurious  one  ;  ease 
and  comfort  seem  to  be  the    ends    of 
life.     This   spirit  is  creeping   into  our 
churches.     It  is  difficult  to  get  people  to 
reaUze  their  responsibility,  and  to  work 
for  God.     They  guage  everything  by 
the   amount  of  pleasure  it  gives,  and 
not  by  the  good  it  is  calculated  to  do 
them.     Men   ought  to  have  a  higher 
ideal.     God  saves  us  that  we  might  be 
His   fellow- workers.     God    makes    us 
soldiers  before    He   makes    us    saints. 
The    highest    test    of    religion    is   not 
enjoyment,    but   usefulness.     There    is 
joy  in  religion.     It  is  the  most  joyous 
thing  in  the  world  ;  but  then  the  joy  is 
associated  with  work.     There  is  no  real 
pleasure  in  idleness.     It  is  the  working 
man,  and  not  the  skulking  idler,  that 
has  the  most  physical  enjoyment.     So 
in  spiritual  things.     There  is  no  luxury 
like  that  of  doing  good.     If  any  Chris- 
tian lacks  joy  in  religion,  let  him  work 
more   for  God.     He  expects  us  all  to 
be  workers.     None  are  exempt.     There 
is   not  one  without  a  *' talent;"    and 
God  expects  it  with  usury.    He  exempts 
none  on  the  ground  of  youth  or  age,  of 
inability  or  weakness,  etc.     If  you  are 
poor,  you  can  show  how  religion  can  sup- 
port in  poverty.     If  you  aie  old,  you  can 
"  bring  forth  fruit  in  old  age.**    Some- 
times  a   Christian  is  laid  by  through 
affliction,  and  feels  that  he  is  of  no  use 
whatever.     But  the  sick  bed  of  a  child 
of  God  is  of  great  profit  to  the  world 
and   to   the  Church   by  showing  how 
religion    can   support    the    mind    and 
comfort  the  heart  in  trial.     Moreover, 


HOMJLhTIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  ni. 


the  afflicted  Christian  can  benefit  others 
by  intercession  with  G  )d.  We  all  know 
})0w  the  suflVring  child  prevails  with 
his  parent,  and  none  can  tell  what  the 
world  and  the  Church  owe  to  the 
prayers  of  God's  suffering  children. 
All  can  do  something  for  God.  He  has 
given  it  them  to  do,  and  He  holds  them 
rej-ponsible  for  it. 

II.  Not  only  does  God  expect  each 
one  to  work  for  Him,  but  He  expects 
all  to  co-operate  in  His  service. 

Each  Levire  had  his  own  work  to 
perform,  but  the  three  divisions  were  to 
move  too'ether  and  to  halt  together. 
Without  their  co-operation  the  taber- 
racle  could  not  have  been  erected,  and 
God  would  not  have  appeared  on  the 
Mercy-seat.  We  are  not  to  be  isolated 
workers,  but  fellow-labourers.  While 
it  is  true  that  each  one  is  accountable 
only  for  himself,  it  is  also  true  (hat  no 
one  liveth  to  himself.  If  we  are  units, 
we  are  parts  of  a  whole.  Paul  takes 
the  different  parts  of  the  human  body 
as  an  illustraiion  of  the  body  of  Christ, 


which  is  the  Church,  Co-operation  is 
the  secret  of  success.  The  Church  and 
the  Sunday-school,  the  pulpit  and  the 
pew,  each  must  do  its  own  work,  and 
all  must  work  together,  if  the  work  of 
God  is  to  prosper  amongst  us.  It  ought 
to  be  so  between  va'  ious  Churches — the 
different  sections  of  the  one  Church  of 
the  living  God.  The  work  of  God  suf- 
fers for  the  want  of  co-operation.  Often 
jealousy  and  rivalry  creep  in  amongst 
us  ;  we  watch  one  another  instead  of 
our  common  foe,  and  prosperity  becomes 
impossible.  Are  we  not  all  soldiers  of 
the  same  Christ?  Different  regiments 
in  one  and  the  same  army?  The  dress 
may  differ,  but  we  all  bear  the  coat-of- 
arms  of  our  King.  Surely,  then,  there 
ought  to  be  EO  jealousy  amongst  us,  and 
we  ought  to  band  together  to  fight 
against  His  enemies.  The  Church  of 
God  must  come  closer  together,  and  co- 
operate more  heartily,  before  the  worM 
is  won  for  Christ.  No  opposition  can 
stand  before  the  united  Church  of  God. 
— David  Lloych 


Thr   Completeness  of  God's   Claims,  and  the  Dignity  op  \u6   Service. 

{Verses  40-51.) 


In  this  section  of  the  history  we  have 
the  account  of  the  numbering  of  the 
fir  t'  orn  males  throughout  the  twelve 
tribes  in  order  to  effect  the  exchange  of 
the  Levites  for  them,  which  God  had 
commanded.  Three  enquiries  claim  our 
attention. 

I.  How  are  we  to  account  for  so  large 
a  number  of  Jir.-thorn  in  so  short  a  time? 
Tne  command  for  the  sanctifioation  of 
the  firstborn,  recorded  in  Exod.  xiii. 
1,  2,  was  not  retrospective,  but  was 
meant  to  apply  to  all  that  should  be 
born  from  that  time  forward.  **  Hence 
the  difficuliy  is  to  explain  how  the  first- 
born sons,  amongst  two  millions  of  per- 
sons in  a  single  year,  could  have  been 
80  many  as  is  stated  in  the  text ;  and  it 
must  be  admitted,  notwithstanding  the 
well-known  and  often  remarkable  fluc- 
tuations in  statistics  of  this  sort,  that 
some  unusual  causes  must  have  been 
concerned.     Such,  not  to  mention  the 


Divine  Blessing,  may  be  found  in  the 
sudden  development  of  national  ener- 
gies which  would  immediately  ensue  on 
the  exodus.  Before  that  event,  the 
miserable  estate  of  the  people,  and  espe- 
cially the  inhuman  order  for  the  destruc- 
tion of  their  first-born,  would  check 
very  seriously  the  ratio  of  marriages 
and  births ;  and  this  ratio  would 
naturally,  when  the  check  was  removed, 
exhibit  a  sudden  and  striking  increase." 
— Speaker* s  Comm.  As  additional  argu- 
ments, the  great  fruitfulness  of  the 
Israelitish  women,  and  the  fact  that 
amongst  them  the  proportion  of  male 
births  is  unusually  large,  are  adduced. 
(See  Keil  and  Del.  in  loco.) 

2.  What  is  the  value  of  *^  the  shekel  of 
the  sanctuary  ?  "  "  Here  the  shekel  is 
evidently  a  weight,  and  of  a  special  sys- 
tem of  which  the  standard  examples 
were  probably  kept  by  the  priests."  At 
this  time  silver,  and  not  gold,  was  used 

69 


CI  AT     III. 


nOMlLETlC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


as  the  standard  of  value.  It  is  impos- 
sible to  determiDe  exactly  what  was  the 
value  of  the  "  sacred  shekel "  as  com- 
pared with  our  English  money  of  to-day, 
but  probably  it  would  be  about  two 
shillings  and  sixpence. 

3.  Who  paid  the  redemption  money  for 
the  21 'd  firstborn  who  were  in  excess  of 
the  number  of  the  Levites  ?  ''  The  re- 
demption money/'  says  The  Speaker  s 
Comm.^  ''would  perhaps  be  exacted 
from  the  parents  ot"  the  youngest  chil- 
dren of  the  22,273,  they  being  in  the 
case  most  nearly  approaching  that  of 
those  who  would  pay  the  tax  for  the 
redemption  of  the  lirst-born  in  future." 
But  the  opinion  of  Attersoll,  A.  Claike, 
and  other.s,  seems  to  us  the  most  pro- 
bable. Was  the  money  paid  'by  the 
firstborn  that  were  last  numbered,  or 
by  the  people?  I  answer,"  sa)?s  Atter- 
soll, "  by  the  people,  to  Moses,  for  the 
priests:  for  so  dotii  common  equity  re- 
quire, that  one  might  not  be  eased,  and 
another  burdened.  But  if  these  first- 
born had  borne  the  burden,  and  others 
been  fjeed  from  the  payment  of  this 
sum  appointed  and  enjomed,  there  had 
been  no  equity  nor  equality  observed, 
which  the  dignity  of  holy  things  seemeth 
to  require." 

The  command  for  substituting  the 
Levites  for  the  firfttborn  (vers.  11-13) 
we  have  already  consid'Med,  and  endea- 
voured to  show  the  reason  of  the  sub- 
stitution. In  considering  this  portion 
of  the  history  we  confine  our  attention 
to  two  main  homiletic  points.   Notice, — 

I.  The  completeness  of  God's 
claims. 

We  see  this  here  in  two  things : 

1.  He  claims  not  only  the  firstborn  of 
Israel,  but  also  thefirstlings  of  their  cattle. 
(See  verses  41  and  45.)  All  were  His 
by  right  of  creation.  *^ Every  beast  of 
the  forest  is  Mine,  and  the  caUle  upon 
a  thousand  hills."  Moreover,  the  cattle 
I  of  Israel  were  spared  on  that  night  when 
"  all  the  firstborn  of  cattle  "  belonging 
to  the  Egyptians  were  slain.  So  that 
His  claim  upon  the  firstborn  of  cattle, 
both  as  having  created  and  as  having 
spared  them,  rested  on  the  same  ground 
as  His  claim  upon  the  firstborn  sons. 
fSee  our  notes  on  vers,  11-13.)  "The 
60 


cattle  of  the  Levites  were  doubtless  taken 
in  the  gross  as  an  equivalent  for  the 
firstborn  cattle  of  the  other  tribes, 
which  of  course,  no  less  than  the  first- 
born of  men,  belonged  to  the  Lord;  and 
in  future  would  have  to  be  redeemed." 
(See  Exod.  xiii.  11-15;  Num.  xviii  15; 
Deut.  XV.  19.) 

God  claims  ours  as  well  as  us ;  what 
we  have  as  well  as  what  we  are  ;  first 
ourselves,  then  our  possessions.  (Comp. 
Matt.  X.  37-39,  xix.  21-24.)  When  we 
have  truly  given  ourselves  to  the  Lord 
we  shall  withhold  nothing  else  from 
Him.  And  apart  from  this  self-conse- 
cration to  Him,  the  consecration  of  even 
our  most  costly  and  treasured  posses- 
sions is  not  a«*ceptable  to  Him.  With- 
out our  supreme  love  all  other  gifts  are 
worthltss  in  His  sight.  (Comp.  Psa.  1. 
7-14,  and  Isa.  i.  11-14.) 

2.  He  claims  t!  at  the  273  firstborn  in 
excess  of  the  Levites  shall  be  redeemed  by 
money.  He  does  not  a(  cept  the  Levites 
as  a  whole  for  the  firstborn  as  a  whole, 
taking  no  account  of  their  relative  num- 
bers. The  Levites  must  be  numbered, 
and  the  firstborn  must  be  numbeied, 
and  as  there  is  an  excess  in  the  number 
of  the  firstborn,  every  one  of  these  must 
be  redeemed.  Every  one  is  His ;  and 
He  is  not  willing  to  lose  any  one.  May 
we  not  regard  this  as  exhibiting  His 
high  estimate  of  men  ?  We  are  so  pre* 
cious  in  His  sight  that  He  will  not  lose 
one  of  us  if  He  can  prevent  it.  His 
heart  yearns  in  unutterable  love  towards 
every  prodigal  wanderer  from  His  ser- 
vice, His  home,  and  His  heart.  "  Turn, 
O  backsliding  children,  saith  the  Lord ; 
for  I  am  married  unto  you.  .  .  .  How 
shall  I  put  thee  among  the  children,  and 
give  thee  a  pleasant  land,  a  goodly  heri- 
tage of  the  hosts  of  nations  ?  and  I  said, 
Thou  shalt  call  Me,  My  Father  ;  and 
shalt  not  turn  away  from  Me."  '*  When 
Israel  was  a  child,  then  I  loved  him," 
etc.  "  How  shall  I  give  thee  up 
Ephraim  ?  "  etc.  God  is  so  exact  in 
His  claims  upon  us,  because  His  love 
toward  us  is  so  great.  His  demands  are 
always  characterised  by  (1)  generosity. 
We  have  seen  (in  considering  vertes 
11-13)  that  the  substitution  of  the 
Levites  was  for  the  advantage  of  the 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  in. 


people.  All  His  requirements  are  un- 
speakably kind  in  their  intentioo,  and 
beneficent  in  their  operation.  (^)  Ex' 
actness.  There  is  no  exaggeration  in 
His  claims,  nor  anything  unreasonable. 
He  means  what  He  says.  He  really 
requires  what  He  demands.  He  claims 
from  us  the  unreserved  consecration  of 
ourselves  and  our  possessions, — that  all 
shall  be  uted  in  accordance  with  His 
will,  etc.  Have  we  duly  considered 
His  claims  ?  Are  we  complying  with 
them ?  "I  beseech  you,  brethren,  by 
the  mercies  of  God,  that  ye  present,*' 
etc.     Rom.  xii.  1. 

II.  The  dignity  of  God's  service. 

It  was  instead  of  the  firstborn  that 
the  tribe  of  Levi  was  chosen  for  the 
service  of  the  tabernacle,  or  the  ministry 
of  religion.  Now  amongst  the  Jews  the 
firstborn  son  ranked  higher  than  the 
other  members  of  the  family,  and  enjoyed 
special  privileges  and  honours.  He  re- 
ceived a  double  portion  of  the  estate ; 
he  exercised  an  authority  over  the 
younger  members  of  the  family  similar 
to  that  of  a  father ;  and  he  was  the 
priest  of  the  entire  family.  "  The  birth- 
right of  Esau  and  of  Reuben,  set  aside 
by  authority  or  forfeited  by  misconduct, 
prove  a  general  privilege  as  well  as 
quasi-sacredness  of  primogeniture  (Gen. 
XXV.  23,  31,  34  ;  xlix.  3  ;  1  Chron.  v.  1 ; 
Heb.  xii.  16),  and  a  precedence  which 
Dbviously  existed,  and  is  alluded  to  in 
several  passages  (as  Psa.  Ixxxix.  27 ; 
Job  xviii.  13 ;  Rom.  viii.  29  ;  Col.  i. 
1 5  ;  Heb.  xii.  23)."  Now  inasmuch  as 
the  leligious  functions  of  the  firstborn 
were  given  to  the  Levites,  is  not  the 
inference  warranted  that  their  service 
as  the  ministers  of  religion  was  espe- 
cially honourable  ?  This  is  true  of  the 
Christian  minister,  because  of — 

1.  The  position  which  He  occupies. 
He  is  the  messenger  of  God  to  men. 
He  stands  before  man  instead  of  Jesus 
Christ.  *'  We  are  ambassadors  for 
Christ,  as  though  God  did  beseech  by 
us :  we  pray  you  in  Christ's  stead,** 
etc.  "  Verily,  verily,'*  said  our  Lord, 
"He  that  receiveth  whomsoever  I  send 
receiveth  Me ;  and  he  that  receiveth 
Me,  receiveth  Him  that  sent  Me.** 

2.  The  Work  in  which  he  is  engaged. 


It  is  his  business  to  expound  and  illus- 
trate the  saving  truth  of  God,  and  to 
apply  that  truth  to  the  souls  of  men 
with  their  many  and  deep  needs;  to 
lead  men  in  their  approaches  to  the 
throne  of  the  Highest  in  public  worship  ; 
and  by  every  po&sible  means  to  promote 
the  divine  culture  of  human  spirits. 
There  can  be  no  work  more  responsible 
and  honourable  than  this. 

3.  The  object  for  which  he  labours. 
The  grand  aim  of  the  Christian  ministry 
is  the  salvation  of  the  souls  of  men. 
How  transcendently  great  and  important 
is  this  aim  I  (1)  Think  of  the  soul — 
its  powers,  preciousness,  etc.  Ho^v 
great  are  its  possibilities  of  progress, 
usefulness,  enjoyment ;  or  of  degrada- 
tion, mischief,  misery  I  Unlimited  are 
the  possibilities  of  every  human  soul. 
Consider  the  Divine  estimate  of  it. 
We  see  this  in  the  stupendous  price 
paid  for  its  redemption.  "  He  gave  His 
only  begotten  Son,"  etc.  "  Redeemed 
with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,"  etc. 
We  see  the  Divine  estimate  of  its 
worth  also  in  the  means  and  agencies 
which  God  employs  for  its  salvation. 
(2)  Think  what  its  salvation  means. 
Not  merely  deliverance  from  punish- 
ment, etc.  But  restoration  to  the 
Divine  image.  *'  To  be  conformed  to 
the  image  of  his  Son,"  etc.  *'  That  ye 
might  be  partakers  of  the  Divine 
nature,*'  etc.  How  grand  then  is  the 
object  of  the  Christian  ministry  !  And 
how  exalted  the  honour  of  those  who 
are  called  to  its  sacred  services  ! 
A  service  so  important  and  honourable: 

First :  Demands  for  its  faithful  dis- 
charge, great  gifts^  great  godliness,  and 
great  devotion,     {a) 

Second  :  Should  be  highly  esteemed  by 
men  and  especially  by  Christians.  To 
this  high  and  holy  service  let  Christian 
parents  consecrate  with  gladness  their 
best  and  most  gifted  sons.  Let  Chris- 
tian young  men  not  shrink  from  it  by 
reason  of  any  of  the  sacrifices  which  it 
involves  ;  but  if  called  thereto,  count  it 
the  highest  honour,  etc.  {b)  Let  all 
esteem  the  true  minister  of  Christ 
highly  because  of  the  work  in  which  ho 
is  engaged,  and  the  Divine  Being  whom 
he  represents,     (c) 

61 


CHAP.  III. 


nOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 


(a)  \  ."ar  work  Is  not  lightened  by  the  ex- 
traordinary development  of  education  and 
literature  within  the  last  few  years,  nor  by  the 
certainty  that  it  will  take  huge  strides  in  ad- 
vance before  you  have  reached  middle  life.  In 
a  few  years  every  village  will  swarm  with  men 
and  women  who  will  have  gone  through,  in 
one  form  or  another,  more  mental  training  and 
con  petitive  examination  in  some  departments 
of  literature,  science,  or  art,  than  was  the  lot 
of  four- fifths  of  the  professional  men  of  half  a 
century  ago.  Those  who  have  nothing  to  say, 
and  who  obviously  have  no  mental  culture, 
will  soon  be  scoffed  o«t  of  the  position  of  pub- 
lic teachers  in  every  department.  The  love  of 
luxury,  the  passion  for  the  sensuous  and  the 
comfortable,  the  desire  for  amusement,  for 
strong  sensation,  for  pleasing  spectacle,  for 
fre.sh  effects,  which  have  impregnated  every 
department  of  modern  life  and  duty,  have 
entered  into  the  house  of  God,  so  that  all  the 
wisdom  of  the  serpent  must  be  joined  with  the 
harmbssness  of  the  dove  to  do  successful  battle 
with  the  spirit  of  the  world  within  the  sanc- 
tuary of  Gud.  The  beautiful  building,  the  well- 
trained  choir,  the  comfortable  pew,  the  gor- 
geous effect,  have  not  infrequently  been  the 
ghastly  sepulchre  of  a  dead  church.  Unchrist- 
like  passions  are  not  charmed  by  sweet  music, 
nor  subtle  speculation  ;  nor  are  unspiritual 
men  sanctified  by  sentimental  eloquence,  or 
mnral  essays,  or  stained  windows.  And  be- 
lieve me  the  great  tide  of  human  suffering  and 
wrong  doing,  of  hopeless  toil,  of  grievous  sick- 
ness and  poverty,  of  boundless  avarice  and 
greed,  is  hardly  touched  by  all  the  work  of  all 
our  preachers,  teachers,  and  philanthropists  of 
every  school.  The  knell  is  always  ringing, 
and  the  spirits  of  men  are  always  passing 
away  in  dread  procession  to  the  silent  land  .  .  . 
It  appears  to  me  that  another  great  desider- 
atum is  what  fome  might  call  enthusiasm; 
some,  intensity  of  conviction  ;  some  would  call 
it  life.  I  prefer  to  speak  of  it  as  reality.  My 
brethren,  the  one  thing  we  want  is  absorbing 
realisation  of  the  end  of  preaching;  such  a 
treatment  of  truth,  and  such  a  dealing  with 
souls,  that  those  who  hear  must  at  least  know 
that  the  preacher  believes  what  he  says,  and  is 
putting  forth  every  available  power  to  make 
othnrs  see  it  with  his  eyes.  If  men  speak  of 
the  Father  God,  it  should  be  because  they  know 
what  it  is  to  be  His  child,  and  have  found  peace 
in  His  house,  and  have  laid  their  head  on  His 
bosom.  If  they  dare  to  lift  the  veil  of  the 
supernatural  darkness  which  shrouds  Geth- 
semane  and  Calvary,  will  it  not  be  with  sore 
amaze  and  eyes  filled  with  tears?  Yet  is  this 
the  tone  of  our  ordinary  preaching? — H.  R. 
Reynolds,  D.D,  From  an  Address  to  Students 
for  the  Ministry, 


(6)  Gentlemen,  yours  Is  a  noble  vocation. 
To  be  the  ally  of  Christ  in  His  great  en- 
deavour to  save  the  world, — with  Him  to 
assert  the  authority  of  the  throne  and  law  of 
God;  with  Him  to  support  human  weakness 
in  its  vacillating  endeavours  to  do  the  Divine 
will;  to  inspire  the  sinful  with  trust  in  the 
Divine  mercy;  to  console  sorrow  ;  to  awaken 
in  the  hearts  of  the  poor,  the  weak,  the  deso- 
late, the  consciousness  of  their  relations  to  the 
Infinite  and  Eternal  God  ;  to  exalt  and  dignify 
the  lives  of  old  men  and  maidens,  young  m«n 
and  children,  by  revealing  to  them  things 
unseen  and  eternal  which  surround  them  now, 
and  the  mysterious,  awful,  glorious  life  which 
lies  beyond  death — this  is  a  great  work.  There 
is  nothing  on  earth  comparable  to  it. — R.  W. 
Dale,  D.D. 

(c)  As  Paul  shows  the  Thessalonians  how 
the  preachers  of  the  Word  should  be  honoured, 
so  he  teaches  the  Philippians  how  to  honour 
their  teacher,  saying : — '*  Receive  him  in  the 
Lord  with  great  gladness,  and  make  much  of 
such  "  (ii.  29)  ;  that  is,  show  yourselves  glad 
of  him,  that  he  may  be  glad  of  you.  Have 
you  any  need  to  be  taugbt  why  Paul  would 
have  you  make  much  of  such  ?  Because  they 
are  like  lamps  which  consume  themselves  to 
give  light  to  others  ;  so  they  consume  them- 
selves to  give  light  to  you.  Because  they  are 
like  a  hen  which  clucks  her  chickens  together 
from  the  kyte ;  so  they  cluck  you  together 
from  the  serpent.  Because  they  are  like  the 
great  shouts  which  beat  down  the  walls  of 
Jericho ;  so  they  beat  down  the  walls  of  sin. 
Because  they  are  like  the  fiery  pillar  which 
went  before  the  Israelites  to  the  Land  of 
Promise,  so  they  go  before  you  to  the  Land  of 
Promise.  Because  they  are  like  good  Andrew, 
who  called  his  brother  to  see  the  Messias ;  so 
they  call  you  to  see  the  Messias ;  and  there- 
fore make  much  of  such. — Henry  Smith. 
He's  Christ's  ambassador  that  man  of  God, 

Steward  of  God's  own  mysteries  1     From  on 
high 

His  warrant  is :  his  charge,  aloud  to  cry, 
And  spread  his  Master's  attributes  abroad, 
His  works,  His  ark  of  mercy,  and  His  rod 

Of  justice :  his  to  sinners  to  supply 

The  means  of  grace,  and  point  how  they 
may  fly 
Hell-flames,  and  how  Heaven's  pathway  must 

be  trod. 
Hold  him  in  honour  on  his  works*  account. 

And  on  his  Master's  I    Though  a  man  he  be. 
And  with  his  flock  partake  corruption's  fount^ 

Holy  and  reverend  is  his  ministry : 
And,  hark  1  a  voice  sounds  from  the  heavenly 
mount, 

^  He  that  despiseth  yoUf  despiseth  Me  t " 

Bishop  ManL 


62 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  IV. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


Critical  Notes.— Ver.  3.  KJ^,  host, 

"signifies  military  service,  and  is  used 
here  with  special  reference  to  the  ser- 
vice of  the  Levites  as  the  militia  sacra 
of  Jehovah." — Keil  and  Del. 

Ver.  4.  "  Omit  the  word  about,  which 
is  unnecessarily  supplied.  The  sense 
is,  *  this  is  the  charge  of  the  sons  of 
Kohath,  the  most  holy  things  : '  i.e,^  the 
Ark  of  the  Covenant,  the  Table  of  Shew- 
bread,  the  Candlestick,  and  the  Golden 
Altar,  as  appears  from  the  verses  fol- 
lowing, together  with  the  furniture  per- 
taining thereto.'* — Speaker^ 8  Comm, 

Ver.  6.  Put  in  the  staves.  "  Rather 
probably,  '  put  the  staves  thereof  in 
order.'  These  were  never  taken  out  of 
the  golden  rings  by  which  the  Ark  was 
to  be  borne  (see  Exod.  xxv.  14,  15),  but 
would  need  adjustment  after  the  process 
described  in  vers.  5  and  6,  which  would 
be  likely  to  disturb  them.'* — Ibid. 

Vers.    10  and   12.      tOT^FT,  a  bar,  a 

bearing  frame,  or  as  in  ch.  xiii.  23,  a 
pole  for  bearing  on  the  shoulder. 

Ver,  20.      When  the  holy  things  are 


covered.       '*  Literally,   ^7^5?   Keballa, 

when  they  are  swallowed  down;  which 
shows  the  promptitude  with  which  every- 
thing belonging  to  the  holy  of  holies 
was  put  out  of  sight,  for  these  mysteries 
must  ever  be  treated  with  the  deepest 
reverence." — A.Clarke.  "Render:  to 
see  the  holy  things  for  an  instant.  The 
expression  means  literally, '  as  a  gulp,* 
i.e.,  for  the  instant  it  takes  to  swallow.'* 
— Speaker's  Comm, 

The  numbering  in  this  chapter  differs 
from  that  recorded  in  the  preceding 
chapter.  In  that  every  male  from  a 
month  old  and  upward  of  the  tribe  of 
Levi  was  numbered,  in  order  that  they 
might  take  the  place  of  the  firstborn 
of  all  the  tribes.  In  this  only  those 
who  were  fitted  by  their  age  for  the 
service  of  the  tabernacle,  *'  from  thirty 
years  old  and  upward  even  until  fifty 
years  old,"  were  numbered  for  that  ser- 
vice. 

The  first  main  division  of  this  chap- 
ter (vers.  1-20)  we  shall  take  as  suggest- 
ing for  homiletic  treatment  the  following 
subject : — 


Aspects  of  the  Christian  Ministbt, 
(Verses  1-20.J 


Looking  at  these  verses  in  this  light, 
the  following  points  are  suggested.  The 
Christian  ministry  is, — 

I.  An  arduous  service. 

The  Levites  were  here  numbered 
'*  from  thirty  years  old  and  upward  even 
until  fifty  years  old,  to  do  the  work  in 
the  taberua'le  of  the  congregation.** 
The  men  selected  for  service  were  in 
the  full  maurity  of  their  physical 
powers.  Such  men  were  needed,  for 
the  labour  of  the  Levites  was  very 
severe  during  the  journeyings  of  ttie 
Israelites.  *'  When  we  consider,"  says 
A.  Clarke,  "  that  there  was  not  less  than 
10  tons  13  cwt,  24  lbs.  14  oz,,  i.e.,  almost 
ten  tons  and  fourteen  hundred  pounds* 
weight  of  metal  employed  in  the  taber- 


nacle, besides  the  immense  weight  of 
the  skins,  hangings,  cords,  boards,  and 
posts,  we  shall  find  it  was  no  very  easy 
matter  to  tran.^port  this  moveable 
temple  from  place  to  place.'*  "  The 
work  of  the  ministry,"  says  Trapp,  "  is 
not  an  idle  man's  occupation,  but  a 
labouring  even  to  lassitude ;  compared 
therefore  to  harvest  work,  and  to  that 
of  cleaving  wood,  digging  in  mine-pits, 
rowing  with  oars,  etc.  All  the  comfort 
is,  that  God  that  helped  the  Levites  to 
bear  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant  (1  Chron, 
XV.  26),  will  not  be  wanting  to  His 
weak,  but  willing  servants, '  that  labour 
in  the  Word  and  doctrine'  (1  Tim. 
V.  17)." 

XL  A  Holy  Warfara 


CUAl'.  iV. 


numii^n^iii^    K^uiriitiaiviAni :    ISUMBtlRiS, 


The  service  of  the  Levites  is  regarded 
in  this  aspect  in  the  third  verse,  where 
all  who  engage  in  it  are  said  to  "  enter 
into  the  host."  •  This  is  expressed  more 
fully  and  clearly  in  verse  23  :  "  all  that 
enter    in    to    perform     the     service." 
Margin  :     "  to     war     the     warfare." 
Fuerst:  "to  do  military  service."     In 
the  New  Testament  the  ministry  of  the 
Word  is  called  a  warfare,  and  faithful 
ministers  of  the  Gospel  good  soldiers  of 
Christ,  and  their  doctrines  weapons  of 
war.     Compare  2  Cor.  x.  3,  4 ;  1  Tim. 
i   18 ;   2  Tim.  ii.  3  ;  iv.  7.     "  Every 
faithful  minister,"  says  Burkitt,  "  is  a 
spiritual  soldier,  warring   under  Jesus 
Christ,    his   captain    and   chief    com- 
mander :  must  the  soldier  be  called  and 
do  all  by  commission?     So  must  the 
minister.     Must  the  soldier  be  armed, 
trained  up,  and  disciplined,  and  made 
fit  for  service  i     So  must  the  minister. 
Must  the  soldier  shun  no  dangers,  stick 
at  no  difficulties,  pass  through  thick  and 
thin  ?   must  he  use   allowed  weapons, 
approved  armour  of  his  general's  direct- 
ing,   not  of  his   own  inventing?     All 
this  must  the  minister  be  and  do  ...  . 
He  must  also  please  his  Captain,  not 
please  himself,  his  appetite,  his  pride, 
his   covetousness,   much  less  must  he 
please  the  enemies  he  is  to  fight  against 
— the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh." 

III.  A  Sacred  Charge. 

The  Levites  had  to  do  with  conse- 
crated things ;  the  Kohathites  with  "  the 
most  holy  thing-;."  They  are  most 
solemnly  enjoined  to  exercise  the  most 
reverent  care  in  the  performance  of 
their  duties.  They  were  to  carry  the 
most  holy  things,  but  not  to  touch  them 
or  curiously  pry  into  them  upon  pain  of 
death  (verses  15,  17-20).  The  ministry 
of  the  Gospel  is  a  charge  still  more 
sacred.  He  who  is  called  to  its  high 
and  holy  duties  is  under  the  most 
solemn  obligations  to  expound  the  re- 
vealed will  of  God,  to  break  the  bread 
of  life  to  men,  to  labour  diligently  for 
the  salvation  of  souls,  and  to  seek  in 
all  things  the  glory  of  God.  He  is 
solemnly  charged  to  "  preach  the  word, 
convict,  rebuke,  exhort  in  all  long  suf- 
fering and  teaching ; "  to  "  feed  the 
flock  of  God,  •  •  •  being  eosamples  to 
64 


the  flock."    "They  watch  for  souls,  as 
they  that  must  give  account." 

Our  text  suggests  further,  that  the 
Christian  ministry, — 

IV.  Demands  the  exercise  of  the 
highest  faculties  of  those  who  are 
called  to  it. 

It  demands — 

1.  Their  mature  powers.  Of  the 
Levites  numbered  for  active  service 
none  were  to  be  under  thirty  or  over 
fifty  years  old  :  they  were  to  be  in  the 
very  zenith  of  physical  strength.  And 
the  duties  of  the  Christian  ministry 
challenge  the  utmost  energies  of  those 
who  undertake  them.  The  design  of 
this  arrangement  was  probably  two- 
fold: (1)  That  the  service  might  he  satis- 
factorily  'performed.  The  Levitical 
duties  in  the  wilderness  could  be 
properly  discharged  only  by  strong 
men.  It  is  noteworthy  that  Joseph  was 
thirty  years  old  when  he  stood  before 
Pharaoh,  and  David  when  he  began  to 
reign,  and  John  the  Baptist  when  he 
entered  upon  his  mission,  and  Jesus 
Christ  when  He  commenced  His  min- 
istry. But  is  this  a  rule  binding  the 
Church  of  Christ?  Certainly  not ;  for 
a  man  may  be  young  in  years,  yet  oM 
in  gifts,  and  in  the  graces  of  character 
which  are  necessary  to  ihis  calling. 
And,  on  the  other  hand,  a  man  may  be 
old  in  years,  yet  a  mere  babe  as  regards 
the  gifts  and  graces  requisite  for  this 
sacred  office.  "  Such  as  execute  this 
holy  calling,"  says  AttersoU,  "  ought  to 
be  qualified  with  judgoaent,  gravity, 
sobriety,  integrity,  diligence,  yea  with 
power,  courage,  strength,  and  to  have 
agility  and  ability  in  mind  and  body, 
that  they  may  do  all  things  wisely,  ex- 
actly, studiously,  and  constantly."  (a) 

2.  That  the  servants  might  not  be  over- 
burdened.  That  this  end  was  contem- 
plated in  this  arrangement  appears  from 
this,  that  the  young  men  were  taken 
into  training  when  they  were  twenty- 
five  years  of  age,  and  into  laborious 
service  when  they  were  thirty,  and  tbe 
aged  did  not  cease  from  service  at  fifty, 
but  only  from  severe  labours  (see  ch. 
viii.  23-26).  And  it  is  important  that 
the  energies  of  the  young  Christian 
minister  be  not  over-taxed,  lest  both  the 


HOMirj'/riC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  IV. 


quality  and  duration  of  his  service  be 
dimini.««hed  tliereby.  And  as  for  the 
aged,  as  M.  He^jry  remarks,  ''  twenty 
years'  good  service  was  thought  pretty 
well  for  one  man." 

2,  Their  acquaintance  with  their  duties. 
The  duties  of  the  priests  and  of  the 
Levites  of  each  division  are  particularly 
set  forth  in  this  chapter.  Each  one 
must  become  acquainted  with  his  own. 
The  Christian  minister  must  learn  his 
Master's  will,  study  his  Master's  Word, 
thoughtfully  consider  the  needs  of  those 
amongst  whom  he  labours,  etc. 

3.  A  reverent  spirit.  Reverently  were 
the  sacred  vessels  to  be  borne  and  re- 
garded. Prying  curiosity  was  utterly 
and  sternly  prohibited.  "  Note  the 
great  care,''  says  Babington,  "  God 
hath  to  maintain  reverence  of  holy 
things  in  men's  hearts,  knowing  the 
corruption   of   man  in  soon  despising 


that  which  is  common.  And  when  He 
so  wi^lieth  reverence,  shall  man  be  care- 
less of  it?"  And  Attersoll:  "We 
must  do  n'^hing  that  may  make  our 
ministry  fuiitle^s  and  brinor  \i.  into 
contempt,  but  seek  to  adorn  it  and 
beautify  it  Uy  all  reverent  carriage  of 
ourselves  in  it,  and  in  the  discharge  of 
the  duties  of  it."     (b) 

4.  A  faithful  'ind  dutiful  spirit.  Each 
one  wa-  n  quired  to  do  his  own  duty, 
not  me<hl!iDg  with  those  of  others. 
Their  wtll-beine:,  and  ev<n  their  very 
life,  depended  upon  the  faithful  per- 
formance by  each  one  of  his  own  service 
(verses  15,  17-20)  I'he  progress, 
health,  even  the  stability  of  human 
society  are  int-epaiable  from  a  faithful 
discharge  of  the  duties  of  the  Christian 
ministry.  Upon  this  point  the  testimony 
of  histor)  is  unequivocal  (See  remarks 
on  this  point  on  ch.  i.  47  54.) 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  We  all  see  and  must  confess,  that  an 
aged  man,  ripe  io  judgment  and  experience,  is 
more  fit  for  government  than  a  younger,  des- 
titute of  such  mature  wisdom  and  knowledge, 
be  the  place  ecclesiastical  or  civil.  Whereupon 
SiUa  said  of  Marius  the  younger,  Debe7-e 
juvenem  prius  remo  quum  guhernacnlo  aclutuveri. 
That  a  young  man  was  first  to  be  appointed  to 
the  oar  and  then  to  the  stern.  Fruit  that  is 
not  ripe  will  serve  so  woil  neither  for  use  nor 
store  as  ripe  fruit  will.  The  untinaely  fruit 
of  a  woman  is  a  cause  of  grief,  and  not  of  com- 
fort. The  young  fowls  ttiat  are  not  fledged 
cannot  fly,  and  green  walls  of  any  building 
should  have  no  weight  laid  upon  thnm  till  tbey 
were  settled  and  sound.  Non  difficAdter  delec- 
tabit  oratio  magis  omata  quum  aotidi,  etc. 
Sed  difficillime  ute  oportet,  dor.ehit,  t  to.  Easily 
may  a  speech  that  bath  more  beauty  than  sub- 
stance please,  but  never  so  well  teach  as  that 
which  hath  matter  and  suhsiance  in  it.  The 
one  usually  is  the  speech  of  young  men,  the 
other  of  elder.  Look,  sai  h  Piutarch,  how  a 
dart  differeth  in  his  piercing,  according  to  the 
strength  of  the  arm  that  cast  it,  so  differeth 
the  word  of  a  young  and  old  man.  The  one 
Cometh  from  a  weaker  strength,  and  so 
pierceth  less;  the  other  from  a  strong  ability, 
and  80  entereth  even  through  and  through 
The  old  man's  speech,  saith  the  same  auhtor 
again,  is  like  to  a  strong  and  sweet  ointment, 
that  fiUetb  all  the  room  with  his  sweetness. — 
Bishop  Babington. 

Ministers  have  oftentimes  given  unto  them 
in  the  Scripture  the  name  of  Eldei-s.  Many 
titles  are  given  unto  thorn,  and  every  one  of 
them  carneth  some  instruction  and  admonition 
with  it  unto  the  conscience.     They  nave  not 


their  names  in  vain,  they  are  not  idle  sounds 
of  vain  words,  but  they  offer  the  signification 
of  some  duty  to  be  perf-  rmed,  and  lead  to  the 
coDsideraiion  of  something  to  be  practiced,  as 
shepherds  call  to  their  remembrance  to  be 
buf^ied  in  feeding;  watchmen,  to  prove  to 
them  that  they  ought  to  have  a  vigilant  care 
ol  the  City  of  God  ;  messengers,  that  they  must 
not  do  their  own  business,  but  His  that  sent 
them.  So  they  are  called  Elders.  1  Tim.  v.  17, 
19;  1  Pet.  V.  1;  Acts  xiv,  23,  xv.  2.  xvi,  4, 
and  XX.  17,  to  imprint  and  engrave  in  their 
hearts,  the  cogitation  and  consideration  of  the 
care,  wisdom,  sobriety,  and  stajedness  that 
ought  to  be  in  men  of  that  calling;  all  which 
gifts  are  for  the  most  part  proper  to  men  of 
that  age,  for  "  days  shall  speak,  aijd  the  mul- 
titude of  years  teach  wisdom,"  Job  xxxii.  7. 
And  therefore  they  are  resembled  unto  them, 
not  because  they  are  so  aLvays  in  age,  but  be- 
cause they  should  be  like  unto  them,  and 
have  the  properties  and  qualities  of  them. — 
W.  Attersoll. 

(6)    VVould  I  describe  a  preacher,   such  as 

Paul, 
Were  he  on  earth,  would  hear,  approve,  and 

own — 
Paul  should  himself  direct  me.     I  would  trace 
His  mast,  r  strokes,  and  draw  from  his  design. 
I  woul  1  express  him  simple,  grave,  sincere  ; 
In  doctrine  uncorrupt;  in  language  plain, 
And  plain  in  manner;  decent,  solemn,  chaste 
And  natural  in  gesture;  much  impressed 
Himself,  as  conscious  of  His  awful  charge. 
And  anxious  mainly  that  the  flock  he  feeds 
May  feel  it  too;  affectionate  in  look 
And  tender  in  address,  as  well  becomes 
A  messenger  of  grace  to  guilty  men. —  Covoper, 

65 


CHAP.  IV. 


HOMfLETlC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


Divine  Secrets  and  Human  Curiosity. 

{Verse  20,) 


I.  There  are  certain  things  in  the 
universe  which  are  hidden  from  man. 

rhe  vessels  of  ihe  sanctuary  were 
conv^ealed  from  the  Levites.  To  the 
P'iests  tliem  elvps  the  Holy  of  holies 
WHS  a  secret  place,  into  which  they  dare 
DOt^  enter.  And  even  the  high  priest 
ni'ght  enter  therein  only  once  a  year, 
and  that  after  careful  and  significant 
prepaVation.  In  these  arrangements  we 
have  an  illustration  of  the  truths  that 
there  are  certain  realms  in  the  universe 
which  are  accessible  only  to  God,  and 
certain  things  which  are  concealed  from 
man.    This  is  tlie  case, 

1.  In  the  material  universe.  Nature 
has  secrets  the  existence  of  which  is 
not  even  conjectured  by  her  most  en- 
thusiastic students,  and  mysterious  pro- 
vinces into  which  neither  the  most 
daring  nor  the  most  reverent  enquirer 
can  enter,     (a) 

2.  In  the  arrangements  of  Providence. 
In  the  dealings  of  God  with  nations 
and  with  the  race  as  a  whole,  there  are 
inscrutable  mysteries  to  us.  In  His 
dealings  with  us  as  families  and  as  indi- 
viduals, there  are  things  the  wisdom 
and  love  and  righteousness  of  which  we 
cannot  discover — things  which  perplex, 
and  sometimes  confound  and  disne.-sus. 
"Clouds  and  darkue.'-s  are  roun  I  about 
Him."  ''Thy  way  is  in  the  sea,  and 
Thy  path  in  the  great  waters,  and  Thy 
footsteps  are  not  known."  "  How  un- 
fearchable  are  His  judjzraents,  and  His 
ways  pa?t  finding  out  1 " 

3.  In  the  economy  of  redemption. 
There  are  deepest,  closest  secrets  here. 
We  ask  question  after  question,  to 
which,  at  present,  we  receive  do  reply. 
*'  Great  is  the  m}?stery  of  godliness," 
etc.,  "  Which  things  the  angels  desire 
to  Inok  into." 

4.  In  the  character  and  contents  of 
the  futwe.  '*  Thou  knowest  not  what 
a  day  may  bring  forth."  "  Ye  know 
not  what  shall  be  on  the  morrow."  Let 
us  notice  concerning  th^se  secrets  that. 

First:  They  are  inecitahle.   "  We  are 
but  of  yesterday  and  ki»ow  nothing,  be- 
66 


cause  our  days  upon  the  earth  are  a.A  h 
shalow."  It  is  utterly  unreasonable  to 
suppose  that  we,  with  our  limited  facul- 
ties and  brief  existence,  should  compre- 
hend the  works  and  ways,  tl  e  thoughts 
and  utterances  of  the  Infinite  and 
Eternal.  "  Canst  thou  by  searching 
find  out  God?  canst  thou  find  out  the 
Almighty  to  perfection?"  Comp.  Job 
xxxviii. — xli. 

Second  :  They  are  merciful.  The 
intense  light  of  a  fuller  and  clearer 
revelation  might,  were  it  given,  smite 
us  with  spiritual  blindness.  As  cloud 
and  shadow  and  darkness  in  nature 
are  good  for  us,  so  the  Divine  re- 
serve is  good  for  us  spiritually.  What 
man  is  there  of  us  who  could  bear  the 
revelation  of  the  scenes  and  events 
which  await  him  and  his  dear  friends 
in    the  future  ?  {b) 

Third  :  They  are  educational.  Myste- 
lies  provoke  enquiry  ;  and  reverent  en- 
quiry coLduces  to  intellectual  and  spiri- 
tual growth.  Wonderful  are  the  dis- 
coveries of  wisdom,  and  power,  of 
righteousness,  and  love  which  God  will 
make  to  His  children  in  the  endless 
hereafter.  Let  us  be  thankful  for  the 
Divine  reserve.  "  We  do  amiss,"  says 
Dr.  Paiker,  "to  stand  before  these  sub- 
lime mysteries  as  we  would  stand  before 
a  vizored  army  of  bloo  'thirsty  foes.  We 
should  stand  before  (hem  as  before  the 
veiled  iniag  ;s  of  Love.  They  are  W  isdom 
indisguifC.  They  are  AfTfection  in  shadow. 
They  a'  e  Royalty  in  its  royalest  pomp." 

II.  Men  are  prone  to  curiously  pry 
into  hidden  things. 

This  is  clearly  implied  in  the  careful 
and  minute  directions  for  covering  the 
sacred  furniture  of  the  sanctuary,  in 
the  prohibition  of  the  text,  and  in  the 
stern  penalty  annexed  to  any  breach  of 
this  prohibition.  There  is  a  sad  ten- 
dency in  hurann  nature,  as  it  now  is, 
to  curious  enquiry  concerning  forbidden 
thinus.  It  has  been  well  said  by  Monro: 
"  Curio.-ity  is  a  languid  principle,  where 
access  is  easy,  and  gratification  imme- 
diate;   remoteness   and   difficulty   are 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


CHAP.   IV, 


powerful  incentives  to  its  vigorous  and 
la.sting  operations."  In  pn)portion  as 
the  secret  things  are  regarded  as  inys- 
teriou.^,  important,  or  tsacred,  will  the 
strength  of  curiosity  be  in  relation  to 
them. 

III.  Irreverent  prying  into  hidden 
things  may  lead  to  the  most  terrible 
results. 

'*  They  shall  not  go  in  to  see  when 
the  holy  things  are  covered  "  (or,  *'  for 
an  instant,"  see  Critical  Notes)^  *'lest 
they  die." 

The  curiosity  of  Eve  concerning  the 
fruit  of  "the  tree  of  the  knowledj^e  (»f 
good  anr)  evil"  led  to  the  spritual  death 
of  our  first  parents  and  their  countless 
posterity.  All  curiou-*  enquiries  as  to 
sacred  things,  and  irreverent  pryings 
into  Divine  my>te.rie.s,  tend  to  utterly 
destroy  spirituality  of  mind  and  fai'h 
in  the  great  Christian  verities.  "  Cu- 
riosity," says  Fuller,  *'  is  a  kernel  of 
the  forbidden  fruit,  which  still  sticketh 
in  the  throat  of  a  natural  man,  some- 


times to  the  danger  of  his  choking." 
N  )r  is  it  less  perilous  to  the  spiritually 
renewed  man,  leading,  as  it  does,  to  the 
death  of  some  of  the  highest  and 
divinest  things  of  the  spirit,  (c) 
Conclusion : 

1.  Guard  against  curiously  enquiring 
into  Divine  secrets.  It  may  be  that 
some  of  these  secrets  are  part  of  that 
ineffable  glory  into  which  no  man  can 
enter  nnd  live. 

2.  Be  humble.,  seeing  that  we  are  sur- 
rounded by  ??tysterie8^  countless  and  deep. 
Humility  becometh  the  ignorant. 

3.  Be  reverent  in  all  our  enquiries  into 
Divine  things.  "  The  secret  ot  the  Lord 
is  with  them  that  fear  Him,"  &c. 
"  The  meek  will  He  guide  in  judg- 
ment," &c.  *'Thou  hast  hid  these 
things  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and 
ha-*t  revealed  them  unto  babes." 

4.  Let  us  be  diligent  in  the  performance 
of  our  manifest  duty.  ^'  It  any  man 
will  do  His  will,  He  shall  know  of  the 
doctrine,  whether  it  be  of  God,"  etc. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  The  eye  can  alight  on  no  spot  free  from 
the  presence  of  mystery.  Questions  may  be 
asked  concerningr  a  grains  blade  or  an  insect, 
which  no  inttl  rrt  c  >ald  atewer.  Men  kbow 
much  about  the  outride  of  things,  but  of  tho 
interior  organism  of  the  universe,  its  fine 
balances,  adaptations,  springs,  impulses,  rtla- 
tionships,  and  purposes,  tbey  understand  little 
or  nothing.  No  intelligent  being  can  obseirve 
the  universe  without  kno^ving  that  it  is  a 
magnificent  mystery.  God  has  imposed  silence 
upon  it.  In  the  thunder-roai  of  the  o  ean  we 
never  hear  the  revelation  of  its  masteries. 
The  whirlwind  gi^'es  U')  account  of  its  hidden 
way  and  unknown  tabernacle.  The  glorious 
stars,  in  their  nocturnal  vigils  ever  shine,  but 
never  speak  the  mystery  of  their  birth.  Mys- 
terious, indeed,  are  all  things.  Worlds  sus- 
pended upon  nothing,  tbe  calm,  majestic  roll 
of  countless  orbs, the  dew  of  the  morniniJ,  the 
glare  of  the  lightning,  the  riven  strata  of  the 
earth,  the  pulsation  of  unnuoibured  mil  ions 
upon  millions  of  hearts,  the  chequered  history 
of  life,  the  complicated  woi  kings  and  evolu- 
tions of  intellect,  all  bespeak  ttie  power  of  ft 
Mysterious,  Dread  Beir  g,  whose  ways  are  un- 
searchable.— Joseph  Parker,  D  D. 
(6)  0  heaven!  that  one  might  read  the  book 

of  fate ; 
And  see  the  revolution  of  the  times 
Make  mountains  level,  and  the  continent 
(Weary  of  solid  firmness^  meli  itself 
F  2 


Into  the  seal  and,  other  times,  to  see 

The  beachy  girdle  of  the  ocean. 

Too    wide   for   Neptune's  hips;   how   chances 

mock 
And  changes  fill  the  cup  of  alteration 
With  divers  liquors  I  O.  if  this  were  seen, 
The    happiest   youth,    viewing    his    progress 

through. 
What  perils  past,  what  crosses  to  ensue. 
Would  shut  the  book,  and  sit  him  down  and 

die. 

Shakemmre.     Second  part  of  Kino  Henry  I V. 
UL,I.  f        J         y  u 

Were  the  time  of  our  death  foreseen,  what 
a  melancholy  character  would  it  impait  to  the 
pursuits  and  occup  itions  of  the  human  race  I 
If  every  man  saw  the  moment  of  his  death 
continually  before  him,  how  would  his  thoughts 
be  fixed  to  the  fatal  spot;  and,  uf  on  itf  near 
approach,  the  consideration  of  it  would 
probably  absorb  every  other.  With  respect  to 
our  fellow-creatures,  how  would  it  poison  the 
springs  of  enjoyment,  were  parents  and  child- 
ren, husbands  and  wives,  brotliers  and  .-istcrs, 
able  to  calculate  with  cprt^inty  the  period  of 
each  others'  lives!  Wo  should  seem  to  be 
walking  among  the  victims  of  death ;  the 
scenes  of  human  existnirice  would  lose  all 
cheerfulness,  animation,  and  beauty.  The 
interests  of  society  would  ali-o  sustain  most 
■erious  injury.  Many  great  and  noble  enter- 
prises would  never  have  been  begun  couid  the 

67 


CHAP.  IV. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


persoDS  who,  in  the  hope  of  life,  engaged 
in  them  have  foreseen  that  before  they  could 
be  concluded,  they  themselves  would  be 
gratched  away  by  the  hand  of  death.  Many 
discoveries,  by  which  great  benetit  has  been 
conferred  on  tbe  world  would  not  have  been 
elicited.  Few  eff  >rts  probably  would  be  made 
to  attain  any  object,  the  conaequencr^s  of 
which  terminate  wirh  the  life  of  the  party,  if  he 
foresaw  that  they  would  be  intercepted  by 
death  Who  would  venture  to  engage  in  any 
lucrative  employment  if  he  certainly  knew 
that  the  benefit  wouM  not  be  even  partially 
realized  during  the  time  of  his  mortal  exis- 
tence ?  But,  happily  for  mankind,  events  are 
concealed  —  dwties  only  are  made  known.— 
h'oh.  Hall,  A.M. 

(c.)  How  notably  again  doth  this  command- 
ment of  hiding  and  folding  them  up,  teach  ua 
to  beware  of  curiosity  in  things  not  revealed, 
"What  God  is  pleased  we  should  know,  that 
safely  we  may  search  for  and  seek  to  know, 
but  further  we  may  not  go.  We  must  not 
have  an  ear  to  hear  when  God  hath  not  a 
mouth  to  speak.  To  eat  much  honey,  saith 
Solomon,  is  not  good;  and  to  search  out 
curiously  God's  Majesty  is  to  endan^^er  my- 
self to  be  oppre>ised  with  His  glory.  Seek  not 
out  thinrjs  which  are  too  hard  for  thee,  neither 
search  the  things  rashly  which  are  too  mighty 
for  thee^  saith  wise  Sirach.  Bat  what  God 
bath  commanded  thee,  think  of  that    with 


reverence,  be  not  curious  in  many  of  His 
works:  for  it  is  not  needful  for  thee  to  see 
with  thine  eyes  the  things  that  be  secret.  Be 
not  curious  in  superfluous  things,  for  many 
things  are  showed  unto  thee  above  the  capacity 
of  men.  The  meddling  with  such  hath  be- 
guiled many,  and  an  evil  opinion  hath  deceived 
their  judgment.  Thou  canst  not  see  without 
eyes,  profess  not  therefore  the  knowledge  that 
thou  hast  not.  Thales  the  philosopher  gazed 
so  upon  the  stars,  that  he  fell  into  the  ditch 
before  him,  and  hismiid  mocked  him.  Seneca 
wisely  complained,  that  a  great  part  of  our 
life  was  spent  in  doing  nothing,  a  greater  part 
in  doing  ill,  and  the  greatest  part  of  all  in 
doing  that  which  appertains  not  to  us.  This 
is  curiosity  in  other  men's  business,  and 
foolish  meddling  with  needless  things. 
Socrates  was  wise,  and  said  it  wisely:  *'  Qjlkz 
super  nos,  nihil  ad  nos ;  Masters  that  are  above 
ns,  bolong  not  to  us."  David,  a  man  indeed 
with  another  light  than  Socrates  had,  pro- 
fesseth  we  know,  as  he  was  not  high  minded, 
neither  had  any  proud  lojk-*;  so  he  did  not 
exe'cist^  himself  in  mattars  that  were  too  high 
for  him.  But  he  did  wean  his  soul,  and  keep 
it  under  even  as  a  young  child,  &c.  Bernard 
taxeth  this  foul  fauit  in  these  words,  "  Multi 
student  magis  alta  quam  apta  proferre :  Many 
study  to  utt(  r  rather  high  matters  than  fit 
matters."  Let  us  avoid  this  fault, — Bishop 
JBahington. 


The  Burdens  of  Lifb. 
(Fmes  21-33.) 


In  these  verses  we  have  the  Divine 
directions  as  to  the  service  of  the  Ger- 
shonites  and  the  Merarites.  They 
present  an  instructive  illustration  of 
the  burdens  of  human  life.  Regarding 
them  in  this  light,  they  sugge-t concern- 
ing these  burdens  that  they  are — 

I.  Distributed  to  all  men. 

The  Kohathites,  Gershonites,  and 
Merarites  each  had  their  service  and 
burden.  (See  verses  19,  27,  32.)  And 
"from  thirty  years  old  and  upward  until 
fifty  years  old  "  no  man  of  either  of  these 
families  was  exempted  from  duty. 
"  Aaron  and  his  sons  shall  appoint  them 
every  one  to  his  service  and  to  his 
burden."  And  now  there  is  no  human 
life  in  this  world  without  its  burden  of 
some  kind  and  degree.  It  is  not  simply 
those  who  are  manifestly  oppressed,  or 
afflicted,  or  sorely  tried,  that  have  a 
burden  to  bear.  Could  we  read  the 
inner  history  of  those  whose  life  seems 
most  pleasant  and  prosperous  and 
08 


favoured,  we  should  doubtless  find  some 
secret  sorrow,  or  wearing  anxiety,  or 
lite-long  disappointment.  There  is  no 
sunshine  without  its  shadow,  no  happy 
family  without  its  trial  or  sorrow,  and 
no  individual  life  without  its  burden  of 
some  kind  or  other.  *'  Every  individual 
experience,"  says  ^r.  Huntington, ''  has, 
soon  or  late,  its  painful  side,  its  crucial 
hours,  when  there  is  darkness  over  all 
the  land,  and  we  cry  out  to  know  if 
God  has  forsaken  us.  For  the  time, 
longer  or  shorter,  we  taste  only  the 
bitter,  and  feel  only  the  thorns.  The 
separations  of  death,  the  distance  be- 
tween our  aspiration  and  performance, 
unsatisfied  ambition,  labouring  year 
after  year  in  vain,  affection  returned  by 
indifference,  the  symptoms  of  fatal 
disease,  former enerj^y  prostrate,  a  friend 
alienated,  a  child  depraved,  an  effort  to 
do  good  construed  into  an  impertinence^ 
—unconquerable  obstacles  that  we  can- 
not measure  ac.d  can  ocarcely  speak  uf, 


HOMILETJC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  rv. 


heaped  up  against  our  best  designs- — 
these  are  some  of  the  most  frequent 
shapes  of  the  misery ;  but  no  list  is 
full.  The  one  essential  thing  is  that 
the  will  is  crossed,  crucified.  Character 
is  everywhere  put  into  this  school  of 
suffering."     (a) 

II.  Distributed  variously. 

AH  men  are  burdened,  but  all  are 
not  alike  burdened.  The  burdens  of 
human  life — 

1.  Differ  in  kind. — The  burden  of 
the  Kohathites  consisted  of  'Mhe  most 
holy  things,"  the  furniture  of  the 
sanctuary  ;  that  of  the  Gershonites,  of 
the  hanging,  curtains,  and  coverings  of 
the  tabernacle,  with  "  their  cords,  and 
all  the  instruments  of  their  service ;" 
and  that  of  the  Merarites,  of  the  pillars, 
boards,  bars,  sockets,  aud  the  more  solid 
parts  of  the  tabernacle.  So  the  burdens 
of  human  life  are  of  various  kinds. 
Some  labour  under  a  great  load  of  tem 
poral  poverty,  others  suffer  more  or  less 
throughout  their  entire  life  by  reason  of 
bodily  afflictions,  the  burden  of  others 
is  some  crushing  family  trial,  of  others 
some  sore  and  secret  sorrow,  and  of 
others  some  profound  and  painful 
longing  which  finds  no  satisfaction,  &c. 

2.  Differ  in  degree.  The  burden  of 
the  Merarites  was  much  heavier  than 
that  of  either  the  Kohathites  or  Ger- 
shonites. And  the  burdens  of  men  now 
are  not  alike  in  weight.  Some  are 
much  more  heavily  ladea  than  others. 
All  good  men  are  not  tried  so  severely 
as  Job  was.  The  Loid  Jesus  Himself 
bore  the  heaviest  burden  of  all.  As 
compared  with  His,  our  heaviest  load 
is  light.  And  compaiing  the  bur- 
dens of  men  one  with  another,  some 
appear  almost  free,  while  others  labour 
under  a  heavy  load. 

III.— Distributed  Divinely. 

By  Divine  direction  Aaron  and  his 
sons  were  to  appoint  to  each  one  his 
burden.  (See  verses  19,  27,  32  )  In  the 
case  of  the  Merarites  the  direction  as 
to  this  appoiniment  was  very  explicit  : 
*'  By  name  ye  shall  reckon  the  instru- 
ments of  the  charge  of  their  burden." 
"  Tnis  direction,  which  occurs  only  in 
reference  to  the  charge  of  the  Merarites, 


imports    apparently   that    *  the    instru- 
ments *  were  to  be  assigned,   no  doubt, 
by  Ithamar  and  his  immediate  assistants, 
to  their  bearers  singly,  and  nominatim. 
These  instruments  comprised  the  heavier 
parts  of  the  Tabernacle ;  and  the  order 
seems   intended   to    prevent    individual 
Merarites  choosing  their   own  burden, 
and  so  throwing  more  than  the  proper 
share   on  others."  —  Speaker's    Comm. 
The  burdens  of  human  life  do  not   fall 
by  chance  or  accident.     God  is  not  the 
Author  of  the   burdens  which  oppress 
human  life.     Pain  and  poverty,  sorrow 
and  trial,  are  the  ( ff-pring  of  sin.     But 
God  regulates  the  burdens  of  men.     No 
trial  befalls  us  without  His  permission , 
and    He    determines    the    extent    and 
severity   of  every  trial.     (Comp.  Job  L 
12,  ii.  6.)     "Thou  art  my  God.      My 
times   are  in   Thy  hand."     "  He  shall 
choose  our   inheritance    for  us."'     The 
Divine   regulation   of    trial    affords   a 
guarantee  that  no  man  shall   be  over- 
burdened ;  for  the  Lord  knoweth  how 
much  we  can  bear;    He  knoweth   us 
altogether,    and   He   has  promised    to 
bestow    grace  adequate  to   our     need. 
"As  thy  days  so  shall  thy  strength  be." 
*'  My  grace  is  sufficient  for   thee,"  &c. 
*' There  hath  no  temptation  taken  you 
but  such  as   is  common  to  man :  but 
God  is  faithful,  who  will  not  suffer  you 
to  be  tempted  above  that  ye  are  able," 
&c. 

"  God  will  keep  his  own  anointed  ; 

Nought  stall  harm  them,  none  condemn; 
All  ti  eir  trials  are  appointed  ; 

All  must  work  for  good  to  them: 
All  shall  help  them 

To  their  heavenly  diadem."— Z^yfc, 

Our  text  further  suggests  that  the 
Burdens  of  Life  should  be — 

IV.  Patiently  borne. 

We  do  not  read  of  any  murmuring 
amongst  the  Levites  because  of  the 
duties  assigned  to  any  of  them.  Each 
one  appears  to  have  accepted  his 
allotted  service,  and  performed  its 
duties.  Let  each  one  of  us  learn  to 
bear  his  life-burden  without  murmuring, 
to  accept  his  lot  in  life  cheerfully,  to  do 
his  duty  faithfully. 

69 


CHAP.  IV. 


nOMIlETlC   COMMENTARY:  NUMBERS, 


1.  God  regulnteff  our  burden^  let  us 
therefore  he  content  under  it,  {b) 

2.  God  sanctifies  our  burden  to  most 
blessed  ends,  let  us  therefore  be  thankful. 
''We  glory  in  tiibulation  also:  know- 
iDg  that  tribulation  worketh  patience," 
&c.  "  Count  it  all  joy  when  ye  fall 
into  divers  temptations  ;  knowing  that 
the  trying  of  your  faith  worketh 
patience,"  etc.  (c) 

3.  God  will  soon  deliver  us  from  our 
burden^  let  us  therefore  be  hopeful, 
*'  The  time  will  come,"  says  Babington, 
*••  that  our  God  will  free  us,  and  then 
we  shall  receive  an  eternal  reward. 
Remember  what  you  read:  The  Lord 
God  of  Israel,  saith  David,  hath  given 
rest  unto  His  people,  that  they  may  dwell 


in  Jerusalem  for  ever,  and  the  Levites 
shall  no  more  bear  the  Tabernacle^  and 
all  the  vessels  for  the  service  thereof. 
So  shall  it  be  said  one  day  of  you,  of 
me,  of  all  the  members  of  the  Lord's 
body.  The  Lord  hath  given  rest,  and 
we  shall  no  more  carry  our  burdens  and 
portions  of  woe  in  this  world,  but  live 
in  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  for  ever. 
O,  wished  rest,  and  ten  thousand  times 
welcome  when  God  is  pleased  I  Do 
men  fear  a  safe  harbour  in  a  mighty 
storm  ?  Do  men  grieve  to  come  home 
to  their  own  houses  after  a  long  and 
painful  journey  ?  No,  no,  we  know ; 
and  no  more  should  we  shrink  to  find 
heavenly  rest." 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  What  is  included  ia  the  term  burden  f 
Whatever  makes  right  livina^,  according  to  the 
law  of  God,  difficult  to  a  sincere  man  that  is  a 
burden.  Whatever  thing  within  or  without  a 
man,  in  his  nature,  in  his  habits,  or  in  his 
circumstancep,  makes  it  hard  for  him  to  live 
purely  a^id  rightly — that  is  in'-luded  in  this 
term  burden.  It  may  be  in  his  mental  con- 
fititution  ;  it  may  be  in  his  bodily  health  ;  it 
may  be  in  the  habits  of  his  education;  it  may 
be  in  his  relation  to  worldly  affairs  ;  it  may  be 
in  his  domestic  circuoastancep ;  it  may  be  in 
his  peculiar  liabilities  to  temptation  and  sin. 
It  includes  the  whole  catalogue  of  conditions, 
and  influences,  and  causes,  that  weigh  men 
down,  and  hinder  them,  when  they  are 
pv^riea^ouring  to  live  lives  of  rectitude. — 
H.  W.  Beecher. 

To-day  I  had  a  long  and  strange  interview 
with    a    lady    who    has    recently    become  a 

member  of  the  congregation She 

asked  me  if  I  had  ever  known  a  case  of  trial 
so  severe  as  hers.  *  Ves,"  I  replied, 
'•numbers;  it  is  the  case  of  all.  differing 
is  verv  common,  so  is  disappo^'ntment."  "  Are 
our  affections  to  be  all  withered?"  "Very 
often,  I  believe."  "  Then  why  were  they  given 
me?"  *'I  am  sure  I  cannot  tell  you  that, 
but  I  suppose  it  would  not  have  been  very 
grod  for  you  to  have  had  it  all  your  own  way  ?  " 
"Then  do  you  think  1  am  better  for  this 
bligbtinsr  succession  of  gri^^fs  ?  "  "I  do  not 
know,  but  I  know  you  ought  to  be."  '  Words- 
worth '  was  lying  open  on  the  table,  and  I 
po'nted  to  her  these  lin»  s: — 
"Then  was  the  truth  received  into  my  heart, 
That  under  heaviest  sorrow  earth  can  bring, 
If  from  the  affliction  somewhere  do  not  grow, 
Honour,  which  could  not  else  have  been  a  faith, 
An  elevation  and  a  sanctity; 
If  new  strength  be  not  given  nor  old  restored, 
The  blame  is  ours,  not  nature's." 

70 


The  deep  undertone  of  this  world  is  sad- 
ness .  a  solemn  bass  occurring  at  measured 
intervals,  and  heard  through  all  other  tones. 
Ultimately,  all  the  strains  of  this  world's 
music  resolve  themselves  into  that  tone;  and 
J  believe  that,  rightly  felt,  the  Cross,  and  the 
Cross  alone,  interprets  the  mournful  mystery 
of  life — the  sorrow  of  the  Highest,  the  Lord 
of  Life;  the  result  of  error  and  sin,  but  ulti- 
mately remedial,  purifyiner,  and  exalting. — 
i^  W.  Robertson,  M.A.,  Life  and  Letters, 

(6)  Contentation  (i.e.  contentment)  is  a 
ready  and  approved  medicine  for  a'l  miseri-is 
and  maladies  whatsoev^er.  No  man  is  troubled 
with  a:iy  grief  or  disease,  but  he  is  most 
willing  to  hear  of  a  salve  for  it.  This  is 
sovereign  for  this  purpose.  It  easieth  the 
burden  of  all  afflictions,  it  taketh  away  the 
smart  of  all  sores ;  it  poureth  oil  and  wine 
into  our  vounds,  and  of  half  dead  it  maketh  us 
alive  again  ;  it  maketh  a  rough  way  plain  and 
crooked  things  straight.  It  casteth  down 
high  hills,  and  maketh  the  path  easy  before 
us.  It  turneth  outward  wants  into  inward 
comforts.  It  maketh  the  bond  to  be  free,  the 
poor  to  be  rich,  the  sick  to  be  whole,  the 
miserable  to  be  happy,  and  such  as  are  ovyners 
of  nothing  to  be  lords  of  a'l  things.  Give  an 
hearty  draught  of  this  strong  drink  to  him 
that  is  ready  to  perish,  and  a  cup  of  thi^  wine 
to  him  that  hath  an  ht^avy  heajt,  it  will  m^ke 
him  forget  his  poverty,  and  remember  his 
misery  no  more.  This  we  see  in  the  Apostle 
Paul,  he  had  drunk  oP  the  wine  of  contenta- 
tion, (2  Cor.  vi.  9.  10)  and  therefore  saith, 
"  As  unknown,  and  yet  well  known  ;  as  dying, 
and,  behold,  we  live;  as  chastened,  and 
not  killed  ;  as  sorrowful, yet  always  rejoicing; 
as  poor,  yet  making  many  rich;  as  having 
nothing,  and  yet  possessing  all  things." —  W, 
A  ttersoll. 


IIOMILBTIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  IV. 


(r)  **I  know,"  is  all  the  mourner  saith, 
"Knowledge  by  suffering  entereth, 
And  life  is  perfected  by  death  ; 

"I  am  content  to  touch  the  brink 
Of  pain's  dark  goblet,  and  I  think 
My  bitter  drink  a  wholesome  drink. 

"  I  am  content  to  be  so  weak  ; 
Put  strength  into  the  words  I  speak, 
For  I  am  strong  in  what  I  seek. 

"  I  am  content  to  be  so  bare 
Before  the  archers  :  evervwhere 

7  V 

My  wounds  being  stroked  by  heavenly  air. 

*'  Glory  to  God— to  God,'*  he  saith  ; 
"Knowledge  by  suffering  entereth, 
And  life  is  perfected  by  death." 

Burdens    are    not    pleasant ;    yet    they  are 


profitable.  They  develop  strength.  The  only 
way  to  make  strong  men  is  to  impose  burdens 
that  require  strength  ;  t^en  if  they  have  the 
substance  in  thena,  it  will  come  out.  We 
know  a  man  who  has  b»  en  struggling  for 
years  to  escap*^  from  business  cares,  yet  they 
have  accumu'ated  upon  him.  Every  measure 
of  relief  has  brought  addi  ional  work  acd 
sometimes  extreme  trial.  But  he  has  risen  in 
power  as  the  load  was  increased,  and  he  has 
grown  to  be  a  man  of  might.  Those  who  run 
flinch,  dodge,  faint,  as  crushii  g  cares  increase, 
are  broken  and  suffer  loss ;  but  those  wLc 
stand,  fight,  tug,  hold  on  and  cry  to  Gud,  grow 
strong.  It  is  a  misfoitano  always  to  have  an 
easy  time,  a  bles-'ing  to  have  work  to  do  which 
taxes  all  our  powers  and  then  taxes  more  and 
more. — 2'he  Study, 


The  Importance  of  Little  Things. 
(Ferses  31-32.) 


In  the  charge  of  Merari  we  find  not 
only  the  heaviest  things  and  most  cum- 
bersome, but  also  some  little  things 
which  are  specially  mentioned.  "  Their 
pins,  and  their  cords,  with  all  their  in- 
struments, and  with  all  their  service; 
and  by  name  ye  shall  reckon  the  instru- 
ments of  the  charge  of  their  burden.'* 
It  is  upon  these  little  things  that  we 
would  fix  attention.  From  the  fact 
that  we  have  here  Divine  directions 
concerning  such  small  things  as  "  pins 
and  cords,"  we  infer  the  importance  of 
little  things.  The  following  considera- 
tions will  help  us  to  realise  this. 

I.  The  completeness  and  perfection 
of  great  things  is  impossible  apart 
from  due  attention  to  little  things. 

Thtse  "  pins  and  cords  "  were  essen- 
tial to  the  completeness  of  the  taber- 
nacle. By  tiny  and  delicate  touches 
the  enchanting  beauty  of  the  painting 
is  achieve!.  By  scrupulous  attention 
to  derails  the  greatest  inventions  have 
been  brought  to  successful  issues.  A 
wise  economy  in  small  expenses  has 
had  no  little  to  do  in  many  instances  in 
the  accumulation  of  great  wealth.  ''  An 
onlooker,  observing  the  slight  taps  given 
to  a  statue  by  Canova,  sp  )ke  as  if  he 
thought  the  artibt  to  be  trifling,  but  was 
rebuked  by  this  reply  :  '*  The  touches 
which  you  igoorantly  hold  in  such  small 
Cbteem  are  the  very  things  which  make 
the  difference  between  the  failure  of  a 


bungler  and  the  chef  d'cBuvre  of  a 
master." 

II.  The  most  important  issues  some- 
times depend  upon  what  seem  to  us 
slight  circumstances. 

Trivial  incidents  sometimes  appear 
to  constitute  the  great  turning  points  in 
lite.  How  often  in  the  life  of  Joseph, 
as  we  view  it  to  day,  events  of  incalcu- 
lable importance  depended  upon  what 
men  call  *'  the  mereht  chance,"  or  the 
most  trivial  incident !  What  stupend- 
ous issues  depend  upon  the  preserva- 
tion of  the  imperilled  life  of  that  goodly 
child  in  his  frail  ark  of  bulrushes  on 
the  Nile  !  A  remarkable  illustration  of 
our  point  occurs  in  the  life  of  the  dis- 
tinguished F.  W".  Robertson.  He  had 
a  passionate  enthusiasm  for  military 
life,  had  chosen  the  array  as  his  profes- 
sion, and  was  studyins:  for  it,  and 
application  had  been  made  to  the  Horse 
Guards  for  a  commi.-sion  for  him. 
'  I'o  two  great  objects,''  says  his 
biographer — "  the  profession  of  arms 
which  he  had  cho-en,  and  the  service 
of  Christ  in  ih»t  piofes.-^icrn — he  now 
devoted  himself  wholly."  The  circum- 
stances which  led  him  to  abandon  that 
profession  for  the  calling  of  the  Chris- 
tian minister  are  remaikable.  This 
result  was  brought  about  by  the  in- 
fluence of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Davies,  who 
thus  1  elates  the  origin  of  their  friend- 
ship:— -'The  daughter  of  Lady  French, 

71 


CHAP.  IV. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


at  whose  bon«e  I  met  my  friend,  had 
been  seriously  iil.  She  was  prevented 
from  sleeping  by  the  barking  of  a  dog 
in  one  of  the  adjoining  bouses.  This 
house  was  Captain  Koberf son's.  A 
letter  was  written  to  ask  that  the  dog 
might  be  removed  ;  and  so  kind  and 
acquiescent  a  reply  was  returned,  that 
Lady  French  called  to  express  her 
thanks.  She  was  muck  struck  at  that 
visit  by  the  manner  and  bearing  of  the 
eldest  son,  and,  in  consequence  an 
intimacy  grew  up  between  the  families." 
Mr.  Robeitson  himself  thus  refers  to 
this  matter  : — "  If  I  had  not  met  a 
certain  person,  I  f^houM  not  have 
changed  my  profession  \  if  I  had  not 
known  a  certain  lady,  1  should  not 
probably  have  met  this  person  ;  if  that 
lady  bad  not  had  a  delicate  daughter 
who  was  disturbed  by  the  barking  of 
my  dog  ;  if  my  dog  had  not,  barked  that 
night,  I  should  now  have  been  in  the 
dragoons,  or  fertili>ing  the  soil  of  India. 
Who  can  say  that  these  things  were 
not  ordered,  and  that,  apparently,  the 
merest  trifle  did  not  produce  failure  and 
a  marred  existence  ? ''  (''  Failure  and 
a  marred  existence*' — so  it  seemed  to 
him  then.  But  how  very  different  it 
really  was  !  How  different  must  it 
appear  to  him  now !)  Such  slight  cir- 
cumstances, apparently,  led  to  his 
entering  upon  the  career  of  a  Christian 
minister — a  career  so  rich  in  the 
highest  results,     (a) 

III.  Life  itself  is  composed  almost 
entirely  of  little  thmgs. 

Great  events  and  noteworthy  ex- 
periences are  very  rare  things  in  life. 
Day  after  day  we  live  in  the  performance 
of  small  duties,  amidst  ordinary  cir- 
cumstances and  events.  With  the  ex- 
ception of  a  very  few  remarkable  events, 
our  life  is  made  up  of  the  most  ordinary 
and  common- plrtCe,  and  apparently,  un- 
important things.  And  yet  life  itself, 
as  a  whole,  is  a  thing  of  utterly  un- 
speakable importance,  most  momentous 
in  its  character,  its  influence,  its  capa- 
bilities, &c 

IV.  Character,  which  to  each  of  us 
is  the  most  important  thing,  is  formed 
almost  entirely  of  littles. 

72 


"  Character,"  says  Beecher,  **  is  noi, 
a  massive  unit ;  it  is  a  fabric  rather. 
It  is  an  artificial  whole  made  up  by  the 
interply  of  ten  thousand  threads.  Every 
faculty  is  a  spinner,  spinning  every  day 
its  threads,  and  almost  every  day 
threads  of  a  different  colour.  Myriads 
and  myriads  of  webbed  products  pro- 
ceed from  the  many  active  faculties  of 
the  human  soul,  and  character  is  made 
up  by  the  weaving  together  of  all  these 
innumerable  threads  of  daily  life.  Its 
strength  is  not  merely  in  the  strength 
of  some  simple  unit,  but  in  the  strength 
of  numerous  elements."  The  great 
Williams  of  Wern,  when  preaching  at 
Bala,  where  many  women  are  employed 
in  knitting  stockings,  inquired,  ''  How 
is  character  formed?"  ^^  Gradually^'* 
he  replied,  "just  as  you  Bala  women 
knit  stockings — a  stitch  at  a  time.*'    (bj 

Conclusion : 

3.  Be  careful  as  to  the  little  things  of 
personal  character  and  conduct.  '*  Let 
us  not  neglect  little  duties,  let  us  not 
allow  ourselves  in  little  faults.  What- 
ever we  may  like  to  think,  nothing  is 
really  of  small  importance  that  affects 
the  soul.  All  diseases  are  small  at  the 
beginning.  Many  a  death-bed  begins 
with  a  ^little  cold.'  Nothing  that  can 
grow  is  large  all  at  once ;  the  greatest 
sin  must  have  a  beginning.  Nothing 
that  is  great  comes  to  perfection  in  a 
day  ;  characters  and  habits  are  all  the 
result  of  little  actions.  Little  strokes 
made  the  ark  which  saved  Noah.  Little 
pius  held  firm  the  tabernacle  which  was 
the  glory  of  Israel.  We,  too,  are 
travelling  through  a  wilderness.  Let 
us  be  like  the  family  of  Merari,  and 
be  careful  not  to  leave  the  pins  be- 
hind." 

Let  us  beware  of  small  sins,  (c) 
Let  us  be  faithful  in  smalt  duties,  {dj 
2.  Be  careful  as  to  the  little  things  of 
church  lije  and  work.  Let  the  most 
feeble  member  of  the  Church  do  the 
work  for  which  he  is  fitted  faithfully. 
Let  not  the  least  or  lowliest  duty  be 
neglected,  or  the  welfare  and  prosperity 
of  the  whole  will  be  tht-reby  injured. 
VVLeu  all  the  members  of   the  Church 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  IV. 


— the  least  gifted  and  the  most  gifted  — 
are  faithful  in  life  and  work ;  and 
when  every  duty— the  least  as  well  as 


the  greatest — is  faithfully  performed, 
great  will  be  her  prosperity  and  her 
power. 


ILL  USTRA  TIONS. 


(o)  Where  Goc'  ''n  generous  fulness  dwells, 
Nor  small  nor  great  is  known  ; 

He  paints  the  tiniest  floweret-cells 
O'er  etLerald  meadows  strewn  ; 

And  sees,  but  not  with  kinder  eyes, 

The  heavens  grow  rich  with  sunset  dyes; 

Both  ministrant  to  beauty's  sense, 

Both  signw  of  one  Omnipotence. 

He  cnmes  not  forth  with  pageant  grand 

His  marvels  to  perform. 
A  cloud  "the  biuressof  a  hand" 

Can  blacken  heaven  with  storm. 
A  grain  of  dust,  if  he  arrange, 
The  fortunes  of  a  planet  change. 
An  inject  reef  can  overwhelm 

The  stately  navies  of  a  realm. 

There  are  no  trifles.     Arks  as  frail 

As  bore  God's  prince  of  old, 
On  many  a  buoyant  Nils  stream  sail 

The  age's  heirs  to  hold. 
From  Jacob's  love  on  Joseph  shed, 
Came  Egypt's  wealth   and  Israel's  bread; 
From  Ruth's  chance  gleaning  in  the  corn, 
The  Psalmist  sang,— the  Christ  was  born. 

W.  M.  Punshon. 

(6)  Have  you  ever  watched  an  icicle  as  it 
formed  ?  You  noticed  how  it  froze  one  drop 
at  a  time,  until  it  was  a  foot  long  or  more. 
If  the  water  was  clear,  the  icicle  remained 
clear,  and  sparkled  brightly  in  the  sun ;  but 


if  the  water  was  but  slightly  muddy,  the  iticle 
looked  foul,  and  its  beauty  was  spoiled.  Just 
80  our  cnaracters  are  forming:  one  little 
thought  or  feeling  at  a  time  adds  its  influer.ce. 
If  each  thought  be  pure  and  right,  the  soul 
will  be  lovely,  and  sparkle  witti  happiness; 
but  if  impure  and  wrong,  there  will  be  defor- 
mity and  wretchedness.— 2e////>e?awce  Anec- 
dotes, in  Diet,  oflllust. 

(c)  Little  thiogs  are  seeds  jf  preat  ones. 
Little  cruelties  are  gems  of  great  ones.  Little 
treacheries  are,  like  small  holes  in  raiment, 
the  begioning  of  large  ones.  Little  disho:!- 
esties  are  like  the  drops  that  work  through 
the  bank  of  the  river  ;  a  drop  is  an  engineer : 
it  tunnels  a  way  for  its  fellows,  and  thoy, 
rusLing,  prepare  for  all  behind  them.  A  worm 
in  a  ship  8  plank  proves,  in  time,  worsft  than 
a  cannon-ball.—^.   W.  Beecher. 

(d)  Let  us  be  content  to  work. 

To  do  the  thing  we  can,  and  not  presume 
To  fret  because  it's  little.     'Twill  employ 
Seven  men,  they  say,  to  make  a  perfect  pin. 
Who  makes  the   head   consents  to   miss  the 
point  ; 

Who  makes  the   point  agrees  to  leare  the 
head  ; 

And  if  a  man  should  cry,  "  I  want  a  pin, 
And  I  must   make  it  straightway,  head  and 

point," 
His  wisdom  is  not  worth  the  pin  he   wants. 

Elizabeth  B.  Browning. 


Pbopoktion  between  Number  and  Service. 
(Fmes  34—49.) 


In  these  verses  we  have  the  account 
of  the  numbering  of  the  Levites  for 
active  service,  according  to  the  com- 
mand given  unto  Moses  and  Aaron  in 
verses  1-3.  The  result  here  recorded 
is  this  :  Of  males  from  thirty  years  old 
and  upward  even  unto  fifty  years  old, 
there  were  of  Kohathites  2.750;  of 
Gershonites,  2,630;  and  of  Merarites, 
3,200,  mnking  a  total  of  8,580.  This 
number  bears  a  just  proportion  to  that 
of  all  the  males  of  the  Levites  from  a 
month  old  and  upward,  which  was 
22,000.  '*  But  the  number  of  Merar- 
ites available  for  the  sacred  service 
bears  an  unusually  large  proportion  to 
the    total    number    of  male*  of    that 


family,  which  is  (iii.  34)  6,200. 
Looking  at  the  relation  of  the  numbers 
to  the  service  required  of  them  we 
discover  iilustratioos  of — 

I.  The  Wisdom  of  God. 

"  By  this  diversity  ot  numbers  among 
the  Levite  fHmilies,"saith  Trapp,  "-  God 
showeth  His  wisdom,  saith  an  inter- 
preter, in  fitting  men  for  the  woik, 
whereunto  He  hath  appointed  them,' 
whether  it  requireth  multitude  or  gifts'. 
*  For  to  one  is  given  by  the  Spirit  the 
word  of  wisdom,'  etc.  (1  Cor.  xii.  8-12). 
It  is  reported  that  in  Luther's  house 
was  found  written,  *  Reset  verba  Pliilli^ 
pus,  res  sine  verbis  Lutherus,  verba  sine 
re    Erasmus,    Melaucthcn    hath    both 

73 


CHAP.  IV. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


matter  and  words  ;  Luther  hath  matter 
but  wants  words  ;  Erasmus  hath  words, 
but  wants  matter.'  Every  one  hath  his 
own  share ;  all  are  not  alike  gifted." 
M.  Henry :  "  The  Merarites  were  but 
6,200  in  all,  and  yet  of  these  there 
were  3,200  serviceable  men,  that  is, 
more  than  half.  The  greatest  burden 
lay  upon  that  family,  the  boards  and 
pillars  and  sockets  ;  and  God  so  ordered 
it  that,  though  they  were  the  fewest  in 
number,  yet  ihey  bhould  have  the  most 
able  men  among  them  ;  for  whatever 
service  God  calls  men  to  He  will  fur- 
nish them  for  it,  and  give  strength  in 
proportion  to  the  work,  grace  sufficient." 
God's  appointments  to  .-^ervice  are  ever 
made  in  perfect  wisdom.  There  are 
ever  a  fitness  and  proportion  between 
the  workers  and  the  woik.  (a) 

II.  The  reasonableness  of  the 
Divine  requirements. 

''  Though  the  sum  total  of  effective 
Levites,"  says  Greenfield,  "  was  very 
small  compared  with  that  of  the  other 
tribe's  ;  yet  they  would  be  far  more  than 
could  be  employed  at  once  in  this  ser- 
vice. But  they  might  carry  by  turns 
and  ease  one  another,  and  thus  do  the 


whole  expeditiously  and  cheerfully. 
They  would  also  have  their  own  tents 
to  remove,  and  their  onu.  families  to 
take  care  of."  There  was  an  ample 
number  for  the  performance  of  the 
work  ;  and  its  distribution  amongst  so 
many  would  render  it  comparatively 
easy  to  everyone.  God's  claims  upon 
us  and  our  service  are  in  the  highest 
degree  reasonable.  He  is  a  kind  and 
gracious  Master.  '*His  yoke  is  easy 
and  His  burden  is  light."  And  if  He 
summon  us  to  difficult  tasks.  He  will 
increase  our  wisdom  and  strength,  so 
we  shall  not  be  overmatched.  "  As 
thy  days  so  shall  thy  strength  be." 
*'  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee."  "  I 
can  do  all  things  through  Christ  which 
strengiheneth  me."     {b) 

We  have  also  in  this  section  of  the 
history  an  illustration  of — 

III.  The  exemplary  obedience  of 
the  servants  of  the  Lord. 

We  see  how  carefully  and  faithfully 
Moses  and  Aaron  carried  out  the  direc- 
tions which  they  received  from  Him. 
In  this  they  are  an  example  to  us.  (See 
notes  and  illustrations  bearing  on  this 
point  given  on  chaps,  ii.  34,  iii.  16.) 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  God's  wisdom  appears  in  the  various 
inclinations  and  conditions  of  men.  As  there 
is  a  distinction  of  several  creatures,  and 
several  quahties  in  them,  for  the  common  good 
of  the  world,  so  atnong  men  there  are  several 
inclinations  and  several  abilities,  as  donatives 
from  God,  for  the  common  advantage  of  human 
society  ;  as  several  channels  cut  out  from  the 
fame  river  run  several  ways,  and  refresh 
several  soils,  one  man  is  qualified  for  one  em- 
ployment, another  marked  out  by  God  for  a 
different  work,  yet  all  of  them  fruitful  to 
bring  in  a  revenue  of  glory  to  God,  and  a 
harvest  of  profit  t^^  the  rest  of  mankind.  How 
unuseful  would  tae  oody  be  if  it  hfid  but  "one 
member"  (1  Cor.  xii.  19)  !  How  unprovided 
would  a  house  be  if  it  had  not  vessels  of  dis- 
hoEOur  as  well  as  of  honour  1  The  corporation 
of  mankind  would  be  as  much  a  chaos  as  tbe 
matter  of  the  heavens  and  tbe  earth  was  before 
it  was  distinguished  by  several  forms  breathed 
into  it  at  the  creation.  Some  are  inspired 
with  a  particular  genius  for  one  art,  some  for 
another;  every  man  hath  a  distinct  talent. 
If  all  were  husbandmen  where  would  be  the 
instruments  to  plough  and  reap  ?  If  all  were 
artificers  where  would  they  have  corn  to 
nourish  themselves?  All  men  are  like  vessels, 

74 


and  parts  in  the  body,  designed  for  distinct 
offices  and  functions  for  the  good  of  the  whole. 
As  the  variety  of  gifts  in  the  Church  is  a  fruit 
of  the  wisdom  of  God  for  the  preservation  aid 
increase  of  the  Church,  so  the  variety  of 
inclinations  and  employments  in  the  world  is 
a  fruit  of  the  wisdom  of  God  for  the  preserva- 
tion and  gubsistence  of  the  world  by  mutual 
CO  mmerce . — Charnocke. 

(h)  Power  is  the  measure  of  obligation.  It 
is  the  circumference  that  bounds  every  line, 
starting  from  the  centre  of  duty.  What  we 
cannot  do,  we  are  not  bound  to  attempt.  The 
command  that  outstrips  our  capacity  is  no  law 
to  us.  Why  is  religion  noi  binding  on  brutes? 
God  IS  as  truly  their  Creator  and  Sustainer  as 
He  is  ours — they  have  not  the  power.  Our 
faculties  ard  adequate  to  the  Divine  will  re- 
specting us.  They  are  made  for  it — made  to 
it.  The  sun  is  not  more  nicely  adjusted  to 
the  work  of  lighting  the  planets — the  rolling 
atmosphere  to  the  purpose"  of  life — these 
bodies  to  all  the  laws,  influences,  and  sceneries 
of  this  material  universe — than  are  all  the 
powers  of  the  soul  adjusted  to  the  work  of 
worship.  To  trace  eflfects  to  causes,  to  discern 
moral  distinctions,  to  reverence  greatness,  t:' 
love  excellence,  to  praise  goodness — these  arv. 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  V. 


the  sacred  functions  of  religion ;  and  whilst 
that  seraph,  glowing  with  rapture  in  the  full 
sunlight  of  the  Eternal,  can  perform  nothing 
higher,  that  human  babe,  gazing  for  the  first 
time  with  wonder  at  the  stars,  has  ample 
powers  to  do  the  same. — D.  Thomas,  D.D. 

The  whole  relation  of  discipleship  is  a  rela- 
tion of  liberty.  No  one  goes  to  his  duty 
because  he  must,  but  only  because  his  heart 
is  in  it.  His  inclinations  are  that  way,  for 
his  heart  is  in  the  Master's  love,  and  he  follows 
Him  gladly.  It,  no  doubt,  seems  to  you  when 
you  look  on,  only  as  strangers  to  Onrist,  that 
this  must  be  a  hard  and  dry  service,  for  you 
see  no  attraction  in  it.  But  the  reason  is  that 
your  heart  is  not  in  it.    With  a  new  heart, 


quickened  by  the  grace  of  Christ,  all  this  would 
be  changed.  It  will  then  seem  wholly  attrac- 
tive. All  the  currents  of  your  love  will  run 
that  way,  and  the  freest  freedom  of  your 
nature  will  be  to  go  after  Chritit  No  sacrifice 
will  be  hard — no  service  a  burden.  The  wonder 
now  will  be  that  all  men  do  not  rush  in  after 
Christ  to  be  His  eager  followers.— .£?.  Bushnell, 
D.D. 

"  In  service  which  Thy  love  appoints, 
There  are  no  hoods  for  me  ; 
My  secret  heart  is  taught  the  truth 

That  makes  Thy  children  free. 
A  life  of  self-renouncinff  love 
Is  one  of  liberty." —  Waring, 


CHAPTER  V. 


Thb  Exclusion  of  the  Unclean. 
(Verse  1-4.) 


"  Now  that  the  nation  was  regularly 
organised,  the  sacred  tribe  dedicated, 
and  the  sanctuary  with  the  tokens  of 
God's  more  immediate  Presence  pro- 
vided with  its  proper  place  and  atten- 
dants in  the  camp,  it  remained  to  attest 
and  to  vindicate,  by  modes  in  harmony 
with  the  spirit  ot  the  theocraticai  law, 
the  sanctity  of  the  people  of  God. 
This  accordingly  is  the  general  purpobC 
of  the  directioncs  given  in  this  and  the 
next  chapter.  Thus  the  congregation 
of  Israel  was  made  to  typify  the  Church 
of  God,  within  which,  in  its  perfection, 
nothing  that  offends  can  be  allowed  to 
remaia  "  (c/.  Matt.  viiL  22;  Rev.  xxi. 
27.) — Speaker^ s  Comm. 

In  the  verses  now  before  us  we  have 
the  directions  for  the  expulsion  of  un- 
clean persons  out  of  the  camp.  The 
laws  as  to  ceremonial  unclean ntss  are 
given  with  considerable  minuteness  in 
Lev.  xi.,  XV.,  xxi.,  xxii.,  and  Num.  xix. 
But  it  appears  that  they  are  now  carried 
out  for  the  firot  time. 

We  shall  look  at  our  text  in  two 
aspects. 

I.  As  a  Sanitary  Measure. 

A  number  of  rules  and  regulations 
for  securing  the  cleanliness  and  health 
of  the  people  were  promulgated  and 
enforced.     Some  of  the  sanitary  regu- 


lations "seem  minute  and  indelicate  to 
modern  ideas,  but  were,  doubtless,  in- 
tended to  correct  unseemly  or  un- 
healthful  practices,  either  of  the  Hebrew 
people  or  of  neighbouring  tribes.'* 
Some  have  asserted  that  the  reason  for 
the  expulsion  of  every  leper  from  the 
camp  was  that  tbe  disease  was  con- 
tagious. So  scholarly  and  well-in- 
formed a  writer  as  Dr.  Milman  says 
that  ""  the  disease  was  lughly  infectious." 
But  this  is  extremely  doubtful.  "All 
who  have  looked  closest  into  the 
matter,'*  says  Archbishop  Trench, 
"  agree  that  tbe  sickness  was  incom- 
municable by  ordinary  contact  from  one 
person  to  another,  A  lepor  might 
transmit  it  to  his  children,  or  the  mother 
of  a  leper's  children  might  take  it  from 
him ;  but  it  was  by  no  ordinary  contact 
communicable    from    one     person    to 

another Naamao,  the 

leper,  commanded  the  armies  of  Syria 
(2  Kings  V.  1) ;  Gehazi,  with  his 
leprosy  that  never  should  be  cleansed 
(2  Kings  V.  27),  talked  familiarly  will: 
the  king  of  apo?tate  Israel  (2  Kings  viii 
5).  And  even  where  the  law  of  Moses 
was  in  force,  the  stranger  and  the  so- 
journer were  expressly  exempted  from 
the  ordinances  relating  to  leprosy  ; 
which   could  not  have    been,  had  the 

75 


CHAP,  V. 


EOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


disease  been  contagious.  How,  more- 
over, should  the  Levitical  priests,  had 
the  disea.^e  V^een  this  creeping  infection, 
have  ever  themselves  escaped  it,  obliged 
as  they  were  by  their  very  office  to 
submit  the  leper  to  actual  handling  and 
closest  examination?"  It  seems  tons 
indisputable  '^  that,  if  the  disease  is 
contagious,  a  very  rare  and  critical 
concurrence  of  circumstancesis  required 
to  develop  the  contagion."  There  were 
special  reasons  tor  selecting  this  dif  ease 
Irom  all  other-  for  exclusion  from  ihe 
camp.  "The  Egyptian  and  Syrian 
climates,  but  especially  the  rair)le^8 
atmosphere  of  the  former,  are  very  pro- 
lific in  skin  diseases The 

E^jptian  bondage,  with  its  studied  de- 
gradations and  privations,  and  e^pefially 
the  work  of  the  kiln  under  the  Ejiyp- 
tian   sun,   must  have  had    a  frightful 
tendency  to  generate  this  class  of  dis- 
orders ;  hence  Man»tho  (Joseph,  cont., 
Ap,   I.  26)  asserts   that  the  Egyptians 
drove  out  the  Israelites  as  infe  t^d  with 
leprosy — a  strange    reflex,   peihaps,   of 
the  Mosaic  narrative  of  the  '  plagues ' 
of  Egypt,  yet  also  probably  containing 
a  germ  of  truth.     The  sudden  and  total 
chr.nge  of  food,  air,  dwelling,  and  mode 
of  life,   caused  by  the  Exodus,  to  this 
nation  of    newly    emancipated    slaves 
may    possibly    have    had     a     further 
tendency   to  skin  digorders,  and  novel 
and  severe    repressive    measures  may 
have  been  required  in  the  desert-mov- 
ing camp  to  secure  the  public  health,  or 
to  allay  the  panic  of  infection.     .     . 
In  the  contact  of  a  dead  body  there  was 
no  notion  of  contagion,  for  the  body  the 
moment  life   was  extinct  was  as  much 
ceremonially  unclean  as  in  a  state  of 
decay.     Why,  then,  in  leprosy  must  we 
have  recourse  to  a  theory  of  contagion  ? 
It  would  perhaps  be  nearer  the  truth  to 
say    that    uncleanness    was    imputed, 
rather  to  inspire  the  dread  of  contagion, 
than  in  order  to  check  contamination  as 
an  actual    process.     .     .     .     On    the 
whole,  though  we  decline  to  rest  leprous 
defilement  merely  on  popular  notions  of 
abhorrence,  dread  of  contagion,  and  the 
like ;  yet  a  deference  to  them  may  be 
admitted  to  have  been  shown,  especially 
76 


at  the  time  when  the  people  were,  from 
previous  habits  and  associations,  up  to 
the  moment  of  the  actual  Exodus,  most 
strongly  imbued  with  the  scrupulous 
purity  and  refined  ceremonial  example 
of  the  Efiyptians  on  the^e  subjects." — 
Smith's  Diet,  of  the  Bible. 

In  each  case  mentioned  in  the  text, 
"every  leper,  and  every  one  that  hath 
an  issue,  and  whosover  is  defiled  by  the 
de^d," — the  person  was  put  without  the 
camp  because  of  ceremonial  pollution, 
not  l)fcau!-e  of  contagion.  It  was  the 
will  of  God  that  the  p(  ople  should  cul- 
tivate the  most  scrupulous  physical 
(leanliness.  In  a  camp  composed  of 
more  than  two  millions  of  persons 
cleanliness  was  of  the  utmost  impor- 
tance. Dirt  is  the  prolific  parent  of 
disease.  Wise  sanitary  measures  are  the 
most  certain  means  of  insuring  bodily 
strength  and  safety,  (aj  Two  things 
in  the  text  show  that  this  sanitary 
measure  was  regarded  as  of  great  im- 
portance by  the  Lord. 

1 .  T/ie  universal  application  of  the  rule. 
''  Every  leper,  and  every  one  that  hath 
an  issue,  and  whosover  is  defiled  by  the 
dead  :  both  male  and  female  shall  ye  put 
out."  No  one  whatever  was  exempted 
from  its  application.  When  Miriam, 
the  prophetess,  and  sister  of  Moses  and 
Aa'on,  was  smitten  with  leprosy,  she 
*'  was  shut  out  from  the  camp  seven 
days."  With  strict  impartiality  the 
rule  was  carried  out. 

2.  The  sacred  reason  by  which  it  was 
enforced  "That  they  dtfile  not  their 
camps,  in  the  midst  whereof  I  dwell.'* 
The  Lord  is  the  God  of  cleanliness  and 
health.  All  impurity  is  an  abomination 
to  Him.  Purity  of  body,  of  home,  of 
towns  and  cities,  is  well-pleasing  to 
Him.  As  a  condition  of  the  Divine 
Presence,  let  us  cultivate  comprehensive 
and  scrupulous  cleanliness.  Impurity 
separates  from  Him. 

II.  As  a  spiritual  parable. 

Ceremonial  uncleanness  was  intended 
to  illustrate  spiritual  uncleanness.  The 
ceremonial  purity  which  was  insisted 
upon  in  the  camp  of  Israel  was  typical 
of  the  spiritual  purity  which  God  re- 
quires of  His  people^     By  enacting  that 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTAliY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  V, 


any  one  who  had  anythinj^  to  do  with 
the  dead  should  be  regatde-l  as  unclean, 
and  put  out  of  the  camp,  the  Lord 
teaches  that  sin  and  death  are  not  from 
Him,  and  cnnnot  dwell  with  Ilim.  And 
the  loathsome  and  terrible  di>ease  of 
'*  leprosy  was  the  outward  abd  visible 
si^n  of  the  innermost  spiritual  corrup- 
tion, the  sacrament  of  death."  '1  he 
leper  ''  was  himself  a  dreadful  parable 
of  death," — '' a  walking  grave."  Thus, 
parabolically,  the  text  represents  sin — 

1.  As  a  defiling  tiling.  The  sinner  is 
morally  ULcltan.  Deeply  did  David 
f^el  this  when  he  cried,  *'  Wash  me 
throughly  from  mine  iniquity,  and 
cleanse  me  from  my  sin.  Purge  me 
with  hysf-op,  and  I  shall  be  clean  ;  wash 
me.  and  I  shall  be  whiter  than  snow. 
Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  O  God." 
Every  sin  proceeds  fiom  the  corruption 
of  the  human  heart,  and  tends  to  in- 
crease that  corruption. 

2.  As  a  deadly  thing.  "  The  soul 
that  sinneth  it  shall  die."  "  The  wages 
of  sin  is  death."  "Sin,  when  it  is 
finished,  bringeth  forth  death."  Every 
sinful  act  tends  to  kill  some  element  or 
power  of  the  spiritual  life.  3  he  life  of 
the  soul  consists  in  truth  and  trust, 
righteousness  arid  love,  reverence  and 
obedience,  etc.  Every  lie  spoken  or 
acted  is  a  blow  aimed  at  the  very  life 
of  truth  in  us.  Every  infidelity  of 
which  we  are  guiliy  tends  to  destrcy 
our  trust.  So  in  relation  to  every  ele- 
ment of  the  soul's  life.  Sin  is  deadly 
in  its  character  and  influence. 

3.  As  a  separating  thing.  The  un- 
clean were  to  be  pui  out  of  the  camp. 
Ceremonial  uncleanness  involved  for- 
feiture of  social  privileges  and  of 
citizenship  among  the  people  of  God 
for  a  time.  '*  The  man  that  shall  be 
unclean,  and  shall  not  purify  himself, 
that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  among 
the  congregation,  because  he  hath 
defiled  the  .^anctuary  of  the  Lord." 
Where  sin  is  cherished  God  will  not 
dwell.  (1)  The  openly  and  persistently 
wicked  shovld  be  eape/led  from  the 
Church  on  eai  tli.      (a)  Because  of  their 


corrupt  influence.  "  Know  ye  not  that 
a  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole 
lump?"  1  Cor.  V.  6-13.  (h)  Be- 
cause of  the  dishonour  to  God  which  their 
prei>ei>ce  in  the  Church  involves.  He 
has  promi.>-e(l  to  dwell  in  His  Church, 
and  to  manifest  Himself  to  His  people 
as  He  does  not  unto  ihe  wcrld.  Matr. 
xviii.  20;  Juhnxiv.  21-23.  And  He 
demands  that  His  people  shall  follow 
after  entire  holiness.  He  demands  our 
entire  consecration.  "Know  ye  not 
that  your  body  is  the  temple  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  which  is  in  you,  which  ye 
have  of  God,  and  ye  are  not  your  own  ?  " 
&c.  *•  Know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the 
temple  of  God,  and  ihdt  the  Spirit  (»f 
God  dwelleth  in  you  ?  if  any  man  dt  file 
the  temple  of  God,  him  shall  God  de- 
stroy ;  for  the  temple  of  God  is  holy, 
which  temple  are  ye."  OurLod  'gave 
Himself  for  us,  that  He  ruight  redeem 
us  from  all  iniquity,  and  puiily  unio 
Himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of 
good  works."  "•  A  chosen  generation, 
a  ro)al  priesthood,  an  holy  nation,  a 
pecu  iar  people,"  etc.  Such  is  the 
Divine  pattern  of  the  Church  and 
people  of  God  :  and  He  is  dishonoured 
when  the  openly  arid  persi^tently 
wi(k(  d  are  allowed  to  remain  in  His 
Church.  With  such  a  church  HE  will 
net  dwell,  (b)  (2)  The  wicked  will 
he  excluded  from  the  city  of  God  above. 
"  Thei'e  shall  in  no  wi-e  enter  into  it 
anything  that  defiieih,'  etc.  Kev.  xxi. 
27.  All  the  citizens  of  that  glorious 
realm  "  have  washed  their  robes,  and 
made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb."     (c) 

Conclusion. 

1.  He  who  demands  this  purity  has  pro- 
vided the  means  VjLercby  we  may  attain 
unto  it.  '^  The  blcod  of  Jesus  Christ  His 
Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin." 

2  Let  us  diligently  use  the  means 
which  He  has  provided.  "  Wash  you, 
make  you  clean,"  etc.  Isa.  i.  16,  18. 
'*  Purifying  their  hearts  by  faith."  "•  Let 
us  cleanse  ourselves  from  all  tilthiness  of 
the  flesh  and  spirit,  perfecting  holiness 
in  the  fear  of  God." 


77 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMII.ETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  Oloanline^g  may  be  defined  to   be  the 
emblem  of  purity  of  mind,  and  may  be  recom- 
mended under  the  thrive  followiuj?   heads  ;  as 
it    is  a   mark    of    politeness,   as    it   produces 
affection,  and  as  it  bears  analogy  to  chastity 
o*'  Si-ntim-nt,     First,  it  is  a  mark  of  politeness, 
for  it  is  univert^ally  agreed  upon,  that  no  one 
unadorned  with  this  virtue  can  go  into  com- 
pany without  giving   a  manifold  offence;  the 
different   nations  of  the    world   are  as  much 
distinguished  by  their  cleanliness  as  by  their 
arts  and  s<nence8  ;  the  more  they  are  advanced 
in  civil  z  tion  the  more  they  consult  this  part 
of   politeness.     Secondly,  cleanliness  may  be 
Bail    to    be    the    foster-mother    of    affection. 
Brtauty  commonly  produces   love,  but  cleanli- 
ness preserves  it.     Age  itself  is  not  unamiable 
while  it  18  preserved  clean  and  unsullied;  like 
a  piece  of  m»>tal   constantly  kept  smoota  and 
bright,  we  look  on  it  with  more  pleasure  than 
on  a  new  vessel  cankered  with  rust.     I  might 
further  ob-erve,  that   as  cleanliness   renders 
us  agreeable  to  others,  it  makes  us  easy  to 
ourselves,  that  it  is  an  excellent  preservative 
of   health;    and   that  several  Tices,    both   of 
mind   and   body,    are    inconsistent    with  the 
habit  of  it.     In  the   third   place,   it   bears  a 
great  analogy  with  chastity  of  sentiment,  and 
naturally   inspiies  refined  feelings   and  pas- 
sions ;  we  find  from  experience,  that  through 
the   prevalence  of   custom,    tho  most  vicious 
actions    lose    their    horror     by    being    made 
familiar  to  us.     On  the  contrary,  those  who 
live  in   the  neighbourhood   of   good  examples 
fly  from  the  first  appearance  of  what  is  shock- 
ing; and  thus  pure  and  unsullied  thoughts  are 
naturally    sugg'^sted    to    the    mind    by    those 
objects  that  pt-rpatuaily   «  ncompass   us  when 
they  are  beautiful  and  elegant  in  their  kind. 
— Addison. 

It  is  wonderful  bow  vie^vs  of  life  depend 
upon  ext-rcise  and  right  management  of  the 
physical  constitution.  Nor  is  this,  ritihtly 
looked  at,  any  o^u~*e  for  perplexity,  thouo:h  it 
seems  so  at  first ;  for  though  you  might  be 
inclined  to  view  it  as  a  degradation  of  our 
higher  nature  to  find  it  so  dependent  on  the 


lower,  and  hope  and  faith  and  energy  resultant 
from  a  walk  or  early  hours  —yet,  in  fact,  it  is 
only  a  proof  that  all  the  laws  of  our  manifold 
being  are  sacred,  and  that  disobedience  to 
them  i.'^  punished  by  God.  And  the  punish- 
ment in  one  department  of  our  nature  of  the 
transgressions  committod  in  the  other — as, 
for  instance,  when  mental  gloom  comes  from 
uncleanliness  or  physical  inertia,  and,  on  the 
other  hand,  where  ill-health  ensues  from  envy 
or  protracted  doubt — is  but  one  of  many  in- 
stances of  the  law  of  vicarious  suffering.  We 
are,  as  it  were,  two.  and  one  suffers  by  what 
the  other  does. — F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.,  Life 
and  Letters. 

{h)  Tney  are  deceived  that  think  it  is  not 
necessary  to  purge  out  the  great  and  gross 
offenders.  The  Church  is  the  City  of  God, 
excommunicatioa  is  the  sword  ;  it  is  the 
school  of  Christ,  this  is  the  rod,  as  the  Apostle 
calleth  it ;  it  is  the  Temple  of  God,  this  is,  as 
it  were,  the  whip,  to  scourge  out  such  as 
abuse  it  and  themselves ;  it  is  the  body  of 
Christ,  this  is  as  a  medicine  to  cure  the  diseases 
of  it  ;  it  is  the  vine  and  sheepfold,  this  serveth 
to  keep  the  foxes  and  wolves  from  it. —  W. 
Attersoll. 

(c)  How  real  is  that  description  of  sin — 
"  it  defileth,  it  worketh  abomination,  it  maketh 
a  lie  1  "  It  is  uncleanness,  un loveliness,  un- 
truth! Bnt  it  shall  "in  no  wis©  enter" 
heaven  There  '*  shall  be  nothing  to  hurt  and 
to  destroy."  Moral  evil  cannot  for  a  moment 
dwell  in  it.  As  tboush  the  leprosy  of  sin  had 
struck  too  inextricably  into  the  abode  of  man, 
had  even  contaminated  the  habitation  of 
angels,  we  anticipate  a  scene  purer  than  earth 
could  afford  however  it  were  changed,  purer 
than  the  heavens  from  which  the  angels  fell. 
And  when  we  can  conceive  of  such  a  state, 
that  which  gives  to  law  all  its  power  of  sway 
and  yet  debars  its  curse,  that  is  heaven,  the 
highest  heaven,  the  heaven  of  heavens  I  We 
know  it  by  this,  we  desire  it  for  this,  ''  wherein 
dwelleth  righteoudneds  1 " — R.  W.  Hamilton^ 
LL.D.,  D.D, 


Where  God  dwj::lls  there  must  be  Puritt. 

(  P'erse  2.) 


**  Put  out  of  the  camp  every  leper." 
God  gave  the  people  moral,  civil,  and 
sanitary  laws.  These  in  the  context 
were  partly  sanitary.  He  would  teach 
the  people  habits  of  cleanliness,  which 
were  essential  to  the  health  of  the  camp. 
Filth  is  a  child  of  sin,  and  the  fruitful 
parent  of  diseases  which  decimate  man- 
kind. But  the  text  is  something  more 
78 


than  a  sanitary  precaution ;  for  it  is 
probable  that  lepro-^y  was  not  conta- 
gious, and  the  ordinances  respecting  it 
did  not  apply  to  the  sojourner  and  the 
stranger.  Why  then  the  injuncaon  of 
the  text  ?  No  doubt  the  great  object 
was  to  enforce  the  ideas  of  purity  and 
holiness,  and  to  teach  them  that  God  can- 
not dwell  among  the  sinful  and  impure. 


HOMILETIC    CO.UMENTARV:    NUMBERS, 


CUAP.  V. 


Lepiosi/ hns  ever  been  cons  dered  a 
striking  iliusfration  of  sin.  For  in- 
stance, — 1.  Sin.  like  leprosy,  is  a  trans- 
gression of  law.  All  evil-j,  physical 
as  well  as  moral,  a'ise  from  disregatd 
of  some  law.  Na  ural  laws  have  their 
penalties ;  they  cannot  be  broken  with 
impunity.  Cliolera,  fevers,  and  other 
terrible  scourges  that  visit  us,  are 
penalties.  We  call  them  "visitations 
from  God,"  and  such  they  are  in  the 
sense  of  being  penalties  for  breaking 
the  laws  that  He  has  imposed  on  us. 
Intemperance,  vice,  etc.,  breed  di.-ease, 
poison  the  blood,  ruin  the  body,  ap.d 
become  cur>es  to  posterity.  Leprosy 
was  caused  throuji;h  di.^regard  of  the 
laws  of  health,  and  the  Bible  definition 
of  sin  is  ''  the  transgression  of  the  law.'' 
2.  Sin,  like  leprosy^  is  very  loathsome  a>-d 
defiling.  Leprosy  spreads  over  the 
whole  body,  destroying  its  beauty  and 
vitality,  and  rendering  it  most  repulsive 
in  appeararjce.  Inthisitisameetemblem 
of  sin,  which  corrupts,  degrades,  and 
defiles  the  soul  of  man.  3.  Sin^  like 
leprosy.^  is  incurable  by  man.  No  human 
skill  could  help  ihe  leper,  *^  Am  I  God 
to  kill  and  to  make  alive?"  cried  the 
kiitg  of  Israel  when  Naaman  came  to 
him.  Only  God  could  cure  the  disease. 
Sin,  in  like  manner,  baffles  human  skill. 
God  alone  can  remove  this  curse  and 
blight  from  the  soul.  No  human  priest, 
no  work  of  merit,  can  affect  the  malady. 
The  stain  is  too  deep  for  anything  but 
the  blood  of  Christ  to  wash  away. 
'*  God  can  save,  and  God  alone." 
Other  points  might  be  mentioned  ;  but 
theaboveare  enough  to  show  that  leprosy 
is  a  striking  type  of  sin,  and  to  suggest 
the  reason  why  God  should  select  this 
**  sickness  of  sicknesses,"  as  Archbishop 
Trench  calls  it,  "to  testify  against  that 
out  of  which  it  and  all  other  sicknesses 
grew,  against  sin,  as  not  from  Him  and 
as  grievous  in  His  sight.**  We  shall 
take  the  text  as  teaching  the  great 
fact  that  where  God  dwells  there  must 
he  purity.  "Put  out  of  the  camp  every 
leper.  ...  in  the  midst  whereof  I 
dwell.'*  That  God  insists  on  purity  as 
the  condition  of  dwelling  with  us  is 
the   emphatic    teaching    of    the  whole 


Bible.  What  care  was  manifested  to 
have  clean  and  perfect  animaN  for 
sacrifice  !  The  Psalmist  asks  :  "  Who 
shall  ascend  into  the  hill  of  the  Lord  ?  " 
He  replies:  "  He  that  hath  clean  bands 
and  a  pure  heart,**  e.e.,  whose  life  within 
and  without  is  holy.  His  prayer  is  : 
"  Create  within  me  a  clean  heart.'* 
The  teaching  of  the  New  Testament  is 
the  same  :  '^  Blessed  are  the  pure  in 
heart;  for  they  shall  see  God."  '•'•  Holi- 
ness, without  which  no  man  shall  see 
the  Lord.'  ••'  The  wisdom  that  is  from 
above  is  iirst  pure."  "  Be  ye  holy ; 
for  I  am  holy."  The  grand  design  ai 
the  atonement  is  described  as  being  "'  to 
redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify 
unto  Himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous 
of  good  works."  God  insists  on  purity. 
Why? 

I.  God  Himse'f  is  pure,  and  cannot 
associate  with  the  impure. 

8m  is  hateful  to  Him.  His  very 
nature  prohibits  Him  from  being  on 
terms  of  intimacy  wi  h  any  one  living 
in  sin.  **  God  is  light,  and  in  Him  is  no 
darkness  at  all  "  The  God  of  the  Bible 
is  Me  only  pure  God.  This  being  His 
character,  purity  must  distinguish  ihose 
with  whom  He  associates.  Character 
d  vides  the  world — unites  or  separates 
men.  So  it  does  with  God  and  man. 
He  can  only  ^  veil  with  the  pure. 
Purity  attracts  fciimtous.  If  discipline 
is  lax,  if  sin  is  tolerated  by  the 
Church,  or  by  the  individual  Christian, 
God  departs.  It  is  not  the  large 
Church,  or  the  intelligent  or  the 
wealthy  one,  that  attracts  Him,  but  the 
pure  one.  As  the  lightning  passes  by 
the  polished  marble  and  the  carved 
wood  to  touch  the  iron  or  steel,  because 
there  it  finds  something  akin  to  itself, 
so  God  passes  by  those  to  visit  and  to 
dwell  with  the  pure,  because  in  them 
He  finds  a  chai-acter  akin  to  His  own. 

IL  God  will  not,  because  He  can- 
not, do  any  good  to  the  impure. 

It  would  ai.swer    no    good    purpose 

them.      The 


for    Him    to    dwell 
essence  of  impurity 
love  sin  is   to   hate 
shuts  the  door  a^ain-t  the  possibiii:y    )f 
improvement  in  character.      God   will 

79 


with 

is  to   love  sin  ;  to 

God  ;  hating  G  jd 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


DOt  dwell  with  man  unless  He  can  do 
him  good.  God  with  us  is  always 
equivalpnt  to  God  blf.-siuij  us.  He 
wants  us  to  be  peif  c  as  He  Himself 
is  perfect.  This  is  Llis  end  in  dwelling 
with  us.  Any  one  tolerating  or  living 
n  sin  would  not  appreciate  the  design 
of  God  and  wcc-'pt  His  hle-.«in^  ;  and 
where  He  cannot  bless,  He  will  not 
come  to  dwell.  Let  us  then  '^  put  oat 
of  the  the  camp  every  leper,"  everything 
that  defileth  ;  tor  the  presence  of  God 
in  our  mid&t  is  of  the  utmost  imp  )r- 
tance  to  us  as  His  Church  and  people. 
His  presence  is  essential 

1.  To  our  comfort  as  Churches  and 
Christians.  What  the  shining  sun  is 
in  nature  His  presence  is  with  us — our 
brighness,  our  j  )y,  etc. 

2.  7o  our  prosperity.  Without  God 
in  the  midst  the  camp  would  have  been 
helpless,  would  soon  hdve  become  a  piey 
to  its  enemies,  and  been  broken  up  and 
scattered.     God  with  His  Church  has 


been  in  all  ages  the  secret  of  its  power 
and  8ucce>s.  His  presence  is  the  life 
of  the  mioi-try  and  of  all  Christian 
work.  Without  Him  we  are,  and  we 
can  do.  nothirii^.  How  to  secure  His 
pre-eoce  oiii^nt  t )  be  the  all-absorbing 
problem.  He  tells  us  how  :  "  Put  out 
of  the  camp  every  leper."  Let  us  put 
from  the  Church  and  from  our  hearts 
all  'hdt  is  offensive  to  Him,  and  let  us 
do  His  co!nmi,nds,  and  Ha  will  come. 
He  lias  satd  so,  and  He  is  waiting  to 
bless.  God  is  not  with  us  as  we  should 
like  :  let  us  search  and  see  if  there  be 
any  leper  in  the  c imp,  any  sin  tolerated, 
and  by  His  help  let  U3  put  ic  out. 

If  to  tole  at-  the  leper  was  so  bad  to 
thec-imp,  want  must  it  hive  been  to  be 
the  leper  hiins-U  !  If  sin  in  the  Chris- 
tian is  so  terrible,  what  must  it  be  to 
the  altogether  sinful!  Let  us  think  of 
it,  and  seek  pardon  at  once  through 
Christ. — David  Lloyd. 


God  Dwelling  with  His  People, 
(Verse  Z.) 


"  In  the  midst  whereof  I  dwell." 
I.  God  is  present  with  His  people. 
He  was  with  l>rael  as  He  was  not 
with  the  neig'tbouring  nations.  The 
Tabernacle — the  Shekioah,  etc.  He 
led,  supported,  defended  them,  etc. 
He  is  everywhere  present  influentiaUy. 
See  P?a  cxxxix.  1-10.  '*  He  giveth 
to  all  life,  and  breath,  and  all  things. 
He  is  not  far  from  every  one  of  us  ;  tor 
in  Him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have 
our  being."  *•'  By  Kim  all  things  con- 
sist." He  is  al.-o  present  with  His 
people  si/mpatheticnl/y.  They  realise  His 
presence,  have  fellowship  with  Him, 
etc.  See  Gen.  xxviii.  16-17 ;  Matt, 
xviii  20;  John  xiv.  15  i^6  ;  Ephes.  iii. 
16.  17  ;   I  John  i.  3. 

II.  Grod  is  present  '*in  the  midst" 
of  His  people. 

The  Tabernacle  was  "  in  the  midst  " 
of  the  camp.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
\s  "  in  the  midst  "  of  His  Church  (Matt, 
xviii.  2(').  Like  the  sun  in  the  midst 
of  the  planets. 
80 


1.  As  the  Centre  of  union.  The  true 
union  of  the  Church  is  not  in  oneness 
of  doctrinal  sy.-tem  or  ecclesiastical 
p)lity,  bat  in  the  vital  fellowship  of  ita 
members  with  the  Lord. 

2.  As  the  Source  of  blessing.  Life, 
light,  growth,  power,  joy,  beauty — all 
good  flows  from  Him. 

III.  Grod's  presence  in  the  midst  of 
His  people  should  exert  a  great  and 
blessed  influence  up  in  them. 

It  should  prove : — 

1.  A  restraint  from  sin.  "  The  sub- 
ject will  do  nothing  unseemly  in  the 
presence  of  His  prince,  nor  the  child  in 
the  sight  of  his  father.  We  are  always 
in  God's  eye ;  He  beholdeth  all  things 
that  are  done  of  us." 

2.  An  incentive  to  holiness.  It  is  thus 
that  it  is  brought  forward  in  this  plase. 
Because  the  Lord  dwelt  in  the  camp  it 
was  to  be  kept  pure.  See  also  Dcut. 
xxlii.  14;   Ezek.  xlii?.  7-ii. 

"^     An  *nco(ira^/ement  t<>  duti^'.      The 


HOMILETIC    COyniENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  V. 


presence  of  so  gracious  a  Master  should 
cheer  and  strengthen  us, 

4.  An  assurance  of  support  in  the 
trials  of  life.  He  marks  the  strain 
which  the  spirit  feels,  and  he  will  either 
temper  its  severity,  or  increase  the 
ppi»itual  strength.  '*  I  will  fear  no 
evil ;  for  Thou  art  with  me." 

5.  An  assurance  of  victory  in  the  con- 
flicts of  life,       **  Through  God  we  shall 


do  valiantly;  for  He  shill  tread  down 
our  enemies."  See  P&a.  cxviii,  6-16  ; 
Rom.  viii.  31-37. 

6.  An  assurance  of  perfect  salvaf  ion. 
"Tne  Lord  is  in  the  midst  of  thee: 
thou  shalt  not  see  evil  any  more.  The 
Lord  thy  God  in  the  midst  of  thee  is 
mighty ;  He  will  save,  He  will  rejoice 
over  thee  with  joy  ;  He  will  rest  in  His 
love,  He  will  joy  over  thee  with  singing/' 


Fraud  and  Forgiveness. 
(  Verses  6-8.) 


In  these  verses  we  have  another 
measure  which  was  instituted  to  secure 
the  sanctity  of  the  congregation. 
Wrong  done  by  one  man  against 
another  is  here  legislated  for  in  a  spirit 
of  just  severity.      Consider — 

I.  The  sin  of  fraud. 

"  When  a  man  or  woman  shall  com- 
mit any  sin  that  men  commir,"  etc. 
Lit. — *' Commit  one  of  all  the  trans- 
gressions of  man."  Keil  and  Del. 
"  Do  one  of  the  sin8  of  men," — one  of 
the  sins  occurring  amongst  men.  The 
reference  is  to  sins  of  dishonesty  or 
fraud.     Fraud  is  here  represented — 

1.  As  assuming  many  forms.     "  Anv 
sin  that  men  commit."     *'  One  of  all 
the  transgressions  of  man.'*     Our  text 
Is   supplementary  to  the   law  on    this 
matter  as  stated  in  Leviticus  vi.  2,  3, 
and  there  various  forms  of  this  hin  are 
stated.     (I)  Fraud   in   the    matter   of 
goods  entrusted   to  the  keeping  of  an- 
other.     (2)  In  business   transactions. 
(3)  In  seizing  by   force    that    which 
belongs  to  another.     (4)  In  wronging 
another  by   means  of  deceit.     (5)  In 
the  finder  of  lost  property  injuring  the 
loser  by  falsehood.     And  in  our  own 
age  fraud  assumes  many   forms,  and 
is    widely    prevalent.      The    employer 
who  does  not  pay  just  wages  to  those 
in  his  service  is  guilty   of  it.     (Prov. 
xxii.  16  ;  Isa.  iii.  14,  15:  Colos.  iv.  1 ; 
Isa.  V.  4.)     So  also  is  the  servant  or 
workman  who  squanders  the  time  for 
which  his  employer  pays  him  ;  in  so 
doing  he  defrauds  his  employer.     The 
trader  who  takes  an  unfair  advantage 


of  his  customer,  which  he  calls  by 
some  specious  name,  e.g.^  *' practice  of 
the  trade,"  etc. ;  the  broker  or  specula- 
tor or  manag  r  who  induces  persons  to 
invest  their  money  in  unreliable  or 
doubtful  enerprizes ;  the  person  wh  > 
contracts  a  debt  without  the  sincere 
intention  and  reasonable  prospect  of 
paying  it — all  these,  and  others,  are 
guilty  of  fraud,     (a) 

2.    As  a  wrong  done  to   God.     "To 
do  a  trespass  against  the  Lord."     Keil 
and  Del.'.  "To  commit  unfaithfulne.s 
against  Jehovah.'*     He  who  is  guilty  ot 
any  act  of  fraud  against  his  neighbour 
commits  sin   against  God.     All  sin  is 
against     Him.       When     Joseph    was 
tempted  to  sin   against    Potiphar,   his 
master,  he  said,   '*  How  can  I  do  this 
great  wickedness,  and  sin  against  God  ?'* 
And  David  after  he  had  committed  the 
blackest    injuries    against     Uriah     the 
Hittite    and  others,   when   brought    to 
repentance  cried,  "  Against  Thee,  Thee 
only,  have  I  sinned  ;  and   done  evil  in 
Thy  sight."     As  viewed  in  their  social 
relations,  he  was  deeply  sensible  of  the 
greatnesi  jf  his  crimes  ;    but  so  over- 
whelming was  his  sense  of  their  enormity 
as  committed  against  God,  as  to  render 
the  former  view  of  them  comparatively 
unimportant,     (h)       How    grievous    a 
thing,  then,  is  dishonesty  of  any  kind  ! 
Let  us  strive  to  be  utterly  free   from  it. 
(1  Thess.   iv.  6.)     Let  us  cultivate  the 
most  thorough  uprightness  in  all  our 
relations  and  dealings  with  each  other. 
XL  The  conditions  of  its  forgiveness. 
1.    ConscioiLsness  of  guilt.       "The 

81 


CHAP.  V. 


nOMlLETlC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


expression,  '  that  person  be  guilty,* 
does  not  merely  refer  to  his  actual  cri- 
minality ;  but  to  his  consciousness  of 
guilt  re.-p!HHing  it:  for  this  case  must 
be  distinguished  frofu  that  of  a  person 
detected  in  dishonesty  which  heattem  pted 
to  cor  ceal." — Scott.  Without  the  con- 
eciou-ness  of  guilt  the  other  conditions 
of  forgiveness  could  not  be  truly  com- 
plied with. 

2.  Confession.  *'  Taen  they  shall 
confe-s  their  sin  which  they  have  done." 
This  is  an  etssential  couditioa  of  for- 
giveness. (Pda.  xxxii.  5  ;  Prov.  xxviii. 
13  ;  1  John  i.  9.)  To  hi  of  any  avail 
confession  must  be  sincere,  must  pro- 
ceed from  the  h  art.  It  is  the  natural 
expression  of  penitence.  Where  true 
penitence  is,  hearty  confession  will  be 
welcomed  as  a  relief,  not  shunned  as  a 
burden  or  regarded  as  an  exaction. 
And  without  true  penitence  forgiveness 
of  sin  is  a  crime,  an  injury  to  society 
and  even  to  the  offender  hirnsell". 
Sincere  penitence  must  utter  itself  in 
confession.  Such  confession  is  not  the 
wail  of  de-pair,  but  the  cry  of  sorrow 
and  of  hope.  In  itself  it  relieves  the 
burdened  and  troubled  soul,  and  it  leads 
to  the  joy  and  peace  of  foi  giveness.  (c) 

3.  Restitution,  *'  An)  He.-hallrecom- 
pense  his  trespa.-s  with  the  principal 
thereof,  and  add  unto  it  the  fifth  part 
thereof,  and  give  it  unto  him  against 
whom  he  hath  trespassed.  But  if  the 
man  hare  no  kinsman  to  recompense 
the  trespass  unto,  let  the  trespass  be 
recompensed  unto  the  Lord,  to  the 
priest."  Restitution  is  an  act  of 
ju.stice  by  which  we  restore  to  another 
that  of  which  we  have  deprived  him, 
o-r  make  him  adequate  compensation 
for  the  same.  In  this  law  it  is  enacted 
that  the  sum  of  which  any  one  has 
been  defrauded  shall  be  restored,  with 
ttie  addition  of  one-fifth  of  its  value. 
Re^titution  is  essential  to  remission  of 
t-m ;  for  where  restitution  is  not  made 
it  is  evident  that  sincere  repentence  is 
absent.  See  Ezek.  xviii.  7,  9,  12,  13 
xxxiii.  15.  The  true  penitent  will 
find  it  an  unspeakable  relief  if  he  is 
able  in  any  degree  to  repviir  the  wrong 
which  he  has  done.     There  was  no  ex- 

X2 


emption  or  escape  from  this  law.  If 
the  person  defrauded  were  d^^ceased, 
restitution  must  be  rnadetohiskmsman 
(Heb.  Goel) ;  and  if  there  were  no 
kinsman,  to  the  priest  as  the  n  pre  en- 
tative  of  Jehovah.  The  priests  were 
the  Lord's  receivers.  In  every  case 
the  property  which  was  (jishone&ily 
acquired  must  be  gtven  up,  restiiution 
must  be  made,  or  the  sin  would  not  be 
forgiven.  And  this  is  still  true.  If 
we  have  acquired  anything  by  dis- 
honest means  let  us  make  full  and  speedy 
restituiion  for  the  same,  even  if  by  so 
duing  we  should  be  reduced  to  utter 
penury.  Better  extreme  poverty  in  tur 
circum-tances  with  a  clear  conscience 
and  an  approving  God,  than  the  greatest 
wealth  wirh  a  guiby  eoriscience  and  a 
condemning  God.  "  What  is  not  our 
property  will  never  be  our  profit." 
And  restitution  should  be  made 
promptly.  Every  minute  of  un- 
neces.^ary  delay  increases  the  guilt  of 
the  wrou!i-doer.      (d) 

4.  Sacrifice,  In  addition  to  making 
restitution  the  offender  was  commanded 
to  offer  '*  the  ram  of  the  atonement, 
wher.-by  an  atonement  shall  be  made 
i'tv  him.''  He  who  was  gudty  of  fraud 
wronged  not  only  his  fellow- man,  but 
God  also;  and  therefore,  in  order  that 
he  inignt  be  forgiven,  he  must  draw 
near  to  God  with  a  sacrifice,  and  so 
make  atonement  for  his  sin.  The  i  un 
was  for  the  "  trespass-offering,"  which 
differed  from  the  sin-offering.  In  each 
offering  the  victim  was  a  ram  ;  but 
'*  the  sin  offering  looked  more  to 
the  guilt  of  the  sin  done,  irre- 
spective of  its  consequences,  while 
the  trespass-offering  looked  to  the  evil 
consequences  of  sin,  either  against  the 
service  of  God  or  against  man,  and  to 
the  duty  of  atonement,  as  far  as  atone- 
ment was  possible."  This  arrangement 
wouM  tend  to  set  forth  the  great  evil  of 
sin  :.5i  an  offence  to  God  Himself.  It 
woul  i  also  meet  a  great  need  of  the 
penitent  heart,  which  cries  out  for 
atonement  for  its  sin.  When  all  these 
things  were  accomplished  the  offender 
was  held  to  be  cleared  from  the  guilt 
of  his  offence,  as  is  stated  in  ver.  8 — 


HOMILBTIC    COMMENTAHY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP,    V, 


**  whereby  an  atonement  shall  be  made 
for  him,"  Lit.  "  which  shall  clear  him 
of  gailt  as  to  it,"  /.e.,  as  to  the  trespass. 
For  us  the  One  Offering  has  been  made 
which  perfects  all  others.  And  if  we 
have  wronged  or  defrauded  any  one, 
and  are  conscious  of  our  guilt,  we  have 
but  to  make  confession  and  restitution 
for  the  same,  with  faith  in  the  merits 
and  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  full 
forgiveness  will  be  ours. 


Conclusion. 

1.  L§t  those  who  have  injured  others 
make  speedy  and  full  confession  and 
restitution. 

2.  Let  us  all  cultivate  the  most 
thorough  integrity  and  uprightnef^s  in 
our  whole  life  and  conduct.  "  All 
things  whatsoever  ye  would  that  men 
should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even  so  to 
them :  for  this  is  the  law  and  the 
prophets." 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  The  rules  which  God  has  given  us  forbid 
every  wish,  much  more  every  attempt,  to 
defraud,  or  deceive  ourneighboar.  They  render 
it  lii^hly  criminal  for  the  seller  to  take  the 
smallest  advantage  of  the  ignorance,  inex- 
perience, or  simplicity  of  his  customers ;  or  to 
conceal  any  detect  which  he  may  have  dis- 
covered in  the  article  of  which  he  wishes  to 
dispose.  They  render  it  equally  criminal  for 
the  buyer  to  wish  or  attempt  to  take  any 
advantage  of  the  seller,  either  by  exaggerat- 
ing the  defects  of  his  merchandise,  or  by  falsely 
pretending  that  he  does  not  wish  to  purchase. 
They  render  it  highly  criminal  for  any  one  to 
contract  debts,  when  he  has  no  suffijient 
reason  to  believe  that  he  shall  be  able  lo  dis- 
charge them  ;  or  to  persuade  another  to 
become  responsible  for  his  debts,  when  he  has 
reason  to  suspect  that  his  spoasor  will  in  con- 
sequence suffer  loss.  In  a  word,  they  require 
us  to  put  ourselves  in  the  place  of  oar  neigh- 
bour, to  be  as  willing  to  defraad  him  as  to  be 
defrauded  ourselves ;  to  be  as  careful  of  his 
property  and  interest,  as  of  our  own ;  to  think 
no  more  of  enriching  ourselves  at  his  expense, 
than  we  should  think  of  robbing  our  left  hand 
with  oar  right.  They  require  us,  in  all  our 
transactions,  to  act  as  we  should  do  if  our 
fellow  creatures  could  see  our  hearts;  for 
though  they  cannot  see  them,  yet  God  can, 
and  does  see  them ;  He  is  both  witness  and 
judge  between  us  and  our  neighbour  in  every 
transation,  and  surely  His  eye  ought  to  be  as 
effectual  in  regulating  our  conduct  as  would 
the  eye  of  our  fellow  creatures,  could  they, 

like  Him,  search  the  heart These  rules 

evidently  forbid  us  to  take  any  advantage 
of  the  necessities  or  imprudence  of  those  whom 
we  employ,  and  require  us  to  give  them  a 
prompt  and  adequate  compensation  for  their 
services  ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  they  make  it 
the  duty  of  all  who  are  employed,  to  be  as 
faithful  to  the  interests  of  their  employers  as 
to  their  own,  and  to  avoid  defrauding  them  of 
any  portion  of  their  time  by  idleness,  or  of 
their  property  by  negligence,  as  they  would 
avoid  theft  or  robbery. — E.  Parson,  D.D. 

(6)  All  sin  is  against  God.     There  are  some 
sins  which  are  exclusively  against  God  ;  there 
are  others  which  are  against  man,  but  no  sin 
o  2 


can  be  exclusively  against  man.  This  point 
is  fraught  with  the  most  profound  significance. 
Let  us  put  it  in  this  form :  Whoever  sins  against 
man  sins  against  God.  Then  how  sacred  are 
ail  human  interests  I  How  solemn  are  all 
human  relations  I  You  cannot  harm  a  widow's 
child  without  sinning  against  God  ;  you  can- 
not sneer  at  a  good  man  without  touching  the 
sensibilities  of  your  heavenly  Father;  you 
cannot  injure  your  wife  or  husband  or  friend 
without,  in  the  degree  of  that  injury,  insulting 
Him  wtio  is  the  Creator  and  Redeemer  of 
human  kind.  Let  it  be  known  then,  in  all 
the  breadth  and  force  of  its  significance,  that 
every  blow  struck  a^^ainst  humanity  is  a  blow 
struck  against  God  1  It  will  be  a  token  of 
solid  progress  when  man  has  more  respect  for 
man.  We  have  held  manhood  too  cheaply. 
We  have  not  suflSnently  pondered  the  great 
fact  that  every  man  su-*tains  a  vital  relation 
to  the  great  Creator  of  all  life,  and  that  every- 
thing whioh  appertains  to  m<in  has  also  an 
immediate  relation  to  God.  Would  that  we 
could  thunder  these  doctrines  into  the  ear  of 
all  despoti'im  ;  they  would  make  the  throne 
of  tyranny  tremble  at  its  foundations  ;  they 
would  blanch  every  tyrant's  cheek,  and  wither 
the  power  of  every  despot.  This  they  will 
assuredly  attain.  As  Christianity  is  developed, 
the  true  feeling  of  Christianity  will  be  more 
and  more  understood  ;  and  tHey  who  once  saw 
no  image  higher  than  human  on  the  counte- 
nance of  mankind,  shall  on  tbat  same  counte- 
nance see  the  ima^je  andsap^r  criptionof  Him 
who  is  infinite  in  pity  and  infinite  in  love. — 
Jos.  Parker,  D.D. 

(c)  The  confession  of  sin  against  a  brother 
is  a  reasonable  condition  of  receiving  a  brother's 
forgiveness.  The  confession  of  sin  to  God  is 
of  the  essence  of  repentance  and  faith,  and  this 
does  not  interfere  with  the  grand  truth  that  u 
man  is  justified  by  faith  only.  It  is  a  bigu 
that  momentous  spiritual  changes  are  going 
on  in  a  man  when  he  can  bring  his  sin  into  the 
presence  of  the  Holy  God,  and  see  it  in  the 
light  of  perfect  law  and  perfect  sacrifice.  The 
effort  to  do  so  tears  up  the  roots  of  evil  d^^sire, 
and  crucifies  the  world  with  its  affections. 
It  is  the  sublime  peculiarity  of  Christianity 
that  a  sinner  can  take  his  sins  to  God  and 

83 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


find  mercy,  even  amid  the  burning  light  of 
that  most  Holy  Presence.  More  thiin  this, 
one  man  may  help  another  to  make  this  con- 
fession, to  see  himself  and  jucige  of  himself 
jDore  accurately  than  he  would  do,  in  the 
solation  an^d  awfulnessof  his  own  reppmtance. 
The  danger  of  self-deceit  and  self-flattery  is 
great.  The  experier  ce  of  the  devout  and 
impartial  Christian  Mho  I  nows  something  of 
human  natur**,  and  has  realised  the  full  as- 
purancft  of  faith,  may  bn  found  of  the  greatest 
avHil  in  tho  struggle  of  the  soul  heavenwards. 
All  ChuictiPS  and  all  Christians  admit  this 
great  advantage. — H.  R.  Reynolds,  D.D. 

(d)  He  must  bring  fortti  fruits  meet  for 
repentance.  In  other  words,  he  must  make 
restitution  to  every  one  whom  he  has  injured, 
-"-defrauded,  so  far  as  ho  can  recollect  who 
iney  are — this  in  indispensable.  There  is  no 
repentance,  and,  of  course,  no  forgiveness 
without  it.  How  can  a  man  repent  of  iniquity, 
who  still  retains  the  wages  of  iniquity  ?  It 
is  impossible.  If  he  feels  any  sorrow,  it  is 
occasioned,  not  by  hatred  of  his  sin,  but  by 
fear  of  the  consequences.  Restitution,  then, 
must  be  made,  or  the  offender  must  perish. 
If  thou  bring  thy  gift  to  the  altar,  says  our 
Saviour,  and  the}e  rememberest  that  thy 
brother  has  aught  against  thee,  that  is,  any 
reason  to  complain  of  thee,  go  thy  way,  first 
be  reconciled  to  thy  brother,  and  then  come 
and  offer  thy  gift.  The  aliar  was  then  the 
place  to  which  the  worshippers  of  God  brought 
their  thank-offerings,  gifts,  and  sacrifices  for 
sin.     Ghrifit,  we  are  told,  is  now  our  altar,  and 


to  this  altar  we  must  bring  our  prayers,  our 
praises,  our  services.  But  he  plainly  intimates 
that  he  will  accept  no  gift  of   us,  receive  no 
thanks  frou  us,   listen  to  none  of  our  prayers, 
so  long  as  we  neglect   to  make  satisfaction  to 
those  whom  we  have  injured.     And  in    vain 
shall  we  attempt  to  atone   for  neglecting  this 
duty,  by  performing  others,   by  contributing 
to  the   promotion   of    reliyious  object^,  or  by 
lib'^rality  to  the  poor;  for  God  has  said,  I  hate 
robbery  for  burnt  offering  ;  that  is,  I  hate,  I 
will  not  receive   an  offering,  which    was  un- 
justly acquired.     There  is,  then,  no  way  but 
to    make    restitution ;  and    this    every    real 
Christian    will    make    to    the   utmost   of    his 
ability.     Agreeably,    we   hear   Zaccheus,  the 
publican,  saying  as  soon  as  he  became  a  Chris- 
tian, "If  I  have  wronged  any  man.  I  restore 
him  fourfold  "     I  am  aware  that  this  is  a  most 
dij-agreeable    duty.     Nothing   can  be  harder, 
or  more  painful  to   our  proud  hearts.     But  it 
will  be  far  easier  to  perform  it,  than   to  suffer 
the  con-equences  of  neglecting  it.     If  it  is  not 
performed,  our  souls  must  perish,  as  sure  as 
the  Word  of  God  is  true;  and  in  consequence 
of  indulging  a  false  shame,  we   shall  be  over- 
whelmed   with  shame    and  everlasting    con- 
tempt. Even  as  it  respects  our  interest  in  this 
world  only,  we  had  bettor,  far  better,   put  a 
blazing  fire-brand  into  the  midst  of    our  pos- 
sessions, than  retain  am<mg  them  the  smallest 
particle  of  gain,  which  was  not  fairly  obtained  ; 
for  it  will  bring  the  curse  of  God  upon  us,  and 
upon  all  the  works  of  our  hands. — £»  Pays(yn, 
D.D, 


The  Maintenance  of  the  Ministbt. 
{Verses  9,  10.) 


In  the  preceding  verses  it  was  enacted 
that,  in  case  of  liaud,  restitution  should 
be  made  to  the  injured  peisc  n,  and,  if 
he  were  deceased,  to  his  Gee),  and,  if 
there  were  no  GreJ,  to  the  priest,  who 
should  (ffer  the  tie.  pass  ofieiing  for  the 
wrong-doer.  The  restitution  in  this 
case  belonged  to  the  priest.  And  in 
these  verses  other  perquisites  of  the 
officiating  priests  are  mentioned.  In 
this  and  other  ways  prov  sion  was  made 
for  their  temporal  support.  It  was  of 
the  first  impoitance  that  such  provision 
should  be  made ;  for  the  proper  dis- 
charge of  their  duties  precluded  them 
from  engaging  in  the  ordinary  activities 
of  life.  '^  At  first,"  says  Professor 
Plumtre,  *'  the  small  number  of  the 
priests  must  have  made  the  work  almost 
unintermittent,  and  even  when  the 
84 


system  of  rotation  had  been  adopted, 
the  periodical  absences  from  home 
could  not  fail  to  be  disturbing  and  in- 
jurious, had  they  been  dependent  on 
their  own  labours.  The  f-erenity  of 
the  priestly  character  would  have  been 
dist  ui  bed  had  they  had  to  lock  forsupport 
to  the  lower  industries.  It  may  have 
been  intended  that  their  time,  when  not 
liturgicaDy  employed,  .should  be  given 
to  the  study  of  the  Law,  or  to  instructing 
others  in  it.  On  these  grounds,  there- 
fore, a  distinct  provision  was  made  for 
thtm.  This  consisted  (1)  Of  one-tenth 
of  the  tithes  which  the  people  paid  to 
the  Levites,  one  per  cent.,  i.e.,  on  the 
whole  produce  of  the  country  (Numb. 
xviii.  2(J-28).  (2)  Of  a  special  tithe  every 
third  year  (Deut.  x  v.  28,  xxvi.  12). 
(3)  Of   the  redemption  money  paid  at 


HOMILEIIC   COMMENTARY^   NUMBERS. 


CHAP.   V. 


the  fixed  rate  of  five  shekels  a  head, 
for    the    first-born    of    man    or    beast 
(Num.    xviii.     14-19).      (4)     Of    the 
redemption    money    paid   in   like   man- 
ner for  men   or   things   specMaliy  dedi- 
cated   to   the  Lord   (Lev.   xxvii).     (5) 
Of  spoil,  captive?!,  cattle,  and  the   hke, 
taken  in  war  (Num.  xxxi.  25-47).     (6) 
Of  what  may  be  described  as  the  per- 
quisites   of   their    sacriBcial   functions, 
the  shew- bread,  the  flesh  of  the  burnt- 
offerines,  peace-offerings,  trespass-offer- 
ings (Num.  xviii.  8-14  ;  Lev.  vi.  26,  29  ; 
vii.  6-10),  and,  in  particular,  the  heave- 
shoulder  and   wave-breast  (Lev.  x.  12- 
15).     (7)   Of  an  undefined   amount  of 
the    first  fruits  of    corn,  wine,  and    oil 
(Ex.  xxiii.  19  ;   Lev.  ii.  14  ;  Deut.  xxvi. 
1-10).       (8)    On    their    settlement    in 
Canaan  the   priestly  families  had  thir- 
teen      cities      assigned       them,      with 
"suburbs"  or  pasture  grounds  for  their 
flocks    (Josh.      xxi.     13  19).        These 
provisions    were  obviously  intended  to 
secure  the  religion  of  Israel  against  the 
dangers  of  a  caste  of  pauper    priests, 
needy   and   dependent,   ani    unable  to 
bear  their   witness  to  the  true   faiih. 
They  were,  on  the  other  hand,  as  far 
as  possible  removed  from  the  condition 
of  a  wealthy  order."     In  the  foregoing 
sources  of   emolument,   only  the    chief 
ones  are  given.     The  "offering"    men- 
tioned in  the  text  is  given  in  the  margin 
as  "heave-offering."      The  Hebrew  is 
nQ1")jp    an    oblation,    used    here,    says 
Fuerst,     "  of    holy    gifts     generally." 
"  The  reference  is  to  dedicatory  offer- 
ings, first-fruits,  and  such  like." — Keil 
and  Del.     These  were  to  be  the  pro- 
perty of  the  officiating  priests.     These 
arrangements   suggest  the  obligation  of 
the   Church    to    adequately   support    its 
ministry.      We  rest  this  obligation— 

I.  On  the^  ground  of  honesty. 

The  physician  and  the  solicitor  are 
paid,  and  that  handsomely,  for  their 
attention  and  counsel,  as  a  matter  of 
duty.  The  Christian  minister  has 
equally  a  claim  that  his  services  shall 
be  remunerated  by  those  who  have  the 
benefit  of  them.  Yet  professedly  Chris- 
tian people  are  far  l^ss  conscientious  in 


paying  for  ministerial  than  they  are  for 
legal  and  medical  services.  The  testi- 
mony of  our  Lord  and  of  His  apo.-tles 
as  to  this  obliiration  is  unm's'akeahly 
clear.  (See  Matt  x.  9,  10;  Luke  x.  7  ; 
1  Cor.  ix.  7-14;  Gal.  vi.  6 ;  1  Tim. 
V.  17,  18.)     (a) 

II.  On  the  ground  of  interest. 

The  Christian  congretjaruin  *hat  does 
not  adequately  support  its  minister  is 
not  wisely  mindful  of  its  own  best 
interests. 

1.  The  services  of  the  true  ininister  oj 
Christ  are  of  the  greatest  benefit  to  the 
Church  and  to  the  world.  His  ministry 
tends  to  quicken  thought  on  the  most 
important  and  sublime  subjects,  to 
educate  the  conscience  aiijiht,  to  arouse 
the  will  to  true  and  earnest  action,  and 
to  lead  the  soul  to  the  great  Source  of 
life  and  lio^ht. 

2.  The  adequate  maintenance  of  the 
ministry  is  indis/jensable  to  it.'<  efficiency. 
VVnen  his  mind  is  harassed  witti  tem- 
poral anxieties,  or  when  much  of  hig 
time  is  occupied  with  matters  not  per 
taining  to  his  ministry,  in  order  to  pro- 
vide for  the  wants  of  his  family,  the 
minister  is  prevented  from  rendering 
the  highest  service  of  which  he  is 
capable.  The  ministry  should  be  the 
great  business  of  his  life,  and  his  mind 
should  be  free  to  prosecute  it.    Hence — 

3.  If  Christians  consult  their  own  in- 
terests they  will  see  to  it  that  their  min- 
isters are  adtqa  itely  maintained.  The 
money  which  is  t.o  spent  will  prove  a 
most  remunerative  investment,     (hj 

Conclusion. 

1.  Let  Churches  recognise  their  interest 
and  heartily  do  their  duty  in  this  respect. 

2.  Let  ministers  recognise  the  import- 
ance of  their  duties.,  and  endeavour  to 
faithfully  perform  them.  *'  It  is  great 
reason  that  he  which  looketh  for  his 
hire  should  do  his  woik;  and  that  he 
which  intendeth  to  live  of  the  Gospel 
of  Christ,  should  preach  to  others  the 
Gospel  of  Christ."  Let  us  strive  to  be 
"scribes  instructed  unto  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,"  etc.  (Matt.  xiii.  52).  "Study 
to  show  thyself  approved  unto  God,'' 
etc.  (2  Tim.  ii.  15). 

85 


CHAP.  V 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:  NUMBERS. 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 


fd)  No  tme  minister  will  ever  preach  with 
an    eyt    tc   eecular  results.      All   mercenary 
considerations  will  be  borne  down  and  engulfed 
by    the   ever-deepening    current   of    spiritual 
pyuipatbies  and  aims.     His  main  purpose  will 
be   not  to  acquire   wealtb,  but  to  win  souls. 
StiU,  in   common  with   all  men,  he   has   his 
physical  and  domestic  wants.     Food,  raiment, 
and  a  home,  are  as  necessary  to  his  existence 
as  to  tbat  of  any  man;  and  according  to  the 
present   arrangements  of    society,    tbese   are 
only    8'ipplied   by  money.     Whence  is   he  to 
receive   this?     As  a  general  rule,  it  comes 
only   as  the  reward  of  labour.     He  labours. 
The  office  of  a  true  minister  is  no  sinecure ; 
there  is  no  work   so  arduous  as  his;  it  is  the 
labour,  not  of  iimbs,  but  of  brain  and  heart; 
it  is  a  constant  draw  upon   the  very  fountains 
of  nervous  energy.     Nor  is  there  any  work  so 
useful  to  society.     In  the  reason  of  things, 
therefore,  has  any  worker  a  stronger  claim  to 
secular   support  than  he?     If  his  labour  is 
the  most  aiduous  and  the  most  useful,  ought 
it  not  to  secure  the  most  ample  secular  returns  ? 
Paul  recognises  and  enforces  this  natural  and 
common-sense  claim.    (1  Cor.  ix.  7,  9,  11,  14.) 
There   are  men    who    receive   and   expect 
lare;e  services  from  their  minister,  and  who 
make  little  or  no  return.     For  a  paltry  pound 
or  two  per  annum,  he  must  preach   to  them 
tbri  ;e  per  week,  pay  them   frequent  pastoral 
vifcits,  or   else    they    set   up  their  complaints 
against  him,  and  seek  to  spread  a  spirit  of  dis- 
satisfaction through  his   sphere.     There   are 
families  in  connection  with  congregations  who 
spend  more  on  perfumery,  or  on  toys  for  their 
children,  than  to  support  the  man  who  is  giving 
the  best  energies  of  his  cultivated  mind  to  save 
their  souls,  A  man  takes  a  pow  in  a  church,  pays 
his  five  or  six  pounds  per  annum, — a  less  sum 
than  be  pays  his  ecullery-maid,— and  for  that 
he    expects   twelve   months'   preaching,   and 
great  pastoral  attention.  What  is  still  worse — 


still  more  unreasonable,  he  regards  the  paltry 
sum  he  subscribes  rather  as  a  charity  than  a 
debt.  Charity,  indeed !  Gall  the  money  you 
pay  to  your  grocer,  draper,  physician,  or  land- 
lord, charity  ;  but  in  the  name  of  all  that  is 
true  in  reason  and  justice,  don't  call  what  you 
tender  to  the  man  to  whom  you  owe  your  best 
ideas,  your  holiest  impressions— who  gives  to 
you  the  choicest  products  of  his  educated  and 
sanctified  intellect,  charity.  It  is  he  that 
shows  charity,  not  you ;  your  gold  is  a 
miserable  compensation  for  the  results  of  his 
sweating  brain  and  ever-anxious  heart. — D, 
Thomas^  D.D. 

(6)   As  the  Church  dependeth  upon  them 
for  their  allowance,  so  they  depend  upon  her 
for  their  maintenance.     Thus  the  Pastor  and 
the  people  do  feed  one  another,   as  a    flock 
of  sheep  nourisheth  the  shepherd,  who  eateth 
the  milk  of  them,  and  clotheth  himself  with 
the  wool  of  them ;    and  again  the  shepherd 
coucheth  them  into  green  pastures,  and  leadeth 
them   by  the  still   waters.      The  people  feed 
him  with  the  bread  of  this  life;  he  feedeth 
them  with  the  bread  of  everlasting  life.    They 
minister   to  him   in    carnal    things;    he    to 
them     in    spiritual     things.       They     cannot 
lack     him    in    regard     of    their    souls ;    he 
cannot  be  without  them  in  regard  of  his  body. 
Thus  then  they  do  feed  one  another,  or  at  least 
ought  to  do.     If  he  receive  food  of  them,  and 
give  none  unto  them  again,  he  robbeth  them 
of  their  goods,  and  murdereth  their  souls.     If 
they  on  the  other  side  receive  food  of  him,  so 
that  they  be  taught  of  him,  and  yet  make  him 
not  partaker  of  a  part  of  their  goods,  they  rob 
him,  and  cause  bim  to  depart  from  them,  and 
so  become  murderers  of  their  own  souls,  as  if 
they  did  lay  violent  hands  upon  themselves, 
or  rather  as  if  they  did  famish  themselves  by 
refusing  bread  provided  for  them  ;  inasmuch 
as  *'  where  vision  ceaseth,  there  people  perish." 
(Prov.  xxix.  18.)—  W.  AttersoU* 


l^E^  Teial  op  the  Suspected  Wife 
(Verses  11-31.) 


We  have  here  another  law  intended 
to  secure  the  sanctity  of  the  L>raelites, 
by  maiotaiiiiDg  fideli'y  in  conjugal  re- 
lations, and  removing  even  the  suspicion 
of  adnl  ery  from  amongst  them.  "The 
chastity  of  females,"  says  Dean  Milman, 
**  was  guarded  by  statutes,  which,  how- 
ever severe  and  cruel  according  to 
modern  notions,  were  wise  and  merciful 
in  that  state  of  society.  Poems  and 
travels  have  familiarised  us  with  the 
horrible  atrocities  committed  by  the 
blind  jealousy  of  Eastern  husband*. 
86 


By  substituting  a  judicial  process  for 
the  wild  and  hurried  justice  of  the 
offended  party,  the  guilty  suffered  a 
death,  probably,  less  inhuman ;  the 
innocent  might  escape.  The  convicted 
adulterer  and  adulteress  were  stoned  to 
death.  Even  the  incontinence  of  a 
female  before  marriage,  if  detected  at 
the  time  of  her  nuptials,  which  was 
almost  inevitable,  underwent  the  same 
penalty  with  that  of  the  adulteress. 
Where  the  case  was  not  clear,  the 
female  suspected  of  iafidelity  might  be 


IWMILRTIC    COMMENTAUY :    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  V. 


eummoned    to    a    most   avvfiil    ordeal. 
She  was  to  be  acquiited  or  condemned 
by    God  Hirn>elr,    whose  aniual  inter- 
position  was  prcirnisfd    by   His    daring 
law- giver.  .   .  .      What  guilty  woman, 
if  she  had  courage  to   confront,   would 
have   the   commnnd    of    countenance, 
firmness  and  resolution,  to  go  through 
all  this  slow,  searching,  and  terrific  the 
process,   and  finally   expose  herself   to 
shame  and  agony,  far  worse  than  death? 
No   doubt,  cases  where  this  trial    was 
undergone  were  rare ;  jet  the  confidence 
of    the  legislator  in  the  Divine  inter- 
ference can  hardly  be   questioned ;  for 
had  such  an  institution  fallen  into  con- 
tempt by  its  failure  in  any  one  instance, 
his  whole  law  and  religion  would  have 
been  shaken  to  its  foundarion."     "  We 
do  not  read  of  any  in:?tance  in  which 
this   ordeal    was   resorted    to;    a   fact 
which  may  be  explained  either  (with 
the  Jews)  as   a   proof  of  its  effi  acy, 
since  the  guilty  could  not  be  brouiiht 
to  face  its  terrors  at  all,   and  avoided 
them  by  confession ;  or  more  probably 
by   the  licence  of  divorce  tolerated  by 
the   law   of  Moses.     Sifice   a  husband 
could  put  away  his  wife  at  pleasure,  a 
jealous  man  would  naturally  prefer  to 
take  this  course  with  a  suspected  wife 
rather  than  to  call  public  attention  to 
his  own  shame  by  having  recourse  to 
the   trial  of    jealousy.       TThe    Talmud 
states  that   the  trirtl  lapsed  into  disuse 
forty  years  before  the   desrriJc:ion   of 
Jerusalem  ;  and  that  becau.>e  (he  crime 
of   adultery  was  so  common    amongNt 
men  that  God  would  no  longer  inflict 
the  curses   here  named    upon    women 
(cf.  Hos.  iv.  l^).~ Speaker  8  Commentary. 
A  critical  examiu^itioa  and  exposition 
of  the  details  of  the  proce>sof  trial  will 
be  found  in  Keil  an  1  Del.,  in  loco.    Let 
us  consider   the  principal   moral  truths 
which  are  here  illustrated. 

I.  Confidence  in  conjugal  relations 
is  of  great  importance. 

This  awful  ordeal  was  instituted  for 
cases  where  this  confilence  was  lost, 
and  the  proof  of  guilt  was  lacking. 
Suspicion  and  jealousy  are  terrible  evils. 
'*  Suspicion,"  says  Babington,  "  is  the 
cut-furoat  and   poison  of   all  love   and 


friendship,"  And  in  proportion  to  the 
intenityof  the  love  will  be  the  anguish 
of  suspicion  in  respect  to  the  object  of 
the  love. 

*'  Where  love  is  great,  the  littlest  doubts  are 

fear  ; 
Where  little  fear  grows  great,  great   love   is 

there."  S^iakespeare. 

"Jealousy,  each  other  passion's  calm, 
To  thee,  thou  coDfligrarion  of  the  soul  I 
Thou  king  of  torments  I  thou  grand  counter- 
poise 
For  all  the  transports  beauty  can  inspire.'* 

Young. 
And  Hannah  More  : 

"0,  jealousy, 
Thou   ugliest  fiend    of    hell  1       thy    deadly 

venom 
Preys  on  my  vital<^.  turns  the  healthful  hue 
Of  my  fresh  cheek  to  haggard  sallownesa, 
And  drinks  my  spirit  up."     (a) 

'*  Jealousy,"  says  Solomon,  "  is  the 
rage  of  a  m^n."  *•'  Jealousy  is  cruel  as 
the  grave ;  the  coals  thereof  are  coals 
of  fire,  a  most  vehement  flime."  This 
dread  ordeal  w^s  intended  as  a  remedy 
for  suspicion  and  jealou-sy.  And  no 
one  can  examine  it  without  perceiving 
that,  if  it  was  severe,  it  w^s  also  calcu 
lated  to  be  thoroughly  effective.  See 
how  searchinjr,  solemn,  and  stern  it  is. 

1.  The  whole  trial  was  to  take  place 
in  the  sight  of  God  (ver  1()). 

2.  The  dread  appeal  was  made  to  the 
Oniiiiscient  and  Almightjj  (ver.  21). 

3.  The  appeal  was  weighted  by  the  most 
terrihhi  iviprecations  (vers.  21,  22). 

4.  It  W'ls  solemnhj  declared  in  the  law 
that  if  the  woman  were  guilty  these  im- 
precations would  be  fulfilled  (ver.  27). 

5.  The  appeal  was  to  he  solemnly 
ratified  by  the  suspected  woman.  ""  The 
woman  shall  say,  Amen,  Amen." 
"Twice,"  says  Trapp  ;  "to  show  the 
fervency  of  her  zeal,  the  innocency  of 
her  cause,  the  uprightness  of  her  con- 
science, and  the  purity  of  her  heart." 
Surely,  if  any  suspected  wife  went 
through  so  solemn  and  terrible  an 
ordeal,  the  efi"ect  would  be  completely 
to  clear  the  mind  of  her  husband  from 
the  least  taint  of  suspicion,  and  to  re- 
store the  brightness  of  her  reputation. 
The  seernuess  of  this  ordeal  for 
the  removal  of  suspicion  impres- 
sively sets  forth  the  importance  of  coo- 

87 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


fidence  between  husband  and  wife. 
Destroy  this  confidence ;  and  what 
ought  to  be  one  of  the  holiest  and 
most  lasting  bonds  is  snapped  asunder, 
the  helpfulness  and  peace  of  the  family 
are  banished  for  ever,  and,  if  the  evil 
prevail  to  any  considerable  extent,  the 
foundations  of  the  civil  commonwealth 
will  be  gradually  but  certainly  under- 
mined. 

II.  Adultery  is  a  sin  of  the  greatest 
enormity. 

This  dreadful  ordeal,  which  was  in- 
tended to  prevent  it,  shows  how  great 
was  its  heinousness  in  the  Divine  esti- 
mation.    This  is  expressed  — 

1.  In  the  abasement  of  the  suspected 
"woman.     The  "  barley  meal"  of  which 

the  offering  was  composed,  the  *'  earthen 
vessel "  which  contained  the  water,  and 
*'  the  dust "  that  was  put  into  the  water, 
indicate  a  state  of  deep  humiliation 
and  disgrace.  The  absence  from  the 
offering  of  oil,  the  symbol  of  the  gifts 
and  graces  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  of 
frankincense,  the  symbol  of  prayer,  also 
proclaimed  her  questionable  repute  and 
the  suspicion  with  which  she  was  re- 
garded. In  like  manner  the  "  uncover- 
ing of  the  woman's  head"  was  indicative 
of  the  loss  of  woman's  best  ornament, 
chastity  and  fidelity  in  the  marriage 
relation. 

2.  In  the  terrible  punishment  which 
came  upon  the  guilty,  **  If  she  be  defiled, 
and  have  done  trespass  against  her 
husband,  the  water  that  causeth  the 
curse  shall  enter  into  her,  and  become 
bitter,  and  her  belly  shall  swell,  and 
her  thigh  shall  rot :  and  the  woman 
shall  be  a  curse  among  her  people." — 
Keil  and  Del.  translate,  "  her  hip 
vanish."  And  Adam  Clarke  :  "her 
thigh  fall."  This  ordeal  was  made  so 
terrible  that  the  dread  of  it  might 
effectually  prevent  the  wives  in  Israel 
from  the  least  violation  of  their  fidelity 
to  their  husbands.  It  remains  as  an 
impressive  proclamation  of  the  utter 
abhorence  with  which  God  rcLirards  the 
sin  of  adultery.  It  is  a  sin  against 
God ;  it  inflicts  the  most  grievous  and 
intolerable  injury  upon  the  husband; 
it  is   an  unmitigated    blight   and  bane 

86 


upon  the  family  ;  and  it  is  a  wrong  to 
society  generally.  The  most  terrible 
condemnations  are  pronounced  upon  it 
in  the  Sacred  Word.  (See  Lev.  xx. 
10  ;  Mai.  iii.  5;  1  Cor.  vi.  9,  10;  Heb. 
xiii.  4.) 

III.  The  punishment  of  sin  is  closely 
related  to  the  sin  itself. 

"  It  cannot  be  determined  with  any 
certainty  what  was  the  nature  of  the 
disease  threatened  in  this  curse.  .  ,  . 
At  any  rate,  the  idea  of  the  curse  is 
this  :  Ai  a>j/  yap  r]  afiapria  Sta  rovTiav  y 
TLfjLOipia  ('  the  punishment  shall  come 
from  the  same  source  as  the  sin,* 
Theodoret).  The  punishment  was  to 
answer  exactly  to  the  crime,  and  to  fall 
upon  those  bodily  organs  which  had 
been  the  instruments  of  the  woman's 
sin,  viz.,  the  organs  of  child-bearing."— 
Keil  and  Del.  The  punishment  came 
in  those  portions  of  her  body  which  she 
had  abused.  "  David  sinned  in  com- 
mitting adultery  v,ith  the  wife  of  Uriah, 
his  faithful  servant,  and  destroyed  him 
with  the  sword  of  the  Ammonites ;  he 
is  paid  home,  and  punished  in  his  own 
kind ;  for  God,  by  way  of  rewarding 
him  and  serving  him  as  he  had  served 
others,  as  a  just  judge,  doth  raise  up 
evil  against  him  out  of  his  own  house. 
His  own  sons  break  out  into  the  same 
sins,  and  he  kindleth  such  a  fire  in  his 
own  family,  that  they  rise  up  against 
him,  and  one  against  another.  Absalom 
spreadeth  a  tent,  and  lieth  with  his 
father's  concubines,  in  the  sight  of  all 
Israel.  Ammon  deflowereth  his  sister 
Tamar ;  to  revenge  this,  Absalom  killeth 
his  own  brother." — AttersolL  (See  Judg. 
I  6-7;  Esth.  vii.  10;  Matt.  vii.  1-2.) 
"  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth  that  shall 
be  also  reap.  For  he  that  soweth  to 
his  flesh  shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corrup- 
tion." (b) 

IV.  God  will  bring  to  light  the 
secret  sins  of  men. 

If  the  suspected  woman  were  guilty, 
after  this  ordeal  her  guilt  would  be 
made  manifest.  All  sins  are  known 
unto  Him.  "  For  His  eyes  are  upon 
the  ways  of  man,  and  He  seeth  all  his 
goings.  There  is  no  darkness,  nor 
shadow  of  death,  where  the  workers  of 


H0M1LETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  V. 


iniquity  may  hide  themselves."  "  Thou 
hast  set  our  iniquities  before  Thee,  our 
secret  sins  in  the  light  of  Thy  counte- 
nance." Sometimes  hidden  sins  are 
strangely  discovered  in  this  life  and 
world,  (c).  The  great  day  will  reveal 
all.  "  For  God  shall  bring  every  work 
into  judgment,  with  every  secret  thing, 
whether  it  be  good,  or  whether  it  be 
evil."  "  The  day  when  God  shall  judge 
the  secrets  of  men  by  Jesus  Christ."  In 
"that  day  the  dark  secrets  of  evil  will  be 
all  brought  to  light. 

V.  God  will  assuredly  vindicate  the 
innocent  who  have  suffered  from  sus- 
picion or  slander. 

In  this  case  the  vindication  was  most 
complete.  **  If  the  woman  be  not  de- 
filed, but  be  clean :  then  she  shall  be 
free,  and  shall  conceive  seed."  "  If  not 
guilty  after  such  a  trial,"  says  Adam 
Clarke,  "  she  had  great  honour  ;  and, 
according  to  the  rabbins,  became  strong. 


healthy,  and  fruitful ;  for  if  she  was 
before  barren,  she  now  began  to  bear 
children ;  if  before  she  had  only 
daughters,  she  now  began  to  have  sons; 
if  before  she  had  hard  travail,  she  now 
had  easy  ;  in  a  word,  she  was  blessed 
in  her  body,  her  soul,  and  her  sub- 
stance." Thus  to  the  innocent  there 
was  no  terror  in  this  stern  ordeal.  It 
was  rather  a  blessing  to  them,  if  by 
any  means  they  had  come  to  be  regarded 
with  suspicion  by  their  husbands  ;  for 
by  means  of  it  such  suspicions  would 
be  removed,  and  their  fidelity  and 
honour  vindicated  and  exalted.  And 
God  will,  sooner  or  later,  splendidly 
vindicate  all  who  sufifer  from  misrepre- 
sentation, slander,  or  false  accusation. 

Conclusion. 

"  We  must  all  appear  before  the 
judgment  seat  of  Christ,"  etc.  Let  us 
seek  by  the  grace  of  God  to  be  ready 
for  that  great  and  awful  tribunal. 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 


(a)   Jealousy  is  the  bane  and  poison  of 
marriage,  and  maketh  that  sociable  life  to  be 
uncomfortable,  and  mingleth  it   with    worse 
than  gall  and  wormwood.  Jealousy,  therefore, 
is  a  grief  of  mind,  arising  from  hence,  that 
another  is  judged  to  enjoy    that   which    we 
desire  to  have  wholly  aod  properly  as   our 
own,  and  none  beside  us  to  possess  any  part 
with  us.     Here,  then,   we  cannot  abide  any 
community,  but  hate  it  as  our  enemy  and  the 
right  cause  of  this  jealousy.     Or  we  may  de- 
scribe it  otherwise  on  this  manner  :  It  is  an 
affection   procieeding  from  fear  to  have  that 
communicated  to  another,  which  we  challenge 
and  covet  to  retain  as  peculiar  and  proper  to 
ourselves   alone.     From   hence  it  appeareth, 
farther,  what  the  nature  of  jealousy  is.  to  wit, 
that  it  is  mixed  and  compounded,  partly  of 
love,  partly  of  fear,  and  partly  of  aoger.     Of 
love,  which  admitteth  no  fellow-partner  in  the 
thing  he   loveth :  for  as  the  king  will  suffer 
no  companion   to  be  equal  unto  him,  or  par- 
taker wit^i  him  in  his  kingdom,  so  will  the 
husband  suffer  no  co-rival  to  mate  him  in  his 
love.     Of  fear,  lest  another  enjoy  the  use  of 
that  which  we  cannot  abide  or  suffer  he  should 
enjoy.     Of  anger,  whereby  it  oometh  to  pass, 
that  he  is  ready  to  break  out  to  se  k  revtnge 
and  punishment  upon   him  that  hath  offended 
him  that  way. —  W.  Attemoll. 
Yet  is  there  one  more  cursed  than  they  all, 

That  canker  worm,  that  monster.  Jealousy, 
Which  eats  the  heart  and  feeds  upon  the  gall, 
Turning  all  love's  delight  to  misery, 
Through  fear  of  losing  his  felicity. 


Nor  ever  is  he  wont  on  aught  to  feed 

But  toads  and  frogs  (his  pasture  poisonous), 
Which,  in  his  cold  complexion,  d)  breed 
A  filthy  blood,  or  humour  rancorous. 
Matter  of  doubt  and  dread  suspicious. 
That  doth   with   cureless   care   consume  the 
heart, 
Corrupt  the  stomach  with  gall  vicious, 
Cross-cuts  the  liver  with  eternal  smart. 
And  doth  transfix  the  soul  with  d'?ath's  eternal 
dart.  Edmund  Spenser. 

(6)  The  punishment  of  sin  is  not  an  arbitrary 
infliction,  but  it  is  a  necessary  law.  Penalty 
is  not  a  direst  interference,  but  a  genuine 
child  of  the  transgression.  We  receive  the 
things  that  we  have  done.  There  is  a  dreadful 
coercion  in  our  own  iniquities.  There  is  an 
inevitable  congruity  between  the  deed  and  its 
consequences.  There  is  an  awful  germ  of 
identity  in  the  seed  and  in  the  fruit.  We  re- 
cognise the  sown  wind  when  we  are  reaping 
ihe  harvest  whirlwind.  We  feel  that  it  is  we 
who  have  winged  the  very  arrows  that  eat 
into  our  hearts  like  fire.  It  needs  no  gathered 
lightnings — n  >  Divine  intervention — no  mirai-- 
ulous  messenger  to  avenge  in  us  God's  violated 

laws;    tney    avenge    themselves Take 

disease  as  one  form  of  the  working  of  this 
inevitable  law — not  always,  of  course,  the 
direct  result  of  sin ;  yet  how  much  of  disease 
is  directly  due  to  dirt,  neglect,  folly,  ignorance 
— the  infected  blood,  the  inherited  instincts 
of  this  sad  world.  But  are  tiiere  not  some 
diseases,  and  those  the  most  terrible  which  I 
have  known,    which  do  spring  directly,  im- 

89 


CHAP.  VI. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


mediately,  exclut  ively,  solely,  from  violence 
of  God's  law?  Is  not  madness  very  often 
such  a  disease?  Is  there  not  at  this  moment 
many  a  degraded  lunatic  who  never  would 
have  been  such  but  for  repeated  transere'^sions 
of  God's  known  will  ?  Ih  there  not  in  the 
very  life-blood  of  millions,  a  hereditary  taint 
blighting  the  healthy,  poisoning:,  as  with  a 
fury's  breath,  the  flower  of  their  happiness,  and 
breaking  out  afresh  in  new  generations,  which 
has  its  sole  source  and  origin  in  uncleanlines?? 
Is  there  not,  too,  an  executioner  of  justice 
which  God  has  told  off  to  wait  upon  drunken- 
ness, which  would  cease  if  drunkenness  ceased 
to  exist?  It  is  God's  warning  against  that 
fearful  intemperance  against  which  senates 
will  not  fight,  and  against  which  they  who 
love  their  fellows  fight  as  yet  in  vain. — F.  W. 
Farrer,  D.D. 

(c)  When  Dr.  Donne,  afterwards  Dean  of 
St.  Paul's,  took  possession  of  the  first  living  he 
ever  had,  he  walked  into  the  churchyard  as  the 
sexton  was  digging  a  grave;  and  on  his  throw- 
ing up  a  skull,  the  doctor  tookit  into  his  hands 
to  indulge  in  serious  contemplation.    On  look- 


ing at  it,  he  found  a  headless  nail  sticking  in 
the  temple,  which  he  secretly  drew  out,  and 
wrapped  in  the  corner  of  his  handkerchief. 
H"  then  a-ked  the  grave-digger,  whether  he 
kuM^v  whose  skull  it  was?  Fie  said  he  did; 
adding,  it  had  been  a  man's  who  kept  a  brandy 
shop;  a  drunken  fellow,  who,  one  night, 
having  talc^n  two  quarts  of  ardent  spirits,  was 
found  de^-d  in  his  bed  the  next  morning. 
*' Had  he  a  wife  ?  "  "  Yos."  "Is  she  living  ?  " 
"Yes."  "  Wnat  character  does  she  bear?" 
*'  A  very  good  one ;  only  her  neighbours  re- 
flect on  her  becau3e  she  married  the  day  a'ter 
her  husband  was  buried."  This  was  enough 
for  the  doctor,  who,  in  the  course  of  visiting 
his  parishioners,  called  on  her  ;  he  asked  ner 
several  questions,  and,  among  others,  of  what 
sickness  her  husband  died.  She  giving  him 
the  same  account,  he  suddenly  opened  the 
handkerchief,  and  cried,  in  an  authoritative 
voice,  "Woman,  do  you  know  this  nail?'* 
She  was  struck  with  horror  at  the  unexpected 
question,  instantly  acknowledged  that  she  had 
murdered  her  husband;  and  was  afterwards 
tried  and  executed. — Biblical  Museum, 


Hints  on  the  Law  op  Jealousies. 
(Verse  29.) 


Describe  trial  by  ordeal.  This  existed 
among  all  primitive  nations,  and  modern 
ones  ^hat  are  yet  in  a  primitive  state. 
Nations  have  their  infancy  ;  this  be- 
longs to  that  state  in  their  existence. 
Israel  had  seen  this  in  Egypt.  God 
permits  them  to  use  it ;  only  stipulating 
that  water  only  should  be  used,  so  that 
no  innocent  one  should  suffer,  and  that 
all  should  see  that  the  guilty  was  de- 
tected by  Him.  Why  should  He  per- 
mit this  1 

1.  To  show  the  importance  He  at- 
taches to  domestic  morality. 


2.  To  teach  them  that  He  was  looking 
on  and  knowing  their  most  secret  sins. 

3.  To  train  them  to  cultivate  a  tender 
conscience,  and  to  acknowledge  its 
authority. 

4.  To  restore  confidence  between 
husband  and  wife  where  it  was  wrongly 
shaken. 

5.  Though  this  custom  is  done  away 
with,  God  is  still  the  same,  and  will 
bring  all  secret  sin  into  the  light.-— 
David  Lloyd, 


CHAPTER  VL 

The  Vow  op  the  Nazaritb,  or  Acceptable  Consecration  to  God. 

(Verses  1-8.^ 


**  The  previous  chapter  has  provided 
for  the  exclusion  from  the  pale  of  God's 
people  of  certain  forms  of  guilt  and 
defilement.  The  present  one  offers  an 
opening  to  that  zeal  for  God  which, 
not  content  with  observing  what  is 
obligatory,  seeks  for  higher  and  stricter 
modes  of  self-dedication.  Thus  the  law 
of  the  Nazarite  is  appropriately  added 
to  other  enactments  which  concern  the 
90 


sanctity  of  the  holy  nation.  That 
sanctity  found  its  highest  expression  in 
the  Nazarite  vow,  which  was  the  volun- 
tary adoption  for  a  time  of  obligations 
resembling,  and  indeed  in  some  par- 
ticulars exceeding,  those  under  which 
the  priests  were  placed." — Speaker's 
Com.m, 

Nazarite,  or  more  properly,  Nazirite 
(Heb.  "T'O  from  *lTi  to  separate),  mgm^Q^ 


HOMILhTlC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  VI. 


a  separated  one,  then  ;  one  consecrated, 
especially  by  a  vow. 

From  the  mode  in  which  the  law  is 
introduced  in  vcr.  2,  it  is  evident  that 
Nazaritism  was  not  a  new  institution, 
but  was  already  familiar  to  the  people. 
Moses  "  appears  to  have  done  no  more 
than    ordain   such  regulations  for  the 
vow  of  the  Nazarite  of  days,  as  brought 
it  under  the  cognizance  of  the  priest, 
and    into   harmony    with    the   general 
system  of  religious  observance.     It  is 
doubted,  in   regard  to  Nazaritism    in 
general,  whether  it  was  of  native  or 
foreign  origin.     ,     ,     .     Winer  justly 
observes  that  the  points  of  resemblance 
between  the  Nazarite  vow  and  heathen 
customs  are  too  fragmentary  and  in- 
definite to  furnish  a  safe  foundation  for 
an   argument   in   favour  of   a  foreign 
origin  for  the  former." 

Nazarites  were  of  two  kinds,  and 
were  styled  respectively,  "  Nazarites  of 
days,"  and  "perpetual  Nazarites."  The 
former  took  the  vow  only  for  a  limited 
and  specified  time.  The  Sacred  Scrip- 
tures are  silent  as  to  the  length  of  time 
for  which  the  vow  was  taken.  "  A.ccord 
ino;  to  Nazir.  the  usual  time  was  thirtv 
days,  but  double  vows  for  sixty  days, 
and  treble  vows  for  a  hundred  days, 
were  sometimes  made."  Of  perpetual 
Nazarites,  three  are  mentioned  in  the 
Scriptures  :  Sampson,  Samuel,  and  John 
the  Baptist.  The  laws  which  are  laid 
down  in  this  chapter  apply  to  those  who 
were  Nazarites  for  a  limited  period  only, 
not  to  those  who  were  Nazarites  for 
life. 

On  the  moral  significance  of  Naza- 
ritism we  cannot  do  better  than  tran- 
scribe the  remarks  of  the  Rev.  S.  Clark, 
M.A.,  in  Smith's  Did.  of  the  Bible. 
"  The  meaning  of  the  Nazarite  vow  has 
been  regarded  in  different  lights.  Some 
consider  it  as  a  symbolical  expression 
of  the  Divine  nature  working  in  man, 
and  deny  that  it  involved  anything  of 
a  strictly  ascetic  character ;  others  see 
in  it  the  principle  of  stoicism,  and 
imagine  that  it  was  intended  to  culti- 
vate, and  bear  witness  for,  the 
sovereignty  of  the  will  over  the  lower 
tendencies   of    human    nature :    while 


some  regard  it  wholly  in  the  light  of 
the  sacrifice  of  the  person  to  God   .  .  . 
Philo  has    taken    the  deeper   view  of 
the    subject.      According   to   him    the 
Nazarite   did  not  sacrifice    merely  his 
possessions,  but  his  person,  and  the  act 
of  sacrifice  was  to  be  performed  in  the 
completest     manner.       The    outward 
observances  enjoined  upon  him  were  to 
be    the     genuine     expressions    of    his 
spiritual  devotion.  To  represent  spotless 
purity  within,  he  was  to  shun  defile- 
ment from   the  dead,  at  the  expense 
even  of  the  obligation  of  the  closest 
family  ties.     As  no  spiritual  state  or 
act   can   be     signified    by  any   single 
symbol,    he   was    to    identify  himself 
with   each   one   of  the   three   victims 
which  he  had  to  offer  as  often  as  he 
broke  his  vow  by  accidental  pollution, 
or  when  the  period  of  his  vow  came  to 
an  end.     He  was  to  realise  in  himself 
the  ideas  of  the  whole  burnt-offering, 
the  sin-offering,  and  the  peace-offering. 
That   no  mistake   might  be  made   in 
regard    to   the    three   sacrifices    being 
shadows  of  one  and  the  same  substance, 
it  was  ordained  that  the  victims  should 
be    individuals    of  one   and  the   same 
species  of  animal.     The  shorn  hair  was 
put  on  the  fire  of  the  altar  in   order 
that,  although  the   Divine  law  did  not 
permit   the   offering  of  human  blood, 
something  might  be  offered  up  actually 
a  portion  of  his  own  person     .... 
That    the    Nazarite    vow    was    essen- 
tially a  sacrifice  of  the   person  to  the 
Lord  is  obviously  in  accordance  with 
the  terms  of  the  Law  (Num.  vi.  2).  In 
the    old    dispensation    it    may   have 
answered  to  that  *  living  sacrifice,  holy, 
acceptable   unto   God,'  which   the   be- 
liever is  now  called  upon  to  make.     As 
the    Nazarite    was  a   witness   for    the 
straitness  of  the  Law,  as  distinguished 
from  the    freedom   of  the    Gospel,  his 
sacrifice  of  himself  was  submission  to 
the  letter  of  a  rule.     Its  outward  mani- 
festations   were    restraints  and    eccen- 
tricities.    The  man  was  separated  from 
his  brethren  that  he  might  be  peculiarly 
devoted  to  the  Lord.     This  was  con- 
sistent  with   the    purpose    of     Divine 
wisdom  for  the  time  for  which  it  was 

yi 


CHAP.  VI, 


BOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


ordained.  Wisdom,  we  are  told,  was 
justified  of  her  child  in  the  life  of  the 
great  Nazarite  who  preached  the  bap- 
tism of  repentance  when  the  Law  was 
about  to  give  way  to  the  Gospel. 
Amongst  those  born  of  women,  no 
greater  than  he  had  arisen,  *but  he 
that  is  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
is  greater  than  he.'  The  sacrifice  which 
the  believer  now  makes  of  himself  is 
not  to  cut  him  off  from  his  brethren, 
but  to  unite  him  more  closely  with 
them ;  not  to  subject  him  to  an  out- 
ward bond,  but  to  confirm  him  in  the 
liberty  with  which  Christ  has  made  him 
free.  It  is  not  without  significance 
that  wine  under  the  Law  was  strictly 
forbidden  to  the  priest  who  was  engagad 
in  the  service  of  the  sanctuary,  and  to 
the  few  whom  the  Nazarite  vow  bound 
to  the  special  service  of  the  Lord ; 
while  in  the  Church  of  Christ  it  is 
consecrated  for  the  use  of  every  be- 
liever to  whom  the  command  has  come, 
*  drink  ye  all  of  this.'"  Confining 
our  attention  to  the  first  eight  verses, 
we  have  in  them  an  illustration  of 
acceptable  consecration  to  God.  Ac- 
ceptable personal  consecration  to  God  is 
characterised  hy-^ 

I.  Voluntariness. 

The  self-consecration  of  the  Nazarite 
was  entirely  spontaneous.  It  is  true 
that  Samson,  Samuel,  and  John  the 
Baptist,  were  dedicated  to  the  Lord  as 
perpetual  Nazarites  by  their  parents 
previous  to  their  birth.  But  as  a  rule, 
the  vow  was  voluntarily  assumed.  In 
the  legislation  recorded  in  this  chapter 
it  is  regarded  as  the  free  act  of  the  in- 
dividual. Our  self-consecration  to  God 
must  be  willing  and  hearty,  or  it  will 
not  be  accepted  by  Him.  The  strictest 
obedieuce,  which  is  begotten  of  fear; 
the  most  careful  performance  of  rolj^ 
gious  duties,  which  is  not  hearty  ;  the 
most  diligent  service,  which  is  not 
free,  is  regarded  as  worthless  in  the 
sight  of  God.  To  be  accepted  by  God, 
we  must  "serve  Him  with  a  perfect 
heart  and  with  a  willing  mind."  The 
service  of  the  slave  or  of  the  hireling, 
He  rejects ;  but  the  free  consecration 
of  the  heart  and  life  to  Him  is  an 
92 


offering     with     which      He     is      well 
pleased  (a). 

II.  Completeness. 

The  Nazarite  dedicated  himself 
wholly  to  God.  This  is  symbolised 
especially  by  the  uncut  hair,  which  is 
spoken  of  in  verse  7  as  "  the  diadem 
of  God  upon  his  head."  "  The  conse- 
cration of  the  Nazarite  culminated  in 
his  uncut  hair.  The  free  growth  of 
the  hair,  unhindered  by  the  hand  of 
man,  was  *  the  symbol  of  strength  and 
abundant  vitality '  (cf.  2  Sara.  xvi.  25, 
26)."  Hence  in  the  Nazarite  it  pro- 
claimed the  fact  that  he  had  dedicated 
himself  wholly,  with  all  his  powers,  to 
the  service  of  God.  Our  consecration 
to  God  must  be  unreserved  to  be  ac- 
ceptable. Divided  allegiance  is  no 
allegiance.  "  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and 
mammon."  Whole-heartedness  is  in- 
dispensable to  true  allegiance  to  any 
person  or  to  any  cause.  Divided  ser- 
vice God  rejects.  He  claims  us  entirely. 
He  requires  our  supreme  affection.  The 
throne  of  our  being  must  be  freely 
given  to  Him,  or  our  consecration  will 
not  be  accepted  by  Him.  When  our 
whole  self  is  given  to  God,  we  shall 
keep  back  nothing  else  from  Him. 
*'  May  the  God  of  peace  Himself  sanc- 
tify you  wholly,"  etc.    (1  Thess.  v.  23). 

III.  Subordination  of  sensual  en- 
joyments. 

The  Nazarite  was  to  abstain  entirely 
from  wine  and  intoxicating  drink.  He 
was  neither  to  eat  nor  to  drink  of  any- 
thing prepared  from  the  vine,  "  from 
the  kernel  even  to  the  husk."  This 
was  to  represent  his  abstinence  from 
every  gratification  of  the  senses,  which 
would  in  any  way  impair  the  holiness 
of  his  soul.  This  entire  abstinence 
from  the  products  of  the  vine  is  not  a 
law  for  Christians.  It  is  never  repre- 
sented as  such  in  the  Sacred  Scriptures. 
The  Nazarite  was  free  to  "drink  wine" 
when  the  period  of  his  separation  was 
ended.  But  it  is  a  law  of  the  Christian 
life,  that  the  sensual  must  ever  and  in 
all  things  be  subordinated  to  the 
spiritual.  Sensual  appetites  must  not 
lord  it  over  spiritual  aspirations.     Our 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  VI. 


animal  passions  must  be  controlled 
by  moral  principles.  Everything 
wiiich  tends  to  weaken  or  becloud 
our  soul's  vision,  to  blunt  our  suscepti- 
bility to  spiritual  impressions  and 
impulses,  to  interrupt  our  conscious 
communion  with  God,  or  to  deprive  us 
of  spiritual  purity  and  power,  we  are 
bound  to  abstain  from.  "  Abstain  from 
fleshly  lusts,  which  war  agaiust  the 
soul."  "  Walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  ye 
shall  not  fultil  the  lust  of  the  flesh." 

IV.  Separation  from  all  moral  evil. 

"Because  the  Nazarite  was  holy  to 
the  Lord  during  the  whole  period  of  his 
consecration,  he  was  to  approach  no 
dead  person  during  that  time,  not  even 
to  defile  himself  for  his  parents,  or  his 
brothers  and  sisters,  when  they  died, 
according  to  the  law  laid  down  for  the 
high  priest  in  Lev.  xxi.  11.  Conse- 
quently, as  a  matter  of  course,  he  was 


to  guard  most  scrupulously  against 
other  defilements,  not  only  like  ordinary 
Israelites,  but  also  like  the  priests." — 
Kell  and  Del.  The  people  of  God 
must  "  abstain  from  every  form  of  evil." 
Jesus  Christ  was  *'  holy,  harmless,  un- 
defiled,  separate  from  sinners,"  even 
while  he  received  sinners  and  ate  with 
them.  A  similar  separation  is  required 
from  His  followers.  "  I  pray  not  that 
Thou  shouldst  take  them  out  of  the 
world,  but  that  Thou  shouldest  keep 
them  from  the  evil."  "  Come  out  from 
among  them,  and  be  ye  separate, 
saith  the  Lord,  and  touch  not  anything 
unclean,  and  I  will  receive  you,  "  etc. 
**  Ye  that  love  the  Lord  hate  evil."  By 
your  consecration  you  are  "  holy  unto 
the  Lord,'  therefore  shun  utterly  all 
8in  whatsoever,   {d) 

Do  these  characteristics  of  acceptable 
personal  consecration  to  God  mark  our 
lives  ] 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 


(«)  Personal  devotion  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  has  distinguished  the  saints  of  all 
churches,  and  of  all  countries.  The^y  have 
acknowledged  that  they  were  not  their  own, 
but  His.  They  have  renounced,  for  His  sake, 
all  private  interests,  and  all  personal  aims. 
They  have  lived,  and  worked,  and  suffered, 
and  died  for  Him.  They  have  been  the  slaves 
of  Christ — His  slaves,  not  because  their  spirit 
was  crushed  by  a  tyrannical  authority  which 
they  had  no  power  or  courage  to  resist,  but 
because  His  Divine  majesty,  His  infinite  love 
for  them,  and  the  glory  of  His  personal  per- 
fection kindled  their  imagination,  commanded 
the  homage  of  their  conscience,  and  won  their 
hearts.  They  were  His  slaves,  but  they  found 
in  His  service  a  larger  freedom  than  they  had 
known  before  they  accepted  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  as  their  Misier  ;  and,  with  the  larger 
freedom,  there  came  a  fuller  life  and  a  nobler 

joy- 

The  act  of  consecration  is  an  act  of  the  will. 
It  is  a  voluntary  surrender  of  the  life  to 
Christ,  a  yielding  to  His  claims  as  our  rightful 
Owner.  But  His  O^vnersbip  belongs  to  the 
moral  and  spiritual  order,  and  is  ultimately 
assorted  in  His  personal  ascend iucy  over  the 
whole  moral  and  spiritual  life  of  those  who 
are  His.  Consecration  is  an  indispensable 
condition  of  holiness,  for  it  is  a  free  consent 
to  belong  to  Christ,  and  not  to  ourselves  ;  but 
where  there  is  p^rso:  a'  r'evotion  to  Christ, 
Christ  is  not  morely  acjcopted  by  the  will  as 
the  Lord  and  Owner  of  life,  He  is  enthroned 


over  all  the  forces  of  our  moral  and  spiritual 
nature.— i2.  W.  Dale,  D.D. 

(6)  It  is  related  of  the  missionary,  Henry 
Martyn,  that,  wdeii  at  college,  "he  never  lost 
an  hour  ; "  but  then  every  moment  was  spent 
in  seeking  honour  for  himself.  When,  how- 
ever, he  had  obtained  the  highest  honours, 
he  was  disappointed  in  finding  that  he  bad 
gra'^ped  a  shadow,  A  friend  told  him  one 
day  that  he  ought  to  attend  to  his  studies 
not  to  obtain  the  praise  of  men,  but  that 
he  might  be  better  fitted  to  promote  the 
glory  of  God.  He  thought  such  a  demanl 
very  strange,  and  when  his  sister  spoke  to 
him  on  the  subject,  and  begged  him  to  give 
his  heart  to  God,  he  did  not  like  to  listen  to 
her,  because  he  fit  that  he  would  have  to  gi^^e 
up  many  things  if  he  became  religious.  At 
length,  however,  a  great  change  came  over 
him — -a  change  of  heart;  and  he  resolved  to 
"seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God."  His  pros- 
pects wore  every  day  becominsr  brighter  and 
brighter  ;  but  the  love  of  God  had  entered 
his  hoart,  and  he  was  enabled  to  conquer 
his  ambition  and  love  of  fame.  He 
became  a  mini-'ter  of  the  Gospel,  and  was 
greitly  esteemed  for  his  learning  and  amiable 
manners.  He  began  now,  more  than  ever,  to 
feel  mat  ne  was  not  his  own,  and  therefore 
that  he  must  not  live  to  himself ;  and  although 
he  mijtht  have  risan  to  posts  of  distinction  in 
his  native  land,  h  <  chose  rather  to  be  a  mis- 
sionary to  the  heathen.  He  sacrificed  home, 
friendship,  worldly  oouifort,   health,   earthly 

93 


CEAP.  VL 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


love,  and  last  of  all.  life  itself,  that  be  might 
tell  the  heathen  of  the  true  God,  and  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  died  to  save  sinners;  for, 
as  he  said,  "  he  could  not  endure  life  if  Jesus 
were  not  glorified."  He  left  all  that  he  might 
follow  Je8U9.  He  felt  that  it  was  what  God 
required  of  him,  and  he  acted  in  the  spirit  of 
his  Divine  Master,  who  gave  Him.^elf  for  the 
sins  of  the  world. — Sunday  School  Teacher. 

(c)  Stimulants,  like  wine,  inflame  the  senses, 
and  through  them  set  the  imagination  and 
feelings  on  fire;  and  the  law  of  our  spiritual 
being  is  that  which  begins  with  the  fl  sh, 
sensualizes  the  spirit — whereas  that  which 
commences  in  the  region  of  the  spirit, 
spiritualizes  the  senses,  in  whi.'h  it  subse- 
quently stirs  emotiom.  But  the  misfortune  is 
that  men  mi- take  this  law  of  their  emotions; 
afbd  the  fatal  error  is,  when  having  found 
spiritual  feelings  existing  in  connection,  and 
assc  elated  with  fleshly  sensations,  men  expect 
by  the  mere  irritation  of  the  emotions  of  the 
frame  to  reproduce  those  high  and  glorious 
feelings.  .  .  The  worst  case  of  all  occurs 
In  the  department  of  the  afifections.  That 
which  begins  in  the  heart  ennobles  the  whole 
animal  being,  but  that  which  begins  in  the 
inferior  departments  of  our  beings  is  the  most 
entire  degradation  and  sensualizing  of  the  soul. 

Wine  is  but  a  specimen  o^  a  clans  of  stiuju- 
lants.  All  that  bogius  from  without  belongs  to 
the  same  cla'-s.  The  stimulus  may  be  afforded 
by  almobt  any  enjoyment  of  the  senses. 
Drunkenness  may  come  from  anything 
wherein  is  excess  ;  from  over-indulgencB  la 
society,  in  pi  a-iure,  in  music,  and  in  the 
delight  of  listening  to  orat  tv,  nay,  even  from 
the  excitement  of  sermons  and  religious 
meetings.  The  prophet  tells  us  of  those 
who  are  drunken,  ard  not  with  wine.  .  .  . 
This  is  what  we  want:  we  want  the  vision  of 
a  calmer  and  simpler  Beauty,  to  tranquillize 
us  in  the  midst  of  artificial  tastes — we  want 
the  draught  of  a  purer  spring  to  cool  the  flame 
of  our  excited  life  ;  we  want,  in  other  words 
the  Spirit  of  the  Life  of  Christ,  simple,  natural, 
with  power  to  calm  and  soothe  the  feelings 
which  it  rouses  :  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit 
which  can  never  intoxicate. — F.  W.  Robertson^ 
M.A. 

(d)  Christ  had  His  power  in  the  fact  that 
He  carried  the  impression  of  His  separatenegs 
from  the  world  and  His  superiority  to  it.  H'< 
was  no  ascetic,  His  separation  no  contrived 
and  prescribed  separation,  but  was  ooly  the 
more  real  and  radical  that  it  was  the  very 
instinct  or  first  impulse  of  His  character.  He 
could  say,  *'  The  prince  of  this  world  comoth, 
and  hath  nothing  in  Me  ;  "  counting  the  bad 
kingdom  to  be  only  a  p.isto-board  affair,  whose 
laws  and  ways  were  but  a  vain  show,  that  He 
could  not  even  so  much  as  feel.    This,  now, 


is  what  we  want,  such  a  fulness  of  Divine  par- 
ticipation, that  we  shall  not  require  to  be 
always  shutting  off  the  world  by  prescribed 
denials,  but  shall  draw  off  from  it  naturally, 
because  we  are  not  of  it.  A  true  Christian, 
one  who  is  deep  enoiigh  in  the  godly  life  to 
have  his  affinities  with  God,  will  infallibly 
become  a  separated  being.  The  instinct  of 
holiness  will  draw  him  apart  into  a  singular, 
superior,  hidden  life  with  God, 

It  is  not  conformity  that  we  want ;  it  is  not 
being  able  to  beat  the  world  in  its  own  way, 
but  it  is  to  stand  apart  from  it,  and  produce 
the  impression  of  a  separated  life;  this  it  is, 
and  this  only,  that  yields  any  proper  sense  of 
the  true  Christian  power.  It  is  not  the  being 
popular  that  makes  one  a  help  to  religion,  no 
I'Oly  man  was  ever  truly  a  popular  character. 
Even  Christ  Himself,  bringing  the  Divine 
beauty  into  the  world,  profoundly  disturbed 
the  quiet  of  men  by  His  very  perfections.  All 
really  bad  men,  adhering  to  their  sin,  hated 
Him,  and  their  animos  ty  was  finally  raised  to 
such  a  pitch,  that  they  crucified  Him.  And 
what  does  He  say,  turning  to  His  disciples, 
but  this  very  thing,  *'  The  servant  is  not 
greater  than  his  lord  ;  if  they  h  ive  persecuted 
me,  they  will  persecute  you.  I  have  chosen 
you  out  of  the  world,  therefore  the  world 
hateth  you."  VVe  are  certainly  not  to  make  a 
merit  of  being  hated,  for  the  worst  and  most 
wicked  men  can  do  that ;  as  little  are  we  to 
make  a  merit  of  popularity  and  being  even 
with  the  world  in  its  ways.  There  is  no  just 
mode  of  life,  no  true  holiness,  or  fruit  of  holy 
liv  n  r,  if  we  do  not  carry  the  conviction,  by  our 
sel'-denial,  our  sobriety  in  the  matter  of  show, 
and  our  withholding  from  all  that  indicates 
being  under  the  world,  that  we  are  in  a  life 
separated  to  God.  Therefore  His  great  call  is 
— ''Come  out  from  amouij  them,  and  be  ye 
separate,  and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing,  and 
-ye  shall  be  my  sons  and  daughters,  saith  the 
Lord  Almighty."  And  there  is  a  most  pro- 
found philosophy  in  this.  If  we  are  to  im- 
press the  world  we  must  be  separate  from 
sinners,  even  as  Christ  our  Master  was,  or  at 
least,  according  to  our  human  degree,  as 
being  in  His  Spirit.  The  great  difficulty  is, 
that  we  think  to  impress  the  world,  standin^f 
on  the  world's  own  level  and  asking  its  appro- 
bation. We  conform  too  easily  and  with  too 
much  appetite.  We  are  all  the  while  touching 
the  unclem  thing — bowing  down  to  it,  accept- 
its  law,  eager  to  be  found  approved  in  it. 
God  therefore  calls  us  away.  Oh,  that  we 
could  take  our  lesson  here,  and  plan  our  life, 
order  our  pursuits,  choose  our  relaxations,  pre- 
pare our  families,  so  as  to  be  truly  with  Christ, 
and  so,  in  fact,  that  we  ourselves  can  say,  each 
for  himself,  "  The  prince  of  this  world  cometh, 
and  hath  nothing  in  me.'* — H.  Bushneli^  D.0» 


94 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBER"^. 


CHAT.  VI. 


The  Involuntary  Defilement  op  the  Nazarite,  or  Sin  in  the  Consecrated. 

(Verses  ^-U.) 


Provision  is  here  made  for  cases  in 
which  the  Nazarite  involuntarily  con- 
tracted defilement,  by  reason  of  a 
person  dying  suddenly  by  him.  He 
was  to  go  through  the  ordinary  process 
of  purification  commanded  for  others  ; 
he  was  also  to  offer  a  trespass- 
offering  as  having  "  sinned  through 
ignorance,  in  the  holy  things  of  the 
Lord ; "  his  head  was  to  be  shaved, 
and  he  was  to  begin  the  days  of  his 
separation  over  again.  We  have,  then, 
in  this  section — 

First :  A  recognition  of  the  fact  that 
man  may  die  suddenly  and  unexpectedly. 
**  If  any  man  die  very  suddenly  by 
him."  It  is  here  implied  that  death 
may  seize  a  man  so  quickly  and  so 
entirely  without  any  sign  of  his 
approach,  that  the  most  zealous  and 
watchful  Nazarite  may  be  'uable  to 
avoid  defilement  from  the  dead  body. 
While  death  sometimes  approaches  his 
victims  with  measured  steps  and  slow, 
at  other  times  he  smites  them  with  the 
suddenness  and  rapidity  of  a  lightning- 
fl.ish.  He  arrests  not  only  the  aged 
and  the  weak,  but  tlie  young  and  the 
strong  also.  In  the  case  even  of  the 
healthy  and  vigorous,  and  apparently 
secure,  frequently  there  is  but  a  step 
between  them  and  death.  Wise  and 
blessed  are  they  to  whom  even  sudden 
dea-th  is  great  gain  !    (</) 

Second:  An  Ulasttatlon  of  the  truth 
that  a  good  man  may  fail  into  sin,  and 
of  the  consequences  of  such  sin.  'J'he 
case  which  is  here  legislated  for  is  that 
of  defilement  which  is  quite  involuntary, 
and,  as  we  should  say,  accidental.  It 
is  a  figure  of  the  involuntai-y  sins  >  f 
good  men,  sins  of  infirmity,  sins  into 
vv  hich  they  are  suddenly  surpi  icsed,  faults 
by  which  they  are  overtaken.  In  our 
pitisent  state  we  are  exjjuse  1  to  subtle 
Satanic  temptations  ;  currents  uf  evil 
influence,  which  are  both  insiJious  and 
strong,  bear  frequently  upon  us  ;  we 
are  in  danger  of  being  taken  iii  an  un- 


guarded moment,  and  surprised  into 
sin.  "  We  have  heard  how  suddenly 
the  storm  sweeps  down  upon  certain 
lakes.  One  moment  all  is  calm,  and 
in  another  the  loosened  wind  lashes  the 
slumberinof  waters  into  waves  and 
billows,  as  if  the  atorm-spirit  had  been 
looking  on  from  some  rift  of  the  hills, 
and  watching  for  an  opportunity  of 
plaguing  the  unsuspecting  lake.  So 
is  it  with  men  who  are  overtaken  in  a 
fault.  They  are  apt  to  imagine  that 
momentary  quiet  means  permanent 
rest,  and  when  they  resign  their 
weapons,  the  enemy  leaps  upon  them 
fiercely."  "You  were  going  quietly  on 
your  way,  thinking  no  evil,  suddenly 
temptation,  for  which  you  were  not 
prepared,  presented  itself,  and  before 
you  knew  where  you  were,  you  were  in 
the  dust,  fallen."  It  is  sins  of  this  class, 
class  m  men  of  sincere  piety,  which 
are  illustrated  in  the  text.  It  is  here 
suggested — 

I.  That   such   sins   defile  and  dis- 
honour good  men. 

**  If  any  man  die  very  suddenly  by 
him,  and  he  hath  defiled  the  head  of 
his  consecration  :  then  he  shall  shave 
his  head  in  the  dav  of  his  cleansin;j:, 
on  the  seventh  day  shall  he  shave  it." 
The  head  is  mentioned  as  defiled  not 
because  uncleanness  was  specially  re- 
tained in  the  hair;  but  because  "the 
cotisecration  of  his  God  was  upon  his 
head."'  His  unshorn  hair  was  the  mark 
of  his  self-dedication  to  God.  He  him- 
self, as  a  person  thus  consecrated,  was 
regarded  as  impure  by  reason  of  his 
nearness  to  the  dead.  If  a  good  man  be 
ensnared  by  temptation  and  commit 
sin,  that  sin  will  leave  its  uiark  upon  his 
beinijj.  We  cannot  sin  under  anv  cir- 
cumstances  without  contracting  some 
mt*asure  of  defilement.  Nor  can  any 
good  man  sin  without  dislionour,  even 
ills  involuntary  sins  tarnish  and  soil  the 
lustre  of  "  the  diadem  of  his  God  upon 
his    head."        When     Abram     sinned 

96 


CHAP    VL 


HOMTLETIC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


through  fear,  by  telling  only  a  half- 
truth  with  an  intention  to  deceive 
Pharaoh,  how  mean  and  dishonoured  he 
appeared  !  As  we  look  upon  Pharaoh, 
the  man  of  the  world,  rebuking  Abram, 
the  man  of  God,  we  feel  how  painfully  the 
latter  has  humiliated  and  degraded 
himself.  When  the  godly  man  is  even 
suddenly  surprised  into  sin  by  subtle 
and  strong  temptation,  he  incurs  im- 
purity and  sad  reproach. 

II.  That  such  sins  require  atone- 
ment on  the  part  of  good  men. 

The  Nazaritewho  had  unintentionally 
contracted  ceremonial  uncleanness  was 
reqnired  to  bring  to  the  priest  a  sin- 
offering  and  a  burnt-offering,  as  in  the 
case  of  those  who  had  unclean  issues 
(comp.  vers.  10,  11,  with  Lev.  xv.  14, 
15).  He  was  also  required  to  bring 
a  trespass-offering,  as  one  who  hi%d. 
"  sinned,  through  ignorance,  m  the 
holy  things  of  the  Lord  "  (comp.  var.  12 
with  Lev.  v.  15,  16).  For  us  in  this 
gospel  age  the  grand  offering,  which 
consummates  and  crowns  all  previous 
offerings,  has  been  made  :  *'  Once  in 
the  end  of  the  world  hath  He  appeared 
to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Him- 
self." And  if  a  good  man  sin  by  reason 
of  infirmity,  or  be  tripped  up  and  over- 
thrown by  temptation  almost  ere  he  is 
aware  of  it,  he  must  penitently  approach 
unto  God  through  that  great  sacrifice, 
— must  repent  of  his  sin,  humbly  con- 
fess it  unto  God,  and  seek  forgiveness 
from  ?Iim.     (See  1  John  i.  9  ;  ii.  1,  2.) 

III.  That  such  sins  involve  loss  to 
good  men. 

The  Nazarite  who  involuntarily  was 
defiled  lost  time.  The  former  days  of 
his  separation  were  not  reckoned  unto 
him:  **the  days  that  were  before  shall 
be  lost,  because  his  separation  was 
defiled."  He  was  put  back,  and  re- 
quired to  begin  afresh  :  'Mie  shall  con- 
secrate unto  the  Lord  the  days  of  his 
separation."  In  this  we  have  a  striking 
illustration  of  a  very  solemn  spiritual 
truth  :  a  godly  man  cannot  sin  under 
any  circumstances  without  suffering  sad 
less — loss  not  only  of  progress,  but  of 
spiritual  parity,  peace,  and  power. 
This  will  account  for  the  very  slow 
96 


progress  of  many  in  the  Christian 
course.  In  an  unguarded  moment  v/e 
are  led  astray,  and  wander  from  God 
and  light  into  sin  and  darkness.  In 
great  mercy  ''  He  restoreth  our  soul ;" 
but  the  journey  home  is  sad  and  sor- 
rowful, and  we  have  lost  much  of  good 
and  gained  bitter  experience  and  pain- 
ful memories,     (b) 

IV.  That  such  sin  will  be  followed 
by  new  efforts  on  the  part  of  good 
men 

The  Nazarite  who  had  unintention- 
ally incurred  defilement  began  again 
the  term  of  separation  which  he  had 
vowed  unto  the  Lord.  "  And  he  shall 
consecrate  unto  the  Lord  the  days  of 
his  separation."  The  godly  man  may 
fall  into  sin,  but  he  will  not  continue 
therein.  He  will  "  rem.ember  from 
whence  he  has  fallen,  and  repent,  and 
do  the  first  works."  "  Though  he  fall, 
he  shall  not  be  utterly  cast  down  ;  for 
the  Lord  upholdeth  him  with  his  hand  " 
"  A  just  man  falleth  seven  times,  and 
riseth  up  again."  *'  Rejoice  not  against 
me,  0  mine  enemv  :  when  I  fall  I  shall 
arise  ;  when  I  sit  in  darkness  the  Lord 
shall  be  a  light  unto  me."  ''There  are 
ever,"  says  Archbishop  Trench,  **  goads 
in  the  recollection  ofa  better  and  a  nobler 
past,  goading  him  who  has  taken  up 
with  meaner  things  and  lower,  and 
urging  him  to  reclaim  and  recover  what 
he  has  lost ;  as,  to  take  an  extreme 
instance,  it  is  the  Prodigal's  recollection 
of  the  bread  enough  and  to  spare  in  his 
father's  house,  which  makes  the  swine's 
husks,  and  the  famine  even  among  them, 
so  intolerable  to  him"  (Luke  xv.  17  ; 
cf.  Heb.  X.  32).  And  Robertson  :  "  In 
the  darkest,  wildest,  wanderings,  a  man 
to  whom  God  has  shown  His  love  in 
Christ  is  conscious  still  of  the  better 
way.  In  the  very  gloom  of  his  remorse, 
there  is  an  instinctive  turning  back  to 
God." 

Conclusion. 

1.  Let  godly  men  watch  and  pray  lest 
tJuy  he  ensnared  by  temptation  and  fall 
into  sin.     "  Be  sober,  be  vigilant,"  etc. 

2.  Let  those  ivho,in  an  unguarded  hour ^ 
have  fallen  into  sin  be  encouraged  to  re- 
turn penitently  unto  God  through  Jesus 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  VL 


Christ,      "  Return,    thou    backsliding 
Israel,  saith  the  Lord,"  etc.   (Jer.  iii. 


12-15).      "0   Israel,   return  unto  the 
Lord  thy  God,"  etc.  (Hos.  xiv.  1-7). 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 


»> 


(a)  "  In  the  midst  of  life  we  are  in  death.' 
Ha  i8  the  interjection  of  laughter.  Ah  is  an 
interjection  of  sorrow;  the  diflference  betwixt 
them  is  very  small,  consistirg  only  in  the 
transposition  of  what  is  no  substantial  letter, 
but  a  bare  aspiration.  How  quickly,  in  one 
minute,  in  the  very  turning  of  a  breath,  is  our 
mirth  changed  iuto  mournitg!  Thus  it  was 
with  upwards  of  seventy  (mostly  females) 
who  were  burned  to  death  in  the  sudden  con- 
flagration of  the  theatre  at  Hicbniond,  in 
Virginia.  "  Ah  I  "  said  the  narrator  of  the 
dreadful  catastrophe,  "  how  little  thought  the 
fair  one,  whose  curls  were  adjusted,  whose 
garments,  costly  and  elegant,  were  disposed 
80  as  to  produce  on  the  spectator  the  most  im- 
pressive effect,  that  those  curls  were  that  same 
night  to  be  crit^ped  with  the  devouring  flame, 
and  those  garments  to  be  defied  the  service 
of  a  winding  sheet!" — Gleanings. 

I  was  meditating  jesterday  upon  death,  till 
I  was  amazed  that  it  is  almost  the  only  subject 
which  is  never  treated  of  in  conversation 
further  than  as  a  mere  uninteresting  fact. 
Were  any  number  of  persons  intending  to 
embark  for  a  distant,  unknown  country,  of 
whom  some  might  be  called  to-morrow,  and 
all  must  be  called  soon,  would  they  not,  when- 
ever they  met  as  friends  and  fellow-travellers, 
be  enquiring  amongst  themselves  how  each 
was  provided  for  the  journey ;  what  accounts 
each  had  heard  of  the  place;  the  terms  of 
reception  ;  what  interest  and  hopes  each  had 
secured,  what  treasures  remitted,  what  pro- 
tection insured  ;  and  would  they  not  excite 
each  other  to  despatch  what  was  yet  possible 
to  be  done,  and  might  tomorrow  be  irre- 
trievably too  late  ?  I  think  it  would  sit 
pleasingly  on  the  mind  when  a  friend  was 
vanished  out  of  this  visible  world  to  have 
such  conversations  to  reflect  upon.  What 
astonishing  scenes  are  now  opened  to  the 
minds  of  many  with  whom,  a  few  months 
ago,  we  used  familiarly  and  triflin^ly  to  con- 
verse; with  whom  we  have  wasted  many  an 
inestimable  hour!  What  clear  views  have 
they  now  of  those  great  and  important  truths, 
for  which  the  foolish  bustle  of  this  world 
leaves  scarcely  any  place  in  the  immortal 
mind. — Talbot. 

(6)  A  young  man  was  for  peveral  months  in 
a  backsliding  state,  which  manifested  itself  in 
the  usual  way — of  conformity  to  a  fashionable 
and  unholy  course  of  life,  and  a  neglect  of  the 
ordinances  and  institutions  of  tho  house  of 
God.  During  this  time  he  c  tiled  on  a  deaccn 
of  the  church,  who  was  a  watchmaker,  and 
asked  him  to  repair  his  watch.  "  What  is  the 
difficulty  w  th  your  watch?"  said  he  "It 
has  lost  time  lately,"  said  the  young  man. 
The  deacon  looked  up  to  him  with  a  steady 
\  significant  eye,  and  said,  *^  Havn" t  you  lost 


time  lately  f**  These  few  words  brought  the 
backslider  to  repentance,  to  the  Church,  and 
to  duty. —  Christian  Treasury. 

How  a  single  sin  tends  to  modify  the  his- 
tory, to  check  tho  progress,  and  to  impair  the 
happiness  and  honour  of  even  a  child  of  God ! 
This  was  eminently  the  case  with  Aaron  and 
Moses.  They  had  "  spoken  unadvisedly  with 
their  lips"  at  Massah  and  Meribah,  and  there- 
fore God  had  "sworn  in  His  wrath  ihat  they 
should  not  enter  into  His  rest,"  that,  name  y, 
of  the  earthly  Canaan.  One  reason  why  God 
is  more  apt  to  punish  His  people  on  earth  for 
sin  is,  that  they  are  not  to  be  punished  for  it 
hereafter.  Hence,  for  the  sake  of  justice  and 
impartiality,  He  often  inflicts  upon  them 
severe  rebukes  even  here,  while  taking  little 
cognianrnce,  seemingly,  of  the  sins  of  some  of 
His  enemies,  for  whom  the  wrath  of  the  future 
is  reserved.  He  forgives  His  people  and  yet 
He  "takes  vengeance  on  their  inventions." 
Thus  Noah's  drunkenness  was  punished  by 
Canaan's  contempt  and  Ham's  unnatural  con- 
duct. Thus  David's  sin,  in  the  matter  of 
Uriah,  was  punished  by  the  death  ot  the  child 
of  guilt.  Ttius  Lot's  sin,  in  choosing  to  dwell 
in  Sodom,  was  punished  by  the  vexation  he 
met  with  there,  and  by  the  sins  of  his  family. 
Thus  Peter's  denial  of  his  Master  was 
punished  by  that  look  of  Christ  which  sent  a 
dart  of  remorse  through  his  soul,  and  wrung 
from  his  eyes  those  bitter  penitential  tears. 
And  thus  Aaron  and  Moses,  mij^ht  be  said,  in 
a  sense,  to  expiate  their  sins  by  a  premature 
and  public  death.  There  can  bo  little  doubt 
that  God  still  visits  His  "people's  faults  with 
rods  and  their  sins  with  chastisements; "  now 
by  permitting  a  remorse  even  greater  than 
their  iniquities  had  deserved;  now  by  allow- 
ing their  subjection  to  abuse  and  calumny 
fiercer  than  thoy  are  entitled  to;  now  by  hid- 
ing His  countenance  from  them;  now  by 
visiting  them  with  the  loss  of  friends  and 
other  painful  bereavements  ;  now  by  breaking 
their  own  health,  and  abridging  their  days ; 
and  now  by  clouding  their  death-beds,  and  de- 
priving them  there  of  all  sensible  comfort  and 
hope.  Many  a  one  wonders  how  a  great,  sin- 
cere, and  Christian  man  like  Dr.  Johnson, 
should  have  been  so  gloomy  in  his  feelings,  so 
terribly  afraid  of  death,  so  void  of  peace  and 
joy  in  believing ;  but  his  biographer,  Boswell, 
has,  with  characteristic  honesty  and  impru- 
dence, explained  one  cause  at  least  of  this,  by 
mentioning  a  certain  sin  which  did  easily  bo- 
set  tho  philosopher  on  even  to  old  age, 
although  he  struggled  against  it  energetically, 
and  most  bitterly  deplored  its  power  over  him ; 
and  were  the  biographers  of  other  sad-hearted 
Christians,  whose  daik  diarit*s  are  printed, 
acting  with  the  same  downrightness,  they 
might  account  for  much  that   is  at  present 

97 


CHAP.  VI, 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


mysterioas  in  their  misery.  God  will  by  no 
means  "clear  the  guilty*' even  among  His 
own  people;  and  although  all  their  sias  are 
laid  on  Christ,  and  pardoned  for  His  sake  at 
last,  it  is  quite  consistent  with  this  that  they 
shou'd  be  puni-sh->d  here.  This  disp-'nsatiou 
is  a  merciful,  as  well  as  a  just  one.  It  tends 
to  check  men  in  courses  that  might  otherwise 
become  habitual  and  hopeless.     And  it  shows 


what  a  fatherly  interest  God  takes  in  His 
people,  administering  to  them  salutary  disji- 
pline,  and  bringing  them  back  to  Him  by  the 
T(  d  "If  ye  be  without  chastisement,  whereof 
all  are  partakers,  then  are  ye  bastards,  and 
not  sons."  How  happy  those  who  receive  all 
their  "evil  things"  here  I — George  GilfiUan, 
MA, 


The  Offering  op  the  Nazarite,  or  the  Sacrifice  op  the  Consecrated. 

(Verses  13-21). 


In  these  verses  we  have  the  cere- 
monies to  be  observed  by  the  Nazarite 
when  the  days  of  his  separation  were 
ended.  "  The  directions  as  to  the  re- 
lease from  consecration  are  called  *  the 
law  of  the  Nazarite  '  (verse  13),  because 
the  idea  of  the  Nazarite's  vows  cul- 
minated in  the  sacrificial  festival  which 
terminated  the  consecration,  and  it  was 
in  this  that  it  attained  to  its  fullest 
manifestation."  In  these  ceremonies 
we  discover  illustrations  of  certain  im- 
portant truths  of  universal  application  ; 
to  these  truths  let  us  direct  our  atten- 
tion. 

I.  That  the  lives  even  of  the  best  of 
mer.  in  the  present  state  are  imperfect. 

When  the  Nazarite  had  successfully 
fulfilled  the  days  of  his  separation  he 
could  not  approach  God  without  a  sin- 
offering.  He  was  required  to  **  offer 
one  ewe  lamb  of  the  first  year  without 
blemish,"  as  an  expiation  for  sins  in- 
voluntarily committed  during  the  period 
of  consecration.  This,  though  men- 
tioned second  in  the  text,  was  offered 
first.  "'.hough  he  had  fulfilled  the 
vow  of  his  separation  without  any  pollu- 
tion, yet  he  must  bring  a  sacrifice  for 
sin ;  for  there  is  guilt  insensibly  con- 
tracted by  the  best  of  men,  even  in  their 
best  works — some  good  omitted,  some 
ill  admitted,  which,  if  we  were  dealt 
with  in  strict  justice,  would  be  our  ruin, 
and  in  consequence  of  which  it  is 
necessary  for  us  to  receive  the  atone- 
ment, and  plead  it  as  our  righteousness 
before  God."  "  When  ye  shall  have 
done  all  those  things  which  are  com- 
manded you,  say,  We  are  unprofitable 
servants ;  we  have  done  that  which 
98 


was  our  duty  to  do."  When  we  have 
done  our  uttermost  and  best,  we  still 
need  an  interest  in  the  great  sacrifice 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,     {a) 

II.  That  our  services  are  acceptable 
to  God  only  as  we  give  ourselves  to 
Him. 

After  the  sin-offering,  the  Nazarite 
was  to  "  offer  unto  the  Lord  one  ho 
lamb  of  the  first  year  without  blemish 
for  a  burnt  offering."  The  burnt- 
offering  was  an  acknowledgment  of 
God's  sovereign  claims  upon  the  Naza- 
rite, and  a  svmbol  of  his  surrender  of 
himself,  body  and  soul,  to  the  Lord. 
So,  also,  the  hair  of  his  head,  which 
had  been  worn  in  honour  of  God,  he 
was  to  cut  off  at  the  door  of  the  taber- 
nacle, and  put  it  into  the  altar  fire 
which  was  under  the  sacrifice  of  the 
peace-offerings,  thus  offering  up  a  por- 
tion of  his  own  person  in  sacrifice  to 
the  Lord.  The  grand  meaning  and 
end  of  all  sacrifice  is  the  surrender  of 
ourselves  to  God.  Our  most  treasured 
possessions  we  must  give  to  Him  ;  we 
must  worship  Him  with  our  best. 
Apart  from  this  self-sacrifice  all  other 
sacrifices  and  services  are  worthless  in 
the  sight  of  God.  The  worth  and 
efficacy  of  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ  as 
a  sacrifice  for  sin  consisted  m  the  entire 
surrender  of  Himself  to  the  will  of 
God.  And  the  grand  object  of  that 
death  as  set  forth  by  St.  Paul  on  one 
occasion  is,  that  every  man  should 
sacrifice  himself  to  God.  "  He  died 
for  all,  that  they  which  live  should  not 
henceforth  live  unto  themselves,  bu': 
unto  Him  which  died  for  them  and  rose 
"     "We    are    Chri^L's    'slaves,' 


agani. 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  VI. 


He  purchased  us,  not  to  set  us  free  and 
to  make  us  our  own  masters,  but  that 
we  might  belong  to  Him.  The  rights 
of  a  master  over  a  slave  appeared  to 
the  Apostle  to  represent  the  rights  of 
Christ  over  us.  .  .  The  slave  has 
no  personal  independence.  He  has  to 
do  his  master's  will.  His  master  de- 
termines where  he  shall  live  and  what 
he  shall  do.  He  works  to  increase,  not 
his  own  wealth,  but  his  master's.  He 
has  to  live  for  his  master,  not  for  him- 
self The  renunciation  of  all  personal 
objects  in  the  presence  of  Christ  is  the 
precise  characteristic  of  Christian 
living."  Without  this  self-renunciation 
all  other  services  and  sacrifices  are  vain 
in  the  sight  of  God.     (b) 

III.  That  all  that  is  good  both  in 
ourselves  and  in  our  services  is  attri- 
butable to  Grod. 

The  Nazarite  was  also  required  to 
"  offer  unto  the  Lord  one  ram  without 
blemish  for  peace-offerings,  and  a  basket 
of  unleavened  bread,  cakes  of  fine  flour 
mingled  with  oil,  and  wafers  of  un- 
leavened bread  anointed  with  oil,  and 
their  meat-offering  and  their  drink- 
offerings."  By  reference  to  Lev.  vii. 
11-12,  it  will  be  seen  that  this  was 
offered  **  for  a  thanksgiving."  The 
Nazarite  presented  the  sacrifice  of 
peace-offerings  unto  the  Lord  as  an 
expression  of  thankfulness  to  Him  for 
the  grace  by  which  he  had  been  enabled 
to  fulfil  his  vow.  Whatever  of  good 
there  is  in  us  is  the  result  of  Divine 
grace.  All  holy  desires  are  quickened 
by  Him.  Every  worthy  resolution 
which  we  form  He  inspires  within  us 
by  His  Spirit.  The  strength  for  holy 
living,  and  diligent  working,  and 
patient  suffering,  He  imparts.  "  Every 
good  gift,  and  every  perfect  gift,  is  from 
above,"  etc.  *'  By  the  grace  of  God  I 
am  what  I  am."  '*  For  who  maketh 
thee  to  differ  1  and  what  hast  thou  that 
thou  didst  not  receive?  now  if  thou 
didst  receive  it,  why  dost  thou  glory  as 
if  thou  hadst  not  received  itl"  *'Not 
unto  us,  0  Lord,  not  unto  us,  but  unto 
Thy  name  give  glory,  for  Thy  mercy, 
and  for  Thy  truth's  sake." 

IV.  That  the  good  man  when  he 
H  2 


has  complied  with  the  express  require- 
ments  of  the  Divine  law  will  seek  for 
other  opportunities  of  expressing  his 
devotion. 

**  This  is  the  law  of  the  Nazarite  who 
hath  vowed  his  offering  unto  the  Lord 
for  his  separation,   beside  that   which 
his  hand  shall  get,    according  to  the 
vow  w^hich  he  vowed,  so  he  must  do 
after  the  law  of  his  separation  ;  "  that 
is,  says  Keil  and  Del.,  "  he  had  to  offer 
the  sacrifices  previously  mentioned  on 
the  ground   of   his    consecration  vow. 
Beyond  that  he  was  free   to   vow  anv- 
thing  else  according  to   his   ability,  to 
present   other   sacrificial   gifts    to  the 
Lord  for  His   sanctuary  and    His  ser- 
vants, which  did  not  necessarily  belong 
to  the  vow  of   the  Nazarite,  but  were 
frequently  added."     The  fulfilment  of 
even  the  largest  requirements  of  the 
Divine  law  cannot  exhaust  the  devotion 
of  the  truly  godly  soul.     He  who  has 
truly   given  himself  to  the  Lord  can 
never  give  Him   enough  to  satisfy  his 
own  desire  ;  where  he  has  given  his  ut- 
most he  would  fain  give  more.     "  Love 
never   puts    its  own    name  upon  any- 
thing.     Love   has   some    object,   must 
have  some  object,  on  whose  shrine  it 
lays  its  every  possession.     Love,  warm, 
intelligent,  growing  Love,  keeps  back 
nothing  from  God.     Its  beaming  eyes 
look  upon  every  treasure  with  a  view 
of  ascertaining  its  proper  relation  to 
the  King.     Love  has  endless  resources, 
because  it  has  endless  sacrifices.     We 
make  a  grievous  mistake  when  we  say^ 
*  Such  a  man  must  be  rich  because  he 
gives  so  much  to  the  cause  of  God  ; '  ha 
may  not  be  rich  in  material  possessions, 
but  he  must  be  rich  in  the  spirit  of  self- 
sacrifice.       He    has   a    wealthy   hea7'ty 
and   that   explains   the   bounty    which 
astonishes    and    confounds   those    who 
have  a   prince's   gold,  but  a  beggar's 
spirit."     (c) 

V.  That  the  good  man  through  the 
sacrifices  by  which  He  approaches  God 
has  communion  with  Him. 

Such  seems  to  be  the  meaning  sym 
bolized  in  that  part  of  the  ceremonial 
for  which  directions  are  given  in  verseu 
19  and  20.     We  quote  the  note  of  KeU 

99 


CHAP.  VL 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


and  Del.  :  *'  When  this  had  been  done 
the  priest  took  the  boiled  shoulder  of  the 
ram,  with  an  unleavened  cake  and  wafer 
out  of  the  basket,  and  placed  these 
pieces  in  the  hands  of  the  Nazarite, 
and  waved  them  before  Jehovah.  They 
then  became  the  portion  of  the  priest, 
in  addition  to  the  wave-breast  and 
heave-leg  which  fell  to  the  priest  in  the 
case  of  every  peace-offering  (Lev.  vii. 
32-34),  to  set  forth  the  participation  of 
the  Lord  in  the  sacrificial  meah     But 

^the  fact  that,  in  addition  to  these,  the 
boiled  shoulder  was  given  up  symboli- 
cally to  the  Lord  through  the  process 
of  waving,  together  with  a  cake  and 
wafer,  was  intended  to  indicate  that 
the  table-fellowship  with  the  Lord, 
shadowed  forth  in  the  sacrificial  meal 
of  the  peace-ofFering,  took  place  here  in 

^  a  higher  degree  ;  inasmuch  as  the  Lord 
directed  a  portion  of  the  Nazarite's 
meal  to  be  handed  over  to  His  repre- 
sentatives and  servants  for  them  to  eat, 
that  he  might  thus  enjoy  the  blessed- 
ness of  having  fellowship  with  his  God, 
in  accordance  with  that  condition  of 
priestly  sanctity  into  which  the  Nazarite 
had  entered  through  the  vow  that  he 
had  made."  Through  the  sacrifice  of 
Jesus  Christ,  the  good  man  may  have 
the   most   intimate   and   blessed  com- 


munion with  God.  "  Jesus  saith,  I  am 
the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life :  no 
man  cometh  unto  the  Father,  but  bv 
me."  "  Through  Him  we  have  access 
by  one  Spirit  unto  the  Father." 
"  Having  therefore,  brethren,  boldness 
to  enter  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood 
of  Jesus,"  etc.  (Heb.  x.  19-22.)  "Our 
fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with 
His  Son  Jesus  Christ." 
Conclusion. 

1.  Let  us  give  ourselves  unreservedly 
and  heartily  to  God.  *'  I  beseech  you, 
brethren,  by  the  mercies  of  God,  that 
ye  present  your  bodies  a  living  sacri- 
fice," etc. 

2.  Let  us  seek  through  God  to  realize 
close  and  constaiit  communion  with  Him. 

'*I  would  commuae  with  Thee,  my  God, 

E'en  to  Thy  seat  I  come; 
I  leave  my  joys,  I  leave  my  sinft, 

And  seek  in  Thee  my  home. 
I  stand  upon  the  mount  of  God, 

With  sunlight  in  my  soul; 
I  hear  the  storms  in  vales  beneath, 

I  hear  the  thunders  roll  ; 
But  I  am  calm  with  Thee,  my  God, 

Beneath  these  glorious  skies; 
And  to  the  height  of  Thine  abode, 

Nor  storms  nor  clouds  can  rise. 
O  this  is  life,  and  peace,  and  joy, 

My  God,  to  find  Thee  so — 
Thy  fase  to  see.  Thy  voice  to  hear, 

And  all  Thy  love  to  know." 

— G.  B.  Bubier, 


vj 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  When,  because  we  have  accomplished 
some  little  work,  we  count  that  we  may 
straightway  take  our  ease,  and  esteem  our 
*'  Well  done  "  as  already  gained,  very  profit- 
able will  be  then  the  warning  of  the  parable 
(Luke  xvii.  7-10) ;  the  example  of  the  hind, 
who  having  laboured  all  day  in  the  field,  re- 
sumes his  labours  in  the  house,  and  only  looks 
to  rest  and  refresh  himself  when  his  master 
has  no  further  need  of  his  service ;  good  for 
us  that,  in  the  words  of  the  son  of  Sirach,  we 
learn  to  '*  wax  old  in  our  work  "  (xi.  20),  and, 
so  long  as  we  are  here,  to  see  in  one  task  com- 
pleted but  a  stepping-stone  to  another  which 
shall  be  begun ;  ever  as  we  have  surmounted 
one  hill  of  labour,  perceiving  a  new  one  rising 
above  it,  and  girding  ourselves  for  the  sur- 
mounting of  that  as  well  Well  for  us,  too,  is 
it  to  know  and  to  confess  that  we  are  not  doinar 
God  a  favour  in  serving  Him,  but  He  the 
highest  favour  to  us  in  enaV)l  ng  us  to  this  ser- 
vice; and  that  He,  graciously  accepting  our 
work  and  rewarding  it,  does  this  solely  out  of 
the  freedom  and  riches  of  His  grace;  adding 

100 


to  it  a  worth  which  of  itself  it  does  not 
possess;  that  there  is  another  footing,  that 
namely  of  the  parable,  upon  which  He  might 
have  put  all — yea,  upon  which,  though  He 
does  not,  yet  we  must  evermore  put  it,  so  far 
as  is  necessary  for  subduing  every  motion  of 
pride  and  vain-glory,  every  temptation  to 
bring  in  God  as  our  debtor — which  we  ever- 
more are  doios^,  or  are  on  the  point  of  doing, — 
Archhiskop  Trench, 

There  is  an  anecdote  of  the  saintly  and 
learned  Archbishop  Usher,  not  unfamiliar  to 
religious  readers,  which  is  meant  to  illustrate 
his  spiritual  modesty.  It  relates  how  a 
friend  frequently  urged  him  to  write  his 
thoughts  on  Sanctification,  which  at  length  he 
engaged  to  do ;  but,  a  considerable  time  elaps- 
ing, the  performance  of  his  promise  was  im- 
portunately claimed.  The  Archbishop  replied 
t )  this  purpose:  "I  have  not  written,  and  yet 
I  cannot  charge  myself  with  a  breach  of 
promise,  for  1  beeran  to  write;  but  when  I 
came  to  treat  of  <  o  new  creature  which  God 
formeth  by  His  l  ,vn  Spirit  in  every  regenerate 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTAUY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAl'.  VL 


Boul,  I  found  80  little  of  it  wrought  in  myself 
that  I  could  speak  of  it  only  as  parrots,  or  by 
rote,  but  without  the  knowledge  of  what  I 
might  have  expressed  ;  and,  therefore,  I  durst 
not  presume  to  proceed  any  further  upon  it." 
Upon  this  his  friend  stood  amazed  to  hear  such 
a  confession  from  so  grave,  holy,  and  eminent 
a  person.  The  Archbishop  then  added  :  "  I 
must  tell  you,  we  do  not  well  understand  what 
Saoctification  and  the  new  creature  are.  It  is 
no  less  than  for  a  man  to  be  brought  to  an 
entire  resignation  of  his  own  will  to  the  will 
of  God  ;  and  to  live  in  the  offering  up  of  his 
soul  continually  in  the  flames  of  love,  as  a 
whole  burnt-offering  to  Christ ;  and  ch,  how 
many  who  profess  Chri>ti^nity  are  unac- 
quamted,  experimentally,  with  this  work  upon 
their  souls  1  "—F.  D.  Huntington,  D.D. 

(6)  It  is  very  possible  for  Christian  men  to 
miss  the  real  extent  of  the  devotion  to  Bimself 
which   is   claimed   by  our   Lord,  and  which, 
throughout  the  New  Testament,  is  assumed 
and   implied   as   the  true  Christian   life.     A 
Christian  man  may  consider  that  he   is    at 
liberty  to  determine  for  himself  the  objects 
for  which  he  will  live,  provided  he  seeks  those 
objects  m  ways  which  the  ethics  of  the  New 
1  stament  do  not  condemn.     He  may  suppose, 
foj  instance,  that  if  he  likes  he  may  determine 
to  accumulate  a  hundred  thousand  pounds  or 
u  quarter  of  a  million,  and  that  the  law  of 
Christ  simply  requires  him  to  carry  on  his 
business  or  profession  in  a  just  and  honourable 
manuer,  and  to  give  a  fair  proportion  of  his 
wealth   to   the   relief   of   the  poor,   and  the 
maiutenance  of  various  religious  societies.    Or 
he  may  suppose  that  having  set  his  heart  upon 
rising  to  a  certain  social  rank,  or  winning  a 
certain  political  position,  he  is  quite  at  liberty 
to  concentrate  all  his  streagth  on  this  object, 
80  long  as  there  is  nothing  dishonest  or  ignoble 
m   the  means  which  he  adopts  to  secure  it. 
But    If   there  be  any    truth    at    all  in  the 
Apostle  s  description  of  us,  if  in  any  sense  we 
are  the  *•  slaves  "  of  Christ,  there  is  obviously 
a  lundamental  mistake  in  this  conception  of 
the  limits  of   our   duty.     Our  first  question 
must  be  whether  Christ  wants  us  to  accumu- 
late a  hundred  thousand  pounds  or  a  quarter 
of  a  million;  and  whether  He  wants  us  to  win 
the  social  rank,  or  the  political  power  which 
we  have  resolved  to  make  our  own.     A  master 
may  often  trust  his  servants  to  determine  for 
themselves  how  they  will  get  a  certain  work 
done,  but  whether  the  work  shall  be  done  at 
all  or  not,  is  a  question  which  must  in  all 
cases  be  referred  to  his  decision.     And  when 
we   are   choosing  an   object  to  live  for— an 
object  which  it  may  take  us  many  years  to 
achieve— It  certainly  shows  a  curious  concep- 
tion of  the  kind  of  relationship  in  which  we 
stand  to  Christ,  to  imagine  that  we  need  not 
consult  Him  about  the  end  for  which  we  are 
to  live,  though  we  must  be  careful  to  employ 
only  those   means  which  He  approves.     Our 
afe,  on  this  theory,  is  not  given    to  Christ 
Wo  keep  It  for  ourselves.     W©  are  not  really 


His.  We  choose  the  objects  to  which  it  shall 
be  devoted.  The  renunciation  of  self  which 
He  imperatively  requires  of  us  is  altc^ether 
evaded.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Lord 
of  our  life  in  such  a  sense  that  it  is  for  Him 
to  determine  the  objects  for  which  our  life 
shall  be  spent,  as  well  as  the  way  in  which 
these  objects  shall  be  sought.  We  are  in  such 
a  sense  His  servants,  that  we  have  no  riffht 
to  do  any  work  but  His.  If  we  desire  that 
He  should  say  to  us  at  last,  <'  Well  done,  good 
and  faithful  servants,"  it  is  clear  that  what- 
ever we  do  must  be  done  for  Him.— i2  W 
Dale,  M.A.,  D.D.  ' 

(c)    David    wanted  to   make    an    offering 
himself,   wanted  to  give  vent  to  the  sorrow 
dependence,  and  gratitude  of  his  soul ;  and  a 
costless   sacrifice  would  not   have   met   this 
want.     It  would  have  been  useless  to  suggest 
that    8uch    a    sacrifice    would    be    as    good 
as  any  other ;  in  itself  it  might  be,  but  not  to 
him.     He  felt   that   the   occasion   demanded 
something   more,   that  something    more  was 
due  both  to  God  and  to  himself :  the  offering 
must  be  the  fruit  and  form  of  deep   and  holy 
emotions,  and  to  give  a  gift  would  be  to  mock 
rather  than  to  manifest  these  emotions.     An 
illustration  may  be  taken  from   some  of   the 
old   sacred  buildings.      You  will  find    them 
"  finished  with  the  most  circumstantial  elegance 
and  minuteness  in  those    concealed   portions 
which  are   excluded  from    public   view,  and 
which    can   only  be   inspected   by   laborious 
climbing  or   groping,"   a    fact   explained    by 
Baying,  "  that  the  whole  carving  and  execution 
was  considered  as  an  act  of   solemn  worship 
and  ad  )ration,  in  which  the  artist  offered  up 
his  best  faculties  to  the  praise  of  the  Creator." 
These  men  of  "the  dark  ages,"  as  we  love 
in  the  pride  of  our  compassion  to  call  them, 
had  in  this  a  true  and  grand  idea :  what  would 
they  say  of  our  veneered  and  gilded  modern 
life,    in    which   everything   is  for  show   and 
nothing  from  reality,  everything  for  a  purpose 
and  nothing  from  a  principle  ?     As  these  men 
builded,   so  David    sacrificed.     They  builde 
not  for  man,  and  hence  the  secret  and  distant 
parts  of  their  work  were  just  as  accurately 
conceived  and  finely  finished  as  those  exposed 
to  the  public  gaze  ;  their  object  was  not  to  do 
something  as  cheaply  and  easily  as  possible, 
but  something  as  well  as  possible  ;  they  wi.-hed 
to  raise  structures  worthy  of  the  Lord ;  they 
had  a  zeal  for  His  glory  and  the  glory  of  His 
worship  which  spurned  meanness  and  imper- 
fection however  hidden  ;  and  the  same  spirit 
in  David  rendered  needful  to  him  what  was 
needless  in  itself,  and  made  it  "  more  blessed 
to  give"  an  offering  of  his  own  than  one  re- 
ceived from  Araunah. 

It  is  the  end  and  essence  of  all  religion  to 
turn  the  mind  from  self  to  God  ;  to  give  it 
absorbing  views  of  the  Divine  beauty  and 
glory  ;  to  fill  it  with  Divine  love  and  zeal;  to 
make  it  feel  honoured  in  honouring  God, 
blessed  in  blessing  Him ;  to  make  it  feel  that 
nothing  is  good  enough  ox  great  enough  for 

101 


CHAP.  VI. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


Him;  and  when  the  mind  is  thus  affected  and 
thus  possessed,  it  will  understand  and  share 
the  spirit  of  David's  resolve,   n©t  to   offer 


burnt-offerings   unto   the   Lord   God  of   that 
which  doth  cost  nothing. — A.  J.  Morris. 


The  Nazaritb, 

(Verse  21.) 

•*  This  is  the  law  of  the  Nazarite." 


Here  a  new  ordinance  appears.  Is- 
rael's whole  race  was  severed  from  the 
world.  But  the  wide  circumference 
was  girdle  to  a  narrower  circle.  Where 
all  were  separate,  the  Nazarites  occu- 
pied special  separation.  They  bound 
themselves  by  voluntary  vows.  The 
vow  might  be  the  act  of  men  weighed 
down  by  consciousness  of  sin,  appalled 
by  sight  of  inborn  evil,  or  penitent  by 
grievous  falls.  It  might  be  gratitude 
for  signal  mercies.  It  might  be  zeal  to 
arouse  others  to  think  more  of  God. 
The  Nazarites'  motives  are  unknown. 
But  Nazarite  rules  are  rigidly  pre- 
scribed. 

I.  No  juice  of  grape,  no  produce  of 
the  vine,  from  kernel  unto  husk,  may 
touch  the  consecrated  lips. 

Believer,  this  principle  is  broad  and 
deep.     You  openly  avow  that  you  are 
not   your    own.      Your    body,    spirit, 
mind,  and   soul,  are  purchased  by   re- 
deeming blood.     They  all  are  bound  a 
living  sacrifice  to  the  one  altar — Christ. 
Hence  you  must  keep  them  pure,  clean, 
bright,  strong,  vigorous  for   His  work. 
They  should    stand    as    servants,  with 
loins  girt,  ready  at  all    times  to  dis- 
charge His  will.     Then  sedulously  flee 
tv'hatever  may  tend  to  weaken  the  firm 
energy,  or  to  stir  up  the  sleeping  brood 
of  sensual  and  ungodly  lusts. 

II.  No  razor  approaches  the  Naza- 
rite's  hair.  His  flowing  locks  openly 
announce  his  separate  state. 

The  dedication  must  not  be  a  secret 
act,  known  only  to  the  conscience  and 
the  Lord.  Religion  is  not  for  the  closet 
or  the  knees  alone.  It  is  not  a  lily, 
growing  only  in  the  shade.  It  must 
be  conspicuous,  as  locks  pendant  from 
the  head.  Like  the  standard,  it  must 
proclaim  the  country  to  which  the  ship 
belongs.  Pure  religion  shines  as  the 
102 


sun,  without  one  cloud.     Thus  others 
profit  by  its  rays. 

III.  He  must  avoid  all  contact  with 
the  dead.     (Verse  6,  7.) 

Wherefore    is    death    to    be     thus 
shunned]     It   is   the   penalty   of   sin. 
Therefore  it  is  emblem  of  what  holy 
men  should  holily  abhor.     Life,  too,  is 
God's  inseparable  essence.     Therefore, 
to  intermix  with  death,  denotes  a  sepa- 
ration from  God.     He  who  is  Christ's 
must    flee    the    touch   of    everything 
allied  to  sin.     The  Spirit's  temple  must 
be  pure.     Believer,  rigidly  apply  this 
maxim.     It  drives  you  from  the  con- 
tagion of  ungodly  scenes.     How  many 
crowds    are    nothing    but   a   crowded 
charnel  house  !     How  many  books  are 
deathful  !     This    rule    brands  many  a 
pulpit    as    a    plague-spot.     A    lifeless 
teacher  often  guides  in  paths  of  death. 
Here,  too,  we  see  the  misery  of  those 
who  by  dead  works  expect  to  buy  soul- 
Ufe.     All  works  are  dead  which  grow 
not  on  the  stem   of  faith.     How  can 
they  purchase  life  1 

But  no  precautionary  care  can  always 
keep  men  from  the  dying  scene.  Death 
has  an  unrestricted  range.  Thus  the 
most  watchful  Nazarite  might  most 
unwillingly  stand  by  the  dead.  If  so, 
pollution  has  polluted  him  ;  his  vow  is 
broken.  Therefore,  atonement  must 
be  made.  He  is  required  to  place  a 
whole  burnt  offering  on  the  blazing 
altar.  He  must  then  add  a  sacrifice 
for  sin.  Moreover,  as  a  debtor,  he 
must  buy  remission  by  a  trespass- 
offering.  Thus  the  chief  types  which 
shadowed  out  Christ's  blood  must  all 
be  brought.  This  is  not  all.  The 
former  period  of  his  Nazarate  is  can- 
celled ;  he  must  commence  afresh  his 
dedicated  walk.  Beware  of  sudden 
evil.     Satan  is   a   lurking  foe;  where 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  VI. 


least  suspected,  nets  are  spread.  But 
there  is  hope  for  suddenly-contracted 
guilt.  There  is  a  Saviour  waiting  to 
obliterate;  there  is  no  stain  which  He 
reiTiOves  not.  Pardon  found  must  be 
the  starting-point  of  new  devotedness. 
The    cleansed    hands    fight  with  more 


vigour. 


But  what  if  deliberate  transgression 
be  indulged  %  The  ordinance  is  silent 
here,  and  thus  warn«  solemnly.  Where 
shall  he  turn  who  turns  presumptuously 
from  God  %  Grieve  not  the  Spirit's 
gentle  mind. 

The  Nazarite  continued  only  for  a 
fixed    time  ;     but    grand    solemnities 


attested  the  completion  of  this  hallowed 
state.  No  rite  is  absent  which  confesses 
need  of  remission,  and  trust  in  recon- 
ciling blood.  (Verses  13-21.)  What  is 
the  purport  of  this  multitude  of  rites  % 
They  all  seek  expiation.  They  graphi- 
cally show  that  holiest  deeds  of  holiest 
men  can  only  find  acceptance  through 
the  dying  Jesus.  Believer,  is  not  this 
the  conscious  feeling  of  your  humbled 
soul  ?  Behold  the  cross.  There  is 
your  only  help  ;  cleanse  there  the  stains 
of  your  most  holy  hours.  Live  under 
vows,  as  a  strict  Nazarite ;  but  wrestle 
for  forgiveness  as  a  sad  short-comer. — 
Henry  Law^  D.D, 


The  Priestly  Blbssinq. 
{Jersei  22-27.) 


"  The  spiritual  character  of  the  con- 
gregation of  Israel  culminated  in  the 
blessing  with  which  the  priests  were  to 
bless  the  people.  The  directions  as  to 
this  blessing,  therefore,  impressed  the 
seal  of  perfection  upon  the  whole  order 
and  organization  of  the  people  of  God, 
inasmuch  as  Israel  was  first  truly 
formed  into  a  congregation  of  Jehovah 
by  the  fact  that  God  not  only  bestowed 
His  blessing  upon  it,  but  placed  the 
communication  of  this  blessing  in  the 
hands  of  the  priests,  the  chosen  and 
constant  mediators  of  the  blessings  of 
His  grace,  and  imposed  it  upon  them 
as  one  portion  of  their  official  duty. 
The  blessing  which  the  priests  were  to 
impart  to  the  people,  consisted  of  a 
triple  blessing  of  two  members  each, 
which  stood  related  to  each  other  thus. 
The  second  in  each  case  contained  a 
special  application  of  the  first  to  the 
people,  and  tlie  three  gradations  un- 
f  'Ided  the  substance  of  the  blessing  step 
by  step  with  ever-increasing  emphasis." 
—  Keil  and  Del. 

Let  us  notice — 

I.  The  Divine  Direction, 

"  And  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses, 
saying,  Speak  unto  Aaron  and  to  his 
sons,  saying.  On  this  wise  ye  shall  bless 
the  children  of  Israel."  It  was  the 
duty    of   the   priests    ministerially    to 


bless  the  people  by  prayer  to  God  on 
their  behalf;  they  were  to  entreat  Him 
to  bless  them.  But  in  this  place  they 
are  commanded  to  pronounce  His  bles- 
sing upon  them  :  speaking  in  His  name, 
and  as  His  representative,  they  were 
to  declare  the  people  blessed.  The 
blessing  which  is  pronounced  in  accor- 
dance with  the  Divine  direction  cannot 
be  a  mere  form ;  it  must  accord  with 
reality.  The  command  to  pronounce 
the  blessing  may  be  regarded  as  an 
assurance  that,  when  it  was  pronounced, 
the  blessing  itself  would  be  given. 
The  command  to  the  priest  to  pronounce 
the  blessing  is  equivalent  to  the 
promise  of  God  to  bestow  that  blessing. 
The  Christian  minister  is  required  both 
to  pray  for  the  blessing  of  God  upon 
the  people  of  His  charge,  and  with  con- 
fidence to  pronounce  that  blessing  upon 
all  who  sincerely  seek  God. 

II.  The  Divine  Bened'ction. 

"  Saying  unto  them,  The  Lord  bless 
thee,  and  keep  thee  :  The  Lord  make 
His  face  shine  upon  thee,  and  be  gracious 
unto  thee  :  The  Lord  lift  up  His  coun- 
tenance upon  thee,  and  give  thee 
peace." 

Let  us  notice  here — 

1.  The  significant  form  of  the  Bene- 
diction. (1)  The  triple  use  of  the  sacred 
Name   is   significant.      "  The    Priestly 

103 


CHAP,  VI, 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


Blessing  prescribed  for  ritual  usage  in 
the   Book   of   Numbers,"    says   Canon 
Liddon,  "  is  spoken  of  as  putting  the 
Name  of  God,  that  is  to  say,  a  symbol 
unveiling  His  nature  upon  the  children 
of  Israel.     Here,   then,  we  discover  a 
distinct   limit   to   the  number  of  the 
Persons  Who  are  internal  to  the  Unity 
of   God.     The  priest  is  to  repeat  the 
Most   Holy  Name  Three  times.     The 
Hebrew  accentuation,  whatever  be  its 
date,  shows  that  the  Jews   themselves 
saw  in  this  repetition  the  declaration  of 
a  mystery  in  the  Divine  Nature.      Un- 
less such  a  repetition  had  been  designed 
to  secure  the    assertion    of  some  im- 
portant truth,  a  single  mention  of  the 
Sacred  Name  would  have  been  natural 
in  a  system,  the  object  of  wliich  was  to 
impress  belief  in  the  Divine  Unity  upon 
an   entire     people.       This     significant 
repetition,    suggesting,     without     dis- 
tinctly asserting,  a  Trinity  in  the  Being 
of  God,  did  its   work  in  the  mind  of 
Israel."      The   same   thing    has    been 
argued   from   a   consideration   of    the 
several   members   of  the  Benediction. 
Thus  Richard   Watson   says,    **  If  the 
three  members  of  this  form  of  benedic- 
tion   be    attentively  considered,    they 
will  be  found  to  agree  respectively  with 
the  three   Persons  taken  in  the  usual 
order  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the 
Holy    Ghost.       The    Father     is    the 
Author  of  blessing  and    preservation  ; 
illumination   and   grace  are  from   the 
Son  ;  illumination  and  peace  from  the 
Spirit,  the  Teacher  of  truth,   and  the 
Comforter."     And  while  in  the  triple 
mention  of  the  sacred  Name  and  the 
threefold  blessing,  we  have  suggestions 
of  the  Trinity  of  Persons  in  the  God- 
head, in   the  great  assurance,  "  I  will 
bless  them,"   we  have  a  revelation  of 
the  Divine  Unity — that  God  is   One. 
(2)  The  use  of  the  singular  number  in 
reference  to  the  subjects  of  the  blessing  is 
significant.     "  The  Lord  bless  thee,  and 
keep  thee,"  etc.    Six  times  we  have  the 
pronoun    in    the    singular    number — 
"  thee."      According  to    the   Speaker^ s 
Comm.y  the  singular  number  indicates 
that  the  blessing  is  conferred  on  Israel 
collectively.     May  we  not  view  it  also 
104 


as  indicating  the  regard  of  God  for  the 
individual  1  "  If  we  take  the  law  to 
ourselves,  we  may  take  the  blessing  to 
ourselves,  as  if  our  names  were  in- 
serted." So  the  Christian  believer  miy 
say,  "  The  son  of  God  loved  me,  and 
gave  Himself  for  we." 

2.   llie  Divine  fulness  of  the  Benedic- 
tion.    "  As  the  threefold  repetition  of 
a  word  or  sentence  serves  to  express  the 
thought  as  strongly  as  possible  (cf.  Jer. 
vii.  4,  xxii.  29),  the  triple   blessing  ex- 
pressed   in    the    most     unconditional 
manner  the  thought,  that  God  would 
bestow  upon  His  congregation  the  whole 
fulness  of  the  blessing  enfolded  in   His 
Divine  Being  which  was  manifested  as 
Jehovah."     Man's  need  of  God's  bless- 
ing is  implied.     That  need  arises  from 
his  condition  as  a  creature  dependent 
on  God  for  "  life,  and  breath,   and  all 
things  ; "  and  as  a  sinful  creature,  who 
merits  no  good  from  God.     Apart  from 
the  blessing  of  God  man  is  utterly  un- 
done.    First,    the   blessing  of  God  in 
general  is  pronounced,  "  The  Lord  bless 
thee ; "  and  then  that  blessing  is  pro- 
nounced in  some  of  its  particular  forms 
(a).     The  second  clause  in  each  verse 
of  the  Benediction  defines  more  closely 
the  general  tenor  of  the  preceding  one. 
The  blessing  includes — (1)  The  preser- 
vation of  God.     "  The  Lord  bless  thee, 
and  keep   thee."     Danger   is   implied. 
We  are  weak,  inexperienced,  prone  to 
sin,  exposed  to  temptation.     God  is  our 
only  sufficient  and  all-sufficient  Guar- 
dian.    What  subtlety  can  surprise  Him 
who  is  infinite  in  intelligence  1     W^hat 
strength  can  stand  against  Omnipotence  % 
*'  Kept  by  the  power  of  God,   through 
faith  unto    salvation"    (6).      (2)    The 
favour  of  God.     "  The  Lord  make   His 
face  shine  upon  thee,  and  be  gracious 
unto  thee."     When  the  Divine  face  is 
dark  with  frowns,  distress  and  death 
ensue ;  when  it  is  bright  with  favours, 
life  and  joy  flow  to  man.     "  They  perish 
at   the  rebuke   of  Thy  countenance." 
"  Cause  Thy  face  to  shine,  and  we  shall 
be  saved."     There  seems  to  be  an  allu- 
sion to  the  shining  of  the  sun.    It  gives 
life,    light,   heat,    beauty,   power,  joy. 
*'  In  His  favour  is  life."     "  The  light  of 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  VL 


the  Divine  countenance  is  the  sum  of 
all  delight."  (See  our  notes  on  Psa. 
Ixxx.  3  ;  Horn.  Gomm.  on  Psalma,  pp. 
466-468).  (3)  The  peace  of  God. 
''The  Lord  lift  up  His  countenance 
upon  thee,  and  give  thee  peace."  D^/^ 
peacCy  *'  the  sura  of  all  the  good  which 
God  sets,  prepares,  or  establishes  for 
His  people."  M.  Henry :  "  Peace,  in- 
cluding all  that  good  which  goes  to 
make  up  a  complete  happiness."  This 
great  blessing  is  viewed  as  flowing  from 
the  gracious  regard  of  God  for  man. 
Pardon,  preservation,  peace,  an  un- 
speakable wealth  of  blessing  flows  to 
man  from  the  sovereign  favour  of  our 
gracious  God. 

III.  The  Divine  Ratification. 

"  And  they  shall  put  my  name  upon 


the  children  of  Israel,  and  I  will  bless 
them."  The  Benediction  was  not  to 
be  the  mere  utterance  of  a  pious  wish  ; 
but  God  would  give  eff*ect  to  it.  The 
people  were  to  be  blessed  in  the  Sacred 
Name,  and  as  the  people  of  God  ;  and 
God  promises  to  make  good  the  blessing 
pronounced  by  the  priests.  "A  Divine 
blessing  goes  along  with  Divine  institu- 
tions, and  puts  virtue  and  efficacy  into 
them."  God  will  certainly  bless  His 
own  ordinances  unto  all  those  who  be- 
lieve. 

Conclusion. 

Let  us  firmly  believe  In  the  great 
willingness  of  God  to  bless  us,  and  let 
us  heartily  seek  for  **  the  fulness  of  the 
blessing  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ." 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  When  we  ask  God's  blessing,  we  pray 
that  first  He  would  ble-s  us  with  all  spiritual 
blessings  in  heaveoly  places  in  Christ  Jesus. 
We   pray  that   He  would   bless   ua   with  the 
pardon  of  every  sin,  with  the  healing  of  every 
moral    disease,  with   fitness  for  the  world  to 
come,  with  victory  over  the  trials  of  the  world 
that  now  is.      We  p'^ay  that  He  would  s'amp 
upon  our  hearts  that  Divine  and  inexhaustib.e 
blessing  which  will  turn  our  trials  into  ele- 
ments of  sanctificaiion,  our  griefs  and  our  tears 
into  a  ministry  of  grace  and  progre-^s,  and  edu- 
cation for  glory;  and  all  the  assaults  of  fSatan 
and    the    obotructions    of  sin    into    means    of 
ripening  and  maturing  us  as  the  sons  of  God 
for   a  kingdom  that   fadeth  not  away.     It  is 
God's  ble-sing  laid  upon  the  heart  within  that 
alters  to  a  Christian  the  whole  world  without. 
If  the  world  were  now  to  be  turned  into  Para- 
dise by  God's  breath   coming  over  it  again, — 
yet,  if  unconverted  men  were  left  to  tread  that 
Paradise,  they  would    soon   reduce   it   to  the 
desert,  polluting,  blasting,  and  destroying  all. 
No  outer  change  'or  the  better  will  ever  do 
without  an  inner  one.     Tbere  must  not  only 
be  a  pure  and  beautiful  Paradise,  but  there 
must  be  a  holy  man  and  a  holy  woman  to  live 
in  it;  and  it  would  be  iu  vain  that  the  millen- 
nium were  to  burst  upon  our  world  if  we  had 
not   first  a   little  millennium  within  to  molt 
into  the  great  millennium  without,  making  the 
outer  world  and  the  inner  world  in  harmony, 
at   peace    with   God,  and  therefore   at   peace 
with  one  another.     Our  constant  idea  is,  that 
what   man  wants   is   something    done  to   his 
outer  circumstances;  the  real  and  the  Divine 
one  is  that  something  should  be  done  for  man 
in  his  inner  heart.     Man  is  sick  and  dying;  it 
will  be  of  very  little,  or  of  very  transient  use 
to  change   bis  bed;  what  he  wants  is  to  be 


cured  of  his  disease.     The  great  mischief  is, 
not  what  sin  has  done  to  the  outer  world,  but 
what  sin  has  done  to  the  inner  world  ;  and  if 
the  inner  world   can  be  made  right,  then  all 
the  outer  will  seem  to  be  altered.     If  you  go 
forth  with  a  sad,  a  grieved,  and  a  bruised  spirit 
into  the  loveliest  scenes  of  nature,  they  will 
all  lose  their  charms  to  you.     To  a  man  who 
is  sorrowful,  his  own  fireside  will  only  reflect 
sorrow;    to   a    heart   that   is  ill   at  ease,   the 
fairest  landscape  will  communicate  no  ecstaHv. 
But  on  the  other  hand,  let  a  man's  heart  be 
overflowing  with   joy — let   the   first   lii^ht  of 
Eden  that  is  to  be,  shine  into  his  mind,  and 
the  very  desert  itself  to  that  man's  eye  will 
grow  beautiful,  and  the  blackest  scenes  of  the 
world  will  shine  bright,  and  all  nature  will 
reflect  a  joy  that  U  first  in  his  own  heart,  and 
repeats  itself  by  a  law  as  beneficent  as  it  is 
true,  wherever  be  sets  his  foot,  or  in  whatever 
path  of  the  world  he  walks.     What  we  need 
therefore  is,  first  the  blessing  pronounced  on 
the  heart,  and  then  we  shall  hear  it  in  multi- 
plying echoes,  and  reflected    in  sweet  music 
from  every  point  of  the  horizon  around  and 
without  us. — John  Cumming  D  D. 

(6)  Christians  are  kept  by  the  supreme 
love  of  their  omnipotent  Saviour  (John  x. 
28,  29  ;  Jude  i.).  The  Lord  Jesus  not  only 
redeemed  His  people ;  He  is  at  this  hour  in- 
terceding for  them  ;  and  His  intercessi  n  keeps 
the  faints.  As  Peter  was  kept  (Luke  xxii. 
31)  by  the  Saviour's  mediation,  so  all  the  good 
of  all  lands,  in  every  age,  are  supported  in 
temptation  and  brought  through  to  the  praise 
and  glory  of  God.  Sublime  is  the  realization 
of  the  thought  that  our  living  and  Divinb 
Lord  is  standing  before  the  Throne  promoting 
the  well-being  of  His  struggling  and  often- 
times disspirited  Ghuroh.     He  knows  that  we 

105 


OHAP.   VI. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


ar^^  stili  in  the  wildernesa  as  "  strangers  and 
pilgrims" — still  exposed  to  the  attacks  of  a 
Y>  leatless antagonist— and  still  possessors  of  a 
depraved  nature;  hence.  He  "ever  livoth  to 
irotke  intercession  "  for  His  Church.  Would 
it  not  comfort  our  hearts  in  seasons  of  distress 
to  fonder  the  fact  of  our  Saviour's  interces- 
f-ion  ?  No  longer  would  we  be  oppressed  with 
a  sense  of  loneliness,  for  no  spirit  can  be  deso- 
late for  which  the  Sm  of  God  is  interceding. 
Am  I  a'idt  easing  a  faint-hearted  disciple  of  the 
Lord— oce  who  is  ever  on  the  stormy  lake  of 
OaMlee?  Cneer  thee  I  though  human  sym- 
pahy  may  flow  scantily,  Divine  sympathy  is 
unlimited  in  abundance.  The  Saviour,  though 
unseen,  is  not  inaccessible;  and  though  no 
I'Uger  on  the  Cross,  He  btands  as  the  great 
High  priest  in  the  Holy  of  Holies.     He  will 


"keep"  His  people  as  the  apple  of  His  eye. 
He  has  "  all  power  "  to  curb  the  rage  of  the 
whirlwind,  and  to  pacify  the  roar  of  the  storm, 
and  to  bring  His  Israel  to  their  "  desired 
haven"!  "Kept  by  the  power  of  God.'* 
What  more  can  we  need  to  assure  our  hearts 
and  to  transfuse  them  with  peace?  "The 
power  of  God"  is  the  stay  of  the  universe— it 
is  the  hope  of  all  creation  animate  and  inani- 
mate. Blessed  God !  they  are  well  kept  whom 
Thou  keepest ;  do  Thou  in  Thy  abounding 
goodness  comfort  our  heai'ts  with  the  assurance 
that  Thou  wilt  keep  us  unto  the  end !  We 
cannot  keep  ourselves:  we  are  blind  and 
weak,  and  ignorant,  but  Thou  art  full  of  help  ; 
teach  us,  therefore,  by  Thy  Spirit,  to  feel  that 
"our  help  is  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord,  who 
made  heaven  and  earth." — Jos.  Parker^  D.D, 


Tub  Preacher's  Blesstno;  or  the  Happy  New  Year, 

{Verses  22-2G.) 


New  Year's  D.iy  so  seldom  falls  on 
a  Sunday,  that,  when  it  does,  it  wonld 
be  a  pity  to  let  it  slip,  without  wishing 
you  all  a  happy  new  year,  according  to 
the  good  old  English  custom.  But  the 
world's  notion  of  happiness,  and  the 
Gospel  notion  of  happiness,  are  very  dif- 
ferent ;  and  therefore  the  world's  wishes 
for  your  happiness,  and  the  preacher's 
wishes  for  yonr  happiness  must  be  very 
different  also.  The  world's  good  wishes 
are  like  itself,  worldly  :  they  look  chiefly 
to  the  body  :  they  reach  not  beyond 
earth,  and  the  things  of  earth.  Whereas 
the  good  wishes  of  the  preacher  are 
chiefly  for  your  souls  :  he  looks,  and  by 
his  office  is  bound  to  look,  first  to  the 
one  thing  needful  ;  his  desires  for  your 
welfare  are  guided  by  tlie  Gospel,  and, 
like  that,  would  raise  you  up  to  heaven. 
Even  with  regard  to  this  world,  the 
preacher  knows  full  well,  that  the 
greatest  happiness  we  can  any  of  U8 
enjoy  is  a  peaceful  mind,  a  quiet  con- 
science, the  feeling  that  God  is  recon- 
ciled to  us,  and  loves  us,  and  cares  for 
us,  and  watches  over  us,  and  will  so 
order  and  arrange  whatever  may  befall 
us,  that  all  things  shall  work  together 
for  our  good.  These  are  the  very  best 
gifts  which  any  man  can  have  in  this 
life  :  and  thev  are  all  contained  in  the 
text.  Therefore,  to  every  one  of  you  I 
say,  "  The  Lord  bless  thee,  and  keep 
106 


thee,"  etc.  But  let  us  look  at  the  text 
a  little  in  detail ;  and  let  us  keep  in 
mind  that  this  solemn  blessino:  was  of 
God's  own  appointment ;  so  that  we 
may  expect  to  find  mention  of  all  those 
thinos  which  He  knows  to  be  best  for 
His  people. 

"  The  Lord  bless  thee  "  1  that  is,  the 
Lord  give  thee  every  good  gift,  and  pour 
down  on  thee  in  due  abundance  what- 
ever is  wholesome  and  profitable,  for 
thy  soul  first,  and  also  for  thy  body. 
"  The  Lord  keep  thee  !  "  that  is,  the 
Lord  watch  over  thee  for  good,  and 
shield  thee  from  every  kind  of  evil. 

"The  Lord  make  His  face  shine 
upon  thee,  and  be  gracious  unto  thee." 
You  all  know  the  difference  of  feel 
between  a  sunshiny  and  a  cloudy  day. 
The  real  heat  may  be  the  same  —  nay, 
the  cloudy  may  be  warmer  than  the 
sunshiny — for  we  often  have  bright 
sunshine  in  the  clear  frosty  days  of 
winter,  and  heavy  clouds  in  the  middle 
of  summer.  But  though  the  real  heat 
may  be  the  same  —though  the  ther- 
mometer may  tell  us  that  the  cloudy 
day  is  the  warmer  of  the  two — yet  to 
our  feelings  it  may  be  quite  the  contrary. 
There  is  something  so  enlivening  in  the 
sun,  that  I  have  often  known  persons 
come  in  from  a  walk  on  a  bright  winter's 
day,  and  speak  of  it  as  very  pleasant ; 
while   the    same  persons  on  a  damp, 


UOMILETIC    COMMENTAlUi    NUMBERS. 


CflAF.  VI. 


cloudy  evening  in  July,  would  be  the 
first  to  shiver,  and   to  wish  for  a  fire. 
Now,  the  same  difference  does  it  make 
to  a  man's  soul,  whether  God's  fiice  is 
shhiing  on  him  or  no.     Let  God's  face 
shine    on    the   soul,    it    walks   in    the 
brightest   sunshine;  let  God   veil    His 
fiice  and  cloud  it  over,  the  soul  feels 
chilled  and  is  discomforted.     (Psa.  xxx. 
7.)     Do  we  not  see  many  a  man  dis- 
quieted and  ill  at  ease  in  the  midst  of 
riches   and    luxuries ;    while    his    poor 
neighbour,  who  lives  in  a  sorry  hovel, 
may   look    always    cheerful    and    con- 
tented 1     What  is  this  difference  owing 
tol     Not  to  the  health  and  strength  of 
the  poor  man ;  for  he  may  be  old,  and 
often  a  sufferer  from  cold  and  wet,  and 
he  cannot  afford   to  buy  himself   the 
,  little  comforts  suited  to  his  years  and 
infirmities.     The  rich  man,  on  the  other 
hand,  may  still  be  young ;  his  disease, 
if  it  can  be  called  one,  is  more  of  the 
mind  than  of  the  body ;  he  can  consult 
the  best  physicians  ;  he  can  travel  from 
place  to  place  in  search  of  pleasure ;  he 
is   not  forced  to  deny  himself  any  one 
earthly  thing  that  may  tend  to  his  ease 
and  enjoyment.     Yet  with  all  this,  in 
spite  of  his  youth  and  riches,  in  spite 
of  his  having  no  outward  ailment,  and 
possessing   every   comfort   and   luxury 
that  heart  could  wi«h   for,  he  may  be 
always  growling  and  grumbling;  while 
the  dweller  in  the   old  hovel,  with  the 
pinching  frost  of  poverty  and  age,  and 
sometimes  sickness  to  boot,  sharp  upon 
him,  may  be  ever  making  the  best  of 
his    condition,   and    finding  out  some- 
thing in  it  to  thank  God  for.     What, 
then,  is  this  difference  owing  to  %     The 
cause  is  simply  this,  that  the  poor  man 
has  led  a  Christian  life,  or  at  least  has 
turned  to  God  in  earnest,  and  repented 
i>f  his  sins  betimes  ;  and   so  God  has 
allowed  His  face  to  shine  upon  him  and 
to  cheer  him  ;  while  his  rich  neighbour 
has  been  led  astray  by  the  deceitful ness 
of  riches,  and  has  been  so   taken  up 
with   his  pleasures,  or  with  the  cares 
which  riches  bring  with   them,  that  he 
could  not  spare  time  to  think  about 
God.     He   has    turned    his  face   away 
from  God  ;  therefore  God   has  turned 


away  His  face  from  him,  and  loft  him 
in  clouds  and  heaviness.  Oh,  that  you 
might  but  know  and  feel  the  joy  and 
gladness  which  the  light  of  God's  face 
can  shed  on  the  soul  of  the  Christian  ! 

"  The  Lord  be  gracious  to  thee  ! " 
that  is,  the  Lord  receive  thy  prayers, 
as  a  kind  and  merciful  king  hearkens 
to  the  petitions  of  his  subjects  (comp. 
Exod.  xxii.  27  ;  Neh.  ix.  17  ;  Jonah  iv.  2; 
Psa.  Ixxvii.  7-9).  To  pray,  then,  that 
God  will  be  gracious  to  His  people, 
is  to  pray  tnat  He  will  listen  to  your 
supplications,  and  grant  your  requests, 
that  He  will  be  slow  to  mark  what  you 
have  done  amiss,  and  ready  to  take  you 
into  favour  when  you  forsake  your  sins 
and  cry  to  Him  for  pardon. 

*'The  Lord  lift  up  His  countenance 
upon   thee  I"    that  is,  the  Lord   show 
forth  His  favour  and  love  toward  you. 
We  may  suppose  this  expression  taken 
from   a  king  sitting  on  his  throne,  and 
looking  with  eyes  of  such  goodwill  on 
the  petitioners    who  come  before  him 
that  the  by-standers  perceive,  and  the 
petitioners  themselves  feel,  that  he  is 
their  friend  :  they  feel  that   they  have 
the  happiness  of   being  esteemed  and 
loved  by  him,  and  that  they  can  reckon 
with  certainty  on  his    protection.     To 
be  countenanced  thus  by  the   King  of 
kings  is  the  highest  privilege  a  son  of 
Adam    can    enjoy.      If  the    king   had 
looked   favourably  upon  us,  we  should 
expect    to    receive    some    honour    or 
preferment ;  or  at  least  we  should  feel 
certain  that,  so  far  as  he  could  hinder, 
he  would  not  sufl^er  anyone  to  hurt  us. 
So   is    it  with    those  who    have  God's 
countenance,  but  in  a  far,  far  higher 
degree.     For  the  king,  great  as  he  is, 
is  only  a  man.     His  power  is  cut  short 
in  a  thousand  ways,  and,  at  the   best, 
can  only  follow  us  to  the  grave.     But 
God  is  the  King  of  kings  :  His  power 
has  no  bounds,  except  His  own  wisdom 
and  goodness  and  will  :  in   the  grave, 
where  human  rule  is  at  an  end,  His 
rule  and  sovereignty  are  doubled,  etc. 

"  The  Lord  give  thee  peace  1 "  i»eace 
is  the  fruit  of  God's  favour.  "The 
effect  of  righteousness  is  peace."  If 
we  know  we  are  forgiven  for  Christ's 

107 


CHAP.  VI. 


HOMTLETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


sake,  we  are  at  peace.  If,  out  of 
gratitude  and  love  to  our  Master  and 
Saviour,  we  are  living  in  obedience  to 
His  holy  laws,  then  too  we  have  every 
ground  and  reason  to  be  at  peace  (1 
Pet.  iii.  13). 

There  is  a  false  peace,  a  peace  arising 
out  of  recklessness  and  carelessness, 
and  the  never  thinking  about  God. 
Would  you  say  that  Samson  was  at 
peace  when  he  lay  sleeping  in  the  lap 
of  Delilah?     So  dangerous,  so  deadly 


is  the  false  security  of  the  self-righteous 
and  the  careless.  Rouse  yourselves,  I 
beseech  you,  from  such  fatal  slumbers, 
if  any  of  you  have  hitherto  been  sinking 
beneath  them.  Awake  !  behold,  the 
face  of  the  Lord  does  not  shine,  but 
frown  upon  you.  Let  this  be  the  first 
day  of  a  new  year  of  godly  fear  and 
hope. 

The   Lord  bless  you  this  year,  and 
keep  you  !  etc. — A.  W»  Eare,  A,M, 


God  will  Bless  His  own  Ordinanom. 
(Verses  23-27.) 


The  exercise  of  benevolence  is  that 
which  every  child  of  God  should  culti- 
vate to  the  uttermost ;  but  ministers 
above  all  should  consider  it  as  the  dis- 
tinguishing badge  of  their  office ;  they 
are  compelled  indeed  sometimes  to 
"  use  sharpness ; "  but  whether  they 
rebuke,  or  whether  they  exhort,  they 
should  be  actuated  by  nothing  but 
a  principle  of  love.  Under  the  Law 
it  was  a  very  important  part  of  the 
priestly  office  to  bless  the  people,  and 
God  prescribed  a  form  of  words  to 
be  used  by  Aaron  and  his  sons  in  the 
discharge  of  that  duty.  Nor  can  any 
words  better  express  the  sc<ipe  and  end 
of  the  Christian  ministry.  If  the  people 
be  brought  to  receive  abundant  com- 
munications of  grace  and  peace,  and  to 
surrender  up  themselves  entirely  to 
God,  a  minister  can  desire  notliing  more 
in  this  world ;  his  labours  are  well  re- 
paid. To  promote  this  blessed  end,  we 
shall — 

I.  I  xplain  the  words  before  us. 

God  is  here  making  known  His  will 
to  Moses,  and  directing  him  what  orders 
to  give  to  Aaron  and  his  sons  respecting 
the  execution  of  their  priestly  office ; 
and  there  are  two  duties  which  He  as- 
signs to  them  : — 

1.  To  bless  the  people  in  God's  name. 
This  was  repeatedly  declared  to  be  their 
office  (Dsut.  xxi.  5),  and  the  constant 
practice  of  the  Apostles  shows  that  it 
was  to  be  continued  under  the  Christ- 
ian dispensation.  In  conformitv  to  their 
108  '      • 


example,  the  Christian  Church  has 
universally  retained  the  custom  of 
closing  the  service  with  a  pastoral 
benediction.  We  are  not  indeed  to 
suppose  that  ministers  can,  by  any 
power  or  authority  of  their  own,  convey 
a  blessing  (Acts  iii.  12)  ;  they  can 
neither  select  the  persons  who  shall  be 
blessed,  nor  fix  the  time,  the  manner, 
or  the  degree  in  which  any  shall  receive 
a  blessing ;  but,  as  stewards  of  the 
mysteries  of  God,  they  dispense  the 
bread  of  life,  assuredly  expecting  that 
their  Divine  Master  will  give  a  salutary 
effect  to  the  ordinances  of  His  own 
appointment.  The  direction  in  the 
text  was  confirmed  with  an  express 
promise,  that  what  they  spake  on  earth 
should  be  ratified  in  heaven;  and  every 
faithful  minister  may  take  encourage- 
ment from  it  in  the  discharge  of  his 
own  duty,  and  may  consider  God  as 
saying  to  him.  Bless  ihou  the  congrega- 
tion, "  and  I  will  bless  them  "  (Luke  x. 
6-6  ;  John  xx.  23). 

2.  To  claim  the  people  as  Gods  pro- 
perty. To  "  put  the  name  of  God  upon 
them"  is  to  challenge  them  as  His  por- 
tion, the  lot  of  His  inheritance  (Deut. 
xxxii.  9).  This  every  minister  must 
do  in  most  authoritative  terms ;  and 
not  only  claim  them  as  His  property, 
but  excite  them  with  all  earnestness  to 
surrender  up  themselves  to  His  service. 
Nor  shall  their  exhortations  be  lost,  for 
God  will  accompany  them  "  with  the 
Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven;** 


«;^— 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  VI. 


and  the  people,  constrained  by  the 
Divine  impulse,  shall  say,  **  I  am  the 
Lord's  "  (Isa.  xliv.  3-5).  Moreover,  in 
their  intercession  for  the  people,  they 
are  also  to  urge  this  plea  with  God  on 
their  behalf  (Jer.  xiv.  9  ;  Dan.  ix. 
17-19).  Thus  are  they  to  strengthen 
the  connection  between  God  and  them, 
and  to  promote  that  fellowship  with 
God,  which  is  the  end,  as  well  as  the 
means,  of  all  spiritual  communications. 

II.  Notice  some  truths  contained  in 
them. 

Amidst  the  many  profitable  observa- 
tions that  may  be  deduced  from  the 
text  there  are  some  deserving  of  peculiar 
attention. 

1,  The  priests  under  the  Law,  while 
they  blessed  the  people,  typically  repre- 
sented the  office  of  Christ  Himself.  Christ 
as  our  great  High  Priest  performs  every 
part  of  the  priestly  office  ;  and  it  is 
remarkable  that  He  was  in  the  very  act 
of  blessing  His  disciples  when  He  was 
taken  up  from  them  into  heaven  (Luke 
xxi V.  50,5 1 ).  Nor  did  He  then  cease,  but 
rather  began,  as  it  were,  to  execute  that 
office,  which  He  has  been  fulfilling  from 
that  time  to  the  present  hour.  St. 
Peter,  preaching  afterwards  to  a  vast 
concourse  of  people,  declared  to  them 
that  to  bless  them  was  the  great  end 
for  which  Jesus  had  ascended,  and  that 
He  was  ready,  both  as  a  Prince  and  a 
Saviour,  to  give  them  repentance  and 
remission  of  sins  (Acts  iii.  26  ;  v.  31). 
Let  us  then  conceive  the  Lord  Jesus 
standing  now  in  the  midst  of  us,  and, 
with  uplifted  hands,  pronouncing  the 
benediction  in  the  text ;  is  there  one 
amongst  us  that  would  not  cordially 
add,  "  Amen,  Amen  "  ]  Nor  let  this 
be  thought  a  vain  and  fanciful  idea, 
since  He  has  promised  to  be  wherever 
two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in 
His  name,  and  that  too  for  the  very 
purpose  which  is  here  expressed.  (Com- 
pare Matt,  xviii.  20,  with  Exod.  xx. 
24.) 

2.  The  ministers  are  used  as  instru- 
ments to  convey  blessings  ;  God  Himself  is 
the  only  Author  and  Giver  of  them.  The 
very   words    which   the    priests    were 


commanded  to  use,  directed  the  atten- 
tion of  all  to  God  Himself  ;  nor  could  the 
frequent  repetition  of  Jehovah's  name 
fail  to  impress  the  most  careless  auditor 
with  a  conviction,  that  the  blessing 
could  come  from  God  alone.  We  ought 
indeed  to  reverence  God's  ministers  as 
the  authorised  dispensers  of  His  bless- 
ings (1  Thess.  V.  13);  but  we  must 
look  for  the  blessings  themselves  to  God 
alone  ;  and  endeavour  to  exercise  faith 
on  the  Father  as  the  Fountain  of  them, 
on  Christ  as  the  Channel  in  which  they 
flow,  and  on  the  Holy  Spirit  as  the 
Agent  by  whose  Divine  energy  they 
are  imparted  to  the  soul  (Rev.  i.  4,  5). 
At  the  same  time  we  should  remember 
the  obligations  which  these  mercies  lay 
us  under  to  devote  ourselves  entirely 
to  the  service  of  our  gracious  and 
adorable  Benefactor. 

3.  However  weak  the  ordinances  be  in 
themselves,  yet  shall  they,  if  attended  in 
faith,  be  available  for  our  greatest  good. 
Nothing  can  be  conceived  more  simple 
in  itself  than  a  priestly  benediction  ; 
yet,  most  undoubtedly  it  brought  down 
many  blessings  upon  the  people.  And 
can  we  suppose  that  God  will  put  less 
honour  upon  His  ordinances  under  the 
Gospel  dispensation  1  Shall  not  "  grace, 
mercy  and  peace  flow  down  from  God 
the  Father  and  from  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,*'  in  answer  to  the  fervent  inter- 
cessions of  His  ministers]  (2  Tim.  i.  2). 
Though  ministers  be  but  earthen 
vessels,  yet  shall  they  impart  unto  the 
people  the  richest  treasures  (2  Cor.  iv. 
7).  Their  word  shall  not  be  in  vain, 
but  shall  accomplish  God's  good 
pleasure,  etc.  (Isa.  Iv.  10,  11).  Let  not 
then  the  benediction  be  so  often  slighted, 
as  though  it  were  only  a  signal  to  de- 
part :  but  while  it  is  delivered  with 
solemnity  in  the  name  of  God,  let  every 
heart  be  expanded  to  receive  the  bene- 
fit. Let  every  one  consider  himself  in 
particular  as  the  person  addressed 
("  thee  "  was  repeated  six  times)  ;  and 
may  the  experience  of  all  attest  at  this 
time  that  God  is  ready  to  "  grant  us 
above  all  that  we  can  ask  or  think." — 
C.  Simeon,  M.A. 


109 


CHAP.  VII. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


CHAPTER  VIL 


Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. 


In  this  chapter  we  have  the  narra- 
tive of  the  presentation  of  gifts  by  the 
princes  of  the  tribes  at  the  dedication 
of  the  altar.     *'  This  presentation  took 

place  at   the  time  (DV)  when  Moses, 

after  having  completed  the  erection  of 
the  tabernacle,  anointed  aud  sanctified 
the  dwelling  and   the   altar,    together 
with  their  furniture  (Lev.  viii.  10,  11). 
Chronologically  considered,  this  ought 
to  have  been  noticed  after  Lev.  viii.  10. 
But  in  order  to  avoid  interrupting  the 
connection  of  the  Sinaitic  laws,  it  is  in- 
troduced for  the  first  time  at  this  point, 
and  placed  at  the  head   of  the  events 
which  immediately   preceded    the    de- 
parture of  the  people  from  Sinai,  be- 
cause these  gifts  consisted  in  part  of 
materials      that     were     indispensably 
necessary  for  the  transport  of  the  taber- 
nacle during  the  march  through  the 
desert.     Moreover,  there  was  only  an 
interval  of  at  the  most  forty  days  be- 
tween the  anointing  of  the  tabernacle, 
which  commenced  after  the  first  day  of 
the  first  month  (cf.  Exod.  xl.  16,  and 
Lev.  viii.   10),   and  lasted  eight  days, 
and  the  departure  from  Sinai,   on  the 
twentieth   day  of    the   second    month 
(chap.  X.  ii),  and  from  this  we  have  to 
deduct  six  days  for  the  Passover,  which 
took  place  before  their  departure  (chap, 
ix.    1   sqq.) ;    and  it  was  within    this 
period    that  the  laws  and    ordinances 
from  Lev.  xi.  to  Num.   vi.   had  to  be 
published,  and  the  dedicatory  offerings 
to  be  presented.     Now,  as  the  presen- 
tation itself  was  distributed,  according 
to  vers.  11  sqq.,  over  twelve  or  thirteen 
days,  we  may  very  well  assume  that  it 
did  not  entirely  precede  the  publication 
of  the  laws  referred  to,  but  was  carried 
on  in  part  contemporaneously  with  it. 
The  presentation  of  the  dedicatory  gifts 
of  one  tribe-prince  might  possibly  occupy 
only  a  few  hours  of  the  day  appointed 
for  the  purpose,  and  the  rest  of  the  day, 
110 


therefore,  might  very  conveniently  be 
made  use  of  by  Moses  for  publishing 
the  laws.  In  this  case  the  short  space 
of  a  month  and  a  few  days  would  be 
amply  sufficient  for  everything  that 
took  place." — Keil  and  Del. 

Ver.  2.  The  princes  of  the  tribes,  and 
were  over  them,  etc.  Margin  ;  Who  stood 
over,  etc.  Keil  and  Del :  "  Those  who 
stood  over  those  that  were  numbered,  i.e., 
who  were  their  leaders  or  rulers  "  (see 
chap.  i.  4-16). 

Ver.  3.  Covered  wagons.  Gesenius 
and  De  Wette  translate  :  *'  litter 
wagons;"  but  their  rendering  ''can 
neither  be  defended  etymologically,  nor 

based  upon  Q''4^  in  Isa.  Ixvi.  20."— 

Keil  and  Del.  The  rendering  of  the 
LXX  is  d/xa^a?  Xaix7rr)VLKa<?,  which,  ac- 
cording to  Euseb.  Emis.  signifies  two- 
wheeled  vehicles.  Dr.  A.  Clarke 
renders  ;  "  tilted  wagons."  And  Dr. 
H.  E.  J.  Howard :  "  tilted  wains." 
They  use  the  word  tilted  in  the  sense 
of  tented,  or,  as  in  the  A.  V.,  covered  ; 
and  this  seema  to  be  the  meaning  of 
the  original. 

The  service  of  the  sanctuary,  Heb. 
lit.,  "  the  holy,"  i.e.,  the  holy  things 
(see  chap.  iv.  5-20). 

Ver.  10,  In  the  day.  Keil  and  Del., 
"  That  is,  at  the  time  *  that  they 
anointed  it.'     '  Day,'  as  in  Gen.  ii.  4." 

Ver.  13.  One  silver  charger.  A  dish, 
or  deep  bowl.  (See  Exod.  xxv.  29.)  [One 
silver  bowl.  A  basin  to  receive  the 
blood  of  the  sacrifice  in. 

Ver.  14.  One  spoon.  A  censer,  on 
which  they  placed  the  incense,  as  in 
Exod.  xxv.  29. 

Ver.  84-86.  Attersol  (1618)  reckons 
the  whole  of  the  dishes,  basins,  and 
censers  to  be  worth  about  X420.  Dr. 
A.  Clarke  (1836),  in  loco,  gives  his 
calculation  in  detail,  and  makes  the 
total  £627  Is.  lljd.  The  Speaker's 
Comm.  (1871) :  '*If  a  silver  shekel  be 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.   VJl. 


taken  roughly  a8  weighing  25  of  a 
shilling,  and  a  golden  shekel  1-15  of  a 
sovereign,  the  intrinsic  worth,  by  weight 
of  each  silver  charger,  will  be  325s.,  of 
each  bowl  175s.,  of  each  golden  spoon 
230s.  Consequently  the  aggregate 
worth,  by  weight,  of  the  whole  of  the 
offerings  will  be  £438.  But  the  real 
worth  of  such  a  sura,  when  measured 
by  the  prices  of  clothing  and  food  at 
that  time,  must  have  been  vastly 
greater.  It  must  not  be  forgotten,  too, 
that  the  tabernacle  itself  had  been 
recently  constructed  at  a  vast  cost." 


Ver.  89.  The  tabernacle  of  the  con- 
gregation. Heb.,  "  The  tent  of  meeting." 
7^0  speak  with  Him,  i.e.,  with  God,  as 
in  the  margin  ;  for  "  the  name  Jehovah, 
though  not  expressly  mentioned  before, 
is  contained  implicite  in  ohei  moed,  *  the 
tent  of  meeting,^  "  He  heard  the  voice  of 
one  speaking.  Eather,  "  he  heard  the 
voice  speaking,"  or  "conversing." 

Proceeding  to  our  Homiletical  treat- 
ment of  the  chapter,  we  have  in  the 
first  paragraph — 


An  Ancient  Offering,  and  its  Modern  Lessons. 

{Verses  1-9.) 


These  verses  suggest  the  following 
lessons — 

1.  That  they  who  hold  the  most 
honourable  positons  should  be  most 
liberal  in  contributions  to  worthy 
objects. 

The  princes  of  the  tribes  of  Israel 
are  here  prominent  in  bringing  their 
offering  for  the  service  of  the  Tabernacle. 
They  present  an  example  well  worthy 
the  imitation  of  those  who  are  exalted 
in  rank,  rich  in  possessions,  or  great 
in  power.  Such  persons  are  under  all 
the  ordinary  obligations  to  help  forward 
every  good  work.  They,  in  common 
with  all  men,  are  required  to  use  their 
talents,  means,  and  opportunities  so  as 
to  accomplish  the  greatest  amount  of 
good.  They  are  also  under  special 
obligations  to  advance  every  true  and 
good  cause  amongst  men,  because  of 
the  conspicuousness  of  their  position, 
and  the  extent  of  their  influence.  The 
extent  of  our  obligations  is  determined 
by  our  opportunities.  Privilege  is  the 
measure  of  responsibility.  "  For  unto 
whomsoever  much  is  given,  of  him 
shall  be  much  required  :  and  to  whom 
men  have  committed  much,  of  him  will 
they  ask  the  more." 

1.  Great  honours  should  incite  to  great 
efforts  to  do  good.  Those  upon  whom 
God  has  bestowed  great  wealth,  or 
whom  He  has  raised  to  exalted  stations, 
shoould  manifest  their  thankfulness  by 


generously  promoting  those  objects 
which  accord  with  the  Divine  will.  *'  The 
more  any  are  advanced,  the  more  is 
expected  from  them,  on  account  of  the 
greater  opportunity  they  have  of  serv- 
ing God  and  their  generation.  What 
are  wealth  and  authority  good  for,  but 
as  they  enable  a  man  to  do  so  much 
the  more  good  in  the  world  1 " 

2.  Great  influence  involves  great  obli- 
gation. The  example  of  persons  in  high 
station  is  extensively  observed ;  their 
exalted  position  gives  conspicuousness 
to  their  life  and  conduct.  Their 
example  is  also  very  effective,  for  per- 
sons are  generally  prone  to  copy  it, 
when  that  of  persons  in  lowly  stations 
would  be  disregarded.  So  their  in- 
fluence is  very  great ;  and  the  posses- 
sion of  great  influence  is  a  sacred  and 
solemn  trust.  So  "  superior  rank  de- 
mands superior  worth."  Thoy  who  are 
exalted  in  station  should  cultivate  the 
exalted  in  character  and  conduct  ;  and 
so  their  great  influence  will  be  a  great 
blessing. 

"  Since  by  your  greatness  you 
Are  nearer  Heaven  in  place,  be  nearer  it 
In  goodness.     Rich  men  should  transcend  the 

poor, 
As  clouds  the  earth ;  raised  by  the  comfort  of 
The  sun,  to  water  dry  and  barren  grounds." 

Tourneive.     (a) 

II.  That  they  who  are  not  entirely 
engaged  in  religious  ministries  should 
seek  to  help  those  who  are  so  engaged. 


«mAp.  vxi. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


These  princes  of  the  tribes  were  not 
set  apart  for  religious  duties ;  but  by 
this  offering  of    wagons  and  oxen  for 
the   service    of    the    tabernacle,    they 
evinced  their  desire  to  assist  the  Levites 
in    discharging    their    sacred    duties, 
"You  know,"   says  Babington,    ''how 
the  Levites  were  to  carry  upon  their 
shoulders  the  things  belonging  to  the 
tabernacle  when  they  removed,  but  now 
they  shall   be  eased  by  these  chariots 
and  oxen.     So  the  laity  careth  for  the 
clergy,  to  help  them,  to  ease  them,  to 
comfort  them  in  their  duties  belonging 
to  God.     And  0  !  how  could  I  dwell  in 
the  meditation  of  it  a  whole  day,  it  is 
so  sweet.     Will  you  note  it  and  think 
of  it  *?     I  trust  you  will,  and  so  I  com- 
mit it  to  you."     There  are  still  many 
ways    in    which    Christian    men    and 
women   may,  and   in    which    some   of 
them    do,    assist    their    ministers.     It 
is  the  privilege  and  duty  of  every  dis- 
ciple of  Christ  Jesus  to  engage  in  some 
work  for  the  good  of  others  ;  and  when 
every  one  is  so  engaged,  the  labours  of 
the  ministers  of  the  Gospel,  which  in 
some  instances  are  very  arduous  and 
continuous,  will  be  much  lightened,  and 
from  many  things,  which  by  reason  of 
the   sloth   or  unreasonableness  of  the 
churches  they  now  have  to  do,  though 
they  pertain  not  to  their  work,   they 
will  then   be  entirely  free.     The  offer- 
ing of  the  princes  of  the  tribes  manifests 
a  thoughtfulness  and  appropriateness, 
which  are  well  worthy  of  commendation 
and   imitation.     They  gave  with   wise 
judgment  such  things  as  proved  most 
useful  in  the  service  of  the  tabernacle. 

III.  That  God  is  graciously  pleased 
to  accept  of  man*s  offerings. 

"And  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses, 
saying,  Take  it  of  them,  that  they  may 
be  to  do  the  service  of  the  tabernacle 
of  the  congregation ;  and  thou  shalt 
give  them  unto  the  Levites,  to  every 
man  according  to  his  service."  Thus 
God  signifies  his  acceptance  of  their 
offering.  Surely  it  is  a  great  honour 
which  God  confers  upon  us  in  accepting 
our  gifts  in  His  service.  If  our  heart 
be  sincere  ^he  offering  of  even  the 
112 


smallest  gift,  or  the  feeblest  effort  in 
His  cause,  He  accepts,  approves,  and, 
in  His  great  grace,  will  reward.  '' Who- 
soever shall  give  to  drink  unto  one  of 
these  little  ones  a  cup  of  cold  water 
only  in  the  name  of  a  disciple,  verily  I 
say  unto  you,  he  shall  in  no  wise  lose 
his  reward."  Let  this  be  to  us  an  in- 
centive to  liberal  and  hearty  giving, 
and  faithful  and  diligent  working  in 
His  cause. 

IV.  That  gifts  for  religious  pur- 
poses should  be  used  in  accordance 
with  the  will  of  God. 

"Thou  shalt  give  them  unto  the 
Levites,  to  every  man  according  to  his 
service.  And  Moses  took  the  wagons 
and  the  oxen,  and  gave  them  unto  the 
Levites.  Two  wagons  and  four  oxen 
he  gave  unto  the  sons  of  Gershom,  ac- 
cording to  their  service,"  etc.  The 
offering  was  faithfully  applied  by  Moses 
in  such  a  way  as  to  gratify  the  wishes 
of  the  givers,  serve  the  interests  of  the 
people,  and  comply  with  the  directions 
of  the  Lord.  Here  is  a  lesson  which  is 
very  wide  in  its  applications,  and  which 
is  urgently  needed  in  some  quarters  to- 
day. The  offerings  which  are  con- 
tributed to  the  cause  of  God,  should 
be  used  not  for  the  mere  increase  and 
aggrandisement  of  a  sect  or  party,  not 
for  the  mere  advocacy  and  spread  of 
any  pet  notions,  favourite  theories,  or 
sectarian  creeds,  but  for  the  promotion 
of  the  cause  and  glory  of  God  in  the 
well-being  of  humanity.  This  is  at- 
tained by  doing  the  largest  amount  of 
^ood  in  the  most  Christlike  spirit. 
The  money  or  property,  which  in  past 
ages,  was  left  for  purposes  which  were 
then  useful  and  worthy,  but  which,  in 
the  altered  circumstances  of  this  age, 
have  very  much  ceased  to  be  so,  should 
be  applied  to  such  purposes  as  shall  be 
at  once  productive  of  the  most  good  to 
the  community,  and  most  nearly  in  ac- 
cord with  the  wishes  of  the  giver,  as 
far  as  they  can  be  ascertained.  To  at- 
tempt to  monopolise  such  gifts,  or 
restrict  the  benefits  which  might  be 
attained  by  them,  on  the  ground  of 
the  wishes  of  the  "pious  douor,"  or 


HOMILETIC    COMMESTAUY:    NUMBiaiS, 


CHAP.  VII. 


"  founder,"  is,  to  say  the  least,  utterly 
unworthy  of  Christian  men. 

V.  That  in  the  Divine  arrangements 
help  is  granted  unto  men  according  to 
their  respective  needs. 

*'  Thou  shalt  give  them  unto  the 
Levites,  to  every  man  according  to  his 
service.  And  Moses  took  the  waggons 
and  the  oxen,  and  gave  them  unto  the 
Levites,"  etc.,  vers.  5-9.  The  principle 
of  distribution  which  Moses  adopted, 
was  laid  down  by  God  Himself  j  "  Give 
to  every  man  according  to  his  service." 
In  harmony  with  this  principle,  the 
Merarites,  to  whom  was  assigned  the 
most  burdensome  part  of  the  service 
(chap.  iv.  29-33),  received  four  wagons 
and  eight  oxen  ;  the  Gershonites,  whose 
service  was  less  burdensome  (chap.  iv. 
21-26),  received  two  wagons  and  four 
oxen ;  while  the  Kohathites,  who  had 
to  carry  the  most  holy  things  upon 
their  shoulders,  and  were  provided  with 
poles  for  that  purpose  (chap.  iv.  4-20), 
received  neither  wagon  nor  oxen. 
There  is  a  proportion  between  the 
burden  imposed  and  the  strength  im- 
parted. **  God  proportions  the  burden 
to  the  back,"  says  Trapp.  But  it  is 
both  more  correct  and  more  inspiring 
to  say,  God  proportions  the  back  to 
the  burden.     (Comp.  1  Cor.  x.  13,  with 


2  Cor.  xii.  9.)  God  will  not  suffer  us  to 
be  tempted  above  that  we  are  able,  be- 
cause as  the  power  of  temptation  in- 
creases, He  will  increase  our  power  of 
resistance.  As  our  need  increases  He 
increases  the  communications  of  His 
grace;  and  the  infinitude  of  His  re- 
sources must  ever  immeasurably  surpass 
our  utmost  need.  And  as  His  know- 
ledge of  us  and  kindness  toward  us  are 
infinite,  we  may  rest  assured  that  He 
will  not  fail  to  proportion  His  assistance 
to  our  necessities.  What  an  encourage- 
ment is  this  as  we  look  on  to  the  future, 
with  its  unknown  experiences,  its 
possibilities  of  sore  trial,  of  insuperably 
ditficult  labour,  etc.  Infinite  resources 
of  patience  and  power,  grace  and 
courage,  are  pledged  to  us.  Apart  from 
Christ  we  can  do  nothing;  but  with  the 
help  of  the  Holy  one  of  Israel  even  a 
"  worm  shall  thresh  the  mountains,  and 
beat  them  small,  and  make  the  hills  as 
chaflf."  (See  Isa.  xli.  13-16.)  "God 
is  able  to  make  all  grace  abound  toward 
you ;  that  ye,  always  having  all  suffi- 
ciency in  all  things,  may  abound  to 
every  good  work."  "  When  I  am  weak, 
then  am  I  strong;"  for  Christ's 
strength  is  made  perfect  in  His  people's 
weakness.  "  I  can  do  all  thin<jrs  through 
Christ  which  strengtheneth  me."  (c) 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  They  that  are  great,  and  worthy  to  be  so, 
Hide  not  their  rays  from  meanest  plants 

that  grow. 
Why  is  the  sun  set  on  a  throne  so  high, 
But  to  give  light  to  each  inferior  eye  ? 
His  radiant  eyes  distribute  lively  grace 
To  all  according  to  their  worth  and  place  ; 
And   from   the  humble  ground  these  va- 
pours drain, 
Which  are  sent  down  in  fruitful  drops"  of 
rain. — Beaumont. 
(5)  We  want  labourers ;    persons  who  can 
distribute  tracts  silently,  and  persons  who  can 
•peak   a   word  in   season  ;  we  want  rich  men 
who  can  go  in    carriages,   and  poor  men  who 
can    only    walk ;     we  want    ladies    who   are 
muffled  and  furred  with  all  the  armour  of  a 
luxurious  civilization,  and  poor  women  whose 
hearts  are  warm  with  ,a  glowing   love  to  the 
Saviour:    we    waat  pt^rsons    who   can    teach 
raggnd  children,  and  persons  who  can  address 
ragrged  men:    Who  will  comet     Don't  oppress 
those  who    are   working   too   much  alreaiy. 
There   is   a  vast   amount   of  non-productive 
I 


energy  in  the  Church.  There  are  men  and 
women  yoluntarily  dumb,  they  must  speak  ; 
there  are  Christians  who  have  an  enormous 
talent  for  sleepingr,  thet/  must  be  awakened ; 
there  are  disciples  who  imagine  that  their 
Christian  duties  are  discharged  when  they 
have  criticised  other  people,  they  must  be  per- 
suaded or  provoked  into  activity  ;  as  with  the 
body,  so  with  the  soul — we  cannot  do  our  duty 
with  mere  empty  words; — *•  if  a  brother  or  a 
sister  be  naked,  and  destitute  of  daily  food, 
and  one  of  you  say  unto  them,  Depart  in  peace, 
and  be  ye  warmed  and  filled ;  notwithstanding 
ye  give  them  not  those  things  which  are 
needful  for  the  body;  what  doth  it  profit?** 
So  with  the  soul.  It  is  not  enough  to  erect 
your  buildings,  you  must  go  out,  and  with  all 
the  gentle  violence  of  love  *^ compel  men  to 
come  in."  ....  You  can  bring  in  the 
mil  ennium  when  you  please;  God  is  waiting; 
th  >  Redeem-^r  is  at  hand;  ''Prove  me  now 
h<  rowith,  saith  the  Lord,  if  I  will  not  open  the 
windows  of  heaven,  and  pour  you  out  a  bless- 
ing, until  there  shall  not  be  room  enough  U 

113 


CHAK  VIL 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


contain  it.'*  That  is  the  challenge  ;  who  will 
accept  it?  God  says  He  waits  to  be  gra- 
cious; then  let  us  wait  patiently  upon  God  I 
The  rain  will  come  if  we  pray  for  it.  The 
battle  will  be  given  to  Israel  *if  we  hold  up 
the  hands  of  His  servant. —  Jos.  Parker,  D.D. 
(c)  Christianity  boldly,  undisgaisedly  de- 
clares to  every  human  being  under  sin,  that  he 
has  no  complete  power  beforehand,  as  in 
reference  to  anything  really  good.  And  then 
it  calls  him  to  be  good,  on  the  express  condition 
always  that  he  is  to  have  powers,  stimulants, 
increments,  accruing  as  he  wants  them  ;  that 
on  these,  or  the  promise  of  them,  he  may  rest 
his  faith,  and  so  go  forward.  It  says  to  the 
struggling  and  misgiving  penitent,  "Let  him 
take  hold  of  My  strength,  that  he  may  make 
peace  with  Me,  and  he  shall  make  peace 
with  Me."  It  calls  every  man  to  earnest 
and  hopeful  endeavour,  by  the  consid- 
eration of  an  all-supporting  grace  that 
cannot  fail;  "Work  out  your  salvation  with 
fear  and  trembling,  for  it  is  God  that  worketh 
in  you."  It  shows  the  Christian  testifying  in 
sublimity  of  confidence,  *'  When  I  am  weak, 
then  am  I  strong ;  I  can  do  all  things  through 
Christ,  which  strengtheneth  me."  It  promises 
the  faithful  man  all  the  support  needed  for 
nis  exigencies  as  they  arise,  ''They  that  wait 
upon  the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength; 
they  shall  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles; 
they  shall  run,  and  not  be  weary ;  they  shall 
walk,  and  not  faint."  It  also  establishes,  in  a 
manner  to  comprehend  everything,  a  doctrine 
of  Divine  concourse  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  which 
carries  in  it  the  pledge  of  all-accruing  grace, 
and  light,  and  might,  and  holy  impulsion; 
'•  Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive;  seek,  and  ye  shall 
find ;  knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened."  Indeed, 


the  doctrine  or  fact  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  on^y 
another  way  of  geaeralizing  the  truth  t*iat 
God  will  co-f<fork  invigoratively,  correctively, 
and  directively  in  all  the  good  struggles  of 
believi-Dg  souls;  and  so  will  bring  in,  at  all 
times  and  junctures,  those  increments  of 
power  that  are  necessary  to  success. 

All  the  simplest,  most  living,  and  moat 
genuine  Christians  of  our  own  time  are  such 
as  rest  their  souls,  day  by  day,  on  this  confi- 
dence and  promise  of  accruing  power,  and 
make  themselves  responsible,  not  for  what 
they  have  in  some  inherent  ability,  but  for 
what  they  can  have  in  their  times  of  stress 
and  peril,  and  in  the  continual  raising  of  their 
own  personal  quantity  and  power.  They 
throw  themselves  on  works  wholly  above  their 
ability,  and  get  accruing  power  in  their  works 
for  others  still  higher  and  greater.  Instead 
of  gathering  in  their  souls  timorously  before- 
hand upon  the  little  sufficiency  they  find  in 
possession,  they  look  upon  the  great  world 
God  has  made,  and  all  the  greater  world  of  the 
Saviour's  kingdom  in  it,  as  being  friendly  and 
tributary,  ready  to  pour  in  help,  minister 
light,  and  strengthen  them  to  victory,  just 
according  to  their  faith.  And  so  they  grow 
in  courage,  confidence,  personal  volume, 
efficiency  of  every  kind,  and  instead  of  slink- 
ing into  their  graves  out  of  impotent  lives, 
they  lie  down  in  the  honours  of  heroes. 

Gci  to  your  duty,  every  man,  and  trast  your- 
selves  to  Christ;  for  He  will  give  you  all 
supply  just  as  fast  as  you  need  it.  You  will 
have  just  as  much  power  as  you  believe  you 
can  have.  Be  a  Christian,  throw  yourself 
upon  God's  work,  and  get  the  ability  you 
want  in  it. — H,  Bushndl^  D.D, 


The  Offerings  for  Dedioatin3  the  Altar,  and  their  Moral  SuaoBSTioNS. 

(Verses  10-88.) 


Two  introductory  points  are  sug- 
gested : 

First :  The  obligation  of  man  to  Jionour 
God  with  his  possessions.  The  princes 
of  the  tribes  liberally  contributed  to 
the  erection  and  furnishing  of  the 
tabernacle,  that  the  Lord  might  be 
honoured  amongst  the  people.  And  all 
men  are  under  the  most  solemn  obliga- 
tions to  employ  their  possessions  in 
Buch  a  way  as  to  honour  God  thereby. 
He  is  the  sole  proprietor  of  all  things. 
"  Every  beast  of  the  forest  is  Mine, 
and  the  cattle  upon  a  thousand  hills." 
**  The  silver  is  Mine,  and  the  gold  is 
Mine,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  **  The 
earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness 
lU 


thereof ;  the  world,  and  they  that  dwell 

therein."  The  wealthiest  man  has  no- 
thing that  he  can  really  call  his  own ; 
his  relation  to  his  temporal  possessions 
is  not  that  of  ownership  but  of  steward 
ship.  In  giving  to  the  cause  of  God,  or 
to  the  needs  of  man,  we  only  give  God 
His  own.  Well  did  king  David  say,  "  All 
things  come  of  Thee,  and  of  Thine  own 
have  we  given  Thee."  To  the  **rich  in 
this  world "  it  is  a  charge  from  God, 
"  that  they  do  gocd..  that  they  be  rich  in 
good  works,  ready  tc  distribute,  willing 
to  communicate."  And  according  to  his 
ability  every  man  is  required  to  com- 
municate unto  others,  and  so  to  dis- 
tribute  his   worldly  goods,    that  Ood 


HOMILETW   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  vn. 


shall  be  honoured  thereby.  Our  busi- 
iiess  is  not  to  selfishly  hoard,  but  to 
generously  dispense  ;  not  vainly  to  ac- 
cumulate, but  wisely  to  use  the  goods 
with  which  (^od  has  entrusted  us.  He 
will  one  day  call  us  to  give  account  of 
our  stewardship.  What  account  will 
the  selfish  and  useless  be  able  to  render 
unto  Him  1     (a) 

Second  :  The  obligation  of  ma  i  to  con," 
tinue  in  a  right  and  good  course.  These 
princes  of  the  tribes  had  already 
liberally  contributed  to  the  construction 
of  the  tabernacle  (Exod.  xxxv.  27,  28J ; 
they  had  also  presented  the  wagons 
and  the  oxen  for  its  removal  from  place 
to  place  ;  and  now  they  are  offering 
their  gifts  for  the  dedication  of  the 
altar.  Having  begun  this  good  work, 
they  continued  therein  until  it  was 
brought  to  perfection.  As  man  accustoms 
himself  to  give  for  the  promotion  of 
worthy  objects,  both  his  disposition  to 
give  and  h.m  power  to  give  are  increased. 
His  disposition  to  give  is  increased ; 
for  he  learns  the  joy  of  giving;  he 
increasingly  proves  that  *'  it  is  more 
blessed  to  give  than  to  receive."  His 
power  to  give  is  also  increased ;  for 
"  there  is  that  scattereth,  and  yet  in- 
creaseth  ;  and  there  is  that  withholdeth 
more  than  is  meet,  but  it  tendeth  to 
poverty.  The  liberal  soul  shall  be 
made  fat ;  and  he  that  watereth  shall  be 
watered  also  himself." 

"  There  was  a  man, — some  men   did  count 
him  mad — 
The  more  he  gave  away  the  more  he  had." 

Good  beginnings  must  be  carried 
onward  to  perfect  endings.  Continuance 
and  progress  in  duty  and  service  are 
required  from  us.  Having  given  much, 
let  us  endeavour  to  give  more.  Having 
done  well,  let  us  try  to  do  better. 
"Forgetting  those  things  which  are 
tiehind,"  etc.  (Phil.  iii.  13,  14).  "Let 
us  goon  unto  perfection." 

Let  us  now  proceed  to  consider — 

I.  The  Significance  of  the  Offerings 
for  the  Dedication  of  the  Altar. 

1.  Their  offerings  express  the  sense  of 
of  equality  of  oh  Ligation.     Every  tribe, 
by  its   prince,  presents  the  same  kind 
oJf  otfcring,  and   in   the  same  quantity, 
I  2 


as  an  expression  of  their  equal  indebted- 
ness to  God.  By  Him  they  all  alike 
had  been  emancipated  from  slavery  and 
cruelty  in  Egypt ;  by  Him  they  were 
all  alike  protected,  provisioned  and  led  ; 
and  it  was  fitting  that  each  should  thus 
testify  to  their  equality  of  obligation. 
There  are  certain  mercies  which  all 
men  have  in  common ;  certain  Divine 
gifts  which  are  bestowed  upon  all  men ; 
Christ  "  died  for  all "  men  ;  and  there 
are  certain  obligations  to  God  in  which 
all  men  share.  "  He  died  for  all,  that 
they  which  live  should  not  henceforth 
live  unto  themselves,"  etc. 

2.  Their  offerings  express  symhoUcally 
the  Divine  calling  of  the  nation  to  he  holy 
unto  the  Lord.  All  the  vessels  |)resented 
were  for  sacrificial  uses,  all  the  animals 
were  ceremonially  clean  and  such  as 
were  proper  for  sacrifices;  all  the  other 
gifts  were  of  the  best  quality  and  were 
to  be  used  in  the  worship  of  God.  By 
these  things  it  was  indicated  that  the 
people  were  to  be  a  separate  people, 
entirely  dedicated  to  God,  and  that 
God  was  to  dwell  in  their  midst.  The 
lesson  for  us  is,  that  God  is  to  be 
worshipped  with  our  highest  and  best. 
The  best  of  our  affections,  of  our 
thoughts,  of  our  actions,  of  our  pos- 
sessions, we  should  cheerfully  consecrate 
to  Him.  Beautifully  was  this  illus- 
trated by  Mary  of  Bethany,  when,  with 
glowing  gratitude  and  reverent  and 
rapturous  love  she  poured  the  precious 
ointment  on  the  head  and  feet  of  her 
adored  Lord,     (b) 

3.  Their  offerings  express  symbolically 
the  great  truths  taught  by  the  diff'erent 
sacrifices.  They  brought  a  "  kid  of  the 
goats  for  a  sin-offering:'  The  sin-offer- 
ing expressed  the  consciousness  of  sin 
on  the  part  of  the  offerer,  the  need  of  for- 
giveness and  taonement  with  God,  and 
the  belief  that  these  were  to  be  obtained 
through  the  sacrifice  of  the  appointed 
victim.  They  offered  "  one  young  bul- 
lock, one  ram,  one  lamb  of  the  first 
year,  for  a  burnt-offering."  The  burnt- 
offering  was  wholly  consumed  upon  the 
altar  to  the  honour  of  God  ;  and  its 
main  idea  is  that  it  represents  the  entire 
devotion  of  the  offerer  to  God,  that  he 

115 


1 

r 


CHAP.  VIU 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


gives  himself  wholly  and  for  ever  to 
Him.  Canon  Barry  well  says  that  "  the 
best  comment  upon  it  is  the  exhorta- 
tion in  Rom.  xii.  1,  to  'present  our 
bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  holy  and  ac- 
ceptable to  God.'  "  They  also  brought 
"  for  a  sacrifice  of  peace-offerings,  two 
oxen,  five  rams,  five  he-goats,  and  five 
lambs  of  the  first  year."  The  peace- 
offerings  were  expressions  of  the  grati- 
tude of  the  worshipper  to  God ;  they 
*'were  simply  ofiferings  to  God  of  His 
own  best  gifts,  as  a  sign  of  thankful 
homage,  and  as  a  means  of  maintaining 
His  service  and  His  servants."  All 
these  ideas  and  feelings,  therefore, 
which  these  sacrifices  represent,  were 
expressed  in  the  offerings  which  the 
princes,  each  one  representing  his  re- 
spective tribe,  presented  to  the  Lord. 
And  should  not  the  ideas  and  feelings 
which  these  offerings  were  intended  to 
express  be  ours  ]  Do  not  we  need  for- 
giveness 1  Let  us  seek  it  in  faith 
through  the  One  great  Sin-Oflfering. 
Are  not  we  under  the  most  sacred  and 
binding  obligations  to  consecrate  our- 
selves entirely  unto  God  1  "  Know  ye 
not  that  j'e  are  not  your  own  1  For 
ye  are  bought  with  a  price ;  there- 
fore glorify  God  in  your  body,  and  in 
your  spirit,  which  are  God's."  *'  I  be- 
seech you  therefore,  brethren,  by  the 
mercies  of  God,  that  ye  present  your 
bodies  a  living  sacrifice,"  etc.  Have 
not  we  many  and  moving  reasons,  for 
most  fervent  gratitude  to  God  ?  *' What 
shall  I  render  unto  the  Lord  for  all  His 
benefits  toward  me  1 "  Let  us  present 
to  Him  the  offering  of  sincere  and 
aideiit  praise.  "  Bless  the  Lord,  0  my 
soul ;  and  all  that  is  within  me,  bless 
His  holy  name."     (c) 

IL  The  Significance  of  the  Record 
of  the  Offerings  for  the  Dedication  of 
the  Altar. 

It  is  remarkable  that  the  particulars 
are  given  of  each  offering,  in  the  case 
of  each  one  of  the  princes,  though  each 
of  the  offerings  was  exactly  similar  to 
the  others.  The  repetition  seems  un- 
interesting, tedious,  wearisome.  But 
is  there  not  some  reason  for  this 
minuteness  of  statement  I  la  a  Book 
116 


where  subjects  of  deep  interest  are 
mentioned  and  dismissed  sometimes  in 
a  few  words,  a  Book  moreover  which  is 
inspired  by  God — is  there  not  signi- 
ficance in  this  wearisome  repetition  of 
uninteresting  details  \  What  does  it 
mean  %     It  seems  to  us  to  suggest — 

L  The  pleasure  of  God  in  the  gifts  of 
His  people,  "That  everything  is  so 
particularly  noted,"  says  Babington, 
"  and  the  weight  so  precisely  mentioned, 
may  teach  us  to  our  comfort,  what  an 
observation  there  is  in  God  of  the  gifts 
we  bestow  on  Him  in  promoting  His 
glory,  advancing  his  service,  maintaining 
His  ministers  in  a  liberal  manner, 
relieving  the  poor,  and  doing  such  good 
things  as  with  God  and  man  are  praise- 
worthy. Surely  the  number,  the 
measure,  with  all  circumstances,  are 
observed ;  and  the  Lord  is  a  plenteous 
Rewarder  of  all  love  to  Him."  "  Man 
may  pass  hastily  or  carelessly  over 
gifts  and  offerings  ;  but  God  never  can, 
never  does,  and  never  will.  He  de- 
lights to  record  every  little  act  of 
service,  every  little  loving  gift.  He 
never  forgets  the  smallest  thing ;  and 
not  only  does  He  not  forget  it  Himself, 
but  He  takes  special  pains  that  untold 
millions  shallread  the  record.  How  little 
did  those  twelve  princes  imagine  that 
their  names  and  their  offerings  were  to 
be  handed  down,  from  age  to  age,  to  be 
read  by  countless  generations  !  Yet  so 
it  was,  for  God  would  have  it  so." 
They  who  honour  Him  with  their 
offerings.  He  will  honour  with  His 
expressed  approbation.  Mary's  offering 
of  her  precious  ointment  is  known  in  all 
the  world  where  the  Gospel  is  preached 
(Matt.  XX vi.  13).  And  the  widow  who 
cast  into  the  treasury  of  the  temple  "  all 
that  she  had,"  though  that  "  all  "  was 
only  "  two  mites,"  has  been  crowned 
by  Christ  with  similar  immortality  and 
fame  (Mark  xii.  41-44).  "God  is  not 
unrighteous  to  forget  your  work  and 
labour  of  love,"  etc,  (Heb.  vi.  10). 

2.     The  permanence   of  good    worVs. 
When   any  one  does  a  kind  or  noble 
deed,  or  bestows  a  generous  gift   from 
worthy  motives,  he  does  a  permaneu't 
an  imperishable  thing.     The  breath  of 


^ 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  Til. 


an  immortal  life  is  in  such  deeds.  God 
remembers  and  will  reward  them. 
The  grateful  heart  will  for  ever  cherish 
the  memory  of  the  kind  service  or 
generous  gift.  «'The  righteous  shall  be 
in  everlasting  remembrance."  The 
noble  deed  shall  live,  and  bring  forth 
fruit.  And  the  doer  himself  by  hia 
deed  has  gained  somewhat  of  nobility 


and  strength  as  a  permanent  acquisition 
in  his  own  being,     (d) 

Conclusion. 

Our  subject  is  most  fruitful  of  en- 


couragement to  — 


1.  Liberality   of  giving    to   promote 
worthy  objects. 

2.  Diligence   in   working  to  promote 
worthy  objects. 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 


(a)  There  is  nothing  made  for  itself,  no- 
thing whose  powers  and  influences  are  entirely 
circumscribed  to  self.  Whatever  a  creature 
receives  it  gives  out,  with  the  modification 
and  increase  of  its  own  force.  The  clouds 
borrow  water  of  the  ocean,  but  they  pour  it 
forth  again  in  refreshing  showers  upon  the 
thirsty  hills,  which,  in  their  turn,  send  them 
amongst  the  valleys.  Planets  borrow  light  of 
their  centres,  and  forthwith  fling  their  rays 
abroad  upon  the  dark  regions  of  space  through 
which  they  roll.  The  tree  borrows  from  every 
part  of  the  world  in  order  to  build  up  itself, 
but  it  gives  out,  in  return,  beauty,  fragrance, 
and  fruit.  Thus  all  things  give  what  they 
appropriate.  The  material  is  but  the  emblem 
of  the  spiritual,  and  thus  all  nature  typiQes 
man's  distributive  function.  Is  not  he  who 
appropriates  and  does  not  give  an  anomaly  in 
the  universe?— Z)at;/rf  Thomas,  D.D. 

There  is  a  popular  but  unfounded  axiom 
respecting  the  use  of  wealth,  namely,  that  "a 
man  may  do  what  he  will  with  his  own." 
Christianity  denies  this  assertion.  Every 
man  has  indeed  a  legal  right  to  the  disposal 
of  his  own  property;  but  religion  interdicts 
his  right  to  sp  nd  it  in  vanity  or  vice  ;  or  if 
he  be  exempt  from  these  grosser  temptations, 
Bhe  still  abridges  his  right  to  monopolize  it. 
Christianity  expects  tnat  the  deserving  and 
the  distressed  shall  coma  in  for  such  a  pro- 
portion of  bis  wealth  as  an  enlightened 
conscience  shall  dictate.  The  Divine  Person 
who  refused,  in  a  leg.l  sense,  to  be  a  divider 
or  a  judge  over  a  contsted  property,  did  not 
fail  to  graft  on  the  question  He  avoided 
answering,  the  imperative  caution,  Take  heed, 
and  beware  of  covetousness.—  Gleanings. 

It  has  been  found,  by  persons  di>posed  to 
distribute  of  their  substance,  that  they  have 
fcuppused  themselves  more  liberal  than  has 
really  been  the  case.  They  have  seemed  to 
give  frequently,  and  perhaps  have  done  so  ; 
aud  have  at  times  feared  that  they  were  ex- 
ceeding proper  bounds,  when  at  last,  resolving 
to  set  »part  a  certain  portion  of  their  income 
for  the  specific  object,  they  have  b;  en  sur- 
prised at  the  end  of  the  year  to  find  their 
funds  not  exhausted,  even  though  their  «ppli- 
cations  had  seemed  as  numerous,  as  urgent 
aud  as  liberally  attended  to  as  before.  ' 

L«t  it  be  remembered  that  the  sums  which 


some  give,  however  large,  may  be  given 
without  the  self-privation  of  a  single  worldly 
comfort,  or  even  of  the  luxurious  enjoyment 
of  the  good  things  of  this  life,  and  thence  be 
as  sacrifices  that  cost  nothing.  The  Christian 
had  need  to  enquire  in  his  closet  concerning 
the  faithful  discharge  of  his  stewardshio.— 
Ibid.  ^ 

(6)  The  act  onco  taken  as  an  homage  to  the 
Saviour,  recommends  itself  to  us  by  the  senti- 
ments which  appear  to  have  inspired  it.     That 
homage  is  agreeable  to  Jesus  Christ,  not  only 
because  it  is  addressed  to  Him,  but  because  it 
is  worthy   of   Him.     That  homage,   whatever 
may  be  said  as  to  its  form,  expresses  all    that 
a  Christian  soul  must  feel  for   Jesus   Christ, 
Wnat  ought  we,  in  truth,  to  say  to  that  God- 
man,  and  what  ought  we  to  find  in  our  hearts 
when  we  render  Him  homage?     What?    Ad- 
miration?   Respect?    An  estimation   of  Him 
above  all  sages,  all  heroes,  all  men?     No !  but 
that  as  He  has  given  Himself  for    as,   we,  in 
our  turn,   give   ourselves   to    Him ;  that    we 
exist  for  Him  ;  that  everything    we  have  is 
held  not  for  ourselves,  but  for  Him ;  that  no 
sacrifice  on  our  part  appears  to  bear  any  pro- 
portion to  that  which  He  has  made  for  us?  and 
that  we  are  ready  to  abandon  everything   for 
His  service  and  for  His  glory.  Now  what  is  the 
languageof  theactof  Mary,  but  all  this  at  once? 
See  her  search  amongst  her  whole  possessions 
for  the  most  precious  and  the   most  valued 
thing,  that  she  may  consume  it   in  honour  of 
Jesus  Christ — for  it  is  truly  a  loss  or  waste 
which  she  intended  to  make, — and  the  objec- 
tion of  the  disciples,  To  what  purpose  is  this 
waste  f  expresses  the  true  meaning  of  the  act 
better  than  they  imagined.  It  was  not  enough 
to  employ  this  perfume  if  ahe  did  not  expend 
it  wholly.     And  since  it  is  to  lose  or  waste  it 
to  pour  it  all  out  at  once  over  the  head   of 
Jesus  Christ,  she  resolves  to  waste  it.     She  is 
betrer  pleased  to  waste  it  by  consecrating  it 
directly  to  the  honour  of  Jesus  Christ  than  to 
employ   it   more  usefully,  perhaps,  in  another 
way.      Ah!  this  perfume  was  doubtless  the 
.•nost  precious  thing  she  could  find  in  her  stores! 
Doubtless  if  she  had  possessed  a  single  thirg 
more   precious,  she   would  have  preferred  to 
sacrifice  it,  since,  not  content  with  having  in 
a  moment  bestowed  so  valuable  an  object,  she 
broke  (needless  sacrifice)  the  alabaster  vase 

117 


CHAP.  Til. 


HOMIimiC    COMMkNTAkr:   NUMBERS. 


in  -which  the  ointment  was  contained.    It  was 
then  that   Judas  might  cry    out   with   dis- 
pleasure, "  To  what  purpose  is  this  waste  ?  ** 
since    the    perfume     spread    around    might 
minister  gratification,  but  not  the  broken  box. 
But  in  this  the  character  of  the  first  of  these 
acts  might  be  misapprehended.     Mary  had  in 
view  in  pouring  out  like  water  this  perfumed 
ointment,  not  to  afford  pleasure,  but  to  subject 
herself  to  a  loss.     She  wished  at  once  to  ex- 
press and  to  prove  her  feeling  that  nothing 
was  so  dear  to  her  as  her  Saviour,  that  she 
was  prepared  for  all  sacrifices  for  His  sake, 
and  that,  not  having  it  in  her  power  to  make 
all   sacrifices    at    once,   she    made   that   the 
opportunity  of    which  presented  itself,  that 
which  was  at  once  a  sacrifice  and  an  act  of 
homage.     She  united  in  one  act  the  reality 
and   the  symbol — she  gave  and   she  adored. 
It  was   with   this   view  she  poured  out   the 
ointment,  it  was  with  this  view  she  broke  the 
box.     And  has  she  no  other  sacrifice  to  make 
for  the  sake   of  Him  who   for   her  gave  up 
everything,    sacrificed   everything  ?     Cannot 
she  devote  herself  ?     She  did  so,  my  brethren, 
she  did  this  at  the  moment  when  the  perfumed 
ointment  flowed  in   streams  over  the  blessed 
forehead  of  her  Master.     She  broke  another 
vase  whence  issued  odours  still  more  sweet. 
She  broke  her  own  penitent  heart;  and  grief, 
love,  and  hope,  perfumes  more  exquisita  than 
spikenard,  myrrh,  and  incense,  spread  them- 
selves around  and  filled  the  house.     You  per- 
ceived nothing  of  this,  O,  intolerant  disciples  I 
in  vain  is  this  perfume  spread  around  you ; 
but   your   Master  has    breathed  it;    He  has 
understood    an    action   incomprehensible   by 
your  proud  hearts;  He  has  seen  the  sorrow  of 
heart  of  that  poor  Mary;  He  has  discerned 
the   tears  of   her  repentance,  which  perhaps 
could  not  get  outward  vent,  roll  drop  by  drop 
from  her  heart;  He  knows  the  secret  of  that 
mute   grief; — the   Saviour    and    the    sinner 
understand  each  other,  and  there  passes  be- 
tween   them,     silently,    something    sublime, 
something  ineffable,  which   you  will  not   be 
able  to  comprehend   unless   you,  yourselves, 
come,   transported  with  sorrow  and  love,  to 
pour  perfumes  also  on  the  head  of  Jesas,  to 
shed   tears   at   His   feet,   and  to  break  your 
hearts  before  Him. — Alex.  Vinet,  D.D. 

(c)  Let  us  offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise  to 
God  continually,  that  is,  the  fruit  of  our  lips, 
giving  thanks  to  His  name.     Had  not  David 


a  most  heavenly  spirit,  who  was  so  much  in 
this  heavenly  work  ?  Doth  it  not  sometimes 
raise  our  hearts,  when  we  only  read  the  Song 
of  Moses,  and  the  Psalms  of  David?  How 
much  more  would  it  raise  and  refresh  us  to  be 
skilful  and  frequent  in  the  work  ourselves  I 
Oh,  the  loss  to  many  of  the  saints  who  drench 
their  spirits  in  continual  sadness,  and  waste 
their  days  in  complaints  and  groans,  and  so 
make  themselves,  both  in  body  and  mind,  un- 
fit for  this  sweet  and  heavenly  work  I  Instead 
of  being  employed  in  the  praises  of  God,  they 
are  questioning  their  worthiness,  and  study- 
ing their  miseries,  and  so  rob  God  of  His 
glory,  and  themselves  of  their  consolation. — 
Gleanings. 

(jd)  There  is  nothing,  no,  nothing  innocent 
or  good,  that  dies,  and  is  forgotten :  let  us 
hold  to  that  faith,  or  none.  An  infant,  a 
prattling  child,  dying  in  its  cradle,  will  live 
again  in  the  better  thoughts  of  those  who 
loved  it ;  and  play  its  part,  through  them,  in 
the  redeeming  actions  of  the  world,  though  its 
body  be  burnt  to  ashes,  or  drowned  in  the 
deepest  sea.  There  is  not  au  angel  added  to 
the  host  of  heaven  but  does  its  blessed  work 
on  earth  in  those  that  loved  it  here.  For- 
gotten 1  oh,  if  the  good  deeds  of  human  crea- 
tures could  be  traced  to  their  source,  how 
beautiful  would  even  death  appear ;  for  how 
much  charity,  mercy,  and  purfied  affection 
would  be  seen  to  have  their  growth  in  dusty 
graves. — Charles  Dickens. 

Thousands  of  men  br^^athe,  move,  and  live, 
pass  off  the  stage  of  life,  and  are  heard  of  no 
more.     Why  ?     They  do  not  partake  of  good 
in  the  world,  and  none  were  blessed  by  them ; 
none  could  point  to  them    as  the  means  of 
their  redemption;  not  a  line  they  wrote,  not  a 
word  they  spake,  could  be  recalled ;  and  so 
they  perished ;  their  light  went  out  in  dark- 
ness, and   they   were  not  remembered  more 
than  insects  of  yesterday.     Will  you  thus  live 
and  die,  0  man  immortal  ?     Live  for  some- 
thing.     Do    good,   and   leave   behind  you   a 
monument  of  virtue  that  the  storm  of  time 
can  never  destroy.     Write  your  name  in  kind- 
ness,  love,    and    mercy,    on    the    hearts    of 
thousands  you  come  in  contact  with  year  by 
year;  you  will  never  be  forgotten.     No,  your 
name,  your  deeds  will  be   as  legible   on  the 
hearts  you  leave  behind  as  the  stars  on  the 
brow  of  evening.     Good  deeds   will    shine  as 
the  stars  of  heaven. —  Chalmers, 


The  Support  op  Religious  Institutions. 

{Verse  8S.) 


"This  was  the  dedication  of  the  altar, 
after  that  it  was  auointed.** 

In  this  chapter  we  see  how  the  altar 
was  dedicated  ;  and  we  learn  that  God 
expects  His  people  to  provide  for  and 
118 


to  carry  on  His  work.  This  dedication 
of  the  altar 

I.  Suggests  to  us  some  of  the  re- 
sponsibilities of  the  wealthy. 

Wealth  is  a  talent    God  will  demand 


HOMILETtC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  VIL 


an  account  of  it.    He  holds  the  wealthy 
responsible — 

1.  To  give  of  their  wealth  to  carry  on 
His  work.  God  claims  a  share  of  all 
we  get ;  how  much  that  shall  be  He 
leaves  to  our  conscience.  He  looks 
not  so  much  at  the  amount  as  at  the 
motive.  He  measures  our  gifts  by  our 
hearts.  To  Christ  the  *'  two  mites  " 
was  the  greatest  offering  in  the  Treasury 
of  the  Temple  for  that  reason.  God 
expects  us  to  take  care  of  His  house 
and  work;  not  to  do  so  is  a  sin.  David 
was  in  distress  because  he  lived  in  a 
better  house  than  the  Ark  of  God  had  ; 
that  is  the  right  feeling.  Surely  we 
ought  to  take  as  good  care  of  God's 
house  as  of  our  own.  Were  it  so,  the 
treasury  of  God's  house  would  never 
be  empty. 

2.  To  take  the  lead  in  doing  good — to 
he  examples  in  giving.  The  wealthy  are 
looked  up  to ;  if  they  fail  to  do  their 
duty,  not  only  do  they  fail  to  do  good, 
but  they  also  check  and  prevent  others 
from  doing  so. 

II.  Is  a  striking  illustration  of  the 
voluntary  principle. 

It  teaches  us  the  true  method  of 
giving  for  the  support  of  religious 
institutions. 


1.  God  has  left  His  work  to  he  carried 
on  hy  His  people. 

2.  The  voluntary  principle  is  the  most 
efftctlve  for  doing  this.  (1)  Because 
conscience  is  brought  into  action  by  it: 
giving  becomes  an  act  of  worship.  (2) 
Because  man  is  then  on  his  honour. 
(3)  As  a  matter  of  fact  it  has  never 
failed.  See  how  much  it  produced 
here  in  the  wilderness.  The  Church 
in  the  present  age  supplies  ample 
proof  of  its  success,     (a) 

3.  God   is  greatly  pleased  with    it. 
He  approves  of  it.     Read  ver.  89  with 
the  text.     He  approves — (1)     Because 
voluntary   giving   evinces  real  interest 
in  His   work — shows  that    it   is    done 
from  love.     The  free-will  offering   is  a 
good  guage  of  the  people's  hearts   and 
interest.     (2)    He  will  accept  nothing 
that  is  done  from  constraint.     (3)   He 
testifies  to   His  pleasure,  in  His  Word 
and  by  blessing  those  who  so  help  His 
work.       "  Every  man  according  as   he 
purposeth  in  his  heart ;  not  grudgini^ly, 
or  of  necessity  ;  for  God  loveth  a  cheer- 
ful giver."     Those  who  give  to  God  are 
ever   blessed   by   Him.       Our    Master 
pays   well;    we  never  lose   by  serving' 
Him    faithfully.       ''  He   which  so  wet  L 
bountifully  shall  reap  also  bountifully." 
— David  Lloyd, 


ILLUSTRATION. 


(a)  In  Scotland,  during  the  last  seventeen 
years  (1861),  an  experiment  has  been  made 
on  a  large  scale  of  the  power  of  the  voluntary 
principle,  and  made,  too,  by  men  who  had  but 
little  faith  in  it  at  first.  Of  course,  I  now 
refer  to  the  "  Free  Church  of  Scotland."  The 
alternative  was  placed  before  the  Church  of 
Scotland,  to  give  up  their  rights  of  self-govern- 
ment or  to  give  up  State  pay.  And  478 
ministers  and  professors  said,  We  will  give 
up  the  pay,  we  will  be  free,  whatever  may  be 
the  result.  They  left  their  homes,  and  the 
churches  in  which  their  fathers  had  wor- 
shipped, trusting  in  God  to  provide  for  them 
And  what  the  results  have  been  I  am  now 
about  to  lay  before  you.  Let  us  first  look  at 
what  they  have  done,  in  sixteen  years,  in  the 
way  of  providing  accommodation  for  religious 
worship.     They  have  built — 

jC     B.  d.             £  s.  d. 
800  'hurehes  «>t  an  aver- 

a^ecstof 918  6    0  total  734  6  U  1     2 

»65  Manses,  diUo 600  0    0    „     SSfJ.OnO  0    0 

«3u  Schools,  ditto   835  0    0    „     207.70i)  0    0 

Carried  forward    ..«,.„ 1,281,341     1     2 


Brought  forward     £128,341  1  2 

Edinburgh  Oolloge,  total  coat 33  879  6  1 

Glasgow  ColleEre,         „        „     11220  0  0 

Aberdeen  College       2.360  0  o 

Edi  ihurgh     a  d      Glasgow     Normal 

Sf^hools    22  514  9  « 

A  8  mblv  Hall  and  site,  Ediaour«h  ...  8,500  0  0 

Church  Offl  "PS  ia  Mound  pi  if.ft  7.5)0  0  0 

Churches,^  Manses,  School-',  erected  ac 

the  expense  of  individuals,  not  aj- 

pearing  in  the  public  accoucts  60,000  0  0 


Aggregate  cost  of  builJing-i  £1,422,364  16    9 

From  this  large  amount  of  money  spent  in 
buildings,  there  are  two  small  deductions  to  b-^ 
made.  First,  the  existing  debt  upon  them  i-« 
estimated  at  £90,000;  and  second,  towards 
theerpction  of  the  schools  th^y  have  r»^ceived 
£20,000  from  the  Government.  Deduct- 
ing these  there  is  the  noble  sum  of 
£l,312,3G4  15s.  9d.  left,  which  in  sixteen 
years  the  Free  Church  of  Scot'and  has  in- 
vested in  lime,  stone,  and  land  I  Let  us  now 
look  at  the  ministry  of  the  Free  Church. 
T'lere  were  478  ministers  who  left  their 
emoluments  and  status  in  the  Established 
Churoh.     In  the  first  year  of  the  Froe  Chui  cb 

lid 


CHAP.  VII, 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


each  of  these  received  a  ptipf^nd  from  £105 
and  upwards.  In  the  year  1859  the  niiuaber 
of  ministers  had  increased  to  784,  and  the 
loA-est  stipend  was  then  £138.  Besides  which, 
5G5  of  them  had  a  pleasant  manse,  built  by 
tbe  free-will  offerings  of  the  people. 

But  perhaps  it  may  be  thought  that  all 
the  energies  of  the  Free  Church  have  been 
confined  to  building  churches  and  schools, 
and  providing  for  their  own  wants  at  home; 
but  this  has  not  been  the  case.  They  have 
been  doing  much  for  others  in  various  ways, 
and  in  many  Ian  Is.  Allow  m<^  to  read  you 
the  income  for  the  year  1859,  for  various 
T'ligiouH  objects : — 
Bui  dingFun<i.  Qea  ral  and  Lo  al   ...    £50.519  16  o^ 

Susientation  Fund  12G  -ISi  14  (J 

Congregational  Fund 9 '481  1«  6 

Fducati'«n  Fun!    17  764  15  3 

Coilege  FuQfl 9,000    8  6 

General  Trustees  and  Mis  iellancous...      3S619    4  7^ 

Oftrried  for«7ard.....MM.M.M..*....M      334,668  18  4 


Brought  forward  ^ £334,668  18  4 

Glasgow  Evangplisation 2.539  11  I 

Missions  to  the  High'an 's    1,314     3  2 

Missions  to  tae  Ooljnieoi    4  487  15  9 

Missions  to  the  Coutineut 2,456  19  8 

ForeigQ  Missions      19,210    2  6 

Missi  ns  to  the  Jews      7,673  13  3 

Making  a  total  income  for  1859  of         £342,723  12  ^ 

You  will  see  from  these  figures  that  the 
zeal  of  the  Free  Church  is  expansive.  If  they 
begin  at  home  they  do  not  stay  there.  From 
the  year  1843  to  1859,  a  period  of  sixteen 
years,  the  Free  Church  raised  for  all  purposes 
£4  883,132  12s.  6fd."  And  after  sixteen  years' 
experience  tne  income  of  the  Free  Church 
still  increases.  "Leaving  out  of  view  the 
building  funds  which  are  temporary,  the  ag- 
gregate of  all  the  other  funds  has  been  steadily, 
year  by  year,  increasing;  so  that  the  yearly 
average  of  the  last  five  years  is  twenty-five 
per  cent,  above  the  yearly  average  of  the 
first  five  years." — Marmaduke  Miller, 


The  Condesoension  of  God  and  the  Privileges  op  Man. 

(Verse  89.) 


Already  the  Lord  had  promised 
M(<ses  that  He  would  meet  with  him, 
and  commune  with  him  from  above  the 
mercy-seat  (Exod.  xxv.  22)  ;  and  now 
He  fulfils  that  promise.  The  tribes 
had  cheerfully  contributed  everything 
necessary  for  the  tabernacle  and  its 
sacred  services !  and  now  the  Most 
High  acknowledges  His  acceptance  of 
their  offerings  hy  manifesting  His  Pre- 
sence in  thus  speaking  to  Moses  in  the 
holy  of  holies.     Let  us  consider, — 

i.  The  great  condescension  of  God. 

"  When  Moses  was  gone  into  the 
tabernacle  of  the  congregation  to  speak 
with  Him,  then  he  heard  the  Voice  of 
One  speaking  unto  him,"  etc.  Moses 
heard  the  Voice  conversing  with  him. 
Great  is  the  condescension  of  the  Lord 
in  thus  speaking  with  Moses,  and 
through  Moses  to  the  people.  Let  us 
notice  here — 

1.  IVie  sacred  place  in  which  He  speaks. 
It  was  in  the  holy  of  holies  in  "  the 
taV)ernacle  of  meeting."  It  was  in  this 
place  that  he  had  promised  to  meet 
with  His  servant.  "  There  I  will  meet 
with  thee,  and  I  will  commune  with 
thee,"  etc.  He  is  represented  as  dweling 
in  this  place,  and  as  entiironed  between 
the  cherubim.  It  was  the  place  of  His 
120 


special  self-manifestation.  God  is  every- 
where present. 

"  Earth's  crammed  with  heaven. 
And  every  common  bush  afire  with  God ; 
But  only  he  who  sees  takes  off  his  shoes ; 
The  rest  sit  round  and  gather  blackb9rries.*» 

The  thoughtful  and  reverent  mind 
beholds  signs  of  the  presence  and 
activity  of  God  on  every  hand.  We 
see  his  glory  in  the  countless  orbs  of 
heaven,  and  in  the  exquisite  pencillings 
and  perfumes  of  the  flowers  of  earth, 
etc.  But  still  He  specially  manifests 
Plimself  to  man  in  His  house.  In  the 
proclamation  of  the  glorious  Gospel,  in 
the  administration  of  the  holy  sacra- 
ments, and  in  the  presentation  of  re- 
verent worship  to  Him,  man  most  often 
and  fully  realses  the  presence  and  hears 
the  Voice  of  God  (compare  Exod.  xx. 
24 ;  2  Chron.  vi.  18;  and  Matt,  xviii. 
20). 

2.  The  grand  medium  through  which 
He  speaks.  "  Speaking  unto  him  from 
off  the  mercy-seat  that  was  upon  the 
ark  of  testimony,  from  between  the  two 
cherubims."  The  mercy-scat  was  "■  the 
massive  golden  cover  of  the  ark  of  the 
covenant,  on  which  the  glory  of  Jehovah 
appeared  between  the  cherubim.  It 
was   that   upoa   which   especially    the 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  VII. 


blood  of  the  propitiatory  sacrifice  was 
fiprinkled  on  the  day  of  atonement 
(Lev.  xvi.  15),  and  from  this  circum- 
stance apparently,  the  propitiation 
taking  place  on  it,  it  obtained  its  name 
of  iA.aorT77ptoi/.  It  was  the  footstool  of 
God  (1  Chron.  xxviii.  2  ;  Psa.  xcix.  5). 
The  spot  where  He,  the  God  of  the 
covenant,  met  with  Israel,  the  people 
of  the  covenant."  It  is  also  called 
'♦the  oracle"  (1  Kings  vi.  19,  20,  23). 
Now  the  mercy-seat  is  an  illustration, 
perhaps  a  type,  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  He  is  the  true  Mercy-seat,  the 
Divine  IXaa-T-^pLov  (Rom.  iii.  25).  By 
the  shedding  of  His  blood,  the  great 
atonement  for  the  sins  of  the  world 
was  made.  In  Him  God  draws  near  to 
man,  and  communes  with  him.  He  is 
the  true  Divine  Oracle ;  through  Him 
the  most  precious  revelations  of  God 
have  been  made ;  in  Him  we  hear  the 
voice  of  God  most  clearly  and  graciously 
(Heb.  i.  1-3). 

3.  The  gracious  purpose  for  vhich  He 
speaks.  In  this  instance,  the  voice  from 
between  the  cherubim  doubtless  an- 
nounced to  Moses  the  gracious  accep- 
tance by  Jehovah  of  the  cheerful  offer- 
ings of  the  princes  of  the  tribes  ;  and 
intimated  that  He  had  taken  up  His 
abode  in  their  midst.  All  the  utter- 
ances of  God  are  for  the  benefit  of 
man.  Even  the  proclamation  of  His 
law  is  an  expression  of  His  benevolence 
to  our  race.  *'  Law  is  love  defined." 
*'  The  law  is  holy,  and  the  command- 
ment holy  and  just,  and  good."  But 
how  gracious  are  His  utterances  to  us 
by  Christ  Jesus!  "All  wondered  at 
the  gracious  words  which  proceeded  out 
of  His  mouth."  "  Never  man  spake 
like  this  Man."  "The  words  that  I 
speak  unto  you  are  spirit,  and  are  life." 
"  Thou  hast  the  words  of  eternal  life." 
The  grand  purpose  for  which  God  speaks 
to  us  through  Christ  is  that  we  might 
be  saved  from  sin,  and  restored  to  the 
perfect  likeness  and  the  intimate  fellow- 
ship of  Himself.  Jesus  Christ  is  pre- 
eminently the  Word  of  God ;  He  is  the 
fullest,  grandest,  most  eloquent  ex- 
pression of  the  Divine  love;  and  the 
great  object  of  His  incarnation  was  the 


redemption  of  man  from  evil,  and  the 
conference  upon  him  of  eternal  and 
blessed  life.  How  great  is  the  conde- 
scension of  God  in  all  this,     (a) 

II.  The  great  privileges  of  man. 

Moses  went  into  the  tabernacle  of 
meeting  to  speak  with  Jehovah,  and  he 
heard  the  voice  conversing  with  him  : 
and  he  spake  unto  Him.  Here  is  a 
twofold  privilege  which  through  Jesus 
Christ  every  man  may  enjoy  : — 

1.  We  maf/  speak  unto  God.  He  in- 
vites us  to  do  so,  and  promises  us  a 
gracious  audience.  "  Offer  unto  God 
thanksgiving,  and  pay  thy  vows  unto 
the  Most  High  ;  and  call  upon  Me  in 
the  day  of  trouble  :  I  will  deliver  thee, 
and  thou  shalt  glorify  Me."  "In  every- 
thing by  prayer  and  supplication  with 
thanksgiving,  let  your  requests  be  made 
known  imto  God."  (See  Isa.  Ixv.  24 ; 
Dan.  ix.  20-23  ;  Mai.  iii.  16,  17  ;  Matt. 
xviii.  19,  20 ;  John  xvi.  23-27.)  In  all 
ages  godly  souls  have  proved  the  reality 
and  the  preciousness  of  this  privilege. 
In  time  of  grief  or  gladness,  of  per- 
plexity or  penitence,  of  doubt  or  dread, 
of  triumph  or  tribulation,  we  may 
speak  unto  God  in  praise  or  prayer,  or 
in  the  silent  language  of  the  heart, 
which  He  perfectly  comprehends,  as- 
sured that  He  will  hear  us  graciously, 
and  bless  us  generously.  Blessed 
privilege  !     (b) 

2.  IVe  may  receive  communications 
from  God.  The  soul  which,  through 
the  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ,  is  brought 
into  sympathy  with  Him,  receives  com- 
munications from  Him  through  many 
voices.  In  the  melodies  and  minstrel- 
sies of  nature  such  a  soul  hears  with 
reverent  delight  the  Divine  music  of 
the  Father's  voice.  We  receive  mes- 
sages from  Him  through  the  sacred 
Scriptures,  through  the  operations  of 
His  providence,  and  through  the  mys- 
terious and  gracious  ministry  of  His 
Spirit.  And  how  precious  and  helpful 
are  His  communications !  Pardon  to 
the  guilt}'',  peace  to  the  penitent,  joy 
to  the  sorrowful,  direction  to  the  per- 
plexed, hope  to  tlie  despondent,  etc. 
Unspeakably  great  and  blessed  are  our 
privileges,     (c) 

121 


CHAP.  VII. 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


III.  The  consequent  duty  of  man. 

The  possession  of  privileges  always 
involves  corresponding  obligations. 
Since  man  possesses  these  privileges,  it 
becomes  his  duty — 

1.  To  wait  upon  God  in  His  house. 
No  one  can  neglect  public  worship 
without  sinning  against  his  own  soul 
and  God. 

2.  To  address  God  in  His  house. 
Since  He  invites  us  to  do  so,  we  cannot 
neglect  the  privilege  of  uniting  in 
praise  and  prayer  without  sin. 


3.  To  listen  for  the  Voice  of  God  in 
His  house.  The  wise  and  godly  soul 
resorts  to  the  temple  of  God  not  to  be 
charmed  with  the  eloquence,  or  stimu- 
lated by  the  reasoning,  or  moved  by 
the  pathos  of  the  preacher ;  not  to  be 
gratified  by  the  spectacles  of  a  gorgeous 
ritualism,  or  delighted  by  the  musical 
performances  of  professional  choirs ; 
but  with  humble  reverence  to  speak  to 
God .  and  with  devout  attention  to  listen 
to  His  voice,     (d) 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 


(a)  A  king  might  hav«  the  whole  of  his 
reign  crowded  with  the  enterprises  of  his 
glory  ;  and  by  the  might  of  his  arms,  and  the 
wisdom  of  his  connsels,  might  win  the  first 
reputation  among  the  potentates  of  the  world, 
and  be  idolized  throughout  all  his  province! 
for  the  wealth  and  the  security  that  he  had 
spread  around  them — and  still  it  is  conceiv- 
able, that  by  the  act  of  a  single  day  in  behalf 
of  a  single  family ;  by  some  soothing  visita- 
tion of  tenderness  to  a  poor  and  solitary 
cottage ;  by  some  deed  of  compassion,  which 
conferred  enlargement  and  relief  on  one 
despairing  sufferer  ;  by  some  graceful  move- 
ment of  sensibility  at  a  tale  of  wretchedness; 
by  some  noble  effort  of  self-denial,  in  virtue  of 
which  he  subdued  his  every  purpose  of  re- 
venge, and  spread  the  mantle  of  a  generous 
oblivion  over  the  fault  of  the  man  who  had 
insulted  and  aggrieved  him  ;  above  all,  by  an 
exercise  of  pardon  so  skilfully  administered, 
as  that,  instead  of  bringing  him  down  to  a 
state  of  defencelessness  against  the  provoca- 
tion of  future  injuries,  it  threw  a  deeper 
pacredn'  8 '  over  him,  and  stamped  a  more 
inviolable  dignity  than  ever  on  his  person  and 
character: — why,  on  the  strength  of  one  such 
performance,  done  in  a  single  hour,  and 
reaching  no  farther  in  its  immediate  effects 
than  to  one  house  or  one  individual,  it  is  a 
most  possible  thing,  that  the  highest  monarch 
upon  earth  might  draw  such  a  lustre  around 
him,  as  would  eclipse  the  renown  of  all  his 
public  achievements — and  that  such  a  display 
of  magnanimity,  or  of  worth,  beaming  from 
the  secrecy  of  his  familiar  movements,  might 
awaken  a  more  cordial  veneration  in  every 
bosom,  than  all  the  splendour  of  his  conspic- 
uous history — ay,  and  that  it  might  pass  down 
to  posterity  as  a  more  enduring  monument  of 
greatness,  and  raise  him  farther,  by  its  moral 
elevation,  above  the  level  of  ordinary  praise ; 
and  when  he  passes  in  review  before  the  men 
of  distant  ages,  may  this  deed  of  modest, 
gentle,  nnobtrusive  virtue,  be  at  all  times 
appealed  to  as  the  most  sublime  and  touohing 
memorial  of  hisnamo. 

122 


In  like  manner  did  the  King  eternal,  im- 
mortal, and  invisible,  surrounded  as  He  is 
with  the  splendours  of  a  wide  and  everlasting 
monarchy,  turn  Him  to  our  humble  habita- 
tion ;  and  the  footsteps  of  God  manifest  in  the 
flesh,  have  been  on  the  narrow  spot  of  ground 
we  occupy ;  and  small  though  our  mansion  be 
amid  the  orbs  and  the  systems  of  immensity, 
hither  hath  the  King  of  glory  bent  His  mys- 
terious way,  and  entered  the  tabernacle  of 
men,  and  in  the  disguise  of  a  servant  did  He 
sojourn  for  years  under  the  roof  which  canopies 
our  obscure  and  solitary  world.  Yes,  it  is 
but  a  twinkling  atom  in  the  peopled  infinity 
of  worlds  that  are  around  it — but  look  to  the 
moral  grandeur  of  the  transaction,  and  not  to 
the  material  extent  of  the  field  upon  which  it 
was  executed — and  from  the  retirement  of  our 
dwelling-place,  there  may  issue  forth  such  a 
display  of  the  Godhead,  as  will  circulate  the 
glories  of  His  name  amongst  all  His  wor- 
shippers. Here  sin  entered.  Here  was  the 
kind  and  universal  beneficence  of  a  Father 
repaid  by  the  ingratitude  of  a  whole  family. 
Here  the  law  of  God  was  dishonoured,  and 
that  too  in  the  face  of  its  proclaimed  and  un- 
alterable sanctions.  Here  the  mighty  contest 
of  the  attributes  was  ended — and  when  justice 
put  forth  its  demands,  and  truth  called  for  the 
fal  filment  of  its  warnings,  and  the  immutability 
of  God  would  not  recede  by  a  single  iota  from 
any  one  of  its  positions,  and  all  the  severities 
He  had  ever  uttered  against  the  children  of 
iniquity,  seemed  to  gather  into  one  cloud  of 
tbroatening  vengeance  on  the  tenement  that 
held  us — did  the  visit  of  the  only  begotten  Son 
chase  away  all  these  obstacles  to  the  triumph 
of  mercy — and  humble  as  the  tenement  may 
be,  deeply  shaded  in  the  obscurity  of  in- 
significance as  it  is,  among  the  statelier 
mansions  which  are  on  every  side  of  it— yet 
will  the  recall  of  its  exiled  family  never  be 
forgotten,  and  the  illustration  that  has  been 
given  here  of  the  mingled  grace  and  majesty 
of  God  will  never  lose  its  place  among  the 
themes  and  the  acclamations  of  eternity.— 
Thomas  Chalmers^  V.D.,  LL.U, 


EOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  VII. 


(6)  Prayer  is  not  asking  for  something.  I 
have  nothing  to  ask  for  since  I  have  known 
what  God's  fatherhood  meant.  I  have  but 
one  petition,  and  that  is,  "  Thy  will  be  done." 
It  is  not  for  me  to  wake  the  sun.  It  is  not 
for  me  to  call  the  summer.  It  is  not  for  me 
to  ask  for  colours  in  the  heavens.  All  these 
things  are  abundantly  provided.  The  earth 
is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof,  and  I 
am  God's  beloved.  He  died  for  me  by  His 
Son  Jesus  Christ.  He  thinks  of  me.  Do  I 
ever  forget  my  children?  Saall  a  mother 
forget  her  baby,  cradled  in  her  arms,  by  day 
or  by  night  ?  And  shall  God  forget  us  in  that 
great  rolling  sea  of  His  thoughts,  in  that 
everlasting  fecundity  of  His  love,  in  the  in- 
finite bound  of  the  Divine  tenderness  and 
mercy  for  man  ?  Is  there  anything  left  to 
ask  for?  When  I  am  tired  I  carry  my  weari- 
ness there,  and  lay  it  down.  When  I  am  in 
sorrow,  I  am  glad  when  I  think  of  the  Sorrow- 
ing One.  The  God  of  all  comfort  is  my  God. 
When  my  burden  is  heavy,  it  is  not  so  heavy 
as  was  His  cross.  Ten  thousand  thoughts  of 
this  kind  that  spring  from  every  side  of 
human  experience  and  touch  human  life  in 
every  part — these  are  elements  of  prayer.  So 
that  when  I  pray,  I  rejoice ;  as  the  Apostle 
would  say,  "  Giving  thanks  in  prayer." 
Prayer  is  cheerful  to  me.  Prayer  is  sweet  to 
me ;  it  is  not  ascetic.  I  know  that  I  am 
wicked;  I  know  that  I  grieve  God;  I  know 
that  there  are  times  when  I  am  glad  to  say, 
*•  God,  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner  !"  So  there 
are  times  for  the  majesty  of  storms  in  summ  r. 
But  thunderstorms  do  not  march  in  prooes.-ion 
all  the  way  across  the  bosom  of  the  summer. 
There  is  more  brightness  than  darkness,  more 
tranquil  fruitfulness  than  agitation  and 
thunder. — H.  W.  Beecher. 

(c)  What  we  want  in  this  English  land,  and 
down  in  the  midst  of  this  busy  nineteenth 
century — want  as  a  gain  that  would  be  to  us 
as  life  from  tho  dead,  is  a  firm  persuasion  of 
God's  presence  with  our  human  affairs,  and  of 
His  inflaence,  not  only  about  us,  but  within 
us.  If  He  be  not  thus  present  with  us,  where 
can  be  tbe  object — the  rationality  of  pmyer? 
Religious  men  of  all  creeds  have  been  praving 
men — must  pray.  In  fact,  the  Light  of  tho 
World  is  ever  knocking  at  the  door,  now  by 
frustrating  our  fond  earthly  schemes,  now  by 
bringing  us  face  to  face  with  the  judgment- 
seat  through  disease  or  accident;  now  sum- 
moning us  to  look  upon  our  loved  ones  dead — 
in  a  thousand  ways  like  these  does  the  Incar- 
nate One  appeal  to  our  susceptibilities  of 
religious  life,  and  we  hearken  to  His  voice, 
and  bid  Him  welcome,  or  we  heed  Him  not, 
and  bid  Him  go  His  way  until  some  more  con- 
venient season.  We  have  to  do  with  a  living 
God.  We  are  in  the  midst  of  a  living  uni- 
verse. Influences  between  heaven  and  earth, 
like  the  figures  seen  on  the  mystio  ladder,  are 
constantly  descending    and    ascending,   and 


spirits  have  been  passing  through  all  time, 
like  an  erer-widening  stream  of  light,  from 
this  lower  world  to  the  higher,  where  the 
Highest  Himself  receives  them  as  His  own. — 
Robert  Vaughan,  D.D. 

(d)  Hear  the  Word  with  constant  self-ap- 
pKcation.  Hear  not  for  others,  but  for  your- 
selves. What  should  we  think  of  a  person 
who,  after  accepting  an  invitation  to  a  feast, 
and  taking  his  place  at  the  table,  instead  of 
partaking  of  the  repast,  amused  himself  with 
speculating  on  the  nature  of  the  provisions, 
or  the  manner  in  which  they  were  prepared, 
and  their  adaptation  to  the  temperament  of 
the  several  guests,  without  tasting  a  single 
article?  Such,  however,  is  the  conduct  of 
th^se  who  hear  the  Word  without  applying  it 
to  themselves,  or  considering  the  aspect  it 
bears  on  their  individual  character.  Go  to 
the  bouse  of  God  with  a  serious  expectation 
and  desire  of  meeting  with  something  suited 
to  your  particular  state  ;  something  that  shall 
lay  the  axe  to  the  root  of  your  corruptions; 
mortify  your  easily-besetting  sin,  and  confirm 
the  graces  in  which  you  are  most  deficient. 
A  little  attention  will  be  sufficient  to  give  you 
that  insight  into  your  character,  which  will 
teach  what  you  need ;  what  the  peculiar 
temptations  to  which  you  are  exposed,  and  on 
what  account  you  feel  most  shame  and  humilia- 
tion before  God.  Every  one  may  know,  if  he 
pleases,  the  plague  of  his  own  heart.  Keep 
your  eye  upon  it  while  you  are  hearing,  and 
eagerly  lay  hold  upon  what  is  best  adapted  to 
heal  and  correct  it.  Remember  that  religion 
is  a  personal  thing,  an  individual  concern ; 
for  every  one  of  us  must  give  an  account  of 
himself  to  God,  and  every  man  bear  his  own 
burden. 

Receive  with  meekness  the  engrafted  Word, 
which  is  able  to  save  your  souls.  It  you  choose 
to  converse  with'  your  fellow-Christians  on 
what  you  have  been  hearing,  a  practice  which, 
if  rightly  conducted,  may  be  very  edifying, 
let  your  conversation  turn  more  upon  the  ten- 
dency, the  spiritual  beauty  and  glory,  of  these 
great  things  of  God  which  have  engaged  your 
attention,  than  on  the  merit  of  the  preacher. 
We  may  readily  suppose  that  Cornelius  and 
his  friends,  after  hearing  Peter,  employed 
very  few  words  in  discussing  the  oratorical 
talents  of  that  great  Apostle  ;  any  more  than 
the  three  thousand,  who  at  the  day  of  Pente- 
cost were  pricked  to  the  heart;  their  minds 
were  too  much  occupied  by  the  momentous 
truths  they  had  been  listening  to,  to  leave 
room  for  such  reflections.  Yet  this  is  the 
only  kind  of  religious  conversation  (if  it 
deserves  the  application)  in  which  too  many 
professors  engage.  "  Give  me,"  says  the  in- 
comparable Fenelon,  "  the  preacher  who 
imbues  my  mind  with  s<uch  a  love  of  the  Word 
of  God,  as  makes  me  desirous  of  hearing  yf 
from  any  mouth." — Robert  Hall,  A.M. 


I2t 


CHAP.  Vll. 


HOMIJ.ETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


Man's  Aooess  to  God,  and  God's  Word  to  Man. 

(Verse  89.) 


The  high  priest  alone  had  access  to 
the  holy  of  holies ;  he  alone  could  ap- 
proach the  mercy-seat,  and  there  enjoy 
the  immediate  and  special  presence  of 
God.  But  Moses  seems  to  have  been 
an  exceptional  case ;  a  privileged  person; 
for  he  was  permitted  to  approach  God 
in  a  way,  and  to  an  extent,  which  was 
the  peculiar  privilege  of  the  high  priest 
alone.  This  may  be  explained  by  the 
fact  that  Moses  was  a  subordinate 
mediator  between  God  and  Israel  in 
the  desert ;  he  is  called  a  mediator  in 
one  of  the  epistles  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment. And  that  would  show  that  he 
had  an  office,  an  elevation,  and  a 
relationship  to  God,  which  none  else 
had  in  that  economy,  and  which  gave 
him,  therefore,  privileges  which  none 
else  were  permitted  to  enjoy.  But 
now  every  Christian  has  all  the  right 
that  Moses  had.  The  humblest  believer 
in  the  house  of  God  is  a  priest  in  the 
truest  and  only  existing  sense  of  the 
word  ;  and  has  access  as  a  priest  into 
the  immediate  presence  of  God  (comp. 
Eph  ii.  18). 

What  was  this  way  of  access  by  which 
Moses  drew  near  to  God,  and  by  which 
we  draw  near  ]  There  never  was  but 
one,  there  never  will  be  but  one  way 
by  which  fallen  man  can  draw  near  to 
God — Christ  the  way,  the  truth,  and 
the  life.  The  mode  of  revealing  it  has 
differed,  but  the  way  itself  has  always 
been  the  same.  Moses  did  not  see  it 
as  clearly  as  we  do,  but  he  trod  the 
same  path,  nevertheless. 

When  Moses  approached  to  God, 
what  was  the  object  that  he  had  first 
in  view  1  Moses  drew  near  to  Him  to 
speak  to  Him.  But  to  speak  how  'i 
No  doubt  about  it,  to  pray.  And  to 
speak  in  what  manner?  No  doubt  in 
the  name  of  Jesus,  with  all  freedom 
(see  Heb.  iv.14-16).  Moses  went  into 
the  presence  of  God  to  tell  Him  what 
the  wants,  the  sorrows,  the  sufferings, 
the  fears,  the  difficulties  of  Israel  were. 
124 


We,  too,  are  welcome  to  go  into  the 

very  chancel  of  the  universe,  into  the 
very  presence  of  Deity,  and  to  tell  God 
our  least  and  our  worst  cares  ;  for  there 
is  no  trouble  so  trivial  that  God  will 
refuse  to  listen  to  it,  and  there  is  no 
trouble  so  bitter  and  so  burdensome 
that  God  will  not  either  remove  or 
give  strength  to  bear. 

Not  only  did  Moses  go  to  speak  to 
God,  but  we  read  that  God  spoke  to 
him.  I  know  not  which  is  most 
precious ;  that  we  may  speak  to  God, 
or  that  God  has  spoken  to  us  (Heb.  i. 
1,  2).  Many  persons  think  it  strange 
that  God  should  give  a  revelation  of 
Himself  to  us.  It  would  seem,  on  the 
contrary,  that  it  would  be  strange  if 
God  did  not  give  us  a  revelation  of  Him- 
self. If  it  be  true  that  we  have  lost 
Him,  that  we  cannot  by  any  searching 
find  Hira,  is  it  not  reasonable — is  it  not 
probable  that  the  Father  of  us  all  should 
tell  us  where  He  is,  what  He  is,  who 
we  are,  and  whither  we  are  going?  Does 
not  the  father  instruct  the  children  ] 
Does  not  ripe  age  warn  and  teach  un- 
ripe youth  ?  The  Great  Father  will 
teach  His  children,  etc. 

But  how  and  by  whom  has  God 
spoken  to  us  ?  Moses  says  it  was  from 
the  mercy-seat,  and  from  between  the 
cherubim.  What  was  that  the  symbol 
of  1  The  Apostle  tells  us,  in  his  epistle 
to  the  Romans  (iii.  25),  "  Propitiation," 
literally,  **  Mercy-seat."  When  God, 
therefore,  spoke  from  the  mercy -seat, 
and  from  between  the  cherubim,  where 
the  Shecinah  or  the  glory  shone,  it  was 
speaking  then,  translated  into  New 
Testament  language,  by  Christ,  the 
Mediator  between  God  and  us.  All 
that  can  be  known  of  God,  He  has  made 
known  ;  all  that  can  be  seen  of  God,  He 
is ;  all  that  can  be  heard  of  God,  He 
speaks.  Christ  thus  is  the  medium  of 
this  communication. 

The  Book  that  the  Spirit  inspired — 
the   Bible — is  the  depository  of  what 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  Vfl. 


God  said  from  between  the  cherubim  ; 
or,  translated  into  our  language,  what 
God  spoke  by  Jesus  Christ.  "  Holy 
men  of  God  spake  as  they  were  moved 
by  the  Holy  Ghost,"  Whatever  is  not 
in  the  Bible,  however  true,  is  not  es- 
sential to  salvation  ;  whatever  contra- 
dicts the  Bible,  however  popular,  is  not 
true.  But  all  that  is  in  the  Bible  is 
profitable  for  instruction,  for  correction 
in  righteousness  ;  for  all  Scripture  is 
given  by  inspiration  of  God.  It  is  the 
Word  perpetuated  in  ceaseless  echoes 
along  the  centuries  as  God  spake  it  in 
and  by  Christ  Jesus. 

We  may  presume  that  the  Book  thus 
inspired  is  at  least  an  intelligible  Book. 
There  is  not  a  more  intelligible  book 
than  the  Bible.  It  is  not  asserted  that 
every  word  of  the  Book  is  plain ;  but 
if  there  be  darkness,  it  is  because  of 
the  infinitude  of  the  subject,  and  our 
imperfection  ;  not  because  of  the  in- 
adequacy of  the  writer  or  the  Inspirer 
of  it.  Finite  minds  cannot  comprehend 
all-infinite  truth.  We  must,  therefore, 
expect  that  there  will  be  some  pages 
difficult,  because  the  subjects  are  in- 
finite ;  but  we  do  find  that  the  passages 
that  relate  to  our  personal  well-being 
are  so  plain,  that  he  who  reads  may 
run  while  he  reads. 

The  preacher,  or  the  minister,  is 
simply  the  expositor  of  this  Book.  He 
is  not  to  add  to  it,  nor  is  he  to  subtract 
from  it;  but  he   is  simply  to  set  it 


forth,  to  explain  allusions  to  customs 
that  have  passed  away ;  to  set  its 
truths  in  clear  light,  applying  them  to 
modern  circumstances,  and  to  the 
varying  phases  of  every  social  system. 

We  have  reason  to  believe  that  this 
revelation  is  God's  last  communica- 
tion to  man  in  this  dispensation 
(Heb.  i.  1,  2).  We  cannot  add  to  it; 
it  is  not  a  discovery  which  man  has 
made,  and  man  can  mend ;  but  a  reve- 
lation which  God  has  given,  and  which 
man,  therefore,  cannot  improve. 

God  spoke  "  from  between  the 
cherubim."  Angels  desire  to  look  into 
these  things.  They  are  hearers ;  we 
are  actors.  Thjy  can  afford  to  look ; 
but  we  cannot  afford  to  be  passive 
spectators.  It  is  to  as  it  is  spoken  ; 
it  is  about  us  that  God  speaks ;  our 
responsibility  is  increased  by  hearing  it. 

And  what  God  has  put  in  this  Book 
is  of  infinite  importance.  God  has  not 
bowed  the  heavens  to  make  known  an 
idle  or  a  useless  tale.  It  is  of  infinite 
value,  unspeakably  precious.  If  so, 
let  us  be  thankful  we  have  heard  it, 
that  we  have  the  Word  uncorrupted,  a 
lamp  to  our  feet,  a  light  to  our  path. 
And  if  we  are  thankful  for  it,  how 
diligently,  how  devoutly  should  we 
study  it !  And,  appreciating  this 
blessed  Book  ourselves,  we  ought  to 
circulate  and  spread  it  among  all  maa- 
kind. — John  Cummin^f  D,D, 


Thb  Chbrubim  and  thb  Meroy-seat. 
(Verse  89.^ 


Surely  there  was  some  design  in 
bringing  together  all  these  different 
objects  into  one  great  symbol  or  type  ; 
— the  tables  of  the  law,  the  covering 
of  the  mercy-seat,  the  representation  of 
the  cherubim,  and  the  glory  of  God, 
the  cloud  of  the  Divine  presence  sur- 
mounting them.  They  teach  us  that 
betwixt  law  and  grace;  betwixt  the 
administration  of  grace  to  man  and  the 
heavenly  world  ;  and  betwixt  the  whole 
of  this  dispensation  and  arrangement, 
and  the  glorious  manifested  presence  of 


Jehovah,  there  is  a  close  and  interesting 
connexion. 

L  There  is  now  a  relation  batwixt 
law  and  grace. 

Why  are  the  tables  of  the  law,  which 
were  "  a  witness  against"  the  people 
(Deut.  xxxi.  26), placed  in  the  sanctuary 
where  everything  spake  of  mercy?  (1 
Kings  viii.  9). 

1.  Because  the  law  is  eternal ^  and 
must  therefore  harmonise  with  every  dis- 
pensation of  religion  to  man.  The  whole 
Gospel  is  founded  upon  the  eternity  of 

125 


CHAP,  vn. 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


the  law;  for  if  its  authority  did  not 
continue,  we  could  not  siu  against  it, 
and  should  therefore  need  no  mercy. 
The  very  nature  of  the  law  bears  with 
it  internal  evidence  that  it  must  endure 
for  ever  ;  it  is  holy,  and  just,  and  good. 
Wherever,  then,  j^ou  look  for  the 
Gospel  you  will  find  the  law. 

2.  Because  it  was  the  violation  of  the 
law  hy  which  the  dispensation  of  mercy 
toas  rendered  necessary.  If  man  had 
never  sinned,  there  would  have  been  no 
need  of  sacrifice,  no  need  of  mediation. 
The  very  Gospel  implies  our  guilt. 
The  tables  are  put  into  the  ark  to  teach 
us,  that  if  they  were  not  there,  we  couM 
expect  nothing  but  the  law's  maledic- 
tion, and  the  execution  of  its  sentence. 

3.  To  intimate  to  us  that  the  grand  end 
of  the  administration  of  grace  to  man  is 
the  re-establishment  of  the  law's  dominion 
over  him.  The  grand  end  of  this  dis- 
pensation is  certainly,  in  the  first 
instance,  to  deliver  us  from  the  guilt 
and  penalty  of  sin  ;  and  then,  in  the 
next  place,  by  the  almighty  grace  of 
Christ,  to  implant  within  us  principles 
which  the  influences  of  the  Spirit  shall 
carry  on  to  maturity,  that  we  may  be 
filled  with  all  the  fruits  of  righteous- 
ness for  ever. 

4.  To  indicate  that  the  administration 
of  grace  is  in  every  part  consistent  with 
law.  The  mercy-seat  was  God's  throne 
of  grace  founded  upon  law.  It  was 
sprinkled  with  the  blood  of  atonement 
(comp.  Rom.  iii.  25,  26  ;   Heb.  ix.  13, 

14;  1  Pet.  ii.  24;  Isa.  liii.  5) 

Wherever  these  three  principles  unite — 
that  the  righteous  character  of  the 
Governor  is  upheld ;  that  men  are 
deterred  from  offences ;  that  the  au- 
thority of  the  law  is  maintained,  and 
its  purity  and  excellence  declared ; — 
there  is  a  righteous  government ;  and 
such  is  the  government  of  God,  even 
while  He  is  abundant  in  mercy,  waiteth 
to  be  gracious,  and  is  ever  ready  to 
forgive. 

II.  There  is  an  harmonious  relation 
betwixt  the  dispensation  of  grace  to 
man  and  the  heavenly  world. 

Over  the  mercy-seat  the  cherubim 
were  placed.  Cherubim  are  placed 
126 


before  us  in  Scripture  under  two  views. 
First,  they  are  presented  to  us  as  the 
ministers  of  Divine  vegeance  (Gen.  iii. 
24).  But  in  the  tabernacle,  from  the 
very  position  in  which  they  were 
placed,  hiding  the  ark  with  their  wings, 
*'  shadowing  the  mercy-seat,"  bending, 
as  if  looking  down  upon  it,  they  are 
represented  as  interested  spectators  of 
the  administration  of  the  grace  of  God 
to  men,  through  the  atonement  and 
sacrifice  of  the  Saviour. 

1.  Angelic  powers  have  an  intellectual 
interest  in  this  great  subject,  (Comp. 
1  Peter  i.  12.) 

2.  The  conneocion  of  the  angelic  world 
with  the  Christian  system  is  likewise  one 
of  large  and  important  moral  benefit. 
We  may  fairiy  infer  this  from  Eph.  iii. 
10.  If  to  any  being  already  pure, 
brighter  views  of  God,  more  important 
degrees  of  moral  knowledge  be  commu- 
nicated, such  communications  of  know- 
ledge must  always  be  the  instrument 
of  an  increase  both  of  holiness  and 
felicity.  And  there  must  be  great 
subjects  with  which  the  angels  must 
become  better  acquainted  than  they 
ever  could  have  been,  but  for  the 
occurrences  and  history  of  our  redemp- 
tion. We  may  see  this  in  relation  to 
the  evil  of  sin,  the  love  of  God,  the 
power  of  God,  the  power  of  grace  in 
man,  etc. 

3.  Angelic  beings  are  ministers  to  the 
Church  and  ministers  to  individuals 
(see  Colos.  i.  20;  Heb.  i.  14.)  God 
Himself  is  the  Friend  of  those  who  are 
reconciled  to  Him  through  Jesus  Christ; 
and  all  His  agents,  whether  angels  or 
men,  are  ministers  to  do  them  good 
(Rom.  viii.  28.) 

III.  There  was  the  presence  of 
God  crowning  the  whole. 

In  the  sanctuary  was  the  visible 
symbol  of  the  Divine  presence.  Thus 
are  we  shown  that  all  things  are  of 
Him,  and  by  Him,  and  for  Him  (2 
Chron.  vi.  41).  As  creation .  is  from 
the  will  of  God,  so  is  redemption.  All 
is  the  result  of  His  benevolence  (2  Cor. 
V.  18). 

This  indicates,  too,  the  necessity  of 
Divine  agency.     As  He  originated  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  Vliu 


whole  scheme  of  *  redemption,  so  must 
He  be  present  with  it  to  give  it  power 
and  efficacy.  This  was  felt  under  the 
law  (comp.  Ps.  Ixxx.  1,  2 ;  cxxxii. 
8,  9).  As  the  most  beautiful  arrange- 
ments of  the  temple  would  have  been 
msuffioient  without  the  cloud  of  the 
Divine  presence,  so,  unless  God  be 
especially  present,  even  with  Christi- 
anity, it  cannot  profit. 

The  whole  points  out  the  everlasting 


presence  of  God  with  His  Church 
(comp.  Isa.  xii.  6;  Psa.  cxxxii,  13-16). 
The  people  of  God  dwell  already  in 
the  outer  courts  ;  but  they  are  waiting 
till  they  shall  be  permitted  to  pass 
**  within  the  vail,  whither  the  Fore- 
runner is  for  them  entered."  There 
God  Himself  shall  be  with  them,  and 
be  their  God  for  ever  and  ever. — 
Richard  Watson, 


CHAPTER   VIII. 


Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. 

Verses  1-4.      (Compare   Exod.    xxv. 
31-40;  xxvii.  20,  21;   xxxvii.    17-24; 
xl.  24,25).  Here  we  have  the  command 
to  actually   light  the  lamps,  and  the 
statement  of  its  fulfilment.     *'  When 
Aaron  is  commanded  to  attend  to  the 
lighting  of  the  candlestick,  so  that  it 
may  light   up   the  dwelling,  in  these 
special  instructions  the  entire  fulfilment 
of  the  service  in  the  dwelling  is  enforced 
upon  him  as  a  duty.     In  this  respect 
the   instructions   themselves,    coupled 
with   the   statement  of  the  fact  that 
Aaron  had  fulfilled  them,  stand  quite 
appropriately  between  the  account  of 
what  the  tribe-princes  had  done  for  the 
consecration   of  the   altar    service   as 
representatives    of    the   congregation, 
and  the  account  of  the  solemn  inaugura- 
tion of  the  Levites  in  their  service  in 
the  sanctuary." — Keil  and  Del. 

Verses  6-22.  Before  entering  upon 
their  duties  the  Levites  were  to  be 
consecrated  to  the  office,  and  then 
formerly  handed  over  to  the  priests. 

Verse   6.     Cleanse  therriy  "'.'^^ ;  not 

t^"^p,  to  hallow  or  sanctify,  used  of  the 

consecration  of  the  priests  (Exod.  xxix. 
1  ;  Lev.  viii.  12). 

Verse  7.  Water  of  purifying.  Lit., 
**  sin-water.**  The  water  used  for  the 
cleansing  of  persons  cured  of  leprosy 
(Lev.  xiv.  5),  and  the  "  water  of  separa- 
tion "  (chap.  xix.  9),  were  both  of  them 
prepared  with  peculiar  and  significant 
ingredients.  The  "sin -water;"  i.e., 
water  designed  to  cleanse  from  sin,  was 


doubtless  taken  from  the  water  in  the 
laver  of  the  sanctuary,  which  was  pro- 
vided for  the  purification  of  the  priests 
before  they  entered  upon  the  per- 
formance of  their  duties  (Exod.  xxx. 
17-21). 

Let  them  shave  all  their  flesh.  Margin  : 
"  Let  them  cause  a  razor  to  pass  over," 
etc.  Keil  and  Del.  :  "  *  They  shall  cause 
the  razor  to  pass  over  their  whole  body, 
njTJ?  'y'^Vr}  is  to  be  distinguished  from 

n?^.  The  latter  signified  to  make 
bald  or  shave  the  hair  entirely  off  (Lev, 
xiv.  8,  9)  ;  the  former  signifies  merely 
cutting  the  hair,  which  was  part  of  the 
regular  mode  of  adorning  the  body." 

Verse  10.  The  children  of  I si'ael  shall 
put  their  hands  upon  the  Levites.  The 
princes  of  the  tribes  would  do  this  as 
the  representatives  of  their  respective 
tribes.  By  this  act  they  represented 
the  transfer  to  the  Levites  of  the  sacred 
duties  which  were  previously  obligatory 
upon  the  whole  nation  in  the  persons 
of  its  first-born  sons. 

Verse  11.  And  Aaron  shall  offer  the 
Levites  before  the  Lord  for  an  offering. 
Lit.,  as  in  margin  :  *'  Shall  wave  the 
Levites  before  the  Lord  (as)  a  wave- 
offering."  "  How  this  was  to  be  done 
is  not  determined.  Alost  likelv,  Aaron 
pointed  to  the  Levites,  and  then  waved 
his  hands,  as  in  ordinary  cases  of 
making  this  offering.  The  multitude 
of  the  Levites  seems  to  preclude  the 
other  modes  suggested,  e.g.,  causing 
them  to  march  backwards  and  forwards 
before  \he  altar,  or  taking  them  round 

127 


CHAP.  Vtll. 


nOMtl.ETlC   COMMENTARY:  NUMBERS. 


it.  The  ceremony  of  waving  indicated 
(cf.  Lev.  vii.  30)  that  the  offering  was 
dedicated  to  God,  and  again,  by  grant 
from  Him,  withdrawn  for  the  use  of  the 
priests.  It  was  therefore  aptly  used  at 
the  inauguration  of  the  Levites." — 
Speaker  s  Comm, 

Verse  1 2.  The  Levites  shall  lay  their 
hands,  etc.  "By  this  imposition  of 
hands,  they  made  the  sacrificial  animals 
their  representatives,  in  which  they 
piesented  their  own  bodies  to  the  Lord 
as  a  living  sacrifice,  well  pleasing  to 
m\nr~Keiland  Del. 

Verse  16.  The  firstborn  of  all  the 
children  of  Israel.  Heb.  :  **  The  first- 
born of  every  one  of  the,"  etc. 

Verse  19.  To  make  an  atonement  for 
the  children  of  Israel.  "/.<?.,  by  per- 
forming those  services  which  were  due 
from  the  children  of  Israel ;  the  omis- 
sion of  which  by  the  children  of  Israel 
would,  but  for  the  interposition  of  the 
Levites,  have  called  down  wrath  from 
God." — Speaker's  Comm. 

That  there  he  no  plague  among  the 
children  of  Israel,  etc.,  by  reason  of  any 
irreverent,  or  otherwise  improper  per- 
formance of  saored  duties,  or  any  trifling 


with  sacred  things.     (Compare  cbaptei 
i.  53.) 

Verse  2L  And  the  Levites  were  puri 
fied.  More  correctly  ;  "  Purified  them 
selves." 

Verse  24.  To  wait  upon  the  service  of 
etc.  Heb.,  as  in  margin  :  "  To  war  the 
warfare  of,"  etc.  Keil  and  Del.  :  "  To 
do  service  at  the  work  of,"  etc. 

Verse  25.  Shall  cease  waiting  upon 
the  service.  Heb.,  as  in  margin  :  "  Re- 
turn from  the  warfare  of  the  service." 
Keil  and  Del.  :  "  Return  from  the  ser- 
vice of  the  work,  and  not  work  any 
further." 

Verse  26.  To  keep  the  charge^  aiid 
shall  do  no  service.  "  Charge^  as  dis- 
tinguished from  ivork,  signified  the  over- 
sight of  all  the  furniture  of  the  taber- 
nacle (see  chap,  iii.) ;  work  (service) 
applied  to  laborious  service,  e.g.y  the 
taking  down  and  the  setting  up  of  the 
tabernacle,  and  cleaning  it,  carrying 
wood  and  water  for  the  sacrificial  wor- 
ship, slaying  the  animals  for  the  daily 
and  festal  sacrifices  of  the  congrega- 
tion," etc. — Keil  and  Del. 

Proceeding  to  view  the  chapter  homi- 
leticallt/f  in  the  first  paragraph  we  have  : 


The  Golden  Candlestick,  an  Emblem  op  the  Church  of  God. 

{Verses  1-4.) 


The  Golden  Candlestick  was  part  of 
the  furniture  of  the   Holy  place,  and 
was  placed  on  the  South  side  of  that 
apartment.     The  full  description  of  the 
candlestick    is   given    in     Exod.    xxv. 
31-40;    xxxvii.    17  24.     According   to 
the  Rabbins,  the  height  of  it  was  five 
feet,  and  the  breadth  of  it,  or  the  dis- 
tance   between    the     outer    branches, 
three   and  a  half   feet.       During    the 
night    the    whole    of  the  seven  lamps 
were   kept   burning,    but   in    the   day 
there  were  only  three.     The  weight  of 
the  entire  candlestick  was  a  talent,  or 
one  hundred  and  twenty-five  pounds. 
It  has  been  calculated   to  have   been 
worth  £5,076.     Regarding  the  candle- 
stick as  an  emblem  of  the  Church,  the 
text  suggests — 
128 


I.  The  Preciousness  and  Sacred- 
ness  of  the  Church  of  God. 

The  candlestick  was  of  pure  beaten 
gold,  so  also  were  the  snuffers  and 
snuffs  dishes.  Much  of  the  furniture 
of  the  sanctuary  was  made  of  pure 
gold — the  mercy-seat,  the  cherubim, 
the  dishes,  spoons,  covers,  bowls,  the 
pot  which  contained  the  manna  ;  and 
many  of  the  larger  things  were  over- 
laid with  gold  (Exod.  xxv.  10-39).  In 
so  large  a  use  of  this,  the  costliest  and 
most  perfect  of  all  metals,  we  have  an 
intimation  of  the  preciousness  of  the 
Church  of  God,  and  all  its  belongings. 
The  people  of  God  are  highly  esteemed 
by  Him.  "  The  precious  sons  of  Zion, 
comparable  to  fine  gold."  "  The  Lord 
taketh  pleasure  in  His  people.")     See 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBEIIS,         chap.  viii. 


Tsa.   xlix.   15,   16;   Mai.    iii.   16,    17; 
Acts  XX.  28;  2  Tim.  ii.  19.)    "But  the 
mere  costliness    of  gold,"   says   Arch- 
bishop   Trench,    "  that    it    was  of  all 
metals   the   rarest,   and  therefore  the 
dearest,   this  was  not  the  only  motive 
for  the  predominant  employment  of  it. 
Throughout  all  the  ancient  East  there 
was  a  sense  of  sacredness  attached  to 
this  metal,  which  still  to  a  great  extent 
survives.     Thus  '  golden  ''  in  the  Zend- 
Avesta  is  throughout  synonymous  with 
heavenly  or  divine.     So  also  in  many 
Eastern  lands  while   silver    might    be 
degraded   to    profane    and    every- day 
uses  of  common  life,   might  as  money 
pass  from  hand  to  hand,  *  the  pale  and 
common  drudge  *twixt  man  and  man,' 
it  was  not  permitted  to  employ  gold  in 
any   services    except    only   royal    and 
divine."     The    Church    of  God    is    a 
sacred  institution.      "  Ye  are  a  chosen 
generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  an  holy 
nation,  a  peculiar  people,"  etc.     *'Know 
ye  not  that  ye  are  the  temple  of  God, 
and  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in 
you  ]     .     .     .     The  temple  of  God  is 
holy,  which  temple  ye  are." 

II.    The  Light  of   the   Church  of 
God. 

The  light   in  the   holy  place  is    an 
emblem  of  the  Word  of  God    in    His 
Church.       His    Word,    His  truth,    in- 
cluding   in    this    all    which    He    has 
declared  of  Himself  in  revealed  religion, 
is  the    light    of   the    Church.       "Thy 
Word   is  a  lamp  unto   my  feet,  and   a 
light  unto  my  path."     "  For  the  com- 
mandment is  a  lamp  ;  and  the  law  is 
light ;  and  reproofs  of  instruction    are 
the    way  of    life."      Like    its    Divine 
Author,  the  Word  of  God  is  light  in 
itself.   "  God  has  ordained  His  Gospel," 
says  iMilton,  "  to  be  the  revelation  of 
His  power  and  wisdom  in  Christ  Jesus. 
Let   others,  therefore,  dread   and  shun 
the  Scriptures  for   their    darkness ;    I 
shall  wish  I  may  deserve  to  be  reckoned 
amongst   those  who  admire  and  dwell 
upon  them  for  their  clearness.     There 
are  no  songs  comparable  to  the  songs 
of  Zion,  no   orations  equal  to  those  of 
the  prophets,  and  no  politics  like  those 
which   the    Scriptures    teach."       The 


Word  of  God  gives  light  to  others,  as 
the  lamps  on  the  candlestick  gave  light 
to  the  priests  in  the  holy  place.  "It 
is  a  book  full  of  light  and  wisdom,"  says 
Sir  Matthew  Hale,  "  will  make  you 
wise  to  eternal  life,  and  furnish  you 
with  directions  and  principles  to  guide 
and  order  your  life  safely  and  pru- 
dently. There  is  no  book  like  the 
Bible  for  excellent  learning,  wisdom, 
and  use."  The  jjerfection  of  this  light 
is  shadowed  forth  by  the  Golden 
Candlestick,  with  its  seven  lamps. 
Seven  is  the  numl)er  of  mystical  com- 
pleteness ;  and  the  seven  lamps  set 
forth  the  full  perfection  of  the  Sacred 
Scriptures,      (a) 

III.  The  Ministers  of  the  Church 
of  Grod,  and  their  Function. 

Aaron  and  his  sons,  the  priests,  were 
to  light  the  lamps  in  the  Holy  Place. 
It  is  the  duty  of  ministers  to  expound 
and  apply  the   teachings  of  the  Word 
of  God  :  not  to  use  that  Word  to  illus- 
trate and  confirm  their  own  theories  or 
the  systems  of  other  men ;  but  reverently 
and  earnestly  to  strive  to  ascertain  its 
meaning  and  message,  and  to  make  that 
meaning   and  message  clear  and  con- 
vincing to  others.     \t  is  their   sacred 
function  to  bring  the  light  of  the  Divine 
Scriptures  to  bear  upon  the  duties  and 
experiences,    the    problems    and    per- 
plexities,   the    sins    and    struggles    of 
human    life.      It    has    been    suggested 
that  "the  lighting  of   one    lamp  from 
another  showed  the  opening  of  one  text 
by  another."     This  work  of  the  Gospel 
ministry,  if  it   is  to  be  well  done,   de- 
mands careful  and  suitable  education, 
diligent    and    devout    study,    and    the 
gracious  help  of  the  Divine  Spirit,    (b) 
It  is  also  neccss;iry  that  the  Christian 
minister    should    live   well.      His    life 
should    be    luminous    as    well    as    his 
ministry.      It  was  well  said  by  Thomas 
Adams :  "  He  that  preaches  well  in  his 
pulpit,  but  lives  disorderly  out  of  it,  is 
like  a  young  scribbler  ;  what  he  writes 
fair  with  his  hand,   his   sleeve   comes 
after  and  blots." 

IV.  The  Function  of  the  Chmxh  of 
God. 

I^ike    ths    Golden   Candlestick,    the 

J39 


CHAP.  VIII. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY :   NUMBERS. 


Church  is  to  be  a  light-bearer.  The 
Church  is  not  the  light,  but  it  is  the 
bearer  of  light,  that  which  holds  it  forth 
and  causes  it  widely  to  spread  abroad 
its  rays.  It  has  no  light  of  its  own, 
but  it  diffuses  that  which  it  receives 
from  its  Saviour  and  Lord.  Every 
Christian  is  "  light  in  the  Lord,"  and 
should  show  forth  this  light  in  the 
darkness  of  this  world.  He  is  called 
to  this :  "  Ye  shine  as  lights  in  the 
world,  holding  forth  the  Word  of  Life." 
"  Ye  are  the  light  of  the  world,"  etc. 
(Matt.  V.  14-16.)  "I  would  not  give 
much  for  your  religion,"  says  Mr.  Spur- 
geon,  "  unless  it  can  been  seen.  Lamps 
do  not  talk ;  but  they  do  shine.  A 
lighthouse  sounds  no  drum,  it  beats  no 


gong ;  and  yet  far  over  the  waters  its 
friendly  spark  is  seen  by  the  mariner. 
So  let  your  actions  shine  out  your  re- 
ligion. Let  the  main  sermon  of  your 
life  be  illustrated  by  all  your  conduct, 
and  it  shall  not  fail  to  be  illustrious." 
(c). 

Application. 

1.  To  individuals:  Are  our  lives 
luminous  in  the  light  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ? 

2.  To  Churches :  Are  we  making  good 
our  claim  to  a  place  in  "  the  Church  of 
the  living  God  "  by  taking  our  part  in 
performing  the  Divine  function  of  that 
Church  ]  Are  we  diffusing  the  light  of 
God  in  Christ  in  this  dark  world  1 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(rt).  How  large  a  space  does  a  candle  oc- 
cupy ?  Just  a  little  hole  in  the  candlestick. 
But  when  it  shines  out  to  the  poor  traveller 
that  has  lost  his  way  in  the  morass  at  mid- 
night, how  far  it  reaches!  Aod  to  him  how 
much  it  means,  when  it  guides  him  to  a  high- 
way, and  to  a  hospitable  place  of  resideuce! 
And  how  much  it  means  on  a  rocky  shore, 
when  it  gives  light  to  a  thousand  ships  with 
their  imperilled  mariners !  It  means  safety. 
It  does  an  important  offiue-work,  although  it 
requires  but  a  small  space  to  stand  in.  And 
although  the  Word  of  God  does  not  cover 
much  ground,  the  ground  that  it  does  cover 
is  so  vital,  and  it  stands  so  conn-  cted  with 
man^B  life  here  and  hereafter,  that  it  shines 
with  a  clear  light.  And  he  that  takes  heed 
to  it  will  certainly  find  the  hai  hour,  the  shore, 
the  haven.  It  is  transcendently  important; 
in  present  and  temporal,  and  human  respects, 
not  so  important  as  men  have  t-upposed;  but 
in  future,  and  eternal,  and  spiritual  respects, 
a  great  deal  more  important  than  men  have 
supposed. — H.  W,  Beecher, 

Whatever  else  may  be  said  about  the  Bible, 
I  am  sure  no  man  can  deny  that  it  is  the 
best  book  to  guide  men  toward  practical  virtue 
and  true  holiness  that  has  ever  appeared  in 
the  world.  Whatever  may  be  the  disputes 
about  its  origin,  whatever  may  be  the  contro- 
versies and  the  doubts  upon  the  various 
th(  ories  of  inspiration,  as  a  practical  book,  as 
a  light  to  a  man's  feet,  and  a  lamp  to  his  path, 
it  has  proved  itself  to  be,  and  can,  by  investi- 
gation, be  shown  to  be  the  wisest  book  to 
follow  that  is  known. — Ibid. 

(b)  Learning,  as  well  as  office,  is  requisite 
for  a  minister.  An  unlearned  scribe,  without 
his  treasure  of  old  and  new,  is  unfit  to 
interpret  God'a  oracles.  The  priest's  lips 
•h»ll  preserve  knowledge,  is  no  less  a  precept 
to  '^ihe  minister  than  a  promise  to  the  people  : 

130 


we  are  unfit  to  be  seers  if  we  cannot  dia 

tinguish  between  Hagar  and  Sarah.  A 
minister  without  lea  ning  is  a  mere  cypher, 
which  fills  up  a  place  and  increaseth  the 
number,  but  signifies  nothing  There  have 
been  some  niggardly  affected  to  learning, 
calling  it  man's  wisdom.  If  the  moral  saying 
of  ft  poet  or  a  philosopher,  or,  perhaps,  some 
golden  sentence  of  a  father,  drop  from  us,  it 
is  straight  called  poisoned  eloquence,  as  if  all 
these  were  not  the  spoils  of  the  Gentiles,  and 
mere  handmaids  unto  divinity.  They  wrong 
us  :  we  make  not  the  pulpit  a  philosophy, 
lo^ic,  poetry-scbool;  but  all  these  are  so  many 
stairs  to  the  pulpit.  Will  you  have  it  ?  The 
fox  di.-^praiseth  the  grapes  he  cannot  reach. 
If  they  could  beat  down  learning,  they  might 
escape  censure  for  tiieir  own  ignorance.  For 
shame  I  Let  noui  that  have  born  a  book 
dispraise  learniug.  Sne  hath  enemies  enough 
abroad.  She  should  be  jus  ified  of  her  own 
cbiLiren.  Let  Btibary  disgrace  arts,  not 
Athena. — Thomas  Adams. 

(c)  This  world,  with  all  its  darkened 
societies,  is  but  Gcd's  large  house,  in  which 
so  many  of  HiS  children  cry  in  the  night,  but 
never  see  or  find  their  father  ;  and  as  house- 
wives do  not  kindle  the  household  lamp  at 
eveoing  only  to  turn  over  it  the  big  wheat 
measure  to  hide  it  or  to  quench  it,  but  set  it 
uncovered  on  its  lamp-stand,  that  it  may  shed 
a  cheer  I  ul  gU-am  tbrougn  all  the  room,  so  his 
our  Heavenly  House-Father,  in  mercy  to  His 
still  darkened  children,  placed  His  saints  on 
their  conspicuous  elevation  of  church-member- 
ship, tijat  tijeir  clear  light  of  Gospel  know- 
ledge and  their  refl  -cted  radiance  of  holy 
affections  and  Ohri-tlihe  deeds  might  spread 
abroad  by  open  professsion  and  unconcealed 
well-doing,  a  blessed  illumination.  It  is  not 
that  the  Christian  need  pant  after  notoriety, 
or  vain^loriously  flash  his  little  spark  whore 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  VIII. 


ho  haa  no  business.  The  House-Master  who 
kindles  us  must  place  us,  one  on  a  loftier  and 
one  on  a  lower  lamp-stand  as  it  pleaseth  Him. 
For  us  it  is  enough  that  we  be  content  with 
the  height  or  conspicuousness  of  our  place, 
and  cheerfully  let  such  light  as  we  have  be 
seen  as  it  may  be,  neither  ambitiously  envious 
nor  timorously  unfaithful.  We  are  not  free 
to  descend  from  the  stand  on  which  He  has 
put  us,  nor  to  hide  our  Christianity  because 
we  are  looked  at,  any  more  than  we  are  free 
to  cease  from  sbiaing  because  there  are  few 
to  see  us,  or  to  flare  the  higher  when  many 
applaud.  ...  As  I  have  seen  the  glow- 
worm at  late  evening,  by  the  silent  side  of  an 
empty  English  lane,  mount  some  tall  spike  of 
grass,  and  turn  up  its  tiny  lamp,  content  to 
hang  head  downwards,  itsolf  unseen,  so  that 
the  exquisite  soft  green  light  which  God  had 
given  it  might  be  visible  in  its  loveliness,  so 
may  one  find  in  this  world's  lowly  and  un- 
frequented paths  Christ's  light-bearers,  who 
shed  each  his  own  sweet  love-light  round  a 
narrow  circle  of  the  dark,  that  the  wayfarer  who 
Bees  may  praise,  not  his  unsightly,  and,  sooth  to 
Bay,  concealed  eelf,  but  that  great  Father  in 


heaven  who  lit  this  faint  taper  upon  earth,  even 
as  He  lit  the  nobler  fires  which  burn  far  up  in 
heaven.  But  just  as  I  have  shut  the  poor 
glow-worm  in  a  box  or  under  an  inverted  dish, 
yet  found  that  it  spent  all  its  radiance  there 
unseen,  only  for  sake  of  love  and  because 
shine  it  must,  so  will  the  true  soul,  whom  his 
Lord  8  all  chance  to  impribon  from  shedding 
light  on  any  human  eye,  rejoice  no  less  to  let 
his  devout  affections  and  gracious  deeds  be 
seen  of  Him  who  looks  through  the  d'  nsest 
cover,  and  knows  how  to  bestow  an  open 
reward. 

Since,  then,  Jesus  hath  taught  us  that  to  be 
visible  is  no  accident  iu  Christian  life,  but  the 
very  condition  of  its  usefulness,  let  us  each 
with  patient  tendance  trim  our  inward  lamp, 
that  in  our  hearts  there  may  b©  the  light  of  a 
sevenfold  blessed  grace;  then  let  us  not  be 
ashamed  with  modest  faithfulness  to  let  that 
silent  efficacious  light  of  Christian  character 
tell  of  us,  that  we  have  been  shone  upon  by 
tne  face  of  Jesus  ;  and  of  your  Lord,  that  He 
is  Light,  and  that  in  Him  there  is  no  dark- 
ness at  all. — J.  0.  Dykes,  M.A.y  D.D. 


The  Consecration  op  the  Levites  ;  or,  Aspects  of  Acceptable  Consecration 

TO  God. 

{Verses  5-22.) 


Several  of  the  tomiletic  suggestions 
arising  out  of  these  verses  have  already- 
been  noticed  by  us  in  our  notes  on  the 
preceding  chapters.  Repetition  of  them 
is  undesirable.  They  will  be  found  on 
pp.  21-23;  48-53;  61-65.  In  this 
section  of  the  history  we  have  the 
account  of  the  ordination  of  the  Levites 
to  the  duties  already  assigned  to  them 
in  chapters  iii.  and  iv.  They  have  been 
exchanged  for  the  firstborn;  and  now 
they  are  consecrated  to  the  work  of 
their  sacred  calling.  The  order  and 
ceremonies  of  their  consecration  were 
appointed  by  God ;  we  shall  regard 
that  consecration  as  setting  forth  several 
aspects  of  acceptable  consecration  to 
God. 

I.  In  acceptable  consecration  to 
Crod  there  is  a  practical  recognition  of 
the  necessity  of  moral  purity. 

"  Take  the  Levites  from  among  the 
children  of  Israel,  and  cleanse  them," 
etc.  (verses  6  and  7).  Human  nature 
is  defiled  by  sin.  Its  springs  of  thought 
and  feeling  are  corrupt.  Heart  and 
bands  are  both  stained  by  evil  in 
K  2 


thought  and  deed.  If  we  would  ap- 
proach unto  God  acceptably,  we  must 
seek  spiritual  cleansing.  The  offerings 
that  are  presented  to  God  must  be  pure, 
and  before  man  can  offer  himself  to 
God,  he  must  cleanse  himself  from  sin 
(See  Exod.  iii.  5  ;  Isa.  i.  11-18;  1  Tim.  ^ 
ii.  8).  Ministers  of  the  Gospel  are" 
specially  required  to  cultivate  and 
exhibit  moral  purity  in  their  life.  They 
must  translate  the  doctrine  of  their 
sermons  into  the  practice  of  their  life  ; 
they  must  be  sound  in  doctrine  and 
sincere  in  life.  "  Be  ye  clean  that  bear 
the  vessels  of  the  Lord."  "A  bishop 
must  be  blameless,"  etc.  (1  Tim.  iii. 
2-7).  "In  all  things  shewing  thyself 
a  pattern  of  good  works,"  etc.  (Titus  ii. 
7,  8).  "  Being  ensamples  to  the  flock." 
Let  all  Christians,  and  all  ministers 
especially,  cultivate  this  moral  purity. 
But  how  may  it  be  attained  % 

I.  By  personal  effort.  "  Let  them 
shave  all  their  flesh,  and  let  them  wash 
their  clothes,  and  so  make  themselves 
clean."  The  cleansing  elements  pro- 
vided by  God  in  the  Gospel  are  of  no 

131 


CHAP.  VIII. 


IIOMlLEriC    COMMEyTARY:    NUMBERS, 


avail  unless  they  are  persoiiallv  applied. 
*'  Wash  vou,  make  voii  clean,"  etc. 
The  iniuimorablo  white-robed  multi- 
tude, before  the  throne  and  before  the 
Lamb,  "  have  washed  their  robes,  and 
made  them  white  iu  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb."  "  Purifvino:  their  hearts  by 
faith." 

2  By  Diviiic  influence.  Moses  was 
commanded  to  cleanse  the  Levites : 
*'  And  thus  thou  shalt  do  unto  them  to 
cleanse  them  :  Sprinkle  water  of  puri- 
fying upon  them."  "  Tlieu  will  I 
sprinkle  clean  w*ater  upon  you,  and  ye 
shall  be  clean  :  from  all  vour  tilthiness, 
and  from  all  vour  idols,  will  I  cleanse 
you."  *' The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His 
Sou  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin,"  Sco.  (1 
John  i.  7-9).  C^d  both  provides  the 
cleansiui^r  element  and  blesses  man's 
cleansiuir  efforts.  "  It  is  our  duty  to 
cleanse  oui*selves,  and  God's  promise 
that  He  will  cleanse  us." 

II.  In  acceptable  consecratiou  to 
God  there  is  a  practical  recognition  of 
the  necessity  of  at  moment  for  sin. 

A  vouiu'  bullock  was,  bv  the  Divine 
direction,  offered  to  God  as  a  sin- 
offering  for  the  Levites  (ver.  8,  1:2). 
In  this,  two  truths  of  vital  importance 
were  symbolically  expressed  . 

1.  That  man  needs  forgive?iess  of  sin 
and  reconciliation  with  God.  Man  cannot 
truly  serve  God  or  commune  with  Him 
until  these  are  attained  bv  him. 

2.  That  forgiveness  of  sin  and  recon- 
ciliation to  God  are  to  be  attained  through 
sacrince.  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the 
world  "  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice 

of   Himself Christ  was 

offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many."  "  In 
whom  we  have  redemption  through 
His  blood,  the  forgiveness  of  sins, 
accord  in  iT  to  the  riches  of  His  i^race." 
(See  remarks  on  the  sin-ottering  iu  our 
exposition  of  chaps,  vi.  13  21,  and  vii. 
lossy      (a) 

III.  Acceptable  consecration  to 
God  must  be  unreserved  and  full, 

"  A  vounu'  bullock  w  ith  his  meat- 
otVering  of  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil  " 
was  to  be  offered  to  God  for  the  Levites 
as  a  burnt  i^fferiuii  ;  which  svmboli- 
callv  expressed  the  entire  surrender  of 
132 


the  offerer  unto  God.  As  the  offering 
was  entirely  consumed  upon  the  altar 
to  the  honour  of  God,  so  the  offerer 
gave  himself  wholly  to  God.  (On  this 
point  see  our  exposition  of  chaps,  vi. 
13-21,  and  vii.  10-88).  Notice  two 
points  : — 

1.  God  deijiands  this  entire  consecra- 
tinn.  "The  Levites  are  whollv  o;iveii 
unto  Me  from  among:  the  children  of 
Israel,"  etc.,  verses  16-18.  (See  pp. 
50  53.) 

2.  G ratlin  le  urges  to  this  entire  conse- 
cration.. We  have  an  intimation  of  this 
iu  this  ceremony  of  consecration.  The 
voung  bullock  that  was  offered  for  a 
burnt-offering  was  to  be  presented  to 
the  Lord  '*  with  his  meat-offering.'* 
This  meat-offering  of  fine  flour  mingled 
with  oil  was  an  appendage  to  the  de- 
votion implied  in  the  burnt-offering :  it 
was  eucharistic — a  symbolical  expres- 
sion of  man's  irratitude  for  God's  o:ood- 
ness.  The  Apostle  besought  the  Roman 
Christians  "  by  the  mercies  of  God " 
to  present  their  bodies  a  living  sacrifice, 
holy,  acceptable  unto  G  >  1,  as  their 
reasonable  service.  "What  shall  I 
render  unto  the  Lord  for  all  His  bene- 
fits toward  me]  I  uill  ofter  to  Thee 
the  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving,"  etc. 
Let  us  through  Jesus  Christ  offer  our- 
selves wholly  and  for  ever  unto  God. 

IV.  Acceptable  consecration  to  God 
must  be  open. 

The  Levites  were  consecrated  to  the 
service  of  the  Lord  iu  the  presence  of 
all    the    conuregatiou.     "  Thou    shalt 

cr         Kj 

briuix  the  Levites  before  the  tabernacle 
of  the  couiTreiratiou  ;  and  thou  shalt 
gather  the  whole  assembly  of  the 
children  of  Israel  together  "etc.  (verses 
9-12).  "Whosoever  shall  confess  Me 
before  men,  him  will  1  confess  also  be- 
fore mv  Father  which  is  in  heaven." 
"  If  thou  shalt  confess  with  thy  mouth 
the  Lord  Jesus,"  etc.  (Rom.  x.  9,  10.) 
"  Everv  tongue  shall  confess  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of  God  the 
Father."  Avoiding  parade  and  osten- 
tation on  the  one  hand,  and  secrecy 
and  undue  reserve  on  the  other,  the 
true  Christian  both  by  word  and  deed 


IIOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  VIll. 


acknowledges  Christ  as  his  Saviour  and 
Lord.  See  Psa.  Ixvi.  15,  16;  Mark  v. 
19,  20;  Matt.  v.  14-16.     (c) 

V,  Acceptable  consecration  to  God 
is  followed  by  religions  service. 

"And after  that  shall  the  Levites  go 
in  to  do  the  service  of  the  tabernacle 

of  the  congregation And 

after  that  went  the  Levites  in  to  do," 
etc.  They  were  consecrated  for  this 
purpose,  that  they  might  "  do  the 
service  of  the  children  of  Israel  in  the 
tabernacle  of  the  congregation."  The 
consecration  to  God  which  is  only  a 
thing  of  profession  and  sentiment  is 
worse  than  worthless  ;  it  is  offensive  in 
the  sight  of  God,  and  baneful  in  its  in- 
fluence upon  men.  The  true  consecra- 
tion is  for  service  accordinij:  to  the  will 
of  God.  In  a  special  sense  Cliristian 
ministers  are  the  servants  of  God  in 
the  work  of  His  Church  ;  but  every 
true  Christian  is  also  a  servant  of  God. 
"  We  can  serve  God  anywhere  and 
everywhere,  as  well  as  in  the  pulpit  or 
in  the  congregation.  You  may  glorify 
God  behind  a  counter  just  as  in  a 
cathedral ;  you  may  serve  God  sweep- 
ing a  street  as  well  as  being  a  bishop." 
In  respect  to  the  service  of  the  Levites 
two  things  are  indicated  : — 

1.  In  religious  services  there  are  dif- 
ferent grades,  and  even  the  lowest  grade 
is  sacred  and  honourable.  "  I  have 
given  the  Levites  as  a  gift  to  Aaron  and 

to  his  sons The  Levites 

went  in  to  do  their  service  in  the 
tabernacle  of  the  congregation  before 
Aaron  and  before  his  sons."  See  pp. 
48-50. 


2.  The  faithful  performance  of  re- 
ligious services  is  of  the  greatest  impor- 
tance to  society.  "I  have  given  the 
Levites  to  do  the  service  of  the  children 
of  Israel  in  the  tabernacle  of  the  con- 
gregation, and  to  make  an  atonement 
for  the  children  of  Israel  :  that  there 
be  no  plague  among  the  children  oi 
Israel,  when  the  children  of  Israel  come 
nigh  unto  the  sanctuary."  (See  ex- 
planatory notes  on  ver.  19.  and  pp.  22, 
23). 

But  the  true  and  acceptable  Christian 
consecration  extends  to  all  our  life  and 
work  :  he  who  is  truly  devoted  to  God 
will  do  all  things  as  for  Him.     (d) 

"If  on  our  daily  course  out  mind 
Ba  set  to  hallow  all  we  find, 
New  treasures  still,  of  countless  price, 
God  will  provide  for  sacrifice. 

As  for  Fome  dear  familiar  strain 
Untir'd  we  ask,  and  ask  again, 
Ever,  in  its  melodious  store, 
Finding  a  spell  unheard  beforo) 

Such  is  the  bliss  of  souls  serene, 

When  they  have  sworn,  and  stedfast  mean. 

Counting  the  cost  in  all  t*  espy 

Their  God,  in  all  themselves  deny. 

0  could  we  learn  that  sacrifice, 
What  lights  would  all  around  us  t\^q  I 
How  would  our  hearts  witd  wisdom  talk 
Along  Life's  dullest,  dreariest  walk  I 

We  need  not  bid,  for  cloister'd  cell, 
Our  neighbour  and  our  work  farewell, 
Nor  strive  to  wind  ourselves  too  high 
For  sinful  man  beneath  the  sky  : 

The  trivial  round,  the  common  task. 
Would  furnish  all  we  ought  to  ask: 
Room  to  deny  ourselves  ;  a  road 
To  bring  us,  daily,  nearer  God." — Keble. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  The  Lord  did  not  study  attractive 
ge-tthetics.  He  did  not  prepare  a  tabernacle 
toat  should  delight  men's  tastes ;  it  was  rich 
ii)det*d,  but  so  blood- stained  as  to  be  by  no 
means  beautiful.  No  staining  of  glass  to  charm 
the  e\e,  but  instead  thereof  the  inwards  of 
slaughtered  bullocks.  Such  sights  would  dis- 
gust the  delicate  tastes  of  the  fops  of  this 
present  age.  Blood,  blood  on  every  side ; 
death,  fire,  smoke,  and  ashes,  varied  with  the 
bellowings  of  dying  beasts,  and  the  active 
exertions  of  men  whose  white  garments  were 
all  crims'^n  with  the  blood  of  victim:^.  How 
clearly  did  the  worshippers  see  the  sternness 
ftnd  severity  of   the   justice  of   God   against 


human  sin,  and  the  intensity  of  the  agony  of 
the  great  Son  of  God  who  was  in  the  fulne.^s 
of  time  by  His  own  death  to  put  away  all  the 
sins  and  transgressions  of  His  people  !  By 
faith  cnme  ye,  my  brethren,  and  walk  round 
that  blood-stained  altar,  ai^d  as  you  mark  its 
four-square  form  and  its  horns  of  strength, 
and  see  the  sacrifices  smoking  thereon  accept- 
able to  God,  look  down  and  mark  the  blood 
with  which  its  foundations  are  so  completely 
saturated,  and  understand  how  all  salvation 
and  all  acceptance  rests  on  the  atonement  of 
the  dying  Son  of  God.—  C.  H  Spujgeon. 

(6)  If  you  could  know  regrets  in  the  realm 
of  blessedness,  would  not  these  be  the  regrets, 

133 


Chap.  viii. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


that  you  hare  not  served  Christ  better,  loved 
Him  more,  spoke  of  Hiaa  oftener,  given  more 
generously  to  His  cause,  and  more  uniformly- 
proved  yuurselves  to  be  consecrated  to  Him  ? 
t  am  afraid  that  such  would  be  the  form  of 
the  regrets  of  Paradise,  if  anv  could  intrude 
within  those  gates  of  pearl.  Come,  let  us  live 
while  we  live  I  Let  us  live  up  to  the  utmost 
stretch  of  our  manhood  1  Let  us  ask  the  Lord 
to  brace  our  nerve?,  t«3  string  our  sinews,  and 
oake  us  true  crusaders,  knights  of  the  blood- 
red  crosp,  consecrated  men  and  women,  who, 
for  the  love  we  bear  Christ's  name,  will  count 
labour  to  be  ease,  and  suffering  to  be  joy,  aod 
reproach  to  be  honour,  and  loss  to  be  gain  ! 
If  we  have  nevoi  yet  given  ourselves  wholly 
up  to  Christ  as  His  disciples,  no^  hard  by  His 
cross,  where  we  see  His  wounds  still  bleeding 
afresh,  and  Himself  quivering  in  pain  for  us, 
let  us  pledge  ourselves  in  His  strength,  that 
we  give  ourselves  wholly  to  Him  without 
r<  serve,  and  fo  may  He  help  us  by  His  Spirit, 
that  th«  vow  may  be  redeemed  and  the  resolve 
may  be  carried  out,  that  we  may  live  to  Christ, 
and  dying  may  find  it  gain. — Ibid. 

(c)  It  is  in  all  cases  the  'instinct  of  a  new 
heart,  in  its  experience  of  God,  to  acknowledge 
Him.  No  one  ever  thinks  it  a  matter  ot" 
delicacy  or  genuine  modesty  entirely  to 
suppress  any  reasonable  joy,  least  of  all  any 
fit  testimony  of  gratitude  toward  a  deliverer 
and  for  a  deliverance.  In  such  a  case  no  one 
ever  asks,  what  is  the  use  ?  where  is  the 
propriety  ?  for  it  is  the  simple  instinct  of  his 
nature  to  speak,  and  he  speaks.  Thus,  if  one 
of  you  had  been  rescued  in  a  shipwreck  on  a 
foreign  shore,  by  some  common  sailor  who 
had  risked  his  life  to  save  you,  and  you  should 
discover  him  across  the  street  in  some  great 
city,  you  would  rush  to  his  side,  seize  his 
band,  and  begin  at  once,  with  a  choking 
utterance,  to  testify  your  gratitude  to  him  for 
80  great  a  deliverance.  Or,  if  you  should 
pass  re^trainedly  on,  making  no  sign,  pretend- 
ing to  yourself  that  you  might  be  wanting  in 
delicacy  or  modesty  to  publish  your  private 
feelings  by  any  such  eager  acknowledgment 
of  your  deliverer,  or  that  you  ought  first  to 
be  more  sure  of  the  genuineness  of  your 
gratitude,  what  opinion  must  we  have  in  such 
a  case  of  your  beartlessness  and  falseness  to 
nature!  In  the  same  simple  way,  all  ambition 
apart,  all  conceit  of  self  forgot,  all  artificial 
and  mock  modesty  excluded,  it  will  be  the 
instinct  of  every  one  that  loves  God  to  acknow- 
ledge Him.  He  will  say  with  our  Psalmist, 
"Come  and  hear,  all  ye  that  fear  God,  and  I 
■will  declare  what  He  hath  done  for  my  soul." 
— i7.  Bushnell,  D.D. 

(c?)  Holiness  is  the  attribute  of  persons, 
places,  times,  or  things,  set  apart  by  the 
will  of  God  from  coipmon  uses,  and  devoted 
to  Himself.  But  by  God's  own  appointment, 
those  who  were  thus  consecrated  to  His 
service  in  Jewish  times  spent  a  great  part 
of  their  life  in  work  which  in  itself  viaa  of 
quite  a  secular  character.  The  Levites,  for 
134 


instance,  were  not  always  praying,  or  preach- 
ing, or  reading  the  scriptures,  or  offering 
sacrifices.  Wden  the  nation  was  in  the 
desert,  the  Levites  had  to  take  down  the 
Tabernacle  and  set  it  up,  and  to  carry  the 
furniture  from  one  camping-ground  to  another, 
just  as  the  rest  of  the  people  had  to  take 
down  their  own  tents  and  set  them  up  again, 
aod  to  carry  their  own  goods  from  place 
to  place.  The  work  of  the  Levites  was  as 
hard  as  the  work  of  the  common  people  j 
but  the  work  of  the  Levites  was  holy,  because 
the  Tabarnacle  was  the  Tent  of  God.  They 
swept  the  courts  of  the  Tabernacle,  and 
when  the  Teoaple  was  built  they  swept  the 
larger  courts  of  the  Temple;  they  kindled 
fires  ;  they  made  incense  ;  they  stored  wine 
and  oil ;  they  drew  water  ;  they  killed  animals; 
they  learnt  to  play  musical  instruments  ;  but 
there  was  nothing  profane  in  their  most 
menial  occupations,  for  whatever  they  did, 
they  did  as  God's  servants.  They  had  charge 
of  large  revenues;  but  the  revenues  consisted 
of  what  the  people  offered  to  God.  They 
acted  as  magistrates  and  administered  the  law; 
but  the  law  which  they  administered  wat 
Divine.  Even  the  priests  had  to  change  the 
shew-bred,  to  burn  incense,  and  to  tend  fires, 

A  great  part  of  the  work  that  was  done  by 
Prieats  and  Le rites  was  in  itself  mere  secular 
work ;  but  they  and  their  work  were  "  holy,'* 
because  they  were  set  apart  to  God's  service, 
and  because  their  work  was  done  for  God,  and 
in  obedience  to  God's  commandments.  A  arreat 
part  of  the  work  that  must  be  done  by  Chris- 
tian   people    in    our   times   is  in  itself  mere 
secular  work.     It  has  to  be  done  at  the  car- 
penter's bench,  at  the  blacksmith's  anvil,  in 
the  kitchen,  behind  a  draper's  ct-unter,  at  the 
desk  in  a  merchant's  office,  on  the  box  of  an 
omnibus,  on  the  platform  of  a  locomotive,  in 
the  van  of  a  railway  guard,  in  cotton  mills,  in 
bank  parlours,  in  the  private  rooms  of  news- 
paper   editors,    in    political    committees,    at 
School  Boards,  in  Government  offices,  in  Par- 
liament;—and  if  there  is  hearty,  unreserved 
consecration  to  God,  if  God's  will  is  the  law 
by  which  all  the  work  is  controlled,    if  God's 
honour   is  the  end   to   which  all  the  work  is 
devoted,     the     "  secular "      work,      however 
earnestly  it  is  done,  is  no  more  inconsistent 
with  saintliness  than  were  the  menial  duties 
of  Priests    with  their  "consecration"  to  the 
duties  of  their  priesthood.     The  Priests  would 
have  been  unfaithful   to  the  solemnities  with 
which  they  were  set  apart  to  their  holy  office 
if,  in  the  conceit  a  ad  fastidiousness  of  priestly 
pride,  they  had  neglected  their  menial  duties 
under  the  pretence  of  maintaining  their  sanc- 
tity.    Christian  men  are  equally  unfaithful  to 
their  nobler  Cfilling  if,  under  the  influence  of  a 
similar  conceit  and  fastidiousness,  they  regard 
what  they  call  secular  work  as  "  common  and 
unclean,"  and   refuse   to   discharge    obvious 
duties  under  the  pretence  of  keeping  their 
holiness  untainted. 

But  holiness  is  something  more  than  a  fault- 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS.         chap.  viii. 


less  morality.  The  difference  between  a  holy 
man  and  a  moral  man  is  the  difference  be- 
tween a  Temple  or  a  Ohurch  and  a  house. 
You  may  erect  a  very  noble  builJing;  the 
design  may  be  stately;  the  proportions  mag- 
nificent; there  may  be  plenty  of  space,  and 
air.  and  li^ht ;  the  walls  may  be  of  pure  white 
marble  like  the  walls  of  Italian  palaces ;  the 
decorations  may  be  p3rfectly  beautiful ;  but  if 
you  build  it  for  yourself  it  is  a  House,  and  not 
a  Temple.  It  was  not  the  splendour  of  the 
building  on  Mount  iMoriah  that  made  it  a 
Temple,  but  the  Divine  uses  to  which  by 
Divioe  appointment  it  was  consecrated.  N  )r 
does  Holiness  consist  ia  fi  Jelity  to  CBrraiu 
«cclesiastical  traditions  You  may  build  a 
House  in  the  style  of  a  Ohurc  i ;  there  may  be 
aave  and  transepts  and  chancel;  there  may  be 


clustered  columns,  and  the  windows  may  be 
glorious  with  crimson  and  purple  and  gold  ; 
but  if  the  building  is  for  yourself  and  for  your 
private  usas,  it  is  no  Cnurch,  but  a  mere 
House.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  no  matter 
how  poor  and  mean  our  life  may  look  to 
common  eyes,  it  is  sacred — every  part  is 
sacred— if  we  have  consecrated  ourselves  to 
God.  The  tent  which  was  God's  Tabernacle 
in  the  wild  -rness  was  more  awful  and  august 
than  the  palaces  of  kings.  Everything  de- 
pends on  the  law  which  we  are  trying  to  obey, 
and  the  Master  whom  we  are  trying  to  serve. 
Holiness  is  the  result  of  the  consecration  of 
our  whole  life  to  God.  It  requires  that  we 
should  make  God's  will  our  supreme  law,  and 
that  wo  should  do  God's  will  for  God's  glory. 
—R,   W.  Dale,  M.A.,  D.D. 


The  Divine  Master  and  His  Human  Servants. 

{Verses  23-26). 


We  have  here  the  Divine  directions 
as  to  the  period  of  the  Service  of  the 
Levites.  The  manner  in  which  these 
directions  are  introduced — "And  the 
Lord  spake  unto  Moses,  saying;"  the 
words  which  immediately  follow  these 
directions — "  Thus  shalt  thou  do  unto 
the  Levites  touchino:  their  charge  : " 
and  their  position  in  the  history,  im- 
mediately after  the  ordination  of  the 
Levites  to  their  sacred  duties,  show  that 
they  are  inteuded  to  be  the  fixed  law 
for  the  service  of  the  Levites  at  the 
sanctuary.  In  chap.  iv.  ver.  3,  Moses 
wap  commanded  to  number  the  Levites 
"from  thirty  years  old  and  upward 
even  until  fifty  years  old,  all  that  enter 
into  the  host,  to  do  the  work  in  the 
tabernacle  of  the  congregation,"  while 
in  the  text  the  period  of  service  is  fixed 
from  twenty- five  years  old  and  upward 
until  fifty  years  old.  That  numbering 
had  reference  especially  to  the  carriage 
of  the  tabernacle  from  place  to  place 
during  the  wanderings  in  the  wilderness, 
a  laboriousservice  requiring  the  strength 
of  mature  manhood  ;  whereas  the  direc- 
tions of  the  text  refer  to  the  entire 
service  of  the  tabernacle,  which,  when 
it  was  stationarj^,  could  be  performed 
without  diffiuulty  by  persons  of  twenty- 
five  years  of  age.  At  a  subsequent 
period  the  age  at  which  the  Levites 
began  their  service  was  fixed  at  twenty 
^'ears,    because    the    tabernacle   being 


permanently  placed  upon  Mount  Ziou, 
they  were  no  longer  required  to  "  carry 
the  tabernacle,  nor  any  vessels  of  it  for 
the  service  thereof "  (1  Chron.  xxiii.  24- 
32). 

The    text    suggests    the    following 
Homiletic  points  ; — 

I.  The  necessity  of  fitness  for  the 
Divine  service. 

Though  the  Levites  entered  upon 
their  service  at  the  age  of  twenty-fivo 
years,  they  took  no  part  in  its  heaviest 
duties  until  they  had  attained  thirty 
years,  and  thorough  physical  fitness  ; 
and  when  at  fifty  years  that  fitness 
began  to  fail,  they  were  released  from 
the  severe  duties,  and  employed  only 
in  such  as  would  not  try  their  physical 
powers.  God  requires  fit  instruments 
for  His  work.  He  can  use  any  instru- 
mentality whatsoever,  or  He  can 
accomplish  His  purpose  without  any 
instrumentality  ;  but  His  rule  is  to  use 
those  instruments  who  are  best  adapted 
for  the  accomplishment  of  His  purposes. 
The  arrangement  of  the  service  of  the 
Levites  shows  this.  The  calling  and 
career  of  such  men  as  Joseph,  Moses, 
David,  John  the  Baptist,  Paul,  sho\^' 
this.  In  learning  any  handicraft  or 
trade,  years  are  spent  under  instructors  : 
for  the  practice  of  law  or  medicine  men 
must  have  special  and  careful  training  : 
and  is  it  not  important  that  they  who 
engage  in  religious  services  should  be 

136 


CHAP.  VIII. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


qualified  for  such  services  ?  Let  all 
religious  workers  do  their  utmost  to 
prepare  themselves  for  their  important 
aud  sacred  duties :  let  them  study, 
pray,  &c.     (a) 

Let  Christian  ministers  especially  be 
conscientious  and  painstaking  in  this 
respect.     (6) 

II.  The  variety  of  employment  in 
the  Divine  service. 

In  their  life  in  the  wilderness  there 
was  Levitical  service  suited  to  young 
men  of  twenty-five  years  of  age,  there 
was  severe  labour  for  men  from  thirty 
to  fifty  years  of  age,  and  there  was 
honourable  and  easy  service  for  those 
who  were  fifty  years  old  and  upward. 
(See  explanatory  notes  on  these  verses). 
The  aged  Levites  had  the  oversight  of 
the  furniture  of  the  tabernacle,  and 
were  probably  engaged  in  instructing 
the  young  men,  and  in  guarding  the 
tabernacle  against  the  approach  of  any 
prohibited  persons.  In  the  service  of 
God  to-day  there  is  room  for  workers 
of  every  kind  and  degree  of  faculty  ; 
there  is  ample  scope  for  the  enthusiasm 
of  youth,  the  strength  of  manhood,  and 
the  ripe  experience  of  age.  The  able 
reasoner,  the  eloquent  orator,  the  skilful 
manager  of  affairs,  the  patient  plodding 
worker,  the  sympathetic  visitor  of  the 
sick  and  sorrowful,  the  gifted  and  loving 
teacher,  the  prevailing  intercessor  at 
the  Throneof  Grace,  the  unobtrusive  aud 
kindly  tract  distributor,  even  the  worn 
and  weary  sufferer,  calm,  and  sweetly 
submissive  to  the  Divine  will,  each 
and  all  have  their  sphere  and  their 
mission  in  the  service  of  God.  In  this 
we  have — 

1.  An  encouragement  to  persons  of 
feeble  poivers  and  narrow  opportunities 
to  tiy  to  do  good,      (c) 

2.  A  rebuke  to  those  who  plead  in- 
ability as  an  excuse  for  their  indolence  in 
religious  service.      Use  the  ability  you 


have,  however  small  it  maybe ;  and  by 
so  doing  you  will  increase  it.  God 
holds  us  responsible  only  for  the  ability 
we  have  or  may  have,  not  for  that  we 
have  not  and  cannot  obtain.  (See  pp. 
40,  41). 

III.  The  care  of  the  Great  Master 
for  His  servants. 

He  will  not  have  His  servants  over- 
burdened ;  His  youthful  servants  He  will 
not  prematurely  call  to  posts  of  severe 
labour  or  solemn  resptjnsibility,  and 
for  those  who  "  have  borne  the  burden 
and  heat  of  the  day "  He  arranges  an 
eventide  of  honourable  and  restful 
service.  He  calls  men  to  work  for 
which  they  are  adapted  ;  and  if  in  their 
work  any  severe  strain  be  imposed  upon 
them.  He  giveth  unto  them  more  grace. 
His  yoke  is  easy  and  His  burden  is 
light.  He  graciously  sustains  every 
worker  in  his  toil,  gives  to  every  worker 
sweetest  joy  in  his  toil,  and  will  glori- 
ously reward  even  the  smallest  service 
of  the  feeblest  worker,     (c?) 

"  How  blessed  from  the  bonds  of  sin. 

And  earthly  fetters  free, 
In  siagluness  of  heart  and  aim, 

Thj?  servant,  Lord,  to  be  I 
The  liardest  toil  to  undertake 

With  joy  at  Thy  command, 
The  meanest  office  to  receive 

With  meekness  at  Thy  hand! 

How  happily  the  working  days 

In  this  dear  service  fly, 
How  rapidly  the  closing  hour, 

The  time  of  rest  draws  nigh  I 
When  all  the  faithful  gather  home, 

A  joyful  company, 
And  ever  where  the  Master  is, 

Shall  His  blest  servants  be." — Spitta, 

Conclusion. 

This  subject  supplies — 

1.  Encouragement  to  enter  into  this 
service.     "  Come  thou  with  ws,"  etc. 

2.  Encouragement  to  persevere  in  this 
service.  A  glorious  reward  awaits  those 
who  patiently  continue  in  well  doing. 


ILLUSTRAllONS. 


(a)  You  have  read  in  history  of  that  hero 
who,  when  an  overwhelming  force  was  in 
full  pursuit,  and  all  his  (ollowers  were 
urfvieg  him  to  more  rapid  flight,  coolly  dis- 
mounted to  repair  a  flaw  in  his  horse's  harne-s. 
WLile  busied   with   the   brokeo   buckle,  the 

13§ 


distant  crowd  swept  down  in  nearer  thunder; 
but,  just  as  the  prancing  hoofs  and  eager 
spears  were  ready  to  dash  upon  him,  the  flaw 
was  mended,  and,  like  a  swooping  falcon,  he 
V  ad  vanished  from  their  view.  The  broken 
buckle  would  haye  left  him  on  the  field  ^  dii- 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAf.  vtit 


monnted  and  inglorious  prisoner  ;  the  timely 
delay  sent  him  in  safety  back  to  his  comrad-is. 
There  is  in  daily  life  the  same  luckless  pre- 
cipitancy, and  the  same  profitable  delay.  The 
man  who,  from  his  prayerless  awakening, 
bounces  into  the  business  of  the  day,  however 
good  his  talents  and  great  his  diligence,  is 
only  galloping  upon  a  steed  harnessed  with  a 
broken  buckle,  and  must  not  marvel  if,  in  his 
hottest  haste  or  most  hazardous  leap,  he  be 
left  ingloriously  in  the  dust;  and  tkough  it 
may  occasion  some  little  delay  beforehand,  his 
neighbour  is  wiser  who  sets  out  all  in  order 
before  the  march  begins. — James  Hamilton, 
D.D. 

(b)  I  believe  that  at  bottom  most  people 
think  it  an  uncommonly  easy  thing  to  preach, 
and  that  they  could  do  it  amazingly  well 
themselves.  Every  donkey  thinks  itself 
worthy  to  stand  with  the  king's  horses  ;  every 
girl  thinks  that  she  could  keep  house  better 
than  her  mother  ;  but  thoughts  are  not  facts, 
for  the  sprat  thought  itself  a  herring,  but  the 
fisherman  knew  better.  I  daresay  those  who 
can  whiatle  fancy  that  they  can  plough  ;  but 
there's  more  than  whistling  in  a  good  plough- 
man ;  and  80  let  me  tell  you  there's  more  in 
good  preaching  than  taking  a  text,  and  saying 
tirstly,  secondly,  and  thirdly.  I  try  my  hand 
at  preaching  myself,  and  in  my  poor  way  I 
find  it  no  very  easy  thing  to  give  the  folks 
something  worth  hearing ;  and  if  the  fine 
critics,  who  reckon  us  up  on  their  thumbs, 
would  but  try  their  own  hands  at  it,  they 
might  be  a  little  more  quiet.  Dogs,  however, 
always  will  bark,  and  what  is  worse,  some  of 
them  will  bite,  too ;  but  let  decent  people  do 
all  they  can,  if  not  to  muzzle  them,  yet  to 
prevent  their  doing  any  great  mischief. — C. 
H.  Spur g eon. 

(c)  In  order  to  serve  Christ  acceptably, 
we  hare  not  to  revolutionize  our  lot,  nor  to 
seek  other  conditions  than  those  Providence 
supplies.  The  place  is  nothing;  the  heart  is 
all.  Chambers  of  patient  invalids,  beds  of 
submissive  sickness,  obscurity,  weakness, 
baffled  plans, — a  thousand  nameless  limita- 
tions of  faculty,  of  opportunity,  of  property, — 
all  these  are  witnesses  of  silent  but  victorious 
faith.  In  all  of  them  God  is  glorified,  for  in  all 
of  them  His  will  is  done.  Out  of  all  of  them 
gates  open  into  heaven  and  the  joy  of  the 
Lord.  Mercifully  the  Father  has  appointed 
many  ways  in  which  we  may  walk  toward  His 
face,  and  run  on  His  errands.  Work  is  the 
way  for  strength ;  lying  still  is  the  way  for 
infirmity.  If  only  there  are  trust  and  prayer 
in  both,  there  is  some  instruction  in  a  picture 


I  have  read  of,  which  represents  the  lives  of 
twin  brothers  diverging  from  the  c  adle. 
One,  by  study,  becomes  a  learned  and  skilful 
physician,  reaching  grej.t  riches  and  honour 
by  administering  to  the  sick.  The  other 
has  no  talent  for  books,  and  no  memory,  and 
no  science ;  he  becomes  a  p)or  strolling 
musician,  but  spends  his  days  in  consoling,  by 
his  lute,  siifTerings  that  are  beyond  all 
medicine.  Tae  brotheis  are  shown  meeting 
at  the  close  of  their  career.  The  vagrant  is 
sick  and  worn  out,  and  the  brother  prescribes 
for  him  out  of  his  learning,  and  gathers 
ingenious  compounds  for  his  relief;  but, 
meantime,  he  to  whom  God  gave  another 
gift  touches  his  instrument  for  the  solace  of 
the  great  man's  shattered  nerves,  and  heals 
his  benefactor's  disordered  spirit. — F.  D.  Hun- 
tington, D.D. 

Oat  of  this  whole  structure  of  the  human 
body,  every  little  muscle,  every  single  cell, 
has  its  own  secretion  and  its  own  work;  and 
though  some  physicians  have  said  this  and 
that  organ  mi?ht  be  spared,  I  believe  thera  is 
not  a  siagie  thread  in  the  whole  embroidery 
of  human  nature  that  could  be  well  spared— 
the  whole  of  the  fabric  is  required.  So  in 
the  mystical  body,  the  Church,  the  least 
member  is  necessary ;  the  most  uncomely 
member  of  the  Christian  Church  is  needful 
for  its  growth.  Find  out,  then,  what  your 
sphere  is,  and  occupy  it.  Ask  God  to  tell 
you  what  is  your  niche,  ahd  stand  in  it, 
occupying  the  place  till  Jesus  Christ  shall 
come  and  give  you  your  reward.  Use  what 
ability  you  have,  and  use  it  at  once. — 
C  H.  Spurgeon. 

(d)  I  know  your  gifts  to  His  Church,  and 
His  poor,  are  necessarily  but  little,  for  yours  is 
the  poor  widow's  portion  perhaps,  and  you  can 
give  only  your  two  mites  ;  but  I  know  that, 
as  they  fall  into  the  treasury,  Jesus  sits  over 
against  the  treasury  and  hears  sweet  sounds 
in  the  dropping  of  your  gifts.  I  know  your 
life  is  such  that  you  mourn  over  it  every  day, 
but  still  you  do  serve  God  in  it,  and  you  lon^ 
to  serve  Him  more,  and  that  love  of  yours  is 
written  in  the  books  of  the  King's  record,  and 
you  shall  be  His  in  the  day  when  He  makes 
up  His  jewels;  and  your  works  shall  be  Hia 
too,  for  your  works  shall  follow  you  to  the 
skies  when  you  rise  in  Jesus,  and  your  reward 
even  for  a  cup  of  cold  water  shall  be  as  sure 
as  it  will  be  gracious,  and  your  entrance  into 
the  joy  of  your  Lord  shall  certainly  be 
bestowed  upon  you  according  to  the  grace 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus,  by  which  he  has 
accepted  you. — Ibid, 


187 


CHAP.  IX. 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


Serviob. 
(Verse    24.) 


The  Levitical  service  in  the  wilder- 
ness was  very  severe  ;  it  required  strong, 
able-bodied  men.  There  were,  in  ad- 
dition to  the  ministrations  in  the 
tabernacle,  many  heavy  weights  to 
carry.  (It  is  computed  by  some  that 
the  metal  of  the  tabernacle  alone 
weighed  10  tons,  13  cwts.,  24  lbs.,  14 
ozs.,  beside  skins,  hangings,  cords, 
boards,  and  posts).  In  David's  time 
we  read  they  began  at  twenty  years  of 
age ;  but  in  the  wilderness  they  did 
not  fully  engage  in  the  more  laborious 
service  until  thirty,  although  the  time 
for  their  assisting  was  fixed  at  twenty- 
five. 

I.  The  service  God  demands  of  all 
Levites. 

Every  Christian  should  be  a  priest, 
ever  ministering  in  His  temple. 

1.  Burden-hearing.  How  often  Christ- 
ians murmur  about  their  burdens,  as 
though  they  were  not  honoured  in  being 
permitted  to  bear  anything  for  God. 

2.  Singing,     The  Levites  sang  and 


played  on  instruments.     Sing  the  BOng 
of  gratitude  and  contentment. 

3.  Studying  of  the  law.  "Search 
the  Scriptures." 

4.  Attendance  on  the  ordinances  of 
the  sanctuary.  There  is  a  special  bless- 
ing for  those  who  worship  in  God's 
house. 

II.  God  demands  the  service  in  our 
prime. 

"  From  twenty  and  five."  We  must 
give  God  the  best  we  have.  The  lamb 
must  be  without  blemish  ;  the  fruit  the 
first  and  choicest,  to  show  our  love  and 
gratitude. 

III.  God  demands  this  service  when 
it  can  be  most  easily  rendered. 

God  did  not  ask  of  the  Levites,  nor 
does  He  of  us,  impossibilities.  The 
very  young  and  the  old  were  exempt 
from  the  bearing  of  the  heavier  burdens. 
God  suits  the  burden  to  the  back.  All 
he  asks  is  that  we  shall  do  what  we 
can. — IL  A*  Griffin, 


CHAPTER  DL 


Critical  and  explanatory  notes. 

Verses  1-5.  This  Passover,  having 
been  kept  in  the  first  month  of  the 
second  year,  preceded  the  numbering 
and  the  other  events  recorded  in  this 
book.  For  this  reason  some  writers 
have  said  that  verses  1-14  should  be 
transposed  to  an  earlier  portion  of  the 
narrative.  But  the  observance  of  the 
supplementary  Passover  (verses  6-14) 
was  one  of  the  last  events  before  the 
departure  from  Sinai ;  and  the  ordinance 
of  it  is  very  properly  placed  here ;  and 
the  account  of  the  observance  of  the 
ordinary  Passover  which  gave  rise  to 
it  is  not  unnaturally  placed  before  it. 

From  Exod.  xii.  24,  25,  the  Israel- 
ites might  have  concluded  that  they 
138 


were  not  to  keep  the  Passover  until 

they  came  to  Canaan ;  but,  inasmuch 
as  the  Anniversary  of  the  Feast  occurred 
while  they  were  still  in  the  desert  of 
Sinai,  a  special  command  is  given  to 
them  to  keep  it.  And  had  it  not  been 
for  the  subsequent  unbelief  and  rebel- 
lion of  the  people,  before  the  anniver- 
sary returned  again  they  would  have 
been  possessors  of  the  land  promised 
unto  them. 

Verse  3.  According  to  all  the  rights 
of  itf  and  according  to  all  the  ceremonies 
thereof  See  Exod.  xii.  3-28,  43-51, 
xiii.  3-11. 

Verse  6.  There  were  certain  merif  etc. 
"  Probably  Mishael  and  Elizaphan,  who 
buried  their  cousins,  Nadab  and  Abihu, 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  IX 


within  a  week  of  this  Passover  (Lev,  x. 
4,  5).  None  would  be  mote  likely  to 
make  this  inquiry  of  Moses  than  his 
kinsmen,  who  had  defiled  themselves 
by  his  express  direction." — Speaker's 
Commentary. 

Verse  15.  The  tent  of  the  testimony^ 
or,  witness,  denotes  the  whole  of  the 
tabernacle,  comprising  the  holy  of 
holies  and  the  holy  place,  and  not 
merely  the  holy  of  holies.  The  phrase 
seems  to  indicate  the  same  portion  of 
the  structure  as  ohel  moed,  "tent  of 
meeting." 

Verse  20.  And  so  it  was,  when,  etc. 
Rather,  "And  there  was  also  when," 
etc. 

Verse  21.  And  so  it  was,  when,  etc. 
Rather,  "  And  there  was  also  when  the 
cloud  abode  from  even  unto  morning, 
and  the  cloud  was  taken  up  in  the 
morning,  and  they  journeyed." 


Verse  22.  A  year,  Heb.,  "days," 
i.e,,  a  space  of  time  not  precisely 
determined. 

As  long  as  the  cloud  rested  upon  the 
tabernacle,  whether  it  was  for  one  day, 
a  few  days,  or  many  days,  they  continued 
their  encampment ;  and  when  it  arose 
from  the  tabernacle  they  broke  up 
their  encampment  and  resumed  their 
march.  The  movements  of  the  cloud 
were  to  them  the  commands  of  the 
Lord  God.  For  the  numerous  Homi- 
letic  suggestions  connected  with  the 
institution  and  observation  of  the 
Passover  we  must  refer  the  reader  to 
The  Homiletical  Commentary  on  Exod. 
xii.  and  xiii.  where  the  directions  for 
keeping  the  ordinance  are  given  in 
detail.  To  attempt  anything  like  an 
exhaustive  treatment  of  the  ordinance 
would  be  out  of  place  here. 


The  Feast  of  thb  Passovbr,  ▲  Memorial  and  a  Tyfb, 

(Verses  \-6,) 


The  Passover,  the  celebration  of 
which  is  here  commanded  by  God, 
was — 

I.  A  Memorial  of  a  great  Deliver- 
ance. 

1,  Deliverance  from  the  most  terrible 
evils.  (1)  From  a  miserable  slavery. 
The  Israelites  in  Egypt  were  held  in 
most  degrading  and  cruel  bondage. 
(2)  From  a  terrible  visitation  of  Divine 
judgment.  When  the  firstborn  of  the 
Egyptians,  both  of  man  and  of  beast, 
were  all  destroyed,  the  firstborn  of  the 
Israelites  were  exempted  from  the  des- 
truction. Primarily  and  essentially 
the  Passover  was  a  memorial  of  this 
great  historical  fact.  Exod.  xii.  26,  27. 
(a) 

2.  Deliverance  from  the  most  terrible 
evils  associated  with  the  sacrifice  of  life. 
A  lamb  of  the  first  year,  without 
blemish,  and  a  male,  was  to  be  slain  for 
every  family  (unless  the  family  were 
too  small  to  consume  the  lamb,  in 
which  case  they  were  to  unite  with 
their  nearest  neighbour  in  the  matter), 
and  the  blood  sprinkled  upon  the  posts 


of  the  door,  and  the  flesh  entirely  eaten 
after  having  been  roasted  with  fire. 
Such  were  the  explicit  commands  of 
God  by  His  servants  Moses  and  Aaron. 
Exod.  xii.  3-10. 

3.  Deliverance  from  the  most  terrible 
evils  through  the  sovereign  grace  of  God. 
Their  exemption  from  the  stroke  of  the 
destroying  angel,  and  their  emancipa- 
tion from  their  bitter  slavery  in  Egypt, 
were  due  to  the  sovereign  favour  of  the 
Lord  God.  The  gracious  purpose  and 
the  grand  performance  were  alike  owing 
to  Him.  "  Thou  hast  with  Thine  arm 
redeemed  Thy  people,  the  sons  of  Jacob 
and  Joseph." 

4.  Deliverance  from  terrible  evils  by 
means  of  faith  and  obedience.  The 
sprinkling  of  the  blood  upon  the  door- 
posts was  an  act  of  faith  and  obedience, 
which  God  required  as  a  condition  of 
their  exempt^  :>n  from  the  stroke  of  the 
destroying  angel,  and  which,  when 
performed.  He  graciously  accepted. 
However  ill-adapted  the  means  might 
have  seemed  to  the  end,  they  em- 
ployed   them  as  they  were   directed, 

139 


CHAP.   IX 


HOMlLETtC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


and  so  secured  their  safety  (Heb.  xi.  28). 

So  great  and  marvellous  a  deliverance 

demanded  a  fitting  memorial. 

II.  A  type  of  a  greater  deliverance. 

This  portion  of  the  history  of  Israel 

typifies — 

1.  The  morally  enslaved  and  perilous 
state  of  man.     Sinful  men  arc  in  a  far 
more   terrible   state  of  bondage   than 
that  of  Israel  in  Egypt.     Their  slavery 
was  physical ;    that   of  the   sinner  is 
spiritual.       His   soul   is  the    slave   of 
animal   appetites,    and  turbulent   pas- 
sions, and  evil  habits.     Their  slavery 
was  a  calamity ;  that  of  the  sinner  is 
a  crime.     The  Lord  God  pitied  them 
because   of    their    bondage ;    He   con- 
demns man  because  of  his.     To  be  the 
slaves  of  sin  is  to  be  guilty  of  grievous 
moral   wrong    in   the    sight   of    God. 
Their  slavery,  at  the  farthest,  would  end 
at  death;    but  death  has   no  power  to 
terminate  the  slavery  of  the  sinner.    The 
death  of  the  body  cannot  free  the  soul 
from  the  bondage  of  evil  passions  or 
tyrannical  habits.      The  peril    also  of 
the  sinner  is  greater  than  was  that  of 
the  ancient  Israelites.     They  were  de- 
livered from  the  stroke  of  the  destroy- 
ing   angel.      But   the    destruction   of 
physical  life  is  a  small  evil  as  compared 
with  the  destruction  of  all  that  con- 
stitutes the  life  of  the  soul.     In  many 
cases  the  death  of  Xhe  body  is  the  great 
gain  of  the  man.     But  what  tongue  or 
pen  can  describe  the  awfulness  and  the 
painfulness  of  the  destruction  by  sin  of 
the  moral  purity,  the  power,  the   reve- 
rence,  the   aspiration,    the   hope,    the 
peace   of    the     souH      Such    is    the 
destruction  of  which  the  sinner  ia  in 
danger. 

2.  The  Divine  method  of  deliverance. 
The  Lamb  of  the  Passover  exhibits 
the  closest  type  of  the  atoning  Sacrifice 
who  died  for  us  and  has  made  our  peace 
with  God.  Our  Lord  is  spoken  of  in 
the  Bible  as  a  lamb.  "Behold  the 
Lamb  of  God,"  i'v;c.  The  Passover  lamb 
was  to  be  **  without  blemish."  St.  Peter 
speaks  of  Jesus  Christ  as  "  a  Lamb 
without  blemish  and  without  spot." 
He  was  "holy,  harmless,  undefiled, 
separate  from  sinners."  The  Passover 
140 


lamb  was  to  be  slain,  and  its  blood 
upon  the  door-posts  was  the  sign  by 
which  the  houses  of  the  Israelites  were 
distinguished,  and  so  exempted  from 
the  power  of  the  destroyer.  Jesus 
Christ  was  crucified  for  us.  By  His 
death  we  have  life.  "  We  have  redemp- 
tion through  His  blood."  "Ye  were 
not  redeemed  with  corruptible  things, 
as  silver  and  gold,  but  with  the  precious 
blood  of  Christ."  "  The  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin," 
**  Christ  our  passover  is  sacrificed  for 
us."  God  delivers  us  from  sin  through 
the  self-sacrifice  of  Christ  for  us. 
*'■  Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any 
other :  for  there  is  none  other  name 
under  heaven  given  among  men  where- 
by we  must  be  saved."     (h) 

3.  The  Divine  Author  of  deliverance. 
The  Lord  God  spared  the  first-born  of 
Israel  when  the  first-born  of  Egypt 
were  destroyed.  He  also  delivered 
them  from  their  cruel  bondage  in  Egypt, 
He  only  can  emancipate  the  soul  from 
the  thraldom  of  sin,  and  deliver  it  from 
that  death  which  is  the  wages  of  sin. 
He  originated  the  method  of  deliver- 
ance ;  and  His  is  the  power  by  which 
the  deliverance  is  accomplished.  Neither 
of  these  things  could  man  have  done. 
Education,  science,  philosophy,  means 
and  eff'orts  of  social  reform  and  ameli- 
oration, may  do  much  for  man;  but 
they  cannot  free  him  from  the  dominion 
of  sin,  or  deliver  him  from  spiritual 
death — they  cannot  save  him.  God 
alone  can  do  this ;  and  He  is  "  mighty 
to  save,"  "  He  is  able  to  saye  them  to 
the  uttermost,"  etc. 

4.  The  human  appropriation  of  de- 
liverance. The  Israelites  were  to  "strike 
the  lintel  and  the  two  side-posts  with 
the  blood  "  of  the  slain  lamb  as  a  con- 
dition of  their  deliverance.  If  they 
would  be  saved  from  the  visit  of  the 
destroyer,  they  must  believe  the  word 
of  the  Lord  by  Moses  and  obey  it.  If 
the  death  of  Jesus  Christ  is  to  be  of 
any  real  benefit  to  us  personally,  we 
must  personally  believe  in  Him  as  our 
Saviour.  "Whosoever  believeth  in 
Him  shall  not  perish,  but  have  eternal 
life."    (c) 


HOMILETtC    COMMENTARY:    Nt/MBfiJRS. 


dHAf.  IX 


Conclusion : 

Sentence  of  death  has  gone  forth 
against  all  sinners.  "  The  wages  of  sin 
is  death."  *'  The  soul  that  sinneth  it 
shall  die.**     God  in  Christ  is  the  only 


One  who  can  deliver  from  this  death. 
Faith  in  Him  is  the  only  condition  by 
which  we  can  avail  ourselves  of  His 
deliverance.  Believe  in  Him,  at  once 
and  fully,  and  life  eternal  is  yours. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(«)  Snoh  a  night  as  never  darkened  from 
heaven  before  or  since  in  Egypt,  now  descends 
upon   her  in   the   mysterious   providence   of 
God.  It  is  "a  night  much  to  be  remembered." 
The  children  of  Israel  are  all  up  and  ready  for 
departure,  their  loins  girt,    and  their  lamps 
burning,  the  Paschal  lamb,  the  unleavened 
bread,  and  the  bitter  herbs  with  which  it  was 
to  be  eaten,  in  their  hands  and  mouths  ;  the 
blood  from  the  basins  sprinkled  on  the  lintel 
and  the  two  door-posts,  and  all  awaiting  the 
moment  when  the  shriek  of  the  victims  of  the 
angel  of  death  shall  act  as  the  blast  of  God's 
trumpet  to  tell  them  to  depart  I  Such  a  feast  I 
without  one  song  of  gladness  or  word  of  con- 
Terse ;  ate  in  absolute  silence  and  in  a  stand- 
ing posture,  and  with  every  ear  erect  to  listen 
to  the  sounds  of  wrath  and   woe  which   are 
expected.     Do  they  hear  the   wings   of    the 
destroying   angel    without    their    dwellings, 
first  sweeping  near,   then   pausing   (what   a 
moment  of  suspense,  for  may  not  some  have 
forgotten  to  stamp  the  stain  upon  the  door,  or 
stamped  it  too  feebly?),  and  then  hurrying 
onward?     And  do   not,  by-and-bye,   faintly- 
heard  and  distant  shrieks  arise,  swelling  soon 
into  one  desperate  ami  universal  "cry,"  pro- 
claiming that  there  is  *'  not  an  house  where 
there  is  not  one  dead"?     It  is  at  midnight 
that  this  fell-stroke  lights  on  guilty  Egypt, 
and  the  darkness  contributes  to  the  confusion, 
the  horror,  and  the  de-^pair.     "  All  the  first- 
born are  smitten,  from  the  firstborn  of  Phar- 
aoh that  sate  on  the  throne  to  the  firstborn  of 
the  captive  that  wai  in  the  dungeon."     In  one 
house,  a  child  has  been  newly  born  to  those 
who  had  been  long  married  without  the  usual 
fruits  of  wedlock,  and  the  parents  are,  perhap=«, 
with  a  fond  and  foolish  joy,  exulting  over  the 
recent  birth,  when  a  sharp  short  cry  from  the 
eradle  tells  them  their  child   is  dead.       In 
another,  all  the  family  have  been  cut  o£F  pre- 
viously, except  their  firstborn,  a  boy  who  has 
become  more  the  delight  of  their  parents  that 
he  is  their  little  all,  as  if  he  had  absorbed  the 
interest  and  life  of  the  rest,  but  he,  too,  on  his 
small  couch  is  smitten,   and  their  hope  and 
joy  die  with  him.     In  a  third  house,  the  first- 
bom  is  a  fair  female,  and  to-morrow  is  her 
wedding  day,  but  death  anticipates  the  bride- 
groom,  and    claps   his    cold   ring   upon   her 
shrinking    finger.      In    a  fourth,    a    heroic 
youth  who  had  projected  a  journey  to  the  lands 
of  Ethiopia  and  the  sources  of  the  Nile,  and  is 
dreaming   that  he  has  set  out   on  his  way, 
awakes  for  a  moment  to  feel  the  death-pang 
summoning  him  to  a  farther  and  more  adven- 


turous exploration.  In  another  house,  one 
lies  down  who  is  on  the  morrow  to  be  initiated 
into  the  higher  mysteries  of  priostdorn,  but 
death  Pays  to  him,  "  Understand  this  my 
mystery  first,  deeper  infinitely  thau  they." 
In  another,  the  firstborn  son  is  to  lise  next 
day  to  bury  his  father,  but  long  ere  morning 
he  is  laid  cold  by  his  side  How  impartial 
this  terrible  angel  1  Here  one  firstborn  has 
been  condemned  to  die  a  public  and  a  sharceiul 
death  on  the  approachipg  day;  but  at  mid- 
night there  is  a  corpse  in  the  prison  cell,  and 
the  law  is  disappointed  of  its  prey.  And 
there  another,  it  is  Pharaoh's  own  eldest  son, 
whose  birthday,  he  is  come  of  sge,^  is  to  be 
C6lebrat?d  to  morro^?,  expires  at  the  very 
moment  of  midnij?ht,  and  his  father  rises  and 
begins  that  wild  wail  which  is  echoed  by  every 
homestead  in  the  land  of  Ham  — G,  Gilfilhin^ 
M.A. 

(h)  Here  is  the  firstborn,  the  unblemished 
beauty,  the  chaste  Lamb  of  God  ;  never  cnme 
to  mortal  eyes   any   such  perfect  one  before. 
And  the  expens-^  He  makes,  under  His  ^reat 
love-struggle   and    heavy   burden    of  feeling. 
His   Gethsemane,    where  the  burden  presses 
Him  down  into  a^ony  ;   Hi*  Oalvary,  where. 
in  His  unprotesting  and  lamb-like  submission, 
He  allows  Himself  to  be  immolated  by   the 
world's  wrath  ;  what  will   any  one,  seeing  all 
this,  so  naturally  or  inevitably  call  it,  as  His 
sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  world  ?     His  blood, 
too,  the   blood  of  the  incarnate  Son  of  God, 
blood  of  the  uppf»r  world  half  as  truly  as  of 
this  —  when  it  touches  and  stains  the  defiled 
earth  of  tLe  planet,  what  so  sacred  blood  on 
the   horns  of  the   altar   and   the   lid  of    the 
mercy-seat  did  any  drvoutest  worshipper  at 
the  altar  ever  see  sprinkled  for  his  cleansing? 
There  his  sin  he  hop(  d  could   be  dissolved 
away,  and  it  comforted  his  conscience  that, 
by  the  offering  of  something  sacred  as  blood, 
he  could  fitly  own  his  defilement,  and  by  such 
tender  argument  win   the  needed  cleansing. 
But  the  blood  of  Christ,  He  that  was  born  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  He  that  was  Imcnanuel — when 
this  sprinkles  Calvary,  it  is  to  l;im  as  if  some 
touch  of  cleansing  were  in  it  for  the  matter 
itself  of   the    world !     In    short,   there   is   so 
much  in  this  analogy,  and  it  is  so  affecting, 
so  profoundly  real,  that  no   worshipper   most 
devout   before   the   altar     having   once   seen 
Christ,  who  He  is,  what   He  has  done  by  His 
cross,  and  the   glorious  offering  He  has  made 
of  Himself  in    His  ministry  of  good,  faithful 
unto  death — who  will  not  turn  away  instinc- 
tively to  Him,  saying,  *' No  more  altars,  goats, 

Ul 


CHAP.  IX. 


HOMTLETW    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


or  lambs;  these  were  shadows  I  see;  now  has 
come  the  substance.  Tbis  is  my  sacrifice, 
and  here  is  ray  peace — the  blood  that  was 
shed  for  the  remission  of  sins — this  I  take 
and  want  no  other." — H.  Buslinell,  D.D. 

(c)  Let  me  suppose  that  you  profoundly 
long  to  know  what  you  must  do,  on  what  you 
mubt  lay  hold,  in  order  that  you  may  appro- 
priate to  yourseU  the  benefits  of  Christ's 
df^ath,  that  you  may  be  saved  by  His  saeiific?, 
that  you  miv  be  reconciled  to  God  by  His 
atonement.  You  coaie  to  me  and  ask,  "What 
must  I  do  ?  do  first  ?  Ho  at  am  I  to  set  about 
thi-i  grrat  quest  and  task?  " 

With  much  sympathy,  as  of  one  who  has 
himself  had  to  solve  your  problem  as  best  he 
could,  I  reply,  Fix  your  thoaghts  first  and 
chiefly  on  the  fact  on  which  both  St.  Paul  and 
St  John  lay  such  excraordinary  emphasis, 
viz.,  that  the  death,  the  cro^is,  the  blood,  the 
sacrifice  of  Christ — take  which  term  you  will 
— is  a  manifestation  of  the  eternal  and  inex- 
haustible love  of  God  for  sinful  men,  for  all 
sinful  men  ;  a  manifestation  of  the  resolve 
and  intention  of  that  Love  to  take  away  the 
sin  of  the  wholo  world,  and  to  redeem  you 
personally  from  all  your  iniquities.  You  see 
at  once  how  great,  how  voluntary,  how  un- 
merited, how  intense  and  Divine  that  Love  is. 
It  shrinks  from  nothing — from  no  effort,  from 
no  sacrifice,  from  no  pang  whether  of  body  or 
of  spirit,  from  no  contact  with  evil,  from  no 
experience  whether  of  the  ingratitude  and 
insolk'nt  wickedness  of  man  or  of  the  pain  of 
self-limitation  to  any  form  of  life  or  of  death.  So 
much  you  cannot  fail  to  see  with  tho  story  of 
the  Gospel  in  your  hand.  And  your  first  duty 
is  to  believe  in  that  almost  incredible  Love,  a 


Love  that  would  be  absolutely  incredible  but 
for  its  manifest ition  and  proof  in  the  history 
of  Jesus  Christ  the  Lord.  You  are  to  trust  in 
that  Love,  to  bo  sure  that  a  love  which 
extends  to  all  the  world  must  extend  to  you. 
You  are  to  commit,  yourself  to  it — your  soul  as 
well  as  your  body  ;  commit  yourself  to  it  in  life, 
in  death,  after  death ;  and  to  sincerely  believe 
that  all  must  go  well  wich  you  because  that 
Love  is  over  you  and  upon  you.  This  is  what 
you  are  to  do  and  believe.  It  is  this  on  which 
specifically  you  are  to  lay  hold.  It  is  thu» 
that  you  are  to  appropriate  the  benefits  of 
Chrifet's  death. 

And,  then,  if  you  take  this  first  step,  what 
will  be  your  second?  What  will  be  the 
inevitable  result  and  consequence  of  having 
taken  the  first  ?  Obviously,  if  you  do  sincerely 
and  heartily  believe  in  such  a  Love  as  that, 
your  own  love  will  spring  up  and  run  out  to 
meet  it.  You  will  love  Him  who  first  loved 
you.  And  your  love  will  be,  or  will  come  to 
ba  as  God's  love  takes  effect  upon  you.  of  the 
same  quality  with  His — an  unselfish  love,  a 
love  capable  of  living  and  dying  for  others,  a 
love  pure  and  righteous,  strong  and  enduring  ; 
a  love  that  will  gradually  transform  you  into 
His  likeness,  and  make  you  of  one  will  with 
Hira  ....  You  are  to  lay  hold  of  the  Cross 
of  Christ  as  at  once  a  manifestation  of  God's 
righteous  anger  against  the  sins  with  which 
you,  too,  are  angry,  and  from  which  you  seek 
to  ba  delivered,  and  a  revelatioa  of  the  Love 
which  is  bent  on  conquering  sin  and  redeeming 
you  from  all  evil.  You  are  to  so  appreciate 
and  trust  that  Love  as  that  it  shall  quicken  a 
corresponding  affection,  and  make  it  the  ruling 
affection,  in  your  own  soul. — Samuel  Cox, 


Ordinance  op  the  Passover. 
{Verses  1-5.) 


The  design  of  God  in  instituting 
this  remarkable  ordinance,  the  Passover, 
was  to  explain  to  us,  as  well  as  to  pre- 
figure to  the  Jews,  the  method  of 
salvation  through  the  blood  of  Christ. 
He  is  the  One  great  Sacrifice  for  sin ; 
and  here,  the  application  to  Him  in  His 
mediatorial  work  is  most  comprehensive. 
Behold  the  analogy.     It  holds  — 

I.  With  regard  to  the  victim  which 
was  chosen. 

Was  it  a  lamb?  Christ  is  often  so 
oiUed  on  account  of  His  innocence, 
meekness,  and  resignation  (Isa.  liii.  7  ; 
John  i.  29  ;  1  Peter  i.  19  ;  Rev.  v.  6.) 
Was  it  chosen  from  the  flock?  Christ 
was  taken  from  among  His  brethren 
(Acts  iii.  22).  Was  it  a  male  of  the 
142 


first  year?  Christ  suffered  in  the 
prime  of  His  days.  Was  it  without 
blemish  ?  Cnrist  was  altogether  perfect 
(Heb.  vii.  26;  1  Peter  i   19). 

II.  With  regard  to  the  oblation 
which  was  made. 

As  the  lamb  was  slain,  so  was  Jesua 
(Rev.  V.  9).  As  the  lamb  was  slain 
before  the  whole  assembly  (Exod.  xii. 
6),  so  Jesus  was  publicly  put  to  death. 
As  the  lamb  was  slain  between  the 
two  evenings,  so  Jesus  was  offered  be- 
tween three  o'clock  and  six  (Matt, 
xxvii.  45).  As  the  lamb  was  set  apart 
four  days  before  it  was  slain  (Exod.  xii. 
3,  6),  so  Christ  entered  the  city  four 
days  before  His  crucifixion  (Matt.  xii. 
1  sqq). 


H0M1LETIC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  IX. 


m.  With  regard  to  the  blood  which 
was  sprinkled. 

The  blood  was  sprinkled  with  a 
bunch  of  hyssop  (Exod.  xii.  22  ,  dipt 
into  the  bason  ;  so  the  blood  of  Christ 
is  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  cove- 
nant, the  deposit  of  privileges,  which 
all  become  ours  by  the  exercise  of 
faith.  The  blood  was  sprinkled  upon 
the  door-posts  of  their  dwellings.  So 
the  blood  of  Christ  is  to  be  applied  to 
the  hearts  and  consciences  of  believers 
(Heb.  ix.  13,  14;  x.  22).  The  blood 
was  sprinkled  upon  the  lintel  and  the 
side  posts ;  but  not  behind  nor  below 
the  door.  So  the  bluod  of  Christ  is 
not  to  be  trodden  under  foot  (Heb.  x. 
29).  The  blood  secured  every  family 
where  it  was  sprinkled,  it  being  within 
the  limits  of  the  Divine  protection,  so 
that  the  destroying  angel  was  forbidden 
to  hurt  them.  So  the  blood  of  Jesus 
is  the  only  refuge  for  the  guilty. 

IV.  With  regard  to  the  flesh  which 
was  eaten. 

The  flesh  of  the  lamb  was  eaten 
roasted  with  fire,  strikingly  exhibiting 
the  severity  of  our  Saviour's  sufferings. 
(Isa.  1. 6  j  lii.  14,  15  ;  Psa.  xxii.  l4, 15.) 


It  was  eaten  whole,  aud  not  a  bone 
broken,  which  was  amazingly  fulfilled 
in  reference  to  Christ.  (John  xix.  31- 
36.)  It  was  eaten  in  haste,  with  the 
staff  in  their  hands,  to  intimate  that 
Chiist  is  to  be  received  immediately 
without  delay.  It  was  eaten  with 
bitter  herbs,  importing  our  looking  to 
Christ  with  sorrow  of  heart,  in  remem- 
brance of  sin,  as  expressed  in  Zech.  xii. 
10.  It  was  eaten  with  the  loins  girded, 
implying  that  we  must  be  prepared  for 
His  coming.  (Eph.  vi.  14.)  It  was 
eaten  with  the  feet  shod,  to  remind  us 
of  the  freedom  and  happiness  which 
Christ  imparts  to  the  believing  Israelites, 
(compare  Isa.  xx.  2-4  with  Horn.  v.  11.) 
It  was  eaten  with  unleavened  bread, 
because  we  are  to  receive  and  profes^t 
Christ  with  unfeiuned  sincerity.  (1  Cor. 
V.  7,  8;  John  i.  47.) 

Upon  the  whole,  we  learn  from  the 
subject  the  happy  state  of  believers, 
who,  though  once  afar  oft',  are  now 
made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ  ;  aud 
likewise  the  unhappy  state  of  unbe- 
lievers, who,  rejecting  the  atonement, 
must  inevitably  perish.  —  William 
Sleigh. 


Unwilling  Exclusion  from  Religious  Ordinances. 

(Verses  e-12,  14.) 


In  these  verses  we  have  the  follow- 
ing homiletic  points,  which  we  may 
profitably  consider  : — 

I.  The  Divine  recognition  of  the 
need  of  personal  fitness  for  an  accep- 
table observance  of  rehgious  ordinances. 

A  person  who  was  ceremonially  un- 
clean was  prohibited  from  taking  part 
in  the  Passover ;  for  only  those  who 
were  clean  could  participate  in  any 
sacrificial  meal,  or  offer  any  sacrifice. 
(Lev.  vii.  20,  21.)  So  '*  there  were 
certain  men,  who  were  defiled  by  the 
dead  body  of  a  man  who  could  not 
keep  the  Passover  on  that  day."  A 
certain  moral  fitness  is  essential  to  an 
acceptable  approach  unto  God.  Our 
Lord  taught  that  a  man  cannot  present 
an  acceptable  offering  to  God  who  is 


not  in  right  relations  with  his  fellow- 
men.  (Matt.  V.  23,  24.)  And  St.  Paul 
exhorted  the  Corinthian  Christians  to 
examine  themselves  before  partaking  of 
the  Supper  of  the  Lord.  (1  Cor.  xi.  28.) 
Two  things  at  least  appear  to  us  as 
indispensable  to  an  acceptable  approach 
to  God  in  public  reli<rious  ordinances  : 

1.  Faith  ill  (he  mediation  of  the  Lord 
Jefus  Christ.  (Jolin  xiv.  6.  ;  Rom.  v. 
1,  2 ;  Eph.  ii.  18  ;  Heb.  iv.  15,  16 ;  x. 
19-22.) 

2.  Devout  preparation  of  the  heart. 
There  are  many  persons  who  derive  no 
benefit  from  the  public  means  of  grace 
because  they  enter  upon  them  with 
minds  engrossed  by  worldly  engage- 
ments or  anxieties,  or  with  thoughless, 
frivolous    minds,    tkc.      Such    mental 

143 


CHAP.  IX. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


states  preclude  communion  with  God.  (a) 

II.  The  unwilling  exclusion  of  men 
from  religious  ordinances. 

Here  are  certain  men  who  were 
excluded  from  keeping  the  Passover 
through  no  fault  of  their  own.  Their 
defilement  was  not  moral,  but  ceremo- 
nial ;  and  this  was  contracted  not  of 
their  own  free  choice,  but  of  inevitable 
necessity;  not  by  association  with  the 
morally  depraved,  but  by  the  needful 
work  of  the  burial  of  the  dead  ;  yet 
they  were  prohibited  from  observing 
the  Passover.  There  are  many  to-day 
who  are  unwillingly  deprived  from 
taking  part  in  public  religious  ordin- 
ances,— some  by  reason  of  severe  bodily 
afflictions  ;  others  by  the  pressure  of 
the  infirmities  of  age  ;  others  by  their 
ministry  to  the  afflicted  ;  and  others  by 
legitimate  domestic  duties,  eg.,  the  care 
of  infants  and  little  children,  &c. 
Every  Lord's  day  there  are  very  many 
persons  who  would  esteem  it  a  privilege 
and  joy  to  unite  in  the  engagements  of 
public  worship,  but  they  cannot  do  so. 
Let  us  learn  to  prize  the  opportunities 
of  doing  so  while  we  have  them. 

III.  A  commendable  enquiry  con- 
cerning the  reason  of  such  exclusion 
from  religious  ordinances. 

The  men  who  were  so  excluded  "  came 
before  Moses  and  before  Aaron  on  that 
day; "  &c.  Their  enquiry  was  com- 
mendable— 

I.  As  regards  its  spirit.  It  implied 
(1)  Faith  in  the  reasonableness  of  the 
Divine  requirements.  "  Wherefore  are 
we  kept  back"]  <ko.  It  is  as  though 
they  had  said,  '*  There  must  be  a  reason 
for  this  prohibition  ;  may  we  know  that 
reason  ?  can  you  explain  it  to  us  ]  or 
can  you  meet  in  some  way  what  seems 
to  us  the  hardship  of  our  case  % "  All 
the  Divine  arrangements  are  in  the 
highest  degree  reasonable ;  they  are 
expressions  of  infiinite  wisdom.  (2) 
Affection  for  Divine  ordinances.  The 
deprivation  was  painful  to  them.  It  is 
a  grief  to  the  godly  soul  to  be  deprived 
Df  the  public  means  of  grace.  *'  Lord 
I  have  loved  the  habitation  of  Thy 
house,  and  the  place  where  Thine 
honour  dwelleth."     "  How  amiable  are 

144 


Thy  tabernacles,  0  Lord  of  hosts  !  My 
soul  longeth,"  &c.  There  is  good  ground 
for  this  affection.  In  Divine  ordinances 
God  manifests  Himself  graciously  to 
His  people  (Exod.  xx.  24  ;  Matt,  xviii. 
19,  20),  and  makes  unto  them  rich 
communications  of  grace  and  truth. 

2.  As  regards  its  direction.  "They 
came  before  Moses  and  before  Aaron," 
and  enquired  of  them.  The  leader  and 
lawgiver,  and  the  high  priest,  both  of 
whom  were  appointed  by  God,  were  the 
proper  persons  to  consult  on  the  diffi- 
culty which  had  arisen.  Let  those  who 
are  religiously  perplexed  seek  help  from 
those  who  by  reason  of  their  character 
and  attainments  are  qualified  to  render 
the  same. 

The  solicitude  of  these  men  for  par- 
ticipation in  this  religious  ordinance  is 
a  rebuke  to  many  who,  in  our  own  day, 
disregard  the  public  worship  of  God  and 
the  ministry  and  the  sacraments  of  the 
Gospel, 

IV.  The  exemplary  conduct  of  reli- 
gious teachers  in  answering  the  enqui- 
ries of  their  charge. 

"And  Moses  said  unto  them,  Stand 
still,"  <kc.  In  the  conduct  of  Moses  we 
see, — 

1.  Exemplary  humility.  He  tacitly 
admits  his  inability  to  answer  their 
enquiry  of  himself  It  is  only  ignor- 
ance and  conceit  that  assumes  the  airs 
of  infallibility  The  minister  of  spirit- 
ual intelligence  and  power  is  ever 
humble.     (6) 

2.  Exemplary  enquiry.  "  I  will  hear 
what  the  Lord  will  command  concerning 
you,"  said  Moses.  That  he  might  an- 
swer these  enquiries,  he  himself  enquires 
of  the  Lord.  So  should  the  Christian 
minister  in  instructing  others.  We 
have,  (1)  The  teaching  of  the  sacred 
Scriptures :  we  should  search  them. 
We  have  (2)  The  promised  guidance  of 
the  Holy  Spirit :  we  should  seek  it  by . 
prayer,     (c) 

3.  Exemplary  eficiency.  Guided  by 
God,  Moses  was  enabled  to  deal  with 
the  difficulty  satisfactorily, — practically 
to  do  away  with  it.  Christian  minis- 
ters should  be  able  efficiently  to  counsel 
tlie  people  of  their  charge.     Those  who 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  IX. 


hfimbly  acknowledge  their  ignorance, 
search  the  Scriptures,  and  seek  help  of 
God,  will  be  able  to  do  so.  Let  all 
religious  instructors  copy  the  example 
of  Moses  in  this  matter. 

V.  A  Divine  arrangement  for  the 
compensation  of  those  who  are  unwil- 
lingly excluded  from  religious  ordi- 
nances. 

"  And  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses, 
saying,  Speak  unto  the  children  of 
Israel,"  &c.  (verses  9,  12,  14.)  Pro- 
vision is  here  made  for  three  distinct 
classes — for  the  defiled,  for  the  traveller 
far  from  home,  and  for  the  stranger. 
For  the  two  former  a  supplementary 
Passover  is  instituted ;  and  for  the 
latter  who  desired  to  unite  in  the 
observance  of  the  ordinance,  liberty  to 
do  so  is  granted.  In  the  directions 
given  to  Moses  by  the  Lord,  two  things 
are  clear  and  conspicuous — 

1.  No  one  was  to  he  uawiUi7igly 
deprived  of  religious  ordinances  vnthout 
compensation. 

2.  All  must  faitlifully  fulfil  the  Divine 
directions  in  the  keeping  of  such  ordi- 


nances as  they  had  access  to  (verses  11, 
12,  14).  The  three  leading  points  of 
the  original  institution  are  here  re- 
peated— that  they  were  to  eat  the 
lamb  with  unleavened  bread  and  bitter 
herbs,  they  were  to  leave  none  of  it  till 
the  next  day,  and  they  were  not  to 
break  a  bone  of  it.  The  foreigner, 
also,  who  kept  the  feast  was  to  do  so 
with  minute  accuracy  as  to  the  direc- 
tions concerning  it.  Compare  verse  14 
with  Exod.  xii.  48,  49.  And  still  when 
any  one  is  involuntarily  detained  from 
religious  ordinances,  God  will  supply 
unto  him  precious  and  abundant  com- 
pensations. To  the  patient  sufferer  on 
his  bed,  to  the  attentive  nurse  as  she 
ministers  to  the  afflicted,  and  to  the 
loving  mother  at  home  with  her  babe, 
if  only  the  spirit  of  true  worship  be 
theirs,  God  will  graciously  reveal  Him- 
self, and  enrich  them  with  the  treasures 
of  His  grace.  He  will  be  with  them  ; 
and  the  chamber  of  sickness,  or  the 
nursery  of  infancy,  shall  become  a 
Bethel,  "a  little  sanctuary,"  sacred 
with  Hia  presence  and  radiant  with 
His  glory,     (d) 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  Previous  to  your  entering  into  the 
honse  of  God,  seek  a  prepared  heart,  and 
implore  the  blessing  of  God  on  the  ministry  of 
the  Word.  It  may  be  presumed  that  no  real 
Christian  will  neglect  to  preface  his  attendance 
on  social  worship  with  secret  prayer.  Bat 
let  the  acquisition  of  a  devout  and  serious 
frame,  freed  from  the  cares,  vanities,  and 
pollutions  of  the  world,  accompanied  with 
earnest  desires  after  God,  and  the  communi- 
cations of  His  grace,  form  a  principal  subject 
of  your  private  devotions.  Forget  not  to 
implore  a  blessing  on  the  public  ministry, 
that  it  may  accomplish  in  yourselves,  and 
to  others,  the  great  purposes  it  is  designed 
to  answer;  and  that  those  measures  of  assis- 
tance may  be  affurded  to  your  ministers 
which  shall  replenish  them  with  light,  love, 
and  liberty,  that  they  may  speak  the  mystery 
of  the  Gospel  as  it  ought  to  be  spoken. 
Pastors  and  people  would  both  derive  eminent 
advantages  from  such  a  practice;  they,  in 
their  capacity  of  exhibiting,  you,  in  your 
preparation  for  receiving,  the  mysteries  of  the 
Gospel.  As  the  duties  of  the  closet  have 
the  happiest  tendency,  by  solemnizing  and 
elevating  the  mind,  to  prepare  for  those  of 
the  sanctuary,  so  the  conviction  of  your 
having  borne  your  minister  on  your  heart 
before   the    thiond    of    grsc«    would,    apart 


from  every  other  consideration,  dispose  him 
to  address  you  with  augmented  zeal  and 
tenderness.  We  should  consider  it  as  such  a 
token  for  good,  as  well  as  such  an  uneqivocal 
proof  of  your  attachment,  as  would  greatly 
animate  and  supnort  us  under  all  our  dis- 
couragements,— Robert  Hall,  A.M. 

(b)  h.  more  despicable  charactar  I  know  not 
than  the  poor  mortal  wh«w  proclaims  his 
opinions  as  if  they  were  the  very  Gospel  of 
God  ;  who  denounces  all  who  adopt  them  not 
as  heretics.  I  pity  the  mental  serfs,  who, 
instead  of  drinking  at  the  crystal  river  of 
truth,  that  rolls  majestically  by,  consent  to 
sip  at  tbe  puddled  cisterns  of  the  would-be 
theological  diotatoro.  While  around  us  have 
been  dang,  with  God-like  profusion,  the 
fruits  and  beauties  of  a  Paradise,  shall  we 
consent  to  confine  ourselves  to  the  scanty 
provisions  of  a  petty  Liitchen  garden?  To  all 
the  dogmatists  who  would  bind  us  to  their 
own  narrow  cr''ed  we  would  say  with  Pope : — 

"  Go,  wondrous  creature  1  mount  where  science 

guides  ; 
Go,  measure  earth,  weigh  air,  and  stem  the  tides ; 
Instruct  tbe  planets  in  what  orbs  to  run, 
Correct  old  time  and  regulate  the  sun. 
Go,  teach  eternal  Wisdom  how  to  rule, 
Then  drop  ioto  thyself,  and  be  a  fook'* 

U5 


CHAP.  IX. 


HOMIhETlC  COMMENTARY:  NUMBERS. 


It  is  the  duty  of  every  man  to  get  convic- 
tions of  Divine  truth  for  himself,  to  hold  those 
convictions  with  firmness,  and  to  promote  them 
■with  earnestness  ;  but  at  the  same  time  witb 
a  due  consciousness  of  his  own  fallibility,  and 
with  a  becoming  deference  to  the  judgment  of 
others.  Sure  am  I  that  he  who  has  penetrated 
farthest  into  the  realms  of  truth,  wrestled 
most  earnestly  with  its  questions,  will  be 
the  most  free  from  all  bigotry  a,ud  do^jmatism 
in  the  proclamation  of  his  views.  The  more 
knowledge  the  more  humility.  True  wisdom 
is  ever  modest.  Those  who  live  mof-t  in  the 
light  are  the  most  ready  to  veil  their  faces. — 
David  Thomas.  D.D. 

(jc)  Among  all  the  formative  icfluences 
which  go  to  make  up  a  man  honoured  of  God 
in  the  ministry,  I  know  of  none  more  mighty 
tha,n  his  own  familiarity  with  the  mercy-seat. 
All  that  a  college  course  can  do  for  a  student 
is  coarse  and  external  compared  with  the 
spiritual  and  clear  refinnment  obtained  by 
communion  with  God.  While  the  unformed 
minister  is  revolving  upon  the  wheel  of  pre- 
paration, prayer  is  the  tool  of  the  Great  Pott^er 
by  which  He  moulds  the  vessel.  All  our 
libraries  and  studies  are  mere  emptiness  com- 
pared with  our  closets.  We  grow,  we  wax 
mighty,  we  prevail  in  private  prayer.  That 
we  may  be  strong  to  labour,  tender  to  sympa- 
thise, and  wise  to  direct,  let  us  p;  ay.  If  study 
makes  men  of  us,  prayer  will  make  saints  of 
us.  Our  sacred  furniture  for  our  holy  ofSce 
can  only  be  found  in  the  arsenal  of  supplica- 
tion ;  and  after  we  have  entered  upon  our 
consecrated  warfare,  prayer  alone  can  keep 
GUI  armour  bright. —  C.  H.  Spvrgeon. 

Moses  was  but  the  echo  of  God's  voice  ;  John 
Baptist  "the  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wil- 
derness;'' St.  Paul  "received  of  the  Lord" 
what  he  delivered  to  the  Church  (1  Cor.  xi. 
23),  and  took  care  that  the  faith  of  his  hearers 
"might  not  be  in  the  wisdom  of  man,  but  in 
the  power  of  God"  (1  Cor.  ii.  4,  5).  Unwar- 
ranted doctrines  come  not  cum  gratia  et  pri' 
vih.qio. — John  Trapp,  M  A. 

[i)  Do  not  think  for  a  moment  that  by  fre- 
quenting places  that  have  an  odour  of  peculiar 
sanctity  you  can  alone  acceptably  worship  God. 


Have  you  got  a  contrite  heart?     That  can 
consecrate  tne    meanest    p'ace   on  earth.     It 
does  not  matter  where  the  congregation  may 
gat^^her,  only  let  them  be    a  congregation   of 
faithful    men,    yearning  for    truth,    ready    to 
make  any  sicrifice  to  obtaiti  it,  and  that  God 
who  is  everywhere  present  will  reveal   Him- 
self in  blessings  wherever  they  may  choose 
to  assemble.     They  may  crowd  into  the  solemn 
Minster,  and  while    the   organ   peals  out  itrf 
alternate  wail  and  psalfn,  to  them  it  may  be  a 
spiritual  service,  and   their  hearts  may  glow 
in  purer  light   than  streams  through  painted 
windows.     They  may  draw  around  the  hearth 
of   the    farmer's    homestead,    and    while  the 
frost  king   reigns   outside,   their  spirits  may 
burn  with  a  warmth  that  may  defy  the  keen- 
ness of  the  sternest  w'nter.     For  them  there 
may  be  a  spiritual  harvest  more  plentiful  than 
the  garnered  store  in  the  barn  that  has  been 
lent    for  worship;    or  a  season  of  refreshing 
beneath  the  t'latch  through  which  the  penitent 
poi'l  can  filter  up  its  sighs  for  heaven.     On 
t/ie  gallant  vessel's  deck,  with  no  witnesses  of 
the  service  but  the  sky  and  S(?a,  there  may  be 
the  sound  of  many  waters  as  the  Lord  of  hosts 
coma's   down.     And   in  the   Alpine   solitudes, 
where  the  spirit,  alone  with  God  mid  murmur- 
ing streams,  and  bowing  pines,  and  summits 
of    eternal  snow,   taplifts  its  adoration,   t^ere 
may   be  a   whi-^per    stiller,  and  sweettr,   a-jd 
more  comforting  than  that  of   nature,  saying, 
"Peace,   peace    be   unto    you."     Oh!    it    is  a 
beautiful  thought,  that  in  this,  the  labt  of  the 
dispensations,   the  contrite  heart  can  hallow 
its    own    temple  I     Wherever    the    emigrant 
wanders — wherever   the    exile  pines — in  the 
dreariest  Sahara,  rarely  tracked  save  by  the 
Bedoum  on  his  camel — on  the  banks  of  rivers 
yet  unknown  to  song — in  the  dense  woodlands 
where  no  axe  has  yet  struck  against  the  trees 
— in  the  dark  ruin — in  the  foul  cell — in  the 
narrow  street — on  the  swift  rail — there  where 
bnsiness    tramps    and    rattles — there    where 
sickness    gaspi   and    pines — anywhere — any- 
where in  this  wide,  wide  world,  if  there  is  a 
soul  that  wants  to  worship,  there  can  be  a 
hallowed  altar  and  a  present   God. —  W,  M, 
Punshon,  LL.D. 


The   Wilful    Neglect    op   Religious  Ordinanoes. 

(Verse  13.) 


In  this  verse  we  have  sat  before  us  a 
case  of, — 

I.  The  wilful  neglect  of  religious 
ordinances. 

**  The  man  that  is  clean,  and  is  not 
in  a  journey,  and  forbeareth  to  keep 
the  Passover."  The  Passover  was  in- 
stituted by  command  of  God  ;  neither 
ceremonial  uncleanness  nor  absence 
from  home  prevented  his  observing  it ; 


yet  he  fails  to  do  so — such  is  the  case 
which  is  set  before  us  in  the  text.  In 
our  day  the  wilful  neglect  of  religious 
ordinances  is  painfully  prevalent. 
Churches,  chapels,  mission  halls,  and 
religious  services  abound ;  yet  in  this 
nominally  Christian  country  there  are 
hundreds  of  thousands  who  are  in  a 
position  to  attend  public  worship,  who 
live  in  the  habitual  neglect  of  it.     (a) 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  IX. 


II.  The  wilful  neglect  of  religious 
ordinances  is  sinful. 

It  is  said  in  the  text  that  the  man 
who  wilfully  forbeareth  to  keep  the 
Passover  "  shall  bear  his  sin."  The 
worship  of  God  is  not  optional,  but 
obligatory  upon  man  ;  it  is  our  duty. 
He  who  wilfully  neglects  religious 
ordinances  by  such  neglect  sins,  because 
he, — 

1.  Withholds  from  God  that  which  is 
His  due.  God  has  an  indefeasible 
right  to  our  homage.  His  greatness 
should  excite  our  awe ;  His  kindness 
should  enkindle  our  gratitude  ;  His 
skill  should  awaken  our  admiration ; 
His  holiness  should  inspire  our  adoring 
love. 

2.  Despises  the  gifts  which  God  bestows. 
Worship  is  a  privilege  as  well  as  a  duty. 
It  is  a  great  kindness  on  the  part  of 
God  that  He  has  instituted  the  ordi- 
nances of  worship,  and  great  condescen- 
sion that  He  graciously  accepts  our 
worship.  To  neglect  public  worship 
is  to  despise  the  ordinance  and  reject 
the  gift  of  God. 

3.  Neglects  the  culture  and  develop- 
ment of  the  highest  faculties  of  his 
being.  Worship  is  a  necessity  of  our 
nature.  We  have  religious  tendencies 
and  aspirations  which  seek  expression 


and  s  itisfaction  in  worship.  We  cannot 
neglect  worship  without  the  deepest 
and  most  deplorable  self-injury,  (b) 
Wilfully  to  neglect  religious  ordinances, 
then,  is  to  sin — to  sin  against  our  own 
nature  and  ai^ainst  God. 

III.  The  wilful  neglect  of  religious 
ordinances  will  be  punished. 

'*  The  man  that  is  clean  and  is  not 
in  a  journey,  and  forbeareth  to  keep 
the  Passover,  even  the  same  soul  shall 
be  cut  off  from  among  his  people,"  &c. 
The  expression  "  cut  off  from  among 
his  people  "  denotes  either  capital  pun- 
ishment, or  exclusion  from  the  society 
and  privileges  of  the  chosen  people. 
The  latter  seems  to  us  the  more  pro- 
bable. No  one  can  neglect  religious 
ordinances  without  incurring  punish- 
ment— a  punishment  which  grows  di- 
rectly out  of  the  sin.  By  his  wilful 
neglect  he  brings  the  punishment  upon 
himself. 

1.  He  foregoes  the  highest  joys  of  life. 

2.  He  dwarfs  and  degrades  his  soul. 

3.  He  excludes  himself  from  thehighest 
fellowship  on  earth. 

4.  He  renders  himself  unfit  for  the  fel- 
lowship of  heaven.  The  worship  of  God 
here  is  a  natural  and  necessary  prepa- 
ration for  uniting  in  His  worship  in  the 
innumerable  company  of  the  glorified. 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 


(a)  The  need  of  more  effort  to  induce  per- 
sons who  never  attend  a  place  of  worship  to 
do  so  seems  very  great.  Thus  there  are 
2,500  people  living  in  one  block  of  buildings 
in  the  South  of  London,  of  whom  not  more 
th'U  130  fr  quent  public  worship.  This  is  a 
Bad  fact,  and  needs  the  consideration  of  Chris- 
tian people, — '•  The  Christian  World"  May 
10,1878. 

A  very  large  proportion  of  the  outside  world 
is  voluntarily  irreligious  or  indifferent.  A 
very  large  proportion  of  those  who  are  not 
church-goer-,  who  connect  themselves  with 
no  religious  society,  and  make  no  professiou 
of  religion,  reside  in  the  midst  of  those  who 
do.  Intelliajpnt,  educated,  surrounded  by 
religious  iufluences,  it  is  not  through  ignorance 
they  remain  where  they  are.  Had  they  the 
longing  for  that  peace  which  Christianity 
gives,  they  know  in  gt^neral  where  to  find  it. 
Their  indifference  and  irreliijion  are  in  a 
great  measure  their  own  choice.  No  special 
mission  is  needed  to  them,  as  it  is  to  those 
who  have  not  their  knowledge  or  their  oppor- 

l2 


tunities.     They  may  be  reached  by  the  qniet, 

unobtrusive  influence,  and  by  the  steady 
growtli  of  vital  religion  among  their  neigh- 
b')urs;  by  the  appeal  of  a  Christian  friend  in 
sickness;  by  the  perusal  of  a  book;  by  the 
voice  of  some  distinguished  preacher  whom 
they  are  led  to  hear.  This  c'ass  is  very  large  ; 
it  is  hindered  by  causes  within  rather  than 
"fiiihonx,.— Joseph  MullenSy  D,D, 

That  the  religion  of  the  working  man  is  at 
alow  ebb  is  a  fact  there  can  be  no  disputing. 
Our  churches  are  for  the  rich,  our  chapels  for 
the  lower  half  of  the  middle  class;  the  work- 
ing man  seldom  finds  his  way  to  either.  The 
Sunday  morning  is  mostly  spent  in  bed,  the 
afternoon  in  an  indolent  and  half  apathetic 
condition,  lolling  on  chairs  or  sofa,  if  he  has 
one,  nodding  and  slumbering  over  Lloyd^s, 
or  the  Weekly  Times ;  it  is  only  during  the 
few  hours  of  evening  that  he  b-'gins  to  show 
any  signs  of  active  life.  On  the  Monday  he 
feel-^  more  tired,  and  imagines  the  day  to  have 
been  very  considerably  longer  than  any  other. 
This  is  how  the  majority  of  London  working 

147 


CHAP.  IX 


EOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


men,  at  least,  spend  their  Sunday,  half  sad  to 
see  it  come,  and  wholly  glad  when  it  is  over. 
This  is  a  state  of  things  to  be  lamented  ;  who 
can  doubt  it  is  only  in  i  he  degree  in  which 
families  are  happy  (to  rise  to  which  there 
must  be  love,  sympathy,  confidence,  and 
mutual  esteem),  that  a  nation  becomes  truly 
great ;  and  this  happiness  is  not  possible  with- 
out religion.  Wo  trust  the  day  is  not  far 
distant  when  almost  every  working  man  will 
not  only  think  it  a  duty  to  attend  public  wor- 
ship, but  will  xeel  it  a  pleasure  likewise. — 
Erlfctic  Reciew. 

(6)  Worship  io  the  instinctive  act  and 
necessity  of  the  religious  ccnsciousneas.  Its 
root  lies  in  our  recognition  of  God,  and  of  our 
personal  relationship  to  Him,  its  eueharistic 
olement  in  our  sense  of  His  transcendent 
excellencies,  and  its  supplicatory  element  in 
our  consciousness  of  absolute  dependence  upon 
Him.  We  do  not,  that  is,  worship  in  mere 
-compliance  '^rith  a  Divine  injunction,  nor  in 


conformity  with  a  conventional  cultns,  nor  as 
a  means  of  religious  benefit.  We  worship 
under  the  impulse  of  our  own  religious  in- 
stincts, because  the  constitution  of  our  nature 
being  what  it  is,  we  cannot  without  violence 
to  it  help  doing  so.  Worship,  therefore,  has 
its  ultimate  reason  neither  in  the  sense  of 
obligatii^n,  nor  in  considerations  of  utility; 
it  is  the  simple  necessity  of  the  religious  soul. 
Hence,  in  the  severest  persecutions  of  the 
Church,  no  considerations  of  personal  peril 
have  ever  been  sufficient  to  deter  Christian 
men  from  assembling  for  social  worship. 
Although  there  is  no  direct  injunction  of 
public  worship,  and  although  the  spiritual  re- 
lationships of  the  soul  are  so  personal,  and 
find  their  full  expression  in  acts  of  personal 
and  private  devotion,  yet  the  consecrating  im- 
pulse of  social  worship  has  led  men  for  the 
sake  of  it  to  dare  and  sacrifice  life  itself.— 
JET.  ^//o«,  D.D. 


Thb  Manitestation  of  the  Diyinb  Pbksbnoh. 

(Vers^  15,  16.; 


I.  The  Sphere  of  the  Manifestation 
of  the  Divine  Presence. 

"  And  on  the  day  that  the  tabernacle 
was  reared  up  the  cloud  covered  the 
tabernacle,  namely,  the  tent  of  the 
testimony."  Previously  the  cloud  had 
hung  up  on  high  over  the  camp ;  but 
now  that  the  tabernacle  is  finished  it 
descended  and  rested  upon  it.  In  the 
tabernacle  and  in  the  ordinances  of  re- 
ligion God  specially  manifested  Him- 
self. He  is  everywhere  present.  The 
thoughtful  mind  discovers  evidences  of 
His  power  and  skill  everywhere.  To 
the  religious  heart  the  whole  world  is  a 
temple  resplendent  with  His  glory  and 
resounding  with  His  praise.  But  still 
He  is  specially  present  in  His  Church  : 

1.  £y  the  ministry  of  the  Word.  He 
speaks  to  men  by  His  servants  as  they 

]  expound  and  apply  the  teachings  of  His 
Book. 

2.  By  the  observance  of  the  Sacraments. 
To  the  believer  Christ  is  really  and 
blessedly  present  in  the  Sacraments 
which  He  instituted. 

3.  By  the  presence  and  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  By  His  Spirit  the  Lord 
Jesus  abides  with  His  Church.  In  His 
material  works  v/e  see  Him  as  the  God 
©f  nature ;  in  His  Church  we  gee  fjjnri 


as  the  God  of  grace  and  salvation,  we 

realize  His  helpful  and  hallowing 
presence,  and  hold  delightful  com- 
munion with  Him.  Comp.  Pss.  xxviL 
4;  cxxxii.  13-16;  Matt,  xviii.  20.     (a) 

II.  The  Aspects  of  the  Manifestation 
of  the  Divine  Presence. 

"  The  cloud  covered  the  tabernacle, 
namely,  the  tent  of  testimony;  and  at 
even  there  was  upon  the  tabernacle,  as 
it  were  the  appearance  of  fire,  until  the 
morning." 

1.  The  aspect  of  the  manifestation  of 
the  Divine  Presence  was  varied.  In  the 
day  He  appeared  in  cloud ;  in  the  night 
in  the  appearance  of  fire.  The  Divine 
Being  does  not  present  the  same 
aspects  to  different  minds  ;  nor  does  He 
always  appear  in  the  same  aspects  to 
the  same  persons.  He  changes  not, 
"with  Him  is  no  variableness  ; "  but 
the  forms  of  His  manifestation  to  His 
creatures  change.  Moreover,  our 
vision  of  Him  varies  with  our  varying 
spiritual  conditions  and  moods. 

2.  The  aspect  of  the  manifestation  of 
the  Divine  Presence  was  varied  accord- 
ing to  the  need  of  the  people.  The  diver- 
sity of  the  Divine  manifestation  was 
perfectly  adapted  to  the  diversity  of 
human  need.    The  cloud  by  day  aad 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS,  chap.  ix. 


the  appearance  of  fire  by  night  were 
easily  discernible.  Mark  the  precious 
truth  of  universal  application  which  is 
here  shadowed  forth  :  God  manifests 
Himself  to  His  people  according  to 
their  need.  To  the  soul  seeking  Him 
in  penitence  He  reveals  Himself  as  a 
gracious  Sovereign  or  a  kind  Father 
waiting  to  forgive  ;  to  the  distressed 
mournjr,  as  the  great  and  tender- 
hearted Comforter;  to  the  perplexed 
student  of  the  Divine  will  and  work,  as 
the  wise  and  kind  Guide  ;  to  the  lonely 
and  sad  by  reason  of  the  bereavements 
of  death,  as  "  the  Kesurrection  and  the 
Life  ; "  &c.  With  infinite  wisdom  and 
goodness  He  adapts  the  revelations  of 
His  presence  and  the  communications 
of  His  grace  to  our  varying  circum- 
stances, conditions,  and  needs,     {h) 

III.  The  Permanence  of  the  Mani- 
festations of  the  Divine  Presence. 

"  So  it  was  alway  :  the  cloud  covered 
it  by  day,  and  the  appearance  of  fire  by 
night."  Through  tlie  whole  of  their 
wanderings  the  blessed  Presence  never 
forsook  them.  God  has  never  left  His 
Church.  The  light  of  His  Presence  has 
varied,  sometimes  burning  more  brightly 
than  at  others ;  but  it  has  never  been 


extinguished  or  withdrawn.  The  light 
of  the  Church  has  waned  in  one  place, 
but  it  has  shone  the  more  brightly  in 
another.  "  I  am  with  you  alway,  even 
unto  the  end  of  the  world."  In  the 
abiding  presence  of  our  Lord  and  Sa- 
viour with  us  we  have  the  guarantee  of 
the  continuance,  the  progress,  and  the 
ultimate  triumph  of  lUs  Church  over  all 
enemies,      (c) 

Conclusion. 

\.  Here  is  admonition  for  Christians, 
The  Lord  is  with  us  ever,  His  eye  is 
ever  upon  us  ;  let  us,  then,  walk  cir- 
cumspectly, &c. 

2.  Here  is  encouragement  for  Christ- 
ians. The  Lord  is  ever  present  to 
guide  us  in  our  way,  to  sustain  us  in 
difficulty  and  trial,  to  defend  us  from 
harm,  and  to  conduct  us  in  safety  and 
in  triumph  to  our  rest  and  home  with 
God.  Wherefore,  let  us  be  of  good 
cheer. 

*'  In  thy  presence  we  are  happy ; 
In  Tby  presence  we're  secure: 
In  Thy  presence  all  afflictioaa 

We  will  easily  endure  ; 
In  Thy  presence  we  can  conquer, 

We  can  suffer,  we  can  die ; 
Far  from  Thee,  we  faint  and  languish; 
Lord,  our  Saviour,  keep  us  nigh." 

W.  Williams. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  If  Louis  Napoleon  could  call  a  senate 
of  all  the  potentates  in  the  world  in  Paris,  and 
hold  a  congress  there,  the  whole  of  them  put 
together  would  not  be  worth  the  snap  of  a 
finger  compared  with  half-a-dozen  godly  old 
women  who  meet  together  in  the  name  of 
Christ  as  a  Church,  in  obedience  to  the  Lord's 
command;  for  God  would  not  be  therewith 
the  potentates  —what  cares  He  for  them  ? — 
but  He  would  be  with  the  most  poor  and  des- 
pised of  His  people  who  meet  together  as  a 
church  in  Jesus  Christ's  name.  "Lo,  I  am 
with  you  always,  even  unto  the  end  of  the 
world,"  is  more  glorious  than  ermine,  or 
purple,  or  crown.  Constitute  a  church  in  the 
name  ©f  Christ,  and  meet  together  aa  such, 
and  there  is  no  assembly  upon  the  face  of  the 
earth  that  can  be  compared  with  it,  and  even 
the  assembly  of  the  first-born  in  heaven  is 
but  a  branch  of  the  grand  whole  of  which  the 
assemblies  of  the  Cnuvch  on  earth  make  up  an 
essential  part.—  C.  H.  Spnrgeon. 

(6)  There  are  in  the  Bible  many  allusions 
to  this  cloud;  all  of  them  indicating  its 
remarkable  and  peculiar  and  significant 
character.  Several  times  we  find  allusions 
to  it  ia  the  book  of  Psalms.    See  Pas.  Uxviii. 


14,  cv.  39.  We  also  find  it  mentioned  in 
Neheujiah  ix,  19.  And  we  have  a  very 
beauiful  allusion,  assuming  the  shape  of 
a  cheering  promise,  in  Inaiah  iv.  6,  6  We 
find  in  all  thf^se  passages  very  plain  and 
unmistakenble  allusions  to  this  bymbol.  Now 
what  does  it  seem  to  have  been?  First  a 
luminous  fire,  in  the  midst  of  the  darkness  of 
:he  night;  bupp'sed  to  extend  to  a  mile  in 
hoight^  into  the  sky,  as  if  a  great  pillar, 
majestic  in  appearance,  but  phosphorescent 
or  luminous  and  shining.  Then  in  the  day- 
time, when  the  splendour  of  a  fire  would  be 
lost  in  the  greater  splendour  of  the  sun,  and 
couM  not  necesrarily  be  a  guide  to  those  that 
sought  to  follow  it,  tho  fire,  or  the  luminous 
portion  of  it,  retreated  into  the  innermost 
recesses  of  the  cloud,  and  a  dark  pillar,  as  if 
made  of  sm -ke  or  of  cloud,  stretched  from 
the  place  where  the  tabernacle  vsted,  a  mile 
upward  into  the  sky.  And  w!,£n  God  rjeart 
that  the  children  of  Israel  should  proceed 
forward,  it  marched  before  them,  or  moved 
before  tham,  their  signal,  their  director,  akd 
their  guide.  It  was  adapted  exactly  to  the 
circumstances  of  their  journey;  a  beautiful 
proof  in  its  boing  cloud  by  day,  and  in  its 

U9 


CHAI.  IX. 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


being  fire  by  night,  that  God  adapts  the 
manifestations  of  Himself,  the  supplies  of 
His  wisdom,  Hia  grace,  and  Hisbf)untv  to  the 
peculiar  circumstances,  necessines,  and  c  -n- 
dition  of  His  believing  peofde.  No^v,  this 
symbol,  as  we  gather  from  all  the  allusions 
to  it  scattered  through  the  Scriptures,  was  a 
type  of  Christ,  God  manifest  in  the  flosh.  It 
was  God's  mode  of  revealing  Himself  to  that 
people  in  the  midst  of  the  desert ;  and  was  to 
them  the  perpetual  pledge  of  His  favourable 
and  gracious  prepence.— Ja/m  Cu/nnv'ng   D.D. 

God  rises  upon  the  sight  of  some  Cbri-tians 
as  the  sun  comes  right  up  againj.t  a  clear  sky, 
and  over  a  sharp-cut  horizon,  and  upon  others 
as  the  sun  comes  up  behind  clouds,  which  it  is 
bis  first  work  to  wear  out  and  disperse  with 
His  bright  beams.  I  have  seen  men  that 
never  realized  God  till  they  were  dying.  Some 
never  see  Him  till  the  midday  of  their  life. 
Others  see  Him  early  in  the  morning.  Some 
see  Him  during  sickness  ;  some  after  sickness  ; 
some  on  the  occurrence  of  some  special  provi- 
dence. Sometimes  Christians  are  lifted  up, 
throu-;h  the  susceptibility  of  their  imagination, 
their  affnctions,  and  their  reason,  all  conjoined, 
into  such  an  extraordinary  sense  of  God's 
glory  that  it  seems  as  though  their  soul  could 
not  abide  in  the  body,  and  they  think,  '*  Praise 
God!  At  last  He  has  had  mercy  on  me,  and 
revealed  Bimself  to  me" — supposing  that  He 
had  not  before  cast  th^  M^ht  of  His  counten- 
ance upon  them. —  H  W.  Beecher. 

(c)  It  was  enoug  1  for  the  army  of  Crom'vell 
to  know  that  he  was  there,  the  ever- victorious, 
the  irresistible,  to  lead  on  his  Ironsidt  s  to  the 
fray.     Many  a  time  the  presence  of   an   old 


Roman  general  was  equal  to  another  legion  j 
as  soon  as  the  cohorts  perceived  that  he  wag 
come  whose  ea^le  eye  watched  every  motion 
of  the  en^-my,  and  whose  practised  hand  led 
his  bat'alions  upon  the  most  salient  points 
of  a  tack,  each  man's  blood  leaped  within 
him,  and  he  grasped  his  sword  and  rushed 
forward  sure  of  success.  My  brethren,  our 
Kinsf  is  in  the  midst  of  us,  and  our  faith 
should  be  iu  active  exercise — *'  The  shout  of  a 
King  is  in  the  midst  of  us,"  it  is  said,  for 
where  the  King  is  there  the  people  shout  for 
joy,  and  b- cause  of  confidence  of  victory. 
Toe  preacher  may  preach,  but  what  is  that  ? 
but  if  the  King  be  there,  then  it  is  a  preaching 
in  very  deed.  The  congregations  may  have 
met,  and  they  may  have  gone  again.  '*  The 
panoramic  view  which  has  dissolved,"  you 
say.  Ah,  so  it  may  seem  to  you,  but  if  the 
Spirit  of  God  was  thpre,  all  that  has  been 
done  will  abide,  and  remain  even  to  that 
day  of  judgment,  when  the  fire  shall  try  every 
man's  work  of  what  sort  it  is.  *•  Nothing 
but  a  simple  girl  sitting  down  to  talk  to  a 
few  li  tie  children  about  their  souls."  Just 
so,  but  if  the  Lord  be  there,  what  awe 
ga'h  rs  round  that  spot !  If  the  King  Himself 
sit  in  that  class,  what  deeds  are  done  that  shal 
mak»>  the  angels  of  heaven  sing  anew  for  joy! 
'•Nothing  but  a  humble  man,  unlettered, 
earnest,  but  not  eloquent,  standing  at  the 
corner  of  a  street  addressing  a  few  hundred 
people.  His  talk  will  soon  be  forgotten."  The 
footprints  of  every  true  servant  of  the  Lord 
shall  not  be  in  the  sand,  but  in  the  enduring 
bra-s,  the  record  of  which  shall  outlast  tho 
wreck  of  matter. — C  H.  Spurgeon, 


The  Pillar  of  Cloud  and  Firb. 
{Verse  16.) 


One  of  the  most  extraordinary  things 
associated  with  the  journey  of  God's 
ancient  people  was  the  pillar  of  cloud 
and  fire.  The  fame  of  this  wonderful 
phenomenon  was  spread  abroad  among 
the  nations  of  the  earth.  There  were 
several  miraculous  thino-s  connected 
with  it  that  made  it  differ  from  other 
clouds.  Its  form  was  never  changed. 
It  always  maintained  its  station  over 
the  tabernacle,  unlike  other  clouds, 
that  are  carried  about  with  the  wind 
and  tempest.  It  preserved  its  con- 
sistency and  shape  for  forty  years ; 
while  other  clouds  are  either  exhaled 
in  the  sun,  dissipated  by  the  wind,  or 
dissolved  in  rain  or  dew,  and  in  a  very 
short  time  blotted  out  of  the  firmament. 
It  moved  in  a  peculiar  direction.    And, 


above  all,  it  was  brighter  at  night  than 
by  day.  We  cannot  be  mistaken  in 
the  typical  meaning  of  this  cloud.  It 
must  be  viewed  as  a  symhol  of  the  pre- 
sence and  glory  of  God  in  the  midst  of 
His  people  (see  Exod.  xvi.  10;  xix. 
9  ;  xxxiv.  5  ;  1  Kings  viii.  10).  Notice 
two  things  in  reference  to  the  presence 
of  God  : 

I.  The  Advantages  of  its  Posses- 
sion. 

Let  us  select  some  of  the  advantages 
to  be  derived  from  it  by  believers  on 
earth  : 

1.  The  distinction  it  maintains.  The 
pillar  of  cloud  and  fire  among  the 
Israelites  may  be  viewed  as  a  token  of 
their  being  a  separate  people  from  other 
nations.       This    distinguished    them; 


nOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  IX. 


they  were  the  only  nation  that  were  so 
privileged.  It  was  a  complete  division 
of  their  forces  one  from  the  other  (see 
Exod.  xiv.  19,  20).  Chnstiaus,  you  are 
a  peculiar  people— your  origin  is  pecu- 
liar— your  character  is  peculiar — your 
spirit— your  desires  and  affections— the 
objects  of  your  pursuit.  You  have 
peculiar  privileges  and  honours  con- 
ferred on  you.  There  is  to  be  a  marked 
difference  between  you  and  the  world. 
"  No  man  can  serve  two  masters," 
etc. 

2.  The  guidance  it  ensures.  All  the 
movements  of  the  Israelites  were  under 
the  direction  of  this  cloud.  God's  pre- 
sence now  goes  with  His  people  for  their 
guidance,  and  shall  conduct  them  safely 
home.  "  My  presence  shall  go  with 
you,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  Jesus 
is  now  the  guide  of  His  people.  He  leads 
in  the  way  of  truth  and  wisdom.  How  ? 
By  His  example.  He  has  gone  before 
us  in  the  path  of  duty,  temptation,  and 
sorrow.  By  His  Word.  This  is  our 
rule.  By  His  ordinances.  He  sends 
His  ministers  as  your  guides.  By  His 
Spirit,  effectua]l7.  By  the  leadings 
of  His  providence.  As  the  Israelites 
watched  the  motion  of  the  cloud,  so 
must  we  the  movements  of  His  provi- 
dence. 

3.  The  projection  it  affords.  This 
was  remarkably  the  case  with  the 
Israelites    when     pursued     by     their 

enemies,    the    Egyptians (Psa. 

Ixxvii.  16-20.)  How  admirably  does 
this  apply  to  the  protecting  presence  of 
God  with  His  people  now.  They  have 
their  enemies,  who  thirst  for  their  de- 
struction. How  nuuierous,  crafty,  and 
powerful  they  are  1  But  God  is  their 
hiding-place,  etc. 

4.  The  joy  it  inspires.  God  is  the 
source  of  happiness,  the  fountain  of 
life.  His  presence  gives  joy  even  in 
sorrow,  and  makes  us  glory  in  tribula- 
tion. 

5.  The  glory  it  confers.  What  a 
wondrous,  glorious  sight  must  have 
been  the  exit  of  the  Israelites  out  of 
Egypt,  and  their  encampment  in  the 
wilderness.  Balaam  viewing  them 
from  a  neighbouring  mountain,    cried 


out  in  admiration,  etc.  (See  Ch.  xxiii. 
9,  10).  The  presence  of  God  is  our 
highest,  best,  only  real  glory.  But 
what  is  all  that  God  confers  here  to 
what  is  in  reserve  !  The  partial  enjoy- 
ment of  God's  presence  affords  some 
particles  of  glory ;  but  the  full  enjoy- 
ment of  Him  shall  constitute  a  weight 
of  glory. 

II.  The  perpetuity  of  its  enjoyment. 

"So  it  was  al way."  Notwithstand- 
ing all  the  sins  and  provocations  of  the 
Israelites,  the  cloud  did  not  leave  them 
till  they  arrived  in  Canaan.  Will  not 
this  apply  to  Christians  now  in  their 
enjoyment  of  God's  presence]  Observe 
two  things  : 

1.  Its  necessity.  It  was  indispensably 
necessary  to  the  Israelites,  for  the 
purposes  to  which  we  have  alluded  ; 
and  is  it  less  so  now  ]  We  always  need 
the  Divine  presence.  Wo  are  de- 
pendent on  Him  for  every  thing.  We 
need  His  providential  presence  and 
agency  to  continue  us  in  being  and 
supply  our  numerous  wants ;  and  we 
require  His  gracious  presence  for  the 
maintenance  of  spiritual  life,  and  for 
the  reception  of  spiritual  blessings. 
We  need  His  presence  for  the  duties  of 
life,  for  consolation  ni  sorrow,  for  sup- 
port in  temptation,  peace  in  death,  and 
happiness  in  glory.  If  we  have  His 
presence,  we  have  everything;  if  we 
want  it,  we  have  nothiuG:. 

2.  The  manner  in  which  it  is  ensured.. 
This  may  be  seen  three  ways.  From 
what  He  has  done— is  doing — and  has 
promised  to  do.  (1)  A  retrospect  of 
the  pad.  May  not  we  say  of  God's 
presence  with  His  Church,  ''So  it  was 
alwayT'  Was  not  His  presence  with 
Abraham  %  and  Moses  %  and  David  % 
and  Daniel  %  And  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment times,  was  He  not  with  Peter] 
and  Paul]  He  has  never  left  His 
Church  to  the  will  of  her  eneuiies. 
But  come  to  individual  experience. 
Has  He  not  been  with  you7  Recall 
past  scenes,  deliverances,  comforts,  joys. 
(2)  A  view  of  the  present.  Is  He  not 
near  at  hand  ]  always  accessible  ?  (3) 
A  glance  at  the  future.  So  it  shall  be 
always.     How  is  it  ensured  ]     His  past 

151 


CHAP.  IX. 


EOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


dealings  with  us  would  be  enough  ;  but 
we  have  more.  Look  at  His  promises. 
"  1  will  never  leave  you,"  etc.  Look  at 
the  mediation  of  His  Son.  The  death 
and  intercession  of  Christ  ensure  it. 
Look  at  the  iitjlaences  of  His  Spirit, 
All     combine     to     testify     His     con- 


tinual care  and  watchfulness  over  you. 
Conclusion : — 

1.  What  a  privileged  character  is  the 
Christian.    How  many  peculiar  mercies. 

2.  The  misery  of  the  ungodly.  With- 
out God.  How  deplorable  1 — Ebenezer 
Temple. 


The  Cloudy  Pillar. 
ijerses  15-19). 


The  cloudy  pillar  may  be  regarded — 
I.  As  an  emblem  of  Divine  truth. 

1.  Supernatural  as  to  origin. 

2.  Stable  :  only  a  cloud,  yet  not  dis- 
persed. 

3.  Adapted  to  both  night  and  day. 

4.  Reliable. 

5.  Intolerant :    "  This   is   the    way," 
and  no  other. 

II.  As  a  symbol  of  Divine  Provi- 
dence. 

1.  Different   appearance   to   different 
characters. 

2.  Presented  alternations  of  aspect  to 
the  same  people. 

3.  Mysterious  in  its  movements. 


4.  Aims  at  the  good  of  all  who  follow 
its  guidance. 

II.   As    a    type    of    the    Divine 
Saviour. 

1.  Mysterious  nature^ 

2.  Challenges  attention, 

3.  His  purpose  beneficent, 

4.  The  source  of  great  comfort, 
6.  Constant  in  His  attachment. 
Learn, — 

(1)  Seek  to  be  on  the  right  side  of 
the  cloud. 

(2)  To  seek  it  in  the  right  place — 
over  the  tabernacle. 

(3)  To  follow  its  guidance. — Biblical 
Museum, 


The  Pilgrimage  of  the  Good. 
{Verses  17-23). 


We  propose  to  use  these  verses  as 
illustrating  the  Pilgrimage  of  the 
Peoplr  of  God.  So  regarding  them 
they  present  three  main  homiletical 
points  for  consideration  : 

1.  The  infallible  Guide  in  the  Pil- 
grimage of  the  Good. 

In  journeying  through  the  desert 
the  Israelites  needed  constant  direc- 
tion. There  were  uo  well-defined 
roads  along  which  they  could  travel ; 
there  were  no  beaten  tracks  of  travellers 
for  their  guidance ;  it  was  customary 
for  *'  travellers  to  steer  their  course  as 
mariners  at  sea  do,  by  a  mathemgi,^  ical 
chart.  But  the  Israelites  went  Ly  a 
better  direction."  The  Lord  Himself 
led  them  by  means  of  "  the  fiery, 
cloudy  pillar."  "  In  the  dciyri.D:ie  he 
led  them  with  a  cloud,  and  all  the  niglyt 
with  a  light  of  fire,"  The  movement 
152 


of  the  cloud  was  to  them  "the  com- 
mandment of  the  Lord ; "  its  ascent 
from  the  tabernacle  was  the  signal  of 
departure ;  its  descent  upon  the  taber- 
nacle was  the  signal  for  halting.  Thus 
Infinite  Wisdom  was  their  Guide.  In 
the  pilgrimage  of  our  life  we  also  need 
guidance.  There  are  perils  to  be 
avoided,  misleading  and  evil  ways  to 
be  shunned ;  and  we  have  not  the  ex- 
perience, the  skill,  or  the  wisdom  to 
shun  these  ways  and  avoid  these  perils. 
*'The  way  of  man  is  not  in  himself ; 
it  is  not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct 
his  steps."  God  is  still  'the  Guide  of 
all  who  acknowledge  Him.  Compare 
Psalms  xxxii.  8  ;  Ixxiii.  24  \  Prov.  iii.  6. 

In  what  way  is  this  guidance  now 
exercised  % 

1.  By  the  indications  of  Providence. 
Circumstances  i^ometimes  become  to  us 


BOMILETtC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  IX. 


a  guiding  pillar,  sometimes  summoning 
us  to  ari>5e  and  depart,  or  to  pitch  our 
tent  and  rest  awhile.  The  good  man 
in  the  combinations  of  circumstances 
frequently  reads  the  directions  of  Goil. 

2.  By  the  teachings  of  the  Bible,  and 
especially  by  the  example  of  Jesus  Chrid 
as  it  is  there  set  forth.  *'  Thy  Word  is 
a  lamp  unto  my  feet,  and  a  light  unto 
my  path."  "  When  thou  goest  it  shall 
lead  thee  ....  For  the  com- 
mandment is  a  lamp ;  and  the  law  is 
light ;  and  reproofs  of  instruction  are 
the  way  of  life."  **  I  have  given  you 
an  example,  that  ye  should  do  as  I 
have  done  to  vou."  *•  Christ  also  suf- 
fered  for  us,  leaving  us  an  example, 
that  ye  should  follow  His  steps."  "  I 
am  the  Light  of  the  world  :  he  that 
folio weth  Mft  shall  not  walk  in  darkness, 
but  shall  have  the  light  of  life." 

3.  By  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
He  enters  into  our  being,  and  mys- 
teriously and  mightily  influences  our 
intellect  and  heart  and  will,  and  works 
within  us  deep  convictions  which  lead 
to  corresponding  actions.  Thus  the 
Divine  guidance,  though  no  longer 
outward  and  visible,  but  inward  and 
spiritual,  is  as  real  as  when  He  led  His 
people  through  the  wilderness,     (a) 

II.  The  perfect  Protector  in  the 
Pilgrimage  of  the  Grood. 

The  pillar  of  cloud  and  of  fire  was 
not  only  a  guide,  but  a  protection  also 
to  the  Israelites.  In  the  passage  of 
the  Red  Sea  it  was  an  impenetrable 
barrier  between  them  and  their  Egyp- 
tian pursuers.  During  the  scorching 
heat  of  the  daytime  in  the  desert,  like 
a  veil  it  sheltered  them  from  the  tierce 
rays  of  the  sun.  And  during  the  night 
its  brightness  shielded  them  from  the 
attacks  of  wild  beasts.  It  is  a  beautiful 
symbol  of  the  Divine  protection  of  the 
people  of  God  in  their  pilgrimage. 

1.  This  protection  was  constant.  Night 
and  day,  during  all  their  life  in  the 
desert,  it  was  never  with.irawn.  (Corap. 
Pss.  xci.  1-13 ;  cxxi. ;  John  x.  27,  28  : 
1  Pet.  i.  5.) 

2.  This  protection  was  adapted  to  the 
varying  circumstances  of  the  people.  By 
day  it  assumed  the  aspect  of  a  cloud, 


and  by  night  that  of  fire.  God  is 
perfectly  acquainted  with  us  and  with 
our  circumstances,  and  with  infinite 
skill  He  adapts  His  defence  to  our 
danger.  He  renders  His  faithful  ser- 
vants, and  their  very  garments,  utterly 
insensible  to  the  heat  of  the  furnace, 
even  when  it  is  heated  "  seven  times 
more  than  it  is  wont  to  be  heated." 
He  shuts  the  mouths  of  the  hungry 
lions ;  and  to  His  servant,  tried  and 
true,  makes  their  den  a  place  not  only 
of  perfect  safety,  but  of  angelic  fellow- 
ship also. 

3.  This  protection  was  inviolable. 
When  this  cloud  was  their  shield,  not 
even  the  mightiest  and  most  malignant 
force  could  penetrate  it  to  their  hurt. 
(Comp.  Pss.  xxvii.  1-3 ;  cxviii.  6 ; 
Kom.  viii.  31 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  13.     (6) 

III.  The  true  Spirit  in  the  Pilgrim- 
age of  the  Grood. 

The  spirit  of  the  Israelites  in  their 
wanderings  in  the  desert  had  two 
characteristics  which  are  worthy  of 
imitation : 

1.  Dependence  upon  God,  They  were 
uncertain  as  to  the  duration  of  their 
sojourn  in  any  place ;  when  the  cloud 
came  down  upon  the  tabernacle,  they 
did  not  know  whether  it  would  continue 
there  for  a  few  hours,  "  or  two  days,  or 
a  month,  or  a  year."  And  with  respect 
to  the  time  of  their  departure,  they 
did  not  know  "  whether  by  day  or  by 
night  the  cloud "  would  be  taken  up. 
Tiiey  were  entirely  dependent  upon  the 
will  of  God  in  these  matters ;  and, 
believing  that  the  Divine  Presence  was 
in  the  cloud,  they  trusted  God,  and 
waited  and  watched  for  its  movements 
as  for  His  orders.  We,  too,  are  depen- 
dent upon  God  in  our  pilgrimage.  Let 
us  endeavour  to  realize  our  dependence  ; 
let  us  trust  in  Him  ;  let  us  watch  the 
movements  of  His  providence,  etc.     (c) 

2.  Obedience  to  God.  "  The  children 
of  Israel  kept  the  charge  of  the  Lord," 
as  indicated  by  the  rising  and  resting 
of  the  cloud.  Disobedient  and  rebel- 
lious in  many  things,  yet  in  this  they 
obeyed  the  commandment  of  the  Lord. 
In  this  let  us  imitate  them ;  let  ua 
make  God's  "  statutes  our  songs  in  the 

153 


CHAP.  IX. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


house  of  our  pilgrimage;"  let  our 
prayer  be,  **  Teach  me,  0  Lord,  the  way 
of  Thy  statutes,  and  I  shall  keep  it 
unto  the  end."  When  God  commands 
let  us  proniptly  and  cheerfully  obey ; 
so  shall  our  pilgrimage  end  in  the  rest 
and  rei'reshment,  the  sanctity  and 
society,  the  gladness  and  glory  of 
Home, 


Conclusion. 

Life  here  is  a  pilgrimage  ia  the  ease 
of  every  one.  Be  it  ours  to  realise  the 
fact  ;  to  seek  the  infallible  guidance 
and  inviolable  protection  of  the  Shep- 
herd of  Israel  in  our  pilgrimage  ;  and 
to  maintain  and  manifest  the  true 
spirit  of  pilgrims  ;  so  shall  our  pilgrim- 
age be  secure,  and  our  rest  glorious,  (d) 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(«) 


Lead,  kindly  Light,  amid  th*  encircling  gloom, 

Lead  Thou  me  on  ; 
The  night  is  dark,  and  I  am  far  from  home  ; 

Lead  Thou  me  on  ; 
Kofp  Thou  my  feet;  I  do  not  ask  to  see 
The  distant  scene;  one  step  enough  for  me. 

I  was  not  ever  thus,  nor  prayed  that  Thou 

Shouldst  lead  me  on  ; 
I  loved  to  choose  and  see  my  path  ;  but  now 

Lead  Thou  me  on. 
f  loved  the  garish  day,  and  spite  of  fears, 
Pride  ruled  ray  will :  remember  not  past  years. 

So  long  Thy  power  has  blest  me,  sure  it  still 

Will  lead  me  on 
O'er  moor  and  fen,  o'er  crag  and  torrent,  till 

The  night  is  gone, 
And  with  the  morn  those  angel  faces  smile 
Which  I  have  loved  long  sinoe  and  lost  awhile- 

J.  H.  Newman. 

(6)  The  utmost  degree  of  personal  security 
that  can  be  enjoyed  under  any  form  of  civil 
power,  is  a  most  imperfect  shadow  of  the  safety 
which  Jesus  Christ  bestows  upon  the  subjects 
of  His  spiritual  reign.     Until  a  man  submits 
to  His  mediatorial  authority,  he  remains  ex- 
posed to  unutterable  evils.     He  ought  to  feel 
perpetual   anxiety   and    alarm ;    for,   in   the 
declared  judgment  of  God,  be  is  in  a  state  of 
condemnation  and  death  : — *'  he  that  belie veth 
not  in  the  Son  of  God  is  condemned  already  "  ; 
he  that  is  not  "  quickened  together  with  Christ 
Jesus  "  is  '•  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  ;  "  ho 
is  a  criminal  under  sentence  of  execution,  and 
only  respited  for  a  brief  and  uncertain  j;)eriod  ; 
the  sword  of  Divine  justice,  suspended  over 
him,  may  fall  at  any  moment,  and  he  is  lost 
for  ever.     This  is  certainly  the  condition  of 
every  unconverted  sinner — every  one  that  has 
not  yielded  himself  a  willing  subject  to  Jesus 
Christ  hifl  Lord.     But  '*  Kiss  the  Son;"  yield 
yourself  as  such  a  subject  to  Him;  and  from 
thatmoa  ent,  ycu  are  placed  in  a  -tare  of  pe'  feet 
security ;  you  are  naved  with  a  great  salvition 
—protected  from  the  wrath  of  God,  from  the 
dread  of  eternity,  from  the  misery  of  sin  ;  ac- 
cording to  the  prophet's  beautiful  descripflon 
of  our  Saviour — "In    that  <iay  a  Kinf;  shall 
reign  in  righteousness;  and  a  man  shall  be  as 
a  covert  from  the  storm,  as  the  sh&do  w  of  a 

154 


great  rock  in  a  weary  land."     The  subjects  of 
Jesus  Christ,  justified  by  faith,  hive  peace  with 
God.      The   last   donatiou    Ee   promised    His 
disciples   was    peace: — '-Ptiace  I  leave   with 
jou;  i/y  peace  I  give  uuto  you:  not  as  the 
world  givetb  give  1  unto  you."  "  My  peace  !  " 
—  the  vsame  peace  which  filled  the  bo~om  of  the 
eternal  Son  of  God,  when,  having  finished  His 
work,  He  was  acknowledged  by  the  Father  as 
His    "Beloved  Son,    in    whom   he    was    well 
pleased."      For,   "  because   ye   are  sons,  God 
hath  sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  His  Son  into  your 
hearts  "—of  His  Son,  the  First-born  of  many 
brethren.  And  (as  the  Apostle  argues)  **  if  God 
be  for  us,  who  shall  be  against  us?   Who  shall 
lay  anything  to   the  charge  of  God's  elect? 
Shall    (?orf  that  justifieth?     Who  is  he  that 
condemneth  ?      Christ   that  died^   yea,  rather 
that  is  risen  for  us  ?     Who   shall   separate  ua 
from  the  love  of  God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus 
our   Lord  ? "      The    Church   of    Christ,   as   a 
collective  society,   is  invested  with  absolute 
security ;  it  is  a   city  on  whose   walls  is  en- 
graven the   name,   Jehovah  Shammah,  thb 
Lord  IS  there!  it  stands  fast  "like  Mount 
Zion  that  cannot  be  moved ;^^  it  is  founded  on  a 
Rock,  and  that  Rock  is  Christ :  He  has  "  all 
power  in  heaven  and  earth"   for  its  preserva- 
tion ;  and  not  "  the  gates  of  hell  shall  prevail 
against   it,"      But   a  portion  of  this   general 
security  of  the  body  belongs  to  every  member 
of  it:  every  believer  in  Christ  enjoys  the  same ; 
and,  as  he  grows  in  grace  and  knowledge,  he 
feels  himself  at  peace    with  God  ;  this  peace 
keeps  and  justifies  his  heart  and  mind  against 
every  assailiog  trouble ;  and,  on  the  most  try- 
ing occasions,  he  learns   to  say    with  humble 
confidence,  "  I  will  go  forth  in  the  strength  of 
the  Lord."— Robert  Hall,  A.M. 

(c)  Everything  in  their  experience  taught 
them  their  d<pendence  upon  God.  They  were 
led  throught  a  region  thit  no  adventurer  had 
ever  explored,  or  foot  had  ever  trod.  When 
they  pitched  their  tents  at  eventide,  they 
knew  not  at  what  hour  they  should  strike 
them,  nor  whether  they  should  strike  them 
at  all ;  there  might  be  forced  years  of  encamp- 
ment in  that  one  spot  ;  there  might  be  forced 
marches  and  rapid  progress  ;  but  they  had  no 
control  over  it:  as  the  pillar  went,  and 
wherever  the  pillar  went,  they  went ;  and  as 
they  sounded  forth  their  matin  song  of  praise 
there  was  not  a  man  in  the  whole  congrega* 


UOMlLBriC   COMMENTAUY:    NUMBERS,  chap.  ix. 


tion  that  could  tell  throusrh  what  rocky  clifis 
or  woody  defilea  the  etihoes  of  the  vesper 
hymn  would  Round.  Their  f-upp'y  was  as 
miraculous  as  their  guidance.  No  ploa^h 
bad  turned  up  the  soil,  no  river  murmured  J)y 
their  side  ;  they  never  gazed  for  forty  yea-s 
upon  one  solitary  hlossom  of  the  spiiog  time, 
nor  the  golden  grain  ever  once  \a  their  si^lit 
bent  gracefully  to  the  sickle  of  the  reap  r ; 
they  were  fed  with  manna  which  they  knew 
not. 

"When  faint  they  were  and  parched  with 
drought. 
Water  at  His  word  gushed  out." 

Oh  I  it  is  the  world's  grandest  illustration 
of  man's  absolute  fe'^blenogs  and  of  God's 
eternal  ]yyv,eT.  GOO, 000  fighting  men,  beaides 
women  ^nd  children,  led  by  Divine  leadorship, 
and  fed  by  Divine  bounty,  for  the  space  of 
forty  years.  BrHthren,  the  dealings  of  Provi- 
dmce  with  ourselvos  arr*  intend  d  to  show  us 
our  dependence  up">n  God,  and  to  humble  us 
in  the  dust  under  His  mighty  hand.  We  are 
very  proud  sometimes,  and  we  talk  about  our 
endowments,  and  we  boast  lari^ely  of  what 
we  have  done,  and  what  we  intend  to  do  ;  but 
we  can  do  absolutely  nothing.  The  athletic 
frame— how  soon  can  He  bring  it  down! 
The  well-endowed  heritaije — bow  soon  can 
He  scatter  it!  The  mental  glance,  keen  and 
piercing — how  soon  can  He  bring  upon  it  the 
dimness  and  bewilderment  of  years  !  We 
cannot  any  one  of  us,  bring  ourselves  into 
being;  we  cannot,  any  one  of  us,  sustain  our- 
Belves  in  being  for  a  moment.  Alas  I  who 
of  us  can  stay  the  spirit  when  the  summons 
has  gone  forth  that  it  must  die?— 1^.  M, 
Punshon,  LL.D. 

(d)  We  are  all  upon  a  journey.  We  are 
walking  either  by  faith  or  by  sight.  We 
have  either  committed  our  destiny  to  God,  or 


we  have  taken  it  under  our  own  care.  Can 
you  oraor  your  own  destiny  as  well  as  God  ? 
Would  you  rather  trust  your  own  eye  than 
the  eye  of  Omnisciencer  1  address  some  who 
Iiave  no  other  care  than  to  walk  with  God. 
With  firm  hold  uf  His  h»nd  they  wander  on, 
knowing  that  He  will  lead  them  by  a  path 
they  have  not  known.  Happy  the  people  that 
are  in  such  a  ca^e  !  They  are  what  they  are 
by  the  grace  of  God, — that  grace  which  stam's 
for  ever  reveaL-d  and  honoured  in  the  Person 
and  work  of  Jesus.  And  now  we  are  gointj 
on:  the  road  is  often  mountainous,  and  uuany 
a  wild  beast  prowls  upon  -t ;  but  we  aro 
obeying  God,  and  obedience  ensures  perpetual 
joy.  It  is  God's  to  lead ;  it  is  man's  to  follow. 
We  are  going  to  a  land  of  which  Canaan  was 
but  a  poor  emblom, — we  advance  toward  a 
city  which  hath  founda^tions  whose  builder  and 
maker  is  God !  If  the  road  is  sometimes 
dreary,  the  Guide  is  ever  safe.  God  hath  not 
permitted  imagination  to  conceive  the  end. 
Fancy's  mighty  wing  cannot  scar  to  the  alti- 
tude of  such  sublimity.  It  r»  mains  a  mystery 
till  our  eyes  are  closed  in  death.  Be  it  ours 
to  move  our  t*'nt  and  erect  our  altar  as  God 
may  direct.  We  shall  in  due  time  exchan-e 
the  tent  for  an  ever-during  mansion,  and  our 
prayer  shall  burst  into  praise.  Our  journey 
hath  an  end, — its  name  is  Hkaven.  But  wliat 
is  involved  in  that  term  "'heaven,"  we  can 
never  know  on  earth.  Loiter  not  in  the  wav. 
The  shadows  deepi^n.  One  .'•tar  CHore  vencurou'^ 
than  others  is  already  twinkling,  and  tolling 
of  the  coming  night.  Up!  my  brethr.  n, — 
Forward,  ye  hosts  of  God  ! 

'*  Here  in  the  body  pent, 
Absent  from  Him  we  roam, 
Yet  nightly  pitch  our  moving  tent 
A  day's  march  nearer  home.*' 

Joseph  Parker,  D.D. 


Thb  Cloud  TARRTiNa. 
{Verse  22.) 


The  Israelites  were  favoured  by  God 
with  the  pillar  of  fire  and  cloud.  Here- 
by they  were  reminded  of  His  special 
presence,  and  instructed  as  to  His  will. 
If  it  moved,  they  must  journey  ;  if  it 
tarried,  they  must  encamp.  Let  us 
describe  these  seasons,  wlien  the  cloud 
tarried.  Remembering  although  we 
have  no  visible  symbol  of  the  Divine 
will,  yet  we  are  not  ignorant  of  His 
mind.  If  Israel  of  old  had  the  cloud, 
we  have  the  Word  of  God,  and  the 
Holy  Spirit  to  teach  us 

L  A  word  of  description. 

The  time  '^  the  cloud  tarried  "  was  : 


1.  One  of  rest.  Such  times  in  our  ex- 
perience. Blessed  tranquillity.  Sweetest 
fellowships  with  each  other. 

2.  One  of  spiritual  adiviti/.  Then 
they  worshipped  in  the  tal)ei'nacle,  etc. 
Use  your  o})portunities.  Go  while  you 
can  to  the  means  of  grace. 

3.  Peculiarly  a  time  of  temptation. 
Remember  Taberah  and  the  consuming 
fire,  Num.  xi.  1  ;  Hazeroth  and 
Miriam's  leprosy.  Num.  xii.  10  ;  re- 
member the  fiery  serpents,  and  the 
blasphemy  of  Sinai.  In  these  haltiuga 
the  people  sinned  most  grievously. 

II.  A  word  of  exhortation. 

155 


CHAP. 


ffOMILETTC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


1.  Be  more  anxious  to  Jceep  the  cloud 
in  sight  than  to  see  it  tarry.  We  are 
responsible  for  the  one,  but  not  for  the 
other.  We  must  strive  to  delight 
more  in  God's  will,  than  in  what  we 
desire. 

2.  Be  more  anxiotcs  to  improve  than 
enjoy  these  refreshing  times.  Times  like 
these  are  for  holy  labour  as  well  as  for 
peaceful  quiet  and  contemplation. 
Think  not  that  Nathanael  was  always 
sitting  beneath  the  fig  tree. 

3.  Be  more  anxious  to  improve  than 
prolong  these  periods.  Seek  not  so  much 
a  protracted  as  a  useful  life.  Strive  to 
use  seasons  of  rest  and  prosperity, 
rather  than  marring  them  by  over 
anxiety  about  the  morrow. 


III.  A  word  of  caution. 

1.  If  the  cloud  tarry  long,  think  not 
it  will  never  move.  The  Church,  the 
home,  the  soul  must  have  vicissitudes. 
Activity  is  necessary  to  every  form  of 
life.  Rest  should  be  the  preparation 
time  for  exertion. 

2.  Be  not  impatient  if  it  tarry  when 
you  wish  to  journey.  It  does  rest  some- 
times over  a  desert  land.  Such  is  life 
to  some  of  you  aged  ones.  There 
were  most  arid  deserts  in  the  confines 
of  Canaan. 

3.  Be  ready ^  that  whenever  the  cloud 
moves  you  may  he  ready  to  journey. 
Whether  it  be  to  go  forward  to  the 
fight,  to  the  Elim  of  plenty,  or  the 
land  of  promise. — R.  A,  Grijini, 


CHAPTER  X. 
Critical   and    Explanatory    Notes. 


Verses  1-10.  Instructions  for  signal- 
ling the  movements  of  the  camp  are 
properly  inserted  here  as  one  of  the 
necessary  preliminaries  for  the  march 
which  was  about  to  commence. 

Verse  2.  Two  trumpets.  "The 
trumpet  (khatsotserah)  was  a  straight 
instrument,  differing  in  this  respect 
from  the  curved  horn  or  cornet  (keren, 
shophar) ;  yet  the  latter  is  frequently 
rendered  *  trumpet'  in  the  A.  V.,  wlien 
the  two  instruments  are  not  mentioned 
together.  The  Jewish  trumpet  is  des- 
cribed (Joseph.  *  Ant.'  iii.  12.0)  as  *a 
little  less  th  m  a  cubit  in  length  ;  the 
tube  narrow,  a  little  thicker  than  a 
flute,  and  just  wide  enough  to  permit 
the  performer  to  blow  it ;  while  it 
terminated,  like  other  trumpets,  in  the 
form  of  a  bell.' " — Speaker^  Gomm, 

M  this  time  only  two  trumpets  were 
ordered.  Two  only  were  required,  in- 
asmuch as  they  were  to  be  used  only 
by  the  priests,  of  which  at  this  time 
there  were  only  two.  When  there  were 
more  priests  there  were  also  more 
trumpets.  Comp.  1  Chron.  xv.  24  ;  2 
Chron.  v.  12. 

Verse  3.     The  blowing  of  both  the 
156 


trumpets  was  the  signal  for  convening 
the  great  assembly,  composed  of  all  the 
representatives  of  the  entire  congrega- 
tion, viz.,  the  heads  of  families,  the 
princes  of  the  tribes,  the  elders,  judges, 
et  aU 

Verse  4.  The  blowing  of  one  trumpet 
only  was  the  signal  for  a  more  select 
assemblj^,  composed  merely  of  the  hea<l8 
of  the  clans  and  the  princes  of  the 
tribes. 

Verse  7.  Expositors  are  not  agreed 
as  to  the  difference  between  the  signal 
for  assembly  and  the  signal  of  alarm. 
Henry,  Trapp,  et  aly  hold  that  the  alarm 
was  a  broken,  quavering,  interrupted 
sound ;  and  the  signal  for  assembly  a 
continued  equal  sound.  Keil  and  Del. 
and  the  Speaker's  Comm.  propound  the 
opposite  view  :  that  for  an  alarm  a  long 
continuous  peal  was  to  be  blown,  and 
for  an  assembly  short  sharp  notes.  Dr. 
A.  Clarke  suggests  that  the  alarm  con- 
sisted of  shortf  broken,  sharp  tones^ 
terminating  with  long  ones,  blown  with 
both  the  trumpets  at  once.  It  is 
perhaps  impossible  to  determine  which 
of  these  interpretations  is  correct. 

Verse  9.  The  trumpets  were  blown 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTAR'/:   MJMBERS. 


CHAP.  X. 


by  the  priests  in  war  as  an  expression 
of  the  dependence  of  Israel  on  the  help 
of  God.  (Comp.  ch.  xxxi.  6 ;  2  Chron. 
xiii.  12,  14.) 

Verse  1 1.  This  verse  is  the  beginning 
of  the  second  great  division  of  the  book. 
The  preparations  for  the  march  being 
completed,  the  camp  is  broken  np,  and 
they  set  out  on  their  march  to  Canaan. 

Verse  12.  The  cloud  rested  in  the 
wilderness  of  Paran.  This  statement 
seems  to  be  made  by  anticipation,  as 
we  find  that  the  desert  of  Paran  was 
the  third  station:  Kibroth-Hattaavah 
being  the  first,  and  Hazeroth,  the  second 
(ch.  xi.  35;  xii.  IG).  Notes  on  "the 
wilderness  of  Paran "  will  be  more 
snital)le  on  ch.  xii.  16,  than  in  this 
place. 

And  here,  at  the  beginning  of  the 
journeyingfs,  we  may  as  well  mention 
the  difficulties  of  tracing  them  accu- 
rately, especially  after  the  arrival  in 
the  desert  of  Paran.  For,  as  Mr.  Hay- 
man  observes,  *'  we  have  not  merely  to 
contend  with  the  fact  that  time  has 
changed  the  desert's  face  in  many  parts, 
and  obliterated  old  names  for  new;  but 
we  have  beyond  this,  great  obscurity 
and  perplexity  in  the  narrative.  The 
task  is,  first,  to  adjust  the  uncertainties 
of  the  record  inter  se,  and  then  to  try 
and  make  the  resultant  probability 
square  with  the  main  historical  and 
physical  facts,  so  long  as  the  latter  can 
be  supposed  to  remain  unaltered.  Be- 
sides the  more  or  less  discontinuous 
form  in  which  the  sacred  narrative 
meets  us  in  Exodus,  a  small  portion  of 
Leviticus,  and  the  greater  part  of  Num- 
bers, we  have  in  Num.  xxxiii.  what 
purports  at  first  sight  to  be  a  complete 
skeleton  route  so  far  as  regards  nomen- 
clature ;  and  we  further  find  in  Deuter- 
onomv  a  review  of  the  leadino'  events 
of  the  wandering — or  some  of  them — 
without  following  the  order  of  occur- 
rence, and  chiefly  in  the  way  of  allusion 
expanded  and  dwelt  upon.  Thus  the 
authority  is  of  a  three-fold  character. 
And  as,  in  the  main  narrative,  whole 
years  are  often  sunk  as  uneventful,  so 
in  the  itinerary  of  Num.  xxxiii.,  on  a 
near  view  great  chasms  occur,  which 


require,  where  all  else  bespeaks  a  severe 
uniformity  of  method,  to  be  somehow 
accounted  for.  But,  beyond  the  ques- 
tions opened  by  either  authority  in 
itself,  we  have  difficulties  of  apparent 
incongruity  between  them  ;  such  as  the 
omission  in  Kxodus  of  Dophka  and 
Alush,  and  of  the  encamj^nent  by  the 
Red  Sea;  and,  incomparably  greater, 
that  of  the  fact  of  a  visit  to  Kadesh 
being  recorded  in  Nam.  xiii.  26,  and 
again  in  xx.  1,  wliie  the  itinerary  men- 
tions the  name  of  Kadesh  oni^  once." 

We  shall  endeavour  to  oiFer  some 
hints  on  these  difficulties  as  they  arise 
in  our  course  ;  but  it  seemed  desirable 
to  call  attention  to  their  existence  at 
the  beginning  of  the  march  from  Sinai. 

Verse  13.  And  they  first  took  their 
journey,  etc.  "  Ratiier,  'And  they 
journeyed '  (or  set  forth)  '  in  the 
order  of  precedence  according  to  {i.e., 
established  by)  the  commandment 
of  the  Lord,'  etc.  The  meaning  of 
the  Hebrew  word  for  *  first  *  seems 
determined  by  its  use  in  the  fol- 
lowing verse,  where  it  applies  to  the 
camp  of  Judah  going  before  the  rest. 
This  order  of  precedence  is  described  in 
verses   14-28." — Speakers  Commentary. 

Verse  14.  According  to  their  armies. 
"Cf.  I.  3.  There  were  three  tribal 
hosts  in  each  camp  ;  and  each  tribe  had, 
of  course,  its  sub-divisions." — Ibid. 

Verse  17.  When  the  tabernacle  was 
taken  down  the  Gershonites  and  the 
Merarites  set  forward  with  the  materials 
of  which  it  was  composed,  so  that  at  the 
place  of  the  next  encampment  they 
might  set  it  up  again,  before  the  arrival 
of  the  Kohathites  (who  followed  after, 
verse  21)  with  the  sacred  vessels,  etc. 
So  that  during  the  march,  the  place  of 
the  tabernacle,  in  the  midst  of  the  host, 
was  represented  by  the  sacred  furniture 
of  the  sanctuary,  in  charge  of  the 
Kohathites. 

Verse  29.  Hohah,  the  son  of  Raguel, 
etc.  There  is  some  uncertainty  as  to  the 
relation  of  Hobab  to  Moses.  Here  he 
would  seem  to  be  the  son  of  Moses' 
father-in-law.  But  in  Judg.  iv.  11,  he 
is  spoken  of  as  "the  father  in-law  of 
Moses."  The  preponderance  of  evidence 

157 


CHAP.  Xi 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


seems  in  favour  of  his  being  the  brother- 
in-law  of  Moses.  The  Hebrew  word 
translated  *'  father-in-law  "  may  be  used 
to  express  any  relation  by  marriage, 
ilaguel,  or  Reuel,  who  was  also  named 
Jethro,  was  the  father-in-law  of  Moses 
•  (Exod.  ii.  18;  iii.  1).  He  had  departed 
from  the  camp  of  Israel  previous  to 
their  arrival  at  Sinai  (Exod.  xviii.  27) ; 
whereas  Hobab  obtained  a  settlement 
with  them  in  the  land  of  Canaan  (com- 
pare Judg.  i.  16  :  iv.  11).  Moreover 
the  request  of  Moses  that  he  would  ac- 
company them  as  their  guide  seems  to 
imply  that  he  was  a  younger  man  than 
the  father-in-law  of  Moses  must  have 
been  at  this  time.  We  conclude  that 
Hobab  was  the  son  of  Reuel  or  Jethro, 
and  consequently  the  brother-in-law  of 
Moses. 

Verse  31.  Thou  may  est  he  to  us 
instead  of  eyes.  "Hobab  may  have 
been  of  great  use  to  the  Israelites,  with 
respect  both  to  guiding  their  parties  to 


wells  and  springs  in  the  desert,  and  to 
giving  them  notice  where  they  might 
find  fuel.  But  besides  this,  the  sacred 
history  expressly  mentions  several 
journeys  undertaken  by  detachments  of 
the  Israelites,  while  the  main  body 
remained  still :  so  in  chap.  xiii.  we  read 
of  a  party  sent  out  to  reconnoitre  the 
land  of  Canaan  ;  in  chap.  xx.  of  the 
messengers  sent  from  Kadesh  to  the 
King  of  Edom ;  in  chap.  xxxi.  of 
an  expedition  against  the  idolatrous 
Midianites  ;  of  some  little  expeditions 
in  the  close  of  chap,  xxxii.  ;  and  more 
journeys  of  the  like  kind  were,  without 
doubt,  undertaken,  though  they  are 
not  particularly  recounted.  Moses, 
foreseeing  this,  might  well  beg  Hobab 
to  accompany  him,  not  as  a  single 
Arab,  but  as  the  prince  of  a  clan  to 
supply  conductors  for  these  detached 
parties,  while  the  body  of  the  people, 
and  the  cloud  of  the  Lord  continued 
stationary." — Harmen 


The  Silveb  Trumpets,  or  the  Relation  op  the  Gospel   Ministry  to  the 

Seasons  and  Services  op  the  Christian  Life. 

(Verses  1-10.) 


Let  us  notice  the  following  prelimi- 
nary points : 

First :  The  trumpets  and  their  use 
were  commanded  hy  God.  He  enjoins 
their  use  as  means  to  secure  order  and 
progress.  He  blesses  men,  saves  men 
by  the  use  of  the  means  which  He  has 
appointed. 

Second :  The  trumpets  were  to  he 
blown  hy  the  priests.  Every  Christian 
is  now  a  priest ;  but  the  ministers  of 
the  Gospel  are  especially  the  heralds 
of  the  Divine  messages  :  it  is  especially 
incumbent  upon  them  to  blow  the 
silver  trumpet  of  the  Gospel. 

Third  :  The  trumpets  were  to  he  hlown 
in  accordance  with  clear  and  well-under' 
stood  instructions.  When  they  were  to 
blow  one  trumpet  only,  and  when  they 
were  to  blow  both ;  when  the  short, 
sharp,  broken  notes,  and  when  the  long 
and  continuous  peal — these  things  were 
clearly  explained  and  enjoined.  There 
was  to  be  no  uncertainty  as  to  the 
158 


meaning  of  the  signals.  The  meaning 
of  the  sounds  of  the  Gospel  trumpet 
should  be  equally  and  unmistakeably 
clear.     (Comp.  1  Cor.  xiv.  7,  8.) 

Fourth:  The  trumpets  were  to  be  hlown 
at  different  seasons  and  for  different  pur- 
poses— for  conventions,  for  journey ings, 
for  battles,  for  festivals,  etc.  In  this 
we  have  an  illustration  of  the  Relation 
of  the  Gospel  Ministry  to  the  seasons  and 
services  of  the  Christian  life.  We  pro- 
ceed to  offer  some  hints  on  the  analogy. 
The  silver  trumoets  were  used — 

I.  For  the  calling  of  assemblies. 

"  Use  them  for  the  calling  of  the 
assembly.  And  when  they  shall  blow 
with  them,"  etc.,  verses  3,  4.  In  the 
assemblies  of  the  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ  for  conference,  or  instruction,  or 
worship,  the  ministry  of  the  Gospel 
should  be  heard  The  Word  of  God 
has  a  clear  and  precious  relation  to  the 
peaceful  engagements  of  holy  worship. 
In  such  seasons  the  Christian  minister 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTAIIV:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  X. 


shriild  lead  the  people  into  the  green 
pastures  of  spiritual  instruction,  and 
bv  the  still  waters  of  pure  refresiunent. 
The  ministry  of  the  Gospel  should  draw 
men  together,  even  as  the  silver  trum- 
pets convened  the  assemblies  of  Israel. 

(«) 

II.  For  summoning  the  people  to 
advance. 

*'  Use  them  for  the  journeying  of  the 
camps.  When  ye  blow  an  alarm,  then 
the  camps"  etc.  (Vers.  5,  6.)  The 
Christian  minister  is  required  to  sum- 
mon the  people  to  arise  and  ^*go  for- 
ward "  in  their  upward  pilgrimage.  He 
summons  them  to  advance — • 

1.  In  personal  holiness.  He  exhorts 
them  to  "follow  on  to  know  the  Lord," 
to  ''  grow  in  grace,"  to  **  forget  those 
things  which  are  behind,"  etc.  (Phil, 
lii.  13,  14.)     It  is  his  to 

"  Allure  to  brighter  worlds,  and  lead  the  way." 
ih) 

2.  In  personal  and  collective  useful- 
ness. He  should  incite  both  individuals 
and  churches  to  more  diligent  and 
devoted  services  in  the  cause  of  Christ. 
The  true  Gospel  ministry  will  never 
allow  the  Church  to  sink  into  an 
inglorious  and  in<iolent  rest  ;  but  as 
with  the  blast  of  a  trumpet  will  rouse 
it  to  continuous  effort  and  to  intermi- 
nable progress. 

III.  For  encouraging  the  people  in 
battle. 

**  And  if  you  go  to  war  in  your  land 
against  the  enemy,"  etc.,  verse  9. 
"  Great  force  is  in  the  sound  of  instru- 
ments, of  any  sort,  to  stir  up  both 
courage  and  cheerfulness  in  the  hearers 
of  them."  But  these  trumpets  were 
blown  to  express  their  dependence  upon 
God,  and  to  inspire  their  faith  in  Him. 
Like  the  priests  with  the  silver  trumpets 
the  minister  of  the  Gospel  should — 

1.  Encourage  Christians  to  battle 
against  evil.  Many  are  the  motives 
which  he  may  employ  for  this  purpose, 
e.g.f  the  righteousness  of  the  warfare, 
the  glory  of  the  great  Leader,  the 
certainty  of  victory,  etc.     (c) 

But,  as  the  priests  with  the  silver 
trumpets,  so  the  Christian  minister  is 


to  encourage  Christians  in   their  battle 
against  evil — 

2.  Bij  inciting  them  to  trust  in  God. 
He  gives  the  victory.  We  c:»nquer 
through  Him.  "  The  God  of  |)eace 
shall  bruise  Satan  under  your  feet 
shortly."  '*  We  are  more  than  con- 
querors through  Him  that  loved  us." 
"Above  all  taking  the  shield  of  fiith," 
etc.  *'  Fight  the  good  tight  of  faith,** 
etc. 

"  The  world  cannot  withstand 
Its  ancient  Conqueror  ; 
The  world  must  sink  beneath  the  hand. 
That  arms  as  for  the  war : 
This  is  our  victory  I 
Before  our  faith  thoy  fall ; 
Jesus  hath  died  for  you  and  me ; 
Believe,  and  conquer  all." 

C.  Wesley. 

IV.  For  suitably  observing  seasons 
of  special  interest. 

*'  Also  in  the  day  of  your  gladness," 
etc.  (verse  10).  Here  are  three  seasons 
specified  at  which  the  trumpets  were  to 
be  blown,  and  to  which  Christianity 
has  a  relation  and  a  ministry. 

1.  Seasons  of  joy.  "In  the  days  of  your 
gladness  ye  shall  blow  with  the  trum- 
pets," etc.  The  Gospel  aims  at  the 
consecration  and  promotion  of  human 
gladness.  "  That  My  joy  might  remain 
in  you,  and  your  joy  might  be  full." 
"  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway."  "  The 
kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and 
drink ;  but  righteousness,  and  peace, 
and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  "  Belie- 
ving, ye  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable 
and  full  of  glory."  The  Gospel  forbids 
no  pure  delight,  but  hallows  and  in- 
creases it. 

2.  Seasons  of  solemnity.  "  In  your 
solemn  days  ye  shall  blow  with  the 
trumpets,"  etc.  There  are  many  solemn 
days  in  life — days  of  mental  conflict, 
of  spiritual  darkness,  of  social  bereave- 
ment, etc.  In  such  days  the  hopeful 
and  helpful  sounds  of  the  Gospel 
trumpet  are  peculiarly  precious. 

3.  Closing  and  commencing  seasons, 
"  And  in  the  beginnings  of  your  months 
ye  shall  blow,"  etc.  "  The  return  of 
the  new  moons  was  announced  by  the 
sounding  of  the  silver  trumpets  ;  and 
in    this    way  provision  was    ma^ie    for 

159 


CHAP.  X. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


keeping  np  a  knowledge  of  thu  '»nd  and 
commencement  of  each  month."  And 
as  one  period  of  time  comes  to  an  end, 
and  we  look  back  npon  its  opporturities 
and  privileo'es  gone  for  ever,  and  gone 
when  we,  alas,  how  often  !  have  made 
but  little  use  of  them,  that  Gospel 
which  tells  of  free  and  full  forgiveness 
is  very  precious.  And  as  wi  look  for- 
ward to  periods  of  time  which  are  yet 
in  the  future,  with  their  manifold  and 
serious  possibilities,  tlie  voice  of  that 
trumpet  which  announces  ''Grace  to 
help  in  time  of  need,"  and  strength 
proportioned  to  our  day,  is  most  gladly 
welcomed  by  us. 


To  all  the  varying  scenes  and  cir- 
cumstances of  life  the  Gospel  ministry, 
like  the  silver  trum.pets,  has  an  im- 
portant and  beneficent  relation. 

And  we  have  a  twofold  intimation  that 
God  would  bless  this  institution  of  the 
blowing  of  the  silver  trumpets.  "Ye 
shall  be  remembered  before  the  Lord 
your  God,  and  ye  shall  be  saved  froji 
your  enemies.  .  .  .  That  they  may  be 
to  you  for  a  memorial  before  your  Goc*  • 
I  am  the  Lord  your  God." 

If  He  blessed  even  the  blowing  o! 
trumpets,  when  \  e.'formed  in  obedience 
to  Him,  will  He  not  much  more  V»less 
the  ministry  of  the  Gospel  of  His  Son  1 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(«)  The  trumpet  was  the  sacred  joyful 
hdund  in  old  Palestine,  the  silver  trumpets 
Olown  by  the  priests  of  the  sons  of  Aaron. 
The  trumpet  proclaimed  the  opening  of  the 
year,  the  trumpet  prociaimed  the  coaamence- 
ment  of  the  sabbatical  year,  the  trumpet  pro- 
claimed the  year  of  Jubilee  that  was  kept  by 
the  Israelite/^,  the  feast  of  trumpets,  and  the 
tone  of  the  trumpet  mingled  with  theirmoet 
solemn  feasts  and  domestic  scenes : 

"  Then  rose  the  choral  hymn  of  praise, 
The  trump  and  timbrel  answered  keen, 
And  Judah's  daughters  poured  their  lays, 
The  priests*  and  warriors'  voice  between.** 

Conceive  such  an  evening  as  this  in  that 
delightful  land;  it  is  the  evening  of  the  sixth 
dav,  our  Friday;  the  sky  is  peaceful,  it  is  the 
wilderness;  among  those  crags  are  tbe  foes 
of  Israel's  race;  there  is  the  tabernacle;  there 
is  the  cloud  about  to  yield  to  the  fire ;  a  star 
or  two  has  already  appeared;  reverently 
waiting  and  expecting,  the  labourers  are 
reposing  from  their  day's  toil;  the  sun  is 
setting,  and  darkness  approaching.  Hark  I 
hark!  this  is  the  peal  of  the  silver  trumpet 
over  the  wasr^^  and  the  tool  is  dropped; 
instantly  all  lab  mr  ceases — and  it  is  more, 
it  is  the  commencement  of  the  sabbatical  yearl 
YonHer  Philistines  may  put  their  own  inter- 
pretation on  it,  and  say,  Their  sabbath  is 
begun;  but  we  can  say  "  Blessed  is  th"  people 
thut  know  the  joyful  sound." — E.  P.  Hood. 

Amazing  is  the  power  of  sound  ;  it  searches 
the  soul  more  than  vision ;  it  vibrates  and 
reverberates — sound  more  immediately  and 
more  deeply  pHnetratea.  Nothing  prt'S  nted 
to  the  eye  tingles  along  the  biood  like  things 
presented  to  the  ear,  Sound  thrills  in  a  wood 
at  night,  in  loneliness  and  darkness;  the  fall 
of  leaves,  ttie  >tir  of  creatures  in  the  grafts, 
and  a  thousand  nameIes.^  sounds,  stir  the  feel- 
ing of  mystic  awe.  Sikht  is  finite;  the  imag- 
ination plays   more   freely  among  sound 

160 


the  forms  are  unshaped — the  powers  are  more 
abiding.  Memory — attention — seems  to  take 
a  deeper  hold  upon  the  things  presented  in 
sound  than  in  sight.  And  hence,  the  preacher 
is  a  trumpet.  The  birth  of  the  Society  of 
Friends  was  in  this  wise  :  Qeori^e  Fox  was 
one  of  the  most  stirring  trumpets  of  the 
Church;  in  the  power  he  poss  ssed  by  his 
holy  earnestness  to  roase  men  be  shows  in  aa 
eminent  manner  what  "  the  voice  of  one  cry- 
ing in  t  le  wilderness"  may  be.  And  White- 
field  was  such  a  trumpet.  Men  heard  and 
trembled.  A  mysterious  fearfulness  shook 
the  souls  of  listeners;  it  must  have  been  as 
wbeu  the  prophet  stood  on  the  mount,  and  the 
Lord  passed  by  in  the  wind,  and  the  earth- 
quake, and  the  fire,  and  broke  in  pieces  the 
rocks ;  they  were  the  announcements  of  danger, 
and    wreck,  and  death 

There  are  trumpets — they  startle  and  sur- 
prise, indeed  ;  but  even  the  trumpet  has  another 
purpose;  it  marshals  into  order,  it  becomes 
motive,  beneath  its  inspiring  strains  men  fall 
into  ranks  and  march,  and  it  becomes  not 
merely  a  blase — a  breath — its  tones  fall  into 
the  harmonies  and  melodies  of  other  instru- 
ments.    Ibid. 

(Jb)  If  a  man  would  be  a  Christian  after 
Christ's  type  of  Christianity,  he  must  aim  at 
making  progress  continually.  His  life  must 
be  a  continual  endeavour  from  the  well  to  the 
better,  from  th^  batter  to  the  best.  The  summit 
of  his  attainment  of  yesterday  must  be  thd 
startirg.point  for  his  venture  of  to-moTTow. 
He  must  not  go  to  bin  rest  upon  the  reputation 
of  old  viccories,  or  beneath  laurels  won  so 
long  ago  that  they  have  ab.-olutely  faded  from 
their  greenness  by  the  lapse  of  time.  Every 
morning  of  his  life  must  light  him  to  a  fresh 
battle-field ;  every  evening  of  his  life  must 
set  upon  some  vanquished  lust  or  slain  desire. 
He  must  fix  his  eye  on  Jesus,  and  long  and 
strive  to  be  like  hira.  He  must  trample  upon 
every  sin,  and  he   must  exhibit  every  giaca 


EOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  X. 


which  was  formerly  lacking,  until  he  stands 
out  as  the  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesua  the 
Lord.     Brethren,   this  must  of    necoasity  be 
the  aim  of  every   Christian's   life.     Ho  must 
grow  if  he  would  live.     If  he  would  ascertain 
his    sense    of    the    Divine    favour,    he  must 
cons^tantiy    aim    at  coutonnity  to    the  Divine 
image.     Nothing  short  of  perfection  must  be 
the   ideal  standard  after  which    we  aim.     In 
the  world  around  us  the  solectest  models  are 
uciformly  chosen.     The   young  sculptor,  and 
the     embryo    poet,    are   thrilled      with    high 
exultation;    but   it   is    to    wieM  a   Phidias's 
mallet,    or    to    sweep   a  Homer's    lyre.     The 
young  soldier  gazes  at  reverent  distance  upon 
some  hero  of  a  hundred  fights  ;  but  it  is  that 
he  may  be  brave  and  honoured  as  he.     Visions 
of  fame  and  fortune  flit  before  the  young  aspi- 
rant's  eye,   only    to    be    embodied    in    some 
renowned  statesman,   or   some    wealthy  mil- 
lionaire.     And    why   are    all    these   models 
chosen,  but   that  each,   in  his  own   sphere, 


may  reach  or  approximate  perfection  ?  World- 
lings wouM  scorn  to  aim  at  a  mark  leas  hi<.';h, 
or  to  set  before  tht'm  a  standard  inferior  to 
themselves.  Let  them  shame  you.  Christians, 
into  a  holier  ambition  to-day. —  W  M  Punshun. 
LL.J) 

(c)  Give  me  to  feel  that  the   strongest  will 
win;    that  he  who  has   most  arm    will    have 
most  wealth    and  most   enjoyment    generally 
in  life  ;  give  me  to  feel  that  the  weakest  must 
go   to  the   wall,  however  good  he  b^,  and   J 
cease  to  be  a  man  ;  I  loso  many  of  the  qualities 
which  redeem  men  from  the  utmost  vulgarity 
and  bestiality  !      But  tell  me  t^  a^  the   hii<hest 
strength  is  spiritual,  that  the  noblest  power  is 
the  power  of  ideas,  the  power  of  love;  give 
me  to  feel  that  God  is  watchingr  the  battle, 
and    that   eventuilly    He    will    make    riijht 
victorious,  and   instantly  I  start  my  life  from 
new    centres,    I    am    controlled    bv   new    and 
higher  considerations. — Joseph  Parker^  D.T). 


The  Silver  Trumpets. 

{Verse  2.) 

Make  thee  two  trumpets  of  silver.*' 


We  see  God's  all-pervading  care.  He 
•  lirects  all  things  for  His  people's  weal. 
Their  least  arrangements  are  arranged 
in  heaven.  Each  little  matter  on  the 
earthly  stage  is  offspring  of  decree. 
There  are  no  trifles  in  a  soul's  career. 
Make  conscience  of  each  trivial  event. 
It  has  an  influence  on  eternity.  When 
God  appears  to  order  two  Silver  Trum- 
pets for  the  camp,  surely  He  stamps 
all  little  things  with  magnitude. 

The  material  must  be  silver.  Em- 
blem of  rare  purity.  Compare  Psalms 
xii.  6.  xciii.  5.  Ministers  should  pre- 
cede with  silver  brightness.  The  flock 
should  follow,  as  silver  v-ithout  alloy. 

Draw  nearer  to  the  camp.  T.fo 
priests  are  seen.  Each  blows  a  Silver 
Ti-umpet,  Light  falls  hence  on  the 
ofl-ice  of  (^od's  ministers.  Their  voice 
should  sound  with  trumpet- clearness 
through  the  flock.  They  are  entrusted 
with  God's  message  to  a  fallen  world. 
.  .  .  The  Silver  Trumpets  sent  a 
piercing  note.  So  should  the  Gospel- 
herald  utter  aloud  the  Gospel  news. 
Let  statements  be  clear,  as  the  sun 
without  one  cloud— pellucid  as  the 
crystal  stream— distinct  as  the  un- 
muffled  tiAimpet's  voice. 


The  Trumpets  were  of  one  piece.  So 
is  the  Gospel-message.  It  is  not  paiijy 
works.  Christ  is  All.  No  diverse 
metal  soiled  these  Trumpets.  No 
intermingling  error  should  soil  pulpits. 

The  type,  moreover,  fixes  attention 
on  the  Christian  as  a  worshipper — a 
pilgrim— a  warrior — a  son  of  joy.  For 
let  the  occasions  on  whlnh  these  Trum- 
pets suunJed  be  now  more  closely 
marked. 

I.  Thoy  call  tie  people  to  God  s 
sanctuary. 

It  is  a   Gospel-ordinance,  that   wor- 
shippers should  throng  the  holy  courts 
— that  public  prayer  and  praise  should 
reverence  the  glorious  name.     A  saintly 
congregation  is  an  antepast  of  heaven. 
The  faithful  meet  to  honour  God.  They 
honour  and  are  honoured.     They  come 
in    faith,    and   they    depart    in    peace. 
Think    not   that    such    assemblage   is 
superfluous.       Doubtless    God    is    noi 
linked  to  means.     He  can  bless  in  soli- 
tude, and  hear  in   the   secluded  closet. 
But  it  has  pleased  Him  to  order  public 
worship.     His    conmiands    are    always 
gain.     Faith    hears,  obeys,    and    finds 
obedience  to  be  weaUh. 
II.  They  give  command  to  marcli. 

161 


CHAP.  X. 


HOMILETia    COMMENTARY:    NUMBEllS. 


Cliristians  are  portion  of  a  marching 
host.  Earth  is  not  our  rest.  We  live 
a  stranger- life.  We  hold  a  pilgrim- 
stafF.  Our  home  is  far  away.  Let  all 
be  ready  for  departure.  Death  should 
not  find  a  Christian  unprepared.  When 
it  appears  let  there  be  no  tremor — no 
surprise — no  work  untinished.  The 
Gospel's  Silver  Trumpets  ever  cry, 
Arise,  Depart.     Come  up  hither, 

III.  They  sound  for  war. 

The  life  of  faith  is  one  incessant 
fight.  Beneath  the  Cross  a  sword  is 
drawn,  of  which  the  scabbard  is  cast 
far  away.  The  foes  are  many — mighty 
— wily — restless.  They  are  without — 
around — within.  Count,  if  you  can, 
the  hateful  legions  who  compose  hell's 
hosts  :  they  all  rush  at  the  soul.  Survey 
the  world — its  snares,  etc.  Behold  the 
heart,  and  all  its  brood  of  lusts  and 
raging  passions.  The  Gospol-trumpet 
ever  cries,  Battle  is  near.  Stand  firm. 
Resist.  But  when  the  Gospel  calls,  it 
promises  sure  triumph.  It  gives  an 
armour  wrought  of  God.     It  points  to 


a  Captain,  beneath  whose  banner  no 
warrior  was  ever  slain.  Believer,  hear, 
and  go  forth  in  hope,  etc. 

IV.  In  the  grand  feasts  they  cheer 
the  worshippers  around  the  bleeding 
victims. 

The  precept  is  obeyed  ;  "  Sing  aloud,'* 
etc.  (Psa.  Ixxxi.  1.)  Believer,  thus, 
too,  the  Gospel  teaches  you  to  joy,  when 
you  in  faith  contemplate,  and  in  worship 
plead  the  meritorious  death  of  Christ. 
My  soul,  obey,  remember  Calvary,  and 
pour  forth  music  of  delight. 

The  Gospel-trumpet  is  now  within 
your  hearing.  But  it  is  prelude  of 
another  clang  (1  Thess.  iv.  16).  Are 
you  prepared  ]  If  you  heed  now  the 
Gospel- trumpet  calling  you  to  Him, 
you  will  hear  then  the  last-day  trumpet 
calling  you  to  glory. 

It  is  faith's  happiest  hour  when  it 
goes  forth  in  spirit  to  intermingle  in 
the  fast-coming  scene  (1  Cor.  xv. 
51-55). 

This  trumpet  soon  will  sound.  Bless 
Jesus — and  fear  not. — Henry  Lawy  D.  D 


The  Resting  and  the  Rising  op  thb  Good. 
{Verses  11,  12.) 


These  verses  suggest — 

L  That  the  people  of  God  are  some- 
times called  to  remain,  as  it  were, 
stationary  for  a  time  in  this  life. 

For  nearly  twelve  months  Israel  re- 
mained in  the  desert  of  Sinai,  without 
making  any  advance,  as  regards  locality, 
to  the  Promised  Land.  In  our  in- 
dividual lives  there  are  sometimes 
seasons  of  quiet  and  rest,  in  which  we 
live  our  life  and  work  our  work  without 
any  apparent  change  :  no  sickness 
seizes  us  reminding  us  of  our  mortality  ; 
no  great  loss  or  sharp  sorrow  shakes 
our  tabernacle  or  tells  us  of  our  pilgrim 
state ;  no  disturbing  influence  reaches 
us,  crying,  "  Arise  ye,  and  depart ;  for 
this  is  not  your  rest."  In  our  family 
life  occasionally  there  are  similar  occa- 
sions ;  when  there  is  a  long  exemption 
from  the  visitations  of  death,  and  the 
strokes  of  affliction  and  grief  seem  far 
removed,  and  no  great  change  takes 
162 


place  in  the  home  circle.  And  in  the 
larger  circle  of  our  friends,  events 
sometimes  move  on  serenely  for  months 
without  any  shock  ;  and  our  pleasant 
intercourse  is  not  interrupted  by  any 
trumpet-call  to  march  onward.  These 
are  seasons  of  quiet  rest  and  precious 
privileges.  And  even  as  the  sojourn 
at  Sinai  was  for  wise  and  most  im- 
portant ends,  so  these  seasons  of  rest 
have  their  sacred  uses  and  obligations  : 
in  them  we  have  lessons  to  learn  for 
ourselves  and  services  to  render  to  others, 
which  cannot  well  be  accomplished 
in  anxious  and  laborious  times,     (a) 

II.  Though  the  people  of  God  may 
appear  to  remain  stationary  for  a 
time,  yet  there  is  no  permanent  settle- 
ment in  this  world. 

The  Israelites  made  a  long  halt  in 
the  desert  of  Sinai  ;  but  it  was  only  a 
halt ;  it  was  not  a  settlement.  Pauses 
in  the  march  have  their  use ;  and  when 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  X. 


that  use  is  accomplished,  orders  to  re- 
sume the  march  are  at  once  given. 
Abiding  rest  is  not  in  this  world.  The 
home  of  the  soul  is  not  here.  The 
longest  season  of  tranquillity  and  re- 
pose is  at  length  broken.  The  most 
protracted  life  has  its  end.  We  are 
"  strangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  earth." 

III.  That  both  the  restings  and  the 
risings  of  the  people  of  God  are 
ordered  by  Him. 

*'  The  cloud  was  taken  up  from  off 
the  tabernacle  of  the  testimony.  And 
the  children  of  Israel  took  their 
journeys,"  etc.  The  rising  of  the  cloud 
was  the  Divine  signal  for  their  depar- 
ture ;  the  resting  of  the  cloud,  for  their 
encampment.  "Thou  leddest  Thy 
people  like  a  flock  by  the  hand  of  Mosea 
and  Aaron."  "And  guided  them  iu 
the  wilderness  like  a  flock."  And  God 
is  still  the  Guide  of  His  people.  "  The 
steps  of  a  good  man  are  ordered  by  the 


Lord."  (See  our  notes  on  chapter  ix. 
17-23).     (c) 

IV.  That  tbe  people  of  God,  whether 
resting  or  marching,  are  protected  by 
Him. 

In  the  cloud  which  preceded  them 
on  the  march,  and  overshadowed  them 
in  their  encampments,  the  Lord  was 
present  for  their  protection.  God  is 
the  Guardian  of  His  people.  "  God 
our  shield."  "  In  the  time  of  trouble 
He  shall  hide  me  in  His  pavilion,"  etc. 
"  Kept  by  the  power  of  God  through 
faith  unto  salvation."  Compare  Psalms 
xci.  1-13;  cxxi.  (See  our  notes  on 
chap.  ix.  17-23.)         (d) 

Learn,  in  conclusion,  to — 

1.  Gratefully  appreciate  and  diligently 
use  the  seasons  of  quiet  rest  in  life. 

2.  Remember  that,  however  long  and 
grateful  a  rest  may  he  granted  unto  us, 
we  are  only  pilgrims  here.  Be  ready  to 
arise  and  depart  when  the  cloud  arises. 

3.  Follow  the  guidance  of  God, 

4.  Trust  the  protection  of  God, 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 


(a)  "  Rest  ft  -while !  "  Why,  it  is  a  mother*t 
word ;  she  says  to  her  little  weary  child  who 
has  toddled  itself  out  of  breath,  "  Rest  a 
while."  It  is  the  word  of  a  great,  generous, 
noble-hearted  leader  of  men.  He  says,  "  My 
company  must  hare  rest.  I  know  I  am  sent 
to  gain  victories  and  conquests,  mnd  to  work 
great  programmes  ;  but  in  the  meantime  my 
over-worked  men  must  have  rest."  It  is  A 
gentle  word.  Where  do  you  find  such  gentle- 
ness as  you  find  in  Jesus  Christ?  Joseph 
Parker,  D.D. 

Rest  time  is  not  waste  time.  It  is  economy 
to  gather  fresh  strength.  Look  at  the  mower 
on  the  summer's  day,  with  so  much  to  cut 
down  ere  the  sun  pets.  He  pauses  in  his  labour 
— is  he  a  sluggard  ?  He  looks  for  his  stone, 
and  begins  to  draw  it  up  and  down  his  scythe, 
with  rink-a-tink,  rink-a-tink,  rinka-tink — 
Is  that  idle  music?  Is  he  wasting  precious 
moments?  How  much  he  might  have  mown 
while  he  has  b^»en  ringing  out  those  notes  on 
his  scythe  1  But  he  is  sharpening  his  tool, 
and  he  will  do  far  more  when  once  again  he 
gives  his  strength  to  those  loug  sweeps  which 
lay  the  grass  prostrate  in  rows  before  him. 
Even  thu3  a  little  pause  prepares  the  mind 
for  greater  service  in  the  good  cause.  Fipher- 
men  must  mend  their  nets,  and  we  must 
every  now  and  then  repair  our  mental  waste 
and  set  our  machinery  in  order  for  future 
service.  To  tug  the  oar  from  day  to  day,  like 
a  galley-slave  who  knows  no  holiHavs,  suits 

m2 


not  mortal  men.  Mill  streams  go  on  and  on 
for  ever,  but  we  must  have  our  pauses  and 
our  intervals.  Who  can  help  being  out  of 
breath  when  the  race  is  continued  without 
intermission?  Even  beasts  of  burden  must 
be  turned  out  to  grass  occasionally;  the  very 
seft  pauses  at  ebb  and  flow ;  earth  keeps  the 
Sabbath  of  ttie  wintry  months  ;  and  man, 
even  when  exalted  to  be  God's  ambas.^ador, 
must  rest  or  faint ;  must  trim  his  lamp  or 
let  it  burn  low ;  mnsv,  recruit  his  vigour  or 
grow  prematurely  old.  It  is  wisdom  to  take 
occasional  furlough.  In  the  long  run  we  shali 
do  more  by  sometimes  doing  less. — C.  11. 
Spurgeon. 

(b)  "  Strangers  and  pilgrims."  That  is  the 
Christian  view  of  life.  Christians  are  all 
travellers,  through  a  countiy  they  cannot 
stay  in;  travellers,  blessed  be  God,  tow^ards  a 
home,  but  all  travellers ;  sotne  seemingly 
going  through  swiftly,  buoyantly,  with  a  high 
head  and  an  open  eye;  some  foot-sore,  jaded, 
sleepy ;  some  with  a  chariot  of  fire,  as  if  ttie 
horses  of  God  were  whirling  them  onvyards 
before  the  eyes  of  an  admiring  Church ; 
splendid  saints,  the  tune  of  whoso  worship 
goes  manly.  Some  heavy-hearted,  heavy- 
limbed,  but  still  crawling  onwards,  feeling, 
perhaps,  no  less  than  the  others  that  here 
they  have  no  continuing  city,  but  that  they 
seek  one  to  come.  Limping  by  the  wayside, 
but  still  creeping  humbly  and  bravely  on.-- 
Harry  Jones,  M.A, 

163 


CHAP.  X. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENT ARY]    NUMBERS, 


(c)  A  journey  may  b^  the  outcome  of  an 
inspiration.  "There's  a  Divinity  that  shapes 
our  enda,  rough  hew  them  as  we  will."  I  feel 
life  to  be  most  solemn  when  I  think  that  inside 
of  it  all  there  is  a  Spirit  that  lays  out  one's 
day's  work,  that  points  out  when  the  road  is 
on  the  left,  and  when  it  is  on  the  right,  and 
that  tells  one  what  words  will  best  express 
one's  thoug'tt.  Then  is  God  nigh  at  hand  and 
aot  afar  ( ff.  *'  The  steps  of  a  good  man  are 
ordered  by  the  Lord  "  And  thu-»,  too,  men 
are  misunderstood :  they  are  call  d  enthu- 
siastic, and  are  said  to  be  impulsive;  they 
are  not  "  safe  "  men ;  they  are  here  to-day  and 
gone  to-morrow,  and  no  proper  register  of 
their  life  can  be  made.  Of  course,  we  are  to 
distinguish  between  inspiration  and  delusion, 
and  not  to  think  that  every  noise  is  thunder. 
We  are  not  to  call  a  "  maggot "  a  "  reveUtion." 
What  we  are  to  do  isthi'^:  We  are  to  live  and 
move  and  have  our  being  in  God ;  to  expect 
His  coming  and  long  for  it ;  to  be  patient 
and  watchful ;  to  keep  our  heart  according  to 
His  word ;  and  then  we  shall  know  His  voice 
from  the  voice  of  a  stranger,  for  "the  secret 
of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him."  If 
God  be  our  supreme  consciousness  He  will 
reveal  His  piovidence  without  cloud  or  doubt- 
fulness. I  think  it  can  be  proved  that  the 
mpn  who  have  done  things  apparently  against 
all  reason  have  often  been  acting  in  the  most 
reasonable  manner,  and  that  inspiration  has 
often  been  mistaken  for  madness.  1  feel  that 
all  the  while  you  are  asking  me  to  give  you 
teats  by  which  you  may  know  what  is  inspira- 
tion, you  have  little  or  nothing  to  do  with 
such  tests, — you  have  to  be  right  and  then  you 
will  be  sure  to  do  right. — Joseph  Parker,  D.D. 


(d)  I  do  not  think  of  the  pillar  of  cl'  ud 
as  being  simply  a  column  of  smoke  arising 
from  the  conrre  of  the  Tabernacle ;  it  was 
such,  but  besides  that  it  covered  the  whole 
camp  as  a  vast  canopy  or  pavilion,  so  that  in 
the  great  and  terrible  wilderness  they  fainted 
not  under  tbe  burning  heat  of  the  sun,  but 
thi-.  pillar  of  cloud  interposed  a  friendly  shade, 
so  that  they  passed  through  the  wilderu'  ss 
beneath  the  wings  of  God.  At  night  thoir 
encampment  would  have  been  like  a  great 
city  wrapp'd  in  darkness,  but  the  pillar  of 
dre  supplied  them  a  light  far  supf^rior  to  that 
which  glows  in  London  or  in  Paris  through 
bhe  art  of  man ;  that  great  flaming  pillar  lit 
up  every  habitation,  so  that  in  point  of  fact 
there  was  no  night  there.  They  were  always 
sheltered  by  God,  both  by  day  and  by  nigbt. 
If  they  strayed  away  from  the  camp  for  a 
little  time  in  the  heat  of  the  sun,  they  had 
only  to  come  flying  back,  and  there  that 
emblem  of  the  present  God  became  their 
she'ter;  or  at  night,  if  they  wandered  for 
awhile,  that  vast  blazing  lampion  conducted 
them  back  again  to  their  place  of  rest.  So  it 
is  with  us.  In  nights  of  trouble  and  grief, 
the  fire  of  Divine  comfort  glows  within  us, 
the  precious  promises  are  round  about  us, 
and  we  rejoice  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Com- 
forter;  and  when  by  day  we  travel  over  this 
burning  wildernes'^  to  the  rest  appointed,  God 
interposes  perpetually  the  sweet  presence  of 
His  love  to  screen  us  from  the  sharper  sorrows 
of  the  world,  that  we  may  still,  while  walking 
onward  to  heaven,  behold  the  shield  of  heaven 
uplifted  above  our  heads. — C  H.  Spurgeon. 


Aspects  op  Human  Pilgrimage, 
(Verses  13-28.) 


These  verses  suggest  the  following 
remarks  ; 

I.  That  humain  pilgrimage  should 
be  prosecuted  in  accordance  with 
Divine  directions. 

**  And  they  first  took  their  journey 
according  to  the  commandment  of  the 
Lord  by  the  hand  of  Moses."  The 
march  proceeded  in  the  order  prescribed 
in  chap.  ii.  In  the  pilgrimage  of  Hfe 
the  directions  of  God  should  be  faith- 
fully followed.  This  will  appear  if  we 
consider — 

1.    TJie  infiwity  of  the  hwwledrje  of 

God.      He    knows    us    altogether   and 

perfectly;    He    knows  the  road  which 

we    have   to   travel,   and    the    events 

IG4 


which  await  us,  and  the  circumstances 
through  which  we  must  pass  in  the 
future.  The  minutest  cu'cumstances 
cannot  be  hidden  from  Him,  and  the 
greatest  event  He  fully  comprehends. 
He  h;is  the  knowledge  which  is  neces- 
siry  for  efficiently  directing  our  patli 
through  life. 

2.  The  dejyth  and  tenderness  of  God's 
interest  in  mamf  He  exercises  tho 
kindest  care  towards  every  man.  There 
is  not  a  creature  in  the  world  but  is 
cared  for  by  Him.  And  man,  who  is  at 
the  head  of  His  creations  in  this  world, 
is  the  object  of  His  special  regard. 
Comp.  Matt.  vi.  25  34.  His  kind  in- 
terest in  us  affords  a  guarantee  that  in 
directing  our  path  through  life  He  will 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


CllAP.  i. 


ever  aim  at  the  realization  of  our  best 
interests. 

3.  The  supremacy  of  God^s  authority 
over  man.  He  has  a  right  to  issue 
commands  for  our  guidance.  As  our 
Creator  and  Sustainer,  and  especially 
as  our  wise  and  kind  Father,  His  autho- 
rity over  us  is  most  absolute  and  sacred. 
When  they  were  condemning  Socrates 
for  teaching  the  people  their  duties  to 
God,  he  replied,  **  O  ye  Athenians,  I 
will  obey  God  rather  than  you  ;  and  if 
you  would  dismiss  me  and  spare  my 
life*  on  condition  that  I  would  cease  to 
teach  my  fellow-citizens,  I  would  rather 
die  a  thousand  times  than  accept  the 
proposal."  How  much  more  should  we 
recognise  and  bow  loyally  to  His  autho- 
rity !  "  He  shall  choose  our  inheri- 
tance for  us."  "  Thou  shalt  guide  me 
with  Thy  counsel."  His  appointments 
concerning  us  are  always  infinitely  wise 
and  kind,     (a) 

II.  In  human  pilgrimage  the 
arrangements  and  provisions  for 
Divine  worship  should  be  matters  of 
primary  concern. 

"And  the  Tabernacle  was  taken 
down,  and  the  sons  of  Gershon  and  the 
sons  of  Merari  set  forward,  bearing  the 
tabernacle.  .  .  .  And  the  Kohath- 
ites  set  forward,  bearing  the  sanctuary  : 
and  "  (the  Gershonites  and  Merarites) 
"  did  set  up  the  tabernacle  against  they 
came."  Thus  it  was  arranged  that  the 
Tabernacle  should  in  every  encamp- 
ment be  erected  in  readiness  to  receive 
the  Ark  and  the  most  holy  things. 
The  arrangements  for  the  worship  of 
the  Lord  were  regarded  as  of  the  first 
importance.  In  like  manner  we  find 
that  wherever  Abraham  pitched  his 
tent,  "  there  he  builded  an  altar  unto 
the  Lord"  (see  Gen.  xii.  7,  8;  xiii.  4, 
18).  The  conduct  of  these  ancient 
saints  in  this  respect  is — 

1.  A  rebuke  to  many  nominal  Christ- 
ians, who  in  their  changes  of  residence 
make  the  arrangements  and  provisions 
for  worship  a  very  inferior  considera- 
tion.    (6) 


2.  An  example  to  all  Christians  who 
contem[)late  a  change  of  residence,    (c) 

III.  In  human  pilgrimage  the  most 
reverent  care  should  be  exercised  in 
relation  to  sacred  ihings. 

"  And  the  Kohathites  set  forward 
bearing  the  sanctuary."  Their  station 
was  in  the  midst  of  the  host  :  thus  the 
most  holy  things,  of  which  they  h  id 
charge,  were  in  the  place  of  the  greatest 
safety  and  the  highest  honour  during 
the  march.  Here  is  an  example  for  us. 
Let  things  around  which  tender  and 
precious  memories  cluster  be  higldy 
esteemed  and  jealously  guarded ;  let 
things  dedicated  to  sacred  uses  be 
reverently  regarded  and  piously  cared 
for. 

IV.  In  human  pilgrimage  the  weak 
and  the  wandermg  should  be  tenderly 
cared  for. 

"  And  the  standard  of  the  camp  of 
Dan  set  forward,  the  rearward  of  all 
the  camps,"  etc.  The  squadron  of  Dan 
came  last,  and  was  called  the  rearward 
or  gathering  host  (Josh.  vi.  9,  margin) 
because  they  gathered  up  those  who 
lagged  behind — the  lame,  the  faint,  and 
the  feeble — and  took  care  that  none 
were  lost  or  left  behind.  God  is  solici- 
tous for  the  salvation  of  the  weak  and 
the  wandering.  Our  Lord  is  careful  to 
lose  none  of  His  followers  (John  xvii. 
12).  **  He  gathers  the  lambs  with  His 
arm,  and  carries  them  in  His  bosom, 
and  gently  leads  those  that  are  with 
young."  **  He  has  compassion  on  the 
ignorant,  and  on  them  that  are  out  of 
the  way."  In  like  manner  **we  that 
are  strong  ought  to  bear  the  infiimitiea 
of  the  weak,"  and  to  strive  to  restore 
the  erring.  "  Brethren,  if  a  man  be 
overtaken  in  a  fault,  ye  which  are 
spiritual  restore  such  an  one,"  etc. 

Conclusion  : 

In  our  pilgrimage  let  us  diligently 
cultivate  this  spirit  of  loyal  obedience 
and  reverent  worship  towards  God,  and 
of  kind  ministries  towards  our  fellow 
men. 


165 


CHAP.  X. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  You  are  to  consider  that  the  position 
which  yoa  occupy  is,  all  things  considered, 
the  most  advantageous  that  you  could  possibly 
have  occupied  for  doing  the  utmost  that  you 
are  capable  of  doing  for  the  glory  of  God. 
Suppose  the  mole  should  cry,  *'  How  could 
I  have  honoured  the  great  Creator  if  I 
could  have  been  allowed  to  fly  ?  "  it  would 
have  been  very  foolish,  for  a  mole  flying  would 
have  been  a  very  ridiculous  object,  while  a 
moln  fashioning  its  tunnels  and  casting  up  its 
castles  is  viewed  with  admiring  wondtr  by 
the  naturalist,  who  p-.  reeives  its  remarkable 
Buitability  to  its  sphere.  The  fish  of  the  sea 
mi^ht  say,  "  How  could  I  display  the  wisdom 
of  God  if  I  could  sing  or  mount  a  tree  like  a 
bird ! "  but  you  know  a  fish  in  a  tree  would 
be  a  very  grotesque  affair,  and  there  would  be 
no  wisdom  of  God  to  admire  is  fiahes  climbing 
trees  ;  but  when  the  fish  cuts  the  wave  with 
agile  fin,  all  who  have  observed  it  say  how 
wonderfully  it  is  adapted  to  its  habitat,  how 
exactly  its  every  bone  is  fitted  to  its  mod©  of 
life.  Brother,  it  is  just  so  with  you.  If  you 
begin  to  say,  "I  catnot  glorify  God  whore  I 
am.  and  as  I  am,"  I  answer.  Neither  could 
you  anywhere  if  not  where  you  are.  Provi- 
dence, which  arranged  your  surroundings, 
appointed  them  so  that,  all  things  considered, 
you  are  in  the  position  in  which  you  can  best 
display  the  wi8dom  and  the  grace  of  God. — C. 
H.  Spurgeon. 

(6)  Men  make  ch'ice  of  a  home  without 
makiDg  any  inquiry  as  to  the  religious  state 
of  the  neighbourhood  They  do  not  care  how 
poor  the  church  is  if  the  farm  be  good.  They 
will  give  up  the  most  inspiring  ministry  in 
the  world  for  ten  feet  more  garden,  or  a  pad- 
dock to  feed  an  aps  in.  They  will  tell  you 
that  the  house  is  roomy,  the  garden  is  larg  , 
the  air  is  balmy,  the  district  is  gentool,  and  if 


yon  ask  them  what  religious  teaching  they 
will  have  there,  they  will  tell  you  they  really 
do  not  know,  but  must  inquire  I  They  will 
take  away  six  children  into  a  moral  desert  for 
the  sake  of  a  garden  to  play  in  ;  they  will 
leave  Paul  or  ApoUos  for  six  feet  of  green- 
house I  Others,  again,  fix  their  tent  where 
they  can  get  the  best  food  for  the  heart's  life ; 
and  they  sacrifice  a  summer  house  that  they 
may  now  and  again  get  a  peep  of  heaven. — 
Joseph  Parker,  D.D. 

{jc)  The  good  man's  Tent  and  Altar  go 
together.  You  might  summarise  much  of  a 
good  man's  life  in  this  brief  sentence, — "  He 
pitched  his  tent,  and  built  an  altar."  As  the 
one  was  necessary  for  the  body,  so  was  the 
other  necessary  for  his  soul.  There  are,  how- 
ever,many  tents  now  which  are  unaccompanied 
by  an  altar.  Man  is  oftentimes  more  anxious 
about  his  tent  than  about  his  altar.  Not  so  with 
the  good  man.  His  altar  is  his  chief  joy.  He 
Communes  there  with  God.  Across  the  altar  he 
catches  glimpses  of  heaven.  Upon  his  altar 
angels  drop  blessings  from  their  wings  of 
light.  When  he  is  stained  with  guilt  or  weary 
with  sorrow,  he  draweth  nigh  to  his  altar,  and 
rises  forgiven  and  strong.  It  is  a  poo/  ''.'j 
that  has  no  altar.  Nay,  'tis  not  a  life,  it  is 
mere  existence.  The  altar  is  the  link  wbrih 
connects  the  human  worshipper  with  the 
adoring  seraphim.  The  whole  of  the  reverent 
inte'ligences  of  the  universe  meet  around  the 
altar.  All  our  Graces  are  strengthened  aiil 
beautifi:d  by  worship.  Faith  inhales  now 
life,  hope  gains  clearer  vision,  joy  learns 
some  nevr  song  to  cheer  the  hours  of  pilgrim- 
age and  toil.  If  you  take  cart  of  the  altar, 
God  will  take  care  of  the  tent.  "  Seek  ye 
first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteous- 
cess,  and  all  these  things  shall  be  added  unto 
you." — Ibid. 


J 


An  Exemplary  Invitation. 

(Verses  29  32). 


Let  us  consider : 

I.  The  Journey. 

"We  are  jouiii eying  unto  the  place 
of  which  the  Lord  said,  I  will  give  it 
you."     It  was — 

\.  A  journey  to  a  glorious  destiny. 
Canaan  was  a  goodly  and  a  glorious 
land  (Deut.  viii.  7-9).  To  this  land  the 
Israelites  were  advancing.  Ail  men  are 
journeying  ;  but  it  is  to  be  feared  that 
many  are  travelling  on  a  dreary  road 
■with  a  dreadful  ending.  Not  so  the 
Christian :  he  is  travelling  to  the 
spiritual  Canaan.  Frequently  Canaan 
166 


is  regarded  as  a  type  of  heaven ;  but 
it  is  rather  a  type  of  the  spiritual 
privileges  and  high  calling  of  the  Cliritst- 
ian.  We  are  journeying  to  'perjection 
of  character.  We  go  forward  to  the 
rest,  not  of  outward  security,  but  of 
inward  harmony.  We  advance  not  to 
any  material  inheritance,  but  to  the  in- 
heritance of  spiritual  perfection — to 
lovs,  holiness,  peace,  joy,  etc.  This  is 
the  surest  guarantee  of  heaven  ;  this  is 
heaven,     (a) 

2.   A  journey  to  an  assured  destiny. 
"  The  Lord  said,  I  will  give  it  you." 


HOMILETW    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  X. 


God  hath  promised  us  the  inheritance. 
True,  there  are  many  foes  to  be  cast 
out  before  we  can  enter  upon  it ;  base 
lusts,  evil  passions,  besetting  sins,  have 
to  be  conquered  before  we  attain  our 
high  calling ;  but  God  hath  assured  us 
of  victory.  "  Ye  shall  be  holy,  for  I  am 
holy."  "A  glorious  Church  not  having 
spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing,"  etc. 
*' Exceeding  great  and  precious  promises 
are  given  unto  us ;  that  by  these  ye 
might  be  partakers  of  the  Divine 
nature."  Perfection  of  character  is 
perfect  blessedness.  Holiness,  the 
heaven  of  the  soul,  is  the  gift  of  God, 
and  is  promised  by  Him  to  all  who  be- 
lieve in  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  He 
cannot  deny  Himself;  His  word  cannot 
pass  away.  "  All  the  promises  of  God 
in  Jesus  Christ  are  yea,  and  in  Him 
Amen,  unto  the  glory  of  God  by  us." 

II.  The  Invitation. 

"  And  Moses  said  unto  Hobab,  the  son 
of  Raguel  the  Midianite,  Moses'  father- 
in-law,  We  are  journeying  unto  the 
place  of  which  the  Lord  said,  I  will  give 
it  you  :  come  thou  with  us." 

1.  The  spirit  of  true  religion  is  social 
and  benevolent.  The  child  of  God  is  not 
content  to  travel  alone  to  the  place 
"which  God  promised  to  give  him  ;  but 
invites  others  to  accompany  him,  saying, 
"  Come  thou  with  us."  I  cannot  un- 
derstand the  piety  of  the  man  who 
possesses  the  grace  of  God  himself,  and 
believes  that  they  who  do  not  possess 
it  will  be  lost,  and  yet  makes  no  effort 
to  save  them.  Such  conduct  is  incon- 
sistent, selfish,  utterly  unchristian. 
The  true  Christian  knows  that  God  has 
declared  that  He  "  will  have  all  men  to 
be  saved ; "  and  He  longs,  prays,  and 
works  for  the  salvation  of  others. 
Godliness  enkindles  in  the  soul  the 
most  kind  and  generous  emotions,  (bj 

2,  The  exercise  of  this  spirit  should  be 
first  directed  to  those  who  are  most 
closely  related  to  us.  Moses  invited 
Hobab,  his  brother-in-law.  Next  to  our 
own  spiritual  well-being  we  should  seek 
that  of  our  own  kindred, — parents  that 
of  their  children,  the  husband  that  of 
his  wife,  etc.  The  principle  is  clearly 
taught  by  oui*  Lord  and  His  Apostles 


(see  Mark  v.    19  ;  Luke  viii.   38,  39  ; 
xxiv.  47  ;  1  Tim.  v.  4).     (c) 
III.  The  Inducements. 

Moses  holds  out  to    Hobab  two  in- 
ducements to  accompany  them, — 

1.    The  benefits  he  tvoidd  receive.   "We 
will  do  thee  good  :  for  the  Lord  hath 
spoken   good    concerning    Israel.     .     . 
.     .     And  it  shall  be  if  thou  go  with 
us,  yea,  it  shall  be,  that  what  goodness 
the   Lord   shall  do   unto  us,  the  same 
will  we  do  unto  thee."  We  have  here,— 
(1)  An  Assurance — (a)   That  they  would 
do   him  good.     The   Christian   pilgrim 
can  do  good  to  his  fellow-pilgrims  by 
kindly  companionship.     Brotherly  sym- 
pathy and  fellowship  are  helpful.     By 
presenting  a  good  example  we  can  also  do 
good.     How  great  is  the   influence  of 
example  !     And,  when  it  is  good,  how 
strong  it  is  to  correct  the  imperfect  and 
the     wrong !    and    to    stimulate    and 
strengthen  to  the  doing  of  the  right ! 
By  prayer  also  we  can  do  good  to  our 
fellow-travellers.       The    prayers    of   a 
truly  Christian  man    are    perhaps  the 
greatest  boon  that  one  man  can  confer 
upon  another.     **  Come   thou  with  us, 
and  we  will  do  thee  good."     (p)  That 
he     should    share    in    the   goodness   of 
God    to  them.     "  What    goodness    the 
Lord  shall  do  unto  us,  the  same  will  we 
do  unto  thee."     And  what  great  good- 
ness the  Lord  had  led  them  to  expect 
He  would  do  for  them !     He  leads  us 
to  expect  even  higher  and  richer  bless- 
ings.    He  promises  to  supply  our  needs 
"  Bread  shall  be  given  him  ;  his  waters 
shall  be  sure."     "  No  good  thing  will 
He   withhold,"   etc.     "  Your  heavenly 
Father   knoweth  that   ye  have  need," 
etc.     In   our  journey  the  mauna  will 
not  fail,  etc.     He  will  guide  and  protetl 
us.     "  I   will  instruct  thee  and   teach 
thee  in  the  w^ay  which  thou  shalt  go  ;   I 
will  guide  thee   with   Mine  eye."     *'  In 
all  thy  ways  acknowledge  Him,  and  He 
shall  direct  thy  paths."     "  God  is  our 
refuge   and    strength,"   etc.     He    will 
accompany  and  sustain  us  all  the  way. 
"  My  presence  shall  go  with  thee,"  etc. 
"  Lo,  I  am  with  you  always,"  etc.     "  I 
will  never  leaye  thee,  nor  forsake  thee," 
*'My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee,"  etc. 

1G7 


CHAP.  X. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


"  As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be." 
He  leads  us  to  expect  a  glorious  fuHtre. 
He  calls  us  to  a  higher  standard  of 
character  than  that  to  which  the 
Israelites  attained,  and  to  a  more 
glorious  inheritance  than  theirs.  They 
had  only  a  very  faint  hope  beyond 
Canaan  and  the  present  life ;  but  we 
look  for  *'  an  inheritance,  incorruptible, 
and  undefiled,"  etc.  Wherefore,  "  Come 
thou  with  us,"  &c.  We  have  here— 
(2).  The  ground  of  this  assurance.  "  For 
the  Lord  hath  spoken  good  concerning 
Israel."  Our  faith  and  hope  rest  in  the 
sure  promises  of  the  faithful  and  un- 
changeable God.  Are  we  not  warranted 
then  in  saying  as  an  inducement  to 
others  to  join  us,  "  We  will  do  thee 
good  "  %     (d) 

2.  The  benefits  he  would  confer.  The 
hope  of  deriving  benefit  did  not  prevail 
with  Hobab  :  he  said  unto  Moses,  "  I 
will  not  go ;  but  I  will  depart  to  mine 
own  land,  and  to  my  kindred."  Then 
Moses  tried  to  persuade  hira  with  this 
inducement,  that  his  presence  would 
be  a  benefit  to  them  :  "  he  said,  Leave 
us  not  I  pray  thee  ;  forasmuch  as  thou 
knowest  how  we  are  to  encamp  in  the 
wilderness,  and  thou  mayest  be  to  us 
instead  of  eyes."  Hobab  appears  to 
have  been  an  "experienced  Bedouin 
sheikh,  to  whom  Moses  looked  for  the 
safety  of  his  cumbrous  caravan  in  the 


new  and  difficult  ground  before  them. 
The  tracks  and  passes  of  that  *  waste 
howling  wilderness'  were  all  familiar 
to  him,  and  his  practised  sight  should 
be  to  them  *  instead  of  eyes '  in  dis- 
cerning the  distant  clumps  of  verdure 
which  betokened  the  wells  or  springs 
for  the  daily  encampment,  and  in  giving 
timely  warning  of  the  approach  of  the 
Amalekites  or  other  spoilers  of  the 
desert." 

What  a  vast  amount  of  good  many 
who  are  outside  the  pale  of  the  Church, 
yet  not  out  of  sympathy  with  the 
Christian  religion,  might  do,  if  they 
would  but  " heartily  come  with  us  "  !  As 
wise  counsellors  in  the  business  affiiirs 
of  the  Church  ;  as  visitors  of  the  sick, 
the  ignorant,  and  the  spiritually  desti- 
tute ;  as  Sunday-school  teachers,  and 
in  many  other  ways,  they  could  render 
invaluable  service  to  the  cause  of  Jesus 
Christ  among  men.  Apply  this  motive 
to  the  young y  to  the  undecided ,  to  the 
almost  persuaded. 

Conclusion  : 

With  what  company  are  you  prose- 
cuting your  life-journey  ?  To  what 
destiny  are  you  advancing  ]  "  Come 
with  us,  and  we  will  do  thee  good ; " 
tkc.  In  our  own  name,  in  the  name  of 
the  Church,  and  in  the  name  of  our 
gracious  Lord,  we  heartily  invite  you, 
"  Come  with  us,"  &o. 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 


(a)  Man  must  go.  It  is  not  a  question  of 
whether  we  will  go  or  not  go,  that  is  deter- 
mined for  us — we  must  go.  Every  man  is 
accomplishing  a  journey,  going  through  a 
process.  No  man  is  standing  still.  The 
infant  is  going  on  towards  youth;  youth  is 
advancing  towards  the  stature  and  strength 
of  manhood;  and  man,  in  the  summer  of  his 
pro«;perity  and  honour,  is  going  on  towards 
ti  e  sere  leaf,  and  towards  a  land  of  darkness 
as  darkness  itself.  Men  must  go  on,  tl^er. 
The  only  question  is — How  ?  Man  may  "^j 
either  with  God  or  without  Him. — Joseph 
Parker,  DM. 

(6)  These  happy  disciples  were  now  united 
in  conversion,  and  each  one  was  made  the 
instrument  of  blessing  the  other.  Philip  and 
Nathanael,  Andrew,  Peter,  and  John  co- 
operated with  Christ,  and  with  the  work  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  It  was  a  most  delightful, 
■imple,  thorough,  hearty  work  of  Christian 

168 


love.  Friends  began  with  friends,  relatives^ 
with  relatives.  Prepently  we  see  the  circle 
enlarging,  but  here  it  is  small  and  distirictl^jf 
visible.  Each  rising  wave  is  apparent,  nva 
we  see  how  it  spreads,  each  circling  ripple 
on  the  lake  of  love,  before  there  are  po 
many  o-f  them,  and  so  vast  and  deep  and 
widening,  that  we  can  no  more  trace  thetn 
but  as  one  common  impulse,  one  gr»jnd 
heaving  and  waving  in  the  mighty  8«sa.  In 
this  simple  early  life  of  Christianity,  every 
infant  misnonary  impulse  of  sympathy  at  d 
love  is  visible,  and  can  be  counted.  First 
come  John,  Andrew,  and  Peter,  then  Philip, 
then  Nathanael ;  and  then  the  wave  that 
starts  at  Bethabara  from  the  peison  of  Christ, 
spreads  all  over  Galilee  and  Judea,  and  then 
over  the  world.  It  is  a  missionary  wave,  and 
here  is  the  very  life  of  Christianity,  the  very 
essence  of  discipleship,  and  the  very  way  of 
the  world's  eyangelization.    Nothing  can  be 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  X. 


more  beautiful  tban  the  working  of  this 
principle  of  the  socialii^m  of  grace,  the  social 
principle  and  power  of  Christianity.  It  is  a 
Bvnapathiping,  impulsive,  progroasive,  diffusive 
life.  It  is  the  leaven  of  tbe  world,  which  will 
work  till  the  whole  is  leavened.  And  it 
works,  where  it  works  at  all,  with  an  accumu- 
lalinyf,  accelerating  tendency  and  power. —  G, 
B   Cheever.  D  D, 

(c)  In  their  first  coming  to  Christ  them- 
selves, they  brought  others  with  them  (John 
i.  40  46).  It  was  a  delightful  example  of  the 
practical,  social,  sympathizing,  working  power 
and  tendency  of  true  piety,  and  of  the  direction 
and  manner  in  which  it  works 

Return  to  thine  own  house,  and  tell  thy 
friends  and  relatives  how  great  things  the 
Lord  hath  done  for  thee,  and  hath  had  mercy 
on  thee.  It  seems  there  was  no  need  of  this 
command  of  Christ  in  the  case  of  Andrew ; 
his  own  heart  led  him  in  that  very  way,  and 
it  was  a  lovely  development  of  character  in 
him.  No  doubt  he  was  thinking  of  his 
brctber  all  the  way  to  the  dwelling  of  Jesus, 
and  no  sooner  had  he  and  John  arrived 
with  Christ,  and  entered  the  house,  to 
abide  with  Him  that  day,  than  he  thought 
within  himself,  I  must  go  and  find  Peter  first, 
and  we  will  be  here  together, — Ibid. 

(d)  Where  I  am,  there  shall  My  servant  be. 
They  are  great  words,  words  of  infinite  weight 
of  meaning,  words  of  transcendent  incon- 
ceiTable  glory,  words  covering  up  an  eternal 
and  exceeding  weight  of  glory.  Whore 
Christ  is,  there  God  is,  and  God's  infinite  love 
and  happiness  are  revealed  in  Christ.  Where 
Christ  is,  there  heaven  is,  and  the  source 
and  fountain  of  heaven's  light  and  glory. 
Where  Christ  is,  there  all  good  things  are, 
all  the  holy,  loving  beings  of  the  universe, 
concentrated  and  circled  in  adoring  ranks 
around  Him,  the  visible  Centre  of  their  bliss, 
the  Author  of  their  holiness.  Now  of  all  this 
glory  Christ  says,  in  the  midst  of  it.  To  him 
that  overcometh  will  I  grant  to  sit  with  Me 
In  My  throne,  OTen  as  I  also  oyercame,  and 


am  set  down  with  My  Father  in  His  throne. 
He  speaks  also  of  His  disciples  and  servants 
as  partakers  of  His  own  J03  ;  and  the  vi»l. 
come  of  Mis  servants  is  even  this;  Well 
done,  good  and  faithful  servant,  f^nter  thou 
into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord  I  The  joy  of  thy  Lord  ! 
What  a  heaven  of  glory  and  blessedness  is 
contained  in  that  one  expression  I  Tbe  joy  of 
thy  Lord  !  Who  can  measure  its  degree,  who 
can  conceive  or  fathom  the  infinite  depth  of 
its  greatness,  the  intinite  intensity  of  its  bliss  ? 
And  yet  that  is  tne  joy  that  awaits  every 
faithful  follower  and  servant  of  the  glorious 
Redeemer  ;  the  Redeemer's  own  joy,  a  thing 
no  more  to  be  measured  or  fathomed  tban  tbe 
actual  infinitude  of  God,  They  shall  be  wiih 
Him  «vhere  He  is,  they  shall  behold  Hid  glory, 
thoy  shall  enter  into  His  joy.  For  that  joy, 
set  before  Him,  He  endured  the  cro^s,  despising 
the  shame,  and  is  set  down  for  over  at  the 
right  hand  of  the  throne  of  God.  There  tl  e 
saints  shall  walk  with  Him  in  glory,  heirs  of 
God,  and  joint-heirs  with  Cnrist,  received  to 
the  possession  of  an  inherit^mce  incorruptible, 
undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away,  re.-erved 
in  heaven  for  those  who  are  faithful  unto 
death,    who  are  kept   by  the  power  of    God 

through  faith  unto   salvation 

Now  let  it  be  remembered  that  all  this  con- 
summation is  connected  indissolubly  with 
every  thought  and  effort  of  the  saint's  life. 
Every  victory  that  through  Divine  gra^^e  the 
Christian  gains  over  sin  and  temptation,  every 
labour  done  for  Christ,  every  prayer  of  faitb, 
every  patient  bearing  of  Christ's  cross,  is  a 
pledge  that  the  soul  is  advancing  to  that  con- 
summation in  glory.  Every  co-operation  of 
the  children  of  God  with  Christ,  is  a  pledge 
that  Christ  is  working  in  them  and  with  thorn, 
preparing  them  for  this  mighty  revelation, 
when  they  are  to  shine  out  like  the  sun  in  the 
firmament,  at  His  coming.  His  appearing.  His 
kingdom.  O,  what  an  inducemeut  to  a  life  of 
holiness  is  here,  what  animating  encourage- 
ment to  every  effort,  and  what  infinite  obliga- 
tion for  such  effort  laid  upon  tha  soul. — Ihid, 


A  Generous  Proposal^ 
(Verse  29.) 


"  Come  thou  with  us,  and  we  will  do 
thee  good." 

The  people  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness 
were  a  type  of  the  Church  of  Christ. 
The  invitation  here  given  was  such  as 
may  be  given  to  those  who  are  proper 
subjects  for  communion  with  the  Christ- 
ian Church. 

I.  What  are  the  characteristics  of 
a  true  church  as  it  is  pictured  by 
Israel  in  the  v/ilderness  ? 

1.  The  people  in  the  wilderness  were 


a  redeemed  people.  They  had  been 
redeemed  by  blood  and  redeemed  by 
power.  All  the  true  members  of  God's 
Church  understand  what  the  blood  of 
sprinkling  means.  They  have  been 
redeemed  by  blood ;  and  the  Holy 
Spirit  has  entered  into  their  hearts,  and 
made  them  hate  their  former  sins,  has 
deUvered  them  from  the  dominant 
power  of  their  inward  corruptions,  has 
set  them  free  and  brought  them  out  of 
the  bondage  of  sin. 

169 


CHAP.  X. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


2.  The  Israelites  were  a  people  who 
were  passing  through  a  land  wherein 
they  found  no  rest^  neither  did  they  desire 
any y  for  they  were  journeying  to  another 
country f  the  promised  land,  the  Canaan. 
Now,  here  is  another  description  of  the 
true  Church  of  God.  They  are  not  of 
the  world,  even  as  Christ  is  not  of  the 
world.  Here  they  have  no  continuing 
city. 

3.  Israel  was  a  people  wallcing  hy  faith 
as  to  the  future.  *'  They  were  going  to 
the  place  of  which  the  Lord  said,  I  will 
give  it  you."  They  had  never  seen  it; 
no  one  had  come  from  it  to  tell  them 
of  it  (1  Cor.  ii.  9,  10).  We  walk  by 
faith  as  Israel  did  of  old. 

4.  These  people,  also,  as  to  their  pre- 
sent circumstances  were  walking  by  faith. 
Faith  told  them  of  the  manna  which 
fell  day  by  day,  and  the  water  which 
flowed  from  the  rock,  which  stream 
foUowed  them  in  their  journeyings. 
In  this  world  the  Christian  man  has  to 
live  by  faith  upon  God  as  to  present 
things.  As  to  temporal  necessities  he 
must  cast  all  his  care  on  Him  who 
caret h  for  us  :  but  especially  as  to  all 
spiritual  supplies  the  Christian  has  no 
stock  of  grace.  He  has  no  minor  spring 
within  himself  in  his  old  nature.  He 
has  to  look  for  everything  that  can 
sustain  his  new  life  to  God,  even  the 
Father,  who  hath  promised  not  to  for- 
sake him. 

5.  These  people  found,  wherever  they 
went,  that  they  were  surrounded  by  foes. 
In  the  wilderness  the  Amalekites  were 
against  them.  When  they  crossed  into 
the  Promised  Land  all  the  inhabitants 
of  Canaan  were  up  in  arms  against 
them.  So,  I  think,  will  you  find  it  if 
you  are  a  child  of  God.  You  will  have 
to  fight  continually.  Till  the  last  step 
you  take  it  will  be  a  conflict,  and  you 
will  never  be  able  to  sheathe  your 
sword  until  you  are  in  the  bosom  of 
Christ. 

II.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  Christian 
Church  to  invite  suitable  persons  to 
join  with  it. 

1.  As  you  read,  '*  Come  thou  ivith  us, 
and  we  will  do  thee  good,"  say  if  t!iese 
are  not  the  t^,rms  in  which  any  church 
170 


should  invite  a  suitable  2^cistor  to  unite 
with  it.  I  have  always  felt  that  they 
have  a  better  application  to  a  pastor 
than  they  have  to  the  people  ;  for  it  is 
said  of  Hobab,  *'  Thou  knowest  how  we 
are  to  encamp  in  the  wilderness,  and 
thou  may  est  be  to  us  instead  of  eyes." 
It  w^as  inviting  a  really  efficient  helper, 
who  would  be  of  great  service  to  the 
Israelites,  to  come  and  cast  in  his  lot 
with  them.  So  should  a  church  ex- 
pect to  find  in  its  pastor  one  who  may 
guide  them,  etc.  Their  invitation 
should  come  in  this  way,  not  only, 
"Come  thou  with  us,  that  we  may  get 
good  out  of  thee  " — that  is  one  design 
— but  it  should  also  be,  "Come  with 
us,  that  we  may  do  thee  good,  that  we 
may  hold  up  thy  hands,"  etc. 

2.  The  words  are  significant  of  the 
manner  in  which  churches  should  in- 
vite suitable  persons  to  come  among 
them  as  private  members.  It  is  the 
duty  of  every  child  of  God  to  be 
associated  with  the  Christian  Church, 
and  surely  it  is  part  of  our  duty  to 
instruct  others  to  do  what  the  Lord 
would  approve  of.  Do  not,  therefore, 
hesitate  to  say  to  such  as  serve  and 
fear  the  Lord,  "  How  is  it  that  you 
remain  outside  of  the  visible  Church  1 
Come  thou  with  us,"  etc. 

Let  it  be  spoken  persuasively.  Use 
such  reasoning  as  you  can  to  prove  that 
it  is  at  once  their  duty  and  their 
privilege. 

Bo  it  heartily.  Give  a  hearty,  loving, 
warm  invitation  to  those  whom  you 
believe  to  be  your  brethren  and  sisters 
in  Christ. 

Do  it  repeatedly,  if  once  will  not 
suffice.  Hobab  said  he  thought  he 
would  depart  to  his  own  land  and  his 
kindred,  but  Moses  returned  to  the 
charge,  and  says,  "  Leave  us  not,  I  pray 
thee." 

3.  Let  me  call  your  attention  to  a 
certain  sense  in  which  Christian  men 
may  address  this  invitation  to  all  that 
they  meet  with.  **Come  thou,  with  us," 
etc.  Not  "  come  and  join  our  church," 
etc.  You  cannot  say  that  to  any  but 
to  those  in  whom  vou  see  the  fruits  of 
the  Spirit,  but  you  may  say,  and  you 


nOMlLETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  X. 


ought  to  say,  to  all  persons  of  all  classes 
on  all  sides,  "  Come  away  from  the  seed 
of  evil  doers,  cast  in  your  lot  with  the 
people  of  God  ;  leave  the  world,"  etc. 
III.  The  main  argument  —the  most 
powerful  incentive  we  can  ever  use  is 
— that  association  with  the  Church  of 
Christ  will  do  those  who  enter  into  it 
good. 

1.  The  Church  of  God  may  say  this, 
because  she  can  offer  to  those  who  join 
with  her  good  company.  *'*  We  will  do 
thee  good,"  for  we  will  introduce  you  to 
the  goodly  fellowship  of  the  saints,  to 
a  section  of  the  general  assembly  and 
Church  of  the  firstborn  whose  names'are 
written  in  heaven,  and  whose  work  of 
faith,  patience  of  hope,  and  labours  of 
love  are  so  spread  abroad  throughout 
the  world,  even  where  their  memory  is 
forgot,  that  we  need  not  to  speak  any- 
thing. 

2.  "Come  thou  with  us,"  and  you 
shall  have  good  instruction.  The  teach- 
ing of  the  Church  shall  do  thee  good ; 
thou  shalt  hear  those  glorious  doctrines 
which  shall  build  thee  up  in  thy  most 
holy  faith. 

3.  ''  We  will  do  the  good "  in  the 
best  sense,  for  thou  shalt  fee/ in  our  midst 
the  good  presence  of  God  (see  Matt,  xviii. 
20). 

4.  "  Come  with  us,"  for  you  shall  par- 
ticipate in  the  good  offices  of  the  Church. 
If  there  be  prayer  thou  shalt  have  thy 
share  in  it.  In  the  true  Church  of  God 
there  is  sympathy.  If  there  be  any- 
thing to  be  found  in  ordinances,  thou 
shalt  have  a  share  of  that  good  thing. 
If  our  fellowship  be  with  Christ,  thou 
shalt  have  a  share  in  it.  We  invite 
thee  to  a  pure  brotherly  fellowship, 
etc. 

6.  But  the  good  that  Hobab  was  to 


get  was  not  only  on  the  road.  He  must 
have  got  a  good  deal  of  good  on  tlie 
road,  etc.  You  shall  get  good  on 
the  road.  But  llohah  went  into  the 
Promised  Land  with  God^s  people 
(Judges,  i.  16;  iv.  11).  So,  the  main 
blessing  that  you  get  from  being  united 
with  the  invisible  Church  of  Christ  ii 
reserved  for  the  hereafter. 

IV.  Let  all  of  us  who  belong  to 
Christ's  Church  take  care  to  make  this 
argument  true. 

How  have  you  carried  out  this  silent 
compact  which  ha^  heeii  made  with  the 
friends  of  Chrid  f  "  Come  thou  with 
us,  and  we,"  etc. 

1.  You  say  thii  to  the  poor  m^mh^rs 
of  the  Church.  Has  God  prospered 
you]  If  thou  knowest  a  brother  in 
Christ  whose  need  is  pressing,  open 
thine  hand  wide  unto  him ;  do  him 
good  in  this  respect. 

2.  You  old  members  of  the  Church 
have  virtually  promised  to  do  good  to 
the  young  members ;  will  you  not  try 
to  do  so  ] 

3.  Some  of  your  fellow  Christians 
are  faint-hearted  ;  they  always  look  on 
the  black  side,  etc.  \)o  them  good 
(Isa.  XXXV.  3,  4). 

4.  Some  amongst  your  number  will 
be  backsliders.  Watch  over  the  .a 
(Gal.  vi.  1). 

5.  Some  in  the  Church  may  be 
ignorant.  Hide  his  shortcomings  and 
help  his  progress. 

6.  There  may  be  some  who  are  in  a 
good  deal  of  ti-ouble.  If  you  never 
owned  him  a  friend  before,  be  to  him  a 
friend  now. 

God  grant  us  to  be  one  with  Christ, 
and  to  be  one  with  His  people,  in  time 
and  in  eternity. — G.  H.  Spurgeon, 


"Come  Thou  with  Us,   and  We  will  do  Thee  Good." 

{Verse  2^.) 
"  Come  thou   with  us,  and  we    will  do  thee  good.** 

This  passage  expresses  the  essential  Jewish  people  as  separate  from  the 
ppirit  of  Judaism.  'I'here  are  those  in  world  as  poss. ole ;  to  keep  them,  like 
the  Ciiurch  wiio  believe  that  God's  ex-  Noah,  in  an  ark,  while  He  plngued  nnd 
press  aim  in  Judaism  was  to  keep  the      punished  the  world  at  His  will      Rut  1 

171 


CHAP.  X. 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


maintain,  on  the  contrary,  that  Judaism 
was  always  genial  to  the  stranger  who 
would  adopt  its  belief,  and  accept  its 
blessings.     From  the  evil  which  was  in 
the  world  God  was  minded  to  keep  the 
Jewish  people  free  at  any  cost.     From 
idolatry  and    its  attendant  pollutions 
He  sought  to  deliver  them,  inasmuch 
as  idolatry  in  the  long  run  inevitably 
leads   to   national  decline    and    death. 
To  the  stranger,  the  foreign  person,  or 
nation,  who  would  dishonour  its  beliefs 
and  trample  on  its  blessings,  Judaism 
was  stern  as  Fate,  and  pitiless  as  Death. 
There   was  no  weak   pity   for  nations 
which  had  become  so  corrupt  as  to  be- 
come   inevitably    corruptive,  just    as 
there  is  no   weak  pity  in   society  for 
abandoned      criminals       now.       How 
utterly,  hopelessly,    awfully   profligate 
the  Canaanitish  nations  were  is  narrated 
in  Lev.   xviii.  24-30.     The  Jews  were 
simply  God's  executioners  here,  and  the 
same  doom,  they  are    plainly  warned, 
awaited  them  if  they  suffered   them- 
selves to    be   tempted  into   the  same 
sins.     ...     I    am   persuaded    that 
the  more   carefully    the   spirit  of   the 
dispensation  is  studied,  the  more  plainly 
will  it  appear  that  it    is  expressed   in 
our  text.     From   Moses  to  Zechariah, 
it  is  a  cry  to  the  nations,  not  to  rot  in 
their    own    corruption,    "  Come    thou 

WITH    us,    AND    WE  WILL    DO  YOU  GoOD." 

1.  And  this  leads  me  to  lay  down 
this  general  principle — 

God's  privileges,  the  gifts  wliich  He 
bestows,  and  the  advantages  which  He 
confers  on  some,  are  never  intended 
to  be  exclusive. 

God  calk  all,  He  calls  you.  The 
banquet  is  spread  for  all,  it  is  spread 
for  you.  The  message  is  pressed  on 
all,  it  is  pressed  on  you. 

It  is  a  condition  of  high  privilege — 
of  great,  eminent,  glorious  joy  and 
hope.  But  if  any  man  say,  "these 
•  privileges  and  hopes  are  mine,  because 
I  am  happy  enough  to  belong  to  a 
sealed  number,  to  which  poor  sinners 
are  not  called,  who  are  not  privileged 
like  me,"  he  wrongs  God,  he  wrongs 
God's  great  Love,  in  his  thoughts.  If 
God  gives  to  one  man  advautages  whiob 
172 


He  denies  to  another,  it  is  that  the  first 
may  be  His  minister  to  bring  that 
other  to  share  in  His  joy.  Unless  a 
Church  or  a  Christian  be  attracting 
men,  ever  saying  to  them  by  look, 
voice,  manner,  hand,  "  Come  with  us 
and  we  will  do  thee  good,"  it  is  simply 
doing  what  the  Jews  did,  causing  the 
name  of  God  to  be  blasphemed 

n.  The  invitation,  ^*  Come  with  us 
and  we  will  do  thee  good." 

1.  Come  with  us  to  the  house  of  God. 
I  believe  that  God  never  gave  to  man  a 
more  blessed  boon  than  the  day  of  rest. 
But  like  all  God's  other  gifts,  just  in 
proportion  to  its  preciousness  is  it  des- 
pised and  profaned  by  those  to  whom 
its  ministries  are  most  important,  and 
its  benediction  most  large  and  complete. 
It  is  not  a  law  of  the  Sabbath  which 
you  are  breaking,  but  something  which 
it  is  yet  more  terrible  to  sin  against, 
God's  loving  and  gracious  counsel,  in 
creating  for  you  a  day  of  rest,  and 
guarding  it  as  man  cannot  guard  it  by 
the  most  elaborate  positive  laws.  I 
want  you  to  feel  how  good  the  ordinance 
is,  and  to  love  it  for  its  goodness,  and 
to  love  the  Lord  who  gave  it,  and  who 
guards  it  by  His  Spirit  in  the  Church. 

Kead  Gen.  ii.  1-3.  From  what  did 
God  rest  %  From  activity  1  Surely 
not ;  but  simply  from  creation  ;  from 
what  under  human  conditions  is  con- 
ceived of  as  the  toil  of  production. 
Comp.  John  vt  16,  17.  God  rested  ; 
but  His  rest  was  the  sustaining  of  the 
Creation,  the  upholding  of  the  order, 
beauty,  and  fruitfulness  of  the  world. 
And  man  is  to  rest  in  his  meaeure  like 
God — a  rest  of  joyful,  holy  activity  ; 
the  activity  of  that  which  is  highest 
and  most  God-like  in  him  ;  not  the  rest 
of  a  brute  sleeping  lazily  before  a  fire. 
Man  is  a  spirit,  and  man's  spirit  rests 
only  in  communing  with  God,  and 
doing  the  Father's  mission. 

A  God-fearing  man,  who  gathers  his 
household  around  him  for  prayer,  and 
goes  up  with  them  to  the  house  of  God 
to  worship  and  get  fresh  strength  for 
the  work  of  life,  belongs  at  once  to  a 
higher  class  Life  means  more  to  him 
and  to  his.      Work  means  more,  and 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CDAP.  X 


produces  more.  Higher  faculties  are 
in  play  within  him,   higher   joys    aud 

ends  are   within  his  reach 

Come  with  us  to  the  house  of  God,  Learn 
with  us  wherein  the  true  rest  of  a  man's 
epirit  consists,  what  it  is  which  lightens 
life's  burdens,  soothes  its  sorrows, 
sanctifies  its  discipline,  and  crowns  its 
labours. 

2.  Come  ivith  us  to  the  word  of  truth. 
T  will  suppose  that  sickness  has  entered 
your  home.  There  is  a  fair  young 
child,  the  darling  of  your  heart,  the 
little  thing  whose  voice  always  wel- 
comed you  home  at  night,  whose  prattle 
never  failed  to  cheer  you  as  she  sat  on 
your  knee  by  your  fireside  at  tea. 
Death  has  marked  her.  Day  after  day 
you  come  home,  and  miss  the  fVimiliar 
welcome ;  you  steal  up  to  the  bedside, 
and  watch  with  an  ngony,  whose 
measure  none  can  guess  at,  the  swift 
progi'ess  of  the  destroyer.  At  length 
the  moment  of  the  last  struggle  comes. 
One  choking  gasp — perhaps  the  word 
''Father,"  "Mother,"  seemed  to  form 
on  her  lips,  and  it  is  over.  She  lies 
there,  fair  as  a  lily,  and  as  perishing  ; 
soon  you  have  to  bury  her  out  of  your 
sight.  Tell  me,  will  it  hurt  you  then 
to  open  your  Bible  and  read  there  that 
the  glorious  King  of  Heaven,  the  King 
who  reiirns  in  the  world  into  which 
your  darling  has  passed — snid  once 
when  a  man  upon  earth,  "  Suffer  little 
children  to  come  unto  Me,"  etc.  1 
Would  it  be  a  dark  thouG:ht,  that  He 
wh'.)  took  them  in  His  arms  and  blessed 
them,  has  there  gathered  your  little 
lamb  in  His  arms,  and  folded  her  in 
His  bosom,  with  a  tenderness  which 
casts  even  yours  into  the  shaded 

Or,  let  US  say  you  have  fallen  into 
trouble.  All  around  you  is  dark,  and 
the  prospect  darker  still  ;  will  it  hurt 
or  help  you  to  open  your  Bible,  and 
read  the  words  of  a  man  whose  case 
was  still  darker,  and,  to  a  human  eye, 
more  hopeless  than  yours  (Psa.  xlii. 
7-11)?  Or  those  words  of  the  great 
Apostle  on  the  meaning  and  end  of  the 
discipline  we  endure  (Heb.  xii.  3-11)'? 
Or,  it  may  be  that  the  dear  companion 
of  your  pilgrimage,  the  sharer  of  all 


your  joys  and  sorrows  through  long  aud 
faitljful  yeurs,  lies  dead  at  length  ;  and 
you  must  write  "  There  1  buried  liachel," 
in  your  way-book  of  life,  and  go  sadly, 
tearfully,  through  the  rest  of  your 
journey  alone.  1  think  that  if  she  died 
in  faith,  in  the  faith  and  hope  of  the 
Gospel,  in  sure  and  certain  hope  of  a 
joyful  resurrection,  tliose  wurds  will 
come  home  to  your  spirit  with  a  strange 
grandeur  and  power  as  you  stand  by 
her  new-made  grave  (1  Cor.  xv.  20- 
23,  50-58).  Or  when  you  3'ourself  grow 
old  and  weary,  and  see  the  form  of  the 
angel  of  death  advancing,  will  it  depress 
and  distress  you  to  read,  "  The  Lord 
is  my  shepherd,"  etc.  (Psa.  xxiii.)  ? 
There  is  iio  condition,  there  are  no  cir- 
cumstances, for  which  blessed  words 
are  not  to  be  found  in  that  Book — words 
such  as  no  mere  man  could  speak  to 
you.  Come  with  U8  to  the  word  of 
truth. 

3.  Come  with  u^  to  the  liv'uig  Saviour. 
.  .  ,  One  who  can  cure  the  disease 
of  sin,  renew  the  heart,  reform  the 
nature,  kindle  within  the  spirit  the 
love  of  God,  of  truth,  of  purity,  and 
inspire  the  hope  of  heavenly  glory.  Fur 
this  the  Lord  came,  wrestled,  suffered, 
died,  etc.  (Ffeb.  vii.  24,  '2o),  Come 
with  us  to  the  living  Saviour;  come 
and  listen  to  His  message  of  mercy  ; 
come,  stand  before  the  cross  on  Calvary, 
look  on  Him,  whom  you,  too,  have 
pierced,  and  mourn,  and  hear  for  your- 
self the  blessed  words,  "  Thy  faith  hath 
saved  thee,  go  in  peace." 

4.  Come  with  us  to  our  Father'' s  home 
on  high.  The  life  struggle  will  soon  be 
ended.  It  will  soon  seem  but  a  slight 
matter  to  you  how  you  struggled 
through.  It  is  said  of  Paul's  com- 
panions, "  Some  on  boards,  some  on 
broken  pieces  of  the  ship  .  .  .  they 
all  escaped  safe  to  land."  It  is  a  picture 
of  the  life-course  of  how  manv  noble 
and  faithful  ones.  .  .  Oh  !  the  rap- 
ture of  the  moments  when  the  feet 
first  feel  the  touch  of  that  blissful 
shore  !  The  peril,  the  darkness,  the 
battle,  the  anguish  behind  us  for  ever  ; 
before  us,  etc. 

Come  with  us  to  Him  who  is  "  The 

173 


CHAP.  X. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


Way."  No  man  cometh  unto  the 
Father,  or  to  His  love,  but  by  Him. 
Come  with  us  to  the  Cross — no  Cross, 
no  Crown.  Come  with  us  to  the 
battle — no   battle,  no  victory.     Come 


with  us  to  the  school  of  discipline — no 
suffering,  no  glory.  "  Come  with  us 
and  we  will  do  you  good,"  etc — J. 
Baldwin  Brown^  B.A, 


On   the  March, 
(Verses  33-36.) 


The  Israelites  are  departing  from 
Sinai,  and  are  marching  on  towards  the 
Promised  Land. 

Consider : 

I.  The  immense  number  on  the 
march. 

Moses  speaks  of  them  as  "  the  many 
thousands  of  Israel."  Margin,  as  in 
Heb.  :  "ten  thousand  thousands."  In 
all  there  were  about  two-and-a-half 
millions  of  persons  :  an  immense  multi- 
tude to  be  marching  through  the  desert. 
Tne  greatness  of  the  number  of  this 
pilgrim  host  illustrates  the  countless 
multitude  of  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord. 
Some  men  of  small  souls  and  narrow 
creeds  have  represented  the  number  of 
tlie  saved  as  comparatively  small,  an 
elect  few  only,  and  that  of  the  lost  as 
terribly  large.  Very  different  is  the 
representation  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures. 
"  Cod  so  loved  the  world,"  etc.  Christ 
"  died  for  all."  "  Many  shall  come 
from  the  east  and  west,"  etc.  "  In  My 
Father's  house  are  many  mansions." 
**  A  great  multitude,  which  no  man 
could  number,"  etc.     (a) 

II,  T  he  bitter  opposers  of  the  march. 
The  Israelites  had  powerful  foes  to 

encounter  and  vanquish  before  they 
could  possess  the  Promised  Land.  Of 
these  enemies  Moses  speaks  in  our  text : 
"  Rise  up,  Lord,  and  let  thine  enemies 
be  scattered,"  etc. 

1.  2^he  enemies  of  this  marching  host 
are  also  the  enemies  of  the  God  of  the 
host.  Moses  in  his  prayer  says,  "  Thine 
enemies."  When  Saul  persecuted  the 
early  Christian  Church,  our  Lord  ap- 
pearing to  him,  demanded.  Saul,  Saul, 
why  persecutest  thou  Me  1  "  He  that 
toucheth  you  toucheth  the  apple  of 
His  eye."  The  Church  is  confronted 
and  opposed  by  enemies  to-day, — "the 
174 


devil  and  his  angels;"  the  world  which 
is  led  by  him ;  and  the  lusts  and  pas- 
sions of  our  carnal  nature,  oppose  our 
heavenward  march.  Conflict  is  a  con- 
dition of  progress.  We  must  fight  if 
we  would  advance.  The  Lord  accounts 
our  enemies  as  His ;  combats  them  as 
His ;  and  aids  us  that  we  may  success- 
fully meet  and  battle  with  them. 

2.  That  the  opposition  of  the  enemies 
arises  from  deep-rooted  aversion  to  God. 
Moses  speaks  of  them  as  "  them  that 
hate  "  God.  The  spirit  of  Satan  and 
the  spirit  of  the  world  is  still  hostile 
to  God,  and  to  His  people  also  in  pro- 
portion to  their  loyal  devoteduess  to 
Him.  "  If  the  world  hate  you,"  said 
our  Lord,  "ye  know  that  it  hated  me," 
etc.  (John  xvi.  18,  19).  "The  world 
hath  hated  them,  because  they  are 
not  of  the  world."  "  Marvel  not, 
my  brethren,  if  the  world  hate  you." 
Mark  the  awful  depravity  which  is  in- 
volved in  this.  How  unspeakably 
terrible  to  hate  truth,  righteousness, 
and  love  !  How  much  more  terrible  to 
hate  Him  who  is  infinite  Truth  and 
Righteousness,  and  Love  !  to  hate  the 
Supremely  Holy  and  Kind !  The 
Church  of  Christ  is  opposed  now  by 
enemies  who  are  inveteiate  in  their 
hatred  to  God,  and  to  the  people  of 
God.     (6) 

III.  The  victorious  Leader  of  the 
march. 

1.  Their  Leader  was  Divine.  "The 
Ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  went 
before  them.**  Keil  and  Del. :  "Jehovah 
still  die'  as  He  had  already  done  on  the 
way  to  Sinai  (Exod.  xiii.  21,  22);  He 
went  before  them  in  the  pillar  of  cloud, 
according  to  His  promise  (Exod.  xxxiii. 
13,  14),  on  their  journey  from  Sinai  to 
Canaan;   with   this  simple   difierence, 


BOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  X. 


however,    that    henceforth    the   cloud 
that  embodied  the  presence  of  Jehovah 
was   connected    with   the   Ark   of  the 
covenant,  as  the  visible  throne  of  His 
gracious  presence,  which  had  been  ap- 
pointed by  Jehovah  Himself.      To  this 
end  the  Ark  of  the  covenant  was  car- 
ried separately    from    the   rest  of  the 
sacred   things,   in    front    of  the   whole 
army;  so   that   the  cloud  which   went 
before   them   floated    above   the  Ark, 
leading  the   procession,  and  regulating 
its  movements  and  the  direction  it  took 
in  such  a  manner  that  the  permanent 
connection  between  the  cloud  and  the 
sanctuary  might  be  visibly  manifested 
even  during  their  march."     The  Lord 
Himself  led  them  in  all  their  journey- 
ings.     He   is   still    the   inflxllible   and 
gracious  Leader  of  His  people. 

2.  llieir  leader  ivas  victorious.  He 
had,  as  it  were,  but  to  arise  and  the 
enemies  were  scattered,  and  fled  in 
dismay.  The  enemies  of  the  Church  ' 
are  unable  to  stand  before  "the  Captain 
of  our  salvation."  When  He  leads  us 
onward  we  march  to   certain  victory. 

*'  We  are  more  than  conquerors  through 
Him  that  loved  us."     (c) 

3.  His  lead  was  earnestly  desired, 
Moses  prayed  for  it :  "  Rise  up,  Lord, 
and  let  tliine  enemies  be  scattered," 
&c.  The  prayer  implies  the  conscious- 
ness of  weakness  and  inability.  Moses 
and  the  hosts  of  Israel  were  not  suf- 
ficient of  themselves  to  cope  with 
their  enemies.     And  as  we  look  upon 


our  foes  to-day  we  may  adopt  the 
language  of  Jehoshaphat  :  "  We  have 
no  might  against  this  great  company 
that  Cometh  against  us,  neither  know 
we  what  to  do  ;  but  our  eyes  are  upon 
Thee."  ^ 

IV.  The  abiding  Presence  of  God  on 
the  march. 

"  And  when  it  rested,  he  said,  Re- 
turn, 0  Lord,  unto  the  many  thousands 
of  Israel."  On  the  march  the  Lord  in 
the  symbol  of  His  Presence  went 
before  them,  and  when  they  encamped 
He  abode  with  them.  The  presence  of 
the  Lord  continued  with  them. 

1.  The  welfare  of  the  Church  of  God 
depends  upon  His  preseiiceiti  t/telr  midst. 
*'  Apart  from  Me,"  said  Christ,  "  ye  can 
do  nothing." 

2.  The  contimious  Presence  of  God  is 
promised  to  His  Church.  "  Lo,  1  am 
with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of 
the  world."  "He  shall  give  jou 
another  Comforter,  that  He  may  abide 
with  you  for  ever."     (d) 

3.  The  continuous  presence  of  God 
should  he  souqht  hi/  the  Church  in  earnest 
praijer.  The  promise  of  His  presence 
should  prove  a  basis  of  confidence  and 
an  encouragement  to  prayer. 

Conclusion : 

1.  Let  the  enemies  of  the  Lord  submit 
themselves  to  Him.  "  Kiss  the  Son,  lest 
He  be  angry,"  etc. 

2.  Lft  every  memher  of  the  pilgrim- 
host  seek  to  realize  constantly  the  victorious 
and  blessed  Presence  of  the  Lord, 


ILL  US  TEA  TIONS. 


(a)  When  these  words  are  set  before  us  as 
descriptive  of  the  heavenly  state,  it  can  hardly 
fail  but  that  the  firtt  thing  on  which  the  mind 
ihall  fasten  will  be  the  expression — "a  great 
multitude,  which  no  man  could  number."  It 
is  so  in  regard  of  parallel  sayings— <•  In  My 
Father's  house  are  many  mansions;"  and, 
'*  many  shall  come  from  the  east  and  from  the 
west,  and  shall  sit  down  with  Abraham,  and 
Isaac,  and  Jacob,  in  the  kingd  «m  of  heaven." 
**  A  great  multitude"! — *'many  manpions"!  — 
"many  shall  come"!  But  what  are  many  ia 
the  Divine  arithmetic  ?  Doubtless,  thousands, 
and  tens  of  thousands— yea,  an  innumerable 
company.  Many  are  the  worlds  scattered 
through  immensity— who  shall  reckon  them  ? 
Many  are  the  leaves  of  the  earth's  forests  — 
who   shall  compute  them  ?      Many  are  the 


grains  of  pand  on  the  sea  shore — who  shall 
count  them  up?  Neither  may  we  think  to 
compass  the  multitude  that  St.  John  saw 
before  the  throne  and  before  the  Lamb.  In- 
deed, he  tells  us  this,  when  he  adds,  "which 
no  man  could  number,"  But  it  is  a  comforting 

thing  to  be  told  that  "a  great  multitude" 

not  great  on  a  mere  human  estimate,  but  groat 
on  a  Divine— shall  press  into  the  inheritance 
purchased  by  Christ's  blood.  Then,  not  only 
is  heavf^n  no  narrow,  no  contracted  spot;  but, 
on  the  contrary,  spacious  enough  for  myiiads 
upon  myriads  of  happy  beings.  But  thoce 
myriads  upon  myriads  .'^hall  be  there;  the  vast 
expanse  whall  not  stand  empty,  but  shall  be 
occupi  d  by  a  rejoicing  and  adequate 
assembly  I  It  is  a  refreshing  tbina;  to  look  away 
for  a  moraentt  rem  the  strife  and  uncharitablJ- 

175 


CHAP.  X. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTAHY:    NUMBERS. 


ness  of  human  systems  and  conclusions,  each 
di  p  sed  to  narrow  heaven  within  its  own  pale 
an<i  party,  to  hf^hold  a  multitude  such  as  no 
man  could  nnmher,  enterinof  by  tho  gate  into 
the  ev6rla^^tiug  city.  There  is  something  un- 
speakably cheering  in  the  contrast  between  the 
reprt  sentation  furnished  in  our  text,  and  that 
derived  from  the  exclusive  systems  of  miscalled 
theology.  If  heaven  were  to  be  peopled  ac- 
cording to  the  estimate  of  self-opiniated  sects  ; 
if  hum^n  judgments  were  to  settle  who  shall 
be  privileged  to  find  place  within  its  precincts; 
not  "  miny,"  but  few;  it    may  be   very  few 

v^oiild  ronati'ute  the  ogJestial  assembly 

I  kindle  at.  the  thought  of  there  being  a  great 
multitude  in  heaven.  A  great  multitude! 
Thtre  is  room  for  us  I  A  great  multitude! 
There  will  be  no  defiiiiency  without  us.  We 
can  be  spared.  The  Joss  will  be  ours  I  but,  0! 
what  a  ]os^\—IIeari/  Melville,  B.D. 

(6)  Our  field  of  conflict  is  different  from 
that  on  which  m(  n  oppose  eacQ  other.  It 
ce)mprises  the  whole  uns*  en  realm.  All  the 
secret  roads,  and  paths,  aud  avenues,  in  which 
spirits  dwell,  are  filled  with  a  great  invisible 
host.  These  are  our  adversaries.  And  th»y 
are  all  the  more  dangerous  because  they  are 
invisible.  Subtle  are  they.  We  are  uncon- 
scious of  their  presence.  They  come,  they 
go;  they  assail,  they  retreat;  they  plan,  they 
attack,  they  withdraw;  they  carry  on  all  the 
processes  by  which  they  mean  to  suborn  or 
destroy  us,  without  the  possibility  of  our 
seeing  them.  When,  in  physical  warfare,  the 
enemy  that  is  over  against  us  establi^thHs  the 
line  of  a  new  redoubt,  we  can  see  that;  and 
when  a  new  battery  is  discovered,  a  battery 
may  be  planted  opposite  to  it;  but  no 
engineering  can  trace  those  invisible  engi- 
neers or  their  work.  And  there  is  soraothing 
very  august  in  the  thought  that  the  most 
transcendent  powers  in  the  universe,  that 
fill  time  and  space,  are  removed  from  the 
ordinary  sight  and  inspection  of  men. — H.  W, 
Beecher. 

(c)  Just  when  the  battle  was  about  to  turn 
with  the  Irons-ides,  and  the  Cavaliers  were 
coming  on  with  one  of  Rupert's  hot  charges 
ready  to  break  the  line,  and  the  brave  old 
Ironsides  were  half  inclined  to  turn,  up  came 
the  General,  old  Noll,  riding  on  his  horse,  and 
they  passed  the  word  along,  "  'Tis  he,  boys  1 
here  he  comes!"  and  every  man  grew  into  a 
giant  at  once;  they  8t:)od  like  iron  columii.>j, 
like  walls  of  granite,  and  the  Cavaliers  as 
they  came  on  broke  like  waves  against  rocks, 
and  dashed  away,  and  were  heard  of  no 
more.  It  was  the  presence  of  the  man  that 
fired  each  soldier.  And  so  it  is  now  with  us. 
We  believe  in  Jesus  Christ.  We  know  that 
He  is  with  His  Church.  He  was  dead,  but 
rose  again.  He  has  gone  tc  heaven,  but  His 
Spirit  is  with  us, — King  of  kings  and  Lord 
of  loids  is  He.  If  Ho  seems  to  sleep  in  the 
miosr,  of  our  ship,  yet  He  ^sleeps  with  His 
band  on  the  helm,  and  He  will  steer  the  vessel 
rightly ;  and  now  the  love  that  we  boar  His 

176 


name  steers  our  souls  to  holiness,  to  self- 
d'  nial,  to  seek  after  God,  to  make  full  oroof 
of  the  faith  and  fellowship  of  the  Gospel,  to 
seek  to  become  like  G'''d,  and  to  be  ab.-orbed 
into  God  that  Hb  may  be  all  in  all.  1  his  is 
what  was  wanted— a  stimulus  potent  enough, 
under  God's  grace,  to  break  through  the 
barriers  of  sin. — C.  H  Spurgeon. 

Is  the  strife  long  and  bard?  Long  and 
hard  it  would  bj,  to  be  ever  defeated.  But 
Christ  shall  lighten  it  for  thee.  He  will  bear 
it  in  thee;  He  will  bear  thee  over  it,  as  He  will 
bear  thee  over  the  mol'en  surges  of  this  burn- 
ing world.  Christ  will  go  before  ti.ee.  U.Q 
saith  unto  thee,  '•  Follow  Me,  and  where  I  am, 
there  shall  thou  be  with  Me"  '"Follow  thou 
Me.''  "Be  ot  good  cheer;  I  have  oven-ome 
the  world."  "  If  Christ  be  for  us,  who  shall 
be  against  us"?  Safely  mayest  thou  fight, 
who  art  secure  of  victory.  And  thou  art  safe, 
if  thou  fight  for  Christ,  and  with  Christ. 
Only  give  not  way.  If  defeated,  be  the 
humt)ler,  and  ri>e  again ;  begin  again,  and 
pray  to  persevere.  If  thou  succeed,  give 
"thanks  to  Him  who  givoth  us  the  victory, 
through  Jesus  Ourit  our  Lord."  And  He  will, 
by  His  Blood,  iulercedeybr  thee;  He  will,  by 
blia  grace,  fight  in  thee;  He  will  keep  theo 
unto  the  end,  who  Himself  crowneth,  and  is 
crowned,  in  all  who  are  faithful  to  His  grace. 
— Dr.  Pusey. 

{d)  It  is  one  of  the  fundamental  things  in 
godline-s  to  koow  and  realize  the  continual 
presence  with  us  of  the  great  Unseen  Spirit. 
A  thousand  foes  beleaguer  my  soul,  and  lie  in 
wait,  and  assault  it  through  the  ga'es  of  sense. 
A  thousand  fears  rise  up  in  my  path  to  terrify 
me,  and  a  thousand  smiling  joys  to  seduce 
and  allure  me.  But  to  be  as  seeing  Him  who 
is  invisible — what  a  defence  against  fear! 
What  a  perennial,  full-flowing  spring  of  joy  and 
strength  and  calmness  and  purity  !  How  it 
sustains  the  soul  in  trouble,  whether  in  the 
fierce,  tumultuous  storm- blast,  or  in  the  slow 
years  of  weary  sorrow,  creeping  on  with  slug- 
gish pace!  There  is  a  little  garret  room — I 
recall  what  I  have  seen  —  with  a  single 
window  looking  out  to  the  smoke  and  chim- 
neys of  a  great  city.  The  marks  of  poverty 
are  abundant  in  its  worn  and  scanty  furniture. 
A  few  sickly  flowers  are  in  the  window, 
testifying  to  the  longing  which  never  deserts 
even  the  most  afflicted,  to  have  but  a  glimpse 
of  Nature's  ,3weet  face,  or  but  the  edge  of 
her  smile.  There  is  a  rough  coucn  in 
the  room,  and  a  thin,  pale,  wasted  woman 
lies  upon  it  For  years  she  has  scarcely 
risen  from  that  bed.  For  years  she  has  been 
subject  to  wastiuii  pain.  Her  friends  are  sel- 
dom with  her ;  they  are  pooi,  and  cannot 
afford  the  luxury  of  constantly  attending  her. 
But  her  long  trouble  has  rot  soured  her.  Her 
room  is  perhaps  the  happi  st  and  lightsomest 
in  the  whole  city.  Go  in  upon  her  when  you 
may,  you  find  the  same  calm  contentment, 
the  same  sweet,  chastened  look,  the  same 
quiet,  all  but  celestial  peace.    Poor  caged  bird. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NtlMBEnS. 


CHAP.  X. 


she  pinps  to  God  as  gladly  as  the  lark  at 
beaven-gatea.  If  one  could  take  down  the 
words  she  utters,  and  the  tone  in  which  they 
are  uttered  -if  one  could  tell  the  heavenly 
thouj?ht8  that  are  unspoken,  aud  that  give  the 
o«  lestial  calmness  to  that  marble   brow,  the 


world  might  learn  the  bl-»8sed  jov  and  power 
of  a  sense  of  God'n  constant  nparness.  "  Never- 
theless I  am  continually  with  Thee ;  Tbou 
bast  holden  me  by  my  right  hand." — Jame* 
Culross,  AM.,  B.D, 


The  March. 
(Verse  35,) 


I  think  I  shall  be  warranted  in  using 
the  text  in  three  ways  : 

I.  This  has  been  the  watchword  of 
the  Church  of  God  in  all  ages. 

The  people  of  God  in  the  wilderness 
were  the  picture  of  God's  Church  upon 
earth.  We  are  strangers  and  foreigners 
upon  earth ;  we  are  pilgrims  and 
sojourners  as  all  our  fathers  were. 
Here  we  have  no  abiding  city.  **  We 
Heck  a  city  that  hath  foundations,"  etc. 

Albeit  that  they  had  no  habitation 
except  their  tents,  yet  is  it  true  of 
Israel  in  the  wilderness  that  they  al- 
ways had  an  habitation.  (Comp.  Psa. 
xc.  1.)  Wherever  they  were,  God  was 
their  dwelling  place.  God's  wings  were 
always  over  them  ;  He  carried  them  all 
the  days  of  old,  and  they  did  really 
rest  and  dwell  in  Him.  This,  too,  is 
true  of  the  entire  Church  ;  always 
wandering,  yet  never  far  from  homo  ; 
unhoused,  yet  always  in  palaces,  etc. 

In  another  point  the  people  of  God 
in  the  wilderness  were  the  picture  of 
the  Church  of  Christ.  Wherever  they 
marched,  when  God  went  before  them, 
they  marched  to  victory.  Even  so 
hath  it  been  with  the  Church  of  God 
in  all  ages  ;  her  march  has  been  that 
of  one  who  is  fair  as  the  moon,  clear  as 
the  sun,  and  terrible  as  an  army  with 
banners.  Her  path  is  the  pathway  of 
a  conqueror ;  her  march  has  been  a 
procession  of  triumph.  Let  me  show 
how  this  war-cry  has  really  been  heard 
of  God  and  has  been  ful'lled  to  all  His 

people Shall  not   this  be    our 

song  to-day  1  Let  but  God  go  forth 
with  our  armies  ;  let  Him  but  speak 
thro  igh  our  ministers;  let  Him  but 
dweU  [n  our  elders ;  let  Him  but  make 
the  bodies  oi  cur  Church  members 
His   temples,  and    His   enemies  must 


be  scattered,  and  they  must  consume 
away. 

Quietly,  for  the  edification  of  each 
Christian,  let  me  remark  that  this 
prayer  will  suit  your  personal  difficul- 
ties. Have  you  been  in  conflict  lately  1 
Can  you  not  deliver  yourself  ]  Pray, 
"  Rise  up,  Lord,"  etc.  Do  your  doubts 
prevail?  Has  your  faith  suffered  an 
eclipse  1  Say,  '*  Rise  up  Lord."  All 
that  is  wanted  in  the  darkest  night  to 
clear  it  away  is  for  the  sun  to  rise. 
Are  you  serving  God  in  some  particular 
work  where  many  are  seeking  to  undo 
all  that  you  can  accomplish  1  Has  the 
Lord  commanded  you  to  some  special 
work,  and  do  friends  discourage  and 
enemies  abuse  ?  This  prayer  may  suit 
you,  "  Bise  up  Lord."  His  uprising  is 
enough,  etc. 

IlT  We  shall  now  take  the  text  in  its 
reference  to  Christ. 

Scripture  is  the  best  expounder  of 
Scripture.  The  diamond  is  not  to  be 
cut  except  with  a  diamond.  The 
sixty-eighth  Psalm  informs  us  that  the 
moving  of  the  Ark,  from  the  lower 
place  to  the  city  of  David,  was  typical 
of  the  ascending  of  Christ  into  heaven. 
How  dense  must  have  been  the  gloom 
over  the  fearing  hearts  of  the  Church 
when  they  saw  their  King,  their  Head 
dragged  away,  and  nailed  ignominiously 
to  the  tree,  and  how  dead  must  all  tlieir 
hopes  have  been  >a  hen  at  last  He  bowed 
His  head  and  gave  up  the  P^host !  Was 
it  not  the  day  of  hell's  triumph,  the 
hour  of  earth's  despair,  the  moment  of 
heaven's  defeat]  No;  it  was  the 
reverse  of  all  this.  That  moment  when 
Christ  died.  He  gave  the  death-blow  to 
all  His  enemies.  Tf  the  Church  had 
had  faith,  thtjy  raight  have  come  early 
on  tiie  dawn  of  the  first  day  in   the 

i77 


CHAP.  X. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


week,  and  standing  outside  the  tomb, 
ihey  might  have  begun  to  sing,  "  Rise 
up,  Lord,"  etc. 

He  rises,  and  in  that  moment  sin 
dies.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  waa 
God's  acceptance  of  Clirist's  sacrifice. 
'*  He  rose  again  for  our  justification." 
Nor  was  sin  alone  that  day  scattered. 
Did  not  all  the  hosts  of  hell  flee  before 
Him  1  When  He  rose,  blank  despair 
sat  on  the  face  of  every  fiend.  VViiere 
was  that  day  the  boast  of  death  1  Had 
Christ  remained  in  the  jaws  of  death, 
then  had  the  redeemed  remained  the 
bond     slaves    of    death   too;  but   He 


lives.  Blessed  are  they  that  sleep,  for 
they  shall  rise  too. 

Nor  was  this  all.  After  Christ  had 
thus  risen  you  will  remember  that  He 
rose  again.  He  rose  from  the  grave  to 
earth — He  next  rose  from  earth  to 
heaven.  (Comp.  Psa.  xxiv.  7-10.)  On, 
on  He  rides  ;  having  scattered  for  ever 
all  His  enemies ;  having  put  all  things 
under  His  feet,  and  being  crowned  King 
of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords. 

III.  What  message  has  this  text 
for  us,  and  how  may  we  use  it  ? 

(7.  R,  Spurgeon, 


The  Church  and  its  Enemies. 
(Verses  35',  36.) 


The  Almighty  is  here  represented 
under  two  very  ditferent  characters  ;  as 
a  God  of  terror,  and  as  a  God  of  grac^. 

I.  That  the  Church  of  God  has  had 
enemies  in  every  age. 

This  is  accounted  for  in  three  ways: 

1.  The  favours  they  received.  God 
nas  set  His  heart  upon  His  people ;  He 
bestows  much  on  them,  and  expects 
much  from  them.  This  creates  envy. 
Joseph's  brethren  hated  him  because 
he  was  the  favourite.  This  evil  principle 
soon  grows  into  opposition  and  mis- 
chief. 

2.  The  principles  they  professed.  They 
were  the  only  true  principles ;  they 
worshipped  the  only  true  God,  and 
therefore  their  conduct  condemned  all 
other  modes  of  worship — all  idolatry, 
and  those  sins  which  the  nations  com- 
mitted. 

3.  The  expectations  which  they 
cherished.  These  were  deemed  vain. 
Are  these  to  become  universal  con- 
querors ?  Come,  let  us  rise  up  against 
them,  and  destroy  them.  And  does 
not  this  bear  a  resemblance  to  the  good 
in  the  present  age  'i  Have  they  not 
enemies  ?  Are  they  not  a  chosen 
people  ^  Are  not  their  principles  pe- 
culiar, and  their  expectations  large  f 
The  Church  not  only  has  outward 
enemies,  but  she  has  civil  discords, 
inward  commotieiifi',  secret  foes. 

178 


II.  That  the  enemies  of  the  Church 
are  considered  the  enemies  of  God. 

The  Cluirch  is  intimately  connected 
with  God's  dealings  in  a  providential 
aud  merciful  way,  for  He  is  near  to  Hia 
people  (Deut.  xxxii.  10  ;  Isa.  Ixiii.  9). 
He  sustains  tender  and  intimate  rela- 
tions to  the  Church,  hence  her  foes 
become  His. 

III.  That  when  God   rises  up   to 
judgment    the    destruction     of    His' 
enemies  is  easy,  terrible,  and  com- 
plete. 

The  Divine  Being  is  here  spoken  of  as 
rising  up  to  judgment ;  this  is  figurative 
language,  but  indicates  peril  and  alarm. 
But  let  us  consider  the  second  part  of 
the  prayer. 

1.  That  when  God  is  represented  as 
proceeding  to  acts  of  justice,  it  intimates 
that  He  is  departing  from  the  ordinary 
course  of  Hiy  dispensations.  Judgment 
is  His  strange  work.  He  is  said  to  come 
out  of  His  place  to  punish  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  earth.  He  takes  no  plea- 
sure in  the  death  of  a  sinner. 

2,  That  the  aggregate  number  of  the 
Lord's  people  is  by  no  means  inconsider- 
able. I  have  no  sympathy  with  that 
spirit  which  would  straiten  the  gate 
already  straight.  Some  unduly  limit 
the  number  of  Israel :  (1)  Because  the 
limits  of  their  observation  are  con- 
tracted.     (2)   Because   the  people   of 


EOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  XI. 


God  are  widely  dispersed  and  scattered. 
(3)  Because  their  own  prejudices  often 
un-Christianize  those  whom  God  designs 
we  should  encourage.  (4)  Because  we 
do  not  know  how  many  Christians  are 
concealed  in  the  grave. 

IV.  That  the  constant  abode  of  God 
with  His  Church  is  an  object  of  their 
supreme  desire. 

"  Return,  0  Lord." 

1.  Let  us  learn  from  this  passage  the 


condescension  and  grace  of  God  in  that 
He  will  dwell  with  us. 

2.  Let  each  of  us  inquire  whether 
we  are  amongst  the  many  thousands  of 
Israel. 

3.  What  comfort  should  this  -give  to 
the  Church  amidst  her  many  trials. 

4.  This  subject  affords  to  the  enemies 
of  the  Church  a  motive  for  seeking  re- 
concilation  with  God. — George  Clayton. 
From  "  The  Homiletic  Quarterly,^* 


CHAPTER   XI. 
Critical    and    Explanatory    Notes. 


Verse  1,  "And  when  the  people  com- 
plained" etc.  Margin  :  "  the  people 
were,  as  it  were,  complainers."  Speaker's 
Comm.  :  "  And  the  people  were  as 
those  that  complain  of  evil  in  the  ears 
of  the  Lord." 

Fire  of  Jehovah :  "  a  fire  sent  by 
Jehovah,  but  not  proceeding  directly 
from  Him,  or  bursting  forth  from  the 
cloud,  as  in  Lev.  x.  2.  Whether  it 
was  kindled  through  a  flash  of  liglitning, 
or  in  some  other  such  w?y,  cannot  be 
more  exactly  determined." — Keil  and 
Del. 

And  consumed  in  the  titter  most  parts 
of  the  camp.  The  words  supplied  by 
the  translators  of  the  A.V.  are  unneces- 
sary. Keil  and  Del.  :  "  And  ate  at  the 
end  of  the  camp."  The  fire  did  nrt 
proceed  far  into  the  camp. 

Verse  3.  Taherah^  i.e.j  burning  or 
place  of  burning.  Not  the  name  of  a 
station  ;  but  the  local  name  given  to 
that  part  of  th3  oamp  where  the  fire 
broke  out.  The  station  was  called 
Kibroth-Hattaavah,  because  of  the 
more  dreadful  judgment  which  the 
people  incurred  by  their  renewed  mur- 


murmgs. 


Verse  4.  The  mixt  multitude.  Heb.. 
Hasaphsiiph,  "  a  number  of  people 
gathered  together  from  all  quarters  : 
rabble."'-^Fuerst.  "The  word  resemble.. 
our  *  riff-raff,'  and  denotes  a  mob  of 
people  scraped  together."  —  Speaker's 
n2 


Comm.  See  Exod.  xii.  38.  "The 
words  *  they  ivept  again  '  point  back  to 
the  former  complaints  of  the  people 
respecting  the  absence  of  flesh  in  the 
desert  of  Sin  (Exod.  xvi.  2  sqq.), 
although  there  is  nothing  said  about 
their  weeping  there.  By  the  flesh 
which  they  missed,  we  are  not  to 
understand  either  the  fish  which  they 
expressly  mention  in  the  following  verse 
(as   in   Lev.  xi.    11),    or   merely  oxen, 

sheep,  and  goats  ;  but  the  word  "1^21 

signifies  flesh  generally,  as  being  a 
better  kind  of  food  than  the  bread-like 
manna." — Keil  and  Del. 

Verse  5.  We  remember  the  fish,  lohich 
we  did  eat  in  Egypt  freely.  Instead  of 
"freely,"  Keil  and  Del.  translate,  "for 
nothing."  Fish  were  so  abundant  in 
the  Nile  and  neighbouring  waters  that 
they  could  be  purchased  at  very  low 
prices. 

The  cummbers  of  Egypt  are  abundant 
and  distinguished  for  softness  and  sweet 
flavour. 

The  melons:  By  the  Hebrew  word 
abatichim,  we  are  probably  to  under- 
stand both  melons  and  water-melons. 
They  are  largely  cultivated  in  Egypt, 
and  are  sold  so  cheaply  that  they  are 
used  both  by  rich  and  poor,  and  much 
appreciated  for  their  refreshing  juice. 
The  water-melon  is  said  to  "  serve  the 
Egyptians  for  meat,  drink,  and  physic." 

in 


CHAP.  il. 


nOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


The  leeks  were  from  the  earliest  times 
a  very  favourite  vegetable  with  the 
Egyptians,  as  both  a  nourishing  and 
savoury  food. 

The  onions  from  time  immemorial 
have  been  a  favourite  article  of  food 
amongst  the  Egyptians.  They  flourish 
greatly  in  Egypt,  are  mild  and  pleasant 
in  flavour,  and  are  unsurpasrsd  as  to 
their  quality. 

Garlich,  an  important  article  of  food 
amongst  Egyptian  workmen.  All  these 
things  were  refreshing  and  pleasant, 
and  were  plentinil  and  cheap  in  Egypt. 
Verse  6.  There  is  nought  at  all,  etc. 
**  Heb.,  *  Nought  at  all  have  we  except 
that  our  eyes  are  unto  this  manna  ; ' 
i.e. J  '  Nought  else  have  we  to  expect 
beside  this  manna.'  Cf.  on  the  phra&o, 
'to  have  the  eves  towards,'  Ps.  rxv. 
15." — Spea^^r's  Comm. 

Verses  7-9.  On  the  manna  see  Exod. 
xvi.  The  description  of  it  seems  to  be 
inserted  parenthetically  in  this  place  to 
show  the  unreasonableness  of  the  people 
in  murmurl'^g  because  of  it. 

Verse  10.  iVcep  throughout  their  fami- 
lies ;  the  weej'ijp  prevailed  amongst 
the  entire  people. 

Every,  man  in  the  door  of  his  tent ; 
the  weeping  was  unconcealed  and  open. 
Verse  17.  /  will  take  of  the  spirit 
which  is  upjon  thee.  *'  Render  rather 
separate  from  the  spirit,  etc. ;  i.  tf.,  they 
shall  have  their  portion  in  the  same 
Divine  gift  which  thou  hast." — Speaker's 
Comm. 

Verse  25.  The  Lord  came  down  in  a 
cloud;  i.e,,  the  cloud  of  the  Divine 
presence,  which  soared  on  high  above 
the  Tabernacle,  came  down  to  the  door 
of  it.  (Comp.  chap.  xii.  5 ;  Exod. 
xxxiii.  9.) 

They  fophenea,  doe.-s  not  mean  that 
they  foretold  future  events,  but  that 
inapired  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  an  exalted 
state  of  mind,  the}-  poured  forth  the 
praise  of  God  or  declared  His  will. 

And  did  not  cease,  is  incorrect.  It 
should  be,  and  did  not  add ;  i.e.,  they 
prophesied  at  this  time  only.  This 
sign  was  given  as  a  proof  that  God  hud 
called  them  to  assist  Moses,  and  Jiad 
given  them  authority  in  their  ofl&ce. 
180 


Verse  26.  Eldad  and  Medad  were 
enrolled  amongst  the  seventy,  but  for 
some  reason  they  remained  in  tlie  camp, 
and  did   not  come   to  the  Tabernacle. 

Verse  31.  A  wind  from  the  Lord , 
i.e.,  an  extraordinary  wind,  not  the 
eff'ect  of  a  natural  cause.  The  wiuci 
was  from  the  south-east  (Psa.  Jxxviii. 
26). 

Quails.  The  common  quails.  ''  The 
whole  description  answers  to  tlie  well- 
known  habits  of  these  birds,  an<i  the 
Arabic  name  for  them  is  tvon  now 
Salwa.  In  the  spi-ing  they  mi  urate 
northwards  from  Africa,  y.nd  flying  low, 
especially  when  wearied,  are  taken  or 
come  uo  ground  in  immense  multi- 
tildes." — Alforcl, 

As  it  were  two  ctibits  high  upon,  etc. 
The  Ixx.,  the  Vulgate,  and  Josephus, 
explain  this  as  referring  to  the  height 
at  '^hich  th^  quails  flew  above  the 
gr'»nnd,   in  their   exhausted    condition 


from   their  lon^:  flight. 


Vulg. 


Vola- 


homt  vn  acre  duohus  cnbitihus  altitudine 
super  terram.  But  that  this  interpre- 
tation is  correct  is  very  questionable  : 

"  for  n:nDn  bv  l^^^:  does   not   mean 

to  cause  to  fly  or  spread  out  over 
the  camp,  but  to  throw  over  or  upon 
the  camp.  The  words  cannot  therefore 
be  understood  in  any  other  way  than 
in  Psa.  Ixxviii.,  27,  28,  viz.,  that  the 
wind  threw  them  about  over  the  camp, 
so^  that  they  fell  upon  the  ground  a 
day's  journey  on  either  side  of  it,  and 
that  in  such  numbers  that  thev  lav,  of 
course  not  for  tlie  whole  distance  men- 
tioned, but  in  places  about  the  camp, 
as  much  as  two  cubits  deep." — L^eil 
and  Del. 

Verse  32.  Ten  homers.  The  homer 
was  iQi\  epbahs.  But  there  is  coLsider- 
able  uncertainty  as  to  the  absolute 
capacity  of  these  measures.  The 
Speaker^  Comm,  says,  "  The  homer 
must  have  been  something  above  five- 
and-a-half  bushels." 

And  they  spread  them  all  abroad,  etc., 
for  the  purpose  of  drying  them,  as  the 
Egyptians  are  said  to  dry  both  quails 
and  fish  (see  Herod,  ii.  77). 

Verse  33.   The  Lord  smote  the  people^ 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


Chap.  xi. 


etc.  **The  plague  with  which  God 
smote  the  people  is  to  be  regarded,  as 
are  miracles  in  many  other  cases,  as  a 
Divine  interference  enhancing  a  pre- 
existing cause.  The  surfeit  in  which 
the  people  indulged,  of  itself  disposed 
them  to  sickness.  God's  wrath,  visiting 
tlie  gluttonous  through  their  gluttony, 
aggravated  natural  consequences  into 
a  supernatural  visitation." — Speaker^s 
Comm. 

Verse  34.  Kibroth-IIattaavah;  i.e.,  the 
graves  of  lust,  or  graves  of  greediness. 
*'  From  there  being  no  change  of  spot 
mentioned  between  it  and  Taberah  in 
verse  3,  it  is  probably  like  the  latter 
about  three  days'  journey  from  Sinai  (x. 
33.) ;  and  from  the  sea  being  twice  men- 
tioned in  the  course  of  the  narrative 
(verses  22,  31),  a  maritime  proximity 
may  perhaps  be  inferred.  If  the  con- 
jecture of  Hudhera  as  a  site  for  Hazeroth 
be  adopted,  then  the  *  graves  of  lust ' 


may  be  perhaps  within  a  day's  journey 
thence  in  the  direction  of  Sinai,  and 
would  lie  within  fifteen  miles  of  the 
Gulf  of  Akabah." — Smith's  Did.  of  the 
Bth'e, 

Verse  35.  Hazeroth.  The  word  means 
simply  the  enclosures.  But  "topographi- 
cally it  is  ^village ;  generally  a  P^douin 
village,  such  as  are  formed  of  tent- 
cloths,  spread  over  stone  walh." — 
Stanley,  S.  and  P.  Fuerst  gives  its 
meaning  in  this  place  as  hamlets.  The 
Miiiculty  of  identifying  the  locality  ia 
increased  by  the  fact  that  the  names  of 

many  placoS  are  compounded  with  "^^ff/. 
Perhaps  Bazeroth  is  identical  with 
Hudhera,  wnich  lies  abcut  eighteen 
hours'  distance  from  Sinai  on  the  road  ro 
the  Akabah  (see  Stanley,  S.  and  P.,  pp. 
81,  82).  Keil  and  Del.  say  concerning 
Ki broth  -  Hattaavah  and  Hazeroth  : 
''  The  situation  of  these  two  places  of 
encampment  ig  altog-ether  unknown." 


Taberah  and  its  Teachings. 
[Verses  1-3). 


In  this  brief  record  of  the  sin  of 
Israel  and  the  judgment  of  God  at 
Taberah,  the  following  points  claim 
consideration. 

I.  Man  sinning  against  the  goodness 
of  God. 

"And  the  people  complained,"  etc. 
Or,  '*  And  the  people  were  as  those 
that  complain  of  evil  in  the  ears  of 
the  Lord."  No  particular  ground  or 
reason  of  complaint  is  mentioned  by 
the  historian.  It  is  probable  that  they 
murmured  because  of  the  privations 
of  the  march  through  the  wilderness. 
Or  it  may  have  been,  as  Matthew 
Henry  suggests,  "  that  those  who  com- 
plained did  not  all  agree  in  the  cause. 
Some  perhaps  complained  that  they 
were  removed  from  Mount  Sinai,  where 
they  had  been  at  rest  so  long ;  others 
that  they  did  not  remove  sooner ; 
some  complained  of  the  weather,  others 
of  the  ways ;  some  perhaps  thought 
three  days  journey  was  too  long  a 
march,   others    thought   it    not    long 


enough,  because  it  did  not  bring  them 
into  Canaan."  In  so  doing  they  sinned 
against  the  great  goodness  of  God. 
He  had  emancipated  them  from  a 
miserable  bondage  by  marvellous  and 
mighty  deeds;  He  had  given  to  them 
most  excellent  laws  ;  He  was  graciously 
supplying  their  wants,  guiding  their 
movementsand  guarding  their  interests; 
and  He  had  promised  them  a  gljrious 
land  as  their  inheritance.  Feivent 
thanksgiving  should  have  engaged  their 
hearts  and  voices,  and  not  mean  mur- 
muring. Their  complaining  was  a  sia 
against  the  great  kindness  of  the  Lord. 
Base  was  their  ingratitude.  Amidst 
present  inconveniences  we  are  all 
too  prone  to  overlook  past  and  present 
mercies,  and  to  complain  as  though  wo 
were  receiving  ill-treatment  at  the 
hands  of  the  Lord.  This  is  a  great 
evil;  it  comprises  ingratitude,  unbelief, 
rebellion  against  God.    (a) 

II.  God    recognising    the    sin    of 
man. 

181 


CHAP.  XI. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


"  And  the  Lord  heard,  and  his  linger 
was  kindled,"  <fec. 

1.  He  knew  the  sin..  They  "com- 
plained in  the  ears  of  the  Lord."  "x^nd 
the  L(.rd  heard."  There  ih  ic  voice 
of  man  that  escapes  His  ear.  Every 
cry  of  blasphemy,  every  murmnr  of 
unbelief,  every  mutter  of  rebellion 
against  Him  every  whispoi*  of  evil 
conspitacy,  la  dibtinctly  audible  to 
Him^  Words  and  thougiits,  deeds 
and  purposes,  are  all  known  to  Him.^ 

2.  He  was  angry  because  of  the  sin. 
"  And  His  anger  was  kindled."  To  the 
Lord  sin  is  the  abominable  thing  which 
He  hates.  His  i  nger  burns  like  an 
intense  and  unquenchable  lire  a^ain^t 

sin. 

3.  He  manifested  His  anger  because  of 
the  sin.     "And  the   fire   of   the  Lord 
burnt  among  them,  and  consumS'l  in 
the  uttermost  parts  of  the  camp."    Or, 
''  So  that  fire  of  Jehovah  burned  against 
them,  and  ate  at  the  end  of  the  camp." 
(L)  The  manifestation  of  His  anger  was 
unmistakeable.     In  whatsoever  way  the 
fire  was  kmdled,  there  was  no  doubt  in 
the  minds  of  the  people  as  to  its  being 
an    expressson    of  the   wrath    of    God 
because  of  their  sin.     Their  appeal  to 
Moses  is  evidence  of  this.    God  has  not 
left  us   in  any  uncertainty  as  to  His 
hatred    of   evil.     The    stern    penalties 
which  are  annexed  to  transgression,  and 
the  clear  testimony  of  history  as  to  the 
connexion  of  sin  with  suffering,  loss, 
and  ruin,  are  conclusive  on  the  matter. 
(2.)  The  manifestation  of  his  anger  was 
restrained.     The  fire  of  Jehovah  burnt 
only  iu    "  the  end  of  the  camp."     In 
wrath  He  remembered  mercy. 

III.  Suffering  men  seeking  the  in- 
tercession of  the  good. 

"  And  the  people  cried  unto  Moses." 

1.  This  is  very  common.  It  was  com- 
mon with  the  Israelites.  "  When  He 
slew  them,  then  they  sought  Him  j  and 
they  returned  and  enquired  early  after 
God."  "  Those  that  slight  God's  friends 
when  they  are  in  prosperity  would  he 
glad  to  make  them  their  friends  when 
they  are  in  distress.  *  Father  Abraham, 
send  Lazarus.* " 

2.  This  is  sometimes  very  mean.     It 

182 


was  so  with  the  Israelites  in  the 
wilderness.  They  were  painfully, 
terribly  prcLe  to  the  most  shameful 
rebellion ;  and  then  when  the  con- 
sequences of  tiieir  sin  came  upon  them, 
like  base  slaves,  they  hastened  to  en- 
treat Moses  to  intercede  with  God  for 
them.  Pharaoh  is  a  notable  example 
of  this  mean  spirit  and  conduct  (t.'>ee 
Exod.  viii.8;  ix.  27-35;  x.  16,  17). 

''  When  meu  in  health  against  physicians  rail 

They  should  consider  that  their  nerves  ujay 
fail ; 

Nay,  when  the  world  can  nothing  more  pro- 
duce, 

The  priest,  the  insulted  priest,  may  have  his 
use."  Crahbe. 

IV.  The  intercession  of  the  good 
resulting  in  blessing  to  men. 

"  And  when  Moses  prayed  unto  the 
Lord,  the  fire  was  quenched."  See 
here — 

1.  The  great  mercy  of  God.  "  Thou, 
Lord,  art  good,  and  ready  to  forgive, 
and  plenteous  in  mercy,"  etc.  "  He  is 
gracious  and  merciful,  slow  to  anger, 
and  of  great  kindness,  and  repenteth 
Him  of  the  evil." 

2.  The  great  efficacy  of  prayer.     In 

answer  to  the  prayer  of  Moses  the  fire 

of  Jehovah  was  quenched.     Comp.  J  as. 

V.  16-18.     Tennyson  says  beautifully — 

.     ,     .     .     'Prayer, 
A  breath  that  fleets  beyond  this  iron  world 
And  touches  Him  that  made  it.''     (6) 

3.  The  distim/uishing  power  of  a  good 
man  to  benefit  his  race.  We  may  ap- 
proach God  in  prayer  on  behalf  of 
others.  The  power  of  intercession  with 
God  is  the  greatest  power  conferred  on 
the  good  man ;  and  by  its  exercise  he 
may  confer  the  richest  blessings  upon 
mankind.  Comp.  Gen.  xviii,  23-33  j  Job 
viii.  20  ;  Heb.  vii.  25.     {s) 

V.  The  employment  of  a  transient 
judgment  as  a  permanent  warning. 

"  And  he  called  the  name  of  the 
place  Taberah,  because  the  fire  of  the 
Lord  burnt  among  them."  The  new 
name  was  a  memorial  of  the  sin  and 
shame  of  the  people,  and  of  the  judg- 
ment and  mercy  of  the  Lord ;  it  has 
been  a  monitor  to  all  succeeding  ages, 
uttering  its  solemn  warning  against  sin, 
and  especially  against  the  sin  of  uu- 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY :   NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  XI. 


gratefully  and  unbelievingly  complain- 
ing against  the  arrangements  of  God. 
Comp.  1  Cor.  x.  10,  11. 


Let  us  heed  the  warning,  and  shun 
the  sin. 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 


(a)  I  think  we  are  too  ready  with  complaint 

In  this  fair  world  of  God's.     Had  we  no  hope, 

Indeed  beyond  the  zenith  and  the  slope 

Of  yon  grey  bank  of  sky,  we  might  grow  faint 

To  muse  upon  eternity's  constraint 

Round   our    aspirant  souls.     But    since    the 

scope 
Must  widen  early,  is  it  well  to  droop 
For  a  few  days  consumed  in  loss  and  taint  ? 
O  pusillanimous  heart !  be  comforted, 
And,  like  a  cheerful  traveller,  take  the  road, 
Sinsring  beside  the  hedge.     What  if  the  bread 
Be  bitter  in  thine  inn,  and  thou  unshod 
To    meet    the   flints? — At  least   it  may   be 

said, 
**  Because  the  way   is  short,  I  thank  Thee, 

God."  Elizabeth  B.  Browning. 

As  it  frequently  happens  that  many  persons 
fn  easy  circumstances,  or  who  have  many  com- 
fortable thing!4,  are  notwithstanding  very  dis- 
contented; it  would  be  well  for  some  friend  thus 
to  reason  with  them :  *'  Have  you  ever  com- 
pared your  situation  with  those  who  hardly 
ever  see  the  sun,  but  live  confined  in  tin 
mines,  stone  quarries,  and  coal-pits?  Before 
you  think  yourself  miserable,  walk  through 
Uie  wards  of  an  hospital ;  think  of  the  galley 
slave,  and  the  day  labourer;  reflect  upon 
the  condition  of  many  large,  poor  families 
who  have  continued  distress  or  sickness. 
Many  are  often  witnesses  to  scenes  eYen  more 
"wretched  than  these,  where  to  poverty,  cold, 
and  nakedness,  are  added  the  languors  of  lin- 
gering and  loathsome  diseases  and  the  torments 
of  excruciating  pain."  Now  let  those  who  are 
miserable  among  many  mercies,  return  as  it 
were  from  these  sad  scenes  to  their  closets, 
gratefully  a3knowl?Qge  the  goodness  of  God  in 
exempting  them  from  so  many  real  ills,  which 
80  many  labour  under,  and  instrad  of  spend- 
ing their  hours  brooding  over  their  own 
imaginary  evils,  let  them  be  continually  cheer- 
ful, happy,  and  tbankful. —  Gleanings. 

(h)  What  has  prayer  done  ?  According  to 
itf'  history  as  given  in  this  Book,  it  has  con- 
quered the  elements,  it  has  healed  the  diseased, 
it  has  put  armies  te  flight,  it  has  restored  life, 
it  has  sent  back  the  angel  of  death  when  he 
has  shown  his  face  in  the   dwelling,  it  has 


brought  down  angels,  and  it  has  changed  the 
hearts  of  men,  even  hearts  the  most  stubborn. 
Prayer  I  It  does  move  the  fingers  which  create, 
and  which  have  created,  and  doubtless  still 
creates.  Prayer  I  It  does  move  the  hand,  as  is 
often  said,  which  moves  the  world. —  Samuel 
Martin. 

(c)  O  priceless  grace  !  if  thou,  O  believer, 
knowest  how  to  ask  by  faith,  thou  mayest 
hand  out  to  thy  brethren  wealth  more  pre- 
cious than  the  gold  of  Ophir ;  for  intercession 
is  the  key  to  the  ivory  palaces  wherein  are  con- 
tained the  boundless  treasures  of  God.  Saints 
in  intercession  reach  a  place  where  angels  can- 
not stand.  Those  holy  beings  rejoice  ovei 
penitent  sinners,  but  we  do  not  read  of  their 
being  admitted  as  suppliants  for  the  saint?.. 
Yet  we,  imperfect  as  we  are,  have  this  favour, 
we  are  permitted  to  open  our  mouth  before  the 
Lord  for  the  sick  and  for  the  tried,  for  th') 
troubled  and  for  the  downcast,  with  the  assu- 
rance that  whatsoever  we  shall  ask  in  p^-ayer 
believing  we  shall  receive. —  C.  H  Spurgcon. 

Our  power  to  help  and  bless  each  other  i^, 
primarily  and  pre-eminently,  the  power  oj 
prayer.  We  can  aid  each  other  by  gifts  of  our 
worldly  goods  ;  we  can  aid  each  other  by  words 
of  instruction,  correction,  and  consolation  ;  we 
can  help  each  other  by  the  influence  of  good 
example,  and  by  serviooa  so  numerous  and 
various  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  clas>(ify 
and  describe  them  ;  but  above  all  these 
ministrations  is  the  intercession  of  a  true 
Christian.  t*rayer,  brethren,  directs  and  im- 
pels to  other  services  of  love.  Prayer  secures 
the  efficiency  and  success  ef  all  other  mini.-tra- 
tions,  while  prayer  is  independent  of  time,  in- 
dependent of  place,  independent  of  temporal 
circumstances,  independent  of  a  man's  bodily 
condition,  and  independent  of  a  man's  worldly 
estate.  Prayer,  too,  appeals  to  the  fountain  of 
good,  and  to  the  Father  of  mercies ;  and  if 
God  be  true  (and  let  God  be  true,  and  every 
man  a  liar)  it  fills  the  channel  of  blessing 
sometimes  even  to  overflowing.  Let  Christ- 
ians say  to  each  other,  "  Brother,  whatever 
you  withold  from  mo,  deny  me  not  your prayers; 
whatever  you  may  give  to  me,  crown  all  your 
gifts  by  your  prayers." — Samuel  Martin. 


The  Supremacy  of  the  Senses  over  the  Soul. 

{Verses  4-6.) 

This  portion  of  the  history  of  Israel  Four  preliminary   remarks  are  sug- 

is  clearly  stated  by  Krummacher  in  a      gested  : 

passage  given  in  the  Illustrations,     (a)  First :     Th^e  is  in  unrenewed  human 

183 


OOAP.  XL 


nOMILETlC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


nature  an  amazing  and  saddening  prone- 
ness  to  sin.  The  nre  of  Jehovah,  which 
had  burnt  amongst  them  as  a  judgment 
because  of  former  sin,  was  scarcely 
quenched  when  they  broke  out  afresh 
into  sin.  Only  a  very  little  time 
previously  they  were  in  their  distress 
crying  to  Moses  for  mercy,  and  now 
they  are  again  Jurying  in  rebellion 
against  God.  "  No  sooner  is  one  mur- 
muring ended,"  says  Babington,  "but 
another  begins.  Obsta  principiis^  Stay 
beginnings,  for  then  is  sin  weakest,  and 
may  best  be  snubbed  and  overcome. 
Let  it  enter  in  at  the  door,  and  get  a 
little  footing  it  will  foil  us,  and  we  shall 
hardly  get  it  out  again.  First  will  enter 
a  bare  cogitation,  then  a  vehement 
imagination,  after  that  a  wicked  delecta- 
tion, and  lastly  a  killing  and  damning 
consent,  if  God  recover  us  not." 

Second  :  The  cries  for  mercy  which 
are  made  under  the  pressure  of  suffering 
ire  seldom  followed  by  reformation  of 
life.  While  the  fire  was  consuming 
them  they  cried  earnestly  to  Moses ; 
but  as  soon  as  the  fire  was  extinguished 
they  returned  to  the  sins  which  kindled 
it.  Vows  begotten  of  pain  are  generally 
ignored  in  ease  and  health,     (b) 

Third  :  We  may  be  associated  with 
th:  people  at  God  without  possessing  a 
godly  spirit. 

"  The  mixed  multitute,"  with  whom 
the  lusting  and  murmuring  commenced, 
were  not  Israelites,  but  had  joined 
themselves  to  them  when  they  left 
Egypt,  probably  from  selfish  motives. 
They  were  utterly  destitute  of  the  true 
Israelitish  spirit.  Membership  in  the 
visible  Church  of  Christ,  and  union 
with  His  true  and  spiritual  Church,  are 
by  no  means  identical.  Mere  outward 
profession  is  spiritually  worthless  :  nay, 
it  is  a  lying  semblance.  Religious  pro- 
fession is  valuable  only  as  it  is  joined 
with  holiness  of  heart  and  life.  Comp. 
Rom.  ii.  28,  29 ;  ix.  6-8 ;  Gal.  iii.  7, 
9;  Tit.  i.  16. 

Fourth  :  Sin  is  terribly  contagious. 
The  sin  in  this  case  began  with  the 
mixed  multitude,  but  it  speedily  spread 
to  the  children  of  Israel.  One  evil 
character  corrupts  another.  "Evil 
I8i 


communications  corrupt  good  manners." 
"  Observe,"  says  Trapp,  *'  the  danger  of 
ill  company.  To  converse  with  the 
ungodly,  and  not  to  learn  their  manners, 
is  marvellously  rare  and  difficult.  A 
man  may  pass  through  Ethiopia  un- 
changed; but  he  cannot  dwell  there 
and  not  be  discoloured."  Wherefore, 
shun  the  society  of  the  wicked,     (c) 

But  it  appears  to  us  that  the  most 
conspicuous  feature  in  this  sad  scene  is 
the  Supremacy  of  the  Senses  over  the 
Soul.  Let  us  glance  at  the  characteris- 
tics of  this  supremacy  which  are  here 
exhibited  : 

I.  Unsatisfied  Cravings. 

*'  And  the  mixed  multitude  that  was 
among  them  fell  a  lusting."  Margin,  as 
in  Heb.,  *'  lusted  a  last."  They  were  not 
satisfied  with  the  provision  which  God 
nad  made  for  them.  Where  animal 
appetites  are  supreme,  satisfaction  is 
unattainable.  Man  w4ll  ever  remain 
restless  and  unsatisfied  until  his  animal 
appetites  are  controlled  by  spiritual 
principles.  The  senses  must  be  governed 
by  the  soul,  the  lower  nature  by  the 
higher,  before  man  can  find  satisfaction 
and  rest.  While  the  senses  are  supreme 
in  man  they  are  never  satisfied ;  soon 
as  one  lust  is  gratified,  another  grows 
clamorous  for  gratification.  "  The  eye 
is  not  satisfied  with  seeing,  nor  the  ear 
filled  with  hearing."  "  All  the  labour 
of  man  is  for  his  mouth,  and  yet  the 
appetite  is  not  filled." 

II.  Humiliating  effeminacy. 

"  And  the  children  of  Israel  wept 
again." 

Tears  are  of  various  kinds,  and  of  these 
kinds  many  are  beautiful  and  blessed. 

**  Tears  I  what  are  tears  ?     The  babe  weepa 
in  ita  cot, 
The  mother  singing ;  at  her  marriage  bell 
The  bride  weeps;  and  before  the  oracle 

Of  high-faned  hills,  the  poet  hath  forgot 
That   moisture  on  his   cheeks.     Commend 
the  grace, 
Mourners  who  weep  I     Albeit,   as  soma 
have  done, 
To  grope,  tear-blinded^  in  a  desert-place, 
And  touch  but  tombs — look  up  I     These 
tears  will  run 
Soon,  in  long  rivers,  down  the  lifted  face, 
And  leave  the  vision  clear  for  stars  and 


sun. 


Elizabeth  B,  Browning. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  XI. 


But  who  shall  commend  these  tears 
i?  the  children  of  Israel  in  the  desert  1 
ivlen    and    women    generally    weeping 
openly,  because  they  could  not  obtain 
the  particular  kind  of  food  which  they 
desired  !     Weeping  openly  for  cucum- 
bers, melons,  etc.  !     Pitiable  spectacle  ! 
Such  tears  will    never  clear  the  vision 
for    either   stars    or   sun.     Tears    are 
revealers    of    character.       Here    they 
surely    indicate   the    most    deplorable 
weakness  and  waywardness  of  soul.    We 
have  spoken  of  **  men  and  women  weep- 
ing."    The    expression    is   inaccurate ; 
for  this  weeping  host  was  composed  of 
those    who  were  men   and  women   in 
body  only,  in  soul  they  were  pusillani- 
mous   children.      A   host    of  weeping 
weaklings  and  cowards !  The  supremacy 
of  the  senses  in  man  is  destructive  of 
strength  and  heroism  of  spirit.   Patience 
under  privations,  persistence   in  duty 
despite  of  difficulty,  calm  endurance  of 
present  suffering  for  the  attainment  of 
great   good   in   the    future — these  are 
incompatible   with    the  sovereignty  of 
man's  lower  nature.     Such  sovereignty 
is  destructive  of  the  noblest  attributes 
of  manhood,     (d) 
III.  Daring  unbelief. 
"  And  said,  who  shall  give  us  flesh 
to  eat  1 "     Cowards  in  the  face  of  any 
difficulty  or   privation,  yet  they  have 
the    hardihood  wickedly    to    challenge 
the    ability  of  God.      Thus    the  poet 
Asaph  describes  their  conduct,  "  They 
tempted  God  in  their  heart  by  asking 
meat  for  their  lust.     Yea,  they  spake 
against    God  ;    they    said.    Can     God 
furnish  a  table  in  the  wilderness?     Be- 
hold,   He   smote   tbe    rock,    that   the 
waters   gushed    out,   and    the  streams 
overflowed;    can  He  give  bread  also? 
can  He  provide  flesh  for  His  people  'J " 
Their  unbelief  was  the  more  inexcusa- 
ble, the    more  guilty,   because  of  the 
•llustrious  displays  of  the  power  of  God 
wliich  they  had  witnessed;  and  not  of 
His  power  only,  but  also  of  His  good- 
ness to  them.     The  supremacy  of  the 
senses  tends  to  close   the  eye  of  the 
soul  to  the  great  verities  of  the  spiritual 
".niversc,  destroys  the  power  of  the  soul 
for  grasping  those  verities,  leads  to  the 


conviction  that  the  things  which  are 
apprehensible  by  the  senses  are  the  only 
real,  trustworthy  things.  Carnality 
of  mind  tends  directly  first  to  the  pros- 
tration and  then  to  the  destruction  of 
the  faith-faculty. 

IV.  Deplorable  degradation. 

**  We  remember  the  fish  wliich  we 
did  eat  in  Egypt  freely,"  etc.  Their 
degradation  appears, — 

1.  In  what  they  remembered.  "  The 
fish,  the  cucumbers,  the  melons,  the 
leeks,"  etc.  To  what  a  dreadful  depth 
must  human  nature  have  fallen  or  sunk 
when  its  most  vivid  and  treasured 
memories  are  of  savoury  dainties  for 
the  gratification  of  the  palate  !  How 
inexpressibly  mournful  when  to  any 
one  the  meat  is  more  than  the  life  ! 

2.  In  what  they  forgot.  The  un- 
speakable degradation  of  their  slavery 
in  Egypt  appears  to  be  forgotten  by 
them.  The  servitude  at  the  brick-kilns, 
the  severe  oppressions  of  their  cruel 
taskmasters,  the  intolerable  insult  and 
injury  of  slavery,  are  all  lost  sight  of 
now  that  the  gratification  of  their 
carnal  appetite  is  denied  them.  Free- 
dom seemed  a  poor  thing  in  their  eye* 
to  be  purchased  at  the  cost  of  the 
denial  of  their  senses.  Alac»,  how  sad 
is  all  this  I  But  far  more  sad  is  it  that 
this  is  a  picture  of  what  is  widely  pre- 
valent in  our  own  land  and  age.  Edu- 
cation, books,  music,  religion,  and  even 
manhood,  are  regarded  by  immense 
numbers  as  utterly  inferior  to  the 
animal  pleasures  ot  eating  and  drinking. 
The  soul  is  engulfed  in  the  stomach. 

V.    Decided    Contempt    of   Divine 
Blessings. 

"  But  now  our  soul  is  dried  away  : 
there    is   nothing   at  all,    beside    this 
manna,  before  our  eyes."     Moses  des- 
cribes the  nature,   form,  and   taste  of 
the  manna,  and  the  mode  of  its  pre- 
paration, to  show  the  unreasonableness 
of  the    people   in    despising   it.      The 
manna  was  (1)  Wholesome  for  health  ; 
(2)  Pleasant  to  the  palate ;  (3)  Abun- 
dant in  quantity  ;  and  (4)  Free  of  cose. 
**  But  the  sweet  bread  of  heaven  v- anted 
*  the  sharp  and  sour,  which  are  required 
to  give  a  stimjh\ting  flavour  to  the  food 

185 


CHAP.  XI. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


of  man,  on  account  of  his  sinful,  rest- 
less desires,  and  the  incessant  changes 
of  his  earthly  life.*  In  this  respect  the 
manna  resembled  the  spiritual  food 
supplied  by  the  Word  of  God,  of  which 
the  sinful  heart  of  man  may  also  speedily 
become  weary,  and  turn  to  the  more 
piquant  produotioiis  of  the  spirit  of  the 
world."  When  thb  senses  are  supreme, 
spiritual  p.nd  divine  things  are  rejected, 
while   carnal   and  earthly  things   are 


eagerly  pursued  and  heartily  cherished. 

Conclusion : 

"  The  mind  of  the  flesh  is  death  ; 
but  the  mind  of  the  spirit  is  life  and 
peace."  Submit  not  to  the  rule  of  the 
senses  and  passions  of  your  nature. 
Let  your  spirit  be  the  sovereign  of  your 
fleshly  nature,  and  let  God  be  tsupreme 
in  your  spirit.  "  Seek  ye  first  the 
Kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteous- 
ness." 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(c)  The  people  were  now  in  a  waste-howl- 
ing wilderness.    Nothing  presented  itself  in 
the  way  of  food,  but  that  which  descended  from 
heaven,  which  lasted  only  for  a  day,  and  they 
had   water   only  by  a  miracle  from  the  rock 
that  followed  them.     The  eye  was   tire;!    of 
resting  upon  the  horrible  uniformity  of  the 
boundless  waste  around  it,  which   produced 
only  here  and  there  a  solitary  thorn  or  brier. 
Not  a   trace  of  any  previous  traveller.     No 
pleasing  sound  delighted  the  ear.     No  turtle- 
dove coood  its  melancholy  note,  no  lark  soared 
warbling  aloft,  as  if  to  point  the  way  to  the 
repenting  mind.     Nothing  but  an  occasional 
howl  was  heard.     Sometimes  a  solitary  pelican 
sounded  its  harsh  and  grating  note,  or  the  roar 
of  nungry  lions  and  the  growls  of  bloodthirsty 
tigers  ami  hyenas  struck  the  ear  from  a  dis- 
tance,  and  excited  a  feeling  of  horror.     The 
Israelites  had  been  accustomed  to  something 
very  different.     In  the  pleasant  land  of  Goshen 
the  case  had  been  otherwise — fruitfulness  and 
pleasing  scenery,  fields,  gardens,  and  meadows, 
rivers,  and  pools,  abounded  everywhere.     Un- 
happily, they  began  to  draw  comparisons,  and 
by  these,  an  evil  or  a   good  is  either  made 
greater  cr  less.     If  %  great  good  is  compared 
■with  one  still  greater,  it  loses  in  our  estima- 
tion ;  and  so  it  is  wiih  an  evil.     If  we  reflect 
that  1^  might  be  much  worse,  it  becomes  more 
tolerable.     But  when  the  evil  is  compared  with 
the  opposite  good,  it  becomes  more  grievous, 
even  as  black  laid  upon  white  appears  still 
blacker.     In  hell,  the  rich  glutton  thought  a 
drop  of  water  a  good  blessing,  who  previously 
would  not  have  esteemed  the  most  costly  wine 
as  much.    If  the  sight  of  the  misery  of  Lazarus 
had   contributed  to   increase   his   enjoyment 
when  on  earth,  by  comparing  his  own  health 
and  ease  with  it — so  the  sight  of  the  glory  he 
enjoyed  in  heaven  must  have  increased  his 
torment. 

The  children  of  Israel  also  drew  a  compari- 
son. In  the  burning  desert,  they  call  to  mind 
the  cooling  cucumbers,  and  the  juicy,  pleasant, 
and  well-flavoured  water-melons.  The  thought 
of  these  things,  it  must  be  confessed,  may  well 
make  the  mouth  water  whilst  traversing  the 
burning  sand.  The  Egyptian  fish  came  also 
unfortunately  to  mind,  as  well  as  the  savoury 
186 


le  ;)ks,  onions,  and  garlic.  There  they  had  them 
for  nought—here  nothing  of  the  kind  was  to 
be  had,  even  for  its  weight  in  gold, 

Let  us  not  be  unjust  towards  them,  but 
confess  that  the  temptation  was  not  a  small 
one  to  flesh  and  blood.  In  one  respect  there 
was  nothing  sinful  in  the  idea  that  they 
would  gladly  now  have  gathered  up  the  melons 
which  perhaps  in  E^ypt  thoy  had  trampled 
under  foot,  and  have  considered  the  fish  as  a 
dainty  which  there  they  disregarded.  But 
this  became  sin  to  them,  because  tbey  desired 
them  in  an  inordinate,  violent  manner,  and 
out  of,  nay,  even  in  opposition  to,  the  Divine 
order.  What  did  they  not  lose  sight  of  in  do- 
ing so  ?  Was  not  Canaan  promised  them, 
where  they  should  have  these  things  in 
abundance?  Should  they  therefore  refuse  to 
wait  a  little  longer,  since  in  the  course  of  a 
few  days  or  weeks  they  might  arrive  there, 
seeing  that  they  wore  travelling  towards  it, 
and  had  already  accomplished  more  than  half 
the  distance — not  considering  that  they  were 
the  people  from  whom  was  to  come  salvation, 
and  out  of  whom  a  seed  should  rise  up,  in 
whom  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  should  be 
blessed — not  considering  that  what  they  en- 
dured and  were  deprived  of,  would  be  to  tbeir 
own  advantage,  and  that  of  the  whole  world— 
not  reflecting  that  they  were  really  not  in 
want  of  any  thing  necessary.  Did  God,  His 
guidance,  His  promise,  and  His  will  appear  to 
them  of  so  little  value;  and  melons,  onions, 
and  garlic  all  to  them?  Was  everything  for- 
gotten which  bad  been  done  to  them  and  for 
them  ?  How  disgustingly  does  their  gloomy, 
earthly  and  carnal-mindedness  manifest  itself  I 
They  imagine  themselves  in  extreme  misery. 
—  G'  D,  Krummacher. 

(6)  How  often  do  we  find  such  whom  God 
hath  beleaguered  with  an  affliction,  or  planted 
His  battery  against  by  a  disease,  whom  He 
seemed  to  have  marked  out  for  death,  make 
covenants  and  promises  for  a  future  reforma- 
tion, and  of  putting  away  their  sin;  whom 
yet,  when  He  withdraws  His  terrors,  and  puts 
up  His  arrows,  those  ties  done  more  bind  than 
the  withes  did  Samson ;  but  they  arise,  and 
go  out,  and  do  as  at  other  times.  While  their 
backs  smart  under  the  rod,  and  they  sit  on  the 


nOMlLET    .    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  XI. 


brink  of  the  grave,  their  spirits  stoop,  their 
pa-isiona  are  broken,  and  the  heat  of  them 
ass'-.pged ;  their  thoughts  are  humbled  to 
Bobri'^ty.  Then  to  bri  liberal  of  promises  is 
an  easy  bounty  ;  but  when  the  storm  is  over, 
and  they  return  to  their  former  freedom  and 
delight,  in  sensible  coavorses,  then  are  they 
restrained  in  performance,  and  rescind  former 
entaaoements.  The  sighs  of  their  sick  bed, 
which  they  turned  into  penitent  groans,  are 
no^  vanished  into  air,  and  forgotten ;  the  sad 
reflections  on  their  former  vanities,  the  serious 
recollection  of  their  ways  which  they  were 
reduced  to,  when  the  flesh  sat  uneasy  upon 
them,  and  dwelt  in  sorrow,  are  now  as  little 
thought  upon  as  the  dolorous  accents  of  their 
grief.  When  they  are  newly  come  out  of  the 
furnace,  while  the  smell  of  fire  is  yet  on  th'-m, 
they  are  scrupulous  and  tender.  But  it  is  as 
those  who  come  out  of  a  hot  stove,  that  shrink 
from  cold  at  first,  but  by  degrees  are  brought 
to  their  former  hardiness  of  temper.  If  the 
soul  be  not  changed,  though  there  may  for  a 
while  some  religious  colour  appear  in  the  man's 
face,  he  will  at  last  return  to  his  former  habit. 
— Spiritual  Bee. 

(c)  Sin  is  like  the  bale  of  goods  which  came 
from  the  east  to  this  city  in  the  olden  time, 
which  brought  the  pest  in  it.  Probably  it 
was  but  a  small  bale,  but  yet  it  contained  in 
it  the  deaths  of  hundreds  of  the  inhabitants  of 
London.  In  those  days  one  piece  of  rag  car- 
ried the  infection  into  a  whole  town.  So,  if 
you  permit  one  sin  or  false  doctrine  in  a 
church  knowingly  and  wittine:ly.  none  can  tell 
the  extent  to  which  that  evil  may  ultimate!)' 
go.     The  church,  therefore,  is  to  be  purged  of 


practical  and  doctrinal  evil  as  diligently  aa 
poRsible.  That  sour  and  corrupting  thing 
which  Gi)d  abhors  must  be  pureed  ou^,  ard  it 
is  to  be  the  buniness  of  the  Christian  minister 
and  of  all  his  follow-helpers,  to  keep  the 
church  free  from  it.      G.  II  Spurgeon. 

{d)  The  most  terrible  scourges  with  which 
the  east  is  afflicted  in  the  way  of  difiease  are 
the  fruits  of  gross  living -eating  as  well  as 
drinking— perhaps  the  first  most.  Men  in 
those  climates  cannot  bear  it ;  students  cannot 
in  this.  To  keep  a  clear  eye,  a  firm  hand, 
a  steady  brain  were  more  to  Daniel  than 
pleasures  of  the  palate.  I  venture  to  say 
that  no  man  has  ever  greatly  distinguished 
himself  whoso  body  was  not  in  firm  control. 
It  is  not  enough  to  follow  nature  and  never  be 
excessive;  nature  wants  curbing,  and  unless 
youni;  men  take  their  bodies  in  baud,  and 
compel  them  sometimes  to  abstain,  and  obey 
the  mastery  of  the  will,  it  is  impossible  to 
keep  the  body  in  due  subjection,  and  make 
it  the  eager  and  rapid  handmaid  of  the  soul. 
Fasts  are  good  things  in  youth,  simply  as  a 
moral  discipline  ;  as  a  man  training  for  a 
race  abstains  from  all  which  might  imperil 
his  hope  of  a  prize.  The  Romanists  abuse 
them  to  superstitious  ends,  and  the  peril  of 
doing  so  is  great ;  therefore  the  Protestant 
churches,  wisely,  I  think,  leave  them  alone. 
Bat  you  must  master  the  body ;  you  must 
make  its  limbs  to  move  to  the  music  of 
temperance  and  chastity  ;  and  there  are  times 
wh«n  pulse  and  water  will  be  the  fittest 
nourishment,  and  leave  the  spirit  free  for 
aspiration,  and  the  mind  clear  and  strong  f<  r 
work. — J.  Baldwin  Brown, 


Partial  Memories. 
(Verses  4-6.) 


I.  Observe  what  they  ought  to  have 
remem' ored : 

1.  What  they  had  suffered. 

2.  What  God  had  done  for  them, 

3.  What  He  then  2vas  doing. 

4.  What  lie  had  promised  to  do. 

II.  Observe  what  they  cniefly  dwelt 
upon  : 

1.  Creature  comforts,  not  sr)iritzial 
deprivations. 


2.  Personal  satisfaction^  not  national 
freedom. 

III.  Observe    the   effects    of   this 
partial  memory  of  the  past : 

1.  lo  led  to  discontent. 

2.  It  resulted  in  Divine  anger, 

3.  li  prolonged  their  stay  in  the  wilder- 
mss. — Biblical  Museum. 


The  Manna  an  Illustration   op    the   Divine  Provision  for  the  Spiritual 

Needs  of  Man. 

(Veri,es  7-9.) 


The  subject  of  the  Mauna  has  been 
treated  at  length  Id  The  Rom.  Comm. 
on  Exod.  xvi. 

This  paragraph  is  introduced  paren- 


thetically to  show  the  unreasonableness 
of  the  people  in  mnrmnriiig  and  speak- 
ing contemptuously  of  the  Manna. 
The  historian  speaks  of  it  as  being  like 

187 


CHAP.   XI. 


HO.VJLETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


as  the    colour 
which  is  trans- 


coriander  seed.  *'  The  coriander  Seed  is 
that  of  the  coriandrum  sativum,  riilti 
vated  in  England  for  confectionery,  and 
wild  in  Egypt  and  Pal'^stine.  The  seed 
is  globular,  grayish-coloured,  and 
hollow,  the  surface  marked  with  fine 
stripes.  It  has  a  pleasant  spicy 
flavour." — Alford.  The  colour  of  the 
Bianna   is  said    to   he   *' 

of  bdellium."    H^'ra 

lated  bdellium,  has  been  variously  inter- 
preted. The  theory  of  Bochart,  which 
is  adopted  by  Gesenius  and  seems  to 
us  the  most  probable,  is  that  it  signifies 
pearls,  which  are  found  in  great  abun- 
dance on  the  shores  of  the  Persian  Gulf. 
Fnerst  also  gives  this  as  the  meaning 
in  this  place — ''  pearl,  with  the  shining 
of  which  the  grains  of  manna  were 
compared,  Num.  xi.  7." 

But  it  is  our  purpose  to  regard  the 
gift  of  the  manna  as  an  illustration  of 
the  Provision  wliich  God  has  made  for 
the  spiritual  needs  of  our  race  in  Jesus 
Christ.  We  have  warrant  for  so  regard- 
ing it  in  the  Scriptures  of  the  New 
Testament,  John  xi.  31-58  ;  1  Cor.  x. 
3,  4.  We  discover  the  following  points 
of  analogy  : 

I,  Both  are  of  Divine  Origin. 

It  seems  to  us  utterly  unreasonable 
to  question  the  miraculous  nature  of 
the  supply  of  manna.      As  Dr    Kitto 
remarks,   *'  If  any    human  infatuation 
could  surprise  a  thoughtful  and  obser- 
vant mind — and  especially  if  any  folly 
of  those  who    deem   themselves   wiser 
than    their    Bible    could     astonish — it 
might  excite  strong  wonder  to  see  grave 
and  reverend  men  set  forth  the  strange 
proposition   that  two  or  three  million? 
of  people   were  fed  from    day  to  day, 
during  forty   years,"  with  the  gum  of 
tlie    tamarisk     tree.      **A    very    small 
quantity — and  that  only  at  a  particular 
time  of  the  year,  which  is  not  the  time 
when    the     manna    first    fell — is    now 
afforded  by  all  the  trees  of  the  Sinai 
peninsula  ;  and  it  would  be  safe  to  say, 
t  ■  it  if  all  the  trees  of  ^  his  kind  then 
O     now  growing:  in  the  world  had  been 
assembled  in  this  part  of  Aracia  Petrea, 
and  had  covered  it  wholly,  they  would 
188 


not  have  yielded  a  tithe  of  the  quantity 
of  gum  required  for  the  subsistence  of  so 
vast  a  multitude."     (a) 

And  all  spiritual  provicijn  for  man's 
needs  proceeds  from  God.  The  idea, 
the  agencies,  and  the  meancj  of  human 
salvation  are  all  of  Divine  ongin.  All 
inspiring  and  strengthening  influences 
are  from  above.  *'  The  bread  of  God  is 
He  which  cometh  down  from  heaven, 

and  giveth  life  unto  the  world 

Jesus  said  urto  them,  I  am  the  bread 
of  life,"  etc.     {h) 

II.  Both  are  unmerited  Gifts. 

Just  before  the  first  bestowal  of  the 
manna  the  people  were  guilty  of  the 
most  grievous  murmurings  and  rebel- 
lion against  God  (Exod.  xvi.  1-12) ;  they 
could  not  therefore  advance  the  slightest 
pretence  of  meriting  any  good  from 
Him.  The  blessings  of  Divine  grace 
ilso  are  entirely  owing  to  the  free 
favour  of  our  heavenly  Father.  Man 
merited  nothing  but  pain  and  punish- 
ment from  God.  Rebels  against  His 
authority,  we  had  foifeited  all  claim  to 
His  favour  "  But  God  commendeth 
His  love  towards  us,"  etc.  (Rom.  v.  8, 
20).  "  For  by  grace  are  ye  saved,"  etc. 
Eph.  ii.  8  ;  1  John,  iv.  9,  10.     (c) 

IIL  Both  are  wholesome. 

The  mama,  which  they  despised, 
"  was  highly  nutritive  and  wholesome 
food,  as  nearly  as  possible  analogous  to 
what  forms  the  staff"  of  life,  be  it  rice  or 
corn,  to  the  present  inhabitants  of  tha 
desert,  who  rarely  tpste  meat  or  vege- 
tables, ana  are  but  too  happy  if  tbey 
can  get  enough  of  their  customary  food." 
The  provisions  of  Divine  grace  for  our 
spiritur.1  needs  are  compared  in  the 
Scriptures  to  those  great  essentials  of 
life  and  health,  bread  and  water.  Coiup. 
John  iv.  13,  14;  vi.  35,  50,  51. 
Spiritual  life  and  health  are  unattain- 
able save  through  the  provisions  of  the 
Gospel.  Only  Jesus  Christ  can  satisfy 
the  cravincfs  of  the  immortal  soul  of 
man.  His  salvation  is  new  life  to  the 
spiritually  dead,  health  to  the  sin-sick 
soul,  stren2;th  to  the  morally  weak. 

IV.  Both  are  pleasant. 

The  manna  was  very  agreeable  to  the 
palate.     "  Eaten  as  gathered,  it  tasted 


BOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  XI. 


like  cakes  made  of  meal  and  honey 
(Exod.  xvi.  31) ;  but  when  dressed,  it 
acquired  the  taste  of  fresh  oil,  a  flavour 
highly  agreeable  to  the  Israelites  "  (ver. 
8).  The  provisions  of  Christianity  are 
pleasant  as  well  as  wholesome.  One  of 
the  favourite  images  of  the  prophets  to 
set  forth  the  blessino^s  of  the  Gospel  age 
is  that  of  a  great  and  bounteous  festival 
(Cant.  V.  1 ;  Isa.  xxv.  6 ;  Ixv.  13,  14). 
Our  Lord  also  uses  the  same  figure  for 
the  same  purpose  (Matt.  xxii.  1-14; 
Luke  xiv.  15-24).  God  in  the  Gospel 
provides  a  delightful  feast  of  spiritual 
experiences,  exercises,  and  services — a 
feast  of  peace,  hope,  love,  joy,  service, 
fellowship,  worship. 

V.  Both  are  Abundant. 

There  was  no  scarcity  of  manna. 
For  forty  years  the  Lord  caused  it  to 
fall  with  unfailing  regularity,  so  that 
there  was  an  omer  (i.e.  nearly  three 
English  quarts)  for  every  person  in  the 
vast  host  every  day.  The  supplies  of 
Christianity  are  abundant.  Like  the 
air  and  the  light,  they  are  inexhaust- 
ible. They  are  like  a  river  deep  and 
broad,  which  is  fed  by  perennial  springs. 
"  The  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ." 
"  God  is  able  to  make  all  grace  abound 
toward  you,"  etc. 

VI.  Both  are  Free. 

All  the  Israelites  might  avail  them- 
selves of  the  manna ;  no  restriction  was 
placed  upon  them  in  this  respect. 
Gloriously  free   are   the  blessings    of 


salvation.  **  Ho,  every  one  that  thirsfc- 
eth,  come  ye  to  the  waters,  and  he 
that  hath  no  money,"  etc.  "  God  so 
loved  the  world,  that  He  gave  His  only 
begotten  Son,"  etc.  "  I  will  give  unto 
him  that  is  athirst  of  the  fountain  of 
the  water  of  life  freely."  "Let  him 
that  is  athirst  come.  And  whosover 
will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life 
freely."     (d) 

VII.  Buth  require  personal  Appro- 
priation. 

The  Israelites  were  required  to  gather 
the  manna  in  the  early  morning ;  they 
then  prepared  it  for  eating  by  grinding 
or  pounding  it,  and  baking  it  in  cakes. 
The  blessings  of  the  Divine  Gospel  will 
profit  us  nothing  unless  we  personally 
appropriate  them.  We  must  believe 
the  Christ  of  the  Gospel  (John  iii.  36 ; 
vi.  47-58) ;  we  must  meditate  upon 
the  teachings  of  the  Gospel ;  we  must 
practise  the  precepts  of  the  Gospel;  we 
must  live  the  Gospel,  if  we  would  enjoy 
the  rich  provisions  which  it  contains 
for  our  spiritual  needs.  Without  this 
personal  appropriation  we  shall  perish 
even  in  the  midst  of  the  banquet-house 
of  Christ,  and  in  presence  of  the  choicest, 
most  abundant,  and  freest  provisions  of 
the  grace  of  the  heavenly  King,     (e) 

Conclusion : 

1.  Take  heed  that  ye  despise  not  the 
spiritual  provisions  of  the  Divine  grace. 

2,  Qratefully  and  gladly  accept  these 
provisions,     (f) 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  The  natural  products  of  the  Arabian 
deserts  and  other  Oriental  regions,  which  bear 
the  name  of  manna,  have  not  the  qualities  or 
uses  ascribed  to  the  manna  of  Scripture.  They 
are  all  condiments  or  medicines  rather  than 
food,  stimulating  or  purgative  rather  than 
nutritious;  they  are  produced  only  three  or 
four  months  in  tbe  year,  from  May  to  August, 
and  not  all  the  year  round;  they  come  only  in 
small  quantities,  never  a£fording  anything  like 
15,000,000  of  pounds  a-week,  which  must 
have  been  requisite  for  the  subsistence  of  the 
whole  Israelitish  camp,  since  each  man  had  an 
omer  (or  three  English  quarts)  a  day,  and 
that  for  forty  years  ;  they  can  be  kept  for  a 
long  time,  and  do  not  become  useless  in  a  day 
or  two ;  they  are  just  as  liable  to  deteriorate  on 
the  Sabbath  as  on  any  other  day  ;  nor  does  a 
donble  quantity  fall  on  the  day  preceding  the 


Sabbath;  nor  would  natural  products  cease  at 
once  and  for  ever,  as  the  manna  is  represented 
as  ceasing  in  the  book  of  Joshua.  The  manna 
of  Scripture  we  therefore  regard  as  wholly 
miraculous,  and  not  in  any  respect  a  product 
of  nature. — C.  E.  Stowe,  D.D. 

(6)  If  it  would  be  marvellous  to  see  one 
river  leap  up  from  tbe  earth  full-grown,  what 
would  it  be  to  gaze  upon  a  vast  spring  from 
which  all  the  rivers  of  the  earth  should  at 
once  come  bubbling  up,  a  thousand  of  them 
born  at  a  birth  1  What  a  vision  would  it  be  I 
Who  can  conceive  it  ?  And  yet  the  love  of 
God  is  that  fou&liain  from  which  all  the  rivers 
of  mercy  which  have  ever  gladdened  our  race 
— all  tb«  lir^rn  of  grace  in  time  and  of  glory 
hercatter  ^-take  their  rise.  My  soul,  stand 
thou  at  that  sacred  fountain-head,  and  adore 
and  magavfy  for  ever  and  ever  '*  God,  even 

189 


CHAP.  XL 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:  NUMBERS, 


our  Fathar,  who   hath    loved  ae," — C  H, 
Spurgeon. 

(c)  The  love  which  God  has  for  U8,  did  not, 
does  not,  spring  from  moral  excalience  in  us; 
and  still  less  does  its  depth  and  bieadthar."  er 
to  the  loveableoess  of  our  disp^^sitioos.  No 
man  can  ponder  for  a  momt-nt  the  facts  in  oUi.* 
case  without  being  obliged  to  say  that  God 
loves  man,  not  so  much  from  the  adipiation 
of  human  nabrre  and  disposition  to  produca 
love,  as  from  a  Divine  nature  that  overflows 
from  the  necessity  of  its  own  richness  and 
fulness.  The  reasons  must  needs  be  in  God, 
and  not  in  us. — IT.  W.  Beecher. 

(rf)  I  walked  over  a  long  sandy  road  one 
day,  when  the  weather  was  sultry,  and  tho 
heat,  far  beyond  our  common  experience  in 
this  country,  was  almost  tropical ;  I  saw  a 
little  stream  of  cool  water,  and  being  parched 
with  thirst  I  stooped  down  and  dran!:.  Do 
you  think  I  asked  anybody's  leave,  or  enquired 
whether  I  might  drink  or  not?  I  did  not 
know  who  it  bidonged  to,  and  I  did  not  care. 
There  it  was,  and  I  felt  if  it  was  there  it  was 
enough  for  me.  I  was  thirsxy,  and  there  was 
the  water.  I  noticed  after  I  had  drank  that 
there  were  two  poor  tramps  came  along,  and 
they  went  down  and  drank  too.  I  did  not 
find  anybody  marching  them  off  to  prison. 
There  was  the  stream.  The  stream  being 
there,  and  the  thirsty  men  being  there,  the 
supply  was  suited  to  their  need,  and  they 
promptly  partook  of  it.  How  strange  it  is 
that  when  God  has  provided  the  Gospel,  and 
men  want  it,  they  should  require  somebody  to 
call  out  to  them,  '  Ho  1  ho  I  ho  I "  and  then 
they  will  not  come  after  all.  Oh  1  if  they  were 
a  little  more  thirsty,  if  they  did  but  know  their 
need  more,  if  they  were  convinced  more  of 
their  sin,  then  they  would  scarcely  want  an 
invitation,  but  the  mere  fact  of  a  supply  would 
be  sufficient  for  them  and  they  would  come 
and  drink,  and  satisfy  the  burning  thirst 
within. —  C.  H.  Spurgeon. 

(e)  What  a  wonderful  deal  is  made  of  faith 
in  God's  Book  I  We  are  justified  by  faith 
and  not  by  works.  .  ,  .  There  is  nothing  arbi- 
trary in  this.  It  is  not  an  arbitrary  appoint- 
ment of  God  that  man  should  be  justified  and 
receive  all  blessedness  when  he  believes  on 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It  arises  from  the 
nature  of  things.  I  shoald  like  to  give  you 
an  illustration  of  this.  There  are  many 
beautiful  trees  in  yonder  park ;  take  one  of 
them.    Now,  in  order  to  grow  and  bring  forth 


fruit,  the  tree  must  hare  its  roots  in  the 
earth,  and  its  branches  spread  out  to  the  air 
and  the  sun.  It  is  no  arbitrary  appointment. 
It  arises  from  the  nature  of  the  tree  and 
earth.  It  cannot  be  otherwise.  Would  man 
be  blessed  ?  Then  he  must  be  united  to 
Christ.  He  must  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  He  must  appropriate  Christ.  Now, 
in  one  respect  I  almost  tire  of  saying,  Believe 
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Such  words  as, 
Come  to  Christ,  and  Come  to  Jesus  have  been 
used  in  such  a  poor,  meaningless,  parrot-like 
way  that  they  have  almost  been  spoiled.  But 
there  is  deep  meaning,  brethren,  in  coming 
to  Christ.  It  is  the  passing  through  a  cloud 
of  doubts,  fears,  sins,  right  up  to  Him,  and 
not  only  as  the  poor  woman  did,  taking  hold 
of  the  hem  of  His  garment,  but  taking  hold 
on  Him  and  saying,  "  Lord,  I  perish  ;  do  Thou 
save  me."  And  mark:  the  moment  I  am 
united  to  Christ,  the  moment  I  am  in  Him, 
all  good  is  possible  to  my  nature.  There  is 
no  limitation  but  the  limitation  of  my  powers. 
All  the  blessedness  possible  to  man  is  mine 
the  moment  I  am  united  to  Him. — JTiomas 
Jones. 

(/*)  Come  then  quickly.  All  is  in  vain  if 
you  do  not  come.  See,  the  Gospel  feast  is 
spread,  and  the  springs  of  life  are  all  open ; 
and  Jesus  stands  in  view  of  all  the  world,  and 
cries  that  all  the  world  may  hear,  and  nam  ^s  no 
man  by  name  and  yet  names  every  man  that 
lives,  each  and  all  being  contained  in  His  in- 
vitation when  He  says,  "If  any  man  thirst, 
let  him  come  to  Me  and  drink."  "  Any  man." 
Why  that  is  you  I  That  is  goul  He  waits 
for  you.  He  has  happiness  for  you;  He  has 
righteousness  for  you,  and  love  untold  for  you, 
and  life,  life  evermore,  for  you.  And  what 
have  you  for  Him  ?  What  have  you  to  give 
Him  ?  Surely  now,  at  length,  a  willing  heart 
— surely  now  an  open  trusting  hand.  Have 
yon  not  had  enough  of  life  without  Him  ?  Will 
you  attempt  the  wilderness  once  more,  and 
perhaps  perish  of  thirst  ?  Will  you  go  again 
to  hew  out  a  broken  cistern,  or  a  cistern  that 
will  be  broken  some  time  or  other,  and,  per- 
haps, one  day  be  found  dead  by  its  side  ?  Are 
you  80  in  love  with  misery?  Is  the  covenant 
with  death  so  dear  ?  Come,  thirsty  soul  and 
drink.  "  The  Spirit  and  the  bride  say, 
*  Come  ;*  and  let  him  that  heareth  say, '  Come  ;* 
and  let  him  that  is  athirst  come.  And  whoso- 
ever will  let  him  come  and  take  of  the  water 
of  life  freely." — Alex,  Raleigh,  D.D, 


Thb  Burdens  of  Leadership. 
(Verses  10-15). 


Sorely  was  Moses  tried  by  the 
unbelief,  the  cowardice,  the  com- 
plainings, and  the  rebellions  of  the 
Israelites.  Pre-eminent  was  he  for 
patience  and  meekness,  yet  there  were 
190 


times  when  the  strain  and  burden 
of  the  perverse  people  that  he  was 
called  to  lead  were  too  great  for  hia 
endurance.  Such  a  time  was  that 
with  which  we  are  now  dealing,     (a) 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  XL 


This    impassioned    appeal    to    God 

suggests — 

I.  That  the  position  of  Leader  or 
Governor  of  men  is  a  very  trying 
one. 

1.  Because  of  the  responsible  nature 
of  the  duties  of  leadership.  The 
guidance  and  direction  of  a  large 
number  of  men,  even  under  the  most 
favourable  circumstances,  involve  a 
great  weight  of  responsibility.  And 
the  government  of  a  large  number  of 
men,  even  when  the  governor  is  most 
able  and  the  governed  most  reasonable, 
is  a  thing  of  enormous  difficulty. 

2.  Because  of  the  interest  which  the 
true  leader  takes  in  his  charge.  The 
true  leader,  like  Moses,  is  so  deeply 
interested  in  those  over  whom  he  is 
placed  as  to  be  afflicted  in  all  their 
affictions ;  their  privations  and  suffer- 
ings sorely  pain  him  ;  their  meannesses 
and  sins  cause  him  to  blush  with 
shame,  or  to  weep  in  penitence.  A 
great  interest  involves,  almost  in- 
variably, a  great  burden. 

3.  Because  of  the  intractahleness  of 
men.  It  was  this  which  made  the 
burden  of  Moses  so  heavy  and  grievous 
to  bear  at  this  time.  *'  Antoninus  the 
Emperor  said  often,  Imperium  oceanum 
esse  maloruTTi,  that  to  be  a  governor 
of  others  is  to  be  plunged  into  an 
ocean  of  miseries.  Pope  Adrian  caused 
to  be  engraven  upon  his  own  tomb, 
Felix  si  nan  imperitasset.  Melancthon 
said,  the  three  sorest  labours  of  all 
were  Docentis,  imperantis,  pariurientis, 
the  labours  of  ministers,  magistrates, 

and   of  travailing  women 

Crowns  have  their  cares ;  high  seats 
are  uneasy ;  many  a  cumber  attends 
honour.  Beatus  ille  qui  procul  negotus. 
— John  Trapp, 

II.  The  true  leader  of  men  must 
often  be  painfully  conscious  of  ius 
insufficiency. 

Moses  felt  it  at  this  time  and  cried 
to  the  Lord,  "  I  am  not  able  to  bear 
all  this  people  alone,  because  it  is  too 
heavy  for  me."  The  difficult  demands 
of  changing  circumstances  and  situa- 
tions, the  perplexing  problems  which 
arise  in  questions  of  government,  \he 


perverse  dispositions  and  practices  of 
men,  these  and  other  things  at  times, 
give  rise  to  such  demands  upon  the 
personal  powers  of  leaders  of  men  as  to 
fill  and  almost  prostrate  them  with  a 
sense  of  their  insufficiency.  Ciu'istian 
ministers  have  felt  this,  and  cried, 
"Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things'?'* 
Kings  have  felt  it,  and  exclaimed  : — 
"  Uneasv  lies  the  head  that  wears  a 
—  crown." 
Statesmen  have  felt  it,  <fec. 

III.  The  ablest  and  holiest  leaders 
of  men  sometimes  fail  under  the 
burdens  of  their  position. 

Moses  was  unquestionably  one  of  the 
most  distinguished  of  men — distin- 
guished for  mental  power,  and  for  eleva- 
tion, strength,  and  holiness  of  character ; 
but  that  he  erred  at  this  time  is  very 
clearly  manifest  from  his  appeal  to  the 
Lord.     He  erred — 

1.  In  exaggerating  the  extent  of  his 
responsibility.  It  appears  that  when 
the  discontent  of  the  people  became 
deep  and  clamorous,  God  did  not  at 
once  interpose,  "  but  withdrew  with 
His  help,  and  let  the  whole  storm  of 
the  infuriated  people  burst  upon  him." 
This  accounts  for  the  language  of  verses 
11-15.  But  it  was  an  exaggeration  to 
sav  that  "  the  burden  of  all  this 
people"  was  cast  upon  him  alone.  Tha 
Lord  was  constantly  assisting  him  both 
by  direction  and  by  all-sufficient  help. 
When  our  anxieties  and  cares  obtain 
the  mastery  of  our  faith  and  patience, 
they  at  once  assume  most  exaggerated 
dimensions  and  gravity. 

2.  In  overlooking  the  history  of  God^s 
dealings  with  them,  and  the  promises  which 
He  had  made  to  them.  For  a  time 
Moses  seems  to  forget  the  glorious 
deeds  of  the  high  Hand  and  the  out- 
stretched Arm  which  had  brought  them 
forth  out  of  Egypt,  the  marvellous  and 
mighty  works  at  the  Red  Sea,  the 
miracles  of  the  quails  and  the  manna 
at  Sin,  and  that  of  the  water  from  the 
rock  at  Rephidim.  He  forgot  the 
gracious  and  all-inclusive  promise,  "  My 
Presence  shall  go  with  thee,  and  I  will 
give  thee  rest."  What  Moses  did,  we 
are  all  more  or  less  prone  to  do  when 

191 


CHAP.  XI. 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


lifo'd   burdens   press  severely   and  its 
norrowa  are  most  sore. 

3.  In  passionately  appealing  to  God 
for  deliverance  or  death.  *'  And  if  Thou 
deal  thus  with  me,  kill  rae,  I  pray 
Thee  out  of  hand,"  etc.  *'  This  is  the 
language  of  the  discontent  of  despair," 
says  Keil  and  Del.,  *'  which  differs  from 
the  murmuring  of  unbelief,  in  the 
fact  that  it  is  addressed  to  God,  for 
the  purpose  of  entreating  help  and 
deliverance  from  Him;  whereas  un- 
belief complains  of  the  ways  of  God, 
but  while  complaining  of  its  troubles, 
does  not  pray  to  the  Lord  its  God.  .  . 
There  was  good  ground  for  his  com- 
plaint. The  burden  of  the  office  laid 
upon  the  shoulders  of  Moses  was 
really  too  heavy  for  one  man ;  and 
even  the  discontent  which  broke  out 
in  the  complaint  was  nothing  more 
than  an  outpouring  of  zeal  for  the 
office  assigned  him  by  God,  under  the 
burden  of  which  his  strength  would 
eventually  break  down,  unless  he 
received  some  support.  He  was  not 
tired  of  the  office,  but  would  stake  his 
life  for  it  if  God  did  not  relieve  him  in 


some  way,  as  office  and  life  were  really 
one  in  him.  Jehovah  therefore  relieved 
him  in  the  distress  of  which  he  com- 
plained, without  blaming  the  words  of 
His  servant,  which  bordered  on  des- 
pair." Still  it  appears  to  us  that 
Moses  was  presumptuous  in  presenting 
to  the  Lord  the  alternative  that  He 
would  either  deliver  him  or  kill  him, 
and  that  he  was  impatient  and  pas- 
sionate in  his  appeal  to  the  Lord.  But 
if  even  he  failed  under  the  heavy 
burden,  how  terribly  complete  and 
unutterably  mournful  would  our  failure 
have  been  had  we  been  subjected  to 
such  a  trial ! 
Conclusion : 

1.  Great  honours  involve  great  obli- 
gations. 

2.  A  man  may  fail  even  in  the 
strongest  point  of  his  character,  Moses 
was  pre-eminently  meek,  yet  here  he 
is  petulant,  etc.  Therefore,  "  Watch 
thou  in  all  things,"  etc. 

3.  It  is  the  duty  of  men  not  to  increasey 
but  if  possible  to  lessen  the  diffictdties  and 
tibials  of  leadership. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  Up  to  the  hour  of  his  mysterious  de- 
parture, he  devoted  himself  to  his  people  with 
an  earnestness  and  an  energy  which  no  com- 
bination of  words  can  express.  For  their  sakes 
he  gave  up  his  own  will,  while  in  the  fulfilling 
of  the  Infinite  Will  he  made  the  most  costly 
sacrifices,  and  sufifered  the  severest  penalties. 
His  very  first  act  on  behalf  of  his  oppressed 
nation  was  misunderstood  and  misinterpreted, 
and  drove  him  into  solitude  and  exile. 
Scarcely  had  the  ambassador  of  Heaven, 
with  the  Divine  credentials  of  his  mission  in 
his  hands,  left  the  presence  of  Pharaoh,  where 
he  had  asserted  the  rights  of  his  people  to 
spiritual  freedom  and  privilege,  than  they 
assailed  him  with  the  most  bitter  inv'^ctive, 
and  accused  him  of  aggravating  the  evils  un- 
der which  they  were  aoomed  to  sufifer.  Only 
a  few  hours  had  run  their  round  since  he  had 
finished  tbo^e  stupendous  deeds  of  might  and 
mercy,  which  had  resulted  in  setting  them 
free — he  had  but  just  sundered  the  link  of  the 
chain  which  chafed  and  fettered  their  inmost 
soul,  when  the  mere  sight  of  the  Egyptians 
following  them  in  their  flight,  led  them  to 
chide  their  illustrious  leader  by  charging  him 
with  subjecting  them  to  a  worse  calamity  than 
bondage,  and  to  protest  even  that  they  would 
rather  have  found  a  grave  in  Egypt  than  fall 

192 


into  the  hand  of  the  enemy;  and  this  indirect 
opposition  to  the  assurance  given  them  from 
on  high,  that  their  deliverance  was  part  of 
the  plan  and  purpose  of  Him  who  is  of  one 
mind,  and  to  whose  powers  and  resources 
there  is  no  limit.  No  sooner  had  they  passed 
through  the  Red  Sea,  whose  waters  thoy  had 
seen  to  part  and  stand  as  a  wall  of  adamant 
on  either  hand,  in  whose  depth  they  had  beheld 
the  horse  and  the  rider  sink  as  a  stone  to  the 
bottom,  aad  on  whose  hither  bank  they  had 
given  voice  and  volume  to  their  joy  in  a  song 
of  triumph  and  gratitude,  than  they  mur- 
mured and  repined,  because  the  water  which 
was  offered  to  them  in  their  thiist  was  neither 
80  sweet  nor  so  living  as  the  current  of  the 
Nile,  or  as  Goshen  s  springs  and  streams. 
Scarcely  had  the  bitter  been  extracted  from 
the  waters  of  Marah ;  scarcely  had  they  amid 
the  solitude  and  the  scantiness  of  the  desert 
found  themselves  free  to  enjoy  their  rest  and 
quiet — their  recreation  and  refreshment — 
when  their  thoughts  went  back  to  Egvpt,  and 
their  soul  lusted  after  its  provisions.  Hence  on 
reaching  the  wilderness  of  Sin,  which  lay 
between  Elim  and  Sinai,  and  finding  that 
they  could  not  indulge  their  sensuous 
appetites  as  they  did  before  their  eman- 
cipation, they  lost  sight  for  the  moment  of 


HOMILETW    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  Tl. 


the  bigher  goofJ  involved  in  their  deliverance, 
and  charged  Moses  with  the  fixed  design  of 
bringing  them  into  the  wilderness  to  compass 
their  death  by  hunger.  How  crushing  to  his 
big  and  generous  hoart  must  have  been  their 
complaint — "Would  to  God  we  had  died  by 
the  hand  of  the  Lord  in  the  land  of  Ej^ypt, 
when  we  sat  by  the  flesh-pot-i,  and  when  we 
did  eat  bread  to  the  full"!  Was  it  their 
drt  am  that  life  is  made  up  of  bodily  ease  and 
fleshly  indulgence  ?  flad  they  no  faith  in  the 
matchless  Power  which  had  so  often  travelled 
forth  on  their  behalf,  and  whose  mighty  deeds 
had  all  been  in  their  favour  ?  Or  were  they 
I'esolved  to  break  the  heart  of  the  Man  who, 
in  the  spirit  of  the  most  self-denying  love  and 
devotedness,  was  prepared  to  give  up  all  thit 
he  had— not  excepting  life  itself — for  their 
wider  freedom  and  higher  good  ?  —  Robert 
Ferguson,  LL.D. 

(h)  If  Moses  is  ever  to  be  held  as  one  of  the 
greatest  men  of  olden  times,  and  of  all  times, 
then  it  must  be  confessed  that  no  man  ever 
paid  a  heavier  penalty  for  his  greatness. 
Never  did  human  being  stand  so  completely 
solitary  aud  alone  ;  never  were  motives  and 
actions  so  misconstrued  or  misunderstood ; 
never  were  noble  and  generous  deeds  so  re- 
quited ;  never  were  charges  and  criminations 
so  unfounded  ;  never  were  labour  and  suffer- 
insT  so  depreciated ;  never  was  heart  so 
ajBflicied,  or  life  so  embittered,  or  death  so 
isolated ;  and  all  this  in  the  prosecution  of  an 
object  which  involved  a  nation's  freedom  and 
a  world's  weal.  Though  his  eoul  was  filled 
with  (Br)  of  Heaven's  sublimest  purposes,  his 
heart  vvas  all  but  broken  by  the  ingratitude 
and  rebellion — the  selfishness  and  the  sensu- 
ousness  of  those  who:r«  cause  he  had  made  his 
own.  So  contiaued  was  the  crucifixion  of 
thought  and  feeling  to  which  he  was  subject — 
such  was  the  total  immolation  of  self  to  which 
he  was  called,  that  his  life  was  more  than  a 
martyr's  death.  His  mental  anguish  threw  all 
physical  suffering  into  the  distance,  and  the 
outward  privation  was  as  nothing  in  com- 
parison with  the  inward  affliction.  But  under 
the  crushing  pressure  of  all  that  was  laid  upon 
him,  he  still  stood  erect — manly  in  his  attitude 
and  heroic  in  his  mien. — litid. 

It  is  a  gallant  thing  to  fight  with  the  free 
and  the  brave  in  defence  of  our  country,  our 
shrines,  our  h^arthstoues,  and  our  fathers' 
sepulchres — action  animates  and  prevents  the 
spirit  drooping ;  companions  in  arms,  though 
they  be  few,  invite  us  on  :  we  fling  fear,  doubt, 
irresolution  to  the  winds — and  death  is  in- 
differeni  to  us,  for  we  know  that   glory  decks 


the  hero's  bier  if  it  does  not  bind  his  brow. 
But  to  bear  witness! — 

To  bear  witness  I  what  a  world  of  meaning 
is  bidden  in  thesf^  few  words :  how  many  of 
the  grandest  elom 'Uts  of  human  n&ture  it 
requires  to  mould  a  character  like  this. 
Every  man  values  the  honest  hearty  good  word 
of  his  neighbours;  and  there  are  associations 
gathered  round  the  heart  of  each  of  us  which 
it  is  im})ossible  to  efface.  To  be  estranged 
from  those  we  have  liv«(i  with  and  loved  from 
infancy — to  pas- from  under  the  shadow  of  the 
faith  that  has  fostered  us — to  look  upon  old 
sights,  old  haunts,  familiar  scenes,  and  find 
they  are  but  fiends  to  mock  us  with  a  memory 
of  what  once  was — to  see  contempt  and  scorn 
assume  the  plac«  where  lov«  was  wont  to 
reigu — to  know  that  the  affections  we  prized 
more  than  life  are  changed  to  wormwood — to 
watch  our  tried  and  trusted  friends  deliberately 
rang«  themselves  in  the  foemen's  ranks — to 
have  the  harrowing  conviction  burned  in 
upon  the  soul  that  we  must  go  on  now 
alone — go  along  the  path  we  have  chosen, 
and  forego  all  the  pleasures  on  which  we 
counted  to  render  existence  endurable — these, 
these  things  try  the  temper  and  the  tone  of 
spirit— these  constitute  a  frightful  and  a  fiery 
ordeal  at  which  human  nature  shudders.  And 
yet  all  this  must  frequently  be  undergone  for 
the  cause  of  truth.  The  alternative  is  a  terri- 
ble one  and  many  waver ;  but  such  have  not 
the  elements  of  real  greatness  in  them,  the 
qualities  which  constitute  one  who  must  bear 
witness.  The  world  has  its  laws  and  customs, 
its  usages  and  ordinances,  and  woe  to  the  i^aa 
who  sets  himself  in  opposition  to  these.  Tue 
world  has  its  idols,  its  creed,  its  rule  of  faith 
— woo  to  the  man  who  rises  and  declares  its 
worship  blasphemy — its  creed  a  falsehood- 
its  rule  of  faith  a  damnable  delusion.  Woe ! 
truly  ;  but  unutterable  woe  would  it  be  if 
these  men  did  not  rise  up  ever  and  anon,  to 
smite  the  lazy  blood  into  the  cheeks  of 
humanity  ;  to  exorcise  the  demon  that  directs 
the  rabid  multitude  ;  to  breathe  a  holier  feel- 
ing through  a  land  .defaced  by  blood  and  crime. 
Tney  are  the  pioneers  of  freedom,  the  van- 
guard of  the  hosts  of  truth.  And  their  fate 
is  to  be  reviled  and  ridiculed-  blasph'^med  and 
buffeted — tortured  body  and  soul  wita  all  the 
ingenuity  of  cruelty  W- 11,  so  it  is,  and  so  it 
will  be;  they  have  counted  the  cost;  their 
death-smile  is  the  calm  of  conquest ;  and — 
'*  They  flee  far 

To  a  sunnier  strand  ; 
And  follow  Love's  folding  star 

To  the  evening  land."— J.  W.  Lester^  D.D, 


The  Sufferings  op  the  Good  in  the  Path  op  Duty. 

(Verse  11.) 

"And  Moses   said   unto   the   Lord,  Keil     and     DeL     translate,    ''Why 

Wherefore    hast    Thou    afflicled    Thy  hast    Thou    done    evil    to    Thy    ser* 

servant  1"  vantl" 

o  193 


OHAP.  XL 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


We  propose  to  look  at  the  afflictions 
of  godly  men  in  the  path  of  duty — 
I.  As  a  Fact. 

1.  Good  men  suffer  afflictions.  Our 
text  is  the  utterance  of  a  distinguished 
servant  of  the  Most  High.  "  Moses  was 
learned  in  all  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyp- 
tians, and  was  mighty  in  words  and  in 
deeds  ;"  he  was  a  man  of  extraordinary 
abilities,  and  of  extraordinary  excellence 
— wise,  meek,  courageous,  prayerful, 
self-denying,  &c.  One  would  have 
thought  that  such  a  man  would 
have  been  unmolested  by  suffering,  and 
free  from  affliction.  But  our  thinking 
would  have  been  erroneous ;  for  out  of 
sharp  suffering  Moses  is  here  appealing 
to  God.  God's  servants  suffer.  Job, 
David,  Asaph,  Jeremiah,  John  the 
Baptist,  the  Sisters  of  Bethany,  the 
Apostles  of  Jesus  Christ,  were  all 
sufferers  ;  some  of  them  very  severe 
sufferers.  The  Lord  Christ,  the  Supreme 
Servant  of  God,  was  the  Supreme 
Sufferer. 

2.  Good  men  suffer  afflictions  in  the 
path  of  duty.  It  does  not  seem  strange 
when  the  storm  pursues  and  overtakes 
a  disobedient  prophet  trying  to  escape 
from  duty  (Jonah  i.) ;  but  it  does 
seem  strange  that  it  should  overtake 
the  disciples  of  our  Lord  while  they  are 
engaged  in  carrying  out  His  com- 
mands (Mark  iv.  35-39).  So  the  afflic- 
tions of  Moses  arose  in  the  fulfilment  of 
the  duty  which  God  had  appointed  him. 
The  same  is  true  of  Jeremiah,  John  the 
Baptist,  the  Apostles  of  Jesus  Christ,  and 
a  great  host  of  others  in  subsequent 
times.  It  is  pre-eminently  true  of  our 
Divine  Lord,     It  is  true  of  very  many 


m  our  own  age. 


II.  As  a  Problem. 

"  Wherefore  hast  Thou  afflicted  Thy 
servant  1"     This  inquiry  implies — 

1.  A  difficulty .  Moses  could  not 
understand  why  the  Lord  had  called 
him  to  a  1  '.ak,  involving  so  much  annoy- 
ance and  pain.  He  is  the  servant  of 
the  Lord,  engaged  in  the  work  of  the 
Iiard,  and  that  a  most  arduous  work  ; 
y^Jt  he  is  crossed,  opposed,  reviled,  and 
the  affliction  is  allowed  by  God,  un- 
relieved iij  God,  indeed,  for  a  time  God 
194 


appears  not  to  heed  either  his  sorely 
tried  servant,  or  the  rebellious  and 
provoking  people,  over  whom  He  had 
placed  him.  The  painful  obstructions 
which  impede  the  course  of  the  good,  and 
the  heavy  burdens  which  oppress  them, 
and  the  bitter  enemies  \7hich  assail 
them,  and  which  are  allowed  by  God, 
even  while  they  tread  the  path  of  duty, 
are  a  source  of  sore  perplexity  to  their 
mind  and  sharp  pain  to  their  heart.  It 
is  supremely  difficult,  in  the  time  of 
trial,  to  discover  how  these  things  can 
be  under  the  rule  of  a  wise  and  kind 
and  holy  Being. 

2.  Faith  in  the  poioer  of  God  to  re- 
move the  difficulty.  "  Wherefore  hast 
Thou  afflicted  Thy  servant  V  "  Why 
hast  Thou  done  evil  to  Thy  servant  1" 
Clearly  Moses  believed  that  there  were 
sufficient  reasons  for  the  sore  trials 
which  he  met  with  while  fulfilling  his 
vocation  ;  that  these  reasons  were 
known  unto  the  Lord ;  and  that  the 
revelation  of  them  would  relieve  his 
perplexed  brain  and  his  troubled  heart. 
When  the  tried  servants  of  God  appeal 
to  Him  as  Moses  did,  we  may  regard 
their  appeals  as  expressions  of  faith  in 
Him,  and  as  precursors  of  relief  and 
rest  from  Him. 

III.  Offer  some  Hints  towards  the 
Solution  of  the  Problem. 

The  afflictions  of  the  good  in  the  path 
of  duty,  under  the  blessing  of  God, 
tend — 

1.  To  test  their  faith.  "  Character,** 
says  Dr.  Huntington,  "  depends  on  in- 
ward strength.  But  this  strength  has 
two  conditions  :  it  is  increased  only  by 
being  put  forth,  and  it  is  tested  only 
by  some  resistance.  So,  if  the  spiritual 
force,  or  character,  in  you  is  to  be 
strong,  it  must  be  measured  against 
some  competition.  It  must  enter  into 
conflict  with  an  antagonist.  It  must 
stand  in  comparison  with  something 
formidabl'^  enough  to  be  a  standard  of 
its  power  ....  Suffering,  then,  in  some 
of  its  forms,  must  be  introduced,  the 
appointed  minister,  the  great  assayist, 
to  put  the  genuineness  of  faith  to  the 
proof,  and  purify  it  of  its  dross."  (a) 

2.  To  promote  their  perfection.     "  Aa 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  XI. 


the  Perfect  One  reached  His  perfect- 
ness  through  suffering,"  says  Dr.  Fer- 
guson, **  so  it  was  with  His  servant. 
It  was  through  the  fire  and  the  flame 
that  the  law  of  separation  and  refine- 
ment acted  on  the  whole  nature,  and 
gave  to  it  higher  worth  and  glory. 
Trial  ripened  his  manly  spirit,  and 
made  it  patient  to  endure. 

*  Useless  and  badly-tempered  is  the  steel 
If  it  refuse  to  bend  ;  but  tbe  goodly  blade— 
The  true  Toledo— circleth  on  itself 
Uninjured.' 

He  had  learned  to  suffer  as  well  as 
to  do ;  and  but  for  suffering,  and  his 
character,  could  never  have  reached 
that  matchless  height  and  perfection 
which  belong  to  it."  Comp.  Acts  xiv. 
2li )  Kom.  v.  3-5  ;  James  i.  2-4,  12.  {hj 

3.  2h  enhancetheir  joy  hereof ter.  Comp. 
Matt.  V.  10-12;  Rom.  viii.  17,  18;  2 
Cor.  iv.  17,  18.     (c) 

4.  To  promote  the  good  of  the  race. 


In  fulfilling  the  Divine  calling,  which 
caused  him  so  much  trial  and  suffering, 
Moses  carried  forward  the  purposes  of 
God,  and  conferred  unspeakable  bene- 
fits on  our  race.  By  the  travail  and 
sorrow  of  the  good,  God  is  savins 
humanity  from  its  sins  and  miseries. 
The  Christian  is  called  to  "  know  the 
fellowship  of  Christ's  sufferings  ; "  to 
suffer  vicariously  with  Him,  that  others 
may  be  benefited  and  blessed.  In  the 
privilege  of  this  high  fellowship,  the 
sharpest  sufferings  become  sacred  and 
exalting  services,     {d) 

Conclusion  : 

1.  Severe  afflictions  in  the  path  of 
duty  are  in  full  accord  with  the  character 
of  God. 

2.  Such  sufferings  are  quite  compati- 
ble with  the  favour  of  God  towards  us. 
Comp.  Heb.  xii.  5-11. 

3.  When  severe  suffering  leads  to  sore 
perplexity  J  let  us  seek  help  of  God,  Comp. 
Psa.  IxKiii,  IG,  17. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  Some  time  ago  I  beard  a  party  of 
friends  singing  the  same  piece  of  music.  For 
a  "while  their  voices  blended  very  sweetly,  and 
I,  not  being  able  to  offer  a  scientific  criticism 
upon  the  performance,  thought  that  they  were 
all  about  equal.  But  presently  they  came  to  a 
passage  of  very  high  notes,  very  lofty  music  : 
and  in  that  moment  they  all  ceased  but  one, 
and  that  one  voice  went  aloft  alone,  and 
thrilled  me  by  the  perfectness  of  its  ease  !  If 
they  had  stopped  before  that,  I  should  have 
said,  "I  give  you  common  applause  ;  one  is 
as  good  as  another,  and  I  thank  you  all."  But 
there  was  a  time  of  trial,  and  in  that  time  of 
trial  the  masterly  voice  rose  -where  other  voices 
could  not  follow  it.  It  is  so  in  the  greater 
concerns  and  trials  ot  life.  For  days  together 
■we  seem  to  be  tolerably  equal,  but  there  come 
sp«»j?il  hours,  critical  trials,  and  in  those  mo- 
ments— which  are  condensed  lifetimes — we 
show  the  stuff  we  are  made  of  and  the  capa- 
city we  repTftpent,  It  is  then  that  the  religious 
man — if  deeply  and  truly  intelligent  and  ear- 
nest— shows  hirus&lf  a  man. — Joseph  Parker, 
D.D. 

(6)  Tribulations  are  treasures ;  and  if  we 
were  wiso,  wo  should  reckon  our  afflictions 
among  our  rarest  jewels.  The  caverns  t :  sor- 
row are  mines  of  diamonds.  Our  '•arthly  \  js- 
sessions  may  be  silver,  but  temporal  trials  are, 
to  the  saints,  invariably  gold.  We  may  grow 
in  grace  through  what  we  enjoy,  but  we  pro- 
bably make  the  greatest  progress  through 
what  we  sufiPer.     Soft  gales  may  be  pleasunt 

o  2 


for  heaven-bound  vessels,  but  rough  winds  are 
better.  The  calm  is  our  way,  but  God  hath 
His  way  in  the  whirlwind,  and  He  rides  on 
the  wings  of  the  wind.  Saints  gain  more  by 
their  losses  than  by  their  profits.  Health  cometh 
out  of  their  sicknesses,  and  wealth  floweth  out 
of  their  poverties. —  C.  H.  Spurgeon. 

(c)  The  contrast  between  suffering  on  earth 
and  its  fruits  in  heaven,  is  wonderful.  They 
ought  to  be  kept  constantly  together,  so  that 
the  darkness  of  the  one  shall  be  interpreted 
by  the  light  of  the  other  ;  that  we  shall  not 
feel  that  sorrows  have  ended  their  course  when 
aching  ceases;  that  we  ^hallnot  for  a  moment 
be  left  to  believe  that  all  the  fruit  of  suffering 
is  that  which  we  pluck  hitherward.  We 
should  know  that  sufferings  produce  their 
final  results  only  after  we  are  disembodied, 
and  stand  on  tbe  heavenly  plain  in  the  glorious 
fellowship  of  the  redeemed.  Then  it  will  be 
made  known  to  us  that  these  and  all  of  them 
came  out  of  great  tribulation,  and  washed 
their  robes,  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood 
of  the  Lamb,  by  the  maintenance  of  their  faith, 
by  their  endeavours  to  live  according  to  God's 
commandments,  by  undergoing  pain,  and 
self-denial,  and  hardness  as  good  soldiers;  by 
accepting  providential  afflictions,  by  cleansing 
their  dispositions  and  purifying  their  hearts, 
by  suffering  death  itself.  The  marvellous 
economy  of  earthly  suffering,  rightly  under- 
stood, is  an  economy  of  cleansing  and  beau- 
tifying. It  is  a  lustration,  and  is  preliminary 
to  a  state  of  glorification, — H.  W.  Beecher. 

195 


CHAP,  XI, 


HOMILETW   COMMENTARy:   NUMBERS. 


(</)  We  pee  no  good  done  in  this  world  that 
somebody  does  not  suffer.  There  can  be  no 
education  of  children  without  there  is  some- 
body to  suffer  for  them.  A  child  with  no 
mother  or  with  no  nurse,  the  mother  having 
been  taken  away,  or  worse  yet,  with  a  mother  or 
nurse  that  is  heartless  and  inhuman,  grows  up 
so  much  less  than  a  human  being  as  it  lacks 
the  training  which  its  helplessness  demands. 
And  if  a  child  is  sweet,  and  pure,  and  aspiring, 
and  noble,  somebody  must  have  practised 
self-denial,  or  siifiFered  for  it;  somebody 
must  have  agonised  to  save  the  child  from 
agony  ;  soineboiy's  conscience  must  have  been 
crucified  that  the  child's  conscience  might  be 
saTed  from  the  thorn.  And  wretched  is  the  child 


that  has  had  nobody  to  suffer  for  it,  to  think 
for  it,  to  feel  for  it,  to  live  for  it — for  sub- 
stituted life  is  the  law  of  the  development  of 
life.  My  soul  is  the  yeast  of  my  children's 
souls  ;  and  I  mix  my  being  into  theirs,  and 
theirs  are  raised  and  brought  to  vitality  by  it. 
And  if  there  is  to  be  a  Bible  that  is  true  to 
life,  there  must  be  somewhere  in  that  Bibla 
a  recognition  of  the  Christian  principle  of 
vicarious  suffering,  the  suffering  of  one  for 
another.  For  it  is  in  nature,  it  is  in  the  house- 
hold, it  is  in  the  Church,  and  it  is  in  the  whole 
realm  of  benevolence  outaiHe  of  the  Church. 
And  when  we  find  the  Bible  teaching  it, 
everybody  says,  *'  It  ought  to  teach  it,  it  is  but 
the  echo  of  fact." — Ibid. 


Thb  Answer  op  God  to  the  Appeals  op  Men, 

(Verses  16-20.) 


,'  * 


In  these  verses  we  liave — 

I.  The  Lord's  Answer  to  the  Ap- 
peal of  his  much-tried  Servant. 

"  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses, 
Gather  unto  me  seventy  men,"  &c. 
(verses  16, 17).  The  Lord  here  arranges 
to  lighten  the  burden  of  which  Moses  had 
complained  as  too  heavy  for  him,  by 
appointing  seventy  elders  who  should 
bear  the  burden  of  the  people  with  him. 
Notice — 

1.  The  number  of  these  assistants. 
''Gather  unto  me  seventy  men  of  the 
elders  of  Israel."  The  number  seventy 
probably  has  a  backward  refeience  to 
the  number  of  persons  that  went  down 
into  Egypt  (Gen.  xlvi.  26,  27).  The 
same  number  of  elders  were  called  to 
accompany  Moses  to  Mount  Sinai  (Exod. 
xxiv.  1)  ;  but  their  calling  seems  to 
have  be^n  for  that  one  occasion  only, 
while  these  were  called  to  permanent 
service.  This  number  was  continued 
in  tl:^  Sanhedrim,  or  great  council  of 
the  Jews.  And  our  Lord  probably  had 
reference  to  it  when  He  appointed 
seventy  disciples,  and  sent  them  forth 
as  assistants  to  the  apostles.  But  the 
point  for  us  to  seize  concerning  this 
number  is,  that  it  would  afford  ade- 
quate relief  to  Moses  ;  the  answer  of 
the  Lord  to  his  appeal  was  sufficient  and 
satisfactory. 

2.  The  selection  of  these  assistants. 
"  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Gather 
unto  me  seventy  men  of  the  elders  of 

196 


Israel,  whom  thou  knowest  to  be,"  &o. 
The  choice  of  the  seventy  was  assigned 
to  Moses.  The  people  being  so  unstable 
and  wayward  were  not  fit  to  be  en- 
trusted with  the  choice.  Moses  was  to 
select  persons  who  were  elders  not 
merely  in  respect  of  years,  but  also  in 
ability  and  character,  and  influence 
with  the  people  for  good.  If  Moses 
made  the  selection  himself,  he  would 
have  no  ground  for  complaint  after- 
wards. 

3.  The  qualiflcation  imparted  to  these 
assistants.  "  And  I  will  come  down  and 
talk  with  thee  there  :  and  I  will  take 
of  the  spirit  which  is  upon  thee,"  »kc. 
This  does  not  imply  any  diminution  of 
the  Divine  grace  and  power  to  Moses. 
Unto  them  was  to  be  granted  a  measure 
of  the  spirit  which  had  been  given  in 
such  great  fulness  to  Lim ;  truth, 
wisdom,  courage,  piety,  power,  were  to 
be  bestowed  upon  them  to  fit  them  for 
their  duties  and  responaibilities.  **  We 
do  not  find  that  Mosea  was  less  fit  for 
government  than  he  was  before  :  rather 
his  gifts  were  derived  to  others,  as  one 
candle  lighteth  another,  and  yet  the 
light  is  not  diminished."  God  never 
calls  any  one  to  the  discharge  of  any 
duty  without  granting  him  ability  for 
the  same.  When  we  are  clear  as  to 
the  Divine  call  we  may  be  confident  as 
to  the  Divine  qualification. 

Such  was  God's  gracious  answer  to 
the  appeal  of  Moses.     That  appeal  was 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CUAF.  XI. 


■omewliat  imperfect  and  faulty ;  it  was 
impetuous,  and,  to  a  certain  extent,  ex- 
pressive of  discontent  and  passion  ;  but 
it  was  the  utterance  of  a  true  and  noble 
gpirit,  of  one  whose  zeal  in  the  work 
assigned  him  by  God  was  most  ardent, 
and  who  was  sublimely  forgetful  of  self 
in  his  solicitude  for  the  glory  of  God. 
So  the  Lord  answers  him  by  granting 
him  relief. 

II.  The  Lord's  Answer  to  the  Appeal 
of  His  Perverse  People. 

**  And  say  thou  unto  the  people. 
Sanctify  yourselves  against  to-morrow," 
&c.     This  answer — 

1.  Recognises  the  sinful  character  of 
their  appeal.  *'  Ye  have  wept  in  the 
ears  of  the  Lord,  saying,"  &c.  "  Tears, 
of  what  sort  soever,  have  a  voice  in 
them  (Psa.  xxxix.  12),  as  blood  hath 
(Gen.  iv.  10).''  Their  sin  is  manifest 
(1)  In  thelowness  of  their  supreme  de- 
sire. "  Who  shall  give  us  flesh  to  eat  ?" 
Their  highest  and  most  eager  longing 
was  for  the  gratification  of  their  animal 
appetites.  (2)  In  their  depreciation  of 
the  Divine  blessings.  "  It  was  well 
with  us  in  Egypt  .  .  .  Why  came  we 
forth  out  of  Egypt  1 "  Their  emancipa- 
tion from  slavery  with  its  cruelty  and 
unutterable  degradation,  the  provisions 
with  which  they  were  so  bounteously 
supplied,  the  glorious  inheritance  which 
was  promised  to  them,  these  things 
they  disparaged  as  unworthy  of  com- 
parison with  the  dainties  of  Egypt 
which  they  had  sacrificed  They  pre- 
ferred cucumbers  to  freedom,  &c.  (3) 
In  their  contempt  of  the  Divine 
Presence.  **  Ye  have  despised  the  Lord 
which  is  among  you."  The  unbelief 
expressed  in  the  enquiry,  **  Who  will 
give  us  flesh  to  eat  %  "  was  a  despising 
of  the  Lord.  It  was  a  questioning,  if 
not  a  denial,  of  His  power,  and  that 
after  the  extraordinary  displays  of  His 
power  which  they  had  witnessed.  God 
marks  the  feelings  which  find  utter- 
ance in  our  cries  to  Him,  or  to  His 
■ervants. 

2.  Demands  'preparation  for  the  grant- 
ing of  their  appeal.  *'  Sanctify  your- 
gelves  against  to-morrow,  and  ye  shall 


eat  flesh."  Keil  and  Del.  explain  **  sane- 
tify  yourselves;"** to  prepare  themselves 
by  purifications  for  the  revelation  of 
the  glory  of  God  in  the  miraculous 
gift  of  flesh."  The  interpretation  of 
Fuerst  is  in  substantial  agreement  with 
this.  They  had  sinned  grievously 
against  God  ;  and  now  they  must  pre- 
pare themselves  by  ablutions  and  by 
humbling  of  themselves,  for  the  extra- 
ordinary manifestation  of  the  Divine 
power. 

3.  Promises  the  most  ahundaid  hestow- 
ment  of  that  which  they  had  so  passionately 
and  sinfully  desired.  "  The  Lord  will 
give  you  flesh,  and  ye  shall  eat.  Ye 
shall  not  eat  one  day,  nor  two  days, 
nor  five  days,  neither  ten  days,  nor 
twenty  days  ;  but  even  a  month  of  days," 
(fee.  Inordinately  they  had  craved  flesh  ; 
generally  and  openly  they  had  wept  for 
it ;  and  God  determines  to  bestow  it 
upon  them  in  super-abundance.  Their 
clamorous  demand  shall  be  granted  ; 
and  the  granting  of  it  shall  be  their 
punishment.  **  He  gave  them  their 
request ;  but  sent  leanness  into  their 
soul."  No  punishment  can  be  more 
terrible  than  to  grant  the  desires  of  a 
soul  in  which  carnal  appetites  are  su- 
preme. Let  our  desires  be  subject  in 
all  things  to  the  wise  and  gracious  will 
of  God,   (a) 

Conclusion.     Mark  well — 

1.  The  disgusting  nature  of  the  sins 
of  gluttony  and  drunkenness. 

2.  The  necessity  of  firmly  controlling 
carnal  desires.  Even  those  animal  appe- 
tites which  are  lawful  must  be  kept 
subordinate  to  higher  things. 

3.  The  necessity  of  submissiveness  in 
prayer, 

'*We,  ignorant  of  ourselves 
Beg   often  our   own  harms,  which    tba  wis© 

powers, 
Deny  us  for  our  good  ;  so  find  we  profit. 
By  losing  of  our  prayers." — Shakespeare* 

Let  us  pray  in  the  spirit  of  Him  who 
in  His  most  intense  agony  said,  **  Never- 
theless, not  My  will,  but  Thine,  be 
done." 


V- 


'VI  v^ 


I$7 


CHAP.  XI. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY;    NUMBERS. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(rt)  Mr.  Edmund  Calamy  relates,  in  his 
Life,  that  some  persons  of  the  name  of  Mart, 
in  whose  family  he  resided  for  some  time,  bad 
a  son  who  discovered  the  most  wicked  and 
impious  di-'j  osition.  When  confined  in  prison, 
he  wrote  lettf^ra  professing  penitence  ;  but  as 
soon  as  he  had  an  opportunity  he  returned  to 
his  former  sins. 

This  young  man  had  been  the  darling  of 
both  his  fi'.iier  and  mother;  and  the  latter  had 
set  her  affections  upon  him  to  so  great  a  degree 
that  when  she  saw  him  a  monster  of  wicked- 
ness, she  became  deranged,  and  attempted  to 
destroy  herself,  which  she  at  length  effected. 
So  far  from  being  suitably  impressed  with  this 
awful  event,  her  son  now  proceeded  to  greater 
lergths  in  wickedness.  At  length  he  pro- 
fessed to  be  sorry  for  his  depraved  course,  and 
applied  to  the  Rev.  Samuel  Pomfret  to  inter- 
cede for  him  with  his  father.  He  was  made 
ready  for  sea,  but,  unhappily,  became  connected 
with  a  gang  of  villains,  and,  on  the  very  night 
before  he  was  to  set  sail,  he  robbed  Mr. 
Pomfret,  was  pursued,  tried,  and  condemned 
to  die. 

On  the  Sabbath  preceding  the  Wednesday 
on  which  he  was  condemned  to  die,  his  father 
entreated  Dr.  Calamy  tc  accompany  him  that 
evening  to  his  cell  in  Newgate,  to  converse 
with  his  unhappy  son,  and  to  givo  hJB  opinion 
as  to  the  propriety  of  seeking  to  obtain  his 
pardon.  The  doctor  went,  and  found  him  in 
a  very  awful  state  of  mind,  resenting  different 
things  which  he  conceived  his  father  had  done 
wrong,  and  saying  that  he  might  obtain  a 
pardon  for  him,  if  he  would  but  part  with 
some  of  his  money.  In  vain  did  the  doctor 
expostulate  with  him  on  the  improper  feelings 
he  manifested,  and  entreat  him  to  humble 
himself  before  God  on  account  of  his  sins,  as 
the  only  way  of  engaging  his  friends  to  obtain 
for  him  a  reprieve.  His  reply  was,  "  Sir,  1 
scorn  anything  of  that  nature;  and  would 
rather  die  with  my  company."  The  doctor 
reasoned  with  him  on  the  existence  of  a  here- 
after, charged  him  with  the  death  of  his 
mother,  taxed  him  with  the  murder  of  some 
persons  abroad,  whose  blood  he  had  actually 
shed,  and  showed  him  the  heavy  punishment 
he  must  endure  in  an  eternal  world,  unless  he 
turned  to  God,  repeated  of  his  eins^  and  prayed 
for  pardon  through  the  atonement  of  the  Lord 
Jesus.  He  admitted  the  truth  of  all  these 
things,  but  was  filled  with  trifling  unconcern. 
He  frankly  said  that  he  had  no  b^pe  of  being 
better  in  his  character,  and  thnt,  on  the  con- 
trary, he  was  satisfied  he  should  grow  worse. 
The  next  morning  he  was  visited  by  Dr. 
Jekyl,  who  asked  him  whether,  during   the 


whole  time  he  had  been  confined  in  Newgate, 
he  had  once  bowed  his  knees  to  the  great  God, 
making  it  his  earnest  request  to  Him  to  give 
him  a  sense  of  his  sins,  and  to  create  in  him 
a  tender  heart ;  he  admitted  that  he  had  not, 
nor  did  he  think  it  of  any  use.  He  was  pro- 
mised that  if  he  would  agree  to  pray  morning 
and  evening  for  the  grace  of  God.  an  effort 
should  be  made  with  every  probability  of  suc- 
cess, for  a  reprieve,  and  subsequently  a  pardon. 
But  he  would  make  no  engagement,  and  was 
hung  on  the  day  appointed. 

On  the  day  of  his  execution,  the  father  of 

this    unhappy  young  man  told  Dr.    Calamy 

that  when   the   culprit    was  a  very   young 

child,     he     was     exceedingly     ill     with     a 

fever,  and  that  both   his   wife  and   himself, 

thinking   their   lives  were  bound  up  in    the 

life  of  the  child,  were  exceedingly  importunate 

with   God  in  prayer  that  his  life  might    be 

spared.    A  pious   mother   expostulated  with 

him  on  the  vehemence   he   manifested,  and 

said    she   dreaded    the    consequence    of    his 

praying  in  such  a  way,  and  that  it   became 

him  to  leave  the  matter  to  an  infinitely  wise 

God.     At  length  the  father  said,   "  Let    him 

prove  what  he  will,  so  he  is  but  spared,  I  shall 

be  satisfied.**     The  old  man  added,  *'  This  I 

now  see  to  have  been  my  folly.     For,  through 

the  just  hand  of  God,  I  have  lived  to  see  this 

wretched  son  of  mine  a  heart-breaking  cross 

to   them    that  loved   him  with   the   greatest 

tenderness,  a  disgrace  to  my  whole  family,  and 

likely  to  bring  my  grey  hairs  with  sorrow  to 

my  grave.     I  read  my  sin  very  distinctly  in 

my  punishment ;  but  must  own  that  God  is 

righteous  in  all  His  ways,  and  holy  in  all  His 

works.'' — R.  Aivine,  A.M. 

It  is  of  great  importance  that  we  should  en- 
treat the  Spirit  of  God  to  enable  us  to  pray  as 
we  ought.  It  is  quite  possible  to  ask  for  what 
may  appear  to  us  good  things,  but  which,  if 
we  had  thtm,  would  prove  evil.  Rachel,  in- 
dulging a  petulant  disposition,  said,  "  Give 
me  children,  or  I  die ; "  her  desire  was  granted, 
and  as  the  result,  she  died. 

The  late  Mr.  Kilpin,  of  Exeter,  writes,  "  I 
knew  a  case  in  which  the  minister,  praying 
over  a  child,  apparently  dying,  said :  '  If  it  be 
Thy  will,  spare  — '  .:.he  poor  mother's  soul 
yearning  for  ber  belovtod,  exclaimed :  *  It  must 
be  His  will  1  I  cannot  bear  e/s.'  The  minister 
stopped.  To  the  surpiise  of  many  the  child 
recovered  ;  and  the  mother,  after  almost  "^ 
suffering  martyrdom  by  him  while  a  stripling, 
lived  to  see  him  hanged  before  h  a  was  two-and-  \ 
twenty  I  Oh,  it  is  good  to  say,  •  Not  my  will, 
but  Thine  be  done.*  ''—Ibid, 


198 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  XL 


The  Unbelief  op  Good  Men,  and  its  Divine  Antidote. 


{Verses  21-23.) 


This  incident  in  the  history  leads  us 
to  consider — 

I.  The  proneness  of  even  the  best 
of  men  to  unbelief. 

When  we  think  of  the  character  of 
Moses,  and  the  experiences  of  his  past 
life,  it  seems  almost  incredible  that  he 
should  "  stagger  at  the  promise  of  God 
through  unbelief"  He  was  one  of  the 
great  heroes  of  faith  (Heb.  xi.  24-28); 
he  had  witnessed  the  most  marvellous 
manifestations  of  the  Divine  power ;  he 
had  himself  been  the  instrument  of 
some  of  its  most  extraordinary  achieve- 
ments ;  yet  for  a  little  time  hi^i  faith  in 
the  promise  and  power  of  God  fails. 
The  error  of  Moses  consisted  in  his 
arraying  the  conclusions  of  human 
reason  '■.gainst  the  promise  of  God.  (a) 
To  his  judgment  the  thing  promised 
seemed  impossible.  Moses  considered 
(1)  The  number  to  be  supplied.  "  And 
Moses  said,  The  people  among  whom  I 
am  are  six  hundred  thousand  footmen." 
The  whole  population  could  not  have 
been  less  than  two  millions,  and  was 
probably  more  numenais.  (2)  The  time 
for  which  the  supply  was  to  be  con- 
tinued. "  And  Thou  hast  said,  I  will 
give  them  flesh,  that  they  may  eat  a 
whole  month."  (3)  The  inadequacy  of 
their  resources.  *'  Shall  the  flocks  and 
the  herds  be  slain  for  them  to  suffice 
them  ?  or  shall  all  the  fish  of  the  sea 
be  gathered  together  for  them,  to  suf- 
fice them  1 "  Of  the  flocks  and  herds 
some  were  needed  for  the  sacrifices,  and 
some  would  be  required  when  they 
settled  in  the  Promised  Land.  The 
result  of  the  consideration  of  the  case 
by  Moses  was,  that  he  could  not  see 
how  the  promise  could  be  fufilled  ;  and 
not  seeing  this,  he  failed  to  believe  the 
promise.  Even  the  most  distinguished 
servants  of  the  Lord  amongst  men  have 
their  infirmities,  ih)  *'  We  need  not 
to  labour  too  curiously,"  says  Attersoll, 
"to  clear  the  faithful  of  the  remnants 
of  sin  and  other  infirmities,  forasmuch 
as  he  and  other  the  best  of  God's  ser- 


vants have  their  failino^s  in  faith  and 
obedience,  as  we  see  in  the  examples  of 
Abraham,  Lot,  Noah,  Isaac,  Jacob, 
David,  Peter,  Thomas,  Zacharias,  and 
which  of  them  not*?  (2  Chron.  xv.  17; 
xvi.  12;  Rom.  vii.  17-19)  because  we 
know  in  part,  and  we  prophesy  in  part ; 
we  are  yet  in  our  journey,  and  walk  in 
our  way,  and  run  in  a  race,  we  are  not 
yet  attained  to  our  journey's  end,  W3 
have  not  vet  obtained  the  crown.  Ajjain, 
we  proceed  all  from  an  unclean  fountain 
(Job  xiv.  4).  There  is  a  combat  re- 
maining in  us  between  the  flesh  and  the 
Spirit  (Rom.  vii.  23;  Gal.  v.  17),  and 
these  are  contrary  the  one  to  the  other, 
and  can  never  be  reconciled."  Two  in- 
ferences should  be  heeded  : — 

1.  The  most  eminent  saints  continualli/ 
need  the  grace  of  God.  "  Hold  Thou 
me  up,  and  I  shall  be  safe,"  is  an  ap- 
propriate aspiration  for  even  the  holiest 
of  men.  And  this,  too,  "  Lord,  increase 
our  faith." 

2.  It  behoves  us  to  he  slow  to  censure 
men.  We  should  rather  take  heed  to 
ourselves,  that  we  fail  not. 

*'  Search  thine  own  heart.     What  painetb 
thee 
In  others,  in  thyself  may  be ; 
All  dust  is  frail,  all  flesh  is  weak ; 
Be  thou  the  true  man  thou  dost  sfeek," 

Whittier. 

II.  The  Divine  Antidote  for  unbe- 
lief in  the  good. 

1.  Consideration  of  the  past  deeds  of 
the  Lord.  *'  And  the  Lord  said  unto 
Moses,  Is  the  Lord's  hand  waxed 
short  *? "  What  He  has  done  is  an  ex- 
ample of  what,  under  similar  circum- 
stances and  conditions,  we  may  expect 
Him  to  do  again  "  The  power  that  is 
unlimited  can  never  be  diminished.^^ 
Faith  argues  from  tiie  past  to  the  pre- 
sent and  the  future.  David  did  so,  with 
the  grandest  results  (1  Sam.  xvii.  34- 
37  ;  Psa.  Ixiii.  7).  So  also  did  Paul 
(2  Cor.    i.  8-10;  2.  Tim.  iv.   17,  18). 

199 


CHAP.  XI. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


2.  Consideration  of  the  unchangeable- 
ness  of  the  Lord  "  Is  the  Lord's  hand 
waxed  short  1 "  "  With  whom  is  no 
variableness,  neither  shadow  of  turn- 
ing." He  is  "  the  same  yesterday,  and 
to-day,  and  for  ever."  "  Thou  art  the 
same,  and  Thy  years  shall  have  no  end." 
"  I  am  the  Lord,  I  change  not."  The 
consideration  of  the  immutability  of 
God  should  inspire  confidence  in  His 
promises. 

3.  Consideration  of  the  faithfulness  of 
God.  *'  Thou  shalt  see  now  whether 
My  word  shall  come  to  pass  unto  thee 
or  not."  "  God  is  not  a  man,  that  He 
should  lie  ;  neither  the  son  of  man,  that 
He  should  repent :  hath  He  said,  and 


shall  He  not  do  ?  or  hath  He  spoken, 
and  shall  He  not  make  it  good  1 " 
"  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away, 
but  My  words  shall  not  pass  away." 
Here,  then,  in  the  consideration  of 
these  great  themes  is  Heaven's  anti- 
dote for  the  pronenesa  to  unbelief  in 
godly  men. 

Conclusion : 

The  subject  suggests  the  inspiring 
fact  that  history  is  an  argument  for 
faith  in  God  of  ever-increasing  power.  In- 
calculably greater  to-day  than  when  it 
was  addressed  to  Moses  is  the  force  of 
the  Divine  demand,  "  Is  the  Lord's  hand 
waxed  short  ] "  as  a  rebuke  of  unbelief 
and  an  encouragement  of  faith. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  I  like  to  reason  ;  I  like  to  search  out 
results  from  causes;  but  it  is  sweet  also,  in 
the  midst  of  the  turmoils  and  troubles  of  life, 
to  rest  in  faith  in  God.  It  is  sweet  to  be  able 
to  say,  "  I  do  not  care  for  to-morrow.  I  do 
not  fear  what  shall  befall  me.  I  will  trust  in 
God."  To  understand  the  philosophy  of  a 
Divine  command,  where  I  can,  affords  me 
satisfaction ;  but  where  a  command  comes 
from  such  an  authority,  and  with  such  variety 
of  illustration  in  nature,  I  do  not  care  whether 
I  understand  the  philosophy  of  it  or  not.  My 
Boul  is  hungry  for  it,  and  1  accept  it  because 
my  God  has  given  it.  I  trust  and  rest  in  God 
simply  because  He  has  said,  "  You  may,  and 
you  must."  That  is  ground  enough,—  H.  W. 
Beecher, 

(Jb)  All  these  four  refloctive  men  are  in 
some  way  unbelieveis.  Nathanael  cultivates 
inward  piety,  but  he  cannot  believe  that  the 
holy  heaven  and  the  common  world  shall  ever 
be  onf,  as  if  angels  came  and  went  between 
them.  Matthew  earnestly  desires,  and  pro- 
motes as  he  can,  the  rule  of  justice  among 
men  ;  but  he  cannot  believe  that  the  law  of 
Truth  will  ever  be  the  law  of  outward  religious 
and  political  society.  Philip  is  a  studtnt  of 
the  Scriptures,  and  caiv  see  much  of  the  God 
of  Israel  in  them  and  in  the  world,  but  not 
enough  anywhere  ;  and  he  cannot  believe  that 
God  will  show  Himself  to  man  so  as  thoroughly 


to  content  the  pious  as  the  yror!d  seems  to 
satisfy  the  worldly.  Thomas  has  choson  the 
"  better  part  ;  "  he  is  determined  to  know  the 
truth  and  not  to  trost  to  deceits.  He,  for  one, 
will  examine  the  pretensions  and  the  evidences 
of  things.  He  has  examined,  and  is  quite  con- 
vinced that  Jesus  has  no  mere  pretensions. 
Jesus,  at  least,  is  a  real  man,  if  there  be  no 
other  and  never  should  be.  And  yet  Thomas 
cannot  believe  that  "  the  way"  Jesus  takes  is  a 
safe  successful  way.  Excellent  men  these 
four  I  reflective  men;  yet  all  in  some  degree, 
each  in  his  own  manner,  unbelievers  I  —  Thomas 
T.  Lynch. 

(c)  Is  God  all-mighty  ?  Then  have  no 
fears  about  the  realization  of  His  promises. 
Oftentimes  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  certain 
promises  are  to  be  realized.  We  have  nothing 
to  do  with  that  whatever.  God  keeps  our 
hands  off  His  promises  quite  as  surely  as  He 
keeps  them  off  His  stars,  and  if  He  won't  let 
us  intermeddle  with  His  planets,  and  do  our 
little  scrubbing  and  burnishing  upon  those 
great  lights,  He  will  not  ask  us  to  have  any- 
thing to  do  with  the  outworking  aud  realiza- 
tion of  His  promises.  He  asks  that  their 
fulfilment  be  loft  to  Him,  and  afterwards  he 
will  challenge  our  own  life  as  the  witness,  and 
answer,  and  confirmation  of  all  that  is  gracious 
and  all  that  io  sure  io  the  outworking  of  His 
words  of  promise. — Joseph  Parker j  U.D, 


The  Glorious  Right  Hand  of  the  Lord. 


(Verse  23.) 


For  Introduction  see  the  Illustra- 
tions, (a) 

I  shall  try  to  mention  some  four  or 
five  cases  in  which  men  act  as  if  they 
200 


really  believed   that  God's  hand   bad 
waxed  short. 

I.  With  regard  to  the  Church  as  a 
whole,  how  often  is  it  true  that  she  so 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  XI. 


behaveth  herself  as  if  she  had  a  ques- 
tion in  her  mind  as  to  whether  the 
Lord's  hand  had  waxed  short  1 

She  believes  that  the  Divine  hand 
was  once  mighty  enough  to  bring  in 
three  thousand  in  one  day  by  the  sim- 
ple preaching  of  Peter.  She  believes 
that  her  God  was  with  her  in  olden 
times  so  mightily  that  her  poor  illiterate 
preachers  were  more  than  a  match  for 
the  scholars  of  Socrates  and  Solon,  and 
were  able  to  overturn  the  gods  of  the 
heathen,  though  they  had  both  poetry 
and  philosophy  to  be  their  bulwarks. 
She  believes  all  this,  and  yet  how  often 
doth  she  act  as  though  the  Gospel  had 
become  effete  and  outworn,  and  the 
Spirit  of  God  had  been  utterly  with- 
drawn from  her !  .  .  .  The  doubts,  the 
fears,  the  calculations,  the  policies,  the 
judicious  advices  of  too  many  Christians 
prove  my  point,  that  often  the  Church 
acts  as  if  she  thought  the  Lord's  hand 
were  waxed  short.  0  Zion !  get  thee  up  ! 
Come  thou  forth  in  simple  confidence 
in  His  promise,  and  thou  shalt  see 
whether  He  will  not  do  according  to 
His  Word. 

II.  When  believers  doubt  their  God 
with  regard  to  Providence,  the  ques- 
tion might  well  be  asked  of  them,  ''  Is 
the  Lord's  hand  waxed  short  1  " 

Some  have  had  many  losses  and 
crosses  in  their  business.  Instead  of 
getting  forward,  they  are  going  back, 
and  perhaps  even  bankruptcy  stares 
them  in  the  face.  Or  possibly,  being 
hard-working  men,  they  may  have  been 
long  out  of  employment,  and  nothing 
Beems  to  be  before  their  eyes  but  the 
starvation  of  themselves  and  their  little 
ones.  It  is  hard  to  bear  this  .  .  .  But 
dost  thou  doubt,  0  believer,  as  to 
whether  God  will  fulfil  His  promise, 
wherein  He  said,  *' His  place  of  defence"? 
&o.  (Isa.  xxxiii.  16).  Wouldst  thou 
question  the  advice  of  thy  Master : 
"Therefore  take  no  thought"?  &c. 
(Matt.  vi.  26-32).  When  not  a  sparrow 
falls  to  the  ground  without  your 
Father,  and  the  very  hairs  of  your 
head  are  all  numbered,  yet  you  must 
mistrust  and  doubt  Him  !  (b) 

III.  This  question    might  he  verj 


naturally  suggested  when  a  man  who 
has  faith  in  Christ  is  exercised  with 
doubts  and  fears  with  regard  to  his 
own  final  perseverance  or  his  own  pre- 
sent acceptance  in  Christ. 

Doubt  not,  I  pray  you ;  believe  your 
God,  and  you  shall  prosper.  The  joy 
of  the  Lord  is  our  strength,  not  the 
melancholy  of  our  hearts. 

IV.  *'Is  the  Lord's  hand  waxed 
short  *?  "  is  a  question  which  I  may  well 
ask  of  any  who  are  convinced  of  sin, 
but  are  afraid  to  trust  their  souls  now, 
at  this  very  hour,  in  the  hand  of  a 
loving  saviour. 

*'0h,  He  cannot  save  me,  I  am  so 
guilty,  so  callous !  Could  I  repent  as 
I  ought,  could  I  but  feel  as  I  ought, 
then  He  could  save  me ;  but  I  am 
naked,  imd  poor,  and  miserable.  I  have 
grieved  away  His  Spirit ;  I  have  sinned 
against  light  and  knowledge — against 
mercy — against  constant  grace  received. 
He  cannot  save  me."  "  Is  the  Lord's 
hand  waxed  short  ?  "  Did  He  not  save 
the  chief  of  sinners,  Saul  of  Tarsus  1 
Why,  then,  can  he  not  save  you  ?  Is 
it  not  written,  "The  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ  His  Son,  cleanseth  us  from  all 
sin  ?  "  Has  that  blood  lost  its  efificacy  ? 
Wouldst  thou  add  to  thy  sin?  Then 
doubt  Christ's  power  to  save  thee.  But 
wouldst  thou  be  saved  ?  Then  dare, 
in  the  teeth  of  all  thy  sins,  to  trust  my 
Master, 


"He  is  able, 
He  is  willing  :  doubt  no  more.' 


If 


He  is  able,  for  He  is  God.  He  is 
willing,  for  He  that  died  for  us  cannot 
be  unwilling.  Christ  did  not  make 
any  exception ;  He  said,  "  Him  that 
comethf"  and  that  means  any  "  him  "  in 
all  the  world  who  comes.  Come,  then, 
I  pray  thee  ;  trust  Him,  &c. 

V.  You  say,  do  you,  that  God  will 
not  avenge  your  sins  upon  you,  that 
ye  may  go  on  in  your  iniquities,  and 
yet  meet  with  no  punishment ;  that  ye 
may  reject  Christ,  and  do  it  safely  ; 
trample  on  His  blood,  and  yet  God  is  so 
calm,  that  His  anger  will  never  flame 
forth  against  you  ?  Well,  soul,  "  thou 
shalt  see  whether  His  word  shall  coma 

201 


CHAP.  XI, 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


to  pass  or  not."  But  let  me  tell  thee 
His  hand  is  not  waxed  short ;  He  is  as 
strong  to  punish  as  when  He  bade  the 
floods  cover  the  earth ;  as  powerful  to 


avenge  as  when  He  rained  hail  out  of 
heaven  upon  the  cities  of  the  plain. 
Thou  shalt  see  whether  He  will  keep 
Hi'i  word  or  not. — 0,  H.  Spurgeon, 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  It  is  a  singular  thing  that  such  a  ques- 
tion as  this  should  ever  be  asked  at  all :  "  Is 
the    Lord's    hand    waxed    short  ? "      If    we 
look  anywhere   and  everywhere,  apart  from 
the   conduct   of    man,    there    is    nothing   to 
suggest     the     suspicion.        Look     at     God's 
rreation!      Is    there    anything   there    wJiich 
would  make  you  say,  "  Is    the   Lord's    hand 
waxed  short?"     What  pillar  of  the  heavens 
hatb  begun  to  reel  ?     What  curtain  of  the  sky 
hath  been  rent  or   moth-eaten  ?      Have  the 
foundations  of  the  earth  begun  to  start?     Do 
they  not  abide  as  the  Lord  hath  settled  them? 
Hath  the  sun  grown  dim  witti  age?  or  have 
the    starry    laoaps   flickered    or  gone  out  in 
darkness?     Are  there  signs  of  decay  to-day 
upon  the  face  of  God's  creation  ?     Have  not 
howling  tempests,  the    yawning    ocean,  and 
death-bearing  hurricanes,  asserted  but  yester- 
day their  undiminished  might?     Say,  is  not 
the  green  earth  as  full  of  vitality,  as  ready 
to  yield  us  harvests  now,  as  it  ever  hath  been  ? 
Do  the  showers  fall  less  frequently?      Hath 
the  sun  ceased  to  warm  ?     Are  there  any  signs 
and  tokens  that  God's  creation  is  totteriog  to 
its  decay?     No,  journey  where  you  will,  you 
will  see  God  is  potent  upon  the  face  of  the 
earth,  and  in  the  very  bowels  of  the  globe,  as 
He  was  when  He  first  said,  '•  Let  there  be  light, 
and  there  was  light."     There  is  nothing  which 
would  tempt  us  to  the  surmise  or  the  suspicion 
that  the  Lord's  hand  hath  waxed  short.    And 
look  ye  too  in  Providence  ;  is  there  aught  there 
that  would  suggest  the  question  ?    Are  not  His 
prophecies  still  fulfilled  ?     Doth  He  not  cause 
all  things  to  work  together  for  good  ?     Do  the 
cattle  on  a  thousand  hills  low  out  to  Him  for 
hunger?    Do  you  meet  with  the  skeletons  of 
birds    tuat    have    fallen  to  the  ground  from 
famine? Doth  Heneglectto giveto  thefishtheir 
food,  or  do  the  sea-monsters  die  ?    Doth  not  God 
itill  open  His   hand  and  supply  the  want  of 
every  living  thing  ?     Is  He  less  bounteous  to- 
day than  He   was  in  the  time  of  Adam  ?     Is 
not  His  cornucopia  still  as  full  ?    Doth  He  not 
still  scatter  mercies  with  both  His  hands  right 
lavishly  ?    Are  there  any  tokens  in  Providence 
any  more  than  in  Nature,  that  God's  arm  hath 
waxed  short?     And  look  ye  too  in  the  matter 
of   Grace:  is  there  any  token  in  the  work  of 
grace  that  God's  power  is  failing  ?     Are  not 
sinners  still  saved  ?     Are  not  profiigates  still 
reclaimed  ?    Are  not  drunkards  still  uplifted 


from  their  sties  to  wit  upon  the  throne  with 
princes  ?  Are  not  hr.rlots  as  truly  reclaimed 
as  were  those  in  the  dayu  of  Christ?  Is  not 
the  Word  of  God  still  quick  and  powerful, 
sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword  ?  Which 
of  His  arrows  hath  been  blunted  ?  Wuere  have 
ye  seen  the  sword  of  tLe  Lord  rinapped  in 
twain?  When  hath  God  assayed  to  melt  a 
h^art  and  failed  in  the  attempt?  Which  of 
Hi3  people  has  found  the  riches  of  His  grace 
draiaed  dry?  Which  of  His  children  has  had 
to  mourn  thpt  tho  unsearchable  riches  of 
Oarist  had  failed  to  supply  his  need?  la 
Grace,  as  well  as  in  Providence  aud  Nature, 
the  unauiciious  verdict  is  that  God  is  still 
Almighty,  that  He  doeth  as  He  wills,  and 
fulfilleth  all  His  promises  and  His  counsels. 
How  is  it,  then,  that  such  a  question  as  this 
over  came  from  the  lips  of  God  Himself? 
Who  suggested  it?  What  suggested  it? 
Wnat  could  there  have  been  that  should  lead 
Him  or  any  of  His  creatures  to  say,  "  Is  the 
Lord's  hand  waxed  short?  "  We  answer,  there 
is  but  one   creature  that  God  has  made  that 

ever  doubts  Him It  was  left  for 

maUy  the    most   favoured  of   all  creatures,  to 
mistrust  his  God. — C.  H  Spurgeon. 

(6)  And  now,  O  true  believer,  what  sayest 
thou  to  this  picture?  In  the  cold,  cold 
winter,  when  the  snows  have  fallen  thick  on 
every  tree,  and  the  ground  is  hard  and  crisp, 
ye  have  sometimes  seen  the  charitable  man 
open  wide  the  window  of  his  house,  and  scatter 
crumbs  along  the  white  snow,  and  ye  have  seen 
the  birds  come  from  all  the  trees  around,  and 
there  they  ate  and  were  satisfied.  A  slanderer 
who  lives  next  door  tells  you  that  that  man 
starves  his  children.  Do  you  believe  him? 
Feed  the  sparrows  and  neglect  the  offspring 
of  his  loins — give  crumbs  to  birds,  and  not 
feed  his  sons  and  daughters?  You  feel  in- 
stinctively that  the  kind  heart  which  remem- 
bers the  fowls  of  heaven  must  yet  more 
remember  his  own  offspring.  But  what  sayest 
thou  to  this  picture  concerning  thyself  ?  Thy 
God  heareth  the  young  ravens  when  they  cry, 
and  giveth  liberally  to  all  the  creatures  that 
His  hands  hath  made,  and  will  He  forget  His 
sons  and  His  daughters — His  people  bought 
with  blood,  His  own  peculiar  heritage  ?  No ; 
dare  to  believe  Him  now.  His  hand  has  not 
waxed  short.  Dare  to  trust  Him  now,'^ 
Ibid. 


203 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  n. 


The  Question  Concerning  the  Lord's  Hand. 

{Verse  23.) 


"  Is  the  Lord's  hand  waxed  short  1 " 
Let  us  apply  this  question — 

I.  To  the  Subject  of  Creative  Mani- 
festations. We  are  in  the  midst  of  a 
marvellous  universe.  Full  of  the  wisdom 
and  power  of  God.  Now,  some  suppose 
Creation  was  finished,  as  related  in 
Genesis.  But  that  relates  to  this  world 
only.  Creation  glorifies  God.  Ke  can 
continue  to  create,  kc.  He  may  do  so 
for  His  own  glory.  Myriads  of  worlds 
may  rise  in  magnificent  succession. 
Worlds  now  get  old,  may  decay,  and 
fall  into  ruin  ;  and  He  may  supply  their 
place.  As  in  the  revivifications  of  the 
seasons.     New  harvests,  new  forms,  &c. 

II.  To  Divine  Providences  for  Ilis 
Church  and  People. 

1.  The  Preservation  of  His  Church, 
Its  extension,  prosperity,  glory. 

2.  The  destruction  to  the  enemies  of  the 
Church.  In  the  past  He  did  it.  Egypt, 
Babylon,  &c. 

3 .  The  good  of  His  in  dividua  I  servan  ts. 
He  can  keep,  deliver,  bless.  However 
dark,  &c.  Overrule;  turn  crosses  into 
blessings,  &c. 

III.  To  the  Salvation  of  the  most 
guilty  and  obstinate  sinners. 


1.  Cannot  His  hand  reach  them  in  the 
lowest  pit  of  guilt  ? 

2.  Break  the  heart  of  the  flinty  rock  / 

3.  Humble  and  save  the  proudest  and 
worst  t  Manas.j-^h,  th°  thief,  Saul,  the 
Corinthians.  We  need  despair  of 
none. 

IV.  To  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine 
prophecies  and  promises. 

L  The  glory  of  the  Lord  filling  the 
earth.     Psa.  Ixxii.  17-19. 

2.  The  spread  of  universal  holiness. 

3.  Universal  worship.     Psa.  Ixvii. 

4.  The  salvation  of  the  world  to 
Christ.  Phil.  ii.  9-11.  The  world 
filled  with  righteousness,  peace,  and 
blessedness.  The  discouragements  may 
be  great  and  numerous ;  but  the  text 
answers  them  all. 

Application. 

1.  The  text  should  lead  us  to  Divine 
reliance.  Trust  in  the  Lord,  &o.  This 
will  cheer  and  strengthen  us. 

2.  To  joyous  hope.  No  need  of 
doubts  and  fears. 

3.  To  more  earnest  effort. 

4.  To  profound  humility,  God's 
hand  alone  can  do  His  work. — Jahez 
Burns y  D.D, 


Helpful  Thoughts  for  the  Lord's  Servants, 

{Verses  24-30.) 


This  section  of  the  history  presents 
several  topics  on  which  we  may  medi- 
tate with  advantage  : 

I.  The  Obedience  of  Moses,  an  ex- 
ample for  the  Lord's  Servants. 

"  And  Moses  went  out,  and  told  the 
people,"  &c.  (verse  24).  Very  recently 
Moses  had  doubted  the  word  of  the 
Lord,  and  questioned  His  ability  to  ful- 
fil His  promises ;  but  now  he  obeys  His 
commands,  trusting  in  Him  to  fulfil 
His  promises.  Doubt  is  not  the  normal 
state  of  a  good  man,  but  an  exceptional 
thing  in  his  life.  It  is  ours,  not  to 
question  the  Lord  ooncerning  the  reason 


of  His  commands,  or  the  way  in  which 
He  will  fulfil  His  promises  ;  but  trust- 
ing His  promises,  we  should  obey  His 
commands.  Faith  and  duty  are  ours  ; 
reasons  and  results  are  God's. 

II.  The  Bestowment  of  the  Spirit 
upon  the  seventy  Elders,  Encourage- 
ment for  the  Lord's  Servants. 

"  And  the  Lord  came  down  in  a 
cloud,  and  spake  unto  him,  and  took  of 
the  Spirit  that  was  upon  him,  and  gave 
unto  the  seventy  elders."     Notice  : — 

1.  The  Lord's  care  of  His  servants. 
By  granting  to  him  the  aid  of  these 
elders,   He   relieves  Moses  of  the  op- 

203 


CHAP.  SI 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


pression  of  the  burden  of  which  he  had 
complained.  When  the  duties  and 
responsibilities  of  His  servants  become 
too  heavy,  He  lightens  them  either  by 
diminishing  their  burdens,  or  by  in- 
creasing their  strength.  He  is  a 
gracious  Master,  <fec. 

2.  The  Lord^s  qualification  of  His 
servants.  When  the  elders  were  as- 
sembled about  the  tabernacle,  the 
cloud  of  the  Divine  Presence,  which  had 
soared  on  high  above  it,  came  down, 
and  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses,  and 
gave  of  His  Spirit  to  the  seventy  elders 
(See  notes  on  ver.  17).  Those  whom 
God  calls  to  duty  He  also  qualifies  for  it. 

3.  The  LorcVs  authentication  of  His 
servants.  "  And  it  came  to  pass,  when 
the  spirit  rested  upon  them,  they  pro- 
phesied, and  did  not  add.  But  there 
remained  two,"  &c.  Under  the  impulse 
and  inspiration  of  the  Spirit  of  God  they 
spoke  to  the  peo;  le  with  such  "  admir- 
able clearness  and  fulness,  and  readi- 
ness, and  aptness  of  expression,"  and 
wisdom,  that  all  who  heard  them  were 
convinced  that  God  was  with  them.  By 
this  sign  the  Lord  accredited  them 
to  their  office ;  this  was  their  cre- 
dential to  the  people,  the  Divine  warrant 
for  the  exercise  of  their  calling.  God 
still  authenticates  His  servants.  In  the 
holiness  of  their  lives,  in  their  qualifica- 
tions for  their  work,  and  in  the  useful- 
ness of  their  work,  we  mark  the  Divine 
credentials  of  the  servants  of  the 
Lord. 

III.  The  error  of  Joshua,  Admoni- 
tion to  the  Lord's  Servants. 

Two  of  the  persons  who  were  called 
to  the  eldership  did  not  go  up  to  the 
tabernacle,  but  remained  in  the  camp ; 
and  the  Spirit  came  upon  them  there, 
and  they  prophesied.  This  caused  some 
excitement,  and  a  boy  went  and  told  the 
matter  to  Moses.  "And  Joshua  the  son 
of  Nun,  the  servant  of  Moses,  one  of 
his  young  men,  answered  and  said.  My 
lord  Moses,  forbid  them."  The  prophe- 
sying of  Eldad  and  Medad  seemed  to 
him  an  irregular  and  unauthorised 
thing.     They  were  not  in  the  gompany 


of  the  others  ;  they  had  not  received 
the  gift  through  the  mediation  of 
Moses ;  and  Joshua  fears  that  if  they 
are  not  restrained,  the  honour  and 
authority  of  Moses  will  be  diminished. 
So  he  proposes  to  Moses  to  prohibit  it. 
I  discover  no  sufficient  reason  for  sup- 
posing that  Joshua  was  jealous  of  this 
prophesying  on  his  own  account.  He 
was  rather  jealous  for  the  honour  of 
M  )ses,  as  the  disciples  of  John  the  Bap- 
tist were  for  the  honour  of  their  Master 
(John  iii.  26).  Still  the  counsel  of 
Joshua  was  unwise  and  rash.  Let  us 
take  warning  from  his  mistake.  The 
Spirit  of  God  is  not  limited  by  our  poor 
notions  and  narrow  parties.  The  streams 
of  Divine  influence  are  much  too 
plenteous  -^o  be  confined  in  the  strait 
and  shallow  channels  which  we  have 
scooped  out  for  them.  The  true  way 
of  regarding  new  and  seemingly  irregu- 
lar manifestations  of  religious  feeling 
and  effort  is  indicated  by  Jesus  Christ 
in  Mark  ix.  38-4U,  and  by  the  Apostle 
Paul  in  Phil.  i.  14-18.     (a) 

IV.  The  Magnanimity  of  Moses,  an 
Example  for  the  Lord's  Servants. 

"  And  Moses  said  unto  him,  Enviest 
thou  for  my  sake  %  would  God  that," 
(fee.  So  far  from  being  displeased  with 
Eldad  and  Medad,  Moses,  who  sought 
not  his  own  honour,  but  the  glory  of 
God,  rejoiced  in  the  gifts  bestowed  upon 
them,  and  *'gave  expressions  to  the 
large-hearted  wish,  that  the  whole 
people  of  the  Lord  might  prophesy. 
And  most  assuredly  there  can  be  no 
such  thing  now,  under  the  grace  of  the 
New  Testament,  which  works  at  large 
and  unconstrained,  as  a  confining  of 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  to  this  or  to  that 
place,  to  the  communion  of  this  or  of 
that  party.  The  Spirit  bloweth  where 
He  listeth  ;  where  is  the  man  who  will 
or  can  hinder  Him  %  Whenever  devils 
are  cast  out  there  is  the  Spirit  of  God 
(Matt.  xii.  27,28);  wherever  the  name 
of  Jesus  is  confessed,  the  c  nifessor  of 
that  name  is  accej  ted  before  God, 
whether  he  stand  in  our  roll  or  noc,^ 
^Stier.     (6) 


204 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  XI. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  I  do  dislike  narrow  churches,  I  do 
dislike  little,  litt/e  self-enclosing,  self-subsist- 
ing clubs  of  so-called  Christian  professors,  I 
find  nothing  narrow  in  Ohristianity.  I  fiod 
Christianity  the  broadest  system,  either  of 
religion  or  of  thought,  or  of  philanthropy,  that 
I  can  find  in  the  world.  If  there  are  persons 
that  wrap  their  sectarian  garoaents  about  them, 
and  say,  "  We  are  the  people  of  Gjd,  and  there 
is  no  other  people  that  belong  to  Him,"  then 
are  they  liars,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  them. 
Little  people  that  live  in  a  nutshell,  which 
they  mistake  for  the  universe,  that  have  their 
own  litcle  Bethel,  and  their  own  little  hymn 
book,  and  theiro-wn  little  sectarian  movements, 
and  their  own  little  heaven,  I  do  not  know 
anything  about  them,  except  that,  having 
heard  about  them,  I  do  not  wish  to  prosecute 
inquiry  further.  If  there  are  such  people — 
no,  I  would  alter  that  grammar,  and  say  if 
there  be  such  people,  hoping  that  their 
existence  is  quite  contingent  and  future — if 
there  be  such  people  they  know  nothing  about 
the  Divine,  catholic,  universal  liberty  of  Jesus 
Christ's  teaching.  I  trust  that  we  all  belong 
to  the  Broad  Church,  that  we  hail  a  brother, 
whatever  be  the  temporary  name  by  which  he 
is  known  in  ecclesiastical  life ;  and  that  we 
allow  heart  to  speak  to  heart,  and  know 
something  of  the  intercourse  of  brotherly 
unity  in  Christ  Jesus. — Joseph  Parker,  U.D. 

(b)  If  ever  you  can  say  a  good  word  oi  a 
fellow-minister,  I  charge  it  upon  your  honour 
to  say  it,  and  if  you  cannot  speak  a  good  word 
you  need  not  speak  a  bad  one.  Don't  set  up 
your  own  style  of  preaching  as  the  standard 
by  which  to  try  the  preaching  of  all  other 
men.  Try  (hard  lesson  !)  to  be  thankful  for 
another  man's  siiccess.  Wben  you  can  heartily 
thank  God  for  another  minister's  prosperity 
(and  that  minister  in  your  own  neighhouihood), 
you  will  have  taken  an  eminent  position  in  the 
temple  of  Christian  magnanimity.  It  is  easy 
to  thank  God  for  the  success  of  a  man  who 
is  fifty  miles  distant  from  your  own  ministerial 
orbit;  but  to  give  thanks  for  the  success  of  a 
man  who  preaches  within  an  hour's  walk  of 
your  own  pulpit,  that  is  what  I  mean  by 
magnanimity.  Men  wbo  do  not  profess  Chris- 
tianity, are  not  expected  to  ct<nform  to  its 
requirements,  but  surely  its  expounders  and 
defenders  should  merge  their  little  solfi-'hness 
in  the  all-absorbing  importance  of  winning 
the  world  back  to  filial  love  and  reverent 
loyalty. — Ibid. 

The  truth  is,  that  it  is  natural  to  all  of  us 
to  envy  the  growing  reputation  of  others  ;  and 
to  be  jealous  where  it  seems  likely  to  trench 
upon  our  own.  We  may  sp  ak  very  justly  of 
the  littleness  of  mind  which  is  displayed  by 
the  envious  and  the  jealous ;  nevertheless, 
this  littleness  of  mind  belongs  naturally  to 
most,  if  not  all  of  us.  And  he  wins  a  fine 
triumph,  or  displays  great  command  over 
himself,  who  can  be  content  with  inferiority, 


provided   the  cause   of   God    and    truth    b© 

advanced.     Now,  this  is  precisely  the  case  in 
which  both  Moses  and  John  showed  greatness 
of  soul.     And  though  it  be  one  in  which  we 
have  most  reason  to  look  for  a  forgetf  ulness 
of  self,  experience  shows  that  the  expectation 
is  but  too  often  disappointed.     In  other  cases 
we  can  hardly   wonder  that   men   should  be 
mortified  by  the  superiority  of   their  rivals  ; 
that  is,  look  with   dislike  and  bitterness  on 
those  who  eclipse  them   in   the   respects   in 
which  they  most  wish  to  shine.     The  courtier, 
for  example,  who  has  long    sought  to  stand 
high  in  the  favour  of  his  sovereign  ;  and  who 
perceives   that  a  younger  candidate,  who  has 
just  entered  the  field,  is  fast  outstripping  him, 
so  that  the  probability  is  that  he  will  soon   be 
widely    distanced, — we    cannot  marvel  if    he 
regard  the  youthful  competitor  with  irritated 
feelings  in  place  of  generously  rejoicing  in 
his  rapid  success.     It  would    be  a  very  fine 
instance  of  magn-nimity  if  this  courtier  were 
to  cede  gracefully  the  place  to  his  rival,  and 
offer   him,    with   marks   of    sincerity    which 
could  not  be  mistaken,  his  congratulations  on 
having  passed  him  in  the  race.     But  we  could 
not  look  for  such  magnanimity.    The  occasion, 
if  we  may  venture  to  say  so,  scarcely  warrants 
it;   the  whole  business   is  of  so  worldly,  so 
igDobl«  a  character,  that  the  high  principles 
of    religion    can     scarcely   be    supposed    to 
be  brought  into  exercise  ;  yet  the  loftiness  of 
spirit  is  such  as  that  these  principles  alone 
can   be   considered   adequate   to   produce   or 
effect.     The  case,  however,  is  widely  different 
when  it  is  in  the  service  of  God,  and  not  of  an 
earthly  king,  that  the  two  men  engage.     Here 
by  the  very  nature  of  the  service,  the  grand 
thirg  aimed  at  is  the  glory  of  God  and  not 
personal   distinction  or  aggrandisement ;    and 
there  is,  therefore,  ground  for  expecting  that 
if  God's  glory  be  promoted,  there  will  be  glad- 
ness of   heart   in   all  Christians,   whoever  the 
agent  who  has  been  specially  honoured.     But, 
alas  !  for  the  infirmity  of  human  nature  ;  there 
is  room  for  questioning  that  even   Chri-stians 
can  be  jealous  of  each  other,  and  feel  it  a  sore 
trial  when  they  are  distanced  and  eirlipsed  in 
bainij  instrumental  in  promoting  Christianity. 
I  can  imagine  to  myself  a  missionarv  settle- 
ment, where  a  devoted  servant   of    God  has 
striven    many    years  with    idolatry,    but  has 
made   bat  little  way  in   winning  heathens  to 
ttie  faith.     Here  and  there  he  can   point  to  a 
convert  fiom  superstition,  but,    for  the  most 
pirt,  he  seems  to  have  laboured  in  vain  :  and 
is  forced  to  exclaim  with  the  prophet,  *'  Who 
hath  believed  our  report,  and  to   whom  hath 
the  arm  of  the  Lord  been  revealed?"     And 
then  there  arrives  in  that  missionary  settle- 
ment, another  and  a  younger  preacher  of  truth, 
and  God  has  endowed  him  with  higher  powers, 
and  honours  hiui  with  greater  success,  so  that 
there  is  a  rapid  demolition  of  the  whole  system 
of  heathenism—  savages  reuouncinir  by  hordes 

205 


CHAP.  XL 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTAUY:    NUMBERS. 


ancestral  aaperstitions;  forming  themselves 
into  peaceful  communities,  and  embracing, 
with  d  'light,  the  Religion  of  Jesas  Christ.  It 
is  very  easy  to  say  that  the  elder  missionary 
ought  to  feel  nothing  but  exultation  and 
thankfulness,  as  he  witnesses  the  glorious  re- 
sults which  follows  the  labours  of  youth.  The 
object  that  he  had  nearest  his  heart  was  the 
conversion  of  Pagans;  what  should  he  do  but 
rejoice  in  the  accomplishment  of  his  object, 
though  effected  through  the  instrumentality 
of  another?  And  we  do  not  say  that  the  elder 
missionary  would  have  other  feelings  than 
those  which  he  is  bound  by  his  profession  to 
entertain ;  nevertheless,  there  will  have  been 
a  great  deal  to  try  that  missionary,  and  we 
can  hardly  doubt — for  as  much  as  his  having 
been  a  Obristian  will  not  have  destroyed  his 
being  a  man — that  his  breast  must  have  been 
the  scene  of  no  inconsiderable  struggle ;  that 
there  must  have  been  earnest  prayer,  and 
earnest  resistance  to  natural  feelings,  ere  he 


could  bring  himself  to  survey,  with  composare, 
the  distinguished  honours  which  God  is  putting 
on  another.  We  are  far  enough  from  regard- 
ing it  as  a  matter  of  course,  that  a  veteran  in 
the  missionary  work  would  feel  contented  and 
pleased  at  seeing  that  work  which  had  gone 
on  80  slowly  with  himself,  progress  with 
amazing  rapidity  when  undertaken  by  a 
younger  labourer  ;  on  the  contrary,  arguing 
from  the  known  tendencies  of  our  nature,  we 
assume  that  he  muat  have  had  a  hard  battle 
with  himself  before  he  could  really  rejoice  in 
the  sudden  advance  of  Christianity ;  and  we 
should  regard  him  as  having  won,  through 
the  assistance  of  Divine  grace,  a  noble  victory 
over  some  of  the  strongest  cravings  of  the 
heart  when  he  frankly  bid  the  stripling  God 
speed  I  and  rejoiced  as  he  saw  the  idols  fall 
prostrate  before  him. 

Here   you    have    very  nearly  the   case   of 
Moses  and  John. — Henry  Melville^  B,D, 


Envt. 


(Terse  29.) 


"  And  Moses  said  unto  him,  Enviest 
thou  for  my  sake*?" 

To  euvy  is  "to  grieve  at  another's 
good ;  to  fret  or  hate  another  on  ac- 
count of  his  superiority."  Envy  "  is 
an  affection,"  says  Attersoll,  "  com- 
pounded of  sorrow  and  malice.  For 
such  persons  are  malicious,  always  re- 
pining and  grudging  at  the  gifts  of 
God  bestowed  upon  others,  and  as  it 
were  look  asquint  at  them,  as  Gen.  xxvi. 
12,  13,  14,  27  ;  xxx.  1  j  xxxi.  1  ;  Mark 
ix.  38 ;  John  iii.  26,  27." 

"  Envy,"  says  Jeremy  ColHer,  "  is 
an  ill-natured  vice,  and  is  made  up  of 
meanness  and  malico.  It  wishes  the 
force  of  goodness  to  be  strained,  and 
the  measure  of  happiness  abated.  It 
laments  over  prosperity,  and  sickens  at 
the  sight  of  health.  It  oftentimes 
wants  spirit  as  well  as  good  nature."   (a) 

Concerning  this  vice  we  call  atten- 
tion to  three  facts  ; — 

I.  It  is  sadly  common. 

It  is  almost  invariably  present  and 
active  in  mean  souls ;  and  it  has  been 
discovered  in  souls  which  in  other  re- 
spects were  noble.  Here  it  is  in  Joshua, 
a  man  of  bravd  and  beautiful  character. 
True,  he  was  not  envious  on  his  own 
account ;  but  he  was  for  the  sake  of  his 
206 


master.  Great  men  are  not  free  from 
littlenesses.  Strong  men  are  generally 
weak  in  some  point.  Good  men,  on 
earth,  are  not  without  their  imperfec- 
tions, and  are  liable  to  fall  into  sin. 
Even  excellencies,  if  not  properly  regu- 
lated, like  Joshua's  zeal  for  the  honour 
of  Moses,  may  lead  to  error  and  sin. 
Wherefore  it  behoves  us  to  be  on  our 
guard  against  envy.  Endeavour  to  re- 
joice in  the  prosperity  of  others,  &c.   {b) 

II.   It  is  extremely  foolish. 

"  Envy,"  says  Attersoll,  "  is  a  very 
torment  to  the  envious,  who  envying 
at  others,  do  plague  and  punish  them- 
selves. For  as  envy  hurtcth  not  him 
at  all  that  is  envied,  so  the  envious  man 
carrieth  about  within  his  own  bosom  an 
inward  and  home-bred  tormentor  that 
never  suffereth  him  to  be  quiet.  Such 
a  monster  is  spite  and  envy,  that  if  he 
see,  or  hear,  or  think  another  to  have 
more  or  as  much,  to  go  beyond  him  or 
be  equal  unto  him,  it  is  a  quotidian, 
nay,  a  continual  fever  without  a-ny  in- 
termission, it  paineth  him  day  and 
night  (Psa.  cxii.  9,  10)."  "Every 
other  sin,"  says  Burton,  "hath  some 
pleasure  annexed  to  it,  or  will  admit  of 
some  excuse ;  but  envy  wants  both :  we 
should  strive  against  it,  for  if  indulged 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  XI. 


hi,  it  will  be  to  us  a  foretaste  of  hell 
upon  earth."  "Envy,"  says  Solomon, 
"  is  the  rottenness  of  the  bones."  (c) 
III.  It  is  heinously  sinful 
The  sin  of  Joshua,  in  envying  for 
Moses'  sake,  because  of  the  exercise  of 
the  prophetic  gift  by  Eldad  and  Medad, 
is  seen  in  that — 

1.  The  gift  was  bestowed  by  God.  He 
bestoweth  His  gifts  as  it  pleaseth  Him; 
and  to  envy  those  ^ho  receive  +hem  is 
to  call  into  question  His  wisdom  or 
righteousness  in  besto  vving  them.  Oomp. 
Matt.  XX.  15.  Many  of  the  things  whic'ii 
excite  envy  in  our  day  are  gifts  of  God. 

2.  The  gift  was  fo)  the  be/ipjit  of  aU 
the  'people.  The  eldership  of  Eldad  and 
Medad  was  for  the  good  of  all  Israel, 
and  by  this  gift  of  prophecy  the  Lord 
accredited  them  to  their  office  in  the 
eyes  of  the  people.  The  spiritual  gifts 
of  every  Christian  are  for  the  advantage 
of  the  entire  Church.  How  sinful  then 
to  envy  them  their  possession  i 


3.  Joshua's  envy  was  a  violation  oj 
the  law  0'''  hrufJ  '^rly  kindness.  To  envy 
is  alway*  to  outrage  Christian  charity. 
"  Charity  ..nvieth  not."  Mark  the  evil 
features  of  this  vice  as  it  is  pourtrayed 
by  Socrates  :  "  An  envious  man  waxeth 
lean  with  th^  fatness  of  his  neighbours. 
Envy  is  the  daughter  of  pride,  the 
an:h)r  of  murder  and  revenge,  the  be- 
ginner of  secret  sedition,  and  the  per- 
petual tormentor  of  virtue.  Envy  is 
the  filthy  slime  of  the  soul ;  a  venom, 
a  poison,  or  quicksilver  which  con- 
sumeiih  the  flesh,  and  drieth  up  the 
marrow  of  the  bones."  How  much 
more  loathsome  should  it  appear  to  us, 
who  should  view  it  in  the  light  of  the 
teaching  and  spirit  of  Jesus  Christ  1 

Conclusion  : 

1.  Gultivaie  Christian  contentment, 

2.  "Follow  after  charity.'^ 

3.  Rejoice  in  the  gifts  of  God  in  whom- 
soever we  discover  them. 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 


(a)  In  some  unlucky  dispositions,  there  is 
such  an  envious  kind  of  pride,  that  they  can 
not  endure  that  any  but  themselves  should  be 
sot  forth  for  excellent ;  so  when  they  hear  oae 
justly  praised,  they  will  either  seek  to  dis- 
count his  virtues,  or,  if  they  he  like  a  clear 
night,  eminent,  they  will  stab  him  with  a 
but  of  detraction,  as  if  there  were  something 
yet  so  foul,  as  did  obnubilate  even  his  brightast 
glory.  Thus  when  their  tongue  cannot  justly 
condemn  him,  they  will  leave  him  in  suspected 
ill,  by  sil'^nce.  Surely,  if  we  considered  de- 
traction to  b3  bred  of  envy,  nested  only  in 
deficient  minds,  we  should  find  that  the  ap- 
plauding of  virtue  would  win  us  far  more 
honour  than  the  seeking  slyly  to  disparage  it. 
That  would  show  we  loved  what  we  com- 
mended, while  this  tells  the  world  we 
grudge  at  what  we  want  in  ourselves. — 
Fellhain. 

We  shall  find  it  in  Cain,  the  proto-murderer, 
whoslo^v  his  brother  at  the  instigation  of  envy. 
We  shall  find  it  in  tbe  dark  and  gloomy  and 
revengeful  spirit  of  Saul,  who,  under  the  in- 
fluence of  envy,  plotted  for  yearn  tbe  slaughter 
of  David.  We  shall  find  it  in  the  King  of 
Israel,  when  he  pined  for  the  vineyard  of  Na- 
both,  and  shed  his  blood  to  gain  it.  Yea,  it 
was  envy  that  perpetrated  that  most  atrocious 
crime  ever  planned  in  hell  or  executed  on  earth, 
on  which  the  sun  refused  to  look,  and  at  which 
Nature  gave  signs  of  abhorrence  by  the  rend- 


ing of  the  rocks:  I  mean  the  crucifixion  of 
Christ;  for  the  evangelist  tells  us,  that  for 
envy,  the  Jews  delivered  our  Lord. — J.  A. 
James. 

(6)  Envy  is  a  weed  that  grows  in  all  soils 
and  climates,  and  is  no  loss  luxuriant  in  the 
country  than  in  the  court;  is  not  cou fined  to 
any  rank  of  men  or  extent  of  fortune,  but 
rages  in  the  breasts  of  a'l  degrees,  Alexander 
was  not  prouder  than  Diogenes;  and  it  may 
be,  if  we  would  endeavour  to  surprise  it  in  its 
most  gaudy  dress  and  attire,  and  in  the  exercise 
of  its  full  empire  and  tyranny,  we  should  find 
it  in  unhool  nasfcers  and  scholars  or  in  some 
country  la  ly,  or  the  knight,  her  husband  ;  all 
whi  h  ra  .ks  of  people  more  despise  their 
neighbjurs  than  all  the  degrees  of  honour  in 
which  courts  abound ;  and  it  rages  as  much 
in  a  sordid  affected  dress  as  in  all  the  silks 
and  embroideries  which  the  excess  of  the  age 
and  the  folly  of  youth  delight  to  be  adorned 
with.  Since  then  it  keeps  all  sorts  of  com- 
pany, and  wriggles  itself  into  the  liking  of  the 
most  contrary  natures  and  dispositions,  and 
yet  carries  so  much  poison  and  venom  with 
it,  that  it  alienates  the  affections  from  heaven, 
and  raises  rebellion  against  God  Himself;  it  is 
worth  our  utmost  care  to  watch  it  in  all  its 
disguises  and  approaches,  that  wo  may  discover 
it  on  its  first  entrance,  and  dislodge  it  before  it 
procures  a  sHelter  or  retiring  place  to  lodge 
and  conceal  itself. — Lord  Clarendon. 

207 


CHAP.  XI. 


HOMLLETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


Ic'i 


i}\  all  antagonists,  most  charity 
T  find  in  envious  men,  for  'hey  do 
Sooner  hurt  themselves  thtn  hurt  or  me  or 
Him  that  raised  me  up.     An  envious  man  is 
Made  of  thoughts ;    to  ruminate  much  doth 
melt 


The  brain,  and  make  the  heart  grow  lean.  Swob 
men 

As  these,  that  in  opposing,  waste  their  proper 
Strength  ;  that  sacrifice  themselves  in  silly 
Hope  to  butcher  us;   save  revenge  a  labour; 
And  die  to  make  experiment  of  wrath. 

Sir.  W,  Davenani. 


Kibboth-Hattaavah  :   Striking  Illustrations  of  Solemn  Teuths. 

(Verses  31-35.) 


In  these  verses  we  have  illustrations 
of  several  important  truths — 

I.  The  Sovereignty  of  God. 

"  And  there  went  forth  a  wind  from 
the  Lord,  and  brought  quails,"  (ko. 
This  wind  does  not  appear  to  have  been 
an  ordinary  one,  the  simple  effect  of  a 
natural  cause.  It  was  Divinely  ordered 
for  this  special  purpose.  In  this  great 
quantity  of  quails,  bestowed  in  accord- 
ance with  the  promise  of  the  Lord, 
the  Divine  Hand  is  equally  manifest. 
The  wind  and  the  quails  are  both  illus- 
trations of  the  power  and  dominion  of 
the  Lord.  His  sovereignty  is  universal. 
The  mightiest  and  the  meannest  of  crea- 
tures are  subject  unto  Him.  This  fact 
should  minister, — 

1.  Encouragement  to  those  who  trust 
Him,  He  can  never  want  means  or 
instruments  to  help  them ;  He  can 
make  all  things  to  promote  their  in- 
terests. He  can  use  the  ravens  as  the 
dispensers  of  His  bounty,  as  He  did  for 
Elijah,  &c. 

2.  Warning  to  those  ivho  rebel  against 
Him.  He  can  marshall  all  ranks  of 
creatures,  and  all  the  forties  of  nature 
against  you,  if  it  please  Him  so  to  do. 
"  Hast  thou  an  arm  like  God  1 "  "  Who 
may  stand  in  Thy  sight  when  once  Thou 
art  augry  ? "  "  Kiss  the  Son,  lest  He 
be  angry,"  &c. 

II.  The  eagerness  with  which  men 
toil  in  the  pursuit  of  temporal  and 
material  good. 

'*  And  the  people  stood  up  all  that 
day,  and  all  night,"  &c.  (verse  32). 
See  with  what  zeal  and  diligence  they 
gather  and  preserve  the  quails.  They 
forego  their  ordinary  sleep  and  rest, 
&c.  It  is  an  illustration  of  the  way  in 
which  men  pursue  pleasure,  and  scheme 
208 


and  toil  for  money,  (ko.  Tens  of  thou- 
sands to-day  are  as  eager  in  the  pursuit 
of  the  perishable  things  of  earth  and 
time  as  the  Israelites  were  in  gathering 
quails.  And  like  the  Israelites,  many 
are  laboriously  accumulating  what 
they  will  never  live  to  enjoy.  Death 
shall  cut  them  down  in  the  midst  of 
their  possessions,  just  as  they  are  com- 
posing themselves  to  take  their  **  ease, 
eat,  drink,  and  be  merry."  How  great 
is  the  contrast  between  the  eagerness 
with  which  men  pursue  these  earthly 
and  temporal  things  and  their  luke- 
warmness  and  indolence  as  to  the  things 
which  are  eterna?  and  divine  !  *' Labour 
not  for  the  meat  which  perisheth,"  &c. 
(John  vi.  27) ;  "  Lay  not  up  for  your- 
selves treasures  upon  earth,"  &c.  (Matt, 
vi.  19-21.)     (a) 

III.  The  gratification  of  the  desires 
of  men  resulting  in  their  ruin. 

**And  while  the  flesh  was  vet  between 
their  teeth,  ere  it  was  chewed,"  &c. 
(verse  33).  Their  passionate  lust  was 
gratified,  and  the  gratification  killed 
them. 

'*  Heaven  is  most  just,  and  of  our  pleasant 

vices 
Makes  instruments  to  scourge  us.*' 

ShakespearB, 

The  thing  we  have  eagerly  coveted 
often  proves  when  attained — 

1.  Unsatisfactory  in  possession.  The 
realization  is  a  painful  contrast  to  the 
anticipation  ;  it  disappoints  us,  it  sad- 
dens us,  <fcc.     (6) 

2.  The  occasion  of  spiritual  loss  and 
harm.  Gratified  appetites  often  lead 
to  crushed  aspirations  ;  carnal  luxuries 
to  spiritual  famine  ;  temporal  riches  to 
eternal  destitution,  &g.   (c) 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  XI. 


IV.  A  sin,  which  on  its  first  com- 
mission was  mercifully  passed  over, 
if  repeated  may  call  forth  the  judg- 
ment of  God, 

Thev  had  murmured  aforetime,  and 
the  Lord  gave  them  quails,  and  did  not 
punish  them  (Exod.  xvi.  2-13).  But 
now,  after  additional  proofs  of  His 
power  and  goodness,  they  murmur 
again  and  more  wickedly,  and  He 
sends  them  quails  and  smites  them  in 
anger.  Persistence  in  wickedness  must 
lead   to  perdition.     (Prov.  xxviii.  14= ; 


xxix.  1).  "  Relapses  ure  desperate, 
where  the  sickness  itself  is  not." 

V.  The  sins  and  punishments  of 
one  generation  should  be  remembered 
as  a  warning  to  future  generations. 

"  And  he  called  the  name  of  that 
place  Kibroth-Hattaavah ;  because 
there  they  buried  the  people  that 
lusted."  So  Moses  endeavours  to  per- 
petuate, as  a  warning  to  others,  the 
memory  of  their  sin,  and  the  judgment 
of  God  which  it  called  forth.  Comp. 
1  Cor.  X.  5,  6. 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 


(a)  Oh,  what  tears  have  strong  men  shed 
in  this  city,  tears  which  fell  not  outside  the 
cheek,  these  had  been  harmless;  but  they 
dropped  within  the  soul,  to  scald  and  pear  it 
with  ever-abiding  melancholy  I  That  which 
cheered  and  comforted  them,  the  gain  of 
wealth,  has  gone,  and  the  busy  merchants 
have  been  ready  for  the  lunatic  asylum  or  for 
Buicide.  How  these  golden  bellows  will  cease 
to  blow  when  men  come  to  die  I  Ah,  how 
little  will  wealth  stimulate  the  joys  of  the  last 
moment  1  Foul,  thou  hast  only  bought  thyself 
a  marble  tomb,  and  what  is  that  to  thy  poor 
dust  and  ashes?  Thou  art  now  to  leave  all 
thou  hast;  thou  art  as  the  partridge  that 
aitteth  on  the  eggs,  but  hatcheth  them  not ; 
thy  joys  are  all  for  another,  and  not  for  thee. 
Oh,  how  often  do  men  that  have  been  happy 
enough  in  the  accumulation  of  riches,  die  in 
ntter  misery,  with  all  their  gold  and  silver 
about  them,  because  their  bellows  of  avaricious 
acquisition  have  been  burned  by  their  very 
■uccess,  and  the  flame  of  hope  and  ambition 
has  hopelessly  died  out  I  —  C.  H.  Spnrgeon. 

(6)  Persons  in  the  midst  of  pleasuie  know 
more  of  its  emptiness  than  any  minister  who 
preaches  of  the  worthlessness  of  this  world. 
The  votaries  of  pleasure  are  the  least  satisfied 
with  it.  He  who  inveighs  against  immorali- 
ties and  vices  has  not  half  so  strong  a  con- 
viction of  their  rottenness  as  they  who  commit 
them.  No  man  has  such  a  sense  of  the  mis- 
chief and  misery  of  intemperance  as  the  very 
drunkard  himself,  when  for  a  moment  he 
staggers  back  from  his  bowl  and  has  one  of 
those  lucid  intervals  in  which  his  better 
nature  returns,  and  he  is  led  to  loathe  himself 
as  other  men  loathe   him.     No  man  knows 


how  h«avy  care  is,  and  how  weak  human 
strength  is  under  it,  so  well  as  the  elect 
children  of  sorrow.  No  man  ever  counts 
riches  at  t  eir  true  value,  as  measured  by  the 
other  world,  so  truly  as  business  men  who 
have  been  the  most  industrious,  the  most 
avaricious,  the  most  greed v,  and  are  after  al! 
the  most  unsatisded. — H.  IV.  Beecher. 

(c)  Upon  such  a  wretched  creature,  who  in 
life  thought  nothing  of  death,  nothing  of  God, 
nothing  of  man,  and  who  took  God's  treasures 
and  prosperities  as  pirates  take  jewels  and 
coin,  to  hide  them  in  the  cave  of  his  own 
selfishness — upon  suchaoae  there  was  an  eye 
beaming  steadily  down,  and,  unheard  by  him, 
a  voice  went  forth  in  heaven,  which  should 
ere  long  put  all  his  arrogance  and  selfishness 
to  shame.  For,  while  men  were  calling  him 
rich,  and  making  him  honourable  ;  while  his 
relations  flitiered  him,  and  his  dependents 
fawned  upon  him  ;  while  men  stood  out  of  his 
path,  and  turned  to  look  back  admiringly  after 
him,  and  to  say  to  the  strang-ir  newly  come  to 
town,  "  Knowest  thou  who  that  is?  That  is 
the  great  and  wealthy  Mr.  Ftt-soul  !" — amid 
all  tHese  congratulations,  and  admirations,  and 
human  praises,  there  were  others  looking  at 
him,  and  expressing  opinions  about  him  not 
quite  so  complimentary.  For  God  and  holy 
angels  looked  down  upon  his  gross  abundance, 
upon  his  fat  and  dozing  ease,  and  upon  his 
arrogant  self-congratulations;  and  God  calmly 
said  to  this  man,  who  stood  so  largw,  who  was 
so  prospered,  and  who  very  likely  was  the 
topmost  man  of  the  whole  circle  in  which  he 
moved,  "Toou  fool,  this  night  thy  soul  shall 
be  required  of  thee.'* — Ibid. 


Kibroth-Hattaavah  :   The  Graves  of  Lust. 

{Verses  31-34). 

We  will  stand  by  those  graves,  and  idols  of  our  own  hearts.     I  shall  endea- 

iisten  to  their  teachings  :  they  may  save  vour  to  illustrate  this  subject  by  dwell- 

^18  from  standing  by  the  graves  of  the  ing  on  three  principles. 

f  209 


CHAP.  XI. 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


I.  There  are  perpetual  resurrections 
of  easily  besetting  sins. 

This  lusting  was  no  novelty  in  their 
experience  ;  it  was  the  besetting  temp- 
tation of  the  desert,  and  the  besetting 
sin  of  their  hearts.     But  they  ought  to 
haTe   viewed    the    first    rising   of    its 
ghastly  shape  with  horror ;  there  were 
graves  enough  in  the  path  from  Egypt, 
to   remind   them  of  its  deadly  work. 
God  had  been  at  great  pains  to  teach 
them   the  lesson  of  dependence,  that 
"  man  doth  not  live  by  bread   alone," 
&c.     (Exod.  xiv.  10-16  ;  xvi.  1-5  :  xvii. 
1-17).     And  now  with  firmer  assurance 
than  ever  that  God  was  in  the  midst  of 
them,  to   bring   them    into   the  place 
which  He  had  prepared,  they  resumed 
their  march  through  the  unknown  desert 
paths.     The   tabernacle,  the   ark,  the 
order  of  the  camp,  the  pillar  of  cloud 
and  flame,  were  all  among  them,  the 
pledge   of  His   presence.     But   all   in 
vain.     They  must  have  flesh,  or  they 
would  give  up  the  enterprise,  and  die 
in  despair.     And  they  had  flesh  ;  they 
were   fed,  were    crammed    with   it    to 
nauseation,  and  with  it  "  God  sent  lean- 
ness into  their  souls."     I  dwell  on  two 
points  of  large  importance  for  the  un- 
derstanding of  this  history. 

1.  The  side  from  which  the  temptation 
came  to  them  (verses  4-6).  This  mixed 
multitude  correspon.is  to  the  troop 
of  disorderly  passions  and  appetites 
with  which  we  suff'er  ourselves  to 
march  through  the  desert  of  life. 
The  mixed  multituda  was  but  loosely 
attac'  ed  to  them.  They  were  a  loose, 
coarse,  common  company,  with  nothing 
to  dignify,  elevate,  inspire.  No  wonder 
they  fainted,  murmured,  lusted  ;  and 
thought  flesh  for  to-day  was  better  than 
Canaan  to-uiorrow,  and  heaven  beyond. 
The  question  was  not  one  of  sustenance. 
EnoupL  f  jr  appetite  was  there  ;  enough 
for  all  the  uses  of  life,  guaranteed  by 
God  ;  "  but  they  wept  again,  saying, 
who  shall  give  us  flesh  to  eat ;"  &c. 
Lust  was  strong  in  them,  the  love  of 
the  satisfaction  of  the  bodily  appetites 
for  the  sake  of  the  momentary  pleasure 
they  bring.  And  appetite  runs  swiftly 
into  lust  in  every  one  of  us ;  each  act 
210 


of  indulgence  opens  a  fresh  mouth 
which  craves  to  be  fed.  The  moment 
you  take  pleasure  in  the  indulgence 
of  appetite  beyond  the  use  for  which  it 
was  ordained  by  God,  you  take  an  ele- 
ment into  your  life  which  will  humble 
it,  and  drag  its  glory  in  the  dust.  It 
is  the  grand  battle  of  life,  to  teach  lust 
the  limits  of  Divine  law. 

2.   TJie  special  season  when  the  easily- 
hesetting  sin  rose  up  and  again  made 
them  its  slave.     Look  at  this    orderly 
aiid    gallant   host.       They   had    been 
baptised  as  God's  soldiers  by  the  splen- 
dours of  the  Mount  of  the  Law.     Full 
of  Divine  joy,  zeal,  courage,  hope,  they 
set   forward,    &c.     "Scant  fare,   hard 
marching,  fierce  battles,  but  exhilarate 
us.     The   flesh-pots,    the    melons,    the 
garlic,   they  belong  to  the  days  of  our 
bondage ;  we   are   free  men  now,  and 
their  power  to  tempt  us  is  gone."    And 
so  many  a  gallant  young  spirit,  having 
heard  the  trumpet  call  of  the  Gospel, 
and  joined  the  glorious  company  of  the 
soldiers  of  the  Cross,  feels  in  the  first 
pride  of  strength  and  flush  of  joy,  that 
the  flesh  is  so  bruised,  as  to  be  broken 
and  crushed  for  ever.     But  dread  the 
hour  when  the  glow  begins  to  die  down ; 
when  the  practical  burdens,  pains,  trials, 
which  you  still  mfiet  with,  prove  to  you 
that  the  Divine  life  on  earth  la  no  para- 
dise   regained ;    when   you    find   your 
strength  barely  equal  to  the  demands 
made  upon  it,   and  see  stretching  on 
through  long  years  a  path  of  struggle, 
denial   and  mortification  of  the  flesh, 
the  end  of  which  is  not  yet  in  sight. 

Beware  of  your  best  moments,  as 
well  as  of  your  worst ;  or  rather  the  mo- 
ments which  succeed  the  best.  They 
are  the  most  perilous  of  all.  Just 
when  the  consciousness  of  triumph 
seems  to  permit  and  justify  disarma- 
ment for  a  moment,  the  subtle  foe  with 
whom  you  have  to  deal  will  steal  in  on 
you,  and  win  a  treacherous  victory. 
Never  relax  the  strain.  Never  allow 
temptation  within  arm's  length.  Never 
believe  that  the  devil  is  asleep;  that  a 
besetting  sin  is  eradicated,  &c.  *'  Lay 
aside  every  weight,"  &c. 
II.  There   comes  a   point   in   luo 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBER  I 


CHJLP.  21. 


history  of  the  indulgence  of  hesetting 
sins,  when  God  ceases  to  strive  with 
us  and  for  us  against  them,  and  lets 
them  have  their  way. 

1.  God  has  great  patience  with  the 
weaknesses  and  sins  of  the  flesh.  But  it 
is  a  dreadful  mistake  to  suppose  that 
therefore  He  thinks  lightly  of  them. 
He  regards  them  as  sins  that  must  be 
conquered,  and  no  matter  by  what 
sharp  discipline,  extirpated  and  killed. 

2.  Hence  all  the  severer  discipline  hy 
which  the  Lord  seeks  to  purge  them^  the 
various  agencies  by  which  He  fights  with 
us  and  for  us  against  their  tyrannous 
power.  What  is  life  but  one  long  dis- 
cipline of  God  for  the  cleansing  of  the 
flesh  %  Are  not  the  after-pains  of  de- 
parted sensual  joys  among  its  chief 
stings  and  thorns  %  God  has  made  a 
sure  link  of  connexion  between  such 
sins  and  their  penalties.  The  body 
itself  is  made  the  index  of  its  indul- 
gence, &c.  Does  He  not  givj  us  the 
bread  of  heaven,  that  He  may  waken 
within  us  a  taste  fur  purer  pleasures, 
and  lead  us  out  of  the  coils  of  the 
fleshly  tempters,  by  giving  us  the  food 
of  a  Diviner  life  ]  It  is  only  when  a 
man  will  not  enter  into  his  Father's 
counsel  in  this ;  will  not  suffer  the 
higher  tastes  to  develope  themselves, 
and  the  higher  appetites  to  indulge 
their  craving  with  the  bread  of  God ; 
will  grovel  w'  .en  God  gives  him  wings 
to  soar;  will  clamour  for  flesh  when 
the  bread  of  G#d  is  in  his  very  hand  : 
it  is  only  then,  when  the  evil  becomes 
deadly,  that  God  stays  His  hand,  with- 
draws His  guardian  angel,  and  leaves 
the  will  to  itself. 

3.  Let  alone  hy  God.  "  Ephraim  is 
joined  to  his  idols,  let  him  alone!"  is 
to  any  mind  among  the  most  awful  sen- 
tences in  the  word  of  God.  It  is  very 
wonderful  to  see  how  often,  if  a  man  is 
bent  on  an  end  which  is  not  God's  end, 
God  gives  it  him,  and  it  becomes  his 
curse.    God  does  not  curse ;  He  leaves 


us  to  ourselves  ;  that  is  curse  enough, 
and  from  that  curse,  what  arm  can  save 
us  1  We  will  have  it,  and  we  shall  have  it. 

III.  The  end  of  that  way  is,  inevit- 
ably and  speedily,  a  grave. 

The  grave  of  lust  is  one  of  the  most 
awful  of  the  inscriptions  on  the  head- 
stones of  the  great  cemetery,  the  world. 
The  words  in  Psa.  cvi.  13-15,  cast  much 
light  on  this  passage.  There  the  lust 
is  spoken  of  as  the  grave  of  the  soul. 
And  I  believe  that  it  is  the  common 
form  of  God's  judgment.  Where  He 
buries  one  in  the  wilderness.  He  suffers 
a  thousand  to  bury  themselves  in  their 
lust.  It  is  the  inevitable  end  of  all 
wanton  self-indulgence  ;  either  a  sharp 
judgment,  or  that  slow  pining  of  soul 
which  makes  the  body  its  grave. 
Where  are  the  graves  "J  I  need  only 
look  on  that  sensual  face,  that  bloated 
form,  that  dull  and  glassy  eye,  that 
brazen  brow,  to  tell.  .  .  How  many 
have  learnt  now  to  laugh  at  emotions 
which  once  had  a  holy  beauty  in  their 
sight ;  to  fence  skilfully  with  appeals 
which  once  would  have  thrilled  to  the 
very  core  of  their  hearts ;  to  grasp  at 
advantages  which  once  they  would  have 
passed  with  a  scornful  anathema,  and 
to  clutch  at  the  gold  which  was  once 
the  glad  instrument  of  diifusing  benefits 
around  !  Yes  !  there  are  graves  enough 
around  us — graves  of  passion,  graves  of 
self-will,  graves  of  lust. 

Beware  !  young  men  ;  young  women, 
beware  !  The  grave-diggers  began  their 
work  far  back  in  those  wretched  his- 
tories. The  first  step  was  the  really 
fatal  one :  the  first  flying,  in  sorrow 
and  heart-ache,  to  any  refuge  but  God. 
Beware  I  Each  act  of  indulgence  makes 
the  grave  wider  and  deeper,  where  the 
whole  breadth  of  God-like  faculty  will 
at  length  lie  buried ;  and  it  fixes  in  the 
brain  a  memory  which  will  one  day 
turn  tyrant,  and  be  the  dread  avenger 
of  a  murdered  hope.  —  J,  Haldivin 
Br  own f  B.A, 


p  2 


%i\ 


CHAr.  XI. 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


The  Graves  op  Lust, 


(Verse  34.) 


The  circumstances  leading  to  the 
fact  of  the  text  are  full  of  instruction 
to  us.  The  mischief  originated  with 
"  the  mixed  multitude."  These  were 
the  rabble  that  had  followed  ths 
Israelites  out  of  Egypt ;  who  having 
seen  what  God  had  done  for  His 
people  in  Egypt,  thought  it  was  a 
good  chance  to  better  themselves  by 
so  doing.  They  soon  found  out  the 
mistake  they  had  made,  and  began  to 
murmur  and  to  excite  the  people  to  dis- 
content. Their  connection  with  the 
history  suggests — 

1.  That  those  ivho  join  themselves  to 
God's  Church  from  worldly  motives  are 
ever  disappointed. 

2.  That  such  characters  ever  do  harm 
to  the  Church. 

The  events  which  gave  rise  to 
the  text  show  how  easily  God  can 
provide  for  our  necessities ,  and  punish 
us  for  our  sins  !  To  Moses  it  seemed 
impossible  to  feed  this  vast  multitude 
with  flesh.  God  said,  **  I  will  do  it  for 
a  month,  until  they  are  surfeited  with 
it."  How  easily  He  keeps  His  promise  ! 
It  is  never  a  difficult  matter  to  Him  to 
help  us.  Let  us  trust  Him.  How  easily 
He  can  punish  /  The  very  blessing, 
owing  to  their  conduct,  became  their 
curse.  They  were  wayward,  and  God 
let  them  have  their  own  way,  than 
which  no  greater  curse  can  befall 
man.  God  can  punish  by  plenty  as 
well  as  by  scarcity.  What  people  have 
lusted  after  often  becomes  their  torment. 

I.  It  is  the  tendency  of  lust  to 
shorten  life  and  to  bring  men  to  an 
untimely  grave. 

The  word  lust  in  the  Bible  has,  for 
the  most  part,  its  general  meaning  of 
inordinate  desire — man's  corrupt  nature 
ruling  instead  of  being  ruled,  and  held 
in  check.  The  finger  of  God  has 
written  on  all  gluttony,  intemperance, 
debauchery — "  This  is  the  pathway  to 
the  grave."  There  is  nothing  excep- 
tional in  the  death  of  these  Israelites. 
There   is  no  fact  better  attested  than 

2ia 


this,  that  all  living  for  the  animal  in 
man  destroys  the  body  as  well  as  the 
soul.  When  intellect  becomes  the  slave 
of  passion,  and  man  is  ruled  by  his 
lusts,  he  transgresses  the  laws  of  health, 
undermines  his  constitution,  and  soon 
sinks  into  the  grave.  Our  animal  de- 
sirrs  are  good  servants  ;  but,  when  they 
gain  the  mastery,  they  are  fearful 
tyrants,  loading  the  conscience  with 
guilt  and  the  body  with  disease,  ruining 
life,  and  making  eternity  a  hell.  The 
Romans,  it  is  said,  held  their  funerals 
at  the  Gate  of  Venus,  to  teach  that 
lust  shortens  life.  The  pleasures  of 
sin  are  dearly  bought.  There  are 
pleasures  in  sin,  which  have  great 
attraction  to  our  sinful  nature.  Folly's 
house,  as  Solomon  tells  us,  is  full  of 
forbidden  sweets  ;  there  is  the  pleasure 
of  the  sensualist,  the  vanities  of  the 
giddy  and  the  gay,  and  the  fatal  cup 
which  has  such  deadly  hold  on  our  land ; 
they  are  there  to  attract,  and  they  do 
attract  corrupt  hearts;  but  over  the 
portal  is  written — "  The  dead  are 
there — her  guests  are  in  the  depths  of 
hell." 

II.  Let  us  record  some  of  our  feel- 
ings as  we  contemplate  "  the  graves 
of  lust." 

These  graves  made  a  deep  impres- 
sion on  the  mind  of  Moses,  as  we  see 
from  his  giving  the  name  to  the  en- 
campment. It  was,  indeed,  a  sad,  sad 
funeral,  &c.  The  grave  ever  suggests 
sober  thoughts.  But  all  by  the  grave 
is  not  sad.  Gospel  light  paints  the 
rainbow  of  hope  in  our  tears,  as  we 
place  there  the  dead  in  Christ,  with  the 
assurance  that  we  shall  be  re-unitei  in 
the  "  home  over  there."  But  graves 
like  these  of  the  text — how  sad !  As 
we  stand  by  them  there  are  two  feo?.- 
ings  prominent — 

1.  The  one  is  of  intense  pity,  that  man 
should  be  so  foolish  as  to  live  in  sin 
when  he  knew  how  it  would  end ;  that 
life  should  be  so  wasted,  and  oppor- 
tunities lost,  &o. 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  XII. 


2.  The  other  is  of  awful  solemnity. 
He  is  gone  !  but  whither  1  He  haa 
given  up  the  ghost ;  but  where  is  he  1 
He  is  somewhere,  &c.  We  cannot  but 
think  of  his  future. 

"  Wrapp'd  in  a  Christless  sbrondi 
He  sleeps  the  Christless  sleep  j 
Above  him,  the  eternal  cloud. 
Beneath,  the  fjry  deep. 

Laid  in  a  Christless  tomb, 
There,  bound  with  felon-chain. 
He  waits  the  terror  of  his  doom, 
The  judgment  and  the  pain. 

O  Christless  shroud,  how  cold  I 
How  dark,  0  Christless  tomb  I 
O  grief  that  never  can  grow  old! 
0  endless,  hopeless  doom  I 

O  Christless  sleep,  how  sad  I 
What  waking  shalt  thou  know  ? 
For  thee  no  star,  no  dawning  glad, 
Only  the  lasting  woe  1 


To  rocks  and  hills  in  vain 
Shall  be  the  sinner's  call  ; 
O  day  of  wrath  and  death  and  pain, 
The  lost  soul's  funeral  I 

O  Christless  soul,  awake 
Ere  thy  lapt  sleep  begin  I 
O  Christ,  the  sleeper's  slumbers  break, 
Burst  Thou  the  bands  of  sin." 

Bonafr 

Thank  God,  this  is  possible  now. 
While  we  are  on  earth  we  may  obtain 
salvation,  &c. 

Let  us  all — 

1.  Ascertain  whether  or  no  we  are  on 
the  way  to  this  grave. 

2.  Resolve  through  the  help  of  God 
that  we  IV ill  net  he  there. 

Seek  Jesus  Christ.  He,  and  He 
only,  can  rescue  us  from  the  power,  the 
curse,  and  the  conseq^uencea  of  sin. — 
David  Lloyd, 


CHAPTER  XTI. 


Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. 


*; 


Verse  1.  The  Ethiopian  woman,  &c. 
Heb.  :  "  The  woman,  the  Cushite. 
This  could  not  have  been  Zipporah, 
who  was  a  Midianite,  not  a  Cushite. 
And  even  if  it  be  supposed  that  Miriam 
called  her  a  Cushite  from  feelings  of 
contempt  and  bitterness,  yet  the  his- 
torian would  not  have  confirmed  the 
epithet  by  adding,  "  for  he  had  taken  a 
Cushite  woman."  Moreover  it  is  ex- 
ceedingly improbable  that  Miriam 
should  have  reproached  Moses  with  a 
marriage  made  many  years  previously, 
and  long  before  he  received  the  call  to 
his  great  mission.  The  probability  is 
that  Zipporah  had  died,  and  Moses  had 
entered  into  **  marriage  with  a  Cushite 
woman,  who  either  sprang  from  the 
Cushites,  dwelling  in  Arabia,  or  from 
the  foreigners  who  had  come  out  of 
Egypt  along  with  the  Israelites."  Such 
a  marriage  was  perfectly  allowable,  so 
long  as  the  woman  was  not  a  daughter 
of  Canaan.     Exod.  xxxiv.  11-16. 


Verse  2.  Hath  He  not  spoken  also  hy 
us  ?  Aaron,  as  the  high-priest,  was  the 
spiritual  head  of  the  whole  nation,  and 
as  a  prophetess  Miriam  was  distinguished 
above  all  the  women  of  Israel.  Having 
received  a  measure  of  the  prophetic 
spirit  (Exod.  iv.  15  ;  xv.  20),  they  aspired 
to  a  share  in  the  authority  of  Moses. 

Verse  3.  Now  the  man  Moses  was  very 
meek,  (fee.  It  has  been  objected  that 
Moses,  being  a  humble  and  modest  man, 
would  not  have  written  this  verse. 
Hence  Dr.  A.  Clarke  translates,  "  Now 
this  man  Moses  was  depressed  or  afflicted 
more   than    any    man   of  that    land." 

Fuerst  renders  W^   in  this  place,  "a 

humble  one."  Sept.  :  Trpai;?.  Vulg.  : 
mitis.  Keil  and  Del.  :  "  meek."  This 
seems  to  us  the  best  rendering.  The 
objections  which  have  been  raised 
against  it  are  not  valid.  The  statement 
"  is  not  an  expression  of  vain  self- 
display,    or  a  glorification   of  hia  own 

213 


'■% 


CHAP.  XII. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


gifts  and  excellencies,  which  he  prided 
himself  upon  possessing  above  all  others. 
It  is  simply  a  statement  which  was 
indispensible  to  a  full  and  correct  in- 
terpretation of  all  the  circumstances." 
When  we  regard  these  words  '*  as  uttered 
by  Moses,  not  propria  7n.otu,  but  under 
the  direction  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which 
was  upon  him  (cf.  xi.  17),  they  exhibit 
a  certain  *  objectivity,'  which  is  a  wit- 
ness at  once  to  their  genuineness  and 
also  to  their  inspiration.  There  is  about 
Ihese  words,  as  also  about  the  passages 
in  which  Moses  no  less  unequivocally 
records  his  own  faults  (cf.  xx.  12  sqq.  ; 
Exod.  iv.  24  sqq.  ;  Deut.  i.  37),  the 
simplicity  of  one  who  bare  witness  of 
himself,  but  not  to  himself  (cf.  St.  Matt, 
xi.  28,  29).  The  words  are  inserted  to 
explain  how  it  was  that  Moses  took  no 
steps  to  vindicate  himself,  and  why 
consequently  the  Lord  so  promptly  in- 
tervened."— Speaktr'^s  Comm. 

Verses  6-8.  If  there  he  a  prophet 
among  you^  (fee.  Keil  and  Del.  :  '*  If 
there  is  a  prophet  of  Jehovah  to  you 
{%,€,  if  you  have  one),  I  make  myself 
known  to  him  in  a  vision ;  I  speak  to 

him  in  a  dream  (^3,,  lit,  *  in  him,'  inas- 
much as  a  revelation  in  a  dream  fell 
within  the  inner  sphere  of  the  soul-life). 
Not  so  my  servant  Moses  :  he  is  ap- 
proved in  My  whole  house ;  mouth  to 
mouth  I  speak  to  him,  and  as  an  ap- 
pearance, and  that  not  in  enigmas;  and 
he  sees  the  f  jrm  of  Jehovah.  Why  are 
ye  not  afraid  to  speak  against  My  ser- 
vant, against  Moses  % 

**  Through  this  utterance  on  the  part 
of  Jehovah,  Moses  is  placed  above  all 
the  prophets,  in  relation  to  God  and 
also  to  the  whole  nation.  The  Divine 
revelation  to  the  prophets  is  thereby 
restricted  to  the  two  forms  of  inward 
intuition  (vision  and  dream)  .  .  . 
The  prophets  were  consequently  simply 
organs,  through  whom  Jehovah  made 
known  His  counsel  and  will  at  certain 
times,  and  in  relation  to  special  cir- 
cumstances and  features  in  the  develop- 
ment of  His  kingdom.  It  was  not  so 
with  Moses.  Jehovah  had  placed  him 
over  all  His  house,  had  called  him  to 
214 


be  the  founder  and  organizer  of  the 
kingdom  established  in  Israel  through 
his  mediatorial  service,  and  had  found 
him  faithful  in  His  service.  With  this 
servant  (Oepa-n-iaVf  LXX.)  of  His,  He 
spake  mouth  to  mouth,  without  a  figure 
or  figurative  cloak,  with  the  distinctness 
of  a  human  interchange  of  thought ;  so 
that  at  any  time  he  could  inquire  of 
God  and  wait  for  the  Divine  reply. 
Hence  Moses  was  not  a  prophet  of 
Jehovah,  like  many  others,  not  even 
merely  the  first  and  highest  prophet, 
primus  inter  pares ^  but  stood  above  all 
the  prophets,  as  the  founder  of  the 
theocracy,  and  mediator  of  the  Old 
Covenant  .  .  .  The  prophets  sub- 
sequent to  Moses  simply  continued  to 
build  upon  the  foundation  which  Moses 
laid.  And  if  Moses  stood  in  this  un- 
paralleled relation  to  the  Lord,  Miriam 
and  A.aron  sinned  grievously  against 
him,  when  speaking  as  they  did." 

Verse  7.  My  servant  Moses,  &o. 
Comp.  Heb.  iii.  1-6. 

Verse  10.     Leprous.     See  pp.  75-77. 

Verse  12.  Let  her  not  be  as  onedead^ 
&c.,  "*.e.,  like  a  still-born  child,  which 
comes  into  the  world  half  decomposed. 
His  reason  for  making  this  comparison 
was,  that  leprosy  produces  decomposi- 
tion in  the  living  body." — Keil  and  Del. 

Verse  14.  If  her  father  had  but  spit, 
&c.  To  spit  in  the  face  was  a  mark  of 
extreme  contempt.  See  Deut.  xxv.  9  ; 
Job  XXX.  10;  Isa.  1.  6  ;  Mark  xiv.  65. 
When  a  parent  did  this  to  his  child,  it 
is  said  the  child  was  banished  from  his 
presence  for  seven  days.  How  much 
more,  then,  should  Miriam,  who  had 
sinned  so  grievously  and  whom  God 
had  smitten  with  leprosy,  be  exiled 
from  the  people  and  presence  of  God 
for  seven  days  ! 

Verse  16.  The  wilderness  of  Paran 
"  was  the  great  tract  south  of  Palestine, 
commencing  soon  after  Sinai,  as  the 
people  advanced  northwards, — that  per- 
haps now  known  as  the  desert  Et-Tihy* 
or  the  desert  of  the  Wandering.  "Be- 
tw^een  the  wilderness  of  Paran  and  that 
of  Zin  no  strict  demarcation  exists  in 
the  narrative,  nor  do  the  natural 
features  of  the  region,  so  far  as   yet 


HOMILETIC    COM]\fENTAnr:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  XII. 


ascertained,  yield  a  well-defined  boun- 
dary." (See  The  Speaker's  Gomm.y  and 
Keil  and  Del.  on  Chap.  x.  12 ;  Smith's 
Diet,   of  Bible,  Arts.    Kadesh,  Paran, 


and  Wilderness  of  the  Wandering ;  and 
the  maps  of  Egypt  and  the  Penin- 
sula  of  Sinai,  in  Stanley's  Sinai  and 
Pal.), 


The  Sin    of    Miriam    and   Aaron  :    Evil  Speaking,   Divine    Hearing,    and 

Saintly   Silence. 

(Verses  1-3.) 


Consider : 

I.  The  Sin  of  Miriam  and  Aaron. 

"And  Miriam  and  Aaron  spake 
against  Moses,"  &c.  In  considering 
this  sin,  let  us  notice — 

1.  Its  root.  The  source  of  this  evil 
speaking  was  (so  we  infer  from  verse 
2)  jealousy  on  the  part  of  Miriam  and 
Aaron  at  the  authority  exercised,  and 
the  powers  assumed  by  Moses.  They 
were  envious  of  his  position  and  power, 
and  ambitious  for  the  exercise  of  equal 
authority.  As  Dr.  Kitto  has  pointed 
out,  the  position  assigned  to  Aaron  "  in 
the  commonwealth  was  in  some  respects 
superior  to  that  of  Moses.  The  function 
of  Moses  was  temporary,  and  would 
pass  away  with  his  life  ;  whereas  Aaron's 
was  permanent  in  himself  and  his  heirs, 
and  would  leave  him  and  them  the 
foremost  and  most  important  persons 
in  the  state.  He  might  not  therefore 
always  regard  with  patience  the  degree 
in  which  his  own  high  office  was  super- 
seded by  the  existing  authority  of 
Moses."  The  fact  that  he  was  the  elder 
brother,  probably  contributed  further  to 
his  discontent  and  jealousy.  Miriam 
also  was  jealous  and  ambitious.  It 
seemed  to  her,  that  being  a  prophetess, 
fche  ought  to  have  a  more  eminent 
position  and  greater  power.  Here  in 
their  mean  jealousy  and  "vaulting 
ambition "  we  have  the  root  of  their 
ein.     (a). 

2.  Its  occasion.  It  is  probable  that 
the  fact  that  Aaron  and  Miriam  had  not 
been  consulted  in  the  choice  of  the 
eeventy  elders  awakened  their  dis- 
content. But  thnt  which  they  put 
forth  as  the  occasion  of  their  reproaches 
was  the  marriage  which  Moses  had  con- 


tracted with  the  Cushite  woman.  This 
seems  to  have  annoyed  Miriam,  and  led 
her  to  engage  Aai'on  in  envious  and  evil 
speeches.  That  Miriam  was  the  in- 
stigator of  the  open  rebellion  appears 
from  three  things :  (1)  That  she  is 
named   before    Aaron.     (2)    From  the 

use  of  the  feminine  verb  "^^"I'O  in  ver. 

1  ;  and  (3)  from  the  fact  that  the 
punishment  fell  upon  her  only,  and  not 
upon  Aaron.  It  appears  that  Aaron 
was  deficient  in  firmness,  and  was  too 
easily  persuaded  by  others.  Weakly 
and  wickedly  he  yielded  to  the  desire  of 
the  people  for  a  golden  idol  (Exod. 
xxxii) ;  and  now  at  the  instigation  of  his 
sister  he  unites  in  rebellion  against  the 
leader  whom  God  had  appointed.  It  is 
natural  that  the  wife  of  Moses  would  be 
reizarded  with  feelings  of  respect  and 
honour  in  the  camp.  Miriam  was 
jealous  of  these  honours  ;  she  wished  to 
occupy  the  rank  of  chief  lady  in  the 
camp  ;  hence  she  instigated  this  mean 
and  sinful  rebellion. 

3.  Its  expression.  They  "  spake 
against  Moses,"  (fee.  Evil  speaking  is 
a  grievous  offence  in  the  sight  of  God. 
But  when,  as  in  this  case,  the  evil 
speeches  are  directed  against  His  chosen 
servants,  the  sin  is  greatly  aggravated. 
"  Jealousy,  the  green-eyed  monster," 
discovers  flaws  in  and  heaps  reproaches 
upon  its  object,  even  though  his  cha- 
racter and  conduct  be  most  faultless 
and  beautiful.  The  bitter  feeling  goes 
forth  in  unjust  and  bitter  speech,  (b) 

II.  The  Divine  Cognizance  of  their 
Sin. 

"  And  the  Lord  heard."  No  one 
utterance  of  all  tlie  myriads  of  voices  in 

215 


CHAP.  XII. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


Hig  universe  ever  escapes  His  ear. 
There  is  a  Divine  Hearer  of  every 
human  speech.     This  is  clear  from  — 

1.  His  omnipresence.  See  Psa.  cxxxix. 
7-12.  He  who  is  everywhere  present 
sees  all  things,  hears  all  things. 

2.  His  infinite  intelligence.  He  to 
whom  all  things  are  known  cannot  be 
ignorant  of  the  evil  speeches  of 
men. 

3.  His  interest  in  His  servants.  God 
is  deeply  concerned  in  the  honour  and 
welfare  of  His  servants.  Thoir  reputa- 
tion is  a  sacred  thing  in  His  sight. 
Therefore  He  notes  all  the  evil  which 
is  spoken  against  them. 

Let  all  evil  speakers  and  slanderers 
ponder  the  solemn  truth  that  every 
whisper  is  distinctl^r  audible  to  the 
Divine  ear. 

III.  The  commendable  conduct  of 
Moses  under  the  provocation  of  their 
sin. 

1.  He  was  sorely  tried.  Under  any 
circumstances  it  is  a  severe  trial  to  be 
reproached  without  cause,  or  to  be 
falsely  accused  ;  but  the  trial  of  Moses 
was  embittered  by  the  source  from 
whence  it  sprung.  Comp.  Psa.  Iv. 
12-15. 

2.  He  bore  his  sore  trial  most  nobly. 
Under  extreme    provocation  he  main- 


tained a  saintly  silence.  He  did  not 
resent  the  attack  made  upon  him,  or 
attempt  in  any  way  to  vindicate  him- 
self, for  he  was  "  meek  and  lowlv  in 
heart."  "  Now  the  man  Moses  was 
very  meek,  above  all  the  men  which 
were  upon  the  face  of  the  earth."  We 
have  here  a  hint  as  to — (1)  The  nature 
of  meekness.  "  Meekness,"  says  Atter- 
soU,  "is  a  gift  of  the  Spirit,  which 
moderatet hanger  and  desire  of  revenge, 
forgiving  offences  and  pardoning  in- 
juries for  peace  and  quietness  sake  :  so 
that  albeit  a  man  be  provoked  by  in- 
juries received,  yet  he  doth  not  intend 
nor  enterprize  to  requite  it,  but  bridleth 
all  hatred  and  impatience."  (c)  (2) 
The  occasions  of  its  manifestation.  When 
we  are  injured  personally,  like  Moses, 
we  must  be  meek.  But  when  the 
honour  of  God  is  impeached,  like  Moses 
in  the  matter  of  the  golden  calf  (Exod. 
xxxii.  19-29),  we  must  be  zealous  and 
determined.  He  was  "as  bold  as  a 
lion  iu  the  cause  of  God,  but  as  mild  as 
a  lamb  in  his  own  cause." 
Conclusion  : 

1.  In  the  conduct  of  Miriam  and 
Aaron  we  have  a  beacon.  Let  us  shun 
thoir  sin,  &c. 

2 .  In  the  conduct  of  Moses  we  have  a 
pattern.     Let  us  imitate  his  meekness. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  Ambition  threw  Adam  out  of  the  garden 
of  God :  it  quickly  crept  into  the  family  of 
Christ,  and  infected  his  disciples,  and,  there- 
fore, being  a  subtle  and  secret  evil,  it  is  to  be 
looked  unto  that  it  ^teal  not  suddenly  upon 
us.  If  any  man  ask  what  it  is,  I  answer,  It 
is  an  immoderate  dodire  after  dignity,  it  is  a 
thirst  that  never  can  be  quenched  ;  lor  as  the 
covetous  person  hath  never  enough  money,  so 
the  ambitious  hath  never  enougu  honour;  it 
is  a  secret  poison,  a  hidden  plague,  the  mis- 
tress of  craft,  the  mother  of  hypocrisy,  the 
father  of  envy,  the  fountain  of  vices,  the 
moth  of  piety,  a  blind  guide  and  leader  of  the 
hearts  of  men  ;  finally,  we  may  say  of  the  love 
of  it  as  Paul  doth  of  the  love  of  money,  "  It 
is  the  root  of  all  evil  "  (1  Tim.  vi.  10).  The 
farther  we  think  ourselves  from  it,  the  nearer 
ccmmonly  it  cometh  unto  us  ;  and,  therefore, 
"  let  nothing  be  done  through  strife  and  vain- 
glory, but  in  lowliness  of  mind  let  each 
esteem  other  better  than  themselves  '*  (PhiL 

216 


(b)  S  ^eetness  is  lost  if  you  pour  in  bitter- 
ness to  it.  And  certainly,  if  otherwise  you 
have  ma  ^j  sweet  qualities  and  virtues,  if 
you  havs3  an  ill  tongue  to  speak  against  Moses, 
the  bitterness  of  it  will  mar  them  all.  The 
little  bee  hath  but  a  little  sting,  and,  tlere- 
fore,  the  wound  is  not  mortal  that  she  can 
make  ;  yet  little  as  it  is,  it  prooureth  usually 
her  death  if  she  be  caught.  So  will  your 
stinging  tongue,  assure  yourself,  kill  you, 
a'thouyh  it  little  hurt  him  or  her  whom  you 
have  stung.  The  foul  frog  lieth  all  day  in 
the  mui  and  mire,  at  ni^ht  putting  up  the 
head  and  croaking  with  a  foul  noise  ;  and 
such  foul  crnatures  are  they  said  to  be  that 
hive  croaking  tongues  against  Moses.  Put  a 
Bwine  into  the  sweetest  garden  you  can  make, 
and  what  will  he  do?  Sm^U  to  the  pleasant 
rose  or  any  other  delightful  flower  there? 
No;  but  straight  he  will  fall  to  rooting,  and 
with  his  foul  mouth  turn  up  both  moor  and 
mould  of  evezy  good  thing.  Such  foHl  ewitia 
are  thev  said  io  be,  that  hare  foal  tongues, 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  XU. 


ever  passing  by  that  which  is  good,  and  root- 
ing up  the  good  names  of  them,  whose  virtues, 
bow  sweet  soever  to  God  and  men,  yet  to 
them  are  ever  hatefal.  I  will  go  no  further, 
but  pray  you  to  mark  him  that  toppeth  a 
candle,  and  taketh  not  good  heed,  dotrihe  not 
usually  black  bis  fingers  and  sometimes  also 
burn  them,  although  ho  make  the  candle  more 
bright?  So  do  such  persons  as  will  be  med- 
dling with  their  neighb  )ur8'  lives.  Well 
may  their  prattling  make  them  burn  and 
shine  more  bright,  whom  they  meddle  withal; 
but  their  own  fiagers  carry  a  mark — nay, 
their  souls  receive  such  a  blot  as  all  the  water 
in  the  sea  wiil  not  wa-<h  off,  but  only  the 
saving  blood  of  Christ  Jesus,  upon  repentance 
and  amendment.  Follow  we  not,  then,  Miriam 
and  Aaron  speaking  against  Moses,  but  pray 
for  His  grace  to  guide  our  tongues  in  a  holy 
course,  and  so,  clean  tongues  being  the  out- 
ward tokens  of  our  clean  souls,  our  life  shall 
bo  godly  and  our  end  happy. — Bishop 
Bahington. 

(c)  All  genuine  meekness  among  men — all, 
I  mean,  which  is  more  than  mere  easiness  of 
dispo.-ition — may  be  defined  to  be  t'lat  bearing 
of  a  man  towards  the  things  of  tijae  and  of 
this  world,  which  springs  from  having:  the 
heart  broken  by  religious  peoiteucH.  and  the 
will  put  humbly  into  the  hand  of  God.  Do 
we  call  him  "  meek ''  who  gives  way  in  silrtnce 
before  noisy  pretension,  will  rather  give  up 


bis  due  than  wrangle  for  it,  and  is  so  far  from 
pushing  himself  into  foremost  places,  that  he 
yields  bef<  re  the  force  or  "  importunity  of 
earthly-minded"  men,  nor  murmurs  at  the 
"  usurpation  of  the  unjust"?  Is  it  not  because 
his  natural  self -importance  has  been  humbled 
into  "  poverty  of  spirit,"  that  he  is  prepared 
thus  to  accept  the  lowest  place  ?  Or  is  it 
"moeknesa,"  as  some  older  expositors  defined 
it,  to  be  ''undesiro  is  of  revenge  "  ("non  cupidus 
vindi  -I  ae) — '•  not  easily  provoked,'  slow  to  take 
offence,  and,  though  stung  deep,  betraying  no 
pergonal  bitterness,  but  hiding  oneself  beneath 
the  wing  of  God,  who  is  the  promised  "  avenger 
of  all  such"?  Surely  he  forbears  and  for- 
gives best  who  knows  by  the  depth  of  his 
contrition  for  personal  guilt  how  deeply  h/^ 
has  been  forgiven.  Or  shill  we  say  he  is  the 
''  meek  "  man,  who,  resting  in  the  quiet  and 
peaceable  enjoyment  of  so  much  as  God  has 
been  pleased  to  give,  can  meet  each  turn  of 
fortune's  wheel  with  an  equal  mind,  quarrel- 
ling neither  with  injurious  providence,  nor 
with  more  successful  rivals;  in  prosperity 
unassuming,  undespot  ding  in  adversity  ? 
Sho^v  me  a  will  made  pliable  to  the  Heavenly 
Father  under  the  experience  of  grace  and 
fortiiven  sin,  and  I  wiil  show  you  equanimity 
above  the  philosophers — the  equanimity  of 
the  Christian  child  1  Yes,  we  must  be  con- 
verted to  become  meek. — J.  0.  Dykes.  M  A.. 
D.D. 


The  Modern  Application  of  an  Ancient  Incident. 


{^Verses  1-3.) 


The  incident  recorded  in  these  verses 
warrants  the  following  practical  obser- 
vations : — 

I.  The  possession  of  the  greatest 
gifts  does  not  exempt  men  from  the 
liability  to  meanness  and  sin. 

Miriam,  a  prophetess  and  poet,  and 
Aaron  an  eloquent  man  (Exod.  iv.  14), 
in  a  measure  inspired  by  God  (Exod. 
iv.  15),  and  appointed  by  God  the  re- 
ligious head  of  the  nation  (Exod.  xxviii.), 
are  here  guilty  of  extreme  meanness 
and  great  sin.  The  possession  of  great 
gifts  does  not  necessarily  involve  the 
possession  of  great  grace  also.  Balaam 
was  a  highly  gifted  man  ;  but  he  was 
covetous,  unprincipled,  &c.  A  man 
may  hold  high  office  in  the  Church, 
and  yet  sin  grievously.  Let  persons 
of  great  abilities  and  influence  re- 
member their  great  responsibilities. 
Let  those  who  occupy  prominent  posi- 


tions in  religion  look  well  to  their  own 
spiritual  life  and  health,     (a) 

II.  The  most  excellent  and  eminent 
servants  of  God  are  not  exempt  froia 
the  reproaches  of  men. 

Even  Moses,  so  distinguished  for 
piety  as  he  was,  was  spoken  against. 

"  No  might  nor  greatness  in  mortality 

Can  censure  'scape;  back-wounding  calumny 

The    whitest  virtue   strikes :  What  kin^    so 

strong, 
Can  tie  the  gall  up  in  the  slanderous  tongue  ?" 

Sli'ikespe.are. 

"  Be  thou  as  chaste  as  ice,  as  pure  as  snow 
Thou  shalt  not  escape  calumny." — Ibid 

*'  The  worthiest  people  are  the  most 
injured  by  slander,"  said  Swift,  "as  we 
usually  find  that  to  be  the  best  fruit 
which  the  birds  have  been  pecking  at." 
It  was  said  of  our  Holy  Lord,  "  He  hath 
a  devil  and  is  mad."     "  If  they  called 

217 


CHAP.  XIL 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


the  Master  of  the  house  Beelzebub, 
how  much  more  them  of  His  house- 
hold 1 "     (6) 

II r.  Our  greatest  trials  sometimes 
arise  from  the  most  unlikely  quarters. 

It  was  remarkably  so  in  the  present 
trial  of  Moses.     It  arose  from — 

1 .  Persons  in  eminent  positions.  One 
would  have  thought  that  they  would 
have  sympathised  with  and  endeavoured 
to  sustain  Moses  in  the  duties  and  bur- 
dens of  his  office ;  but,  <fec. 

2.  Persons  of  excellent  character, 
Aaron  and  Miriam  were  undoubtedly, 
in  the  main,  good  and  worthy  persons. 
Many  of  the  trials  of  ministers  and 
other  religious  leaders  in  our  own  day 
come  from  religious  and  well-meaning 
men;  from  their  unreasonable  com- 
plaints, their  ignorant  criticism,  their 
conceited  censures,  (fee. 

3.  Persons  in  near  relationship.  The 
present  trial  of  Moses  arose  from  his 
own  brother  and  sister.  David  suffered 
sorely  in  this  way  from  Absalom,  Ahith- 
ophel,  et  at.  Com  p.  Psa.  xli.  9  ;  Iv.  12- 
14.  When  trials  arise  in  this  way  they 
cause  great  disappointment.  AVe  ex- 
pect such  difiPerent  things  from  kins- 
folk and  friends.     They  also  cause  sore 


distress.      They   wound   the   tenderest 
feelings,  <fec. 

IV.  The  Lord  takes  cognizance  of 
the  reproaches  wliich  are  cast  upon 
His  servants. 

When  "  Miriam  and  Aaron  spake 
against  Moses,  .  .  .  the  Lord  heard." 

1.  He  is  perfectly  acquainted  with  all 
things.  *'  The  Lord  is  a  God  of  know- 
ledge." "  His  understanding  is  infinite.'"' 
**  God  knoweth  all  things." 

2.  He  is  deeply  interested  in  all  that 
concerns  His  servants.  This  interest  is 
set  forth  in  most  expressive  forms  in 
the  Scriptures  (Deut.  xxxii.  9,  10;  Isa. 
xlix.  15,  16  :  Zech.  ii.  8).  The  repu- 
tation of  His  servants  is  sacred  and 
precious  in  His  sight. 

V.  The  servants  of  the  Lord  do  well 
in  bearing  patiently  the  reproaches 
which  are  cast  upon  them. 

Moses  did  not  attempt  to  vindicate 
himself  against  the  reproaches  of 
Miriam  and  Aaron.  The  good  man  in 
similar  circumstances  may  well  follow 
his  example  in  this.  If  we  are  tho- 
roughly devoted  to  God's  service,  we 
may  safely  leave  it  to  Him  to  vindicate 
us  against  the  reproaches  of  man, 
Comp.  Job  xvi.  19;  Psa.  xxxvii.  5-6.  (c) 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 


(a)  Years  ago  Hamburg  was  nearly  half  of 
it  burned  down,  and  among  the  incidents  that 
happened  there  was  this  one.  A  large  house 
had  connected  with  it  a  yard,  in  which  there 
was  a  great  biack  dog,  and  this  black  dog  in 
the  middle  of  the  night  barked  and  bowled 
most  furiously.  It  was  only  by  his  barking 
that  the  family  wer*"  awakened  just  in  time 
to  escape  from  the  flamf-s,  and  their  lives  were 
spared ;  but  the  poor  dog  was  chained  to  his 
kennel,  and  though  he  barked  and  thus  saved 
the  lives  of  others,  he  was  burned  himself. 
Oh !  do  not  you,  who  work  for  God  in  this 
church,  perish  in  that  fashion.  Do  not  permit 
your  sins  to  enchain  you,  so  that  while  you 
warn  others  you  become  lost  yourselves.  Do 
see  that  you  have  the  godliness  which  has  the 
promise  of  the  life  to  come. —  C.  H.  Spurgeon. 

(Jb)  I  think  there  is  no  Christian,  but  sooner 
or  later,  first  or  last,  shall  have  cause  to  say 
with  David,  "  False  witnesses  did  rise  up, 
th«y  laid  to  my  charge  things  that  I  kne^ 
not"  (Psa.  XXV.  11).  They  charged  me  with 
such  things  whereof  I  was  both  innocent  and 
ignorant.  It  was  the  saying  of  one,  that  there 
218 


was   nothing   so    intolerable    as    accusation, 
because  there  was  no  punishment  ordained  by 
law  for  accusers,  as  there   was  for  thieves, 
although    they    stole     friendship   from   men, 
which  is  the  goodliest  riches  men  have.  Well, 
Christians,  seeing  it  has  been  the  lot  of  the 
dearest  saints  to   be  falsely  accused,  and  to 
have  their  names  and  reputes  in  the  world 
reproached,  do  you  hold  your  peace,  seeing  it 
is  no  worse  with  you  than  it  was  with  them, 
of  whom  this  world  was  not  worthy. — Brooks. 
(c)    The   celebrated   Boerhaave,   who    had 
many    enemies,  used    to    say    that  he  never 
thought  it  necessary  torepf  at  their  calumnies. 
"  They  are  sparks,"  said  he,  "  which,  if  you 
do  not  blow  them,  will  go  out  of  themselves. 
The  surest  method  against  scandal  is  to  live 
it  down  by  perseverance  in  well-doing,  and  by 
prayer  to  God,  that  He  would  cure  the  dis- 
tempered  mind   of   those    who   traduce    and 
injure  us."     It  was  a  good  remark  of  another 
that  '*  the  malice  of  ill  tongues  cast  upon  a 
good  man  is  only  like  a  mouthful  of  smoke 
blown    upon   a    diamond,    which,   though    it 
clouds  its  beauty  for  the  present,  yet  it  la 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  XII. 


easily  rubbed  off,  and  the  gem  restored,  with 
little  trouble  to  its  own  lustre." — Diet,  oflllust, 
Rowland  Hill,  when  once  scarrilously  at- 
tacked in  one  of  the  public  journals,  was  urged 
by  a  zealous  friend  t  bring  a  legal  action  in 
defence;  to  this  he  replied  with  calm,  unruf- 
fled dignity, — "I  shall  neither  answer  the 
libel,  nor  prosecute  the  writer,  and  that  for 


two  reasons  :  first,  because,  in  attempting  the 
former,  I  should  probably  be  betrayed  into 
unbecoming  violence  of  temper  and  expression, 
to  my  own  grief,  and  the  wounding  of  my 
friends  ;  and  in  the  next  place,  I  have  learned 
by  experience,  that  no  mans  character  can  be 
eventually  injured  but  by  his  own  acts.'^ — 
Gleanings. 


The  Inquest  oj*  the  Lord  into  the  Sin  of  Miriam  and  Aaron. 

(^Verses  4-9.) 


We  now  come  to  the  second  scene  in 
this  painful  cliapter  of  IsraeUtish  his- 
tory.    Coi^sider — 

I.  The  solemn  convocation. 

"  And  the  Lord  spake  suddenly  unto 
Moses,  and  unto  Aaron,  and  unto 
Miriam,  Come  out,"  &c.  (verses  4,  5). 
We  have  here  the  solemn  summons  of 
the  Divine  Voice  to  Moses  and  to  the 
two  offenders,  the  majestic  descent  of 
the  cloud  of  the  Divine  Presence,  &c. 
Two  great  truths  appear  to  be  set  forth 
in  all  this : 

1.  The  timeliness  of  the  Divine  inter' 
position.  "  The  Lord  spake  suddenly." 
His  interposition  was  not  delayed.  In 
due  season,  at  the  earliest  fitting  oppor- 
tunity. He  appears  for  the  vindication 
of  His  reproached  servants, 

2.  The  righteousness  of  the  Divine 
judgment.  This  seems  to  be  taught  by 
the  summoning  of  the  offenders  and  of 
the  person  wronged  before  Him,  and  by 
the  descent  of  the  cloud  of  His 
presence.  He  knows  all  things,  yet. 
He  makes  inquiry,  &c.  There  is  no 
haste  in  the  Divine  judgments;  but 
patient  and  thorough  examination  pre- 
cedes them.  Comp.  Gen.  iii.  8-13;  vi. 
12  ;  xi.  5  ;  xviii.  21  ;  Zeph  i.  12.     (a) 

The  unimpeachable  righteousness  of 
the  judgments  of  God  should  prove — 

1.  A  comfort  to  the  upright  when  un- 
justly reproached. 

2.  A  warning  to  the  wicked, 
II.   The  splendid  vindication. 
"And  he  said,  Hear  now  my  words: 

If  there  is  a  prophet  of  Jehovah  to  you," 
&c.  (verses  6-8).  Miriam  and  Aaron 
had  aspired  to  equality  with  Moses,  and 
disputed  his  claim  to  superior  authority, 


and  now  Jehovah  splendidly  vindicates 
his  pre-eminent  character,  and  privi- 
leges, and  consequent  authority.  He 
asserts  that  Moses  was — 

1.  Pre-eminent  in  the  intimacy  of 
his  communion  with  God,  In  the  reve- 
lations which  God  made  to  men  there 
were  different  degrees  of  clearness. 
To  prophets  He  spake  in  visions  and 
dreams;  He  revealed  His  will  to  them 
in  "  the  inner  sphere  of  the  soul-life." 
But  He  spake  to  Moses  "mouth  to 
mouth,"  "i.e.,  without  any  mediation 
or  reserve,  but  with  the  same  closeness 
and  freedom  with  which  friends  converse 
together"  (Exod.  xxxiii.  11).  He  spake 
to  Moses  "  as  an  appearance,  and  that 
not  in  enigmas,"  i.e..  His  communica- 
tions were  made  to  him  directly  and  in 
the  plainnest  and  most  intelligible 
manner.  And  of  Moses  He  says  further, 
"  tlie  similitude  of  the  Lord  shall  he 
behold."  By  "  the  similitude  "  we  are 
not  to  understand  the  unveiled  essence 
of  the  Deity  (John  i.  18;  1  Tim.  vi.  16) 
nor  any  representation  of  God  in  the 
form  of  man  or  in  the  form  of  the  angel 
of  Jehovah  (Ezek.  i.  26-28 ;  Dan.  vii. 
9,  13  ;  Gen.  xvi.  7).  "  It  was  the  Deity 
Himself  manifesting  Himself  so  as  to  be 
cognizable  to  mortal  eye."  Thus  Moses 
was  exalted  far  above  all  the  other 
prophets.  (See  explanatory  notes  on 
verses  6-8.) 

2.  Pre-eminent  in  his  faithfulness  in 
the  charge  which  he  received  of  the  Lord. 
"  My  servant  Moses  is  approved  in  My 
whole  house."  The  "  house  "  of  Jehovah 
in  this  place  does  not  signify  the  Ta- 
bernacle, but  the  covenant  people,  who 
were  to  be  instructed  and  regulated  by 

219 


CHAP.  XIL 


UOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


Moses.  In  all  his  duties  to  the  people 
of  God,  Moses  is  declared  ftiithful;  in 
all  he  was  approved  by  God.  *'  He 
said  and  did  everything  in  the  manage- 
ment of  that  great  affair,  as  became  an 
honest  good  man,  that  aimed  at  nothing 
else  but  the  honour  of  God  and  welfare 
of  Israel."  How  completely  does  the 
Lord  vmdicate  His  servant,  and  how 
highly  does  He  honour  him !  Well 
does  Trapp  say,  "  God  had  never  so 
much  magnified  Moses  to  them,  but 
for  their  envy.  We  cannot  devise  to 
pleasure  God's  servants  so  much  as  by 
despiting  them.  Quisquis  volens  de- 
trahit  famce  mece^  nolens  addit  mercedi 
mece,  saith  Augustine ;  He  that  wil- 
lingly detracteth  from  mine  honour, 
doth,  though  against  his  will,  add  to 
my  reward." 

III.  The  unanswerable  interroga- 
tion. 

"  Wherefore,  then,  were  ye  not  afraid 
to  speak  against  My  servant,  against 
Moses  1"  This  iuquiry  implies  that 
their  speech  against  Moses  was — 

1.  Unreasonable.  "  Wherefore,  then," 
&c.  Their  reproaches  were  ground- 
less. The  Divine  "Wherefore?"  re- 
veals the  utter  absence  of  any  true 
cause  for  them. 

2.  Profane.  "  Were  ye  not  afraid  to 
?peak  against  My  sei-vant  V^  In  re- 
proachmg  the  servant,  they  had  dis- 
honoured the  Master.  "  The  rule  is. 
Injuria  illata  legnto  redundat  in  legan- 
tern,  Wrong  done  to  a  messenger  re- 
flects on  him  that  sent  him." 

3.  Daring.  "  Why  were  ye  not  afraid]" 
If  they  had  considered,  they  would  have 
discovered  strong  reasons  to  dread  the 


result  of  their  conduct.  "We  have 
reason,"  says  Matthew  Henry,  "to  be 
afraid  of  saying  or  doing  anything 
against  the  servants  of  God ;  it  is  at 
our  peril  if  we  do  so,  for  God  will  plead 
their  cause,  and  reckon  that  what 
'  touches  them  touches  the  apple  of 
His  eye.'  It  is  a  dangerous  thing  to 
*  offend  one  of  Christ's  little  ones' 
(Matt,  xviii.  6).  Those  are  presump- 
tuous, indeed,  that  '  are  not  afraid  to 
speak  evil  of  dignities'  (2  Pet.  ii.  10)." 
Interrogated  thus  by  the  Lord,  Aaron 
and  Miriam  were  "speechless,"  like  the 
man  at  the  marriage  feast  who  had  not 
on  a  wedding  garment  (Matt.  xxii.  12). 
Their  conduct  was  utterly  indefensible. 

IV.  The  Divine  anger. 

"  And  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was 
kindled  against  them,  and  He  departed." 
There  are  here  two  considerations  con- 
cerning the  anger  of  the  Lord  : 

1.  Its  righteousness.  It  was  kindled 
by  sin — the  sin  of  Aaron  and  Miriam. 
The  anger  of  God  is  a  perfectly  holy 
principle  which  hates  and  antagonises 
sin.     (6) 

2.  Its  manifestation.  "  And  He  de- 
parted." "The  removal  of  God's  pre- 
sence from  us,"  says  Matthew  Henry, 
"  is  the  surest  and  saddest  token  of 
God's  displeasure  against  us.  Woe  unto 
us  if  He  depart ;  and  He  never  departs 
till  we  by  our  sin  and  folly  drive  Him 
from  us."  "  The  final  absence  of  God 
is  hell  itself."     (c) 

Conclusion : 

The  time  approaches  when  God  will 
summon  all  men  to  give  account  of 
themselves  and  their  lives  to  Him. 
'*  Prepare  to  meet  thy  God," 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  There  are  many  ways  of  representinaf 

p  rfect    justice.     The    Thebans    represented 

h>  T  as  having  neither  hands  nor  eyes,  for  the 

j'.idge  should  neither  receive  bribes  nor  respect 

persons.     We,  for  similar  reasons,  picture  her 

with  a  sword  in  one  hand,  scales  in  the  other, 

and    bandaged   eyes.     Whatever  dcubt  there 

may  be  as  to  the  justice  of  the  earthly  judge, 

a=<  to  that  of  the  Heavenly  there  can  be  none. 

Now,  His  ways  may  sometimes  appear  to  be 

*•  unequal."     We  see  the  wicked  in  prosperity 

and  the  rightecus  in  adversity.     Likd  David, 

220 


we  are  troubled  at  it.  But  when  with  David 
we  "enter  into  the  tabernacle  of  God,  then 
understand  we  their  end ;  "  for  God  *'  hath 
appointed  a  day  in  which  He  will  judge  the 
world  in  righteousness  by  that  Man  whom  He 
hath  ordained," — J.  G  Pilkington. 

(b)  There  is  a  deep  wrath-principle  in  God, 
as  in  all  moral  natures,  that  puts  Him  down 
upon  wrong,  and  girds  Him  in  avenging 
majesty  for  the  infliction  of  suffering  upon 
wrong.  Just  as  we  speak  of  our  felt  indigna* 
tions,  and  tell  how  we  are  made  to  born  agaiust 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  XIL 


the  person,  or  even  the  life  of  the  wrong-doer, 
80  God  has  His  heavier  indignations,  and  burns 
with  His  more  consuming  fire.  This  combus- 
tion of  right  anger  is  that  girding  power  of 
juHtice  that  puts  Him  on  the  work  of  redress, 
and  that  armature  of  strength  upon  His  feel- 
ing, that  enables  Him  to  inflict  pain  without 
shrinking. — H.  Bashnell^  D  D, 

Say  you  that  God  is  love?  Oh  1  but  look 
round  this  world.  The  aspect  of  things  is 
stern — very  stern.  If  they  be  ruled  by  love, 
it  is  a  love  which  does  not  shrink  from  hum^n 
agony.  There  is  a  law  of  infinite  mercy  here, 
but  there  is  a  law  of  boundless  rigour-,  coo. 
Sin,  and  you  will  suffer — that  law  ri  not 
reversed.  The  young,  and  the  gentle,  and 
oho  tender,  are  inexorably  subjected  to  it.  We 
would  shield  them  if  we  could ;  but  there  is 
that  which  says  they  shall  not  be  shielded. 


They  shall  weep,  and  fade,  and  taste  of  mortal 
anguish,  even  as  others.  Carry  that  out  into 
the  next  world,  and  you  have  **  wrath  to 
come." — F,  W.  Robertson,  M.A. 

(c)  Think  of  God  sending  a  famine  npon  the 
soul — of  minds  pining  and  dying  because 
Divine  messages  have  been  withdrawn  1  We 
know  what  the  effect  would  be  if  God  were  to 
withhold  the  dew,  or  to  trouble  the  air  with 
u  plague,  or  to  avert  the  beams  of  the  sun ; 
the  garden  would  be  a  desert^  the  fruitful 
field  a  sandy  plain,  the  wind  a  bearer  of  death, 
summer  a  stormy  night,  and  life  itself  a  cruel 
variation  of  death,  so  penetrating,  so  bound- 
less is  the  influence  of  God  in  nature.  Is  it 
conceivable  that  the  withdrawment  of  God*8 
influence  would  be  less  disastrous  npon  the 
spirit  of  man  ? — Joseph  Parker^  D.D, 


Honour  to  Moses;  Greater  Honour  to  Chbisl 

(Verse  7.) 


We  have  an  inspired  comment  in  the 
New  Testament  on  these  words  (Heb.  iii. 
1-6).  Paul,  reasoning  with  the  Jews, 
tries  to  divert  their  minds  from  giving 
to  Moses  a  glory  that  was  in  excess  ; 
and  to  show  that  all  the  honour  they 
gave  to  Moses,  the  early  servant,  be- 
longed in  a  far  richer  degree  to  Jesus, 
their  rejected  Lord.  It  is  said  that 
Moses,  in  all  his  offices,  as  priest,  as 
prophet,  as  ruler,  as  teacher,  as  guide, 
Wis  faithful  in  all  his  house. 

What  was  his  house  ?    "  Whose  house," 
Eays  the  Apostle,  '*are  we." 

What  does  faithfulness  mean  ?  What- 
ever be  the  function  assigned  to  you, 
that  you  honestly,  impartially,  ear- 
nestly, and  fully  discharge.  Moses  was 
in  the  midst  of  the  people  of  God  faith- 
ful. He  finished  the  tabernacle  ;  and 
you  remember  how  specitio  are  the 
injunctions  laid  down,  and  how  mi- 
nutely Moses  fulfilled  them  all.  So 
Jesus,  the  antitype,  dimly  foreshadowed 
by  Moses,  has  been  faithful* in  all  the 
arrangements  of  His  house.  He  has 
furnished  it  with  precious  sacraments  ; 
He  has  appointed  it  a  teachhig  and  a 
preaching  ministry ;  He  has  redeemed 
it  by  His  precious  blood  ;  He  has  be- 
queathed to  it  the  ceaseless  presence  of 
His  Holy  Spirit,  &c. 

The  Apostle  justly  says,    that    this 


Moses y  who  was  faithful  in  all  his  honse 
is  counted  worthy  of  glory  ;  though  One 
is  counted  worthy  of  greater  glory.  The 
very  comparison  indicates  that  Moses 
was  counted  worthy  of  honour.  We 
need  not  disparage  the  servant  in  order 
to  ei^alt  the  Master.  Moses  was  a  ser- 
vant in  the  house ;  as  a  servant  to  be 
honoured ;  Jesus,  the  Builder  of  the 
house,  as  the  Builder  of  the  house  to 
have  the  great  and  the  lasting  glory. 
Comp.  John  v.  23. 

We  see  what  is  the  true  definition  of 
the  Church.  The  definition  of  Scripture 
of  the  Church  is  not  the  size  of  an 
edifice,  or  the  splendour  of  its  archi- 
tecture ;  but  the  regenerated  men  that 
meet  together  in  the  name  of  Christ, 
&c.  The  orator  may  collect  a  crowd, 
but  that  is  not  a  Church.  The  archi- 
tect may  build  a  cathedral,  but  that 
is  not  a  Church.  It  is  living  stones, 
knit  together  by  living  love,  not  dead 
stones  fastened  together  by  dead  mor- 
tar, that  constitute  a  Church  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

We  see  also  the  true  oneness  of  the 
Church  of  Christ  in  all  ages.  There 
was,  says  the  Apostle,  but  one  house. 
*' Moses  was  faithful  in  all  his  house  ; 
.  .  .  whose  house,"  says  the  Apostle, 
"  are  we."  Then  the  Church  that  was 
in  the  days  of  Moses  is  the  Church  that 

221 


CHAP.  XIL 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


exists  now.  There  never  has  been  but 
one  Church  ;  there  never  has  been  but 
one  religion — I  mean  true  religion; 
there  never  has  been  but  one  Saviour. 
The  formula  has  differed,  the  circum- 
stances have  varied,  the  degree  of 
spirituality  or  conformity  to  Christ  has 
differed  ;  but  the  substance  has  been 
everywhere  and  always  essentially  the 
same. 

Now  the  argument  of  the  Apostle 
(tleb.  iii.  1-6)  is  most  logical;  a 
building  infers  and  suggests  a  builder  ; 
an  effect  throws  you  back  upon  a  cause  ; 
a  creation  leads  you  back  or  upwards 
to  a  Creator ;  and  if  Christ  be  the 
builder  of  all,  and  peculiarly  the  builder 
of  that  edifice  of  living  stones  which  is 
called  the  Church  ;  to  build  which  re- 
'\uires  more  of  God  than  to  build  the 
a-iiverse ;  then,  says  the  Apostle,  of 
how  great  honour  ought  He  to  be  the 
inheritor  who  is  thus  God,  the  Builder 
and  the  Maker  of  all  %  If  it  required 
God  to  make  a  world  ;  it  requires  God 
to  regenerate  sinners  ;  nay,  if  possible 
more  so.  Omnipotence  has  but  to 
mould  the  obedient  dust  into  all  its 
forms  of  beauty,  of  symmetry  and 
order  ;  and  no  resisting  element,  from 
first  to  last,  will  intrude  to  disturb  the 
perfection,  or  to  mar  the  beauty  of  the 
product.  But  in  dealing  with  sinners 
(here  is  not  simply  dead  material  to  be 
moulded  into  its  varied  forms  of  loveli- 
ness and  symmetry,  but  resistant  pas- 
sions,    lebtllious     feelings,    reluctant 


appetites,  diverging  tendencies  j  a 
thousand  things  to  obstruct,  to  resist 
and  to  mar.  And  hence,  if  it  required 
God  to  build  the  outer  world,  it  re- 
quires no  less  a  God  to  build  that 
inner  house,  &c.  Now  then,  argues 
the  Apostle,  if  the  servant  Moses  is 
counted  by  every  Jew  worthy  of  honour, 
what  language  shall  express  the  honour 
due  to  Him  who  built  all  things  1 
Comp.  Heb.  i.  And  thus  he  shows  that 
Christ  is  superior  to  Moses ;  that  He 
is  superior  to  angels ;  he  proves  by 
compiirison  that  he  is  God;  and  there- 
fore, that  the  glory,  and  the  honour, 
and  the  thanksgiving,  and  the  praise 
are  exclusively  due  to  Him,  who  re- 
deemed us  by  His  blood,  and  has  made 
us  what  we  are. 

We  infer  from  the  whole — 

1.  The  greater  glory  of  the  New 
Testament  economy.  The  figures  are 
removed  because  their  reality  has 
come. 

2.  The  greater  responsibility  of  all 
who  live  under  so  clear,  so  simple,  so 
spiritual  an  economy.  Comp.  Heb. 
X.  28,  29. 

3.  Paul  shows  us  also  the  secret  of 
our  safety  (Heb.  iii.  6). 

4.  If  Christ  was  faithful  in  His  house, 
and  Moses  faithful  in  his,  let  us  be 
faithful  in  ours  (Matt.  xxiv.  45-50). 

Are  we  living  stones,  laid  upon  Christ 
the  rock  *?  —  Arra?ir/ecl  from  ^^  Sahb'ttk 
Morning  Readingsy^  by  John  Cummlu(jf 
B.D. 


The  PuNisHMiiNT  OF  Miriam  and  Aaron, 


{Verses  10  IG,) 


Consider : 

I.  The  Divine  judgment  because  of 
the  sin  of  Miriam  and  Aaron. 

"And  the  cloud  departed  from  off 
the  tabernacle ;  and,  behold,  Miriam 
became  leprous,"  &c.  (ver.  10). 

1.  The  punishment  was  inflicted  by 
the  Lord,  "Leprosy,"  says  Archbishop 
Trench,  "  was  often  the  punishment  of 
sins  committtd  against  the  Divine 
government.  Miriam,  Gehazi,  Uzziah, 
ftre  all  cases  in  point ;  and  when  Mu^'s 
233 


says  to  the  people,  '  Take  heed  of  the 
plague  of  leprosy'  (Dent.  xxiv.  8),  this 
is  no  admonition  diligently  to  observe 
the  laws  about  leprosy,  but  a  warning 
lest  any  disobedience  of  theirs  should 
provoke  God  to  visit  them  with  this 
plague.  The  Jews  themselves  called  it 
'  the  finger  of  God,'  and  emphatically, 
'  the  stroke.'  It  attacked,  they  said, 
first  a  man's  house;  and  then,  if  he  re- 
fused to  turn,  his  clothing ;  and  lastly, 
should  he   persist  in  sin,  himself    -a 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NUMBERS. 


criAP.  XII. 


fine  parable,  let  the  fact  have  been  as 
it  might,  of  tlie  manner  in  which  God's 
judj^ments,  if  a  man  refuse  to  listen  to 
them,  reach  ever  nearer  to  the  centre 
of  his  life.  So,  too,  they  said  that 
a  man's  true  repentance  was  the  one 
condition  of  h"s  leprosy  leaving  him." 
The  leprosy  of  Miriam  was  certainly 
*'  the  stroke"  of  Divine  punishment 
because  of  her  sin. 

2.  The  puriuhinent  was  appropriate  to 
the  sin.  "  Her  foul  tongue,"  says 
Bishop  Hall,  **  is  justly  punished  with 
c  foul  face,  and  her  folly  in  pretending 
10  be  a  rival  with  Moses  is  made  mani- 
fest to  all  men,  for  every  one  sees  his 
face  to  be  glorious,  and  hers  to  be 
leprous.  While  Moses  needs  a  veil  to 
hide  his  glory,  Miriam  needs  one  to 
hide  her  shame."  Not  content  with 
her  exalted  position,  she  aspired  to  the 
highest  place  of  all,  and  for  seven  days 
she  was  not  allowed  even  the  lowest 
place  in  the  camp,  but  was  completely 
exiled  from  it. 

3.  The  punishment  fell  most  severely 
upon  Miriam.     Aaron  was  not  struck 
with  leprosy.     (1)  She  was  the  instiga- 
tor of  the  sin.     The   Lord   visits    her 
greater   guilt    with   a   severer  punish- 
ment.    (2)  Aaron's  office  of  High  Priest 
also    probably    helped   to    shield    him. 
Had  he  been  smitten   with  leprosy  he 
would  have   been  deeply  disgraced  in 
the    eyes  of  the  people,  and   his  holy 
office  WO'  Id  probably  have  been  brought 
into  disesteem  amongst  them.     (3)  Yet 
Aaron   was   not    altogether    exempted 
from   punishment.     As   priest    he  had 
to  examine  Miriam  and  pronounce  her 
leprous.     Again  he  had  to  examine  her 
and  pronounce  her  clean  before  she  was 
readmitted    to    the    camp.     That    he 
d'^'^ply  realized   his  painful   position  is 
evident  from  the  narrative  (verses   10- 
12).     Let   us  remember  that  there  is 
judgment  with  God,     He  punishes  men 
for  their  sins.     If  His  chosen  and  dis- 
tinguished  servants   sin   against    Him, 
He  *'will  visit  their  transgression  with 
the  rod,  and  their  ini(]uity  with  stripes." 
(a) 

II.   The  Divine    judgment  leading 
to  personal  humiliation. 


"And  Aaron  said  unto  Moses,  Alas  ! 
my  lord,  I  beseech  thee,"  6lq.  (verses 
11,  12).     We  see  here — 

1.  Humble  ack7ioivledgm.ent  to  Moses. 
A  short  time  since  Aaron  had  spoken 
against  Moses;  but  mark  the  humility 
with  which  he  now  approaches  him, 
and  the  respect  with  which  he  now 
addresses  him — "Alas !  my  lord,  I  beseech 
thee,"  &c.  When  the  Lord  takes  up 
the  cause  of  His  servants  He  speedily 
humbles  their  detractors. 

2.  Confession  of  sin.  "  Lay  not  the 
sin  upon  us,  wherein  we  have  done 
foolishly,  and  wherein  we  have  sinned." 
Though  he  was  not  himself  smitten 
with  leprosy,  yet  Aaron  deeply  feels 
and  penitently  acknowledges  his  sin. 

3.  Entreaty  for  the  removal  of  the 
severe  judgment  from  Miriam.  "Let 
her  not  be  as  one  dead,"  &c.  *'  Leprosy," 
says  Archbishop  Trench,  "was  nothing 
short  of  a  living  death,  a  corrupting  of 
all  the  humours,  a  poisoning  of  the 
very  springs,  of  life ;  a  dissolution  little 
by  little  of  the  whole  body,  so  that 
one  limb  after  another  actually  decayed 
and  fell  away.  Aaron  exactly  describes 
the  appearance  which  the  leper  pre- 
sented to  the  eyes  of  the  beholders, 
when,  pleading  for  Miriam,  he  says, 
*  Let  her  not  be  as  one  dead,  of  whom,'" 
&c.  Thus  he  invokes  the  aid  of  Moses 
in  intercession  for  the  removal  of  the 
dreadful  punishment.  How  speedily 
God  by  His  judgments  can  humble 
men !  Even  the  greatest  and  the 
mightiest  are  utterly  unable  to  sustain 
His  strokes. 

III.  The  remarkable  acknowledg- 
ment of  the  eminencs  of  Moses,  the 
servant  of  the  Lord. 

In  Aaron's  confession  and  appeal  to 
Moses  we  have  a  splendid  tribute  to 
the  character  and  power  with  God  of 
the  latter. 

1.  In  the  manner  in  which  he  was 
addressed  by  Aaron.  "  And  Aaron  said 
unto  Moses,  Alas  !  my  lord,  I  beseech 
thee,"  (kc. 

2.  In  the  appeal  which  was  made  to 
him  by  Aaron.  "  Let  her  not  be  as 
one  dead,"  &c.  This  appeal  implies  on 
the  part  of  Aaron — (1)   Fnitb    in    th© 

223 


— -v 


CHAP.  XII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NUMBERS. 


m-  {iiaidmity  of  Moses — that  he  would 
not  retaliate  upon  them  for  their  attack 
upon  him  ;  that  he  was  forgiving  and 
generous.  (2)  Faith  in  the  influence 
which  Moses  had  with  God.  Aaron 
does  not  dare  to  present  his  prayer 
directly  to  God,  but  he  seeks  the  media- 
tion and  intercession  of  Moses.  Thus 
out  of  the  evil  speaking  of  Aaron  and 
Miriam  against  Moses^  God  brings  a 
splendid  tribute  to  the  magnanimity, 
the  holiness,  and  the  spiritual  power  of 
His  servant.  Men  in  prosperity  may 
reproach  the  servants  of  the  Lord,  bi:t 
in  adversity  the}^  will  eagerly  seek  their 
sympathies  and  services. 

IV.  The  distinguished  magnanimity 
and  grace  of  Moses. 

*'And   Moses   cried  unto  the  Lord, 
saying.  Heal  her  now,  0  God,  T  beseech 
Thee."     There   was  no   resentment  in 
his  heart  towards  the  brother  and  sister 
who  had  injured  him  ;  but  fullest  for- 
giveness for  both,  and  sincerest    pity 
for  his  smitten  sister.     His  prayer  for 
Miriam   is  an  anticipation  of  the  pre- 
cept of  our  Lord,  •'  Pray  for  them  which 
despitefully  use  you,  and  persecuteyou'* 
(Matt.  V.  44).     We  have  another  l:)eau- 
tiful   example  of    this   forgivhig     -tnd 
gracious   spirit   in  the  "man   of   Gor< 
out     of     Judah,"    who    prayed     that 
the  withered  hand  of  Jeroboam,  whicn 
had  been  stretched  out  against  him, 
might   be    healed  (1   Kings  xiii.    1-6). 
This  spirit  found  its  supreme  and  per- 
fect expression  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
For  those  who  crucified  Him,  when  He 
was  enduring  the  anguish  of  the  cross. 
He  prayed,  "  Father,  forgive  them  ;  for 
they  know  not   what  they  do "  (Luke 
xxiii.  34).     Let  us  imitate  Him. 

V.  The  great  power  of  the  inter- 
cession of  good. 

In  answer  to  the  prayer  of  Moses 
Miriam  was  healed  of  her  leprosy,  and, 
after  an  exclusion  lasting  seven  days, 
was  restored  to  her  place  in  the  camp 
and  congregation  of  the  Lord.  *'  Pray 
one  for  another,  that  ye  may  be  healed. 
The  effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a  right- 
eous man  availeth  much."     (h) 

VI.  The  justice  and  mercy  of  God  as 
manifested  in  His  treatment  of  Miriam. 

•>  0 1 


1.  He  manifests  His  justice.  To  mark 
His  abhorrence  of  her  sin  He  commands 
that  Miriam  .^hall  be  shut  out  of  the 
camp  seven  days.  "  To  deal  lightly 
with  sin  is  actually  to  commit  sin." 
God  punishes  sin  in  whomsoever  He 
finds  it  *'  There  is  no  respect  of  per- 
sons with  God  in  punishing,  for  none 
shall  escape  His  hand.  He  doth  not 
strike  the  poor  and  spare  the  rich ; 
wink  at  the  noble  and  honourable,  and 
strike  down  the  uunoble  and  baser 
sort :  but  He  resoecteth  everv  one  k% 
He  findeth  him,  and  puniftheth  su^ 
wheresoever  sin  reigneth,  that  all  shculc* 
fear." 

2.  He  manifests  His  mercy.  He  does 
not  deal  with  Miriam  and  Aaron  as 
they  deserve,  but  mingles  His  judg- 
ment with  mercy.  VVe  see  His  mercy 
in  healing  Miriam,  and  in  sentencing 
her  to  only  seven  days  banishment  from 
the  camp.  He  does  not  execute  the 
fierceness  of  His  anger.  In  wrath  He 
remembers  mercy.  *'He  delighteth  In 
mercy."     (c) 

VII.  The  sin  of  one  person  check- 
ing the  progress  of  an  entire  nation. 

"  The  people  journeyed  not  tdl 
Miriam  was  brought  in."  For  seven  days 
the  advance  of  the  entire  people  was 
arrested  by  reason  of  the  sin  of  Miriam. 
In  consequence  of  the  sin  of  Achan  the 
Israelites  were  smitten  at  the  battle  of 
Ai,  and  ignominiously  defeated.  How 
often  have  we  seen  since  those  days  the 
current  of  the  progress  of  a  nation,  or 
of  nations,  arrested  and  turned  back 
by  some  unprincipled  and  ambitious 
monarch,  or  by  some  unrighteous  and 
powerful  statesman  !  "  None  of  us 
liveth  to  himself."  The  sin  of  one  per- 
son of  high  position  and  great  in- 
fluence may  result  in  deepest  injury  to 
thousands. 

Conclusion : 

The  history  supplies  materials  for  a 
stioiig  argument  against  sinning.  By 
t!  e  heinousness  of  sin,  by  the  Divine 
jud;ment  upon  sin,  and  by  the  injury 
which  sin  inflicts  upon  others,  we  aro 
urged  to  "abstain  from  every  form  of 
evU." 


iWMlLETlC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBEJiS, 


CHAP.  XII. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(<l)  Let  us  all  learn  this  fact — that  the  con- 
sequences of  sin  are  inevitable ;  in  fact,  that 
punishment  is  the  extreme  consequence  of  sin 
going  on  unchecked.  There  is  in  human 
nature  an  element  of  the  gambler.  There  is 
a  willicgnessto  take  the  chances  of  things — a 
willinguess  to  rui^a  risk,  however  uncertain. 
There  is  no  such  element  here.  The  punish- 
ment of  sin  is  certain.  All  Scripture  tells  ua 
so.  "  The  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die."  *'  Be 
sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out."  "Though 
hand  join  in  hand,  the  wicked  shall  not  go 
unpunished."  "  Ttie  way  of  transgressors  is 
hard."  All  the  world's  proverbs  tell  us  so. 
''  A  reckless  youth  :  rueful  age."  *'  As  he  has 
made  his  bed,  so  he  must  lie  in  it."  **  He 
wno  will  not  be  ruled  by  the  rudder,  must  be 
ruled  by  the  rock."  Even  Satan  himself  tells 
us  so.  In  the  old  legend  of  Dr.  Faustus,  when 
he  bids  the  devil  lay  aside  his  propensity  for 
lying,  and  tell  the  truth,  the  devil  answers, 
"The  world  does  me  injustice  to  tax  me  with 
lies.  Let  me  ask  their  own  conscience  if  I 
have  ever  deceived  a  single  man  into  believ- 
ing; that  a  bad  deed  was  a  good  one."  Even 
wicked  men  admit  it.  .  ,  •  God  is  no  respecter 
of  persons. 

Fire  burns  and  water  drowns,  whether  the 
sufferer  be  a  worthless  villain  or  whether  it 
be  a  lair  and  gentle  child.  And  so  the  moral 
law  works,  whether  the  sinner  ba  a  David 
or  a  Judas,  whether  he  be  a  publican  or  a 
pri<  St.  In  the  physical  world  there  is  no 
forgiveness  of  sins.  Sin  and  punishment,  as 
P  ato  said,  walk  this  world  with  their  hands 
tied  together,  and  the  rivet  by  which  they  are 
linked  is  as  a  link  of  adamant.  A  writer  has 
said  that  a  man  who  cannot  swim  might  as 
well  walk  into  a  river  and  hope  that  it  is  not 
a  river,  and  will  not  drown,  as  a  man,  seeing 
judgment  and  not  mercy,  denounced  upon 
willing  sin,  hope  that  it  will  turn  out  to  be 
mercy,  and  not  judgment,  and  so  defy  God's 
law.  Will  he  escape  ?  No.  He  who  chooses 
sin  must  meet  with  retribution;  must  experi- 
ence in  his  own  individual  person  the  lex 
talionis  of  off -nded  nature — eye  for  eye,  tooth 
for  tooth,  hand  for  hand,  burning  for  burning, 
wound  for  wound,  stripe  for  stripe. — F,  W. 
FarraVy  D  D. 

{b)  I  wish  we  did  believe  in  prayer  :  I  am 
afiaid  most  of  us  do  not.  People  will  say, 
''  What  a  wonderful  thing  it  is  that  God  hears 
George  Miiller's  prayers  !  "  Bat  is  it  not  a 
sad  thing  that  we  should  think  it  wonderful 
for  God  to  hear  prayer  ?  We  are  come  to  a 
pretty  pass  certainly  when  we  think  it  won- 
derful that  God  is  true!  Much  better  faith 
was  that  of  a  little  boy  in  one  of  the  schools 
at  Edinburgh,  who  had  attended  the  prayer- 
meetings,  and  at  last  said  to  his  teacher  who 
conducted  the  prayer-meeting,  "Teacher,  I 
wish  my  8ii>t»-r  could  be  got  to  read  the  Bible  ; 
ane  never  rea.ls  it."     "  Why,  Johnny,  should 


your  sister  read  the  Bible  ?  **  "  Because  if 
she  once  could  read  it,  I  am  sure  it  would  do 
her  good,  and  she  would  be  converted  and  be 
saved."  "Do  you  think  so,  Johnny  ?  "  *' Yes, 
1  do,  sir,  and  I  wish  the  next  time  there's  a 
prayer-meeting  you  would  ask  the  people  to 
prav  for  my  sister,  that  she  may  begin  to  read 
the*  Bible."  "  Well,  well,  it  shall  be  done, 
John."  So  the  teacher  gave  out  that  a  littla 
boy  was  very  anxious  that  prayers  should  be 
offered  that  his  sister  might  begin  to  read  the 
Bible.  John  was  observed  to  get  up  and  go 
out.  The  teacher  thought  it  very  unkind  of 
the  boy  to  disturb  the  people  in  a  crowded 
room  and  go  out  like  that,  and  so  the  next 
day  when  the  lad  came,  he  said,  *' John,  I 
thought  that  was  very  rude  of  you  to  get  up 
in  the  prayer- meeting  and  go  out.  You  ought 
not  to  have  done  it."  "  Oh  1  sir,"  t^aid  the 
boy,  *'  I  did  not  mean  to  be  rude,  bat  I  thought 
I  should  just  like  to  go  home  and  see  my 
sister  read  her  Bible  for  the  first  time."  That 
is  how  we  ought  to  believe,  and  wait  with 
expectation  to  see  the  answer  to  prayer.  The 
girl  was  reading  the  Biblo  when  the  boy  went 
home.  God  had  been  pleased  to  hear  the 
prayer  i  and  if  we  could  but  trust  God  after 
that  fashion  we  should  often  see  similar  things 
accomplished — C,  H.  Spurgton. 

F  •  ail  art  thou,  0  man,  as  a  bubble  on  the  breaker, 
A't^ak,  and  govornod  by  externals,  like  a  poor 

oird  oaugnt  in  the  storm  ; 
Vet  thy  momentary  breath  can  still  the  raging 

waters, 
Thy  hand  can  toneb  a  lever  that  may  move 

the  world. 
O  Merciful  I  we  strike  eternal  covenant  with 

Thee, 
For  man  may  take  for  his  ally  tiio  King  wno 

ruleth  kings ; 
IIow   strong,    yet  how   most   weak,  in  utter 

poverty  how  rich, 
What  possible  omnipotence  to  good  is  dormant 

in  a  man ; 
Prayer  is  a  creature's  strength,  hia  very  breath 

and  being; 
Prayer  is  the  golden  key  which  can  open  the 

wicket  of  mercy ; 
Prayer  is  the  magical  sound  that  saith  to  Fate, 

So  be  it ; 
Prayer  is  the  slender  nerve  that  moveth  the 

muscles  of  Omnipotence.  —  M.  F.  Tapper. 

(c)  Mercy  is  God's  Benjamin,  and  He 
delight'th  most  of  all  in  it.  It  is  the  son  of 
His  right  hand,  though,  alas  1  in  bringing  it 
forth,  it  might  well  have  been  called  the  son 
of  sorrow,  too,  for  mercy  came  into  this  world 
through  the  sorrows  of  the  only-begotten  Sou 
of  God.  He  delights  in  mercy,  jusi  as  some 
men  delijiht  in  trade,  some  in  the  arts,  some 
in  professions;  and  ea  h  m«n,  accordinsr  to 
his  delight,  becomes  proLicieut  iu   pursuing  n 

225 


CHAP,  XIL 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


work  for  the  very  love  thereof.  So  God  \% 
proficient  in  mercy.  He  addicts  Himself  to 
it.  He  is  most  God-like,  most  happy,  if  such 
a    thing  may  be  said  of   Him,  when  He  is 


stretching  out  His  right  band  with  bis  golden 
sceptre  in  it,  and  saying  to  the  guilty,  "  Gome 
to  Me,  touch  this  sceptre,  and  you  shall  live." 
— C.  H.  Spurgeon. 


Miriam  smitten  with  Leprosy  :  Transfiguration  through  Transgression. 

(Verse   10.) 


I.  This  transfiguration  was  brought 
to  pass  on  account  of  the  jealousy  of 
Miriam  of  Moses,  and  the  jealousy  of 
God  for  Moses. 

"  Hath  the  Lord  indeed  spoken  only 
by  Moses?"  (ver.  2).  "Were  ye  not 
afraid  to  speak  against  My  servant 
Moses  1 "  (ver.  8). 

Thoughts  that  contain  the  venom  of 
jealousy,  when  expressed,  form  the 
character  and  pass  judgment  upon  it. 
(Comp.  Matt.  xii.  37.)  Miriam's  jeal- 
ousy of  her  brother  came  out  in  her 
speech,  and  her  speech  brought  miracu- 
lous judgment  upon  her.  God  was 
jealous  of  the  honour  of  His  servant, 
and  His  jealousy  manifested  itself  in 
words  of  reproof.  So  a  righteous  and 
sinful  jealousy  led  to  this  transforming 
judgment.  God's  words  justified  Him; 
Miriam's  condemned  her. 


II.  The  translormation  was  in 
keeping  vsdth  the  expressed  jealousy 
of  Grod  and  of  Miriam. 

The  narrative  leads  us  to  think  that 
Miriam's  feelings  broke  forth  like  sudden 
fire.  While  she  was  **  musing,  the  fire 
burned,"  and  she  spake  bitter  and 
angry  words.  And  we  are  told  that 
the  Lord  likewise  spake  suddenly  (ver. 
4)  in  words  of  authority  and  reproof. 
And  the  punishment  came  suddenly. 
"  The  cloud  departed,  and  behold 
Miriam  became  leprous."  So,  we  are 
told,  shall  "the  coming  of  the  Son  of 
Man  be"  (Matt.  xxiv.  27).  The  in- 
dignation of  the  Lord  was  great,  the 
bitter  feeling  of  Miriam  was  intense, 
and  the  disease  which  was  the  conse- 
quence of  both  was  of  the  most  malig- 
nant kind. 


Lessons. 


I.  That  inequalities  of  position  in 
the  Church  of  God  have  their  origin  in 
the  will  of  God.  Vessels  belonging  to 
the  same  owner  vary  in  the  amount  of 
cargo  they  carry  because  they  vary  in 
their  capacity.  One  is  1,000  tons  bur- 
then, finother  600,  and  so  on.  But 
why  do  they  differ  in  tonnage  1  This 
must  be  referred  to  the  will  of  the 
owner  who  built  each  one.  The  forest 
trees  are  all  free  to  grow,  but  the  wil- 
low cannot  attain  to  the  dimensions  of 
the  oak,  or  the  ash  to  the  strength  of 
the  cedar  of  Lebanon  It  has  not  been 
given  to  them  to  do  so.  So  there  are 
intellectual  inequalities  among  God's 
servants  (Comp.  Matt.  xxv.  15).  Why 
not  give  to  each  one  the  same  number 
of  talents  1  Why  does  not  the  ship- 
builder build  each  vessel  of  the  same 
size?  or  the  Creator  make  each  tree 
226 


exactly  like  its  fellow  1  Because  they 
are  destined  for  dififerent  service,  and 
this  destiny  must  be  referred  to  the 
will  of  their  owners.  Neither  Miriam 
nor  Aaron  could  grow  into  a  Moses. 

II.  That  God  is,  from  a  blessed  neces- 
sity ^  a  respecter  of  persons  in  relation 
to  character. 

Some  of  God's  children  command  more 
affection  and  respect  than  others,  be- 
cause they  deserve  more.  We  find  our- 
selves under  the  necessity  of  esteeming 
Gome  more  highly  than  others,  and  God 
is,  so  to  speak,  under  the  same  blessed 
necessity.  He  did  esteem  Moses  more 
highly  than  He  esteemed  Aaron  or 
Miriam,  and  the  reason  is  found,  not 
in  his  mental  superiority,  but  because 
he  "  was  ^^r^  meek,  above  all  the  men 
which  A^ere  uj-on  the  face  of  the  earth  " 
(ver.  3). 


IIOMILETIC    COMMENTAIIY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  xn. 


III.  That  the  abstract  devil  of  jea- 
lousy udthin  the  Church  of  God  hinders 
its  progress  more  than  a  legion  of  per- 
sonal devils  without.  "The  people 
journeyed  not,"  &c.,  (ver.  15).  When 
leaders  of  an  army  become  jealous  of 
each  other's  reputation,  they  let  loose 
an  enemy  which  will  soon  take  the 
wheels  off  the  artillery,  and  ham-string 
the  horses ;  and  the  same  devil  in  the 
Church  of  God  has  often  made  the 
chariot  wheels  go  heavily. 

IV.  The  practice  and  precept  of  the 


New  Testament  were  anticipated  by 
some  Old  Testament  saints.  The  river 
at  its  well-head  may  be  narrow,  but  the 
water  is  the  same  in  quality  as  it  is 
when  it  flows  into  the  ocean.  The 
channel  was  not  so  broad,  but  the 
spirit  was  tiie  same.  *'  Heal  her  now, 
0  God,  I  beseech  Thee  "  (ver.  13),  an- 
ticipates Acts  vii.  60;  Luke  xxiii.  34; 
Matt.  V.  ^\.—From  "  Outlines  of  Ser- 
mons on  (he  Miracles  and  Parables  of 
the  Old  Testament" 


.The  Prayer  of  Moses  for  Miriam* 
(Verses  13-15.) 


A  man's  foes  too  often  are  those  of 
his  own  house.  The  sister  and  brother 
of  Moses  spake  against  him ;  his  mar- 
riage displeased  them  ;  their  resentment 
led  them  beyond  the  mere  expression 
of  discontent ;  they  question  his  au- 
thority, envy  his  power,  are  jealous  of 
his  position.  They  have  much  influ- 
ence—the one  a  prophetess,  the  other  a 
high  priest.  But  for  Divine  interposi- 
tion the  whole  of  Israel  might  have 
been  led  to  revolt  against  Moses'  au- 
thority. "  The  Lord  heard  it."  They 
are  summoned  to  His  presence.  He 
applauds  Moses ;  Miriam  becomes  a 
lener  ;  Aaron  also  was  punished.  For 
the  lips  that  sinned  with  Miriam  must 
pronounce  her  lep/ous.  And  now  Moses 
turns  to  God,  and  prays  for  Miriam's 
recovery. 

I.  The  prayer.  How  conclusively 
does  it  attest  the  excellency  of  the 
character  of  Moses!  How  worthy  of 
power  is  one  so  large-hearted  and  for- 
giving !  How  much  of  resemblance  is 
there  between  the  behaviour  of  Moses 
and  the  law  of  Christ  !  "  Pray  for  them 
which  despitefully  use  you." 

1.  The  prayer  was  explicit.  Nothing 
vague.  He  pra3^s  not  for  wrong  doers  in 
the  mass,  but  for  one  in  particular,  and 
that  one  who  had  wronged  him.  Many  will 
pray  general  prayers  heartily  enough. 
Lips  willing  to  say,  "  Have  mercy  on 
us  miserable  sinners,"  refuse  to  say, 
••  Lord,  be  merc'ful  to  me  a  sinner." 
Q  2 


2.  The  prayer  was  earnest,  **  I  be- 
seech Thee."  Did  he  see  the  Shekinah 
receding  (ver.  10),  and  would  have 
God  return  at  oncel  God's  withdrawals 
excite  prayer. 

3.  Tiie  prayer  was  generous.  "Heal 
her  now."  Not  make  her  penitent,  or 
cause  her  to  beg  forgiveness,  and  then 
heal  her,  or  remove  the  disease  after  a 
certain  time,  but,  "Heal  her  now." 
This  is  how  true  brothers  always  pray. 
Sympathy  produces  generosity  and 
earnestness. 

4.  The  prayer  ivas  well-timed.  He 
waited  not  till  the  memory  of  her  sin 
and  his  wrong  were  fainter;  at  once 
his  cry  goes  up,  as  Miriam's  departing 
foot-fall  is  heard.  "  Love  one  another." 
We  are  not  to  "  give  place  unto  wrath." 
He  gives  Place  who  gives  Time. 

II.  The  answer,     ver.  14. 

1.  It  was  most  gracious.  He  conde- 
scended to  return  and  speak  to  Moses. 
Intimates  she  shall  be  healed  at  the 
expiration  of  seven  days. 

2.  It  was  most  wise.  Seven  days  she 
must  suffer  for  her  own  good,  for 
Aaron's  good,  for  all  Israel's  good,  to 
show  that  an  exalted  position  in  His 
service  does  not  exempt  from  the  pun- 
isliment  of  sin. 

3.  It  was  most  speedy.  He  answered 
at  once.  Why  so  speedy  1  Because 
He  desired  the  innocent  should  not 
be  afflicted  with  the  guilty.  Read 
ver.    14,    how    God     sets    forth     the 

227 


CilA.'    XIII. 


nOMILETlC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHse  to  Moses,  so  that  he,  seeing  the 
wisdom  of  the  punishment,  and  God's 
irrace  in  curtailing  it,  may  be  at 
rest. 

Think,    brethren,   of  the    Miriams 


without  the  camp,  think  of  the  time 
when,  timbrel  in  hand,  they  joined 
with  you  ;  now  kneel  with  Moses  to 
pray,  "  Heal  them  now,  0  God." — 
E.  A.  Griffin, 


CHAPTER  XIII. 
Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. 


Verses  1,  2.  And  the  Lord  spake  unto 
Moses,  &c. 

It  appears  from  Deut.  i.  22,  23,  that 
the  sending  of  the  spies  to  search  out 
the  land  was  suggested  by  the  people 
and  approved  by  M  jses ;  and  here  it  is 
permitted  by  the  Lord.  God  had 
commanded  them  to  go  and  take  pos- 
session of  the  land  ;  and  the  motion  to 
send  the  spies  was  an  expression  of 
their  unbelief. 

Everyone  a  ruler  among  them*  By  a 
comparison  of  the  names  of  tliese 
'*  rulers  "  with  those  of  **  the  princes  of 
the  tribes"  (chap.  i.  5-16),  we  see  that 
they  were  not  the  same  in  any  one 
case.  These  now  sent  forth  were 
doubtless  selected  from  the  chiefs  of 
each  tribe  for  their  fitness  for  the  work 
entrusted  to  them.  In  verse  3  they 
are  spoken  of  as  '*  heads  of  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel;"  i.e.,  heads  of  families. 

Verse  16.  And  Moses  called  Oshea 
....  Jehoshua.  Oshea,  Hoshea,  or 
Hosea  signifies  help  or  deliverance.  To 
this  Moses  added  a  syllable  of  the 
sacred  Name,  and  made  it  Jehoshua, 
contracted  into  Joshua,  which  signifies 
Jehovah  is  help,  or  deliverance ;  or, 
"  whose  help  is  Jehovah."  This  verse 
does  not  imply  that  the  alteration  in 
the  name  was  made  at  this  time.  It 
was  probably  made  at  the  time  of,  and 
in  consequence  of  his  victory  over  the 
Amalekites  (Exod,  xvii.  8-16). 

Verse  17.  Get  you  up  this  way  south- 
ward. Or,  *'  Get  you  up  there  in  the 
south  country."  21ie  Negeb  (south 
country)  primarily  signifies  a  dry, 
parched  distri  t,  from  nagab,  to  be 
dried  up,  to  be  withered.  This  name 
was  applied  to  the  southern  and  least 
fertile  district  of  Canaan,  which  "  ex- 
228 


tended  northward  from  Kadesh  to 
within  a  few  miles  of  Hebron,  and 
from  the  Dead  Sea  westward  to  the 
Mediterranean  (cf.  especially  Josh.  xv. 
21-32)." 

And  go  up  into  the  mountain.  The 
hill-country  of  Palestine,  including  the 
mountains  of  Judah  and  Ephraim  or 
Israel.  The  expressions  "  the  south 
country "  and  "  the  mountain  "  seem 
intended  to  set  forth  the  whole  land  of 
Canaan. 

Verse  19.  In  tents,  or  camps,  ».f.,  in 
open  or  unwalled  villages. 

Verse  2u.  The  time  of  the  first-ripe 
grapes.  The  first  grapes  ripen  in  Pal- 
estine as  early  as  August,  and  some- 
times even  in  July ;  and  the  vintage 
takes  place  in  September  and  October. 
It  appears  to  us  most  probable  that  the 
spies  were  despatched  early  in  August. 
Dr.  Kitto,  however,  conjectures  that 
"  probably  they  set  out  early  in  Sep- 
tember, and  returned  about  the  middle 
of  October." 

Verse  21.  The  wilderness  of  Zin, 
The  north-eastern  portion  of  the  great 
desert  of  Paran,  and  part  of  the 
southern  border  of  the  Promised  Land 
(chap,  xxxiv.  4  ;  Josh.  xv.  1-3).  (See 
notes  on  **  The  wilderness  of  Paran," 
chap.  xii.  16). 

Rehob  as  men  come  to  Hamath,  or 
"at  the  entrance  of  Hamath,"  i.e.,  at 
the  commencement  of  the  territory  of 
that  name,  on  the  northern  boui^dary 
of  Canaan.  Rehob  was  probably  the 
Bethrehob  of  Judg.  xviii.  28,  near  to 
Dan-Laish,  the  modern  Tell  el  Kady. 

Hamath,  the  principal  city  of  Upper 
Syria,  from  the  time  of  the  Exodus  to 
that  of  the  prophet  Amos.  It  is 
situated   on   the   Orontes.     Antiochua 


nOMlLETIC   COMME^TAliY:    NUMIlEllS.         ciiAr.  xiii. 


Epiphanes  changed  its  name  to  Epiph- 
aneia.     Hamah  is  its  present  name. 

The  spies  went  through  the  whole 
land  from  the  southern  to  the  northern 
frontier. 

Verse  22.  Came  unto  Hebron.  Hebron 
signifies  an  associate  or  friend.  A  most 
ancient  city,  situated  amongst  the 
mountains  (Josh.  xx.  7),  20  Roman 
miles  south  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  same 
distance  north  of  Bcersheba.  It  was 
a  well  known  place  when  Abram 
entered  Canaan  about  3800  years  ago 
(Gen.  xiii.  18).  Trapp  points  out  that 
at  Hebron  "  lay  buried  those  three 
reverend  couples  :  Abraham  and  Sarah, 
Isaac  and  Rebekah,  Jacob  and  Leah 
(Gen.  xlix.  31).  Here  David  began  his 
reign  over  Israel  (2  Sam.  ii.  1),  and 
hither  came  Mary  to  visit  Elizabeth 
(Luke  i.  39)." 

The  original  name  of  Hebron  was 
Kirjath-Arba,  the  city  of  Arba,  so 
called  from  Arba,  the  father  of  Anak 
and  progenitor  of  the  Anakim  (Josh. 
XV.  13,  14 ;  xxi.  11). 

Ahiman,  Sheshai,  and  Talmai^  the 
children  of  Anak.  Probably  the  names 
not  of  individuals,  but  of  tribes  of 
Anakim  ;  for  we  meet  with  them  again 
fifty  years  or  more  after  this  time 
(Josh.  XV.  14). 

Anak,  the  name  of  the  ancestor  of 
the  Anakim,  signifies  long-necked. 

■Now  Hebron  was  built  spven  years 
before  Zoan  in  V lypt.  "Some  think," 
says  Dr.  A.  Clai.ve,  "  it  was  to  humble 
the  pride  of  the  Egyptians,  who  boasted 
the  highest  antiquity,  that  this  note 
concerning  the  higher  antiquity  of 
Hebron  was  introduced  by  Moses." 

Zoan,  an  ancient  city  situated  near 
the  eastern  border  of  Lower  Egypt, 
and  called  by  the  Greeks  and  Romans 
Tatiis.  At  the  time  of  the  Exodus  the 
Pharaoh  dwelt  at  Zoan  (Psa.  Ixxviii. 
43). 

Verse  23.  The  brook  of  Eshcol,  or, 
The  valley  of  the  cluster,  or  bunch  ;  a 
fertile  uady,  probably  about  two  miles 
north  of  Hebron,  where  the  largest  and 
best  grapes  in  the  whole  of  Palestine 
are  grown,  besides  apricots,  figs,  pome- 
granates, &c.,  in  abundance. 


One  cluster  of  grapes  and  they  hare  it, 
&c.  Not  simply  because  of  the  size  of 
the  cluster  did  they  carry  it  in  this 
way,  but  chiefly  to  prevent  its  being 
bruised.  Clusters  of  grapes  of  great 
size  are  found  in  Palestine.  "  Plniy 
mentions,"  says  Dr.  A.  Chirke,  "bunches 
of  grapes  in  Africa  each  of  which  was 
larger  than  an  infant.  Paul  Lucas 
mentions  some  bunches  which  he  saw 
at  Daniascus  that  weighed  above  forty- 
five  pounds.  I  myself  once  cut  down  a 
bunch  of  grapes  nearly  twenty  pounds 
in  weight.  Those  who  live  in  cold 
climates  can  scarcely  have  any  con- 
ception to  what  perfection  both  grapes 
and  other  fruits  grow  in  climates  that 
are  warm,  and  where  the  soil  is  suit- 
able to  them." 

Verse  26.  Kadesh  signifies  the  Holy 
Place  or  Sanctuary.  Great  uncertainty 
exists  as  to  the  situation  of  Kadesh. 
Dr.  Robinson  identilied  it  with  Ain  el- 
Weibeh,  on  the  western  side  of  the 
Arabah ;  and  this  identification  has 
been  generally  accepted  by  English 
geographers  as  the  most  probable. 
Dean  Stanley  {Sinai  and  Fal.,  pp.  93- 
96)  identifies  Kadesh  with  Petra.  But 
Petra  was  in  the  heart  of  Edom,  while 
Kadesh  is  ,said  to  be  "  in  the  uttermost 
border"  of  that  land  (chap.  xx.  16). 
And  in  chap,  xxxiii.  37  an  encampment 
at  Mount  Hor  is  mentioned  as  quite 
distinct  from  the  encampment  at 
Kadesh,  and  Mount  Hor  is  situated  close 
to  Edom.  Moreover,  in  chap,  xxxiv.  4, 
and  Josh.  xv.  3,  Kadesh  is  reckoned  as 
part  of  the  land  of  Canaan.  Keil  and 
Del.  are  of  the  opinion  that  "  the  name 
Kadesh  embraces  a  large  district  of  the 
desert  of  Zin,  and  is  not  confined  to  one 
particular  spot."  The  conclusion  of 
Mr.  Hayman  (Smith's  Bible  Diet.,  arts. 
"  Kadesh"  and  "  Wilderness  of  the  Wan- 
dering ")  seems  to  us  satisfactory  :  "  It 
seems  that  Kadesh  probably  means, 
firstly,  a  region  of  the  desert  spoken  of 
as  having  a  relation,  sometimes  with 
the  wilderness  of  Paran,  and  sometimes 
with  that  of  Zin  (comp.  vers.  21,  26)  ^ 
and  secondly,  a  distinct  city  within  that 
desert  limit." 

Ver,  32.  A  land  that  eateth   up   the 

229 


CHAP.  xin. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


inhabitants  thereof  does  not  mean  "  that 
it  was  so  barren  and  unfruitful  that 
it  did  not  produce  food  sufficient  for  the 
inhabitants  of  it."  Keil  and  Del.  give 
what  we  regard  as  the  correct  interpre- 


tation :  "The  land  was  an  apple  cf 
discord,  because  of  its  fruitfulness  and 
situation ;  and  as  the  different  nations 
strove  for  its  possession,  its  inhabitants 
wasted  away." 


The  Sending  forth  of  the  Spibsi. 
(Verses  1-20.) 


The  people  have  now  arrived  at  the 
border  of  the  Promised  Land  ;  and 
there  seems  to  be  no  reason  why  they 
may  not,  if  they  will,  speedily  enter 
and  take  possession  of  it.  But  instead 
of  this,  they  propose  to  send  spies  into 
the  land  to  investigate  it,  and  bring 
back  a  report  to  them.  The  results  of 
this  in  the  subs'equent  history  were 
both  great  and  disastrous. 

Consider : — 

I.  The  Origin  of  this  Expedition. 

"And  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses, 
saying,  send  thou  men,"  &c.  (vers.  1,  2). 
But  we  find,  from  the  history  as  given 
in  Deut.  i.  20-25,  that  the  proposal  to 
search   the    land    originated    with  the 
people  themselves,  and  was  an  expres- 
sion of  their  unbelief,  and,  at  the  least, 
a  failure  to  render  prompt  obedience  to 
the  command  of  the  Lord.     Let  us  see 
how  the  case  stood  at  this  time.     (1) 
God  had  Himself  declared  to  them  the 
excellence  of  the   land  (Exod.  iii.  8  ; 
xxxiii.    3).     (2)  He   had   promised   to 
guide  them  to  the  land  (Exod.  xxxii. 
34 ;  xxxiii.  2,  14).     Moreover,  He  was 
visibly    present    with    them     in    the 
mysterious  and  majestic  pillar  of  cloud 
and    fire.      (3)    He    had    promised    to 
drive  out  the  heathen  nations  and  give 
them    possession    of    the  land    (Exod. 
xxiii.  20-33 ;  Deut.  i.  8).     (4)  He  com- 
manded them  to  "  go  up  and  possess  " 
the    land    (Deut.    i,    8,    21).     (5)  Yet 
their  answer  was,  "  We  will  send  men 
before  us,  and  they  shall  search  us  out 
the  land,"  &c.  (Deut.  i.  22).     Clearly 
their  duty  was   not   to  send  men   to 
search    out   the  land,  but  trusting  in 
(Jod,  to  obey  His  voice  and  go  and  take 
possession  of  the  land.     Their  proposi- 
tion involved  a  sinful  distrust  of  the 
I)resence  of  God  with  them  and  of  His 
230 


promises  to  them ;  it  also  involved  a 
failure    in    their    obedience    to    Him. 
Moses    did   not    suspect    the    unbelief 
which   had  suggested    their   proposal ; 
and    approving    it    himself,    he    asked 
counsel  of  the  Lord,  who  permitted  it. 
God  may  allow  us  to  carry  out  our  un- 
believing plans  to  our  own  confusion. 
If  we  will  "  lean  unto  our  own  under- 
standing," He  will  let  us  take  our  way 
until    we   find    what   utter    folly    our 
fancied  wisdom  is.    (a).     In  this  way 
in  after  years  when  they  demanded  a 
king,  God  directed  Samuel  to  "  hearken 
unto   their   voice,    and   make  them  a 
king"(l  Sam.  viii.  5-22).     Our  busi- 
ness is  not  to  suggest  alterations  in  or 
additions   to    the    Divine    plans,    but 
heartily  to  trust  and  promptly  to  obey 
the  Divine  Word. 

II.  The  Agents  in  this  Expedition. 

"  Of  everv  tribe  of  their  fathers  shall 
ye  send  a  man,  every  one  a  ruler  among 
them,"  &G.  (vers.  2-16).  Three  points 
here  require  notice  : 

1.  The  wisdom  of  this  arrangement. 
(1)  In  sending  one  man  from  each 
tribe.  By  this  arrangement  every  tribe 
was  represented,  and  would  have  a  wit- 
ness of  its  own.  (2)  In  sending  a 
leading  man  from  each  tribe.  They 
were  approved  men,  men  of  influence, 
and  therefore  their  testimony  would  be 
the  riiore  likely  to  be  received  and 
credited. 

2.  The  scarcity  of  worthy  leaders. 
W"e  see  here  that  a  large  proportion  of 
even  these  leading  men,  these  "rulers" 
and  "  heads  of  the  children  of  Israel," 
were  inferior  men  and  unworthy  of  tlie 
position  which  they  occupied.  Here 
are  the  names  of  twelve  men,  and  ten 
of  them  seem  to  have  been  feeble  and 
common-place  men,  and  (as  we   shall 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CDAr.  xiir 


hereafter  see)  deficient  in  faith,  in 
enterprise,  and  in  courage.  How  many 
of  the  world's  heroes  and  leaders  are 
mentally  weak  and  morally  inferior,  or 
even  corrupt  men  !  The  true  hero  and 
the  worthy  leader  often  fail  of  recogni- 
tion except  by  a  superior  few.  Hitherto 
in  the  world's  history  the  majority  of 
the  leaders  of  men  have  been  feeble 
and  cowardly,  and  very  often  base  and 
corrupt,     (b) 

3.  The  diversity  of  human  fame.  The 
names  of  these  twelve  men  have  been 
handed  down  from  generation  to 
generation,  and  at  the  present  time  the 
record  which  contains  them  is  to  be 
found  throughout  the  whole  of  the 
known  world  ;  but  how  different  are  the 
positions  which  they  occupy  !  Two  of 
them,  Joshua  and  Caleb,  are  in  the 
foremost  rank  of  saints  and  heroes  : 
while  the  other  ten  are  known  as  the 
chief  agents  in  arresting  the  progress 
of  the  nation  for  more  than  thirty- 
ei;4ht  years.  History  perpetuates  the 
memory  of  Nero  as  well  as  of  St.  Paul, 
of  Judas  Iscariot  as  well  as  of  Jesus 
Christ.  We  are  making  our  posthumous 
reputation  now  j  let  us  take  heed  that 
it  be  of  a  worthy  character,     (c) 

III.  The  Aims  of  this  Expedition. 

"  And  Moses  sent  them  to  spy  out 
the  land  of  Canaan,  and  said  unto  them, 
Get  you  up,"  &c.  (vers.  17-20).  They 
were  to  examine  and  report  as  to  the 
condition  of-— 


1.  The  landy  whether  it  was  fertile  or 
barren,  whether  it  was  wooded  or  bare, 
(fee. 

2.  The  toivnSj  whether  they  were 
walled  and  fortified  or  open  and  unpro- 
tected, &c. 

3.  The  people  J  whether  they  were 
strong  or  weak,  whether  they  were  few 
or  many,  &c. 

Their  investigation  was  to  be  thorough. 
*'  Get  you  up  there  in  the  south  country, 
and  go  up  into  the  mountain."  They 
were  to  search  the  whole  land  of 
Canaan.  Partial  investigations  are  apt 
to  prove  misleading. 

Their  report  was  to  be  verified.  ''  And 
bring  of  the  fruit  of  the  land."  They 
were  charged  to  bring  of  the  fruit  as  a 
confirmation  of  their  testimony. 

IV.  The  Spirit  appropriate  to  this 
Expedition. 

"  And  be  ye  of  good  courage."  The 
mission  with  which  they  were  entrusted 
would  require  firm  and  fearless  hearts  ; 
for  if  the  object  of  their  journey  had 
been  discovered  by  the  Canaanites,  it 
would  have  fared  ill  with  them.  They 
needed  courage,  too,  in  order  that  they 
might  view  things  hopefully,  and  br-ing 
back  an  inspiring  report.  Want  of 
courage  in  its  leaders  is  a  sore  hindrance 
and  calamity  to  any  people.  The 
courage  they  needed  could  spring  only 
from  faith  in  God,  and  could  be  sus- 
tained only  by  faith  in  Him.  Faith  in 
Him  is  the  soul  of  all  true  heroism,    {d) 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  A.  man  sets  his  mind  on  standing  on 
some  high  place;  he  points  to  a  pillar  and 
says  that  if  he  conld  ascend  to  its  sumoait  he 
would  see  from  that  lofty  elevation  glimpses 
of  heaven,  and  he  determines  that  he  will 
stand  upon  that  summit,  whatever  hazards 
be  may  incur.  At  length  God  grants  him  his 
request,  and  when  the  man  has  ascended  to 
the  eminence  which  he  coveted,  what  does  he 
find?  Sand,  sand,  Band  i  Mile  on  mile  of 
sard— sand  for  mile  on  mile!  And  now  he 
wishes  to  descend;  but  how  to  get  down  is 
his  great  difQculty.  There  may  be  no  way 
down  but  that  which  involves  suicide.  Yet 
the  man  was  determined  to  reach  that  eleva- 
tion ;  nothing  could  etand  between  him  and 
hia  wish ;  he  urged  Q^d  to  grant  him  his 
request;  with  importunate  desire  he  besought 


that  he  might  have  his  way  ;  and  there  is  no 
punishment  heavier  than  that  which  falls  upon 
any  man  when  God  allows  him  to  take  his  own 
course. — Joseph  Parker,  D  D. 

(h)  The  servile  imitancy  of  mankind  might 
be  illustrated  under  the  figure,  itself  nowise 
original,  of  a  Flock  of  Shf>ep  Shoep  go  in 
flocks  for  three  reasons  :  First,  because  they 
are  of  a  grogaiious  temper,  and  love  to  be 
together :  Secondly,  because  of  their  cowardice ; 
they  are  afraid  to  be  left  alone:  Thirdly, 
because  the  common  run  of  them  are  dull  of 
figbt,  to  a  proverb,  and  can  have  no  choice  in 
roads  ;  sheop  can  in  fact  see  nothing ;  in  a 
celestial  Luminary,  and  a  scoured  pewter 
Tankard,  they  would  discern  only  that  b-t'i 
f'azz'f^d  them,  and  were  of  unspeakable  glory. 
II  .Nv  like  their  fellow-creatures  of  the  human 

231 


CHAP.  XIII. 


IIOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


gpeciesl  Men,  too,  are  gregarious ;  then  surely 
faint-hearted  enough,  trembling  to  be  left  by 
themselves;  above  all,  dull-sighted,  down  to 
the  verge  of  utter  blindness.  Thus  are  we 
seen  ever  running  in  torrents,  and  mobs,  if  we 
run  at  all ;  and  after  what  foolish  scoured 
Tankards,  mistaking  them  for  Suns  I  Foolish 
Turnip-lanterns  likewise,  to  all  appearance 
supernatural,  keep  whole  nations  quaking, 
their  hair  on  end.  Neither  know  we,  except 
by  blind  habit,  where  the  good  pastures  lie : 
solely  when  the  sweet  grass  is  between  our 
teetb,  we  know  it,  and  chew  it  ;  also  when 
grass  is  bitter  and  scant,  we  know  it,  -  and 
bleat  and  butt  :  these  la^t  two  facts  we  know 
of  a  truth  and  in  very  deed.  Thus  do  M  "U 
and  Sheep  play  their  parts  on  this  nether 
Earth;  wandering  restlessly  in  large  masses, 
they  know  not  whither;  for  most  part,  each 
following  his  neighbour,  and  his  own  nose. — 
Thomas  Carlyle, 

(c)  Posthumous  influence  invests  life  with 
enhanced  dignity.  While  Banyan  lived  he 
was  but  as  a  mustard-seed  ;  now  he  is  as  a 
great  cathedral  tree,  in  which  ten  thousand 
voices  are  lifted  up  in  laudatory  and  grateful 
songl  "  Thou  fool  I  that  which  thou  sowest 
is  not  quickened  except  it  die.*'  No  living 
man  is  complete.  While  your  heart  beats 
you  are  undergoing  a  process.  Time  will 
mellovp  you  ;  age  will  tone  your  character. 
Do  not  urge  society  to  give  you  a  verdict  just 
now.  Society  is  too  heated  and  confuspd  to 
pronounce  upon  you  with  the  accuracy  of  de- 
liberation and  the  dignity  of  repose.  Death 
will  befriend  you.  A  most  solemn  and  right- 
eous estimation  of  character  is  often  introduced 
by  death.  The  green  hillock  in  the  yard  of 
the  dead  is  a  judgment-seat  which  might 
appal  an  unjust  judge.  Your  appeal,  then, 
under  all  misapprehension  and  misrepresenta- 
tion, must  be  to  the  new  hours  which  Time 
has  yet  to  strike  from  her  bell,  and  which 
shall  chime  out  many  a  reversal  of  condemna- 
tion, and  many  a  fulfilment  of  expectation 
long  deferred. — Joseph  Parker.  D,D. 

id)  The  courage  that  can  go  forth,  once  and 
away,  to  Chalk-Farm,  and  have  itself  shot,  and 
snuffed  out,  with  decency,  is  nowise  wholly 
what  we  mean  here.  Such  courage  we  indeed 
esteem  an  exceeding  small  matter;  capible  of 
co-existing  with  a  life  full  of  falsehood,  feeble- 
ness, poltroonery,  and  despicability.  Nay, 
oftener  it  is  cowardice  rather  that  produces 
tLe  result ;  for  oousider,  Is  the  Chalk-Farm 


pistoleer  inspired  with  any  reasonable  Belief 
and  Determination ;  or  is  he  hounded  on  by 
haggard  indefinable  Fear, — how  he  will  be 
cut  at  public  places,  and  *'  plucked  geese  of  the 
neighbourhood  "  will  wag  their  tongues  at  him 
a  plucked  goose?  If  he  go,  then,  and  be  shot 
without  shrieking  or  audible  uproar,  it  is  well 
for  him  :  nevertheless  there  is  nothing  amaz- 
ing in  it.  Courage  to  manage  all  this  has  not 
perhaps  been  denied  to  any  man,  or  to  any 
woman.  Thus,  do  not  recruiting  sergeants 
drum  throusrh  the  streets  of  manufacturing 
tovvns,  and  collect  ragged  losels  enough;  every 
one  of  whom,  if  once  dressed  in  red,  and 
trained  a  little,  will  receive  fire  cheerfully  for 
the  small  sum  of  one  shilling  per  diem,  and 
have  the  soul  blown  out  of  him  at  last,  with 
perfect  propriety.  Ttie  Courage  that  dares 
only  die,  is  on  ttie  whole  no  sublime  affair ; 
necessary,  indeed,  yet  universal ;  pitiful  when 
it  begins  to  parade  itself.  On  this  Globe  of 
ours,  there  are  some  thirty-six  persons  that 
manifest  it,  seldom  with  the  smallest  failure, 
during  every  second  of  time.  Nay,  look  ai 
Newgate  :  do  not  the  offscourings  of  creation, 
when  condemned  to  the  gallows  as  if  they 
were  not  men  but  vermin,  walk  thither  with 
decency,  and  even  to  the  scowls  and  hootings 
of  the  whole  universe  give  their  stern  good- 
night in  silence  ?  What  is  to  be  undergone 
only  once,  we  may  undergo ;  what  must  be, 
comes  almost  of  its  own  accord.  Considered 
as  Duellist,  what  a  p)or  figure  does  the  fiercest 
Irish  Wbiskerando  make,  compared  with  any 
English  Qime-cock,  such  as  you  may  buy  fur 
fifteen  ponce  1 

The  Courage  we  desire  and  prize  is  not  the 
courage  to  die  decently,  but  to  live  manfully. 
This,  when  by  God's  grace  it  has  been  given, 
lies  deep  in  the  soul ;  like  genial  heat,  fosters 
all  other  virtues  and  gifts  ;  without  it  they 
could  not  live.  In  spite  of  our  innumerable 
Waterloos  and  Peterloos,  and  such  campaign- 
ing as  there  has  been,  this  Courage  we  allude 
to,  and  call  the  only  true  one,  is  perhaps  rarer 
in  these  last  ages,  than  it  has  been  in  any 
other  since  the  Saxon  Invasion  under  Hengist. 
Altogether  extinct  it  can  never  be  among 
men ;  otherwise  the  species  Man  were  no 
longer  for  this  world :  here  and  there,  in  all 
times,  under  various  guises,  men  are  sent 
hither  not  only  to  demonstrate  but  exhibit  it, 
and  testify,  aa  from  heart  to  heart,  that  it  is 
still  possible,  still  practicable. — Jliomas  Car- 
lyle. 


Glimpses  op  tub  Better  Land. 
(Verses  1,  2.) 


I.  The  search. 

II.  The  retreat. 

III.  An  emblem  of  God's  dealings 
with  Ills  people. 

L  The  children  of  Israel  were  sent 
232 


back  to  the  wilderness  on  account  of 
their  sin. 

2.  While  they  are  sent  in  judgment, 
they  go  back  of  their  own  accord. 

3.  Though  the  fruit  of  sin,  and  the 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS.  Chap.  xiii. 


token  of   God's  righteous  displeasure, 
all  was  overruled  for  their  good. 

4.  Though  chastened  and  afflicted 
they  are  not  cast  off.  (1)  They  are  Di- 
vinely delivered.  (2)  They  are  Divinely 
sustained.  (3)  They  are  Divinely  guided. 
(4)   They  are  Divinely  chastened. 


IV.  Improvement. 

1.  Let  young  believers  be  not  high- 
minded,  but  fear. 

2.  Let    backsliders   remember   and 
weep. 

3.  Let  tried  and  troubled  saints  take 
fresh  couraire. — J.  Burns. 


The  Exploration  op  the  Promised  Land   by  the  Spies,  an  Illustration  of 

Human  Inquiries  into  Divine  Realms. 

(Venes  21-25.) 


I.  The  exploration  of  the  Promised 
Land  by  the  Spies  was  thorough. 

''So  they  went  up,  and  searched  the 
land  from  the  wilderness  of  Zin  unto 
Uehob,  at  the  entrance  of  Hamath." 
They  went  quite  through  the  land 
from  the  N'egeb  in  the  south  to  Re  hob 
on  the  northern  border.  In  this  they 
are  worthy  of  imitation  by  inquirers 
into  Divine  realms.  It  is  the  shallow 
and  superficial  students  of  Nature^  of 
Providence,  and  of  the  Bible  who  carp 
and  cavil  at  the  discoveries  which  they 
make  ;  for  such  investigators  can  only 
make  obscure,  partial,  one-sided  dis- 
coveries. If  man  would  be  admitted 
into  the  secrets  of  Nature,  of  Provi- 
dence, or  of  the  Bible ;  if  he  would 
discover  the  power,  the  wisdom,  and 
the  grace  which  are  enshrined  in  them  ; 
if  he  would  be  brought  into  communion 
with  the  mind  and  spirit  of  their 
Divine  Author,  he  must  investigate 
them  thoroughly,  patiently,  and  rever- 
ently,    (a) 

II.  The  exploration  of  the  Promised 
Land  by  the  spies  led  to  the  discovery 
of  difficulties. 

1.  Tlietj  discovered  formidable  enemies 
to  their  taking  possession  of  the  land. 
*'  And  they  came  unto  Hebron ;  where 
Ahiman,  Sheshai,  and  Talmai,  the  chil- 
dren of  Anak,  were."  Before  they 
entered  upon  the  Promised  Land  the 
Israelites  would  have  to  conquer  these 
mighty  tribes.  We  cannot  attain  unto 
a  large  and  correct  acquaintance  with 
the  revelation  of  God  in  Nature,  Provi- 
dence, or  the  Bible,  without  battling 
with  and  overcoming  many  and  grave 
dithculties.      We   cannot   attain    unto 


self-conquest,  self-possession,  without 
patient,  persistent,  and  courageous  war- 
fare. We  cannot  inherit  the  Promised 
Land  of  Divine  privileges  without  de- 
termined struggles  with  powerful  foes. 
Our  own  unbelief,  carnality,  worldliness, 
and  selfishness ;  the  corrupt  influences 
of  society  ;  and  the  temptations  of  the 
(ievil, — these  are  the  Anakim  with 
which  we  must  contend,  and  which  we 
must  conquer  if  we  would  enter  into 
full  possession  of  our  Promised  Land. 
No  true  kingdom  is  ever  entered  except 
*'  through  much  tribulation."     (6) 

2.  They  discovered  these  formidable 
enemies  where  they  least  expected  them. 
It  was  at  Hebron  that  they  found  the 
Anakim.  Now  Hebron  was  sacred  in 
the  annals  of  the  greatest  of  their  an- 
cestors. Abraham  and  Sarah,  Isaac 
and  Rebekah,  Jacob  and  Leah  all 
found  their  last  resting  place  there 
(Gen.  xxiii.  19,  20  ;  xlix.  31) ;  yet  there 
they  find  the  tribes  that  are  likely  to 
offer  the  stoutest  resistance  to  their 
taking  the  land.  "  In  that  place  where 
they  expected  the  greatest  encourage- 
ments they  met  with  tlie  greatest  dis- 
couragements. Where  the  bodies  of 
their  ancestors  kept  possession  for  them 
the  giants  kept  possession  against 
them."  So  with  us  in  Christian  life  and 
enterprise,  it  is  not  where  we  feel  there 
is  danger  and  are  guarding  against  it 
t'lat  our  real  foes  and  grave  perils  are  ] 
but  in  places  and  in  circumstances  where 
we  least  expect  them.  How  often  liave 
godly  men  failed  where  they  seemed 
most  strong !  Abraham  was  i)reemi- 
nent  for  faith  ;  yet  he  fell  into  sin  more 
U\an  auoe   throu^^h   the   failure   of  hie 

233 


CHAP.  XIII. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


faith  in  little  trials.  Peter  deemed 
his  courage  unquestionable  and  invin- 
cible; yet  it  was  his  courage  that  gave 
way  in  the  hour  of  trial. 

ill.  The  exploration  of  the  Promised 
Land  by  the  spies  led  to  the  discovery 
of  rich  treasures. 

*'  And  they  came  unto  the  brook  of 
Eshcol,  and  cut  down  from  thence," 
SzG.  (23-25). 

1.  Tlie  discovered  treasures  were  rich. 
The  valley  of  Eshcol  was  celebrated  for 
its  abrndant  and  choice  fruits.  One 
very  large  and  rich  bunch  of  grapes 
tlioy  cut  and  conveyed  from  thence  to 
the  people.  "  They  cut  down  from 
thence  a  branch  with  one  cluster,  and 
they  bare  it  between  two  upon  a  staff," 
&c.     (c) 

How  rich  are  the  fruits  of  that  in- 
heri lance  of  Divine  privilege  to  which 
God  calls  us  !  What  satisfaction,  peace, 
hope,  joy !  &c. 

2.  The  discovered  treasures  were  various. 
"  Grapes,  pomegranates,  and  figs."  How 
various  are  the  treasures  and  delights 
God  bestows  upon  His  people  !  They 
have  joy  in  the  new  discoveries  of 
truth  ;  joy  in  high  and  holy  fellowships  ; 
joy  in  Christ-like  service;  joy  in  loving 
and  being  loved,  &o. 


3.  Specimens  of  the  discovered  treasures 
were  carried  to  the  people  by  the  explorers. 
"  They  cut  down  a  branch  with  one 
cluster,"  &c.  The  probability  is  that 
Caleb  and  Joshua  brought  this  cluster ; 
for  the  other  explorers  were  not  disposed 
to  encourage  the  people  to  attempt  to 
to  take  possession  of  the  land.  The 
knowledge  and  enjoyments  we  now 
have  of  Divine  things  are  but  specimens 
and  foretastes  of  what  is  reserved  in 
heaven  for  us.  The  '*  fulness  of  joy," 
and  the  "  far  more  exceeding  and  eter- 
nal weight  of  glory,"  await  us  in  the 
hereafter. 

4.  The  discovered  treasures  deeply  im- 
pressed (he  mind  of  the  explorers  and  of 
those  ivho  saw  the  specimens.  We  see 
this  from  the  fact  that  the  valley  from 
which  the  bunch  of  grapes  was  cut  was 
henceforth  called,  "the  valley  of  the 
cluster."  "  The  place  was  called  the 
brook  Eshcol,  because  of  the  cluster  of 
grapes  which  the  children  of  Israel  cut 
down  from  thence."  Were  we  not 
blinded  and  prejudiced  by  sin,  the  rich 
treasures  of  Gospel  grace  would  so 
impress  our  hearts  that  we  should 
eagerly  seek  Him  in  whom  they  are 
stored  and  through  whom  they  are 
bestowed. 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 


(a)  Only  those  who  wait  upon  the  Bib^e 
through  a  life-time  of  prayer,  study,  aod 
patience,  can  be  rewarded  with  an  intollig-inc 
and  beautiful  reverence  for  it,  as  for  *'the 
Wisdom  of  God  in  a  mystery."  Think !  it  is 
not  simply  Wisdom,  but  the  Wisdom  of  God, 
and  not  simply  the  Wisdom  of  God,  but  the 
Wisdom  of  God  in  a  mystery. 

Very  notable  is  the  agreement  between  the 
Book,  and  every  man's  ieep  nature.  *'  Deep 
calleth  unto  deep."  The  Bibl'^  io  the  only 
profoundly  human  thing  in  the  world.  The 
world,  and  a)l  that  is  in  the  wtirld,  are  in 
asfreement  only  with  our  shallow  nature. 
When  conscience  awakes  from  its  sensual 
elumbcTs,  there  is  a  marvellous  agreement 
between  its  suspicions,  its  fears,  its  dark 
utterances,  and  the  Old  Testament.  The  true 
Mount  Sinai  is  in  the  human  soul.  But  there 
are  also  deep  and  far-reaching  longings  in 
man,  aa  well  as  conscience,  and  the  New 
Testament  is  a  complete  answer  to  all  these 
longings. 

The  Bible  seems  to  ba  th«  law  of  my  own 
234 


being  outwritten.  It  meets  every  difficulty,  it 
throws  light  on  every  mystery,  it  supplies 
every  want,  it  leaves  nothing  to  bo  desired. 

There  is  much  in  the  Book  to  exercise  both 
patience  and  hope;  and  I  need  both,  I  need 
patience,  under  the  present  dark  and  corrupt 
condition  of  nature,  and  I  need  hope,  that  the 
mystery  of  God  will  be  fioished.  It  is  finished 
in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  When  all  the  re- 
deemed shall  have  the  Spirit  of  Christ  for 
their  spirit,  and  when  all  matter  shall  be  like 
untr  His  glorious  Body,  then  the  mystery  of 
God  will  be  finished  also  in  the  universe. — 
John  Pulsford. 

(6)  Any  service  for  God,  if  it  be  done  at  all, 
should  be  hard  work.  If  you  want  to  be 
feather-bed  soldiers,  go  and  enlist  somewhere 
else  ;  but  Christ's  soldiers  must  fight,  and  they 
will  find  the  battle  rough  and  stern,  W«,  of 
the  Church  militant,  are  engaged  in  no  mimic 
manoeuvres  and  grand  parades;  our  life  is 
real  and  earnest ;  our  battle,  though  not  with 
flesh  and  blood,  is  with  spiritual  wickedness  in 
high  places,  and  it  involTos  hard  Mows  and 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  XIII. 


keen  anguish.  Ton  mnat look  for  real  fighting 
if  you  become  a  soldier  of  Christ,  and  0,  Sir,  if 
the  excuse  for  fainting  be  that  the  work  is 
toilsome,  that  it  is  too  much  a  drag  upon  you, 
why  did  you  begin  it?  You  ought  to  have 
known  this  at  the  first.  You  should  have 
counted  the  cost.  Bat,  ah,  let  me  add,  the 
work  was  not  toilsome  when  your  heart  was 
loving,  neither  would  it  now  be  so  hard  if  your 
soul  were  right  with  God,  This  is  but  an  un- 
worthy excuse.  Ardent  spirits  love  difficul- 
ties ;  fervent  love  delights  in  making  eacritices ; 
they  would  not  wish  to  swim  for  ever  in  smooth 
sea^  of  pi  asure;  they  know  that  manhood's 
truest  glory  lies  in  contendino:  with  and  over- 
coming tl  at  which  is  hard.  Give  to  the  child 
the  easy  task,  but  let  the  man  have  something 
worth  the  doing  to  perform.  Instead  of  shrink- 
ing because  the  work  is  tedious,  we  ought  to 
gird  up  our  loins  and  push  on  the  enterprise 
with  all  the  greater  force. — C.  H.  Spurgeon, 

(c)  In  conformity  with  the  text  before  us, 
the  nize  and  richness  of  the  clusters  of  the 
grapes  in  many  parts  of  Palestine  excite  more 
astonishment  than  even  the  size  and  richness 
of  the  grapes.  An  Italian  traveller,  Mariti, 
avers,  that  in  different  parts  of  Syria  he  saw 
clusters  that  would  be  a  sufficient  burden  for 
one  man.  A  German  traveller,  Neitzschutz, 
declares,  with  some  solemnity  of  assertion,  that 
in  the  mountains  of  Israel  he  had  seen  and 
eaten  from  vine  clusters  that  were  half  an  ell 
long,  and  the  grapes  of  which  were  equal  to 
two  finger  joints  in  Length.  A  very  intelligent 
F(  ench  traveller,  Nau,  is  still  more  particular. 
He  declares  that  one  who  had  seen  the  vine 
only  in  the  vine  countries  of  France  and  Italy, 
could  form  no  just  conception  of  the  size  to 
which  the  clusters  attain  in  Syria,  He  had 
himself  eeen  clusters  weighing  len  or  twelve 
pounds ;  and  he  had  reason  to  believe  that  in 
the   Archipelago  clusters  of  thirty   or  forty 


ponnda  were  not  ancommon.  A  atill  older 
traveller  of  the  same  nation,  Doubdan,  tells  us 
that,  travelling  near  Bethlehem,  he  found  him- 
self in  a  delighful  valley,  replete  with  rose- 
trees  and  aromatic  plants,  and  planted  with 
vines.  This  was  that  which  tradition  regards 
as  the  valley  of  Eshcol,  from  which  the  spies 
obtained  their  cluster.  Not  being  there  in 
the  season,  he  did  not  see  the  fruit  himself  ; 
but  he  was  assured  that  clusters  of  ten  and 
twelve  pounds  were  not  seldom  gathered  from 
these  vines.  \Ve  share  the  doubt,  however, 
that  this  was  the  vale  of  Eshcol,  which  seems 
rather  to  have  been  near  to  Hebron.  It  was 
in  this  neighbourhood  that  Nau  saw  the  large 
vine-clusters  of  which  he  makes  mention.  In 
this  quarter  tho  hill-sides  are  still  thickly 
planted  with  vineyards,  the  vines  of  which 
are  laden  with  large  clusters  of  delicious 
grapes.  It  is  beyond  a  doubt  that  the  cluster 
in  question  was  gathered  in  the  south  of 
Palestine ;  for  as  the  spies  had  seen  these 
grapes  in  their  outward  way,  it  would  have 
been  absurd  for  them  to  gather  any  but  at  the 
last   available   noint  towards   their    own  en. 

A 

campment.  As  striking  an  instance  as  any 
that  we  have  quoted,  has  occurred  in  our  own 
country,  in  regard  to  the  produce  of  a  Synan 
vine  at  Welbeck,  the  seat  of  the  Duke  of 
Portland.  A  bunch  from  this  vine  was  sent, 
in  1819,  as  a  present  to  the  Marquis  ol 
Backingham,  which  weighed  nineteen  pounds. 
It  was  conveyed  to  its  destination,  more  than 
twenty  miles  distant,  on  a  staff,  by  foui 
labourers,  two  of  whom  bore  it  in  rotation  ; 
thus  affording  a  striking  illustration  or  the 
means  adopted  by  the  explorers  in  transporting 
the  Eshcol  cluster.  The  greatest  diameter 
of  this  Welbeck  cluster  was  nineteen  inches 
and  a  half ;  its  circumference  four  feet  and  a 
half ;  and  its  length  nearly  twenty-three 
inches, — John  Kitto^  D.D.t  F,S.A, 


Eshcol. 


(Terse  23.; 


"They  came  unto  the  brook  of 
Eshcol,  and  cut  down  from  thence  a 
branch  with  one  cluster  of  grapes." 

We  reach  the  brook  of  Eshcol  through 
a  humblirjg  path.  When  Sinai  is  left 
the  march  of  Israel  advances  pros- 
peroasly.  There  is  no  check.  And 
now  a  few  more  steps  will  plant  the 
pilgrim-host  in  Canaan. 

Surely  courage  will  now  brace  each 
nerve,  (fee.  But  is  it  sol  Alas  !  they 
pause.  The  unworthy  thought  creeps 
in — perchance  the  nations*  r.re  too 
strong  for  us,  tkc.  Thus  they  distrust : 
and  tremblingly  propose  to  search  the 


country  by  spies.  They  follow  sight- 
not  faith.  And  unbelief  is  not  dead 
It  lurks  in  corners  of  each  heart,  &c. 
Beware — look  inward  ....  Heistht 
fool  of  fools,  who  tests  Divine  assu- 
rances in  the  scales  of  mortal  vision. 

The  spies  are  named.  They  are  sent 
forth  to  ascertain  whether  their  God  be 
true,  (ScC. 

Contemplate  that  cluster  which  they 
bear — that  earnest  of  rich  fields.  These 
grapes  are  proof  of  Canaan's  exuberant 
fertility.  So,  too,  there  is  a  heavenly 
Kshcol  before  faith's  eye.  It  shows 
delicious     clustera.      The   jov    before 

235 


CHAP.  XIII. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


Clirist  chcerrd  His  heart.  The  joy 
belure  us  should  gird  up  our  loins.  The 
racer  bounds  when  he  discerns  the  goal 
just  won.  Conne,  then,  in  Eshcol's 
grapes  read  faith's  amazing  prize. 

Heaven !  It  is  the  palace  of  the 
great  Eternal.  Salvation  for  its  walls 
— its  gates  are  praise.  Its  atmosphere 
is  perfect  love  It  is  the  home  pre- 
pared of  God  before  the  worlds  were 
made,  for  His  redeemed  children.  It  is 
the  mansion  which  the  ascended  Jesus 
still  labours  to  make  fit.  It  is  so  fair 
that  all  Jehovah's  skill  cannot  increase 
the  beauty.  .  .   . 

This  cluster  was  the  vine's  perfection. 
So,  too,  perfection  is  the  essence  of  our 
heaven.  Nothing  can  enter  there  to 
stain,  &c.  Oh  I  what  a  contrast  to  our 
present  state  !  .  .  .  But  our  high  home 
is  barricaded  against  sin. 

Here  the  foul  tempter  all  day  long  is 
spreading  nets.  There  is  no  saint  too 
saintly  for  his  vile  approach.  In  Eden 
he  approached  the  innocent.     To  Jesus 

he   said,   Worship    me But  in 

heaven  this  misery  has  ceased.  Satan 
is  without — far  off — the  bottomless  pit 
has  shut  its  mouth  upon  him. 

Here  fears  rush  in.  The  ground  is 
slippery.  A  preci})ice  is  near.  We 
trenible  on  the  brink  ....  May  I  not, 
after  all,  fail  of  salvation  !  But  fear 
dies  at  heaven's  gate.  The  happy 
company  realize  that  they  are  lofty 
above  injury. 

Earth  is  afiBiution's  home.  A  troop 
of  sorrows  compass  us  about.  Death 
tears    away    the    much-loved    friend. 


Sickness  invades  the  frame  ....  But 
heaven  is  a  wide  sea  of  bliss  without  a 
ripple.  All  tears  are  wiped  away.  We 
bathe  in  oceans  of  delight. 

Here  unbelief  oft  gathers,  as  a  chilly 
cloud.  It  mantles  the  soul  in  darkness 
....  But  in  heaven  a  present  God  is 
always  everywhere.  We  cannot  move 
beyond  the  sunshine  of  His  love. 

Here  we  thirst  for  knowledge,  but 
we  reach  it  not.  How  much  concern- 
ing God  is  utterly  beyond  our  grasp. 
Blindness  curtails  our  prospect.  Clouds 
narrow  our  circumference.  But  heaven 
is  a  realm  without  horizon.  We  know 
God,  as  we  are  known.  We  love  intel- 
ligently, &c. 

In  the  true  Eshcol's  cluster  there  is 
this  richer  fruit ;  Jesus  is  seen.  This 
is  the  crown  of  heaven.  The  rising  of 
the  sun  makes  day.  The  presence  of 
the  king  constitutes  the  court.  The 
revelation  of  the  Lord,  without  one  in- 
tervening cloud,  is  the  grand  glory  of 
the  endless  kingdom. 

Believer,  what  will  it  be  to  gaze  on 
the  manifested  beauty  of  Him,  who  is 
altogether  lovely !  What,  to  compre- 
hend all  that  Jesus  is  1  What,  never 
to  lose  sight  of  Him  ! 

Are  you  a  traveller  towards  this 
heaven  1  When  you  behold  the  grapes 
of  Eshcol,  do  you  know  that  the  vine- 
yard is  your  sure  heritage?  The  king- 
dom is  for  the  subjects  of  the  King. 
Are  you  His  by  faith  1  This  is  that 
Spirit-implanted  confidence,  which  looks 
to  Eshcol,  and  claims  all  Canaan  as  a 
promised  home. — Henry  Law,  D.D, 


The  Reports  of  the  Spies,  and  the  Lessons  these  Reports  Teaoh  us. 

(Verses  26-33.) 


I.  Examine  the  Reports  of  the  Spies. 

First :  The  report  of  the  majority. 
The  impression  produced  upon  ten  of 
the  explorers  from  their  survey  differed 
from  that  produced  upon  the  other 
two.  We  will  first  attend  to  the  testi- 
mony of  the  ten. 

I.  They  testify  to  the  fertility  of  the 
land.  "  Sorely  it  floweth  with  milk  and 
23G 


honey ;  and  this  is  the  fruit  of  it  '* 
(See  remarks  on  verses  23-25,  and 
comp.  Deut.  viii.  7-9). 

2.  They  set  forth  the  dificulfies  in  the 
way  of  taking  the  land.  Speedily  they 
pass  from  the  cheering  announcement 
of  the  fertility  of  the  country  to  a 
gloomy  and  discouraging  representation 
of  the  grave  difficulties  which  opposed 


HOMILETIC    COMMEi\rAIiY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP   XI  ri. 


their  possession  of  it.  **  Nevertheless, 
the  people  be  strong  that  dwell  in  the 
land,"  <kc.  (verses  28,  29,  32,  33). 
These  obstacles  which  seemed  to  them 
insuperable  were  of  two  classes: — (1) 
The  defences  of  the  cities.  '^  The  cities 
are  w^alled  and  very  great."  In  their 
eyes  ewQvy  town  was  an  impregnable 
stronghold.  (2)  The  strength  and 
stature  of  the  inhabitants.  "  More- 
over, we  saw  the  children  of  Anak 
there,"  &c.  "  All  the  people  that  we 
saw  in  it  are  men  of  great  stature," 
&c. 

3.  They  declare  their  inability  to  take 
the  land.  "  We  be  not  able  to  go  up 
against  the  people,  for  they  are  stronger 
than  we."  And  yet  the  army  of  Israel 
numbered  600,000  able  men,  and  was 
well  organized. 

4.  They  suggest  the  difficulty  of  main- 
taining posb^ssion  of  the  land.  "  It  is  a 
£and  that  euteth  up  the  inhabitants 
thereof."  According  to  their  repre- 
sentation, by  rettson  of  the  fertility  of 
its  soil  and  the  importance  of  its 
situation,  dift'eren^  nations  contended 
rbr  its  possession  ;  so  that  they  who 
neld  it  must  needs  W  armed  and  watch- 
nil,  and  frequently  suifer  loss  in  battle. 

5.  They  exhibit  the  most  despicable 
vowardice.  Surely  the  tone  of  their 
report  is  utterly  unwortrxy  of  men  who 
^new  that  the  army  of  Israel  was 
oOO,000  strong.  Ala?  !  they  were  al- 
loost  destitute  of  the  higher  attributes 
of  manhood.  It  we  would  estrmrite  the 
cowardice  of  their  conduct  aright  we 
/;ave  but  to  compare^  or  rather  conirast 
it  with  the  conduct  of  Caleb  (verse  30), 
or  with  that  of  David  (1  Sam.  xvii. 
3.^-37).     (a) 

3.  They  manifest  the  most  deplo7xibte 
and  sinful  unbelief.  In  framing  their 
conclusions  and  delivering  their  report 
they  utterly  ignored  the  Lord  God. 
Faith  in  Him  was  entirely  absent.  Un- 
belief was  supreme.  Their  unbelief 
was  aggravated  in  its  sinfulness  by 
reason  of — (1)  The  promises  which  He 
had  repeatedly  made  to  them.  Had 
He  not  assured  them  again  and  again 
that  he  would  give  them  the  land  1  (2) 
The    mighty    works     which    He    had 


wrought  for  them.  Is  it  possible  that 
they  have  forgotten  the  wonders 
wrought  for  them  in  Egypt  and  at  tlu? 
Red  Seal  Could  they  discover  no  sig- 
nificance or  feel  no  inspiration  to  faith 
in  the  daily  miracle  of  the  manual  (3) 
The  visible  symbol  of  His  presence 
with  them.  The  miraculous  and  ma- 
jestic Pillar  of  His  Presence  was  visible 
to  every  eye.  Yet  despite  all  these 
things  unbelief  held  undisputed  supre- 
macy within  them. 

Second  ;  The  Report  of  the  m^inority. 
Caleb  and  Joshua  seem  to  have  agreed 
with  the  report  of  the  ten  other  spies 
in  some  particulars  ;  but  in  two  most 
important  matters  they  differed  from 
them.  (1)  Their  impression  of  their 
relative  power  was  different ;  they  held 
that  they  were  "well  able  to  overcome" 
the  inhabitants  of  the  land.  (2)  Their 
advice  as  to  their  practical  action  was 
different ;  they  counselled  that  thev 
should  "  go  up  at  once  and  possess  " 
the  land.  In  considering  the  conduct 
of  Caleb,  who  was  supported  by  Joshua, 
let  us  notice  — 

1.  The  exhortation  which  he  addressed 
to  the  people.  "  Let  us  go  up  at  once, 
and  possess  it."  He  exhorts  to  (1) 
Mutual  action.  "Let  us  go  up."  There 
is  far  more  inspiration  in,  **  Let  us 
go,"  than  in  Let  them  go,  or  than  in 
Go  ye.  (2)  Prompt  action.  "  Let  us 
go  up  at  once."  He  would  lose  no 
time  in  debating  what  they  could  do, 
or  what  they  should  do ;  but  urges 
immediate  and  bold  action.  (3)  Con- 
fident action.  "  Let  us  go  up  at  once, 
and  possess  it."  **  He  does  not  say, 
*  Let  us  go  up,  and  conquer  it ;'  he 
looks  upon  that  to  be  as  good  as  done 
already  ;  but,  *  Let  us  go  up,  and  pos- 
sess it ;  there  is  nothing  to  be  done  but 
to  enter,  and  take  the  possession  which 
God  our  great  Lord  is  ready  to  give 


us. 


I » 


2.  The  assurance  hy  which  he  enforced 
this  exhortation.  "  For  we  are  well  able 
to  overcome  it."  The  fortified  ciijes 
and  the  giant  peoples  did  not  appal 
Caleb  and  Joshua.  They  were  confi- 
dent that  Israel  could  vanquish  the 
Canaanites  and  take  the  land. 

237 


CHAP.  XIII. 


tlOMILETlC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


3.  The  faith  in  God  which  inspired 
this  assurance.  The  confidence  of  these 
two  brave  men  was  neither  in  the 
strength  and  courage  of  their  army, 
nor  in  the  skill  and  spirit  of  their 
leaders;  but  in  the  Lord  thftir  God. 
'I'his  is  made  abundantly  clear  in  verses 
8  and  9  of  the  following  chapter.  This 
faith  of  theirs  had  sure  and  splendid 
warranty  in — (1)  The  divine  promises 
to  Israel.  (2)  The  divine  performances 
for  Israel.  (3)  The  Divine  Presence 
with  Israel.  Their  faith  was  profoundly 
reasonable.  Can  walled  cities  or  armies 
of  giants  withstand  the  Almighty  ?  (b) 
Their  faith  was  thoroughly  religious. 
It  rested  in  God  ;  it  honoured  Him. 

II.  Deduce  the  Lessons  arising  from 
these  reports. 

1.  A  statement  may  be  ti'ue  as  to  mat- 
ters of  fact,  yet  false  and  evil  i'l  its  spirit 
and  influence.  The  report  of  the  ten 
spies  was  true  as  to  actual  facts ;  but 
the  balance  or  prop  )rtion  of  its  state- 
ments was  false,  the  spirit  which 
breathed  in  it  was  mean  and  cowardly, 
and  its  influence  was  extremely  perni- 
cious. A  man  may  be  guilty  of  lying 
while  speaking  the  truth  in  words. 
You  may  lie  by  an  accent,  by  dispro- 
portion of  the  respective  branches  of 
a  narrative,  by  undue  warmth  in  one 
thing  and  coldness  in  another,  by  the 
drapery  in  which  bare  facts  are  clothed. 
Truthfulness  is  a  thing  not  merely  of 
words,  but  first  and  chiefly  of  spirit. 

2.  The  cause  of  God  has  nevtr  been 
left  without  some  true  witnesses.  Here 
there  were  ten  faithless  cowards,  but 
there  were  two  brave  believers;  ten 
who  brought  an  evil  report,  but  two 
who  brought  a  good  report.  "  Thou 
hast  a  few  names  even  in  Sardis  which 
have  not  defiled  their  garments." 

3.  Majorities  are  not  trustworthy  cri- 
teria of  truth  and  right.  Of  the  twelve 
explorers  "  only  two  deal  faithfully  and 
truly,  the  rest  were  treacherous   and 


hollow  -  hearted  hypocrites."  "  Vox 
populi  vox  Dei,  is  true  only  in  a  com- 
munity of  holy  beings — true  only  in 
heaven.  In  a  corrupt  world  like  ours 
it  is  impossible  for  language  to  em- 
body a  greater  falsehood.  As  the  devil 
leads  the  world  captive  at  his  will,  Vox 
populi  vox  diaboli,  is  the  truth  here." 
The  popularity  of  a  doctrine,  or  a  cause, 
or  a  party,  is  no  guarantee  of  its  truth 
or  righteousness.  Because  the  many 
tread  the  wrong  path  our  obligation  to 
tread  the  right  path  is  in  no  wise 
diminished.  "  Error  does  not  become 
truth  because  majorities  accept  it,  and 
truth  does  not  become  falsehood  be- 
cause a  minority  only  accept  it."  Let 
us  follow  those  things  which  are  right 
and  true  whether  they  be  popular  or 
not. 

4.  To  Judge  by  appearances  only  is 
foolish,  sinful,  and  perilous.  The  report 
of  the  ten  spies  was  based  solely  upon 
what  they  saw  through  their  bodily 
eyes !  it  does  not  take  any  account 
whatever  of  the  presence,  or  power,  or 
promise  of  God.  In  ordinary  every-day 
purposes  and  duties  he  is  a  foolish  man 
who  trusts  solely  to  bodily  sight  for 
guidance.  To  walk  by  sight  alone  in- 
stead of  by  faith  ;  to  accept  the  testi- 
mony of  the  senses,  and  reject  the 
testimony  of  the  soul ;  to  trust  our 
own  reasonings  rather  than  the  Word 
of  God,  is  egregious  folly  and  heinous 
sin.  Well  does  Mr.  Carlyle  say,  "  There 
is  but  one  thing  without  honour ;  smit- 
ten with  eternal  barrenness,  inability  to 
do  or  to  be  :  insincerity,  unbelief.  He 
who  believes  no  thijig,  who  believes  only 
the  shows  of  things,  is  not  in  relation 
with  nature  and  fact  at  all."   (c) 

Note. — The  points  suggested  in  the  preced- 
ing article  are  too  numerous  and  inoportant 
for  one  discourse.  Three  sermons  may  with- 
out difficulty  be  arranged  on  this  section,— 
one,  on  a  disco7i7-aging  repoi't ;  another,  on 
an  encouraging  exhorlation  ;  and  a  third,  on 
modern  lessons  from  ancient  reports. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  Moral  cowardice  is  the  Bource  of  every 

mean  and  pitiful  thing,  renders  a  man  afraid 

of  duty,  afraid  of  death;  so  that    when  the 

moment  Ur  action    arrives,  he  equivocates, 

238 


intreats,  fears.  Moral  courage  is  religion  in 
action  ;  moral  cowardice  is  religion  in  defeat. 
Oh,  brother,  exclaims  a  strenuous  thinker, 
never  strike  sail   to  a  fear,  cume  gently  into 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY;   NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  XIII. 


port  or  sail  with  God  over  the  seas.  Without 
tourago,  the  courage  of  the  heart,  no  one  can 
be  truly  great.  This  is  a  courage  that  does 
not  depend  on  thews  or  sinews,  but  on  the 
soul.  It  animated  the  patriots  and  martyrs 
of  old,  as  it  animates  the  patriots  and  martyrs 
of  to-day.  Moral  courage  makes  the  man,  the 
absence  of  it  the  knave,  the  driveller,  and  the 
fool.  It  is  to  the  age's  dishonour  that  its 
intellectual  tendencies  are  marked  with  the 
characters  of  fear.  Yet  courage  must  be 
guided  by  purity  and  truth;  since  divested 
of  these,  it  is  shorn  of  half  its  strength. — II. 
McCoj^mac. 

(6)  He  who  walks  by  sight  only,  walks  in 
a  blind  alley.  He  who  does  not  know  the 
freedom  and  joy  of  reverent,  loving  specula- 
tion, wastes  bis  life  in  a  gloomy  cell  of  the 
m'»uldie8t  of  prisons.  Even  in  matters  that 
are  not  distinctively  religi)us,  faith  will  be 
found  to  be  the  inspiration  and  strength  of 
the  most  useful  life.  It  is  faith  that  does  the 
gr  at  work  of  the  world.  It  is  faith  that  sends 
mon  in  search  of  unknown  coasts.  It  is  faith 
that  retrims  the  lamp  of  inquiry,  when  sight 
is  weary  of  the  flime.  It  is  faith  that  unfas- 
tens the  cable  and  gives  men  the  liberty  of 
the  seas.  It  is  faith  that  inspires  the  greatest 
works  in  civilization.  So  we  cannot  get  rid 
of  religion  unless  we  first  get  rid  of  faith,  and 
when  we  get  rid  of  faith  we  give  up  our  birth- 
riijht  and  go  into  slavery  for  ever, — Joseph 
Parker,  DD. 

(c)  Imagine  a  man  who  disbelieves  every- 
thing he  cannot  see  with  his  naked  eye. 
Suppose  that  it  should  come  to  pass  to  morrow 
thdt  everything  shall  be  taken  away  which 
cannot  be  rearl  by  the  naked  eye,  or  that  has  not 
been  discovered  by  the  naked  eye.  What  will 
come?  Shut  up  the  heavens,  for  astronomy 
must  go:  and  cov.3rover  fie  fields,  for  botany 
shall  tell  litMe  to  the  naked  eye.  All  ssience, 
indeed,  would  be  impoverished,  insulted,  de- 
graded.    Yet  the  man  who  cannot  read  his 


own  mother's  letter  without  the  aid  of  an  eye- 
glass, insists  upon  reading  the  infinite  and 
eternal  God  by  his  own  unassisted  powers  ; 
says,  that  whatsoever  is  too  mysterious  for  his 
natural  understanding  is  but  worthy  of  insult, 
degradation,  and  contempt.  I  charge  him, 
before  God's  face,  with  insulting  hig  own  com- 
mon sense,  and  contradicting  the  highest  ex- 
periences of  mankind. — Ibid. 

Walking  by  sight  is  just  this — "I  believe  in 
myself;"  whereas  walking  by  faith  is — "I 
believe  in  God."  If  I  walk  by  sight,  I  walk 
by  myself  ;  if  I  walk  by  faith,,  then  there  are 
two  of  us,  and  the  second  One — ah  I  how 
great,  how  glorious,  how  mighty  is  He — the 
Great  All-in-all — God-all-sufficient  I  Sight 
goes  a  warfare  at  its  own  charges,  and  becomes 
a  bankrupt,  and  is  defeated.  Faith  goes  a 
warfare  at  the  charges  of  the  King's  Ex- 
chequer, imd  there  is  no  fear  that  Faith's  bank 
shall  ever  be  broken.  Sight  builds  the  house 
from  its  own  quarry,  and  on  its  own  foundation, 
but  it  begins  to  build  and  is  never  able  to 
finish,  and  what  it  does  build  rests  on  the 
sand  and  falls.  But  faith  builds  on  the  foun- 
dation laid  in  eternity,  in  tbe  fair  colours  of 
the  Saviour's  blood,  in  the  covenant  of  grace. 
It  goes  to  God  for  every  stone  to  be  used  in 
the  building,  and  brings  forth  the  top-stone 
with  shouting  of  "  Grace,  grace  unto  it." — 
C.  H.  Spurgeon. 

Where  men  are  called  of  God  to  go  forth,  it 
should  be  theirs  instantly  and  gladly  to  obey, 
how  dark  soever  or  stormy  the  night  into 
which  they  move.  Life  is  a  discipline.  Shrewd 
men  say  they  want  to  know  whither  they  are 
going  before  they  set  out  on  a  journey  ;  but 
m^n  of  higher  shrewdness,  men  of  Christian 
faith,  often  go  out  into  enterprise  and  diffi- 
culty without  being  able  to  see  one  step  before 
them.  The  watchword  of  the  noblest,  truest 
souls  is,  "  to  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight ;  " 
faith  has  a  wider  dominion  and  a  more  splendid 
future. — Joseph  Parker ^  U.D, 


The  ancient  Canaan,  a  type  of  Heaven, 


{Verse  30.) 


I,  In  what  respects  the  ancient 
Canaan  was  a  type  of  heaven. 

1.  It  was  a  promised  land,  and  the 
right  of  possession  was  founded  on  the 
promise. 

2.  It  was  a  land  in  which  God  was 
peculiarly  present. 

3.  It  was  a  land  of  fruition. 

4.  It  was  a  free  gift. 

II.  As  the  Israelites  had  dangers, 
diificulties,  and  discouragements    ou 


their  way  to  Canaan,  so  have  Christians 
in  their  progress  to  heaven. 

1.  There  are  formidable  foes  to  be 
encountered. 

2.  There  are  adversaries  in  timid  and 
faint  hearted  associates. 

3.  The  Israelites  in  their  progress 
were  made  dependent  on  the  Lord  for 
all  things. 

III.  Consider  the  resolution  :  **  Let 
us  go  up  at  once  and  possess  it." 

23d 


CHAP.  XIIL 


nuMlLETIC    COMMEyTAllY:    NUMBERS. 


1.  The  title  to  it  is  sure. 

2.  We  have  means  and  ordinances 
hy  which  needed  strength  is  supplied. 


3.  Here  we  have  many  foretastes  of  the 
good  land. — The  Ev<iiigelical  Preachei . 
quoted  in  "  The  Biblical  Museum,^^ 


Caleb. — A  Call  to  Inquiry  and  Courage. 

(  Verse  30.) 


Glance  at  the  history.  This  incident 
sets  forth  vividly  some  of  the  difficulties 
which  lie  in  the  way  of  the  higher 
kingdom,  the  kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ, 
and  it  is  in  this  view  that  I  intend  to 
regard  the  graphic  narrative. 

I.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  challenges 
the  inquiry  of  all  men.  It  addresses 
an  appeal  to  human  reason  and  to 
human  trust.  Though  itself  a  revela- 
tion, and  therefore  not  to  be  handled 
as  a  common  thing,  nor  to  be  tested  by 
common  instruments,  yet  Christianity 
invites  the  most  careful  inquest.  It 
does  not  seek  to  rest  upon  the  human 
intellect  as  a  burden,  but  to  shine  upon 
it  as  a  light )  it  does  not  fasten  itself 
upon  the  human  heart  as  an  excrescence, 
but  blesses  and  enriches  it  with  a  new 
and  mightier  life.  If  Christianity  may 
be  represented  under  the  image  of  a 
land  such  as  ancient  Canaan,  then  it 
is  fair  to  say  of  it,  that  it  offers  right  of 
way  over  its  hills  and  through  its  val- 
leys, that  its  fruits  and  flowers  are 
placed  at  the  disposal  of  all  travellers, 
and  that  he  who  complains  that  the  land 
is  shut  against  him  speaks  not  only  un- 
gratefully, but  most  falsely. 

There  are  not  wanting  men  who  say 
that  Christianity  forbids  inquiry. 

The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  the  highest 
revelation  of  the  mind  of  God  to  the 
mind  of  man.  The  mind  must  be  at 
its  highest  possible  point  of  energy  in 
order  to  lay  hold  of  the  doctrines  which 
constitute  that  revelation.  To  get  the 
mind  to  the  point  requires  the  excite- 
ment of  the  heart]  for  mind  is  never 
fully  alive  whilst  the  moral  powers  are 
dormant.  When  the  heart  is  moved  in 
its  deepest  passions,  and  the  mind  is  set 
in  its  highest  key,  the  man  is  prepared 
to  enter  upon  the  great  studies  to  which 
he  is  invited  by  the  Gospel 
240 


It  is  certainly  true,  and  ought  to  be 
taken  account  of  in  this  connection,  that 
some  people  have  peculiar  notions  of 
what  is  meant  by  inquiry.  In  the  first 
instance,  they  dismiss  everything  like 
reverence  ;  in  the  next  place,  they 
make  themselves  the  standard  and 
measure  of  all  truth  ;  and  in  the  third 
place,  they  seek  to  materialize  and 
debase  everything  that  is  spiritual  and 
heavenly.  This  is  not  inquiry,  it  is  in- 
solent self-sufficiency  :  it  is  not  the 
spirit  of  a  student  seeking  light,  it  is 
the  spirit  of  a  braggart  who  thinks  the 
sun  inferior  to  his  spark.  The  tone  of 
mind  must  be  in  harmonv  with  the 
subject  considered  ;  in  every  depart- 
ment of  intellectual  life  it  is  required 
that  a  student  be  self-controlled,  patient, 
docile  ;  that  his  temper  be  subdued,  and 
that  his  conclusions  be  reached  through 
long  and  earnest  watching  of  processes. 
This  is  required  in  all  sciences ;  why 
not  in  the  science  of  sciences — the 
knowledge  and  worship  of  the  true 
God-? 

II  Different  reports  will  of  course 
be  brought  by  the  inquirers.  It  was 
so  in  the  case  of  the  spies — it  will  be 
so  in  all  inquiry.  The  result  of  the 
survey  will  be  according  to  the  peculi- 
arities of  the  surveyors.  As  streams 
are  impregnated  by  the  soils  over  which 
they  flow,  so  subjects  are  afiected  by 
the  individualism  of  the  minds  through 
which  they  pass.  Thus  Christianity 
may  be  said  to  be  different  things  to 
difterent  minds.  To  the  speculative 
man  it  is  a  great  attempt  to  solve  deep 
problems  in  theology  ;  to  the  contro- 
versialist it  is  a  challenge  to  debate 
profound  subjects  on  new  ground  ;  to 
the  poet  it  is  a  dream,  a  wondrous 
vision  many-coloured  as  the  rainbow^,  a 
revelation  many-vT>iced  as  the  tunes  of 


UOMILETW   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS.  chap.  xiu. 


tho  wind  or  the  harmonies  of  the  sea. 
Each  inquirer  will  have  his  own  way 
of  reporting  the  result  of  his  inquiry. 
Christian  testimony  is  not  of  one  un- 
changing sort.  One  Christian  will  re- 
port his  experience  in  highly  intellectual 
phraseology,  as  if  God  had  entered  his 
heart  through  the  shining  chambers  of 
his  mind;  another  will  show  that  he 
has  reached  peace  through  many  a 
stormy  conflict  with  doubt ;  another 
will  speak  the  language  of  music  as 
though  he  had  been  taught  it  in  inter- 
course with  the  angels  ;  another  will 
Rtammer  by  reason  of  sobs  and  tears. 
Yet  the  subject  is  the  same,  the  result 
is  the  same — this  is  the  diversity  that 
is  unity— 


*  Ton  thousand  thouaand  are  their  tongoeHj 
But  all  their  joys  are  one.** 

1.  Some  inquirers  will  see  all  the  hin- 
drances. 2.  All  will  confess  that  there 
is  somethvig  good  in  the  land.  3.  Those 
who  hold  back  by  reason  of  the  difficul- 
ties will  come  to  a  miserable  end.  (a) 
We  don't  escape  by  false  reasoning, 
{b)  We  don't  escape  by  fear. 

Application:  1.  Some  have  shown 
the  spirit  of  Caleb — what  is  your  testi- 
mony ?  2.  Will  any  resolve  now,  in 
Divine  strength,  to  follow  the  Lord 
fully  ] 

Observe  that  it  is  the  spirit  of  Caleb 
which  is  commendedi — Joseph  Farker, 
D,D. 


The  Spies. 
(Verse  32,  and  chap.  xiv.  6,  7.) 


The  land  of  Canaan  is  a  very  excel- 
lent picture  of  religion.  The  children 
of  Israel  must  stand  as  the  representa- 
tives of  the  great  mass  of  mankind. 
The  great  mass  of  mankind  never  try 
fi>r  themselves  what  religion  is ;  they 
neither  search  our  sacred  books,  nor 
taste  and  try  our  religion.  But  this  is 
what  they  do  ;  they  consider  those  who 
make  a  profession  of  religion  as  spies 
who  have  entered  the  laud,  and  they 
look  upon  our  character  and  our  con- 
duct as  the  message  we  bring  back  to 
them.  And  if  they  find  that  our  report 
is  a  gloomy  one  or  an  unholy  one,  they 
turn  aside  and  they  say,  *'  It  is  not  a 
good  land ;  we  will  not  enter  into  it, 
for  its  difficulties  are  great,  but  its  en- 
joyments are  few." 

I.  The  ungodly  world  are  not  to  be 
excused  for  that  instead  of  investigat- 
ing religion  for  themselves,  they 
usually  trust  to  the  representation  of 
others. 

The  worldly  man  looks  at  a  Christian 
to  see  whether  his  religion  be  joyful. 
"  By  this,"  says  he,  '*  shall  I  know 
whether  there  is  that  in  religion  which 
will  make  a  man  glad.  If  I  see  the 
piofessor  of  it  with  a  joyous  counten- 


ance, then  I  will  believe  it  to  be  a  good 
thing."  But  hast  thou  any  right  to 
put  it  to  that  test  ]  Is  not  God  to  be 
counted  true,  even  before  we  have 
proved  Him]  Would  you  not  know 
from  Scripture,  if  you  were  to  take  the 
Bible  and  read  it,  that  everywhere  the 
Christian  is  commanded  to  rejoice,  be- 
cause it  is  comely  for  him  %  Ps;^. 
xxxii.  11  ;  1  Thess.  v.  16  ;  Phil,  iv  4. 
Again,  you  say  you  will  test  the  hoH- 
7iess  of  Christ's  religion  by  the  holiness 
of  Christ's  people.  The  proj  er  test  that 
you  ought  to  use  is  to  try  it  yourselves 
— to  "  taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is 
good."  Your  business  is  yourselves  to 
enter  into  its  valleys  and  pluck  its 
grr.pes  ;  yours'^ives  to  climb  its  hills  and 
see  its  inhabitants.  Inasmuch  as  God 
has  given  you  a  Bible,  He  intended 
you  to  read  it,  and  not  to  be  content 
with  reading  men.  You  have  no  right 
to  j  udge  rel  igion  from  anything  extra  or 
external  from  itself. 

It  will  be  in  vain  for  you  to  say  at 
the  day  of  Judgment,  "Such  and  such 
a.  man  was  inconsistent,  therefore  I 
despised  religion."  In  business,  »fec., 
you  were  independent  enough.  You 
are   asked    to   follow   Christ    Himself. 

241 


CHAP  xin. 


nOMIlKTlC   COMMENTATIY:    NUMBERS, 


[Jntil,  then,  you  can  find  a  flaw  in  His 
cliaractcr,  &  mistake  in  His  conduct, 
you  have  no  right  to  fling  the  incon- 
sistency of  His  followers  in  the  teeth  of 
Christ,  nor  to  turn  from  Him  because 
His  disciples  forsake  Him  and  flee. 
"  Every  man  shall  bear  his  own 
lurdeu." 

II.  Bring  forth  the  bad  spies. 

These  spies  are  to  be  judged,  not  by 
what  they  say,  but  by  what  they  do ; 
for  to  a  worldling,  words  are  nothing — 
acts  are  everything. 

i.  I  produce  a  man  who  brings  up 
an  evil  report  of  the  land,  for  he  is  of 
a  dull  and  heavy  spirit.  If  he  preaches, 
he  takes  this  text — "Through  much 
ti/ouiation  we  must  enter  into  the 
kingdom."  He  never  mentions  God's 
people,  without  calling  them,  "God's 
tried  children."     He  is  always  in  the 

valley,  &c.     See  him  at  home 

Hear  him  pray.  .  .  .  These  men  are 
evil  spies.  .  .  .  Permit  me  to  bear  my 
testimony.  "  Her  ways  are  ways  of 
pleasantness,"  &c.  It  is  a  land  that 
floweth  with  milk  and  honey,  &c. 

2.  The  next  one  makes  very  boastful 
pretensions  to  piety.  Everybody  says 
when  they  see  him  in  his  good  frames 
in  chapel  or  elsewhere,  "  What  a  dear 
good  ma£i.  he  is ! "  Follow  him  to 
Ijusiness.  He  will  not  swear,  but  he 
will  lie.  He  won't  out-and-out  rob,  but 
he  will  cheat.  .  .  .  What  does  the 
world  sa-y  of  religion  when  they  see 
these  people?  They  say  at  once, 
"  Well,  if  this  be  religion,  we  had 
better  have  none  of  it."  ...  .  But 
while  you  have  met  with  hypocrites, 
you  have  met  v  th  men  whom  you 
could  not  doubt.  Do  not  believe  the 
ill  report  of  the  hypocrite  and  the 
'anholy  man. 

3.  The  Christian  man,  ....  there  are 
times  i^hen  his  witness  is  not  consistent. 
AVhen  you  see  an  angry  Christian— and 
such  a  thing  may  be  seen  ;  and  when 
you  meet  with  a  Christian  who  is 
proud— and  such  a  thing  has  been 
known;  when  you  catch  a  Christian 
overtaken  in  a  fjiiilt,  as  you  may  some- 
times do,  then  his  testimony  is  not 
consistent.     He  contradicts  then  what 

242 


he  has  at  other  times  declared  by  his 
acts.  ...  If  sometimes  you  see  a 
Christian  man  betrayed  into  a  hasty  or 
a  wrong  expression,  do  not  set  it  down 
to  our  religion,  set  it  down  to  our  poor 
fallen  humanity. 

III.  Now  we  have  some  good  spies. 

1.  An  aged  Christian.  "  Fifty  and 
six  years  have  I  served  Him,  and  I 
have  never  found  Him  once  unfaithful." 

2.  The  sufferer,  "  He  has  made  my 
bed  in  all  my  sickness ;  He  has  given 
me  joy  in  my  sorrows,"  &o. 

3.  A  Christian  merchant;  he  is 
immersed  in  the  cares  of  this  life,  and 
yet  he  always  finds  time  to  prepare  for 
a  world  that  is  to  come.  Men  said  of 
him  in  the  Exchange  and  in  the 
Market,  "  If  there  is  a  Christian,  it  is 
that  man."  Such  a  man  brings  up  a 
good  report  of  the  land. 

4.  My  sisters,  it  is  possible  for  you,  too, 
to  bring  up  a  good  report.  We  have  know  n 
an  ungodly  husband  converted  by  a 
godly  wife.  When  you  have  done 
what  you  can  for  Christ,  by  holy,  pa- 
tient, quiet  meekness,  you  are  good 
spies  ;  you  have  brought  a  good  report 
of  the  land. 

5.  And  yoUy  servants,  can  do  the  same. 
A  religious  servant  girl  ought  to  be 
the  best  servant  anywhere. 

IV.  The  great  necessity  of  bringing 
out  a  uniformly  good  testimony  con- 
cerning religion. 

1.  Every  unguarded  word  you  use,  every 
inconsistent  act,  puts  a  slur  on  Christ. 
Do  not  suffer  His  escutcheon  to  be 
tarnished ;  do  not  permit  His  banner 
to  be  trampled  in  the  dust. 

2.  If  you  do  wrong,  the  world  urill  be 
quite  sure  to  notice  you.  Remember, 
too,  that  the  world  always  wears  mag- 
nifying glasses  to  look  at  Christians' 
faults.  If  we  have  more  privileges,  and 
more  culture,  and  make  more  profes- 
sion, we  ought  to  live  up  to  them,  and 
the  world  is  quite  right  in  expecting 
us  to  do  so. 

3.  Tf  you  do  not  bring  a  good  testimony 
for  your  religion,  an  evil  testimony  will 
defeat  a  great  deal  of  good.  The  Chris- 
tian may  flow  on  in  a  steady  course  of 
life,  unseen,  unheard  ]  but  you  are  sui'O 


HOMILETIC    COMMErJTAnV:   NUMBER!^. 


CHAP    XIV. 


to  hear  of  hiiL.  if  he  makes  a  fall.     Be 
wdtchfiil,  therefore,  <kc. 

As  for  you  who  fear  not  God,  re- 


member^ if  Christians  do  sin,  that 
shall  aot  be  an  excuse  for  you.—  6'.  //. 
Spurgeon, 


CHAPTER  XIV 
Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. 


Verse  4.  Let  us  mahe  a  captain.  It 
appears  from  Neh.  ix.  17,  that  they 
actually  appointed  another  leader. 

Verse  5.  Fell  on  their  faces^  &c.  In 
solemn  prayer  to  God,  and  in  the  pre- 
sence of  all  the  people,  in  the  hope  of 
changing  their  minds. 

Verse  9.  They  are  bread  for  us  ;  i.e.  ^vre 
can  easily  destroy  them,  and  all  their 
possessions,  and  th^ir  land  with  all  its 
productions  shall  become  ours. 

7%eir  defence  is  departed.  Heb  lit., 
**  their  shadow."  A  very  expressive 
metaphor  for  shelter  and  protection  in 
the  sultry  east.  Comp.  Ps.  xci.  1  j  cxxi. 
6  ;  Isa.  XXX.  2  ;  xxxii.  2  ;  xlix.  2  ;  li.  16. 

Verse  13,  14.  Keil  and  Del.  trans- 
late, "  *  Not  only  have  the  Egyptians 
heard  that  thou  hast  brought  out  this 
people  from  among  them  with  T^y 
might;  they  have  also  told  it  to  the 
inhabitants  of  this  land.  They  (the 
Egyptians  and  other  nations)  have  heard 
that  Thou,  Jehovah,  art  in  the  midst  of 
this  people — that  Thou,  Jehovah,  ap- 
pearest  eye  to  eye,'  <fec.  The  inhabitants 
of  this  land  (verse  1 3)  were  not  merely 
the  Arabians,  but.  according  to  Exod. 
XV.  14,  sqq.,  the  tribes  dwelling  in  and 
around  Arabia,  tho  Philistines,  Edi.- 
mites  Moabites,  and  Canaauites,  to 
whom  *-he  tidings  had  been  brought  of 
the  miraoles  of  God  in  Egypt  and  at 
the  Red  Sea." 

Ver.^e  15.  As  one  r.i  in  ;  equivalent  to 
"  with  a  stroke"  (J'ldg.  vi.   16). 

Verse  18.  Comp.   Exod.  xxxiv.  6,  7. 

Verses  21-23.  Translate,  **But  as 
truly  as  I  live,  and  as  all  the  earth 
shall  be  filled  with  the  glory  of  Jeho- 
vah, all  those  men  ....  shall 
not  see   the  land,"  <kc.     The   Hebrew 

particle    ^^    in    verse   22   (incorrectly 

rendered  **  because*'  in  the  A.V.)  intrn- 
B  2 


duces  the  apodosis  of  the  sentence  and 
the  substance  of  the  oath  ;  and,  accord- 
ing to  the  ordinary  form  of  an  oath, 

the  particle    D^^,  in  the  beginning   of 

verse  23,  merely  signifies  "not." 

Verse  22.  These  ten  times.  Ten  is 
used  here  as  thf  number  of  complete- 
ness (Comp  Gei  xxxi.  7)  They  had 
now  filled  up  thf;  measure  of  their 
iniquities. 

Verse  24.  liaih  flowed  me  fidlv. 
Lit,  "Fulfilled  s.''ter  Me."  He  had 
manifested  unv^avering  fidelity  in  the 
Divine  service.  Caleb  only  is  men- 
tioned here  because  of  the  conspicuous 
part  he  took  in  opposing  the  exagge- 
rated acccunt  of  the  evil  spies,  and  in 
urging  the  people  to  a  true  and  coura- 
geous course  of  conduct.  And  "  this 
first  revelation  oi  God  to  Moses  is  re- 
stricted to  the  maiL.  fact ;  the  particu- 
lars aro  given  afterwards  in  the  sentence 
of  God.  j,s  intended  for  communication 
to  the  peoplt  (verses  26-38)." 

Verse  25.     No^o  the  Amalekitei  and 
the    Canaanifes    dwelt    in    the    valley, 
"  These  words  are  best  und'=<''stood  aa 
the  continuation  of  the  answer  of  God 
to  Moses  :     *  And   now  the  Amalekites 
and  the  Canaauites   are    dwelling    (or 
abiding)  in  the  valley  :  wherefore,  turn 
you,'  &c.  (that  so  ye    ,.-   n)t  smitten 
before  them).     Some  ditFiculty  hasljoen 
occasioned  by  the  fact  that  in  verses 
43-45    these     tribes     are    represented 
rather  as  dwelling   on  the  hill.     The 
Syriac  version  alters  the  passage  before 
us  accordingly  ;  but  such  procedure  is 
unnecessary.     What  was  in  one  respect 
a  valley,  or  rather,  as  the  Hebrew  term 
emeJc  implies,  a  broad  sweep   between 
hills,  might  in  another  respect  be  itself 
a  hill,  as  lying  on  top  of  the  mountain- 
pint  ran.     Such  was  precisclv  the  cas« 

243 


CHAP.  XIV. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


with  the  elevated  plain  on  which  the 
couflict  of  the  disobedient  Israelites 
with  the  Amalekites  and  Canaanites 
eventually  ensued." — Speaker-'s  Comm. 

Verse  27.  "  This  announcement 
commences  in  a  tone  of  anger,  with  an 
aposiopesis,  *  How  long  this  evil  congre- 
gation '  (sc, '  shall  I  forgive  it/  the  sim- 
plest plan  being  to  supply  ^^^?J,  as 
Rosenmiiller  suggests,  from  verse  18) 
*  that  they  murmur  against  me  ? ' " — Keil 
and  Bel. 

Verse  32.  JBut  as  for  you,  your  car- 
cases, &c.  "  Rather,  *  But  your  car- 
cases, even  yours,  shall  fall,'  "  &c. — 
Speaker's  Gomm. 

V erse  3 3.  Your  ch lldren  shall  wa nder, 
(fee.  Margin:  "shall  feed."  Keil  and 
Del :  " '  will  be  pasturing,'  i.e.,  will 
lead  a  restless  shepherd's  life." 

Tour  whoredoms.  Their  many  faith- 
less departures  from  the  Lord. 


Verse   34.     My   breach  of  promise. 
Margin:    "altering   of  Thy   purpose." 

nj^i^JA  from  ^^^^  removal,  alienation. 

T        :  '  '  '  ' 

i.e.,  the  withdrawal  of  oneself  from  a 
person  or  thing,  and  so  metaphor. 
enmity. — Fuerst.  The  word  is  used 
only  in  this  place  and  in  Job  xxxiii.  10. 
Keil  and  Del. :  "  *  My  turning  away 
from  you,'  or  aballenatio.^* 

Verse  45.  Hormah.  Keil  and  Del. 
say  the  word  means,  "  the  ban-place  "  ; 
but  Fuerst :  **  fortress,  mountain  fast- 
ness;  from   Q']«7»    to   t>6  ^igbj   ^^   ^® 

prominent."  The  nam?  is  used  here 
by  anticipation.  Its  earlier  name  was 
Zephath  (Judg.  i.  17).  The  circum- 
stances which  led  to  the  change  of  the 
name  are  given  in  chap.  xxi.  1-3.  It 
was  a  royal  city  of  a  Canaanitish  tribe 
on  the  southern  frontier  of  Palestine. 
Its  precise  situation  is  uncertain^ 


The  Rebeluon  op  Israel  upon  receiving  the  Report  op  THij.  Spies. 

(Verses  1-5.) 


In  this  chapter  we  have  the  conse- 
quences of  the  evil  report  which  the 
ten  unbelieving  explorers  gave  to  the 
people ;  and  in  the  section  now  before 
us  we  see  its  immediate  effect  upon 
the  people. 

I.  Grievous  mental  distress. 

"  And  all  the  congregation  lifted  up 
their  voice,  and  cried  ;  and  the  people 
wept  that  night." 

1.  The  distress  was  general — almost 
universal.  "  All  the  congregation" 
were  disheartened  by  the  gloomy  re- 
port which  they  had  heard.  The  whole 
nation,  with  very  few  and  distinguished 
( xceptions,  was  stricken  with  dismay 
and  grief,  and  spent  the  night  in 
lamentation  and  weeping. 

2.  The  distress  was  unrestrained  in  its 
expression.  They  "lifted  up  their 
voice,  and  cried."  "  The  word  cry- 
ing," says  Babington,  *'  noteth  out  the 
manner  of  their  weeping,  even  with 
vociferation  or  roaring,  howling  ana 
ytlling,  that  is,  in  most  impatient  and 
grievous  manner."   In  the  most  childish 

244 


and  pusillanimous  manner  they  utterly 
give  way  to  ihep'  reelings,     (a) 

3.  The  distress  was  sinful.  It  sprang 
from  their  unbelief  of  God's  assurances 
to  them.  The  reports  of  the  spies 
were  opposed  to  the  word  of  God  to 
them,  yet  they  receive  those  reports 
rather  than  that  word.  They  even 
accept  the  cowardly  opinions  of  the 
faithless  spies  rather  than  the  inspiring 
declarations  of  the  Lord  God.  Their 
crie'^  and  tears  are  the  expression  of 
their  cowardly  fears  ;  and  their  cowardly 
fears  arose  from  their  unbelief  towards 
God.  Their  cries  and  tears  proclaim 
their  sin  and  shame. 

II.  Unreasonable  and  unjust  mur- 
muring. 

"And  all  the  children  of  Israel  mur- 
mured aL,^ainst  Moses  and  against 
Aaron,"  ^g.  (ver.  2).  Their  murmuring 
was — 

1.  Unreasonable^  They  cry  out  be- 
cause they  dread  death  by  the  sword  of 
t'e  Canaanites,  and  yet  they  wish  that 
tiiey  had  died  in  Egypt  or  in  the  wilder- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NUMBFJi^, 


CHAP.   XIV. 


ness.  "Surely  M  had  been  at  'ejist  as 
eligible  to  have  fallen, soldier-like,  -iword 
in  hand,  in  attempting  to  conquer 
Ciinaan,  as  to  have  died  slaves  in  Egypt, 
or  by  famine  or  pestilence  in  the  wil- 
derness !  "  **  They  wish  to  die,  for  fear 
of  dying."  There  is  neither  reason  nor 
nobility  in  their  conduct.   (6) 

2.  UnjuU.  (1)  To  Moses  and  Aaron, 
who  had  dared  and  done  and  borne  so 
much  for  them.  (2)  Their  murmur- 
ing was  still  more  unjust  to  God, 
who  had  done  and  was  still  doing 
such  great  and  gracious  things  for 
them.  All  His  mercies  are  forgotten, 
all  His  glorious  purposes  towards  them 
disregarded,  all  His  precious  promises 
disbelieved,  and  base  and  bitter  mur- 
muring openly  indulged  in,  because 
ten  cowards  have  maujnified  the  dif- 
Acuities  in  the  way  of  their  enter- 
prise, fc) 

HE.  Shocking  blasphemy. 

"And  wherefore  hath  the  Lord 
brought  us  unto  this  land,  to  fall  by  the 
sword,  that  our  wives  and  our  children 
should  be  a  preyl"  As  Matthew  Henry 
expresses  it,  "  Here  is  a  most  wicked 
blasphemous  reflection  upon  God  Him- 
self, as  if  He  had  brouoht  them  hither 
on  purpose  that  they  miyht  fall  by  the 
sword,  and  that  their  wives  and  children, 
those  poor  innocents,  should  be  a  prey. 
Thus  do  they  in  eftoct  charge  that  God, 
who  is  Love  itself,  with  the  worst  of 
malice,  and  eternal  Truth  with  the 
basest  hypocrisy,  suggesting  that  all  the 
kind  things  He  had  said  to  them,  and 
done  for  them,  hitherto,  were  intended 
only  to  decoy  them  into  a  snare,  and  to 
cover  a  secret  desi^jfu  carried  on  all  alono' 
to  ruin  them.  Daring  impudence ! 
But  what  will  not  that  tongue  speak 
against  Heaven  that  is  set  on  fire  of 
hell  ]"     Their  blasphemy  Involved — 

1.  Unhelief  of  the  Divine  Word.  It 
expresses  the  complete  rejection  of  God's 
dechired  purposes  concerning  them 
and  His  promises  to  them,  and  the  un- 
qualified acceptance  of  the  worst  sug- 
gestions of  the  faithless  explorers. 

2,  Base  ingratitude  to  the  Divine 
Being,  To  all  His  great  and  nudes  rved 
kindness    to    them,    and    for    uU    His 


mighty  and  merciful  deeds  on  their  be- 
half, this  is  their  response,  "  Wherefoio 
hath  the  Lord  brought  us  unto  this 
land  1 "  tfec.  How  applicable  to  them 
are  the  words  of  Kowe — 

«  To  break  thy  faith. 
And  turn  a  rebel  to  so  good  a  master, 
Is  an  ingratitude  unnaatched  on  earth. 
The  first  revolting  angel's  pride  could  only 
Do  more  than  thou  hast  done ;  thou  copieat 

well, 
And  keep'st  the  black  original  in  view  I "  (</) 

IV.  Foolish  and    wicked  rebellion, 
"Were  it  not  better  for  us  to  return 

into   Egypt  1     And    they  said    one    to 
another  :  Let  us  make  a  captain,  and 
lei  us  return  into  Egypt." 
Consider  : 

1.  The  folly  of  thin  rehellion.  (1)  How- 
could  they  get  back  into  Egypt  \  Could 
they  expect  that  the  Lord  would  lead 
them,  defend  them,  and  provide  for 
them  in  a  journey  which  was  directly 
and  entirely  opposed  to  His  will?  Yet 
without  this,  how  was  it  possible  for 
them  to  **  return  into  Egypt"  1  (2)  If 
they  could  have  returned  into  Egypt, 
what  kind  of  reception  were  they  likely 
to  meet  with  there  ]  Their  folly  was 
utter  and  egregious. 

2.  The  baseness  of  this  rehellion.  To 
return  into  Egypt  was  to  go  back  into 
bondage.  If  the  nobler  attributes  of 
manhood  had  not  been  crushed  out  of 
them  by  their  former  slavery,  they 
would  have  preferred  to  die  a  thousand 
deaths  fighting  for  the  mauitenance  of 
their  freedom  than  to  be  again  sub- 
jected to  the  deep  degradation  of  serf- 
dom. But  though  free  in  body,  they 
were,  alas !  mean  and  cowardly  slaves 
in  spirit. 

3.  The  wickedness  of  this  rehellion. 
Rebellion  against  an  oppressive  and 
cruel  despotism  is  justifiable  under 
certain  circumstances  ;  but  they  were 
under  a  most  righteous  and  beneficent 
government.  Their  rebellion  was  not 
ao^ainst  even  an  excellent  human  tiovern- 
ment :  blacker  than  this  was  their  guilt ; 
for  they  rebelled  against  the  govern- 
ment of  the  Lord  their  God. 

V.  The  noble  conduct  of  Moses  and 
Aaron  in  these  painful  circumstauccjs. 

24.^ 


CHAP.  XIV, 


UOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  NUMBERS. 


Consider : 

1.  Their  exhortation  to  the  people. 
From  the  narrative  of  the  rebellion 
which  Moses  gave  to  the  people  more 
than  thirty-eight  yearo  afterward*^,  i*- 
appears  that  he  endc^.voured  to  ciil'u 
and  encourage  the  people  (Deut.  i. 
29-31).  This  appeal  to  them  was  (1) 
Manly.  "  Dread  not,  neither  be  airaid 
of  them."  (2)  Tn.piring.  "The  Lord 
your  God  which  goeth  before  you,  He 
shall  fight  for  you."  (3)  Religiou6.  He 
bases  his  assurance  of  Divine  aid  on 
the  wondrous  and  glorious  works  which 
God  had  done  for  them,  "According 
to  all  that  He  did  for  you  in  Egypt 
before  your  eyes,  and  in  the  wilderness," 
&c.  But  he  appe*^.!':  to  them  in  vain. 
"  Wise  and  true,"  says  Babington,  "  was 
that  inscription  in  Hato  his  seal, 
*  Facilius est  movere  quieta, quam qu'ietare 
mota.^ " 

2.  T/ieir  prayer    to    Ghd.      "Then 


Moses  and  Aaron  fell  on  their  faces  be- 
fore all  the  assembly  of  the  congregation 
of  the  children  of  Israel."  (1)  They 
thus  manifest  their  deep  distress  awl 
shame  because  of  the  rebellion  of  the 
p(-oj/lc\  (2)  By  thus  publicly  prostrat- 
ing tjjemyuives  they  probably  hoped  to 
move  the  people  for  good.  (3)  They 
prayed  for  the  interposition  of  God. 
*'  In  such  distress,  nothing  remained  but 
to  pour  out  their  desires  before  God." 
When  human  strength  and  wisdom  are 
of  no  avail ;  when  all  other  resources 
fail,  and  every  other  hope  expiroo,  the 
good  man  still  hopes  in  God,  and  in 
prayer  to  Him  has  an  unfailing  re- 
source. 


Note. — In  preaching  from  this  portion  of 
the  hiatory,  it  may  perhaps  be  well  to  take  the 
noble  conduct  of  Moses  and  Aaron  in  the  rebel- 
I'oa  oj  the  people^  as  the  subject  of  a  separate 
discourse  ;  taking  Deut.  i.  29-dl|  and  ver.  6  of 
this  chap,  as  the  text. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(•)  Shallow  Judges  of  human  nature  are 
they  who  think  that  tears  in  themselves  ever 
misbecome  a  man.  Sooner  mayest  thou  trust 
thy  purse  to  a  professional  pickpocket  than 
give  loyal  friendship  to  a  man  who  boasts  of 
eyes  to  which  the  heart  never  mounts  in  dew. 
Only  when  man  weeps  he  should  be  alone, — 
not  because  tears  are  weak,  but  because  they 
should  be  sacred.  Tears  are  akin  to  prayers. 
Pharisees  parade  prayers;  impostors  parade 
tears. — Lord  Lyttoa, 

Tears  are  not  always  fruitful  ;  their  hot  drops 
Sometimes  but  scorch  the  cheek  and  dim 
the  eye  j 
Despairing  murmurs  over  blackened  hopes, 
Not  the  meek  spirit's  calm  and  chastened 
ery. 

Ob  !  better  not  to  grieve  than  waste  our  woe, 
To  fling  away  thespiiit's  finest  gold, 

To  lo8o,  not  gain,  by  sorrow  j  to  overflow 
The   sacred  channels  which  true  sadness 
hold. 

Weep  not  too  fondly,  lest  the  cherished  grief 
Should  into  vain,  self-pitying  weaknesR  turn ; 

Weep  not  too  long,  but  seek  Divine  reli.'f ; 
Weep   not  too  fiercely,  Ust  the  fiereoness 
burn. 

246 


It  is  not  tears  but  teaching  we  should  seek ; 

The  tears  we  need  are  genial  a?  the  shower; 
They  mould  the  being  while  they  st!.in  the 
cheek, 
Freshening  the  spirit  into  life  and  power. 

H.  Bonar,  D  D. 

(6)  When  these  ten  spies  broUg,'ht  back  the 
disastrous  account,  it  spread  d-  pression  amid 
the  sensitive  crowd.  And  it  is  singular  enough, 
that  if  each  individual  of  a  crowd  were  alone, 
he  would  think  rationally,  weijh  fairly,  and 
act  with  some  common  sense.  But  of  all  things 
upon  earth,  a  crowd,  when  onceciLcited,  seems 
to  bficome  the  most  tumulcuous,  and  to  defy 
every  prescription  of  precedent  and  common 
sense.  The  excitement  runs  thiough  the 
ranks,  accumulating  at  each  >t6p  till  the  whole 
presents  one  of  those  anomalous  spectacles  that 
make  us  som'^times  wonder  at  the  insanity  and 
infatuation  of  mankind.  Wo  have  in  ihia 
chapter  a  specimen  of  a  genuine  mob,  fright- 
ened  by  false  fears,  acting  with  all  that  indiM- 
cretioD,  imprudence,  inconsistency,  by  wbioh 
mobs,  in  most  countries  and  in  most  ages, 
hare  been  branded  or  characterised.  When 
they  heard  the  news,  they  forgot  that  God 
waa  with  His  people;  they  forgot  that  His 
promises  were  committed  to  their  success,  aud 
sinking  into  the  very  depths  of  despair  they 
"lifted  up  their  Toice  and    wept"  a    whole 


HOMTLETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  XIV. 


night;  and  gave  utterance  to  their  tumul- 
tuous feelings  in  language  the  most  disgrrace- 
ful  to  them  as  men,  the  most  discrpditable  to 
th' m  as  professing  Christians. — John  Cutii' 
ttiing,  D.D, 

(c)  Consider  that  murmuring  is  a  mercy- 
emb'ttering  sin,  a  mercy-souring  sin.  As  the 
sweetest  thing*?  put  into  a  sour  veasel  become 
sour,  or  put  into  a  bitter  vessel  bitter;  so 
murmuring  puts  gall  and  wormwood  into 
every  cup  of  m'^rcy  that  God  gives  into  our 
hands.  The  murmurer  writes  •'  Marah,"  th^t 
is  bitterness,  upon  all  his  mercies ;  and  he 
n-ads  and  tastes  bitterness  in  them  all.  Aa 
"  to   the  hungry  aoul   every  bitter   thing  ia 


/ 


Bweet,**  80  to  the  murmuring  soul  every  sweet 
thinir  is  bitter. — Brooks. 

(jd)   Blow,  blow,  thou  winter  wind, 
Thou  art  not  so  unkind 

As  man's  ingratitude ; 
Thy  tooth  is  not  po  keen, 
Because  thou  art  not  seen. 
Although  thy  breath  be  rndsw 

Freeze,  freeze,  thou  bitter  sky, 
Thou  dost  not  bite  so  nigh 

As  benefits  forgot : 
Though  thou  the  waters  warp, 
Thy  sting  is  not  so  sharp 

As  friend  rem'nnber'd  not. 
Shakespeare.    '*  As  you  Like  iC*    ii.  7. 


Joshua  and  Caleb  :   A  noble  Effort  to  Arrest  a  Nation's  Rebellion. 


(Verses  6-10.) 


I.  Joshua  and  Caleb  were  deeply 
grieved  by  reason  of  the  rebellion  of 
the  nation. 

*'  And  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  and 
Caleb  the  son  of  Jephunneh,  of  them 
that  searched  the  land,  rent  their 
clothes."  They  did  this  as  a  sign  of 
their  deep  distress  at  the  rebeUious 
attitude  of  the  people.  The  sins  of 
men  are  ever  a  cause  of  deep  grief  to 
lioly  souls  They  who  are  faithful  can- 
nut  but  mourn  over  the  unfaithfulness 
of  others  when  they  see  it.  "  Rivers 
of  waters,"  said  the  Psalmist,  "  run 
down  mine  eyes,  because  they  keep  not 
Thy  law."  "  1  beheld  the  transgressors, 
and  was  grieved,  because,"  ttc.  And 
Jeremiah  cried,  "  Oh  that  my  head 
were  waters,  and  mine  eyes  a  fountain 
of  tears,"  <fec. 

II.  Joshua  and  Caleb  nobly  endea- 
voured to  arrest  the  rebellion  of  the 
nati'^a 

**  They  spake  unto  all  the  company 
of  the  children  of  Israel,  saying,"  &c. 
(verses  7-9).     In  this  address — 

1 .  They  re  assert  the  excellence  of  the 
land.  *'  The  land,  which  we  passed 
through  to  search  it,  is  an  exceeding 
good  land,  ...  a  land  which  floweth 
with  milk  and  honey"  (see  notes  on 
chap.  xiii.  23,  24). 

2.  Thej/  declare  the  attainahleness  of 
the  land.  "  If  the  Lord  delight  in  u:<, 
then   He  will  bring  us  into  this  laud, 


and  give  it  us.**  (1)  It  was  attainable 
as  a  Divine  gift.  "  He  will  give  it  us." 
God  had  repeatedly  promised  to  leal 
them  in  and  to  give  them  possession  of 
the  laud.  See  Gen.  xvii.  8  ;  xxviii.  4  ; 
Exod.  iii.  8  ;  vi.  4,  8 ;  and  comp.  Psa. 
xliv.  3.  (2)  This  gift  would  certainly 
be  bestowed  unless  they  alienated  from. 
them  the  Divine  favour.  "  If  the  Lord 
delight  in  us,"  &c.  If  they  did  not  by 
their  sin  cause  Him  to  withdraw  His 
good  pleasure  from  them  the  land 
would  certainly  be  theirs. 

3.  They  exhort  the  people  not  to  violate 
the  conditions  of  its  attainment,  ( L)  By 
rebelling  against  the  Lord.  *  Only 
rebel  not  ye  against  the  Lord."  Rebel- 
lion against  God  deprives  man  of  every 
worthy  spiiHual  inheritance,  excludes 
him  from  ■  very  heaven  o^  the  soul. 
(2)  By  dreading  the  people  of  t'iC 
land.  **  Neithev  fear  ye  the  people  of 
the  land ;  for  they  are  bread  for  us." 
&c.  To  dread  the  people  of  the  land 
was  to  dishonour  God  by  distrusting 
Him.  He  was  not  with  the  people  of 
the  land.  "  Their  shadow  is  departed 
from  them."  When  God  gives  up  a 
people,  as  He  had  given  up  the  idol- 
atrous and  corrupt  Canaanites,  their 
defence  is  gone.  When  a  people  have 
sunk  so  deeply  in  sin  as  to  compel  God 
to  abandon  them,  the  strongest  walls 
are  but  a  miserable  and  worthless  de- 
fence to  them.      But  the  Lord  was  with 

247 


CHAP.  XIV. 


nOMlLf'.TIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


T^rgel.  "The  Lord  is  with  us:  fear 
them  not."  "  If  God  be  for  us,  ''\o 
can  be  against  us  1 "  While  God  is 
■with  us,  we  may  confidently  say,  even 
in  the  presence  of  the  most  numerous 
and  mighty  foes,  "  Fear  not ;  for  they 
that  be  with  us  are  more  than  they 
that  be  with  tliem."  To  dread  our 
enemies  is  to  distrust,  and,  by  distrust- 
injj;,  to  dishonour  God.  So  Joshua  and 
Caleb  wisely  and  bravely  tried  to  crush 
the  rebellion,  and  to  awaken  a  worthy 
spirit  in  the  people.  But  their  excel- 
lent effort  was  in  vain.  The  excited 
multitude  wa.s  utterly  impervious  to 
reason.  Still,  honour  to  Joshua  and 
Caleb  for  their  brave  effort !  (a) 

III.  Joshua  ar.d  Caleb  were  in 
danger  hy  reason  oi  their  effort  to 
arrest  the  rebellion  of  the  nation. 

•'All  thp  congregation  bade  stone 
them  w'tb  stones."     See  here — 

1  Tne  ^actios  of  an  excited  moh  when 
defeated  ^?.,  a  ^gument.  This  mad  multi- 
tude could  rot  gainsay  or  controvert 
the  statement  of  Joshua  and  Caleb; 
but  having  oi  its  side  eome  six  hundred 
thousand  men  <tnd  on  the  other  side 
only  four  (inciudmg  Moses  and  Aaron), 
it  was  an  eas}  ''  hin^  to  propose  co  stone 
them ;  ard  as  cowardly  as  it  was  easy. 
That  must  ^e  a  Dad  cause  that  needs 
to  be  si.pportfcQ  by  persecution.  Reasons 
musb  bw  very  scarce  whpu  men  resort 
to  stoiies. 

£.  The  fully  of  an  excited  moh.  This 
proposal  to  dtone  Joshua  and  Caleb  was 
quite  insane.  (1)  Stoning  would  not 
disprove  the  testimony,  or  take  away 
the  wisdom  from  the  counsel  of  the  two 
true  and  bravo  explorers.  (2)  Stoning 
would  involve  the  nation  in  deeper 
jruilt  and  diugrace.  Utterly  and  some- 
times? outrt^geously  unreasonable  is  an 


excited  multitude,  and  ready  to  pro- 
pose and  CO  ^^rform  tMngs  not  only 
extremely  foolish  but  terribly  wicked, 
as  in  this  case. 

3.  The  perils  of  faithfulness.  Because 
of  their  loyalty  to  truth  and  duty 
Joshua  and  Caleb  are  in  danojer  of  be- 
ing  stoned  to  death.  It  has  always 
been  a  perilous  thing  for  a  man  to  bear 
witness  to  an  unpopular  truth,  or  to 
advocate  an  unpopular  cause,  or  to 
oppose  a  popular  movement.  He  who 
would  do  any  of  these  things  must  not 
count  it  a  strange  thing  if  he  is  reviled, 
slandered,  and  sorely  persecuted.  But, 
rightly  regarded,  it  is  unspeakably  more 
perilous  if  man  from  fear,  or  any  other 
motive,  prove  unfaithful  to  truth  and 
recreant  to  duty.  A  destiny  of  eternal 
shame  awaits  such. 

**They  are  slaves  who  will  not  choose 
Hatred,  scoffing,  and  abuse, 
Bather  than  in  silence  shrink 
From  the  truth  they  need-?  munt  think  ; 
They  are  slaves  who  dare  not  bj 
In  the  right  with  two  or  three."     (6) 

IV.  Joshua  and  Caleb  rescued  from 
danger  by  the  interposition  of  G-od, 

"  And  the  glory  of  the  Lord  appeared 
in  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation 
beiore  all  the  children  of  Israel."  Keil 
and  Del.:  *' Jehovah  interposed  with 
His  judgment,  .  .  .  the  majesty  of 
God  flashed  out  before  the  eyes  of  the 
people  ill  a  light  which  suddenly  burst 
forth  from  the  tabernacle  (see  Exod. 
xvi.  10)."  A  revelation  like  thisvvould 
strike  that  cowardly  host  with  instant 
confusion  and  alarm.  "  Those  who 
faithfully  expose  themselves  for  God," 
says  M.  Henry,  **  ar?  sure  to  be  taken 
unW  His  special  protection,  and  shall 
be  hi<''den  from  th^  rage  of  men,  either 
under  iiciiven  '^r  '<i  heaven." 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  On  the  whole,  honour  to  small  minori- 
t'e",  when  they  are  genuine  ones.  S  vere  is 
tbeir  battle  sometimf^s,  but  it  is  victorious 
always  like  that  of  gods.  Taocred  of  Haute- 
ville's  sons,  some  eight  centuries  ago,  coi- 
qnered  all  Italy  ;  bound  it  up  into  orgauic 
masses,  of  vital  order  after  a  sort;  foucded 
thrones   and     principalities    upon    the    same 

248 


which  have  not  yet  enti:"=<]y  ''ani*»he(5 — which, 
th  1  last  dying  wrecks  of  ^hich,  still  wait  for 
some  worthier  successor  ic  would  appear. 
The  Tancred  Normans  were  some  Four 
Thousand  strong  ;  the  Italy  they  conquered 
in  open  fight,  and  bound  up  into  ma'^s^s  at 
their  ordering  will,  might  count  Eight 
Millions,  all  as  large  of  bone,  as  eupeptic  and 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  XIV. 


black  whiskered  as  they.  How  came  the 
small  minority  of  Normans  to  prevail  in  this 
80  hopeloss-looking  debate?  Intrinsically, 
doubt  it  not,  because  they  were  in  the  right ; 
because  in  ..dim,  instinctive,  but  most  genuine 
manner,  they  were  doing  the  commandment 
of  Heaven,  and  so  Heaven  had  decided  that 
they  were  to  prevail.  But  extrinsically  also, 
I  can  see,  it  was  because  the  Normans  were 
not  afraid  to  have  their  skins  scratched  ;  and 
were  prepared  to  die  in  their  quarrel  where 
needful.  One  man  of  that  humour  among 
a  thousand  of  the  other,  consider  it!  Let  the 
small  minority,  backed  by  the  whole  Universe, 
and  looked  on  by  such  a  cloud  of  invisible 
witnesses,  fall  into  no  despair. — Thos.  Garlyh. 
(p)  An  English  oJECcer,  Oolocel  Wheeler, 
usrtd  to  preach  in  the  bazaar  of  the  great  city 
of  Delhi.  A  Mohammedan,  Wilayat  Ali,  was 
persuaded  to  give  up  tne  false  prophet,  and 
to  believe  in  the  true  Saviour.  He  was 
baptised,  and,  in  spite  of  the  sufferings  he 
had  to  endure  in  consequence,  became  a 
preacher  in  the  bazaars.  At  last  he  came  to 
live  at  Dolhi,  where  he  often  preached,  and 
thousands  6ocked  to  hear  him.  A  prreat 
prince,  Mirza  Hajee,  need  to  creep  like  Nico- 
demuSjin  thedark evenings, to  Wilayat's  house, 
to  hear  in  secret  about  Jesus.  One  Monday 
morninsr  a  friend  rushed  into  the  house,  cry- 
ing *'The  sepoys  1  the  sepoys!  They  are 
murdering  the  Christians!"  Wilayat  called 
Fatima,  his  wife,  and  his  seven  children 
around  him,  and  prayed,  '*  O  Lord,  we  have 
fallen  into  the  fiery  trial  I  Oh,  help  us  to  con- 
fess our  dear  Lord,  that  if  we  die  we  may  ob- 
tain a  crown  of  glory."  He  then  kissed  his 
wife  and  children,  and  said,  "  Whatever  comes, 
don't  deny  Christ.  If  you  confess  Him,  you 
will  have  a  crown  of  glory."  His  wife  cry- 
ing bitterly,  he  said  all  he  could  to  comfort 
her.  "Oh,  remember,  my  dear  wife,  if  you 
die  you  will  go  to  Jesus,  and  if  you  live  Jesua 
will  be  with  you.  If  any  of  the  missionaries 
are  alive,  they  will  take  care  of  you  after  my 
deith;  but  if  the  missionaries  should  all  die, 
Christ  lives  for  ever.  Even  if  the  children 
are  killed  before  your  eyes,  do  not  deny 
Christ."  While  Wilayat  was  yet  speaking,  a 
number  of  sepoys  on  hor.-»eback  rode  up  to 
his  house,  and  knowing  him  to  be  a  Christian, 
said,  "  Repeat  the  Motiammedan  oreed,  or  we 


will  shoot  yon.**  But  he  wonld  not  deny  hia 
Lord.  ''I -^11  ns  what  yi«  i>r#,*'  said  one. 
*'Iam  a  Ci.iistian,  and  a  OLi:&Li<tn  I  will  live 
and  die."  Thoy  dragged  him  along  the  ground, 
beating  him  abcat  the  head  and  face  with 
their  shoas.  Not  being  soldiers,  they  had  no 
swords,  "Now  preach  Christ  to  .s,"  some 
cried  out  in  mocking  tones.  Others  said, 
"  Turn  to  Mohammed,  and  we  will  let  you  go." 
**  No,  I  never,  never  will  I  "the  faithful  martyr 
cried ;  "  my  Saviour  took  up  His  cross  and  went 
to  God,  and  I  will  lay  down  my  life  and  go  to 
Him."  The  scorching  rays  of  the  sun  were 
beating  on  the  poor  sufferer's  head.  With  a 
laugh  one  of  the  wretches  exclaimed,  "  I 
suppose  you  would  like  some  water. "  "  I  do 
not  want  water,"  replied  the  martyr.  "  When 
my  Saviour  was  dying.  He  had  nothing  but 
vinegar  mingled  with  gall.  But  do  not  keep 
me  in  this  pain.  If  you  mean  to  kill  me,  do 
so  at  once."  Another  sepoy  coming  up  lifted 
his  sword,  the  martyr  called  aloud,  *•  Jesus 
receive  my  spirit!  "  and  with  one  Jtroke  his 
head  was  nearly  cut  off.  Fatima,  standing 
under  a  tree,  beheld  the  stroke  ;  she  shrieked 
with  agony,  and  ran  back  to  her  house.  But 
she  found  it  on  fire  and  surrounded  by  people 
who  were  plundering  it.  Then  she  fled  to 
Prince  Mirza  Hajee's  house,  where  she  dis- 
covered her  fatherless  children.  At  the  end 
of  three  days  Mirzi  Hajoe  came  to  Fatima,  and 
said,  ''I  dare  not  keep  you  any  longer,  but  if 
you  will  become  a  MoLiammedan,  you  will  be 
safe,  and  I  will  give  you  a  house,  and  three 
pounds  a  month  for  your  support."  B  it 
Fatima  would  not  give  up  her  Saviour.  No 
one  attempted  to  kill  her,  for  very  few  knew 
she  was  a  Christian.  After  ten  days  she 
escaped  with  her  children  out  of  the  tovvn  of 
Delhi;  and  went  to  a  village  forty  miles  off. 
After  three  months,  hearing  that  the  Engli^^h 
had  taken  Delhi,  she  returned  thither.  But 
soon  her  little  baby  died.  Fdtima  wept  much. 
She  now  b^gan  to  inquire  about  the  mission- 
aries, but  found  they  had  all  been  killed. 
But  remembering  the  missionaries  at  Agra, 
her  native  town,  she  sent  to  one  of  them. 
What  was  her  joy  when  an  answer  arrived, 
inviting  her  to  go  to  Agra !  She  cried  for 
joy,  thanked  Q  )d,  and  went  to  her  native 
city  with  all  her  surviving  children, — **  The 
Sunday  School  Teacher.^* 


Joshua  and  Caleb's  Encouraging  Declaration. 


(Verse  8.) 


Let  us  lose  sight  of  the  Israelites, 
and  direct  our  thoughts  to  the  univer- 
sal family  of  God  ;  and  look  beyond 
Canaan  to  the  heavenly  land.  Our 
text  contains, — 

I.  A  Supposition. 

"  If  the  Lord  delight  in  us."     Prov. 


viii.  30.  God  delights  in  His  Son,  <fec. 
He  delights  in  His  holy  angels,  ckc. 
But  have  we  reason  to  suppose  that  He 
delii>;hts  in  His  saints  % 

1.  We  Ttiight  conclude ^  indeed,  thai  He 
could  not  delight  in  them,  when  we  reflect, 
(1)   On  their  nothingness   and  vanity 

^49 


CHAP.  XIV, 


nOMILETlC    COMMBNTAIIY:    NUMBERS, 


"  Mm  at  his  best  estate,"  Szc.  (2)  On 
their  guilt  and  rebellion.  Not  one  but 
is  M  sinner.  (3)  On  their  pollution  and 
want  of  conformity  to  His  likeness. 
(i)  And  more  especially  when  we  reflect 
on  His  greatness,  independence  and 
purity. 

£.  B%',t  there  are  the  most  satisfactory 
evidences  that  He  does  delight  in  His 
people.  (1)  Observe  the  names  by 
which  He  distinguishes  them.  He  calls 
them  His  "jewels" — "inheritance" — 
*'  treasure  " — **  diadem" — "  crown"  and 
"  portion."  See  the  very  term  in  the 
text.  And  Prov.  xi.  20.  (2)  Observe 
the  declarations  He  has  made  respecting 
them.  "  He  that  toucheth  you,  touch- 
eth  the  apple  of  Mine  eye."  He  has 
engaged  His  constant  presence — His 
unremitting  c*Are — His  ceaseless  good- 
ness— His  tender  mercy — His  gracious 
interpositions — His  richest  gifts — His 
greatest  blessings.  (3)  Observe  what 
He  has  done  for  them.  Favoured  them 
— sustained  them — redeemed  them — 
given  His  Son — Spirit — promises.  (4) 
What  He  has  provided  for  them.  All 
needful  grace.  "  The  Lord  God  is  a 
sun,"  &c.  "  My  God  shall  supply,"  &c. 
"  Eye  hath  not  seen,"  &c.  (5)  Eternal 
life  and  unceasing  glory. 


"  His  saints  are  precious  in  His  sight, 
He  views  His  children  with  deligh^** 

II.  An  inference. 

"  Then  He  will  bring  us  into  this 
laud,"  &c.     Observe  here, — 

1.  The  land  specified.  It  is  "the 
land  afar  off."  The  good  land.  The 
heavenly  Canaan.  The  region  of  im- 
mortality. We  shall  not  live  here 
always.     Need  this  rest,  &c. 

"  There  is  a  land  of  pure  delight,"  &c. 

2.  This  land  is  God's  gift.  Not  the 
result  of  merit — free  gift  of  God.  It  is 
given  in  promise  — given  in  Christ. 
Purchased  inheritance. 

3.  To  this  land  God  must  bring  His 
saints.  Difficulties,  enemies,  and  dan- 
gers intervene.  He  will  guide  to  it. 
Keep — safely  conduct,  and  at  lengtli 
put  people  into  it,  as  He  did  Israel. 
"  Fear  not,  little  flock,"  &c.  "  Let  not 
your  hearts  be  troubled,"  &c.  Rev.  ii. 
10,  26  ;  iii.  5,  12.  0,  yes;  the  infer- 
ence is  satisfactory,  and  most  con- 
clusive.    Let, — 

1.  Christians  expect  it,  and  live  in 
reference  to  it. 

2.  Invite  others  to  go  with  you  to  the 
better  land. — Jabez  Burns j  D,D, 


The  Divine  Declaration  op  Judgment  because  op  the  Rebellion  of 

Israel. 


{Verses  11,12.) 


In  the  eleventh  verse  the  Lord  re- 
monstrates with  Moses  on  the  sin  of 
the  rebellious  people,  and  in  the  twelfth 
He  announces  His  judgment  because  of 
their  sin.     Let  us  notice  : — 

I.  The  Divine  view  of  Israel's  sin. 

"  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  How 
long  will  this  people  provoke  Me  % "  &c. 
(ver.  11).  This  remonstrance  sets 
forth— 

1.  The  nature  of  their  sin.  They  dis- 
trusted God.  The  very  root  of  their 
rebellion  was  their  unbelief  "How 
long  will  it  be  ere  they  believe  Mel" 
They  did  not  believe  His  promises  to 
250 


them,  or  His  power  to  fulfil  His  word. 
They  distrusted  both  His  truth  and  Hia 
strength.  (I)  Unbelief  is  a  terribly 
prolific  sin  :  it  gives  birth  to  many  other 
sins.  (2)  Unbelief  is  a  terribly  fatd 
sin  :  it  involves  the  soul  in  condemna- 
tion and  death  (John  iii.  18,  36). 

2.  The  reproach  which  their  sin  cast  upon 
God.  "  The  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  How 
long  will  this  people  provoke  Me  1 " 
"  Provoke  "  is  not  a  good  rendering  of 

V^? ;  to  scorn,  to  despise,  to  contemn, 

to  reject,  would  better  express  the  mean- 
ing  of  the  word  (See  Fuerst's  Lex,), 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  XIV. 


Kell  and  Del.  clearly  and  truly  express 
the  meaning  of  the  interrogation  :  "  Je- 
hovah resented  the  conduct  of  the  peo- 
ple as  base  contempt  of  His  Deity,  and 
as  utter  mistrust  of  Him,  notwithstand- 
ing all  the  signs  which  He  had  wrought 
in  the  midst  of  the  nation."  Unbe- 
lief is  an  insult  to  God.  "  He  that 
belie veth  not  God  hath  made  Him  a 
liar."    (a) 

3.  The  long  continuance  of  thdr  sin. 
"  How  long  will  this  people  despise 
Mel  and  how  long  will  it  be  ere  they 
believe  Me?"  Protracted,  indeed,  must 
have  been  their  unbelief,  when  the  in- 
finitely Patient  One  cries  out  concerning 
it,  "  How  long  ] "  God  notes  how  long 
we  continue  in  evil.  Solemn  reflection 
this.  He  has  marked  some  of  you  per 
sisting  in  evil  through  many  years  ;  and 
He  cries  concerning  you,  "  How  long]  " 
Let  the  young  see  to  it  that  the  long- 
sutfering  God  shall  not  have  to  make 
such  an  inquiry  concerning  them 

4.  The  aggravation  of  their  sin. 
**  How  long  will  it  be  ere  they  believe 
Me,  for  all  the  signs  which  1  have 
shewed  among  them  % "  Many  and 
marvellous  were  the  manifestations  of 
the  Divine  power,  which  they  had  seen 
working  on  their  behalf;  these  should 
have  destroyed  their  unbelief,  and  con- 
firmed their  faith.  Man's  unbelief  is 
aggravated  in  proportion  to  the  number 
and  power  of  the  aids  to  faith  which 
God  has  granted  to  him. 

II  The  Divine  judgment  for  Israel's 
sin 

"  I  will  smite  them  with  the  pesti- 
lence, and  disinherit  them." 

1 .  Tlie  nature  of  the  judgment,  "  I 
will  disinherit  them.''  God  proposes 
to  deprive  them  of  the  inheritance  to 
which  He  ht^d  called  them.  Thpy  had 
despised  their  destiny,  and  they  shall 
forfeit  it.  **  Let  us  therefore  fear,  lest 
a  promise,"  &c.  (Heb.  iv.  1-1 1.) 

2.  The  instrument  of  tlic  judgment. 
**  I  will  smite  them  with  the  pesti- 
lence." In  God's  armoury  therp  is  no 
deficienty  of  weapons,  tire  and  hail, 
8to»m  and  tempest,  plague  and  pesti- 
lence, famine  and  war,  are  all  His 
instruments,  <&o.     (6) 


3.  The  righteousness  of  the  judgment. 
They  had  despised  the  good  land,  and 
they  shall  not  inherit  it.  They  wished 
that  they  had  died  in  Egypt  or  in  the 
wilderness,  and  they  shall  have  their 
wish — in  the  wilderness  they  shall  die. 
They  had  shown  themselves  utterly  un- 
worthy of  their  inheritance,  and  it 
shall  not  be  theirs.  The  rigteousness 
of  such  a  judgment  is  unquestionable. 
**  The  Lord  is  righteous  in  all  His  ways," 
&c.  **  All  His  ways  are  judgment :  a 
God  of  truth  and  without  iniquity,  just 
and  rigiit  is  He." 

III.  The  Divine  regard  for  His  cove- 
nant. 

*'  I  will  make  of  thee  a  greater  nation 
and  mightier  than  they." 

In  these  words  we  see  : 

1.  God^s  regard  for  His  covenant. 
*•'  My  covenant  will  I  not  break,  nor 
alter  the  thing  that  is  gone  out  of  My 
lips."  "  My  counsel  shall  stand,  and  I 
will  do  all  My  pleasure."  He  may  cut 
off  Israel,  but  He  will  not  fail  to  carry 
out  His  plans.  By  sin  we  may  violate 
our  interest  in  the  purposes  of  His 
grace ;  but  we  cannot  frustrate  their 
fulfilment. 

2.  God's  independence  of  man.  He 
could  accomplish  His  designs  without 
the  aid  of  Israel.  He  needs  not  the 
support  of  any  of  His  creatures.  H* 
Himself  is  the  great  sustainer  of  all 
creatures,  and  of  all  worlds.  He  can 
do  without  any  of  us,  or  without  all  of 
us.  "  Who  hath  known  the  mind  of 
the  Lord  ]  or  who  hath  been  His 
counsellor]  or  who  hath  first  given  to 
Him?"  &c.  (Rom.  xi.  34-36). 

3.  God^s  regard  for  His  faithful  ser- 
vant. See  the  honour  which  the  Lord 
here  puts  upon  Moses.  (1)  In  an- 
nouncing to  him  His  purposes.  He 
would  not  destroy  this  rebtdiions  race 
until  He  had  communicated  with  His 
faithful  servant.  Comp.  Gen.  xviii. 
1749:  "And  the  Lord  said.  Shall  I 
hide  from  Abraham  that  thing  which 
I  do  1 "  he.  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord 
is  w'th  them  that  fear  Him,"  &c.  (2) 
In  oriormg  to  him  this  extraordinary 
honour.  "  1  will  make  of  thee  a  greater 
nation  and  mightier  than  they."     *'  if 

251 


•3HAP.  XIV, 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


any  man  serve  Me,  him  will  My  Fatl^oi- 
honour.'* 

Conclusioa 

Impress     such     considerations     as 

these  : — 

1.  The  heinousness  of  unbelief; — shun 
it. 

2.  The  large  number  and  convinci'^/j 
character  of  the  evideness  of  Christianity  ; 
— remember  that  our  faith  should  bea^^ 


a  proportion  to  them.  "  For  unto 
¥/.  msoevcr  much  is  given,  of  him 
shali  be  much  required/'  Lz. 

3.  God  takes  oytr  conduci  as  evidence 
of  our  belief  or  unbelief ;  —let  us  show  our 
faith  bv  our  works.  "  Faith  without 
■^orkti  is  dead,"  worthless,  unreal. 
"  Faith  worketh  by  love,"  &c. 

4.  Take  heed  lest  we  he  disinherited  he* 
cause  of  unbelief  Rom.  ad.  20,  21 ;  Heb. 
iu.  12— iv,  11. 


JLLUSITATIONS, 


i  a)  The  goodnesf*  of  God  is  contemned  by  a 
distrust  of  His  FroTidence.     As  all  trust  ia 
Him  eupposeth  Him  good,  so  all  distrust  of 
Him    supposeth    Him    evil ;    either   without 
goodness  to  exert  His  power,  or  without  power 
to  display  His  goodness.     Job  seems  to  have 
a  spice  of  this  in  His  complaint  (Jobxxx.  20), 
•'  I  cry  unto  Thee  and  Thou  dost  not  hear  me  ; 
I  stand  up,  and  Thou  regard  est  me  not."     It 
is  a  fume  of  the  serpent's  venom,  first  breathed 
mto  man  to  suspect  Him  of  cruelty,  severity, 
regardlessness,  even  under  the  daily  evidencas 
of  His  good  disposition :  and  it  is  ordinary  not 
10  believe  Him  when   He  speaks,  nor  credit 
Him  when  He  acts  ;  to  question  the  goodness 
of  His  precepts,  and  misinterpret  the  kindness 
of  His  providence,  as  if  they  were  designed 
for  the  supports  of  a  tyranny  and  the  deceit 
of  the  miserable.     Thus  the  Israelites  thought 
their  miraculous  deliverance  from  Egypt,  and 
the  placing  them  in  security  in  the  wilder- 
ness, was  intended  only  to  pound  them  up  for 
a  slaughter  (Num.  xiv.  3)  ;  thus  they  defiled 
the  lustre  of  Divine  goodness  which  they  had 
so  highly  experimented,  and  placed  not  that 
confidence  in  Him  which  was  due  to  so  frequent 
a  Benefactor,  and  thereby  crucified  the  rich 
kindness  of  God,  as  Gduebrard  translates  the 
word  "  limited  "  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  41),     It  is  also 
a  jealousy  of  Divine  goodness,  when  we  seek 
to  deliver  ourselves  from  our  straits  by  un- 
lawful wayp,  as  though  God  had  not  kindness 
enough  to  deliver  us  without  committing  evil. 
What  I  did  God  make  a  world  and  all  creatures 
in  it,  to  think  of  them  no  more,  not  to  concern 
Himself  in  their  affairs?     If  He  be  good,  He 
is  diffusive,  and  delights  to  communicate  Him- 
self;  and  what  subjects  should  there  be  for  it 
but  those  that   seek    Him  and  implore  His 
assistance?     It    is    an    indignity    to   Divine 
bounty  to  have  such  mean  thoughts  of  it,  that 
it  should  be  of  a  nature  contrary  to  that  of 
His  works,  which,  the   better  they  are,  the 
more  diffusive  they  are.     Doth  a  man  distrust 
that  the  sun  will  not  shine  any  more,  or  the 
earth  not  bring  forth  its  fruit  ?  Doth  he  distrust 
the  goodness  of  an  approved  medicine  for  the 
expelling  of  his  distemper?     If  we  distrust 
those  things,  should  we  not  render  ourselves 

252 


ridiculous  and  ecttiah?  And  If  we  distrust 
the  Creator  of  those  things,  do  we  not  make 
ourselves  contemners  of  His  goodness?  If 
His  caring  for  rs  be  a  continual  argument  to 
move  u-^^  to  cast  our  care  upon  Him  as  it  ia 
(1  Pot.  V.  7);  then,  if  we  cast  not  our  care 
upon  Him,  it  is  a  denial  of  Hif  gracious  care 
of  us,  as  if  He  regarded  net  what  becomes  of 
us. — Charnocke. 

A  very  tender  parent  had  a  son,  who  from 
his  earliest  years  proved  headstrong  and  disso- 
lute. Conscious  of  the  extent  of  his  demerits, 
he  dreaded  and  hated  his  parent.  Meanwhile 
every  means  were  used  to  disarm  him  of  these 
suspicions,  so  unworthy  of  the  tenderness  and 
love  which  yearned  in  his  father  s  bosom,  and 
of  all  the  kindness  and  forbearance  which 
were  lavished  upon  him.  Eventually,  the 
means  appeared  to  be  successful,  and  confi- 
dence, in  a  great  degree,  took  the  place  of  his 
ungenerous  suspicions.  Entertained  in  the 
family  as  one  who  had  never  trespassed,  he 
now  left  his  home  to  embark  in  mercantile 
affairs,  and  was  assured  that  if  in  any  extremity 
he  would  apply  to  his  parent,  he  should  find 
his  application  kindly  received.  In  the  course 
of  years  it  fell  out  that  he  was  reduced  to 
extremity;  but  instead  of  communicating  his 
case  to  his  parent,  his  base  suspicion  and  dis- 
belief of  his  tenderness  and  care  again 
occupied  him,  and  he  neglectod  to  apply  ivs 
him.  Who  can  tell  how  deeply  that  father  & 
heart  was  rent  at  such  depravity  of  feeling  ? 
Yet  this  is  the  case  of  the  believer,  who,  par- 
doned and  accepted,  and  made  partaker  of  a 
Father's  love  and  covenant  promises,  when 
under  distress  refuses  to  trust  his  heavenly 
and  almighty  Parent,  throws  away  his  filial 
coufidt^nce,  and  with  his  old  suspicions  stands 
aloof  in  sullen  distrust.  O!  how  is  God  dis- 
honoured by  this  sinful  unbelief.  —  Salte7\ 

(6)  By  His  sovereign  authority  God  can 
make  any  creature  the  instrument  of  His  ven- 
geance. He  hath  all  the  creatures  at  His 
beck,  and  can  commission  any  of  them  to  be 
a  dreadful  scourge  Strong  winds  and  tem- 
pests ful£l  His  word  ("Psa.  cxlviii.  8)  ;  the 
lightnings  answer  Him  xi  His  call,  and  cry 
aloud,  "  Here  are  we  '"  <Job  xxxviii.  35).     B^ 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  XIV. 


His  sorereign  authority  He  can  render  locusts 
as  mischievoas  as  lions,  forge  the  motinest 
creatures  into  swords  and  arrows,  and  com- 
mission the  most  despicable  to  be  His  execu- 
tioners. He  can  cut  o£F  joy  from  our  spirits, 
and  make  our  own  hearts  to  be  our  tormentors, 
our  most  confident  frionds  our  persecu'ora, 
our  nearest  relations  to  be  His  avengers;  they 
are  more  His,  who  is  their  Sovereign,  than 
ours,  who  place  a  vain  confidence  in  them. 
Rather  than  Abraham  shall  want  children. 
He  can  raise  up  stones,  and  adopt  them  into 


His  family ;  and  rather  than  not  executo  Hia 
vengeance,  He  can  array  the  stones  in  the 
streets,  and  make  them  Hia  armed  subjects 
against  us.  If  He  speak  the  word,  a  hair 
shall  drop  from  our  heads  to  choke  us,  or  a 
vapour,  congealed  into  rheum  in  our  heads, 
shall  drop  down  and  putrefy  our  vitals.  He 
can  never  want  weapjus,  who  is  Sovereign 
over  the  thunders  of  h'  avpu  ?.nd  sfc'.-nos  of  the 
earth,  over  every  creaturo;  and  can,  by  a 
sovereign  word  tarn  our  greatest  comforts 
into  curses.  —  Charuocke, 


The  Interoession  of  Moses  for  the  Doomed  Nation. 

{Verses  13-19.) 


Mose3  does  not  appear  to  have  enter- 
tained for  a  moment  the  proposal  that  a 
people  greater  and  mightier  than  Israel, 
and  arising  from  him,  should  take  the 
place  of  Israel.  He  sought  not  his  own 
honour,  but  the  glory  of  God.  And 
at  once  in  broken  speech,  indicating  a 
spirit  deeply  moved,  he  earnestly  inter- 
cedes with  God  for  the  guilty  and  con- 
demned people.  His  simple  and  earnest 
intercession  r'^quires  very  little  explan- 
ation.    Let  lis  ot-iioiidpr  : — 

I.  The  peiition  which  he  presented. 

"  Pardon,  I  beseech  Tb^e,  the  in- 
iquity of  this  people."  *^  The  pardon 
of  a  nationd.1  siu,  as  such,  consists  in 
the  turning  away  of  the  national  pun- 
ishment ;  and  that  is  it  for  which 
Moies  is  here  so  earnest."  His  prayer 
is  that  God  would  not  disinher::  the 
guiltv  nation ;  that  he  would  not  kill 
all  this  people  at  a  stroke ;  but  that  he 
would  manifest  His  mercy  in  mitigating 
their  doom. 

II.  The  pleas  by  which  he  urged  his 
petition. 

1.  The  honour  of  the  Divine  Name 
aynongsi  the  heatheiu  "  And  Moses  said 
unto  the  Lord  :  Then  the  Egyptians 
sliall  hear,"  &c.  Verses  13-16.  (See 
Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes.)  The 
main  points  of  this  plea  seem  to  be 
these  :  (1)  i'h<-  relations  of  God  with 
Israel  and  His  doings  for  Israel  were 
well  knov^n  amongst  neighbouring 
nations.  (2)  If  God  should  des'roy 
Israel  at  a  stroke,  that  also  would  be 
known    amongst    these    nations.     (3) 


The  interpretation  of  such  destruc- 
tion by  the  nations  would  be  such 
as  would  reflect  on  the  honour  of 
God.  They  would  conclude  that  His 
resources  were  exhausted ;  that  His 
power  had  failed  to  sustain  and  lead 
Israel  onward  ;  and  thus  His  glory 
would  be  tarnished.  (4)  That  this 
might  not  be  the  case  Moses  entreats 
the  Lord  not  to  disinherit  the  rebelli- 
ous people.  This  plea  of  the  Divine 
honour  in  the  eyes  of  the  nations  should 
afford  both  en  courage  m  out  and  exhor- 
tation to  the  Church  of  God.  Encour- 
aganent^  inasmuch  as  it  implies  that 
the  glory  of  God  amongst  men  is  bound 
up  with  the  prosperity  of  His  Church. 
And  exhortation^  since  it  implies  that  it 
is  the  duty  of  every  member  of  the 
Church  to  seek  in  all  things  the  glory 
of  Kis  Name,     (a) 

2.  The  Divine  character  as  revealed  to 
Moses.  "  And  novv,  I  beseech  Thee, 
let  the  power  of  my  Lord  be  great,'' 
&c.  (Verses  17,  18)  ;  Comp.  Exod. 
xxxiv.  6,  7.  Keil  and  Del.  :  *'  The 
words  :  Let  the  power  be  great,  equiva- 
lent to  show  Thyself  great  in  power, 
are  not  to  be  connected  with  what  pre- 
cedes, but  with  what  follows  ;  viz.  '  show 
Thyself  mighty  by  verifying  Thy  word, 
Jehovah,  long  suffering  and  great  in 
mercy,'  &c."  For  a  ruler  to  forgive  on 
a  large  scale  and  wisely,  and  at  the 
same  time  to  uphold  the  authority  of 
the  law  and  the  dignity  of  the  throne, 
demands  much  power,  and  that  of  the 
highest  kind.     Excellent    is   Matthew 

253 


CHAP.  XIV. 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


Henry*8  note  rn  this  point :  "  If  He 
should  destroy  them  God's  power  would 
.  be  questioned  ;  if  He  should  continue 
and  complete  their  salvation,  notwith- 
standing the  difficulties  that  arose,  not 
only  from  the  strength  of  their  enemies, 
but  from  their  own  provocations,  this 
would  greatly  magnify  the  Divine 
power;  what  cannot  He  do  who  could 
make  so  weak  a  people  conquerors,  and 
such  an  unworthy  people  favourites?" 
The  servant  of  God  pleads  especially 
the  great  mercy  of  God  as  manifes'ed  in 
His  forbearance  ivith  sinners  and  His  for- 
givenessof  sin.  *' The  Lord  is  longs uffer- 
ing  and  of  great  mercy,  forgiving 
iniquity  and  transgression."  And  his 
plea  is  strengthened  by  the  fact  that 
God  has  revealed  Himself  as  exercising 
this  mercy  in  such  a  way  as  to  afford 
no  encouragement  to  evil.  "  By  no 
means  clearing  the  guilty,  visiting  the 
iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon  the  child- 
ren unto  the  third  and  fourth  genera- 
tion." The  Psalmist  celebrates  the 
same  aspect  of  God's  dealings  with 
Israel  in  the  wilderness  :  "Thou  wast 
a  God  that  fongavest  them,  and  Thou 
cookest  vengeance  of  their  inventions." 
How  powerful  is  this  plea  !    {b) 

3.  Tht  truth  of  the  Divine  word. 
"  Let  the  power  of  my  Lord  be  great, 
according  as  Thou  hast  spoken."  God 
had  Himself  proclaimed  to  Moses  those 
attributes  of  His  character  which  he 
pleads.  So  the  man  of  God  appeals  to 
the  Divine  faithfulness.  Surely  God 
will  maintain  the  character  which  He 
had  Himself  proclaimed  !   (cj 

All  ihe  pleas  which  we  have  men- 
tioned are  based  upon  the  doinsrs  and 
character  and  honour  of  God.     No  plea 


is  based  upon  anything  in  the  people. 
Moses  dors  not  even  urge  their  great 
need.  But,  like  David,  he  entreats 
God  to  forgive  for  His  own  bake.  "  For 
Thy  Name's  sake,  0  Lord,  pardon 
mine  iniquity."  "The  reason  of  our 
forgiveness  is  not  in  ourselves,  but  in 
God.  The  least  sinner  has  no  more 
right  to  the  forgiveness  of  the  least  sin, 
than  the  greatest  sinner  has  to  the  for- 
giveness of  the  greatest  sin.  Both  must 
seek  mercy,  not  because  of  any  ex- 
tenuating elements  in  themselves,  but 
wholly  and  solely  because  God  is  *  the 
Lord  God,  merciful  and  gracious,  for- 
giving iniquity,  transgression,  and  sin.* 
God's  sovereign  love  originated  salva- 
tion ;  God's  sovereign  love  must  get  the 
glory  of  that  salvation." 

3.  The  forgiveness  which  God  Iiad 
already  bestowed. 

"  Pardon,  I  beseech  Thee,  the  iniquity 
of  this  people,  ...  as  Thou  hast 
forgiven  this  people  from  Egypt  evert 
until  now."  This  is  bold  pleading;  but 
it  puts  great  honour  upon  God.  It 
would  not  do  to  make  this  a  plea  in  asking 
anything  of  man.  But  "  God  makes 
past  favours  precedents  for  new  ones." 

"  Man's  plea  to  man  is  tnat  he  never  more 
Will  beg  ;  and  that  he  never  begged  before. 
Man's  plea  to  God  is  that  he  did  obtain 
A  former  suit,  and  therefore  sues  again. 
How  good  a  jlod  vre  serve,  who,  when  we  sue. 
Makes  Hi"  old  gifts  the  examples  of  the  new  l" 
(J) 

Conclusioa 

From  this  intercession  of  Moses  let  us 
learn — 

1 .  How  to  plead  with  God  for  ourselves, 

2.  How  to  plead  with  God  for  others^ 
and  especially  for  His  people. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  The  zeal  of  many  rises  and  falls  like  a 
barometer.  They  are  hot  as  fire,  and  cold  as 
ice,  in  the  shortest  space ;  their  fervour  is  as 
transient  as  the  flame  of  thorns,  and  hence  it 
is  very  hard  to  turn  it  to  any  practical  account. 
Oh,  for  more  of  the  deeply-seated  principle  of 
intense  love  to  God's  salvation,  steady  and 
abiding,  which  shall  make  a  man  say  con- 
tinually, ''Let  God  be  magnified  T*  We 
would  desire  to  wake  up  in  the  mornine  with 
254  ^ 


this  on  our  lips.  We  would  begin  with  tho 
enquiry,  "  What  can  I  do  to  magnify  God  thia 
day  ? "  W  ?  would  be  in  business  in  the 
middle  of  the  day,  and  yet  never  lose  the  one 
desire  to  magnify  God.  We  would  return  to 
our  family  at  night,  urged  by  the  saoie  im- 
pulse, "How  can  I  magnify  God  in  my  house- 
hold?" If  I  lie  sick,  I  would  feel  that  I 
mu«t  magnify  God  by  patience;  if  I  rise  from 
that  bed,  I  would  feel  the  sweet  obligation  to 


HOMiLETic  coM.yr:yrARY:  NUMniiHs. 


JHAP.  XT?. 


magnify  Him  by  gratitude ;  if  I  take  a  pro- 
minent position,  I  am  doubly  bounc'  'o  magnify 
Him  who  makes  me  a  1 'ader  to  His  flock; 
and,  if  I  be  unknown  and  obscure  in  tlae 
Ohurch,  I  must  with  equal  zeal  magnify  Him 
by  a  conscientious  discharge  of  the  duties  of 
my  position.  Oh,  to  have  one  end  alvvays 
before  ''iSy  and  to  press  forward  towards  it, 
neither  turning  to  the  right  hand  nor  to  the 
left  I  As  though  we  were  balls  shot  out  of  a 
rifled  cannon,  we  would  rush  on,  never  hesi- 
tating or  turning  aside,  but  flying  with  all 
speed  towards  tbe  centre  of  the  target.  May 
our  spirits  be  impelled  by  a  Divine  energy  to- 
wards this  one  only  thing.  The  Lord  be 
magnified  I  whether  I  live  or  die,  may  God 
be  glorified  in  me  I — C  H.  Spurgeon, 

(6)  Consider  what  it  is  for  God  to  be 
glorioup.  It  is  the  glory  of  pity  unfat'^.om- 
able.  He  considers  glory  to  lie  in  long- 
suffering  love.  It  is  not  that  He  shoots  the 
light  of  His  countenance  far  as  the  sun  shoots 
its  beams,  that  m;ikes  God  proud.  It  is  because 
He  knows  how^  to  work  for  mei  that  are  un- 
grateful, that  His  heart  swells  with  conscious- 
ness of  its  power.  It  is  not  be  ause  He  ia 
able,  as  it  were,  by  His  hands  to  span  easily 
the  orbs  that  fill  immensity  It  is  the  glory 
of  magnanimity;  it  it.  the  glory  of  waiting 
upon  imperfection  and  .weakness;  it  is  tlie 
glory  of  pardoning  and  healing,  and  pardon- 
ing again  and  healing  again,  and  still  con- 
tinuing to  pardon  and  heal  to  the  uttermost 
and  to  the  end — it  is  this  that  makes  Divine 
glory.  It  is  the  power  of  God's  heart  to  be 
magnanimous  that  makes  Him  think  well  of 
Himself.  There  lies  His  glory. — H,  W. 
Beecher. 

(c)  Moses  takes  what  God  had  said,  next  to 
what  God  is,  as  the  ground  and  warrant  of 
his  plea  and  cry  to  Him  for  mercy  and  for 
forgiveness.  What  God  has  proiaised  is  given 
to  us  to  be  returned  to  Him  in  prayer.  The 
meaning  of  promises  is  to  suggest  and  be  the 
language  of  prayer.  Wherever  you  find  a 
promise  in  the  Bible,  there  you  find  the  sub- 
stance, the  element,  the  words  of  priyer, 
"All  the  promises  of  God  in  Jesus  Gl^rist  are 
Yea  and  Amen."  They  wait  for  you  -  dead 
in  themselves  on  the  sacred  page — tt  ^eize 
them,  translate  them  into  prayer,  and  return 
them  in  that  shape  to  Him  who  spake  them, 
pleading  with  Him, — *'0  Lord,  remember  Thy 
power,  as  Thou  hast  promised  us,  saying.  The 
Lord,  the  Lord  God,  merciful  and  gracious." 
You  can  never  need  a  prayer-book  as  long  as 
you  have  a  Bible.  You  can  never  plead  that 
you  cannot  pray  as  long  as  you  can  open  the 
book  of  Psalms,  and  see  what  God  has  pro- 
mised; take  those  beauiifal  Psalms,  which 
M;»rtia  Luther  called  "A  little  Bible," 
and  M  you  read  them,  turn   their  promisM 


into  prayer.  "The  Lord  is  my  shepherd, 
I  suall  lot  want  .  .  .  •  Yea,  though  I 
walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow 
of  caath,  I  will  fear  no  evil:  for  Thou 
art  with  me ;  Thy  rod  and  Thy  staff  thoy 
comfort  me."  Turn  that  into  prayer  ;  and 
plead  with  God,  that  He  will  never  let  you 
want — that  He  will  never  forsake  you  and  leave 
you — that  He  will  be  your  rod  and  your  staff 
— that  He  will  furnish  your  table  in  the  pre- 
sence of  your  enemies — that  He  will  let  mercy 
and  j^oodness  follow  you  all  the  days  of  your 
life — and  that  you  may  dwell  in  His  house 
for  ever.  Take  promises  so  frequent,  so  full 
of  power  in  all  that  can  cheer,  comfort,  and 
sustain,  scattered  through  every  page  of  this 
blessed  Book,  and  transmit  them  back  to  God 
in  prayer,  in  the  name  of  Christ  Jesus. — 
John  Cumming,  D.D. 

{d)  It  is  a  strange  thing  in  human  nature, 
that  if  anybody  does  you  a  kindness,  you  may 
forget  him,  and  be  ungrateful;  but  if  you 
bestow  a  kindness  on  a  person  you  will  love 
him  and  remember  hinu  It  is  not  the 
receiver  generally  that  is  certain  to  give  the 
love,  it  is  the  givev  of  kindness  who  binds  him- 
seh  to  th  other.  A  mother  must  love  her 
child  br'cause  she  has  done  so  much  for  it;  she 
has  sufferc  d  and  she  has  cared  so  much,  that 
she  must  love  it  The  more  you  have  done  for 
a  person  the  letter  you  love  him.  Now,  Jesus 
does  not  love  us  because  of  any  good  in  us,  but 
to-day  Ho  loves  us  because  He  has  done  so 
much  for  us.  He  has  taken  the  yoke  from 
our  necks,  He  has  laid  meat  to  us,  He  has 
drawn  us  with  bands  of  love  and  cords  of  a 
man,  and  having  spent  so  much  love  on  us,  He 
loves  us  dearly.  Jesus,  who  suffered  so  much, 
is  bound  to  us  by  new  bonds.  Ca.lvary  is  not 
only  the  fruit  of  Hi:^  love,  but  the  root  of  fresh 
love.  Another  stream  of  love  springs  u^)  at 
the  cross'  foot  "  I,"  eaith  the  Redeemer,  "  can 
see  My  groans  and  agonies  in  them."  He 
loves  us  because  He  has  loved  us.  Thi'; 
thought  ought  to  cheer  us — God  has  done  too 
much  for  us  to  let  us  perish. 

"And  can  He  have  taughj  mo 
To  trust  in  His  name, 
And  thus  far  have  brought  me 
To  put  me  to  shame  ?  " 

C  H.  Spurgeon 

The  Rev,  Fhilip  "^lenry,  after  praying  f-r 
two  of  his  children  who  w^re  dangerously  ill^ 
said,  "  If  the  Lord  w'll  be  pleased  to  grant  me 
this  my  request  concerning  my  childron,  I 
will  not  say  as  the  beggars  at  our  door  uswd 
to  do,  •  I'll  never  ask  anything  of  Him  again  ; ' 
but,  on  the  contrary,  he  shall  hear  oftem  r  fro  n 
me  than  ever  ;  and  I  will  love  God  the  b^i^r 
as  long  as  I  live." — Diet,  of  IllusU 


255 


CHAP.  XIV, 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY :    NUMBERS, 


God's  Pakdoning  Grace  in  the  Pa^t  at?  Encouragement  to  Seek  for  the 

SAME    IN    THE    PftESifiNT. 

(Verse  10). 


"Pardon,  T  beseech  Theo,  the  ini- 
quity of  this  people  .  .  .  .  a?<  Thou  Last 
forgiven  this  people,  from  Egypt  even 
until  now." 

The  narrative  from  which  the  text  is 
take»n  shews, — 

2.  How  apt  we  are  to  look  at  the  darh 
tide  of  things  and  to  believe  the  had  before 
the  good. 

3.  How  unreisonable  people  are  when 
angry.  **  The  children  of  Israel  mur- 
mured against  Moses  and  against 
Aaron,"  when  they  knew  that  it  wa« 
Jehovah  who  was  leading  them. 

3.  How  fearful  it  is  to  give  way  to 
and  to  nurse  evil  temper.  Here,  having 
spent  the  night  fostering  bitter  feeling, 
we  find  the  people  proposing  to  murder 
Joshua  and  Caleb.  Man  in  a  passion 
has  for  the  time  his  reason  dethroned, 
&c.  The  Bible  condemns  anger,  shewa 
it  to  be  of  the  essence  of  murder. 

The  text  teaches,  That  God's  merciful 
dealings  ivith  us  in  the  past,  are  encour- 
agements for  us  to  ask  and  to  hope  for 
the  same  in  the  present.  God  does  not 
change  as  wc  do  ;  what  He  has  done, 
He  does  nov^,  and  will  do.  His  past 
treatment  of  us  is  an  index  to  His 
future.  History  is  a  revelation  of  His 
character.  God  ever  has  forgiven,  and 
He  does  so  now.  In  this  lies  our  only 
hope  as  sinners.  We  deserve  not  to  be 
forgiven ;  we  dare  not  hope  for  it  time 
after  time,  were  it  not  that  God  has 
forgiven  until  now,  and  that  with  Him 
there  "is  no  variableness,  neither  sha- 
dow of  turning."  This  thought  helped 
Moses  to  pray  for  the  people.  Ho  had 
nothing  to  offer  as  an  excuse  for  them ; 
his  only  hope  was  in  the  known  charac- 
ter of  God.  He  had  forgiven  them 
again  and  again,  and  because  of  that 
Moses  had  faith  to  arsk  Him  still  to  do 
eo.  We  could  not  use  this  argument 
Y?ith  any  one  but  God.  With  our 
fellow-man  we  should  feel, — "he  has 
done  it  so  often,  I  have  no  heart  to  ask 
him  again."  But  God  gives  that  we 
256 


:iiv:l\t  still  ask  ;  every  gift  of  His  is  an 
"  earnest "  No  sinner  need  despair. 
Let  him  only  think  of  the  char.x,cter  of 
God,  and  he  cannot  sink.  Is  the  sin 
great  1  God  has  "  forgiven  until  now," 
and  we  have  His  word  that  "  Whosoever 
will"  may  come  to  Him.  It  is  more 
certain  that  God  will  forgive  the  peni- 
tent than  that  the  sun  and  moon  will 
rise  in  their  appointed  time.  They 
have  done  so  ;  we  therefore  conclude 
that  they  will  continue  to  do  so.  God 
has  forgiven  in  all  ages  ;  and  in  addition 
to  that  we  have  His  Word.  Let  those 
v/ho  under  a  deep  sense  of  guilt  are 
trembling  on  the  verge  of  despair,  take 
heart.  Go  to  God  as  you  are,  seek 
Him  in  Christ :  He  has  "  forgiven  until 
now,"  and  He  will  forgive.  We  argue 
this  because, — • 

I.  God  is  as  able  and  as  vpilling  to 
forgive  now  as  ever  He  has  been. 

"  The  Lord's  hand  is  not  shortened,*' 
&c.  (Isa.  lix.  1).  His  mercy  is  not  ex- 
hausted. He  has  been  giving  to  num- 
berless ages  ;  but  he  has  lost  nothing 
in  imparting  to  others.  Notice  how  the 
word  power  is  associated  with  pardon 
and  salvation.  "  Mighty  to  save ; " 
"  able  to  save  ; "  "  power  of  God  unto 
salvation ;  "  and  here  in  verse  17,  "  Let 
the  power,"  &c.  It  is  not  a  trifling 
thing  to  save  man.  It  is  only  the  strong 
that  can  afford  to  forgive  the  rebel. 
God  is  great  enough  and  strong  enough 
to  offer  a  free  and  full  pardon  to  all 
who  will  accept  it.  Not  only  has  He 
the  power  to  forgive,  but  He  is  now  as 
full  of  comp:issiou  as  ever  He  has  been. 
His  lieart  is  as  tender  as  His  arm  is 
strouur.  Noue  need  fear  to  come  to 
Him.  If  sin  abounds,  grace  abounds 
much  more.  As  the  tide  covers  the 
rock  as  well  as  the  grains  of  sand,  so 
Divine  mercy  covers  the  sins  cf  every 
penitent 

II.  Man  is  now,  as  much  as  ever  he 
has  been,  the  object  of  God's  compas- 
sion. 


/ 


HOMIJ,ETrc    COMMENTARY:    NUMHERS. 


CHAP.  XIV. 


There  has  been  no  change  in  man's 
condition  or  deserts.  We  are  no  better 
or  worse  than  others  who  have  been  for- 
given. We,  in  this  enlightened  age, 
have  not  in  any  way  ceased  to  need  the 
mercy  of  God.  We  are  helpless,  full  of 
.sin,  in  great  danger,  &c.  God  knows 
this,  and  yearns  for  our  salvation. 

III.  God's  purpose  with  regard  to 
the  human  race  is  now  what  it  ever 
has  been. 

His  purpose  has  been,  and  is,  our  sal- 
vation. This  is  near  to  His  heart,  &c. 
He  gave  His  Son,  &c.    He  has  the  same 


motives  and  tlie  same  desire  to  pardon 
now  as  ever  He  has  had. 

Well,  then,  we  can  confidently  invite 
all,  ALL  to  Plim.  "  Him  that  cometh 
to  Me  T  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  Let 
none  despair.  He  has  forgiven  through 
Christ  "  until  now." 

"  Until  now  "  /  Let  there  be  no  mis- 
understanding. "  Now  is  the  accepted 
time."  None  of  us  have  to-morrow ; 
that  belongs  to  God.  All  we  have  is 
this  moment.  Let  it  not  be  misused. 
Mercy  is  within  reach.  God  forgives 
"  until  now." — David  Lloyd. 


The  Answer  op  the  Lord  to  the  Intercession  op  Moses. 

(Verses  20-25.) 


In  this  reply  we  have — 

L  Pardon  in  answer  to  prayer. 

"And  the  Lord  said,  I  have  par- 
doned according  to  thy  word."  Moses 
had  prayed  that  God  would  not  cut  off 
all  the  people  at  a  stroke,  but  that  He 
would  pardon  them  \  and  God  grants 
him  his  requests.  *'  The  answer  of 
God,"  says  Attersoll,  "is  to  be  referred 
to  the  prayer  of  Moses,  and  is  propor- 
tioned out  according  to  his  request.  He 
desired  that  God  would  not  utterly 
root  out  that  whole  people  as  one  man, 
according  as  He  had  threatened  :  his 
prayer  is  granted,  and  God  declareth 
that  He  had  pardoned  them,  not  abso- 
lutely, but  according  to  His  word  :  he 
requested  they  might  not  utterly  be  de- 
stroyed, he  receiveth  answer,  they  shall 
not  utterly  be  destroyed."  Observe 
here  : 

1  Thegreat'power  of  prayer,  "Pray 
one  for  another  ....  The  effectual 
fervent  prayer,"  &c. 

2.  The  great  mercy  of  God.  "  He 
hath  not  dealt  with  us  after  our  sins," 
&c.  "Thy  mercy  is  great  unto  the 
heavens."  ^r^) 

II.  Funishment  for  aggravated  sins. 

1.  Their  sin,  and  its  aggravations. 
(1)  They  tempted  God  by  their  unbe- 
lief and  disobedience.  "  Have  tempted 
me  now  these  ten  times,  and  have 
not  hearkened  to  My  voice."  With  a 
perversity  which  is  almost  incredible, 
8 


they  questioned  His  power  to  provide 
for  them  and  give   them  possession  of 
the  land,  His  goodness  in  His  dealings 
with  them,  and  His  faithfuhiess  as  to 
the  promises  whicli  He   had   made   to 
them.     They    "  tempted  "    and    "  pro- 
voked "  Him  by  demanding  signs  and 
wonders  as  a  proof  of  His  power.    Comp. 
Psa.    Ixxviii.     17-20.      (2)   They    thus 
tempted    God    by  their    unbelief  not- 
withstanding   many    and    mighty   en- 
couragements to  faith.     "  These   men 
have  seen  My  glory  and  My  miracles, 
which  I  did  in  Egypt  and  in  the  wilder- 
ness."    This  was  the  great  aggravation 
of  their  sin.  (See  notes  on  ver.  11).   (3) 
Tiiey  had  been  guilty  of  this  sin  many 
times.     "These  ten  times."     Some  ex- 
positors   enumerate   ten    occasions   on 
which    they    had    tempted    God    since 
their  emancipation  from  Egypt.     But 
we  take  it  that  "  ten  "  is  used  here  as 
the  number  of  completeness,  as  in  Gen. 
xxxi.  7.    They  had  filled  up  the  measure 
of  their  provocations  ;   and  now  God 
will  visit  and  punish  them. 

2.  Their  punishment  and  its  certainty. 
"As  truly  as  I  live,  and  as  all  the 
earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  glory  of 
Jehovah,  all  those  men  .  .  .  shall  not 
see  the  land  which  I  sware  unto  their 
fathers,  neither  sliall  any  of  them  that 
provoked  Me  see  it."  (1)  The  nature 
of  their  punishment.  They  had  des- 
pised the  good  land,  and  they  shal-  not 

257 


CHAP.  XIV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMKXrAnV:  NUMBI^IIS. 


inherit  it;  they  had  distrusted  His 
promise,  and  its  blessings  shall  not 
be  to  them.  *'They  shall  not  see  the 
land/'&c.  Comp.  Psa.  xcv.  11.  (2)  The 
certainty  of  their  punishment.  God 
declares  it  with  an  oath.  "  As  truly  as 
I  live,"  &c.  He  swears  by  His  own 
existence,  and  by  the  certainty  of  the 
accomplishment  of  His  purposes,  that 
they  shall  not  see  the  good  laud.  Sure 
as  He  lives,  and  sure  as,  "notwith- 
standing the  sin  and  opposition  of  these 
men,  He  would  still  carry  out  His  work 
of  salvation  to  a  glorious  victory,"  these 
men  shall  not  enter  into  the  Promised 
Land.  Thus  they  were  pardoned,  but 
they  were  punished.  **  Thou  wast  a 
God  that  forgavest  them,  and  Thou 
tookest  vengeance  of  their  inventions." 
Many  of  the  consequences  of  sin  are 
not  annulled,  cannot  be  annulled  by 
forgiveness.  (6) 

III.  Reward  for  eminent  service. 

"  But  my  servant  Caleb,  because  he 
had  another  spirit,"  &c.  Caleb  is  here 
distinguished  from  the  rest  (Joshua  is 
honourably  named  hereafter)  in  three 
respects : 

1.  ^5  to  his  spirit.  *'  He  had  another 
spirit  with  him,"  and  a  different  one. 
His  was  a  believing  spirit,  theirs  an  un- 


believing one ;  his  was  courageous, 
theirs  cowardly ;  his  was  obedient, 
theirs  rebellious. 

2.  As  to  his  conduct.  **And  hath 
followed  Me  fully."  He  had  manifested 
unfaltering  fidelity  to  God.   (c) 

3.  As  to  his  destiny.  "  Him  will  I 
bring  into  the  land  whereinto  he  went  ; 
and  his  seed  shall  possess  it."  Comp. 
Josh.  xiv.  6-15. 

IV.  Judgment  for  cowardice. 

"  And  now  the  Amalekites  and  the 
Canaanites  are  dwelling  in  the  valley  ; 
wherefore,  to-morrow  turn  you,  and  get 
you  into  the  wilderness  by  the  way  of 
the  Red  Sea."  They  had  taken  alarm 
when  they  heard  of  the  Amalekites  and 
the  Canaanites  (chap.  xiii.  29),  and  shown 
themselves  utterly  unfit  to  encounter 
them  :  and  now  when  they  must  ad- 
vance to  meet  them  or  retreat  into  the 
wilderness,  most  naturally  they  are 
commanded  to  retreat.  The  life  of 
struggle  and  enterprize  and  glory 
is  not  for  cowards :  it  is  for  them  to 
turn  back  from  these  things,  and  to 
wander  ingloriously,  ignobly,  in  the 
desert.  Unto  these  cowards  is  awarded 
a  coward's  doom.  *'  The  backslider  in 
heart  shall  be  filled  with  his  ovvu 
ways." 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  Say  not  that  any  crime  of  man 

Was  e'er  too  great  to  be  forgiven ; 
Can  we  within  our  little  span, 

Engrasp  the  viewless  micd  of  Heav'n  ? 
Shall  we  attempt  with  puny  force 

To  lash  back  ocean  with  a  rod  ? 
Arrest  the  planets  in  their  conr-e? 

Of  weigh  the  mercies  of  a  God  ? 

Oar  mercies,  like  ourselves,  may  be 

Small,  finite,  and  ungracious  ever  ; 
May  spurn  a  brother's  bended  knee — 

But  God  forsakes  the  contrite,  never  ! 
Vast  as  Himself  they  sbine  above, 
To  eyes  that  look  through  sorrow's  tear; 
.  Great  though  the  crime,  great  is  the  love, 
If  those  who  seek  it  are  sincere. 

Muckay, 

(6)  Men's  sins  carry  with  them  a  puoish- 
ment  in  this  life.  Different  sins  are  differ- 
ently punished.  The  degrees  of  punishment 
are  not  always  according  to  our  estimate  of  the 
culpability.  Many  sins  against  a  man's  body  go 
on  in  the  body,  reproducing  their  penalties 
258 


from  year  to  year,  and  from  ten  years  to  ten 
years.  And  the  ignorantcrime,  or  the  knowicg 
crime,  committed  when  one  is  yet  in  his  mi- 
nority, may  repeat  itself  and  repeat  its  bitter- 
ness and  its  penalty  when  one  is  hoary  with 
age.  Mere  repenting  of  sin  does  not  dispossess 
the  power  of  all  sins.  There  are  transgressions 
that  throw  persons  out  of  the  pale  o\  society. 
There  are  single  acts,  the  penalties  of  which 
never  fail  to  reassert  themselves.  There  are 
single  wrongs  that  are  never  healed.  This 
great  transgression  that  seemed  in  the  cona- 
mission  without  any  threat  and  without  any 
danger,  pursued  this  man  through  all  his  early 
life,  and  clear  down  until  he  was  an  old  man 
and  returned  from  his  exile.  And  now  then 
he  was  quit  of  it  only  by  one  of  those  graat 
critical  transitions  that  take  place,  or  may 
take  place,  in  the  life  of  a  man,  without  whicti 
he  would  have  gone  on.  doubtless,  expiating 
still  his  great  yfroug.—H.  W.  Beecher. 

Gay,  dissolute  man,  thoie  is  that  poor  girl 
ruined  body  and  soul  through  you  in  years 
gone  by,  and  nothing  you  can  ever  do  can 
undo   that  mischief.     Gould    your  tears   for 


nOMlLETlC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


CHAP.  XIV. 


ever  flow,  you  can  never  un write  the  past  nor 
restore  the  lost  one.  Could  you  b  iog  tha'; 
wandering  soul  back  by  Divine  g-ace,  even 
then  the  bitter  past  could  not  be  unwrift^o, 
for  she,  too,  has  spread  the  poison.  All  that 
accursed  past  of  sin  must  live  on.  God  for- 
gives sin,  but  much  of  the  con.-equenc^s  of 
sin  God  Himself  does  not  avert.  If  you  light 
the  fire  it  will  burn  on  to  the  lowest,  he  1  ; 
God  may  forgive  your  incendiarism  but  the 
lite  itself  still  continues.  You  spoke  a  word 
against  the  Lord  Jesus  in  the  ears  of  some 
youQgster  years  gone  by,  whidi  turn^^d  him 
a  ide  from  the  right  path.  You  cannot  unsay 
it,  and  that  youngster's  infidelity  and  unbelief 
you  cannot  now  destroy.  The  perpetual 
mischief  which  jouhave  dono  to  others  might 
fitly  be  a  reason  with  the  Most  High  why  He 
should  not  forgive  you,  but  yet  He  says,  "  My 
thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts."     With  all 


this  before  Him,  with  all  the  consequences  of 
your  sin  before  Him,  He  forgives  jou  freely 
if  you  rest  on  Jesud. —  C  II.  Sjmrgeon. 

(c)  Is  there  anything  we  value  amongst 
ourselve-j  more  than  faithfulness,  honesty,  con- 
stancy— punctual,  critical,  scrupulous  virtue  ? 
Do  we  not  trust  the  faithful  one  ?  Do  we 
not  praisf  faithfulness  above  all  other  virtues 
when  we  are  talking  about  relationships 
which  subsist  between  us  and  amongst 
us?  It  is  faithfulness  that  God  values;  not 
brilliance,  not  grf^atness,  not  aHtonishing, 
dazzling  splendour,  but  raality,  honour, 
honesty,  diligence  Herein  it  is  that  the 
appeal  of  the  Gospel  coaaos  to  every  man — to 
the  man  of  great  powers,  and  the  man  of  the 
feeblest  influance  ;  to  the  man  of  the  highest 
honour,  and  to  the  man  of  the  remotest 
obscurity, — Joseph  ParkeVy  D.D. 


The  Earth  filled  with  the  Glory  of  the  Lord. 


(Verses  20,  21.) 


I.  The  import  of  the  promise  before  us. 

"  As  T  live,  saith  the  Lord,  all  the 
earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  glory 
of  the  Lord."  Glorv  is  the  maiiifesta- 
tioQ  of  excellence.  The  glory  of  God 
is  that  display  of  His  most  blessed 
character  and  will  which  opens  the  way 
for  His  intelligent  creatures  to  know, 
to  love,  and  to  obey  Him.  This  glory 
is  exhibited  in  various  ways.  It  shines 
in  all  the  works  of  creation ;  ....  is 
manifested  by  the  works  of  His  provi- 
dence ;  .  .  .  .  above  all,  in  His  works  of 
REDEMPTION.  Here  all  His  perfections 
unite  and  harmonize,  and  shine  with 
transcendent  glory.  Now,  when  the 
Gospel  shall  be  preached  and  received 
throughout  the  world ;  when  every 
kindred,  and  people,  and  nation,  and 
tongue  shall  not  only  be  instructed  in 
its  sublime  doctrines,  but  also  brought 
under  its  benign  and  sanctifying  power, 
then,  with  emphatic  propriety,  may  it 
be  said  that  "  the  earth  is  filled  with 
the  glory  of  the  Lord."  As  the  highest 
glory  of  which  an  individual  creature 
is  capable  is  to  bear  the  image  of  his 
Maker,  so  the  highest  glory  of  which 
our  world  at  large  is  capable  is  to  be 
filled  with  the  holy  and  benevolent 
Spirit  of  Him  who  is  the  brightness  of 
the  Father's  glory,  and  the  express  im- 
age of  His  person, — is  to  have  the 
B  2 


knowledge  and  love  of  the  Saviour 
reigning  over  all  the  populations  of  our 
globe,  "  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  even 
unto  the  going  down  of  the  same." 
Such  appears  to  be  the  import  of  the 
promise  before  us. 

II.  What  rea.son  have  we  for  be- 
lieving that  these  scenes  will  be  one 
day  realized? 

1 .  Our  hope  is  founded  on  Jehovah! s 
faithful  and  unerring  promise  (Num. 
xxiii.  19  ;  Matt.  xxiv.  35).  Take  the 
following  as  a  small  specimen  of  the 
"exceeding  great  and  precious"  cata- 
logue found  in  the  inspired  volume, 
— Ps.  ii.  8  ;  Ixvii.  2 ;  Ixxii.  17  ;  Isa.  xl. 
5;  Hxb.  ii.  14;  Zech  ix.  10;  Mai.  i. 
11;  Phil.  ii.  10,  11;  Rev.  xi.  15. 

2.  Our  confidence  is  confirmed  by  the 
consideration  that  this  religion  is,  in  its 
nature,  adapted  above  all  others  to  be  a 
universal  religion.  Its  doctrines,  its 
worship,  and  its  system  of  moral  duty 
are  all  equally  adapted  to  universality. 
Acts  X.  3-1,  35  ;  xvii.  26.  It  teaches 
that  He  is  alike  related  to  the  children 
of  men  as  their  Creator,  Preserver,  and 
Benefactor ;  and  that  the  high  and  the 
low,  the  rich  and  the  poor,  the  monarch 
and  the  slave,  all  stand  upon  a  level  in 
His  sight,  and  have  all  equal  access,  if 
penitent  and  believing,  to  the  throne 
of  His  heavenly  grace. 

259 


CHAP   XIV. 


HOMlLliTlC    COMMENTAUY:    NUMBERS. 


3.  The  present  aspect  of  the  world  fur- 
nishes much  reason  to  hope  that  the  ac- 
complishment of  this  promise  is  draiulng 
nigh.  I  know  not  that  there  is  at  this 
hour  a  single  portion  of  the  globe  to 
which  the  enlightened  and  prudent 
missionary  may  not  obtain  some  degree 
of  access.  He  who  "  sits  as  Governor 
among  the  nations  "  seems  to  be  spread- 
ing a  natural  preparation  around  the 
world  for  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel 
among  all  nations. 

Contemplate,  further,  the  singular 
progress  of  various  forms  of  improve- 
ment throughout  the  civilized  world, 
all  of  which  may  be  considered  as  bear- 
ing on  the  great  promise  contained  in 
the  text.  The  intercourse  between 
different  parts  of  the  globe  increasing 
every  day  with  a  rapidity  and  to  an 
extent  beyond  all  former  precedent ; 
the  endless  improvements  in  the  means 
of  conveyance  from  one  part  of  the 
world  to  another;  the  wonderful  im- 
provements in  the  art  of  printing  ;  and 
the  many  indications  that  the  English 
language — the  language  of  those  parts 
of  the  world  which  are  most  favoured 
with  Gospel  light —  will  probably,  ere 
long,  become  the  prevailing  language  of 
the  whole  world. 

III.  What  is  our  present  duty  in 
relation  to  the  promise  before  us  ? 

1.  To  believe  the  prowbise.  Unbelief 
cuts  the  nerves  of  all  spiritual  exer- 


tion, and  tends  to  discouragement  and 
despondency. 

2.  To  labour  and  pray  tuithout  ceasing 
for  its  accomplishment.  There  is  no 
piety  in  the  confidence  which  neglects 
prayer,  and  which  does  not  add  to 
prayer  diligent  effort  to  attain  that  for 
which  it  prays.  God's  Kingdom  is  a 
Kingdom  of  means. 

3.  In  lahouring  for  the  spread  of  the 
Gospel  no  adverse  occurrence,  however 
painful,  ought  to  discourage  us,  or  at  all 
to  weaken  either  our  confidence  or  our 
efforts.  With  that  promise  we  may 
meet  the  most  distressing  difficulties 
without  fear. 

4.  To  pray  without  ceasing  for  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  render  all 
the  means  vjhich  are  einplo^jed  for  its  ac- 
complishment effectual.  It  is  '*  not  by 
might  nor  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit, 
saith  Jehovah,"  that  means  are  attended 
with  a  saving  energy. 

5.  If  so  great  a  work  as  evangelizing 
the  whole  world  is  promised,  and  is 
certainly  to  he  accomplished,  then  our 
plans  and  efforts  for  promoting  this 
object  ought  to  hear  a  corresponding 
character  ;  that  is,  they  ought  to  be  large, 
liberal,  and  ever  expanding.  We  ought 
to  consider  it  as  our  duty  to  devote  to 
this  object  our  utmost  resources,  and 
to  engage  the  co-operation  of  all  over 
whom  we  exert  an  influence. — Sam., 
Miller. 


Caleb — the  Man  for  the  Times. 


{Verse  24.) 


There  are  three  things  about  Caleb 
worthy  of  consideration  : — 

I.  His  faithful  following  of  his  God. 

Perceive,  he  never  went  before  his  God. 
That  is  presumption.  The  highest 
point  to  which  the  true  believer  ever 
comes  is  to  walk  with  God,  but  never 
to  walk  before  Him.  We  ought  to  follow 
the  Lord.  The  sheep  follow  the  shep- 
herd (John  X.  4).     They  follow  as  the 

soldier  follows  the  captain as  the 

disciple  follows  the  master.  Caleb 
followed  the  Lord  '^  fully,"  says  one  text, 
**wholly,^^  says  another.  And  here  I 
260 


shall   follow  the   explanation   of  good 
Matthew  Henry. 

1.  He  followed  Him  universally, 
without  dividing.  He  did  not  wish  to 
divide  the  commands;  what  God  had 
joined  together  he  did  not  desire  to  put 
asunder.  Caleb  was  quite  as  ready  to 
fight  the  giants  as  he  was  to  carry  the 
clusters.  If  you  say  concerning  the 
Lord's  will,  "  I  will  do  this  and  I  will 
not  do  that,"  you  do  in  fact  make 
yourself  the  master,  the  spirit  of  rebel- 
lion is  in  you.  Some  excuse  themselves 
for  neglecting  duties  on  the  ground  that 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JSUMUlinS. 


CHAP.  XIV. 


they  are  non-essoiitial — as  if  all  duty 
was  not  essential  to  the  perfect  follower 
of  Christ.  "  They  are  unimportant," 
says  the  man,  "  the^^  involve  notliing  ;  " 
wliereas  it  often  happens  that  the  ap- 
parently unimportant  duty  is  really  the 
most  important  of  all.  Many  a  great 
lord,  in  the  olden  times,  has  given  up 
his  land  on  copyhold  to  his  tenant,  and 
perhaps  the  fee  which  was  to  be  annually 
paid  was  to  bring  a  small  bird  or  a 
peppercorn  to  the  lord  of  the  manor — 
in  some  cases  it  has  been  the  bringing 
of  a  turf  or  a  green  leaf.  Now,  if  the 
tenant  should  on  the  annual  day  refuse 
to  do  his  homage,  and  say  it  was  too 
trifling  a  thing  to  bring  a  peppercorn 
to  the  lord  of  the  manor  in  fee,  would 
he  not  have  forfeited  his  estate,  for  he 
would  have  been  setting  himself  up  as 
a  superior  owner,  and  asserting  a  right 
which  his  feudal  lord  would  at  once 
resist  1 

Brother,  is  there  not  some  comm  nd 
which  as  yet  you  have  not  obeyed? 

2.  Caleb  followed  the  Lord  sincerely, 
vjiihout  dissembling.  One  of  the  safest 
tests  of  sincerity  is  found  in  a  willing- 
ness to  suffer  for  the  cause.  How 
courageous  was  that  man,  who  had  only 
numbered  forty  summers,  to  put  him- 
self in  opposition  to  the  other  ten 
princes,  and  declare  in  flat  contradic- 
tion to  them — "  Let  us  go  up  ;  we  are 
able  to  Dossess  the  land."  When  the 
people  took  up  stones,  and  Joshua  was 
forced  to  speak  with  Caleb,  it  was  with 
no  small  peril,  and  required  no  little 
mental  courage  to  stand  up  amidst  the 
insults  and  jeers  of  the  crowed,  and  still 
to  bring  up  a  good  report  of  the  land. 
....  How  many  profess  to  follow  God 
who  follow   Him  without  their  hearts ! 

3.  Caleb  followed  the  Lord  cheerfully, 
without  (Handing.  God  requires  no 
slaves  to  grace  His  throne  ;  He  is  the 
Lord  of  the  empire  of  love.  God  loveth 
to  have  the  joyful  obedie-nce  of  His 
creatures.  That  obedience  which  is 
not  cheerful  is  disobedience,  for  the 
Lord  looketh  at  the  heart  of  a  thing, 
and  if  He  seeth  that  we  serve  Him 
from  force,  and  not  because  we  love 
Him,  He  will  reject  our  offerings  at  our 


hands.  The  service  which  is  coui)led 
with  cheerfuhies^  is  lie;i)-ty  service,  and 
therefore  true.  Cheorfuluesss,  again, 
makes  a  man  strong  in  service.  It  is 
to  our  service  what  oil  is  to  the  wheels 
of  a  railway  carriage. 

Brother,  do  you  serve  the  Lord  cheer- 
fully ] 

4.  He  followed  the  Lord  constaiitly^ 
without  declining.  Forty-five  years  he 
lived  in  the  camp  of  Israel,  but  all  that 
time  he  followed  the  Lord  and  never 
once  consorted  with  murmuring  rebels  ; 
and  when  his  time  came  to  claim  his 
heritage  at  the  age  of  eighty-five,  the 
good  old  man  is  following  the  Lord 
fully  ;  he  shows  a  constant  heart.  How 
many  professors  fail  in  this  respect ! 
They  follow  the  Lord  by  fits  and  starts, 
(fee.  But,  to  use  the  metaphor  of  Gott- 
hold,  we  may  compare  Caleb  to  a  tree. 
The  wind  had  been  blowing — it  was  a 
dreadful  hurricane,  andGotthold  walked 
into  a  forest  and  saw  many  trees  torn 
up  by  the  roots  ;  he  marvelled  much 
at  one  tree  which  stood  alone  and  yet 
had  been  unmoved  in  the  tempest.  He 
said,  "  How  is  this  %  The  trees  that 
were  together  have  fallen,  and  this 
alone  stands  fast !  "  He  obsei'ved  that 
when  the  trees  grow  too  closely  they 
cannot  send  their  roots  into  the  earth  ; 
they  lean  too  much  upon  each  other  ; 
but  this  tree,  standing]:  alone,  had  space 
to  thrust  its  roots  into  the  earth,  and 
lay  hold  on  the  rocks  and  stones,  and 
so  when  the  wind  came  it  fell  not. 
Caleb  was  constant,  because  he  was  a 
rooted  man.  He  had  a  firm  hold  upon 
his  God. 

II.  Caleb's  favoured  portion. 

In  reward  for  his  faithful  following 
of  his  Master, — 

1.  His  life  tvas  preserved  in  the  hour 
of  judgment.  The  ten  fell,  smitten  with 
plague,  but  Caleb  lived.  If  he  follows 
God  fully,  God  will  fully  take  care  of 
him.  Caleb  is  willing  to  give  his  life 
for  his  Master,  and  therefore  his  Master 
gives  him  his  life. 

2.  Caleb  was  also  comforted  with  a 
long  life  of  vigour.  At  eighty-five  he 
was  as  strong  as  at  forty,  and  still  able 
to  face  the  giants.  If  there  be  a  Christ- 

261 


CHAP.  \IV. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


ian  man  who  shall  have  in  his  old  age 
a  vigour  of  faith  and  courage,  it  is  the 
man  who  follows  the  Lord  fully. 

3.  Caleb  received  great  honour  among 
his  brethren.  He  was  at  least  twenty 
years  older  than  any  other  man  in  the 
camp  except  Joshua.  At  their  council 
he  would  be  regarded  with  as  much 
reverence  as  Nestor  in  the  assemblies 
of  the  Greeks  ;  in  their  camps  he  would 
stand  like  another  Achilles  in  the  midst 
of  the  armies  of  Lacaedaemon.  As 
king  and  sire  he  dwelt  among  men.  If 
we  honour  God,  He  will  honour  us  (1 
Sam.  ii.  30). 

4.  Caleb  was  put  upon  the  hardest 
service.  That  is  always  the  lot  of  the 
most  faithful  servant  of  God.  Caleb 
had  the  distinguished  honour  of  being 
permitted  to  lead  the  van  against  the 
gigantic  Anakim  (Josh.  xiv.  12  ;  xv. 
13,  14).  Get  your  soul  right,  and  you 
may  defy  the  sharpest  arrow  of  the 
adversary. 

5.  He  had  the  honour  of  enjoying 
what  he  had  once  seen.  He  had  only 
seen  the  land  wh^n  he  said,  ''  We  are 
able  to  take  it."  He  lived  not  only  to 
take  it,  but  to  enjoy  it  for  himself. 
God  does  reward  those  who  dare  to  do 


hard  things  in  confidence  in  His  name. 

6.  Caleb  left  a  blessing  to  his  children. 
If  there  is  any  man  who  shall  be  able 
to  leave  his  children  the  blessing  of  the 
upper  and  nether  springs,  it  is  the  man 
who  follows  the  Lord  fully  (Josh,  xv, 
13-19). 

III.  Caleb's  secret  character. 

"  He  had  another  spirit  with  him,*' 
— not  only  a  bold,  generous,  noble,  and 
heroic  spirit,  but  the  Spirit  and  influ- 
ence of  God  which  thus  raised  him 
above  human  inquietudes  and  earthly 
fears.  Ever3'thnig  acts  according  to 
the  spirit  which  is  in  it.  The  real  way 
to  make  a  new  life  is  to  receive  a  new 
spirit.  The  distinguibhing  mark  of  a 
right  spirit  is  faith.  Then  a  faithful 
spirit  always  begets  a  meek  spirit,  and 
a  meek  spirit  always  begets  a  brave 
spirit.  The  true  believer  has  also  a 
loving  spirit  ....  a  zealous  spirit 
....  a  heavenly  spirit.  Such  a  spirit 
had  good  Caleb.  0  that  His  Holy 
Spirit  would  lead  us  to  goto  Jesus  just 
as  we  are,  and  look  up  to  Him  and  be- 
seech Him  to  fulfil  that  great  covenant 
promise — "  A  new  heart  also  will  I  give 
them,  a  right  spirit  will  I  put  withiu 
them." — G.  H.  Spurgeon, 


Holy  Singularity  Divinely  Honoured, 


{Verse  24.) 


Tn  considering  what  is  here  recorded 
concerning  Caleb,  we  may  notice  — 

I.  The  relation  he  bore. 

He  was  God's  servant — a  relation 
denoting  that  he  acknowleged  no  other 
master,  Matt.  vi.  24  ;  that  he  had  his 
allotted  work,  Matt.  xxi.  28  ;  that  he 
was  not  at  liberty  to  govern  himself, 
Dent.  xii.  8  ;  that  he  was  to  do  all  for 
God  and  His  service,  Rom.  xiv.  8  ;  that 
his  employment  was  highly  honourable, 
Psa.  Ixxxiv.  10. 

II.  The  disposition  he  possessed. 

**  He  had  another  spirit  with  him  ; " 
— a  spirit  altogether  different  from  that 
of  the  rest  of  the  spies, — the  one  being 
base,  mean,  sneaking,  and  cowardly ; 
whilst  the  other  inspired  with  courage 
and  undaunted  resolution  (ver.  2-10; 
262 


Josh.  xiv.  7,  8;  2  Cor.  iv.  13).  We 
may  learn  hence  that  all  men  must  un- 
avoidably be  actuated  by  one  spirit  or 
another,  in  their  different  ways  ;  that 
God  perfectly  knows  what  spirit  is  with 
us ;  and  that  a  right  spirit  is  of  great 
and  essential  importance  if  we  would 
secure  the  Divine  approval. 

III.  The  course  he  pursued. 

He  followed  the  Lord  fully.  To 
follow  the  Lord  fully  is  to  follow  Him 
sincerely,  without  dissimulation;  alone, 
without  dividing;  universally,  without 
reserve ;  openly,  without  shame ; 
fixedly,  without  instability ;  constantly, 
without  weariness  ;  submissively,  with- 
out dictating ;  and  confidently,  without 
doubting. 

IV.  The  recompense  he  obtained. 


HOMILETIC    COMMKNTAllY:    NUMBEHS 


CHAP    XIV. 


God  brought  him  into  the  land  of 
Canaan  ; — typical  of  heaven,  the  better 
couutry  which  God's  people  have  ever 
sought,  having  earnest  desires  after  its 
possession,  as  the  dwelling-place  of  all 
their  brethren,  and  as  their  Father's 
house. —  William  Sleigh. 


I.  Real  Christians  are  actuated  by  a 
different  spirit  from  that  of  the  world. 

II.  Those  who  possess  a  right  spirit 
will  follow  the  Lord  fully. 

III.  Those  who  follow  the  Lord 
fully  shall  be  honourably  distin^ished 
by  Him. — G.  Burder, 


A      The  Sentence  of  God  upon  the  Sinful  People. 

{Verses  26-39.) 


The  Divine  judgment  iipon  tlie  re- 
bellious people  has  ah-eady  been  de- 
clared in  general  terms  to  Moses  (vers. 
lil-25).  In  this  paragraph  that  judg- 
ment is  pronounced  in  full  to  Moses 
and  Aaron,  for  announcement  to  the 
people.  We  have  spoken  of  the  sin  and 
punishment  of  the  people  in  our  notes 
on  vers.  20-25  ;  the  additional  sugges- 
tions introduced  in  this  paragraph  we 
will  now  endeavour  to  indicate,  taking 
as  our  subject.  The  sentence  of  God  upon 
the  sinful  people. 

I.  The  sentence  was  conspicuously 
just. 

Its  justice  is  manifest — 

1,  In  the  correspondetice  between  the 
nature  of  the  sin  and  the  nature  of  the 
punishment.  They  had  disbelieved 
God's  solemn  and  repeated  promise  to 
give  them  the  land ;  they  had  shrunk 
as  utter  cowards  from  attempting  to 
take  possession  of  it ;  and  God  sentences 
them  to  exclusion  from  it  They  had 
cried,  "  Would  God  that  we  had  died 
in  the  wilderness ! "  and  God  takes 
them  at  their  word ;  in  the  wilderness 
they  shall  die.  The  Divine  punish- 
ment of  sin  ever  answers  in  its  nature 
to  the  sin  itself.  "  Of  what  kind  the 
sin  is,  of  the  same  kind  is  the  punish- 
ment (Gen.  xUi.  21).  David  sinned 
greatly  in  numbering  of  the  people, 
through  the  pride  of  his  heart,  and 
vain  glory  in  his  own  greatness  :  God 
could  have  punished  him  many  otlier 
ways,  but  He  meeteth  with  him  in  the 
same  kind.  He  diminisheth  the  number 
of  his  people  exceedingly  by  the  pesti- 
lence, in  whose  strength  he  much 
trusted."  Comp.  Judg.  i.  6,  7  ;  Jer. 
li.  5Q.      The  punishment  of  sin  gene- 


rally grows  out  of  the  sin  itself. 
"  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall 
he  also  reap,"  etc.     (a) 

2.  In  the  correspondence  between  the 
duration  of  the  unbelieving  exploration 
and  the  duration  of  the  punishment, 
"  After  the  number  of  the  days  in 
which  ye  searched  the  land,  even  forty 
days,  each  day  for  a  year,  shall  ye  bear 
your  iniquities,  even  forty  years."  M. 
Henry  :  "  They  were  content  to  wait 
forty  days  for  the  testimony  of  men, 
because  they  could  not  take  God's 
word  ;  and  therefore  justly  are  they 
kept  forty  years  waiting  for  the  per- 
formance of  God's  promise."    Attersoll : 

*  A  year  for  a  day.  A  dram  of  sin  hath 
a  pound  of  sorrow.  A  day  of  pleasure 
hath  a  year  of  pain." 

3.  In  the  correspondence  between  the 
different  degrees  of  guilt  and  the  different 
severities  of  punishment.  The  heaviest 
and  sternest  doom  fell  upon  the  ten 
unbelieving  explorers,  who  were  the 
greatest  sinners.  "  The  men  which 
Moses  sent  to  search  the  land,  who  re- 
turned, and  made  all  the  congregation 
to  murmur  against  him,  by  bringing  up 
a  slander  upon  the  land,  even  those 
men  that  did  bring  up  the  evil  report 
upon  the  land,  died  by  the  plague  be- 
fore the  Lord."  They  were  smitten  by 
a  sudden  death  which  manifestly  pro- 
ceeded from  Jehovah  Himself.  When 
God  ariseth  to  judgment  He  distri- 
buteth  punishment  in  proportion  to 
the  guilt  of  the  offenders.  Those  who 
not  only  sin  themselves  but  lead  others 
into  sin  will  have  the  sorest  punish- 
ment. (6)  Here  is  warning  to  those 
who  tempt  others  to  evil,  and  to  those 
whose    example    leads    others    astray. 

263 


CHAr.  XIV. 


BOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


Repent ;  or  you  will  be  *'  beaten  with 
many  stripes  "  (Luke  xii.  47,  48 ;  Heb. 
X.  28,  29).     (c) 

4.  In  the  exemption  from  punishment 
of  those  who  had  not  shared  in  the  guilt. 
When  the  ten  faithless  explorers  were 
smitten  with  sudden  death  by  the  Lord, 
Caleb  and  Joshua  were  spared.  "Joshua 
the  son  of  Nun,  and  Caleb  the  son  of 
Jephunneh,  of  the  men  who  went  to 
search  the  land,  lived."  In  lil^e  man- 
ner, those  who  had  not  joined  in  the 
murmuring  and  the  rebellion  were  not 
excluded  from  the  Promised  Land. 
"  Your  little  ones  which  ye  said  should 
be  a  prey,  them  will  I  bring  in,  and  they 
shall  know  the  land  which  ye  have  des- 
pised." Caleb  and  Joshua  also  were  to 
enter  and  possess  the  good  land.  In 
His  judgments  God  discriminates  be- 
tween the  righteous  and  the  wicked. 
Comp.  Gen.  xviii.  25. 

But  the  innocent,  though  exempt 
from  the  punishment  of  the  guilty, 
suffered  privation  and  loss  on  account 
of  their  sins.  "  Your  children  shall  wan- 
der in  the  wilderness  forty  years,  and 
bear  your  whoredoms  until  your  car- 
cases be  wasted  in  the  wilderness."  So 
closely  are  we  related  to  each  other  by 
national,  social,  and  family  ties,  that 
the  good  cannot  altogether  escape  the 
consequences  of  the  sins  of  the  wicked. 
"  None  of  us  liveth  to  himself."  "  We 
are  members  one  of  another."  No  one 
can  sin  without  inflicting  loss  and  in- 
jury upon  others.  "  One  sinner  des- 
troyeth  much  good."  The  innocent 
suffer  with  the  guilty.  Children  still 
bear  the  sins  of  their  parents.  Very 
clearly  is  this  the  case  with  the  children 
of  the  extravagant  and  wasteful,  the 
drunken  and  the  unchaste.  Here  is 
solemn  admonition  to  parents.  ''  If 
they  love  their  sons,  they  must  leave 
their  sins,  and  walk  in  a  careful  obedi- 
ence to  the  law  of  God.  Wicked  parents 
are  the  greatest  enemies  to  their  chil- 
dren." 

II.  The  sentence  was  utterly  irre- 
versible. 

"  Say  unto  them,  As  I  live,  saith  the 
Lord,  as  ye  have  spoken  in  mine  ears, 
so  «pill  I   do  to  you  ....  I  the   Lord 
264 


have  said,  I  will  surely  do  it  unto  all 
this  evil  congregation,  that  are  gathered 
together  against  Me  :  in  this  wilderness 
shall  they  be  consumed,  and  there  they 
shall  die."  God  forgives  the  sinners, 
but  pronounces  irreversible  judgment 
against  their  sin.  He  pardons  the 
rebels ;  but  they  shall  not  enter  the 
Promised  Land.  The  penalties  of  sin 
are  certain.  "  The  soul  that  sinneth  it 
shall  die."  "  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find 
you  out."  "  Though  hand  join  in  hand, 
the  wicked  shall  not  go  unpunished." 
The  punishment  of  sin  is  inevitable. 
Let  no  one  go  on  presumptuously  in 
wickedness  imagining  that  he  shall  es- 
cape the  penalties  of  his  course.  "  Be- 
cause sentence  against  an  evil  work  is 
not  executed  speedily,  therefore  the 
heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  fully  set  in 
them  to  do  evil."  This  is  the  extreme  of 
folly;  for  though  the  execution  of  the 
sentence  be  delayed,  nevertheless  it  is 
infallibly  certain.  What  God  hath  said 
He  will  surely  do.     {d) 

III.  The  sentence  caused  great  sor- 
rov7. 

*'  And  Moses  told  these  sayings  unto 
all  the  children  of  Israel,  and  the  people 
mourned  greatly." 

1.  Their  sorrow  had  a  real  and  suf- 
ficient cause.  Only  a  little  time  pre- 
viously they  had  mourned  without  any 
true  reason  (verse  1)  ;  but  now  they 
have  sadly  real  and  abundant  reason 
for  grief  and  tears. 

2.  Their  sorrow  was  not  that  of  repent- 
ance, hut  of  selfishness.  They  mourned  j 
because  of  the|punishmentof  sin,  not  be- 
cause of  the  sin  itself.  "  In  the  sorrow 
of  the  world,"  says  F.  W.  Robertson, 
'*  the  obliquity  of  the  heart  towards 
evil  is  not  cured ;  it  seems  as  if  nothing 
cured  it ;  heartache  and  trials  come  in 
vain  ;  the  history  of  life  at  last  is  what 
it  was  at  first.  The  man  is  found  erring 
where  he  erred  before.  The  same  course, 
begun  with  the  certainty  of  the  same 
desperate  end  which  has  taken  place  so 
often  before.  They  have  reaped  the 
whirlwind,  but  they  will  again  sow  the 
wind."  Such  was  the  sorrow  of  the 
people  at  this  time.  Such  mourning  is 
never  blessed ;  never  issues  in  blessing. 


UOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAT.  XIV. 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 


(a)  It  pleapetb  God  to  make  His  punish- 
ments answerablo,  and  carrying  alikeness  with 
the  sin  for  which  it  is  inflicted  ;  so  that  they 
are  punished  by  that  thing  by  which  they 
have  sinned  against  God.  Covetous  persons 
■which  get  their  goods  by  fraud  and  oppression, 
are  themselves  or  their  heirs  many  times  op- 
pressed and  deceived,  and  brought  to  beggary. 
Gluttony,  surfeiting,  and  drunkenness,  are 
oftentimes  punithed  with  dropsies,  and  many 
gross  and  corrupt  humours,  distempering  their 
bodies,  and  bringing  them  with  speed  to  their 
graves.  But  these  judgments  belong  only  to 
the  body,  and  do  not  stretch  to  the  soul  and 
conscience  :  nevertheless,  the  Lord  ceaseth  not 
to  repay  us  even  in  this  kind  also,  according 
to  our  sin.  Hence  it  is,  that  Hi  threatenotti  to 
Bend  strong  delusions  upon  men  to  believe  lies, 
which  will  not  receive  and  believe  the  truth 
(2  Thess.  ii.  11);  and  they  ^^hich  will  not  be- 
lieve wholesome  doctrine,  but  having  itching 
ears,  get  them  an  heap  of  teachers,  snail  turn 
their  ears  from  the  truth,  and  be  turn^^d  unto 
fables,  and  believe  lies  (2  Tim.  iv.  3,  4)  — At- 
tersoll. 

(Jb)  The  makers  of  criminals  are  more  guilty 
than  the  criminals  that  they  make.  They  who 
lay  the  foundations  for  the  destruction  of  men 
by  inciting  them  to  evil  through  their  appe- 
tites and  passions,  are  the  architects  of  dam 
nation  in  the  world,  and  are  the  wick  'dest  of 
men.  Not  the  man  that  drinks,  but  the  man 
who  puts  the  cup  to  his  neighbour's  lips,  is 
the  most  wicked.  Not  the  man  that  steals, 
but  the  man  who  makes  a  haunt  for  the  pro- 
daction  of  thieves,  rears  them,  nourishes  them. 


and  injures  them,   is  the  culprit — the   arch- 
demon. — H.  W.  Beecher. 

(c)  The  legend  of  St.  Macarius  of  Alexan- 
dria, rune  thus  : — "  Oie  day,  as  Macarius  wan- 
dered among  those  ancient  Egyptian  tombs 
wherein  he  had  made  himself  a  dwalling-place, 
he  found  the  skull  of  a  mummy,  and,  turning 
it  over  with  his  crutch,  he  inquired  to  whom 
it  belonged ;  and  it  replied,  '  To  a  pagan.'  And 
Macarius,  looking  into  the  empty  eyes,  raid, 
'  Where,  then,  is  thy  soul  ?  '  And  the  head 
replied,  '  In  hell.'  Macarius  asked,  *  How 
deep  ?  '  And  the  head  replied,  '  The  depth 
is  greater  than  the  distance  from  heaven  to 
earth.'  Then  Macarius  asked,  '  Are  there 
any  deeper  than  thou  art?'  The  skull  re- 
pUed,  *  Yes;  the  Jews  are  deeper  still.'  And 
Macarius  asked,  '  Are  there  any  deeper  than 
the  Jews?  '  To  which  the  head  replied,  'Yes, 
in  sooth  1  for  the  Cnristians  whom  Jesus  Christ 
hath  redeemed,  and  who  show  in  their  actions 
that  they  despise  His  doctrine,  are  deeper 
still.'"— i>«'c^.  oflllust. 

(d)  The  pea  contains  the  vine  and 
flower  and  the  pod  in  embryo;  and  I  am  sure, 
when  I  plant  it,  that  it  will  produce  them,  and 
nothing  else.  No  at,  every  action  of  our  lives 
is  embryonic,  and,  according  as  it  is  right  or 
wrong,  it  will  surely  bring  forth  the  sweet 
flowers  of  joy,  or  the  poison  fruits  of  sorrow. 
Such  is  the  constitution  of  this  world  ;  and 
the  Bible  assures  us  that  the  next  world  only 
carries  it  forward.  Here  and  hereafter, "  what- 
soever a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap," 
— H.  W.  Beecher, 

For  additional  illustrations  of  the  certainty 
of  the  punishment  of  sin,  see  pp.  89,  225,  258. 


Base  Murmuring. 


(Verse  27.) 


No  sin  stands  alone.  Every  sin  is 
related  to  other  sins,  and  frequentlj 
involves  other  sins.  Such  is  the  case 
with  the  sin  of  murmuring.  It  is  not 
a  simple  sin,  but  involves — 

1.  Presumption.  The  murmurer  re- 
gards his  view  as  to  how  things  ought 
to  be,  as  superior  to  the  Divine  arrange 
meats.  Man  murmuring,  is  folly  ar- 
raigning infinite  wisdom ;  it  is  like  a 
glowworm  grumbling  at  the  sun. 

2.  Ingratitude.  Blessings  are  depre- 
ciated and  inconveniencies  are  exag- 
gerated by  the  murmurer  :  in  present 
difficulties  hi  quite  ignores  past  kind- 
nesses. "  Murmuring  persons,'"  says 
Dyer,  *'  think  everything  done  b)'  them- 


selves too  much,  and  everything  done 
for  them  too  little." 

3.  Rebellion.  The  will  of  the  mur- 
murer is  in  a  state  of  active  antagonism 
to  the  holy  will  of  God. 

We  have  a  mournful,  but  by  no 
means  a  solitary  example  of  murmur- 
ing mentioned  in  the  text.  Let  U3 
mark  its  conspicuous  features  as  they 
are  here  indicated. 

I.  Murmuring  without  any  cause. 

The  Israelites  had  much  reason  for 
thankfulness  and  praise  ;  but  none  foi 
complaint.  They  had  been  emancipated 
from  Egyptian  bondage  by  God  ;  they 
were  being  graciously  led,  provisioned, 
and  protected  b}    Him ;  thev  were  on 

265 


CHAP,  xrv. 


nOMILETlC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


the  borders  of  that  excellent  land  which 
He  had  promised  to  give  them  ;  yet 
because  of  the  false  report  of  the 
cowardly  spies  they  break  forth  into 
unrestrained  murmuring  against  God, 
!/  and  against  the  loaders  whom  He  had 
appointed. 

Psalms  of  grateful  praise  would  have 
been  becoming  in  them  ;  but  ungrate- 
ful murmurings  were  utterly  unbecom- 
ing and  base.  And  still  men  murmur 
without  any  cause,  except  the  ingrati- 
tude and  discontent  of  their  own  souls. 
(a) 

II.  Mui'muring  against  the  Best 
Being. 

"  This  evil  congregation  which  mur- 
mur against  Me."  In  vers.  2  it  is  said, 
"All  the  children  of  Israel  murmured 
agjiinst  Moses  and  against  Aaron."  The 
Lord  says,  "  They  murmur  against  Me." 
Complaints  made  against  the  servants 
of  God  in  the  fulfilment  of  their  ap- 
pointed duties  He  regards  as  against 
Himself. 

1.  Thhik  who  and  what  He  is, — the 
Supremely  Wise  and  Good,  c^c. 

2.  Think  of  what  He  had  done  for  the 
Israelites,  and  what  He  has  done  for  us, 
— redeemed,  guarded,  sustained,  &c. 

3.  Think  of  what  He  had  promised  to 
them,  and  what  He  has  promised  to  us, — 
the  continuance  of  His  presence  and 
support,  victory  over  our  enemies,  the 
possession  of  a  glorious  inheritance,  &o. 
How  heinously  base,  then,  is  it  to  mur- 
mur against  Him !  to  murmur  against 
Him  who  in  Himself  is  perfect,  and  who 
is  our  great  Benefactor !  Yet  all  our 
complaints  as  to  our  circumstances,  our 
duties,  our  lot  in  life,  are  murmurings 
against  Him. 

III.  Murmuring  of  long  continuance. 
"  How  long  shall  I  bear  with  this  evil 

congregation,   which    murmur    against 
Me  %  "  Murmuring  had  become  chronic 


with  this  generation  of  the  Israelites. 
There  are  many  to-day  who  are  habitual 
grumblers;  murmuring  is  not  an  oc- 
casional and  infrequent  thing  with 
them,  but  a  constant  mood  which  is 
more  or  less  manifest  in  all  their  speech. 
(6)  How  great  is  their  sin !  How 
great  also  is  the  patience  of  God  with 
them  ! 

IV.  Murmuring  known  to  G-od. 

"  I  have  heard  the  murmurings  of 
the  children  of  Israel,  which  they  mur- 
mur against  Me."  God  hears  every 
bitter  complaint,  whether  uttered  in 
loud  wailings  or  soft  whispers;  He 
perceives  every  unthankful  and  rebel- 
lious mood  of  the  spirit.  Consider  this, 
ye  murmurers,  and  be  shamed,  and  be 
warned  ! 

V.  Murmuring  punished  by  God. 

These  Israelite  murmurers  were  ex- 
cluded from  the  Promised  Land.  The 
murmurer  excludes  himself  from  the 
Canaan  of  joy  and  peace  and  content- 
ment. Murmuring  is  a  self-punishing 
sin.  God  has  made  it  so.  Murmuring 
is  misery.  The  murmurer  is  his  own 
tormentor,  (c) 

Let  us  endeavour  to  conquer  and 
avoid  this  evil  by  cultivating  a  spirit  of 
thankfulness  and  contentment. 

*'  Some  murmur  when  their  sky  is  clea% 

And  wholly  bright  to  view, 
If  one  small  speck  of  dark  appear 

In  their  great  Leaven  of  blue  ; 
And  some  with  thankful  love  are  filled 

If  but  ODe  streak  of  light, 
One  ray  of  God's  good  mercy,  gild 

The  darkness  of  their  night. 

In  palaces  are  hearts  that  ask, 

In  discontent  and  pride, 
Why  life  is  such  a  dreary  task, 

And  all  good  things  denied? 
And  hearts  in  poorest  huts  admire 

How  love  has  in  their  aid 
(Love  that  not  ever  seems  to  tire) 

Such  rich  provision  mad  \" 

Archbishop  Trench, 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 


(a)  In  ft  love-feast  in  Yorkshire,  a  good 
man  had  been  drawing  out  a  long  complain- 
ing strain  of  experiences  about  his  difficulties 
and  trials  on  the  way  to  heaven.  Another,  of 
a  different  spirit,  followed,  who  said,  "  I  see  our 
brother  who  has  just  sat  down  lives  in  Grumb- 

266 


ling  Street.  I  lived  there  myself  for  some 
time,  and  never  enjoyed  good  health.  The 
air  was  bad,  the  housa  bad,  the  water  bad  ; 
the  birds  never  came  and  sung  in  the  street ; 
and  I  was  gloomy  and  sad  enough.  But  I 
*  flitted.'     I  got  into  Thanksgiving   Street ; 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  XIV. 


V 


and  ever  since  then  I  have  had  good  health, 
and  80  baTo  my  family.  The  air  is  pure,  the 
water  pure,  the  house  good  ;  the  sua  shines  on 
it  all  day  ;  the  birds  are  always  singing;  and 
I  atu  as  happy  as  I  can  live.  Now,  I  recom- 
mend our  brother  to  '  flit.'  There  are  plenty 
of  houses  to  let  in  Thanksgiving  Street ;  and 
I  am  sure  he  will  find  him'^elf  a  new  man  if 
he  will  only  come  ;  and  I  will  be  rii^ht  glad  to 
have  him  for  a  neighbour." — Diet,  of  lllust. 
^  (b)  Some  people  are  always  ''out  of  sorts." 
The  weather  is  always  just  what  they  don't 
want.  I  met  one  of  these  men  a  while  ago,  a 
farmer,  who  raised  all  manner  of  crops.  It 
was  a  wet  day,  and  I  said,  "Mr.  Nay  ling, 


this  rain  will  be  fine  for  your  grass  crop.**— 
"  Yos,  pfirhaps ;  but  it  is  bad  for  the  com, 
and  will  keep  it  back.  I  don't  believe  we 
shall  have  a  crop."  A  few  days  after  this 
when  the  sun  was  shining  hot,  I  said,  **  Fine 
sun  for  your  corn,  sir." — '*  Yes,  pretty  fair ; 
bat  ib's  awful  for  the  rye.  Rye  wants  cold 
weather."  Again :  on  a  cold  morning  I  met 
my  neighbour,  and  si  id,  '•  This  must  be 
capital  for  your  rye,  Mr.  Ntyliog." — "Yes; 
but  it  is  the  very  worst  weather  for  the  corn 
and  grass.  Thev  want  heat  to  bring  them 
forward." — Di'.   Todd. 

(c)  For  an  illusiration  of  this  point  see   p. 
247. 


A  Presumptuous  Enterprise  and  its  Disastrous  Termination. 


(Verses  40-45.) 


We  have  in  these  verses  an  illustra- 
tion of — 

First :  The  sad  perversity  of  sinful 
human  nature.  The  children  of  Israel 
seemed  determined  to  walk  contrary  to 
God.  When  He  said,  "  Go,  and  possess 
the  land,"  they  disobeyed,  saying,  "  Let 
us  return  into  Egypt."  And  now  that 
He  says,  *'  Ye  shall  not  come  into  the 
land,"  they  say,  "  Lo,  we  will  go  up 
unto  the  place  which  the  Lord  hath 
promised."  "  When  they  should  go 
forward,"  says  AttersoU,  "  then  they 
will  go  backward  and  make  them  a 
captain  to  conduct  them  into  Egypt. 
When  they  should  go  backward,  then 
they  will  go  forward,  though  they 
perish  forit.  This  is  our  corrupt  nature. 
That  which  God  willeth  us  to  do,  we 
will  not  do  ;  and  that  which  He  willeth 
us  not  to  do,  that  we  will  do  ;  whereby 
we  see  thit  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  are 
enmity  against  God." 

Second :  2'he  confession  of  sin  and 
persistence  in  sin.  *'  We  have  sinned," 
said  the  Israelites,  and  in  the  same 
breath  they  propose  to  sin  again. 
They  were  not  penitent  for  their  sin  ; 
they  do  not  seem  at  all  conscious  of 
that  unbelief  which  was  their  great  sin, 
and  the  prolific  parent  of  so  many  other 
sins.  When  God  said  that  He  would 
give  them  the  land,  they  did  not  believe 
Him  ;  and  now  He  says  that  they  shall 
not  enter  the  land,  they  do  not  believe 
Him.  Then  they  sinned  by  their  un- 
believing  despair ;    now    they    sin  by 


their  presumptuous  self-confidence. 
*'  Man  is  ever  supposing,"  says  Dr.  A. 
Clarke,  "  he  can  either  do  all  things^  or 
do  nothirig ;  he  is  therefore  sometimes 
presumptuous,  and  at  other  times  in 
despair."  The  people  cried.  **  We  have 
sinned,"  and  at  once  proceeded  to  sin 
again  in  another  form.  How  many  of 
us  bear  a  close  resemblance  to  them  in 
this  respect  !     (a) 

Third  :  The  great  difficulty  of  walking 
humhly  and  patiently  in  the  path  which 
our  sins  has  rendered  necessary  for  us. 
The  unbelief  of  the  Israelites  had  ren- 
dered it  necessary  that  they  should  be 
ordered  bick  into  the  wilderness,  and 
against  this  they  rebelled  ;  they  would 
go  forward,  not  backward.  So  with  us. 
We  rebel  against  God,  or  fiiil  to  enter 
into  His  purposes  concerning  us ;  and 
when  suffering  and  loss  follow,  we  fail 
to  see  in  them  the  just  and  natural 
consequences  of  our  sin  ;  and,  instead  )f 
humbly  submitting  to  them,  we  •  lam  5 
circumstances  or  find  fault  wit  i 
Providence,  and  presumptuously  rebel 
against  the  Divine  order. 

Now  let  us  turn  to  the  main  subject 
of  this  paragraph,  and  consider — 

I.  The  presumptuous  enterprise. 

In  the  narrative  as  given  both  here 
and  in  Dent.  i.  41-45,  their  presumption 
is  mentioned.  Their  presumption  is 
seen  in  that  they  went  forth — 

1.  In  opposition  to  the  command  of  the 
Lord.  "  And  the  Lord  said,  To-morrow 
turn  you  and  get  yon  into  the  wilder- 

267 


CHAP.  XIV.  HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


ness  by  the  way  of  the  Red  Sea.  D.nil)t- 
less  ye  shall  not  come  into  the  land," 
&c.  "  And  they  rose  up  early  in  the 
morning,  and  got  them  up  into  the  top 
of  the  mountain,  saying,  Lo,  we  be 
here,  and  we  will  go  up  into  the  place 
which  the  Lord  hath  promised."  The 
enterprise  which  is  forbidden  by  God 
cannot  possibly  under  any  circum- 
stances be  either  wise  or  right. 

2.   Despite  the  remonstrance  of  Moses. 
Being  acquainted  with   their  purpose, 
Moses  points  out  to  them  (1)  The  sin 
of  their  proposal.     *'And  Moses  said. 
Wherefore   now  do  ye   transgress    the 
commandment  of  the  Lord  1 "     (2)  The 
peril  of  their  proposal.    "  It  shall  not 
prosper.    Go  not  up,  for  the  Lord  is  not 
among  you ;  that  ye  be  not  smitten  be- 
fore your  enemies.    For  the  Amalekitea 
and   the  Canaanites    are  there   before 
you,  and  ye  shall  fall  by  the  sword.'* 
)  To  firm  believers  in  God,  the  taking  of 
i  the  land  would  have   been  a  question 
between  the  Lord  and  the  heathen  na- 
tions of  Canaan.    But  by  their  unbelief 
the  Israelites  had  made   it  a  question 
between  themselves  and  the  Canaanites ; 
and,  without  the  Divine  Presence,  the 
Israelites    were   not   a  match  for  the 
Canaanites.       (3)  The  reason  of  their 
peril.     "  The  Lord  is  not  among  you 
....  Because  ye  are  turned  away  from 
the  Lord,  therefore  the  Lord  will  not 
be  with  you."     The  presence  of  God 
with  His  people   is  the  secret  of  their 
strength  and   victory.  Comp.  2  Chron. 
XX.  15,  17.      But  sin  strips  us  of  the 
consciousness  of  His  Presence,  despoils 
us  of  calainess  and  courage,  withdraws 
from  us  our  defence,  and  leaves  us  an 
easy  prey  to  our  enemies.    Thus  Moses 
remonstrated    with   them ;    ''  but  they 
presumed  to  go  up  unto  the  hill  top." 
3.    Without   the  symbol  of  the  Divine 
Presence  and  the  presence  of  the  Divinely- 
appointed  leader.       "  Nevertheless  the 
Ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord,  and 
Moses  departed  not  out  of  the  camp." 
Moses   would    not    countenance    their 
enterprise  in  any  way  or  in  any  degree 
whatsoever.     But  they  despised  all  re- 
monstrances and  counsels   and  expres- 
sions of  disapproval ;  and  they  set  out 
268 


to  "  go  up  unto  the  place  which  the 
Lord  had  promised." 

II.  The  disastrous  termination  of 
this  presumptuous  enterprise  "  Then 
the  Amalekites  came  down,  and  the 
Canaanites  which  dwelt  in  that  hill, 
and  smote  them,  and  discomfited 
them,  unto  Hormah."  Their  presump- 
tuous enterprise  ends  in — 

1.  Disgraceful  defeat.  They  had  said, 
"  We  will  go  up  and  fight ;  .  .  .  .  We 
will  go  up  unto  the  place  which  the 
Lord  hath  promised."  And  they  went 
out;  but  returned  more  quickly  than 
they  went ;  for  the  Canaanites  which 
dwelt  in  that  mountain,  came  out  against 
them,  and  chased  them,  as  bees  do, 
unto  Hormah  (Deut.  i.  44).  They  did 
not  fight  like  men;  but  fled  like  cowards. 
Their  defeat  was  ignominious.     (6) 

2.  Sore  slaughter.  The  Canaanites 
"  smote  them  and  discomfited  them  ;  '* 
..."  and  destroyed  them  in  Seir." 
They  were  defeated  with  severe  loss  of 
men.  Already  they  are  beginning  to 
bring:  about  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine 
sentence,  that  their  carcases  should  fall 
in  the  wilderness. 

3.  Bitter  sorrow.  "  And  ye  returned 
and  wept  before  the  Lord."  How  prone 
these  people  were  to  weep.  Shallow 
hearts  perhaps  weep  most.  There  was 
nothing  noble  or  commendable  in  these 
tears.  They  were  the  expressions  of 
disappointment  and  cowardice,  and  were 
as  fruitless  as  they  were  bitter  ;  for  "  the 
Lord  would  not  hearken  to  their  voice, 
nor  give  ear  unto  them." 

Conclusion. 

From  the  whole  let  us  learn  the  sin 
and  the  folly  of  entering  upoi  any  enter- 
prises, and  especially  difficidt  ones,  in 
our  own  strength.  "  Apart  from  me," 
said  Christ,  "  ye  can  do  nothing."  This 
is  applicable  to — 

1.  Spiritual  life  in  its  origin  ana 
progress.  The  attempt  in  our  own 
strength  to  lead  a  religious,  godly  life, 
is  sure  to  end  in  sad  disappointment 
and  utter  failure,  (c) 

2.  idpiritual  conflict.  Unless  we  take 
to  ourselves  "  the  whole  armour  ')f 
God,"   our  spiritual  foes    will   be  too 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  XV. 


many  and  too  tnighty  for  us.     We  can 
conquer  only  through  Christ. 

3.  Spiritual  service.     Our  clforts  to 
benefit  our  fellow    men   will   succeed 


only  as  they  are  made  in  reliance  upon 
the  blessing  of  God.  We  can  blesa 
others  only  as  He  blesses  us.  Comp. 
1  Cor.  iii.  5-7. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  How  many  a  hardened  rebel  on  ship- 
board,   when    the    timbers   are    strained    and 
creaking,  when  the  mast  is  broken,  and  the 
Bhip  is   drifting   before  the  gale,    when    the 
hungry  waves  are  opening   their   mouths  to 
swallow  up  the  ship  alive  and  quick  as  those 
that   go  into   the  pit — how   many   an   hard- 
ened sailor  has  then  bowed  his   knee,  with 
tears  in  his  eyes,  and  cried,  '"I  have  sinned  I  " 
But  of  what  avail  and  of  what  value  was  his 
confession?     The   repentance   that  was  born 
in  the  storm  died  in  tde  calm  ;  that  repentance 
of  his  that  was  begotten  amidst  the  thunder 
and  the  lightning,  ceased  so  soon  as  all  was 
hushed  in  quiet,  and  the  man  who  was  a  pious 
mariner  when  on  board  ship,  became  the  most 
wicked   and  abominable   of   sailers  when   he 
placed  his  foot  on  <e;va  Jirma.     How  often, 
too,  have  we  seen  this  in  a  storm  of  thun- 
der and  lightning  I     Many  a  man's  cheek  is 
blanched  when  he  hears  the  thunder  rolling; 
and  the  tears  start  to  his  eyes,  and  he  cries, 
*'  0  God,  I  have  sinned  I  "  while  the  rafters  of 
his  house  are  shaking,  and  the  very  ground 
beneath  him  reeling  at  the  voice  of  God  which 
is  full  of  majesty.     But  alas,  for  such  a  re- 
pentance 1     When  the  sun  again  shines,  and 
the   black  clouds  are  withdrawn,    sin  comes 
again  upon  the  man,  and  he  becomes  worse 
than  before.     How  many  of  the  same  sort  of 
confessions,  too,  have  we    seen   in  times    of 
cholera,  and  fever,  and  pestilence  I     Then  our 
churches  have   been  crammed  with   hearers, 
who,  because  so  many  funerals  have  passed 
their  doors,  or  so  many  have  died  in  the  street, 
could  not  refrain  from  going  up  to  God's  house 
to  confess  their  sins.     And  under  that  visita- 
tion, when  one,  two,  and  three  have  been  lying 
dead  in  the  house,  or  next  door,   bow  many 
have  thought  they  would  really  turn  to  God  1 
But,  alas  I  when  the  pestilence  had   done  its 
work,  conviction  ceased ;  and  when  the  boll 
had  tolled  the  last  time  for  a  death  caused  by 
cholera,  then  their  hearts  ceased  to  beat  with 
penitence,  and   their  tears  did  flow  no  more, 
...  It  is  of  no  use  for  you  to    say,  "  I  have 
sinned/'  merely  under  the  influence  of  terror, 


and   then    to  forget  it  afterwards.  —  C   H, 
Spurgeon. 

(6)  A  noble  ship  was  bearing  into  port.  It 
was  the  evening  hour,  and  too  late  to  enter 
without  a  pilot.  There  were  two  passages 
into  the  harbour ;  one  a  dangerous  narrow 
channel,  the  other  a  wide  and  safe  one. 
The  captain  determined  to  pilot  himself  by 
the  narrow  passage.  A  storm  was  coming 
up  ;  and  the  passengers,  with  fear  and  con- 
sternation, begged  him  to  take  the  wider 
channel.  He  laughed  at  their  cowardice,  and 
swore  he  would  do  as  he  pleased.  As  the 
night  advance>d,  the  gale  increased.  Soon 
rose  a  cry,  '•'' Breakers  <ihe<td,  breakers  ahead  1^'' 
The  captain  flaw  to  the  wheel ;  the  sails  were 
struck;  the  wind  had  tuo  mastery;  and  the 
captain  found  a  will  that  could  defy  his  own. 
The  vessel  made  a  fearful  plunge,  stiuck  the 
foreship  deep  into  the  sand,  to  be  shattered  by 
the  wild  waves'  pleasuro.  Few  survived  the 
terrors  of  that  fearful  night;  but  among  the 
dead  thrown  up  by  the  rising  tide  watt  the 
body  of  the  wilful  and  presumptuous  captain. 
— Diet,  of  Illust. 

(c)  There  is  not  a  daisy  that  was  not 
organised  to  be  a  daisy,  but  I  should  like  to 
see  one  that  did  not  have  the  sun  to  help  it 
up  from  the  seed ;  there  is  not  an  aster  that 
was  not  organised  to  be  an  aster,  but  where  is 
there  one  that  grew  independent  of  the  sun  ? 
What  the  sun  is  to  flowers,  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  must  be  to  our  hearts,  if  we  would  be 
Christians.  If  there  is  a  man  who  can  be  a 
Christian  without  the  help  of  God,  he  has  a 
heart  such  as  I  never  knew  a  person  to  have. 
I  never  seek  to  put  down  wicked  thoughts  and 
incite  good  ones  without  feeling  that  if  God 
does  not  help  me  I  shall  not  siiccaed.  And 
here  we  come  to  the  very  bosom  of  the  truth  I 
am  enforcing,  for  what  God  commands  us  to 
be,  that  He  is  Himself,  and  when  we  need 
help  in  our  Christian  course.  He  stands  ready, 
of  all  others,  to  help  us,  working  in  iis  both  to 
will  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure. — H.  W. 
Beecher, 


CHAPTER   XV. 


Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. 


In  this  and  the  next  four  chapters 
"we  have  a  narrative  of  certain  oc- 
currences and  enactments  during  the 
penal  wandering  in  the   desert,  which 


lasted  for  nearly  thirty-eight  years. 
The  relation  of  these  chapters  to  the 
history  is  well  expressed  by  Keil  and 
Del.  in  this  note  :  "  After  the  unhappy 

2G9 


CHAP.  XV. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENT ARV:    NUMBERS, 


issue  of  the  attempt  to  penetrate  into 
Canaan,  in  opposition  to  the  will  of  God 
and  the  advice  of  Moses,  the  Israelites 
remained  *  many  days '  in  Kadesh,  as 
the    Lord    did    not    hearken    to    their 
lamentations    concerning     the    defeat 
which  thej;  had  suffered  at  the  hands 
of    the    Canaan  it  es    and    Am  ale  kites. 
Then    they   turned,    and   took    their 
journey,  as  the  Lord  had  commanded 
(chap,  xiv,  25),  into  the  wilderness,  in 
the   direction   towards    the    Red    Sea 
(Deut.  i.  45 ;  ii.   1) ;  and  in   the  first 
month  of  the  fortieth  year  they  came 
again  into  the  desert  of  Zin,  to  Kadesh 
(chap.    XX.    1).      Ail   that    we    know 
respecting  this  journeying  from  Kadesh 
into   the    wilderness   in   the    direction 
towards  the  Bed  Sea,   and  up  to  the 
time  of  their  return  to  the  desert  of 
Zin,  is  limited  to  a  number  of  names  of 
places  of  encampment  given  in  the  list 
of  journeying  stages   in  chap,  xxxiii. 
19-30,  out  of  which,  as  the  situation  of 
the  majority  of  them  is  altogether  un- 
known,  or  at  all  events  has  not  yet 
been  determined,  no  connected  account 
of  the  journeys  of  Israel  during  this 
interval     of    thirty-seven     years    can 
possibly  be  drawn.     The  most  import- 
ant event  related  in   connection  with 
this  period  is  the  rebellion  of  the  com- 
pany  of    Korah    against    Moses    and 
Aaron,  and  the  re-establishment  of  the 
Aaronic  priesthood  and  confirmation  of 
their    rights,    which    this    occasioned 
(chaps,  xvi.-xviii).     The  rebellion  pro- 
bably occurred  in  the  first  portion  of 
the  period  in  question.     In  addition  to 
this  there  are  only  a  few  laws  recorded, 
which  were  issued  during  this  long  time 
of    punishment,     and      furnished      a 
practical  proof  of  the  continuance  of 
the  covenant  which  the  Lord  had  made 
with  the  nation  of  Israel  at  Sinai.  There 
was  nothing  more  to  record  in  connec- 
tion   with    these    thirty-seven    years, 
which  formed  the  second  stage  in  the 
guidance  of  Israel  through  the  desert. 
For,  as  Baumgarten  has  well  observed, 
the  fighting  men  of  Israel  had   fallen 
under  the  judgment  of  Jehovah,  and  the 
sacred  history,  therefore,  was  no  longer 
concerned     with    them ;    whilst    the 
270 


youth,  in  whom  the  life  and  hope  of 
Israel  were  preserved,  had  as  yet  no 
history  at  all." 

In  this  chapter  certain  regulations 
concerning  certain  offerings  and  obser- 
vances are  laid  down. 

Verse  4.  On  the  meat  offering  comp. 
Lev.  ii. 

Verse  14.  ^  stranger.  "  There  were 
two  sorts  of  strangers  among  the 
Israelites  ;  some  that  entirely  embraced 
and  professed  the  Jewish  religion,  into 
which  they  were  admitted  by  circumci- 
sion, &c  ;  others  that  lived  among  them 
by  permission,  having  renounced  all 
idolatry,  but  did  not  submit  to  their 
whole  religion.  The  former  sort  are 
understood  to  be  meant  here. — Bp. 
Patrick. 

Verse  15.  One  ordinance,  &c.  Keiland 
Del.  translate  :  "  '  As  for  the  assembly, 
there  shall  be  one  law  for  the  Israelite 
and  the  stranger, ....  an  eternal 
ordinance     ....    before     Jehovah.' 

'^'7't^>    which  is  construed  absolutely, 

refers  to  the  assembling  of  the  nation 
before  Jehovah,  or  to  the  congregation 
viewed  in  its  attitude  with  regard  to 
God." 

As  ye  are,  so  shall  the  stranger  he,  dec, 
'*  The  meaning  is,  *  as  with  you,  so 
shall  it  be  with  the  stranger,'  &c."— 
Speaker's  Comm. 

Verses  17-21.  The  ordinances  here 
prescribed  are  based  upon  the  general 
principle  stated  in  Exod.  xxii.  29  ;  xxiii. 
19. 

Verse  20.     Dough.     -Hfanj?,  is  only 

used  in  Neh.  x.  37 ;  Ezek.  xliv.  30, 
and  in  both  places  the  reference  is 
to  this  ordinance.  Keil  and  Del.  say 
that  the  word  "  signifies  most  probably 
groats,  or  meal  coarsely  bruised." 
Fuerst,  however,  regards  the  old  inter- 
pretation, dough  or  mixed  dough,  as  the 
more  probable. 

Verse  24.  By  ignorance  without  the 
knowledge,  &c.  Lit.,  as  in  margin, 
"  By  ignorance  from  the  eyes  of,"  &o. 
Keil  and  Del.  :  **  If  it  occur  away  from 
the  eyes  of  the  congregation  through 
error."     . 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  XV. 


According  to  the  manner.  Margin  : 
"According  to  the  ordinance."  H.  E.  J, 
Howard  :  "  According  to  the  appoint- 
ment." 

Verse  26.  Seeing  all  the  people  were 
in  ignorance.  Keil  and  Del.  :  "  '  For ' 
(sc.  it  has  happened)  *  to  the  wliole 
nation  in  mistake.'  "  Howard  :  "  For  to 
all  the  people  (it  was)  nnintentional." 

Verse  30.  Presumptuously .  Margin  : 
"  With  an  high  hand."  Fnerst  :  "  With 
a  raised  hand  ; "  raised  *'  as  a  sign  of 
presumption." 

Reproacheth  the  Lord,  Translate, 
**  Blasphemeth  the  Lord."  Keil  and 
Del.  :  "  Whoever  committeth  a  sin 
'  with  a  high  hand,' — i.e.,  so  that  he 
raised  his  hand,  as  it  were,  against 
Jehovah,  or  acted  in  open  rebellion 
against  Him,  — blasphemed  God,  and 
was  to  be  cut  off  (see  Gen.  xvii.  14)  ; 
for  he  had  despised  the  word  of  Je- 
hovah, and  broken  His  commandment, 
and  was  to  atone  for  it  with  his  life." 

Verse  31.  His  iniquity  shall  he  ujjon 
him.  Howard  ;  "  Its  sin  (is)  in  it." 
Keil  and  Del.  :  "  *  Its  crime  upon  it ;  * 
i.e.,  it  shall  come  upon  such  a  soul  in 
the  punishment  which  it  shall  endure." 


Verse  34.  Because  it  wan  not  declared^ 
&c.  It  had  already  been  determined 
that  Sabbatii-brea-king  should  be  pun- 
ished by  death  (LCxod.  xxxi.  14,  15); 
but  the  mode  of  death  was  not 
declared. 

Verse  35.  The  man  shall  he  surely  put 
to  death.  "  For  as  no  fire  was  to  be 
made  throughout  their  habitations  on 
a  Sabbath  day  (Exod.  xxxv.  2,  3), 
gathering  sticks  for  such  a  purpose  was 
a  work  that  was  a  violation  of  the 
Sabbath,  punishable  with  death." — Dr, 
Gill. 

Verse  38.  The  outer  garment  of  the 
Hebrews  was  a  quadrangular  piece  of 
cloth.  They  are  here  commanded  to 
w^ear  fringes  or  tassels  at  the  corners 
of  this  garment,  and  to  fasten  the 
tassels  to  the  edge  of  the  garment  by  a 
riband  or  thread  of  a  deep  blue  colour. 
This  riband  or  thread  of  blue  was  de- 
signed to  remind  them  of  the  command- 
ments of  the  Lord,  and  of  their  obli- 
gation to  keep  them. 

Verse  39.  That  ye  seeh  not.  Speaker^ % 
Comm.  :  "  That  ve  wander  not."  Keil 
and  Del. :  *'  And  ye  shall  not  stray 
after,"  &c. 


PnopRiETY  IN  Worship, 
(Verses  1-16.) 


In  this  paragraph  we  have  certain 
instructions  as  to  the  offering  of  sacri- 
fices, when  the  people  had  entered  into 
the  Promised  Land.  These  instruc- 
tions are  supplementary  to  the  laws 
concerning  sacrifices  which  had  already 
been  promulgated.     Let  us  consider — 

I.  The  gracious  intimation. 

"  When  ye  be  come  into  the  land  of 
your  habitations,  which  I  give  unto 
you." 

We  know  not  at  what  time  during 
their  long  wanderings,  these  directions 
were  given  unto  them  ;  but  the  place 
which  they  occupy  in  the  history  is 
significant  and  suggestive.  Imme- 
diately after  the  record  of  the  sentence 
of  death  in  the  wilderness,  which  was 
passed  upon  the  generation  of  rebels, 
ihese   instructions   are  inserted  '.\hicli 


graciously  intimate  that  another  gene- 
ration should  possess  the  good  land. 
This  intimation  was  eminently  calcu- 
lated to  promote  their — 

1.  E)icouragement.  It  assures  them 
that,  notwithstanding  the  sin  of  the 
parents,  their  children  should  not  be 
disinherited  ;  and  this  assurance  would 
be  to  them  a  pledge  of  the  renewal  of 
the  flivour  of  God  to  them.  These 
would  animate  and  cheer  them  in  their 
tedious  wanderings  in  the  desert. 

2.  Instruction.  Here  they  are 
taught  that,  notwithstanding  all  the 
unfaithfulness  and  rebellion  of  man, 
God  "  abideth  faithful :  He  cannot  deny 
Himself."  We  may  by  our  sin  exclude 
ourselves  from  the  enjoyment  of  the 
privileges  promised  to  the  people  of 
God  ]  but  we  cannot  prevent  the  fulnl- 


CHAP.  XV.  HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


ment  of  those  promises,  or  frustrate  the 
Divine  purposes.  "  My  counsel  shall 
stand,  and  I  will  do  all  My  pleasure." 

II.  The  directions  concerning  the 
worship  of  God.     (Vers.  3-12). 

1.  The  perpetual  obligation  of  ivorship 
is  here  implied.  These  instructions 
concerning  worship  are  spoken  of  as 
"  an  ordinance  for  ever  in  your  genera- 
tions." (1)  Man's  need  of  worship  is 
permanent.  Human  nature  can  never 
outgrow  its  need  of  worship.  The 
higher  man  rises  in  the  scale  of  being, 
the  more  reverently  he  adores  the  Holy 
One.  (2)  God's  w^orthiness  to  receive 
worship  is  permanent.  He  is  eternally 
and  unchangeably  tlie  Supremely  and 
Infinitely  Perfect,  the  Supremely  and 
Infinitely  Beautiful.  Hence  the  perpe- 
tual obligation  of  worship. 

2.  That  man  must  approach  God 
through  sacrifice  is  also  implied  in  the 
text.  Man's  consciousness  of  sin  is  the 
reason  of  this  need.  Feeling  our  guilti- 
ness, we  are  afraid  to  approach  unto 
the  Being  of  perfect  holinesG  against 
whom  we  have  sinned.  VVe  draw  near 
to  God  through  the  mediation  of  Jesus 
Christ,  the  great  Sin  Offering  (John 
xiv.  6).  He  removes  our  suspicions 
concerning  God,  and  banishes  our  guilty 
fears,  and  brings  us  near  to  Him.  "God 
hath  reconciled  us  to  Himself  by  Jesus 
Christ,"  (fee.  (2  Cor.  v.  18,  19).  But  the 
chief  teaching  of  these  directions  is 
this — 

3.  In  the  oferings  which  we  present 
to  Gody  proper  p)roportions  should  he 
observed.  These  proportions  are  stated 
in  the  text.  "  If  the  sacrifice  was  a  lamb 
or  a  kid,  then  the  meat  offering  must 
be  a  tenth-deal  of  flour,  that  is  an  omer, 
which  contained  about  five  pints  ;  this 
must  be  mingled  with  oil,  the  fourth 
part  of  a  hin  (a  hin  contained  about 
five  quarts),  and  the  drink  offering 
must  be  the  same  quantity  of  wine,  about 
a  quart  and  half  a  pint,"  (vers.  3-5). 
If  it  was  a  ram,  the  meat  offering  was 
doubled,  two  tenth-deals  of  flour,  about 
five  quarts,  and  a  third'  part  of  a  hin  of 
oil  (which  was  to  them  as  butter  is  to 
us)  mingled  with  it ;  and  the  same 
quantity  of  wine  for  a  drink  offerin 

272 


o 


(vers.  6,  7.)  If  the  sacrifice  was  a  bul- 
lock, the  meat-offering  was  to  be  trebled, 
three  omers,  with  five  pints  of  oil,  and 
the  same  quantity  of  wine  for  a  drink- 
offering  (vers.  8-10).  And  thus  for  each 
sacrifice,  whether  offered  by  a  particu- 
lar person  or  at  the  common  charge." 
The  principle  seems  to  be  this,  that 
there  should  be  order  and  congruity 
in  the  services  which  we  offer  to  God  ; 
everything  connected  with  the  worship 
of  God  should  be  appropriate  and  har- 
monious. This  principle  may  be  applied 
to  (1)  The  edifices  for  Divine  worship, 
(a).  (2)  The  exercises  of  Divine  wor- 
ship. (6).  (3)  The  great  sacrifice  for  us 
and  our  offerings  to  God.  "  God  gave 
His  only  begotten  Son."  "  He  spared 
not  His  Own  Son,  but  delivered  Him 
up  for  us  all."  Then  we  should  give 
ourselves  unreservedly  to  Him.  Comp. 
Rom.  xii.  1. 

III.  The  pleasure  of  God  in  the 
worship  of  His  people. 

Five  times  in  this  paragraph  we 
meet  with  the  words,  "  A  sw^eet  savour 
unto  the  Lord  "  (vers.  3,  7,  10,  13,  U). 
The  words  express  the  pleasure  which 
God  takes  in  the  true  worship  of  His 
people.  For  what  reasons  does  God 
delight  in  His  people's  wor.ship? 

1.  Because  the  feelings  which  find 
expression  in  true  worship  are  good  and 
heautifvl.  The  sin-offering  was  designed 
to  express  the  penitence,  the  meat- 
offering the  gratitude,  and  the  burnt- 
offering  the  self-consecration  of  the 
worshippers  ;  and  penitence,  gratitude, 
and  consecration  of  self  to  God  are 
good  and  becoming  in  us,  beneficial 
to  us,  and  well-pleasing  to  God. 

2.  Because  worship  is  essential  to  tJie 
education  and  j^^^ogress  of  His  creatures. 
Without  worship  the  noblest  capacities 
and  faculties  of  our  nature  remaiii 
undeveloped.  Gratitude,  humility,  ad- 
miration, adoration,  aspiration,  thes',  are 
worship;  and  without  the^e  our  spirits 
cannot  grow,  cannot  even  live  in  an) 
worthy  sense.  True  worship  transforms 
the  worshipper  into  the  image  of  the 
object  worshipped.  He  ice  the  worship 
of  the  Lord  God  exalte,  purifies, enriches, 
strengthens   the    worshipper.     **  It    is 


noMlLETW    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS.  chap.  xv. 


gc''»i  to   give   thanks  unto  the  Lord/' 

3.  Becmise  these  sacrifices  were   types 
of  the  perfect  Sacrifice   of  Jesus  Christ. 
the  s;icriiEices    offered  under  the  cere- 
monial hxw  pointed    onward  to  Christ 
Jesus,  and  found  their  consummation 
in  His   glorious   self-sacrifice.     In  the 
sublime  self-devotion  of  that  sacrifice, 
in  the   unspeakable  love    which    it  so 
eloquently  expresses,  and  in  the  hearty 
obedience    even    unto    death,   we  have 
the  highest  worship.     As  Thomas  Car- 
lyle   says,  "  0    brother,  if   this  is  n3t 
'  worship,'  then  I  say,  the  more  pity  for 
worship  ;  for  this  is  the   noblest   thing 
yet  discovered  under  God's  sky."     For 
these  reasons  the  offerings  of  His  people 
are  "a  sweet  savour  unto  the   Lord," 
and  in  their  worship  He  takes  delight. 

IV.  The  directions  concerning  the 
stranger  sojourning  with  the  Israelites. 

**  All  that   are  born  of  the  country 
ahall  do  these  things  after  this  manner," 


&c.  (vers.  13-16).  Before  the  Lord  and 
in  the  exercises  of  worship,  tlie  Israelite 
had  no  advantage  over  the  stranger  ; 
there  was  one  law  for  both,  and  one 
ordinance.      This    arrangement    would 

tend — 

1.  To  checTc  exclusiveness  and  pride 
among  the  Israelites.  It  was  eminently 
calculated  to  suppress  the  risings  of 
spiritual  pride  and  pride  of  race  to  which 
they  were  so  prone  (John  viii.  33,  39). 

2.  To  encourage  the  Israelites  in  the 
humane  treatment  of  foreigners.  They 
are  here  taught  that  if  the  foreigner 
were  willing  to  adopt  their  religion,  they 
were  to  receive  him  with  kindness,  &c. 

3.  To  encourage  the  Gentiles  to  unite 
in  the  worsldp  and  service  of  the  Lord 

God, 

4.  To  foreshadow  the  universality  oj 
the  Christian  Church.  Comp.  John  iii. 
14-17  ;  Acts  X.  34,  35  ;  xvii.  26-28  ; 
Gal.  iii.  7-9,  14,  22,  26-29  ;  Rev.  xxii. 
17. 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 


(a)  Excess  of  material    circumstance    ia 
spiritual    worship,  whether   of   architectaral 
adornment,  ritual  ceremony,  musical  elabora- 
tion, or  even  intellectual  fastidiousness,  is  as 
injurious  to  it  as  is  over-cumbroufl  machinery 
in  manufacture,  excess  of  ceremonial  in  social 
life,  superfluous  raiment  to  personal  activity, 
or  gaudy  ornamentation  to  personal  grace.  It 
is  both  injarioua  to  life  and  offensive  to  tasto. 
But  equally  so,  on  the  other  hand,  is  penu- 
riousness  and  nakedness.  If  we  may  not  over- 
lay spiritual  life,  neither  may   we  denude  it. 
The  true  law  of  life  is  that  its  energies  be 
developed  in  all  the  force  and  with  all  the 
beauty  of  which  they  are  capable,  and  that  it 
worship  with  such  cultured  adornment  as  in 
the  highest  degree  may  appe^il  to  and  express 
its  own  spiritual  emotions.   This  is  the  simple 
law  and  the  sufficient  test  of  all  artistic  appli- 
ances.    Is  any  particalar  culture  conducive  to 
the  worshipping  heart  of  the  congregation  ? 
If  not,  and  still  more  if  it  be  injurious  to  it, 
then  no  matter  how  beautiful  in  itself  it  may 
be— how  conducive  to  the  profit  acd  joy  of 
other  congregations— however  sanctioned  by 
history  and  contemporary  use — let  it  be  re- 
jected, and,  if  needful,  let  it  be  deaU  with  as 
the  serpent  of  brass  which  Hezekiah  destroyed 
and   pronounced    to  be     "  Nuhushtan."— //. 
Allon,D.D. 

(If)  In  the  Temple  sorvice  there  was  not 
only  the  Holy  Sacrifice  and  the  fragrant 
incense,  but  the  golden  altar,  and  the  richly- 
robed  priest— not  only  the  holy  song,  but  the 


rich  poetry  of  David's  p.-^ilms,   and  the  cul- 
tured music  of  the  sons  of  Asaph  and  Korah. 
In  every  allusion  of  the  psalmists,  as  well  as 
in  every  record  of  the  historian,  we  feel  the 
implications  of  an  earnest  reverential  manner. 
What  special  spirituality   can  there  be  in  the 
pious  doggrel  of  hymns,  or  in  the  rude  incon- 
gruities of  tunes  ?  Way  should  it  be  necessary 
to  abjure  all  culture  and  excruciate  all  ta^^te, 
in  order  that  piety  may  have  its  supreme  en- 
joymeut?     It  is  true  that   worship   does  not 
contnistin  artistic  song,  but  neither  does  it  in 
inharmonious  doggrel.     While  the  essence  of 
all  worship  must  ever  lie  in  the  true  and  fer- 
vent   expression     of     spiritual    feeling,    the 
reverence  which  constitutes  the  pertection  of 
such  feeling  demands  that  worship  be  clothed 
with  every  beauty  that  can  adorn,  with  every 
appliance  that  can  enhance  it,  so  that  in  God's 
sanctuary   there  may  be  beauty    as  well  aa 
strength  ;  for  beauty  is  the  comely  costume 
of  str'ength.  Strength  bjdizaned  is  not  beauty, 
neither    is    stretjgth   denuded,   but   strength 
clothed  in  rich  but  yet  unobtrusive  garments. 
It  is  surely  a  careless  if  not  a  scornful  dis- 
paragement of  the  service  of  the  Church,  to 
be  contented  with  rude,  icfharmonious  song  in 
it,  while  we  bestow  upon  our  drawing-room 
song  and  our  music-hall  concerts  our  highest 
arti's'ic  culture  and  care.     No  genuine  piety 
can   excuse  nogligonce;    by   its   very    negli- 
gence it  will  tes^tify  to  its  own  defects.  Every- 
thing  pertaining   to    worship    should   surely 
indicate  a  reverent  solicitude  to  bring  to  God 

273 


CHAP.  XV. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS. 


fhe  beat  that  we  can  proffer — an  offering  per- 
fect in  every  appliance  th'-itcan  give  etnphasig 
to  its  adorotion  ;  intensify  its  rapture,  or 
beautify  its  love.  Heu :;e  the  di^voutest  wor- 
shippers will  provide  for  their  praise  hymns  of 
the  highest  p^totry,  and  nausic  of  the  richest 
harmony. — J  bid. 

(c)  He  who  worships  the  God  and  Father  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  munt,  in  all  the 
qualities  of  his  soul,  in  all  the  relations  of  his 
life,  be  a  better  man  than  the  atheist,  than  the 
man  who  denies  the  existence  of  God.  The 
man  who  worships  a  stone  is  a  better  man 
than  he  who  worships  nothing.  The  man  who 
falls  down  before  carven  wood,  or  worships 
the  beasts  of  the  field,  is  a  grander  nature 
than  he  who  never  bows  his  head  in  prayer, 
and  never  lifts  up  his  heart  in  aspiration  and 
religious  desire.  The  tendency  of  worship  is 
to  elevate  our  nature.  He  who  worships 
sincerely,  however  ignorantly,  is  the  better 
for  his  worship ;  he  is  enlarged  in  his  nature, 
his  outlook  upon  things  is  widened,  he  is  led 
away  from  self- trust,  and  is  taught  to  depend 
upon  a  power,  not  lower,  but  higher,  and  in  his 
pstimation  better,  than  his  own. — Joseph 
Parker,  D.I). 

The  worship  of  praise  is  the  supreme  act  of 
intercourse  between  God  and  the  creature. 
We  gather  into  it  all  the  elements  of  our  com- 
plex nature,  our  intellect,  conscience,  religious 
emotion  and  physical  faculty, — and  engage 
them  in  a  great  religious  serrice  ;  and  thus 
we  realize  tho  noblest]  fellowship  with  th© 
Creator  that  is  possible  to  a  creature.    In  other 


ways  also   we  have  fellowship  with   God  •  in 
prayer,   when   wo    come    to    Him    to    ask   kha 
supply  of  our  need ;  in  m  ^ditation,  when  we 
muse  upon    His   excellencies,  or  rest  in  the 
quiet  assurance  of  His  lore ;  and  in  service, 
when    we   enter  into   His   purposes,    and    as 
"  workers  together  with  God  "  consecrate  our- 
selves to  the  accomplishment  of  them ;  but  in 
praise,  our  fellowship  with  God  is  far  higher 
than    in   any  other ;  the    pergonal   want   that 
protfipts   prayer    is    forgotten ;    the    anxious 
thought    that    ponders    Divine    mysteries   is 
banished;  the  strenuous  toil  that  wearies  even 
ths    eonsocrated  hand  is  suspended ;  and  we 
lift  up  the  face  of  our  worship  to  tho  light  and 
g'ory    of   God's   great    love.      Absorbed    and 
blessed  in  the  sense  of  His  Divine  excellencies, 
we  stand  before  Him  as  the  angels  do ;  our 
reverence  and  love  are  quickened  into  adoring 
rapture,  and  we  utter  our  reverent  estimate  of 
what  Ho  is,  in  the  largest  and  most  rapturous 
words  that  we  can  find.     Such  worship  God 
graciously  accepts ;  all  natures  that  love  crave 
love,  and  the  loving  God  supremely  craves  the 
love  of  His  creatures.  Else  would  our  worship 
be  chilled  and  driven  back  into  our  own  hearts. 
We  speak  to  Him  oar  admiration  and  praise 
because    He    graciously     listens    to    it    and 
joyously  accepts  it.   We  look  up  with  gladness 
into  tho  face  of  our  Father  in  Heaven,  because 
He  responds  to  our  loving  rapture  with  His,^ 
His  Divine  heart  answers  the  love  of  our  poor 
human  hearts, — ''  God  is  love,"  and  He  sei'keth 
loving  souls  to  worship  Him. — H.  Allon,  D  D. 


Aims  at  Perfection. 


(Verse  12.) 


Here  we  have  the  doctrine  enforced, 
that  what  is  done  should  be  well  done. 

I.  Attention  to  the  greater  does  not 
excuse  neglect  of  the  less  (Matt,  xxiii. 
23;  Luke  xi.  42). 

II.  Obedience  in  the  greater  matters 
tested,  as  to  sincerity,  by  obedience 
in  the  lesser  details  of  ceremonial  ob- 
servance (Matt.  XXV.  21 ;  Luke  xvi.  10.) 


III.  The  offering  up  of  the  great 
sacrifice  for  sin  does  not  liberate  us 
from  the  duty  of  offering,  on  our  part, 
the  lesser  sacrifice  of  faith,  &c. 
(2  Cor.  V.  15  ;  Rom.  xii.  1.) 

IV.  The  offering  of  the  less  mani- 
fests our  appreciation  of  the  greater. — 
Biblical  Museum, 


The  Offering  of  the  First  of  the  Dough. 


{Verses  17-21.) 


We  have  here  an  application  of  the 
law  of  the  firstfruits,  which  is  laid 
down  in  Exod.  xxii.  29  ;  xxiii.  19. 
Other  applications  of  the  law  we  find  in 
Lev.  ii.  12-U;  xxiii.  10,  11,  U,  17. 
At  a  later  period  other  directions  were 
274 


given  concerning  the  observance  of  this 
law  (Deut.  xxvi.  1-11). 

The  command  here  is  that  of  the 
first  dough  made  of  the  first  corn  that 
was  threshed,  winnowed,  and  ground, 
they  were  to  take  to  the  priest  a  cake 


i 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NUMBERS. 


CHAP.    XV. 


as  a  heave-offering  unto  the  Lord.  The 
size  of  the  cake  is  not  specified,  but  was 
left  to  the  generosity  of  the  offerer.  In 
this  offering  we  have — 

1.  An  expression  of  gratitude. 

In  presenting  the  firstfruits  to  the 
Lord  the  Israehtes  acknowledged  that 
they  owed  everything  to  Him.  Very 
clearly  this  is  brought  out  in  the  con- 
fession of  the  offerer  of  the  basket  of 
firstfruits  (Dent.  xxvi.  1-11).  The 
offering  was  an  expression  of  gratitude 
to  Him  for  His  bounty  and  beneficence. 
All  the  good  that  we  possess  we  have 
received  from  Him.  "  He  giveth  to  all 
life,  and  breath,  and  all  things." 
**  Every  good  gift  and  every  perfect 
gift  is  from  above,"  &c.  We  have  re- 
ceived countless  and  priceless  benefits 
from  Him.  Seeing  that  all  good  comes 
from  God  two  conclusions  are  irresis- 
tible : 

L  That  all  good  should  be  accepted 
and  enjoyed  gratefully.  "  Bless  the 
Lord,  0  my  soul,  and  forget  not  all 
His  benefits."  "  What  shall  I  render 
unto  the  Lord  for  all  His  benefits 
toward  mel"  Very  great  should  be 
our  gratitude  to  Him.    (a) 

2.  That  all  good  should  he  employed 
in  accordance  with  His  holy  will.  We 
must  guard  against  the  abuse  of  any  of 
His  gifts  j  for  He  will  require  of  us  an 
account  of  them.  Gratitude  for  our 
blessings  urges  us  to  use  them  in  such 
a  way  as  shall  please  Him — to  use  them 
for  His  glory. 

II.  £si  acknowledgment  of  depend- 
ence. 

In  offering  the  first  of  their  dough 
after  they  entered  the  Promised  Land 
they  confessed  their  continued  depend- 
ence upon  Him.  Very  clearly  and 
impressively  Moses  enjoined  upon  the 
Israelites  that  they  siiould  reverently 
remember  the  Lord  their  God,  and 
humbly  acknowledge  their  dependence 
upon  Him  after  they  entered  the  good 
Land  (Deut.  viii.  10-20).  We  too  are 
constantly  dependent  upon  God  for  all 
things.     He  is  the  one  great  Fountain 


of  all  physical,  mental,   and  spiritual 
good.  *'  AH  our  springs  are  in  Him."  (6) 
Seeing  that  we  are  thus  absolutely 
dependent,  it  bocometh  us  to  be — 

1.  Hnnihle.  "  V^^hat  hast  thou  that 
thou  didst  not  receive  1  "  &c.  "  Shall 
the  axe  boast  itself  against  him  that 
heweth  therewith  1 "  &c.     (c) 

2.  Prayerful.  Surely  it  behoves  us 
to  acknowledge  our  dependence,  and 
seek  support  "  Give  us  this  day  our 
daily  bread;"  " Uphold  me  with  Thy 
free  Spirit ; "  Leave  me  not,  neither 
forsake  me,  0  God  of  my  salvation ; " — 
such  petitions  are  ever  appropriate  on 
the  lips  of  dependent  creatures. 

III.  A  consecration  of  common 
things. 

To  the  offerer  of  the  basket  of  first- 
fruits  all  his  goods  were  sacred  ;  all  were 
blessed  to  him  (Deut.  xxvi.  11  ;  and 
comp.  Ezek.  xliv.  30  ;  1  Tim.  iv.  4,  5). 
Blessings  are  most  enjoyed  by  us  when 
we  receive  them  with  gratitude,  and 
with  practical  acknowledgment  of  our 
obligation  to  God  for  them.  The 
practical  recognition  of  God's  goodness 
to  us  in  the  mercies  of  every-day  life, 
by  heartily  contributing  to  the  cause  of 
God  amongst  men,  sanctifies  all  our 
mercies.  So  St.  Paul  affirms  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Romans  (xi.  16),  referring 
to  this  offering  of  the  first  dough,  *'  If 
the  firstfruit  be  holy,  so  also  is  the 
lump."  After  the  cake  of  the  first  of 
their  dough  was  offered  unto  the  Lord 
the  whole  mass  was  consecrated  to  the 
use  of  man.  (d) 

IV.  A  provision  for  the  mainten- 
ance of  the  ministry  and  of  the  wor- 
ship of  God. 

This  offering  of  the  first  of  the  dough, 
being  an  heave-offering,  was  the  per- 
quisite of  the  priests.  Comp.  chap, 
xviii.  24;  Neh.  x.  37.  The  meat 
offerings  were  designed  by  the  Lord  to 
be  means  of  maintaining  His  service 
and  His  servants. 

(For  remarks  and  illustrations  on 
this  topic  See  pp.  84-86). 


t2 


275 


CHAP.  XV. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  A  gentleman  of  very  considerable  for- 
tune,  but  a   stranger  to   both  personal   and 
f  mily  religion,  one  evening  took  a  solitary 
walk  through   part  of  his  grounds.     He  hap- 
pened to  come  near  a  mean  hut,  where  a  poor 
man  lived  with  a  numerous  family,  who  earned 
their  bread  by  daily  labour.     He  heard  a  con- 
tinued and  pretty  load  voice.     Not  knowing 
what  it  was,  curiosity  prompted  him  to  listen. 
The  man,  who  was  piously  disposed,  happened 
to  be  at  prayer  with  his  family.     So  soon  as 
he  could  distinguish  the  words,  he  heard  him 
giving  thanks,  with  great  affdction,  to  God,  for 
the  goodness  of  His  providence,  in  giving  them 
food  to  eat  and  raiment  to  put  on,  and  in  sup- 
plying them  with  what  was   necessary   and 
comfortable  in  the  present  life.     He  was  im- 
mediately struck  with  astonishment  and  con- 
fusion, and  said  to  himself,  "Does  this  poor 
man,  who  has  nothing  but  the  meanest  fare, 
fcnd  that   purchased    by  severe   labour,   give 
thanks  to  God  for  His  goodness  to  himself  and 
family  ;  and  I,  who  enjoy  ease  and  honour, 
and  everything  that  is  pleasant  and  desirable, 
have  hardly  ever  bent  my  knee,  or  made  any 
acknowledgment  to  my  Maker  and  Preserver  I " 
It   pleased   God  to   make    this    providential 
occurrence  the  means  of  bringing  him  to  a 
real  and  lasting  sense  of  religion. — The  Sunday 
School  Teachers'  Treasury. 

(b)  We  stand  to  God  ii.  the  relation  of  de- 
pendents.   That  is  our  actual  position  in  life. 
"  What  hast  thou  that  thou  hast  not  received  ?" 
Let  a  man  begin  his  studies  there,  and  he  will 
become  correspondingly  reverent.     Have  you 
genius?     Who  lighted  the  lamp?     Have  you 
health  ?     Who  gave  you  your  constitution  f   Do 
you  find  the  earth  productive?    "Yes."    Who 
made  it  productive  f     "I  did.     I  till  it,  I  sup- 
ply all  the  elements  of  nourishment  needful;  I 
did,"   Did  you?   Can  you  make  it  rain?    Can 
you  make  the  sun  shine?     Come,  I  will  set 
you  a  little  task,  mighty  man,  potentate  I  This: 
Change  the  quarter  of  the  windl     Now,  come, 
that  is  a  very  little  thing  for  a  great  man  like 
you.     "  Well,"  you  say,  "  that  is  the  sort  of 
thing  that  I  really  cannot  do."     Then,  clear  a 
fog  off  the  hill.     You  can  do  that.    Look  what 
a  port  you  have,  and  what  infinite  impudence. 
Come,  char  a  fog!     Where  would  your  tilling, 
and  your  manuring,  and  your  subsoiling,  and 
your  harrowing  and  rolling  all  be,  and  what 
would  they  come  to,  if  God  were  to  say  to 
the  wind,    "Never  leave    the  east;"  if   God 
were  to   say  to   the  clouds,  "Stand   still;"  if 
God  were  to  say  to  the  sun,  "  Don't  shew  thy- 
self for  a  year  "  ?     All  these  things  shew  us 
that  we  are,  notwithstanding  our  resources, 
which  are  undoubtedly  numerous  and  great, 
dependents. — Joseph  Parker,  D.D, 

(c)  How  often  have  we  aimed  at  building  for 
ourselves  taberLacles  of  remembrance  and  of 
rest,  and  we  have  gazed  joyfully  as  it  pro- 
gressed to  completion,  and  then  the  breath  of 
the  Lord  has  blown  upon  it,  and  it  has  been 
276 


scattered,  and  we  have  been  turned  adrift  and 
shelterless;  and,  lol  dwellings  already  pro- 
vided for  us,  of  firmer  materials  and  of  more 
excellent  beauty,  upon  which  we  bestowed  no 
labour  nor  thought.  And  so  it  is  with  all  the 
matters  of  human  glory.  The  strong  man 
rejoiceth  in  his  strength,  and  magnifieth  him- 
self in  the  might  of  his  arms,  but  the  Lord 
hath  made  him  strong  ;  the  wise  man  glorieth 
himself  in  his  intellect,  but  the  clear  j-ercep- 
tion,  and  the  brilliant  fancy,  and  the  fluent 
utterance,  these  are  God's  gifts;  the  rich  man 
rejoiceth  in  his  riches,  but  the  prudence  to 
plan,  and  the  sagacity  to  foresee,  and  the  in- 
dustry to  gather,  these  are  the  bestowments  of 
God. 

Ah  I  why  will  men  sacrifice  to  their  own 
net,  and  burn  incense  to  their  own  drag,  when 
they  have  absolutely  nothing  which  they  have 
not  received;  and  when  every  gift  "  cometh 
from  the  Father  of  lights,  with  whom  is  no 
variableness,   neither   shadow   of    turning"? 
And  in  the  realm  of  morals,  and  in  the  spi- 
ritual  life,  our   feebleness   is   the   same.     A 
conscience   void   of   offence,  a  good  report  of 
those  that  are  without,  a  heavenly  purpose  or 
a  holy  resolve,  the  inner  purification  or  the 
comely    outgrowth    of    a   beneficent   life — we 
are  poor  to  compass  them.     We  acquire  them 
only  by  our  dependence  upon  God.    Have  you 
learned  this  lesson,  this  deep  hard   lesson  of 
humility  ?     Forty  years'  sins  you  have  com- 
mitted I  have  they  humbled  you  in  the  pre- 
sence of  God  ?     Forty  years'  chastenings  have 
corrected  you  1  have  they  humbled  your  pride 
or   fretted  you  into  greater   audacity  of  re- 
bellion ?     Forty  years'  mercies  have  blessed 
you  I   have   they  excited    your   gratitude  or 
inflated  your  vanity  ?     Brethren,  we  must  be 
humbled  if  we  would  be  happy.     It  was  in 
the  valley  of  Humiliation,  you  remember,  that 
the  lad  that  had  the  herb  heart's-ease  in  his 
bosom  kept  his  serene  and  his  rejoicing  home, 
—  W.  M.  Funshon,  LL.D. 

(d)  Between  the  element  of  evil  and  the 
Christian  elements  there  can  be  but  one  re- 
lation— that  of  war  and  struggle.  They  are 
antagonistic — the  strength  of  the  one  is  the 
weakness  of  the  other.  The  evil  must  be 
wrestled  with  and  overcome  and  exterminated, 
if  it  is  to  be  well  with  the  religious  life.  There 
is  no  such  opposition  between  the  Christian 
and  the  con-Christian  elements  of  our  exist- 
ence. They  become  as.similated:  the  Chris- 
tian absorbs  the  non-Christian  elements  of 
good.  The  ordinary  duties  of  life — the  every 
day  virtues  which  form  so  large  a  portion 
of  our  being — have  thus  a  Christian  direction 
given  th(  m  ;  they  are  elevated  to  a  higher 
region  than  that  which  they  naturally  occupy. 
They  become  idealized ,  for  just  as  the  poetical  \ 
spirit  elevates  and  idealizes  the  most  ordinary 
Bcenec,  bo  does  the  religious  spirit  «levate  and 
idealize  the  most  ordinary  ongoings  of  life. 
Religion  is  like  poetry,  an  elevation  and  con. 


HOMILKTIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMnrCRs;. 


CHAP    XV 


Bocrationof  comoaon  t'linga.  You  have  seen  a 
lanHscape  which,  while  under  the  shadow, 
looked  cold  and  blaak  and  forbidding,  burst 
forth  into  life  and  beauty  when  the  sun's  rays 
fell  upon  it;  so  are  the  most  ordinary  affairs 


— the  weary  pi  )dilinor,  the  dreary  sameness,  the 
dull  routine  -  of  our  daily  existence  irradiated 
wiih  a  Divine  gfl^ry  by  the  light  which  comes 
from  God.— C*.  K.  Watt,  MM 


Sins  op  Omission  and  Ton  orange. 


{Verses  22-29.) 


This  paragraph  suggests  the  following 
observations : — 

I,  Omissions  of  duty  are  accounted 
Biiiful  by  God. 

"  If  ye  have  erred,  and  not  observed 
all  these  commandments,  which  the 
Lord  hath  spoken  unto  Moses,"  &c. 
We  sin  not  only  when  we  break  the 
commandments  of  God,  but  also  when 
we  fail  to  keep  any  of  them.  How 
many  are  our  sins  of  omission  !  We 
are  conscious  of  very  many.  And  how 
many  are  there  which  have  eluded  our 
observation,  and  are  known  only  to 
God !  **  Sins  of  commission,"  says 
Bulwer  Lytton,  "  may  not,  perhaps, 
shock  the  retrospect  of  conscience. 
Large  and  obtrusive  to  view,  we  have 
confessed,  mourned,  repented,  possibly 
atoned  them.  Sins  of  omission,  so 
veiled  amidst  our  hourly  emotions — 
blent,  confused,  unseen  in  the  conven- 
tional routine  of  existence  ; — Alas  ! 
could  these  suddenly  emerge  from  their 
shadow,  group  together  in  serried  mass 
and  accusing  order,  would  not  the  best 
of  us  then  start  in  dismay,  and  would 
not  the  proudest  humble  himself  at  the 
Throne  of  ^lercy  !  "  (a) 

II.  Omissions  of  duty,  even  when 
arising  from  ignorance,  are  accounted 
sinful  by  God. 

**  If  ought  be  committed  by  ignor- 
ance without  the  knowledge  of  the 
congregation,"  &c.  (verse  24).  "And 
if  any  soul  sin  through  ignorance,"  &o. 
(verse  27).  So  David  prays,  "  Who 
can  understand  his  errors  i  Cleanse 
Thou  me  from  secret  faults."  The  re- 
ference is  to  unintentional  sins  ;  to  sins 
not  only  unobserved  by  men,  but  not 
even  known  to  the  person  himself  at 
the  time  ;  unintentional  sins  of  omis- 
sion. (6)  But  let  it  be  noticed  in  this 
connection,  that — 


\,  Ignorance  of  the  Divine  require- 
ments  is  itself  sinful  in  the  case  of  most 
persons.  If  a  person  can  ascertain  the 
will  of  God  concerning  him,  he  is  bound 
to  do  so.  That  will  is  revealed  to  us 
in  Nature  and  in  the  Bible :  it  is  pro- 
claimed and  expounded  regularly  and 
freely  and  frequently  by  Christian 
teachers  and  preachers.  We  may  know 
it  if  we  will;  we  ought  to  know  it. 
S^Diritual  ignorance  is  frequently  not  a 
misfortune,  but  a  sin  ;  not  to  be  pitied, 
but  to  be  condemned,     (c) 

2.  It  is  to  he  feared  that  in  many 
cases  where  ignorance  is  urged  as  an  ex- 
cuse for  sin,  the  real  cause  is  indifference. 
When  men  make  no  effort  to  know  the 
will  of  God,  and  are  but  little  concerned 
to  do  it,  it  is  not  ingenuous  on  their 
part  to  plead  ignorance  as  an  excuse 
for  their  sins. 

III.  A  whole  nation  may  be  guilty 
of  sins  of  omission  and  ignorance  as 
well  as  an  individual. 

The  legislation  laid  down  in  verses 
22-26,  is  with  a  view  to  the  whole 
nation  being  guilty  of  such  sins.  "  This 
*  not  doing  all  the  commandments  of 
Jehovah,'  of  which  the  congregation  is 
supposed  to  incur  the  guilt  without 
perceiving  it,  might  consist  either  in 
the  fact  that,  in  particular  instances, 
whether  from  oversight  or  negligence, 
the  whole  congregation  omitted  to  fulfil 
the  commandments  of  God,  i.e.  certain 
precepts  of  the  law,  sc.  in  the  fact  that 
they  neglected  the  true  and  proper 
fulfilment  of  the  whole  law,  either,  as 
Outram  supposes,  *  by  retaining  to  a 
certain  extent  the  national  rites,  and 
following  the  worship  of  the  true  God, 
and  yet  at  the  same  time  acting  un- 
consciously in  opposition  to  the  law, 
through  having  been  led  astray  by  some 
common  errors,'    or  by  allowing   the 

277 


CHAP.  XV. 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  NUMBERS. 


evil  example  of  godless  rulers  to  seduce 
them  to  neglect  their  religious  duties, 
or  to  adopt  and  join  in  certain  customs 
and  usages  of  the  heathen,  which  ap- 
peared to  be  reconcilable  with  the  law 
of  Jehovah,  though  they  really  led  to 
contempt  and  neglect  of  the  command- 
ments of  the  Lord." — Keil  and  Del. 
As  illustrations  of  the  sins  here  legis- 
lated, for  Outram  refers  to  the  apostate 
kings,  "  when  the  people  neglected  their 
hereditary  rites,  and,  forgetting  the 
sacred  laws,  fell  by  a  common  sin  into 
the  observance  of  the  religious  rites  of 
other  nations."  This  view  is  confirmed 
by  the  offerings  which  Hezekiah  made 
as  an  atonement  for  the  sins  of  his 
father's  reign  (2  Chron.  xxix.  21-36); 
and  by  the  offerings  made  by  the 
Israelites  upon  their  return  from  their 
captivity  (Ezra  viii.  35). 

It  is,  alas !  not  difficult  to  discover 
sins  which  may  be  truly  called  national 
even  in  our  own  enlightened  country 
and  age ;  but  it  would  be  difficult  hon- 
estly to  allege  that  they  are  sins  of 
ignorance.  Is  not  drunkenness  a  na- 
tional sin  1  Are  we  as  a  nation  guiltless 
in  relation  to  the  opium  traffic  t  Are 
there  not  other  sins  of  which  this 
British  nation  is  greatly  guilty  ? 

IV.  Sins  of  omission  and  ignorance 
may  be  forgiven. 

There  is  a  sin  for  which  there  is  no 
forgiveness ;  but  sins  of  ignorance  and 
omission  may  be  forgiven  upon  certain 
conditions.  Our  Lord  pleaded  that  His 
crucifiers  might  be  forgiven  because  of 
their  ignorance  of  the  true  character 
of  their  deed  (Luke  xxiii.  34).  And  St. 
Paul  writes,  "  I  obtained  mercy,  because 
I  did  it  ignorantly  in  unbelief." 

1.  In  every  case  sactiflce  was  a  con- 
dition of  forgiveness.  When  the  congre- 
gation or  the  individual  became  aware 


of  the  sinfulness  of  their  omissions,  they 
were  to  offer  a  sin  offering  as  an  ac- 
knowledgment of  guilt  and  a  condition 
of  forgiveness.  Whether  the  case  were 
that  of  the  whole  congregation,  or  one 
member  of  the  congregation  ;  whether 
the  individual  were  an  Israelite,  or  a 
foreigner,  sacrifice  must  be  offered  when 
the  sin  became  known.  The  great 
truth  here  set  forth  is  that  the  sinner 
needs  atonement.  Every  sin  tends  to 
estrange  the  sinner  from  God.  We  are 
forgiven  through  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus 
Ciirist,  which  strikingly  exhibits  tlie 
heinousness  of  sin,  God's  abhorrence  of 
it  also,  and  His  infinite  love  for  the 
sinner  (d).  Our  need  of  the  merit  of 
the  Saviour's  sacrifice,  and  the  aid  of  His 
intercession,  is  continual. 

2.  The  extent  of  the  sacrifice  required 
varied  in  different  cases.  When  the 
sin  was  national,  "  all  the  congregation 
shall  offer  one  young  bullock  for  a  burnt- 
otfering,  for  a  sweet  savour  unto  the 
Lord,  with  his  meat-offering,  according 
to  the  ordinance,  and  one  kid  of  the 
goats  for  a  sin  offering  ;"  but  when  the 
sin  was  personal,  "  then  he  shall  bring 
a  she-goat  of  the  first  year  for  a  sin- 
offering."  The  law  of  proportion  is 
observed  in  the  sacrifices  which  God 
demands.  His  requirements  are  ever 
"  reasonable."    Comp.  Rom.  xii.  1. 

Conclusion. 

1.  Let  us  heartily  loathe  sin^  whether 
of  omission  or  commission  (Jer.  xliv.  4). 

2.  Let  us  faithfully  examine  ourselves 
in  the  light  of  God's  holy  Word.  Let  no 
sin  hide  itself  from  our  view,  if  we  can 
prevent  it  (2  Cor.  xiii.  5). 

3.  Let  us  earnestly  seek  forgiveness  for 
all  sins  through  the  mediation  of  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord  (Eph.  i.  7  ;  1  John 
i.  9). 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  Omiapiona  cannot  be  trivial,  if  we  only 
refloct  what  an  iofluence  they  would  have 
upon  an  ordinary  commonwealth,  if  they  were 
perpetrated  there  as  they  are  in  God's  com- 
monwealth. Think  a  minute,  if  one  person 
has  a  right  to  omit  his  duty,  another  has,  and 
all  have.  Then  the  watchman  would  omit 
to  guard  the  house,  the  policeman  would  omit 

278 


to  arrest  the  thief,  the  judge  would  omit  to 
sentence  the  olfender,  the  sherifif  would  omit 
to  punish  the  culprit,  the  government  would 
omit  to  carry  out  its  laws ;  then  every  occu- 
pation would  cease,  and  the  world  would 
die  of  stagnation  ;  the  merchant  would  omit 
to  attend  to  his  calling,  the  husbandman 
would  omit  to  plough  the  land  :  where  would 


HOUILETIC    COMMESrARY:    S UMBERS. 


CHAP.  XV. 


the  commonwealth  bo?  Tbe  kingdom  would 
be  out  of  joint ;  the  machine  would  break 
down,  for  no  cog  of  the  wheels  would  act  upon 
its  fellow.  How  Kvoul  i  societies  of  men  exist 
at  all  ?  And  surely  if  this  is  not  to  bo  toler- 
ated in  a  socit^ty  of  men,  maoh  less  in  that 
great  commonwealth  of  which  God  i?  the 
King,  in  which  aognls  ancl  giorifiod  spirit-! 
are  the  peers,  and  al-  creatures  citizona  !  How 
can  the  Lord  tolerate  that  here  there  should 
be  an  omission,  and  thoro  an  omission,  ia  do- 
fiance  of  His  authority?  As  the  Judge  of  all 
the  earth.  He  must  bring  down  His  strong 
right  tiand  upon  these  omissions,  and  crush 
out  for  ever  the  spirit  that  would  thus  revolt 
against  His  will, —  C.  H  Spurgeon. 

{b)  The  perfection  and  spirituality  of  God's 
law  render  it  almost  impossible  for  a  fallen  son 
of  Adam  ever  to  know  all  the  innumerable  in- 
stances of  his  transgressing  it.  Add  to  which, 
that  false  principles  and  inveterate  prejudices 
make  us  regard  many  things  as  innocent,  and 
some  things  as  laudable,  which,  in  the  eye  of 
Heaven,  are  far  otherwise.  Self-examination 
is  a  duty  which  few  practise  as  they  ought  to 
do :  and  he  who  practises  it  best  will  always 
have  reason  to  conclude  his  particular  con- 
fession with  this  general  petition,  "Cleanse 
Thou  me  from  secret  faults." — George  Home. 
Many  books  have  a  few  lines  of  errata  at 
the  end,  but  our  errata  might  well  be  as 
large  as  the  volume  if  we  could  but  have 
eense  enough  to  see  them.  Augustine  wrote 
in  his  older  days  a  series  of  Retractations ; 
ours  might  make  a  library  if  we  had  enough 
grace  to  be  convinced  of  our  mistakes,  and  to 
confess  them.  If  we  had  eyes  like  those  of 
God  we  should  think  tery  differently  of  our- 
selves. The  transgressions  which  we  see  and 
confess  are  but  like  (he  farmer's  small  samples 
which  he  brings  to  market,  when  he  has  left 
his  granary  full  at  home. — C  H.  Spurgeon, 

(c)  The  things  revealed  belong  to  us  and 
our  children  to  do  them  ;  and  to  be  ignorant  of 


any  of  these  is  a  sin  in  the  sight  of  God.  We 
have  the  light  of  the  truth  shining  in  our 
faces,  but  we  shut  our  eyes  against  it,  lest  it 
should  shine  in  our  hearts.  We  have  the 
Word,  we  may  read  it,  or  hear  it  read,  we  have 
it  preached,  and  other  means  of  knowledge 
offered  to  us,  therefore  all  such  are  left  with- 
ouc  dXouMO.  It  shall  not  excuse  a  subject 
when  he  hath  broken  some  penal  statute,  to 
say,  "  Alas  I  I  knew  not  the  law,  I  was  utterly 
ignorant  of  it,  I  never  heard  in  all  my  life  of 
any  such  matter."  For  the  law  is  passed, 
printed,  and  published,  and  thou  must  take 
knowledge  of  it.  Every  man  at  hi^  own  peril 
must  look  to  it,  and  if  he  run  in  danger  of  it, 
it  is  his  own  fault:  so  we  may  say  of  t^e  law 
of  God.  He  hath  set  it  forth  to  the  view  of 
all,  and  all  must  make  inquiry  after  it  at  their 
uttermost  peril. — Atlersoll. 

(d)  Sinners  are  saved  not  simply  because 
so  much  pain  and  grief  have  been  endured  in 
their  stead,  but  because  Christ  has  performed 
a  groat  spiritual  work  on  their  behalf,  and  has 
performed  it  in  the  full  foresight  of  all  the 
suffering  that  would  be  inseparable  from  His 
so  doing.  It  is  monstrous  to  suppose  that  the 
Deity  could  be  pleased  with  mere  suffering. 
It  is  the  spiritual  essence  in  the  Atonement 
that  makes  it  to  be  what  it  is  to  us.  It  may 
be  accepted  as  certain,  that  in  the  gift  of  the 
Son  of  God  we  have  the  brightest  manifestation 
of  the  love  of  the  Father  ;  and  that  in  the 
willing  humiliation  and  grief  of  the  Redeemer 
we  have  the  tenderest  revelation  of  pity  to- 
wards the  evil  and  unthankful,  and  at  the 
same  time  the  noblest  act  of  worship  ever 
rendered  to  the  good  and  the  holy.  In  this 
sense,  it  is  truly  by  the  sorrows,  the  death, 
the  cross  of  Christ  that  we  have  salvation.    It 

has  been  His  will  to  become  thus  acquainted 
with  grief,  and  to  die — to  die  the  death  of 
the  cross — that  we  might  be  saved. — Robert 

Vaugharij  D.D, 


The  Nature  and  Punishment  op  Presumptuous  Sins. 


{Verses  30,  31.) 


A  very  marked  difference  isrecognised 
between  sins  of  omission  and  ignorance 
and  sins  of  presumption  ;  the  heinous- 
ness  of  the  latter  is  much  greater  than 
of  the  former.  *'  All  unrighteousness 
is  sin  ; "  and  all  sin  is  essentially  evil ; 
.but  all  sins  are  not  alike  evil ;  the  evil 
of  some  sins  is  greater  than  the  evil  of 
otliLTS.  Moreover  the  guilt  of  the 
same  sin  may  differ  greatly  when  com- 
mitted by  ditTerent  persons  under 
different  circumstances  and  influences, 
and  with  different  motives.     Attersoll 


says  truly,  "  There  is  great  difference  m 
the  manner  of  sinning;  some  sin  igno- 
rantly,  some  willingly  (Psa.  xix.  12,  13  ; 
1  Tim.  i.  13).  Some  are  principal  and 
ringleaders  in  the  sin,  others  are  only 
accessories  ;  some  are  only  in  thought, 
others  in  deed  ;  some  offend  of  malice, 
some  offend  of  weakness ;  some  com- 
mit sin,  others,  besides  this,  have 
pleasure  in  them  that  do  them  (Rom. 
i.  32)."  (a)  We  have  now  to  consider 
the  worst  of  sins.     Notice  :  — 

I.  The  nature  of  presumptuous  sins. 

279 


CHAP.  XV. 


BOMIIETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS. 


"  But  the  soul  that  (locth  ought  pre- 
sumptuously," &c.  Tlie  inar'^nual  reud- 
ei-injjT,  which  is  correct,  jjjives  us  an  in- 
sight into  the  nature  of  these  sins. 
"■  The  soul  that  doeth  with  an  high 
hand/'  To  sin  "with  a  high  hand"  is 
to  sin  in  a  daring  spirit  and  defying 
manner.  Comp.  Job  xv.  25.  Pre- 
sumptuous sins  are  here  represented  as 
involving — 

1.  Positive  breach  of  the  law  of  God. 
"  He  hath  broken  His  commandment." 
Very  great  is  the  difference  between  sins 
of  omission  unwittingly  committed,  and 
sins  of  commission  wilfully  committed. 
The  guilt  of  the  latter  is  very  dark. 

2 .  Contempt  of  the  word  of  God.  "  He 
hath  despised  the  word  of  the  Lord." 
He  despised  God's  word  of  command  by 
disregarding  its  authority;  His  word  of 
promise  by  disregarding  its  encourage- 
ments to  obedience ;  and  His  word  of 
threatening  by  setting  at  nought  its 
design  and  power  to  deter  from  sin. 

3.  Blasphemy  against  God  Himself. 
"  The  same  reproacheth  "  (revileth,  or 
blasphemeth)  "the  Lord."  "Yes,  re- 
proacheth Him  :  reproacheth  His  om- 
niscience as  if  He  did  not  know ;  re- 
proacheth His  holiness  as  if  He  did  not 
care ;  reproacheth  His  truth  as  if, 
having  spoken,  yet  He  would  not  do  it ; 
reproacheth  His  power  as  if  His  arm 
were  shortened,  and  He  could  not 
strike  !  Are  we  prepared  for  this  cluster 
of  impieties  ]  *  Lord,  keep  back  Thy 
servant  from  presumptuous  sins.'  "  (6) 

II.  The  punishment  of  presumptu- 
ous sins. 

1.  Death.  "That  soul  shall  be  cut 
off  from  among  his  people ;  .  .  .  .  that 
soul  shall  utterly  be  cut  off."  We  con- 
chide  that  these  words  point  to  the 
punishment  of  death,  and  not  simply 


to  exclusion  from  the  political  and 
religious  privileges  of  the  nation,  be- 
cause of — (1)  The  solemn  force  and 
emphasis  of  the  words  themselves ; 
and  (2)  The  illustration  of  the  opera- 
tion of  the  law  given  in  the  next  para- 
graph (verses  32-36).  Presumptuous 
ainnern  were  put  to  death,  in  some 
instances  by  public  execution,  and  in 
others  by  the  immediate  judgment  of 
God.  Persistence  in  sin  leads  to  worse 
than  bodily  death.  "  The  soul  that 
sinneth  it  shall  die."  "  Sin,  when  it  is 
finished,  bringeth  forth  death."  (c) 

2.  Confirmed  sinfulness.  "  His  iniquity 
shall  be  upon  him."  The  natural  ten- 
dency of  wilful  and  daring  sin  is  to 
harden  the  heart  in  its  rebellion  against 
God  beyond  all  hope  of  repentance. 
Comp.  Heb.  x.  26-29.  {d) 

Conclusion. 

L  As  the  guilt  of  sin  differs  so  also 
does  the  punishment.  Comp.  Matt.  xi. 
22-24;  xxiii.  14;  Luke  xii.  47,  48; 
Heb.  X.  28,  29. 

2,  Let  those  who  have  already  advanced 
far  in  sin  turn  from  their  evil  ways  ere 
it  he  too  late.  You  cannot  remain  sta- 
tionary. You  must  either  turn  from 
sin  to  the  Saviour,  or  go  on  in  sin  until 
you  become  a  daring  and  defiant  and 
hopeless  rebel  against  God.  Be  warned 
in  time. 

Z.  Jf  we  would  keep  clear  of  pre- 
sumptuous sins  let  us  guard  against  sins 
of  every  kind  and  degree.  "  Cultivate  a 
holy  shrinking  from  sin  in  its  most  un- 
observed beginnings,  and  in  its  least 
degrees.  Sensitiveness  to  the  smallest 
degree  of  offending  is  the  true  and  only 
security  of  the  Christian.  Sin  shall 
never  have  dominion  over  him  who  re- 
sists the  first  putting  on  of  its  chains." 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


(a)  Two  persons  may  commit  the  same 
identical  crime,  yet  the  guilt  may  be  incon- 
ceivably greater  in  the  one  case  than  the 
other.  The  one  may  have  had  no  instruction 
—  no  benefit  from  parental  culture— no  faith- 
ful warnings  and  admonitions — no  holy  ex- 
ample to  direct  and  regulate — no  warning  to 
restrain — no  encouragement  to  animate  in  the 
right  path.     The  other  may  have  been  sur- 

280 


rounded  by  all  the  helps  and  inducements  to 
right  consideration — to  holy  fear — to  correct 
conduct ;  and  therefore  his  sin  is  marked  with 
a  far  higher  degree  of  aggravation  than  the 
other;  and  thus,  in  the  sight  of  God,  the 
judge  on  the  bench  often  may  be  far  moro 
srui'tv  than  the  criminal  at  the  bar. — Joseph 
Fletcher^  D  D. 

(6)  The  final  stage  of  presumptuous  sinning 


IIOMILETIC    COMMhNTAIlY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  XV. 


is  reached  when,  to  the  clearest  knowledge  of 
the  greatness  of  our  sin,  and  to  the  most  elab- 
orate and  carefully-contrived  schemes  for 
effecting  it,  there  is  added  the  resoluteness  of 
obstinacy — a  dogged  and  persevering  stub- 
bornness in  getting  our  own  way,  even  though, 
in  addition  to  all  the  remonstrances  of  con- 
science and  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  all  the 
aspects  of  God's  Providence  are  against  us — • 
frowning  us  back  every  step  we  take^.  A 
striking  illustration  of  this  form  of  prcsaviip- 
tion  we  have  in  the  history  of  Balaam.  We 
see  there  a  man  intent  on  a  scheocie  for  his 
own  aggrandisement.  God  opposed  thatscheme. 
The  man  keeps  tampering  with  his  conscience 
to  get  leave  to  do  a  wrong  thing,  till  at  last 
God  in  anger  gives  him  leavo.  B  .t  no  sooner 
does  this  bad  man  set  out  than  the  frown  of 
God  meets  him.  A  mysterious  power  drives 
him  back.  His  foot  is  crushed.  His  ass  falls. 
Before  his  opened  eyes  stands  the  aogol  of 
God,  telling  him  his  way  is  a  perverse  way, 
and  yet,  after  a  few  hollow  professions  of 
contrition,  he  determines  to  go  on.  So  it  is 
that  the  tranpgressor  "  holdeth  fast  his  iniqui- 
ty/* and  will  not  let  it  go.  He  would  break 
a  lance  even  with  an  angel  in  the  path  of 
the  vineyards.  Oh  1  how  often  does  God  make 
it  difficult  for  us  to  find  opportunities  for  our 
besetting  sin.  The  farther  we  go  the  more  we 
find  our  way  hedged  up  with  thorns.  The 
difficulties  grow  upon  us  like  a  waking  night- 
mare. And  yet  with  a  madness  that  knows 
no  control,  and  a  hardihood  that  braves  all 
consequences,  we  rush  upon  the  thick  bosses 
of  the  Almighty,  and,  in  an  attitude  of  defiant 
presumption,  stretch  out  our  hands  against 
God. — Daniel  Moore,  M.A. 

(c)  The  tale  of  the  goblet  which  the  genius 
of  a  heathen  fashioned  was  true,  and  taught  a 


moral  of  which  many  a  death-bed  furnishes 
the  melancholy  illustration.  Having  made 
the  model  of  a  serpent,  he  fixed  it  in  the 
bottom  of  the  cup.  Coiled  for  the  spring,  a 
pair  of  gleaming  eyes  in  its  head,  and  in  its 
open  mouth  fangs  raised  to  strike,  it  lay 
beneath  the  ruby  wine.  Nor  did  ho  who 
raisi^d  the  golden  cup  to  quench  his  thirst,  and 
quaff  the  delicious  draught,  suspect  what  lay 
below,  till,  as  he  reached  the  dregs,  that  dread- 
ful head  rose  up,  and  glistened  before  his  eyes. 
So,  when  life's  cup  is  nearly  emptied,  and  sin's 
last  pleasure  quaffed,  and  unwilling  lips  are 
draining  the  bitter  dregs,  shall  rise  the  ghastly 
terrors  of  remorse  and  death  and  judgment 
upon  the  despairing  soul.  Be  assured,  a 
serpent  lurks  at  the  bottom  of  guilt's  sweetest 
pleasure. — Thomas  Gut/u-ie,  D.D. 

(d)  There  is  a  gravitating  power  about  sins 
of  presumption  from  which  the  soul  rarely 
ever  rises.  Every  wilful  sin  hardens  the 
heart  and  renders  it  less  accessible  to  conver- 
ting influences  than  it  was  before.  One  con- 
quest over  the  conscience  makes  way  for 
another,  and  that  for  a  third,  till  at  length 
this  inward  monitor  becomes  "  seared  as  with 
a  hot  iron."  It  has  neither  voice  to  speak, 
nor  authority  to  restrain,  nor  sensibility  to 
feel.  S.ieptrelo35,  deaf,  stifled,  gagged,  it  dies 
and  makes  no  sign.  Thus  evil  men  and  wil- 
ful sinners  wax  worse  and  worse  ;  because  the 
habit  of  presumptuous  sinning,  of  tampering 
with  conscience,  and  resisting  the  Holy  Ghost, 
forecloses  against  them  all  the  means  of  their 
ever  getting  better  ....  From  transgression 
to  transgression,  from  lower  depth  to  lower 
depth,  neither  heaven  nor  earth,  neither 
angels  nor  men  have  it  in  charge  to  interfere 
— "Ephraim  is  joined  to  his  idols:  let  b'ai 
alone." — Daniel  Moore,  M,A, 


Sins  Dangerous  and  Sins  Deadly, 


(Verses  27  and  30.) 


In  the  text  God  seeks  to  impress  on 
all  that  no  sin  can  be  trifled  with,  be- 
cause every  sin  must  be  atoned  for,  and 
then  to  warn  that  constant  trifling  with 
sin  must  harden  the  soul  and  place  it 
beyond  the  limits  of  pardon.  The  text 
suggests  two  thoughts — 

I.  That  there  are  degrees  in  sin. 

The  Lord  distinguishes  here  between 
sins  of  ignorance,  which  might  be 
atoned  for,  and  sins  of  presumption, 
for  which  there  could  be  no  atonement. 
There  are  degrees  in  guilt.  The  same 
act  of  sin  in  two  ditlerent  persons,  or 
in  the  same  person  at  different  times, 


varies  as  to  guilt.  Take  any  sin — the 
mere  deed  is  the  same  in  the  professing 
Christian  and  the  man  that  has  been 
brought  up  in  ignorance  and  vice,  but 
the  degrees  of  guilt  are  very  different. 
Guilt  is  not  to  be  measured  by  the  mere 
act  of  the  sin  ;  but  by  the  mind  that 
gives  birth  to  it,  by  the  circumstances 
under  which  it  is  done,  by  the  results 
which  follow,  &c. 

Suis  of  ignorance  are  those  which  are 
not  intentional  and  deliberate  ;  those 
resulting  from  human  frailty  and 
thoughtlessness,  from  lack  of  watchful- 
ness or  courage,  &c. 

281 


CHAP.  XV. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


Presumptuous  sinsiiro  tliose  committed 
**  with  a  high  hand,"  delii)erately,  dar- 
ingly, against  light  and  conviction  and 
the  known  commands  of  God. 

Between  these  two  God  made  a  dis- 
tinction. He  did  not  and  could  not 
deal  with  them  alike.  He  weighs 
actions;  He  estimates  conduct.  His 
knowledge,  wisdom  and  justice  are  such 
that  He  carniot  err,  and  that  no  one 
shall  be  wronged.  There  are  then  de- 
grees in  sin  ;  and  it  is  of  the  utmost 
importance  for  all  to  know  and  realise 
this.  It  will  act  as  a  great  check  on 
sin.  People  sometimes  say,  as  an  ex- 
cuse for  their  sin,  that  as  they  have  gone 
wrong  they  might  as  well  suffer  for 
much  as  for  little.  No  !  it  is  false. 
With  every  sin  the  man  gets  worse ; 
sinfulness  increases.  Sin  grows ;  there 
is  development  in  it.  Every  step  in 
sin  is  a  step  into  greater  danger,  and 
leaves  less  hope  of  reclamation.  Sins 
of  ignorance  through  trifling  and  ne- 
glect may  grow  to  be  those  of  presump- 
tion. 

II.  That  while  all  sins  are  dangerous 
some  are  deadly. 

The  text  shows  that  all  sin  is  dan- 
gerous by  the  fact  that  an  atonement 
had  to  be  made  for  sins  of  ignorance ; 
none  could  be  forgiven  without.  In 
sinning  we  trifle  with  our  best  in- 
terests, and  expose  ourselves  to  the 
greatest  danger.  While  ignorance  may 
excuse,  nothing  can  justify  any  sin. 
The  text  further  tells  us  of  sins  for 
which  the  doer  was  cut  ofl"  from  among 
the  people.  These  sins  were  murder, 
adultery,  swearing,  Sabbath- breaking, 
et  al.  For  these  there  was  no  pardon. 
Why  ?  Not  because  God  was  not  mer- 
ciful enough  to  forgive  ;  but  because 
the  sinner  knew  these  things  to  be 
wrong,  and  did  them  in  defiance  of 
God.  The  text  gives  the  reason,  "  The 
same  reproacheth  the  Lord,"  treats 
Him  with  contempt  and  scorn,  and 
despises  His  law.     And  when  man  gets 


into  that  state  penitence  is  impossible, 
and  that  being  so  God  will  not  and 
cannot  forgive.  The  New  Testament 
teaches  the  same.  We  find  there  that 
sin  was  so  dangerous  as  to  need  the 
sacrifice  of  Christ,  and  it  tells  us  of  "  a 
sin  which  is  unto  death,"  and  of  "  the 
blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost, 
which  shall  not  be  forgiven  unto  men." 
We  think  that  this  is  not  any  one  sin 
so  much  as  a  state  of  mind  that  opposes 
God, — a  malicious  contempt  and  wilful 
rejection  of  the  Gospel,  For  such  the 
Bible  tells  us  there  is  no  hope  ;  that 
the  *'  day  of  grace  has  closed  with  them 
before  the  day  of  life."  How  is  this  I 
Not  because  God  is  not  ready  to  par- 
don, or  the  sin  too  great  to  be  forgiven. 
There  is  no  sin  beyond  the  merits  of 
Christ's  atonement.  His  blood  "  clean- 
seth  from  all  sin."  Why,  then  ]  The 
reason  is  in  the  man  himself.  God  for- 
gives only  the  penitent ;  it  would  be 
neither  right  nor  safe  to  forgive  without 
penitence.  But  this  man  is  mpenitent ; 
he  resists  and  hates  God ;  he  "  re- 
proacheth the  Lord."  To  such  a  man 
pardon  becomes  impossible  because  peni- 
tence has  become  impossible.  God  leaves 
him !  What  a  doom !  Let  hearers 
of  the  Gospel  think  of  it.  This  doom 
is  possible  j  and  it  is  possible  only  in 
Christian  lands,  &c.     Learn  : — 

1.  That  God  is  merciful.  He  sent 
His  Son  to  die  that  He  might  put  away 
sin,  and  restore  us  unto  Himself. 

2.  That  there  is  a  limit  to  His  mercy. 
What  cost  Him  so  much  He  will  let  no 
one  despise.  Let  the  sinning  one  take 
care.  The  door  of  mercy  will  be  closed, 
and  it  may  be  against  him. 

Are  you  afraid  that  you  have  com- 
mitted the  "  sin  unto  death  "  %  The  fear 
proves  that,  so  far,  you  have  not.  If 
there  is  pain  in  the  injured  limb,  it  is 
certain  that  mortification  has  not  set 
in ;  &o.  Hasten  to  Christ  at  once, 
while  there  is  hope.  Out  of  Him  man 
is  ever  in  danger. — David  Lloyd, 


282 


nOMlLETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  AV 


PRESUMrTION. 


{Verse  30.) 


We  desire  to  warn  you  against  pre- 
sumpiion.  The  Psalmist  prays  to  be 
cleansed  from  secret  faults,  and  kept 
back  from  presumptuous  sins.  Our 
text  and  the  context  indicate  the 
heinousness  and  fearful  consequences 
of  this  kind  of  evil.  Yet  we  fear  that 
sins  of  this  kind  are  awfully  prevalent. 
Let  us  notice — 

I.  What  presumption  includes.     It 

signities — 

1.  Boldness  in  emJ.  Sinning  without 
fear.      Hardihood,  daring,  recklessness. 

2.  Arrogance  in  evil.  Setting  our- 
selves up  against  God.  Pride  of  heart 
and  spirit  and  tongue.  Ps.  Ixxiii.  6  ; 
ix.  2  ;  Acts  ii.  18. 

3.  Irreverence  towards  God.  All  pro- 
fanity. Blasphemies  of  the  Divine 
name,  &c.  All  cursing  and  defying 
God.  As  in  the  case  of  Pharaoh  : — 
"Who  is  the  LordT'  &c. 

4.  Confidence  of  escape  from  the 
ihreatenings  of  God.  This  is  one  of  the 
chief  elements  of  presumption.  Not 
dreading  nor  caring  for  consequences, 

&c. 

II.  The  chief  causes  of  presump- 
tion. 

1.  Spiritual  ignorance.  Blindness  of 
mind,  &c.  Ignorance  of  self  and  God. 
It  is  the  offspring  of  darkness. 

2«    Recklessness  and  inconsideration. 


Do  not  reflect.  Do  not  conskfirr  the 
claims  of  God  or  man.  The  giam'.eur 
of  Jehovah,  and  the  guilty  worm.  The 
holy  law,  and  man's  criminality. 

3.  Confirmed  unbelief,  giving  no 
credit  to  the  Word.  Its  revelations,  oi 
threatenings,  &c. 

4.  Hardness  of  heart.  This  is  both  a 
cause  and  a  result.  It  makes  men 
presumptuous.    Presumption   increases 

it. 

III.  The  terrible  results  of  pre- 
sumptuousness. 

1.  Godf  defied,  will  vindicate  His 
authority.  He  cannot  let  it  pass.  His 
majesty  and  law  concerned,  &c. 

2.  Threatening  despised,  He  will 
terribly  execute.  Not  one  jot  fail.  There 
may  be  delay,  waiting,  longsuffering, 
but  the  execution  of  vengeance  is  cer- 
tain. 

3.  Mercy  despised  will  involve  in  fear- 
ful retribution.  Hear  God, — Prov.  i.  24  ; 
Ps.  ii.  4,  &c.  The  instances  of  this, 
how  numerous  !  The  old  world,  Pha- 
raoh, Sodom,  &c.,  nations  of  Canaan, 
Jerusalem.     (See  Luke  xii.  41-44). 

Application. 

1.  How  needful  is  consideration. 

2.  Repentance^  how  imperative  I 

3.  To  seek  mercy.  The  Gospel  pub- 
lishes it  in  Christ,  and  offers  it  to  every 
sinner. — Jabez  Burns^  D.D, 


The  Sin  and  Punishment  of  the  Sabbath-breaker, 

(Verses  32-36.) 


This  event  is  recorded  here  as  an 
illustration  of  presumptuous  sin  and 
its  punishment.     Notice  : — 

I.  The  sin  committed. 

This  man  violated  the  law  of  the 
Sabbath  (Exod.  xx.  8-11)  by  gathering 
sticks  on  that  day.  Looking  at  the  mere 
act  it  seems  a  very  small  sin  indeed, 
and  the  punishment  seems  utterly  dis- 
proportioned  to  the  sin ;  but  in  esti- 
mating the  moral  quality  of  an  action 


much  has  to  be  taken  into  account  in 
addition  to  the  mere  act.  Thus  in  the 
present  case,  in  order  to  form  a  correct 
judgment  it  is  necessary  to  consider — 
1.  The  solemn  urgency  ivith  which  the 
violated  command  is  enforced  in  the 
Sacred  Scriptures.  See  Exod.  xvi.  22- 
30;  XX.  8-11  ;  xxxi.  13-17;  xxxv.  1-3; 
Lev.  xxiii.  3  ;  xxvi.  2  ;  Deut.  v.  12-lo. 
The  first  incontrovertible  institution  of 
the  Sabbath  amongst  the  Israelites  is 

283 


CHAP.  XV. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


recorded  in  Exod.  xvi.  23-29.  Shortly 
afterwards,  at  the  giving  of  the  Law, 
"  it  was  re-enacted  in  the  Fourth  Com- 
mandment, which,"  as  Mr.  Garden 
points  out,  "  gave  it  a  rank  above  that 
of  an  ordinary  law,  making  it  one  of 
the  signs  of  the  Covenant.  As  such  it 
remained  together  with  the  Passover, 
the  two  forming  the  most  solemn  and 
distinctive  features  of  Hebrew  religious 
life.  Its  neglect  or  profanation  ranked 
foremost  among  national  sins  ;  the  re- 
newed observance  of  it  was  sure  to 
accompany  ntitional  reformation."  The 
importance  attached  to  the  keeping  of 
the  Sabbath  in  subsequent  times 
appears  from  Isa.  Iviii.  13,  14  ;  Jer. 
xvii.  21-27;  Ezek.  xx.  12-24;  Neh.  x. 
31 ;  xiii.  15-22. 

2.  The  relation  of  the  violated  com' 
mand  to  the  Lord  God.  (1)  The  day 
was  consecrated  to  God ;  it  was  dedi- 
cated to  His  honour;  its  violation, 
therefore,  involved  reproach  to  Him, 
"The  holy  Sabbath  unto  the  Lord;" 
"  the  Sabbath  of  rest  holy  to  the 
Lord ; "  "  the  seventh  day  is  the 
Sabbath  of  the  Lord  thy  God ; "  thus 
the  observance  of  the  day  is  bound  up 
with  His  honour.  (2)  The  day  was  a 
memorial  of  their  emancipation  from 
Egypt ;  its  violation,  therefore,  in- 
volved ingratitude  to  God,  their  Eman- 
cipator (Deut.  V.  15).  So  that  he  who 
wilfully  broke  the  Sabbath  reproached 
the  Lord. 

3.  The  beneficence  of  the  violated  com- 
mand. The  beneficent  character  of  the 
institution  is  unmistakably  clear  in 
the  version  of  it  given  in  Deut.  v.  12- 
1 5.  Its  design  and  tendency  are  to  pro- 
mote human  well-being,  by  securing  to 
man  a  regularly  recurring  season  of 
bodily  rest  and  opportunity  of  spiritual 
culture.  The  day  of  rest  has  been 
well  compared  to  '*  the  green  oasis,  the 
little  grassy  meadow  in  the  wilderness, 
where  after  the  week-days'  journey  the 
pilgrim  halts  for  refreshment  and  re- 
pose ;  where  he  rests  beneath  the  shade 
of  the  lofty  palm  trees,  and  dips  his 
vessel  in  the  waters  of  the  calm,  clear 
stream,  and  recovers  his  strength  to  go 
forth  again  upon  his  pilgrimage  in  the 

284 


desert  with  renewed  vigour  and  cheer- 
fulness." 

4.  The  wilfidness  of  the  violation  of 
the  command.  This  man  certainly  knew 
the  law ;  the  manner  in  which  the 
manna  was  bestowed  was  a  resfular  re- 
minder  of  it ;  he  could  not  have  been 
ignorant  of  the  penalty  of  breaking  the 
law  (Exod  XXX i.  14,  15)  ;  yet  he  breaks 
it.  He  sins  knowingly,  wilfully,  *'  with 
a  high  hand  ;  "  and  in  accordance  with 
the  law  which  he  had  broken,  he  is 
put  to  death  for  his  sin.  So  we  see  that 
his  sin  was  not  a  small  or  slight  one, 
but  one  of  great  heinousness. 

II.  The  punishment  inflicted  upon 
the  sinner. 

He  was  stoned  to  death.  Three  points 
deserve  notice  : — 

1.  The  case  ivas  dealt  with  in  an  or- 
derly aiid  becoming  manner.  The  man 
was  taken  in  the  very  act  of  gathering 
sticks,  he  was  then  brought  before  Mo- 
ses and  Aaron  and  the  whole  congrega- 
tion, i.e.y  "the  college  of  elders,  as  the 
judicial  authorities  of  the  congregation" 
(Exod.  xviii.  25,  2G).  Death  had  been 
assigned  as  the  penalty  of  the  transgres- 
sion (Exod.  xxxi.  14,  15  ;  xxxv.  2) ;  but 
it  had  not  been  determined  by  what 
mode  the  transgressor  should  be  put  to 
death ;  he  was  therefore  kept  in  custody 
until  the  next  day,  in  order  that  Moses 
might  consult  the  Lord  on  that  point. 
Comp.  Lev.  xxiv.  12.  There  was  nothing 
rash  or  disorderly  in  the  procedure  in 
the  case. 

2.  The  punishment  was  ordered  by 
God.  "  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses, 
The  man  shall  be  surely  put  to  death  ; " 
&o.  Both  the  penalty  itself  and  the 
mode  of  inflicting  it  were  declared  by 
the  Lord  to  Moses. 

3.  The  punishment  was  calculated  to 
deter  others  from  the  sin.  This  was  pro- 
bably the  design  in  calling  upon  the 
people  to  stone  him  :  "  All  the  congre- 
gation shall  stone  him  with  stones  with- 
out the  camp.  And  all  the  congregation 
brought  him,"  &g.  This  would  be  likely 
to  impress  them  deeply  with  the  enor- 
mity of  the  sin  and  the  severity  of  the 
punishment,  and  to  awaken  within  them 
a  wholesome  fear  of  the  oflence. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS, 


CHAP.  XV. 


Conclusion. 

1.  Here  is  solemn  loarning  to  those 
wlio  attend  to  moral  duties,  hut  neglect 
relic/ion.  There  are  some  who  strive  to 
obey  the  commands  of  the  second  table 
of  the  Law,  but  disregard  those  of  the 
first.  The  violations  of  the  commands 
of  the  first  table  are  directly  against 
God  Himself,  and  they  will  not  go  un- 
punished. The  man  who  neglects  wor- 
ship dwarfs  and  degrades  his  own 
soul,  &c. 

2.  The  essential  element  in  the  law  of 
the  Sabbath  is  of  perpetual  obligation. 
Several  non-essentials  have  been  altered, 
or  have  passed  away  ;  e,  ^.,  instead  of 
observing  the  seventh,  we  observe  the 
first  day  of  the  week ;  instead  of  reckon- 
ing the  day  from  sunset  to  sunset,  we 
reckon  it  from  midnight  to  midnight ; 


and  many  things  as  to  the  mode  of  its 
observance  have  passed  away.  But  tlie 
spirit  and  substance  of  the  law  is  as 
binding  now  as  ever  it  was.  Worsliip 
for  the  soul  and  rest  for  the  body  are 
two  of  the  deepest  needs  of  man.  The 
institution  of  the  Sabbath  is  designed 
to  meet  these  needs.  **  The  Sabbatli 
was  made  for  man,"  and  man  cannot  do 
without  it.  "  Eternal  as  the  constitu- 
tion of  the  soul  of  man,  is  the  necessity 
for  the  existence  of  a  day  of  rest."  The 
proportion  also,  one  day  in  seven,  is  of 
perpetual  obligation.  *'  One  day  in  ten, 
prescribed  by  revolutionary  France,  was 
actually  pronounced  by  physiologists  in- 
sufficient." No  man  can  set  at  nought 
this  ordinance  of  God  without  inflicting 
upon  himself  sore  loss  and  injury. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Whatever  Divine  commands  Moses  gave  the 
Israelites,  he  communicated  to  them  their 
grounds.  When  he  gave  them  the  law  of  the 
Jewish  Sabbath  he  gave  them  along  with  it 
its  basis,  that  is,  the  revelation  of  God's  Sab- 
bath. At  the  time  of  the  laraelitish  captivity 
in  Egypt  we  find  not  a  trace  of  the  Sabbath. 
It  was  a  new  thing  when  Moaes  gave  it  by 
Qod*s  command  as  a  law  unto  the  Israelites  ; 
and  he  made  it  the  seal  of  a  covenant  which 
marked  them  out  from  other  nations.  On 
what  did  it  rest  ?  It  rested  upon  something 
greater  than  mere  human  will,  or  even  Divine 
will,  and  that  something  was  an  eternal  neces- 
sity of  man's  nature,  derived  from  a  similar 
necessity  in  the  nature  of  his  Maker.  And 
this  is  the  only  ground  on  which  our  obligation 
to  keep  the  Sabbath  day  can  rest.  We  cannot 
place  it  on  the  ground  of  the  Mosaic  law. 

We  have  abrogated  almost  all  that  belonged 
to  the  Sabbath  day.  We  have  taken  away 
**  every  manner  of  work."  We  have  changed 
many  other  important  pa^rticulars.  From  sun- 
set to  sunset  we  have  altered  to  from  midnight 
to  midnight.  And  then  instead  of  **the 
seventh  day,"  we  have  left  only  this  "  one  day 
in  seven ;"  and  the  sceptical  mind  requires 
some  proof  of  the  moral  obligation  of  keeping 
one  day  without  work  when  we  have  admitted 
all  the  rest  of  the  covenant  to  be  ceremonial. 
We  must  take  higher  ground,  and  tell  the 
doubter  that  there  is  an  eternal  necessity  for 
the  recurring  Sabbath.  It  is  just  on  this,  only 
on  this  perpetual  necessity  of  a  Sabbath, 
that  our  ob^erTance  of  the  Sabbath  must 
be  founded,  in  this  requirement  of  physical 
rest  by  our  nature,  in  the  fact  also  that  it  is 
only  by  means  of  these  stated  returns  of  par- 


ticnlar  seasons  that  man  can,  in  rest  from  tem- 
poral concerns,  fix  his  attention  on  his  Maker. 

There  is  a  further  necessity  for  a  similar 
outward  form  in  the  mode  of  worship  on  the 
Sabbath,  which  illustrates  the  primal  necessity 
of  having  a  day  set  apart.  Thoughtful  men 
have  often  asked  why  they  cannot  go  out  and 
have  their  worship  in  the  great  temple  of  the 
universe  The  man  who  argues  so  knows  not 
his  own  nature.  There  is  a  temple  of  God's 
universe,  and  those  who  deny  it  forget  a  grand 
spiritual  truth  ;  but  the  feeling  gained  in  this? 
temple  of  God  is  one  thing,  that  gained  in  the 
church  of  God  is  another.  We  may  in  like 
manner  worship  God  all  the  week,  but  the 
emotion  of  worahip  on  the  Sabbath  when  wa 
lay  aside  work  is  di£Ferent  from  the  emotions 
felt  towards  God  in  the  midst  of  work. — 1'\  W. 
Robertson,  M.A. 

Although  I  think  that  the  whole  law  is  dTJne 
away  with,  so  far  as  it  is  the  law  given  on 
Mount  Sinai,  yet  as  far  as  it  is  the  law  of  the 
Spirit  I  hold  it  to  be  all  binding;  and  believ- 
ing that  our  need  of  a  Lord's-day  is  as  great  as 
ever  it  was,  and  that,  therefore,  its  observance 
is  God's  will,  and  is  likely  as  far  as  we  can 
see,  to  be  so  to  the  end  of  time,  I  should  think 
it  mischievous  to  weaken  the  respect  paid  to 
it. — Dr.  Arnold. 

Religion  has  been  the  basis,  the  mother,  the 
nurse  of  the  English  day  of  rest.  It  has 
sprung  out  of  deep  convictions  of  the  sacred- 
ness  of  lift3,  the  holiness  of  law,  the  certainty 
of  judgment,  and  the  prospect  of  heaven. 
....  The  English  Sunday  will  not  be  pre- 
Rjrv^d  without  the  continued  operation  of  this 
religious  principle.  Tlie  love  of  money  will 
be  stronger  than  the  love  of  rest.     Competi- 

285 


CliAP.  XV. 


IIOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   NUMBERS, 


lion  can  wage  successful  battles  with  anything 
short  of  conscience ;  God  knows  that  it  often 
avails  to  conquer  this.  But  religious  con- 
yictions  are  stronger,  more  widely  spread, 
more  deeply  penetrating  than  any  notion  of 
conventional  right,  than  any  laws  of  a  shallow 
expediency.  If  you  try,  if  the  nation  tries, 
if  a  few  noisy  talkers  try,  to  found  the  sanctity 
of  the  Sabbath  on  the  advantage  of  recreation, 
— rational  or  irrational, — there  will  be  very 
soon  an  end  of  its  sacredness  altogether.  Let 
Sunday  become  the  day  on  which  ordinary 
travelling  for  recreation  takes  place, — and  it 
will  occupy  tens  of  thousands  of  hands,  who 
will  find  that  day,  as  many  do  on  the  con- 
tinent of  Europe,  the  hardest  and  most 
laborious  of  the  seven.  Let  recreation  and 
amusement  be  the  main  reasons  upon  which 
you  ask  for  the  preservation  of  this  day  of 
rest,  and  you  will  have  it  invaded  at  every 
point.  Let  us  be  distinctly  forewarned,  that 
if  the  great  use  of  a  Sunday  is  a  holiday ;  if 
tre  bavo  no  deeper  reason  than  the  relaxation 
of  our  physical  energies ;  no  other  attraction 
than  that  which  music,  or  fresh  air,  or  public 
amusement  may  afford ;  we  ara  destroying  the 
great  safeguard  of  the  day,  we  are  running 
in  danger  of  being  robbed  altogether  of  a 
■acred  and  invaluable  right.  To  reduce  our 
English  Sunday  to  th«  level  of  a  Continental 
or  pleasure-taking  Sunday,  -voold  ba  to  do- 


prive  the  people  of  England  of  their  birthright, 
to  hand  labour,  more  than  ever,  into  the 
power  of  capital,  and  to  open  the  door  along 
which  all  kinds  of  toil  must,  as  in  other 
countries,  infallibly  follow 

In  the  name  of  your  own  rights,  by  reason 
of  your  own  need,  out  of  regard  to  the  obvious 
necessities  of  the  case,  and  in  view  of  the  ex- 
perience of  all  Europe,  beware  how  you  trifle 
with  the  conscience,  the  religious  spirit,  the 
Christian  consecration,  the  holy  safeguards, 
of  what,  even  in  spite  •!  yourselves,  is  bless- 
ing you. — ff.  R.  Reynolds^  D.D. 

Experience  tells  us,  after  a  trial,  that  those 
Sundays  are  the  happiest,  the  purest,  the 
most  rich  in  blessing,  in  which  the  spiritual 
part  has  been  most  attended  to; — those  in 
which  the  business  letter  was  put  aside  till 
evening,  and  the  profane  literature  not  opened, 
and  the  ordinary  occupations  entirely  sus- 
pended ; — those  in  which  as  in  the  temple  of 
Solomon,  the  sound  of  the  earthly  hammer 
has  not  been  heard  in  the  temple  of  the  soul : 
for  this  is,  in  fact,  the  very  distinction  between 
the  spirit  of  the  Jewish  Sabbath  and  the  spirit 
of  the  Christian  Lord's-day.  The  one  is  chiefly 
for  the  body — "Thou  shalt  do  no  manner  of 
work.**  The  other  is  principally  for  the  soul 
— **  I  was  in  the  spirit  on  the  Lord's-day."— 
F,  W»  Robertson,  ALA. 


The  Sabbath-brbaker  and  his  doom. 


{Verses  32-36.) 


Here  Is  another  arrangement  for  the 
exposition  of  this  paragraph  : — 
I.  The  sin. 

1.  The  transgression  of  a  moral  law, 
which  wets  enforced  by  the  most  solemn 
commands  and  by  the  severest  penalty. 

2.  The  transgression  of  this  law  wit- 
fully, 

II.  The  arrest. 

The  oflFender  was  seized  in  the  act  of 
transgression,  and  taken  before  the 
judicial  authorities. 

III.  The  consultation. 

The  direction  of  the  Lord  is  sought 
as  to  the  mode  bj  which  the  sentence 
of  death  is  to  be  executed  upon  him. 

IV.  The  sentence. 

This  was  determined  by  the  Lord. 
The  transgressor  must  be  put  to  death 


(Exod.  xxxi.  14,  15);  he  must  be  put 
to  death  by  stoning  (ver.  35). 

V.  The  execution. 

'*And  all  the  congregation  brought 
him  without,"  &c.  (ver.  36).  The 
people  were  the  executioners.  This 
would  increase  the  force  of  the  warning 
which  the  event  gave  to  the  nation. 

Conclusion. 

1.  The  moral  element  in  the  Law  of 
the  Sabbath  is  of  perpetual  obligation. 
We  still  need  rest  for  body  and  mind ; 
we  still  need  worship  for  the  spirit. 

2.  The  neglecters  of  religious  duties 
and  privileges  will  do  well  to  take  warn- 
ing.  If  any  man  fails  to  observe 
religiously  the  Lord's  day,  he  does  80 
at  his  own  loss  and  periL 


IIOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    NUMBERS 


ruAP.  av 


The  Ordinance  op  the  Fringes  :   Gracious  Reminders  op  Divine 

Commands. 

(Verses  37,  41.) 


In  previous  paragraphs  we  have  had 
legislation  coucerniug  sins  of  ignorance 
and  of  presumption  ;  in  this  paragraph 
we  have  an  institution  designed  to  pre- 
vent sins  of  ignorance — sins  committed 
unwittingly— by  keeping  before  the 
eyes  of  the  people  reminders  of  the 
commands  of  God,  and  of  their  duty  in 
relation  to  them.  The  Israelites  are 
commanded  to  wear  fringes  or  tassels, 
&c.  {See  Explanatory  Notes  on  ver.  38). 
This  institution  is  not  binding  upon 
us,  but  it  contains  important  instruc- 
tion for  us.     Consider — 

I.  The  proneness  of  man  to  forget 
••  the  commandments  of  the  Lord.'* 

This  is  clearly  implied  in  this  ordi- 
nance. The  counteraction  of  this 
proneness  is  the  design  of  the  ordinance. 
This  tendency  to  lose  sight  of  the  com- 
mands of  God  arises  from — 

1.  The  sinfulness  of  human  nature. 
Unless  we  are  renewed  by  the  Spirit 
of   God  we  naturally  "wander  after 
our  own   heart  and    our   own    eyes." 
The  commandments   of  the  Lord  are 
opposed  to  many  of  the  desires    and 
purposes   of    the   human   heart ;    and 
we  are  not   anxious  "to   bear  in  mind 
that  which  clashes   with  our  wishes, 
and  rebukes  us  for  much  of  our  life 
and   conduct.      Men   do   not   remem- 
ber the  commands  of  God  because  they 
do  not  want  to  remember  them.     Comp, 
Psa.   Ixxvii.    10,    11;   cvi.    13;   Rom. 
i.  28. 

2.  The  wordly  spirit  which  so  largely 
prevails  in  htiman  society.  In  the  con- 
duct of  trade,  as  a  rule  we  fear,  men 
do  not  ask  if  their  practices  accord  with 
the  laws  of  God,  but  if  they  accord 
with  the  usages  of  trade  or  profession. 
In  social  relations  to  a  very  large  ex- 
tent men  are  not  governed  by  the  com- 
mands of  God,  but  by  the  requirements 
of  the  society  in  which  they  move. 
The  first  and  the  supreme  inquiry  is 
not.  Is  this  right  1  but,  Is  this  expe- 
dient 1   or,  popular?  or,  Will  it  pay? 


In  this  way  "  the  commandments  of  the 
Lord "  are  overlooked,  or  cast  aside. 
"  Our  memories,"  says  Trapp,  "  are  like 
strainers,  nets,  grates,  that  let  the  pure 
water  run  away,  but  retain  mud,  trash, 
&c.  It  is  with  us  as  with  those  in 
Psa.  cvi.  13,  *  they  soon  forgat  His 
works,'  &c.,  and  therefore  we  have  need 
of  all  good  helps." 

II.  The  arrangements  which  God 
has  made  to  remind  man  of  His  com- 
mandments. 

**  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel, 
and  bid  them  that  they   make  them 
fringes,"  <fcc.     These  fringes  "  were  not 
appointed  for  the  trimming  and  adorn- 
ing of  their  clothes,  but  to  *  stir  up  their 
pure  minds  by  way  of  remembrance ' 
(2   Pet.   iii.  1),   that  they  might  look 
upon  the  fringe  and  remember  the  com- 
mandments ....  If  they  were  tempted 
to  sin,  the  fringe  would  be  a  monitor 
to  them  not  to  break  God's  command- 
ments ;  if  a  duty  was  forgotten  to  be 
done  in  its  season,  the   fringe  would 
remind  them  of  it."     Notice — 

1.   The  means  which  God  employs  to 
remind  us  of  His  commandments.     (1) 
The  Bible.  In  this  He  not  only  reveals 
His  will  concerning  us,  but  illustrates 
and  enforces  it  in  various  ways  so  that 
we  might  not  forget  it.     (2)  The  Holy 
Spirit.  He  influences  our  spirits;  speaks 
in  us  by  means  of  conscience,  &c.     (3) 
Holy  examples.     In  these  the  will  of 
God  is  "  drawn  out  in  living  characters." 
(4)  Warning  examples  of  the  evil  con- 
sequences of  overlooking  His  commands. 
These  witness  to  us  that  it  is  perilous 
to  forget  the  Divine  will,  and  admonish 
us  against  doing  so.     (a) 

2.  The  design  of  God  in  reminding  us 
of  His  commandments.  "  That  ye  wan- 
der not  after  your  own  heart  and  your 
own  eyes,  after  which  ye  use  to  go  a 
whoring ;  that  ye  may  remember  and 
do  all  My  commandments,  and  be  holy 
unto  your  God."  Recollection  of  the 
will   of  God  must  be  followed  by  obe- 

287 


BRIGHAM   YOUNG   UNIVERSITY 


3  1197 


00700  887 


DATE  DUE 

hi-i.- 

1 

1 
1 

L- 


DEfvICO    38-297 


